aS, Ὁ Ch Svat 


οἰδο διοιο cede 


τόνος ay 


Ὡς τ ret Sea hy 


: Ἐὰν ᾿ 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


EDITED BY 
E, CAPPS, Pu.D., LL.D. T. E. PAGE, Lirr.D. W. H. Ὁ. ROUSE, Lirv.D. 


APOLLODORUS 
THE LIBRARY 


Il 


APOLLODORUS 


THE LIBRARY 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 


SIR JAMES GEORGE FRAZER, 
F.B.A., F.R.S. 


FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
II 


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
MCMXXI 


8T. Mic s 
COLi cue ee 
et S 
LIBRARY 


FEB © 3 1940 
1892 


CONTENTS 
BOOK I1I—continued . . 
EPITOME 


APPENDIX 


INDEX 


APOLLODORUS 


THE LIBRARY | 


AITTOAAOAQPOY 
BIBAIOOHKH 


Γ 


X. Ἴλτλαντος δὲ καὶ τῆς ᾽Ωκεανοῦ Ἰ]ληιόνης 
ἐγένοντο θυγατέρες ἑπτὰ ἐν Κυλλήνῃ τῆς ᾿Αρκα- 
δίας, αἱ Ἰ]ληιάδες προσαγορευθεῖσαι, ᾿Αλκυόνη 
Μερόπη Κελαινὼ λέκτρα Στερόπη Ταῦγέτη 


1 As to the Pleiades, see Aratus, Phaenomena, 254-268 ; 
Kratosthenes, Cataster. 23; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Postho- 
merica, xiii. 551 sqq.; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xviii. 486 ; 
Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. ii. 10 (16); Scholiast on Apollonius 
Rhodius, Argon. ili. 226 ; Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 21 ; id. Fab. 
192; Ovid, Fasti, iii. 105, iv. 169-178; Servius on Virgil, 
Georg. i. 188, and on Aen. i. 744; Scholia in Caesaris Ger- 
manict Aratea, p. 397, ed. F. Eyssenhardt (in his edition of 
Martianus Capella); Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 75 (First Vatican Mythographer, 
234). There was a general agreement among the ancients 
as to the names of the seven Pleiades. Aratus, for example, 
gives the same names as Apollodorus and in the same order. 
However, with the exception of Maia, a different list of 
names is given by the Scholiast on Theocritus (xiii. 25), who 
tells us further, on the authority of Callimachus, that they 
were the daughters of the queen of the Amazons. As their 
father was commonly said to be Atlas, they were sometimes 
called Atlantides (Apollodorus, below ; Diodorus Siculus, iii. 
60. 4; compare Hesiod, Works and Days, 382). But there 
was much diversity of opinion as to the origin of the name 
Pleiades. Some derived it from the name of their mother 


2 


APOLLODORUS 
THE LIBRARY 


BOOK  I[]].—continued 


X. Atxtas and Pleione, daughter of Ocean, had 
seven daughters called the Pleiades, born to them at 
Cyllene in Arcadia, to wit: Alcyone, Merope, Celaeno, 
Electra, Sterope, Taygete, and Maia. Of these, 


Pleione ; but the most probable view appears to be that the 
name comes from πλεῖν, ‘‘to sail,’ because in the Mediter- 
ranean area these stars were visible at night during the 
summer, from the middle of May till the beginning of 
November, which coincided with the sailing season in anti- 
quity. This derivation of the name was recognized by some 
of the ancients (Servius on Virgil, Georg. i. 138). With 
regard to the number of the Pleiades, it was generally agreed 
that there were seven of them, but that one was invisible, or 
nearly so, to the human eye. Of this invisibility two ex- 
planations were given. Some thought that Electra, as the 
mother of Dardanus, was so grieved at the fall of Troy that 
she hid her face in her hands; the other was that Merope, 
who had married a mere man, Sisyphus, was so ashamed of 
her humble, though honest, lot by comparison with the 
guilty splendour of her sisters, who were all of them para- 
mours of gods, that she dared not show herself. These alter- 
native and equally probable theories are stated, for example, 
by Ovid and Hyginus. The cause of the promotion of the 
maidens to the sky is said to have been that for seven or 
even twelve years the hunter Orion pursued them with his 
unwelcome attentions, till Zeus in pity removed pursuer and 
pursued alike to heaven, there to shine as stars for ever and 


3 
B 2 


APOLLODORUS 


Maia. τούτων Στερόπην μὲν Οἰνόμαος ἔγημε, 
Σίσυφος <6é>" Μερόπην. δυσὶ δὲ ἐμίχθη Ποσει- 
δῶν, πρώτῃ μὲν Κελαινοῖ, ἐξ ἧς Λύκος ἐγένετο, ὃν 
Ποσειδῶν ἐ ἐν μακάρων ς ᾧκισε 2 νήσοις, δευτέρᾳ δὲ 
᾿Αλκυόνῃ, ἣ θυγατέρα μὲν ἐτέκνωσεν Αἴθουσαν 
τὴν ᾿Απόλλωνι ᾿Ελευθῆρα͵ τεκοῦσαν," υἱοὺς δὲ 
‘Tora καὶ Ὕ περήνορα. Ὑριέως μὲν οὖν καὶ 
Κλονίης νύμφης Νυκτεὺς καὶ Λύκος, Νυκτέως δὲ 
καὶ Ἰ]ολυξοῦς ᾿Αντιόπη, ᾿Αντιόπης δὲ καὶ Διὸς 
Ζῆθος καὶ ᾿Αμφίων. ταῖς δὲ λοιπαῖς ᾿Ατλαντίσι 
Ζεὺς συνουσιάζει. ; ; 

Μαῖα μὲν οὖν ἡ πρεσβυτάτη Ad συνελθοῦσα 
ἐν ἄντρῳ τῆς Κυλλήνης “Ἑρμῆν τίκτει. οὗτος ἐν 
σπαργάνοις ὁ ἐπὶ τοῦ λίκνου κείμενος, ἐκδὺς εἰς 


1 δὲ added by Bekker. 2 wxioe Faber: oxnoe A. 

ὃ The MSS (A) add καλλίστην, which is retained by 
Westermann, Miiller, and Bekker, but omitted by Hercher 
and Wagner and regarded as a marginal gloss by Heyne. 

4 σπαργάνοις Heyne (conjecture), Bekker, Hercher: πρώ- 
τοις A, Heyne (in text), Westermann: στρωτοῖς Valckenar, 
Miiller: πρώτοις --σπαργάνοις -- Wagner. 


to continue the endless pursuit. The bashful or mournful 
Pleiad, who hid her light, is identified by modern astrono- 
mers with Celaeno, a star of almost the seventh magnitude, 
which can be seen now, as in antiquity, in clear moonless 
nights by persons endowed with unusually keen sight. See 
A. von Humboldt, Cosmos, translated by E. Sabine, iii. 
47 sq. 

* Compare Pausanias, v. 10. 6. According to another 
account, Sterope or Asterope, as she is also called, was not the 
wife but the mother of Oenomaus by the god Ares. See 
Eratosthenes, Cataster. 23; Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 21; id. 
Fab. 84 and 159; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latint, ed. 
G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 73 (First Vatican Mythographer, 234). 


2 See above. iii. 5. 5. 


4 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 1-2 


Sterope was married to Oenomaus,! and Merope to 
Sisyphus. And Poseidon had intercourse .with two 
of them, first with Celaeno, by whom he had Lycus, 
whom Poseidon made to dwell in the Islands of the 
Blest, and second with Alcyone, who bore a daughter, 
Aethusa, the mother of Eleuther by Apollo, and two 
sons Hyrieus and Hyperenor. MHyrieus had Nycteus 
and Lycus by a nymph Clonia; and Nycteus had 
Antiope by Polyxo; and Antiope had Zethus and 
Amphion by Zeus.2— And Zeus consorted with the 
other daughters of Atlas. 

Maia, the eldest, as the fruit of her intercourse 
with Zeus, gave birth to Hermes in a cave of Cyllene.? 
He was laid in swaddling-bands on the winnowing 
fan,‘ but he slipped out and made his way to Pieria 


3 The following account of the birth and youthful exploits 
of Hermes is based, whether directly or indirectly, on the 
beautiful Homeric Hymn IV, Zo Hermes, though it differs 
from the hymn on a few minor points, as to which Apollo- 
dorus may have used other sources. Compare The Homeric 
Hymns, ed. T. W. Allen and EK. E. Sikes, pp. 130 sg. Among 
the other literary sources to which Apollodorus may have 
had recourse was perhaps Sophocles’s satyric play Ichneutae 
or The Trackers. See below. 

4 Compare the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 21, 63, 150 sq., 
254, 290, 358 ; Sophocles, Ichneutae, 269 (The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, ii. 258). So Dionysus at birth 
is said to have been laid on a winnowing-fan (Servius on 
Virgil, Georg. i. 166): hence he got the surname of ‘‘ He of 
the Winnowing-fan” (Arcvitns, Plutarch, Isis et Osiris, 35). 
These traditions as: to the gods merely reflected an ancient 
Greek custom of placing new-born children in winnowing- 
fans ‘‘as an omen of wealth and fruitfulness” (πλοῦτον καὶ 
καρποὺς οἰωνιζόμενοι). See the Scholiast on Callimachus, 
Hymn I, 48 (Callimachea, ed. O. Schneider, i. 109). As to 
the symbolism of the custom, see W. Mannhardt, ‘‘ Kind 
und Korn,” Mythologische Forschungen, pp. 351-374; Miss 
J. ἡ. Harrison, ‘‘ Mystica Vannus Iacchi,” Journal of Hellenic 


5 


APOLLODORUS 


/ , \ / / ἃ ” 
Πιερίαν παραγίνεται, καὶ κλέπτει Boas ἃς ἔνεμεν 
> / “ \ \ / e 4 a 5 a 

Ἀπόλλων. ἵνα δὲ μὴ φωραθείη ὑπὸ τῶν ἰχνῶν, 


Studies, xxiii. (1903), pp. 292-824. The custom was not 
confined to ancient Greece, but has been widely practised in 
India and other parts of the east down to modern times. 
The motives assigned or implied for it are various. Some- 
times it seems to have been intended to ensure the wealth 
and prosperity of the infant, sometimes to guard it against 
the evil eye and other dangerous influences. See Spirits of 
the Corn and of the Wild, i. 5-11. To quotea single example, 
among the Brahuis of Baluchistan, ‘‘ most good parents keep 
their babe for the first six days ina chaj, or winnowing-basket, 
that God may vouchsafe them full as many children as the 
basket can hold grain . . . But some folk will have nothing to 
do with a winnowing-basket ; it harbours epilepsy, they say, 
though how or why I am at a loss to think. So they lay the 
child in a sieve, that good luck may pour upon him as 
abundantly as grain pours through a sieve” (Denys Bray, 
The Life-History of a Brahii, London, 1918, p. 18). The 
substitution of a corn-sieve for a winnowing-fan seems to be 
common elsewhere. 

1 Compare Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 68 sqq.; Antoninus 
Liberalis, Transform. 23; Ovid, Metamorph. ii. 680 sqq. 
The theft of cattle by the infant Hermes was the subject of 
Sophocles’s satyric drama Ichneutae or The Trackers, of 
which some considerable fragments have been discovered in 
recent years. The scene of the play is laid on Mount Cyllene. 
Apollo appears and complains of the loss of the cattle, 
describes how he has come from Thessaly and through 
Boeotia in search of them, and offers a reward to anyone 
who will help him to find the missing beasts. ‘The procla- 
mation reaches the ears of Silenus, who hurries to the scene 
of action and warmly proffers the services of himself and his 
Satyrs in the search, only stipulating that the reward shall 
take the solid shape of cash down. His offer being accepted, 
the Satyrs at once open on the scent like sleuth-hounds and 
soon discover confused tracks of cattle pointing in different 
directions. But in the very heat of this discovery they are 
startled by a strange sound, the like of which they had never 
heard before. It is, in fact, the τὰ ἢ] θα sound of the lyre 


6 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 2 


and stole the kine which Apollo was herding.! And 
lest he should be detected by the tracks, he put 


played by the youthful Hermes in the cave. At this point 
the nymph Cyllene issues from the cavern and upbraids the 
wild creatures with the hubbub they are raising in the still- 
ness of the green wooded hills. The Satyrs tender a humble 
apology for their intrusion, but request to know the meaning 
of the strange sounds that proceed from the bowels of the 
earth. In compliance with their request the nymph explains 
how Zeus had secretly begotten Hermes on Maia in the cave, 
how she herself was acting temporarily as nurse to the child, 
how the infant grew at an astonishing and even alarming 
rate, and how, being detained in the cave by his father’s 
orders, he devoted his leisure hours to constructing out of a 
dead beast a curious toy which emitted musical notes. Being 
pressed for a fuller explanation she describes how Hermes 
made the lyre out of a tortoise shell, how the instrument 
was ‘‘his only balm of grief, his comforter,” and how the 
child was transported with delight at the ravishing sweet- 
ness of the tones which spoke to him from the dead beast. 
Unmoyed by this touching description, the Satyrs at once 
charge the precocious infant with having stolen the cattle. 
His nurse indignantly repels the charge, stoutly declaring 
that the poor child had inherited no propensity to thieving 
either from its father or from its mother, and recommending 
his accusers to go and look for the thief elsewhere, since at 
their age, with their long beards and bald heads, they ought 
to know better than to trump up such ridiculous accusa- 
tions, for which they may yet have to smart. The nurse’s 
passionate defence of her little charge makes no more impres- 
sion on the Satyrs than her previous encomium on his musical 
talent: indeed their suspicions are quickened by her reference 
to the hides which the infant prodigy had used in the con- 
struction of the lyre, and they unhesitatingly identify the 
skins in question with those of the missing cattle. Strong in 
this conviction, they refuse to budge till the culprit has been 
made over tothem. At this point the Greek text begins to 
fail; we can just catch a few disjointed fragments of a heated 
dialogue between the nurse and the satyrs; the words 
‘‘cows,” ‘‘ thief,” ‘‘ rascal,” and so forth, occur with painful 
iteration, then all is silence. See The Fragments of Sophocles, 


7 


APOLLODORUS 


ὑποδήματα τοῖς ποσὶ περιέθηκε, καὶ κομίσας εἰς 
Πύλον τὰς μὲν λοιπὰς εἰς σπήλαιον ἀπέκρυψε, 
δύο δὲ καταθύσας τὰς μὲν βύρσας πέτραις καθή- 
λωσε, τῶν δὲ κρεῶν τὰ μὲν κατηνάλωσεν ἑψήσας 
τὰ δὲ κατέκαυσε" καὶ ταχέως εἰς Κυλλήνην ᾧ ῴχετο. 
καὶ εὑρίσκει πρὸ τοῦ ἄντρου νεμομένην χελώνην. 
ταύτην ἐκκαθάρας, εἰς τὸ κύτος χορδὰς ἐντείνας 
ἐξ ὧν ἔθυσε βοῶν καὶ ἐργασάμενος λύραν εὗρε 
καὶ πλῆκτρον. ᾿Απόλλων δὲ τὰς βόας ζητῶν εἰς 
Πύλον ἀφικνεῖται, καὶ τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἀνέκρι- 
νεν. οἱ δὲ ἰδεῖν μὲν παῖδα ἐλαύνοντα ἔφασκον, 
οὐκ ἔχειν δὲ εἰπεῖν ποῖ ποτε ἠλάθησαν διὰ τὸ μὴ 
εὑρεῖν ἔχνος δύνασθαι. μαθὼν δὲ ἐκ τῆς μαντικῆς 
τὸν κεκλοφότα, πρὸς Μαῖαν εἰς Κυλλήνην παρα- 
γίνεται, καὶ τὸν Ἑρμῆν ἠἡτιᾶτο. ἡ δὲ ἐπέδειξεν 
αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς σπαργάνοις. ᾿Απόλλων δὲ αὐτὸν 
πρὸς Δία κομίσας τὰς βόας ἀπήτει. Διὸς δὲ 
κελεύοντος ἀποδοῦναι ἠρνεῖτο. μὴ πείθων δὲ ἄγει 
τὸν ᾿Απόλλωνα εἰς Πύλον καὶ τὰς βόας ἀποδί- 
δωσιν. ἀκούσας δὲ τῆς λύρας ὁ ᾿Απόλλων ἀντι- 
δίδωσι τὰς βόας. “Ἑρμῆς δὲ ταύτας νέμων σύριγγα 
πάλιν πηξάμενος ἐσύριζεν. ᾿Απόλλων δὲ καὶ 


ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 224-270. From this seemingly 
simple piece of mild buffoonery Miss J. E. Harrison would 
extract a ritual of serious and indeed solemn significance, of 
which, however, she admits that the author of the play was 
himself probably quite unconscious. See her learned essay in 
Essays and Studies presented to William Ridgeway, ed. E. 
C. Quiggin (Cambridge, 1913), pp. 136 sqq. 

1 In the Homeric Hymn to Hermes (115 sqq.) we are told 
that Hermes roasted the flesh of two oxen and divided it 
into twelve portions (for the twelve gods), but that in spite 
of hunger he ate none of it himself, 


8 


— ———_——- 


ee. LIBRARY, Tl. x. 2 


shoes on their feet and brought them to Pylus, and 
hid the rest in a cave; but two he sacrificed and 
nailed the skins to rocks, while of the flesh he boiled 
and ate some,! and some he burned. And quickly 
he departed to Cyllene. And before the cave he 
found a tortoise browsing. He cleaned it out, strung 
the shell with chords made from the kine he had 
sacrificed, and having thus produced a lyre he in- 
vented also a plectrum.? But Apollo came to Pylus ὃ 
in search of the kine, and he questioned the inhabit- 
ants. They said that they had seen a boy driving 
cattle, but could not say whither they had been driven, 
because they could find no track. Having discovered 
the thief by divination,t Apollo came to Maia at 
Cyllene and accused Hermes. But she showed him 
the child in his swaddling-bands. So Apollo brought 
him to Zeus, and claimed the kine; and when Zeus 
bade him restore them, Hermes denied that he had 
them, but not being believed he led Apollo to Pylus 
and restored the kine. Howbeit, when Apollo heard 
the lyre, he gave the kine in exchange for it. 
And while Hermes pastured them, he again made 
himself a shepherd’s pipe and piped on 11. And 


2 Compare Sophocles, Ichneutae, 278 sqq. (The Fragments 
of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, ii. 259). In the Homeric 
Hymn to Hermes, 22 sqq., the invention of the lyre by Hermes 
precedes his theft of the cattle. 

3 In the Homeric Hymn to Hermes (185 sqq.) it is to On- 
chestus in Bocotia, not to Pylus, that Apollo goes at first to 
inquire after the missing cattle. 

Compare the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 213 sq., where 
it is said that Apollo discovered Hermes to be the thief through 
observing a certain long-winged bird. 

> Compare the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 511 sq., where, 
however, nothing is said about an attempt of Apollo to get 
the pipes from Hermes, or about an exchange of the pipes for 


PA | 9 
3873 
AI56 


‘i=. ~™ ε 


oo 


APOLLODORUS 


ταύτην βουλόμενος λαβεῖν, τῆν χρυσῆν ῥάβδον 
ἐδίδου ἣν ἐκέκτητο βουκολῶν. ὁ δὲ καὶ ταύτην 
λαβεῖν ἀντὶ τῆς σύριγγος ἤθελε καὶ τὴν μαντικὴν 
ἐπελθεῖν: καὶ δοὺς διδάσκεται τὴν διὰ τῶν ψήφων 
μαντικήν. Ζεὺς δὲ αὐτὸν κήρυκα ἑαυτοῦ καὶ θεῶν 
ὑποχθονίων τίθησι. 

Ταὐγέτη δὲ ἐκ Διὸς «ἐγέννησε! Λακεδαίμονα, 
ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ Λακεδαίμων ἡ χώρα καλεῖται. Λακεδαί- 
μονος δὲ καὶ Σπάρτης τῆς Εὐρώτα, ὃς ἦν ἀπὸ 
Λέλεγος αὐτόχθονος καὶ νύμφης νηίδος Κλεοχα- 
ρείας,᾿ Ἀμύκλας καὶ Εὐρυδίκη, ἣν ἔγημεν ᾿Ακρίσιος. 
᾿Αμύκλα δὲ καὶ Διομήδης τῆς Λαπίθου Kuvoptys 
καὶ ‘Taxw6os. τοῦτον εἶναι τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἐρώ- 
μενον λέγουσιν, ὃν δίσκῳ βαλὼν ἄκων ἀπέκτεινε. 


1 γέννησε conjecturally supplied by Hercher. A verb is 
certainly wanted. It may have been érexe. 


the golden wand. However, there is a lacuna in the hymn 
after verse 526, and the missing passage may have contained 
the exchange in question and the request of Hermes for the 
gift of divination, both of which are mentioned by Apollo- 
dlorus but omitted in the hymn as it stands at present. See 
Allen and Sikes on the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 526 sq., 
in their edition of the Homeric Hymns, p. 190. 

1 For the gift of the golden wand, see Homeric Hymn to 
Hermes, 527 sqq. 

2 Compare the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 552 sqq. The 
reference is to the divining pebbles called thriae, which were 
personified as three winged sisters who dwelt on Parnassus, 
and are said to have been the nurses of Apollo. See Zenobius, 
Cent. v. 75; Callimachus, Hymn to Apollo, 45, with the 
Scholiast ; Htymologicum Magnum, Ὁ. 455. 45, 8.v. Θρία ; 
Hesychius, s.v. θριαί; Anecdota Graeca, ed. Im. Bekker, i. 
265. 11, s.v. Θριάσιον πεδίον. According to one account, the 
divining pebbles were an invention of Athena, which so dis- 
eusted Apollo that Zeus caused that mode of divination to 
fall into discredit, though it had been in high repute before ; 


1o 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 2-3 


wishing to get the pipe also, Apollo offered to give 
him the golden wand which he owned while he 
herded cattle.1 But Hermes wished both to get the 
wand for the pipe and to acquire the art of divina- 
tion. So he gave the pipe and learned the art of 
divining by pebbles.2~ And Zeus appointed him 
herald to himself and to the infernal gods. 

Taygete had by Zeus a son Lacedaemon, after 
whom the country of Lacedaemon is called.? Lace- 
daemon and Sparta, daughter of Eurotas (who was a 
son of Lelex,+ a son of the soil, by a Naiad nymph 
Cleocharia), had a son Amyclas and a daughter Eury- 
dice, whom Acrisius married. Amyclas and Diomede, 
daughter of Lapithus, had sons, Cynortes and 
Hyacinth.° They say that this Hyacinth was beloved 
of Apollo and killed by him involuntarily with the 


and Apollo vented his spite at the practitioners of a rival art 
by saying that ‘‘There be many that cast pebbles, but few 
prophets.” See Zenobius, l.c.; Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. 
@pia. This tradition may perhaps be accepted as evidence 
that in time the simple mode of divination by pebbles went 
out of fashion, being cast into the shade by the far more 
stately and imposing ritual of the frenzied prophetesses at 
Delphi, whose wild words were accepted as the very utterances 
of the deity. However, we are informed that in the temple 
at Delphi there were divining pebbles in a bowl on a tripod, 
and that when an inquirer applied to the oracle, the pebbles 
danced about in the bowl, while the inspired priestess pro- 
phesied. See Nonnus, in Westermann’s Mythographi Graeci, 
Appendix Narrationum, No. 67, p. 384; Suidas, s.v. Πυθώ. 
As to Greek divination by pebbles, see A. Bouché-Leclereq, 
Histoire de la Divination dans Tl Antiquité, i. 192, sqq.; and 
my note on Pausanias, vii. 25. 10 (vol. iv. pp. 172 sqq.). 

9. Compare Pausanias, iii. 1. 2; Scholiast on Euripides, 
Orestes, 626. 
4 According to Pausanias (iii. 1. 1), Eurotas was a son of 
Myles, who was a son of Lelex. 

5. Compare Pausanias, iii. 1. 3. 


Il 


APOLLODORUS 


i 
Κυνόρτου δὲ Iepujpns, ὃς γαμεῖ Τοργοφόνην 
τὴν Περσέως, καθάπερ Στησίχορός φησι, καὶ 
τίκτει 'Γυνδάρεων ᾿Ικάριον ᾿Αφαρέα Λεύκιππον. 
᾿Αφαρέως μὲν οὗν καὶ ᾿Αρήνης τῆς Οἰβάλου 
Λυγκεύς τε καὶ Ἴδας καὶ Πεῖσος: κατὰ πολλοὺς 
δὲ Ἴδας ἐκ Ἰ]Ποσειδῶνος λέγεται. Λυγκεὺς δὲ 
ὀξυδερκίᾳ διήνεγκεν, ὡς καὶ τὰ ὑπὸ γῆν θεωρεῖν. 
Λευκίππου δὲ θυγατέρες ἐγένοντο ἹἸλάειρα καὶ 
Φοίβη: ταύτας ἁρπάσαντες ἔγημαν Διόσκουροι. 
πρὸς δὲ ταύταις ᾿Αρσινόην ἐγέννησε. ταύτῃ μίγ- 
vutat ᾿Απόλλων, ἡ δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιὸν γεννᾷ. τινὲς 
δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιὸν οὐκ €& Ἀρσινόης τῆς Λευκίππου 


λέγουσιν, GAN ἐκ Κορωνίδος τῆς Φλεγύου ἐν 


1 Οἰβάλου Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 511, Aegius: 
οἰβάδου A. 


1 See above, i. 3.3; Nicander, Ther. 901 sqq., with the 
Scholiast on v. 902; Pausanias, iii. 1.3, iii. 19.5; J. Tzetzes, 
Chiliades, i. 241 sqq.; Ovid, Metamorph. x. 161-219; Pliny, 
Nat. Hist. xxi. 66; Seriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 37, 135 sq. (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 117; Second Vatican Mythographer, 181). The 
tomb of Hyacinth was shown at Amyclae under the great 
image of Apollo; a bronze door opened into the tomb, and 
sacrifices were there offered to him as a hero. See Pausanias, 
iii. 19.3. Compare Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Third Edition, 
i. 313 sqq. 

2 See above, i. 9. 5, where Apollodorus represents Perieres 
as the son of Aeolus (compare i. 7. 3), though he adds that 
many people regarded him as the son of Cynortas. See below 
ill. 10. 4 note. : 

3 Compare Pindar, Nem. x. 62 (116) 8. ; Pausanias, iv. 
2.7 (who seems to have misunderstood the foregoing passage 
of Pindar); Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 553; Hyginus, 
Fab. 14, p. 42, ed. Bunte. 

4 See below, iii. 11. 2. 


12 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 3 


east of a quoit.1 Cynortes had a son Perieres, who 
married Gorgophone, daughter of Perseus, as Ste- 
sichorus says, and she bore Tyndareus, Icarius, Apha- 
reus, and Leucippus.? Aphareus and Arene, daughter 
of Oebalus, had sons Lynceus and Idas and Pisus ; 
but according to many, Idas is said to have been 
gotten by Poseidon. Lynceus excelled in sharpness 
of sight, so that he could even see things under 
ground. lLeucippus had daughters, Hilaira and 
Phoebe: these the Dioscuri carried off and married.* 
Besides them Leucippus begat Arsinoe: with her 
Apollo had intercourse, and she bore Aesculapius. 
But some affirm that Aesculapius was not a son of 
Arsinoe, daughter of Leucippus, but that he was a 
son of Coronis, daughter of Phlegyas in Thessaly.° 


5 The ancients were divided with regard to the mother of 
_ Aesculapius, some maintaining that she was a Messenian 
woman Arsinoe, daughter of Leucippus, others that she was 
a Thessalian woman Coronis, daughter of Phlegyas. See the 
Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 8 (14), who quotes authorities 
on both sides: amongst the champions of Arsinoe were 
Asclepiades and an Argive writer named Socrates. The claims 
of the Messenian Arsinoe were naturally supported by pa- 
triotic Messenians, who looked on the god and his sons as in 
a sense their fellow countrymen. See Pausanias, ii. 26. 3-7, 
iv. 3. 2, iv. 31. 12. Apollodorus apparently accepted the 
Messenian view. But on the other side a long array of autho- 
rities declared in favour of Coronis, and her claim to be the 
mother of the god had the powerful support of the priesthood 
of Aesculapius at Hpidaurus, one of the principal seats of the 
worship of the healing god. See the Homeric Hymn to 
Aesculapius, xvi. 1 sqq.; Pindar, Pyth. iii. 8 (14) sqq. ; 
Apollonius Rhodius, Argonaut. iv. 616 sq. ; Diodorus Siculus, 
iv. 71.1, v. 74.6; Pausanias, ii. 26. 3-7; Hyginus, Fab. 
202 ; id. Astronom. ii. 40; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. vi. 617 ; 
Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Theb. iii. 506; Scriptores 
rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i pp. 17 and 
37 (First Vatican Mythographer, 46 and 115). Pausanias, 


13 


APOLLODORUS 


Θεσσαλίᾳ. καί φασιν ἐρασθῆναι ταύτης ᾿Απόλ- 
\ >’ / a x \ \ \ 
Awva Kal εὐθέως συνελθεῖν: τὴν dé! mapa τὴν 
Tov πατρὸς γνώμην [ἑλομένην] 5 “Ioyvi τῷ Kar- 
νέως ἀδελφῷ συνοικεῖν. ᾿Απόλχλων δὲ τὸν μὲν 
ἀπαγγείλαντα κόρακα καταρᾶται, ὃν τέως λευ- 
κὸν ὄντα ἐποίησε μέλανα, αὐτὴν δὲ ἀπέκτεινε. 
καιομένης δὲ αὐτῆς ἁρπάσας τὸ βρέφος ἐκ τῆς 
πυρᾶς πρὸς Χείρωνα τὸν Κένταυρον ἤνεγκε, παρ᾽ 


1 τὴν δὲ Aegius, Heyne, Miiller, Hercher, Wagner: τοῦ 
δὲ A, Westermann, Bekker. 

2 ἑλομένην Heyne, Miiller, Wagner: ἑλομένου A, Bekker : 
ἑλωμένου R®: ἐρωμένου Sevinus, Westermann. Hercher 
omits the word, perhaps rightly. 

3 ὃν Faber. The MSS. read ὃς or ὧς. 

4 αὐτῆς A, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, Her- 
cher ; ταύτης RR®, Wagner. 


who expressly rejects the claim of Arsinoe, quotes in favour 
of Coronis a Delphic oracle, which he regards as decisive ; 
for who should know the true mother of Aesculapius better 
than his own father Apollo? The testimony of the deity 
for once was quite unambiguous. It ran thus :— 


“Ὁ born to be the world’s great joy, Aesculapius, 
Offspring of love, whom Phlegyas’ daughter, fair Coronis, 
bore to me 
In rugged Epidaurus.” 


See Pausanias, ii. 26. 7. In modern times the stones of Epi- 
daurus, if we may say so, have risen up to testify to the truth 
of this oracle. For in the course of the modern excavations 
at the great Epidaurian sanctuary of Aesculapius there was 
discovered a limestone tablet inscribed with a hymn in honour 
of Apollo and Aesculapius, in which the family tree of the 
junior god is set out with the utmost precision, and it entirely 
confirms the Delphic oracle. The author of the hymn was a 
certain native of Epidaurus, by name Isyllus, a man of such 
scrupulous accuracy that before publishing his hymn he took 
the precaution of submitting it to the fount of knowledge at 
Delphi with an inquiry whether the god would sanction its 


14 


(ii i “5. 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 3 


And they say that Apollo loved her and at once con- 
sorted with her, but that she, against her father’s 
judgment, preferred and cohabited with Ischys, 
brother of Caeneus. Apollo cursed the raven that 
brought the tidings and made him black instead of 
white, as he had been before; but he killed Coronis. 
As she was burning, he snatched the babe from the 
pyre and brought it to Chiron, the centaur,! by. 


publication. The deity granted his permission in very 
cordial terms; hence we may look on the hymn as an 
authentic document bearing the imprimatur of the Delphic 
Apollo himself. In it the pedigree of Aesculapius is traced 
as follows: Father Zeus bestowed the hand of the Muse 
Erato on Malus in holy matrimony (ὁσίοισι yauos). The pair 
had a daughter Cleophema, who married Phlegyas, a native 
of Epidaurus ; and Phlegyas had by her a daughter Aegla, 
otherwise known as Coronis, whom Phoebus of the golden 
bow beheld in the house of her grandfather Malus, and falling 
in love he got by her a child, Aesculapius. See ᾿Εφημερὶς 
dpxatodoyixn, ili. (1885) coll. 65 sqq. ; H. Collitzand F. Bechtel, 
Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften, iii. 1, pp. 
162 sqq., No. 3342. : 

1 The story how Coronis played her divine lover false and 
was killed by him, and how the god rescued his child from 
the burning pyre and carried him to Chiron, is told by Pindar, 
Pyth. iii. ὃ (14) sqq. Compare the Scholia on this passage 
of Pindar, especially on v. 27 (48); Pausanias, ii. 26. 6 
(according to whom it was Hermes, not Apollo, who snatched 
the child from the burning pyre); Hyginus, Fab. 202; id. 
Astronom. ii. 40; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Theb. 
ili. 506 ; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. pp. 17, 37, and 118 (First Vatican Mythographer, 46 
and 115; Second Vatican Mythographer, 128). All these 
writers, except Pindar and Pausanias, relate the story of the 
tell-tale raven and his punishment. The story isalso told by 
Ovid (Metamorph. ii. 534 sqq.) and Antoninus Liberalis 
(Transform., 20), but neither of them mentions Aesculapius. 
It was narrated by Pherecydes, who may have been the source 
from which the other writers drew their information. See 
Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 34 (59). The name of the 


15 


APOLLODORUS 


Φ 
ὦ καὶ τὴν ἰατρικὴν καὶ τὴν κυνηγετικὴν τρεφο- 


μενος ἐδιδάχθη. καὶ γενόμενος χειρουργικὸς καὶ 
τὴν τέχνην ἀσκήσας ἐπὶ πολὺ οὐ μόνον ἐκώλυέ 
τινας ἀποθνήσκειν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνήγειρε καὶ τοὺς ἀποθα- 
νόντας" παρὰ γὰρ ᾿Αθηνᾶς λαβὼν τὸ ἐκ τῶν 
φλεβῶν τῆς Γ οργόνος ῥυὲν αἷμα, τῷ μὲν ἐκ τῶν 
ἀριστερῶν ῥυέντι πρὸς φθορὰν ἀνθρώπων é ἐχρῆτο, 
τῷ δὲ ἐκ τῶν δεξιῶν πρὸς , σωτηρίαν, καὶ διὰ 
τούτου " τοὺς τεθνηκότας ἀνήγειρεν. [εὗρον ® δέ 
τινᾶς λεγομένους ἀναστῆναι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, Καπανέα 
καὶ Λυκοῦργον, ὡς Στησίχορός φησιν «ἐν; Ἔρι- 
POND. Ἱππόλυτον, ὡς ὁ τὰ Ναυπακτικὰ συγ- 


τ Αι: οὗ Hercher, Wagner. 

2 διὰ τούτου A, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, 
Hercher: διὰ τοῦτο ES, Wagner (but wrongly, since διὰ with 
the accusative is never used to express the instrument). 

’ As Heyne pointed out, the following list of persons 
raised from the dead by Aesculapius is probably a marginal 
gloss which has crept into the text. Nowhere else does 
Apollodorus speak of himself in the first person or indeed 
make any reference to himself. 


human lover of Coronis is given as Ischys, son of Elatus, by 
Pindar and Pausanias in agreement with Apollodorus. But 
Antoninus Liberalis calls him Alcyoneus; Lactantius Pla- 
cidus and the Second Vatican Mythographer call him Lyeus ; 
and the First Vatican Mythographer describes him (fab. 115) 
simply as the son of Elatus. As to the connexion of Coronis 
with the raven or the crow in Greek legendary lore, see my 
note on Pausanias, ii. 17. 11 (vol. iii. pp. 72 sqg.). Compare 
D’Arcy Wentworth T hompson, Glossary of Greek Birds, p. 93. 

1 Compare Zenobius, Cent. i. 18, who probably copied 
Apollodorus. According to Euripides (Ion, 999 sqq.), Pallas 
gave Erichthonius two drops of the Gorgon’s blood, one of 
them a deadly poison, the other a powerful medicine for the 
healing of diseases. 

2 For other lists of dead men whom Aesculapius is said 
to have restored to life, see Sextus Empiricus, p. 658, ed. 


16 


aoe LIBRARY, III. x. 3 


whom he was brought up and taught the arts of 
healing and hunting. And having become a surgeon, 
and carried the art to a great pitch, he not only pre- 
vented some from dying, but even raised up the dead; 
‘for he had received from Athena the blood that 
flowed from the veins of the Gorgon, and while he 
used the blood that flowed from the veins on the left 
side for the bane of mankind, he used the blood that 
flowed from the right side for salvation, and by that 
means he raised the dead.!_ I found some who are 
reported to have been raised by him,” to wit, Capa- 
neus and Lycurgus,? as Stesichorus says in the 
Eriphyle ; Hippolytus,4 as the author of the Nau- 


Bekker; Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 54 (96); Scholiast 
on Euripides, Alcestis, 1. These two Scholiasts mention that 
according to Pherecydes the people who died at Delphi were 
raised from the dead by Aesculapius. To the list of dead men 
whom Aesculapius restored to life, Propertius adds Androgeus, 
son of Minos (ii. 1. 61 sq.). 

3 The resurrection of these two men by the power of Aes- 
culapius is mentioned also, on the authority of Stesichorus, 
by the Scholiast on Euripides, Alcestis, 1, and the Scholiast 
on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 54 (96). Otherwise the event is appa- 
rently not noticed by ancient writers, and of the many legen- 
dary persons who bore the name of Lycurgus we do not know 
which is referred to. Heyne conjectured that the incident 
took place in the war of the Epigoni against Thebes, when 
Capaneus, one of the original Seven against Thebes, and 
Lycurgus, son of Pronax (as to whom see i. 9. 13) may have 
been restored to life by Aesculapius. This conjecture is con- 
firmed by a passage of Sextus Empiricus (p. 658 ed. Bekker), 
where we read: ‘‘Stesichorus in his Hriphyle says that he 
(Aesculapius) raised up some of those who fell at Thebes.” 

4 As to the restoration of Hippolytus to life by Aesculapius 
see Pindar, Pyth. iii. 54 (96) sqq., with the Scholiast ; Sextus 
Empiricus, p. 658, ed. Bekker (who quotes as his authority 
Staphylus in his book on the Arcadians); Scholiast on Euri- 
pides, Alcestis, 1 (who quotes Apollodorus as his authority) ; 


; 17 
VOL, IL. c 


APOLLODORUS 


γράψας λέγει, Τυνδάρεων, ὥς φησι Πανύασις,' 
Ὑμέναιον, ὡς οἱ ᾿Ορφικοὶ λέγουσι, Γλαῦκον τὸν 
Μίνωος, ὡς Μελησαγόρας λέγει.] Ζεὺς δὲ φοβη- 
θεὶς μὴ λαβόντες ἄνθρωποι θεραπείαν παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ F 
βοηθῶσιν ἀλλήλοις, ἐκεραύνωσεν αὐτόν. καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο ὀργισθεὶς ᾿Απόλλων κτείνει Κύκλωπας τοὺς 
τὸν κεραυνὸν Ai κατασκευάσαντας. Ζεὺς δὲ 
ἐμέλλησε ῥίπτειν αὐτὸν εἰς Τάρταρον, δεηθείσης 


1 Πανύασις S, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker: 
Πανύασσις RR® C, Wagner. 2 αὐτοῦ ES: αὐτῶν A. 


Yratosthenes, Catasier. 6; Hyginus, Fab. 49; id. Astro- 
nom. ii. 14; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Theb. iv. 434, 
vi. 353 (875). After his resurrection Hippolytus is said to 
have gone to dwell at Aricia, on the Alban Hills, near Rome, 
where he reigned as a king and dedicated a precinct to Diana. 
See Pausanias, ii. 27. 4; Virgil, Aen. vii. 761 sqgq., with the 
commentary of Servius ; Ovid, Fastt, iii. 263 sqq., vi. 735 sqq. ; 
id. Metamorph. xv. 297 sqq.; Scholiast on Persius, Sat. 
vi. 56, pp. 347 sq., ed. O. Jahn; Lactantius, Divin. Inst. 
i.17; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. p. 118 (Second Vatican Mythographer, 128). The 
silence of Apollodorus as to this well-known Italian legend, 
which was told to account for the famous priesthood of Diana 
at Aricia, like his complete silence as to Rome, which he 
never mentions, tends to show that Apollodorus either 
deliberately ignored the Roman empire or wrote at a time 
when there was but little intercourse between Greece and 
that part of Italy which was under Roman rule. 

1 For the raising of Tyndareus from the dead by Aescu- 
lapius see also Sextus Empiricus, p. 658, ed. Bekker ; 
Scholiast on Euripides, Alcestis, 1 (both these writers cite 
Panyasis as their authority); Lucian, De saltatione, 45; 
Zenobius, Cent. i. 47; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxix. 3. 

2 See above, iii. 3. 1. 

3 This account of the death of Aesculapius, the revenge of 
Apollo, and his servitude with Admetus is copied almost 
verbally by Zenobius, Cent. i. 18, but as usual without 
acknowledgment. Compare Pherecydes, quoted by the 


18 


THE LIBRARY, IIIT. x. 3-4 


pactica reports; Tyndareus, as Panyasis says;! Hy- 
menaeus, as the Orphics report ; and Glaucus, son of 
Minos,? as Melesagoras relates. But Zeus, fearing 
that men might acquire the healing art from him and 
so come to the rescue of each other, smote him with 
a thunderbolt. Angry on that account, Apollo slew 
the Cyclopes who had fashioned the thunderbolt for 
Zeus.* But Zeus would have hurled him to Tartarus ; 


Scholiast on Euripides, Alcestis,.1; Pindar, Pyth. iii. 54 
(96) sqg.; Euripides, Alcestis, 1 sqqg., 123 sqqg.; Diodorus 
Siculus, iv. 71. 1-3; Hyginus, Fab. 49; Servius, on Virgil, 
Aen. vii. 761; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. 
G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 17 (First Vatican Mythographer, 46). 
According to Diodorus Siculus (J.c.) Aesculapius as a physician 
was so successful in his practice that the death-rate was per- 
ceptibly lowered, and Hades accused the doctor to Zeus of 
poaching on his preserves. The accusation angered Zeus, 
and he killed Aesculapius with a thunderbolt. According to 
Pherecydes, with whom Apollodorus agrees, the period of 
Apollo’s servitude with Admetus was one year ; according to 
Servius and the First Vatican Mythographer it was nine 
years. This suggests that the period may have been what 
was called a ‘‘great” or ‘‘eternal” year, which included 
eight ordinary years. See above, iii. 4. 2, with the note on 
ii. 5. 11. According to one account the motive for Apollo’s 
servitude was his love for Admetus. See Callimachus, Hymn 
to Apollo, 45 sqq. ; Scholiast on Euripides, Alcestis, 1, quoting 
Rhianus as his authority. Apollo is said to have served 
Branchus as well as Admetus (Philostratus, H’pist. 57), and 
we have seen that he served Laomedon. See above, ii. 5. 9 note. 

1 According to Pherecydes, quoted by the Scholiast on 
Euripides, Alcestis, 1, it was not the Cyclopes but their sons 
whom Apollo slew. The passage of Pherecydes, as quoted by 
the Scholiast, runs as follows: “ΤῸ him” (that is, to Adme- 
tus) ‘‘came Apollo, to serve him as a thrall for a year, at the 
command of Zeus, because Apollo had slain the sons of 
Brontes, of Steropes, and of Arges. He slew them out of 
spite at Zeus, because Zeus slew his son Aesculapius with a 
thunderbolt at Pytho; for by his remedies Aesculapius raised 
the dead.” 


19 
c 2 


APOLLODORUS 


δὲ Λητοῦς ἐκέλευσεν αὐτὸν ἐνιαυτὸν ἀνδρὶ θητεῦ- 
σαι. ὁ δὲ παραγενόμενος εἰς Φερὰς πρὸς "᾿Αδμητον 
τὸν Φέρητος τούτῳ λατρεύων ἐποίμαινε, καὶ τὰς 
θηλείας βόας πάσας διδυμοτόκους ἐποίησεν. 
Εἰσὶ δὲ οἱ λέγοντες ᾿Αφαρέα μὲν καὶ Λεύκιππον 
> / / “ » / \ 
ἐκ Ilepinpovs γενέσθαι τοῦ Αἰόλου, Kuvoptov δὲ 
Περιήρην, τοῦ δὲ Οἴβαλον, Οἰβάλου δὲ καὶ vnidos 
Mg 7 r / ¢ / 3 ’ 
νύμφης Βατείας Τυνδάρεων ᾿ἵπποκόωντα ᾿Ικάριον. 
ς a 
Ἱπποκόωντος μὲν οὖν ἐγένοντο παῖδες Δορυ- 
\ 1 τι a Ἢ “4 BK > / B , 
κλεὺς ' Σκαῖος Kvapoghopos Kutetyns Βουκόλος 


1 Δυρυκλεὺς. Heyne conjectured Δορκεὺς (comparing Pau- 
sanias, ili. 15. 1 sq.), which is accepted by Bekker and 
Hercher. 


----  - 


1 See Appendix, ‘‘ Apollo and the Kine of Admetus.” 

2 As to these genealogies see above, i. 7. 3, i. 9. 5, ii. 4. 5, 
iii. 10. 3; Pausanias, ii. 21.7, i. 1 dae, τὸ eee 4; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 284, 511. Pausanias con- 
sistently represents Perieres as the son of Aeolus, and this 
tradition had the support .of Hesiod (quoted by ‘Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 284). On the other hand Tzetzes re- 
presents Perieres as the son of Cynortes (Schol. on Lycophron, 
511). Apollodorus here and elsewhere (i. 9. 5) mentions both 
traditions without deciding between them. In two passages 
(i. 7.3, i. 9. 5) he asserts or implies that the father of Perieres 
was Acolus; in another passage (iil. 10. 3) he asserts that 
the father of Perieres was Cynortes. In the present passage 
he seems to say that according to one tradition there were 
two men of the name of Perieres: one of them was the son 
of Aeolus and father of Aphareus and Leucippus ; the other 
was the son of Cynortes and father of Oebalus, who married 
the nymph Batia and became by her the father of Tyndareus, 
Hippocoon, and Icarius. Pausanias says that Gorgophone, 
daughter of Perseus, first married Perieres and had by him 
two sons, Aphareus and Leucippus, and that after his death 
she married Oebalus, son of Cynortas (Cynortes), and had by 
him a son Tyndareus. See Pausanias, ii. 21. 7, iil. 1. 4, 
iv. 2. 4. Apollodorus, on the other hand, represents Perieres 
as the father not only of Aphareus and Leucippus, but also 


20 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 4-5 


however, at the intercession of Latona he ordered 
him to serve as a thrall to a man for a year. So he 
went to Admetus, son of Pheres, at Pherae, and served 
him as a herdsman, and caused all the cows to drop 
twins.! 

But some say that Aphareus and Leucippus were 
sons of Perieres, the son of Aeolus, and that Cynortes 
begat Perieres, and that Perieres begat Oebalus, and 
that Oebalus begat Tyndareus, Hippocoon, and Icarius 
by a Naiad nymph Batia.? 

Now Hippocoon had sons, to wit: Dorycleus, 
Seaeus, Enarophorus, Eutiches, Bucolus, Lycaethus, 


of Tyndareus and Icarius by Gorgophone, daughter of Perseus. 
See above, i. 9. 5, iii. 10. 8. Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 
511) agrees with him as to the sons, but makes Perieres the 
son of Cynortas instead the son of Aeolus. Thus there were 
two traditions as to the father of Tyndareus ; according to 
one, his father was Perieres, according to the other, he was 
Oebalus. But the two traditions were agreed as to the mother 
of Tyndareus, whom they represented as Gorgophone, 
daughter of Perseus. According to another account, which 
may have been intended to reconcile the discrepant traditions 
as to the father of Tyndareus, Oebalus was the son of Perieres 
and the father of Tyndareus, Icarius, Arene, and the bastard 
Hippocoon, whom he had by Nicostrate. See Scholiast on 
Euripides, Orestes, 457; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. ii. 581, 
This account is mentioned, but apparently not accepted, by 
Apollodorus in the present passage, though he says nothing 
about the daughter Arene and the bastardy of Hippocoon. 
If we accept this last version of the genealogy, Tyndareus 
was descended both from Oebalus and Perieres, being the son 
of Oebalus and the grandson of Perieres. Ina recently dis- 
covered fragment of the Catalogues of Hesiod, that poet calls 
Tyndareus an Oebalid, implying that his father was Oebalus. 
See Griechische Dichterfraymente, i., Epische und elegische 
Fragmente, bearbeitet von W. Schubart und U. von Wila- 
mowitz-Moellendorff (Berlin, 1907), p. 30, line 38 (Berliner 
Klassikertexte, v. 1); Hesiod, ed. H. G. Evelyn-White, p. 
194, Frag. 68, line 88 (The Loeb Classical Library). 


21 


oO 


APOLLODORUS 


Λύκαιθος Τέβρος * “Ἵππόθοος Evputos Ἵπποκο- 
ρυστὴς ᾿Αλκίνους ᾿Αλκων. τούτους ᾿Ἱπποκόων 
ἔχων παῖδας ᾿Ικάριον " καὶ Τυνδάρεων ἐξέβαλε 
Λακεδαίμονος. οἱ δὲ φεύγουσι πρὸς Θέστιον, καὶ 
συμμαχοῦσιν αὐτῷ πρὸς τοὺς ὁμόρους πόλεμον 
ἔχοντι' καὶ γαμεῖ T υνδάρεως Θεστίου θυγατέρα 
Λήδαν. αὖθις δέ, ὃ ὅτε Ἡρακλῆς Ἱπποκόωντα καὶ 
τοὺς τούτου παῖδας ἀπέκτεινε, κατέρχονται, καὶ 
παραλαμβάνει Τυνδάρεως τὴν βασιλείαν. 

᾿Ικαρίου μὲν οὖν καὶ TlepeBotas νύμφης vidos 
Θόας Δαμάσιππος ᾿Ἰμεύσιμος ᾿Αλήτης Περίλεως, 
καὶ θυγάτηρ Πηνελόπη, ἣν ἔγημεν ᾿Οδυσσεύς: 
Τυνδάρεω δὲ καὶ Λήδας Τιμάνδρα, ἣ ἣν Ἔχεμος 
ἔγημε, καὶ Κλυταιμνήστρα, ἣν ἔγημεν ᾿Αγα- 
μέμνων, ἔτε Te Φυλονόη, ἣν ἴΑρτεμις ἀθάνατον 
ἐποίησε. Διὸς δὲ Λήδᾳ συνελθόντος ὁμοιωθέντος 
κύκνῳ, καὶ κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν νύκτα Τυνδάρεω," 
Διὸς μὲν ἐγεννήθη ἸΤ]ολυδεύκης καὶ ᾿Ελένη, Τυνδά.- 
pew δὲ Κάστωρ «καὶ Κλυταιμνήστραϊξ ἡ λέγουσι 

1 Σεβρός Pausanias, 111. 15. 1 sq. 

2 ixapt R (R®): ixaplwva A, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, 
Bekker, Hercher. For the form Ἰκάριος compare i. 9. 5. 

3 Tuvddpew RR®: τυνδάρεως A. 


4 καὶ Κλυταιμνήστρα inserted conjecturally by Gale, Bek- 
ker, Hercher, and Wagner, approved by Heyne. 


? As to the banishment of Tyndareus and his restoration 
by Hercules, see Diodorus Siculus, iv. 33. 5; Pausanias, ii. 
18. 7, iii. 1. 4 sq., 111. 21. 4; Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes, 
457 ; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. ii. 581. According to the 
Scholiasts on Kuripides and Homer (ll.cc.), Icarius joined 
Hippocoon in driving his brother Tyndareus out of Sparta. 

2 See above, ii. 7. 3. 

3 According to the Scholiast on Homer (Od. xv. 16), the 

wife of Icarius was Dorodoche, daughter of Ortilochus; but 


22 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 5-7 


Tebrus, Hippothous, Eurytus, Hippocorystes, Alcinus, 
and Alcon. With the help of these sons Hippocoon 
expelled Icarius and Tyndareus from Lacedaemon.! 
They fled to Thestius and allied themselves with him 
in the war which he waged with his neighbours; and 
Tyndareus married Leda, daughter of Thestius. But 
afterwards, when Hercules slew Hippocoon and his 
sons,’ they returned, and T’'yndareus succeeded to 
the kingdom. 

Icarius and Periboea, a Naiad nymph,’ had five sons, 
Thoas, Damasippus, Imeusimus, Aletes, Perileos,* and 
a daughter Penelope, whom Ulysses married.° Tyn- 
dareus and Leda had daughters, to wit, Timandra, 
whom Echemus married,° and Clytaemnestra, whom 
Agamemnon married; also another daughter Phy- 
lonoe, whom Artemis made immortal. But Zeus in the 
form of a swan consorted with Leda, and on the same 
night Tyndareus cohabited with her; and she bore 
Pollux and Helen to Zeus, and Castor and Cly- 
taemnestra to Tyndareus.’ But some say that Helen 


he adds that according to Pherecydes she was Asterodia, 
daughter of Eurypylus. 

4 Perileos (Perilaus), son of Icarius, is said to have accused 
the matricide Orestes at the court of the Areopagus. See 
Pausanias, viii. 34. 4. 

5 Compare Pausanias, 111. 12. 1, 111. 20. 10 sg. According 
to the former of these passages, Ulysses won her hand in a 
foot-race. As to races for brides, see iii. 9. 2, Epitome ii. 5, 
and note on i. 7. 8. 6 Compare Pausanias, vill. 5. 1. 

7 Compare Euripides, Helen, 16 sqq. ; Lucian, Dial. deorum, 
xx. 14; id. Charidemus,7; Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 
298; Hyginus, Fab. 77; id. Astronom. ii. 8; Scriptores 
rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 27, 
64, 119 sqg., 163 (First Vatican Mythographer, 78 and 204 ; 
Second Vatican Mythographer, 132; Third Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 3. 6). As the fruit of her intercourse with the swan, 
Leda is said to have laid an egg, which in the time of Pau- 


23 


APOLLODORUS 


» « 
δὲ ἔνιοι Νεμέσεως ᾿Ιλένην εἶναι καὶ Διός. ταύτην 
/ / ? fal 
yap τὴν Διὸς φεύγουσαν συνουσίαν εἰς χῆνα τὴν 
lal «ς 
μορφὴν μεταβαλεῖν, ὁμοιωθέντα δὲ καὶ Δία κύκνῳ 
a > - al 
συνελθεῖν: τὴν δὲ Mov ἐκ τῆς συνουσίας ἀποτεκεῖν, 
τοῦτο δὲ ἐν τοῖς ἄλσεσιν" εὑρόντα τινὰ ποιμένα 
Λήδᾳ κομίσαντα δοῦναι, τὴν δὲ καταθεμένην εἰς 
/ 
λάρνακα φυλάσσειν, καὶ χρόνῳ καθήκοντι yevvn- 
θεῖσαν ᾿Ελένην ὡς ἐξ αὑτῆς θυγατέρα τρέφειν. 
γενομένην δὲ αὐτὴν κάλλει διαπρεπῆ Θησεὺς 
ἁρπάσας εἰς ᾿Αφίδνας " ἐκόμισε. ἸΙολυδεύκης δὲ 
\ / 3 > / 2 ae 9 ὃ Θ 
καὶ Κάστωρ ἐπιστρατεύσαντες, ἐν Atdov Θη- 
σέως ὄντος, αἵρουσι τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὴν ᾿Ελένην 
/ \ \ / / ” 
λαμβάνουσι, καὶ τὴν Θησέως μητέρα AiOpav 


1 ἄλσεσιν A: ἅλσεσιν S: ἕλεσιν L. Preller (Griechische 
Mythologie’, ii. 110, note 5), Hercher (compare Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 88, ἐν τῷ ἕλει). 

2 ᾿Αφίδνας SR (first hand): ἀθήνας R (second hand), A. 

3 Κάστωρ. Here SR add eis ᾿Αφίδνας or eis ᾿Αθήνας, as 
above. The words are omitted by Bekker, Hercher, and 
Wagner. 


— 


sanias was still to be seen hanging by ribbons from the roof 
of the temple of Hilaira and Phoebe at Sparta. See Pau- 
sanias, 111. 16. 1. According to one account (First Vatican 
Mythographer, 78), Castor, Pollux, and Helen all emerged 
from a single egg; according to another account (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 204), Leda laid two eggs, one of which 
produced Castor and Pollux, and the other Clytaemnestra 
and Helen. In heaven the twins Castor and Pollux had each, 
if we may believe Lucian, half an egg on or above his head’ 
in token of the way in which he had been hatched. See 
Lucian, Dialog. deorum, xxvi. 1. For the distinction between 
Pollux and Castor, the former being regarded as the son of 
Zeus and the latter as the son of Tyndareus, see Pindar. 
Nem. x. 79 (149) sq. According to Hesiod, both Pollux and 
Castor were sons of Zeus. See Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. 
x. 80 (150). 


24 


ἘΠΕ LIBRARY, II, x.-7 


was a daughter of Nemesis and Zeus; for that she, 
flying from the arms of Zeus, changed herself into a 
goose, but Zeus in his turn took the likeness of a 
swan and so enjoyed her; and as the fruit of their 
loves she laid an egg, and a certain shepherd found it 
in the groves and brought and gave it to Leda; and 
she put it in a chest and kept it; and when Helen 
was hatched in due time, Leda brought her up as 
her own daughter.!. And when she grew into a 
lovely woman, Theseus carried her off and brought 
her to Aphidnae.?, But when Theseus was in Hades, 
Pollux and Castor marched against Aphidnae, took 
the city, got possession of Helen, and led Aethra, the 


1 With this variant story of the birth of Helen compare 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 88 (who may have followed 
Apollodorus) ; Eratosthenes, Cataster. 25; Pausanias, i. 
33. 7 sq.; Scholiast on Callimachus, Hymn to Artemis, 232 ; 
Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 8.. According to Eratosthenes and 
the Scholiast on Callimachus (//.cc.), the meeting between Zeus 
and Nemesis, in the shape respectively of a swan and a goose, 
took place at Rhamnus in Attica, where Nemesis had a 
famous sanctuary, the marble ruins of which may still be seen 
in a beautiful situation beside the sea. The statue of the 
goddess at Rhamnus was wrought by the hand of Phidias, 
and on the base he represented Leda bringing the youthful 
Helen to her mother Nemesis. In modern times some of 
these marble reliefs have been found on the spot, but they 
are too fragmentary to admit of being identified. See Pau- 
sanias, 1. 33. 2-8, with my commentary, vol. ii. pp. 455 sqq. 

2 As to the captivity of Helen at Aphidnae, and her rescue 
by her brothers Castor and Pollux, see Apollodorus, Epitome, 
i. 23; Herodotus, ix. 73; Strabo, ix. 1. 17, p. 396; Diodorus 
Siculus, iv. 63. 2-5; Plutarch, Thescus, 31 sq.; Pausanias, 
ieee, 1, 41.3, 11. 22. G, 111. 18. 4 sqg., compare v. 19, 3; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 503; Hyginus, Fab 79. 
The story was told by the historian Hellanicus (Scholiast 
on Homer, Il. iii. 144), and in part by the poet Aleman 
(Scholiast on Homer, 11. iii. 242). 


APOLLODORUS 


ἄγουσιν αἰχμάλωτον. παρεγένοντο δὲ εἰς 
Σπάρτην ἐπὶ τὸν ᾿Βλένης γώμον οἱ βασι 
λεύοντες “Ελλάδος. ἦσαν δὲ οἱ μνηστευόμενο 
olde ᾿Οδυσσεὺς Λαέρτου, Διομήδης Τυδέως, 
᾿Αντίλοχος Νέστορος, ᾿Αγαπήνωρ ᾿Αγκαίου, Σθέ- 
veros Καπανέως, ᾿Αμφίμαχος . Κτεάτου, Θάλπιος 
Εὐρύτου, Μέγης Φυλέως, ᾿Αμφίλοχος᾽ Ἀμφιαράου, 
Μενεσθεὺς Πετεώ, Σχεδίος «καὶ!» ᾿Επίστροφος 
«Ἰφίτου;»," Πολύξενος ᾿Αγασθένους, Πηνέλεως 
«Ἱππαλκίμου;», Anitos < ᾿Αλέκτορος;:», Αἴας 
᾿Οἱλέως, ᾿Ασκάλαφος καὶ ᾿Ιάλμενος “Apeos, ᾿ἔλε- 
φήνωρ Χαλκώδοντος, Εὔμηλος ᾿Αδμήτου, Πολυ- 
ποίτης Πειρίθου, Λεοντεὺς Κορώνου, ἸΤοδαλείριος 
καὶ Μαχάων ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ, Φιλοκτήτης Loiavtos, 
Εὐρύπυλος Evaipovos, Upwteciiaos Ἰφίκλου, 
Μενέλαος ᾿Ατρέως, Αἴας καὶ Τεῦκρος Τελαμῶνος, 


'-Augluaxos Heyne: ἀμφίλοχος SA. The name ᾿Αμφί- 
Aoxos occurs below. 

2 Σχεδίος <Kal> Ἐπίστροφος <*I¢itov> Palmer, Bekker, 
Hercher, Wagner: Σχέδιος ᾿Επιστρόφου A. 

3 Πηνέλεως «(Ἱππαλκίμου καὶ; Λήϊτος --᾿Αλεκτρυόνος -- 
Heyne: Πηνέλεως -«-[Ἱππαλκίμου:-, Λήιτος <’AA€KTopos > 


Bekker. 


1 For another list of the suitors of Helen, see Hyginus, 
Fab. 81. Hesiod in his Catalogues gave a list of the suitors 
of Helen, and of this list considerable fragments have been 
discovered in recent years. They include the names of 
Menelaus, the two sons of Amphiaraus (Alemaeon and 
Amphilochus), Ulysses, Podarces, son of Iphiclus, Protesilaus, 
son of Actor, <Menestheus>, son of Peteos, Ajax of Salamis, 
Klephenor, son of Chalcodon, and Idomeneus, son of Minos. 
Thus the list only partially agrees with that of Apollodorus, 
for it comprises the names “of Podarces and Idomeneus, 
which are omitted by Apollodorus, who also mentions only 
one son of Amphiaraus, namely Amphilochus. Hyginus 


26 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 7-8 


mother of Theseus, away captive. Now the kings 
of Greece repaired to Sparta to win the hand of 
Helen. The wooers were these :!—Ulysses, son of 
Laertes; Diomedes, son of Tydeus; Antilochus, son 
of Nestor; Agapenor, son of Ancaeus; Sthenelus, 
son of Capaneus; Amphimachus, son of Cteatus; 
Thalpius, son of Eurytus; Meges, son of Phyleus ; 
Amphilochus, son of Amphiaraus; Menestheus, son 
of Peteos; Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of 
Iphitus; Polyxenus, son of Agasthenes; Peneleos, 
son of Hippalcimus; Leitus, son of Alector; Ajax, 
son of Oileus; Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of 
Ares; Elephenor, son of Chalecodon; Eumelus, son 
of Admetus; Polypoetes, son of Perithous ; Leonteus, 
son of Coronus; Podalirius and Machaon, sons of 
Aesculapius ; Philoctetes, son of Poeas; Eurypylus, 
son of Evaemon; Protesilaus, son of Iphiclus ; Mene- 
laus, son of Atreus; Ajax and Teucer, sons of 


includes Idomeneus, but not Podarces, nor the sons of 
Amphiaraus. In these recently discovered fragments Hesiod 
does not confine himself to a bare list of names; he contrives 
to hit off the different characters of the suitors by describing 
the different manners of their wooing. Thus the canny and 
thrifty Ulysses brought no wedding presents, because he was 
quite sure he had no chance of winning the lady. On the 
other hand, the bold Ajax was extremely liberal with his 
offer of other people’s property ; he promised to give magni- 
ficent presents in the shape of sheep and oxen which he pro- 
posed to lift from the neighbouring coasts and islands. 
Idomeneus sent nobody to woo the lady, but came himself, 
trusting apparently to the strength of his personal attrac- 
tions to win her heart and carry her home with him 
a blooming bride. See Griechische Dichterfragmente, i., 
Epische und elegische Fragmente, bearbeitet von W. Schubart 
und U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (Berlin, 1907), pp. 28 
sqq. (Berliner Klassikertevte, v. 1); Hesiod, ed. H. G. 
Evelyn-White (London, 1914), pp. 192 sqq. (Lhe Loeb Clas- 
sical Inbrary). 


27 


APOLLODORUS 


9 Πάτροκλος Μενοιτίου. τούτων ὁρῶν τὸ πλῆθος 
Τυνδάρεως ἐδεδοίκει μὴ «προ:»κριθέντος 1 ἑνὸς 
στασιάσωσιν οἱ λοιποί. ὑποσχομένου δὲ Ὀδυσ- 
σέως, ἐὰν συλλάβηται πρὸς τὸν Πηνελόπης αὐτῷ 
γάμον, ὑποθήσεσθαι τρόπον τινὰ δι᾽ οὗ μηδεμία 
γενήσεται στάσις, ὡς “ὑπέσχετο αὐτῷ συλλήψε- 
σθαι ὁ Τυνδάρεως, πάντας εἶπεν ἐξορκίσαι τοὺς 
μνηστῆρας βοηθήσειν, ἐὰν ὁ προκριθεὶς νυμφίος 
ὑπὸ ἄλλου τινὸς ἀδικῆται περὶ τὸν γώμον. ἀκούσας 
δὲ τοῦτο Τυνδάρεως τοὺς μνηστῆρας ἐξορκίξει, καὶ 
Μενέλαον μὲν αὐτὸς αἱρεῖται νυμφίον, ᾿Οδυσσεῖ 
δὲ παρὰ ᾿Ικαρίου μνηστεύεται Πηνελόπην. 

ΧΙ. Μενέλαος μὲν οὖν ἐξ “Ἑλένης ἹῬρμιόνην 
ἐγέννησε καὶ κατά τινας Νικόστρατον, ἐ ἐκ δούλης 
«δὲ: ὃ Πιερίδος, γένος Αἰτωλίδος, ἢ καθάπερ 


1 προ: κριθέντος Faber, Heyne, Hercher: κριθέντος SA, 
Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, Wagner. Compare 6 προκριθεὶς 
a few lines below. 

2 δὲ inserted by Westermann, accepted by Bekker, Her- 
cher, Wagner. 


* Compare Hesiod, in Epische und elegische Fragmenite, 
ed. W. Schubart und U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, p. 
33; Hesiod, ed. H. G. Evelyn-White, p. 198; Euripides, 
Iphig. in Aulis, 57 sqq.; Thucydides, i. 9; Pausanias, iii. 
20.9; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. 11. 339; Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 202. According to Pausanias (l.c.) the suitors 
took the oath standing on the severed pieces of a horse. As 
to the custom of standing on the pieces of a sacrificial victim 
or passing between them at the making of solemn covenants, 
see Folk-lore in the Old Testament, i. 392 sqq. 

2 Homer definitely affirms (Od. iv. 12-14; compare 1}. iii. 
174 sq.) that Helen had only one child, her daughter Her- 
mione. But according to Hesiod, whose verses are quoted 
by the Scholiast on Sophocles, Electra, 539, Helen afterwards 
bore a son Nicostratus to Menelaus. Compare Scholiast on 
Homer, Od. iv. 11, who tells us further that according to 


28 


THE LIBRARY, III. x. 8--χι. 1 


Telamon; Patroclus, son of Menoetius. Seeing the 
multitude of them, Tyndareus feared that the pre- 
ference of one might set the others quarrelling; but 
Ulysses promised that, if he would help him to win 
the hand of Penelope, he would suggest a way by 
which there would be no quarrel. And when Tyn- 
dareus promised to help him, Ulysses told him to 
exact an oath from all the suitors that they would 
defend the favoured bridegroom against any wrong 
that might be done him in respect of his marriage. 
On hearing that, Tyndareus put the suitors on their 
oath,! and while he chose Menelaus to be _ the 
bridegroom of Helen, he solicited Icarius to bestow 
Penelope on Ulysses. 

XI. Now Menelaus had by Helen a daughter 
Hermione and, according to some, a son Nico- 


9 


stratus ;* and by a female slave Pieris, an Aetolian, 


more recent writers Helen had a son Corythus or Helenus 
by Alexander (Paris). According to Dictys Cretensis (Bell. 
Trojan. v. 5), Helen had three sons by Alexander, namely, 
Bunomus, Corythus, and Idaeus, who were accidentally 
killed at Troy through the collapse of a vaulted roof. The 
Scholiast on Homer, 11. iii. 175, says that the Lacedae- 
monians worshipped two sons of Helen, to wit, Nicostratus 
and Aethiolas. He further mentions, on the authority of 
Ariaethus, that Helen had by Menelaus a son Maraphius, 
from whom the Persian family of the Maraphions was 
descended. See Dindorf’s edition of the Scholia on the 
Iliad, vol. i. pp. 147 sq., vol. iii. p. 171. According to one 
account, Helen had a daughter by Theseus hefore she was 
married to Menelaus; this daughter was Iphigenia ; Helen 
entrusted her to her sister Clytaemnestra, who reared the 
child and passed her off on her husband Agamemnon as her 
own offspring. ‘This account of the parentage of Iphigenia 
was supported by the authority of Stesichorus and other 
poets. See Pausanias, ii. 22. ὁ sqg.; Antoninus Liberalis, 
Transform. 27. Sophocles represents Menelaus as having 
two children before he sailed for Troy (Electra, 539 sq.). 


29 


APOLLODORUS 


᾿Ακουσίλαός φησι Tnpnidos, MeyarévOn, ἐκ 
Κνωσσίας δὲ νύμφης κατὰ Εὔμηλον Ἐενόδαμον. 
Τῶν δὲ ἐκ Λήδας γενομένων παίδων Κάστωρ 
μὲν ἤσκει τὰ κατὰ πόλεμον, Πολυδεύκης δὲ 
πυγμήν, καὶ διὰ τὴν ἀνδρείαν ἐκλήθησαν ἀμφό- 
τερον Διόσκουροι. βουλόμενοι δὲ γῆμαι τὰς 
Λευκίππου θυγατέρας ἐκ Μεσσήνης ἁρπάσαντες 
éynuav: καὶ γίνεται μὲν Πολυδεύκους καὶ Φοίβης 


1 Compare Homer, Od. iv. 10-12. 

2 Compare Homer, Jl. iii. 237 ; Od. xi. 300. 

3 That is, ‘‘striplings of Zeus.” 

4 The usual tradition seems to have been that Idas and 
Lynceus, the sons of Aphareus, were engaged to be married 
to the daughters of Leucippus, who were their cousins, since 
Aphareus and Leucippus were brothers (see above, iii. 10. 3). 
They invited to their wedding Castor and Pollux, who were 
cousins both to the bridegrooms and the brides, since Tyn- 
dareus, the human father of Castor and Pollux (see above, 
iii. 10. 7), was a brother of Aphareus and Leucippus (see 
above, iii. 10. 3). But at the wedding Castor and Pollux 
carried off the brides, and being pursued by the bridegrooms, 
Idas and Lynceus, they turned on their pursuers. In the 
fight which ensued, Castor and Lynceus were slain, and Idas 
was killed by Zeus with a thunderbolt. See Theocritus, 
xxii. 137 sqq.; Scholiast on Homer, J1. iii. 243; Scholiast on 
Pindar, Nem. x. 60 (112); Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 546 ; 
id. Chiliades, ii. 686 sqq.; Hyginus, ab. 80; Ovid, Fasti, v. 
699 sqq.; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. ἃ. H. 
Bode, vol. i. p. 27 (First Vatican Mythographer, 77). Accord- 
ing to Apollodorus, however, the fight between the cousins 
was occasioned by a quarrel arising over the division of some 
cattle which they had lifted from Arcadia in a joint raid. 
This seems to have been the version of the story which 
Pindar followed; for in his description of the fatal affray 
between the cousins (Nem. x. 60 (112) sqq.) he speaks only of 
anger about cattle as the motive that led Idas to attack 
Castor. The rape of the daughters of Leucippus by Castor 
and Pollux was a favourite subject in art. See Pausanias, 
i. 18. l, iii. 17. 3 iii. 18. 11, iv. 31. 9. The names of the 


30 


THE LIBRARY, III. x1. 1-2 


or, according to Acusilaus, by Tereis, he had a son 
Megapenthes ;1 and by a nymph Cnossia, according 
to Kumelus, he had a son Xenodamus. 

Of the sons born to Leda Castor practised the art 
of war, and Pollux the art of boxing ;? and on account 
of their manliness they were both called Dioscuri.* 
And wishing to marry the daughters of Leucippus, 
they carried them off from Messene and wedded 
them;* and Pollux had Mnesileus by Phoebe, and 


damsels, as we learn from Apollodorus, were Phoebe and 
Hilaira. Compare Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. “Agidva; Pro- 
pertius, i»2. 15 sq.; Hyginus, Fab. 80. At Sparta they had 
a sanctuary, in which young maidens officiated as priestesses 
and were called Leucippides after the goddesses. See Pau- 
sanias, iii. 16. 1. From an obscure gloss of Hesychius (s.v. 
mwAia) we may perhaps infer that these maiden priestesses, 
like the goddesses, were two in number, and that they were 
called ‘‘the colts of the Leucippides.” Further, since the 
name of Leucippus, the legendary father of the goddesses, 
means simply ‘‘ White Horse,” it is tempting to suppose that 
the Leucippides, like their priestesses, were spoken of and 
perhaps conceived as white horses. More than that, Castor 
and Pollux, who carried off these white-horse maidens, if we 
may call them so, were not only constantly associated with 
horses, but were themselves called White Horses (λευκόπωλοι) 
by Pindar, Pyth. i. 66 (126) and ‘‘ White Colts of Zeus” by 
Euripides in a fragment of his lost play the Antiope. See 
8S. Wide, Lakonische Kulte (Leipsic, 1893), pp. 331 sq.; 
A. B. Cook, Zeus, i. 442. These coincidences can hardly be 
accidental. They point to the worship of a pair of brother 
deities conceived as white horses, and married to a pair of 
sister deities conceived as white mares, who were served by 
a pair of maiden priestesses called White Colts, assisted 
apparently by a boy priest or priests ; for a Laconian inscrip- 
tion describes a certain youthful Marcus Aurelius Zeuxippus 
as ‘‘priest of the Leucippides and neatherd (? Bovaydp) of the 
Tyndarids,” that is, of Castor and Pollux. See P. Cauer, 
Delectus Inscriptionum Graecarum propter dialectum me- 
morabilium, Ὁ. 17, No. 36; H. Collitz und F. Bechtel, 

ammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften, iii. 2, pp. 
40 sq., No. 4499. 


31 


APOLLODORUS 


Μνησίλεως, Κάστορος δὲ καὶ ᾿Ιλαείρας ᾿Ανώγων. 
ἐλάσαντες δὲ ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αρκαδίας βοῶν λείαν μετὰ 
τῶν ᾿Αφαρέως παίδων ᾿ ‘Ida καὶ Λυγκέως, ἐ ἐπιτρέ- 
πουσιν Ἴδᾳ διελεῖν"; ὁ δὲ τεμὼν βοῦν εἰς μέρη 
τέσσαρα, τοῦ πρώτου καταφαγόντος εἶπε τῆς 
λείας τὸ ἥμισυ ἔσεσθαι, καὶ τοῦ δευτέρου τὸ 
λοιπόν. καὶ φθάσας κατηνάλωσε τὸ μέρος τὸ 
ἴδιον πρῶτος " Ἴδας, καὶ τὸ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ, καὶ 
μετ᾽ ἐκείνου τὴν λείαν εἰς Μεσσήνην ἤλασε. 
στρατεύσαντες δὲ ἐπὶ Μεσσήνην οἱ Διόσκουροι 
τήν τε λείαν ἐκείνην καὶ πολλὴν ἄλλην συνε- 
λαύνουσι. καὶ τὸν Ἴδαν ἐλόχων καὶ τὸν Λυγκέα. 
Λυγκεὺς δὲ ἰδὼν Κάστορα ἐμήνυσεν ἤἴδα, κἀκεῖνος 
αὐτὸν κτείνει. Πολυδεύκης δὲ ἐδίωξεν αὐτούς, 
καὶ τὸν μὲν Λυγκέα κτείνει τὸ δόρυ προέμενος, 
τὸν δὲ Ἴδαν διώκων, βληθεὶς ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου πέτρᾳ 
κατὰ τῆς κεφαλῆς, πίπτει σκοτωθείς. καὶ Ζεὺς 
Idav κεραυνοῖ, ἸΤολυδεύκην δὲ εἰς οὐρανὸν ἀνάγει. 
μὴ δεχομένου δὲ Πολυδεύκους τὴν ἀθανασίαν 
ὄντος νεκροῦ Κάστορος, Ζεὺς ἀμφοτέροις παρ᾽ 
ἡμέραν καὶ ἐν θεοῖς εἶναι καὶ ἐν θνητοῖς ὃ ἔδωκε. 


1 διελεῖν Commelinus: διελθεῖν A. 

* πρῶτος RR®° BV: πρῶτον LT. Hercher omits the word. 

Ὁ θνητοῖς. -Hercher conjectured νεκροῖς. Perhaps we 
should read τεθνηκόσιν. We can hardly suppose that Apollo- 
dorus used θνητοὶ in the sense in which John Wilson Croker 
used it and was scarified by Macaulay for so doing. 


1 Compare Homer, Od. xi. 298-304; Pindar, Nem. x. 55 
(101) sqgq., 75 (141) sqq.; td. Pyth. xi. 61 (93) sqqg.; Schol. on 
Homer, Od. xi. 302; Lucian, Dialog. deorum, xxvi.; Virgil, 
Aen. vi. 19] sq.; Hyginus, Fab. 80; id. Astronom. ii. 22 ; 
Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. 
p. 120 (Second Vatican Mythographer, 132). The ‘last of 


32 


THE LIBRARY, III. xr. 2 


Castor had Anogon by Hilaira. And having driven 
booty of cattle from Arcadia, in company with Idas 
and Lynceus, sons of Aphareus, they allowed Idas to 
divide the spoil. He cut a cow in four and said that 
one half of the booty should be his who ate his share 
first, and that the rest should be his who ate his 
share second. And before they knew where they 
were, Idas had swallowed his own share first and 
likewise his brother’s, and with him had driven oft 
the captured cattle to Messene. But the Dioscuri 
marched against Messene, and drove away that 
cattle and much else besides. And they lay in wait 
for Idas and Lynceus. But Lynceus spied Castor 
and discovered him to Idas, who killed him. Pollux 
chased them and slew Lynceus by throwing his spear, 
but in pursuing Lynceus he was wounded in the head 
with a stone thrown by him, and fell down in a swoon. 
And Zeus smote Idas with a thunderbolt, but Pollux 
he carried up to heaven. Nevertheless, as Pollux 
refused to accept immortality while his brother 
Castor was dead, Zeus permitted them both to be 
every other day among the gods and among mortals.! 


these writers explains the myth to mean that when the star 
of the one twin is setting, the star of the other is rising. It 
has been plausibly argued that in one of their aspects the 
twins were identified with the Morning and Evening Stars 
respectively, the immortal twin (Pollux) being conceived as 
the Morning Star, which is seen at dawn rising up in the sky 
till it is lost in the light of heaven, while the mortal twin 
(Castor) was identified with the Evening Star, which is seen 
at dusk sinking into its earthy bed. See J. G. Welcker, 
Griechische Gotterlehre, i. 606 sqq.; J. Rendel Harris, The 
Dioscuri in the Christian Legends (London, 1903), pp. 11 sqq. 
It would seem that this view of the Spartan twins was 
favoured by the Spartans themselves, for after their great 
naval victory of Aegospotami, at which Castor and Pollux 


33 


VOL, II. D 


APOLLODORUS 


/ δὲ ? fa \ lal , gf 
μεταστάντων δὲ εἰς θεοὺς τῶν Διοσκούρων, Tuv- 
δάρεως μεταπεμψάμενος Μενέλαον εἰς Σπάρτην 
τούτῳ τὴν βασιλείαν παρέδωκεν. 


XII. Ἠλέκτρας δὲ τῆς "Ἄτλαντος καὶ Διὸς 
Ἴασί t Δάρδ ἐγέ ἸΙασίων μὲν οὖν 

ασίων καὶ Δάρδανος ἐγένοντο. μ 
ἐρασθεὶς Δήμητρος καὶ θέλων καταισχῦναι τὴν 
θεὸν κεραυνοῦται, Δάρδανος δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ θανάτῳ 
τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ λυπούμενος, Σαμοθράκην ἀπολιπὼν 
εἰς τὴν ἀντίπερα ἤπειρον ἦλθε. ταύτης δὲ ἐβασί- 
Neve Τεῦκρος ποταμοῦ Σκαμάνδρου καὶ νύμφης 
᾿Ιδαίας" ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ οἱ τὴν χώραν νεμόμενοι 
Τεῦκροι προσηγορεύοντο. ὑποδεχθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ 
βασιλέως, καὶ λαβὼν μέρος τῆς γῆς καὶ τὴν 
ἐκείνου θυγατέρα Βάτειαν, Δάρδανον ἔκτισε πόλιν" 
τελευτήσαντος δὲ Τεύκρου τὴν χώραν ἅπασαν 
2 Δαρδανίαν ἐκάλεσε. γενομένων δὲ αὐτῷ παίδων 
1 χεύκρου S: τεῦκρος A. 


were said to have appeared visibly in or hovering over the 
Spartan fleet, the victors dedicated at Delphi the symbols of 
their divine champions in the shape of two golden stars, which 
shortly before the fatal battle of Leuctra fell down and dis- 
appeared, as if to announce that the star of Sparta’s fortune 
was about to set for ever. See Cicero, De divinatione, i. 34. 
75, li. 32. 68. The same interpretation of the twins would 
accord well with their white horses (see the preceding note), 
on which the starry brethren might be thought to ride through 
the blue sky. 

1 This account of the parentage of Iasion had the authority 
of Hellanicus (Scholiast on Homer, Od. v. 125). Compare 
Diodorus Siculus, ν. 48. 2. 

2 Compare Conon, Narrat. 21; Strabo, vii. p. 331, frag. 50, 
ed. Meineke ; Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 4. A different turn is 
given to the story by Homer, who represents the lovers 
meeting in a thrice-ploughed field (Od. v. 125-128). To the 


34 


THE LIBRARY, III. xr. 2-x1. 2 


And when the Dioscuri were translated to the gods, 
Tyndareus sent for Menelaus to Sparta and handed 
over the kingdom to him. 


XII. Electra, daughter of Atlas, had two sons, 
Iasion and Dardanus, by Zeus.! Now Iasion loved 
Demeter, and in an attempt to defile the goddess 
he was killed by a thunderbolt.2 Grieved at his 
brother’s death, Dardanus left Samothrace and came 
to the opposite mainland. That country was ruled 
by a king, Teucer, son of the river Scamander and 
of a nymph Idaea, and the inhabitants of the coun- 
try were called Teucrians after Teucer. Being wel- 
comed by the king, and having received a share 
of the land and the king’s daughter Batia, he built 
a city Dardanus, and when Teucer died he called 
the whole country Dardania.? And he had sons born 


same effect Hesiod (Theog. 969-974) says that the thrice- 
ploughed field where they met was in a fertile district 
of Crete, and that Wealth was born as the fruit of their love. 
Compare Diodorus Siculus, v. 77. 1 8ᾳ.; Hyginus, Fab. 270. 
The Scholiast on Homer, Od. v. 125, attempts to rationalize 
the myth by saying that Iasion was the only man who pre- 
served seed-corn after the deluge. 

3 As to the migration of Dardanus from Samothrace to Asia 
and his foundation of Dardania or Dardanus, see Diodorus 
Siculus, v. 48. 2 δᾳ. ; Conon, Narrat. 21; Stephanus By- 
zantius, s.v. Adpdavos; compare Homer, Jl. xx. 215 sqq. 
According to one account he was driven from Samothrace by 
a flood and floated to the coast of the Troadona raft. See 
Lycophron, Cassandra, 72 sqq., with the scholia of Tzetzes ; 
' Scholia on Homer, Jl. xx. 215. As to his marriage with 
Batia, daughter of Teucer, and his succession to the kingdom, 
compare Diodorus Sicuius, iv. 75. 1. According to Stephanus 
Byzantius (s.v. Adpdaves), Batia, the wife of Dardanus, was 
a daughter of Tros, not of Teucer. 


35 
p 2 


APOLLODORUS 


Ἴλου καὶ ᾿Ι!ριχθονίου, Ἶλος μὲν ἄπαις ἀπέθανεν, 
᾿Ιδριχθόνιος δὲ διαδεξάμενος τὴν βασιλείαν, γήμας 
᾿Αστυόχην τὴν Σιμόεντος, τεκνοῖ Toda. οὗτος 
παραλαβὼν τὴν βασιλείαν τὴν μὲν χώραν ἀφ᾽ 
ἑαυτοῦ Τροίαν ἐκάλεσε, καὶ γήμας Καλλιρρόην 
τὴν Σκαμάνδρου γεννᾷ θυγατέρα μὲν Κλεοπάτραν, 
παῖδας δὲ Ἶλον καὶ ᾿Ασσάρακον καὶ Τ᾿ανυμήδην. 
τοῦτον μὲν οὗν διὰ κάλλος ἀναρπάσας Ζεὺς bv 
ἀετοῦ θεῶν οἰνοχόον ἐν οὐρανῷ κατέστησεν" ᾿Ασ- 
σαράκου δὲ καὶ ᾿Ιερομνήμης τῆς Σιμόεντος Κάπυς, 
τοῦ δὲ καὶ Θεμίστης τῆς Ἴλου ᾿Αγχίσης, ᾧ δι 
ἐρωτικὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ᾿Αφροδίτη συνελθοῦσα Ai- 
νείαν ἐγέννησε καὶ Λύρον, ὃς ἄπαις ἀπέθανεν. 
Ἶλος δὲ εἰς Φρυγίαν ἀφικόμενος καὶ καταλαβὼν 
ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως αὐτόθι τεθειμένον ἀγῶνα νικᾷ 
πάλην: καὶ λαβὼν θλον πεντήκοντα κόρους " 
καὶ κόρας τὰς ἴσας, δόντος αὐτῷ τοῦ βασιλέως 
κατὰ χρησμὸν καὶ βοῦν ποικίλην, καὶ φράσαντος 


1 ᾿Αστυόχην 8.) ; ἀστρόχην A. 
2 κόρους δ: κούρους A. 


1 Compare Tzetzes, ϑδοῆοῖ. on Lycophron, 29. As to 
Erichthonius, son of Dardanus, see Homer, Jl. xx. 219 sqq. ; 
Diodorus Siculus, iv. 75.2. According to Dionysius of Hali- 
carnassus (Antiquit. Rom., i. 50. 3) the names of the two 
sons whom Dardanus had by his wife Batia were Erichthonius 
and Zacynthus. 

2 Compare Homer, J/. xx. 230, who does not mention th 
mother of Tros. She is named Astyoche, daughter of Simoeis, 
by Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 29) in agreement with 
Apollodorus. 

3 Compare Homer, 11. xx. 231 sqg.; Diodorus Sieulus, iv. 
75.3. The name of the wife of Tros is not mentioned by 
Ifomer and Diodorus. She is called Callirrhoe, daughter of 
Scamander, by Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 29) and the 


36 


THE LIBRARY, III. xu. 2-3 


to him, Ilus and Erichthonius, of whom [lus died 
childless,! and Erichthonius succeeded to the king- 
dom and marrying Astyoche, daughter of Simoeis, 
begat Tros.2 On succeeding to the kingdom, Tros 
called the country Troy after himself, and marrying 
Callirrhoe, daughter of Scamander, he begat a 
daughter Cleopatra, and sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and 
Ganymede.? This Ganymede, for the sake of his 
beauty, Zeus caught up on an eagle and appointed him 
cupbearer of the gods in heaven ;* and Assaracus had 
by his wife Hieromneme, daughter of Simoeis, a son 
Capys; and Capys had by his wife Themiste, daughter 
of Ilus,a son Anchises, whom Aphrodite met in love’s 
dalliance, and to whom she bore Aeneas® and Lyrus, 
who died childless. But Ilus went to. Phrygia, and 
finding games held there by the king, he was vic- 
torious in wrestling. As a prize he received fifty 
youths and as many maidens, and the king, in 
obedience to an oracle, gave him also a dappled 


Scholiast on Homer, 11. xx. 231, who refers to Hellanicus as 
his authority. See Scholia Graeca in Homeri Iliadem 
Townleyana, ed. Εἰ. Maass, vol. 11. p. 321. 

4 Compare Homer, Jl. xx. 232-235; Homeric Hymn to 
Aphrodite, 202 sqq. ‘These early versions of the myth do 
not mention the eagle as the agent which transported Gany- 
mede to heaven. The bird figures conspicuously in later 
versions of the myth and its representation in art. Compare 
Lucian, Dialog. deorum,iv.1; Virgil, Aen. v. 252 sqq.; Ovid, 
Metamorph. x. 155 sqq.; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 56, 139, 162, 256 (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 184, Second Vatican Mythographer, 
198, Third Vatican Mythographer, 3. 5 and 15. 11). 

®° Compare Homer, J/. xx. 239 sq.; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 
75. 5. Neither writer names the wives of Assaracus and 
Capys. As to the love of Aphrodite for Anchises, and the 
birth of Aeneas, see Homer, 11. ii. 819-821, v. 311-313; 
Hesiod, Theog. 1008-1010. 


37 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐν περ ἂν αὐτὴ κλιθῇ τόπῳ πόλιν κτίξειν, εἵπετο 
τῇ Bot. ἡ δὲ ἀφικομένη ἐπὶ τὸν λεγόμενον "τῆς 
Φρυγίας᾽ ΄Λτης λόφον. κλίνεται: ἔνθα πόλιν κτίσας 
Ἶλος ταύτην μὲν ἵλιον ἐκάλεσε, τῷ δὲ Δεὶ 
σημεῖον εὐξάμενος αὐτῴ TL φανῆναι, μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν 
τὸ διιπετὲς παλλάδιον. πρὸ τῆς σκηνῆς κείμενον 
ἐθεάσατο. ἣν δὲ τῷ “μεγέθει τρίπηχυ, τοῖς δὲ 
ποσὶ συμβεβηκός, καὶ τῇ μὲν δεξιᾷ δόρυ διηρ- 
μένον | ἔχον τῇ δὲ ἑτέρᾳ ἠλακάτην καὶ ἄτρακτον. 


1 διηρμένον Heyne: διηρτημένον A, Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 355. : 


1 This legend of the foundation of Ilium by Ilus is repeated 
by Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 29. The site of Thebes 
is said to have been chosen in obedience to a similar oracle. 
See above, iii. 4. 1. Homer tells us (11. xx. 215 sqq.) that 
the foundation of Dardania on Mount Ida preceded the 
foundation of Ilium in the plain. As to the hill of Ate, com- 
pare Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. Ἴλιον. 

? As to the antique image of Pallas, known as the Palladium, 
see Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Antiquit. Rom. i. 68 sq., ii. 
66.5; Conon, Narrationes, 34; Pausanias, i. 28. 9, ii. 23.5; 
Clement of Alexandria, Protrept. iv. 47, p. 42, ed. Potter ; 
J. Malalas, Chronogr. v. pp. 108 sqg., ed. L. Dindorf ; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 355; Suidas, s.v. Παλλάδιον ; 
Etymologicum Magnum, s.v. Παλλάδιον, p. 649. 50; Scholiast 
on Homer, Jl. vi. 311; Virgil, Aen. ii. 162 sqqg.; Ovid, Fasti, 
vi. 417-436 ; id. Metamorph. xiii. 337-349; Silius Italicus, 
Punic. xiii. 30 sqq.; Dictys Cretensis, Bell. Trojan. v. 5; 
Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 166; Scriptores rerum mythi- 
carum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 14 sq., 45 (First 
Vatican My thogt ‘apher, 40 and 142). The traditions con- 
cerning the Palladium which have come down to us are all 
comparatively late, and they differ from each other on various 
points; but the most commonly received account seems to 
have been that the image was a small wooden one, that it 
had fallen from heaven, and that so long as it remained in 
Troy the city could not be taken. The Greek tradition was 


38 


THE LIBRARY, III. χη. 3 


cow and bade him found a city wherever the animal 
should lie down; so he followed the cow. And when 
she was come to what was called the hill of the 
Phrygian Ate, she lay down; there Ilus built a 
city and called it Hlium.t And having prayed to 
Zeus that a sign might be shown to him, he beheld 
by day the Palladium, fallen from heaven, lying be- 
fore his tent. It was three cubits in height, its feet 
joined together; in its right hand it held a spear 
aloft, and in the other hand a distaff and spindle.” 


that the Palladium was stolen and carried off to the Greek 
camp by Ulysses and Diomedes (see Apollodorus, Epitome, 
v. 10 and 13), and that its capture by the Greeks ensured the 
fall of Troy. The Roman tradition was that the image re- 
mained in Troy till the city was taken by the Greeks, when 
Aeneas succeeded in rescuing it and conveying it away with 
him to Italy, where it was finally deposited in the temple of 
Vesta at Rome. These two traditions are clearly inconsistent 
with each other, and the Roman tradition further conflicts 
with the belief that the city which possessed the sacred image 
could not be captured by an enemy. Hence in order to 
maintain the genuineness of the image in the temple of Vesta, 
patriotic Roman antiquaries were driven to various expedients. 
They said, for example, that an exact copy of the Palladium 
had been publicly exposed at Troy, while the true one was 
carefully concealed in a sanctuary, and that the unsuspicious 
Greeks had pounced on the spurious image, while the knowing 
Aeneas smuggled away the genuine one packed up with 
the rest of his sacred luggage (Dionysius Halicarnasensis, 
Antiquit. Rom. i. 68 sq.). Or they affirmed that the thief Dio- 
medes had been constrained to restore the stolen image to its 
proper owners (First Vatican Mythographer, ll.cc.) ; or that, 
warned by Athena in a dream, he afterwards made it over to 
Aeneas in Italy (Silius Italicus, 1.6.) But the Romans were 
not the only people who claimed to possess the true Palladium ; 
the Argives maintained that it was with them (Pausanias, li. 
23. 5), and the Athenians asserted that it was to be seen in 
their ancient court of justice which bore the very name of 
Palladium. See Pausanias, i. 28. 8 sq.; Harpocration, s.vv. 


39 


APOLLODORUS 


Ἱστορία δὲ! ἡ περὶ τοῦ παλλαδίου τοιάδε 
φέρεται" φασὶ γεννηθεῖσαν τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν παρὰ 
r ρίτωνι τρέφεσθαι, ᾧ ὡ θυγάτηρ ἢ ἣν Παλλάς: ἀμφο- 
τέρας δὲ ἀσκούσας τὰ κατὰ πόλεμον εἰς φιλονεικίαν 
ποτὲ προελθεῖν. μελλούσης δὲ πλήττειν τῆς Παλ- 
λάδος τὸν Δία φοβηθέντα τὴν αἰγίδα προτεῖναι," 
τὴν δὲ εὐλαβηθεῖσαν ἀναβλέψαι, καὶ οὕτως ὑπὸ 
τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς τρωθεῖσαν πεσεῖν. ᾿Αθηνᾶν δὲ περί- 
λυπον ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ γενομένην, ξόανον ἐκείνης ὅμοιον 
κατασκευάσαι, καὶ περιθεῖναι τοῖς στέρνοις ἣν 
ἔδεισεν αἰγίδα, καὶ τιμᾶν ἱδρυσαμένην παρὰ τῷ 
Διί. ὕστερον δὲ Ἠλέκτρας κατὰ τὴν φθορὰν 
τούτῳ προσφυγούσης, Δία ῥῖψαι [μετ᾿ Ατης 


1 Heyne thought that the whole of this paragraph, relating 
to the Palladium, has been interpolated from an ancient 
author. It is omitted from the text by Hercher and 
bracketed as spurious by Wagner. 

2 προτεῖναι Faber: προθεῖναι R: προσθεῖναι R®: προσθῆ- 
ναι A, 

9 κατασκευάσαι R: κατασκευάσασα A. 

4 κατὰ SA: μετὰ Bekker. 

5 Δία ῥῖψαι Gale, Bekker, Wagner: διαρρίψαι SA, Tzetzes 
Schol. on Lycophron, 355, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller. 
βουλεύσεως and ἐπὶ Παλλαδίῳ ; Suidas, s.v. ἐπὶ Παλλαδίῳ ; 
Julius Pollux, viii. 118 δῳ. ; Scholiast on Aeschines, ii. 87, 
p. 298, ed. Schultz; Bekker’s Anecdola Graeca, i. p. 311, 
lines 3 sgq. The most exact description of the appearance of 
the Palladium is the one given by Apollodorus in the present 
passage, which is quoted, with the author’s name, by 
Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 355). According to Dictys 
Cretensis (/.c.), the image fell from heaven at the time when 
Tlus was building the temple of Athena ; the structure was 
nearly completed, but the roof was not yet on, so the Palla- 
dium dropped straight into its proper place in the sacred 
edifice. Clement of Alexandria (/.c.) mentions a strange 
opinion that the Palladium ‘‘ was made out of the bones of 
Pelops, just as the Olympian (image of Zeus was made) out 


40 


THE LIBRARY, III, χη. 3 


The story told about the Palladium is as follows: ! 
They say that when Athena was born she was brought 
up by Triton,? who had a daughter Pallas; and that 
both girls practised the arts of war, but that once on 
a time they fell out; and when Pallas was about 
to strike a blow, Zeus in fear interposed the aegis, 
and Pallas, being startled, looked up, and so fell 
wounded by Athena. And being exceedingly grieved 
for her, Athena made a wooden image in her like- 
“ness, and wrapped the aegis, which she had feared, 
about the breast of it, and set it up beside Zeus and 
honoured it. But afterwards Electra, at the time of 
her violation,? took refuge at the image, and Zeus 
threw the Palladium along with Ate‘ into the [lian 


of other bones of an Indian beast,” that is, out of ivory. 
Pherecydes discussed the subject of palladia in general ; he 
described them as ‘‘shapes not made with hands,” and de- 
rived the name from πάλλειν, which he considered to be equi- 
valent to βάλλειν, ““ἴο throw, cast,” because these objects 
were cast down from heaven, See T'zetzes, Schol. on Ly- 
cophron, 355; Htymologicum Magnum, s.v. Παλλάδιον, 
p- 649. 50. Apollodorus as usual confines himself to the 
Greek tradition ; he completely ignores the Romans and their 
claim to possess the Palladium. 

1 The following account of the origin of the Palladium 
was regarded as an interpolation by Heyne, and his view has 
been accepted by Hercher and Wagner. But the passage 
was kuown to Tzetzes, who quotes it (Schol. on Lycophron, 
355) immediately after his description of the image, which 
he expressly borrowed from Apollodorus. 

2 Apparently the god of the river Triton, which was com- 
monly supposed to be in Libya, though some people identified 
it with a small stream in Boeotia See Herodotus, iv. 180; 
Pausanias, ix. 33.7; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 519; 
compare Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 109. 

3 See above, iii. 12. 1. 

4 Homer tells (11. xix. 126-131) how Zeus in anger swore 
that Ate should never again come to Olympus, and how he 
seized her by the head and flung her from heaven. 


41 


APOLLODORUS 


xal|! τὸ παλλάδιον εἰς τὴν ᾿Ιλιάδα χώραν, ’ Tov 
/ a 

δὲ τούτῳ " ναὸν κατασκευάσαντα τιμᾶν. Kal περὶ 

μὲν τοῦ παλλαδίου ταῦτα λέγεται. 

Ἶλος δὲ γήμας Εὐρυδίκην τὴν ᾿Αδράστου 
Λαομέδοντα ἐγέννησεν, ὃς γαμεῖ Στρυμὼ τὴν 
Σκαμάνδρου, κατὰ δέ τινας Πλακίαν τὴν ᾿᾽Οτρέως,3 
κατ᾽ ἐνίους δὲ Λευκίππην,' καὶ τεκνοῖ παῖδας μὲν 
Τιθωνὸν Λάμπον ὅ Κλυτίον ᾿Ικετάονα ]Ποδάρκην, 
θυγατέρας δὲ Ησιόνην καὶ Κίλλαν καὶ ᾿Αστυόχην, 
> \ / / V4 
ἐκ δὲ νύμφης Καλύβης Βουκολίωνα. 

Ν \ > > \ e / 2 δε > 

Τιθωνὸν μὲν οὖν Has ἁρπάσασα δι᾽ ἔρωτα eis 
Αἰθιοπίαν κομίζει, κἀκεῖ συνελθοῦσα γεννᾷ παῖδας 
᾽ / \ l ν; a Se a 
ΗἩμαθίωνα καὶ Μέμνονα. peta δὲ τὸ αἱρεθῆναι 


1 wer “Arns καὶ. Heyne was probably right in regarding 
these words as an interpolation introduced by a scribe who 
remembered that Ate was flung from heaven by Zeus 
(Homer, 11. xix. 131 sq.). For ’Artns, which is a conjecture 
of Gale’s, the MSS. (SA) read αὐτῆς, which is retained by 
Miiller, Bekker, and Wagner. The words μετ᾽ αὐτῆς καὶ are 
not bracketed by Wagner. 

2 τούτῳ ὃ: τούτου A, Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 355: 
τοῦτο Heyne. 3 "οτρέως Hercher: ἀτρέως A, 

4 Λευκίππην Heyne (conjecture), Bekker, Hercher, Wag- 
ner: Λευκίππου A, Heyne (in text), Westermann, Miiller. 
The reading Λευκίππην is supported by Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 18, who says that the mother of Priam (Po- 
darces) was Leucippe. 

5 Λάμπον R, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner (compare Homer, 
Il. iii. 147, xix. 238): λάμπωνα A, Westermann, Miiller. 


1 Compare Homer, Jl. xx. 236. Homer does not mention 
the mother of Laomedon. According to one Scholiast on the 
passage she was Eurydice, daughter of Adrastus, as Apollo- 
dorus has it ; according to another she was Batia, daughter 
of Teucer. But if the family tree recorded by Apollodorus 
is correct, Batia could hardly have been the wife of Ilus, 
since she was his great-grandmother. 


42 


THE LIBRARY, III. xn. 3-5 


country ; and Ilus built a temple for it, and honoured 
it. Such is the legend of the Palladium. 

And Illus married Eurydice, daughter of Adrastus, 
and begat Laomedon,! who married Strymo, daughter 
of Scamander ; but according to some his wife was 
Placia, daughter of Otreus, and according to others 
she was Leucippe; and he begat five sons, Tithonus, 
Lampus, Clytius, Hicetaon, Podarces,? and three 
daughters, Hesione, Cilla, and Astyoche; and by a 
nymph Calybe he had a son Bucolion.? 

Now the Dawn snatched away Tithonus for love 
and brought him to Ethiopia, and there consorting 
with him she bore two sons, Emathion and Memnon.* 


2 Compare Homer, 17. xx. 237 sq., with whom Apollodorus 
agrees as to Laomedon’s five sons. Homer does not mention 
Laomedon’s wife nor his daughters. According to a Scholiast 
on Homer, Jl. iii. 250, his wife’s name was Zeuxippe or 
Strymo ; forthe former name he cites the authority of the 
poet Aleman, for the latter the authority of the historian 
Hellanicus. Apollodorus may have followed Hellanicus, 
though he was acquainted with other traditions. According 
to Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 18), Priam and Tithonus 
were sons of Laomedon by different mothers ; the mother of 
Priam was Leucippe, the mother of Tithonus was Strymo or 
Rhoeo, daughter of Scamander. The Scholiast on Homer, 
Il. xi. 1, speaks of Tithonus as a son of Laomedon by Strymo, 
daughter of Scamander. 

3 Compare Homer, 17. vi. 23 sqq., who says that Bucolion 
was the eldest son of Laomedon, but illegitimate and one of 
twins. 

4 As to the love of Dawn (Kos) for Tithonus, see the 
Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite, 218 sqq.; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 18; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xi. 1 ; Propertius, ii. 18. 
7-18, ed. Butler. Homer speaks of Dawn (Aurora) rising from 
the bed of Tithonus (71. xi. 1 sqg.; Od. v. 1 sq.). According to 
the author of the Homeric hymn, Dawn obtained from 
Zeus for her lover the boon of immortality ; according to the 
Scholiast on Homer, it was Tithonus himself who asked and 


43 


APOLLODORUS 


Ιλιον ὑπὸ Ἡρακλέους, ὡς μικρὸν πρόσθεν ἡμῖν 
λέλεκται, ἐβασίλευσε Ποδάρκης ὁ κληθεὶς II pt- 
αμος' καὶ γαμεῖ “πρώτην ᾿Αρίσβην τὴν Μέροπος, 
ἐξ ἧς αὐτῷ παῖς Αἴσακος γίνεται, ὃς ἔγημεν 
᾿Αστερόπην } τὴν Κεβρῆνος θυγατέρα, ἣν πενθῶν 
ἀποθανοῦσαν ἀπωρνεώθη. ἸΠρίαμος δὲ ᾿Αρίσβην 
ἐκδοὺς Ὕρτάκῳ δευτέραν ἔγημεν “ExaBnv τὴν 
Δύμαντος, ἢ ὥς τινές φασι Kiocéws, ἢ ὡς ἕτεροι 
λέγουσι Σαγγαρίου ποταμοῦ καὶ Μετώπης. γεν- 
νᾶται δὲ αὐτῇ " πρῶτος μὲν Εκτωρ' δευτέρου δὲ 


1 ᾿Αστερόπην Commelinus: στερόπην SA. 
2 αὐτῇ A, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, Hercher : 
αὐτῷ S, ‘Wagner. 


obtained the boon from the loving goddess. But the boon 
turned to be a bane; for neither he nor she had remembered 
to ask for freedom from the infirmities of age. So when he 
was old and white-headed and could not stir hand or foot, he 
prayed for death as a release from his sufferings ; but die he 
could not, for he was immortal. Hence the goddess in pity 
either shut him up in his chamber and closed the shining 
doors on him, leaving him to lisp and babble there eternally, 
or she turned him into a grasshopper, the most musical of 
insects, that she might have the joy of hearing her lover’s 
voice sounding for ever in her ears. The former and sadder 
fate is vouched for by the hymn writer, the latter by the 
Scholiast. Tzetzes perhaps lets us into the secret of the 
transformation when he tells us (/.c.) that ‘‘the grasshoppers, 
like the snakes, when they are old, slough their old age” (rd 
γῆρας, literally ‘‘old age,” but applied by the Greeks to the 
cast skins of serpents). It is a widespread notion among 
savages, which the ancestors of the Greeks apparently shared, 
that creatures which cast their skins, thereby renew their 
youth and live for ever. See Folk-lore in the Old Testament, 
i. 66 sqq. The ancient Latins seem also to have cherished 
the same illusion, for they applied the same name (senecta or 
senectus) to old age and to the cast skins of serpents. 
1 See above, ii. 6. 4. 


44 


THE LIBRARY, III. xm. 5 


But after that Ilium was captured by Hercules, as 
we have related a little before,! Podarces, who was 
called Priam, came to the throne, and he married 
first Arisbe, daughter of Merops, by whom he had a 
son Aesacus, who married Asterope, daughter of 
Cebren, and when she died he mourned for her and 
was turned into a bird.?, But Priam handed over 
Arisbe to Hyrtacus and married a second wife Hecuba, 
daughter of Dymas, or, as some say, of Cisseus, or, as 
others say, of the river Sangarius and Metope.* The 
first son born to her was Hector; and when a second 


2 Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 224, who seems 
to follow Apollodorus. The bird into which the mourner 
was transformed appears to have been a species of diver. 
See Ovid, Metamorph. xi. 749-795; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 
iv. 254, v. 128. 

3 According to Homer (J/. xvi. 718 sq.) Hecuba was ἃ 
daughter of Dymas, ‘‘ who dwelt in Phrygia by the streams 
of Sangarius.”” But Euripides (Hecuba, 3) represents her as 
a daughter of Cisseus, and herein he is followed by Virgil, 
(Aen, vii. 320, x. 705). The mythographers Hyginus and 
Tzetzes leave it an open question whether Hecuba was a 
daughter of Cisseus or of Dymas. See Hyginus, Fab. 91, 
111, 249; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, Introd. p. 266, 
ed. Miilier. Compare the Scholiast on Euripides, Hecuba, 3: 
**Pherecydes writes thus: And Priam, son of Laomedon, 
marries Hecuba, daughter of Dymas, son of Kioneus, son of 
Proteus, or of the river Sangarius, by a Naiad nymph Eva- 
gora. But some have recorded that Hecuba’s mother was 
Glaucippe, daughter of Xanthus. But Nicander, in agree- 
ment with Euripides, says that Hecuba was a daughter of 
Cisseus.” The Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xvi. 718, says that 
according to Pherecydes the father of Hecuba was Dymas 
and her mother was a nymph Eunoe, but that according to 
Athenion her father was Cisseus and her mother Teleclia. 
Thus it would appear that after all we cannot answer with 
any confidence the question with which the emperor Tiberius 
loved to pose the grammarians of his time, ‘‘ Who was 
Hecuba’s mother?” See Suetonius, Tiberius, 70. 


45 


APOLLODORUS 


γεννᾶσθαι μέλλοντος βρέφους ἔδοξεν ἡ Εκάβη καθ᾽ 
ὕπνους ᾿ δαλὸν τεκεῖν διάπυρον, τοῦτον δὲ πᾶσαν 
ἐπινέμεσθαι τὴν πόλιν καὶ καίειν. μαθὼν δὲ 
Πρίαμος Tap Ἑκάβης τὸν ὄνειρον, Αἴσακον τὸν 
υἱὸν μετεπέμψατο"" ἣν γὰρ ὀνειροκρίτης παρὰ 
τοῦ μητροπάτορος Μέροπος διδαχθείς. οὗτος 
εἰπὼν τῆς πατρίδος γενέσθαι τὸν παῖδα ἀπώλειαν, 
ἐκθεῖναι τὸ βρέφος ἐκέλευε. Πρίαμος δέ, ὦ ὡς ἐγεν- 
νήθη τὸ βρέφος, δίδωσιν ἐκθεῖναι οἰκέτῃ κομί- 
σαντι εἰς Ἴδην. ὁ δὲ οἰκέτης ᾿Αγέλαος ὠνομάζετο. 
τὸ δὲ ἐκτεθὲν ὑπὸ τούτου βρέφος πένθ᾽ ἡμέρας 
ὑπὸ ἄρκτου * ἐτράφη. ὁ δὲ σωζόμενον εὑρὼν ἀναι- 
ρεῖται, καὶ κομίσας ἐπὶ τῶν χωρίων ὡς ἴδιον παῖδα 
ἔτρεφεν, ὁ ὀνομάσας Πάριν. γενόμενος, δὲ νεανίσκος 
καὶ πολλῶν διαφέρων κάλλει τε καὶ ῥώμῃ αὖθις 
᾿Αλέξανδρος προσωνομάσθη, λῃστὰς ἀμυνόμενος ὃ 
καὶ τοῖς ποιμνίοις ἀλεξήσας |, ὅπερ ἐστὶ βοηθή- 
σας]. καὶ μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ τοὺς γονέας ἀνεῦρε. 
Μετὰ τοῦτον ἐγέννησεν ‘ExaBn θυγατέρας μὲν 


3 δ΄’ 


1 καθ᾽ ὕπνους SR: καθ᾽ ὕπαρ A. 

2 μετεπέμψατο ὃ : κατεπέμψατο A. 

3 κομίσαντι SA, Wagner: κομίσοντι Heyne, Westermann, 
Miiller, Bekker: κομιοῦντι Hercher. 

4 ἄρκτου SR . ἄρτου Α. 

Ἢ ἀμυνόμενος SA, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, 
Wagner: ἀμυνάμενος Hercher. 

6 ὅπερ ἐστὶ βοηθήσας omitted as a gloss by Hercher and 
Wagner. 


1 For Hecuba’s dream and the exposure of the infant 
Paris, see Pindar, pp. 544, 546, ed. Sandys ; Scholiast on 
Homer, Ll. iii, 325; Tzetzee, ‘Schol. on Lycophron, 86 ; 
Cicero, De divinatione, i, 21. 42 ; Hyginus, Fab. 91; Scrip- 


46 


THE LIBRARY, III. xu. 5 


babe was about to be born Hecuba dreamed she 
had brought forth a firebrand, and that the fire 
spread over the whole city and burned it.) When 
Priam learned of the dream from Hecuba, he sent for 
his son Aesacus, for he was an interpreter of dreams, 
having been taught by his mother’s father Merops. 
He declared that the child was begotten to be the 
ruin of his country and advised that the babe should 
be exposed. When the babe was born Priam gave 
it to a servant to take and expose on Ida; now the 
servant was named Agelaus. Exposed by him, the 
infant was nursed for five days by a bear; and, when 
he found it safe, he took it up, carried it away, brought 
it up as his own son on his farm, and named him 
Paris. When he grew to be a young man, Paris 
excelled many in beauty and strength, and was 
afterwards surnamed Alexander, because he repelled 
robbers and defended the flocks.2. And not long 
afterwards he discovered his parents. 

- After him Hecuba gave birth to daughters, Creusa, 


tores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 
139 (Second Vatican Mythographer, 197). The dream is 
alluded to, though not expressly mentioned, by Euripides 
(Troades, 919 sqq.) and Virgil (Aen. vii. 319 sqq.)._ The warn- 
ing given by the diviner Aesacus is recorded also by Tzetzes 
(Schol. on Lycophron, 224), according to whom the sage 
advised to put both mother and child to death. Euripides 
(Andromache, 293 sqq.) represents Cassandra shrieking in a 
prophetic frenzy to kill the ill-omened babe. The suckling 
of the infant Paris for five days by a she-bear seems to be 
mentioned only by Apollodorus. 

* Apollodorus apparently derives the name Alexander from 
ἀλέξω ““ἴο defend” and ἀνδρός, the genitive of ‘‘man.” As the 
verb was somewhat archaic, he explains it by the more famil- 
iar βοηθῶ, if indeed the explanation be not a marginal gloss, 
See the Critical Note. 


47 


APOLLODORUS 


Κρέουσαν Λαοδίκην Ἰ]ολυξένην Κασάνδραν, ἡ 
συνελθεῖν βουλόμενος ᾿Απόλλων τὴν μαντικὴν 
ὑπέσχετο διδάξειν. ἡ δὲ μαθοῦσα οὐ συνῆλθεν" 
ὅθεν ᾿Απόλλων ἀφείλετο τῆς μαντικῆς αὐτῆς τὸ 
πείθειν. αὖθις δὲ παῖδας ἐγέννησε Δηίφοβον 
“EXevov Ἰ]Πάμμονα ἸΠολίτην "Αντιφον ἹἹππόνοον 
ΤἸΠολύδωρον Tpwirov: τοῦτον ἐξ᾿ Λπόλλωνος λέγε- 
ται γεγεννηκέναι. ' 

Ἔκ δὲ ἄλλων γυναικῶν Ἰ]ριάμῳ παῖδες γίνον- 
ται Μελάνιππος Lopyv0iwv Φιλαίμων [Ἱππόθοος 
Γλαῦκος, ᾿Αγάθων Χερσιδάμας Evayopas 'Ἵππο- 
δάμας Μήστωρ,'Ατας Δόρυκλος Λυκάων Δρύοψ' 
Βίας, Χρομίος ᾿Αστύγονος Τελέστας Evavdpos 
Κεβριόνης, Μύλιεος 1 ᾿Αρχέμαχος Λαοδόκος ᾿χέ- 
φρων ᾿Ιδομενεύς, ὙὝπερίων ᾿Ασκάνιος Δημοκόων 
“Apntos Δηιοπίτης, KXovios ᾿Εχέμμων “Ὑπείροχος 
Alyewvets Λυσίθοος ἸΠολυμέδων, θυγατέρες δὲ 
Μέδουσα Μηδεσικάστη Λυσιμάχη ᾿Δριστοδήμη. 


1 Μύλιος R: μήλιος A. Wagner compares Stephanus 
Byzantius, Μύλιοι (Μύλισιν ed. Westermann), ἔθνος Φρυγίας. 
Ἑκαταῖος ᾿Ασίᾳ. 


1 Laodice is mentioned by Homer as the fairest of Priam’s 
daughters and the wife of Helicaon (Jliad, 111. 122 sqq., 
vi. 252). 

2 Compare Aeschylus, Agamemnon, 1202-1212; Hyginus, 
Fab. 93; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 247; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. δῦ, 139 
(First Vatican Mythographer, 180; Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 196). According to Servius (l.c.), Apollo deprived 
Cassandra of the power of persuading men of the truth of 
her prophecies by spitting into her mouth. We have seen 
that by a similar procedure Glaucus was robbed of the faculty 
of divination. See above, iii. 3. 2. An entirely different 
account of the way in which Cassandra and her twin brother 


48 


THE LIBRARY, III. xu. 5 


Laodice,! Polyxena, and Cassandra. Wishing to gain 
Cassandra’s favours, Apollo promised to teach her 
_ the art of prophecy; she learned the art but refused 
her favours; hence Apollo deprived her prophecy of 
power to persuade.?, Afterwards Hecuba bore sons, 
Deiphobus, Helenus, Pammon, Polites, Antiphus, 
Hipponous, Polydorus, and Troilus: this last she is 
said to have had by Apollo. 

By other women Priam had sons, to wit, Melanip- 
pus, Gorgythion, Philaemon, Hippothous, Glaucus, 
Agathon, Chersidamas, Evagoras, Hippodamas, Mestor, 
Atas, Doryclus, Lycaon, Dryops, Bias, Chromius, 
Astygonus, Telestas, Evander, Cebriones, Mylius, 
Archemachus, Laodocus, Echephron, Idomeneus, 
Hyperion, Ascanius, Democoon, Aretus, Deiopites, 
Clonius, Echemmon, Hypirochus, Aegeoneus, Lysi- 
thous, Polymedon; and daughters, to wit, Medusa, 
Medesicaste, Lysimache, and Aristodeme. 


Helenus acquired the gift of prophecy is given by a Scholiast 
on Homer, J/. vii. 44. He says that when the festival in 
honour of the birth of the twins was being held in the 
sanctuary of the Thymbraean Apollo, the two children 
played with each other there and fell asleep in the temple. 
Meantime the parents and their friends, flushed with wine, 
had gone home, forgetting all about the twins whose birth 
had given occasion to the festivity. Next morning, when 
they were sober, they returned to the temple and found the 
sacred serpents purging with their tongues the organs of 
sense of the children. Trightened by the cry which the 
women raised at the strange sight, the serpents disappeared 
among the laurel boughs which lay beside the infants on the 
floor; but from that hour Cassandra and Helenus possessed 
the gift of prophecy. For this story the Scholiast refers to 
the authority of Anticlides. In like manner Melampus is 
said to have acquired the art of soothsaying through the 
action of serpents which licked his ears. See above, i. 9. 11. 
8 Compare Homer, 11. xxiv. 248 sqq. ; Hyginus, Fab. 90. 


49 
VOL. 11. E 


6 


APOLLODORUS 


wh » Φ 2 ὃ / \ ᾿ ,ὔὕ 
Extwp μὲν οὖν ᾿Ανδρομάχην τὴν ᾿Ηετίωνος 
a 9 / \ ᾽ / \ ἴω a 
γαμεῖ, ᾿Αλέξανδρος δὲ Οἰνώνην τὴν Κεβρῆνος τοῦ 
ποταμοῦ θυγατέρα. αὕτη παρὰ Ῥέας τὴν μαντι- 
Χ a / ᾽ / \ val a «ὃ 
κὴν μαθοῦσα προέλεγεν ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ μὴ πλεῖν ἐπὶ 
“Ἑλένην. μὴ πείθουσα δὲ εἶπεν, ἐὰν τρωθῇ, παρα- 
γενέσθαι πρὸς αὐτήν: μόνην! γὰρ θεραπεῦσαι 
δύνασθαι. τὸν δὲ ᾿λένην ἐκ Σπάρτης ἁρπάσαι, 
/ \ ’ I e εἶ 
πολεμουμένης δὲ Τροίας τοξευθέντα ὑπὸ Φιλο- 
7 / «ς fs Ἂ ? ᾿ 3 
κτήτου τόξοις Ἡρακλείοις πρὸς Οἰνώνην ἐπανεὰλ- 
θεῖν εἰς Ἴδην. ἡ δὲ μνησικακοῦσα θεραπεύσεινϑ οὐκ 
ἔφη. ᾿Αλέξανδρος μὲν οὖν εἰς Τροίαν κομιζόμενος 
ἐτελεύτα, Οἰνώνη δὲ μετανοήσασα τὰ πρὸς θερα- 
πείαν φάρμακα ἔφερε, καὶ καταλαβοῦσα αὐτὸν 
νεκρὸν ἑαυτὴν ἀνήρτησεν. 


Ὁ δὲ ᾿Ασωπὸς ποταμὸς ᾽Ωκεανοῦ καὶ Τηθύος, 
e \?) / / lal \ n 
ὡς δὲ ᾿Ακουσίλαος λέγει, IInpovs καὶ Ποσειδῶνος, 
ὡς δέ τινες, Διὸς καὶ Εὐρυνόμης. τούτῳ Μετώπη 
γημαμένη ὃ (Λάδωνος δὲ τοῦ ποταμοῦ θυγάτηρ 
αὕτη) δύο μὲν παῖδας ἐγέννησεν, ᾿Ισμηνὸν καὶ 
Πελάγοντα, εἴκοσι δὲ θυγατέρας, ὧν μὲν ὁ μίαν 

"» ὃ sy \ a 
Αἴγιναν ἥρπασε Ζεύς. ταύτην ᾿Ασωπὸς ξητῶν 


1 μόνην SR: μόνη A. 

2 θβεραπεύσειν SR (compend.), Hercher, Wagner: @epa- 
πεῦσαι A, Heyne, Westermann, Miller, Bekker. 

3 τρύτῳ Μετώπη ynuauevn R (compend.), Wagner: οὗτος 
Μετώπην ynuduevos A, Heyne, Westermann, Miller, Bekker : 
οὗτος Μετώπην γήμας Hercher. 

4 μὲν omitted by Hercher, perhaps rightly. 


1 See Homer, Jl. vi. 395 sqg., where it is said that Eetion 
was king of Thebe in Cilicia, 


5° 


THE LIBRARY, III. x11. 6 


Now Hector married Andromache, daughter of 
Eetion,! and Alexander married Oenone, daughter 
of the river Cebren.2 She had learned from Rhea 
the art of prophecy, and warned Alexander not to 
sail to fetch Helen; but failing to persuade him, 
she told him to come to her if he were wounded, 
for she alone could heal him. When he _ had 
carried off Helen from Sparta and Troy was be- 
sieged, he was shot by Philoctetes with the bow 
of Hercules, and went back to Oenone on Ida. But 
she, nursing her grievance, refused to heal him. So 
Alexander was carried to Troy and died. But Oenone 
repented her, and brought the healing drugs; and 
finding him dead she hanged herself. 


The Asopus river was a son of Ocean and Tethys, 
or, as Acusilaus says, of Pero and Poseidon, or, 
according to some, of Zeus and Eurynome. Him 
Metope, herself a daughter of the river Ladon, 
married and bore two sons, Ismenus and Pelagon, 
and twenty daughters, of whom one, Aegina, was 
carried off by Zeus.2 In search of her Asopus came 


2 For the loves of Paris and Oenone, and their tragic end, 
compare Conon, Narrat. 23; Parthenius, Narrat. 4; Ovid, 
Heroides, v. 

* As to the river-god Asopus and his family, see Diodorus 
Siculus, iv. 72. 1-5; Pausanias, ii. 5. 1 sq., ν. 22. 6. Accord- 
ing to Diodorus, Asopus was a son of Ocean and Tethys ; he 
married Metope, daughter of the Ladon, by whom he had 
two sons and twelve daughters. Asopus, the father of Aegina, 
is identified by Diodorus and Pausanias with the Phliasian 
or Sicyonian river of that name; but the patriotic Boeotian 
poet Pindar seems to claim the honour for the Boeotian Asopus 
(Isthm. viii. 16 (35) sqq.), and he is naturally supported by 
his Scholiast (on v. 17 (37) of that poem) as well as by Statius 


51 
E.2 


APOLLODORUS 


ἧκεν εἰς Κόρινθον, καὶ μανθάνει παρὰ Σισύφου 
τὸν ἡρπακότα εἶναι Δία. Ζεὺς δὲ ᾿Ασωπὸν “μὲν 
κεραυνώσας διώκοντα πάλιν ἐπὶ τὰ οἰκεῖα ἀπέ- 
πεμψε ῥεῖθρα (διὰ τοῦτο μέχρι καὶ νῦν ἐκ τῶν 
τούτου ῥείθρων. ἄνθρακες φέρονται), Αἴγιναν δὲ 
κομίσας | εἰς τὴν τότε Οἰνώνην λεγομένην νῆσον, 
νῦν δὲ Αἴγιναν ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνης κληθεῖσαν, μίγνυται, 
καὶ τεκνοῖ παῖδα ἐξ αὐτῆς Αἰακόν. τούτῳ Ζεὺς 
ὄντι μόνῳ ἐν τῇ νήσῳ τοὺς μύρμηκας ἀνθρώπους 
ἐποίησε. γαμεῖ δὲ Αἰακὸς "Evdnida τὴν Σκείρωνος, 
ἐξ ἧς αὐτῷ παῖδες ἐγένοντο Ἰ]ηλεύς τε καὶ Te- 
λαμών. Φερεκύδης δέ φησι Τελαμῶνα φίλον, οὐκ 
ἀδελφὸν Πηλέως εἶναι, ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Ακταίου παῖδα καὶ 
Γλαύκης τῆς Κυχρέως. μίγνυται δὲ αὖθις Αἰακὸς 

1 


κομίσας Hercher, Wagner: εἰσκομίσας A, Heyne, Wester- 
mann, Miiller, Bekker. 


(Theb. vii. 315 sqq.) and his Scholiast, Lactantius Placidus 
(on Theb. vii. 424). The Phliasians even went so far as to 
assert that their Asopus was the father of Thebe, who gave her 
name to the Boeotian Thebes; but this view the Thebans 
could not accept (Pausanias, ii. 5. 2). 

1 Compare above, i. 9. 3; Pausanias, ii. 5. 1. 

2 Compare Callimachus, ‘Hymn to Delos, 78 ; Scholiast on 
Apolionias Rhodius, Argon. 2. 297. 

8 According to Lactantius Placidus (on Statius, Theb. vii. 
315), live coals were to be found in the Asopus, and Statius, 
in his windy style (Theb. vii. 325 sqq.), talks of the ‘‘ brave 
river blowing ashes of thunderbolts and Aetnaean vapours 
from its panting banks to the sky,” which may be a poetical 
description of river-mists. But both the poet and his dutiful 
commentator here refer to the Boeotian Asopus, whereas 
Apollodorus probably refers to the Phliasian river of that 
name. 

4 Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72. 5; Pausanias, ii. 29. 2 ; 
Hyginus, Fab. 52. As to Oenone, the ancient name of Aegina, 
compare Pindar, Nem. iv. 46 (75), v. 16 (29), viii. ‘7 (12), 


52 


THE LIBRARY, ΠῚ xi. 6 


to Corinth, and learned from Sisyphus that the 
ravisher was Zeus.! Asopus pursued him, but Zeus, 
by hurling thunderbolts, sent him away back to his 
own streams;? hence coals are fetched to this day 
from the streams of that river. And having con- 
veyed Aegina to the island then named Oenone, but 
now called Aegina after her, Zeus cohabited with her 
and begot a son Aeacus on her. As Aeacus was 
alone in the island, Zeus made the ants into men for 
him.» And Aeacus married Endeis, daughter of 
Sciron, by whom he had two sons, Peleus and Tela- 
mon.® But Pherecydes says that Telamon was a 
friend, not a brother of Peleus, he being a son of 
Actaeus and Glauce, daughter of Cychreus.’ After- 


Isthm. v. 34 (44); Herodotus, viii. 46; Strabo, viii. 6. 16, 
p. 375; Hyginus, Fab. 52. Another old name for Aegina 
was Oenopia. See Pindar, Nem. viii. 21 (45); Ovid, Meta- 
morph, vii. 472 sqq. 

5 As to the transformation of the ants into men see Hesiod, 
quoted by the Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iii. 13 (21), and by 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 176; Scholiast on Homer, 
dl. i. 180; Strabo, viii. 6. 16, p. 375; Hyginus, Fab. 52; 
Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 614 sqq.; Scriptores rerum mythi- 
carum Latin, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 23, 142 (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 67; Second Vatican Mythographer, 
204). The fable is clearly based on the false etymology which 
derived the name Myrmidons from μύρμηκες, “ants.” Strabo 
(l.c.) attempted to rationalize the myth. 

6 Compare Plutarch, Theseus, 10; Pausanias, 11. 29. 9; 
Scholiast on Euripides, Andromache, 687. According to 
another account, Endeis, the mother of Telamon and Peleus, 
was a daughter of Chiron. See Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. v. 
7 (12); Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xvi. 14; Hyginus, Fab. 14. 

7 This account of the parentage of Telamon, for which we 
have the authority of the old writer Pherecydes (about 480 
B.C.), is probably earlier than the one which represents him 
as a son of Aeacus. According to it, Telamon was a native, 
not of Aegina, but of Salamis, his mother Glauce heing a 


53 


APOLLODORUS 


Ψαμάθῃ τῇ Νηρέως εἰς φώκην! ἠχλαγμένῃ διὰ τὸ 
μὴ βούλεσθαι συνελθεῖν, καὶ τεκνοῖ παῖδα Φῶκον. 

ἮΝν δὲ εὐσεβέστατος πάντων" Αἰακός. διὸ καὶ 
τὴν “Ῥλλάδα κατεχούσης ἀφορίας διὰ Πέλοπα, 
ὅτι Στυμφάλῳ τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν ᾿Αρκάδων πολεμῶν 
καὶ τὴν ᾿Αρκαδίαν ἑλεῖν μὴ δυνάμενος, προσποιη- 
σάμενος φιλίαν ἔκτεινεν αὐτὸν καὶ διέσπειρε μελί- 
σας, χρησμοὶ" θεῶν ἔλεγον ἀπαλλαγήσεσθαι τῶν 
ἐνεστώτων κακῶν τὴν “Βλλάδα, ἐ ἐὰν Αἰακὸς ὑπὲρ 
αὐτῆς εὐχὰς “ποιήσηται ποιησαμένου δὲ εὐχὰς 
Αἰακοῦ τῆς ἀκαρπίας ἡ ᾿Ελλὰς ἀπαλλάττεται. 


1 φώκην S, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner: φύκην ROR, 
Heyne, Westermann, Miiller: φύλην A. 
2 πάντων ES: ἁπάντων A. 


3 χρησμοὶ S: χρησμοὶ δὲ A. 


daughter of Cychreus, king of Salamis (as to whom see below, 
iii. 12. 7). It is certain that the later life of Telamon was 
associated with Salamis, where, according to one account 
(Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72. 7), he married Glauce, daughter of 
Cychreus, king of Salamis, the very woman whom the other 
and perhaps later version of the legend represented as his 
mother. See Sir R. C. Jebb, Sophocles, Ajyaw (Cambridge, 
1896), Introduction, § 4, pp. xvii sq. 

1 Compare Hesiod, Theog. 1003 sqq.; Pindar, Nem. v. 12 
(21) sq.; Scholiast on Euripides, Andromache, 687, who 
mentions the transformation of the sea-nymph into a seal. 
The children of Phocus settled in Phocis and gave their name 
to the country. See Pausanias, ii. 29. 2, x. 1.1, x. 30. 4. 
Thus we have an instance of a Greek people, the Phocians, 
who traced their name and their lineage to an animal 
ancestress. But it would be rash to infer that the seal was 
the totem of the Phocians. There is no evidence that they 
regarded the seal with any superstitious respect, though the 
people of Phocaea, in Asia Minor, who were Phocians by 
descent (Pausanias, vii. 3. 10), put the figure of a seal on 
their earliest coins. But this was probably no more than a 
punning badge, like the rose of Rhodes nerf the wild celery 


54 


THE LIBRARY, III. χη. 6 


wards Aeacus cohabited with Psamathe, daughter of 
Nereus, who turned herself into a seal to avoid his 
embraces, and he begot a son Phocus.! 

Now Aeacus was the most pious of men. Therefore, 
when Greece suffered from infertility on account of 
Pelops, because in a war with Stymphalus, king of 
the Arcadians, being unable to conquer Arcadia, he 
slew the king under a pretence of friendship, and 
scattered his mangled limbs, oracles of the gods 
declared that Greece would be rid of its present 
calamities if Aeacus would offer prayers on its be- 
half. So Aeacus did offer prayers, and Greece was 
delivered from the dearth.2 Even after his death 


(selinon) of Selinus. See George Macdonald, Coin Types 
(Glasgow, 1905), pp. 17, 41, 50. 

2 Compare Isocrates, Hvagoras, 14 5. ; Diodorus Siculus, 
iv. 61. 1 sq. ; Pausanias, ii. 29. 7 sq. ; Clement of Alexandria, 
Strom. vi. 3. 28, p. 753; Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. v. 9 (17). 
Tradition ran that a prolonged drought had withered up the 
fruits of the earth all over Greece, and that Aeacus, as the 
son of the sky-god Zeus, was deemed the person most 
naturally fitted to obtain from his heavenly father the rain 
so urgently needed by the parched earth and the dying corn. 
So the Greeks sent envoys to him to request that he would 
intercede with Zeus to save the crops and the people. ‘‘Com- 
plying with their petition, Aeacus ascended the Hellenic 
mountain and stretching out pure hands to heaven he called 
on the common god, and prayed him to take pity on afflicted 
Greece. And even while he prayed a loud clap of thunder 
pealed, and all the surrounding sky was overcast, and furious 
and continuous showers of rain burst out and flooded the 
whole land. Thus was exuberant fertility procured for the 
fruits of the earth by the prayers of Aeacus” (Clement of 
Alexandria, l.c.). In gratitude for this timely answer to his 
prayers Aeacus is said to have built a sanctuary of Zeus on 
Mount Panhellenius in Aegina (Pausanias, ii. 30. 4). No 
place could well be more appropriate for a temple of the rain- 
god; for the sharp peak of Mount Panhellenius, the highest 
mountain of Aegina, is a conspicuous landmark viewed from 


55 


APOLLODORUS 


τιμᾶται δὲ Kal παρὰ ]λούτωνι τελευτήσας Aiakos, 
καὶ τὰς κλεῖς τοῦ “Αἰδου φυλάττει. 

Διαφέροντος δὲ ἐν τοῖς ἀγῶσι Φώκου, τοὺς. 
ἀδελφοὺς Πηλέα καὶ Τελαμῶνα ἐπιβουλεῦσαι: 
καὶ λαχὼν κλήρῳ Τελαμὼν συγγυμναζόμενον av- 
τὸν βαλὼν δίσκῳ κατὰ τῆς κεφαλῆς κτείνει, καὶ 
κομίσας μετὰ Ἰ]ηλέως κρύπτει κατά τινος ὕλης. 
φωραθέντος δὲ τοῦ φόνου φυγάδες ἀπὸ Αἰγίνης ὑπὸ 
Αἰακοῦ ἐλαύνονται. καὶ Τελαμὼν μὲν εἰς Σαλα- 


1 ἀδελφούς <gacw> Eberhard. 


all the neighbouring coasts of the gulf, and in antiquity a 
cloud settling on the mountain was regarded as a sign of rain 
(Theophrastus, De signis tempestat. i. 24). According to 
Apollodorus, the cause of the dearth had been a crime of 
Pelops, who had treacherously murdered Stymphalus, king 
of Arcadia, and scattered the fragments of his mangled body 
abroad. This crime seems not to be mentioned by any other 
ancient writer ; but Diodorus Siculus in like manner traces 
the calamity to a treacherous murder. He says (iv. 61. 1) 
that to punish the Athenians for the assassination of his son 
Androgeus, the Cretan king Minos prayed to Zeus that 
Athens might be afflicted with drought and famine, and that 
these evils soon spread over Attica and Greece. Similarly 
Alemaeon’s matricide was believed to have entailed a failure 
of the crops. See above, iii. 7. 5 with the note. 

1 In some late Greek verses, inscribed on the tomb of a 
religious sceptic at Rome, Aeacus is spoken of as the warder 
or key-holder (κλειδοῦχος) of the infernal regions; but in the 
same breath the poet assures us that these regions, with all 
their inmates, were mere fables, and that of the dead there 
remained no more than the bones and ashes. See Corpus 
Inscriptionum Graecarum, vol. iii. p. 933, No. 6298; G. 
Kaibel, Epigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus coniecta (Berlin, 
1878), pp. 262 sq., No. 646. Elsewhere Pluto himself was 
represented in art holding in his hand the key of Hades. 
See Pausanias, v. 20. 3. According to Isocrates (Hvagoras, 
15), Aeacus enjoyed the greatest honours after death, sitting 


56 


THE LIBRARY, III. xu. 6-7 


Aeacus is honoured in the abode of Pluto, and keeps 
the keys of Hades.! 

As Phocus excelled in athletic sports, his brothers 
Peleus and Telamon plotted against him, and the lot 
falling on Telamon, he killed his brother in a match 
by throwing a quoit at his head, and with the help 
of Peleus carried the body and hid it in a wood. But 
the murder being detected, the two were driven 
fugitives from Aegina by Aeacus.2 And Telamon 


as assessor with Pluto and Proserpine. Plato represents him - 
as judging the dead along with Minos, Rhadamanthys, and 
Triptolemus (Apology, 32, p. 414), it being his special duty 
to try the souls of those who came from Kurope, while his 
colleague Rhadamanthys dealt with those that came from 
Asia (Gorgias, 79, p. 5244); apparently no provision was 
made for African ghosts. Lucian depicts Aeacus playing a 
less dignified part in the lower world as a sort of ticket- 
collector or customhouse officer (reAdvns), whose business it 
was to examine the ghostly passengers on landing from the 
ferry-boat, count them, and see that they had paid the fare. 
See Lucian, Cataplus, 4, Charon, ἃ. Elsewhere he speaks 
of Aeacus as keeping the gate of Hades (Dialog. Mort. xx. 1). 

2 As to the murder of Phocus and the exile of Peleus and 
Telamon, see Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72. 6 sq. (who represents 
the death as accidental) ; Pausanias, ii. 29. 9 sg. ; Scholia on 
Pindar, Nem. v. 14 (25) ; Scholia on Euripides, Andromache, 
687 (quoting verses from the Alemaeconis); Scholiast on 
Homer, 11. xvi. 14; Antoninus Liberalis, Transform. 38; 
Plutarch, Parallela, 25; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
175 (vol. i. pp. 444, 447, ed. Miiller); Hyginus, Fab. 14; 
Ovid, Metamorph. xi. 266 sqq.; Lactantius Placidus on 
Statius, Zheb. ii. 113, vii. 344, xi. 281. Tradition differed 
on several points as to the murder. According to Apollo- 
dorus and Plutarch the murderer was Telamon ; but according 
to what seems to have been the more generally accepted view 
he was Peleus. (So Diodorus, Pausanias, the Scholiast on 
Homer, one of the Scholiasts on Euripides, J.c., Ovid, and in 
one passage Lactantius Placidus). If Pherecydes was right 
in denying any relationship between Telamon and Peleus, 


57 


APOLLODORUS 


a / \ \ fal 
μῖνα παραγίνεται πρὸς Kuypéa τὸν «ἸΠοσειδῶνος 
καὶ; ᾿ Σαλαμῖνος τῆς ᾿Ασωποῦ. κτείνας δὲ ὄφιν 
οὗτος ἀδικοῦντα τὴν νῆσον αὐτῆς " ἐβασίλευε, καὶ 

a 7 \ / / 
τελευτῶν ἄπαις τὴν βασιλείαν παραδίδωσι Teda- 


1 Ποσειδῶνος καὶ inserted by Aegius. 

2 αὐτῆς Heyne (conjecture): ἧς αὐτὸς Heyne (in text), 
Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner, appa- 
rently following the MSS. Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 175 (vol. i. p. 444, ed. Miiller), Κυχρεὺς yap ὁ 
Ποσειδῶνος καὶ Σαλαμῖνος τῆς ᾿Ασωποῦ κτείνας ὄφιν τὴν νῆσον 
λυμαινόμενον ἐβασίλευσεν αὐτῆς, ἄπαις δὲ τελευτῶν τὴν βασι- 
λείαν Τελαμῶνι κατέλειψε φυγόντι πρὸς αὐτόν. In writing 
thus, Tzetzes probably had the present passage of Apollo- 
dorus before him. Accordingly in Apollodorus we should 
perhaps read ἐβασίλευσε for ἐβασίλευε. 


and in representing Telamon as a Salaminian rather than an 
Aeginetan (see above), it becomes probable that in the original 
tradition Peleus, not Telamon, was described as the murderer 
of Phocus. Another version of the story was that both 
brothers had a hand in the murder, Telamon having banged 
him on the head with-a quoit, while Peleus finished him off 
with the stroke of an axe in the middle of his back. This 
was the account given by the anonymous author of the old 
epic Alemaeonis; and the same division of labour between 
the brothers was recognized by the Scholiast on Pindar and 
Tzetzes, though according to them the quoit was handled by 
Peleus and the cold steel by Telamon. Other writers (An- 


toninus Liberalis and Hyginus) lay the murder at the door ἡ 


of both brothers without parcelling the guilt out exactly 
between them. There seems to be a general agreement that 
the crime was committed, or the accident happened, in the 
course of a match at quoits; but Dorotheus (quoted by Plu- 
tarch, 1.6.) alleged that the murder was perpetrated by 
Telamon at a boar hunt, and this view seems to have been 
accepted by Lactantius Placidus in one place (on Statius, 
Theb. ii. 113), though in other places (on vii. 344 and xi. 281) 
he speaks as if the brothers were equally guilty. But perhaps 
this version of the story originated in a confusion of the 
murder of Phocus with the subsequent homicide of Eurytion, 


58 


* 


ΤΗΝ LIBRARY, ΠῚ. xu. 7 


betook himself to Salamis, to the court of Cychreus, 
son of Poseidon and Salamis, daughter of Asopus. 
This Cychreus became king of Salamis through killing 
a snake which ravaged the island, and dying childless 
he bequeathed the kingdom to Telamon.! And 


which is said to have taken place at a boar-hunt, whether 
the hunting of the Calydonian boar or another. See below, 
iii. 13.2 withthe note. According to Pausanias the exiled Te- 
lamon afterwards returned and stood his trial, pleading his 
cause from the deck of a ship, because his father would not 
suffer him to set foot in the island. But being judged guilty 

*by his stern sire he sailed away, to return to his native 
land no more. It may have been this verdict, delivered 
against his own son, which raised the reputation of Aeacus 
for rigid justice to the highest pitch, and won for him a 
place on the bench beside Minos and Rhadamanthys in the 
world of shades. 

1 Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72.4; Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 110, 175, 451. In the second of these passages 
(on v. 175, vol. i. p. 444, ed. Miiller) Tzetzes agrees closely 
with Apollodorus and probably follows him. A somewhat 
different version of the legend was told by Hesiod. According 
to him the snake was reared by Cychreus, but expelled from 
Salamis by Eurylochus because of the ravages it committed 
in the island ; and after its expulsion it was received at 
Eleusis by Demeter, who made it one of her attendants. 
See Strabo, ix. 1. 9, p. 394. Others said that the snake was 
not a real snake, but a bad man nicknamed Snake on account 
of his cruelty, who was banished by Eurylochus and took 
refuge at Eleusis, where he was appointed to a minor office 
in the sanctuary of Demeter. See Stephanus Byzantius, 
8.v. Kuxpeios πάγος ; Kustathius, Commentary on Diony- 
sius Periegetes, 507 (Geographi Graeci Minores, ed. C. 
Miller, vol. ii. p. 314). Cychreus was regarded as one of the 
guardian heroes of Salamis, where he was buried with his 
face to the west. Sacrifices were regularly offered at his 
grave, and when Solon desired to establish the claim of 
Athens to the possession of the island, he sailed across by 
night and sacrificed to the dead man at his grave. See Plu- 
tarch, Solon,9. Cychreus was worshipped also at Athens 


ἊΨ" 


APOLLODORUS 


μῶνι. ὁ δὲ γαμεῖ Περίβοιαν τὴν ᾿Αλκάθου 5 τοῦ 
Πέλοπος: καὶ ποιησαμένου εὐχὰς Ἡρακλέους ἵ ἔα 
αὐτῷ παῖς ἄρρην γένηται, φανέντος δὲ μετὰ τὰς 
εὐχὰς αἰετοῦ, τὸν γεννηθέντα ἐκάλεσεν Αἴαντα. 
καὶ στρατευσάμενος ἐπὶ Τροίαν σὺν Ἡρακλεῖ 
λαμβάνει γέρας Ἡσιόνην τὴν Λαομέδοντος θυγα- 
τέρα, ἐξ ἧς αὐτῷ γίνεται Τεῦκρος. 

XIII. Πηλεὺς δὲ εἰς Φθίαν φυγὼν πρὸς Βύρυ- 
τίωνα ὃ τὸν Ἄκτορος ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καθαίρεται, καὶ 
λαμβάνει map αὐτοῦ τὴν θυγατέρα ᾿Αντιγόνην καὶ 
τῆς χώρας τὴν τρίτην μοῖραν. καὶ γίνεται θυγάτηρ 


1 Περίβοιαν A: ᾿Ηερίβοια, Scholiast on Homer, 71. xvi. 14: 
Ἐρίβοια Pindar, Isthm. vi. 45 (65), Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72. 7. 

2 ᾿Αλκάθου Aegius: ἀχκάνδρου A. 

3 Evputiwva Aegius: Εὔρυτον A, Tzetzes, Schol.. on Lyco- 
phron, 175 (vol. i. p. 445, ed. Miller). As to Εὐρυτίων, see 
a few lines below. 


(Plutarch, Theseus, 10). It is said that at the battle of Sa- 
lamis a serpent appeared among the Greek ships, and God 
announced to the Athenians that this serpent was the hero 
Cychreus (Pausanias i. 36. 1). The story may preserve a 
reminiscence of the belief that kings and heroes regularly 
turn into serpents after death. The same belief possibly 
explains the association of Erichthonius or.Erechtheus and 
Cecrops with serpents at Athens. See Zhe Dying God, 
pp. 86 sg. On account of this legendary serpent Lycophron 
called Salamis the Dragon Isle (Cassandra, 110). 

1 Compare Xenophon, Cyneget. i. 9; Scholiast on Homer, 
11. xvi. 14. According to Diodorus Siculus (iv. 72. 7), Telamon 
first married Glauce, daughter of Cychreus, king of Salamis, 
and on her death he wedded the Athenian Eriboea, daughter 
of Alcathous, by whom he had Ajax. Pindar also mentions 
Eriboea as the wife of Telamon: see Jsthm. vi. 45 (65). 

2 As to the prayer of Hercules and the appearance of the 
eagle in answer to the prayer, see Pindar, Jsthm. vi. 35 
(51) sqqg.; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 455-461. Pindar, 
followed by Apollodorus and Tzetzes, derived the name Ajax 


60 


THE LIBRARY, III. xi. 7-xm. 1 


Telamon married Periboea, daughter of Alcathus,! son 
of Pelops, and called his son Ajax, because when 
Hercules had prayed that he might have a male child, 
an eagle appeared after the prayer.? And having 
gone with Hercules on his expedition against Troy, 
he received as a prize Hesione, daughter of Laomedon, 
by whom he had a son Teucer.? 

XIII. Peleus fled to Phthia to the court of Eurytion, 
son of Actor, and was purified by him, and he received 
from him his daughter Antigone and the third part 
of the country. And a daughter Polydora was born 


from aietos ‘‘an eagle.” <A story ran that Hercules wrapt 
the infant Ajax in the lion’s skin which he himself wore, and 
that Ajax was thus made invulnerable except in the armpit, 
where the quiver had hung, or, according to others, at the 
neck. Hence, in describing the suicide of the hero, Aeschylus 
told how, when he tried to run himself through the body, 
the sword doubled back in the shape of a bow, till some 
spirit showed the desperate man the fatal point to which to 
apply the trenchant blade. See Scholiast on Sophocles, Ajax, 
833; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 455-461; Scholiast on 
Homer, Jl. xxiii. 821. Plato probably had this striking 
passage Of the tragedy in his mind when he made Alcibiades 
speak of Socrates as more proof against vice than Ajax 
against steel (Sympos. 35, p. 219 E). 

3 See above, ii. 6. 4. As Hesione, the mother of Teucer, 
was not the lawful wife of Telamon, Homer speaks of Teucer 
as a bastard (11. viii. 283 sqg., with the Scholiast on v. 284). 
According to another account, it was not Telamon but his 
brother Peleus who went with Hercules to the siege of Troy. 
The poets were not consistent on this point. Thus, while in two 
passages (Nem. iv. 25 (40) sq.; Isthm. vi. 27 (39) sqq.) Pindar 
assigns to Telamon the glory of the adventure, in another 
he transfers it to Peleus (quoted by the Scholiast on Euripides, 
Andromache, 796; Pindar, p. 604 ed. Sandys). Euripides was 
equally inconsistent. See his 7'roades 804 sqq. (Telamon), 
contrasted with his Andromache, 796 sqq. (Peleus). 

4 Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 175 (vol. i. 
pp. 444 sqg., 447, ed. Miiller) ; Antoninus Liberalis, Transform. 


61 


APOLLODORUS 


αὐτῷ Ἰ]ολυδώρα, ἣν ἔγημε Βῶρος ὁ ἹΠεριήρους. 
ἐντεῦθεν ἐπὶ τὴν θήραν τοῦ Καλυδωνίου κάπρου 
3 / / a 
μετ᾽ Evputiwvos ἐλθών, προέμενος ἐπὶ τὸν σῦν 
/ / la) 
ἀκόντιον Kvputiwvos τυγχάνει Kal κτείνει τοῦτον 
» / 9S > , \ > ᾽ Ν 
ἄκων. πάλιν οὖν ἐκ Φθίας φυγὼν εἰς ᾿Ιωλκὸν 
’ - > a 
mpos”Axaotov ἀφικνεῖται καὶ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καθαί- 
> / δὲ \ Ν Ε \ II 7 1 > an 
ρεται. ἀγωνίζεται δὲ καὶ τὸν ἐπὶ Ἰ]ελίᾳ' ἀγῶνα, 
x ory 7 / be / 
πρὸς ᾿Αταλάντην διαπαλαίσας. καὶ ᾿Αστυδάμεια 
ἡ ᾿Ακάστου γυνή, Πηλέως ἐρασθεῖσα, περὶ συνου- 
σίας προσέπεμψεν αὐτῷ λόγους. μὴ δυναμένη 


Ἵ πελίᾳ Aegius: μελίᾳ A. 


38 ; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72. 6; Scholiast on Aristophanes, 
Clouds, 1063; Kustathius on Homer, Jl. ii. 684, p. 321. 
There are some discrepancies in these accounts. According to 
Tzetzes and the Scholiast on Aristophanes, the man who 
purified Peleus for the murder of Phocus was Eurytus (not 
Eurytion), son of Actor. According to Antoninus Liberalis, 
he was Eurytion, son of Irus. According to Diodorus, he 
was Actor, king of the country, who died childless and left 
the kingdom to Peleus. Eustathius agrees that the host of 
Peleus was Actor, but says that he had a daughter Polymela, 
whom he bestowed in marriage on Peleus along with the 
kingdom. From Tzetzes (l.c., pp. 444 sg.) we learn that the 
purification of Peleus by Eurytus (Hurytion) was recorded by 
Pherecydes, whom Apollodorus may here be following. 

1 See Homer, Jl. xvi. 173-178, who says that Polydora, 
daughter of Peleus, had a son Menesthius by the river 
Sperchius, though the child was nominally fathered on 
her human husband Borus, son of Perieres. Compare 
Heliodorus, Acthiop. ii. 34. Hesiod also recognized Poly- 
dora as the daughter of Peleus (Scholiast on Homer, 
Il. xvi. 175). Homer does not mention the mother of 
Polydora, but according to Pherecydes she was Antigone, 
daughter of Kurytion (Scholiast on Homer, l.c.). Hence it 
is probable that here, as in so many places, Apollodorus 
followed Pherecydes. According to Staphylus, in the third 
book of his work on Thessaly, the wife of Peleus and mother 


62 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiu. 1-3 


to him, who was wedded by Borus, son of Perieres.! 
Thence he went with Eurytion to hunt the Calydonian 
boar, but in throwing a dart at the hog he involun- 
tarily struck and killed Eurytion. ‘Therefore flying 
again from Phthia he betook him to Acastus at Iolcus 
and was purified by him.2, And at the games cele- 
brated in honour of Pelias he contended in wrestling 
with Atalanta.2 And Astydamia, wife of Acastus, 
fell in love with Peleus, and sent him a proposal for 
a meeting ;* and when she could not prevail on him 


of Polydora was Eurydice, daughter of Actor (Scholiast on 
Homer, l.c.). A little later on (8 4 of this chapter) Apollodorus 
says that Peleus himself married Polydora, daughter of 
Perieres, and that she had a son Menesthius by the river 
Sperchius, though the child was nominally fathered on Peleus. 
In this latter passage Apollodorus seems to have fallen into 
confusion in describing Polydora as the wife of Peleus, though 
in the present passage he had correctly described her as his 
daughter. Compare Hofer, in W. H. Roscher, Lexikon der 
griech. und rom. Mythologie, iii. 2641 sq. 

* As to this involuntary homicide committed by Peleus 
and his purification by Acastus, see above, i. 8. 2; Scholiast 
on Aristophanes, Clouds, 1063 ; Antoninus Liberalis, Z'rans- 
form. 38; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 175 (vol. i. p. 447, 
ed. Miiller). The Scholiast on Aristophanes calls the slain 
man EKurytus, not Eurytion. Antoninus Liberalis and Tzetzes 
describe him as Eurytion, son of Irus, not of Actor. They 
do not mention the hunt of the Calydonian boar in particular, 
but speak of a boar-hunt or a hunt in general. 

3 See above, iii. 9. 2. 

4 The following romantic story of the wicked wife, the 
virtuous hero, and his miraculous rescue from the perils of 
the forest, in which his treacherous host left him sleeping 
alone and unarmed, is briefly alluded to by Pindar, Nem. iv. 
54 (88) sqq., v. 25 (46) sqqg. It is told more explicitly by the 
Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iv. 54 (88) and 59 (95); the Scho- 
liast on Aristophanes, Clouds, 1063 ; and the Scholiast on Apol- 
lonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 224. But the fullest and clearest 
version of the tale is given by Apollodorus in the present 


63 


APOLLODORUS 


δὲ πεῖσαι, πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα αὐτοῦ πέμψασα ἔφη 
μέλλειν Πηλέα γαμεῖν Στερόπην τὴν ᾿Ακάστου 
θυγατέρα: καὶ τοῦτο ἐκείνη ἀκούσασα ἀγχόνην 
ἀνάπτει. Πηλέως δὲ πρὸς "AKkao Tov ,“καταψεύ- 
δεται, λέγουσα ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ περὶ συνουσίας πεπει- 
ρᾶσθαι. "Λκαστος 1 «δὲ: ἀκούσας κτεῖναι μὲν ὃν 
ἐκάθηρεν οὐκ ἠβουλήθη, ἄγει δὲ αὐτὸν ἐπὶ θήραν ὃ 
εἰς τὸ Πήλιον. ἔνθα ἁμίλλης περὶ θήρας γενομέ- 
VS Πηλεὺς μὲν ὧν ἐχειροῦτο θηρίων τὰς γλώσσας 
τούτων ἐκτεμὼν * εἰς πήραν ἐτίθει, οἱ δὲ μετὰ 
᾿Ακάστου ταῦτα χειρούμενοι κατεγέλων ὡς μηδὲν 
τεθηρακότος ° τοῦ Πηλέως. ὁ δὲ τὰς γλώσσας 
παρασχόμενος ὅσας εἶχεν ἐκείνοις, τοσαῦτα ἔφη 
τεθηρευκέναι. ἀποκοιμηθέντος δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ 
Πηλίῳ, ἀπολιπὼν᾽ Ἄκαστος καὶ τὴν μάχαιραν ἐν 
τῇ τῶν βοῶν κόπρῳ κρύψας ἐπανέρχεται. ὁ δὲ 
ἐξαναστὰς καὶ ζητῶν τὴν μάχαιραν, ὑπὸ THA 
Κενταύρων καταληφθεὶς ἔμελλεν. ἀπόλλυσθαι, 
σώζεται δὲ ὑπὸ Χείρωνος" οὗτος καὶ τὴν μάχαιραν 
αὐτοῦ ἐκξητήσας δίδωσι. 

1 ἃ Ἄκαστος Emperius, Westermann, Bekker. 

2 δὲ inserted by Hercher. 3 θήραν R: θήρας A. 

4 ἐκτεμὼν R®, Hercher: ἐκτέμνων Heyne, Westermann, 
Miiller, Bekker, Wagner, apparently following most MSS. 


> τεθηρακότος RR®B, Westermann, Wagner: τεθηρευ- 
κότος C, Heyne, Miiller, Bekker. 


passage. Pindar calls the wicked wife Hippolyta or Hippo- 
lyta Cretheis, that is, Hippolyta daughter of Cretheus. His 
Scholiast calls her Cretheis; the Scholiast on Apollonius 
Rhodius calls her Cretheis or Hippolyte ; and the Scholiast 
on Aristophanes calls her first Hippolyte and afterwards 
Astydamia. The sword of Peleus, which his faithless host 
hid in the cows’ dung while the hero lay sleeping in the 
wood, was a magic sword wrought by the divine smith 
Hephaestus and bestowed on Peleus by the pitying gods as a 


64 


THE LIBRARY, III. xu. 3 


she sent word to his wife that Peleus was about to 
marry Sterope, daughter of Acastus ; on hearing which 
the wife of Peleus strung herself up. And the wife 
of Acastus falsely accused Peleus to her husband, 
alleging that he had attempted her virtue. On hearing 
that, Acastus would not kill the man whom he had 
purified, but took him to hunt on Pelion. There a 
contest taking place in regard to the hunt, Peleus cut 
out and put in his pouch the tongues of the animals 
that fell to him, while the party of Acastus bagged 
his game and derided him as if he had taken nothing. 
But he produced them the tongues, and said that he 
had taken just as many animals as he had tongues.} 
When he had fallen asleep on Pelion, Acastus deserted 
him, and hiding his sword in the cows’ dung, returned. 
On arising and looking for his sword, Peleus was 
caught by the centaurs and would have perished, if 
he had not been saved by Chiron, who also restored 
him his sword, which he had sought and found. 


reward for his chastity. With this wondrous brand the chaste 
hero, like a mediaeval knight, was everywhere victorious 
in the fight and successful in the chase. Compare Zenobius, 
Cent. v.20. The episode of the hiding of the sword was told 
by Hesiod, some of whose verses on the subject are quoted 
by the Scholiasteon Pindar, Nem. iv. 59 (95). The whole 
story of the adventures of Peleus in the house of Acastus and 
in the forest reads like a fairy tale, and we can hardly doubt 
that it contains elements of genuine folk-lore. These are 
well brought out by W. Mannhardt in his study of the story. 
See his Antike Wald- und Feldkulte (Berlin, 1877), pp. 49 sqq. 
1 In fairy tales the hero often cuts out the tongues of a 
seven-headed dragon or other fearsome beast, and produces 
them as evidence of his prowess. See W. Mannhardt, Antike 
Wald- und Feldkulte, pp. 53 sqq. ; Spirits of the Corn and of 

the Wild, ii. 269. 
. 6 5 


VOL. II, F 


APOLLODORUS 


4 Paper δὲ ὁ Πηλεὺς ΠΠολυδώραν τὴν Περιήρους, 
ἐξ ἧς αὐτῷ γίνεται Μενέσθιος ἐπίκλην, ὁ Σπερ- 
5 χειοῦ τοῦ ποταμοῦ. αὖθις δὲ γαμεῖ Θέτιν τὴν 
Νηρέως, περὶ ἧς τοῦ γάμου Ζεὺς καὶ Ποσειδῶν 
ἤρισαν, Θέμιδος 1 δὲ θεσπιῳδούσης ἔσεσθαι τὸν 
ἐκ ταύτης γεννηθέντα κρείττονα, τοῦ πατρὸς ἀπέ- 
σχοντο. ἔνιοι δέ φασι, Διὸς ὁρμῶντος ἐπὶ τὴν 
ταύτης συνουσίαν, εἰρηκέναι Προμηθέα τὸν ἐκ 
ταύτης αὐτῷ γεννηθέντα οὐρανοῦ δυναστεύσειν." 
τινὲς δὲ λέγουσι Θέτιν μὴ βουληθῆναι Διὶ συνελ- 
θεῖν ὡς ὃ ὑπὸ Ἥρας τραφεῖσαν, Δία δὲ ὀργισθέντα 
θνητῷ θέλειν αὐτὴν ὁ συνοικίσαι. “Χείρωνος οὖν 
ὑποθεμένου Πηλεῖ συλλαβεῖν καὶ κατασχεῖν ὃ 
αὐτὴν μεταμορφουμένην, ἐπιτηρήσας συναρπάξ, εἰ, 
γινομένην δὲ ὁ ὁτὲ “μὲν πῦρ ὁτὲ ὲ δὲ ὕδωρ ὁ ὁτὲ ὲ δὲ θηρίον 
οὐ πρότερον ἀνῆκε πρὶν ἢ τὴν ἀρχαίαν μορφὴν 
εἶδεν ἀπολαβοῦσαν. γαμεῖ δὲ ἐν τῷ Πηλίῳ, κἀκεῖ 


1 Θέμιδος ER: Θέτιδος A (also as a first-hand correction 
in E). 2 δυναστεύσειν Gale: δυναστεύειν A. 
ws E, but apparently wanting in A. 
αὐτὴν WH: αὐτῇ A. 
συνοικίσαι Staverenus : συνοικίσειν Εἰ : συνοικῆσαι A. 
κατασχεῖν ER: κατέχειν C. 


ao σι - Ww, 


1 See above, note on iii. 13. 1. 

* Compare Homer, Jl. xviii. 83 sqq., 482 sqq.; Pindar, 
Nem. iv. 61 (100) sqq.; Euripides, Iphigenia in Aul. 701 sqq., 
1036 sqq.; Apollonius "Rhodius, Argon. iv. 805 sqq.; Catullus, 
lxiv. ; ‘Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. pp. 65, 142 sq. (First Vatican Mythographer, 207, 208 ; 
Second Vatican Mythographer, 205). 

% See Pindar, Isthm. viii. 27 (58) sqq. ; Apollonius Rhodius, 
Argon. iv. 790 sqq.; Ovid, Metamorph. xi. 217 sqq., who 
attributes the prophecy to Proteus. The present passage of 
Apollodorus is quoted, with the author’s name, by Tzetzes, 
(Schol. on Lycophron, 178). 


66 


THE LIBRARY, III. xi. 4-5 


Peleus married Polydora, daughter of Perieres, by 
whom he had a putative son Menesthius, though in 
fact Menesthius was the son of the river Sperchius.} 
Afterwards he married Thetis, daughter of Nereus,? 
for whose hand Zeus and Poseidon had been rivals; 
but when Themis prophesied that the son born of 
Thetis would be mightier than his father, they 
withdrew.? But some say that when Zeus was 
bent on gratifying his passion for her, Prometheus 
declared that the son borne to him by her would 
be lord of heaven;* and others affirm that Thetis 
would not consort with Zeus because she δὰ 
been brought up by Hera, and that Zeus in anger 
would marry her to a mortal.®° Chiron, therefore, 
having advised Peleus to seize her and hold her fast 
in spite of her shape-shifting, he watched his chance 
and carried her off, and though she turned, now 
into fire, now into water, and now into a beast, he 
did not let her go till he saw that she had resumed 
her former shape. And he married her on Pelion, 


4 Compare Aeschylus, Prometheus, 908 sqq.; Scholiast on 
Homer, Ji. 1. 519; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, v. 
338 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 54; id. Astronom.ii.15. According 
to Hyginus, Zeus released Prometheus from his fetters in 
gratitude for the warning which the sage had given him not 
to wed Thetis. 

5. Compare Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. iv. 790-798, a pas- 
sage which Apollodorus seems here to have had in mind. 

® As to the various shapes into which the reluctant Thetis 
turned herself in order to evade the grasp of her mortal 
lover, see Pindar, Nem. iv. 62 (101) sgqg.; Scholiast on Pin- 
dar, Nem. iii. 35 (60), iv. 62 (101); Pausanias, v. 18. 5; 
Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, iii. 618-624; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 175, 178 (vol. i. pp. 446, 457, ed. Miiller); 
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 582; Ovid, Meta- 
morph. xi. 235 sqqg. She is said to have changed into fire, 
water, wind, a tree, a bird, a tiger, a lion, a serpent, anda 


67 
yr 2 


APOLLODORUS 


θεοὶ τὸν γάμον εὐωχούμενοι καθύμνησαν. καὶ 
δίδωσι Χείρων 1Πηλεῖ δόρυ μείλινον, Ἰ]οσειδῶν δὲ 
Ὡ / \ = / ᾽ / \ 9 
ἵππους Βαλίον καὶ Ἐάνθον: ἀθάνατοι δὲ ἦσαν 
οὗτοι. 

‘Os δὲ ἐγέννησε Θέτις ἐκ Πηλέως βρέφος, ἀθά- 
vatov θέλουσα ποιῆσαι τοῦτο, κρύφα Ἰ]Πηλέως εἰς 
τὸ πῦρ ἐγκρύβουσα τῆς νυκτὸς ἔφθειρεν ὃ ἣν 
αὐτῷ θνητὸν πατρῷον, μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν δὲ ἔχριεν 
ἀμβροσίᾳ. ἸΠηλεὺς δὲ ἐπιτηρήσας καὶ σπαίροντα 


1 ἐγκρύβουσα SA: ἐγκρύπτουσα KE. 


cuttle-fish. It was when she had assumed the form of a 
cuttle-fish (sepia) that Peleus at last succeeded in seizing her 
and holding her fast (Tzetzes, Jl.cc.). With the trans- 
formations which Thetis underwent in order to escape from 
the arms of her lover we may compare the transformations 
which her father Nereus underwent in order to escape from 
Hercules (above, ii. 5. 11), the transformations which the 
river-god Achelous underwent in his tussle with the same 
doughty hero (above, ii. 7. 5, note), and the transformations 
which the sea-god Proteus underwent in order to give the 
slip to Menelaus (Homer, Od. iv. 354 sqq.). All these stories 
were appropriately told of water-spirits, their mutability 
reflecting as it were the instability of the fickle, inconstant 
element of which they were born. The place where Peleus 
caught and mastered his sea-bride was believed to be the 
south-eastern headland of Thessaly, which hence bore the 
name of Sepia or the Cuttle-fish. The whole coast of the Cape 
was sacred to Thetis and the other Nereids; and after their 
fleet had been wrecked on the headland, the Persians sacri- 
ficed to Thetis on the spot (Herodotus, vii. 191). See further, 
Appendix, “" The Marriage of Peleus and Thetis.” 

1 The Muses sang at the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, 
according to Pindar (Pyth. iii. 89 (159) sqq.). Catullus 
describes the Fates singing on the same occasion, and he has 
recorded their magic song (Ixiv. 305 sqq.). 

2 Compare Homer, Jl. xvi. 140-144, with the Scholiast on 
v. 140, according to whom Chiron felled the ash-tree for the 


68 


THE LIBRARY, III. xi. 5-6 


and there the gods celebrated the marriage with 
feast and song.! And Chiron gave Peleus an ashen 
spear,? and Poseidon gave him horses, Balius and 
Xanthus, and these were immortal.? 

When Thetis had got a babe by Peleus, she wished 
to make it immortal, and unknown to Peleus she used 
to hide it in the fire by night in order to destroy the 
mortal element which the child inherited from its 
father, but by day she anointed him with ambrosia.4 
But Peleus watched her, and, seeing the child 


shaft, while Athena polished it, and Hephaestus wrought 
(the blade). For this account the Scholiast refers to the 
author of the epic Cypria, 

3 Compare Homer, Jl. xvi. 148 sqq. 

4 This account of how Thetis attempted to render Achilles 
immortal, and how the attempt was frustrated by Peleus, is 
borrowed from Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. iv. 869 sqq. 
Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 178 (vol. i. p. 458, 
ed. Miiller). According to another legend, Thetis bore seven 
sons, of whom Achilles was the seventh; she destroyed the 
first six by throwing them into the fire or into a kettle of 
boiling water to see whether they were mortal or to make 
them immortal by consuming the merely mortal portion of 
their frame; and the seventh son, Achilles, would have 
perished in like manner, if his father Peleus had not snatched 
him from the fire at the moment when as yet only his ankle- 
bone was burnt. To supply this missing portion of his body, 
Peleus dug up the skeleton of the giant Damysus, the fleetest 
of all the giants, and, extracting from it the ankle-bone, 
fitted it neatly into the ankle of his little son Achilles, 
applying drugs which caused the new, or rather old, bone to 
coalesce perfectly with the rest. See Ptolemy Hephaestionis, 
vi. in Westermann’s Mythographi Graeci, p. 195; Lycophron, 
Cassandra, 178 sq., with scholium of Tzetzes on v. 178 
(vol. i. pp. 455 sq.) ; Scholiast on Homer, 11. xvi. 37; Scho- 
liast on Aristophanes, Clouds, 1068, p. 443, ed. Fr, Diibner ; ; 
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. iv. 816. <A similar 
story is told of Demeter and the infant son of Celeus. See 
above, i. 5. 1, with the note. 


69 


APOLLODORUS 


\ a ΟΝ ’ \ a \ 5 / \ / 
Tov παῖδα ἰδὼν ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρὸς éBonoe: καὶ Θέτις 
κωλυθεῖσα τὴν προαίρεσιν τελειῶσαι, νήπιον τὸν 
παῖδα ἀπολιποῦσα πρὸς Νηρηίδας ὥχετο. κομίζει 

Ν Ν a \ / , 3 \ \ 
δὲ τὸν παῖδα πρὸς Xetpwva IInrevs. ὁ δὲ λαβὼν 
αὐτὸν ἔτρεφε σπλάγχνοις λεόντων καὶ συῶν 
ἀγρίων καὶ ἄρκτων μυελοῖς, καὶ ὠνόμασεν ᾿Αχιλ- 
λέα (πρότερον δὲ Hv ὄνομα αὐτῷ Avyvpwv) ὅτι 
τὰ χείλη μαστοῖς οὐ προσήνεγκε. 

Πηλεὺς δὲ μετὰ ταῦτα σὺν ᾿Ιάσονι καὶ Διοσ- 


1 δὲ EH: μὲν A. 


1 Compare Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. iv. 875 sqq., who 
says that when Thetis was interrupted by Peleus in her effort 
to make Achilles immortal, she threw the infant screaming 
on the floor, and rushing out of the house plunged angrily 
into the sea, and never returned again. In the Jdiad Homer 
represents Thetis dwelling with her old father Nereus and 
the sea-nymphs in the depths of the sea (J/. 1. 857 sqq., xviii. 
35 sqq., Xxiv. 83 sgq.), while her forlorn husband dragged 
out a miserable and solitary old age in the halis (JJ. xviii. 
434 sq.). Thus the poet would seem to have been acquainted 
with the story of the quarrel and parting of the husband and 
wife, though he nowhere alludes to it or to the painful mis- 
understanding which led to their separation. In this, as in 
many other places, Homer passes over in silence features of 
popular tradition which he either rejected as incredible or 
deemed below the dignity of the epic. Yet if we are right in 
classing the story of Peleus and Thetis with the similar tales 
of the marriage of a man to a mermaid or other marine 
creature, the narrative probably always ended in the usual 
sad way by telling how, after living happily together for a 
time, the two at last quarrelled and parted for ever. 

2 Compare Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xvi. 37. According to 
Statius (Achill. ii. 382 sqq.), Chiron fed the youthful Achilles 
not on ordinary victuals, but on the flesh and marrows of lions. 
Philostratus says that his nourishment consisted of honey- 
combs and the marrows of fawns (Herotca, xx. 2), while the 
author of the Htymologicum Magnum (s.v. ᾿Αχιλλεύς, p. 181) 


0 


THE LIBRARY, III. xin. 6-7 


writhing on the fire, he cried out; and Thetis, thus 
prevented from accomplishing her purpose, forsook 
her infant son and departed to the Nereids.! Peleus 
brought the child to Chiron, who received him and 
fed him on the inwards of lions and wild swine and 
the marrows of bears,? and named him Achilles, be- 
cause he had not put his lips to the breast ; 5 but 
before that time his name was Ligyron. 

After that Peleus, with Jason and the Dioscuri, 


says that he was nurtured on the marrows of deer. Compare 
Eustathius, on Homer, 11. 1.1, Ὁ. 14. The flesh and marrows 
of lions, wild boars, and bears were no doubt supposed to 
impart to the youthful hero who partook of them the strength 
and courage of these animals, while the marrows of fawns or 
deer may have been thought to ensure the fleetness of foot 
for which he was afterwards so conspicuous. It is thus that 
on the principle of sympathetic magic many races seek to 
acquire the qualities of certain animals by eating their flesh 
or drinking their blood; whereas they abstain from eating 
the flesh of other animals lest they should, by partaking of it, 
be infected with the undesirable qualities which these crea- 
tures are believed to possess. For example, in various African 
tribes men eat the hearts of lions in order to become lion- 
hearted, while others will not eat the flesh of tortoises lest 
they should become slow-footed like these animals. See 
Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 138 sqq. On the same 
principle the ancients believed that men could acquire the art 
of divination by eating the hearts of ravens, moles, or hawks, 
because these creatures were supposed to be endowed with 
prophetic powers. See Porphyry, De abstinentia, ii. 48; 
Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxx. 19. So Medea is said to have restored 
the aged Aeson to youth by infusing into his veins a decoction 
of the liver of a long-lived stag and of the head of a crow 
that had survived nine generations of men. See Ovid, Meta- 
morph. vii. 273 sqq. 

3 Apollodorus absurdly derives the name Achilles from 
a (privative) and χείλη, ‘‘ lips,” so that the word would mean 
“not lips.” Compare Etumologicum Magnum, p. 181, s.v. 
᾿Αχιλλεύς ; Eustathius, on Homer, Jl. i. 1, p. 14. 


1 


APOLLODORUS 


/ > / » / Ace / \ 
κούροις ἐπόρθησεν ᾿Ιωλκόν, καὶ ᾿Αστυδάμειαν τὴν 
᾽ / a / \ \ \ 
ἈΑκάστου γυναῖκα φονεύει, καὶ διελὼν μεληδὸν 
διήγαγε δι᾿ αὐτῆς τὸν στρατὸν εἰς τὴν πόλιν. 

€ 

Os δὲ ἐγένετο ἐνναετὴς ᾿Αχιλλεύς, Κάλχαντος 
λέγοντος οὐ δύνασθαι χωρὶς αὐτοῦ Τροίαν αἱρε- 
θῆναι, Θέτις προειδυῖα ὅτι δεῖ στρατευόμενον 
αὐτὸν ἀπολέσθαι, κρύψασα ἐσθῆτι γυναικείᾳ ὡς 
παρθένον Λυκομήδειϊ παρέθετο. κἀκεῖ τρεφό- 


1 Λυκομήδει ES, apparently wanting in A. 


1 As to the wicked behaviour of Astydamia to Peleus, see 
above, iii. 13. 3. But it is probable that the cutting of the 
bad woman in pieces and marching between the pieces into 
the city was more than a simple act of vengeance ; it may 
have been a solemn sacrifice or purification designed to ensure 
the safety of the army in the midst of a hostile people. In 
Boeotia a form of public purification was to cut a dog in two 
and pass between the pieces. See Plutarch, Quaestiones 
Romanae, 111. A similar rite was observed at purifying a 
Macedonian army. <A dog was cut in two: the head and 
fore part were placed on the right, the hinder part, with the 
entrails, was placed on the left, and the troops in arms 
marched between the pieces. See Livy, xli. 6; Quintus 
Curtius, De gestis Alexandri Magni, x. 9. 28. For more 
examples of similar rites, and an attempt to explain them, 
see Folk-lore in the Old Testament, i. 391 sqq. To the 
instances there cited may be added another. When the 
Algerine pirates were at sea and in extreme danger, it was 
their custom to sacrifice a sheep, cut off its head, extract its 
entrails, and then throw them, together with the head, over- 
board ; afterwards ‘‘ with all the speed they can (without 
skinning) they cut the body in two parts by the middle, and 
then throw one part over the right side of the ship, and the 
other over the left, into the sea, as a kind of propitiation.” 
See Joseph Pitts, A trwe and faithful Account of the Religion 
and Manners of the Mohammetans (Exon. 1704), p. 14. As 
to the capture of Ioleus by Peleus, see Pindar, Nem. iii. 34 
(59), iv. 54 (89) sq. In the former of these passages Pindar 
says that Peleus captured Ioleus single-handed; but the 


72 


a 


THE LIBRARY, III. xm. 7-8 


laid waste Ioleus; and he slaughtered Astydamia, 
wife of Acastus, and, having divided her limb from 
limb, he led the army through her into the city. 
When Achilles was nine years old, Calchas declared 
that Troy could not be taken without him ; so Thetis, 
foreseeing that it was fated he should perish if he 
went to the war, disguised him in female garb and 
entrusted him as a maiden to Lycomedes.* Bred at 


Scholiast on the passage affirms, on the authority of Phere- 
cydes, that he was accompanied by Jason and the Tyndarids 
(Castor and Pollux). As this statement tallies with the 
account given by Apollodorus, we may surmise that here, as 
often elsewhere, our author followed Pherecydes. According 
to the Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius (Argon. i. 224), Peleus 
on his return to Iolcus put to death Acastus himself as well 
as his wicked wife. 

2 As to Achilles disguised as a girl at the court of Lyco- 
medes in Scyros, see Bion, ii. 5 sqg.; Philostratus Junior, 
Imag. 1; Scholiast on Homer, 11. ix. 668 ; Hyginus, Fab. 96 ; 
Statius, Achill. i. 207 sqq. The subject was painted by 
Polygnotus in a chamber at the entrance to the acropolis of 
Athens (Pausanias i. 22. 6). Euripides wrote a play called 
The Scyrians on the same theme. See J’ragicorum Grae- 
corum Fragmenta, ed. Nauck?, pp. 574 sg. Sophocles com- 
posed a tragedy under the same title, which has sometimes 
been thought to have dealt with the same subject, but more 
probably it was concerned with Neoptolemus in Scyros and 
the mission of Ulysses and Phoenix to carry him off to Troy. 
See The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. 1]. 

. 191 sqq. The youthful Dionysus, like the youthful 
Achilles, is said to have been brought up as a maiden. See 
above, iil. 4. 3, with the note. One of the questions which 
the emperor Tiberius used solemnly to propound to the anti- 
quaries of his court was: What was the name of Achilles 
when he lived asa girl among girls? See Suetonius, Tiberius, 
70. The question was solemnly answered by learned men in 
various ways: some said that the stripling’s female name 
was Cercysera, others that it was Issa, and others that it 
was Pyrrha. See Ptolemy Hephaestionis, Nov. Hist. i. 
in Westermann’s Mythographi Gracct, p. 183. 


73 


APOLLODORUS 


μενος τῇ Λυκομήδους θυγατρὶ Δηιδαμείᾳ μίγνυται, 
καὶ γίνεται παῖς Πύρρος αὐτῷ ὁ κληθεὶς Νεοπτό- 
λεμὸος αὖθις. ᾿Οδυσσεὺς δὲ μηνυθέντα παρὰ 
Λυκομήδει! ζητῶν ᾿Αχιλλέα, σάλπιγγι χρησά- 
μενος εὗρε. καὶ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον εἰς ‘Tpolay 
ἦλθε. 

Συνείπετο δὲ αὐτῷ Φοῖνιξ ὁ ᾿Αμύντορος. οὗτος 
ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ᾿ἐτυφλώθη καταψευσαμένης 
φθορὰν" Φθίας τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς παλλακῆς." 
Πηλεὺς δὲ αὐτὸν πρὸς Χείρωνα κομίσας, ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνου θεραπευθέντα τὰς ὄψεις βασιλέα κατέ- 
στησε Δολόπων. 

Συνείπετο δὲ καὶ Ἰ]άτροκλος ὁ Μενοιτίου καὶ 


1 Λυκομήδει ES R (compend.): λυκομήδου A. 

2 φθορὰν ES: φθορᾷ A. 

3 παλλακῆς ES, Scholiast on Plato, Laws, xi. p. 9918: 
παλλακίδος A. - 


1 The usual story was that the crafty Ulysses spread out 
baskets and women’s gear, mingled with arms, before the 
disguised Achilles and his girlish companions in Seyros ; and 
that while the real girls pounced eagerly on the feminine 
gauds, Achilles betrayed his sex by snatching at the arms. 
See Philostratus Junior, Imagines, i; Scholiast on Homer, 
Il. xix. 326; Ovid, Metamorph. xiii. 162 sqgg. Apollodorus 
tells us that Achilles was detected by the sound of a trumpet. 
This is explained by Hyginus (fab. 96), who says that while 
Achilles was surveying the mingled trumpery and weapons, 
Ulysses caused a bugle to sound and a clash of arms to be 
heard, whereupon Achilles, imagining that an enemy was at 
hand, tore off his maidenly attire and seized spear and shield. 
Statius gives a similar account of the detection (Achdl. ii. 
167 sqq.). 

2 See Homer, 11. ix. 437-484, with the Scholiast on wv. 448. 
But Homer says nothing about the blinding of Phoenix by 
his angry father or his cure by Chiron; and according to 
Homer the accusation of having debauched his father’s con- 


74 


THE LIBRARY, III. xm. 8 


his court, Achilles had an intrigue with Deidamia, 
daughter of Lycomedes, and a son Pyrrhus was born 
to him, who was afterwards called Neoptolemus. 
But the secret of Achilles was betrayed, and Ulysses, 
seeking him at the court of Lycomedes, discovered 
him by the blast of a trumpet.!. And in that way 
Achilles went to Troy. 

He was accompanied by Phoenix, son of Amyntor. 
This Phoenix had been blinded by his father on 
the strength of a false accusation of seduction pre- 
ferred against him by his father’s concubine Phthia. 
But Peleus brought him to Chiron, who restored his 
sight, and thereupon Peleus made him king of the 
Dolopians.? 

Achilles was also accompanied by Patroclus, son ot 


cubine was not false but true, Phoenix having been instigated 
to the deed by his mother, who was jealous of the concubine. 
But variations from the Homeric narrative were introduced 
into the story by the tragedians who handled the theme 
(Scholiast on Homer, l.c.). Sophocles and Euripides both 
wrote tragedies on the subject under the same title of Phoenix ; 
the tragedy of Euripides seems to have been famous. See 
Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 286, 
621 sqq.; The Fragmenis of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. 
il. pp. 820 sqq. The blinding of Phoenix by his father Amyntor 
is alluded to bya poet of the Greek anthology (Anthol. Palat. 
111, 3). Both the poet and Apollodorus probably drew on 
Kuripides, who from an allusion in Aristophanes (Acharn. 
421) is known to have represented Phoenix as blind. Both 
the blinding and the healing of Phoenix are related by Tzetzes 
(Schol. on Lycophron, 421), who may have followed Apollo- 
dorus. According to the Scholiast on Homer (/.c.), the name 
of the concubine was Clytia ; according to Tzetzes (l.c.), it 
was Clytia or Phthia. Apollodorus calls her Phthia. The 
Scholiast on Plato (Laws, xi. p. 931 8B), gives a version of the 
story which agrees entirely with that of Apollodorus, and 
may have been copied from it. The healing of Phoenix’s eyes 
by Chiron is mentioned by Propertius (ii. 1. 60). 


75 


APOLLODORUS 


Σθενέλης τῆς ᾿Ακάστου ἢ Περιώπιδος τῆς Φέρη- 
τος, ἢ καθάπερ φησὶ Φιλοκράτης, Ἰ]Πολυμήλης 

fal / e ᾽ 2 a \ ᾽ 
τῆς Πηλέως. οὗτος ἐν Οποῦντι διενεχθεὶς ἐν 
παιδιᾷ περὶ ἀστραγάλων: παῖδα ἸΚλειτώνυμον 3 
τὸν ᾿Αμφιδάμαντος ἀπέκτεινε, καὶ φυγὼν μετὰ 
τοῦ πατρὸς παρὰ Ἰ]ηλεῖ κατῴκει, καὶ ᾿Αχιλλέως 


ἐρώμενος γίνεται.) . .. 


XIV. Κέκροψ αὐτόχθων, συμφυὲς ἔχων σῶμα 
ἀνδρὸς καὶ δράκοντος, τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς ἐβασίλευσε 
πρῶτος, καὶ τὴν γῆν πρότερον λεγομένην ᾿Ακτὴν 
ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ Κεκροπίαν ὠνόμασεν. ἐπὶ τούτου, 

/ » a a , / > 
φασίν, ἔδοξε τοῖς θεοῖς πόλεις καταλαβέσθαι, ἐν 


1 ἐν παιδιᾷ περὶ ἀστραγάλων παίζων A, Westermann, Miiller, 
Wagner. I follow Bekker in omitting παίζων, but Heyne 
may be right in proposing to strike out both ἐν παιδιᾷ and 
παίζων as independent glosses on περὶ ἀστραγάλων. Compare 
Schohast on Homer, J/. xii. 1, περὶ ἀστῥαγάλων ὀργισθεὶς 
ἀπέκτεινεν. Hercher changed παίζων into παῖς dv, but the 
jingle παῖς ὧν παῖδα is not at all in the manner of Apollo- 
dorus. 

2 κλειτώνυμον RO: κλυτώνυμον A: κλεισώνυμος Pherecydes 
(quoted by Scholiast on Homer, J/. xxiii. 87), Philostephanus 
(quoted by Scholiast on Homer, J/. xvi. 14): κλισώνυμος 
Hellanicus (quoted by Scholiast on Homer, J/. xii. 1). 

3’ Heyne was probably right in marking a lacuna here. 


1 Compare Homer, JI. xi. 785 sgq. Homer does not mention 
the name of Patroclus’s mother. 

2 See Homer, Jl. xxiii. 84-90; compare Scholiast on 
Homer, Jl. xii. 1 ; Strabo, ix. 4. 2, p. 425; Ovid, Ha Ponto, 
i. 3. 73 sq. The name of the slain lad was variously given 
as Clisonymus (Scholiast, J.c.) or Aeanes (Strabo and Scho- 
liast, dl.cc.). 

ὃ According to the Parian Chronicle (Marmor Parium, 
lines 2-4), with which Apollodorus is in general agreement, 


76 


THE LIBRARY, III. xm. 8-x1v. 1 


Menoetius! and Sthenele, daughter of Acastus ; or 
the mother of Patroclus was Periopis, daughter of 
Pheres, or, as Philocrates says, she was Polymele, 
daughter of Peleus. At Opus, in a quarrel over a 
game of dice, Patroclus killed the boy Clitonymus, 
son of Amphidamas, and flying with his father he 
dwelt at the house of Peleus* and became a 
minion of Achilles. 


XIV. Cecrops, a son of the soil, with a body 
compounded of man and serpent, was the first king 
of Attica, and the country which was formerly called 
Acte he named Cecropia after himself.* In his time, 
they say, the gods resolved to take possession of 


the first king of Attica was Cecrops, and the country was 
named Cecropia after him, whereas it had formerly been 
called Actice (sic) after an aboriginal named Actaeus. Pau- 
sanias (i. 2. 6) represents this Actaeus as the first king of 
Attica, and says that Cecrops succeeded him on the throne 
by marrying his daughter. But Pausanias, like Apollo- 
dorus (iii. 15. 5), distinguishes this first Cecrops from a 
later Cecrops, son of Erechtheus (i. 5. 3). Apollodorus is 
at one with Pausanias in saying that the first Cecrops 
married the daughter of Actaeus, and he names her 
Agraulus (see below, iii. 14. 2). Philochorus said, with 
great probability, that there never was any such person as 
Actaeus ; according to him, Attica lay waste and depopu- 
lated from the deluge in the time of Ogyges down to the 
reign of Cecrops. See Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelit, x. 10. 
J. Tzetzes (Chiliades, v. 637) and Hyginus (Fab. 48) agree 
in representing Cecrops as the first king of Attica ; Hyginus 
calls him a son of the earth. As to his double form, the 
upper part of him being human and the lower part serpen- 
tine, see Aristophanes, Wasps, 438, with the Scholiast ; 
Kuripides, Ion, 1163 sq.; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
111; td. Chiliades, v. 638 sqq.; Scholiast on Aristophanes, 
Plutus, 773; Diodorus Siculus, i. 28. 7, who rationalizes the 
fable after his usual fashion. 

77 


APOLLODORUS 


ais ἔμελλον ἔχειν τιμὰς ἰδίας ἕκαστος. ἧκεν οὖν 
πρῶτος ἸΠοσειδῶν ἐπὶ τὴν ᾿Αττικήν, καὶ πλήξας 
τῇ τριαίνῃ κατὰ μέσην τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἀπέφηνε 
θάλασσαν, ἣν νῦν ᾿Ερεχθηίδα καλοῦσι. μετὰ δὲ 
τοῦτον ἧκεν ᾿Αθηνᾶ, καὶ ποιησαμένη τῆς κατα- 
λήψεως Κέκροπα μάρτυρα ἐφύτευσεν ἐλαίαν, ἣ 
νῦν ἐν τῷ Πανδροσείῳ δείκνυται. γενομένης δὲ 
ἔριδος ἀμφοῖν περὶ τῆς χώρας, διαλύσας Ζεὺς 


1 Πανδροσείῳ Bekker: πανδροσίῳ EA. 


1 As to the contest between Poseidon and Athena for 
possession of Attica, see Herodotus, viii. 55; Plutarch, 
Themistocles, 19; Pausanias, i. 24. 5, i. 26.5; Ovid, Meta- 
morph. vi. 70 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 164; Servius, on Virgil, 
Georg. i. 12; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Theb. vii. 185; 
Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. 
pp. 1, 115 (First Vatican Mythographer, 2; Second Vatican 
Mythographer, 119). A rationalistic explanation of the fable 
was propounded by the eminent Roman antiquary Varro. 
According to him, the olive-tree suddenly appeared im Attica, 
and at the same time there was an eruption of water in 
another part of the country. So king Cecrops sent to inquire 
of Apollo at Delphi what these portents might signify. The 
oracle answered that the olive and the water were the 
symbols of Athena and Poseidon respectively, and that the 
people of Attica were free to choose which of these deities 
they would worship. Accordingly the question was sub- 
mitted to a general assembly of the citizens and citizenesses ; 
for in these days women had the vote as well as men. All 
the men voted for the god, and all the women voted for the 
goddess ; and as there was one more woman than there were 
men, the goddess appeared at the head of the poll. Chagrined 
at the loss of the election, the male candidate flooded the 
country with the water of the sea, and to appease his wrath 
it was decided to deprive women of the vote and to forbid 
children to bear their mother’s names for the future. See 
Augustine, De civitate Dei, xviii. 9. The print of Poseidon’s 
trident on the rock of the acropolis at Athens was shown 


78 


ΤΠ LIBRARY, III. xv. 1 


cities in which each of them should receive his own 
peculiar worship. So Poseidon was the first that 
came to Attica, and with a blow of his trident on 
the middle of the acropolis, he produced a sea which 
they now call Erechtheis.1_ After him came Athena, 
and, having called on Cecrops to witness her act of 
taking possession, she planted an olive-tree, which 
is still shown in the Pandrosium.? But when the 
two strove for possession of the country, Zeus parted 


down to late times. See Strabo, ix. 1. 16, p. 396; Pau- 
sanias, i. 26. 5. The ‘‘sea,” which the god was supposed 
to have produced as evidence of his right to the country 
was also to be seen within the Erechtheum on the acro- 
polis; Pausanias calls it a well of sea water, and says that, 
when the south wind blew, the well gave forth a sound of 
waves. See Herodotus, viii. 55; Pausanias, i. 26. 5, viii. 
10. 4. According to the late Latin mythographers (see the 
references above), Poseidon produced a horse from the rock 
in support of his claim, and this version of the story seems 
to have been accepted by Virgil (Georg. i. 12 sqq.), but 
it is not countenanced by Greek writers. The Athenians 
said that the contest between Poseidon and Athena took 
place on the second of the month Boedromion, and hence 
they omitted that day from the calendar. See Plutarch, De 
fraterno amore, 11; id. Quaest. Conviv. ix. 6. The unlucky 
Poseidon also contested the possession of Argos with Hera, 
and when the judges gave a verdict against him and in favour 
of the goddess, he took his revenge, as in Attica, by flooding 
the country. See Pausanias, ii. 22. 4; compare 7d. ii. 15. 
5; Polemo, Greek Hisiory, cited by the Scholiast on Aris- 
tides, vol. iii. p. 322, ed. G. Dindorf. 

2 The olive-tree seems to have survived down to the 
second century of our era. See Herodotus, viii. 55; Diony- 
ae Halicarnasensis, De Dinarcho Judicium, 33 Pausanias, 

27. 3; Cicero, De legibus, i. 1. 2; Hyginus, Fab. 164; 
Pliny, Nat. Hist. xvi. 240. Dionysius agrees with Apollo- 
dorus in representing the tree as growing in the Pandrosium, 
which is proved by inscriptions to have been an enclosure to 
the west of the Erechtheum. See my commentary on Pau- 
sanias, vol. il. p. 337. 


79 


APOLLODORUS 


κριτὰς ἔδωκεν, οὐχ ws εἶπόν tives, Κέκροπα καὶ 
Κραναόν," οὐδὲ ᾿ρυσίχθονα, θεοὺς δὲ τοὺς δώδεκα. 
καὶ τούτων δικαζόντων ἡ χώρα τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
ἐκρίθη, Κέκροπος μαρτυρήσαντος ὅτι πρώτη 8 τὴν 
ἐλαίαν ἐφύτευσεν. ᾿Αθηνᾶ μὲν οὖν ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς 
\ , Rope 2 / a \ lal 
Τὴν πόλιν ἐκάλεσεν ᾿Αθήνας, Ποσειδῶν δὲ θυμῷ 
ὀργισθεὶς τὸ Θριάσιον πεδίον ἐπέκλυσε καὶ τὴν 
᾿Αττικὴν ὕφαλον ἐποίησε. 

Κέκροψ' δὲ γήμας τὴν ᾿Ακταίου κόρην "Αγραυ- 
λον παῖδα μὲν ἔσχεν ᾿Βρυσίχθονα, ὃς ἄτεκνος 

/ / \ ” 7 

μετήλλαξε, θυγατέρας δὲ "Αγραυλον “Epony 
Πάνδροσον. ᾿Αγραύλου μὲν οὖν καὶ “Apeos ᾿᾽ΔΑλ- 
κίππη γίνεται. ταύτην βιαζόμενος ᾿Αλιρρόθιος, 
ς a \ 7] > 7 ig XN @ 
ὁ Ἰ]οσειδῶνος καὶ νύμφης Εὐρύτης, ὑπὸ Αρεος 
φωραθεὶς κτείνεται. ἸΠοσειδῶνος δὲ «εἰσάγοντος: 
ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ κρίνεται δικαζόντων τῶν δώδεκα 
θεῶν “Apns* καὶ ἀπολύεται. 


1 ᾿Αθηνᾷ καὶ Ποσειδῶνι κριτὰς δέδωκεν ὁ Ζεὺς E: ᾿Αθηνᾶν καὶ 
Ποσειδῶνα διαλύσας Ζεὺς κριτὰς ἔδωκε Α : ᾿Αθηνᾷ καὶ Ποσειδῶνι 
διαλύσας Ζεὺς κριτὰς ἔδωκε Wagner. The words ᾿Αθηνᾷ καὶ 
Ποσειδῶνι (or ᾿Αθηνᾶν καὶ Ποσειδῶνα) appear to be ἃ gloss on 
the preceding ἀμφοῖν, as Heyne perceived. Accordingly I 
have omitted them with Hercher. 

2 Kpavady Aegius: δαναὸν A. 

* πρώτη KR (compend.), Hercher, Wagner: πρῶτον A, 
Heyne, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker. 

* Ποσειδῶνος δὲ -« εἰσάγοντος -- ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ κρίνεται δικα- 
ζόντων τῶν δώδεκα θεῶν "Αρης Scaliger: Ποσειδῶν δὲ ἐν Apel 
πάγῳ κρίνεται, δικαζόντων τῶν δώδεκα θεῶν, “Ape. Heyne, 
Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner. But the 
construction κρίνεσθαί τινι in the sense of ‘‘ bring a person to 
trial” is impossible, and the abrupt change of nominative 
from κρίνεται (Ποσειδῶν) to ἀπολύεται (Apns) is very harsh, if 
not intolerable. Scaliger’s emendation certainly gives the 
right sense and may be verbally correct also. ‘The acci- 
dental omission of εἰσάγοντος would not be difficult. The 
emendation is recorded, but not accepted, by Heyne. 


80 


ΤῊ LIBRARY, 111]. xrv. r—2 


them and appointed arbiters, not, as some have 
affirmed, Cecrops and Cranaus, nor yet Erysichthon, 
but the twelve gods.!_ And in accordance with their 
verdict the country was adjudged to Athena, because 
Cecrops bore witness that she had been the first to 
plant the olive. Athena, therefore, called the city 
Athens after herself, and Poseidon in hot anger 
flooded the Thriasian plain and laid Attica under 
the sea.? 

Cecrops married Agraulus, daughter of Actaeus, 
and had a son Erysichthon, who departed this life 
childless; and Cecrops had daughters, Agraulus, 
Herse, and Pandrosus.* Agraulus had a daughter 
Aleippe by Ares. In attempting to violate Alcippe, 
Halirrhothius, son of Poseidon and a nymph Euryte, 
was detected and killed by Ares. Impeached by 
Poseidon, Ares was tried in the Areopagus before 
the twelve gods, and was acquitted.° 

1 Compare Ovid, Metamorph. vi. 72 sq. 

2 As to this flood, see Varro, in Augustine, De civitate 
De, xviii. 9; Hyginus, Fab. 164. The Thriasian plain is 
the plain in which Eleusis stands. See Strabo, ix, 1. 6, p. 392, 
i= 1. 18, p- 395. 

3 Compare Pausanias, i. 2. 6; Hyginus, Fab. 146; Ovid, 
Metamorph. ii. 737 sqq. All these writers call the first of 
the daughters Aglaurus instead of Agraulus, and the form 
Aglaurus is confirmed by inscriptions on two Greek vases 
(Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, vol. iv. p. 146, Nos. 
7716, 7718). 

4 Compare Pausanias, i. 21. 4; Stephanus Byzantius and 
Suidas, s.v. ἴΑρειος πάγος ; Bekker’s Anecdota Gracca, vol. i. 
p. 444, lines 8 sqq. From the three latter writers we learn 
that the story was told by the historians Philochorus and 
Hellanicus, whom Apollodorus may here be following. 

®° See Euripides, Jon, 1258 sqq., Iphigenia in Tauris, 
945 sq.; Demosthenes, xxiii. 66, p. 641; Parian Chronicle 
(Marmor Parium), lines 5 84. ; Pausanias, i. 28. 5; Scholiast 
on Euripides, Orestzs, 1648, 1651. The name Areopagus was 

81 

VOL. II. G 


3 


APOLLODORUS 


“Epons δὲ καὶ Ἑρμοῦ Κέφαλος, οὗ ἐρασθεῖσα 
"Has ἥ ἥρπασε καὶ μιγεῖσα ἐν Συρίᾳ παῖδα ἐ ἐγέννησε 
Τιθωνόν, οὗ παῖς ἐγένετο Φαέθων, τούτου δὲ 
᾿Αστύνοος, τοῦ δὲ Σάνδοκος," ὃς ἐκ Συρίας ἐλθὼν 
εἰς Κιλικίαν, πόλιν ἔκτισε Κελένδεριν, καὶ γήμας 
Φαρνάκην" τὴν Μεγασσάρου τοῦ Ὑριέων βα- 
σιλέως ὃ ἐγέννησε Κινύραν. οὗτος ἐν Κύπρῳ, 

1 Savdoxos RR®C: σάνδακος B. 

2 Φαρνάκη Muncker (on Antoninus Liberalis, Transform. 
34, p. 277, ed. Koch, comparing Hesychius, s.v. Κινύρας" 
᾿Απόλλωνος Kal Φαρνάκης Tais): θαινάκην RR®: θανάκην A. 

3 τῶν ‘Tpiéwy βασιλέως Bekker, Hercher, Wagner: τοῦ 


συρίων βασιλέως Ri: τῶν συρίων βασιλέα A. 
4 Κινύραν R: κινύρας A. 


commonly supposed to mean ‘‘ the hill of Ares” and ex- 
plained by the tradition that Ares was the first to be tried 
for murder before the august tribunal. But more probably, 
perhaps, the name meant ‘‘ the hill of curses.” See my note 
on Pausanias. i. 28. 5 (vol. ii. pp. 363 sq.). For other legen- 
dary or mythical trials in the court of the Areopagus, see 
below, iii. 15. 1, iii. 15. 9. 

* See above, i. 9. 4, note, where Cephalus is said to have 
been a son of Deion by Diomede ; compare ii. 4. ἐξ ili, 15, 1. 
Pausanias also calls Cephalus ason of Deion (i. 37. 6, x. 29. 6), 
and so does Antoninus Liberalis (Transform, 41). The Scho- 
liast on Homer (Od. xi. 321) calls his father Deioneus. Hy- 
ginus in two passages (Jab. 189, 270) describes Cephalus as 
a son of Deion, and in another passage (Fab. 160) as a son of 
Hermes (Mercur y) by Creusa, daughter of Erechtheus. 
Euripides tells how ‘‘ Dawn with her lovely light once 
snatched up Cephalus to the gods, all for love”’ (Hippolytus, 
454 sqq.). 

2 According to Hesiod (Theog. 986 sqgq.) and Pausanias 
(i. 3. 1), Phaethon was a son of Cephalus and the Dawn or 
Day. ‘Accor ding to another and seemingly more usual 
account the father of Phaethon was the Sun. See Diodorus 
Siculus, v. 23; Pausanias, i. 4. 1, ii. 3. 2; Lucian, Dialog. 
deorum, xxv. 1; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, iv. 357 sqq. ; Eusta- 
thius, on Homer, Od. xi. 325, p. 1689; Scholiast on Homer, 


82 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 3 


Herse had by Hermes a son Cephalus, whom Dawn 
loved and carried off,! and consorting with him in 
Syria bore ason Tithonus, who had a son Phaethon,? 
who had a son Astynous, who had a son Sandocus, 
who passed from Syria to Cilicia and founded a city 
Celenderis, and having married Pharnace, daughter 
of Megassares, king of MHyria, begat Cinyras.? 
This Cinyras in Cyprus, whither he had come with 


Od. xvii. 208; Ovid, Metamorph. ii. 19 sqq. ; Hyginus, Fab. 
152, 156; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Τοῦ. i. 221; 
Scholia in Caesaris Germanici Aratea, p. 421, ed. Fr. Kyssen- 
hardt, in his edition of Martianus Capella ; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latin, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 37, 93, 208 
(First Vatican Mythographer, 118; Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 57 ; Third Vatican Mythographer, iii. 8. 14) ; Servius 
on Virgil, Aen. x. 189. The mother who bore him to the 
Sun is usually called Clymene (so Lucian, Tzetzes, Husta- 
thius, Ovid, Hyginus, Lactantius Placidus, the Vatican 
mythographers, and Servius); but the Scholiast on Homer 
(l.c.) calls her Rhode, daughter of Asopus. Clymene herself, 
the mother of Phaethon, is said to have been a daughter of 
Ocean and Tethys (J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, iv. 359; Ovid, 
Metamorph. ii. 156) or of Iphys or Minyas (Eustathius, /.c.). 
Apollodorus passes over in silence the famous story how 
Phaethon borrowed the chariot of the Sun for a day, and 
driving too near the earth set it on fire, and how in his wild 
career he was struck dead by Zeus with a thunderbolt and 
fell into the river Eridanus, where his sisters mourned for 
him till they were turned into poplar trees, their tears being 
changed into drops of amber which exuded from the trees. 
The story is told at great length and with many picturesque 
details by Ovid (Metamorph. ii. 1 sqq.)._ Compare Lucretius, 
v. 396 sqq.; Diodorus Siculus, Lucian, the Scholiast on Homer, 
Hyginus, and the Latin Mythographers, ll.cc. Euripides 
wrote a tragedy on the subject, of which some considerable 
fragments survive. See Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 599 8425. For some similar stories, see 
Appendix, ‘‘ Phaethon and the Chariot of the Sun.” 
% According to Hyginus (fab. 142), Cinyras was a son of 
Paphus. 
83 


α 2 


APOLLODORUS 


παραγενόμενος σὺν λαῷ, ἔκτισε Πάφον, γήμας δὲ 
ἐκεῖ Μεθάρμην, κόρην Tuyparivos Κυπρίων 
βασιλέως, ᾿Οξύπορον ἐγέννησε καὶ Αδωνιν, πρὸς 
δὲ τούτοις θυγατέρας ᾿Ορσεδίκην «καὶ; Λαογόρην 
καὶ Βραισίαν. αὗται δὲ διὰ μῆνιν ᾿Αφροδίτης 
ἀλλοτρίοις ἀνδράσι συνευναζόμεναι τὸν βίον ἐν 
Αὐγύπτῳ μετήλλαξαν. "Adonis δὲ ἔτι παῖς ὧν 
᾿Αρτέμιδος χόλῳ πληγεὶς ἐν θήρᾳ" ὑπὸ συὸς 
ἀπέθανεν. Ἡσίοδος δὲ αὐτὸν Φοίνικος καὶ ᾿Αλ- 
φεσιβοίας λέγει, Πανύασις 5 δέ φησι Θείαντος 


1 θήρᾳ Heyne (conjecture), Hercher, Wagner: θήραι RR*: 
θήραις A, Heyne (in text), Westermann, Miiller, Bekker. 
2 πανύασσος A. 


1 A different and apparently more prevalent tradition re- 
presented Adonis as the son of Cinyras by incestuous inter- 
course with his daughter Myrrha or Smyrna. See Scholiast 
on Theocritus, i. 107; Plutarch, Parallela, 22; Antoninus 
Liberalis, Transform. 34 (who, however, differs as to the 
name of Smyrna’s father); Ovid, Metamorph. x. 298 sqq. ; 
Hyginus, Fab. 58, 164; Fulgentius, Mytholog. iii. 8; Lac- 
tantius Placidus, Narrat. Fabul. x. 9; Servius, on Virgil, 
Ecl. x. 18, and on Aen. v. 72; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 60 (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 200). Similar cases of incest with a daughter are 
frequently reported of royal houses in antiquity. They per- 
haps originated in a rule of transmitting the crown through 
women instead of through men; for under such a rule a 
widowed king would be under a strong temptation to marry 
his own daughter as the only means of maintaining himself 
legitimately on the throne after the death of his wife. See 
Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 3rd ed., i. 43 sq. The legend of the 
incestuous origin of Adonis is "mentioned, on the authority 
of Panyasis, by Apollodorus himself a little lower down. 

2 Compare Bion, Jdyl. i. ; Cornutus, Theologiae Graecae 
Compendium, 28; Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. iv. 5. ὃ, ὃ 8; 
Athenaeus, ii. 80, p. 698; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 


84 . 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 3-4 


some people, founded Paphos; and having there 
married Metharme, daughter of Pygmalion, king of 
Cyprus, he begat Oxyporus and Adonis,! and besides 
them daughters, Orsedice, Laogore, and _ Braesia. 
These by reason of the wrath of Aphrodite cohabited 
with foreigners, and ended their life in Egypt. And 
Adonis, while still a boy, was wounded and killed in 
hunting by a boar through the anger of Artemis.” 
Hesiod, however, affirms that he was a son of Phoenix 
and Alphesiboea ; and Panyasis says that he was a son 


831; Aristides, Apology, ed. J. Rendel Harris (Cambridge, 
1891), pp. 44, 106 sg. ; Propertius, 111. 4 (5) 53 sq., ed. F. A. 
Paley ; Ovid, Metamorph. x. 710 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 248 ; 
Macrobius, Saturnal. i. 21. 4; Lactantius, Divin. Inst. i. 17; 
Firmicus Maternus, De errore profanarum religionum, 9; 
Augustine, De civitate Der, vi. 7. There are some grounds 
for thinking that formerly Adonis and his Babylonian proto- 
type Tammuz were conceived in the form of a boar, and that 
the story of his death by a boar was only a misinterpretation 
of this older conception. See Spirits of the Corn and of the 
Wiid, ii. 22 sq.; C. F. Burney, The Book of Judges (London, 
1918), pp. xvii sqq., who refers to ‘‘the brilliant discovery 
of Ball (PSBA. xvi. 1894, pp. 195 sqq.) that the Sumerian 
name of Tammuz, DUMU.ZI (Bab. Dw dazu, Dizu) is iden- 
tical with the Turkish ddémaz ‘pig,’ and that there is thus 
an ‘original identity of the god with the wild boar that slays 
him in the developed legend.’” W. Robertson Smith, as 
Professor Burney points out, had many years ago expressed 
the view that ‘‘ the Cyprian Adonis was originally the Swine- 
god, and in this as in many other cases the sacred victim has 
been changed by false interpretation into the enemy of the 
god” (Relrgion of the Semites, New Edition, London, 1894, 
p- 411, note‘). The view is confirmed by the observation 
that the worshippers of Adonis would seem to have abstained 
from eating swine’s flesh. See W. W. Baudissin, Adonis 
und Esmun (Leipsic, 1911), p. 142, quoting SS. Cyri et 
Joannis Miracula, in Migne’s Patrologia Graeca, \xxxvii. 3, 
col. 3624. 


85 


APOLLODORUS . 


βασιλέως ᾿Ασσυρίων, ὃ ὃς ἔσχε θυγατέρα Σμύρναν. 
αὕτη κατὰ μῆνιν ᾿Αφροδίτης (οὐ γὰρ αὐτὴν ἐτίμα) 
ἴσχει τοῦ πατρὸς ἔρωτα, καὶ συνεργὸν λαβοῦσα 
τὴν τροφὸν ἀγνοοῦντι τῷ πατρὶ νύκτας δώδεκα 
συνευνάσθη. ὁ δὲ ὡς ἤσθετο, σπασάμενος «τὸ; ἷ 
ξίφος ἐδίωκεν αὐτήν: ἡ δὲ περικαταλαμβανομένη 
θεοῖς ηὔξατο ἀφανὴς γενέσθαι. θεοὶ δὲ κατοικτεί- 
ραντες αὐτὴν εἰς δένδρον μετήλλαξαν, ὃ καλοῦσι 
σμύρναν.5" δεκαμηνιαίῳ δὲ ὕστερον χρόνῳ τοῦ 
δένδρου ῥαγέντος γεννηθῆναι τὸν λεγόμενον "Ado- 
νιν, ὃν ᾿Αφροδίτη διὰ κάλλος ἔτι νήπιον κρύφα 
θεῶν εἰς “λάρνακα κρύψασα Περσεφόνῃ παρί- 
στατο. ἐκείνη δὲ ὡς ἐθεάσατο, οὐκ ἀπεδίδου. 
κρίσεως δὲ ἐπὶ Διὸς γενομένης εἰς τρεῖς μοίρας 
διῃρέθη ὁ ἐνιαυτός, καὶ μίαν μὲν παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ 
μένειν τὸν Λδωνιν, μίαν δὲ παρὰ Περσεφόνῃ προσ- 
ἔταξε, τὴν δὲ ἑτέραν παρ᾽ ᾿Αφροδίτη: ὁ δὲ 


1 τὸ added by Hercher. 
2 σμύρναν R®: μύρναν B, μύρνας C. 


1 According to Antoninus Liberalis (Transform. 34), 
Smyrna, the mother of Adonis, was a daughter of Belus by 
a nymph Orithyia. Tzetzes mentions, but afterwards rejects, 
the view that Myrrha, the mother of Adonis, was a daughter 
of Thias (Schol. on Lycophron, 829, 831). Hyginus says that 
Cinyras, the father of Adonis, was king of Assyria (Fab. 58). 
This traditional connexion of Adonis with Assyria may well 
be due to a well-founded belief that the religion of Adonis, 
though best known to the Greeks in Syria and Cyprus, had 
originated in Assyria or rather in Babylonia, where he was 
worshipped under the name of Dumuzi or Tammuz. See 
Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 3rd ed., i. 6 sqq. 

2 As to the transformation of the mother of Adonis into a 
myrrh-tree, see Scholiast on Theocritus, i. 107; Plutarch, 
Parallela, 22 ; Antoninus Liberalis, Transform. 34 ; Tzetzes, 


86 


a ae 


Te 9 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 4 


of Thias, king of Assyria, who had a daughter 
Smyrna, In consequence of the wrath of Aphrodite, 
for she did not honour the goddess, this Smyrna con- 
ceived a passion for her father, and with the complicity 
of her nurse she shared her father’s bed without his 
knowledge for twelve nights. But when he was 
aware of it, he drew his sword and pursued her, and 
being overtaken she prayed to the gods that she 
might be invisible; so the gods in compassion turned 
her into the tree which they call smyrna (myrrh).? 
Ten months afterwards the tree burst and Adonis, as 
he is called, was born, whom for the sake of his 
beauty, while he was still an infant, Aphrodite hid in 
a chest unknown to the gods and entrusted to Per- 
sephone. But when Persephone beheld him, she 
would not give him back. The case being tried 
before Zeus, the year was divided into three parts, 
and the god ordained that Adonis should stay by 
himself for one part of the year, with Persephone for 
one part, and with Aphrodite for the remainder.® 


Schol. on Lycophron, 829; Ovid, Metamorph. x. 476 sqq.; 
Hyginus, Fab. 58, 164; Fulgentius, Mytholog. iii. 8; Lac- 
tantius Placidus, Narrat. Fabul. x. 9; Servius, on Virgil, 
Ποῖ. x. 18 and Aen. v. 72; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 60 (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 200). The drops of gum which oozed from the 
myrrh-tree were thought to be the tears shed by the trans- 
formed Myrrha for her sad fate (Ovid, l.c. 500 sqq.). 

8 According to another version of the story, Aphrodite and 
Persephone referred their dispute about Adonis to the judg- 
ment of Zeus, and he appointed the Muse Calliope to act as 
arbitrator between them. She decided that Adonis should 
spend half the year with each of them; but the decision so 
enraged Aphrodite that in revenge she instigated the Thracian 
- women to rend in pieces Calliope’s son, the musician Orpheus. 
See Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 6. A Scholiast on Theocritus 
(Id. iii. 48) reports the common saying that the dead Adonis 


87 


APOLLODORUS. 


Αδωνις ταύτῃ προσένειμε καὶ τὴν ἰδίαν μοῖραν. 
¢ » \ \ 
ὕστερον δὲ θηρεύων "Adwris ὑπὸ συὸς πληγεὶς 
ἀπέθανε. 
’ 
Κέκροπος δὲ ἀποθανόντος Κραναὸς «ἐβασί- 
1 ’ / θ » Le es \ δι ς ἢ, A 
Aevoev>* αὐτόχθων ὦν, ἐφ᾽ οὗ τὸν ἐπὶ Δευκα- 
\ ᾿ς 
λίωνος λέγεται κατακλυσμὸν γενέσθαι. οὗτος 
/ 
γήμας ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος Πεδιάδα τὴν Μύνητος 3 
δ γ8 7 \ , (is bis 
ἐγέννησε Kpavanv καὶ Kpavaixyunv καὶ ᾿Ατθίδα, 
ἣν , , \ 
ἧς ἀποθανούσης ἔτι παρθένου τὴν χώραν Kpavads 
᾿Ατθίδα προσηγόρευσε. 
J / 
Kpavaov δὲ ἐκβαλὼν ᾿Αμφικτύων ἐβασίλευσε: 
al > / 
τοῦτον ἔνιοι μὲν Δευκαλίωνος, ἔνιοι δὲ αὐτόχθονα 8 
\ , 
λέγουσι. βασιλεύσαντα δὲ αὐτὸν ἔτη 4 δώδεκα 
an / 
᾿Εριχθόνιος ἐκβάλλει. τοῦτον of μὲν Ηφαίστου 
n val / 
καὶ τῆς Kpavaod θυγατρὸς ᾿Ατθίδος εἶναι λέ- 
ς \ ¢ / \ ᾽ Ὁ [τά 
γουσιν, οἱ δὲ Ἡφαίστου καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾶς, οὕτως" 
> an ᾽ ΟἿ Ω [τ 
AOnva παρεγένετο πρὸς Ἥφαιστον, ὅπλα κατα- 
σκευάσαι θέλουσα. ὁ δὲ ἐγκαταλελειμμένος" ὑπὸ 
/ »” a / Lal 
᾿Αφροδίτης εἰς ἐπιθυμίαν ὦλισθε τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς, 
ἐβασίλευσεν conjecturally inserted by Gale. 
Μύνητος Bekker, Hercher, Wagner: μήνυτος A. 
αὐτόχθονα R®: αὐτόχθονος A. 
ἔτη L: ἐπὶ A. 
ἐγκαταλελειμμένος Ei: ἐγκαταλελεγμένος A. 
i Τ ὲὋ ,.,,6ῃῃᾳᾳῃ 
spends six months of the year in the arms of Persephone, and 
s1x months in the arms of Aphrodite; and he explains the 
saying as ἃ mythical description of the corn, which after 
sowing 15. six months in the earth and six months above 
ground, 
' Compare Pausanias, i. 2. 6. 
* According to the Parian Chronicle (lines 4-7), Deucalion 
reigned at Lycorea on Mount Parnassus, and when the flood, 


following on heavy rains, took place in that district, he fled 
for safety to king Cranaus at Athens, where he founded a 


δὸ 


οι ὦ & τῷ "»- 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 4-6 


However Adonis made over to Aphrodite his own 
share in addition ; but afterwards in hunting he was 
gored and killed by a boar. 

When Cecrops died, Cranaus came to the throne?!; 
he was a son of the soil, and it was in his time that 
the flood in the age of Deucalion is said to have taken 
_place.2 He married a Lacedaemonian wife, Pedias, 
daughter of Mynes, and begat Cranae, Menaechme, 
and Atthis; and when Atthis died a maid, Cranaus 
called the country Atthis.* 

Cranaus was expelled by Amphictyon, who reigned 
in his stead ;* some say that Amphictyon was a son of 
Deucalion, others that he was a son of the soil; and 
when he had reigned twelve years he was expelled 
by Erichthonius.° Some say that this Erichthonius was 
a son of Hephaestus and Atthis, daughter of Cranaus, 
and some that he was ason of Hephaestus and Athena, 
as follows: Athena came to Hephaestus, desirous of 
fashioning arms. But he, being forsaken by Aphro- 
dite, fell in love with Athena, and began to pursue 


sanctuary of Rainy Zeus and offered thank-offerings for his 
escape. Compare Eusebius, Chronic. vol. ii. p. 26, ed. A. 
Schoene. We have seen that, according to Apollodorus (iii. 
8. 2), the flood happened in the reign of Nyctimus, king of 
Arcadia. 

8 Compare Pausanias, i. 2. 6; Eusebius, Chronic. vol. ii. 
p. 28, ed. A. Schoene. 

4 Compare the Parian Chronicle, lines 8-10; Pausanias, i. 
2.6; Eusebius, Chronic. vol. ii. p. 30, ed. A. Schoene. The 
Parian Chronicle represents Amphictyon as a son of Deucalion 
and as reigning, first at Thermopylae, and then at Athens; 
but it records nothing as to his revolt against Cranaus. Pau- 
sanias says that Amphictyon deposed Cranaus, although he 
had the daughter of Cranaus to wife. Eusebius says that 
Amphictyon was a son of Deucalion and son-in-law of 
Cranaus. 

> Compare Pausanias, i. 2. 6. 


89 


APOLLODORUS 


καὶ διώκειν αὐτὴν ἤρξατο" ἡ δὲ ἔφευγεν. ὡς δὲ 
ἐγγὺς αὐτῆς ἐγένετο πολλῇ ἀνάγκῃ (ἣν γὰρ 
χωλός), ἐπειρᾶτο συνελθεῖν. ἡ δὲ ὡς σώφρων 
καὶ παρθένος οὗσα οὐκ ἠνέσχετο" ὁ δὲ ἀπεσπέρ- 
penvev els τὸ σκέλος τῆς θεᾶς. ἐκείνη δὲ μυσα- 
χθεῖσα ἐρίῳ ἀπομάξασα τὸν γόνον εἰς γῆν ἔρριψε. 
φευγούσης δὲ αὐτῆς καὶ τῆς γονῆς εἰς γῆν 
πεσούσης ᾿Βριχθόνιος γίνεται. τοῦτον ᾿Αθηνᾶ 
κρύφα τῶν ἄλλων θεῶν ἔτρεφεν, ἀθάνατον θέ- 
λουσα ποιῆσαι" καὶ καταθεῖσα αὐτὸν εἰς κίστην 
Πανδρόσῳ τῇ Κέκροπος παρακατέθετο, ἀπει- 
ποῦσα τὴν κίστην ἀνοίγειν. αἱ δὲ ἀδελφαὶ τῆς 


, lal 
Πανδρόσου ἀνοίγουσιν ὑπὸ περιεργίας, καὶ θεῶν-. 


ται τῷ βρέφει παρεσπειραμένον δράκοντα" καὶ 
ὡς μὲν ἔνιοι λέγουσιν, ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ διεφθάρησαν 
τοῦ δράκοντος, ὡς δὲ ἔνιοι, δι᾽ ὀργὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
ἐμμανεῖς γενόμεναι κατὰ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως αὑτὰς 
ἔρριψαν. ἐν δὲ τῷ τεμένει τραφεὶς ᾿Εριχθόνιος 


1 With this story of the birth of Erichthonius compare 
Scholiast on Homer, JI. ii. 547 (who agrees to a great extent 
verbally with Apollodorus) ; Euripides, Jon, 20 sqq., 266 sqq. ; 
Kratosthenes, Cataster. 13; Nonnus, in Westermann’s My- 
thographi Graeci, Appendix Narrationum, 3, pp. 359 sq. ; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 111; Antigonus Carystius, 
Histor. Mirab. 12; Etymologicum Magnum, s.v. ᾿Ἐρεχθεύς, 
p. 371. 29; Hyginus, Fab. 166; id. Astronom. ii. 133; Ser- 
vius, on Virgil, Georg. iii. 113; Fulgentius, Mytholog. ii. 14; 
Lactantius, Divin. Inst. ii. 17; Augustine, De civitate Dei, 
xvill. 12; Scholia in Caesaris Germanict Aratea, p. 394, 
ed. Fr. Kyssenhardt (in his edition of Martianus Capella) ; 
Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. 
pp. 41, 86 sq., 88 (First Vatican Mythographer, 128 ; Second 
Vatican Mythographer, 37, 40). The story of the birth of 
EKrichthonius was told by Euripides, according to Eratosthe- 
nes (/.c,) and by Callimachus, according to the Scholiast on 


go 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 6 


her; but she fled. When he got near her with much 
ado (for he was lame), he attempted to embrace her ; 
but she, being a chaste virgin, would not submit to 
him, and he dropped his seed on the leg of the 
goddess. In disgust, she wiped off the seed with 
wool and threw it on the ground; and as she fled 
and the seed fell on the ground, Erichthonius was 
produced! Him Athena brought up unknown to the 
other gods, wishing to make him immortal; and having 
put him in a chest, she committed it to Pandrosus, 
daughter of Cecrops, forbidding her to open the chest. 
But the sisters of Pandrosus opened it out of curiosity, 
and beheld a serpent coiled about the babe; and, as 
some say, they were destroyed by the serpent, but ac- 
cording to others they were driven mad by reason of 
the anger of Athena and threw themselves down from 
the acropolis.2, Having been brought up by Athena 


Homer (/.c.). Pausanias was plainly acquainted with the 
fable, though he contents himself with saying that Erichtho- 
nius was reported to be a son of Hephaestus and Earth (i. 2. 6, 
i. 14. 6). As C. G. Heyue long ago observed, the story is 
clearly an etymological myth invented to explain the meaning 
of the name Erichthonius, which some people derived from 
ἔρις, ‘‘strife,” and χθών, ‘‘the ground,” while others derived 
it from ἔριον, ‘‘ wool,” and χθών, ‘‘the ground.” The former 
derivation of ez in Erichthonius seems to have been the more 
popular. Mythologists have perhaps not sufficiently reckoned 
with the extent to which false etymology has been operative 
in the creation of myths. ‘‘ Disease of language” is one 
source of myths, though it is very far from being the only 
one. 

2 With this story of the discovery of Erichthonius in the 
chest compare Euripides, Ion, 20 sqq., 266 sqq. ; Pausanias, 
i. 18.2; Antigonus Carystius, Hist. Mirab. 12; Ovid, Me- 
tamorph. ii. 552 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 166; id. Astronom. 
ii. 13; Fulgentius, Mytholog. ii. 14; Lactantius, Divin. Inst. 
i. 17; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. pp. 41, 86 sq., 88 (First Vatican Mythographer, 128 ; 


gt 


APOLLODORUS 


ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς, ἐκβαλὼν ᾿Αμφικτύονα ἐβασί- 
᾿] an 

λευσεν ᾿Αθηνῶν, καὶ τὸ ἐν ἀκροπόλει ξόανον 

τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱδρύσατο, καὶ τῶν Παναθηναίων 

\ « \ / \ / 1 / 

τὴν ἑορτὴν συνεστήσατο, καὶ IIpakiPéeav! νηΐδα 


1 Πραξιθέαν Heyne: πρασιθέαν A: Πασιθέαν Aegius. Tzetzes 
calls her Φρασιθέα (Chiliades, i. 174, v. 671), but mentions 
Πραξιθέα as the wife of Erechtheus and mother of Cecrops 
(Chiliades, i. 177, v. 674). 


Second Vatican Mythographer, 37, 40). Apollodorus appar- 
ently describes the infant Erichthonius in the chest as a purely 
human babe with a serpent coiled about him. The serpent 
was said to have been set by Athena to guard the infant ; 
according to Euripides (Jon, 20 sqq-), there were two such 
guardian serpents. But according to a common tradition 
Erichthonius was serpent-footed, that is, his legs ended in 
serpents. See Nonnus, in Westermann’s Mythographi Graeci, 
Appendix Narrationum, 3, p. 360; Etymologicum Magnum, 
8.v. Ἐρεχθεύς, p. 371. 47; Hyginus, Fab. 166; Servius, on 
Virgil, Aen. 111]. 113; Seriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 41, 87 (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 128, Second Vatican Mythographer 37). Indeed, 
in one passage (Astronom. ii. 13) Hyginus affirms that 
Erichthonius was born a serpent, and that when the 
box was opened and the maidens saw the serpent in it, 
they went mad and threw themselves from the’ acropolis, 
while the serpent took refuge under the shield of Athena 
and was reared by the goddess. This view of the identity 
of Erichthonius with the serpent was recognized, if not 
accepted, by Pausanias ; for in describing the famous statue 
of the Virgin Athena on the acropolis of Athens, he notices 
the serpent coiled at her feet behind the shield, and adds 
that the serpent ‘‘may be Erichthonius” (1. 24. 7). The 
sacred serpent which lived in the Erechtheum on the acro- 
polis of Athens and was fed with honey-cakes once a month, 
may have been Erichthonius himself in his original form of 
a worshipful serpent. See Herodotus, viii. 41 ; Aristophanes, 
Lysistrata, 758 sq., with the Scholiast; Plutarch, Zhemis- 
tocles, 10; VPhilostratus, Imagines, ii. 17. 6; Hesychius, s.vv. 
δράκαυλος and οἰκουρὸν dow; Suidas, s.v. Δράκαυλος ; Htymo- 


92 


OE LL νι ««....ώ...ὉθΘὃΘὖΘΞξόὉὩππ-π:,οὄ.ΡοΡουουὃὁὃὁὃὁὃὁ 6 μμμμὩὩὩπὰὩπὰπἧὩπ..ὉὉὉ 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 6 


herself in the precinct,! Erichthonius expelled Am- 
phictyon and became king of Athens; and he set up 
the wooden image of Athena in the acropolis,? and 
instituted the festival of the Panathenaea,? and 


logicum Magnum, s.v. δράκανλος, p. 287; Photius, Lexicon, 
8.v. οἰκουρὸν ὄφιν ; Kustathius on Homer, Od. i. 357, p. 1422, 
lines 7 sgq. According to some, there were two such sacred 
serpents in the Erechtheum (Hesychius, s.v. οἰκουρὸν ὄφιν). 
When we remember that Cecrops, the ancestor of Eri- 
chthonius, was said, like his descendant, to be half-man, half- 
serpent (above, 111. 14. 1), we may conjecture that the old 
kings of Athens claimed kinship with the sacred serpents on 
the acropolis, into which they may have professed to trans- 
migrate at death. Compare The Dying God, pp. 86 sq. ; and 
my note on Pausanias, i. 18. 2 (vol. ii. pp. 168 sqq.). The 
Krechtheids, or descendants of Erechtheus, by whom are 
meant the Athenians in general, used to put golden serpents 
round the necks or bodies of their infants, nominally in 
memory of the serpents which guarded the infant Erich- 
thonius, but protably in reality as amulets to protect the 
children. See Euripides, Jon, 20-26, 1426-143]. Erechtheus 
and Erichthonius may have been originally identical. See 
Scholiast on Homer, Jl. ii. 547; Htymologicum Magnum, 
8.v. Ἐρεχθεύς, Ὁ. 371. 29; C. F. Clinton, Fasti Hellenici, 
vol. i. p. 61 note ἃ, 

1 «The precinct” is the Erechtheum on the acropolis of 
Athens. It was in the Krechtheum that the sacred serpent 
dwelt, which seems to have been originally identical with 
Krichthonius. See the preceding note. 

2 That is, the ancient image of Athena, made of olive- 
wood, which stood in the Erechtheum, See my note on 
Pausanias, i. 26. 6 (vol. ii. pp. 340 sq.). 

3 Compare the Parian Chronicle, line 18; Harpocration, 
8.0. Παναθήναια ; Kratosthenes, Cataster. 13; Hyginus, Astro- 
nom. ii. 13, who says that KErichthonius competed at the 
games in a four-horse car. Indeed, Erichthonius was re- 
puted to have invented the chariot, or, at all events, the 
four-horse chariot. See the Partan Chronicle, lines 18 and 
21; Eusebius, Chronic. vol. ii. p. 32, ed. A. Schoene; 
Virgil, Georg. iis 113 sq.; Fulgentius, Mytholog. ii. 14. 
According to some, he invented the chariot for the purpose of 


ms 


APOLLODORUS 


νύμφην ἔγημεν, ἐξ ἧς αὐτῷ παῖς Πανδίων 
ἐγεννήθη. 
᾿Εριχθονίου δὲ ἀποθανόντος καὶ ταφέντος ἐν 
τῷ αὐτῷ" τεμένει τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς Πανδίων ἐβασί- 
5.1} χυ 7 \ / > \ 
λευσεν, Ef οὗ Δημήτηρ καὶ Διόνυσος εἰς τὴν 
᾿Αττικὴν ἦλθον. ἀλλὰ Δήμητρα μὲν Kereos [εἰς 


1 τῷ αὐτῷ Scaliger, Wagner: τῷ a R®: τῷ ἃ τῷ A. 


concealing his serpent feet. See Servius, on Virgil, Georg. 
iii. 1138; MScriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. 
Bode, vol. i. pp. 41, 87 (First Vatican Mythographer, 127; 
Second Vatican Mythographer, 37). The institution of the 
Panathenaic festival was by some attributed to Theseus 
(Plutarch, Theseus, 24), but the Parian Chronicle (line 18), 
in agreement with Apollodorus, ascribes it to Erichthonius ; 
and from Harpocration (/.c.) we learn that this ascription 
was supported by the authority of the historians Hellanicus 
and Androtion in their works on Attica. Here, therefore, 
as usual, Apollodorus seems to have drawn on the best 
sources. 

1 Compare Clement of Alexandria, Protrept. iii. 45, p. 39, 
ed. Potter, who gives a list of legendary or mythical per- 
sonages who were said to have been buried in sanctuaries or 
temples. Amongst the instances which he cites are the 
graves of Cinyras and his descendants in the sanctuary of 
Aphrodite at Paphus, and the grave of Acrisius in the 
temple of Athena on the acropolis of Larissa. To these 
examples C. G. Heyne, commenting on the present passage 
of Apollodorus, adds the tomb of Castor in a sanctuary at 
Sparta (Pausanias, 111. 13. 1), the tomb of Hyacinth under 
the image of Apollo at Amyclae (Pausanias, 1]. 19. 3), and 
the grave of Arcas in a temple of Hera at Mantinea (Pau- 
sanias, vili. 9. 8. ‘‘ Arguing from these examples,” says 
Heyne, ‘‘some have tried to prove that the worship of the 
gods sprang from the honours paid to buried mortals.” 

2 Compare Pausanias, i. 5. 3, who distinguishes two kings 
named Pandion, first, the son of Erichthopius, and, second, 


94 


OO, a ν τὰ 


ΤΠ LIBRARY, IIT. χιν. 6—7 


married Praxithea, a Naiad nymph, by whom he had 
“ἃ son Pandion. 

When Erichthonius died and was buried in the 
same precinct of Athena,! Pandion? became king, in 
whose time Demeter and Dionysus came to Attica.? 
But Demeter was welcomed by Celeus at Eleusis,4 and 


the son of Cecrops the Second. This distinction is accepted 
by Apollodorus (see below, iii. 15. 5), and it is supported by 
the Parian Chronicle (Marmor Parium, lines 22 and 30). 
Eusebius also recognizes Pandion the Second, but makes him 
a son of Erechtheus instead of a son of Cecrops the Second 
(Chronic. bk. i. vol. i. col. 185, ed. A. Schoene). But like 
Cecrops the Second, son of Erechtheus (below, iii. 15. 5), 
Pandion the Second is probably no more than a chronological 
stop-gap thrust into the broken framework of tradition by a 
comparatively late historian. Compare R. D. Hicks, in 
Companion to Greek Studies, ed. L. Whibley, 3rd. ed. 
(Cambridge, 1916), p. 76. 

%’ Here Apollodorus differs from the Parian Chronicle, 
which dates the advent of Demeter, not in the reign of 
Pandion, but in the reign of his son Erechtheus (Marmor 
Parium, lines 23 sq.). To the reign of Erechtheus the Parian 
Chronicle also refers the first sowing of corn by Triptolemus 
in the Rharian plain at Eleusis, and the first celebration of 
the mysteries by Eumolpus at Eleusis (Marmor Parium, 
lines 23-29). Herein the Parian Chronicle seems to be in 
accord with the received Athenian tradition which dated the 
advent of Demeter, the beginning of agriculture, and the 
institution of the Eleusinian mysteries in the reign of Ere- 
chtheus. See Diodorus Siculus, i. 29. 1-3. On the other hand, 
the Parian Chronicler dates the discovery of iron on the 
Cretan Mount Ida in the reign of Pandion the First (armor 
Parium, lines 22 sq.). He says nothing of the coming of 
Dionysus to Attica. The advent of Demeter and Dionysus 
is a mythical expression for the first cultivation of corn and 
vines in Attica; these important discoveries Attic tradi- 
tion referred to the reigns either of Pandion the First or 
of his son Erechtheus. 

4 See above, i. 5. 1. 


95 


APOLLODORUS 


τὴν ᾿Ελευσῖνα |} ὑπεδέξατο, Διόνυσον δὲ Ἰκάριος" 
Os? "λαμβάνει παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ κλῆμα ἀμπέλου καὶ τὰ 
περὶ τὴν οἰνοποιίαν μανθάνει. καὶ τὰς τοῦ θεοῦ 
δωρήσασθαι θέλων χάριτας ἀνθρώποις, ἀφικνεῖται 
πρός τινας ποιμένας, οἱ γευσάμενοι τοῦ ποτοῦ 
καὶ χωρὶς ὕδατος δι᾽ ἡδονὴν ἀφειδῶς ἑλκύσαντες, 
πεφαρμάχθαι νομίζοντες ἀπέκτειναν αὐτόν. μεθ᾽ 
ἡμέραν δὲ νοήσαντες ὃ ἔθαψαν αὐτόν. Ἠριγόνῃ 
δὲ τῇ θυγατρὶ τὸν πατέρα μαστευούσῃ κύων 
συνήθης ὄνομα Μαῖρα, ἣ τῷ ᾿Ικαρίῳ συνείπετο, 
τὸν τεκρὸν ἐμήνυσε' κἀκείνη κατοδυραμένη * τὸν 
πατέρα ἑαυτὴν ἀνήρτησε. 

‘eis τὴν Ἐλευσῖνα. ‘These words may be, as Heyne 
thought, a gloss on eis τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν. They are omitted by 
Hercher. Wagner keeps them unbracketed. 

2 Os... μανθάνει E: nal... μανθάνων A. 

3 thease A: νήψαντες ΤΑ τεσ 

4 κατοδυραμένη Hercher: κατοδυρομένη Heyne, Wester- 
mann, Miiller, Bekker, Wagner. 


1 The implication is that their wassailing had taken place 
by night. The Greek μεθ’ ἡμέραν regularly means ‘‘ by day” 
as opposed to ‘*by night”; it is not to be renal ‘the 
day after.” See Herodotus, ii. 150, οὐ νυκτὸς ἀλλὰ μετ᾽ ἡμέρην 
ποιεύμενον ; Plato, Phaedrus, p. 251 D, ἐμμανὴς οὖσα οὔτε νυκτὸς 
δύναται καθεύδειν οὔτε μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν. Compare Apollodorus, i. 
9. 18, iii. 5. 6 (νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν), ili, 12. 3, Epitome, iv. 5, 
vii. 31 (μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν μὲν ὑφαίνουσα, νύκτωρ δὲ ἀναλύουσα). 

2 With this story of the first introduction of wine into 
Attica, and its fatal consequences, compare Scholiast on 
Homer, Jl. xxii. 29; Aelian, Var. Hist. vii. 28; Nonnus, 
Dionys. xlvii. 34-245; Hyginus, Fab. 130; td. Astronom. 
ii. 4; Statius, Theb. xi. 644-647, with the comment of Lac- 
tantius Placidus on v. 644; Servius, on Virgil, Georg. ii. 
389; Probus, on Virgil, Georg. ii. 385; Seriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 6, 94 sq. 
(First Vatican Mythographer, 19; Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 61). The Athenians celebrated a curious festival of 


οὔ 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 7 


Dionysus by Icarius, who received from him a 
branch of a vine and learned the process of making 
wine. And wishing to bestow the god’s boons on 
men, Icarius went to some shepherds, who, having 
tasted the beverage and quaffed it copiously without 
water for the pleasure of it, imagined that they were 
bewitched and killed him; but by day! they under- 
stood how it was and buried him. When his daughter 
Erigone was searching for her father, a domestic dog, 
named Maera, which had attended Icarius, discovered 
his dead body to her, and she bewailed her father 
and hanged herself.” 


swinging, which was supposed to be an expiation for the 
death of Erigone, who had hanged herself on the same tree 
at the foot of which she had discovered the dead body of her 
father Icarius (Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 4). See Hesychius 
and Htymologicum Magnum, s.v. Aidpa; Athenaeus, xiv. 10, 
p- 618 uF; Festus, ed. C. O. Miiller, p. 194, s.v. ‘* Oscillantes.”’ 
Compare The Dying God, pp. 281 sqqg. However, some 
thought that the Erigone whose death was thus expiated 
was not the daughter of Icarius, but the daughter of Aegis- 
thus, who accused Orestes at Athens of the murder of her 
father and hanged herself when he was acquitted (so Htymo- 
logicum Magnum, l.c.; compare Apollodorus, Hpitome, vi. 
25 with the note). Sophocles wrote a play Hrigone, but it is 
doubtful to which of the two Erigones it referred. See The 
Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 173 sqq. 
The home of Icarius was at Icaria (Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. 
*Ixapia). From the description of Statius (/.c.) we infer that 
the place was in the woods of Marathon, and in accordance 
with this description the site has been discovered in a 
beautiful wooded dell at the northern foot of the forest-clad 
slopes of Mount Pentelicus. The place is still appropriately 
named Dionysos. A rugged precipitous path leads down a 
wild romantic ravine froin the deserted village of Rapentosa 
to the plain of Marathon situated at a great depth below. 
Among the inscriptions found on the spot several refer to the 
worship of Dionysus. See my commentary on Pausanias, 
vol. il. pp. 461 sqq., compare p. 442. 


97 
MOL; 11. H 


8 


APOLLODORUS 


Πανδίων δὲ γήμας Ζευξίππην τῆς μητρὸς τὴν 
ἀδελφὴν θυγατέρας μὲν ἐτέκνωσε Ἰ]ρόκνην καὶ 
Φιλομήλαν, παῖδας δὲ διδύμους ᾿Ερεχθέα καὶ 
Βούτην. πολέμου δὲ ἐνστάντος πρὸς Λάβδακον 
περὶ γῆς ὅρων ἐπεκαλέσατο βοηθὸν ἐκ Θράκης 
Τηρέα τὸν ἴΑρεος, καὶ τὸν “πόλεμον σὺν αὐτῷ 
κατορθώσας ἔδωκε Τηρεῖ πρὸς γάμον τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 
θυγατέρα Πρόκνην. ὁ δὲ ἐκ ταύτης γεννήσας 


1 ἐνστάντος E: ἐξαναστάντος A, Heyne, Westermann, 
Miller, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner. But such a use of 
ἐξαναστὰς seems unparalleled, whereas ἐνστὰς is regularly 
applied to war breaking out or threatening. See below iii. 
15. 4, πολέμου ἐνστάντος πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους : Isocrates, Or. v. 2, 
τὸν πόλεμον τὸν ἐνστάντα σοὶ καὶ TH πόλει περὶ ᾿Αμφιπόλεω ; 
Demosthenes, Or. xviii. 89, 6 γὰρ τότε ἐνστὰς πόλεμος, and 
139, οὐκέτ᾽ ἐν ἀμφισβητησίμῳ τὰ πράγματα ἦν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνειστήκει 
πόλεμος; Polybius, i. 71 4, μείζονος γὰρ ἐνίστατο πολέμον 
καταρχή. 


1 This tradition of marriage with a maternal aunt is re- 
markable. I do not remember to have met with another 
instance of such a marriage in Greek legend. 

2 For the tragic story of Procne and Philomela, and their 
transformation into birds, see Zenobius, Cent. iii. 14 (who, to 
a certain extent, agrees verbally with Apollodorus) ; Conon, 
Narrat. 31; Achilles Tatius, v. 3and5; J. Tzetzes, Chili- 
ades, vii. 459 sqq.; Pausanias, i. 5. 4, i. 41. 8 sq., x. 4. 8 sq.; 
EKustathius, on Homer, Od. xix. 518, p. 1875; Hyginus, Fab. 
45; Ovid, ‘Metamorph. vi. 426-674 ; Servius, on Virgil, Hel. 
vi. 78 ; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Theb. ν. 120; Scrip- 
tores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. 6. H. Bode, vol. i. pp: 
2 and 147 (First Vatican Mythographer, 8; Second Vatican 
Mythographer, 217). On this theme Sophocles composed a 
tragedy T'ereus, from which most of the extant versions of 
the story are believed to be derived. See The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 221 sqq. However, 
the version of Hyginus differs from the rest in a number of 
particulars. For example, he represents ‘Tereus as trans- 
formed into a hawk instead of into a hoopoe; but for this 


98 


5 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 8 


Pandion married Zeuxippe, his mother’s sister,! 
and begat two daughters, Procne and Philomela, and 
twin sons, Erechtheus and Butes. But war having 
broken out with Labdacus on a question of boundaries, 
he called in the help of Tereus, son of Ares, from 
Thrace, and having with his help brought the war to 
a successful close, he gave Tereus his own daughter 
Procne in marriage. Tereus had by her a son Itys, 


transformation he had the authority of Aeschylus (Sup- 
pliants, 60 sqq.). Tereus is commonly said to have been a 
Thracian, and the scene of the tragedy is sometimes laid in 
Thrace. Ovid, who adopts this account, appears to have 
associated the murder of Itys with the frenzied rites of the 
Bacchanals, for he says that the crime was perpetrated at 
the time when the Thracian women were celebrating the 
biennial festival (sacra trieterica) of Dionysus, and that the 
two women disguised themselves as Bacchanals. On the 
other hand, Thucydides (ii. 29) definitely affirms that Tereus 
dwelt in Daulia, a district of Phocis, and that the tragedy 
took place in that country ; at the same time he tells us that 
the population of the district was then Thracian. In this he 
is followed by Strabo (ix. 3. 13, p. 423), Zenobius, Conon, 
Pausanias, and Nonnus (Dionys. iv. 320 sqq.). Thucydides 
supports his view by a reference to Greek poets, who called 
the nightingale the Daulian bird. The Megarians maintained 
that Tereus reigned at Pagae in Megaris, and they showed 
his grave in the form of a barrow, at which they sacrificed to 
him every year, using gravel in the sacrifice instead of barley 
groats (Pausanias, i. 41. 8 sg.). But no one who has seen 
the grey ruined walls and towers of Daulis, thickly mantled 
in ivy and holly-oak,,on the summit of precipices that 
overhang a deep romantic glen at the foot of the towering 
slopes of Parnassus, will willingly consent to divest them of 
the legendary charm which Greek poetry and history have 
combined to throw over the lovely scene. 

It is said that, after being turned into birds, Procne and 
Tereus continued to utter the same cries which they had 
emitted at the moment of their transformation ; the nightin- 
gale still fled warbling plaintively the name of her dead son, 
1! Itu! while the hoopoe still pursued his cruel wife 


99 
nS 


APOLLODORUS 


παῖδα “Ituv, καὶ Φιλομήλας ἐρασθεὶς ἔφθειρε καὶ 

/ ‘ 
ταύτην, [εἰπὼν τεθνάναι Ἰ]ρόκνην,}" κρύπτων ἐπὶ 

a / 
τῶν χωρίων. [αὖθις dé γήμας Φιλομήλαν συνηυ- 
νάζετο,]" καὶ τὴν γλῶσσαν ἐξέτεμεν αὐτῆς. ἡ δὲ 
e / > / / \ » b / 
υφήνασα ἐν πέπλῳ Ypa ο 

pn ἐν πέπλῳ γράμματα διὰ τ ύτων ἐμήνυσε 
Πρόκνῃ τὰς ἰδίας συμφοράς. ἡ δὲ ἀναζητήσασα 
τὴν ἀδελφὴν κτείνει τὸν παῖδα ἤϊτυν, καὶ καθε- 
ψήσασα Τηρεῖ δεῖπνον ἀγνοοῦντι παρατίθησι" 8 

\ wi a LO - ὃ nS / 4m” 5 \ 

Kal μετὰ τῆς ἀδελφῆς διὰ τάχους ἔφυγε." Τηρεὺς 
, 

δὲ αἰσθόμενος, ἁρπάσας πέλεκυν ἐδίωκεν. αἱ δὲ ἐν 

Δαυλίᾳ τῆς Φωκίδος γινόμεναι περικατάληπτοι 

θεοῖς εὔχονται ἀπορνεωθῆναι, καὶ ἸΙρόκνη μὲν 

/ > , / \ , 2 
γίνεται ἀηδών, Φιλομήλα δὲ χελιδών' ἀπορνε- 
οῦται δὲ καὶ Τηρεύς, καὶ γίνεται ἔποψ. 

XV. Πανδίονος δὲ ἀποθανόντος οἱ παῖδες τὰ 
πατρῷα ἐμερίσαντο, καὶ τὴν «μὲν; βασιλείαν 
᾿Ερεχθεὺς λαμβάνει, τὴν δὲ ἱερωσύνην τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
καὶ τοῦ Ἰ]οσειδῶνος τοῦ ᾿ρεχθέως ἴ Βούτης. 

1 εἰπὼν τεθνάναι Πρόκνην omitted by Hercher. 

5. αὖθις δὲ γήμας Φιλομήλαν συνηυνάζετο omitted by Hercher. 
The narrative gains in clearness by the omission, 

3 παρατίθησι Zenobius, Cent. ili. 14, Bekker, Hercher, 
Wagner: προτίθησι KA, Heyne, Westermann, Miiller. 

4 διὰ τάχους E: διαταχέως A: διὰ ταχέος Miiller:. διὰ 
ταχέων Westermann, Bekker, Hercher. 

5 ἔφυγε EA: ἔφευγε Hercher. 

ὁ μὲν inserted by Bekker. 

7 Ἐρεχθέως Heyne (conjecture), Hercher, Wagner: ἜἘρι- 
χθονίου A, Westermann, Miiller, Bekker. 


crying, Poo! poo! (ποῦ, ποῦ, ‘* Where? Where?”). The 
later Roman mythographers somewhat absurdly inverted the 
transformation of the two sisters, making Procne the swallow 
and the tongueless Philomela the songstress nightingale. 

1 Erechtheus is r ized_as the son of Pandion by the 


Parian Chro é 
100 


THE LIBRARY, III. xiv. 3-xv. τ 


and having fallen in love with Philomela, he seduced 
her also saying that Procne was dead, for he con- 
cealed her in the country. Afterwards he married 
Philomela and bedded with her, and cut out her 
tongue. But by weaving characters in a robe she 
revealed thereby to Procne her own sorrows. And 
having sought out her sister, Procne killed her son 
Itys, boiled him, served him up for supper to the un- 
witting Tereus, and fled with her sister in haste. 
When Tereus was aware of what had happened, he 
snatched up an axe and pursued them. And being 
overtaken at Daulia in Phocis, they prayed the 
gods to be turned into birds, and Procne became a 
nightingale, and Philomela a swallow. And Tereus 
also was changed into a bird and became a hoopoe. 
XV. When Pandion died, his sons divided their 
father’s inheritance between them, and Erechtheus 
got the kingdom,! and Butes got the priesthood 
of Athena and Poseidon Erechtheus.? Erechtheus 


(Chronic. vol. i. p. 186, ed. A. Schoene), Hyginus (Fab. 48) 
and Ovid (Metamorph. vi. 675 sqq.). According to Ovid 
(/.c.), Erechtheus had four sons and four daughters. 

2 Compare Harpocration, s.v. Βούτης, who tells us that the 
families of the Butads and Eteobutads traced their origin to 
this Butes. There was an altar dedicated to him as to a 
hero in the Erechtheum on the acropolis of Athens (Pau- 
sanias, 1, 26. 5). Compare J. Toepffer, Aitische Genealogie 
(Berlin, 1889), pp. 113 sqqg. Erechtheus was identified with 
Poseidon at Athens (Hesychius, s.v. ’Epex@evs). The Athen- 
ians sacrificed to Erechtheus Poseidon (Athenagoras, Suppli- 
catio pro Chrisitianis, 1). His priesthood was called the 
priesthood of Poseidon Erechtheus (Pseudo-Plutarch, x. Orat. 
Vit., Lycurgus, 30, Ὁ. 1027, ed. Diibner ; Corpus Inscrip- 
tionum Atticarum, ili. No. 805; Dittenber ger, Sylloge In- 
scriptionum Graecarum 3, No. 790). An inscription found at 
the Erechtheum contains a dedication to Poseidon Erechtheus 


ΙΟΙ 


APOLLODORUS 


γήμας δὲ ᾿ῇεχθεὺς Upakibéav τὴν Φρασίμου 
καὶ Διογενείας τῆς Κηφισοῦ, ἔσχε παῖδας Κέ- 
κροπα Ilavdwpov Μητίονα, θυγατέρας δὲ Ἰ]ρόκριν 
Κρέουσαν Χθονίαν ᾿Ωρείθυιαν, ἣν ἥρπασε Βορέας. 

Χθονίαν μὲν οὖν ἔγημε Βούτης, Κρέουσαν δὲ 
Flov0os, ἹΤρόκριν δὲ Κέφαλος <o> Δηιόνος. ἡ δὲ 


(Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum, i. No. 387). Hence we 
may conclude with great probability that Heyne is right in 
restoring ’Epex@éws for ᾿Εριχθονίου in the present passage of 
Apollodorus. See the Critical Note. i 

! Orithyia is said to have been carried off by Boreas from 
the banks of the Ilissus, where she was dancing or gathering 
flowers with her playmates. An altar to Boreas marked the 
spot. See below, iii. 15. 2; Plato, Phaedrus, p. 229BC; 
Pausanias, i. 19.5; Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. 1. 212 sqq., 
with the Scholiast on v. 212, from whom we learn that the 
story was told by the poet Simonides and the early historian 
Pherecydes. Compare Ovid, Metamorph. vi. 683 sqqg. Accord- 
ing to another account, Orithyia was seen and loved by 
Boreas as she was carrying a basket in a procession, which 
was winding up the slope of the acropolis to offer sacrifice to 
Athena Polias, the Guardian of the City; the impetuous 
lover whirled her away with him, invisible to the crowd 
and to the guards that surrounded the royal maidens. See 
Scholiast on Homer, Od. xiv. 533, who refers to Aculiaus as 
his authority. <A different tradition as to the parentage of 
Orithyia appears to be implied by a vase-painting, which 
represents Boreas carrying off Orithyia in the presence of 
Cecrops, Erechtheus, Aglaurus, Herse, and Pandrosus, all of 
whom are identified by inscriptions (Corpus Inscriptionum 
Graecarum, vol. iv. p. 146, No. 7716). The painting is 
interpreted most naturally by ‘the supposition that in the 
artist’s opinion Aglaurus, Herse, and Pandrosus, the three 
daughters of Cecrops (see above, iii. 14. 2), were the sisters 
of Orithyia, and therefore that her father was Cecrops, and 
not Erechtheus, as Apollodorus, following the ordinary Greek 
tradition (Herodotus, vii. 189), assumes in the present pas- 
sage. This inference is confirmed by an express statement 
of the Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius (Argon, i, 212) that 


102 


ΤΉ; LIBRARY, Ill. xv. 1 


married Praxithea, daughter of Phrasimus by Dio- 
genia, daughter of Cephisus, and had sons, to wit, 
Cecrops, Pandorus, and Metion; and daughters, to 
wit, Procris, Creusa, Chthonia, and Orithyia, who was 
carried off by Boreas.! 

Chthonia was married to Butes,? Creusa to Xuthus,® 
and Procris to Cephalus, son of Deion.* Bribed by 


Cecrops was the father of Orithyia. As to the vase-painting 
in question, see F. G. Welcker, Antike Denkmédiler, iii. 144 
sqq.; A. Baumeister, Denkmdler des klassischen Altertums, 
i. 351 sqq. 

2 This is the third instance of marriage or betrothal with 
a niece, the daughter of a brother, which has met us in 
Apollodorus. See above, ii. 4. 3, ii. 4. 5. So many refer- 
ences to such a marriage seem to indicate a former practice 
of marrying a niece, the daughter of a brother. 

3 Compare Euripides, Jon, 57 sqqg.; Pausanias, vii. 1, 2, 
where, however, Creusa is not named. 

4 The tragic story of Cephalus and Procris was told with 
variations in detail by ancient writers. See Scholiast on 
Homer, Od. xi. 321; Eustathius on Homer, l.c., p. 1688; 
Antoninus Liberalis, Z'ransform. 41; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, 
i. 542 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 189; Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 
670-862 ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. vi. 445; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latin, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 16 sq., 147 
(First Vatican Mythographer, 44; Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 216). Of these writers, Tzetzes closely follows 
Apollodorus, whom he cites by name. They are the only 
two authors who mention the intrigue of Procris with Pteleus 
and the bribe of the golden crown. The story was told by 
Pherecydes, as we learn from the Scholiast on Homer, l.c., 
who gives an abstract of the narrative. In it the test of his 
wife’s chastity is made by Cephalus himself in disguise ; 
nothing is said of the flight of the abashed Procris to Minos, 
and nothing of the love of Dawn (Aurora) for Cephalus, 
which in several of the; versions figures conspicuously, since 
it is the jealous goddess who suggests to her human lover 
the idea of tempting his wife to her fall. The episode of 
Procris’s flight to Minos is told with some differences of 
detail by Antoninus Liberalis. As to the dog which Procris 


103 


APOLLODORUS 


λαβοῦσα χρυσοῦν στέφανον Ἰ]τελέοντι συνευνά- 
ἕεται, καὶ φωραθεῖσα ὑπὸ Κεφάλου πρὸς Μίνωα 
φεύγει. ὁ δὲ αὐτῆς ἐρᾷ καὶ πείθει συνελθεῖν. εἰ 
δὲ συνέλθοι γυνὴ Μίψωι, ἀδύνατον ἣν αὐτὴν 
σωθῆναι" ἸΙασιφάη γάρ, ἐπειδὴ πολλαῖς Μίνως 
συνηυνάξετο γυναιξίν, ἐφαρμάκευσεν αὐτόν, καὶ 
ὁπότε ἄλλῃ συνηυνάζετο, εἰς τὰ ἄρθρα ἀφίει 
θηρία, καὶ οὕτως ἀπώλλυντο. ἔχοντος οὖν αὐτοῦ 
κύνα ταχὺν «καὶ» ἀκόντιον ἰθυβόλον, ἐπὶ τούτοις 
Πρόκρις, δοῦσα τὴν Κιρκαίαν πιεῖν ῥίζαν πρὸς τὸ 
μηδὲν βλάψαι, συνευνάξεται. δείσασα δὲ αὖθις 
τὴν Μίνωος γυναῖκα ἧκεν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας, καὶ διαλ- 
λαγεῖσα Κεφάλῳ μετὰ τούτου παραγίνεται ἐπὶ 
θήραν' ἣν as θηρευτική. διωκούσης δὲ αὐτῆς 
ἐν τῇ λόχμῃ 3 ἀγνοήσας Κέφαλος ἀκοντίξει, καὶ 
τυχὼν ἀποκτείνει ἸΤρόκριν. καὶ κριθεὶς ἐν ᾿Δρείῳ 
πάγῳ φυγὴν ἀίδιον καταδικάξεται. ‘ ; 

Ὡρείθυιαν δὲ παίξουσαν 8 ἐπὶ ᾿Γλισσοῦ ποταμοῦ 
ἁρπάσας Βορέας συνῆλθεν' ἡ δὲ γεννᾷ θυγατέρας 
μὲν Κλεοπάτραν καὶ Χιόνην, υἱοὺς δὲ Ζήτην καὶ 
Κάλαϊν πτερωτούς, οἱ πλέοντες σὺν ᾿Ιάσονι καὶ 


1 ἀφίει Heyne (conjecture), Bekker, Hercher: ἐφίει, Wes- 
termann, Miiller, Wagner, following apparently the MSS. 

2 rAdxun O: λόγχῃ A. 

3 παίζουσαν Staverenus, Hercher, Wagner (compare παί- 
ὥυσαν in Plato, Phaedrus, p. 229c; Pausanias, 1. 29. 5; 
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 212): περῶσαν A, 
Westermann, Bekker. 


received from Minos, see above, ii. 7. 1. The animal’s name 
was Laelaps (Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 771; Hyginus, Fab. 
189). According to Hyginus (l.c.), both the dog and the 
dart which could never miss were bestowed on Proeris by 
Artemis (Diana). Sophocles wrote a tragedy Procris, of 


104 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 1-2 


a golden crown, Procris admitted Pteleon to her 
bed, and being detected by Cephalus she fled to 
Minos. But he fell in love with her and tried to 
seduce her. Now if any woman had intercourse 
with Minos, it was impossible for her to escape with 
life; for because Minos cohabited with many women, 
Pasiphae bewitched him, and whenever he took 
another woman to his bed, he discharged wild beasts 
at her joints, and so the women perished.' But 
Minos had a swift dog and a dart that flew straight ; 
and in return for these gifts Procris shared his bed, 
having first given him the Circaean root to drink 
that he might not harm her. But afterwards, fearing 
the wife of Minos, she came to Athens and being 
reconciled to Cephalus she went forth with him to 
the chase ; for she was fond of hunting. As she was 
in pursuit of game in the thicket, Cephalus, not 
knowing she was there, threw a dart, hit and killed 
Procris, and, being tried in the Areopagus, was con- 
demned to perpetual banishment.? 

While Orithyia was playing by the Ilissus river, 
Boreas carried her off and had intercourse with her ; 
and she bore daughters, Cleopatra and Chione, and 
-winged sons, Zetes and Calais. These sons sailed 


which antiquity has bequeathed to us four words. See The 
Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 170 sq. 
The accidental killing of Procris by her husband was a 
familiar, indeed trite, tale in Greece (Pausanias, x. 29. 6). 

1 The danger which the women incurred, and the device 
by which Procris contrived to counteract it, are clearly 
explained by Antoninus Liberalis (Transform. 41). According 
to him, the animals which Minos discharged from his body 
were snakes, scorpions, and millipeds. 

2 Compare J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 552. After the homi- 
cide of his wife, Cephalus is said to have dwelt as an exile in 
Thebes (Pausanias, i. 37. 6). 


105 


4 


APOLLODORUS 


\ ; ς / , 2 / e δύῃ / 

Tas ἁρπυίας διώκοντες ἀπέθανον, ὡς δὲ ᾿Ακουσί- 
/ a 

Laos λέγει, περὶ νον ὑφ᾽ Ἡρακλέους ἀπώλοντο. 
Κλεοπάτραν δὲ ἔγημε Φινεύς, ᾧ γίνονται παῖδες 
<€&>1 αὐτῆς WAH Eros καὶ ἸΙανδίων. ἔχων δὲ 
τούτους ἐκ Κλεοπάτρας παῖδας ᾿Ιδαίαν ἐγάμει 
τὴν Δαρδάνου. κἀκείνη τῶν προγόνων πρὸς Φινέα 
φθορὰν καταψεύδεται, καὶ πιστεύσας Φιινεὺς 
>’ / a / \ e 3 
ἀμφοτέρους τυφλοῖ. παραπλέοντες δὲ οἱ Apyo- 
ναῦται σὺν Βορέᾳ κολάζονται" αὐτόν. 

Χιόνη δὲ Ἰ]Ποσειδῶνι, μίγνυται. ἡ δὲ κρύφα 


1 ἐξ inserted by Heyne. 

2 γαμεῖ Hercher. 

3 κολάζουσιν Bekker (conjecture), Hercher. 
4 Χιόνῃ δὲ Ποσειδῶν Hercher. 


1 See above, i. 9. 21; Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 211 
sqq., li. 273 sqq. ; Scholiast on Homer, Od. xiv. 533; Scholiast 
on Sophocles, Antigone, 981; Hyginus, Fab. 14, pp. 42 sq., 
ed. Bunte; Ovid, Metamorph. vi. 711 sqq.; Servius, on 
Virgil, Aen. 111. 209. According to Hyginus (/.c.), their wings 
were attached to their feet, and their hair was sky-blue. 
Elsewhere (Fab. 19) he describes them with wings on their 
heads as well as on their feet. Ovid says that they were 
twins, and that they did not develop wings until their beards 
began to grow; according to him, the pinions sprouted from 
their sides in the usual way. 

2 This is the version adopted by Apollonius Rhodius (Argon. 
i. 1298-1308), who tells us that when Zetes and Calais were 
returning from the funeral games of Pelias, Hercules killed 
them in Tenos because they had persuaded the Argonauts to 
leave him behind in Mysia; over their grave he heaped a 
barrow, and on the barrow he set up two pillars, one of which 
shook at every breath of the North Wind, the father of the 
two dead men. The slaughter of Zetes and Calais by Her- 
cules is mentioned by Hyginus (Fab. 14, p, 48, ed. Bunte). 

5 See above, i. 9. 21. The story of Phineus and his sons is 
related by the Scholiast on Sophocles (Antigone, 981), referring 


106 


eS OE “ὦ. 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 2-4 


with Jason! and met their end in chasing the Harpies; 
but according to Acusilaus, they were killed by Her- 
cules in Tenos.2_ Cleopatra was married to Phineus, 
who had by her two sons, Plexippus and Pandion. 
When he had these sons by Cleopatra, he married 
Idaea, daughter of Dardanus. She falsely accused 
her stepsons to Phineus of corrupting her virtue, and 
Phineus, believing her, blinded them both.? But 
when the Argonauts sailed past with Boreas, they 
punished him.‘ 

Chione had connexion with Poseidon, and having 


to the present passage of Apollodorus as his authority. The 
tale was told by the ancients with many variations, some of 
which are noticed by the Scholiast on Sophocles (/.c.) Accord- 
ing to Sophocles (Antigone, 969 sqq.), it was not their father 
Phineus, but their cruel stepmother, who blinded the two 
young men, using her shuttle as a dagger. The names both 
of the stepmother and of her stepsons are variously given by 
our authorities. See further Diodorus Siculus, iv. 43 sq. ; 
Scholiast on Homer, Od. xii. 69 (who refers to Asclepiades as 
his authority); Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. ii. 
178; Hyginus, Fab. 19; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. iii. 209; 
Scholiast on Ovid, Ibis, 265, 271; Scriptores rerum mythica- 
rum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 9, 124 (First Vatican 
My thographer, oT; Second Vatican Mythographer, 124). 

According to Phylarchus, Aesculapius restored the sight of 
the blinded youths for the sake of their mother Cleopatra, but 
was himself killed by Zeus with a thunderbolt for so doing. 
See Sextus Empiricus, Adversus mathematicos, i. 262, p. 658, 
ed. Bekker ; compare Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. 111. 54 (96) ;. 
Scholiast on Euripides, Alcestis, 1. Both Aeschylus and 
Sophocles composed tragedies entitled Phineus. See Tragi- 
corum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 83, 284 sqq.; 
The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 

311 sqq. 

4 Here Apollodorus departs from the usual tradition, 
followed by himself elsewhere (i. 9. 21), which affirmed that 
the Argonauts, instead of punishing Phineus, rendered him a 
great service by delivering him from the Harpies. 


107 


APOLLODORUS 


ἴω \ lf lal 
Tov πατρὸς Kvporrov τεκοῦσα, iva μὴ γένηται 
\ Ν 
καταφανής, εἰς τὸν βυθὸν ῥίπτει τὸ παιδίον. 
an / 
Ποσειδῶν δὲ ἀνελόμενος εἰς Αἰθιοπίαν Kopiter 
/ al 
καὶ δίδωσι Βενθεσικύμῃ τρέφειν, αὐτοῦ θυγατρὶ 
Ἀν 8 ’, ς δὲ > / 1 ς 0 
καὶ ᾿Αμφιτρίτης. ὡς δὲ ἐτελειώθη, ὁ Βενθεσι.- 
ἣν ΄ fal a 
κύμης ἀνὴρ τὴν ἑτέραν αὐτῷ τῶν θυγατέρων 
δίδωσιν. ὁ δὲ καὶ τὴν ἀδελφὴν τῆς γαμηθείσης 
5 7 / \ \ a \ 
ἐπεχείρησε βιάζεσθαι, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο φυγαδευθεὶς 
μετὰ ᾿Ισμάρου τοῦ παιδὸς πρὸς Τεγύριον ἧκε, 
Θρᾳκῶν βασιλέα, ὃς αὐτοῦ τῷ παιδὶ τὴν θυγατέρα 
συνῴκισεν." ἐπιβουλεύων δὲ ὕστερον Τεγυρίῳ 
Ν > ΄ 
καταφανὴς γίνεται, καὶ πρὸς ᾿λευσινίους φεύγει 
καὶ φιλίαν ποιεῖται πρὸς αὐτούς. αὖθις δὲ Ἴσ- 
μάρου τελευτήσαντος μεταπεμφθεὶς ὑπὸ Τεγυρίου 
\ “ 
παραγίνεται, καὶ τὴν πρὸ τοῦ μάχην διαλυσά- 
/ 

μενος τὴν βασιλείαν παρέλαβε. καὶ πολέμου 
3 / \ , θ / lal ἯΝ ’ 3 
ἐνστάντος πρὸς ᾿Αθηναίους τοῖς ᾿Ελευσινίοις, 
> \ ς XS / \ a 

ἐπικληθεὶς ὑπὸ ᾿Ελευσινίων μετὰ πολλῆς συνε- 


' After ἐτελειώθη some MSS. read ἔνδον or ἔνδον “ἐν, which 
Bekker changed into Ἔνδιος and Hercher into “Evados. It 
seems probable that the name of Benthesieyme’s husband is 
concealed under ἔνδον or ἔνδον ἐν. 

2 συνῴκισεν R®: συνῴκησεν A. 

S τοῖς ᾿Ελευσινίοις Heyne, Westermann, Miller, Bekker, 
Hercher, Wagner: καὶ Ἐλευσινίους A. 


* With this account of the parentage of Eumolpus, compare 
Pausanias, i. 38. 2; Scholiast on Kuripides, Phoeniss. 854 ; 
Hyginus, Fab. 157. Isocrates (iv. 68) agrees with Apollodorus 
in describing Eumolpus as a son of Poseidon, but does not 
name his mother. On the other hand the Parian Chronicle 
(Marmor Pariwm, lines 27 sq.) represents Eumolpus as a son 
of Musaeus, and says that he founded the mysteries of Eleusis. 
Apollodorus does not expressly attribute the institution of the 


108 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 4 


given birth to Eumolpus! unknown to her father, 
in order not to be detected, she flung the child into 
the deep. But Poseidon picked him up and con- 
veyed him to Ethiopia, and gave him to Benthesicyme 
(a daughter of his own by Amphitrite) to bring up. 
When he was full grown, Benthesicyme’s husband 
gave him one of his two daughters. But he tried to 
force his wife’s sister, and being banished on that 
account, he went with his son Ismarus to Tegyrius, 
king of Thrace, who gave his daughter in marriage 
to Eumolpus’s son. But being afterwards detected 
in a plot against Tegyrius, he fled to the Eleusinians 
and made friends with them. Later, on the death of 
Ismarus, he was sent for by Tegyrius and went, com- 
posed his old feud with him, and succeeded to the 
kingdom. And war having broken out between the 
Athenians and the Eleusinians, he was called in by 
the Eleusinians and fought on their side with a large 


mysteries to Eumolpus, but perhaps he implies it. Compare 
ii. 5. 12. It seems to have been a common tradition that the 
mysteries of Eleusis were founded by the Thracian Eumolpus. 
See Plutarch, De exilio, 17; Lucian, Demonax, 34; Photius, 
Lexicon, s.v. Ἑὐμολπίδαι. But some people held that the 
Eumolpus who founded the mysteries was a different person 
from the Thracian Eumolpus ; his mother, according to them, 
was Deiope, daughter of Triptolemus. Some of the ancients 
supposed that there were as many as three different legendary 
personages of the name of Eumolpus, and that the one who 
instituted the Eleusinian mysteries was descended in the fifth 
generation from the first Kumolpus. See Scholiast on Sopho- 
cles, Oedipus Colon. 1053; Photius, Lexicon, s.v. Εὐμολπίδαι. 
The story which Apollodorus here tells of the casting of 
EKumolpus into the sea, his rescue by Poseidon, and his 
upbringing in Ethiopia, appears not to be noticed by any other 
ancient writer. 


109 


co 


APOLLODORUS 


panel Θρᾳκῶν δυνάμεως. ᾿Ββρεχθεῖ δὲ vmép! 
᾿Αθηναίων νίκης χρωμένῳ ἔχρησεν ὁ θεὸς κατορ- 
θώσειν τὸν πόλεμον, ἐὰν μίαν τῶν θυγατέρων 
σφάξῃ. καὶ σφάξαντος αὐτοῦ τὴν νεωτάτην καὶ 
αἱ λοιπαὶ ἑαυτὰς κατέσφαξαν" ἐπεποίηντο γάρ, 
ὡς ἔφασάν τινες, συνωμοσίαν ἀλλήλαις συναπο- 
λέσθαι. γενομένης δὲ μετὰ «τὴν! 5 σφαγὴν τῆς 
μάχης ‘EpexOevs μὲν ἀνεῖλεν Βὔμολπον, Ποσειδῶ- 
νος δὲ καὶ τὸν ᾿Βρεχθέα καὶ τὴν οἰκίαν αὐτοῦ κατα- 


λύσαντος, Κέκροψ ὁ 0 πρεσβύτατος τῶν ᾿Βρεχθέως᾽ 


παίδων ἐβασίλευσεν, ὃ ὃς γήμας Μητιάδουσαν τὴν 

Εὐπαλάμου παῖδα ἐτέκνωσε ἸΠανδίονα. οὗτος 
\ / 3 , ε Ν a M , 

μετὰ Κέκροπα βασιλεύων ὑπὸ τῶν Μητίονος 


1 ὑπὲρ A: περὶ Hercher. 
2 τὴν inserted by Bekker. 
3 Κέκροπα Heyne: κέκροπος A. 


1 As to the war between the Athenians and the Eleusinians, 
see Pausanias, i. 5. 2, 1. 27. 4, 1. 31. 3, 1. 36. 4, i. 38. 3, ii. 14: 
2, vii. 1. 5, ix. 9. 1; Alcidamas, Odyss. 23, p. 182, ed. Blass; 
Scholiast on Euripides, Phoeniss. 854; Aristides, Or. xiii. 
vol. i. pp. 190 sqg., ed. Dindorf. Pausanias differs from 
Apollodorus and our other authorities in saying that in the 
battle it was not Eumolpus, but his son Ismarus or, as 
Pausanias calls him, Immaradus who fell by the hand of 
KErechtheus (i. 5. 2, i. 27. 4. According to Pausanias (i. 38. 
3), Erechtheus was himself slain in the battle, but Eumolpus 
survived it and was allowed to remain in Eleusis (ii. 14. 2). 
Further, Pausanias relates that in the war with Eleusis the 
Athenians offered the supreme command of their forces to the 
exiled Ion, and that he accepted it (i. 31. 3, 11. 14. 2, vii. 1. δ); 
and with this account Strabo (viii. 7. 1, p. 383) substantially 
agrees. The war waged by Eumolpus on Athens is mentioned 
by Plato (Menexenus, p. 239 8), lsocrates (iv. 68, xii. 193), 
Demosthenes (Ix. 8. p. 1391), and Plutarch (Parallela, 31). 
According to Isocrates, Eumolpus claimed the kingdom of 
Athens against Krechtheus on the ground that his father 
Poseidon had gained possession of the ΗΝ before Athena, 


110 


a iin i 


THE LIBRARY, IIT. xv. 4-5 


force of Thracians.1 When Erechtheus inquired of 
the oracle how the Athenians might be victorious, 
the god answered that they would win the war if he 
would slaughter one of his daughters; and when he 
slaughtered his youngest, the others also slaughtered 
themselves; for, as some said, they had taken an oath 
among themselves to perish together.? In the battle 
which took place after the slaughter, Erechtheus killed 
Eumolpus. But Poseidon having destroyed Erech- 
theus? and his house, Cecrops, the eldest of the sons 
of Erechtheus, succeeded to the throne.*- He married 
Metiadusa, daughter of Eupalamus, and begat Pan- 
dion. This Pandion, reigning after Cecrops, was 


* Compare Lycurgus, Contra Leocratem, 98 sq., ed. C. 
Scheibe; Plutarch, Parallela, 20; Suidas, s.v. παρθένοι ; 
Apostolius, Cent. xiv. 7; Aristides, Or. xiii. vol. i. p. 191, 
ed. Dindorf; Cicero, Pro Sestio, xxi. 48; id. Tusculan. 
Disput. i. 48. 116; id. De natura deorum, iii. 19. 50; τώ. De 
jinibus, v. 22. 62; Hyginus, Fab. 46. According to Suidas 
and Apostolius, out of the six daughters of Erechtheus only 
the two eldest, Protogonia and Pandora, offered themselves 
for the sacrifice. According to Euripides (Ion, 277-280), the 
youngest of the sisters, Creusa, was spared because she was 
an infant in arms. Aristides speaks of the sacrifice of one 
daughter only. Cicero says (De natura deorum, iii. 19. 50) 
that on account of this sacrifice Erechtheus and his daughters 
were reckoned among the gods at Athens. ‘‘ Sober,” that is, 
wineless, sacrifices were offered after their death to the 
daughters of Krechtheus. See Scholiast on Sophocles, 
Oedipus Coloneus, 100. The heroic sacrifice of the maidens 
was celebrated by Euripides in his tragedy Hrechtheus, from 
which a long passage is quoted by Lycurgus (op. cif. 100). 
See Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 
464 sqq. 

3 According to Hyginus (Fab. 46), Zeus killed Erechtheus 
with a thunderbolt at the request of Poseidon, who was 
enraged at the Athenians for killing his son Eumolpus. 

* Compare Pausanias, i. 5. 3, vii. 1. 2. 


11 


APOLLODORUS 


tn \ / 3 / \ , 
υἱῶν κατὰ στάσιν ἐξεβλήθη, καὶ παραγενόμενος 
» , 

εἰς Μέγαρα πρὸς Πύλαν τὴν ἐκείνου θυγατέρα 
ΠΠυλίαν! γαμεῖ. αὖθις «-δὲ;2 καὶ τῆς πόλεως 
βασιλεὺς καθίσταται: κτείνας γὰρ Πύλας τὸν 

n \ > \ ’ \ / / 

Tov πατρὸς ἀδελφὸν Βίαντα τὴν βασιλείαν δίδωσι 
ΠΠανδίονι, αὐτὸς δὲ εἰς Πελοπόννησον σὺν λαῷ 
παραγενόμενος κτίζει πόλιν Πύλον. 

Πανδίονι δὲ ἐν Μεγάροις ὄντι παῖδες ἐγένοντο 
Αἰγεὺς Πάλλας Nicos, Λύκος. ἔνιοι δὲ Αἰγέα 
Σ κυρίου εἰναι λέγουσιν, ὑποβληθῆναι δὲ ὑπὸ 
Πανδίονος. μετὰ δὲ τὴν Πανδίονος τελευτὴν οἱ 
παῖδες αὐτοῦ στρατεύσαντες ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αθήνας ἐξέ- 
βαλον τοὺς Μητιονίδας καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν τετραχῇ 
διεῖλον" εἶχε δὲ τὸ πᾶν κράτος Αἰγεύς. γαμεῖ δὲ 

, 4 \ Ae \ ¢ A ὃ / δὲ 
πρώτην" μὲν Μήταν τὴν “Οπλῆτος, δευτέραν δὲ 
Χαλκιόπην τὴν Ῥηξήνορος. ὡς δὲ οὐκ ἐγένετο 
παῖς αὐτῷ, δεδοικὼς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς εἰς Πυθίαν 5 


1 Πυλίαν Faber, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner, preferred by 
Heyne: πελίαν A, Westermann, Miiller. 

° δὲ conjectured by Heyne, accepted by Westermann, 
Hercher, and Wagner. 

8 βασιλεὺς. The MSS. (A) add ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς, which is kept by 
Westermann, Bekker, and Wagner, but altered into sr 
αὐτοῦ by Miiller. I have followed Hercher in omitting the 
words as a gloss, which was the course preferred by Heyne. 

4 πρώτην Hercher, Wagner: πρῶτον AS. 

° Πυθίαν a rare, if not unexampled, form of the old name 
for Delphi. The usual form is Πυθώ, which is used by Apol- 
lodorus elsewhere (i, 4. 1) and should perhaps be restored 
here. 


SSDS 


1 Compare Pausanias, i. 5. 8, who tells us that the tomb— 
of Pandion was in the land of Megara, on a bluff called the 
bluff of Diver-bird Athena. 


12 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 5-6 


expelled by the sons of Metion in a sedition, and 
going to Pylas at Megara married his daughter Pylia.! 
And at a later time he was even appointed king of 
the city ; for Pylas slew his father’s brother Bias and 
gave the kingdom to Pandion, while he himself 
repaired to Peloponnese with a body of people and 
founded the city of Pylus.? 

While Pandion was at Megara, he had sons born to 
him, to wit, Aegeus, Pallas, Nisus, and Lycus. But 
some say that Aegeus was a son of Scyrius, but was 
passed off by Pandion as his own.? After the death 
of Pandion his sons marched against Athens, ex- 
pelled the Metionids, and divided the government 
in four; but Aegeus had the whole power.* The 
first wife whom he married was Meta, daughter of 
Hoples, and the second was Chalciope, daughter of 
Rhexenor.® As no child was born to him, he feared 
his brothers, and went to Pythia and consulted the 


2 Compare Pausanias, i. 39. 4, iv. 36. 1, vi. 22. 5, who 
variously names this Megarian king Pylas, Pylus, and: 
Pylon. 

8 Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 494, who may 
have copied Apollodorus. The sons of Pallas, the brother of 
Aegeus, alleged that Aegeus was not of the stock of the 
Erechtheids, since he was only an adopted son of Pandion. 
See Plutarch, Theseus, 13. 

4 Compare Pausanias i. 5. 4, i. 39. 4, according to whom 
Aegeus, as the eldest of the sons of Pandion, obtained the 
sovereignty of Attica, while his brother Nisus, relinquishing 
his claim to his elder brother, was invested with the king- 
dom of Megara. As to the fourfold partition of Attica 
among the sons of Pandion, about which the ancients were 
not agreed, see Strabo, ix. i. 6, p. 392; Scholiast on Aris- 
tophanes, Lysistrata, 58, and on Wasps, 1223. 

5 Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 494, who may 
have copied Apollodorus. 


113 
Vol. II. I 


APOLLODORUS 


ἦλθε Kal περὶ παίδων γονῆς ἐμαντεύετο. ὁ δὲ 
θεὸς ἔχρησεν αὐτῷ" 


ἀσκοῦ τὸν προύχοντα ποδάονα, φέρτατε Χαῶν, 
εἶ 3 \ >’ 7 > / ’ / 
μὴ λύσῃς, πρὶν ἐς ἄκρον ᾿Αθηναίων adixnat. 


> ἴω \ \ Ν > / / > 3 / 
ἀπορῶν δὲ τὸν χρησμὸν ἀνήει πάλιν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας. 
καὶ Τροιζῆνα διοδεύων ἐπιξενοῦται ἸΠιτθεῖ τῷ 
Πέλοπος, ὃς τὸν χρησμὸν συνείς, μεθύσας αὐτὸν 
τῇ θυγατρὶ συγκατέκλινεν Αἴθρᾳ. τῇ δὲ αὐτῇ 
νυκτὶ καὶ Ποσειδῶν ἐπλησίασεν αὐτῇ. Αἰγεὺς 
δὲ ἐντειλάμενος Αἴθρᾳ, ἐ ἐὰν ἄρρενα γεννήσῃ, τρέ- 
φειν, τίνος ἐστὶ μὴ λέγουσαν, ἀπέλιπεν ὑπό τινα 
πέτραν μάχαιραν καὶ πέδιλα, εἰπών, ὅταν ὁ 
παῖς δύνηται τὴν πέτραν ἀποκυλίσας ἀνελέσθαι 
ταῦτα, τότε μετ᾽ αὐτῶν αὐτὸν ἀποπέμπειν. 

Αὐτὸς δὲ ἧκεν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας, καὶ τὸν τῶν Πανα- 
θηναίων ἀγῶνα ἐπετέλει, ἐν ᾧ ὁ Μίνωος παῖς 
᾿Ανδρόγεως ἐ ἐνίκησε πάντας. τοῦτον Αἰγεὺς * ἐπὶ 
τὸν Μαραθώνιον ἔπεμψε ταῦρον, ὑφ᾽ οὗ διεφθάρη. 
ἔνιοι δὲ αὐτὸν λέγουσι πορευόμενον εἰς Θήβας ὃ 

1 ποδάονα ES, Scholiast on Euripides, Medea, 679, Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 494 (where, however, the MSS. seem 
to vary), Heyne, Wagner: πόδα μέγα A, Plutarch, Theseus, 3, 
Westermann, Miiller, Bekker, Hercher. The form ποδάων 
seems to be known only in these passages: elsewhere the 
word occurs in the form ποδεών. 

2 σίνος ἐστὶ μὴ λέγουσαν ES: καὶ τίνος ἔσται μὴ λέγειν A. 

3 ria πέτραν ESA, Westermann, Wagner: τινὶ πέτρᾳ 
Heyne, Miiller, Bekker, Hercher. 

+ Αἰγεὺς S: ὁ Ceus A. 

ὃ Θήβας Meursius (compare Diodorus Siculus, iv, 60. 5; 
Scholiast on Plato, Minos, p. 3214): ἀθήνας A, 


' As to the oracle, the ὑπ ρος of Theseus, and the 
tokens of his human paternity, see Plutarch, Theseus, 3 and 


114 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 6-7 


oracle concerning the begetting of children. The 
god answered him :— ὶ 


«The bulging mouth of the wineskin, O best of men, 
Loose not until thou hast reached the height of 
Athens.” 1 


Not knowing what to make of the oracle, he set 
out on his return to Athens. And journeying by 
way of Troezen, he lodged with Pittheus, son of 
Pelops, who, understanding the oracle, made him 
drunk and caused him to lie with his daughter Aethra. 
But in the same night Poseidon also had connexion 
with her. Now Aegeus charged Aethra that, if she 
gave birth to a male child, she should rear it, without 
telling whose it was; and he left a sword and sandals 
under a certain rock, saying that when the boy could 
roll away the rock and take them up, she was then 
to send him away with them. 

But: he himself came to Athens and celebrated 
the games of the Panathenian festival, in which An- 
drogeus, son of Minos, vanquished all comers. Him 
Aegeus sent against the bull of Marathon, by which 
he was destroyed. But some say that as he journeyed 


6; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 494; Hyginus, Fab. 37 
As to the tokens, compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 59. 1 and 6; 
Pausanias, i. 27. 8, ii. 32. 7. .Theseus is said to have claimed 
to be a son of Poseidon, because the god had consorted with 
his mother ; and in proof of his marine descent he dived into 
the sea and brought up a golden crown, the gift of Amphi- 
trite, together with a golden ring which Minos had thrown 
into the sea in order to test his claim to be a son of the sea- 
god. See Bacchylides, xvi. (xvii.) 33 sqq.; Pausanias, i. 
17. 3; Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 5. The picturesque story was 
painted by Micon in the sanctuary of Theseus at Athens 
(Pausanias, l.c.), and is illustrated by some Greek vase- 
paintings. See my commentary on Pausanias, vol. ii. pp. 
157 sq. 

τὰ 

12 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐπὶ tov Λαΐου ἀγῶνα πρὸς τῶν ἀγωνιστῶν ἐνε- 
δρευθέντα διὰ φθόνον ἀπολέσθαι. Μίνως δέ, 
ἀγγελθέντος αὐτῷ τοῦ θανάτου," θύων ἐν Ilapw 
ταῖς χάρισι, τὸν μὲν. στέφανον ἀπὸ τῆς κεφαλῆς 
ἔρριψε καὶ τὸν αὐλὸν κατέσχε, τὴν δὲ θυσίαν 
οὐδὲν 7) ἧττον ἐπετέλεσεν" ὅθεν ἔτι καὶ δεῦρο χωρὶς 
αὐλῶν καὶ στεφάνων ἐν Idpw θύουσι ταῖς χάρισι. 
μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ δὲ θαλασσοκρατῶν ἐπολέμησε 
στόλῳ τὰς ᾿Αθήνας, καὶ Μέγαρα εἷλε Νίσου 
βασιλεύοντος τοῦ Ilavdiovos, καὶ Μεγαρέα τὸν 
Ἵππομένους ἐξ ᾿Ογχηστοῦ Νίσῳ βοηθὸν ἐλθόντα 
ἀπέκτεινεν. ἀπέθανε δὲ καὶ Νῖσος διὰ θυγατρὸς 
προδοσίαν. ἔχοντι γὰρ αὐτῷ πορφυρέαν ἐ ἐν μέσῃ 
τῇ κεφαλῇ τρίχα ταύτης ἀφαιρεθείσης ἣν χρὴη- 
σμὸς τελευτῆσαι" ᾿ ἡ δὲ θυγάτηρ αὐτοῦ Σκύλλα 
ἐρασθεῖσα Μίνωος ἐξεῖλε τὴν τρίχα. Μίνως ὃ δὲ 
Μεγάρων κρατήσας καὶ τὴν κόρην τῆς πρύμνης 
τῶν ποδῶν ἐκδήσας ὑποβρύχιον ἐποίησε. 

1 ἀγγελθέντος αὐτῷ τοῦ θανάτου Wyttenbach (on Plutarch, 
Praecepta sanit. tuend., 13828, vol. ii., p. 154, Leipsic, 1821), 
Westermann, Bekker, Hercher, Wagner: ἐπαγγελθέντος αὐτῷ 
τοῦ θανάτου Heyne ; ἐπελθόντος αὐτοῦ θανάτου A, Miiller. 


3 ἣν χρησμὸς τελευτῆσαι ἢ: τελευτᾷ A (omitting ἦν χρη- 
ods). 3 Μίνως E: μόνον A. 


1 This account of the murder of Androgeus is repeated 
almost verbally by the Scholiast on Plato, Minos, p. 321 a. 
Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 60. 4 sqg.; Zenobius, Cent. 
iv. 6; Scholiast on Homer, J/. xviii. 590. All these writers 
mention the distinction won by Androgeus in the athletic 
contests of the Panathenian festival as ‘the ultimate ground 
of his undoing. Servius (on Virgil, Aen. vi. 14) and Lactan- 
tius Placidus “(on Statius, Achill. 192) say that, as an eminent 
athlete who beat all competitors in the games, Androgeus 
was murdered at Athens by Athenian and Megarian con- 
spirators. Pausanias (i. 27. 10) mentions the killing of Andro- 


116 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 7-8 


to Thebes to take part in the games in honour of 
Laius, he was waylaid and murdered by the jealous 
competitors.1 But when the tidings of his death were 
brought to Minos, as he was sacrificing to the Graces 
in Paros, he threw away the garland from his head 
and stopped the music of the flute, but nevertheless 
completed the sacrifice ; hence down to this day they 
sacrifice to the Graces in Paros without flutes and 
garlands. But not long afterwards, being master of 
the sea, he attacked Athens with a fleet and captured 
Megara, then ruled by king Nisus, son of Pandion, 
and he slew Megareus, son of Hippomenes, who had 
come from Onchestus to the help of Nisus.2, Now 
Nisus perished through his daughter’s treachery. 
For he had a purple hair on the middle of his head, 
and an oracle ran that when it was pulled out he 
should die; and his daughter Scylla fell in love with 
Minos and pulled out the hair. But when Minos had 
made himself master of Megara, he tied the damsel 
by the feet to the stern of the ship and drowned her.? 


geus by the Marathonian bull. According to Hyginus (Fab. 
41), Androgeus was killed in battle during the war which his 
father Minos waged with the Athenians. 

2 Compare Pausanias, i. 39. 5, who calls Megareus a son of 
Poseidon, and says that Megara took its name from him. 

9 With this story of the death of Nisus through the 
treachery of his daughter Scylla, compare Aeschylus, 
Choephor. 612 sqq.; Pausanias, i. 19. 5, ii. 34. 7; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 650; Scholiast on Euripides, Hippo- 
lytus, 1200; Propertius, iv. 19 (18) 21 sqq. ; [Virgil,] Ciris, 
378 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 198; Ovid, Metamorph. viii. 6 sqq. ; 
Servius, on Virgil, Hcl. vi. 74; Lactantius Placidus, on 
Statius, Theb. i. 333, vii. 261; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latin, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 2, 116 (First Vatican 
Mythographer, 3; Second Vatican Mythographer, 121). A 
similar tale is told of Pterelaus and his daughter Comaetho. 
See above, ii. 4. 5, ii. 4. 7. 


117 


APOLLODORUS 


Χρονιξομένου δὲ τοῦ πολέμου, μὴ δυνάμενος 
ἑλεῖν ᾿Αθήνας εὔχεται. Aui παρ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίων λαβεῖν 
δίκας. γενομένου δὲ τῇ πόλει λιμοῦ τε καὶ λοιμοῦ. 
τὸ μὲν πρῶτον κατὰ λόγιον ᾿Αθηναῖοι παλαιὸν 
τὰς “Ὑακίνθου κόρας, ᾿Ανθηίδα Αἰγληίδα Λυταίαν 
᾿Ορθαίαν, ἐ ἐπὶ τὸν Γεραίστου τοῦ Κύκλωπος τάφον 
κατέσφαξαν" τούτων δὲ ὁ πατὴρ άκινθος ἐλθὼν 
ἐκ Λακεδαίμονος ᾿Αθήνας κατῴκει. ὡς δὲ οὐδὲν 


Φ 


” => a > “ \ J na 

ὄφελος ἣν τοῦτο, ἐχρῶντο περὶ ἀπαλλαγῆς. ὁ 

δὲ θ Ν > “Ὁ 1 > lal / ὃ ὃ / δί ἃ 

€ θεὸς ἀνεῖλεν αὐτοῖς Μίνωι διδόναι δίκας ἃς 
\ e - / Ν ’ 

ἂν αὐτὸς αἱροῖτο πέμψαντες οὖν πρὸς Μίνωα 

al 7 / / 
ἐπέτρεπον αἰτεῖν δίκας. Μίνως δὲ ἐκέλευσεν 
a \ 

αὐτοῖς κόρους ὃ ἑπτὰ Kal κόρας Tas ἴσας χωρὶς 

δ a / 

ὅπλων πέμπειν τῷ Μινωταύρῳ βοράν. ἣν δὲ 


1 ἀνεῖλεν Faber, Hercher, Wagner: ἀνεῖπεν Scholiast on 
Plato, Minos, p. 3214, Heyne, Westermann, Miller, Bekker: 
ἀπεῖπεν Α. 

2 αἱροῖτο EK, Wagner: αἱρεῖται A, Heyne, Miiller: αἱρῆται 
Scholiast on Plato, Minos, p. 321 A, Westermann, Bekker, 
Hercher. 

3 κόρους K, Scholiast on Plato, A/inos, p. 321 A: κούρους A. 


1 Compare Diodorus Siculus, xvii. 15. 2; Hyginus, Fab. 
238 (who seems to mention only one daughter ; but the passage 
is corrupt); Harpocration, s.v. ‘Yaxiwéldes, who says that the 
daughters of Hyacinth the Lacedaemonian were known as the 
Hy acinthides. ‘The name of one of the daughters of Hyacinth 
is said to have been Lusia (Stephanus Byz antius, 8.v. Aovala). 
Some people, however, identified the Hyacinthides with the 
daughters of Erechtheus, who were similarly sacrificed for 
their country (above, ili. 15. 4). See Demosthenes, lx. 27, p. 
1397 ; Suidas, s.v, παρθένοι. According to Phanodemus in the 
fifth book of his Atthis (cited by Suidas, J.c.), the daughters 
of EKrechtheus were called Hyacinthides because they were 
sacrificed at the hill named Hyacinth. Similarly, as Heyne 
pointed out in his note on the present passage, the three 
daughters of Leos, namely, Praxithea, Theope, and Eubule, 


118 


os 


“ωφ« Πρ Ὺ .ᾳῳᾳ....ᾳΨᾳ.ᾳ..ᾳ.,ᾳ.ᾳΨῃ α΄’, 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 8 


When the war lingered on and he could not take 
Athens, he prayed to Zeus that he might be avenged 
on the Athenians. And the city being visited with 
a famine and a pestilence, the Athenians at first, in 
obedience to an ancient oracle, slaughtered the 
daughters of Hyacinth, to wit, Antheis, Aegleis, 
Lytaea, and Orthaea, on the grave of Geraestus, the 
Cyclops; now Hyacinth, the father of the damsels, had 
come from Lacedaemon and dwelt in Athens.!. But 
when this was of no avail, they inquired of the oracle 
how they could be delivered ; and the god answered 
them that they should give Minos whatever satis- 
faction he might choose. So they sent to Minos and 
left it to him to claim satisfaction. And Minos 
ordered them to send seven youths and the same 
number of damsels without weapons to be fodder 
for the Minotaur.2. Now the Minotaur was confined 


are said to have sacrificed themselves voluntarily, or to have 
been freely sacrificed by their father, for the safety of Athens 
in obedience to an oracle. A precinct called the Leocorium 
was dedicated to their worship at Athens. See Aelian, Var. 
Hist. xii. 28 ; Demosthenes, Ix. 28, p. 1398 ; Pausanias, i. 5. 2, 
with my note (vol. ii. p. 78); Apostolius, Cent. x. 53 ; Aristides, 
Or. xiii. vol. i. pp. 191 sq., ed. Dindorf; Cicero, De natwra 
deorum, iii. 19. 50. So, too, in Boeotia the two maiden 
daughters of Orion are said to have sacrificed themselves freely 
to deliver their country from a fatal pestilence or dearth, 
which according to an oracle of the Gortynian Apollo could be 
remedied only by the voluntary sacrifice of two virgins. See 
Antoninus Liberalis, Transform. 25; Ovid, Metamorph. xiii. 
685-699. The frequency of such legends, among which the 
traditional sacrifice of Iphigenia at Aulis may be included, 
suggests that formerly the Greeks used actually to sacrifice 
maidens in great emergencies, such as plagues and prolonged 
droughts, when ordinary sacrifices had proved ineffectual. 

2 Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 61. 1-4; Plutarch, Theseus, 
15; Pausanias, i. 27. 10; Scholiast on Plato, Minos, p. 3214; 
Virgil, Aen. vi. 20 sqq.; Servius on Virgil, Aen. Vi. 14; 
Hyginus, Fab.41; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Achill. 192. 


11g 


APOLLODORUS 


οὗτος ἐν λαβυρίνθῳ καθειργμένος, ἐν ῳ TOV εἰσεὰ- 
, ΄ , 
θόντα ἀδύνατον ἦν ἐξιέναι" πολυπλόκοις γὰρ 
καμπαῖς τὴν ἀγνοουμένην ἔξοδον ἀπέκλειε. κατε- 
/ \ > \ / « ᾽ / lal 
σκευάκει δὲ αὐτὸν Δαίδαλος ὁ Εὐπαλάμου παῖς 
an , ἘΠῚ , 3 \ hee 
τοῦ Μητίονος καὶ ᾿Αλκίππης. nv yap* apxt- 
al / / 
τέκτων ἄριστος καὶ πρῶτος ἀγαλμάτων εὑρετής. 
ω a / 
οὗτος ἐξ ᾿Αθηνῶν ἔφυγεν, ἀπὸ THs ἀκροπόλεως 
βαλὼν τὸν τῆς ἀδελφῆς [Πέρδικος] 3 υἱὸν Taro,? 
» oh \ 
μαθητὴν ὄντα, δείσας μὴ διὰ τὴν εὐφυΐαν αὐτὸν 
¢ / / \ ” 4 Ἂς / 
vepBaryn σιαγόνα yap ὄφεως εὑρὼν ξύλον λεπ- 


1 ἣν γὰρ Εἰ : οὗτος ἦν SA. 

2 πέρδικος A: περδίκας ὦ, Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 493. 

3 TadAw Diodorus Siculus, iv. 76. 4: ἀτάλω AS (Rheinisches 
Museum, xlvi. 1891, p. 618): ἀττάλω Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 
493: ἀτάλην E. 


1 As to the Minotaur and the Labyrinth, see above, iii. 1. 4. 

2 Compare J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 490, and the Scholiast 
on Plato, Jon, p. 121 A, both of whom name the father and 
mother of Daedalus in agreement with Apollodorus. The 
father of Daedalus is called Eupalamus also by Suidas (s.v. 
Πέρδικος ἱερόν), the Scholiast on Plato (Republic, vii. p. 529 
b), Hyginus (fab. 39, 244, and 274), and Servius (on Virgil, 
vi. 14). He is called Palamaon by Pausanias (ix. 3. 2), and 
Metion, son of Eupalamus, son of Erechtheus, by Diodorus 
Siculus (iv. 76. 1). Our oldest authority for the parentage of 
Daedalus is Pherecydes, who says that the father of Daedalus 
was Metion, son of Erechtheus, and that his mother was 
Iphinoe (Scholiast on Sophocles, Oedipus Celoneus, 472); and 
this tradition as to the father of Daedalus is supported by 
Plato (Jon, 4, p. 533 a). According to Clidemus, cited by 
Plutarch (T’hesews, 19), Daedalus was a cousin of Theseus, his 
mother being Merope, daughter of Erechtheus. On the whole, 
tradition is in harmony with the statement of Pausanias (vii. 
4. 5) ‘‘ that Daedalus came of the royal house of Athens, the 
Metionids.” Compare J. Tépffer, Attische Genealogie, pp. 
165 sqq. Through the clouds of fable which gathered round 


120 


eee 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 8 


in a labyrinth, in which he who entered could not. 
find his way out; for many a winding turn shut off 
the secret outward way.! The labyrinth was con- 
structed by Daedalus, whose father was Eupalamus, 
son of Metion, and whose mother was Alcippe ;? for 
he was an excellent architect and the first inventor 
of images. He had fled from Athens, because he 
had thrown down from the acropolis Talos, the son 
of his sister Perdix;* for Talos was his pupil, and 
Daedalus feared that with his talents he might sur- 
pass himself, seeing that he had sawed a thin stick 


his life and adventures we may dimly discern the figure of a 
vagabond artist as versatile as Leonardo da Vinci and as 
unscrupulous as Benvenuto Cellini. 

3 As to Daedalus’s murder of his nephew, his trial, and 
flight, compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 76. 4-7; Pausanias, i. 
21. 4, 1, 26. 4, vii. 4. 5; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 490 sqq. ; 
Suidas and Photius, Lexicon, s.v. Πέρδικος ἱερόν ; Apostolius, 
Cent. xiv. 17; Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes, 1648; Ovid, 
Metamorph. viii. 236-259; Hyginus, Fab. 39 and 244; 
Servius, on Virgil, Georg. i. 148 and on Aen. vi. 14; Isidore, 
Orig. xix. 19. 9. The name of the murdered nephew is 
commonly given as Talos, but according to Pausanias and 
Suidas (dl.cc.) it was Calos. On the other hand Sophocles, in 
his lost play The Camicians (cited by Suidas and Photius, 
ll.cc.) called him Perdix, that is, Partridge ; and this name is 
accepted by Ovid, Hyginus, Servius, and Isidore. But accord- 
ing to a different tradition, here followed by Apollodorus, 
Perdix (‘‘ Partridge’’) was the name, not of the murdered 
nephew, but of his mother, the sister of Daedalus, who hanged 
herself in grief at the death of her son; the Athenians 
worshipped her and dedicated a sanctuary to her beside the 
acropolis (so Apostolius, Suidas, and Photius, ll.cc.). The 
grave of Talos or Calos was shown near the theatre, at the 
foot of the acropolis, probably on the spot where he was 
supposed to have fallen from the battlements (Pausanias, i. 
21. 4. The trial of Daedalus before the Areopagus 15 
mentioned by Diodorus Siculus and the Scholiast on Euri- 
pides (Jl.cc.). 


121 


APOLLODORUS 


. TOV ἔπρισε. φωραθέντος δὲ τοῦ νεκροῦ κριθεὶς 
ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ καὶ καταδικασθεὶς πρὸς Μίνωα 
ἔφυγε. [κἀκεῖ" Πασιφάῃ ἐρασθείσῃ" τοῦ ἸΙοσει- 
δωνείου ὃ ταύρου συνήργησε" τεχνησάμενος ξυλί- 
νην βοῦν, καὶ τὸν λαβύρινθον κατεσκεύασεν, εἰς 
ὃν κατὰ ἔτος ᾿Αθηναῖοι κόρους" ἑπτὰ καὶ κόρας 
τὰς ἴσας τῷ Μινωταύρῳ βορὰν ἔπεμπον. 

ΧΥ͂Ι. Θησεὺς δὲ γεννηθεὶς ἐξ Αἴθρας Αἰγεῖ 
παῖς, ὡς ἐγένετο " : τέλειος, ἀπωσάμενος τὴν πέτραν 
τὰ πέδιλα καὶ τὴν μάχαιραν ἀναιρεῖται, καὶ πεζὸς 
ἠπείγετο εἰς τὰς ᾿Αθήνας. φρουρουμένην | δὲ ὑπὸ 
ἀνδρῶν κακούργων τὴν ὁδὸν ἡμέρωσε. πρῶτον 
μὲν γὰρ Περιφήτην τὸν Ἡφαίστου καὶ ᾿Αντι- 
κλείας, ὃς ἀπὸ τῆς κορύνης ἣν ἐφόρει κορυνήτης 
ἐπεκαλεῖτο, ἔκτεινεν ἐν ᾿Επιδαύρῳ. πόδας δὲ 
ἀσθενεῖς * ἔχων οὗτος ἐφόρει κορύνην σιδηρᾶν," 
δι᾿ ἧς τοὺς παριόντας ἔκτεινε. ταύτην ἀφελό- 
μενος Θησεὺς ἐφόρει. δεύτερον δὲ κτείνει Σίνιν 


1 The passage enclosed in square brackets (κἀκεῖ Πασιφάης 
... βορὰν ἔπεμπον) is found in ESA, but is probably an 
interpolation, as Heyne observed. It is merely a repetition 
of what the author has already said (iii. i. 4, 111. 15. 8). 

2 Πασιφάῃ ἐρασθείσῃ E: Πασιφάης ἐρασθείσης SA, Heyne, 
Miiller, Westermann, Bekker, Wagner. 

3 Ποσειδωνείου KH: Ποσειδῶνος Heyne, Miiller, Westermann, 
Bekker, Wagner, following apparently the other MSS. 

4 συνήργησε E: συνήρτησε S: συνήρπασε A. 

> κόρους ES: κούρους A, 8 ἐγένετο Ei: ἐγεννήθη SA. 

7 φρουρουμένην... τὴν ὁδὸν KX: ppovpovuevns... THs ὁδοῦ A. 

8 ἀσθενεῖς A: βριαροὺς S. 

® σιδηρᾶν. In S there follow the words ἣν ἀπὸ τὸν ‘Hoal- 
στου Περιφήτην ἔλαβεν. 


' He is said to have improved the discovery by inventing 
the iron saw in imitation of the teeth in a serpent’s jawbone. 
See Diodorus Siculus, iv. 76. 5; J. Tzetzes, Cheliades, i, 


I22 


ee 


THE LIBRARY, III. xv. 8-xvi. 2 


with a jawbone of a snake which he had found.! 
But the corpse was discovered ; Daedalus was tried in 
the Areopagus, and being condemned fled to Minos. 
And there Pasiphae having fallen in love with the 
bull of Poseidon, Daedalus acted as her accomplice 
by contriving a wooden cow, and he constructed the 
labyrinth, to which the Athenians every year sent 
seven youths and as many damsels to be fodder for 
the Minotaur. 

XVI. Aethra bore to Aegeus a son Theseus, and 
when he was grown up, he pushed away the rock 
and took up the sandals and the sword,” and hastened 
on foot to Athens. And he cleared® the road, which 
had been beset by evildoers. For first in Epidaurus 
he slew Periphetes, son of Hephaestus and Anticlia, 
who was surnamed the Clubman from the club which 
he carried. For being crazy on his legs he carried 
an iron club, with which he despatched the passers- 
by. That club Theseus wrested from him and 
continued to carry about. Second, he killed Sinis, 


494 sqq. Latin writers held that the invention was suggested 
to him by the backbone of a fish. See Ovid, Metamorph. 
vili. 244 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 274; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 
vi. 14; Isidore, Orig., xix. 19. 9. According to these Latin 
writers, the ingenious artist invented the compass also. As 
to Talos or Perdix and his mechanical inventions, see A. B. 
Cook, Zeus, i. 724 sqq. 

2 The tokens of paternity left by his human father Aegeus. 
See above, iii. 15. 7. : 

8. Literally, ‘‘tamed.” As to the adventures cf Theseus 
on his road to Athens, see Bacchylides, xvii. (xviii.) 16 sqq. ; 
Diodorus Siculus, iv. 59; Plutarch, Theseus, 8 sqqg.; Pau- 
sanias, i. 44. 8, 11. 1. 8 δᾳ. ; Scholiast on Lucian, Jupiter 
Tragoedus, 21, pp. 64 sq., ed. H. Rabe; Ovid, Metamorph. 
vii. 433 sqq.; id. Ibis, 407 δηᾳ. ; Hyginus, Fab. 38. 

4 Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. ὅθ. 2; Plutarch, Theseus, 
8. 1; Pausanias, ii. 1. 4; Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 436 sq. ; 


123 


APOLLODORUS 


tov Πολυπήμονος Kat Συλέας τῆς Κορίνθου. οὗτος 
πιτυοκάμπτης ἐπεκαλεῖτο' οἰκῶν γὰρ τὸν Κοριν- 
θίων ἰσθμὸν ἠνάγκαζε τοὺς παριόντας πίτυς κάμ- 
mrovtas ἀνέχεσθαι οἱ δὲ διὰ τὴν ἀσθένειαν οὐκ 
ἠδύναντο, ' καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν δένδρων ἀναρριπτούμενοι 
πανωλέθρως ἀπώλλυντο. τούτῳ τῷ τρόπῳ καὶ 
Θησεὺς Σίνιν ἀπέκτεινεν. 


1 ἠδύναντο. EK and apparently A add κάμπτειν, which was 
rightly rejected as a gloss by Heyne and omitted by Her- 
cher. It is retained by Westermann, Bekker, and Wagner, 
and bracketed by Miiller. 


Hyginus, Fab. 38. Periphetes dwelt in Epidaurus, which 
Theseus had to traverse on his way from Troezen to the Isth- 
mus of Corinth. No writer but Apollodorus mentions that 
this malefactor was weak on his legs; the infirmity suggests 
that he may have used his club as a crutch on which to hobble 
along like a poor cripple, till he was within striking distance 
of his unsuspecting victims, when he surprised them by 
suddenly lunging out and felling them to the ground. 

1 Compare Bacchylides, xvii. (xviii.) 19 sgq.; Diodorus 
Siculus, iv. 59. 3; Plutarch, Thesews, 8. 2; Pausanias, ii. 
1. 4; Scholiast on Lucian, Jupiter Tragoedus, 21 ; Scholiast 
on Pindar, Isthm., Argum. Ὁ. 514, ed. Boeckh; Ovid, 
Metamorph. vii. 440 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 38. Bacchylides, 
the Scholiast on Pindar, and Hyginus call Sinis a son of 
Poseidon (Neptune). The ancients are not agreed as to the 
exact mode in which the ruffian Sinis despatched his victims. 
According to Diodorus, Pausanias, and the Scholiast on 
Pindar he bent two pine-trees to the ground, tied the extre- 
mities of his victim to both trees, and then let the trees go, 
which, springing up and separating, tore the wretch’s body 
in two. This atrocious form of murder was at a later time 
actually employed by the emperor Aurelian in a military exe- 
cution. See Vopiscus, Aurelian, 7. 4. A Ruthenian pirate, 
named Botho, is said to have put men to death in similar 
fashion. See Saxo Grammaticus, Historia Danica, bk, vii. 


124 


THE LIBRARY, III. xvi. 2 


son of Polypemon and Sylea, daughter of Corinthus. 
This Sinis was surnamed the Pine-bender; for in- 
habiting the Isthmus of Corinth he used to force 
the passers-by to keep bending pine-trees ; but they 
were too weak to do so, and being tossed up by the 
trees they perished miserably. In that way also 
Theseus killed Sinis.1 


a 
vol. i. pp. 353 sq., ed. P. E. Miiller. According to Hyginus, 
Sinis, with the help of his victim, dragged down a pine-tree 
to the earth; then, when the man was struggling to keep 
the tree down, Sinis released it, and in the rebound the man 
was tossed up into the air and killed by falling heavily to 
the ground. Apollodorus seems to have contemplated a 
similar mode of death, except that he does not mention the 
co-operation of Sinis in bending the tree tothe earth. Accord- 
ing to the Parian Chronicle (Marmor Parium, lines 35 sq.) 
it was not on his journey from Troezen to Athens that Theseus 
killed Sinis, but at a later time, after he had come to the 
throne and united the whole of Attica under a single govern- 
ment; he then returned to the Isthmus of Corinth, killed 
Sinis, and celebrated the Isthmian games. This tradition 
seems to imply that Theseus held the games as a funeral 
honour paid to the dead man, or more probably as an 
expiation to appease the angry ghost of his victim, This 
implication is confirmed by the Scholiast on Pindar (J.c.), 
who says that according to some pecple Theseus held the 
Isthmian games in honour of Sinis, whom he had killed. 
Plutarch tells us (/.c.) that when Theseus had killed Sinis, 
the daughter of the dead man, by name Perigune, fled and 
hid herself in a bed of asparagus; that she bore a son Mela- 
nippus to Theseus, and that Melanippus had a son Ioxus, 
whose descendants, the Ioxids, both men and women, revered 
and honoured asparagus and would not burn it, because 
asparagus had once sheltered their ancestress. This heredi- 
tary respect shown by all the members of a family or clan for 
a particular species of plant is reminiscent of totemism, 
though it is not necessarily a proof of it. 


125 


Ἢ 
᾿ 
ταν a 
᾿ 
- 
Ξ i? 
ἡ. 
: 
hd - 
‘* Ἂν 
Γ a -~ 5 
- 
Ἕ - 
* ἂ. 


ws a gee, \ δ.,} ὲ j 


Seas κοι. A ..: ; 
' megs 3 ὶ ‘ at 


’ 


“ἢ 
, 
ἱ 
= 
a 
ΠῚ 
> % al 
‘ 
a 
34 
ὩΥ 
al : 
t 
he ‘ 
=P. 
* 
. 
. 
Ἵ 
., 


eo 


APOLLODORI BIBLIOTHECA 
EPITOMA 


EX EPITOMA VATICANA ET FRAGMENTIS 
SABBAITICIS COMPOSITA 1} 


I. Τρίτην ἔκτεινεν ἐν Κρομμυῶνι σῦν τὴν καλου- 
μένην Φαιὰν ἀπὸ τῆς θρεψάσης γραὸς αὐτήν" 
ταύτην τινὲς ᾿Εχίδνης καὶ Τυφῶνος λέγουσι. 
τέταρτον ἔκτεινε Σκείρωνα τὸν Κορίνθιον τοῦ 
Πέλοπος, ὡς δὲ ἔνιοι Ποσειδῶνος. οὗτος ἐν τῇ 
Μεγαρικῇ κατέχων τὰς ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ κληθείσας 
πέτρας Σκειρωνίδας, ἠνάγκαζε τοὺς παριόντας 
νίζειν αὐτοῦ τοὺς πόδας, καὶ νίζοντας εἰς τὸν 
βυθὸν αὐτοὺς ἔρριπτε βορὰν ὑπερμεγέθει χελώνῃ. 
Θησεὺς δὲ ἁρπάσας αὐτὸν τῶν ποδῶν ἔρριψεν 
«εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν;».)Σ πέμπτον ἔκτεινεν ἐν 


‘ The passages derived from the Vatican and Sabbaitic 
manuscripts respectively are indicated in the margin by the 
letters EK (= Vatican Epitome) and § (= Sabbaitic). The 
combination ES signifies that the passage is found in both 
manuscripts, though sometimes with variations, which are 
indicated in the Critical Notes. The point of transition from 
the one manuscript to the other, or from one to both, or 
from both to one, is marked by a vertical line in the Greek 
text. 

* ἀπὸ Wagner: ind EK. 

* els τὴν θάλασσαν added by Wagner, comparing Scholiast 
on Euripides, Hippolytus, 979, ῥίψας εἰς θάλασσαν, and Pau- 
sanias, i. 44. 8, ἀφεθέντα és θάλασσαν. 


128 


EPITOME OF THE LIBRARY OF 
APOLLODORUS 


COMPOUNDED OF THE VATICAN EPITOME 
AND THE SABBAITIC FRAGMENTS 


I. Turrp, he slew at Crommyon the sow that was 
called Phaea after the old woman who bred it ;! that 
sow, some say, was the offspring of Echidna and 
Typhon. Fourth, he slew Sciron, the Corinthian, son 
otf Pelops, or, as some say, of Poseidon. He in the 
Megarian territory held the rocks called after him 
Scironian, and compelled passers-by to wash his feet, 
and in the act of washing he kicked them into the 
deep to be the prey of a huge turtle. But Theseus 
seized him by the feet and threw him into the sea.? 


1 Compare Bacchylides, xvii. (xviii.)23 sg.; Diodorus Siculus, 
iv. 59.4; Plutarch, Theseus, 9; Vausanias, ii. 1. 83; Hyginus, 
Fab. 38, who calls the animal a boar. Plutarch notices a 
rationalistic version of the story, which converted the sow 
Phaea into a female robber of that name. No ancient writer 
but Apollodorus mentions the old woman Phaea who nursed 
the sow, but she appears on vase-paintings which represent 
the slaughter of the sow by Theseus. See Baumeister, Denk- 
mdler des klassischen Altertums, iii. pp. 1787 sq., 1789, fig. 
1873; Hofer, in W. H. Roscher, Lexikon der griech. und 
rom. Mythologie, ii. 1450 sq. 

2 Compare Bacchylides, xvii. (xviii.) 24 sq. ; Diodorus Sicu- 
lus, iv. 59. 4; Plutarch, Theseus, 10; Pausanias, i. 44. 8; 
Scholiast on Euripides, Hippolytus, 979; Scholiast on Lucian, 
Jupiter Tragoedus, 21, p. 65, ed. H. Rabe ; Ovid, Metamorph. 


129 
VOL. II. K 


APOLLODORUS 


*EXevoive Kepxvova τὸν Bpayxov Kal ᾿Αργιόπης 
νύμφης. οὗτος ἠνάγκαξε τοὺς παριόντας παλαίειν 
καὶ παλαίων ἀνήρει" Θησεὺς δὲ αὐτὸν μετέωρον 
ἀράμενος ἤρραξεν εἰς γῆν. ἕκτον ἀπέκτεινε Δαμά- 
στην, ὃν ἔνιοι ἸΠολυπήμονα λέγουσιν. οὗτος τὴν 


vii. 448 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 38; Lactantius Placidus, on 
Statius, Theb. i. 333; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 52, 117 (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 167 ; Second Vatican Mythographer, 127). Curiously 
enough, the Second Vatican Mythographer attributes the 
despatching of Sciron, notto Theseus, but to theartist Daedalus. 
The Megarians, as we learn from Plutarch, indignantly 
denied the defamatory reports current as to the character 
and pursuits of their neighbour Sciron, whom they represented 
as a most respectable man, the foe of robbers, the friend of 
the virtuous, and connected ‘by marriage with families of the 
highest quality ; ; but their efforts to whitewash the blackguard 
appear to have been attended with little success. The 
Scironian Rocks, to which Sciron was supposed to have given 
his name, are a line of lofty cliffs rising sheer from the sea ; 
a narrow, crumbling ledge about half way up their face 
afforded a perilous foothold, from which the adventurous 
traveller looked down with horror on the foam of the 
‘breakers far below. The dangers of the path were obviated 
about the middle of the nineteenth century by the construc- 
tion of a road and railway along the coast. See my note on 
Pausanias, i. 44. 6 (vol. 11. pp. 546 sqq.). 

1 Compare Bacchylides, xvii. (xviii. )26 sq.; Diodorus Siculus, 
iv. 59.5; Plutarch, Thesews, 11; Pausanias, i. 39. 3; Scho- 
liast on Lucian, Jupiter T'ragoedus, 21, p. 65, ed. H. Rabe ; 
Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 439; Hyginus, Fab. 38, who calls 
Cereyon a son of Vulcan (Hephaestus). The place asso- 
ciated with the story, known as the wrestling-school of 
Cercyon, was near Eleusis, on the road to Megara (Pausanias, 
δ}. oe he Scholiast on Lucian (/.c.) says that it was near 
Kleutherae, but he is probably in error; for if the place were 
near Eleutherae, it must have been on ‘the road from Eleusis 
to Thebes, which is not the road that Theseus would take on 
his way from the Isthmus of Corinth to Athens. 


130 


EPITOME, 1. 3-4 


Fifth, in Eleusis he slew Cercyon, son of Branchus and 
anymph Argiope. This Cercyon compelled passers-by 
to wrestle, and in wrestling killed them. But Theseus 
lifted him up on high and dashed him to the ground.! 
Sixth, he slew Damastes, whom some call Polypemon.? 


2 More commonly known as Procrustes. See Bacchylides, 
xvii. (xviii.) 27 sqg.; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 59. 5; Plutarch, 
Theseus, 11; Pausanias, i. 38. 5; Scholiast on Euripides, 
Hippolytus, 977; Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 438; Hyginus, 
Fab. 38. Ancient authorities are not agreed as to the name 
of this malefactor. Apollodorus and Plutarch call him 
Damastes ; but Apollodorus says that some people called him 
Polypemon, and this latter name is supported by Pausanias, 
who adds that he was surnamed Procrustes. Ovid in two 
passages (Metam. vii. 438, Heroides, ii. 69) calls him simply 
Procrustes, but in a third passage (Ibis, 407) he seems to 
speak of him as the son of Polypemon. The Scholiast on 
Kuripides (/.c.) wrongly names him Sinis. The reference of 
Bacchylides to him is difficult of interpretation. Jebb trans- 
lates the passage: ‘‘The mighty hammer of Polypemon has 
dropt from the hand of the Maimer [Prokoptes], who has met 
with a stronger than himself.” Here Jebb understands Pro- 
koptes to be another name for Procrustes, who received the 
hammer and learned the use of it from Polypemon, his pre- 
decessor, perhaps his father. But other translations and 
explanations have been proposed. See the note in Jebb’s 
Appendix, pp. 490 sqg.; W. H. Roscher, Lexikon der griech. 
und rom. Mythoiogie, iii. 2683, 2687 sgq. The hammer in 
question was the instrument with which Procrustes operated 
on the short nen, beating them out till they fitted the long 
bed, as we learn from the Scholiast on Euripides as well as 
from Apollodorus ; a hand-saw was probably the instrument 
with which he curtailed the length of the tall men. Accord- 
ing to Apollodorus, with whom Hyginus agrees, Procrustes 
had two beds for the accommodation of his guests, a long one 
for the short men, and a short one for the long men. But 
according to Diodorus Siculus, with whom the Scholiast on 
Euripides agrees, he had only one bed for all comers, and ad- 
justed his visitors to it with the hammer or the hand-saw 
according to circumstances. 


ES 5 


APOLLODORUS 


οἴκησιν ἔχων παρ᾽ ὁδὸν ἐστόρεσε δύο κλίνας, μίαν 
μὲν μικράν, ἑτέραν δὲ μεγάλην, καὶ τοὺς παριόντας 
ἐπὶ ξένια! καλῶν τοὺς μὲν βραχεῖς, ἐπὶ τῆς 
μεγάλης κατακλίνων σφύραις ἔ ἔτυπτεν, ἵν᾽ ἐξισω- 
θῶσι" τῇ κλίνῃ, τοὺς δὲ μεγάλους ἐπὶ τῆς μικρᾶς, 
καὶ τὰ ὑπερέχοντα τοῦ σώματος ἀπέπριξε. 
Καθάρας οὖν Θησεὺς τὴν ὁδὸν ἧκεν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας." 
| Μήδεια δὲ Αἰγεῖ τότε συνοικοῦσα" ἐπεβούλευσεν 
αὐτῷ, καὶ πείθει τὸν Αἰγέα φυλάττεσθαι ὡς ἐπί- 
βουλον αὐτῷ. Αἰγεὺς δὲ τὸν ἔδεον ἀγνοῶν παῖδα, 
δείσας ἔπεμψεν ἐπὶ tov Μαραθώνιον ταῦρον 
ὡς δὲ ἀνεῖλεν αὐτόν, παρὰ Μηδείας λαβὼν αὐθ΄- 
μερον ὃ προσήνεγκεν αὐτῷ φάρμακον. ὁ δὲ μέλ- 
λοντος αὐτῷ τοῦ ποτοῦ προσφέρεσθαι ἐδωρήσατο 
τῷ πατρὶ τὸ ξίφος, ὅπερ ἐπιγνοὺς Αἰγεὺς '᾿ τὴν 
κύλικα ἐξέρριψε τῶν χειρῶν αὐτοῦ. Θησεὺς δὲ 


1 ξένια Wagner: ξενίαν ἢ. Compare iii. 8. 1. 

2 ἐξισωθῶσι Wagner: ἐξισωθῇ K. 

3 τῇ κλίνῃ Frazer: ταῖς κλίναις Hh, Wagner. 

4 καθάρας οὖν Θησεὺς thy ὁδὸν ἧκεν eis ᾿Αθήνας E. The 
whole opening passage, down to and inclusive of this 
sentence, is wanting in 8, which substitutes the following : 
ἔκτεινε δὲ πάντας καὶ κατετροπώσατο τοὺς ἀντιπράττοντας 
ἥρωας καὶ πάντας τοὺς ληστρικὸν μετιόντας βίον. “«Απὰὶ he 
slew all and put to flight the heroes that withstood him 
and all that pursued a robber life.” But the verb κατα- 
τροπόομαι is late, the use of ἥρως is suspicious, and the 
whole sentence is probably an independent concoction of 
the abbreviator. 

ὅ συνοικοῦσα EK: συνοικοῦσα ᾿Αθήναις S. 

ὃ αὐτῷ Frazer: αὐτοῦ ES, Wagner: αὐτόν Biicheler. For 
the dative, compare Plato, Symposiwn, p. 203 D, ἐπίβουλός 
ἐστι τοῖς καλοῖς. 

1 δείσας EK: δείσας αὐτὸν ὡς βριαρὸν ὄντα S. The rare epic 
adjective Bpiapds, ‘‘ strong,” seems to be rather a favourite 
with 8S, for he goes out of his way to apply it absurdly to 
the crazy legs of Periphetes. See Critical Note on iii, 10. 1. 


132 


EPITOME, τ. 4-6 


He had his dwelling beside the road, and made up 
two beds, one small and the other big; and offering 
hospitality to the passers-by, he laid the short 
men on the big bed and hammered them, to make 
them fit the bed; but the tall men he laid on the 
little bed and sawed off the portions of the body that 
projected beyond it. 

So, having cleared the road, Theseus came to 
Athens. But Medea, being then wedded to Aegeus, 
plotted against him! and persuaded Aegeus to beware 
of him as a traitor. And Aegeus, not knowing his 
own son, was afraid and sent him against the Mara- 
thonian bull. .And when Theseus had killed it, 
Aegeus presented to him a poison which he had 
received the selfsame day from Medea. But just as 
the draught was about to be administered to him, 
he gave his father the sword, and on recognizing it 
Aegeus dashed the cup from his hands.2~ And when 


1 That Theseus was sent against the Marathonian bull at 
the instigation of Medea is affirmed also by the First Vatican 
Mythographer. See Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 18, Fab. 48. Compare Plutarch, 
Theseus, 14; Pausanias, i. 27. 10; Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 
433 sq. As to Medea at Athens, see above, i. 9. 28. 

2 Compare Plutarch, Theseus, 12; Scholiast on Homer, 
Il. xi. 741; Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 404-424. According to 
Ovid, the poison by which Medea attempted the life of 
Theseus was aconite, which she had brought with her from 
Scythia. The incident seems to have been narrated by 
Sophocles in his tragedy Aegeus. See The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 15 sq. 


8 ἔπεμψεν ἐπὶ τὸν Μαραθώνιον ταῦρον i: ἐπὶ τὸν Μαραθώνιον 
ἔπεμψε ταῦρον ἀναλωθῆναι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ &, 
9. αὐθήμερον S: αὐθημερινὸν K. 


10 ἐπιγνοὺς Αἰγεὺς E: Αἰγεὺς ἐπιγνοὺς 8. 


133 


7 
1D) 


ES 8 


‘“APOLLODORUS 


ἀναγνωρισθεὶς τῷ πατρὶ Kal THY ἐπιβουλὴν μαθὼν 
ἐξέβαλε τὴν Μήδειαν. 

Καὶ εἰς τὸν τρίτον δασμὸν τῷ Μινωταύρῳ συγ- 
καταλέγεται 1 ὡς δέ τινες λέγουσιν, ἑκὼν ἑαυτὸν 
ἔδωκεν. ἐχούσης δὲ τῆς νεὼς μέλαν ἱστίον Αὐγεὺς 
τῷ παιδὶ ἐνετείλατο, ἐὰν ὑποστρέφῃ ζῶν, λευκοῖς 
πετάσαι τὴν ναῦν ἱστίοις. ὡς δὲ ἧκεν εἰς Κρήτην," 
᾿Αριάδνη θυγάτηρ Μίνωος ἐρωτικῶς διατεθεῖσα 
πρὸς αὐτὸν ὃ συμπράσσειν' ἐπαγγέλλεται, ἐὰν 
ὁμολογήσῃ γυναῖκα αὐτὴν ἕξειν ἀπαγαγὼν εἰς 
᾿Αθήνας. ὁμολογήσαντος δὲ σὺν ὅρκοις Θησέως 
δεῖται Δαιδάλου μηνῦσαι τοῦ λαβυρίνθου τὴν 
ἔξοδον. ὑποθεμένου δὲ ἐκείνου, λίνον εἰσιόντι 
Θησεῖ δίδωσι" τοῦτο ἐξάψας Θησεὺς τῆς θύρας ὃ 
ἐφελκόμενος εἰσήει. καταλαβὼν δὲ Μινώταυρον 


1 συγκαταλέγεται EK: συγκαταλέγει βοράν S. 
2 ὡς δὲ ἧκεν εἰς Κρήτην EK: ἐξέπλει δ᾽ εἰς Κρήτην καὶ ἧκεν S. 

ὃ Αριάδνη θυγάτηρ Μίνωος ἐρωτικῶς διατεθεῖσα πρὸς αὐτὸν E: 
᾿Αριάδνη γοῦν ἣ Μίνωος θυγάτηρ ἐρωτικῶς τῷ Θησεῖ διατεθεῖσα Ὁ. 

συμπράσσειν S: συμπεράσειν K. 

> ἐπαγγέλλεται Εἰ : ἐπαγγέλλεται πρὸς τὴν Μινωταύρου εἰσέ- 
λευσιν λαβυρίνθου S. 

ὃ Θησεὺς τῆς θύρας KL: τῆς θύρας Θησεὺς S. 


1 Compare Plutarch, T'hesews, 17; Eustathius, on Homer, 
Od. xi. 320, p. 1688; Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 322, and on 
Il. xviii. 590; Hyginus, Fab. 41; Lactantius Placidus, on 
Statius, Achill. 192. The usual tradition seems to have been 
that he volunteered for the dangerous service ; but a Scholiast 
on Homer (Jl. xviii. 590) speaks as if the lot had fallen on 
him with the other victims. According to Hellanicus, cited 
by Plutarch (l.c.), the victims were not chesen by lot, but 
Minos came to Athens and picked them for himself, and on 
this particular occasion Theseus was the first on whom his 
choice fell. 

2 As to the black and white sails, see Diodorus Siculus, iv. 


134 


EPITOME, 1. 6-9 


Theseus was thus made known to his father and 
informed of the plot, he expelled Medea. 

And he was numbered among those who were to 
be sent as the third tribute to the Minotaur ; or, as 
some affirm, he offered himself voluntarily. And as 
the ship had a black sail, Aegeus charged his son, 
if he returned alive, to spread white sails on the 
ship.2. And when he came to Crete, Ariadne, 
daughter of Minos, being amorously disposed to 
him, offered to help him if he would agree to 
carry her away to Athens and have her to wife. 
Theseus having agreed on oath to do so, she besought 
Daedalus to disclose the way out of the labyrinth. 
And at his suggestion she gave Theseus a clue when 
he went in; Theseus fastened it to the door, and, 
drawing it after him, entered in.? And having found 


61. 4; Plutarch, Theseus, 17 and 22; Pausanias, i. 22. 5; 
Catullus, lxiv. 215-245; Hyginus, Fab. 41 and 43; Servius, 
on Virgil, Aen. iii. 74. According to Simonides, quoted by 
Plutarch (J.c.), the saii that was to be the sign of safety was 
not white but scarlet, which, by contrast with the blue sea, 
would have caught the eye almost as easily as a white sail at 
a great distance. 

3 Compare Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 322, and on J1. xviii. 
590; Eustathius, on Homer, Od. xi. 320, p. 1688; Diodorus 
Siculus, iv. 61. 4; Plutarch, Theseus, 19; Hyginus, Fab. 42; 
Servius, on Virgil, Aen. vi. 14, and on Georg. i. 222; Lac- 
tantius Placidus, on Statius, Z'heb. xii. 676; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 16, 116 sq. 
(First Vatican Mythographer, 43; Second Vatican Mitho- 
grapher, 124). The clearest description of the clue, with 
which the amorous Ariadne furnished Theseus, is given by 
the Scholiasts and Eustathius on Homer (ll.cc.). From them 
we learn that it was a ball of thread which Ariadne had 
begged of Daedalus for the use of her lover. He was to fasten 
one end of the thread to the lintel of the door on entering 
into the labyrinth, and holding the ball in his hand to un- 
wind the skein while he penetrated deeper and deeper into 


135 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐν ἐσχάτῳ μέρει τοῦ λαβυρίνθου παίων πυγμαῖς 
ἀπέκτεινεν," ἐφελκόμενος δὲ τὸ λίνον πάλιν ἐξήει. 
καὶ διὰ νυκτὸς μετὰ ᾿Αριάδνης καὶ τῶν παίδων 
εἰς Νάξον ἀφικνεῖται. ἔνθα Διόνυσος ἐρασθεὶς 
᾿Αριάδνης ἥρπασε, καὶ κομίσας εἰς Λῆμνον ἐ ἐμίγη. 

S τ καὶ γεννᾷ Θόαντα Στάφυλον Οἰνοπίωνα καὶ 
Πεπάρηθον." 

E10 | Λυπούμενος δὲ Θησεὺς ἐ ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αριάδνῃ καταπλέων 
ἐπελάθετο πετάσαι τὴν ναῦν λευκοῖς ἱστίοις. 
Αἰγεὺς δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως τὴν ναῦν ἰδὼν 
ἔχουσαν μέλαν ἱστίον, Θησέα νομίσας ἀπολω- 

ES 11 λέναε ῥίψας ἑαυτὸν μετήλλαξε. Θησεὺς δὲ παρέ- 

1 


> , | εἰ , > 
ἀπέκτεινεν Ki: ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτόν § 
2 Πεπάρηθον Biicheler: πάρηθον S. 


the maze, till he found the Minotaur asleep in the inmost 
recess ; then he was to catch the monster by the hair and 
sacrifice him to Poseidon; after which he was to retrace his 
steps, gathering up the thread behind him as he went. 
According to the Scholiast on the Odyssey (l.c.), the story 
was told by Pherecydes, whom later authors may have 
copied. 

1 That is, the boys and girls whom he had rescued from 
the Minotaur. 

2 Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 61. 5; Plutarch, Theseus, 
20; Pausanias, i. 20. 3, x. 29. 4; Scholiast on Apollonius 
Rhodius, Argon. iii. 997; Scholiast on Theocritus, ii. 45; 
Catullus, lxiv. 116 sqq.; Ovid, Heroides, x. ; td. Ars amat. 
i. 527 sqq.; td. Metamorph. viii. 174.sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 48 ; 
Servius, on Virgil, Georg. i. 222; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 116 sq. (Second Vatican 
Mythographer, 124). Homer’s account of the fate of Ariadne 
is different. He says (Od. xi. 321-325) that when Theseus 
was carrying off Ariadne from Crete to Athens she was 
slain by Artemis in the island of Dia at the instigation of 
Dionysus. Later writers, such as Diodorus Siculus, identified 
Dia with Naxos, but it is rather ‘‘the little island, now 


136 


EPITOME, 1. 9-11 


the Minotaur in the last part of the labyrinth, he 
killed him by smiting him with his fists; and drawing 
the clue after him made his way out again. And by 
night he arrived with Ariadne and the children! at 
Naxos. There Dionysus fell in love with Ariadne 
and carried her off;? and having brought her to 
Lemnos he enjoyed her, and begat Thoas, Staphylus, 
Oenopion, and Peparethus.? 

In his grief on account of Ariadne, Theseus forgot 
to spread white sails on his ship when he stood for 
port; and Aegeus, seeing from the acropolis the ship 
with a black sail, supposed that Theseus had perished; 
so he cast himself down and died.* But Theseus 


Standia, just off Heraclaion, on the north coast of Crete, 
Theseus would pass the island in sailing for Athens” (W. W. 
Merry on Homer, Od. xi. 322). Apollodorus seems to be the 
only extant ancient author who mentions that Dionysus 
carried off Ariadne from Naxos to Lemnos and had inter- 
course with her there. 

3 Compare Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. 11]. 
997. Others said that Ariadne bore Staphylus and Oenopion 
to Theseus (Plutarch, T’hesews, 20). 

* Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 61. 6 sq.; Plutarch, The- 
seus, 22 ; Pausanias, i. 22.5; Hyginus, Fab. 43; Servius, on 
Virgil, Aen. iii. 74; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 117 (Second Vatican Mythographer, 
125). The three Latin writers say that Aegeus threw himself 
into the sea, which was hence called the Aegean after him. 
The Greek writers say that he cast himself down from the 
rock of the acropolis. Pausanius describes the exact point 
from which he fell, to wit the lofty bastion at the western 
end of the acropolis, on which in after ages the elegant little 
temple of Wingless Victory stood and still stands. It com- 
mands a wonderful view over the ports of Athens and away 
across the sea to Aegina and the coast of Peloponnese, looming 
clear and blue through the diaphanous Attic air in the far 
distance. A better look-out the old man could not have 
chosen from which to watch, with straining eyes, for the 
white or scarlet sail of his returning son. 


137 


APOLLODORUS 


S λαβε' τὴν ᾿Αθηναίων δυναστείαν, «καὶ; 5 τοὺς 
μὲν Πάλλαντος παῖδας πεντήκοντα τὸν ἀριθμὸν 
ἀπέκτεινεν" ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ὅσοι, ἀντᾶραι ἤθελον 
map αὐτοῦ ἀπεκτάνθησαν, καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἅπασαν 
ἔσχε μόνος. 

E12 [Ὅτι Mivas, αἰσθόμενος, τοῦ φεύγειν τοὺς μετὰ 
Θησέως, Δαίδαλον αἴτιον ἐν τῷ λαβυρίνθῳ μετὰ 
τοῦ παιδὸς ᾿ Ικάρου καθεῖρξεν, ὃς ἐγεγέννητο αὐτῷ 
ἐκ δούλης Μίψωος Ναυκράτης. ὁ δὲ πτερὰ κατα- 
σκευάσας ἑαυτῷ καὶ τῷ παιδὶ ἀναπτάντι ἐνετεί- 
λατο μήτε, εἰς ὕψος πέτεσθαι, μὴ τακείσης τῆς 
κόλλης ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου αἱ πτέρυγες λυθῶσι, μήτε 
ἐγγὺς θαλάσσης, ἵνα μὴ τὰ πτερὰ ὑπὸ τῆς νοτί- 

13 δος λυθῇ. Ἴκαρος δὲ ἀμελήσας τῶν τοῦ πατρὸς 
ἐντολῶν ψυχαγωγούμενος ἀεὶ μετέωρος ἐφέρετο" 
τακείσης δὲ τῆς κόλλης πεσὼν εἰς τὴν ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου 
κληθεῖσαν ᾿Ικαρίαν θάλασσαν ἀπέθανε. <Aat- 


12 Zenobius, Cent. iv. 92:3 Δαίδαλον γὰρ σὺν Ἰκάρῳ 
τῷ παιδὶ καθεῖρξε Μίνως ἐν τῷ λαβυρίνθῳ, δι᾿ ὅπερ εἰργά- 
σατο μύσος ἐπὶ τῷ τῆς Πασιφάης ἔρωτι τῷ πρὸς τὸν 
ταῦρον. 6 δὲ πτερὰ κατασκευάσας ἑαυτῷ καὶ τῷ παιδὲ 
5.2 A / ΝΟ , Ν \ ? , 
ἐξῆλθε τοῦ λαβυρίνθου καὶ ἀναπτάμενος ἔφυγε σὺν Ἰκάρῳ. 

13 ᾿Ικάρου μὲν οὖν μετεωρότερον φερομένου καὶ τῆς κόλλης 
ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου τακείσης, αἱ πτέρυγες διελύθησαν. καὶ 
οὗτος μὲν εἰς τὸ ἀπ’ ἐκείνου κληθὲν ᾿Ικάριον πέλαγος κατα- 

1 Θησεὺς δὲ παρέλαϑε E: Θησεὺς παραλαβὼν ὃ. 
* καὶ τοὺς μὲν Frazer: τοὺς μὲν S, Wagner. 


3 The version of Zenobius, which is probably based on 
that of Apollodorus, is here printed for comparison. 


1 Pallas was the brother of Aegeus (see above, iti. 15, 5) ; 
hence his fifty sons were cousins to Theseus. So long as 
Aegeus was childless, his nephews hoped to succeed to the 


138 


EPITOME, 1. 11-13 


succeeded to the sovereignty of Athens, and killed 
the sons of Pallas, fifty in number;! likewise all who 
would oppose him were killed by him, and he got 
the whole government to himself. 

On being apprized of the flight of Theseus and 
his company, Minos shut up the guilty Daedalus in 
the labyrinth, along with his son Icarus, who had 
been borne to Daedalus by Naucrate, a female slave of 
Minos. But Daedalus constructed wings for himself 
and his son, and enjoined his son, when he took to 
flight, neither to fly high, lest the glue should melt in 
the sun and the wings should drop off, nor to fly near 
the sea, lest the pinions should be detached by the 
damp. But the infatuated Icarus, disregarding his 
father’s injunctions, soared ever higher, till, the glue 
melting, he fell into the sea called after him Icarian, 
and perished.? But Daedalus made his way safely to 


throne ; but when Theseus appeared from Troezen, claiming 
to be the king’s son and his heir apparent, they were disap- 
pointed and objected to his succession, on the ground that he 
was a stranger and a foreigner. Accordingly, when Theseus 
succeeded to the crown, Pallas and his fifty sons rebelled 
against him, but were defeated and slain. See Plutarch, 
Theseus, 3 and 13; Pausanias, i. 22. 2, i. 28. 10; Scholiast on 
Euripides, Hippolytus, 35, who quotes from Philochorus a 
passage about the rebellion. In order to be purified from the 
guilt incurred by killing his cousins, Theseus went into banish- 
ment for a year along with his wife Phaedra. The place of 
their exile was Troezen, where Theseus had been born; and 
it was there that Phaedra saw and conceived a fatal passion 
for her stepson Hippolytus, and laid the plot of death. See 
Euripides, Hippolytus, 34 sqq.; Pausanias, i. 22.2. Accord- 
ing to a different tradition, Theseus was tried for murder 
before the court of the Delphinium at Athens, and was 
acquitted on the plea of justifiable homicide (Pausanias, i. 
28. 10). ὃ 

2 Compare Strabo, xiv. 1. 19, p. 639; Lucian, Gallus, 28 ; 
Arrian, Anabasis, vii. 20.5 ; Zenobius, Cent. iv. 92; J. 


139 


APOLLODORUS 


δαλος δὲ διασώξεται εἰς Κάμικον τῆς Σικελίας.» 
14 Δαίδαλον δὲ ἐδίωκε Μίνως, καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην 
χώραν ἐρευνῶν ἐκόμιξε κόχλον, καὶ πολὺν ἐπηγ- 
γέλλετο δώσειν μισθὸν τῷ διὰ τοῦ κοχλίου λίνον 
διείραντι," διὰ τούτου νομίζων εὑρήσειν Δαίδαλον. 
ἐλθὼν δὲ εἰς Κάμικον τῆς Σικελίας παρὰ ἹΚώκαλον, 
παρ᾽ ᾧ Δαίδαλος ἐκρύπτετο, δείκνυσι τὸν κοχλίαν. 
«ς δὲ \ b] / ὃ / = \ A ὃ / 
ὁ ὃὲ λαβὼν ἐπηγγέλλετο ἐείρειν “ καὶ Δαιδάλῳ 
’ c 
15 δίδωσιν: ὁ δὲ ἐξάψας μύρμηκος λίνον καὶ τρήσας 
τὸν κοχλίαν εἴασε Sv αὐτοῦ διελθεῖν. λαβὼν δὲ 
Μίνως τὸ λίνον διειρμένον 4 ἤσθετο ὄντα παρ᾽ 
> / / \ > / > / ’ 
ἐκείνῳ Δαίδαλον, καὶ εὐθέως ἀπήτει. Κώκαλος 
Ψ 
δὲ ὑποσχόμενος ἐκδώσειν ἐξένισεν αὐτόν: ὁ δὲ 


14 πίπτει, Δαίδαλος δὲ διασώζεται. ὃ Μίνως οὖν ἐδίωκε 
Δαίδαλον καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην χώραν ἐρευνῶν ἐκόμιζε κόχλον, 
καὶ πολὺν ὑπισχνεῖτο δοῦναι μισθὸν τῷ διὰ τοῦ κοχλίου 
λίνον διείραντι, διὰ τούτου νομίζων εὑρήσειν Δαίδαλον. 
ἐλθὼν δὲ εἰς Κώκαλον, παρ᾽ ᾧ Δαίδαλος ἐκρύπτετο, 
δείκνυσι τὸν κοχλίαν. 6 δὲ λαβὼν ἐπηγγέλλετο διείρειν 

15 καὶ Δαιδάλῳ δίδωσιν: ὁ δὲ ἐξάψας μύρμηκος λίνον καὶ 
τρήσας τὸν κοχλίαν εἴασε bv αὐτοῦ διελθεῖν. λαβὼν δὲ 
Μώνως τὸν λίνον διειρμένον yobero εἶναι παρ᾽ ἐκείνῳ τὸν 
Δαίδαλον, καὶ εὐθέως ἀπήτει: Κώκαλος δὲ ὑποσχόμενος 
δώσειν ἐξένισεν αὐτόν. ὁ δὲ λουσάμενος ὑπὸ τῶν Κωκάλου 
θυγατέρων ἀνῃρέθη ζέουσαν πίσσαν ἐπιχεαμένων αὐτῷ. 


1 Δαίδαλος δὲ διασώζεται εἰς Κάμικον τῆς Σικελίας inserted b 
Wagner from a comparison with Zenobius, Cent. iv, 92 and 
Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 506, Ὁ Δαίδαλος δ᾽ εἰς Κάμινον (stc) 
σώζεται Σικελίας. 

5 διείραντι Valckenar: διείρξαντι E: διείξαντε Zenobius. 

ὃ διείρειν Valckenar: διείρξειν KE: διέρξειν Zenobius. 

* διειρμένον Valckenar: διειργμένον EB: διειργασμένον Zeno- 
bius. 


a 


140 


EPITOME, 1. 13-15 


Camicus in Sicily. And Minos pursued Daedalus, and 
in every country that he searched he carried a spiral 
shell and promised to give a great reward to him who 
should pass a thread through the shell, believing that 
by that means he should discover Daedalus, And 
having come to Camicus in Sicily, to the court of 
Cocalus, with whom Daedalus was concealed, he 
showed the spiral shell. Cocalus took it, and promised 
to thread it, and gave it to Daedalus; and Daedalus 
fastened a thread to an ant, and, having bored a hole 
in the spiral shell, allowed the ant to pass through it. 
But when Minos found the thread passed through the 
shell, he perceived that Daedalus was with Cocalus, 
and at once demanded his surrender.! Cocalus prom- 
ised to surrender him, and made an entertainment for 


Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 498 sqq.; Severus, Narr. 5, in Wester- 
mann’s Mythographi Graeci, Appendix Narrationum, 82, p. 
373; Scholiast on Homer, JI. ii. 145; Ovid, Metamorph. viii. 
183-235 ; Hyginus, Fab. 40; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 16 and 117 (First Vatican 
Mythographer, 43, Second Vatican Mythographer, 125). 
According to one account, Daedalus landed from his flight at 
Cumae, where he dedicated his wings to Apollo. See Virgil, 
Aen. vi. 14 sqq.; Juvenal, iii. 25. The myth of the flight of 
Daedalus and Icarus is rationalized by Diodorus Siculus (iv. 
77. 5 sq.) and Pausanias (ix. 1]. 4 sq.). According to 
Diodorus, the two were provided by Pasiphae with a ship 
in which they escaped, but in landing on a certain island 
Icarus fell into the sea and was drowned. According to 
Pausanias, father and son sailed in separate ships, scudding 
before the wind with sails, which Daedalus had just invented 
and spread for the first time to the sea breeze. The only 
writer besides Apollodorus who mentions the name of Icarus’s 
mother is Tzetzes ; he agrees with Apollodorus, whom he may 
have copied, in describing her as a slave woman named 
Naucrate. 

1 The story of the quaint device by which Minos detected 
Daedalus is repeated by Zenobius (Cent. iv. 92), who probably 
copied Apollodorus. Seeabove, pp. 138, 140. The device was 


141 


ES 16 


S 


APOLLODORUS 


/ Ὁ Ν a / / ΨΥ 
λουσάμενος ὑπὸ τῶν Κωκάλου θυγατέρων ἔκλυτος 
ἐγένετο 'ἱ ὡς δὲ ἔνιοί φασι, ἕεστῷ καταχυθεὶς 
«ὕδατι; δ μετήλλαξεν. 

/ δὶ ‘72 / «ς lal 

| Συστρατευσάμενος δὲ ἐπὶ ᾿Αμαζόνας Ηρακλεῖ 
ἥρπασεν ὃ ᾿Ι᾿Αντιόπην, ὡς δέ τινες Μελανίππην, 
> ἊΝ S35 , ΦΩ͂Σ > 9 
ἐιμωνίδης δὲ Immodvtny.t διὸ ἐστράτευσαν ἐπ 


1 ἔκλυτος ἐγένετο. These words can hardly be right. The 
required sense is given by Zenobius, ἀνῃρέθη. Perhaps we 
should read ἐν λουτροῖς ἀπέθανεν or ἀπώλετο. Compare Dio- 
dorus Siculus, iv. 79. 2, κατὰ τὸν λουτρῶνα ὠλίσθηκε καὶ πεσὼν 
εἰς τὸ θερμὸν ὕδωρ ἐτελεύτησε. But see Exegetical Note. - 

2 ζεστῷ καταχυθεὶς ὕδατι Wagner (comparing Scholiast 
on Homer, J/. li, 145, ἀποθνήσκει καταχυθέντος αὐτοῦ ζεστοῦ 
vdaros): ξεστῷ καταλυθεὶς Εἰ. 

3 συστρατευσάμενος δὲ ἐπὶ ᾿Αμαζόνας Ἡρακλεῖ ἥρπασεν S: ὅτι 
Θησεὺς Ἡρακλεῖ συστρατευσάμενος ἐπὶ ᾿Αμαζόνας ἥρπασε Εἰ. ᾿ 

1 ᾿Αντιόπην. .. Ἱππολύτην Ὁ : Γλαύκην τὴν καὶ Μελανίππην E. 


mentioned by Sophocles in a lost play, The Camicians, in 
which he dealt with the residence of Daedalus at the court 
of Cocalus in Sicily, See Athenaeus, iii. 32, p. 86 ον; The 
Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, ii. 3 sqgq. 

1 Compare Zenobius, Cent. iv. 92; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 79. 
2; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 508 sq. ; Scholiast on Homer, 1]. 
ii. 145; Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iv. 59 (95); Ovid, Ibis, 
289 sq., with the Scholia. The account of Zenobius agrees 
closely with that of Apollodorus, except that he makes the 
daughters of Cocalus pour boiling pitch instead of boiling 
water on the head of their royal guest. The other authorities 
speak of boiling water. The Scholiast on Pindar informs us 
that the ever ingenious Daedalus persuaded the princesses to 
lead a pipe through the roof, which discharged a stream of 
boiling water on Minos while he was disporting himself in the 
bath. Other writers mention the agency of the daughters of 
Cocalus in the murder of Minos, without describing the mode 
of his taking off. See Pausanias, vii. 4. 6; Conon, Narrat. 
25; Hyginus, Fab. 44. Herodotus contents himself with 
saying (vii. 169 sq.) that Minos died a violent death at Cami- 
cus in Sicily, whither he had gone in search of Daedalus. 
The Greek expression which I have translated ‘* was undone ” 
(ἔκλυτος ἐγένετο) is peculiar, Ifthe text is sound (see Critical 


142 


EPITOME, 1. 15-16 


Minos; but after his bath Minos was undone by the 
daughters of Cocalus; some say, however, that he 
died through being drenched with boiling water.t 
Theseus joined Hercules in his expedition against 
the Amazons and carried off Antiope, or, as some say, 
Melanippe; but Simonides calls her Hippolyte.? 


Note), the words must be equivalent to ἐξελύθη, ‘‘ was re- 
laxed, unstrung, or unnerved.” Compare Aristotle, Problem 
i. p. 862 Ὁ 2 sq., ed. Bekker, κατεψυγμένου παντὸς τοῦ σώματος 
καὶ ἐκλελυμένου πρὸς τοὺς πόνους. Aristotle also uses the 
adjective ἔκλυτος to express a supple, nerveless, or effeminate 
motion of the hands (Physiog. 3, p. 808a 14); and he says 
that tame elephants were trained to strike wild elephants, 
ἕως ἂν ἐκλύσωσιν (αὐτούΞ5), ““ until they relax or weaken them” 
(Hist. anim. ix. 1, Ὁ. 610 a 27, ed Bekker). Isocrates speaks 
of a mob (ὄχλος) πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον ἐκλελυμένος (Or. iv. 150). 
The verb éxAvew is used in the sense of making an end of 
something troublesome or burdensome (Sophocles, Oedipus 
Tyrannus, 35 sq. with Jebb’s note); from which it might 
perhaps be extended to persons regarded as troublesome or 
burdensome. We may compare the parallel uses of the Latin 
dissolvere, as applied both to things (Horace, Odes, i. 9. 5, 
dissolve frigus) aud to persons (Sallust, Jugurtha, 17, plerosque 
senectus dissolvit), 

* As to Theseus and the Amazons, see Diodorus Siculus, iv. 
28; Plutarch, Theseus, 26-28 ; Pausanias, i. 2. 1, i. 15. 2, i. 
4]. 7, i1. 32. 9, νυ. 11. 4 and 7; Zenobius, Cent. v. 33. The 
invasion of Attica by the Amazons in the time of Theseus is 
repeatedly referred to by Isocrates (Or. iv. 68 and 70, vi. 42, 
vii. 75, xii. 193). The Amazon whom Theseus married, and 
by whom he had Hippolytus, is commonly called Antiope 
(Plutarch, Thesews, 26, 28; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 28; Pau- 
sanias, 1. 2.1, 1.41.7; Seneca, Hippolytus, 927 sqq.; Hyginus, 
Fab. 30). But according to Clidemus, in agreement with 
- Simonides, her name was Hippolyte (Plutarch, Theseus, 27), 
and so she is called by Isocrates (Or. xii. 193). Pausanias says 
that Hippolyte was a sister of Antiope (i. 41. 7). Tzetzes 
expressly affirms that Antiope, and not Hippolyte, was the 
wife of ‘Theseus and mother of Hippolytus (Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 1329). The grave of Antiope was shown both at 
Athens and Megara (Pausanias, i. 2. 1, i. 41. 7). 


143 


APOLLODORUS 


᾿Αθήνας ᾿Αμαξζόνες. καὶ στρατοπεδευσαμένας * 


αὐτὰς περὶ τὸν “A pevov πάγον Θησεὺς μετὰ ᾿Αθη- 
ES ναίων ἐνίκησεν. | ἔχων δὲ 3 ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αμαξόνος παῖδα 
17 Ἱππόλυτον, λαμβάνει μετὰ ταῦτα παρὰ Δευκαλί- 
S vos Φαίδραν τὴν Μίνωος θυγατέρα, | ἧς ἐπιτε- 
λουμένων τῶν γάμων ᾿Αμαξὼν ἡ προγαμηθεῖσα 
Θησεῖ τοὺς συγκατακειμένους σὺν ταῖς μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῆς 
᾿Αμαζόσιν ἐπιστᾶσα σὺν ὅπλοις κτείνειν ἔμελλεν. 
οἱ δὲ κλείσαντες διὰ τάχους τὰς θύρας ἀπέκτειναν 
αὐτὴν. τινὲς δὲ μαχομένην αὐτὴν ὑπὸ Θησέως 
ES 18 λέγουσιν ἀποθανεῖν." Φαίδρα δὲ γεννήσασα Θησεῖ 
δύο παιδία ᾿Ακάμαντα καὶ Δημοφῶντα ἐρᾷ" τοῦ 
ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αμαζόνος παιδὸς [ἤγουν τοῦ Ἱππολύτου) τ 
καὶ δεῖται συνελθεῖν αὐτῇ. ὁ δὲ μισῶν πάσας 

“ 0 \ / Μ ς \ ’ 
γυναῖκας ὃ τὴν συνουσίαν ἔφυγεν. ἡ δὲ Φαίδρα, 
δείσασα μὴ τῷ πατρὶ διαβάλῃ, κατασχίσασα 
τὰς τοῦ θαλάμου θύρας καὶ τὰς ἐσθῆτας σπα- 
19 ράξασα κατεψεύσατο ἹἹππολύτου βίαν. Θησεὺς 
δὲ πιστεύσας ηὔξατο Ποσειδῶνι ᾿Ἱππόλυτον δια- 
φθαρῆναι" ὁ δέ, θέοντος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἅρματος ὃ 
καὶ παρὰ τῇ θαλάσσῃ ὀχουμένου, ταῦρον ἀνῆκεν 
ἐκ τοῦ κλύδωνος. πτοηθέντων δὲ τῶν ἵππων κατηρ- 


1 στρατοπεδευσαμένας Biicheler: στρατευσαμένας ὃ, Wagner. 

2 ἔχων δὲ... μετὰ TadtaS: ἐξ ἧς [scil. Γλαύκης) ἔσχε παῖδα 
Ἱππόλυτον. τὴν πρότερον δὲ διαλυσάμενος ἔχθραν λαμβάνει BE. 

3 Φαίδρα δὲ γεννήσασα Θησεῖ δύο παιδία ᾿Ακάμαντα καὶ Δημο- 
φῶντα ἐρᾷ S: ἐξ Hs [sctl. Φαίδρας} γεννᾷ δύο παῖδας ᾿Ακάμαντα 
καὶ Δημοφῶντα. Φαίδρα γοῦν ἐρᾷ K. 

+ τοῦ ἐκ τῆς ᾿Αμαζόνος παιδὸς ἤγουν τοῦ Ἱππολύτου Εἰ : Ἱπ- 
πολύτου ὃ. 

> συνελθεῖν αὐτῇ Εἰ ; συνελθεῖν δ΄. 

ὃ πάσας γυναῖκας EK: πάσας τὰς γυναῖκας S, 

7 κατασχίσασα ὃ : κατασχοῦσα K, 

ὃ. ἐπὶ τοῦ ἅρματος Ki: ἐπὶ ἅρματος ὃ. 


144 


EPITOME, 1. 16-19 


Wherefore the Amazons marched against Athens, and 
having taken upa position about the Areopagus ! they 
were vanquished by the Athenians under Theseus. 
And though he had a son Hippolytus by the Amazon, 
Theseus afterwards received from Deucalion? in 
marriage Phaedra, daughter of Minos; and when. 
her marriage was being celebrated, the Amazon that 
had before been married to him appeared in arms 
with her Amazons, and threatened to kill the assem- 
bled guests. But they hastily closed the doors and 
killed her. However, some say that she was slain in 
battle by Theseus. And Phaedra, after she had borne 
two children, Acamas and Demophon, to Theseus, 
fell in love with the son he had by the Amazon, to 
wit, Hippolytus, and besought him to lie with her. 
Howbeit, he fled from her embraces, because he hated 
all women. But Phaedra, fearing that he might 
accuse her to his father, cleft open the doors of her 
bedchamber, rent her garments, and falsely charged 
Hippolytus with an assault. Theseus believed her 
and prayed to Poseidon that Hippolytus might perish. 
So, when Hippolytus was riding in his chariot and 
driving beside the sea, Poseidon sent up a bull from 
the surf, and the horses were frightened, the chariot 

' According to Diodorus Siculus (iv. 28. 2), the Amazons 
encamped at the place which was afterwards called the Ama- 
zonium. The topography of the battle seems to have been 
minutely described by the antiquarian Clidemus, according 
to whom the array of the Amazons extended from the 
Amazonium to the Pnyx, while the Athenians attacked them 
from the Museum Hill on one side and from Ardettus and 
the Lyceum on the other. See Plutarch, Theseus, 27. 

2 This Deucalion was a son of Minos and reigned after him ; 
he was thus a brother of Phaedra. See above, iii. 1. 2; 
Diodorus Siculus, iv. 62. 1. He is not to be confounded with 
the more famous Deucalion in whose time the great flood took 
place. See above, i. 7. 2. 

145 


VOL, Il. : L 


APOLLODORUS 


payOn! τὸ ἅρμα. ἐμπλακεὶς δὲ «ταῖς ἡνίαις"» 3 
ἹἽἽππόλυτος συρόμενος ἀπέθανε. γενομένου δὲ τοῦ 
ἔρωτος περιφανοῦς ἑαυτὴν ἀνήρτησε Φαίδρα. 
1 κατηρράχθη EK: κατεάχθη S. 

3 ταῖς ἡνίαις inserted by Wagner (comparing Scholiast on 
Plato, Laws, xi. p. 9318, ταῖς ἡνίαις ἐμπλακεὶς ἑλκόμενος 
θνήσκει; Kuripides, Hippolytus, 1236, ἡνίαισιν ἐμπλακεὶς ; 
Diodorus Siculus, iv. 62. 3; ἐμπλακὲν τοῖς ἱμᾶσιν ἑλκυσθῆναι). 


1 The guilty passion of Phaedra for her stepson Hippolytus 
and the tragic end of the innocent youth, done to death by 
the curses of his father Theseus, are the subject of two extant 
tragedies, the Hippolytus of Euripides, and the Hippolytus 
or Phaedra of Seneca. Compare also Diodorus Siculus, iv. 
62; Pausanias, i. 22, 1 sq., ii. 32. 1-4; Scholiast on Homer, 
Od. xi, 321, citing Asclepiades as his authority; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 1329; id. Chiliades, vi. 504 sqq. ; 
Scholiast on Plato, Laws, xi. p. 931B; Ovid, Metamorph. 
xv. 497 sqq. ; td. Heroides, iv.; Hyginus, Fab. 47; Servius, 
on Virgil, Aen. vi. 445, and vii. 761; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 17, 117 sq. 
(First Vatican Mythographer, 46; Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 128). Sophocles composed a tragedy Phaedra, 
of which some fragments remain, but little or nothing is 
known of the plot. See Zhe Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. 
C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 294 sgqg. Euripides wrote two 
tragedies on the same subject, both under the title of Hippo- 
lytus : it is the second which has come down tous. In the 
first Hippolytus the poet, incensed at the misconduct of his 
wife, painted the character and behaviour of Phaedra in 
much darker colours than in the second, where he has 
softened the portrait, representing the unhappy woman as 
instigated by the revengeful Aphrodite, but resisting the 
impulse of her fatal passion to the last, refusing to tell her 
love to Hippolytus, and dying by her own hand rather than 
endure the shame of its betrayal by a blabbing nurse. This 
version of the story is evidently not the one here followed by 
Apollodorus, according to whom Phaedra made criminal ad- 
vances to her stepson. On the other hand the version of 
Apollodorus agrees in this respect with that of the Scholiast 
on Homer (/.c.): both writers may have followed the first 


146 


EPITOME, 1. 19 


dashed in pieces, and Hippolytus, entangled in the 
reins, was dragged to death. And when her passion 
was made public, Phaedra hanged herself.! 


Hippolytus of Euripides. As to that lost play, of which 
some fragments have come down to us, see the life of Euri- 
pides in Westermann’s Vitarum Scriptores Graeci Minores, 
p. 137; the Greek argument to the extant Hippolytus of 
Kuripides (vol. i. p. 163, ed. Paley) ; T'ragicorum Graecorum 
Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 491 sgqg. Apollodorus says 
nothing as to the scene of the tragedy. Euripides in his 
extant play lays it at Troezen, whither Theseus had gone 
with Phaedra to be purified for the slaughter of the sons of 
Pallas (Hippolytus, 34 sqq.). | Pausanias agrees with this 
account, and tells us that the graves of the unhappy pair 
were to be seen beside each other at Troezen, near a myrtle- 
tree, of which the pierced leaves still bore the print of 
Phaedra’s brooch. The natural beauty of the spot is in 
keeping with the charm which the genius of Euripides has 
thrown over the romantic story of unhappy love and death. 
Of Troezen itself only a few insignificant ruins remain, over- 
grown with weeds and dispersed amid a wilderness of bushes. 
Rut hard by are luxuriant groves of lemon and orange with 
here and there tall cypresses towering like dark spires above 
them, while behind this belt of verdure rise wooded hills, 
and across the blue waters of the nearly landlocked bay 
lies Calauria, the sacred island of Poseidon, its peaks veiled 
in the sombre green of the pines. 

A different place and time were assigned by Seneca to the 
tragedy. According to him, the events took place at Athens, 
and Phaedra conceived her passion for Hippolytus and made 
advances to him during the absence of her husband, who had 
gone down to the nether world with Pirithous and was there 
detained for four years (Hippolytus, 835 sqq.). Diodorus 
Siculus agrees with Euripides in laying the scene of the 
tragedy at Troezen, and he agrees with Apollodorus in saying 
that at the time when Phaedra fell in love with Hippolytus 
she was the mother of two sons, Acamas and Demophon, by 
Theseus. In his usual rationalistic vein Diodorus omits all 
mention of Poseidon and the sea-bull, and ascribes the acci- 
dent which befell Hippolytus to the mental agitation he felt 
at his stepmother’s calumny. 


147 


E 20 


Z 21 


: APOLLODORUS 


[Ὅτε ὁ "T&wv “Hpas ἐρασθεὶς ἐπεχείρει βιά- 
ἕεσθαι, καὶ προσαγγειλάσης τῆς Ἥρας γνῶναι 
/ ς / > Ὁ » Ν n / 
θέλων ὁ Ζεύς, εἰ οὕτως ἔχει TO πρᾶγμα, νεφέλην 
ἐξεικάσας Ἥρᾳ παρέκλινεν αὐτῷ" καὶ καυχώμενον 
e¢.@ / » Ἡ an ς ’ μὰ / 
ὡς Ἥρᾳ μιγέντα ἐνέδησε τροχῷ, ὑφ᾽ οὗ φερόμενος 
διὰ πνευμάτων ἐν αἰθέρι ταύτην τίνει δίκην. νε- 
φέλη δὲ ἐξ Ἰξίονος ἐγέννησε Κένταυρον. 

«Συνεμάχησε δὲ! τῷ Πειρίθῳ Θησεύς, ὅτε 
κατὰ τῶν Κενταύρων συνεστήσατο πόλεμον. 


1 Συνεμάχησε δὲ... ὁ Θησεὺς αὐτῶν ἀνεῖλεν. This passage 
is inserted from Zenobius, Cent. v. 33, who probably bor- 
rowed it from Apollodorus. 


_ 


1 Compare Pindar, Pyth. ii. 21 (39)—48 (88), with the Scho- . 
liast on v. 21 (39); Diodorus Siculus, iv. 69. 4 sq. ; Scholiast 
on Euripides, Phoenissae, 1185; Scholiast on Homer, Od. 
xxi, 303; Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. ili. 62; 
Hyginus, Fab. 62; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. vi. 286 (who does 
not mention the punishment of the wheel); Lactantius Pla- 
cidus on Statius, Theb. iv. 539; Scriptores rerum mythi- 
carum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 4, 110 sg. (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 14; Second Vatican Mythographer, 
106). J. Tzetzes flatly contradicts Pindar and substitutes a 
dull rationalistic narrative for the poet’s picturesque myth 
(Chiliades, vii. 30 sqq.). According to some, the wheel of 
Ixion was fiery (Scholiast on Euripides, J.c.) ; according to 
the Vatican Mythographer it was entwined with snakes. 
The fiery aspect of the wheel is supported by vase-paintings. 
From this and other evidence Mr. A. B. Cook argues that the 
flaming wheel launched through the air is a mythical ex- 
pression for the Sun, and that Ixion himself ‘‘ typifies a whole 
series of human Ixions who in bygone ages were done to 
death as effete embodiments of the sun-god.” See his book 
Zeus, i. 198-211. 

* This passage concerning the fight of Theseus with the 
centaurs at the marriage of Pirithous does not oceur in our text 


148 


EPITOME, 1. 20-21 


Ixion fell in love with Hera and attempted to force 
her; and when Hera reported it, Zeus, wishing to 
know if the thing were so, made a cloud in the like- 
ness of Hera and laid it beside him; and when Ixion 
boasted that he had enjoyed the favours of Hera, Zeus 
bound him to a wheel, on which he is whirled by 
winds through the air; such is the penalty he pays. 
And the cloud, impregnated by Ixion, gave birth to 
Centaurus. 

And Theseus allied himself with Pirithous,? when 
he engaged in war against the centaurs. For when 


_ of Apollodorus, but is conjecturally restored to it from Zeno- 
bius (Cent. v. 33), or rather from his interpolator, who 
frequently quotes passages of Apollodorus without acknow- 
ledgment. The restoration was first proposed by Professor 
C. Robert before the discovery of the Hpitome; and it is 
adopted by R. Wagner in his edition of Apollodorus. See C. 
Robert, De Apollodort Bibliotheca, pp. 49 sq.; R. Wagner, 
-_Epitoma Vaticana ex Apollodort Bibliotheca, p. 147. As 
Pirithous was a son of Ixion (see above, i. 8. 2), the account 
of his marriage would follow naturally after the recital of his 
father’s crime and punishment. As to the wedding of Piri- 
thous, see further Diodorus Siculus,iv. 70. 3; Plutarch, Theseus, 
30; Pausanias, v. 10. 8; Scholiast on Homer, Od. xxi. 295; 
Hyginus, Fab. 33; Ovid, Metamorph. xii. 210-535 ; Servius, 
on Virgil, Aen. vii. 304; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 51, 111 (First Vatican Mythogra- 
pher, 162; Second Vatican Mythographer, 108). The wife of 
Pirithous is called Deidamia by Plutarch, but Hippodamia by 
Diodorus Siculus, Hyginus, and the Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, as well as by Homer (11. ii. 742). Ovid calls her 
Hippodame. The scene of the battle of the Lapiths with the 
centaurs at the wedding of Pirithous was sculptured in the 
western gable of the temple of Zeus at Olympia; all the 
sculptures were discovered, in a more or less fragmentary 
state, by the Germans in their excavations of the sanctuary, 
and they are now exhibited in the museum at Olympia. See 
Pausanias, v. 10. 8, with my commentary (vol. iii. pp. 516 


874.). 
149 


APOLLODORUS 


Πειρίθους yap Ἱπποδάμειαν μνηστευόμενος εἱστία 
Κενταύρους ὡς συγγενεῖς ὄντας αὐτῇ. ἀσυνήθως 
δὲ ἔχοντες οἴνου ἀφειδῶς ἐμφορησάμενοι ἐμέθυον, 
καὶ εἰσαγομένην τὴν νύμφην ἐπεχείρουν βιά- 
ζεσθαι: ὁ δὲ Πειρίθους μετὰ Θησέως καθοπλισά- 
μενος μάχην συνῆψε, καὶ πολλοὺς ὁ Θησεὺς 
αὐτῶν ' avetnev.> 

E 22 [Ὅτι Καινεὺς πρότερον ἣν γυνή, συνελθόντος 
δὲ αὐτῇ Ποσειδῶνος ἠτήσατο ἀνὴρ γενέσθαι ἄτρω- 
τος" διὸ καὶ ἐν τῇ πρὸς Κενταύρους μάχη τραυ- 
μάτων καταφρονῶν πολλοὺς τῶν Κενταύρων 
ἀπώλεσεν, οἱ δὲ λοιποί, περιστάντες αὐτῷ, 
ἐλάταις τύπτοντες ἔχωσαν εἰς γῆν. 


1 αὐτῶν Wagner: am αὐτῶν MSS. of Zenobius. 


1 As to Caeneus, his change of sex and his invulnerability, 
see Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 57-64, with the Scholiast 
on v. 57; Scholiast on Homer, J/. i. 264; Plutarch, Stozc. 
absurd. 1;7d. De profectibus in virtute, 1; Lucian, Gallus, 
19; id. De saltatione, 57 ; Apostolius, Cent. iv. 19; Palae- 
phatus, De incredib. 11 ; Antoninus Liberalis, Z’ransform. 17 ; 
Virgil, Aen. vi. 448 sg.; Ovid, Metamorph. xii. 459-532 ; 
Hyginus, Fab. 14, pp. 39 sq., ed. Bunte ; Servius, on Virgil, 
Aen. vi. 448; Lactantius Placidus on Statius, Achill. 264; 
Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. 
pp. 49, 111 sqg., 189 (First Vatican Mythographer, 154; Second 
Vatican Mythographer, 108; Third Vatican Mythographer, 
6. 25). According to Servius and the Vatican Mythographers, 
after his death Caeneus was changed back into a woman, thus 
conforming to an observation of Plato or Aristotle that the sex 
of a person generally changes at each transmigration of his 
soul intoa new body. Curiously enough, the Urabunna and 
Waramunga tribes of Central Australia agree with Plato or 
Aristotle on this point. They believe that the souls of the 
dead transmigrate sooner or later into new bodies, and that 
at each successive transmigration they change their sex. See 
(Sir) Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, The Northern Tribes 
of Central Australia (London, 1904), p. 148. According to 


150 


EPITOME, 1. 21-22 


Pirithous wooed Hippodamia, he feasted the centaurs 
because they were her kinsmen. But being unaccus- 
tomed to wine, they made themselves drunk by 
swilling it greedily, and when the bride was brought 
in, they attempted to violate her. But Pirithous, fully 
armed, with Theseus, joined battle with them, and 
Theseus killed many of them. 

Caeneus was formerly a woman, but after that 
Poseidon had intercourse with her, she asked to be- 
come an invulnerable man; wherefore in the battle 
with the centaurs he thought scorn of wounds and 
killed many of the centaurs; but the rest of them 
surrounded him and by striking him with fir-trees 
buried him in the earth. 


Ovid (Metamorph. xii. 524 sqq.), a bird with yellow wings was 
seen to rise from the heap of logs under which Caeneus was 
overwhelmed ; and the seer Mopsus explained the bird to be 
Caeneus transformed into that creature. Another tradition 
about Caeneus was that he set up his spear in the middle of 
the market-place and ordered people to regard it as a god and 
to swear by it. He himself prayed and sacrificed to none of 
the gods, but only to his spear. It was this impiety that drew 
down on him the wrath of Zeus, who instigated the centaurs 
to overwhelm him. See the Scholiast on Homer, 11. i. 264; 
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 57. The whole 
story of the parentage of Caeneus, his impiety, his invulner- 
ability, and the manner of his death, is told by the old prose- 
writer Acusilaus in a passage quoted by a Greek grammarian, 
of whose work some fragments, written on papyrus, were 
discovered some years ago at Oxyrhynchus in Egypt. See The 
> Oxyrhynchus Papyri, part xiii. (London, 1919), pp. 133 sq. 
Apollodorus probably derived his account of Caeneus from 
Acusilaus, whom he often refers to (see Index). The fortunate 
discovery of this fragment of the ancient writer confirms our 
confidence in the excellence of the sources used by Apollo- 
dorus and in the fidelity with which he followed them. In 
his complete work he may have narrated the impiety of 
Caeneus in setting up his spear for worship, though the 
episode has been omitted in the Epitome. 


151 


APOLLODORUS 


23 Ὅτι Θησεύς, Πειρίθῳ συνθέμενος Διὸς θυ- 
γατέρας “γαμῆσαι, ἑαυτῷ μὲν ἐκ Σπάρτης μετ᾽ 
ἐκείνου ἥρπασεν Ἑλένην δωδεκαέτη οὖσαν, Tev- 
ρίθῳ δὲ μνηστευόμενος τὸν llepaehovns γάμον εἰς 
” Atdou κάτεισι. καὶ Διόσκουροι μὲν μετὰ Λακε- 
δαιμονίων καὶ ᾿Αρκάδων εἷλον ᾿Αθήνας καὶ 
ἀπάγουσιν ᾿Βλένην καὶ μετὰ ταύτης Αἴθραν τὴν 
Πιτθέως αἰχμάλωτον" Δημοφῶν δὲ καὶ ᾿Ακάμας 
ἔφυγον. κατάγουσι δὲ καὶ Μενεσθέα καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν 

24 τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων διδόασι τούτῳ. Θησεὺς δὲ μετὰ 
Πειρίθου παραγενόμενος εἰς “Διδου ἐξαπατᾶται, 
καὶ «ὃς; ὡς ξενίων μεταληψομένους πρῶτον ἐν 
τῷ τῆς Λήθης εἶπε καθεσθῆναι θρόνῳ, ᾧ προσ- 
φυέντες σπείραις δρακόντων κατείχοντο. Πειρί- 
θους μὲν οὖν εἰς ἀίδιον * δεθεὶς ἔμεινε, Θησέα 
δὲ ᾿Ηρακλῆς ἀναγαγὼν ἔπεμψεν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας. 
ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ὑπὸ Μενεσθέως ἐξελαθεὶς πρὸς Λυκο- 

1 ὃς ὡς Herwerden: ὡς Εἰ, Wagner. 
2 ἀΐδιον Herwerden : ᾿Αἰδωνέα K, Wagner. 


1 See above, iii. 10. 7, with the note. Diodorus Siculus (iv. 
63. 2) says that Helen was ten years old when she was 
carried off by Theseus and Pirithous. 

2 Compare Diodorus Siculus, iv. 63. 3 and 5; Plutarch, 
Theseus, 32 and 34; Pausanias, i. 17. 5, ii. 22.6. According 
to these writers, it was not Athens but Aphidna (Aphidnae) 
that was captured by the Dioscuri. 

3. Menestheus was one of the royal family of Athens, being 
a son of Peteos, who was a son of Orneus, who was a son of 
Erechtheus. See Plutarch, Thesews, 32 ; Pausanias, ii. 25. 6. 
That he was restored and placed on the throne by Castor 
and Pollux during the absence of Theseus is mentioned also 
by Pausanias (i. 17. 6) and Aelian (Var. Hist. iv. 5). Com- 
pare Plutarch, Theseus, 32 sq. 

4 As to Theseus and Pirithous in hell, and the rescue of 
Theseus by Hercules, see above, ii. 5. 12 with the note. The 
great painter Polygnotus painted the two heroes seated in 


152 


EPITOME, 1. 23-24 


Having made a compact with Pirithous that they 
would marry daughters of Zeus, Theseus, with the 
help of Pirithous, carried off Helen from Sparta for 
himself, when she was twelve years old,! and in the 
endeavour to win Persephone as a bride for Pirithous 
he went down to Hades. And the Dioscuri, with the 
-Lacedaemonians and Arcadians, captured Athens and 
carried away Helen, and with her Aethra, daughter 
of Pittheus, into captivity;? but Demophon and 
Acamas fled. And the Dioscuri also brought back 
Menestheus from exile, and gave him the sovereignty 
of Athens.* But when Theseus arrived with Pirithous 
in Hades, he was beguiled ; for, on the pretence that 
they were about to partake of good cheer, Hades 
bade them first be seated on the Chair of Forget- 
fulness, to which they grew and were held fast by 
coils of serpents. Pirithous, therefore, remained 
bound for ever, but Hercules brought Theseus up 
and sent him to Athens.4— Thence he was driven by 


chairs, Theseus holding his friend’s sword and his own, while 
Pirithous gazed wistfully at the now useless blades, that had 
done such good service in the world of light and life. See 
Pausanias, x. 29. 9. No ancient author, ~ howev er, except 
Apollodorus in the present passage, expressly mentions the 
Chair of Forgetfulness, though Horace seems to allude to it 
(Odes, iv. 7. 27 sq.), where he speaks of ‘‘ the Lethaean bonds” 
which held fast Pirithous, and which his faithful friend was 
powerless to break. But when Apollodorus speaks of the 
heroes growing to their seats, he may be following the old 
poet Panyasis, who said that Theseus and Pirithous were not 
pinioned to their chairs, but that the rock growing to their 
flesh held them as in a vice (Pausanias l.c.). Indeed, Theseus 
stuck so fast that, on being wrenched away by Hercules, he 
left a piece of his person adhering to the rock, which, accord- 
ing to some people, was the reason why the Athenians ever 
afterwards were so remarkably spare in that part of their 
frame. See Suidas, s.v. Λίσποι; Scholiast on Aristophanes, 
Knights, 1368 ; compare Aulus Gellius, x. 16. 18. 


153 


2 


APOLLODORUS 


/ ὃ 
μήδην ἦλθεν, ὃς αὐτὸν βάλλει κατὰ βαράθρων 
καὶ ἀποκτείνει. 
« 
II. Ὅτι ὁ Τάνταλος ἐν “Atdov? κολάζεται, 
πέτρον ἔχων ὕπερθεν ἑαυτοῦ ἐπιφερόμενον, ἐν 
lal 
λίμνῃ τε διατελῶν καὶ περὶ τοὺς ὥμους ἑκατέρωσε 
δένδρα μετὰ καρπῶν ὁρῶν παρὰ τῇ λίμνῃ πεφυ- 
/ \ i lal lal 
κότα' TO μὲν οὖν ὕδωρ ψαύει αὐτοῦ τῶν γενύων, 
Ὁ 
καὶ ὅτε θέλοι σπάσασθαι τούτου ξηραίνεται, 
a \ fal « , / δ 
τῶν δὲ καρπῶν ὁπότε βούλοιτο μεταλήψεσθαι 
/ a 
μετεωρίζονταιΣ μέχρι νεφῶν ὑπ’ ἀνέμων τὰ 
δένδρα σὺν τοῖς καρποῖς. κολάζεσθαι δὲ αὐτὸν 
Ὁ“ / / “ \ lal “ > / 
οὕτως λέγουσί τινες, OTL TA τῶν θεῶν ἐξελάλησεν 
“ / a 
ἀνθρώποις μυστήρια, Kal ὅτι τῆς ἀμβροσίας τοῖς 
ἡλικιώταις μετεδίδου. 
a i / \ xX \ v > 
τι Bpotéas κυνηγὸς ὧν τὴν Αρτεμιν οὐκ 


1 βαράθρων Wagner: βάθρων E. 
*“Aidou Wagner: ἅδῃ Εἰ. 
3 μετεωρίζονται Wagner: μετεωρίζοντα E. 


1 Compare Plutarch, Thesews, 35; Pausanias, i. 17. 6; 
Diodorus Siculus, iv. 62. 4. 

2 As to the punishment of Tantalus, see Homer, Od. xi. 
582-592, who describes only the torments of hunger and 
thirst, but says nothing about the overhanging stone. But 
the stone is often mentioned by later writers. See Archilochus, 
quoted by Plutarch, Praecept. Ger. Reipub. 6, and by the 
Scholiast on Pindar, Olymp. i. 60 (97); Pindar, Olymp. i. 55 
(87) sqg., with the Scholia on v. 60 (97); id. Isthm. viii. 10 
(21) ; Euripides, Orestes, 4-10; Plato, Cratylus, p. 395 DE ; 
Hyperides, Frag. 176, ed. Blass; Antipater, in Anthologia 
Palatina, Appendix Planudea, iv. 131. 9 sq.; Plutarch, De 
superstitione, 11; Lucian, Dial. Mort. 17; Pausanias, x. 31. 
10; Philostratus, Vit. Apollon. iii. 25; Apostolius, Cent. vii. 
60, xvi. 9; Nonnus, Narrat. in Westermann’s Mythographi 
Graeci, Appendix Narrationum, 73, p. 386; Athenaeus, vii. 
14, p. 281 Bc; Lucretius, iii. 980 sqg.; Cicero, De finibus, i. 


154 


EPITOME, 1. 24-1. 2 


Menestheus and went to Lycomedes, who threw 
him down an abyss and killed him.! 

II. Tantalus is punished in Hades by having a 
stone impending over him, by being perpetually in a 
lake and seeing at his shoulders on either side trees 
with fruit growing beside the lake. The water touches 
his jaws, but when he would take a draught of it, the 
water dries up; and when he would partake of the 
fruits, the trees with the fruits are lifted by winds 
as high as the clouds. Some say that he is thus 
punished because he blabbed to men the mysteries of 
the gods, and because he attempted to share ambrosia 
with his fellows.” 

Broteas, a hunter, did not honour Artemis, and 


18. 60; td. Tuscul. Disput. iv. 16. 35 ; Horace, Epod. 17, 65 sy. 
and Sat. i. 1.68 sq.; Ovid, Metamorph. iv. 458 sq.; Hyginus, 
Fab. 82. Ovid notices only the torments of hunger and 
thirst, and Lucian only the torment of thirst. According 
to another account, Tantalus Jay buried under Mount 
Sipylus in Lydia, which had been his home in life, and on 
which his grave was shown down to late times (Pausanias, 
ii. 22. 3, v. 13. 7). The story ran that Zeus owned a valu- 
able watchdog, which guarded his sanctuary in Crete; but 
Pandareus, the Milesian, stole the animal and entrusted 
it for safekeeping to Tantalus. So Zeus sent Hermes to 
the resetter to reclaim his property, but Tantalus impu- 
dently denied on oath that the creature was in his house 
or that he knew anything about it. Accordingly, to punish 
the perjured knave, the indignant Zeus piled Mount Sipylus 
on the top of him. See the Scholiast on Pindar, Olymp. i. 
60 (97); Scholiast on Homer, Od. xix. 518, xx. 66. In his 
lost play Tantalus Sophocles seems to have introduced the 
theft of the dog, the errand of Hermes to recover the animal, 
and perhaps the burial of the thief under the mountain. See 
The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. 
pp. 209 sqq. 


155 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐτίμα: ἔλεγε δέ, ὡς οὐδ᾽ <av>! ὑπὸ πυρός τι 
πάθοι: ἐμμανὴς οὖν γενόμενος ἔβαλεν εἰς πῦρ 
ς 

ἑαυτόν. 

“Ὅτι Πέλοψ σφαγεὶς ἐν τῷ τῶν θεῶν ἐράνῳ 
καὶ καθεψηθεὶς ὡραιότερος ἐν τῇ ἀναξωώσει γέ- 
γονε, καὶ κάλλει διενεγκὼν Ἰ]οσειδῶνος ἐρώμενος 
γίνεται, ὃς αὐτῷ δίδωσιν ἅρμα ὑπόπτερον: τοῦτο 
καὶ διὰ θαλάσσης τρέχον τοὺς ἄξονας οὐχ ὑγραί- 
veto. τοῦ δὲ βασιλεύοντος [Πίσης Οἰνομάου 
θυγατέρα ἔχοντος “Ἱπποδάμειαν, καὶ εἴτε αὐτῆς 


1 οὐδ᾽ ἂν Herwerden: οὐδ᾽ E, Wagner. 


1 This Broteas, mentioned by Apollodorus between Tan- 
talus and Pelops, is probably the Broteas, son of Tantalus, 
who was said to have carved the ancient rock-hewn image of 
the Mother of the Gods which is still to be seen on the side of 
Mount Sipylus, about three hundred feet above the plain. 
See Pausanias, iii. 22. 4, with my note on v. 13. 7 (vol. iii. 
pp. 553 sq.). Ovid mentions a certain Broteas, who from a 
desire of death burned himself on a pyre (Ibis, 517 sq.), and 
who is probably to be identified with the Broteas of Apollo- 
dorus, though the Scholiasts on Ovid describe him either as 
a son of Jupiter (Zeus), or as a son of Vulcan (Hephaestus) 
and Pallas (Athena), identical with Erichthonius. According 
to one of the Scholiasts, Broteas, son of Zeus, was a very 
wicked man, who was blinded by Zeus, and loathing his life 
threw himself on a burning pyre. According to another of 
the Scholiasts, Broteas, son of Hephaestus and Athena, was 
despised for his ugliness, and this so preyed on his mind that 
he preferred death by fire. See Ovid, Jbis, ed. R. Ellis, 
p. 89. It seems not improbable that this legend contains a 
reminiscence of a human sacrifice or suicide by fire, such as 
occurs not infrequently in the traditions of western Asia. See 
K. B. Stark, Niobe und die Niobiden (Leipsic, 1863), pp. 
437 sq. ; and for the Asiatic traditions of a human sacrifice 
or suicide by fire, see Adonis, Αἰ δ, Osiris, Third Edition, 
vol. i. pp. 172 sqq. 

2 The story was that at a banquet of the gods, to which he 


156 


EPITOME, u. 2-4 


said that even fire could not hurt him. So he went 
mad and threw himself into fire.! 

Pelops, after being slaughtered and boiled at the 
banquet of the gods, was fairer than ever when he 
came to life again,” and on account of his surpassing 
beauty he became a minion of Poseidon, who gave 
him a winged chariot, such that even when it ran 
through the sea the axles were not wet.? Now 
Oenomaus, the king of Pisa, had a daughter Hippo- 
damia,* and whether it was that he loved her, as some 


had been invited, Tantalus served up the mangled limbs of his 
young son Pelops, which he had boiled in a kettle. But the 
murdered child was restored to life by being put back into 
the kettle and then drawn out of it, with an ivory shoulder 
to replace the shoulder of flesh which Demeter or, according 
to others, Thetis had unwittingly eaten. See Pindar, 
Olymp. i. 24 (37) sqq., with the Scholia on v. 37 ; Lucian, De 
saliatione, 54; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 152; Nonnus, 
Narr., in Westermann’s Mythographi Graeci, Appendix 
Narrationum, 57, p. 380; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. vi. 603, 
and on Georg. iii. 7; Hyginus, Fab. 83; Secriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 109, 186 
(Second Vatican Mythographer, 102; Third Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, vi. 21). The ivory shoulder of Pelops used after- 
wards to be exhibited at Elis (Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxviii. 34) ; 
but it was no longer to be seen in the time of Pausanias 
(Pausanias, i. 13. 6), 

3 Compare Pindar, Olymp. i. 37 (60) sqq., 71 (114) sqq.; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 156. Pindar describes how 
Pelops went to the shore of the sea and prayed to Poseidon 
to give him a swift chariot, and how the god came forth and 
bestowed on him a golden chariot with winged steeds. On 
the chest of Cypselus at Olympia the horses of Pelops in the 
chariot race were represented with wings (Pausanias, v. 
17. -7). 

4 The following account of the wooing and winning of 
Hippodamia by Pelops is the fullest that has come down to 
us. Compare Pindar, Olymp. i. 67 (109) sqg.; Diodorus 
Siculus, iv. 73; Pausanias, v. 10. 6 sq., v. 14. 6, v. 17. 7, 


Ἐ57 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐρῶντος, WS τινες λέγουσιν, εἴτε χρησμὸν ἔχοντος 
τελευτῆσαι ὑπὸ τοῦ γήμαντος αὐτήν, οὐδεὶς αὐτὴν 
ἐλάμβανεν εἰς γυναῖκα: ὁ μὲν γὰρ πατὴρ οὐκ 
ἔπειθεν αὑτῷ συνελθεῖν, οἱ δὲ μνηστευόμενοι 


1 αὑτῷ Frazer: αὐτῇ EK, Wagner. ἐπέτρεπεν οὐδενὶ αὐτῇ 
Herwerden. 


vi. 20. 17, vi. 21. 6-11, viii. 14. 10 sg. ; Scholiast on Homer, 
Il. ii. 104; Scholiast on Pindar, Olymp. i. 71 (114) ; Scholiast 
on Sophocles, Electra, 504; Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes, 
982 and 990; Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 
752; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 156; Hyginus, Fab. 84 ; 
Servius, on Virgil, Georg. ili. 7, ed. Lion; Seriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 7, 125 (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 21; Second Vatican Mythographer, 
146). The story was told by Pherecydes, as we learn from 
the Scholiasts on Sophocles and Apollonius Rhodius. (il.cc ) 
It was also the theme of two plays called Oenomaus, one of 
them by Sophocles, and the other by Furipides. See T'ragi- 
corum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 233 sqq., 
539 sqq.; The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, 
vol. ii. pp. 121 sqq. The versions of the story given by 
Tzetzes and the Scholiast on Euripides (Orestes, 990) agree 
closely with each other and with that of Apollodorus, which 
they may have copied. They agree with him and with the 
Scholiast on Pindar in alleging an incestuous passion of Oeno- 
maus for his daughter as the reason why he was reluctant to 
give her in marriage ; indeed they affirm that this was the 
motive assigned for his conduct by the more accurate histor- 
ians, though they also mention the oracle which warned him 
that he would perish at the hands of his son-in-law. The fear 
of this prediction being fulfilled is the motive generally alleged 
by the extant writers of antiquity. Diodorus Siculus mentions 
some particulars which are not noticed by other authors. 
According to him, the goal of the race was the altar of Posei- 
don at Corinth, and the suitor was allowed a start; for before 
mounting his chariot Oenomaus sacrificed a ram to Zeus, and 
while he was sacrificing the suitor drove off and made the best 
of his way along the road, until Oenomaus, having completed 
the sacrifice, was free to pursue and overtake him. ‘The saeri- 


158 


EPITOME, u. 4 


say, or that he was warned by an oracle that he must 
die by the man that married her, no man got her to 
wife ; for her father could not persuade her to cohabit 
with him, and her suitors were put by him to death. 


fice was offered at a particular altar at Olympia, which some 
people called the altar of Hephaestus, and others the altar of 
Warlike Zeus (Pausanias, v. 14. 6). In the eastern gable of 
the temple of Zeus at Olympia the competitors with their 
chariots and charioteers were represented preparing for the 
race in the presence of an image of Zeus; among them were 
Hippodamia and her mother Sterope. These sculptures were 
found, more or less mutilated, by the Germans in their excav- 
ation of Olympia and are now exhibited in the local museum. 
See Pausanias, v. 10. 6 sg. with my commentary (vol. ili. pp. 
504 sqq.). Curiously enough, the scene of the story is trans- 
posed by the Scholiast on Euripides (Orestes, 990), who affirms 
that Oenomaus reigned in Lesbos, though at the same time he 
says, in accordance with the usual tradition, that the goal of 
the race was the Isthmus of Corinth. The connexion of 
Oenomaus with Lesbos is to a certain extent countenanced by 
a story for which the authority cited is Theopompus. He 
related that when Pelops was on his way to Pisa (Olympia) to 
woo Hippodamia, his charioteer Cillus died in Lesbos, and 
that his ghost appeared to Pelops in a dream, lamenting his 
sad fate and begging to be accorded funeral honours. So 
Pelops burned the dead man’s body, buried his ashes under a 
barrow, and founded a sanctuary of Cillaean Apollo close by. 
See the Scholiast on Homer, J. i. 38 (where for ἐξερυπάρου τὸ 
εἴδωλον διὰ πυρός we Should perhaps read ἐξεπύρου τὸ εἴδωλον 
διὰ πυρός, ““Ὧ6 burned the body to ashes with fire,” εἴδωλοτ' 
being apparently used in the sense of ‘‘dead body”). 
Strabo describes the tomb of Cillus or Cillas, as he calls 
him, as a great mound beside the sanctuary of Cillaean 
Apollo, but he places the grave and the sanctuary, not in 
Lesbos, but on the opposite mainland, in the territory of 
Adramyttium, though he says that there was a Cillaeum also 
in Lesbos. See Strabo, xiii. 1. 62 and 63, pp. 612, 613. 
Professor C. Robert holds that the original version of the 
legend of Oenomaus and Hippodamia belonged to Lesbos and 
not to Olympia. See his Bild und Lied, p. 187 note. 


159 


5 


--1 


APOLLODORUS 


ἀνῃροῦντο ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. ἔχων; γὰρ ὅπλα τε καὶ 
ἵππους παρὰ “A peos ἄθλον ἐτίθει τοῖς μνηστῆρσι 
τὸν γάμον, καὶ τὸν μνηστευόμενον ἔδει ἀναλα- 
βόντα τὴν ἹἹπποδάμειαν εἰς τὸ οἰκεῖον ἅρμα φεύγειν 
ἄχρι τοῦ Kopwliwv ἰσθμοῦ, τὸν δὲ Οἰνόμαον 
εὐθέως διώκειν καθωπλισμένον καὶ καταλαβόντα 
κτείνειν" τὸν δὲ μὴ καταληφθέντα ἔχειν γυναῖκα 
τὴν Ἱπποδάμειαν. καὶ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον πολλοὺς 
μνηστευομένους ἀπέκτεινεν, ὡς δέ τινες λέγουσι 
δώδεκα: τὰς δὲ κεφαλὰς τῶν μνηστήρων ἐκτεμὼν ᾿ 
τῇ οἰκίᾳ προσεπαττάλευε. 

Ιαραγίνεται τοίνυν καὶ Πέλοψ ἐπὶ τὴν μνη- 
στείαν' οὗ τὸ κάλλος ἰδοῦσα ἡ Ἱπποδάμεια ἔ ἔρωτα 
ἔσχεν αὐτοῦ, καὶ πείθει Μυρτίλον τὸν Ἑρμοῦ 
παῖδα συλλαβέσθαι αὐτῷ" ἣν δὲ Μυρτίλος ἱπαρας 
βάτης εἴτουν) ἡνίοχος Οἰνομάου. Μυρτίλος οὗν 
ἐρῶν αὐτῆς καὶ βουλόμενος αὐτῇ χαρίσασθαι, ταῖς 
χοινικίσι τῶν τροχῶν τοὺς ἥλους οὐκ ἐμβαλὼν 
ἐποίησε τὸν Οἰνόμαον ἐν τῷ τρέχειν ἡττηθῆναι 
καὶ ταῖς ἡνίαις συμπλακέντα συρόμενον ἀποθανεῖν, 
κατὰ δέ τινας ἀναιρεθῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ Πέλοπος" ὃ- 


1 ἐκτεμὼν Frazer: ἐκτέμνων K, Wagner. 


1 The number of the slain suitors was twelve according to 
Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 156) and the Scholiast on Euri- 
pides (Orestes, 990); but it was thirteen according to Pindar 
and his Scholiasts. See Pindar, Olymp. i. 79 (127) 8ᾳ., with 
the Scholia on v. 79 (127), where the names of the suitors are 
given. A still longer list of their names is given by Pausanias 
(vi. 21. 7), w ho + says that they were buried under a high 
mound of earth, and that Pelops afterwards sacrificed to them 
as to heroes every year. 

* According to Hyginus (Fab. 84), when Pelops saw the 
heads of the unsuccessful suitors nailed over the door, he 


160 


EPITOME, wu. 4-7 


For he had arms and horses given him by Ares, and 
he offered as a prize to the suitors the hand of his 
daughter, and each suitor was bound to take up 
Hippodamia on his own chariot and flee as far as the 
Isthmus of Corinth, and Oenomaus straightway 
pursued him, in full armour, and if he overtook him 
he slew him; but if the suitor were not overtaken, 
he was to have Hippodamia to wife. And in this 
way he slew many suitors, some say twelve;1 and 
he cut off the heads of the suitors and nailed them 
to his house.” 

So Pelops also came a-wooing; and when Hip- 
podamia saw his beauty, she conceived a passion 
for him, and persuaded Myrtilus, son of Hermes, 
to help him; for Myrtilus was charioteer to 
Oenomaus. Accordingly Myrtilus, being in love 
with her and wishing to gratify her, did not insert 
the linchpins in the boxes of the wheels, and thus 
caused Oenomaus to lose the race and to be en- 
tangled in the reins and dragged to death; but 
according to some, he was killed by Pelops. And 


began to repent of his temerity, and offered Myrtilus, the 
charioteer of Oenomaus, the half of the kingdom if he would 
help him in the race. 

3 According to another account, which had the support of 
Pherecydes, Myrtilus substituted linchpins of wax for linch- 
pins of bronze. See Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. 
i. 752; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 156; Scholiast on 
Euripides, Orestes, 998 ; Servius, on Virgil, Georg. iii. 7, ed. 
Lion, where for aereis we should read cereis (the text in 
Thilo and Hagen’s edition of Servius is mutilated and omits 
the passage) ; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. 
H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 7, 125 (First Vatican Mythographer, 21 ; 
Second Vatican Mythographer, 146). 


- 


TOT 
VOL, 11, M 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐν τῷ ἀποθνήσκειν κατηράσατο τῷ Μυρτίλῳ γνοὺς 
τὴν ἐπιβουλήν, ἵ ἵνα ὑπὸ Πέλοπος ἀπόληται. 

8 "Λαβὼν οὖν "Πέλοψ τὴν Ἱπποδάμειαν. καὶ διερ- 
χόμενος ἐν τόπῳ τινί, τὸν Μυρτίλον ἔχων μεθ᾽ 
ἑαυτοῦ, μικρὸν ἀναχωρεῖ κομίσων ὕδωρ διψώσῃ 
τῇ γυναικί: Μυρτίλος δὲ ἐν τούτῳ Paden αὐτὴν 
ἐπεχείρει. μαθὼν δὲ τοῦτο παρ᾽ αὐτῆς * ὁ Πέλοψ 
ῥίπτει τὸν Μυρτίλον περὶ Γεραιστὸν ἀκρωτήριον 
εἰς τὸ ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου κληθὲν Μυρτῷον πέλαγος" ὁ δὲ 
ῥιπτούμενος ἀρὰς ἔθετο κατὰ τοῦ Ἰ]έλοπος γένους. 

9 παραγενόμενος δὲ ἸΤέλοψ' ἐπ᾽ ὠκεανὸν καὶ ἄγνι- 
σθεὶς ὑπὸ Ἡφαίστου, ἐπανελθὼν εἰς Πῖσαν τῆς 
Ἤλιδος τὴν Οἰνομάου βασιλείαν λαμβάνει, χειρω- 

7 μ μ χεὶρ 
σάμενος τὴν πρότερον ᾿Απίαν καὶ Πελασγιῶτιν 
λεγομένην, ἣν ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ 1]ελοπόννησον ἐκάλεσεν. 

ιῖιο Ὅτι viol Πέλοπος Πιτθεὺς ᾿Ατρεὺς Θυέστης 
καὶ ἕτεροι: γυνὴ δὲ ᾿Ατρέως ᾿Αερόπη τοῦ Κατ- 


1 αὐτῆς Wagner: αὐτῆν E. 


1 Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 156; Scholiast 
on Homer, 11. ii. 104. The latter writer says, somewhat ab- 
surdly, that the incident took place when Pelops and Hippo- 
damia were crossing the Aegean Sea, and that, Hippodamia 
being athirst, Pelops dismounted from the chariot to look for 
water in the desert. 

2 Compare Euripides, Orestes, 989 sqq. 

3. Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 156; Scholiast 
on Euripides, Orestes, 990. 

4 As to Apia, the old name of Peloponnese, see above, ii. 
1. 1; Pausanias, ii. 5. 7; Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. ᾿Απία. 
The term Pelasgiotis seems not to occur elsewhere as a name 
for Peloponnese. However, Euripides uses Pelasgia appa- 
rently as equivalent to Argolis (Orestes, 960). 

5 According to Pindar, Pelops had six sons by Hippodamia, 
and three different lists of their names are given by the 
Scholiasts on the passage. All the lists include the three 


162 


EPITOME, wu. 7-10 


in dying he cursed Myrtilus, whose treachery he had 
discovered, praying that he might perish by the hand 
of Pelops. 

Pelops, therefore, got Hippodamia; and on his 
journey, in which he was accompanied by Myrtilus, 
he came to a certain place, and withdrew a little to 
fetch water for his wife, who was athirst ; and in the 
meantime Myrtilus tried to rape her.t But when 
Pelops learned that from her, he threw Myrtilus into 
the sea, called after him the Myrtoan Sea, at Cape 
Geraestus”; and Myrtilus, as he was being thrown, 
uttered curses against the house of Pelops. When 
Pelops had reached the Ocean and been cleansed by 
Hephaestus,? he returned to Pisa in Elis and 
succeeded to the kingdom of Oenomaus, but not till 
he had subjugated what was formerly called Apia 
and Pelasgiotis, which he called Peloponnesus after 
himself.* 

The sons of Pelops were Pittheus, Atreus, Thyestes, 
and others. Now the wife of Atreus was Aerope, 


mentioned by Apollodorus. See Pindar, Olymp. i. 89 (144), 
with the Scholia. Three sons, Hippalcimus, Atreus, and 
Thyestes, are named by Hyginus (Jab. 84). Besides his legi- 
timate sons Pelops is said to have had a bastard son Chrysip- 
pus, who was born to him before his marriage with Hippo- 
damia. His fondness for this love-child excited the jealousy 
of his wife, and at her instigation Atreus and Thyestes mur- 
dered Chrysippus by throwing him down awell. For this 
crime Pelops cursed his two sons and banished them, and 
Hippodamia fled to Argolis, but her bones were afterwards 
brought back to Olympia. See Thucydides, i. 9; Pausanias, 
vi. 20. 7; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 415 sqq ; Scholiast on 
Homer, Ji. ii. 105; Hyginus, Fab. 85. Euripides wrote a 
tragedy Ohrysippus on this subject. See Zragicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 632 sqgqg. The 
tragedy is alluded to by Cicero (Tuscul. Disput. iv. 33. 71). 
As to Chrysippus, see also aboye, iii. 5. 5. 


163 


mM 2 


APOLLODORUS 


/ Ἔν oe ” / ς \ 9 \ > “ ld 
pews,’ ἥτις ἤρα Θυέστου. 0 be Arpeus εὐξάμενός 
ποτε τῶν αὑτοῦ " ποιμνίων, ὅπερ ἂν κάλλιστον 
γένηται, τοῦτο θῦσαι ᾿Αρτέμιδι, λέγουσιν ἀρνὸς 
φανείσης χρυσῆς ὅτι κατημέλησε τῆς εὐχῆς" 
πνίξας δὲ αὐτὴν εἰς λάρνακα κατέθετο κἀκεῖ 
ἐφύλασσε ταύτην' ἣν ᾿Δερόπη δίδωσι τῷ Θυέστῃ 
μοιχευθεῖσα ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. χρησμοῦ γὰρ γεγονότος 
τοῖς Μυκηναίοις ἑλέσθαι βασιλέα Πελοπίδην, 
μετεπέμψαντο ᾿Ατρέα καὶ Θυέστην. λόγου δὲ 
γενομένου περὶ τῆς βασιλείας ἐξεῖπε Θυέστης τῷ 
πλήθει τὴν βασιλείαν δεῖν ἔχειν τὸν ἔχοντα τὴν 
ἄρνα τὴν χρυσῆν' συνθεμένου δὲ τοῦ ᾿Ατρέως 
12 δείξας ἐβασίλευσε. Ζεὺς δὲ Ἑρμῆν πέμπει πρὸς 

᾿Ατρέα καὶ λέγει συνθέσθαι πρὸς Θυέστην περὶ 
τοῦ βασιλεῦσαι ᾿Ατρέα, εἰ τὴν ἐναντίαν ὁδεύσει 

ὁ Ἥλιος: Θυέστου δὲ συνθεμένου τὴν δύσιν εἰς 

ἀνατολὰς ὁ ἽἭλιος ἐποιήσατο' ὅθεν ἐκμαρτυρή- 

σαντος τοῦ δαίμονος τὴν Θυέστου πλεονεξίαν, τὴν 
βασιλείαν ᾿Ατρεὺς παρέλαβε καὶ Θυέστην ἐφυ- 
13 γάδευσεν. αἰσθόμενος δὲ τῆς μοιχείας ὕστερον 


- 
-- 


' Κατρέως Wagner: καστρέως EK. 
2 αὑτοῦ Wagner: αὐτοῦ E. 


1 This story of the golden lamb, and of the appeal made to its 
possession by the two brothers in the contest for the kingdom, 
is told in substantially the same way by J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, 
i. 425 sqqg.; Scholiast on Homer, Ji. ii. 106; Scholiast on 
Euripides, Orestes, 811, 998. Tzetzes records the vow of Atreus 
to sacrifice the best of his flock to Artemis, and he cites as 
his authority Apollonius, which is almost certainly a mistake 
for Apollodorus. Probably Tzetzes and the Scholiasts drew 
on the present passage of Apollodorus, or rather on the 
passage as it appeared in the unabridged text instead of in 
the Hpitome which is all that we now possess of the last 


164 


EPITOME, 1. 10-13 


daughter of Catreus, and she loved Thyestes. And 
Atreus once vowed to sacrifice to Artemis the finest 
of his flocks; but when a golden lamb appeared, 
they say that he neglected to perform his vow, and 
having choked the lamb, he deposited it in a box 
and kept it there, and Aerope gave it to Thyestes, by 
whom she had been debauched. For the Mycenaeans 
had received an oracle which bade them choose a 
Pelopid for their king, and they had sent for Atreus 
and Thyestes. And when a discussion took place 
concerning the kingdom, Thyestes declared to the 
multitude that the kingdom ought to belong to him 
who owned the golden lamb, and when Atreus 
agreed, Thyestes produced the lamb and was 
made king. But Zeus sent Hermes to Atreus and 
told him to stipulate with Thyestes that Atreus 
should be king if the sun should go backward ; and 
when Thyestes agreed, the sun set in the east ; 
hence the deity having plainly attested the usur- 
pation of Thyestes, Atreus got the kingdom and 
banished Thyestes.1 But afterwards being apprized 


part of the Library. Euripides told the story allusively in 
much the same way. See his Electra, 699 sqq.; Orestes, 
996 sqq. Compare Plato, Politicus, 12, pp. 268 sg. ; Pau- 
sanias, 11, 18, 1; Lucian, De astrologia, 12 ; Dio Chrysostom, 
Or. Ixvi. vol. ii. p. 221, ed. L. Dindorf; Accius, quoted by 
Cicero, De natura deorum, iii. 27. 68; Seneca, Thyestes, 
222-235; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Theb. iv. 306; 
Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. 
pp. 7, 125 sq. (First Vatican Mythographer, 22; Second 
Vatican Mythographer, 147). From these various accounts 
and allusions it would seem that in their dispute for the 
kingdom, which Atreus claimed in right of birth as the elder 
(J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 426), it was agreed that he who 
could exhibit the greatest portent should be king. Atreus 
intended to produce the golden lamb, which had been born in 


165 


APOLLODORUS 


κήρυκα πέμψας ἐπὶ διαλλαγὰς αὐτὸν ἐκάλει" καὶ 
ψευσάμενος εἶναι φίλος, παραγενομένου τοὺς παῖ- 
das, ods εἶχεν ἐκ νηΐδος νύμφης, ᾿Αγλαὸν" καὶ 
Καλλιλέοντα καὶ ᾿Ορχομενόν, ἐπὶ τὸν Διὸς βωμὸν 
καθεσθέντας ἱκέτας ἔσφαξε, καὶ μελίσας καὶ 
καθεψήσας παρατίθησι Θυέστῃ χωρὶς τῶν ἄκρων, 
ἐμφορηθέντι" δὲ δείκνυσι τὰ ἄκρα καὶ τῆς χώρας 
14 αὐτὸν ἐκβάλλει. Θυέστης δὲ κατὰ πάντα τρόπον 


+ ᾿Αγλαὸν Wagner (comparing J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 449, 
Tov ᾿Αγλαόν,᾿ Ορχομενόν, Κάλλαον) : ἀγωὸν Εἰ. 
5 ἐμφορηθέντι Frazer : ἐμφορηθέντα B, Wagner. 


his flocks ;-but meanwhile the lamb had been given by his 
treacherous wife Aerope to her paramour Thyestes, who pro- 
duced it in evidence of his claim and was accordingly awarded 
the crown. However, with the assistance of Zeus, the right- 
ful claimant Atreus was able to exhibit a still greater portent, 
which was the sun and the Pleiades retracing their course in 
the sky and setting in the east instead of in the west. This 
mighty marvel, attesting the divine approbation of Atreus, 
clinched the dispute in his favour; he became king, and 
banished his rival Thyestes. According to a different account, 
which found favour with the Latin poets, the sun reversed 
his course in the sky, not in order to demonstrate the right 
of Atreus to the crown, but on the contrary to mark his dis- 
gust and horror at the king for murdering his nephews and 
dishing up their mangled limbs to their father Thyestes at 
table. See J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 451; Statyllius Flaccus, 
in Anthologia Palatina, ix. 98. 2; Hyginus, Fab. 88 and 258 ; 
Ovid, T'ristia, ii. 391 sq.; id. Ars amat. i. 327 sqq. ; Seneca, 
Thyestes, 776 sqq.; Martial, iii. 45. 1 sq. From the verses 
of Statyllius Flaccus we may infer that this latter was the 
interpretation put on the backward motion of the sun by 
Sophocles in his tragedy Atreus. See The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. p. 93. In later times 
rationalists explained the old fable by saying that Atreus 
was an astronomer who first calculated an eclipse, and so 
threw his less scientific brother into the shade (Hyginus, 


160 


EPITOME, π΄. 13-14 


of the adultery, he sent a herald to Thyestes with a 
proposal of accommodation ; and when he had lured 
Thyestes by a pretence of friendship, he slaughtered 
the sons, Aglaus, Callileon, and Orchomenus, whom 
Thyestes had by a Naiad nymph, though they had 
sat down as suppliants on the altar of Zeus. And 
having cut them limb from limb and boiled them, he 
served them up to Thyestes without the extremities ; 
and when Thyestes had eaten heartily of them, he 
showed him the extremities, and cast him out of the 
country.' But seeking by all means to pay Atreus 


Fab. 158 ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. i. 568), or who first pointed 
out that the sun appears to revolve in a direction contrary 
to the motion of the stars. See Strabo, i. 2. 15, p. 23 ; Lucian, 
De astrologia, 12. A fragment of Euripides appears to show 
that he put in the mouth of Atreus this claim to astronomical 
discovery. See Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. 
Nauck?, p. 639 (frag. 861). A still more grandiose explana- 
tion of the myth was given by Plato (l.c.), who adduced it, 
with grave irony, as evidence that in alternate cycles of vast 
duration the universe revolves in opposite directions, the 
reversal of its motion at the end of each cycle being accom- 
panied by a great destruction of animal life, This magnificent 
theory was perhaps suggested to the philosopher by the spe- 
culations of Empedocles, and it bears a resemblance not only 
_ to the ancient Indian doctrine of successive epochs of creation 
and destruction, but also to Herbert Spencer’s view of the 
great cosmic process as moving eternally in alternate and 
measureless cycles of evolution and dissolution. See Sir 
Charles Lyell, Principles of Geology, Twelfth Edition (London, 
1875), i. 7, quoting the Laws of Manu; Herbert Spencer, 
First Pr inciples, Third Edition (London, 1875), pp. 536 sq. 
Compare Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 303 «qq. 

1 As to the famous, or infamous, Thyestean banquet, see 
Aeschylus, Agamemnon, 1590 sqq.; Pausanias, ii. 18. 1; J. 
Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 447 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 88; Seneca, 
Thyestes, 682 sqq.; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. i. 568, xi. 262; 
Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, heb. iv. 306; Sceriptores 
rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 7, 126, © 


167 


APOLLODORUS 


ζητῶν ᾿Ατρέα μετελθεῖν ἐχρηστηριάζετο περὶ Tov- 
του καὶ λαμβάνει χρησμόν, ὡς εἰ παῖδα γεννήσει 
τῇ θυγατρὶ συνελθών. ποιεῖ οὖν ᾿ οὕτω καὶ γεννᾷ 
ἐκ τῆς θυγατρὸς Αἴγισθον," ὃς ἀνδρωθεὶς καὶ 
μαθών, ὅτι Θυέστου παῖς ἐστι, κτείνας ᾿Ατρέα 
Θυέστῃ τὴν βασιλείαν ἀποκατέστησεν. 


* 2% ὩΣ * * Ἐξ * +* 
Tz 15 «Τὸν δ᾽ ᾿Αγαμέμνονα ὃ τροφὸς μετὰ τοῦ Μενελάου 


1 οὖν Frazer: γοῦν E, Wagner. 

* Wagner marks a lacuna between θυγατρὸς and Αἴγισθον. 
There seems to be none in the MS. 

3 τὸν δ᾽ ’Ayauéuvova ... Μενέλαος Ἑλένην. These verses 
are inserted from J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, i. 456-465, who may 
have borrowed the substance of them from Apollodorus. 


209 (First Vatican Mythographer, 22; Second Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 147; Third Vatican Mythographer, viii. 16). Sopho- 
cles wrote at least two tragedies on the fatal feud between the 
brothers, one of them being called Atreus and the other 
Thyestes. The plots of the plays are not certainly known, but 
it is thought probable that in the former he dealt with the 
cannibal banquet, and in the latter with the subsequent 
adventures and crimes of Thyestes. See The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 91 sqq., 185 sqq. 
Euripides also wrote a tragedy called Thyestes. See Tragi- 
corum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 480 sqq. 
Tzetzes agrees with Apollodorus as to the names of the three 
murdered sons of Thyestes, except that he calls one of them 
Callaus instead.of Callileon. Only two, Tantalus and Plis- 
thenes, are named by Seneca and Hyginus. 

1 The later history of Thyestes, including his incest with his 
daughter Pelopia, is narrated much more fully by Hyginus 
(Fab. 87 and 88), who is believed to have derived the story 
from the Thyestes of Sophocles. See The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 185 sqq. The incest 
and the birth of Aegisthus, who is said to have received his 


168 


EPITOME, 1. 14-15 


out, Thyestes inquired of the oracle on the subject, 
and received an answer that it could be done if he were 
to beget a son by intercourse with his own daughter. 
He did so accordingly, and begot Aegisthus by his 
daughter. And Aegisthus, when he was grown to 
manhood and had learned that he was a son of 
Thyestes, killed Atreus, and restored the kingdom 
to Thyestes.! 


* ἧς * * * τι * * 
But? the nurse took Agamemnon and Menelaus 


-name because he was suckled by a goat, are told more briefly 
by Lactantius Placidus (on Statius, Theb. iv. 306) and the 
First and Second Vatican Mythographers (Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 7 sq., 126). 
The incest is said to have been committed at Sicyon, where 
the father and daughter met by night without recognizing each 
other ; the recognition occurred at a later time by means of a 
sword which Pelopia had wrested from her ravisher, and with 
which, on coming to a knowledge of her relationship to him, 
she stabbed herself to death. 

2 The passage translated in this paragraph does not occur 
in our present text of Apollodorus, which is here defective. 
It is found in the Chiliades of J. Tzetzes (i. 456-465), who 
probably borrowed it from Apollodorus ; for in the preceding 
lines Tzetzes narrates the crimes of Atreus and Thyestes in 
agreement with Apollodorus and actually cites him as his 
authority, if, as seems nearly certain, we should read Apollo- 
dorus for Apollonius in his text (see above p. 164). The 
restoration of the passage to its present place in the text of 
Apollodorus is due to the German editor R. Wagner. Here 
after describing how Aegisthus had murdered Atreus and 
placed his own father Thyestes on the throne of Mycenae, 
Apollodorus tells us how the nurse of Atreus’s two children, 
Agamemnon and Menelaus, saved the lives of her youthful 
charges by conveying them to Sicyon. The implied youthful- 
ness of Agamemnon and Menelaus at the time of the death of 
their father Atreus is inconsistent with the narrative of 
Hyginus (fab. 88), who tells how Atreus had sent his two sons 
abroad to find and arrest Thyestes. 


169 


APOLLODORUS 


” \ > A fal an 
ἄγει πρὸς lodupeidea, κρατοῦντα Σικυῶνος, 
ὃς πάλιν τούτους πέπομφε πρὸς Αἰτωλὸν Οἰνέα. 
μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ Τυνδάρεως, τούτους κατάγει πάλιν, 
οἵ τὸν Θυέστην μὲν αὐτὸν Ἥρας βωμῷ φυγόντα 
ὁρκώσαντες διώκουσιν οἰκεῖν τὴν Κυθηρίαν. 
οἱ δὲ Τυνδάρεω γαμβροὶ γίνονται θυγατράσιν, 
ὁ ᾿Αγαμέμνων μὲν λαβὼν σύνευνον Κλυταιμνή- 
στραν, 
7 > a x / / \ / 
κτείνας αὐτῆς τὸν σύζυγον Τάνταλον τὸν Θυέστου 
\ / / a / «ε / 
συν τέκνῳ Travu νεογνῷ, Μενέλαος “EXévnv.> 


S 16. ᾿Αγαμέμνων δὲ βασιλεύει Μυκηναίων καὶ γαμεῖ 


Τυνδάρεω θυγατέρα Κλυταιμνήστραν, τὸν πρό- 
τερον αὐτῆς ἄνδρα Τάνταλον Θυέστου σὺν τῷ 
παιδὶ κτείνας, καὶ γίνεται αὐτῷ παῖς μὲν Ὀρέσ- 
της, θυγατέρες δὲ Χρυσόθεμις᾽ Ηλέκτρα Ἰφιγένεια. 
Μενέλαος δὲ Ἑλένην γαμεῖ καὶ βασιλεύει Σπάρ- 
της, Τυνδάρεω τὴν βασιλείαν δόντος αὐτῷ. 

III. Αὖθις δὲ ᾿Βλένην ᾿Αλέξανδρος ἁρπάξει, ὥς 
τινες λέγουσι κατὰ βούλησιν Διός, i ἵνα Εὐρώπης 
καὶ ᾿Ασίας εἰς πόλεμον. ἐλθούσης 3 ἡ θυγάτηρ 
αὐτοῦ ἔνδοξος γένηται, ἢ καθάπερ εἶπον ἄλλοι 
ὅπως τὸ τῶν ἡμιθέων γένος ἀρθῆ. διὰ δὴ τούτων 

1 κτείνας Frazer (compare Euripides, Iphigenia in Aulis, 
1150; Pausanias, ii. 18. 2, ii. 22. 2sq.; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, 


i. 464, quoted above): κτείναντος δ, Wagner. 
2 ἐλθούσης S. Perhaps we should read ἐλθουσῶν. 


1 Polyphides is said to have been the twenty-fourth king 
of Sicyon and to have reigned at the time when Troy was 
taken. See Eusebius, Chronic. vol. i. coll. 175, 176, ed. 
A. Schoene. 

2 As to Tantalus, the first husband of Clytaemnestra, and 
his murder by Agamemnon, see Euripides, Iphigenia in 


170 


EPITOME, uw. 15-10. 2 


to Polyphides, lord of Sicyon,! who again sent them 
to Oeneus, the Aetolian. Not long afterwards Tyn- 
dareus brought them back again, and they drove 
away Thyestes to dwell in Cytheria, after that they 
had taken an oath of him at the altar of Hera, to 
which he had fled. And they became the sons-in-law 
of Tyndareus by marrying his daughters, Agamemnon 
getting Clytaemnestra to wife, after he had slain her 
spouse Tantalus, the son of Thyestes, together with 
his newborn babe, while Menelaus got Helen. 

And Agamemnon reigned over the Mycenaeans and 
married Clytaemnestra, daughter of Tyndareus, after 
slaying her former husband Tantalus, son of Thyestes, 
with his child.2, And there were born to Agamemnon 
a son Orestes, and daughters, Chrysothemis, Electra, 
and Iphigenia.* And Menelaus married Helen and 
reigned over Sparta, Tyndareus having ceded the 
kingdom to him.‘ 

III. But afterwards Alexander carried off Helen, 
as some say, because such was the will of Zeus, in 
order that his daughter might be famous for having 
embroiled Europe and Asia; or, as others have said, 
that the race of the demigods might be exalted. For 


Aulis, 1148 sqq. ; Pausanias, 11, 18. 2, 11. 22.2 sq. According 
to Pausanias, he was a son of Thyestes or of Broteas, and his 
bones were deposited in a large bronze vessel at Argos. 

3 In Homer (JJ. ix. 142 sqq.) Agamemnon says that he has 
a son Orestes and three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and 
Iphianassa (Iphigenia), and he offers to give any one of his 
daughters in marriage to Achilles without a dowry, if only that 
doughty hero will forgive him and fight again for the Greeks 
against Troy. Electra, the daughter of Agamemnon, who 
᾿ figures so prominently in Greek tragedy, is unknown to 
Homer, and so is the sacrifice of Agamemnon’s third daughter, 
[phigenia. 


4 See above, iii. 11, 2. 


171 


Es 


ῷ9 


APOLLODORUS 


μίαν αἰτίαν μῆλον περὶ κάλλους Ἔρις ἐμβάλλει 
Ἥρᾳ καὶ ᾿Αθηνᾷ ᾷ καὶ ᾿Αφροδίτῃ, καὶ κελεύει, Ζεὺς * 

Ἑρμῆν εἰς Ἴδην πρὸς ᾿Αλέξανδρον. ἄγειν, ἵνα ὑπ 
ἐκείνου διακριθῶσι. αἱ δὲ ἐπαγγέλλονται δῶρα 
δώσειν "᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ, | Ηρα μὲν πασῶν προκριθεῖσα 
βασιλείαν πάντων," ᾿Αθηνᾶ δὲ πολέμου νίκην, 
᾿Αφροδίτη δὲ γάμον “λένης. ὁ δὲ 38 ᾿Αφροδίτην 
προκρίνει καὶ πηξαμένου Φερέκλου ναῦς * εἰς Σπάρ- 
τὴν ἐκπλέει. ἐφ᾽ ἡμέρας δ᾽ ἐννέα ξενισθεὶς παρὰ 
Μενελάῳ, τῇ δεκάτῃ πορευθέντος εἰς Κρήτην ἐκεί- 
νου κηδεῦσαι τὸν μητροπάτορα Κατρέα, πείθει 
τὴν ᾿Ελένην ἀπαγαγεῖν σὺν ἑαυτῷ. ἡ δὲ ἐνναέτη 


1 Ζεὺς Εἰ, omitted in 8. 

“Ἥρα μὲν πασῶν προκριθεῖσα βασιλείαν πάντων EK: Ἥρα μὲν 
οὖν ἔφη προκριθεῖσα δώσειν αὐτῷ πάντων βασιλείαν S. 

8. ὁ δὲ ᾿Αφροδίτην. .. τῇ δεκάτῃ E: ᾿Αφροδίτην δὲ προκρίνας 
πηξαμένου ναῦς Φερέκλου πλεύσας εἰς Σπάρτην ἐπὶ ἐννέα ἡμέρας 
ἑενίζεται παρὰ Μενελάου. τῇ δεκάτῃ δὲ S. 

4 ναῦς S: νῆας KE. For the form vats compare ii. 8. 2 
Epitome, iii. 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 31, iv. 4, v. 13, 22, vi. 29, 
vii. 3, 4. 


1 As to the γι μάζα ἡ of Paris (Alexander), see Homer, JJ. 
xxiv. 25 sqqg.; Cypria, in Proclus, Chrestom. i. (Hpicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. 6. Kinkel, pp. 16 sq.; Hesiod, 
etc., ed. H. G. Evelyn-White, pp. 488, 490, in Loeb Classical 
Inbrary) ; Euripides, Troades, 924 sqq., Iphigenia in Aulis, 
1290 sqq., Helen, 23 sqq., Andromache, 274 sqq. ; Isocrates, 
Flelene, 41; Lucian, Dial. deorum, 20, Dial. marin. δ: 
Tzetzes, Schol. on panne 93; Hyginus, Fab. 92; Ser- 
vius, on Virgil, Aen. i. 27; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. τὶ: ἮΙ. Bode, vol. i. pp. 65 sqg., 142 sq. (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 208 ; Second Vatican Mythographer, 
205). The story ran that all the gods and goddesses, except 
Strife, were invited to attend the marriage of Peleus and 
Thetis, and that Strife, out of spite at being overlooked, 
threw among the wedding guests a golden apple inscribed 


[72 


EPITOME, m1. 2-3 


one of these reasons Strife threw an apple as a prize 
of beauty to be contended for by Hera, Athena, and 
Aphrodite; and Zeus commanded Hermes to lead 
them to Alexander on Ida in order to be judged by 
him. And they promised to give Alexander gifts. 
Hera said that if she were preferred to all women, 
she would give him the kingdom over all men ; and 
Athena promised victory in war, and Aphrodite the 
hand of Helen. And he decided in favour of 
Aphrodite; and sailed away to Sparta with ships 
built by Phereclus.*. For nine days he was enter- 
tained by Menelaus; but on the tenth day, Menelaus 
having gone on a journey to Crete to perform the 
obsequies of his mother’s father Catreus, Alexander 
persuaded Helen to go off? with him. And _ she 


with the words, ‘‘ Let the fair one take it,” or ‘‘ The apple 
for the fair.” Three goddesses, Hera, Athena, and Aphro- 
dite, contended for this prize of beauty, and Zeus referred 
the disputants to the judgment of Paris. The intervention 
of Strife was mentioned in the Cypria according to Proclus, 
but without mention of the golden apple, which first appears 
in late writers, such as Lucian and Hyginus. The offers made 
by the three divine competitors to Paris are recorded with 
substantial agreement by Euripides (T'roades, 924 sqq.), Iso- 
crates, Lucian, and Apollodorus. Hyginus is also in harmony 
with them, if in his text we read fortissimum for the for- 
missimum of the MSS., for which some editors wrongly read 
formosissimum. The scene of the judgment of Paris was 
represented on the throne of Apollo at Amyclae and on the 
chest of Cypselus at Olympia (Pausanias, iii. 18. 12, v. 19. 5). 

2 Compare Homer, 171. v. 59 sqq., from which we learn 
that the shipbuilder was a son of Tecton, who was a son of 
Harmon. The names of his father and grandfather indicate, 
as Dr. Leaf observes, that the business had been carried on 
in the family for three generations. Compare Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 97. 

3 The Greek for ‘‘to go off” is ἀπαγαγεῖν, a rare use of 
ἀπάγειν, which, however, occurs in the common phrase, ἄπαγε, 
‘* Be off with you!” 


173 


APOLLODORUS 


€ / nw 5 / ε ~ ~ 
Ερμιόνην καταλιποῦσα, ἐνθεμένη τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν 
χρημάτων, ἀνάγεται τῆς νυκτὸς σὺν αὐτῷ. “Hpa 
δὲ αὐτοῖς ἐπιπέμπει χειμῶνα πολύν, Up οὗ βια- 
σθέντες προσίσχουσι Σιδῶνι. εὐλαβούμενος δὲ 
᾿Αλέξανδρος μὴ διωχθῇ, πολὺν διέτριψε χρόνον 
ἐν Φοινίκῃ καὶ Κύπρῳ. ὡς δὲ ἀπήλπισε τὴν 
Sf a‘ > ; 1) Ὁ , y δέ 
ἰωξιν, ἧκεν εἰς Τροίαν μετὰ ᾿Ὡλένης. ἔνιοι δέ 
ς / x e \ ¢ lal \ 4 

φασιν EKnrevnvy μὲν ὑπὸ ᾿ρμοῦ κατὰ βούλησιν 
Διὸς κομισθῆναι κλαπεῖσανϊ εἰς Αἴγυπτον καὶ 
δοθεῖσαν Ilpwret τῷ βασιλεῖ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων 
φυλάττειν,᾽ Αλέξανδρον δὲ παραγενέσθαι εἰς Τροίαν 
πεποιημένον ἐκ νεφῶν εἴδωλον ᾿ΕἸλένης ἔχοντα. 


1 κλαπεῖσαν K: κατὰ πεῖσαν ὃ. 

1 With this account of the hospitable reception of Paris in 
Sparta, the departure of Menelaus for Crete, and the flight of 
the guilty pair, compare Proclus, Chrestom. i., in Epicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 17; J. Tzetzes, 
Antehomerica, 96-134. As to the death of Catreus, the 
maternal grandfather of Menelaus, see above, iii. 2. 1 sq. 

* The voyage of Paris and Helen to Sidon was known to 
Homer (11. vi. 289 sqq., with the Scholia on v. 291). It was 
also recorded in the epic Cypria, according to Proclus, who 
says that Paris captured the city (Hpicorum Graecorum Frag- 
menta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 18). Yet according to Herodotus 
(ii. 117), the author of the Cypria described how Paris and 
Helen sailed in three days from Sparta to Ilium with a fair 
wind and a smooth sea. It seems therefore that Herodotus 
and Proclus had different texts of the Cypria before them. 
Dictys Cretensis tells how, driven by the winds to Cyprus, 
Paris sailed with some ships to Sidon, where he was hos- 
pitably entertained by the king, but basely requited his 
hospitality by treacherously murdering his host and plun- 
dering the palace. In embarking with his booty on his ships, 
he was attacked by the Sidonians, but, after a bloody fight 
and the loss of two ships, he succeeded in beating off his 
assailants and putting to sea with the rest of his vessels. 
See Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, i. 5. 


17 4 


EPITOME, 11. 3-5 


abandoned Hermione, then nine years old, and put- 
ting most of the property on board, she set sail with 
him by night.! But Hera sent them a heavy storm 
which forced them to putin at Sidon. And fearing 
lest he should be pursued, Alexander spent much 
time in Phoenicia and Cyprus.? But when he thought 
that all chance of pursuit was over, he came to Troy 
with Helen. But some say that Hermes, in obedience 
to the will of Zeus, stole Helen and carried her to 
Egypt, and gave her to Proteus, king of the Egyptians, 
to guard, and that Alexander repaired to Troy with 
a phantom of Helen fashioned out of clouds.® 


8 Compare Euripides, Helene, 31-51, 582 sqq., 669 sqq., 
Electra, 1280 sqq. In the Helene the dramatist says that 
Hera, angry with Paris for preferring Aphrodite to her, 
fashioned a phantom Helen which he wedded, while the real 
Helen was transported by Hermes to Egypt and committed 
to the care of Preteus. In the Electra the poet says that it 
was Zeus who sent a phantom Helen to Troy, in order to 
stir up strife and provoke bloodshed among men. A different 
account is given by Herodotus (ii. 112-120). According to 
him, Paris carried the real Helen to Egypt, but there king 
Proteus, indignant at the crime of which Paris had been guilty, 
banished him from Egypt and detained Helen in safekeeping 
until her true husband, Menelaus, came and fetched her away. 
Compare Philostratus, Vit. Apollon. iv. 16; J. Tzetzes, 
Antehomerica, 147 sqq. Later writers accepted this view, 
adding that instead of the real Helen, whom he kept, Proteus 
conjured up by magic art a phantom Helen, which he gave 
to Paris to carry away with him to Troy. See Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 113; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 1. 651, 
ii. 592. So far as we know, the poet Stesichorus in the sixth 
century before our era was the first to broach the theory that 
Helen at Troy, for whom the Greeks and Trojans fought and 
died, was a mere wraith, while her true self was far away, 
whether at home in Sparta or with Proteus in Egypt; for 
there is nothing to show whether Stesichorus shared the 
opinion that Paris had spirited her away to the East before 
he returned, with or without her, to Troy. This view the 


175 


S 6 


oD) 


APOLLODORUS 


Μενέλαος δὲ αἰσθόμενος τὴν ἁρπαγὴν ἧκεν εἰς 
Μυκήνας πρὸς ᾿Αγαμέμνονα, καὶ δεῖται στρα- 
τείαν ἐπὶ Τροίαν ἀθροίξειν καὶ στρατολογεῖν τὴν 
“Ἑλλάδα. ὁ δὲ πέμπων κήρυκα πρὸς ἕκαστον τῶν 
βασιλέων τῶν ὅρκων ὑπεμίμνησκεν ὧν ὦμοσαν, 
καὶ περὶ τῆς ἰδίας γυναικὸς ἕκαστον ἀσφαλίξεσθαι 
παρήνει, ἴσην λέγων͵ γεγενῆσθαι τὴν τῆς “Ελλά- 
δος καταφρόνησιν καὶ κοινήν. ὄντων δὲ πολλῶν 
προθύμων στρατεύεσθαι, παραγίνονται καὶ πρὸς 
᾿Οδυσσέα εἰς ᾿Ιθάκην. | ὁ δὲ οὐ βουλόμενος ' στρα- 
τεύεσθαι προσποιεῖται μανίαν. Παλαμήδης δὲ ὁ 
Ναυπλίου ἤλεγξε τὴν μανίαν ψευδῆ, καὶ προσ- 
ποιησαμένῳ " μεμηνέναι παρηκολούθει: ἁρπάσας 
δὲ Τηλέμαχον ἐκ τοῦ κόλπου τῆς Πηνελόπης ὃ ὡς 
κτενῶν ἐξιφούλκει. ᾽Οδυσσεὺς δὲ περὶ τοῦ παιδὸς 
εὐλαβηθεὶς ὡμολόγησε τὴν προσποίητον μανίαν 
καὶ στρατεύεται. 


1 ὃ δὲ οὐ βουλόμενος S: ὅτι Ὀδυσσεὺς μὴ βουλόμενος EK. 

2 προσποιησαμένῳ KH: προσποιησαμένου ὃ 

3 ἐκ τοῦ κόλπου τῆς Πηνελόπης Εἰ: ἐκ τοῦ Πηνελόπης κόλ- 
που S. 


poet propounded by way of an apology to Helen for the evil 
he had spoken of her in a former poem ; for having lost the 
sight of his eyes he ascribed the loss to the vengeance of the 
heroine, and sought to propitiate her by formally retracting 
all the scandals he had bruited about concerning her. See 
Plato, Phaedrus, Ὁ. 2434 8B, Republic,ix. p. 5860; Isocrates, 
Helene, 64; Pausanias, iii. 19. 18; Poetae Lyrici Graeci, ed. 
Th. Bergk’, iii. 980 sqq. 
1 As to these oaths, see above, iii. 10. 9. 

2 As to the madness which Ulysses feigned in order to 
escape going to the Trojan war, see Proclus, in Eptcorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 18; Lucian, De 
domo, 30; Philostratus, Heroica, xi. 2 Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 818; Cicero, De offictis, iii. 26. 97; Hyginus, 


176 


EPITOME, πὶ. 6-7 


When Menelaus was aware of the rape, he came 
to Agamemnon at Mycenae, and begged him to 
muster an army against Troy and to raise levies in 
Greece. And he, sending a herald to each of the 
kings, reminded them of the oaths which they had 
sworn,! and warned them to look to the safety each of 
his own wife, saying that the affront had been offered 
equally to the whole of Greece. And while many 
were eager to join in the expedition, some repaired 
also to Ulysses in Ithaca. But he, not wishing to go 
to the war, feigned madness. However, Palamedes, 
son of Nauplius, proved his madness to be fictitious ; 
and when Ulysses pretended to rave, Palamedes 
followed him, and snatching Telemachus from Pene- 
lope’s bosom, drew his sword as if he would kill him. 
And in his fear for the child Ulysses confessed that 
his madness was pretended, and he went to the 
war.” 


Fab. 95 ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 81 ; Lactantius Placidus, 
on Statius, Achill. i. 93; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 12, 140 sq. (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 35; Second Vatican Mythographer, 200). The usual 
story seems to have been that to support his pretence of in- 
sanity Ulysses yoked an ox and a horse or an ass to the plough 
and sowed salt. While he was busy fertilizing the fields in 
this fashion, the Greek envoys arrived, and Palamedes, seeing 
through the deception, laid the infant son of Ulysses in front 
of the plough, whereupon the father at once checked the 
plough and betrayed his sanity. However, Lucian agrees with 
Apollodorus in saying that Palamedes threatened the child 
with his sword, though at the same time, by mentioning the 
unlike animals yoked together, he shows that he had the scene 
of the ploughing in his mind. His description purports to be 
based on a picture, probably a famous picture of the scene 
which was still exhibited at Ephesus in the time of Pliny 
(Nat. Hist. xxxv. 129). Sophocles wrote a play on the 
subject, called The Mad Ulysses. See The Fragments of 
Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 115 sqq. 

177 

VOL; I{1. N 


E 8 


APOLLODORUS 


\"O7 ᾿Οδυσσεὺς λαβὼν αἰχμάλωτον Φρύγα 
ἠνάγκασε γράψαι περὶ προδοσίας ὡς παρὰ Πριά- 
μου πρὸς Παλαμήδην' καὶ χώσας ἐν ταῖς σκηναῖς ' 
αὐτοῦ χρυσὸν τὴν δέλτον ἔρριψεν ἐν τῷ στρατο- 
πέδῳ. ᾿Αγαμέμνων δὲ ἀναγνοὺς καὶ εὑρὼν τὸν 
χρυσόν, τοῖς συμμάχοις αὐτὸν ὡς προδότην παρέ- 
δωκε καταλεῦσαι. 

Ὅτι Μενέλαος σὺν ᾿Οδυσσεῖ καὶ Ταλθυβίῳ 
πρὸς «Κινύραν eres Κύπρον ἐλθόντες συμμαχεῖν 
ἔπειθον" ὁ δὲ ᾿Αγαμέμνονι μὲν οὐ παρόντι θώρακας 
ἐδωρήσατο, ὁ ὀμόσας δὲ πέμψειν πεντήκοντα ναῦς, 
μίαν πέμψας, ἣ ἧς ἦρχεν Die aaie Μυγδαλίωνος, καὶ 
τὰς λοιπὰς ἐκ γῆς πλάσας μεθῆκεν εἰς τὸ πέλαγος. 


Ι0 “Oru θυγατέρες ᾿Ανίου τοῦ “᾿Απόλλωνος ’EXals 


1 We should perhaps read ἐν τῇ σκηνῇ. 

* πρὸς «--Κινύραν eis> Κύπρον Wagner: πρὸς Κύπρον E. 

5. The personal name of the captain of the ship seems to 
have dropped out. 

4 ᾿Ανίου τοῦ Wagner: ᾿Ανιούτου τοῦ E. 


1 The Machiavellian device by which the crafty Ulysses 
revenged himself on Palamedes for forcing him to go to the 
war is related more fully by a Scholiast on Euripides (Orestes, 
432) and Hyginus (Fab. 105). According to the Scholiast, a 
servant of Palamedes was bribed to secrete the forged letter 
and the gold under his master’s bed, where they were dis- 
covered and treated as damning ev idence of treason, Accord- 
ing to Hyginus, Ulysses had recourse to a still more elaborate 
stratagem in order to bury the gold in the earth under the 
tent of Palamedes. Compare Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 81 ; 
Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Achill. i. 93; Scriptores 
rerum mythicarum ‘Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 12, 
140 sg. (First Vatican Mythographer, 35; Second Vatican 
Mythographer, 200). An entirely dillerent account of the 
plot against Palamedes is told by Dictys Cretensis (Bellum 


178 


EPITOME, tu. 8-10 


Having taken a Phrygian prisoner, Ulysses com- 
pelled him to write a letter of treasonable purport 
ostensibly sent by Priam to Palamedes; and having 
buried gold in the quarters of Palamedes, he dropped 
the letter in the camp. Agamemnon read the letter, 
found the gold, and delivered up Palamedes to the 
allies to be stoned as a traitor.} 

Menelaus went with Ulysses and Talthybius to 
Cinyras in Cyprus and tried to persuade him to join 
the allies. He made a present of breastplates to the 
absent Agamemnon,” and swore he would send fifty 
ships, but he sent only one, commanded by the son 
of Mygdalion, and the rest he moulded out of earth 
and launched them in the sea.* 

The daughters of Anius, the son of Apollo, to wit, 


Trojanum, ii. 15). He says that Ulysses and Diomede in- 
duced him to descend into a well, and then buried him under 
rocks which they hurled down on the top of him. 

2 Compare Homer, Jl. xi. 19 sgg., who describes only one 
richly decorated breastplate. 

8 Compare Eustathius on Homer, J/. xi. 20, p. 827, who 
says that, according to some people, Cinyras ‘‘swore to 
Menelaus at Paphos that he would send fifty ships, but he 
despatched only one, and the rest he fashioned of earth and 
sent them with earthen men in them; thus he cunningly 
evaded his oath by keeping it with an earthenware fleet.” 
Compare the Townley Scholia on Homer, JI. xi. 20, ed. E. 
Maass (Oxford, 1887), vol. i. p. 378. Wagner may be right 
in supposing that this ruse of the Cyprian king was recorded 
in the epic Cypria, though it is not mentioned in the brief 
summary of the poem compiled by Proclus. See R. Wagner, 
Epitoma Vaticana ex Apollodort Bibliotheca, pp. 181 sq. 
A different account of the Greek embassy to Cinyras is given 
by Alcidamas (Odyss. 20 sq., pp. 181 sq., ed. Blass). He says 
that Cinyras bribed the Greek envoy Palamedes to relieve 
him from military service, and that, though he promised to 
send a hundred ships, he sent none at all. 


179 
N 2 


APOLLODORUS 


Σπερμὼ Οἰνώ, ai Οἰνότροφοι λεγόμεναι: als 

ἐχαρίσατο Διόνυσος ποιεῖν ἐκ γῆς ἔλαιον σῖτον 

οἶνον. 

11 | Συνηθροίξετο δὲ ὁ στρατὸς ἐν Αὐλίδι. οἱ δὲ 

στρατεύσαντες ἐπὶ Τροίαν ἦσαν οἵδε. Βοιωτῶν 
1 Οἰνότροφοι EK: Οἰνότροποι Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 


570 (but according to the editor, Miiller, the MSS. have @ 
written over the 7). 


' As to these three women, the Wine-growers (Oinotrophoi 
or Oinotropoi) see Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. 
Kinkel, pp. 29 sq. ; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 570, 581; 
Scholiast on Homer, Od. vi. 164; Ovid, Metamorph. xiii. 
632-674 ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. iii. 80; Dictys Cretensis, 
Bellum Trojanum, i. 23. Each of the Wine-growers received 
from Dionysus the power of producing the thing from which 
she derived her name; thus Elais, who took her name from 
elaia, ‘‘an olive,” could produce olive oil ; Spermo, who took 
her name from sperma, ‘‘ seed,” could produce corn; and 
Oeno, who took her name from oznos, ‘‘ wine,” could produce 
wine. According to Apollodorus, the women elicited these 
products from the ground ; but according to Ovid and Servius, 
whatever they touched was turned into olive-oil, corn, or 
wine, as the case might be. Possessing these valuable powers, 
the daughters of Anius were naturally much sought after. 
Their father, a son of Apollo, was king of Delos and at the 


same time priest of his father Apollo (Virgil, Aen. iii. 80), and - 


when Aeneas visited the island on his way from Troy, the 
king, with pardonable pride, dwelt on his Senohuneel accom- 
plishments and on the income they had brought him in (Ovid, 
Metam. xiii. 650 sqq.). It is said by Tzetzes that when the 
Greeks sailed for Troy and landed in Delos, the king, who had 
received the gift of prophecy from his divine sire (Diodorus 
Siculus, v. 62. 2), foretold that Troy would not be taken for 
ten years, and invited them to stay with him for nine years, 
promising that his daughters would find them in food all the 
time. This hospitable offer was apparently not accepted at 
the moment ; but afterwards, when the Greeks were encamped 
before Troy, Agamemnon sent for the young women and 


180 


EEE . νυ μἱμνει 


Μ᾿ 


EPITOME, 11. 1ro-11 


Elais, Spermo, and Oeno, are called the Wine- 
growers: Dionysus granted them the power of pro- 
ducing oil, corn, and wine from the earth.’ 

The armament mustered in Aulis. The men who 
went to the Trojan war were as follows? :—Of the 


ordered them peremptorily to feed his army. This they did 
successfully, if we may believe Tzetzes; but, to judge by 
Ovid’s account, they found the work of the commissariat too 
exacting, for he says that they took to flight. Being over- 
taken by their pursuers, they prayed to Dionysus, who turned 
them into white doves. And that, says Servius, is why down 
to this day it is deemed a sin to harm a dovein Delos. From 
Tzetzes we learn that the story of these prolific damsels was 
told by Pherecydes and by the author of the epic Cypria, 
from whom Pherecydes may have borrowed it. Stesichorus 
related how Menelaus and Ulysses went to Delos to fetch the 
daughters of Anius (Scholiast on Homer, Od. vi. 164). If we 
may judge from the place which the brief mention of these 
women occupies in the Lpitome of Apollodorus, we may con- 
jecture that in his full text he described how their services 
were requisitioned to victual the fleet and army assembling at 
Aulis. The conjecture is confirmed by the statement of 
Dictys Cretensis, that before the Greek army set sail from 
Aulis, it had received a supply of corn, wine, and other 
provisions from Anius and his daughters. It may have been 


in order to ensure these supplies that Menelaus and Ulysses 


repaired to Delos for the purpose of securing the persons of 
the women. 

2 As to list of the Greek forces which mustered at Aulis, 
see Homer, 71. ii. 494-759; Euripides, Inhigenia in Aulis, 
253 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 97; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum T'ro- 
janum, i. 17. The numbers of the ships and leaders recorded 
by Apollodorus do not always tally with those of Homer. 
For example, he gives the Boeotians forty ships, while Homer 
(v. 509) gives them fifty ; and he says that the Phocians had 
four leaders, whereas Homer (v. 517) mentions only two. 
The question of the catalogue of the Greek forces, and its 
relation to Homer and history, are fully discussed by Dr. 
Walter Leaf in his Homer and History (London, 1915). He 
concludes that the catalogue forms no part of the original 


181 


APOLLODORUS 


μὲν ἡγεμόνες δέκα' ἦγον ναῦς μ΄. ᾿Ορχομενίων 
δ΄. ἦγον ναῦς λ΄. Φωκέων ἡγεμόνες 8: ἦγον ναῦς 
μ΄. Λοκρῶν Αἴας ’Oidws:! ἦγε ναῦς μ΄. Εὐβοέων 
᾿Ελεφήνωρ Χαλκώδοντος καὶ ᾿Αλκυόνης" ἦγε ναῦς 
μ΄. ᾿Αθηναίων Μενεσθεύς: ἦγε ναῦς ν. Sara- 
12 μινίων" Αἴας ὁ Τελαμώνιος" ἦγε ναῦς ιβ΄. ᾿Αργείων 
Διομήδης Tudéws καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ: ἦγον ναῦς π΄. 
Μυκηναίων ᾿Αγαμέμνων ᾿Ατρέως καὶ ᾿Αερόπης 
ναῦς ρ΄. Λακεδαιμονίων Μενέλαος ᾿Ατρέως καὶ 
᾿Αερόπης ξ΄. Πυλίων ὃ Νέστωρ Νηλέως καὶ Xro- 
ρίδος ναῦς μ΄. ᾿Αρκάδων ᾿Αγαπήνωρ ναῦς ξ΄. 
λείων ᾿Αμφίμαχος καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ ναῦς μ΄. 
Δουλεχίων Μέγης Φυλέως ναῦς μ. Κεφαλλήνων 
᾿Οδυσσεὺς Λαέρτου καὶ ᾿Αντικλείας " ναῦς ιβ΄. 
Δἰτωλῶν Θόας ᾿Ανδραίμονος καὶ Γόργης" ἦγε 
ναῦς μ΄. Κρητῶν ᾿Ιδομενεὺς Δευκαλίωνος μ΄. 
Ῥοδίων '“ληπόλεμος " Ἡρακλέους καὶ ᾿Αστυόχης 
ναῦς θ΄. Συμαίων Νιρεὺς Χαρόπου ναῦς γί. 


oe 


1 Οιλέως Kerameus: ὁ iAdws S. 


~ Σαλαμινίων Kerameus : ΣΞαλμινίων S. 

ὃ Πυλίων Kerameus: Πηλίων ὃ. 

* ᾿Αντικλείας Kerameus: Αὐτικλείας S. 

ἢ Τληπόλεμος Kerameus: τλιπόλεβος S. 

" Συμαίων Νιρεὺς Χαρόπου Kerameus: κυμαίων νηρεὺς χαρο- 
ποῦ Ὁ. 


Iliad, but was added to it at a later time by a patriotic 
Boeotian for the purpose of glorifying his people by claiming 
that they played a very important part in the Trojan war, 
although this claim is inconsistent with the statement οἱ 
Thineydlities (1, 12) that the Boeotians did not migrate into 
the country henceforth known as Boeotia until sixty years 


182 


EPITOME, πὴ. 11-13 


Boeotians, ten leaders: they brought forty ships. Οἱ 
the Orchomenians, four: they brought thirty ships. 
Of the Phocians, four leaders: they brought forty 
ships. Of the Locrians, Ajax, son of Oeleus: he 
brought forty ships. Of the Euboeans, Elephenor, 
son of Chalecodon and Alcyone: he brought forty 
ships. Of the Athenians, Menestheus: he brought 
fifty ships. Of the Salaminians, Telamonian 
Ajax: he brought twelve ships. Of the Argives, 
Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and his company: they 
brought eighty ships. Of the Mycenaeans, Aga- 
memnon, son of Atreus and Aerope : a hundred ships. 
Of the Lacedaemonians, Menelaus, son of Atreus 
and Aerope: sixty ships. Of the Pylians, Nestor, 
son of Neleus and Chloris: forty ships. Of the 
Arcadians, Agapenor: seven ships. Of the Eleans, 
Amphimachus and his company: forty ships. Of 
the Dulichians, Meges, son of Phyleus: forty ships. 
Of the Cephallenians, Ulysses, son of Laertes and 
Anticlia: twelve ships. Of the Aetolians, Thoas, 
son of Andraemon and Gorge: he brought forty 
ships. Of the Cretans, Idomeneus, son of Deucalion : 
forty ships. Of the Rhodians, Tlepolemus, son of Her- 
cules and Astyoche: nine ships. Of the Symaeans, 


after the capture of Troy. I agree with Dr. Leaf in the 
belief, which he energetically maintains in this book, that 
the Trojan war was not a myth, but a real war, ‘‘fought 
out in the place, and at least generally in the manner, 
described in Homer,” and that the principal heroes and 
heroines recorded by Homer were not ‘‘ faded gods” but men 
and women of flesh and blood, of whose families and fortunes 
the memory survived in Greek tradition, though no doubt in 
course of time many mythical traits and incidents gathered 
round them, as they have gathered round the memories of the 
Hebrew patriarchs, of Alexander the Great, of Virgil, and of 
Charlemagne. 


183 


APOLLODORUS 


rs / a , 

Κώων Φείδιππος καὶ “Avtipos of Θεσσαλοῦ λ΄. 

/ 

14 Μυρμιδόνων ᾿Αχιλλεὺς Πηλέως καὶ Θέτιδος ν΄. 
/ Α 

ἐκ Φυλάκης Ἰ]ρωτεσίλαος ᾿Ιφίκλου μ΄. Φεραίων 

Εὔμηλος ᾿Αδμήτου ια΄. Ὀλιζώνων Φιλοκτήτης 

/ / 

Ποίαντος ζ΄. Αἰνιάνων Γουνεὺς ᾿᾽Ωκύτου kf’. 

γ / > 4 

Ρρικκαίων ἸΤοδαλείριος ᾿... λ΄. Ὀρμενίων EKvpu- 
a / 

muros”. . . ναῦς μ΄. Τυρτωνίων ὃ Πολυποίτης 

, 

Πειρίθου λ΄. Μαγνήτων Πρόθοος Τενθρήδονος * μ΄. 

ral ἴω , 
νῆες μὲν οὖν αἱ πᾶσαι aLy’, ἡγεμόνες δὲ μγ΄, HYE- 
μονεῖαι δὲ λ΄: 

aan fe a Qn / 
ES τό | Ὅτι ὄντος ἐν Αὐλίδι τοῦ στρατεύματος, θυσίας 
/ > / 5 «ς ᾽ὔ ὃ / > a 
γενομένης ᾿Απόλλωνι,5 ὁρμήσας δράκων ἐκ τοῦ 
βωμοῦ παρὰ τὴν πλησίον πλάτανον, οὔσης ἐν 
αὐτῇ νεοττιᾶς," τοὺς ἐνὶ αὐτῇ καταναλώσας στρου- 
θοὺς ὀκτὼ σὺν τῇ μητρὶ ἐνάτῃ λίθος ἐγένετο. 
Κάλχας δὲ εἰπὼν κατὰ Διὸς βούλησιν γεγονέναι 
αὐτοῖς τὸ σημεῖον τοῦτο, τεκμηράμενος ἐκ τῶν 

, v a / - ld e fal 

γεγονότων ἔφη δεκαετεῖ χρόνῳ δεῖν Τροίαν ἁλῶναι. 
16 καὶ πλεῖν παρεσκευάζοντο ἐπὶ Τροίαν. ᾿Αγαμέ- 
μνων οὖν αὐτὸς ἡγεμὼν ὃ τοῦ σύμπαντος στρατοῦ 

1 The blank is doubtless to be supplied thus : Ποδαλείριος 
« καὶ Μαχάων ᾿Ασκληπιοῦξ:, ‘‘Podalirius <and Machaon, 
sons of Aesculapius>,” as Wagner observes, comparing 
Homer, J/. ii. 731 sq. 

2 Εὐρύπυλος. Add <Evaiuovos>, ‘‘ Kurypylus, <son of 
Kuaemon>, as Wagner observes, comparing Homer, J/. ii. 
736. 

5 Τυρτωνίων Kerameus : γοργυτίων S. 

* TevOpnddvos Kerameus: Πενθρηδόνος δ᾽. 

Ὁ Ὅτι ὄντος ἐν Αὐλίδι τοῦ στρατεύματος, θυσίας γενυμένης 


᾿Απόλλωνι E: θυσίας δὲ γενομένης ἐν Αὐλίδι τῷ ᾿Απόλλωνι, 
ὄντος ἐκεῖ τοῦ στρατεύματος Ὁ. 


184 


EPITOME, wt. 13-16 


Nireus, son of Charopus: three ships. Of the Coans, 
Phidippus and Antiphus, the sons of Thessalus: 
thirty ships. Of the Myrmidons, Achilles, son of 
Peleus and Thetis: fifty ships. From Phylace, 
Protesilaus, son of Iphiclus: forty ships. Of the 
Pheraeans, Eumelus, son of Admetus: eleven ships. 
Of the Olizonians, Philoctetes, son of Poeas: seven 
ships. Of the Aeanianians, Guneus, son of Ocytus: 
twenty-two ships. Of the Triccaeans, Podalirius: 
thirty ships. Of the Ormenians, Eurypylus: forty 
ships. Of the Gyrtonians, Polypoetes, son of Piri- 
thous: thirty ships. Of the Magnesians, Prothous, 
son of Tenthredon: forty ships. The total of ships 
was one thousand and thirteen; of leaders, forty- 
three ; of leaderships, thirty. 

When the armament was in Aulis, after a sacrifice 
to Apollo, a serpent darted from the altar beside the 
neighbouring plane-tree, in which there was a nest ; 
and having consumed the eight sparrows in the 
nest, together with the mother-bird, which made 
the ninth, it was turned to stone. Calchas said 
that this sign was given them by the will of Zeus, 
and he inferred from what had happened that Troy 
was destined to be taken in a period of ten years.! 
And they made ready to sail against Troy. So 
Agamemnon in person was in command of the whole 


1 Compare Homer, J/. ii. 299-330; Proclus, in Hpicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 18; Cicero, De 
divinatione, ii. 30. 63-65 ; Ovid, Metamorph. xii. 11-23. 


5 νεοττιᾶς EK: veorreias δ. “ évS: ep E. 

ὅ καὶ πλεῖν παρεσκευάζοντο ἐπὶ Τροίαν. These words are 
wanting in E. 5; 

" λΑγαμέμνων οὖν αὐτὸς ἡγεμὼν ὃ : Ὅτι ᾿Αγαμέμνων ἡγεμὼν Ε΄. 


185 


APOLLODORUS 


1 δ᾽ ᾿Αχιλλεὺς πεντεκαιδεκαέτης 


ἣν, ἐναυάρχει 
τυγχάνων. 
ΒΕ Ayvoobytes δὲ τὸν ἐπὶ Τροίαν πλοῦν Μυσίᾳ 
προσίσχουσι καὶ ταύτην ἐπόρθουν, Τροίαν νομί- 
Cov res εἶναι. βασιλεύων δὲ Τήλεφος Μυσῶν, 
Ἡρακλέους παῖς, ἰδὼν τὴν χώραν λεηλατουμένην, 
τοὺς Μυσοὺς καθοπλίσας ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς συνεδίωκε 
τοὺς “Ἕλληνας καὶ πολλοὺς ἀπέκτεινεν, ἐν οἷς καὶ 
Θέρσανδρον τὸν Πολυνείκους ὑποστάντα. ὁρμή- 
σαντος δὲ ᾿Αχιλλέως ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν οὐ μείνας ἐδιώκετο" 
καὶ διωκόμενος ἐμπλακεὶς εἰς ἀμπέλου κλῆμα " 
18 τὸν μηρὸν τιτρώσκεται δόρατι. τῆς δὲ Μυσίας 
ἐξελθόντες “Ἕλληνες ἀνάγονται, καὶ χειμῶνος 
ἐπιγενομένου σφοδροῦ διαξευχθέντες ἀλλήλων εἰς 
τὰς πατρίδας καταντῶσιν. ὑποστρεψάντων οὖν 
τῶν  λλήνων τότε λέγεται τὸν πόλεμον εἰκοσαετῆ 
γενέσθαι: μετὰ γὰρ τὴν “EXévns ἁρπαγὴν ἔτει 


; ἐναυάρχει E: ἐναυάρχη S. 

° ἐμπλακεὶς εἰς ἀμπέλου κλῆμα EK. Perhaps we should read 
ἐμπλακεὶς ἀμπέλου κλήματι. Compare Epitome, i. 19, ii. 7. 
But the construction with eis and the accusative occurs in 
Aeschylus, Prometheus, 1078 sq. 

1 No other ancient writer mentions that Achilles was high 
admiral of the fleet, though as son of a sea-goddess he was 
obviously fitted for the post. Dictys Cretensis, however, 
tells us (Bellum Trojanum, i. 16) that Achilles shared the 
command of the ships with Ajax and Phoenix, while that of 
the land forces was divided between Palamedes, Diomedes, 
and Ulysses. 

2 With the following account of the landing of the Greeks 
in Mysia and their encounter with Telephus, compare Proclus, 
in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, pp. 
18 sq.; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. i. 59. The accounts of both 
these writers agree, to some extent verbally, with that of 
Apollodorus on are probably drawn from the same source, 
which may have been the epic Cypria summarized by Proclus, 


186 


EPITOME, 1. 16-18 


army, and Achilles was admiral,! being fifteen 
years old. 

But not knowing the course to steer for Troy, 
they put in to Mysia and ravaged it, supposing 
it to be Troy.2, Now Telephus son of Hercules, 
was king of the Mysians, and seeing the country 
pillaged, he armed the Mysians, chased the Greeks 
in a crowd to the ships, and killed many, among 
them Thersander, son of Polynices, who had made 
a stand. But when Achilles rushed at him, 
Telephus did not abide the onset and was pur- 
sued, and in the pursuit he was entangled in a 
vine-branch and wounded with a spear in the thigh. 
Departing from Mysia, the Greeks put to sea, and a 
violent storm coming on, they were separated from 
each other and landed in their own countries.* So 
the Greeks returned at that time, and it is said that 
the war lasted twenty years.+ For it was in the 
second year after the rape of Helen that the Greeks, 


The Scholiast tells us that it was Dionysus who caused Tele- 
phus to trip over a vine-branch, because Telephus had robbed 
the god of the honours that were his due. The incident is 
alluded to by Pindar ; see Isthm. viii. 48 (106) sqqg. The war 
in Mysia is narrated in more detail by Philostratus (Heroica, 
iii. 28-36) and Dictys Cretensis (Bellum Trojanum, ii. 1-7). 
Philostratus says (§ 35) that the wounded were washed in 
the waters of the hot Ionian springs, which the people of 
Smyrna called the springs of Agamemnon. 

3 Compare Proclus, in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. G. Kinkel, p. 19, according to whom Achilles, on this 
return voyage, landed in Scyros and married his youthful love 
Deidamia, daughter of Lycomedes, See above, iii. 13. 8. 

4 Compare Homer, 1. xxiv. 765 sqg., where Helen at Troy 
says that it was now the twentieth year since she had quitted 
her native land. The words have puzzled the Scholiasts and 
commentators, but are explained by the present passage of 
Apollodorus. 


1387 


APOLLODORUS 


δευτέρῳ τοὺς KAAnvas παρασκευασαμένους στρα- 
τεύεσθαι, ἀναχωρήσαντας ' δὲ ἀπὸ Μυσίας εἰς 
Ἑλλάδα μετὰ ἔτη ὀκτὼ πάλιν εἰς Άργος μετα- 
στραφέντας “ ἐλθεῖν εἰς Αὐλίδα. 

19 Συνελθόντων δὲ αὐτῶν ἐν Ἄργει αὖθις μετὰ τὴν 
ῥηθεῖσαν ὀκταετίαν, ἐν ἀπορίᾳ τοῦ πλοῦ πολλῇ 
καθεστήκεσαν, καθηγεμόνα μὴ ἔχοντες, ὃς ἣν 

20 δυνατὸς δεῖξαι τὴν εἰς “Ῥροίαν. Τήλεφος δὲ ἐκ 
τῆς “Μυσίας, ἀνίατον τὸ τραῦμα ἔχων, εἰπόντος 
αὐτῷ τοῦ ᾿Απόλλωνος τότε τεύξεσθαι θεραπείας, 
ὅταν ὁ τρώσας ἰατρὸς γένηται, τρύχεσιν ἠμφιεσ- 
μένος, εἰς "Apyos ἀφίκετο, καὶ δεηθεὶς ᾿Αχιλλέως 
καὶ ὑπεσχημένος τὸν εἰς Τροίαν πλοῦν δεῖξαι 
θεραπεύεται ἀποξύσαντος ᾿Αχιλλέως τῆς Πηλιά- 
dos μελίας τὸν ἰόν. θεραπευθεὶς οὖν ἔδειξε τὸν 


1 ἀναχωρήσαντας Wagner: ἀναχωρήσαντες KH. 
2 μεταστραφέντας biden ἐὐγὲ μεταστραφέντες KH. 


* This account of how Telephus steered the Greek fleet to 
Troy after being healed of his grievous wound by Achilles, is 
probably derived from the epic Cypria ; since it agrees on 
these points with the brief summary of Proclus. See Zpicorwm 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 19. Compare Scho- 
liast on Homer, 11]. 1. 59; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, 
ii. 10. As to the cure of Telephus’s wound by means of the rust 
of the spear, see also Hyginus, fab. 101; Propertius, ii. 1. 
63 sq.; Ovid, Ex Ponto, ii. 2.6. Pliny describes a painting in 
which Achilles was represented scraping the rust from the 
blade of his spear with a sword into the wound of Telephus 
(Nat. Hist.xxv. 42, χχχὶν. 152). The spear was the famous one 
which Chiron had bestowed on Peleus, the father of Achilles ; 
the shaft was cut from an ash-tree on Mount Pelion, and none 
of the Greeks at Troy, except Achilles, could wield it. See 
Homer, J]. xvi. 140-144, xix. 387-391, xxii. 188 sg. The 
healing of Telephus’s wound by Achilles is also reported, 
though without mention of the spear, by Dictys Cretensis 


188 


EPITOME, 1. 18-20 


having completed their preparations, set out on the 
expedition and after their retirement from Mysia to 
Greece eight years elapsed before they again returned 
to Argos and came to Aulis. 

Having again assembled at Aulis after the afore- 
said interval of eight years, they were in great per- 
plexity about the voyage, because they had no leader 
who could show them the way to Troy. But Tele- 
phus, because his wound was unhealed, and Apollo 
had told him that he would be cured when the one 
who wounded him should turn physician, came from 
Mysia to Argos, clad in rags, and begged the help of 
Achilles, promising to show the course to steer for 
Troy. So Achilles healed him by scraping off the 
rust of his Pelian spear. Accordingly, on being 
healed, Telephus showed the course to steer,! and 


(l.c.), a Scholiast on Homer (Jl. i. 59) and a Scholiast on 
Aristophanes (Clouds, 919). The subject was treated by 
Sophocles in a play called The Assembly of the Achaeans, 
and by Euripides in a play called Telephus. See The Frag- 
ments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, i. 94 sqqg. ; Griechische 
Dichterfragmente. ii. Lyrische und dramatische Fragmente, 
ed. W. Schubart und U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff 
(Berlin, 1907), pp. 64 sqq.; Tragicorum Graecorum Frag- 
menta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 161 sqq., 579 sqg. Aristophanes 
ridiculed the rags and tatters in which Telephus appeared 
on the stage in Euripides’s play (Acharn. 430 sqq.). Apollo- 
dorus may have had the passage of Euripides or the parody 
of Aristophanes in mind when he describes Telephus as clad 
in rags. 

The cure of a wound by an application to it of rust from 
the weapon which inflicted the hurt is not to be explained, 
as Pliny supposed, by any medicinal property inherent in 
rust as such, else the rust from any weapon would serve 
the purpose. It is clearly a folk-lore remedy based on the 
principle of sympathetic magic. Similarly Iphiclus was 
cured of impotence by the rust of the same knife which 
had caused the infirmity. See Apollodorus, i. 9.12. The 


189 


APOLLODORUS 


- \ a / > \ / a 
πλοῦν, TO τῆς δείξεως ἀσφαλὲς πιστουμένου τοῦ 
Κάλχαντος διὰ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ μαντικῆς. 

2] ᾿Αναχθέντων δὲ αὐτῶν ἀπ᾽ Ἄργους καὶ παραγε- 
ἘΝ νομένων τὸ δεύτερον εἰς Αὐλίδα, | Tov στόλον ἄπλοια 
κατεῖχε" Κάλχας δὲ ἔφη οὐκ " ἄλλως δύνασθαι 
πλεῖν αὐτούς, εἰ μὴ τῶν ᾿Αγαμέμνονος θυγατέρων 
ἡ κρατιστεύουσα κάλλει σφάγιον ᾿Αρτέμιδι 5 πα- 
ραστῇ, διὰ τὸ μηνίειν * τὴν θεὸν τῷ ᾿Αγαμέμνονι, 
ὅτι τε βαλὼν ἔλαφον εἶπεν' οὐδὲ ἡ ἢ ᾿Άρτεμις, καὶ ὅτι 
2? ‘Atpevs οὐκ ἔθυσεν αὐτῇ τὴν χρυσῆν ἄρνα. τοῦ δὲ 
ησμοῦ τούτου γενομένου, πέμψας ‘A αμέμνων ὃ 
x γεένομ μ γᾶμεμ 
πρὸς Κλυταιμνήστραν., Ὀδυσσέα καὶ Ταλθύβιον 
᾿Ιφιγένειαν ἢ ἥτει, λέγων ὃ ὑπεσχῆσθαι δώσειν αὐτὴν 
Ss ᾿Αχιλλεῖ γυναῖκα μισθὸν τῆς στρατείας. Τὴ πεμψά- 
σης δὲ ἐκείνης ᾿Αγαμέμνων τῷ βωμῷ παραστήσας 
ES ἔμελλε σφάζειν, Αρτεμις δὲ αὐτὴν ἁρπάσασα 
1 τὸν στόλον ἄπλοια κατεῖχε E: ἄπλοια οὖν κατεῖχε τὸν 
στόλον S. 
2 οὐκ S: μὴ E. 
3 ῬΑρτέμιδι E: ᾿Αρτέμιδος S 
4 διὰ τὸ unview ... τὴν χρυσῆν ἄρνα E: ἔλεγε yap μηνίσα. 
᾿Αγαμέμνονι τὴν θεόν, κατὰ μέν τινας ἐπεὶ κατὰ θήραν ἐν ᾿Ικαρίῳ 
βαλὼν ἔλαφον εἶπεν οὐ δύνασθαι σωτηρίας αὐτὴν τυχεῖν οὐδ᾽ 
᾿Αρτέμιδος θελούσης, κατὰ δέ τινας ὅτι τὴν χρυσῆν ἄρνα οὐκ ἔθυσεν 
αὐτῇ ᾿Ατρεύς S. 
5 rovde χρησμοῦ. .. ᾿Αγαμέμνων ὃ. : πέμψας οὖν ᾿Αγαμέμνων EK. 
δ ᾿Ιφιγένειαν ἤτει, Aeyar S: ἄγει τὴν ᾿Ιφιγένειαν, εἰπὼν Τὺ. 
7 τῆς στρατείας S: τῆς στρατείας αὐτοῦ Εἰ. 


proverbial remedy for the bite of a dog ‘‘ the hair of the dog 
that bit you,” is strictly analogous in principle ; for it is not 
the hair of any dog that will work the cure, but only the 
hair of the particular dog that inflicted the bite. Thus we 
read of a beggar who was bitten by a dog, at the vicarage of 
Heversham, in Westmoreland, and went back to the house 
to ask for some of the animal’s hair to put on the wound. 
See W. Henderson, Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern 


1go 


EPITOME, 11. 20-22 


the accuracy of his information was confirmed by 
Calchas by means of his own art of divination. 

But when they had put to sea from Argos and 
arrived for the second time at Aulis, the fleet was 
wind-bound, and Calchas said that they could not 
sail unless the fairest of Agamemnon’s daughters 
were presented as a sacrifice to Artemis; for the 
goddess was angry with Agamemnon, both because, 
on shooting a deer, he had said, “ Artemis herself 
could not (do it better),’”’1 and because Atreus 
had not sacrificed to her the golden lamb. On 
receipt of this oracle, Agamemnon sent Ulysses 
and Talthybius to Clytaemnestra and asked for 
Iphigenia, alleging a promise of his to give her 
to Achilles to wife in reward for his military ser- 
vice. So Clytaemnestra sent her, and Agamemnon 
set her beside the altar, and was about to slaughter 
her, when Artemis carried her off to the Taurians 


Counties of England (London, 1879), p. 160, note. A pre- 
cisely similar remedy for similar hurts appears to be popular 
in China; for we hear of a missionary who travelled about 
the province of Canton accompanied by a powerful dog, which 
bit children in the villages through which his master passed ; 
and when a child was bitten, its mother used to run after the 
missionary and beg for a hair from the dog’s tail to lay on 
the child’s wound as a remedy. See N. B. Dennys, The 
Folk-lore of China (London and Hongkong, 1876), p. 52. 
For more examples of supposed cures based on the principle 
of sympathy between the animal who bites and the person 
who is bitten, see W. Henderson, J.c.; ὟΝ. G. Black, Folk- 
Medicine (London, 1883), pp. 50 sqgg.; W. Gregor, Notes on 
the Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland (London, 1881), 
p. 127. 

1 Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 183. The full 
expression is reported by the Scholiast on Homer, J]. i. 108, 
οὐδὲ ἢ “Apreuis οὕτως ἂν ἐτόξευσε, ‘‘ Not even Artemis could 
have shot like that.” The elliptical phrase is wrongly 
interpreted by the Sabbaitic scribe. See the Critical Note. 


IQI 


APOLLODORUS 


εἰς Ταύρους ἱέρειαν “ἑαυτῆς | κατέστησεν, ἔλαφον 

ἀντ᾽ αὐτῆς παραστήσασα τῷ βωμῷ' 2 | ὡς δὲ ἔνεοι 

λέγουσιν, ἀθάνατον αὐτὴν ἐποίησεν. 

E 23 0: δὲ ἀναχθέντες ἐξ Αὐλίδος προσέσχον '“ενέδῳ. 
ταύτης ἐβασίλευε Τένης ὁ Κύκνου καὶ Προκλείας, 
ὡς δέ τινες ᾿Απόλλωνος" οὗτος ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς 

24 φυγαδευθεὶς ἐνταῦθα ὃ κατῴκει. Κύκνος γὰρ ἔχων 
ἐκ ἸἹΤροκλείας τῆς Λαομέδοντος παῖδα μὲν Τένην, 
θυγατέρα δὲ Ἡμιθέαν, ἐπέγημε τὴν Τραγάσου " 
Pirovounv: ἥτις ένου ἐρασθεῖσα καὶ μὴ πεί- 
θουσα καταψεύδεται πρὸς Κύκνον αὐτοῦ φθοράν, 
καὶ τούτου μάρτυρα παρεῖχεν αὐλητὴν Εὔμολπον 

25 ὄνομα. Κύκνος δὲ πιστεύσας, ἐνθέμενος αὐτὸν 
μετὰ τῆς ἀδελφῆς εἰς λάρνακα μεθῆκεν εἰς τὸ 


Ss 


: ἼΑρτεμις δὲ αὐτὴν ἁρπάσασα εἰς Ταύρους ἱέρειαν αὐτῆς S: 
ἀλλὰ ταύτην μὲν Αρτεμις ἁρπάσασα ἱέρειαν ἑαντῆς εἰς Σκυθο- 
ταύρους HK. 

a παραστήσασα τῷ βωμῷ S: τῷ βωμῷ παραστήσασα ΕἸ. 

3 ἐνταῦθα Frazer : ἐνταυθοῖ E. 

4+ Τραγάσου KE: Τραγάσου or Τραγανάσου (the MSS. seem to 
vary) Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 232: Κραγάσον Pau- 
sanias, x. 14. 2 


1 This account of the attempted sacrifice of Iphigenia at 
Aulis and the substitution of a doe agrees with the narrative 
of the same events in the epic Cypriaas summarized by Proclus 
(Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 19). It 
is also in harmony with the tragedy of Euripides on the 
same subject. See Euripides, Iphigenia in Aulis, especially 
vv. 87 8ηη., 358 sqq., 1541 δηᾳ. Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 183 ; Scholiast on Homer, .11.1. 108 ; Hyginus, Fab. 
98 ; Ovid, Metamorph. xii, 24-38 ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum 
Trojanum, i. 19-22; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latina, ed. 
G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 6 sq., 141 (First Vatican } mt yg a 
20; Second Vatican Mythographer, 202). Some said that 
genia was turned by the goddess into a bear or a bull (Tzetaes, 
Le. ). Dictys Cretensis dispenses with the intervention of 


102 


EPITOME, m1. 22-25 


and appointed her to be her priestess, substituting a 
deer for her at the altar; but some say that Artemis 
made her immortal.! 

After putting to sea from Aulis they touched at 
Tenedos. It was ruled by Tenes, son of Cycnus and 
Proclia, but according to some, he was a son of Apollo. 
He dwelt there because he had been banished by 
his father. For Cyenus had a son Tenes and a 
daughter Hemithea by Proclia, daughter of Laomedon, 
but he afterwards married Philonome, daughter of 
Tragasus ; and she fell in love with Tenes, and, failing 
to seduce him, falsely accused him to Cyenus of 
attempting to debauch her, and in witness of it she 
produced a fluteplayer, by name Eumolpus. Cycnus 
believed her, and putting him and his sister in a chest 
he set them adrift on the sea. The chest was washed 


Artemis to save Iphigenia; according to him it was Achilles 
who rescued the maiden from the altar and conveyed her 
away to the Scythian king. 

2 The following story of Tenes, his stepmother’s calumny, 
his banishment, and his elevation to the throne of Tenedos, 
is similarly told by Pausanias, x. 14. 2-4; Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 232; Scholiast on Homer, Jl. i. 38; Eusta- 
thius on Homer, J/. 1. 38, p. 39. Eustathius and the Scholiast 
on Homer call Tenes’s sister Leucothea, and give Polyboea 
as an alternative name of their stepmother. According to 
Pausanias, the first wife of Cycnus was a daughter of Clytius, 
not of Laomedon. As to the names, Tzetzes agrees with 
Apollodorus, whom he probably copied. <A_ rationalized 
version of the story is told by Diodorus Siculus (V. 83). 
According to him, Tenes was worshipped after his death asa 
god by the people of Tenedos, who made a precinct for him 
and offered sacrifices to him down to late times. No flute- 
player was allowed to enter the precinct, because a flute- 
player had borne false witness against Tenes; and the name 
of Achilles might not be mentioned within it, because 
Achilles had killed Tenes. Compare Plutarch, Quaestiones 
Graecae, 28. 


193 
VOL, 11. O 


APOLLODORUS 


πέλαγος" προσσχούσης δὲ αὐτῆς Λευκόφρυι νήσῳ 
ἐκβὰς ὁ Τένης κατῴκησε ταύτην καὶ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
Τένεδον ἐκάλεσε. Κύκνος δὲ ὕστερον ἐπιγνοὺς 
τὴν ἀλήθειαν τὸν μὲν αὐλητὴν κατέλευσε, τὴν δὲ 
γυναῖκα ζῶσαν εἰς γῆν κατέχωσε. 

26 Προσπλέοντας οὖν Τενέδῳ τοὺς “Ἕλληνας ὁ ὁρῶν 
Τένης ἀπεῖργε βάλλων πέτρους, καὶ ὑπὸ ᾿Αχιλ- 
λέως ξίφει πληγεὶς κατὰ τὸ στῆθος θνήσκει, 
καίτοι Θέτιδος προειπούσης ᾿Αχιλλεῖ μὴ κτεῖναι 
Τένην: τεθνήξεσθαι γὰρ ὑπὸ ᾿Απόλλωνος αὐτόν, 

27 ἐὰν κτεῖνῃ Τένην. τελούντων δὲ αὐτῶν ᾿Απόλ- 
Awve θυσίαν, ἐκ τοῦ βωμοῦ προσελθὼν ὕδρος 
δάκνει Φιλοκτήτην" ,ἀθεραπεύτου δὲ τοῦ ἕλκους 
καὶ δυσώδους γενομένου τῆς τε ὀδμῆς οὐκ ἀνεχο- 
μένου τοῦ στρατοῦ, ᾽Οδυσσεὺς αὐτὸν εἰς Λῆμνον 

μεθ᾽ ὧν εἶχε τόξων Ἡρακλείων ἐκτίθησι κελεύ- 
σαντος ᾿Αγαμέμνονος. ὁ δὲ ἐ ἐκεῖ τὰ πτηνὰ τοξεύων 


ἐπὶ τῆς ἐρημίας τροφὴν εἶχεν. 


1 Compare Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae, 28. Plutarch 
mentions the warning given by Thetis to Achilles not to kill 
Tenes, and says that the goddess specially charged one of 
Achilles’s servants to remind her son of the warning. But 
in scouring the island Achilles fell in with the beautiful 
sister of Tenes and made love to her; Tenes defended his 
sister against her seducer, and in the brawl was slain by 
Achilles. When the slayer discovered whom he had slain, 
he. killed the servant who ought to have warned him in 
time, and he buried Tenes on the spot where the sanctuary 
was afterwards dedicated to his worship. This version of the 
story clearly differs from the one followed by Apollodorus. 

2 This story of the exposure and desertion of Philoctetes 
in Lemnos appears to have been told in the epic Cypria, as 
we may judge by the brief summary of Proclus. See Εἰ ρὲ- 
corum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. (ἃ. Kinkel, p. 19. Accord- 
ing to Proclus, the Greeks were feasting in Tenedos when 


194 


EPITOME, 1. 25-27 


up on the island of Leucophrys, and Tenes landed 
and settled in the island, and called it Tenedos 
after himself. But Cycnus afterwards learning the 
truth, stoned the fluteplayer to death and buried 
his wife alive in the earth. 

So when the Greeks were standing in for Tenedos, 
Tenes saw them and tried to keep them off by 
throwing stones, but was killed by Achilles with a 
sword-cutin the breast, though Thetis had forewarned 
Achilles not to kill Tenes, because he himself would 
die by the hand of Apollo if he slew Tenes.1 And 
as they were offering a sacrifice to Apollo, a water- 
snake approached from the altar and bit Philoctetes ; 
and as the sore did not heal and grew noisome, the 
army could not endure the stench, and Ulysses, by 
the orders of Agamemnon, put him ashore on the 
island of Lemnos, with the bow of Hercules which 
he had in his possession; and there, by shooting 
birds with the bow, he subsisted in the wilderness.” 


Philoctetes was bitten by a water-snake. This is not neces- 
sarily inconsistent with the statement of Apollodorus that 
the accident happened while the Greeks were sacrificing to 
Apollo, for the feast mentioned by Proclus may have been 
sacrificial. According to another version of the story, which 
Sophocles followed in his Philoctetes, the accident to Philo- 
ctetes happened, not in Tenedos, but in the small island of 
Chryse, where a goddess of that name was worshipped, and 
the serpent which bit Philoctetes was the guardian of her 
shrine. See Sophocles, Philoctetes, 263-270, 1326-1328. 
Later writers identified Chryse with Athena, and said that 
Philoctetes was stung while he was cleansing her altar or 
clearing it of the soil under which it was buried, as Tzetzes 
has it. See Scholiast on Homer, J/. ii. 722; Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 911 ; Eustathius on Homer, Jl. ii. 724, p. 330. 
But this identification is not supported by Sophocles nor by 
the evidence of a vase painting, which represents the shrine 
of Chryse with her name attached to her image. See Jebb’s 


195 
o 2 


APOLLODORUS 


ES 28 | ᾿Αναχθέντες δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς Τενέδου 1 προσέπλεον 
7 pola, καὶ πέμπουσιν ᾽Οδυσσέα καὶ Μενέλαον 
τὴν “ϑλένην καὶ τὰ χρήματα ἀπαιτοῦντας.5 συνα- 
θροισθείσης δὲ παρὰ τοῖς Τρωσὶν ἐκκλησίας, οὐ 

/ \ «ς / > ᾽ / > \ \ / 
μόνον τὴν ‘EXévnv οὐκ ἀπεδίδουν ἀλλὰ Kal τού- 
29 τους κτείνειν ἤθελον. ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν ἔσωσεν 


1 ἀπὸ τῆς Τενέδου. These words are wanting in S, 
2 ἀπαιτοῦντας EK: αἰτοῦντες S. 


3 ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν 1 : τούτους μὲν οὖν S. 


edition of Sophocles, Philoctetes, p. xxxviii. § 21; A. Ban- 
meister, Denkmdler des klassischen Altertums, iii. 1326, fig. 
1325. The island of Chryse is no doubt the ‘‘ desert island 
near Lemnos” in which down to the first century B.c. were to 
be seen ‘‘an altar of Philoctetes, a bronze serpent, a bow, and 
a breastplate bound with fillets, the memorial of his sufferings” 
(Appian, Mithridat. 77). The island had sunk in the sea 
before the time of Pausanias in the second century of our era 
(Pausanias, vill. 33. 4). According toa different account, the 
unfortunate encounter of Philoctetes with the snake took 
place in Lemnos itself, the island where he was abandoned 
by his comrades. See Scholiast on Homer and Eustathius, 
ll.ce.; Scholiast on Sophocles, Philoctetes, 270; Hyginus, Fab. 
109. Philoctetes was commonly supposed to have received 
the bow and arrows of Hercules from that hero as a reward 
for his service in kindling the pyre on Mount Oeta. See 
Sophocles, Philoctetes, 801-803 ; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 38. 4; 
Scholiast on Homer, Jl. ii. 724; Hyginus, Fab. 102; Ovid, 
Metamorph. ix. 229-234. According to one account, which 
Servius has preserved, it was from these arrows, envenomed 
with the poison of the hydra, and not from a serpent, that 
Philoctetes received his grievous hurt. It is said that Her- 
cules on the pyre solemnly charged his friend never to reveal 
the spot where his ashes should repose. Philoctetes promised 
with an oath to observe the wish of his dying friend, but after- 
wards he betrayed the secret by stamping with his foot on the 
grave. Hence on his way to the war one of the poisoned 
arrows fell upon and wounded the traitor foot. See Servius, 
on Virgil, Aen. iii. 402; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 21, 132 (First Vatican 


196 ᾿ 


EPITOME, in. 28-29 


Putting to sea from Tenedos they made sail for 
Troy, and sent Ulysses and Menelaus to demand the 
restoration of Helen and the property. But the 
Trojans, having summoned an assembly, not only 
refused to restore Helen, but threatened to kill the 
envoys. ‘These were, however, saved by Antenor ; ἢ 


Mythographer, 59; Second Vatican Mythographer, 165). 
Homer speaks of Philoctetes marooned by the Greeks in 
- Lemnos and suffering agonies from the bite of the deadly 
water-snake (Il. ii. 721-725), but he does not say how or 
where the sufferer was bitten. Sophocles represents Lemnos 
as a desert island (Philoctetes, 1 sq.). The fate of the forlorn 
hero, the ancient Robinson Crusoe, dwelling for ten years in 
utter solitude on his lonely isle, was a favourite theme of 
tragedy. Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides all composed 
plays on the subject under the title of Philoctetes. See Dio 
Chrysostom, Or. lii ; Jebb’s Introduction to Sophocles, Philo- 
cictes, pp. xili. sqq.; Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. 
A. Nauck?, pp. 79 sqq., 613 sqq. 

1 As to the embassy of Ulysses and Menelaus to Troy to 
demand the surrender of Helen, see Homer, Jl. iii. 205 sqq., 
xi. 138 sqqg.; Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. G. Kinkel, p. 19; Bacchylides, xiv. [xv.] ; Herodotus, i1. 
118; J. Tzetzes, Antehomerica, 154 sqq.; Scholiast on Homer, 
11. iii. 206. According to the author of the epic Cypria, as 
reported by Proclus (l.c.), the embassy was sent before the 
first battle, in which Protesilaus fell (see below) ; according 
to Tzetzes, it was sent before the Greek army assembled at 
Aulis; according to the Scholiast on Homer (l.c.), it was 
despatched from Tenedos. Herodotus says that the envoys 
were sent after the landing of the army in the Troad. 
Sophocles wrote a play on the subject of the embassy, called 
The demand for the surrender of Helen. See Tragicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 171 sq.; The 
Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 121 sqq. 
Libanius has bequeathed to us two imaginary speeches, which 
are supposed to have been delivered by the Greek ambassadors, 
Menelaus and Ulysses, to the Trojan assembly before the 
opening of hostilities, while the Greek army was encamped 
within sight of the walls of Troy. See Libanius, Declama- 

tiones, iii. and iv. (vol. v. pp. 199 sqq., ed. R. Foerster). 


197 


APOLLODORUS 


᾿Αντήνωρ, οἱ δὲ ‘ Ἕλληνες, ἀχθόμενοι ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν 
βαρβάρων καταφ ρονήσει,' ἀναλαβόντες τὴν πανο- 
πλίαν ἔπλεον ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς. ᾿Αχιλλεῖ δὲ ἐπιστέλλει 
Θέτις πρῶτον © μὴ ἀποβῆναι τῶν νεῶν: τὸν γὰρ 
ἀποβάντα πρῶτον πρῶτον * μέλλειν τελευτήσειν ἡ 
ne ] πυθόμενοι δὲ οἱ βάρβαροι τὸν στόλον ἐπιπλεῖν, 
σὺν ὅπλοις ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν ὥρμησαν. καὶ 
ES 30 βάλλοντες πέτροις ἀποβῆναι. ἐκώλυον. | τῶν δὲ 
᾿Βλλήνων πρῶτος" ἀπέβη τῆς νεὼς | Πρωτεσί- 
λαος, καὶ κτείνας οὐκ ὀλίγους τῶν βαρβάρων " 
ὑφ᾽ “Ἕκτορος θνήσκει. τούτου «ἡ; ὃ γυνὴ Λαο- 
δάμεια καὶ μετὰ θάνατον ἤρα, καὶ ποιήσασα 
εἴδωλον ἸΙρωτεσιλάῳ παραπλήσιον τούτῳ προσω- 
/ ¢ an \ 5 / lal 3 / 
E pire. | Ἑρμῆς δὲ ἐλεησάντων θεῶν ἀνήγαγε 
IIpwtecinaoy ἐξ “Αιδου. Λαοδάμεια δὲ ἰδοῦσα 
1 ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν βαρβάρων καταφρονήσει HK: τῶν βαρβάρων τὴν 
καταφρύνησιν ὃ 
πρῶτον Ki: πρώτῳ ὃ 
πρῶτον πρῶτον E: πρῶτον S. 
τελευτήσειν Εἰ : καὶ τελευτᾶν Ὁ. 
ἐπιπλεῖν Biicheler : πλεῖν S. 
τῶν δὲ Ἑλλήνων πρῶτος S: πρῶτος τοίνυν Ii. 
νεὼς Εἰ : νηὸς ὃ 
οὐκ ὀλίγους τῶν βαρβάρων ἘἸ : οὐκ ὀλίγους S. 
ἡ inserted by Biicheler. 


Co ὦ A OH ἢ ὦ: Ὁ 


1 Compare Homer, JI. ii. 698-702; Proclus, in Epicorwm 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 19; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 245; id. Chiliades, ii. 759 sqq.; id. 
Antehomerica, 221 sqq.; Eustathius on Homer, 11. ii. 701, p. 
325, and on Od. xi. 521, p. 1697; Pausanias, iv. 2.5; Hyginus, 
Fab. 103; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, ii. 11. The 
common tradition, followed by Apollodorus, was that Protesi- 
laus fell by the hand of Hector; but according to others, his 
slayer was Aeneas, or Achates, or Euphorbus. See Eustathius, 
ll.cc.; J. Tzetzes, Antehomerica, 230 sq. The Greeks had 
received an oracle that the first of their number to leap from 


198 


EPITOME, 11. 29-30 


but the Greeks, exasperated at the insolence of the 
barbarians, stood to arms and made sail against them. 
Now Thetis charged Achilles not to be the first to 
land from the ships, because the first to land would 
be the first to die. Being apprized of the hostile 
approach of the fleet, the barbarians marched in arms 
to the sea, and endeavoured by throwing stones to 
prevent the landing. Of the Greeks the first to land 
from his ship was Protesilaus, and having slain not a 
few of the barbarians, he fell by the hand of Hector.! 
His wife Laodamia loved him even after his death, 
and she made an image of him and consorted with it. 
The gods had pity on her, and Hermes brought up 
Protesilaus from Hades. On seeing him, Laodamia 


the ships would be the first to perish. See Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 245; Hyginus, Fab. 113; Ovid, Herovd. xiii. 
93 sq. Protesilaus was reckoned by Pausanias (i. 34. 2) among 
the men who after death received divine honours from the 
Greeks. He was buried in the Thracian Chersonese, opposite 
the Troad, and was there worshipped as a god (Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 532). His grave at Elaeus, or Eleus, in the pen- 
insula was enclosed in a sacred precinct, and his worshippers 
testified their devotion by dedicating to him many vessels 
of gold and silver and bronze, together with raiment and 
other offerings; but when Xerxes invaded Greece, these 
treasures were carried off by the Persians, who desecrated the 
holy ground by sowing it with corn and turning cattle loose 
on it to graze (Herodotus, ix. 116). Tall elms grew within 
the sacred precinct and overshadowed the grave; and it is 
said that the leaves of the trees that looked across the narrow 
sea to Troy, where Protesilaus perished, burgeoned early but 
soon faded and fell, like the hero himself, while the trees 
that looked away from Troy still kept their foliage fresh 
and fair. See Philostratus, Heroica, iii. 1. Others said that 
when the elms had shot up so high that Troy could be seen 
from them away across the water, the topmost boughs 
immediately withered. See Quintus Smyrnaeus, Postho- 
merica, vii. 408 sqq.; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xvi. 238. 


199 


APOLLODORUS 


καὶ νομίσασα αὐτὸν ἐκ Tpolas παρεῖναι τότε 
\ ’ / / \ 3 / > ψ 

μὲν ἐχάρη, πάλιν δὲ ἐπαναχθέντος εἰς “Αὐδου 

ἑαυτὴν ἐφόνευσεν. 

B91 Πρωτεσιλάου δὲ τελευτήσαντος, ἐκβαίνει μετὰ 
Μυρμιδόνων ᾿Αχιλλεὺς καὶ λίθον «βα:λὼν εἰς 
τὴν κεφαλὴν Κύκνου κτείνει. ὡς δὲ τοῦτον νεκρὸν 
εἶδον οἱ βάρβαροι, φεύγουσιν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, οἱ 
δὲ Ἕλληνες ἐκπηδήσαντες τῶν νεῶν ἐνέπλησαν 
σωμάτων τὸ πεδίον. καὶ κατακλείσαντες * τοὺς 

32 Τρῶας ἐπολιόρκουν' ἀνέλκουσι δὲ τὰς ναῦς. μὴ 
θαρρούντων δὲ τῶν βαρβάρων, ᾿Αχιλλεὺς ἐνεδρεύ- 
σας Tpwidov ἐν τῷ τοῦ Θυμβραίου ᾿Απόλλωνος 
ἱεοῷ φονεύει, καὶ νυκτὸς ἐλθὼν ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν 


1 κατακλείσαντες Biicheler: καταλείσαντες S. 


1 According to the author of the epic Cypria the name of 
Protesilaus’s wife was Polydora, daughter of Meleager (Pau- 
sanias, iv. 2. 7). Later writers, like Apollodorus, called her 
Laodamia. As to her tragic tale, see Lucian, Dial. Mort. 
Xxlil. (who does not name her) ; Eustathius, on Homer, J]. ii. 
701, p. 325; Scholiast on Aristides, vol. iii. pp. 671 sq., ed. 
Dindorf ; J. Tzetzes, Chiliades, ii. 763 seq.; Propertius, i. 19. 
7-10; Hyginus, Fab. 103, 104; Ovid, Heroid. xiii.; Servius, 
on Virgil, Aen. vi. 447; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latint, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 51, 147 (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 158 ; Second Vatican Mythographer, 215). According 
to Hyginus (Fab. 103), Laodamia had prayed that Protesilaus 
might be restored to her for only three hours ; her prayer 
was granted, but she could not bear the grief of parting with 
him, and died in his arms (Servius, J.c.). A rationalistic version 
of the story ran that Laodamia had made a waxen image of 
her dead husband and secretly embraced it, till her father 
ordered it to be burned, when she threw herself into the fire 
and perished with the image (Hyginus, Fab. 104). According 
to Ovid, Laodamia made the waxen image of her absent lord 
and fondled it even in his lifetime. Her sad story was the 
theme of a tragedy of Euripides (T'ragicorum Graecorum 


200 


EPITOME, πι. 30-32 


thought it was himself returned from Troy, and. she 
was glad; but when he was carried back to Hades, 
she stabbed herself to death. 

On the death of Protesilaus, Achilles landed with 
the Myrmidons, and throwing a stone at the head of 
Cycnus, killed him.2 When the barbarians saw him 
dead, they fled to the city, and the Greeks, leaping 
from their ships, filled the plain with bodies. And 
having shut up the Trojans, they besieged them ; and 
they drew up the ships. The barbarians showing no 
courage, Achilles waylaid Troilus and slaughtered him 
in the sanctuary of Thymbraean Apollo,’ and coming 


Fragmenta, ed. Nauck?*, pp. 563 sqqg.), as it is of a well- 
known poem of Wordsworth (Laodameia). 

2 Compare Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fraqmenta, ed. 
G. Kinkel, p. 19 ; Pindar, Olymp. ii. 82 (147); Aristotle, Rhe- 
toric, ii. 22, p. 1396 b 16-18, ed. Bekker ; Quintus Smyrnaeus, 
Posthomerica, iv. 468 sqq.; J. Tzetzes, Antehomerica, 257 sqq.; 
Scholiast on Theocritus, xvi. 49; Ovid, Metamorph. xii. 70- 
140 ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, ii. 12. Cycnus was 
said to be invulnerable (Aristotle, l.c.): hence neither the 
spear nor the sword of Achilles could make any impression 
on his body, and the hero was reduced to the necessity of 
throttling him with the thongs of his own helmet. So Ovid 
tells the tale, adding that the sea-god, his father Poseidon, 
changed the dead Cycnus into a swan, whose name (Cygnus, 
kuxvos) he had borne in life. 

3 Compare Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. G. Kinkel, p. 20; Scholiast on Homer, 11. xxiv. 257 
(where for ὀχευθῆναι it has been proposed to read λοχηθῆναι or 
λογχευθῆναι) ; Kustathius, on Homer, J. xxiv. 251, p. 1348 ; 
Dio Chrysostom, Or. xi. vol. i. p. 189, ed. L. Dindorf ; 
Tzetzes, Schel. on Lycophron, 307-313; Virgil, Aen. i. 
474 sqq.; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. i. 474; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 66 (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 210). Troilus is represented as a 
youth, but the stories concerning his death are various. 
According to Eustathius, the lad was exercising his horses in 


201 


APOLLODORUS 


Λυκάονα λαμβάνει. παραλαβὼν δὲ ᾿Αχιλλεύς 
τινας τῶν ἀριστέων τὴν χώραν ἐπόρθει, καὶ παρα- 
γίνεται εἰς Ἴδην ἐπὶ τὰς Αἰνείου [τοῦ Πριάμου] 1 
Boas. φυγόντος δὲ αὐτοῦ, τοὺς βουκόλους κτείνας 
καὶ Μήστορα3 τὸν Πριάμου τὰς βόας ἐλαύνει. 
33 αἱρεῖ δὲ καὶ Λέσβον καὶ Φώκαιαν, εἶτα Κολο- 
“Ὁ \ 4 \ \ \ 4 
fava καὶ Σμύρναν καὶ Κλαζομενὰς καὶ Κύμην, 
θ᾽ a Ad \ \ TH 4 \ e \ 
μεθ᾽ ἃς Αἰγιαλὸν καὶ Τῆνον, [τὰς ἑκατὸν καλου- 
μένας πόλεις" εἶτα ἑξῆς ᾿Αδραμύτιον καὶ Σίδην," 
εἶτα Ἔνδιον καὶ Λιναῖον ὃ καὶ Κολώνην.ἶ αἱρεῖ 
δὲ καὶ Θήβας τὰς Ὑποπλακίας ὃ καὶ Λυρνησσόν, 
ἔτι δὲ καὶ «“Αντανδρον καὶ ἄλλας πολλάς. 
84 ᾿ἘΕνναετοῦς δὲ χρόνου διελθόντος παραγίνονται 
τοῖς Τρωσὶ σύμμαχοι: ἐκ τῶν περιοίκων πόλεων 


1 τοῦ Πριάμου S: καὶ Πριάμου Wagner. 

2 καὶ Μήστορα Kerameus: καμήστορα S. 

3 Φώκαιαν Kerameus: φωκέας Ὁ. 

1 Τῆνον ὃ. Kerameus conjectured Τῆμνον : Wagner pro- 
posed τίειον. 

5 Σίδην S. Kerameus conjectured ° Ἴδην or Σιδήνην : Wag- 
ner proposed Σίγην, comparing Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. 
Slyn, πόλις Τρωάδος, ws Ἑκαταῖος ᾿Ασίᾳ. 

6 Λιναῖον ὃ. Kerameus conjectured Κίλλαιον: Wagner 
proposed Aivéay, comparing Strabo, xiii. i. 45, p. 603, where, 
however, Meineke reads Νέας for Aivéas. 

7 Κολώνην ὃ. Kerameus conjectured Καλλικολώνην ; but 
Wagner compares Diodorus Siculus, v. 83. 1, Κολώνης τῆς ἐν 
τῇ Tpyad:, and Strabo, xiii. i. 46, p. 604, βασιλέα δὲ Κολωνῶν. 

8 ‘YromAakias Kerameus: ὑπὸ πλακείας S 

9 <”Avr>avdpov Kerameus: ἄνδρον S. 


the Thymbraeum or sanctuary of the Thymbraean Apollo, 
when Achilles killed him with his spear. Tzetzes says that 
he was a son of Hecuba by Apollo, though nominally by 
Priam, that he fled from ‘his assailant to the temple of 
Apollo, and was cut down by Achilles at the altar. There 
was a prophecy that Troy could not be taken if Troilus should 
live to the age of twenty (so the First Vatican Mythographer). 


202 


EPITOME, m1. 32-34 


by night to the city he captured Lycaon.! Moreover, 
taking some of the chiefs with him, Achilles laid 
waste the country,and made his way to Ida to lift the 
kine of Aeneas. But Aeneas fled, and Achilles killed 
the neatherds and Mestor, son of Priam, and drove 
away the kine.? He also took Lesbos* and Phocaea, 
then Colophon, and Smyrna, and Clazomenae, and 
Cyme; and afterwards Aegialus and Tenos, the so- 
called Hundred Cities; then, in order, Adramytium 
and Side; then Endium, and Linaeum, and Colone. 
He took also Hypoplacian Thebes* and Lyrnessus,° 
and further Antandrus, and many other cities. 

A period of nine years having elapsed, allies came 
to join the Trojans:® from the surrounding cities, 


This may have been the motive of Achilles for slaying the 
lad. According to Dictys Cretensis (Bellum Trojanum, iv. 
9), Troilus was taken prisoner and publicly slaughtered in 
cold blood by order of Achilles. The indefatigable Sophocles, 
as usual, wrote a tragedy on the subject. See The Frag- 
ments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 253 sqq. 

1 Compare Homer, 1. xxi. 34 sqq., xxiii. 746 sq. Lycaon 
was captured by Achilles when he was cutting sticks in the 
orchard of his father Priam. After being sold by his captor 
into slavery in Lemnos he was ransomed and returned to Troy, 
but meeting Achilles in battle a few days later, he was ruth- 
lessly slain by him. The story seems to have been told also 
in the epic Cypria. See Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum 
Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 20. 

2 Compare Homer, J]. xx. 90 sqq., 188 sqg.; Proclus, in 
Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 20. 

3 Compare Homer, Jl. ix. 129; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum 
Trojanum, ii. 16. 

4 Compare Homer, JI. ii. 691, vi. 397. 

5 It was at the sack of Lyrnessus that Achilles captured 
his concubine Briseis after slaying her husband. See Homer, 
Il. ii. 688 sqq., xix. 60, 291 sqg., xx. 92, 191 8ηᾳ. Compare 
Dictys Cretensis, Béllum Trojanum, 11. 17. 

§ With the following list of the Trojans and their allies, 
compare Homer, JJ. ii. “816-877. 


203 


APOLLODORUS 


Αἰνείας ᾿Αγχίσου καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ "Apyéroxos! καὶ 
᾿Ακάμας ᾿Αντήνορος " καὶ Θεανοῦς, Δαρδανίων 
ἡγούμενοι, Θρᾳκῶν ᾿Ακάμας Evoapov, Κικόνων 
Εὔφημος Τροιζήνου,Σ Παιόνων Πυραίχμης," ITa- 

35 φλαγόνων Πυλαιμένης Βιλσάτου,, ἐκ Zerias 
Πάνδαρος Λυκάονος, ἐξ ᾿Αδραστείας ᾿ 'Λδραστος ° 
καὶ ΓΛμφιος Μέροπος. ἵ ἐκ δ᾽ ᾿Αρίσβης “Actos 
Ὑρτάκου, ἐκ Λαρίσσης Ἱππόθοος Πελασγοῦ, ἐκ 
Μυσίας Χρόμιος καὶ “ἔννομος 3 ᾿Αρσινόου, ᾿Αλι- 
ζώνων ᾿Οδίος 19. καὶ ᾿Επίστροφος Μηκιστέως,"} 
Φρυγῶν Φόρκυς καὶ ᾿Ασκάνιος ᾿Αρετάονος, Μαιό- 
νων Μέσθλης καὶ ΓΑντιφος Ταλαιμένους, Καρῶν 1" 
Νάστης καὶ ᾿Αμφίμαχος Νομίονος," Λυκίων Σαρ- 
πηδὼν Διὸς καὶ Γλαῦκος | Ἱππολόχου. 

IV. ᾿Αχιλλεὺς δὲ μηνίων ἐπὶ τὸν πόλεμον οὐκ 
ἐξηει διὰ Βρισηΐδα... τῆς θυγατρὸς Χρύσου τοῦ 
ἱερέως. διὸ θαρσήσαντες οἱ βάρβαροι ἐκ τῆς 

1 ᾿Αρχέλοχος Wagner (comparing Homer, J/. ii. 828): 


> 


ἀρχέλαος ὃ 

2 ῬΑντήνορος Kerameus (compare Homer, 71. ij. 822 sq): 
Αὐτήνορος ὃ. 

3 προιζήνον Wagner (comparing Homer, 764. ii. 847): Τροι- 
Givos ὃ 

4 flupaixuns Kerameus (compare Homer, J/. ii. 848): 
πυραιχάγης S. 

5 Βιλσάτου S. Wagner conjectures Βισάλτου. 

ὁ “Adpaoros Kerameus (compare Homer, J/. 11. 830): 
ἄδρας S. 

7 Μέροπος Kerameus (compare Homer, J/. ii. 831): Μερό- 
ans Ὁ. 

8 ‘Inmodoos. Πελασγοῦ δ. Compare Homer, 71. ii. 842 sq.: 
ἽἽππόθοός τε Πύλαιός τ᾽, ὄζος “Apnos, || vie δύω Λήθοιο Πελασγοῦ 
Τευταμίδαο, which Apolloderus has misunderstood. See the 
exegetical note. 

9 Έννομος Kerameus (compare Homer, J/ ii. 858): ἐνγό- 
μιος ὃ. 


204 


EPITOME, 1. 34-1v. 1 


Aeneas, son of Anchises, and with him Archelochus 
and Acamas, sons of Antenor, and Theanus, leaders of 
the Dardanians; of the Thracians, Acamas, son of 
Eusorus ; of the Cicones, Euphemus, son of Troezenus ; 
of the Paeonians, Pyraechmes; of the Paphlagonians, 
Pylaemenes, son of Bilsates; from Zelia, Pandarus, 
son of Lycaon ; from Adrastia, Adrastus and Amphius, 
sons of Merops; from Arisbe, Asius, son of Hyrtacus ; 
from Larissa, Hippothous, son of Pelasgus;! from 
Mysia, Chromius* and Ennomus, sons of Arsinous ; 
of the Alizones, Odius and Epistrophus, sons οἵ 
Mecisteus; of the Phrygians, Phorcys and Ascanius, 
sons of Aretaon; of the Maeonians, Mesthles and 
Antiphus, sons of Talaemenes ; of the Carians, Nastes 
and Amphimachus, sons of Nomion; of the Lycians, 
Sarpedon, son of Zeus. and Glaucus, son of Hippo- 
lochus. 

IV. Achilles did not go forth to the war, because 
he was angry on account of Briseis, the daughter 
of Chryses the priest? Therefore the barbarians 


1 Compare Homer, 11. ii. 842 sq., where the poet describes 
Hippothous as the son of the Pelasgian Lethus. Apollodorus, 
misunderstanding the passage, has converted the adjective 
Pelasgian into a noun Pelasgus. 

* Homer calls him Chromis (11. ii, 858). 

3 Compare Homer, JI. i. 1 sqq. From this point Apollo- 
dorus follows the incidents of the Trojan war as related by 
Homer. 


2 ᾿Αλιζώνων ᾿Οδίος Kerameus (compare Homer, JI. ii. 856) : 

ἀλιζόνων ὃ δῖος S. 

il Μηκιστέως Kerameus: μηκιστεύς S. 

2 "Αντιφος Ταλαιμένους, Καρῶν Kerameus (compare Homer, 
Il. i1. 864-867): "Αντυφος Πυλαιμένου, σκάρων S. 

8 ᾿Αμφίμαχος Νομίονος Kerameus (compare Homer, JI. 1]. 
870 sq.): ἀμφίναχος νομίωνος Ὁ. 

1. Τλαῦκος Kerameus: γλαῦχος S. 

205 


APOLLODORUS 


πόλεως προῆλθον. καὶ μονομαχεῖ ᾿Αλέξανδρος 
πρὸς Μενέλαον, ᾿Αλέξανδρον δὲ ἡττώμενον ἁρπάξει 
᾿Αφροδίτη. Πάνδαρος δὲ τοξεύσας Μενέλαον τοὺς 
ὅρκους ἔλυσεν. 

| “Ὅτι Διομήδης ἀριστεύων ᾿Αφροδίτην. Αἰνείᾳ 
βοηθοῦσαν τιτρώσκει, καὶ Ἰλαύκῳ συστάς, ὑπο- 
μνησθεὶς πατρῴας «φιλίας, ἀλάσσει τὰ ὅπλα. 
| προκαλουμένου ὟΝ ᾿ἕκτορος τὸν ἄριστον εἰς μονο- 
μαχίαν, πολλῶν ἐλθόντων 5 Αἴας κληρωσάμενος 
ἀριστεύει' ᾿ νυκτὸς δὲ ἐπιγενομένης κήρυκες δια- 


λύουσιν αὐτούς. 


| Οἱ δὲ “Ἕλληνες πρὸς τοῦ ναυστάθμου τεῖχος 
ποιοῦνται καὶ τάφρον, καὶ γενομένης μάχης ἐν 
τῷ πεδίῳ οἱ Τρῶες τοὺς “Ἕλληνας εἰς τὸ τεῖχος 
διώκουσιν: οἱ δὲ “πέμπουσι πρὸς ᾿Αχιλλέα πρέσ- 
βεις ᾽Οδυσσέα καὶ Φοίνικα καὶ Αἴαντα, συμμαχεῖν 
ἀξιοῦντες καὶ Βρισηίδα καὶ ἄλλα δῶρα ὑ ὑπισχνού- 
μενοι. νυκτὸς δὲ ἐ ἐπιγενομένης κατασκόπους πέμ- 
πουσιν Ὀδυσσέα καὶ Διομήδην' οἱ δὲ ἀναιροῦσι 
Δόλωνα τὸν ,Εὐμήλου καὶ Ῥῆσον τὸν Θρᾷκα (ὃς 
πρὸ μιᾶς ἡμέρας παραγενόμενος Τρωσὶ σύμμαχος 
οὐ συμβαλὼν ἀπωτέρω ὁ τῆς Τρωικῆς δυνάμεως 
χωρὶς “Ἕκτορος ἐστρατοπέδευσε) τούς τε περὶ 
αὐτὸν δώδεκα κοιμωμένους κτείνουσι καὶ τοὺς 

1 προκαλουμένου δὲ KE: προκαλουμένου S. 

2 ἐλθόντων. ΚΝ should perhaps read θελόντων. 

3 ἀριστεύει Frazer (compare a few lines above Διομήδης 
ἀριστεύων, and τὸν ἄριστον ; below, iv. 7, Αἴας ἀριστεύσας, v. 12, 
τοῦτον ἀριστεύσαντα) : πυκτεύει ES, Wagner: mpwrever Her- 


werden (Mnemosyne, N.S. XX. (1892), p. 199). 


4 ἀπωτέρω Kerameus: ἀποτέρω ὃ. 


1 Compare Homer, JJ. iii. 15-382. 
2 Compare Homer, Jl. iv. 85 sqgq. 
206 


EPITOME, ιν. 1-4 


took heart of grace and sallied out of the city. And 
Alexander fought a single combat with Menelaus; 
and when Alexander got the worst of it, Aphrodite 
carried him off.! And Pandarus, by shooting an arrow 
at Menelaus, broke the truce.? 

Diomedes, doing doughty deeds, wounded Aphro- 
dite when she came to the help of Aeneas ;? and 
encountering Glaucus, he recalled the friendship 
of their fathers and exchanged arms.*— And Hector 
having challenged the bravest to single combat, many 
came forward, but the lot fell on Ajax, and he did 
doughty deeds; but night coming on, the heralds 
parted them.° 

The Greeks made a wall and a ditch to protect the 
roadstead,® and a battle taking place in the plain, 
the Trojans chased the Greeks within the wall.’ But 
the Greeks sent Ulysses, Phoenix, and Ajax as am- 
bassadors to Achilles, begging him to fight for them, 
and promising Briseis and other gifts.§ And night 
coming on, they sent Ulysses and Diomedes as spies ; 
and these killed Dolon, son of Eumelus, and Rhesus, 
the Thracian (who had arrived the day before as an 
ally of the Trojans, and having not yet engaged in 
the battle was encamped at some distance from the 
Trojan force and apart from Hector); they also slew 
the twelve men that were sleeping around him, and 


8. Compare Homer, 1]. v. 1-417. 

4 Compare Homer, J]. vi. 119-236. 

5 Compare Homer, 11. vii. 66-312. 

6 Compare Homer, JI. vii. 436-441. 

7 Compare Homer, I. viii. 53-565. 

8 The embassy of Ulysses, Phoenix, and Ajax to Achilles 
is the subject of the ninth book of the Jliad. Libanius com- 
posed an imaginary reply to the speech of Ulysses (Declam. 
v., vol, v. pp. 303-360, ed. R. Foerster). 


207 


APOLLODORUS 


5 ἵππους ἐπὶ Tas ναῦς ἄγουσι. μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν δὲ 
ἰσχυρᾶς μάχης γενομένης, τρωθέντων ᾿Αγαμέμ- 
νονος καὶ Διομήδους Οδυσσέως Εὐρυπύλου Μαχά- 
ovos καὶ τροπῆς τῶν ᾿Ελλλήνων γενομένης, “Εκτωρ 
ῥήξας τὸ τεῖχος εἰσέρχεται καὶ ἀναχωρήσαντος 
Αἴαντος πῦρ ἐμβάλλει ταῖς ναυσίν. 

6 ‘Os δὲ εἶδεν ᾿Αχιλλεὺς τὴν Πρωτεσιλάου ναῦν 
καιομένην, ἐκπέμπει Ἰ]άτροκλον καθοπλίσας τοῖς 
ἰδίοις ὅπλοις μετὰ τῶν Μυρμιδόνων, δοὺς αὐτῷ 
τοὺς ἵππους. ἰδόντες δὲ αὐτὸν οἱ Τρῶες καὶ 
νομίσαντες ᾿Αχιλλέα εἶναι εἰς φυγὴν τρέπονται. 
καταδιώξας δὲ αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸ τεῖχος πολλοὺς 
ἀναιρεῖ, ἐν οἷς καὶ Σαρπηδόνα τὸν Διός, καὶ ὑφ᾽ 
“Ἕκτορος ἀναιρεῖται, τρωθεὶς πρότερον ὑπὸ Εὐφόρ- 

7 βου. μάχης δὲ ἰσχυρᾶς γενομένης περὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ, 
μόλις Αἴας ἀριστεύσας σώζει τὸ σῶμα. “Ayir- 
λεὺς δὲ τὴν ὀργὴν ἀποθέμενος καὶ τὴν Βρισηίδα 
κομίζεται. καὶ πανοπλίας αὐτῷ κομισθείσης παρὰ 
Ἡφαίστου, καθοπλισάμενος ἐπὶ τὸν πόλεμον ἐξ- 
έρχεται, καὶ συνδιώκει τοὺς Τρῶας ἐπὶ τὸν Σκά- 
μανδρον, κἀκεῖ πολλοὺς μὲν ἄλλους ἀναιρεῖ, κτείνει 
δὲ καὶ ᾿Αστεροπαῖον τὸν Ἰ]ηλεγόνος ῖ τοῦ ᾿Α ξιοῦ 
ποταμοῦ: καὶ αὐτῷ λάβρος ὁ ποταμὸς ἐφορμᾷ. 
καὶ τούτου μὲν ὁ “Ηφαιστος τὰ ῥεῖθρα ἀναξηραίνει 
πολλῇ φλογὶ διώξας, ὁ δ᾽ ᾿Αχιλλεὺς “Extopa ἐκ 


1 Πηλεγόνος Kerameus: τηλεγόνον S, 


1 These events are narrated in the tenth book of the Iliad. 
They form the subject of Euripides’s tragedy Rhesus, the only 
extant Greek drama of which the plot is derived from the 
action of the Jliad. 

2 These events are told in the eleventh book of the Jliad. 

3 Compare Homer, J1. xii. 436 sqq. 


208 


EPITOME, ιν. 4-7 


drove the horses to the ships.!_ But by day a fierce 
fight took place ; Agamemnon and Diomedes, Ulysses, 
Eurypylus, and Machaon were wounded, the Greeks 
were put to flight,2 Hector made a breach in the 
wall and entered? and, Ajax having retreated, he 
set fire to the ships.‘ 

But when Achilles saw the ship of Protesilaus burn- 
ing, he sent out Patroclus with the Myrmidons, after 
arming him with his own arms and giving him the 
horses. Seeing him the Trojans thought that he was 
Achilles and turned to flee. And having chased them 
within the wall, he killed many, amongst them 
Sarpedon, son of Zeus, and was himself killed by 
Hector, after being first wounded by Euphorbus.° 
And a fierce fight taking place for the corpse, Ajax 
with difficulty, by performing feats of valour, rescued 
the body.6 And Achilles laid aside his anger and 
recovered Briseis. And a suit of armour having been 
brought him from Hephaestus, he donned the armour ? 
and went forth to the war, and chased the Trojans in a 
crowd to the Scamander, and there killed many, and 
amongst them Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon, son of 
the river Axius ; and the river rushed at him in fury. 
But Hephaestus dried up the streams of the river, 
after chasing them with a mighty flame.’ And Achilles 


4 Compare Homer, 11]. xv. 716 sqq. 

5 These events are narrated in the sixteenth book of the 
liad. 

6 These events are the subject of the seventeenth book of 
the Iliad. 

_ 17 These events are narrated in the eighteenth and nine- 
teenth books of the Iliad. 

8 These events are related in the twentieth and twenty-first 
books of the Iliad. As to the slaying of Asteropaeus by 
Achilles, see JJ, xxi. 189-204. As to the combat of Achilles 
with the river Scamander, and the drying up of the streams 


209 
VOL, Il. P 


APOLLODORUS 


μονομαχίας ἀναιρεῖ καὶ ἐξάψας αὐτοῦ τὰ σφυρὰ 

/ 
ἐκ τοῦ ἅρματος σύρων ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς παραγίνεται. 
καὶ θάψας Πάτροκλον ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ἀγῶνα τίθησιν, 
ἐν ᾧ νικᾷ ἵπποις Διομήδης, Ἐπειὸς πυγμῇ, Alas 
καὶ Ὀδυσσεὺς πάλῃ. “μετὰ δὲ τὸν ἀγῶνα παρα- 
γενόμενος Πρίαμος πρὸς ᾿Αχιλλέα λυτροῦται τὸ 
eat σῶμα καὶ θάπτει. 

V. | "Ore Πενθεσίλεια, ᾿Οτρηρῆς καὶ ἔΑρεος, 
ἀκουσίως Ἱππολύτην κτείνασα καὶ ὑπὸ Πριάμου 
καθαρθεῖσα, μάχης γενομένης πολλοὺς κτείνει, 
ἐν οἷς καὶ Μαχάονα" εἶθ᾽ ὕστερον θνήσκει ὑπὸ 
᾿Αχιλλέως," ὅστις μετὰ θάνατον ἐρασθεὶς τῆς 
᾿Αμαζόνος κτείνει Θερσίτην λοιδοροῦντα αὐτόν. 


1 This and the following paragraph are from E. The 
death of Penthesilia seems also to have been told in 5, but 
the passage is incomplete. It runs thus: καὶ μάχης yevo- 
μένης πολλοὺς κτείνει, θνήσκει δ᾽ ὁ τρι]ὴς ὑπὸ ᾿Αχιλλέως, Where 
for the corrupt δ᾽ ὁ τριὴς we should perhaps, following E, 
read δὲ ὕστερον. Biicheler thought that in ὁ τριὴς there 
lurks ’Orpnpn, the name of Penthesilia’s mother. Perhaps 
the whole passage in § originally ran thus: καὶ μάχης yevo- 
μένης --Πενθεσίλεια, ᾿Οτρηρῆς καὶ “Apeos,> πολλοὺς κτείνει, 
θνήσκει δ᾽ ὕστερον ὑπὸ ᾿Αχιλλέως, ‘and a battle taking place, 
Penthesilia, daughter of Otrere and Ares, slays many and is 
afterwards slain by Achilles.” Wagner prints in the text 
θνήσκει δ᾽ ᾿οτρηρῆς ὑπὸ ᾿Αχιλλέως, apparently taking ’Orpnpijs 
for the name of a man. 


of the river by the fire-god Hephaestus, see JJ. xxi. 211-382. 
The whole passage affords a striking example of the way in 
which the Greeks conceived rivers as personal beings, en- 
dowed with human shape, human voice, and human passions. 
Incidentally (vv. 180-132) we hear of sacrifices of bulls and 
horses to a river, the horses being thrown alive into the 
stream. 

1 The combat of Achilles with Hector, and the death of 
Hector, form the subject of the twenty-second book of the 
Iliad. 


210 


EPITOME, ιν. 7-v. 1 


slew Hector in single combat, and fastening his ankles 
to his chariot dragged him to the ships.1 And having 
buried Patroclus, he celebrated games in his honour, 
at which Diomedes was victorious in the chariot race, 
Epeus in boxing, and Ajax and Ulysses in wrestling.” 
And after the games Priam came to Achilles and 
ransomed the body of Hector, and buried 1.8 

V. Penthesilia, daughter of Otrere and Ares, 
accidentally killed Hippolyte and was purified by 
Priam. In battle she slew many, and amongst them 
Machaon, and was afterwards herself killed by 
Achilles, who fell in love with the Amazon after her 
death and slew Thersites for jeering at him.+ 


2 The burial of Patroclus and the funeral games celebrated 
in his honour, are described in the twenty-third book of the 
Iliad. 

3 These events are narrated in the twenty-fourth book of 
the Iliad. 

4 These events were narrated in the Aethiopis of Arctinus, 
as we learn from the summary of that poem drawn up by 
Proclus. See EHpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. 
Kinkel, p. 33. Compare Diodorus Siculus, ii. 46. 5; Quintus 
Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, i. 18 sqq., 227 sqq., 538 sqq.; J. 
Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 6 sqq., 100 sqq., 136 sqq.; id. Schol. 
on Lycophron, 999 ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, iv. 
2sq. Quintus Smyrnaeus explains more fully than Apollo- 
dorus the reason why Penthesilia came to Troy (Postho- 
merica, i. 18 sqq.). Aiming at a deer in the chase, she had 
accidentally killed her sister Hippolyte with her spear, and, 
haunted by the Furies of the slain woman, she came to Troy 
to be purified from her guilt. The same story is told more 
briefly by Diodorus Siculus. According to Tzetzes (Schol. 
on Lycophron, 999), Thersites excited the wrath of Achilles, 
not only by his foul accusations, but by gouging out the eyes 
of the beautiful Amazon. In the Aethiopis it was related 
how, after killing the base churl, Achilles sailed to Lesbos 
and was there purified from the guilt of murder by Ulysses, 
but not until he had offered sacrifice to Apollo, Artemis, and 
Latona. See Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 


Zk 


Ρ 2 


2 


APOLLODORUS 


Ἣν δὲ Ἱππολύτη ἡ τοῦ Ἱππολύτου μήτηρ, ἡ 
καὶ Pavan Kal Μελανίππη. αὕτη γάρ," ἐπιτε- 
λουμένων τῶν γάμων Φαίδρας, ἐπιστᾶσα σὺν 
ὅπλοις ἅμα ταῖς μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῆς ᾿Αμαζόσιν ἔλεγε 
κτείνειν τοὺς συνανακειμένους Θησεῖ. μάχης οὖν 
γενομένης ἀπέθανεν, εἴτε ὑπὸ τῆς συμμάχου Πεν- 
θεσιλείας ἀκούσης, εἴτε ὑπὸ Θησέως, εἴτε ὅτι οἱ 
περὶ Θησέα, τὴν τῶν ᾿Αμαζόνων ἑωρακότες ἐπι- 
στασίαν, κλείσαντες διὰ τάχους τὰς θύρας καὶ 
ταύτην ἀπολαβόντες ἐ ἐντὸς ἀπέκτειναν. 

[Ὅτι Μέμνονα 25 τὸν Τιθωνοῦ καὶ ᾿Ηοῦς μετὰ 
πολλῆς Αἰθιόπων δυνάμεως παραγενόμενον ἐν 
Τροίᾳ καθ᾽ Ἑλλήνων καὶ πολλοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων 
κτείναντα καὶ ᾿Αντίλοχον κτείνει ὁ ᾿Αχιλλεύς. 
διώξας δὲ καὶ τοὺς" Τρῶας πρὸς ταῖς Σκαιαῖς 


1 With what follows compare Hpitome, i. 17, which is 
from 8, while the present passage is from EK. 

2 "Ort Méuvova... κτείνει ὁ ᾿Αχιλλεής Εἰ: Μέμνων δὲ ὃ 
Τιθωνοῦ καὶ ᾿Ηοῦς πολλὴν Αἰθιόπων δύναμιν ἀθροίσας παραγίνεται 
καὶ τῶν “Ελλήνων οὐκ ὀλίγους ἀναιρεῖ, κτείνει καὶ ᾿Αντίλοχον καὶ 
αὐτὸς θνήσκει ὑπὸ ᾿Αχιλλέως SB, 83. δὲ καὶ τοὺς KE: δὲ τοὺς S. 


p- 393 The mother of Penthesilia is named Otrere (Otrera) 
by Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 997) and Hyginus (fab. 
112), in agreement with Apollodorus. Machaon is usually 
said to have been killed by Eurypylus, and not, as Apollo- 
dorus says, by Penthesilia. See Pausanias, iii. 26. 9 ; Quintus 
Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, vi. 390 sqq.; J. Tzetzes, Postho- 
merica, 520 sqq.; Hyginus, Fab. 113. From Pausanias (.6.) 
we learn that Eur ypylus, not Penthesilia, was represented 
as the slayer in the Little Iliad of Lesches. 

1 See above, Hpitome, i. 17. The two passages are prac- 
tically duplicates of each other. The former occurs in the 
Sabbaitic, the latter in the Vatican Epitome of Apollodorus. 
The author of the one compendium preferred to relate the 
incident in the history of Theseus, the other in the history 
of Troy. 


212 


EPITOME, v. 2-3 


Hippolyte was the mother of Hippolytus; she also 
goes by the names of Glauce and Melanippe. For 
when the marriage of Phaedra was being celebrated, 
Hippolyte appeared in arms with her Amazons, and 
said that she would slay the guests of Theseus. So 
a battle took place, and she was killed, whether in- 
voluntarily by her ally Penthesilia, or by Theseus, or 
because his men, seeing the threatening attitude of 
the Amazons, hastily closed the doors and so 
intercepted and slew her.! 

Memnon, the son of Tithonus and the Dawn, 
came with a great force of Ethiopians to Troy 
against the Greeks, and having slain many of the 
Greeks, including Antilochus, he was himself slain by 
Achilles.2, Having chased the Trojans also, Achilles 


2 These events were narrated in the Aethiopis of Arctinus, 
as we learn from the summary of Proclus. See Hpicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 33. Compare 
Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, ii. 100 sqq., 235 sqq., 
452 sqq.; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 234 sqq.; Dictys Cre- 
tensis, Bellum Trojanum, iv. 6. The fight between Memnon 
and Achilles was represented on the throne of Apollo at 
Amyclae, and on the chest of Cypselus at Olympia (Pausanias, 
iii. 18. 12, v. 19.1). It was also the subject of a group of 
statuary, which was set up beside the Hippodamium at 
Olympia (Pausanias, v. 22. 2). Some fragments of the pedestal 
which supported the group have been discovered: one of 
them bears the name MEMNON inscribed in archaic letters. 
See Die Inschriften von Olympia, No. 662; and my commen- 
tary on Pausanias, vol. 111, pp. 629 sg. Aeschylus wrote a 
tragedy on the subject called Psychostasia, in which he 
described Zeus weighing the souls of the rival heroes in scales. 
See Plutarch, De audiendis poetis, 2; Scholiast on Homer, 
Il. viii. 70; TLragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. 
Nauck?, pp. 88 sg. A play of Sophocles, called The Ethiopians, 
probably dealt with the same theme. See The Fragments 
of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 22 sqq. The 
slaying of Antilochus by Memnon is mentioned by Homer 
(Od. iv. 187 sq.). 

213 


4 


APOLLODORUS 


πύλαις TokeveTar! ὑπὸ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου καὶ ᾿Απόλ- 
λωνος εἰς τὸ σφυρόν. γενομένης δὲ μάχης περὶ 
τοῦ νεκροῦ," Alas Τῦλαῦκον ἀναιρεῖ, καὶ τὰ ὅπλα 
δίδωσιν ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς κομίζειν, τὸ δὲ σῶμα βαστά- 
σας Αἴας βαλλόμενος βέλεσι μέσον τῶν πολεμίων 
διήνεγκεν, ᾽Οδυσσέως πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιφερομένους 
μαχομένου. | ᾿Αχιλλέως δὲ ἀποθανόντος συμφορᾶς 


1 πτοξεύεται HK: ἐτοξεύθη S. 
2 μάχης περὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ Εἰ : περὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ μάχης ὃ. 


1 The death of Achilles was similarly related in the Aethi- 
opis of Arctinus. See Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum 
Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, pp. 33 sq. Compare Quintus 
Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, 111. 26-387; Hyginus, Fab. 107. 
All these writers agree with Apollodorus in saying that the 
fatal wound was inflicted on the heel of Achilles. The story 
ran that at his birth his mother Thetis made Achilles in- 
vulnerable by dipping him in the water of Styx; but his 
heel, by which she held him, was not wetted by the water 
and so remained vulnerable. See Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 
vi. 57; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, Achill. i. 134; τα. 
Narrat. fabul. xii. 6; Fulgentius, Mytholog. iii. 7. Tradition 
varied as to the agent of Achilles’s death. Some writers, like 
Arctinus and Apollodorus, say that the hero was killed by 
Apollo and Paris jointly. Thus in Homer (Jl. xxii. 359 sq.) 
the dying Hector prophesies that Achilles will be slain by 
Paris and Apollo at the Scaean gate ; and the same prophecy 
is put by Homer more darkly into the mouth of the talking 
horse Xanthus, who, like Balaam’s ass, warns his master of 
the danger that besets his path (Jl. xix. 404 sqq.). Accordin 
to Virgil and Ovid, it was the hand of Paris that discharge 
the fatal arrow, but the hand of Apollo that directed it to 
the mark. See Virgil, Aen. vi. 56-58; Ovid, Metamorph. 
xii. 597-609. According to Hyginus, it was Apollo in the 
guise of Paris who transfixed the mortal heel of Achilles with 
an arrow (Fab. 107). But in one passage (Zl. xxi. 277 sq.) 
Homer speaks of the death of Achilles as wrought by the 
shafts of Apollo alone; and this version was followed by 


214 


EE — ΨΡΡΌΝΝ 


EPITOME, v. 3-5 


was shot with an arrow in the ankle by Alexander 
and Apollo at the Scaean gate. A fight taking place 
for the corpse, Ajax killed Glaucus, and gave the arms 
to be conveyed to the ships, but the body he carried, 
in a shower of darts, through the midst of the enemy, 
while Ulysses fought his assailants.1 The death 


Quintus Smyrnaeus (iii. 60 844.) and apparently by Aeschylus, 
Sophocles and Horace. See Plato, Republic, 11. 21, p. 383.4 B; 
Sophocles, Phiioctetes, 334 sq.; Horace, Odes, iv. 6. 1 sqq. 
Other writers, on the contrary, speak of Paris alone as the 
slayer of Achilles. See Euripides, Andromache, 655; id. 
Hecuba, 387 sq.; Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. ix. 13. 2; id. 
Comparison of Lysander and Sulla, 4. <A very different 
version of the story connected the death of Achilles with a 
romantic passion he had conceived for Polyxena, daughter of 
Priam. It is said that Priam offered her hand in marriage 
to Achilles on condition that the siege of Troy was raised. 
In the negotiations which were carried on for this purpose 
Achilles went alone and unarmed to the temple of Thym- 
braean Apollo and was there treacherously assassinated, 
Deiphobus clasping him to his breast in a pretended embrace 
of friendship while Paris stabbed him with a sword. See 
J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 385-423; Philostratus, Heroica, 
xx. 16 sq.; Hyginus, Fab. 110; Dictys Cretensis, Bellwm 
Trojanum, iv. 10 sq. ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. vi 57 ; Lactan- 
tius Placidus, on Statius, Achill. i. 134; Dares Phrygius, 
De excidio Trojae, 34; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 18, 143 (First Vatican Mytho- 
grapher, 36; Second Vatican Mythographer, 205). Of these 
writers, the Second Vatican Mythographer tells us that 
Achilles first saw Polyxena, Hector’s sister, when she stood 
on a tower in the act of throwing down bracelets and ear- 
rings with which to ransom Hector’s body, and that when 
Achilles came to the temple of the Thymbraean Apollo to 
ratify the treaty of marriage and peace, Paris lurked behind 
the image of the god and shot the confiding hero with an 
arrow. This seems to be the account of the death which 
Servius and Lactantius Placidus (//.cc.) followed in their briefer 
narrative. Compare Nonnus, in Westermann’s Mythographi 
Graeci, Appendix Narrationum, p. 382, No. 62. 


215 


KS 


ES 6 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐπληρώθη τὸ στράτευμα. | θάπτουσι δὲ αὐτὸν 1 
[ἐν Λευκῇ νήσῳ] * μετὰ Πατρόκλου, τὰ ἑκατέρων 
ὀστᾶ συμμίξαντες. λέγεται δὲ 5 μετὰ θάνατον 
᾿Αχιλλεὺς ἐν Μακάρων νήσοις Μηδείᾳ συνοικεῖν. 
᾿τιθέασι δὲ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ ἀγῶνα, ἐν ᾧ νικᾷ Βὔμηλος 
ἵπποις, Διομήδης σταδίῳ, Αἴας δίσκῳ, Τεῦκρος 
τόξῳ. | ἡ δὲ πανοπλία αὐτοῦ τῷ ἀρίστῳ νικητή- 


1 θάπτουσι δὲ αὐτὸν S: Ὅτι θάπτουσι τὸν ᾿Αχιλλέα EK. 

2 ἐν Λευκῇ νήσῳ... . συμμίξαντες Εἰ : τοῖς Πατρόκλου μίξαντες 
ὀστοῖς ἐν Λευκῇ νήσῳ S. 3 χέγεται δὲ E: καὶ λέγεται S. 

4 ᾿Αχιλλεὺς ἐν Μακάρων νήσοις Μηδείᾳ συνοικεῖν Τὰ: ἐν 
Μακάρων νήσοις αὐτῷ Μήδειαν συνοικεῖν S. 


1 According to Arctinus in the Aethiopis, when the body 
of Achilles was lying in state, his mother Thetis came with 
the Muses and her sisters and mourned over her dead son ; 
then she snatched it away from the pyre and conveyed it to 
the White Isle; but the Greeks raised a sepulchral mound 
and held games in honour of the departed hero. See Proclus, 
in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 34. 
Compare Homer, Od. xxiv. 43-92; Quintus Smyrnaeus, 
Posthomerica, iii. 525-787 (the laying-out of the body, the 
lamentation of Thetis, the Nereids, and the Muses, and the 
burning of the corpse); J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 431-467 ; 
Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, iv. 13 and 15. Homer 
tells how the bones of Achilles, after his body had been 
burnt on the pyre, were laid with the bones of his friend 
Patroclus in a golden urn, made by Hephaestus, which 
Thetis had received from Dionysus. The urn was buried 
at the headland of Sigeum, according to Tzetzes and Dictys 
Cretensis. In Quintus Smyrnaeus ὮΝ. 766-780) we read 
how Poseidon comforted Thetis by assuring her that Achilles, 
her sorrow, was not dead, for he himself would bestow on 
the departed hero an island in the Euxine Sea where he 
should be a god for evermore, worshipped with sacrifices 
by the neighbouring tribes. The promised land was the 
White Isle mentioned by Apollodorus. It is described as a 
wooded island off the mouth of the Danube. In it there was 
a temple of Achilles with an image of him; and there the 
hero was said to dwell immortal with Helen for his wife and 


216 


EPITOME, v. 5-6 


of Achilles filled the army with dismay, and they 

buried him with Patroclus in the White Isle, mixing 
the bones of the two together.! It is said that after 
death Achilles consorts with Medea in the Isles of 
the Blest.2, And they held games in his honour, at 
which Eumelus won the chariot-race, Diomedes the 
foot-race, Ajax the quoit-match, and Teucer the 
competition in archery.? Also his arms were offered 


his friends Patroclus and Antilochus for his companions. 
There he chanted the verses of Homer, and mariners who 
sailed near the island could hear the song wafted clearly across 
the water ; while such as put in to the shore or anchored off 
the coast, heard the trampling of horses, the shouts of warriors, 
and the clash of arms. See Pausanias, iii. 19. 11-13; Philo- 
stratus, Heroica, xx. 32-40. As the mortal remains of Achilles 
were buried in the Troad, and only his immortal spirit was 
said to dwell in the White Isle, the statement of Apollodorus 
that the Greeks interred him in the White Isle must be 
regarded as erroneous, whether the error is due to Apollodorus 
himself, or, as is more probable, either to his abbreviator or to 
a copyist. Perhaps in the original form of his work Apollo- 
dorus followed Arctinus in describing how Thetis snatched the 
body of Achilles from the pyre and transported it to the 
White Isle. 

2 Compare Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. iv. 810 sqq.; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 174. According to the Scholiast on 
Apollonius Rhodius (Argon. iv. 815), the first to affirm 
that Achilles married Medea in the Elysian Fields was the 
poet Ibycus, and the tale was afterwards repeated by Simon- 
ides. The story is unknown to Homer, who describes the 
shade of Achilles repining at his lot and striding alone in the 
Asphodel Meadow (Od. xi. 471-540). 

3. The funeral games in honour of Achilles are described at 
full length, in the orthodox manner, by Quintus Smyrnaeus, 
Posthomerica, iv. 88-595. He agrees with Apollodorus in 
representing Teucer and Ajax as victorious in the contests of 
archery and quoit-throwing respectively (Posthomerica, iv. 
405 sqq., 436 sqq.) ; and he seems to have described Eumelus 
as the winner of the chariot-race (iv. 500 sqq.), but the conclu- 
sion of the race is lost through a gap in the text. 


214 


ES 


APOLLODORUS 


/ 
ρίον τίθεται, ᾿ καὶ καταβαίνουσιν εἰς, ἅμιλλαν 


Αἴας καὶ ᾿Οδυσσεύς. | καὶ κρινάντων τῶν Τρώων, 
ὡς δέ τινες τῶν συμμά ων, ] ᾽Οδυσσεὺς προκρί- 
νεται. Αἴας δὲ ὑπὸ λύπης ταραχθεὶς “ἐπιβου- 
λεύεται νύκτωρ τῷ στρατεύματι, καὶ αὐτῷ μανίαν 
ἐμβαλοῦσα ᾿Αθηνᾶ εἰς τὰ βοσκήματα ἐκτρέπει 
ξιφήρη" ὁ δὲ ἐκμανεὶς σὺν τοῖς νέμουσι τὰ βοσκή- 
ματα ὡς ᾿Αχαιοὺς φονεύει. ὕστερον δὲ σωφρονήσας 
κτείνει καὶ ἑαυτόν. ᾿Αγαμέμνων δὲ κωλύει τὸ 
σῶμα αὐτοῦ καῆναι, καὶ μόνος οὗτος τῶν ἐν Ἰλίῳ 
ἀποθανόντων ἐν σορῷ κεῖται" ὁ δὲ τάφος ἐστὶν 
ἐν Ροιτείῳ. 


1 7 δὲ πανοπλία αὐτοῦ τῷ ἀρίστῳ νικητήριον τίθεται Ἐὶ : τὴν δὲ 
᾿Αχιλλέως πανοπλίαν τίθεισι (sic) τῷ ἀρίστῳ νικητήριον S. 

2 ᾽Οδυσσεὺς mpoxplvera. .. ὡς ᾿Αχαιοὺς φονεύει S: προκρι- 
θέντος δὲ ᾿Οδυσσέως Αἴας ὑπὸ λύπης ταράττεται καὶ νύκτωρ ἐπι- 
βουλεύεται τῷ στρατεύματι: καὶ ὑπὸ ᾿Αθηνᾶς μανεὶς εἰς τὰ βοσκή- 
ματα ξιφήρης ἐκτρέπεται καὶ ταῦτα κτείνει σὺν τοῖς νέμουσιν ὡς 
᾿Αχαίους K 

3 ὕστερον δὲ σωφρονήσας κτείνει καὶ ἑαυτόν E: καὶ σωφρο- 
νήσας ὕστερον ἑαυτὸν κτείνει S. 


1 These events were narrated in the Little Iliad of Lesches. 
See Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. ἃ. 
Kinkel, p. 36; compare Aristotle, Poetics, 23, p. 1459 Ὁ 4 sq. 
The contest between Ajax and Ulysses for the arms of 
Achilles was also related in the Aethiopis of Arctinus. See 
Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 84. It 
was known to Homer (Qd. xi. 542 sqq.), who tells us that the 
Trojans and Pallas Athena acted as judges and awarded the 
arms to Ulysses. A Scholiast on this passage of Homer (v. 
547) informs us that Agamemnon, unwilling to undertake the 
invidious duty of deciding between the two competitors, 
referred the dispute to the decision of the Trojan prisoners, 
inquiring of them which of the two heroes had done most harm 
to the Trojans. The prisoners decided that Ulysses was the 
man, and the arms were therefore awarded to him. According 
to another account, which was adopted by the author of the 


218 


EPITOME, v. 6-7 


as a prize to the bravest, and Ajax and Ulysses came 
forward as competitors. The judges were the Trojans 
or, according to some, the allies, and Ulysses was 
preferred. Disordered by chagrin, Ajax planned 
a nocturnal attack on the army. And Athena 
drove him mad, and turned him, sword in hand, 
among the cattle, and in his frenzy he slaughtered 
the cattle with the herdsmen, taking them for the 
Achaeans. But afterwards he came to his senses 
and slew also himself. And Agamemnon forbade 
his body to be burnt; and he alone of all who 
fell at lium is buried in a coffin.2 His grave is at 
Rhoeteum. 


Little Iliad, the Greeks on the advice of Nestor sent spies to 
the walls of Troy to overhear the Trojans discussing the 
respective merits of the two champions. They heard two 
girls debating the question, and thinking that she who gave 
the preference to Ulysses reasoned the better, they decided 
accordingly. See Scholiast on Aristophanes, Knights, 1056. 
According to Pindar (Nem. viii. 26 (45) sq.), it was the Greeks 
who by secret votes decided in favour of Ulysses. The subject 
was treated by Aeschylus in a lost play called The Decision 
of the Arms. See Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. 
Nauck?, pp. 57 sq. The madness and suicide of Ajax, conse- 
quent on his disappointment at not being awarded the arms, 
are the theme of Sophocles’s extant tragedy Ajax. As to the 
contest for the arms, see further Quintus Smyrnaeus, Post- 
homerica, v. 121 sqq.; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 481 sqq. ; 
Zenobius, Cent. i. 43; Hyginus, Fab. 107 ; Ovid, Metamorph. 
xii. 620-628, xiii. 1-398. Quintus Smyrnaeus and Tzetzes 
agree in representing the Trojan captives as the judges in the 
dispute, while Ovid speaks of the Greek chiefs sitting in 
judgment and deciding in favour of Ulysses. According to 
Zenobius (l.c.), Ajax in his frenzy scourged two rams, believing 
that he was scourging Agamemnon and Menelaus. This 
account is based on the description of the frenzy of Ajax in 
Sophocles (Ajax, 97-110, 237-244). 

* Similarly the author of the Little Iliad said that the body 
of Ajax was not burned, but placed in a coffin ‘‘on account of 


219 


APOLLODORUS 


E 8 |’ ‘Hoy δὲ ὄντος τοῦ πολέμου δεκαετοῦς ἀθυμοῦσι 
ES τοῖς “λλησι! Κάλχας θεσπίξει, οὐκ * ἄλλως ἀλῶ- 
vat δύνασθαι 'Γροίαν, ἂν μὴ τὰ Ἡρακλέους ἔχωσι" 


1 οὐκ S: μὴ KF. 2 ἂν μὴ: HE. 
3 ἔχωσι ὃ : ἔχουσι E. 


the wrath of the king.” See Eustathius on Homer, .17. ii. 557, 
p- 285. Philostratus tells us that the body was laid in the 
earth by direction of the seer Calchas, ‘‘ because suicides may 
not lawfully receive the burial by fire” (Heroica, xiii. 7). 
This was probably the true reason for the tradition that the 
corpse was not cremated in the usual way. For the ghosts of 
suicides appear to be commonly dreaded; hence unusual 
modes of disposing of their bodies are adopted in order to 
render their spirits powerless for mischief. For example, the 
Baganda of Central Africa, who commonly bury their dead in © 
the earth, burn the bodies of suicides on waste land or αὖ 
cross-roads in order to destroy the ghosts; for they believe 
that if the ghost of a suicide is not thus destroyed, it will 
tempt other people to imitate its example. As an additional 
precaution everyone who passed the place where the body of 
a suicide had been burnt threw some grass or a few sticks on 
the spot, ‘‘so as to prevent the ghost from catching him, in 
case it had not been destroyed.” For the same reason, if a 
man took his life by hanging himself on a tree, the tree was 
torn up by the roots and burned with the body; if he had 
killed himself in a house, the house was pulled down and 
the materials consumed with fire ; for ‘‘ people feared to live 
in a house in which a suicide had taken place, lest they 
too should be tempted to commit the same crime.” See 
J. Roscoe, The Baganda (London, 1911), pp. 20 sg., 289. 
Similar customs prevailed among the Banyoro, a neighbour- 
ing nation of Central Africa. ‘‘It was said to be necessary 
to destroy a tree upon which a person had hanged himself 
and to burn down a house in which a person had committed 
suicide, otherwise they would be a danger to people in 
general and would influence them to commit suicide.” See J. 
Roscoe, The Northern Bantu (Cambridge, 1915), pp. 24 sq. 
(where, however, the burning of the body is not ex sressly men- 
tioned). In like manner the “Hos of Togoland, in West Africa, 


220 


EPITOME, v. 8 


When the war had already lasted ten years, and the 
Greeks were despondent, Calchas prophesied to them 
that Troy could not be taken unless they had the bow 


are much afraid of the ghost of a suicide. They believe that the 
ghost of a man who has hanged himself will torment the first 
person who sees the body. Hence when the relations of such 
a man approach the corpse they protect themselves against the 
ghost by wearing magical cords and smearing their faces with 
a magical powder. ‘The tree on which a man hanged himself 
is cut down, and the branch on which he tied the fatal noose 
is lopped off. To this branch the corpse is then tied and 
dragged ruthlessly through the woods, over stones and through 
thorny bushes, to the place where ‘‘ men of blood,” that is, all 
who die a violent death, are buried. There they dig a shallow 
grave in great haste and throw the body in. Having done so 
they run home; for they say that the ghosts of ‘‘men of 
blood ” fling stones at such as do not retreat fast enough, and 
that he who is struck by one of these stones must die. The 
houses of such men are broken down and burnt. A suicide is 
believed to defile the land and to prevent rain from falling. 
Hence the district where a man has killed himself must be puri- 
fied by a sacrifice offered to the Earth-god. See J. Spieth, 
Die Ewe-Stimme (Berlin, 1906), pp. 272, 274, 276 sq. 
756, 758. As to the special treatment of the bodies of 
suicides, see R. Lasch, ‘‘Die Behandlung der Leiche des 
Selbstmorders,” Globus, Ixxvi. (Brunswick, 1899, pp. 63-66. ) 
In the Ajax of Sophocles the rites of burial are at first 
refused, but afterwards conceded, to the dead body of Ajax ; 
and though these ceremonies are not described, we may 
assume that they included the burning of the corpse on a 
pyre. This variation from what appears to be the usual 
tradition may have been introduced by Sophocles out of 
deference to the religious feelings of the Athenians, who wor- 
shipped Ajax as a hero, and who would have been shocked 
to think of his remains being denied the ordinary funeral 
honours. See Jebb’s Introduction to his edition of the Ajax 
(Cambridge, 1896), pp. xxix. 844. As to the worship of Ajax 
at Athens, see Pausanias, i. 35. 3; Corpus Inscriptionum 
Atticarum, ii. Nos. 467-471; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscrip- 
tionum Graecarum*®, No. 717, vol. ii. p. 370. From these 
inscriptions we learn that the Athenian youths used to sail 
across every year to Salamis and there sacrifice to Ajax. 


221 


APOLLODORUS 


a \ 
τόξα συμμαχοῦντα." τοῦτο" ἀκούσας ᾿Οδυσσεὺς 


μετὰ Διομήδους εἰς Λῆμνον ἀφικνεῖται πρὸς Φιλο- 
κτήτην, καὶ δόλῳ ἐγκρατὴς γενόμενος τῶν τόξων 
πείθει πλεῖν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ Τροίαν. ὁ δὲ παραγενό- 
μενος καὶ θεραπευθεὶς ὑπὸ Ποδαλειρίου ᾿Αλέξ- 
9 ανδρον τοξεύει. τούτου δὲ ἀποθανόντος εἰς ἔριν 
ἔρχονται “Ἕλενος καὶ Δηίφοβος ὑπὲρ τῶν “Ἑλένης 
γάμων' προκριθέντος δὲ τοῦ Δηιφόβου " ‘EXevos 
ἀπολιπὼν Τροίαν ἐν ἴδῃ διετέλει. εἰπόντος δὲ 
Κάλχαντος ἡ ἽἝ ἔλενον εἰδέναι τοὺς ῥυομένους τὴν 
πόλιν χρησμούς, ἐνεδρεύσας αὐτὸν ᾽Οδυσσεὺς καὶ 
10 χειρωσάμενος ἐπὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον ἤγαγε" καὶ 
ἀναγκαζόμενος ὁ “ἕλενος λέγει πῶς ἂν αἱρεθείη ἡ 


1 τόξα συμμαχοῦντα E: συμμαχοῦντα τόξα 8. 
3 τοῦτο Ἐὶ : ταῦτα ὃ. 


1 These events are related in precisely the same way, 
though with many poetic embellishments, by Quintus Smyr- 
naeus, Posthomerica, ix. 325-479 (the fetching of Philoctetes 
from Lemnos and the healing of him by Podalirius), x. 206 sq. 
(Paris wounded to death by the arrows of Philoctetes). The 
story was told somewhat differently by Lesches in the Ltile 
Iliad. According to him, the prophecy that Troy could not 
be taken without the help of Philoctetes was uttered, not by 
Calchas, but by the Trojan seer Helenus, whom Ulysses had 
captured; Philoctetes was brought from Lemnos by Diomedes 
alone, and he was healed, not by Podalirius, but by Machaon. 
The account of Tzetzes (Posthomerica, 571-595) agrees with 
that of Lesches in respect of the prophecy of Helenus and the 
cure by Machaon. Sophocles also followed the Little Iliad in 
putting the prophecy in the mouth of the captured Trojan 
seer Helenus (Philoctetes, 604-613). Compare Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 911. In their plays on the subject (see 
above, note on Hpitome, iii. 27) Euripides and Sophocles 
differed as to the envoys whom the Greeks sent to bring the 
wounded Philoctetes from Lemnos to Troy. According to 
Euripides, with whom Apollodorus, Quintus Smyrnaeus, and 


222 


EPITOME, v. 8-10 


and arrows of Hercules fighting on their side. On 
hearing that, Ulysses went with Diomedes to Philo- 
ctetes in Lemnos, and having by craft got possession 
of the bow and arrows he persuaded him to sail to 
Troy. So he went, and after being cured by Poda- 
lirius, he shot Alexander.1 After the death of 
Alexander, Helenus and Deiphobus quarrelled as to 
which of them should marry Helen ; and as Deipho- 
bus was preferred, Helenus left Troy and abode in 
Ida.2_ But as Chaleas said that Helenus knew the 
oracles that protected the city, Ulysses waylaid and 
captured him and brought him to the camp; and 
Helenus was forced to tell how Ilium could be 


Hyginus (Fab. 103) agree, the envoys were Ulysses and 
Diomedes ; according to Sophocles, they were Ulysses and 
Neoptolemus, son of Achilles. See Dio Chrysostom, Or. lii. 
vol. ii. p. 161, ed. L. Dindorf; Jebb’s Introduction to his 
edition of Sophocles, Philoctetes (Cambridge, 1898), pp. xv. 
sqq.; Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, pp. 
613 sqgqg. However, while Sophocles diverges from what seems 
to have been the usual story by representing Neoptolemus in- 
stead of Diomedes as the companion of Ulysses on this errand, 
he implicitly recognizes the other version by putting it in the 
mouth of the merchant (Philoctetes, 570-597). A painting at 
the entrance to the acropolis of Athens represented Ulysses or 
Diomedes (it is uncertain which) in the act of carrying off the 
bow of Philoctetes. See Pausanias, i. 22. 6, with my com- 
mentary (vol. ii. pp. 263 sg.). The combat between Philoctetes 
and Paris is described by John Malalas, Chronogr. v. pp. 110 
sq., ed. L. Dindorf, 

2 Compare Conon, Narrat. 34; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 
ii. 166. The marriage of Deiphobus to Helen after the death 
of Paris was related in the Little Iliad. See Proclus, in 
Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 36. 
Compare J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 600 sq.; id. Schol. on 
Lycophron, 143, 168; Euripides, Troades, 959 sq. ; Scholiast 
on Homer, 1. xxiv. 251, and on Od. iv. 276; Dictys Cretensis, 
Bellum Trojanum, iv. 22. The marriage was seemingly 
known to Homer (Θά. iv. 276). 

223 


APOLLODORUS 


Ἴλιος, πρῶτον" μὲν εἰ τὰ Πέλοπος ὀστᾶ κομι- 
σθείη παρ᾽ αὐτούς," ἔπειτα εἰ Νεοπτόλεμος συμμα- 
χοίη, τρίτον εἰ τὸ διιπετὲς παλλάδιον ἐκκλαπείη" 
τούτου γὰρ ἔνδον ὄντος οὐ δύνασθαι τὴν πόλιν 
ἁλῶναι. 

1]. Ταῦτα * ἀκούσαντες Ελληνες ὃ τὰ μὲν Πέλοπος 
ὀστᾶ μετακομίζουσιν, ᾽Οδυσσέα δὲ καὶ Φοίνικα 
πρὸς Λυκομήδην πέμπουσιν εἰς Σκῦρον, οἱ δὲ πεί- 
θουσι «αὐξΞτὸν Νεοπτόλεμον ὃ προέσθαι. παρα- 
γενόμενος δὲ οὗτος εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον καὶ λαβὼν 
παρ᾽ ἑκόντος ᾿ΟΥυσσέως τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς πανο- 


1 ἢ Ἴλιος E: τὸ "Ἴλιον S. 2 πρῶτον S: καὶ πρῶτον KE. 
ὃ αὐτούς Biicheler: αὐτοῖς Εἰ : αὐταῖς S. 
4 ταῦτα S: τούτων EK. > “Ἕλληνες wanting in ὃ. 


ὃ πείθουσι «αὖ: τὸν Νεοπτόλεμον Wagner (conjecture) : 
πείθουσι τὸν Νεοπτόλεμον S: πείθουσι Νεοπτόλεμον ΕἸ. 


1 As to the capture of Helenus and his prophecy, see 
Sophocles, Philoctetes, 604 sqq., 1337 sqq.; Conon, Narrat. 
34; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 571-579; id. Chiliades, vi. 
508-515 ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 166 ; Dictys Cretensis, 
Bellum Trojanum, ii. 18. The mode of his capture and the 
substance of his prophecies were variously related. The need 
of fetching the bones of Pelops is mentioned by Tzetzes among 
the predictions of Helenus ; and the necessity of obtaining 
the Palladium is recorded by Conon and Servius. According 
to Pausanias (v. 13. 4), it was a shoulder-blade of Pelops 
that was brought from Pisa to Troy; on the return from 
Troy the bone was lost in a shipwreck, but afterwards 
recovered by a fisherman. 

2 As to the Palladium, see above, ili. 12. 3. 

3 As to the fetching of Neoptolemus from Scyros, see 
Homer, Od. xi. 506 sqq.; the Little Iliad of Lesches, summa- 
rized by Proclus, in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenia, ed. 
CG. Kinkel, pp. 36 sq.; Pindar, Paean, vi. 98 sqq., ed. Sandys ; 
Sophocles, Philoctetes, 343-356 ; Philostratus Junior, Imag. 
2; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, vi. 57-113, vii. 169- 
430; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 523-534. Apollodorus agrees 
with Sophocles in saying that the Greek envoys who fetched 


224 


EPITOME, v. 10-1t 


taken,! to wit, first, if the bones of Pelops were 
brought to them; next, if Neoptolemus fought for 
them; and third, if the Palladium,? which had fallen 
from heaven, were stolen from Troy, for while it was 
within the walls the city could not be taken. 

On hearing these things the Greeks caused the 
bones of Pelops to be fetched, and they sent Ulysses 
and Phoenix to Lycomedes at Scyros, and these two 
persuaded him to let Neoptolemus go.2 On coming to 
the camp and receiving his father’s arms from Ulysses, 
who willingly resigned them, Neoptolemus slew many 


Neoptolemus from Scyros were Ulysses and Phoenix. Accord- 
ing to Quintus Smyrnaeus, they were Ulysses and Diomedes. 
Ulysses is the only envoy mentioned by Homer, Lesches, and 
Tzetzes ; and Phoenix is the only envoy mentioned by Philo- 
stratus. Pindar speaks vaguely of ‘‘ messengers.” In this pas- 
sage I have adopted Wagner’s conjecture πείθουσι -« αὐ» τὸν 
Νεοπτόλεμον προέσθαι, ““ persuaded him to let Neoptolemus go.” 
If this conjecture is not accepted, we seem forced to translate 
the passage ‘‘ persuaded Neoptolemus to venture.” But I can. 
not cite any exact parallel to such a use of the middle of mpctnut. 
When employed absolutely, the verb seems often to convey 
a bad meaning. Thus Demosthenes uses it in the sense of 
“throwing away a chance,” ‘‘neglecting an opportunity” 
(Or. xix. De falsa legatione, p. 388, ὃς 150, 152, μὴ πρόεσθαι, 
ov προήσεσθαι). Iphicrates employed it with the same signi- 
ficance (quoted by Aristotle, Rhetoric, ii. 23. 6 διότι προεῖτο). 
Aristotle applied the verb to a man who had ‘‘ thrown away.” 
his health (Nicom. Ethics, iii. 5. 14, τότε μὲν οὖν ἐξῆν αὐτῷ μὴ 
νοσεῖν, προεμένῳ δ᾽ οὐκέτι, ὥσπερ οὐδ᾽ ἀφέντι λίθον ἔτ᾽ αὐτὸν 
δυνατὸν ἀναλαβεῖν). However, elsewhere Aristotle uses the 
word to describe the lavish liberality of generous men (Rhe- 
toric, i. 9. 6, εἶτα ἣ ἐλευθεριότης" προΐενται yap καὶ οὐκ ἀντα- 
γωνίζονται περὶ τῶν χρημάτων, ὧν μάλιστα ἐφίενται ἄλλοι). In 
the present passage of Apolledorus, if Wagner’s emendation 
is not accepted, we might perhaps real -- μὴ Ξ-- πρόεσθαι and 
translate, ‘‘ persuaded Neoptolemus not to throw away the 
chance.” But it is better to acquiesce in Wagner’s simple 
and probable correction. 


225 
VOL. Il. Q 


APOLLODORUS 


12 πλίαν πολλοὺς τῶν Τρώων a ἀναιρεῖ. ἀφικνεῖται δὲ 
ὕστερον Τρωσὶ σύμμαχος Ἐὐρύπυλος ὁ Τηλέφου 
πολλὴν Μυσῶν δύναμιν ayo τοῦτον ἀριστεύ- 

13 σαντα Νεοπτόλεμος ἀπέκτεινεν. ᾿Οδυσσεὺς δὲ 
μετὰ Διομήδους παραγενόμενος νύκτωρ εἰς, τὴν 
πόλιν Διομήδην μὲν αὐτοῦ μένειν εἴα, αὐτὸς δὲ 
ἑαυτὸν] αἰκισάμενος καὶ πενιχρὰν στολὴν ἐνδυ- 
σάμενος " ἀγνώστως εἰς τὴν πόλιν εἰσέρχεται ὡς 
ἐπαίτης" γνωρισθεὶς δὲ ὑ ὑπὸ Ἑλένης δι᾽ ἐκείνης τὸ 
παλλάδιον ἔκλεψε καὶ πολλοὺς κτείνας τῶν 
φυλασσόντων ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς μετὰ Διομήδους 
κομίζει. 


1 ἑαυτὸν E: αὑτὸν S. 


2 ἐνδυσάμενος ἀγνώστως εἰς τὴν πόλιν E: ἐνδὺς εἰς τὴν πόλιν 
ἀγνώστως“ S. Perhaps for ἀγνώστως we should read ἄγνωστος. 
3 ἔκλεψε S: ἐκκλέψας Ε΄. 


1 As to the single combat of Eurypylus and Neoptolemus, 
and the death of Kurypylus, see Homer, Od. xi. 516-521 ; the 
Tittle Iliad of Lesches, summarized by Proclus, in Epicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 37 ; Quintus Smyr- 
naeus, Posthomerica, viii. 128-220; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 
560-565 ; ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, iv. 17. Eury- 
pulus was king of Mysia. At first his mother Astyoche 
refused to let him go to the Trojan war, but Priam overcame 
her scruples by the present of a golden vine. See Scholiast 
on Homer, Od. xi. 520. The brief account which Apollodorus 
gives of the death of Eurypylus agrees closely with the equally 
summary narrative of Proclus. Sophocles composed a tragedy 
on the subject, of which some very mutilated fragments have 
been discovered in Egypt. See The Fragments of Sophocles, 
ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 146 sqg.; A. S. Hunt, Tragi- 
corum Graecorum Fragmenta Papyracea nuper reperta (Ox- 
ford, the Clarendon Press ; no date, no pagination). 

2 These events were narrated in the Little Jad of Lesches, 
as we learn from the summary of Proclus (Hpicorum Graec- 
orum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 37), which runs thus: 
‘* And Ulysses, having disfigured himself, comes as a spy to 


226 


———————————— μμμμι κῳὼ 


. EPITOME, v. 11-13 


of the Trojans. Afterwards, Eurypylus, son of Tele- 
phus, arrived to fight for the Trojans, bringing a great 
force of Mysians. He performed doughty deeds, but 
was slain by Neoptolemus.1 And Ulysses went with 
Diomedes by night to the city, and there he let Dio- 
medes wait, and after disfiguring himself and putting 
on mean attire he entered unknown into the city as 
a beggar. And being recognized by Helen, he with 
her help stole away the Palladium, and after killing 
many of the guards, brought it to the ships with the 
aid of Diomedes.? 


Troy, and being recognized by Helen he makes a compact 
with her concerning the capture of the city; and having 
slain some of the Trojans he arrives at the ships. And after 
these things he with Diomedes conveys the Palladium out of 
Ilium.” From this it appears that Ulysses made two different 
expeditions to Troy: in one of them he went by himself as a 
spy in mean attire, and being recognized by Helen concerted 
with her measures for betraying Troy to the Greeks ; in the 
other he went with Diomedes, and together the two stole the 
Palladium. The former of these expeditions is described by 
Homer in the Odyssey (iv. 242 sqq.), where Helen tells how 
Ulysses disfigured himself with wounds, and disguising him- 
self in mean attire came as a beggar to Troy; how she alone 
detected him, wormed the secrets of the Greeks out of him, 
and having sworn not to betray him till he had returned in 
safety to the ships, let him go free, whereupon on his way 
back he killed many Trojans. Euripides also relates this’ 
visit of Ulysses to Troy, adding that Helen revealed his 
presence to Hecuba, who spared his life and sent him out of 
the country (Hecuba, 239-250). These two quite distinct 
expeditions of Ulysses have been confused and blended into 
one by Apollodorus. As to the joint expedition of Ulysses 
and Diomedes to Troy, and the stealing of the Palladium, see 
further Conon, Narrat. 34; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Postho- 
merica, x. 350-360; Scholiast on Homer, 11. vi. 311; J. 
Malalas, Chronogr. v. pp. 109, 111 sq., ed. L. Dindorf ; Zeno- 
bius, Cent. iii. 8; Apostolius, Cent. vi. 15; Suidas, s.vv. 
Διομήδειος ἀνάγκη and Παλλάδιον ; Hesychius, s.v. Διομήδειος 


227 


ῳ 2 


APOLLODORUS 


wi δὲ b] a / / \ 
14 στερον δὲ ἐπινοεῖ δουρείου ἵππου κατασκευὴν 
καὶ ὑποτίθεται ᾿᾿ἃπειῷ, ὃς ἣν ἀρχιτέκτων: οὗτος 


ἀνάγκη ; EKustathius, on Homer, 11. x. 531, p. 822; Scholiast 
on Plato, Republic, vi. 4938; Virgil, Aen. ii. 162-170; Ser- 
vius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 166; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Tro- 
janum, v. 5 ‘and 8 sq. The narrative of Apollodorus suggests 
that Ulysses had the principal share in the exploit. But 
according to another and seemingly more prevalent tradition 
it was Diomedes who really bore off the image. This emerges 
particularly from Conon’s account. Diomedes, he tells us, 
mounted on the shoulders of Ulysses, and having thus scaled 
the wall, he refused to draw his comrade up after him, and 
went in search of the Palladium. Having secured it, he re- 
turned with it to Ulysses, and together they retraced their 
steps to the Greek camp. But by the way the crafty Ulysses 
conceived the idea of murdering his companion and making 
himself master of the fateful image. So he dropped behind 
Diomedes and drew his sword. But the moon shone full ; and 
as he raised his arm to strike, the flash of the blade in the 
moonlight caught the eye of the wary Diomedes. He faced 
round, drew his sword, and, upbraiding the other with his 
cowardice, drove him before him, while he beat the back of 
the recreant with the flat of his sword. This incident gave 
rise to the proverb, ‘‘ Diomedes’s compulsion,” applied to 
such as did what they were forced to do by dire necessity. 
The proverb is similarly explained by the other Greek proverb- 
writers and lexicographers cited above, except that, instead 
of the flash of the sword in the moonlight, they say it was 
the shadow of the sword raised to strike him which attracted 
the attention of Diomedes. The picturesque story appears to 
have been told in the Little Iliad (Hesychius, s.v. Διομήδειος 
ἀνάγκη). According to one account, Diomedes and Ulysses 
made their way into the Trojan citadel through a sewer (Ser- 
vius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 166), indeed a narrow and muddy 
sewer, as Sophocles called it in the play which he composed 
on the subject. See Julius Pollux, ix. 49; Zhe Fragments 
of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. p. 36, frag. 367. 
Some atfirmed that the Palladium was treacherously surren- 
dered to the Greek heroes by Theano, the priestess of the 
goddess (Scholiast on Homer, 1]. vi. 311; Suidas, 5.0. Παλλᾶ- 


228 


EPITOMEB, v. 14 


But afterwards he invented the construction of 
the Wooden Horse and suggested it to Epeus, who 
was an architect.1 Epeus felled timber on Ida, 


διον) ; to this step she was said to have been instigated by 
her husbana Antenor (J. Malalas, Chronogr. v. p. 109, ed. 
L. Dindorf ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, v. 5and 8). 
As to Theano in her capacity of priestess, see Homer, JI. vi. 
297 sqq. 

The theft of the Palladium furnished a not infrequent sub- 
ject to Greek artists ; but the artistic, like the literary, tra- 
dition was not agreed on the question whether the actual 
thief was Diomedes or Ulysses. See my note on Pausanias, 
i. 22. 6 (vol. ii. pp. 264 sq.). 

1 As to the stratagem of the Wooden Horse, by which Troy 
is said to have been captured, see Homer, Od. iv. 271-289, 
vill. 492-515, xi. 523-532; the Little Iliad of Lesches, 
summarized by Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. G. Kinkel, p. 37; the Zlii Persis (‘‘Sack of Troy”) by 
Arctinus, summarized by Proclus, in Epicorum Graecorum 
Fragmenia, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 49; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Post- 
homerica, xii. 23-83, 104-156, 218-443, 539-585, xiii. 21-59 ; 
Tryphiodorus, Hxcidium Ilii, 57-541; J. Tzetzes, Posthom- 
erica, 629-723; id. Schol. on Lycophron, 930; Virgil, Aen. 
1. 13-267; Hyginus, Fab. 108; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum 
Trojanum, v. 9 and 11 sq. The story is only alluded to by 
_ Homer, but was no doubt fully told by Lesches and Arctinus, 
though of their narratives we possess only the brief abstracts 
of Proclus. The accounts cf later writers, such as Virgil, 
Quintus Smyrnaeus, Tryphiodorus, Tzetzes, and Apollodorus 
himself, are probably based on the works of these early cyclic 
poets. The poem of Arctinus, if we may judge by Proclus’s 
abstract, opened with the deliberations of the Trojans about 
the Wooden Horse, and from the similarity of the abstract to 
the text of Apollodorus we may infer that our author followed 
Arctinus generally, though not in all details ; for instance, he 
differed from Arctinus in regard to the affair of Laocoon and 
his sons. See below. 

With the stratagem of the Wooden Horse we may compare 
the stratagem by which, in the war of Independence waged by 
the United Provinces against Spain, Prince Maurice contrived 
to make himself master of Breda. The city was then held by 


229 


‘ 


APOLLODORUS 


5) \ a "18 1 ΄ \ “ 7 
ἀπὸ τῆς Ἴδης 1 ξύλα τεμὼν ἵππον κατασκευάζει 
κοῖλον ἔνδοθεν εἰς Tas πλευρὰς ἀνεῳγμένον. εἰς 
fa , \ “ 
τοῦτον ᾽Οδυσσεὺς εἰσελθεῖν πείθει πεντήκοντα 
\ heat. 6 δὰ δ \ \ , ᾽ 7 
τοὺς ἀρίστους, ὡς δὲ ὁ τὴν μικρὰν γράψας ᾿Ιλιάδα 
φησί, τρισχιλίους, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς γενομένης 
νυκτὸς ἐμπρήσαντας τὰς σκηνάς, ἀναχθέντας 
περὶ" τὴν Τένεδον ναυλοχεῖν καὶ μετὰ τὴν 
15 ἐπιοῦσαν νύκτα καταπλεῖν. οἱ δὲ πείθονται καὶ 
\ \ » / a / > \ ts 
τοὺς μὲν ἀρίστους ἐμβιβάζουσιν εἰς τὸν ἵππον, 
/ lal 
ἡγεμόνα καταστήσαντες αὐτῶν ‘Odvacéa, γράμ- 


1 ἀπὸ τῆς Ἴδης E: ἐπὶ τῶν ᾿Ἴδης S. 
2 περὶ ὃ : ἐπὶ E, 


a Spanish garrison, which received its supply of fuel by boats. 
The master of one of these boats, Adrian Vandenberg by name, 
noticed that in the absence of the governor there was great 
negligence in conducting the examination to which all boats 
were subjected before they were allowed to enter the town. 
This suggested to Vandenberg a plan for taking the citadel by | 
surprise. He communicated his plan to Prince Maurice, who 
readily embraced it. Accordingly the boat was loaded in 
appearance with turf as usual; but the turf was supported by 
a floor of planks fixed at the distance of several feet from the 
bottom ; and beneath this floor seventy picked soldiers were 
placed under the command of an able officer named Harauguer. 
The boat had but a few miles to sail, yet through unexpected 
accidents several days passed before they could reach Breda, 
The wind veered against them, the melting ice (for it was the 
month of February) retarded their course, and the boat, having 
struck upon a bank, was so much damaged that the soldiers 
were for some time up to their knees in water. Their provi- 
sions were almost spent, and to add to their anxieties one of 
their number was seized with a violent cough, which, if it had 
conténued, would inevitably have betrayed them to the enemy. 
The man generously entreated his comrades to kill him, 
offering them his own sword for the purpose; but they as 
generously refused, and happily the soldier’s cough left him 
before they approached the walls. Even the leak in the boat 


230 


EPITOME, v. 14-15 


and constructed the horse with a hollow interior and 
an opening in the sides. Into this horse Ulysses 
persuaded fifty (or, according to the author of the 
Little Iliad, three thousand) of the doughtiest to 
enter,! while the rest, when night had fallen, were 
to burn their tents, and, putting to sea, to lie to off 
Tenedos, but to sail back to land after the ensuing 
night. They followed the advice of Ulysses and 
introduced the doughtiest into the horse, after 
appointing Ulysses their leader and engraving on 


was stopped by some accident. On reaching the fortifications 
the boat was searched, but only in the most superficial manner, 
Still the danger was great, for the turf was immediately 
purchased and the soldiers of the garrison set to work to 
unload it. They would soon have uncovered the planks and 
detected the ambush, if the ready-witted master of the boat 
had not first amused them with his discourse and then invited 
them to drink wine with him. The offer was readily accepted. 
The day wore on, darkness fell, and the Spanish soldiers were 
all drunk or asleep. At dead of night Harauguer and his men 
issued from the boat, and dividing into two bodies they 
attacked the guards and soon made themselves masters of two 
gates. Seized with a panic, the garrison fled the town. 
Prince Maurice marched in and took possession of the citadel. 
These events happened in the year 1590. See Robert Watson, 
History of the Reign of Philip the Second, Fourth Edition 
(London, 1785), bk. xxi. vol. iii. pp. 157-161. 

1 According to Tzetzes the number of men who entered 
into the Wooden Horse was twenty-three, and he gives the 
names of them all (Posthomerica, 641-650). Quintus Smyr- 
naeus gives the names of thirty, and he says that there were 
more of them (Posthomerica, xii. 314-335). He informs us 
that the maker of the horse, Epeus, entered last and drew 
up the ladder after him ; and knowing how to open and shut 
the trapdoor, he sat by the bolt. To judge hy Homer’s 
description of the heroes in the Horse (Od. xi. 526 sqq.), the 
hearts of most of them failed them, for they blubbered and 
their knees knocked together; but Neoptolemus never 
blenched and kept fumbling with the hilt of his sword. 


231 


APOLLODORUS 


/ \ a a 
pata ἐγχαράξαντες τὰ δηλοῦντα' τῆς εἰς οἶκον 
z ns? “EAX ᾿Αθηνῷ Ἵ 
ἀνακομιδῆς ηνες ηνᾷ χαριστήριον. 
\ / \ \ 
αὐτοὶ Σ δὲ ἐμπρήσαντες τὰς σκηνὰς Kal καταλι- 
/ a 
πόντες Σίνωνα, ds ἔμελλεν αὐτοῖς πυρσὸν ἀνάπτειν, 
na \ 
τῆς νυκτὸς ἀνάγονται Kal περὶ Tévedov ναυλο- 
οὔσιν. 
¢€ , \ / ” e cal \ a 
16 Ἡμέρας δὲ γενομένης ἔρημον οἱ Τρῶες τὸ τῶν 
«ς / 
Ελλήνων στρατόπεδον θεασάμενοι 38 καὶ νομί- 
\ 
σαντες αὐτοὺς πεφευγέναι, περιχαρέντες εἷλκον 
τὸν ἵππον καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ἸἹΙριάμου βασιλείοις 
17 στήσαντες ἐβουλεύοντο τί χρὴ ποιεῖν. Κασάνδρας 
δὲ λεγούσης ἔνοπλον ἐν αὐτῷ δύναμιν εἶναι, καὶ 
προσέτι Λαοκόωντος τοῦ μάντεως, τοῖς μὲν ἐδόκει 
, a \ 
κατακαίειν, Tots δὲ κατὰ βαράθρων ἀφιέναι" δόξαν 
δὲ τοῖς πολλοῖς ἵνα αὐτὸν ἐάσωσι θεῖον ἀνάθημα, 
, BPN ’ > a > ͵ \ 
18 τραπέντες ἐπὶ θυσίαν εὐωχοῦντο. ᾿Απόλλων δὲ 
a a \ 
αὐτοῖς σημεῖον ἐπιπέμπει: δύο yap δράκοντες 
a a 
διανηξάμενοι διὰ τὴς θαλάσσης ἐκ TOV πλησίον 4 
/ 
19νήσων τοὺς Λαοκόωντος υἱοὺς κατεσθίουσιν. ὡς 
δὲ ἐγένετο νὺξ καὶ πάντας ὕπνος κατεῖχεν, οἱ ἀπὸ 


1 τῆς εἰς οἶκον ἀνακομιδῇς S: τὴν εἰς οἶκον κομιδὴν EK. 

2 αὐτοὶ δὲ [ἢ : οἱ δὲ δ. 

3 é 5 / E ᾿ / / S 
στρατόπεδον θεασάμενοι Ἐὶ : θεασάμενοι στράτευμα S. 

4 πλησίον E: πλησίων ὃ. 


1 As to these deliberations of the Trojans, compare Homer, 
Od. viii. 505 sqq.; Arctinus, Jlii Persis, summarized by 
Proclus, in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, 
p. 49; Tryphiodorus, Hacidiwm Ilit, 250 sqq. 

2 Compare the Jlit Persis of Arctinus, summarized by 
Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, 
p. 49; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Antiquit. Roman. i. 48. 2; 
Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xii. 444-497; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 347 ; Virgil, Aen. ii. 199-227 ; Hyginus, 
Fab. 135; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. ii. 201; Seriptores rerum 


232 


EPITOME, v. 15-19 


the horse an inscription which signified, “ For their 
return home, the Greeks dedicate this thankoffering 
to Athena.” But they themselves burned their 
tents, and leaving Sinon, who was to light a beacon 
as a signal to them, they put to sea by night, and lay 
to off Tenedos. 

And at break of day, when the Trojans beheld the 
camp of the Greeks deserted and believed that they 
had fled, they with great joy dragged the horse, and 
stationing it beside the palace of Priam deliberated 
what they should do. As Cassandra said that there 
was an armed force in it, and she was further con- 
firmed by Laocoon, the seer, some were for burning 
it, and others for throwing it down a pretipice; but 
as most were in favour of sparing it as a votive 
offering sacred to a divinity, they betook them to 
sacrifice and feasting. However, Apollo sent them 
a sign; for two serpents swam through the sea from 
the neighbouring islands and devoured the sons of 
Laocoon.2, And when night fell, and all were 


mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 144 sq. (Second 
Vatican Mythographer, 207). According to Arctinus, our 
oldest authority for the tragedy of Laocoon, the two serpents 
killed Laocoon himself and one of his sons. According to 
Virgil, Hyginus, and Servius, they killed Laocoon and both 
his sons. According to Quintus Smyrnaeus, the serpents 
killed the two sons but spared the father, who lived to lament 
their fate. This last seems to have been the version followed 
by Apollodorus. The reason of the calamity which befel 
Laocoon is explained by Servius on the authority of Kuphorion. 
He tells us that when the Greek army landed in the Troad, 
the Trojans stoned the priest of Poseidon to death, because 
he had not, by offering sacrifices to the sea-god, prevented 
the invasion. Accordingly, when the Greeks seemed to be 
departing, it was deemed advisable to sacrifice to Poseidon, 
no doubt in order to induce him to give the Greeks a stormy 
passage. But the priesthood was vacant, and it was necessary 


233 


APOLLODORUS 


Τενέδου προσέπλεον, καὶ Σίνων αὐτοῖς ἀπὸ τοῦ 
᾿Αχιλλέως τάφου πυρσὸν ἧπτεν. ᾿Βλένη δὲ ἐλθοῦ- 
σα περὶ τὸν ἵππον, μιμουμένη τὰς φωνὰς ἑ ἑκάστης 
τῶν γυναικῶν, τοὺς ἀριστέας ἐκάλει. ὑπακοῦσαι 
δὲ ᾿Αντίκλου θέλοντος ᾿Οδυσσεὺς τὸ στόμα κατέ- 
0 σχεν. ὡς δ᾽ ἐνόμισαν κοιμᾶσθαι τοὺς πολεμίους, 
ἀνοίξαντες σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις ἐξήεσαν" καὶ πρῶτος 
μὲν ᾿Εχίων Πορθέως ἀφαλλόμενος t ἀπέθανεν, οἱ 
δὲ λοιποὶ σειρᾷ ἐξάψαντες ἑ ἑαυτοὺς * ἐπὶ τὰ τείχη 
παρεγένοντο καὶ τὰς πύλας ἀνοίξαντες ὑπεδέ- 
2] ἕαντο τοὺς ἀπὸ Τενέδου “καταπλεύσαντας. χωρή- 
σαντες δὲ μεθ᾽ ὅπλων εἰς τὴν πόλιν, εἰς τὰς οἰκίας 


1 ἀφαλλόμενος Εἰ : ἐφαλλόμενος S. 
2 ἑαυτοὺς Εἰ : αὐτοὺς δ 
to choose a priest by lot. The lot fell on Laocoon, priest of 
the Thymbraean Apollo, but he had incurred the wrath of 
Apollo by sleeping with his wife in front of the divine image, 
and for this sacrilege he perished with his two sons. This 
narrative helps us to understand the statement of Apollodorus 
that the two serpents were sent by Apollo for asign. Accord- 
ing to Tzetzes, the death of Laocoon’s son took place in the 
temple of the Thymbraean Apollo, the scene of the crime 
thus becoming the scene of the punishment. Sophocles wrote 
a tragedy on the subject of Laocoon, but though a few frag- 
ments of the play have survived, its contents are unknown. 
See Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. A. Nauck?, 
pp. 211 sqq.; The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C Pearson, 
vol. ii. pp. 38 sqq. In modern times the story of Laocoon is 
probably even better known from the wonderful group of 
statuary in the Vatican than from the verses of Virgil. That 
group, the work of three Rhodian sculptors, graced the 
palace of the emperor Titus in the time of Pliny, who de- 
clared that it was to be preferred to any other wor ‘either of 
sculpture or painting (Nat. Hist. xxxvi. 37). Lessing took 
the group for the text of his famous essay on the comparative 
limitations of poetry and art. 

1 The beacon-light kindled by the deserter and traitor 


234 


EPITOME, v. tg—21 


plunged in sleep, the Greeks drew near by sea from 
Tenedos, and Sinon kindled the beacon on the grave 
of Achilles to guide them.1 And Helen, going round 
the horse, called the chiefs, imitating the voices ot 
each of their wives. But when Anticlus would 
have answered, Ulysses held fast his mouth.2 And 
when they thought that their foes were asleep, they 
opened the horse and came forth with their arms. 
The first, Echion, son of Portheus, was killed by leap- 
ing from it; but the rest let themselves down by a 
rope, and lighted on the walls, and having opened the 
gates they admitted their comrades who had landed 
from Tenedos. And marching, arms in hand, into 


Sinon to guide the Greeks across the water to the doomed 
city is a regular feature in the narratives of the taking of 
Troy ; but the only other writer who mentions that it shone 
from the grave of Achilles is Tryphiodorus, who adds that all 
_ night long there blazed a light like the full moon above Helen’s 
chamber, for she too was awake and signalling to the enemy, 
while all the town was plunged in darkness and silence; the 
sounds of revelry and music had died away, and not even the 
barking of a dog broke the stillness of the summer night. 
See Tryphiodorus, Hacidium Ili, 487-521. That the poet 
conceived the fall of Troy to have happened in the summer 
time is shown by his describing how the Trojans wreathed 
the mane of the Wooden Horse with flowers culled on river 
banks, and how the women spread carpets of roses under 
its feet (verses 316 sq., 340-344). For these flowers of fancy 
Tryphiodorus is severely taken to task by the pedantic 
Tzetzes on the ground that Troy fell at midwinter ; and he 
clinches the lesson administered to his predecessor by observ- 
ing that he had learned from Orpheus, ‘‘who had it from 
another man,” never to tell a lie. Such was the state of the 
Higher Criticism at Byzantium in the twelfth century of our 
era. See J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 700-707. 

2 This incident is derived from Homer, Od. iv. 274-289. 
It is copied and told with fuller details by Tryphiodorus, who 
says that Anticlus expired under the iron grip of Ulysses 
(Excidium Ilit, 463-490). 


235 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐπερχόμενοι κοιμωμένους ἀνήρουν. Kal Νεοπτό- 
λεμὸος μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ ἑρκείου Διὸς βωμοῦ κατα- 
Ὁ φεύγοντα Ἰ]ρίαμον ἀνεῖλεν": [ Οδυσσεὺς δὲ καὶ 
Μενέλαος Γλαῦκον τὸν ᾿Αντήνορος " εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν 
φεύγοντα γνωρίσαντες μεθ᾽ ὅπλων ἐλθόντες 5 ἔσω- 
I / a / x, / / 
σαν. Αἰνείας δὲ ᾿Αγχίσην τὸν πατέρα βαστάσας 
» « \ δ ux \ \ > / 
ἔφυγεν, οἱ δὲ “EXAnves αὐτὸν διὰ τὴν εὐσέβειαν 
ES 22 εἴασαν. | Μενέλαος δὲ Δηίφοβον κτείνας Ἑλένην 
ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς ἄγει" ἀπάγουσι δὲ καὶ τὴν Θησέως 
E μητέρα Αἴθραν οἱ Θησέως παῖδες | Δημοφῶν καὶ 
᾿Ακάμας" καὶ γὰρ τούτους λέγουσιν εἰς Τροίαν 


1 ῬΑντήνορος Wagner: ἀγήνορος EK. 
2 ἐλθόντες Frazer: θέλοντες KE, Wagner. 


1 As to the death of Priam at the altar, compare Arctinus, 
Ilit Persis, summarized by Proclus, in Hpicorum Graecorum 
Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 49 ; Euripides, T'roades, 16 sq., 
481-483 ; ad. Hecuba, 22-24; Pausanias, iv. 17. 4; Quintus 
Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiii. 220-250 ; Tryphiodorus, Exci- 
dium Ilit, 634-639 ; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 732 sq. ; Virgil, 
Aen. ii. 533-558 ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, v. 12. 
According to Lesches, the ruthless Neoptolemus dragged 
Priam from the altar and despatched him at his own door. 
See Pausanias, x. 27. 2, with my note (vol. v. p. 371). The 
summary account of Proclus agrees almost is with the 
eq ually summary account of Apollodorus. 

2 Ulysses and Menelaus were bound by ties of hospitality 
to Antenor ; for when they went as ambassadors to Troy to 
treat of the surrender of Helen, he entertained them hospi- 
tably in his house. See Homer, Ji. iii. 203-207. Moreover, 
Antenor had advocated the surrender of Helen and her 
property to the Greeks. See Homer, Jl. iii. 347-353. 
According to Lesches, one of Antenor’s sons, Lycaon, was 
wounded in the sack of Troy, but Ulysses recognized him 
and carried him safe out of the fray. See Pausanias, x. 26. 8. 
Sophocles composed a tragedy on the subject of Antenor and 
his sons, in which he said that at the storming of Troy the 
Greeks hung a leopard’s skin in front of Antenor’s house in 


236 


EPITOME, v. 21-22 


the city, they entered the houses and slew the 
sleepers. Neoptolemus slew Priam, who had taken 
refuge at the altar of Zeus of the Courtyard.t_ But 
when Glaucus, son of Antenor, fled to his house, 
Ulysses and Menelaus recognized and rescued him 
by their armed intervention.2, Aeneas took up his 
father Anchises and fled, and the Greeks let him 
alone on account of his piety.2 But Menelaus slew 
Deiphobus and led away Helen to the ships*; and 
Aethra, mother of Theseus, was also led away by 
Demophon and Acamas, the sons of Theseus; for 
they say that they afterwards went to Troy.® And 


token that it was to be respected by the soldiery. See Strabo, 
xiii. 1. 53, p. 608. In Polygnotus’s great picture of the sack 
of Troy, which was one of the sights of Delphi, the painter 
depicted the house of Antenor with the leopard’s skin hung 
on the wall; in front of it were to be seen Antenor and his 
wife, with their children, including Glaucus, while beside 
them servants were lading an ass, to indicate the long journey 
which the exiles were about to undertake. See Pausanias, x. 
27. 3 sq. According to Roman tradition, Antenor led a colony 
of Enetians to the head of the Adriatic, where the people 
were thenceforth called Venetians (Livy i. 1). As to Sophocles’s 
play, The Antenorids, see Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. A. Nauck?, p. 160; The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. 
C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 86 sqq. 

% Compare Xenophon, Cyneg. i. 15; Quintus Smyrnaeus, 
Posthomerica, xiii. 315-327 ; Virgil, Aen. 11. 699 sqq. 

4 Compare Arctinus, Jliz Persis, summarized by Proclus, 
in Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 49: 
Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiii. 354 sqq.; Tryphio- 
dorus, Hacidium Ilii, 627-633; J. Tzetzes, Posthomerica, 
729-731 ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, v. 12. Dei- 
phobus had married Helen after the death of Paris. See 
above, Hpitome, v. 8. 9. 

δ᾽ Compare Arctinus, [lit Persis, summarized by Proclus, 
in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 50; 
Pausanias, x. 25. 8; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, 
xiii. 496-543; Scholia on Euripides, Hecuba, 123, and 


23/ 


APOLLODORUS 


ἐλθεῖν ὕστερον. Αἴας δὲ ὁ Aoxpos Κασάνδραν 
ὁρῶν περιπεπλεγμένην τῷ ξοάνῳ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς 
βιάζεται" διὰ «τοῦ;το τὸ! ξόανον εἰς οὐρανὸν 
βλέπειν.3 

ES 23 3 Κτείναντες δὲ τοὺς Τρῶας τὴν πόλιν ἐνέπρησαν 
καὶ τὰ λάφυρα ἐμερίσαντο. καὶ θύσαντες πᾶσι 
τοῖς θεοῖς ᾿Αστυάνακτα a ἀπὸ τῶν πύργων ἔρριψαν, 
Πολυξένην δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ ᾿Αχιλλέως τάφῳ κατέ- 


1 διὰ «-ζτοῦ; το τὸ Wagner: διὰιτὸ τὸ ΕἸ. 
2 For βλέπειν we should perhaps read βλέπει. 


on Troades, 31; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, 
v. 18. Homer mentions Aethra as one of the handmaids of 
Helen at Troy (11.111. 53). Quintus Smyrnaeus (l.c.) has 
described at length the recognition of the grandmother by 
the grandsons, who, according to Hellanicus, went to Troy 
for the purpose of rescuing or ransoming her (Scholiast on 
Euripides, Hecuba, 123). The recognition was related also 
by Lesches (Pausanias, /.c.). Aethra had been taken prisoner 
at Athens by Castor and Pollux when they rescued their 
sister Helen. See above, iii. 7. 4, Epitome, i. 23. On the 
chest of Cypselus at Olympia the artist portrayed Helen 
setting her foot on Aethra’s head and tugging at her hand- 
maid’s hair. See Pausanias, v. 19. 3; Dio Chrysostom, Or. 
xi. vol. i. p. 179, ed. Τὸ, Dindorf. 

1 As to the violence offered to Cassandra by Ajax, com- 
pare Arctinus, Jlic Persis, summarized by Proclus, in Epi- 
corum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, pp. 49 sq. ; 
Scholiast on Homer, Jl. xiii. 66, referring to Callimachus ; 
Pausanias, 1. 15. 2, v. 11. 6, v. 19.6, x. δ νι σι 
Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiii. 420-429; Tryphio- 
dorus, Hacidium Ilii, 647-650; Virgil, Aen. ii. 403-406 ; 
Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, v. 12; Scriptores rerum 
mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. p. 55 (First 
Vatican Mythographer, 181). Arctinus described how, in 
dragging Cassandra from the image of Athena, at which she 
had taken refuge, Ajax drew down the image itself. This 
incident was carved on the chest of Cypselus at Olympia 
(Pausanias, v. 19. 5), and painted by Polygnotus in his great 


238 


EPITOME, v. 22-23 


the Locrian Ajax, seeing Cassandra clinging to the 
wooden image of Athena, violated her; therefore 
they say that the image looks to heaven.! 

And having slain the Trojans, they set fire to the 
city and divided the spoil among them. And having 
sacrificed to all the gods, they threw Astyanax from 
the battlements? and slaughtered Polyxena on the 


picture of the sack of Troy at Delphi (Pausanias, x. 26. 3). 
The Scholiast on Homer (l.c.) and Quintus Smyrnaeus describe 
how the image of Athena turned up its eyes to the roof in 
‘horror at the violence offered to the suppliant. 

~ ® Compare Arctinus, [lit Persis, summarized by Proclus, 
in Hpicorum Graecorum Fraymenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 50; 
Euripides, Troades, 719-739, 1133-1135; id. Andromache, 
8-11; Pausanias, x. 26.9; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, 
‘xiii. 251-257 ; Tryphiodorus, Hacidium Ili, 644-646; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 1263; Scholiast on Euripides, Andro- 
mache, 10; Ovid, Metamorph. xiii. 415-417; Hyginus, Fab. 
109; Seneca, Troades, 524 sqq., 1063 sqqg. While ancient 
‘writers generally agree that Astyanax was killed by being 
thrown from a tower at or after the sack of Troy, they differ 
as to the agent of hisdeath. Arctinus, as reported by Proclus, 
says merely that he was killed by Ulysses. 'Tryphiodorus 
‘reports that he was hurled by Ulysses from a high tower. On 
the other hand, Lesches in the J%ttle Iliad said that it was 
Neoptolemus who snatched Astyanax from his mother’s lap 
and cast him down from the battlements (J. Tzetzes and 
Pausanias, lJ.cc.). According to Euripides and Seneca, the 
murder of the child was not perpetrated in hot blood during 
the sack of Troy, but was deliberately executed after the 
capture of the city in pursuance of a decree passed by the 
Greeks in a regular assembly. This seems to have been the 
version followed by Apollodorus, who apparently regarded the 
death of Astyanax as a sacrifice, like the slaughter of Polyxena 
on the grave of Achilles. But the killing of Astyanax was 
not thus viewed by our other ancient authorities, unless we 
except Seneca, who describes how Astyanax leaped voluntarily 
from the wall, while Ulysses was reciting the words of the 
soothsayer Calchas and invoking the cruel gods to attend the 
rite. 


239 


APOLLODORUS 


σφαξαν. λαμβάνει δὲ ᾿Αγαμέμνων μὲν κατ᾽ ἐξαί- 
ρετον Κασάνδραν, Νεοπτόλεμος δὲ ᾿Ανδρόμαχην, 
᾽Οδυσσεὺς δὲ ‘ExaBnv. ὡς δὲ ἔνιοι λέγουσιν, 
EXevos αὐτὴν λαμβάνει, καὶ διακομισθεὶς εἰς 
Χερρόνησον σὺν αὐτῇ κύνα γενομένην θάπτει, 
ἔνθα νῦν λέγεται Κυνὸς σῆμα. Λαοδίκην μὲν γὰρ 
κάλλει τῶν ᾿ Πριάμου θυγατέρων διαφέρουσαν. βλε- 
πόντων πάντων γῆ χάσματι ἀπέκρυψεν. | ws δὲ, 


1 As to the sacrifice of Polyxena on the grave of Achilles, 
see Arctinus, [liz Persis, summarized by Proclus, in Epicorum 
Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 50; Euripides, 
Hecuba, 107 sqq., 218 sqq., 391-393, 521-582; Quintus Smyr- 
naeus, Posthomerica, xiv. 210-328 ; Tryphiodorus, Hacidiwm 
Ilit, 686 sq.; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 323; Hyginus, 
Fab. 110; Ovid, Metamorph. xiii. 439-480; Seneca, Troades, 
168 sqq., 938-944, 1118-1164; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Tro- 
janum, v. 13; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. iii. 322. According to 
Euripides and Seneca, the ghost of Achilles’ appeared above 
his grave and demanded the sacrifice of the maiden. Others 
said that the spirit of the dead showed himself in a dream to 
Neoptolemus (so Quintus Smyrnaeus) or to Agamemnon (so 
Ovid). In Quintus Smyrnaeus the ghost threatens to keep 
the Greeks windbound at Troy until they have complied with 
his demand, and accordingly the offering of the sacrifice is 
followed by a great calm. Euripides seems to have contem- 
plated the sacrifice, in primitive fashion, as a means of 
furnishing the ghost with the blood needed to quench his 
thirst (Hecuba, 391-393, 536 sq.) ; but Seneca represents the 
ghost as desiring to have Polyxena as his wife in the Elysian 
. Fields (Troades, 938-944). A more romantic turn is given 
to the tradition by Philostratus, who says that after the 
death of Achilles, and before the fall of Troy, the amorous 
Polyxena stole out from the city and stabbed herself to death 
on the grave of Achilles, that she might be his bride in the 
other world. See Philostratus, Heroica, xx. 18; td. Vit. 
Apollon. iv. 16.4. According to the usual tradition, it was 
Neoptolemus who slew the maiden on his father’s tomb. 
Pictures of the sacrifice were to be seen at Athens and Per- 


240 


EPITOME, v. 23 


grave of Achilles.t And as special awards Agamem- 
non got Cassandra, Neoptolemus got Andromache, 
and Ulysses got Hecuba.* But some say that 
Helenus got her, and crossed over with her to the 
Chersonese*; and that there she turned into a 
bitch, and he buried her at the place now called 
the Bitch’s Tomb.* As for Laodice, the fairest of the 
daughters of Priam, she was swallowed up by a 
chasm in the earth in the sight of all.2 When they 


gamus (Pausanias, i. 22. 6, x. 25. 10). Sophocles wrote a 
tragedy on the theme. See The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. 
A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 161 sqq. 

2 Compare Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiv. 20-23, 
who agrees with Apollodorus as to the partition of these 
captive women among the Greek leaders. 

3. This is the version of the story adopted by Dares 
Phrygius, who says that Helenus went to the Chersonese 
along with Hecuba, Andromache, and Cassandra (De Excidio 
Trojae, 43). 

4As to the transformation of Hecuba into a bitch, com- 
pare Euripides, Hecuba, 1259-1273; Quintus Smyrnaeus, 
Posthomerica, xiv. 347-351; Dio Chrysostom, Or. xxxii. 
vol. ii. p. 20, ed. L. Dindorf; Agatharchides, De Erythraeo 
Mari, in Photius, Bibliotheca, p. 442a 23 sq., ed. Bekker; 
Julius Pollux, v. 45; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 315, 
1176; Cicero, Tuscul. Disput. iii. 26. 63; Ovid, Metamorph. 
xii. 565-571 ; Hyginus, Fad. 111; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 
111. 6; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. p. 145 (Second Vatican Mythographer, 209). A ration- 
alistic version of the story is told by Dictys Cretensis (Bellum 
Trojanum, v. 16). We may conjecture that the fable of the 
transformation originated in the resemblance of the name 
Hecuba to the name Hecate ; for Hecate was supposed to be 
attended by dogs, and Hecuba is called an attendant of Hecate 
(Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 1176). 

5 Compare Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiii. 544-551; 
Tryphiodorus, Hacidium Ili, 660-663; J. Tzetzes, Post- 
homerica, 736 ; id. Schol on Lycophron, 314. 


241 
VOL. Il. R 


ES 


ES 


APOLLODORUS 


ἔμελλον ἀποπλεῖν πορθήσαντες Τροίαν, ὑ ὑπὸ Κάλ- 
χαντος κατείχοντο, μηνίειν ᾿Αθηνᾶν αὐτοῖς “λέγον- 
τος διὰ τὴν Αἴαντος ἀσέβειαν. | καὶ τὸν μὲν 
Αἴαντα " κτείνειν ἔμελλον, φεύγοντα 5 δὲ ἐπὶ 
βωμὸν εἴασαν. 

VI. 
᾿Αγαμέμνων καὶ Μενέλαος ἐφιλονείκουν, Meve- 
λάου λέγοντος ἀποπλεῖν, ᾿Αγαμέμνονος δὲ ἐπιμέ- 
νειν κελεύοντος καὶ θύειν ᾿Αθηνᾷ. | ἀναχθέντες ὃ 
δὲ Διομήδης «καὶ! “Νέστωρ καὶ Μενέλαος ἅμα, 
οἱ μὲν εὐπλοοῦσιν, ὁ δὲ Μενέλαος χειμῶνι περι- 
πεσών, τῶν λοιπῶν ἀπολομένων σκαφῶν, πέντε 
ναυσὶν ἐπ᾽ Αἴγυπτον. ἀφικνεῖται. 

᾿Αμφίλοχος δὲ καὶ Κάλχας καὶ Λεοντεὺς καὶ 
Ποδαλείριος καὶ “Πολυποίτης ° ἐν Ἰλίῳ τὰς ναῦς 
ἀπολιπόντες ἐπὶ Κολοφῶνα, πεζῇ πορεύονται, 
κἀκεῖ θάπτουσι Κάλχαντα τὸν μάντιν" ἣν γὰρ 
αὐτῷ λόγιον τελευτήσειν, ἐὰν ἑαυτοῦ " σοφωτέρῳ 
περιτύχῃ μάντει. ὑποδεχθέντων οὖν ὑπὸ Μόψου 
μάντεως, ὃς ᾿Απόλλωνος καὶ Μαντοῦς παῖς ὑπῆρ- 
χεν, οὗτος ὁ Μόψος περὶ μαντικῆς pire Kan- 
χαντι. καὶ Κάλχαντος ἀνακρίναντος ἐρινεοῦ 


1 καὶ τὸν μὲν Αἴαντα κτείνειν S: τὸν μέντοι Αἴαντα διὰ τὴν. 

ἀσεβείαν κτείνειν Εἰ. 

2 φεύγοντα ES: we should perhaps read φυγόντα. 

3 ἀναχθέντες δὲ Διομήδης Νέστωρ καὶ Μενελάος ἅμα, οἱ μὲν 
ἀποπλοοῦσιν, ὃ δὲ Μενέλαος χειμῶνι περιπεσὼν KH: Διομήδης μὲν 
οὖν καὶ Νέστωρ εὐπλοοῦσι, Μενέλαος δὲ μετὰ τούτων ἀναχθεὶς 
χειμῶνι περιπεσὼν S. In the text I have corrected the ἀπο- 
πλοοῦσιν of E by the εὐπλοοῦσιν of 8, 

4 καὶ inserted by Frazer 

> καὶ Ποδαλείριος καὶ Πολυποίτης KE, wanting in S. 


ὃ ἑαυτοῦ S: αὑτοῦ EK. 


242 


EPITOME, v. 23-v1. 3 


had laid Troy waste and were about to sail away, 
they were detained by Calchas, who said that 
Athena was angry with them on account of the 
impiety of Ajax. And they would have killed 
Ajax, but he fled to the altar and they let him 
alone.} 

VI. After these things they met in assembly, and 
Agamemnon and Menelaus quarrelled, Menelaus 
advising that they should sail away, and Agamemnon 
insisting that they should stay and_ sacrifice to 
Athena. When they put to sea, Diomedes, Nestor, 
and Menelaus in company, the two former had a 
prosperous voyage, but Menelaus was overtaken by a 
storm, and after losing the rest of his vessels, arrived 
with five ships in Egypt.? 

But Amphilochus, and Calchas, and Leonteus, 
and Podalirius, and Polypoetes left their ships in 
Ilium and journeyed by land to Colophon, and 
there buried Calchas the diviner*; for it was fore- 
told him that he would die if he met with a wiser 
diviner than himself. Well, they were lodged by 
the diviner Mopsus, who was a son of Apollo and 
Manto, and he wrangled with Calchas about the 
art of divination. A wild fig-tree grew on the spot, 


1 Compare Arctinus, Iii Persis, summarized by Proclus, 
in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, pp. 49 sq. 
Ulysses advised the Greeks to stone Ajax to death for his 
crime against Cassandra (Pausanias, x. 31. 2). 

2 Compare Homer, Οὐ. iii. 130 sqq., 276 sqq.; Hagias, 
Returns (Nostoi), summarized by Proclus, in Epicorum Grae- 
corum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 53. 

3 Compare Hagias, Returns, summarized by Proclus, in 
Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 53; 
Strabo, xiv. 1. 27, p. 642; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
427-430, 980. 


243 
R 2 


ES 


APOLLODORUS 


ἑστώσης “Πόσους ' ὀλύνθους φέρει; "" ” ὁ Μόψος" 
᾽᾽ > 
“ Mupious ἔφη © Kal μέδιμνον καὶ ἕνα ὄλυνθον 


4 περισσόν"" καὶ εὑρέθησαν οὕτω. Μόψος δὲ συὸς 


οὔσης ἐπιτόκου ἠρώτα Κάλχαντα," πόσους χοί- 


ρους ὃ κατὰ γαστρὸς ἔχει καὶ πότε πέκοι"" | τοῦ δὲ 
εἰπόντος" 5 “Οκτώ," μειδιάσας ὁ Μόψος ἔφη: 
“Κάλχας τῆς ἀκριβοῦς μαντείας ἀπεναντιῶς ὃ 

διακεῖται, ἐ ἐγὼ δ᾽ ᾿Απόλλωνος. καὶ Μαντοῦς παῖς 
ὑπάρχων τῆς ἀκριβοῦς μαντείας τὴν ὀξυδορκίαν 
πάντως πλουτῶ, καὶ οὐχ ὡς ὁ Κάλχας ὁ ὀκτώ, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐννέα κατὰ γαστρός, καὶ τούτους ἄρρενας. ὅλους 
ἔχειν μαντεύομαι, καὶ rina! ἀνυπερθέτως € ἐν ἕκτῃ 
ὥρᾳ τεχθήσεσθαι.᾽" ὦ ap! γενομένων Κάλχας ἀθυ. 
μήσας ἀπέθανεϑ καὶ ἐτάφη ἐν Νοτίῳ. 


1 «πόσους ὀλύνθους... καὶ εὑρέθησαν οὕτω Ἐὶ : ““ πόσα ἔχει; ᾽" 
τοῦ δὲ εἰπόντος μύρια καὶ μέτρῳ μέδιμνον καὶ ἕν περισσόν," κατα- 
στήσας Κάλχας μυριάδα εὗρε καὶ μέδιμνον καὶ ἕν πλεονάζον κατὰ 
τὴν τοῦ Μόψου πρόρρησιν S. Here καταστήσας is clearly 
wrong. Herwerden conjectured κατασείσας (Mnemosyne, 
N.S. xx. (1892), p. 200): Wagner suggested καταπλήσας (Viz. 
τὸ μέτρον). Per haps we should read καταμετρήσας (comparing 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 427, καὶ μετρήσαντες εὗρον οὕτω). 

2 ἠρώτα Κάλχαντι (816) ἃ : ἠρώτησε Κάλχαντα Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 427: ἠρώτα BK. 

3 πόσους χοίρους S (compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
980, Πόσους χοίρους ἔχει κατὰ γαστρὺ5) : πόσους EK. 

4 καὶ πότε τέκοι K, wanting in 8. 

5 rod δὲ εἰπόντος... ἐν ἕκτῃ Spa τεχθήσεσθαι S: τοῦ δὲ 
μηδὲν εἰπόντος αὐτὸς ἔφη δέκα χοίρους ἔχειν καὶ τὸν ἕνα τούτων 
ἄρρενα, τέξεσθαι δὲ αὔριον K, ‘Sand when he (Calchas) said 
nothing, he himself (Mopsus) said that the sow had ten pigs, 
and that one of them was a male, and that she would farrow 
on the morrow.” Thus the versions of S and E differ on some 
points. The version of Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 980) 
agrees substantially, though not verbally, with that of E, 
It runs thus: Méwos δὲ aves ἐπὶ τόκου & ἑστώσης, ἤρετο, Πόσους 
χοίρους ἔχει κατὰ γαστρός, καὶ πότε τέξεται; Κάλχαντος δὲ μὴ 
ἀποκριναμένου, αὐτὸς ὁ Μόψος πάλιν εἶπε, Δέκα χοίρους ἔχει, ὧν 


244 


EPITOME, vi. 3~4 


and when Calchas asked, “ How many figs does it 
bear?” Mopsus answered, “Ten thousand, and a 
bushel, and one fig over,’ and they were found to 
be so. And when Mopsus asked Calchas concerning 
a pregnant sow, “How many pigs has she in her 
womb, and when will she farrow?” Calchas 
answered, “ Eight.’”’ But Mopsus smiled and said, 
“ The divination of Calchas is the reverse of exact ; 
but I, as a son of Apollo and Manto, am extremely 
rich in the sharp sight which comes of exact 
divination, and I divine that the number of pigs in 
the womb is not eight, as Calchas says, but nine, 
and that they are all male and will be farrowed 
without fail to-morrow at the sixth hour.” So when 
these things turned out so, Calchas died of a broken 
heart and was buried at Notium.} 


1 Compare Strabo, xiv. 1. 27, pp. 642 sq.; Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 427-430, 980. From Strabo we learn that 
the riddle of Calchas concerning the wild fig-tree was re- 
corded by Hesiod, and that the riddle of Mopsus concerning 
the sow was recorded by Pherecydes. Our authorities vary 
somewhat in regard to the latter riddle. According to Phe- 
recydes, the true answer was, ‘‘ Three little pigs, and one of 
them a female.” According to Tzetzes, Calchas could not 
solve the riddle, so Mopsus solved it by saying that the sow 
would farrow ten little pigs, of which one would be a male. 
Strabo also tells us that the oracle which doomed Calchas to 
death whenever he should meet a diviner more skilful than 
himself, was mentioned by Sophocles in his play The Demand 
for Helen. As to that play, see The Fragments of Sophocles, 
ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. i. pp. 121 sqq. A different story of 
the rivalry of the two seers is told by Conon (Narrat. 6). 


ὁ εἷς ἄρρην: τέξεται δὲ κατὰ τὴν αὔριον. ov γενομένου Κάλχας 
ἀθυμήσας τελευτᾷ. The same version is repeated by Tzetzes 
elsewhere (Schol. on Lycophron, 427) with a few verbal 
variations. δ ἀπεναντιῶς Frazer: ἀπεναντίας 8. 

7 ὧν E: τούτων γοῦν S. 

ὃ ἀπέθανε S: τελευτᾷ Εἰ, Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 427 
and 980. νι 

245 


5 


ES 6 


APOLLODORUS 


᾿ / \ / > / \ if 

Αγαμέμνων δὲ θύσας ἀνάγεται καὶ Τενέδῳ προσ- 
/ / 
ίσχει, Νεοπτόλεμον δὲ πείθει Θέτις ἀφικομένη 

an / 

ἐπιμεῖναι δύο ἡμέρας Kal θυσιάσαι, καὶ ἐπιμένει. 
οἱ δὲ ἀνάγονται καὶ περὶ Thvov χειμάζονται. 
᾽ a \ b / Ni a 7 n 
AOnva yap ἐδεήθη Διὸς τοῖς “Ελλησι χειμῶνα 
ἐπιπέμψαι. καὶ πολλαὶ νῆες βυθίζονται. 

> a n 

| "A@nva δὲ! ἐπὶ τὴν Αἴαντος ναῦν κεραυνὸν 

/ ¢ \ a \ / bl Ψ / 
βάλλει, ὁ δὲ τῆς νεὼς διαλυθείσης ἐπί τινα πέτραν 

\ a / a 

διασωθεὶς Tapa τὴν θεοῦ ἔφη πρόνοιαν σεσῶσθαι. 
Ποσειδῶν δὲ πλήξας τῇ τριαίνῃ 3 τὴν πέτραν 
ἔσχισεν, ὁ δὲ πεσὼν εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν τελευτᾷ, 

ae / / / ? U 
καὶ ἐκβρασθέντα θάπτει Θέτις ἐν Μυκόνῳ. 

Τῶν δὲ ἄλλων Εὐβοίᾳ προσφερομένων νυκτὸς 

/ a 
Ναύπλιος ἐπὶ tod Kadnpéws ὄρους" πυρσὸν 
’ Ὁ 

ἀνάπτει: οἱ δὲ νομίσαντες εἶναί τινας τῶν 
σεσωσμένων προσπλέουσι, καὶ περὶ τὰς Καφη- 
ρίδας πέτρας θραύεται τὰ σκάφη καὶ πολλοὶ 


1 ᾽Αθηνᾶ δὲ δ : Ὅτι ᾿Αθηνᾷ FE. 
2 πλήξας τῇ τριαίνῃ S: τριαίνῃ πλήξας EK. 
3 ὄρους Ki: ὄρους τῆς Εὐβοίας ὃ. 


1 As to the shipwreck and death of the Locrian Ajax, com- 
pare Homer, Od. iv. 499-511; Hagias, Returns, summarized 
by Proclus, in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. 
Kinkel, p. 53; Scholiast on Homer, Ji. xiii. 66; Quintus 
Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiv. 530-589; Tzetzes, Schol. 
on Lycophron, 365, 387, 389, 402; Virgil, Aen. i. 39-45; 
Hyginus, Fab. 116; Seneca, Agamemnon, 532-556 ; Dictys 
Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, vi. 1. In his great picture of 
the underworld, which Polygnotus painted at Delphi, the 
artist depicted Ajax as a castaway, the brine forming a scurf 
on his skin (Pausanias, x. 31. 1). According to the Scholiast 
on Homer (/.c.) Ajax was cast up on the shore of Delos, where 
Thetis found and buried him. But as it was unlawful to be 
buried or even to die in Delos (Thucydides, iii. 104), the 


246 . 


EPITOME, vi. 5-7 . 


After sacrificing, Agamemnon put to sea and 
touched at Tenedos. But Thetis came and persuaded 
Neoptolemus to wait two days and to offer sacrifice ; 
and he waited. But the others put to sea and 
encountered a storm at Tenos; for Athena entreated 
Zeus to send a tempest against the Greeks; and 
many ships foundered. 

And Athena threw a thunderbolt at the ship οἱ 
Ajax ; and when the ship went to pieces he made 
his way safe to a rock, and declared that he was 
saved in spite of the intention of Athena. But Posei- 
don smote the rock with his trident and split it, and 
Ajax fell into the sea and perished; and his body, 
being washed up, was buried by Thetis in Myconos.! 

The others being driven to Euboea by night, 
Nauplius kindled a beacon on Mount Caphareus ; and 
they, thinking it was some of those who were saved, 
stood in for the shore, and the vessels were wrecked 
on the Capherian rocks, and many men perished. 


statement of Apollodorus that Ajax was buried in Myconus, 
a small island to the east of Delos, is more probable. It is 
said that on hearing of his death the Locrians mourned for 
him and wore black for a year, and every year they laded a 
vessel with splendid offerings, hoisted a black sail on it, and, 
setting the ship on fire, let it drift out to sea, there to burn 
down to the water’s edge as a sacrifice to the drowned hero. 
See Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 365. Sophocles wrote a 
tragedy, The Locrian Ajax, on the crime and punishment of 
the hero. See The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. 
Pearson, vol. i. pp. 8 sqq. 

2 As to the false lights kindled by Nauplius to lure the 
Greek ships on to the breakers, see above, ii. 1.5; Euripides, 
Helen, 7665 sq., 1126 sqqg.; Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes, 
432; Quintus Smyrnaeus, Posthomerica, xiv. 611-628; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 384 ; Propertius, v. 1. 115 sq.; 
Hyginus, Fab. 116; Seneca, Agamemnon, 557-575; Dictys 
Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, vi, 1; Servius on Virgil, Aen. 


247 


é APOLLODORUS 


E 8 τελευτῶσιν. | 0 yap τοῦ Ναυπλίου! καὶ KrXupévns 
τῆς Katpéws vids Παλαμήδης ἐπιβουλαῖς ᾿Οδυσ- 
/ \ > a al \ / 
σέως λιθοβοληθεὶς ἀναιρεῖται. τοῦτο μαθὼν Nav- 
πλιος ἔπλευσε πρὸς τοὺς “ὕλληνας καὶ τὴν τοῦ 
9 παιδὸς ἀπήτει ποινήν: ἄπρακτος δὲ ὑποστρέψας, 
ὡς πάντων χαριζομένων τῷ βασιλεῖ ᾿Αγαμέμνονι, 
μεθ᾽ οὗ τὸν Παλαμήδην ἀνεῖλεν ᾿Οδυσσεύς, παρα- 
πλέων τὰς χώρας τὰς ᾿Βλληνίδας παρεσκεύασε 
τὰς τῶν “EXAnvav γυναῖκας μοιχευθῆναι, Κλυ- 
ταιμνήστραν Αἰγίσθῳ, Αὐἰγιάλειαν τῷ Σθενέλου 
10 Κομήτῃ, τὴν ᾿Ιδομενέως Μήδαν ὑπὸ Λεύκου: ἣν 
καὶ ἀνεῖλε Λεῦκος ἅμα Κλεισιθύρᾳ" τῇ θυγατρὶ 
ταύτης ἐν τῷ ναῷ ὁ προσφυγούσῃ, καὶ δέκα πόλεις : 
ἀποσπάσας * τῆς Κρήτης ἐτυράννησε' καὶ μετὰ 
τὸν Τρωικὸν πόλεμον καὶ Tov Ιδομενέα κατάραντα 
11 τῇ Κρήτῃ ἐξήλασε. ταῦτα πρότερον κατασκευά- 
σας ὁ Ναύπλιος, ὕστερον μαθὼν τὴν εἰς τὰς 
/ a“ ¢ / 9 / \ 2 ἈΝ 
πατρίδας τῶν  λλήνων ἐπάνοδον, τὸν εἰς τὸν 
Καφηρέα, νῦν δὲ Ἐυλοφάγον λεγόμενον, ἀνῆψε 
φρυκτόν: ἔνθα προσπελάσαντες “EXAnves ἐν τῷ 
δοκεῖν λιμένα εἶναι. διεφθάρησαν. 
1 τοῦ Ναυπλίου Frazer: αὐτοῦ τοῦ Ναυπλίου E, Wagner. 
3 Κλεισιθύρᾳ KH: Κλεισιθήρα Lycophron, Alexandra, 1222, 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 384, id. Chiliades, iii. 294. 
3 The name of the deity of the temple seems wanting, 
perhaps τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς. 
4 ἀποσπᾶσας K, Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 384. We 
should perhaps read ἀποστήσας, ‘‘ having caused to revolt.” 


xi. 260 ; Lactantius Placidus on Statius, Achdl. i. 98; Serip- 
tores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H Bode, vol. i. pp. 
46, 141 (First Vatican Mythographer, 144; Second Vatican 
Mythographer, 201). The story was probably told by Hagias 
in his epic The Returns (Nostot), though in the abstract of 


248 


EPITOME, vi. 7-11 


For Palamedes, the son of Nauplius and Clymene 
‘daughter of Catreus, had been stoned to death 
through the machinations of Ulysses.1 And when 
Nauplius learned of it,? he sailed to the Greeks 
and claimed satisfaction for the death of his son; 
but when he returned unsuccessful (for they all 
favoured King Agamemnon, who had been the accom- 
plice of Ulysses in the murder of Palamedes), he 
coasted along the Grecian lands and_ contrived 
that the wives of the Greeks should play their hus- 
bands false, Clytaemnestra with Aegisthus, Aegialia 
with Cometes, son of Sthenelus, and Meda, wife of 
Idomeneus, with Leucus. But Leucus killed her, 
together with her daughter Clisithyra, who had 
taken refuge in the temple; and having detached 
ten cities from Crete he made himself tyrant of 
them ; and when after the, Trojan war Idomeneus 
landed in Crete, Leucus drove him out.? These 
were the earlier contrivances of Nauplius; but after- 
wards, when he learned that the Greeks were on 
their way home to their native countries, he kindled 
the beacon fire on Mount Caphereus, which is now 
called Xylophagus; and there the Greeks, standing 
in shore in the belief that it was a harbour, were 
cast away. 


that poem there occurs merely a mention of ‘‘ the storm at the 
Capherian Kocks.” See Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. 
G. Kinkel, p. 53. The wrecker Nauplius was the subject of 
a tragedy by Sophocles. See The Fragments of Sophocles, 
ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 80 sqq. 

1 As to the death of Palamedes, see above, Epitome, iii. 8. 

2 This passage, down to the end of §12, is quoted with 
some slight verbal changes, but without citing his authority, 
by Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 384-386; compare id. on 
v. 1093. 

8 See Appendix, ‘‘ The vow of Idomeneus.,”’ 


249 


APOLLODORUS 


12 Νεοπτόλεμος δὲ μείνας ἐν Τενέδῳ δύο ἡμέρας 
ὑποθήκαις τῆς Θέτιδος εἰς Μολοσσοὺς πεζῇ ἀπῆει 
μετὰ “EXévov, καὶ παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν ἀποθανόντα 
Φοίνικα θάπτει, καὶ νικήσας μάχῃ Μολοσσοὺς 
βασιλεύει, καὶ ἐξ ᾿ Ανδρομάχης γεννᾷ Μολοσσόν. 

13 “Ἕλενος δὲ κτίσας ἐν τῇ Μολοσσίᾳ πόλιν κατοικεῖ, 
καὶ δίδωσιν αὐτῷ Νεοπτόλεμος εἰς γυναῖκα τὴν 
μητέρα Δηιδάμειαν. Πηλέως δὲ ἐκ Φθίας ἐκβλη 
θέντος ὑπὸ τῶν ᾿Ακάστου παίδων καὶ ἀποθαν- 


1 Compare Hagias, Returns, summarized by Proclus, in 
Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 53; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 902, quoting ‘* Apollodorus 
and the rest.” According to Servius (on Virgil, Aen. ii. 166), 
it was the soothsayer Helenus who, foreseeing the shipwreck 
of the Greek leaders, warned Neoptolemus to return home 
by land; hence in gratitude for this benefit Neoptolemus at 
his death bequeathed Andromache to Helenus to be his wife 
(Servius, on Virgil, Aen. iii. 297). Neoptolemus was on 
friendly terms with Helenus, because the seer had revealed 
to the Greeks the means by which Troy could be taken, and 
because in particular he had recommended the fetching of 
Neoptolemus himself from Scyros. See above, Epitome, v. 
10. A different tradition is recorded by Eustathius, on 
Homer, Od. iii. 189, p. 1463. He says that Neoptolemus 
sailed across the sea to Thessaly and there burned his ships 
by the advice of Thetis; after which, being directed by the 
soothsayer Helenus to settle wherever he should find a house 
with foundations of iron, walls of wood, and roof of wool, he 
marched inland till he came to the lake Pambotis in Epirus, 
where he fell in with some people camping under blankets 
supported by spears, of which the blades were stuck into the 
earth. Compare Scholiast on Homer, Qd. iii. 188, who adds 
that, ‘‘ having laid waste Molossia, he begot Molossus by 
Andromache, and from Molossus is descended the race of the 
kings of Molossia, as Eratosthenes relates.” The lake Pam- 
botis is believed to be what is now called the lake of Joannina, 
near which Dodona was situated. Pausanias (i. 11. 1) men- 
tions that Pyrrhus (Neoptolemus) settled in Epirus ‘in 


250 


> 


EPITOME, νι. 12-13 


After remaining in Tenedos two days at the advice 
of Thetis, Neoptolemus set out for the country of the 
Molossians by land with Helenus, and on the way 
Phoenix died, and Neoptolemus buried him ;! and 
having vanquished the Molossians in battle he reigned 
as king and begat Molossus on Andromache. And 
Helenus founded.a city in Molossia and inhabited 
it, and Neoptolemus gave him his mother Deidamia 
to wife.2, And when Peleus was expelled from Phthia 
by the sons of Acastus* and died, Neoptolemus 


compliance with the oracles of Helenus,” and that he had 
Molossus, Pielus, and Pergamus by Andromache. 

2 As to Deidamia, mother of Neoptolemus, see above, iii. 
15. 8. The marriage of Helenus to Deidamia appears not to 
be mentioned by any other ancient writer. 

3 According to Euripides (Zroades, 1126-1130), while 
Neoptolemus was still at Troy, he heard that his grand- 
father Peleus had been expelled by Acastus ; hence he de- 
parted for home in haste, taking Andromache with him. 
The Scholiast on this passage of Euripides (υ. 1128) says that 
Peleus was expelled by Acastus’s two sons, Archander and 
Architeles, and that the exiled king, going to meet his grand- 
son Neoptolemus, was driven by a storm to the island of 
Cos, where he was entertained by a certain Molon and died. 
As to an early connexion between Thessaly and Cos, see W. 
R. Paton and Εἰ. L. Hicks, The Inscriptions of Cos, pp. 344 sqq. 
A different and much more detailed account of the exile of 
Peleus is furnished by Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, 
vi. 7-9. According to it, when Neoptolemus was refitting 
his shattered ships in Molossia, he heard that Peleus had 
been deposed and expelled by Acastus. Hastening to the aid 
of his aged grandfather, he found him hiding in a dark cave 
on the shore of one of the Sepiades Islands, where he eagerly 
scanned every passing sail in hopes that one of them would 
bring his grandson to his rescue. By disguising himself 
Neoptolemus contrived to attack and kill Acastus’s two sons, 
Menalippus and Plisthenes, when they were out hunting. 
Afterwards, disguising himself as a Trojan captive, he lured 
Acastus himself to the cave and would have slain him there, 


251 


APOLLODORUS 


ὄντος, Νεοπτόλεμος τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ πατρὸς 
14 παρέλαβε. καὶ μανέντος ᾿Ορέστου ἁρπάζει τὴν 
ἐκείνου γυναῖκα “Ὡρμιόνην κατηγγυημένην αὐτῷ 
πρότερον ἐν Τροίᾳ, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἐν Δελφοῖς ὑπὸ 


if it had not been for the intercession of Thetis, who had 
opportunely arrived from the sea to visit her old husband 
Peleus. Happy at his escape, Acastus resigned the kingdom 
on the spot to Neoptolemus, and that hero at once took pos- 
session of the realm in company with his grandfather, his 
divine grandmother Thetis, and the companions of his voyage. 
This romantic narrative may be based on a lost Greek tragedy, 
perhaps on the Peleus of Sophocles, a play in which the dra- 
matist appears to have dealt with the fortunes of Peleus in 
his old age. See The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. 
Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 140 sqqg. The statement of Dictys Cre- 
tensis that Peleus took refuge in one of the Sepiades Islands 
suggests that in the scholium on Euripides (/.c.) the name 
Icos should be read instead of Cos, as has been argued by 
several scholars (A. C. Pearson, op. cit. ii. 141); for Icos was 
a small island near Euboea (Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. "Ikés), 
and would be a-much more natural place of refuge for Peleus 
than the far more distant island of Cos. Moreover, we have 
the positive affirmation of the poet Antipater of Sidon that 
Peleus was buried in Icos (Anthologia Palatina, vii. 2. 9 sq.). 
The connexion of Peleus with the Sepiades Islands is further 
supported by Euripides ; for in his play Andromache (vv. 
1253-1269) he tells how Thetis bids her old husband Peleus 
tarry in a cave of these islands, till she should come with a 
band of Nereids to fetch him away, that he might dwell with 
her as a god for ever in the depths of the sea. In the same 
play (vv. 22 sq.) Euripides says that Neoptolemus refused 
to accept the sceptre of Pharsalia in the lifetime of his grand- 
father Peleus. 

1 In this passage Apollodorus appears to follow the account 
given by Euripides in his Andromache, 967-981. According 
to that account, Menelaus gave his daughter Hermione in 
marriage to her cousin Orestes, the son of Agamemnon and 
Clytaemnestra. But in the Trojan war he afterwards pro- 
mised the hand of Hermione to Neoptolemus, if Neoptolemus 
should succeed in capturing Troy. Accordingly on his return 


252 


EPITOME, vi. 13-14 


succeeded to his father’s kingdom. And when 
Orestes went mad, Neoptolemus carried off his wife 
Hermione, who had previously been betrothed to him 
in Troy!; and for that reason he was slain by Orestes 


from the war Neoptolemus claimed his bride from her husband 
Orestes, who was then haunted and maddened by the Furies 
of his murdered mother Clytaemnestra. Orestes protested, 
but in vain ; Neoptolemus insolently reproached him with his 
crime of matricide and with the unseen avengers of blood by 
whom he was pursued. So Orestes was obliged to yield up 
his wife to his rival, but he afterwards took his revenge by 
murdering Neoptolemus at Delphi. This version of the legend 
is followed also by Hyginus (Fab. 123). An obvious difficulty 
is presented by the narrative ; for if Menelaus had given his 
daughter in marriage to Orestes, how could he afterwards 
have promised her to Neoptolemus in the lifetime of her first 
husband? This difficulty was met by another version of the 
story, which alleged that Hermione was betrothed or married 
to Orestes by her grandfather Tyndareus in the absence of 
her father Menelaus, who was then away at the Trojan war ; 
that meantime, in ignorance of this disposal of his daughter, 
Menelaus had promised her hand to Neoptolemus before Troy, 
and that on his return from the war Neoptolemus took her 
by force from Orestes. See Eustathius, on Homer, Od. iv. 3, 
p- 1479; Scholiast on Homer, Od. iv. 4; Ovid, Heroides, viii. 
31 sqq. ; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. iii. 330, compare zd. on v. 
297. According to the tragic poet Philocles, not only had 
Hermione been given in marriage by Tyndareus to Orestes, 
but she was actually with child by Orestes when her father 
afterwards married her to Neoptolemus. See Scholiast on 
Euripides, Andromache, 32. This former marriage of Her- 
mione to Orestes, before she became the wife of Neoptolemus, 
is recognized by Virgil (Aen. iii. 330), and Ovid (Heroides, 
Vili. passim), but it is unknown to Homer. On the other 
hand, Homer records that Menelaus betrothed Hermione to 
Neoptolemus at Troy, and celebrated the marriage after his 
return to Sparta (Od. iv. 1-9). Sophocles wrote a tragedy 
Hermione, the plot of which seems to have resembled that of 
the Andromache of Euripides. See The Fragments of So- 
phocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 141 sqgqg. Euripides 
does not appear to have been consistent in his view that 


253 


APOLLODORUS 


Ὀρέστου κτείνεται. ἔνιοι δὲ αὐτόν φασι Tapa- 
γενόμενον εἰς Δελφοὺς ἀπαιτεῖν ὑπὲρ τοῦ πατρὸς 
τὸν ᾿Απόλλωνα δίκας καὶ συλᾶν τὰ ἀναθήματα 
καὶ τὸν νεὼν ἐμπιμπράναι, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὑπὸ 
Μαχαιρέως } τοῦ Φωκέως ἀναιρεθῆναι. 


1 Μαχαιρέως Wagner : βαχαιρέως ΕἸ. 


Neoptolemus forcibly deprived Orestes of Hermione and 
married her himself; for in his play Orestes (vv. 1653-1657) 
he makes Apollo prophesy to Orestes that he shall wed Her- 
mione, but that Neoptolemus shall never do so. 

1 The murder of Neoptolemus at Delphi, as Apollodorus 
observes, was variously related. According to Euripides, 
Neoptolemus paid two visits to Delphi. On the first occa- 
sion he went to claim redress from Apollo, who had shot his 
father Achilles at Troy (see above, E’'pitome, v. 3). On the 
second occasion he went to excuse himself to the god for the 
rashness and impiety of which he had been guilty in calling 
the deity to account for the murder; and it was then that 
Orestes, enraged at having been robbed of his wife Hermione 
by Neoptolemus, waylaid and murdered his rival in the 
temple of Apollo, the fatal blow being struck, however, not 
by Orestes but by ‘‘a Delphian man.” See Euripides, 
Andromache, 49-55, 1086-1165; compare id. Orestes, 1656 
sq. This is the version of the story which Apollodorus 
appears to prefer. It is accepted also by Hyginus (Fab. 
123), Velleius Paterculus (i. 1. 3), Servius (on Virgil, Aen. 
iii. 297 and 330), and somewhat ambiguously by Dictys 
Cretensis (Bellum Trojanum, vi. 12 sq.). The murder of 
Neoptolemus by Orestes is mentioned, but without any 
motive assigned, by Heliodorus (ii. 34) and Justin (xvii. 3. 7). 
A different account is given by Pindar. He says that Neopto- 
lemus went to consult the god at Delphi, taking with him 
first-fruit offerings of the Trojan spoil; that there he was 
stabbed to death by a man in a brawl concerning the flesh of 
the victim, and that after death he was supposed to dwell 
within the sacred precinct and to preside over the processions 
and sacrifices in honour of heroes. See Pindar, Nem. vii. 34 
(50)-47 (70); compare id. Paean, vi. 117 sqg., ed. Sandys. 
The Scholiast on the former of these passages of Pindar, verse 


254 


EPITOME, νι. 14 


at Delphi. But some say that he went to Delphi 
to demand satisfaction from Apollo for the death ot 
his father, and that he rifled the votive offerings 
and set fire to the temple, and was on that account 
slain by Machaereus the Phocian.1 


42 (62), explains the brawl by saying that it was the custom 
of the Delphians to appropriate (ἁρπάζειν) the sacrifices; that 
Neoptolemus attempted to prevent them from taking posses- 
sion of his offerings, and that in the squabble the Delphians 
despatched him with their swords. -This explanation seems 
to be due to Pherecydes, for a Scholiast on Euripides 
(Orestes, 1655) quotes the following passage from that early 
historian: ‘‘ When Neoptolemus married Hermione, daughter 
of Menelaus, he went to Delphi to inquire about offspring ; 
for he had no children by Hermione. And when at the 
oracle he saw the Delphians scrambling for (διαρπάζοντας) the 
flesh, he attempted to take it from them. But their priest 
Machaereus killed him and buried him under the threshold 
of the temple.” This seems to have been the version of the 
story followed by Pausanias, for he mentions the hearth at 
Delphi on which the priest of Apollo slew Neoptolemus 
(x. 24. 4), and elsewhere he says that ‘‘the Pythian priestess 
ordered the Delphians to kill Pyrrhus (Neoptolemus), son of 
Achilles” (i. 13. 9; compare iv. 17. 4). That the slayer of 
Neoptolemus was called Machaereus is mentioned also by a 
Scholiast on Euripides (Andromache, 53) and by Strabo 
(ix. 3. 9, p. 421), who says that Neoptolemus was killed 
*‘because he demanded satisfaction from the god for the 
murder of his father, or, more probably, because he had 
made an attack on the sanctuary.” Indeed, Asclepiades, in 
his work Tragodoumena, wrote as follows: ‘‘ About his death 
almost all the poets agree that he was killed by Machaereus 
and buried at first under the threshold of the temple, but 
that afterwards Menelaus came and took up his body, and 
made his grave in the precinct. He says that Machaereus 
was a son of Daetas.”” See Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. vii. 
42 (62). The story that Neoptolemus came to Delphi to 
plunder the sanctuary, which is noticed by Apollodorus and 
preferred by Strabo, is mentioned by Pausanias (x. 7. 1) and 
a Scholiast on Pindar (Nem. vii. 58, Boeckh). It is probably 


255 


APOLLODORUS 


ΕἸ [Ὅτι πλανηθέντες “Ελληνες ἄλλοι ἀλλαχοῦ 


κατάραντες κατοικοῦσιν, οἱ μὲν εἰς Λιβύην, οἱ 
δὲ εὖ i / ᾽ > / 7 \ δὲ 
ε εἰς ἰταλίαν, εἰς Σικελίαν ἕτεροι, τινὲς O€ 
\ x , > / ΄ ” \ 
πρὸς Tas πλησίον ᾿Ιβηρίας νήσους, ἄλλοι παρὰ 
\ « 
τὸν Layydpiov ποταμόν' εἰσὶ δὲ of καὶ Κύπρον 
» lal 
oxnoav. | Tv δὲ ναυαγησάντων περὶ τὸν Kadn- 
/ > Μ > an / \ x ? 
pea" ἄλλος ἀλλαχῆ φέρεται, Τ᾿ ουνεὺς μὲν eis 
/ an 
Λιβύην, Ἄντιφος δὲ ὁ Θεσσαλοῦ eis Πελασγοὺς 
καὶ «τὴν! χώραν" κατασχὼν Θεσσαλίαν ἐκάλε- 
ς 
σεν, ὁ δὲ Φιλοκτήτης πρὸς ᾿Ιταλίαν εἰς Καμπανούς, 


1 Ὅτι πλανηθέντες... Κύπρον ᾧκησαν. This passage is 
from Εἰ ; the passage immediately following (τῶν δὲ ναναγη- 
oavTwy... καὶ ἄλλος ἀλλαχοῦ) isfrom 5. The two passages 
are perhaps duplicate versions of the same passage in the 
original unabridged work of Apollodorus; but as they 
supplement each other, each giving details which are omitted 
by the other, I have printed them consecutively in the text. 
Wagner prints them in parallel columns to indicate that 
they are duplicates. 

= Kapnpéa Kerameus: κηφέα S. 

3 «τὴν» χώραν Wagner (comparing Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 911, καὶ τὴν χώραν κατασχών). 


not inconsistent with the story that he went to demand 
satisfaction from, or to inflict punishment on, the god for the 
death of his father ; for the satisfaction or punishment would 
naturally take the shape of a distress levied on the goods and 
chattels of the defaulting deity. The tradition that the slain 
Neoptolemus was buried under the threshold of Apollo’s 
temple is remarkable and, so far as I remember, unique in 
Greek legend. The statement that the body was afterwards 
taken up and buried within the precinct agrees with the 
observation of Pausanias (x. 24. 6) that ‘‘ quitting the temple 
and turning to the left you come to an enclosure, inside of 
which is the grave of Neoptolemus, son of Achilles. The 
Delphians offer sacrifice to him annually as to a hero.” 
From Pindar (Nem. vii. 44 (65) sqq.) we learn that Neo- 
ptolemus even enjoyed a pre-eminence over other heroes at 


256 


EPITOME, νι. 15 


After their wanderings the Greeks landed and 
settled in various countries, some in Libya, some 
in Italy, others in Sicily, and some ἴῃ the 
islands near Iberia, others on the banks of the San- 
garius river ; and some settled also in Cyprus. And of 
those that were shipwrecked at Caphereus, some 
drifted one way and some another.1_ Guneus went to 
Libya; Antiphus, son of Thessalus, went to the Pelas- 
gians, and, having taken possession of the country, 
called it Thessaly. Philoctetes went to the Cam- 


Delphi, being called on to preside over the processions and 
sacrifices in their honour. The Aenianes of Thessaly used 
to send a grand procession and costly sacrifices to Delphi 
every fourth year in honour of Neoptolemus. The ceremony 
fell at the same time as the Pythian games. See Heliodorus, 
Aethiop. ii. 34—-iii. 6. It is a little difficult to understand how 
a man commonly accused of flagrant impiety and sacrilege 
should have been raised to such a pitch of glory at the very 
shrine which he was said to have attacked and robbed. The 
apparent contradiction might be more intelligible if we could 
suppose that, as has been suggested, Neoptolemus was publicly 
sacrificed as a scapegoat, perhaps by being stoned to death, 
as seems to have been the fate of the human victims at the 
Thargelia, whose sacrifice was justified by a legend that the 
first of their number had stolen some sacred cups of Apollo. 
See Harpocration, s.v. φάρμακος ; and as to the suggestion that 
Neoptolemus may have been sacrificed as a scapegoat, see 
J. Toepffer, ‘‘ Thargelienbriuche,” Beitrdge zur griechischen 
Altertumswissenschaft (Berlin, 1897), pp. 132 sq., who points 
out that according to Euripides (Andromache, 1127 sqq.) 
Neoptolemus was stoned as well as stabbed at the altar of 
Apollo. As to the custom of burying the dead under a 
threshold, see Folk-lore in the Old Testament, iii. 13 sq. 

1 The wanderings described in the remainder of this para- 
graph, except those of Agapenor, are resumed and told some- 
what more fully in the following three paragraphs (15a, 15b, 
15c), which do not occur in our text of the Hpitome, but are 
conjecturally restored to it from the scholia on Lycophron of 
Tzetzes, who probably had before him the full text of Apollo- 
dorus, and not merely the Hpitome. 


VOL. Il. 5 


APOLLODORUS 


Φείδιππος μετὰ τῶν Κῴων ἐ ἐν "Ανδρῳ κατῴκησεν, 
᾿Αγαπήνωρ ἐν Κύπρῳ, καὶ ἄλλος ἀλλαχοῦ. 

TZ 15a «902: ᾿Απολλόδωρος δὲ καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ οὕτω 
φασί: Τοουνεὺς εἰς Λιβύην λιπὼν τὰς ἑαυτοῦ ναῦς 
ἐλθὼν ἐπὶ Κίνυφα" ποταμὸν κατοικεῖ. Μέγης ὃ δὲ 
καὶ Πρόθοος ἐν Εὐβοίᾳ περὶ τὸν Καφηρέα σὺν 
πολλοῖς ἑτέροις διαφθείρεται a yw Tae δὲ Προθόου 
περὶ τὸν Καφηρέα ναυαγήσαντος, οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ 
Μάγνητες εἰς Κρήτην ῥιφέντες ὠκησαν."» 

1» <911: Μετὰ δὲ τὴν Ἰλίου πόρθησιν Μενεσθεὺς 
Φείδιππός τε καὶ" Ἀντιφος καὶ οἱ ᾿Ελεφήνορος καὶ 
Φιλοκτήτης μέχρι Μίμαντος κοινῇ ἔπλευσαν. εἶτα 
Μενεσθεὺς μὲν εἰς Μῆλον ἐλθὼν βασιλεύει, τοῦ 
ἐκεῖ ἢ βασιλέως Πολυάνακτος τελευτήσαντος. “Av- 
Tupos δὲ ὁ Θεσσαλοῦ εἰς Πελασγοὺς ἐλθὼν καὶ 
τὴν χώραν κατασχὼν Θεσσαλίαν ἐκάλεσε. Φεί- 
διππος δὲ μετὰ Κῴων ἐξωσθεὶς περὶ τὴν "Ανδρον," 
εἶτα περὶ Κύπρον ἐκεῖ κατῴκησεν. ᾿Ελεφήνορος 
δὲ ἀποθανόντος ἐν Τροίᾳ, οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ ἐκριφέντες 
περὶ τὸν ᾿Ιόνιον κόλπον ᾿Απολλωνίαν. ῴκησαν τὴν 
ἐν Ηπείρῳ. καὶ οἱ τοῦ Ῥληπολέμου προσίσχουσι 


1 The following three paragraphs are extracted from the 
Scholia on Lycophron of Tzetzes, who seems to have borrowed 
them from Apollodorus. 

2 Κίνυφα Tzetzes: Kivura Wagner. Either form is legiti- 
mate. See Pape, Woérterbuch der griech. Eigennamen, s.v. 
Kivuy, p. 663. 

3 Μέγης Stiehle, Wagner. The MSS. of Tzetzes read 
Μέγας or Μάγνητες. : 

οἱ Ἐλεφήνορος. Some MSS. οἱ Tzetzes read ᾿ἙΕλεφήνωρ. 
5 χὴν Ανδρον Wagner : τὸν ἀδρίαν Tzetzes. 


: Compare Pausanias, viii. 5. 2, who says that, driven by 
the storm to Cyprus, Agapenor founded Paphos and built the 
sanctuary of Aphrodite at Old Paphos. Compare Aristotle, 
Peplos, 30 (16), in Bergk’s Poetae Lyrict Graeci®, ii. 654. 


258 


EPITOME, vi. 15-15b 


panians in Italy ; Phidippus with the Coans settled in 
Andros, Agapenor in Cyprus,! and others elsewhere. 

Apollodorus and the rest? say as follows. Guneus 
left his own ships, and having come to the Cinyps 
river in Libya he dwelt there.? But Meges and 
Prothous, with many others, were cast away at 
Caphereus in Euboea* . . . and when Prothous was 
shipwrecked at Caphereus, the Magnesians with him 
drifted to Crete and settled there. 

After the sack of Ilium,® Menestheus, Phidippus 
and Antiphus, and the people of Elephenor, and 
Philoctetes sailed together as far as Mimas. Then 
Menestheus went to Melos and reigned as king, be- 
cause the king there, Polyanax, had died. And 
Antiphus the son of Thessalus went to the Pelasgians, 
and having taken possession of the country he called 
it Thessaly.6 Phidippus with the Coans was driven 
first to Andros, and then to Cyprus, where he settled. 
Elephenor died in Troy,’ but his people were cast 
away in the Ionian gulf and inhabited Apollonia in 
Epirus. And the people of Tlepolemus touched 


2 This paragraph is quoted from Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 902. 

3 According to another account, Guneus was drowned at 
sea. See Aristotle, Peplos, 32 (37), in Bergk’s Poetae Lyrici 
Graeci’, ii. 654. 

4 Epitaphs on these two drowned men are ascribed to 
Aristotle, Peplos, 25 (19) and 28 (38). See Bergk’s Poetae 
Lyrict Graeci*®, ii. 653, 654. Meges was leader of the 
Dulichians, and Prothous was leader of the Magnesians. See 
Epitome, iii. 12 and 14. 

5 This paragraph is quoted from Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 911. 

6 Compare Strabo, ix. 5. 23, p. 444. 

7 Elephenor was killed in battle by Agenor. See Homer, 
11. iv. 463-472. Compare Aristotle, Peplos, 33 (4), in Bergk’s 
Poetae Lyrici Graecv*, ii. 654, 


APOLLODORUS 


— 


Κρήτῃ, εἶτα ὑπ᾽ ἀνέμων ἐξωσθέντες περὶ τὰς 
᾿Ιβηρικὰς νήσους ὠκησαν. ... οἱ τοῦ Ipwtect- 
λάου εἰς Πελλήνην 1 ἀπερρίφησαν πλησίον πεδίου 
Κανάστρου. Φιλοκτήτης δὲ ἐξώσθη εἰς ᾿Ιταλίαν 
πρὸς Καμπανοὺς καὶ πολεμήσας Λευκανοὺς πλη- 
/ lal 
σίον Κρότωνος καὶ Θουρίου Κρίμισσαν κατοικεῖ" 
\ \ a A > / ᾽ , « ἈΝ 
καὶ παυθεὶς τῆς ἄλης ᾿Αλαίου ᾿Απόλλωνος ἱερὸν 
κτίζει, ᾧ καὶ τὸ τόξον αὑτοῦ ἀνέθηκεν, ὥς φησιν 
Εὐφορίων.:- 
<921: Ναύαιθος)] ποταμός ἐστιν ᾿Ιταλίας" 
> / \ “ A \ > / \ \ 
ἐκλήθη δὲ οὕτω κατὰ μὲν ᾿Απολλόδωρον Kal τοὺς 
λοιπούς, OTL μετὰ τὴν ᾿Ιλίον ἅλωσιν αἱ Λαομέ- 


1 εἰς Πελλήνην omitted by Wagner in his edition of 
Apollodorus, probably by mistake. For Πελλήνην we should 
perhaps read Παλλήνην. See exegetical note. 


' Canastrum, or Canastra, is the extreme southern cape of 
the peninsula of Pallene (Pellene) in Macedonia. See Hero- 
dotus, vii. 123; Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 599, with the 
Scholiast ; Strabo, vii. frag. 25, p. 330 (vol. ii. p 462, ed. 
Meineke) ; Apostolius, Cent. ii. 20; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 526; Livy, xxx. 45. 15, xliv. 11. 3. 

2 It is said that in a sedition Philoctetes was driven from 
his city of Meliboea in Thessaly (Homer, 71. ii. 717 sq.), and 
fled to southern Italy, where he founded the cities of Petilia, 
Old Crimissa, and Chone, between Croton and Thurii. See 
Strabo, vi. 1. 3, p. 254, who, after recording the foundation 
of Petilia and Old Crimissa by Philoctetes, proceeds as follows : 
‘* And Apollodorus, after mentioning Philoctetes in his Book 
of the Ships, says that some people relate how, on arrivin 
in the country of Croton, he founded Crimissa on the headlanc 
and above it the city of Chone, from which the Chonians 
hereabout took their name, and how men sent by him to 
Sicily fortified Segesta near Eryx with the help of Aegestes 
the Trojan.” The book from which Strabo makes this 
quotation is not the Library of our author, but the Catalogue 


260 


ro. wate Δ 


a ἀν μῶν ἰὼ... .ὦ 


EPITOME, vi. 15b—15¢ 


at Crete; then they were driven out of their course 
by winds and settled in the Iberian islands. . . . The 
people of Protesilaus were cast away on Pellene near 
the plain of Canastrum.! And Philoctetes was driven 
to Campania in Italy, and after making war on the 
Lucanians, he settled in Crimissa, near Croton and 
Thurium?; and, his wanderings over, he founded 
a sanctuary of Apollo the Wanderer (Alaios), to 
whom also he dedicated his bow, as Euphorion 
says.8 

Navaethus is ariver of Italy.4 It was called so, 
according to Apollodorus and the rest, because after 
the capture of Ilium the daughters of Laomedon, the 


of the Ships, a work on the Homeric Catalogue by the 
Athenan grammarian Apollodorus. According to Strabo (viii. 
3. 6, p. 339), Apollodorus borrowed most of his materials for 
this work from Demetrius of Scepsis. For the fragments of 
the work see Heyne’s Apoilodorus (Second Edition, 1803), 
vol. i. pp. 417 sqq.; Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, 
ed. C. Miiller, 1. 453 sqq. 

8 Compare Aristotle, Mirab. Auscult. 107 (115): ‘‘It is 
said that Philoctetes is worshipped by the Sybarites ; for on 
his return from Troy he settled in the territory of Croton at 
the place called Macalla, which they say is distant a hundred 
and twenty furlongs, and they relate that he dedicated the 
bow of Hercules in the sanctuary of the Halian Apollo. But 
they say that in the time of their sovereignty the people of 
Croton fetched the bow from there and dedicated it in the 
sanctuary of Apollo in their country. It is said, too, that 
when he died he was buried beside the river Sybaris ; for he 
had gone to the help of the Rhodians under Tlepolemus, who 
had been carried out of their course to these regions and had 
engaged in battle with the barbarous inhabitants of that 
country.” This war with the barbarians is no doubt the ‘‘ war 
on the Lucanians,” in which Apollodorus, or at all events, 
Tzetzes here tells us that Philoctetes engaged after his arrival 
in Italy. 

* This paragraph is quoted from Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 92), 

261 


APOLLODORUS 


δοντος θυγατέρες, ἸΙριάμου δὲ ἀδελφαί," Ai θυλλα 
᾿Αστυόχη Μηδεσικάστη μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν αἰχμα- 
λωτίδων ἐκεῖσε γεγονυῖαι τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας, εὐλαβού- 
μεναι τὴν ἐν τῇ ᾿Ελλάδι δουλείαν τὰ σκάφη 
ἐνέπρησαν, ὅθεν ὁ ποταμὸς Ναύαιθος ἐκλήθη καὶ 
αἱ γυναῖκες Ναυπρήστιδες" οἱ δὲ σὺν αὐταῖς 
“Ἕλληνες ἀπολέσαντες τὰ σκάφη ἐκεῖ κατῴκησαν. > 
E16 | “Δημοφῶν δὲ Θρᾳξὶ Βισάλταις μετ᾽ ὀλίγων 
νεῶν προσίσχει, καὶ αὐτοῦ ἐρασθεῖσα. Φυλλὶς ἡ 
θυγάτηρ τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπὶ προικὶ τῇ βασιλείᾳ 
συνευνάξεται ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρός. ὁ δὲ βουλόμενος 
εἰς τὴν πατρίδα ἀπιέναι, πολλὰ δεηθεὶς ὁ ὀμόσας 
ἀναστρέψειν ἀπέρχεται: καὶ Φυλλὶς αὐτὸν ἄχρι 
τῶν ᾿Εννέα ὁδῶν * λεγομένων προπέμπει καὶ 
δίδωσιν αὐτῷ κίστην, εἰποῦσα ἱερὸν «τῆς» μητρὸς " 
Ῥέας ἐνεῖναι, καὶ ταύτην μὴ ἀνοίγειν, εἰ μὴ ὅταν 


1 Πριάμου δὲ ἀδελφαὶ. These words are omitted, doubtless 
by accident, in Wagner’s edition of Apollodorus. 

2 The following story of the loves of Demophon and 
Phyllis is repeated by Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 495) in 
a passage which to a great extent agrees verbally with the 
present passage of Apollodorus. 

3 Ἐννέα ὁδῶν Wagner (comparing Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 495): ἐννεάδων HK. 

4 «τῆς: μητρὸς Wagner (comparing Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 495): μητρὸς E. 


1 The same story is told by Strabo, who calls the river 
Neaethus (vi. 1. 12, p. 262). Stephanus Byzantius agrees 
with Apollodorus in giving Navaethus (Navai@os) as the form 
of the name. Apollodorus derives the name from vais, ‘‘a 
ship,” and aféw, ‘‘to burn.” Virgil tells a similar tale of the 
founding of Segesta or, as he calls it, Acesta in Sicily. See 
Virgil, Aen. v. 604-771. 

2 Demophon and his brother Acamas, the sons of Theseus, 
had gone to Troy to rescue their grandmother Aethra from 


262 


EPITOME, vi. 15c-16 


sisters of Priam, to wit, Aethylla, Astyoche, and 
Medesicaste, with the other female captives, finding 
themselves in that part of Italy, and dreading slavery 
in Greece, set fire to the vessels ; whence the river 
was called Navaethus and the women were called 
Nauprestides ; and the Greeks who were with the 
women, having lost the vessels, settled there.! 
Demophon with a few ships put in to the land of 
the Thracian Bisaltians,? and there Phyllis, the king’s 
daughter, falling in love with him, was given him in 
marriage by her father with the kingdom for her 
dower. But he wished to depart to his own country, 
and after many entreaties and swearing to return, he 
did depart. And Phyllis accompanied him as far as 
what are called the Nine Roads, and she gave him a 
casket, telling him that it contained a sacrament of 
Mother Rhea, and that he was not to open it until he 


captivity. See above, Hpitome, v. 22. The following story 
of the loves and sad fate of Demophon and Phyllis is told in 
almost the same words by Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 495, 
except that for the name of Demophon he substitutes the 
name of his brother Acamas. Lucian also couples the names 
of Acamas and Phyllis (De saltatione, 40). A pretty story is 
told of the sad lovers by Servius. He says that Phyllis, 
despairing of the return of Demophon, hanged herself and was 
turned into a leafless almond tree; but that when Demophon 
came and embraced the trunk of the tree, it responded to his 
endearments by bursting into leaf; hence leaves, which had 
been called peiala before, were ever after called phylla in 
Greek. See Servius, on Virgil, Hcl. v.10. Compare Scrip- 
tores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 
51 and 146 sq. (First Vatican Mythographer, 159; Second 
Vatican Mythographer, 214). The story is told in a less 
romantic form by Hyginus (fab. 59, compare 243). He says 
that when Phyllis died for love, trees grew on her grave and 
mourned her death at the season when their leaves withered 
and fell. 


263 


APOLLODORUS 


17 ἀπελπίσῃ τῆς πρὸς αὐτὴν avodov.! Δημοφῶν δὲ 
ἐλθὼν εἰς Κύπρον ἐκεῖ κατῴκει. καὶ τοῦ τακτοῦ 
χρόνου διελθόντος Φυλλὶς ἀρὰς θεμένη κατὰ Δημο- 
φῶντος ἑαυτὴν ἀναιρεῖ" ΔΉΜΟΘΕΝ δὲ τὴν κίστην 
ἀνοίξας φόβῳ κατασχεθεὶς " ἄνεισιν ἐπὶ τὸν ἵππον 
καὶ τοῦτον ἐλαύνων ἀτάκτως ἀπόλλυται: τοῦ γὰρ 
ἵππου σφαλέντος κατενεχθεὶς ἐπὶ τὸ ξίφος ἔπεσεν. 
οἱ δὲ σὺν αὐτῷ κατῴκησαν ἐν Κύπρῳ. 

18 Ποδαλείριος δὲ ἀφικόμενος εἰς Δελφοὺς ἐχρᾶτο 
ποῦ κατοικήσει" χρησμοῦ δὲ δοθέντος, εἰς ἣν 
πόλιν τοῦ περιέχοντος οὐρανοῦ πεσόντος οὐδὲν 
πείσεται," τῆς Καρικῆς Χερρονήσου τὸν πέριξ 
οὐρανοῦ κυκλούμενον ὄρεσι τόπον κατῴκησεν. 

19 ᾿Αμφίλοχος δὲ ὁ ᾿Αλκμαίωνος, κατά τινας 
ὕστερον παραγενόμενος εἰς Τροίαν, κατὰ [τὸν] * 
χειμῶνα ἀπερρίφη. πρὸς Μόψον, καί, ὥς τινες 
λέγουσιν, ὑπὲρ τῆς βασιλείας μονομαχοῦντες - 
ἔκτειναν ἀλλήλους. 

1 τῆς πρὸς αὐτὴν ἀνόδου EK: τὴν πρὸς αὐτὴν ἄνοδον Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 495. 

2 φόβῳ κατασχεθεὶς Εἰ ; φάσματι κρατηθεὶς Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 495. 

3 οὐδὲν πείσεται E. Wagner conjectures οὐδὲν « δεινὸν Σ- 
πείσεται, comparing Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 1047, οὐ- 
dev δεινὸν πείσεται. 

4 κατὰ [τὸν] χειμῶνα. As Wagner observes, the article 
should perhaps be omitted, as in the quotation of the passage 
by Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 440, κατὰ χειμῶνα ἀπερρίφη 
πρὸς Μόψον, who cites Apollodorus by name. Yet perhaps 
our author was thinking of the famous storm that overtook 


the Greeks on their return from Troy and wrecked so many 
gallant ships. 


1 The same story is told, nearly in the same words, by 
Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 1047), who probably copied 
Apollodorus. As to the settlement of Podalirius in Caria, 


264 


EPITOME, vi. 16-19 


should have abandoned all hope of returning to her. 
And Demophon went to Cyprus and dwelt there. 
And when the appointed time was past, Phyllis 
called down curses on Demophon and killed herself ; 
and Demophon opened the casket, and, being struck 
with fear, he mounted his horse and galloping wildly 
met his end; for, the horse stumbling, he was thrown 
and fell on his sword. But his people settled in 
Cyprus. 

Podalirius went to Delphi and inquired of the 
oracle where he should settle; and on receiving an 
oracle that he should settle in the city where, if the 
encompassing heaven were to fall, he would suffer no 
harm, he settled in that place of the Carian Cherson- 
nese which is encircled by mountains all round the 
horizon. ' 

Amphilochus son of Alemaeon, who, according to 
some, arrived later at Troy, was driven in the storm 
to the home of Mopsus ; and, as some say, they fought 
a single combat for the kingdom, and slew each 
other.” 


compare Pausanias, iii. 26. 10; Stephanus Byzantius, s.v. 
Σύρνα. Podalirius was worshipped as a hero in Italy. He had 
a shrine at the foot of Mount Drium in Daunia, and the seer 
Calchas was worshipped in a shrine on the top of the same 
mountain, where his worshippers sacrificed black rams and 
slept in the skins of the victims for the purpose of receiving 
revelations in dreams. See Strabo, vi. 3. 9, p. 284; Lyco- 
phron, Cassandra, 1047 sqq. Hence Lycophron said that 
Podalirius was buried in Italy, and for so saying he was 
severely taken to task by his learned but crabbed commen- 
tator Tzetzes, who roundly accused him of lying (Schol. on 
Lycophron,' 1047). 

2 This passage is quoted from Apollodorus, with the 
author’s name, by Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 440-442), 
who says that according to the usual tradition Amphilochus 
and Mopsus had gone together to Cilicia after the capture of 


265 


APOLLODORUS 


20 Λοκροὶ dé μόλις τὴν ἑαυτῶν καταλαβόντες, ἐπεὶ 
μετὰ τρίτον ἔτος τὴν Λοκρίδα ' κατέσχε φθορά, 
δέχονται χρησμὸν ἐξιλάσασθαι τὴν ἐν Ἰλίῳ ᾿Αθη- 
vav καὶ δύο παρθένους πέμπειν ἱκέτιδας ἐπὶ ἔτη 
χίλια. καὶ λαγχάνουσι πρῶται Περίβοια καὶ 

2] Κλεοπάτρα. αὗται δὲ εἰς Τροίαν ἀφικόμεναι, 
διωκόμεναι παρὰ τῶν ἐγχωρίων εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν κατέρ- 
χονται" καὶ τῇ μὲν θεᾷ οὐ προσήρχοντο, τὸ δὲ 
ἱερὸν ἔσαιρόν 5 τε καὶ ἔρραινον' ἐκτὸς δὲ τοῦ νεὼ 
οὐκ ἐξήεσαν, κεκαρμέναι δὲ ἦσαν καὶ μονοχίτωνες 


1 Λοκρίδα Wagner (comparing Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
1141): Λοκρίαν E. 

2 ἔσαιρον Wagner (comparing Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
1141): ἔσηρον K. 


Troy. This statement is confirmed by the testimony of 
Strabo (xiv. 5. 16, pp. 675 sq.), who tells us that Amphi- 
lochus and Mopsus came from Troy and founded Mallus in 
Cilicia. The dispute between Amphilochus and Mopsus is 
related more fully both by Tzetzes and Strabo (dl.cc.). 
According to them, Amphilochus wished to go for a time to 
Argos (probably Amphilochian Argos; see above, ili. 7. 7). 
So he departed after entrusting the kingdom or priesthood 
to Mopsus in his absence. Dissatisfied with the state of 
affairs at Argos, he returned in a year and reclaimed the 
kingdom or priesthood from Mopsus. But, acting on the 
principle Beati possidentes, the viceroy refused to cede the 
crown or the mitre to its proper owner; accordingly they 
had recourse to the ordeal of battle, in which both com- 
batants perished. Their bodies were buried in graves which 
could not be seen from each other; for the people built a 
tower between them, in order that the rivals, who had fought 
each other in life, might not scow] at each other in death. 
However, their rivalry did not prevent them Working an 
oracle in partnership after their decease. In the second 
century of our era the oracle enjoyed the highest reputation 
for infallibility (Pausanias, i. 34. 3). The leading partner of 
the firm was apparently Amphilochus, for he is usually men- 


266 


EPITOME, vi. 20-21 


The Locrians regained their own country with 
difficulty, and three years afterwards, when Locris 
was visited by a plague, they received an oracle bid- 
ding them to propitiate Athena at Ilium and to send 
two maidens as suppliants for a thousand years. The 
lot first fell on Periboea and Cleopatra. And when 
they came to Troy they were chased by the natives 
and took refuge in the sanctuary. And they did not 
approach the goddess, but swept and sprinkled the 
sanctuary ; and they did not go out of the temple, and 
their hair was cropped, and they wore single garments 


tioned alone in connexion with the oracle; Plutarch (De 
defectu oraculorum, 45) is the only ancient writer from whom 
we learn that Mopsus took an active share in the business, 
though Cicero mentions the partners together (De divina- 
tione, i. 40. 88). According to Plutarch and Dio Cassius 
(Ixxii. 7), the oracles were communicated in dreams; but 
Lucian says (Philopseudes, 38) that the inquirer wrote down 
his question on a tablet, which he handed to the prophet. 
The charge for one of these infallible communications was 
only two obols, or about twopence halfpenny. See Lucian, 
Alexander, 19; id. Deorum concilium, 12. The ancients 
seem to have been divided in opinion on the important 
question whether the oracular Amphilochus at Mallus was 
the son or the grandson of Amphiaraus. Apollodorus calls 
him the son of Alemaeon, which would make him the grand- 
son of Amphiaraus, for Alemaeon was a son of Amphiaraus. 
But Tzetzes, in reporting what he describes as the usual 
version of the story, calls Amphilochus the son, not the 
grandson of Amphiaraus (Schol. on Lycophron, 440-442). 
Compare Strabo, xiv. 1. 27, p. 642; Quintus Smyrnaeus, 
Posthomerica, xiv. 365-369. Lucian is inconsistent on the 
point ; for while in one passage he calls Amphilochus the son 
of Amphiaraus (Alexander, 19), in another passage he speaks 
of him sarcastically as the noble son of an accurst matricide, 
by whom he means Alcmaeon (Deorum concilium, 12). Else- 
where Apollodorus mentions both Amphilochus, the son of 
Amphiaraus, and Amphilochus, the son of Alemaeon. See 
above, iii. 7. 2 and 7. 


267 


APOLLODORUS 


22 καὶ ἀνυπόδετοι. τῶν δὲ πρώτων ἀποθανουσῶν 
ἄλλας ἔπεμπον" εἰσήεσαν δὲ εἰς τὴν πόλιν νύκτωρ, 
ἵνα μὴ φανεῖσαι τοῦ τεμένους ἔξω φονευθῶσι" 
μετέπειτα δὲ βρέφη μετὰ τροφῶν ἔπεμπον. χιλίων 
δὲ ἐτῶν παρελθόντων μετὰ τὸν Φωκικὸν πόλεμον 
ἱκέτιδας ἐπαύσαντο πέμποντες. 

ES 23 [᾿Αγαμέμνων δὲ καταντήσας εἰς Μυκήνας μετὰ 
Κασάνδρας ἀναιρεῖται ὑπὸ Αἰγίσθου καὶ ζλυται- 
μνήστρας" δίδωσι γὰρ αὐτῷ χιτῶνα ἄχειρα καὶ 
ἀτράχηλον, καὶ τοῦτον ἐνδυόμενος φονεύεται, καὶ 
βασιλεύει Μυκηνῶν Αἴγισθος: κτείνουσι δὲ καὶ 


1 The story of the custom of propitiating Athena at Troy 
by sending two Locrian virgins to her every year is similarly 
told by ‘'zetzes, who adds some interesting particulars 
omitted by Apollodorus. From him we learn that when the 
maidens arrived, the Trojans met them and tried to catch 
them. If they caught the maidens, they killed them and 
burned their bones with the wood of wild trees which bore 
no fruit. Having done so, they threw the ashes from Mount 
Traron into the sea. But if the maidens escaped from their 
pursuers, they ascended secretly to the sanctuary of Athena 
aud became her priestesses, sweeping and sprinkling the 
sacred precinct; but they might not approach the goddess, 
nor quit the sanctuary except by night. Tzetzes agrees with 
Apollodorus in describing the maidens during their term of 
service as barefoot, with cropped hair, and clad each in a 
single tunic. He refers to the Sicilian historian Timaeus as 
his authority for the statement that the custom was observed 
for a thousand years, and that it came to an end after the 
Phocian war (357-346 B.c.). See Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 
1141. The maidens were chosen by lot from the hundred 
noblest families in Locris (Polybius, xii. 5) ; and when they 
escaped death on landing, they served the goddess in the 
sanctuary for the term of their lives (Plutarch, De sera 
numinis vindicta, 12), or, at all events, till their successors 
arrived (Suidas, .s.v. κατεγήρασαν). For other references to 
this very remarkable custom, which appears to be well 


268 


EPITOME, vi. 21-23 


and no shoes. And when the first maidens died, they 
sent others ; and they entered into the city by night, 
lest, being seen outside the precinct, they should be 
put to the sword; but afterwards they sent babes 
with their nurses. And when the thousand years 
were passed, after the Phocian war they ceased to 
send suppliants.! 

After Agamemnon had returned to Mycenae with 
Cassandra, he was murdered by Aegisthus and 
Clytaemnestra; for she gave him a shirt without 
sleeves and without a neck, and while he was 
putting it on he was cut down, and Aegisthus 
reigned over Mycenae.? And they killed Cassandra 


authenticated, see Strabo, xiii. 1. 40, pp. 600 sq. ; Scholiast 
on Homer, Il. xiii. 66; Iamblichus, De Pythagorica vita, 
viii. 42 ; Suidas, s.v. ποινή (quoting Aelian) ; Servius, on Virgil, 
Aen. i. 41. Servius, in contradiction to our other autho- 
rities, says that only one maiden was sent annually. Strabo 
appears to affirm that the custom originated as late as the 
Persian period (τὰς δὲ Aoxpidas πεμφθῆναι Περσῶν ἤδη κρατούν- 
των συνέβη. This view is accepted by Clinton, who accord- 
ingly holds that the custom lasted from 559 B.c. to 346 B.C. 
(Fastt Hellenict, i. 134 sq.). 

2 As to the murder of Agamemnon, see Homer, Od. iii. 
193 sq., 303-305, iv. 529-537, xi. 404-434; Hagias, Returns, 
summarized by Proclus, in Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, 
ed. G. Kinkel, p. 53; Aeschylus, Agamemnon, 1379 sqq. ; 
id. Humenides, 631-635 ; Sophocles, Electra, 95-99; Kuri- 
pides, Electra, 8-10; id. Orestes, 25 sq.; Pausanias, ii. 16. 6; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 1108 and 1375; Hyginus, 
Fab. 117; Seneca, Agamemnon, 875-909; Servius, on Vir- 
gil, Aen. xi. 268; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, 
ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 47, 126, 141 sq. (First Vatican 
Mythographer, 147; Second Vatican Mythographer, 147 and 
202) ; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, vi. 2. According 
to Homer and the author of the Returns, with whom Pau- 
Sanias agrees, it was Aegisthus who killed Agamemnon ; 
according to Aeschylus, it was Clytaemnestra. Sophocles 
and Euripides speak of the murder being perpetrated by the 


269 


APOLLODORUS 


24 Κασάνδραν. ᾿Ηλέκτρα δὲ pia τῶν ᾿Αγαμέμνονος 
,ὕὔ ᾽ / \ > \ > / \ 
θυγατέρων ᾿Ορέστην tov ἀδελφὸν ἐκκλέπτει Kal 
δίδωσι Στροφίῳ Φωκεῖ τρέφειν, ὁ δὲ αὐτὸν ἐκτρέ- 
\ / \ 297 \ \ 
gee peta Πυλάδου παιδὸς ἰδίου. τελειωθεὶς δὲ 
> / > \ / \ Χ Ν 
Ορέστης εἰς “Δελφοὺς παραγίνεται καὶ τὸν θεὸν 
ἐρωτᾷ," εἰ τοὺς αὐτόχειρας τοῦ πατρὸς μετέλθοι. 
25 τοῦτο δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπιτρέποντος " ἀπέρχεται εἰς 
Μυκήνας * “μετὰ Πυλάδου λαθραίως καὶ κτείνει" 
τήν τε μητέρα καὶ τὸν Αἴγισθον, καὶ μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺ 
μανίᾳ κατασχεθεὶς ὑ ὑπὸ ᾿Ερινύων 5 διωκόμενος εἰς 
᾿Αθήνας παραγίνεται καὶ κρίνεται ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ 
5 πάγῳ, | ὡς μὲν λέγουσί τινες ὑπὸ ᾿Ερινύων, ὡς 
δέ τινες ὑπὸ Τυνδάρεω, ὡς δέ τινες ὑπὸ ᾿Ηριγόνης 
τῆς Αἰγίσθου καὶ Κλυταιμνήστρας, καὶ κριθεὶς 
ἴσων γενομένων τῶν ψήφων ἀπολύεται. 


Στροφίῳ Φωκεῖ Εἰ : Φωκεῖ Στροφίῳ S. 
καὶ τὸν θεὸν ἐρωτᾷ ὃ : κἀκεῖ ἐρωτᾷ HK. 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἐπιτρέποντος S: τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐπιτραπεὶς E. 
ἀπέρχεται Μυκήνας KE: ἀπερχόμενος εἰς Μυκήνας S. 
καὶ κτείνει τήν τε μήτερα καὶ τὸν Αἴγισθον Ἰὰ : τόν Te 
Αἴγισθον καὶ τὴν μητέρα κτείνει S. 
6 "Ἐρινύων S: Ἐριννύων Εἰ 
7 καὶ κρίνεται Εἰ : κρίνεται δὲ ᾿Ορέστης ὃ. 
8 ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ S: ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ καὶ ἀπολύεται KE. 


- (ὦ τῷ μὸ 


σι 


two jointly. The sleeveless and neckless garment in which 
Clytaemnestra entangled her husband, while she cut him 
down, is described with tragic grandiloquence and vagueness 
by Aeschylus, but more explicitly by later writers (Tzetzes, 
Seneca, Servius, and the Vatican Mythographers). 

1 As to the murder of Cassandra, see Homer, Od. xi. 491-- 
423; Pindar, Pyth. xi. 19 (29) sqq.; Philostratus, Imagines, 
ii. 10; Athenaeus, xiii. 38, p. 5560; Hyginus, Fab. 117. 
According to Hyginus, both Clytaemnestra and Aegisthus 
had a hand in the murder of Cassandra; according to the 
other writers, she was despatched by Clytaemnestra alone. 

2 Compare Pindar, Pyth. xi. 34 (52) sqq.; Sophocles, 
Electra, 11 sqq.; Euripides, Electra, 14 sqq. ; Hyginus, Fab. 


270 


EPITOME, νι. 23-25 


also.! But Electra, one of Agamemnon’s daughters, 
smuggled away her brother Orestes and gave him to 
Strophius, the Phocian, to bring up; and he brought 
him up with Pylades, his own son.?, And when Orestes 
was grown up, he repaired to Delphi and asked the 
god whether he should take vengeance on his father’s 
murderers. The god gave him leave, so he departed 
secretly to Mycenae in company with Pylades, and 
killed both his mother and Aegisthus.*? And not long 
afterwards, being afflicted with madness and pursued 
by the Furies, he repaired to Athens and was tried 
in the Areopagus. He is variously said to have been 
brought to trial by the Furies, or by Tyndareus, or by 
Erigone, daughter of Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra ; 
and the votes at his trial being equal he was acquitted.* 


117. Pindar tells how, after the murder of his father Aga- 
memnon, the youthful Orestes was conveyed to. the aged 
Strophius at the foot of Parnassus; but he does not say who 
rescued the child and conveyed him thither. According to 
Sophocles and Euripides, it was an old retainer of the family 
who thus saved Orestes, but Sophocles says that the old man 
had received the child from the hands of Electra. Hyginus, 
in agreement with Apollodorus, relates how, after the murder 
of Agamemnon, Electra took charge of (swstulit) her infant 
brother Orestes and committed him to the care of Strophius 
in Phocis. | 

3 This vengeance for the murder of Agamemnon is the 
theme of three extant Greek tragedies, the Choephori of 
Aeschylus, the Electra of Sophocles, and the Electra of Euri- 
pides. It was related by Hagias in his epic, the Returns, as 
we learn from the brief summary of Proclus (Epicorum Grae- 
corum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 53). Compare Pindar, 
Pyth. xi. 36 (55) sq.; Hyginus, Fab. 119. Homer briefly 
mentions the murder of Aegisthus by Orestes (Od. i. 29 sq., 
298-300, iii. 306 sqq.); he does not expressly mention, but 
darkly hints at, the murder of Clytaemnestra by her son 
(Od. iii. 309 sq.). 

4 The trial and acquittal of Orestes in the court of the 
Areopagus at Athens is the subject of Aeschylus’s tragedy, 


271 


APOLLODORUS 


ES 26 | ’Epopevm) δὲ αὐτῷ, πῶς ἂν ἀπαλλαγείη τῆς 

νόσου, ὁ θεὸς εἶπεν, εἰ τὸ ἐν Ταύροις ξόανον μετα- 

S xopicesev.” | οἱ δὲ Ταῦροι μοῖρά ἐστι Σκυθῶν, οἱ 

τοὺς ξένους φονεύουσι καὶ εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν «πῦρ!:» 3 

ῥίπτουσι. τοῦτο ἣν ἐν τῷ τεμένει διά τινος πέτρας 

ES 27 ἀναφερόμενον ἐξ “Ardov. | παραγενόμενος οὖν εἰς 
1 For ἐρομένῳ we should perhaps read χρωμένῳ. 


2 ἐρομένῳ δὲ... ξόανον μετακομίσειεν S: καὶ λαμβάνει xpno- 
μὸν ἀπαλλαγῆναι τῆς νόσου, εἰ τὸ ἐν Ταύροις μετακομίσοι βρέ- 
τας K. 


8. εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν --πῦρ-- ῥίπτουσι Herwerden (Mnemosyne, 
xx. (1892), p. 200) (compare Euripides, Iphigenia in Tauris, 
626, πῦρ ἱερόν) : εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν ῥίπτουσι ὃ, Wagner. 


the Eumenides, where the poet similarly represents the matri- 
cide as acquitted because the votes were equal (verses 752 sq.). 
The Parian Chronicle also records the acquittal on the same 
ground, and dates it in the reign of Demophon, king of Athens. 
See Marmor Parium, 40 sq. (Fragmenta Historicorum Grae- 
corum, ed. C. Miiller, i. 546). Compare Euripides, Iphigenia 
in Tauris, 940-967, 1469-1472; id. Orestes, 1648-1652 ; 
Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 1374; Pausanias, i. 28. 5, 
viii. 34. 4; Dictys Cretensis, Bellum Trojanum, vi. 4. In the 
Eumenides the accusers of Orestes are the Furies. According 
to the Parian Chronicler, it was Erigone, the daughter of 
Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra, who instituted the prosecution 
for the murder of her father ; the chronicler.does not mention 
the murder of Clytaemnestra as an article in the indictment 
of Orestes. According to the author of the Htymologicum 
Magnum (p. 42, s.v. Aidépa), the prosecution was conducted 
at Athens jointly by Erigone and her grandfather Tyndareus, 
and when it failed, Erigone hanged herself. Peloponnesian 
antiquaries, reported by Pausanias (viii. 34. 4), alleged that 
the accuser was not Tyndareus, who was dead, but Perilaus, 
a cousin of Clytaemnestra. According to Hyginus (Fab. 119), 
Orestes was accused by Tyndareus before the people of My- 
cenae, but was suffered to retire into banishment for the sake 
of his father. As to the madness of Orestes, caused by the 
Furies of his murdered mother, see Euripides, Orestes, 931 sqq.; 
Pausanias, iii. 22. 1, viii. 34, 1-4. The incipient symptoms of 
272 


EPITOME, νι. 26-27 


When he inquired how he should be rid of his 
disorder, the god answered that he would be rid of it if 
he should fetch the wooden image that was in the 
land of the Taurians.t_ Now the Taurians are a part 
of the Scythians, who murder strangers” and throw 
them into the sacred fire, which was in the pre- 
cinct, being wafted up from Hades through a 
certain rock. So when Orestes was come with 


madness, showing themselves immediately after the com- 
mission of the crime, are finely described by Aeschylus 
(Choephort, 1021 sqq.). 

1 As to the oracle, compare Euripides, Iphigenia in 
Tauris, 77-92, 970-978 ; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 1374 ; 
Hyginus, Fab. 120. 

2 The Taurians inbabited the Crimea. As to their custom 
of sacrificing castaways and strangers, see Herodotus, iv. 103; 
Kuripides, Iphigenia in Tauris, 34-41 ; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 
44. 7; Pausanias, i. 43. 1; Orphica, Argon. 1075 sq., ed 
Abel; Ovid, Hx Ponto, iii. 2. 45-58 ; Mela, ii. 11 ; Ammianus 
Marcellinus, xxii. 8. 34. According to Herodotus, these 
Taurians sacrificed human beings to a Virgin Goddess, whom 
they identified with Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon. 
The victims were shipwrecked persons and any Greeks on 
whom they could lay hands. They were slaughtered by 
being knocked on the head with a club, after which their 
heads were set up on stakes and their bodies thrown down a 
precipice into the sea or buried in the ground; for reports 
differed in regard to the disposal of the corpses, though all 
agreed as to the setting of the heads on stakes. Ammianus 
Marcellinus says that the native name of the goddess was 
Orsiloche. 

3 This account of the disposal of the bodies of the victims 
is based on Euripides, Iphigenia in Tauris, 625 sq. :— 

OP. τάφος δὲ ποῖος δέξεταί μ᾽, ὅταν θάνω; 
Id. πῦρ ἱερὸν ἔνδον χάσμα τ᾽ εὐρωπὸν πέτρας. 
Compare zd. 1154 sq. :--- 
ἤδη τῶν ξένων κατήρξατο, 
ἀδύτοις T ἐν ἁγνοῖς σῶμα λάμπονται πυρί; 
Thus Apollodorus differs from the account which Herodotus 
gives of the disposal of the bodies. See the preceding note. 


273 


VOL. II. T 


APOLLODORUS 


Tavpous Ορέστης * μετὰ Πυλάδου φωραθεὶς ἑάλω 
καὶ ἄγεται πρὸς Θόαντα τὸν βασιλέα δέσμιος, 
6 δὲ ἀμφοτέρους πρὸς τὴν ἱέρειαν ἀποστέλλει. 
ἐπιγνωσθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ τῆς ἀδελφῆς ἱερὰ ποιούσης 
ἐν Ταύροις," ἄρας τὸ ξόανον σὺν αὐτῇ φεύγει. 
| κομισθὲν δὲ εἰς ᾿Αθήνας νῦν λέγεται. τὸ τῆς Ταυ- 
ροπόλου" ἔνιοι δὲ αὐτὸν κατὰ χειμῶνα προσενε- 


1 παραγενόμενος οὖν εἰς Ταύρους Ορέστης S: καὶ δὴ παραγενό- 
μενος ἐν Ταύροις E. 
2 τῆς ἀδελφῆς ἱερὰ ποιούσης ἐν Ταύροις S: τῆς ἀδελφῆς E. 


1 This account of the expedition of Orestes and Pylades to 
the land of the Taurians, and their escape with the image of 
Artemis, is the subject of Euripides’ s play Iphigenia in Tauris, 
which Apollodorus. seems to have followed closely. The gist 
of the play is told in verse by Ovid (Hx Ponto, iii. 2. 43-96) 
and in prose by Hyginus (Fab. 120). Compare Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 1374; Scriptores rerum mythicarum 
Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, vol. i. pp. 7, 141 sq. (First Vatican 
Mythographer, 20; Second Vatican Mythographer, 202). 

2 In saying that the image of the Taurie Artemis was 
taken to Athens our author follows Euripides. See Iphi- 
genia in Tauris, 89-91, 1212-1214. But according to Euri- 
pides the image was not to remain in Athens but to be 
carried to a sacred place in Attica called Halae, where it was 
to be set up in a temple specially built for it and to be called 
the image of Artemis Tauropolus or Brauronian Artemis 
(I phigenia in Tauris, 1446-1467). An old wooden image of 
Artemis, which purported to be the one brought from the 
land of the Taurians, was shown at Brauron in Attica as late 
as the second century of our era; Iphigenia is said to have 
landed with the image at Brauron and left it there, while she 
herself went on by land to Athens and afterwards to Argos. 
See Pausanias, i. 23. 7, i. 33. 1. But according to some the 
original image was carried off by Xerxes to Susa, and was 
afterwards presented by Seleucus to Laodicea in Syria, where 
it was said to remain bee mn to the time of Pausanias in the 
second century of our era (Pausanias, iii. 16, 8, viii, 46. 3), 


274 


EPITOME, νι. 27 


Pylades to the land of the Taurians, he was detected, 
caught, and carried in bonds before Thoas the king, 
who sent them both to the priestess. But being re- 
cognized by his sister, who acted as priestess among 
the Taurians, he fled with her, carrying off the 
wooden image.! It was conveyed to Athens and is 
᾿ now called the image of Tauropolus.?, But some say 


Euripides has recorded, in the form of prophecy, two in- 
teresting features in the ritual of Artemis at Halae or Brauron. 
In sacrificing to the goddess the priest drew blood with a 
sword from the throat of a man, and this was regarded as a 
substitute for the sacrifice of Orestes, of which the goddess 
had been defrauded by his escape. Such a custom is ex- 
plained most naturally as a mitigation of an older practice of 
actually sacrificing human beings to the goddess; and the 
tradition of such sacrifices at Brauron would suffice to give 
rise to the story that the image of the cruel goddess had 
been brought from the land of ferocious barbarians on the 
Black Sea. For similar mitigations of an old custom of 
human sacrifice, see The Dying God, pp. 214 sqq. The other 
feature in the ritual at Brauron which Euripides notices was 
that the garments of women dying in childbed used to be 
dedicated to Iphigenia, who was believed to be buried at 
Brauron. See Euripides, Iphigenia in Tauris, 1458-1467. 
As to Brauron and Halae, see my note on Pausanias, i. 33. 1 
(vol. ii. pp. 445 sqq.). But other places besides Brauron 
claimed to possess the ancient idol of the Tauric Artemis 
The wooden image of Artemis Orthia at Sparta, at whose 
altar the Spartan youths were scourged to the effusion of 
blood, was supposed by the Lacedaemonians to be the true 
original image brought by Iphigenia herself to Sparta; and 
their claim was preferred by Pausanias to that of the Athe- 
nians (Pausanias, iii. 16. 7-10). Others said that Orestes 
and Iphigenia carried the image, hidden in a bundle of 
faggots, to Aricia in Italy. See Servius, on Virgil, ii. 116, 
vi. 1386; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latint, ed. G. H. 
Bode, vol. i. pp. 7, 142 (First Vatican Mythographer, 20; 
Second Vatican Mythographer, 202); compare Strabo, v. 3. 
12, p. 239. Indeed, it was affirmed by some people that on 
his wanderings Orestes had deposited, not one, but many 


275 
τ 2 


APOLLODORUS 


χθῆναι τῇ νήσῳ Ῥόδῳ λέγουσιν. .. αὐτὸν καὶ 


ES 28 κατὰ χρησμὸν ἐν τείχει καθοσιωθῆναι." | καὶ δὴ 


E 


ἐλθὼν eis Μυκήνας Πυλάδῃ μὲν τὴν ἀδελφὴν 
᾿Ηλέκτραν συξεύγνυσιν," αὐτὸς δὲ γήμας ἹῬρμιόνην, 

ἢ κατά τινας ριγόνην," τεκνοῖ Τισαμενόν," | καὶ 
δηχθεὶς ὑπὸ ὄφεως ἐν ᾿Ορεστείῳ τῆς ᾿Αρκαδίας 
VNC κει. 


1 λέγουσιν αὐτὸν καὶ κατὰ χρησμὺν ἐν τείχει καθοσιωθῆναι S. 
There seems to be a lacuna after λέγουσιν. Biicheler pro- 
posed to correct the passage and supply the lacuna as follows: 
λέγουσι «καὶ τὸ ξόανον μεῖναι» αὐτοῦ καὶ κατὰ χρησμὸν ἐν 
τείχει καθοσιωθῆναι, “ΤΟΥ say that the image remained 
there and in accordance with an oracle was dedicated in a 
fortification wall.” This may give the sense. Kerameus 
proposed to change αὐτὸν into vavaydy, but this would still 
leave the verb καθοσιωθῆναι without a proper subject. 

2 καὶ δὴ ἐλθὼν εἰς Μυκήνας Πυλάδῃ μὲν τὴν ἀδελφὴν Ηλέκτραν 
συζεύγνυσιν E: Ὀρέστης δὲ τὴν ἀδελφὴν ᾿λέκτραν Πυλάδῃ 
συνῴκισεν Ὁ. 

3 ἢ κατά τινας ᾿Ηριγόνην Εἰ, wanting in 8. 

4 ἐγέννησε Τισαμενόν ὃ : τεκνοῖ (without an accusative) Εἰ. 
The original text of Apollodorus in this passage is probably 
reproduced more fully by Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 1374) 
as follows: Ὕστερον δὲ ἦλθεν eis ᾿Αθήνας, καὶ Πυλάδῃ μὲν 
Ἠλέκτραν Cevyvvet, αὐτὸς δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἀνελὼν Νεοπτύ- 
λεμὸον τὸν ᾿Αχιλλέως ἔγημεν Ἑ ρμιόνην, ἐξ hs γεννᾷ Τισαμενόν, ἢ 
κατά τινας ᾿Ηριγόνην γήμας, τὴν Αἰγίσθου. Πένθιλον γεννᾷ, οἰκῶν 
ἐν ᾿Ορεστίᾳ τῆς ᾿Αρκαδίας, ὕπου ὑπὸ ὄφεως δηχθεὶς ἀναιρεῖται. 
‘‘ Afterwards he came to Athens and united Electra in 
marriage to Pylades, but he himself, with the help of his 
brothers, killed Neoptolemus, son of ‘Achilles, and married 
Hermione, by whom he begat Tisamenus ; or, according to 
some, he married Krigone, daughter of Aegisthus, and begat 
Penthilus, dwelling in Orestia, a district of Arcadia, where 
he was killed by the bite of a snake.” 


images of Artemis in many places (Aelius Lampridius, Helto- 
gabalus, 7). Such stories have clearly no historical value. 
In every case they were probably devised to explain or excuse 
a cruel and bloody ritual by deriving it from a barbarous 
country. 


276 


EPITOME, νι. 27-28 


that Orestes was driven in a storm to the island 
of Rhodes, and in accordance with an oracle the 
image was dedicated in a fortification wall.) And 
having come to Mycenae, he united his sister Electra 
in marriage to Pylades,? and having himself married 
Hermione, or, according to some, Erigone, he begat 
Tisamenus,® and was killed by the bite of a snake at 
Oresteum in Arcadia.* 


1 This drifting of Orestes to Rhodes seems to be mentioned 
by no other ancient writer. The verb (καθοσιωθῆναι), which 
I have taken to refer to the image and have translated by 
“dedicated,” may perhaps refer to Orestes; if so, it would 
mean ‘‘ purified” from the guilt of matricide. According to 
Hyginus (fab. 120), Orestes sailed with Iphigenia and Pylades 
to the island of Sminthe, which is otherwise unknown. 
Another place to which Orestes and Iphigenia were supposed 
to have come on their way from the Crimea was Comana in 
Cappadocia; there he was said to have introduced the wor- 
ship of Artemis Tauropolus and to have shorn his hair in 
token of mourning. Hence the city was said to derive its 
name (Κόμανα from κόμη). See Strabo, xii. 2. 3, p. 535. 
According to Tzetzes (Schol. on Lycophron, 1374), Orestes 
was driven by storms to that part of Syria where Seleucia 
and Antioch afterwards stood; and Mount Amanus, on the 
borders of Syria and Cilicia, was so named because there the 
matricide was relieved of his madness (‘Auavoes, from μανία 
‘*madness” and @ privative). Such is a sample of Byzantine 
etymology. 

2 As to the marriage of Electra to Pylades, see Euripides, 
Electra, 1249 ; id. Orestes, 1658 sq. ; Hyginus, Fab. 122. 

3 As to the marriage of Orestes and Hermione, see above, 
Epitome, v. 14, with the note. According to Pausanias 
(ii. 18. 6), Orestes had by Hermione a son Tisamenus, who 
succeeded his father on the throne of Sparta. But Pausanias 
also mentions a tradition that Orestes had a bastard son 
Penthilus by Erigone, daughter of Aegisthus, and for this 
tradition he cites as his authority the old epic poet Cinae- 
thon. Compare Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 1474. 

4 Compare Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes, 1645, quoting 
Asclepiades as his authority; Tzetzes, Schol. on Lyco- 
phron, 1374. In the passage of Euripides on which the 


277 


APOLLODORUS 


ES 29 | Μενέλαος δὲ πέντε ναῦς τὰς πάσας ' ἔχων μεθ᾽ 


a \ ‘ na lal 
ἑαυτοῦ προσσχὼν" Σουνίῳ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς ἀκρω- 
/ cal > 
τηρίῳ κἀκεῖθεν εἰς Κρήτην ἀπορριφεὶς πάλιν ὑπὸ 
ἀνέμων μακρὰν ἀπωθεῖται, καὶ πλανώμενος ἀνά 
» \ / \ / \ » 
τε Λιβύην καὶ Φοινίκην καὶ Κύπρον καὶ Αἴγυπτον 
\ 
πολλὰ συναθροίζει χρήματα. καὶ κατά τινας. 
/ a a lal , 
εὑρίσκεται Tapa Ipwret τῷ τῶν Αἰγυπτίων βασι- 


λεῖ ᾿Ελένη, μέχρι τότε εἴδωλον ἐκ νεφῶν ἐσχη- 


, “ / > \ \ \ » 
κότος τοῦ Μενελάου. ὀκτὼ δὲ πλανηθεὶς ἔτη 
᾿ > / ’ a / > / 
κατέπλευσεν εἰς Μυκήνας, κἀκεῖ κατέλαβεν Opé- 
, X “ \ , ’ \ 
στὴν μετεληλυθότα τὸν τοῦ πατρὸς φόνον. ἐλθὼν 
\ > 7, \ 577 > / » 
δὲ εἰς Σπάρτην τὴν ἰδίαν" ἐκτήσατο βασιλείαν. 
\ 4 > θ θ \ e Ν ὝἭ > A ἃ A 
καὶ ὁ ἀποθανατισθεὶς ὑπὸ Ἥρας εἰς τὸ ᾿Ηλύσιον 
i / » ς / 
ἦλθε πεδίον μεθ᾽ “Ἑλένης. 
«ς / ς \ ΝΜ / 
VII. ‘O δὲ Ὀδυσσεύς, ὡς μὲν ἔνιοι λέγουσιν, 
’ a \ , ς \ ὃλ \ ,ὔ 
ἐπλανᾶτο κατὰ Λιβύην, ὡς δὲ ἔνιοι κατὰ Σικελίαν, 


1 τὰς πάσας S: τὰς ὅλας E. 

2 προσσχὼν Σουνίῳ. .. Κύπρον καὶ Αἴγυπτον S: πολλὰς 
χώρας παραμείψας Ν᾿. 3 τὴν ἰδίαν E: ἰδίαν ὅ. 

4 Here the Vatican Epitome ends. What follows is found 
in the Sabbaitic fragments alone. 


Scholiast comments: (Orestes, 1643-1647), Orestes is bidden 
by Apollo to retire to Parrhasia, a district of Arcadia, for 
the space of a year, after which he is to go and stand his 
trial for the murder of his mother at Athens. This year to 
be spent in Arcadia is no doubt the year of banishment to 
which homicides had to submit before they were allowed to 
resume social intercourse with their fellows. See above note 
on ii. 5. 11 (vol. i. pp. 218 sq.). The period is so interpreted by 
a Scholiast on Euripides (Orestes, 1645). As to Oresteum in 
Arcadia, see Pausanias, vili. 3. 1 sq., who says that it was 
formerly called Oresthasium. A curious story of the madness 
of Orestes in Arcadia is told by Pausanias (viii. 34. 1-4), He 
says that, when the Furies were about to drive him mad, they 
appeared to him black, but that he bit off one of his own 


278 


Β... 


EPITOME, νι. 29—vu. 1 


_Menelaus, with five ships in all under his command, 
put in at Sunium, a headland of Attica; and being 
again driven thence by winds to Crete he dritted far 
away, and wandering up and down Libya, and Phoe- 
nicia, and Cyprus, and Egypt, he collected much 
treasure! And according to some, he discovered 
Helen at the court of Proteus, king of Egypt ; for till 
then Menelaus had only a phantom of her made of 
clouds.?, And after wandering for eight years he came 
to port at Mycenae, and there found Orestes, who 
had avenged his father’s murder. And having come 
to Sparta he regained his own kingdom,? and being 
made immortal by Hera he went to the Elysian Fields 
with Helen.* 


VII. Ulysses, as some say, wandered about 
Libya, or, as some say, about Sicily, or, as others 


fingers, whereupon they appeared to him white, and he 
immediately recovered his wits. The grave of Orestes was 
near Tegea in Arcadia; from there his bones were stolen by 
a Spartan and carried to Sparta in compliance with an oracle, 
which assured the Spartans of victory over their stubborn 
foes the Tegeans, if only they could get possession of these 
valuable relics. See Herodotus, i. 67 sg. ; Pausanias, 111. 3° 
5 aq., iii. 11. 10, viii. 54. 3. 

1 For the wanderings of Menelaus on the voyage from Troy, 
see Homer, Od. iii. 276-302 ; compare Pausanias, x. 25. 2. 

2 As to the real and the phantom Helen, see above, Epi- 
tome, ili. 5, with the note. 

$The return of Menelaus to his home was related by 
Hagias in the Returns, as we learn from the brief abstract of 
that poem by Proclus (Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. 
G. Kinkel, p. 53). 

4 Homer in the Odyssey (iv. 561-569) represents Proteus 
prophesying to Menelaus that he was fated not to die but to 
be transported by the gods to the Elysian Fields, there to 
dwell at ease where there was neither snow, nor storm, or 
rain, because he had married Helen and was thereby a son- 
in-law of Zeus. Compare Euripides, Helen, 1676-1679. 


279 


APOLLODORUS 


@S δὲ ἄλλοι κατὰ τὸν ᾿᾽Ωκεανὸν ἢ κατὰ τὸ Τυρρη- 
νικὸν πέλαγος. 

2 ᾿Αναχθεὶς δὲ ἀπὸ ᾿Ιλίου προσίσχει πόλει Kixo- 
νων ᾿Ισμάρῳ καὶ ταύτην αἱρεῖ πολεμῶν καὶ λαφυ- 
ραγωγεῖ, μόνου φεισάμενος Μάρωνος, ὃς ἣν ἱερεὺς 
᾿Απόλλωνος. αἰσθόμενοι δὲ οἱ τὴν ἤπειρον οὐ- 
κοῦντες Κίκονες σὺν ὅπλοις ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸν παραγίνονται: 
ἀφ᾽ ἑκάστης δὲ νεὼς ἐξ ἀποβαλὼν ἄνδρας ἀνα- 

8 χθεὶς ἔφευγε. καὶ καταντᾷ εἰς τὴν Λωτοφάγων 
χώραν καὶ πέμπει τινὰς 1 μαθησομένους τοὺς 
κατοικοῦντας" οἱ δὲ γευσάμενοι τοῦ λωτοῦ κατέ- 
μειναν'" ἐφύετο γὰρ ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ καρπὸς ἡδὺς 
λεγόμενος λωτός, ὃς τῷ γευσαμένῳ πάντων ἐποίει 
λήθην. Οδυσσεὺς δὲ αἰσθόμενος, τοὺς λοιποὺς 
κατασχών, τοὺς γευσαμένους μετὰ βίας ἐπὶ τὰς 
ναῦς ἄγει, καὶ προσπλεύσας " τῇ Κυκλώπων γῇ 
προσπελάζει. 

4 Καταλιπὼν δὲ τὰς λοιπὰς ναῦς ἐν τῇ πλησίον 
νήσῳ, μίαν ἔχων τῇ Κυκλώπων γῇ προσπελάξει, 
μετὰ δώδεκα ἑταίρων ἀποβὰς τῆς νεώς. ἔστι δὲ 
τῆς θαλάσσης πλησίον ἄντρον, εἰς ὃ ἔρχεται ἔχων 

1 τινὰς Wagner: τοὺς 8. 


2 προσπλεύσας S. Wagner conjectures ἀποπλεύσας, which 
would be better. 


1 As to ἐπὶ adventures of Ulysses with the Cicones, see 
Homer, Od. ix. 39-66. The Cicones were a Thracian tribe ; 
Xerxes and his army marched through their country (Hero- 
dotus, vii. 110). As to Maro, the priest of Apollo at Ismarus, 
see Homer, Od. ix. 196-211. He dwelt in a wooded grove 
of Apollo, and bestowed splendid presents and twelve jars of 
red honey-sweet wine, in return for the protection which he 
and his wife received at the hands of Ulysses. 

2 As to the adventures of Ulysses with the Lotus-eaters, 
see Homer, Od. ix. 82-104; Hyginus, Fab. 125. The Lotus- 


280 


EPITOME, vu. 1-4 


say, about the ocean or about the Tyrrhenian 
Sea. 

And putting to sea from Ilium, he touched at 
Ismarus, a city of the Cicones, and captured it in 
war, and pillaged it, sparing Maro alone, who was 
priest of Apollo.1_ And when the Cicones who inhab- 
ited the mainland heard of it, they came in arms to 
withstand him, and having lost six men from each ship 
he put to’sea and fled. And he landed in the country 
of the Lotus-eaters,2 and sent some to learn who 
inhabited it, but they tasted of the lotus and remained 
there ; for there grew in the country a sweet fruit 
called lotus, which caused him who tasted it to forget 
_everything. When Ulysses was informed of this, he 
restrained the rest of his men, and dragged those 
who had tasted the lotus by force to the ships. And 
having sailed to the land of the Cyclopes, he stood 
in for the shore. 

And having left the rest of the ships in the neigh- 
bouring island, he stood in for the land of the Cyclopes 
with a single ship, and landed with twelve compan- 
ions.2 And near the sea was a cave which he entered, 


eaters were a tribe of northern Africa, inhabiting the coast 
of Tripolis (Scylax, Periplus, 110; Pliny, Nat. Hist. v. 28). 
As to the lotus, see Herodotus, iv. 177; Polybius, xii. 2. 1, 
quoted by Athenaeus, xiv. 65, p. 651 p-F; Theophrastus, 
Hist. Plant. iv. 3. 1 sq. The tree is the Zizyphus Lotus of 
the botanists. Theophrastus says that the tree was common 
in Libya, that is, in northern Africa, and that an army 
marching on Carthage subsisted on its fruit alone for several 
days. The modern name of the tree is ssodr or ssidr. A whole 
district in Tripolis is named Ssodria after it. See A. Wiede- 
mann, Herodots zweites Buch, p. 385, note on Herodotus, ii. 96. 
3 As to the adventures of Ulysses and his companions 
among the Cyclopes, see Homer, Od. ix. 105-542 ; Hyginus, 
Fab. 125. The story is a folk-tale found in many lands. See 

Appendix, ‘‘ Ulysses and Polyphemus.” 
281 


APOLLODORUS 


ἀσκὸν οἰνου TOV ὑπὸ “Μαάρωνος αὐτῷ δοθέντα." ἣν 
δὲ Πολυφήμου τὸ ἄντρον, ὃς ἦν Ποσειδῶνος καὶ 
Θοώσης νύμφης, ἀνὴρ ὑπερμεγέθης ἄ ἄγριος ἀνδρο- 
φάγος, ἔχων ἕνα ὀφθαλμὸν. ἐπὶ τοῦ μετώπου. 
ἀνακαύσαντες δὲ πῦρ καὶ τῶν ἐρίφων θύσαντες 
εὐωχοῦντο. ἐλθὼν δὲ ὁ Κύκλωψ καὶ εἰσελάσας 
τὰ ποίμνια τῇ μὲν θύρᾳ προσέθηκε πέτρον ὑπερ- 
μεγέθη καὶ θεασάμενος αὐτοὺς ἐνίους κατήσθιεν. 
᾿Οδυσσεὺς δὲ αὐτῷ δίδωσιν ἐκ τοῦ Μάρωνος οἴνου 
πιεῖν: ὁ δὲ πιὼν πάλιν ἤτησε, καὶ πιὼν τὸ δεύ- 
τερον ἐπηρώτα τὸ ὄνομα. τοῦ δὲ εἰπόντος «ὅτι!» " 
Οὔτις καλεῖται, Οὔτιν ἠπείλει ὕστερον ἀναλῶσαι, 
τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἔμπροσθεν, καὶ τοῦτο αὐτῷ ξένιον 
ἀποδώσειν ὑ ὑπέσχετο. κατασχεθεὶς δὲ ὑπὸ μέθης 
ἐκοιμήθη. ᾽Οδυσσεὺς δὲ εὑρὼν ῥόπαλον κείμενον 
σὺν τέσσαρσιν ἑταίροις ἀπώξυνε καὶ πυρώσας 
ἐξετύφλωσεν αὐτόν. ἐπιβοωμένου δὲ Πολυφήμου 
τοὺς πέριξ Κύκλωπας, παραγενόμενοι ἐπηρώτων 
τίς αὐτὸν ἀδικεῖ. τοῦ δὲ εἰπόντος ᾿"Οὔτις,᾽" νομί- 
σαντες αὐτὸν λέγειν “ὑπὸ μηδενός" ἀνεχώρησαν. 
ἐπιξητούντων. δὲ τῶν ποιμνίων τὴν συνήθη νομήν, 
ἀνοίξας καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ προθύρου στὰς τὰς χεῖρας 
ἐκπετάσας ἐψηλάφα τὰ ποίμνια. ᾽Οδυσσεὺς δὲ 
τρεῖς κριοὺς ὁμοῦ συνδέων ... καὶ αὐτὸς τῷ μεί- 
ζονι ὑποδύς, ὑ ὑπὸ τὴν γαστέρα κρυβείς, σὺν τοῖς 
ποιμνίοις ἐξῆλθε, καὶ λύσας τοὺς ἑταίρους τῶν 
ποιμνίων, ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς ἐλάσας ἀποπλέων ἀνε- 
βόησε Κύκλωπι ὡς ᾽Οδυσσεὺς εἴη καὶ ἐκπεφεύγοι * 


1 For τὸν... δοθέντα we should perhaps read rod. . . δο- 
θέντος, as Wagner suggests, since it was not the wine-skin 
(%oxos), but the wine, which Maron gave to Ulysses. See 
Homer, Od, ix. 196 sq., 203-205, 


282 


EPITOME, vi. 4-8 


taking with him the skin of wine that had been given 
him by Maro. Now the cave belonged to Polyphemus, 
who was a son of Poseidon and the nymph Thodsa, a 
huge, wild, cannibal man, with one eye on his 
forehead. And having lit a fire and sacrificed some 
of the kids, they feasted. But the Cyclops came, and 
when he had driven in his flocks, he put a huge stone 
to the door, and perceiving the men he ate some of ᾿ 
them. But Ulysses gave him of Maro’s wine to drink, 
and when he had drunk, he asked for another draught, 
and when he had drunk the second, he inquired his 
name; and when Ulysses said that he was called 
Nobody, he threatened to devour Nobody last and the 
others first, and that was the token of friendship 
which he promised to give him in return. And being 
overcome by wine, he fell asleep. But Ulysses found 
a club lying there, and with the help of four comrades 
he sharpened it, and, having heated it in the fire, he 
blinded him. And when Polyphemus cried to the 
Cyclopes round about for help, they came and asked 
who was hurting him, and when he said, “ Nobody,” 
they thought he meant that he was being hurt by 
nobody, and so they retired. And when the flocks 
sought their usual pasture, he opened the cave, and 
standing at the doorway spread out his hands and felt 
the sheep. But Ulysses tied three rams together, and 
himself getting under the bigger, and hiding under 
its belly, he passed out with the sheep. And having 
released his comrades from the sheep, he drove the 
animals to the ships, and sailing away shouted to the 
Cyclops that he was Ulysses and that he had escaped 


14 


ὅτι wanting in ὃ, inserted by Biicheler. 
ἀπώξυνε Kerameus: ἀπώξενε 5. 


2 
3 
4 ἐκπεφεύγοι Biicheler: ἐπιφεύγει 8, 


APOLLODORUS 


\ / a 5 
9 Tas ἐκείνου χεῖρας. ἣν δὲ λόγιον Κύκλωπι εἰρη- 
μένον ὑπὸ μάντεως τυφλωθῆναι ὑπὸ ᾽Οδυσσέως. 
\ \ ¥ / “ 
καὶ μαθὼν τὸ ὄνομα πέτρας ἀποσπῶν ἠκόντιζεν 
\ / a 
εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν, μόλις δὲ ἡ ναῦς σώζεται 
\ \ / > a 
πρὸς Tas πέτρας. ἐκ τούτου δὲ μηνίει Ilocedav 
᾿Οδυσσεῖ. 
> 
10 ᾿Αναχθεὶς δὲ συμπάσαις <vavol>' παραγίνεται 
, a 
εἰς Αἰολίαν νῆσον, ἧς ὁ βασιλεὺς ἣν Αἴολος. 
\ \ \ al 
οὗτος ἐπιμελητὴς ὑπὸ Διὸς τῶν ἀνέμων καθεσ- 
Nt oh ἃ 
τήκει καὶ παύειν καὶ προΐεσθαι. ὃς ξενίσας ᾿Οδυσ- 
a \ / 
σέα δίδωσιν αὐτῷ ἀσκὸν βόειον, ἐν ᾧ κατέδησε 
\ / / a fal 
τοὺς ἀνέμους, ὑποδείξας ols δεῖ χρῆσθαι πλέοντα, 
fal 2 3 a / ὃ / ς δὲ > ὃ \ 
τοῦτον" ἐν τῷ σκάφει καταδήσας. ὁ δὲ ᾿Οδυσσεὺς 
ἐπιτηδείοις ἀνέμοις χρώμενος εὐπλοεῖ, καὶ πλησίον 
Ἰθάκης ὑπάρχων ἤδη τὸν ἀναφερόμενον ἐκ τῆς 
ll πόλεως καπνὸν ἰδὼν ἐκοιμήθη. οἱ δὲ ἑταῖροι 
Ν A a , , 
νομίζοντες χρυσὸν ἐν τῷ ἀσκῷ κομίζειν αὐτόν, 
/ a 
λύσαντες TOUS ἀνέμους ἐξαφῆκαν, Kal πάλιν εἰς 
τοὐπίσω παρεγένοντο ὑπὸ τῶν πνευμάτων ἁρπα- 
/ > \ \ > , Ν » 
σθέντες. ᾿Οδυσσεὺς δὲ ἀφικόμενος πρὸς Αἴολον 
? , an a € \ > y > / lol 
ἠξίου πομπῆς τυχεῖν, ὁ δὲ αὐτὸν ἐκβάλλει τῆς 
. , A a \ Y 
νήσου λέγων avTiTpaccovT@y τῶν θεῶν μὴ Svva- 
σθαι σώζειν. 

12 Πλέων οὖν κατῆρε πρὸς Λαιστρυγόνας, Kal... 
τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ναῦν καθώρμισεν ἐσχάτως. Λαιστρυ- 
γόνες δ᾽ ἦσαν ἀνδροφάγοι, καὶ αὐτῶν éBacirevev 
᾽ ΄, A e ἃ \ , 
Αντιφάτης. μαθεῖν οὖν ᾿Οδυσσεὺς βουλόμενος 


1 ναυσὶ conjectured by Kerameus, wanting in 8. 
2 Perhaps we should read καὶ τοῦτον. 


1 As to the adventures of Ulysses with Aeolus, the Keeper 
of the Winds, see Homer, Od. x. 1-76; Hyginus, Fab. 125 ; 
Ovid, Metamorph. xiv. 223-232. 


284 


EPITOME, vu. 8-12 


out of his hands. Now the Cyclops had been fore- 
warned by a soothsayer that he should be blinded by 
Ulysses; and when he learned the name, he tore 
away rocks and hurled them into the sea, and hardly 
did the ship evade the rocks. From that time 
Poseidon was wroth with Ulysses. 

Having put to sea with all his ships, he came to 
the island of Aeolia, of which the king was Aeolus.* 
He was appointed by Zeus keeper of the winds, both 
to calm them and to send them forth. Having enter- 
tained Ulysses, he gave him an ox-hide bag in which 
he had bound fast the winds, after showing what 
winds to use on the voyage and binding fast the bag 
in the vessel. And by using suitable winds Ulysses 
had a prosperous voyage; and when he was near Ithaca 
and already saw the smoke rising from the town,? 
he fell asleep. But his comrades, thinking he carried 
gold in the bag, loosed it and let the winds go 
free, and being swept away by the blasts they were 
driven back again. And having come to Aeolus, 
Ulysses begged that he might be granted a fair 
wind ; but Aeolus drove him from the island, saying 
that he could not save him when the gods opposed. 

So sailing on he came to the land of the Laestry- 
gones,®? and his own ship he moored last. Now 
the Laestrygones were cannibals, and their king was 
Antiphates. Wishing, therefore, to learn about the 


* Homer says (Od. x. 30) they were so near land that they 
could already see the men tending the fires (πυρπολέονταϑ) ; 
but whether the fires were signals to guide the ship to port, 
or watch-fires of shepherds tending their flocks on the hills, 
does not appear. 

3 As to the adventures of Ulysses and his comrades among 
the Laestrygones, see Homer, Od. x. 80-132; Hyginus, Fab. 
125; Ovid, Metamorph. xiv. 233-244. 


285 


APOLLODORUS 


τοὺς κατοικοῦντας ἔπεμψέ τινας πευσομένους. 
τούτοις δὲ ἡ τοῦ βασιλέως θυγάτηρ συντυγχάνει 

13 καὶ αὐτοὺς “ἄγει πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. ὁ δὲ ἕνα μὲν 
αὐτῶν ἁρπάσας ἀναλίσκει, τοὺς δὲ λοιποὺς ἐδίωκε 
φεύγοντας κεκραγὼς καὶ ovyKahav τοὺς ἄλλους 
Λαιστρυγόνας. οἱ δὲ ἦλθον ἐπὶ τὴν θάλασσαν 
καὶ βάλλοντες πέτροις τὰ μὲν σκάφη κατέαξαν, 
αὐτοὺς δὲ ᾿ἐβίβρωσκον. ᾽Οδυσσεὺς δὲ κόψας τὸ 
πεῖσμα τῆς νεὼς ἀνήχθη, αἱ δὲ λοιπαὶ σὺν τοῖς 
πλέουσιν ἀπώλοντο. 

14 Μίαν δὲ “ἔχων ναῦν Aiain νήσῳ προσίσχει. 
ταύτην κατῴκει Κίρκη, θυγάτηρ Ἡλίου καὶ Πέρ- 
σης, Αἰήτου δὲ ἀδελφή, πάντων ἔμπειρος οὖσα 
φαρμάκων. διελὼν! τοὺς ἑταίρους αὐτὸς μὲν 
κλήρῳ μένει παρὰ τῇ νηΐ, Εὐρύλοχος δὲ πορεύεται 
μεθ᾽ ἑταίρων 3 εἰκοσιδύο τὸν ἀριθμὸν πρὸς Κίρκην. 

15 καλούσης δὲ αὐτῆς χωρὶς , Εὐρυλόχου πάντες 
εἰσίασιν. ἡ δ᾽ ἑκάστῳ κυκεῶνα πλήσασα τυροῦ 
καὶ μέλιτος καὶ ἀλφίτων καὶ οἴνου δίδωσι, μίξασα 
φαρμάκῳ. πιόντων δὲ αὐτῶν, ἐφαπτομένη ῥάβδῳ 
τὰς μορφὰς ἠλλοίου, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἐποίει λύκους, 
τοὺς δὲ σῦς, τοὺς δὲ ὄνους, τοὺς δὲ λέοντας. 

16 Εὐρύλοχος δὲ ἰδὼν ταῦτα ᾿Οδυσσεῖ ἀπαγγέλλει. 


᾿ Wagner conjectures διελὼν <5¢>, which would be better. 
2 ἑταίρων Kerameus: ἑτέρων 8. 


1 As to the adventures of Ulysses and his comrades with 
the enchantress Circe, see Homer, Od. x. 133-574 ; Hyginus, 
Fab. 125; Ovid, Metamorph. xiv. 246-440. The word (φάρ- 
axa) here translated ‘‘enchantments” means primarily 
drugs; but in the early stages of medicine drugs were sup- 
posed to be endowed with magical potency, partly in virtue 
of the spells, that is, the form of words, with which the 


286 


EPITOME, vu. 12-16 


inhabitants, Ulysses sent some men to inquire. But 
the king’s daughter met them and led them to her 
father. And he snatched up one of them and de- 
voured him; but the rest fled, and he pursued them, 
shouting and calling together the rest of the Laestry- 
gones. They came to the sea, and by throwing stones 
they broke the vessels and ate the men. Ulysses cut 
the cable of his ship and put to sea; but the rest ot 
the ships perished with their crews. Ὁ 

With one ship he put in to the Aeaean isle. It was 
inhabited by Circe, a daughter of the Sun and of 
Perse, and a sister of Aeetes; skilled in all enchant- 
ments was she.! Having divided his comrades, 
Ulysses himself abode by the ship, in accordance 
with the lot, but Eurylochus with two and twenty 
comrades repaired to Circe. At her call they all 
entered except Eurylochus; and to each she gave a 
tankard she had filled with cheese and honey and 
barley meal and wine, and mixed with an enchant- 
ment. And when they had drunk, she touched them 
with a wand and changed their shapes, and some she 
made wolves, and some swine, and some asses, and 
some lions.2. But Eurylochus saw these things and 


medical practitioner administered them to the patient. Hence 
druggist and enchanter were nearly synonymous terms. As 
Circe used her knowledge of drugs purely for magical pur- 
poses, without any regard to the medical side of the profession, 
it seems better to translate her φάρμακα by ‘‘ enchantments ” 
or ‘“‘charms” rather than ‘‘ drugs,” and to call her an en- 
chantress instead of a druggist. 

2 In Homer (Od. x. 237 sqq.) the companions of Ulysses are 
turned into swine only; nothing is said about a transforma- 
tion of them into wolves, lions, and asses, though round about 
the house of the enchantress they saw wolves and lions, which 
stood on their hind legs, wagged their tails, and fawned upon 
them, because they were men enchanted (Od. x. 210-219). 


287 


APOLLODORUS 


ὁ δὲ λαβὼν μῶλυ παρὰ Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς Κίρκην 
ἔρχονται; καὶ βαλὼν εἰς τὰ φάρμακα τὸ μῶλυ 
μόνος πιὼν οὐ φαρμάσσεται' σπασάμενος δὲ τὸ 

/ > a ς \ \ > \ 
ξίφος ἤθελε! Κίρκην ἀποκτεῖναι. ἡ δὲ τὴν ὀργὴν 
παύσασα τοὺς ἑταίρους ἀποκαθίστησι. καὶ λαβὼν 
ὅρκους ᾿Οδυσσεὺς παρ᾽ αὐτῆς μηδὲν ἀδικηθῆναι 
συνευνάζεται, καὶ γίνεται αὐτῷ παῖς Τηλέγονος. 
? \ \ , >? cal 7 2 \ > / 

17 ἐνιαυτὸν δὲ μείνας ἐκεῖ, mEVTAaS” τὸν ᾿Ωκεανόν, 
σφάγια ταῖς ψυχαῖς ποιησάμενος μαντεύεται 
παρὰ Τειρεσίου, Κίρκης ὑποθεμένης, καὶ θεωρεῖ 
τάς τε τῶν ἡρώων ψυχὰς καὶ " τῶν ἡρωΐδων. 
βλέπει δὲ καὶ τὴν μητέρα ᾿Αντίκλειαν καὶ ᾿Ελπή- 
vopa, ὃς ἐν τοῖς Κίρκης πεσὼν ἐτελεύτησε. 

/ \ As ’ e » » 

18 Παραγενόμενος δὲ πρὸς Κίρκην ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνης 
προπεμφθεὶς ἀνήχθη, καὶ τὴν νῆσον παρέπλει 

1 ἤθελε Biicheler: ἦλθε S. 

2 Perhaps we should read πλεύσας <eis> τὸν ᾿Ὥκεανόν. 

3 Wagner conjectured - καὶ -- σφάγια. 


4 Perhaps we should read καὶ τὰς. 
5 παρέπλει Wagner: παραπλέει 8, 


1 As to moly, see Homer, Od. x. 302-306. Homer says 
that it was a plant dug up from the earth, with a black root 
and a white flower. According to Theophrastus (Hist. Plant. 
ix. 15. 7), moly resembled Allium nigrum, which was found 
in the valley of Pheneus and on Mount Cyllene in northern 
Arcadia ; he says it had a round root, like an onion, and a 
leaf like a squill, and that it was used as an antidote to spells 
and enchantments. But probably the moly of Homer grew 
on no earthly hill or valley, but only in ‘‘ fairyland forlorn.” 

2 Telegonus is unknown to Homer, who mentions no off- 
spring of Ulysses by the enchantress Circe. He is named 
as a son of Ulysses and Circe by Hesiod in a line which is 
suspected, however, of being spurious (Z'heogony, 1014). He 
was recognized by Hagias in his epic, The Returns, and by 
another Cyclic poet Eugammon of Cyrene ; indeed Eugammon 
composed an epic called the Telegony on the adventures of 
Telegonus, but according to him Telegonus was a son of 


288 


EPITOME, vu. 16-18 


reported them to Ulysses. And Ulysses went to Circe 
with moly,! which he had received from Hermes, 
and throwing the moly among her enchantments, he 
drank and alone was not enchanted. Then drawing 
his sword, he would have killed her, but she appeased 
his wrath and restored his comrades. And when he 
had taken an oath of her that he should suffer no harm, 
Ulysses shared her bed, and a son, Telegonus, was 
born to him.? Having tarried a year there, he sailed 
the ocean, and offered sacrifices to the souls,? and by 
Circe’s advice consulted the soothsayer Tiresias,* and 
beheld the souls both of heroes and of heroines. He 
also looked on his mother Anticlia® and Elpenor, 
who had died of a fall in the house of Circe.® 

And having come to Circe he was sent on his way 
by her, and put to sea, and sailed past the isle of the 


Ulysses by Calypso, not by Circe. See Hpicorum Graecorum 
Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, pp. 56, 57 sqg.; Kustathius on 
Homer, Od. xvi. 118, p. 1796. According to Hyginus (fab. 
125), Ulysses had two sons, Nausithous and Telegonus, by 
Circe. As to Telegonus, see also below, Epitome, vii. 36 sq. 

3 The visit of Ulysses to the land of the dead is the theme 
of the eleventh book of the Odyssey. Compare Hyginus, 
Fab. 125, The visit was the subject of one of the two great 
pictures by Polygnotus at Delphi. See Pausanias, x. 28-31. 

4 As to the consultation with Tiresias, see Homer, Od. xi. 
90-151, 

5 As to the interview of Ulysses with his mother, see 
Homer, Od. xi. 153-224. 

ὁ In the hot air of Circe’s enchanted isle Elpenor had 
slept for coolness on the roof of the palace; then, sud- 
denly wakened by the noise and bustle of his comrades 
making ready to depart, he started up and, forgetting to 
descend by the ladder, tumbled from the roof and broke his 
neck. In his hurry to be off, Ulysses had not stayed to bury 
his dead comrade; so the soul of Elpenor, unwept and un- 
buried, was the first to meet his captain on the threshold of 
the spirit land. See Homer, Od. x. 552-560, xi. 51-83. 


289 
VOL, 11. U 


APOLLODORUS 


TOY Σειρήνων. αἱ δὲ Σειρῆνες ἦσαν Αχελῴου 
καὶ Μελπομένης μιᾶς τῶν Μουσῶν ,»θυγατέρες, 
Πεισινόη ᾿Αγλαύόπη Θελξιέπεια. τούτων ἡ μὲν 
ἐκιθάριζεν, ἡ δὲ ἦδεν, ἡ δὲ ηὔλει, καὶ διὰ τούτων 
19 ἔπειθον καταμένειν τοὺς παραπλέοντας. εἶχον δὲ 
ἀπὸ τῶν μηρῶν ὀρνίθων μορφάς. ταύτας παρα- 
πλέων Ὀδυσσεύς, τῆς δῆς βουλόμενος ὑ ὑπακοῦσαι, 
Κίρκης ὑποθεμένης τῶν μὲν ἑταίρων τὰ ὦτα ἔβυσε 
κηρῷ, ἑαυτὸν δὲ ἐκέλευσε προσδεθῆναι τῷ ἱστῷ. 
πειθόμενος δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν Σειρήνων καταμένειν ἠξίου 
λυθῆναι, οἱ δὲ μᾶλλον αὐτὸν ἐδέσμευον, καὶ οὕτω 


1 As to the return of Ulysses to the isle of Circe, and his sail- 
ing past the Sirens, see Homer, Od. xii. 1-200 ; Hyginus, Fab. 
125. Homer does not name the Sirens individually nor men- 
tion their parentage, but by using the dual in reference to them 
(verses 52, 167) he indicates that they were two in number, 
Sophocles, in his play Ulysses, called the Sirens daughters of 
Phoreus, and agreed with Homer in recognizing only two of 
them. See Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. ix. 14.6; The Frag- 
ments of Sophocles, ed. A. CO. Pearson, vol. iii. p. 66, frag. 
861. Apollonius Rhodius says that the Muse ‘Terpsichore 
bore the Sirens to Achelous (Argonaut. iy. 895 sq.). Hyginus 
names four of them, Teles, Raidne, Molpe, and Thelxiope 
(Fabulae, praefat. p. 30, ed. Bunte), and, in agreement with 
Apollodorus, says that they were the offspring of Achelous 
by the Muse Melpomene. Tzetzes calls them Parthenope, 
Leucosia, and Ligia, but adds that other people named them 
Pisinoe, Aglaope, and Thelxiepia, and that they were the 
children of Achelous and Terpsichore. With regard to the 
parts which they took in the bewitching concert, he agrees 
with Apollodorus. See Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 712. 
According to a Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius (Argonaut. 
iv. 892), their names were Thelxiope, or Thelxione, Molpe, 
and Aglaophonus. As jto their names and parents see also 
Eustathius on Homer, Od. xii. p. 1709, Scholiast on Homer, 
Od. xii. 39, who mention the view that the father of the 
Sirens was Achelous, and that their mother was either the 
Muse Terpsichore, or Sterope, daughter of Porthaon. 


290 


EPITOME, vu. 18-19 


Sirens.1_ Now the Sirens were Pisinoe, Aglaope, and 
Thelxiepia, daughters of Achelous and Melpomene, 
one of the Muses. One of them played the lyre, 
another sang, and another played the flute, and by 
these means they were fain to persuade passing 
mariners to linger; and from the thighs they had the 
forms of birds.2 Sailing by them, Ulysses wished 
to hear their song, so by Circe’s advice he stopped 
the ears of his comrades with wax, and ordered that 
he should himself be bound to the mast. And being 
persuaded by the Sirens to linger, he begged to be 
released, but they bound him the more, and so he 


* Similarly Apollonius Rhodius (Argon. iv. 898 sq.) 
describes the Sirens as partly virgins and partly birds. 
Aelian tells us (De natura animalium, xvii. 23) that poets 
and painters represented them as winged maidens with the 
feet of birds. Ovid says that the Sirens had the feet and 
feathers of birds, but the faces of virgins; and he asks why 
these daughters of Achelous, as he calls them, had this hybrid 
form. Perhaps, he thinks, it was because they had been 
playing with Persephone when gloomy Dis carried her off, 
and they had begged the gods to grant them wings, that they 
might search for their lost playmate over seas as well as land. 
See Ovid, Metamorph. v. 552-562. In like manner Hyginus 
describes the Sirens as women above and fowls below, but he 
says that their wings and feathers were a punishment in- 
flicted on them by Demeter for not rescuing Persephone from 
the clutches of Pluto. See Hyginus, Fab. 125,141. Another 
‘story was that they were maidens whom Aphrodite turned 
into birds because they chose to remain unmarried. See 
Eustathius, on Homer, Od. xii. 47, p. 1709. It is said that 
they once vied with the Muses in singing, and that the Muses, 
being victorious, plucked off the Siren’s feathers and made 
crowns out of them for themselves (Pausanias, ix. 34. 3). 
In ancient art, as in literature, the Sirens are commonly re- 
presented as women above and birds below. See Miss J. E. 
Harrison, Myths of the Odyssey (London, 1882), pp. 146 sqq. 
Homer says nothing as to the semi-bird shape of the Sirens, 
thus leaving us to infer that they were purely human. 


201 
ὌΠ 


APOLLODORUS 


παρέπλει. ἣν δὲ αὐταῖς 1 Σειρῆσι λόγιον τελευ- 
τῆσαι νεὼς “ παρελθούσης. αἱ μὲν οὖν ἐτελεύτων. 
20 Μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο παραγίνεται ἐπὶ δισσὰς ὁδούς. 
ἔνθεν μὲν ἦσαν αἱ Ἰ]λαγκταὶ πέτραι, ἔνθεν δὲ 
ὑπερμεγέθεις σκόπελοι δύο. ἣν δὲ ἐν μὲν θατέρῳ 
Σκύλλα, Κραταιίδος θυγάτηρ, καὶ t Τριήνου 3 ἢ 
Φόρκου, πρόσωπον ἔχουσα καὶ στέρνα γυναικός, 
ἐκ λαγόνων δὲ κεφαλὰς ἕξ καὶ δώδεκα πόδας 
2] κυνῶν. ἐν δὲ θατέρῳ [τῷ σκοπέλῳ] ἡ ἣν Χάρυβδις, 
i) τῆς ἡμέρας τρὶς ἀνασπῶσα“ τὸ ὕδωρ πάλιν 
ἀνίει. ὑποθεμένης δὲ Κίρκης, τὸν μὲν παρὰ τὰς 
Πλαγκτὰς πλοῦν ἐφυλάξατο, παρὰ δὲ τὸν τῆς 
Σκύλλης σκόπελον «πλέων! ὅ ἐπὶ τῆς π ύμνης 
ἔστη καθωπλισμένος. ἐπιφανεῖσα δὲ ἡ Σκύλλα 


1 αὐταῖς ὃ. Wagner conjectures αὖ ταῖς. 

2 νεὼς Wagner: νηὸς S. 

3 Tpiqnvov δ: Tupphvov Scholiast on Plato, Republic, ix. 
p- 588 c. Biicheler conjectured Τριαίου or Τυφῶνος (compare 
Hyginus, Fab., p. 31, ed. Bunte): Wagner proposed τρί- 
Ttwvos, comparing Eustathius on Homer, Od. xii. 85, p. 1714. 

4 τρὶς ἀνασπῶσα Wagner: τρίτον σπῶσα δ: τρὶς σπῶσα 
Kerameus. 

5 σκόπελον <mA€wy> ἐπὶ Wagner (conjecture): σκόπελον 


ἐπὶ S. 


1 This is not mentioned by Homer, but is affirmed by 
Hyginus (fab. 125, 141). Others said that the Sirens cast 
themselves into the sea and were drowned from sheer vexa- 
tion at the escape of Ulysses. See Scholiast on Homer, Od. 
xii. 39; Eustathius on Homer, Od, xii. 167, p.1709 ; Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 712 ; compare Strabo, vi. 1. 1, p. 252. 

2 As to Ulysses and the Wandering Rocks, see Homer, 
Od. xii. 52-72, 201-221. The poet mentions (verses 70-72) 
the former passage of the Argo between the Wandering or 
Clashing Rocks, as to which see above i. 9. 22, with the 
note. It has bs bpd. in the story of the 
Wandering aged reminiscence of some 


292 


EPITOME, vu. 19-21 


sailed past. Now it was predicted of the Sirens that 
they should themselves die when a ship should pass 
them ; so die they did. 

And after that he came to two ways. On the one 
side were the Wandering Rocks,? and on the other 
side two huge cliffs, and in one of them was Scylla,? 
a daughter of Crataeis and Trienus or Phorcus,* with 
the face and breast of a woman, but from the flanks 
she had six heads and twelve feet of dogs. And in 
the other cliff was Charybdis, who thrice a day drew up 
the water and spouted it again. By the advice of Circe 
he shunned the passage by the Wandering Rocks, 
_and in sailing past the cliff of Scylla he stood fully 

armed on the poop. But Scylla appeared, snatched 


sailor’s story of floating icebergs. See Merry, on Homer, 
Od. xii. 61. 

3 As to the passage of Ulysses between Scylla and 
Charybdis, see Homer, Od. xii. 73-126, 222-259; Hyginus, 
Fab. 125, 199. 

4 Homer mentions Crataeis as the mother of Scylla, but 
says nothing as to her father (Od. xii. 124 sq.). According 
to Stesichorus, the mother of Scylla was Lamia. See Scho- 
liast on Homer, Od. xii. 124; Eustathius, on Homer, Od. xii. 
85, p. 1714. Apollonius Rhodius represents Scylla as a 
daughter of Phorcus by the night-wandering hag Hecate 
(Argonaut. iv. 828 sq.), and this parentage had the support 
of Acusilaus, except that he named her father Phorcys 
instead of Phorcus (Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. 
iv. 828; compare Eustathius, l.c.). Hyginus calls her a 
daughter of Typhon and Echidna (Fab. 125, 151, and praefat. 
p. 31], ed. Bunte). A Scholiast on Plato (Repub. ix. p. 588 c), 
who may have copied the present passage of Apollodorus, calls 
Seylla a daughter of Crataeis and Tyrrhenus or Phorcus, 
adding that she had the face and breasts of a woman, but 
from the flanks six heads of dogs and twelve feet. Some said 
that the father of Scylla was Triton (Eustathius, 1.6.) ; and 
perhaps thename Triton should be read instead of Trienus 
in the present passage of Apollodorus. See the Critical Note. 


293 


APOLLODORUS 


ἕξ ἑταίρους ἁρπάσασα τούτους κατεβίβρωσκεν. 

22 ἐκεῖθεν δὲ ἐχθὼν εἰς Θρινακίαν νῆσον οὗσαν 
Ἡλίου, ἔνθα βόες ἐβόσκοντο, καὶ ἀπλοίᾳ κατα- 
σχεθεὶς ἔμεινεν αὐτοῦ. τῶν δὲ ἑταίρων σφαξάν- 
των ἐκ τῶν βοῶν καὶ θοινησαμένων, λειφθέντων 
τροφῆς, “ἡ Ἥλιος ἐμήνυσε Διί. καὶ ἀναχθέντα 

23 κεραυνῷ ἔβαλε. λυθείσης δὲ τῆς νεὼς ᾽Οδυσσεὺς 
τὸν ἱστὸν κατασχὼν παραγίνεται εἰς τὴν Χάρυβ- 
διν. τῆς δὲ Χαρύβδεως καταπινούσης τὸν ἱστόν, 
ἐπιλαβόμενος ὑπερπεφυκότος" ἐρινεοῦ περιέμεινε. 
καὶ πάλιν ἀνεθέντα τὸν ἱστὸν θεωρήσας, ἐπὶ τοῦ- 
τον ῥίψας εἰς ᾿Ωγυγίαν νῆσον διεκομίσθη. 

94 «(Exel δὲ ἀποδέχεται Καλυψὼ θυγάτηρ "Ατ- 
λαντος, καὶ συνευνασθεῖσα γεννᾷ παῖδα Λατῖνον. 
μένει δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτῇ πενταετίαν, καὶ σχεδίαν 
ποιήσας ἀποπλεῖ. ταύτης δὲ ἐν τῷ πελάγει δια- 
λυθείσης ὀργῇ Ποσειδῶνος, γυμνὸς πρὸς Φαίακας 

25 éxBpaocerat. Ναυσικάα δέ, ἡ τοῦ βασιλέως 
θυγάτηρ. ᾿Αλκινόου, πλύνουσα τὴν ἐσθῆτα ἱ ἱκετεύ- 
σαντα αὐτὸν ἄγει πρὸς ᾿Αλκίνοον, ὃς αὐτὸν ξενίξζει 


1 χειφθέντων Kerameus : ληφθέντων 8. 
2 ἐμήνυσε Kerameus: ἐμήνισε ὃ. 
3 ὑπερπεφυκότος Kerameus: ὑπερφυκότος S. 


1 As to the adventures of Ulysses in Thrinacia, the island 
of the Sun, see Homer, Od. xii. 127-141, 260—402. 

2 See Homer, Od. xii. 403-425. 

3 See Homer, Od. xii. 426-450, compare v. 128-135. 

4 As to the stay of Ulysses with Calypso in the island of 
Ogygia, and his departure in a boat of his own building, see 
Homer, Od. v. 13-281, vii. 243-266; Hyginus, Fab. 195. 
According to Homer (Od. vii. 259), Ulysses stayed seven years 
with Calypso, not five years, as Apollodorus says. Hyginus 
limits the stay to one year. Homer does not mention that 


294 


EPITOME, vu. 21-25 


six of his comrades, and gobbled them up. And 
thence he came to Thrinacia, an island of the Sun, 
where kine were grazing, and being windbound, he 
tarried there.! But when his comrades slaughtered 
some of the kine and banqueted on them, for lack 
of food, the Sun reported it to Zeus, and when 
Ulysses put out to sea, Zeus struck him with a 
thunderbolt.2, And when the ship broke up, Ulysses 
clung to the mast and drifted to Charybdis. And 
when Charybdis sucked down the mast, he clutched 
an overhanging wild fig-tree and waited, and when 
he saw the mast shot up again, he cast himself on it, 
and was carried across to the island of Ogygia.° 
There Calypso, daughter of Atlas, received him, 
and bedding with him bore a son Latinus. He stayed 
with her five years, and then made a raft and sailed 
away. But on the high sea the raft was broken in 
pieces by the wrath of Poseidon, and Ulysses was 
washed up naked on the shore of the Phaeacians.® 
Now Nausicaa, the daughter of king Alcinous, was 
washing the clothes, and when Ulysses implored 
her protection, she brought him to Alcinous, who 
entertained him, and ‘after bestowing gifts on him 


Calypso bore a son to Ulysses. In the Theogony of Hesiod 
(verses 1111 sqq.) it is said that Circe (not Calypso), bore two 
sons, Agrius and Latinus, to Ulysses; the verses, however, 
are probably not by Hesiod but have been interpolated by a 
later poet of the Roman era in order to provide the Latins 
with a distinguished Greek ancestry. The verses are quoted 
by the Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argonaut. iii. 200. 
Compare Joannes Lydus, De mensibus, i. 13, p. 7, ed. Bekker. 
Eustathius says (on Homer, Od. xvi. 118, p. 1796) that, 
according to Hesiod, Ulysses had two sons, Agrius and 
Latinus, by Circe, and two sons, Nausithous and Nausinous, 
by Calypso. 
5 See Homer, Od. v. 282-493; Hyginus Fab. 125. 


295 


APOLLODORUS > 


και δῶρα δοὺς μετὰ πομπῆς αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα 
ἐξέπεμψε. Ποσειδῶν δὲ Φαίαξι μηνίσας τὴν μὲν 
ναῦν ἀπελίθωσε, τὴν δὲ πόλιν ὄρει περικαλύπτει. 
26 ᾿Οδυσσεὺς δὲ παραγενόμενος εἰς τὴν πατρίδα 
εὑρίσκει τὸν οἶκον διεφθαρμένον" ᾿ νομίσαντες γὰρ 
αὐτὸν τεθνάναι ἸΠηνελόπην ἐμνῶντο ἐκ Δουλιχίου 
27 μὲν νζ΄. ᾿Αμφίνομος Θόας Δημοπτόλεμος ᾿Αμφί- 
μαχος Εὐρύαλος, ἸΤάραλος Evnvopidns ΚΚλυτίος 
᾿Αγήνωρ Ἰὐὐρύπυλος, Πυλαιμένης * ᾿Ακάμας Θερ- 
σίλοχος ἽΑγιος Κλύμενος, Φιλόδημος Μενε- 
πτόλεμος Δαμάστωρ Βίας Τέλμιος, ΠΠολύιδος 
᾿Αστύλοχος Σχεδίος ᾿Αντίγονος 3 Μάρψιος, Ἴφι- 
δάμας ᾿Αργεῖος Γλαῦκος Καλυδωνεὺς ᾿Εχίων, 
Λάμας ᾿Ανδραίμων ᾿Αγέρωχος Μέδων Λγριος, 
ἹΙρόμος Κτήσιος ᾿Ακαρνάν Κύκνος Ψηρᾶς, “EXXa- 
νικος Περίφρων Μεγασθένης Θρασυμήδης Ὀρμέ- 
vios, Διοπίθης Μηκιστεὺς ᾿Αντίμαχος Πτολεμαῖος 
28 Λεστορίδης, Νικόμαχος Πολυποίτης Κεραός. ἐκ 
δὲ Σάμης κγ΄ ᾿Αγέλαος Πείσανδρος “EXatos 
Κτήσιππος ᾿ἽἹππόδοχος, ᾿ὐρύστρατος ᾿Αρχέμολος " 
Ἴθακος ἸΠεισήνωρ Ὑ περήνωρ, Φεροίτης ὃ ᾽Αντι- 
σθένης Κέρβερος Περιμήδης Kiovvos, Θρίασος 
᾿Ετεωνεὺς Κλυτίος ΠΠρόθοος Λύκαιθος, Ἐὔμηλος 
29"Iravos’ Λύαμμος. ἐκ δὲ Ζακύνθου μδ΄. Εὐρύ- 
1 Πυλαιμένης Kerameus ; Παλαιμένης 8, 
2 ᾿Αντίγονος Kerameus: ᾿Ανήγονος 8. 
3 Kerameus conjectured Νεστορίδης : Wagner Θεστορίδης. 
4 Kerameus conjectured ᾿Αρχέμορος or ᾿Αρχέμαχος. 
5 Kerameus conjectured Φιλοίτιος. 
6 Λύκαιθος Kerameus: Λυκάεθος 8. 
τ. Biicheler conjectured "Irauos. 
1 See Homer, Od. vi., vii., viii., xii. 1-124; Hyginus, 
Fab, 125. 
* See Homer, Od. xii, 125-187. ‘‘ Poseidon does not pro- 


296 


EPITOME, vir. 25-29 


sent him away with a convoy to his native land.4 
But Poseidon was wroth with the Phaeacians, and 
he turned the ship to stone and enveloped the city 
with a mountain.? 

And on arriving in his native land Ulysses found 
his substance wasted ; for, believing that he was dead, 
suitors were wooing Penelope.? From Dulichium 
came fifty-seven:—Amphinomus, Thoas, Demopto- 
lemus, Amphimachus, Euryalus, Paralus, Evenorides, 
Clytius, Agenor, Eurypylus, Pylaemenes, Acamas, 
Thersilochus, Hagius, Clymenus, Philodemus, Me- 
neptolemus, Damastor, Bias, Telmius, Polyidus, Asty- 
lochus, Schedius, Antigonus, Marpsius, Iphidamas, 
Argius, Glaucus, Calydoneus, Echion, Lamas, An- 
draemon, Agerochus, Medon, Agrius, Promus, Ctesius, 
Acarnan, Cyenus, Pseras, Hellanicus, Periphron, 
Megasthenes, Thrasymedes, Ormenius, Diopithes, 
Mecisteus, Antimachus, Ptolemaeus, Lestorides, Ni- 
comachus, Polypoetes, and Ceraus. And from Same 
there came twenty-three :—Agelaus, Pisander, Elatus, 
Ctesippus, Hippodochus, Eurystratus, Archemolus, 
Ithacus, Pisenor, Hyperenor, Pheroetes, Antisthenes, 
Cerberus, Perimedes, Cynnus, Thriasus, Eteoneus, 
Clytius, Prothous, lLycaethus, Eumelus, Itanus, 
Lyammus. And from Zacynthos came forty-four :— 


pose to bury the city, but to shut it off from the use of its 
two harbours (cp. Od. vi. 263) by some great mountain mass ” 
(Merry, on verse 152). 

3. The number of the suitors, according to Homer, was one 
hundred and eight, namely, fifty-two from Dulichium, twenty- 
four from Same, twenty from Zacynthus, and twelve from 
Ithaca. See Homer, Od. xvi. 245-253. Apollodorus gives 
the numbers from these islands as fifty-seven, twenty-three, 
forty-four, and twelve respectively, or a hundred and thirty- 
six in all. Homer does not give a regular list of the names, 
but mentions some of them incidentally. 


297 


APOLLODORUS |» 


λοχος Λαομήδης Μόλεβος] Φρένιος Ἴνδιος, Μίνις 3 
Λειώκριτος ὅ Ἰ]ρόνομος Νίσας Δαήμων, ᾿Αρχέ- 
στρατος * Ἱππόϊμαχος Εὐρύαλος Περίαλλος 
Evnvopidns, ἸΚλυτίος ᾿Αγήνωρ] Πόλυβος ἸΠολύ- 
δωρος Oadvtios,? Στράτιος [ Φρένιος Ἴνδιος | 
Δαισήνωρ Λαομέδων, Λαόδικος “AXtos Μάγνης 
᾿Ολοίτροχος ὃ Βάρθας, Θεόφρων Νισσαῖος ᾿Αλκά- 
po Περικλύμενος ᾿Αντήνωρ, Πέλλας Κέλτος 

30 Περίφας᾽ ‘Oppevos Πόλυβος, ᾿Ανδρομήδης. ἐκ δὲ 
αὐτῆς ᾿Ιθάκης ἦσαν οἱ μνηστευόμενοι ιβ' οἵδε" 
᾿Αντίνοος Πρόνοος Λειώδης Evdipuvopos ᾿Αμφί- 
μαχος, ᾿Αμφίαλος Πρόμαχος ᾿Αμφιμέδων ᾿Αρί- 
στρατος “ἔλενος, Δουλεχιεὺς Κτήσιππος. 

81 Οὗτοι πορευόμενοι εἰς τὰ βασίλεια δαπανῶντες 
τὰς ᾽Οδυσσέως ἀγέλας εὐωχοῦντο. IInvedorn δὲ 
ἀνωγκαζομένη τὸν γάμον ὑπέσχετο ὅτε τὸ ἐντάφιον 
Λαέρτῃ πέρας ἕξει, καὶ τοῦτο ὕφηνεν ἐπὶ ἔτη τρία, 
μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν μὲν ὑφαίνουσα, νύκτωρ δὲ ἀναλύουσα. 
τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἐξηπατῶντο οἱ μνηστῆρες ὑπὸ 

32 τῆς Πηνελόπης, μέχρις ὅτε ἐφωράθη. ᾽Οδυσσεὺς 
δὲ μαθὼν τὰ κατὰ τὴν οἰκίαν, ὡς ἐπαίτης πρὸς 
Evpatov οἰκέτην ἀφικνεῖται, καὶ Τηλεμάχῳ ἀνα- 
γνωρίζεται, καὶ παραγίνεται els τὴν πόλιν. Με- 
λάνθιος δὲ αὐτοῖς συντυχὼν ὁ αἰπόλος οἰκέτης 
ὑπάρχων ἀτιμάζει. παραγενόμενος δὲ εἰς τὰ 
βασίλεια τοὺς μνηστῆρας μετήτει τροφήν, καὶ 


' Biicheler conjectured Μούλιος. 

> Kerameus conjectured Μύνης. 

3 Λειώκριτος Wagner (comparing Homer, Od. ii. 242): 
Λαόκριτος S. 

4 ᾿Αρχέστρατος Kerameus: ᾿Αρχέστατος 8. 

5 Biicheler conjectured Θαλύτιος. 

ὃ ’Orolrpoxos Biicheler: Ὀλοίροχος 8. 


298 


EPITOME, vu. 29-32 


Eurylochus, Laomedes, Molebus, Phrenius, Indius, 
Minis, Liocritus, Pronomus, Nisas, Daémon, Ar- 
chestratus, Hippomachus, Euryalus, Periallus, Eve- 
norides, Clytius, Agenor, Polybus, Polydorus, 
Thadytius, Stratius, Phrenius, Indius, Daesenor, 
Laomedon, Laodicus, Halius, Magnes, Oloetrochus, 
Barthas, Theophron, Nissaeus, Alcarops, Pericly- 
menus, Antenor, Pellas, Celtus, Periphus, Ormenus, 
Polybus and Andromedes. And from Ithaca itself 
the suitors were twelve, to wit :—Antinous, Pronous, 
Liodes, Eurynomus, Amphimachus, Amphialus, Pro- 
machus, Amphimedon, Aristratus, Helenus, Dulicheus, 
and Ctesippus. 

These, journeying to the palace, consumed the 
herds of Ulysses at their feasts.1_ And Penelope was 
compelled to promise that she would wed when the 
shroud of Laertes was finished, and she wove it for 
three years, weaving it by day and undoing it by 
night. In this way the suitors were deceived by 
Penelope, till she was detected.?, And Ulysses, being 
apprized of the state of things at home, came to his 
servant Eumaeus in the guise of a beggar,? and made 
himself known to Telemachus,* and arrived in the 
city. And Melanthius, the goatherd, a servant man, 
met them, and scorned them.® On coming to the 
palace Ulysses begged food of the suitors,® and 


1 As to the reckless waste of the suitors, see Homer, Od. 
xiv. 80-109. 

2 As to Penelope’s web, see Homer, Od. xix. 136-158; 
Hyginus, Fab. 126. 

* As to the meeting of Ulysses and Kumaeus, see Homer, 
Od. xiv. 1-492; Hyginus, Fab. 126. 

4 As to the meeting and recognition of Ulysses and Tele- 
machus, see Homer, Od. xvi. 1-234. 

5 See Homer, Od. xvii. 184-253. 

6 See Homer, Od. xvii. 360-457. 


299 


APOLLODORUS 


εὑρὼν μεταίτην Ἶ Tpov καλούμενον διαπαλαίει αὐτῷ. 
Εὐμαίῳ δὲ μηνύσας ἑαυτὸν καὶ Φιλοιτίῳ,; μετὰ 
τούτων 5 καὶ Τηλεμάχου τοῖς μνηστῆρσιν ἐπιβου- 

38 λεύει. Πηνελόπη. δὲ τοῖς μνηστῆρσι τίθησιν 
Ὀδυσσέως τόξον, ὃ ὃ παρὰ ᾿Ιφίτου ποτὲ ἔλαβε, καὶ 
τῷ τοῦτο τείναντί φησι συνοικήσειν. μηδενὸς δὲ 
τεῖναι δυναμένου, δεξάμενος ᾽Οδυσσεὺς τοὺς μνη- 
στῆρας κατετόξευσε σὺν Βὐμαίῳ καὶ Φιλοιτίῳ 
καὶ Τηλεμάχῳ. ἀνεῖλε δὲ καὶ Μελάνθιον καὶ τὰς 
συνευναζομένας τοῖς μνηστῆρσι θεραπαίνας, καὶ 
τῇ γυναικὶ καὶ τῷ πατρὶ ἀναγνωρίξεται. 

84 Θύσας δὲ "Ὧἕϑ ‘Ady Kal Περσεφόνῃ καὶ Τειρεσίᾳ, 
πεζῇ διὰ τῆς Ἠπείρου βαδίξων εἰς Θεσπρωτοὺς 
παραγίνεται καὶ κατὰ τὰς Τειρεσίου μαντείας 
θυσιάσας ἐξιλάσκεται Ἰ]οσειδῶνα. ἡ δὲ βασιλεύ- 


1 καὶ Φιλοιτίῳ Kerameus: καὶ τῷ παιδὶ Φιλοιτίου Ὁ. 

3 τούτων Frazer: τούτου ὃ. Kumaeus ἃ5 well as Philoetius 
was privy to the plot, as we know from Homer (Od. xxi. 
188-244) and as Apollodorus himself recognizes a few lines 
below. 


τ See Homer, Od. xviii. 1-107; Hyginus, Fab. 126. In 
Homer it is ina boxing-match, not in a wrestling-bout, that 
Ulysses vanquishes the “braggart beggar Irus. Hyginus, like 
Apollodorus, substitutes wrestling for boxing. 

2 See Homer, Od. xxi. 188-244. 

3 See Homer, Od. xxi. 1-82; Hyginus, Fab. 126. 

4 See Homer, Od. xxi. 140-434, xxii. 1-389; Hyginus, 
Fab. 126. 

δ See Homer, Od. xxii. 417-477. 

6 See Homer, Od. xxiii. 153-297, xxiv. 205-348. 

7 Tiresias had warned Ulysses that, after slaying the 
suitors, he must journey inland till he came to a country 
where men knew not the sea, and where a wayfarer would 
mistake for a winnowing-fan the oar which Tees was 
carrying on his shoulder. There Ulysses was to sacrifice a 
ram, a bull, and a boar to Poseidon, the god whom he had 


300 


EPITOME, vu. 32-34 


finding a beggar called Irus he wrestled with him. » 
But he revealed himself to Eumaeus and Philoetius, 
and along with them and Telemachus he laid a plot 
for the suitors.2, Now Penelope delivered to the 
suitors the bow of Ulysses, which he had once received 
from Iphitus; and she said that she would marry him 
who bent the bow.? When none of them could bend 
it, Ulysses took it and shot down the suitors, with 
the help of Eumaeus, Philoetius, and Telemachus.* 
He killed also Melanthius, and the handmaids that 
bedded with the suitors,® and he made himself known 
to his wife and his father.® 

And after sacrificing to Hades, and Persephone, 
and Tiresias, he journeyed on foot through Epirus, 
and came to the Thesprotians, and having offered 
sacrifice according to the directions of the soothsayer 
Tiresias, he propitiated Poseidon.’ But Callidice, 


offended. See Homer, Od. xi. 119-131. But the journey 
itself and the sacrifice are not recorded by Homer. In a 
little island off Cos a Greek skipper told Dr. W. H. D. Rouse 
a similar story about the journey inland of the prophet Elias. 
The prophet, according to this account, was a fisherman who, 
long buffeted by storms, conceived a horror of the sea, and, 
putting an oar on his shoulder, took to the hills and walked 
till he met a man who did not know what an oar was. There 
the prophet planted his oar in the ground, and there he 
resolved to abide. That is why all the prophet’s chapels are 
on the tops of hills. This legend was published by Dr. Rouse 
in The Cambridge Review under the heading of ‘‘ A Greek 
skipper.” 

This and the remaining part of Apollodorus are probably 
drawn from the epic poem Z'elegony, a work by Eugammon of 
Cyrene, of which a short abstract by Proclus has been pre- 
served. See Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, 
pp. 57 sg. The author of the abstract informs us that after 
the death and burial of the suitors ‘‘ Ulysses sacrificed to 
the nymphs and sailed to Elis to inspect the herds. And 
he was entertained by Polyxenus and received a present of a 


_301 


APOLLODORUS | 


ουὐσα τότε Θεσπρωτῶν [ΚΚαλλιδίκη καταμένειν 
35 αὐτὸν ἠξίου τὴν. βασιλείαν αὐτῷ δοῦσα. καὶ 
συνελθοῦσα αὐτῷ γεννᾷ Πολυποίτην. γήμας δὲ 
Καλλιδίκην Θεσπρωτῶν ἐβασίλευσε καὶ μάχῃ τῶν 
περιοίκων νικᾷ τοὺς ἐπιστρατεύσαντας. Καλλι- 
δίκης δὲ ἀποθανούσης, τῷ παιδὶ τὴν βασιλείαν 
ἀποδιδοὺς εἰς ᾿Ιθάκην παραγίνεται, καὶ εὑρίσκει 
ἐκ Πηνελόπης Πολιπόρθην αὐτῷ “γεγεννημένον. 
80 Τηλέγονος δὲ παρὰ Κίρκης μαθὼν ὅ ὅτι παῖς Oévo- 
σέως ἐστίν, ἐπὶ τὴν τούτου ζήτησιν ἐκπλεῖ. παρα- 
γενόμενος δὲ εἰς ᾿Ιθάκην τὴν νῆσον ἀπελαύνει 3 
τινὰ τῶν βοσκημάτων, καὶ ᾽Οδυσσέα βοηθοῦντα 
τῷ μετὰ χεῖρας δόρατι Τηλέγονος «τρυγόνος: ὁ 
κέντρον τὴν αἰχμὴν ἔχοντι τιτρώσκει, καὶ Ὄδυσ- 
87 σεὺς θνήσκει. ἀναγνωρισάμενος δὲ αὐτὸν καὶ 


1 Biicheler conjectured διδοῦσα. 

Ξ γεγεννημένον Wagner (comparing Pausanias, vill. 12, 6): 
γεγενημένην S: γεγεννημένην Kerameus. 

3 ἀπελαύνει Biicheler: améAave 8. 

4 <rtpvyédvos> inserted by Biicheler. 


bowl. And after that followed the episodes of Trophonius, 
and Agamedes, and Augeas. Then he sailed home to 
Ithaca and offered the sacrifices prescribed by Tiresias. 
And after these things he went to the Thesprotians and 
married Callidice, queen of the Thesprotians. Then the 
Thesprotians made war on the Brygians, under the leadership 
of Ulysses. There Ares put Ulysses and his people to flight, 
and Athena engaged him in battle; but Apollo reconciled 
them. And after r Callidice’ s death, Polypoetes, son of Ulysses, 
succeeded to the kingdom, and Uly sses himself went to Ithaca. 
Meanwhile Telegonus, sailing in search of his father, landed 
in Ithaca and ravaged the island ; and marching out to repel 
him Ulysses was killed by his son in ignorance. Recognizing 
his error, Telegonus transported his father’s body, and Tele- 
machus, and Penelope to his mother, and she made them 


302 


EPITOME, vu. 34-37 


who was then queen of the Thesprotians, urged him 
to stay and offered him the kingdom; and she had 
by him a son Polypoetes. And having married Calli- 
dice, he reigned over the Thesprotians, and defeated 
in battle the neighbouring peoples who attacked him. 
But when Callidice died he handed over the kingdom 
to his son and repaired to Ithaca, and there he found 
Poliporthes, whom Penelope had borne to him.t_ When 
Telegonus learned from Circe that he was a son of 
Ulysses, he sailed in search of him. And having 
come to the island of Ithaca, he drove away some of 
the cattle, and when Ulysses defended them, Tele- 
gonus wounded him with the spear he had in his 
hands, which was barbed with the spine of a sting- 
ray, and Ulysses died of the wound.? But when 


immortal. And Telegonus married Penelope, and Telemachus 
married Circe.” The tradition, mentioned also by Hyginus 
(Fab. 127), that one son of Ulysses (Telegonus) married his 
father’s widow (Penelope), and that another son (Telemachus) 
married his father’s concubine (Circe), is very remarkable, 
and may possibly point to an old custom according to which 
a son inherited his father’s wives and concubines, with the 
exception of his own mother. Compare Apollodorus, ii. 7. 7, 
with the note (vol. i. p. 269). Apollodorus mentions the 
marriage of Telegonus to Penelope (see below), but not the 
marriage of Telemachus to Circe. 

1 Compare Pausanias, viil. 12. 6, from whom we learn that 
the birth of this son Poliporthes or Ptoliporthes, as Pausanias 
calls him, was mentioned in the epic poem Thesprotis. 

* Compare Oppian, Haliewt. ii. 497-500: Scholia Graeca 
in Homeri Odysseam, ed. G. Dindorf, vol. i. p. 6; Scholiast 
on Homer, Od. xi. 134; Eustathius on Homer, Od. xi. 133, 
p. 1676; Philostratus, Vit. Apollon. vi. 32; itd. Heroica, 
111. 42; Parthenius, Narrat. Amat. 3; Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 794; Scholiast on Aristophanes, Plutus, 303 ; 
Cicero, Tusculan. Disput. ii. 21. 48 sg. ; Horace, Odes, iii. 
29. 8; Hyginus, Fab. 127; Ovid, Ibis, 567 sq.; Dictys Cre- 
tensis, Bellwm Trojanum, vi. 14 sq.; Servius, on Virgil, Aen. 


393 


APOLLODORUS 


πολλὰ κατοδυράμενος, τὸν νεκρὸν <Kal>! τὴν 
Πηνελόπην πρὸς Κίρκην ἄγει, κἀκεῖ τὴν ]Πηνελό- 
mv γαμεῖ. Κίρκη δὲ ἑκατέρους αὐτοὺς εἰς Μακά- 
ρων νήσους ἀποστέλλει. 

88 Τινὲς δὲ Πηνελόπην ὑπὸ ᾿Αντινόου φθαρεῖσαν 

> 

λέγουσιν ὑπὸ Odvacéws πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ᾿Ικάριον 
ἀποσταλῆναι, γενομένην 5 δὲ τῆς ᾿Αρκαδίας κατὰ, 

39 Μαντίνειαν ἐξ ᾿ρμοῦ τεκεῖν lava: ἄλλοι δὲ δι᾽ 
᾽ ’ ς A pat t 4 > “8 a 
Αμφίνομον ὑπὸ ᾽Οδυσσέως αὐτοῦ 5 τελευτῆσαι" 
διαφθαρῆναι γὰρ αὐτὴν ὑπὸ τούτου λέγουσιν. 
> mem | \ Ξ / 5 4 ’ ͵ ς \ 

40 εἰσὶ δὲ οἱ λέγοντες ἐγκαλούμενον Οδυσσέα ὑπὸ 
τῶν οἰκείων ὑπὲρ “τῶν ἀπολωλότων δικαστὴν 


1 <xal> inserted by Wagner (comparing the Ζεἰεροπῖα ; 
see Hpicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, ed. G. Kinkel, p. 58). 

2 γενομένην Biicheler: γενομένης ὃ. 

3 αὐτοῦ Biicheler: αὐτὸν S. 


ii. 44. The fish (τρυγών), whose spine is said to have barbed the 
fatal spear, is the common sting-ray (T'rygon pastinaca), as I 
learn from Professor D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson, who in- 
forms me that the fish is abundant in the Mediterranean and 
not uncommon on our southern coasts. For ancient descrip- 
tions of the fish he refers me to Oppian, Halteut. ii. 470 sqq. 
(the locus classicus) ; Aelian, Nat. Anim. i. 56; Nicander, 
Ther. 828 sqq. According to Aelian, the wound inflicted by the 
sting-ray is incurable. Hercules is said to have lost one of his 
fingers by the bite of a sting-ray (Ptolemy Hephaest., Nov. Hist. 
ii. in Westermann’s Mythographi Graeci, p. 184). Classical 
scholars, following Liddell and Scott, sometimes erroneously 
identify the fish with the roach. The death of Ulysses through 
the wound of a sting-ray is foreshadowed in the prophecy of 
Tiresias that his death would come from the sea (Homer, 
Od, xi. 134 sq.). According to a Scholiast on Homer (Scholia 
Graeca in Homert Odysseam, ed. G. Dindorf, vol. i. p. 6), 
Hyginus, and Dictys Cretensis, Ulysses had been warned by 
an oracle or a dream to beware of his son, who would kill 
him ; accordingly, fearing to be slain by Telemachus, he 
banished him to Cephallenia (Dictys Cretensis, vi. 14). But 


304 


EPITOME, vit. 37-40 


Telegonus recognized him, he bitterly lamented, and 
conveyed the corpse and Penelope to Circe, and there 
he married Penelope. And Circe sent them both 
away to the Islands of the Blest. 

But some say that Penelope was seduced by An- 
tinous and sent away by Ulysses to her father Icarius, 
and that when she came to Mantinea in Arcadia she 
bore Pan to Hermes.! However others say that she 
met her end at the hands of Ulysses himself on 
account of Amphinomus,? for they allege that she 
was seduced by him. And there are some who say 
that Ulysses, being accused by the kinsfolk of 
the slain, submitted the case to the judgment of 


he forgot his son Telegonus, whom he had left behind with 
his mother Circe in her enchanted island. The death of 
Ulysses at the hands of his son Telegonus was the subject of 
a tragedy by Sophocles. See The Fragments of Sophocles, 
ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 105 sqq. 

1 A high mound of earth was shown as the grave of Pene- 
lope at Mantinea in Arcadia. According to the Mantinean 
story, Ulysses had found her unfaithful and banished her the 
house ; so she went first to her native Sparta, and afterwards 
to Mantinea, where she died and was buried. See Pausanias, 
viii. 12. 5sqg. The tradition that Penelope was the mother 
of Pan by Hermes (Mercury) is mentioned by Cicero (De 
natura deorum, iii. 22. 56). According to Duris, the Samian, 
Penelope was the mother of Pan by all the suitors (Tzetzes, 
Schol. on Lycophron, 772). The same story is mentioned also 
by Servius (on Virgil, Aen. ii. 44), who says that Penelope 
was supposed to have given birth to Pan during her husband’s 
absence, and that when Ulysses came home and found the 
monstrous infant in the house, he fled and set out afresh on 
his wanderings. 

2 Amphinomus was one of the suitors of Penelope; his 
words pleased her more than those of the other suitors, be- 
cause he had a good understanding. See Homer, Od. xvi. 
394-398. He was afterwards killed by Telemachus (Homer, 
Od. xxii. 89 sqq.). The suspicion that Penelope was unfaithful 
to her husband has no support in Homer, 

305 


VOL, II. x 


APOLLODORUS 


Νεοπτόλεμον λαβεῖν τὸν βασιλεύοντα τῶν κατὰ 
τὴν Ἤπειρον νήσων, τοῦτον δέ, νομίσαντα ἐκπο- 
δὼν ᾿Οδυσσέως γενομένου Κεφαλληνίαν καθέξειν, 
κατακρῖναι φυγὴν αὐτοῦ, ᾿Οδυσσέα δὲ εἰς Αἰτωλίαν 
πρὸς Θόαντα τὸν ᾿Ανδραίμονος “παραγενόμενον 
τὴν τούτου θυγατέρα γῆμαι, καὶ καταλιπόντα 
παῖδα Λεοντοφόνον ἐκ ταύτης γηραιὸν τελευτῆσαι. 


1 Θόαντα Kerameus: θύεντα 8. 


1 Compare Plutarch, Quaestiones Graecae, 14. According 
to Plutarch’s account, the kinsmen of the slain suitors rose 
in revolt against Ulysses; but Neoptolemus, being invited 
by both parties to act as arbitrator, sentenced Ulysses to 
banishment for bloodshed, and condemned the friends and 
relatives of the suitors to pay an annual compensation to 


306 


EPITOME, vn. 40 


Neoptolemus, king of the islands off Epirus; that 
Neoptolemus, thinking to get possession of Cephal- 
lenia if once Ulysses were put out of .the way, con- 
demned him to exile;1 and that Ulysses went to 
Aetolia, to Thoas, son of Andraemon, married the 
daughter of Thoas, and leaving a son Leontophonus, 
whom he had by her,? died in old age. 


Ulysses for the damage they had done to his property. The 
sentence obliged Ulysses to withdraw not only from Ithaca, 
but also from Cephallenia and Zacynthus ; and he retired to 
Italy. The compensation exacted from the heirs of the suitors 
was paid in kind, and consisted of barley groats, wine, honey, 
olive oil, and animal victims of mature age. This payment 
Ulysses ordered to be made to his son Telemachus. 

* These last recorded doings of Ulysses appear to be 
mentioned by no other ancient writer. 


407 


APPENDIX 


I.—PutTrinc CHILDREN ON THE FIRE . 
I7l.—Wak oF EARTH ON HEAVEN. . 
111.---ΜΥΤῊ5 oF THE ORIGIN OF FIRE BG ade 


IV.—MELAMPUS AND THE KINE ΟΕ PHYLACUS 


V.—THE CuASHING Rocks 


IX.—APOLLO AND THE KINE OF ADMETUS 


X.—THE MARRIAGE OF PELEUS AND THETIS... 


XI.—PHAETHON AND THE CHARIOT OF THE SUN 


XII.—Tue Vow or IDOMENEUS 


πὰ τον δ ἃ κὶ ὦ λα 


ae? Ὁ Se, fo er te 


399 


APPENDIX 


J.—PuttTinc CHILDREN ON THE FIRE 
(Apollodorus 1. v. 1) 


THE story that Demeter put the infant son of Celeus ο΄ 
the fire to make him immortal is told by other ancient writers 
as well as by Apollodorus,! and while there is a general 
resemblance between the various versions of the legend, 
there are some discrepancies in detail. Thus, with regard to 
the child’s parents, Apollodorus and Ovid agree with the 
Homeric hymn-writer in calling them Celeus and Metanira. 
But Hyginus calls them Eleusinus and Cothonea; while 
Servius in one passage ? names them Eleusinus and Cyntinia, 
and in another passage ? calls the father Celeus. Lactantius 
Placidus names them Eleusius and Hioma; and the Second 
Vatican Mythographer calls them Celeus and Hiona. Then, 
with regard to the child who was put on the fire, Apollo- 
dorus agrees with the Homeric hymn-writer in calling him 
Demophon and in distinguishing him from his elder brother 
Triptolemus. But Ovid, Hyginus, Servius, Lactantius 
Placidus, and the First Vatican Mythographer call the child 
who was put on the fire Triptolemus, and make no mention 
of Demophon. The Second Vatican Mythographer wavers 
on this point ; for, after saying * that Demeter received the 
child Triptolemus to nurse, he proceeds ὅ to name the child 


1 See Homeric Hymn to Demeter, 231-274; Ovid, Fast, 
iv. 549-562 ; Hyginus, Fab. 147; Servius, on Virgil, Georg. 
i. 19 and 163; Lactantius Placidus, on Statius, heb. ii. 
382; Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latim, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. pp. 3, 107 (First Vatican Mythographer, 8; Second 
Vatican Mythographer, 96 sq.). 

2 On Georg. i. 19. 3 On Georg. i. 163. 

4 Fab. 96. 5 Fab. 97. 


311 


APPENDIX 


who was put on the fire Eleusius. As to the fate of the child 
who was put on the fire, the Homeric hymn-writer merely 
says that Demeter, angry at being interrupted, threw him 
on the ground ; whether he lived or died the author does not 
mention. Apollodorus definitely affirms that the child was 
consumed in the fire ; and the Second Vatican Mythographer 
says that Demeter in her rage killed it. On the other hand, 
the writers who call the child Triptolemus naturally do not 
countenance the belief that he perished in the fire, for they 
record the glorious mission on which he was sent by Demeter - 
to reveal to mankind her beneficent gift of corn. Lastly, 
the writers are not at one in regard to the well-meaning but 
injudicious person who interrupted Demeter at her magic 
rite and thereby prevented her from bestowing the boon of 
immortality on her nursling. Ovid, in agreement with the 
Homeric hymn-writer, says that the person was the child’s 
mother Metanira; Apollodorus calls her Praxithea, an other- 
wise unknown person, who may have been the child’s sister 
or more probably his nurse ; for Praxithea is not named by 
the Homeric hymn-writer among the daughters of Celeus.! 
Some critics would forcibly harmonize Apollodorus with the 
hymn-writer by altering our author’s text in the present 
passage.” On the other hand, Hyginus, Servius, Lactantius 
Placidus, and the Second Vatican Mythographer say that it 
was the child’s father who by his exclamation or his fear 
distracted the attention of the goddess and so frustrated her 
benevolent purpose. 

Just as Demeter attempted to make Demophon or Trip- 
tolemus immortal by placing him on the fire, so Thetis tried 
to make her son Achilles immortal in like manner,*® and 
so Isis essayed to confer immortality on the infant son of 
the king of Byblus.* All three goddesses were baftled by 
the rash intervention of affectionate but ignorant mortals. 
These legends point to an ancient Greek custom of passing 
newborn infants across a fire in order to save their lives from 
the dangers which beset infancy, and which, to the primitive 
mind, assume the form of demons or other spiritual beings 
lying in wait to cut short the frail thread of life. The Greek 


1 vv. 105 sqq. 2 See Critical Note, vol. i. p. 38. 
3 Apollodorus, iii. 13. 6, with the note. 
4 Plutarch, 1818 et Osiris, 16. 


312 


I.—PUTTING CHILDREN ON THE FIRE 


practice of running round the hearth with a child on the fifth 
or seventh day after birth may have been a substitute for the 
older custom of passing the child over the fire.’ Similar 
customs have been observed for similar reasons in many 
parts of the world. Thus, in the highlands of Scotland, ‘‘ it 
has happened that, after baptism, the father has placed a 
basket filled with bread and cheese on the pot-hook that 
impended over the fire in the middle of the room, which the 
company sit around; and the child is thrice handed across 
the fire, with the design to frustrate all attempts of evil 
spirits or evil eyes.”* Inthe Hebrides it used to be customary 
to carry fire round children in the morning and at night 
every day until they were christened, and fire was also 
carried about the mothers before they were churched ; and 
this ‘‘ fire-round was an effectual means to preserve both the 
mother and the infant from the power of evil spirits, who are 
ready at such times to do mischief, and sometimes carry 
away the infant.” Customs of this sort prevailed in Scotland 
down to the beginning of the nineteenth century. Sometimes 
the father leaped across the hearth with the child in his arms ; 
“‘moreover, every person entering the house was required to 
take up a burning fire-brand from the hearth, and therewith 
cross himself, before he ventured to approach a new-born 
child or its mother. It was also customary to carry a 
burning peat sun-wise round an unbaptised infant and its 
mother, to protect them from evil spirits.”* The custom of 
leaping over a hearth or carrying a child round it, implies 
that the fireplace is in the middle of the floor, as it used to 
be in cottages in the highlands of Scotland. Miss Gordon 


1 Suidas, 8.0. ᾿Αμφιδρόμια ; Scholiast on Plato, Theaetetus, 

. 100 Ε. 

2 ΠῚ, Pennant, ‘‘ Second Tour in Scotland,’ in J. 
Pinkerton’s General Collection of Voyages and Travels, 
ili. 383. 

3M. Martin, ‘‘ Description of the Western Islands of 
Scotland,” in J. Pinkerton’s General Collection of Voyages 
and Travels, vol. iii. p. 612. 

4 Miss C. F. Gordon Cumming, In the Hebrides, New 
Edition (London, 1886), p. 101. Compare John Ramsay, 
Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century (Edin- 
burgh and London, 1888), ii. 423. 


313 


APPENDIX 


Cumming describes from her own observation such a cottage 
in Iona, ‘‘ with the old-fashioned fireplace hollowed in the 
centre of the earthen floor, and with no chimney except a 
hole in the middle of the roof.”+ Ancient Greek houses 
must similarly have had the fireplace in the middle of the 
floor, and probably in them also the smoke escaped through 
a hole in the roof. 

Sometimes the motive for putting the child on the fire was 
different, as will appear from the following accounts. In the 
north-east of Scotland, particularly in the counties of Banff 
and Aberdeen, ‘‘if the child became cross and began to dwine, 
fears immediately arose that it might be a ‘ fairy changeling,’ 
and the trial by fire was put into operation. The hearth was 
piled with peat, and when the fire was at its strength the 
suspected changeling was placed in front of it and as-near as 
possible not to be scorched, or it was suspended in a basket 
over the fire. If it was a ‘changeling child’ it made its 
escape by the lum [chimney], throwing back words of scorn 
as it disappeared.” ? Similarly in Fife we hear of ‘‘ the old 
and widespread superstitious belief that a fairy changeling, 
if passed through the fire, became again the person the fairies 
had stolen, ... believed but not acted on by the old women 
in Fife in an earlier part of this [19th] century.”* Among 
the miners of Fife, ‘‘if a child cries continuously after being 
dressed at birth, the granny or some other wise elder wiil 
say, ‘If this gangs on we'll hae to pit on the girdle’ (the 
large circular flat baking-iron on which scones and oat- 
cakes are ‘ fired’). Sometimes this is actually done, but the 
practice is rare now, and very few can give the true meaning 
of the saying. The idea is that the crying child is a change- 
ling, and that if held over the fire it will go up the chimney, 
while the girdle will save the real child’s feet from being 
burnt as it comes down to take its own legitimate place.” * 
Similarly, in the Highlands one way of getting rid of a 
changeling was to seat him on a gridiron, or in a creel, with 


1 Miss C. F. Gordon Cumming, op. cit.~p. 100. 

2 W. Gregor, Notes. on the Folk-lore of the North-east 
of Scotland (London, 1881), pp. 8 sq. 

3’ County Folk-lore, vol. vii. Fife, by J. Ἐς Simpkins 
(London, 1914), p. 32. 

* County Folk-lore, vol. vii. (as above), p. 398. 


314 


I.—PUTTING CHILDREN ON THE FIRE 


a fire burning below. This mode of exchanging fairy 
changelings for real children by putting the changelings 
on the fire appears to be also Scandinavian; for a story 
relates how, in the little island of Christiansé, to the 
south-east of Sweden, a mother got rid of a changeling 
and recovered her own child by pretending to thrust the 
changeling into the oven; for no sooner had she done so 
than the fairy mother rushed into’the room, snatched up her 
child, which was a puny, dwining little creature, and gave the 
woman her own babe back again, saying, ‘‘ There is your 
child! I have done by it better than you have by mine.” 
And indeed the returned infant was a fine sturdy child.? 

A similar custom has been observed by the Jews, for 
Maimonides writes that ‘‘we still see the midwives wrap 
newborn children in swaddling bands, and, after putting 
foul-smelling incense on the fire, move the children to and fro 
over the incense on the fire.”* Similarly, of the Jakuns, a 
wild people of the Malay Peninsula, ‘‘it is reported that, in 
several tribes, the children, as soon as born, are carried to 
the nearest rivulet, where they are washed, then brought 
back to the house, where fire is kindled, incense of kamunian 
wood thrown upon it, and the child then passed over it several 
times. We know from history that the practice of passing 
children over fire was in all times much practised amongst 
heathen nations, and that it is even now practised in China 
and other places.” * In Canton, in order to render a child 
courageous and to ward off evil, a mother will move her child 
several times over a fire of glowing charcoal, after which she 
places a lump of alum in the fire, and the alum is supposed 
to assume the likeness of the creature which the child fears 
most.° In the Tenimber and Timorlaut islands (East Indies), 


1 J. G. Campbell, Superstitions of the Highlands and 
Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1900), p. 39. 

2 B. Thorpe, Northern Mythology (London, 1851-1852), 
ii. 174 sq. 

3 Maimonides, quoted by D. Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier und 
der Ssabismus (St. Petersburg, 1856), ii. 473. 

4 The ἘΔ, Favre (Apostolic Missionary), An Account of 
the Wild Tribes inhabiting the Malay Peninsula, etc. (Paris, 
1865), pp. 68 sq. 

> F. Warrington Eastlake, ‘‘Cantonese Superstitions 
about Infants,” China Review, ix. (1880-1881), p. 303. 


Sts 


APPENDIX 


‘in order to prevent sickness, or rather to frighten the evil 
spirits, the child is, in the first few days, laid beside or over 
the fire.’ + In New Britain, after a birth has taken place, 
they kindle a fire of leaves and fragrant herbs, and a woman 
takes the child and swings it to and fro through the 
smoke of the fire, uttering good wishes. At the same time 
a sorcerer pinches up a little of the ashes from the fire, and 
touches with it the infant’s eyes, ears, temples, nose, and 
mouth, ‘‘ whereby the child is thenceforth protected against 
evil spirits and evil magic.” 2 In Yule Island, off British New 
Guinea, ‘‘ the child at birth is passed across the flames. It 
seems probable that in this there is the idea of purification by 
the fire.’* In Madagascar a child used to be twice carefully 
lifted over the fire before he was carried out of the house for 
the first time.‘ 

Among the Kafirs of Sonth Africa ‘‘the mother makes a fire 
with some scented wood which gives off an abundance of 
pungent smoke. Over this smoke the baby is held till it 
cries violently. It is believed that some people at death 
become wizards or wizard-spirits, and that these evil beings 
seek malevolently to injure small babies ; they cannot abide 
the smell of the smoke from this scented wood, which they 
meet as they wander round seeking for prey, and trying to 
take possession of babies. The wizard is therefore repelled 
by the odour, and goes on its journey, hunting for a baby 
which is not so evil-smelling. When the baby cries in the 
smoke the mother calls out, ‘There goes the wizard.’ This 
smoking process has to be performed daily with closed doors 


1 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tus- 
schen Selebes en Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 303. 

2 R. Parkinson, Dreissig Jahre in der Siidsee (Stuttgart, 
1907), pp. 70 sg. Compare id. Im Bismarck-Archipel (Leipsic, 
1887), pp. 94 sq.; A. Kleintitschen, Die Kiistenbewohner der 
Gazellehalbinsel (Hiltrup bei Miinster, n.d.), p. 204; Les 
Missions Catholiques, xvii. (Lyons, 1885), p. 110; Dr. Hahl, 
in Nachrichten δον Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck- 
Archipel (Berlin, 1897), p. 81. 

3 Father Navarre, in Annales de la Propagation de la οὶ, 
lix. (Lyons, 1887), p. 185. 

4 W. Ellis, History of Madagascar (London, n.d.), i. 161 84. 


316 


- 1—PUTTING CHILDREN ON THE FIRE 


for several weeks, while the mother sings special chants.!” 
So among the Ovambo, a Bantu people of South Africa, when 
the midwife or an old female friend of the mother has carried 
a newborn baby out of the hut for the first time, she finds on 
her return a great fire of straw burning at the entrance, and 
across it she must stride, while she swings the infant several 
times to and fro through the thick smoke, ‘‘in order to free 
the child from the evil magic that still clings to it from its 
birth. According to another version, this swinging through 
the smoke is meant to impart courage to the child ; but the 
first explanation appears to me to tally better with the views 
of the natives.” ? At a certain festival, which occurred every 
fourth year, thé ancient Mexicans used to whirl their 
children through the flames of a fire specially prepared for 
the purpose.’ Among the Tarahumares, an Indian tribe of 
Mexico, ‘‘when the baby is three days old the shaman comes 
to cure it. A big fire is made of corn-cobs, the little one is 
placed on a blanket, and with the father’s assistance the 
shaman carries it, if it is a boy, three times through the 
smoke to the four cardinal points, making the ceremonial 
circuit and finally raising it upward. This is done that the 
child may grow well and be successful in life, that is, in 
raising corn.” 4 


1 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood, a Study of Kafir 
Children (London, 1906), pp. 18 sq. 

ὃ Hans Schinz, Deutsch-Siidwest-Afrika (Oldenburg and 
Leipsic, n.d.), p. 307. 

9 H. H. Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific States 
(London, 1875-1876), iii. 376, note “1, quoting Sahagun, ‘‘rode- 
arlos por las llamas del fuego que tenian aparejado para esto,” 
which I translate as above. Bancroft translates, ‘‘ passed the 
children over, or near to, or about the flame of a prepared 
fire.” The French translators turn the words, ‘‘ conduisaient 
autour dune flamme quon avait préparée pour cet objet.” 
See B. de Sahagun, Histoire Générale des choses de la 
Nouvelle-Hspagne, traduite par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon 
(Paris, 1880), p. 166. Compare C. F. Clavigero, History of 
Mexico, translated by C. Cullen, 2nd ed. (London, 1807), 1. 
317. 
4 C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mezico (London, 1903), i. 272. 


317 


APPENDIX 


Il.—War or Eartn on HEAVEN 
(Apollodorus 1. vi. 1) 


Some Indian tribes of North-Western America tell a story 
which resembles in certain respects the Greek myth of the 
war waged by the Earth-born Giants on the gods in heaven. 
The details of the story vary from tribe to tribe, but its 
substance is the same. 

As told by the Pend’ d’Oreille Indians of Montana, the 
story runs as follows :— 

The Earth people wanted to make war on the Sky people. 
Grizzly-Bear was their chief, and he called all the warriors 
together. They were told to shoot in turn at the moon (or 
sky). All did as they were told, but their arrows fell short. 
Only Wren had not shot his arrow. Coyote said, ‘‘ He need 
not shoot. He is too small, and his bow and arrows are too 
weak.” However, Grizzly-Bear declared that Wren must 
have his turn. Wren shot his arrow, and it hit the moon (or 
sky) and stuck fast. Then the others shot their arrows, 
which stuck each in the notch of the preceding one, until 
they made a chain of arrows that reached from the sky to 
the ground. Then all the people climbed up, Grizzly-Bear 
going last. He was very heavy; and when he was more 
than half way up, the chain broke by his weight. He made 
a spring, and caught the part of the chain above him; and 
this caused the arrows to pull out at the top, where the 
leading warriors had made a hole to enter the sky. So the 
whole chain fell down and left the people up aloft without 
the means of descending. The Earth people attacked the 
Sky people, and defeated them in the first battle; but the 
Sky people soon mustered in such force that they far out- 
numbered the Earth people, and in the next battle routed 
them, killing a great many. The defeated Earth people ran 
for the ladder, but many were overtaken and killed on the 
way. When they found the ladder broken, each prepared 
himself the best way he could so as not to fall too heavily, 
and one after another jumped down. Flying-Squirrel was 
wearing a small robe, which he spread out like wings when 
he jumped; therefore he has something like wings now. He 
came down without hurting himself. Whitefish looked down 
the hole before jumping. When he saw the great depth, he 


318 


I1.—WAR OF RARTH ON HEAVEN 


puckered up his mouth and drew back; therefore he has a 
small puckered mouth at the present day. Sucker jumped 
down without first preparing himself, and his bones were 
broken ; therefore the sucker’s bones are now found in all 
parts of its flesh. At that time there were a number of 
different animals on earth that are not here now; but they 
were killed in this war and transformed into stars. Had 
they all come back to earth, there would be many more 
kinds here now. Those which we have at the present time 
represent only the survivors of the war. 

In this, as in most other versions of the story, the Earth 
people are conceived as animals, whether beasts, birds or 
fish. This comes out clearly in a parallel version of the 
story told by the Indians of the Okanagon tribe in British 
Columbia. In it we are told that each animal and bird shot 
at the sky, and that the Fish, Snakes, and Toads also tried, 
but that only the Chickadee succeeded in hitting the sky 
with his arrow ; and in the fall from heaven the fish fared 
worst, because they had no wings. According to this version, 
the Grizzly Bear and the Black Bear were the only animals 
that were left on earth when all the rest had climbed up the 
ladder to the sky ; and in quarrelling as to which of them 
should mount the ladder first, the two bears knocked it 
down.? 

Similarly the Shuswap tribe of British Columbia tell how 
“ Black Bear and Wolverene were great chiefs, the former of 
the Fish people, the latter of the Bird people. They assembled 
the warriors of all the fishes and birds of the earth to go on 
a war expedition against the people of the sky. All the men 
shot their arrows up towards the sky, but they fell back 
without hitting it. Last of all Wren,? who was the smallest 
of all the birds, shot an arrow, which stuck in the sky. The 
next smallest bird shot an arrow, which hit the end of the 
first one ; and thus they shot arrows; and one stuck in the 
end of the other, until there was a chain of arrows forming a 
ladder from earth to sky. On this all the warriors ascended, 
leaving the two chiefs to guard the bottom. Soon after all 


1 Folk-tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes, edited by 
Franz Boas (Lancaster, Pa., and New York, 1917), p. 118 
(Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society, vol. xi.). 

? Folk-tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes, p. 85. 

3 **Some say Humming-Bird, others Chickadee.” 


319 


APPENDIX 


had reached the sky world, Wolverene and Black Bear began 
to laugh at each other’s tails. Black Bear grew angry, 
chased Wolverene around the foot of the ladder, struck 
against it, and knocked it down. 

‘* Meanwhile the earth people had attacked the sky people, 
and at first were victorious; but afterwards the latter, 
gathering in great force, routed the earth people, who fled in 
great disorder towards the top of the ladder. By its fall 
their retreat was cut off; and many made a stand against the 
sky people, while others threw themselves down. ‘The birds 
were able to reach the earth safely, for they could fly down ; 
but many of the fishes, who tried to throw themselves into a 
large lake, were wounded. In their fall some missed the 
lake and dropped on rocks. Thus the skull of the sematsar 
came to be flattened, the kwaak broke its jaw, the tcoktcitcin 
got a bloody mouth, and the sucker had all its bones scattered 
and broken, so that it died. The grandson of a man called 
Tcel gathered the bones, put them back into the body, and 
revived it. This is the reason why the sucker has now so 
many bones scattered through its flesh, why the sematsai 
has a flat head, the tcoktcitcin a red mouth, and why the 
mouth of the kwaak appears to be broken. The earth people 
who remained above were all slain, and transformed by the 
sky people into stars.” ἢ 

Thus the story of the attack on the Sky people purports at 
the same time to explain certain peculiar features of the 
fauna with which these Indians are acquainted. Animals 
naturally attract the attention of savages, especially of 
savage hunters; and the observation of their peculiarities, 
by exciting the curiosity of the observer, is a fruitful source 
of explanatory myths. 

So far no explanation is given of the reasons which led the 
Earth people to make war on the Sky people. But in a 
version of the story told by the Quinault Indians, who in- 
habit a district on the western coast of Washington State, 
the motives for the war are fully reported. Raven’s two 
daughters, we are told, went out on the prairie to dig roots, 
and night overtook them before they could reach home. 
Camping out in the open, they looked up at the starry sky, 


1 James Teit, The Shuswap (Leyden and New York, 1909), 
p. 749 (The Jesup North Pacific Hxpedition, vol. ii. part 7). 


320 


I1—WAR OF EARTH ON HEAVEN 


and the younger sister said, ‘‘I wish I were up there with 
that big bright star!” And the elder sister said, ‘‘ I wish I 
were there with that little star!” Soon they fell asleep, 
and when they awoke they were up in the sky country, 
where the stars are; and the younger sister found that her 
star was a feeble old man, while the elder sister’s star was a 
young man. Now the younger sister was afraid of the old 
man ; so she ran away and tried to descend to earth with the 
help of a rope, which she borrowed from an old woman 
called Spider. But the rope proved too short, and there she 
hung just over her father’s house till she died, and her bones 
dropped down on the ground. Bluejay picked them up and 
knew them to be the bones of Raven’s daughter. So he 
called Raven, and they agreed that it was so. ‘‘ And they 
gathered together all the fragments, and then called upon all 
the people, and all the animals, and all the birds and fishes, 
to gather and make an attack upon the Sky People to 
recover the other sister.” ‘The rest of the story follows 
substantially as in the preceding versions. Having deter- 
mined to make war on the Sky People, the animals prepared 
to shoot at the heavenly vault with arrows. So they made 
a bow of the trunk of a white cedar and an arrow of a limb 
of atree. Then Grizzly Bear stepped up to string the bow, 
but could not bend it; after him, Elk and all the large 
animals tried, but all failed. At last Wren, the smallest of 
birds, bent the bow, strung it easily, and shot an arrow, 
which stuck in thesky. Then with the help of Snail, who 
aimed the arrows, Wren shot shaft after shaft, so that each 
stuck in the notch of the preceding one, till the arrows 
formed a chain that reached from the sky to the earth. Up 
the chain the animals swarmed to heaven, and there, feeling 
very cold in the upper air, Beaver contrived to steal fire for 
them from a house of the Sky People, after Robin Redbreast, 
Dog, and Wildcat had failed in the attempt. There, too, in 
a corner of the house, they found Raven’s elder daughter. 
Having procured the fire they sent all the rats and mice 
among the Sky People to gnaw through all the bowstrings of 
the men and all the girdles of the women, and all fastenings 
of any kind which they could find. So, when all was ready, 
the Karth People attacked. The Sky men tried to use their 
bows, but the bowstrings were cut. The Sky women tried 
to put on their clothes to run away, but they could not 
fasten them and they had to stay where they were. Then 

321 


APOLL. II, Y 


APPENDIX 


the Earth People went from house to house and killed great 
numbers of the Sky People. At last the Sky People rallied 
and began to beat back the Earth People. So, taking 
Raven’s daughter with them, they retreated down the chain 
of arrows, and they had almost all got safely down, when 
the chain broke. So some were left hanging in the sky, and 
they can be seen there now in the stars.} 

The story is told in a somewhat similar form by the 
Kathlamet Indians, whose territory lay in the south-western 
part of Washington State to the south of the country owned 
by the Quinault Indians ; but in the Kathlamet version there 
is no mention of Raven’s daughters nor of the chain of 
arrows. On the other hand it contains the incidents of the 
stealing of fire by Beaver and of the cutting of the bow- 
strings and girdles by Mouse and Rat. According to the 
Kathlamets, it was Bluejay who cut the rope by which, in 
their version of the tale, the animals had ascended to the 
sky ; and among the creatures who remained up aloft in the 
shape of stars were the Woodpecker, the Fisher, the Skate, 
the Elk, and the Deer.? 

The story of the War on the Sky is told, in the same 
general form, also by the Kutenai Indians in the interior of 
British Columbia. Their version includes the incident of 
the chain of arrows, and describes the shifts to which the 
animals in heaven were put when the chain of arrows, by 
which they had ascended, was broken down. The Bats, we 
are told, flew down, spreading out their blankets as wings. 
The Flying Squirrel pulled out his skin and used it as wings 
to fly with. All the fish threw themselves down, but the 
Sucker was the only one who was broken to pieces. How- 
ever, he was restored to life by the touch of his brother’s 
widow. ὃ 

A different account of the origin of the War on the Sky is 
given in a version of the story recorded among the Indians of 


1 L. Farrand, Traditions of the Quinault Indians [New 
York] (1902), pp. 107-109 (The Jesup North Pacific Expedt- 
tion). I have abridged the story. 

2 Franz Boas, Kathlamet Texts (Washington, 1901), pp. 
67-71 (Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 26). 

8 Franz Boas, Kutenat Tales (Washington, 1918), pp. 
73-77 (Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 59). 


322 


SR. et ότι 


Ii—WAR OF EARTH ON HEAVEN 


the Lower Fraser River in British Columbia. They say that 
the Redheaded Woodpecker and the Eagle had each a son, 
and that the two youths in pursuit of a beautiful bird were 
lured on till they came to the sky. The bereaved fathers 
desired to go up after them, but did not know how to do it. 
So they called a general assembly of the animals and inquired 
of them how one may ascend to heaven. First, the Pelican 
flew up, but returned without reaching the sky. Next the 
Mole attempted to scale the heavenly heights by burrowing 
under the water and under the earth, but naturally he failed. 
Even the Eagle himself, the father of one of the missing 
youths, could not fly so high, though he tried hard. At last 
& man or an animal named Tamia, a grandson of Wood- 
pecker’s wife, came forward and declared that he had learned 
in a dream how one may ascend up to heaven. So he painted 
his hair red, and having adorned his face with a streak of red 
paint from the forehead down over the nose to the chin, he 
began to sing. “1 am Tamia! I fear not to shoot at the 
sky,” while his grandmother Takt beat time to the song. 
Having thus attuned himself to the proper pitch, he took 
his bow and shot arrow after arrow at the sky, until the 
arrows, as usual, formed a chain stretching right down to the 
earth. So all the people ascended the chain, vanquished 
the Sky People in battle, and freed the two sons of the 
Woodpecker and the Eagle. When they had returned home 
victorious, they broke down the chain of arrows, or rather 
the broad road into which the chain had been converted. 
But they did not notice that the Snail had lagged behind 
and was still up aloft. So when the Snail came to heaven’s 
gate and found no ladder, he had to throw himself down, 
and in his fall he broke every bone in his body. That is why 
he now moves so slowly.! 

Yet another motive is assigned for the War on the 
Sky by the Thompson Indians of British Columbia. Αο- 
cording to them, that war was caused by the rape of a 
married woman. ‘The people of the Sky, so they say, 
stole the wife of Swan, who, in great wrath at this outrage, 
called all the people of the earth to a council. They agreed 
to make war on the Sky People, and under the direction 


1 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiste Amerikas (Berlin, 1895), pp. 30 sq. 


3:3 


APPENDIX 


of the injured husband, they all gathered together with 
their bows and arrows and shot at the sky, but all their 
arrows fell short. After they had all tried in vain, Wren 
shot an arrow. The people watched it rising till it passed 
out of sight, and though they waited some time, it never 
came down again. It had stuck in the sky. Then Wren 
shot another arrow, which likewise disappeared and did not 
come down again. It had stuck in the notch of the first one. 
After he had discharged many arrows, the people saw them 
sticking one in the end of the other, like a chain hung 
from the sky. Wren continued to shoot till at last the 
arrow-chain reached the earth. Then all the people ascended 
one behind the other over the chain of arrows and entering 
the upper world (some say through a hole which they tore in 
the sky) they attacked the Sky People, some of whom consisted 
of Grizzlies, Black Bears, and Elks. A great battle was 
fought, in which the Sky People were victorious, and the 
Karth People began to retreat in great haste down the chain of 
arrows. When about half the people had reached the ground, 
the chain broke in the middle, and many were killed by the 
fall. Others, who were on the chain above the point at which 
it broke, had to ascend again, and were either killed or made 
prisoners by the Sky People. Those who reached the earth 
represent the people, animals, birds, and fishes to be found 
on the earth at the present time. There were formerly other 
different animals and birds on the earth, but they either 
were killed in this war or remain in the sky to this day.! 

A short version of the story, without the assignment of any 
motive for the war, is reported from among the Ntlakya- 
pamuq Indians of British Columbia. It includes the usual 
incident of the sky-reaching chain of arrows.” 

A somewhat different story of the War on the Sky is told 
by the Catloltq Indians of Vancouver Island. They say that 
long ago Turpentine was a blind man, who could not bear the 
sun’s heat and used te go a-fishing for red shell-fish by night. 


————EEEe ὦ 


1 James Teit, Mythology of the Thompson Indians (Leyden 
and New York, 1912), p. 246 (The Jesup North Pacific 
Expedition, vol. viii. part ii.). Another, but briefer, version 
of the story is reported in the same work (p. 334). 

2 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, p. 17. 


324 


Il.—WAR OF EARTH ON HEAVEN 


Every morning, when the day began to break, his wife called 
him back, saying, ‘‘ Come home quick! The sun is rising. 
So he always hurried home before it grew warm. But one 
day his wife slept late, and when she awoke, it was broad 
day. Horrified by the discovery, she rushed to the beach, 
shrieking, ‘‘ Come home quick! The sun is high in heaven.” 
Thus adjured, old Turpentine plied his oars as for dear life, 
but it was too late; the Sun shone down on him so hot that 
he melted away before he reached the shore. Indignant at 
his fate, his two sons resolved to avenge his death by killing 
the Sun, his murderer. So they took their bows and arrows 
and went to the place where the Sun rises. There they shot 
an arrow at the sky, and a second arrow at the first, until 
the usual ladder of arrows was constructed leading up to 
heaven. When it was finished, the elder brother shook it to 
gee whether it was strong enough to bear his weight, and 
finding it quite firm, the two brothers climbed up aloft by it. 
On reaching the sky they killed the Sun with their arrows. 
Then they deliberated how to replace the dead luminary and 
solved the problem very simply ; for the elder brother became 
the Sun, and the younger brother became the Moon.’ 

A different motive for the War on the Sky is assigned by 
the Sanpoil Indians, who live on the Columbia River and 
belong to the Salish stock.2 They say that once on a time it 
rained so heavily that. all the fires on earth were extin- 
guished. The animals held a council and decided to make 
war against the sky in order to bring back the fire. In spring 
the people began, and tried to shoot their arrows Up to the 
sky. Coyote tried first, but did not succeed, Finally the 
Chickadee contrived to shoot an arrow which stuck in the 
sky. He continued to shoot, making a chain of arrows by 


1 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pactfischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, pp. 64 86. The use of a chain of arrows to 
give access to the sky is a common incident in the folk-tales 
told by the Indians of North-west America, even in stories in 
which there is no question of an attack upon the Sky 
People. See Franz Boas, ““ Tsimshian Mythology,” Thirty- 
first Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
(Washington, 1916), pp. 364 sqq. 

2 F. W. Hodge, Handbook of American Indians (Wash- 
ington, 1907-1910), ii. 451. enti ma 


325 


APPENDIX 


means of which the animals climbed up. The last to climb 
was the Grizzly Bear, but so heavy was he that he broke the 
chain of arrows and so could not join the other animals in 
the sky. 

When the animals reached the sky, they found themselves 
in a valley near a lake where the people of the sky were 
fishing. Coyote wished to act as scout, but was captured. 
Then the Muskrat dug holes along the shore of the lake, and 
Beaver and Eagle set out to obtain the fire. Beaver entered 
one of the fish-traps and pretended to be dead. They carried 
him to the chief's house, where the people began to skin 
him. At this time the Eagle alighted on a tree near the 
tent. When the people saw the Eagle, they ran out, and at 
once Beaver took a clam-shell full of glowing coals and ran 
away. He jumped into the lake, and people tried to catch 
him in nets; but the water drained away through the holes 
which Muskrat had made. The animals now ran back to the 
chain of arrows, which they found broken. Then, as the 
birds could fly down and the quadrupeds could not, each bird 
took a quadruped on its back and flew down with it. Only 
Coyote and the Sucker were left up above. Coyote tied a 
piece of buffalo robe to each paw and jumped down. He 
sailed down on the skin, and finally landed on a pine-tree. 
Next morning he showed off his wings, but could not take 
them off again, and was transformed into a bat. The Sucker 
had to jump down, and was broken to pieces. The animals 
fitted his bones together ; and, since some were missing, they 
put pine-needles into his tail. Therefore the Sucker has 
many bones.? 


IIJ.—Myrus oF THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 
(Apollodorus τ. vii. 1) 


According to Hesiod and Hyginus, it was from Zeus him- 
self that Prometheus stole the fire which he bestowed on 
men ;? and Hyginus clearly conceived the theft to have been 
perpetrated in heaven, for he speaks of Prometheus bringing 


1 Folk-tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes, edited by 
Franz Boas, pp. 107 sq. 

2 Hesiod, Works and Days, 50 sqq., Theog. 565 sqq.; 
Hyginus, Astronom. ii. 15. ; 


326 


III.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


down the stolen fire to earth in a stalk of fennel;! and Latin 
poets similarly refer to the sky as the source from which our 
earthly fire was procured by the artful Prometheus.” But 
according to Plato it was from the workshop of Athena 
and Hephaestus that Prometheus abstracted the fire. The 
philosopher tells us that when the time appointed for man’s 
creation or appearance out of the earth was at hand, Pro- 
metheus, the friend of the human race, was sore puzzled 
what to do; for no provision had been made for supplying 
the new creatures with fire, and, without that element, how 
could the mechanical arts exist? Prometheus himself might 
not enter the citadel of Zeus, which was guarded by dreadful 
warders ; so he made his way secretly into the workshop 
where Athena and Hephaestus laboured in common, and, 
stealing the fire of Hephaestus and the mechanical skill of 
Athena, he bestowed both these precious gifts on men.’ 
This version of the story was known to Lucian, for he repre- 
sents Hephaestus reproaching Prometheus with having pur- 
loined the fire and left his forge cold.4 Cicero speaks of 
“the Lemnian theft” of fire committed by Prometheus ; ? 
which implies that the fire was obtained from the forge of 
Hephaestus in Lemnos, the island on which Hephaestus fell 
when he was hurled from heaven by Zeus. Perhaps the 
origin of fire on earth was mythically explained by this fall 
of Hephaestus, who may have been supposed to carry it with 
him in his descent from heaven, and to have used it to light 
the furnace of his smithy in the island. 

The notion that the first fire used by man was stolen from 
a deity or other fairyland being meets us in many stories 
told by many savages in many parts of the world. Very 
often, curiously enough, the thief is a bird or beast; not 
uncommonly the theft is committed by a number of birds or 
beasts, which combine together for the purpose. On the 
other hand, a beast or bird often figures, not as the thief, 
but as the first owner of fire, and the story relates how the 


1 Hyginus, Fab. 144. 

2 Horace, Odes, i. 3. 27 sqq.; Juvenal, xv. 84 sqq. 
3 Plato, Protagoras, 11, p. 321 σ-Ἑ. 

4 Lucian, Prometheus, 5. 

° Cicero, Tuscul. Disput. ii. 10. 23. 

6 Homer, Il. i. 590 sqq. 


327 


APPENDIX 


fire was obtained from the animal or bird and conveyed to 
men. ‘Tales of the origin, and in particular of the theft, of 
fire are too numerous to be told here at length; elsewhere I 
hope to deal with them fully.1 But it may be worth while 
to illustrate the nature and wide diffusion of such tales by 
some examples. 

The aborigines of Cape Grafton, on the eastern coast of 
Queensland, tell of a time when there was no such thing as 
fire on earth; so Bin-jir Bin-jir, a small wren with a red 
back (Malurus sp.), went up into the skies to get some. He 
was successful, but lest his friends on earth should have the 
benefit of it, he hid it away under his tail. Asked on his 
return how he had fared, he told his friend that his quest 
had been fruitless. But his friend laughed and said, ‘‘ Why, 
you have got some fire stuck on to the end of your tail,” 
referring to the red spot on the bird’s back. Bin-jir Bin-jir 
was therefore obliged to admit that he did get some fire, and 
finally he showed his friend from what particular wood to 
extract it by friction.2 Some of the aborigines of Western 
Victoria thought that the first fire was procured by a little 
bird described as a ‘‘ fire-tail wren,” which stole it from the 
crows, who till then had had sole possession of the valuable 
element. ? . 

According to the Booandik tribe, who used to inhabit the 
extreme south-east corner of South Australia, the first owner 
of fire was the cockatoo, who kept it jealously hidden in his 
red crest and produced it from there by scratching his crest 
whenever he wished to cook his victuals. But he took care 
to cook his food privately, lest the other cockatoos should 
learn the secret. However, one little cockatoo contrived to 
stea] some of the fire and communicated it to his fellows.* 
One of the tribes about Maryborough in Queensland related 
how men originally obtained fire by knocking off a piece of 


1 Ina volume, The Origin of Fire, and other Essays, to be 
published by Messrs. Macmillan & Co., London. 

2 Walter E. Roth, ‘‘ Superstition, Magic, and Medicine,” 
North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin No. 5 (Brisbane, 
1903), p. 11. 

8. James Dawson, Australian Aborigines (Melbourne, 
Sydney, and Adelaide, 1881), p. 54. 

4 Mrs. James Smith, Zhe Booandik tribe (Adelaide, 1880), 
pp. 2] sq. 

328 


IIl.—THE ORJGIN OF FIRE 


the sun when he rose in the east.t_ The natives about Lake 
Condah in Victoria said that once upon a time a man threw 
up a spear to the clouds with a string attached to it. Then 
he climbed up the string and brought down fire from the sun 
to the earth.* 

The natives of the Eastern Islands of Torres Straits, 
between Australia and New Guinea, say that fire was for- 
merly in possession of an old woman, who kept it in a sixth 
finger which she had between her finger and thumb. When 
she wished to kindle a fire, she had only to put this finger 
under the fuel, and the fuel at once ignited. The animals 
on another island often saw the smoke of her fire and were 
envious, for they had no fire of their own. They tried, one 
after the other, to swim across the channel and get the fire 
by hook or crook; but they all failed until the big lizard 
made his way across, bit off the old woman’s fiery finger, 
and swam back with it in his mouth. All the people, or 
rather all the animals, were very glad to see the fire which 
he brought to them. They all went into the wood and every- 
one got a branch from the tree he liked best; they asked 
each tree to come and get a fire-stick. All the trees came 
and got fire and have kept it ever since ; and men obtain 
their fire-sticks from the trees.* 

The natives of Kiwai, an island off the mouth of the Fly 
River in New Guinea, say that fire was first produced on the 
mainland of New Guinea by two men. All animals tried to 
steal some of the fire and to swim across to Kiwai with it, 
but they all failed. The birds also failed in the attempt, 
till at last the black cockatoo succeeded in bringing a 
burning stick in his beak. But his mouth was terribly burnt 
by the fire ; and he has had a red spot on both sides of his 
mouth from that day to this. He let the fire-stick drop at 
lasa ; and the people secured it, and have had fire ever since.*4 


1A. W. Howitt, Zhe Native Tribes of South-Hast 
Australia (London, 1904), p. 432. 
2 R. Brough Smyth, The Aborigines of Victoria (Mel- 
bourne and London, 1878), i. 462. 

5 Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition 
to Torres Straits, vi. (Cambridge, 1908), pp. 29 sq. 

4 Rev. J. Chalmers, ‘‘ Note on the Natives of Kiwai 
Island,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii. 
(1903) p. 188. For other versions of the same story, see 


370 


APPENDIX 


The cockatoo here referred to belongs no doubt to the genus 
Microglossa, ‘‘whose wholly black plumage is relieved by 
their bare cheeks of bright red.” 

Some people in Kiwai give a different account of the 
origin of fire. They say that the method of making fire 
was (dliscovered accidentally or through the advice of a spirit 
by sawing wood with a bamboo rope or a bowstring: the 
friction first made the wood wurm and then elicited smoke 
and flame. 3 

At Wagawaga, on Milne Bay, near the south-eastern 
extremity of New Guinea, they say that people used to cook 
their yams and taro in the sun, because they were ignorant 
of fire. Buta certain old woman had fire in her body and 
used to draw it out from between her legs when she wished 
to cook her own food. She carefully kept the secret from 
other people; but a boy detected her in the act of making 
fire and contrived to steal a fire-brand from her. This was 
the beginning of the general use of fire among men.* A 
similar story is told by the natives of Dobu, an island 
belonging to the D’Entrecastaux group which lies to the 
east of New Guinea,* and also by the natives of the 
Trobriand Islands, to the north of the D’Entrecastaux 
Islands.° 

In the Admiralty Islands, to the north of New Guinea, 
the natives say that in the beginning there was no fire on 


Gunnar Landtman, The Folk-tales of the Kiwai Papuans 
(Helsingfors, 1917), pp. 331 sq. (Acta Societatis Scientiarum 
Fennicae, vol. xlvii); W. N. Beaver, Unexplored New 
Guinea (London, 1920), p. 174. 

1 Alfred Newton and Hans Gadow, A Dictionary of Birds 
(Cambridge, 1893-1896), p. 93. 

* Gunnar Landtman, op. ctt. pp. 83, 334 sq. 

950, G. Seligmann, The Melanesians of British New 
Guinea (Cambridge, 1910), pp. 379 sq. 

4 Rev. W. E. Bromilow, ‘‘ Dobuan (Papuan) beliefs and 
folk-lore,” Report of the Thirteenth Meeting of the Austra- 
lasian Association for the Advancement of Science, held at 
Sydney, 1911 (Sydney, 1912), pp. 425 sq. . 

> The story was recorded in the Trobriands by Dr. B. 
Malinowski, who was good enough to communicate it to me. 


33° 


III.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


earth, A woman sent the sea-eagle and the starling to 
fetch fire from heaven. The two birds brought it, and since 
then people have cooked their food by fire; were it not for 
these two birds we should still have to dry our food in the 
sun. But on their flight down to earth, the two birds 
shifted the fire between them. The starling took the fire 
and carried it on the back of his neck, and the wind blew 
up the flame, so that it singed the bird. That is why the 
starling is now so small and the fish-eagle so big. 

The Maoris of New Zealand tell how fire was procured 
for the earth by the great primordial hero Maui. He got it 
from his grandmother, Mahuika, the goddess of fire, who at 
his request produced fire successively from all the nails of 
her fingers and toes, one after the other. A great conflagra- 
tion followed, which was extinguished by heavy rain. What 
little fire escaped extinction took refuge in certain trees, 
from which it is still elicited by friction.*? Substantially the 
same myth, with local variations, is told in many parts of 
Polynesia, as in the Chatham Islands,* Tonga,# Savage 
Island,5 Samoa,® Bowditch Island,’ the Union Islands,° the 


1 Josef Meyer, ‘“‘Mythen und Sagen der Admiralitits- 
insulaner,” Anthropos, ii. (1907), pp. 659 sq. 

* Sir George Grey, Polynesian Mythology (London, 1855), 
pp. 45-49. For briefer versions of the story, see R. Taylor, 
Te Ika A Maw, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants? 
(London, 1870), pp. 130 sq.; John White, The Ancient 
History of the Maori, ii. (London and Wellington, 1889), 
pp. 108-110. 

3 A. Shand, The Moriori People of the Chatham Islands 
(Washington and New Plymouth, 1911), p. 20 (Memoirs of 
the Polynesian Society, vol. ii.). 

4 Le P. Reiter, ‘‘ Traditions Tonguiennes,” Anthropos, 
xli.—xiii. (1917-1918), pp. 1026-1040; E. E. Collcott, 
“Legends from Tonga,” /olk-lore, xxxii. (1921), pp. 45-48. 

δα. Turner, Samoa (London, 1884), pp. 211 sq. ; (Sir) 
Basil Thomson, Savage Island (London, 1902), pp. 86 sq. 

ὁ G. Turner, op. cit. pp. 209-211; J. B. Stair, Old Samoa 
(London, 1897), pp. 238 sq. 

7G. Turner, op. cit. p. 270. 

8 (Sir) Basil Thomson, op. cit. p. 87. 


331 


APPENDIX 


Hervey Islands,! and the Marquesas Islands.? Everywhere 
the fire-bringer is the human or superhuman hero Maui, but 
there is some variation in regard to the name and sex of 
the deity from whom he obtained the fire. Sometimes the 
deity appears as a female and sometimes as a male, some- 
times as the grandmother and sometimes as the grandfather 
of the hero; and her or his name is variously given as 
Mahuika, Mahuike, Mauika, Mauike, Mauimotua, Mafuie, 
and Mafuike. In the Maori myth the realm of the tire- 
goddess would seem to be in the sky, for the hero speaks of 
fetching down fire for the world. But in almost all the 
other versions the home of the fire-deity is definitely sub- 
terranean, and the hero has to descend into the nether 
world in order to procure the fire. Sometimes the fire-god 
only yields the fire on compulsion after a struggle with the 
hero, in which the deity gets the worst of it. In the 
Chatham Islands version, as in the Maori version, the fire- 
god produces the fire from his fingers. In the Marquesas 
version the fire-goddess produces the fire from her toes, 
knees, back, and navel; but in the other versions which I 
have cited nothing is said about the fire being extracted 
from the body of the deity. While the fire-bringer Maui is 
clearly conceived as a hero in human form, he ξ΄ sometimes 
said to have assumed the form of a bird in order either to 
obtain access to the realm of the fire-deity or to escape from 
the conflagration which followed his interview with that 
potentate. Thus in the Maori version the hero Maui is said 
to have assumed the form of an eagle; in one of the two 
Hervey Islands versions he is reported to have entered 
temporarily into the body of a red pigeon; while in the 
Marquesas version he concealed himself under the form of 
a patiotio bird. A version of the story which is reported 
from the Hawaii or Sandwich Islands relates how Mani 
learned the art of fire-making from an alae bird, which used 
to carry fire about and communicate it to its fellow-birds in 
order that they might roast bananas or taro with it. Being 


1W. W. Gill, Myths and Songs from the South Pacific 
(London, 1876), pp. 51-58, 63-69. 

8. a Tregear, δ Polynesian folk-lore ; ii.: The Origin of 
Fire,” Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand 
Institute, xx. (1887), pp. 385-387. 


334 


I1I.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


caught by Maui, the bird explained to him how to make fire 
by rubbing two sticks together, and indicated to him the 
various sorts of trees from which fire-sticks could be pro- 
cured.. As all but one of these trees proved on trial to be 
quite unsuitable for the purpose, Maui in a rage applied a 
burning brand to the bird’s head, as you may still see by the 
red crest on its poll.!. In one of the Hervey Islands versions 
the fire-god employed a bird of white plumage, the tern, to 
hold down the lower fire-stick, while he himself twirled 
the upper fire-stick in the usual way to elicit fire. But 
Maui snatched the burning upper stick from the fire-god’s 
hands, and as the bird continued to clutch the lower stick, 
the hero applied the flaming stick in his hands to either side 
of the bird’s eyes and scorched both places. That is why 
you see the black marks on either side of the tern’s eyes down 
to this day. Thus, while the human aspect of the fire-bringer 
certainly prevails in the Polynesian myths of the origin of 
fire, there are hints that in another and perhaps older 
version of the tale he may have been a bird rather than 
a man, 

The natives of Nukufetau, one of the Ellice Islands, give 
a very rationalistic account of the origin of fire. They say 
that fire was discovered by seeing smoke rise from two 
crossed branches which were rubbed against each other in 
the wind. 

The Toradyas of Central Celebes say that the Creator gave 
fire to the first man and woman, but did not teach them how 
to make it. So when the fire went out, people were at a loss 
how to boil their rice. Accordingly they resolved to send a 
messenger to the sky to ask for a little fire, for in those days 
the sky was much nearer to the earth than it is now. The 
messenger chosen for the purpose was a certain insect named 
tambooya. When the insect came to the sky and asked for 
fire, the gods said, ‘‘ We will give you fire; but you must 
cover your eyes with your hands, that you may not see how 
we make it.” But the gods did not know that the insect had 
an eye under each shoulder ; so while he lifted up his arms 


1 A. Bastian, Inselgruppen in Oceanien (Berlin, 1883), 
pp. 278 sq.; id., Allerlec aus Volks- und Menschenkunde 
(Berlin, 1888), i. 120 sq. 

2 6, Turner, Samoa, pp. 285 sq. 


Jac 


APPENDIX 


to hide his eyes in his head, he saw with his eyes under his 
arms how the gods made fire by striking a flint with a chop- 
ping-knife, and on his return to earth he communicated the 
secret to mankind, who have made fire in that way ever 
since. 

The natives of Nias, an island to the west of Sumatra, say 
that in the olden time certain evil spirits called Belas used 
to consort with mankind in a friendly way, but only the 
Belas knew how to make fire, and they kept the secret to 
themselves, though they were willing enough to lend fire to 
men. One day a man, whose fire had gone out, went to 
borrow it from the wife of a Bela. To prevent him from 
seeing how she made it, she proposed to cover him up with 
a garment. But he said, “1 can see through a garment ; 
put a basket over me.” She did so, but while she made fire, 
he looked through the interstices of the basket, and so 
learned the secret. ? 

The Andaman Islanders say that after the great flood, 
which extinguished all fires on earth, the ghost of a drowned 
man assumed the form of a kingfisher and flew up to the sky, 
where he discovered the Creator seated beside his fire. The 
bird seized a burning log in its beak, but accidentally dropped 
it on the Creator, who, smarting with pain, hurled the brand 
at the awkward bird. The missile missed the kingfisher but 
dropped near the survivors of the flood, who thus recovered 
the use of fire.§ 


1 A. C. Kruijt, ‘De legenden der Poso-Alfoeren aan- 
gaande de eerste menschen,” Mcdedeelingen van wege het Ne- 
derlandsche Zendelinggenootschap, xxxviili. (1894), pp. 340 sy. ; 
N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt, De Bare’e-sprekende Toradjas 
van Midden-Celebes (Batavia, 1912-14), ii. 186 sq. 

2L. N. H. A. Chatelin, ‘‘Godsdienst en bijgeloof der 
Niassers,” Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en V olken- 
kunde, xxvi. (1880), p. 182; E. Modigliani, Un Viaggio a 
Nias (Milan, 1890), pp. 629 sg. Compare H. Sundermann, 
Die Insel Nias (Barmen, 1905), p. 70. 

8K. H. Man, On the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the An- 
daman Islands (London, n.d.), pp. 98 sg. Compare Census 
of India, 1901, vol. iii. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
by Sir Richard C. Temple (Caleutta, 1903), p. 63; M. V. 
Portman, ‘‘The Andaman fire-legend,” The Indian Antt- 
quary, xxvi. (1897), pp. 14-18. 


334 


Δ αν. δ τ, 


11. ΤΗΝ ORIGIN OF FIRE 


The Thay or Tai of Siam have likewise a legend of a 
great flood which extinguished all fires on earth. The 
survivors sent three several messengers, a man, a serpent, 
and an owl, one after the other, to the Spirit of the Sky 
to procure fire, but none of them succeeded in the task. 
At last they applied to the gad-fly, and he willingly under- 
took the duty, only stipulating that if he succeeded in his 
mission he should be free thenceforth to batten on the thighs 
of buffaloes and the legs of men. His terms being accepted, 
the gad-fly flew up to the sky. Now the eyes of a gad-fly 
- are not in its head but at the root of its wings; at least the 
Thay think so. But when Sky asked the gad-fly, ‘‘ Where 
are your eyes?” the cunning insect replied, ‘‘ They are just 
where other people’s eyes are.” ‘‘ Then,” pursued the Sky, 
‘‘where will you shut yourself up so as to see nothing?” 
The artful gad-fly answered, ‘‘I see through the sides of a 
pitcher just as if they did not exist ; but put me in a basket 
with interstices, and I see absolutely nothing.” The simple- 
minded Sky accordingly put the gad-fly in a basket with 
interstices and set about making fire by the process of draw- 
ing a cord rapidly to and fro in the notch of a stick. En- 
sconced in the basket, the gad-fly saw the whole process and 
communicated the secret tomen.! In this story the gad-fly’s 
trick of peeping through the interstices of a basket resembles 
ihe trick played by the man in the corresponding story from 

ias. 3 

The Ba-ila, a tribe of Northern Rhodesia, in South Africa, 
tell how the Mason-Wasp brought fire from God. They say 
that formerly there was no fire on earth, so all the birds 
assembled together and asked, ‘‘ Whence shall we get fire?” 
Mason-Wasp offered to go to God to get some, and the 
Vulture, the Fish-Eagle, and the Crow volunteered to go 
with him. So they all flew off; but first the Vulture, then 
the Fish-Eagle, and then the Crow expired with the effort, 
and their bones fell to the earth. Only Mason-Wasp won 
his way to God and told him that he was come to ask for fire. 
God gave him fire and his blessing as well, saying, ‘‘ You 
shall not have to beget children. When you desire a child, 
go and look into a grainstalk and you will find an insect 


1 A. Bourlet, ‘‘ Les Thay,” Anthropos, ii. (1907), pp. 921- 
24, 2 See above, p. 334. 


335 


APPENDIX 


whose name is Ngongwa. When you have found him, take 
and carry him into a house. When you arrive in the house, 
look out for the fireplace where men cook, and build there a 
dwelling for your child Ngongwa. When you have finished 
building, put him in and let him remain there. When many 
days have elapsed, just go and have a look at him ; and one 
day you will find he has changed and become just as you are 
yourself.” So it is to-day: Mason-Wasp builds a house, 
as for the fireplace, just as he was commanded by 
od. 

This African account of the origin of fire on earth is 
explained as follows by the writers who have recorded it : 
‘*The Mason-Wasp, the Prometheus of the Ba-ila, with its 
indigo-blue wings, yellow abdomen, and black and orange 
legs, is a common object in Central Africa. It builds its cell 
of mud not only on the fireplaces, as the tale narrates, but 
also (and this is a great nuisance) on walls, books, and 
pictures in one’s dwelling. In the cell it lays its eggs, 
together with a caterpillar or grub, and seals them up ; then 
it builds other cells, until quite a large unsightly lump of 
clay is left on the wall. As the young grubs hatch out they 
eat the insects which have been benumbed, but not killed, by 
the sting of their parent. We have here an interesting 
example of how the observation of natives is correct up to 
a certain point ; but not taking into consideration, because 
they have not noticed, all the facts, the conclusion they draw 
is wrong. They suppose Ngongwa to metamorphose into a 
Mason-Wasp ; and this tale is to explain why it is so, as well 
as to account for the domestic fire.” ? 

A very different story of the origin of fire is told by the 
Basongo Meno, a group of tribes in the Congo basin, whose 
territory lies to the north of the Sankuru and Kasai rivers. 
They say that from the earliest times they have made their 
fishing-traps out of the ribs of the Raphia palm. One day a 
man, constructing such a trap, wished to bore a hole in the 
end of one of the ribs, and he used a small pointed stick for 
the purpose. In the process of boring fire was elicited, and 
this method of procuring fire has been employed ever since. 


1K. W. Smith and A. M. Dale, The Ila-speaking Peoples 
of Northern Rhodesia (London, 1920), ii. 345 sq. 
2 KE. W. Smith and A. M. Dale, op. οὐδ. ii. 346 sq. 


336 


III.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


Hence large plantations of Raphia palm are maintained by 
the people to supply them with fire-sticks.! 

In Loango they say that once on a time the spider spun a 
long, long thread, and that the wind caught one end of the 
thread and carried it up to the sky. Then the woodpecker 
climbed up the thread, and pecking at the celestial vault 
made those holes in it which we call stars. After the wood- 
pecker had thus ascended, man 8150 clambered up the thread 
to the sky and fetched down fire.” 

The Ekoi of Southern Nigeria, on the borders of the 
Cameroons, say that in the beginning of the world, the Sky 
God, Obassi Osaw, made everything, but he did not give fire 
to the people who were on earth. A chief named Etim ‘Ne 
sent the Lame Boy, who at that time was not lame, to the 
Sky God to ask for fire. The Lame Boy went and proffered 
the request, but the Sky God refused it angrily and sent him 
back to earth. Next the chief went himself to the deity and 
humbled himself before him ; but he fared no better and had 
to return home empty-handed. Thereupon the Lame Boy 
undertook to steal fire from the Sky God. With that view 
he went and took service with the Sky God, and after he 
had served the deity for some days, the god said to him, 
“*(;0 to the house of my wives, and ask them to send me a 
lamp.” The boy gladly did as he was bidden, for it was in 
the house of the god’s wives that the fire was kept. He 
waited till the lamp was given him, and then brought it back 
with all speed. Once, after he had stayed many days among 
the servants, the Sky God Obassi sent hiin again for a lamp, 
and this time one of the wives said, ‘‘ You can light the lamp 
at the fire.” The boy took a brand and lighted the lamp, 
then he wrapped the brand in plantain leaves and tied it 
up in his cloth. He carried the lamp to his master ; but that 
night, when all the people were asleep, he took the fire-brand 
which he had wrapped in plantain leaves, and carrying it he 
set out homeward. When he reached the earth once more, 
he took the fire to his chief and showed it to him. So the 
first fire was made on earth. But looking down from his 
house in the sky the god, Obassi Osaw, saw the smoke rising, 


1 K. Torday et T. A. Joyce, Les Bushongo (Brussels, 1910), 
pp. 275 sq. 
2 Die Loango-Expedition, iii. 2, von ΕΠ, Pechuél-Loesche 
(Stuttgart, 1907), p. 135. 
33. 
APOLL, II. Z 


APPENDIX 


and he said to his eldest son, ‘‘ Go, ask the boy if it is he who ; 
has stolen the fire.” His eldest son came down to earth and 
delivered his father’s message. The lad confessed, saying, 
‘*T was the one who stole the fire. The reason why Τ hid it 
was because I feared.” The god’s eldest son, whose name 
was Akpan, replied, ‘‘I bring you a message. Up till now 
you have been able to walk. From to-day you will not be 
able to do so any more.” That is the reason why the Lame 
Boy cannot walk. He it was who first brought fire to earth 
from Obassi’s house in the sky.? 

The Lengua Indians of the Paraguayan Chaco say that in 
early times men, being unable to produce fire, were compelled 
to eat their food raw. But one day an Indian found a fire 
which a certain bird had kindled in order to cook snails. In 
the bird’s absence he stole some of the burning sticks and 
communicated the fire to his friends, who that night cooked 
their food for the first time. When the bird, soaring up in 
the sky, saw the Indians sitting round the stolen fire, he was 
very angry, and created a great thunderstorm, accompanied 
by terrible lightning, which terrified the people. Hence, 
whenever it thunders, it is a sign that the thunder-bird is 
angry and is seeking to punish the Indians by fire from the 
sky ; for ever since the bird lost its fire it has had to eat its 
food raw.? ; 

The Tapietes, an Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, say that 
of old the black vulture obtained fire by means of lightning 
from heaven, while as yet the Indians had no fire. However, 
a frog stole two sparks from the black vulture’s fire and 
brought them in his mouth to the Tapietes. Since then the 
Tapietes have had fire, and the black vulture has had none. 
Robbed of his fire, the black vulture sat down with his 
hands over his head and wept. 

The Tembes, an Indian tribe of north-eastern Brazil, in 
the province of Grao Para, say that formerly fire was in the 
possession of the king vulture. The Tembes, being destitute 


1 P. Amaury Talbot, In the Shadow of the Bush (London, 
1912), pp. 370 sq. 
2 W. B. Grubb, An Unknown People in an Unknown 
Land (London, 1911), p pp. 97-99. 
3 K. Nordenskiéld, Indianerleben. El Gran Chaco (Leip- 
sic, 1912), pp. 313 sq. For other stories of the origin of fire, 
see id., pp. 21 sq., 110 sq. 


338 


ΤΉΝ ORIGIN OF FIRE 


of fire, had to dry their meat in the sun., So they resolved 
to steal fire from the king vulture. For this purpose they 
killed a tapir and let it lie for three days, after which the 
carcase was rotten and full of maggots. The king vulture 
and his clan now came down to partake of the feast. They 
pulled off their garments of feathers and appeared in human 
form. They had brought with them a fire-brand, and with 
it they kindled a great fire. They gathered the maggots, 
wrapped them in leaves, and roasted them. Then the 
Tembes, who had lain in ambush, ran to the spot, but the 
vultures flew up and bore the fire to a place of safety. Thus 
the Indians exerted themselves in vain for three days. Then 
they built a hunting-shelter beside the carrion, and an old 
medicine-man hid in it. The vultures came again and 
kindled their fire close to the shelter. And when they had 
laid aside their feather-garments and were roasting the 
maggots, the old man jumped out on them. ‘The vultures at 
once made for their cast-off garments, the old man snatched 
a fire-brand, and by means of it he put fire into all the trees 
from which the Indians now extract it by friction.+ 

᾿ The Arekuna Indians of northern Brazil tell of a certain 
man named Makunaima, who lived with his brothers long 
ago before the great flood. They had as yet no fire and were 
compelled to eat all their food raw. So they sought for fire 
and found the little green bird called by the natives mutug 
(Prionites momola) which was said to be in possession of fire. 
The bird was in the act of fishing, and Makunaima tied a 
string to its tail without its knowledge. The string was very 
. long, and following it up the brothers came to the bird’s 
house, from which they carried away fire with them. After- 
wards there came a great flood, and a certain rodent, which 
the natives call akuli (Dasyprocta aguti), saved itself from 
drowning by creeping into a hole ina tree and bunging up 
the hole. There in the hole the creature made fire; but the 
fire caught the animal’s hinder quarters and changed into red 
hair. Hence the beast has had red hairs on that part of its 
body to this day.” 


1 Th. Koch-Griinberg, Indianermdarchen aus Siidamerika 
(Jena, 1920), No. 65, pp. 186 sq. 

* Th. Koch-Griinberg, Vom Roroima zum Orinoco (Berlin, 
1916-17), ii. 33-36. For another story of the origin of fire, 
told by the Taulipang Indians of the same region, see 7d. ii. 76. 


339 
2. 


APPENDIX 


The Tarumas, an Indian tribe inhabiting the forests in the 
south-eastern region of British Guiana, say that in the begin- 
ning two brothers only lived on earth ; there was no woman. 
Afterwards the younger brother Duid fished up the first 
woman from a deep pool and married her. The two brothers 
lived in separate houses near each other. They had always 
eaten their food raw, having no fire to cook it with; but 
they noticed that the woman ate nothing raw except fruit. 
At last, after many years, when she was an old woman and 
had borne many children, the elder brother forced her by 
threats of violence to reveal her secret. So she sat down, 
and spreading her legs wide apart produced fire from her 
genital canal. From that fire is descended the fire which we 
now use. One day as Duid was sitting on the bank of the 
river with his fire beside him, an alligator came and snapped 
up the fire in its jaws and carried it off. However, Duid’s 
elder brother recalled the alligator and induced it to disgorge 
its fiery prey. The fire itself was uninjured, but it had 
burned out the alligator’s tongue, and in consequence the 
alligator has been tongueless ever since. Another day, soon 
afterwards, a maroudi picked up Duid’s fire and flew away 
with it. Again the elder brother came to the rescue. The 
bird was recalled and gave back the fire, but her neck was 
burned and has remained red to this day. Another day, 
when Duid was absent, a jaguar came along, and stepping on 
the tire burned his feet so badly that he has never since been 
able to plant them flat on the ground, but must walk on his 
toes. A tapir also came along and trod on the fire, and he is 
so slow in his movements that he was very badly burned and 
has had hoofs ever since.? 

The Cora Indians of Mexico tell how in former times the 
iguana, a species of lizard, was in possession of fire, and how, 
having quarrelled with his wife and his mother-in-law, he 
retired to the sky, taking the fire with him, Thus there was 
no more fire on earth, because the iguana had carried it all 
away and kept it hidden up aloft. So the people assembled 
and consulted. They determined to send the raven up to the 
sky to fetch the fire down, but he failed in the attempt; so 


1 W. C. Farabee, The Central Arawaks (Philadelphia, 
1918), pp. 143-47 (University of Pennsylvania, Anthropolo- 
gical Publications, vol. ix.). 


340 


IL—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


did the humming-bird, and-all the other birds At last the 
opossum contrived to climb up to the sky. There he found 
an old man sitting by a fire. When the old man fell asleep, 
the opossum seized a firebrand and dragged it towards the 
abyss by which the way to earth went down. Being over- 
taken by the old man, the opossum threw down the fire. It 
fell on the ground and set the earth on fire But the earth 
goddess extinguished the conflagration with her milk, The 
people carried away the fire, and it remained with them.? 
The Sia Indians of New Mexico say that Spider was the 
creator of men and all animals. He lived in a house under- 
ground, and there he made fire by rubbing a sharp-pointed 
stone on a round flat stone. But having kindled the fire, he 
kept it in his house, setting a snake, a cougar, and a bear to 
guard the first, second, and third door, that no one might 
enter and see the fire. So people on earth had no fire and 
grew weary of browsing on grass like deer. They sent the 
coyote to steal fire for them from the nether world. He went, 
passed the warders at the doors of Spider’s house, because 
they were all asleep, and made his way into the room where 
Spider himself was slumbering beside the fire. Coyote 
hastened to the fire and lighted at it a cedar brand which 
was tied to his tail. Then he hurried away, and Spider 
awoke; but before he could rouse the sleeping warders, 
coyote was far on his way with the fire to the upper world.? 
The Navahoes of New Mexico say that when men first 
emerged from the earth, they found the animals already in 
possession of fire, though they themselves had none. But 
the coyote, the bat, and the squirrel, being friends of men, 
Bereed to aid each other in procuring fire for mankind. So 
while the animals were busy playing the moccasin game, 
Coyote appeared on the scene with splinters of resinous pine- 
wood tied to his tail. While the attention of the animals 
was absorbed by the game, Coyote dashed through the fire, 
the splinters attached to his tail took fire, and with his fiery 
train he fled, pursued by all the animals. When he was 
exhausted, he passed the fire to the bat, and when the bat in 


1K. Th. Preuss, Die Nayarit-Expedition, i. (Leipsic, 
1912), pp 177-81. 

2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, ‘‘ The Sia,” Hleventh 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1894), pp. 26 sq., 70, 72 sq. 


341 


APPENDIX 


turn could run no more, he transmitted the fire to the 
squirrel, who contrived to carry it safe to the Navahoes.! 

This arrangement of relays of animal runners,’ who pass 
the stolen fire from one to another, is a common feature in 
North American myths of the origin of fire. A typical story 
of this sort, for example, is told by the Uintah Utes of north- 
eastern Utah. They relate how Coyote and his people the 
Kagle, the Humming-bird, the Hawk-Moth, the Chicken- 
Hawk, and so on, had no fire, and how, led by Coyote, they 
started out in search of it, till at last they came to the 
village of people who had fire. There, dancing round the 
fire, Coyote contrived to ignite the shredded bark which he 
had stuck on his head in imitation of hair. Having thus 
secured the fire, he ran off with it, pursued by the people 
whose fire he had stolen. Growing tired, he passed the ΙΝ 
first to Eagle, who in turn transmitted it to Humming-bird, 
and so on. Finally, Coyote succeeded in bringing the 
precious fire, in a tube of old dry sagebrush, to his people, 
and explained to them how to make fire by boring a hole in 
a piece of sagebrush with a piece of greasewood.? In this 
tale, as in many others of the same sort, the actors bear the 
names of animals or birds but are conceived in some measure 
as human. The confusion is not necessarily a product of 
totemism; the lack of the power to discriminate clearly 
between animals and men is rather a cause than an effect of 
totemism. 

The Sioux, Menomonis, Foxes, and several other Indian 
tribes in the valley of the Mississippi, used to relate, like many 
other peoples, that the few survivors of the great flood were 
left without fire. ‘To remedy this inconvenience the Master off 
Life sent a white raven to carry fire to them. But the bird 
stopped by the way to batten on carrion and allowed the 
fire to go out. For this negligence the Great Spirit punished 
him by making him black instead of white. Then the Great 
Spirit sent a little grey bird (the erbette) as his messenger to 
carry fire to the man and woman, who alone had escaped 
from the flood. The bird did as he was bidden, and the 


1 Major E. Backus, ‘‘ An account of the Navajoes of New 
Mexico,” in H. R. Schooleraft’s Indian Tribes of the United 
States.(Philadelphia, 1853-1856), iv. 281 eq. 

2 A. L. Kroeber, ‘‘ Uteh Tales,” Journal of American 
Folk-lore, xiv. (1901), pp. 252-260. 


342 


III.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


Great Spirit rewarded him by giving him two little black 
bars on each side of his eyes. Hence the Indians regard the 
bird with great respect; they never kill it themselves, and 
they forbid their children to shoot it. Moreover, they 
imitate the bird by painting two little black bars on each 
side of their own eyes.? 

The Karok Indians of California say that in the early ages 
of the world men were without fire. For the Creator had 
hidden the fire and given it to two old hags to guard 
jealously. However, the Coyote, who was friendly to men, 
contrived to procure fire for them by stealing it from the 
two hags and passing it along a line of animal runners. 
Amongst the runners was the ground-squirrel, and the black 
spot which you see to this day just behind his fore-shoulders 
is the mark of the fire which burned him there when he was 
carrying it. Another of the runners was the frog. In those 
days he had a tail, but as he could not hop fast enough, one 
of the old hags, who came tearing after the fire-thief, caught 
him up and tweaked off his tail. That is why frogs have no 
tails down to this day.? 

The Tolowa Indians of California say that after the great 
flood there was no fire left on earth. However, the Spider 
Indians and the Snake Indians contrived by means of a 
captive balloon to ascend to the moon and to steal fire from 
the Indians who inhabited the lunar orb.? The Maidu In- 
dians of California relate how once Thunder carried off all 
the fire and kept it in his house, setting Woswosim (a small 
bird) to guard it and to prevent people from stealing it. 
However, with the help of two Lizards the people discovered 
the house of Thunder by its smoke, and they sent Mouse, 
Deer, Dog, and Coyote to get the fire, and they took 
a flute with them in which to carry the fire when they 
should get it. Mouse contrived to steal the fire while the 
watcher slept, and the stolen element was given to the 


1 Francois- Vincent Badin, in Annales de l Association de 
la Propagation de la Foi, iv. (Lyons and Paris, 1830), 
pp. 537 sq. 

2 §. Powers, T'ribes of California (Washington, 1877), 
pp. 38 sg. (Contributions to North American Ethnology, 
vol. iii. ). 

3S. Powers, op. cit. pp. 70 sg. For other stories of the 
origin of fire, see 7d., pp. 161, 182, 273, 343 sq. 


343 


APPENDIX 


swiftest runner to carry in the tube. But Deer carried some 
of it in the hock of his leg, and that is why there is a 
reddish spot in his hock .to this day. While they were 
making off with the fire, Thunder awoke, jumped up with 
a roar like thunder, and came tearing after the thieves. 
But Skunk shot him dead. So the people got home safely 
with the fire, and they have had it ever since.! 

While in the more southern tribes of North America the 
animal which is most commonly supposed to have procured 
fire for men is the coyote, in the more northerly tribe the 
place of the coyote in the myth is taken by other animals or 
birds, such as the deer, the beaver, the mink, and the raven. 
For example, among the tribes of Vancouver Island the 
thief of fire is usually the deer, who steals it in much the 
same way as the coyote, by tying resinous shavings of pine- 
wood to his tail or his bead and then whisking his tail or 
butting with his head through the fire, so that the shavings 
ignite and the animal makes off with its tail or head ablaze 
and with the usual hue and cry after it. Such stories are 
told, for example, by the Nootkas or Ahts,* the Catloltq,® 
the Tlatlasikoala,4 and the Kwakiutl® Indians, all of Van- 


1 Rowland B. Dixon, ‘‘Maidu Myths,” Bulletin of the 
American Museum of Natural History, xvii. part ii. (New 
York, 1902), pp. 65-67. 

2G. M. Sproat, Scenes and Studies of Savage Life 
(London, 1868), pp. 178 sg. ; George Hunt, ‘‘ Myths of the 
Nootka,” in ‘‘ Tsimshian Mythology,” by Franz Boas, Thirty- 
first Annual Report of the Burcau of American Ethnology 
(Washington, 1916), pp. 894-896. Compare Franz Boas, 
Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen Kiiste Amerikas 
(Berlin, 1895), p. 102. In this last version Deer fails in his 
attempt to steal fire from the Wolves, its owners; but the 
theft is successfully perpetrated by Woodpecker and a 
creature called Kwatiath, who, in carrying the fire, inad- 
vertently put it to his cheek and so burned a hole in his 
cheek, which may be seen there to this day. 

3 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, pp. 80 sq. 

4 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, p. 187. 

5 George M. Dawson, ‘‘ Notes and Observations on the 
Kwakiool people of Vancouver Island,” Transactions of the 


344 


+ SP, 


σας \ at Adee 


IiI.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


couver Island. Myths of the same sort are current among 
the tribes on the adjacent coast of British Columbia, such 
as the Awikenoq? and the Tsimshian.?- Among the Heiltsuk, 
another tribe on the coast of British Columbia, the Deer is 
said to have borne a title meaning the Torch-bearer, because 
he stole the fire by means of wood tied to his tail.? 

In a myth told by the Thompson Indians, who inhabit the 
interior of British Columbia, the Coyote reappears as the 
first thief of fire, who stole it in the usual way by dancing 
round a fire with a head-dress of combustible shavings and 
then running away as soon as the shavings ignited. The 
parallel with the southern myths is completed by a chain of 
animals, including Fox, Wolf, and Antelope, to which Coyote 
passed the fire, and who ran with it till they succumbed, 
one after the other.* But in other versions of the myth told by 
the Thompson Indians the thief of fire is the Beaver, assisted 
by the Eagle or by the Eagle and the Weasel together. A 
very similar story of the theft of fire is told by the Lillooet 
Indians, who are neighbours of the Thompson Indians. In 


Royal Society of Canada, vol. v. section ii. (1887), p. 22. 
In another Kwakiutl version of the myth the thief is not 
the Deer but the Mink, who stole the first fire for men from 
the ghosts. See Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der 
Nord-Pacifischen Kiiste Amerikas, p. 158. 

1 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, pp. 213 sq. 

2 Franz Boas, ‘‘ Tsimshian Mythology,” Thirty-first 
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
(Washington, 1916), p. 63. 

3 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, p. 241. 

4 James A. Teit, ‘‘Thompson Tales,” in Folk-tales of 
Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes, edited by Franz Boas 
(Lancaster, Pa., and New York, 1917), p. 2 (Memoirs of the 
American Folk-lore Society, vol. xi.). 

δ᾽ James Teit, ‘‘Mythology of the Thompson Indians,” 
The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. viii. part ii. 
(Leyden and New York, 1912), pp. 229 sq. 338 sq. (Memoirs 
of the American Museum of Natural History) ; id. Tradi- 
tions of the Thompson River Indians of British Columbia 
(Boston and New York, 1898), pp. 56 sq. 


3535 


APPENDIX 


their version also the thief is the Beaver, and his accomplice 
is the Eagle, who diverts the attention of the owners of the 
fire, while Beaver conveys it away in a clam-shell.! A 
like tale is told by the Okanaken Indians, who form the 
most easterly division of the Salish stock in British 
Columbia. In their version the fire is stolen from the sky 
people by the animals who climb up to the sky along a chain 
of arrows constructed in the way which has been already 
described.?, Having reached the upper world in this manner, 
Beaver and Eagle are deputed to secure the fire, and they do 
so as before, Eagle attracting the attention of the Sky 
people, while Beaver makes off with the fire, which he has 
stowed away for safety under his skin. On reaching the 
top of the ladder of arrows in order to descend to earth, 
the animals scuffle among themselves as to who should go 
down first, and in the scuffle the ladder breaks before they 
could all descend by it. Hence some of them had to jump 
down, and Catfish and Sucker broke their heads in leaping, 
which explains why their heads are so funny to this day.* 
An almost precisely similar story is told by the Sanpoil 
Indians, another tribe of the Salish stock who live in 
Washington State. 

The Chilcotin Indians, in the interior of British Columbia, 
tell how in the old days there was no fire in the world 
except in the house of one man, who would not give it to 
anybody. But Raven contrived to steal fire from him by 
the familiar device of tying pitchwood shavings in his hair, 
dancing round the man’s fire, and then poking his head in 
the fire, so that the shavings ignited. Thus Raven got fire 
and used it to kindle conflagrations all over the country. 
When the woods began to burn, the animals ran for their 


1 James Teit, ““ Traditions of the Lillooet Indians of 
British Columbia,” Journal of American Folk-lore, xxv. 
(1912), pp. 299 sq. 

2 See above, Appendix, ‘‘ War of Earth on Heaven,” 
pp. 318 sqq. 

3 C. Hill Tout, ‘‘Report on the Ethnology of the 
Okanaken of British Columbia,” Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute, xli. (1911), p. 146. 

4 See above, Appendix, ‘‘ War of Earth on Heaven,” 
pp. 325 sq. 


346 


ss 


IIl.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


lives and most of them escaped ; but the rabbit did not run 
fast enough, and the fire caught him up, and burned his 
feet. That is why rabbits have black spots on the soles of 
their feet to this day. And after the trees had caught fire, 
the fire remained in them, which is the reason why wood 
burns to-day, and why you can get fire by rubbing two 
sticks together.+ 

The Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands say that 
long ago people had neither fire, nor daylight, nor fresh 
water, nor the olachen fish, all these good things being in the 
possession of a great chief or deity who lived where is now 
the Nasse River, and who kept them all to himself. But the 
cunning Raven contrived to steal all these boons from the 
selfish chief or deity and to communicate them to mankind. 
The way in which he stole fire was this. He did not dare to 
appear in his proper shape in the chief’s house ; but assuming 
the form of a leaf of the spruce fir he floated on the water 
near the house. Now the chief had a daughter, and when 
she went down to draw water, she drew up the leaf along 
with it, and afterwards, taking a draught of the water, she 


- swallowed the leaf. Shortly afterwards she conceived and 


bore a child, who was no other than the subtle Raven. Thus 
Raven gained an entry into the lodge. Watching his chance, 
he one day picked up a burning brand, and donning his coat 
of feathers (for he could don and doff his plumage at will) he 
flew out of the smoke-hole, carrying fire with him and 
spreading it wherever he went. 3 

The Tlingit Indians of Alaska also tell of the wonderful 
doings of Raven in the early days of the world. They say 
that fire did not then exist on the earth, but only on an 
island in the sea. Raven flew thither, and picking up a 


1 Livingston Farrand, ‘‘ Traditions of the Chilcotin 
Indians.” The Jesup North Pazific Expedition, vol. ii. 
part i. ((New York], 1900), p. 3 (Memoir of the American 
Museum of Natural History). 

2G. M. Dawson, Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, 
1878 (Montreal, 1880), pp. 14198--1518 (Geological Survcy of 
Canada). A less romantic version of the Haida story is 
current in the Masset dialect. See John R. Swanton, “ Haida 
texts—Masset dialect,” The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
vol. x. part ii. (Leyden and New York, 1908), pp. 315 sq. 


347 


APPENDIX 


firebrand in his bill returned. But so great was the distance 
that when he came to land the brand was almost consumed, 
and even Raven’s bill was half burnt off. As soon as he 
reached the shore, he dropped the glowing embers on the 
ground, and the scattered sparks fell on stones and wood, 
And that, the Tlingit say, is the reason why both stones and 
wood still contain fire; for you can strike sparks from 
stones by striking them with steel, and you can produce fire 
from wood by rubbing two sticks together.! 

In another Tlingit version of the myth it is said that in 
the beginning men had no fire. But Raven (Yetl) knew that 
Snow-Owl, who lived far out in the ocean, guarded the fire. 
He commanded all men, who in those days still had the form 
of animals, to go, one after the other, to fetch fire ; but none 
of them succeeded in bringing it. At last the Deer, who 
then had a long tail, said, ‘‘I will take fir-wood and tie-it to 
my tail. With that I will fetch fire.” So he ran to the 
house of Snow-Owl, danced round the fire, and at last 
whisked his tail close to the flames. Then the wood on his 
tail caught fire, and he ran away. Thus it came about that 
his tail was burnt off, and since that time the Deer has had 
only a stumpy tail.? 

In Normandy they say that long ago there was no fire on 
earth and it was necessary to fetch fire from heaven. The 
people applied to the big birds, but they refused to under- 
take the task. At last the little wren offered to go, and 
succeeded in bringing back the fire to earth. But on the 
return journey all the wren’s feathers were burnt by the fire ; 
and to supply their place the other birds out of gratitude 
gave each a feather from his own plumage. Since that time 
the wren’s plumage has been speckled. The only bird that 
_ would not give a feather to clothe the wren was the screech- 
owl. All the birds attacked him to punish him for his 


1H. J. Holmberg, ‘‘ Ueber die Volker des Russischen 
Amerika,” Acta WSocietatis Scientiarum Fennicae, iv. 
(Helsingfors, 1856), p. 339; Alph. Pinart, ‘‘ Notes sur les 
Koloches,” Bulletins de la Société d Anthropologie de Paris, 
I[™e série, vii. (1872), pp. 798 sq.; Aurel Krause, Die Tlinkit- 
Indianer (Jena, 1885), p. 263. 

2 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, p. 314. 


348 


ee 


Ss =. 


IlI.—THE ORIGIN OF FIRE 


hardness of heart. Hence he is forced to hide himself by day 
and only comes out at night.!~ Hence in Normandy the 
wren is much respected, and people believe that some 
misfortune would befall him who should kill the bird.? Some 
say that fire from heaven would strike the house of any bad 
boy who should kill a wren or rob its nest. 

In Brittany the same story is told of the wren, and there is 
the same unwillingness to hurt the bird. At Saint Donan 
they say that if little children touch a wren’s young ones, 
they will catch St. Lawrence’s fire: that is, they will suffer 
from pimples or pustules on the face, legs, and other parts of 
the body.* But in some parts of Brittany the same story is 
told of the robin redbreast. They say it was he who fetched 
the fire, and in doing so he burnt all his feathers, whereupon 
the other birds reclothed him by each one giving him a 
feather. Only the screech-owl refused to lend a feather ; 
hence, if he shows himself by day, all the little birds ery out 
on him.® In Guernsey they say that robin redbreast was the 
first who brought fire to the island. But while he was 
crossing the water, the fire singed his feathers, and hence his 
breast has been red ever since.® 

At Le Charme, in the Département of Loiret, the story 
goes that the wren stole the fire of heaven and was descend- 
ing with it to earth, but his wings caught fire and he was 
obliged to entrust his precious burden to robin redbreast. 
But robin burned his breast by hugging the fire to it ; hence 
he in turn had to resign the office of fire-bearer. Then the 
lark took up the sacred fire, and carrying it safe to earth 


1 Jean Fleury, Littérature orale de la Basse Normandie 
(Paris, 1885), pp. 108 sg. Compare Amélie Bosquet, La 
Normandie Romanesque et Merveilleuse (Paris and Rouen, 
1845), pp. 220 sq. 

* Alfred de Nore, Coutwmes, Mythes, et Traditions des 
Provinces de France (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 271. 

8. Amélie Bosquet, op. cit. p. 221. 

4 P. Sébillot, Traditions et Superstitions de la Haute- 
Bretagne (Paris, 1882), ii. 214 sq. 

5 P. Sébillot, Traditions et Superstitions de la Haute- 
Bretagne, ii. 209 sq. 

ὁ Charles Swainson, The Folk-lore and Provincial Names 
of British Birds (London, 1886), p. 16. 


349 


APPENDIX 


delivered the treasure to mankind.! This story resembles 
the American fire-myths in which the stolen fire is said to 
have been passed on from one to another along a line of 
animal runners, * 


IV.—MELAMPUS AND THE KINE OF PHYLACUS 
(Apollodorus τ. ix. 12) 


The story of Melampus and the kine of Phylacus or of 
Tphiclus is told by the Scholiast on Homer, who cites as his 
authority the seventh book of Pherecydes.* Since this version 
of the legend contains some picturesque details, which are 
omitted by Apollodorus, and probably affords a fair specimen 
of the manner of the early mythographer Pherecydes, it 
may be worth while to submit it to the reader in a transla- 
tion. As printed by Dindorf in his edition of the Scholia on 
Homer, the tale runs as follows ?: 

‘* Neleus, son of Poseidon, had a daughter named Pero, of 
surpassing beauty, but he would give her in marriage to 
none except to him who should first drive away from Iphiclus 
at Phylace the cows of his (that is, of Neleus’s) mother 
Tyro.° When all hesitated, Bias, son of Talaus,® alone 
undertook to do it, and he persuaded his brother Melampus 


1 E. Rolland, Faune Populaire de la France, ii. (Paris, 
1879), p. 294; P. Sébillot, Le Folk-lore de France (Paris, 
1904—1907), iii. 156. 2 See above, pp. 341 saq. 

* Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 287. 

* Scholia Graeca in Homeri Odysseam, ed. G. Dindorf 
(Oxford, 1855), vol. ii. pp. 498 sq. 

> The cows belonged originally to Tyro, the mother of 
Neleus. But when Neleus was under age, Iphiclus stole the 
kine and kept them. On growing up, Neleus demanded back 
the cattle, but Iphiclus refused to return them. Hence 
Neleus was driven to promise the hand of his beautiful 
daughter Pero to anyone who should succeed in recovering 
the stolen kine. See Eustathius, on Homer, Od. xi. 292, 
p. 1685. Phylace was in Thessaly (Scholiast on Homer, Od. 
xi. 290). 

® According’ to Apollodorus (i. 9. 13), Talaus was not the 
father but the son of Bias. 


359 


αν τὰν 


IV.—MELAMPUS AND THE KINE 


to achieve the task. And he, although as a soothsayer he 
knew that he should be kept a prisoner for a year, went to 
Othrys! to get the cows. The watchmen there and the 
herdsmen caught him in the act of stealing, and handed him 
over to Iphiclus. And he was kept in bonds with two ser- 
vants, a man and a woman, who were put in charge of him. 
Now the man treated him kindly, but the woman treated 
him scurvily. But when the year was nearly up, Melampus 
heard some worms overhead saying among themselves that 
they had gnawed through the beam. On hearing that, he 
called the attendants and bade them carry him out, the 
woman taking hold of the bed by the foot, and the man by 
the head. So they took him up and carried him out. But 
meantime the beam broke and fell on the woman and killed 
her. The man reported to Phylacus what had happened, 
and Phylacus reported it to Iphiclus. And they came to 
Melampus aud asked him who he was. He said he was a 
soothsayer. And they promised to give him the cows if he 
should discover some means whereby Iphiclus might beget 
children. On this subject they gave mutual pledges. And 
Melampus sacrificed an ox to Zeus and cut it into portions 
for all the birds, and they all came, save one vulture. And 
Melampus asked all the birds if any of them knew means 
whereby Iphiclus might have children. And being all 
puzzled, they brought the vulture. He at once discovered 
the cause of the inability to beget children. For while 
TIphiclus was still a child, Phylacus had pursued him with a 
knife because he saw him misbehaving; then not catching 
him up, Phylacus stuck the knife in a certain wild pear-tree 
and the bark had grown round it, and on account of his fright 
Tphiclus had no longer the power to get children. So the 
vulture advised them to get the knife from the wild pear- 
tree, and wiping off the rust from it to give it in wine to 
Tphiclus to drink for ten days; for by that means he would 
get children. And having done so, Iphiclus recovered his 
virility and got a son Podarces. And he gave the cows 


1 Accepting the correction ἤοθρυν, proposed by Barnes and 
approved by Buttmann, for the MS. reading ’O¢pny or ᾽Οφρύν. 
For Othrys, see Theocritus, iii. 43: 

τὰν ἀγέλαν χὡ μάντις ἀπ᾿ “OPpvos Gye Μελάμπους 
ἐς Πύλον. 


351 


APPENDIX 


to Melampus, who took them and brought them to Pylus 
and gave them to Neleus as a bridal gift for Pero; and he 
got her as a bride for his brother Bias. And children were 
born to him, namely, Perialces and Aretus and Alphesiboea. 
The story is to be found in the seventh book of Phere- 
cydes.” 

The story is told in a nearly identical form by Eustathius, 
but without mentioning his authority.! He adds, however, 
one or two touches to the narrative which deserve to be 
noticed. Thus he says that when Melampus heard the 
worms conversing overhead, he pretended to be ill and 
availed himself of this pretence in order to have himself 
transported from the house which was so soon to collapse ; 
and again he tells us that Melampus invited all the birds to 
the sacrifice except the vulture, and that he questioned 
them all as to the means by which Iphiclus could beget 
children, but that none of them could answer, until last of 
all the vulture appeared and explained the matter. After 
concluding his version of the story, Eustathius calls at- 
tention to a scholium on Theocritus which adds a notable 
feature to the tale. According to the scholium, Phylacus, 
the father of Iphiclus, was gelding animals at the time when 
he frightened his little son by threatening him with the 
knife ; nay, in lifting up the knife to stick it in the tree he 
accidentally touched his son’s genital organs with it. This 
incident, though it is not mentioned in the scholium on 
Theocritus as that scholium now appears in our editions,* 
is recorded in a scholium on Homer,‘ and it has all the 


1 Commentary on Homer, Od. xi. 292, p. 1685. 

2 ἐκτέμνοντί ποτε τῷ Φυλάκῳ ζῶα παρειστήκει παῖς dv Ἴφικλος, 
ὃν ἐκπλῆξαι θέλων ὁ πατὴρ καὶ ἀνατείνας ἣν κατεῖχε μάχαιραν, 
εἶτα εἰς τὸ πλησίον δένδρον ἐμπῆξαι θελήσας, ἐπήνεγκεν αὐτοῦ τοῖς 
μορίοις οὕτω σύμβαν. If the last two words are not corrupt, 
they seem to mean ‘‘ by accident.” 

3 Schol. on Theocritus, iii. 43. In this scholium, as it now 
stands, Phylacus is said to have been engaged in cutting a 
tree (ἐκτέμνοντί mote τῷ πατρὶ Φυλάκῳ δένδρον) instead of 
gelding animals. 

4 Schol. on Homer, Od. xi. 290 ἣν [scil. μάχαιραν] ἐπήνεγκε 
Φύλακος τῷ Ἰφίκλῳ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀγρῶν ἐκτέμνοντι τὰ τετράποδα. 
Here τῶν ἀγρῶν seems to support the reading τῶν ἀγρῶν 


352 


a 


IV.—MELAMPUS AND THE KINE 


appearance of being an original and vital part of the narra- 
tive. It was, in fact, the contact of the gelding knife with 
the boy’s genitals which, on the principle of sympathetic 
magic, was supposed to have deprived him of his virility be- 
cause it had just deprived the rams of their generative power. 
The incident is reported by Apollodorus, except that he does 
not mention the actual contact of the knife with the boy’s 
genital organs. We can hardly doubt that the incident also 
formed part of the story as told by Pherecydes, though the 
scholiast on Homer, who professes to reproduce the narra- 
tive of Pherecydes, has passed it over in silence, perhaps 
out of delicacy. The mode of cure recommended by the 
vulture, which undoubtedly was recorded by Pherecydes, 
furnishes another good example of sympathetic or, in the 
strict sense, homoeopathic magic. The lad recovered his 
virility by swallowing the rust of the knife which had de- 
prived him of his generative powers, exactly as the wounded 
Telephus was healed by the rust of the spear which had 
wounded him.! 

On one point of the story our authorities are not agreed. 
Were the cattle which Melampus went to steal in possession 
of Phylacus or of his son Iphiclus? In one passage ? Homer 
plainly says that the cattle were in possession of Iphiclus, 
and that it was Iphiclus who released Melampus after a 
forcible detention of a year. This is the version of the story 
accepted, doubtless on Homer’s authority, by Pausanias, by 
the scholiasts on Homer, Theocritus, and Apollonius 
Rhodius, and by. Propertius.* But in another passage 
Homer affirms that Melampus was detained a prisoner in 
the house, not of Iphiclus, but of Phylacus.4 This latter 
version is clearly the one accepted by Apollodorus, who 
speaks of the cows as in possession of Phylacus, and 
ascribes the release of Melampus to Phylacus and not to 


against the reading τῶν αἰδοίων in the parallel passage of 
Apollodorus (i. 9. 12). See the Critical Note on that 
passage, vol. i. p. 88, note 5, 

1 See Apollodorus, Epitome, iii. 20. 

2 Homer, Od. xi. 288 sqq. 

8 Pausanias, iv. 36. 3; Scholiasts on Homer, Od. xi. 287 
and 290; Scholiast on Theocritus, iii. 43 ; Scholiast on Apol- 
lonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 118; Propertius, 11, 3. 51 sqq. 

4 Homer, Od. xv. 231 sq. 


553 
APOLL, II. AA 


APPENDIX 


Iphiclus. Hence his text ought not to be altered, as it has 
been altered by some editors,! in order to bring it forcibly 
into accord with the passages of Homer and the other 
writers in which the ownership, or rather the possession, of 
the cows is assigned to Iphiclus instead of to his father 
Phylacus. 

Apollodorus also differs from Eustathius and the Scholiast 
on Homer in describing as a sacred oak the tree into which 
Phylacus stuck the bloody knife with which he had been 
gelding the rams ; whereas according to these other writers 
the tree was a wild pear-tree.? It is tempting to connect 
the sacred oak of which Apollodorus here speaks with the 
oak which a little before he had described as standing in 
front of the house of Melampus and as harbouring the brood 
of serpents to which Melampus owed his prophetic powers. ὃ 
But the two trees can hardly have been the same, if Me- 
lampus lived at Pylus and Phylacus in Thessaly. No doubt 
oaks were common in ancient Greece as they still are in some 
parts of modern Greece, especially in the secluded highlands 
of Northern Arcadia. But why was the oak in which 
Phylacus stuck the knife a sacred tree? ‘Thereby perhaps 
hangs a tale, which, like so many other stories of the olden 
time in Greece, is lost to us. 

The calling of all the birds together for a consultation, their 
profession of ignorance, and the subsequent information 
given by the bird which was the last to arrive, are common 
incidents of folk-tales. Thus in a Rumanian story all the 
storks are assembled by the King of the Storks to say where 
the water of life and the water of death are to be found ; 
but none of them can say, until at last a blind old stork 
comes forward from the rear and supplies the desired in- 
formation. So in a Hungarian story a _ twelve-headed 
dragon calls all his beasts together to tell him where White- 
land is ; but none of them know. At last a lame wolf limps 


1 See Apollodorus, i. 9. 12, with the Critical Note, vol. i. 
p. 88, note ?. 

2 The Scholiast on Theocritus iii, 43 adopts an attitude of 
judicial impartiality by describing the tree simply as a tree. 

3 Apollodorus, i. 9. 11. 

4M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London, 
1915), pp. 263 sg. See below, pp. 356 sq. 


354 


¥—THE CLASHING ROCKS 


forward and acts as a guide to Whiteland.!’ In another 
Hungarian story the Queen of Mice summons all the mice to 
tell her where a certain castle is situated; but none of them 
can tell her. However, soon afterwards an old bald mouse 
appears who knows all about it.* So ina modern Greek story 
an old woman calls all the birds together to learn where the 
Glass City is; but none of them know. At last she consults 
a lame bird, whom she had at first neglected to summon, and 
he knows where the Glass City is situated.* In another 
modern Greek story the eagle summons all the birds to tell 
him where the Jlinen Vilinen are to be found, but none of 
them can tell him. Then he remembers a lame hawk whom 
he had not summoned to the assembly ; so he sends for the 
lame hawk, who, as usual, gives the desired information.‘ 

In a German story the King of the Golden Castle has lost 
his way and comes to the Queen of Birds to ask if she can 
direct him to the Golden Castle. The Queen has never 
heard of it, and summons all her birds to inquire whether 
they know where the castle is ; but not one of them can tell. 
At last, after all the rest of the birds had assembled, up 
comes a stork. The Queen chides him for being so late, but 
he answers that he had come from far, being perched on the 
Golden Castle when he heard the Queen’s whistle summoning 
him home. So the stork takes the King on his back and flies 
with him to the Golden Castle.® 


V.—Tue CriasHine Rocks 
(Apollodorus τ. ix. 22) 
In folk-tales the water of life is sometimes said to be 


found between two huge cliffs, which dash together and 
separate again, barely allowing the hero or his messenger 


1G. Stier, Ungarische Volksmdrchen (Pesth, n.d.), p. 9. 

2 G. Stier, op. cit. pp. 142 sq. 

3 J. G. von Hahn, Griechische und Albanesische Mdrchen 
(Leipsic, 1864), i. 138. 

* J. G. von Hahn, op. cit., i. 184 sq. 

ὃ P. Zaunert, Deutsche Marchen seit Grimm (Jena, 1919), 
pp. 32-35. For more examples, see E. Cosquin, Contes 
Populaires de Lorraine, i. 48. 


APPENDIX 


time to snatch the precious liquid before they close on each 
other once more. ‘Thus in a Russian story ‘‘ the hero is sent 
in search of ‘a healing and vivifying water,’ preserved 
between two lofty mountains which cleave closely together, 
except during ‘two or three minutes’ of each day. He 
follows his instructions, rides to a certain spot, and there 
awaits the hour at which the mountains fly apart. ‘ Sud- 
denly a terrible hurricane arose, a mighty thunder smote, 
and the two mountains were torn asunder. Prince Ivan 
spurred his heroic steed, flew like a dart between the moun- 
tains, dipped two flasks in the waters, and instantly turned 
back.’ He himself escapes safe and sound, but the hind legs 
of his horse are caught between the closing cliffs and 
smashed to pieces. The magic waters, of course, soon 
remedy this temporary inconvenience.” * 

In a Rumanian story the hero Floria is ordered by a king 
to procure for him the water of life and the water of death. 
In this difficulty the hero applies to a stork who, grateful 
for a kindness that Floria had done him, was ready to assist 
him to the best of his power. Accordingly the stork, who 
happened to be the king of storks, returned to his palace, 
called all the storks together, and asked them whether they 
had seen or heard or been near the mountains that knock 
against one another, at the bottom of which are the fountains 
of the water of life and the water of death. None of the 
young strong storks could tell, but at last there came from 
the rear a stork, lame on one foot, blind in one eye, with a 
shrivelled body and half his feathers plucked out. This 
maimed bird said, ‘‘ May it please your majesty, I have been 
there, and the proofs of it are my blinded eye and my 
crooked leg.” Notwithstanding these painful experiences 
the gallant bird undertook once more to put his life to 
hazard and to fetch the water of life and death. After 
providing himself with fresh meat and two bottles, the 
stork flew straight to the place where the mountains were 
knocking against one another, thus preventing anyone from 
approaching the fountains of life and death. It was when 
the sun had risen as high as a lance that he espied in the dis- 
tance those huge mountains which, when they knocked against 


1W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-tales (London, 1873), 
pp. 235 sq. 
356 


Η͂ Εν ον ee νυν μη Te 


V.—THE CLASHING ROCKS 


each other, shook the earth and made a noise that struck fear 
and terror into the hearts of those even who were far away. 
When the mountains had recoiled a little, the stork was 
about to swoop down between them and get the water, when 
suddenly a swallow flew to him from the heart of the 
mountain and warned him, on peril of his life, to wait till 
noon, when the mountains rested for half an hour. ‘SAs 
soon as thou seest,” said the swallow, ‘‘ that a short time 
has passed and they do not move, then rise up as high as 
possible into the air, and drop down straight to the bottom 
of the mountain. There, standing on the ledge of the stone 
between the two waters, dip thy bottles into the fountains 
and wait until they are filled. Then rise as thou hast got 
down, but beware lest thou touchest the walls of the moun- 
tain or even a pebble, or thou art lost.” The stork did as 
the swallow had told him; he waited till noontide, and 
when he saw that the mountains had gone to sleep, he 
soared up into the air, then shooting down into the depth, he 
settled on the ledge of stone and filled his bottles. Having 
done so he rose with them again, but when he had almost 
reached the top of the mountains, he touched a pebble. 
Immediately the mountains closed on him with a snap, but 
all they caught of him was the tail, which remained fast 
wedged between the two peaks of the mountains. With a 
great wrench he tore himself away, leaving his tail behind, 
but glad to escape with his life and with the two bottles of 
precious water. 

Here the nipping off of the stork’s tail resembles the 
nipping off of the dove’s tail in the Argonaut story. In a 
modern Greek story a girl fetches the water of life from a 
spring in a mountain which opens for a short time every day 
at noon. In issuing from the cleft she barely escapes, for 
the mountain closes on her and catches the skirt of her 
dress. But she draws her sword, severs the skirt, and 
having thus freed herself, she carries away the water of life 
and by means of it restores to life her two brothers, who had 
been turned to stone by the glance of acertain bird.? In 


1M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London, 
we pp. 263-265. 
J. G. v. Hahn, Griechische und albanesische Mdrchen 
(Leipsic, 1864), ii. 46 8q. 


357 


APPENDIX 


another modern Greek story a young man is directed to the 
water of life by an old woman. She tells him that within a 
certain mountain, which opens every day at noon, there are 
many springs, and that he must draw only from the par- 
ticular spring to which he should be guided by a bee, other- 
wise he would be lost.! 

An Kskimo story, which relates the adventurous voyage of 
a certain hero named Giviok, describes how “ he continued 
paddling until he came in sight of two icebergs, with a 
narrow passage between them; and he observed that the 
passage alternately opened and closed again. He tried to 
pass the icebergs by paddling round outside them, but they 
always kept ahead of him; and at length he ventured to go 
right between them. With great speed and alacrity he 
pushed on, and had just passed when the bergs closed to- 
gether, and the stern-point of his kayak got bruised between 
them.” ? 

Tylor proposed to explain the passage of the Argo be- 
tween the Clashing Rocks ‘‘as derived from a broken-down 
fancy of solar-myth” ;* but the analogies on which he based 
the hypothesis seem dubious, and the episode, like the whole 
story of the voyage of the Argo, savours more of a simple 
folk-tale than of a solar myth. In spite of the resemblance 
of the incident in the Eskimo story it would be rash to 
suppose that the Greek tale of the Clashing Rocks was sug- 
gested by a sailor’s reminiscence of an encounter with 
icebergs in some far northern sea. More probably it is a 
mere creation of a story-teller’s fancy. 


1 J. G. v. Hahn, op. ctt., ii. 280 sq. For other stories of 
the water of life enclosed between two clashing mountains or 
in a mountain that only opens for a short time, see J. G. v. 
Hahn, op. cit. i. 238, ii. 195, 284; A. Leskien und K. 
Brugman, Jitauische Volkslieder und Madrchen (Strasbourg, 
1882), p. 551. 

3 Ἡ. Rink, Zales and Traditions of the Eskimo (Edinburgh 
and London, 1875), pp. 158 sq. 

3 (Sir) E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture? (London, 1873), 
i. 349. 


358 


a 


—_— 


VI.—THE RENEWAL OF YOUTH 


VI.—THE RENEWAL OF YOUTH 
(Apollodorus τ. ix. 27) 


Stories like that of Medea and Pelias have been re- 
corded among European peasantry in Scandinavia, Germany, 
Russia, and Italy. They tell how Christ, or St. Peter, 
or the Devil, going about on earth in disguise, restored 
an old person to youth or a dead person to life by boiling 
him in a kettle or burning him in a smith’s forge, and 
how a bungler (generally a smith) tried to perform the 
same feat but failed.! A similar story is told of a certain 
mythical king of Cambodia, named Pra T’hong Rat Koma, 
who in his later years was afflicted with leprosy. ‘‘A 
learned Brahmin offered to cure him of his malady; but 
first it was necessary that he should be killed, and thrown 
into a cauldron of boiling medicine, from which he would 
emerge alive and clean. The King refused to believe in the 
Brahmin’s power, but the Brahmin took a dog, which he 
killed and threw into the boiling cauldron, when it im- 
mediately jumped out and frisked about. Still the King 
doubted. Thereupon the Brahmin offered to slay himself, 
and he gave the King three drugs which were to be thrown 
successively into the cauldron. The first would give form 
to the dead body; the second, beauty; the third, life. 
Then the Brahmin flung himself into the boiling medicine, 
but the King, forgetful of his instructions, threw in all the 
drugs at once, and the Brahmin was changed to a stone 
statue.” 2 The Shans of Lakon tell a similar story of one of 
1 (Sir) G. W. Dasent, Popular Tales from the Norse 
(Edinburgh, 1859), pp. 106 sqq., ‘‘The Master-Smith” ; 
Grimm, Household Tales, No. 81, ‘‘ Brother Lustig,” vol. i. 
pp. 312 sqq., 440 sq. (English translation by M. Hunt) ; 
W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-tales (London, 1873), 
pp. 57 sqq., ‘‘The Smith and the Demon”; T. F. Crane, 
Tialian Popular Tales (London, 1885), pp. 188 sg., ‘* The 
Lord, St. Peter and the Blacksmith.” 

2p. A. Thompson, Lotus Land (London, 1906), pp. 
300 sg. The story is told, with some unimportant variations, 
by Adolf Bastian, who calls the king Krung Phala. See 
A. Bastian, Die Voelker des oesilichen Asien, I (Leipsic, 
1866), pp. 444 sqq. 


359 


APPENDIX 


their early kings, who lived in the time of Buddha. The 
say that Kom-ma Rattsee, ‘‘a famous magician, demigod, 
and doctor, visited Lakon, and informed the princes and 
people that by his medicines and charms he could add beauty 
and restore youth and life to anyone, however he might have 
been dismembered and mangled. A decrepit old prince, 
who was verging on dotage, and longed for a renewal of his 
youth, begged the magician to experiment upon him. The 
doctor, after mincing him up, prepared a magic broth, and, 
throwing the fragments into it, placed it over the fire. 
After performing the necessary incantations, the prince, re- 
juvenated and a perfect beau, was handed out of the pot. 
He was so pleased with his new appearance, and the new 
spirit of youth and joy pervading him, that he entreated the 
magician to re-perform the operation, as he thought the first 
chopping up having been so successful, still greater benefits 
would accrue from its repetition. On the magician refusing, 
he clamorously persisted in his request. The demigod, an- 
noyed at his persistence and his covetousness, accordingly 
minced him up and put him into the pot, where he remains 
to thisday. The hill where the Phya, or prince, was dipped, 
is called Loi Phya Cheh (the hill of the dipped Phya); and a 
hill near it is known as Loi Rattsee (Russi), after the ma- 
gician.” Σ 

The Papuans of Geelvink Bay, on the northern coast of 
Dutch New Guinea, tell of an old man who used to earn 
his living by selling the intoxicating juice of the sago-palm. 
But to his vexation he often found that the vessels, which 
he had set overnight to catch the dripping juice of the 
tapped palms, were drained dry in the morning. As the 
people in his village denied all knowledge of the theft, he 
resolved to watch, and was lucky enough to catch the thief 
in the very act, and who should the thief be but the 
Morning Star? To ransom herself from his clutches she 
bestowed on him a magical stick or wand, the possession of 
which ensured to its owner the fulfilment of every wish. 
In time the old man married a wife, but she was not pleased 
that her husband was so old and so covered with scabs. So 
one day he resolved to give her a joyful surprise by renewing 


1 Holt S. Hallett, A Thowsand Miles on an Elephant 
tn the Shan States (Edinburgh and London, 1890), pp, 269 sq. 


360 


VI.—THE RENEWAL OF YOUTH 


his youth with the help of his magic wand. For this 
purpose he retired into the forest and kindled a great fire of 
iron-wood. When the flames blazed up he flung himself 
among the glowing embers, and immediately his shrivelled 
skin peeled off, and all the scabs were turned into copper 
trinkets, beautiful corals, and gold and silver bracelets. He 
himself came forth from the fire a handsome young man, 
decked himself with some of the ornaments and returned to 
his house. But there neither his wife nor her sister recog- 
nised him ; and only his little son cried out, ‘‘ There comes 
father!” However, when he explained to the women how 
he had been made young again, and convinced them of the 
truth of his story by conducting them to the place in the 
wood where the remains of the fire were still to be seen, 
with the rest of the trinkets lying about, their joy knew no 
bounds.? 

_ We may conjecture that these stories reflect a real belief 
in the possibility of renewing youth and prolonging life by 
means of the genial influence of fire. The conjecture de- 
rives some support from a custom observed by the Wajagga 
of Mount Kilimandjaro in East Africa. Among them ‘the 
wizards boast of possessing the power to protect people 
against sickness and death. A peculiar custom may be 
quoted as an example. It is called nduwmo woika ndu 
nnini: ‘custom of boiling a nobleman.’ When a great man 
desires to make himself a name, and also to prolong his life, 
he has this ceremony performed over him. He invites all 
his relations to come who desire to take part in it. The 
wizard arrives early in the morning, and first of all causes a 
trench to be dug large enough to allow a man to lie on one 
side of it with his legs drawn up ; and his wife or a girl of 
the family lies down beside him. The wizard usually says 
to him, ‘ Step in with your favourite wife.’ Only in case she 
refuses does he ask a girl to do him this service. When the 
man with his female companion has laid himself down in the 

1 J. B. van Hasselt, ‘‘Die Noeforezen,” Zeitschrift fiir 
Ethnologie, viii. (1876), pp. 176-178; J. L. van Hasselt 

“16 Papuastimme an der Geelvinkbai (Neuguinea),” Mtt- 
tetilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena, ix. 
(Jena, 1891), pp. 103-105. The story is told more briefly 
by A. Goudswaard, Die Papoewa’s van de Geelvinksbaai 
(Schiedam, 1863), pp. 84-87. 


361 


APPENDIX 


trench, poles are placed over it, and on the poles banana- 
bark andearth. After the trench has thus been covered in, 
the man’s three hearthstones are set over them at the heads 
(of the pair), a tire is kindled between them, a pot is placed 
on the fire, and food is boiled in it. This fire is kept up till 
evening, and the boiled food is eaten by those who take part 
in the ceremony, while the two who lie in the trench get 
none of it. Not till evening are they liberated from their 
confinement. In the heat they have been obliged to sweat 
profusely. The wizard now spits on them and says more- 
over, ‘Long life! Even in war thou shalt not be slain, even 
a musket-ball will not hit thee.’”! Here the process of 
boiling a pot on a man’s own hearthstones over his, own 
head, while he sweats at every pore below, is perhaps the 
nearest approach that can safely be made to boiling him in 
person, and the beneficial effect of it is supposed to be a 
prolongation of the ‘‘ boiled nobleman’s” life. But we have 
seen that the process of roasting, applied to babies, was 
believed by the ancient Greeks to be equally effectual in 
prolonging the lives of the infants, or rather in render- 
ing them immortal, by stripping off their mortal flesh and 
leaving only the immortal element.” Thus the Greeks 
apparently reposed a robust faith in the renovating virtue 
both of roasting and boiling, but they drew a delicate 
distinction between the two, for while they roasted babies, 
they boiled old people, at least theoretically, like the 
Wajagga of Mount Kilimandjaro. Nor are these the only 
modes in which the primitive natural philosopher has at- 
tempted to repair the decaying energies of human and 
animal life by a judicious application of what we may call 
thermodynamics: for this purpose he has often either_leaped 
over fire or walked deliberately over glowing stones and has 
driven his flocks and herds through the smoke and the 
flames. These experiments in the art of prolonging life, 
by cauterising, so to say, the germs that threaten its con- 
tinuation, have been descrihed by me elsewhere.* 


1 Bruno Gutman, Dichten und Denken der Dschagganeger 
(Leipsic, 1906), p. 162. 

2 Above, pp. 311 sqq. 

8 Balder the Beautiful, vol. ii. pp. 1 sqq., ‘* The-Fire- 
walk.” Compare Adonis, Attis, Osiris, vol. i. pp. 179 sqq., 
‘* Purification by Fire.” 


362 


VII.—THE RESURRECTION OF GLAUCUS 


VII.—Tuer RESURRECTION oF GLAUCUS 
(Apollodorus 111. iii. 1) 


Other ancient writers relate, like Apollodorus, how the 
seer Polyidus restored the dead Glaucus to life by laying on 
him a magical herb which he had seen a serpent apply with 
similar effect to a dead serpent.1_ A similar story was told of 
the resurrection of a Lydian legendary hero named Tylon or 
Tylus. It is said that one day as he was walking on the banks 
of the Hermus a serpent stung and killed him. His distressed 
sister, Moire, had recourse to a giant called Damasen, who 
attacked and slew the serpent. But the serpent’s mate 
culled a herb, “‘ the flower of Zeus,” in the woods, and bringing 
it in her mouth put it to the lips of the dead serpent, which 
immediately revived. In her turn Moire took the hint and 
restored her brother, Tylon or Tylus, to life by touching him 
with the same plant.2 The story seems to have been associated 
with Sardes, since it is clearly alluded to on the coins of that 
city.® 

The fisherman, Glaucus of Anthedon, whom the ancients 
distinguished from Glaucus, the son of Minos, is said to have 
learned in like manner the life-giving property of a certain 
herb or grass by observing that when a dead or dying fish or, 


according to another account, hare was brought into contact 


1 Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 811 (perhaps following 
Apollodorus); Apostolius, Cent. v. 48; Palaephatus, De 
incredib. 27; Hyginus, Fab. 136; id. Astronom. ii. 14. The 
story is told allusively by Claudian, De bello Getico, 442-446 : 

Cretaque, si verax narratur fabula, vidit 
Minoum rupto puerum prodire sepulchro: 

Quem senior vates avium clangore repertum 
Gramine restituit: mirae nam munere sortis 
Dulcia mella necem, vitam dedit horridus anguts. 

2 Nonnus, Dionys. xxv. 451-551; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxv. 
14. The story, as we learn from Pliny, was told by Xanthus, 
an early historian of Lydia. 

3B. V. Head, Catalogue of the Greek coins of Lydia, pp. 
exi.—cxiii., with pl. xxvii. 12. As to Tylon and the ‘‘ herb 
of Zeus,” see further Adonis, Attis, Osiris’, i. 186 sq. 


363 


APPENDIX 


with it, the creature at once revived or came to life again ; 
having tasted the herb Glaucus became himself immortal 
and leaped into the sea, where he continued to dwell as a 
marine deity. 

The magical herb, which brings the dead to life again by 
simple contact, meets us elsewhere in folk-tales. Thus a 
modern Greek story relates how a mother, going in search of 
her dead son, killed a serpent by the way; how another 
serpent brought the dead serpent to life by laying a herb on 
its body ; and how the mother, taking the hint, restored her 
dead son to life by means of the same herb.? In another 
modern Greek story a husband and wife, going in search of 
their dead son, see two serpents fighting and one of them 
killing the other. The husband says to his wife, “‘ Cover up 
the dead serpent with leaves, that no man may see 10. The 
wife does so, and immediately the dead serpent comes to life 
again. Thereupon the husband says to his wife, “ Fill your 
pocket full of that herb, for it is a good medicine.”” Afterwards 
by means of the herb they restore their dead son to life.® 
Another modern Greek story tells how three ogres, as they 
sat talking together at a spring, saw two serpents fighting. 
One of the serpents struck the other such a violent blow with 
its tail that it cut the body of the other clean through. But 
the two pieces wriggled to a herb that grew near, and wrapping 
themselves up in it were united into one body as before. 
When the youngest of the three ogres saw that, he said to his 
brothers, ‘‘ That forebodes ill to us. Let us take some of 
this herb and go home, to see what is doing there.” So they 
returned to the crystal tower in which they dwelt, and found 
it dark and deserted; and not far off they discovered the 


1 Nicander, in the first book of his Aetolian History, cited 
by Athenaeus, vii. 48, pp. 296¥r-2974; Tzetzes, Schol. on 
Lycophron, 754; Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. i. 
1310: Ovid, Metamorph. xiii. 924 sqg. ; Ausonius, Mosella, 
276 sqg.; Servius on Virgil, Georg. i. 437. According to 
Nicander, it was a hare that was revived by the herb; 
according to the other writers it was the fish which Glaucus 
had just caught. 

2 J. G. von Hahn, Griechische und albanesische Madrchen 
(Leipsic, 1864), ii. 204. 

3 J. G. von Hahn, op. cit. ii. 260. 


364 


VII.—THE RESURRECTION OF GLAUCUS 


headless body of the young prince who had married their 
sister. A little search revealed the missing head, and by 
applying it to the body and rubbing the herb on the severed 
neck, they soon joined the two together. The prince started 
up, saying, “‘ Ah, brothers, how deep has been my sleep and 
how light my awakening ! ’"1 

Again, a German folk-tale relates how a young man of 
humble birth married a princess on condition that, if she ~ 
died before him, he should be buried alive with her. She did 
die before him, and accordingly her young husband was 
conducted down into the royal vault, there to stay with the 
body of his dead wife till he died. While he sat there watching 
by the corpse and gloomily expecting death, he saw a snake 
creep out of a corner of the vault and crawl towards the dead 
body. Thinking that the creature had come to gnaw the 
corpse, he drew his sword and hewed the snake in three 
pieces. After a time a second snake crawled out of the hole, 
and seeing the first snake cut in pieces, it went back again, 
but soon returned with three green leaves in its mouth. 
These leaves it laid on the three severed pieces of the dead 
snake, and immediately the pieces joined together, and the 
dead snake came to life. Thereupon the two snakes retired 
together, but the leaves remained lying on the ground. The 
young man picked them up, and by applying them to the 
mouth and eyes of his dead wife he resuscitated her. After 
that they knocked on the door of the vault and called out, 
till they attracted the notice of the sentinels and were released 
from confinement by the King in person. But the provident 
young man kept the three snake-leaves carefully, and it was 
lucky for him that he did so; for they afterwards served to 
restore himself to life, when he had been treacherously done 
to death by his ungrateful wife with the assistance of an 
unscrupulous skipper.? 

Again, in a Lithuanian story a young man on his travels 
sees two snakes fighting with such fury that both of them 
were wounded and mangled, and the young man thought 
they would die on the spot. But after the fight the snakes 
crawled to a certain bush, and plucking leaves from it applied 


1 J. G. von Hahn, op. cit. ii, 274. 
2 Grimm, Household Tales, No. 16 (vol. i. pp. 70 8ᾳ., 
Margaret Hunt’s translation). 


365 


APPENDIX 


them to their wounded bodies, which were immediately made 
whole. Afterwards, when the young man had been foully 
murdered, he was brought to life again by some helpful 
animals, whose life he had spared, and which now repaid his 
kindness by fetching leaves from the snakes’ bush and laying 
them on his body. No sooner had they done so than he re- 
vived and asked, “‘ Why have you wakened me? I was 
sleeping so soundly.’’4 

In a Walachian story the hero, lying asleep, is beheaded by 
a gipsy, whereupon three friendly animals, a bear, a wolf, and 
a fox, consult how they may bring him to life again. After 
they have laid their heads together in vain, the fox meets a 
serpent which is carrying a herb in its mouth. The fox asks, 
‘‘ What sort of herb is that which you are carrying there ? ”’ 
The serpent answers, “ It is a magic herb; I will restore my 
son’s head, which has been cut off.’’ ‘“‘ Let me see it nearer,” 
says the fox. The simple serpent complies with the request, 
and the fox seizes the herb in his mouth and makes off with it. 
By means of the herb he attaches the hero’s severed head to 
his body, and the application of a jugful of water of life, 
borrowed, or rather stolen, by the wolf from an old woman, 
soon completes the hero’s resurrection. 

In a Russian story a mother is wandering in a wood with her 
dead baby at her breast. She sees an old serpent creep up 
to a dead serpent and restore it to life by rubbing it with a leaf. 
The mother snatches the leaf, and by touching her dead baby 
with it she resuscitates the infant.® 

In some stories the secret of the life-giving plant is learned, 
not from a serpent, but from some other animal. Thus in an 
Irish tale a woman, whose husband has been killed in single 
combat, sees two birds fighting and one of them killing the 
other. Then birds come and put leaves of a tree on the dead 
bird, and in half an hour the dead bird comes to life. The 
widow puts the leaves on her dead husband, who had assumed 


1 A. Schleicher, Litawische Mdrchen, Sprichworte, Rdtsel 
und Lieder (Weimar, 1857), pp. 57-59. 

2 Arthur und Albert Schott, Walachische Maehrchen 
(Stuttgart and Tubingen, 1845), p. 142. 

8G. Polivka, ‘‘ Zu der Erzihlung von der undankbaren 
Gattin,” Zeitschrift des Vereins fiir Volkskunde, xiii. (1903), 
p. 408. 


366 


"νυ τ τυ 


VII.—THE RESURRECTION OF GLAUCUS 


the form of a bird for the purpose of the single combat; and 
as usual the application of the magic plant effects the re- 
surrection of the corpse. 

In a medieval romance, a weasel having been killed by the 
blow of a stick, his mate brings a red flower and places it in 
the mouth of the dead weasel, which at once returns to life. 
The same flower thereafter, applied to a dead maiden, works 
on her the same miracle of resurrection.” 

In a story told by the Baraba, a Turkish tribe of Southern 
Siberia, the hero has his legs cut off through the treachery of 
his two elder brothers. Sitting disconsolate propped up 
against the wall of the house, he sees the mice gather about his 
severed limbs and begin to nibble them. He seizes a mouse 
and breaks one of its legs, saying, ‘‘ If I am lame, you shall be 
lame too.”” The other mice now gather about the lame mouse, 
and grubbing up a little white root out of the earth, give it to 
the lame mouse to eat. The mouse eats it, and after a time 
its broken leg is made whole, and the little creature runs away. 
The hero takes the hint, digs up the root with his nails, and 
eats it. After a time his two legs join on to his body aguin, 
and you could not detect so much as a scar at the joining.® 

In a Polish story a girl kills her too importunate lover and 
is buried with him in a vault. There she sees two ravens 
fighting and one of them killed by the other; whereupon a 
third raven brings a herb in its bill, and by means of it brings 
the dead raven to life. As usual, the girl restores her dead 
lover to life by an application of the herb.‘ 

In an Italian story a hero rescues a princess from a horrible 
seven-headed dragon, which was about to devour her. In 
the combat the hero began by cutting off one of the dragon’s 
heads ; but so soon as this happened, the dragon rubbed the 
headless neck on a herb that grew near, and at once the 


1W. Larminie, West Irish Folk-tales and Romances 
(London, 1893), pp. 82 sq. 

2 Pp. Sébillot, Le Folk-lore de France, iii. 529, referring to 
Marie de France, Poésies, ed. Roquefort, i. 475. 

85. W. Radloff, Proben der Volkslitteratur der Tiirkischen 
Stamme Siid-Sibiriens iv. (St. Petersburg, 1872), pp. 77 84. 

4G. Polivka, ‘‘Zu der Erzihlung von der undankbaren 
Gattin,” Zeitschrift des Vercins fiir Volkskunde, xiii. (1903), 
pp. 408 sq. 


367 


APPENDIX 


severed head was reunited to the body. Seeing this, the 
hero killed the dragon by slicing off all his seven heads at 
one stroke, and after that he plucked a handful of the herb 
which had healed the dragon’s dreadful wound. As usual, 
the magical herb thus acquired is afterwards turned to good 
account by the hero; for having the misfortune to decapitate 
his own brother, “like a pumpkin,” in consequence of a 
painful misunderstanding, he soon mended matters by 
rubbing the bleeding neck with the miraculous herb, where 
upon the head immediately rejoined its body, and the dead 
brother was restored to vigorous life.+ 

In a Kabyle story a man sees two large spiders (tarantulas) 
fighting; one of them kills the other and then restores it to 
life by pressing into its nose the sap of a herb; the man takes 
the herb and by means of it restores to life his dead brother, 
who had been devoured by an ogress.” 

A Jewish story, in the Midrash Tanchuma, tells of a man 
who, travelling from Palestine to Babylon, saw two birds 
fighting with each other. In the fight one of the birds killed 
the other, but immediately brought it to life again by fetching 
a herb and laying it on the beak of the dead bird. As the 
herb dropped from the bird’s beak, the man picked it up and 
took it with him, intending to raise the dead by its means. 
When he came to the staircase leading up to Tyre, he found 
a dead lion by the wayside, and experimented on the animal 
by laying the herb on its mouth. The experiment was per- 
fectly successful. The dead lion came to life and devoured 
its benefactor. The story ends with the moral, Do not good 
to the wicked, lest evil befal thee. The same story is told 
at greater length in the Alphabet of Ben-Sirah.® 

We may compare, also, an episode in a Socotran story 
which bears a close resemblance to the ancient Egyptian 
story of ‘The Two Brothers.” One of two brothers finds 


1 Giambattista Basile, Der Pentamerone, iibertragen von 
Felix Liebrecht (Breslau, 1846), vol. i. pp. 99-109 (First Day, 
Seventh Story, ‘‘ Der Kaufmann”). 

2 J. Riviédre, Contes populaires de la Kabylie du Djurd- 
jura (Paris, 1882), pp. 193-197. 

3 Siidarabische Expedition, vol. iv. 1. Die Mehri- und 
Sogotri-Sprache, von D. H. Miiller (Vienna, 1902), pp. 
201-208. 


368 


sh Ul Th 


i i i bt ὍΝ» ὍΝ 


ἌΝ 


ΜΠ.-- ΤῊ RESURRECTION OF GLAUCUS 


his brother dead in the castle of the Daughter of the Sunrise. 
As he sits weeping with the corpse on his lap, he sees a raven 
take a dead raven and plunge with it into the water, from 
which both birds emerge alive. The brother took the hint, 
tied his dead brother on his back, and leaped with him into 
the water, which had the effect of restoring the dead man to 
life.1 Here the life-giving agent is not a magical plant, but 
a magical water; but the mode of its discovery by observation 
of animals is similar. 

A belief in the actual existence of a plant endowed with 
such magical virtue appears to survive in some parts of 
Germany to this day; at least it is said to have survived 
down to the middle of the nineteenth century. At Holzhausen, 
near Dillingen in Swabia, an informant reported as follows: 
“In our country there are many large snakes in the wood. 


- If you hew a snake in three pieces with a shovel or a hoe, 


without smashing the head, and go away at once, the snake 
seeks a herb, lays it between the wounds, and is imme- 
diately whole again. I have often searched diligently after 
the healing herb, but have never been able to get it; for so 
long as you stand by the severed snake, it is never made 
whole, and after sundown never at all. But if you leave the 
spot, the snake quickly fetches the unknown herb and heals 
itself. I have often seen such snakes as have been cut in 
pieces and made whole again; for a scar remains right round 
the parts at the point where they cohered and healed.’’? 
That serpents possess a knowledge of plants which confer 
immortality is a popular belief among the Armenians. ‘They 
think that ‘the springs and flowers actually confer im- 
mortality, but not on men. ‘The belief is that snakes, if they 
are not killed, live forever. There are ‘ wells of immortality,’ 
the springs of which are surrounded with various flowers and 


herbs. Old, sick, and wounded snakes are acquainted with 


such springs and herbs. They come to these springs, slough 
their skins, eat a leaf of a flower, then crawl to the spring, 
bathe in it, and drink three sips of the water. Then they 


1 Siidarabische Expedition, vol. iv. 1. Die Mehri- und 
Sogotri-Sprache, von D. H. Miiller, p. 88. 

2 Fried. Panzer, Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie (Munich, 
1848-1855), ii. 206, 8 360. : 


369 
APOLL. II. ΒΒ 


APPENDIX 


crawl out, and are healed, and renew their youth. If any- 
one knows that spring and flower, drinks three handfuls of 
the water, and eats the flower, he will be himself immortal.’’! 


VIII.—Tue ΠΟΘῈΝ or OEpIPuUs 
(Apollodorus 111. v. 7) 


According to the legend, Oedipus committed a twofold 
crime in ignorance: he killed his father and married his 
mother. ‘The same double tragedy meets us in a Finnish 
tale, which runs as follows :— 

Two wizards arrived at the cottage of a peasant and were 
hospitably entertained by him. During the night a she-goat 
dropped a kid, and the younger of the two wizards proposed 
to assist the mother-goat in her travail, but the elder of the 
two would not hear of it, ‘“‘ Because,’’ said he, “‘ the kid is 
fated to be swallowed by a wolf.” At the same time the 
peasant’s wife was overtaken by the pangs of childbirth, 
and the younger of the two wizards would have gone to her 
help, but was dissuaded by the elder, who told him that the 
boy who was about to be born would kill his father and marry 
his mother. The peasant overheard this conversation and 
reported it to his wife, but they could not make up their 


minds to kill the child. One day, when they were making 


merry in the peasant’s cottage, they put the kid to roast on 
a spit, and then laid the roasted meat near the window ; 
but it fell out of the window and was devoured by a passing 
wolf. Seeing that one of the two predictions made by the 
wizards was thus fulfilled, the peasant and his wife were sore 
afraid and thought how they could get rid of their child. 
Not having the courage to kill him outright, they wounded 
him in the breast, tied him to a table, and threw him into the 
sea. The forsaken child drifted to an island, where he was 
picked up and carried to the abbot of a monastery. There 
he grew up and became a clever young man. But he wearied 
of the monastic life, and the abbot advised him to go out into 
the world and seek his fortune. So he went. One ΦᾺΣ he 


1 Manuk ἀμνωῤμω ἢ Der armenische Volksglaube (Leipsic, 
1899), p. 59. 


37° 


ja et 


VIII.—THE LEGEND OF OEDIPUS 


came to a peasant’s cottage. The peasant was out, but his 
wife was at home, and the young man asked her for work. 
She told him, ‘“‘ Go and guard the fields against robbers.’’ 
So he hid under the shadow of a rock, and seeing a man enter 
the field and gather grass, he struck and killed him. Then 
he returned to his mistress, who was uneasy because her 
husband did not come home to dinner. So they discovered 
that the supposed thief, whom the young man had killed, 
was no other than the husband of his mistress; but as the 
homicide had not been committed with any evil intent, the 
widow, after weeping and wailing, forgave the young man 
and kept him in her service; nay, in time she consoled 
herself by marrying him. However, one day she noticed the 
scar on her second husband’s breast and began to have her 
suspicions. Inquiry elicited the fatal truth that her husband 
was also her son. What were they to do? ‘The woman 
sent him to seek out wise men, who might teach him how to 
expiate his great sin. He went and found a monk with a 
book in his hand. ‘To him the conscience-stricken husband 
put his question; but when the monk, on consulting his 
book, replied that no expiation was possible for guilt so 
atrocious, the sinner in a rage killed the holy man. ‘The 
same thing happened to another monk who had the misfortune 
to receive the confession of the penitent. But a third monk 
proved more compliant, and answered very obligingly that 
there was no sin which could not be atoned for by repentance. 
Accordingly he advised the repentant sinner to dig a well 
in the rock till he struck water ; and his mother was to stand 
beside him holding a black sheep in her arms, until the sheep 
should turn white. This attracted public attention, and 
passers-by used to stop and ask the pair what they were doing. 
One day a gentleman, after putting the usual question and 
receiving the usual answer, was asked by the penitent, ‘‘ And 
who are you?” He answered, “1 am he who makes straight 
what was crooked, and I summon you to the bar of justice.” 
Seeing no hope of escaping from the arm of the law, the 
penitent took the bull by the horns and killed the gentleman. 
At the same moment the rock opened, the water gushed out, 
and the black sheep turned white. But his fourth homicide 
lying heavy on his soul, the murderer returned to the monk 
to learn how he could expiate his latest crime. But the 
holy man reassured him. “The gentleman whom you 


371 


[5 
ies) 
bo 


APPENDIX 


killed,” said he, ‘‘ offended God more than you by his pro- 
fessions. Your penance has been shortened; no expiation 
is required.”” So the repentant sinner was able to pass the 
rest of his days in peace and quietness. 

The same story is told, with some variations of detail, in 
the Ukraine : 

There was a man and his wife, and they had a son. One 
day they dreamed that when their son should be grown up, 
he would kill his father, marry his mother, and afterwards 
kill her also. They told each other their dream. ‘‘ Well,” 
said the father, “let us cut open his belly, put him into a 
barrel, and throw the barrel into the sea.’”’ They did so, 
and the barrel with the boy in it floated away on the sea. 
Some sailors found it, and hearing the squalling of a child 
in the barrel, they opened it, rescued the boy, sewed up his 
wound, and reared him. When he was grown to manhood, 
he bid the sailors good-bye and went away to earn his bread. 
He came to the house of his father, but his father did not 
recognize him and took him into his service. The duty laid 
on the son by his father was to watch the garden; and if 
anyone entered it, he was to challenge the intruder thrice, 
and if he received no answer, he was to fire on him. After 
the young man had served some time, his master said, “ Go 
to, let us see whether he obeys my orders.” So he entered 
the garden. The young man challenged him thrice, and 
receiving no answer, he shot him dead, and on coming up to 
his victim he recognized his master. Then he went to his 
mistress in her chamber, married her, and lived with her. 
One Sunday morning, when he was changing his shirt, she 
saw the scar on his body and asked him what it was. ‘‘ When 
I was small,’’ answered he, “ some sailors found me at sea 
with my belly cut open, and they sewed it up.” “ Then 1 
am your mother!” she cried. He killed her on the spot 
and went away. He walked and walked till he came to a 
priest and asked him to inflict some penance on him by way 
of atonement for his sins, ‘* What are your sins?” asked 
the priest. He told the priest, and the priest refused him 


1 ZL. Constans, La légende dOedipe (Paris, 1881), pp. 
106-108. The story is told more briefly by Gustav Meyer, in 
his preface to E. Schreck’s Finnische ΜΙ ἄγονον (Weimar, 
1887), p. xxv., referring to Erman’s Archiv, xvii, 14 sqq. 


312 


VIIL—THE LEGEND OF OEDIPUS 


absolution. So he killed the priest and came to another 
priest, who, proving equally recalcitrant, was disposed of by 
the young man in the same summary fashion. The third 
priest to whom he applied was kind or prudent enough to 
explain to him how he might expiate his sins. “ Take this 
staff of apple-tree wood,” said the priest ; “‘ plant it on yonder 
mountain, and morning and evening go to it on your knees 
with your mouth full of water, and water the staff. When 
it shall have sprouted and the apples on it are ripe, then 
shake it; as soon as the apples shall have fallen, your sins 
will be forgiven you.” After twenty-five years, the staff 
budded and the apples ripened. The sinner, no longer 
young, shook the tree, and all the apples fell but two. So he 
returned and reported to the priest. ‘“‘ Very good,” said the 
priest, “1 will throw you into a well.” He was as good as his 
word, and when the sinner was at the bottom of the well, the 
priest shut down the iron trap door, locked it, covered it up 
with earth, and threw the keys into the sea. Thirty years 
passed, and one day, the priest’s fishermen caught a jack, 
cut it open, and found the keys in its belly. They brought 
the keys to the priest. “‘ Ah!” said the priest laconically, 
““my man is saved.” They ran at once to the well, and on 
opening it they found the sinner dead, but with a taper 
burning above his body. ‘Thus all his sins were forgiven and 
he was gathered to the saints in bliss.+ 

The same double crime of parricide and incest with a mother, 
both committed in ignorance, occurs in a very savage story 
which the Javanese of the Residency of Pekalongan tell to 
account for the origin of the Kalangs, an indigenous tribe of 
Java. In it a woman, who is a daughter of a sow, marries 
her son unwittingly, and the son kills a dog, who is really his 
father, though the man is ignorant of the relation in which 
he stands to the animal. In one version of the story the 
woman has twin sons by the dog, and afterwards unwittingly 
marries them both; finally she recognizes one of her sons by 
the scar of a wound which she had formerly inflicted on his 


1 Kugéne Hins, ‘‘Légendes chrétiennes de lOukraine,”’ 
Revue des Traditions Populaires, iv. (1889), pp. 117 sq., 
from T'raditions et Contes populaires de la petite Russie, by 
Miche! Dragomanof. , 


373 


APPENDIX 


head with a wooden spoon.'! According to the Javanese, 
such incestuous unions are still not uncommon among the 
Kalangs: mother and son often live together as man and 
wife, and the Kalangs think that worldly prosperity and 
riches flow from these marriages.2 However, it is to be 
observed that the story of the descent of the Kalangs from a 
dog and a pig is not told by the people themselves, but by 
the Javanese, who apparently look down with contempt on 
the Kalangs as an inferior race. Similar stories of descent 
from a dog and a pig are commonly told of alien races in the 
Indian Archipelago, and they are usually further embellished 
by accounts of incest practised by the ancestors of these 
races in days gone by. For example, the Achinese of Sumatra 
tell such a tale of the natives of the Nias, an island lying off 
the west coast of Sumatra; and the natives of Bantam tell 
a similar story of the Dutch.* Probably, therefore, many 
stories of incest told of alien peoples, whether in the past or 
in the present, are no more than expressions of racial hatred 
and contempt, and it would be unsafe to rely upon them as 
evidence of an actual practice of incest among the peoples in 
question. 

In the Middle Ages the story of Oedipus was told, with 
variations, of Judas Iscarioth. It is thus related in The 
Golden Legend :— ; 

There lived at Jerusalem a certain Ruben Simeon, of the 
race of David. His wife, Cyborea, dreamed that she gave 
birth to a son, who would be fatal to the family. On waking, 
she told her dream to her husband, who endeavoured to 
comfort her by saying that she had been deceived by the 
evil spirit. But perceiving that she was with child from that 
very night, she began to be very uneasy, and her husband 
with her. When the child was born, they shrank from killing 
him, but put him in a little ark and committed it to the sea. 
‘'he waves washed up the ark on the shore of the island of 
Iscarioth. The queen of the island found it, and having no 


1 E. Ketjen, ‘‘De Kalangers,” Tidjschrift voor Indische 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, xxiv. (1877), pp. 480-435. 

2 EK. Ketjen, op. cit. p. 427. 

3 J. C. van EKerde, ‘‘De Kalanglegende op Lombok,” 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, xlv. 
(1902), pp. 30 sq. 


374 


VII.—THE LEGEND OF OEDIPUS 


child of her own, she adopted the little foundling. But 
soon afterwards she was with child and gave birth to a son. 
When the two boys were grown up, Judas Iscarioth behaved 
very ill to his supposed brother, and the queen, seeing that 
expostulations had no effect on him, upbraided him with 
being a foundling. In a rage, Judas murdered his brother 
and took ship for Jerusalem. There he found a congenial 
soul in the governor of Judea, Pontius Pilate, who appointed 
him to a high office in his court. One day the governor, 
looking down from his balcony on the garden of a neighbour, 
was seized with a great longing to eat some apples which he 
saw hanging there from the boughs. The obsequious Judas 
hastened to gratify his master’s desire by procuring, not to 
say stealing, the apples. But the old man who owned the 
garden, and who chanced to be no other than Judas’s father, 
resisted the attempt, and Judas knocked him on the head with 
a stone. As one good turn deserves another, the governor 
rewarded Judas by bestowing on him the property of the 
deceased, together with the hand of his widow, who was no 
other than Cyborea, the mother of Judas. Thus it came 
about that Judas, without knowing it, killed his father and 
married his mother. Still the widow, now again a wife, was 
not consoled, and one day Judas found her sighing heavily. 
When he questioned her as to the reason of her sadness, she 
replied, ““ Wretch that I am, I drowned my son, my husband 
is dead, and in my affliction Pilate gave me in marriage 
against my will.” The answer set Judas thinking, and a 
few more questions elicited the melancholy truth. Struck 
with remorse and anxious to comfort his mother, Judas 
flung himself at the feet of Christ, confessed his sins, and 
became his disciple. But being entrusted with the bag, he 
allowed his old evil nature to get the better of him, with the 
tragical consequences with which we are all familiar.1 This 
monkish legend may have been concocted by a medieval 
writer who, having read the story of Oedipus, turned it to 
the purpose of edification by casting a still deeper shade of 
infamy on the character of the apostate and traitor. 

It has been argued that traditions of incest, of which the 
Oedipus legend is only one instance out of many, are derived 
from a former custom of incestuous unions among mankind, 


! L. Constans, La légende d’Oedipe, pp. 95-97. 
375 


APPENDIX 


such as some inquirers believe to have prevailed at an early 

eriod in the evolution of society.1 But this interpretation, 
ike another which would explain the legend as a solar myth,? 
appears to be somewhat far-fetched and improbable. 


1X.—APOLLO AND THE KINE oF ADMETUS 
(A pollodorus 111. x. 4) 


Apollodorus tells us that when Apollo herded the cattle o 
Admetus, he caused all the cows to bear twins. So Calli- 
machus says that the she-goats which Apollo tended for 
Admetus could not lack kids, and that the ewes could not be 
milkless, but that all must have had their lambs; and if any 
had borne but a single young one before, she would then 
bear twins. 

Perhaps, as himself a twin, Apollo may have been supposed 
to possess a special power of promoting the birth of twins in 
animals. A similar faculty may possibly have been ascribed 
to the patriarch and herdsman, Jacob, himself a twin, who 


1 L, J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, Superstitions et Survivances, 
ili. (Paris, 1896), pp. 467-514. 

2 This explanation of the story of Oedipus, put forward by 
the French scholar Michel Bréal, has been criticized and 
rightly rejected by Domenico Comparetti in his essay, Edipo 
e la Mitologia Comparata (Pisa, 1867). It was not to be 
expected that the parricidal and incestuous Oedipus should 
escape the solar net in which Sir George Cox caught so many 
much better men. According to him, Oedipus was the sun, 
his father Laius was the darkness of night, and his mother 
Jocasta was the violet-tinted sky ; while his daughter Anti- 
gone may have been, as M. Bréal thought, ‘‘ the light which 
sometimes flushes the eastern sky as the sun sinks to sleep in 
the west.” Thus the old tragic story of crime and sorrow is 
wiped out, and an agreeable picture of sunrise and sunset is 
painted, in roseate hues, on the empty canvas. See Sir 
George W. Cox, I'he Mythology of the Aryan Nations (Lon- 
don, 1882), pp. 312 sqq. 

8. Callimachus, Hymn to Apollo, 47-54. 


376 


IX.—APOLLO AND THE KINE 


is said to have resorted to peculiar devices for the multiplica- 
tion of Laban’s flocks, of which he was in charge.! We know 
that a fertilizing power was ascribed to the mound which 
covered the grave of the twins, Amphion and Zethus, near 
Thebes; for every year, at the time when the sun was in 
Taurus, the people of Tithorea in Phocis used to try to steal 
earth from the mound, believing that with the earth they 
would transfer the fertility of the Theban land to their own.? 

Similarly some savages ascribe to twins and their parents 
a power of multiplying animals and plants, so as to ensure a 
good catch to the fisherman and a plentiful crop to the 
farmer.? Thus the Tsimshian Indians of British Columbia 
believe that all the wishes of twins are fulfilled. Therefore 
twins are feared, as they can harm the man whom they hate. 
They can call the salmon and olachen, hence they are called 
Sewthan, that is, ‘‘ making plentiful.’4 Among the Nootkas 
of Vancouver Island “‘ numerous regulations refer to the birth 
of twins. The parents of twins must build a small hut in the 
woods, far from the village. There they have to stay two years. 
The father must continue to clean himself by bathing in 
‘ponds for a whole year, and must keep his face painted red. 
While bathing he sings certain songs that are only used on 
this occasion. Both parents must keep away from the people. 
They must not eat, or even touch, fresh food, particularly 


1 Genesis, xxx. 37-43. 2 Pausanias, ix. 17. 4 sq. 

3. The customs and superstitions relating to twins are dis- 
cussed with great learning and ingenuity by my friend 
Dr. Rendel Harris in his book Boaneryes (Cambridge, 1913) ; 
see particularly pp. 73, 122, 123, 124, 143 sq. for the belief in 
the fertilizing powers of twins. The same writer has dealt 
more briefly with other aspects of the subject in two treatises, 
The Dioscurt in the Christian Legends (London, 1903), and 
The Cult of the Heavenly Twins (Cambridge, 1906). On this 
curious department of folk-lore 1 have also collected some 
facts, on which I will draw in what follows. 

4 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the Committee of the 
British Association on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p- 51 (separate reprint from the Report of the British Asso- 
ciation, Newcastle-wpon-Tyne Meeting, 1889); zd. ““ Tsim- 
shian Mythology,” T'hirty-first Annual Report of the Bureau 
of American Ethnology (Washington, 1916), p. 545. 


377 


APPENDIX 


salmon. Wooden images and masks, representing birds and 
fish, are placed around the hut, and others, representing fish 
near the river, on the bank of which the hut stands. The 
object of these masks is to invite all birds and fish to come 
and see the twins and to be friendly to them. They are in 
constant danger of being carried away by spirits, and the 
masks and images—or rather the animals which they represent 
—will avert this danger. The twins are believed to be in 
some way related to salmon, although they are not considered 
identical with them, as is the case among the Kwakiutl. 
The father’s song which he sings when cleaning himself is an 
invitation for the salmon to come, and is sung in their praise. 
On hearing this song, and seeing the images and masks, the 
salmon are believed to come in great numbers to see the twins. 
Therefore the birth of twins is believed to indicate a good 
salmon year. If the salmon should fail to come in large 
numbers it is considered proof that the children will soon die, 
Twins are forbidden to catch salmon, nor must [may] they 
eat or handle fresh salmon.’’! 

In this custom the twins and their father rather attract 
than multiply the fish, but for the purpose of the fisherman 
the two things come to the same. The reason why the twins 
and their parents are forbidden to eat or even touch fresh 
salmon is probably a fear of thereby deterring the salmon 
from coming to see the twins ; for the fish would hardly come 
if they knew that they were to be eaten. They visit the 
twins for the pleasure of seeing them, but in the innocence of 
their hearts they have no inkling of the fate that awaits 
them from the wily fisherman lurking in the background. _ 

The Kwakiutl, another Indian tribe of British Columbia, 
“believe that twins are salmon that have assumed the form 
of men, and that they are able to bring salmon.“* A story 
told by one branch of the tribe illustrates the belief in the 


a = i 


1 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the Committee of the 
British Association on the North-Western T'ribes of Canada, 
p. 39 (separate reprint from Report of the British Asso- 
ciation, Leeds Meeting, 1890). 

2 Franz Boas and George Hunt, Kwakiutl Texts, 11. (1902), 
p. 322 note (The Jesup North Pacific Hxpedition, Memoirs — 
of the American ral History [New York] 


Sue 4° 


IX.-_APOLLO AND THE KINE 


power of twins to attract or multiply salmon. They say 
that a certain old woman, who died some thirty years ago, 
was one of twins, and when she came to die she warned the 
people not to cry for her after she was gone. “If you cry,” 
said she to her sorrowing relatives, ‘no more salmon will 
come here. Hang the box into which you will put my body 
on to a tree near the river after having painted it. When you 
pass by, ask me for salmon, and I shall send them.’”’! 
Another Kwakiutl story brings out the same belief still 
more clearly. Once upon a time, we are told, a certain chief 
called Chief of the Ancients wished to marry a twin woman 
in order that the various kinds of salmon might come to him 
for the sake of his wife. His aunt, the Star-Woman, advised 
him to go to the graves and search among them for a dead 
twin woman to be his wife. So he went to the graves and 
asked, “15 there a twin here?”’ But the graves answered, 
“There is none here.” From grave to grave he went, but 
there was no twin in them, till at last one of the graves 
answered him, saying, “1 am atwin.” So the chief gathered 
the bones from the grave, and sprinkled them with the water 
of life, and the dead twin became a living woman. She was 
a very pretty woman, and Chief of the Ancients married 
her. But she warned him, saying, “‘ Just take care, Chief of 
the Ancients! Jam Salmon-Maker. Don’t do me any harm.” 
Then Salmon-Maker made many salmon for her husband. 
When she put her finger in a kettle of water, a large spring- 
salmon would at once be there in the water, jumping about, 
and when she put two fingers into the kettle, there would be 
two large spring-salmon jumping about in the water. When 
she walked into the river with the water only up to the 
instep of her foot, the salmon at once came jumping ; and if 
she were to walk right into the river, it would dry up, so full 
would it be of salmon. Thus the salmon-traps of the people 
were full of salmon, and their houses were full of dried and 
roasted salmon. Then Chief of the Ancients grew proud 
and his heart was lifted up because he had much food to eat. 
When the backbone of the spring-salmon caught in the hair 
of his head, he took it and threw it into the corner of the 
house. He said, “‘ You come from the ghosts, and you catch 


1 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the. Committee, etc. (see 
note !, p. 378), p. 62. 


379 


APPENDIX 


me!’ His wife, Salmon-Maker, hung her head and cried, 
but he laughed at her and spoke angrily to her. At last she 
could bear his unkindness no more. She arose. She spoke, 
weeping, to the dried salmon, saying, ‘“‘ Come, my tribe, let 
us go back.” Thus she spoke to them. Then she started 
and led her tribe, the dried salmon, and they all went into the 
water. Chief of the Ancients tried to put his arm round his 
wife ; but her body was like smoke, and his arms went through 
her. ‘Then Chief of the Ancients and his younger brothers 
became poor again. They had nothing to eat.? 

Among the Baganda of Central Africa twins were believed 
to be sent by Mukasa, the great god whose blessing on the 
crops and on the people was ensured at an annual festival. 
The twins were thought to be under the special protection of 
the god, and they bore his name, the boys being called 
Mukasa, and the girls Namukasa. After the birth of twins 
the parents, with the infants, used to make a round of visits 
to friends and relations. They were received with dances 
and rejoicing, for “the people whom they visited thought 
that, not only they themselves would be blessed and given 
children, but that their herds and crops also would be multi- 
plied.”” A ceremony performed by the father and mother of 
the twins over a flower of the plantain indicated in the plainest, 


1 Franz Boas and G. Hunt, Kwakiutl Texts, I1. pp. 322-330 
(Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History, The 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. III. [New York] 1902). 
Compare Franz Boas, Kwakiutl Tales (New York and Leyden, 
1910), pp. 491 sg. (Columbia University Contributions to 
Anthropology, vol. II.). Similar tales are told more briefly 
by the Tlatlasikoala and Awikyenoq Indians of the same 
region. See Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord- 
Pacifischen Kiiste Amerikas (Berlin, 1895), pp. 174, 209 sq. 
The Awikyenoq Indians, whose territory is situated on the 
coast of British Columbia immediately to the north of the 
Kwakiutl, also believe that twins were salmon before they 
were born as human beings, and that they can turn into 
salmon again (F. Boas, op. ctt. p. 209 note). For other 
versions of the story told by the Indians of this region, 
see Franz Boas, ‘‘Tsimshian Mythology,” Thirty-first Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology (Washington, 
1916), pp. 667 sq. 


380 


IX.—APOLLO AND THE KINE 


if the grossest, manner the belief of the Baganda that parents 
of twins possessed a power of magically fertilizing the plantains 
which form the staple food of the people. 

Among the Bateso, a tribe of the Uganda Protectorate, 
“the birth of twins is a welcome event. The midwife 
announces the fact to the father, who immediately orders 
the special drum-rhythm to be beaten to make the fact known, 
and women soon gather at the house uttering a peculiar 
shrill ery of pleasure. The mother remains secluded for 
three months, and during this time the father pays visits to 
members of his own and of his wife’s clans, from whom he 
receives presents of food and animals for a special feast to be 
held when the period of seclusion is ended and the twins are 
presented to the members of the clans. Should no hospitality 
be offered to the father and no present be given at a place 
when he is making his round of visits, he refuses to enter the 
house and passes on elsewhere. This is regarded by its 
occupants as a loss, because the blessing of increase which 
rests upon the father of twins is not communicated to the 
inhospitable family.” 

Among the Basoga, another tribe of the Uganda Protector- 
ate, the birth of twins is ascribed to the intervention of the 
god, Gasani. When such a birth has taken place, a shrine is 
built near the house in which the twins live, and two fowls 
and a basket, containing a few beans, a little sesame, a little 
millet, and some earth from a cross-road, are deposited in the 
shrine, after they have been solemnly offered to the god, 
Gasani. This shrine is the place to which barren women go 
to make offerings to the god, to ask his blessing, and to seek 
the gift of children.* Moreover, in the Central District of 
Busoga, the land of the Basoga, “ when a woman has twins, 
the people to whose clan she belongs do not sow any seed 
until the twins have been brought to the field. A pot of 
cooked grain is set before the children with a cake of sesame 


1 Rev. J. Roscoe, The Baganda (London, 1911), pp. 64-72. 
As to the annual festival in honour of Mukasa, see id. pp. 
298 sq. At it the priest of the god gave the blessing to the 
people, their wives, children, cattle, and crops. 

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, The Northern Bantu (Cambridge, 1915), 

. 265. 
᾿ 8. Rey. J. Roscoe, 7'he Northern Bantu, p. 249. 


381 


APPENDIX 


and all the seed that is to be sown. The food is eaten by the 
people assembled and afterwards the field is sown in the 
presence of the twins; the plot is then said to be the field of 
the twins. The mother of twins must sow her se€éd before 
any person of her clan will sow theirs.’’4 

These customs seem clearly to imply that twins and their 
PASENAP are endowed with a special power of quickening the 
seed. 

But though a belief in the fertilizing virtue of twins is 
found among peoples so far apart as the red men of North- 
western America and the black men of Central Africa, it 
would be rash to assume that such a belief is universal or 
even common; on the contrary, it appears to be rare and 
exceptional. Far more usually the birth of twins is viewed 
with horror and dismay as a portent which must be expiated 
by the death of the twins and sometimes by that of the 
mother also. ΤῸ adduce the evidence at large would be out 
of place here; I will only cite a few instances in which a 
directly contrary influence is ascribed to twins or their 
mother. For example, in Unyoro, a district of the Uganda 
Protectorate, the explorer, Speke, was told by one of his 
men, who was a twin, that “in Ngura, one of the sister 
provinces to Unyanyembé, twins are ordered to be killed 
and thrown into water the moment they are born, lest 
droughts and famines or floods should oppress the land 
Should anyone attempt to conceal twins, the whole family 
would be murdered by the chief.’ Among the Nandi of 
British East Africa “‘ the birth of twins is looked upon as an 
inauspicious event, and the mother is considered unclean 
for the rest of her life. She is given her own cow and may 
not touch the milk or blood of any other animal. She may 
enter nobody’s house until she has sprinkled a calabash full 
of water on the ground, and she may never cross the threshold 
of a cattle kraal again.”’* Indeed, if a mother of twins goes 
near the cattle, the Nandi believe that the animals will die.‘ 


' Rev. J. Roscoe, The Northern Bantu, p. 235. 
» J. H. Speke, Jowrnal of the Discovery of the Source of 
the Nile, ch. xviii. p. 426 (Hveryman’s Library). 

3 A. C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi (Oxford, 1909), p. 68. 

40. W. Hobley, Hastern Uganda, an Ethnological Study 
(London, 1902), p. 40, 


382 


Νουα δια» ee ee a eee ee eee 


ee —_— χάδιωυ at 


oo 


X.—MARRIAGE OF PELEUS AND THETIS 


Again, among the Bassari of Togo, in Western Africa, women 
who have given birth to twins are not allowed to go into the 
cornfields at the time of sowing and harvest, because it is 
believed that, if they did so, they might spoil the crop. Only 
after such a woman has again been brought to bed and given 
birth to a single child may she once more take part in field 
Jabour.t Among the natives of Nias, an island to the west 
of Sumatra, the birth of twins is regarded as a misfortune 
which portends failure of the crops, epidemics, sickness among 
the cattle, conflagrations, and other ills; it used, therefore, 
to be customary to expose one or both of the infants and 
leave them to perish ; sometimes, it is said, the mother would 
strangle one of the twins with her own hand.? A German 
missionary reports a case in Nias of a woman who gave birth 
to twins twice in successive years; both sets of children 
were exposed by the father in a tree and left to die; but on 
the second occasion the spirits were supposed to demand 
another victim, so the father bought a slave, a poor young 
man, tied him up near the village beside a river, and killed 
him with his own hand.? 

Thus contrary and equally baseless, though not equally 
mischievous, are the superstitions of savages touching the 
birth of twins. 


X.—THE MARRIAGE OF PELEUS AND THETIS 


(Apollodorus, 111. xiii. 5) 


The story how Peleus won the sea-goddess for his wife has 
its parallel in a modern Cretan tale. It is said that a young 
man, who played the lyre beautifully, was carried off by the 
sea nymphs (Nereids) to their cave, where they listened with 
delight to his music. But he fell in love with one of them, 


+ as Klose, Z’ogo wnter deutscher Flagge (Berlin, 1899), 
p. 510. 

2 J. P. Kleiweg de Zwaan, De Geneeskunde der Menang- 
kabau-Malevers (Amsterdam, 1910), p. 149; id. Die Heil- 
kunde der Niassers (The Hague, 1913), p. 178. Compare 
K. Modigliani, Un Viaggio a Nias (Milan, 1890), p. 555. 

3 A. Fehr, Der Niassér im Leben und Sterben (Barmen, 
1901), pp. 14 sq. 


QO 


398 


APPENDIX 


and ‘not knowing how to win her for his wife, he asked the 
advice of an old woman who dwelt in his village. She ad- 
vised him to seize his darling by the hair when the hour of 
cock-crow was near, and though she should turn into diverse 
shapes, he was not to be frightened or to let her go, but to 
hold fast till the cocks crew. He took theadvice, and though 
the wild sea-maiden turned into a dog, a serpent, a camel, 
and fire, he held her by the hair till the cocks crew and the 
other sea-maidens vanished. Then she changed back into 
her own beautiful shape and followed him meekly to the 
village. There they lived as man and wife for a year, and 
she bore him a son, but she never spoke a word. Her strange 
silence weighed on him, and in his perplexity he again betook 
him to the old woman, and she gave him a piece of advice, 
which in an unhappy hour he followed. He heated the stove 
and taking up their child in his arms, he threatened to throw 
it into the fire'if his wife would not speak to him. At that 
she started up, crying, ‘‘ Leave my child alone, you dog!” 
and snatching the infant from him she vanished before his 
eyes. But as the other Nereids would not receive her back 
among them because she was a mother, she took up her abode 
at a spring not far from the sea-nymphs’ cave, and there you 
may see her twice or thrice a year with her baby in her arms.! 

This modern Greek story serves to explain a feature in the 
ancient story which is known only through an incidental 
allusion of Sophocles. In his play Troilus the poet spoke of 
the marriage of Peleus and Thetis as voiceless or silent 
(apOdyyous yauous).2 In the original form of the tale it is 
probable that the sea-bride of Peleus remained strangely and 
obstinately silent until Peleus detected her in the act of placing 
their child on the fire to make him immortal.* At that sight 
the father cried out, no doubt reproaching his sea-wife for 
murdering, as he supposed, their infant; and she, offended 
at the interruption and hurt at the unmerited reproach, 
spoke to him once for all, and then, vanishing before his eyes, 
returned to her old home in the sea. This conjecture is 


1 B. Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen (Leipsic, 
1871), pp. 115-117. 

* Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. iii. 35 (60); The Fragments 
of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, vol. ii. pp. 255 sq. 

% See Apollodorus, ili. 13. 6, with the note, 


384 


εἰ eS 


X.—MARRIAGE OF PELEUS AND THETIS 


partially confirmed by a fragment of Sophocles, in which 
the poet said that Thetis deserted Peleus because she was 
reproached by him.! The silence of the bride in the folk- 
tale is probably to be explained as a reminiscence of a 
custom of imposing silence on brides for some time after 
marriage. For example, among the Tedas of Tibesti, a 
region of the Central Sudan, a bride is shut up after marriage 
for seven days in a special compartment of her husband’s 
house and does not utter a word.? Again, among the 
Wabende, of Lake Tanganyika, a wife does not speak to her 
husband for several days after marriage; she waits till he 
has made her a present. 

The story of Peleus and Thetis seems to belong to a 
familiar type of popular tale known as the Swan Maiden type. 
A number of swans are in the habit of divesting themselves 
of their plumage and appearing as beautiful maidens. In 
that temporary state they are seen by a young man, who 
falls in love with one of them, and by concealing the bird’s 
skin, which she has stripped off, he prevents the Swan Maiden 
from resuming her wings and flying away. Thus placed at 
his mercy, she consents to marry him, and for some time they 
live together as husband and wife, and she bears him a child. 
But one day she finds by accident the bird-skin which her 
husband had hidden ; a longing for her old life in the air 
comes over her; she puts on the feathery coat, and leaving 
husband and child behind, she flies away to return no more. 
The story recurs with many minor variations in many lands. 


1 Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Argon. iv. 816; 
Scholiast on Aristophanes, Clouds, 1068, p. 443, ed. Fr. 
Diibner ; The Fragments of Sophocles, ed. A. C. Pearson, 
vol. i. pp. 106 sq. : 

2 P. Noel, ‘‘ Kthnographie et Anthropologie des Tedas du 
Tibesti,” L’ Anthropologie, xxx. (1920), p. 121. 

3 Avon, ‘‘ Vie sociale des Wabende au Tanganika,” An- 
thropos, x.—xi. (1915-1916), p. 101. For more instances, see 
Totemism and Exogamy, i. 63, note®, iv. 233-237. Com- 
pare Andrew Lang, Custom and Myth (London, 1884), 
p- 74, ‘‘M. Dozon, who has collected the Bulgarian songs, 
says that this custom of prolonged silence on the part of the 
bride is very common in Bulgaria, though it is beginning to 
yield to a sense of the ludicrous.” 


385 
APOLL. II. Ὁ Ὁ 


APPENDIX 


Often the fairy wife is not a bird but a beast, who doffs her 
beast skin to be a human wife for a time, till in like manner 
she discovers the cast skin, and resuming with it her beast 
shape returns to her old life in the woods or the wilderness. 
Sometimes she is a fish or other marine creature, and then 
the resemblance to the story of Peleus and Thetis is parti- 
cularly close, for she comes from the sea to be married as a 
human maid to her human lover, and after the last unhappy 
parting she returns as a fish to dwell with her finny kindred 
in the depths of the sea. To increase the resemblance with 
the tale of Peleus and Thetis, the cause of the parting is 
often some unkindness done to the wife or to her animal 
kinsfolk, or simply some cruel taunt reflecting on her relation- 
ship to the fish or the birds or the beasts. 

For example, ‘‘in the Faré Islands the superstition is 
current that the seal casts off its skin every ninth night, 
assumes a human form, and dances and amuses itself like 
a human being until it resumes its skin, and again becomes 
a seal. It once happened that a man, passing during one of 
these transformations, and seeing the skin, took possession 
of it, when the seal, which was a female, not finding her skin 
to creep into, was obliged to continue in a human form, and 
being a comely person, the man made her his wife, had several 
children by her, and they lived happily together, until, after 
a lapse of several years, she chanced to find her hidden skin, 
which she could not refrain from creeping into, and so 
became a seal again.” ! A similar notion prevailed among 
the people of Shetland regarding mermaids, about whom it 
is said that ‘‘they dwell among the fishes, in the depth of 
the ocean, in habitations of pearl and coral; that they 
resemble human beings, but greatly excel them in beauty. 
When they wish to visit the upper world, they put on the 
ham or garb of some fish, but woe to those who lose their 
ham, for then are all hopes of return annihilated, and they 
must stay where they are.... It has also happened that 
earthly men have married mermaids, having taken possession 
of their ham, and thus got them into their power.” ? 


1 B. Thorpe, Northern Mythology (London, 1851-1852), 
ii, 1°73. 

2 B. Thorpe, l.c., referring to Hibbert’s Shetland, quoted 
' by Faye, pp. 60, 61. 


386 


X.—MARRIAGE OF PELEUS AND THETIS 


Again, in the Pelew Islands, in the Pacific, they tell how 
a man used to hang bowls on palm-trees to collect the palm- 
wine which oozed from incisions in the trunks. Every night 
he examined the bowls, but every night he found that they 
had been emptied by somebody. So he set himself to watch, 
and one night he saw a fish come out of the sea, lay aside 
its tail, and then in human shape climb a palm-tree. The 
man snatched up the tail, and taking it home with him hung 
it up in the storeroom. Next morning when he went to the 
palm-tree to collect the wine, he found a woman under the 
tree, who called out to him that she was naked and begged 
him to bring her an apron. They returned to his house 
together, and the unknown woman became his wife. She 
bore him a child, who grew up to be a very beautiful maiden. 
But one day, in her husband’s absence, she received a visit 
from some chiefs. For their entertainment she needed the 
pestle with which to mash sweet potatoes, and searching for 
it in the storeroom she discovered her old tail. At sight of 
it a great longing for her old home came over her. She told 
her daughter to cleave to her father if she herself were long 
away, and that same evening she secretly took down the 
tail, ran to the beach, and plunged into the sea.} 

The stories of ‘‘ Beauty and the Beast” and ‘‘Cupid and 
Psyche” belong to the same type of tale, though in them it 
is the husband and not the wife who is the fairy spouse and 
is liable to vanish away from his mortal wife whenever she 
offends him by breaking some rule, the observance of which 
he had enjoined on her as a condition of their wedded bliss. ? 


1 J. Kubary, ‘‘ Die Religion der Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s 
Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde (Berlin, 1888), i. 
60 sq. The Kwakiutl story of Chief of the Ancients and his 
wife Salmon-Maker is another instance of this class of tales. 
See above, pp. 379 sq. 

* As to these stories, see Theodor Benfey, Pantschatantra 
(Leipsic, 1859), i. 254 sqq.; A. Lang, Custom and Myth 
(London, 1884), pp. 64 sqq.; S. Baring-Gould, Curious 
Myths of the Middle Ages (London, 1884), pp. 561 sqq.; 
W. A. Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions, i. 182 sqq. ; 
τ, Cosquin, Contes populaires de Lorraine, ii. 215 sqq. ; 
K. 8. Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales (London, 1891), 
pp. 255 sgg.; Miss.M. R. Cox, Introduction to Folk-lore, 


387 
γε» 


APPENDIX 


The folk-lore element in the marriage of Peleus and 
Thetis was fully recognized and clearly brought out by 
W. Mannhardt im his admirable study of the Peleus saga. 
He was probably right in holding that the modern Cretan 
story’ is not a reminiscence of the story of the marriage of 
Thetis, but an independent folk-tale, of which the Peleus 
and Thetis story was merely a localized version.? 


XI.—PHAETHON AND THE CHARIOT OF THE SUN 
(Apollodorus 11. xiv. 3) 


Some Indian tribes of North-western America tell a story 
which bears a close resemblance to the story of Phaethon 
and the chariot of the Sun, his father. The tale of Phaethon 
is related most fully by Ovid. According to the poet, the 
sea-nymph, Clymene, daughter of Tethys, bore a son, 
Phaethon, to the Sun. When the lad grew up, he one day 
boasted of his illustrious parentage to a companion, who 


New Edition (London, 1904), pp. 120 sqq.; Totemism and 
Exogamy, ii. 205 8ᾳ., 565-571, iii. 60-64; The Dying God, 
pp. 124-131. Τὸ the stories of this type quoted or referred to 
in these passages add KE. Stack and Sir Charles Lyall, The 
Mikirs (London, 1908), pp. δῦ sqg.; A. Playfair, The Garos 
(London, 1909), pp. 123 sqgq.; ὃ. Endle, The Kachdris (Lon- 
don, 1911), pp. 119 δᾳᾳ.; R. Neuhauss, Deutsch Neu-Guines 
(Berlin, 1911), iii. 564 sqgqg.; N. Adriani en A. C. Kruijt, De 
Bare’e-sprekende Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes (Batavia, 
1912-1914), iii. 401 ; Ὁ. Macdonald, ‘‘ Efate, New Hebrides,” 
Report of the Fourth Meeting of the Australasian Association 
for the Advancement of Science, held at Hobart, Tasmania, 
in January, 1892, p. 731; [D.] Macdonald, ‘‘ The mythology 
of the Efatese,” Report of the Seventh Meeting of the Austra- 
lasian Association for the Advancement of Science, held at 
Sydney, 1898, pp. 765-767 ; Elsdon Best, ‘‘ Maori Folk-lore,” 
Report of the Tenth Meeting of the Australasian Association 
for the Advancement of Science, held at Dunedin, 1904, pp. 
450 sq. 
1 See above, pp. 383 sq. 
2 See his Antike Wald- und Feldkulte, pp. 60 sqq. 


388 


XI.—PHAETHON AND THE SUN 


ridiculed the notion and told Phaethon that he was a fool to 
believe such a cock-and-bull story. In great distress Phaethon 
repaired to his mother and begged her to tell him truly 


_ whether his father was really the Sun or not. His mother 


reassured him on this point. Stretching her arms towards 
the Sun, she solemnly swore that the great luminary was 
indeed his father; but if he had any lingering doubts on the 
question, she advised him to apply to the Sun himself. “ You 
can easily do so,” she said. “‘ The house of the Sun, from 
which he rises, is near our land. Go and question the Sun 
himself.’”’ So Phaethon journeyed to the house of the Sun 
and found the deity clad in purple and seated on a throne 
resplendent with emeralds in the midst of a gorgeous palace. 
At first the youth could not bear the fierce light that beat on 
him, so he halted afar off. But the god received him kindly, 
and freely acknowledged him as his truly begotten son. 
More than that, he promised by the Stygian marsh to grant 
him any boon he might ask. Thus encouraged, Phaethon 
requested to be allowed to drive the Sun’s chariot for a single 
day. The Sun, foreseeing the fatal consequences of granting 
the request, endeavoured to dissuade his son from the 
hazardous enterprise, by pointing out its difficulties and 
dangers. But allin vain; the rash youth insisted, and bound 
by his oath the deity had no choice but to comply. Even as 
they talked, the rosy light of dawn flushed the eastern sky, 
the starry host fled away, with Lucifer bringing up the rear, 
and the horned moon grew pale. There was no time to 


_ delay. The Sun commanded the Hours to yoke the horses, 


and forth from their stalls clattered the fire-breathing steeds. 
As Phaethon prepared to mount the car, his Heavenly Sire 
invested him with his own beamy crown, and sighing, said : 
“Spare the whip, my boy, and use the reins; the horses 
need to be held in rather than urged to speed. Drive not too 
high, or you will kindle the celestial vault; drive not too low, 
or you will set the earth on fire. The middle is the safest 
course.” But the father’s warnings were wasted on his 
imprudent son. Once started on his mad career, Phaethon 
soon lost all control of the horses, which, not feeling the 
master’s hand, quickly ran wild, dragging the chariot out of 
its course, now to the icy north, now to the torrid south, now 
high, now low, now crashing into the fixed stars and colliding 
with the constellations, now brushing the earth and setting 


389 


APPENDIX 


it all on flame. ‘The forests blazed, the rivers boiled and 
steamed: the Ethiopians, who had been fair before, were 
scorched and blackened in the heat: the Nile in terror hid 
his head, dry was his channel, and his seven mouths were 
choked with dust; and southward an arid desert stretched 
far in the waste Sudan. Heaven and earth might have 
perished in one vast conflagration if the Omnipotent Father 
himself, the mighty Jove, had not hurled a thunderbolt from 
the zenith and struck dead the helpless charioteer. Down, 
down he crashed, his burning hair streaming behind him like 
the trail of light left by a falling star; so he dropped plump 
into the waters of the Eridanus, which laved his charred and 
smoking limbs. There the Naiads of the West buried his 
mangled remains, and over his grave they set a stone with 
an inscription recording his ambitious attempt and its dis- 
astrous issue. 

The corresponding story as told by the Bella Coola Indians 
of British Columbia runs as follows : 

A young woman had been married against her will by a 
man of the name of Stump. But their connubial bliss was 
short, for Stump’s hair was full of toads and he expected his 
wife to pick them out for him. This was more than she could 
bear, and she fled, pursued by the too faithful Stump. He 
gained on her, but she delayed his pursuit by throwing over 
her shoulder successively a bladder full of liquid, a comb, and 
a grindstone. The liquid turned into a lake, the comb into a 
thicket, and the grindstone into a great mountain, which 
carried her up to heaven. There she came to the house of 
the Sun, and peeping in through a chink she saw the Sun 
sitting inside in the likeness of aman. He said, “‘ Come in”’ ; 
but the doorway was blazing with fire and she hung back. 
The Sun told her to jump through the fire. She did so and 
entered the house safely. After her up came Stump, and 
endeavouring to pass the fiery doorway was consumed in the 
flames. The woman now lived in a corner of the house of the 
Sun, and after a while she gave birth to a boy, the son of the 
Sun. His name was Totqoaya. He was very ugly, and his 
face was covered with sores. In time his mother longed to 
return to her father on earth; so, instructed by the Sun, 
she took her a POR on her back and walked down the ΜΌΝΟΝ 


1 Ovid, Netamaens i. 750—ii. 328, 
39° 


XI.—PHAETHON AND THE SUN 


of the Sun, which are the sunbeams, till she came in the 
evening to her father’s house. Her parents and friends were 
very glad to see her. 

“The next morning the boy went out of the house, and 
began to play with the other children, who made fun of him. 
Then he told them that his father was the Sun; but they 
merely laughed at him, until he grew very angry. Then he 
told his mother that he intended to return to his father in 
heaven. He made a great many arrows and a bow, went 
outside, and began to shoot his arrows upward. The first 
one struck the sky. The second one struck the notch of the 
first one. And thus he continued until a chain of arrows 
was formed which reached the ground. Then he climbed up ; 
and after reaching heaven, he went into the Sun’s house. 
There he said, ‘ Father, I wish to take your place to-morrow.’ 
The Sun consented, but said, ‘ Take care that you do not burn 
the people. I use only one torch in the morning, and increase 
the number of torches until noon. In the afternoon I 
extinguish the torches one by one.’ On the following 
morning the boy took his father’s torches and went along the 
path of the Sun; but very soon he lighted all the torches. 
It became very hot on the earth. The woods began to burn, 
and the rocks to crack, and many people died. But his 
mother waved her hands, and thus kept her own house cool. 
The people who had entered her house were safe. When 
the Sun saw what the boy was doing, he caught him and threw 
him down to the earth, and said, ‘ Henceforth you shall be 
the mink.’ ’’+ 

The story is told, with variations of details, by the Kwakiutl 
Indians of British Columbia as follows : 


1 Franz Boas, The Mythology of the Bella Coola Indians 
[New York] (1898), pp. 100-103 (Memoirs of the American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. ii., The Jesup North 
Pacific Expedition). For another version of the Bella 
Coolan story, see Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der 
Nord-Pacifischen Kiiste Amerikas (Berlin, 1895), p. 246. 
In this other version the Sun says to his son Totqoaya, “1 
am old. Henceforth carry the sun in my place. But take © 
care. Go straight on, bend not down, else will the earth 
burn.” The catastrophe follows as before, and the American 
Phaethon is finally turned, as before, into a mink, 


391 


APPENDIX 


“The future mother of Born-to-be-the-Sun was weaving 
wool, facing the rear of the house. Then the sun was in the 
sky, and the sun was shining through the holes in the house ; 
and the rays struck her back while she sat facing the rear of 
the house, on her bed. Thus she became pregnant. There 
was no husband of this woman. She gave birth, and Born- 
to-be-the-Sun (Mink) became a child. Therefore it had 
immediately the name Born-to-be-the-Sun, because it was 
known that its mother became pregnant by the sun shining 
on her back. 

“The Born-to-be-the-Sun was fighting with his friend 
Bluebird. Then Bluebird made fun of Born-to-be-the-Sun 
because he had no father. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun cried 
in the house to his mother, telling his mother that he was 
called an orphan because he had no father. Therefore his 
mother said to him that his father was the Sun. 

“Immediately Born-to-be-the-Sun said he would go and 
visit his father. Then his mother made a request of the 
uncle of Born-to-be-the-Sun: ‘ Make arrows for this child, 
that he may go and see his father.’ He made four arrows 
for him. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun shot one of the arrows 
upward, It is said it struck our sky. Then he shot another 
one upward. It struck the nock of the one that he had shot 
upward first ; then again another one, and it hit the end of 
his arrow. His arrows came down sticking together. Then 
he shot the last one, and it hit the end of the one he had shot 
before. They came to the ground. 

““Then the mother of Born-to-be-the-Sun took the end of 
the arrows and shook them, and they became a rope. Then 
she cautioned her child, (saying,) ‘Don’t be foolish at the place 
where you are going.’ Thus Born-to-be-the-Sun was told 
by his mother. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun climbed the rope, 
going upward. He went to visit his father. He arrived, 
and went through to the upper side of the sky. Then Born-to- 
be-the-Sun sat on the ground next to his father’s house. 
Then Born-to-be-the-Sun was seen by a boy. Then he was 
asked by the boy, ‘ Why are you sitting there?’ ‘ I came to 
see my father.’ Then the boy entered, and reported to the 
chief, ‘ This boy sitting on the ground near the house comes 
to see his father.’ ‘ Ah, ah, ah! indeed! 1 obtained him by 
shining through. Go ask him if he will come in.’ 

‘“Then the boy went out and called Born-to-be-the-Sun. 
Born-to-be-the-Sun entered and sat down. Immediately he 


392 


XI.—PHAETHON AND THE SUN 


was taken care of by his father. ‘ Thank you, child, that you 
will change feet with me. I have tried not to be tired from 
walking to and fro every day. Now you shall go, child.’ 
Thus said the chief to his son. 

“Then he was cautioned by his father. ‘ Don’t walk fast 
where you are walking along. Don’t look right down to 
those below us, else you will do mischief.’ Then he dressed 
him up with his ear-ornaments. Then he put on his mask. 
Then he walked on the trail that was pointed out. He walked 
along. ‘My dear master, don’t sweep too much when you 
are walking along. Don’t show yourself [through] entirely 
when you are peeping through.’ Then he started in the 
morning. He passed noon. Then in the afternoon the sun 
was warm. Then he desired to peep through. He swept 
away his aunts (the clouds). Already this world began to 
burn. There was noise of the cracking of mountains, and 
the sea began to boil. The trees of the mountains caught 
fire. Therefore there are no good trees on the mountains, 
and therefore the rocks are cracked. 

“That was the reason of the fury of Born-to-be-the-Sun’s 
father. The chief pursued his child. He reached him when the 
sun was not low. Then the clothing of Born-to-be-the-Sun 
was taken away. ‘Is that what I told you? You have come 
only once.’ Born-to-be-the-Sun was just taken by the neck 
by his father, and was thrown through the hole. Born-to-be- 
the-Sun came down. A canoe was paddling along, and came 
right to Born-to-be-the-Sun. ‘Is this our chief, Born-to-be- 
the-Sun, floating about?’ Then he raised his head on the 
water when they touched him with the paddle. Born-to-be- 
the-Sun awoke and puffed. ‘ Indeed, I have been asleep on 
the water a long time.’ He went ashore and went inland.’’! 


' Franz Boas Kwakiutl Tales (New York and Leyden, 
1910), pp. 123, 125, 127 (Columbia University Contributions to 
Anthropology, vol. ii.). For a briefer Kwakiutl version of 
the story, see Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord- 
Pacifischen Kiiste Amerikas, p. 157. In this latter version 
there is no mention of the mother of the son of the Sun, but 
the narrator describes how the Sun’s ear-rings and nose-plug 
were made of glittering haliotis shell, and how, when his son 
wore these borrowed ornaments, the light flashed from them 
so fiercely that it caused the rocks to split and the water to 


boil. 
393 


APPENDIX 


‘The story is told more briefly, but in similar form, by the 
Tlatlasikoala, the Awikyenog, and the Heiltsuk Indians of 
British Columbia. In the first of these three versions the 
Sun, as in Ovid’s narrative, warns his son to go neither too 
high nor too low, for otherwise it would be either too cold or 
too hot on earth.' 

Whether the remarkable resemblances between the Greek 
and the Indian versions of the tale are to be explained as due 
to independent invention or to European influence, is a ques- 
tion which, so far as I know, there is no evidence to determine, 
and on which therefore it would be rash to pronounce an 
opinion. In the Indian versions the unlucky hero always 
appears, sooner or later, as a mink, an animal about which the 
Indians of this part of America tell many stories. I have 
spoken of the Greek version of the story because it is probable 
that Ovid drew the main outlines of his narrative from Greek 
originals, though doubtless many of the picturesque particulars 
with which he embellished it are due to the poet’s own imagi- 
nation. But the more we compare the Metamorphoses with the 
parallel stories in extant Greek literature, the more, I think, 
we shall be inclined to admire his learning and the fidelity 
with which he followed his sources, always, however, em- 
broidering their usually plain substance with the many- 
coloured threads of his exuberant fancy. 


XII.—TuE Vow or [DOMENEUS 
(Apollodorus, Epitome, vi. 10) 


Apollodorus tells us that while Idomeneus, king of Crete, 
was away with his army at the siege of Troy, his wife Meda 
at home was debauched by a certain Leucus, who afterwards 
murdered her and her daughter, and, having seduced ten cities 
of Crete from their allegiance, made himself lord of the island 
and expelled the lawful king Idomeneus when, on bis return 
from Troy, he endeavoured to reinstate himself in the kingdom. 
The same story is told, almost in the same words, by Tzetzes, 
who doubtless here, as in so many places, drew his information 


1 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen 
Kiiste Amerikas, pp. 173, 215 sq., 234, 


394 


XII.—THE VOW OF IDOMENEUS 


direct from Apollodorus.1 The exile of Idomeneus is men- 
tioned by Virgil, who says that the king, driven from his 
ancestral dominions, settled in the Sallentine land, a district 
of Calabria at the south-eastern extremity of Italy.2 The 
poet says nothing about the cause of the king’s exile; but 
his old commentator Servius explains it by a story which differs 
entirely from the account given by Apollodorus. The story is 
this. When Idomeneus, king of Crete, was returning home after 
the destruction of Troy, he was caught in a storm and vowed 
to sacrifice to Neptune whatever should first meet him; it 
chanced that the first to meet him was his own son, and 
Idomeneus sacrificed him or, according to others, only wished 
or attempted to do so; subsequently a pestilence broke out, 
and the people, apparently regarding it as a divine judgment 
on their king’s cruelty, banished him the realm.* The same 
story is repeated almost in the same words by the First and 
Second Vatican Mythographers, who clearly here, as in many 
places, either copied Servius or borrowed from the same 
source which he followed.4 But on one point the First 
Vatican Mythographer presents an interesting variation ; 
for according to him it was not his son but his daughter whom 
the king first met and sacrificed, or attempted to sacrifice. 
A similar story of a rash vow is told of a certain Maeander, 
son of Cercaphus and Anaxibia, who gave his name to the 
river Maeander. It is recorded of him that, being at war with 
the people of Pessinus in Phrygia, he vowed to the Mother of 
the Gods that, if he were victorious, he would sacrifice the first 
person who should congratulate him on his triumph. On his 
return the first who met and congratulated him was his son 
Archelaus, with his mother and sister. In fulfilment of his 
vow, Maeander sacrificed them at the altar, and thereafter, 
broken-hearted at what he had done, threw himself into the 


1 Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 384-386, compare Schol. 
on zd. 1093. 

3 Virgil, Aen. 111. 121 sq., 400 sg. ; compare id., xi. 264 sq. 

3 Servius, on Virgil, Aen. iii. 121 and on xi. 264. The 
two passages supplement each other on some points, and in 
the text I have combined them. 

4 Scriptores rerum mythicarum Latini, ed. G. H. Bode, 
vol. i. pp. 59, 145 sq. (First Vatican Mythographer, 195 ; 
Second Vatican Mythographer, 210). 


395 


APPENDIX 


river, which before had been called Anabaenon, but which 
henceforth was named Maeander after him. The story is 
told by the Pseudo-Plutarch, who cites as his authorities 
Timolaus, in the first book of his treatise on Phrygia, and 
Agathocles the Samian, in his work, 7.6 Constitution of 
Pessinus.+ 

In this last story, according to the only possible inter- 
pretation of the words,* Maeander clearly intended from the 
outset to offer a human sacrifice, though he had not antici- 
pated that the victims would be his son, his daughter, and his 
wife. Similarly in the parallel Israelitish legend of Jephthah’s 
vow it seems that Jephthah purposed to sacrifice a human 
victim, though he did not expect that the victim would be his 
daughter: “‘ And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and 
said, If thou wilt indeed deliver the children of Ammon into 
mine hand, then it shall be, that whosoever cometh forth of 
the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace 
from the children of Ammon, he shall be the Lord’s, and I will 
offer him up for a burnt offering.”® For so the passage runs 
in the Hebrew original,‘ in the Septuagint,® and in the Vulgate® 
and so it has been understood by the best modern com- 
mentators.’ In the sequel Jephthah did to his daughter 


1 Pseudo-Plutarch, De fluviis, ix. 1. 

2 ηὔξατο τῇ Μητρὶ τῶν θεῶν, ἐὰν ἐγκρατὴς γένηται τῆς νίκης, 
θύσειν τὸν πρῶτον αὐτῷ συγχαρέντα [ἐπὶ] ταῖς ἀνδραγαθίαις 
τρόπαια φέροντι. 3 Judges, xi. 80 sq. 

4 Judges, xi. 31, nN? ΤΣ Cn ΝᾺ WR RPT Pm: 
γες WIP. 

5 καὶ ἔσται ὃ ἐκπορευόμενος ds ἂν ἐξέλθῃ ἀπὸ τῆς θύρας τοῦ 


οἴκου μου εἰς συνάντησίν μου... ἀνοίσω αὐτὸν ὁλοκαύτωμα. 

6 Quicumque primus fuecrit egressus de foribus domus 
meae, mihique occurrerit... eum holocaustum offeram 
Domino. 


7 J. 8. Black (The Smaller Cambridge Bible for Schools, 
1892), G. W. Thatcher (Zhe Century Bible, n.d.), G. F. 
Moore (The International Commentary, Second Edition, 
1903), G. A. Cooke (The Meee Bible for Schools and 
Colleges, 1913), C. F. Burney (1918). Professor G, Εἰ. Moore 
observes, ‘‘ That a human victim is intended is, in fact, as 


plain as words can make it ; the language is inapplicable to 


396 


» 


XII.—THE VOW ΟΕ IDOMENEUS 


according to his vow,! in other words he consummated the 
sacrifice. ‘‘ Karly Arabian religion before Mohammed 
furnishes a parallel: ‘Al-Mundhir [king of al-Hirah] had 
made a vow that on a certain day in each year he would 
sacrifice the first person he saw; ‘Abid came in sight on the 
unlucky day, and was accordingly killed, and the altar smeared 
with his blood.’ ”’? 

Similar vows meet us in folk-tales. Thus in a German story 
from Hesse we read how a man, setting out on a long journey, 
promised his three daughters to bring back a present for each, 
whatever they should desire. The youngest of them, his 
favourite child, asked him to bring back a singing, soaring 
lark. On his way through a forest, he saw a singing, soaring 
lark perched on the top of a tree, and he called to his servant 
to climb up and catch the bird. But as he approached the 
tree, a lion leaped from under it, saying that he would devour 
whoever tried to steal his singing, soaring lark. The man 
prayed the lion to spare his life and to take a large sum of 
money instead. But the animal replied, ‘‘ Nothing can save 
thee, unless thou wilt promise to give me for my own what 
first meets thee on thy return home; but if thou wilt do 
that, I will grant thee thy life, and thou shalt have the bird 
for thy daughter, into the bargain.”” The man accepted the 
offer, and on his return home the first who met him was his 
youngest and dearest daughter, who came running up, kissed 
and embraced him, and when she saw that he had brought 
with him a singing, soaring lark, she was beside herself with 
joy. But her father wept and said, “ My dearest child, I 
have bought the little bird dear. In return for it I have 
been obliged to promise thee to a savage lion, and when he 
has thee, he will tear thee in pieces and devour thee.” But 
the brave damsel, like Jephthah’s daughter, consoled her 
sorrowful father, saying that he must keep his word, and 
that she would go to the lion and try to mollify him. The story 
ends happily, for the lion turned out to be no real lion but an 


an animal, and a vow to offer the first sheep or goat that 
he comes across—not to mention the possibility of an unclean 
animal—is trivial to absurdity.” 

1 Judges, xi. 39. 

Bg ἢ Cooke, on Judges, xi. 31, peaked Lyall, Ancient 
Arabian Poetry, p. xxviil. 


397 


APPENDIX 


enchanted prince, who married the girl, and after a series of 
adventures the two lived happily together. 

A similar tale is reported from Lorraine. Its substance is 
as follows: Once upon a time there was a man who had three 
daughters. One day he told them that he was setting out on 
a journey and promised to bring each of them back a present, 
whatever they pleased. The youngest, whom he loved the 
best, said she would like to have the talking rose. So one 
day on his travels the man came to a fine castle from which 
issued a sound of voices speaking and singing. On entering 
the castle he found himself in a courtyard, in the middle of 
which was a rose-bush covered with roses. It was the roses 
which he had heard speaking and singing. “ At last,” thought 
he, “1 have found the talking rose.” He was just about to 
pluck one of the roses, when a white wolf ran at him, crying, 
‘* Who gave you leave to enter my castle and to pluck my roses? 
You shall be punished with death. All who intrude here must 
die.”” The poor man offered to give back the talking rose, if 
only the white wolf would let him go. Af first the wolf would 
not consent, but, on hearing that the man’s daughter had 
begged for the talking rose, he said, ‘“‘ Look here. I will 
pardon you, and more than that I will let you keep the rose, 
but on one condition: it is that you will bring me the first 
person you meet on returning home.”” The poor man promised 
and went away back to his own country. The first person 
he saw on entering his house was his youngest daughter. 
‘“‘ Ah, my daughter,” said he, “‘ what a sad journey!” “ Have 
you not found the talking rose ?”’ quoth she. “1 found it,” 
quoth he, ‘‘ to my sorrow. In the castle of the white wolf I 
found it, and I must die.” When he explained to her that 
the white wolf had granted him his life on condition of his 
bringing the first person he should meet on entering his house, 
she bravely declared herself ready to go with him. So together 
they came to the castle. There the white wolf received them 
very civilly and assured them that he would do them no harm. 
‘** This castle,’’ said he, “* belongs to the fairies ; we who dwell 
in it are all fairies; I myself am condemned to be a white 
wolf by day. If you keep the secret, it will go well with you.” 
That night the white wolf appeared to the maiden in her 


1 Grimm’s Household Tales, No. 88 (vol. ii. pp. 5-10 of 
Margaret Hunt’s translation), 


398 


XII._—THE VOW OF IDOMENEUS 


chamber in the form of a handsome gentleman and promised 
that, if only she followed his directions, he would marry her 
and make her his queen, and she should be mistress of the 
castle. All went well till one day the girl received a visit from 
one of her sisters, and, yielding to her importunity, revealed 
the wondrous secret. A frightful howl at once rang through 
the castle; the maiden started up affrighted, but hardly 
had she passed the doorway when the white wolf fell dead at 
her feet. She now rued her fatal compliance, but it was too 
late, and she was wretched for the rest of her life.4 

So in a Lithuanian story we read of a king who had three 
fair daughters, but the youngest was the fairest of them all. 
Once on a time the king wished to go on business to Wilna, 
there to engage a maid who would look after his royal house- 
hold, sweep the rooms, and feed the pigs. But his youngest 
daughter told him that she needed no maid-servant, for she 
would herself discharge these domestic duties, if only he brought 
her back from Wilna a mat woven of living flowers. So the 
king went to Wilna and bought presents for his two elder 
daughters, but though he searched the whole town and went 
into every shop, he could not find a mat woven of living 
flowers. His way home led him through a forest, and there 
in the wood, a few miles from his castle, what should he see 
but a white wolf sitting by the side of the path with a hood of 
living flowers on his head. The king said to the coachman, 
“(δ down from the box, and fetch me that hood.” But 
the white wolf opened his mouth and said, “‘ My lord and 
king, you may not get the flowery hood for nothing.” The 
king asked him, ‘“‘ What would you have? I will gladly load 
you with treasures in return for the hood.” But the wolf 
answered, “1 want not your treasures. Promise to give me 
whatever you shall first meet. In three days I will come to 
your castle to fetch it.”” The king thought to himself, ‘ It is 
still a long way to home. I am quite sure to meet some wild 
beast or bird. 11 promise 10. And so he did. Then he 
drove away with the flowery hood in the carriage, and on the 
whole way home he met just nothing at all. But no sooner 
had he entered the courtyard of his castle than his youngest 
daughter came forth to meet him. The king and likewise the 
queen wept bitter tears. Their daughter asked, ‘‘ Father and 


1 KE. Cosquin, Contes populaires de Lorra*ne (Paris, n.d.), 
11. 215-217. 


399 


APPENDIX 


mother, why do you weep so?” Her father answered, 
“Alas, [ have promised you to a white wolf; in three days he 
will come to the castle, and you must go with him.” Sure 
enough the white wolf came on the third day and carried off 
the princess to his castle; for he-was really a prince who was 
a wolf by day, but put off the wolf skin by night and appeared 
in his true form as a handsome young man. After a series 
of adventures, in the course of which the wolf-skin is burnt 
by the mother of the princess and the prince in consequence 
disappears for a time, the rediscovered and now transformed 
prince marries the princess in his fine castle.+ 

In a Tyrolese story of the same type, a merchant, setting 
out on his travels, asks his three daughters what he shall bring 
them back from the city. The youngest asks him to bring 
her a leaf that dances, sings, and plays. Jn the city, as usual, 
he buys the presents for his elder daughters but cannot find 
the leaf on which his youngest daughter had set her heart. 
However, on his way home he comes to a palace with a 
beautiful garden ; and in the middle of the garden is a tree 
on which all the leaves are dancing and singing and playing 


delightfully. Thinking that one of these leaves is just the © 


thing his daughter wants, he plucks one ; but no sooner has he 
done so than a great serpent appears and says: “‘ Since you 
have taken a leaf, I demand of you that you send me within 
three days the first person whom you shall meet at home. 
Woe to you if you do not!’’ With a foreboding of evil he 
goes home, and the first person that meets him there is his 
youngest daughter. ‘‘ Father,” she asks, “‘ have you brought 
the leaf ὃ “1 have,’ he answers sadly, “‘ but it will cost 
you dear.” He then tells her on what condition he had re- 
ceived the leaf from the serpent. But his daughter goes cheer- 
fully to the serpent, who, as usual, turns out to be an enchanted 
nobleman. Dancing with him at the wedding of her sisters, 
the young lady inadvertently treads on his tail and crushes 
it ; this suffices to break the spell: he turns into a handsome 
young man in her arms: the two are married, and he intro- 
duces his bride to his noble and overjoyed parents.? 


1 A. Leskien und K. Brugman, Litawische Volkslieder 
und Mdrchen (Strasbourg, 1882), No. 23, pp. 438-443. 

2 Chr. Schneller Mdrchen und Sagen aus Walschtirol 
(Innsbruck, 1867), No. 25, pp. 63-65, 


400 


Rab o.6 oS ὼς 


>— 
« 


XII.—THE VOW OF IDOMENEUS 


A Hanoverian story relates how once upon a time a king had 
three daughters, but the youngest was the apple of his eye. 
Setting out one day to make some purchases at the yearly 
fair, he asked his daughters what presents he should bring 
them back. The youngest asked for a tinkling lion-leaf.+ 
At the fair the king easily bought the presents for his elder 
daughters, but do what he would, he could not find the tink- 
ling lion-leaf. Riding dejectedly home, he had to traverse 
a wide, wide wood, and in the wood he came to a great birch- 
tree, and under the birch-tree lay a great black poodle 
dog. Seeing the king so sad, the poodle asked him what ailed 
him, and on learning the cause of his sadness the dog said, 
“1 can help you. The tinkling lion-leaf grows on this very 


tree, and you shall have it if in a year and a day from now you 


will give me what to-day shall first come out of your house to 
meet you.”’ The king thought to himself, ‘“‘ What should that 
be but my dog?” So he gave his word. Then the poodle 
wagged his tail, climbed up the birch-tree, broke the leaf 
off with his paw, and gave it to the king, who took it and rode 
merrily home. But when he came near the house, his youngest 
daughter sprang joyfully out to meet him. Struck with horror 
he pushed her from him. She wept and thought, “‘ What can 
be the matter that my father thus repels me?” And she 
went and complained to her mother. The queen asked her 
husband why he had so treated his youngest daughter; but 
he would not tell her, and for a whole year he continued in the 
dumps and pined away. At last, when the year was all but up, 
he let the cat out of the bag. At first the queen was thunder- 
struck, but soon she pulled herself together, and concerted with 
her husband a device to cheat the black poodle by palming 
off the goose-girl instead of their daughter on him when he 
came to fetch away the princess. The deception succeeded 
at first, but when the poodle had carried off the goose-girl 
to the wood, he detected the fraud and breught her back. 
A second time a false princess was fobbed oif on him, and a 
second time detected. At last the parents had, amid the 
loud lamentation of the courtiers, to give up their real daughter 
to the black poodle, who led her away and lodged her, all 
alone, in a little cottage in the depth of a great forest. There 


1 Hin klinkesklankes Lowesblatt. I am not sure of the 
meaning. 
40! 
APOLL, II. DD 


APPENDIX 


she learned from an old hag that the poodle was an enchanted 
prince, the cottage an enchanted castle, the wood an en- 
chanted city, and the wild beasts enchanted men, and 
that every day at midnight the black poodle stripped off his 
shaggy hide and became an ordinary man. Following the 
directions of the hag, the princess waited till the third night, 
and when the enchanted prince had laid aside the black dog- 
skin and was fast asleep, she got hold of the skin and threw 
it on the fire. That broke the spell. The prince now appeared 
before her eyes in his true, his handsome form; the cottage 
turned into a palace, the wood into a city, and the wild beasts 
into men and women. The prince and princess were married, 
and at the wedding feast the bride showed great honour to 
the old hag, who thereupon blessed her and, vanishing away, 
was never seen or heard of again. 

Two stories of the same general type have been recorded in 
Schleswig-Holstein. In one of them a king has three daughters, 
and when he is about to set out on a journey he asks them 
what presents he should bring them back. The eldest daughter 
wished for a golden spinning-wheel, the second for a golden 
reel, and the youngest for a golden jingle-jangle.2» When the 
king had procured the golden spinning-wheel and the golden 
reel, and was about to set out for Home, he was very sad, 
for he did not know how to get a golden jingle-jangle. While 
he sat and wept, an old man came up to him and inquired 
the cause of his sorrow. On hearing it he said, “ The golden 
jingle-jangles are on a great tall tree in the forest, and a big bear 
watches over them; but if you promise the bear something, 
he will give you one.”’ So the king went and found the big 
bear under the big tree, and begged him to let him have a 
golden jingle-jangle. The bear answered, ‘‘ You shall have a 
golden jingle-jangle if you will give me whatever first meets 
me in your castle.” The king consented, and the bear 
promised to come next morning to the castle and bring the 
golden jingle-jangle. But when the bear appeared in the castle 
next morning, who should first meet him but the king’s youngest 
daughter ? The bear would have carried her off at once, but 
the king was sore troubled and said to the bear, “‘ Go away ; 


1 Carl und Theodor Colshorn, Mdrehen und Sagen (Han- 
over, 1854), No. 20, pp. 64-69. 


9 


“τ Hinen goldenen Klingelklangel.”’ 
402 


XII.—THE VOW OF IDOMENEUS 


she will soon follow you.”’ But instead of his own daughter 
the king dressed up the shepherd’s daughter and sent her to 
the bear, who detected the fraud and returned her to the 
king. The same thing happened to the swineherd’s daughter, 
whom the king next attempted to palm off on the bear instead 
of the princess. Last of all the king was forced to send his 
youngest daughter, and with her the bear was content. 
Afterwards the bear brought her back on a visit to her father’s 
castle and danced with her there. In the dance she trod 
heavily on one of his paws, and immediately he was changed 
into a rich and handsome prince and took her to wife.* 

Another story, recorded in Schleswig-Holstein, relates how 
a king lost his way and wandered in a ‘great forest, till a little 
black man appeared and offered to guide him home if the king 
would promise to give him whatever should first come out of 
the king’s house to meet him. The king accepted the offer, and 
on his return to the castle the first to run out to meet him was 
his daughter. He told her with tears of his promise ; but she 
answered, “‘ Since I have been the means of saving your life, 
I will willingly go away thither.”’ Accordingly she is fetched 
away by a white wolf, who, as usual, turns out to be an en- 
chanted prince, and marries her as soon as the spell which 
bound him is broken.? 

In a German story of the same type a nobleman loses his 
way in a wood and meets a poodle who promises to guide him 
home if the nobleman will give the poodle whatever on his 
return should first come forth from the nobleman’s house to 
meet him. As usual, the nobleman’s daughter is the first to 
come forth to meet him ; and, as usual, the seeming calamity 
ends in the girl’s marriage with a prince. 

Similarly in a Swedish story we hear of a king who had three 
daughters, but he loved the youngest best of all. One day he 
lost his way in the forest, and, whichever way he turned, he 
always met a man in a grey cloak, who said to him, “ If you 
would make your way out of the forest, you must give me the 


1 K, Miillenhoff, Sagen Mdrchen und Lieder der Herzcg- 
thiimer Schleswig-Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel, 1845), 
p. 384 sq 
4,K. Miallenhoff, op. cit. pp. 385-388. 
P. Zaunert, Deutsche Marchen seit Grimm (Jena, 1919), 
pp. 303 sqq. 


403 
pip 2 


APPENDIX 


first living thing that meets you at your home-coming.” The 
king thought to himself, “‘'That will be my greyhound as 
usual’’; so he promised. But it was his youngest and dearest 
daughter who met him first. The king sent his two elder 
daughters, one after the other, into the forest ; but the man 
in the grey cloak sent them both back with rich presents. 
At last the king sent his youngest daughter, and after various 
adventures she was happily wedded to the man in the grey 
cloak, who, as usual, turned out to be an enchanted prince or 
nobleman, the owner of a fine castle.! 

Thus in most of the folk-tales the rash vow tufns out 
fortunately for the victim, who, instead of being sacrificed 
or killed, obtains a princely husband and wedded bliss. Yet 
we may suspect that these happy conclusions were simply 
devised by the story-teller for the sake of pleasing his hearers, 
and that in real life the custom, of which the stories preserve 
a reminiscence, often ended in the sacrifice of the victim at the 
altar. Of such a custom a record seems to survive in the 
legends of Idomeneus, Maeander, al-Mundhir, and Jephthah. 


XIII.—Untyssts AND PoLYPHEMUS 


(Apollodorus, Epitome, vm. 4-9) 


Stories like that of Ulysses and Polyphemus have been 
recorded in modern times among many widely separated 
peoples. So close is the resemblance between the various 
versions of the tale that they must all apparently be derived 
from a common original, whether that original was the 
narrative in the Odyssey, or, more probably, a still older folk- 
tale which Homer incorporated in his epic. Some of these 
parallel versions were collected by Wilhelm Grimm about 


1 J. Bolte und G. Polivka, Anmerkungen zu den Kinder- 
und Hausmdrchen der Briider Grimm, i. (Leipsic, 1913), 
pp. 16sg. As to stories of this type, see further E. Cosquin, 
Contes populaires de Lorraine, ii. 218 δᾳᾳ.; W. Baumgartner, 
‘* Jephtas Geliibde,” Archiv fiir Religionswissenschaft, xviii. 
(1915), pp. 240-249, 


404 


fll teed πὰ ee” ae ee 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


the middle of the nineteenth century,! but many others 
have since come to light. 

(1) The oldest of the modern versions of the Polyphemus 
story occurs in a mediaeval collection of tales which was 
written in or soon after 1184 a.p. by a monk, John, of the 
Cistercian Abbey of Haute-Seille (Alta Silva) in Lorraine. 
The book, dedicated to Bertrand, Bishop of Metz, is composed 
in very fair Latin and bears the title of Dolopathos sive de 
Rege et Septem Sapientibus. It was lost for centuries, but in 
1864 a manuscript copy of the work was discovered by 
A. Mussafia in the Royal Library at Vienna. Subsequent 
research brought to light several other manuscripts at 
Vienna, Innsbruck, and Luxemburg, and in 1873 a complete 
edition of the book was published by H. Oesterley at Stras- 
bourg.* Meantime the work had long been known to scholars 


1 Wilhelm Grimm, Die Sage von Polyphem (Berlin, 1857) 
(reprinted from the Abhandlungen der kénigl. Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1857). The versions recorded by 
Grimm are summarized by W. W. Merry in his edition of Homer, 
The Odyssey, Books I-XII (Oxford, 1876), pp. 546-550. 

2 See A. van Gennep, “La Légende de Polyphéme,”’ 
Religions, Moeurs, et Légendes (Paris, 1908), pp. 155-164. 
In this essay the learned author reviews a work by O. Hack- 
man, Die Polyphemsage in der Volksiiberlieferung (Helsingfors, 
1904), which I have not seen. From M. van Gennep’s notice 
of it, I gather that Mr. Hackman has collected, analysed, and 
classified no less than two hundred and twenty-one popular 
variations of the tale. Very many versions are referred to 
by Messrs. J. Bolte and G. Polivka in their erudite Anmer- 
kungen zu den Kinder- und Hausmdrchen der Briider Grimm 
iii. (Leipzig, 1918), pp. 374-378. Thus the versions quoted 
by me in the following pages form apparently only a small 
part of those which are on record. But they may suffice 
to illustrate the wide diffusion of the tale and the general 
similarity of the versions. 

3 Joannes de Alta Silva, Dolopathos sive de Rege et Septem 
Sapientibus, herausgegeben von Hermann Oesterley (Strass- 
burg, Karl J. Triibner, 1873). A more recent edition is that 
of A. Hilka (Heidelberg, 1913). Of the manuscripts the one 
now in the Atheneum at Luxemburg is the oldest and most 
complete; it was written in the thirteenth century and 


405 


APPENDIX 


through a metrical French translation which was written 
somewhere between the years 1222 and 1226 a.p. by a certain 
trouvére named Herbers. Considerable extracts from the 
poem, amounting to about a third of the whole, were pub- 
lished, with a prose analysis, by Le Roux de Lincy in 1838 ;1 
but the complete poem was first edited, from two manuscripts 
in the Imperial (now the National) Library i in Paris, by Charles 
Brunet and Anatole de Montaiglon in 1856.? 

This mediaeval collection of stories, called Dolopathos, 
whether in its original Latin form or in the metrical French 
translation, is clearly based, directly or indirectly, on an older 
mediaeval collection of tales called The Book of Sindibad or 
The Seven Sages, of which versions exist in many languages, 
both Oriental and European ;° for not only is the general 


alone contains the author’s dedication and preface. It 
formerly belonged to the Abbey of Orval (Aurea Vallis) in 
the diocese of Tréves and was removed, with the rest of the 
library, for safety to Luxemburg at the time when the Abbey 
was sacked by the French in 1793. As to the date of Dolo- 
pathos, see Oesterley’s preface, p. xi. The monkish author’s 
orthography is not equal to his diction and style. He uses 
such forms as michi for mihi, nichil for nihil, herbe for herbae, 
nephas for nefas, etas for aetas, que for quae, &e. 

1 Le Roux de Lincy, Roman de Sept Sages de Rome, printed 
as an appendix or introduction to A. Loiseleur Deslongchamps’s 
Essai sur les Fables Indiennes et sur leur Introduction en 
Europe (Paris, 1838), but paged separately. The analysis 
and the extracts include the tale of Polyphemus (pp. 133-135, 
239-251), who, however, is not mentioned by name, being 
simply referred to as “ the giant.” 

2 71 Romans de Dolopathos, publié pour la premiére fois 
par Charles Brunet et Anatole de Montaiglon (Paris, 1856). 
For the story of Polyphemus (who is not mentioned by 
name), see pp. 284-295. As to the date of this metrical 
translation see the editors’ preface, pp. Xvii—xix. 

8 As to The Book of Sindibad or The Seven Sages, see 
A. Loiseleur Deslongchamps, Essai sur les Fables Indiennes 
et sur leur Introduction en Europe, pp. 80 sqg.; J. Dunlop, 
Geschichte der eT si ibertragen von Felix Liebrecht 
(Berlin, 1851), pp. 196 sqq.; Ὁ. Comparetti, Researches 
concerning the “Book of Sindrbad (London, 1882), pp. 1 sqq. 


406 


X#I.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


framework or plan of Dolopathos the same with that of 
Sindibad or The Seven Sages, but out of the eight stories 
which it contains, three are identical with those included 
in the earlier work.! Among the tales which the two collec- 
tions have in common the story of Polyphemus is not one, 
for it appears only in Dolopathos. 

As told by the author of Dolopathos the story of Polyphemus 
diverges in certain remarkable features from the Homeric 
account, and since some of these divergences occur in popular 
versions of the story recorded among various peoples, we may 
reasonably infer that John de Haute-Seille herein followed 
oral tradition rather than the Homeric version of the tale.? 
At the same time he certainly appears to have been acquainted 
with the Odyssey ; for he not only mentions Polyphemus 


The fullest of the versions is the mediaeval Greek version 
known as Syntipas, of which a critical edition was published 
by A. Eberhard at Leipsic in 1872 (Fabulae Romanenses 
Graece conscriptae, volumen prius, Leipsic, Teubner, 1872). 
This version purports to be translated from the Syriac, and a 
Syriac version was published with a German translation 
' by Fr. Baethgen in 1879 (Sindban oder Die Sieben Weisen 
Meister, syrisch und deutsch, von Friederich Baethgen, Leipsic, 
1879); but this version can hardly be the one which Andreo- 
pulos translated into Greek, since it is,somewhat shorter. 
Compare D. Comparetti, op. cit. p. 63 note, who has made it 
probable (pp. 53 sqq.) that the Greek version (Syntipas) 
was made towards the end of the eleventh century by order 
of Gabriel, Duke of Melitene. A French translation of the 
Syriac version was published by F. Macler in 1903 (Contes 
Syriaques, Histoire de Sindban, mise en frangais par Frédéric 
Macler, Paris, 1903). The same scholar has since published 
a French translation of an Armenian version, which seems to 
have been made from the Latin. See La version Arménienne 
de lV Histoire des Sept Sages de Rome, mise en frangais par 
Frédéric Macler (Paris, 1919). 

1H. Oesterley, preface to his edition of Dolopathos, pp. 
xili sqq. 

2 It is the opinion of Oesterley, his editor, that in general 
John drew the materials for his work rather from oral tradition 
than from literary sources. See H. Oesterley’s preface, pp. 
xii sqq. 


407 


APPENDIX . 


by name but speaks of Circe, daughter of the Sun, and how 
she transformed the companions of Ulysses into diverse 
beasts. ! 

The story of Polyphemus, as recorded in Dolopathos, 
runs as follows :— 

A famous robber, who had lived to old age and accumulated 
vast riches in the exercise of his profession, resolved to devote 
the remainder of his days to the practice of virtue, and in 
pursuance of that laudable resolution he excited by his 
exemplary conduct the wonder and admiration of all who 
remembered the crimes and atrocities of his earlier life. 
Being invited by the queen to recount the greatest perils and 
adventures which he had met with in his career of brigandage, 
he spoke thus: ‘“ Once on a time we heard that a giant, 
who owned great sums of gold and silver, dwelt in a solitary 
place about twenty miles distant from the abodes of men. 
Lured by the thirst for gold, a hundred of us robbers assem- 
bled together and proceeded with much ado to his dwelling. 
Arrived there, we had the pleasure of finding him not at home, 
so we carried off all the gold and silver on which we could lay 
hands. We were returning home, easy in our minds, when all 
of a sudden the giant with nine others comes upon us and takes 
us prisoners, the more shame to us that a hundred men should 
be captured by ten. They divided us among them, and, as 
ill luck would have it, I and nine others fell to the share of the 
one whose riches we had just been lifting. So he tied our 
hands behind our backs and drove us like so many sheep to 
his cave; now his stature exceeded thirteen cubits. We 
offered to pay a great sum as ransom, but he mockingly 
replied that the only ransom he would accept was our flesh. 
With that he seized the fattest of our number, cut his throat, 
and rending him limb by limb, threw him into the pot to boil. 
He treated the rest of us, all but me, in the same fashion, 
and to crown it all he forced me to eat of every one of them. 
Why dwell on the painful subject ? When it came to my turn 
to have my throat cut, I pretended to be a doctor and 
promised that, if he spared my life, I would heal his eyes, 
which ached dreadfully. He agreed to these terms for m 
medical services, and told me to be quick about it. So I 


1 Joannes de Alta Silva, Dolopathos sive de Rege et Septem 
Sapientibus, herausgegeben von H. Oesterley, pp. 71, 99. 


408 


προ =" wa =” 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


took a pint of oil and set it on the fire, and stirring it up with 
a good dose of lime, salt, sulphur, arsenic, and anything else 
I could think of that was most injurious and destructive to 
the eyes, I compounded a salve, and when it was nicely on the 
boil, I tipped the whole of it on the patient’s head. The 
boiling oil, streaming over every inch of his body, peeled him 
like an onion; his skin shrivelled up, his sinews stiffened, 
and what little sight he had left he lost completely. And 
there he was, like a man in a fit, rolling his huge body about 
on the floor, roaring like a lion and bellowing like a bull—a 
really horrid sight. After long rolling about and finding 
no ease to his pain, he grips his cudgel like a madman and 
goes groping and fumbling about for me, thumping the walls 
and the floor like a battering-ram. Meantime what was I 
to do ? and whither could I fly ἢ Onevery side the house was 
walled in by the most solid masonry, the only way out was 
by the door, and even that was barred with bolts of iron. 
So while he was tearing about after me in every corner, the 
only thing for me to do was to climb up a ladder to the roof 
and catch hold of a beam, and there I hung to it by my hands 
for a whole day and night. When 1 could bear it no longer, 
1 had just to come down and dodge between the giant’s legs 
and among his flock of sheep. For yon must know that he 
had a thousand sheep and counted them every day. And 
while he kept a fat one he used to let the others go to grass ; 
and whether it was his skill or his witchery I know not, but 
at evening they would all come trooping back of themselves, 
and he got the full tale. So when he was counting them and 
letting them out as usual, I tried to escape by wrapping me in 
the shaggy fleece of a ram and fixing his horns on my head ; 
and in that guise I mingled with the flock that was going out. 
On my turn coming to be counted, he feels me all over, and 
finding me fat, he keeps me back, saying, ‘To-day I'll fill 
my empty belly on you.’ Seven times did I thus pass under 
his hands, seven times did he keep me. back, yet every time I 
gave him the slip. At last, when I came under his hand 
once more, he drove me in a rage out of the door, saying, 
“Go and be food for the wolves, you who have so often de- 
ceived your master.” When I was about a stone’s throw off, 
I began to mock him because I had outwitted him so often 
and made my escape. But he drew a gold ring from his 
finger and said, ‘ Take that for a reward; for it is not meet. 


409 


APPENDIX 


that a guest should go without a gift from a man like me.’ 
1 took the proffered ring and put it on my finger, and at once 
I was bewitched by some devilry or other and began to shout, 
‘Here Iam! Here [ am!’ Thereupon, blind though he 
was, guided by the sound of my voice, he came tearing along, 
bounding over the smaller bushes, sometimes stumbling and 
collapsing like a landslide. When he was nearly up to me, 
and 1 could neither stop shouting nor tear the ring from my 
finger, | was forced to cut off the finger with the ring and to 
fling it at him. Thus by the loss of a finger did I save my 
whole body from imminent destruction.’’4 

This version differs from the Homeric account in several 
important respects. It represents the giant as merely 
blear-eyed instead of one-eyed ; it describes the blinding of 
him as effected by a stratagem which the hero of the tale 
practises on the giant with his own consent instead of as a 
violence done to him in his sleep; and it adds an entirely 
new episode in the trick of the magic ring and the consequent 
sacrifice of the hero’s finger. These discrepancies, which 
recur, as we shall see, in other versions, confirm the view that 
the source from which the monk John drew the story was 
oral tradition rather than the narrative in the Odyssey. 

(2) All the distinctive features which we have just remarked 
in the version of John of Haute-Seille meet us again in a 
West Highland version of the story, which was told by a 
blind fiddler in the island of Islay. It runs thus: A certain 
man called Conall Cra Bhuidhe undertook with the help of his 
sons to steal the brown horse of the King of Lochlann; but 
in the attempt they were caught by the king, who would 
have hanged them, if Conall had not saved their lives by telling 
the story of his adventures. One of his adventures was like 


1 Joannes de Alta Silva, Dolopathos sive de Rege et Septem 
Sapientibus, herausgegeben von H. Oesterley, pp. 66-68 ; 
id., herausgegeben von A. Hilka (Heidelberg, 1913), pp. 73-75. 
There are a few minor discrepancies in the texts of these 
editions. According to Oesterley’s text, the hero was obliged 
to cut off (abscidere) his finger; according to Hilka’s text, 
he was compelled to bite it off (dentibus abscidere). The word 
dentibus is wanting in the Luxemburg manuscript. The 
parallel versions are in favour of cutting off, as against biting 
off, the finger. See below, pp. 412, 413 5ᾳ., 415, 416, 418, 419, 
421, 422. ; 


410 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


that of Ulysses in the cave of Polyphemus. “1 was there 
as a young lad,” said Conall, ‘‘ and I went out hunting, and 
my father’s land was beside the sea, and it was rough with 
rocks and caves and chasms. When I was going on the 
shore, I saw a smoke curling up between two rocks, and while 
I was looking at it, I fell; but the place was so full of manure 
that neither skin nor bone was broken. Then I heard a 
great clattering, and what was there but a great giant and two 
dozen of goats with him, and a buck at their head? And 
when the giant had tied the goats, he came up and he said to 
me, ‘ Ho, Conall, it’s long since my knife is rusting in my 
pouch waiting for thy tender flesh.’ ‘Och,’ said I, ‘it’s 
not much thou wilt be bettered by me, though thou shouldst 
tear me asunder; I will make but one meal for thee. But 
I see thou art one-eyed. I am a good leech, and I will give 
thee the sight of the other eye.’ The giant went and he drew 
the great cauldron on the site of the fire. I told him how to 
heat the water so that I should give its sight to the other 
eye. I got heather, and I made a rubber of it, and 1 set him 
upright in the cauldron. I began at the eye that was well, 
pretending to him that I would give its sight to the other one, 
till 1 left them as bad as each other; and surely it was easier 
to spoil the one that was well than to give sight to the other. 

** When he saw that he could not see at all, and when 1 
myself said to him that I would get out in spite of him, he 
gave a spring out of the water and stood at the mouth of 
the cave, and he said that he would have revenge for the 
sight of his eye. I had to stay there crouched all night, 
holding my breath that he might not feel where I was. When 
he heard the birds calling in the morning, and knew that 
it was day, he said, ‘ Art thou sleeping ? Awake and let out 
my goats.’ I killed the buck. He cried, ‘I will not believe 
that thou art killing my buck.’ ‘I am not,’ said I, ‘ but the 
ropes are so tight that I take long to loose them.’ [I let out 
one of the goats, and he caressed her, and he said to her, 
‘There thou art, thou shaggy white goat, and thou seest me, 
but I see thee not.’ I let them out one by one, as I flayed the 
buck, and before the last one was out I had flayed him 
bag-wise. Then I put my legs in place of his legs, and my 
hands in place of his fore legs, and my head in place of his 
head, and the horns on top of my head, so that the brute 
might think that it was the buck. I went out, When I 


4τ| 


APPENDIX 


was going out, the giant laid his hand on me, and he said, 
‘There thou art, my pretty buck; thou seest me, but I see 
thee πού. When 1 myself got out, and I saw the world about 
me, surely, oh King! joy was on me. 

‘* When I was out and had shaken the skin off me, I said 
to the brute, ‘I am out now in spite of thee.’ ‘ Aha!’ said 
he, ‘ hast thou done this to me ? Since thou wert so stalwart 
that thou hast got out, I will give thee a ring that I have here, 
and keep the ring, and it will do thee good.’ ‘I will not take 
the ring from thee,’ said I, ‘ but throw it, and I[ will take it 
with me.’ He threw the ring on the flat ground, I went 
myself and I lifted the ring, and I put it on my finger. Then 
he said, ‘ Does the ring fit thee?’ I said to him, ‘ It does.’ 
He said, ‘ Where art thou, ring?’ And the ring said, ‘I 
am here.’ The brute came towards where the ring was 
speaking, and now I saw that I was in a harder case than 
ever | was. I drew a dirk. I cut off my finger, and I threw 
it from me as far as I could on the loch, and the place was very 
deep. He shouted, ‘Where art thou, ring?’ And the 
ring said, ‘I am here,’ though it was at the bottom of the 
ocean. He gave a leap after the ring, and down he went in 
the sea. I was pleased when I saw him drowning, and when 
he was drowned 1 went in, and I took with me all he had of 
gold and silver, and I went home, and surely great joy was on 
my people when I arrived. And as a sign for thee, look thou, 
the finger is off me.’ 

(3) In another Highland story, recorded in Argyllshire, 
a one-eyed giant carries the hero of the tale into his cave, 
intending to devour him; but with the help of a king’s 
daughter, whom the giant had detained for seven years, the 
hero contrives to blind the monster by thrusting a red-hot 
bar into his single eye while he sleeps. There is no mention 
of sheep or goats in this story, and the episode of the talking 
ring is also absent. 


1 J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands, 
New Edition, I (Paisley and London, 1890), pp. 105-114 
(Tale V). I have slightly abridged the story and changed a 
few words for the sake of the English idiom. 

2D. MacInnes, Folk and Hero Tales (London, 1890), 
pp. 263, 265, 267 (Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, 
Argylishire Series, No. 11). 


412 


ES Se east mh ee ee - 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


(4) The incident of the ring and the severed finger occurs 
also in two Basque stories of the same type. One of them 
was told by the parish priest of Esquiule, in La Soule, as 
follows : 

“Τὴ my infancy I often heard from my mother the story 
of the Tartaro. He was a Colossus, with only one eye in the 
middle of his forehead. He was a shepherd and a hunter, 
but a hunter of men. Every day he ate a sheep; then, 
after a snooze, everyone who had the misfortune to fall 
into his hands. His dwelling was a huge barn, with thick 
walls, a high roof, and a very strong door, which he alone 
knew how to open. His mother, an old witch, lived in one 
corner of the garden, in a hut constructed of turf. 

** One day a powerful young man was caught in the snares 
of the Tartaro, who carried him off to his house. This 
young man saw the Tartaro eat a whole sheep, and he knew 
that he was accustomed to take a snooze, and then after 
that his own turn would come. In his despair he said to 
himself that he must do something. Directly the Tartaro 
began to snore he put the spit into the fire, made it red-hot, 
and plunged it into the giant’s one eye. Immediately he 
leapt up, and began to run after the man who had injured 
him; but it was impossible to find him. ‘ You shall not 
escape. It is all very well to hide yourself,’ said he, ‘ but 
I alone know the secret how to open this door.’ 

“The Tartaro opened the door half-way, and let the 


τ sheep out between his legs. The young man takes the big 


bell off the ram, and puts it round his neck, and throws over 
his body the skin of the sheep which the giant had just eaten, 
and walks on all fours to the door. The Tartaro examines 
him by feeling him, perceives the trick, and clutches hold 
of the skin; but the young man slips off the skin, dives 
between his legs, and runs off. 

“Immediately the mother of the Tartaro meets him, 
and says to him: “Ὁ, you lucky young fellow! You have 
escaped the cruel tyrant; take this ring as a remembrance 
of your escape.’ He accepts, puts the ring on his finger, 
and immediately the ring begins to cry out, ‘ Heben nuk / 
Heben nuk!’ (‘Thou hast me here! Thou hast me here !’) 
The Tartaro pursues, and is on the point of catching him, 
when the young man, maddened with fright, and not being 
able to pull off the ring, takes out his knife, and cuts off his 


413 


APPENDIX 


own finger, and throws it away, and thus escapes the pursuit 
of the ‘l'artaro.”’+ 

(5) Another Basque story of the same sort was told by 
Jean Sallaber of Aussurucq as follows: 

Two soldiers of the same district, having got their furlough, 
were returning home on foot together. Night fell as they 
were traversing a great forest. But in the twilight they 
perceived a smoke in the distance, so they turned their 
steps towards it and discovered a poor hovel. They knocked 
at the door, and a voice from within answered, “‘ Who is 
there?” ‘Two friends,” they answered. ‘What do 
you want?” asked the voice. ‘‘ A lodging for the night,” 
they replied. The door opened, they were admitted, and 
then the door closed. Brave as the soldiers were, they were 
yet terrified at finding themselves in the presence of a Basa- 
Jaun. He had the figure of a man, but was all covered 
with hair, and had a single eye in the middle of his forehead. 

The Basa-Jaun set food before them, and when they had 
finished their supper, he weighed them and said to the 
heavier, ““ You will do for to-night, and the other for to- 
morrow ”’?; and without more ado he ran a big spit through 
the fatter of the two, without even stripping him of his 
clothes, and after setting him to roast on the spit before a 
great fire, he ate him up. The other was in a sad fright, 
not knowing what to do to save his life. 

Having made a hearty meal, the Basa-Jaun fell asleep. 
Immediately the soldier laid hold of the spit which had served 
to roast his comrade, heated it red-hot in the fire, and plunging 
it into the eye of the Basa-Jaun, blinded him. Howling aloud, 
the Basa-Jaun ran about everywhere to find the stranger ; 
but the soldier had made haste to hide in the fold, among 
the sheep of the Basa-Jaun; for he could not get out, because 
the door was shut. 

Next morning the Basa-Jaun opened the door of the fold, 
and, wishing to catch the soldier, he made all the sheep, 
on their way out, pass one by one between his legs. But 
the soldier had conceived the idea of skinning a sheep and 
clothing himself in its fleece, in order that the blinded giant 
should not catch him. As the Basa-Jaun felt all the sheep, 


1 Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends (London, 1879), 
pp. 4 sq. 
414 


XIII. ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


the skin of the flayed one remained in his hands, and he 
thought that the man had passed out under it. 

The soldier did escape, and very glad he was to do so. But 
the Basa-Jaun ran after him as well as he could, crying, 
“‘ Hold, take this ring, in order that, when you are at home, 
you may be able to tell what a marvel you have done!” 
And with that he threw him the ring. The soldier picked 
it up and put it on his finger; but the ring began to speak 
and to say, “Here I am! Here I am!” Away ran the 
soldier, and the blinded monster after him. At last, worn out 
with his flight, and fearing to be overtaken by the Basa-Jaun, 
the soldier would have thrown the ring into a stream, but he 
could not wrench it from his finger. So he cut off the finger 
and threw it with the ring into the stream. From the bottom 
of the river the ring continued to cry, “‘ Here lam! Here I 
am!” and hearing the cry the Basa-Jaun rushed into the 
water and was drowned. Then the soldier crossed the stream 
on a bridge and escaped, very happy, to his home.+ 

(6) The episode of the talking ring and the severed finger 
occurs also in a Rumanian story of the same type. In it 
a man sends his three sons out with the flock of sheep and 
warns them not to answer if anyone should hail them by 
night. But they neglect his warning, and in the night, 
when a voice has hailed them thrice, they all answer, ‘‘ Here 
we are.” <A giant now appears and calls to them to roast 
their fattest wether for him, because he is hungry. When 
the wether is roasted, the giant swallows it at a gulp, and 
orders the three brothers to follow him with the flock. He 
leads them to his home, where they are obliged to leave the 
sheep in the walled courtyard. When they enter the giant’s 
house, they bid him good evening, but he answers that the 
eldest brother will serve him for supper that same evening, 
that the second brother will do the same the next evening, 
and that the youngest brother will be kept for the next day 
but one. He then made up a big fire, hung a huge kettle 
over it, and lay down to sleep, after telling the brothers to 
wake him when the water should boil. They did so accord- 
ingly, whereupon he seized the eldest brother, threw him 
into the kettle, boiled him till he was tender, and then ate 


1 J. Vinson, Le Folk-lore du pays Basque (Paris, 1883), 
pp. 42-45. 


415 


APPENDIX 


him, ‘Thereupon he put water to boil on the fire again and lay 
down, with an injunction to wake him at the time appointed. 
But the youngest brother skimmed off the fat of his boiled 
brother as it floated on the water, and having got it he 
secreted it. The giant slept till evening, then waking from 
his nap he seized the second brother and devoured him. 
A third time he set water on the fire, ordering the surviving 
brother to waken him as usual. Meantime the survivor 
found a tripod in the kitchen, set his brother’s fat on it, 
and roasted it over the fire. Then he flung the roasted fat 
and the tripod at the sleeping giant, thus putting out both 
his eyes. Up started the giant in a fury and tried to catch 
the young man, but the youth threw him off the scent by 
dropping nuts, which he had in his wallet, one after the 
other on the floor. In his blind rage the giant seized the 
latch and wrenched the door open. The young man darted 
out into the courtyard, slaughtered a ram, and crept into 
its skin. Not suspecting the trick, the giant now opened 
the gate of the courtyard and let the sheep out one by one 
in the hope of catching his prisoner when he should 
attempt to escape. But the disguised youth slipped through 
and called out mockingly to the giant, “‘Now you can 
do nothing to me.” ‘Then the giant, making believe to 
be friendly, called after him, ‘‘ Take this ring from my little 
finger for a memorial.”” The young man picked it up and 
put it on. Then the ring began to call out, “ This way, 
blind man, this way!’ Away ran the youth and the giant 
after him. The fugitive reached the water first, but the 
giant was close on his heels; so the young man cut off his 
own finger with the ring on it, and threw it into the waves. 
As the ring continued to call out, ‘‘ This way, blind man, 
this way !”’ the giant leaped into the water and was drowned.+ 

(7) The episode of an enchanted, though not talking, ring 
and a severed finger, meets us in two Italian stories of this 
type. One of them, recorded in the Abruzzo, tells of two 
brothers who were going to a fair. As they were crossing 
a rugged mountain, night overtook them. They saw a 
gleam of light in a cave, and approaching they called out, 
‘** Master of the house, will you give us shelter ὃ A voice 


1 W. Grimm, Die Sage von Polyphem, pp. 15 84., referring 
to Franz Obert (Ausland, 29, 717). 


416 


S 8 oe ee ie ΄- 


—_ = 


τὸ ee lil ΣΝ 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


from within answered, ‘‘ Wait.” ‘They waited, and out 
came a giant who had an eye in his forehead. He said, 
“Pray come in. Here there is no lack of anything.” The 
two brothers went in, but they were all of a tremble, all the 
more because Hye-in-his-forehead shut the door with a bolt 
which not a hundred men could lift. Standing in front of the 
fire, Eye-in-his-forehead said to the two brothers, “1 have 
a hundred sheep, but the year is long, and we must be as 
thrifty as may be. So which shall we eat first? Little 
Brother or Big Brother? You may cast lots for it.” The 
two brothers cast lots, and the lot fell on Big Brother. So 
Big Brother was stuck on a spit and set on the hot coals. 
While Eye-in-his-forehead turned the spit, he said in an 
undertone, “‘ Big Brother to-day, Little Brother to-morrow.”’ 
Little Brother racked his brains to think how he could escape 
from the danger. Meantime Big Brother was roasted, and 
HKye-in-his-forehead began to eat him. He wished Little 
Brother to eat too, and Little Brother pretended to eat, 
but he threw the meat behind his back. Dinner over, Eye- 
in-his-forehead went to sleep in the straw, but Little Brother 
remained beside the fire. When he perceived that Eye-in- 
his-forehead snored, he heated the point of the spit red-hot 
and thrust it, fizzing, into the giant’s eye. The giant started 
up to catch Little Brother, but Little Brother nimbly mixed 
with the sheep, and though the giant searched the sheep, 
feeling them one by one, he could not discover the fugitive. 
However, he said, “I'll catch him at break of day.” 
Little Brother thought it was all up with him unless he could 
hit on some dodge or other. So he killed the ram, skinned 
it, and dressed himself in the skin. At break of day Eye- 
in-his-forehead removed the bolt and stood straddling in the 
doorway. And first of all he called for the ram with the 
bell on its neck. Little Brother came forward, jingling the 
bell and going on all fours. As he passed between the legs 
of Eye-in-his-forehead, the giant caressed him, and so he did 
to the rest of the sheep. But groping about in the cave he 
lighted on the carcass of the ram which Little Brother had 
killed and skinned. Then he perceived the trick which 
Little Brother had played him, and sniffing about in his 
direction he threw him an enchanted ring. Little Brother 
picked it up and put it on his finger, but having done so he 
found himself compelled, instead of running away, to draw 


417 
APOLL. II. EB 


APPENDIX 


near to the giant. In vain he tried to pull the ring from his 
finger; the ring would not budge. So in order not to fall 
into the hands of Eye-in-his-forehead he cut off the finger 
on which was the ring, and threw it in the face of the giant 
who ate it and said to Little Brother, ‘‘ At least I have tasted 

ou,’?4 

(8) Another Italian version of the story, recorded at Pisa, 
tells of a man of Florence who set out on his travels. On 
the way he picked up a curate and a workman, and the three 
agreed to try their fortunes together. Walking through 
a wood for a long time, they came at last to a very fine palace 
and knocked at the door. A giant opened the door in person 
and asked them where they were going. ‘‘ Oh, just taking 
a turn,” said they. ‘“‘ Very well,” said the giant, “ just 
turn in here. There’s a vacancy in the curacy of my parish, 
and a vacancy in my workshop, and 111] find some job or 
other for him,” alluding to the Florentine. All three closed 
with the offer, and put up in the giant’s house. He gave 
them a room and said, “‘l'’o-morrow I'll give you your jobs 
to do.” Next day the giant came to them, took the curate, 
and led him away to another chamber. Instigated by the 
passion of curiosity, the Florentine followed on tiptoe, and 
applying his eye to the keyhole of the chamber in which 
the curate was getting his job, he saw the giant showing 
him some leaves, and while the clergyman was looking at 
them, what does the giant do but whip out a scimitar, and 
in less than no time he had the curate’s head off and his 
body in a grave, which was in the chamber. ‘Good idea of 
mine to come here,’ thought the Florentine to himself. 
When they were at dinner, the giant said, ‘The curate 
has got his job. Now I'll give the workman his.” So after 
dinner he led the workman to the same chamber. The 
Florentine followed as before, and again applying his eye 
to the keyhole, he saw the giant taking some leaves from 
his writing-desk and showing them to the workman, and 
while the workman was gazing at them, the giant performed 
the sword-trick once more. ἡ My turn next,’’ thought the 
Florentine to himself. 

That evening at supper the giant remarked that the work- 


1 Antonio de Nino, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi (Florence, 
1879-1883), III. 305-307. 


418 


ee ἌΝ ΟΣ ra* 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


man had got his job, and that he, the giant, would soon 
find a job for the Florentine too. But the Florentine had 
no wish to do the job in question, and he cudgelled his brains 
as to how he could get out of it. At last he thought of a 
plan. It happened that one of the giant’s eyes was defective ; 
so hersaid to the giant, “ What a pity that with that fine 
figure of yours you should have such an eye! But look here, 
I know a cure for it, it is a certain herb which I have seen 
here in the meadow.” “ Really?” said the giant, ‘“ here 
in the meadow? ‘Then let’s go and find it.”” When they 
were in the meadow, the Florentine picked up the first herb 
he saw, and bringing it back with him put it in a pot of oil, 
which he set on the fire. When the oil was boiling, the 
Florentine said to the giant, “1 warn you that the pain will 
be great ; but you must keep steady, and it will be well that 
I should tie you to this marble table, for otherwise the opera- 
tion will turn out ill.” The giant, who was bent on having 
his bad eye put right, told the Florentine to tie away. The 
Florentine did as he was desired, and then poured the boiling 
oil on both the giant’s eyes. ‘‘ You have blinded me,” 
roared the giant; but the other stole softly down the stair, 
opened the door, and cut away. The giant had now lost 
both his eyes, but such was his strength that he rose to his 
feet with the marble table on his back, and made after his 
foe. ‘‘Come here! Come here!” he cried, ‘fear not. 
At least take a keepsake.’’ And he threw a ring to the 
Florentine, who picked it up and put it on his finger. But 
no sooner had he done so than his finger was turned to marble, 
and he couJd not budge from the spot. In vain did he tug 
at the ring; he could not stir it from his finger. And now 
the giant was all hut up with him. In despair the fugitive 
drew a knife, which he had in his pocket, and cut off his 
finger. Then he could move again, and away he tore, and the 
giant, encumbered by the table on his shoulders, could not 
catch him up. The wanderer reached Florence in a state of 
exhaustion, and by this time he had had enough of it. The 
wish to scour the world and to tell of his travels never came 
back on him.t In this version we miss the characteristic 
episode of the hero’s escape under a ram or clad in a slfeepskin. 


1 Ὁ. Comparetti, Novelline popolari Italiane (Rome, Turin, 
and Florence, 1875), No. 44, pp. 192-195. 


; | 419 


ic) 
5: 
bo 


APPENDIX 


(9) A Serbian story of this type relates how a priest and 
his scholar were once walking through a great mountainous 
region when night overtook them. Seeing a fire burning 
in a cave some way off, they made for it. On reaching the 
cave they found nobody in it except a giant with one eye 
in his forehead. They asked him if he would let them enter, 
and he answered “ Yes.” But the mouth of the cave was 
blocked with a huge stone, which a hundred men could not 
have stirred. The giant arose, lifted the stone, and let 
them in. Then he rolled back the stone into the mouth of 
the cave and kindled a great fire. The travellers sat down 
beside it and warmed themselves. When they had done so, 
the giant felt their necks in order to know which was the 
fatter, that he might kill and roast him. Finding the parson 
the fatter of the two, he knocked him on the head, stuck him 
on a spit, and roasted him over the fire. When he was 
done to a turn, the giant invited the scholar to partake of 
the roasted flesh, and though the scholar protested that he 
was not hungry, the giant forced him to take a mouthful, 
which, however, he spat out on the sly. Having eaten 
his fill, the giant composed himself to slumber beside the 
fire. While he slept, the scholar sharpened a stick and 
thrusting it into the giant’s eye, blinded him. “ You 
have robbed me of my one eye,” roared the giant, “‘ be- 
cause I had not the sense to put out both of yours. But 
no matter. Thank God, you will not escape me.” He 
groped about in the cave, but could not find the scholar, 
because there were many sheep in it, and the scholar had 
drawn a ram’s skin over his body and in that disguise had 
mingled with the flock. Then the giant went to the mouth 
of the cave, pushed the great stone a little aside, and let the 
sheep pass out, one after the other, and the scholar in the 
ram’s skin slipped out with them. Having escaped into the 
open, he cried to the giant, “Seek for me no more. I am 
out.”” When the giant saw that his prisoner had given 
him the slip, he held out a staff to him, saying, “ Though you 
have escaped me, take this staff to shepherd the sheep with ; 
for without it you will not get a single sheep to budge.’ 
The simple scholar took it, and no sooner had le touched it 
than one of his fingers clave fast to the staff. He now gave 
himself up for lost and began to run round and round the 
giant, till he remembered that he had his clasp-knife on him, 


420 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


Whipping it out, he cut off the finger that clave to the staff, 
and so he escaped. Afterwards, driving the flock before 
him, he mocked and jeered at the blinded giant, who pursued 
him till he came to the edge of the water, into which he 
fell and was drowned.! ᾿ 

(10) A Russian story, which belongs to the same class, 
tells how once upon a time there was a smith. ‘‘ Well now,” 
says he, “ I’ve never set eyes on any harm. They say there’s 
evil (likho) in the world. 11 go and seek out evil.”’ So he 
went and started in search of evil, and on the way he met 
a tailor, who agreed to join him in the search. Weil, they 
walked and walked till they came to a dark, dense forest, 
and in the forest they found a narrow path, and along the 
path they walked till they saw a large cottage standing 
before them. It was night, and there was nowhere else to 
go to. So they went in. There was nobody there. All 
looked bare and squalid. They sat down, and remained 
sitting there some time. Presently in came a tall woman, 
_ lank, crooked, with only one eye. ‘“‘ Ah!” says she, “ I’ve 
visitors. Good day to you.” “Good day, grandmother. 
We’ve come to pass the night under your roof.” ,“‘ Very 
good: I shall have something to sup on.” 

Thereupon they were greatly terrified. As for her, she 
went and fetched a great heap of firewood. She flung it 
into the stove, and set it alight. Then she took the tailor, 
cut his throat, trussed him, and put him in the oven. When 
she had finished her supper, the smith looked at the oven 
and said, “‘ Granny, I’m a smith.”” “ What can you forge ? ” 
“Anything.” ‘“‘Make me an eye.” ‘‘ Good,” says he; 
“but have you got any cord? I must tie you up, or you 
won’t keep still. I shall have to hammer your eye in.” 

She went and fetched two cords, one rather thin, the other 
thicker. Well, he bound her with the thinner, but she broke 
it. So he took the thick cord, and tied her up with it famously. 
She wriggled and writhed, but break it she could not. Then 
he took an awl, heated it red-hot, and applied the point of it 
to her sound eye, while he hammered away at the other end 
with a hatchet. She struggled like anything and broke the 


1 W. 5. Karadschitsch, Volksmdrchen der Serben (Berlin, 
1854), No. 38, pp. 222-225; F. S. Krauss, Sagen und Marchen 
der Sridslaven (Leipsic, 1883), No. 5, Vol. I, pp. 170-173. 


421 


APPENDIX 


cord; then she went and sat down at the threshold. ‘ Ah, 
villain!’ she cried, ‘‘ you shan’t get away from me now.” 

By and by the sheep came home from afield, and she drove 
them into her cottage for the night. Well, the smith spent 
the night there, too. In the morning she got up to let the 
sheep out. He took his sheep-skin pelisse and turned it 
inside out, so that the wool was outside, passed his arms 
through its sleeves, and pulled it well over him, and then 
crept up to her as if he had been a sheep. She let the flock 
go out one at a time, catching hold of each by the wool on 
its back, and shoving it out. Well, he came creeping up 
like the rest. She caught hold of the wool on his back and 
shoved him out. But as soon as she had shoved him out, 
he stood up and cried, “‘ arewell, Likho! I have suffered 
much evil (likho) at your hands. No, you can do nothing 
to me.” ‘‘ Wait a bit!” she replied, “you shall endure 
still more.” 

The smith went back through the forest along the narrow 
path. Presently he saw a golden-handled hatchet sticking 
in a tree, and he felt a strong desire to seize it. Well, he did 
seize that hatchet, and his hand stuck fast to it. What was 
to be done? There was no freeing it anyhow. He gave a 
look behind him. There was Likho coming after him and 
crying, ‘‘ There you are, villain! you’ve not got off yet.” 
The smith pulled out a knife and began hacking away at his 
hand; he cut it clean off and ran away. When he reached 
his village, he showed the stump of his arm as a proof that 
he had seen Likho at last. 

(11) A story which resembles this Russian tale in some 
points is told by the Esthonians. They call the farm-servant 
who has the superintendence of barns and corn the Barn- 
carl (Riegenkerl).2 One day when a Barn-carl sat casting 
knobs in a mould, up comes to him the devil, bids him 
good-day, and asks him what he is doing. “I am casting 
eyes,” says the Barn-carl. ‘“‘ Eyes?” quoth the devil. 
“δὴ you cast new eyes for me?” “ Yes,” says the Barn- 
carl, ‘“‘ but just at the moment I have no more in stock.” 


1 Ww. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-tales (London, 1873), 
pp. 178-181; W. W. Strickland, Russian and Bulgarian 
Folk-lore Stories (London, 1907), pp. 38 sqq. 

2 Riege is ‘‘ a building for drying corn spread out” (Lucas). 


422 


XIII.—_ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


“ But perhaps you could do it some other time ?”’ asks the 
devil. ‘‘ That [ could,” says the Barn-carl. ‘‘ When shall 
I come then?” asks the devil. ‘‘ When you please,” says 
the Barn-carl. Next day the devil came to get his new pair 
of eyes. ‘‘ Do you want big eyes or small ones?” asks the 
Barn-carl. “‘ Right big ones,” says the devil: The man 
set a lump of lead to melt on the fire and said, “1 can’t 
mould you the eyes when you are like that. You must let 
yourself be tied up fast.”” With that he made the devil lie 
down on his back on a bench, took a strong cord, and bound 
him tight. When the devil was bound tight, he asked the 
Barn-carl, “What is your name?” “ My name,” he said, 
“is Myself” (Zssz). “‘That’s a good name,” quoth the 
devil, “‘ I never heard a better.”’ By this time the lead was 
molten, and the devil opened his eyes wide, expecting to get 
new ones. “Here goes,’ quoth the Barn-carl, and with 
that he pours the molten lead on the devil’s eyes. Up jumps 
the devil with the bench tied to his back and makes off at a 
run. Some people were ploughing in a field, and as the poor 
devil tore past them, they asked him, “‘ Who did that to 
you?” “Myself did it,” says he. They laughed. But 
the devil died of his new eyes, and has never been seen since.! 

Here the trick of ‘“ Myself ’’ played by the Barn-carl on 
the devil resembles the trick of ‘‘ Nobody ” played by Ulysses 
on Polyphemus. 

(12) A similar trick is played on a blinded giant in a Lapp 
tale, which in other respects resembles the Homeric story 
still more closely. Many hundred years ago, we are told, 
when there were still giants and trolls among the mountains 
and hills, a man might easily stumble on a troll against his 
will when he passed the boundary of his home-land. Well, it 
chanced once on a time that four Lapps, who had gone out 
to seek their reindeer, lost their way on the mountains. 
Three whole days and as many nights did they wander about 
without coming to a human habitation, and they were near 
dead with hunger and weariness when at last they spied a 
light that seemed to shine at the foot of a mountain, whose 
top reached the clouds. Joyfully they hastened to it, 
expecting to find a human dwelling. But when they reached 


1 W. Grimm, Die Sage von Polyphem, pp. 16 sq. ; J. Grimm, 
Deutsche Mythologie, 11. 858 ἐφ. 


423 


APPENDIX 


the foot of the mountain, they found that the light glimmered 
from a cave under the crag. After a moment's deliberation 
they resolved to enter the cave. When they had penetrated 
it might be a couple of musket shots into the bowels of the 
mountain, they found themselves in a great hall, of which 
the roof and the walls were of purest silver and so bright 
that you could see yourself in them as in a looking-glass. 
Not a human being was to be seen, but there were more than 
a hundred gigantic goats, both billy-goats and nanny-goats. 
In one corner of the hall there was a great hearth with a fire 
blazing merrily on it, and over the fire hung a prodigious 
big kettle with the flesh of a whole ox boiling in it. As the 
Lapps were very sharp set, they gathered round the kettle 
and began to eat the beef. 

When they had satisfied their hunger, they put out the 
fire by pouring the hot water from the kettle on it, and having 
done so they filled the kettle with cold water. What was 
left of the beef in the kettle they hid. Then, poking about 
in the cave, they discovered great store of gold and silver 
and other precious things, but they did not dare to lay hands 
on them as not knowing to whom all these riches might 
belong. Suspecting that the owner might be no mere man, 
they made up their minds to quit the cave after they had 
rested a little from their weary wanderings. So they hid- 
in a dark corner of the cave and fell asleep. Hardly had 
they done so when they were awakened by a noise so loud 
that they thought their last hour was come. Next moment 
they saw a man stride into the cave, and he was so big that 
they were all amazed, for they knew at once that he was a 
giant. To escape was impossible, and they made up their 
minds to keep quite still. 

The giant stopped short in the middle of the cave and began 
to crinkle his nose and to sniff and snuff on ali sides. “‘ Very 
odd,”’ he muttered at last, ‘‘ it can’t be that there should have 
been somebody here.”” Then he went up to the hearth, and, 
lifting the lid from the kettle, he looked in and was not a little 
surprised to find nothing in it but water. In a rage he flung 
the lid at the silver roof, where it stuck; then he began to 
rummage every corner and crevice of the cave. It was not 
long before he lit upon the terrified Lapps, dragged the 
biggest of them out, and threw him into the kettle to boil, 
forgetting that the kettle could not boil without fire. The 


424 


XIII-—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


rest of the Lapps he chained up to the wall of the cave, then 
lay down to sleep till the Lapp in the kettle should be boiled. 

Not many minutes passed before he snored so loud that 
the mountain shook and the cinders danced on the hearth. 
Then the Lapp stepped out of the kettle, freed his comrades 
from their chains, and with them hastened to the mouth 
of the cave. But to their dismay they found that the giant 
had barred it with a stone so huge that all four of them 
could not stir it. 

After laying their heads together for an hour they turned 
back into the cave, resolved by hook or crook to play the 
giant a trick. The beef which they had hidden they put 
into the kettle again, and the three Lapps went back to the 
places where the giant had chained them up; but the fourth 
Lapp hid behind a great coop near the door. 

The giant now woke up and hurried to the kettle to see 
whether the Lapp were boiled, but not finding him in it he 
went to the other prisoners and threatened to knock them 
on the head out of hand if they did not tell him where their 
friend had gone. One of the Lapps swore that sure his 
friend must be in the kettle, and that the giant’s eyes must 
be blear not to see him. ‘‘ That would be odd,” said the 
giant, who was a little ashamed of his hastiness, “‘ but now 
that I think of it, 1 do believe that of late my sight has 
been a bit dim.” ‘‘Well,” said the Lapp, “ a good eye-salve 
will soon set that right.”” ‘‘ Can you make up such a salve ? ”’ 
asked the giant. ‘To be sure,” says the Lapp; “as soon 
as you get my salve in your eyes you will see fifty miles just 
as well as fifty yards. But you must know that it smarts 
horribly.” ‘‘ No matter,’ says the giant, “‘just you make 
up the salve and let me have it as quick as may Ρ6. “ With 
all my heart,’ says the Lapp, “if you will pay me well for 
it.” “* You shall live with me fourteen whole days,” says 
the giant, ‘ till I have eaten up your friends. But you must 
tell me your name, lest I should eat you up instead.” The 
Lapp said that his name was Nobody, and the giant repeated 
it ten times to make quite sure that he should not forget 
it. A fire was now made on the hearth, the Lapp heated 
five pounds of lead on it, and when it was molten he poured 
it on the giant’s eyes, which of course were quite put out by it. 

The giant soon perceived that Nobody had tricked him, 
so he began to call his neighbour to help him to serve out the 


425 


APPENDIX 


Lapp. His neighbour came running and asked who had 
hurt him, that he howled so dolefully. ‘‘ Nobody has done 
it,” answered the giant. On that the neighbour, thinking 
that he was joking, flew into a rage and said, “‘ Then you can 
help yourself. Don’t call me another time, or it will be the 
worse for you.” And with that he went away. 

As he got no help from his neighbour, the giant now made 
shift to search the cave and catch his foes; but they hid 
behind the goats, so that he could not find them. After 
groping about in this way for a long time he came to see that 
the beasts were in the way of his search. So he went to the 
doorway, took away the big stone which served as a door, 
and let out the goats one by one, after making sure that none 
of the Lapps slipped out with them. 

When the Lapps saw what he was up to, they killed four 
billy-goats with all speed, skinned them, and wrapped them- 
selves up in the skins, after which they crawled out of the 
cave on hands and feet, taking as much gold and silver with 
them as they could carry. When the last Lapp was about 
to leave the cave, the giant detained him, caressed him, and 
stroked his back, saying, ‘My poor big billy-goat, you will 
now be without a master.” After caressing the supposed 
billy-goat, he let him go; then he shut up the mouth of the 
cave with the big stone, and with a grin cried out, “ Now 
I’ve got you in the trap! Now we shall see which of us can 
chouse the other best, my dear Mr. Nobody!” 

Nobody knows what afterwards befel the silly giant. As 
like as not, he went round and round the cave looking for the 
Lapps, till he died of hunger. 

(13) A Lapp variant of the preceding story runs as follows : 
Once on a time Slyboots? lost his way and came to the abode 
of a Stalo. This Stalo owned a house, a kitchen, and sheep. 
It was his way, whenever he got hold of a poor little oaf of 
a Lapp, to keep him by him for a time, so as to fatten him 
before he made a meal of him. He thought to do the same 
thing to Slyboots. But Slyboots thought of a dodge to blind 


1 J. C. Poestion, Lappldndische Médrchen (Vienna, 1886), 
No. 29, pp. 122-126. 

2 Aschenputtel, equivalent to the “ Boots” of our fairy 
tales, a general name for the youngest son, who is supposed 
to be slyer than his elder brothers. 


426 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


the Stalo. So he made believe to be very sharp-sighted 
and to be able to see all sorts of funny things ever so far off. 
The Stalo glowered for all he was worth in the same direction, 
but could make out just nothing at ali. “‘ Look here, young 
man,” says he, “‘ however do you come to be so sharp-sighted?”’ 
“ Oh,” says Slyboots, ‘“‘it’s in this way. I let them drip a 
drop of lead in my eyes. That’s why I am so sharp-sighted.”’ 
“ Oh, that’s it, is it 7”’ says the Stalo. ‘“‘ Come on, my dear 
chap, and pour a little molten lead in my eyes. I should so like 
to be as sharp-sighted as you.” “11 do it with all my heart,”’ 
says Slyboots, “ but you could not stand it, for it hurts 
rather.” ‘‘ Not stand it?” says the Stalo. “‘ ’U stand any- 
thing to be as sharp-sighted as you.” 

So Slyboots must needs, as if against his will, pour lead 
into the Stalo’s eyes. He made him lie on his back and 
poured the lead first into one eye. The Stalo whimpered, but 
said, ‘“‘ Look sharp, my dear fellow, and pour the lead into 
the other eye also.” ‘The young man did so. ‘‘ Now,” said 
he, “‘ you will be blind for a while, till your eyes have grown 
accustomed to the change; but afterwards you will see like 
anything.” 

it was now arranged that so long as the Stalo was blind, 
the young man should take charge of the household. So he 
picked out a fat ram from the Stalo’s sheep and slaughtered 
it, and next he took the Stalo’s old dog and slaughtered him 
too. In the evening he boiled the fat mutton for himself in 
one pot, and in another pot he cooked the dog’s flesh for 
the Stalo, and when all was ready he served up the dog’s flesh 
to the Stalo ina trough, while he devoted his own attention to 
the mutton. The Stalo heard him pegging away and smacking 
his lips, while he himself could hardly get his teeth into the 
tough old dog’s flesh. ‘‘ Look here, young man,” says he, 
“‘ what’s all that smacking and licking of the lips that 1 hear, 
while my jaws only creak and clatter?” But the Slyboots 
fobbed him off with some answer or other. 

However it was not long before the Stalo perceived that 
Slyboots had made a fool of him, for the sharp sight which 
had been promised him was still to seek. In fact he was 
blind and remained so. So he now racked his brains to 
know how he could pay Slyboots off for the trick he had 
played him. At last one day he told Slyboots to go into 
the fold and count the sheep. ‘“‘ That’s easily done,” says 


427 


APPENDIX 


Slyboots, and in he goes. But blind as the Stalo was, 
he came on the heels of Slyboots and set himself plump in 
the doorway. “Aha!” thinks he to himself, “now I’ve 
got you in the trap! you shan’t slip from my claws!” But 
Slyboots was not so easily to be cast down. “ Let all my 
sheep out, one after the other,” said the Stalo, “ but my 
big ram last of all.’ ‘‘ All right,’ said the youth, “so be 
it.” Then he let the sheep out between the legs of the Stalo, 
who stood straddling in the doorway. But Slyboots slaugh- 
tered the big ram and skinned him. And when it came to his 
turn, he put on the ram’s skin amd crawled on all fours 
between the Stalo’s legs. ‘‘ Aha!” said the Stalo, ‘‘ that’s 
my fine, fat ram!” and he clapped the supposed ram on the 
back. At last the Stalo said, ‘‘Now come out yourself, 
my fine fellow!’ Then Slyboots cried to him from without, 
““T’ve been out ever so long.’’} 

(14) A Finnish tale of the same general type, but lacking 
some characteristic features of the Homeric story, is as 
follows. A poor ostler, named Gylpho, sets out to free three 
king’s daughters, who are kept prisoners spellbound in a 
subterranean cave. He arrives in an iron chamber, where 
one of the princesses is watched by the old rock-spirit Kammo, 
who has a great horn on his head, and a single eye in the 
middle of his forehead. The monster smells human flesh, 
but the maiden contrives to lull his suspicions. His eye had 
grown dim, and the eyelashes had grown into it, so that he 
could not see the young man. The stove was heated, and 
beside it stood a great iron poker with which the rock-spirit 
used to poke the fire. Gylpho took it quietly, heated it -red- 
hot, and then poked it into the spirit’s eye. Up got Kammo 
and screamed so loud that the rocks echoed with the shriek. 
He groped about, but could not find his foe, who seized a 
chance of hewing off the spirit’s head.? 

(15) The Finnish scholar Castren records, with some surprise, 
that in Russian Karelia, which borders on Finland, he met 
with a tale like that of Ulysses and Polyphemus in Homer. 
The hero of the Karelian story is shut up in a castle, where 

1 J. C. Poestion, Lappldndische Mdrchen, No. 36, pp. 152- 
154. 

2 W. Grimm, Die Sage von Polyphem, p. 17, referring to 
Bertram, Finnische Volksmdrchen und Sprichworter, Ὁ. 9. 


428 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


he is watched by a giant blind of one eye. In order to escape 
from the castle the Karelian hero resorts to the same stratagem 
as that to which the Greek hero had recourse in a similar 
plight. He pokes out the giant’s eye by night, and next 
morning, when the giant sends out his sheep to graze, the 
hero hides himself under one of them, and so has the good 
luck to pass out of the castle gate. 

(16) From Lithuania is reported a tale which bears a close, 
if not a suspicious, resemblance to the Homeric story. It 
runs thus. One day a ship put in to an island. The skipper 
landed with his crew. To cook their victuals they built a 
hearth of stones, and looking about for a big flat stone to 
serve as a hearth-stone, they spied just such a stone as they 
wanted at the foot of a mountain. Having pried it up 
by their united efforts, they saw to their surprise that the 
big smooth stone had covered a wide opening with steps 
leading down into a cave. They descended and soon saw 
that they were in a giant’s house. The house was so huge 
that you could hardly see the vaulted roof, in the middle of 
which was an aperture that allowed the sunlight to enter 
and the smoke to escape. 

While they were looking about, they heard a sudden 
rumbling, and soon a giant, tall as a tower, came down the 
steps, after closing the entrance with the big stone. Next he 
planted a whole forest of trees about the hearth and set them 
on fire. By the light of the fire the mariners saw to their 
horror that the giant had only one eye in the middle of his 
forehead. They tried to flee to the barred entrance, but the 
giant perceived them, seized one of them, and swallowed 
him at a gulp. The others he drove back into the inner part 
of the cave. Then he stirred the fire and began to milk the 
ewes, and next he set a huge kettle on the fire to boil the 
milk. When the milk boiled, he quaffed it, lay down on his 
bed of moss, and fell asleep. Soon he slept so soundly that 
the whole mountain quaked with his snoring. 

The sailors now plucked up courage, and the skipper 
unfolded a plan for their salvation. He had noticed a great 
iron spit belonging to the giant. The point of it he soon heated 
red-hot in the fire, and then with the help of the crew he 


1M. A. Castren, Reisen tm Norden (Leipsic, 1853), pp. 
98 sq. 


429 


APPENDIX 


rammed it into the ygiant’s eye. The glowing iron hissed, 
and the blood spouted up in a jet, falling back in drops that 
scalded like boiling water. Up started the giant, bellowing 
with pain, but though he groped and fumbled along the sides 
and floor of the cave, he could not catch his assailants, for 
they had hidden in the sheep-fold. 

Thus baffled, the giant fell into a terrible fury, hurling 
the burning brands in all directions to set fire to his foes. 
But instead of igniting them he only set fire to his own mossy 
bed, and soon the cave was filled with such a thick smoke 
that the giant was obliged to quit it and sit down in front 
of the entrance, plotting revenge. But the skipper devised 
a new device to effect an escape. He tied every one of his 
men under a sheep, and getting himself under the old tup 
that le@ the flock, he and the rest passed out with the sheep 
when they trooped out of the cave. Thus they all escaped 
from the giant. Once safe on board, the skipper could not 
help mocking the giant, who replied by hurling mighty rocks 
in the direction of the voice. One of the rocks smashed the 
stern of the ship and killed some of the crew. It was with 
difficulty that the skipper and the rest of the crew contrived 
to save themselves in the damaged vessel. 

(17) A German version of the widespread tale has been 
recorded in the Harz mountains. A clever man, travelling 
with six companions, comes to a land ruled by a giant, twelve 
feet high, six feet broad, and furnished with only one eye, 
which is planted in the middle of his forehead and is as 
big as a cheese-bowl. The giant catches the seven and devours 
one of them a day. When only the clever man and one 
comrade are left, they devise a plan of escape. In the night 
they make an iron red-hot, thrust it into the giant’s one eye, 
and take to their heels. The giant makes after them with 
huge strides, but in his blindness fails to catch them. ?* 

(18) An English version of the Polyphemus story is re- 
ported from Yorkshire. At Dalton, in the parish of Sessay, 
near Thirsk, there is, or used to be, a mill, and in front of it ~ 


1 Fr. Richter “ Lithauische Marchen. Der einaugige Riese,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Volkskunde, I. (1889), pp. 87-89. The writer 
says nothing as to the source of the tale. 

2 W. Grimm, Die Sage von Polyphem, p. 18, referring to 
H. Prohle’s Kinder- wnd Volksmdrchen, p. 137. 


430 


XIII—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


there was a mound, which went by the name of “ the Giant’s 
Grave.”’ In the mill was shown a long blade of iron, something 
like a scythe-blade, but not curved. This was said to have 
been the giant’s razor, and there was also exhibited the stone 
porridge-pot or lather-dish which had been the property of 
the giant. This giant used to reside at the mill and to grind 
men’s bones to make his bread. One day he captured a lad 
on Pilmoor, and instead of grinding him to flour as usual in 
the mill, he kept him as his servant and never let him go 
away. Jack served the giant many years without a holiday. 
At last he could bear it no longer. Topcliffe Fair was coming 
on, and the lad entreated that he might be allowed to go 
there to see the lasses and buy some spice. The giant surlily 
refused to give him leave, so Jack resolved to take it. The 
day was hot, and the giant was sleeping after dinner in the 
mill, with a great loaf of bone-bread beside him and a knife 
in his hand. Jack slipped the knife from the sleeper’s grasp 
and jabbed it into his single eye. Up started the giant with 
a howl of agony and barred the door. Jack was again in 
difficulty, but he soon found a way out of it. The giant 
had a favourite dog which had also been sleeping when the 
giant was blinded. Jack killed the dog, skinned it, and 
throwing the hide over his back, ran on all-fours barking 
between the legs of the giant, and so escaped.} 

(19) A Breton version of the story relates how a young 
man, returning with a well-filled purse from La Vendée, was 
traversing a forest, when he saw a hut, and going up to it 
knocked at the door. A rough voice answered, ‘‘ Wait a 
moment and 1 will open to you.” Then there was a loud 
noise, the door opened and he beheld a giant with a single 
eye in the middle of his forehead, holding in his hand the 
bolt of the door, and the bolt itself was as big as an ordinary 
man. On entering the house the young man saw human 
arms hanging, along with chitterlings, in the chimney, and 
feet of men and pieces of human flesh boiling in a pot on 
the fire. He made an excuse for retiring from the house, 
but he could not lift the bolt. ‘‘ You need not go out,” said the 
giant, ‘‘you may retire among the sheep there.” Now in 
the inner part of the house there was a flock of eight sheep, 


1 §. Baring Gould, “The Giant of New Mills, Sessay,” 
Folk-lore, I. (1890), p. 130. 


431 


APPENDIX 


every one of them as big as a colt, To hide his fear, the 
young man stepped up to the hearth and began to smoke his 
pipe. The giant asked him if he would eat some meat. 
‘No,’ said the youth, “I am not hungry.” “ You shall 
eat all the same,”’ answered the giant. But the young man 
drew a pistol from his pocket, and firing at the giant put out 
his eye. ‘‘ Wretch,” cried the giant, “1 will kill and eat 
you.” The youth took refuge among the sheep. The giant 
sought him, but could not find him. Then he opened the 
door and caused the sheep to go out one by one, feeling each 
of them as it passed. When only three or four were left, 
the youth got under the belly of one of them, holding fast 
to the fleece. In passing the door he knocked against the 
giant, who stopped the sheep; but by this time the young 
man was out, and making his way through the forest with the 
sheep he sold them for a good price in the market.} 

(20) In another Breton version of the story the hero goes 
by the name of Bihanic, and is, as usually happens with 
heroes, the youngest of three brothers. He is sent by a 
king to rob a certain giant of his treasures, which consisted of 
a wonderful parrot, endowed with the gift of second sight, 
a dromedary which could run faster than a bird could fly, 
and a carbuncle which radiated so brilliant a light that 
the darkness of night was turned to day for seven leagues 
round the giant’s castle. The hero succeeded in procuring 
the dromedary and the carbuncle without much trouble, 
but to capture the parrot was a much harder task. When 
Bihanic drew near the giant’s castle for this purpose, he 
met a young shepherd who was feeding the giant’s sheep. 
‘Go to the castle,’ he said to the shepherd, “‘ and fetch me 
a light for my pipe. Ill give you a crown.” The unsus- 
pecting swain pocketed the money and ran to the castle. 
Meantime Bihanic took one of the sheep, the woolliest of the 
flock, killed it and skinned it. Then he put on the skin, 
and mixing with the flock at eventide, he entered into the 
castle, all unknown both to the giant and to the shepherd. 
Now it was the giant’s custom morning and evening to con- 
sult his oracular parrot, and that night, when he inquired of 
the oracle as usual, the parrot informed him that. his enemy 


1 P. Sébillot, ‘‘ Contes de la Haute-Bretagne,”’ Revue des 
Traditions Populaires, 1x. (1894), pp. 105 sqq. 


432 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


Bihanic, who had already robbed him of his dromedary 
and his carbuncle, was again in the castle; more than 
that, the sagacious bird told him that the thief was lurking 
in the fold, disguised in the skin of a sheep which he had 
killed and skinned. The giant searched for him in the 
fold, but could not find him, though he felt the sheep with 
his hands, one after the other. Then he ordered the shepherd 
- to let the sheep out, one by one, and as they passed out, 
the giant stood at the threshold and examined every one. 
When they were almost all out, the skin of one of them 
remained in his hands and he cried, ‘“‘ Aha, l’ve got him! ”’ 
“ Alas,” thought Bihanic to himself, “‘ it’s all up with me this 
time,” as he felt the grip of the giant’s fingers on his ribs. 
The giant carried him to the kitchen. ‘“‘ Here’s that rascal 
of a Bihanic,” said he, showing him to the other giants and 
giantesses, “‘ he'll not play us any more tricks. What sauce 
shall we eat him with?” ‘‘ You must put him on the spit,”’ 
they all answered. So they stripped him stark naked, 
trussed him like a fowl, and threw him into a corner of the 
kitchen till it was time to stick him on the spit. The cook, 
left alone, complained to Bihanic that she had not wood 
enough to roast him. ‘“‘ Just loose my bonds a bit, fair 
cook,” said he, “‘and I'll go and fetch some.” Flattered 
by being called “ fair,” the cook was mollified and undid 
the bonds. No sooner had she done so than the grateful 
Bihanic caught up a hatchet and brought it down on the 
head of the giantess with such hearty good will that he cleft 
her in two from top to toe. He then hurried to the parrot, 
stuffed it into his bag, and made off. When the giant came 
to the kitchen to see whether Bihanic was done to a turn, 
and saw his wife, the cook, dead and weltering in her gore, 
and the parrot gone, he howled and shrieked so that the 
other giants and giantesses came running, and between them 
all there was a terrible noise.?. 

(21) A Gascon version of the old heathen tale is enriched 
with some pious details for the edification of devout Christians. 
It runs thus: Once upon a time there lived a poor widow in 
a cottage with her two children, a boy and a girl. One day 
the boy said to his mother, ‘‘ Mother, from morning to night 


1 F. M. Luzel, Contes populaires de Basse-Bretagne (Paris, 
1887), 11. 231 sqq. 


433 
APOLL. II. F F 


APPENDIX «+ 


I, you, and my sister work to earn a bare livelihood. I will 
go and seek my fortune. I will go to the land of the Ogres? to 
gather golden horns, horns of oxen, and horns of sheep.” 
But his mother said, ‘‘ No, no, my dear. I will not let youe 
The Ogres dwell far, far from here, towards the setting sun 
They dwell in a wild black country, in a country of high 
mountains, where the streams fall from heights of three 
thousand feet. In that country there are no priests, nor 
churches, nor churchyards. The Ogres are giants seven 
fathoms tall. They have only one eye, right in the middle of 
the forehead. All the long day they watch their oxen and 
their sheep with golden horns, and at evening, at set of sun, 
they bring back these cattle to the caves. When they catch 
a Christian, they roast him alive on a gridiron and swallow 
him at one bite. No, no, my dear, you shall not go to seek 
your fortune. You shall not go seek golden horns, horns of 
oxen and sheep, in the land of the Ogres.” 

‘“* Excuse me, mother,” he said, “‘ but this time you cannot 
have your way.”’ Then the girl spoke. ‘* Mother,” she said, 
“you see my brother is wilful. Since he will not listen to 
reason, I will go with him. Count on me to guard him from 
all harm.”” So the poor mother had to give her -consent. 
“Hold, my child,” said she, ‘“‘ take this little silver cross, 
and never part with it, neither by day nor by night. It will 
bring you good luck. Go then, my poor children, go with 
the grace of God and the Holy Virgin Mary.” 

The brother and sister saluted their mother and set out, 
staff in hand, with their wallets on their backs. For seven 
months they walked, from morning to night, towards the 
setting sun, living on alms and sleeping in the stables of 
charitable folk. At last they came to a wild black country, 
a country of high mountains, where the streams fell from 
heights of three thousand feet. In that country there are no 
priests, nor churches, nor churchyards. In that country 
live the Ogres, giants seven fathoms tall. These giants have 
only one eye, right in the middle of their forehead. All the 
long day they watch their oxen and their sheep with golden 
horns, and at evening, at set of sun, they bring back these 
cattle to the caves. As for good cheer, there is no lack of 


1 Bécuts. In the Gascon dialect Bécut means “‘ beaked *’ 
and by extension an ogre. 


434 


/ 


XIII. ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


meat. For dinner they kill an ox, and for supper a sheep. 
But they take no account of their golden horns and throw 
them away. When they catch a Christian, they roast him 
alive on a gridiron and swallow him at one bite. 

Every day, from sunrise to sunset, the brother and sister 
sought for the golden horns in the mountains, hiding them- 
selves as well as they could under the bushes and among the 
rocks, lest they should be seen by the Ogres. At the end of 
seven days their wallets were full. Sitting down by a stream, 
they counted them, ‘“‘ One, two, three, four... ninety- 
eight, ninety-nine, a hundred golden horns. And now we 
are rich enough. To-morrow we will return to our mother.’’ 

At that moment the sun was sinking. An Ogre passed, 
driving before him his oxen and his sheep with golden horns. 
“The Ogre! the Ogre!” cried the children and fled at the 
top of their speed. But the Ogre had seen it all. He took 
them, threw them into a big bag, and repaired to his cave, 
which was shut by a flat stone weighing a hundred hundred- 
weights. With a push of his shoulder the Ogre shoved aside 
the stone and closed the entrance. That done, he shook out 
his big bag on the ground. “ Little Christians,” said he, 
“sup with me.” “ With pleasure, Ogre,” said they. The 
Ogre threw a heap of logs on the hearth, lit a fire, bled a 
sheep, skinned it, threw the skin and the two golden horns 
in a corner, and spitted the flesh. ‘* Little Christians,” said 
he, ‘‘ turn the spit.” ‘‘ Ogre, you shall be obeyed,” said they. 
While they turned the spit, the Ogre laid a hundredweight of 
bread and seven great jars of wine on the table. 

* Little Christians,’ said the Ogre, ‘sit down there. 
Want for nothing, and tell me all about your country.” 
The boy knew a great many fine stories, and he talked till 
supper was done. “ Little Christian master,” said the 
Ogre, “1 am pleased with you. Now it’s your turn, little 
Christian miss.” The girl knew many beautiful prayers, 
in honour of the Good God, of the Holy Virgin, and of the 
saints. But at the first word the Ogre turned blue with rage. 
“Oh, you hussy,” cries he, ‘‘ you are praying to God. Just 
wait a bit.”” Straightway he seized the girl, stripped her of 
her clothes, laid her on a gridiron, and roasted her alive on a 
slow fire. “‘ Little Christian master,’’ says he to her brother, 
“what do you think of this steak ? 11 give you your share 
of it presently.”’ But the boy answered, ‘“‘ No, Ogre, Christians 


435 
er 2 


APPENDIX 


do not eat one another.” “‘ Little Christian master, look, 
that is what | will do to you to-morrow, when you shall have 
told all your fine stories.’’ 

The boy was white with anger, but he could do nothing 
against the Ogre. He watched his sister broiling alive on a 
slow fire. The poor girl clasped in her right hand the little 
silver cross, which her mother had enjoined her never to 
part with, neither by night nor by day. ‘‘ My God,” cried 
she, “have pity on me! Holy Virgin, come to my help!”’ 
‘“‘ Ah, hussy,” said the Ogre, “80 you pray God even when 
you are broiling alive, just wait a bit.”” The Ogre swallowed 
her alive in one mouthful. Then he lay down on the ground, 
the whole length of the hearth, “ Little Christian master,”’ 
said he, “ tell me stories of your country.”’ The boy talked 
till midnight. From time to time the Ogre interrupted him, 
saying, ‘* Little Christian master, poke the fire. 1 am cold.”’ 

An hour after midnight the Ogre, glutted with meat and 
wine, was snoring like a hurricane. Then the boy thought to 
himself, ‘‘ Now we shall see some fun.” Softly, very softly, 
he drew near the hearth, seized a glowing brand, and thrust 
it with all his strength into the Ogre’s eye. The Ogre was 
now blind. He ran about in the cave like one possessed. 
by a devil, yelling so that he could be heard a hundred leagues 
off, ‘‘ Oh, all ye gods! I am blind! I am blind!” The boy 
laughed, hidden under the litter, among the oxen and sheep 
with the golden horns. 

At the cries of the Ogre his brothers awoke in their caves. 
“Ha! ha! ha!” they shouted, “ what’s the matter there ὃ 
What’s the matter there?’ And the Ogres came running 
in the black night, with lanterns as big as barrels and with 
staves as tall as poplars. ““Ha! ha! ha!” they shouted, 
‘“‘ what’s the matter there ? What's all that there?’ With 
a push of the shoulder they shoved aside the stone weighing 
a hundred hundredweights which stopped the mouth of the 
cave, from which the cries still proceeded, ‘‘ Oh, all ye gods, 
[ am blind! I am blind!” “ Brother,” said they, “ who 
has put you in that state?” ‘‘ Brothers,” he answered, 
‘it was a little Christian. Seek him everywhere in the cave. 
Seek him, that I may swallow him alive. Oh, ye gods, 1 
am blind! I am blind!’? The Ogres searched everywhere, 
but found nothing, while the boy laughed, hidden under the 
straw, among the oxen and sheep with horns of gold. At 


436 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


last the Ogres were tired. ‘“‘ Good-bye, brother,” they said, 
“try to sleep. We will come back to-morrow.” So they 
shut up the cave and withdrew. 

Then the boy tried to roll away the big stone that barred 
the entrance, but he had to cry, *‘ Mother of God, this is too 
much for my strength.”” The Ogre listened. “1 hear you, 
little Christian. I hear you, youcur. Blind as I am, you shall 
not escape me.”’ For three days and nights the boy, the 
Ogre, and the cattle remained in the cave without eating or 
drinking. At last the oxen and the sheep with golden horns 
bellowed and bleated for hunger. ‘“* Wait a bit, poor beasts,” 
said the Ogre, ‘I'll open the cave for you. But as for you, 
little Christian, that is quite a different matter. Blind as 
I am, you shall not escape me.’’ While the Ogre groped 
about at the mouth of the cave, the boy put on the golden 
horns and the skin of the sheep that had been killed three 
days before. 

At last the big stone fell. The Ogre seated himself outside, 
on the threshold of the cave, and the oxen and the sheep 
passed out, one by one, the oxen first. Their master felt 
their horns and their backs, and he counted them, one by 
one. Then came the sheep, and their master felt their horns 
and their woolly coats, and counted them, one by one. 
Among the sheep the boy waited on all fours. When his 
turn came, he advanced fearlessly. ‘The Ogre was suspicious. 
On feeling the wool of his back he perceived that the fieece 
fitted ill. “ΑἸ, little Christian,’ he called out, ‘“‘ ah, you 
cur! Just wait a bit!’’ But the boy made off as fleet as 
the wind. 

The story ends by relating how the Ogre was sick and 
vomited up alive the girl whom he had swallowed, and how 
the brother and sister returned with great riches to their 
mother. 

(22) If the Homeric story of Ulysses and Polyphemus 
survives anywhere in oral tradition, it might be expected 
to survive in Sicily>; and certainly a story of the same type 
has been recorded in that island from the lips of a girl eight 
years old. It is in substance as follows. There were once 
two monks who went begging for the church every year. 


1 J. F. Bladé, Contes populaires de la Gascogne (Paris, 
1886), [. 32-42. 


437 


APPENDIX 


One was large and the other small. They lost their way once 
and came to a large cave, and in the cave was a monster who 
was building a fire. However, the two monks did not believe 
it was a monster, but said, “Let us go and rest there.” 
They entered, and saw the monster killing a sheep and roasting 
it. He had already killed and cooked twenty. 

“Kat!” said the monster to them. ‘“ We don’t want to 
eat,’ they replied, ‘“‘we are not hungry.” “ Eat, I tell you!” 
he repeated. After they had eaten the sheep, they lay down, 
and the monster closed the entrance to the cave with a great 
stone. Then he took a sharp iron, heated it in the fire, and 
having stuck it in the throat of the bigger monk he roasted 
his body and desired the other monk to help him to eat it. 
“1 don’t want to eat,’’ answered the monk, “1 am full.” 
“Get up!” said the monster, “‘ if you don’t, I will kill you.” 
The wretched monk arose in fright, seated himself at the 
table, and pretended to eat, but threw the flesh away. 

In the night the good man took the iron, heated it, and 
plunged it in the monster’s eyes. Then in his terror he 
slipped into the skin of a sheep. The monster groped his 
way to the mouth of the cave, removed the stone, and let the 
sheep out one by one; and so the good man escaped and 
returned to Trapani, and told his story to some fishermen. 
The monster went fishing, and, being blind, stumbled against 
a rock and broke his head.?. 

(23) A similar Greek story has been recorded at Pharasa 
in Cappadocia. It runs thus: “In the old time there was 
a priest. He went to get a goat. He went toa village. There 
was another priest. He said, ‘Where are you going?’ 
The priest said, ‘I am going to get a goat.’ He said, ‘ Let 
me come also, to get a goat.’ They rose up; they went to 
another village. There was there another priest. And the 
three went to another village. They found another priest. 
They took that priest also. They went on. They made up 
seven priests. 

‘‘ As they were going to a village, thére was a woman ; 


~. i 


1G. Pitré, Fiabe Novelle e Racconti popolari Siciliani 
II. (Palermo, 1875), No. 51, pp. 1-3; T. F. Crane, Italian 
Popular Tales (London, 1885) pp. 89 sqqg. I have followed 
Crane’s summary of the story, as the Sicilian dialect is only 
partially intelligible to me. 


438 


XIIT—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


she was cutting wood. There was also a Cyclops. The 
Cyclops ran up; he seized the seven priests. He carried 
them to his house. In the evening he roasted one priest ; 
he ate him. He was fat. He ate him; he got drunk. 

“The six priests rose up. They heated the spit. They 
drove it into the Cyclops’ eye. They blinded the Cyclops. 
They ran away. Inside the stable the Cyclops had seven 
hundred sheep. They went into the stable. They flayed 
six sheep. They left their heads and their tails. They got 
into the skins. In the morning the Cyclops rose up; he 
drove out the sheep; he took them by the head and tail. 
He drove out the seven hundred sheep. He shut the doors. 
He went inside; he searched for the six priests. He could 
not find them. He found the six sheep killed. 

“The six priests took the seven hundred sheep; they 
went to their houses. They also gave a hundred sheep to 
the wife of the priest, whom the Cyclops had eaten. The 
woman said, ‘ Where is my priest?’ They said, ‘He has 
remained to gain yet more.’ And the six priests took a 
hundred sheep each. They went to their houses. They 
ate, they drank, they attained their desires.’’* 

(24) Another modern Greek version of the Polyphemus 
story, recorded at Athens, runs as follows: A prince makes 
his way into an Ogre’s cave in the Ogre’s absence, and finds 
there a tub of milk and a cake almost as big as a threshing- 
floor. Having refreshed himself by drinking of the milk 
and eating of the cake, he looked about, and seeing a crevice 
in the rock hid himself in it. Soon the tinkling of sheep bells 
announced that the sheep were returning to the cave for 
the night, and the Ogre with them. On entering the cave 
the Ogre closed the entrance by rolling a great rock into the 
opening, and then he sat down to eat, noticing that his supply 
of milk and cake was short. However, after satisfying 
his appetite as well as he could, he raked up the fire and lay 
down to sleep. While he slept and snored the prince crept 


1 In Greek τεπεκόζησ. This word is explained to be a 
Turkish expression for a one-eyed giant, derived from tepe, 
“head” and géz, “eye.” See R. M. Dawkins, Modern Greek 
in Asia Minor, p. 650. 

2 R. M. Dawkins, Modern Greek in Asia Minor (Cambridge, 
1916), p. 551. 


439 


APPENDIX 


out from his place of concealment, and taking a long stake, 
sharpened it and held it in the fire. When the stake glowed 
in the fire, the Prince thrust it into the Ogre’s eye and blinded 
him ; for the Ogre had only one eye, which was in his fore- 
head. The shrieks of the Ogre roused the whole neighbour- 
hood, and the other Ogres came to see what was the matter 
with their chief ; but finding the mouth of the cave barred 
by the great rock, they could not enter, and so went away 
again, supposing that the chief was drunk. Then the Ogre 
opened the cave by rolling away the stone, and sitting down 
at the entrance he began to let out his sheep, feeling them one 
by one. Now there was one big woolly ram, and clinging 
to its belly the prince contrived to escape from the cave, 
while the Ogre stroked the animal on the back. 

(25) Another modern Greek version of the ancient tale 
was told to the German archaeologist, Ludwig Ross, by a 
native of Psara, an island off the west coast of Chios. In 
outline it is as follows: Three brothers, by name Dimitri, 
Michael, and George, landed from a ship on an unknown 
coast, and separating from their comrades wandered about 
till they came to a magnificent palace. Entering it they 
found in the forecourt a great flock of sheep, and in the 
banqueting-hall a feast set out, but no human being was 
to be seen. They sat down and partook of the good things, 
and hardly had they done so when a huge, ugly, blind Ogre 
appeared, and in a voice which curdled the blood in their 
veins cried out, ‘“‘ I smell human flesh, I smell human flesh ! ”’ 
Pale with terror, the three brothers sprang to their feet, 
but the Ogre, guided by the sound, stretched out his hideous 
claws and seized first Dimitri and then Michael, and dashed 
them to pieces on the floor. George, being nimble, contrived 
to escape into the forecourt, but there he found the gate 
shut and the walls so high that he could not scale them. 
What was he to do? Drawing his knife, he killed the biggest 
ram of the flock, stripped off its skin, and throwing the carcass 
into a well he wrapped himself up in the skin and attempted 
to creep out on all fours, as if he were a ram. Meantime the 
Ogre had finished his horrible meal of human flesh, and came 
waddling down the marble staircase, shouting, ‘ You shall 


1 G. Drosinis, Land und Leute in Nord-Euhéa, Deutsche 
Uebersetzung von Aug. Boltz (Leipsic, 1884), pp. 170-176. 


440 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


not escape me! You shall serve me for a savoury supper!” 
Then he went to the gate and opened it just wide enough to 
let out one sheep at a time. He next called all the ewes by 
name, and as each came he milked it and let it out. Last 
of all came the rams, amongst which George, wrapt in the 
ram’s skin, had taken his place. He approached the Ogre 
with fear and trembling, but the monster stroked his back, 
praised his size and strength, and ἰοῦ him go through the 
gateway. So George escaped.? 

In this version the hero does not blind the monster, and 
thus one of the most characteristic incidents of the story is 
wanting; but in other respects the tale conforms to the 
common type 

(26) Another modern Greek version of the story, recorded 
at Lasta in Gortynia, a district of the Morea, relates how a 
man of old set out to wander through the world and came to 
a land where the men were of great stature, but had only 
one eye each. The traveller lodged in the house of one of 
these one-eyed giants, and at evening the giant’s wife hid 
him ; for during the day the giant, who was a wicked cannibal, 
was not at home. When the giant came home, he told his 
wife that he smelt something, and though she tried to per- 
suade him that it was nothing, he searched the house and 
discovered the man. At first he made as if he would devour 
the man, but after putting him into his mouth, he took him 
out again and spared him for the sake of his wife. However, 
next day he repented of his mercifulness and would have 
gobbled the man up, if his wife had not made him drunk, 
and secretly fetching out the man urged him to fly. But 
before he fled, the man took a burning coal and thrust it into 
the giant’s eye, thus blinding him. So the wicked cannibal 
was punished and never devoured men afterwards.2 This 
version omits the characteristic episode of the hero’s escape 
by the means of a sheep or a sheepskin. 

(27) An Albanian version of the story, recorded in Sicily, 
runs as follows: Once on a time there were two men travel- 
ling. Night fell upon them by the way, and it rained and 
thundered. Poor fellows, just think what a plight they were 


1 Ludwig Ross, EHrinnerungen und Mittheilungen aus 
Griechenland (Berlin, 1863), pp. 287-289. 
‘= 2 K. Dieterich, ‘“‘ Aus neugriechische Sagen,”’ aan δε: 
Vereins fur Volkskunde, XV. (1905), p. 381. 


441 


APPENDIX 


in! They saw a light far off and said, “‘ Let’s go and see 
if we can pass the night where that light is.” And they 
went and came to the cave, for a cave it was where the light 
shone. They went in and saw that there were sheep and 
rams and two Cyclopes, who had two eyes in front and two 
behind. The Cyclopes saw them come in and said one to 
the other. “‘Go to, here we have got something to eat.” 
And they proposed to eat the two men. The poor fellows 
stayed there two days; then the Cyclopes felt the back of 
their necks and said, ‘“‘Good! We’ll eat one of them to- 
morrow.” Meantime they made them eat to fatten them. 
For in the evening they would take a sheep and a ram, 
roast them on spits over the fire, and compel the poor wretches 
to devour them, entrails and all, just to fatten them. And 
every now and then they would feel the back of their necks, 
and one would say to the other, “ They’re getting on very 
well!’ But the two men said to each other by words or 
signs, “‘ Let us see whether we can escape.’’ Now, as I said, 
two days passed, and on the second day the Cyclopes fell 
asleep and slumbered with all their eyes open. Nevertheless, 
when the two men saw the Cyclopes sleeping, they took the 
spits on which the sheep had been roasted, and they heated 
them in the fire. Then they took rams’ skins and clothed 
themselves in them, and going down on all fours they walked 
about in the rams’ skins. Meanwhile the spits were heated, 
and each of the men took two, and going softly up to the 
sleeping Cyclopes, they jabbed the hot spits into their eyes. 
After that, they went down on all fours like sheep. ‘The 
Cyclopes awoke blind, and*gave themselves up for lost. 
But they took their stand at the door, each at a doorpost, 
just as they were, with all the spits sticking in their eyes. 
They let out all the sheep that were in the cave, saying, ‘‘'The 
sheep will go out, and the men will stay in,” and they felt 
the fleeces of the sheep to see whether the men were going 
out too. But the men had the sheepskins on their backs, 
and they went on all fours, and when the Cyclopes felt them, 
they thought they were sheep. So the men escaped with their 
life, and when they were some way off, they put off the skins. 
Kither the Cyclopes died or they know themselves what they 
did. That is the end of the story. 


1 D. Comparetti, Novelline popolari I taliane (Rome, Tarin, 
and Florence, 1875), No. 70, pp. 308-310, 
442 


XIII.— ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


A peculiar feature of this version is the multiplication of 
the eyes of the Cyclopes from one to four apiece. 

(28) A Hungarian story of this type tells of three travelling 
craftsmen, Balzer, Laurence, and John, who, after sailing 
‘the sea for seven days and seven nights, landed in a great 
wood. There they lighted on a sheep-walk and followed it 
till they came to a stall. They entered the stall and found 
there a huge giant who had only one eye in his forehead. 
He asked them what they wanted, and when they had told 
him, he set food before them. Evening soon fell, and then 
the giant drove the sheep into the stall. Now the sheep 
were as big as asses are with us. ‘To shut the stall the giant 
had nothing but a big stone, which sixteen men like you and 
me could not have stirred from the spot. 

When the sheep had all been let in, the giant sat down by 
the fire and chatted with his guests; at the same time he 
felt the neck of each of them to see which was the fattest. 
Poor Balzer was the man, as the giant perceived; so he 
took a knife, cut off his head, and gave him to his sheep to 
devour. The two surviving friends looked anxiously at 
each other and consulted secretly together; and when they 
saw that the giant was sleeping on his back by the fire, 
John took a firebrand and poked it into his eye, so that he 
could see no more. 

When morning broke and the birds began to twitter, the 
giant took the stone from the doorway and let the sheep out ; 
but he was so sly that he straddled his legs and let each sheep 
pass between them. Now John was by trade a shoemaker ; 
so he had with him a paring-knife and an awl. He showed 
Laurence what to do and gave him an awl in his hand; he 
was to hang on to the tail of a sheep, and just when the sheep 
was in the doorway he was to jab the awl into its paunch ; so 
would the animal run through the doorway like lightning. 
John did just the same himself, and both came safely through. 
When the sheep were all out, the giant shut the door and 
groped all about, but found nobody. Then he set up such 
a shriek that the two on the shore fell all their length to the 
ground. And at his roar twelve more giants, each as big 
as he, came at a run; and when they saw him in that sorry 
plight they seized him straight off and tore him to bits. 
Then they ran all twelve to the sea, but by this time the two 
fugitives were twelve fathoms from the shore, so that the 


443 


APPENDIX 


giants could not take vengeance on them. ‘Then the giants 
began to shriek and roar so terribly that the sea rose in great 
waves, and the two wretches were almost drowned. But God 
in his mercy saved them, and they sailed on till they came to 
a wood, where they landed and walked for pleasure. 

(29) A modern Syrian version of the old tale runs as follows : 
Once upon a time there was a prince who had two sons. 
One of them set out with a book, which he owned, to go to a 
monastery. He journeyed till nightfall, when he tarried 
among the mountains and slept till about midnight. Then he 
heard someone crying. He thought, “‘ I will go and see what 
it 15. He went and found a cave in which a fire was blazing. 
Entering the cave, he saw a blind giant sleeping by the fire. 
The youth sat down and pricked the giant with a needle. 
The giant got up and searched for him, but could not find 
him. After a while the youth pricked the giant again. 
The giant arose. Little by little the day broke, and the goats 
began to pass out of the cave. The giant stood straddling 
at the mouth of the cave and let the goats pass out one 
by one. The young man crouched under the belly of the he- 
goat, and so got out. In the sequel the youth professes to be 
the giant’s son, and after undergoing a peculiar test of sonship 
he is accepted as such by the giant and allowed to lead the 
goats to grass. He even recovers the giant’s lost eyes from 
a she-bear, which had apparently abstracted them.? 

This story differs from all the rest in that the hero, instead 
of blinding the giant, restores his lost sight. But in other 
respects, particularly in the mode of the hero’s escape from 
the cave, the tale conforms to the ordinary type. 

(30) In the ‘‘ Third Voyage of Sindibad the Sailor,” which 
is incorporated in The Arabian Nights, the voyager and his 
companions are landed on an island, where they find and 
enter a giant’s house. Presently the giant, a huge black 
monster with two eyes blazing like fire, arrived, and finding 
his uninvited guests, he seized them and felt them as a butcher 
feels the sheep he is about to slaughter. The first whom he 
thus treated was Sindibad himself, but finding him lean 


1G. Stier, Ungarische Volksmdrchen (Pesth, n.d., preface 
dated June 1857), No. 14, pp. 146-150. 

* EK. Prym and A. Socin, Syrische Sagen und Maerchen 
(Gédttingen, 1881), No. 32; pp. 115 sq. 


444 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


from the excessive fatigue which he had undergone on the 
voyage, he ἰοῦ him go. In this way the giant picked out the 
master of the ship, a fat, stout, broad-shouldered man, broke 
his neck, spitted him, and roasted him on the spit before the 
fire, after which he devoured him, tearing the fiesh to pieces 
with his nails and gnawing the bones. Then he lay down and 
slept till morning. ‘This proceeding he repeated on the two 
subsequent days; but on the third night, when three of their 
number had thus perished, Sindibad and his fellows took two 
spits, which they thrust into the fierce fire till they were red- 
hot like burning coals. These they grasped firmly and thrust 
with all their might into the giant’s two eyes while he lay 
snoring. Thus rudely awakened from slumber, the giant started 
up and searched for his assailants right and left, but could 
not find them. So he groped his way to the door and went 
out, followed by Sindibad and his friends, who had prudently 
prepared rafts for their escape from the island. Presently 
the giant returned with a giantess, taller and uglier than 
himself ; but by this time the fugitives were on board the 
rafts, and they now shoved off with all speed. The two giants 
pelted the runaways with rocks, which killed most of them ; 
Sindibad and two others alone escaped on their raft to 
another island. 

(31) In “The Story of Seyf El-Mulook,” which also forms 
part.of The Arabian Nights, we have another slightly different 
version of the same story. <A certain man Saed, brother of 
Seyf El-Mulook, relates how he was shipwrecked and drifted 
ashore on a plank with a party of memlooks (male white 
slaves). He and two of the memlooks walked till they came 
to a great wood. There they met a person of tall stature, 
with a long beard, long ears, and two eyes like cressets, who 
was tending many sheep. He greeted them in a friendly 
way and invited them to his cave. There they found a 
number of men whom the giant had blinded by giving them 
cups of milk to drink. Warned by them, Saed pretended to 
drink the milk offered him by the giant, and he made believe 
to be blinded by it ; but really he poured the milk into a hole 
in the ground. His two companions drank the milk and 
became blind. Thereupon the giant arose, and having closed 


1 The Arabian Nights’ Entertainment, translated by E: W. 
Lane, III. (London, 1839-1841), pp. 26-30. 


445 


APPENDIX 


the entrance of the cave, drew Saed towards him and felt 
his ribs, but found him lean with no flesh on him. Wherefore 
he felt another, and saw that he was fat, and he rejoiced 
thereat. He then slaughtered three sheep, skinned them, 
spitted them, and roasted them over a fire, after which he 
brought the roast mutton to Saed’s two companions, who 
ate it with him. Next he brought a leathern bottle of 
wine, drank the wine, and lying down fell asleep and snored. 
While he slept, Saed took two spits, heated them red-hot 
in the fire, and thrust them into the giant’s two eyes. The 
blinded giant arose and pursued his enemy into the inner 
part of the cave; but, directed by the blind men, Saed found 
a polished sword, with which he hewed the giant through the 
middle, so that he died.1 
It is to be observed that both the versions of the story in 
The Arabian Nights omit the characteristic episode of the 
hero’s escape in a sheepskin or under the belly of a sheep. 
(32) A story resembling the Homeric tale of Ulysses and 
Polyphemus is reported to be widely current in the mountains 
of Armenia. It is told orally as a popular tale in Erzerum, 
Kars, Bajberd, Erzinka, Keghi, and other towns; and 
Armenian emigrants carry it with them to ther new homes 
in Alexandropol, Achalzich, Achalkalak, Gumush-chane, 
and so forth. The tale is known as the “ Story of the Eye in the 
Forehead.’ There are a number of different versions of it. 
One of the best, closely resembling the Homeric version, is 
said to be the one told at Gumush-chane, to the south of 
Trebizond. The version told at Achalzich runs as follows : 
One day a rich man, looking out of his window, saw a 
porter approaching with a sack of mea] on his back. When 
he came to the wall of the house, the porter put down his load 
to take breath, and began to bemoan his hard fate. ‘“‘ What 
an unlucky wretch am [!” he complained, “‘ what a hell of a 
life I lead! When will God deliver me from my horrible lot!” 
and so on in the same strain. The rich man sent his servants 
to call in the porter, and when the fellow said that he could 
not leave his sack, the other had the sack despatched to its 
destination by one of his servants. It happened that the 
ponies had invited friends to dinner that day, and by this 


1 The iat Nights? “Eennaeaal πων by E. W. 
Lane, III. 353-355. 


446 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


time the guests had begun to assemble. But the best place 
at table was reserved for the porter. When they were all 
seated, the host stood up and said, “ Listen, gentlemen, and 
you, my friend,” turning to the porter, “listen you too, I: 
have something to tell you. When I have finished my story 
you, gentlemen, and you, my friend” (meaning the porter) 
‘shall judge whether the present lot of our friend here, of 
which he has just been complaining, is harder and more un- 
endurable than the experience I have undergone in my life. 
“41 was a merchant and a handicraftsman. Once I sailed 
in a ship on business with twenty companions. A great 
storm overtook us, and our ship was cast on the rocks and 
broken in pieces, but we were carried ashore by the wind. 
So far as our vision extended, there was not a living being 
anywhere, neither man nor devil. For long we had nothing 
to eat or drink, and we wandered about till we came to a 
wood. In the wood we saw a building. We went in and 
waited. About the time when the sun went down, there 
appeared a frightfully big man, who had an eye in the middle 
of his forehead. When he saw us, he began to laugh, his 
face beamed with joy, and he made curious grimaces. He 
blinked with his eyes, kindled a great fire in the oven, and 
put an iron spit in it. Then he came up to us, felt every one 
of us, and choosing the strongest and fattest stuck him on 
the spit, held him over the fire for a little, and ate him. We 
were horrified, but could do nothing, and waited to see what 
would befall. Next evening he came again, stuck another of 
us on the spit, roasted him, and ate him. We saw that this 
could not last, and that something must be devised to save us. 
“The giant with one eye in his forehead, who devoured our 

companions, laid him down every evening before the door 
and fell asleep, after he had partaken of his supper. In the 
morning he went away and walked about till evening. The 
third evening, when he had lain down and was sleeping 
quietly, whereas we could not sleep for fear, one of us by my 
advice got up, heated the spit in the fire, and thrust it, red-hot, 
into the giant’s eye. The blinded giant shrieked dreadfully. 
We ran hastily to the sea, and embarking in a boat, rowed 
away at once from the shore. The giant’s mates heard his 
shrieks and observed us. They hastened to him, and threw 
great stones at us from a distance, so that the whole sea rose 
in billows. At last our boat was hit by a stone and knocked 


447 


APPENDIX — 


to bits. All my comrades were drowned, I alone was saved, 
for I tied myself to a board, and so came to shore.’ ἢ 

In this version there is no mention of sheep, and no 
explanation is given of the hero’s escape from the abode of 
the giant. 

(33) A version of the tale which presents the main features 
of the Homeric story has been recorded in Mingrelia, a district 
on the southern slope of the Caucasus and on the eastern shore 
of the Black Sea. It is as follows: 

Once upon a time a traveller on the road from Redut-Kale 
to Anaklia (on the eastern shore of the Black Sea) was over- 
taken by night, a dark and rainy night. In the midst of the 
forest, far from every human habitation, a pack of wolves beset 
him, and some of them tried to tear him from his horse. But 
the horse stood stock still, and neither soft nor hard words 
could induce him to stir from the spot. What booted it that 
the wanderer had tied sticks to the tail of his horse to keep 
the wolves at bay? They attacked him in spite of the 
talisman. A cold shudder ran over the poor man, his sword 
hung powerless in his limp hand. All he could do was to 
ery aloud for help. And lo! a light appeared in the distance, 
the wolves vanished, and the horse galloped towards the 
light. It was a torch in the hand of a man who inhabited a 
lonely house hard by. The traveller warmed himself in the 
hut and told his host of his adventures. But his host had far 
worse experiences to relate. ‘‘ Brother,’’ quoth he, ‘‘ you are 
unhappy because the insects in the wood have attacked you. 
But if you only knew what I have endured, you would deem 
yourself lucky that nothing worse has befallen you. 

“You see we are all here in mourning. We were seven 
brothers, all fishermen. ‘Often we would be months at sea 
with our ship, only sending a boat home once a week with 
our catch. One day when we had cast our lines we 
noticed that our ship was moving away from the shore ; 
something was pulling it, and we could not stop it. Thus 
we were drawn on, and after some weeks we saw before us a 
rocky shore with a stream of honey flowing into the sea. 
Our ship drew in towards the honey stream, and when we were 
near it, a huge fish, with a mouth a fathom wide, bobbed up 


1 Senekerim Ter-Akobian, *‘ Das armenische Marchen vom 
‘ Stirnange,’’’ Globus, XCIV. (1908), p. 205. 


448 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


out of the water beside our ship. It swallowed the honey so 
greedily that the brook almost ran dry. Our hooks had caught 
in its gills, and it had been towing us along all the time. 
While it was busy gorging itself on the honey, we cut loose 
our lines, and let the fish go free. We loaded the ship with 
honey and wax, and the evening before we were to make sail 
for home, we saw a flock of sheep and goats approaching the 
honey stream. ‘The shepherd was a one-eyed giant. In his 
hand he held a staff as thick as a pillar, and he twirled it like 
a spindle. A dreadful fear came over us. The giant drew our 
ship to the shore, and drove us with his flock to a great 
building, which stood in the middle of a wood. The trees 
were so high that we could not see the tops. The very rushes 
were as thick and tall as oaks are with us. 

“The enormous edifice was built of huge, unhewn blocks of 
stone and divided into various rooms for the flocks; the 
goats, the sheep, the lambs, and the kids had their separate 
compartments. The one-eyed giant shut us in and then drove 
his flock away. We tried to break open the door, but in vain. 
Like mice in a trap we ran about from morning to night. At 
evening the giant returned, shut up his beasts, and made a fire. 
He laid on whole trunks of trees. Then he took a spit, fetched 
a fat wether, and roasted it, without skinning it. Nay, he 
did not even kill it, but stuck it alive on the spit ; the animal 
writhed in the fire till its eyes burst. Then he ate it up, lay 
down, and began to snore. 

“Next morning he ate two more wethers, and in the evening 
he took the fattest of us, stuck him on the spit, and began to 
roast him. Our brother writhed horribly and shrieked for 
help, but what could we do? When our brother’s eyes burst, 
the giant tore off one of his legs and threw it to us; but the 
rest of our brother he ate. We buried the leg. The next days 
it came to the turn of my other brothers; at last only I 
and our youngest brother were left. We were almost beside 
ourselves with fright and longed for death, but not such a 
terrible one. 

“Well, when he had eaten our fifth brother and lay by the 
fire and snored, we slunk up to the spit which he had stuck 
at his side in the ground, and with much ado we pulled it out. 
Then we thrust it into the fire, and waited anxiously till it 
was red-hot; and we thrust the red-hot spit into his eye. 
Blinded, he bounced up with such force in his pain, that we 


449 
APOLL., II. GG 


APPENDIX 


thought he would have broken through the roof, but he only 
hurt his head. With a frightful yell he ran through the whole 
house, trampling on sheep and goats; but he could not find 
us, for we dodged between his legs. 

“‘In the morning the beasts began to bleat, being fain to 
go out to graze. ‘The giant opened the door, stood in front of 
it, and let the sheep and goats pass out one by one between 
his legs, but he felt the back, head, and belly of each. So he 
did tillnoon. Then he grew tired, and contented himself with 
feeling the back of each beast. Luckily my brother had still 
a knife, and with it we skinned two sheep. Then we wrapped 
ourselves up in the skins and resolved to creep between his 
legs. Half dead with fear, 1 was the first to try my luck. 
The giant remarked nothing, and I was out. My brother 
followed. We sought our ship, which was still in the same place. 
Our hope of escape rose. Meantime the giant’s flock came up. 
We picked out the best animals and took them with us on board. 
But scarcely had we cut the cable when the giant arrived and 
felt for the ship. When we were out of reach, we called to him 
our names, that he might know who had played him such a 
trick. In a rage he flung his club at us, with such violence 
that the sea foamed up, and our ship nearly went down. 
After long wanderings along the coast and many hardships, 
we at last came home.’’} 

(34) A version of the tale which also resembles the Homeric 
story is told by the Ossetes of the Caucasus, a people who 
speak an Iranian tongue. Their version runs as follows: 
Urysmag rode with his companions a long, long way, till 
they could hardly stir a step for weariness and hunger. 
Then Urysmag suddenly remarked at the foot of a mountain 
a shepherd of gigantic stature with a flock of sheep. So 
he rode up to him, and dismounting from his horse, caught 
the best ram, which was as big as an ox. But he could not 
hold the ram ; nay, the ram drew him bit by bit, till he fell 
into the hands of the one-eyed giant. “Ὁ Bodsol,” said the 
giant, addressing the ram, “I thank you for procuring me 
a right good roast.” So saying he thrust Urysmag into 
his shepherd’s pouch. Being hungry, Urysmag at once 


1 A, Dirr, Kaukasische Mdrchen (Jena, 1920), No. 65, pp. 
248--251. The Mingrelian language is akin to the Georgian 
(id., Ὁ. 290). 


450 


_—— 


a i αὐ 


‘XIIIL—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


addressed himself to the giant’s provisions. ‘‘ What are you 
up to there ?”’ said the giant to him, “keep still, or 171 give 
you such a squeeze that 111 break every rib in your body.” 
Meantime the sun went down, and the one-eyed giant drove 
his flock home to a cave and rolled a great rock before the 
entrance. The rock shut the mouth of the cave so tight that 
not a single ray of light could penetrate into the cavern. “ Go, 
my son,” said the giant to his offspring, ‘‘and bring me the 
roasting spit. Ill roast a tit-bit for you which the ram Bodsol 
has brought me home to-day.” The son quickly brought the 
iron spit. The giant took the spit, stuck Urysmag on it, and set 
it on the fire ; then he lay down to sleep. Now the spit had not 
pierced Urysmag, but only passed between his body and his 
clothes. So when the giant had lain down and began to snore, 
Urysmag disengaged himself from the spit, heated it red-hot, 
and thrust it into the giant’seye. The giant roared and raged, 
and threatened what he would do to his little enemy when he 
caught him. Meantime Urysmag killed the giant’s son; and in 
his fury the giant bit his own fingers, but that did not mend 
matters. Inthe morning the sheep began to bleat ; the day was 
breaking, and it was time to let them out to pasture. “Νοῦν 
you llcatchit ! You shall not escape me,” threatened the giant, 
and rolling the block of stone from the mouth of the cave, 
he sat down on it and caused every sheep to pass before him, 
one by one. Now in the giant’s flock there was a big white 
ram with long horns, and it was the giant’s favourite. Urys- 
mag hastily killed this ram, drew off the skin with the horns, 
put the skin with the horns on himself, and thus disguised 
was the first to creep on all fours out of the cave. ‘‘ You 
are Gurtshi,” said the giant to the supposed ram as he felt him, 
“go, my clever beast, go and guard the flock till evening, and 
drive them home. Alas! I’m blind, but 111] punish him who 
has outwitted me.’’ So saying he stroked the back of the sup- 
posed ram and let him go out. Thus Urysmag escaped, and 
he waited till the whole flock was out. Then he cried out, 
“And here I am after all, you blind donkey!” ‘The giant 
died of vexation. But Urysmag drove away the sheep to his 
eons and killed some rams to make a feast for his 
riends.? 


1 Chr. H., “‘ Ossetische Marchen und Sagen,”’ Globus, XLI. 
(1882), pp. 333 sg.; A. Dirr, Kaukasische Marchen, pp. 252- 


451 
Ga 2 


APPENDIX 


(35) A story of the same type is reported from Daghestan, 
a region situated on the north-eastern slope of the Caucasur. 
It is as follows: Two shipwrecked mariners meet a one-eyed 
giant, who is tending a flock of sheep. The giant seizes them 
and carries them to his abode, which is built of great blocks 
of stone in the forest. He sends one of the two to fetch water, 
and in his absence he roasts and devours the other, leaving 
nothing but a hand and foot, which he offers to the other 
shipwrecked mariner on his return. The mariner replies 
that he is not hungry. Then the giant shuts up his abode 
with an enormous rock and goes to sleep. The man puts 
out the giant’s eye with a red-hot bar of iron. Next morning 
the man kills a ram, wraps himself up in the skin, and so 
makes his way out along with the flock. The giant becomes 
aware of the trick and utters a shout: other Cyclopes come in 
haste ; but the man reaches the shore and makes good his 
escape on a piece of the wreck. 

(36) A story of the type we are considering occurs also in a 
Mongolian work, dating perhaps from the thirteenth or 
fourteenth century, which professes to narrate the history of 
the Oghuz, a widely spread branch of the great Turkish family, 
who include the Turcomans and the Uzbegs of Bokhara and are 
said still to constitute perhaps the majority of the population 
between the Indus and Constantinople.?. The work in question 
includes eight narratives. It is in the eighth narrative, en- 
titled ‘“‘ How Bissat killed Depé Ghoz,”’ that the story occurs 
with which we are here concerned. It runs as follows.* 
An Oghuzian herdsman surprised and caught at a spring a 


254. There are a few unimportant variations, mostly verbal, 
between these two versions of the tale. In the former it is 
said that the outwitted giant “died of vexation’’; in the 
latter it is said that he ‘almost died of vexation and rage.” 
As to the Ossete language, see A. Dirr, op. cit., p. 290. 

1 A. van Gennep, Religions, Meurs, et Légendes (Paris, 
1908), p. 162. 

2 As to the Oghuz, see A. H. Keane, Man, Past and Present, 
revised by A. H. Quiggin and A. C. Haddon (Cambridge, 1920), 
pp. 311 sqq. 

8. W. Grimm, Die Sage von Polyphem, pp. 7-12, referring 
to Diez, Der neuentdeckte oghuzische cyklop verglichen mit dem 
homerischen, 1815. 


452 


ee ὌΝ 


XIJI.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


fairy of the Swan Maiden type, and had by her a semi-divine 
son named Depé Ghoz, who had the form of a man, except 
that he possessed only a single eye on the crown of his head. 
His birth was attended with prodigies, and as his fairy mother 
flew away she prophesied that he would be the bane of the 
Oghuz. The prediction was unhappily fulfilled. The monster 
began a long career of villainy by killing the nurse who gave 
him the breast, and he soon began to carry off and devour his 
own people, the Oghuz. It was in vain that they sent troops 
against him, for he was invulnerable ; his fairy mother had 
put a ring on his finger, saying, ‘‘ No arrow shall pierce thee, 
and no sword shall wound thy body.’ So no man could 
stand before him, and he put his foes to flight with great 
slaughter. Therefore they were forced to send envoys to 
negotiate a peace. Depé Ghoz at first, pitching his pretentions 
in a rather high key, stipulated for a daily ration of twelve 
men to be consumed by him; but the envoys pointing out to 
him with much force that at such a rate of consumption the 
population would soon be exhausted, the Ogre consented to 
accept the more reasonable ration of two men and five hundred 
sheep a day. On this basis he made shift to subsist until 
a distressed mother appealed to the heroic Bissat to save her 
second son, who was doomed to follow his elder brother into 
the maw of the monster. Touched by her story, and burning 
to avenge his own brother, who had been one of the giant’s 
victims, the gallant Bissat declared his resolve to beard the 
Ogre in his den and to rid society of a public nuisance. It 
was in vain that the princes endeavoured to deter him from 
the dangerous enterprise. He listened to none of them, but 
stuck a handful of arrows in his belt, slung his bow over his 
shoulder, girt his sword on his thigh, and bidding farewell to 
his father and mother set out for the giant’s home. 

He came to the rock where Depé Ghoz devoured his human 
victims. The giant was sitting there with his back to the sun. 
Bissat drew an arrow from his belt and shot it at the giant’s 
breast, but the shaft shivered at contact with his invulnerable 
body. A second arrow fared no better; the monster only 
observed, “ἡ fly has bothered me.”’ A third shaft likewise 
shivered, and a piece of it fell before the giant. He started 
up. “The Oghuz are waylaying me again,” said he to his 
servants. Then he walked leisurely up to Bissat, gripped him 
by the throat, and carried him to his abode. There he stuck 


453 


APPENDIX 


him in his own ox-hide boot, saying to the servants, “ I'll 
roast him on a spit for supper.’’ So saying he went to sleep. 
But Bissat had a knife, and he slit the ox-hide and stepped out 
of the boot. He asked the servants how he could kill the 
giant. “‘We know not,” said they, “there is no flesh on his 
body except in his eye.” Bissat went up to the sleeper’s 
head, and lifting his eyelid saw that the eye was indeed of 
flesh. He ordered the servants to heat the butcher’s knife in 
the fire. When the knife was red-hot, Bissat thrust it into the 
giant’s eye, destroying it entirely. Depé Ghoz bellowed so 
that mountains and rocks rang again. But Bissat sprang away 
and fell into the cave among the sheep. 

The giant perceived that his foe was in the cave. So he 
took his stand in the doorway, setting a foot on each side of it 
and calling out, “‘ Come, little rams, one after the other.” As 
each came up, he laid his hand on its head. Meantime Bissat had 
killed a ram and skinned it, leaving the head and tail attached 
to the skin. Now he put on the skin and so arrayed drew near 
to the giant. But the giant knew him and said, “‘ You knew 
how to rob me of my sight, but I will dash you against the 
wall.” Bissat gave him the ram’s head into his hand, and 
when the giant gripped one of the horns and lifted it up, the 
skin parted from it, and Bissat leaped out between the giant’s 
legs. Depé Ghoz cast the horn on the ground and asked, 
‘“‘ Are you freed?” Bissat answered, ‘‘ My God has set me 
free.” Then the giant handed him a ring and said, “* Put it 
on your finger. Then neither arrow nor sword can harm 
you.” Bissat put the ring on his finger. The giant attacked 
him and would have wounded him with a knife. Bissat leaped 
away and noticed that the ring again lay under the giant’s 
feet. The giant again asked, ‘‘ Are you freed?” and Bissat 
again replied, ‘‘ My God has set me free.’’ Finally, the hero 
contrived to slay the monster by cutting off his head with a 
sword, but this conclusion of the tale does not concern us 
here, having no parallel in the Homeric story. 

In this Mongolian or Turkish version the giant’s offer of a 
ring to his escaped prisoner recalls the incident of the ring in 
some of the other versions already noticed ;} but here the 
ring does not talk and thereby betray its wearer’s presence to 
his vengeful enemy. 


' See above, p. 410, with the note, 


454 


ae 


XIII.—ULYSSES AND POLYPHEMUS 


Wilhelm Grimm interpreted the eye of Polyphemus as the 
sun, and found the origin of the story in the physical conflict 
of the elements and in the moral contrast of rude violence 
with crafty adroitness.1 Such interpretations may safely be 
dismissed as erroneous. They illustrate the common tendency 
of learned men to attribute their own philosophic or mystical 
views to simple folk who are quite incapable, not only of con- 
ceiving, but even of comprehending them. To all appearance 
Polyphemus and his fellows are fairyland beings, neither more 
nor less, the creation of a story-teller who invented them for 
the sheer delight of giving the reins to his imagination and of 
exciting the wonder and admiration of his spellbound hearers, 
but who never dreamed of pointing a moral or of elucidating 
the dark, mysterious processes of external nature. Early 
man was not for ever pondering the enigmas of the universe ; 
he, like ourselves, had doubtless often need to relax the strain 
and to vary the monotony of ordinary life by excursions into 
the realm of fancy. 


1 W. Grimm, Die Suge von Polyphem, pp. 28 sqq. 


455 


INDEX 


The roman numbers (i., u.) refer to the volumes ; the arabic 
numbers (1, 2, 3, &c.) refer to the pages. 


Abas, Mount, in Erythia, i. 213 

Abas, son of Lynceus by Hyper- 
mnestra, father ot Acrisius and 
Proetus, i. 145 

Abas, son of Melampus, i. 91 

Abdera, city in Thrace, founded 
at grave of Abderus, i. 201 

Abderia, in Spain, Hercules passes 
through, i. 215 

Abderus, son of Hermes, killed by 
the mares of Diomedes, i. 201; 
the city of Abdera founded by 
Hercules beside his grave, 201 

Acalle, daughter of Minos, i. 303 

Acamas, son of Antenor, leader of 
the Dardanians, ii. 205 

Acamas, son of Eusorus, a Thracian 
leader, ii. 205 

Acamas, son of Theseus and 
Phaedra, ii. 145; flies from 
Athens, 153; goes to Troy and 
leads away Aethra, 237 

Acamas, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Acarnan, son of Alemaeon, i. 387. 
See Amphoterus 

Acarnan, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Acarnania, colonized by Acarnan 
and Amphoterus, i. 387 

Acastus, son of Pelias, i. 85 ; in the 
Argo, 97; buries his father, 121 ; 
expels Jason and Medea from 
lolcus, 123; purifies Peleus, ii. 
63; takes Peleus to hunt, deserts 
him, and hides his sword, 65; 
father of Sthenele, 77; the sons 
of, expél Peleus from Phthia, 251 

sg 7 i descended from Achaeus, 

ΒΥ « 

Achaeus, son of Xuthus, ancestor 
of the Achaeans, i, 57 


APOLL, II. 


Achaia, Olenus in, i. 71 

Achelous, father of the Sirens, i. 21, 
63, li. 291; father of Hippodamas 
and Orestes, i. 57; wrestles with 
Hercules for Deianira, 65, 257 ; 
loses a horn in the struggle, 
but recovers it, 257; purifies 
Alemaeon and gives him his 
daughter Callirrhoe to wife, 383, 
385; enjoins Alemaeon’s sons to 
dedicate the necklace and robe 
(of Harmonia) at Delphi, 387 

Achelous, river, the matricide 
Alemaeon takes up his abode 
in the land formed by its silt, 


i. 385 
AARON: Cerberus at the gates of, 


1: 

Acheron, father of Ascalaphus by 
Gorgyra, i. 41 

Achilles, son of Peleus and Thetis, 
ii. 69, 185; put by his mother in 
the fire to make him immortal, 
69; brought up by Chiron, 71 ; 
fed on the flesh of lions, wild 
swine, and bears, 71; at first 
named Ligyron, 71; bred as a 
maiden at the court of Lyco- 
medes, 73, 75; detected by 
Ulysses, goes to Troy, 75; 
leader of the Myrmidons against 
Troy, 185; admiral of the fleet 
against Troy, 187; wounds 
Telephus, 187; heals Telephus 
with the rust of his spear, 189; 
Iphigenia said to have been be- 
trothed to, 191; kills Tenes in 
Tenedos, 195; lands with the 
Myrmidons at Troy and kills 
Cycnus, 201; slaughters Troilus, 


457 


INDEX 


201; captures Lycaon, 203 ; lifts 
the cattle of Aeneas, 203; takes 
many cities, 203; angry on 
account of Briseis, does not fight, 
205; receives an embassy of 
the Greeks, 207; sends Patroclus 
to fight the Trojans, 209; recovers 
Briseis and lays aside his anger, 
209; dons the armour of 
Hephaestus and goes forth to 
war, 209; his conflict with the 
river Scamander, 209; slays 
Hector, buries Patroclus, and 
allows Priam to ransom the 
body of Hector, 211; kills Pen- 
thesilia and Thersites, 211; 
slays Memnon, 213; shot by 
Alexander and Apollo, 215; 
buried with Patroclus in the 
White Isle, 217; consorts with 
Medea in the Isles of the Blest, 
217; gamesin his honour, 217; 
his arms, contended for by 
Ajax and Ulysses, adjudged to 
Ulysses, 217, 219; beacon light 
kindled on his grave, 235; 
Polyxena slain by the Greeks 
on the grave of, 239, 241 

Acontes, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Acrisius, twin'son of Abas by 
Aglaia, i. 145; expels his twin 
brother Proetus, 145; reigns over 
Argos, 147; father of Danae, 
147; guards her in a brazen 
chamber, 153, 155; casts her and 
Perseus into the sea, 155; fears 
the oracle and goes to Larissa, 
161, 163; killed accidentally by 
Perseus, 163; husband of Eury- 
dice, ii. 11 } 

Acropolis (of Athens), the Erech- 
theis and Pandrosium on the, 
ii. 79; the sisters of Pandrosus 
throw themselves from the, 91; 
wooden image of Athena on the, 
93; Daedalus throws Talos from 
the, 121; Aegeus flings himself 
from the, 137 

Actaea, a Nereid, i. 15 

Actaea, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Periphas, i. 141 

Actaeon, son of Aristaeus and 
Autonoe, a hunter, woos Semele 
or sees Artemis bathing, i. 323; 
torn to pieces by his dogs, 323, 325 


458 


’ 


Actaeus, father of Agraulus, il. 81 

Actaeus, father of Telamon, accord- 
ing to Pherecydes, ii. 53 

Acte, old name of Attica, ii. 77 

Actor, brother of Augeas, father of 
Eurytus and Cteatus, i. 249 

Actor, son of Deion, i. 79; father 
of Menoetius, 97 

Actor, son of Hippasus, in the 
Argo, i. 97 

Actor, son of Myrmidon, i. 57; 
father of Eurytion, 67, ii. 61 

Acusilaus, on Pelasgus, i, 131, 389 ; 
on Io, 1383; on Argus, 133; on 
the madness of the daughters of 
Proetus, 147; on the Cretan 
bull, 199; on the death of Ac- 
taeon, 323; as to Megapenthes, 
son of Menelaus, ii. 31; on the 
parents of Asopus, 51; on the 
death of Zetes and Calais, 107 

Adiante, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Daiphron, i. 143 

Adite, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Menalces, i. 143 

Admete, daughter of Eurystheus, 
Mae ἐν the belt of the Amazon, 
i 

Admetus, son of Pheres, hunts 
the Calydonian boar, i. 67 ; served 
by Apollo, 91; husband of Al- 
cestis, who dies for him, 93; in 
the Argo, 97; Apollo serves him 
as a herdsman, ii. 21; father of 
Eumelus, 27,185 ᾿ 

Adonis loved by Aphrodite, i. 19; 
son of Cinyras, or of Phoenix, 
or of Thias, ii. 85, 87; born 
of a myrrh tree, 87; carried 
by Aphrodite in a chest to 
Persephone, 87; divides his time 
between Aphrodite and Perse- 
phone, 87, 89; killed by a boar 
in hunting, 85, 89 

Adramyttium, a city taken by 
Achilles, ii. 203 

Adrastia, a city, allied with Troy, 
ii. 205 

Adrastia, nurse of Zeus, i. 7 

Adrastus, father of Eurydice, ti. 43 

Adrastus marches against Thebes, 
i. 73; father of Aegialia, 75; 
married to Amphithea, 91; son of 
Talaus, 91; king of Argos,§ 353 ; 
marries his daughters to the exiles 


. 


ee re eee 


INDEX 


Tydeus and Polynices, and pro- 
mises to restore both to their 
native lands, 353; musters an 
army with seven leaders and 
makes waron Thebes, 355; one of 
the victors in the Nemean "games, 
359; stationed at the Homo- 
loidan gate of Thebes, 361; alone 
of the Seven Champions saved 
by his horse Arion, 373; flies 
to Athens and prays the Athen- 
ians to bury the Argive dead, 
ae 375; father of Aegialeus, 

Adrastus, 568 of Merops, a Trojan 
ally, ii. 205 

Aeacus, father of Peleus and 
Telamon, i. 67, 97, ii. 533 son 
of Zeus and Aegina, father 
of Phocus by Psamathe, 55; 
prays for rain, 55; banishes 
Peleus and Telamon from Ae- 
gina, 57; keeps the keys of 
Hades, 57 

Aeaea, the Argonauts purified by 
Circe in, i. 115 

Aeaean isle of Circe, Ulysses in, 
ii. 287, 289 

Aeanianians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185 

Aeetes, son of the Sun by Perseis, 
king of Colchis, receives Phrixus, 
i. 773; promises ‘the Golden Fleece 
to Jason, 109; orders him to 
yoke brazen-footed bulls and 
sow dragon’s teeth, 109; wishes 
to burn the Argo, 113; ” pursues 
Medea, 113; deposed by his 
brother Perses, but restored by 
ee 121; brother of Circe, ii. 


Aegaeon, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Aegeoneus, son of Priam, li, 49 

Aegeus, father of Theseus, i. 67; 
married to Medea, 125; son of 
Pandion or of Scyrius, "born at 
Megara, ii. 113; restored to 
Athens by his brothers (the sons 
of Pandion), 113; consults the 
oracle as to the begetting of 
children, 118, 115; at Troezen 
he lies with Aethra, daughter of 
Pittheus, 115; sends Androgeus, 
son of Minos, against the 
bull of Marathon, 115; sends 


Theseus against the Marathonian 
bull, 1383; recognizes Theseus 
and expels Medea, 133, 135; 
charges Theseus to hoist a white 
sail in sign of success, 135; casts 
himself from the acropolis at 
sight of the black sail, 137 

Aegialeus, father of Aegialia, i. 75; 
son of Adrastus, 91; one of 
the Epigoni, 379; killed by 
Laodamas, 381 

Aegialeus, son of Inachus, i. 129 

Aegialia, daughter of Adrastus or 
of Aegialeus, wife of Diomedes, 
i. 75, 91; corrupted by Cometes, 
li. 249 

Aegialia, a country, named after 
Aegialeus, i. 129 

Aegialus, a ‘city, taken by Achilles, 
li. 203 

Aegimius, king of the Dorians, 
Hercules helps him against the 
Lapiths, i. 263; his sons slain 
in battle, 289 

Aegina, daughter of Asopus, carried 
off by Zens? 10 79. 1 bly; 
conveyed to "island of Oenone 
(Aegina), where she bears Aeacus 
to Zeus, 53 

Aegina, the Argonauts in, i. 119; 
island, formerly called Oenone, 
ii. 53; Peleus and Telamon 
banished from, 57 

Aegipan steals the severed sinews 
of Zeus, i. 49 

Aegis wrapt by Athena round the 
Palladium, ii. 41 

Aegisthus, son of Thyestes, ii. 169 ; 
murders Atreus and τας the 
kingdom to Thyestes, 169; para- 
mour of Clytaemnestra, 249; 
with Clytaemnestra, murders 
Agamemnon and Cassandra, 269 ; 
murdered by Orestes, 271; father 
of Erigone by Clytaemnestra, 271 

Aegius, son of Egyptus, i. 141 

Aegle, one of the Hesperides, i. 221 

Aegleis, daughter of Hyacinth, 
oh nalinda by the Athenians, ii. 
11 

Aello, a Harpy, i. 15 

Aellopus, a Harpy, i. 105 

Aeneas, son mt Anchises and 
Aphrodite, 37; his kine on 
Ida raided by Achilles, 203 -2an 


459 


INDEX 


ally of the Trojans, 205; 
Aphrodite comes to his help, 207 ; 
carries Anchises on his back, 237 
Aenetus, son of Deion, i. 79 
Aenus, a οἷον of Thrace, Hercules 


Aeolia, daughter of Amythaon, wife 
of Calydon, i. 61 

Aeolia, the island of Aeolus, 
Ulysses in, ii. 285 

Aeolians, descended from Aeolus, 
i. 57; found Elis, 61 

Aeolus, king of Aeolia, keeper of 
the winds, gives Ulysses winds 
in a bag, ii. 285 

Aeolus, son of Hellen, ancestor of 
the Aeolians, i. 57; father of 
Athamas, 75; of Sisyphus, 79; 
of Perieres, ii. 21 

Aepytus, son of Cresphontes, kills 
Polyphontes and recovers the 
kingdom (of Messene), i. 293 

Aerope, daughter of Catreus, i. 307 ; 
wife of Plisthenes, mother of 
Agamemnon and Menelaus, 
309; wife of Atreus, loves his 
brother Thyestes, ii. 163, 165; 
gives him the golden lamb, 165 ; 
mother of Agamemnon and 
Menelaus, 183 

Aesacus, son of Priam, ii. 45; 
interprets Hecuba’s dream, 47: 
on his wife’s death turned into 
a bird, 45 

Aeschreis, daughter of Thespius, 
paihes of Leucones by Hercules, 
i. 273 

Aesculapius, son of Apollo by 
Arsinoe or Coronis, ii. 13, 15; 
entrusted by Apollo to Chiron, 
who teaches him the healing art, 
15, 17; receives the Gorgon’s 
blood from Athena, 17; raises 
the dead, 17, 19; smitten with 
a thunderbolt by Zeus, 19; father 
of Podalirius and Machaon, 27 

Aeson, father of Jason, i. 67, 93; 
son of Cretheus, 87, 93; kills 
τ by drinking bull’s blood, 
121 


Aethlius, son of Zeus, i. 57; father 
of Endymion, 61 

Aethra, mother of Theseus, cap- 
tured by Pollux and Castor, 
ii. 25, 27; daughter of Pittheus, 


460 


lies with Aegeus at Troezen, 115 ; 
bears him a son Theseus, 123 ; 
etaken captive by the Dioscuri, 
153; led away from Troy by the 
sons of Theseus, 237 

Aethusa, daughter of Poseidon by 
Alcyone, and mother of Eleuther 
by Apollo, ii. 5 ͵ 

Aethylla, daughter οἱ Laomedon, 
sister of Priam, ii. 261, 263 

Aetolia, named after Aetolus, i. 61; 
Oxylus returns to, 289; Ulysses 
goes to, ii. 307 

Aetolians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 

Aetolus, father of Palaemon, i. 97 

Aetolus, son of Endymion, names 
Aetolia after himself, i. 61 

Agamemnon, son of Atreus or 
Plisthenes and Aerope, leader of 
the Mycenaeans against Troy, i. 
309, ii. 183; husband of Clytaem- 
nestra, 23;. carried by his 
nurse to Polyphides at Sicyon, 
169, 171; sent to Oeneus in 
Aetolia, 171; brought back by 
Tyndareus, 171; expels Thyestes 
and slays Tantalus, son of 
Thyestes, 171 ; marries Clytaem- 
nestra, and reigns over Mycenae, 
171; his children, 171 ; musters 
an army against Troy, 177; 
takes the command, 185, 187; 
offends Artemis, 191; prepares 
to sacrifice Iphigenia to Artemis, 
191; orders Philoctetes to be 
put ashore in Lemnos, 195; 
wounded, 209; forbids the body 
of Ajax to be burnt, 219; gets 
Cassandra, 241; quarrels with 
Menelaus, 243; puts to sea and 
touches at Tenedos, 247; accom- 
plice in the murder of Palamedes, 
249; returns to Mycenae, mur- 
dered by Aegisthus and Clytaem- 
nestra, 269 

Agapenor, the sons of Phegeus en- 
counter the sons of Alemaeon at 
the house of, i. 385; son of An- 
caeus, suitor of Helen, ii. 27; 
leader of the Arcadians against 
aor 183; settles in Cyprus, 


Agaptolemus, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Pirene, i. 141 


INDEX 


— ΗΝ father of Polyxenus, 

li. 2 

Agathon, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Agave, a Nereid, i. 15 

Agave, daughter of Cadmus, wife of 
Echion, i. 317; kills her son 
Pentheus in a fit of Bacchic 
frenzy, 331 

Agave, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Lycus, i. 139 

Agelaus, a servant, exposes the 
infant Paris, ii. 47 

Agelaus, son of Hercules by 
Omphale, i. 275 

Agelaus, son of Temenus, hires men 
to murder his father, i, 291 

Agelaus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Agenor, father of Phineus, i. 105 

Agenor, son of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Agenor, son of Ecbasus, i. 131 

Agenor, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Cleopatra, i. 141 

Agenor, son of Phegeus, i. 385. See 
Phegeus 

Agenor, son of Pleuron, husband of 
Epicaste, i. 61 

Agenor, son of Poseidon and Libya, 
1. 1385; reigns in Phoenicia, 135 ; 
his children, Europa, Cadmus, 
Phoenix, and Cilix, 297 

Agenor, suitor of Penelope, from 
Dulichium, ii. 297 

Agenor, suitor of Penelope, from 
Zacynthos, ii. 299 

Agerochus, suitor of Penelope, ii.297 

Aglaia, a Grace, i. 17 

Aglaia, daughter of Mantineus, wife 
of Abas, i..145 

Aglaia, daughter of Thespius, 
ΠΣ of Antiades by Hercules, 

Aglaope, one of the Sirens, ii. 291 

Aglaus, son of Thyestes, murdered 
by Atreus, ii. 167 

Agraulus, daughter of Actaeus, wife 
of Cecrops, ii. 81 

Agraulus, daughter of Cecrops, 
mother of Alcippe by Ares, ii. 
81 

Agrius, a centaur, repelled by Her- 
cules, i. 193 

eo a giant, killed by the Fates, 
i 


Agrius, son of Porthaon, i. 63; 


accuses Tydeus, 73; some of his 
sons killed by ‘'ydeus, 73; two 
of his sons kill Oeneus, 73 

Agrius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Ajax, son of Oileus, suitor of Helen, 
ii. 27; leader of the Locrians 
against Troy, 183; violates Cas- 
sandra, 239; Athena angry at his 
impiety, 248; wrecked and 
drowned, 247; buried by Thetis 
in Myconos, 247 

Ajax, son of Telamon, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27, 29; named after 
an eagle, 61; leader of the Sala- 
minians against Troy, 183; fights 
Hector, 207; sent as ambassador 
to Achilles, 207; retreats, 209; 
rescues the body of Patroclus, 
209; victor in wrestling, 211; 
kills Glaucus, 215; carries off the 
dead body of Achilles, 215; 
victor in the quoits match, 217; 
contends for the arms of Achilles, 
219; goes mad and kills himself, 
219; his dead body not allowed 
to be burnt, is buried in a 
coffin at Rhoeteum, 219 

Alastor, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Alcaeus, son of Androgeus, taken 
as hostage by Hercules, i. 205 

Alcaeus, son of Perseus, i. 163; 
ἜΗΝ of Amphitryon and Anaxo, 
1 

Alcarops, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Alcathous, son of Porthaon, i. 63 ; 
killed by Tydeus, 71 

Alcathus, father of Automedusa, i. 
181; father of Periboea, ii. 61; 
son of Pelops, 61 

Alces, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Glauce, i. 141 

Alcestis, daughter of Pelias, i. 85; 
dies for her husband Admetus 
and is restored to life, 93 

Alcides, name given to Hercules, 


i. 183 

Alcidice, wife of Salmoneus, mother 
of Tyro, i. 81 

er brother of Bellerophon, 
i. 14 

Alcinous, king of Corcyra (of the 
Phaeacians), i. 115; his reception 
of the Argonauts and Medea, 117; 
sends Ulysses away to his native 
land, ii. 295, 297 


461 


INDEX 


Alcinus, son of Hippocoon, slain by 
Hercules, ii. 23 

Alcippe, daughter of Ares by 
Agraulus, ii. 81; Halirrothius 
attempts to violate her, 81 

Alcippe, mother of Daedalus, ii. 121 

Alcemaeon goes with Diomedes (to 
Calydon), i. 73; son of Amphi- 


araus, leader of the Epigoni 
against Thebes, 879; kiils 
Laodamas, 381; learning the 


treachery of his mother Eriphyle, 
he kills her, 381, 383; haunted 
by her Fury, 383 ; is purified by 
Phegeus at Psophis and marries 
Arsinoe, daughter of Phegeus, 
383; his wanderings and final 
purification by Achelous, 383 ; 
marries Callirrhoe, daughter of 
Achelous, 385 ; murdered by the 
sons of Phegeus, 385 

Alemaeonid, homicide of Tydeus 
mentioned in the, i. 71 

Alcmena, daughter of Electryon, 
i. 165; her delivery retarded by 
the Llithyias, 167 ; goes to Thebes 
with Amphitryon, 171; visited 
by Zeus in the likeness of Amphi- 
tryon, 173, 175; bears Hercules 
and Iphicles, 175; marries 
Khadamanthys and "dwells at 
Ocaleae, 181; gouges out the 
eyes of Eurystheus, 279; married 
to Rhadamanthys, 303 

Alcmenor, son of Kgyptus, husband 
of Hippomedusa, i. 141 

Alcon, son of Hippocoon, slain by 
Hercules, ii. 23 

Alcyone, daughter of Aeolus, wife 
of Ceyx, i. 57; says that her 
husband is Zeus, 59; turned 
into a kingfisher, 59 

Alcyone, daughter of Atlas, one 
οἱ the Pleiades, ii. 3; mother of 
Aethusa by Poseidon, 5 

Alcyone, daughter of Sthenelus, 
, a 


Alcyone, wife of Chalcodon, mother 
οἱ Elephenor, ii. 183 

Alcyoneus, a giant, i. 43; shot by 
Hercules, 45 

Alecto, a Fury, i. 5 

Alector, father of Iphis, i, 353 

Alector, father of Leitus, i. 97, 
ii, 27 


462 


ae son of Icarius by Periboea, 


Aleus, father of Cepheus, i. 97; 
father of Auge, 253, 277; 
exposes her child (Telephus), 
255; gives her to Nauplius to 
sell, 257; son of Aphidas, 397 ; 
father of Auge, Cepheus, and 
Lycurgus, 397 

Alexander, son of Eurystheus, 
slain by the Athenians, i. 277 

Alexander, surname of Paris, ii. 
47 ; marries Oenone, 51; warned 
by ‘her not to fetch Helen, Gl: 
carries off Helen, 51, 171; shot by 
Philoctetes, 51; carried to Oenone 
and dies, 5135 judges the three 
goddesses and gives the prize to 
Aphrodite,j173; sails to Sparta, 
1 Wis entertained by Menelaus, 
173 ; carries off Helen, 173, 175; 
driven by a storm to Sidon, 175 ; 
comes to Troy with Helen, 175 ; 
fights Menelaus, 207; shoots 
Achilles, 215; shot by Philo- 
ctetes, 223. See Paris 

Alexiares, son of Hercules by 
Hebe, i. 273 

Alizones, Trojan allies, ii. 205 

Allies of the ‘'rojans, ii. 208, 205 

Aloads, the, Otus and Ephialtes, 
attack the gods, i. 59; put Ares 
in bonds, 59; kill each other, 


61 
a son of Poseidon by Canace, 
Aloplus, son of Hercules by Antiope, 
7: 


Alphesiboea, wife of Phoenix, 
mother of Adonis, according to 
Hesiod, ii. 85 

Alpheus, river, Apollo at the, i. 87; 
diverted by Hercules into the 
cattle-yard of Augeas, 195, 197 

Altar of Radiant Apollo, i. Dy: 
of Hera of the Height, 123, 125; 
of Zeus, strangers sacrificed on, 
225; of Hercules the Glorious 
Victor, 245 ; of Pelops at Olympia, 
251; of Cenaean Zeus, built by 
Hercules, 267; of Mercy, 277; of 
Atabyrian Zeus, founded by 
Althaemenes, 307; of Mercy at 
Athens, Adrastus takes refuge a 
373, 375; of Hera, ii. 171; ὁ 


eS ee ἡ 


— «(ὦ 


Pos 


INDEX 


Apollo, 195; of Zeus of the 
Courtyard, 237 

Altars of the twelve gods at 
Olympia, built by Hercules, i. 
251; of Paternal Zeus, set up by 
the Heraclids, 289 

os, daughter of Thestius, i. 
63; wife of Oeneus, mother of 
Meleager, 65; purns the brand 
on which the life of Meleager 
depended, 69; curses Meleager, 
69; hangs herself, 71 

Althaemenes, son of Catreus, quits 
Crete and settles in Rhodes, i. 
307; founds an altar of Ata- 
byrian Zeus, 307; kills his sister 
and his father, 309, 811 

Amalthea, infant Zeus fed on the 
milk of, i. :7; daughter of Hae- 
monius, the horn of, 257 

Amarynceus, father of Hippostra- 


tus, i. 71 

Amarynthus, one of Actaeon’s 
dogs, i. 325 

Amazons, conquered by bBelle- 


rophon, i. 153; dwell on the 
river Thermodon, 203; their 
customs, 203; fought by Her- 
cules, 205; march against Athens, 
arm ee "defeated by Theseus, 


145 

Ambrosia, child anointed with, to 
make him immortal, ii. 69; 
Tantalus attempts to share, with 
his fellows, 155 

Amestrius, son of Hercules by 
Kone, i. 275 

seers han breeds the Chimera, 
i. 

Ammon, his prediction concerning 
the exposure of Andromeda to 
the sea beast, i. 159 


Amphialus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii, 299 
Amphianax, king of Lycia, re- 


ceives Proetus, i. 145 
Amphiaraus, son of Oicles, hunts 
the Calydonian boar, i. 67; hus- 
band of Eriphyle, 91 ;in the Argo, 
97; a seer, averse to the ex- 
pedition of Adrastus against 
Thebes, 353; persuaded by his 
wile Eriphyle to go, he com- 
mands his sons to slay her, 355; 
one of the Seven against Thebes, 


357; his prediction at Nemea, 
359; one of the victors in the 
Nemean games, 359; cuts off 
head of Melanippus and gives it 
to 'Tydeus, 369; swallowed with 
his chariot in the earth, 371; 
made immortal, 371; father of 
ao and Amphilochus, 379, 
ii. 

Amphictyon, son of Deucalion, 
king of Attica, i. 57; expels 
Cranaus and reigns over Attica, 
ae 89 ; expelled by Erichthonius, 


Amphidamas, father of Clitonymus, 
Ἡ; 11 

Amphidamas, son of Busiris, killed 
by Hercules, i. 227 

Amphidamas, son of lLycurgus, 
father of Melanion and Anti- 
mache, i. 399 

Amphidicus, son of Astacus, slays 
Parthenopaeus, i. 369 

Amphilochian Argos colonized by 
Amphilochus, i. 387, 389 

bia a s son of Alemaeon by 
Manto, i. 387; founds Amphi- 
lochian Argos, 387, 389 ; goes to 
Colophon and helps to bury 
Calchas, ii. 243 ; fights Mopsus for 
the kingdom, slays and is slain 
by him, 263 

Amphilochus, son of Amphiaraus, 
one oi the Epigoni, i. 379; helps 
his brother Alcmaeon to kill 
their mother Eriphyle, 383; 
suitor of Helen, ii. 27 

Amphimachus, son of Cteatus, 
suitor of Helen, ii. 27; leader of 
the Eleans against Troy, 183 

SENG, son of Electryon, 
ea 

Amphimachus, son of Nomion, a 
Carian leader, ii. 205 

Amphimachus, suitor of Penelope, 
from Dulichium, ii. 297 

Amphimachus, suitor of Penelope, 
from Ithaca, ii. 299 

Amphimedon, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 299 

Amphinomus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297; said by some to have 
seduced Penelope, 305 

Amphion and Zethus, twin sons of 
Zeus by Antiope, i. 337, 339, 


463 


INDEX 


ii. 5; they rescue their mother, 
kill Lycus, and tie Dirce to a bull, 
3393; succeed to the throne of 
Thebes and fortify the city, 339. 
See Amphion, Zethus 
Amphion (same as the preceding), 
father of Chloris, i. 85; father 
of Phylomache, 85; receives a 
lyre from Hermes and practises 
minstrelsy, 339; in fortifying 
Thebes, the stones follow his 
lyre, 339; marries Niobe, 341 
Amphion, son of Amphion and 
ee survives his brothers, 
1. 343 
Amphithea, daughter of Pronax, 
wife of Adrastus, i. 91 
Amphithea, wife of Lycurgus, 
mother of Opheltes, i. 91 
Amphitrite, a Nereid, i. 15 
Amphitrite, an Oceanid, i. 13; 
wife of Poseidon, 35; mother of 
Benthesicyme, ii. 109 
oe father of Iphicles, 


Amphitryon, son of Alcaeus, i. 
165; receives Alemena and the 
kingdom of Mycenae from Elec- 
tryon, 169; accidentally kills 
Electryon, 169; banished from 
Argos, 169, 171; goes with 
Alcmena to Thebes, 171; purified 
by Creon, 171; makes war on 
the Teleboans (Taphians), 171, 
173; hunts the (Teumessian) 
fox, 171, 1733; teaches Hercules 
to drive a chariot, 175; his 
cattle harried by the lion of 
Cithaeron, 177; killed in battle 
with the Minyans, 181 

Amphius, son of Merops, a Trojan 
ally, ii. 205 

Amphoterus and Acarnan, sons of 
Alemaeon, kill their father’s 
murderers, dedicate the necklace 
and robe (of Harmonia) at Delphi, 
δὰ colonize Acarnania, i. 385, 

— Hercules purified at, 1. 


Amyclas, 
Niobe, 
i. 343 

Amyclas, son of Lacedaemon, 
father of Cynortas and Hyacinth, 


464 


son of Amphion and 
survives his brothers, 


i. 81, 11. 11; father of Leanira, i. 
397 


Amycus, son of Poseidon, king of 
the Bebryces, killed by Pollux, 
i. 1035 ea of Mygdon, 205 

Amymone, ughter of Danaus, 
beloved es oseidon, i. 139; 
bears him a son Nauplius, 143 

Amymone, the springs of the, at 
Lerna, i. 189 

Amyntor, king of Ormenium, slain 
by Hercules, i. 265; father of 
Astydamia, 277; blinds his son 
Ae ty on a false accusation, ii. 


Amythaon, son of Cretheus, dwells 
in Pylus, i. 87; father of Bias and 
4 ecm 87; father of Aeolia, 


Anactor, son of Electryon, i. 165 

Anaphe, an island, seen by the 
Argonauts, i. 117 

Anaurus, river, i. 95 

Anaxibia, daughter of Bias, wife 
of Pelias, i. 85 

Anaxibia, daughter of Cratieus, 
wife of Nestor, i. 85 

Anaxibia, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Archelaus, i. 141 

Anaxo, daughter of Alcaeus, wife 
ero paternal uncle Electryon, 
3 

Ancaeus, son of Lycurgus, hunts 
the Calydonian boar, i. 67, 69; 
in the Argo, 97; steers the Argo, 
109; son of lLycurgus, 399; 
father of Agapenor, ii. 27 

Anchinoe, daughter of Nile, wife 
of Belus, i. 135 

Anchises, son of Capys, beloved by 
Aphrodite, father of Aeneas, 
ii. 37, 205; carried off by Aeneas 
at sack of Troy, 237 

Anchius, a centaur, repelled by 
Hercules, i. 193 

Ancyor, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Andraemon, father of Oxylus, i. 289 

Andraemon, husband of Gorge, 
daughter of Oeneus, i. 65, 73; 
father of Thoas, ii. 183, 307 

bearer oo suitor of Penelope, 
i 

Androgeus, son of Minos, his sons 
taken as hostages by Hercules, 
i, 205, and settled by him in 


INDEX 


Thasos, 209; son of Minos, 303, 
307; vanquishes all comers at 
the Panathenian games, ii. 115; 
‘killed by the bull of Marathon, 
115; or murdered on his way to 
Thebes, 115, 116 

Andromache, daughter of Eetion, 
wife of Hector, ii. 51; assigned 
to Neoptolemus, 241 ; "pears him 
a son Molossus, 251 

Andromeda, daughter of Cepheus, 
exposed to a sea-monster, rescued 
by Perseus, i. 159, 161; goes 
with him to Argos, 161; her 
sons by him, 163 

Andromedes, suitor of Penelope, 
11. 299 : 

Andros, Coans settle in, ii. 259 

ee son of Hercules by Hebe, 


Anius, son of Apollo, his daughters 
called the Wire-growers, ii. 179, 


81 
oe son of Castor by Hilaira, 
ii 


Antaeus, son of Poseidon, wrestles 
with Hercules and is killed by 
him, i. 223 

Antandrus, city, taken by Achilles, 
ii. 203 


Antenor Saves Ulysses and Mene- 
laus, ii. 197; father of Arche- 
lochus and Acamas, 205; father 
of Glaucus, 237 

Antenor, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

ree daughter of ‘Thespius, 


Antheis, daughter of Hyacinth, 
slain by the Athenians, ii. 119 
Anthelia, daughter of Danaus 
by Polyxo, i i. 141 

Anthemus, river, egg of Hercules 
with Geryon at the, i. 215 

Anthippe, daughter "of Thespius, 
mother of Hippodromus by 
Hercules, i. 273 

Antia, daughter of Iobates, wife of 
Proteus, i. 145 


Antiades, son of Hercules by 
Aglaia, i. 273 
Anticlia, mother of Periphetes, 


il. 123 

Anticlia, mother of Ulysses, ii. 183 ; 
Ulysses sees the ghost of his 
mother, 289 


APOLL., II, 


Anticlus would answer Helen from 
the Wooden Horse, ii. 235 

Antigone, daughter of Eurytion, 
married to Peleus, ii, 61; hangs 
herself, 65 

Antigone, daughter of Oedipus, 
i. 349; goes with him to Attica, 
351 3 secretly buries the dead 
body of Polynices, 373; herself 
buried alive in the grave, 373 

Antigonus, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 297 

Antileon, son of Hercules by 
Procris, i. 273 

Antilochus, son of Nestor, i. 85; 
suitor of Helen, ii; 27 

Antimache, daughter of Amphi- 
damas, wife of Eurystheus, i. 399 

Antimachus, son of Hercules by 
Nicippe, i. 275 

Antimachus, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 297 

Antinous, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299; 
said by some to have seduced 
Penelope, 305 

Antiochus, son of Hercules, father 
of Phylas, i. 287 

Antiochus, son of Melas, killed by 
Tydeus, i. 71, 73 

Antiochus, son of Pterelaus, i. 165 

Antiope, an Amazon, carried off 
by Theseus, ii. 143 

Antiope, daughter of Nycteus, 
loved by Zeus, i. 337 ; runs away 
to Epopeus at Sicyon and is 
married to him, 337; captured 
by her uncle Lycus, 337; gives 
birth to Amphion and Zethus 
337, 339; is. tormented by 
Lycus and Dirce, but released 
by her sons, 339; mother of 
bg and Amphion by Zeus, 
ii 

Antiope, daughter of Thespius, 
‘oe of Alopius by Hercules, 
1. 273 

Antiphates, king of the Laestry- 
gones, li. 285 

Antiphus, son of 
Laothoe, i. 273 

Antiphus, son of Myrmidon, i. 57 

Ania, son of Priam and Hecuba 

49 


Hercules by 


Mutievias, son of Talaemenes, a 
leader of the Maeonians, ii, 205 


465 


ΕἾ ἘΠ 


INDEX 


Antiphus, son of Thessalus, leader 
of the Coans against Troy, ii. 185; 
occupies the land of the Pe- 
lasgians and calls it Thessaly, 
257, 259 

Antisthenes, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

6 ce, into men in Aegina, 
ii. 58 

Apemosyne, daughter of Catreus, 
i. 307; loved by Hermes, 309; 
killed by her brother, 309 

Aphareus, father of Idas and 
Lynceus, 1. 67, 87 s.usonemor 
Perieres, 79; father of Lynceus, 
Idas, and Pisus, ii. 13, 21, 33 

Aphetae, in Thessaly, Hercules left 
by the Argonauts at, i. 101 

Aphidas, son of Arcas, joint ruler 
of Arcadia, i. 397 

Aphidnae, Helen carried off to, 
li. 25; captured by Pollux and 
Castor, 25 

Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus and 
Dione, i. 15, 17; loves Adonis, 
19; angry with Pierus, 19; 
causes Dawn to be perpetually 
in love, 33; afflicts the Lemnian 
women, 99; carries away Butes, 
115; mother of Harmonia, 317 ; 
gives the golden apples to 
Melanion, 401; loves Anchises 
and bears him Aeneas and 
Lyrus, ii. 37; im anger causes 
the daughters of Cinyras to 
cohabit with foreigners, 85; 
disputes with Persephone for the 
possession of Adonis, 87, 89; 
forsakes Hephaestus, 89; a 
competitor for the prize of 
beauty, preferred by Alexander, 
173; rescues Alexander (Paris) 
from Menelaus, 207; wounded 
by Diomedes, 207 

Apia, old name of Peloponnese, 
1. 129, ii. 185 

Apis, son of Phoroneus, slain by 
Aetolus, i. 61; tyrant of Pelopon- 
nese, 129; deemed a god, identi- 
fied with Sarapis, 129; his 
murder avenged by Argus, 139 

Apollo, father of Linus, i. 17; 
loves Hyacinth, 19; father of 
the Corybantes, 21; son of 
Zeus and Latona, born in Delos, 


466 


25; comes to Delphi, kills the 
Python, and takes over the 
oracle, 27; kills Tityus, 27, 29; 
his contest with Marsyas, 
29, 31; shoots Ephialtes, 45 ; his 
intrigue with Phthia, 61; woos 
Marpessa, fights Idas, 61; sooth- 
saying learned from; 87; serves 
Admetus, 91, 93; bids Pelias 
appease Artemis, 93; Radiant, 
the Argonauts found an altar of, 
117; flashes lightning to guide 
Argonauts, 117; gives Hercules 
a bow and arrows, 183; fortifies 
Troy, but being defrauded by 
Laomedon he punishes the city 
with a pestilence, 205, 207; 
fights Hercules for the tripod, 
241; precinct of, 263; father 
of Miletus, 301; shoots down 
the sons of Niobe, 343; portion 
of Theban booty sent to, at 
Delphi, 381; his oracle as to 
foundation of Amphilochian 
Argos, 389; herds kine in 
Pieria, ii. 5, 7; recovers the 
stolen kine from Hermes, 9; 
gets the lyre from Hermes, 9; 
gives him the golden wand, 11 ; 
receives from him the pipe, 11 ; 
loves Hyacinth and kills him 
involuntarily, 11, 13; father of 
Aesculapius by Arsinoe, or by 
Coronis, 13, 15; curses the 
raven that brings word of 
Coronis’s infidelity, 15; kills 
Coronis, but entrusts the infant 
Aesculapius to Chiron, 15; kills 
the Cyclopes, 19 ; serves Admetus 
as a herdsman, 21; causes the 
cows to drop twins, 21; confers 
the gift of prophecy on Cassandra, 
49; deprives her of the power to 
persuade, 49; father of Troilus 
by Hecuba, 49; father of Anius, 
179; father of Tenes, according 
to some, 193; tar of, 195; 
will kill Achilles if Achilles 
kills Tenes, 195; Thymbraean, 
the sanctuary of, 201; and 
Alexander shoot Achilles, 215; 
sends a sign to warn the Trojans, 
233; father of Mopsus by 
Manto, 243, 245; Neoptolemus 
demands satisfaction of, for the 


INDEX 


death of his father, 255; the 
Wanderer, sanctuary of, founded 
by Philoctetes, 261; Maro, 
priest of, 281 

Apollonia, in Epirus, the people of 
Elephenor inhabit, ii. 259 

Apollonius, <Argonautica, on the 
Harpies, i. 107 

Apple, prize of beauty, thrown by 
Strife, ii. 173 

Apples of the Hesperides, i. 219, 
221, 231; golden, let fall by 
Melanion in the race, 401 

Apsyrtides Islands, the Argonauts 
at the, i. 115; Colchians settle 
in the, 117 

Apsyrtus, brother of Medea, mur- 
dered by her, i. 113; the Argo- 
revi purified for the murder of, 

Arabia, Egyptus settled in, i. 137; 
Hercules passes by, 229 

ae woman, wife of Egyptus, 
iD 

Arbelus, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Oeme, i. 143 

Arcadia, Lycurgus in, i. 67; 
Atalanta in, 67; the hearth of 
Telephus in, 73; ravaged by a 
bull, 131; traversed by the mad 
daughters of Proetus, 147; 
Stymphalus in, 197; the Cretan 
bull roams over, 199; Hercules 
in, 253; Arcas brought up in, 
397; Cyllene in, ii. 3; booty of 
cattle driven from, 33 ; Oresteum 
in, 277; Mantinea in, 305 

Arcadian army collected by 
Hercules, i. 249 

Arcadians robbed of their cattle by 
a satyr, i. 1315; join Hercules in 
his attack on Oechalia, 265; 
help the Dioscuri to capture 
Athens, ii. 153; their muster for 
the Trojan war, 183 

Arcas, son of Zeus by Callisto, 
given by Zeus to Maia to bring up, 
i. 395, 397 

Arcena, one of Actaeon’s dogs, 
i. 323 


Archebates, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Archedicus, son of Hercules by 
Eurypyle, i. 273 

Archelaus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Anaxibia, i. 141 


Archelaus, son of Electryon, i. 165 

Archelochus, son of Antenor, leader 
of the Dardanians, ii. 205 

Archemachus, son of Hercules by 
Patro, i. 273 

Archemachus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Archemolus, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 297 

Archemorus. See Opheltes 

Archery, bride offered as prize in a 
contest of, i. 237, 239 

Archestratus, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 299 

Architeles, father of Eunomus, 
i. 259; pardons Hercules for 
killing his son, 261 

Arcisius, father of Laertes, i. 97. 

Arene, daughter of Oebalus, wife 
of Aphareus, ii. 13 

Areopagus, Ares tried for murder 
in the, ii. 81; Cephalus tried 
for homicide in the, 105; 
Daedalus tried for murder in 
the, 123; Orestes tried and ac- 
quitted of murder in the, 271 

Ares, son of Zeus and Hera, i. 15; 
bedded with Dawn, 33; put in 
bonds by the Aloads, 59 ; rescued 
by Hermes, 59, 61; father 
of Oxylus by Protogonia, 61; 
his children by Demonice, 63; 
father of Meleager, 65; father 
of Dryas, 67; grove of, in 
Colchis,- 77... ὅς father οὗ 
Ascalaphus and JIalmenus, 99, 
ii. 27; father of Diomedes the 
Thracian, i. 201; the belt of, 
worn by Hippolyte, queen of the 
Amazons, 203; father of Cycnus, 
champions him against Hercules, 
221; father of Cycnus, 265; 
the: spring of, at Thebes, 315; 
dragon, offspring of, 315; Cad- 
mus serves Ares to atone for 
slaughter of dragon, 317; father 
of Harmonia, 317; father of 
Phlegyas, 337; Menoeceus offers 
himself as a sacrifice to, 367; 
father of Parthenopaeus by 
Atalanta, according to some, 
403; father of Alcippe by 
Agraulus, ii. 81; kills Halir- 
rhothius and 18 tried for 
murder in the Areopagus, 81; 
father of Tereus, 99; gives arms 


467 


an 2 


INDEX 


and horses to Oenomaus, 161; 
father of Penthesilia by Otrere, 
21 

Arestor, father of Argus, according 
to Pherecydes, i. 133 

Arete, wife of Alcinous, 
Medea to Jason, i. 117 

age rig one of the Hesperides, 
i. 221 

Aretus, son of Nestor, i. 85 

Aretus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Argele, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Cleolaus by Hercules, 
i. 273 

Arges, a Cyclops, i. 5 

Argia, daughter of Adrastus, i. 91; 
wife of Polynices, 353 

Argia, daughter of Autesion, wife 
of Aristodemus, i. 287 

Argiope, a nymph, mother of 
Cercyon, ii. 131 

Argiope, a nymph, mother of 
Thamyris, i. 19 

Argius, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Evippe, i. 141 

Argius, son of Licymnius, buried 
by Hercules, i. 267 

Argius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Argive land, traversed by the mad 
daughters of Proetus, i. 147; 
oe cast out unburied by Creon, 
8 

Argives flee before the Thebans, 
i. 367; capture and spoil Thebes 
and pull down the walls, 381; 
send Manto and a portion of the 
booty to Apollo at Delphi, 381 ; 
help to save the sons of Alemaeon 
from their pursuers, 387; their 
— for the Trojan war, ii. 
18 

Argo, the building of the, i. 975 
speaks with human voice, 97, 
101, 108, 115; Amycus goes to 
the, 103; Aeetes wishes to burn 
the, 113; the Colchians search 
for the, 113; find it in the land 
of the Phaeacians, 117; pelted 
with stones by ‘Talos, 119; 
dedicated to Poseidon at the 
Isthmus of Corinth, 121 

Argonautica of Apollonius, i. 105 

Argonauts, list of the, i. 97, 99; 


marries 


in Lemnos, i. 99; among the 
Doliones, 99, 101; in Mysia, 
468 


101; among the Bebryces, 103; 


deliver Phineus from the Harpies, 
105; learn from him the course 
of their voyage, 105; among the 
Mariandynians, 109; sail from 
Colchis with Medea, 113; over- 
taken by a storm, 113; pass the 
Sirens, 115; sail from Phaeacia 
with Medea, 117; Pelias despairs 
of the return of the, 121; sail 
with Boreas, ii. 107; punish 
Phineus, 107 

Argos, Amphiaraus at, i. 67; 


Tydeus at, 73; madness of the 


women of, 91; Melampus re- 
ceives part of the kingdom of, 
91; Hercules returns to, 101; 


river Inachus in, 129; Danaus, . 


king of, 137; the inhabitants of 
Argos called Danai by Danaus, 
137; the sons of Egyptus come 
to, 139; Lynceus, king of, 145 ; 
Acrisius, king of, 147; Am- 
phitryon banished from, 169, 
171; allotted to Temenus, 289 ; 
toad a symbol of, 291; Polyi- 
dus departs to, 313; Dionysus 
drives the women mad at, 331; 
Polynices goes to, 351; Tele- 
phus comes to, to be healed 
by Achilles, ii. 189; the Greeks 
sail from, to Aulis, 191. See 
also Amphilochian Argos 

Argus, son of Phrixus, i. 77; builds 
the Argo, 95, 97 

Argus, son of Zeus and Niobe, 
i. 129; gave his name to Argos, 
129; his children, 129 

Argus the All-seeing, son of Agenor, 
i. 131; his exploits, 131; set to 
guard Io in form of a cow, 131; 
killed by Hermes, 131 

Argyphia, wife of Egyptus, i. 139 

Aria, daughter of Cleochus, mother 
of Miletus by Apollo, i. 301 

Ariadne, daughter of Minos, i. 303, 
307 ; 
him the clue to the labyrinth, 
ii. 135; taken by him to Naxos, 
137; carried off by Dionysus to 
Lemnos, 137; her sons by 
Dionysus, 137 

Arion, a horse, offspring of Posei- 
don and Demeter, saves his 
master Adrastus, i, 373 


loves Theseus and gives © 


| 
| 
. 
; 
. 


é 


INDEX 


Arisbe, a city, allied with Troy, ii. 
205 


Arisbe, daughter of Merops, wife 
of Priam, ii. 45; handed over 
by him to Hyrtacus, 45 

Aristaeus, husband of Autonoe, 
i. 317; father of Actaeon, 323 

er bi daughter of Priam, 
1: 

Aristodemus, an Heraclid, father 
of Eurysthenes and _ Procles, 
i. 287, 289; his sons are allotted 
Lacedaemon, 289 

Aristomachus, father of Hippome- 
don, i. 357 

Aristomachus, one of the Heraclids, 
slain in battle, i. 285 

Aristomachus, son of Talaus, i. 91 

Aristratus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Armed men spring from dragon’s 
teeth sown in the ground, i. 111, 
31 


5 

Arneus, father of Megamede, i. 179 

Arsinoe, daughter of Leucippus, 
ee of Aesculapius by Apollo, 
i 

Arsinoe, daughter of Phegeus, 
receives the necklace and robe 
(of Harmonia) from her husband 
Alemaeon, i. 383; is carried by 
the sons of Phegeus to Tegea and 
given as a slave to Agapenor, 385 

Arsinous, father of Chromius and 
Ennomus, ii. 205 

Artemis, daughter of Zeus and 
Latona, born in Delos, i. 25; 
a huntress, 27; slays Orion, 31; 
wooed by Otus, 59; kills the 
Aloads, 61; sends the Calydonian 
boar, 67; angry with Oeneus 
for forgetting to sacrifice to her, 
67; Admetus forgets to sacrifice 
to, 93; hind with golden horns 
sacred to, 191; rebukes Her- 
cules for shooting it, 191; seen 
bathing by Actaeon, turns him 
into a deer, 323; shoots down 
the daughters of Niobe, 343; 
shoots Callisto in the form of a 
bear, 395; makes Phylonoe im- 
mortal, ii. 23; angry with 
Adonis, 85; not honoured by 
Broteas, 155, 157; Pelops neg- 
lects to perform his vow to, 


165, 191; angry with Agamem- 
non, 191; Iphigenia about to be 
sacrificed to her, but Artemis 
carries her off and substitutes a 
deer, 191, 193 


Artemisius, Mount, the Cerynitian 


hind on, i. 191 


Ascalaphus, son of Acheron, bears 


witness against Demeter, punished 
in Hades, i. 41; relieved by Her- 
pe 237 ; turned into an owl, 


Ascalaphus, son of Ares, in the 


Argo, i. 993; suitor of Helen, 
li. 27 


Ascanius, son of Aretaon, leader 


of the Phrygians, ii. 205 


Ascanius, son of Priam, ii. 49 
Asclepiades, on Argus, i. 133; as 


to the wife of Minos, 303 


Asia, an Oceanid, i. 11; wife of 


Tapetus, mother of Atlas, Pro- 
metheus, and Epimetheus, 13 


Asia traversed by Io, i. 133; 


traversed by Hercules, 227; 
Nysa in, 321 


Asius, as to Callisto, i. 395 
Asius, son of Hyrtacus, a Trojan 


ally, ii. 205 


Asopis, daughter of Thespius, 


mother of Mentor by Hercules, 
i. 273 


Asopus, river, his parentage, ii. 51 ; 


father of Aegina, i. 79, ii. 51: 
father of Ismene, i. 131; father 
of Ismenus and Pelagon, ἢ 51 
pursues Zeus, the ravisher of 
Aegina, but is driven back by 
thunderbolts, 53; father of 
Salamis, 59 


Assaracus, son of Tros, father of 


Capys, ii. 37 


Asses, companions of Ulysses 


turned into, ii. 287 


Assyria, Thias, king of, ii. 87 
Astacus, the sons of, Ismarus, 


Leades, Amphidocus, and Mela- 
nippus, do doughty deeds, i. 369 


Asteria, daughter of Coeus and 


Phoebe, i. 13; to avoid Zeus 
plunges into the sea and is 
transformed into a quail, 25 


Asteria, daughter of Danaus, wife 


of Chaetus, i. 141 


Asteria ,old name of Delos, i. 25 


469 


INDEX 


Asterius, name of the Minotaur, 
i. 805. See Minotaur 

Asterius, prince of Crete, marries 
Europa, i. 301; dies childless, 
303; father of Crete, according 
to Asclepiades, 303 

Asterius, son of Cometes, in the 
Argo, i. 99 

tar ae son of Neleus by Chloris, 
i 

Asterodia, daughter of Deion, i. 79 

Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon, slain 
by Achilles, ii. 209 ᾿ 

Asterope, daughter οἵ Cebren, wife 
of Aesacus, ii. 45 

Astraeus, offspring of Crius and 
Eurybia, i. 13 

Astyanax, son of 
Epilais, i. 273 

Astyanax thrown by the Greeks 
from the battlements of Troy, 
li. 239 

Astybies, son of Hercules, by 
Calametis, i. 273 

Astycratia, daughter of Amphion 
and Niobe, i. 341 

Astydamia, daughter of Amyntor, 
oe of Ctesippus by Hercules, 


Hercules by 


i. 

Astydamia, daughter of Pelops, 
wife of Alcaeus, i. 165 

Astydamia, wife of Acastus, falsely 
accuses Peleus, ii. 63, 65; killed 
by Peleus, 73 

Astygonus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Astylochus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

Astynous, son of Phaethon, father 
of Sandocus, ii. 83 

Astyoche, daughter of Amphion 
and Niobe, i. 341 

Astyoche, daughter of Phylas, 
mother of Tlepolemus, i. 259; 
mother of Tlepolemus by Her- 
cules, 277, ii. 183 

Astyoche, daughter of Laomedon, 
ii. 43, 261, 263 

Astyoche, daughter of Simoeis, 
wife of Erichthonius, ii. 37 

Astypalaea, mother of Eurypylus 
by Poseidon, i. 247 

me warms a mountain in Rhodes, 
1. ς 

Atalanta, daughter of Iasus and 
Clymene, exposed by her father, 


470 


suckled by a she-bear, i. 399; 
a virgin huntress, 399; kills two 
centaurs, 399; hunts the Caly- 
donian boar, 399; wrestles with 
Peleus, 399, 401, ii. 63; races 
with her suitors, i. 401; won by 
Melanion with golden apples, 
401; changed into a lion, 401 ; 
mother of Parthenopaeus, 403. 
See also Atalanta, daughter of 
Schoeneus 

Atalanta, daughter of Schoeneus, 
hunts the Calydonian boar, i. 67, 
69; in the Argo, 97. See also 
Atalanta, daughter of Iasus 

Atas, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Ate, the Phrygian, the hill of, site 
of Ilium, ii. 39; thrown by Zeus 
into the Ilian country, 41, 43 

a named after Athamas, 
i. 

Athamas, son of Aeolus, i. 57; 
rules over Boeotia, 75; attempts 
to sacrifice his son Phrixus, 75 ; 
shoots his son Learchus, 77; 
banished from Boeotia, 77; 
marries Themisto, 77; husband 
of Ino, 317; rears Dionysus as a 
girl, 319; driven mad by Hera, 
hunts and kills his son Learchus 
as a deer, 319 . 

Athena, born of the head of Zeus, 
i. 25; throws away the pipes, 
29; kills Enceladus, 45; flays 
giant Pallas, 45; superintends 
the building of the Argo, 95, 97; 
gives dragon’s teeth to Aeetes, 
109; advises Danaus to build 
a ship, 137; Lindian, her image 
set up by Danaus, 137; and 
Hermes purify the Danaids for 
the murder of their husbands, 
143; helps Perseus, 155, 159; 
receives the Gorgon’s head from 
Perseus and puts it in her shield, 
161; gives Hercules a robe, 183 ; 
gives Hercules brazen castanets, 
199; gets the apples of the 
Hesperides from Hercules, 233 ; 
brings Hercules to Phiegra, 
247; precinct of, at Tegea, 255 ; 
Cadmus wishes to sacrifice a cow 
to, 315; procures for him the 
kingdom (of Thebes), 317; seen 
naked by Tiresias, blinds him but 


INDEX 


makes him understand the notes 
of birds, 363 ; would make Tydeus 
immortal, put changes her mind, 
369 ; precinct of, 397; gives 
Aesculapius the Gorgon’ § blood, 
ii. 17; brought up by Triton, 
41: wounds Pallas and makes 
an ‘image of her (the Palladium), 
41; strives with Poseidon for 
the possession of Attica, 79, 81; 
plants an olive-tree, 79, 81; 
the country adjudged to her, 
81; calls the city Athens, 81; 
mother of Erichthonius. by 
Hephaestus, 89, 91; entrusts 
Erichthonius in a chest to 
Pandrosus, 91; angry with the 
sisters of Pandrosus for opening 
the chest, drives them mad, 91 ; 
brings up Erichthonius in the pre- 
cinct, 91, 93; wooden image of, 
on the Acropolis, 93; Erich- 
thonius buried in the precinct of, 
95; Butes gets priesthood of, 
101; ; a competitor for the prize 
of beauty, 173; drives Ajax mad, 
219; the Wooden Horse dedi- 
cated to, 233; Cassandra vio- 
lated by the Locrian Ajax at the 
image of, 239; angry with the 
Greeks for the impiety of Ajax, 
243; Agamemnon proposes to 
sacrifice to, 243; asks Zeus to 
send a storm on the Greeks, 247 ; 
hurls a thunderbolt at the ship of 
Ajax, 247; propitiated at Ilium 
by the Locrians for a thousand 
years, 267, 269 


Athenians refuse to surrender the 


sons of Hercules, i. 277; wage 
war with lEurystheus, 277; 
capture Thebes and bury the 
Argive dead, 375; their war 
with the Eleusinians, ii. 109; 
visited with famine and pesti- 
lence, slaughter the daughters of 
Hyacinth, 119; send seven 
youths and seven maidens every 
year to be devoured by the 
Minotaur, 119, 123; their muster 
for the Trojan war, 183 

Athens, Theseus at, i. 67; the 
road to, cleared of evildoers by 
Theseus, 123; Amphitryon at, 
1738; altar of Mercy at, 277, 373, 


Atlas, son of 


Atromus, son of 


375; the sons of Hercules come 
for protection to, 277; Daedalus 


banished from, 305; Adrastus 
flees to, 3873; named after 
Athena, ii. 81; Erichthonius, 


king of, 93 ; Procris comes to 105 3 
the Metionids expelled from, 113 ; 
return of Aegeus to, 115; 
attacked with a fleet by Minos, 
117; Daedalus flees from, 121; 
Medea at, 123, 125; Theseus 
comes to, 133; battle of Theseus 
with the Amazons at, 145; 
captured by the Dioscuri, 153; 
Menestheus restored to, by the 
Dioscuri, 153; Orestes tried at, 
971. image of Tauropolus 
brought to, 275 


Athletic contest for brides, i. 143 
Atlantia, a Hamadryad nymph, 


consorts with Danaus, i. 141 

- Tapetus and 
Asia, i. 138; bears the sky, 13; 
father of Merope, 79; family of, 
81; among the Hyperboreans, 
the golden apples of the Hes- 
perides on, 219, 221; gives the 
apples to Hercules, 231; holds 
up the sphere, 231; asks Her- 
cules to relieve him of the 
burden, 231; father of the 
Pleiades, by Pleione, ii. 3; Zeus 
consorts with the daughters of, 
5; father of Electra, 35; father 
of Calypso, 295 


Atonement for slaughter by servi- 


tude, i. 317. See Servitude 


Atreus, son of Pelops, along with 


his brother Thyestes is entrusted 
with Midea, i. 171; father of 
Menelaus, ii. 27; son of Pelops, 
163; neglects to perform his 
vow to Artemis, 165, 191; 
puts the golden lamb in a 
box, 165; gets the sign of the 
sun going backward and ousts 
his brother Thyestes from the 
kingdom of Mycenae, 165; 
murders the children of Thyestes 
and serves them up to him at a 
banquet, 167; killed by Aegis- 
thus, 169; father of Agamemnon 
and Menelaus by Aerope, 183 
Hercules by 
Stratonice, i, 273 


471 


INDEX 


Atropus, a Fate, i. 15 

Atthis, daughter of Cranaus, ii. 89 ; 
mother of Erichthonius, accord- 
ing to some, 89; Attica named 
Atthis after her, 89 

Atthis, name of Attica, ii. 89 

Attica, Amphictyon, king of, i. 57; 
Marathon in, 201; Colonus in, 
351; Cecrops the first king of, 
ii. 77 ; formerly called Acte, after- 
wards Cecropia, 77; Poseidon 
the first god to come to, 79; laid 
under the sea by Poseidon, 81; 
Demeter and Dionysus come to, 
95; Sunium in, 279 

Atymnius, son of Zeus, loved by 
Sarpedon, i. 303 

Auge, daughter of Aleus, i. 253, 275; 
debauched by Hercules, 253, 397 ; 
priestess of Athena, hides her 
babe in Athena’s precinct, 397 ; 
delivered by her father to Nau- 
plius to be put to death, 397 ; 
married by Teuthras, prince of 
Mysia, 397 

Augeas, son of the Sun, in the 
Argo, i. 97; king of Elis, his 
cattle-yard cleaned out by Her- 
cules, 195, 197; refuses to pay 
Hercules his reward and expels 
him from Elis, 197; appoints 
the Molionides his _ generals, 
249; killed by Hercules, 249; 
father of Epicaste, 277 

Aulis in Boeotia, the Greek 
army musters for the Trojan 
war at, ii. 181; portent of the 
serpent and the sparrows at, 
185; Greeks reassemble at, after 
eight years, 189 

Aulis in Lydia, Syleus in, i, 241 

Ausonia, Circe in, i. 115 

Auspices, art of taking the, i. 87 

Autesion, father of Argia, i. 287 

ser ΧΟΌΝ, father of Polymede, 

93; son of Hermes, in the 

p Mind 97; teaches Hercules to 
wrestle, 175; steals cattle of 
Eurytus, 239 

Automate, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Busiris, i. 139 

Automedusa, daughter of Alcathus, 
wife of Iphicles, i. 181 

Autonoe, a Nereid, i. 15 

Autonoe, daughter of Cadmus, wife 


475 


οἵ ey i. 317; mother of 
Actaeon, 323 
Autonoe, daughter of Danaus, 


wife of Eurylochus, i. 141 
Autonoe, daughter of Pireus, mother 

of Palaemon by Hercules, i. 277 
a father of Pelegon, 


Bacchanals taken prisoners by 
Lycurgus and then released, i. 327 

Balius, an immortal horse, given by 
Poseidon to Peleus, ii. 69 

Balius, one of Actaeon’s dogs, i. 325 

aa rg 5 for homicide, i. 61. 
See Exile 

Barrenness of earth caused by 
presence of matricide Alec- 
maeon, i. 383; of land caused by 
seduction = Auge (priestess of 
Athena), 3 

Barthas, Seated of Penelope, ii. 299 

Batia, a Naiad nymph, wife of 
Oebalus, ii. 21 

Batia, daughter of Teucer, wife of 
Dardanus, ii. 35 

Baton, charioteer of Amphiaraus, 
swallowed up with his master in 
the earth, i. 371 

Bear, Callisto turned into a, 1, $95: 
the star Coonan anys Callisto 
turned into, ; Atalanta 
suckled by a, *s00: "Baris suckled 
by a, ii. 47 

Dees Achilles fed on the marrows 
of, ii 

Bearskin, severed sinews of Zeus 
wrapt in a, i. 49 

Bebryces, the Argonauts among 
the, i. 103; a Mysian tribe, con- 
quered by Hercules, 205 

Beds, the two, on which Damastes 
ὑφ τ ἡσρρ stretched his guests, 

δ, 1 

Bellerophon, son οἵ Glaucus, kills 
the Chimera, i. 79; kills his 
brother, 149; is purified by 
Proetus, 151; refuses the amor- 
ous proposals of Stheneboea, 151 ; 
sent by lIobates against the 
Chimera, 151; shoots the Chim- 
era, 153; conquers the Solymi 
and the Amazons, 153; kills an 
ambush of Lycians, 153 ; marries 


INDEX 


daughter of Iobates and succeeds 
to the kingdom, 153; his winged 
steed Pegasus, 153; father of 
Laodamia, 299 

Belt of Hippolyte, queen of the 
Amazons, brought by Hercules 
Ὁ : Eurystheus, i, 203, 205, 


Belus, son of Poseidon and Libya, 
i. 135; reigns over Egypt, 135, 
297; marries Anchinoe, 135 

Benthesicyme, daughter of Poseidon 
and Amphitrite, ii. 109 ; Poseidon 
entrusts Eumolpus to, 109 

Bias, father’s brother of Pylas, 
king of Megara, ii. 113; slain by 
him, 113 

Bias, father of Anaxibia, i. 85; 
son of Amythaon, 87; woos 
Pero, 87; asks his brother 
Melampus to steal the kine of 
Phylacus, 89; settles with Me- 
lampus in Argos, 91; father of 
Talaus, 91; receives a third part 
of the kingdom (of Argos), 149 

Bias, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Bias, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

oe father of Pylaemenes, ii. 


Birds, transformation of persons 
into, i. 25, 59, 71, 237, ii. 45, 101 ; 
voices of, understood by Melam- 
pus, i. 87; the Stymphalian, 
shot by Hercules, 197, 199; the 
a of, understood by Tiresias, 


Bisaltians, the Thracian, Demophon 
marries the daughter of the king 
of, ii. 263 

Bistones, a Thracian tribe, defeated 
in battle by Hercules, i. 201 

a transformed into a, 


Bitch’s Tomb, burial place of 
_Hecuba, ii. 241 

Bithynian nymph, mother of Amy- 
cus by Poseidon, i. 103 

Blind seer, i. 103, 105, 363, 367 

Blood of Cronus, the Furies born of 
the, i. 5; of Typhon on Mt. 
Haemus, 51; of bull drunk by 
Aeson, 121; offered by Hercules 
to the souls of the dead, 237; 
of Nessus smeared on robe of 
Hercules, 261, 269; of Gorgon 


used by Aesculapius for bane and 
for healing, ii. 17 

Boar, the Calydonian, i. 67, 69, 243, 
245, 399, ii. 63; Idmon killed by 
a, i. 109; the Erymanthian, 
brought by Hercules to Mycenae, 
191, 195; forepart of a, as a 
badge on a shield, 353; Adonis 
killed by a, ii. 85, 89 

Boeotia ruled by Athamas, i. 75; 
Ocaleae in, 181; Rhadamanthys 
in, 303; Cadmus traverses, 315 ; 
Eleutherae in, 339 

Boeotians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 

Soren Pelops brought to Troy, 
ii ᾿ 


Boreas, father of Zetes and Calais, 
i. 97, 105, ii. 105; carries off 
Orithyia, ii. 103, 105; with the 
Argonauts punishes Phineus, 107 

Bores, one of Actaeon’s dogs, i. 325 

Borus, son of Perieres, husband of 
Polydora, ii. 61, 63 

Bosphorus named after Io, i. 133 

Bough, the suppliant’s, i. 375 

Bow of Hercules, ii. 51, 195, 221, 
223; of Ulysses, given to him by 
Iphitus, ii, 301 

Bowels of a child mixed with 
sacrifices, i. 391 ᾿ 

Boxing match between Pollux and 
Amycus, i. 103 

Braesia, daughter of Cinyras, ii. 85 

Branchus, father of Cercyon, ii. 131 

Brand with which the life of 
Meleager was bound up, i. 65, 69 

Brazen Race, the, i. 119 

Briareus, a Hundred-handed, i. 3 

Briseis, daughter of Chryses, 
Achilles angry on her account, 
ii. 205; her restoration promised 
Ὁ or 207; recovered by him, 

0 

Bromius, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Erato, i. 141 

Brontes, a Cyclops, i. 5 

Bronze Age, Zeus desires to destroy 
the men of the, i. 53, 55 

Broteas, a hunter failing to honour 
Artemis, throws himself into the 
fire, ii. 155, 157 

Bryce, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Chthonius, i. 141 

Bucolion, son of Laomedon, ii. 43 


473 


INDEX 


Bucolion, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Bucolus, son of Hercules by Marse, 
1.276 

Bucolus, son of Hippocoon, ii. 21 

Buleus, son of Hercules by Elachia, 
i. 275 

Bull that ravaged Arcadia, killed 
by Argus, i. 131; Europa on the, 
199; sent up by Poseidon from 
the sea, 199; the Cretan, brought 
by Hercules to Eurystheus, 199 ; 
Achelous turns himself into a, 
257; Zeus turns himself into a, 
to carry off Europa, 299; sent 
up by Poseidon, 305; loved by 
Pasiphae, 305; Dirce tied to a, 
339; of Marathon kills Andro- 
geus, son of Mincs, ii. 115; of 
Poseidon, Pasiphae in love with 
the, 123; the Marathonian, 
Theseus sent against, 133; sent 
up by Poseidon against Hippo- 
lytus, 145 

Bull’s blood, death by drinking, 
i. 121; horn of Amalthea, 257 

Bulls. sacrificed by Melampus, 
i. 89; brazen-footed, yoked by 
Jason, 109, 111 

Burial, costly, of Cyzicus, i. 101; 
alive as a punishment, 373, ii. 195 

Busiris, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Automate, i. 139 

Busiris, son of Poseidon, king of 
Egypt, wont to sacrifice strangers 
on an altar, i. 225; slain by 
Hercules, 227 

Butes, son of Teleon, in the Argo, 
i. 97; settled in Lilybaeum, 115 

Butes, twin son of Pandion, ii. 99 ; 
becomes priest of Athena and 
Poseidon Erechtheus, 101; mar- 
ries (his brother’s daughter) 
Chthonia, 103 

Byblus, in Syria, Io finds her son 
Epaphus at, i. 135 


Cadmea ravaged by a vixen, i. 171; 
marriage of Cadmus and Har- 
monia in the, 317 

Cadmeans chased by the Seven 
against Thebes, i. 367 

Cadmus, son of Agenor, i. 297; 
settles with his mother in Thrace, 
301; hospitably received by the 


474 


Thracians, 313; in obedience to 
an oracle follows a cow and 
founds Thebes, 313, 315; kills 
the dragon of the Spring and 
sows its teeth, 315; serves Ares 
as an atonement, 317; marries 
Harmonia, 317; his children, 
317, 319; succeeded by Pentheus 
on the throne of Thebes, 331; 
goes with Harmonia to the 
Encheleans, where they turn 
into serpents, 335; sent to 
Hlysian Fields, 335; father of 
Illyrius, 335 

Caeneus, an invulnerable man, 
formerly a woman, ii. 151; 
buried by the centaurs under 


ga of Astybies by Hercules, 


A: 

Calchas declares that Troy cannot 
be taken without Achilles, ii. 73 ; 
interprets the portent of the 
serpent and the sparrows at 
Aulis, 185; confirms the direc- 
tions of Telephus, 191; orders 
the sacrifice of Iphigenia to 
Artemis, 191; prophesies that 
Troy cannot be taken without 
the bow of Hercules, 221, 223; 
declares Athena angry on account 
of the impiety of Ajax, 243; 
defeated in a contest of skill with 
Mopsus, dies and is buried in 
Notium, 243, 245 ; 

Caliadne, Naiad nymph, wife of 
Egyptus, i, 141 

Callias, son of Temenus, with his 
brothers hires men to murder his 
father, i. 291 

Callidice, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Pandion, i. 148 

Callidice, queen of the Thesprotians, 
bears ἃ son Polypoetes to 
Ulysses, ii. 301, 808 

Callileon, son of Thyestes, murdered 
by Atreus, ii. 167 

Calliope, a Muse, i. 17; reported 
mother of Rhesus, 21 

Callirrhoe, daughter of Achelous, 


INDEX 


married by Alcmaeon, i. 385; 
covets the necklace and robe (of 
Harmonia), 385; courted by 
Zeus, requests that her sons be 
suddenly full-grown, 385; her 
sons kill their father’s murderers 
(the sons of Phegeus), slay 
Phegeus and his wife, and dedi- 
cate the necklace and robe at 
Delphi, 387 

Callirrhoe, daughter of Ocean, 
mother of Geryon, i. 211 

Callirrhoe, daughter of Scamander, 
wife of Tros, ii. 37 

Callisto, daughter of Lycaon, ac- 
cording to some, i. 395; vowed 
to maidenhood, companion of 
Artemis in the chase, 395 ; forced 
by Zeus and turned by him into 
a bear, 395; shot down as a 
bear by Artemis, 395; turned 
into the star called the Bear, 
397; her babe Arcas rescued by 
Zeus and given to Maia to bring 
up, 397 

Calybe, a nymph, mother of 
Bucolion by Laomedon, ii. 43 

Calyce, daughter of Aeolus, i. 57; 
— of Endymion by Aethlius, 
A 

Calydon, city in Aetolia, i. 61; 
Oeneus, king of, 63; the Caly- 
donian boar, 67, 69, 243, 245; 
Hercules woos Deianira at, 257 ; 
Tydeus flees from, 353; Alc- 
maeon goes to, 383 

Calydon, son of Aetolus, his 
daughters by Aeolia, i. 61 

Calydoneus, suitor of Penelope, 
li, 297 

Calydonians at war with Curetes, 
i. 69; Hercules marches with 
Ἐν against the Thesprotians, 

Calypso, a Nereid, i. 15 

Calypso, daughter of Atlas, re- 
ceives Ulysses in the island of 
Ogygia, ii. 295; bears him a son 
Latinus, 295 

Camicus in Sicily, Daedalus and 
Minos at, ii. 141 

Campania in Italy, Philoctetes 
driven to, ii. 261 

Campanians, in Italy, Philoctetes 
goes to the, ii, 257, 259 


Campe, gaoleress of the ‘Titans, 
slain by Zeus, i. 11 

Canace, daughter of Aeolus, i. 57 ; 
her sons by Poseidon, 59 

Canastrum, the plain of, ii. 261 

Canethus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Cannibals, Polyphemus, ii. 283 ; the 
Laestrygones, 285, 287; man- 
eating mares of Diomedes, i. 201 

Capaneus, son of Hipponous, one of 
the Seven against Thebes, i. 357 ; 
killed by thunderbolt in scaling 
the walls of Thebes, 367; his 
wife burns herself with his dead 
body, 375; father of Sthenelus, 
379, ii. 27; raised from the dead 
by Aesculapius, 17 

Caphereus, Mt., in Euboea, false 
lights kindled by Nauplius on, 
ii. 247, 249; Greeks shipwrecked 
at, 247, 249, 257, 259 

Capherian rocks, Greek 
wrecked on the, ii. 247 

Capylus, son of Hercules, i. 273 

Capys, son of Assaracus, father of 
Anchises, ii. 37 

Caria, Miletus in, i, 303 

Carian Chersonese, ii. 
Chersonese 

Carians, Trojan allies, ii. 205 

Carteron, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Casius, Mount, i. 49 

Cassandra, daughter of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49; learns art of 
prophecy from Apollo, but with- 
out the power to persuade, 49 ; 
warns the Trojans against the 
Wooden Horse, 233; violated by 
the Locrian Ajax, 239 ; Agamem- 
non gets, 241; killed by Aegis- 
thus and Clytaemnestra, 269 

Cassiepea, mother of Atymnius by 
Zeus, i. 303 

Cassiepea, wife of Cepheus, vies 
with the Nereids, i, 159 

Castanets, brazen, given by Athena 
to Hercules, i. 199 

Castor, the annalist, on ΤΟ, i. 131 

Castor teaches Hercules to fence, 
i. 175; son of Tyndareus by 
Leda, ii. 23; practises war, 31; 
father of Anogon by Hilaira, 33 ; 
killed by Idas, 33; alternately 
among gods and mortals, 33 

Castor and Pollux, sons of Zeus and 


475 


ships 


265. See 


INDEX 


Leda, hunt the Calydonian boar, 
i. 67; in the Argo, 97; capture 
Aphidnae, recover Helen, and take 
Aethra prisoner, ii. 25, 27 ; called 
the Dioscuri, 31. See Dioscuri 

Catreus, father of Clymene, i. 145, 
ii. 249; son of Minos, i, 303; 
receives an oracle that he should 
be killed by one of his children, 
307; killed by his son Althae- 
menes, 309, 311; father of 
Aerope, ii. 163, 165; father of 
Menelaus’s mother, buried by 
Menelaus in Crete, 173 

Caucasus, Mount, Prometheus 
nailed to, i. 538, 229; passed by 
the Argonauts, 109 

Caucon, son of Lycaeon, i. 389 

Cave, of Dicte, Zeus born in a, i. 7 ; 
Hermes born in a, ii. 5; stolen 
kine hidden in a, 93; of the 
Cyclops Polyphemus, 281, 283 

Cebren, river, father of Asterope, 
ii. 45; father of Oenone, 51 

Cebriones, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Cecropia, old name of Attica, ii. 77 

Cecrops, first king of Attica, half 
man, half serpent, ii. 77; bears 
witness to Athena’s claim to 
possession of Attica, 79, 81; 
father of Erysichthon and of 
Agraulus, Herse, and Pandrosus, 
81; succeeded by Cranaus, 89 

Cecrops, son of Erechtheus, ii. 103 ; 
succeeds his father on the throne, 
111; father of Pandion, 111 

Celaeneus, son of Electryon, i. 165 

Celaeno, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Hyperbius, i. 143 

Celaeno, daughter of Atlas, one of 
the Pleiades, ii. 8; mother of 
Lycus by Poseidon, 5 9 

Celenderis, city in Cilicia, ii. 88 

Celeus, king of Eleusis, husband of 
Metanira, father of Demophon, 
i. 373; welcomes Demeter at 
Eleusis, ii. 95 

Celeustanor, son of Hercules by 
Iphis, i. 273 

Celeutor, son of Agrius, i. 73 

Celtic nation, the Argonauts sail 
past the, i. 115 

Celtus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Cenaeum, in Euboea, Hercules 
sacrifices at, i, 267, 269 


476 


Centaur, Chiron, the, i. 13 

Centaurs, their wine-jar, i. 193; 
their fight with Hercules, 193 ; 
Hercules cleansed of the slaughter 
of the, 233 ; attack Peleus, ii. 65 ; 
war of Pirithous and Theseus on 
the, 149, 151; attempt to violate 
Hippodamia, 151; bury Caeneus 
under pine-trees, 151 

Centaurus, born of a cloud im- 
pregnated by Ixion, ii. 149 

Cephallenia coveted by WNeo- 
ptolemus, ii. 307 

Cephallenians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 


Cephalus, son of Deion, husband of | 


Procris, i. 79; loved by Dawn, 
79; son of Deioneus, at Thoricus, 
173; his wonderful dog, 173; 
hunts the (Teumessian) vixen, 
173; goes with Amphitryon 
against the Taphians, 173 ; settles 
in the Taphian islands, 173; son 
of Deion, marries Procris, ii. 103 ; 
detects his wife in an intrigue, 
105; kills her accidentally, 105 ; 
tried in the Areopagus and 
banished, 105 

Cephalus, son of Hermes by Herse, 
ii. 833; carried off by Dawn, 83; 
father of Tithonus by her, in 
Syria, 83 

Cepheus, son of Aleus, in the Argo, 
i. 97; King of Tegea, and his 
sons march with Hercules against 
Tacocaseeaaen fall in battle, 
253 


Cepheus, son of Belus, i. 187; King 
of Ethiopia, father of Andromeda, 
exposes her to a sea-beast, 159 

Cepheus, son of Lycurgus, hunts the 
Calydonian boar, i. 67 ΐ 

Cephisus, father of Diogenia, ii. 108 

Ceraunian mountains, Colchians 
settle in the, i. 117 

Ceraus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Cerberus brought up by Hercules 
from Hades, i. 233, 237; carried 
by him back to Hades, 257 ‘ 

Cerberus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 
297 


Cercetes, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Dorium, i. 141 

Cercopes at Ephesus, bound by 
Hercules, i, 241 


eT a ee ee 


“ἀν. 4... 


" 


6M elie. © vi x 


INDEX 


Cercops, on Argus, i. 133; on wife 
of Nauplius, 145 

Cercyon, son of Branchus, a 
wrestler, slain by Theseus, ii. 131 

Certhe, daughter of Thespius, 
wel of Iobes by Hercules, 
i. 2 

Cerynitian hind brought by Her- 
cules to Mycenae, i. 191 

Ceteus, father of Callisto, according 
to Pherecydes, i. 395 

Ceto, a Nereid, i. 15 

Ceto, daughter of Sea (Pontus) and 
Earth, i. 13, 15; wife of Phorcus, 
mother of Phorcides and Gorgons, 
15, 155 

oe father of Menoetes, 
i: 

Ceyx, son of Lucifer, i. 57; perishes 
for his pride, 59; says that his 
wife is Hera, 59; turned into a 
gannet, 59 

Ceyx, at "Trachis, Hercules goes to, 
i. 261, 263; father of Hippasus, 
265: sons of Hercules flee to, 277 

Chaetus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Asteria, i. 141 

Chair of Forgetfulness, Theseus and 
Pirithous bound fast to the, ii. 153 

Chalciope, daughter of Aeetes, wife 
of Phrixus, i. 77 

Chalciope, daughter of Eurypylus, 
mother of Thettalus by Hercules, 
1: 275, 277 

Chalciope, daughter of Rhexenor, 
second wife of Aegeus, ii. 113 

ee father of Elephenor 

i, 27, 183 

ἘΠῊΝ Ἀκᾳ son of _Egyptus, hus- 
band of ’Rhodia, i 141 

Ἐν ΤῊΝ wounds Hiaroules in Cos, 
i 

Chariclo, a nymph, mother of 
Tiresias, i. 361; a friend of 
Athena, she asks the goddess to 
restore her son’s sight, 363 

Chariot of winged dragons given to 
Triptolemus, i. 39; winged 
chariot given to Idas, 63; winged 
chariot given by Poseidon to 
Pelops, ii. 157 

Cherone, father of Nireus, ii. 


Charybdis, the Argo encounters, 
i. 115; draws in water and 


spouts it again thrice a day, ii. 
293; Ulysses escapes from, 295 

Chasm, oracular, at Delphi, i. 27 

Chersidamas, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Chersidamas, son of Pterelaus, i. 165 

Chersonese, the Thracian, i. 77; 
Hecuba buried in the, ii. 241: 
ae Carian, Podalirius settles in, 

Chimera killed by Bellerophon, 
i. 79, 151, 153; deseribed, 151 

Chione, daughter of Boreas and 
Orithyia, ii. 105; mother of 
Eumolpus by Poseidon, 107, 109; 
flings Kumolpus into the sea, 109 

Chios, island, Orion in, i. 31! 

Chirimachus, son of Electryon, 1.165 

Chiron, a ‘centaur, offspring of 
Cronus and Philyra, i. 13; breeds 
Actaeon to be a hunter, 323; 
makes an image of him, 323; the 
centaur, driven by the Lapiths 
from Mt. Pelion, dwells at 
Malea, 193 ; accidentally 
wounded by Hercules he wishes 
to die, and dies, Prometheus con- 
senting to be immortal in his 
stead, 193, 229, 231; the cen- 
taur, receives the infant Aescu- 
lapius and teaches him the healing 
art, ii. 15, 17; saves Peleus from 
the centaurs, 65; advises Peleus 
to seize Thetis, 67; gives him an 
ashen spear, 69 

Chloris, daughter of Amphion, wife 
of Neleus, mother of Nestor, i. 85, 
ii. 183; daughter of Niobe, alone 
survives her sisters, i. 343; 
married by Neleus, 343 

Chromius, son of Arsinous, a 
» Mysian’ leader, ii. 205 

dusrceatna. son of Priam, ii. 49 

Chromius, son of Pterelaus, 1105 

Chrysaor, father of Geryon, springs 
from decapitated Gorgon, i. 159; 
father of Geryon, 211 

Chryseis, daughter of Thespius, 
a’ of Onesippus by Hercules, 
i: 

Chryses, a priest, father of Briseis, 
li. 205 

Chryses, son of Minos, in Paros, 
i. 203, 303 

Chrysippe, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Chrysippus, i. 141 


477 


INDEX 


Chrysippus, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Chrysippe, i. 141 

Chrysippus, son of Pelops, is loved 
and carried off by Laius, i. 339 


Chrysopelia, a nymph, wife of 
Arcas, i. 397 
Chrysothemis, daughter of Aga- 


memnon and Clytaemnestra, ii. 


171 

Chthonia, daughter of Hrechtheus, 
ii. 103; married to (her father’s 
brother) Butes, 103 

Chthonius, one of the Sparti, i, 317 ; 
father of Nycteus, 335 

Chthonius, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Bryce, i. 141 

Cicones, ‘Trojan allies, ii, 205; 
Ulysses among the, 281 

Cilicia, Typhon in, i. 47 49% 
Corycian cave in, 49; named 
ἀφο Cilix, 301; Celenderis in, 
ii. 

Cilix, son of Agenor, i, 297; settles 
in ‘Cilicia, 301 

Cilla, daughter of Laomedon, ii. 43 

Cimmerian land traversed by io; 
he 

Cinyps, river in Libya, ii. 259 

Cinyras, father of Laodice, i. 397; 
son of Sandocus, founds Paphos 
in Cyprus, ii. 83, 85; father of 
Adonis, 85; his daughters co- 
habit with foreigners and die in 
Egypt, 85; in Cyprus, promises 
to send ships for the war against 
Troy, 179 

Circaean root given by Procris to 
Minos to drink, ii. 105 

Circe, sister of Aeetes, ἃ. 77; 
purifies the Argonauts for the 
murder of Apsyrtus, ELS. 
daughter of the Sun, sister of 
Aeetes, an enchantress, turns the 
companions of Ulysses into 
beasts, ii. 287; Ulysses escapes 
her enchantments and shares her 
bed, 289; she bears him a son 
Telegonus, 289; 8060 sends 
Ulysses on his way, 289 

Cisseus, father of Hecuba, ii. 45 

Cisseus, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Anthelia, i. 141 

Cithaeron, the lion of, killed by 
Hercules, ἃ, 477. 179; Actaeon 
devoured by his dogs on, 323; 


478 


Theban women rave in Bacchic 
frenzy on, 331; Pentheus torn to 
pieces there, 331; ; the children 
of Niobe killed on, 343; the 
Seven against Thebes at, 359 
Cius, in Mysia, founded by Poly- 
phemus, i. 101 
Clashing Rocks, the Argo passes 
between the, i. 107, 109 
Clazomenae taken by ‘Achilles, 11.208 
re mother of Eurythemis, 


Cleocharia, a Naiad nymph, wife of 
EK and mother of Eurotas, 


diene: father of Aria, i. 301 

Cleodaeus, the sons of, inquire of 
the oracle, i. 285 

Cleodore, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Lixus, i. 141 


Cleodoxa, daughter of Amphion and - 


Niobe, i. 341 
Cleolaus, son of Hercules by Argele, 


Cleonae, Hercules at, i. 185, «187 ; 
the Molionides killed by Hercules 
at, 249 

Cleopatra, daughter of Boreas and 
Orithyia, ii. 105; 
Phineus, 107 

Cleopatra, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Agenor, i, 141 

Cleopatra, daughter of Idas and 
Marpessa, wife of Meleager, i. 67 ; 
hangs herself, 71 

Cleopatra, daughter of Tros, ii, 37 

Cleopatra, maiden sent by the 
Locrians to propitiate Athena at 
Ilium, ii. 267 

Cleophyle, wife of Lycurgus, i, 399 

Clio, a Muse, i. 17 ; twits Aphrodite 
with her love of Adonis, 19; 
mother of Hyacinth by Pierus, 


19 

clisithyra, daughter of Idomeneus 
and Meda, murdered by Leucus, 
li. 249 

Clite, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Clitus, i, 141 

Clitonymus, son of Amphidamas, 
killed by Patroclus, ii. 77 

Clitor, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Clitus, son of Kgyptus, husband of 
Clite, i, 141 

Clonia, a nymph, wife of Hyrieus, 


wife οἵ. 


INDEX 


ae of Nycteus and Lycus, 


ii. 

Clonius, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Clotho, a Fate, i. 15 

Cloud in the likeness of Hera im- 
pregnated by Ixion, ii. 149 ; gives 
birth to Centaurus, 149; phan- 
tom of Helen made of clouds, 
175, 279 

Club of Sinis taken and carried by 
Theseus, i. 123 

Clymene, daughter of Catreus, wife 
of Nauplius, i. 


Clymene, daughter of Minyas, wife 
of JIasus, mother of Atalanta, 

- 1,899 

Clymenus, king of the Minyans, 
father of Erginus, killed by 
Perieres, charges his son to 
avenge his death, i. 179 

Clymenus, son of Oeneus, i. 65 

Clymenus, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 297 

Clytaemnestra, daughter of Tyn- 
dareus by Leda, wife of Agamem- 
non, ii. 23, 171; sends Iphigenia 
to Aulis, 191; corrupted by 
Aegisthus, 249; with Aegisthus, 
murders Agamemnon and Cas- 
sandra, 269; murdered by 
Orestes, 271; mother of Erigone 
by Aegisthus, 271 

Clytippe, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Eurycapys by Hercules, 


1, 273 
eee a giant, killed by Hecate, 


Ls 

Clytius, son of Laomedon, ii. 43 

Clytius, suitor of Penelope, from 
Dulichium, ii, 297 

Clytius, suitor of Penelope, from 
Same, ii. 297 

Clytius, suitor of Penelope, from 
Zacynthos, ii. 299 

Cnossia, a nymph, mother of 
Xenodamus by Menelaus, ii. 31 

Coals in the river Asopus, ii. 53 

Coans, attempt to repel Hercules, 
i. 247; their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185; settle in 
Andros, 259 

Cocalus, at Camicus in Sicily, con- 
ceals Daedalus, ii. 141 ; promises 
to surrender him to Minos, 141; 


145, 307, 309, ii. 


the daughters of Cocalus_ kill 
Minos, 143 

Coeranus, father of Polyidus, i. 311 

Coeus, a Titan, son of Sky and Earth, 
i.5; father of Asteria, 13, 25 

Colchians, Phrixus and the ram 
with the golden fleece among the, 
i. 77; search for the Argo, 113, 
115; demand the restoration of 
Medea from Alcinous, settle 
among the Phaeacians, 117 

Colchis, the Golden Fleece in, i. 77, 
95; Hercules sails to, 103; the 
children of Phrixus in, 105; river 
Phasis in, 109; voyage of the 
Argonauts to, i. 243 ᾿ 

Colone taken by Achilles, ii. 203 

Colonus, in Attica, Oedipus goes 
thither and dies, 1. 351 

Colophon taken by Achilles, 11. 203 ; 
contest of skill between Calchas 
and Mopsus at, 243 

Comaetho, daughter of Pterelaus, 
pulls out her father’s golden hair, 
ke 173; slain by Amphitryon, 

Cometes, father of Asterius, i. 99 

Cometes, son of Sthenelus, para- 
mour of Aegialia, ii. 249 

Compensation for murder, i. 241 

Copreus, son of Pelops,_ kills 
Iphitus and 185 purified by 
EKurystheus, i. 187 

Corcyra, the Argonauts in, i. 115 

Coretho, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Corinth, formerly called Ephyra, 
founded by Sisyphus, i. 79; 
Jason and Medea at, 123; Poly- 
bus king of, 345; Oedipus at, 
345; the children of Alcmaeon 
brought up at, 387; Sisyphus at, 
ii. 53. See also Isthmus 

eee kill Medea’s children, 
i 


Corinthus, father of Sylea, ii. 125 
Coronis, daughter of Phlegyas, 
mother of Aesculapius by Apollo, 
li. 13, 153; proves unfaithful with 
Ischys, 15; killed by Apollo, 15 
Coronus, father of Caeneus, i. 97 
Coronus, father of Leonteus, ii. 27 
Coronus, general of the Lapiths, 
slain by Hercules, i. 263 
Corybantes, sons of Apollo, i. 21 
Corycian cave in Cilicia, i, 49 


479 


INDEX 


Corythus, Telephus bred by the 
neatherds of, i. 397 

Cos, Polybotes at, i. 47; ravaged 
by Hercules, 247 

Cottus, a Hundred-handed, i. 3 

Cow, Io turned into a white, i. 133 ; 
of three different colours, how 
described, 311; as guide to 
the foundation of Thebes, 313, 
3153 as guide to the foundation 
of Ilium, ii. 37, 39 

Cows of the Sun driven away from 
Erythia by Alcyoneus, i. 43. See 
Kine 

Crab attacks Hercules, i. 189 

od ak daughter of Cranaus, ii. 


Cranaechme (not Menaechme), 
daughter of Cranaus, ii. 89 

Cranaus, king of Attica, i. 57, ii. 89 ; 
said to have arbitrated between 
Poseidon and Athena, ii, 81; 
names the country Atthis, 89; 
expelled by Amphictyon, 89; 
father of Atthis, 89 

Cranto, a Nereid, i. 15 

Crataeis, mother of Scylla, ii. 293 

Cratieus, father of Anaxibia, i. 85 

Crenidian gate of Thebes, i, 361 

Creon, king of Corinth, betroths his 
daughter Glauce to Jason, i. 123 ; 
brings up two children of Alc- 
maeon, 387 

Creon, king of Thebes, purifies Am- 
phitryon, i. 171; helps him in the 
war on the Teleboans (Taphians), 
171, 173; marries his daughters 
to Hercules and Iphicles, 181; 
father of Megara, 275; son of 
Menoeceus, succeeds Laius as 
king of Thebes, 347; his son 
Haemon devoured by the Sphinx, 
349; promises the kingdom to 
him who should read the riddle of 
the Sphinx, 349; father of 
Menoeceus, 367; succeeds to the 
kingdom of Thebes, 373; casts 
out the Argive dead unburied, 
373; buries Antigone alive, 373 

Creon, son of Hercules, i. 273 

Creontiades, son of Hercules by 
Megara, i. 181, 275 

Cresphontes, a Heraclid, gets Mes- 
sene by lot, i. 289, 291; murdered 
by his sons, 291 


480 


Cretans, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii, 183 

Crete, daughter of Asterius, wife of 
Minos, i, 303 

Crete, daughter of Deucalion, i. 511 

Crete, Zeus born in, i. 7; guarded 
by Talos, 119; Hercules goes to, 
to fetch the bull, 199; Europa 
brought by Zeus to, 299; Minos 
in, 303; Althaemenes sets out 
from, 307; visible from Rhodes, 
307; Theseus in, ii, 135; Mene- 
laus goes to, to bury Catreus, 
173; revolt of Leucus in, 249; 
Idomeneus lands in, 249; Mag- 
nesians under Prothous settle in, 
259; the people of Tlepolemus 
touch at, 259, 261; 
‘driven to, 279 

Cretheus, son of Aeolus, i. 57; 
brings up Tyro, 81; founds 
Tolcus, 85; marries Tyro, 85; 
father of Aeson, Amythaon, and 
Pheres, 87, 91 

a τως a district of Rhodes, i. 


Creusa, daughter of Erechtheus, 
mother of Achaeus and Ion, i. 57 ; 
daughter of Erechtheus, ii. 103; 
married to Xuthus, 103 

Creusa, daughter of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 47 

Criasus, son of Argus, succeeds his 
hee in the kingdom of Argos, 
i, 

Crimissa, near Croton, Philoctetes 
settles at, ii, 261 

Crino, wife of Danaus, i, 143 

Crius, a Titan, i. 5; father of 
Astraeus, Pallas, and Perses, 13 

Croco, father of Meganira, i. 397 

Croesus, family of, descended from 
Agelaus, son of Hercules, i. 275 

Crommyon, the sow at, offspring of 
Echidna and Typhon, ii. 129; 


Menelaus 


sovereignty, 7; marries R 
swallows’ his _ offspring, Y 
deceived by Rhea, 9; father of 
Chiron, 13 
Croton, Crimissa near, ii, 261 
Crown, a golden, Procris bribed by 
a, ii. 103, 105 


INDEX 


Cteatus, father of Amphimachus, 
ii. 27 


Cteatus. See Kurytus 

er Aap two sons of Hercules, 
i, ἦ 

Ctesippus, suitor of Penelope, from 
Ithaca, ii. 299 

Ctesippus, suitor of Penelope, from 
Same, ii. 297 

Ctesius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Curetes, guards of infant Zeus, 
i. 7, 9; at war with the Caly- 
donians, 69; make away with 
Epaphus, 135; killed by Zeus, 
135; tell Minos how to recover 
his dead son, 311 

Curetian country, Aetolia, i. 61 

Curses at sacrifices to Hercules (at 
Lindus), i. 227 

Cyanippus, son of Adrastus, i. 91 

alge in Phrygia, Dionysus at, 

27 


Cychreus, father of Glauce, ii. 53; 
son of Poseidon and Salamis, 
delivers island of Salamis from a 
snake and becomes king, 59; be- 
aaa the kingdom to Telamon, 


Cyclopes, offspring of Sky and 
Earth, i. 3; bound and cast into 
Tartarus by Sky, 5; released by 
Zeus, they forge thunderbolts 
for him, 11; fortify ‘iryns, 
147; fashion the thunderbolt for 
Zeus, ii. 19; slain by Apollo, 19; 
Ulysses in the land of the, 281, 
283, 285 

Cyclops, Geraestus the, his grave at 
Athens, ii. 119 

Cycnus, father of Tenes and 
Hemithea, ii. 193; believing a 
false accusation he sets them 
adrift on the sea, 193; learning 
the truth he stones one of the 
accusers, 195 

Cycnus, son of Ares, his combat with 
Hercules, i. 221; slain by 
Hercules, 265 

Cycnus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Cyllene, a nymph, wife of Pelasgus, 
mother of Lycaon, according to 
some, i. 389 

Cyllene, snakes seen copulating on, 

365 ; in Arcadia, the Pleiades 
hon at, ii. 3; Hermes born in a 


APOLL. II, 


ay on, 5; invents the lyre 

on, 

Cyme, city, taken by Achilles, ii. 203 

Cymo, a Nereid, i. 15 

Cymothoe, a Nereid, i. 15 

Cynaethus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Cynnus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Cynortas (Cynortes), son of Amy- 
elas, 1 81, ti 11s tapher ΟΣ 
Perieres, 13 

Cyprus, Phrasius, a seer from, i, 225; 
Cinyras in, ii. 83, 179; Pygmalion, 
king of, 85; Alexander (Paris) 
tarries in, 175; Greeks settle in, 
257; Agapenor settles in, 259; 
Phidippus settles in, 259; Demo- 
phon settles in, 265 

Cyrene, mother of Diomedes the 
Thracian, by Ares, i. 201 

Cytheria, the banished Thyestes 
dwells in, ii. 171 

Cytisorus, son of Phrixus,i. 77 

Cyzicus, king of the Doliones, i. 99 ; 
slain by the Argonauts, 101 


Daedalus makes a statue of Her- 
cules at Pisa, i. 243; architect, 
banished from Athens for murder, 
305; makes an artificial cow for 
Pasiphae, 305; son of Eupala- 
mus, architect and first inventor 
of images, ii. 121; murders his 
nephew Talos, 121; tried and 
condemned in the Areopagus, 
123; flees to Minos, 123; 
accomplice of Pasiphae, 123; 

“ constructs the labyrinth, 121, 
123; besought by Ariadne to 
disclose the way out of the 
labyrinth, 135; shut up by 
Minos in the labyrinth, 139; 
makes wings for himself and flies 
to Camicus in Sicily, 139, 141; 
pursued and detected by Minos, 
141 

Daémon, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Daesenor, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Daiphron, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Scaea, i. 139 

Daiphron, son of Egyptus, husband 
ot Adiante, i, 143 

Damasichthon, son of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Damasippus, son of Icarius, ii. 23 


481 


INDEX 


Damasistratus, king of Plataea, 
buries Laius, i, 847 

Damastes, or Polypemon, a male- 
factor, slain by Theseus, ii. 131, 
133 

Damastor, 
297 

Danae, daughter of Acrisius, i. 147 ; 
shut up in a brazen chamber, 153, 
155; conceives Perseus by Zeus, 
155; cast into sea and drifts 
with Perseus to Seriphus, 155; 
loved by Polydectes, 155; re-~ 
turns with Perseus to Argos, 161 

Danai, old name of the Argives, 
i, 187 

Danaus, son of Belus, i. 137; 
settled in Libya, 137; has fifty 
daughters, 137 ; the first to build 
a ship, 137; flees with his 
daughters to Argos and obtains 
the kingdom, 137; consents to 
marry his daughters to the sons 
of Egyptus, 139, 141, 143; his 
daughters murder their husbands, 
143; gives his daughters to victors 
in an athletic contest, 143 

Dance, frenzied, of the mad daugh- 
ters of Proetus, i. 149 

Dardania, country named after 
Dardanus, ii. 35 

Dardanians, Trojan allies, ii. 205 

suche Tu a city built by Dardanus, 
i. 35 

Dardanus, son of Zeus and Electra, 
ii. 35 ; leaves Samothrace, marries 
the daughter of King Teucer, and 
calls the country Dardania, 353 
father of Idaea, 107 

Dascylus, father of Lycus, i. 205 

Daulia, in Phocis, Procne and 
Philomela at, ii, 101 

Dawn, daughter of Hyperion and 
Thia, i. 138; mother of winds 
and stars, 13; loves Orion, 33; 
bedded with Ares, 33; caused by 
Aphrodite to be perpetually in 
love, 33; forbidden by Zeus to 
shine, 45; carries off Cephalus, 
79; loves Tithonus and carries 
him to Ethiopia, ii. 43; bears to 
him Emathion and Memnon, 48 ; 
carries off Cephalus and bears 
him a son Tithonus, 83 

Dead raised to life by Aesculapius 


482 


suitor of Penelope, ii. 


τ means of the Gorgon’s blood, 
ub, 


Dearth, human sacrifices as a | 


remedy for, i. 225, 227 

Deer substituted for Iphigenia at 
the altar, ii, 193 

ier τ daughter of Oeneus, 

ὃ, 257 ; Hercules wrestles for 

fae with’ Achelous, 65, 257; 
receives the poison from ‘Nessus, 
261; sends the poisoned robe to 
Hercules, 269; hangs herself, 
269; her sons by Hercules, 275 

Deico6n, son of Hercules’ by 
Megara, i. 181, 275 

Deidamia, daughter of Lycomedes, 
intrigue of Achilles with, ii. 75; 
mother of Pyrrhus (Neoptolemus) 
by Achilles, 75; given by 
Neoptolemus in marriage to 
Helenus, 251 

Deimachus, father of Enarete, i. 57 

Deimachus, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Deion, son of Aeolus, i. 57; reigns 
over Phocis,79 ; marries Diomede, 
father of Cephalus, 79, ii. 103 

Deioneus, father of Cephalus, i. 171 

Deiopites, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Deiphobus, son of Hippolytus, 
purifies Hercules for the murder 
of Iphitus, i. 239 

Deiphobus, son of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49; awarded Helen 
after the death of Alexander 
ΔΑ μος 223; slain by Menelaus, 

237 


Deiphontes, husband of Hyrnetho, 
i. 291; promoted with his wite 
to the kingdom (of Argos), 291 

Deipyle, daughter of Adrastus, wife 
ot Tydeus, i. 73, 91, 353 

Deliades, brother of Bellerophon, 
accidentally killed by him, i.149 

Delos, formerly called Asteria, 
i. 25; birth of Apollo and 
Artemis in, 25; Orion in, 31, 33 

Delphi, Apollo, Themis, and the 
Python at, i. 27; Tityus at, 29; 
oracle at, 5; Hercules inquires 
of the oracle at 183; Hercules 
at, 239, 241; Hyllus ἢ inquires of 
the oracle at, 283; Cadmus in- 
quires of the oracle at, 313; 
Oedipus inquires of the oracle at, 
345; portion of Theban booty 


ee ee Oe eee eee Ch 


. INDEX 


sent by Argives to, 381; the 
necklace and robe (of Harmonia) 
dedicated at, 385, 387; Telephus 
inquires of the god at, 397; 
Neoptolemus slain at, ii. 255; 
Podalirius consults the oracle at, 
265; Orestes consults the oracle 
at, 271 

Delphyne, a she-dragon, guards the 
severed sinews of Zeus in the 
Corycian cave, i. 49 

Demaratus on the voyage of Her- 
cules to Colchis, i. 103 

- Demeter, daughter of Cronus 
and Rhea, swallowed by Cronus, 
i. 7; searches for Persephone, 
35; received by Celeus at 
Eleusis, 37; seeks to make 
the child ‘of Celeus immor- 
tal, 37, 39; gives wheat and a 
winged chariot to Triptolemus, 
39; punishes Ascalaphus, 41; 
legend of, 43; called Isis by the 
Egyptians, 135 ; turns Ascalaphus 
into an owl, 237; in the likeness 
of a Fury, consorts with Poseidon 
and gives birth to horse Arion, 
373; loved by Iasion, ii. 35; 
comes to Attica, welcomed by 
Celeus at Eleusis, 95 

Demigods, the race of the, ii. 171 

Democoon, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Demonice, daughter of Agenor, her 
intrigue with Ares, i. 63 

Demophon, son of Celeus and 
Metanira, put on the fire by 
Demeter to make him immortal, 


i. 37, 39 
Demophon, son of Theseus and 
Phaedra, ii. 145; flies from 


Athens, 153; goes to Troy and 
leads away Aethra, 237; goes to 
the land of the Thracian Bisal- 
tians, and marries Phyllis, the 
king’s daughter, 263; goes to 
Cyprus, and being cursed by the 
deserted Phyllis he falls on his 
sword, ii. 263, 265 

Demoptolemus, suitor of Penelope, 
li, 297 

Dercynus. See Jalebion, i. 215 

Dero, a Nereid, i. 15 

Deucalion, son of Minos, i. 303 ; his 
children, 311; father of Ido- 
meneus, ii. 183 


Deucalion, son of Prometheus, 
husband of Pyrrha, i. 53; saved 
from great flood, 55; makes men 
out of stones, 55; his children, 
55, 57; the family of, 129; the 
flood of, in the reign of Nyctimus, 
395; the flood said to be caused 
by the impiety of Lycaon’s sons, 
395; father of Amphictyon, ii. 
89; the flood in the age of, 89 

Dexithea, concubine of Minos, 
mother of Euxanthius, i. 303 

Dicte, Zeus born in a cave of, i. 7 

Dictys, son of Magnes, i. 81; rears 
Perseus, 155; made king of 
Seriphus by Perseus, 163 

Dino, daughter of Phorcus, i. 155 

Diocorystes, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Hippodamia, i. 141 

Diogenia, daughter ot Cephisus, 
wife of Phrasimus, ii. 103 

Diomede, daughter of Lapithus, wife 
of Amyclas, ii. 11 

Diomede, daughter of Xuthus, wife 
of Deion, i. 79 

Diomedes, ‘kills Rhesus. i. 21; son 
of Tydeus, kills the sons of 
Agrius, 73; gives the kingdom 
of Calydon to Andraemon, 73; 
marries Aegialia, 73 ; goes to wars 
of Thebes and Troy, 73 ; one of the 
Epigoni, 379; suitor of Helen, 
ii, 27; leader of the Argives 
against Troy, 183; wounds 
Aphrodite, exchanges arms with 
Glaucus, 207; sent as spy with 
Ulysses, kills Dolon and Rhesus, 


207; wounded, 209; victor in 
chariot race, 211; goes with 
Ulysses to Lemnos to _ fetch 


Philoctetes, 223; goes with 
Ulysses to ‘Troy and helps to steal 
the Palladium, 227; has a 
prosperous voyage from Troy, 243 

Diomedes, the Thracian, son of 
Ares, king of the Bistones, slain 
by Hercules, i. 201; his man- 
eating mares brought by Hercules 
to Eurystheus, 201, 203 

Dione, a Nereid, i. 15 

Dione, a Titanid, i. 5; 
Aphrodite, 15, 17 

Dionysius on Hercules as leader of 
the Argonauts, i. 103 

Dionysus, mysteries of, invented by 


483 


mother of 


the 


INDEX 


Orpheus, i. 19; kills Eurytus, 
45; gives the first vine-plant to 
Oeneus, 63, 65; father of 
Deianira by Althaea, 65; drives 
the women of Argos mad, 91; 
father of Phanus and Staphylus, 
97; rites of, rejected by the 
daughters of Proetus, 147; off- 
spring of Zeus and Semele, 319; 
sewn up in his father’s thigh, 319 ; 
entrusted to Hermes, 319 ; reared 
as a girl by Athamas and Ino, 
319; turned into a kid, 321; 
brought by Hermes to the 
nymphs at Nysa, 321; discovers 


the vine, 325; driven mad by Hera . 


he roams Egypt and Syria, 325, 
327; received by Proetus, king 


Dioxippe, 


Divination, 


daughter of Danaus, 
i. 143 


Dirce, wife of Lycus, ill-treats 


Antiope, i. 339; tied by 
Antiope’s sons to a bull, 339; 
her body thrown into a spring, 
ae is called Dirce after her, 


Disease a consequence of murder, 


i. 239; cured by servitude and 
conpenen for the murder, 


art of, taught by 
Polyidus to Glaucus, i. 3138; 
learned by Hermes from Apollo, 
ii. 11; practised by Calchas, 191 ; 
trial of skill in the art of, between 
Calchas and Mopsus, 243 sq. See 


Prophecy, Soothsaying 
Dodona, the oak of, i. 97 
Doe, Telephus suckled by a, i. 255, | 
257, 397 
Dog, unapproachable, i. 89; won- 
derful, given by Minos to Procris, 
173, ii. 205; hunts the (Teumes- 
πὶ ἄρευ; and is turned to stone, 
: 
Dogs of Actaeon, i. 323, 325 
Doliche, old name of the island of 


of Egypt, 327; comes to Phrygia, 
where he is purified by Rhea and 
learns the rites of initiation, 327 ; 
passes through Thrace, 327; ex- 
pelled by Lycurgus, 327; takes 
refuge in the sea, 327; drives 
Lycurgus mad, 327; causes him 
to be put to death, 331; traverses 
Thrace and India and sets up 
pillars, 331; comes to Thebes 
and sets the women raving, 331 ; 
comes to Argos and drives the Icaria, i. 243 
women mad, 331; is ferried to Doliones, the Argonauts among the, 
Naxos by pirates, whom he turns * i. 99, 101; harassed by the 
into dolphins, 331, 333; recog- Pelasgians, 101 
nized as a god, brings up his /Dolon, son of Eumelus, killed by 
mother from Hades and ascends Ulysses and Diomedes, ii. 207 ’ 
with her to heaven, 333; comes Dolopians, Phoenix made king of 
to Attica, ii. 95; received by the, by Peleus, ii. 75 
Icarius, 97; carries off Ariadne Dominion, born of Pallas and Styx, 
from Naxos to Lemnos, 137; 1.18 
grants the daughters of Anius the Dorians, descended from Dorus, 
power to produce oil, corn, and i. 57; Hercules fights for the, 
wine, 179, 181 against the Lapiths, 263 

Diopithes, suitor of Penelope, ii.297 Doris, an Oceanid, i. 13; wife of 

Dioscuri, the name given to Castor Nereus, 15 
and Pollux, ii. 31; carry off and Dorium, daughter of Danaus, wife 
marry Hilaira and Phoebe, of Cercetes, i. 141 J 
daughters of Leucippus, 18, 31; Dorus, father of Xanthippe, i. 61 
drive away cattle from Messene, Dorus, son of Apollo, killed by 
33; translated to the gods, 35; Aetolus, i. 61 
help Peleus to lay waste lolcus, Dorus, son of Hellen, ancestor of the . 
71, 73; capture Athens and Dorians, i. 57 
rescue Helen, 153; restore Dorycleus, son of Hippocoon, ii, 21 
Menestheus and give him the  Doryclus, son of Priam, ii. 49 ; 
sovereignty of Athens, 153. See Dotis, mother of Phlegyas, i. 337 ; 
also Castor and Pollux Doto, a Nereid, i. 15 


484 


INDEX 


Dove let fly between the Clashing 
Rocks, i. 107 
Dragon, sleepless, guards the Golden 
Fleece, i. 95, 113; from its teeth 
spring armed men, 111, 315; 
guards the golden apples of the 
Hesperides, 221; offspring of Ares, 
guards spring at Thebes, 315; 
slain by Cadmus, 315 
Dragon-car given by the Sun to 
Medea, i. 123 
Dragon-drawn chariot of  Tri- 
_ ptolemus, i. 39 
Dragon’s teeth sowed by Cadmus in 
Thebes, i. 109, 315; sowed by 
Jason in Colchis, 109, 111 
Dream, Hecuba’s, ii. 47 
arog Aesacus an interpreter of, 
li. 47 


Drugs, magical, of Medea, i. 111, 
eis, 119, 121 

Dryas, father of Lycurgus, i. 327 

Dryas, son of Ares, hunts Caly- 
donian boar, i. 67 

Dryas, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Eurydice, i. 141 

Dryas, son of Lycurgus, his father 
in a fit of madness strikes him 
with an axe and cuts off his 
extremities, i. 327, 329 

Dryopes, Hercules traverses their 
country and conquers them, i. 
261, 263 

Dryops, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Dulicheus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Dulichians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 

Dulichium, Phyleus goes to, i. 197; 
suitors of Penelope from, li. 297 

Dymas, father of Hecuba, ii. 45 

Dymas, son of Aegimius, killed in 
battle, i. 289 

Dynamene, a Nereid, i. 15 

Dynastes, son of Hercules, i. 273 


Eagle devours the liver of Pro- 
metheus, i. 53, 229; offspring of 
Kchidna and ‘Typhon, 229; 
carries off Ganymede, ii. 37; 
Ajax named after an, 61 

Earth married to Sky, i. 3; persuades 
the Titans to attack their father 
(Sky), gives Cronus an adamantine 
sickle, 5; her prophecies, 7, 11, 


25; her offspring, 3, 5, 13, 
15, 39, 181; mother. of the 
giants, 43; mother of Typhon, 
47, of Echidna, 131; presents the 
golden apples of the Hesperides 
to Zeus on his marriage, 221; 
Antaeus said to be a son of, 223 ; 
saves Nyctimus, son of Lycaon, 
when his father and brothers were 
killed by Zeus, 393, 395 

Ecbasus, son of Argus, i. 131 

ac ik ae river, Hercules at the, 
ib 

Echemmon, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Papeete: husband of Timandra, 
il. 

Echephron, son of Nestor, i. 85 

Echephron, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Echidna, daughter of Tartarus and 
Earth, slain by Argus, i. 131; 
~mother of the Chimera by 
Typhon, i. 151; mother of the 
dog Orthus by Typhon, 211; 
mother by Typhon of the 
dragon which guards the apples 
of the Hesperides, 221; mother 
of the Caucasian eagle by 
Typhon, 229; mother of the 
Sphinx by Typhon, 347; mother 
of the Crommyon sow by 
Typhon, ii. 129 

Echinadian Islands, the Harpies 
pursued to the, i. 105, 107, 165 

Echion, one of the Sparti, i. 317; 
husband of Agave, 317, 331; 
father of Pentheus, 331 

Echion, son of Portheus, killed by 
leaping from the Wooden Horse, 
li. 235 

Echion, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Edonians, Lycurgus, king of the, 
i. 327; put the king to death, 
327, 329 

Eetion, father of Andromache, ii. 51 

Egg, Helen hatched out of an, ii. 25 

Egypt, the gods take refuge in, 
i. 49; Io comes to, 135; Epa- 
phus and Belus, kings of, 135, 
297; formerly called the country 
of the Melampods, 137 ; Hercules 
in, 223, 225, 227; Dionysus 
roams over, 325; the daughters 
of Cinyras die in, ii. 85; Helen 
carried by Hermes to, 175; 
Proteus, king of, 175, 279; 


485 


INDEX 


Menelaus driven by a storm to, 
568 ; Helen found by Menelaus in, 


Egyptians identify Demeter with 
Isis, i. 135 

Egyptus, son of Belus, conquers 
and reigns over Egypt, i. 137; 
has fifty sons, 137 ; his sons come 
to Argos, marry the daughters of 
Danaus, and are murdered by 
them, 139, 141, 143 

Egyptus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Dioxippe, i. 141, 143 

Eight years’ period, i. 317 

Hione, a Nereid, i. 15 

Elachia, daughter of Thespius, 
eg of Buleus by Hercules, 
i. 

Elais, daughter of Anius, one of the 
Wine-growers, ii. 179, 181 

Elare, daughter of Orchomenus, 
mother οἱ Tityus by Zeus, i. 27 

Elato, charioteer of Amphiaraus, 
sey 

Elatus, a centaur, wounded by 
Hercules, i. 193 

Elatus, father of Polyphemus, i. 99 

Elatus, son of Arcas, joint ruler of 
Arcadia, father of Stymphalus 
and Pereus, i. 397 

Elatus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Eleans, Polyxenus, king of the, 
i. 169; war of Hercules with the, 
249; their muster for the Trojan 
war, ii. 183. See also Elis 

Electra, an Oceanid, i. 11, 138; 
mother of Iris and the Harpies by 
Thaumas, 15 

Electra, daughter of Atlas, one of 
the Pleiades, ii. 3; has Iasion and 
Dardanus by Zeus, 35; takes 
refuge at the Palladium, 41 

Electra, daughter of Agamemnon, 
ii. 171, 271; saves Orestes and 
entrusts him to Strophius, 271; 
married to Pylades, 277 

Electra, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Peristhenes, i. 141 

Electran gate of Thebes, i. 361 

Electryon, son of Perseus, i. 163; 
father of Alemena, 165; king of 
Mycenae, 167; his sons slay the 
sons of Pterelaus, 169; acciden- 
tally killed by Amphitryon, 169 

Klephantis, wife of Danaus, i. 141 


486 


Elephenor, son of Chalcodon, 
suitor of Helen, ii. 27; leader of 
the Euboeans against Troy, 183 ; 
dies in Troy, 259; his people 
inhabit Apollonia in Epirus, 259 

Eleusinians, their war with the 
Athenians, ii. 109 

Eleusis, Demeter at, i, 37, 39, ii. 95 ; 
the Laughless Rock at, i.37 ; Well 
of the Fair Dances at, 37; the 
centaurs, fleeing from Hercules, 
are received and hidden by 
Poseidon at, 193, 195; Hercules 
initiated by Eumolpus at, 233 

Eleusis, father of Triptolemus, ac- 
cording to Panyasis, i. 39 

es el eo son of Apollo by Aethusa, 


ii. 
Eleutherae, in Boeotia, Amphion 
and Zethus born at, i. 337, 339 
Elis, founded by Endymion, i. 61 ; 
Salmoneus founds a city in, which 
is destroyed by thunderbolt, 81; 
Augeas, king of, 195; captured 
by Hercules, 249; Oxylus flees to, 
289; Pisa in, ii. 163. See also 
Eleans 

sas a 4 Ulysses sees the ghost of, 
li. 289 

ay Sicily, Eryx king of the, 
i 


Elysian Fields, Cadmus and Har- 
monia sent by Zeus to the, i. 335 ; 
Menelaus and Helen go to the, 
li. 279 

Emathion, son of Tithonus, slain by 
Hercules, i. 229; son of Tithonus 
and Dawn, ii. 43 

Emulation, born of Pallas and 
Styx, i. 13 

Enarete, daughter of Deimachus, 
wife of Aeolus, i. 57 

Enarophorus, son of Hippocoon, 
Ἐ 91 , 

Enceladus, a giant, overwhelmed 
under Sicily by Athena, i. 45 

Enceladus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Amymone, i. 139 

Encheleans get Cadmus and Har- 
monia to help them against the 
Illyrians, i. 335 ᾿ 

Endeis, daughter of Sciron, wife of 
Aeacus, ii. 53 

Endium, a city, taken by Achilles, 
ii, 203 


INDEX 


Endymion, founder of Elis, beloved 
by the Moon, his eternal sleep, 
i. 61; father of Aetolus, 61 

Enipeus, river, loved by Tyro, i. 81 

Ennomus, son of Arsinous, a 
Mysian leader, ii. 205 

Entelides, son of Hercules, by Me- 
nippis, i. 273 

Enyo, daughter of Phorcus, i. 155 

Eone, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Amestrius by Hercules, i. 275 

Epaphus, son of Io, i. 1385; put out 
of the way by the Curetes, 135; 
discovered in Byblus by Io, 135; 
reigns over Egypt, 135; founds 
Memphis, 135; father of Lysia- 
nassa, 225 

Epeus, victor in boxing, ii. 211; an 
architect, constructs the Wooden 
Horse, 229, 231 

Ephemeral fruits, i. 51 

Ephesus, the Cercopes at, i. 241 

Ephialtes, a giant, shot by Apollo 
and Hercules, i. 45 

Ephialtes, one of the Aloads, son of 
Poseidon by Iphimedia, woos 
Hera, i. 59. See Otus, Aloads 

Ephyra (Corinth) founded by 
Sisyphus, i. 79 

Ephyra in Thesprotia, captured by 
Hercules, i. 259 ἥ 

Epicasta, daughter οὗ Menoeceus, i. 
343.. See Jocasta 

Epicaste, daughter of Augeas, 
oe of Thestalus by Hercules, 
aE eae 

Epicaste, daughter of Calydon, wife 
of Agenor, i. 61 

-_Epicnemedian Locrians join Her- 
cules in his attack on Oechalia, 
i. 265 

Epidaurus, Periphetes the Clubman 
in, ii. 123 

Epidaurus, son of Argus, i. 131 

Epigoni, their war on Thebes, 1. 91, 
377, 379, 381 

Epilais, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Astyanax by Hercules, 


i. 273 

Epilaus, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Epimetheus, son of Japetus and 
Asia, i. 13; husband of Pandora 
and father of Pyrrha, 53 

Epirus, the sons of Alcmaeon, 
journey to, i. 387; Apollonia in, 


ii. 259 ; Ulysses journeys through, 
301; Neoptolemus, king of the 
islands off, 307 

Epistrophus, son of Iphitus, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27 

Epistrophus, son of Mecisteus, 
leader of the Alizones, ii. 205 

Epochus, son of Lycurgus, i. 399 

Epopeus, son of Poseidon by Canace, 
i. 59; king of Sicyon, marries An- 
tiope, 337 ; killed by Lycus, 337 

Erasippus, son of Hercules by Ly- 
sippe, i. 275 

Erato, a Muse, i. 17 

Erato, a Nereid, i. 15 

Erato, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Bromius, i. 141 

Erato, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Dynastes by Hercules, i. 273 

Erechtheis, the (so-called) sea on 
the Acropolis of Athens, produced 
by Poseidon, ii. 79 

Erechtheus, father of Creusa, i. 57 ; 
father of Procris, 79; twin son 
of Pandion, ii. 99; succeeds to 
the kingdom, 101; marries Praxi- 
thea, 103; his children, 103; in 
the war with the Eleusinians he 
slaughters his youngest daughter 
for victory, and the other daugh- 
ters slaughter themselves, 111; 
kills Eumolpus, 111; he and his 
house destroyed by Poseidon, 111 

Erginus, son of Clymenus, king of 
Orchomenus, exacts tribute from 
the Thebans and is killed by Her- 
cules, i. 179, 181 

Erginus, son of Poseidon, in the 

_ Argo, i. 97 

Erichthonius, son of Dardanus, 
succeeds to the kingdom, ii. 37; 
husband of Astyoche, father of 
Tros, 37 

Erichthonius, son of Hephaestus 
and Atthis or Athena, ii. 89, 91; 
put in a chest and entrusted by 
Athena to Pandrosus, 91; 
brought up by Athena in the 
precinct, 91, 93; king of Athens, 
933; sets up a wooden image of 
Athena, 93; institutes the Pana- 
thenaea, 93; marries Praxithea, 
95; father of Pandion, 95; buried 
in the precinct of Athena, 95 

Eridanus, river, the Argonauts at 


487 


INDEX 


the, i. 118; 
223 

Erigone, daughter of Aegisthus and 
Clytaemnestra, brings Orestes to 
trial at the Areopagus, ii, 271; 
married by Orestes, 277 

Erigone, daughter of Icarius, be- 
wails her father and hangs 
herself, ii. 97 

Eriphyle, daughter of Talaus, wife 
of Amphiaraus, i. 91; bribed by 
the necklace of Harmonia, per- 
suades her husband Amphiaraus 
to go to the war against Thebes, 
855; bribed by the robe of 
Harmonia, persuades her sons 
Alemaeon and Amphilochus to go 
to the war against Thebes, 379, 
381, 388; killed by Alcmaeon, 
883; her Fury visits the mur- 
derer, 383 

Eriphyle, the, of Stesichorus, ii. 17 

Erymanthus, Mount, the boar of, 
overcome by Hercules, i. 191, 193 

Erysichthon, son of Cecrops by 
Agraulus, ii. 813; dies childless, 81 

Erythia, cows of the Sun in, i. 43; 
island of Geryon, 211, 213 

arc one of the ‘Hesperides, 


Erythras (not Eurythras), son of 
Hercules by Exole, i. 273 
Erythrius, son of Athamas, tee 
Eryx, son of Poseidon, king of the 
Elymi in Sicily, killed by Her- 
cules, i. 217 
Eteocles, son of Oedipus, i. 349; 
makes a compact with his brother 
Polynices to rule alternately, 351 3 
rules over Thebes and refuses to 
hand over the kingdom to his 
brother Polynices, 351; pays no 
heed to message of Tydeus, 359, 
361; puts the Thebans in battle 
array, 361; slain in single combat 
by his brother Polynices, 369 
Eteoclus, son of Iphis, one of the 
Seven against Thebes, i. 357 ; one 
of the victors in the Nemean 
games, 359; slain by Leades, 369 
Eteoneus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 
Ethiopia, Perseus in, i. 159; Dawn 
carries Tithonus to, ii. 438; 
Eumolpus carried by Poseidon to, 
109 


Hercules at the, 


488 


_— woman, wife of Danaus, 


Ethiopians compel their king 
(Cepheus) to expose his daughter 
to a sea monster, i. 159 

Fthodia, ae of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

a Mount, thrown on Typhon, 


Euboea, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Olympus by Hercules, 


2 
ae the Argonauts sail past, 
119; Autolycus steals cattle 
py 239; Cenaeum in, 267; 
wreck of the Greeks on the coast 
of, ii. 247, 259 
Euboeans, ‘their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 
Eubote, daughter of Thespius, 
a of Eurypylus by Hercules, 
i. 
Euchenor, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Iphimedusa, i. 141 
Eucrante, a Nereid, i. 15 
Eudore, a Nereid, i. 15 
Eueres, son of Pterelaus, i. 165. See 
Everes 
Eulimene, a Nereid, i. 15 
Eumaeus, servant of Ulysses, ii. 299; 
— Ulysses to shoot the suitors, 
301 


aber oe. son of Hercules by Lyse, 

i 

Eumedes, son of ᾿ς ων. killed by 
Tydeus, i. 71, 

Eumelus, as to * Callisto, 1. 395; on 
the wife of Arcas, 397; as to 
rae Bis: 

Eumelus, father of Dolon, ii, 207 

Eumelus, son of Admetus, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27; leader of the 
Pheraeans against Troy, . 185; 
victor in the chariot-race, 217 

Eumelus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

EKumenides, precinct of the, at 
Colonus, i. 351 

Eumetes, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Eumolpe, a Nereid, i. 15 

Eumolpus at Eleusis cleanses and 
initiates Hercules, i. 233; son of 
Poseidon by Chione, ii. 107, 109 ; 
thrown by his mother into the 
sea, but rescued by Poseidon and 


son of Menelaus, | 


ι 


INDEX 


carried to Ethiopia, 109; being 
banished, he goes to Thrace, of 
which he becomes king, 109 ; 
fights for the Eleusinians against 
the Athenians, 109, 111; killed 
by Erechtheus, 111; father of 
Ismarus, 109 

Eumolpus, a flute iawn, falsely 
accuses Tenes, ii. 193; killed by 
Cycnus, 195 

Eumon, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Euneus, son of Jason, i. 9 

Eunice, a Nereid, i. 15 

Eunomus, son of Architeles, killed 
by Hercules, i. 259 

Eupalamus, father of Metiadusa, 
ii. 111; son of Metion, father of 
Daedalus, 121 

Euphemus, son of Poseidon, in the 
Argo, i. 97 

Euphemus, son of ‘Troezenus, 
leader of the Cicones, ii. 205 

Euphorbus wounds Patroclus, 11.209 

Euphorion, on the dedication of the 
bow of Philoctetes to Apollo, 
ii, 261 

Euphrosyne, a Grace, i. 17 

Eupinytus, son of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Euripides, on the sons of Belus, 
i. 137 ; on the death of Partheno- 
paeus, 369; on the children of 
Alemaeon, 387; as to the father 
and husband of Atalanta, 401, 403 

Europa on the bull, i. 199 ; daughter 
of Agenor or of Phoenix, 297, 
299; loved by Zeus, who carries 
her on a bull through the sea to 
Crete, 299; she bears him Minos, 
Sarpedon, and Rhadamanthys, 
299 ; sought for by her brothers, 
her mother, and Thasus, 299, 
301; married by Asterius, 301 ; 
her descendants, 313; gives 
necklace to Harmonia, 317 

Europe, traversed by Io, i. 133; 
traversed by Hercules on his way 
to fetch the kine of Geryon, 211 ; 
and Libya, pillars of Hercules at 
the boundaries of, 211, 213; and 
Asia embroiled by the will of 
Zeus, ii. “171 

Hurope, wife of Danaus, i. 139 

Eurotas, son of Lelex, father of 
Sparta, ii, 11 


Euryale, a Gorgon, i. 157 

Euryale, mother of Orion by 
Poseidon, i. 31 

Euryalus, son of Mecisteus, i. 91 ; 
in the Argo, 97; one of the 
Epigoni, 379 

Euryalus, son of Melas, killed by 
Tydeus, 1: 71;78 . 

Euryalus, suitor of Penelope from 
Dulichium, ii. 297 

Euryalus, suitor of Penelope from 
Zacynthos, ii. 299 

Eurybia, daughter of Sea, mother of 
“agian Pallas, and Perses, i. 13, 


Eurybia, daughter of Thespius, 
τῶ of Polylaus by Hercules, 
i: 

Eurybius, son of Eurystheus, slain 
in battle with the Athenians, 
1277. 

Eurybius, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Eurycapys, son of Hercules by 
Clytippe, 1. 273 

Eurydamas, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Phartis, i. 141 

Eurydice, daughter of Adrastus, 
wife of Ilus, ii. 43 

Eurydice, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Dryas, i. 141 

Eurydice, daughter of Lacedaemon, 
wife of Acrisius, mother of Danae, 
14}. ie LL 

Eurydice, wife of Lycurgus, mother 
of Opheltes, i. 91, 357 

Eurydice, wife of Orpheus, dies of 
snake-bite, i. 17; sent up from 
Hades by Pluto, but obliged to 
return, 17, 19 

Kurygania, daughter of Hyperphas, 
wife of Oedipus, according to 
some, i. 349 

Eurylochus, a companion οἵ 
Ulysses, reports to him the en- 
chantments of Circe, ii. 287, 289 

Eurylochus, son of Danaus, hus- 
band of Autonoe, i. 141 

Eurylochus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Eurymede, wife of Glaucus, mother 
of Bellerophon, i. 79 

Eurymedon, son of Minos, in Paros, 
i. 203, 808 

Eurymenes, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Eurynome, an Oceanid, 1k ἡ 


489 


INDEX 


daughter of Ocean, 17; mother 
of Asopus by Zeus, ii. 51 

Eurynome, wife of Lycurgus, i. 399 

Eurynomus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Euryopes, son of Hercules’ by 
Terpsicrate, i. 275 

Eurypyle, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Archedicus by Her- 
cules, i. 273 

Eurypylus, son of Evaemon, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27; leader of the 
Ormenians against Troy, 185 ; 
wounded at Troy, 209 

Eurypylus, son of Hercules by 
Eubote, i. 273 

Eurypylus, son of Poseidon, king of 
Cos, slain by Hercules, i. 247; 
father of Chalciope, 275, 277 

Eurypylus, son of Telephus, fights 
for the Trojans, ii. 227; slain by 
Neoptolemus, 227 

Eurypylus, son of Temenus, hires 
men to murder his father, i. 291 

Eurypylus, son of Thestius, i. 63 

Eurypylus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

Eurysthenes, son of Aristodemus, 
i. 287; with his brother Procles 
gets Lacedaemon by lot, 289 

Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, born 
a seven-month child, reigns over 
Mycenae, i. 167; at Tiryns, 
Hercules ordered to serve, 185; 
commands Hercules to bring the 
skin of the Nemean lion, 185; 
hides in a bronze jar under the 
earth, 187; purifies Copreus, 
187; orders Hercules to kill the 
hydra, 187, but refuses to recog- 
nize this labour, 189; orders 
Hercules to clean out the dung of 
the cattle of Augeas, 195; re- 
fuses to recognize this as one of 
the labours, 197 ; orders Hercules 
to chase away the Stymphalian 
birds, 197, to bring the Cretan 
bull, 199, to bring the mares of 
Diomedes, 201, to bring the belt 
of Hippolyte, 203; father of 
Admete, 203; orders Hercules 
to fetch the kine of Geryon, 211 ; 
sacrifices the kine to Hera, 219; 
orders Hercules to fetch the 
golden apples from the Hes- 


490 


perides, 219, 221; bestows the 
apples of the Hesperides on 
Hercules, 231, 233 ; demands the 
surrender of the sons of Hercules 
from Ceyx, 277; wages war with 
the Athenians, 277; killed by 
ae 277, 279; his sons slain, 
Eurystratus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 
Euryte, a nymph, mother of 
Halirrhothius by Poseidon, ii. 81 
Euryte, daughter of Hippodamas, 
wife of Porthaon, i, 63 
Eurytele, daughter of Thespius, 
ere of Leucippus by Hercules, 


1.8 

Eurythemis, daughter of Cleoboea, 
wife of Thestius, i. 63 

Eurythras. See Erythras 

Eurytion, a centaur, i. 193; slain 
by Hercules, 197 

Eurytion, herdsman of Geryon, 
i. 211; killed by Hercules, 215 

Eurytion, son of Actor, hunts the 
Calydonian boar, i. 67; killed by 
Peleus, 69; king of Phthia, 
receives Peleus, purifies him, and 
gives him his daughter, ii. 61; 
accidentally killed by Peleus, 63 

Eurytus, a giant, killed by Diony- 
sus, i. 45 

Eurytus and Cteatus, sons of 
Actor or Poseidon by Molione, 
called the Molionides, slain by 
Hercules, i. 249 

Eurytus, father of Thalpius, ii. 27 

Eurytus, teaches Hercules to shoot, 
i. 175, 183; prince of Oechalia, 
offers his daughter as a prize to 
the best. archer, 237, 239 ; sus- 
pects Hercules of stealing his 
cattle, 239 ; refuses compensation 
for the murder of his son, 241; 
slain by Hercules, 265 

Eurytus, son of Hermes, in the 
Argo, i. 97 

Eurytus, son of Hippocoon, slain by 
Hercules, ii. 23 

Eusorus, father of Acamas, ii, 205 

Euterpe, a Muse, i. 17; mother of 
Rhesus, 21 , 

Eutiches, son of Hippocoon, ii. 21 ; 
slain by Hercules, 23 

Euxanthius, son of Minos, i. 303 


INDEX 


᾿ς Evadne, daughter of Iphis, burns 
herself with the corpse of her 
husband Capaneus, i. 375 

Evadne, daughter of Strymon, wife 
of Argus, i. 131 

oe father of Eurypylus, 
τ. 

Evaemon, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Evagoras, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Evagoras, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Evagore, a Nereid, i. 15 

Evander, son of Priam, ii. 49 


Evenorides, suitor of Penelope 
from Dulichium, ii. 297 
Evenorides, suitor of Penelope 


from Zacynthos, ii. 299 

Evenus, a river, i. 63; the centaur 
Nessus at the, 261 

Evenus, son of Ares, father of 
Marpessa, i. 63; throws himself 
into a river, which is named after 
him, 63 

Everes, father of Tiresias, i. 361 

Everes, son of Hercules by Par- 
thenope, i. 277 

Everes (Eueres), son of Pterelaus, 
i. 165; survives the slaughter of 
his brothers, 169 

Evippe, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Argius, i. 141 

Evippe, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Imbrus, i. 141 

Evippus, son of Thestius, i. 63 

Exile the penalty for homicide, 
i. 61, 261, 283, 287, 289, 305, 335, 
337, ‘ii. 57, 105 

Exole, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Erythras by Hercules, i. 273 

Extremities of human victim cut 
off, i. 329 


Fates, the, daughters of Zeus and 
Themis, i. 15; slay two giants, 
47; beguile Typhon, 51; predict 
the death of Meleager, 65; allow 
Admetus a substitute to die for 
him, 93 

Fennel, fire hidden in a stalk of, 


i, 51 
Fire, Demophon put on the, by 
Demeter to make him immortal, 
i. 37, 39; stolen by Prometheus 
and given to men, 51; fire- 
breathing bulls, 109, 111; Her- 


cules throws his children into the, 
183; Achilles put by Thetis on 
the, to make him immortal, ii. 69, 
71; Broteas throws himself into 
the, 155, 157; sacred fire into 
which the Taurians throw stran- 
gers; 275 

First fruits sacrificed to the gods, 
i, 65, 67 

Flesh of infants eaten by women in 
Bacchic frenzy, i. 331 

Flood in Deucalion’s time, i. 55, 
li. 89. See Deucalion 

Fox a symbol of Messene, i. 291 

Furies, born of the flowing blood of 
Sky, i. 5; pursue Orestes, ii. 271 

Fury, Demeter in the likeness of a, 

οἷ, 373; of Eriphyle pursues her 
murderer Alcmaeon, 383 


Gadfly sent by Hera to infest Io in 
cow-form, i. 133; sent by Hera 
Ἢ torment the cows of Hercules, 

17 

Gadira, the kine of Geryon in, i. 211 

Galatea, a Nereid, i. 15 

Games celebrated in honour of 
father of Teutamides, i. 163; in 
honour of Archemorus, 359; in 
honour of Pelias, 399, ii. 62 ; held 
by king of Phrygia, 57: in 
honour of Laius at Thebes, ‘117; 
in honour of Patroclus, 211; in 
honour of Achilles, 217 

Ganymede, son of Tros, caught up 
by Zeus on an eagle and made 
cupbearer of the gods, ii. 37; 
horses given by Zeus as compen- 
sation for the rape of, i. 209 

Gelanor, king of Argos, surrenders 
the kingdom to Danaus, i. 137 

Genetor, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Geraestus, Cape, Myrtilus thrown 
into the sea at, ii. 163 

Geraestus, the Cyclops, the daugh- 
ters of Hyacinth sacrificed on the 
grave of, ii. 119 

Gerenians, Nestor brought up 
among the, i. 85, 251 

Geryon, son of Chrysaor, i. 159; a 
triple-bodied giant in Erythia, 
211; killed and his kine driven 
away by Hercules, 215 

Giants, sons of Sky and Earth, 


491 


INDEX 


make war on the gods in the 
sky, i. 43, 45, 47, 247; dragon- 
ὌΝΩΝ 43; shot by Hercules, 45, 

Glauce, an Amazon, carried off by 
Hercules, ii. 142, note 4 

Glauce, daughter of Creon, married 
πὸ Jason, murdered by Medea, 
i 

Glauce, daughter of Cychreus, 
mother of Telamon, according to 
Pherecydes, ii. 53 

Glauce, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Alces, i. 141 

Glaucippe, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Potamon, i. 141 

Glauconome, a Nereid, i. 15 

Glaucus, son of Antenor, saved by 
Ulysses and Menelaus, ii. 237 ~ 

Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, leader 
of the Lycians, ii. 205 ; exchanges 
arms with Diomedes, 207 ; killed 
by Ajax, 215 

Glaucus, son of Minos, i. 303; 
drowned in a jar of honey, 311; 
brought to life by a magic herb, 
313; taught the art of divination 
by Polyidus, but forgets it, 313 ; 
raised from the dead by Aescu- 
lapius, ij. 19 

Glaucus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Glaucus, son of Sisyphus, i. 149; 
father of Bellerophon, 79 

Glaucus, suitor of Penelope, ii, 297 

oe son of Hercules by Deianira, 
1, 275 

Goblet, golden, Hercules crosses 
the ocean ina, i. 218, 215, 229 

Gods turned into animals, i. 49; 
attacked by the Aloads, 59; 
altars of the twelve, at Olympia, 
251; all the, celebrate the mar- 
riage of Cadmus and Harmonia, 
317; blind Tiresias for revealing 
their secrets, 361; celebrate the 
marriage of Peleus and Thetis, 
ii. 69; the twelve, arbiters be- 
tween Poseidon and Athena, 81 ; 
the twelve, try Ares for murder in 
the Areopagus, 81 ; the mysteries 
of the, revealed to men by 
Tantalus, 155 

Golden Fleece, the, i. 75; nailed to 
an oak in Colchis, 77, 95 ; guarded 
by a sleepless dragon, 95, 113; 


492 


Jason sent by Pelias to fetch it, 
95, tie, procured for him by 
Medea, 113 

ae hair of Pterelaus, i. 165, 


Golden horns of the Cerynitian 
hind, i. 191 

Gorge, ‘daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Hippothous, i. 141 

Gorge, daughter of Oeneus, wife of 
Andraemon, i. 65; said to be 
mother of Tydeus’ by her own 
father, 71; mother of Thoas, 
ii. 183 

Gorgo, wife of Egyptus, i. 141 

Gorgon (Medusa), Perseus sent to 
fetch the head of the, i. 155; 
beheaded b Perseus, 159; 
Pegasus and ysaor spring from 
her trunk, 159; her head turns 
to stone those against whom it is — 
directed, 161; it is given to 
Athena, who puts it in her shield, 
161; said to have rivalled 
Athena, 161; hair of the lock of 
the, can turn enemies to flight, 
253; blood of the, used by — 
Aesculapius to kill or give life, 
ii. 17. See also Medusa 

Gorgons, the, offspring of Phorcus — 
and Ceto, i. 15; sisters of the 
Phorcides, 155; "described, 1573 
visited by Perseus, 1572, 159 

Gorgophone, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Proteus, i. 139 

Gorgophone, daughter of Perseus, — 
wife of Perieres, i. 79, 163, ii. 13 


Comer son of Electryon, 
i 
Gorgyra, 


mother of Ascalaphus, 
by Acheron, i. 41 | 
Gorgythion, son of Priam, ii. 49 
Graces, the, daughters of Zeus, i. 17; 
sacrifices in Paros to the, without 
flutes and garlands, ii, 117 
Gration, a giant, slain by Artemis, 
Grave of Abderus, Abdera founded 
beside the, i. 201; of Geraestus, 
the Cyclops, at Athens, the 
daughters of Hyacinth sacrificed 
on the, ii, 119; of Ajax, 201; 
Polyxena sacrificed on the grave 
of Achilles, 239, 241 
Greece, great part of, flooded in 


INDEX 


Deucalion’s time, 1. 55; kings of, 
go to Sparta to woo Helen, ii. 27 ; 
delivered from dearth by prayer 
of Aeacus, 55; army raised in, 
for war against Troy, 177; 
ae women dread slavery in, 
26 


Greeks named Hellenes after Hellen, 
i. 57; ravage Mysia, taking it for 
Troy, ii. 187; repulsed by Tele- 
phus, they return home, 187; 
at Troy make a wall to protect 
the roadstead, 207; chased by 
the Trojans, 207, 209; many of 
them slain by Memnon, 213)3 
after ten years of war the ‘Greeks 
despondent, 224 ; fetch the bones 
of Pelops, 225 dedicate the 
Wooden Horse to Athena, 233; 
lighted to Troy by a beacon, 235 ; 
spare Aeneas and Anchises, 237 ; 
Zeus sends a storm on the, 247 ; 
refuse satisfaction to Nauplius for 
the death of Palamedes, 249; 
wives of the, persuaded to be 
unfaithful, 249; their wander- 
ings and ‘settlements in various 
countries, 257; lose their ships 
and settle in Italy, 263 

Guneus, father of Laonome, i. 165 

Guneus, son of Ocytus, leader of the 
Aeanianians against Troy, ii. 185 ; 
settles in Libya, 257, 259 

Gyes, a Hundred-handed, i. 3 

Gyrtonians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185 


Hades, Tartarus a place in, i. 5; 
Pluto, lord of, 11; Styx in, 13; 
descent of Orpheus "to, ys Tityus 
in, 29; Side in, 31; "Ascalaphus 
in 39, 2387; Sisyphus im. 79: 
Alcestis brought up from, 93; 
the mouth of, at Taenarum, 233, 
235 ; Hercules il; Boo, 20D, 997: 
Cerberus brought up by Hercules 
from, 233, 237; Theseus and 
Pirithous in, 235, 237; Meleager 
and the Gorgon Medusa in, 235; 
Rhadamanthys and Minos judges 
in, 301; Dionysus brings up his 
mother (Semele) from, 333; 
Aeacus keeps the keys of, ii. 57; 
descent of Theseus and Pirithous 


to, 153; punishment of Tantalus 
in, 155; Protesilaus brought up 
from, 199, and carried back to, 
201; fire wafted up from, 273 

Hades, the cap of, which rendered 
the wearer invisible, i. 157, 159; 
the kine of, i. 215, 237 ; wounded 
by Hercules at Pylus, 251. See 
Pluto 

Haemo, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Haemon, son of Creon, killed by 
the Sphinx, i. 349 

Haemus, Mount, in Thrace, i. 51; 
traversed by To, 133 

Hagius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Hagnias, father of Tiphys, i. 97 

Hair cut off in mourning, i. 101; 
golden hair of Pterelaus, 165, 173; 
of Gorgon turns enemies to flight, 
253; purple hair of Nisus, ii. 
173; of Locrian maidens cropped 
at Troy, 267 

Halie, a Nereid, i. 15 

Halimede, a Nereid, i. 15 

Halipherus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Halirrhothius, son of Poseidon 
killed by Ares, ii. 81 

Halius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Halocrates, son of Hercules, by 
Olympusa, 1..275 

Hamadryad nymphs, mothers of 
children by Danaus, i. 141 

Hanging as a mode of suicide, i. 71, 
121, 269, 349, ii. 51, 65, 97, 147 

Harmonia, daughter of ‘Ares and 
Aphrodite, married to Cadmus, 
i. 317; receives a necklace made 
by Hephaestus, 317; goes with 
Cadmus to the Encheleans and is 
turned into a serpent, 335; sent 
ee Zeus to the Elysian Fields, 

3 

Harpaleus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Harpalycus, son of Lycaon, i, 389 

Harpies, the, offspring of Thaumas 
and Electra, i. 15; molest 
Phineus, chased away by Zetes 
and Calais, 105, 107, ii. 105, 107 

Harpys, river in Peloponnese, i. 105 

Heads of murdered sons of Egyptus 
buried at Lerna, i. 143; of un- 
successful suitors of Hippodamia 
nailed to her father’s house, ii. 161 

Heaven attacked by Typhon, i. 49; 
Hercules carried up to, 271; 


493 


INDEX 


Dionysus ascends with his mother 
to, 333; oracle about the fall of, 
ii. 265. See also Sky 

Hebe, daughter of Zeus and Hera, 
eh married to Hercules, 271, 

Hecate, born of Perses and Asteria, 
i. 13; kills Clytius, 45 

Hector, firstborn son of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 45; marries Andro- 
mache, 51; kills Protesilaus, 
199; fights Ajax, 207; sets fire 
to the Greek ships, 209; slain by 
Achilles, 209, 211; his body 
ransomed by Priam, 211 

Hecuba, daughter of Dymas, second 
wife of Priam, ii. 45; mother of 
Hector, 45; mother of Paris, 47 ; 
her dream, 47; her other sons 
and daughters, 47, 49; awarded 
to Ulysses or Helenus, 241; 
turned into a bitch, 241; buried 
in the Chersonnese, 241 

Helen, daughter of Zeus by Leda 
or by Nemesis, fi. 23, 253 
hatched out of an egg, 25; 
carried off by Theseus’ to 
Aphidnae, 25; recovered by 
Pollux and Castor, 25; her 
wooers, 27, 29; carried off by 
Alexander (Paris) from Sparta, 
51, 171; carried off from Sparta 
by Theseus and Pirithous, 153 ; 
rescued by the Dioscuri, 153; 
married by Menelaus, 171; goes 
off with Alexander (Paris), 173, 
175; comes with him to Troy, 
175; the real Helen carried by 
Hermes to Egypt, a phantom 
Helen carried by Alexander to 
Troy, 175; assigned to Dei- 
phobus after the death of Alex- 
ander (Priam), 223; recognizes 
Ulysses and helps him to steal the 
Palladium, 227; speaks to the 
Greek chiefs in the Wooden 
Horse, 235; led away by 
Menelaus, 237; a phantom of 
her possessed by Menelaus, 279 ; 
discovered by Menelaus in Egypt, 
279; goes with him to the 
Elysian Fields, 279 

Helenus, son of Priam and Hecuba, 
ii. 49; claims Helen in marriage 
against Deiphobus, 223; cap- 


494 


tured by Ulysses, he tells how 
llium may be taken, 223, 225; 
gets Hecuba and buries her, 241 ; 
goes with Neoptolemus ἴὸ 
Molossia, founds a city, and 
marries Deidamia, 251 

Helenus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Heleus, son of Perseus, i. 163; 
goes with Amphitryon against 
the Taphians, 173; settles in the 
Taphian islands, 173 

Heliconis, daughter of Thespius, 
i ὰ of Phalias by Hercules, 
is 

Helix, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Hellanicus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

Helle, daughter of Athamas, i. 75; 
drowned in the Hellespont, to 
which she gives her name, 77 

Hellen, son of Deucalion or Zeus 
and Pyrrha, i. 55, 57; the Hel- 
lenes (Greeks) named after him, 
57; divides the country among 
his sons, 57 

Hellenes (Greeks) named after 
Hellen, i. 57 

Hellespont named after Helle, i. 77 ; 
Hercules drives some of the kine 
of Geryon to the, 217 


Helmet of Pluto, i. 11 : of Hades, 47 


Helos, in Argolis, Heleus at, i. 173 
Hemithea, daughter of Cycnus, 
banished with her brother Tenes 
by her father, ii. 193 
Hephaestine, wife of Egyptus, i. 143 
Hephaestus, borne by Hera without 
intercourse with the other sex, 


i. 21; according to Homer, a son — 


of Zeus and Hera, 21, 23; comes 
to the rescue of Hera, cast out of 


heaven by Zeus, falls on Lemnos, — 


23; helps the birth of Athena, 
25; his smithy, 33; under- 
ground house constructed by, 33 ; 
kills the giant Mimas, 45; nails 
Prometheus to the Caucasus, 53 ; 
father of Palaemon, 97; gives 
brazen-footed bulls to Aeetes, 
109; gives Talos to Minos, 119; 
gives Hercules a golden breast- 
plate, 183; gives brazen cas- 
tanets to Athena, 199; entrusted 
with the kine of Geryon by 
Hercules, 217 ; makes a necklace 


INDEX 


for Harmonia, 317; father of 
Erichthonius by Athena, ii. 89, 
91; father of Periphetes by 
Anticlia, 123; cleanses Pelops 
(for the murder of Myrtilus), 163 ; 
makes armour for Achilles, 209; 
dries up the river Scamander, 209 
Hera, daughter of Cronus and 
Rhea, swallowed by Cronus, 
ieeearies Zeus, 15; her 
offspring, 15; mother’ of 
Hephaestus, 21’; put in bonds, 
23; hung from Olympus by Zeus, 
23, "247; Zeus afraid of, 29; casts 
down her rival Side to Hades, 
31; attacked by Porphyrion, 
45; claim of Alcyone to be, 59; 
wooed by Ephialtes, 59; angry 
with Athamas, 77; precinct of, 
83; treated with contumely by 
Pelias, 85, 95; helps the Argo- 
nauts through the Clashing 
Rocks, 107; summons Thetis to 
help the Argo, 115; of the 
Height at Corinth, altar of, 123, 
125; persecutes lo in form of a 
cow, 131; instigates the Curetes 
to make away with Epaphus, 
135; land of Argos belongs to, 
139; image of, disparaged by 
the daughters of Proetus, 147 ; 
persuades the Ilithyias to retard 
Alemena’s delivery, 167; sends 
serpents to kill intant Hercules, 
175; drives Hercules mad, 183; 
stirs up the Amazons against Her- 
cules, 205; afflicts the cows of 
Geryon with a gadfly,217; the kine 
of Geryon sacrificed by Eurystheus 
to, 219; golden apples presented 
by Earth on her marriage with 
Zeus, 221; sends storms against 
Hercules, 247; Hercules _ re- 
conciled to, 271; deceives 
Semele, 319; drives Athamas 
and Ino mad for rearing Diony- 
sus, 319; Dionysus turned into 
a kid to elude her wrath, 321; 

drives Dionysus mad, 325; 

sends the Sphinx to Thebes, 347 ; 
and Zeus refer their dispute to 
Tiresias as arbiter, 367; blinds 
Tiresias, 367; persuades Artemis 
to shoot Callisto as ἃ wild 
beast, 395; brings up Thetis, 


ii. 67; assaulted by Ixion, 149 3 
a cloud in her likeness sub- 
stituted for her, 149; Thyestes 
takes refuge at the altar of, 
171; a competitor for the prize 
of beauty, 173; sends a storm 
on Alexander and Helen, 175; 
makes Menelaus immortal, 279 


Heraclea in Mysia, i. 205 
Heraclids (the sons of Hercules) 


attack and conquer Peloponnese, 
i. 281; quit Peloponnese and 
retire to Marathon, 283 ; Hyllus 
seeks to effect the return of the, 
283; Polyphontes, one of the, 
291; belong to the family of 
Inachus, 297 


Heraeeus, son of Lycaon, i i. 389 
Herb, magical, which brings dead 


to life, 1, 313 


Hercules slays Linus, i. 17; at 


Troy, 23; shoots the giants, 45, 
47; delivers Prometheus, 53; 
wrestles with Achelous for 
Deianira, 65, 257; ravages 
Pylus, 85, 251; kills Pericly- 
menus, 85, 251; rescues Alcestis 
from Hades, 93; in the Argo, 
07, 101, 108: and: Hylas, 101 5 

lett by the Argonauts at Aphetae, 
101; slave of Omphale, 101; 

his expedition against the Ama- 
zons, 141; brings up Theseus 
from Hades, 153; his birth 
delayed by the Ilithyias, 167; 
born along with his twin Iphicles, 
175; strangles two serpents in 
his infancy, 175; his education, 
175, 177; kills Linus and tried 
for murder, 177; reared on a 
cattle farm, 177; kills the lion of 
Cithaeron, 177; has intercourse 
with the daughters of Thespius, 
179; dresses in the lion’s skin, 
179; mutilates the heralds of 
Erginus, 179, 181; kills Erginus, 
181; receives weapons from 
Athena, 181; compels the Min- 
yans to pay tribute to Thebes, 
181; marries Megara, daughter 
of Creon, 1815; receives weapons 
from the gods, 183; cuts himself 
a club at Nemea, 183; goes mad 
and burns his children, is purified 
by Thespius, and ordered by the 


495 


INDEX 


Delphic oracle to serve Eurys- 
theus at Tiryns, 183, 185; 
named Alcides, 183; his ten 
(twelve) labours, 185-237; kills 
the Nemean lion, 185, 187; 
lodged at Cleonae by Molorchus, 
185, 187; sacrifices to Saviour 
Zeus, 187 (cp. 185); kills the 
Lernaean hydra, 187, 189; dips 
his arrows in the hydra’s gall, 
189; brings the Cerynitian hind 
to Mycenae, 191; brings the 
Erymanthian boar to Mycenae, 
191, 195; his battle with the 
centaurs, 193; cleans out the 
cattle-yard of Augeas, 195, 197; 
is refused his reward by Augeas, 
197; shoots the Stymphalian 
birds, 197, 199; receives brazen 
castanets from Athena, 199; 
brings. the Cretan bull, 199; 
brings the mares of Diomedes, 
201, 203; defeats the Bistones, 
201; founds Abdera, 201; 
brings the belt of the Amazon 
Hippolyte to Eurystheus, 203, 
205, 209; kills some of the sons 
of Minos in Paros, 203, 205; goes 
to Mysia, defeats the Bebryces, 
and kills their king Mygdon, 205 ; 
delivers Hesione, daughter of 
Laomedon, at Troy from a sea- 
beast, but is defrauded of his 
reward by Laomedon, 205, 207, 
209; his adventures at Aenus, 
Thasos, and Torone, 209 ; ordered 
to fetch the kine of Geryon from 
Erythia, 211; destroys wild 
beasts in Europe, 211; sets up 
the pillars of Hercules at Tar- 
tessus, 211, 213; receives from 
the Sun a golden goblet in which 
he crosses the ocean, 213; comes 
to Erythia, 213; kills Geryon 
and drives away his kine, 215; 
sent to fetch the golden apples of 
the Hesperides, 219, 221; fights 
Cycnus, son of Ares, 221; 
extorts an answer from Nereus, 
223; wrestles with and kills 
Antaeus, 223; goes to Egypt, 
223; haled to the altar to be 
sacrificed, but kills Busiris, 227 ; 
sacrifices a bullock (at Lindus), 
227; sacrifices to, accompanied 


496 


by curses, 227; releases Pro- 
metheus, 229 ; ae the apples of 
the Hesperides from Atlas, 231 ; 
relieves Atlas of his burden, 231 ; 
brings up Cerberus from Hades, 
233, 237; his adventures in 
Hades, 235, 237; gives Megara 
to Jolaus, 237; woos 1016, 237, 
239; kills Iphitus, is purified by 
Deiphobus, 239; goes to Delphi, 
239; carries off the tripod, 241 ; 
serves Omphale as a slave, 241, 
243; binds the Cercopes, 241; 
kills Syleus, 241, 243; buries 
Icarus, 243; captures Ilium, 
245; gives Hesione to Telamon, 
245, 247; ravages Gos, 247; 
sides with the gods in their war 
with the giants, 247; kills the 
Molionides, 249; captures Elis 
and kills Augeas, 249; celebrates 
the Olympian games, 249 ; founds 
altars of Pelops and the twelve 
gods at Olympia, 251; captures 
Pylus, slays Neleus and his sons, 
251; captures Lacedaemon, slays 
Hippocoon and his sons, 251, 253 ; 
restores Tyndareus, 253; begets 
Telephus on Auge, 253, 255, 257 ; 
woos Deianira, wrestles with 
Achelous, 257; marches against 
the Thesprotians, 259: kills 
Eunomus, 259; goes into exile, 
261; goes to Trachis, 261, 263 ; 
kills Nessus, 261; conquers the 
Dryopes, 263; fights for the 
Dorians against the Lapiths, 
263; kills Cyenus, son of Ares, 
265; kills Amyntor, 2653; cap- 
tures Oechalia and slays Eurytus, 
265, 267; proposes to sacrifice to 
Zeus at Cenaeum, 267; tortured 
by the poisoned robe he burns 
himself on Mt. Oeta, 269, 271; 
obtains immortality, 271 ; marries 
Hebe, 271, 273; his sons, 273, 
275, 277; his sons (the Heraclids) 
flee Ceyx at Trachis, 277 ; his 
sons come to Athens and claim 
protection, 277 (see also Hera- 
clids) ; seduces Auge, 397; kills 
Hippocoon and his sons, ii, 23 ; 
captures Ilium, 45; the bow of, 
51, 195; prays for a male child 
for Telamon, 61; his expedition 


INDEX 


against Troy, 61; kills Zetes and 
Calais, 107; Troy not to be 
? without the bow of, 221, 


Herds of Augeas, i. 195 

Hermes slays giant Hippolytus, 
i. 47; steals the severed sinews 
of Zeus, 49; sent by Zeus to 
Deucalion, 55; rescues Ares, 59, 
61; gives ram with golden fleece 
to Nephele, 75; father of Auto- 
lycus, 97; father of Eurytus, 
97; ordered by Zeus to steal Io 
in form of a cow, 133; kills Argus 
the All-seeing, 133; hence called 
Argiphontes, 133; and Athena 
purify the Danaids for the 
murder of their husbands, 143 ; 
guides Perseus to the Phorcides, 
155; gives Perseus an adaman- 
tine sickle, 157; receives the 
winged sandals, wallet, and cap 
of Hades from Perseus and re- 
stores them to the nymphs, 
161; gives Hercules a sword, 
183; father of Abderus, 201; 
admonishes Hercules in Hades, 
235; sells Hercules to Omphale, 
241; loves Apemosyne, 309; 
conveys infant Dionysus to Ino 
and Athamas, 319; _ brings 
Dionysus to the nymphs at Nysa, 
321; gives Amphion a lyre, 339 ; 
son’ of Zeus by Maia, born on 
Cyllene, ii. 5; goes to Pieria and 
steals the kine of Apollo, 5, 7, 9; 
makes a lyre from tortoise-shell, 
9; makes a shepherd’s pipe, 9; 
gets from Apollo a golden wand 
and the art of divination, 11; 
appointed herald of the gods, 11 ; 
father of Cephalus by Herse, 83 ; 
sent by Zeus with a message to 
Atreus, 165; leads the goddesses 
to be judged by Alexander on 
Ida, 173; steals Helen and carries 
her to Egypt, 175; brings up 
Protesilaus from Hades, 199: 
gives moly to Ulysses, 289; 
father of Pan by Penelope, 305 

Hermion, Pluto at, i. 35 

Hermione, daughter of Menelaus 
and Helen, ii. 29; daughter of 
Helen, abandoned by her mother, 
175; betrothed to Neoptolemus, 


APOLL. II. 


253; wife of Orestes, 253, 277; 
carried off by Neoptolemus, 253 

Hermus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Cleopatra, i. 141 

Herodorus, on Hercules and Om- 
phale, i. 101; on the children of 
Niobe, 343 

Heroes, sacrifices to, i. 185; and 
heroines, Ulysses sees the souls 
of, ii. 289 

Herse, daughter of Cecrops, ii. 81; 
mother of Cephalus by Hermes,83 

Herse, wife of Danaus, i. 143 

Hesiod, on Periboea, i. 71; on one 
of the Harpies, 105; on Pelasgus, 
191. 380 son To) 181, 1338 on 
lovers’ oaths, 131; on the mad- 
ness of the daughters of Proetus, 
147; on the Chimera, 151; on 
the kibisis, 157; on the children 
of Niobe, 341; on the changes of 
sex experienced by ‘Tiresias, 363, 
365; as to Callisto, 395; on the 
father of Atalanta, 401; on 
Adonis, ii. 85 

Hesione, daughter of Laomedon, 
exposed to a sea monster, rescued 
by Hercules, i. 207, 209; given by 
him to Telamon, 245, 247; she 
ransoms her brother Podarces 
(Priam), 247; daughter of 
Laomedon, ii. 48: given as a 
prize to Telamon, 61; mother of 
Teucer by Telamon, 61 

Hesione, wife of Nauplius, i. 145 

Hesperia, one of the Hesperides, 
1. 291 

Hesperides, the golden apples of the, 
on Atlas, among the Hyper- 
boreans, guarded by a dragon, 
i. 219, 221; given by Atlas to 
Hercules, who brings them to 
Eurystheus, 231; carried back 
by Athena 231 

Hestia, first-born of Cronus, swal- 
lowed by him, i. 7 

Hestiaea, city built by the exiled 
Thebans, i. 381 

Hesychia, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Oestrobles by Her- 
cules, i. 275 

Hicetaon, son of Laomedon, ii. 43 

Hierax blabs on Io, i. 188 

Hieromneme, daughter of Simoeis, 
wife of Assaracus, ii, 37 


497 
K K 


INDEX 


Hilaira, daughter of lLeucippus, 
carried off by the Dioscuri, ii. 13 ; 
bears Anogon to Castor, 33 

Hind, the Cerynitian hind with the 
golden horns brought by Her- 
cules to Mycenae, i. 191 

Hippalcimus, father of 
My 27 

Hippalmus, father of Peneleus, i. 97 

Hippasus, father of Actor, i. 97 

Hippasus, son of Ceyx, buried by 
Hercules, i. 267 

Hippeus, son of Hercules by Pro- 
cris, i. 273 

Hippo, daughter of ‘Thespius, 
are of Capylus by Hercules, 
i 

Hippocoon, son of Oebalus by Batia, 
1 91. king of jae 
i, 251; his sons, 21, 23; he 
and his sons fight for Neleus 
against Hercules, i.251; they kill 
the son of Licymnius, 251; they 
expel Icarius and Tyndareus from 
Lacedaemon, ii. 23; they are 
killed by Hercules, i. 253, ii. 23 

Hippocoodntids, the sons of Hippo- 
coon, kill the son of Licymnius, 
i. 251, 253. See Hippocoon 

Hippocorystes, son of Egyptus, 
husband of Hyperippe, i. 143 

he ai stes, son of Hippocoon, 
li. 23 

Hippocrate, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Hippozygus by Her- 
cules, i. 275 

Hippodamas, son of Achelous, i. 573 
father of Euryte, 63 

Hippodamas, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Hippodamia, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Istrus, i. 141 

Hippodamia, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Diocorystes, i. 141 

Hippodamia, daughter of Oenomaus, 
wooed by Polydectes, i. 1553 
otfered as a prize to the victor 
in a chariot-race, ii. 157, 161; 
her suitors put to death by her 
father, 159, 161; loves Pelops 
and is won by him, 161, 163; 
persuades Myrtilus to help Pelops 
in the race, 161 

Hippodamia, wooed by Pirithous, 
ii, 151; centaurs attempt to 
violate her, 151 


498 


Peneleos, 


Hippodice, daughter of ΡΝ 
wife of Idas, i. 148 

Hippodochus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii, 297 

Hippodromus, son of Hercules 
y Anthippe, i. 273 

Hippolochus, father of Glaucus, 
ii. 205 

Hippolyte, an Amazon carried off 
by Theseus, ii. 143; also called 
Glauce and Melanippe, 213; 
daughter of Ares and Otrere, 
211; mother of Hippolytus, 213 ; 
killed involuntarily by Penthesilia 
or by Theseus, 211, 213 

Hippolyte, queen of the Amazons, 
killed by Hercules, i. 205; her 
belt brought by him to Eurys- 
theus, i. 203, 205, 209 

Hippolytus, a giant, 
Hermes, i. 47 

Hippolytus, father of Deiphobus, 


slain by 


Hit polytus son of Egyptus, hus- 
and of Rhode, i. 141 

Hippolytus, son of Theseus by the 
Amazon, ii. 145; loved and 
falsely accused by Phaedra, 145 ; 
cursed by Theseus, 145; dragged 
to death by his horses, 147; 
raised from the dead by Aescu- 
lapius, 17 

Hippomachus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 - 

Hippomedon, son of Aristomachus 
or of Talaus, one of the Seven 
against Thebes, i. 357; slain by 
Ismarus, 369 

Hippomedusa, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Alemenor,i. 141 

Hippomenes, father of Megareus, 
". 117 

Hippomenes, husband of Atalanta, 
according to Euripides, i. 401, 403 

Hipponoe, a Nereid, i, 15 

Hipponome, daughter of Menoeceus, 
wife of Alcaeus, i. 165 

Hipponous, father of Periboea, 
i. 71; father of Capaneus, 357 

Hipponous, son of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49 

Hippostratus, son of Amarynceus, 
seduces Periboea, i. 71 

Hippotes, son of Phylas, banished 
for homicide, i, 287 


INDEX 


Hippothoe, daughter of Mestor, 
wie of Taphius by Poseidon, 
i. 

Hippothoe, daughter of Pelias, i. 85 

Hippothoe, a Nereid, i. 15 

Hippothous, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Gorge, i. 141 

Hippothous, son of Hippocoon, ii. 23 

Hippothous, son of Pelasgus, a 
Trojan ally, ii, 205 

Hippothous, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Hippozygus, son of Hercules, by 
Hippocrate, i. 275 

Homer on Hephaestus, i. 21, 23; 
on the wife of Proetus, 145; on 
the Chimera, 151; on Sarpedon, 
ey on the children of Niobe, 

Homicide, banishment for, i. 61. 
See Exile 

Homolippus, son of Hercules by 
Xanthis, i. 273 

Homoloidian gate of Thebes, i. 361 

Hoopoe, Tereus turned into a, 
ii. 101 

Hoples, father of Meta, ii. 113 

Hopleus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Hopleus, son of Poseidon, i. 59 

Horn of Amalthea, i. 257 

Horses, winged, of Zeus, i. 51; 
man-eating mares of Diomedes, 
201; mares given by Zeus to 
Laomedon, 209; king Lycurgus 
killed by, 331; immortal, given 
by Poseidon to Peleus, ii. 69; 
al given by Ares to Oenomaus 


Horus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Human sacrifices. See Sacrifices 

Hundred-handed, the, i. 3; guards 
of the Titans, 11 

Hunting of the Calydonian boar, 
i. 67, 69. See Boar 

Hyacinth, a Lacedaemonian, his 
daughters slaughtered by the 
Athenians on the grave of 
Geraestus in time of famine and 
plague, ii. 119 

Hyacinth, son of Magnes and the 
Muse Clio, i. 19; loved .by 
Thamyris, loved and killed acci- 
dentally by Apollo, 19; son of 
Amyclas and Diomede, loved by 
Apollo and killed by him in- 
voluntarily, ii. 11, 13 


Hyades, the nymphs of Nysa 
changed into the, i. 321 

Hybris, mother of Pan by Zeus, i. 27 

Hydra, the Lernaean, killed by 
Hercules, i. 187, 189: poison of 
a corrodes the skin of Hercules, 

Hylaeus, a centaur, shot by 
Atalanta, i. 399 

Hylas, son of Thiodamas, minion 
of Hercules, ravished by water 
nymphs, i. 101 

Hee killed by Calydonian boar. 
i. 69 


Hyllus, son of Hercules by Deianira, 
i. 269, 275; charged by his 
father to marry Iole, 275; slays 
Eurystheus, 277, 279; marries 
Tole and seeks to effect the return 
oe the Heraclids to Peloponnese, 

3 

Hymenaeus raised from the dead 
by Aesculapius, ii. 19 

Hyperbius, son of Egyptus, husband 
ot Celaeno, i. 143 

Hyperboreans, the, i. 33; golden 
apples of the Hesperides among 
the, 219, 221, 231 

Hyperenor, one of the Sparti, i. 317 

Hyperenor, son of Poseidon by 
Aleyone, ii. 5 

Hyperenor, suitor 
ii. 297 

Hyperion, a Titan, son of Sky and 
Earth, i. 5; father of Dawn, Sun, 
and Moon, 13 

Hyperion, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Hyperippe, daughter of Danaus, 
wife ot Hippocorystes, i. 143 

Hyperlaus, son of Melas, killed by 
Dydeus, 1. 71, 73 


of Penelope, 


. Hypermnestra, daughter of Danaus, 


wife of Lynceus, i. 139; saves 
her husband’s life, 143; mother 
of Abas, 145 

Hypermnestra, daughter of Thes- 
tius, i. 63 

Hyperochus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Hyperphas, father of Eurygania, 
i. 349 

Hypoplacian Thebes 
Achilles, ii. 203 

Hypseus, father of Themisto, i. 77 


taken by 


Hypsipyle, daughter of ‘Thoas, 
queen of Lemnos, saves her 
499 


K KOZ 


INDEX 


father from massacre, i, 99; 
bedded with Jason, 99; sold 
into slavery, serves in the house 
ot Lycurgus, king of Nemea, 
359; nurses the child of 
Lycurgus, 357; guides the 
cy ty against Thebes to a spring 

Hypsistan gate of Thebes, i, 361 

Hyria, Lycus and Neos settle 
at, i. 337 

Hyria, in Cilicia, ii. 83 

Hyrieus, son of Poseidon by 
Alcyone, ii. 5; father of Nycteus 
and Lycus, 5 

Hyrnetho, daughter of Temenus, 
wife of Deiphontes, i. 291 


Hyrtacus, second husband of 
Arisbe, ii. 45; father of Asius, 
205 


Ialebion and Dercynus, sons of 
Poseidon, killed by Hercules, 
i. 215 

Talmenus, son of Ares, in the Argo, 
i. 99; suitor of Helen, ii. 27 

Iambe, her jokes with Demeter, 
if 37 

Ianira, a Nereid, i. 15 

lapetus, a Titan, son of Sky and 
Earth, i. 5; father of Atlas, 
Prometheus, and Epimetbeus, 13 

Iardanus (lardanes), father of 
Omphale, i. 241 

Iasion, son of Zeus, attempts to 
force Demeter, ii. 35; killed by 
a thunderbolt, 35 

TIasus, son of Argus, father of Io, 
1 Sl 

Iasus, son of Lycurgus, i. 399; 
father of Atalanta, 399 

Iberia, Greeks settle in the islands 
near, ii. 257 < 

Iberian islands, the people of 
Tlepolemus settle in the, ii. 259, 
261 

Icaria, island, body of Icarus washed 
ashore on, i. 243; Dionysus at, 
331 

Icarian Sea, ii. 139 

Icarium, ii. 190, note 4 

Icarius, an Athenian, 
Dionysus, and _ learns 
brewing from him, ii. 97; 


500 


receives 
wine- 
mur- 


dered by drunken = shepherds, 
see by his daughter Erigone, 


Jcarius, son of Perieres, i. 81; 
son of hia or of Oebalus, 
fie MSs expelled from 
nossinnmmen ἐν Hippocoon, 23; 
father of Penelope, &c., 23; 
bestows Penelope on Ulysses, 29: 
Penelope said to have been sent 
away by Ulysses to her father 
Iearius, 305 

Icarus, body of, washed ashore on 
Icaria and buried by Hercules, 
i. 243; son of Daedalus, flies 
a a and falls into the sea, 
ii. 

Ida, a nymph, daughter of Melisseus, 
nurse οἵ Zeus, i. 7 

Ida, Mount, Paris at birth exposed 
on, ii. 47; Oenone on, 51; the 
three goddesses judged by Paris 
on, 173; the kine of Aeneas on, 
203 ; Helenus takes up his 
abode on, 223; the timber for 
the Wooden Horse felled on, 229 

Idaea, daughter of Dardanus, 
second wife of Phineus, falsely 
accuses her stepsons, ii. "107 

Idaea, a nymph, mother of Teucer 
by the Scamander, ii. 35 

Idas, son of Aphareus, carries off 
Marpessa, fights Apollo, i. 63; 
father of Cleopatra, 67; hunts 
Calydonian boar, 67; in the 
Argo, 97; son of Aphareus or 
of Poseidon, ii. 138; cheats ‘the 
Dioscuri in a cattle-raid, $3; 
kills Castor, but is thunderstruck 
by Zeus, 33 

Idas, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Hippodoce, i. 143 

Idmon, a seer, one of the Argo- 
nauts, i. 109 

Idmon, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Pylarge, i, 143 

Idomene, ‘daughter of Pheres, wife 
of Amythaon, i. 87; daughter of 
Abas, wife of Amythaon, mother 
of Melampus, 149 

Idomeneus, son of Deucalion, i, 311; 
leader of the Cretans against 
Troy, ii. 183; lands in Crete, 
expelled by Leucus, 249 

Idomeneus, son of Priam, ii, 49 


INDEX 


Idyia, daughter of Ocean, mother 
of Medea, i. 111 

Tlissus, river, Orithyia carried off 
by Boreas at the, ii. 105 

Tlithyia, daughter of Zeus and 
Hera, i. 15 

Tlithyias, the, retard Alcmena’s 
delivery, i. 167 

Ilium captured by Hercules, i. 245 ; 
founded by Ilus, ii. 39; captured 
by Hercules, 45; not to be taken 
without the bones of Pelops, 223, 
225; Calchas and others leave 
their ships at, 243; the sack of, 
259, 261; Athena at, pro- 
pitiated by the Locrians, 267 ; 
Ulysses sails from, 281. See also 


Troy 

Illyria, traversed by Io, i. 133; 
Colchians journey to, 117; Her- 
cules journeys through, 221, 223 

Illyrians at war with the Enche- 
leans, i. 8335; conquered by 
Cadmus, 335 

Illyrius, son of Cadmus and Har- 
monia, i. 335 

Ilus, son of Dardanus, dies child- 
less, ii. 37 

Ilus, son of Tros, ii. 37; father of 
Themiste, 37; wins a prize for 
wrestling in Phrygia, 37; in 
obedience to an oracle founds 
Ilium, 39; receives the Palla- 
dium, 39; builds a temple for it, 
43; father of Laomedon, 43 

Images first invented by Daedalus, 


i 

Imbrus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Evippe, i. 141 

Imeusimus, son of Icarius, ii. 23 

Impiety of Lycaon’s sons, i. 389, 
391, 395 

Inachus, river in Argos, i, 129 

Inachus, son of Ocean, gives his 
name to river Inachus, i. 129; 
the family of, 129, 297; father 
of Io, 131, and of Argus, according 
to Asclepiades, 133; _ testifies 
that Argos belongs to Hera, 139 

Incest of Oeneus with his daughter 
Gorge, i. 71; of Smyrna with her 
father Thias, ii. 87 

India traversed by Dionysus, 
i. 331 (cp. 327); pillars set up 
by him there, 331 


Indians, Medus marches against 
the, i. 125 

Indius, two suitors of Penelope, 
both from Zacynthus, ii. 299 

Infertility, human sacrifice to avert, 
i, ibe of land caused by murder, 
ii. 

Ino, second wife of Athamas, plots 
against her step-children, i. 75; 
casts herself into the sea, 77; 
daughter of Cadmus, wife of 
Athamas, 317; rears Dionysus as 
a girl, 319; driven mad by Hera, 
throws her son Melicertes into a 
boiling cauldron, 319, 321; 
called Leucothoe as ἃ Ssea- 
goddess, 321 

Invulnerability of Meleager, i. 65; 
of Caeneus, ii. 151 

Το, daughter of Iasus, Inachus, or 
Piren, i. 131; seduced by Zeus, 
131; turned into a white cow, 
133; her wanderings, 133; 
comes to Egypt and gives birth 
to Epaphus, 135; finds Epaphus 
at Byblus, 135; married to 
Telegonus, 135; called Isis by 
the Egyptians, 135 

Iobates, king of lLycia, receives 
Proetus from Argos, i. 145; 
restores him to his own land, 
145, 147; sends Bellerophon 
against the Chimera, 151; orders 
him to fight the Solymi and 
Amazons, 153; gives him his 
daughter Philonoe to wife and 
bequeaths to him the kingdom, 
153 

Lobes, = of Hercules by Certhe, 
1 eC 

Tolaus, son of Iphicles, i. 181; 
charioteer of Hercules, 189; 
receives Megara in marriage from 
him, 237 

Ioleus, Jason at, i. 67, 93, 95; 
founded by Cretheus, 85; Pelias, 
King of, 95; return of the 
Argonauts to, 121; Jason and 
Medea expelled from, 123; Peleus 
purified by Acastus at, ii. 63; 
laid waste by Peleus, who enters 
the city between the severed limbs 
of Astydamia, 73 

Tole, daughter of Eurytus, wooed 
by Hercules, i, 237, 239; taken 


501 


INDEX 


captive by Hercules, 267; Deia- 
nira jealous of, 269; Hercules 
enjoins Hyllus to marry, 269, 283 

Ton, son of Xuthus, ancestor of the 
Achaeans, i. 57 

Tone, a Nereid, i. 15 

Tonian Gulf named after Io, i. 133 ; 
people of Elephenor cast away 
in the, ii, 259 

Ionian Sea, Hercules drives the kine 
of Geryon to the, i. 217 

Iphianassa, daughter of Proetus, 
goes mad with her sisters, i. 147 

Iphianassa, wife of Endymion, 
mother of Aetolus, i. 61 

Iphicles, son of Amphitryon, hunts 
the Calydonian boar, i. 67; son 
of Amphitryon and Alemena, 
twin brother of Hercules, 175; 
father of Iolaus, 181; marries 
Creon’s younger daughter, 181 ; 
two of his children burnt by 
Hercules, 183; killed in battle, 
253 


Iphiclus, son of Phylacus, how his 
virility was restored, i. 89, 91; 
father of Protesilaus. ii. 27, 185 

Iphiclus, son of Thestius, i. 63; 
hunts the Calydonian boar, 69; 
in the Argo, 97 

Iphidamas, suitor 
ii. 297 

Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon 
and Clytaemnestra, said to have 
been betrothed to Achilles, ii. 191; 
about to be sacrificed by her 
father to Artemis, but carried off 
by Artemis to the Taurians, and 
appointed her priestess, 191, 193 

Iphimedia, daughter of Triops, 
mother of the Aloads, i. 59 

Iphimedon, son of LEurystheus, 
“erg battle by the Athenians, 
i 

Iphimedusa, daughter of Danaus, 
wife of Euchenor, i. 141 

TIphinoe, daughter of Proetus, 
goes mad with her sisters, i. 147 ; 
her death, 149 

Iphis, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Celeustanor by Hercules, i. 273 

Iphis, son of Alector, tells Polynices 
how to bribe Amphiaraus, i. 353, 
355; father of Eteoclus, 357; 
father of Evadne, 375 


502 


of Penelope, 


yr gives his bow to Ulysses, 


Iphitus killed by Copreus, i. 187. 

Iphitus, son of Eurytus, supports 
the claim of Hercules to fole, 
i. 239; thrown by Hercules from 
the walls of Tiryns, 239 

Iphitus, son of Naubolus, in the 
Argo, i. 97; father of Schedius 
and Epistrophus, ii. 2 

Iris, daughter of Thaumas and 
Electra, i. 15 

Irus, a beggar, Ulysses wrestles 
with him, ii. 801 

Ischys, brother of Caeneus, Coronis 
cohabits with, ii. 15 

Isis identified with Demeter by the 
Egyptians, i. 135 

Islands of the Blest, Lycus in the, 
ii. 5; Telegonus and Penelope 
sent by Circe to the, 305 

Isles of the Blest, Achilles and 
Medea in the ii. 217 

Ismarus, a city of the Cicones, 
captured by Ulysses, ii. 281 

Ismarus, son of Astacus, 
Hippomedon, i. 369 

Ismarus, son of Eumolpus, marries 
the daughter of Tegyrius, king 
of Thrace, ii. 109 

Ismene, daughter of Asopus, wife of 
Argus, i. 131 

Ismene, daughter of Oedipus, i. 349 

Ismenus, river, Amphiaraus flees 
beside the, i. 371 

Ismenus, son of Amphion and 
Zethus, i. 341 

Ismenus, son of Asopus, ii. 51 

Isthmian festival, the third, i. 249; 
games instituted by Sisyphus in 
honour of Melicertes, 321 

Isthmus (of Corinth), i. 55; the 
Argo dedicated to Poseidon at 
the, 121; traversed by the 
Cretan bull, 199, 201; cleared of 
maletactors by’ Theseus, 245; 
oracle concerning the, 285; 
Sinis at the, ii. 123; the goal of 
the chariot-race for the suitors 
of Hippodamia, 161 

Istrus, son of Heyptus, husband of 
Hippodamia, i. 1 

Italy, named after eh *a bull,” 
i. 217; Greeks settle in, ii. 257 ; 
the Campanians in, 257, 259; 


slays 


INDEX 


Campania in, 261; river Navae- 
thus in, 261 

Itanus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Ithaca, Ulysses in, ii. 177; Ulysses 
in sight of, 285; suitors of 
Penelope from, 299; Ulysses 
returns from Thesprotia to, 303 ; 
Telegonus comes to, 303 

Ithacus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Itonus, combat of Hercules with 
Cycnus at, i. 263, 265 

Itys, son of Tereus and Procne, 
li. 99; killed and served up by 
his mother to his father, 101 

Ixion, father of Pirithous, i. 67 ; 
attempts to violate Hera, ii. 149 ; 
deluded by a cloud in the like- 
ness of Hera, 149; bound to 
a wheel and whirled through the 
air, 149 


Jason, son of Aeson, hunts the 
Calydonian boar, i. 67; son of 
Aeson, 93; dwells in Iolcus, 93, 
95; sent by Pelias to fetch the 
Golden Fleece, 95; admiral of 
the Argo, 99; bedded with 
Hypsipyle, queen of Lemnos, 
99; demands the Golden Fleece 
from Aeetes, 109; yokes the 
brazen-footed bulls, 109, 111; 
swears to make Medea his wife, 
111; sows the dragon’s teeth, 
111; wins the Golden Fleece and 
flees with Medea, 113; marries 
Medea in Corcyra, 117; on re- 
turning to Iolcus surrenders the 
Golden Fleece to Pelias, 121; 
dedicates the Argo to Poseidon at 
Corinth, 121; expelled with 
Medea from Iolcus, 123; goes 
to Corinth, 123; marries Glauce 
and divorces Medea, 123; helps 
Peleus to lay waste [Iolcus, 
ii. 71, 73; sails with Zetes and 
Calais, 105, 107 

Jesting of women customary at a 
sacrifice, i. 117 

Jests at the Thesmophoria, i. 37 

Jocasta, or Epicasta, daughter of 
Menoeceus, wife of Laius, i. 343 ; 
mother of Oedipus, 345; marries 
her son unwittingly, and hangs 
herself, 349 


Justice, daughter of Zeus and 
Themis, i. 15 


Kibisis (wallet) given to Perseus by 
the nymphs, i. 157; Medusa’s 
head put in it, 159 

Kine (cows) of the Sun in Erythia, 
i. 43; in Thrinacia, 115; tribute 
of, paid by Thebes to Orcho- 
menus, 179; of Hades, 215, 237 ; 
of Geryon, 211; driven away by 
Hercules, 215; sacrificed by 
Kurystheus to Hera, 219; of 
the Sun killed and eaten by the 
comrades of Ulysses, ii. 295. See 
Cow, Cows 


Labdacus, son of Polydorus, father 
of Laius, i. 335; war of Pandion 
with, ii. 99 

Labours, the ten, of Hercules, 
i. 185-237; completed in eight 
years and a month, 219 

Labyrinth, constructed by Dae- 
dalus, house of the Minotaur, 
i. 305, 307 ; the Minotaur confined 
in the, ii. 119, 121; constructed 
by Daedalus, 121; penetrated 
by Theseus with the help of a 
clue, 135, 137 

Lacedaemon, Castor and Pollux at, 
i. 67; expedition of Hercules 
against, 251; allotted to the sons 
of Aristodemus, 289; serpent a 
symbol of, 291; Hyacinth comes 
from, to Athens, ii. 119. See 
Sparta 

Lacedaemon, son of Zeus and 
Taygete, ii. 11; the country 
named aiter him, 11; father of 
Amyclas and Eurydice, 11 

Lacedaemonians help the Dioscuri 
to capture Athens, ii. 153; their 
muster for the Trojan war, 183 

Lachesis, a Fate, i. 15 

Laconia, Taenarum in, ij. 235 

Ladon river, the Cerynitian hind 
shot by Hercules at the, i. 191; 
father of Metope, ii. 51 

Laertes, son of Arcisius, in the 
Argo, i. 97; father of Ulysses, 
ii. 27, 183; Penelope weaves the 
shroud of, 299 


5°3 


INDEX 


Laestrygones, cannibals, Ulysses 
among the, ii. 285, 287 

Laius, son of Labdacus, the govern- 
ment of Thebes usurped in his 
childhood, i. 335; expelled by 
Amphion and Zethus, 339; 
received by Pelops in Pelopon- 
nese, 339; loves Chrysippus, son 
of Pelops, and carries him off, 
339; succeeds to the kingdom of 
Thebes and marries Jocasta 
(Epicasta), 343; exposes his son 
Oedipus, 345; is killed by him, 
345, 347; buried by Damasi- 
stratus, 347 ; games in honour of, 
at Thebes, ii. 117 

Lamas, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Lamb, the golden, not sacrificed 
by Atreus to Artemis, ii. 165,191; 
given by Aerope to Thyestes, who 
produces it and is made king of 
Mycenae, 165 

Lampus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Ocypete, i. 143 

Lampus, son of Laomedon, ii. 43 

Language of animals learned from 
snakes, i. 87 

Laocoon, a seer, warns the Trojans 

i the Wooden Horse, ii. 
233; his sons devoured by two 
serpents, 233 

Laodamas, son of Eteocles, leader 


of the Thebans against the 
Epigoni, killed by Alcmaeon, 
i. 379, 381 


pene, daughter of Bellerophon, 

i. 299 

Laodamia makes an image of her 
dead husband Protesilaus, ii. 199 ; 
mistakes his ghost for himself, 
and stabs herself, 199, 201 

Laodice, daughter of Cinyras, wife 
of Elatus, i. 397 

Laodice, daughter of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49; fairest of the 
daughters of Priam, swallowed 
alive in the earth, 241 

Laodicus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Laodocus, one of the victors in the 
Nemean games, i. 359 

Laodocus, son of Apollo, killed by 
Aetolus, i. 61 

Laodocus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Laogoras, king of the Dryopes, 
slain by Hercules, i, 263 


504 


Laogore, daughter of Cinyras, 
Aphrodite angry with her, she 
ends her life in Egypt, ii. 85 

Laomedes, suitor of Penelope, 
ii, 299 

Laomedon, king of Troy, defrauds 
Apollo and Poseidon of their 
wages for fortifying Pergamum, 
i. 205, 207 ; exposes his daughter 
Hesione to a sea monster, 207 ; 
defrauds Hercules of his reward 
for saving Hesione, 209; killed 
by Hercules, 245; son of Ilus, 
ii. 43 ; his children, 43, 61 ; father 
of Proclia, 193; the daughters 
of, burn the Greek ships in Italy, 
261, 263 

Laomedon, son of Hercules, i. 273 

Laomedon, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Lae son of Hercules by Oria, 
i. 

Laonome, daughter of Guneus, wife 
of Alcaeus, i. 165 

Lee daughter of Pleuron, 


i. 

Laothoe, daughter of Thespius, 
ee of Antiphus by Hercules, 
i, 

Lapithes (not Lapithus), father of 
Diomede, ii. 11 

Lapiths drive Chiron from Mount 
Pelion, i. 193; Hercules fights 
against the, 263 

Larissa, Pirithous at, i. 67; Teuta- 
mides, king of, 163; Perseus 
at, 163; allied with Troy, ii. 205 

a son of Ulysses by Calypso, 
ii, 295 

Latona, daughter of Coeus and 
Phoebe, i. 13; hér intrigue with 
Zeus, 25: hunted by Hera over 
the whole earth, 25; comes to 
Delos and gives birth to Apollo 
and Artemis, 25; attempt of 
Tityus on, 29; instigates Artemis 
and Apollo against the children 
of Niobe, 343; intercedes with 
Zeus for Apollo, ii. 21 

Laughless Rock at Eleusis, i. 37 

Leades, son of Astacus, slays 
Eteoclus, i. 369 

Leanira, daughter of Amyclas, wife 
of Arcas, i, 397 

Learchus, son of Athamas and Ino, 


INDEX 


i. 75; killed by his father in a fit 
of madness, 77, 319 
Leda, daughter of Thestius, i. 63 ; 

mother of Castor and Pollux by 
Zeus, 67; wife of Tyndareus, 
1. 28: Zeus as ἃ swan consorts 
with her, 23; she bears Pollux 
and Helen to Zeus, and Castor 
and Clytaemnestra to Tyndareus, 
2 


3 

Leitus, son of Alector, in the Argo, 
i. 97; suitor of Helen, Wh atl 

Lelex, a son of the soil, father of 
Eurotas, ii. 11 

Lemnian women do not honour 
Aphrodite, i. 99; murder their 
fathers and husbands, 99; kill 
Thoas and sell Hypsipyle into 
slavery, 357, 359 

Lemnos, fall of Hephaestus on, 
i. 23; bereft of men and ruled by 
a queen, 99; the Argonauts at, 
99; Dionysus carries Ariadne to, 
ii. 1387; Philoctetes put ashore 
in, 195;  Philoctetes fetched 
from, 223 

Leo, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Leonteus, son of Coronus, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27 ; goes to Colophon 
and helps to bury Calchas, 243 

Leontophonus, son of Ulysses by 
the daughter of Thoas, ii. 307 

Lerna, the springs at, revealed by 
Poseidon, i. 139; heads of the 
sons of Egyptus buried at, 143; 
the hydra at, killed by Hercules, 
187, 189 

Lesbos taken by Achilles, ii. 203 

-Lestorides, suitor of Penelope, 
11, 297 

Leucippe, wife of Laomedon, ii. 43 

Leucippus, son of Hercules by 
Eurytele, i. 275 

Leucippus, son of Perieres, i. 79, 
jis, 521: has daughters, 
Hilaira, Phoebe, and Arsinoe, 13 ; 
the two first of the daughters 
carried off and married by the 
Dioscuri, 13, 31 

Leucon, son of Athamas, i. 77 

Leucones, son of Hercules by 
Aeschreis, i. 273 

Leucopeus, son of Porthaon, i. 63 

Leucophrys, island, afterwards 
called Tenedos, ii. 195 


Leucothea (not Leucothoe), 
goddess, formerly Ino, i. 341 
Leucus, paramour and murderer of 
Meda, wife of Idomeneus, ii. 249 ; 
makes himself tyrant in Crete, 
249; drives out Idomeneus, 249 
Libya, daughter of Epaphus, the 
region of Libya named after her, 
i. 135; mother of Agenor and 
Belus by Poseidon, 135, 297 
Libya named after Libya, ’ daughter 
of Epaphus, i. 1385; Danaus 
settled in, 137; Hercules in, 211; 
and Europe, pillars of Hercules 
at the boundaries of, 211, 213; 
traversed by Hercules, 223, 229 ; 
Greeks settle in, ii. 257; Guneus 
goes to, 257, 259; Cinyps, river 
in, 259; Menelaus wanders to, 
279; Ulysses wanders to, 279 
Lichas, herald of Hercules, i. 267; 
anne by Hercules into the sea, 
Licymnius, bastard son of Elec- 
tryon, i. 165; survives the 
slaughter of his brothers, 169; 
goes with Amphitryon to Thebes, 
171; marries Perimede, 171 ; son 
of, killed by the Hippocooéntids, 
251, 253; father of Argius and 
Melas, 267; killed by Tlepolemus, 


sea- 


283 

Life of Meleager bound up with a 
brand, i. 65, 69 

Liguria, Hercules in, i. 215 

Ligurian nation, the Argonauts 
sail past the, i. 115 

Ligyron, first. name of Achilles, 
Ὧν} 

Lilybaeum, Butes settled at, i. 115 

Limnoria, a Nereid, i. 15 

Linaeum taken by "Achilles, li, 203 

Lindians, their harbour Thermydrae, 
i. 227; their sacrifices to Her- 
cules, 227 

Linus, son of Oeagrus by the Muse 
Calliope, i. 17; slain by Hercules, 
17, 177; brother of Orpheus, 
teaches Hercules to play the lyre, 
175, 177 

Linus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Liocritus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Liodes, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Lion, and boar yoked to car, task 
imposed on suitors of Alcestis, 


595 


INDEX 


i. 93; of Cithaeron, killed by 
Hercules, 177, 179; Nemean, 
killed by Hercules, 185, 187; 


forepart of, as a badge on a 
shield, 353 

Lions, transformation of Melanion 
and Atalanta into, i. 401; 
Achilles fed on the inwards of, 
ii. 71; companions of Ulysses 
turned into, 287 

Little Iliad, the author of the, on 
the Wooden Horse, ii. 231 

Lixus, son of Egyptus, husband of 
Cleodore, i. 141 

Locrians, the Kpicnemedian, join 
Hercules in his war on Oechalia, 
i. 265; their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183; propitiate 
Athena at Ilium by sending 
maidens to her for a thousand 
years, 267, 269 

Locris, the Argonauts sail past, 
i. 119; Opus in, 201; Naupactus 
in, 287; visited by a plague, 
li. 267 

Lots cast by Zeus, Poseidon, and 
Pluto for the sovereignty, i. 11; 
drawn by the MHeraclids for 
το kingdoms of Peloponnese, 

Lotus-eaters, Ulysses in the land of 
the, ii. 281 

Lucanians, Philoctetes makes war 
on the, ii. 261 

Lucifer, father of Ceyx, i. 57 

Lyammus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

Lycaethus, son of Hippocoon, ii. 21 

Lycaethus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 2397 

Lycaon, father of Pandarus, ii. 205 

Lycaon, son of Pelasgus, reigns 
over the Arcadians and begets 
fifty sons, i. 389; their pride and 
impiety, 389, 391; they tempt 
Zeus by mixing the bowels of a 
child with the sacrifices, 391; 
all but the youngest son are 
blasted by Zeus with thunder- 
bolts, 893; their impiety the 
cause of Deucalion’s flood, 395; 
Lycaon father of Callisto, accord- 
ing to some, 395 

Lycaon, son of Priam, — rs 49 ; 
captured by Achilles, 20 


506 


Lycia, Proetus goes to, i. 145; 
Sarpedon becomes king of, 303° 
Lycians, army of, restores Proetus 
to Argolis, i. 145, 147; lay an 
ambush for Bellerophon, 158 ; at 
war with Cilix, 303; Trojan 

allies, ii. 205 

Lycius, | son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Lycomedes, youthful Achilles bred 
at the court of, ii. 73, 75; kills 
Theseus, 155; allows ’ Neo- 
ptolemus to go ‘to Troy, 225 

Lycopeus, son of Agrius, i. 73 

Lycurgus, father of Ancaeus and 
Cepheus, i. 67, 97; son of Aleus, 
397; his sons, 399 

Lycurgus, son of Dryas, king of the 
Edonians, insults Dionysus, i. 
827: driven mad by the god, 
327, 329; in obedience to an 
oracle his subjects cause him to 
be killed by horses, 329, 331 

Lycurgus, son of Hercules’ by 
Toxicrate, i. 275 

Lycurgus, son of Pheres, at Nemea, 
father of Opheltes by Eurydice or 
Amphithea, i. 91; king of Nemea, 
357; Hypsipyle a bondwoman 
in the house of, 359 

Lycurgus, son of Pronax, i. 913 
raised Ὁ the dead by Aescula- 
pius, ii. 

Lycus, aa of the Mariandynians, 
receives the Argonauts, i. 109; 
son of Dascylus, entertains 
Hercules in Mysia and receives 
from him part of the land of the 
Bebryces, 205 

Lycus, son ‘of Egyptus, husband οὗ 
Agave, i. 139 

Lycus, son of Hyrieus, ii. 5 ; brother 
of Nycteus, banished for "murder, ἢ 
settles at Hyria, i. 335, 337; 
comes to Thebes and usurps 
the kingdom, 337; captures 
Sicyon and recovers Antiope, 
337; ill-treats Antiope, and is 
killed by her sons Amphion and 
Zethus, 337, 339 

Lycus, son of Pandion, ii, 113 

Lycus, son of Poseidon by Celaeno, 
transferred by him to the Islands 
of the Blest, ii. ὃ 


Lydia, Omphale, queen of, i, 
241 


INDEX 


Lyncaeus, son of Hercules by 
Tiphyse, i. 275 

ee, one of Actaeon’s dogs, 
i. 32 


Lynceus, son of Aphareus, hunts 
Calydonian boar, i. 67; in the 
Argo, 97; his sharp sight, ii. 13 ; 
spies Castor in ambush, 33; 
wounds Pollux, but is killed by 
him, 33 

Lynceus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Hypermnestra, i. 139; saved 
by his wife, 143; reigns over 
Argos, 145; father of Abas, 145 

Lyre, Apollo plays with lyre upside 
down, i. 31; given by Hermes to 
Amphion, the stones follow it, 
339; made by Hermes out of 
tortoiseshell and given by him 
to Apollo, ii. 9 

Lyrnessus taken by Achilles, ii. 203 

Lyrus, son of Anchises and Aphro- 
dite, dies childless, ii. 37 

Lyse, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Eumedes by Hercules, i. 273 

Lysianassa, daughter of Epaphus, 
mother of Busiris by Poseidon, 
1. 225 

Lysianassa, a Nereid, i. 15 

Lysidice, daughter of Pelops, wife 
of Mestor, i. 165 


Lysidice, daughter of Thespius, 
ig of Teles by Hercules, 
i. 


Lysimache, daughter of Abas, wife 
of Talaus, i. 91 

Lysimache, daughter of Priam, ii. 49 

Lysinomus, son of Electryon, i. 165 

Lysippe, daughter of Proetus, goes 
mad, i. 147 

Lysippe, daughter of Thespius, 
oer of Erasippus by Hercules, 
a 

Lysithous, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Lytaea, daughter of Hyacinth, 
slaughtered with her sisters by 
the Athenians on the grave of 
Geraestus, ii. 119 


Macareus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Macednus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Machaereus, a Phocian, said to have 
a ems at Delphi, 
ii, 25 


Machaon, son of Aesculapius, 
suitor of Helen, ii. 27; wounded 
at Troy, 209; slain by Penthe- 
silia, 211 


_ Madness of Athamas, i. 77, 319; of 


the women of Argos, cured by 
Melampus. 91; of Talos, 119; 
of the daughters of Proetus, cured 
by Melampus, 147, 149: of Her- 
cules, 183, 239; of Actaeon’s 
dogs, 323; of Dionysus, 325; of 
Lycurgus, 327; of Agave, 331; 
of the women of Argos, 331; of 
the pirates, 331 ; of the matricide 
Alemaeon, 383, 387; of the 
daughters of Cecrops, ii. 91; of 
Broteas, 157; pretended, of 
Ulysses, 177; of Ajax, 219; of 
the matricide Orestes, 271 

ai ing tear Orpheus to pieces, 
te 

Maenalus, son of Lycaon, i. 389; 
instigates his brothers to offer to 
Zeus human bowels mixed with 
the sacrifices, 391 

Maenalus, father of Atalanta, 
according to Euripides, i. 401, 403 

Maeon, a Theban, escapes from 
Tydeus, i. 361 

Maeonians, Trojan allies, ii. 205 

Maera, dog of Icarius, discovers 
his dead body, li. 97 

Magnes, father of Pierus, i. 19 

Magnes, son of Aeolus, i. 57; his 
sons colonize Seriphus, 81 

Magnes, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Magnesians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185; drift to 
Crete and settle there, 259 

Maia, daughter of Atlas, one of 
the Pleiades, ii. 3; bears Hermes 
to Zeus, 5; shows the infant 
Hermes to Apollo, 9; receives 
the infant Arcas from Hermes to 
bring up in Arcadia, i. 397 

Maid, the (Persephone), ‘eats a 
seed of pomegranate given her 
by Pluto, i. 39, 41 

Maiden, the (Persephone), 
up Alcestis, i. 93. 
phone 

Maidens sent as a propitiation by 
the Locrians to Athena at Ilium 
fom a thousand years, ii. 267, 


sends 
See Perse- 


597 


INDEX 


Malea, the centaurs pursued by 
Hercules to, i. 198 

Mantinea, in Arcadia, Penelope 
said to have given birth to Pan 
at, ii. 305 

Mantineus, father of Aglaia, i. 145 

Mantineus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Manto, daughter of Tiresias, dedi- 
cated by the Argives to Apollo, 
i. 381; mother of Amphilochus 
and Tisiphone by Alemaeon, 387 ; 
mother of Mopsus by Apollo, 
ii, 243, 245 

Marathon, the Cretan bull at, i. 201 ; 
the Heraclids retire to, 283; the 
bull of, kills Androgeus, son of 
Minos, ii. 115; the bull of, 
Theseus sent against, 133 

Mares, man-eating, of Diomedes 
brought by Hercules to Eurys- 
theus, i. 201, 203. See Horses 

Mariandynians, the Argonauts 
among the, i. 109 

Maro, priest of Apollo at Ismarus, 
spared by Ulysses, ii. 281; gives 
Ulysses wine, 283 

Marpessa, daughter of Evenus, 
wooed by Apollo, carried off by 
Se i. 63 ; mother of Cleopatra, 


Marpsius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 
Marriage with brother’s daughter 
(Amythaon with Idomene), i. 87, 
(Electryon with Anaxo) 165; of 
Cadmus and Harmonia cele- 
brated by all the gods, 317; with 
a mother’s sister, ii. 99 
Marse, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Bucolus by Hercules, i. 275 
Marsyas defeated in a musical 
contest with Apollo, i. 29, 31; 
flayed and hung on a pine-tree, 31 
Mecisteus, an Alizonian, father of 
Odius and Epistrophus, ii. 205 
Mecisteus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 
Mecisteus, son of Talaus, brother of 
Adrastus, i. 91; father of 
Euryalus, 91, 97, 379; one of the 
Seven against Thebes, 357 
Mecisteus, suitor of Penelope, 


li, 297 

Meda, wife of Idomeneus, corrupted 
by Leucus, ii. 249 

Medea, daughter of Aeetes, i, 111; 
a curse to Pelias, 95; a witch, 


508 


111; loves Jason and gives him 
a magic drug, 111; procures for 
him the Golden Fleece, 113; 
flies with him and murders her 
brother Apsyrtus, 113; her 
surrender demanded of Alcinous, 
117; married to Jason, 117; 
beguiles Talos to his death, 119; 
beguiles the daughters of Pelias 
into murdering their father, 121 ; 
goes to Corinth, 123; is divorced 
by Jason, 123; burns Glauce, 
murders her own children, and 
flees to Athens, 123; married to 
Aegeus, 125, ii. 133; plots against 
Theseus and is expelled by 
Aegous, . i: 2265 ei, ss, 155. 
returns to Colchis and restores 
the kingdom to her father, i. 
125; consorts with Achilles in 
the Isles of the Blest, 217 

Medesicaste, daughter of Laomedon, 
sister of Priam, ii. 263 

Μοδρειρώμαι daughter of Priam, 
ii. 

Media named after Medus, son of 
Medea, i. 125 

Medon, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Medus, son of Aegeus by Medea, 
gives his name to Media, i. 125 

Medusa, daughter of Priam, ii. 49 

Mesnan, daughter of Sthenelus, 
i. 167 

Medusa, a Gorgon, beheaded by 
Perseus, i. 157, 159, 161; mother 
of Pegasus by Poseidon, 153; 
threatened by Hercules in Hades, 
235. See Gorgon 

Megaera, a Fury, i. 5 

Megamede, daughter of Arneus, 
wife of Thespius, i. 179 

Meganira, daughter of Croco, wife 
of Arcas, i. 397 

Megapenthes, son of Menelaus, ii. 


81 

Megapenthes, son of Proetus, i. 149 ; 
Perseus surrenders the kingdom 
of Argos to him and receives 
Tiryns in exchange, 163 

Megara, daughter of Creon, married 
to Hercules, i. 181; Hercules 
burns the children he had by her, 
183; given by him to Tolaus, 
237; her sons by Hercules, 275 

Megara, Pandion goes to, ii, 113; 


INDEX 


ruled by ~ ame 117; captured 
by Minos, 
Megareus, as of Hippomenes, 


comes from Onchestus to Megara, 
li. 117; slain by Minos, 117 
Megassares, king of Hyria, father of 
: Pharnace, ii. 83 
Megasthenes, suitor of Penelope, 
11, 297 


Meges, son of Phyleus, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27; leader of the 
Dulichians against Troy, 183; 
cast away at Caphereus, 259 

Melaeneus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Melampods, country of, old name 

᾿ οὗ Egypt, i. 137 

Melampus, son of Amythaon, 
brother of Bias, i. 87; learns 
soothsaying and the language 
of animals, 87; procures the 
kine of Phylacus for Neleus, 
87, 89, 91; tells how Iphiclus 
may get a son, 89, 91; heals the 
Argive women of their madness, 
91; receives part of the kingdom 
of Argos, 91; father of Abas, 91; 
the first to devise the cure by 
drugs and purification, 149; 
heais the daughters of Proetus 
of their madness, 149; marries 
one of them, and receives a third 
part of the kingdom, 149 

Melanion, father of Parthenopaeus, 
i. 357; son of Amphidamas, 
399; wins Atalanta in a race 
by letting fall golden apples, 401 ; 
turned into a lion, 401 

Melanippe, an Amazon, carried off 
by Theseus, ii. 143 

Melanippus, son of Agrius, kills 
Tydeus, i. 73 

Melanippus, son of Astacus, wounds 
Tydeus and is killed by Amphi- 
araus, i. 369 

Melanippus, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Melanthius, a goatherd, scorns 
Ulysses, ii. 299; killed by 
Ulysses, 301 

Melantian ridges, Apollo stands on 
the, i. 117 

Melas, son of Licymnius, buried 
by Hercules, i. 267 

Melas, son of Phrixus, i. 77 

Melas, son of Porthaon, i. 63; his 
sons slain by Tydeus, 71, 73 


Meleager, son of Oeneus or Ares 
and Althaea, i. 65; his life 
bound up with burning brand, 
65; hunts the Calydonian boar, 
67 ; kills the sons ot Thestius and 
gives the boar’s skin to Atalanta, 
69; his death, 69, 71; ‘in the 
Argo, 97; seen by Hercules in 
Hades, 235 

Melesagoras, on the resurrection of 
Glaucus, li. 19 

Melia, daughter of Ocean, wife of 
Inachus, i. 129 

Melian nymph, mother of the 
centaur Pholus, i. 191, 193 

Melians from Trachis join Hercules 
in his attack on Oechalia, i. 265 

Meliboea, daughter of Amphion 
and Niobe, survives her sisters, 
i. 343 

Meliboea, daughter of Ocean, wife 
of Lycaon, i. 389 

Melicertes, son of Athamas and 
Ino, i. 75; cast into the sea by 
his mother, 77, 321; thrown 
by his mother into a boiling 
cauldron, 319, 321; named 
Palaemon as a sea-god, 321; 
Isthmian games instituted in his 
honour, 321 

Meline, daughter of Thespius, i. 273 

Melisseus, father of the nymphs 
Adrastia and Ida, i. 7 

Melite, a Nereid, i. 15 

Melos, Menestheus goes 
reigns as king in, ii. 259 

Melpomene, a Muse, i. 17; mother 
of the Sirens by Achelous, 21, 
11: 291 

Memnon, son of Tithonus and 
Dawn, ii. 43; comes with a 
force of [Ethiopians to ‘Troy 
against the Greeks, 213; slain 
by Achilles, 213 

Memory (Mnemosyne), mother \of 
the Muses, i. 17 

Memphis, daughter of the Nile, 
wife of Epaphus, i. 135 

Memphis founded by Epaphus, 
iy E35 

Memphis, wife of Danaus, i. 141 

Men moulded by Prometheus, i. 51 

Menaechme, See Cranaechme 

Menalces, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Adite, i. 143 


to, and 


599 


INDEX 


Menelaus, son of Atreus, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27; chosen her 
husband, 29; his children, 29, 
31; sent for to Sparta by 
Tyndareus, who hands over the 
kingdom to him, 35; carried by 
his nurse to Polyphides at 
Sicyon, 169, 171; sent to Oeneus 
in Aetolia, 171; helps Aga- 
memnon to expel Thyestes, 171; 
marries Helen and reigns over 
Sparta, 171; entertains Alexander 
(Paris), 173; goes to Crete to 
bury Catreus, 173; begs Aga- 
memnon to muster an army 
against Troy, 1773; goes to 
Cinyras in Cyprus, 179: son of 
Atreus and Aerope, leader of 
the Lacedaemonians against Troy, 
183; sent to Troy with Ulysses 
to demand the restoration of 
Helen, 197; fights Alexander, 
207; slays Deiphobus and leads 
away Helen, 237; quarrels with 
Agamemnon, 243; driven by a 
storm to Egypt, 243; puts in 
at Sunium, 279; wanders to 
Crete, Libya, Phoenicia, Cyprus, 
and Egypt, 279; finds Helen in 
Egypt, 279; lands at Mycenae 
and finds Orestes, 279; goes to 
Sparta and regains his kingdom, 
279; goes to the Elysian Fields 
with Helen, 279 

Menelaus, son of Plisthenes and 
Aerope, 1. 309 

Menemachus, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Nelo, i. 141 

Meneptolemus, suitor of Penelope, 
li. 297 

Menestheus, son of Peteos, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27; brought back 
by the Dioscuri from exile and 
given the sovereignty of Athens, 
153; leader of the Athenians 
against Troy, 183; sails to 
Mimas, 259; reigns as king in 
Melos, 259 Ὶ 

Menesthius, son of the river 
Sperchius by Polydora, fathered 
on Peleus, ii. 67 

Menippis, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Entelides by Hercules, 
i. 273 

Menoeceus. 


510 


father of Hipponome, 


i. 165; his charioteer Perieres, 
179; father of Jocasta or Epi- 


casta, 343; father of Creon, 347 
Menoeceus, son of Creon, kills 
himself to save Thebes, i. 367 


Menoetes, son of Ceuthonymus, 
herdsman of Hades, reports to 
Geryon the theft of the cattle by 
Hercules, i. 215; wrestles with 
Hercules in Hades, 237 

Menoetius, son of Iapetus and Asia, 
thunderstruck by Zeus, i. 13 

Menoetius, son of Actor, in the 
Argo, i. 97; father of Patroclus, 
ii. 29, 75, 77; flies with his son 
to Peleus, 77 

Mentor, son of Eurystheus, killed 
in battle by the Athenians, i. 
277 

Mentor, son of Hercules by Asopis, 
1, 273 ν 

Mercy, altar of, at Athens, i. 277, 
873; 9720 

Mermerus, son of Jason and Medea, 
murdered by Medea or the 
Corinthians, i. 123, 125 

Merope, daughter of Atlas, wife of 
Sisyphus, i. 79, ii. 3, 5; one of 
the Pleiades, 3 

Merope, daughter of Oenopion, 
wooed by Orion, i. 

Merope, wife of Cresphontes, king 
of Messene, married by his 
successor, i. 293 

Merops, father of Arisbe, ii. 45 ; 
teaches Aesacus the interpreta- 
tion of dreams, 47; father of 
Adrastus and Amphius, 205 

Messene, fight of Idas and Apollo 
at, i. 63; occupied by Perieres, 
79; Neleus in, 85; Melampus in, 
91 ; allotted to Cresphontes, 289, 
291; fox a symbol of, 291; the 
Dioscuri carry off the daughters 
of Leucippus from, ii. 31; the 
Dioscuri carry off cattle from, 33 

Mesthles, son of Talaemenes, a 
leader of the Maeonians, ii, 205 

Mestor, son of Perseus, i. 163; 
father of Hippothoe, 165; his 
kingdom claimed by the sons of 
Pterelaus, 167 

Mestor, son of Priam, ii. 49; slain 
by Achilles, 203 

Mestor, son of Pterelaus, i. 165 


INDEX 


Meta, daughter of Hoples, first 
wite of Aegeus, ii. 113 

Metanira, wife of Celeus, mother 
of Demophon and Triptolemus, 
i. 37, 39 

_ Metharme, daughter of Pygmalion, 
wife of Cinyras, mother of 
Adonis, ii. 85 

Metiadusa, daughter of Eupala- 
mus, wife of Cecrops, ii. 111 

Metion, son of Erechtheus, ii. 103 ; 
his sons expel Cecrops from 
Athens, 111, 113; father of 
Eupalamus, 121 

Metionids, the sons of Metion, are 
expelled from Athens by the 
sons of Pandion, ii. 113 

Metis, daughter of Ocean, i. 9, 13; 
turns into many shapes to avoid 
Zeus, 23; got with child by 
Zeus, 23 ; swallowed by Zeus, 25 ; 
prophecy that she would give 
birth to a son who should be lord 
of heaven, 25 

Metope, daughter of the river 
Ladon, wife of Asopus, ii. 51 

Metope, wife of the river Sangarius, 
mother of Hecuba, ii. 45 

Midea, fortified by Perseus, i. 163 ; 
entrusted by Sthenelus to Atreus 
and Thyestes, 171 

Midea, a Phrygian woman, mother 
of Licymnius by Electryon, i. 165 

Miletus, city, founded by Miletus, 
son of Apollo, i. 303 

Miletus, son of Apollo, loved by 
Sarpedon and Minos, i. 301; 
lands in Caria and founds the 
city of Miletus, 303 

Mimas, a giant, killed by Hephaes- 
tus, i. 45 

Mimas, some of the Greeks sail to, 
after the sack of Ilium, ii. 259 

Minis, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Minos, husband of Pasiphae, i. 77 ; 
receives ‘Talos from Hephaestus, 
119; gives Procris a wonderful 
dog, 173; vows to sacrifice a 
bull to Poseidon, but does not 
keep his vow, 199, 305; tells 
Hercules to catch the bull, 199; 
his sons in Paros, 203; father 
of Androgeus, 205; son of Zeus 
and Europa, 299; goes to war 
with his brother Sarpedon, 301 ; 


passes laws in Crete, 303; 
marries Pasiphae, 303; his 
children, 303; claims the kingdom 
of Crete, 303; shuts up the 
Minotaur in the Labyrinth, 305 ; 
recovers bis son Glaucus from the 
dead by means of the diviner 


Polyidus, 311, 313: father of 
Glaucus, ii. 19; receives and 
seduces Procris, 105; his loose 


life, 105; bewitched by Pasiphae, 
105; gives Procris a dog and a 
dart, 105; father of Androgeus, 
115; sacrifices to the Graces in 
Paros, 117 ; attacks Athens, 117; - 
captures Megara, and drowns 
Scylla, daughter of king Nisus, 
117; prays to Zeus for vengeance 
on Athens, 119; orders the 
Athenians to send seven youths 
and seven maidens to be devoured 
by the Minotaur, 119; father of 
Ariadne, 135; shuts up Daedalus 
in the Labyrinth, 139; pursues 
him to Sicily, detects him, and 
demands his surrender by 
Cocalus, 141; undone by the 
daughters of Cocalus, 143 
Minotaur, a bull-headed man, off- 
spring of Pasiphae and a bull, 
i. 305; shut up in the Labyrinth, 
305, 307; Athenians send seven 
youths and seven damsels every 
year to be devoured by the, 


li, 119, 128; confined in the 
Labyrinth, 119, 121; Theseus 
sent against the, 135; killed 


by Theseus, 137 
Minyans of Orchomenus receive 
tribute from Thebes, i. 179, 181; 
are forced by Hercules to pay 
tribute to Thebes, 181 
Minyas, father of Clymene, grand- 
father of Atalanta, i. 399 
Mnemosyne, a Titanid, i. 5; mother 
of the Muses by Zeus, 17 
Mnesileus, son of Pollux, ii, 31 
Mnesimache, daughter of Dexa- 
menus, wooed by a centaur, 
rescued by Hercules, i. 197 
Mnestra, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Aegius, i. 141 
Molebus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 
Molione, wife of Actor, mother of 
the Molionides, i. 249 


511 


INDEX 


Molionides, the, slain by Hercules, 
i. 249. See Hurytus 

Molorchus, a day-labourer, enter- 
tains Hercules, i. 185, 187 


Molossia, Neoptolemus founds a 
city in, ii. 251 
ac τηὰ breed of hounds, i, 


Molossians conquered by Neopto- 
lemus, ii. 251 

Molossus, son of Neoptolemus by 
Andromache, ii. 251 

ΤΕΣ bastard son of Deucalion, 


Molus, son of Ares, i. 63 

Moly, a drug used by Ulysses as an 
antidote to Circe’s enchantments, 
li. 289 

Moon, daughter of Hyperion, i. 13; 
forbidden to shine, 45; loves 
Endymion, 61 

Mopsus, a diviner, son of Apollo 
and Manto, defeats Calchas in a 
trial of skill, 11. 243, 245; slain 
by Amphilochus, son of Alc- 
maeon, in single combat, 265 

πὰ ἢ s sister, marriage with a, 
1.9 

Muses, the, daughters of Zeus by 
Memory (Mnemosyne), i. 17; 
vanquish Thamyris in a musical 
contest and blind him, 21; the 
Sphinx learns a riddle from the, 
ig i Melpomene, one of the, 
ii 


Mycenae, fortified by Perseus, 
i, 163; Electryon king of, 167; 
Eurystheus king of, 167; throne 
of, seized by Sthenelus, 171; 
Hercules brings the Nemean lion 
to, 187; Copreus is purified at, 
187; Menelaus comes to Aga- 
memnon at, ii. 177; Agamemnon 
and Cassandra murdered at, 
269; Clytaemnestra and Aegis- 
thus murdered at, 271; Orestes 
returns to, 277; Menelaus comes 
to port in, 279 

Mycenaeans, Io tethered to a 
tree in the grove of the, i. 133; 
commanded by an oracle to 
choose a Pelopid for king, ii, 165 ; 
Agamemnon king of the, 171; 
ty muster for the Trojan war, 
18: 


512 


Myconos, island, the Locrian Ajax 
buried in, ii. D47 

Myedalion, the son of, commands 
a ship sent by Cinyras, ii. 179 

Mygdon, king of the Bebryces, 
slain by Hercules, i. 205 

Mylius, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Mynes, father of Pedias, ii. 89 

Myrmidon, father of Antiphus and 
Actor by Pisidice, i. 57 

Myrmidons, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185; land with 
Achilles, 201 

εἰ τ ‘tree, Adonis born from a, 
ii 

Myrtilus, son of Hermes, charioteer 
of Oenomaus, in love with 
Hippodamia, ii. 161; causes the 
death of his master in the chariot- 
race, 161; tries to rape Hippo- 
damia, and is drowned by Pelops, 
163; in dying curses the house 
of Pelops, 163 

ber Sea, called after Myrtilus, 


Mysia, the Argonauts in, i. 101; 
Hercules in, 205; Teuthras, 
prince of, 397; Auge and 
Telephus in, 397; ravaged by 
the Greek army "against Troy, 
ii. 187; allied with Troy, 205 

Mysians, force of, brought by 
Eurypylus to Troy, 227. 

Mysteries, of Ἰώ το τς invented 
by Orpheus, i. of Eleusis, 

Hercules initiated i in the, 233 


Naiad nymph, mother of Aetolus, 
i. 61; wife of Magnes, 81; nymph, 
ii. 95 ; nymphs, 11, 21, 23 ; nymph, 
or of the sons of Thyestes, 
z 

Nastes, son of Nomion, a Carian 
leader, ii. 205 

Naubolus, father of Iphitus, i. 97 

Naucrate, mother of Icarus by 
Daedalus, ii. 139 

Naupactica, the author of, on the 
resurrection of Hippolytus, ii. 17, 


19 
Naupactus, in Locris, origin of the 
name, ships built by Temenus 


at, i. 287 
Nauplius, son of Poseidon by 


INDEX 


Amymone, a wrecker, i. 148, 
145; his sons by Clymene, or 
Philyra, or Hesione, 145; 
receives Auge to sell into 
a foreign land, 257; gives Auge 
τ Teuthras, 257; receives 
Aerope and Clymene to sell into 


foreign lands, 309; #marries 
Clymene, 309; father of Oeax 
and Palamedes, 309; receives 


Auge to put her to death, 397; 
gives her to Teuthras, 397; 
father of Palamedes, ii. 177, 249 ; 
demands satisfaction for the 
death of Palamedes, 249; con- 
trives that the Greek ’ wives 
should be unfaithful, 249 ; kindles 
false lights on Mount Caphereus 
and lures the Greeks on the 
breakers, 247, 249 

Nauprestides, name given to the 
daughters of Laomedon, ii. 263 

Nausicaa, daughter of ‘alcinous, 
king of the Phaeacians, brings 
. Ulysses to her father, ii. 295 

Nausimedon, son of Nauplius, i. 145 

Nausithoe, a Nereid, i. 15 

Navaethus, river of Italy, reason 
for the name, ii. 261, 263 

Naxos, island, the Aloads Ie, 61; 
Dionysus ferried to, 331 ; Theseus 
and Ariadne in, ii. "137 

Neaera, daughter of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Neaera, daughter of Pereus, wife 
of Aleus, i. 397 

Neaera, wife of Strymon, mother of 
Evadne, i. 131 

Nebrophonus, son of Jason by 
Hypsipyle, i. 99 

Necklace made by Hephaestus and 
given to Harmonia at ‘marriage, 
i. 317; taken by Polynices to 
ΟΞ op), 3853; given by 
Polynices to Eriphyle as a bribe, 
355; given by Alcmaeon to his 
wife Arsinoe, 383; coveted by 
Callirrhoe, 385; dedicated at 
Delphi, 385, 387 

Neleus, son of Poseidon by Tyro, 
twin brother of Pelias, i. 83; 
exposed by his mother, 959": 
quarrels with his brother, is 
banished and goes to Messene, 
85; founds Pylus, 85; father 


APOLL. II. 


of - Nestor, “δῦ... (890... i 188; 

refuses to purify Hercules, i. 239; 

ae with his sons by Hercules, 
5Ὶ 

Nelo, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Menemachus, 16} 

Nemea, Lycurgus at, «ἀν 9.2 
Hercules cuts himself’a club at, 
183; the lion at, killed by 
Hercules, 187 ; the Seven against 
Thebes at, 357, 359 

Nemean games celebrated by the 
Seven against Thebes in honour 
of Opheltes (Archemorus), i. 359 

Nemesis, turned into a _ goose, 
consorts with Zeus, turned into 
a swan, ii. 25; lays an egg, out 
of which Helen is hatched, 25 

Neomeris, a Nereid, i. 15 

Neoptolemus, son of Achilles by 
Deidamia,formerly called Pyrrhus, 
ii. 75; fetched from Scyros to 
Troy by Ulysses and Phoenix, 
225; slays many Trojans, 225, 
227; kills Telephus, 227; slays 
Priam, 237; is awarded Andro- 
mache, 241 ; persuaded by Thetis 
to wait at Troy, 247, and 
at Tenedos, 251; sets out with 
Helenus by land for the country 
of the Molossians, 251; buries 
Phoenix, 251; conquers the 
Molossians and reigns as king, 
251; gets a son Molossus by 
Andromache, 251; gives Helenus 
his mother Deidamia to wife, 
251; succeeds to his father’s 
kingdom, 251, 253; carries off 
Hermione, wite of Orestes, 253 ; 
slain by Orestes or by Machaereus 
at Delphi, 253, 255; said to have 
rifled and fired the temple in 
revenge for the death of his 
father, 255; condemns Ulysses 
to exile, 305, 307 

Nephalion, son of Minos, in Paros, 
i. 203, 808 

Nephele, wife of Athamas, mother 
of Phrixus and Helle, i. 75; 
rescues Phrixus from the altar 
and gives him and Helle a ram 
with a golden fleece, 75 

Nephus, son of Hercules’ by 
Praxithea, i. 275 

Nereids, offspring of Nereus and 


513 


INDEX 


Doris, i. 15; help to steer the 
Argo, 115; angry with Cassiepea 
for vying with them in beauty, 
159; Thetis after her marriage 
with Peleus departs to the, ii. 71 

Nereus, son of Sea (Pontus) and 

arth, i. 13, 15; his offspring, 

by Doris, 15; after turning into 
many shapes, reveals to Hercules 
the place of the Hesperides, 223; 
father of Thetis, 327 

Nesaea, a Nereid, i. 15 

Nessus, a centaur, flees from 
Hercules to the river Evenus, i. 
193 ; ferries passengers across the 
river Evenus, 261; tries to violate 
Deianira and_ gives her his 
poisoned blood to be a _ love- 
charm, 261; killed by Her- 
cules, 261; his blood smeared 
by Deianira on a tunic, 269 

Nestor, son of Neleus, i. 85, 251; 
brought up among the Gerenians, 
85, 251; marries Anaxibia, 85; 
father of Antilochus, ii. 27; son 
of Neleus and Chloris, leader of 
the Pylians against Troy, 183; 
has a prosperous voyage from 
Troy, 243 

Nice, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Nicodromus by Hercules, i. 273 

Nicippe, daughter of Pelops, wife 
οἱ Sthenelus, i. 167 

Nicippe, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Antimachus by 
Hercules, i. 275 

Nicodromus, son of Hercules by 
Nice, i. 273 

Sou suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 

Nicostratus, son of Menelaus and 
Helen, ii. 29 

‘Nicothoe, a Harpy, i. 105 

Prpetbanin, Procne turned into a, 
li, 101 

Nile, Epaphus born beside the, 
i. 185; father of Memphis, 135, 
and of Anchinoe, 135 

Nine days and nights, duration of 
Deucalion’s flood, i. 55 

N ae βισὰ feast given by Oeneus 
. 

Nine Roads, in Thrace, ii. 263 

Nine years old, the Aloads, i. 59 

Niobe, daughter of Phoroneus, 


514 


mother of Argus and Pelasgus 
by Zeus, i. 129, 181 

Niobe, daughter of Tantalus, wife 
of Amphion, i. 341; her sons 
and daughters, 341, 343; boasts 
herself happier than Latona, 
341; her children shot down 
by Artemis and Apollo, 3438; 
goes to her father at Sipylus 
and is turned to stone, 343 

Nireus, son of Charopus, leader of 
the Symaeans against Troy, 
ii. 183, 185 

Nireus, son of Poseidon, i. 59 

Nisas, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Nissaeus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Nisus, son of Pandion, ii. 113; king 
of Megara, his purple hair, 
117; perishes by the treachery 
of his daughter Scylla, 117 

Nisyrum, part of the island of Cos 
broken off by Poseidon, i. 47 

Nobody, Ulysses deceives Poly- 
phemus by calling himself, ii. 283 

Nomion, father of Nastes- and 
Amphimachus, ii. 205 

Notium, Calchas buried at, ii. 245 

Nycteis, daughter of Nycteus, wife 
of Polydorus, king of Thebes, 
i. 335; mother of Labdacus, 335 

Nycteus, father of Callisto, ac- 
cording to Asius, i. 395 

Nycteus, son of Chthonius, father 
of Nycteis, i. 335; brother of 
Lycus, 335 ; banished for murder, 
settles at Hyria, 335; comes to 
Thebes, 3837; threatens his 
daughter Antiope,. and _ kills 
himself, 337; father of Callisto, 
according to Asius, 395 

Nycteus, ,son of Hyrieus by a 
nymph Clonia, father οἱ 
Antiope, ii. 5 

Nyctimus, youngest son of Lycaon, 
a 89; alone of the sons 
of Lycaon saved by Earth, 393, 
395; succeeds to the kingdom 
(of Arcadia), 395; in his reign 
the flood of Deucalion, 395 

Nymphs, feed infant Zeus, i. 13; 
ravish Hylas, 101; give Perseus 
winged sandals, the kibisis, and 
the cap of Hades, 157; receive 
them back from Hermes, 161; 
daughters of Zeus and Themis, 


‘ 
a 
4 
‘ 
4 
! 
4 
ἡ 
t 
4 


atl 2 


- gm 


INDEX 


reveal Nereus to Hercules, 223 ; 
at Nysa receive Dionysus, 321 ; 
changed by Zeus into the 
Hyades, 321; Callisto one of 
the, according to Hesiod, 395 

Nysa, mountain, Typhon at, i. 51 ; 
in Asia, the nymphs and Dionysus 
at, 321 


Oak, the Golden Fleece nailed to 
an, i. 77, 95; lair of serpents in 
an, 87; sacred, 89; of Dodona, 


Oaths by the Styx, i. 13 

one, in Boeotia, Alcmena at, 
ιν 

Ocean, a Titan, son of Sky and 

hh, i. 5; father of Metis, 

9; offspring of, 11, 18; father 
of Eurynome, 17; father of Trip- 
tolemus, according to -Phere- 
cydes, 39; father of Idyia, 111; 
father of Inachus and of Melia, 
129; father of Callirrhoe, 211; 
father of Meliboea, 389; father 
of Pleione, ii. 3; father of 
Asopus, 51 

Ocean, Pelops goes to the, ii. 163 ; 
‘Ulysses wanders about the, 279, 
281, 289 

Oceanids, offspring of Ocean and 
Tethys, i. 11 

Ocypete, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Lampus, i. 143 

Ocypete, Ocythoe, or Ocypode, a 
Harpy, i. 15, 105 

Ocytus, father of Guneus, ii. 185 

Odius, son of Mecisteus, leader of 
the Alizones, ii. 205 

Oeagrus, father of Linus by the 

_ Muse Calliope, i. 17; father of 
Orpheus, 97 

Oeax, son of Nauplius, i. 145, 309 

Oebalus, according to some, son of 
Perieres, father of Tyndareus, 
Hippocoon, and Icarius, ii. 21; 
father of Arene, ii. 13 

Oechalia, Hercules at, i. 237, 239; 
captured by Hercules, 265, 267 

Oedipus, son of Laius and Jocasta 
(or Epicasta), exposed on Cith- 
aeron, adopted by FPeriboea, 
queen of Corinth, i. 345; in- 
quires of the oracle at Delphi 


concerning his parentage, 345; 
kills his father unwittingly, 345, 
347; reads the riddle of the 
Sphinx, 347, 349 ; succeeds to the 
kingdom of Thebes and marries 
his mother, 349; his children 
(Eteocles, Polynices, Ismene, 
Antigone) by Jocasta or by 
Eurygania, 349; banished from 
Thebes, 351; kindly received 
by Theseus, dies at Colonus in 
ria 351; father of Polynices, 


Oeleus. See Oileus. 

Oeme, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Arbelus, i. 143 

Oeneus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Podarce, i. 141 

Oeneus, son of Porthaon, king of 
Calydon, i. 63; receives vine- 
plant from Dionysus, 65 ; marries 
Althaea, 65; father of Meleager, 
65; slays his son Toxeus, 65; 
in sacrificing the first-fruits to 
the gods he forgets Artemis, 65, 
67; she sends against him the 
Calydonian boar, 67; he marries 
Periboea, 71; father of T'ydeus, 
71; deposed and killed by the 
sons of Agrius, 73 (where for 
Thestius read Agrius); feasts 
with Hercules, 259; father of 
Deianira, 275; at Calydon, Alc- 
maeon goes to, 383; the Aetolian, 
receives the infant Agamemnon 
and Menelaus, ii. 169, 171 

Oeno, daughter of Anius, one of 
the Wine-growers, ii. 179, 181 

Oenoe, in Argolis, Oeneus buried 
at, i. 73; Cerynitian hind at, 191 

Oenomaus, father of Hippodamia, 
i. 155; husband of Sterope, ii. 5; 
king of Pisa, offers the hand of 
his daughter Hippodamia to the 
victor in a chariot-race, 157, 
161; cuts off the heads of un- 
successful suitors, 161; dragged 
to death by his horses or killed 
by Pelops, 161 

Oenone, daughter of river Cebren, 
wife of Alexander (Paris), ii. 51 ; 
learns art of prophecy from Rhea, 
51; warns Paris not to fetch 
Helen, 51; refuses to heal _his 
wound, 51; hangs herself, 51 


515 


INDEX 


Oenone, old name of island of 
Aegina, ii. 53 

Oenopion, father of Merope, blinds 
Orion, and is hidden from Orion 
by Poseidon in an underground 
house, i. 33 

Oenopion, son of Dionysus by 
Ariadne, ii. 137 

Oestrobles, son of Hercules, by 
Hesychia, i. 275 

Oeta, Mount, Hercules burnt on, 
i. 269, 271 

Ogygia, daughter of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Ogygia, the island of Calypso, 
Ulysses in, ii. 295 

Ogygian gate of Thebes, i. 361 

Oicles, father of Amphiaraus, i. 67, 
97, 353, 357; killed at Tlium, 
245; in Arcadia, Alemaeon repairs 
to, 383 


Oileus, father of the Locrian Ajax, 


ii. 27, 183 

Olenias, brother of Tydeus, mur- 
dered by him, i, 73 

Olenus, in Achaia, sack of, i. 71; 
ge ay goes to Dexamenus at 
1 

Olive, bond of, chosen by Hercules, 


i. 229 

Olive-tree, planted by Athena in 
the Pandrosium at Athens, i. 79, 
81; Io tethered to, 133 

Olizonians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185 

Oloetrachus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Olympian games celebrated by 
Hercules, i. 249 

Olympus, Hera hung by Zeus from, 
i. 23, 247; Mount, Ossa piled 
on, 59; the mares of Diomedes 
destroyed by wolves at, 203 

Olympus, son of Hercules by 
Euboea, i. 273 

Olympusa, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Halocrates by Hercules, 
1.276 

et er a one of Actaeon’s dogs, 
i. 8. 

Omphale, mistress of Hercules, 
i. 101; daughter of lardanus 
(lardanes), queen of Lydia, buys 
Hercules as a slave, 241; his ser- 
vitude with her, 241, 243, 245; 


516 


rn of Agelaus by Hercules, 


Oncaidian gate of Thebes, i. 361 

Onchestus, precinct of Poseidon at, 
i. 179; Megareus at, ii. 117 

Onchestus, son of Agrius, escapes 
ἠὲ τῇ Diomedes to Peloponnese, 
1. 7 

Onesippus, son of Hercules by 
Chryseis, i. 273 

Onites, son of Hercules, i. 275 

Opheltes, called Archemorus, son 
of Lycurgus, i. 91; child of Lycur- 
gus and Eurydice, nursed by 
Hypsipyle, 357; killed by a ser- 
pent, 359; called Archemorus, 
359; Nemean games celebrated 
in his honour, 359 ; 

Opis, a Hyperborean maiden, i. 33 

Opus, in Locris, Abderus a native 
of, i. 201; Patroclus at, ii. 77 

Oracle at Delphi, i. 27; as to the 
destruction of the giants, 43; 
commanding that Athamas 
should sacrifice his son Phrixus 
as a remedy for dearth, 75; that 
Athamas should dwell among 
wild beasts, 77; that Pelias 
should beware of the man with 
one sandal, 95; about the Argo, 
97; about the son who would kill 
his father, 153 ; as to the sale of 
Hercules, 241; as to the return of 
the Heraclids, 283, 285; about 
the Three-Eyed One, 287, 289; 
about the foundation of Thebes, 
313, 315; that barrenness of land 
will be cured by putting the 
king to death, 329; that a iather 
should die by the hand of one 
of his children, 307; that a 
father should be killed by his. 
son, 343, 345; that Alemaeon 
should depart to Achelous, 383 ; 
as to the foundation of llium, ii. 
37, 39; that Aeacus should pray 
for Greece, 55; that Oenomaus 
must die by him who should 
marry his daughter, 159; that the 
Mycenaeans should choose a Pelo- 
pid for king, 165; that Thyestes 
should beget a son on his own 
daughter, 169; about the settle- 
ment of a city, 265; about the 
propitiation Athena at Llium, 


INDEX 


267; given to Orestes, 271, 273; 
about the image of Tauropolus, 
277. See Delphi 
Oracles given by Themis, i. 27; re- 
cited by a soothsayer, 287; which 
protected Troy, ii. 223 
Orchomenians, their muster for 
the Trojan war, ii. 183 
Orchomenus, father of Elare, i. 27 
Orchomenus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 
Orchomenus, son of ‘Thyestes, 
murdered by Atreus, ii. 167 
Orchomenus, the Minyans of, i. 179 
Order, daughter of Zeus and 
Themis, i. 15 
Orestes, son of Achelous by Peri- 
mede, 157 
Orestes’ (son of Agamemnon), 
father of Tisamenus, i. 283, 285, 
289; goes mad, ii. 253; robbed 
of his wife Hermione by Neo- 
ptolemus, 253 ; slays Neoptolemus 
at Delphi, 253, 255; saved by 
Electra and brought up by 
Strophius, 271; allowed by the 
god at Delphi to avenge his 
father’s murder, kills Clytaem- 
nestra and Aegisthus, 271; 
pursued by the Furies, he goes 
to Athens and is tried and 
acquitted in the Areopagus, 271 ; 
goes to the land of the Taurians, 
finds his sister, and flees with 
her, carrying the wooden image 
of Tauropolus, 273, 275; driven 
by a storm to Rhodes, dedicates 
the image (of Tauropolus), 277 ; 
comes to Mycenae, 277; gives 
his sister Electra to Pylades in 
marriage, 277 ; marries Hermione 
or Erigone, 277; father of 
Tisamenus, 277; killed by a 
snake at Oresteum, 277 
Oresteum, in Arcadia, Orestes 
killed by snake-bite at, ii. 277 
Oria, daughter of Thespius, mother 
of Laomenes by Hercules, i. 273 
Orion, a giant, earth-born, or a son 
of Poseidon and Euryale, i. 31 ; 
can stride across the sea, 31; woos 
Merope, 33; blinded by Oeno- 
pion, 33; healed by the sun’s 
rays, 33; loved by Dawn and 
carried off to Delos, 33; slain 
by Artemis in Delos, 31, 33 


Orithyia, daughter of Erechtheus, 
carried off by Boreas, ii. 103, 
et mother of Zetes and Calais, 


Ormenians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185 
Ormenium, combat of Hercules 


with Amyntor at, i. 265 
Ormenius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 
Ormenus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 
Orpheus, son of Oeagrus or Apollo 

and Calliope, i. 17; tries to bring 

up his dead wife Eurydice from 

Hades, 17, 19; his music, 17; 

invents mysteries of Dionysus, 

19; torn to pieces by the 

Maenads, 19; buried in Pieria, 

19; in the Argo, 97; restrains 

the Argonauts at the Sirens, 115 ; 

brother of Linus, 177 
Orphics on the resurrection of 

Hymenaeus, ii. 19 
Orsedice, daughter of Cinyras, 

incurs the wrath of Aphrodite, 

dies in Egypt, ii. 85 
Orseis, a nymph, wife of Hellen, 

i. 57 


1, 

Orthaea, daughter of Hyacinth, 
slaughtered with her sisters by 
the Athenians on the grave of 
Geraestus, ii. 119 

Orthus, watch-dog of Geryon, 
offspring of Typhon and Echidna, 
1, 21 

Ossa piled on Olympus, i. 59 

Otrere, mother of Pentheailea by 
Ares, li. 211 

Otreus, father of Placia, ii. 43 

Otus and Ephialtes, sons of 
Poseidon, fight against the gods, 
i. 59; put Ares in bonds, 59; 
kill each other, 61; Otus woos 
Artemis, 59. Compare Aloads 

Oxylus, son of Andraemon, banished 
for homicide, taken as guide by 
the Heraclids, i. 289 

Oxylus, son of Ares by Protogonia, 
i. 61 

Oxyporus, son of Cinyras by. Me- 
tharme, li. 85 


Paeonians, Trojan allies, ii. 205 
Palaemon, a sea-god, i, 321. See 
Melicertes 


517 


INDEX 


Palaemon, son of Hephaestus or 
Aetolus, in the Argo, i. 97 

Palaemon, son of Hercules by 
Autonoe, i. 277 

Palamedes, son of Nauplius by 
Clymene, i. 145, 309; detects the 
feigned madness of Ulysses, ii. 
177; stoned as a traitor at Troy 
through the machinations of 
Ulysses, 179, 249 

Palladium granted by Zeus to 
Ilus, ii. 39; story of its origin, 
41; temple built for it, 43; 
Troy not to be taken while the 
Palladium was within the walls, 
225; stolen from Troy by 
Ulysses, 227 

Pallas, a giant, flayed by Athena, 
i. 45; his skin used by her to 
shield her body in the fight, 45, 47 

Pallas, daughter of Triton, wounded 
by Athena, ii. 41; her image the 
Palladium, 41 

Pallas, son of Crius and Eury- 
bia, i. 18; father of Victory, 
Dominion, Emulation, and Vio- 
lence, 13 

Pallas, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Pallas, son of Pandion, ii. 113; 
ss fifty sons killed by Theseus, 


Pallene, giants born at, i. 43 

Pammon, son of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49 

Pamphylus, son of Aegimius, ally of 
the Heraclids, slain in battle 
with the Peloponnesians, i. 289 

Pan, son of Zeus and Hybris, i. 27 ; 
said to have been borne by 
Penelope to Hermes, ii. 305 

Panathenaea, instituted by Erich- 
thonius, ii. 93 

Panathenian festival celebrated by 
Aegeus, ii, 115 

Pandarus, son of Lycaon, a Trojan 
ally, ii. 205; breaks the truce, 207 

Pandion, son of Cecrops, king of 
Athens, ii. 111; expelled by 
the sons of Metion, 113; goes 
to Megara, marries the king’s 
daughter, and becomes king of 
Megara, 113; father of Aegeus, 
Pallas, Nisus, and Lycus, 113; 
his sons march against Athens 
and expel the Metionids, 113 


518 


Pandion, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Callidice, i. 143 

Pandion, son of Erichthonius by 
Praxithea, king of Athens, ii. 93, 
95; in his time Demeter and 
Dionysus come to Attica, 94, 97; 
marries his mother’s sister, 99 ; 
father of Procne and Philomela, 
99; at war with Labdacus, calls 
in the help of Tereus, 99; 
gives Procne in marriage to 
Tereus, 99; succeeded by his 
sons Erechtheus and Butes, 101 

Pandion, son of Phineus by Cleo- 
rie blinded by his father, ii. 


Pandora, first woman fashioned 
by the gods, i. 53; wife of 
Epimetheus, mother of Pyrrha, 53 

Pandorus, son of Erechtheus, ii. 103 

Pandrosium, olive-tree of Athena 
shown in the, ii. 79 

Pandrosus, daughter of Cecrops by 
Agraulus, ii. 81; receives Erich- 
thonius in a chest from Athena, 
91; her sisters open the chest, 
see a serpent, and throw them- 
selves from the Acropolis, 91 

Pangaeum, Mount, King Lycurgus 
put to death at, i. 331 

Panope, a Nereid, i. 15 

Panope, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of. Threpsippas by Her- 
cules, i. 273 ἢ : 

Panopeus joins Amphitryon in his 
expedition against the Taphians, 
i. 173 

Panyasis on Triptolemus, i. 39; 
on the resurrection of Tyndareus, 
ii. 19; on Adonis, 85, 87 — 

Paphlagonians, Trojan allies, ii, 205 

Paphos, in Cyprus, founded by 
Cinyras, ii. 83, 85 

Paralus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Paria, a nymph, a concubine of 
Minos, i. 303 

Paris, second son of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 45, 47; exposed on 
Mount Ida, 47; suckled by a 
bear, 47; afterwards surnamed 
Alexander, 47. See Alexander 

Parnassus, Mount, Deucalion on, 


i. 55 
Paros, island, the sons of Minos in, 
i. 203, 205; Hercules lands in, 


INDEX 


kills some of the sons of Minos, 
and takes hostages of the rest, 
203, 205 ; Minos sacrifices to the 
Graces in, ii. 117 

Parthenius, Mount, infant Telephus 
exposed on, i. 255, 397 

Parthenopaeus, son of Melanion or 
of Ares by Atalanta, one of the 
Seven against Thebes, i. 357, 403; 
one of the victors in the Nemean 
games, 359; stationed at the 
Electran gate of Thebes, 361; 
slain by Amphidocus or by Peri- 
clymenus, 369; father of Pro- 
machus, 379 

Parthenopaeus, son of Talaus, father 
of Promachus, i. 91 

Parthenope, daughter of Stym- 
phalus, i. 277 

Pasiphae, sister of Aeetes, wife of 
Minos, i. 77; daughter of the 
Sun, married by Minos, 303 ; be- 
witches Minos, ii. 105; loves 
the bull, with the complicity of 
Daedalus, 123 

Patro, daughter of 'Thespius, mother 
of Archemachus by Hercules, i. 
23. 

Patroclus, son of Hercules by 
Pyrippe, i. 275 

Patroclus, son of Menoetius, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 29; kills Clitonymus 
and takes refuge in the house of 
Peleus, accompanies Achilles to 
Troy, 75, 77; sent by Achilles 
to fight the Trojans, killed by 
Hector, 209; games celebrated 
in his honour, 211; buried with 
Achilles in the White Isle, 217 

Peace, daughter of Zeus and 
Themis, i. 15 

Pebbles, divination by, ii. 11 

Pedias, daughter of Mynes, wife of 
Cranaus, ii. 89 

Pegasus, winged steed, offspring of 
Medusa and Poseidon, bears 
Bellerophon aloft while he kills 
the Chimera, i. 151, 153; springs 
from the Gorgon’s trunk, 159 

Pelagon, son of Asopus by Metope, 


ieee 
Pelagon, site of Thebes indicated by 
a cow from the herds of, i. 315 
Pelasgian land (Thessaly), Acrisius 
departs to the, i. 163 


Pelasgians harass the Doliones, 
i. 101; early inhabitants of 
Peloponnese, 131; the country 
of, called Thessaly, ii, 257, 259 

Pelasgiotis, old name of Pelo- 
ponnese, ii. 163 

Pelasgus, father of Hippothous, 
ii. 205 

Pelasgus, son of Zeus and Niobe, 
or, according to Hesiod, a son 
of the soil, i. 129, 131, 389; 
father of Lycaon, 389 

Pelegon, son ot the river Axius, 
li. 209 

Peleus, son of Aeacus by Endeis, ii. 
533 hunts the Calydonian boar, 
i. 67, 69; in the Argo, 97; wrestles 
with Atalanta, 399, 401, ii. 63; 
plots the death of his brother 
Phocus, 57; expelled from Aegina, 
57; flees to Eurytion in Phthia 
and gets his daughter Antigone 
to wife, 61; kills Eurytion acci- 
dentally and flees to Acastus at 
Iolcus, 63; is purified by Acastus, 
63; falsely accused by Astydamia, 
wife of Acastus, 63, 65; deserted 
by Acastus, caught by centaurs, 
rescued by Chiron, 65; marries 
Thetis, 67; father of Achilles, 
1853; prevents Thetis from 
rendering Achilles immortal, 69, 
71; takes Achilles to Chiron, 71; 
lays waste Iolcus and kills Asty- 
damia, 73; brings Phoenix to 
Chiron, 75; makes him king of 
the Dolopians, 75; father of 
Polymele, 77; Patroclus takes 
refuge in the house of, 77; ex- 
pelled from Phthia by the sons 
of Acastus, his death, 251 

Pelian spear of Achilles, ii. 189 

Pelias, son of Poseidon by Tyro, 
twin brother of Neleus, i. 83; 
kills his stepmother Sidero, 83, 
85; quarrels with his brother, 85; 
dwells in Thessaly, 85; father 
of Acastus, Alcestes, etc., 85, 
93, 97; does not honour Hera, 
85, 95; king of Iolcus after 
Cretheus, 95; sends Jason to 
fetch the Golden Fleece, 95; 
makes away with Aeson and his 
son, 121; murdered by his 
daughters at the instigation of 


519 


INDEX 


Medea, 121; ‘games held in 
honour of, 399, ii. 63 

Pelion, Mount, piled on Ossa, i. 59 ; 
the hunt of Acastus and Peleus 
on, ii. 65; Peleus and Thetis 
married on, 67 

Pellas, suitor ‘of Penelope, ii. 299 

Pellene, near the plain of Canas- 
trum, the people of Protesilaus 
settle at, ii. 261 

Pelopia, daughter of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Pelopia, daughter of Pelias, i. 85 

Pelopia, mother of Cycnus by Ares, 
i. 

Pelopid, Mycenaeans ordered by 
oracle to choose a Pelopid for 
their king, ii. 165 

Peloponnese, not flooded in Deu- 
calion’s time, i. 55; assigned to 
Xuthus, 57, 78: river Harpys in, 
105; formerly called Apia, 129 ; 
inhabited by Pelasgians, 131; 
traversed by the mad daughters 
of Proetus, 147; conquered by 
the Heraclids, 281 ; return of 
the Heraclids to, 283 ; evacuated 
by the Heraclids, 283 ; finally 
conquered by them, 289; the 
exiled Laius lives in, 339; Pylas 
retires from Megara to, ii. 113; 
(Peloponnesus) conquered by 
roe and named after himself, 

Peloponnesians, ruled by Tisa- 
menus, i, 283, 285; defeat the 
Heraclids, 285. 

Pelops, father of Astydamia and 
Lysidice,i. 165 ; father of Nicippe, 
167°; father of Atreus and Thy- 
estes, 171; father of Copreus, 
187; altar of, founded by Her- 
cules at Olympia, 251; receives 
the exiled Laius, 339; father of 
Chrysippus, 339; treacherously 
murders Stymphalus, thereby 
bringing infertility on Greece, ii. 
55; father of Alcathus, 61; 
father of Pittheus, 115; "father 
of Sciron, 129; boiled and 
brought to life again, 157; 
receives a winged chariot from 
Poseidon, 157; loved by Hippo- 
damia, wins her in the chariot- 
race, 161; throws Mpyrtilus 


520 


into the sea, 163; cleansed by 
Hephaestus, 163; succeeds to 
the kingdom of Oenomaus in 
Pisa, 163; conquers the Pelo- 
ponnese, 163 ; his sons Pittheus, 
Atreus, and Thyestes, 163; 
Ilium not to be taken without 
the bones of, 223, 225 

Pelorus, one of the five Sparti who 
survived, 1, 317 

Peneleos, son of Hippalcimus, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27 

Peneleus, son of Hippalmus, in the 
Argo, i. 97 

Penelope, daughter of Icarius, wife 
of Ulysses, ii. 23; her father 
asked to give her to Ulysses, 29; 
mother of Telemachus, 177; the 
suitors of, 297, 299; she deceives 
them by undoing her web, 299 ; 
delivers to them the bow of 
Ulysses, 301; bears Poliporthes 
to Ulysses, 303; conveyed by 
Telegonus to Circe, 305 ; married 
to Telegonus, 305 ; sent with him 
to the Islands of the Blest, 305 ; 
said by some to have been 
seduced by the suitors and sent 
away or killed by Ulysses, 305 ; 
said to have borne Pan to Hermes 
in Mantinea, 305 

Peneus, river, diverted by Hercules 
into the cattle-yard of Augeas. 
i, 159. 70} 

Pentathilum, Perseus engages in the, 
i. 163 

Penthesilia, an Amazon, daughter 
of Ares and Otrere, kills Hippo- 


lyte and is purified by Priam, — 


ii. 211; killed by Achilles, 211 
Pentheus, king of Thebes, son of 
Echion and Agave, tries to stop 
the Bacchic orgies, i. 331; is 
torn to pieces by his mother, 939] 


Peparethus, son of Dionysus by 
Ariadne, ii, 137 
Pephredo, daughter of Phorcus, 


i. 155 

Perdix. sister of Daedalus, mother 
of Talos, ii. 121 

Pereus, son of Elatus by Laodice, 
father of N eaera, i. 397 

Pergamum fortified by Apollo and 
Poseidon, i. 207 

Periallus, suitor of Penelope, ii, 299 


INDEX 


Periboea, a Naiad nymph, wife of 
Icarius, ii. 23 

Periboea, daughter of Alcathus, 
wife of Telamon, ii. 61 

Periboea, daughter of Hipponous, 
wife of Oeneus, i. 71; sent away 


by her father, 71; mother of 
Tydeus, 71 
Periboea, maiden sent by the 


Locrians to propitiate Athena at 
Ilium, ii. 267 

Periboea, wife of Polybus, king of 

Corinth, receives and adopts 

Oedipus, i. 345 

Periclymenus, son of Poseidon, 
slays Parthenopaeus, i. 369; 
unable to wound Amphiaraus, 371 

Periclymenus, son of Neleus, re- 
ceives from Poseidon the power 
of shape-shifting, i. 85, 251; in 
the Argo, 97; killed by Hercules, 
85, 251 


Periclymenus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Perieres, charioteer of Menoeceus, 
wounds Clymenus, king of the 
Minyans, i. 179 

Perieres, son of Aeolus, i. 57; takes 
possession of Messene, 79 ; marries 
Gorgophone, 79, 163; father of 
Aphareus, Leucippus, Tyndareus, 


and Icarius, 79, 81; his descen-: 
dants, 81 
Perieres, son of Cynortes, marries 


Gorgophone, father of Tyndareus, 
learius, Aphareus, and Leu- 
cippus, li. 13, 21 ; father of Borus, 
63; father of Polydora, 67 

a gga son of Icarius by Periboea, 
11. 25 

Perimede, daughter of Aeolus, wife 
of Achelous, i. 57 

Perimede, sister of Amphitryon, 
married to Licymnius, i. 171 

Perimedes, son of EKurystheus, 
slain by the Athenians, i. 277 

Perimedes, suitor of Penelope, 
li, 297 

Periopis, daughter of Pheres, 
mother of Patroclus, according 
to some, ii. 77 

Periphas, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Actaea, i. 141 

Periphas (not Periphus), suitor of 
Penelope, ii. 299 


Periphetes, son of Hephaestus, 
called the Clubman, killed by 
Theseus in Epidaurus, ii. 123 

Periphron, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

Peristhenes, son of Egyptus, hus- 
band of Electra, i. 141 

Pero, daughter of Neleus by 
Chloris, i. 85; wooed by Bias, 
87; her son Talaus, 91 

Pero, mother of Asopus by Posei- 
don, ii. 51 

Perse, wife of the Sun, mother of 
Circe and Aeetes, ii. 287 

Perseis, wife of the Sun, mother of 
Aeetes and Pasiphae, i. 77, 303 

Persephone, daughter of Zeus and 
Styx, i. 17; carried off by Pluto, 
35; compelled to remain a third. 
of the year with Pluto and the 


rest with the gods, 41 ; wooed by 
Pirithous, 235; intercedes for 
Menoetes, 237; disputes with 


Aphrodite for the possession of 
Adonis, ii. 87; Pirithous tries to 
win, to wife, 153. See Maid, 
Maiden 

Perses, brother of Aeetes, deposes 
him and is killed by Medea, i. 125 

Perses, son of Crius and Eury- 
bia, father of Hecate, i. 13 

Perses, son of Perseus, ancestor of 
kings of Persia, i. 163 

Perseus, son of Nestor, i. 85 

Perseus, son of Zeus and Danae, 
i. 15, 155; cast into the sea with 
his mother, washed ashore on 
Seriphus, 155; sent by Polydectes 
to fetch the Gorgon’s head, 155; 
visits the Phorcides and nymphs, 
155, 157; cuts cff Medusa’s head, 
157, 159; rescues Andromeda, 
159, 161 ; turns Phineus to stone, 
161; comes to Seriphus and turns 
Polydectes to stone, 161; gives 
back the sandals, wallet, and cap 
to Hermes, 161; gives the Gor- 
gon’s head to Athena, 161; goes 
to Argos, 161; accidentally kills 
Acrisius, 163; surrenders Argos 
and reigns over Tiryns, 163; 
his children by Andromeda, 163 ; 
father of Gorgophone, i. 79, ii. 13 

Persia, kings of, descended from 
Perses, 6s 


521 


INDEX 


he ane father of Menestheus, ii. 


Peucetius, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Phaea, the name of the Crommyon 
sow and of the old woman who 
bred it, ii, 129 

Phaeacians, Corcyra, the island of 
the, the Argonauts come to, 
i. 115; the Colchians settle down 
among the, 117; Ulysses cast up 
on the shore of the, ii. 295; 
Poseidon turns their ship to stone 
and envelops their city with a 
mountain, 297 

Phaedimus, son of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Phaedra, daughter of Minos by 
Pasiphae or Crete, i. 303, 307; 
wife of Theseus, ii. 145; loves 
Hippolytus and falsely accuses 
him to Theseus, 145; hangs 
herself, 147; intervention of 
Amazons at her marriage, 215 

Phaethon, son of Tithonus, father 
of Astynous, ii. 88 

Phalias, son of Hercules by Heli- 
conis, i. 275 

Phantes, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Theano, i. 141 

Phantom of Helen carried by 
Alexander (Paris) to Troy, ii. 175; 
possessed by Menelaus, 279 

Phanus, son of Dionysus, in the 
Argo, i. 97 

Pharnace, daughter of Megassares, 
wife of Sandocus, ii. 83 

Phartis, daughter of Danaus,mother 
of Eurydamas, i. 141 

Phasis, river, in Colchis, arrival of 
the Argonauts at, i. 109 

Phassus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Phegeus at Psophis purifies Alc- 
maeon and gives him his daughter 
Arsinoe to wife, i. 383; his sons 
Pronous and Agenor kill Alc- 
maeon, 385; Phegeus, his wife 
and sons killed by Alcmaeon’s 
sons, 387 

Pheneus, son of Melas, killed by 
Tydeus, i. 71, 73 

Pherae, Admetus at, i. 67; in 
Thessaly, founded by Pheres, 91 ; 
Hercules comes from, after saving 
Alcestis, 239; Apollo. serves 
Admetus as a herdsman at, ii, 21 


522 


Phereans, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii, 185 

Phereclus builds the ships for 
Alexander (Paris), ii, 173 


Pherecydes on Orion, i, 81; on 
Triptolemus, 389; on the 
homicide of Tydeus, 73; on 


Hercules and the Argo, 101; on 
Argus, 133; on the serpents 
killed by the infant Hercules, 
175; on the horn of Amalthea, 
257; on Thasus, 299, 301; on 
Cadmus and the Sparti, 315; 
on the necklace of Harmonia, 
317; on the blindness of Tiresias, 
363; on Callisto, 395; on the 
father of Telamon, ii. 53 

Pheres, father of Admetus, i. 67, 
ii. 21; son of Cretheus, i. 87; 
father of Idomene, 87; founds 
Pherae, 91; father of Admetus 
and Lycurgus, 91; father of 
Periopis, ii. 77 

Pheres, son of Jason, murdered by 
ΤΩ or the Corinthians, i. 123, 
if 


Pheroetes, 
ii. 297 

Pherusa, a Nereid, i. 15 

os Mount, the Sphinx on, 
if 

Phidippus, son of Thessalus, leader 
of the Coans against Troy, 
ii. 185; goes to Andros, settles 
in Cyprus, 259 : 

Philaemon, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Philammon, father of Thamyris by 
a nymph Argiope, i. 19 

Philocrates, on the mother of 
Patroclus, ii. 77 

Philoctetes, son of Poeas, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27; leader of the 
Olizonians against Troy, 185; 
bitten by a snake in Tenedos, 
put ashore and abandoned by 
the Greeks in Lemnos, 195; 
fetched by Ulysses and Diomedes, 
223; shoots Alexander, 223; 
sails to Mimas, 259; goes to 
Campania in Italy, 257, 259; 
makes war on the Lucanians, 
261; settles in Crimissa, 261; 
founds a sanctuary of Apollo the 
Wanderer, and dedicates his 
bow to him, 261 


suitor of Penelope, 


i eae ee ee ee ae 


INDEX 


Philodemus, 
ii. 297 
Philoetius helps Ulysses to shoot 

the suitors, ii. 301 
Philolaus, son of Minos, i. 303; 
a aie killed by Hercules, 203, 


suitor of Penelope, 


Philomela, daughter of Pandion, 
ii. 99; seduced by Tereus, 101 ; 
turned into a swallow, 101 

Philonoe, daughter of Iobates, wife 
of Bellerophon, i. 153 

Philonome, daughter of Tragasus, 
second wife of Cycnus, falsely 
accuses her stepson Tenes, ii. 193 ; 
oe by Cycnus in the earth, 


Philyra, mother of Chiron by 
Cronus, i. 13 

Philyra, wife of Nauplius, i. 145 

Phineus, son of Belus, brother of 
Cepheus, i. 137; plots against 
oo but is turned to stone, 


Phineus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Phineus, a blind seer, i. 103, 105; 
son of Poseidon or Agenor, 105 ; 
tormented by the Harpies, de- 
livered by the Argonauts, 105; 
reveals to them the course of 
their voyage, 107; misled by 
his second wife Idaea, he blinds 
Plexippus and Pandion, the sons 
of his first wife Cleopatra, ii. 107 ; 
punished by the Argonauts, 107 

Phlegra, Hercules in the battle of 
the gods with the giants at, 
i. 247. See Phiegrae 

Phiegrae, giants born at, i. 43. 
See Phiegra 

Phlegyas, son of Ares, slain by 
Lycus and Nycteus, i. 335, 337; 
father of Coronis, ii. 13 

Phocaea taken by Achilles, ii. 203 

Phocian war, the Locrians cease 
to send suppliants to Troy after 
the, ii. 269 

Phocians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 

Phocis, ruled by Deion, i. 79; 

raw Panopeus in, 173; Cadmus 

Ε journeys through, 315; Oedipus 

+ encounters and kills his father 
in, 345; Daulia in, ii. 101 

Phocus, son of Aeacus and 


Psamathe, ii. 55; murdered by 
Telamon, 57 

Phoebe, a Hamadryad nymph, 
mother of some of the daughters 
of Danaus, i. 141 

Phoebe, a Titanid, daughter of Sky 
and Earth, i. 5; wife of Coeus, 
mother of Asteria and Latona, 
1 15 

Phoebe, daughter of Leucippus, 
carried off by the Dioscuri, ii. 13 ; 
bears Mnesileus to Pollux, 31 

Phoenicia, Agenor reigns in, i. 135, 

7; Phoenix settles in, 301; 

Alexander (Paris) tarries in, 
ii. 175 ; Menelaus wanders to, 279 

Phoenician woman, wife of Egyptus, 
mother of seven sons, i. 141 

Phoenix, son of Agenor by Tele- 
phassa, i. 297; settles in Phoe- 
nicia, 301; father of Adonis, 
according to Hesiod, ii. 85 

Phoenix, son of Amyntor, blinded 
by his father, healed by Chiron, 
goes with Achilles to Troy, ii. 75 ; 
sent as an ambassador to 
Achilles, 207; sent with Ulysses 
to Scyros to fetch Neoptolemus, 
225; buried by Neoptolemus, 251 

Pholoe, Hercules entertained by 
the centaur Pholus at, i. 191, 
198, 195 

Pholus, a centaur, son of Silenus, 
entertains Hercules, i. 191, 193; 
accidentally killed by an arrow, 
buried by Hercules, 195 

Phorbas, said to be father of 
Augeas, i. 195 

Phorbus, father of Pronoe, i. 61 

Phorcides (Phorcids), daughters of 
Phorcus and Ceto, sisters of the 
Gorgons, i. 15, 155; have only 
one eye between the three of 
them, 155, 157; show Perseus 
the way to the nymphs, 157 

Phorcus, son of Sea (Pontus) and 
Earth, i. 13; father of the 
Phorcids (Phorcides) and Gorgons 
by Ceto, 15, 155;° father οἵ 
Scylla, ii. 293 

Phorcys, son of Aretaon, leader of 
the Phrygians, ii. 205 

Phoroneus, father of Apis, i. 61, 
129: son of Inachus, king of 
Peloponnese, 129 


523 


INDEX 


Phrasimus, father of Praxithea 
by Diogenia, ii. 103 

Phrasius, a seer from Cyprus, 
prescribes human sacrifices as a 
remedy for dearth, i. 225, 226; 
himself sacrificed, 227 

Phrasius, son of Neleus, i. 85 

Phrenius, two suitors of Penelope, 
both from Zacynthos, ii. 299 

Phrixus, son of Athamas, brought 

* by his father to the altar, i. 75; 
carried on ram with golden fleece 
to Colchis, 75, 77; marries 
Chalciope, daughter of <Aeetes, 
77; father of Argus, 95, 97; his 
ae directed by Phineus, 

Phrontis, son of Phrixus by Chal- 
ciope, i. 77 

ed ow Cybela in, i. 327; Ilus in, 
ii 


Phrygian prisoner taken by Ulysses, 
ii. 179 


Phrygian woman (Midea), mother of 
Licymnius, i. 165 

Phrygians, Trojan allies, ii. 205 

Phthia, concubine of Amyntor, 
‘eid accuses his son Phoenix, 


ii. 

Phthia, daughter of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Phthia, loved by Apollo, i. 61 

Phthia, Deucalion in, i. 53; Peleus 
in, 67; Eurytion in, 67; Peleus 
flees to and from, ii. 61, 63; 
Peleus expelled from, 251 

Phthius, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Phylace, Melampus at, i. 89; 
ships sent from, to the Trojan 
war, ii. 185 

Phylacus, son of Deion by Diomede, 
i. 79; father of Iphiclus, keeps 
Melampus in bonds, 89; restores 
the kine to Neleus, 89, 91 

Phylas, king of Ephyra, in Thes- 
protia, i. 259 ; father of Astyoche, 
277 

Phylas, son of Antiochus, father of 
Hippotes, i. 287 

Phyleis, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Tigasis by Hercules, 
1, 278 

Phyleus, son of Augeas, bears 
witness for Hercules against his 
father, i. 195, 1973; expelled 


524 


by his father, goes to Dulichium, 
197; restored by Hercules, 249 ; 
father of Meges, ii. 27, 183 
Phyllis, daughter of the king of the 
Bisaltians, loves Demophon, ii. 
263; deserted by him she curses 
him and kills herself, 265 
Phylomache, daughter of Amphion, 
wife of Pelias, i. 85 
Phylonoe, daughter of Tyndareus 
and Leda, made immortal by 
Artemis, ii, 23 
Phylonomus, son 
by Anaxo, i. 165 
Physius, son of Lycaon, i, 389 
Pieria, Orpheus buried in, i. 19; 
Hermes steals the kine of Apollo 
in, ii, 5, 7 
Pieria, wife of Danaus, i. 141 
Pieris, an Aetolian slave, mother of 
τινάν by Menelaus, ii. 29, 


of Electryon 


Pierus, son of Magnes, father of 
ning by the Muse Clio, i. 


Pillars set up by Dionysus in 
India, i. 331; of Hercules, 
ii. 211, 218 

Pindar, on the kibisis, i, 157 

ὰ πεν το, name applied to Sinis, 
Hi. ἃ 

Pine-tree, Marsyas hung on a, i. 31 

Piras, son of Argus, i. 131 

Pirates, Tyrrhenian, their adventure 
with Dionysus, i. 331, 333 

Piren, brother of Bellerophon, 
accidentally killed by him, i. 149 

Pirene, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Agaptolemus, i. 141 

Pireus, father of Autonoe, i. 277 

Pirithous, son of Ixion, hunts the 
Calydonian boar, i. 67; woos 
Persephone, 235; seen in Hades 
by Hercules, who fails to rescue 
him, 235, 237; father of Poly- 
poetes, ii. 27, 185; aided by 
Theseus in his war with the 
centaurs, 145, 149; his marriage 
with Hippodamia, 151; helps 
Theseus to carry off Helen, 153 ; 
tries to win Persephone to wife, 
but is detained with Theseus in 
Hades, 153 

Pisa, statue of Hercules made by 
Daedalus at, i, 243; Oenomaus, 


INDEX ' 


king of, ii. 157; Pelops returns 
to, 163 

a on the mother of Tydeus, 
a 

Pisander, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Pisenor, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Pisidice, daughter of Aeolus, wife 
of Myrmidon, i. 57 

Pisidice, daughter of Nestor, i. 85 

Pisidice, daughter of Pelias, i. 85 

Pisinoe, one of the Sirens, ii. 291 

Pisistratus, son of Nestor, i. 85 

Pisus, son of Aphareus, ii. 13 

Pittheus, son of Pelops, ii. 115, 163 ; 
at Troezen makes Aegeus lie 
with his daughter Aethra, 115; 
father of Aethra, 153 

Placia, daughter of Otreus, wife of 
Laomedon, ii. 43 

Plane-tree at Aulis, with an altar 
beside it, ii. 185 

Plataea, Damasistratus, king of, 


i, 34 

Plato, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Pleiades, the seven, daughters of 
Atlas and Pleione, ii. 2 

Pleione, daughter of Ocean, mother 
of the Pleiades by Atlas, ii. 3 

Pleuron, city in Aetolia, i. 61 

Pleuron, son of Aetolus, husband of 
Xanthippe, i. 61 

Plexaure, a Nereid, i. 15 

Plexippus, son of Phineus and 
Cleopatra, blinded by his father 
on a false accusation, ii. 107 

Plexippus, son of Thestius, i. 63 

Plisthenes, husband of Aerope, 
father of Agamemnon and Mene- 
laus, i. 309 

Pluto, son of Cronus and Rhea, 
swallowed by Cronus, i. 7; his 
helmet, 11; lord of Hades, 11 ; 
sends up Eurydice for Orpheus, 
19; carries off Persephone, 35 ; 
gives her a seed of a pomegranate 
to eat, 39; sends up the Maid, 
39; bids Hercules take Cerberus, 
237; Aeacus honoured in the 
abode of, ii. 57. See Hades 

Podalirius, son of Aesculapius, 
suitor of Helen, ii. 27; leader 
of the Triccaeans against Troy, 
185; heals Philoctetes, 223; 
goes to Colophon and helps to 
bury Calchas, 243; consults 


the oracle at Delphi and settles 
in the Carian Chersonese, 265 

Podarce, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Oeneus, i. 141 

Podarces, afterwards called Priam, 
i. 245, 247; son of Laomedon, 
ii. 43; called Priam, 45. See 
Priam 

Podarces, son of Iphiclus, i. 91 

Poeas, son of Thaumacus, in the 
Argo, i. 97; shoots Talos, 119; 
kindles the pyre of Hercules, 271 ; 
Hercules gives him his bow, 271; 
father of Philoctetes, ii. 27, 185 

Polichus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Poliporthes, son of Ulysses and 
Penelope, ii. 303 

Polites, son of Priam and Hecuba, 
ii. 49 

Pollux, son of Zeus, in the Argo, 
i. 97; kills Amycus, king of the 
Bebryces, in a boxing match, 
103 ; son of Zeus by Leda, ii. 23; 
practises boxing, 31; father of 
Mnesileus by Phoebe, 31; kills 


Lynceus, 33; carried up to 
heaven by Zeus, 33; refuses to 
accept immortality while his 


brother is dead, 33; alternately 
among gods and mortals, 33. 
See Castor, Dioscuri 

hig + ΠΝ Hercules at Aenus, 
i. 20 

Polyanax, king of Melos, ii. 259 

Polybotes, a giant, overcome by 
Poseidon, i. 47 

Polybus, king of Corinth, his 
neatherds find the exposed 
Oedipus, i, 345 

Polybus, two suitors of Penelope, 
both from Zacynthos, ii. 299 

Polycaste, daughter of Nestor, i. 85 

Polyctor, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Stygne, i. 141 

Polydectes, son of Magnes, colonizes 
Seriphus, i. 81; king of Seriphus, 
falls in love with Danae, sends 
Perseus to fetch the Gorgon’s 
head, 155; turned to stone by 
Perseus, 161 

Polydora, daughter of Peleus, wife 
of Borus, ii. 61, 63 

Polydora, daughter of Perieres, wife 
of Peleus, ii. 67 

Polydorus, son of Cadmus and 


525 


INDEX 


Harmonia, i. 317; becomes king 
of Thebes, marries Nycteis, 335 ; 
father of Labdacus, 335 

Polydorus, son of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49 

Polydorus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Polygonus, son of Proteus, killed 
by Hercules, i. 209 

Polyidus, son of Coeranus, a 
diviner, restores Glaucus to life 
by means of a magic herb, i. 311, 
313; imparts to him the art of 
divination, but afterwards de- 
prives him of it, 313; departs to 
Argos, 313 

Polyidus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Polylaus, son of Hercules by 
Eurybia, i. 273 

Polymede, daughter of Autolycus, 
wife of Aeson, mother of Jason, 
i. 93; curses Pelias and hangs 
herself, 121 

Polymedon, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Polymele, daughter of Peleus, 
mother of Patroclus, according 
to some, li. 77 

Polymnia, a Muse, i. 17 

Polynices, son of Oedipus by 
Jocasta or Eurygania, brother of 
Eteocles, i. 349; agrees with his 
brother to rule the kingdom 
alternately for a year, 351; 
banished from Thebes, comes to 


Argos, 351; marries Argia, 
daughter of Adrastus, 3533 
bribes Eriphyle to persuade 


Amphiaraus to go to war, 353, 
355; one of the Seven against 
Thebes, 357; one of the victors 
in the Nemean games, 359; 
slain in single combat by his 


brother Eteocles, 369; his body 
buried by Antigone, 373; father 
of Thersander, 379, ii. 187 
Polynome, a Nereid, i. 15 
Polypemon, father of Sinis by 
Sylea, ii. 125 
Polypemon, a name_ given to 
Damastes, ii. 131. See Damastes 
Polyphemus, a Cyclops, son of 


Poseidon by the nymph Thodsa, 
made drunk and blinded by 
Ulysses, ii, 283 

Polyphemus, son of Elatus, in the 
Argo, i, 99; searches for Hylas, 


526 


is left behind by the Argonauts in 
Mysia, 101; founds Cius in 
Mysia, 101 

Rolyphiden lord of Sicyon, Aga- 
memnon and Menelaus brought 
by their nurse to, ii. 169, 171 

Polyphontes, a Heraclid, ‘king of 
Messene, i. 291, 293; marries 
Merope, wife of ἘΠ predecessor, 
293; killed by Aepytus, son of 
Merope, 293 

Polyphontes, herald of Ogee killed 
by Oedipus, i. 345, 347 

Polypoetes, son of Apollo by Phthia, 
killed by Aetolus, i. 61 

Polypoetes, son of Pirithous, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27; 
Gyrtonians against Troy, 185: 
goes to Colophon and helps to 
bury Calchas, 243 

Polypoetes, son of Ulysses and 
Callidice, queen of the Thes- 
protians, li. 303 

oo suitor of Penelope, 
ii 

Polyxena, daughter of Priam and 
Hecuba, ii. 49; slaughtered by 
the Greeks on the grave οἱ 
Achilles, 239, 241 

Polyxenus, king of the Eleans, 
entrusted by the Taphians with 
stolen kine, allows Amphitryon 
to ransom them, i. 169 

Polyxenus,- son of Agasthenes, 
suitor of Helen, ii. 27 

Polyxo, Naiad nymph, wife of 
Danaus, i, 14} 

Polyxo, mother of Antiope by 
Nycteus, ii. 5 

Pomegranate, seed of, eaten by 
Persephone, i, 39, 41 

Pontomedusa, a Nereid, i. 15 

Pontus (Sea), i, 18. See Sea 

Porphyrion, a giant, i. 43; attacks 
Hera, thunderstruck by Zeus and 
shot by Hercules, 45 

Porthaon, son of Agenor, i, 61; his 
children by Euryte, 63 

Portheus, father of Echion, ii. 235 

Portheus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Poseidon, son of Cronus and Rhea, 
i. 7; swallowed by Cronus, 7 ; his 
trident, 11; lord of the ’sea, 
11.» father of Orion, bestows on 
him the power of striding across 


leader of the, 


(= " ϑυταδν» μ»- 


INDEX 


the sea, 31; prepares under- 
ground house for Oenopion, 33 3 
husband of Amphitrite, father of 
Triton and Rhode, 35; combats 
giant Polybotes, 47; his sons 
by Canace, 59; father of the 
Aloads by Iphimedia, 59; father 
of Pelias and Neleus by Tyro, 
83; gives Periclymenus power 
to shift his shape, 85; father of 
Euphemus, 97, of Erginus, 97 ; 
father of Amycus, 103; father 
of Phineus, 105; blinds Phineus, 
105; at the Isthmus (of Corinth), 
121; father of twins, Agenor 
and Belus, 185; dries up springs 
of Argos, 139; reveals to 
Amymone the springs of Lerna, 
139; father of Nauplius, 143, 
257; father of Pegasus, 153; 
sends a flood and a sea monster 
against Ethiopia, 159; father of 
Taphius by Hippothoe, 163; his 
precinct at Onchestus, 179; re- 
ceives the centaurs at Hleusis and 
hides them, 193, 195; said to be 
father of Augeas, 195; sends upa 
bull from the sea for Minos to 
sacrifice, 199; fortifies ‘Troy, 
but being defrauded by Lao- 
medon punishes the city with a 
Hood, 205, 207; father of 
Sarpedon, 209, of Proteus, 209; 
father of Ialebion and Dercynus, 
2153) father of Eryx, 217; 
father of Antaeus, 223; father 
of Busiris, 225; father of 


Eurypylus, 247; father οἵ. 


Eurytus and Cteatus, 249; 
sends up bull, with which 
Pasiphae falls in love, 305; 
father of Periclymenus, 369; 
father of horse Arion by Demeter, 
373; father of Lycus' by 
Celaeno, ii. 5; makes Lycus to 
dwell in the Islands of the Blest, 
5; father of Aethusa, Hyrieus, 
and Hyperenor by Alcyone, 5; 
father of Idas, according to many, 
13 ; father of Asopus by Pero, 51 ; 
and Zeus rivals for the hand of 
Thetis, 67; gives Peleus im- 
mortal horses, 69; strives with 
Athena for the possession of 
Attica, 79, 81; produces a sea on 


the Acropolis (of Athens), 79; 
floods the Thriasian plain, 81 ; 
father of Halirrhothius by Euryte, 
accuses Ares of murder, 81 ; 
Poseidon Erechtheus, priesthood 
of, got by Butes, 101; father of 
Eumolpus by Chione, 107, 109 ; 
rescues Eumolpus from the sea 
and conveys him to Ethiopia, 
109; father of Benthesicyme, 
109; destroys Erechtheus and 
his house, 111; hag connexion 
with Aethra in the same night as 
Theseus, 115; father of Sciron, 
129; sends up a bull from the 
sea, which frightens the horses of 
Hippolytus, 145, 147; grants 
Caeneus to be invulnerable, 151 ; 
bestows a winged chariot on 
Pelops, 157; splits the ship of 
Ajax with his trident, 247; 
father of Polyphemus by the 
nymph Thodsa, 283; angry 
with Ulysses, 285; breaks up 
the raft of Ulysses, 295; angry 
with the Phaeacians, turns 
their ship to stone, 297; pro- 
pitiated by Ulysses, 301 

Potamon, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Glaucippe, i. 141 

Praxithea, a Naiad nymph, wife 
of Erichthonius, mother of Pan- 
dion, ii. 95 , 

Praxithea at Eleusis, discovers 
Demophon in the fire, i. 39 

Praxithea, daughter of Phrasimus, 
wife of Erechtheus, her children, 
τ VOL OS 

Praxithea, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Nephus by Hercules, 
1, 275 

Prayers offered by Aeacus for rain, 
ii: δῦ 

Priam, formerly called Podarces, 
son of Laomedon, spared by 
Hercules and redeemed by 
Hesione, i. 245, 247; king of 
Ilium, ii. 45; his wives and 
children, 45, 47, 49; marries first 
Arisbe, but afterwards bestows 
her on Hyrtacus, 45; marries 
a second wife Hecuba, 45; 
alarmed by Hecuba’s dream, he 
causes the infant Paris to be 
exposed, 47; forged letter of, to 


527 


INDEX 


Palamedes, 179; ransoms the 
body of Hector, 211; purifies 
Penthesilia, 211; the Wooden 
Horse stationed at the palace 
of, 233; slain by Neoptolemus, 
237; the sisters of, 263 

Priest, Chryses, priest (of Apollo), 
ii. 205; Maro, priest of Apollo, 281 

Priestess, Iphigenia, priestess of 
Artemis among the Taurians, 
ii. 191, 193, 275 

Priesthood of Hera, i. 183; of 
Athena, 397; of Athena and 
Poseidon Erechtheus, ii. 101 

Procles, twin son of Aristodemus by 
Argia, i. 287; with his twin 
brother Eurysthenes he obtains 
by lot the kingdom of Lacedae- 
mon, 289 

Proclia, daughter of Laomedon, 
wife of Cycnus, ii. 193 

Procne, daughter of Pandion by 
Zeuxippe, wife of Tereus, ii. 99; 
kills her son Itys, and serves him 
up to Tereus, 101; pursued by 
Tereus and turned into a nightin- 
gale, 101 

Procris, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Antileon and Hippeus 
by Hercules, i. 273 

Procris receives a wonderful dog 
from Minos, i. 173; daughter of 
Erechtheus by Praxithea,~ ii. 
103; married to Cephalus, 103; 
plays him false and flees to Minos, 
105; has connexion with Minos 
and receives from him a dog 
and a dart, 105; killed acci- 
dentally by Cephalus, 105 

Proetidian gate of Thebes, i. 361 

Proetus, twin son of Abas, expelled 
by his twin brother Acrisius from 
Argos, i. 145; goes to lobates in 
Lycia, 145; marries Antia or 
Stheneboea, 145; returns and 
reigns over Tiryns, 147; his 
daughters go mad, but are cured 
by Melampus, 147, 149; gives his 
daughters in marriage, with part 
of the kingdom, to Melampus and 
Bias, 149; purifies Bellerophon, 
149, 151; sends Bellerophon to 
lobates with a treacherous letter, 
151; said to have seduced Danae, 
155 


528 


Promachus, son of Aeson, slain by 
Pelias, i, 121 

Promachus, son of Parthenopaeus, 
i. 91; one of the = in 379 

Promachus, suitor of Penelope, 


Prometheus, son of Iapetus and 
Asia, i. 13; smites the head of 
Zeus with an axe and lets out 
Athena, 25; makes men and 
gives them fire, 51; nailed to 
Mount Caucasus, but released by 
Hercules, 53; father of Deu- 
calion, 53; advises Deucalion 
to construct a chest in the great 
flood, 55; offers to live im- 
mortal that the wounded Chiron 
may die, 193, 229, 231; released 
by Hercules, 229; advises him 
as to the apples of the Hesperides, 
231; his prediction as to the son 
of Zeus by Thetis, ii. 67 

Promus, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Pronax, son of Talaus by Lysimache, 
father of Lycurgus, i. 91 

Pronoe, daughter of Phorbus, wife 
of Aetolus, i. 61 

Pronomus, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 299 

Pronous, son of Phegeus, i. 385. 
See Phegeus 

Pronous, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Prophecy, the art of, bestowed by 
Apollo on Cassandra, ii. ; 
bestowed by Rhea on Oenone, 51. 
See Divination, Soothsaying 

Propontis, a Harpy flees by the, i.105 

Protesilaus, son of Iphiclus, suitor 
of Helen, ii. 27 ; leads ships from 
Phylace against Troy, 185; is 
the first to land, but is killed by 
Hector, 199; brought up by 
Hermes from Hades to his wile 
Laodamia, 199; his people cast 
away on Pellene, 261 

Proteus, king of Egypt, receives 
Dionysus, i. 8327; receives Helen 
from Hermes to guard, ii. 175; 
Menelaus discovers her at the 
court of, 279 

Proteus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Gorgophone, i, 139 

Proteus, son of Poseidon, father of 
Polygonus and Telegonus, i, 209 

Prothous, son of Agrius, i. 73 


INDEX 


Prothous, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Prothous, son of Tenthredon, leader 
of the Magnesians against Troy, 
li. 185; wrecked at Caphereus, 
settles with the Magnesians in 
Crete, 259 

Prothous, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Proto, a Nereid, i. 15 

Protogenia (not Protogonia), 
daughter of Calydon by Aeolia, 
mother of Oxylus by Ares, i. 61 

Protogenia (not Protogonia), 
daughter of Deucalion and 
Pyrrha, mother of Aethlius by 
Zeus, i. 57 

Psamathe, a Nereid,i.15; daughter 
of Nereus, mother of Phocus by 
Aeacus, ii. 55 

Pseras, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Psophidians pursue the sons of 
Alemaeon, but are put to flight 
by the Tegeans, i. 387 

Psophis, the Erymanthian boar at, 


i. 191; in Arcadia, Alcmaeon at, 
383, 385 ; the sons of Alcemaeon 
at, 387 


Pteleon, lover of Procris, ii. 105 

Pterelaus, son of Etna, his 
golden hair, i. 165; made 
immortal by Poseidon, 165; 
his golden hair pulled ‘out by 
his daughter, he dies, 173; his 
sons claim the kingdom of 
Mycenae from Electryon, 167; 
they fight and kill the sons of 
Electryon, 169 

Ptolemaeus, suitor of Penelope, 


li, 297 
Pto τ son of Athamas by Themisto, 


1 

ἘΞ ΑΝΕΝ for homicide, i. 115 (of 
Argonauts for murder of Ap- 
syrtus), 143 (of Danaids for the 
murder of their husbands), 151 
(of Bellerophon for the murder of 
his brother), 171 (of Amphitryon 
for the killing of Electryon), 183 
(of Hercules for murder of his 
children), 187 (of Copreus for the 
killing of Iphitus), 233 (of Her- 
cules for the slaughter of the cen- 
taurs), 239 (of Hercules for the 
murder of IJphitus), 383 (of 
Alemaeon for the murder of his 
mother Eriphyle), ii. 61 (of Peleus 


APOLL. II. 


for murder of Phocus), 63 (of 
Peleus for the killing of Hurytion), 
163 (of Pelops for the murder of 
Myrtilus), 211 (of Penthesilia for 
killing of Hippolyte) ; for madness, 
1. 149; of Dionysus by Rhea, 327 

Pygmalion, king of Cyprus, father 
of Metharme, ii. 85 

Pylades, son of Strophius, brought 
up with Orestes, ii. 271; goes 
with Orestes to Mycenae, 271, 
and to the land of the Taurians, 
273, 275; marries Electra, 277 

Pylaemenes, son of Bilsates, leader 
of the Paphlagonians, ii. 205 


Pylaemenes, suitor of Penelope, 
ii. 297 

Pylaon, son of Neleus by Chloris, 
i, 85 : 


Pylarge, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Idmon, i, 143 

Pylas, king of Megara, receives 
Pandion and gives him his 
daughter to wife, ii. 113; slays 
his father’s brother Bias, gives the 
kingdom to Pandion, and retires 
to Peloponnese, 113; founds 
Pylus, 113 

Pylia, daughter of Pylas, wife of 
Pandion, ii. 113 

Pylians, Neleus prince of the, 
i 239 ; Hades sides with the, 
against Hercules, 251; their 
muster for the Trojan war, ii. 183 

Pylius, adoptive father of Hercules 
at Hleusis, i. 233 

Pylus founded by Neleus, i. 85; 
captured and ravaged by 
Hercules, 85, 251 ; Amythaon in, 
87; kine of Phylacus brought 
to, 91; Hermes brings the stolen 
to, ii. 9; founded by Pylas, 
11: 

Pylus, son of Ares, i. 63 

Pyraechmes, leader of the Pae- 
onians, ii. 205 

Pyramus, river, in Cilicia, i. 301 

Pyre of Hercules, i. 2715 of 
Capaneus, 375; of Coronis, ii. 15 

ἰδ τῇ mother of Cycnus by Ares, 
Deca 

Pyrippe, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Patroclus by Hercules, 


1, 275 
Pyrrha, daughter of Epimetheus, 
529 


M M 


INDEX 


wife of Deucalion, i. 53; saved 
in great flood, 55; makes women 
out of stones, 55; her children, 
55, 57 

Pyrrhus, afterwards called Neo- 
ptolemus, son of Achilles by 
Deidamia, ii. 75. See Neopto- 
lemus 

ὡς “aye ma name for Delphi, 
11. 

Pythian priestess orders Hercules 
to serve Eurystheus, i. 183, 185; 
names him Alcides, 183; refuses 
to answer Hercules, 241 

ue another name for Delphi, 
i. 

Python, a snake, guardian of the 
ae at Delphi, killed by Apollo, 
δ ὦ y 


Quail, transformation of Asteria 
into a, i. 25 : 


Race for the hand of ἃ bride 
(Atalanta), i. 401. (Hippodamia) 
ii, 161 

Ram with golden fleece carries 
Phrixus and Helle, i. 753; sacri- 
ficed to Zeus, 77; made into 
lamb by boiling, 121 

Raven cursed and made black 
instead of white by Apollo, ii. 15 

Resurrection of Alcestis, effected by 
Hercules, i. 93, 2393; of Glaucus, 
effected by Polyidus, 311, 313 ; 
of Semele, effected by Dionysus, 
333: from the dead wrought 
by Aesculapius, ii. 17, 19; of 
Pelops, 157; - οὗ Protesilays, 199 

Returns, The, as to wife of Nauplius, 
i. 143 

Rhadamanthys, his law as_ to 
homicide, i. 177 ; son of Zeus and 
Europa, 181, 299;  legislates 
for the islanders, 303; flees to 
Boeotia and marries Alcmena, 
303 (compare 181); judge in 
Hades, 303 

Rhea, a Titanid, daughter of Sky 
and Earth, i. 5; marries Cronus, 
mother of Zeus, i. 7; gives Cronus 
a stone to swallow instead of the 
infant 9; her seat at 


530 


Zeus, 


Cybela in Phrygia, 327; purifies 
Dionysus, teaches him rites of 
initiation, and gives him his 
costume, 327; teaches Oenone 
the art of prophecy, ii. 51; 
Mother, Phyllis gives Demophon 
a sacrament of, 263 

Ὁ in Italy, Hercules at, 
ar 

Rhesus, son of Strymon, killed by 
Diomedes at Troy, i. δι 1 γῆ 
Thracian, killed by Ulysses and 
Diomedes, ii. 207 

ets, father of Chalciope, 


ii. 

Rhode, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Hippoiytus, i. 141 

Rhode, daughter of Poseidon and 


Amphitrite, wife of the Sun, i. 35 . 


Rhodes, Danaus touches at, i. 137 ; 
Tlepolemus flees to, 283; Althae- 
menes settles in, 307; Orestes 
driven to, ii. 277 

Rhodia, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Chalcodon, i. 141 

Rhodians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 

Rhoecus, a centaur, shot by 
Atalanta, i. 399 

Rhoeteum, grave of Ajax at, ii. 219 

Riddle of the Sphinx, i, 347, 349 


Robe steeped in poison given by 


Medea to Glauce, i. 123; given 
to Hercules by Athena, 183; 
poisoned tunic sent by Deianira 
to Hercules, 269; given by 
Cadmus to Harmonia at their 
marriage, 317; taken by Poly- 
nices to Argos, 351, 353; given 
as ἃ bribe to Eriphyle by 
Thersander, son of Polynices, 
379; given by Alcmaeon to his 
wife Arsinoe, 383; coveted by 
Callirrhoe, 385; dedicated at 
Delphi, 385, 387; shirt without 
neck or sleeves given by Clytaem- 
nestra to Agamemnon, ii. 269 

Rust of gelding knife restores 
virility, i. 91; of Achilles’s 
spear heals the wound inflicted 
by the spear, ii. 189 


Sack of Ilium, ii. 259, 261 
Sacrament of Mother Rhea, li, 236 


eae «* 


z INDEX 


Sacrifice of bulls, i. 89; ‘at marriage, 
93; jesting of women at, ; 
of a bull to Poseidon, 199, 305 

Sacrifices, human, i. 75 (Phrixus), 
225 (of strangers, offered by 
Busiris in Egypt), 367 (Menoe- 
cous), 11. 111] (daughters of 
Erechtheus), 119 (daughters of 
Hyacinth), 191 (Iphigenia), 239, 
241 (Polyxena), 273 (of strangers, 
offered by Scythian Taurians) 

Sacrifices to Saviour Zeus, i. 185, 
187: to heroes, 185; to dead 
men, 187; to Hercules accom- 

panied with curses, 227 ; without 
jiiikes and garlands to the Graces 
in Paros, ii. 117; to the souls of 
the dead, 289 

Salaminians, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183 

Salamis, daughter of Asopus, wife 
of Cychreus, ii. 59 

Salamis, Telamon in, i. 67; island, 
ravaged by a snake, τ δ9: 
Cychreus king of, 59; Telamon 
comes to, and succeeds to the 
kingdom, 57, 59 

Salmoneus, son of Aeolus by 
Enarete, i. 57; founds Elis, 81 ; 
mimics Zeus and is killed by 
thunderbolt, 81; father of Tyro 
by Alcidice, 81, "85, 87 

Salmydessus, ‘city in Thrace, home 
of Phineus, 1, 105 

Same, island, suitors of Penelope 
from, ii. 297 

Samothrace, 
leaves, ii. 35 

Sandocus, son of Astynous, comes 
from Syria and founds Celenderis 
in Cilicia, ii. 83; marries Phar- 
nace and begets Cinyras, 83 

Sangarius, the river, father of 
Hecuba by Metope, ii. 45 ; Greeks 
settle on the banks of the, 257 

Sao, a Nereid, i. 15 

Sarapis, name given to deified 
Apis, i. 129 

Sardinia, forty sons of Hercules 
by the daughters of Thespius 
sent to, i. 259 

Sardinian Sea, the Argonauts sail 
through the, 1 5 

Sarpedon, son of Poseidon, shot 
by Hercules, i. 209 


island, Dardanus 


Sarpedon, son of Zeus by Europa 
or Laodamia, i. 299; quarrels 
with Minos and flies from him, 
301; becomes king of Lycia, 
303; leader of the Lycians at 
aS? ii. 205; killed by Hector, 


0 

Satyr, that robbed the Arcadians, 
killed by Argus, i. 131 ; attempts 
to force Amymone, 139 

Satyrs, attendants of Dionysus, 
taken prisoners by Lycurgus, but 
afterwards released, i. 327 

Scaea, daughter of Danaus, wife of 
Daiphron, i. 139 

Scaean gate (of Troy), Achilles shot 
at the, 11. 213, 215 

Scaeus, son of Hippocoon, slain by 
Hercules, 20) 20 

Scamander, the river, father of 
Teucer, ii. 35; father «of Callir- 
rhoe, 37, of Strymo, 43 3 rushes at 
Achilles, 209; dried up by 
Hephaestus, 209 

Schedius, son of Iphitus, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27 

Schedius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 

97 

Schoeneus, father of Atalanta, i. 67, 
97; father of Atalanta, according 
to ‘Hesiod, 401 

Schoeneus, son of Athamas, ἘΣ ἢ 

Sciron, father of Endeis, ii. 533 
son of Pelops or of Poseidon, a 
malefactor, siain by Theseus, 129 

Scironian cliffs, Eurystheus killed 
at the, i. 277, 279 

Scironian rocks, in the Megarian 
territory, ii. 129 

ia ig'e and Charybdis, the Argo at, 


115 

Scylla, daughter of Crataeis and 
Trienus or Phorcus, 11. 295; 
Ulysses sails past her, 293 ; she 
gobbles up six of his comrades, 
293, 295 

Seyila, daughter of Nisus, falls in 
love with Minos and betrays her 
father by pulling out his purple 
hair, ii. 117; drowned by Minos, 
11 


7 
Scyrius, father of Aegius, according 
to some, ii. 113 
Scyros, Neoptolemus fetched to 
Troy from, ii. 225 


531 
MM 24 


INDEX 7 


Scythia, Mount Caucasus in, i, 53 ; 
traversed by Io, 133 

Scythians, the Taurians part of 
the, ii. 273 

Sea (Pontus) and Earth, their off- 
spring, i. 13, 15 

Sea monster, Andromeda exposed 
to, i. 159; Hesione exposed to, 207 

Seal, the Nereid Psamathe turns 
herself into a, ii. 55 

Seasons, daughters of Zeus and 
Themis, i. 15 

Semele, daughter of Cadmus and 
Harmonia, i. 317 ; 
317; gives birth to Dionysus, 
319; expires of fright at the 
thunders of Zeus, 319; wooed by 
Actaeon, 323; brought up from 
Hades by Dionysus and named 
Thyone, 333; ascends with 
Dionysus to heaven, 333 

Seriphus, colonized by the sons of 
Magnes, i. 81; Polydectes, king 
of, 1553 Danae and Perseus in, 
155, 161: Dictys made king of, 161 

Serpent, a symbol of Lacedaemon, 
3 291 ; brings dead serpent to 
life by’ means of magic herb, 311, 
313; coiled about Erichthonius 


in the chest, ii. 91 : portent of the 
serpent and the sparrows at 
Aulis, 185 


Serpents, sent by Hera to destroy 
the infant Hercules, i. 175; 
Cadmus and Harmonia turned 
into, 3835; sea, devour the sons 
of Laocoon, ii. 233. See Snakes 

Servitude, Apollo serves Admetus as 
a herdsman for a year for the 
murder of the Cyclopes, i. 91, 
ii. 19, 21; Hercules condemned 
to serve Eurystheus twelve years 
for the murder of his children, 
i. 185; Hercules condemned to 
serve three years for the murder 
of Iphitus, 241; servitude of 
Hercules with Omphale, 243; 
Cadmus serves Ares eight years 
to atone for the slaughter of the 
Sparti, 317 

Seven against Thebes, war of the, 
i. 355-373 

Shape-shifting, of 
1, 85, 251; 
Thetis, ii. 67 


Periclymenus, 
of Nereus, 223; of 


2 


5 


Gs 


loved by Zeus, 


Shell, the spiral, by means of which 
Minos discovered Daedalus, ii, 141 


Shepherd’s pipe invented by 
Hermes, ii. a given by him 
to A pollo, 1 


shied,” The, a Hesiod, quoted, 


Shields, invention of, i. 145 

Shipbuilder, the first, i. 187 

Shirt, the sleeveless and neckless, 
given by Clytaemnestra to Aga- 
memnon, ii, 269 

Shoes not es: by ao maidens 
at Troy, ii. 267, 2 

Sicilian Sea, ποι τις, in the, i. 51 

ee thrown on giant Enceladus, 

45; Hercules in, 217; 

ΤΆΣ δ, καὶ! in; “fi sre Greeks 
settle in, 257; Ulysses wanders 


to, 

Sickle, adamantine, given to Cronus 
by Earth, i. 53; Zeus strikes 
Typhon down with an, 49 ; given 
to Perseus by Hermes, 157 

Sicyon, the mad daughters of 
Proetus driven down to, i. 149; 
Antiope takes refuge at, 887: 
captured by Lycus, 337; Aga- 
memnon and Menelaus taken by 
their nurse to, ii. 169, 171 

Side, city; taken by Achilles, ii. 203 

Side, wife of Orion, i. 31; rivals 
Hera in beauty and is cast by her 
into Hades, 31 

Sidero, stepmother of Pelias and 
Neleus, i. 83; attacked by them, 
takes refuge in a precinct of Hera, 
83; cut down by Pelias, 83, 85 

Sidon, Alexander puts in at, ii. 175 

Sigeum, Helle drowned near, i. 77 

Silenus, father of the centaur 
Pholus, i. 191 

Simoeis, father of Astyoche, ii. 37, 
and of Hieromneme, 37 

Sinis, son of Polypemon and Sylea, 
called the Pine-bender, killed by 
Theseus at the Isthmus of 
Corinth, ii, 128, 125 

Sinon lights the beacon to guide 
the Greeks to Troy, ii. 233, 235 

Sipylus, Mount, Niobe turned into a 
stone at, i, 3438 

Spyies, son of Amphion and Niobe, 

4 


Sirens, daughters of Achelous by 


ἃ Φν 


goals Gk 


“τ ».-- 


INDEX 


Melpomene, i. 21, ii. 291, or by 
Sterope, i. 63 "the Argonauts 
pass the, 115; Ulysses sails past 
the isle of the, ii. 289, 291, 293; 
ΤῊΝ die after the ship has passed, 


Sisyphus, son of Aeolus by Enarete, 
i. 57; founds Ephyra (Corinth), 
79; his punishment in Hades, 
79; father of Glaucus, 149; in- 
stitutes the Isthmian games in 
honour of Melicertes, 321; hus- 
band of Merope, ii. 5; reveals to 
Asopus the rape of Aegina by 
Zeus, 53 

Sky married to Earth, i. 3; father 
of the Hundred-handed and the 
Cyclopes, 3; casts the Cyclopes 
into Hades, 5; father of the 
Titans, 5; mutilated by his son 
Cronus, 5; prophesies that 
Cronus will be dethroned by his 
own son, 7; father of Themis, 
15: father of the giants, 43; the 
giants hurl rocks and burning 
oaks at the, 43 : 

es eternal, of Endymion, i. 

Smyrna, daughter of Thias, mother 

Adonis through incest with 
her father, ii. 87; changed into 
a myrrh-tree, ii. 87 

Sg city, taken by Achilles, ii. 


Snake ravages Salamis, killed by 
Cychreus, ii. 59 

Snakes teach Melampus the lan- 
guage of animals, i. 87; marriage 
chamber full of coiled, 93 ; 
copulating, change of sex conse- 
quent on seeing, 365. See Ser- 
pents 

Socleus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

eee conquered by Bellerophon, 
ap 


Soothsaying, art of, how acquired 
by Melampus, i. 87; by Tire- 
Prophe τὸν 363. See Divination, 

ro 

Souls tof. a dead), flee at the sight 
of Hercules in Hades, i. 235: 
Ulysses sacrifices to, ii. 289; of 


heroes and heroines, seen by 
Ulysses, 289 
Sow, at Crommyon, killed by 


Theseus, ii. 245; riddle about a 
pregnant, 245. See Swine 

Sparta, daughter of Eurotas, wife 
of Lacedaemon, ii. 11 

Sparta, the city, the Cretan bull 
roams to, i. 199; the wooers of 
Helen at, ii. 27 ; Tyndareus sends 
for Menelaus to, 35; Helen car- 
ried off by Alexander (Paris) 
from, 51; Menelaus reigns over, 
51; Helen carried off from, by 
Theseus and Pirithous, 153; 
Menelaus returns to, 279. See 
Lacedaemon 

Sparti, armed men sprung from 
a teeth at Thebes, i. 315, 

ii 


Spartus, one of Actaeon’s dogs, 
L. 325 


1: 

Speaking timber from the oak of 

- Dodona, i. 97 

Sperchius, river, father of Menes- 
thius, ii. 67 

Spermo, daughter of Anius, one of 
the Wine-growers, ii. 179, 181 

Sphere, the burden of. borne by 
Atlas, i. 231; taken on himself 
by Hercules, 231 

Sphinx, offspring of Typhon and 
Echidna, sent by Hera to Thebes, 
i. 347; her riddle, 347, 349; 
the riddle read by Oedipus, 349; 
the Sphinx kills herself, 349 

Spio, a Nereid, i. 15 

Spitting into the mouth of another 
deprives the spitter of the art of 
divination, i. 313 

aie ἷν Ares, guarded by dragon, 

1 


Staff of cornel-wood given by 
Athena to Tiresias, i. 363 

Staphylus, son of Dionysus, in the 
Argo, i. 97; son of Dionysus by 
Ariadne, ii. 137 

a Σὰ of Astraeus and Dawn, 
ἐμαὶ 

Sternops, son of Melas, killed by 
Tydeus, i. 71, 73 

Sterope, daughter of Acastus, ii. 


Sterope, daughter of Atlas and 
Pleione, one of the Pleiades, ii. 2 ; 
wife of Oenomaus, 5 

Sterope, daughter of Cepheus, 
receives from Hercules a lock of 


533 


INDEX 


the Gorgon’s hair to turn enemies 
to flight, i. 253 

Sterope, daughter of Pleuron, i. 61 

Sterope, daughter of Porthaon, 
mother of the Sirens, i. 63 

Steropes, a Cyclops, i. 5 

Stesichorus, as to Gorgophone, 
ii. 13; in his Hriphyle as to the 
restoration of Lycurgus to life, 17 

Stheneboea, daughter of Aphidas, 
wife of Proetus, i. 397 

Stheneboea, daughter of Iobates, 
wife of Proetus, i. 145, 147; 
makes love to Bellerophon, and 
her love being rejected, falsely 
accuses Bellerophon to Proetus, 
151 

Sthenelaus, son of Melas, killed by 
Tydeus, i. 71, 73 

Sthenele, daughter of Acastus, 
mother of Patroclus by Menoe- 
tius, il. 77 

Sthenele, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Sthenelus, i. 141 

Sthenelus, father of Cometes, ii. 249 

Sthenelus, son of Androgeus, taken 
as hostage by Hercules from 
Paros, i. 205 

Sthenelus, son of Capaneus, one of 
the Epigoni, i. 379; suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27 

Sthenelus, son of Egyptus, husband 
of Sthenelus, i. 141 

Sthenelus, son of Perseus, i. 163; 
marries Nicippe, 167; father of 
Thurystheus, 167; banishes Am- 
phitryon and seizes the throne of 
Mycenae and Tiryns, 169, 171 

Stheno, a Gorgon, immortal, i. 157 

Sting-ray,' Ulysses killed by a 
spear barbed with the spine of a, 
ii. 303 

Stone swallowed by Cronus and 
afterwards disgorged, i. 9; of 
Ascalaphus in Hades, 41, 237; 
of Sisyphus in Hades, 79; per- 
sons who see the Gorgons are 
turned to, 157, 161; vixen and 
dog turned to, 173; Niobe 
turned to, 343; serpent at Aulis 
turned to, ii. 185; ship of the 
Phaeacians turned by Poseidon 
to, 297 

Stones turned into men _ and 
women by Deucalion and Pyrrha, 


534 


i. 55; follow Amphion’s lyre, 
339 


Stoning, death by, ii. 179 (Pala- 
medes), 195 (a flute player), 249 
(Palamedes) 

Strangers sacrificed by Busiris on 
an altar of Zeus, i. 225; com- 
pelled by Syleus to dig his vines, 
241, 243 ; murdered by the Tau- 
rians and thrown into the sacred 
fire, ii. 273 

Stratichus, son of Nestor, i. 85 

Stratius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 299 

Stratobates, son of Electryon, i. 165 

Stratonice, daughter of Pleuron, i. 61 

Stratonice, daughter of Thespius, 
τ ἢ of Atromus by Hercules, 
i. 

Strife throws an apple to be con- 
tended for by Hera, Athena, and 
Aphrodite, ii. 173 

Strophades, islands, the Harpies 
pursued to the, i, 105, 107 

Strophius, the Phocian, father of 
Pylades, brings up Orestes, ii. 271 

Strymo, daughter of Scamander, 
wife of Laomedon, ii. 43 

Strymon, river, father of Rhesus 
by the Muse Euterpe, i. 21; 
father-of Evadne, 131; made 
unnavigable by Hercules, 217; 
the Edonians beside the, 327 

Stygne, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Polyctor, i. 141 

Stymphalian lake in Arcadia, the 
birds at the, shot by Hercules, 
i. 197, 199 

Stymphalus, city in Arcadia, i. 197 

Stymphalus, father of Parthenope, 
i. 277; βοὴ οὗ Elatus, 397 ; king of 
the Arcadians, treacherously mur- 
dered by Pelops, ii. 55 

Stymphalus, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Styx, an Oceanid, i. 11 ; mother of 
Victory, etc., by Pallas, 13; 
flows from a rock in Hades, 13 ; 
Zeus ordains oaths by the water 
of, 18 ; mother of Persephone by 
Zeus, 17 

Suitors of Helen, ii, 27, 293; of 
Penelope, 297, 299; suitors of 
Penelope shot by Ulysses, 301 

Sun, son of Hyperion, i, 13; Sun’s 
rays restore sight to blind, 33; 
husband of Rhode, 35 :the cows 


INDEX 


of the, in Erythia, 43 ; forbidden 
by Zeus to shine, 45 3 father of 
Aeetes, Circe, and Pasiphae by 
Perseis, 77; father of Augeas, 
97,195; the kine of the, in the 
island of Thrinacia, 115; gives a 
dragon-car to Medea, 123; gives 
Hercules a golden goblet in which 
to cross the sea, 213, 215, 229; 
father. of Pasiphae by Perseis, 
303 ; going backward and setting 
in the east, sign of the, ii. 165; 
father of Circe by Perse, 287 : 
Thrinacia, the island of the, 
295 ; reports the slaughter of his 
kine to Zeus, 295 

Sunium, a headland of Attica, 
Menelaus puts in at, ii. 279 

Swallow, Philomela turned into ἃ. 
ii. 101 

Swine, Achilles fed on the inwards 
of wild, ii. 71; companions of 
Ulysses turned by Circe into, 287. 
See Sow 

Sword and sandals, tokens of the 
fatherhood of Aegeus, ii. 115; 
taken up by Theseus, 123 

ade daughter of Corinthus, wife 

f Sinis, iis 125 
dean in Aulis, compels strangers 
his vines, i. 241, 243; 

killed by Hercules, 243 

Symaeans, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 183, 185 

Syria, Mount Casius in, i... 40; 
traversed by Io in search of 
Epaphus, ert Dionysus roams 
Over, 325, Dawn consorts 
with Epes and bears Tithonus 
in, ii. 83; Sandocus migrates 
from, to Cilicia, 83 


Taenarum, in Laconia, the mouth 
of Hades at, i. 233, 235 

Talaemenes, father of Mesthles and 
Antiphus, ii. 205 

Talaus, son of Bias and Pero, i. 91; 

. father of Adrastus, 91, 353, 355 

Talos, ἃ brazen man, guardian of 
Crete, killed by Medea, i. 119 

Talos, son of Perdix, nephew and 
pupil of Daedalus, ii. 121; his 
invention, 121, 123; murdered 
by Daedalus, 121 


- 


Talthybius, goes with Ulysses to 
Cinyras, ii. 179; goes with 
Ulysses to Clytaemnestra, 191 

Tantalus, father of Niobe, i. 341 ; 
after the death of her children 
Niobe goes to him at Sipylus, 
343; punished in Hades, ii. 155 

Tantalus, son of Amphion and 
Niobe, i. 341 

Tantalus, son of Thyestes, former 
husband of Clytaemnestra, ii. 
171; slain by Agamemnon, 171 

Taphians carry off cattle ‘from 
Mycenae, i. 169; their islands 
ravaged by Amphitryon, 173, 
See Teleboans 

Taphius, son of Poseidon, father of 
Pterelaus, colonizes Taphos and 
calls the people Teleboans, i. 165 

Taphos, island colonized by Taphius, 
i. 165; could not be taken while 
Pterelaus lived, 173 

Tartarus, a gloomy place in Hades, 
yet 8 7, 11; father of Typhon, 
47; father of Echidna, 131; Zeus 
would hurl Apollo to, ii. 19 

Tartessus, two pillars set up by 
Hercules at, i. 211, 218 ; Hercules 
ΤΥ to, in the goblet of the Sun, 


Taurians, part of the Scythians, ii. 
273 ; wooden image of 'Tauropolus 
in the land of the, carried off by 
Orestes, 273, 275 

Tauropolus, ‘wooden image of, 
brought to Athens, ii. 275 

Taurus, son of Neleus by Chloris, 
i. 85 


ἢ; 

Taygete, daughter of Atlas and 
Pleione, one of the Pleiades, ii. 
3; mother of Lacedaemon by 
Zeus, 11 

Tebrus, son of Hippocoon, killed 
by Hercules, ii. 21, 23 

Tegea, Cepheus, king Of, 1. "25a" 
the ‘city defended against enemies 
by a lock of the Gorgon’s hair, 
253; Auge debauched by Her- 
cules at, 253; Arsinoe brought by 
the sons of Phegeus to, 385; sons 
of Alemaeon pursued to, 387 

Tegeans save the sons of Alcmaeon 
ele the pursuing Psophidians, 
it 

Tegyrius, king of Thrace, gives his 


535 


INDEX 


daughter in marriage to Ismarus, 
son of Eumolpus, ii. 109; plotted 
against by Eumolpus, 109; 
reconciled to Eumolpus, leaves 
him the kingdom, 109 

Telamon, son of Aeacus, i. 67, 
ii. 58; hunts the Calydonian boar, 
i. 67; in the Argo, 97; with Her- 
cules at the capture of lium, 245 ; 
father of Ajax and Teucer, wi 
27, 29; murders Phocus, 57; ex- 
pelled’ from Aegina, 57; "goes 
to Salamis, where he sueceeds 
Cychreus in the kingdom, 59; 
father of Ajax by Periboea, 61; 
goes with Hercules to Troy and 
receives Hesione as a prize, 61; 
has a son Teucer by Hesione, 61 

Telchis. See Thelxion 

Teleboans, the inhabitants of 
Taphos, i. 165; Electryon pro- 
poses to make war on them, 169 ; 
expedition of Amphitryon against 
the, £71, 178, 178 

Teleboas, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

aaee , nymph, wife of Phoroneus, 


Telegonus, king of Egypt, marries 
lo, i. 185 

Telegonus, son of Proteus, killed 
by Hercules, i. 209 

Telegonus, son of Ulysses by Circe, 
ii. 289; sails in search of Ulysses, 
303; comes to Ithaca and kills 
Ulysses unwittingly, 303; con- 
veys the corpse and Penelope to 
Circe, 305; marries Penelope, 
305; sent with Penelope to the 
Islands of the Blest, 305 

Telemachus, son of Ulysses and 
Penelope, ii. 177; Ulysses reveals 
himself to, 299; helps Ulysses to 
shoot the suitors, 301 

Teleon, father of Butes, 1.97 

Telephassa, wife of Agenor, mother 


of Europa, Cadmus, Phoenix, 
and Cilix, i. 297, 299; settles 
in Thrace, 301; buried by 


Cadmus, 313 

Telephus, son of Hercules by Auge, 
i: 277; exposed on Mount Par- 
thenius, 255, 397; suckled by a 
doe, 255, 257; inquires of the 
god. at Delphi ‘as to his parents, 
397; adopted by Teuthras, prince 


536 


of Mysia, and succeeds to the 


princedom, 397; king of the 
Mysians, chases the Greek in- 
vaders, ii. 187; wounded by 


Achilles, 187; healed by Achilles 
with the rust of his spear, 189; 
shows the Greeks the way to 
τῶν 189; father of Rurypylus, 


‘Telephus, the hearth of, by ieee 
Oeneus murdered at, i 
= of Hercules tear eaetaios, 


Telesilla, on the death of the 
children of Niobe, i. 343 

Telestas, son of Priam, ii. 49 

Teleutagoras, son of Hercules by one 
of | = daughters of Thespius, 
132 

Telmius, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Temenus, one of the Heraclids, 
remonstrates with the oracle, 
i. 285; prepares to invade 
Peloponnese, 287: receives an 
oracle about a Three-eyed One, 
287; has Argos allotted to him, 
289 ; favouring his daughter and 
her husband, he is murdered at 
the instigation of his sons, 291 

Ten years’ big of Zeus on the 
Titans, i. 11; ten labours of 
panes ἈΟΎΥ, 185; ten years the 
ΒΝ of the Trojan war, ii. 185, 


Tenedos, Greeks on way to Troy 
touch at, ii. 193, 195; the island 
formerly called Leucophrys, but 
named ‘enedos after Tenes, 195: 
Philoctetes bitten by a snake in, 
195; the Greeks sail back to, 
231; lie off, 233; sail back to 
Troy from, 235; Agamemnon 
touches at, 247; Neoptolemus 
spends two days in, 251 

Tenes, son of Cyenus or Apollo, 
falsely accused by his stepmother 
and set adrift by his father, ii 
193; lands in Tenedos and 
dwells there, 195; repels the 
Greeks, but is killed by Achilles, 
195 

Tenos, island, Zetes and Calais 
killed by Hercules in, ii. 107; 
taken by Achilles, 203; Greeks 
encounter a storm at, 247 


ee ae - 


δ a ee a ed 2 8 


INDEX 


oe father of Prothous, 

i. 

Tereis, mother of Megapenthes by 
Menelaus, ii. 31 

Tereus, son of Ares, a Thracian, 
ally of Pandion against Lab- 
dacus, ii. 99; marries Procne, 
99; seduces Philomela, 101; has 
his dead son Itys served up to 
him by Procne, 101; pursues 
Procne and Philomela, 101; 
turned into a hoopoe, 101 

Terpsichore, a Muse, i. 17 

Terpsicrate, daughter of Thespius, 
oe of Euryopes by Hercules, 


127 

Tethys, a Titanid, daughter of 
Sky and Earth, i. 5; mother of 
— 129; mother of Asopus, 
ii. 

Teucer, son of the Scamauder, 
king of the Teucrians, ii. 35; 
gives Dardanus a share of the 
land and his daughter Batia to 
wife, 35 

‘Teucer, son of Telamon, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27, 29; son of Telamon 
and MHesione, 61; victor in 
archery competition, 217 

Teucrians named after Teucer, ii. 35 

Teutamides, king of Larissa, holds 
games in honour of his dead 
father, i. 163 

—— Teuthras, prince of, 
i, 25 


Teuthras, prince of Teuthrania, 
marries Auge, i. 257; adopts 
Telephus and is succeeded by 
him in the princedom, 397 

ΗΒ ΤῊΝ, suitor of Penelope, 


ii. 

Thalia, a Grace, i. 17 

Thalia, a Muse, i. 17; mother of 
the Corybantes, 21 

Thalpius, son of Eurytus, suitor of 
Helen, ii. 27 

Thamyris, his love of Hyacinth, 
i. 19; a great minstrel, engages 
in a musical contest with the 
Muses, 21; is beaten and blinded 
by them, 21 

Thasos, island, conquered by Her- 
cules, who settles the sons of An- 
drogeus in it, i. 209 

Thasus, son of Poseidon or of 


Cilix, sent out to find Europa, 
i, 299, 301; settles in Thasos, 301 

Thaumacus, father of Poeas, i. 97 

Thaumas, son of Sea (Pontus) and 
Earth, father of Iris and the 
Harpies by Electra, i. 18, 15 

Theano, daughter of Danaus, wife 
of Phantes, i. 141 

Theano (not Theanus), wife of 
Antenor, mother of Archelochus 
and Acamas, ii. 205 

Thebaid, mention of Oeneus and 
Periboea in the, i. 71 

Thebans expose one of their sons 
every month to the (Teumessian) 
vixen, i. 171; pay -tribute to 
Erginus, king of Orchomenus, 
179; Hercules compels the 
Minyans to pay double tribute to 
the, 181; Dionysus proves to 
the Thebans that he is a god, 
331; Lycus chosen commander- 
in-chief by the, 337; the Sphinx 
propounds a riddle to the, 347; 
ambush set for Tydeus by the, 
361; armed by Kteocles, 361; 
Tiresias among the, 361; they 
seek counsel of Tiresias, 367; 
defeated by the Argives, abandon 
the city, 379, 381; found 
Hestiaea, 381 


Thebe, wife of Zethus, gives her 


name to Thebes, i. 341 

Thebes, Iphicles at, i. 67; expedi- 
tion of Adrastus against, 73; 
the war of, 75; war of the 
Epigoni on, 91; Amphitryon 
and Alemena go to, 171; three 
sons of Hercules by daughters 
of Thespius sent to, 259; 
founded by Cadmus, 815; Dio- 
nysus drives the women mad at, 
331; Polydorus king of, 335; 
Lycus and Nycteus come to, 337; 
named after Thebe, wife of 
Zethus, 341; Niobe quits Thebes, 
343; Oedipus arrives in, 347; 
atflicted by the Sphinx, 347; 
Oedipus expelled from, 351; 
Polynices banished from, 351; 
war of the Seven Champions 
against, 353-373; the seven 
gates of, 361; Creon succeeds 
to the kingdom: of, 373; 
captured by the Athenians under 


537 


INDEX 


Theseus, 875; taken by the 
Epigoni, 377, 379, 381; aban- 
doned by the Thebans and cap- 
tured by the Argives, 381; games 
in honour of Laius ‘at, ii. LUZ 

Thelxiepia, one of the Sirens, ii. 291 

Thelxion and Telchis slay Apis, 
tyrant of the Peloponnese, i. 129 

Themis, ἃ ‘Titanid, daughter of 
Sky and Earth i. 5; mother of 
the Seasons and the Fates by 
Zeus, i. 15; her oracle at Delphi, 
27; her prophecy to Zeus and 
She Ceo as to the son of Thetis, 
ii 

Themiscyra, battle of Hercules with 
the Amazons at, i. 205 

Themiste, daughter of lus, wife of 
Capys, mother of Anchises, ii. 37 

Themisto, daughter of Hynpseus, 
third wife of Athamas, i. 77 

Theophron, suitor of Dancin: 
ii. 299 

Therimachus, son of Hercules by 
Megara, i. 181, 275 

Thermodon, river, passed by the 
Argonauts, i. 109; the Amazons 
dwell on the, 209 

Thermydrae, harbour of the Lin- 
dians, Hercules puts in at, i. 227 

Thersander, son of Polynices, gives 
the robe (of Harmonia) to 
Eriphyle, i. 379; one of the 
—— 379 ; killed by Telephus, 


Thersilochus, 
li. 297 
Thersites, slain by Achilles, ii. 211 
Thersites, son of Agrius, flees from 
Diomedes to Peloponnese, i. 73 
Theseus, son of Aegeus, hunts the 
Calydonian boar, i. 67; in the 
Argo, 97; in τ δ νὸς raised up 
by Hercules, 235; clears the 
Isthmus of malefactors, 245; 
his adventures with the Minotaur, 
Phaedra, and Ariadne, 307; 
receives the banished Oedipus, 
351; with the Athenians, captures 
Thebes and gives the Argive dead 
to be buried, 375; carries off Helen 
to Aphidnae, ii. 25; in Hades, 
25; son of Aegeus and Aethra, 
123; takes up the sword and 
sandals, 123; clears the road of 


eK: 


suitor of Penelope, 


evildoers (from ‘Troezen) to 
Athens, 123; kills Periphetes, 
the Clubman, 123; kills Sinis, 
the Pine-bender, 123, 125; 
slays the Crommyon sow, 20. 
throws Sciron into the sea, 129; 
slays Cereyon and Damastes or 
Polypemon, 131; comes to 
Athens, 133; sent against the 
Marathonian bull, 133; 
nized by Aegeus, 133, ‘ 
sent with the third tribute to 
the Minotaur, 135; by means of 
a clue furnished by Ariadne he 
enters the labyrinth and kills 
the Minotaur, 135, 1387; goes 
with Ariadne to Naxos, 187: 
succeeds to ee sovereignty of 
Athens, 139; kills the fifty sons 
of Pallas, 139 ; goes with Hercules 
against the Amazons, 143; 
carries off Antiope or Hippolyte, 
143; vanquishes the Amazons 
at ‘Athens, 145; has ason Hippo- 
lytus by the Amazon, 145; 
marries Phaedra, 145; curses 
his son Hippolytus, 145; father 
of Acamas and Demophon, 145, 
237 ; allies himself with Pirithous 
in the war with the centaurs, 
149, 151; carries off Helen 
from Sparta, 153; attempts to 
win Persephone for Pirithous, 
but is detained with him in 
Hades, 153; rescued by Hercules 
and sent back to Athens, 153; 
banished by Menestheus, 153, 
155; killed by Lycomedes, 155 

Thesmophoria, W y women jest at 
the, 1. 

Thespiae, Hercules at, i, = ys 

Thespius, King of Thes his 
fifty daughters have in τς δβκοσα 
with Hercules, i, 179; purifies 
Hercules, 183 ; Hercules instructs 
him as to his ‘sons, 259; sons ᾿ 
Hercules by the aataiare vol 
273, 275 

Thesprotians, Hercules marches 
against the, i. 259; Alcemaeon 
driven from the country of the, 
383 ; Ulysses comes to the, ii. 301 

'Thesprotus, son of πὸ τ L389 

Thessalus, father of rgd and 
Antiphus, ii, 185, 2 


INDEX 


Thessaly in the great flood, i. 55; 
inhabited by the Aeolians, 57, 61 ; 
Salmoneus at first dwelt in, 
81; Pelias dwelt in, 85; 
Pheres founds Phere in, 91; 
Hercules left behind by the 
Argonauts at Aphetae in, 101; 
Phiegyas in, ii. 13; the country 
of the Pelasgians, 257, 259 

Thestalus, son of Hercules by 
Epicaste, i. 277 

Thestius, son of Ares, husband of 
Eurythemis, i. 63; his children 
by her, 63; his sons hunt the 
Calydonian boar, 67, and are 
killed by Meleager, 69; father 
of Tphiclus, 97; Tyndareus and 
Icarius flee to, ii. 23; father of 
Leda, 23 

Thetis, a Nereid, i. 15; saves 
Hephaestus when he was cast 
down from heaven, 23; with the 
Nereids steers the Argo through 
the Wandering Rocks, 115; 
daughter of Nereus, Dionysus 
takes refuge with her in the 


sea, 327; Zeus and Poseidon 
tives tor her hand, ii. 67; 
married by Peleus, 67; her 
transformations to avoid him, 
67; mother of Achilles, 95; 
tries to make Achilles im- 


mortal, 69, 71; departs to the 
Nereids, 71; entrusts Achilles in 
female garb to Lycomedes, 73 ; 
warns Achilles not to kill Tenes, 
195, and not to be the first to 
land at Troy, 199; persuades 
Neoptolemus to wait at Troy, 
247; buries Ajax in Myconos, 
247; advises Neoptolemus to 
stay in Tenedos, 251 

Thettalus, son of Hercules by 
Chalciope, i. 275, 277 

Thia, a Titanid, daughter of Sky 
and Earth,i.5; wife of Hyperion, 
mother of Dawn, Sun, and Moon, 


13 
Thias, king of Assyria, father of 
oe according to Panyasis, 


il. 

Thiodamas, father of Hylas, i. 101 ; 
a bullock-driver, his encounter 
with Hercules, 261, 263 

Thoas, father of Hypsipyle, saved 


oy her from massacre, i. 99, 
Thoas, king of the Taurians, 
Orestes brought before, ii. 275 
Thoas, son of Andraemon and 
Gorge, leader of the Aetolians 
against Troy, ii. 183; in Aetolia, 
307; Ulysses goes to him and 
marries his daughter, 307 

Thoas, son of Dionysus by Ariadne, 
li, 137 

Thoas, son of Icarius, ii. 23 

Thoas, suitor of Penelope, ii. 297 

Tho6sa, a nymph, mother of 
Polyphemus by Poseidon, ii. 283 

Thoricus, Cephalus at, i. 173 

Thrace, Typhon in, i. 51; Lemnian 
men take captive women from, 
99; Salmydessus in, 103; the 
cows of Geryon disperse in the 
mountains of, 217; Cadmus 
and Telephassa settle in, 301; 
traversed by Dionysus, 331; 
Tereus in, ti. 99; Eumolpus in, 


109 

Thracian Bisaltians, ii. 263. See 
Bisaltians 

Thracian people, the Bistones a, 
1,201 

Thracian Straits, afterwards called 
the Bosporus, i. 133 

Thracians in Thasos, subjugated 
by Hercules, i. 209; hospitably 
receive Cadmus, 313; a force of, 
fights for the Eleusinians against 
the Athenians, ii, 109, 111; 
Trojan allies, 205 

Thrasymedes, son of Nestor, i. 85 

Thrasymedes, suitor of Penelope, 
ii, 297 

Three-eyed One, oracle concerning, 
i. 287, 289 

Threpsippus, son of Hercules by 
Panope, i. 273 

Thriasian plain flooded by Posei- 
don, ii. 81 

oe suitor of Penelope, ii. 
97 


Thrinacia, Island of, the kine of 
the Sun in, i. 115, ii. 295 

Thunder and lightning bestowed 
on Zeus by the Cyclopes, i. 11; 
Salmoneus’s imitation of, 81 

bees ere cast by Athena, 
ii, 24 


539 


INDEX 


Thunderbolts hurled by Zeus, 
i, 18, 45, 47, 319, 867,371, 893; 
ii. 19, 33, 58, 295° 

Thurium, Crimissa near, ii. 261 

Thyestes, son of Pelops, i. 171, ii. 
163; along with his brother 
Atreus is entrusted with Midea, 
171; debauches the wife of his 
brother Atreus and gets from her 
the golden lamb, 163 ; made king 
of Mycenae, but ousted and 
banished by Atreus, 165; eats 
unwittingly of his own children 
at a banquet, 167; begets 
Aegisthus on his own daughter, 
169; restored to the kingdom 
by Aegisthus, 169; driven away 
by Agamemnon and Menelaus, 
171; dwells in Citheria, 171 

Thymbraean Apollo, Troilus slain 
by Achiiles in the sanctuary of, 
li. 201 

Thyone, the name bestowed by 
Dionysus on his mother (Semele) 
when he raised her from the 
dead, i. 333 

Thyreus, son of Oeneus, i. 65 

Tigasis, son of Hercules - Phyleis, 
aie mee 

Tigres, old name of river Harpys 
in Peloponnese, i, 105 

Tilphussa, ἃ spring, death of 
Tiresias at, i, 381 

Timandra, daughter of Tyndareus, 
wife of Echemus, ii. 23 

Tiphys, son of Hagnias, pilot of 
the Argo, i. 97; dies among the 
Mariandynians, "109 

Tiphyse, daughter of Thespius, 
mother of Lyncaeus by Hercules, 
i. 275 

Tiresias reveals the intrigue of Zeus 


with Alcmena, i. 175; son of 
Everes and Chariclo, ἃ blind 
Theban soothsayer, 361; how he 


lost his sight, 361, 363, 367; 
his repeated change of sex, 365; 
consulted as arbiter by Zeus 
and Hera, 367; recommends 
a voluntary human = sacrifice 
to save Thebes, 367; advises 
Thebans to abandon’ the city, 
381; his death, 381; _ his 
daughter Manto, 381 ; Ulysses 
consults the ghost of the sooth- 


540 


sayer, ii. 289; directs Ulysses 
to propitiate Poseidon, 301 

Tiryns, fortified by the Cyclopes, 
occupied by Proetus, i, 147; 
Perseus reigns over, 163 ; throne 
of, seized by Sthenelus, 471 : 
Hercules ordered to dwell at, 
185; Eurytus thrown by Her- 
cules from the walls of, 239 

Tisamenus, son of Orestes, king of 
the Peloponnesians, i. 288, 285, 
ii. 277; slain in battle “by the 
Heraclids, i. 289 

Tisiphone, a Fury, i. 5 

Tisiphone, daughter of Alcmaeon, 
brought up by Creon at Corinth, 
i. 387; sold as a slave and 
— by her father in ignorance, 


Titanas, son of Lycaon, i. 389 

Titanides, daughters of Sky and. 
Earth, i. 5 

oo, the, sons of Sky and Earth, 

5; persuaded by Earth to 

ial their father, 5; dethrone 
their father (Sky) and bring up 
their brethren from ‘Tartarus, 
δ, 7; commit the sovereignty to 
Cronus, 7; shut up in Tartarus 
by Cronus, 7; war of Zeus on the, 
8: tle offspring of the, 11, 18 

Tithe of cattle stipulated by 
Hercules as his reward from 
Augeas, i. 195 

Tithonus, father of Emathion, 
i. 229; son of Laomedon, ii. 43 ; 
loved by Dawn and carried by 
her to Ethiopia, 43; father of 
ἘΌΝ and Memnon by her, 


Tithonus, son of Cephalus by the 
Dawn, ii. 83 

Tityus, son of Zeus and Elare, 
i. 27; offers violence to Latona, 
29; slain by Apollo and Artemis, 
29; tortured by vultures in 
Hades, 29 

Tlepolemus, son of Hercules by As- 
tyoche, i, 259, 277, ii. 183; kills 
Licymnius inadvertently, " 2883 ; 
settles in Rhodes, 283; 
of the Rhodians “against Troy, 


ii. 183; his e settle in the 
Iberian islan 51, 261 
Tmolus, husband of Omphale, at 


INDEX 


his death bequeaths to her the 
government of Lydia, i. 241 
Toad a symbol of Argos, i. 291 
Tomi, city, the murdered Apsyrtus 
buried at, i. 113 
ue of game animals cut out, 


ii. 

Torches of Demeter, i. 35 

Torone, city, Hercules at, i. 209 

Tortoise-shell, ine” makes a 
lyre out of, 

Toxeus, son of Oeneus, slain by 
his father, i, 65 

Toxicrate, daughter of Thespius, 
et of Lycurgus by Hercules, 
i 

Trachinian territory, Mount Oeceta 
in, i. 269, 271 

Trachis, Hercules at, i. 261, 263, 
265, 269, 271; Lichas sent by 
Hercules to, 267 ; the sons of 
Hercules at, 277 

Tragasus, father of Philonome, 
ii. 193 

Tragedians on Io, i. 131 

Tragic poets, as to the wife of 
Nauplius, i. 143; as to the wife 
of Proetus, 145 

Transformation of Asteria into a 
quail, i. 25; of gods into animals, 
49; of Ceyx and Alcyone into a 
kingfisher and a gannet, 57, 59; 
of Artemis into a deer, 61; of 
women mourning Meleager ‘into 
birds (guinea-fowl), fies wor. 19 
into a white cow, 133; of Zeus 
into a stream of gold, 155; of 
Ascalaphus into ἃ short-eared 
owl, 237; of Zeus into a bull, 
299 of Dionysus into a kid, 321 ; 
of nymphs into stars called 
Hyades, 321; of Actaeon into a 
deer, 323; of mast and oars into 
snakes, 331: of pirates into 
dolphins, 331, 333; of Cadmus 
and Harmonia into serpents, 335 ; 
of Tiresias into a woman and 
back into a man, 365; of Callisto 
into a bear, 395; of Callisto into 
a star (constellation) called the 
Bear, 397; of Melanion and 
Atalanta into lions, 401; of 
Nemesis into a goose, ii. 25; of 
Zeus into a swan, 25; of Aesacus 
into a bird (species of diver ?), 


45; of Psamathe into a seal, 55; 
of Smyrna into a myrrh-tree, 87 ; 
of Procne into a nightingale, 101 ; 
of Philomela into a swallow, 101 ; 
of Tereus into a hoopoe, 101; of 
Caeneus from a woman into a 
man, 151; of Hecuba into a 
bitch, 241; of the companions of 
Ulysses into wolves, swine, asses, 
and lions, 287. See Shape- 
shifting, Stone 

Transformations of Metis to avoid 
Zeus, i. 23; of Periclymenus, 85, 
251; of Nereus to escape Her- 
cules, 223; of Thetis to escape 
from Peleus, ii. 67 

Trapezus, a place in Arcadia, origin 
of the name, i. 393 

Triccaeans, their muster for the 
Trojan war, ii. 185 

Trident of Poseidon, i. 11, ii. 79, 247 

bial oy son of Poseidon by Canace, 
i. 5S 

Tripod carried off from Delphi by 
Hercules, i. 241 

Triptolemus, elder son of Metanira 
and Celeus, receives a dragon- 
drawn chariot and wheat from 
Demeter, and sows the whole 
earth, i. 39; according to 
others, a son of Hleusis or ot 
Ocean and Earth, 39 

Triton, river, Athena born at the, 
i. 25; brings up Athena, ii. 41 

Triton, son of Poseidon and Am- 
phitrite, 1.96 

Troezen, Hercules ascends from 
Hades at, i.-237; Theseus at, 
245 ; Aegeus lodges with Pit- 
theus at, ii. 115 

Troezenus, father of Euphemus, 
ii. 205 

Troilus, son of Hecuba by Apollo, 
ii. 49; slain by Achilles in the 
Fad aed of Thymbraean Apollo, 

Trojan war, muster of the Greek 
army -for the, ii, 181, 183, 
185 

Trojans refuse to restore Helen, 
ii. 197; besieged by the Greeks, 
201; joined by allies, 203, 205; 
chase the Greeks within their 
wall, 207; flee before Patroclus, 
209; chased by Achilles, 209. 


541 


INDEX 


213; judge in the competition 
for the arms of Achilles, 219; 
many slain by Neoptolemus, 225, 
227; drag the Wooden Horse 
into Troy, 233; slain by the 
Greeks, 239 

Tros, son of EHrichthonius, succeeds 
to the kingdom and calls the 
country Troy, ii. 37; his children 
by Callirrhoe, 37 


Troy, Rhesus at, i. 21; Hercules 


at, 238; the: war: of, 70, 91: 
Hercules rescues Hesione from a 
sea monster at, 205, 207; 
visited by the wrath of Apollo 
and Poseidon for the faithlessness 
of Laomedon, 205, 207; named 
after Tros, ii. 37; besieged, 51; 
dying Alexander (Paris) carried 
to, 51; expedition of Hercules 
against, 61; not to be taken 
without Achilles, 73; Achilles 
goes to, 75; Alexander comes 
with Helen to, 175; Agamemnon 
musters an army against, 177; 
to be taken after ten years, 185; 
Telephus shows the Greeks the 
way to, 189; the Greeks make 
sail for, 197; not to be taken 
without the bow of Hercules, 
221, 223; Philoctetes comes to, 
223; Helenus leaves, 223; not to 
be taken while the Palladium was 
within the walls, 225; the sons 
of Theseus come to, 237; laid 
waste by the Greeks, 243; Her- 
mione betrothed to Neoptolemus 
at, 253; Elephenor dies in, 259; 
Amphilochus comes later to, 265; 
the Locrians send maidens to 
propitiate Athena at, 267. See 
llium 

Twins exposed, i. 83 (Pelias and 
Neleus), 339 (Zethus and Am- 
phion); quarrelling in the womb, 
1453 Apollo makes the cows of 
Admetus to bear, ii. 21 


Tydeus, son of Oeneus and Periboea 


or Gorge, i. 71; banished for homi- 
cide, 71, 73; marries Deipyle, 
daughter of Adrastus, 73, 353; 
marches against Thebes, 73; 
killed by Melanippus, 73; father 
of Diomedes, 73, 379, ii. 27, 1833 
fights Polynices at Argos, i, 353 ; 


542 


one of the Seven against Thebes, 
357; one of the victors in the 
Nemean games, 359; sent to 
Eteocles with a message, 359 ; 
defeats a Theban ambush, 361 ; 
wounded by Melanippus, sucks 
the brains of his slain foe, 369 ; 
Athena in disgust withholds from 
him the immortality which she 
had designed for him, 369 


Tyndareus, son of Perieres and 


Gorgophone, i. 79; restored to 
Tacedaemon by Hercules, 253 ; 
son of Perieres or of Oebalus, ii. 
13, 21; raised from the dead by 
Aesculapius, 19; expelled from 
Lacedaemon by Hippocoon, 23 ; 
flies to Thestius and marries Leda, 
23; returns and succeeds to the 
kingdom, 23; his children, 23; 
exacts an oath from Helen’s 
suitors, 29; gives Helen to Mene- 
laus, 29; procures Penelope for 
Ulysses, 29; on the translation 
of the Dioscuri to the gods, he 
hands over the kingdom of 
Sparta to Menelaus, 35, 171; 
brings back Agamemnon and 
Menelaus from dAetolia, 171; 
brings Orestes to trial at the 
Areopagus, 271 


Typhon, a hybrid monster, offspring 
of T i, 47; 


artarus and Earth, i ᾿ 
brought forth in Cilicia, 47; 
attacks heaven, 49; pelted with 
thunderbolts by Zeus, 49; grapples 
with Zeus, severs his sinews. and 
deposits him in the Corycian 
cave, 49; beguiled by the lates, 
51; buried under Mount Etna, 51; 
begets the Chimera, 151; father 
of the Nemean lion, 185; begets 
dog Orthus on Kehidna, 211 ; 
begets the dragon of the 
Hesperides, 221; father of the 
eagle that devoured the liver of 
Prometheus, 229; father of the 
Sphinx, 347; father of the 
Crommyon sow, ii. 129 


Tyrannus, son of Pterelaus, i. 165 
Tyria, wite of Egyptus, i. 141 
‘T'yro, daughter of Salmoneus and 


Alcidice, loves river Enipeus, i. 
81; mother of twins, Pelias and 
Neleus, by Poseidon, 83; wife of 


INDEX 


Cretheus, mother of Aeson, Amy- 
thaon, and Pheres, 85, 87 
Tyrrhenia, the Argonauts skirt, 
; aa Hercules passes through, 
1 


Tyrrhenian Sea, Ulysses wanders 
about the, ii. 281 

Yyrrhenians call a bull italus, 
i. 217; Tyrrhenian pirates en- 
gaged by Dionysus to ferry him 
to Naxos, 331; turned by him 
into dolphins, 331 


Udaeus, one of the five surviving 
Sparti, i. 317; his family, 361 

Ulysses son of Laertes and Anticlia, 
ii. 27, 183; suitor of Helen, 27; 
advises Tyndareus to exact an 
oath of Helen’s suitors, 29 ; woos 
Penelope, 29; detects Achilles at 
the court of Lycomedes, 75; feigns 
madness to avoid going to the 
Trojan war, 177; detected by 
Palamedes, he goes to the war, 
177; plots the death of Pala- 
medes, 179; leader of the Cephal- 
lenians against Troy, 183; asks 
for Iphigenia from Clytaemnestra. 
191; puts Philoctetes ashore in 
Lemnos, 195; sent with Menelaus 
to Troy to demand the restora- 
tion of Helen, 197; sent as 
ambassador to Achilles, 207; 
sent as spy with Diomedes, 
kills Dolon and Rhesus, 207; 
wounded, 209; victor in wrest- 
ling, 211; defends dead body of 
Achilles, 215; awarded the arms 
of Achilles, 219; goes with 
Diomedes to Lemnos to fetch 
Philoctetes, 223 ; captures 
Helenus, 223; sent to Scyros 
to fetch Neoptolemus, 225; 
resigns the arms of Achilles to 
Neoptolemus, 225; goes with 
Diomedes to Troy and steals the 
Palladium, 227; invents the 
Wooden Horse, 229; enters it 
with fifty others, 231; holds 
fast the mouth of Anticlus in 
the Wooden Horse, 235; rescues 
Antenor, 237; gets Hecuba, 
241; accomplice in the death of 


Palamedes, 249; sails from 
Tlium, 281; his adventures 
among the Cicones and the Lotus- 
eaters, 281 ; among the Cyclopes, 
281, 283, 285; in the island of 
Aeolia, 285; among the Laestry- 
gones, 285, 287; with Circe in 
the Aeaean isle, 287, 289; sails 
to ocean, sacrifices to the souls 
of the dead, consults Tiresias, 
and beholds the souls of heroes 
and heroines, 289; passes the 
Sirens and hears their song, i. 21, 
ii. 289, 291, 293; passes Scylla, 
293, 295; in Thrinacia, the island 
of the Sun, 295; shipwrecked 
and saved from Charybdis, 295 ; 
five years with Calypso in the 
island of Ogygia, 295; washed 
ashore on the island of the 
Phaeacians, entertained by King 
Alcinous, 295; sent away by 
him in a ship to his native land, 
297; comes as a beggar to 
Eumaeus, 299; makes himself 
known to ‘Telemachus, 299; 
scorned by the goatherd Melan- 
thius, 299; begs food of the 
suitors, 299; wrestles with Irus, 
301; reveals himself to Eumaeus 
and Philoetius, 301; shoots the 
suitors, 301; kills Melanthius 
and the handmaids, 301: makes 
himself known to his wife and 
father, 301; sacrifices to Hades, 
Persephone, and ‘Tiresias, 301; 
journeys to the ‘Thesprotians 
and propitiates Poseidon, 301; 
marries Callidice and reigns over 
the Thesprotians, 303; returns 
to Ithaca and finds Poliporthes, 
his son by Penelope, 303; killed 
unwittingly by his son Telegonus, 
303 ; his body conveyed to Circe, 
305; said by some to have 
found Penelope unfaithful, and 
to have sent her away or killed 
her, 305: accused by the kins- 
folk of the slain suitors, 305 ; tried 
by Neoptolemus, 305, 307; con- 
demned to exile, 307; goes to 
Thoas in Aetolia, 307; marries a 
daughter of Thoas, and dies in 
old age, 307 


Urania, a Muse, i. 17 


543 


INDEX 


bis nyse born of Pallas and Styx, 
1. ‘ 


Vine discovered by Dionysus, 
i. 325; Lycurgus, driven mad 
by Dionysus, mistakes his son 
for a branch of a, 327; branch 
of, ren by Dionysus to Icarius, 
ii. 

Vine-plant first given by Dionysus 
to Oeneus, i. 63, 65 

ae a born of ’Pallas and Styx, 
Ld 

Vixen ravages the Cadmea, i. 171; 
sons of Thebans exposed to it 
monthly, 171; chased by the 
dog of en and turned to 
stone, 173 

Vulture tells Melampus how to cure 
the ne of Iphiclus, i. 
89, 91 


Vultures eat the heart of Tityus, 
i: 2 


Wand, golden, given by Apollo to 
Hermes, ii. 11; of Circe, 287 

Wandering Rocks, the Argo at the, 
i. 115; Ulysses at the, ii. 293 

behing the Fair Dances at Eleusis, 
i, 37 

Wheat given by Demeter to 
Triptolemus and sown by him 
over the whole earth, i. 39; 
parched by women at instigation 
of Ino, 75 

White Isle, Achilles and Patroclus 
buried together in the, ii. 217 

Winds, born of Astraeus and 
Dawn, i. 13; Aeolus keeper of 


8 

Wine- -brewing taught by Dionysus 
to Icarius, li. 97 

Wine-jar of the centaurs, i. 193 

Winged sandals worn by Perseus, 
i, 157 

Winnowing-fan, Hermes at birth 
placed in a, ii. 5 

Wolves, Athamas entertained by, 
i. 77; feared by the Stymphalian 
birds, 199; companions of 
Ulysses turned into, ii. 28 


Wooden Horse, invented by Ulysses, | 


ii. 229; constructed by Epeus, 
229, 231; dragged by the 
Trojans into Troy, 233; opened 
to let out the Greeks, 235 


544 


Xanthippe, daughter of Dorus, 
wife of Pleuron, i. 61 

ἐπ μεν at | son ἐξ Melas, killed by 
Tydeus, i. 71, 7 

Xanthis, aaah of ‘Thespius, 
mother of Homolippus by Her- 
cules, i. 273 

Xanthus, an immortal horse, given 
by Poseidon to Peleus, ii. 69 

Xenodamus, son of Menelaus by a 
nymph Cnossia, ii. 31 

Xenodice, daughter of Minos, i. 303 

Xenodoce (not Xenodice), daughter 
of Ye killed by Hercules, 


πλοῦν son of Hellen by a nymph 
Orseis, father of Achaeus and 
Ion, i 57; father of Diomede, 
79; husband of Creusa, ii. 103 

Xylophagus, later name for Mount 
Caphereus, ii, 249 


Year, an eternal, equivalent to 
eight common years, i. 317 


Zacynthos, suitors of Penelope 
from, ii. 297, 299 

Zelia, city allied with Troy, ii. 205 

Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, 
in the Argo, i. 97; pursue the 
Harpies and failing to catch 
them die, 105, ii. 105, 107, or 
are killed by Hercules, 107 © 

Zethus, son of Zeus by Antiope, 
twin brother of Amphion, i. 337 
339; pays attention to cattle- 
breeding, 339; marries Thebe, 
341. See Amphion and Zethus 

Zeus, son of Cronus and Rhea, i. 7; 
born in a cave of Dicte in 
Crete, 7; fed by nymphs, 7; 
guarded by Curetes, 7, 9; makes 
war on the Titans, 9, 11; 
releases the Cyclopes from Tar- 
tarus and receives thunder 
and lightning from them, 11: 
shuts up the Titans in Tartarus, 
11; casts lots with his brothers 
Poseidon and Pluto for the 
sovereignty, 11; allotted the 
dominion of the sky, 11; ordains 
oaths by the water ot Styx, 
13; marries Hera, 15; _ his 


ce Ge 


INDEX 


offspring, 15, 17; casts He- 
phaestus out of heaven, 23; 
hangs Hera from Olympus, 23; 
has intercourse with Metis, 23; 
swallows the pregnant Metis, 23, 
25; Athena born from his head, 
25; makes love to Asteria, 25; 
father of Pan by Hypbris, 27; 
father of Tityus by Elare, 27, 
29; father of Iasion and Dar- 
danus by Electra, 35; helps 
Pluto to carry off Persephone, 
35; culls ἃ magic simple, 4 ; 
inspires Porphyrion with lust for 
Hera, 45; smites the giants 
with a thunderbolt, 45, 47; his 
combat with Typhon, 49, 51; 
his sinews cut by Typhon and 
restored by Hermes and Aegipan, 
49, 51: casts Etna on Typhon, 
51; orders Hephaestus to nail 
Prometheus to the Caucasus, 53; 
resolves to destroy the men of 
the Bronze Age and causes the 
great flood, 53, 55; Deucalion 
sacrifices to Zeus, God of Escape, 
55; sends Hermes to Deucalion, 
55; bids Deucalion throw stones 
over his head, 55; father of 
Hellen by Pyrrha, 55, 57, of 
Aethlius by Protogenia, 57 ; turns 
Ceyx and Alcyone into birds for 
their presumption, 59; claim of 
Ceyx to be, 59; gives Endymion 
his choice, 61; parts Apollo and 
Idas, 63; father of Castor and 
Pollux by Leda, 67, 97; makes 
Oeneus fall in love with his own 
daughter, 71; Phrixus ordered 
to be sacrificed to, 75; Zeus, God 
of Escape, the ram with the 
golden fleece sacrificed to, 77; 
carries off Aegina, 79; Sal- 
moneus’s mimickry of, 81; kills 
Salmoneus by a thunderbolt, 81 ; 
angry with the Argonauts for 
the murder of Apsyrtus, 113, 
115; seduces Io and turns her 
into a white cow, 133; orders 
Hermes to steal Io, 133 ; father of 
Argus and Pelasgus by Niobe, 
129, 131, 389; orders Athena 
and Hermes to purify the 
Danaids, 148; in shape of 
stream of gold impregnates 


APOLL., 11. 


Danae, 155; his prediction 
concerning the descendant of 
Perseus, 167; turns vixen and 
dog to stone, 173; in likeness of 
Amphitryon begets Hercules on 
Alemena, 173, 175; father of 
Rhadamanthys, 181; Saviour, 
Hercules sacrifices to, 187 (cp. 
185); Prometheus offers himself 
to Zeus to be immortal instead 
of Chiron, 193, 229, 231; Huropa 
ferried by bull for, 199; on his 
marriage receives the apples of 
the Hesperides from Earth, 221 ; 
strangers sacrificed to, by Busiris, 
225, 227; parts Apollo and 
Hercules, 241; hangs Hera from 
Olympus, 247; rescues wounded 
Hercules, 247 ; Cenaean, altar of, 
267 ; Paternal, altars of, 289; as 
a bull, carries Kuropa to Crete, 
299; begets Minus, Sarpedon, 
and Rhadamanthys by Europa, 
299; grants Sarpedon to live for 
three generations, 303; father of 
Atymnius by Cassiepea, 303; 
Atabyrian, altar of, 307; gives 
Harmonia in marriage to Cadmus. 
317; gives necklace to Europa, 
317; loves Semele, 317; visits 
her with thunder and lightning, 
319; sews up the _ abortive 
infant Dionysus in his thigh, 319; 
gives birth to Dionysus in due 
time and entrusts him to Hermes, 
319; turns Dionysus into a kid, 
821; changes the nymphs at 
Nysa into the Hyades, 321; 
angry with Actaeon for wooing 
Semele, 323; instigates Actaeon’s 
dogs to devour him, 325; sends 
Cadmus and Harmonia to the 
Elysian Fields, 335; father of 
Amphion and Zethus by Antiope, 
337, 339, ii. 5; Niobe prays to, 
i. 343; and Hera refer their 
dispute to Tiresias as arbiter, 
367; grants Tiresias the art of 
soothsaying, 367; kills Capaneus 
with a thunderbolt, 367 ; cleaves 
the earth by a thunderbolt, 371 ; 
makes Amphiaraus immortal, 
371; consorts with Callirrhoe 
and grants that her sons should 
be suddenly full grown, 385; in 


545 
N N 


INDEX 


disguise visits Lycaon and his 
sons, is tempted by them with 
human sacrifices, and _ blasts 
them by thunderbolts, 391,. 393 ; 
in the likeness of Artemis or 
Apollo forces Callisto, turns her 
into a bear, then into the con- 
stellation called the Bear, 395, 
397; gives her child Arcas to 
Maia to bring up, 397; Melanion 
and Atalanta have intercourse in 
a precinct of, 401; consorts with 
the daughters of Atlas, ii. 5; 
father of Hermes by Maia, 5; 
orders Hermes to restore the 
stolen kine to Apollo, 9 ; father of 
Lacedaemon by Taygete, 11: 
smites Aesculapius with a 
thunderbolt to prevent men from 
learning the healing art, 19: 
Cyclopes forge thunderbolts for, 
19 ; orders Apollo to serve a man 
for a year as expiation for the 
slaughter of the Cyclopes, 19, 21 ; 
as a swan consorts with Leda 
and begets Pollux and Helen, 
23; according to others, he got 
Helen on Nemesis, 25; smites 
Idas with a thunderbolt, 33; 
raises Pollux to heaven, 33; 
allows Castor and Pollux to be 
among gods and mortals on 
alternate days, 33; carries off 
Ganymede on an eagle and makes 
him cupbearer to the gods, 37; 
gives the Palladium as a sign to 
Ilus, 39; interposes the aegis 
between Athena and Pallas, 41; 
throws the Palladium into the 


546 


Ilian country, 41; father of 
Asopus by Eurynome, 51 ; carries 
off Aegina and has a son Aeacus 
by her, 51, 53; hurls thunder- 
bolts at Asopus, 53; turns 
ants into men for Aeacus, 53; 
and Poseidon rivals for the 
hand cf Thetis, 67; appoints 
arbiters between Poseidon and 


‘Athena in the dispute for the 


possession of Attica, 79, 81; 
decides the dispute between 
Aphrodite and Persephone about 
Adonis, 87; Minos prays for 
vengeance on Athens to, 119; 
makes a cloud in the likeness o 
Hera and lays it beside Ixion, 
149; binds Ixion to a wheel, 149 ; 
compact of Theseus and Pirithous 
to marry daughters of, 153; 
sends Hermes to Atreus with a 
message, 165; sons of Thyestes 
slaughtered by AtreuS on an 
altar of, 167; wills that Europe 
and Asia should be embroiled,171; 
wills that Hermes should carry 
Helen to Egypt, 175; sign of the 
serpent and the sparrows given at 
Aulis by, 185 ; Zeus of the Court- 
yard, Priam slain at the altar of, 
237; asked by Athena to send a 
storm on the Greeks, 247; appoints 
Aeolus keeper of the winds, 285 ; 
the Sun reports the slaughter of 
his kine to, 295; strikes Ulysses 
with a thunderbolt, 295 


Zeuxippe, mother’s sister and wife 


of Pandion, mother of Procne 
and Philomela, ii. 99 


“ρθη a ee ee te ee 


NWALL PRESS, LTD., PARIS GARDEN, 


‘MFORD STREET, LONDON, S.E. I. 


Ἀνὰ 4. 
ὑπ cae’, 
"Oa ae ἮΚ Ay ae OM) 


> 


bom 


| JHE INSTITUTE OF MEDIAEVAL STUDIES 
89 QUEEN’S PARK CRESCENT 
JORONTO — 5, CANADA 


J a ΠΗ. 


ee oe Le 


en 


* 
3 
Ε 
: 
ῃ 
Η 
: 
Η 
= 
7 
: 
ι ϑ 
ἢ 


oe ©0090 ΤΥ ΜΗ ΎΎΘΎ eet © 1 Oe e Rew ee aad we 


