«<^ 


% 

=& 


'*/);• 


r?W*i" 


■  - 


•jMNfl 


fe. 


V  °A 


^ 


THE  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SAN  DIEGO 

LA  iOLLA,  CALIFORNIA 


*QUJFC** 


■^*snv,. 


>  "^ 


^     Ti— n-  G°       ^|H 


22ID'/ 


Social  Sciences  &  Humanities  Library 

University  of  California,  San  Diego 
Please  Note:  This  item  is  subject  to  recall. 

Date  Due 


MAR  1  6  19C7 

'    ■    ■    .  .     ; 

CI  39  (2/95) 


UCSD  Lb. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA.  SAN  DIEGO 


3  1822  01957  4995 


THE    LOEB    CLASSICAL   LIBRARY 

EDITED   BY 

T.  E.  PAGE,  Litt.D.,  and  W.  H.  D.  ROUSE,  Litt.D. 


OVID 

HEROIDES    AND    AMORES 


OVID 


HEROIDES    AND    AMORES 

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  BY 

GRANT    SHOWERMAN 

PROFESSOR    OF    LATIN    IN    THE    DNIVBBSITV    0]     WISCONSIN 

.    ■  I 


LONDON   :  WILLIAM    HKINEMANN 
NEW    YORK    :    THE    MACMILLAN    CO. 

MCMXIV 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
THE  HEROIDES 1 

THE  A  MORES S13 

INDEX 509 


I 
THE   HEROIDES 


OVID'S    LIFE 

Publius  Ovidius  Naso  was  born  at  Sulmo,  a  city 
about  ninety  miles  south-east  of  Rome,  in  the  country 
of  the  Paeligni,  on  March  20,  43  B.C.,  the  year  of 
the  second  triumvirate,  composed  of  Augustus, 
Antony,  and  Lepidus,  and  the  year  of  the  proscription 
and  death  of  the  Ciceros.  His  family  had  been  of 
equestrian  rank  for  several  generations. 

Ovid's  education  was  begun  at  Sulmo,  and  com- 
pleted at  Rome  and  Athens.  In  deference  to  his 
father's  wishes,  he  pursued,  with  his  brother,  the 
rhetorical  studies  usual  with  the  ambitious  young 
men  of  the  time,  expecting  to  enter  upon  a  public 
career  ;  but  so  fervent  was  his  passion  for  literature, 
and  so  irresistible  his  instinct  for  literary  art — he 
himself  says  that  whatever  he  attempted  to  write 
took  the  form  of  verse — that  he  found  it  impossible 
to  follow  the  profession  of  his  father's  preference. 
He  held,  indeed,  one  or  two  minor  offices  in  the 
public  service,  but  his  chief  interests  were  always 
among  the  social  and  literary  circles  of  the  capital. 
Among  those  with  whom  he  was  intimate  were 
Tibullus,  who  died  when  Ovid  was  twenty-four, 
Propertius,  and  Aemilius  Macer  of  Verona.  Horace 
and  Virgil  were  his  seniors  by  twenty-two  and 
twenty-seven  years  respectively  ;  he  heard  the 
former  recite,  and  says  he  merely  saw  Virgil,  and 
was  probably  well  acquainted  with  neither. 


OVID'S    LIFE 

At  the  age  of  nineteen,  Ovid  mourned  the  death 
of  his  only  brother.  The  poet  was  three  times 
married — twice  with  divorce  as  a  hasty  result,  and 
the  third  time  to  a  lady  of  one  of  the  oldest  and 
most  respected  families  of  Rome,  the  Fabii.  The 
last  union  seems  to  have  been  based  upon  serious 
affection,  or,  at  least,  esteem,  and  remained  un- 
broken to  Ovid's  death.  A  daughter,  Perilla,  is 
said  to  have  been  born  of  this  marriage.  In  8  a.d., 
the  poet  was  suddenly  banished  by  Augustus — with- 
out loss  of  property  or  citizenship,  however — to 
Tomi,  a  distant  town  on  the  Black  Sea,  where  he 
dragged  out  a  miserable,  though  poetically  pro- 
ductive, existence  until  his  death  in  the  year  18  at 
the  age  of  sixty-one.  The  cause  of  his  banishment 
is  generally  supposed  to  have  had  some  connection 
with  the  scandalous  conduct  of  the  Emperor's 
granddaughter  Julia. 

Ovid's  literary  activities  began  at  about  his 
twentieth  year,  and  extended  over  a  period  of  nearly 
forty  years.  His  works  fall  naturally  into  three 
groups  :  the  amatory  poems,  consisting  of  the 
Amoves,  the  Heroides,  De  Medicaviine  Faciei,  Ars 
Amatoria,  and  Remedia  Amoris,  were  the  works  of  his 
youth  ;  in  the  following  period  appeared  two  poems, 
the  Fasti  and  the  Metamorphoses,  which  may  be 
described  as  mythological  ;  and  the  final  products 
of  his  pen,  the  Tristia  and  the  Epistulae  ex  Panto, 
came  from  Tomi,  and  were  in  the  nature  of  laments. 
All  of  these  poems  have  been  preserved.  The 
Medea,  a  Gigantoinachy,  a  Panegyric  of  Augustus 
after  his  death,  a  Parody  on  Bad  Authors,  and  a 
poem  in  the  language  of  the  Getae,  may  be 
mentioned  among  works  which  have  been  lost. 


OVID'S   LIFE 

Though  composed  after  the  Amoves,  the  Heroides 
are  placed  first  in  this  volume  because  the  Amoves 
in  their  extant  form  were  the  result  of  a  revision 
by  the  poet,  who  first  published  them  in  five  books. 
The  present  tendency  may  be  said  to  favour  the 
assumption  that  the  last  six  of  the  Heroides,  in 
spite  of  suspicious  irregularities  in  form  and  lan- 
guage, represent  a  reawakening  of  the  poets 
interest  in  this  field  at  a  period  later  than  the 
appearance  of  the  first  fifteen — possibly  during  or 
shortly  after  his  composition  of  the  Metamorphoses. 


MANUSCRIPTS,   EDITIONS,   AND 
TEXTUAL   CRITICISM    OF 
THE    HEROIDES 

The  principal    manuscripts    of   the    Heroides   are 
the   following  : — 

1.  Codex  Parisinus  8242,  formerly  called  Puteanus, 

of  the  eleventh  century,  corrected  about  the 
twelfth  ;  by  universal  consent  the  best  manu- 
script. It  contains  the  Heroides  and  the 
Amores,  with  omissions.  Of  the  Heroides 
there  is  lacking:  I;  II,  1-13;  IV,  48-103  ; 
V,  97-end;  VI,  1-49;  XV;  XVI,  39-142; 
XX,  176-end. 

2.  Codex  Guelferbytanus,  of  the  twelfth  century, 

with  a  recension  in  the  thirteenth  ;  of  com- 
paratively little  value.  XVII-XX  are  almost 
illegible.    The  first  hand  gave  to  XX,  194. 

3.  Codex  Etonensis,  of  the  eleventh  century,  but 

inferior  to  its  eontemporarv,  the  Parisinus. 
It  contains,  with  various  other  compositions, 
the  Heroides  up  to  VII,  157. 

4.  Schedae  Vindobonenses,  of  the  twelfth  century, 

containing  fragments  of  X-XX,  omitting  XV, 
and  often  serving  to  confirm  the  Parisinus. 


TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  HEROIDES 

5.  Codex  Francofurtanus,  of  the  thirteenth  century, 

the  best  authority  for  XV. 

6.  A  mass  of  manuscripts  of  the  thirteenth,  four- 

teenth, and  fifteenth  centuries,  all  of  which 
have  been  subjected  to  extensive  alterations. 

7.  The   Greek  translation    of  Maximus   Planudes, 

of  the  latter  part  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
from  a  Latin  manuscript  resembling  the 
Parisinus,  and  of  considerable  value  in  the 
parts  omitted  by  it. 

•  Two  Editiones  Principes  of  Ovid  appeared  in  1471 
— one  at  Rome  and  one  at  Bologna,  with  independent 
texts.  A  Venetian  edition  was  published  in  1491, 
with  commentary  by  Vossius. 

The  principal  edition  of  recent  times  is  that  of 
Arthur  Palmer,  Oxford,  1898.  It  contains  the  Greek 
translation  of  Planudes.  The  introduction  and  por- 
tions of  the  commentary  are  by  Louis  C.  Purser,  who 
assumed  the  task  of  completing  the  work  at  Palmer's 
request  a  short  time  before  his  death  in  1897.  The 
text  in  Postgate's  Corpus  Poetarum  Latinorum, 
Vol.  I,   1894,  is  also  Palmer's. 

Other  editors  and  critics  may  be  mentioned  as 
follows:  A.  Heinsius,  Amsterdam,  1661;  Bentley, 
1662-1742;  Heinsius-Burmann,  Amsterdam,  1727; 
Van  Lennep,  Amsterdam,  1809  :  Loers,  Cologne, 
1829;  Madvig,  Emendationes  Latinae,  1873;  Mer- 
kel,  1876 ;  Shuckburgh,  Thirteen  Epistles,  London, 
1879,  corrected  in  1885;  Sedlmayer,  Vienna,  1886; 
Ehwald,  edition  of  Merkel,  1888;  Housman,  critical 
notes,  Classical  Review,  1897. 


SIGNS   AND   ABBREVIATIONS 

P=  Parisinus. 

G  =  Guelferbytanus. 

E  =  Etonensis. 

V  =  Vindobonensis. 

F  =  Francofurtanus. 

u)  =  the    mass    of    MSS.    of    the    thirteenth    to 

fifteenth  centuries. 
s  =  a    few    inferior    MSS.   of   the    thirteenth  to 
fifteenth  centuries. 
Bent.  =  Bentley. 
Hein.  =  Heinsius. 
Burm.  —  Burmann. 
Merk.  =  Merkel. 
Sedl.  =  Sedlmayer. 
Ehw.  =  Ehwald. 
Pa.  =  Palmer. 
Hous.  =  Housman. 


IN   APPRECIATION   OF   THE 
HEROIDES 

The  Heroides  are  not  a  work  of  the  highest  order 
of  genius.  Their  language,  nearly  always  artificial, 
frequently  rhetorical,  and  often  diffuse,  is  the  same 
throughout — whether  from  the  lips  of  barbarian 
Medea  or  Sappho  the  poetess.  The  heroines  and 
heroes  who  speak  it  are  creatures  from  the  world  of 
legend,  are  not  always  warm  flesh  and  blood,  and 
rarely  communicate  their  passions  to  us.  The  critic 
who  cares  more  for  the  raising  of  a  laugh  than  for 
the  strict  rendering  of  justice  may  with  no  great 
difficulty  find  room  here  for  the  exercise  of  his  wit. 

Yet  the  malicious  critic  of  the  Heroides  will  be 
hard  to  find  ;  for  they  belong  to  the  engaging  sort  of 
art  which  disarms  criticism.  Their  theme,  first  of  all, 
is  the  universal  theme  of  love — and  of  woman's  love 
— and  of  woman's  love  in  straits.  The  heroines  that 
speak  to  us  from  Ovid's  page  may  lack  in  convincing 
quality,  and  may  not  stir  our  passions,  but  they  are 
sufficiently  real  to  win  our  sympathy,  and  to  blind  us 
for  the  moment  to  the  faults  of  both  themselves  and 
their  sponsor.  Their  language  may  be  unvarying, 
and  may  border  too  much  on  the  rhetorical,  but  it  is 
full-flowing,  clear,  euphonious,  and  restful.  It  may 
be  artificial,  but  its  very  artificiality  is  of  charming 
quality. 

8 


IN  APPRECIATION  OF  THE  HEROIDES 

What  the  Heroides  lose  by  reason  of  being  the 
portrayal  of  legendary  characters  in  language  removed 
from  ordinary  life  they  gain  from  their  pleasant 
quality  of  style,  and  from  their  constant  stimulation 
of  literary  reminiscence.  They  should  not  be  judged 
as  attempts  at  realistic  art ;  their  author  did  not 
aim  at  even  naturalism'.  If  we  must  choose,  they 
should  be  judged  on  the  basis  of  their  connection 
rather  with  literature  than  with  life. 

Yet  we  need  not  choose ;  we  may  enjoy  them  as 
clever  and  genial  treatments  of  literary  themes 
enriched  with  enough  of  the  warmly  human  to  beget 
in  the  benevolent  reader  the  illusion  of  life.  Pene- 
lope, Briseis,  Dido,  and  Helen  no  doubt  interest  us 
mainly  as  figures  from  Homer  and  Virgil,  but  even 
they  possess  qualities  that  give  them  semblance 
of  reality :  Penelope  is  faithful,  Briseis  forgiving, 
Dido  filled  with  despair,  and  Helen  with  vanity. 
In  Medea,  Hypsipyle,  Oenone,  and  Ariadne,  there  is 
a  nearer  approach  to  real  passion.  The  wifely 
solicitude  of  Laodamia,  the  loving  trustfulness  of 
deserted  Phyllis,  and  the  mother's  grief  of  Canace 
are  still  more  warm  with  life.  The  stories  of  Acontius 
and  Cydippe,  and  in  greater  degree  of  Hero  and 
Leander,  are  so  full  of  the  romance  of  young  love 
that  we  think  of  neither  life  nor  letters,  but  simply 
enjoy  the  delightful  tale.  And,  whatever  else  may 
be  said  of  his  heroines,  in  every  one  of  them  the 
poet  has  placed  the  most  human  of  qualities  —  a  heart 
submissive  to  the  power  of  love.  All  the  world  loves 
a  lover,  and  all  the  world  has  for  a  long  time  loved 
most  of  the  Heroides. 


P.  OVIDI  NASONIS  HEROIDES 
i 

Penelope  Ui.ixi 

Hanc  tua  Penelope  lento  tibi  mittit,  Ulixe — 

nil  mihi  reseribas  tu  tamen  ; 1  ipse  veni  ! 
Troia  iacet  certe,  Danais  hivisa  puellis ; 

vix  Priamus  tanti  totaque  Troia  fuit. 
o  utinam  turn,  cum  Lacedaemona  classe  petebat,       5 

obratus  insanis  esset  adulter  aquis  ! 
non  ego  deserto  iacuissem  frigida  leeto, 

non  quererer  tardos  ire  relicta  dies  ; 
nee  mihi  quaerenti  spatiosam  fallere  noctem 

lassaret  2  viduas  pendula  tela  manus.  10 

Quando  ego  non  timui  graviora  pericula  veris  ? 

res  est  solliciti  plena  timoris  amor, 
in  te  fingebam  violentos  Troas  ituros  ; 

nomine  in  Hectoreo  pallida  semper  eram. 
sive  quis  Antilochum  narrabat  ab  hoste  revietum,3  15 

Antiloehus  nostri  causa  timoris  erat  ; 

1  tu  tamen  Bent. :  at  tamen  G.  Often  written  reseribas,  tu 
tamen  ipse  veni.  2  lassaret  o> :  lassasset  G. 

3  ab  hoste  revietum  Hous. :  ab  Heetore  victum  MSS.  con- 
tradict» the  fact.  % 


THE 

HEROIDES  OF  P.  OVIDIUS  NASO 

i 

Penelope  to  Ulysses 

This  missive  your  Penelope  sends  to  you,  O 
Ulysses,  slow  of  return  that  you  are — yet  write 
nothing  back  to  me  ;  yourself  come  !  Troy,  to  be 
sure,  is  fallen,  hated  of  the  daughters  of  Greece  ;  but 
scarcely  were  Priam  and  all  Troy  worth  the  price  to 
me."  O  would  that  then,  when  his  ship  was  on  the 
way  to  Lacedaemon,  the  adulterous  lover  had  been 
overwhelmed  by  raging  waters  !  Then  had  I  not 
lain  cold  in  my  deserted  bed,  nor  would  now  be 
left  alone  complaining  of  slowly  passing  days  ;  nor 
would  the  hanging  web  be  wearying  now  my  widowed 
hands  as  I  seek  to  beguile  the  hours  of  spacious  night. 

11  When  have  I  not  feared  dangers  graver  than 
the  real  ?  Love  is  a  thing  ever  filled  with  anxious 
fear.  It  was  upon  you  that  my  fancy  ever  told  me 
the  furious  Trojans  would  rush ;  at  mention  of 
the  name  of  Hector  my  pallor  ever  came.  Did 
someone  begin  the  tale  of  Antilochus  laid  low  by 
the   enemy,   Antilochus  was  cause  of  my  alarm  ;  or, 

"  Homer  is  Ovid's  direct  source  for  this  letter.  Tennyson's 
Ulyxnea  is  of  interest  in  connection  with  it. 

For  brief  statements  of  the  circumstances  under  which  the 
heroines  write  their  letters,  and  for  proper  names  in  general, 
consult  the  index. 

I  I 


OVID 

sive  Menoetiaden  falsis  cecidisse  sub  armis, 

flebam  successu  posse  carere  dolos. 
sanguine  Tlepolemus  Lyciam  tepefecerat  hastam  ; 

Tlepolemi  leto  cura  novata  mea  est.  20 

denique,  quisquis  ei*at  castris  iugulatus  Achivis, 

frigidius  glacie  pectus  amantis  erat. 
Sed  bene  consuluit  casto  deus  aequus  amori. 

versa  est  in  cineres  sospite  Troia  viro. 
Argolici  rediere  duces,  altaria  fumant ;  25 

ponitur  ad  patrios  barbara  praeda  deos. 
grata  ferunt  nymphae  pro  salvis  dona  maritis  ; 

illi  victa  suis  Troica  fata  canunt. 
mirantur  iustique  senes  trepidaeque  puellae  ; 

narrantis  coniunx  pendet  ab  ore  viri.  30 

atque  aliquis  posita  monstrat  fera  proelia  mensa, 

pingit  et  exiguo  Pergama  tota  mero : 
"  hac  ibat  Simois  ;  haec  est  Sigeia  tellus  ; 

hie  steterat  Priami  regia  celsa  senis. 
illic  Aeacides,  illic  tendebat  Ulixes  ;  35 

hie  lacer  adrnissos  terruit  Hector  equos." 
Omnia  namque  tuo  senior  te  quaerere  misso 

rettulerat  nato  Nestor,  at  ille  rnihi. 
rettulit  et  ferro  Rhesumque  Dolonaque  caesos, 

utque  sit  hie  somno  proditus,  ille  dolo.  40 

ausus  es, — o  nimium  nimiumque  oblite  tuoruin  ! — 

Thracia  nocturno  tangere  castra  dolo 
totque  simul  mactare  viros,  adiutus  ab  uno  ! 

at  bene  cautus  eras  et  raeraor  ante  mei ! 

"  Patroclus  in  the  armour  of  Achilles. 
b  Tlepolemus  was  slain  by  Sarpedon,  king  of  Lycia. 
c  The  past  rises  vividly  in  her  mind. 
12 


THE    HEROIDES   I 

did  he  tell  of  how  the  son  of  Menoetius  fell  in 
armour  not  his  own/'  I  wept  that  wiles  could  lack 
success.  Had  Tlepolemus  with  his  blood  made  warm 
the  Lycian  spear,6  in  Tlepolemus'  fate  was  all  my 
care  renewed.  In  short,  whoever  it  was  in  the 
Argive  camp  that  was  pierced  and  fell,  colder  than 
ice  grew  the  heart  of  her  who  loves  you. 

23  But  good  regard  for  me  had  the  god  who  looks 
with  favour  upon  chaste  love.  Turned  to  ashes  is 
Troy,  and  my  lord  is  safe.  The  Argolic  chieftains 
have  returned,  our  altars  are  a-smoke ; c  before  the 
gods  of  our  fathers  is  laid  the  barbarian  spoil.  The 
young  wife  comes  bearing  thank-offering  for  her 
husband  saved  ;  the  husband  sings  of  the  fates  of 
Troy  that  have  yielded  to  his  own.  Righteous 
elder  and  trembling  girl  admire ;  the  wife  hangs 
on  the  tale  that  falls  from  her  husband's  lips. 
And  someone  about  the  board  shows  thereon  the 
fierce  combat,  and  with  scant  tracing  of  wine  pictures 
forth  all  Pergamum  :  "  Here  flowed  the  Simois  ;  this 
is  the  Sigeian  land ;  here  stood  the  lofty  palace 
of  Priam  the  ancient.  Yonder  tented  the  son 
of  Aeacus ;  yonder,  Ulysses ;  here,  in  wild  course 
went  the  frightened  steeds  with  Hector's  mutilated 
corpse." 

37  For  the  whole  story  was  told  your  son,  whom  1 
sent  to  seek  you  ;  ancient  Nestor  told  him,  and  he 
told  me.  He  told  as  well  of  Rhesus'  and  Dolon's  fall 
by  the  sword,  how  the  one  was  betrayed  by  slumber, 
the  other  undone  by  guile.  You  had  the  daring — O 
too,  too  forgetful  of  your  own ! — to  set  wily  foot 
by  night  in  the  Thracian  camp,  and  to  slay  so  many 
men,  all  at  one  time,  and  with  only  one  to  aid  ! 
Ah  yes,  you  were  cautious,  indeed,  and  ever  gave  me 

J3 


OVID 

usque  metu  micuere  sinus,  dum  victor  amicum         45 

dictus  es  Ismariis  isse  per  agmen  equis. 
Sed  mihi  quid  pi-odest  vestris  disiecta  lacertis 

Ilios  et,  murus  quod  fuit,  esse  solum, 
si  maneo,  qualis  Troia  durante  manebam, 

virque  mihi  dempto  fine  carendus  abest  ?  50 

diruta  sunt  aliis,  uni  mihi  Pergama  restant, 

incola  captivo  quae  bove  victor  arat. 
iam  seges  est,  ubi  Troia  fuit,  resecandaque  falce 

luxuriat  Phrygio  sanguine  pinguis  humus  ; 
semisepulta  virum  curvis  feriuntur  aratris  55 

ossa,  ruinosas  occulit  herba  domos. 
victor  abes,  nee  scire  mihi,  quae  causa  morandi, 

aut  in  quo  lateas  ferreus  orbe,  licet ! 
Quisquis  ad  haec  vertit  peregrinam  litora  puppim, 

ille  mihi  de  te  multa  rogatus  abit,  60 

quamque  tibi  reddat,  si  te  modo  viderit  usquam, 

traditur  huic  digitis  charta  notata  meis. 
nos  Pylon,  antiqui  Neleia  Nestoris  arva, 

misimus  ;  incerta  est  fama  remissa  Pylo. 
inisimus  et  Sparten  ;  Sparte  quoque  nescia  veri.1     65 

quas  habitas  terras,  aut  ubi  lentus  abes  ? 
utilius  starent  etianmunc  moenia  Phoebi — 

irascor  votis,  heu,  levis  ipsa  meis  ! 
scirem  ubi  pugnares,  et  tantum  bella  timerem, 

et  mea  cum  multis  iuncta  querela  foret.  70 

1  vestri  Bent. 

a  If  this  refers  to  Telemachus'  journey,  Ovid  has  forgotten 
his  Homer,  or  disregards  it ;  for  in  the  Odyssey  (2,  373) 
Telemachus  goes  without  his  mother's  knowledge. 

?4 


THE   HEROIDES   I 

first  thought !  My  heart  leaped  with  fear  at  every 
word  until  I  was  told  of  your  victorious  riding  back 
through  the  friendly  lines  of  the  Greeks  with  the 
coursers  of  Ismarus. 

47  But  of  what  avail  to  me  that  Ilion  has  been 
scattered  in  ruin  by  vour  amis,  and  that  what  once 
was  wall  is  now  level  ground — if  I  am  still  to  remain 
such  as  I  was  while  Troy  endured,  and  must  live  to 
all  time  bereft  of  my  lord  ?  For  others  Pergamum 
has  been  brought  low  ;  for  me  alone  it  still  stands, 
though  the  victor  dwell  within  and  drive  there  the 
plow  with  the  ox  he  took  as  spoil.  Now  are  fields 
of  corn  where  Troy  once  was,  and  soil  made  fertile 
with  Phrygian  blood  waves  rich  with  harvest  ready 
for  the  sickle ;  the  half-buried  bones  of  her  heroes 
are  struck  by  the  curved  share,  and  herbage  hides 
from  sight  her  ruined  palaces.  A  victor,  you  are  yet 
not  here,  nor  am  I  let  know  what  causes  your  delay, 
or  in  what  part  of  the  world  hard-heartedly  you  hide. 

59  Whoso  turns  to  these  shores  of  ours  his  stranger 
ship  is  plied  with  many  a  question  ere  he  go  away, 
and  into  his  hand  is  given  the  sheet  writ  by  these 
fingers  of  mine,  to  render  up  should  he  but  see 
you  anywhere.  We  have  sent  to  Pylos,  the  land  of 
ancient  Nestor,  Neleus'  son ;  the  word  brought  back 
from  Pylos  was  nothing  sure."  We  have  sent  to 
Sparta,  too  ;  Sparta  also  could  tell  us  nothing  true. 
In  what  lands  are  you  abiding,  or  where  do  you  idly 
tarry  ?  Better  for  me,  were  the  walls  of  Phoebus 
still  standing  in  their  place — ah  me  inconstant, 
1  am  wroth  with  the  vows  myself  have  made  ! 
Had  they  not  fallen,  I  should  know  where  you 
were  fighting,  and  have  only  war  to  fear,  and  my 
plaint  would  be  joined. with  that  of  many  another. 

15 


OVID 

quid  timeam,  ignoro — timeo  tamen  omnia  demens, 

et  patet  in  curas  area  lata  meas. 
quaecumque  aequor  habet,quaecumquepericula  tellus, 

tarn  longae  causas  suspicor  esse  morae. 
haec  ego  dum  stulte  metuo,  quae  vestra  libido  est,  75 

esse  peregrino  captus  amore  potes. 
forsitan  et  narres,  quam  sit  tibi  rustiea  coniunx, 

quae  tantum  lanas  non  sinat  esse  rudes. 
fallar,  et  hoc  crimen  tenues  vanescat  in  auras, 

neve,  revertendi  liber,  abesse  velis  !  80 

Me  pater  Icarius  viduo  discedere  lecto 

cogit  et  immensas  increpat  usque  moras, 
increpet  usque  licet — tua  sum,  tua  dicar  oportet ; 

Penelope  cQniunx  semper  Ulixis  ero. 
ille  tamen  pietate  mea  precibusque  pudicis  85 

frangitur  et  vires  temperat  ipse  suas. 
Dulichii  Samiique  et  quos  tulit  alta  Zacynthos, 

turba  ruunt  in  me  luxuriosa  proci, 
inque  tua  regnant  nullis  prohibentibus  aula  ; 

viscera  nostra,  tuae  dilacerantur  opes.  90 

quid  tibi  Pisandrum  Polybumque  Medontaque  dirum 

Eurymachique  avidas  Antinoique  manus 
atque  alios  referam,  quos  omnis  turpiter  absens 

ipse  tuo  partis  sanguine  rebus  alis  ? 
Irus  egens  pecorisque  Melanthius  actor  edendi        95 

ultimus  accedunt  in  tua  damna  pudor. 


a  Rustiea  is  frequent  in  the  Heroides.  It  suggests  "  rustic," 
"  countryfied,"  "simple,"  "  homety,"  "unsophisticated," 
but  maybe  rendered  well  by  no  single  word. 

16 


THE   HEROIDES    I 

But  now,  what  I  am  to  fear  I  know  not — yet  none 
the  less  I  fear  all  things,  distraught,  and  wide 
is  the  field  lies  open  for  my  cares.  Whatever 
dangers  the  deep  contains,  whatever  the  land,  sus- 
picion tells  me  are  cause  of  your  long  delay.  While 
I  live  on  in  foolish  fear  of  things  like  these, 
you  may  be  captive  to  a  stranger  love — such  are 
the  hearts  of  you  men  !  It  may  be  you  even 
tell  how  rustic"  a  wife  you  have  —  one  fit  only  to 
dress  fine  the  wool.  May  I  be  mistaken,  and  this 
charge  of  mine  be  found  slight  as  the  breeze  that 
blows,  and  may  it  not  be  that,  free  to  return,  you 
will  to  be  away  ! 

81  As  for  me — my  father  Iearius  enjoins  on  me 
to  quit  my  widowed  couch,  and  ever  chides  me 
for  my  measureless  delay.  Let  him  chide  on  — 
yours  I  am,  yours  must  I  be  called  ;  Penelope, 
the  wife  of  Ulysses,  ever  shall  I  be.  Yet  is  he 
bent  by  my  faithfulness  and  my  chaste  prayers, 
and  of  himself  abates  his  urgency.  The  men  of 
Dulichium  and  Samos,  and  they  whom  high 
Zacynthus  bore — a  wanton  throng — come  pressing 
about  me,  suing  for  my  hand.  In  your  own  hall  they 
are  masters,  with  none  to  say  them  nay  ;  my  heart  is 
being  torn,  your  substance  spoiled.  Why  tell  you 
of  Pisander,  and  of  Polybus,  and  of  Medon  the 
cruel,  and  of  the  grasping  hands  of  Eurymachus  and 
Antinous,  and  of  others,  all  of  whom  through 
shameful  absence  you  yourself  are  feeding  fat  with 
store  that  was  won  at  cost  of  your  blood  ?  Irus  the 
beggar,  and  Melanthius,  who  drives  in  your  flocks  to 
be  consumed,  are  the  crowning  disgrace  now  added 
to  your  ruin. 

17 


OVID 

Tres  sumus  inbelles  numero,  sine  viribus  uxor 

Laertesque  senex  Telemachusque  puer. 
ille  per  insidias  paene  est  mihi  nuper  ademptus, 

dum  parat  invitis  omnibus  ire  Pylon.1  100 

di,  precor,  hoc  iubeant,  ut  euntibus  ordine  fatis 

ille  meos  oculos  conprimat,  ille  tuos  ! 
hac  faciunt  custosque  bourn  longaevaque  nutrix, 

Tertius  inmundae  cura  fidelis  harae ; 2 
sed  neque  Laertes,  ut  qui  sit  inutilis  armis,  105 

hostibus  in  mediis  regna  tenere  potest — 
Teleniacho  veniet,  vivat  modo,  fortior  aetas  ; 

nunc  erat  auxiliis  ilia  tuenda  patris  3 — 
nee  mihi  sunt  vires  inimicos  pellere  teetis. 

tu  citius  venias,  portus  et  ai*a  tuis  !  110 

est  tibi  sitque,  precor,  natus,  qui  mollibus  annis 

in  patrias  artes  erudiendus  erat. 
respice  Laerten  ;  ut  iam  sua  lumina  condas, 

extremum  fati  sustinet  ille  diem.4 
Certe  ego,  quae  fueram  te  discedente  puella,  115 

protinus  ut  venias,  facta  videbor  anus. 

II 

Phyllis  Demophoonti 

Hospita,  Demophoon,  tua  te  Rhodopeia  Phyllis 
ultra  promissum  tempus  abesse  queror. 

1  99,100  spurious  Bent. 

2  Ehiv.  places  103,  104  after  96  :  hac   Tyrrell ;  hec  G  E  w. 
hue  Bent.  :  hinc  Merk. 

18 


THE    HEROIDES    II 

97  We  number  only  three,  unused  to  war — a  power- 
less wife  ;  Laertes,  an  old  man  ;  Telemachus,  a  boy. 
He  was  of  late  all  but  waylaid  and  taken  from  me, 
while  making  ready,  against  the  will  of  all  of  them, 
to  go  to  Pylos.  The  gods  grant,  I  pray,  that  our 
fated  ends  may  come  in  due  succession — that  he  be 
the  one  to  close  my  eyes,  the  one  to  close  yours  !  To 
sustain  our  cause  are  the  guardian  of  your  cattle 
and  the  ancient  nurse,  and,  as  a  third,  the  faithful 
ward  of  the  unclean  stye  ;  but  neither  Laertes, 
unable  as  he  is  to  wield  arms  now,  can  sway  the 
sceptre  in  the  midst  of  our  foes — Telemachus,  in- 
deed, so  he  live  on,  will  arrive  at  years  of  strength, 
but  now  should  have  his  father's  aid  and  guarding — 
nor  have  I  strength  to  repel  the  enemy  from  our 
halls.  Do  you  yourself  make  haste  to  come,  haven 
and  altar  of  safety  for  your  own  !  You  have  a  son — 
and  may  you  have  him  ever,  is  my  prayer — who  in 
his  tender  years  should  have  been  trained  by  you  in 
his  father's  ways.  Have  regard  for  Laertes  ;  in  the 
hope  that  you  will  come  at  last  to  close  his  eyes, 
he  is  withstanding  the  final  day  of  fate. 

115  As  for  myself,  who  when  you  left  my  side  was  but 
a  girl,  though  you  should  come  straightway,  I  surely 
shall  seem  grown  an  aged  dame. 

II 

Phyllis  to  Demophoon 

I,  you  it  Phyllis,  who  welcomed  you  to  Rhodope, 
Demophoon,  complain  that  the  promised  day  is  past, 

3  Birt  place*  107,  108  after  98  :  spurioui  Sedl.  Scheukel. 
*  111-114  spurious  Bent. 

19 
c  2 


OVID 

cornua  cum  lunae  pleno  semel'orbe  eoissent, 

litoribus  nostris  ancora  pacta  tua  est — 
luna  quater  latuit,  toto  quater  orbe  recrevit ;  5 

nee  vehit  Actaeas  Sithonis  unda  rates, 
tempora    si    numeres  —  bene  quae l     numeramus 
amantes — 

non  venit  ante  suani  nostra  querela  diem. 
Spes  quoque  lenta  fiiit ;  tarde,  quae  credita  laedunt, 

credimus.    invito  nunc  et  amore  noces.2  10 

saepe  fui  mendax  pro  te  mihi,  saepe  putavi  3 

alba  pi-ocellosos  vela  referre  Notos. 
Thesea  devovi,  quia  te  dimittere  nollet ; 

nee  tenuit  cursus  forsitan  ille  tuos. 
interdum  timui,  ne,  dum  vada  tendis  ad  Hebri,       15 

mersa  foret  cana  naufraga  puppis  aqua, 
saepe  deos  4  supplex,  ut  tu,  seelerate,  valeres, 

cum  prece  turicremis  sum  venerata  sacris  ; 
saepe,  videns  ventos  caelo  pelagoque  faventes, 

ipsa  mihi  dixi :  "  si  valet  ille,  venit."  20 

denique  fidus  amor,  quidquid  properantibus  obstat, 

finxit,  et  ad  causas  ingeniosa  fui. 
at  tu  lentus  abes ;  nee  te  iurata  reducunt 

numina,  nee  nostro  motus  amore  redis. 
Demophoon,  ventis  et  verba  et  vela  dedisti ;  25 

vela  queror  reditu,  verba  carere  fide. 

1  bene  quae  EwPlan.:  quae  nos  0  Merk. 

2  So  6  :  invita  nunc  et  amante  nocens  E. 

3  putavi  E  s  Plan.:  notavi  O  Merk. 

4  deo  Pa.  who  omits  IS,  19. 

"  Attica. 


THE    HEROIDES    II 

and  you  not  here.  When  once  the  horns  of  the 
moon  should  have  come  together  in  full  orb,  our 
shores  were  to  expect  your  anchor — the  moon  has 
four  times  waned,  and  four  times  waxed  again  to  her 
orb  complete  ;  yet  the  Sithonian  wave  brings  not  the 
ships  of  Acte.a  Should  you  count  the  days — which 
we  count  well  who  love — you  will  find  my  plaint 
come  not  before  its  time. 

9  Hope,  too,  has  been  slow  to  leave  me  ;  we  are 
tardy  in  believing,  when  belief  brings  hurt.  Even 
now  my  love  is  loath  to  let  me  think  you 
wrong  me.  Oft  have  I  been  false  to  myself 
in  my  defence  of  you ;  oft  have  I  thought  the 
gusty  breezes  of  the  south  were  bringing  back  your 
white  sails.  Theseus  I  have  cursed,  because 
methought  he  would  not  let  you  go;  yet  mayhap 
'tis  not  he  that  has  stayed  your  course.  At  times 
have  I  feared  lest,  while  you  were  holding  toward 
the  waters  of  the  Hebrus,  your  craft  had  been 
wrecked  and  engulfed  in  the  foaming  wave.  Oft, 
bending  the  knee  in  prayer  that  you  fare  well — ah, 
wretched  man ! — have  I  venerated  the  gods  with 
prayer  or  with  burning  of  holy  incense  ;  oft,  seeing 
in  sky  and  on  sea  that  the  winds  were  favouring, 
have  I  said  to  myself :  "  If  he  do  fare  well,  he  is  on 
the  way."  In  a  word,  all  things  soever  that  hinder 
those  in  haste  to  come,  my  faithful  love  has  tried  to 
image  forth,  and  my  wit  has  been  fertile  in  the 
finding  of  causes.  But  you  delay  long  your  coming  ; 
neither  do  the  gods  by  whom  you  swore  bring  von 
back  to  me,  nor  does  love  of  mine  move  your 
return.  Demophoon,  to  the  winds  you  gave  at  once 
both  promised  word  and  sails;  your  sails,  alas  !  have 
not  returned,  your  promised  word  has  not  been  kept. 


OVID 

Die  mihi,  quid  feci,  nisi  non  sapienter  amavi  ? 

erimine  te  potui  demeruisse  meo. 
unura  in  me  scelus  est,  quod  te,  scelerate,  recepi ; 

sed  scelus  hoc  meriti  pondus  et  instar  habet.        30 
iura,  fides  ubi  nunc,  commissaque  dextera  dextrae, 

quique  ei-at  in  falso  plurimus  ore  deus  ? 
promissus  socios  ubi  nunc  Hymenaeus  in  annos, 

qui  mihi  coniugii  sponsor  et  obses  erat  ? 
per  mare,  quod  totum  ventis  agitatur  et  undis,        35 

per  quod  saepe  ieras,  per  quod  iturus  eras, 
perque  tuum  mihi  iurasti — nisi  fictus  et  ille  est — 

concita  qui  ventis  aequora  mulcet,  avum, 
per  Venerem  nimiumque  mihi  facientia  tela — 

altera  tela  arcus,  altera  tela  faces —  40 

Iunonemque,  toris  quae  praesidet  alma  maritis, 

et  per  taediferae  mystica  sacra  deae. 
si  de  tot  laesis  sua  numina  quisque  deorum 

vindicet,  in  poenas  non  satis  unus  eris. 
At  laceras  etiam  puppes  furiosa  refeci —  45 

ut,  qua  desererer,  finna  carina  foret ! — 
remigiumque  dedi,  quod  me  fugiturus  haberes. 

heu  !  patior  telis  vulnera  facta  meis  ! 
credidimus  blandis,  quorum  tibi  copia,  verbis  ; 

credidimus  generi  nominibusque  tuis  ;  50 

22 


THE    HEROIDES    II 

27  Tell  me,  what  have  I  done,  except  not  wisely 
love  ? — and  by  the  very  fault  I  might  well  have 
won  you  for  my  own.  The  one  crime  which  may  be 
charged  to  me  is  that  I  took  you,  O  faithless,  to 
myself ;  but  this  crime  has  all  the  weight  and 
seeming  of  good  desert.  The  bonds  that  should 
hold  you,  the  faith  that  you  swore,  where  are 
they  now  ? — and  the  pledge  of  the  right  hand  you 
placed  in  mine,  and  the  talk  of  God  that  was  ever  on 
your  lying  lips  ?  Where  now  the  bond  of  Hymen 
promised  for  years  of  life  together — promise  that  was 
my  warrant  and  surety  for  the  wedded  state  ?  By 
the  sea,  all  tossed  by  wind  and  wave,  over  which  you 
had  often  gone,  over  which  you  were  still  to  go ;  and 
by  your  grandsire — unless  he,  too,  is  but  a  fiction — 
by  your  grandsire,  who  calms  the  windwrought  wave, 
you  swore  to  me ;  yes,  and  by  Venus  and  the 
weapons  that  wound  me  all  too  much — one  weapon 
the  bow,  the  other  the  torch  ;  and  by  Juno,  the 
kindly  ward  of  the  bridal  bed  ;  and  by  the  mystical 
rites  of  the  goddess  who  bears  the  torch.  Should 
all  the  many  gods  you  have  wronged  take  vengeance 
for  the  outrage  to  their  sacred  names,  your  single 
life  would  not  suffice. 

45  Yes,  and  more,  in  my  madness  I  even  refitted 
your  shattered  ships — that  the  keel  might  be  firm 
by  which  I  was  left  behind! — and  gave  you  the 
oars  by  which  you  were  to  fly  from  me.  Ah  me,  my 
pangs  are  from  wounds  wrought  by  weapons  of  my 
own  !  I  had  faith  in  your  wheedling  words,  and 
you  had  good  store  of  them  ;  I  had  faith  in  your 
lineage,  and   in  the   names  it   shows;    I    had    faith 

-3 


OVID 

credidimus  lacrimis — an  et  h*e  simulare  docentur  ? 

hae  quoque  habent  artes,  quaque  iubentur,  eunt  ? 
dis  quoque  credidimus.    quo  iam  tot  pignora  nobis  ? 

parte  satis  potui  qualibet  inde  capi. 
Nee   moveor,  quod  te  iuvi  portuque  locoque —        55 

debuit  haec  meriti  summa  fuisse  mei ! 
turpiter  hospitium  lecto  cumulasse  iugali 

paenitet,  et  lateri  conseruisse  latus. 
quae  fuit  ante  illanx,  mallem  suprema  fuisset 

nox  mihi,  dum  potui  Phyllis  honesta  mori.  60 

speravi  melius,  quia  me  meruisse  putavi ; 

quaecumque  ex  merito  spes  venit,  aequa  venit. 
Fallere  credentem  non  est  operosa  puellam 

gloria,    simplicitas  digna  favore  fuit. 
sum  decepta  tuis  et  amans  et  femina  verbis.  65 

di  faciant,  laudis  summa  sit  ista  tuae  ! 
inter  et  Aegidas,  media  statuaris  in  urbe, 

magnificus  titulis  stet  pater  ante  suis. 
cum  fuerit  Sciron  lectus  torvusque  Procrustes 

et  Sinis  et  tauri  mixtaque  forma  viri  70 

et  domitae  bello  Thebae  fusique  bimembres 

et  pulsata  nigri  regia  caeca  dei — 
hoc  tua  post  illos  titulo  signetur  imago  : 

HIC    EST,    CUIUS    AMANS    HOSPITA    CAPTA    DOLO    EST. 

de  tanta  rerum  turba  factisque  parentis  75 

sedit  in  ingenio  Cressa  relicta  tuo. 

"  Theseus. 
24 


THE    HRROIDES    II 

in  your  tears — or  can  these  also  be  taught  to  feign  ; 
and  are  these  also  guileful,  and  ready  to  How  where 
bidden  ?  I  had  faith,  too,  in  the  gods  by  whom 
you  swore.  To  what  end.  pray,  so  many  pledges  of 
faith  to  me  ?  By  any  part  of  them,  however  slight, 
I  could  have  been  ensnared. 

55  I  am  stirred  by  no  regret  that  I  aided  you  with 
haven  and  abiding-place — only,  this  should  have 
been  the  limit  of  my  kindness !  Shamefully  to 
have  added  to  my  welcome  of  the  guest  the  favours 
of  the  marriage-bed  is  what  I  repent  me  of — to  have 
pressed  your  side  to  my  own.  The  night  before 
that  night  I  could  wish  had  been  the  last  for  me, 
while  I  still  could  have  died  Phyllis  the  chaste.  I 
had  hope  for  a  better  fate,  for  I  thought  it  my 
desert  ;  the  hope — whatever  it  be — that  is  grounded 
in  desert,  is  just. 

63  To  beguile  a  trustful  maid  is  glory  but  cheaply 
earned  ;  my  simple  faith  was  worthy  of  regard.  I  was 
deceived  by  your  words — I,  who  loved  and  was  a 
woman.  May  the  gods  grant  that  this  be  your 
crowning  praise  !  In  the  midst  of  your  city,  even 
among  the  sons  of  Aegeus,  go  let  yourself  be  statued, 
and  let  your  mighty  father"  be  set  there  first,  with 
record  of  his  deeds.  When  men  shall  have  read 
of  Sciron,  and  of  grim  Procrustes,  and  of  Sinis,  and 
of  the  mingled  form  of  bull  and  man,  and  of  Thebes 
brought  low  in  war,  and  of  the  rout  of  the  two- 
framed  Centaurs,  and  of  the  knocking  at  the  gloomy 
palace  of  the  darksome  god — after  all  these,  under 
your  own  image  let  be  inscribed  these  words  : 

THIS    IS    HE    WHOSE    WILES    BETRAYED    THE    HOSTESS 
THAT    LOVED    HIM. 

Of  all  the  great  deeds  in  the  long  career  of  your 
sire,  nothing  has  made  impress  upon  your  nature  but 

25 


OVID 

quod  solum  excusat,  solum  miraris  in  illo  ; 

heredem  patriae,  perfide,  fraudis  agis. 
ilia — nee  invideo — fruitur  meliore  marito 

inque  capistratis  tigribus  alta  sedet ;  80 

at  mea  despecti  fugiunt  conubia  Thraces, 

quod  ferar  externum  praeposuisse  meis. 
atque  aliquis  "iam  nunc  doctas  eat,"  inquit,  "Athenas; 

armiferam  Thracen  qui  regat,  alter  erit. 
exitus  acta  probat."    careat  successibus,  opto,  85 

quisquis  ab  eventu  facta  notanda  putat ! 
at  si  nostra  tuo  spumescant  aequora  remo, 

iam  mihi,  iam  dicar  consuluisse  meis — 
sed  neque  consului,  nee  te  mea  regia  tanget 

fessaque  Bistonia  membra  lavabis  aqua  !  90 

Ilia  meis  oculis  species  abeuntis  inhaeret, 

cum  premeret  portus  classis  itura  meos. 
ausus  es  amplecti  colloque  infusus  amantis 

oscula  per  longas  iungere  pressa  moras 
curaque  tuis  lacrimis  lacrimas  confundere  nostras,  95 

quodque  foret  velis  aura  secunda,  queri 
et  mihi  discedens  suprema  dicere  voce  : 

"  Phylli,  fac  expectes  Demophoonta  tuum  !  " 
Expectem,  qui  me  numquam  visurus  abisti  ? 

expectem  pelago  vela  negata  meo  ?  x  100 

1  So  G  co  :  negante  data  Pa. :  velane  gatata  meo  P. 

a  After  Theseus'  desertion  of  her,  Ariadne  was  wedded  to 
Bacchus,  whose  tigers  and  car  she  drives. 

26 


THE   HEROIDES    II 

the  leaving  of  his  Cretan  bride.  The  only  deed 
that  draws  forth  his  excuse,  that  only  you  admire  in 
him  ;  you  act  the  heir  to  your  father's  guile,  per- 
fidious one.  She — and  with  no  envy  from  me — 
enjoys  now  a  better  lord,  and  sits  aloft  behind 
her  bridled  tigers a ;  but  me,  the  Thracians  whom 
I  scorned  will  not  now  wed,  for  rumour  declares  I 
set  a  stranger  before  my  countrymen.  And  some- 
one says :  "  Let  her  now  away  to  learned  Athens  ; 
to  rule  in  armour-bearing  Thrace  another  shall  be 
found.  The  event  proves  well  the  wisdom  of  her 
course.''  Let  him  come  to  naught,  I  pray,  who 
thinks  the  deed  should  be  condemned  from  its 
result.  Ah,  but  if  our  seas  should  foam  beneath 
your  oar,  then  should  I  be  said  to  have  counselled 
well  for  myself,  then  well  for  my  countrymen  ;  but  I 
have  neither  counselled  well,  nor  will  my  palace  feel 
your  presence  more,  nor  will  you  bathe  again  your 
wearied  limbs  in  the  Bistonian  wave ! 

91  Ever  to  my  sight  clings  that  vision  of  you  as 
you  went,  what  time  your  ships  were  riding  the 
waters  of  my  harbour,  all  ready  to  depart.  You  dared 
embrace  me,  and,  with  arms  close  round  the  neck  of 
her  who  loved  you,  to  join  your  lips  to  mine  in 
long  and  lingering  kisses,  to  mingle  with  my  tears 
your  own,  to  complain  because  the  breeze  was 
favouring  to  your  sails,  and.  as  you  left  my  side,  to 
Say  for  your  last  words  :  "  Phyllis,  remember  well, 
expect  your  own  Demophoon  !  " 

99  And  am  I  to  expect,  when  you  went  forth  with 
thought  never  to  see  me  more  ?  Am  I  to  expect  the 
sails    denied    return    to    my    seas?      And    yet    I    do 

27 


OVID 

et  tamen  expecto — redeas  modo  serus  amanti, 

ut  tua  sit  solo  tempore  lapsa  fides ! 
Quid  precor  infelix  ?    te  iam  tenet  altera  coniunx 

forsitan  et,  nobis  qui  male  favit,  amor ; 
utque  tibi  excidimus,  nullam,  puto,  Phyllida  nosti.  105 

ei  mihi  !  si,  quae  sim  Phyllis  et  unde,  rogas — 
quae  tibi,  Demojmoon,  longis  erroribus  acto 

Threicios  portus  hospitiumque  dedi, 
cuius  opes  auxere  meae,  cui  dives  egenti 

munera  multa  dedi,  multa  datura  fui ;  110 

quae  tibi  subieci  latissima  regna  Lycurgi, 

nomine  femineo  vix  satis  apta  regi, 
qua  patet  umbrosum  Rhodope  glacialis  ad  Haemum, 

et  sacer  admissas  exigit  Hebrus  aquas, 
cui  mea  virginitas  avibus  libata  sinistris  1 1 5 

castaque  fallaci  zona  recincta  manu  ! 
pronuba  Tisiphone  thalamis  ululavit  in  illis, 

et  cecinit  maestum  devia  carmen  avis  ; 
adfuit  Allecto  brevibus  torquata  colubris, 

suntque  sepulcrali  lumina  mota  face  !  120 

Maesta  tamen  scopulos  fruticosaque  litora  caleo 

quaeque  patent  oculis  litora l  lata  meis. 
sive  die  laxatur  humus,  seu  frigida  lucent 

sidei'a,  prospicio,  quis  freta  ventus  agat ; 
et  quaecumque  procul  venientia  lintea  vidi,  125 

protinus  ilia  meos  auguror  esse  deos. 

1  litora  MSS.:  aequora  Aldus  Pa. 

a  A  Fury,  instead  of  Juno,  patroness  of  marriage. 
28 


THE    HEROIDES    II 

expect — ah,  return  only,  though  late,  to  her  who 
loves  you,  and  prove  your  promise  false  only  for  the 
time  that  you  delay  ! 

103  Why  entreat,  unhappy  that  I  am  ?  It  may  be 
you  are  already  won  by  another  bride,  and  feel 
for  her  the  love  that  favoured  me  but  ill ;  and 
since  I  have  fallen  from  out  your  life,  I  feel  you 
know  Phyllis  no  more.  Ah  me  !  if  you  ask  who  1, 
Phyllis,  am,  and  whence — I  am  she,  Demophoon, 
who,  when  you  had  been  driven  far  in  wanderings  on 
the  sea,  threw  open  to  you  the  havens  of  Thrace  and 
welcomed  you  as  guest,  you,  whose  estate  my  own 
raised  up,  to  whom  in  your  need  I  in  my  plenty  gave 
many  gifts,  and  would  have  given  many  still  ;  I  am 
she  who  rendered  to  you  the  broad,  broad  realms  of 
Lycurgus,  scarce  meet  to  be  ruled  in  a  woman's 
name,  where  stretches  icy  Rhodope  to  Haemus  with 
its  shades,  and  sacred  Hebrus  drives  his  headlong 
waters  forth — to  you,  on  whom  mid  omens  all  sinister 
my  maiden  innocence  was  first  bestowed,  and  whose 
guileful  hand  ungndled  my  chaste  zone  !  Tisiphone 
was  minister  at  that  bridal,  with  shrieks,"  and  the 
bird  that  shuns  the  light  chanted  her  mournful 
note  ;  Allecto  was  there,  with  little  serpents  coiled 
about  her  neck,  and  the  lights  that  waved  were 
torches  of  the  tomb  ! 

121  Heavy  in  soul,  none  the  less  do  I  tread  the 
rocks  and  the  thicket-covered  strand,  where'er  the 
sea  view  opens  broad  before  my  eyes.  Whether  bj 
dav  the  soil  is  loosed  by  warmth,  or  whether  con- 
stellations coldly  shine,  I  look  ever  forth  to  see 
what  wind  doth  sweep  the  straits ;  and  whatever 
sails  I  see  approaching  from  afar,  straightway  I  augur 
them   the  answer  to  my  prayers.      I   rush   forth   to 

29 


OVID 

in  freta  procurro,  vix  me  retinentibus  undis, 

mobile  qua  primas  porrigit  aequor  aquas, 
quo  magis  accedunt,  minus  et  minus  utilis  adsto  ; 

linquor  et  ancillis  exeipienda  cado.  130 

Est  sinus,  adductos  modice  falcatus  in  arcus  ; 

ultima  praerupta  cornua  mole  rigent. 
hinc  mihi  suppositas  inmittere  corpus  in  undas 

mens  fuit ;  et,  quoniam  fallere  pergis,  erit. 
ad  tua  me  fluctus  proiectam  litora  portent,  135 

occurramque  oculis  intumulata  tuis  ! 
duritia  ferrum  ut  supei'es  adamantaque  teque, 

"non  tibi  sic,"  dices,  "  Phylli,  sequendus  eram  !  " 
saepe  venenonnn  sitis  est  mihi ;  saepe  cruenta 

traiectam  gladio  morte  perire  iuvat.  140 

colla  quoque,  infidis  quia  se  nectenda  lacertis 

praebuerunt,  laqueis  inplicuisse  iuvat. 
stat  nece  matura  tenenim  pensare  pudorem. 

in  necis  electu  parva  futura  mora  est. 
Inscribere  meo  causa  invidiosa  sepulcro.  145. 

aut  hoc  aut  simili  cannine  notus  eris  : 

Phyllida  Demophoon  leto  dedit  hospes  amantem  ; 
ille  necis  causam  praebuit,  ipsa  manum. 


30 


THE  HEROIDES   IJ 

the  waters,  scarce  halted  by  the  waves  where  first 
the  sea  sends  in  its  mobile  tide.  The  nearer  the 
sails  advance,  the  less  and  less  the  strength  that 
bears  me  up ;  my  senses  leave  me,  and  I  fall,  to  be 
caught  up  by  my  handmaids'  arms. 

131  There  is  a  bay,  whose  bow-like  lines  are 
gently  curved  to  sickle  shape  ;  its  outmost  horns 
rise  rigid  and  in  rock-bound  mass.  To  throw  myself 
hence  into  the  waves  beneath  has  been  my  mind ; 
and,  since  you  still  pursue  your  faithless  course,  so 
shall  it  be.  Let  the  waves  bear  me  away,  and  cast 
me  up  on  your  shores,  and  let  me  meet  your  eyes 
untombed  !  Though  in  hardness  you  be  more  than 
steel,  than  adamant,  than  your  very  self,  you  shall 
say  :  "  Not  so,  Phyllis,  should  I  have  been  followed 
by  thee  !"  Oft  do  J  long  for  poison;  oft  with  the 
sword  would  I  gladly  pierce  my  heart  and  pour 
forth  my  blood  in  death.  My  neck,  too,  because 
once  offered  to  the  embrace  of  your  false  arms,  I 
could  gladly  ensnare  in  the  noose.  My  heart  is 
fixed  to  die  before  my  time,  and  thus  make  amends 
to  tender  purity.  In  the  choosing  of  my  death  there 
shall  be  but  small  delay. 

145  On  my  tomb  shall  you  be  inscribed  the  hate- 
ful cause  of  my  death.  By  this,  or  by  some  similar 
verse,  shall  you  be  known  : 

DEMOPHOON    'TWAS    SENT    PHYLLIS    TO    HER    DOOM  J 
HER    GUEST    WAS    HE,    SHE    LOVED    HIM    WELL. 

HE     WAS     THE      CAUSE     THAT     BROUGHT    HER     DEATH      TO 
PASS  ; 
HER    OWN    THE    HAND    BY    WHICH    SHE    FELL. 


31 


OVID 

III 
Briseis    Achilli 

Quam  legis,  a  rapta  Briseide  littera  venit, 

vix  bene  barbarica  Graeca  notata  manu. 
quaseumque  adspicies,  laerimae  fecere  lituras  ; 

sed  tamen  et  laerimae  pondera  vocis  habent. 
Si  mihi  pauca  queri  de  te  dominoque  viroque  5 

fas  est,  de  domino  pauca  viroque  querar. 
non,  ego  poscenti  quod  sum  cito  tradita  regi, 

culpa  tua  est — quamvis  haec  quoque  culpa  tua  est ; 
nam  simul  Eurybates  me  Talthybiusque  vocarunt, 

Eurybati  data  sum  Talthybioque  comes.  10 

alter  in  alterius  iactantes  lumina  vultum 

quaerebant  taciti,  noster  ubi  esset  amor, 
differri  potui ;  poenae  mora  grata  fuisset. 

ei  mihi  !  discedens  oscula  nulla  dedi  ; 
at  lacrimas  sine  fine  dedi  rupique  capillos —  15 

infelix  iterum  sum  mihi  visa  capi  ! 
Saepe  ego  decepto  volui  custode  reverti, 

sed,  me  qui  timidam  prenderet,1  hostis  erat. 
si  progressa  forem,  caperer  ne  nocte  timebam, 

quamlibet  ad  Priami  munus  itura  nurum.  20 

Sed  data  sim,  quia  danda  fui — tot  noctibus  absum 

nee  repetor ;  cessas,  iraque  lenta  tua  est. 
1  redderet  Ehw. 

a  Briseis  was  a  captive  from  Lyrnesus,  in  Mysia.  Iliad  IX 
is  the  basis  of  this  letter. 

b  Agamemnon  forced  Achilles  to  give  np  Briseis.  Achilles 
having  refused  to  aid  the  Greeks,  Agamemnon  sent  an  embassy 
to  him,  but  the  offended  warrior  scorned  his  advances. 

32 


THE    HEROIDES    III 

III 
Briseis  to  Achilles 

From  stolen  Briseis  is  the  writing  you  read,  scarce 
charactered  in  Greek  by  her  barbarian  hand." 
Whatever  blots  you  shall  see,  her  tears  have  made  ;  but 
tears,  too,  have  none  the  less  the  weight  of  words. 

5  If  'tis  right  for  me  to  utter  brief  complaint 
of  you,  my  master  and  my  beloved,  of  you,  my 
master  and  my  beloved,  will  I  utter  brief  complaint. 
That  I  was  all  too  quickly  delivered  over  to  the 
king  at  his  demand  is  not  your  fault — yet  this, 
too,  is  your  fault ;  for  as  soon  as  Eurybates  and 
Talthybius  came  to  ask  for  me,  to  Eurybates  was  I 
given  over,  and  to  Talthybius,  to  go  with  them.'' 
Each,  casting  eyes  into  the  face  of  other,  inquired 
in  silence  where  now  was  the  love  between  us.  My 
going  might  have  been  deferred  ;  a  stay  of  my 
pain  would  have  eased  my  heart.  All  me  !  I  had  to 
go,  and  with  no  farewell  kiss  ;  but  tears  without 
end  I  shed,  and  rent  my  hair — miserable  me,  I 
seemed  a  second  time  to  suffer  the  captive's  fate  ! 

17  Oft  have  I  wished  to  elude  my  guards  and 
return  to  you  ;  but.  the  enemy  was  there,  to  seize 
upon  a  timid  girl.  Should  I  have  gone  far,  I  feared 
I  should  be  taken  in  the  night,  and  delivered  over 
a  gift  to  some  one  of  the  ladies  of  Priam's  sons. 

21  But  grant  I  was  given  up  because  I  must  be 
given — yet  all  these  nights  I  am  absent  from  your 
side,  and  not  demanded    back  ;  you    delay,  and  your 

33 


OVID 

ipse  Menoetiades  turn,  cum  tradebar,  in  aurem 

"quid  fles  ?  hie  parvo  tempore,"  dixit,  "eris.'' 
Nee  repetisse  parum;  pugnas,  ne  reddar,  Achille!    25 

i  nunc  et  cupidi  nomen  amantis  habe  ! 
venerunt  ad  te  Telamone  et  Amyntore  nati — ■ 

ille  gradu  propior  sanguinis,  ille  comes — 
Laertaque  satus,  per  quos  comitata  redirem. 

auxerunt  blandas  grandia  dona  preces  :  30 

viginti  fulvos  operoso  ex  aere  lebetas, 

et  tripodas  septem  pond  ere  et  arte  pares ; 
addita  sunt  illis  auri  bis  quinque  talenta, 

bis  sex  adsueti  vincere  semper  equi, 
quodque  super\racuum  est,  forma  praestante  puellae  35 

Lesbides,  eversa  corpora  capta  domo, 
cumque  tot  his — sed  non   opus  est  tibi  coniuge — 
coniunx 

ex  Agamemnoniis  una  puella  tribus. 
si  tibi  ab  Atride  pretio  redimenda  fuissem, 

quae  dare  debueras,  accipere  ilia  negas  !  40 

qua  merui  culpa  fieri  tibi  vilis,  Achille  ? 

quo  levis  a  nobis  tarn  cito  fugit  amor  ? 
An  miseros  tristis  fortuna  tenaciter  urget, 

nee  venit  inceptis  mollior  hora  malis  ? 1 
diruta  Marte  tuo  Lyrnesia  moenia  vidi —  45 

et  fueram  patriae  pars  ego  magna  meae  ; 
vidi  consortes  pariter  generisque  necisque 

tres  cecidisse — tribus,  quae  mini,  mater  erat ; 
vidi,  quantus  erat,  fusum  tellure  cruenta 

pectora  iactantem  sanguinolenta  virum.  50 

1  malis  Lehrs  Hous.  Plan.:  nieis  MSS. 
"  Patroclud. 
34 


THE    HEROIDES    III 

anger  is  slow.  Menoetius'  son  himself/'  at  the  time 
I  was  delivered  up,  whispered  into  my  ear :  "  Why 
do  you  weep  ?  But  a  short  time,"  he  said,  "  will  you 
be  here." 

a5  And  not  to  have  claimed  me  back  is  but  a 
slight  thing  ;  you  even  oppose  my  being  restored, 
Achilles.  Go  now,  deserve  the  name  of  an  eager 
lover !  There  came  to  you  the  sons  of  Amyntor 
and  Telamon — the  one  near  in  degree  of  blood, 
the  other  a  comrade — and  Laertes'  son  ;  in  company 
of  these  I  was  to  return.  Rich  presents  lent 
weight  to  their  wheedling  prayers  :  twenty  ruddy 
vessels  of  wrought  bronze,  and  tripods  seven,  equal 
in  weight  and  workmanship  ;  added  to  these, 
of  gold  twice  five  talents,  twice  six  coursers  ever 
wont  to  win,  and — what  there  was  no  need  of! 
— Lesbian  girls  surpassing  fair,  maids  taken  when 
their  home  was  overthrown ;  and  with  all  these 
— though  of  a  bride  you  have  no  need — as  bride, 
one  of  the  daughters  three  of  Agamemnon.  What 
you  must  have  given  had  you  had  to  buy  me  back 
from  Atrides  with  a  price,  that  you  refuse  as  a  gift ! 
What  have  I  done  that  I  am  held  thus  cheap  by  you, 
Achilles  ?  Whither  has  fled  your  light  love  so 
quickly  from  me  ? 

43  Or  can  it  be  that  a  gloomy  fortune  still  weighs 
the  wretched  down,  and  a  gentler  hour  comes  not 
when  woes  have  once  begun  ?  The  walls  of  Lyriiesus 
I  have  seen  laid  in  ruin  by  your  soldier  band — I, 
who  myself  had  been  great  part  of  my  father's  land  ; 
I  have  seen  fall  three  who  were  partners  alike  in 
birth  and  in  death — and  the  three  had  the  mother 
who  was  mine  ;  I  have  seen  my  wedded  lord  stretched 
all  his  length  upon  the  gory  ground,  heaving  in  agony 

35 
i)   •_' 


OVID 

tot  tamen  amissis  te  conpensavimus  unum  ; 

tu  dominus,  tu  vir,  tu  mihi  frater  eras, 
tu  mihi,  iuratus  per  numina  matris  aquosae, 

utile  dicebas  ipse  fuisse  capi — 
scilicet  ut,  quamvis  veniam  dotata,  repellas  55 

et  mecum  fugias  quae  tibi  dantur  opes  ! 
quin  etiam  fama  est,  cum  erastina  fulserit  Eos, 

te  dare  nubiferis  lintea  velle  Notis. 
Quod  scelus  ut  pavidas  miserae  mihi  contigit  aures, 

sanguinis  atque  animi  pectus  inane  fuit.  60 

ibis  et — o  miseram  ! — cui  me,  violente,1  relinquis  ? 

quis  mihi  desertae  mite  levamen  erit  ? 
devorer  ante,  precor,  subito  telluris  hiatu 

aut  rutilo  missi  fulminis  igne  cremer, 
quam  sine  me  Phthiis  canescant  aequora  remis,       65 

et  videam  puppes  ire  relicta  tuas  ! 
si  tibi  iam  reditusque  placent  patriique  Penates, 

non  ego  sum  classi  sarcina  magna  tuae. 
victorem  captiva  sequar,  non  nupta  maritum-; 

est  mihi,  quae  lanas  molliat,  apta  manus.  70 

inter  Achaeiadas  longe  pulcherrima  matres 

in  thalamos  coniunx  ibit  eatque  tuos, 
digna  nurus  socero,  lovis  Aeginaeque  nepote, 

cui  que  senex  Nereus  prosocer  esse  velit. 
nos  humiles  famulaeque  tuae  data  pensa  trahemus,  75 

et  minuent  plenos  stamina  nostra  colos. 

1  tu  lente  Bent. 


"  Peleus,  son  of  Aeacus,  son  of  Jupiter  and  Aegina. 
b  Thetis,  mother  of  Achilles,  was  daughter  of  Nereus 


36 


HEROIDES    III 

his  bloody  breast.  For  so  many  lost  to  me  1  still 
had  only  you  in  recompense  ;  you  were  my  master, 
you  my  husband,  you  my  brother.  You  swore  to 
me  by  the  godhead  of  your  seaborn  mother,  and 
yourself  said  that  my  captive's  lot  was  gain — yes,  that 
though  I  come  to  you  with  dowry,  you  may  thrust 
me  back,  scorning  with  me  the  wealth  that  is 
tendered  you  !  Nay,  'tis  even  said  that  when  to- 
morrow's dawn  shall  have  shone  forth,  you  mean  to 
unfurl  your  linen  sails  to  the  cloud-bringing  winds  of 
the  south. 

59  When  the  monstrous  tale  fell  on  my  wretched 
and  terror-stricken  ears,  the  blood  went  from  my 
breast,  and  with  it  my  senses  fled.  You  are  going — 
ah  me,  wretched  ! — and  to  whom  do  you  leave  me,  O 
hardened  of  heart  ?  Who  shall  afford  me  gentle 
solace,  left  behind?  May  I  be  swallowed  up,  1  pray, 
in  sudden  yawning  of  the  earth,  or  consumed  by 
the  ruddy  fire  of  cai*eering  thunderbolt,  e'er  that, 
without  me,  the  seas  foam  white  with  Phthian 
oars,  and  I  am  left  behind  to  see  your  ships  fart- 
forth  !  If  it  please  you  now  to  return  to  the  hearth 
of  your  fathers,  I  am  no  great  burden  to  your 
fleet.  As  captive  let  me  follow  my  captor,  not  as 
wife  my  wedded  lord  ;  I  have  a  hand  well  skilled 
to  dress  the  wool.  The  most  beauteous  by  far 
among  the  women  of  Achaea  will  come  to  the 
marriage-chamber  as  your  bride — and  may  she  come  ! 
— a  bride  worthy  of  her  lord's  father."  the  grandchild 
of  Jove  and  Aegina,  and  one  whom  ancient  Nereus 
would  welcome  as  his  grandson's  bride.6  As  for 
me,  I  shall  be  a  lowly  slave  of  yours  and  spin  off  the 
given  task,  and  the  full  distaff  shall  grow  slender  at 
the  drawing  of  my  threads.      Only  let  not   your  lady 

37 


OVID 

exagitet  ne  me  tantum  tua,  deprecor,  uxor — 

quae  mihi  nescio  quo  non  erit  aequa  niodo — 
neve  meos  coram  seindi  patiare  capillos 

et  leviter  dieas  :  "  haec  quoque  nostra  fuit."  80 
vel  patiare  licet,  dum  ne  contempta  relinquar — 

hie  mihi  vae  !  miserae  concutit  ossa  metus. 
Quid  tamen  expectas  ?     Agamemnona  paenitet  irae, 

et  iacet  ante  tuos  Graecia  maesta  pedes, 
vince  animos  iramque  tuam,  qui  cetera  vincis  !  85 

quid  lacerat  Danaas  inpiger  Hector  opes  ? 
arma  cape,  Aeacide,  sed  me  tamen  ante  recepta, 

et  preme  turbatos  Marte  favente  viros  ! 
propter  me  mota  est,  propter  me  desinat  ira, 

simque  ego  tristitiae  causa  modusque  tuae.  90 

nee  tibi  turpe  puta  precibus  succumbere  nostris  ; 

coniugis  Oenides  versus  in  arma  prece  est. 
res  audita  mihi,  nota  est  tibi.      fratribus  orba 

devovit  nati  spemque  caputque  parens, 
bellum  erat ;  ille  ferox  positis  secessit  ab  armis       95 

et  pati'iae  rigida  mente  negavit  opem. 
sola  virum  coniunx  flexit.      felicior  ilia ! 

at  mea  pro l  nullo  pondere  verba  cadunt. 
nee  tamen  indignor  nee  me  pro  coniuge  gessi 

saepius  in  domini  serva  vocata  torum.  100 

me  quaedam,  memini,  dominam  captiva  vocabat. 

"  servitio,"  dixi,  "  nominis  addis  onus." 
Per  tamen  ossa  viri  subito  male  tecta  sepulero, 

semper  iudiciis  ossa  verenda  meis  ; 
1  pro  !  Madv. 

a  The  story  of  Meleager,  who  slew  his  mother  Althea's 
brother,  and  was  cursed  by  her.  Refusing  to  aid  his  country 
in  the  war  that  followed  the  killing  of  the  Calydonian  boar, 
he  was  turned  from  his  purpose  by  his  wife  Cleopatra. 

38 


THE    HEROIDES    111 

be  harsh  with  me,  I  pray — for  in  some  way  I  feel 
she  will  not  be  kino! — and  suffer  her  not  to  tear  my 
hair  before  your  eyes,  while  you  lightly  say  of  me  : 
"She,  too,  once  was  mine."  Or,  suffer  it  even  so, 
if  only  I  am  not  despised  and  left  behind — this  is 
the  fear,  ah  woe  is  wretched  me,  that  shakes  my 
very  bones ! 

83  What  do  you  still  await  ?  Agamemnon  repents 
him  of  his  wrath,  and  Greece  lies  prostrate  in 
affliction  at  your  feet.  Subdue  your  own  angry 
spirit,  you  who  subdue  all  else  !  Why  does  eager 
Hector  still  harry  the  Danaan  lines?  Seize  up  your 
armour,  O  child  of  Aeacus — yet  take  me  back  first 
— and  with  the  favour  of  Mars  rout  and  overwhelm 
their  ranks.  Forme  your  anger  was  stirred,  through 
me  let  it  be  allayed  ;  and  let  me  be  both  the  cause 
and  the  measure  of  your  gloomy  wrath.  Nor  think 
it  unseemly  for  you  to  yield  to  prayer  of  mine  ;  by 
the  prayer  of  his  wedded  wife  was  the  son  of  Oeneus 
roused  to  arms."  'Tis  only  a  tale  to  me,  but  to  you 
well  known.  Reft  of  her  brothers,  a  mother  cursed 
the  hope  and  head  of  her  son.  There  was  war ; 
in  fierce  mood  he  laid  down  his  arms  and  stood 
apart, and  with  unbending  purpose  refused  his  country 
aid.  Only  the  wife  availed  to  bend  her  husband. 
The  happier  she  ! — for  my  words  have  no  weight, 
and  fall  for  naught.  And  yet  I  am  not  angered,  nor 
have  I  borne  myself  as  wife  because  oft  summoned, 
a  slave,  to  share  my  master's  bed.  Some  captive 
woman  once,  I  mind  me,  called  me  mistress.  "To 
slavery,"  I  replied.  "  you  add  a  burden  in  that 
name." 

103  None  the  less,  by  the  bones  of  my  wedded  lord. 
ill    covered    in    hasty   sepulture      bones   ever    to    be 

39 


OVID 

perque  trium  foi'tes  animas,  mea  numina,  fratrum,  105 

qui  bene  pro  patria  cum  patriaque  iacent ; 
perque  tuum  nostrumque  caput,  quae  iunximus  una, 

perque  tuos  enses,  cognita  tela  meis — 
nulla  Mycenaeum  sociasse  cubilia  inecum 

iuro  ;  fallentem  deseruisse  velis  !  110 

si  tibi  nunc  dicam  :  "  fortissirne,  tu  quoque  iura 

nulla  tibi  sine  me  gaudia  facta  !  "  neges. 
at  Danai  maerere  putant — tibi  plectra  moventur, 

te  tenet  in  tepido  mollis  arnica  sinu  ! 
et  quisquam1  quaerit,  quare  pugnare  recuses?        115 

pugna  nocet,  citharae  noxque  Venusque  iuvant. 
tutius  est  iacuisse  toro,  tenuisse  puellarn, 

Threiciam  digitis  inerepuisse  lyram, 
quam  manibus  clipeos  et  acutae  cuspidis  hastam, 

et  galeam  pressa  sustinuisse  coma.  120 

Sed  tibi  pro  tutis  insignia  facta  placebant, 

partaque  bellando  gloria  dulcis  erat. 
an  tantum  dum  me  caperes,  fera  bella  probabas, 

cumque  mea  patria  laus  tua  victa  iacet  ? 
di  melius  !  validoque,  precor,  vibrata  lacerto  1 25 

transeat  Hectoreum  Pelias  hasta  latus  ! 
mittite  me,  Danai  !  dominum  legata  rogabo 

multaque  mandatis  oscula  mixta  feram. 
plus  ego  quam  Phoenix,  plus  quam  facundus  Ulixes, 

plus  ego  quam  Teucri,  credite,  frater  again.        130 

1  So  O :    si  quisquam  (quisquis  ?)  P :  et  si  quis  w  :  et  quis- 
(jitis  y  :  si  quis  nunc  quaerat  or  si  quis  forte  roget  Bent. 

a  Because  Orpheus  was  a  Thracian. 

*  Ajax.     The  three  were  the  delegation  sent  by  Agamem- 
non to  offer  to  make  amends. 

40 


THE    HEROIDES    III 

held  sacred  in  my  eyes ;  and  by  the  brave  souls  of 
my  three  brothers,  to  me  now  spirits  divine,  who 
died  well  for  their  country,  and  lie  well  with  it 
in  death  ;  and  by  your  head  and  mine,  which  we 
have  laid  each  to  each  ;  and  by  your  sword,  weapon 
well  known  to  my  kin — I  swear  that  the  Mycenaean 
has  shared  no  couch  with  me ;  if  I  prove  false5 
wish  never  to  see  me  more  !  If  now  I  should  say 
to  you  :  "  Most  valiant  one,  do  you  swear  also  that 
you  have  tasted  no  joys  apart  from  me ! "  you 
would  refuse.  Yes,  the  Danai  think  you  are 
mourning  for  me — but  you  are  wielding  the  plectrum, 
and  a  tender  mistress  holds  you  in  her  warm 
embrace  !  And  does  anyone  ask  wherefore  do  you 
refuse  to  fight  ?  Because  the  fight  brings  danger ; 
while  the  zither,  and  night,  and  Venus,  bring 
delight.  Safer  is  it  to  lie  on  the  couch,  to  clasp  a 
sweetheart  in  your  arms,  to  tinkle  with  your  fingers 
the  Thracian  a  lyre,  than  to  take  in  hand  the  shield, 
and  the  spear  with  sharpened  point,  and  to  sustain 
upon  your  locks  the  helmet's  weight. 

121  Once  the  deed  of  renown,  rather  than  safety, 
was  your  pleasure,  and  glory  won  in  warring  was 
sweet  to  you.  Or  can  it  be  that  you  favoured  fierce 
war  only  till  you  could  make  me  captive,  and  that  your 
praise  lies  dead,  o'ercome  together  with  my  native 
land  ?  Ye  gods  forfend  !  and  may  the  spear  of 
Pelion  go  quivering  from  your  strong  arm  to  pierce 
the  side  of  Hector  !  Send  me,  O  Danai  !  I 
will  be  ambassadress  and  supplicate  my  lord,  and 
carry  many  kisses  mingled  with  my  message.  I  shall 
achieve  more  than  Phoenix,  believe  me,  more  than 
eloquent  Ulysses,  more  than   Tcucer's  brother!''     It 

4" 


OVID 

est  aliquid,  collum  solitis  tetigisse  lacertis, 

praesentisque  oculos  admonuisse  sinu.1 
sis  licet  inmitis  matrisque  ferocior  undis, 

ut  taceam,  lacrimis  conminuere  meis. 
Nunc   quoque — sic    omnes    Peleus    pater   inpleat 

armos,  135 

sic  eat  auspiciis  Pyrrhus  ad  arma  tuis  !  — 
respice  sollicitam  Briseida,  fortis  Achille, 

nee  miseram  lenta  ferreus  ure  mora  ! 
autj  si  versus  amor  tuus  est  in  taedia  nostri, 

quam  sine  te  cogis  vivere,  coge  mori !  1 40 

utque  facisj  coges.     abiit  corpusque  colorque; 

sustinet  hoc  animae  spes  tamen  una  tui. 
qua  si  destituor,  repetam  fratresque  virumque — 

nee  tibi  magnificum  femina  iussa  mori. 
cur  autem  iubeas  ?     stricto  pete  corpora  ferro  ;       145 

est  mihi  qui  fosso  pectore  sanguis  eat. 
me  petat  ille  tuus,  qui,  si  dea  passa  fuisset, 

ensis  in  Atridae  pectus  iturus  erat  ! 
A,  potius  serves  nostram,  tua  munera,  vitam ! 

quod  dederas  hosti  victor,  arnica  rogo.  150 

perdere  quos  melius  possis,  Neptunia  praebent 

Pergama  ;  materiam  caedis  ab  hoste  pete, 
me  modo,  sive  paras  inpellere  remige  classem, 

sive  manes,  domini  iure  venire  iube  ! 
1  sinu  0  Ew,  sinus  s  :  suis  P. 
42 


THE    HEROIDES    III 

will  avail  something  to  have  touched  your  neck  with 
the  accustomed  arms,  to  have  seen  you  and  stirred 
your  recollection  by  the  sight  of  my  bosom.  Though 
you  be  cruel,  though  more  savage  than  your  mother's 
waves,  even  should  I  keep  silence  you  will  be  broken 
by  my  tears. 

135  Even  now — so  may  Peleus  your  father  fill  out 
his  tale  of  years,  so  may  Pyrrhus  take  up  arms  with 
fortune  as  good  as  yours  ! — have  regard  for  anxious 
Briseis,  brave  Achilles,  and  do  not  hard-heartedly 
torment  a  wretched  maid  with  long  drawn  out 
delay  !  Or,  if  your  love  for  me  has  turned  to 
weariness,  compel  the  death  of  her  whom  you  compel 
to  live  without  you  !  And,  as  you  now  are  doing, 
you  will  compel  it.  Gone  is  my  flesh,  and  gone  my 
colour ;  what  spirit  I  still  have  is  but  sustained  by 
hope  in  you.  If  I  am  left  by  that,  I  shall  go  to 
rejoin  my  brothers  and  my  husband — and  'twill  be 
no  boast  for  you  to  have  bid  a  woman  die.  And 
more,  why  should  you  bid  me  die  ?  Draw  the  steel 
and  plunge  it  in  my  body  ;  I  have  blood  to  flow 
when  once  my  breast  is  pierced.  Let  me  be  stricken 
with  that  sword  of  yours,  which,  had  the  goddess 
not  said  nay,  would  have  made  its  way  into  the 
heart  of  Atreus'  son  ! 

149  Ah,  rather  save  my  life,  the  gift  you  gave  me  ! 
What  you  gave,  when  victor,  to  me  your  foe,  I  ask 
now  from  you  as  your  friend.  Those  whom  'twere 
better  you  destroyed,  Neptunian  Pergamum  affords  ; 
for  matter  for  your  sword,  go  seek  the  foe.  Only, 
whether  you  make  ready  to  speed  on  with  the  oar 
your  ships,  or  whether  you  remain,  O,  by  your  right 
as  master,  bid  me  come  ! 


43 


OVID 

IV 

Phaedra  Hippolyto 

Quam  nisi  tu  dederis,  caritura  est  ipsa,  salutem 

mittit  Amazonio  Cressa  puella  viro. 
perlege,  quodcumque  est — quid  epistula  lecta  noeebit  ? 

te  quoque  in  hac  aliquid  quod  iuvet  esse  potest ; 
his  arcana  notis  terra  pelagoque  feruntur.  5 

inspicit  aeceptas  hostis  ab  hoste  notas. 
Ter  tecum  conata  loqui  ter  inutilis  haesit 

lingua,  ter  in  primo  destitit  ore  sonus. 
qua  licet  et  sequitur,  pudor  est  miscendus  amori  ; 

dicere  quae  puduit,  scribere  iussit  amor.  10 

quidquid  Amor  iussit,  non  est  contemnere  tutum  ; 

regnat  et  in  dominos  ius  habet  ille  deos. 
ille  mihi  primo  dubitanti  scribere  dixit : 

"scribe  !  dabit  victas  ferreus  ille  manus." 
adsit  et,  ut  nostras  avido  fovet  igne  medullas,  15 

figat  sic  animos  in  mea  vota  tuos  ! 
Non  ego  nequitia  socialia  foedera  nimpam  ; 

fama — velim  quaeras — crimine  nostra  vacat. 
venit  amor  gravius,  quo  serius — urimur  intus  ; 

urimur,  et  caecum  pectora  vulnus  habent.  20 

44 


THE    HEROIDES    IV 

IV 

Phaedra  to   Hippoi.vtus 

With  wishes  for  the  welfare  which  she  herself, 
unless  you  give  it  hei-,  will  ever  lack,  the  Cretan 
maid  greets  the  hero  whose  mother  was  an  Amazon. 
Read  to  the  end,  whatever  is  here  contained — what 
shall  reading  of  a  letter  harm  ?  In  this  one,  too, 
there  may  be  something  to  pleasure  you  ;  in  these 
characters  of  mine,  secrets  are  borne  over  land  and 
sea.     Even  foe  looks  into  missive  writ  by  foe. 

7  Thrice  making  trial  of  speech  with  you,  thrice 
hath  my  tongue  vainly  stopped,  thrice  the  sound 
failed  at  first  threshold  of  my  lips.  Wherever 
modesty  may  attend  on  love,  love  should  not  lack  in 
it ;  with  me,  what  modesty  forbade  to  say,  love 
has  commanded  me  to  write.  Whatever  Love  com- 
mands, it  is  not  safe  to  hold  for  naught  ;  his 
throne  and  law  are  over  even  the  gods  who  are 
lords  of  all.  'Twas  he  who  spoke  to  me  when  first  I 
doubted  if  to  write  or  no  :  "  Write  ;  the  iron- 
hearted  one  will  yield  his  hand."  Let  him  aid  me, 
then,  and,  just  as  he  heats  my  marrow  with  his 
avid  flame,  so  may  he  transfix  your  heart  that  it 
yield  to  my  prayers  ! 

17  It  will  not  be  through  wanton  baseness  that  I 
shall  break  my  marriage-bond  ;  my  name — and  you 
may  ask — is  free  from  all  reproach.  Love  has  come 
to  me,  the  deeper  for  its  coming  late — 1  am  binning 
with  love  within  ;  I  am  burning,  and  my  breast  lias 
an  unseen  wound.      As  the  first  bearing  of  the  yoke 

45 


OVID 

scilicet  ut  teneros  laedunt  iuga  prima  iuvencos, 

frenaque  vix  patitur  de  grege  captus  equus, 
sic  male  vixque  subit  primos  rude  pectus  amores, 

sarcinaque  haec  animo  non  sedet  apta  meo. 
ars  fit,  ubi  a  teneris  crimen  condiscitur  annis  ;  25 

quae  *  venit  exacto  tempore,  peius  amat. 
tu  nova  servatae  carpes  libamina  famae, 

et  pariter  nostrum  net  uterque  nocens. 
est  aliquid,  plenis  pomaria  carpere  ramis, 

et  tenui  primam  delegere  ungue  rosam.  30 

si  tamen  ille  prior,  quo  me  sine  crimine  gessi, 

candor  ab  insolita  labe  notandus  erat, 
at  bene  successit,  digno  quod  adurimur  igni  ; 

peius  adulterio  turpis  adulter  obest. 
si  mihi  concedat  Iuno  fratremque  virumque,  35 

Hippolytum  videor  praepositura  Iovi! 
lam  quoque — vix  credes — ignotas  mutor  in  artes  ; 

est  mihi  per  saevas  impetus  ire  feras. 
iam  mihi  prima  dea  est  arcu  praesignis  adunco 

Delia  ;  iudicium  subsequor  ipsa  tuum.  40 

in  nemus  ire  libet  pressisque  in  retia  cervis 

hortari  celeris  per  iuga  summa  canes, 
aut  tremulum  excusso  iaculum  vibrare  lacerto, 

aut  in  graminea  ponere  corpus  humo. 
saepe  iuvat  versare  leves  in  pulvere  currus  45 

torquentem  frenis  ora  fugacis  equi ; 
nunc  feror,  ut  Bacchi  furiis  Eleleides  2  actae, 

3  quaeque  sub  Idaeo  tympana  colle  movent, 


cui  Rein.  Bent.         ~  Elelegides  P :  Eleides/ 
3  48-103  lost  from  P. 


46 


THE    HEROIDES    IV 

galls  the  tender  steer,  and  as  the  rein  is  scarce 
endured  by  the  colt  fresh  taken  from  the  drove,  so 
does  my  untried  heart  rebel,  and  scarce  submit  to 
the  first  restraints  of  love,  and  the  burden  I  undergo 
does  not  sit  well  upon  my  soul.  Love  grows  to  be 
but  an  art,  when  the  fault  is  well  learned  from 
tender  years  ;  she  who  yields  her  heart  when  the 
time  for  love  is  past,  has  a  fiercer  passion.  You 
will  reap  the  fresh  first-offerings  of  purity  long 
preserved,  and  both  of  us  will  be  equal  in  our  guilt. 
'Tis  something  to  pluck  fruit  from  the  orchard  with 
full-hanging  branch,  to  cull  with  delicate  nail  the 
first  rose.  If  nevertheless  the  white  and  blameless 
purity  in  which  I  have  lived  before  was  to  be  marked 
with  unwonted  stain,  at  least  the  fortune  is  kind 
that  buiTis  me  with  a  worthy  flame  ;  worse  than 
forbidden  love  is  a  lover  who  is  base.  Should 
Juno  yield  me  him  who  is  at  once  her  brother 
and  her  lord,  methinks  I  should  prefer  Hippolytus 
to  Jove. 

37  Now  too — you  will  scarce  believe  it — I  am 
changing  to  pursuits  I  did  not  know  ;  I  am  stirred 
to  go  among  wild  beasts.  The  goddess  first  for  me 
now  is  the  Delian,  known  above  all  for  her  curved 
bow;  it  is  your  choice  that  I  myself  now  follow. 
My  pleasure  leads  me  to  the  wood,  to  drive  the 
deer  into  the  net,  and  to  urge  on  the  fleet  hound 
over  the  highest  ridge,  or  with  arm  shot  forth  to  let 
fly  the  quivering  spear,  or  to  lay  my  body  upon  the 
grassy  ground.  Oft  do  I  delight  to  whirl  the  light 
car  in  the  dust  of  the  course,  twisting  with  the 
rein  the  mouth  of  the  flying  steed  ;  now  again 
I  am  borne  on,  like  (laughters  of  the  Bacchic  cry 
driven  by   the  frenzy  of  their  god,  and  those    who 

47 


OVID 

aut  quas  semideae  Dryades  Faunique  bicornes 

numine  contactas  attonnere  suo.  50 

namque  mihi  referunt,  cum  se  furor  ille  remisit, 

omnia ;  me  tacitam  conscius  urit  amor. 
Forsitan  hunc  generis  fato  reddamus  amorem, 

et  Venus  ex  tota  gente  tributa  petat. 
luppiter  Europen — prima  est  ea  gentis  origo —       55 

dilexit,  tauro  dissimulante  deum. 
Pasiphae  mater,  decepto  subdita  tauro, 

enixa  est  utero  crimen  onusque  suo. 
perfidus  Aegides,  ducentia  fila  secutus, 

curva  meae  fugit  teeta  sororis  ope.  60 

en,  ego  nunc,  ne  forte  parum  Minoia  credar, 

in  socias  leges  ultima  gentis  eo  ! 
hoc  quoque  fatale  est :  placuit  domus  una  duabus ; 

me  tua  forma  capit,  capta  parente  soror. 
Thesides  Theseusque  duas  rapuere  sorores —  65 

ponite  de  nostra  bina  tropaea  domo  ! 
Tempore  quo  nobis  inita  est  Cerealis  Eleusin, 

Gnosia  me  vellem  detinuisset  humus  ! 
tunc  mihi  praecipue,  nee  non  tamen  ante,  placebas  ; 

acer  in  extremis  ossibus  haesit  amor.  70 

Candida  vestis  erat,  praecincti  flore  capilli, 

flava  verecundus  tinxerat  ora  rubor, 
quemque  vocant  aliae  vultum  rigidumque  trucemque, 

pro  rigido  Phaedra  iudice  fortis  erat. 
sint  procul  a  nobis  iuvenes  ut  femina  compti ! —     75 

fine  coli  modico  forma  virilis  amat. 

"  The  votaries  of  Cybele,  Great  Mother  of  the  Gods. 

6  The  gods  caused  the  animal  to  see  in  her  his  own  kind. 

c  The  story  of  the  Minotaur  and  the  Labyrinth. 

48 


THE    HEROIDES    IV 

shake  the  timhrel  at  the  foot  of  Ida's  ridge/*  or 
those  whom  Dryad  creatures  half-divine  and  Fauns 
two-homed  have  touched  with  their  own  spirit 
and  driven  distraught.  For  they  tell  me  of  all  these 
things  when  that  madness  of  mine  has  passed 
away ;  and  I  keep  silence,  conscious  'tis  love  that 
tortures  me. 

53  It  may  be  this  love  is  a  debt  I  am  paying, 
due  to  the  destiny  of  my  line,  and  that  Venus  is 
exacting  tribute  of  me  for  all  my  race.  Europa — 
this  is  the  first  beginning  of  our  line — was  loved 
of  Jove  ;  a  bull's  form  disguised  the  god.  Pasiphae 
my  mother,  victim  of  the  deluded  bull,*  brought  forth 
in  travail  her  reproach  and  burden.  The  faithless 
son  of  Aegeus  followed  the  guiding  thread,  and 
escaped  from  the  winding  house  through  the  aid  my 
sister  gave."  Behold,  now  I,  lest  I  be  thought 
too  little  a  child  of  Minos'  line,  am  the  latest  of 
my  stock  to  come  under  the  law  that  ndes  us  all ! 
This,  too,  is  fateful,  that  one  house  has  won  us  both  ; 
your  beauty  has  captured  my  heart,  my  sister's 
heart  was  captured  bv  your  father.  Theseus'  son 
and  Theseus  have  been  the  undoing  of  sisters 
twain — rear  ye  a  double  trophy  at  our  house's  fall  ! 

67  That  time  I  went  to  Eleusis,  the  city  of  Ceres, 
would  that  the  Gnosian  land  had  held  me  hack  !  It 
was  then  you  pleased  me  most,  and  yet  you  had 
pleased  before  ;  piercing  love  lodged  in  my  deepest 
bones.  Shining  white  was  your  raiment,  hound  round 
with  flowers  your  locks,  the  blush  of  modesty  had 
tinged  your  sun-browned  cheeks,  and,  what  others 
call  a  countenance  hard  and  stern,  in  Phaedra's  eve 
was  strong  instead  of  hard.  Away  from  me  with  your 
young  men  arrayed   like  women  ! — beauty  in  a  man 

49 


OVID 

te  tuus  iste  rigor  positique  sine  arte  capilli 

et  levis  egregio  pulvis  in  ore  decet. 
sive  ferocis  equi  luctantia  colla  recurvas, 

exiguo  flexos  miror  in  orbe  pedes ;  80 

seu  lentmn  valido  torques  hastile  lacerto, 

ora  ferox  in  se  versa  lacei'tus  habet, 
sive  tenes  lato  venabula  cornea  ferro. 

denique  nostra  iuvat x  luniina,  quidquid  agis. 
Tu  modo  duritiam  silvis  depone  iugosis ;  85 

non  sum  militia  2  digna  perire  tua. 
quid  iuvat  incinctae  studia  exercere  Dianae, 

et  Veneri  numeros  eripuisse  suos  ? 
quod  caret  alterna  requie,  durabile  non  est ; 

baec  reparat  vires  fessaque  membra  novat.  90 

arcus — et  anna  tuae  tibi  sunt  imitanda  Dianae — 

si  numquam  cesses  tendere,  mollis  erit. 
clarus  erat  silvis  Cephalus,  multaeque  per  herbas 

conciderant  illo  percutiente  ferae  ; 
nee  tamen  Aurorae  male  se  praebebat  amandum.    95 

ibat  ad  hunc  sapiens  a  sene  diva  viro. 
saepe  sub  ilicibus  Venerem  Cinyraque  creatum 

sustinuit  positos  quaelibet  herba  duos, 
arsit  et  Oenides  in  Maenalia  Atalanta  ; 

ilia  ferae  spolium  pignus  amoris  habet.  100 

nos  quoque  iam  primum  turba  numeremur  in  ista  ! 

si  Venerem  tollas,  rustica  silva  tua  est. 
ipsa  comes  veniam,  nee  me  latebrosa  movebunt 

saxa  neque  obliquo  dente  timendus  aper. 

1  iuvat  E  ia  Plan.  :  iuvas  <*>  vulg. 

2  materia  MSS.  :  militia  Pa. :  materias  digna  vigore  tuo 
Bent.:  duritia  Faber. 

a  Tithonus.  *  Adonis. 

SO 


THE    HEROIDES    IV 

would  fain  be  striven  for  in  measure.  That  hardness 
of  feature  suits  )rou  well,  those  loeks  that  fall  without 
art,  and  the  light  dust  upon  your  handsome  face. 
Whether  you  draw  rein  and  curb  the  resisting  neck 
of  your  spirited  steed,  I  look  with  wonder  at  your 
turning  his  feet  in  circle  so  slight ;  whether  with 
strong  arm  you  hurl  the  pliant  shaft,  your  gallant 
arm  draws  my  regard  upon  itself,  or  whether  you 
grasp  the  broad-headed  cornel  hunting-spear.  To  say 
no  more,  my  eyes  delight  in  whatsoe'er  you  do. 

s5  Do  you  only  lay  aside  your  hardness  upon  the 
forest  ridges  ;  I  am  no  fit  spoil  for  your  campaign. 
What  use  to  you  to  practise  the  ways  of  girded 
Diana,  and  to  have  stolen  from  Venus  her  own 
due  ?  That  which  lacks  its  alternations  of  repose 
will  not  endure ;  this  is  what  repairs  the  strength 
and  renews  the  wearied  limbs.  The  bow — and  you 
should  imitate  the  weapons  of  your  Diana — if  you 
never  cease  to  bend  it,  will  grow  slack.  Renowned 
in  the  forest  was  Cephalus,  and  many  were  the  wild 
beasts  that  had  fallen  on  the  sod  at  the  piercing 
of  his  stroke  ;  yet  he  did  not  ill  in  yielding  himself 
to  Aurora's  love.  Oft  did  the  goddess  sagely  go  to 
him,  leaving  her  aged  spouse."  Many  a  time  beneath 
the  ilex  did  Venus  and  he''  that  was  sprung  of  Cinyras 
recline,  pressing  some  chance  grassy  spot.  The  son 
of  Oeneus,  too,  took  fire  with  love  for  Maenalian 
Atalanta ;  she  has  the  spoil  of  the  wild  beast  as  the 
pledge  of  his  love.  •  Let  us,  too,  be  now  first 
numbered  in  that  company !  If  you  take  away  love, 
the  forest  is  but  a  rustic  place.  I  myself  will  come 
and  be  at  your  side,  and  neither  rocky  covert  shall 
make  me  fear,  nor  the  boar  dreadful  for  the  side- 
stroke  of  his  tusk. 

5' 


OVID 

Aequora  bina  suis  obpugnant  fluctibus  isthmon,     105 

et  tenuis  tellus  audit  utrumque  mare, 
hie  tecum  Ti*oezena  eolam,  Pittheia  regna ; 

iam  nunc  est  patria  gratior  ilia  mea. 
tempore  abest  aberitque  diu  Neptunius  heros  ; 

ilium  Pirithoi  detinet  ora  sui.  110 

praeposuit  Theseus — nisi  si 1  manifesta  negamus — 

Pirithoum  Phaedrae  Pirithoumque  tibi. 
sola  nee  haec  ad  nos  iniuria  venit  ab  illo  ; 

in  magnis  laesi  rebus  uterque  sumus. 
ossa  mei  fratris  clava  perfracta  trinodi  115 

sparsit  humi ;  soror  est  pi-aeda  relicta  feris. 
prima  securigeras  inter  virtute  puellas 

te  peperit,  nati  digna  vigore  parens  ; 
si  quaeras,  ubi  sit — Theseus  latus  ense  peregit, 

nee  tanto  mater  pignore  tuta  fuit.  120 

at  ne  nupta  quidem  taedaque  accepta  iugali — 

cur,  nisi  ne  caperes  regna  paterna  nothus  ? 
addidit  et  fratres  ex  me  tibi,  quos  tamen  onmis 

non  ego  tollendi  causa,  sed  ille  fuit. 
o  utinam  nocitura  tibi,  pulcherrime  rerum,  125 

in  medio  nisu  viscera  rupta  forent ! 
i  nunc,  sic  meriti  lectum  reverere  parentis — 

quern  fugit  et  factis  abdicat  ipse  suis  ! 
Nee,  quia  privigno  videar  coitura  noverca, 

terruerint  animos  nomina  vana  tuos.  130 

1  nisi  si  Hein.:  nisi  P  :.nisi  nos  Gee. 

"  The  king  of  the  Lapithae,  Theseus'  companion  on  the 
expedition  to  Hades,  aided  by  him  in  the  war  against  the 
Centaurs. 

4  Antiope,  sister  of  Hippolyte,  is  here  meant ;  but  the 
usual  story  made  Hippolyte  Theseus'  mother. 

c  Palmer  makes  Hippohtus  the  antecedent  of  quern. 

52 


THE    HEROIDES    IV 

105  There  are  two  seas  that  on  either  side  assail  an 
isthmus  with  their  floods,  and  the  slender  land  hears 
the  waves  of  both.  Here  with  you  will  I  dwell,  in 
Troezen's  land,  the  realm  of  Pittheus  ;  yon  place  is 
dearer  to  me  now  than  my  own  native  soil.  The 
hero  son  of  Neptune  is  absent  now,  in  happy  hour, 
and  will  be  absent  long ;  he  is  kept  by  the  shores  of 
his  dear  Pirithous."1  Theseus — unless,  indeed,  we 
refuse  to  own  what  all  may  see — has  come  to  love 
Pirithous  more  than  Phaedra,  Pirithous  more  than 
you.  Nor  is  that  the  only  wrong  we  suffer  at  his 
hand ;  there  are  deep  injuries  we  both  have  had 
from  him.  The  bones  of  my  brother  he  crushed 
with  his  triple-knotted  club  and  scattered  o'er  the 
ground;  my  sister  he  left  at  the  mercy  of  wild 
beasts.  The  first  in  courage  among  the  women  6  of 
the  battle-axe  bore  you,  a  mother  worthy  of  the 
vigour  of  her  son  ;  if  you  ask  where  she  is — Theseus 
pierced  her  side  with  the  steel,  nor  did  she  find 
safety  in  the  pledge  of  so  great  a  son.  Yes,  and  she 
was  not  even  wed  to  him  and  taken  to  his  home 
with  the  nuptial  torch — why,  unless  that  yon.  a 
bastard,  should  not  come  to  your  father's  throne  ?  He 
has  bestowed  brothers  on  you,  too,  from  me,  and  the 
cause  of  rearing  them  all  as  heirs  has  been  not 
myself,  but  he.  Ah,  would  that  the  bosom  which 
was  to  work  you  wrong,  fairest  of  nun,  had  been 
rent  in  the  midst  of  its  throes  !  Go  now,  reverence 
the  bed  of  a  father  who  thus  deserves  of  you — the 
bedc  which  he  neglects  and  is  disowning  by  his 
deeds. 

VM  And,  should  you  think  of  me  as  a  stepdame 
who  would  mate  with  her  husband's  son,  let  empty 
names    fright    not    your    soul.     Such     old-fashioned 

53 


OVID 

ista  vetus  pietas,  aevo  moritura  futuro, 

rustica  Saturno  regna  tenente  fuit. 
Iuppiter  esse  pium  statuit,  quodcumque  iuvaret, 

et  fas  orane  faeit  fratre  marita  soror. 
ilia  coit  firma  generis  iunctura  catena,  135 

inposuit  nodos  cui  Venus  ipsa  suos. 
nee  labor  est  celare — licet ;  pete  munus  ab  ilia  ; l 

cognato  poterit  nomine  culpa  tegi. 
viderit  amplexos  aliquis,  laudabimur  ambo  ; 

dicar  privigno  fida  noverca  raeo.  140 

non  tibi  per  tenebras  duri  reseranda  mariti 

ianua,  non  custos  decipiendus  erit ; 
ut  tenuit  domus  una  duos,  domus  una  tenebit ; 

oscula  aperta  dabas,  oscula  aperta  dabis  ; 
tutus  eris  mecum  laudemque  merebere  culpa,        145 

tu  licet  in  lecto  conspiciare  meo. 
tolle  moras  tantum  properataque  foedera  iunge — 

qui  mihi  nunc  saevit,  sic  tibi  parcat  Amor ! 
non  ego  dedignor  supplex  humilisque  precari. 

lieu!  ubi  nunc  fastus  altaque  verba  ?  iacent !  150 
et  pugnare  diu  nee  me  submittere  culpae 

certa  fui — certi  siquid  haberet  amor  ; 
victa  precor  genibusque  tuis  regalia  tendo 

bracchia  !    quid  deceat,  non  videt  ullus  amans. 
depuduit,  profugusque  pudor  sua  signa  reliquit.2   155 

Da  veniam  fassae  duraque  corda  doma  ! 
quod  mihi  sit  genitor,  qui  possidet  aequora,  Minos, 

quod  veniant  proavi  fulmina  torta  manu, 

1  licet  pete  munus  ab  ilia  MSS. :  licet  ;  pete  munus  !  ab  ilia 
Ehw. :  licet  peccemus,  amorem  Pa.  Sedl. :  celare  virum  ; 
pete  munus  ab  illo'i?en/. :  celare  ;  licet ;  pete  munus  ab  ipsa 
Madv.:  etc.  2  relinquit  Ps. 

54 


THE   HEROIDES   IV 

regard  for  virtue  was  rustic  even  in  Saturn's  reign, 
and  doomed  to  die  in  the  age  to  come.  Jove  fixed 
that  virtue  was  to  be  in  whatever  brought  us 
pleasure  ;  and  naught  is  wrong  before  the  gods  since 
sister  was  made  wife  by  brother.  That  bond  of 
banship  only  holds  close  and  firm  in  which  Venus 
herself  has  forged  the  chain.  Nor  need  you  fear  tin- 
trouble  of  concealment — it  will  be  easy  ;  ask  the  aid 
of  Venus  !  Through  her  our  fault  will  be  covered 
under  name  of  kinship.  Should  someone  see  us 
embrace,  we  both  shall  meet  with  praise  ;  I  shall  be 
called  a  faithful  stepdame  to  the  son  of  my  lord. 
No  portal  of  a  dour  husband  will  need  unbolting 
for  you  in  the  darkness  of  night;  there  will  be 
no  guard  to  be  eluded  ;  as  the  same  root'  has  covered 
us  both,  the  same  will  cover  us  still.  Your  wont  has 
been  to  give  me  kisses  unconcealed,  your  wont  will 
be  still  to  give  me  kisses  unconcealed.  You  will  be 
safe  with  me,  and  will  earn  praise  by  your  fault, 
though  you  be  seen  upon  my  very  couch.  Only, 
away  with  tarrying,  and  make  haste  to  bind  our 
bond — so  may  Love  be  merciful  to  you.  who  is 
bitter  to  me  now  !  1  do  not  disdain  to  bend  my 
knee  and  humbly  make  entreaty.  Alas!  where 
now  are  my  pride,  my  lofty  words;  fallen!  1 
was  resolved — if  there  was  aught  love  could  resolve 
— both  to  fight  long  and  not  to  yield  to  fault  ;  but  I 
am  overcome.  1  pray  to  you,  to  clasp  your  knees  1 
extend  my  queenly  arms.  Of  what  befits,  no  one 
who  loves  takes  thought.  My  modesty  has  tied,  and 
as  it  fled  it  left  its  standards  behind. 

156  Forgive  me  my  confession,. and  soften  your  hard 
heart!  That  I  have  for  sire  Minos.  who  rules  tin 
seas,  that  from  my  ancestor's   hand    comes  Inn-led  the 

55 


OVID 

quod  sit  avus  radiis  frontem  vallatus  acutis, 

purpureo  tepidum  qui  movet  axe  diem —  160 

nobilitas  sub  amore  iacet !    miserere  priorum 

et,  mihi  si  non  vis  parcere,  parce  meis  ! 
est  mihi  dotalis  tellus  Iovis  insula,  Crete — 

serviat  Hippolyto  regia  tota  meo  ! 
Flecte,  ferox,1  animos  !  potuit  corrumpere  taurum  165 

mater  ;  eris  tauro  saevior  ipse  truci  ? 
per  Venerem,  pareas,  oro,  quae  plurima  mecum  est ! 

sic  numquam,  quae  te  spernere  possit,  ames  ; 
sic  tibi  secretis  agilis  dea  saltibus  adsit, 

silvaque  perdendas  praebeat  alta  feras  ;  170 

sic  faveant  Satyri  montanaque  numina  Panes, 

et  cadat  adversa  cuspide  fossus  aper  ; 
sic  tibi  dent  Nymphae,  quamvis  odisse  puellas 

diceris,  arentem  quae  levet  unda  sitim  ! 
Addimus    his    precibus     lacrimas    quoque ;     verba 
precantis  175 

perlegis  et  lacrimas  finge  videre  meas  ! 


Oenone  Paridi  2 

Perlegis  ?    an  coniunx  prohibet  nova  ?    perlege — 
non  est 
ista  Mycenaea  littera  facta  manu  ! 

1  ferox  P  s  :  feros  PQ  a>  wig. 

2  Introductory  couplets  found  in  V-XII,  XVII,  XX,  XXI, 

are  omitted  by  Plan,  and  condemned  by  Pa.  Mtrh.  et  at. 

56 


THE    HEROIDKS    V 

lightning-stroke,  that  the  front  of  my  grandsire,  he 
who  moves  the  tepid  day  with  gleaming  chariot,  is 
crowned  with  palisade  of  pointed  rays — what  of  this, 
when  my  noble  name  is  prostrate  under  love  ?  I  lave 
pity  on  those  who  have  gone  before,  and,  if  me  vou 
will  not  spare,  O  spare  my  line  !  To  my  dowry 
belongs  the  Cretan  land,  the  isle  of  Jove — let  my 
whole  court  be  slaves  to  my  Hippolytus! 

166  Bend,  O  cruel  one,  your  spirit  !  My  mother 
could  pervert  the  bull ;  will  you  be  fiercer  than  a 
savage  beast?  Spare  me,  by  Venus  I  pray,  who  is 
chiefest  with  me  now.  So  may  you  never  love  one 
who  will  spurn  you  ;  so  may  the  agile  goddess  wait  on 
you  in  the  solitary  glade  to  keep  you  safe,  and  tin- 
deep  forest  yield  you  wild  beasts  to  slay  ;  so  may  tin 
Satyrs  be  your  friends,  and  the  mountain  deities,  the 
Pans,  and  may  the  boar  fall  pierced  in  full  front  by 
your  spear  ;  so  may  the  Nymphs — though  you  are  said 
to  loathe  womankind — give  you  the  flowing  water  to 
relieve  your  parching  thirst ! 

175  I  mingle  with  these  prayers  my  tears  as  well. 
The  words  of  her  who  prays,  you  are  reading;  her 
tears,  imagine  you  behold  ! 


Oenone  to  Paris 

Will  you  read  my  letter  through  ?  or  does  your 
new  wife  forbid?  Read  this  is  no  letter  writ  by 
Mycenaean  hand  !"    It  is  the  fountain-nymph  Oenone 

a  She  taunts  Paris  with  fear  of  Agamemnon  and   Mene 
laus. 

57 


OVID 

Pegasis  Oenone,  Phrygiis  celeberrima  silvis, 

laesa  queror  de  te,  si  sinis,  ipsa  meo. 
Quis  deus  opposuit  nostris  sua  numina  votis  ?  5 

ne  tua  permaneam,  quod  mihi  crimen  obest  ? 
leniter,  ex  merito  quidquid  patiare,  ferendum  est ; 

quae  venit  indigno  poena,  dolenda  venit. 
Nonduni  tantus  eras,  cum  te  contenta  marito 

edita  de  magno  flumine  nympha  fui.  10 

qui  nunc  Priamides — absit  reverentia  vero  ! — 

servus  eras  ;  servo  nubere  nympha  tuli ! 
saepe  greges  inter  requievimus  arbore  tecti, 

mixtaque  cum  foliis  praebuit  herba  torum  ; 
saepe  super  stramen  faenoque  iacentibus  alto  15 

defensa  est  humili  cana  pruina  casa. 
quis  tibi  monstrabat  saltus  venatibus  aptos, 

et  tegeret  catulos  qua  fera  rupe  suos  ? 
retia  saepe  comes  maculis  distincta  tetendi ; 

saepe  citos  egi  per  iuga  longa  canes.  20 

incisae  servant  a  te  mea  nomina  fagi, 

et  legor  oenone  falce  notata  tua,1 
et  quantum  trunci,  tantum  mea  nomina  crescunt.     25 

crescite  et  in  titulos  surgite  recta  meos  ! 
popule,  vive,  precor,  quae  consita  margine  ripae 

hoc  in  rugoso  cortice  carmen  habes  : 

CUM    PARIS  OENONE  POTERIT  SPIRARE   RELICTA, 

AD  FONTEM  XANTHI VERSA  RECURRET  AQUA.  30 

1  vy.  23,  24  omitted  as  spurious  Merl\  : 

populus  est,  memini,  pluviali  consita  rivo, 
est  in  qua  nostri  littera  scripta  memor. 
"there  is  a  poplar,   I  mind  me,  planted  on  the  banks  of  a 
stream,  on  which  is  written  the  legend  that  recalls  our  memory." 

58 


THE   HEROIDES   V 

writes,  well-known  to  the  Phrygian  forests — wronged , 
and  with  complaint  to  make  of  you,  you  my  own.  if 
you  but  allow. 

5  Wh,at  god  has  set  his  will  against  my  prayers? 
What  guilt  stands  in  my  way,  that  I  may  net  remain 
your  own  ?  Softly  must  we  hear  whatever  suffering  is 
our  desert ;  the  penalty  that  comes  without  deserving 
brings  us  dole. 

9  Not  yet  so  great  were  you  when  I  was  content 
to  wed  you — I,  the  nymph-daughter  of  a  mighty 
Stream.  You  who  are  now  a  son  of  Priam — let  not 
respect  keep  back  the  truth! — were  then  a  slave; 
I  deigned  to  wed  a  slave — 1,  a  nymph  !  Oft 
among  our  flocks  have  we  reposed  beneath  the 
sheltering  trees,  where  mingled  grass  and  leaves 
afforded  us  a  couch  ;  oft  have  we  lain  upon  the 
straw,  or  on  the  deep  hay  in  a  lowly  hut  that  kept  the 
hoar-frost  off.  Who  was  it  pointed  out  to  you  the 
coverts  apt  for  the  chase,  and  the  rocky  den  where 
the  wild  beast  hid  away  her  cubs  ?  Oft  have  1  gone 
with  you  to  stretch  the  hunting-net  with  its  wide 
mesh  ;  oft  have  I  led  the  fleet  hounds  over  the  long 
ridge.  The  beeches  still  conserve  mv  name  carved  <>n 
them  by  you,  and  I  am  read  there  OENONE,  charac- 
tered by  your  blade;  and  the  more  the  trunks, 
the  greater  grows  my  name.  Grow  on,  rise  high 
and  straight  to  make  my  honours  known  !  O 
poplar,  ever  live,  I  pray,  that  art  planted  by  the 
marge  of  the  stream  and  hast  in  thy  Beamy  hark 
these  verses : 

if   paris'  breath    shall   fail  not,  once  obnone   he 

doth  spurn, 
the  waters  of  the  xanthus  to  their   fount  3hal1 

backward  turn. 

59 


OVID 

Xanthe,  retro  propera,  versaeque  recurrite  lymphae  ! 

sustinet  Oenonen  deseruisse  Paris. 
Ilia  dies  fatum  miserae  mihi  dixit,  ab  ilia 

pessima  mutati  eoepit  amoris  hiemps, 
qua  Venus  et  Iuno  sumptisque  decentior  armis         35 

venit  in  arbitrium  nuda  Minerva  tuum. 
attoniti  mieuere  sinus,  gelidusque  cucurrit, 

ut  mihi  narrasti,  dura  per  ossa  tremor, 
consului— neque  enim  modice  terrebar — anusque 

longaevosque  senes.     constitit  esse  nefas.  40 

Caesa  abies,  sectaeque  trabes,  et  classe  parata 

caerula  cei-atas  accipit  unda  rates, 
flesti  discedens — hoc  saltim  parce  negare  ! x 

miscuimus  laerimas  maestus  uterque  suas  ;  46 

non  sic  adpositis  vincitur  vitibus  ulmus, 

ut  tua  sunt  collo  bracchia  nexa  meo. 
a,  quotiens,  cum  te  vento  quererere  teneri, 

riserunt  comites — ille  secundus  erat  !  50 

oscula  dimissae  quotiens  repetita  dedisti  ! 

quam  vix  sustinuit  dicere  lingua  "  vale  "  ! 
Aura  levis  rigido  pendentia  liritea  malo 

suscitat,  et  remis  eruta  canet  aqua, 
prosequor  infelix  oculis  abeuntia  vela,  55 

qua  licet,  et  lacrimis  umet  harena  meis, 
utque  celer  venias,  virides  Nereidas  oro — 

scilicet  ut  venias  in  raea  damna  celer ! 

1  vv.  44,  45  omitted  as  spurious  Merk.  : 

praeterito  magis  est  iste  pudendus  amor, 
et  flesti  et  nostros  vidisti  flentis  ocellos. 
"  the  love  that  holds  you  now  is  more  to  your  shame  than  the 
one  of  yore.      You  both  wept  and  you  saiu  my  weeping  eyes." 

6o 


THE    HEROIDES   V 

O  Xanthus,  backward  haste  ;  turn,  waters,  and  How 
again  to  your  fount  !  Paris  has  deserted  Oenone, 
and  endures  it. 

33  That  day  spoke  doom  for  wretched  me,  on  that 
day  did  the  awful  storm  of  changed  love  begin.  \\  hen 
Venus  and  Juno,  and  unadorned  Minerva,  more 
comely  had  she  borne  her  anus,  appeared  before 
you  to  be  judged.  My  bosom  leaped  with  amaze 
as  you  told  me  of  it,  and  a  chill  tremor  rushed 
through  my  hard  bones.  1  took  counsel — for  I  was 
no  little  terrified  —  with  grandams  and  long-lived 
sires.  'Twas  clear  to  us  all  that  evil  threatened 
me. 

41  The  firs  were  felled,  the  timbers  hewn  ;  your 
fleet  was  ready,  and  the  deep-blue  wave  received 
the  waxed  crafts.  Your  tears  fell  as  you  left  me — 
this,  at  least,  deny  not!  We  mingled  our  weeping, 
each  a  prey  to  grief;  the  elm  is  not  so  closely 
clasped  by  the  clinging  vine  as  was  my  neck  by  your 
embracing  arms.  Ah,  how  oft.  when  you  com- 
plained that  you  were  kept  by  the  wind,  did  your 
comrades  smile  ! — that  wind  was  favouring.  How 
oft,  when  you  had  taken  your  leave  of  me.  did  you 
return  to  ask  another  kiss  !  How  your  tongue 
could  scarce  endure  to  say  "  Farewell  !  " 

53  A  light  breeze  stirs  the  sails  that  hang  idly 
from  the  rigid  mast,  and  the  water  foams  white  with 
the  churning  of  the  oar.  In  wretchedness  I  follow 
with  my  eyes  the  departing  sails  as  far  as  1  may, 
and  the  sand  is  humid  with  my  tears;  that  you  may 
swiftly  come  again.  I  prav  the  sea-green  daughters 
of  Nereus — ves,  that  vou  may  swiftly  come  to  m\ 
undoing!        Expected     to    return     in    answer    to    m\ 

Oi 


OVID 

votis  ergo  meis  alii  rediture  redisti  ? 

ei  mihi,  pro  dira  paelice  blanda  fiii  !  60 

Adspicit  inmensum  moles  nativa  profundum — 

mons  fuit ;  aequoreis  ilia  resistit  aquis. 
hinc  ego  vela  tuae  cognovi  prima  carinae, 

et  mihi  per  fluctus  impetus  ire  fuit. 
dum  moror,  in  summa  fulsit  mihi  purpura  prora —  65 

pertimui  ;  cultus  non  erat  ille  tuus. 
fit  propior  terrasque  cita  ratis  attigit  aura  ; 

femineas  vidi  corde  tremente  genas. 
non  satis  id  fuerat —  quid  enim  furiosa  morabar  ? — 

haerebat  gremio  turpis  arnica  tuo  !  70 

tunc  vero  rupique  sinus  et  pectora  planxi, 

et  secui  madidas  ungue  rigente  genas, 
inplevique  sacram  querulis  ululatibus  Iden 

illuc  has  lacrimas  in  mea  saxa  tuli. 
sic  Helene  doleat  desertaque  coniuge  ploret,  75 

quaeque  prior  nobis  intulit,  ipsa  ferat ! 
Nunc  tibi  conveniunt,  quae»te  per  aperta  sequantur 

aequora  legitimos  destituantque  viros  ; 
at  cum  pauper  eras  armentaque  pastor  agebas, 

nulla  nisi  Oenone  pauperis  uxor  erat.  80 

non  ego  miror  opes,  nee  me  tua  regia  tangit 

nee  de  tot  Priami  dicar  ut  una  nurus — 
non  tamen  ut  Priamus  nymphae  socer  esse  recuset, 

aut  Hecubae  fuerim  dissimulanda  nurus  ; 

62 


THE    HEROIDES    V 

vows,  have  you  returned  for  the  sake  of  another? 
Ah  me,  'twas  for  the  sake  of  a  cruel  rival  that  my 
persuasive  prayers  were  made  ! 

61  A  mass  of  native  rock  looks  down  upon  the 
unmeasured  deep — a  mountain  it  really  is;  it  stavs 
the  billows  of  the  sea.  From  here  I  was  the  first  to 
spy  and  know  the  sails  of  your  bark,  and  mv  heart's 
impulse  was  to  rush  through  the  waves  to  you. 
While  I  delayed,  on  the  highest  of  the  prow  I  saw 
the  gleam  of  purple — fear  seized  upon  me  ;  that  was 
not  the  manner  of  your  garb.  The  craft  comes 
nearer,  borne  on  a  freshening  breeze,  and  touches 
the  shore  ;  with  trembling  heart  I  have  caught  the 
sight  of  a  woman's  face.  And  this  was  not  enough 
— why  was  I  mad  enough  to  stay  and  sec'-  in  pour 
embrace  that  shameless  woman  clung  !  Then 
indeed  did  I  rend  my  bosom  and  beat  mv  breast, 
and  with  the  hard  nail  furrowed  my  streaming 
cheeks,  and  filled  holy  Ida  with  wailing  cries  of 
lamentation  ;  yonder  to  the  rocks  1  love  1  bore  mv 
tears.  So  may  Helen's  grief  be,  and  so  her  lamenta 
tion,  when  she  is  deserted  by  her  love  :  and  what 
she  was  first  to  bring  on  me  may  sin-  herself 
endure ! 

77  Your  pleasure  now  is  in  jades  who  follow  \oii 
over  the  open  sea,  leaving  behind  their  lawful 
wedded  lords  ;  but  when  you  were  poor  and 
shepherded  the  flocks,  Oenone  was  your  wife,  poor 
though  you  were,  and  none  else.  I  am  not  dazzled  1>\ 
your  wealth,  nor  am  I  touched  by  thought  of  your 
palace,  nor  would  I  be  called  one  of  the  many  wives 
of  Priam's  sons — yet  not  that  Priam  would  disdain 
a  nymph  as  wife  to  his  son,  or  that  Hecuba 
would  have  to  hide    her  kinship    with    me  ;    1    am 

63 


OVID 

dignaque  sum  et  cupio  fieri  matrona  potentis  ;  85 

sunt  mihi,  quas  possint  sceptra  decere,  manus. 
nee  me,  faginea  quod  tecum  fronde  iacebam, 

despice  ;  purpureo  sum  magis  apta  toro. 
Denique  tutus  amor  meus  est ;  tibi  nulla  parantur 

bella,  nee  ultrices  advehit  unda  rates.  90 

Tyndaris  infestis  fugitiva  reposcitur  armis  ; 

hac  venit  in  thalamos  dote  superba  tuos. 
quae  si  sit  Danais  reddenda,  vel  Hectora  fratrem, 

vel  cum  Deipbobo  Polydamanta  roga  ; 
quid  gravis  Antenor,  Priamus  quid  suadeat  ipse,      95 

consule,  quis  aetas  longa  magistra  fuit ! x 
turpe  rudimentum,  patriae  praeponere  raptam. 

causa  pudenda  tua  est ;  iusta  vir  arma  movet. 
Nee  tibi,  si  sapias,  fidam  promitte  Lacaenam, 

quae  sit  in  amplexus  tarn  cito  versa  tuos.  100 

ut  minor  Atrides  temerati  foedera  lecti 

clamat  et  externo  laesus  amore  dolet, 
tu  quoque  clamabis.      nulla  reparabilis  arte 

laesa  pudicitia  est ;  deperit  ilia  semel. 
ardet  amore  tui  ?     sic  et  Menelaon  amavit.  105 

nunc  iacet  in  viduo  credulus  ille  toro. 
felix  Andromache,  certo  bene  nupta  marito  ! 

uxor  ad  exemplum  fratris  habenda  fui  \ 
tu  levior  foliis,  turn  cum  sine  pondere  suci 

mobilibus  ventis  arida  facta  volant  ;  110 

1  From  97  to  VI,  49  are  missing  m  P. 
"  Of  his  career  as  a  prince,  after  his  recognition. 
64 


THE   HEROIDKS    \ 

worthy  of  being,  and  I  desire  to  be.  the  matron  of  a 
puissant  lord  ;  my  hands  are  such  as  the  sceptre  could 
well  beseem.  Nor  despise  me  because  once  I  pressed 
with  you  the  beeehen  frond  ;  I  am  better  suited  for 
the  purpled  marriage-bed. 

89  Remember,  too,  my  love  can  bring  no  harm  ; 
it  will  beget  you  no  wars,  nor  bring  avenging 
ships  across  the  wave.  The  Tyndarid  run-away 
is  now  demanded  back  by  an  enemy  under  arms  ; 
this  is  the  dower  the  dame  brings  proudly  to 
your  marriage-chamber.  Whether  she  should  be 
rendered  back  to  the  Danai,  ask  Hector  your 
brother,  if  you  will,  or  Deiphobus  and  Polydamas  ; 
take  counsel  with  grave  Antenor,  find  out  what 
Priam's  self  persuades,  whose  long  lives  have  made 
them  wise.  'Tis  but  a  base  beginning,"  to  prize  a 
stolen  mistress  more  than  your  native  land.  Your 
case  is  one  that  calls  for  shame  ;  just  arc  the  anus 
her  lord  takes  up. 

99  Think  not,  too,  if  you  arc  wise,  that  the 
Laconian  will  be  faithful — she  who  so  quickly 
turned  to  your  embrace.  Just  as  the  younger 
Atrides  cries  out  at  the  violation  of  his  marriage- 
bed,  and  feels  his  painful  wound  from  the  wife  who 
loves  another,  you  too  will  cry.  By  no  art  may 
purity  once  wounded  be  made  whole;  'tis  lost. 
lost  once  and  for  all.  Is  she  ardent  with  love  for 
you?  So,  too,  she  loved  Menelaus.  He.  trusting 
fool  that  he  was,  lies  now  in  a  deserted  bed.  Happy 
Andromache,  well  wed  to  a  constant  mate  !  I  was 
a  wife  to  whom  you  should  have  clung  alter  your 
brother's  pattern;  but  you — are  lighter  than  leaves 
what  time  their  juice  has  failed,  and  dry  they  flutter 
in   the   shifting    breeze;  you    have    less   weight    than 

65 


OVID 

et  minus  est  in  te  quam  summa  pondus  arista, 

quae  levis  adsiduis  solibus  usta  riget. 
Hoc  tua — nam  recolo— quondam  germana  canebat, 

sic  mihi  diff'usis  vaticinata  comis  : 
"  quid    facis,     Oenone  ?      quid    harenae    semina 

mandas  ?  115 

non  profecturis  litora  bubus  aras. 
Graia  iuvenca  venit,  quae  te  patriamque  domumque 

perdat !  io  prohibe  !     Graia  iuvenca  venit ! 
dum  licet,  obscenam  ponto  demergite  x  puppim  ! 

heu  !     quantum  Phrygii  sanguinis  ilia  vehit  !  "  120 
Dixerat ;  in  cursu  famulae  rapuere  furentem  ; 

at  mihi  flaventes  diriguere  comae, 
a,  nimium  miserae  vates  mihi  vera  fuisti — 

possidet,  en,  saltus  ilia  2  iuvenca  meos  ! 
sit  facie  quamvis  insignis,  adultera  certe  est ;  125 

deseruit  socios  hospite  capta  deos. 
illam  de  patria  Theseus — nisi  nomine  fallor — 

nescio  quis  Theseus  abstulit  ante  sua. 
a  iuvene  et  cupido  credatur  reddita  virgo  ? 

unde  hoc  conpererim  tarn  bene,  quaeris  ?  amo.   130 
vim  licet  appelles  et  culpam  nomine  veles  ; 

quae  totiens  rapta  est,  praebuit  ipsa  rapi. 
at  manet  Oenone  fallenti  casta  marito — 

et  poteras  falli  legibus  ipse  tuis ! 
Me  Satyri  celeres — silvis  ego  tecta  latebam —        135 

quaesierunt  rapido,  turba  proterva,  pede' 
cornigerumque  caput  pinu  praecinctus  acuta 

Faunus  in  inmensis,  qua  tumet  Ida,  iugis. 

1  dimergite  s:  di  mergite  E  *  Hein. 

2  Graia  G  Merk.  :  ilia  E  a,  Plan. 

a  Cassandra. 

6  Theseus  and  Pirithous  had  carried  away  Helen  in  her 
early  youth. 

66 


THE    HEROIDES   V 

the  tip  of  the  spear  of  grain,  burned  light  and   crisp 
by  ever-shining  suns. 

113  This,  once  upon  a  time — for  I  call  it  back,  to 
mind — your  sister*  sang  to  me,  with  locks  let  loose, 
foreseeing  what  should  come:  "What  art  thou 
doing,  Oenone  ?  Why  commit  seeds  to  sand  ?  Thou 
art  ploughing  the  shores  with  oxen  that  will  accomplish 
naught.  A  Greek  heifer  is  on  the  way,  to  ruin  thee. 
thy  home-land,  and  thy  house  !  Ho,  keep  her  far ! 
A  Greek  heifer  is  coming  !  While  yet  ye  may,  sink 
in  the  deep  the  unclean  ship  !  Alas,  how  much  of 
Phrygian  blood  it  hath  aboard  ! " 

121  She  ceased  to  speak  ;  her  slaves  seized  on  her 
as  she  madly  ran.  And  I — my  golden  locks  stood 
stiffly  up.  Ah,  all  too  true  a  prophetess  you  were  to 
my  poor  self — she  has  them,  lo,  the  heifer  has  my 
pastures  !  Let  her  seem  how  fair  soever  of  face,  none 
the  less  she  surely  is  a  jade  ;  smitten  with  a  stranger, 
she  left  behind  her  marriage-gods.  Theseus — unless 
I  mistake  the  name — one  Theseus,  even  before, 
had  stolen  her  away  from  her  father's  land.''  Is  it  to 
be  thought  she  was  rendered  back  a  maid,  by  a  young 
man  and  eager?  Wrhence  have  I  learned  this 
so  well?  you  ask.  I  love.  You  may  call  it  violence, 
and  veil  the  fault  in  the  word;  yet  she  who  his 
been  so  often  stolen  has  surely  lent  herself  to 
theft.  But  Oenone  remains  chaste,  false  though  her 
husband  prove — and,  after  your  own  example,  sin 
might  have  played  you  false. 

135  Me,  the  swift  Satyrs,  a  wanton  rout  with  nimble 
foot,  used  to  come  in  quest  of — where  I  would  lie 
hidden  in  covert  of  the  wood — and  Faunus.  with 
horned  head  girt  round  with  sharp  pine  needles, 
where    Ida    swells    in    boundless    ridges.        Me,    tin 

67 


OVID 

me  fide  conspicuus  Troiae  munitor  amavit, 

admisitque  meas  ad  sua  dona  manus.1  146 

quaecumque    herba   potens    ad    opem    radixque 
medendo  2 

utilis  in  toto  nascitur  orbe,  mea  est. 
me  miseraim  quod  amor  non  est  medieabilis  herbis  ! 

deficior  prudens  artis  ab  arte  mea.  150 

Quod  nee  graminibus  tellus  fecunda  creandis  153 

nee  deus,  auxilium  tu  mihi  ferre  potes. 
et  potes,  et  merui — dignae  miserere  puellae  !         155 

non  ego  cum  Danais  arraa  cruenta  fero — 
sed  tua  sum  tecumque  fui  puerilibus  annis 

et  tua,  quod  superest  temporis,  esse  precor! 


VI 
Hypsipyle    Iasoni 

Litora  Thessaliae  reduci  tetigisse  carina 

diceris  auratae  vellere  dives  ovis. 
gratulor  incolumi,  quantum  sinis  ;  hoc  tamen  ipsum  3 

debueram  scripto  certior4  esse  tuo. 
nam  ne  pacta  tibi  praeter  mea  regna  redires,  5 

cum  cuperes,  ventos  non  habuisse  potes  ; 
quamlibet  adverso  signetur  epistula  vento. 

Hypsipyle  missa  digna  salute  fui. 

1  vv.  140-145,  151,  152  condemned  Mirk : 

ille  meae  spolium  virginitatis  habet,  140 

id  quoque  luctando  ;  rupi  tamen  ungue  capillos, 

oraque  sunt  digitis  aspei'a  facta  meis  ; 
nee  pretium  stupri  gemmas  aur unique  poposci : 

turpiter  ingenuum  munera  corpus  emunt ; 
ipse,  ratus  dignam,  medicas  mihi  tradidit  aites  145 

ipse  repertor  opis  vaccas  pavisse  Pheraeas  151 

fertur  et  a  nostro  saucius  igne  fuit. 

68 


THE    HEROIDES    VI 

builder  of  Troy,  well  known  for  keeping  faith, 
loved,  and  let  my  hands  into  the  secret  of  his 
gifts.  Whatever  herb  potent  for  aid,  whatever  root 
that  is  used  for  healing  grows  in  all  the  world,  is 
mine.  Alas,  wretched  me,  that  love  may  not  be 
healed  by  herbs  !  Skilled  in  an  art,  I  am  left  help- 
less by  the  very  art  I  know. 

153  The  aid  that  neither  earth,  fruitful  in  the  bring- 
ing forth  of  herbs,  nor  a  god  himself,  can  give,  you 
have  the  power  to  bestow  on  me.  You  can  bestow 
it,  and  I  have  merited — have  pity  on  a  deserving 
maid  !  I  come  with  no  Danai,  and  bear  no  bloody 
armour — but  I  am  yours,  and  I  was  your  mate  in 
childhood's  years,  and  yours  through  all  time  to  come 
I  pray  to  be  ! 

VI 

Hypsipvi.e  to  Jason 

You  are  said  to  have  touched  the  shores  of 
Thessaly  with  safe-returning  keel,  rich  in  the  fleece 
of  the  golden  ram.  I  speak  you  well  for  your  safety 
— so  far  as  you  give  me  chance  ;  yet  of  this  very 
thing  I  should  have  been  informed  by  message  of 
your  own.  For  the  winds  might  have  tailed  yon, 
even  though  you  longed  to  see  me,  and  kept  you 
from  returning  by  way  of  the  realms  I  pledged 
you;"  but  a  letter  may  be  written,  howe'er  ad- 
verse the  wind.  Hypsipyle  deserved  the  sending 
of  a  greeting. 

°  As  her  marriage  portion. 

2  medendo  Ehw.:  medendi  MSS.  :  medenti  Hein. 

3  ipsum  Plan,  s  :  ipso  (?  w  ■.  ipsa  Hein.  Ehw. 

4  So  (he  xlfSS.:  delmcrat  .  .  .  certiua  Pa. 

69 


OVID 

Cur  mihi  fama  prior  de  te  quam  littera  venit : 

isse  sacros  Martis  sub  iuga  panda  boves,  10 

seminibus  iactis  segetes  adolesse  virorum 

inque  necem  dextra  non  eguisse  tua, 
pervigilem  spolium  pecudis  servasse  draconem, 

rapta  tamen  forti  vellera  fulva  manu  ? 
haec  ego  si  possem  timide  credentibus  "  ista  1 5 

ipse  mihi  seripsit  "  dicere,  quanta  forem  ! 
Quid  queror  officium  lenti  cessasse  mariti  ? 

obsequium,  nianeo  si  tua,  grande  tuli ! 
barbara  narratur  venisse  venefiea  tecum, 

in  mihi  promissi  parte  recepta  tori.  20 

eredula  res  amor  est ;  utinam  temeraria  dicar 

criminibus  falsis  insimulasse  virum  ! 
nuper  ab  Haemoniis  hospes  mihi  Thessalus  oris 

venerat,  et  tactum  vix  bene  limen  erat, 
"  Aesonides,"  dixi,  "quid  agit  meus  ?  "  ille  pudore  25 

haesit  in  opposita  lumina  fixus  humo. 
protinus  exilui  tunicisque  a  pectore  ruptis 

"  vivit  ?  an,"  exclamo,  "me  quoque  fata  vocant  ?  " 
"  vivit,"  ait.     timidum  quod  amat x  ;  iurare  coegi. 

vix  mihi  teste  deo  credita  vita  tua  est.  30 

Utque  animus  rediit,  tua  facta  requirere  coepi. 

narrat  aenipedes  Martis  arasse  boves, 
vipereos  dentes  in  humum  pro  semine  iactos, 

et  subito  natos  arma  tulisse  viros — 

1  timidum  quod  amat  E  s  Shuckburgh  Hous.  :  timidumque 
mihi  G  s  :  timidus  timidum  Pa. 

70 


THE    HERO  IDES   VI 

9  Why  was  it  rumour  brought  me  tidings  of  you, 
rather  than  lines  from  your  hand  ? — tidings  that  the 
sacred  bulls  of  Mars  had  received  the  curving  yoke  ; 
that  at  the  scattering  of  the  seed  there  sprang  forth 
the  harvest  of  men,  who  for  their  doom  had  no  need 
of  your  right  arm;  that  the  spoil  of  the  ram,  the 
deep-gold  fleece  the  unsleeping  dragon  guarded, 
had  nevertheless  been  stolen  away  by  your  hold 
hand.  Could  I  say  to  those  who  are  slow  to  en  (lit 
these  reports,  "  He  has  written  me  this  with  his  own 
hand,''  how  proud  should  I  be ! 

17  But  why  complain  that  my  lord  has  been 
slow  in  his  duty  ?  I  shall  think  myself  treated 
with  all  indulgence,  so  I  remain  yours.  A  bar- 
barian poisoner,  so  the  story  goes,  has  come  with  you, 
admitted  to  share  the  marriage-couch  you  promised 
me.  Love  is  quick  to  believe  ;  may  it  prove  that  I 
am  hasty,  and  have  brought  a  groundless  charge 
against  my  lord !  Only  now  from  Haemonian 
borders  came  a  Thessalian  stranger  to  my  gates. 
Scarce  had  he  well  touched  the  threshold,  when  I 
cried,  "How  doth  my  lord,  the  son  of  Aeson  ?  " 
Speechless  he  stood  in  embarrassment,  his  eyes 
fixed  fast  upon  the  ground.  I  straight  leaped  up, 
and  rent  the  garment  from  my  breast.  "  Lives 
he?"  I  cried,  "or  must  fate  call  me  too?"  "He 
lives,"  was  his  reply.  Full  of  fears  is  love  ;  I  made 
him  say  it  on  his  oath.  Scarce  with  a  god  to  witness 
could  I  believe  you  living. 

31  When  calm  of  mind  returned,  I  began  to 
ask  of  your  fortunes.  He  tells  me  of  the  brazen- 
footed  oxen  of  Mars,  how  they  ploughed,  of  the 
serpent's  teeth  scattered  upon  the  ground  in  way  of 
seed,  of  men    sprung    suddenly    forth    and    bearing 

7i 


OVID 

terrigenas  populos  civili  Marte  peremptos  35 

inplesse  aetatis  fata  diurna  suae, 
devictus  serpens,     iterum,  si  vivat  Iason, 

quaerimus  ;  alternant  spesque  timorque  fidein.1 
Singula  dum  narrat,  studio  cursuque  loquendi 

detegit  ingenio  vulnera  nostra  suo.  40 

heu  !  ubi  pacta  fides  ?     ubi  conubialia  iura 

faxque  sub  arsuros  dignior  ire  rogos  ? 
non  ego  sum  furto  tibi  cognita  ;  pronuba  Iuno 

adfuit  et  sertis  tempora  vinctus  Hymen, 
at  mihi  nee  Iuno,  nee  Hymen,  sed  tristis  Erinys      45 

praetulit  infaustas  sanguinolenta  faces. 
Quid  mihi  cum  Minyis,  quid  cum  Dodonide  2  pinu  ? 

quid  tibi  cum  patria,  navita  Tiphy,  mea  ? 
non  erat  hie  aries  villo  spectabilis  aureo, 

nee  senis  Aeetae  regia  Lemnos  erat.  50 

certa  fui  primo — sed  me  mala  fata  trahebant — 

hospita  feminea  pell  ere  castra  manu  ; 
Lenmiadesque  viros,  nimium  quoque,  vincere  norunt. 

milite  tarn  forti  causa  3  tuenda  fuit  ! 
Urbe  virum  vidi,  tectoque  animoque  recepi !  55 

hie  tibi  bisque  aestas  bisque  cucurrit  hiemps. 
tertia  messis  erat,  cum  tu  dare  vela  eoactus 

inplesti  lacrimis  talia  verba  tuis  : 
"  abstrahor,  Hypsipyle  ;  sed  dent  modo  fata  recursus, 

vir  tuus  hinc  abeo,  vir  tibi  semper  ero.  60 

1  vv,  31-38  spurious  Merle.  Pa.:  31-36  defended  Horn. 

2  Dodonide  Plan.:  Tritonide  MSS. 

s  causa  Merle  Pa.:  vita  P2G E m  Plan.:  fortuna  Pv 

a  The  Argo,  with  whose  building  Dodona  in  Thessal}'  had 
to  do. 

6  The  women  of  Lemnos  had  once  slain  all  the  men  in  the 
island  as  a  measure  of  revenge  against  their  husbands,  who 
had  taken  Thracian  women  in  their  stead. 

72 


THE    HEROINES    VI 

arms — earth-horn  peoples  slain  in  combat  with  their 
fellows,  filling  out  the  fates  of  their  lives  in  the  space 
of  a  day.  He  tells  of  the  dragon  overcome.  Again 
I  ask  if  Jason  lives;  hope  and  fear  bring  trust  and 
mistrust  by  turns. 

3'-'  While  part  by  part  he  tells  the  tale,  such,  in 
the  rushing  eagerness  of  Ins  speech,  is  his  uncon- 
scious art  that  he  lays  bare  my  wounds.  Alas  ! 
where  is  the  faith  that  was  promised  me?  Where 
the  bonds  of  wedlock,  and  the  marriage  torch,  more 
fit  to  set  ablaze  my  funeral  pile?  I  was  not  made 
acquaint  with  you  in  stealthy  wise  ;  Juno  was  there 
to  join  us  when  we  were  wed,  and  Hymen,  his 
temples  bound  with  wreaths.  And  vet  neither  Juno 
nor  Hymen,  but  gloomy  Erinys,  stained  with  blood, 
carried  before  me  the  unhallowed  torch. 

47  What  had  I  with  the  Minyae,  or  Dodona's 
pine  ? a  What  had  you  with  my  native  land,  O 
helmsman  Tiphys  ?  There  was  here  no  ram,  sightly 
with  golden  fleece,  nor  was  Lemnos  the  royal  home 
of  old  Aeetes.  I  was  resolved  at  first — but  my  ill 
fate  drew  me  on — to  drive  out  with  my  women's 
band  the  stranger  troop;  the  women  of  Lemnos 
know — yea,  even  too  well — how  to  vanquish  men.'' 
I  should  have  let  a  soldiery  so  brave  defend  my 
cause. 

55  But  I  looked  on  the  man  in  my  city  :  I  welcomed 
him  under  mv  roof  and  into  my  heart  !  Here  twice 
the  summer  fled  for  you,  here  twice  tin-  winter.  It 
was  the  third  harvest  when  you  were  compelled 
to  set  sail,  and  with  your  tears  poured  forth  such 
words  as  these:  "I  am  sundered  from  thee.  Hyp 
sipyle ;  but  so  the  fates  grant  me  return,  thine  own 
I    leave    thee    now,  and  thine   own    will    1    ever   be. 


OVID 

quod  tamen  e  nobis  gravida  celatur  in  alvo, 

vivat,  et  eiusdem  simus  uterque  parens  !  " 
Hactenus,  et  lacrimis  in  falsa  cadentibus  ora 

cetera  te  memini  non  potuisse  loqui. 
Ultimus  e  soeiis  sacram  conscendis  in  Argon.  65 

ilia  volat ;  ventus  concava  vela  tenet  ; 
caerula  propulsae  subducitur  unda  carinae  ; 

terra  tibi,  nobis  adspiciuntur  aquae, 
in  latus  omne  patens  turns  circumspicit  undas  ; 

hue  feror,  et  lacrimis  osque  sinusque  madent.       70 
per  lacrimas  specto,  cupidaeque  faventia  menti 

longius  adsueto  lumina  nostra  vident. 
adde  preces  castas  inmixtaque  vota  timori — 

nunc  quoque  te  salvo  persoluenda  mihi. 
Vota  ego  persolvam  ?     votis  Medea  fruetur  !  75 

cor  dolet,  atque  ira  mixtus  abundat  amor, 
dona  feram  templis,  vivum  quod  Iasona  perdo  ? 

hostia  pro  damnis  concidat  icta  meis  ? 
Non  equidem  secura  fui  semperque  verebar, 

ne  pater  Argolica  sumeret  urbe  nurum.  80 

Argolidas  timui — nocuit  mihi  barbara  paelex  ! 

non  expectata  vulnus  ab  hoste  tuli. 
nee  facie  meritisque  placet,  sed  carmina  novit 

diraque  cantata  pabula  falce  metit. 
ilia  reluctantem  cursu  1  deducere  lunam  85 

nititur  et  tenebris  abdere  solis  equos  ; 

1  cursu  P Eai  :  curru  s  Hein. 
"  Built  at  the  instigation  of  .\thena. 
74 


THE    HEROIDES    VI 

What  lieth  heavy  in  thy  bosom  from  me — may  it 
come  to  live,  and  may  we  both  share  in  its  parentage  !  " 

63  Thus  did  you  speak;  and  with  tears  streaming 
down  your  false  face  I  remember  you  could  say  no 
more. 

65  You  are  the  last  of  your  band  to  board  the 
sacred  Argo.rt  It  flies  upon  its  way;  the  wind  bellies 
out  the  sail  ;  the  dark-blue  wave  glides  from  under  the 
keel  as  it  drives  along  ;  your  gaze  is  on  the  land,  and 
mine  is  on  the  sea.  There  is  a  tower  that  looks 
from  every  side  upon  the  waters  round  about ;  thither 
I  betake  myself,  my  face  and  bosom  wet  with  tears. 
Through  my  tears  I  gaze  ;  my  eyes  are  gracious  to 
my  eager  heart,  and  see  farther  than  their  wont. 
Add  thereto  pure-hearted  prayers,  and  vows  mingled 
with  fears — vows  which  I  must  now  fulfil,  since 
you  are  safe. 

75  And  am  I  to  absolve  these  vows — vows  but  for 
Medea  to  enjoy?  My  heart  is  sick,  and  surges  with 
mingled  wrath  and  love.  Am  I  to  bear  gifts  to 
the  shrines  because  Jason  lives,  though  mine  no 
more?  Is  a  victim  to  fall  beneath  the  stroke  for  the 
loss  that  has  come  to  me  ? 

70  No,  I  never  felt  secure  ;  but  my  fear  was  ever 
that  your  sire  would  look  to  an  Argolic  city  for  a 
bride  to  his  son.  'Twas  the  daughters  of  Argolis  I 
feared — yet  my  ruin  has  been  a  barbarian  jade  !  The 
wound  I  feel  is  not  from  the  foe  whence  I  thoughl 
to  see  it  come.  Her  charm  for  you  is  neither  in  her 
beauty  nor  her  merit;  but  you  are  made  hers  by 
the  incantations  she  knows,  by  the  enchanted  blade 
with  which  she  garners  the  baneful  herb.  She  strh  es 
with  the  reluctant  moon,  to  bring  it  down  from  its 
course  in   the   skies,  and  makes  hide  away  in  shadows 

75 


OVID 

ilia  refrenat  aquas  obliquaque  flumina  sistit ; 

ilia  loco  silvas  vivaque  saxa  movet. 
per  tumulos  errat  passis  discincta  capillis 

certaque  de  tepidis  colligit  ossa  rogis.  90 

devovet  absentis  simulacraque  cerea  figit, 

et  miserum  tenuis  in  iecur  urget  acus — 
et  quae  nescierim  melius,     male  quaeritur  herbis 

moribus  et  forma  eonciliandus  amor. 
Hanc  potes  ampleeti  thalamoque  relictus  in  uno      95 

inpavidus  somno  nocte  silente  frui  ? 
scilicet  ut  tauros,  ita  te  iuga  ferre  coegit 

quaque  feros  anguis,  te  quoque  mulcet  ope. 
adde,  quod  adscribi  factis  procerumque  tuisque 

se  facit,1  et  titulo  coniugis  uxor  obest.  100 

atque  aliquis  Peliae  de  partibus  acta  venenis 

inputat  et  populum,  qui  sibi  credat,  habet : 
"  non  haec  Aesonides,  sed  Phasias  Aeetine 

aurea  Phrixeae  terga  revellit  ovis." 
non      probat     Alcimede     mater     tua  —  consule 

matrem —  105 

non  pater,  a  gelido  cui  venit  axe  nurus. 
ilia  sibi  a  Tanai  Scythiaeque  paludibus  udae 

quaerat  et  a  patria  Phasidis  usque  virum  ! 
Mobilis  Aesonide  vernaque  incertior  aura, 

cur  tua  polliciti  pondere  verba  carent  ?  110 

vir  meus  hinc  ieras,  vir  non  meus  inde  redisti. 

sim  reducis  coniunx,  sicut  euntis  eram  ! 

1  facit  fj  Es,  Ehuw  favet  P :  fa  vet  O  Merh, 
76 


THE    HEROIDES    VI 

the  steeds  of  the  sun  ;  she  reins  the  waters  in,  and 
stays  the  down-winding  stream  ;  she  charms  life  into 
trees  and  rocks,  and  moves  them  from  their  place. 
Among  sepulchres  she  stalks,  ungirded,  with  hair 
Mowing  loose,  and  gathers  from  the  yet  warm  funeral 
pyre  the  appointed  bones.  She  vows  to  their  doom 
the  absent,  fashions  the  waxen  image,  and  into  its 
wretched  heart  drives  the  slender  needle — and  other 
deeds  'twere  better  not  to  know.  Ill  sought  by 
herbs  is  love  that  should  be  won  by  virtue  and 
by  beauty. 

95  A  woman  like  this  can  you  embrace  ?  Can  you 
be  left  in  the  same  chamber  with  her  and  not  feel 
fear,  and  enjoy  the  slumber  of  the  silent  night? 
Surely,  she  must  have  forced  you  to  bear  the  yoke, 
just  as  she  forced  the  bulls,  and  has  you  subdued 
by  the  same  means  she  uses  with  fierce  dragons. 
Add  that  she  has  her  name  writ  in  the  record  of 
your  own  and  your  heroes'  exploits,  and  the  wife 
obscures  the  glory  of  the  husband.  And  someone 
of  the  partisans  of  Pelias  imputes  your  deeds  to  her 
poisons,  and  wins  the  people  to  believe  :  "  This  fleece 
of  gold  from  the  ram  of  Phrixus  the  son  of  Aeson  did 
not  seize  away,  but  the  Phasian  girl,  Aeetes'  child." 
Your  mother  Alcimede — ask  counsel  of  your  mother 
— favours  her  not,  nor  your  sire,  who  sees  his  son's 
bride  come  from  the  frozen  north.  Let  her  seek  for 
herself  a  husband — from  the  Tanais,  from  the  marshes 
of  watery  Scythia,  even  from  her  own  land  of  Phasis  ! 

109  O  changeable  son  of  Aeson,  more  uncertain 
than  the  breezes  of  springtime,  why  lack  your  words 
the  weight  a  promise  claims  ?  My  own  you  went 
forth  hence  ;  my  own  you  have  not  returned.  Let 
me  be  your  wedded  mate  now  you   arc  come  back, 

77 


OVID 

si  te  nobilitas  generosaque  nomina  tangunt — 

en,  ego  Minoo  nata  Thoante  feror ! 
Bacchus  avus  ;  Bacchi  coniunx  redimita  corona      115 

praeradiat  stellis  signa  minora  suis. 
dos  tibi  Lemnos  erit,  terra  ingeniosa  colenti ; 

me  quoque  dotalis  l  inter  habere  potes. 
Nunc  etiam  peperi ;  gratare  ambobus,  Iason  ! 

dulce  mihi  gravidae  fecerat  auctor  onus.  120 

felix  in  numero  quoque  sum  prolemque  gemellam, 

pignora  Lucina  bina  favente  dedi. 
si  quaeris,  cui  sint  similes,  cognosceris  illis. 

fallere  non  norunt ;  cetera  patris  habent. 
legates  quos  paene  dedi  pro  matre  ferendos  ;  125 

sed  tenuit  coeptas  saeva  noverca  vias. 
Medeam  timui :  plus  est  Medea  noverca  ; 

Medeae  faciunt  ad  scelus  omne  manus. 
Spai-gere  quae  fratris  potuit  lacerata  per  agros 

corpora,  pignoribus  parceret  ilia  meis  ?  1 30 

banc,  banc,2  o  demens  Colchisque  ablate  venenis, 

diceris  Hypsipyles  praeposuisse  toro  ! 
turpiter  ilia  virum  cognovit  adultera  virgo  ; 

me  tibi  teque  mihi  taeda  pudica  dedit. 
prodidit  ilia  patrem  ;  rapui  de  clade  Thoanta.         135 

deseruit  Colchos  ;  me  mea  Lemnos  habet. 

1  dotales  Sahnasius  :  quoque  ///////,  U'ith  1  and  s  risible  P  : 
quod  tales  G  s  :  res  tales  many  MSS. 

2  hanc  hanc  Pa.:  hanc  P  :  hanc  tamen  O  w. 

a  Nebrophonus  and  Euneus,  according  to  Apollodorus  ; 
according  to  Hyginus,  Euneus  and  Deiphilus. 

*  So  Medea  had  done  with  Absyrtus,  to  delay  her  father's 
pursuit  of  Jason  and  herself. 

0  She  had  saved  her  father  from  the  general  massacre  of 
the  men  of  Lemnos. 

78 


THE    HEROIDES    VI 

as  I  was  when  you  set  forth  !  If  noble  blood  and 
generous  lineage  move  you — lo,  I  am  known  as 
daughter  of  Minoan  Thoas  !  Bacchus  was  my  grand- 
sire  ;  the  bride  of  Bacchus,  with  crown-encircled 
brow,  outshines  with  her  stars  the  lesser  constella- 
tions. Lemnos  will  be  my  marriage  portion,  land 
kindly-natured  to  the  husbandman;  and  me,  too, 
you  will  possess  among  the  subjects  my  dowry 
brings. 

119  And  now,  too,  I  have  brought  forth  ;  rejoice  for 
us  both,  Jason  !  Sweet  was  the  burden  that  I  bore 
its  author  had  made  it  so.  I  am  happy  in  the  number, 
too,  for  by  Lucina's  kindly  favour  I  have  brought 
forth  twin  offspring,  a  pledge  for  each  of  us.*1  If  you 
ask  whom  they  resemble,  1  answer,  yourself  is  seen 
in  them.  The  ways  of  deceit  they  know  not  ;  for 
the  rest,  they  are  like  their  father.  I  almost  gave 
them  to  be  carried  to  you,  their  mother's  ambassa 
dors;  but  thought  of  the  cruel  stepdame  turned  me 
back  from  the  path  I  would  have  trod.  'Twas  Medea 
I  feared.  Medea  is  more  than  a  stepdame;  the 
hands  of  Medea  are  fitted  for  any  crime. 

129  Would  she  who  could  tear  her  brother  limb  from 
limb  and  strew  him  o'er  the  fields  be  one  to  spare 
my  pledges?6  Such  is  she,  such  the  woman,  () 
madman  swept  from  your  senses  by  the  poisons  of 
Colchis,  for  whom  you  are  said  to  have  slighted  the 
marriage-bed  with  Hypsipyle  !  base  and  shameless 
was  the  way  that  maid  became  your  bride;  but  the 
bond  that  gave  me  to  you,  and  you  to  me,  was 
chaste.  She  betrayed  her  sire;  I  rescued  from  death 
my  father  Thoas.0  She  deserted  the  Colchians ;  my 
Lemnos  has  me  still.      What   matters  aught,  if  sin  is 

7" 


OVID 

Quid  refert,  scelerata  piam  si  vincet  et  ipso 

criiiiine  dotata  est  emeruitque  viruni  ? 
Lemniadum  facinus  culpo,  non  miror,  Iason  ; 

quamlibet  infirmis  ipse  }  dat  arma  dolor.  1 40 

die  age,  si  ventis,  ut  oportuit,  actus  iniquis 

intrasses  portus  tuque  comesque  meos, 
obviaque  exissem  fetu  comitante  gemello — 

hiscere  nempe  tibi  terra  roganda  fuit ! — 
quo  vultu  natos,  quo  me,  seelerate,  videres  ?  145 

perfidiae  pretio  qua  neee  dignus  eras  ? 
ipse  quidem  per  me  tutus  sospesque  fuisses — 

non  quia  tu  dignus,  sed  quia  mitis  ego. 
paelicis  ipsa  nieos  inplessem  sanguine  vultus, 

quosque  venefieiis  abstulit  ilia  suis  !  150 

Medeae  Medea  forem  !  quodsi  quid  ab  alto 

iustus  ad  est  votis  Iuppiter  ipse  2  meis, 
quod  gemit  Hypsipyle,  lecti  quoque  subnuba  nostri 

maereat  et  leges  sentiat  ipsa  suas  ; 
utque  ego  destituor  eoniunx  materque  duorum,      155 

a  totidem  natis  orba  sit  ilia  viro  ! 
nee  male  parta  diu  teneat  peiusque  relinquat — 

exulet  et  toto  quaerat  in  orbe  f'ugam  ! 
quam  fratri  germana  fuit  miseroque  parenti 

filia,  tarn  natis,  tarn  sit  acerba  viro  !  160 

1  ipse  P2 :  ls^e  MaAv. 

-  ipse  the  MSS. :  ilia  Hein.  Bent.  Pa. 

8o 


THE    HEROIDRS   VI 

to  be  set  before  devotion,  and  she  lias  won  her 
husband  with  the  very  crime  she  brought  him  as  her 
dower  ? 

139  The  vengeful  deed  of  the  Lemnian  women  I 
condemn,  Jason,  I  do  not  marvel  at  it  ;  passion 
itself  drives  the  weak,  however  powerless,  to  take 
up  arms.  Come,  say,  what  if,  driven  by  unfriendly 
gales,  you  had  entered  my  harbours,  as  'twere  fitting 
you  had  done,  you  and  your  companion,  and  I  had 
come  forth  to  meet  you  with  my  twin  babes — surely 
you  must  have  prayed  earth  to  yawn  for  you  — 
with  what  countenance  could  you  have  gazed  upon 
your  children,  O  wretched  man,  with  what  counten- 
ance upon  me  ?  What  death  would  you  not  deserve 
as  the  price  of  your  perfidy  ?  And  yet  you  yourself 
would  have  met  with  safety  and  protection  at  my 
hands — not  that  you  deserved,  but  that  1  was 
merciful.  But  as  for  your  mistress— with  my  own 
hand  I  would  have  dashed  my  face  with  her  blood, 
and  your  face,  that  she  stole  away  with  her  poisonous 
arts  !     I  would  have  been  Medea  to  Medea  ! 

151  But  if  in  any  way  just  Jupiter  himself  from  on 
high  attends  to  my  prayers,  may  the  woman  who 
intrudes  upon  my  marriage-bed  suffer  tin-  wots  in 
which  Hypsipyle  groans,  and  feel  the  lot  she  her- 
self now  brings  on  me  ;  and  as  1  am  now  left  alone, 
wife  and  mother  of  two  babes,  so  may  she  one  day 
be  reft  of  as  many  babes,  and  of  her  husband  !  Nor 
may  she  long  keep  her  ill-gotten  gains,  but  leave 
them  in  worse  hap — let  her  he  an  exile,  and  seek  a 
refuge  through  the  entire  world  !  A  bitter  sister  to 
her  brother,  a  hitter  daughter  to  her  wretched  sire. 
may  she  he  as  bitter  to  her  children,  and  as  bitter  t" 
her  husband!     When  she  shall  have  no  hope  more  of 

Si 


OVID 

cum  mare,  cum  terras  consumpserit,  aera  temptet ; 

erret  inops,  exspes,  caede  cruenta  sua  ! 
haec  ego,  coniugio  fraudata  Thoantias  oro. 

vivite,  devoto  nuptaque  virque  toro  ! 

VII 
Dido  Aeneae 

Sic  ubi  fata  vocant,  udis  abiectus  in  herbis 

ad  vada  Maeandri  concinit  albus  olor. 
Nee  quia  te  nostra  sperem  prece  posse  moveri, 

adloquor — adverso  movimus  ista  deo  ; 
sed    merita     et     famam     coi'pusque    animumque 

pudicum  5 

cum  male  perdiderim,  perdere  verba  leve  est. 
Certus  es  ire  tamen  miseramque  relinquere  Didon, 

atque  idem  venti  vela  fidemque  ferent  ? 
certus  es,  Aenea,  cum  foedere  solvere  naves, 

quaeque  ubi  sint  nescis,  Itala  regna  sequi  ?  10 

nee  nova  Carthago,  nee  te  crescentia  tangunt 

moenia  nee  sceptro  tradita  summa  tuo  ? 
facta  fugis,  facienda  petis  ;  quaerenda  per  orbem 

altei*a,  quaesita  est  altera  terra  tibi. 

a  The  song  preceding  death. 

*  Ovid  has  the  fourth  book  of  the  Aeneid  in  mind  as  he 
composes  this  letter. 

82 


THE    HER01DES    VII 

refuge  by  the  sea  or  by  the  land,  let  her  make  trial 
of  the  air;  let  her  wander,  destitute,  bereft  of  hope, 
stained  red  with  the  blood  of  her  murders  !  This 
fate  do  I,  the  daughter  of  Thoas,  cheated  of  my 
wedded  state,  in  prayer  call  down  upon  you.  Live 
on,  a  wife  and  husband;,  accursed  in  your  bed  ! 


VII 

Dido   to  Aeneas 

Thus,  at  the  summons  of  fate,  casting  himself  down 
amid  the  watery  grasses  by  the  shallows  of  Marauder, 
sings  the  white  swan." 

3  Not  because  I  hope  you  may  be  moved  by 
prayer  of  mine  do  I  address  you — for  with  God's 
will  adverse  I  have  begun  the  words  you  read  ;  but 
because,  after  wretched  losing  of  desert,  of  reputa- 
tion, and  of  purity  of  body  and  soul,  the  losing  of 
words  is  a  matter  slight  indeed. 

7  Are  you  resolved  none  the  less  to  go,  and  to 
abandon  wretched  Dido,6  and  shall  the  same  winds 
bear  away  from  me  at  once  your  sails  and  your 
promises  ?  Are  you  resolved,  Aeneas,  to  break  at 
the  same  time  from  your  moorings  and  from  your 
pledge,  and  to  follow  after  the  fleeting  realms  of 
Italy,  which  lie  you  know  not  where  ?  and  does  new- 
founded  Cartilage  not  touch  you,  nor  her  rising  walls. 
nor  the  sceptre  of  supreme  power  placed  in  your 
hand?  What  is  achieved,  you  turn  your  back 
upon;  what  is  to  be  achieved,  you  ever  pursue. 
One  land  has  been  sought  and  gained,  and  ever 
must   another    be   sought,    through    the   wide   world. 

»3 


OVID 

ut   terram  invenias,  quis  earn   tibi  tradet  haben- 

dam  ?  15 

quis  sua  non  notis  arva  tenenda  dabit  ? 
alter  habendus  amor  tibi  restat  et  altera  Dido  ; l 

quamque  iteruni  fallas  altera  danda  fides, 
quando  erit,  ut  condas  instar  Carthaginis  urbem 

et  videas  populos  altus  ab  arce  tuos  ?  20 

omnia  ut  eveniant,  nee  te  tua  vota  morentur, 

unde  tibi,  quae  te  sic  amet,  uxor  erit  ? 
Uror,  ut  inducto  ceratae  sulpure  taedae, 

ut  pia  fumosis  addita  tura  focis.'2 
Aeneas  oculis  semper  vigilantis  inhaeret ;  25 

Aenean  animo  noxque  diesque  refert. 
ille  quidem  male  gratus  et  ad  mea  munera  surdus, 

et  quo,  si  non  sim  stulta,  carere  velim  ; 
non  tamen  Aenean,  quamvis  male  cogitat,  odi, 

sed  queror  infidum  questaque  peius  amo.  30 

parce,  Venus,  nurui,  durumque  amplectere  fratrem, 

frater  Amor,  castris  militet  ille  tuis  ! 
aut  ego,  quern3  coepi — neque  enim  dediguor — amare, 

materiam  curae  praebeat  ille  meae  ! 
Fallor,  et  ista  mihi  falso  iactatur  imago ;  35 

matris  ab  ingenio  dissidet  ille  suae, 
te  lapis  et  montes  innataque  rupibus  altis 

robora,  te  saevae  progenuere  ferae, 

1  So  s  Burm.:  alter  amor  tibi  est  habendus  et  P  :  a.  a.  t.  et 
exstat  habendus  G  E  s  :  a.  a.  tibi  restat  ?  habendast  altera 
Dido  ?  Birt  Ehw. 

2  vv.  24,  25  defended  I>y  Hous.,  condemned  by  Pa.  Ehw. 

3  quern  o>  early  editions  :  quae  P  0  E  s  Plan. 

84 


THE   HEROIDES    VII 

Yet,  even  should  you  find  the  land  of  your  desire, 
who  will  give  it  over  to  you  for  your  own  ?  Who 
will  deliver  his  fields  to  unknown  hands  to  keep  ? 
A  second  love  remains  for  you  to  win,  and  a  second 
Dido ;  a  second  pledge  to  give,  and  a  second  time 
to  prove  false.  When  will  it  be  your  fortune,  think 
you,  to  found  a  city  like  to  Carthage,  and  from  the 
citadel  on  high  to  look  down  upon  peoples  of  your 
own  ?  Should  your  every  wish  be  granted,  even 
should  you  meet  with  no  delay  in  the  answering  of 
vour  pravers,  whence  will  come  the  wife  to  love  you 
"as  I  ? 

23  I  am  all  ablaze  with  love,  like  torches  of  wax 
tipped  with  sulphur,  like  pious  incense  placed  on 
smoking  altar-fires.  Aeneas  my  eyes  cling  to 
through  all  my  waking  hours  ;  Aeneas  is  in  my  heart 
through  the  night  and  through  the  day.  "lis  true 
he  is  an  ingrate,  and  unresponsive  to  my  kindnesses, 
and  were  1  not  fond  I  should  be  willing  to  have  him 
go;  yet,  however  ill  his  thought  of  me,  I  hate  him 
not,  but  only  complain  of  his  faithlessness,  and  when 
I  have  complained  I  do  but  love  more  madly  still. 
Spare,  O  Venus,  the  bride  of  thy  son  ;  lay  hold 
of  thy  hard-hearted  brother,  O  brother  Love,  and 
make  him  to  serve  in  thv  camp  !  Or  make  him  to 
whom  I  have  let  my  love  go  forth — I  fust,  and  with 
never  shame  for  it — yield  me  himself,  the  object  ot 
my  care  ! 

35  Ah,  vain  delusion  !  the  fancy  that  Hits  before  my 
mind  is  not  the  truth;  far  different  his  heart  from 
his  mother's.  Of  rocks  and  mountains  were  you  be- 
gotten, and  of  the  oak  sprung  from  the  lofty  cliff,  of 
savage  wild  beasts,  or  of  the  sea — such  a  sea  aseven  now 

85 


OVID 

aut  mare,  quale  vides  agitari  nunc  quoque  ventis, 

quo  tamen  adversis  fluetibus  ire  paras.  40 

quo  fugis  ?  obstat  hiemps.  hiemis  mihi  gratia  prosit  . 

adspiee,  ut  eversas  concitet  Eurus  aquas  ! 
quod  tibi  malueram,  sine  me  debere  procellis  ; 

iustior  est  animo  ventus  et  unda  tuo. 
Non  ego  sum  tanti — quid  non  censeris  inique  ? —    45 

ut  pereas,  dum  me  per  freta  longa  fugis. 
exerees  pretiosa  odia  et  eonstantia  magno, 

si,  dum  me  careas,  est  tibi  vile  mori. 
iam  venti  ponent,  strataque  aequaliter  unda 

caeruleis  Triton  per  mare  curret  equis.  50 

tu  quoque  cum  ventis  utinam  mutabilis  esses  ! 

et,  nisi  duritia  robora  vincis,  eris. 
quid,  si  nescires,  insana  quid  aequora  possunt  ? 

expertae  totiens  quam  x  male  eredis  aquae  ! 
ut,  pelago  suadente  etiam,  retinaeula  solvas,  55 

multa  tamen  latus  tristia  pontus  habet. 
nee  violasse  fidem  temptantibus  aequora  prodest  ; 

perfidiae  poenas  exigit  ille  locus, 
praecipue  cum  laesus  amor,  quia  mater  Amorum 

nuda  Cytheriacis  edita  fertur  aquis.  60 

Perdita  ne  perdam,  timeo,  noceamve  nocenti, 

neu  bibat  aequoreas  naufragus  hostis  aquas, 
vive,  precor !  sic  te  melius  quam  funere  perdam. 

tu  potius  leti  causa  ferere  mei. 
1  quam  s  Merle. 
86 


THE   HEROIDES    VII 

you  look  upon,  tossed  by  the  winds,  on  which  you  art' 
none  the  less  making  readyto  sail, despite  the  threaten 
ing  floods.      Whither  are  you  flying?     The  tempesl 

rises  to  stay  you.   Let  the  tempest  he  my  grace!    1 k 

you,  how  Eurus  tosses  the  rolling  waters  ]  What  I  had 
preferred  to  owe  to  you,  let  me  owe  to  the  stormy 
blasts  ;  wind  and  wave  are  juster  than  your  heart. 

45  I  am  not  worth  enough — ah.  why  do  I  not 
wrongly  rate  you? — to  have  you  perish  flying  from 
me  over  the  long  seas.  'Tis  a  costly  and  a  dear- 
bought  hate  that  you  indulge  if,  to  be  quit  of  me, 
you  account  it  cheap  to  die.  Soon  the  winds  will 
fall,  and  o'er  the  smooth-spread  waves  will  Triton 
course  with  cerulean  steeds.  O  that  you  too  were 
changeable  with  the  winds  ! — and,  unless  in  hard- 
ness you  exceed  the  oak,  you  will  be  so.  What 
could  you  worse,  if  you  did  not  know  of  the  power 
of  raging  seas?  How  ill  to  trust  the  wave  whose 
might  you  have  so  often  felt!  Even  should  you 
loose  your  cables  at  the  persuasion  of  calm  seas, 
there  are  none  the  less  many  woes  to  be  met  on 
the  vasty  deep.  Nor  is  it  well  for  those  who  have 
broken  faith  to  tempt  the  billows.  Von  is  the  place 
that  exacts  the  penalty  for  faithlessness,  above  all 
when  'tis  love  has  been  wronged;  for  'twas  from 
the  sea,  in  Cytherean  waters,  so  runs  the  talc.th.it 
the  mother  of  the  Loves,  undraped,  arose. 

61  Undone  myself,  I  fear  lest  1  be  the  undoing 
of  him  who  is  my  undoing,  lest  I  bring  harm  to 
him  who  brings  harm  to  me,  lest  my  enemy  !>• 
wrecked  at  sea  and  drink  the  waters  of  the  deep. 
O  live;  1  pray  it!  Thus  shall  I  see  you  worse 
undone  than  by  death.  You  shall  rather  he  reputed 
the  cause  of  my  own  doom.     Imagine,  pray,  imagine 

8? 


OVID 

finge,    age,    te    rapid  o — nullum     sit    in     amine 

pond  us  ! —  65 

turbine  deprendi ;  quid  tibi  mentis  erit  ? 
protinus  oecurrent  falsae  periuria  linguae, 

et  Phrygia  Dido  fraude  coacta  mori  ; 
coniugis  ante  oculos  deceptae  stabit  imago 

tristis  et  effusis  sanguinolenta  comis.  70 

quid  tanti  est  ut  turn  "  merui !  concedite  !  "  dicas, 

quaeque  eadent,  in  te  fulmina  missa  putes  ? 
Da  breve  saevitiae  spatium  pelagique  tuaeque  ; 

grande  morae  pretium  tuta  futura  via  est. 
nee  mihi  tu  curae  ;  puero  parcatur  Iulo  !  75 

te  satis  est  tituluin  mortis  habere  meae. 
quid  puer  Ascanius,  quid  di  meruere  T  Penates  ? 

ignibus  ereptos  obruet  unda  deos  ? 
sed  neque  fers  tecum,  nee,  quae  mihi,  perfide,  iactas, 

presserunt  umeros  sacra  paterque  tuos.  80 

omnia  mentiris,  neque  enim  tua  fallere  lingua 

incipit  a  nobis,  primaque  plector  ego. 
si  quaeras,  ubi  sit  formosi  mater  Iuli — 

occidit  a  duro  sola  relicta  viro  ! 
haec  mihi  narraras — sat  me  monuere  !  2  merentem  85 

ure  ;  minor  culpa  poena  futura  mea  est. 
Nee    mihi    mens    dubia    est,    quin    te    tua    numina 
damnent. 

per  mare,  per  terras  septima  iactat  hiemps. 

1  So  G  w  wig. :  quid  meruere  P  :  quid  commeruere  Pa. 
-  at  me   novere  Eod:    at    me    movere  Merk.   Pa.:    di  me 
monuere  Madv.:  sat  me  monuere  Hows. 

"  Another  name  for  Ascanius,  the  sou  of  Aeneas. 

8S 


THE   HEROIDKS    VII 

that  you  are  caught — may  there  be  nothing  in  the 

omen  ! — in  the  sweeping  of  the  storm;  what  will  be 
your  thoughts  ?  Straight  will  come  rushing  to  pour 
mind  the  perjury  of  your  false  tongue,  and  Dido 
driven  to  death  by  Phrygian  faithlessness :  before 
your  eyes  will  appear  the  features  of  your  deceived 
wife,  heavy  with  sorrow,  with  hair  streaming,  and 
stained  with  blood.  What  now  can  you  gain  to 
recompense  you  then,  when  you  will  have  to  say  : 
"  'Tis  my  desert ;  forgive  nie.  ye  gods!"  when  you 
will  have  to  think  that  whatever  thunderbolts  fall 
were  hurled  at  you  ? 

73  Grant  a  short  space  for  the  cruelty  of  tin  sea, 
and  for  your  own,  to  subside;  your  safe  voyage 
will     be     great    reward    for    waiting.  Nor     is     it 

vou  for  whom  I  am  anxious;  only  let  the  little 
lulus"  be  spared!  For  you.  enough  to  have  the 
credit  for  my  death.  What  has  little  Aseanius 
done/ or  what  your  Penates,  to  deserve  ill  fate? 
Have  they  been  rescued  from  fire  but  to  be  over- 
whelmed by  the  wave?  Yet  neither  are  you  bearing 
them  with  you;  the  sacred  relics  which  arc  your 
pretext  never  rested  on  your  shoulders,  nor  did 
your  father.  You  are  false  in  everything— and  I 
am  not  the  first  your  tongue  has  deceived,  nor  am 
I  the  first  to  feel  the  blow  from  you.  Do  you  ask 
where  the  mother  of  pretty  lulus  is? — she  perished, 
left  behind  by  her  unfeeling  lord!  This  was  tin- 
story  you  told  me-  yes.  and  it  was  warning  enough 
for  me!  Burn  me;  I  deserve  it!  The  punishment 
will  be  less  than  befits  my  fault. 

87  And  my  mind  doubts  not  that  you,  too.  arc 
under  condemnation  of  your  gods.  Over  sea  :ind 
over  land  you  are  now  for  the  seventh  winter  being 

So 


OVID 

fluctibus  eiectum  tuta  statione  recepi 

vixque  bene  audito  nomine  regna  dedi.  90 

his  tamen  offieiis  utinam  contenta  fuissem, 

et  mihi  eoncubitus  fama  sepulta  foret ! 
ilia  dies  nocuit,  qua  nos  declive  sub  antrum 

caeruleus  subitis  eonpulit  imber  aquis. 
audieram  vocem  ;  nymphas  ululasse  putavi —  95 

Eumenides  fatis  signa  dedere  meis! 
Exige,  laese  pudor,  poenas  !  violate  Syehaei 1  .  .  .  . 

ad  quas,  me  miseram,  plena  pudoris  eo. 
est  mihi  marmorea  sacratus  in  aede  Sychaeus — 

oppositae  frondes  velleraque  alba  tegunt.  100 

hinc  ego  me  sensi  noto  quater  ore  eitari ; 

ipse  sono  tenui  dixit  "  Elissa,  veni!  " 
Nulla  mora  est,  venio,  venio  tibi  debita  coniunx  ; 

sum  tamen  admissi  tarda  pudore  mei. 
da  veniam  culpae  !  deeepit  idoneus  auctor  ;  105 

invidiam  noxae  detrahit  ille  meae. 
diva  parens  seniorque  pater,  pia  sarcina  nati, 

spem  mihi  mansuri  rite  dedere  viri.2 
si  fuit  errandum,  eausas  habet  error  honestas ; 

adde  fidem,  nulla  parte  pigendus  erit.  110 

Durat  in  extremum  vitaeque  novissima  nostrae 

prosequitur  fati,  qui  fuit  ante,  tenor, 
occidit  internas  coniunx  mactatus  ad  aras, 

et  seeleris  tanti  praemia  frater  habet ; 
1  Lacuna.  2  tori  G  Merk. 

a  Dido's  husband  in  Tyre. 

9° 


THE    HEROIDES    VII 

tossed.  You  were  cast  ashore  by  the  waves  and 
I  received  you  to  a  safe  abiding-place  ;  scarce 
knowing  your  name,  I  gave  to  you  my  throne.  Yet 
would  I  had  been  content  with  these  kindnesses, 
and  that  the  story  of  our  union  were  buried  !  That 
dreadful  day  was  my  ruin,  when  sudden  downpour 
of  rain  from  the  deep-blue  heaven  drove  us  to 
shelter  in  the  lofty  grot.  I  had  heard  .a  voice ;  I 
thought  it  a  cry  of  the  nymphs — 'twas  the  Eu- 
menides  sounding  the  signal  for  my  doom  ! 

97  Exact  the  penalty  of  me,  O  purity  undone  ! — 
the  penalty  due  Sychaeus."  To  absolve  it  now  I 
go — ah  me,  wretched  that  I  am,  and  overcome  with 
shame  !  Standing  in  shrine  of  marble  is  an  image 
of  Sychaeus  I  hold  sacred — in  the  midst  of  green 
fronds  hung  about,  and  fillets  of  white  wool.  From 
within  it  four  times  have  I  heard  myself  called  by  a 
voice  well  known;  'twas  he  himself  crying  in  faintly 
sounding  tone  :  "  Elissa,  come  !  " 

103  J  de]ay  n0  longer,  I  come  ;  I  come  thy  bride, 
thine  own  by  right ;  I  am  late,  but  'tis  for  shame  of 
my  fault  confessed.  Forgive  me  my  offence  !  He 
was  worthy  who  caused  my  fall  ;  he  draws  from  my 
sin  its  hatefulness.  That  his  mother  was  divine  and 
his  aged  father  the  burden  of  a  loyal  son  gave 
hope  he  would  remain  my  faithful  husband.  If  'twas 
my  fate  to  err,  my  error  had  honourable  cause  ;  so 
only  he  keep  faith,  I  shall  have  no  reason  for  regret. 

111  The  lot  that  was  mine  in  days  past  still  follows 
me  in  these  last  moments  of  life,  and  will  pursue 
to  the  end.  My  husband  fell  in  his  blood  before  the 
altars  in  his  very  house, and  my  brother  possesses  tin 
fruits    of    the    monstrous    crime:    myself  am    driven 


OVID 

exul  agor  cineresque  viri  patriamque  relinquo,        115 

et  feror  in  duras  hoste  sequente  vias. 
adplicor  ignotis  fratrique  elapsa  fretoque 

quod  tibi  donavi,  perfide.  litus  emo. 
urbem  constitui  lateque  patentia  fixi 

moenia  finitimis  invidiosa  locis.  120 

bella  tument  ;  bellis  peregrina  et  femina  temptor, 

vixque  rudis  portas  urbis  et  arma  paro. 
mille  procis  plaeui,  qui  me  coiere  querentes 

nescio  quern  thalamis  praeposuisse  suis. 
quid  dubitas  vinetam  Gaetulo  tradere  Iarbae  ?        125 

praebuerim  sceleri  bracehia  nostra  tuo. 
est  etiam  frater,  cuius  manus  inpia  possit 

respergi  nostro,  sparsa  cruore  viri. 
pone  deos  et  quae  tangendo  sacra  profanas  ! 

non  bene  caelestis  inpia  dextra  colit.  130 

si  tu  eultor  eras  elapsis  igne  futurus, 

paenitet  elapsos  ignibus  esse  deos. 
Forsitan  et  gravidam  Didon.  scelerate.  relinquas, 

parsque  tui  lateat  corpore  clausa  meo. 
aecedet  fatis  niatris  miserabilis  infans.  135 

et  nondum  nato  l  funeris  auctor  ens, 
cumque  parente  sua  frater  morietur  Iuli, 

poenaque  conexos  auferet  una  duos. 
■' Sed  iubet  ire  deus."      vellem,  vetuisset  adire, 

Puniea  nee  Teucris  pressa  fuisset  humus  !  1-10 

1  nato  Hein.:  nati  Pa. 
92 


THE    HEROIDKS    VII 

into  exile,  compelled  to  leave  behind  the  ashes 
of  my  lord  and  the  land  of  my  birth.  Over  hard 
paths  I  fly,  and  my  enemy  pursues.  I  land  on  shores 
unknown  ;  escaped  from  my  brother  and  the  sea.  1 
purchase  the  strand  that  I  gave,  perfidious  man,  to 
you.  I  establish  a  city,  and  lay  about  it  the  found 
ations  of  wide-reaching  walls  that  stir  the  jealousy 
of  neighbouring  realms.  Wars  threaten  ;  bv  wars, 
a  stranger  and  a  woman,  I  am  assailed  ;  hardly  can 
I  rear  rude  gates  to  the  city  and  make  ready  my 
defence.  A  thousand  suitors  cast  fond  eyes  on  me, 
and  have  joined  in  the  complaint  that  I  preferred 
the  hand  of  some  stranger  love.  Why  do  you  not 
bind  me  forthwith,  and  give  me  over  to  Gaetulian 
Iarbas?  I  should  submit  my  arms  to  your  shameful 
act.  There  is  my  brother,  too.  whose  impious  hand 
could  be  sprinkled  with  my  blood,  as  it  is  already 
sprinkled  with  my  lord's.  Lay  down  those  gods  and 
sacred  things;  your  touch  profanes  them!  It  is 
not  well  for  an  impious  right  hand  to  worship 
the  dwellers  in  the  sky.  If  'twas  fated  tor  you  to 
worship  the  gods  that  escaped  the  fires,  the  gods 
regret  that  they  escaped  the  fires. 

133  Perhaps,  too,  it  is  Dido  soon  to  be  mother, 
()  evil-doer,  whom  you  abandon  now.  and  a  part 
of  your  being  lies  hidden  in  myself.  To  the  tale 
of  the  mother  will  be  added  that  of  the  wretched 
babe,  and  you  will  be  the  cause  of  doom  to  your  yel 
unborn  child;  with  his  own  mother  will  lulus' 
brother  die,  and  one  fate  will  bear  us  both  aw  i\ 
together. 

189  "  Hut  you  are  bid  to  go— by  your  god  I  '  Ah, 
would  he  had  forbidden  you  to  come  :  would 
Funic    soil    had     never     been     pressed     by    Teiicrian 

93 


OVID 

hoc  duce  nempe  deo  ventis  agitaris  iniquis 

et  teris  in  rapido  tempora  longa  freto  ? 
Pergama  vix  tanto  tibi  erant  repetenda  labore, 

Hectore  si  vivo  quanta  fuere  forent. 
non    patrium     Simoenta     petis,     sed     Thybridas 

undas —  145 

nempe  ut  pervenias,  quo  cupis,  hospes  eris  ; 
utque  latet  vitatque  tuas  abstrusa  carinas, 

vix  tibi  continget  terra  petita  seni. 
Hos  potius  populos  in  dotem,  ambage  remissa, 

accipe  et  advectas  Pygmalionis  opes.  150 

Ilion  in  Tyriam  transfer  felicius  urbeni 

resque  loco  1  regis  sceptraque  sacra  tene  ! 
si  tibi  mens  avida  est  belli,  si  quaerit  lulus, 

unde  suo  partus  Marte  triumphus  eat, 
quern    superet,  nequid    desit,    praebebimus    hos- 

tem ;  155 

hie  pacis  leges,  hie  locus  anna  capit. 
tu  modo,  per  matrem  fraternaque  tela,  sagittas, 

perque  fugae  comites,  Dardana  sacra,  deos — 
sic  superent,  quoscumque  tua  de  gente  reportas, 

Mars  ferus  et  danmi  sit  modus  ille  tui,  160 

Ascaniusque  suos  feliciter  inpleat  annos, 

et  senis  Anchisae  molliter  ossa  cubent ! — 
parce,  precor,  domui,  quae  se  tibi  tradit  habendam  ! 

quod  crimen  dicis  praeter  amasse  meum  ? 
non  ego  sum  Phthias  magnisque  oriunda  Mycenis,  165 

nee  steterunt  in  te  virque  paterque  meus. 

1  So  Pa.:  inque  loco  P2  over  an   erasure   G  E s  :    ianique 
locum  Ehw. :  etc. 

"  The  home  of  Achilles. 

94 


THE    HEROIDES    VII 

feet !  Is  this,  forthsooth,  the  god  under  whose 
guidance  you  are  tossed  about  by  unfriendly  winds, 
and  pass  long  years  on  the  surging  seas?  'Twould 
scarce  require  such  toil  to  return  again  to  Perga- 
muni,  were  Pergamum  still  what  it  was  while  Hector 
lived.  'Tis  not  the  Simois  of  your  fathers  you  seek, 
but  the  waves  of  Tiber — and  yet,  forsooth,  should 
you  arrive  at  the  place  you  wish,  you  will  be  but 
a  stranger;  and  the  land  of  your  quest  so  hides 
from  your  sight,  so  draws  away  from  contact  with 
your  keels,  that  'twill  scarce  be  your  lot  to  reach 
it  in  old  age. 

140  Cease,  then,  your  wanderings  !  Choose  rather 
me,  and  with  me  my  dowry — -these  peoples  of  mine, 
and  the  wealth  of  Pygmalion  I  brought  with  me. 
Transfer  your  Ilion  to  the  Tyrian  town,  and  give 
it  thus  a  happier  lot;  enjoy  the  kingly  state,  and 
the  sceptre's  right  divine.  If  your  soul  is  eager 
for  war,  if  lulus  must  have  field  for  martial 
prowess  and  the  triumph,  we  shall  find  him  foes 
to  conquer,  and  naught  shall  lack ;  here  there  is 
place  for  the  laws  of  peace,  here  place,  too,  for 
arms.  Do  you  only,  by  your  mother  I  pray,  and  by 
the  weapons  of  your  brother,  his  arrows,  and  by 
the  divine  companions  of  your  flight,  the  gods  "I 
Dardanus — so  may  those  rise  above  fate  whom  you 
are  saving  from  out  your  race,  so  may  that  cruel  war 
be  the  last  of  misfortunes  to  you,  and  so  m  i\ 
Ascanius  fill  happily  out  his  years,  and  the  hones  of 
old  Anchises  rest  in  peace  !  -do  you  only  spare  t hi- 
house  which  gives  itself  without  condition  into  your 
hand.  What  can  you  charge  me  with  but  love? 
I  am  not  of  Phthia,"  nor  sprung  of  great  My>  <  nae, 
nor   have    I   had   a   husband   and   a   father  who   have 

»5 


OVID 

si  pudet  uxoris,  non  nupta,  sed  hospita  dicar ; 

dum  tua  sit,  Dido  quidlibet  esse  feret. 
Nota  mihi  f  reta  sunt  Afrum  plangentia  litus ; 

temporibus  certis  dantque  negantque  viam.         170 
cum  dabit  aura  viam,  praebebis  earbasa  ventis  ; 

nunc  levis  eiectam  continet  alga  ratem. 
tempus  ut  observem,  manda  mihi ;  serius  ibis, 

nee  te,  si  cupies,  ipsa  manere  sinam. 
et  socii  requiem  poscunt,  laniataque  classis  175 

postulat  exiguas  semirefecta  moras  ; 
pro  meritis  et  siqua  tibi  debebimus  ultra,1 

pro  spe  coniugii  tempora  parva  peto — 
dum  freta  mitescunt  et  amor,  dum  tempore  et  usu 

fortiter  edisco  tristia  posse  pati.  180 

Si  minus,  est  animus  nobis  effundere  vitam  ; 

in  me  erudelis  non  potes  esse  diu. 
adspicias  utinarn,  quae  sit  seribentis  imago  ! 

scribimus,  et  gremio  Troicus  ensis  adest, 
perque     genas     lacrimae     strictum    labuntur     in 

ensem,  185 

qui  iam  pro  lacrimis  sanguine  tinetus  erit. 
quam  bene  conveniunt  fato  tua  munera  nostro  ! 

instruis  inpensa  nostra  sepulcra  brevi. 
nee  mea  nunc  primum  feriuntur  pectora  telo  ; 

ille  locus  saevi  vulnus  amoris  habet.  190 

Anna  soror,  soror  Anna,  meae  male  conscia  culpae, 

iam  dabis  in  cineres  ultima  dona  meos. 

1  ultro  P. 
96 


THE   HEROIDES    VII 

stood  against  you.  If  you  shame  to  have  me  your 
wife,  let  me  not  be  called  bride,  but  hostess  ; 
so  she  be  yours,  Dido  will  endure  to  be  what 
you  will. 

169  weii  (]0  J  know  the  seas  that  break  upon 
African  shores;  they"  have  their  times  of  granting 
and  denying  the  way.  When  the  breeze  permits, 
you  shall  give  your  canvas  to  the  gale;  now  the 
light  seaweed  detains  your  ship  by  the  strand. 
Entrust  me  with  the  watching  of  the  skies ;  you " 
shall  go  later,  and  I  myself,  though  you  desire  it, 
will  not  let  you  to  stay.  Your  comrades,  too,  de- 
mand repose,  and  your  shattered  fleet,  but  half 
refitted,  calls  for  a  short  delay ;  by  your  past  kind- 
nesses, and  by  that  other  debt  I  still,  perhaps,  shall 
owe  you,  by  my  hope  of  Wedlock,  I  ask  for  a  little 
time — while  the  sea  and  my  love  grow  calm,  while 
through  time  and  wont  I  learn  the  strength  to 
endure  my  sorrows  bravely. 

181  If  you  yield  not,  my  purpose  is  fixed  to  pour 
forth  my  life ;  you  can  not  be  cruel  to  me  for  long. 
Could  you  but  see  now  the  face  of  her  who  writes 
these  words  !  I  write,  and  the  Trojan's  blade  is 
ready  in  my  lap.  Over  my  cheeks  the  tears 
roll,  and  fall  upon  the  drawn  steel— which  soon 
shall  be  stained  with  blood  instead  of  tears.  How 
fitting  is  your  gift  in  my  hour  of  fate  !  You  furnish 
forth  my  death  at  a  cost  but  slight.  Nor  does 
my  heart  now  for  the  first  time  feel  a  weapon's 
thrust  ;  it  already  bears  the  wound  of  cruel 
love. 

191  Anna  my  sister,  my  sister  Anna,  wretched 
sharer  in  the  knowledge  of  my  fault,  soon  shall  you 
give  to  my  ashes  the  last  boon.      Nor  when    I   have 

97 


OVID 

nee  consumpta  rogis  inscribar  Elissa  Sychaei, 
hoc  tamen  in  tumuli  marmore  carmen  erit  : 

PRAEBUIT  AENEAS  ET  CAUSAM  MORTIS  ET  ENSEM  :  195 

IPSA  SUA  DIDO  CONCIDIT  USA  MANU. 


VIII 

Hermione    Oresti 

1  Pyrrhus  Achillides,  animosus  imagine  patris,  3 

inclusam  contra  iusque  pitimque  tenet, 
quod  potui,  renui,  ne  non  invita  tenerer ;  5 

cetera  femineae  non  valuere  manus. 
"  quid  facis,  Aeacide  ?  non  sum  sine  vindice,"  dixi : 

"  haec  tibi  sub  domino  est,  Pyrrhe,  puella  suo  ! '' 
surdior  ille  freto  clamantem  nomen  Orestis 

traxit  inornatis  in  sua  tecta  comis.  10 

quid  gravius  capta  Lacedaemone  serva  tulissem, 

si  raperet  Graias  barbara  turba  minis  ? 
parcius  Andromachen  vexavit  Achaia  victrix, 

cum  Danaus  Phrygias  ureret  ignis  opes. 
At  tu,  cura  mei  si  te  pia  tangit,  Oreste,  15 

inice  non  timidas  in  tua  iura  manus  ! 

1  vv.  1,  2  spurious,  hut  given  in  Aid.  Burm. :  see  note  to  V,  title. 

a  A  legal  allusion  :  a  vindex  was  one  who  undertook  the 
defence  of  a  person  seized  for  debt. 

*  Andromache's  son  Astyanax  was  thrown   from  the  walls 


THE    HEROIDES    VIII 

been  consumed  upon  the  pyre,  shall  my  inscription 
read:  elissa,  wife  of  svchaeus  ;  yet  there  shall  be 
on  the  marble  of  my  tomb  these  lines : 

From  aeneas  came  the  cause  of  heb  death, 
and  from  him  the  blade  j  from  thl  hand  01 
dido  herself  came  the  stroke  by  which  sue  fell. 


VIII 

Hermione  to  Orestes 

Pyrrhus,  Achilles'  son,  in  self-will  the  image 
of  his  sire,  holds  me  in  durance  against  every 
law  of  earth  and  heaven.  All  that  lay  in  my 
power  I  have  done — I  have  refused  consent  to  be 
held;  farther  than  that  my  woman's  hands  could  not 
avail.  "What  art  thou  doing,  son  of  Aeacus  ?  I  laek 
not  one  to  take  my  part !  "  a  I  cried.  "  This  is  a 
woman,  I  tell  thee,  Pyrrhus,  who  has  a  master  of  her 
own  !  "  Deafer  to  me  than  the  sea  as  1  shrieked 
out  the  name  of  Orestes,  he  dragged  me  with  hair 
all  disarrayed  into  his  palace.  What  worse  my  lot 
had  Lacedaemon  been  taken  and  I  been  made  a 
slave,  carried  away  by  the  barbarian  rout  with  the 
daughters  of  Greece  ?  Less  misused  by  the  \  ictorious 
Aehaeans  was  Andromache  herself,  what  time  the 
Danaan  fire  consumed  the  wealth  of  Phrygia.' 

15  But  do  you,  if  your  heart  is  touched  with  any 
natural  care  for  me,  Orestes,  lay  claim  to  your 
right  with  •.  no   timid   hand.      What!    should   anyone 

of  Troy,  and  she  became  the  prize  of  Pyrrhus  (also  oalled 
Neoptolemus).  She  was  afterwards  given  l>\  bim  i>> 
Helenus. 

99 


OVID 

an  siquis  rapiat  stabulis  armenta  reclusis, 

arma    feras,1  rapta  coniuge  lentus  eris  ? 
sit  socer  exemplo  nuptae  repetitor  ademptae, 

cui  pia  militiae  causa  puella  fuit  !  20 

si  socer  ignavus  vidua  stertisset  in  aula, 

nupta  foret  Paridi  mater,  ut  ante  fuit. 
Nee  tu  mille  rates  sinuosaque  vela  pararis 

nee  numeros  Danai  militis — ipse  veni ! 
sic    quoque    eram    repetenda   tamen,    nee    turpe 

marito  25 

aspera  pro  caro  bella  tulisse  toro. 
quid,  quod  avus  nobis  idem  Pelopeius  Atreus, 

et,  si  non  esses  vir  mihi,  frater  eras, 
vir,  precor,  uxori,  frater  succurre  sorori ! 

instant  officio  nomina  bina  tuo.  30 

Me  tibi  Tyndareus,  vita  gravis  auctor  et  annis, 

tradidit ;  arbitrium  neptis  habebat  avus. 
at  pater  Aeacidae  promiserat  inscius  acti  ; 

plus  quoque,  qui  prior  est  ordine,  posset  2  avus. 
cum  tibi  nubebam,  nulli  raea  taeda  nocebat ;  35 

si  iungar  Pyrrho,  tu  mihi  laesus  eris. 
et  pater  ignoscet  nostro  Menelaus  amori — 

succubuit  telis  praepetis  ipse  dei. 
quern  sibi  permisit,  genero  concedet  amorem  ; 

proderit  exemplo  mater  amata  suo.  40 

tu  mihi,  quod  matri  pater  est ;  quas  egerat  olim 

Dardanius  partis  advena,  Pyrrhus  agit. 

1  feras  P  :  feres  s. 

2  posset  P  G  a  :  possit  s  and, early  editions-,  pollet  Bent. 

°  Frater  is  often  so  used. 


THE    HEROIDES    VIII 

break  open  your  pens  and  steal  away  your  herds, 
would  you  resort  to  arms  ?  and  when  your  wife  is 
stolen  away  will  you  be  slow  to  move?  Let  your 
father-in-law  Menelaus  be  your  example,  he  who 
demanded  back  the  wife  taken  from  him.  and  had  in 
a  woman  righteous  cause  for  war.  Had  he  been 
spiritless,  and  drowsed  in  his  deserted  halls,  my 
mother  would  still  be  wed  to  Paris,  as  she  was  before. 

23  Yet  make  not  ready  a  thousand  ships  with 
bellying  sails,  and  hosts  of  Danaan  soldiery — your- 
self come!  Yet  even  thus  1  might  well  have  been 
sought  back,  nor  is  it  unseemly  for  a  husband  to 
have  endured  fierce  combat  for  love  of  his  marriage- 
bed.  Remember,  too,  the  same  grandsire  is  ours, 
Atreus,  Pelops'  son,  and,  were  you  not  husband  to 
me,  you  would  still  be  cousin."  Husband.  I  entreat, 
succour  your  wife  ;  brother,  your  sister  !  Both  bonds 
press  you  on  to  your  duty. 

31  I  was  given  to  you  by  Tyndareus,  weighty 
of  counsel  both  for  his  lite  and  tor  his  years  ;  the 
grandsire  was  arbiter  of  the  grandchild's  fate.  Hut 
my  father,  it  might  be  said,  had  promised  me  to 
Aeacus'  son,  not  knowing  this;  yet  my  grandsire, 
who  is  first  in  order,  should  also  be  first  in  power, 
When  I  was  wed  to  you.  my  union  broughl  harm 
to  none  ;  if  I  wed  with  Pyrrhus,  I  shall  deal 
a  wound  to  you.  My  father  Menelaus,  too.  will 
pardon  our  love — he  himself  succumbed  to  the  darts 
of  the  winged  god.  The  love  he  allowed  himself'. 
he  will  concede  to  his  daughter's  chosen  ;  m\ 
mother,  loved  by  him.  will  aid  with  her  precedent 
You  are  to  me  what  my  sire  is  to  my  mother,  and 
the  part  which  once  the  Dardanian  stranger  played. 
Pyrrhus    now    plays.        Let     him    he    endlessly    proud 

ioi 


OVID 

ille  licet  patriis  sine  fine  superbiat  actis  ; 

et  tu,  quae  referas  facta  parentis,  habes. 
Tantalides  omnis  ipsumque  regebat  Achillem.  45 

hie  pars  militiae  ;  dux  erat  ille  ducum. 
tu  quoque  habes  proavum  Pelopem  Pelopisque  paren- 
tem ; 

si  melius  numeres,  a  love  quintus  eris. 
Nee  virtute  cares,     arma  invidiosa  tulisti, 

sed  tibi — quid  faceres  ? — induit  ilia  pater.1  50 

materia  vellem  fortis  meliore  fuisses  ; 

non  lecta  est  operi,  sed  data  causa  tuo. 
hanc  tamen  inplesti  ;  iuguloque  Aegisthus  aperto 

tecta  cruentavit,  quae  pater  ante  tuus. 
increpat  Aeacides  laudemque  in  crimina  vertit —     55 

et  tamen  adspectus  sustinet  ille  meos. 
rumpor,  et  ora  mihi  pariter  cum  mente  tumescunt, 

pectoraque  inclusis  ignibus  usta  dolent. 
Hermione  coram  quisquamne  obiecit  Oresti, 

nee  mihi  sunt  vires,  nee  ferus  ensis  adest  ?  60 

flere  licet  certe  ;  flendo  defundimus  iram, 

perque  sinum  lacrimae  fluminis  instar  eunt. 
has  solas  habeo  semper  semperque  profundo ; 

ument  incultae  fonte  perenne  genae. 
Num  generis  fato,  quod  nostros  errat  in  annos,        65 

Tantalides  matres  apta  rapina  sumus  ? 

1  So  Hous. :  Sed  tu  quid  faceres  ?  others. 

a  Jupiter,  Tantalus,  Pelops,  Atreus,  Agamemnon,  Orestes 
— really  sixth. 

6  During  Agamemnon's  absence,  Aegisthus  won  Clytem- 
nestra's  heart,  and  the  two  compassed  the  king's  death. 
After  seven  jears  of  reigning,  Aegisthus  and  Clytemnestra 
were  slain  by  her  son  Orestes. 


THE    HEROiDES    VII] 

because  of  his  father's  deeds;  you,  t < »< » ,  hav<  a  sires 

achievements  of  which  to  boast.  The  son  of  Tantalus 
was  ruler  over  all,  over  Achilles  himself.  The  one 
was  but  a  part  of  the  soldier  hand;  the  other  was 
chief  of  chiefs.  You,  too,  have  ancestors — Pelops, 
and  the  father  of  Pelops  :  should  you  care  to  count 
more  closely,  you  could  call  yourself  fifth  from 
Jove.*1 

49  Nor  are  you  without  your  prowess.  The  arms 
you  wielded  were  hateful — but  what  were  you  to 
do? — your  father  placed  them  in  your  hand.  1 
could  wish  that  fortune  had  given  you  more  ex- 
cellent matter  for  courage  ;  but  the  cause  that 
called  forth  your  deed  was  not  chosen  —  it  was 
fixed.  The  call  you  none  the  less  obeyed  :  and 
the  pierced  throat  of  Aegisthus  stained  with  blood 
the  dwelling  your  father's  blood  had  reddened 
before.6  The  son  of  Aeacus  assails  your  name. 
and  turns  your  praise  to  blame — and  yet  shrinks 
not  before  my  gaze.  I  burst  with  anger,  and  my 
face  swells  with  passion  no  less  than  my  heart,  and 
my  breast  burns  with  the  pains  of  pent-up  wrath. 
Has  anyone  in  hearing  of  Hermione  said  aught 
against  Orestes,  and  have  1  no  strength,  and  no 
keen  sword  at  hand  ?  I  can  weep,  at  least.  In 
weeping  I  let  pour  forth  my  ire,  and  over  my  bosom 
course  the  tears  like  a  flowing  stream.  These  only 
I  still  have,  and  still  do  1  let  them  gush;  my 
cheeks  are  wet  and  unsightly  from  their  never 
ending  fount. 

65  Can  it  be  some  fate  has  come  upon  our  house 
and  pursued  it  through  the  years  even  to  my  time, 
that  we  Tantalid  women  are  ever  victims  ready  to  the 
ravisher's    hand?      I    shall     not      rehearse     the     lying 


OVID 

non  ego  fluminei  referam  mendacia  cygni 

nee  querar  in  plumis  delituisse  Iovem. 
qua  duo  porrectus  longe  freta  distinet  Isthmos, 

veeta  peregrinis  Hippodamia  rotis  ; 1  70 

Taenaris  Idaeo  trans  aequora  ab  hospite  rapta  73 

Argolicas  pro  se  vertit  in  arma  manus. 
vix  equidem  memini,  memini  tamen.   omnia  luctus,  75 

omnia  sollieiti  plena  timoris  erant ; 
flebat  avus  Phoebeque  soiw  fratresque  gemelli, 

orabat  superos  Leda  suumque  Iovem. 
ipsa  ego,  non  longos  etiamtunc  scissa  capillos, 

elamabam  :  "  sine  me,  me  sine,  mater,  abis  ?  "     80 
nam  eoniunx  aberat  !  ne  non  Pelopeia  credar, 

ecce,  Neoptolemo  praeda  parata  fui  ! 
Pelides  utinam  vitasset  Apollinis  areus  ! 

damnaret  nati  facta  proterva  pater  ; 
nee  quondam  placuit  nee  nunc  placuisset  Achilli     85 

abducta  viduum  coniuge  flere  virum. 
quae  mea  caelestis  iniuria  fecit  iniquos, 

quodve  mini  miserae  sidus  obesse  querar  ? 
parva  mea  sine  matre  fui,  pater  arma  ferebat, 

et  duo  cum  vivant,  orba  duobus  eram.  90 

non  tibi  blanditias  primis,  mea  matei-,  in  annis 

incerto  dictas  ore  puella  tub  ; 
non  ego  captavi  brevibus  tua  colla  lacertis 

nee  gremio  sedi  sarcina  grata  tuo. 
non  cultus  tibi  cura  mei,  nee  pacta  marito  95 

intravi  thalamos  matre  parante  novos. 

1  71,  72  spurious  Pa  : 

Castori  Amyelaeo  et  Amyclaeo  Polluci 
reddita  Mopsopia  Taenaris  urbe  soror  ; 

a  The  story  of  Leda  and  the  swan.  b  Pelops  won  her 

in  the  race  witli  Oenomaus,  her  father,  whose  death  he  com- 
passed by  tampering  with  Oenomaus'  charioteer  Myrtilus. 

c  Apollo   directed    the    arrow   of    Paris    which    wounded 
Achilles  in  the  heel,  his  only  vulnerable  part. 
104 


THE   HEROIDES   VIII 

words  of  the  swan  upon  the  stream,  nor  complain  of 
Jove  disguised  in  plumage."  Where  the  sea  i^ 
sundered  in  two  by  tin-  far-stretched  Isthmus, 
Hippodamia h  was  borne  away  in  the  car  of  the 
stranger;  she  of  Taenarus,  stolen  away  across  the 
seas  by  the  stranger-guest  from  Ida, roused  to  arms 
in  her  behalf  all  the  men  of  Argos.  I  scarcely 
remember,  to  be  sure,  yet  remember  I  do.  All  was 
grief,  everywhere  anxiety  and  fear  ;  my  grandsire 
wept,  and  my  mother's  sister  Phoebe,  and  the  twin 
brothers,  and  Leda  fell  to  praying  the  gods  above,  and 
her  own  Jove.  As  for  myself,  tearing  my  locks,  not 
yet  long,  I  began  to  cry  aloud  :  "  Mother,  will  you  go 
away,  and  will  you  leave  me  behind?"  For  her  lord 
was  gone.  Lest  J  be  thought  none  of  Pelops"  Hue.  lo, 
I  too  have  been  left  a  ready  prey  for  Neoptolemus  ! 

83  Would  that  Peleus'  son  had  escaped  the  how  of 
Apollo  !c  The  father  would  condemn  the  son  for 
his  wanton  deed  ;  'twas  not  of  yore  the  pleasure  "1 
Achilles,  nor  would  it  be  now  his  pleasure,  to  see 
a  widowed  husband  weeping  for  his  stolen  wife. 
What  wrong  have  I  done  that  heaven's  hosts  are 
against  me  ?  or  what  constellation  shall  I  complain  is 
hostile  to  my  wretched  self  ?  In  my  childhood  I  had 
no  mother;  my  father  was  ever  in  the  wars — though 
the  two  were  not  dead,  I  was  reft  of  both.  You 
were  not  near  in  my  first  years,  0  my  mother,  to 
receive  the  caressing  prattle  from  the  tripping 
tongue  of  the  little  girl  :  I  never  clasped  about  your 
neck  the  little  arms  that  would  not  reach,  and  never 
sat,  a  burden  sweet,  upon  your  lap.  I  was  not 
reared  and  cared  for  by  your  hand  ;  and  when  I  was 
promised  in  wedlock  I  had  no  mother  to  make  ready 
the   new  chamber  for  my   coming.      I    wenl    oul    to 

105 


OVID 

obvia  prodieram  reduci  tibi — vera  fatebor — 

nee  facies  nobis  nota  parentis  erat ! 
te  tamen  esse  Helenen,  quod  eras  pulcherrima,  sensi ; 

ipsa  requirebas,  quae  tua  nata  foret !  100 

Pars  haec  una  inihi,  coniunx  bene  cessit  Orestes  ; 

is  quoque,  ni  pro  se  pugnat,  ademptus  erit. 
Pyrrhus  habet  captam  reduce  et  victoreparente — 

hoc  munus  !  nobis  x  diruta  Troia  dedit  ! 
cum  tamen  altus  equis  Titan  radiantibus  instat,     105 

perfruor  infelix  liberiore  malo  ; 
nox  ubi  me  thalamis  ululantem  et  acerba  gementem 

condidit  in  maesto  procubuique  toro, 
pro  somno  lacrimis  oculi  funguntur  obortis, 

quaque  licet,  fugio  sicut  ab  hoste  viro.  110 

saepe  malis  stupeo  rerumque  oblita  locique 

ignara  tetigi  Scyria  membra  manu, 
utque  nefas  sensi,  male  corpora  tacta  relinquo 

et  mihi  pollutas  credor  habere  maims. 
saepe  Neoptolemi  pro  nomine  nomen  Orestis         115 

exit,  et  errorem  vocis  ut  omen  amo. 
Per  genus  infelix  iuro  generisque  parentem, 

qui  freta,  qui  terras  et  sua  regna  quatit ; 
per  patris  ossa  tui,  patrui  mihi,  quae  tibi  debent, 

quod  se  sub  tumulo  fortiter  ulta  iacent —  120 

aut  ego  praemoriar  primoque  exstingiiar  in  aevo, 

aut  ego  Tantalidae  Tantalis  uxor  ero  ! 

1  So  G  t  Merh.  Pa.-,  et  minus  a  nobis  P :    munus   et  hoe 
nobis  s  Plan.:  munus  et  a!  nobis  Ehw. 


THE    HEROIDES    VIII 

meet  you  when  you  came  back  home — what  I  shall 
say  is  truth — and  the  face  of  my  mo1  her  was  unknown 
to  me!  That  you  were  Helen  1  none  the  less  knew. 
because  you  were  most  beautiful  :  but  you — you  had 
to  ask  who  your  daughter  was  ! 

101  This  one  favour  of  fortune  has  been  mine — to 
have  Orestes  for  my  wedded  mate;  but  he.  toOj  will 
be  taken  from  me  if  he  does  not  fijdit  for  his  own. 
Pyrrhus  holds  me  captive,  though  my  father  is 
returned  and  a  victor — this  is  the  boon  brought  me 
by  the  downfall  of  Troy  !  Yet  my  unhappy  soul  has 
the  comfort,  when  Titan  is  urging  aloft  his  radiant 
steeds,  of  being  more  free  in  its  wretchedness  ;  bat 
when  the  dark  of  night  has  fallen  and  sent  me  to  my 
chamber  with  wails  and  lamentation  for  my  bitter  lot. 
and  I  have  stretched  myself  prostrate  on  my  sorrowful 
bed,  then  springing  tears,  not  slumber,  is  the  service 
of  mine  eyes,  and  in  every  way  I  can  I  shrink  from 
my  mate  as  from  a  foe.  Oft  I  am  distraught 
with  woe;  I  lose  sense  of  where  I  am  and  what  my 
fate,  and  with  witless  hand  have  touched  the  body  of 
him  of  Scyrus  ;  but  when  I  have  waked  to  the  awful 
act,  I  draw  my  hand  from  the  base  contact,  and  look 
upon  it  as  defiled.  Oft.  instead  of  Neoptolemus  the 
name  of  Orestes  comes  forth,  and  the  mistaken 
word  is  a  treasured  omen. 

117  By  our  unhappy  line  I  swear,  and  by  the  parent 
of  our  line,  he  who  shakes  the  seas,  tin-  land,  and 
his  own  realms  on  high  ;  by  the  bones  of  your  father, 
uncle  to  me,  which  owe  it  to  you  that  bravely 
avenged  they  lie  beneath  their  burial  mound  either 
I  shall  die  before  mv  time  and  in  myyouthful  years  be 
blotted  out,  or  I,  a  Tantalid.  shall  hi-  the  wife  of  him 
sprung  from  Tantalus  ! 

1 07 


OVID 

IX 

Deianira  Herculi 

Gratulor  Oechaliam  titulis  accedere  nostris  ; 

victorem  victae  succubuisse  queror. 
fama  Pelasgiadas  subito  pervenit  in  urbes  . 

decolor  et  factis  infitianda  tuis, 
quern  numquam  Iuno  seriesque  inmensa  laborum      5 

fregerit,  huic  Iolen  inposuisse  iugum. 
hoc  velit  Eurystheus,  velit  hoc  germana  Tonantis, 

laetaque  sit  vitae  labe  noverca  tuae  ; 
at  non  ille  velit,  cui  nox — sic  creditur — una 

non  tanta,1  ut  tantus  eonciperere,  fuit.  10 

Plus  tibi  quam  Iuno,  nocuit  Venus  :  ilia  premendo 

sustulit,  haec  humili  2  sub  pede  colla  tenet, 
respice  vindicibus  pacatum  viribus  orbem, 

qua  latam  Nereus  caerulus  ambit  liumura. 
se  tibi  paxterrae,  tibi  se  tuta  aequora  debent ;        15 

inplesti  mentis  solis  utramque  domum. 
quod  te  laturum  est,  caelum  prius  ipse  tulisti ; 

Hercule  supposito  sidera  fulsit  Atlans. 
quid  nisi  notitia  est  misero  quaesita  pudori, 

si  cumulus  stupri  facta  priora  notat  ?  20 

1  tanta  s  lahn  Loers  ran  Lennep  :   tanti  P  G  oo. 

2  humilis  PGw  Bent.  Ehir. 

a  The  Trachiniae  of  Sophocles  dramatizes  the  Deianira 
story,  and  Apollodorns  contains  it.  See  also  Ovid,  Metam. 
ix.  1-273.  and  Seneca,  Hercules  Oetae,us. 

*  Who  imposed  the  twelve  labours  on  Hercules  at  the 
instigation  of  Juno. 

108 


THE    HEUOIDES    IX 

IX 
Deianika  to   Hercules 

"  I  render  thanks  that  Oechalia  lias  been  added 
to  the  list  of  our  honours;  but  that  the  victor  lias 
yielded  to  the  vanquished,  I  complain.  The  rumour 
has  suddenly  spread  to  all  the  Pelasgian  cities — a 
rumour  unseemly,  to  which  your  deeds  should  give 
the  lie — that  on  the  man  whom  Juno's  unending 
series  of  labours  has  never  crushed,  on  him  Ink-  has 
placed  her  yoke.  This  would  please  Eurystheus,'' 
and  it  would  please  the  sister  of  the  Thunderer; 
stepdame c  that  she  is,  she  would  gladly  know  of 
the  stain  upon  your  life;  but  'twould  give  no  joy  t<> 
him  for  whom,  so  'tis  believed,  a  single  night  did  not 
suffice  for  the  begetting  of  one  so  great. 

11  More  than  Juno,  Venus  has  been  your  banc. 
The  one,  by  crushing  you  down,  has  raised  you 
up;  the  other  has  your  neck  beneath  her  humbling 
foot.  Look  but  on  the  circle  of  the  earth  made 
peaceful  by  your  protecting  strength,  wherever  tin- 
blue  waters  of  Nereus  wind  round  the  broad  land. 
To  you  is  owing  peace  upon  the  earth,  to  you  safety 
on  the  seas;  you  haye  filled  with  worthy  deeds 
both  abodes  of  the  sun.rf  The  heaven  thai  is  to  bear 
you,  yourself  once  bore  ;  Hercules  bent  to  the  load 
of  the  Stars  when  Atlas  was  their  stay.  What  have 
you  gained  but  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  your 
wretched  shame,  if  a  final  act  of  baseness  blots 
your  former  deeds?      Can  it    be  you   that   men   saj 


•'  Jupiter  was  the  father  of  Hercules  by  Alcmene. 

*'  Farthest  east  and  west 


IO<) 


OVID 

tene  ferunt  geminos  pressisse  tenaciter  angues, 

cum  tener  in  cunis  iam  love  dignus  eras  ? 
coepisti  melius  quam  desinis  ;  ultima  primis 

cedunt ;  dissimiles  hie  vir  et  ille  puer. 
quern    non     mille    ferae,    quern    non    Stheneleius 
hostis,  25 

non  potuit  Iuno  vincere,  vincit  amor. 
At  bene  nupta  feror,  quia  nominer  Herculis  uxor, 

sitque  socer,  rapidis  qui  tonat  altus  equis. 
quam  male  inaequales  veniunt  ad  aratra  iuvenci, 

tarn  premitur  magno  eoniuge  nupta  minor.  30 

non  honor  est  sed  onus  species  laesura  ferentis  ; 

siqua  voles  apte  nubere,  nube  pari, 
vir  mihi  semper  abest,  et  eoniuge  notior  hospes, 

monstraque  terribiles  persequiturque  feras. 
ipsa  domo  vidua  votis  operata  pudicis  35 

torqueoir,  infesto  ne  vir  ab  hoste  cadat  ; 
inter  serpentes  aprosque  avidosque  leones 

iactor  et  haesuros  terna  per  ora  canes, 
me  pecudum  fibrae  simulacraque  inania  somni 

omniaque  arcana  nocte  petita  movent.  40 

aucupor  infelix  incertae  murmura  famae, 

speque  timor  dubia  spesque  timore  cadit. 
mater  abest  queriturque  deo  placuisse  potenti, 

nee  pater  Amphitiyon  nee  puer  Hyllus  adest ; 
arbiter  Eurystheus  irae  Iunonis  iniquae  45 

sentitur  nobis  iraque  longa  deae. 
no 


THE    HEROIDES    IX 

clutched  tight  the  serpents  twain  while  a  tender  babe 
in  the  cradle,  already  worthy  of  Jove  ?  You  began 
better  than  you  end  ;  your  last  deeds  yield  to  your 
first;  the  man  you  are  and  the  child  you  were  are 
not  the  same.  He  whom  not  a  thousand  wild  beasts, 
whom  not  the  Stheneleian  toe.  whom  not  Juno  could 
overcome,  love  overcomes. 

27  Yet  I  am  said  to  be  well  mated,  because  I  am 
called  the  wife  of  Hercules,  and  because  the  father 
of  my  lord  is  he  who  thunders  on  high  with  im- 
petuous steeds.  As  the  ill-mated  steer  yoked 
miserably  at  the  plough,  so  fares  the  wife  who  is  less 
than  her  mighty  lord.  It  is  not  honour,  but  mere 
fair-seeming,  and  brings  dole  to  us  who  bear  the 
.load;  would  you  be  wedded  happily,  wed  your 
equal.  My  lord  is  ever  absent  from  me — he  is 
better  known  to  me  as  guest  than  husband — ever 
pursuing  monsters  and  dreadful  beasts.  1  myself,  at 
home  and  widowed,  am  busied  with  chaste  prayers, 
in  torment  lest  my  husband  fall  by  the  savage 
foe;  with  serpents  and  with  boars  and  ravening 
lions  my  imaginings  are  full,  and  with  hounds 
three-throated  hard  upon  the  prey.  The  entrails 
of  slain  victims  stir  my  fears,  the  idle  images  of 
dreams,  and  the  omen  sought  in  the  mysterious  night. 
Wretchedly  I  catch  at  the  uncertain  murmurs  of  the 
common  talk;  my 'fear  is  lost  in  wavering  hope,  mj 
hope  again  in  fear.  Your  mother  is  away,  and 
laments  that  she  ever  pleased  the  potent  god.  and 
neither  your  father  Amphitryon  is  here,  nor  your  son 
Hyllus;  the  acts  of  Eurystheus,  the  instrument  of 
Juno's  unjust  wrath,  and  the  long-eont iiui.il  ang<  r 
of  the  goddess — I  am  the  one  to  feel. 

i  i  l 


OVID 

Haec  mihi  ferre  parum  ?  peregrinos  addis  amores, 

et  mater  de  te  quaelibet  esse  potest, 
non  ego  Partheniis  temeratam  vallibus  Augen, 

nee  referam  partus,  Ormeni  nympha,  tuos  ;  50 

non  tibi  crimen  erunt,  Teuthrantia  turba,  sorores, 

quarum  de  populo  nulla  relieta  tibi  est. 
una,  recens  crimen,  referetur  adultera  nobis, 

unde  ego  sum  Lydo  facta  noverca  Lamo. 
Maeandros,  terris  totiens  errator  in  isdem,  55 

qui  lassas  in  se  saepe  retorquet  aquas, 
vidit  in  Herculeo  suspensa  monilia  collo 

illo,  cui  caelum  sarcina  parva  fuit. 
non  puduit  fortis  auro  cohibere  lacertos, 

et  solidis  gemmas  opposuisse  toris  ?  60 

nempe  sub  his  animam  pestis  Nemeaea  lacertis 

edidit,  unde  umerus  tegmina  laevus  habet  ! 
ausus  es  hirsutos  mitra  redimire  capillos  ! 

aptior  Herculeae  populus  alba  comae, 
nee  te  Maeonia  lascivae  more  puellae  65 

incingi  zona  dedecuisse  pudet  ? l 
non  tibi  succurrit  crudi  Diomedis  imago, 

efferus  humana  qui  dape  pavit  equas  ? 
si  te  vidisset  cultu  Busiris  in  isto, 

huic  victor  victo  2  nempe  pudendus  eras.  70 

detrahat  Antaeus  duro  redimicula  collo, 

ne  pigeat  molli  succubuisse  viro. 
Inter  Ioniacas  calathum  tenuisse  puellas 

diceris  et  dominae  pertimuisse  minas. 

1  pudet  P  Gu> :  putas  s  Burm. :  putes  Leidensis  :  patet  Pa. 

2  Hie  ///  victor  victo  P  ;  huic  w  :  victori  victo  .  .  .  erat  Pa. 

a  There  were  fifty  of  them,  and  their  father  Thespius 
wished  for  fifty  grandchildren  by  Hercules. 

*  Hercules  was  the  lover  of  Omphale,  or  Iardanis  (v.  103), 
queen  of  Lydia,  sold  to  her  by  Hermes  as  a  slave. 


THE    HEROIDES    IX 

47  Is  this  too  little  for  me  to  endure  ?  You  add 
to  it  your  stranger  loves,  and  whoever  will  may 
be  by  you  a  mother.  I  will  say  nothing  of  Aug'e 
betrayed  in  the  vales  of  Parthenius,  or  of  thy  travail, 
nymph  sprung  of  Ormenus ;  nor  will  I  charge 
against  you  the  daughters  of  Teuthras'  son,  tin- 
throng  of  sisters  from  whose  number  none  was 
spared  by  you."  But  there  is  one  love — a  fresh 
offence  of  which  I  have  heard — a  love  by  which 
I  am  made  stepdame  to  Lydian  Lamus.6  The 
Meander,  so  many  times  wandering  in  the  same 
lands,  who  oft  turns  back  upon  themselves  his 
wearied  waters,  has  seen  hanging  from  the  neck  of 
Hercules — the  neck  which  found  the  heavens  but 
slight  burden — bejewelled  chains !  Felt  you  no 
shame  to  bind  with  gold  those  strong  arms,  and  to 
set  the  gem  upon  that  solid  brawn  ?  Ah,  to  think 
'twas  these  arms  that  crushed  the  life  from  the 
Nemean  pest,  whose  skin  now  covers  your  left  side  ! 
You  have  not  shrunk  from  binding  your  shaggy  hair 
with  a  woman's  turban !  More  meet  for  the  locks 
of  Hercules  were  the  white  poplar.  And  for  you  to 
disgrace  yourself  by  wearing  the  Maeonian  zone, 
like  a  wanton  girl — feel  you  no  shame  for  that  ? 
Did  there  come  to  vour  mind  no  image  of  savage 
Diomede,  fiei'cely  feeding  his  mares  on  human  meat  ? 
Had  Busiris  seen  you  in  that  garb,  he  whom  you 
vanquished  would  surely  have  reddened  for  such  a 
victor  as  you.  Antaeus  would  tear  from  the  hard 
neck  the  turban-bands,  lest  he  feel  shame  at  having 
succumbed  to  an  unmanly  foe. 

73  They  say  that  you  have  held  the  wool-basket 
among  the  girls  of  Ionia,  and  been  Brightened  al 
your  mistress'  threats.      Do  you  not  shrink,  Aleides. 

"3 


OVID 

non  fugis,  Alcide,  victricem  mille  laborum  75 

rasilibus  calathis  inposuisse  manum, 
crassaque  robusto  deducis  pollice  fila, 

aequaque  formosae  pensa  rependis  erae  ? 
a,  quotiens  digitis  dum  torques  stamina  duris, 

praevalidae  fusos  conminuere  manus  !  80 

ante  pedes  dominae 1  .  .  .  . 

factaque  narrabas  dissimulanda  tibi —  84 

scilicet  inmanes  elisis  faucibus  hydros  85 

infantem  caudis  involuisse  manum, 
ut  Tegeaeus  aper  cupressifero  Erymantho 

incubet  et  vasto  pondere  laedat  humum. 
non  tibi  Threiciis  adfixa  penatibus  ora, 

non  hominum  pingues  caede  tacentur  equae  ;       90 
prodigiumque  triplex,  armenti  dives  Hiberi 

Geryones,  quamvis  in  tribus  unus  erat ; 
inque  canes  totidem  trunco  digestus  ab  uno 

Cerberos  inplicitis  angue  minante  comis  ; 
quaeque  redundabat  fecundo  vulnere  serpens  95 

fertilis  et  damnis  dives  ab  ipsa  suis  ; 
quique  inter  laevumque  latus  laevumque  lacertum 

praegrave  conpressa  fauce  pependit  onus  ; 
et  male  confisum  pedibus  formaque  bimembri 

pulsum  Thessalicis  agmen  equestre  iugis.  100 

Haec  tu  Sidonio  potes  insignitus  amictu 

dicere  ?     non  cultu  lingua  retenta  silet  ? 
se  quoque  nympha  tuis  ornavit  Iardanis  armis 

et  tulit  a  capto  nota  tropaea  viro. 

1  81,  half  of  82,  and  83,  spurious,  Merle.  Pa. 

crederis  infelix  scuticae  tremefactus  habenis 

ante  pedes  dominae  pertimuisse  minas  .  .  . 
eximias  pompas,  inmania  eemina  laudum. 

114 


THE    HEROIDES    IX 

from  laying  to  the  polished  wool-basket  the  hand 
that  triumphed  over  a  thousand  toils ;  do  you  draw 
oft  with  stalwart  thumb  the  coarsely  spun  strands, 
and  give  back  to  the  hand  of  a  pretty  mistress  the 
just  portion  she  weighed  out  ?  Ah,  how  often, 
while  with  dour  finger  you  twisted  the  thread,  have 
your  too  strong  hands  crushed  the  spindle  !  Before 
your  mistress'  feet  ....  and  told  of  the  deeds  of 
which  you  should  now  say  naught — of  enormous 
serpents,  throttled  and  coiling  their  lengths  about 
your  infant  hand  ;  how  the  Tegeaean  boar  has  his 
lair  on  cypress-bearing  Erymanthus,  and  afflicts  the 
ground  with  his  vast  weight.  You  do  not  omit  the 
skulls  nailed  up  in  Thracian  homes,  nor  the  mares 
made  fat  with  the  flesh  of  slain  men ;  nor  the  triple 
prodigy.  Geryones,  rich  in  Iberian  cattle,  who  was 
one  in  three ;  nor  Cerberus,  branching  from  one 
trunk  into  a  three-fold  dog,  his  hair  inwoven  with 
the  threatening  snake  ;  nor  the  fertile  serpent  that 
sprang  forth  again  from  the  fruitful  wound,  grown 
rich  from  her  own  hurt ;  nor  him  whose  mass 
hung  heavy  between  your  left  side  and  left  arm  as 
your  hand  clutched  his  throat  ;  nor  the  equestrian 
array  that  put  ill  trust  in  their  feet  and  dual  form, 
confounded  by  you  on  the  ridges  of  Thessaly. 

101  These  deeds  can  you  recount,  gaily  arrayed  in 
a  Sidonian  gown  ?  Does  not  your  dress  rob  from 
your  tongue  all  utterance?  The  nymph-daughter 
of  Iardanus"  has  even  tricked  herself  out  in  your 
arms,  and  won  famous  triumphs  from  the  vanquished 
"  Omphale. 

"5 


OVID 

i  nunc,  tolle  animos  et  fortia  gesta  recense  ;  105 

quo l  tu  non  esses,  iure  vir  ilia  fait. 
qua  tanto  minor  es,  quanto  te,  maxime  rerum, 

quam  quos  vicisti,  vincere  maius  erat. 
illi  procedit  rerum  mensura  tuarum — 

cede  bonis  ;  heres  laudis  arnica  tuae.  110 

o  pudor  !  hirsuti  costis  exuta  leonis 

aspera  texerunt  vellera  molle  latus  ! 
falleris  et  nescis — non  sunt  spolia  ilia  leonis, 

sed  tua,  tuque  fieri  victor  es,  ilia  tui. 
femina  tela  tulit  Lernaeis  atra  venenis,  115 

ferre  gravem  lana  vix  satis  apta  colum, 
instruxitque  manum  clava  domitrice  ferarum, 

vidit  et  in  speculo  coniugis  arma  sui  ! 
Haec  tamen  audieram  ;  licuit  non  credere  famae, 

et  venit  ad  sensus  mollis  ab  aure  dolor —  120 

ante  meos  oculos  adducitur  advena  paelex, 

nee  mihi,  quae  patior,  dissimulare  licet ! 
non  sinis  averti ;  mediam  captiva  per  urbem 

invitis  oculis  adspicienda  venit. 
nee  venit  incultis  captarum  more  capillis,  125 

fortunam  vultu  fassa  decente  2  suam  ; 
ingreditur  late  lato  spectabilis  auro, 

qualiter  in  Phrygia  tu  quoque  cultus  eras, 
dat  vultum  populo  sublimis  ut  3  Hercule  victo  ; 

Oechaliam  vivo  stare  parente  putes.  130 

1  quo  Pa. :  quern  P1  :    quod  P2  G  u> :  quom  Madv. 

2  So  van  Lennep  :  vultu  fassa  tegente  P. 

3  So  early  editions,  Plan  :  sublime  sub  Hercule  victo  P  G  a>. 

"  Iole. 
n6 


THE    HEROIDES    IX 

hero.  Go  now,  puff  up  your  spirit  and  recount  your 
brave  deeds  done ;  she  has  proved  herself  a  man  by 
a  right  you  could  not  urge.  You  are  as  much  less 
than  she,  O  greatest  of  men,  as  it  was  greater  to 
vanquish  you  than  those  you  vanquished.  To  her 
passes  the  full  measure  of  your  exploits — yield  up 
what  you  possess  ;  your  mistress  is  heir  to  your  praise. 
O  shame,  that  the  rough  skin  stripped  from  the 
flanks  of  the  shaggy  lion  has  covered  a  woman's 
delicate  side !  You  are  mistaken,  and  know  it  not — 
that  spoil  is  not  from  the  lion,  but  from  you  ;  you 
are  victor  over  the  beast,  but  she  over  you.  A 
woman  has  borne  the  darts  blackened  with  the 
venom  of  Lerna,  a  woman  scarce  strong  enough  to 
carry  the  spindle  heavy  with  wool ;  a  woman  lias 
taken  in  her  hand  the  club  that  overcame  wild 
beasts,  and  in  the  mirror  gazed  upon  the  armour  of 
her  lord  ! 

lly  These  things,  however,  I  had  only  heard  ;  I 
could  distrust  men's  words,  and  the  pain  hit  on  my 
senses  softly,  through  the  ear — but  now  my  very 
eyes  must  look  upon  a  stranger-mistress  "  led  before 
them,  nor  may  I  now  dissemble  what  I  suffer  !  You 
do  not  allow  me  to  turn  away ;  the  woman  comes  a 
captive  through  the  city's  midst,  to  be  looked  upon 
by  my  unwilling  eyes.  Nor  comes  she  after  the 
manner  of  captive  women,  with  hair  unkempt, 
and  with  becoming  countenance  that  tells  to  all 
her  lot ;  she  strides  along,  sightly  from  afar  in 
plenteous  gold,  apparelled  in  such  wise  as  you  your- 
self in  Phrygia.  She  looks  straight  out  at  the 
throng,  with  head  held  high,  as  if  'twere  she  had 
conquered  Hercules  ;  you  might  think  Oechalia 
standing  yet,  and  her  father  yet  alive.      Perhaps  you 

"7 


OVID 

forsitan  et  pulsa  Aetolide  Deianira 

nomine  deposito  paelicis  uxor  erit, 
Eurytidosque  Ioles  atque  Aonii :  Alcidae 

turpia  famosus  corpora  iunget  Hymen, 
mens  fugit  admonitu,  frigusque  perambulat  artus,    1 35 

et  iacet  in  gremio  languida  facta  manus. 
Me  quoque  cum  multis,  sed  me  sine  crimine  amasti. 

ne  pigeat,  pugnae  bis  tibi  causa  fui. 
cornua  flens  legit  ripis  Achelous  in  udis 

truncaque  limosa  tempora  mersit  aqua;  140 

semivir  occubuit  in  lotifero  Eueno  2 

Nessus,  et  infecit  sanguis  equinus  aquas, 
sed  quid  ego  haec  refero  ?     scribenti  nuntia  venit 

fama,  virum  tunicae  tabe  perire  meae. 
ei   mihi !    quid  feci  ?    quo   me   furor  egit  aman- 

tem?  145 

inpia  quid  dubitas  Deianira  mori*1 
An  tuus  in  media  coniunx  lacerabitur  Oeta, 

tu  sceleris  tanti  causa  superstes  eris  ? 
siquid  adhue  habeo  facti,  cur  Herculis  uxor 

credar,  coniugii  mors  mea  pignus  erit !  1 50 

tu  quoque  cognosces  in  me,  Meleagre,  sororem  ! 

inpia  quid  dubitas  Deianira  mori  ? 
Heu  devota  domus  !     solio  sedet  Agrios  alto  ; 

Oenea  desertum  nuda  senecta  premit. 
exulat  ignotis  Tydeus  germanus  in  oris  ;  155 

alter  fatali  vivus  in  igne  fuit ; 

1  atque  Aonii  Bent.  Merit. :  et  insanii  P  :  insani  G. 

2  lotifero  Bent.:  Eueno  Hein.:  letiferoque  veneno  G :  in 
lorifero  eueneno  Gue/f.  3  :  in  letifero  Eueno  Hein.  Burnt,  etc. 

a  His  poisoned  blood  is  in  the  robe  she  sends  to  Hercules. 

*  Agrius  drove  out  Oeneus  his  brother  after  Meleager's 
death. 

c  By  Oeneus,  for  slaying  a  brother. 

d  Meleager  perished  when  his  mother  Althea,  in  revenge 
n8 


THE   HEROIDES   IX 

will  even  drive  away  Aetolian  Deianira,  and  her  rival 
will  lay  aside  the  name  of  mistress,  and  be  made 
your  wife.  Iole,  the  daughter  of  Eurytus,  and 
Aonian  Alcides  will  be  basely  joined  in  shameful 
bonds  of  Hymen.  My  mind  fails  me  at  the  thought, 
a  chill  sweeps  through  my  frame,  and  my  hand  lies 
nerveless  in  my  lap. 

187  Me,  too,  you  have  possessed  among  vour  many 
loves — but  me  with  no  reproach.  Regret  it  not — 
twice  you  have  fought  for  the  sake  of  me.  In  tears 
Achelous  gathered  up  his  horns  on  the  wet  banks  of 
his  stream,  and  bathed  in  its  clayey  tide  his  mutilated 
brow  ;  the  half-man  Nessus  sank  down  in  lotus- 
bearing  Euenus,  tingeing  its  waters  with  his  equine 
blood.0  But  why  am  I  reciting  things  like  these  ? 
Even  as  I  write  comes  rumour  to  me  saying  my 
lord  is  dying  of  the  poison  from  my  cloak.  Alas 
me  !  what  have  I  done  ?  Whither  has  madness 
driven  me  in  my  love  ?  O  wicked  Deianira,  why 
hesitate  to  die  ? 

147  Shall  thy  lord  be  torn  to  death  on  midmost 
Oeta,  and  shalt  thou,  the  cause  of  the  monstrous 
deed,  remain  alive  ?  If  I  have  yet  done  aught  to  win 
the  name  of  wife  of  Hercules,  my  death  shall  be  the 
pledge  of  our  union.  Thou,  Mel  eager,  shalt  also 
see  in  me  a  sister  of  thine  own  !  O  wicked  Deianira. 
why  hesitate  to  die  ? 

153  Alas,  for  my  devoted  house  !  Agrius  sits  on 
the  lofty  throne ; b  Oeneus  is  reft  of  all,  and 
barren  old  age  weighs  heavy  on  him.  Tydeus  my 
brother  is  exiled  on  an  unknown  shore  ;c  my  second 
brother's  life  hung  on  the  fateful  fire  ; d  our  mother 

for  his  slaying  her  brother,  finally  burned  the  brand  on 
whose  preservation  the  Fates  had  said  his  life  depended. 

119 


OVID 

exegit  ferrum  sua  per  praecordia  mater. 

inpia  quid  dubitas  Deianira  mori  ? 
Deprecor  hoc  unum  per  iura  sacerrima  lecti, 

ne  videar  fatis  insidiata  tuis.  160 

Nessus,  ut  est  avidum  percussus  harundine  pectus, 

"  hie/'  dixit,  "vires  sanguis  amoris  habet." 
inlita  Nesseo  misi  tibi  texta  veneno. 

inpia  quid  dubitas  Deianira  mori  ? 
Iamque  vale,  seniorque  pater  germanaque  Gorge,    165 

et  patria  et  patriae  frater  adempte  tuae, 
et  tu  lux  oculis  hodierna  novissima  nostris, 

virque — sed  o  possis  ! — et  puer  Hylle,  vale  ! 

X 

Ariadne  Theseo 

Minus  inveni  quam  te  genus  omne  ferarum  ; 

credita  non  ulli  quam  tibi  peius  eram. 
quae  legis,  ex  illo,  Theseu,  tibi  litore  mitto 

unde  tuam  sine  me  vela  tulere  ratem, 
in  quo  me  somnusque  meus  male  prodidit  et  tu,        5 

per  facinus  somnis  insidiate  meis. 
Tempus  erat,  vitrea  quo  primum  terra  pruina 

spargitur  et  tectae  fronde  queruntur  aves. 
incertum  vigilans  a  somno  languida  movi 

Thesea  prensuras  semisupina  manus —  10 

120 


THE    HEROIDES    X 

drove  the  steel  through  her  own  heart.  O  wicked 
Deianira,  why  hesitate  to  die  ? 

159  This  one  thing  I  deprecate,  by  the  most 
sacred  bonds  of  our  marriage-bed — that  I  seem  to 
have  plotted  for  your  doom.  Nessus,  stricken  with 
the  arrow  in  his  lustful  heart,  "This  blood,''  he 
said,  "  has  power  over  love."  The  robe  of  Nessus, 
saturate  with  poisonous  gore,  I  sent  to  you.  () 
wicked  Deianira,  why  hesitate  to  die  ? 

165  And  now,  fare  ye  well,  O  aged  father,  and  O 
my  sister  Gorge,  and  O  my  native  soil,  and  brother 
taken  from  thy  native  soil,  and  thou,  O  light  that 
shinest  to-day,  the  last  to  strike  upon  mine  eves  ; 
and  thou  my  lord,  O  fare  thou  well — would  that 
thou  couldst ! — and  Hyllus,  thou  mv  son,  farewell  to 
thee  ! 


X 

Ariadne  to  Theseus 

Gentler  than  you  I  have  found  every  race  of 
wild  beasts ;  to  none  of  them  could  I  so  ill  have 
trusted  as  to  you.  The  words  you  now  are  reading, 
Theseus,  I  send  you  from  that  shore  from  which  the 
sails  bore  off  your  ship  without  me,  the  shore  on 
which  my  slumber,  and  you,  so  wretchedly  betrayed 
me — you,  who  wickedly  plotted  against  me  as  I 
slept. 

7  'Twas  the  time  when  the  earth  is  first  be- 
sprinkled with  crystal  rime,  and  songsters  hid  in 
the  branch  begin  their  plaint.  Half  waking  only, 
languid  from  sleep,  I  turned  upon  my  side  and 
put   forth  hands  to  clasp  my  Theseus — he  was  not 

i  j  l 


OVID 

nullus  erat !  referoque  manus  iterumque  retempto, 

pei-que  torum  moveo  bracchia — rmllus  erat ! 
excussere  metus  somnum  ;  contei'rita  surgo, 

membraque  sunt  viduo  praecipitata  toro. 
protinus  adductis  sonuerunt  pectora  palmis,  15 

utque  erat  e  somno  turbida,  rapta  coma  est. 
Luna  i'uit ;  specto,  siquid  nisi  litora  cernam. 

quod  videant  oculi,  nil  nisi  litus  habent. 
nunc  hue,  nunc  illuc,  et  utroque  sine  ordine,  curro  ; 

alta  puellares  tardat  harena  pedes.  20 

interea  toto  clamanti  l  litore  "  Theseu  !  " 

reddebant  nomen  concava  saxa  tuum, 
et  quotiens  ego  te,  totiens  locus  ipse  vocabat. 

ipse  locus  miserae  ferre  volebat  opem. 
Mons  fuit — apparent  frutices  in  vertice  rari ;  25 

hinc  2  scopulus  raucis  pendet  adesus  aquis. 
adscendo — vires  animus  dabat — atque  ita  late 

aequora  prospectu  metior  alta  meo. 
inde  ego — nam  ventis  quoque  sum  crudelibus  usa — 

vidi  praecipiti  carbasa  tenta  Noto.  30 

ut  vidi  haut  dignam  3  quae  me  vidisse  putarein, 

frigidior  glacie  semianimisque  fui. 
nee  languere  diu  patitur  dolor ;  excitor  illo, 

excitor  et  summa  Thesea  voce  voco. 
"quo    fugis  ?  "     exclamo ;    "  scelerate    revertere 
Theseu !  35 

flecte  ratem  !  numerum  non  habet  ilia  suum  !  " 

1  clamanti     s    Plan.:     clamati////     P :     clamanti     in    G: 
clamavi  V  s  Bent. :  clamavi  in  Ehw. 

2  hinc  G  Burm.:  nunc  P  V :  hie,  huic  s. 

3  So  Hous.:   aut  vidi  a///uam  quae  me  P  :   aut  vidi  aut 
tamquam  quae  me  G. 


THE    HEROIDRS   X 

there  !  I  drew  back  my  hands,  a  second  time  I 
made  essay,  and  o'er  the  whole  couch  moved  my 
arms — he  was  not  there  !  Fear  struck  away  my 
sleep ;  in  terror  I  arose,  and  threw  myself  headlong 
from  my  abandoned  bed.  Straight  then  my  palms 
resounded  upon  my  breasts,  and  I  tore  my  hair,  all 
disarrayed  as  it  was  from  sleep. 

17  The  moon  was  shining ;  I  bend  my  gaze  to  see 
if  aught  but  shore  lies  there.  So  far  as  my  eyes 
can  see,  naught  do  they  find  but  shore.  Now  this 
way,  and  now  that,  and  ever  without  plan,  I  course  ; 
the  deep  sand  stays  my  girlish  feet.  And  all  the 
while  I  cried  out  "Theseus!  "  along  the  entire  shore, 
and  the  hollow  rocks  sent  back  your  name  to  me  ; 
as  often  as  I  called  out  for  you,  so  often  did  the 
place  itself  call  out  your  name.  The  very  place  felt 
the  will  to  aid  me  in  my  woe. 

25  There  was  a  mountain,  with  bushes  rising  here 
and  there  upon  its  top  ;  a  cliff  hangs  over  from  it, 
gnawed  into  by  deep-sounding  waves.  I  climb  its 
slope — my  spirit  gave  me  strength — and  thus  with 
prospect  broad  I  scan  the  billowy  deep.  From  there 
— for  I  found  the  winds  cruel,  too — I  beheld  your 
sails  stretched  full  by  the  headlong  southern  gale. 
As  I  looked  on  a  sight  methought  I  had  not 
deserved  to  see,  I  grew  colder  than  ice,  and  life 
half  left  my  body.  Nor  does  anguish  allow  me  long 
to  lie  thus  quiet ;  it  rouses  me,  it  stirs  me  up  to  call 
on  Theseus  with  all  my  voice's  might.  "  Whither 
dost  fly?"  I  cry  aloud.  "Come  back.  ()  wicked 
Theseus!  Turn  about  thy  ship!  She  hath  not  all 
her  crew  !  " 

I23 


OVID 

Haec  ego  ;  quod  voci  deerat,  plangore  replebam  ; 

verbera  cum  verbis  mixta  fuere  meis. 
si  non  audires,  ut  saltern  cernere  posses, 

iactatae  late  signa  dedere  manus  ;  40 

candidaque  inposui  longae  velamina  virgae — 

scilicet  oblitos  admonitura  mei  ! 
iamque  oculis  ereptus  eras,     turn  denique  flevi  ; 

torpuerant  molles  ante  dolore  genae. 
quid  potius  facerent,  quarmme  mea  lumina  flerent,  45 

postquam  desieram  l  vela  videre  tua  ? 
aut  ego  diffusis  erravi  sola  capillis, 

qualis  ab  Ogygio  concita  Baccha  deo, 
aut  mare  prospiciens  in  saxo  frigida  sedi, 

quamque  lapis  sedes,  tarn  lapis  ipsa  fui.  50 

saepe  torum  repeto,  qui  nos  acceperat  ambos, 

sed  non  acceptos  exhibiturus  erat, 
et  tua,  quae  possum  pro  te,  vestigia  tango 

strataque  quae  membris  intepuere  tuis. 
incumbo,  lacrimisque  toi'o  manante  profusis,  55 

"  pressimus,"  exclamo,  "  te  duo — redde  duos! 
venimus  hue  ainbo  ;  cur  non  discedimus  ambo  ? 

perfide,  pars  nostri,  lectule,  maior  ubi  est?  " 
Quid  faciam  ?  quo  sola  ferar  ?  vacat  insula  cultu. 

non  hominum  video,  non  ego  facta  bourn.  60 

orane  latus  terrae  cingit  mare  ;  navita  nusquam, 

nulla  per  ambiguas  puppis  itura  vias. 
finge  dari  comitesque  mihi  ventosque  ratemque — 

quid  sequar  ?     accessus  terra  pate  ma  negat. 
1  desieram  Pw  :  desierant  s  Plan.:  desierat  G. 
124 


THE    HEROIDES    X 

37  Thus  did  I  cry,  and  what  my  voice  could  not 
avail,  I  filled  with  beating  of  my  breast ;  the 
blows  I  gave  myself  were  mingled  with  my  words. 
That  you  at  least  might  see,  it'  you  could  not  hear, 
with  might  and  main  I  sent  you  signals  with 
my  hands  ;  and  upon  a  long  tree-branch  I  fixed  my 
shining  veil — yes,  to  put  in  mind  of  me  those  who 
had  forgotten  !  And  now  you  had  been  swept 
beyond  my  vision.  Then  at  last  I  let  flow 
my  tears ;  till  then  my  tender  eyeballs  had  been 
dulled  with  pain.  What  better  could  my  eyes 
do  than  weep  for  me,  when  I  had  ceased  to  see 
your  sails  ?  Alone,  with  hair  loose  flying,  I  have 
either  roamed  about,  like  to  a  Bacchant  roused  by 
the  Ogygian  god,  or,  looking  out  upon  the  sea,  I 
have  sat  all  chilled  upon  the  rock,  as  much  a  stone 
myself  as  was  the  stone  I  sat  upon.  Oft  do  I 
come  again  to  the  couch  that  once  received  us  both, 
but  was  fated  never  to  show  us  together  again, 
and  touch  the  imprint  left  by  you — 'tis  all  1  can  in 
place  of  you  ! — and  the  stuffs  that  once  grew  warm 
beneath  your  limbs.  1  lay  me  down  upon  my 
face,  bedew  the  bed  with  pouring  tears,  and  cry 
aloud  :  "  We  were  two  who  pressed  thee — give  back 
two  !  We  came  to  thee  both  together;  why  do  we 
not  depart  the  same  ?  Ah,  faithless  bed—  the  greater 
part  of  my  being,  oh,  where  is  he  ? 

59  What  am  I  to  do  ?  Whither  shall  1  take 
myself — I  am  alone,  and  the  isle  unfilled.  Of 
human  traces  I  see  none ;  of  cattle,  none.  On 
every  side  the  land  is  girt  by  sea;  nowhere  a 
sailor,  no  craft  to  make  its  way  over  the  dubious 
paths.  And  suppose  I  did  find  those  to  g<>  \\ith 
me,  and  winds,  and    ship — yet    where    am    I    to  go  : 

125 


OVID 

ut  rate  felici  pacata  per  aequora  labar,  65 

temperet  ut  ventos  Aeolus — exul  ero  ! 
non  ego  te,  Crete  centum  digesta  per  urbes, 

adspiciam,  puero  cognita  terra  Iovi ! 
at  pater  et  tellus  iusto  regnata  parenti 

prodita  sunt  facto,  nomina  cara,  meo,  70 

cum  tibi,  ne  victor  tecto  morerere  recurvo, 

quae  regerent  passus,  pro  duce  fila  dedi, 
cum  mihi  dicebas  :  "  per  ego  ipsa  pericula  iuro, 

te  fore,  dum  nostrum  vivet  uterque,  meam." 
Vivimus,  et  non  sum,  Theseu,  tua — si  modo  vivit    75 

femina  periuri  fraude  sepulta  viri. 
me  quoque,  qua  fratrem,  mactasses,  inprobe,  clava  ; 

esset,  quam  dederas,  morte  soluta  fides, 
nunc  ego  non  tantum,  quae  sum  passura,  recordor, 

sed  quaecumque  potest  ulla  relicta  pati.  80 

occurrunt  animo  pereundi  mille  figurae, 

morsque  minus  poenae  quam  mora  mortis  habet. 
iam  iam  venturos  aut  hac  aut  suspicor  iliac, 

qui  lanient  avido  viscera  dente,  lupos. 
quis  scit  an  et *  fulvos  tellus  alat  ista  leones  ?  85 

forsitan  et  saevas  tigridas  insula  habet.2 
et  freta  dicuntur  magnas  expellere  phocas  ! 

quis  vetat  et  gladios  per  latus  ire  meum  ? 
Tantum  ne  religer  dura  captiva  catena, 

neve  traham  serva  grandia  pensa  manu,  90 

1  Quis  scit  an  made  to  change  place*  with  forsitan  et,  for 
the  sake  of  syntax  Hous. 

2  saevas  tigridas  insula  habet  G  :  trigides  insula  habent  P  : 
et  saevam  tigrida  Dia  f erat  editor  of  E. 

a  Her  aid  to  Theseus  in  his  slaying  of  the  Minotaur  her 
brother,  and  his  escape  from  the  Labyrinth. 

126 


THE    HEROIDES   X 

My  father's  realm  forbids  me  to  approach.  Grant 
I  do  glide  with  fortunate  keel  over  peaceful  seas, 
that  Aeolus  tempers  the  winds — I  still  shall  be  an 
exile!  'Tis  not  for  me,  O  Crete  composed  of  the 
hundred  cities,  to  look  upon  thee,  land  known  to 
the  infant  Jove  !  No,  for  my  father  and  the  land 
ruled  by  my  righteous  father — dear  names  ! — were 
betrayed  by  my  deed  a  when,  to  keep  you,  after  your 
victory,  from  death  in  the  winding  halls,  I  gave  into 
your  hand  the  thread  to  direct  your  steps  in  place  of 
guide — when  you  said  to  me  :  "By  these  very  perils 
of  mine,  I  swear  that,  so  long  as  both  of  us  shall  live, 
thou  shalt  be  mine  !  " 

75  We  both  live,  Theseus,  and  I  am  not  yours  ! — 
if  indeed  a  woman  lives  who  is  buried  by  the  treason 
of  a  perjured  mate.  Me,  too,  you  should  have 
slain,  O  false  one,  with  the  same  bludgeon  that  slew 
my  brother ;  then  would  the  oath  you  gave  me 
have  been  absolved  by  my  death.  Now,  I  ponder 
over  not  only  what  I  am  doomed  to  suffer,  but  all 
that  any  woman  left  behind  can  suffer.  There 
rush  into  my  thought  a  thousand  forms  of  perishing, 
and  death  holds  less  of  dole  for  me  than  the  delay 
of  death.  Each  moment,  now  here,  now  there,  I 
look  to  see  wolves  rush  on  me,  to  rend  my  vitals 
with  their  greedy  fangs.  Who  knows  but  that  this 
shore  breeds,  too,  the  tawny  lion  ?  Perchance  the 
island  harbours  the  savage  tiger  as  well.  They  say, 
too,  that  the  waters  of  the  deep  cast  up  the  mighty 
seal !  And  who  is  to  keep  the  swords  of  men  from 
piercing  my  side  ? 

89  But  I  care  not,  if  I  am  but  not  left  captive 
in  hard  bonds,  and  not  compelled  to  spin  the 
long    task    with    servile    hand — I,    whose    father    is 

i  27 


OVID 

cui  pater  est  Minos,  eui  mater  filia  Phoebi, 

quodque  magis  memini,  quae  tibi  pacta  fui ! 
si  mare,  si  terras  porrectaque  litora  vidi, 

multa  mihi  terrae,  multa  minantur  aquae, 
caelum  restabat— timeo  simulacra  deorum  !  95 

destituor  rapidis  praeda  cibusque  feris  ; 
sive  colunt  habitantque  viri,  diffidimus  illis — 

externos  didici  laesa  timere  viros. 
Viveret  Androgeos  utinam  !  nee  facta  luisses 

inpia  funeribus,  Cecropi  terra,  tuis  ;  100 

nee  tua  mactasset  nodoso  stipite,  Theseu, 

ardua  parte  virum  dextera,  parte  bovem  ; 
nee  tibi,  quae  reditus  monstrarent,  fila  dedissem, 

fila  per  adductas  saepe  recepta  manus. 
non  equidem  miror,  si  stat  victoria  tecum,  105 

strataque  Cretaeam  belua  planxit1  humum. 
non  poterant  figi  praecordia  ferrea  cornu  ; 

ut  te  non  tegeres,  pectore  tutus  eras, 
illic  tu  silices,  illic  adamanta  tulisti, 

illic  qui  silices,  Thesea,  vincat,  habes.  110 

Crudeles  somni,  quid  me  tenuistis  inertem  ? 

aut  semel  aeterna  nocte  premenda  fui. 
vos  quoque  crudeles,  venti,  nimiumque  parati 

flaminaque  in  lacrimas  officiosa  meas. 
dextera  crudelis,  quae  me  fratremque  necavit,       115 

et  data  poscenti,  nomen  inane,  fides  ! 

1  planxit    Bent.:    stravit    PG2   Plan.:    texit    G,    Merk.' 
pressit  s  Sedl. :  tinxit  o>  Burm, 

a  Androgeos,  Ariadne's  brother,  was  accidentally  killed  at 
Athens. 

128 


THE   HERO  IDES   X 

Minos,  whose  mother  the  child  of  Phoebus,  and  who 
— what  memory  holds  more  close — was  promised 
bride  to  you  !  When  I  have  looked  on  the  sea,  and 
on  the  land,  and  on  the  wide-stretehing  shore,  I 
know  many  dangers  threaten  me  on  land,  and 
many  on  the  waters.  The  sky  remains — yet  there  I 
fear  visions  of  the  gods !  I  am  left  helpless,  a  prey 
to  the  maws  of  ravening  beasts  ;  and  if  men  dwell  in 
the  place  and  keep  it,  I  put  no  trust  in  them — my 
hurts  have  taught  me  fear  of  stranger-men. 

99  O,  that  Androgeos  were  still  alive,  and  that 
thou,  O  Cecropian  land,  hadst  not  been  made  to 
atone  for  thy  impious  deeds  with  the  doom  of  thy 
children  !  "  and  would  that  thy  upraised  right  hand, 
O  Theseus,  had  not  slain  with  knotty  club  him 
that  was  man  in  part,  and  in  part  bull  ;  and  I  had 
not  given  thee  the  thread  to  show  the  way  of  thy 
return — thread  oft  caught  up  again  and  passed 
through  the  hands  led  on  by  it.  1  marvel  not  — ah, 
no! — if  victory  was  thine,  and  the  monster  smote 
with  his  length  the  Cretan  earth.  His  horn  could  not 
have  pierced  that  iron  heart  of  thine:  thy  breast 
was  safe,  even  didst  thou  naught  to  shield  thy- 
self. There  barest  thou  flint,  there  barest  thou 
adamant;  there  hast  thou  a  Theseus  harder  than 
any  flint  ! 

111  Ah,  cruel  slumbers,  why  did  you  hold  me 
thus  inert?  Or,  better  had  I  been  weighed  down 
once  for  all  by  everlasting  night.  You,  too,  were 
cruel,  O  winds,  and  all  too  well  prepared,  and  you 
breezes,  eager  to  start  my  tears.  Cruel  the  right 
hand  that  has  brought  me  and  my  brother  to  our 
death,  and  cruel  the  pledge  an  empty  word  that 
you  gave  at  my  demand  !     Against   me  conspiring 

i  29 

K 


OVID 

in  me  iurarunt  somnus  ventusque  fidesque ; 

prodita  sum  causis  una  puella  tribus  ! 
Ergo  ego  nee  lacrimas  matris  moritura  videbo, 

nee,  mea  qui  digitis  lumina  condat,  erit?  120 

spiritus  infelix  peregrinas  ibit  in  auras, 

nee  positos  artus  unguet  arnica  manus  ? 
ossa  superstabunt  volucres  inhumata  marinae  ? 

haec  sunt  officiis  digna  sepulcra  meis  ? 
ibis  Cecropios  portus  patriaque  reeeptus,  125 

cum  steteris  turbae  x  celsus  in  ore  2  tuae 
et  bene  narraris  letum  taurique  virique 

sectaque  per  dubias  saxea  tecta  vias, 
me  quoque  narrato  sola  tellure  relictam  ! 

non  ego  sum  titulis  subripienda  tuis.  130 

nee  pater  est  Aegeus,  nee  tu  Pittheidos  Aethrae 

Alius  ;  auctores  saxa  fretumque  tui  !  3 
Di  facerent,  ut  me  sumraa  de  puppe  videres  ; 

movisset  vultus  maesta  figura  tuos  ! 
nunc  quoque  non  oculis,  sed,  qua  potes,  adspice 
mente  135 

haerentem  scopulo,  quern  vaga  pulsat  aqua, 
adspice  demissos  lugentis  more  capillos 

et  tunicas  lacrimis  sicut  ab  imbre  gravis, 
corpus,  ut  inpulsae  segetes  aquilonibus,  horret, 

litteraque  articulo  pressa  tremente  labat.  140 

non  te  per  meritum,  quoniam  male  cessit,  adoro  ; 

debita  sit  facto  gratia  nulla  meo. 
sed  ne  poena  quidem  !   si  non  ego  causa  salutis, 

non  tamen  est,  cur  sis  tu  mihi  causa  necis. 

1  turbae  G  u>  :  turbes  P3  :  urbis  P2s  :  urbes  Pv 

2  in  ore  G1  Jahn  Merk.  Ehw.  :  in  aure  Pi  :  in  arce  P2  V s  : 
urbis  .   .   .   arce  Pa. 

3  vv.  131,  132  after  110  Birt  Ehw. 

130 


THE   HEROIDES   X 

were  slumber,  wind,  and  treacherous  pledge — treason 
three-fold  against  one  maid  ! 

119  Am  I,  then,  to  die,  and,  dying,  not  behold  my 
mother's  tears  ;  and  shall  there  be  no  one's  finger  to 
close  my  eyes  ?  Is  my  unhappy  soul  to  go  forth  into 
stranger-air,  and  no  friendly  hand  compose  my 
limbs  and  drop  on  them  the  unguent  due  ?  Are  my 
bones  to  lie  unburied,  the  prey  of  hovering  birds  of 
the  shore  ?  Is  this  the  entombment  due  to  me  for 
my  kindnesses?  You  will  go  to  the  haven  of 
Cecrops  ;  but  when  you  have  been  received  back 
home,  and  have  stood  in  pride  before  your  throng- 
ing followers,  gloriously  telling  the  death  of  the 
man-and-bull,  and  of  the  halls  of  rock  cut  out  in 
winding  ways,  tell,  too,  of  me,  abandoned  on  a  solitary 
shore — for  I  must  not  be  stolen  from  the  record  of 
your  honours !  Neither  is  Aegeus  your  father,  nor 
are  you  the  son  of  Pittheus'  daughter  Aethra ;  they 
who  begot  you  were  the  rocks  and  the  deep  ! 

133  Ah,  I  could  pray  the  gods  that  you  had  seen  me 
from  the  high  stern  ;  my  sad  figure  had  moved  your 
heart !  Yet  look  upon  me  now — not  with  eyes,  for  with 
them  you  cannot,  but  with  your  mind — clinging  to  a 
rock  all  beaten  by  the  wandering  wave.  Look  upon 
my  locks,  let  loose  like  those  of  one  in  grief  for  the 
dc.ul,  and  on  my  robes,  heavy  with  tears  as  if  with 
rain.  My  body  is  a-quiver  like  standing  corn  struck 
by  the  northern  blast,  and  the  letters  I  am  tracing 
falter  beneath  my  trembling  hand.  'Tis  not  for  my 
desert — for  that  has  come  to  naught — that  I  entreat 
you  now;  let  no  favour  be  due  for  my  service.  Yet 
neither  let  me  suffer  for  it!  If  I  am  not  the  cause 
of  your  deliverance,  yet  neither  is  it  right  that  you 
should  cause  my  death. 

'3i 


OVID 

Has  tibi  plangendo  lugubria  pectora  lassas  145 

infelix  tendo  trans  freta  longa  manus ; 

hos  tibi — qui  superant — ostendo  maesta  capillos  ! 
per  lacrimas  oro,  quas  tua  facta  movent —  150 

flecte  ratem,  Tbeseu,  versoque  relabere  vento  ! 
si  prius  occidero,  tu  tamen  ossa  feres  ! 


XI 
Canace    Macareo 

Siqua  tamen  caeeis  errabunt  scripta  lituris, 

oblitus  a  dominae  caede  libellus  erit. 
dextra  tenet  calamum,  strictum  tenet  altei*a  ferrum, 

et  iacet  in  gremio  charta  soluta  met), 
baec  est  Aeolidos  fratri  scribentis  imago  ;  5 

sic  videor  duro  posse  placere  patri. 
Ipse  necis  cuperem  nostrae  spectator  adesset, 

auctorisque  oculis  exigeretur  opus  ! 
ut  ferus  est  multoque  suis  truculentior  Euris, 

spectasset  siccis  vulnera  nostra  genis.  10 

scilicet  est  aliquid,  cum  saevis  vivere  ventis  ; 

ingenio  populi  convenit  ille  sui. 
ille  Noto  Zephyroque  et  Sithonio  Aquiloni 

imperat  et  pinnis,  Eure  proterve,  tuis. 
imperat  heu  !  ventis,  tumidae  non  imperat  irae,        15 

possidet  et  vitiis  regna  minora  suis. 
132 


THE    HEROIDES    XI 

145  These    hands,    wearied    with    beating    of    my 

sorrowful  breast,  unhappy  I  stretch  toward  you  over 
the  long  seas  ;  these  locks — such  as  remain — in  grief 
I  bid  you  look  upon  !  By  these  tears  I  pray  you — 
tears  moved  by  what  you  have  done — turn  about 
your  ship,  reverse  your  sail,  glide  swiftly  back  to 
me  !  If  I  have  died  before  you  come,  'twill  yet 
be  you  who  bear  away  my  bones  ! 


XI 
Canace  to  Macareus 

If  aught  of  what  I  write  is  yet  blotted  dec])  and 
escapes  your  eye,  'twill  be  because  the  little  roll 
has  been  stamed  by  its  mistress'  blood.  My 
right  hand  holds  the  pen,  a  drawn  blade  the  other 
holds,  and  the  paper  lies  unrolled  in  my  lap.  This 
is  the  picture  of  Aeolus'  daughter  writing  to  her 
brother;  in  this  guise,  it  seems,  I  may  please  my 
hard-hearted  sire. 

7  I  would  he  himself  were  here  to  view  my  end, 
and  the  deed  were  done  before  the  eyes  of  him 
who  orders  it  !  Fierce  as  he  i^.  tar  harsher  than  his 
own  east-winds,  he  would  look  dry-eyed  upon  my 
wounds.  Surely,  something  comes  from  a  life  with 
savage  winds  ;  his  temper  is  like  that  of  his  subjects. 
It  is  Notus,  and  Zephyrus,  and  Sithonian  Aquilo, 
over  whom  he  rules,  and  over  thy  pinions,  wanton 
Eurus.  He  rules  the  winds,  alas  !  but  his  swelling 
wrath  In-  does  not  rule,  and  the  realms  of  his 
possession  are  less  wide  than   his   faults.     Of  what 


OVID 

quid  iuvat  admotam  per  avorum  nomina  caelo 

inter  cognatos  posse  referre  Iovem  ? 
num  minus  infestum,  funebria  munera,  ferrum 

feminea  teneo,  non  mea  tela,  manu  ?  20 

O  utinam,  Macareu,  quae  nos  eommisit  in  unum, 

venisset  leto  serior  hora  meo  ! 
cur  umquam  plus  me,  frater,  quam  frater  amasti, 

et  tibi,  non  debet  quod  soror  esse,  fui  ? 
ipsa  quoque  incalui,  qualemque  audire  solebam,      25 

nescio  quern  sensi  corde  tepente  deum. 
fugerat  ore  color  ;  macies  adduxerat  artus  ; 

sumebant  minimos  ora  coacta  cibos  ; 
nee  somni  faciles  et  nox  erat  annua  nobis, 

et  gemitum  nullo  laesa  dolore  dabam.  30 

nee,  cur  haec  facerem,  poteram  mihi  reddere  causain 

nee  noram,  quid  amans  esset  ;  at  illud  eram. 
Prima  malum  nutrix  animo  praesensit  anili  ; 

prima  mihi  nutrix  "  Aeoli,"  dixit,  "  amas  !  " 
erubui,  gremioque  pudor  deiecit  ocellos ;  35 

haec  satis  in  tacita  signa  fatentis  erant. 
iamque  tumescebant  vitiati  pondera  ventris, 

aegraque  furtivum  membra  gravabat  onus, 
quas  mihi  non  herbas,  quae  non  medicamina  nutrix 

attulit  audaci  supposuitque  manu,  40 

ut  penitus  nostris— hoc  te  celavimus  unum — 

visceribus  crescens  excuteretur  onus  ! 
a,  nimium  vivax  admotis  restitit  infans 

artibus  et  tecto  tutus  ab  hoste  fait ! 

r34 


THE   HEROIDES    XI 

avail  for  me  through  my  grandsires'  names  to  reach 
even  to  the  skies,  to  be  able  to  number  Jove  among 
my  kin  ?  Is  there  less  deadliness  in  the  blade — my 
funeral  gift  ! — that  I  hold  in  my  woman's  hand, 
weapon  not  meet  for  me  ? 

21  Ah,  Maeareus,  would  that  the  hour  that  made 
us  two  as  one  had  come  after  my  death  !  Oh  why. 
my  brother,  did  you  ever  love  me  more  than  brother, 
and  why  have  I  been  to  you  what  a  sister  should  not 
be?  I,  too,  was  inflamed  by  love;  I  felt  some  god 
in  my  glowing  heart,  and  knew  him  from  what  I  used 
to  hear  he  was.  My  colour  had  tied  from  my  face  ; 
wasting  had  shrunk  my  frame  ;  I  scarce  took  food, 
and  with  unwilling  mouth ;  my  sleep  was  never 
easy,  the  night  was  a  year  for  me,  and  I  groaned, 
though  stricken  with  no  pain.  Nor  could  I  render 
myself  a  reason  why  I  did  these  things ;  I  did 
not  know  what  it  was  to  be  in  love — yet  in  love 
I   was. 

33  The  first  to  perceive  my  trouble,  in  her  old 
wife's  way,  was  my  nurse  ;  she  first,  my  nurse,  said  : 
"  Daughter  of  Aeolus,  thou  art  in  love  !  "  I  blushed, 
and  shame  bent  down  my  eyes  into  my  bosom ; 
1  said  no  word,  but  this  was  sign  enough  that  I 
confessed.  And  presently  there  grew  apace  the 
burden  of  my  wayward  bosom,  and  my  weakened 
frame  felt  the  weight  of  its  secret  load.  What  herbs 
and  what  medicines  did  my  nurse  not  bring  to  me, 
applying  them  with  bold  hand  to  drive  forth  entirely 
from  my  bosom — this  was  the  only  secret  we  kept 
from  you — the  burden  that  was  increasing  there  ! 
Ah,  too  full  of  life,  the  little  thing  withstood  the  arts 
employed  against  it,  and  was  kept  safe  from  its 
hidden  foe ! 

135 


OVID 

lam  noviens  erat  orta  soror  pulcherrima  Phoebi,     45 

denaque  1  luciferos  Luna  movebat  equos. 
nescia,  quae  faceret  subitos  mihi  causa  dolores, 

et  rudis  ad  partus  et  nova  miles  eram. 
nee  tenui  voeem.  "  quid/'  ait,  "  tua  crimina  prodis  ?  " 

oraque  elamantis  conscia  pressit  anus.  50 

quid  faciam  infelix  ?  gemitus  dolor  edere  cogit, 

sed  timor  et  nutrix  et  pudor  ipse  vetant. 
eontineo  gemitus  elapsaque  verba  reprendo 

et  cogor  lacrimas  conbibere  ipsa  meas. 
mors  erat  ante  oculos,  et  opem  Lucina  negabat —  55 

et  grave,  si  morerer,  mors  quoque  crimen  erat — 
cum  super  incumbens  scissa  tunicaque  comaque 

pressa  refovisti  pectora  nostra  tuis, 
et  mihi  "  vive,  soror,  soror  o  carissima,"  aisti ; 

"  vive  nee  unius  corpore  perde  duos  !  60 

spes  bona  det  vires ;  fratri  nam  nupta  futui'a  es.2 

illius,  de  quo  mater,  et  uxor  eris." 
Mortua,  crede  mihi,  tamen  ad  tua  verba  revixi  : 

et  positum  est  uteri  crimen  onusque  mei. 
quid  tibi  grataris  ?  media  sedet  Aeolus  aula  ;  65 

crimina  sunt  oculis  subripienda  patris. 
frugibus  3  infantem  ramisque  albentis  olivae 

et  levibus  vittis  sedula  celat  anus, 
fictaque  sacra  facit  dicitque  precantia  verba  ; 

dat  populus  sacris,  dat  pater  ipse  viam.  70 

iam  prope  limen  erat — patrias  vagitus  ad  auris 

venit,  et  indicio  proditur  ille  suo  ! 

1  nonaque  P  s  Ehw. :  denaque  others  :  pronaque  Bent. 

2  So  Ga>  Mcrl-.:    fratri    es    nam  nuptura  P2 :    fratris  nam 
nupta  futura  es  Pa. :  germano  nupta  futura  es  Ehw. 

3  frugibus  P  :  frondibus  O  V  Plan. 

136 


THE    HEROIDES    XI 

45  And  now  for  the  ninth  time  had  Phoebus' 
fairest  sister  risen,  and  for  the  tenth  time  the 
moon  was  driving  on  her  light-bearing  steeds.  I 
knew  not  what  caused  the  sudden  pangs  in  me ; 
to  travail  I  was  unused,  a  soldier  new  to  the  service. 
I  could  not  keep  from  groans.  "  Why  betray  thy 
fault?"  said  the  ancient  dame  who  knew  my 
secret,  and  stopped  my  crying  lips.  What  shall  I 
do,  unhappy  that  I  am  ?  The  pains  compel  my  groans, 
but  fear,  the  nurse,  and  shame  itself  forbid.  1  repress 
my  groans,  and  try  to  take  back  the  words  that  slip 
from  me,  and  force  myself  to  drink  my  very  tears. 
Death  was  before  my  eyes ;  and  Lucina  denied 
her  aid — death,  too,  were  I  to  die,  would  fasten  upon 
me  heavy  guilt — when  leaning  over  me,  you  tore 
my  robe  and  my  hair  away,  and  warmed  my  bosom 
back  to  life  with  the  pressure  of  your  own,  and  said  : 
"  Live,  sister,  sister  O  most  dear ;  live,  and  do  not 
be  the  death  of  two  beings  in  one  !  Let  good  hope 
give  thee  strength ;  for  now  thou  shalt  be  thy 
brother's  bride.  He  who  made  thee  mother  will 
also  make  thee  wife." 

™  Dead  that  I  am,  believe  me,  yet  at  your  words 
I  live  again,  and  have  brought  forth  the  reproach 
and  burden  of  my  womb.  But  why  rejoice?  In  the 
midst  of  the  palace  hall  sits  Aeolus  ;  the  sign  of  my 
fault  must  be  removed  from  my  lather's  eyes.  With 
fruits  and  whitening  olive-branches,  and  with  light 
fillets,  the  careful  dame  attempts  to  hide  the  babe, 
and  makes  pretence  of  sacrifice,  and  utters  words  of 
prayer  ;  the  people  give  way  to  let  her  pass,  my  father 
himself  gives  way.  She  is  already  near  the  threshold 
— my  father's  ears  have  caught  the  crying  sound, and 
the  babe  is  lost,  betrayed  by  his  own  sign  !     Aeolus 

•37 


OVID 

eripit  infantem  mentitaque  sacra  revelat 

Aeolus  ;  insana  regia  voce  sonat. 
ut  mare  fit  tremulum,  tenui  cum  stringitur  aura,      75 

ut  quatitur  tepido  fraxina  virga  T  Noto, 
sic  mea  vibrari  pallentia  membra  videres ; 

quassus  ab  inposito  corpore  lectus  erat. 
inruit  et  nostrum  vulgat  clamore  pudorem, 

et  vix  a  misero  continet  ore  manus.  80 

ipsa  nihil  praeter  lacrimas  pudibunda  profudi  ; 

torpuerat  gelido  lingua  retenta  metu. 
Iamque  dari  parvum  canibusque  avibusque  nepotem 

iusserat^  in  solis  destituique  locis. 
vagitus  dedit  ille  miser — sensisse  putares —  85 

quaque  suum  poterat  voce  rogabat  avum. 
quid  mihi  tunc  animi  credis,  germane,  fuisse — 

nam  potes  ex  amnio  colligere  ipse  tuo — 
cum  mea  me  coram  silvas  inimicus  in  altas 

viscera  montanis  ferret  edenda  lupis  ?  90 

exierat  thalamo  ;  tunc  demum  pectora  plangi 

contigit  inque  meas  unguibus  ire  genas. 
Interea  patrius  vultu  maerente  satelles 

venit  et  indignos  edidit  ore  sonos  : 
"Aeolus    hunc     ensem     mittit     tibi "  —  tradidit 

ensem —  95 

"  et  iubet  ex  merito  scire,  quid  iste  velit." 
scimus,  et  utemur  violento  fortiter  ense  ; 

pectoribus  condam  dona  paterna  meis. 
his  mea  muneribus,  genitor,  conubia  donas  ? 

hac  tua  dote,  pater,  filia  dives  erit  ?  100 

1   The  usual  JISS.  reading  :  fraxineies  virga   P  :    fraxinus 
icta  Pa. 

MS 


THE    HEROIDKS    XI 

catches  up  the  child  and  reveals  the  pretended  sacri- 
fice ;  the  whole  palace  resounds  with  his  maddened 
cries.  As  the  sea  is  set  a-trembling  when  a  light 
breeze  passes  o'er,  as  the  ashen  branch  is  shaken 
by  the  tepid  breeze  .from  the  south,  so  might  you 
have  seen  my  blanching  members  quiver;  the 
couch  was  a-quake  with  the  body  that  lay  upon  it. 
He  rushes  in  and  with  cries  makes  known  my  shame 
to  all,  and  scarce  restrains  his  hand  from  my  wretched 
face.  Myself  in  my  confusion  did  naught  but  pour 
forth  tears  ;  my  tongue  had  grown  dumb  with  the  icy 
chill  of  fear. 

83  And  now  he  had  ordered  his  little  grandchild 
thrown  to  the  dogs  and  birds,  to  be  abandoned  in 
some  solitary  place.  The  hapless  babe  broke  forth 
in  wailings — you  would  have  thought  he  understood 
—  and  with  what  utterance  he  could  entreated  his 
grandsire.  What  heart  do  you  think  was  mine  then, 
O  my  brother — for  you  can  judge  from  your  own — 
when  the  enemy  before  my  eyes  bore  away  to  the 
deep  forests  the  fruit  of  my  bosom  to  be  devoured 
by  mountain  wolves  ?  My  father  had  gone  out  of 
my  chamber ;  then  at  length  could  I  beat  my  breasts 
and  furrow  my  cheeks  with  the  nail. 

■':i  Meanwhile  with  sorrowful  air  came  one  of  my 
father's  guards,  and  pronounced  these  shameful 
words  :  "  Aeolus  sends  this  sword  to  you " — he 
handed  me  the  sword — "and  bids  you  know  from 
your  desert  what  it  may  mean."  I  do  know,  and 
shall  bravely  make  use  of  the  violent  blade  ;  1  shall 
bury  in  my  breast  my  father's  gift.  Is  it  presents 
like  this,  O  my  sire,  you  give  me  on  my  marriage  ? 
With  this  dowry  from  you,  O  father,  shall  \  cm- 
daughter  be  made  rich?     Take  away  afar,  deluded 

139 


OVID 

tolle  procul,  decepte,  faces,  Hymenaee,  maritas 

et  fuge  turbato  tecta  nefanda  pede  ! 
ferte  faces  in  me  quas  fertis,  Erinyes  atrae, 

et  meus  ex  isto  luceat  igne  rogus  ! 
nubite  felices  Parca  meliore  sorores,  105 

amissae  memores  sed  tamen  este  mei ! 
Quid  puer  admisit  tarn  paucis  editus  horis  ? 

quo  laesit  facto  vix  bene  natus  avum  ? 
si  potuit  meruisse  necem,  meruisse  putetur — 

a,  miser  admisso  plectitur  ille  meo  !  110 

nate.  dolor  niatris,  rapidarum  x  praeda  ferarum, 

ei  mihi !  natali  dilacerate  tuo  ; 
nate,  parum  fausti  miserabile  pignus  amoris — • 

haec  tibi  prima  dies,  haec  tibi  summa  fuit. 
non  mihi  te  licuit  lacrimis  perfundere  iustis,  115 

in  tua  non  tonsas  ferre  sepulcra  comas ; 
non  super  incubui.  non  oscula  frigida  carpsi. 

diripiunt  avidae  viscera  nostra  fei'ae. 
Ipsa  quoque  infantis  cum  vulnere  prosequar  umbras 

nee  mater  fuero  dicta  nee  orba  diu.  120 

tu  tamen,  o  frustra  miserae  sperate  sorori, 

sparsa,  precor,  nati  collige  membra  tui, 
et  refer  ad  matrem  socioque  inpone  sepulcro, 

urnaque  nos  habeat  quamlibet  arta  duos  ! 
vive  memor  nostri,  lacrimasque  in  vulnera  funde,  125 

neve  reformida  corpus  amantis  amans. 
tu,  rogo,2  dilectae  nimium  mandata  sororis 

]>erfer  ;  mandatum  persequar  ipsa  patris  ! 

1  rabidarum  s  Bent. 

-  tura  rogo  placitae  .  .   .   tu  fer  Pa. 


140 


THE   HEROIDES   XI 

Hymenaeus,  thy  wedding-torches,  and  fly  with 
frightened  foot  from  these  nefarious  halls !  Bring 
for  me  the  torches  ye  bear,  Erinyes  dark,  and  let 
my  funeral  pyre  blaze  bright  from  the  fires  ye 
give !  Wed  happily  under  a  better  fate,  O  my 
sisters,  but  yet  remember  me  though  lost ! 

107  What  crime  could  the  babe  commit,  with  so  few 
hours  of  life  ?  With  what  act  could  he,  scarce  born, 
do  harm  to  his  grandsire  ?  If  it  could  be  he  deserved 
his  death,  let  it  be  judged  he  did — ah,  wretched 
child,  it  is  my  fault  he  suffers  for !  O  my  son,  grief 
of  thy  mother,  prey  of  the  ravening  beasts,  ah  me ! 
torn  limb  from  limb  on  thy  day  of  birth  ;  O  my  son, 
miserable  pledge  of  my  unhallowed  love — this  was 
the  first  of  days  for  thee,  and  this  for  thee  the  last. 
Fate  did  not  permit  me  to  shed  o'er  thee  the  teal's 
I  owed,  nor  to  bear  to  thy  tomb  the  shorn  lock  ; 
I  have  not  bent  o'er  thee,  nor  culled  the  kiss  from 
thy  cold  lips.  Greedy  wild  beasts  are  rending  in 
pieces  the  child  my  womb  put  forth. 

119  I,  too,  shall  follow  the  shades  of  my  babe — 
shall  deal  myself  the  sti-oke — and  shall  not  long 
have  been  called  or  mother  or  bereaved.  Do  thou, 
nevertheless,  O  hoped  for  in  vain  by  thy  wretched 
sister,  collect,  I  entreat,  the  scattered  members  of 
thy  son,  and  bring  them  again  to  their  mother  to 
share  her  sepulchre,  and  let  one  urn,  however  scant, 
possess  us  both  !  O  live,  and  forget  me  not ;  pour 
forth  thy  tears  upon  my  wounds,  nor  shrink  from 
her  thou  once  didst  love,  and  who  loved  thee  ! 
Do  thou,  I  pray,  fulfil  the  behests  of  the  sister  thou 
didst  love  too  well  ;  the  behest  of  my  father  I 
shall  myself  perform  ! 


141 


OVID 

XII 
Medea    Iasoni 

At  tibi  Colchorum,  memini,  regina  vacavi, 

ars  mea  cum  peteres  ut  tibi  ferret  opem. 
tunc  quae  dispensant  mortalia  fata  l  sorores 

debuerant  fusos  evoluisse  meos. 
turn  potui  Medea  mori  bene !  quidquid  ab  illo  5 

produxi  vitam  2  tempore,  poena  fait. 
Ei  mihi  !  cur  umquam  iuvenalibus  acta  lacertis 

Phrixeam  petiit  Pelias  arbor  ovem  ? 
cur  umquam  Colchi  Magnetida  vidimus  Argoa, 

turbaque  Phasiacam  Graia  bibistis  aquam  ?  10 

cur  mihi  plus  aequo  flavi  placuere  capilli 

et  decor  et  linguae  gratia  ficta  tuae  ? 
aut.  semel  in  nostras  quoniam  nova  puppis  harenas 

venerat  audacis  attuleratque  viros, 
isset  anhelatos  non  praemedicatus  in  ignes  15 

inmemor  Aesonides  oraque  adusta  bourn  ; 
semina  iecisset,3  totidemque  et  4  semina  et  hostes, 

ut  caderet  cultu  cultor  ab  ipse  suo  ! 
quantum  perfidiae  tecum,  scelerate,  perisset, 

dempta  forent  capiti  quam  mala  multa  meo  !        20 

1  fata  G  w  :  facta  P  :  fila  s  Hein.  Pa.  2  vitae  o>. 

3  iecisset  P  G  :  sensisset  s :  sevisset  Hein.  Merle.  Pa. 

4  totidemque  et  P  :  totidem  quod  G  :  quot  Pa. 


"  Medea  begins  suddenly,  as  if  in  answer  to  a  refusal  of 
Jason  to  listen  to  her  plea. 

Euripides  wrote  a  Medea,   and   was  followed  by  Ennius, 

142 


THE    HER01DES    XII 

XII 

Medea  to  Jason 

And  yet"  for  you,  I  remember,  I  the  queen  of 
Colchis    could   rind    time,  when   you   besought   that 

my  art  might  bring  you  help.  Then  was  the  time 
when  the  sisters  who  pay  out  the  fated  thread  of 
mortal  life  should  have  unwound  for  aye  my  spindle. 
Then  could  Medea  have  ended  well  !  Whatever  of 
life  has  been  lengthened  out  for  me  from  that  time 
forth  has  been  but  punishment. 

7  Ah  me  !  why  was  the  ship  from  the  forests  of 
Pelion  ever  driven  over  the  seas  by  strong  young 
arms  in  quest  of  the  ram  of  Phrixus.--'  Why  did 
we  Colchians  ever  cast  eye  upon  Magnesian  Argo. 
and  why  did  your  Greek  crew  ever  drink  of  the 
waters  of  the  Phasis  ?  Why  did  I  too  greatly  delight 
in  those  golden  locks  of  yours,  in  your  comely  ways, 
and  in  the  false  graces  of  your  tongue?  Vet  delighi 
too  greatly  I  did — else,  when  once  the  strange  craft 
had  been  beached  upon  our  sands  and  brought  us 
her  bold  crew,  all  unanointed  would  the  unreniember- 
ing  son  of  Aeson  have  gone  forth  to  meet  the  fires 
exhaled  from  the  flame-scorched  nostrils  of  the  bulk  ; 
he  would  have  scattered  the  seeds — -as  many  as  tin- 
seeds  were  the  enemy,  too — for  the  sower  himself 
to  fall  in  strife  with  his  own  sowing!  Mow  much 
perfidy,  vile  wretch,  would  have  perished  with  \ou. 
and  how  many  woes  been  averted  from  my  head  ! 

Accius,  and  Ovid  himself,  whose  play  is  lost,   and   v 

In  this  letter  Ovid  draws   from    Euripides  and   Apolloniua 

Rhodius,  Argonaittica  lit  and  IV.  See  Index. 

H3 


OVID 

Est  aliqua  ingrato  meritum  exprobrare  voluptas. 

hac  fruar  ;  haec  de  te  gaudia  sola  feram. 
iussus  inexpertam  Colchos  advertere  puppim 

intrasti  patriae  regna  beata  meae. 
hoc  illic  Medea  fui,  nova  nupta  quod  hie  est ;  25 

quam  pater  est  illi,  tani  mihi  dives  erat. 
hie  Ephyren  bimarem,  Seythia  tenus  ille  nivosa 

omne  tenet,  Ponti  qua  plaga  laeva  iacet. 
Aecipit  hospitio  iuvenes  Aeeta  Pelasgos, 

et  premitis  pictos,  corpora  Graia,  toros.  30 

tunc  ego  te  vidi,  tunc  coepi  scire,  quis  esses  ; 

ilia  fuit  mentis  prima  ruina  meae. 
et  vidi  et  perii ;  nee  notis  ignibus  arsi, 

ardet  ut  ad  magnos  pinea  taeda  deos. 
et  formosus  eras,  et  me  mea  fata  trahebant  ;  35 

abstulei-ant  oculi  lumina  nostra  tui. 
perfide,  sensisti — quis  enim  bene  celat  amorem  ? 

eminet  indicio  prodita  flamma  suo. 
Dicitur  interea  tibi  lex  ut  dura  ferorum 

insolito  premeres  vomere  colla  bourn.  40 

Martis  erant  tauri  plus  quam  per  cornua  saevi, 

quorum  terribilis  spiritus  ignis  erat ; 
aere  pedes  solidi  praetentaque  naribus  aera, 

nigra  per  adflatus  haec  quoque  facta  suos. 
semina  praeterea  populos  genitura  iuberis  45 

spargere  devota  lata  per  arva  maim, 
qui  peterent  natis  secum  tua  corpora  telis ; 

ilia  est  agricolae  messis  iniqua  suo. 

"  Corinth. 
144 


THE    HEROIDES    XII 

21  'Tis  some  pleasure  to  reproach  the  ungrateful 
with  favours  done.  That  pleasure  I  will  enjoy  ;  that 
is  the  only  delight  1  shall  win  from  you.  Bidden  to 
turn  the  hitherto  untried  craft  to  the  shores  of 
Colchis,  you  set  foot  in  the  rich  realms  of  my  native 
land.  There  I,  Medea,  was  what  here  your  new 
bride  is  ;  as  rich  as  her  sire  is,  so  rich  was  mine. 
Hers  holds  Ephyre,"  washed  by  two  seas ;  mine, 
all  the  country  which  lies  along  the  left  strand 
of  the  Pontus  e'en  to  the  snows  of  Scythia. 

29  Aeetes  welcomes  to  his  home  the  Pelasgiau  youths, 
and  you  rest  your  Greek  limbs  upon  the  pictured 
couch.  Then  'twas  that  I  saw  you,  then  began  to 
know  you  ;  that  was  the  first  impulse  to  the  downfall 
of  my  soul.  I  saw  you,  and  I  was  undone  :  nor  did  I 
kindle  with  ordinary  fires,  but  like  the  pine-torch 
kindled  before  the  mighty  gods.  Not  only  were 
you  noble  to  look  upon,  but  my  fates  were  dragging 
me  to  doom;  your  eyes  had  robbed  mine  of  their 
power  to  see.  Traitor,  you  saw  it — for  who  can 
well  hide  love?  Its  flame  shines  forth  its  own 
betrayer. 

39  Meanwhile  the  condition  is  imposed  that  you 
press  the  hard  necks  of  the  fierce  bulls  at  the 
unaccustomed  plow.  To  Mars  the  bulls  belonged, 
raging  with  more  than  mere  horns,  for  I  heir  breath 
ing  was  of  terrible  fire;  of  solid  bronze  were  their 
feet,  wrought  round  with  bronze  their  nostrils,  made 
black,  too,  by  the  blasts  of  their  own  breath. 
Besides  this,  you  arc  bidden  to  scatter  with 
Obedient  hand  over  the  wide  fields  the  seeds  that 
should  beget  peoples  to  assail  you  with  weapons 
born  with  themselves  ;  a  baneful  harvest,  that,  to  its 
own   husbandman.       Tin     e\es   of    the  guardian    that 

M5 
i. 


OVID 

lumina  custodis  suecumbere  nescia  somno, 

ultimus  est  aliqua  decipere  arte  labor.  50 

Dixerat  Aeetes  ;  maesti  eonsurgitis  omnes, 

mensaque  purpureos  deserit  alta  toros. 
quam  tibi  tunc  longe  regnum  dotale  Creusae 

et  socer  et  magni  nata  Creontis  erat  ? 
tristis  abis  ;  oculis  abeuntem  prosequor  udis,  55 

et  dixit  tenui  murmure  lingua :    "vale  !  " 
ut  positura  tetigi  thalamo  male  saueia  lectum, 

acta  est  per  lacrimas  nox  mihi,  quanta  fuit ; 
ante  oculos  taurique  nie'os  segetesque  nefandae, 

ante  meos  oculos  pervigil  anguis  erat.  60 

hinc    amor,  hinc  timor    est ;  ipsum    timor    auget 
amorem. 

mane  erat,  et  thalamo  cara  recepta  soror 
disiectamque  comas  adversaque  1  in  ora  iacentem 

invenit,  et  Iacrimis  omnia  plena  meis. 
orat  opem  Minyis.  alter  petit,  alter  habebit ;  2         65 

Aesonio  iuveni  quod  rogat  ilia,  damus. 
Est  nemus  et  piceis  et  frondibus  ilicis  atrum ; 

vix  illuc  radiis  solis  adire  licet, 
sunt  in  eo — fuerant  certe — delubra  Dianae  ; 

aurea  barbarica  stat  dea  facta  manu.  70 

noscis  ?  an  exciderunt  mecum  loca  ?  venimus  illuc. 

orsus  es  infido  sic  prior  ore  loqui : 
"ius  tibi  et  arbitrium  nostrae  fortuna  salutis 

tradidit,  inque  tua  est  vitaque  morsque  manu. 

1  adversaque  PG  a>  MerkEhic:   aversaque  V  s  Burm.  Sedl. 

2  So  Pa  Sedl.:  petit  altera  et  altera  habebit  P20  s  Burm.: 
petit  altera  et  altera  habebat  wJahn. 

a  Chalciope. 
146 


THE   HEROIDES    XII 

know  not  yielding  to  sleep — by  some  art  to  elude 
them  is  your  final  task. 

51  Aeetes  had  spoken  ;  in  gloom  you  all  rise  up, 
and  the  high  table  is  removed  from  the  purple-spread 
couches.  How  far  away  then  from  your  thought 
were  Creusa's  dowry-realm,  and  the  daughter  of 
great  Creon,  and  Creon  the  father  of  your  bride  ! 
With  foreboding  you  depart ;  and  as  you  go  my 
moist  eyes  follow  you,  and  in  faint  murmur  comes 
from  my  tongue:  "Fare  thou  well!"  Laying 
myself  on  the  ordered  couch  within  my  chamber, 
grievously  wounded,  in  tears  1  passed  the  whole 
night  long ;  before  my  eyes  appeared  the  bulls  and 
the  dreadful  harvest,  before  my  eyes  the  un- 
sleeping serpent.  On  the  one  hand  was  love,  on 
the  other,  fear ;  and  fear  increased  my  very  love. 
Morning  came,  and  my  dear  sister,*1  admitted  to  my 
chamber,  found  me  with  loosened  hair  and  lying 
prone  upon  my  face,  and  everywhere  my  tears. 
She  implores  aid  for  your  Minyae.  What  one  asks, 
another  is  to  receive  ;  what  she  petitions  for  the 
Aesonian  youth,  I  grant. 

67  There  is  a  grove,  sombre  with  pine-trees  and 
the  fronds  of  the  ilex  ;  into  it  scarce  can  the  rays  of 
the  sun  find  way.  There  is  in  it — there  was.  at 
least — a  shrine  to  Diana,  wherein  stands  the  goddess, 
a  golden  image  fashioned  by  barbaric  hand.  Do 
you  know  the  place  ?  or  have  places  fallen  from  your 
mind  along  with  me  ?  We  came  to  the  spot.  You 
were  the  first  to  speak,  with  those  faithless  lips, 
and  these  were  your  words:  "To  thy  hand  fortune 
has  committed  the  right  of  choosing  or  not  my 
deliverance,  and  in  thy  hand  are  the  ways  of 
life  and   death    for  me.       To    have    power    to    ruin 

M7 
l  2 


OVID 

perdere  posse  sat  est,  siquem  iuvet  ipsa  potestas  ;  75 

sed  tibi  servatus  gloria  maior  ero. 
per  mala  nosti'a  precor,  quorum  potes  esse  levamen, 

per  genus,  et  numen  cuncta  videntis  avi, 
per  triplieis  vultus  arcanaque  sacra  Dianae, 

et  si  forte  aliquos  gens  habet  ista  deos —  80 

o  virgo,  miserere  mei,  miserere  meorum ; 

effice  me  meritis  tempus  in  omne  tuum  ! 
quodsi  forte  virum  non  dedignare  Pelasgum — 

sed  mihi  tam  faciles  unde  meosque  deos  ? — 
spiritus  ante  meus  tenues  vanescat  in  auras  85 

quam  thalamo  nisi  tu  nupta  sit  ulla  meo  ! 
conscia  sit  Iuno  sacris  praefecta  maritis, 

et  dea  marmorea  cuius  in  aede  sumus  !  " 
Haec  animum — et  quota  pars   haec   sunt  ! — movere 
puellae 

simplicis,  et  dextrae  dextera  iuncta  meae.  90 

vidi  etiam  lacrimas — an  pars  est  fraudis *  in  illis  ? 

sic  cito  sum  verbis  capta  puella  tuis. 
iungis  et  aeripedes  inadusto  corpore  tauros 

et  solidam  iusso  vomere  findis  humum. 
arva  venenatis  pro  semine  dentibus  inples  ;  95 

nascitur  et  gladios  scutaque  miles  habet. 
ipsa  ego,  quae  dederam  medicamina,  pallida  sedi, 

cum  vidi  subitos  arma  tenere  viros  ; 
donee  terrigenae,  facinus  mirabile,  fratres 

inter  se  strictas  conseruere  manus.  100 

1  a!  pars  est  L.  Mueller :  an  et  ars  est  Sedl.:  an  et  est  pars 
some  of  the  early  editions. 

148 


THE    HEROIDES    XII 

is  enough,  if  anyone  delight  in  power  for  itself ; 
but  to  save  me  will  be  greater  glory.  By  our 
misfortunes,  which  thou  hast  power  to  relieve,  I 
pray,  by  thy  line,  and  by  the  godhead  of  thy  all- 
seeing  grandsire  the  sun,  by  the  three-fold  face 
and  holy  mysteries  of  Diana,  and  by  the  gods 
of  that  race  of  thine — if  so  be  gods  it  have — by  all 
these,  O  maiden,  have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  on 
my  men  ;  be  kind  to  me  and  make  me  thine  for 
ever!  And  if  it  chance  thou  dost  not  disdain  a 
Pelasgian  suitor — but  how  can  I  hope  the  gods  will 
be  so  facile  to  my  wish  ? — may  my  spirit  vanish 
away  into  thin  air  before  another  than  thou  shall 
come  a  bride  to  my  chamber  !  My  witness  be  Juno, 
ward  of  the  rites  of  wedlock,  and  the  goddess  in 
whose  marble  shrine  we  stand  ! " 

89  Words  like  these — and  how  slight  a  part  of  them 
is  here  ! — and  your  right  hand  clasped  with  mine, 
moved  the  heart  of  the  simple  maid.  I  saw  even 
tears — or  was  there  in  the  tears,  too.  part  of  your 
deceit?  Thus  quickly  was  I  ensnared,  girl  that  I 
was,  by  your  words.  You  yoke  together  the  bronze- 
footed  bulls  with  your  body  unharmed  b}r  their  fin-, 
and  cleave  the  solid  mould  with  the  share,  as  you 
were  bid.  The  ploughed  fields  you  sow  full  with 
envenomed  teeth  in  place  of  seed  ;  and  there  rises 
out  of  the  earth,  with  sword  and  shield,  a  warrior 
hand.  Myself,  the  giver  of  the  charmed  drug,  sat 
pallid  there  at  sight  of  nun  all  suddenly  arisen 
and  in  arms;  until  the  earth-horn  brothers — O  deed 
most  wonderful  ! — drew  arms  and  came  to  the 
grapple  each  with  each. 

M9 


OVID 

Insopor  ecce  vigil  ]  squamis  crepitantibus  horrens 

sibilat  et  torto  pectore  verrit  humum  ! 
dotis  opes  ubi  erant  ?  ubi  erat  tibi  regia  coniunx, 

quique  maris  gemini  distinet  Isthmos  aquas? 
ilia  ego,   quae    tibi    sum   nunc    denique    barbara 

facta,  105 

nunc  tibi  sum  pauper,  nunc  tibi  visa  nocens, 
flammea  subduxi  medicato  lumina  somno, 

et  tibi,  quae  raperes,  vellera  tuta  dedi. 
proditus  est  genitor,  regnum  patriamque  reliqui  ; 

munus,  in  exilio  quod  licet  esse,  tub  !  110 

virginitas  facta  est  peregrini  praeda  latronis  ; 

optima  cum  cara  matre  relicta  soi'or. 
At  non  te  fugiens  sine  me,  gei'mane,  reliqui  ! 

deficit  hoc  uno  littera  nostra  loco, 
quod   facere    ausa  mea   est,  ncn  audet   scribere 

dextra.  115 

sic  ego,  sed  tecum,  dilaceranda  fui. 
nee  tamen  extimui — quid  enim  post  ilia  timerem  ? — 

credere  me  pelago,  femina  iamque  nocens. 
numen  ubi  est  ?  ubi  di  ?     meritas  subeamus  in  alto, 

tu  fraudis  poenas,  credulitatis  ego  !  1 20 

Compressos  utinam  Symplegades  elisissent, 

nostraque  adhaererent  ossibus  ossa  tuis  ; 
aut  nos  Scylla  rapax  canibus  mersisset 2  edendos — 

debuit  ingratis  Scylla  nocere  viris  ; 
quaeque  vomit  totidem  fluetus  totidemque  resor- 
bet,  125 

nos  quoque  Trinacriae  supposuisset  aquae  ! 

1  So  Pl  6',  Merk.:  Pervigil  ecce  draco  P.,  w  Burm.:  insuper 
ecce  vigil  Hein.:  insopor  ecce  draco  Pa. 

2  mersisset  Pa.:  misisset  MSS. 

a  The  dismemberment  of  her  brother  Absyrtus. 


THE  -HEROINES    XII 

101  Then,  1<>  and  behold  !  all  a-bristle  with  rattling 
scales,  comes  the  unsleeping  sentinel,  hissing  and 
sweeping  the  ground  with  winding  hellv.  Where 
then  was  your  rich  dowry?  Where  then  your  royal 
consort,  and  the  Isthmus  that  sunders  the  waters  of 
two  seas?  I,  the  maiden  who  am  now  at  last 
become  a  barbarian  in  your  eyes,  who  now  am  poor, 
who  now  seem  baneful — I  closed  the  lids  of  the 
flame-like  eyes  in  slumber  wrought  by  my  drug,  and 
gave  into  your  hand  the  fleece  to  steal  away  un- 
harmed. I  betrayed  my  sire,  I  left  my  throne  and 
my  native  soil  ;  the  reward  I  get  is  leave  to  live  in 
exile!  My  maidenly  innocence  has  become  the  spoil 
of  a  pirate  from  overseas  ;  beloved  mother  and  best 
of  sisters  I  have  left  behind. 

113  But  thee,  O  my  brother,  I  did  not  leave  behind 
as  I  fled  !  In  this  one  place  my  pen  fails.  Of  the 
deed  my  right  hand  was  bold  enough  to  do/'  it  is 
not  bold  enough  to  write.  So  I.  too,  should  have 
been  torn  limb  from  limb — but  with  thee  !  And  yet 
I  did  not  fear — for  what,  after  that,  could  I  fear? — 
to  trust  myself  to  the  sea,  woman  though  I  was,  and 
now  with  guilt  upon  me.  Where  is  heavenly  justice  ? 
Where  the  gods?  Let  the  penalty  that  is  our  due 
overtake  us  on  the  deep — you  for  your  treachery, 
me  for  my  trustfulness  ! 

121  Would  the  Symplegades  had  caught  and 
crushed  us  out  together,  and  that  my  bones  wen 
clinging  now  to  yours;  or  Seylla  the  ravening  sub- 
merged us  in  the  deep  to  be  devoured  by  her  dogs 
— fit  were  it  for  Seylla  to  work  woe  to  ingratr  nun  ! 
And  she  who  Spews  forth  so  many  times  the  Hoods. 
and  sucks  them  so  many  times  back  in  again — would 
she   had  brought    us,   too,  beneath    the    Trinacrian 

151 


OVID 

sospes  ad  Haemonias  victorque  reverteris  urbes ; 

ponitur  ad  patrios  aurea  lana  deos. 
Quid  referam  Peliae  natas  pietate  nocentes 

caesaque  virginea  membra  paterna  manu  ?  130 

ut  culpent  alii,  tibi  me  laudare  necesse  est, 

pro  quo  sum  totiens  esse  coacta  nocens. 
ausus  es— o,  iusto  desunt  sua  verba  dolori ! — 

ausus  es  "  Aesonia,"  dicere,  "cede  domo  !  " 
iussa  domo  cessi  natis  comitata  duobus  135 

et,  qui  me  sequitur  semper,  amore  tui. 
ut  subito  nostras  Hymen  cantatus  ad  aures 

venit,  et  accenso  lampades  igne  micant, 
tibiaque  efFundit  socialia  carmina  vobis, 

at  mihi  funerea  flebiliora  tuba,  140 

pertimui,  nee  adhuc  tantum  scelus  esse  putabam  ; 

sed  tamen  in  toto  pectore  frigus  erat. 
turba  ruunt  et  "  Hymen,"  clamant,  K  Hymenaee  !  " 
frequenter — 

quo  propior  vox  haec,  hoc  mihi  penis  erat. 
diversi  flebant  servi  lacrimasque  tegebant —  145 

quis  vellet  tanti  nuntius  esse  mali  ? 
me  quoque,  quidquid  erat,  potius  nescire  iuvabat ; 

sed  tamquam  scirem,  mens  mea  tristis  erat, 
cum  minor  e  pueris  iussus  l  studioque  videndi 

constitit  ad  geminae  limina  prima  foris.  150 

"hinc"2    mihi    "mater,    abi ! 3    pompam    pater," 
inquit,  "  Iason 

ducit  et  adiunctos  aureus  urget  equos !  " 

1  iussus  P  G  Plan.:  lassus  Pa. 

2  hie  s  Hein.  3  abi  P :  adi  Ehw. 

°  At  tlie  persuasion  of  Medea,  who  wished  to  avenge  Jason, 
they  attempted  the  rejuvenation  of  their  father  by  dis- 
membering and  boiling  him  in  a  supposed  magic  cauldron. 

*  They  were  still  in  the  palace.  Palmer,  who  reads  lassus 
and  abi,  pictures  Medea  and  her  son  in  the  street. 

152 


THE    HEROIDES    XII 

wave  !  Yet  unharmed  and  victorious  you  return  to 
Haemonia's  towns,  and  the  golden  fleece  is  laid 
before  your  fathers'  gods. 

129  YVhy  rehearse  the  tale  of  Pelias'  daughters,  by 
devotion  led  to  evil  deeds — of  how  their  maiden 
hands  laid  knife  to  the  members  of  their  sire  ? a 
I  may  be  blamed  by  others,  but  you  perforce  must 
praise  me — you,  for  whom  so  many  times  I  have 
been  driven  to  crime.  Vet  you  have  dared — O,  fit 
words  fail  me  for  my  righteous  wrath  ! — you  have 
dared  to  say  :  "  Withdraw  from  the  palace  of  Aeson's 
line!"  At  your  bidding  I  have  withdrawn  from 
your  palace,  taking  with  me  our  two  children,  and — 
what  follows  me  evermore — my  love  for  you.  When, 
all  suddenly,  there  came  to  my  ears  the  chant  of 
Hymen,  and  to  my  eyes  the  gleam  of  blazing  torches, 
and  the  pipe  poured  forth  its  notes,  for  you  a 
wedding-strain,  but  for  me  a  strain  more  tearful  than 
the  funeral  trump,  I  was  filled  with  fear:  I  did  not 
yet  believe  such  monstrous  guilt  could  he  :  hut  all 
my  breast  none  the  less  grew  chill.  The  throng 
pressed  eagerly  on,  crying  "  Hymen,  0  Hymen- 
aeus  !  "  in  full  chorus — the  nearer  the  cry,  lor  me 
the  more  dreadful.  My  slaves  turned  away  and 
wept,  seeking  to  hide  their  tears — who  would  be 
willing  messenger  of  tidings  so  ill  ?  Whatever  it 
was,  'twas  better,  indeed,  that  I  not  know  ;  hut  my 
heart  was  heavy,  as  if  I  really  knew,  when  the 
younger  of  the  children,  at  my  bidding,  and  eager 
for  the  sight,  went  and  stood  at  the  outer  threshold 
of  the  double  door.  "Here,  mother,  come  out  !  "  '' 
he  cries  to  me.  "A  procession  is  coming,  and  my 
father  Jason  leading  it.  He's  all  in  gold,  and  driving 
a  team   of  horses!"      Then  straight    I  rent  my  cloak 

'S3 


OVID 

protinus  abscissa  planxi  mea  pectora  veste, 

tuta  nee  a  digitis  ora  fuere  meis. 
ire  animus  mediae  suadebat  in  agmina  turbae        155 

sertaque  conpositis  demere  rapta  comis  ; 
vix  me  continui,  quin  sic  laniata  capillos 

clamarem  " meus  est!  "  iniceremque  manus. 
Laese  pater,  gaude  !  Colchi  gaudete  relicti  ! 

inferias  umbrae  fratris  habete  mei ;  160 

deseror  amissis  regno  patriaque  domoque 

coniuge,  qui  nobis  omnia  solus  erat  ! 
serj>entis  igitur  potui  taurosque  furentes  ; 

uiium  non  potui  perdomuisse  virum, 
quaeque  feros  pepuli  doctis  medicatibus  ignes,       165 

non  valeo  nammas  effugere  ipsa  meas. 
ipsi  me  cantus  herbaeque  artesque  relinquunt ; 

nil  dea,  nil  Hecates  sacra  potentis  agunt. 
non  mihi  grata  dies  ;  noctes  vigilantur  amarae, 

et  tener  a  misero  pectore  somnus  abit.1  170 

quae  me  non  possum,  potui  sopire  draconem ; 

utilior  cuivis  quam  mihi  cura  mea  est. 
quos  ego  servavi,  paelex  amplectitur  artus, 

et  nostri  fructus  ilia  laboris  habet. 
Forsitan  et,  stultae  dum  te  iactare  maritae  175 

quaeris  et  iniustis  auribus  apta  loqui, 
in  faciem  moresque  meos  nova  crimina  fingas. 

rideat  et  vitiis  laeta  sit  ilia  meis  ! 
rideat  et  Tyrio  iaceat  sublimis  in  ostro — 

flebit  et  ardores  vincet  adusta  meos  !  180 

dum  ferrum  Hammaeque  aderunt  sucusque  veneni, 

hostis  Medeae  nullus  inultus  erit  ! 

1  So  Pa.:    nee   ten//ra   misero  pectore  somnus  habet  P: 
nee  tener  ah  miserae  pectora  somnus  habet  or  alit  Htin. 

"*  Creusa  and  her  father  will  really  be  consumed  in  the  fire, 
with  the  palace. 

154 


THE    HEROIDKS    Ml 

and  beat  my  breast  and  cried  aloud,  and  niv  cheeks 
were  at  the  mercy  of  my  nails.  M\-  In-art  impelled 
me  to  rush  into  the  midst  of  the  moving  throng,  to 
tear  off  the  wreaths  from  my  ordered  locks  ;  F  scarce 
could  keep  from  crying  out,  thus  with  hair  all  torn. 
"  He  is  mine  !"  and  laying  hold  on  you. 

159  Ah,  injured  father,  rejoice  !  Rejoice,  ye  Col- 
chians  whom  I  left!  Shades  of  my  brother,  receive 
in  my  fate  your  sacrifice  due  ;  I  am  abandoned  ; 
I  have  lost  my  throne,  my  native  soil,  my  home, 
my  husband — who  alone  for  me  took  the  place  of 
all!  Dragons  and  maddened  bulls,  it  seems,  I  could 
subdue;  a  man  alone  I  could  not;  I,  who  could 
beat  back  fierce  fire  with  wise  drugs,  have  not  the 
power  to  escape  the  flames  of  my  own  passi.ni. 
My  very  incantations,  herbs,  and  arts  abandon  me  ; 
naught  does  my  goddess  aid  me,  naught  the  sacrifice 
I  make  to  potent  Hecate.  I  take  no  pleasure  in  the 
day;  my  nights  are  watches  of  bitterness,  and  gentle 
sleep  is  far  departed  from  my  wretched  soul.  1,  who 
could  charm  the  dragon  to  sleep,  can  bring  none 
to  myself;  my  effort  brings  more  good  to  any  one 
else  soever  than  to  me.  The  limbs  I  saved,  a 
wanton  now  embraces;  'tis  she  who  naps  the  fruit 
of  my  toil. 

175  Perhaps,  too,  when  you  wish  to  make  boast  to 
your  stupid  mate  and  say  what  will  pleasure  her 
unjust  ears,  you  will  fashion  strange  slanders  againsl 
my  face  and  against  my  ways.  Let  her  make  merry 
and  be  joyful  over  my  faults!  Let  her  make  merry, 
and  lie  aloft  ontheTyrian  purple — she  shall  weep^  and 
the  flames"  that  consume  her  will  surpass  my  own  ! 
While  sword  and  fire  are  at  my  hand,  and  the  juice 
of  poison,  no  foe  of  Medea  shall  go  unpunished  ! 

■  5; 


OVJD 

Quodsi  forte  preces  praecordia  ferrea  tangunt, 

nunc  animis  audi  verba  minora  meis  ! 
tarn  tibi  sum  supplex,  quam  tu  mihi  saepe  fuisti,  185 

nee  moror  ante  tuos  procubuisse  pedes. 
si  tibi  sum  vilis,  communis  respice  natos  ; 

saeviet  in  partus  dira  noverca  meos. 
et  nimium  similes  tibi  sunt,  et  imagine  tangor, 

et  quotiens  video,  lumina  nostra  madent.  190 

per  superos  oro,  per  avitae  lumina  flammae, 

per  meritum  et  natos,  pignora  nostra,  duos — 
redde  torum,  pro  quo  tot  res  insana  reliqui ; 

adde  fidem  dictis  auxiliumque  refer  ! 
non  ego  te  inploro  contra  taurosque  virosque,        195 

utque  tua  serpens  victa  quiescat  ope ; 
te  peto,  quern  merui,  quern  nobis  ipse  dedisti, 

cum  quo  sum  pariter  facta  parente  parens. 
Dos  ubi  sit,  quaeris  ?     campo  numeravimus  illo, 

qui  tibi  laturo  vellus  arandus  erat.  200 

aureus  ille  aries  villo  spectabilis  alto 

dos  mea,  quam,  dicam  si  tibi  "  redde !  "  neges. 
dos  mea  tu  sospes ;  dos  est  mea  Graia  iuventus  ! 

i  nunc,  Sisyphias,  inprobe,  confer  opes  ! 
quod    vivis,    quod    habes     nuptam    socerumque 

potentis,  205 

hoc  ipsum,  ingratus  quod  potes  esse,  meum  est. 
quos  equidem  actutum — sed  quid  praedicere  poenam 

attinet  ?  ingentis  pai'turit  ira  minas. 
156 


THE   HEROIDES    XII 

183  But  if  it  chance  my  entreaties  touch  a  heart 
of  iron,  list  now  to  my  words — words  too  humble  for 
my  proud  soul!  I  am  as  much  a  suppliant  to  you  as 
you  have  often  been  to  me,  and  I  hesitate  not  to  cast 
myself  at  your  feet.  If  I  am  cheap  in  your  eyes,  In- 
land to  our  common  offspring ;;  a  hard  stepdame  will 
be  cruel  to  the  fruitage  of  my  womb.  Their  resem- 
blance to  you  is  all  too  great,  and  I  am  touched  by 
the  likeness  ;  and  as  often  as  I  sec  them,  my  eyes 
drop  tears.  By  the  gods  above,  by  the  light  of  your 
grandsire's  beams,  by  my  favours  to  you,  and  by  the 
two  children  who  are  our  mutual  pledge — restore  me 
to  the  bed  for  which  I  madly  left  so  much  behind  : 
be  faithful  to  your  promises,  and  come  to  my  aid  as 
I  came  to  yours!  I  do  not  implore  you  to  go  forth 
against  bulls  and  men,  nor  ask  your  aid  to  quiet 
and  overcome  a  dragon  :  it  is  you  I  ask  for, — you. 
whom  I  have  earned,  whom  you  yourself  gave  to 
me,  by  whom  I  became  a  mother,  as  you  by  me  a 
father. 

199  VVhere  is  my  dowry,  you  ask  ?  On  the  field  I 
counted  it  out — that  held  which  you  had  to  plough 
before  vou  could  bear  away  the  fleece.  The  famous 
«•olden  ram,  sightly  for  deep  flock,  is  my  dowry — 
the  which,  should  I  say  to  you  "  Restore  it  !  "  you 
would  refuse  to  render  up.  My  dowry  is  yourself — 
saved  ;  my  dowry  is  the  hand  of  Grecian  youth  ! 
Go  now,  wretch,  compare  with  that  your  wealth  of 
Sisyphus!  That  you  are  alive,  that  you  take  to  wife 
one  who,  with  the  father  she  brings  you,  is  of  kingly 
station,  that  you  have  the  very  power  of  being 
ingrate — vou  owe  to  me.  Whom,  hark  you,  I  will 
straight — hut  what  boots  it  to  foretell  your  penalty  ? 
My  ire  is  in  travail  with  mighty  threats.     Whither 

'57 


OVID 

quo  feret  ira,  sequar  !  facti  fortasse  pigebit — 

et  piget  infido  consuluisse  viro.  210 

viderit  ista  deus,  qui  nunc  mea  pectora  versat ! 
nescio  quid  certe  mens  mea  maius  agit ! 


XIII 

Laudamia  Protesilao. 

Mittit  et  optat  amans,  quo  mittitur,  ire  salutem 

Haemonis  Haemonio  Laudamia1  viro. 
Aulide  te  fama  est  vento  retinente  morari. 

a.,  me  cum  fugeres,  hie  ubi  ventus  ei-at  ? 
turn  freta  debuerant  vestris  obsistere  remis  ;  5 

illud  erat  saevis  utile  tempus  aquis. 
oscula  plura  viro  mandataque  plura  dedissem  ; 

et  sunt  quae  volui  dicere  multa  tibi. 
raptus  es  hinc  praeceps,  et  qui  tua  vela  vocaret, 

quern  cuperent  nautae,  non  ego,  ventus  erat ;  10 
ventus  erat  nautis  aptus,  non  aptus  amanti. 

solvor  ab  amplexu.,  Protesilae,  tuo, 
linguaque  mandantis  verba  inperfecta  reliquit ; 

vix  illud  potui  dicere  triste  "vale  ! " 
Incubuit  Boreas  abreptaque  vela  tetendit,  15 

iamque  metis  longe  Protesilaus  erat. 
dum  potui  spectare  virum,  spectare  iuvabat, 

sumque  tuos  oculos  usque  secuta  meis ; 

1  Laudamia  Go  :  Laudomia  P  V. 

"  Homer,  //.  ii.  695  ff.,  refers  to  the  story  of  Protesilaus, 
and  Euripides  uses  it  in  his  Protesilaus.  Compare  also 
Hyginus,  Pah.  ciii. 

*  With  the  rest  of  the  Greek  fleet,  which  was  under  divine 

158 


THE   HEROIDES    XIII 

my  ire  leads,  will  I  follow.  Mayhap  I  shall  repent 
ine  of  what  I  do — but  I  repent  me,  too,  of  regard  for 
a  faithless  husband's  good.  Be  that  the  concern  of 
the  god  who  now  embroils  my  heart  !  Something 
portentous,  surely,  is  working  in  my  soul  ! 


XIII 
Laodamia  to  Protesilaus 

Greetings  and  health  Haemonian  Laodamia  sends 
her  Haemonian  lord,"  and  desires  with  loving  heart 
they  go  where  they  are  sent. 

3  Report  says  you  are  held  at  Aulis  by  the  wind.'' 
Ah,  when  you  were  leaving  me  behind,  when-  then 
was  this  wind?  Then  should  the  seas  have  risen 
to  stay  your  oars  ;  that  was  the  fitting  time  for 
the  floods  to  rage.  I  could  have  given  my  lord 
more  kisses  and  laid  upon  him  more  behests;  and 
many  are  the  things  I  wished  to  say  to  you.  Bid 
you  were  swept  headlong  hence  :  and  the  wind  that 
invited  forth  your  sails  was  one  your  seamen  longed 
for,  not  I  ;  it  was  a  wind  suited  to  seamen,  not  to 
one  who  loved.  I  must  needs  loose  myself  from 
your  embrace,  Protesilaus,  and  my  tongue  leave  half 
unsaid  what  I  would  enjoin  ;  scarce  had  I  time  to 
say  that  sad  ,l  Farewell  !  " 

15  Boreas  came  swooping  down,  seized  on  and 
stretched  your  sails,  and  my  Protesilaus  soon  was  far 
away.  As  long  as  I  could  gaze  upon  my  lord,  to 
gaze  was  my  delight,  and    I    followed   your  eyes   ever 

displeasure  because  Agamemnon  hail    killed    B    itag   in    die 
grove  of  Diana. 

'59 


OVID 

ut  te  non  poteram,  poteram  tua  vela  videre, 

vela  diu  vultus  detinuere  nieos.  20 

at  postquam  nee  te  nee  vela  fugacia  vidi, 

et  quod  spectarem  nil  nisi  pontus  erat, 
lux     quoque     tecum     abiit,    tenebrisque     exanguis 
obortis 

succiduo  dicor  procubuisse  genu. 
vix  socer  Iphiclus,  vix  me  grandaevus  Acastus,         25 

vix  mater  gelida  maesta  refecit  aqua  ; 
officium  fecere  pium,  sed  inutile  nobis. 

indignor  miserae  non  licuisse  mori ! 
Ut  rediit  animus,  pariter  rediere  dolores. 

pectora  legitimus  casta  momordit  amor.  30 

nee  mihi  pectendos  cura  est  praebere  eapillos, 

nee  libet  aurata  corpora  veste  tegi. 
ut  quas  pampinea  tetigisse  Bicorniger  hasta, 

creditur,  hue  illue,  qua  furor  egit,  eo. 
conveniunt  matres  Phylaceides  l  et  mihi  clamant :  35 

"  Indue  regales,  Laudamia,  sinus  !  " 
scilicet  ipsa  geram  saturatas  murice  vestes, 

bella  sub  Iliacis  moenibus  ille  geret  ? 
ipsa  comas  peetar,  galea  caput  ille  premetur  ? 

ipsa  novas  vestes,  dura  vir  arma  feret  ?  40 

qua  2  possum,  squalore  tuos  imitata  labores 

dicar,  et  baec  belli  tempora  tristis  again. 
Dyspari  Priamide,  damno  formose  tuorum, 

tarn  sis  hostis  iners,  quam  malus  hospes  eras ! 

1  phylaceides     -P2o:      phyleides    P1 :      phylleides    Hein. 
Phyllos  was  a  welt  knoum  fotrn  in  Thessaly. 

2  Qua  Px :  quo  P^  oi. 

°  The  bacchic  frenzy. 
160 


THE    HEROIDES    XIII 

with  my  own;  when  I  could  no  longer  see  you,  I 
still  could  see  your  sails,  and  long  your  sails  detained 
my  eyes.  But  after  I  descried  no  more  either  you 
or  your  flying  sails,  and  what  my  eyes  rested  on  was 
naught  but  only  sea,  the  light,  too,  went  away  with 
you,  the  darkness  rose  about  me,  my  blood  retreated, 
and  with  failing  knee  I  sank,  they  say,  upon  the 
ground.  Scarce  your  sire  Iphiclus,  scarce  mine,  the 
aged  Acastus,  scarce  my  mother,  stricken  with  grief, 
could  bring  me  back  to  life  with  water  iey-cold. 
They  did  their  kindly  task,  but  it  had  no  profit  for 
me.  'Tis  shame  I  had  not  in  my  misery  the  right 
to  die ! 

29  When  consciousness  returned,  my  pain  returned 
as  well.  The  wifely  love  I  bore  you  has  torn  at  my 
faithful  heart.  I  care  not  now  to  let  my  hair  l><- 
dressed,  nor  does  it  pleasure  me  to  be  arrayed  in 
robes  of  gold.  Like  those  whom  he  of  the  two 
horns  is  believed  to  have  touched  with  his  vine- 
leafed  rod,  hither  and  thither  1  go,  where  madness 
drives."  The  matrons  of  Phylace  gather  about,  and 
cry  to  me:  "Put  on  thy  royal  robes,  Laodamia ! " 
Shall  I,  then,  go  clad  in  stuffs  that  are  saturate  with 
costly  purple,  while  my  lord  goes  warring  under  the 
walls  of  llion  ?  Am  I  to  dress  my  hair,  while  his 
head  is  weighed  down  by  the  helm  ?  Am  I  to  wear 
new  apparel  while  my  lord  wears  hard  and  hea\  \ 
arms?  In  what  I  can,  they  shall  say  I  imitate  your 
toils — in  rude  attire  ;  and  these  limes  of  war  1  will 
pass  in  gloom. 

43  Ill-omened  Paris,  Priam's  son,  fair  al  COSl  ol 
thine  own  kin,  mayst  thou  be  as  inert  a  foe  as 
thou    wert   a    faithless   guest  !     Would    that    either 

M 


OVID 

aut  te  Taenariae  faciem  culpasse  maritae,  45 

aut  illi  vellem  displicuisse  tuam  ! 
tu,  qui  pro  rapta  nimium,  Meuelae,  laboras, 

ei  mini,  quam  multis  flebilis  ultor  eris  ! 
di,  precor,  a  nobis  omen  removete  sinistrum, 

et  sua  det  Reduci  vir  meus  anna  Iovi !  50 

sed  timeo,  quotiens  subiit  miserabile  bellum  ; 

more  nivis  laerimae  sole  madentis  eunt. 
Ilion  et  Tenedos  Simoisque  et  Xanthus  et  Ide 

nomina  sunt  ipso  paene  timenda  sono. 
nee  rapere  ausurus,  nisi  se  defendere  posset,  55 

bospes  erat ;  vires  noverat  ille  suas. 
venerat,  ut  fama  est,  multo  speetabilis  auro 

quique  suo  Phrygias  corpore  ferret  opes, 
classe  virisque  potens,  per  quae  fera  bella  geruntur — 

et  sequitur  regni  pars  quotacumque  sui  ?  60 

his  ego  te  victam,  consors  Ledaea  gemellis, 

suspieor ;  haec  Danais  posse  nocere  puto.1 
Hectora,  quisquis  is  est,  si  sum  tibi  eara,  caveto  ;    65 

signatum  memori  pectore  nomen  habe  ! 
hunc  ubi  vitaris,  alios  vitare  memento 

et  multos  illie  Heetoras  esse  puta ; 
et  facito  ut  dieas,  quotiens  pugnare  parabis  : 

"pareere  me  iussit  Laudamia  sibi."  70 

si  cadere  Argolico  fas  est  sub  milite  Troiam, 

te  quoque  non  ullum  vulnus  habente  cadat ! 
pugnet  et  adversos  tendat  Menelaus  in  hostis  ;2 

hostibus  e  mediis  nupta  petenda  viro  est.  76 

1  63,  64  spurious  Pa.  : 

Hectora  nescio  quern  timeo  :  Paris  Hectora  dixit 
ferrea  sanguinea  bella  niovere  manu  ; 

2  74,  75  spurious  Merle.  Pa.  : 

ut  rapiat  Paridi  quam  Paris  ante  sibi 
inruat  et  causa  quern  vicit,  vincat  et  armis  : 

162 


THE    HEROIDES    XIII 

thou  hadst  seen  fault  in  the  face  of  the  Taenarian 

wife,  or  she  had  taken  no  pleasure  in  thine  !  Thou, 
Menelaus.  who  dost  grieve  o'ermuch  for  the  stolen 
one,  all  me,  how  many  shall  shed  tears  for  thy 
revenge  !  Ye  gods,  I  pray,  keep  from  us  the  sinister 
omen,  and  let  my  lord  hang  up  his  arms  to  Jo 
Safe-Return!  But  I  am  fearful  as  oft  as  the 
wretched  war  comes  to  my  thoughts ;  my  tears  come 
forth  like  snow  that  melts  beneath  the  sun.  [lion 
and  Tenedos  and  Siniois  and  X  intlius  and  Ida  are 
names  to  be  feared  from  their  very  sound.  Nor  would 
the  stranger  have  dared  tin- theft  if  he  had  not  power 
to  defend  himself;  his  own  strength  he  well  knew. 
He  arrived,  they  say.  sightly  in  much  gold,  bearing 
upon  his  person  the  wealth  of  Phrvgia.  and  potent 
in  ships  and  men.  with  which  fierce  wars  are  fought 
■ — and  how  great  a  part  of  his  princely  power  came 
with  him  ?  With  means  like  these  were  you  over- 
come, I  suspect,  ()  Leila's  daughter,  sister  to  tin- 
Twins;  these  are  the  things  I  feel  may  be  working 
the  Danaans  woe. 

,,:'  Of  Hector,  whoe'er  he  he.  if  1  am  dear  to  you. 
be  ware;  keep  his  name  stamped  in  ever  mindful 
heart  !  When  you  have  shunned  him,  remember  to 
shun  others;    think   that  man)    Hectors  are  there: 

and    see   that  you    sav,  as   oft    as   you  make  ready   for 

the  fight:  "  Labdamia  hade  me  spare  herself."  If  it 
be  fated  Troy  shall  fall  before  the  Argolic  host,  lei 
it  also  fall  without  your  taking  a  single  wound  .'  Lei 
Menelaus  battle,  let  him  press  to  meet  the  foe;  to 
seek    the    wife    from     the    midst    of    the     foe    is    the 

m    2 


OVID 

causa  tua  est  dispar  ;  tu  tantum  vivere  pugna, 

inque  pios  dominae  posse  redire  sinus. 
Parcite,  Dardanidae,  de  tot,  precor,  hostibus  uni, 

ne  meus  ex  illo  corpore  sanguis  eat  !  80 

non  est  quern  deceat  nudo  concurrere  ferro, 

saevaque  in  oppositos  pectora  ferre  viros ; 
fortius  ille  potest  multo,  quam  pugnat,  amare. 

bella  gerant  alii  ;  Protesilaus  amet ! 
Nunc  fateor — volui  revocare,  animusque  ferebat  ;    85 

substitit  auspicii  lingua  tiniore  mali. 
cum  foribus  velles  ad  Troiam  exire  paternis, 

pes  tuus  offenso  limine  signa  dedit. 
ut  vidi,  mgemuij  tacitoque  in  pectore  dixi  : 

"  signa  reversuri  sint,  precor,  ista  viri  !  "  90 

haec  tibi  nunc  refero,  ne  sis  animosus  in  armis  ; 

fae,  meus  in  ventos  hie  timor  oninis  eat ! 
Sors  quoque  nescio  quern  fato  designat  iniquo, 

qui  primus  Danaum  Troada  tangat  humum. 
infelix,  quae  prima  virum  lugebit  ademptuni  !  95 

di  faciant,  ne  tu  strenuus  esse  velis  ! 
inter  mille  rates  tua  sit  millensima  puppis, 

iamque  fatigatas  ultima  verset  aquas ! 
hoc  quoque  praemoneo  :  de  nave  novissimus  exi ; 

non  est,  quo  properas,  terra  paterna  tibi.  100 

cum  venies,  remoque  move  veloque  carinam 

inque  tuo  celerem  litore  siste  gradum  ! 
Sive  latet  Phoebus  seu  terris  altior  exstat, 

tu  mihi  luce  dolor,  tu  mihi  nocte  venis, 
164 


THE   HEROIDES   XIII 

husband's  part.  Your  case  is  not  the  same  ;  do  you 
fight  merely  to  live,  and  to  return  to  your  faithful 
queen's  embrace. 

70  O  ye  sons  of  Dardanus,  spare,  I  pray,  from  so 
many  foes  at  least  one,  lest  my  blood  flow  from 
that  body!  He  is  not  one  it  befits  to  engage  with 
bared  steel  in  the  shock  of  battle,  to  present  a 
savage  breast  to  the  opposing  foe  ;  his  might  is 
greater  far  in  love  than  on  the  field.  Let  others  go 
to  the  wars  ;  let  Protesilaus  love  ! 

85  I  confess  now,  I  would  have  called  you  back, 
and  my  spirit  strove;  but  my  tongue  stood  still  for 
fear  of  evil  auspice.  When  you  would  fare  forth 
from  your  paternal  doors  to  Troy,  your  loot,  stumbling 
upon  the  threshold,  gave  ill  sign.  At  the  sight  I 
groaned,  and  in  my  secret  heart  I  said  :  ■'  May  this, 
1  pray,  be  omen  that  my  lord  return  !"  Of  this  I 
tell  you  now,  lest  you  be  too  forward  with  your 
arms.  See  you  make  this  fear  of  mine  all  vanish  to 
the  winds  ! 

93  There  is  a  prophecy,  too,  that  marks  someone 
for  an  unjust  doom — the  first  of  the  Danaans  to 
touch  the  soil  of  Troy.  Unhappy  she  who  first 
shall  weep  for  her  slain  lord  !  The  gods  keep  you 
from  being  too  eager  !  Among  the  thousand  ships 
let  yours  be  the  thousandth  craft,  and  the  last  to  stir 
the  already  wearied  wave  !  This,  too,  I  warn  you  of: 
be  last  to  leave  your  ship;  the  land  to  which  you 
haste  is  not  your  father's  soil.  When  you  return. 
then  speed  your  keel  with  oar  and  sail  at  once,  and 
on  your  own  shore  stay  your  hurried  pace. 

103  Whether  Phoebus  be  hid,  or  high  above  tin- 
earth  he  rise,  you  are  niv  care  by  day,  yon  come  to 
me  in  the  night;  and  yet  more  by  night  than  in  the 

165 


OVID 

nocte     tamen     quam     luce     magis — nox     grata 
puellis  105 

quarum  suppositus  colla  lacertus  habet. 
aucupor  in  lecto  mendaces  caelibe  somnos ; 

dum  careo  veris  gaudia  falsa  iuvant. 
Sed  tua  cur  nobis  pallens  occurrit  imago  ? 

cur  venit  a  labris1  multa  querela  tuis  ?  110 

excutior  somno  simulacraque  noctis  adoro  ; 

nulla  caret  fumo  Thessalis  ara  meo ; 
tura  damus  lacrimamque  super,  qua  sparsa  relucet, 

ut  solet  adfuso  surgere  flamma  mero. 
quando  ego,  te  reducem  cupidis  amplexa  lacertis,  115 

languida  laetitia  solvar  ab  ipsa  mea  ? 
quando  erit,  ut  lecto  mecum  bene  iunctus  in  uno 

militiae  referas  splendida  facta  tuae  ? 
quae  mihi  dum  referes,  quamvis  audire  iuvabit, 

multa  tamen  capies  oscula,  multa  dabis.  120 

semper  in  his  apte  narrantia  verba  resistant ; 

promptior  est  dulci  lingua  referre  mora. 
Sed  cum  Troia  subit,  subeunt  ventique  fretumque; 

spes  bona  sollicito  victa  timore  cadit. 
hoc  quoque,  quod  venti  prohibent  exire  carinas,     125 

me  movet — invitis  ire  paratis  aquis. 
quis  velit  in  patriam  vento  prohibente  reverti  ? 

a  patria  pelago  vela  vetante  datis  ! 
ipse  suam  non  praebet  iter  Neptunus  ad  urbem. 

quo  ruitis  ?  vestras  quisque  redite  domos  !  130 

quo  ruitis,  Danai  ?  ventos  audite  vetantis  ! 

non  subiti  casus,  numinis  ista  mora  est. 

1  a  labris  Birt.  Sedl.  Jackson  (Trans.  Camb.  Phil.  Soc.  I, 
p.  377».), 

a  The  final  flare  when  the  fire  at  the  altar  is  quenched. 
166 


THE    HEROIDES   XIII 

light  of  day — night  is  welcome  to  women  beneath 
whose  necks  an  embracing  arm  is  placed.  1,  in  my 
widowed  couch,  can  only  court  a  sleep  with  lying 
dreams ;  while  true  joys  fail  me,  false  ones  must 
delight. 

100  But  why  does  your  face,  all  pale,  appear  before 
me  ?  Why  from  your  lips  comes  many  a  complaint  ? 
I  shake  slumber  from  me,  and  pray  to  the  apparitions 
of  night ;  there  is  no  Thessalian  altar  without  smoke 
of  mine  ;  I  offer  incense,  and  let  fall  upon  it  my  tears, 
and  the  flame  brightens  up  again  as  when  wine  has 
been  sprinkled  o'er.rt  When  shall  I  clasp  you,  safe  re- 
turned, in  my  eager  arms,  and  lose  myself  in  languish- 
ing delight?  When  will  it  be  mine  to  have  you  again 
close  joined  to  me  on  the  same  couch,  telling  me  your 
glorious  deeds  in  the  field  ?  And  while  you  are  tell- 
ing them,  though  it  delight  to  hear,  you  will  snatch 
many  kisses  none  the  less,  and  will  give  me  many 
back.  The  words  of  well-told  tales  meet  ever  with 
such  stops  as  this;  more  ready  for  report  is  the 
tongue  refreshed  by  sweet  delay. 

123  But  when  Troy  rises  in  my  thoughts.  I  think 
of  the  winds  and  sea;  fair  hope  is  overcome  by 
anxious  fear,  and  falls.  This,  too,  moves  me,  that 
the  winds  forbid  your  keels  to  fare  forth — yet  you 
make  readyr  to  sail  despite  the  seas.  Who  would 
be  willing  to  return  homeward  with  the  wind 
saying  nay  ?  Yet  you  trim  sail  to  leave  your  homes, 
though  the  sea  forbids!  Neptune  himself  will 
open  up  no  way  for  you  against  his  own  city. 
Whither  your  headlong  course?  Return  ye  all 
to  your  own  abodes!  Whither  your  headlong 
course,  O  Danaans  ?  Heed  the  winds  that  say  you 
nay  !      No    sudden   chance,   but   God    himself,    sends 

167 


OVID 

quid  petitur  tanto  nisi  turpis  adultera  bello  ? 

dum  licet,  Inachiae  vertite  vela  rates ! 
sed  quid  ago?  revoco?  revocaminis  omen  abesto,  135 

blandaque  conpositas  aura  secundet  aquas  ! 
Troasin  invideo,  quae  sic  lacrimosa  suorum 

funera  conspicient,  nee  procul  hostis  erit. 
ipsa  suis  manibus  forti  nova  nupta  marito 

inponet  galeam  Dardanaque  anna  dabit.  140 

anna   dabit,    dumque    anna    dabit,    simul    oscula 
sumet — 

hoc  genus  officii  dulce  duobus  erit — 
producetque  viram,  dabit  et  mandata  reverti 

et  dicet :   "  referas  ista  fac  anna  Iovi  ! '' 
ille  ferens  dominae  mandata  recentia  secum  145 

pugnabit  caute  respicietque  domum. 
exuet  haec  reduci  cli])eum  galeamque  resolvet, 

excipietque  suo  corpora  lassa  sinu. 
Nos  sumus  incertae  ;  nos  anxius  omnia  cogit, 

quae  possunt  fieri,  facta  putare  timor.  150 

dum  tamen  anna  geres  diverso  miles  in  orbe, 

quae  referat  vultws  est  mihi  cera  tuos  ; 
illi  blanditias,  illi  tibi  debita  verba 

dicimus,  amplexus  accipit  ilia  meos. 
crede     mihi,     plus     est,     quam     quod     videatur, 

imago ;  1 55 

adde  sonum  cerae,  Protesilaus  erit. 
hanc  specto  teneoque  sinu  pro  coniuge  vero, 

et,  tamquam  possit  verba  referre,  queror. 
168 


THE   HEROIDES    XIII 

that  delay  of  yours.  What  is  your  quest  in  so  great 
a  war  but  a  shameful  wanton  ?  While  you  may, 
reverse  your  sails,  O  ships  of  Inachus  !  But  what 
am  I  doing?  Do  I  call  you  back?  Far  from  me 
be  .the  omen  of  calling  back;  may  caressing  gales 
second  a  peaceful  sea  ! 

137  I  envy  the  women  who  dwell  in  Troy,  who  will 
thus  behold  the  tearful  fates  of  them  they  love,  with 
the  foe  not  far  away.  With  her  own  hand  the  newly 
wedded  bride  will  set  the  helmet  upon  her  valiant 
husband's  head,  and  give  into  his  hands  the  Dar- 
danian  arms.  She  will  give  him  his  arms,  and  the 
while  she  gives  him  arms  will  receive  his  kisses — 
a  kind  of  office  sweet  to  both — and  will  had  her 
husband  forth,  and  lay  on  him  the  command  to 
return,  and  say  :  "  See  that  you  bring  once  more 
those  arms  to  Jove!"  He,  bearing  fresh  in  mind 
with  him  the  command  of  his  mistress,  will  fight  with 
caution,  and  be  mindful  of  his  home.  When  safe 
returned,  she  will  strip  him  of  his  shield,  unloose  his 
helm,  and  receive  to  her  embrace  his  wearied 
frame. 

140  But  we  are  left  Uncertain  ;  we  are  forced  by 
anxious  fear  to  fancy  all  things  befallen  which  may 
befall.  None  the  less,  while  you,  a  soldier  in  a 
distant  world,  will  be  bearing  arms,  I  keep  a  waxen 
image  to  give  back  your  features  to  my  sight;  it 
hears  the  caressing  phrase,  it  heai*s  the  words  of 
love  that  are  jours  by  right,  and  it  receives  my 
embrace.  Believe  me,  the  image  is  more  than  it 
appears;  add  but  a  voice  to  the  wax,  Protesilaus 
it  will  be.  On  this  I  look,  and  hold  it  to  niv  heart 
in  place  of  my  real  lord,  and  complain  to  it,  as  if  it 
could  speak  again. 

169 


OVID 

Per  reditus  corpusque  tuum,  mea  numina,  iuro, 

perque  pares  animi  coniugiique  faces,1  160 

me  tibi  venturam  comitem,  quocumque  vocaris,      163 
sive — quod  lieu  !  timeo — sive  superstes  eris. 

ultima  mandato  claudetur  epistula  parvo  : 
si  tibi  cura  mei,  sit  tibi  cura  tui  ! 


XIV 
Hypermestra   Lynceo 

Mittit  Hypermestra  de  tot  modo  fratribus  uni — 

cetera  nuptarum  crimine  turba  iacet. 
clausa  domo  teneor  gravibusque  coercita  vinclis  ; 

est  mihi  supplicii  causa  fuisse  piam. 
quod  maims  extimuit  iugulo  demittere  ferrum,  5 

sum  rea ;  laudarer,  si  scelus  ausa  fofem. 
esse  ream  praestat,  quam  sic  placuisse  parenti  ; 

non  piget  inmunes  caedis  habere  manus. 
me  pater  igne  licet,  quern  non  violavimus,  urat, 

quaeque  aderant  sacris,  tendat  in  ora  faces  ;  10 

aut  illo  iugulet,  quern  non  bene  tradidit  ensem, 

ut,  qua  non  cecidit  vir  nece,  nupta  cadam — 
non  tanien,  ut  dicant  morientia  •'*  paenitet !  "  ora, 

efficiet.     non  est,  quam  piget  esse  piam. 
paeniteat  sceleris  Danaum  saevasque  sorores ;  15 

hie  solet  eventus  facta  nefanda  sequi. 

1  161,  162  spurious  Pa.  : 

perque,  quod  lit  videam  canis  albere  capillis, 
quod  tecum  possis  ipse  referre,  caput. 

170 


THE    HEROIDES    XIV 

159  By  thy  return  and  by  thyself,  who  art  my  god, 
I  swear,  and  by  the  torches  alike  of  our  love  and 
our   wedding-day,   I   will    come  to  be  thy  comrade 

whithersoever  thou  dost  call,  whether  that  which. 
alas,  I  fear,  shall  come  to  pass,  or  whether  thou  shall 
still  survive.  The  last  of  my  missive,  ere  it  close, 
shall  be  the  brief  behest  :  if  thou  carest  ought  for 
me,  then  care  thou  for  thyself ! 


XIV 

Hypermnesxra  to  Lvnceus 

Hypermnestra  sends  this  letter  to  the  one 
brother  left  of  so  many  but  now  alive — the  rest 
of  the  company  lie  dead  by  the  crime  of  their 
brides.  Kept  close  in  the  palace  am  I,  bound  with 
heavy  chains;  and  the  cause  of  my  punishment  is 
that  I  was  faithful.  Because  my  hand  shrank  from 
driving  into  your  throat  the  steel,  I  am  charged 
with  crime  ;  I  should  be  praised,  had  I  but  dared 
the  deed.  Better  be  charged  with  crime  than  thus 
to  have  pleased  inv  sire  ;  I  feel  no  regret  at  having 
hands  free  from  the  shedding  of  blood.  My  father 
may  burn  me  with  the  flame"  I  would  Hot  violate, 
and  hold  to  my  face  the  torches  that  shone  at  my 
marriage  rites  ;  or  he  may  lay  to  my  throat  the 
sword  he  falsely  gave  me,  so  that  I,  the  wife,  may 
die  the  death  my  husband  did  not  die  yet  In-  will 
not  bring  my  dying  lips  to  say"  I  repent  me  !  She 
is  not  faithful  who  regrets  her  faith.  Lit  repent- 
ance for  crime  come  to  Danaus  and  my  cruel  sisters  : 
this  is  the  wonted  event  that  follows  on  wicked  deeds. 
"  Of  the  marriage-altar. 

171 


OVID 

Cor  pavet  admonitu  temeratae  sanguine  noctis, 

et  subitus  dextrae  praepedit  ossa  tremor, 
quam  tu  caede  putes  fungi  potuisse  maritij 

scribere  de  facta  non  sibi  caede  timet !  20 

Sed  tamen  experiar.     modo  facta  crepuscula  terris  ; 

ultima  pars  lucis  primaque  noctis  erat. 
ducimur  Inachides  magni  sub  tecta  Pelasgi, 

et  socer  armatas  accipit  ipse  nurus. 
undique  eonlucent  praecinctae  lampades  auro  ;         25 

dantur  in  invitos  inpia  tura  focos  ; 
vulgus  a  Hymen,   Hymenaee  !  "  vocant.    fugit  ille 
vocantis  ; 

ipsa  Iovis  coniunx  cessit  ab  urbe  sua  ! 
ecce,  mero  dubii,  comitum  clamore  frequentes, 

flore  novo  madidas  inpediente  comas,  30 

in  thalamos  laeti — thalamos,  sua  busta  ! — feruntur 

strataque  corporibus  funere  digna  premunt. 
Iamque  cibo  vinoque  graves  somnoque  iacebant, 

securumque  quies  alta  per  Argos  erat — 
circum  me  gemitus  morientum  audire  videbar  ;       35 

et  tamen  audibam,1  quodque  verebar  erat. 
sanguis  abit,  mentemque  calor  corp usque  relinquit, 

inque  novo  iacui  frigida  facta  toro. 
ut  leni  Zephyro  graciles  vibrantur  aristae, 

frigida  populeas  ut  quatit  am*a  comas,  40 

aut  sic,  aut  etiam  tremui  magis.     ipse  iacebas, 

quaeque  tibi  dederam,  vina  2  soporis  erant. 

1  audibam  /'  Burm.:  audieram  s  Gl  :  auditum  s. 

2  vina  P  G  V a  :  plena  Pa. 

"  Inachus,  Io,  Epaphus,  Libya,  Belus,  Danaus — was  their 
descent.  *  King  of  Argos.  c  Aegyptus. 

172 


THE   HEROIDES   XIV 

17  My  heart  is  struck  with  fear  at  remembrance 
of  that  night  profaned  with  blood,  and  sudden 
trembling  fetters  the  bones  of  my  right  hand.  She 
you  think  capable  of  having  compassed  her  husband's 
death  fears  even  to  write  of  murder  done  by  hands 
not  her  own  ! 

21  Yet  I  shall  essay  to  write.  Twilight  had  just 
settled  on  the  earth  ;  it  was  the  last  part  of  day 
and  the  first  of  night.  We  daughters  of  Inachus " 
are  escorted  beneath  the  roof  of  great  Pelasgus,6  and 
our  husbands'  father c  himself  receives  the  armed 
brides  of  his  sons.  ■  On  every  side  shine  bright  the 
lamps  girt  round  with  gold  ;  unholy  incense  is 
scattered  on  unwilling  altar-fires ;  the  crowd  cry 
"Hymen,  Hymenaeus!"  The  god  shuns  their 
cry ;  Jove's  very  consort  has  withdrawn  from  the 
city  of  her  choice  !  Then,  look  you,  confused  with 
wine,  they  come  in  rout  amidst  the  cries  of  their 
companions  ;  with  fresh  flowers  in  their  dripping 
locks,  all  joyously  they  burst  into  the  bridal  chambers 
— the  bridal  chambers,  their  own  tombs  ! — and  with 
their  bodies  press  the  couches  that  deserve  to  be 
funeral  beds. 

33  And  now,  heavy  with  food  and  wine  they  lay  in 
sleep,  and  deep  repose  had  settled  on  Argns,  free 
from  care — when  round  about  me  I  seemed  to  hear 
the  groans  of  dying  men;  nay,  I  heard  indeed. 
and  what  I  feared  was  true.  My  blood  retreated, 
warmth  left  my  body  and  soul,  and  on  my  newly- 
wedded  couch  all  chill  I  lav.  As  the  gentle  zephyr 
sets  a-quiver  the  slender  stalk  of  grain,  as  wintry 
breezes  shake  the  poplar  leaves,  even  thus— yea, 
even  more — did  I  tremble.  Yourself  lav  quiet  :  the 
wine  1  had  given  you  was  the  wine  of  sleep. 

•73 


OVID 

Excussere  metum  violenti  iussa  parentis  ; 

erigor  et  eapio  tela  tremente  manu. 
non  ego  falsa  loquar  :   ter  acutum  sustulit  ensem,    45 

ter  male  sublato  reccidit  ease  maims, 
admovi  iugulo — sine  me  tibi  vera  fateri  ! — 

admovi  iugulo  tela  paterna  tuo  ; 
sed  timor  et  pietas  crudelibus  obstitit  ausis, 

castaque  mandatum  dextra  refugit  opus.  50 

purpureos  laniata  sinus,  laniata  capillos 

exiguo  dixi  talia  verba  sono  : 
"  saevus,  Hypermestra,  pater  est  tibi ;    iussa  parentis 

eflice  ;  germanis  sit  conies  iste  suis  ! 
femina  sum  et  virgo,  natura  mitis  et  annis  ;  55 

non  faciunt  molles  ad  fera  tela  maims, 
quin  age,  dumque  iacet,  fortis  iinitare  sorores — - 

eredibile  est  caesos  omnibus  esse  viros  ! 
si  manus  haec  aliquam  posset  committere  caedem, 

morte  foret  dominae  sanguinolenta  suae.  60 

banc  meruere  neeein  patruelia  regna  tenendo  ; 

cum  sene  nos  inopi  turba  vagamur  inops.1 
finge  viros  meruisse  mori — quid  fecimus  ipsae  ? 

quo  mihi  eommisso  non  licet  esse  piae  ? 
quid  mihi  cum  ferro  ?  quo  bellica  tela  puellae  ?        65 

aptior  est  digitis  lana  colusque  meis." 
Haec  ego  ;  dumque  queror,  lacrimae  sua  verba  se- 
quuntur 

deque  meis  oculis  in  tua  membra  cadunt. 
dum  petis  amplexus  sopitaque  bracchia  iactas, 

paene  manus  telo  saucia  facta  tua  est.  70 

1  114  placed  here  by  Hous.  who  omits  62  and  113,  fabricated 
to  accommodate  the  misplaced  114. 

174 


THE    HEROIDES    XIV 

43  Thought  of  my  violent  father's  mandates  struck 
away  my  fear.  I  rise,  and  clutch  with  trembling 
hand  the  steel.  I  will  not  tell  you  aught  untrue  : 
thrice  did  my  hand  raise  high  the  piercing  blade, 
and  thrice,  having  basely  raised  it,  fell  again.  I 
brought  it  to  your  throat — let  me  confess  to  you  the 
truth  ! — I  brought  my  father's  weapon  to  your 
throat ;  but  fear  and  tenderness  kept  me  from 
daring  the  cruel  stroke,  and  my  chaste  right  hand 
refused  the  task  enjoined.  Rending  the  purple 
robes  I  wore,  rending  my  hair,  I  spoke  with  scant 
sound  such  words  as  these  :  "  A  cruel  father,  Hyper- 
mnestra,  thine  ;  perform  thy  sire's  command,  and  let 
thy  husband  there  go  join  his  brethren  !  A  woman 
am  I,  and  a  maid,  gentle  in  nature  and  in  years  ; 
my  tender  hands  ill  suit  fierce  weapons.  But  come, 
while  he  lies  there,  do  like  as  thy  brave  sisters — it 
well  may  be  that  all  have  slain  their  husbands  ! 
Yet  had  this  hand  power  to  deal  out  mui'der  at 
all,  it  would  be  bloody  with  the  death  of  its 
own  mistress.  They  have  deserved  this  end  for 
seizing  on  their  uncle's  realms;  we,  helpless  band, 
must  wander  in  exile  with  our  aged,  helpless  sire. 
Yet  suppose  our  husbands  have  deserved  to  die — 
what  have  we  done  ourselves  ?  What  crime  have  I 
committed  that  I  must  not  be  free  from  guilt  ? 
What  have  swords  to  do  with  me  ?  What  has  a  girl 
to  do  with  the  weapons  of  war  ?  More  suited  to  my 
hands  are  the  distaff  and  the  wool." 

07  Thus  I  to  myself;  and  while  I  utter  my  com- 
plaint, my  tears  follow  forth  the  words  that  start 
them,  and  from  my  eyes  fall  down  upon  your  body. 
While  you  grope  for  my  embrace  and  toss  your 
slumbrous   arms,    your  hand   is  almost   wounded  by 

175 


OVID 

iamque  patrem  famulosque  patris  lueemque  timebam 

expulerunt  somnos  haec  mea  dicta  tuos  : 
"  surge  age,  Belide,  de  tot  modo  fratribus  unus  ! 

nox  tibi,  ni  properas,  ista  perennis  erit !  " 
territus  exsurgis  ;  fugit  omnis  inertia  somni ;  71 

adspicis  in  timida  fortia  tela  manu. 
quaerenti  causam  "  dum  nox  sinit,  efFuge  !  "  dixi. 

dum  nox  atra  sinit,  tn  fugis,  ipsa  moror. 
Mane  erat,  et  Danaus  generps  ex  caede  iacentis 

dinumerat.  summae  criminis  unus  abes.  8( 

fert  male  cognatae  iacturam  mortis  in  uno 

et  queritur  facti  sanguinis  esse  parum. 
abstrahor  a  patriis  pedibus,  raptamque  capillis — 

haec  meruit  pietas  praemia  ! — career  habet. 
Scilicet  ex  illo  Iunonia  permanet  ira  8' 

cum  bos  ex  homine  est,  ex  bove  facta  dea. 
at  satis  est  poenae  teneram  mugisse  puellam 

nee,  modo  formosam,  posse  placere  Iovi. 
adstitit  in  ripa  liquidi  nova  vacca  parentis, 

cornuaque  in  patriis  non  sua  vidit  aquis,  9( 

conatoque  queri  mugitus  edidit  ore 

territaque  est  forma,  territa  voce  sua. 
quid  furis,  infelix  ?  quid  te  miraris  in  umbra  ? 

quid  numeras  factos  ad  nova  membra  pedes  ? 
ilia  Iovis  magni  paelex  metuenda  sorori  9i 

fronde  levas  nimiam  caespitibusque  famem, 


"  Belus,  Aegyptus,  Lynceus. 

*  The  story  of  Io,  daughter  of  the  river  Inachus. 


176 


THE   HER01DES   XIV 

my  blade.  And  now  fear  of  my  father  seized  on 
me,  and  of  my  father's  minions,  and  of  the  light  of 
dawn  ;  I  drove  away  your  sleep  with  these  words  of 
mine  :  "  Rise  up,  away,  O  child  of  Belus,"  the  one 
brother  left  of  so  many  but  now  alive  !  This  night, 
unless  you  haste,  will  be  forever  night  to  you  !  "  In 
terror  you  arise  ;  all  sleep's  dulness  flies  away ; 
you  behold  the  strenuous  weapon  in  my  timorous 
hand.  You  ask  the  cause.  "While  night  permits," 
I  answer,  "fly  !  "  While  the  dark  night  permits,  you 
fly,  and  I  remain. 

79  'Twas  early  morn,  and  Danaus  counted  o'er  his 
sons-in-law  that  lay  there  slain.  You  alone  lack 
to  make  the  crime  complete.  He  bears  ill  the  loss 
of  a  single  kinsman's  death,  and  complains  that  too 
little  blood  was  shed.  I  am  seized  by  the  hair, 
and  dragged  from  my  father's  feet — such  reward  my 
love  for  duty  won ! — and  thrust  in  gaol. 

85  Clear  it  is  that  Juno's  wrath  endures  from  the 
time  the  mox-tal  maid  became  a  heifer,  and  the  heifer 
became  a  goddess.6  Yet  it  is  punishment  enough 
that  the  tender  maid  was  a  lowing  beast,  and,  but 
now  so  fair,  could  not  retain  Jove's  love.  On  the 
banks  of  her  sire's  stream  the  new-created  heifer  stood, 
and  in  the  parental  waters  beheld  the  horns  that 
were  not  her  own  ;  with  mouth  that  tried  to  com- 
plain, she  gave  forth  only  lowings  ;  she  felt  terror 
at  her  form,  and  terror  at  her  voice.  Why  rage, 
unhappy  one?  Why  gaze  at  thyself  in  the  water's 
shadow  ?  Why  count  the  feet  thou  hast  for  thy 
new-created  frame?  Thou  art  the  mistress  of  great 
Jove,  that  rival  to  be  dreaded  by  his  sister — and 
must  quiet  thy  fierce  hunger  with  the  leafy  branch 
and    grassy    turf,    drink    at    the    spring,    and    gaze 

177 


OVID 

fonte  bibis  spectasque  tuam  stupefacta  figuram 

et,  te  ne  feriant,  quae  geris,  arma,  times, 
quaeque  modo,  ut  posses  etiam  love  digna  videri, 

dives  eras,  nuda  nuda  recumbis  liumo.  100 

per  mare,  per  terras  cognataque  numina  curris  ; 

dat  mare,  dant  amnes,  dat  tibi  terra  viam. 
quae  tibi  causa  fugae  ?  quid  tu  freta  longa  pererras  ? 

non  poteris  vultus  effugere  ipsa  tuos. 
Inachi,     quo    properas  ?    eadem     sequerisque    fu- 
gisque ;  105 

tu  tibi  dux  comiti,  tu  comes  ipsa  duci. 
Per  septem  Nilus  portus  emissus  in  aequor 

exuit  insana  paelicis  ora  bove. 
ultima  quid  referam,  quorum  mihi  cana  senectus 

auctor?  dant  anni,  quod  querar,  ecce,  mei.  110 

bella  pater  patruusque  gerunt ;  regnoque  domoque 

pellimur  ;  eiectos  ultimus  orbis  habet. 
de  fratrum  populo  pars  exiguissima  restat.  115 

quique  dati  leto,  quaeque  dedere,  fleo  ; 
nam  mihi  quot  fratres,  totidem  periere  sorores. 

accipiat  lacrimas  utraque  turba  meas  ! 
en,  ego,  quod  vivis,  poenae  crucianda  reservor  ; 

quid  net  sonti,  cum  rea  laudis  agar  120 

et  consanguineae  quondam  centensima  turbae 

infelix  uno  fratre  manente  cadam  ? 
At  tu,  siqua  piae,  Lynceu,1  tibi  cura  sororis, 

quaeque  tibi  tribui  munera,  dignus  habes, 

1  The  name,  preserved  only  by  Plan. 

"  Oceanus,  father  of  all  streams,  was  father  of  Inachus, 
Io's  father. 

*  The  scholiast  to  Euripides'  Hec.  886  says  Lynceus 
avenged  his  brothers  by  slaying  the  guilty  wives. 

I78 


THE    HEROIDES   XIV 

astonied  on  thine  image  there,  and  fear  lest  the 
arms  thou  bearest  may  wound  thyself!  Thou,  who 
but  now  wert  rich,  so  rich  as  to  seem  worthy  even  of 
Jove,-  liest  naked  upon  the  naked  ground.  Over 
seas,  and  lands,  and  kindred a  streams  dost  thou 
course  ;  the  sea  opens  a  way  for  thee,  and  the 
rivers,  and  the  land.  What  is  the  cause  of  thy 
flight  ?  Why  dost  thou  wander  over  the  long  seas  ? 
Thou  wilt  not  be  able  to  fly  from  thine  own  features. 
Child  of  Inachus,  whither  dost  thou  haste  ?  Thou 
followest  and  fliest — the  same  ;  thou  art  thyself 
guide  to  thy  companion,  thou  art  companion  to  thy 
guide  ! 

107  The  Nile,  let  flow  to  the  sea  through  seven 
mouths,  strips  from  the  maddened  heifer  the  features 
loved  of  Jove.  Why  talk  of  far-off  things,  told  me 
by  hoary  eld  ?  My  own  years,  look  you,  give  me 
matter  for  lament.  My  father  and  my  uncle  are  at 
war  ;  we  are  driven  from  our  realms  and  from  our 
home ;  we  are  cast  away  to  the  farthest  parts  of 
earth.  Of  the  number  of  the  brothers  but  a  scantest 
part  remains.  For  those  who  were  done  to  death, 
and  for  those  who  did  the  deed,  I  weep  ;  as  many 
brothers  as  I  have  lost,  so  many  sisters  also  have  I 
lost.6  Let  both  their  companies  receive  my  tears  ! 
Lo,  I,  because  you  live,  am  kept  for  the  torments 
of  punishment  ;  but  what  shall  be  the  fate  of  guilt, 
when  I  am  charged  with  crime  for  deeds  of  praise, 
and  fall,  unhappy  that  1  am,  once  the  hundredth 
member  of  a  kindred  throng,  of  whom  one  brother 
only  now  remains  ? 

123  But  do  thou,  O  Lynceus,  if  thou  carest  aught 
for  thy  sister,  and  art  worthy  of  the  gift  I  rendered 
thee,  come  bear  me  aid  ;  or,  if  it  please  thee,  abandon 

179 

n  2 


OVID 

vel  fer  opem,  vel  dede  neci  defunctaque  vita  125 

corpora  furtivis  insuper  adde  rogis, 
et  sepeli  lacrimis  perfusa  fidelibus  ossa, 

sculptaque  sint  titulo  nostra  sepulcra  brevi  : 
"  exul  Hypermestra,  pretium  pietatis  iniquum, 

quam  mortem  fratri  depulit,  ipsa  tulit."  130 

Scribere  plura  libet,  sed  pondere  lapsa  catenae 

est  manus,  et  vires  subtrahit  ipse  timor. 


XV 

Sappho  Phaoni 1 

Ecquid,  ut  adspecta  est  studiosae  littera  dextrae, 

Protinus  est  oculis  cognita  nostra  tuis — 
an,  nisi  legisses  auctoris  nomina  Sapphus, 

hoc  breve  nescires  unde  movetur  opus  ? 
Forsitan  et  quare  mea  sint  alterna  requiras  5 

carmina,  cum  lyrieis  sim  magis  apta  modis. 
flendus  amor  meus  est — elegiae  2  flebile  carmen  ; 

non  facit  ad  lacrimas  barbitos  ulla  meas. 
Uror,  ut  indomitis  ignem  exercentibus  Euris 

fertilis  accensis  messibus  ardet  ager.  10 

arva,  Phaon,  celebras  diversa  Typhoidos  Aetnae  ; 

me  calor  Aetnaeo  non  minor  igne  tenet. 

1  This  epistle  is  not  in  P,  G,  or  any  MS.  earlier  than  P 
or  G,  and  is  not  in  Plan.  In  the  MSS.  which  do  contain  it, 
it  is  either  annexed  or  prefixed  to  the  whole.  Hein.  placed  it 
after  XIV  because  of  the  presence  of  some  verses  from  it  in  that 
position  in  two  JISS.  of  excerpts  from  a  ninth  or  tenth  century 
archetype. 

The  Sappho- Phaon  story  see7}is  to  have  been  well  known  by 

i  So 


THE    HEROIDES    XV 

me  to  death,  and,  when  my  body  is  done  with  life,  lay 
it  in  secret  on  the  funeral  pile,  and  bury  my  bones 
moistened  with  faithful  tears,  and  let  my  sepulchre 
be  graved  with  this  brief  epitaph  :  "  Exiled  Hyper- 
mnestra,  as  the  unjust  price  of  her  wifely  deed,  has 
herself  endured  the  death  she  warded  from  her 
brother!" 

131  1  would  wi*ite  more  ;  but  my  hand  falls  with 
the  weight  of  my  chains,  and  very  fear  takes  away 
my  strength. 


XV 

Sappho  to  Phaon 

Tell  me,  when  you  looked  upon  the  characters 
from  my  eager  right  hand,  did  your  eye  know  forth- 
with whose  they  were — or,  unless  you  had  read  their 
author's  name,  Sappho,  would  you  fail  to  know 
whence  these  brief  words  come  ? 

5  Perhaps,  too,  you  may  ask  why  my  verses  alter- 
nate, when  I  am  better  suited  to  the  lyric  mode. 
I  must  weep,  for  my  love  — and  elegy  is  the  weeping 
strain  ;   no  lyre  is  suited  to  my  tears. 

9  I  burn — as  burns  the  fruitful  acre  when  its 
harvests  are  ablaze,  with  untamed  cast-winds  driving 
on  the  flame.  The  fields  you  frequent,  O  Phaon,  lie 
far  away,  by  Typhoean  Aetna  ;  and  I — heat  not  less 
than   the   fires   of  Aetna   preys    on   me.      Nor  can  I 


the  fourth  century  u.c.     The  authorship  of  this  fetter  has  been, 
disputed,  but  it  is  generally  conceded  to  be  Ovid's. 
2  elegiae  Pa.:  elegi  many  MSS.:  elegeia  or  elegia  s. 


OVID 

nee  mihi,  dispositis  quae  iungam  carmina  nervis, 

proveiiiunt ;  vacuae  carmina  mentis  opus  ! 
nee  me  Pyrrhiades  Methymniadesve  puellae,  15 

nee  me  Lesbiadum  cetera  turba  iuvant. 
vilis  Anaetorie,  vilis  mihi  Candida  Cydro  ; 

non  oculis  grata  est  Atthis,  ut  ante,  meis, 
atque  aliae  centum,  quas  hie  sine  crimine  amavi  ; 

inprobe,  multarum  quod  fuit,  unus  habes.  20 

Est  in  te  facies,  sunt  apti  lusibus  anni — 

o  facies  oculis  insidiosa  meis  ! 
sume  fidem  et  pharetram — fies  manifestus  Apollo  ; 

accedant  capiti  cornua — Bacchus  eris  ! 
et  Phoebus  Daphnen,  et  Gnosida  Bacchus  amavit,  25 

nee  norat  lyricos  ilia  vel  ilia  modos  ; 
at  mihi  Pegasides  blandissima  carmina  dictant ; 

iam  canitur  toto  nomen  in  orbe  meum. 
nee  plus  Alcaeus,  consors  patriaeque  lyraeque, 

laudis  habet,  quamvis  grandius  ille  sonet.  30 

si  mihi  ditfieilis  formam  natura  negavit, 

ingenio  formae  damna  repende  1  meae. 
sum  brevis,  at  nomen,  quod  terras  inpleat  omnes, 

est  mihi  ;  mensuram  nominis  ipsa  fero. 
Candida  si  non  sum,  placuit  Cepheia  Perseo  35 

Andromede,  patriae  fusca  colore  suae, 
et  variis  albae  iunguntur  saepe  columbae, 

et  niger  a  viridi  turtur  amatur  ave. 
si,  nisi  quae  facie  poterit  te  digna  videri, 

nulla  futura  tua  est,  nulla  futura  tua  est.  40 

1  rependo  the  JfSS.:  repende  Bent. 

a  The  parrot.     Compare  Amoves  II.  vi.  16. 
182 


THE    HEROIDES   XV 

fashion  aught  of  song  to  suit  the  well-ordered 
string ;  songs  are  the  laboiw-  of  minds  care-free ! 
Neither  the  maids  of  Pyrrha  charm  me  now,  nor 
they  of  Methymna,  nor  all  the  rest  of  the  throng  of 
Lesbian  daughters.  Naught  is  Anactorie  to  me, 
naught  Cydro,  the  dazzling  fair ;  my  eyes  joy  not  in 
Atthis  as  once  they  did,  nor  in  the  hundred  other 
maids  I  loved  here  to  my  reproach  ;  unworthy  one, 
the  love  that  belonged  to  many  maids  you  alone 
possess. 

21  You  have  beauty,  and  your  years  are  apt  for 
life's  delights — O  beauty  that  lay  in  ambush  for  my 
eyes  !  Take  up  the  lyre  and  quiver — you  will  be 
Apollo  manifest ;  let  horns  but  spring  on  your  head 
• — you  will  be  Bacchus !  Phoebus  loved  Daphne,  and 
Bacchus,  too,  loved  the  Gnosian  maid,  and  neither 
one  nor  other  knew  the  lyric  mode ;  yet  for  me 
the  daughters  of  Pegasus  dictate  sweetest  songs ; 
my  name  is  already  sung  abroad  in  all  the  earth. 
Not  greater  is  the  praise  Alcaeus  wins,  the  sharer  in 
my  homeland  and  in  my  gift  of  song,  though  a 
statelier  strain  he  sounds.  If  nature,  malign  to  me, 
has  denied  the  charm  of  beauty,  weigh  in  the  stead 
of  beauty  the  genius  she  gave.  I  am  slight  of 
stature,  yet  I  have  a  name  fills  every  land ;  the 
measure  of  my  name  is  my  real  height.  If  I  am 
not  dazzling  fair,  Cepheus'  Andromeda  was  fair 
in  Perseus'  eyes,  though  dusky  with  the  hue  of  her 
native  land.  Besides,  white  pigeons  oft  are  mated 
with  those  of  different  hue,  and  the  black  turtle- 
dove, too,  is  loved  by  the  bird  of  green."  If  none 
shall  be  yours  unless  deemed  worthy  of  you  for 
her  beautv's  sake,  then  none  shall  be  yours  at 
all. 

i83 


OVID 

At  mea  cum  legerem,  sat  iam  x  formosa  videbar  ; 

unani  iurabas  usque  Uecei*e  loqui. 
cantabam,  memini — meminerunt  omnia  amantes — 

oscula  cantanti  tu  mihi  rapta  dabas. 
haec   quoque    laudabas,   omnique  a   parte   place- 
bam —  45 

sed  turn  praecipue,  cum  fit  amoris  opus, 
tunc  te  plus  solito  lascivia  nostra  iuvabat, 

crebraque  mobilitas  aptaque  verba  ioco, 
et  quod,  ubi  amborum  fuerat  confusa  voluptas, 

plurimus  in  lasso  corpore  languor  erat.  50 

Nunc  tibi    Sicelides  veniunt  nova  praeda  puellae. 

quid  mihi  cum  Lesbo  ?  Sicelis  esse  volo. 
o  2  vos  erronem  tellure  remittite  vestra, 

Nisiades  matres  Nisiadesque  nurus, 
nee  vos  decipiant  blandae  mendacia  linguae  !  55 

quae  dicit  vobis,  dixerat  ante  mihi. 
tu  quoque,  quae  montes  celebras,  Erycina,  Sicanos — 

nam  tua  sum — vati  consule,  diva,  tuae  ! 
an  gravis  inceptum  peragit  fortuna  tenorem 

et  manet  in  cursu  semper  acerba  suo  ?  60 

sex  mihi  natal  es  ierant,  cum  lecta  parentis 

ante  diem  lacrirnas  ossa  bibere  meas. 
arsit  iners  3  frater  meretricis  captus  amore 

mixtaque  cum  turpi  damna  pudore  tulit ; 
factus  inops  agili  peragit  freta  caerula  remo,  65 

quasque  male  amisit,  nunc  male  quaerit  opes. 

1  So  Hmts.:  legeres  etiam  Pa. 

2  0  vos  F  s  :  at  vos,  nee  vos,  neu  vos  x  :  aut  vos  Bent. 

3  inops  the  MSS.:  iners  Ouden.  Pa.:  inops  of  65  caused  the 
corruption. 

"  The  Parian  Marble  says  that  Sappho  really  was  exiled 
and  went  to  Sicily.     Her  troubles  were  of  a  political  nature. 

184 


THE    HEROIDES   XV 

41  Yet,  when  I  read  you  my  songs,  I  seemed 
already  beautiful  enough  ;  you  swore  'twas  I  alone 
whom  speech  forever  graced.  I  would  sing  to  you, 
I  remember — for  lovers  remember  all — and  while  I 
sang  you  stole  kisses  from  me.  My  kisses  too  you 
praised,  and  I  pleased  in  every  way — but  then  above 
all  when  we  wrought  at  the  task  of  love.  Then  did 
my  playful  ways  delight  you  more  than  your  wont  — 
the  quick  embrace,  the  jest  that  gave  spice  to  our 
sport,  and,  when  the  joys  of  both  had  mingled 
into  one,  the  deep,  deep  languor  in  our  wearied 
frames. 

51  Now  new  prey  is  yours — the  maids  of  Sicily. 
What  is  Lesbos  now  to  me  ?  I  would  I  were  a 
Sicilian  maid.*1  Ah,  send  me  back  my  wanderer,  ye 
Nisaean  matrons  and  Nisaean  maids,  nor  let  the  lies 
of  his  bland  tongue  deceive  you  !  What  he  savs  to 
you,  he  had  said  before  to  me.  Thou  too,  Erycina, 
who  dost  frequent  the  Sicanian  mountains — for  I 
am  thine — protect  thy  singer,  O  lady !  Can  it  be 
my  grievous  fortune  will  hold  the  ways  it  first  began, 
and  ever  remain  bitter  in  its  course  ?  Six  natal 
days  had  passed  for  me,  when  I  gathered  the  bones 
of  my  father,  dead  before  his  time,  and  let  them 
drink  my  tears.  My  untaught  brother  was  caught 
in  the  flame  of  harlot  love,  and  suffered  loss 
together  with  foul  shame ;  reduced  to  need,  he 
roams  the  dark  blue  seas  with  agile  oar,  and  the 
wealth  he  cast  away  by  evil  means  once  more  by  evil 
means  he  seeks.6     As  for  me,  because  I  often  warned 

*  Probably  as  a  pirate.  He  ransomed  the  courtesan 
Rhodopis  from  Egypt,  and  was  reproved  by  Sappho  in  a 
poem. 

185 


OVID 

me  quoque,  quod  monui  bene  multa  fideliter,  odit ; 

hoc  mihi  libertas,  hoc  pia  lingua  dedit. 
et  tamquam  desint,  quae  me  sine  fine  fatigent, 

accumulat  curas  filia  parva  meas.  70 

Ultima  tu  nostris  accedis  causa  querelis. 

non  agitur  vento  nostra  carina  suo. 
ecce,  iacent  collo  sparsi  sine  lege  capilli, 

nee  premit  articulos  lucida  gemma  meos  ; 
veste  tegor  vili,  nullum  est  in  crinibus  aurum,  75 

non  Arabum  noster  dona  capillus  habet. 
cui  colar  infelix,  aut  cui  placuisse  laborem  ? 

ille  mei  cultus  unicus  auctor  abest. 
molle  meum  levibusque  cor  est  violabile  telis, 

et  semper  causa  est,  cur  ego  semper  amem —       80 
sive  ita  nascenti  legem  dixere  Sorores 

nee  data  sunt  vitae  fila  severa  meae, 
sive  abeunt  studia  in  mores,  artisque  magistra 

ingenium  nobis  molle  Thalia  facit. 
quid  mirum,  si  me  primae  lanuginis  aetas  85 

abstulit,  atque  anni  quos  vir  amare  potest  ? 
hunc  ne  pro  Cephalo  raperes,  Aurora,  timebam — 

et  faceres,  sed  te  prima  rapina  tenet ! 
hunc  si  conspiciat  quae  conspicit  omnia  Phoebe, 

iussus  erit  somnos  continuare  Phaon  ;  90 

hunc  Venus  in  caelum  curru  vexisset  eburno, 

sed  videt  et  Marti  posse  placere  suo. 
o  nee  adhuc  iuvenis,  nee  iam  puer,  utilis  aetas, 

o  decus  atque  aevi  gloi'ia  magna  tui, 
hue  ades  inque  sinus,  formose,  relabere  nostros  !      95 

non  ut  ames  oro,  verum  ut  amere  sinas. 
Scribimus,  et  lacrimis  oculi  rorantur  obortis  ; 

adspice,  quam  sit  in  hoc  multa  litura  loco  ! 

"  Cleis. 
186 


THE    HEROIDES    XV 

him  well  and  faithfully,  he  hates  me ;  this  has  my 
candour  brought  me,  this  my  duteous  tongue.  And 
as  if  there  were  lack  of  things  to  weary  me  endlessly, 
a  little  daughter  a  fills  the  measure  of  my  cares. 

71  Last  cause  of  all  are  you  for  my  complaint. 
My  craft  is  not  impelled  by  a  propitious  gale.  Lo, 
see,  my  hair  lies  scattered  in  disorder  about  my 
neck,  mv  fingers  are  laden  with  no  sparkling  gems  ; 
I  am  clad  in  garment  mean,  no  gold  is  in  the  strands 
of  my  hair,  my  locks  are  scented  with  no  gifts  of 
Arabv.  For  whom  should  1  adorn  myself,  or  whom 
should  I  strive  to  please  ?  He,  the  one  cause  for 
my  adornment,  is  gone.  Tender  is  my  heart,  and 
easily  pierced  by  the  light  shaft,  and  there  is  ever 
cause  why  I  should  ever  love — whether  at  mv  birth 
the  Sisters  declared  this  law  and  did  not  spin  my 
thread  of  life  with  austere  strand,  or  whether  tastes 
change  into  character,  and  Thalia,  mistress  of  my 
art,  is  making  my  nature  soft.  What  wonder  if  the 
age  of  first  down  has  carried  me  away,  and  the 
years  that  stir  men's  love  ?  Lest  thou  steal  him  in 
Cephalus'  place,  I  ever  feared,  Aurora — and  so  thou 
wouldst  do,  but  that  thy  first  prey  holds  thee  still. 
Him  should  Phoebe  behold,  who  beholds  all  things, 
'twill  be  Phaon  she  bids  continue  in  his  sleep  ;  him 
Venus  would  have  carried  to  the  skies  in  her  ivory 
car,  but  that  she  knows  he  might  charm  even  her 
Mars.  O  neither  yet  man  nor  still  boy — meet  age 
for  charm — O  ornament  and  great  glory  of  thy  time, 
O  hither  come  ;  sail  back  again,  O  beauteous  one, 
to  my  embrace  !  I  do  not  plead  for  thee  to  love, 
but  to  let  thyself  be  loved. 

97  I  write,  and  my  eyes  let  fall  the  springing  tears 
like  drops  of  dew ;  look,  how  many   a  blot  obscures 

187 


OVID 

si  tarn  certus  eras  hinc  ire,  modestius  isses, 

et l  modo  dixisses  et  Lesbi  puella,  vale  !  "  100 

non  tecum  lacrimas,  non  oscula  nostra  tulisti ; 

denique  non  timui,  quod  dolitura  fui. 
nil  de  te  mecum  est  nisi  tantum  iniuria  ;  nee  tu, 

admoneat  quod  te,  pignus  amantis  habes. 
non  mandata  dedi,  neque  enim  mandata  dedissem  105 

ulla,  nisi  ut  nolles  inmemor  esse  mei. 
per  tibi — qui  numquam  longe  discedat  ! — amorem, 

perque  novem  iuro,  numina  nostra,  deas, 
cum  mihi  nescio  quis  "  fugiunt  tua  gaudia ''  dixit, 

nee  me  flere  diu,  nee  potuisse  loqui  !  110 

et  lacrimae  deerant  oculis  et  verba  palato, 

adstrictum  gelido  frigore  pectus  erat. 
postquam  se  dolor  invenit,  nee  pectora  plangi 

nee  puduit  scissis  exululare  comis, 
non  aliter,  quam  si  nati  pia  mater  adempti  115 

portet  ad  exstructos  corpus  inane  rogos. 
gaudet  et  e  nostro  crescit  maerore  Charaxus 

frater,  et  ante  oculos  itque  reditque  meos, 
utque  pudenda  mei  videatur  causa  doloris, 

"quid  dolet  haec  ?  certe  filia  vivit  !  "  ait.  120 

non  veniunt  in  idem  pudor  atque  amor,   omne  videbat 

vulgus  ;  eram  lacero  pectus  aperta  sinu. 
Tu  mihi  cura,  Phaon  ;  te  somnia  nostra  reducunt — 

somnia  formoso  candidiora  die. 
illic  te  invenio,  quam  vis  regionibus  absis  ;  125 

sed  non  longa  satis  gaudia  somnus  habet 
saepe  tuos  nostra  cervice  onerare  lacertos, 

saepe  tuae  videor  supposuisse  meos  ; 

1  et  modo  »  :  et  michi  F  :  si  modo  s. 
188 


THE    HEROIDES    XV 

this  place  !  If  you  were  so  resolved  to  leave  my  side, 
you  could  have  gone  in  more  becoming  wise.  You 
might  at  least  have  said  to  me  :  "  O  Lesbian  mis- 
tress, fare  you  well ! "  You  did  not  take  with  you 
my  tears,  you  did  not  take  my  kisses ;  indeed,  I 
felt  no  fear  of  the  Jiangs  I  was  to  suffer.  You  have 
left  me  nothing,  nothing  except  my  wrong ;  and 
you — you  have  no  token  of  my  love  to  put  you  in 
mind  of  me.  I  gave  you  no  behests — nor  Avould 
I  have  given  any,  save  not  to  be  unmindful  of  me. 
O  by  our  love — and  may  it  never  far  depart ! — 
and  by  the  heavenly  Nine  who  are  my  deities,  I 
swear  to  you,  when  someone  said  to  me  :  "  Your 
joys  are  flying  from  you  !  "  for  a  long  time  I  could 
not  weep,  and  could  not  speak  !  Tears  failed  my 
eyes,  and  words  my  tongue ;  my  breast  was  fast 
frozen  with  icy  chill.  After  my  grief  had  found 
itself,  I  felt  no  shame  to  beat  my  breast,  and  rend 
my  hair,  and  shriek,  not  otherwise  than  when 
the  loving  mother  of  a  son  whom  death  has  taken 
bears  to  the  high-built  funeral  pile  his  empty  frame. 
Joy  swells  my  brother  Charaxus'  heart  as  he  sees  my 
woe  ;  he  passes  before  my  eyes,  and  passes  again  ; 
and,  purposing  to  make  the  cause  of  my  grief  appear 
immodest,  he  says  :  "  Why  does  she  grieve  ?  Surely 
her  daughter  lives!  "  Modesty  and  love  are  not  at 
one.  There  was  no  one  did  not  see  me  ;  yet  I  rent 
my  robe  and  laid  bare  my  breast. 

123  You,  Phaon,  are  my  care  ;  you,  my  dreams  bring 
back  to  me — dreams  brighter  than  the  beauteous 
day.  In  them  I  find  you,  though  in  space  you  are 
far  away ;  but  not  long  enough  are  the  joys  that 
slumber  gives.  Often  I  seem  with  the  burden  of 
my  neck  to  press  your  arms,  often  to  place  beneath 

189 


OVID 

oscula  cognosco,  quae  tu  committere  linguae 

aptaque  consueras  accipere,  apta  dare.  130 

blandior  interdum  verisque  simillima  verba 

eloquor,  et  vigilant  sensibus  ora  meis. 
ulteriora  pudet  narrate,  sed  omnia  fiunt, 

et  iuvat,  et  siccae  J  non  licet  esse  mihi. 
At  cum  se  Titan  ostendit  et  omnia  secum,  135 

tarn  cito  me  somnos  destituisse  queror  ; 
antra  nemusque  peto,  tamquam  nemus  antraque 
prosint — 

conscia  deliciis  ilia  fuere  meis. 
illuc  mentis  inops,  ut  quam  furialis  Enyo  2 

attigit,  in  collo  crine  iacente  feror.  140 

antra  vident  oculi  scabro  pendentia  tofo, 

quae  mihi  Mygdonii  marmoris  instar  erant ; 
invenio  silvam,  quae  saepe  cubilia  nobis 

praebuit  et  multa  texit  opaca  coma — 
sed  non  invenio  dominum  silvaeque  meumque.       145 

vile  solum  locus  est ;  dos  erat  ille  loci, 
cognovi    pressas  noti  mihi  caespitis  herbas  ; 

de  nosti'o  curvum  pondere  gramen  erat. 
incubui  tetigique  locum,  qua  parte  fuisti ; 

grata  prius  lacrimas  conbibit  herba  meas.  150 

quin  etiam  rami  positis  lugere  videntur 

frondibus,  et  nullae  dulce  queruntur  aves ; 
sola  virum  non  ulta  })ie  maestissima  mater 

concinit  Ismarium  Daulias  ales  Ityn. 
ales  Ityn.,  Sappho  desertos  cantat  amores —  155 

hactenus  ;  ut  media  cetera  nocte  silent. 
Est  nitidus  viti'oque  magis  perlucidus  omni 

fons  sacer — hunc  multi  numen  habere  putant — 

1  siccae  F  :  sine  te  co. 

-  Enyo   F :  erictho,  ericto,    eritho,    hericto,    enio,    en    o, 
erinnis  s. 

190 


THE   HEROIDES   XV 

your  neck  my  arms.  I  recognize  the  kisses — close 
caresses  of  the  tongue — which  you  were  wont  to 
take  and  wont  to  give.  At  times  I  fondle  you,  and 
utter  words  that  seem  almost  the  waking  truth,  and 
my  lips  keep  vigil  for  my  senses.  Further  I  blush 
to  tell,  but  all  takes  place  ;  I  feel  the  delight,  and 
cannot  rule  myself. 

135  But  when  Titan  shows  his  face  and  lights  up 
all  the  earth,  I  complain  that  sleep  has  deserted  me 
so  soon ;  I  make  for  the  grots  and  the  wood,  as 
if  the  wood  and  the  grots  could  aid  me — those 
haunts  were  in  the  secret  of  my  joys.  Thither  in 
frenzied  mood  I  course,  like  one  whom  the  madden- 
ing Enyo  has  touched,  with  hair  flying  loose  about 
my  neck.  My  eyes  behold  the  grots,  hanging 
with  rugged  rock — grots  that  to  me  were  like 
Mygdonian  marble  ;  I  find  the  forest  out  which  oft 
afforded  us  a  couch  to  lie  upon,  and  covered  us  with 
thick  shade  from  many  leaves — but  I  find  not  the 
lord  both  of  the  forest  and  myself.  The  place  is  but 
cheap  ground  ;  he  was  the  dower  that  made  it  rich. 
I  have  recognised  the  pressed-down  grass  of  the 
turf  I  knew  so  well  ;  the  sod  was  hollowed  from  our 
weight.  I  have  laid  me  down  and  touched  the  spot, 
the  place  you  rested  in  ;  the  grass  I  once  found 
gracious  has  drunk  my  tears.  Nay,  even  the 
branches  have  laid  aside  their  leafage,  and  no  birds 
warble  their  sweet  complaint  ;  only  the  Daulian 
bird,  most  mournful  mother  who  wreaked  unholy 
vengeance  on  her  lord,  laments  in  song  Ismarian 
Itys.  The  bird  sings  of  Itys,  Sappho  sings  of  love 
abandoned — that  is  all ;  all  else  is  silent  as  midnight. 

157  There  is  a  sacred  spring,  bright  and  more 
transparent    than  any  crystal — many  think    a  spirit 

lyi 


OVID 

quern  supra  ramos  expandit  aquatiea  lotos, 

una  nemus  ;  tenero  caespite  terra  viret.  160 

hie  ego  cum  lassos  posuissem  nebilis  l  artus, 

constitit  ante  oculos  Naias  una  meos. 
constitit  et  dixit :   "  quoniam  non  ignibus  aequis 

ureris,  Ambracia  est  terra  petenda  tibi. 
Phoebus    ab    excelso,     quantum    patet,    adspicit 

aequor —  165 

Aetiacum  populi  Leucadiumque  vocant. 
hine  se  Deucalion  Pyrrhae  succensus  amore 

misit,  et  inlaeso  corpore  pressit  aquas, 
nee  mora,  versus  amor  fugit  2  lentissima  Pyrrhae 

pectora,  Deucalion  igne  levatus  erat.  170 

hanc  legem  locus  ille  tenet,     pete  protinus  altam 

Leucada  nee  saxo  desiluisse  time  !  " 
Ut  monuit,  cum  voce  abiit ;  ego  territa  surgo, 

nee  lacrimas  oculi  continuere  mei.3 
ibimus,  o  nymphe,  monstrataque  saxa  petemus  ;    175 

sit  procul  insano  victus  amore  timor  ! 
quidquid  erit,  melius  quam  nunc  erit !  aura,  subito  ; 

et  mea  non  magnum  corpora  pondus  habent. 
tu  quoque,  mollis  Amor,  pennas  suppone  cadenti, 

ne  sim  Leucadiae  mortua  crimen  aquae  !  180 

hide  chelyn  Phoebo,  communia  munera,  ponam, 

et  sub  ea  versus  unus  et  alter  erunt : 

GRATA  LYRAM  POSUI  TIBI,  PHOEBE,  POETRIA  SAPPHO  : 
CONVENIT  ILLA  MIHI,  CONVENIT  ILLA  TIBI. 

1  fietibus  s. 

2  fugit  F  s :  tetigit  co  Hein.:  figit  s  De  Vries. 

3  So  F :  nee  gravidae  lacrimas  continuere  genae  others. 

192 


THE    HEROIDES    XV 

dwells  therein — above  which  a  watery  lotus  spreads 
its  branches  wide,  a  grove  all  in  itself;  the  earth  is 
green  with  tender  turf.  Here  I  had  laid  my  wearied 
limbs  and  given  way  to  tears,  when  there  stood 
before  my  eye's  a  Naiad.  She  stood  before  me,  and 
said  :  "  Since  thou  art  burning  with  unrequited  flame, 
Ambracia  is  the  land  thou  needs  must  seek.  There 
Phoebus  from  on  high  looks  down  on  the  whole 
wide  stretch  of  sea — of  Aetium,  the  people  call  it,  and 
Leucadian.  From  here  Deucalion,  inflamed  with 
love  for  Pyrrha,  cast  himself  down,  and  struck  the 
waters  with  body  all  unharmed.  Without  delay, 
his  passion  was  turned  from  him,  and  fled  from  his 
tenacious  breast,  and  Deucalion  was  freed  from  the 
fires  of  love.  This  is  the  law  of  yonder  place.  Go 
straightway  seek  the  high  Leucadian  cliff",  nor  from  it 
fear  to  leap  !  " 

173  Her  warning  given,  she  ceased  her  speech,  and 
vanished  ;  in  terror  I  arose,  and  my  eyes  could  not 
keep  back  their  tears.  I  shall  go,  O  nymph,  to  seek 
out  the  cliff"  thou  toldst  of;  away  with  fear — my 
maddening  passion  casts  it  out.  Whatever  shall  be, 
better  'twill  be  than  now  !  Breeze,  come — bear  me 
up ;  my  limbs  have  no  great  weight.  Do  thou,  ^oo, 
tender  Love,  place  thy  pinions  beneath  me,  lest  I 
die  and  bring  reproach  on  the  Leucadian  wave ! 
Then  will  I  consecrate  to  Phoebus  my  shell,  our 
common  boon,  and  under  it  shall  be  writ  one  verse, 
and  a  second  : 

SAPPHO    THE     SINGF.R,    O     PHOEBUS,     HATH    GRATEFULLY 

BROUGHT    THEE    A    ZITHER  I 
TOKEN    WELL    SUITED   TO    ME,    TOKEN    WELL    SUITED    TO 

THEE. 

IQ3 


OVID 

Cur  tamen  Actiacas  miseram  me  mittis  ad  oras,     185 

cum  prof u  gum  possis  ipse  referre  pedem  ? 
tu  mihi  Leucadia  potes  esse  salubrior  unda  ; 

et  forma  et  meritis  tu  mihi  Phoebus  eris. 
an  potes,  o  scopulis  undaque  ferocior  onmi,1 

si  moriar,  titulum  mortis  habere  meae  ?  190 

at  quanto  melius  iungi  mea  pectora  tecum 

quam  poterant  saxis  praecipitanda  dari ! 
haec  sunt  ilia,  Phaon,  quae  tu  laudare  solebas, 

visaque  sunt  totiens  ingeniosa  tibi. 
nunc  vellem  facunda  forem  !  dolor  artibus  obstat,  195 

ingeniumque  meis  substitit  omne  malis. 
non  mihi  respondent  veteres  in  carmina  vires ; 

plectra  dolore  tacent,  muta  dolore  lyra  est. 
Lesbides  aequoreae,  nupturaque  nuptaque  proles, 

Lesbides,  Aeolia  nomina  dicta  lyra,  200 

Lesbides,  infamem  quae  me  fecistis  amatae,2 

desinite  ad  citharas  turba  venire  meas  ! 
abstulit  omne  Phaon,  quod  vobis  ante  placebat, 

me  miseram,  dixi  quam  modo  paene  "  meus  !  " 
efficite  ut  redeat ;  vates  quoque  vestra  redibit.       205 

ingenio  vires  ille  dat,  ille  rapit. 
Ecquid  ago  precibus,  pectusve  agreste  movetur  ? 

an  3  riget,  et  Zephyr i  verba  caduca  ferunt  ? 
qui  mea  verba  ferunt,  vellem  tua  vela  referrent ; 

hoc  te,  si  saperes,  lente,  decebat  opus.  210 

sive  redis,  puppique  tuae  votiva  parantur  4 

munera,  quid  laceras  pectora  nostra  mora  ? 

1  onmi  F :  ilia  s. 

2  amatae  F :  amare  others  :  amore  Baehrens. 

3  an  Pa.'.  A!  Baehrens  :  piget  F. 

4  parantur  s  :  paramus  Fw. 

194 


THE   HEROIDES   XV 

185  Yet  why  do  you  send  me  to  the  shores  of 
Acthnn,  unhappy  that  I  am,  when  you  yourself 
could  turn  back  your  wandering  steps?  You  can 
better  help  my  state  than  the  Leucadian  wave  ;  both 
in  beauty  and  in  kindness  you  will  be  a  Phoebus  to 
me.  Or,  if  I  perish,  O  more  savage  than  any  cliff  or 
wave,  can  you  endure  the  name  of  causing  my  death  ? 
But  how  much  better  for  my  bosom  to  be  pressed  to 
yours  than  headlong  to  be  hurled  from  the  rocks ! — 
the  bosom,  Phaon,  of  her  whom  you  were  wont  to 
praise,  and  who  so  often  seemed  to  you  to  have  the 
gift  of  genius.  Would  I  were  eloquent  now  !  Grief 
stops  my  art,  and  all  my  genius  is  halted  by  my  woes. 
My  old-time  power  in  song  will  not  respond  to  the 
call  ;  my  plectrum  for  grief  is  silent ;  mute  for  grief 
is  my  lyre.  Lesbian  daughters  of  the  wave,  ye 
who  are  to  wed  and  ye  already  wed,  ye  Lesbian 
daughters,  whose  names  have  been  sung  to  the 
Aeolian  lyre,  ye  Lesbian  daughters  whom  I  have 
loved  to  my  reproach,  cease  thronging  to  me  more 
to  hear  my  shell  !  Phaon  has  swept  away  all  that 
ye  loved  before — ah,  wretched  me.  how  nearly  I 
came  then  to  saying  "my  Phaon"!  Accomplish  his 
return ;  your  singer,  too,  will  then  return.  My 
genius  had  its  powers  from  him ;  with  him  they 
were  swept  away. 

207  Hut  do  my  prayers  accomplish  aught,  or  is  his 
churl's  heart  moved?  or  is  it  cold  and  hard,  and  do 
the  zephyrs  bear  away  my  idly  lading  words? 
Would  that  the  winds  that  bear  away  my  words 
might  bring  your  sails  again  ;  this  deed  wen-  fitting 
for  you,  tardy  one,  had  you  a  feeling  breast.  If  you 
intend  return,  and  are  making  for  your  stern  the 
votive  gift,  why  tear  my  heart  with  delay  ?     Weigh 

"95 


OVID 

solve  ratem !  Venus  orta  mari  mare  praestat  amanti. 

aura  dabit  cursum  ;  tu  modo  solve  ratem  ! 
ipse  gubernabit  residens  in  puppe  Cupido  ;  215 

ipse  dabit  tenera  vela  legetque  manu. 
sive  iuvat  longe  fugisse  Pelasgida  Sapphon — 

non  tamen  invenies,  cur  ego  digna  fugi — 
hoc  saltern  miserae  crudelis  epistula  dieat, 

ut  mihi  Leucadiae  fata  petantur  aquae  !  220 


XVI 

Paris  Helenae  1 

Hanc  tibi  Priamides  mitto,  Ledaea,  salutem, 

quae  tribui  sola  te  mihi  dante  potest. 
Eloquar,  an  flammae  non  est  opus  indice  notae, 

et  plus  quam  vellem  iam  meiis  extat  amor  ? 
ille  quidem  lateat  malim,  dum  tempora  dentur  5 

laetitiae  mixtos  non  habitura  metus, 
sed  male  dissimulo  ;  quis  enim  celaverit  ignem, 

lumine  qui  semper  proditur  ipse  suo  ? 
si  tamen  expectas,  vocem  quoque  rebus  ut  addam — 

uror  !  habes  animi  nuntia  verba  mei.  10 

1  Of  Epistles  xvi.-xxi.  Palmer  says:  "  I  hold  very  strongly 
the  view  (1)  that  they  were  not  written  by  Ovid;  (2)  that  they 
were  all,  except  16.  39-142,  21.  13  ad  Ji».,  written  by  the  same 
author ;  (3)  that  that  author  lived  in  the  early  silver  age,  about 
the  epoch  of  Persius  or  Petroniiut."  For  him,  proofs  of  non- 
Ovidian  authorship  lie  in  form,  metre,  and  diction.  Purser's 
view,  however,  Introd.  to  Palmer,  p.  xxxii.  has  gained  ground : 

196 


THE    HEROIDES    XVI 

anchor !  Venus  who  rose  from  the  sea  makes  way 
on  the  sea  for  the  lover.  The  wind  will  speed  you 
on  your  course ;  do  you  but  weigh  anchor !  Cupid 
himself  will  be  helmsman,  sitting  upon  the  stern ; 
himself  with  tender  hand  will  spread  and  furl  the 
sail.  But  if  your  pleasure  be  to  fly  afar  from 
Pelasgian  Sappho — and  yet  you  will  find  no  cause  for 
flying  from  me — ah,  at  least  let  a  cruel  letter  tell 
me  this  in  my  misery,  that  I  may  seek  my  fate  in 
the  Leucadian  wave  ! 


XVI 
Paris  to   Helen 

I,  son  of  Priam,  send  you,  Leda's  daughter,  this 
wish  for  welfare — welfare  that  can  fall  to  me  through 
your  gift  alone. 

3  Shall  I  speak,  or  is  there  no  need  to  tell  of 
a  flame  already  known,  and  is  my  love  already 
clearer  than  I  could  wish  ?  I  should  indeed  prefer 
to  keep  it  hid,  until  the  time  came  when  my  joy 
could  be  unmixed  with  fears,  but  I  can  ill  disguise ; 
for  who  could  conceal  a  fire  that  ever  betrays  itself 
by  its  own  light  ?  If,  none  the  less,  you  look  for  me 
to  add  word  to  fact — I  am  on  fire  with  love  !  There 
you   have  the  words  that  bring  the   message  of  my 

"  These  Epistles,  neither  in  matter  nor  in  lamjuagi -,  appear  to 
offer  a  sufficient  number  of  anomalies  to  mah  it  necessary  to 
disallow  their  Ocirfian  authorship.  Tiny  probcibly  formed  a 
separate  volume,  Epistles  (Second  Series),  written  some  years 
after  the  others,  when  Ovid  was  not  so  punctilious  with  regard 
to  his  metre  as  he  was  in  his  earlier  works,  and  lohen  he  had 
acquired  a  greater  diffuseness  of  style." 

197 


OVID 

parce,  precor,  fasso  nee  vultu  cetera  duro 

perlege,  sed  fomiae  conveniente  tuae. 
Iamdudum  gratum  est,  quod  epistula  nostra  recepta 

spem  facit,  hoc  recipi  me  quoque  posse  modo. 
quae  rata  sit,  nee  te  frustra  promiserit,  opto,  15 

hoc  mihi  quae  suasit,  mater  Amoris,  iter ; 
namque  ego  divino  monitu — ne  nescia  pecces — 

advehor,  et  coepto  non  leve  numen  adest. 
praemia  magna  quidem,  sed  non  indebita,  posco  ; 

pollicita  est  thalamo  te  Cytherea  meo.  20 

hac  duce  Sigeo  dubias  a  litoi'e  feci 

longa  Phereclea  per  freta  puppe  vias. 
ilia  dedit  faciles  auras  ventosque  secundos — 

in  mare  nimirum  ius  habet  orta  mari. 
perstet  et  ut  pelagi,  sic  pectoris  adiuvet  aestum ;    25 

deferat  in  portus  et  mea  vota  suos. 
Attulimus  flammas,  non  hie  invenimus,  illas. 

hae  mihi  tarn  longae  causa  fuere  viae, 
nam  neque  tristis  hiemps  neque  nos  hue   appulit 
error ; 

Taenaris  est  classi  terra  petita  meae.  30 

nee  me  crede  fretum  merces  portante  carina 

findere — quas  habeo,  di  tueantur  opes  ! 
nee  venio  Graias  veluti  spectator  ad  urbes — 

oppida  sunt  regni  divitiora  mei. 
te  ]>eto,  quam  pepigit  lecto  Venus  aurea  nostro ;     35 

te  prius  optavi,  quam  mihi  nota  fores. 
198 


THE    HEROIDES    XVI 

heart.  Pardon,  I  entreat,  my  having  confessed,  and 
do  not  read  the  rest  with  face  that  is  hard,  but  with 
one  that  suits  your  beauty. 

13  Long  now  have  I  had  cheer,  for  your  welcoming 
my  letter  begets  the  hope  that  I  also  may  be  like- 
wise welcomed.  What  the  mother  of  Love,  who 
persuaded  me  to  this  journey,  has  fixed  upon,  I 
deeply  hope  may  be,  and  that  she  has  not  promised 
you  to  me  in  vain  ;  for  at  divine  behest — lest  you 
sin  unawares — I  sail  hither,  and  no  slight  godhead 
favours  my  undertaking.  The  prize  I  seek  in- 
deed is  great,  but  I  ask  naught  that  is  not  my 
due ;  you  have  been  promised  for  my  marriage- 
chamber  by  her  of  Cythera.  With  her  for  pilot, 
from  the  Sigean  strand  I  have  sailed  in  Phere- 
clean  stern  the  dubious  paths  of  the  far-stretching 
flood.  It  is  she  who  has  given  me  gentle  breeze  and 
favouring  wind — of  a  surety  she  has  dominion  over 
the  sea,  for  she  rose  from  the  sea.  May  she  still 
favour  me,  and  calm  my  heart's  tide  as  she  calmed 
the  wave's ;  and  bring  my  vows  to  their  desired 
haven. 

2T  My  passion  for  you  I  have  brought  ;  1  did  not 
find  it  here.  It  is  that  which  was  the  cause  of  so 
long  a  voyage,  for  neither  gloomy  stonn  has  driven 
me  hither,  nor  a  wandering  course  ;  Taenaris  is 
the  land  toward  which  inv  ships  were  steered. 
Nor  think  I  cleave  the  seas  with  a  keel  that  carries 
merchandise — what  goods  I  have,  may  the  gods  only 
keep  for  me  !  Nor  am  I  come  as  one  to  see  the 
sights  of  Grecian  towns — the  cities  of  my  own  realm 
are  wealthier.  It  is  you  I  come  for — you,  whom 
golden  Venus  has  promised  for  my  bed;  you  were 
my  heart's  desire   before  you  were  known  to  me.      I 

199 


OVID 

ante  tuos  animo  vidi  quam  lumine  vultus  ; 

prima  tulit  vulnus  nuntia  fama  tui.1 
Nee  tamen  est  minim,2  si,  sicut  oportet,  ab  arcu 

missilibus  telis  eminus  ictus  amo.  40 

sic  placuit  fatis  ;  quae  ne  convellere  temptes, 

accipe  cum  vera  dicta  relata  fide. 
matris  adhuc  utero  partu  remorante  tenebar  ; 

iam  gravidus  iusto  pondere  venter  erat. 
ilia  sibi  ingentem3  visa  est  sub  imagine  somni  45 

flammiferam  pleno  reddere  ventre  facem. 
territa  consurgit  metuendaque  noctis  opacae 

visa  seni  Priamo  ;  vatibus  ille  refert. 
arsurum  Paridis  vates  canit  Ilion  igni — 

jiectoris,  ut  nunc  est,  fax  fuit  ilia  mei  !  50 

Forma  vigorque  animi,  quamvis  de  plebe  videbar, 

indicium  tectae  nobilitatis  erat. 
est  locus  in  mediis  nemorosae  vallibus  Idae 

devius  et  piceis  ilicibusque  frequens, 
qui  nee  ovis  placidae  nee  amantis  saxa  capellae        55 

nee  patulo  tardae  carpitur  ore  bovis. 
hinc  ego  Dardaniae  muros  excelsaque  tecta 

et  freta  prospiciens  arbore  nixus  eram — 
ecce  !  pedum  pulsu  visa  est  mihi  terra  moveri — 

vera  loquar  veri  vix  habitura  fidem —  60 

1  Ao  Hous.:  mihi  vultus  V :  fuit  vultus  P  a> :  prima  mihi 
vulnus  nuntia  fama  tulit  Pa. 

2  39-142  are  in  Cod.  Pal.  and  the  Pauline  Fragment: 
missing  elsewhere  and  in  Plan.  3  urgentis  Pa. 

a  Of  39  142,  Palmer  says:  "The  question  of  authorship 
of  these  verses  is  bound  up  witli  that  of  the  authorship  of 
21.  13-248.  Their  date  has  been  a  subject  of  much  discussion: 
many  critics  have  held  that  they  were  written  so  late  as  the 

200 


THE    HEROIDES   XVI 

beheld  your  features  with  my  soul  ere  I  saw  them 
with  my  eyes  ;  rumour,  that  told  me  of  you,  was  the 
first  to  deal  my  wound. 

39  Yet a  it  is  not  strange  if  I  am  prey  to  love,  as  'tis 
fitting  I  should  be,  stricken  by  darts  that  were  sped 
from  far.  Thus  have  the  fates  decreed  ;  and  lest  you 
try  to  say  them  nay,  listen  to  words  told  faithfully  and 
true.  I  was  still  in  my  mother's  bosom,  tardy  of 
birth  ;  her  womb  already  was  duly  heavy  with  its 
load.  It  seemed  to  her  in  the  vision  of  a  dream  that 
she  put  forth  from  her  full  womb  a  mighty  flaming 
torch.  In  terror  she  rose  up,  and  told  the  dread 
vision  of  opaque  night  to  ancient  Priam  ;  he  told  it 
to  his  seers.  One  of  the  seers  sang  that  Ilion  would 
burn  with  the  fire  of  Paris — that  was  the  torch  of 
my  heart,  as  now  has  come  to  pass  ! 

61  My  beauty  and  my  vigour  of  mind,  though  I 
seemed  from  the  common  folk,  were  the  sign  of 
hidden  nobility.  There  is  a  place  in  the  woody 
vales  of  midmost  Ida,  far  from  trodden  paths  and 
covered  over  with  pine  and  ilex,  where  never  grazes 
the  placid  sheep,  nor  the  she-goat  that  loves  the 
cliff,  nor  the  wide-mouthed,  slowly-moving  kine. 
From  here,  reclining  against  a  tree,  I  was  looking 
forth  upon  the  walls  and  lofty  roofs  of  the  Dardanian 
city,  and  upon  the  sea,  when  lo  !  it  seemed  to  me 
that  the  earth  trembled  beneath  the  tread  of  feet — 
I  shall  speak  true  words,  though  they  will  scarce 
have  credit  for  truth — and  there  appeared  and  stood 

revival  of  letters  .  .  .  Internal  evidence  seems  to  point  to  a 
date  not  more  than  a  generation  later  than  that  of  the  com- 
position of  the  Epistleal6-21  :  and  the  general  correctness  of 
tin'  versification  speaks  for  an  author  with  an  instinctive,  not 
an  acquired,  feeling  for  Ovidian  verse." 


OVID 

constitit  ante  oculos  actus  velocibus  a]  is 

Atlantis  magni  Pleionesque  nepos — 
fas  vidisse  fuit,  fas  sit  mihi  visa  referre  ! — 

inque  dei  digitis  aurea  virga  fuit  ; 
tresque  simul  divae,  Venus  et  cum  Pallade  Iuno,     65 

graminibus  teneros  inposuere  pedes, 
obstipui,  gelidusque  comas  erexerat  horror, 

cum  mihi  "  pone  metum  ! ''  nuntius  ales  ait, 
"  arbiter  es  formae  ;  certamina  siste  dearum  ; 

vincere  quae  forma  digna  sit  una  duas  !  "  70 

neve  recusarem,  verbis  Iovis  imperat  et  se 

protinus  aetheria  tollit  in  astra  via. 
Mens  mea  convaluit,  subitoque  audacia  venit, 

nee  timui  vultu  quamque  notare  meo. 
vincere  erant  omnes  dignae  iudexque  querebar        75 

non  omnes  causam  vincere  posse  suam. 
sed  tamen  ex  illis  iam  tunc  magis  una  placebat, 

hanc  esse  ut  scires,  unde  movetur  amor, 
tantaque  vincendi  cura  est  ;  ingentibus  ardent 

iudicium  donis  sollicitare  meum.  80 

regna  Iovis  coniunx,  virtutem  filia  iactat ; 

ipse  potens  dubito  fortis  an  esse  velim. 
dulce  Venus  risit ;  "  nee  1  te,  Pari,  munera  tangant 

utraque  suspensi  plena  timoris  !  "  ait ; 
"  nos  dabimus,  quod  ames,  et  pulchrae  filia  Ledae  85 

ibit  in  amplexus  pulchrior  ilia  tuos  !  " 
dixit,  et  ex  aequo  donis  formaque  probata 

victorem  caelo  rettulit  ilia  pedem. 

1  nee  MSS. :  ne  Bent. 
202 


THE    HEROIDES    XVI 

before  my  eyes,  propelled  on  pinions  swift,  the 
grandchild  of  mighty  Atlas  and  Pleione — it  was 
allowed  me  to  see,  and  may  it  be  allowed  to  speak 
of  what  I  saw  ! — and  in  the  fingers  of  the  god  was 
a  golden  wand.  And  at  the  self-same  time,  three 
goddesses — Venus,  and  Pallas,  and  with  her  Juno — 
set  tender  feet  upon  the  sward.  I  was  mute,  and 
chill  tremors  had  raised  my  hair  on  end,  when 
"  Lay  aside  thy  fear !  "  the  winged  herald  said  to 
me  ;  "  thou  art  the  arbiter  of  beauty  ;  put  an  end  to 
the  strivings  of  the  goddesses ;  pronounce  which 
one  deserves  for  her  beauty  to  vanquish  the  other 
two ! "  And,  lest  I  should  refuse,  he  laid  com- 
mand on  me  in  the  name  of  Jove,  and  forthwith 
through  the  paths  of  ether  betook  him  toward  the 
stars. 

73  My  heart  was  reassured,  and  on  a  sudden  I  was 
bold,  nor  feared  to  turn  my  face  and  observe  them 
each.  Of  winning  all  were  worthy,  and  I  who  was 
to  judge  lamented  that  not  all  could  win.  But,  none 
the  less,  already  then  one  of  them  pleased  me  more, 
and  you  might  know  it  was  she  by  whom  love  is 
inspired.  Great  is  their  desire  to  win ;  they  burn 
to  sway  my  verdict  with  wondrous  gifts.  Jove's 
consort  loudly  offers  thrones,  his  daughter,  might  in 
war  ;  I  myself  waver,  and  can  make  no  choice 
between  power  and  the  valorous  heart.  Sweetly 
Venus  smiled  :  "  Paris,  let  not  these  gifts  move  thee, 
both  of  them  full  of  anxious  fear!  "  she  says  ;  "my 
gift  shall  be  of  love,  and  beautiful  Leda's  daughter, 
more  beautiful  than  her  mother,  shall  come  to  thy 
embrace."  She  said,  and  with  her  gift  and  beauty 
equally  approved,  retraced  her  way  victorious  to  the 
skies. 

203 


OVID 

Interea —  credo  versis  ad  prospera  fatis  — 

regius  adgnoscor  per  rata  signa  puer.  90 

laeta  domus  nato  post  tempora  longa  recepto  est, 

addit  et  ad  festos  hunc  quoque  Troia  diem, 
utque  ego  te  cupio,  sic  me  cupiere  puellae  ; 

multarum  votum  sola  tenere  potes  ! 
nee  tantum  regum  natae  petiere  ducumque,  95 

sed  nymphis  etiam  curaque  amorque  fui. 
quam  super  Oenones  faciem  mirarer  ?  1  in  orbe 

nee  Priamo  est  a  te  dignior  ulla  nurus. 
sed  mihi  cunctarum  subeunt  fastidia,  postquam 

coniugii  spes  est,  Tyndari,  facta  tui.  100 

te  vigilans  oculis,  animo  te  nocte  videbam, 

lumina  cum  placido  victa  sopore  iacent. 
quid  facies  praesens,  quae  nondum  visa  placebas  ? 

ardebam,  quamvis  hie  procul  ignis  erat, 
nee  potui  debere  mihi  spem  longius  istam,  105 

caerulea  peterem  quin  mea  vota  via. 
Troia  caeduntur  Phrygia  pineta  securi 

quaeque  erat  aequoreis  utilis  arbor  aquis  ; 
ardua  proceris  spoliantur  Gargara  silvis, 

innumerasque  mihi  longa  dat  Ida  trabes.  110 

fundatura  citas  flectuntur  robora*  naves, 

texitur  et  costis  panda  carina  suis. 
addimus  antennas  et  vela  sequentia  malo  ; 2 

accipit  et  pictos  puppis  adunca  deos  ; 
qua  tamen  ipse  vehor,  comitata  Cupidine  parvo      115 

sponsor  coniugii  stat  dea  picta  tui.3 

'  l  So  Pa.:  quas  super  Oenones  faciem  mirabar  Ehw.:  quas 
.  .  .  Oenonen  facies  MSS.:  mutarer  Cod.  Pal.:  imitarer 
Paid.  Frag.  2  malo  Pa.:  malos  MSS.-.  malis  Ehw. 

3  tui  Bent.:  sui  MSS. 

204 


THE    HEROIDES    XVI 

80  Meanwhile — I  suppose  because  fate  had  turned 
to  prosper  me — I  am  found  by  well  approved  signs 
to  be  a  child  of  the  royal  line.  The  son,  after  long 
time,  is  taken  back  to  his  home,  the  house  is  glad, 
and  Troy  adds  this  day,  too,  to  its  festivals.  And 
as  I  long  for  you,  so  women  have  longed  for  me  ; 
alone,  you  can  possess  the  object  of  many  women's 
prayers  !  And  not  only  have  the  daughters  of  princes 
and  chieftains  sought  me,  but  even  the  nymphs  have 
felt  for  me  the  cares  of  love.  Whose  beauty  was 
I  to  admire  more  than  Oenone's  ? — after  you,  the 
world  contains  none  more  fit  than  she  to  be  bride  to 
Priam's  son.  But  I  am  weary  of  all  of  them,  Tyndaris, 
since  hope  was  made  mine  of  winning  you.  It  was 
you  that  rilled  my  vision  as  I  waked,  and  you  my 
sold  saw  in  the  night,  when  eyes  lie  overcome  in 
peaceful  slumber.  What  will  you  be  face  to  face, 
you  who  won  me  yet  unseen  ?  I  was  fired  with  love, 
though  here,  far  away,  was  the  flame.  I  could  not 
longer  cheat  myself  of  the  hope  of  you,  but  started 
on  the  dark  blue  path  to  seek  the  object  of  my 
vows. 

107  The  Trojan  groves  of  pine  are  felled  by  the 
Phrygian  axe,  and  whatsoever  tree  will  serve  on  the 
billowy  seas  ;  the  steeps  of  Gargara  are  spoiled  of  their 
lofty  woods,  and  far-stretched  Ida  gives  up  to  me 
unn umbered  beams.  The  oak  is  bent  to  make  the 
frame  for  the  speedy  ship,  and  the  curving  keel  is 
woven  with  the  ribbed  sides.  We  add  the  yards, 
and  the  sails  that  hang  to  the  mast;  the  hook- 
shaped  stern,  too,  receives  its  painted  gods  ;  on 
the  one  which  carries  me  stands  painted — and, 
with  her,  tiny  Gupid — the  goddess  who  is  sponsor  for 
your  wedding  me.     After  the  last  hand  lias  been  laid 

205 


OVID 

inposita  est  factae  postquam  manus  ultima  classi, 

protinus  Aegaeis  ire  lubebat l  aquis  — 
at  pater  et  genetrix  inhibent  mea  vota  rogando 

propositumque  pia  2  voce  morantur  iter ;  1 20 

et  soror,  effusis  ut  erat,  Cassandra,  capillis, 

cum  vellent  nostrae  jam  dare  vela  rates, 
"quo  ruis  ?  "  exclamat,  "referes  incendia  tecum  ' 

quanta  per  has  nescis  namma  petatur  aquas  !  " 
vera  fuit  vates  ;  dictos  invenimus  ignes,  125 

et  ferus  in  molli  pectore  nagrat  amor  ! 
Portubus  egredior,  ventisque  ferentibus  usus 

applicor  in  terras,  Oebali  nympha,  tuas. 
excipit  hospitio  vir  me  tuus — hoc  quoque  factum 

non  sine  consilio  numinibusque  deum  !  130 

ille  quidem  ostendit,  quidquid  Lacedaemone  tota 

ostendi  dignum  conspicuumque  fuit  ; 
sed  mihi  laudatam  cupienti  cernere  formam 

lumina  nil  aliud  quo  caperentur  erat. 
ut  vidi,  obstipui  praecordiaque  intima  sensi  135 

attonitus  curis  intumuisse  novis. 
his  similes  vultus,  quantum  reminiscor,  habebat 

venit  in  arbitrium  cum  Cytherea  meum. 
si  tu  venisses  pariter  certamen  in  illud, 

in  dubium  Veneris  palma  futura  fuit  !  140 

magna  quidem  de  te  rumor  praeconia  fecit, 

nullaque  de  facie  nescia  terra  tua  est ; 
nee  tibi  par  usquam  Phrygia  nee  solis  ab  ortu 

inter  formosas  altera  nomen  habet  ! 
Credis  et  hoc  nobis? — minor  est  tua  gloria  vero,    145 

famaque  de  forma  paene  maligna  tua  est  ; 

1  lubebat  iV.  Hem.:  iubebat  Paul.  Frag. :  in bebar  Cod.  Pal. 

2  pia  N,  Hein.:  viae  MSS. 

206 


THE   HEROIDES   XVI 

to  the  ships,  and  all  is  complete,  forthwith  1  am  eager 
to  sail  the  Aegean  main — but  my  father  and  lady 
mother  hold  me  back  from  my  purpose  with  their 
prayers,  and  with  fond  words  delay  the  journey  I 
propose.  My  sister  Cassandra,  too,  all  as  she  was, 
with  hair  let  loose,  when  my  vessels  were  eager  now 
to  spread  the  sail,  cried  out  :  "  Whither  thy  head- 
long course  ?  Thou  wilt  bring  conflagration  back 
with  thee  !  How  great  the  flames  thou  seek  est  over 
these  waters,  thou  dost  not  know!"  A  truthful 
prophetess  was  she  ;  I  have  found  the  fires  of  which 
she  spoke,  and  flames  of  fierce  love  rage  in  my 
helpless  breast ! 

127  I  sail  forth  from  the  harbour,  and  with  favour- 
ing winds  disembark  upon  your  shores,  O  nymph  of 
Oebalus'  line.  Your  lord  receives  me  as  befits  a 
guest — this,  too,  an  act  not  without  the  counsel 
and  approval  of  the  gods !  He  showed  me,  of 
course,  whatever  in  all  Lacedaemon  was  worthy  to 
be  shown  and  sightly  to  be  seen ;  but  I  was  eager 
to  behold  your  much-praised  charms,  and  there 
was  nothing  else  by  which  my  eyes  could  be  held. 
When  I  did  look  on  them,  I  was  astonished,  mute, 
and  felt  new  cares  swelling  big  in  my  inmost  breast. 
Features  like  those,  as  near  as  I  recall,  were 
Cytherea's  own  when  she  came  to  be  judged  by 
me.  If  you  had  come  to  that  contest  together  with 
her,  the  palm  of  Venus  would  have  come  in  doubt ! 
Fame  has  indeed  made  great  heralding  of  you,  and 
there  is  no  land  that  knows  not  of  vour  beauty  ;  no 
other  among  fair  women  has  a  name  like  yours — 
nowhere  in  Phrygia,  nor  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  ! 

145  Will  you  believe  me  when  I  say  this,  too  ?  — 
your  glory  is   less   than   the    truth,  and   fame   has  all 

_  207 


OVID 

plus  hie  invenio,  quani  quod  promiserat  ilia, 

et  tua  materia  gloria  vieta  sua  est. 
ergo  arsit  merito,  qui  noverat  omnia,  Theseus, 

et  visa  es  tanto  digna  rapina  viro,  150 

more  tuae  gentis  nitida  dum  nuda  palaestra 

ludis  et  es  nudis  femina  mixta  viris. 
quod  rapuit,  laudo  ;  miror,  quod  reddidit  umquam. 

tarn  bona  constanter  praeda  tenenda  fuit. 
ante  recessisset  caput  hoc  cervice  cruenta,  155 

quam  tu  de  thalamis  abstraherere  meis. 
tene  manus  umquam  nostrae  dimittere  vellent  ? 

tene  meo  paterer  vivus  abire  sinu  ? 
si  reddenda  fores,  aliquid  tamen  ante  tulissem, 

nee  Venus  ex  toto  nostra  fuisset  iners.  160 

vel  mihi  virginitas  esset  libata,  vel  illud 

quod  poterat  salva  virginitate  rapi. 
Da  modo  te,  quae  sit  Paridis  constantia,  nosces  ; 

Mamma  rogi  flammas  finiet  una  meas. 
praeposui  regnis  ego  te,  quae  maxima  quondam     165 

pollicita  est  nobis  nupta  sororque  Iovis  ; 
dumque  tuo  possem  circumdare  bi'acchia  collo, 

contempta  est  virtus  Pallade  dante  mihi. 
nee  piget,  aut  umquam  stulte  legisse  videbor ; 

permanet  in  voto  mens  mea  firma  suo.  170 

spem  modo  ne  nostram  fieri  patiare  cadueam. 

dejn*ecor,  o  tanto  digna  labore  peti ! 

"  Theseus  and  Pirithous  carried   her  off,  and  Castor  and 
Pollux  rescued  her. 

208 


THE    HEROIDES   XVI 

but  maligned  your  charms  ;  I  find  more  here  than 
the  goddess  promised  me,  and  your  glory  is  exceeded 
by  its  cause.  And  so  Theseus  rightly  felt  love's 
flame,  for  he  was  acquaint  with  all  your  charms,  and 
you  seemed  fit  spoil  for  the  great  hero  to  steal 
away/'  when,  after  the  manner  of  your  race,  you 
engaged  in  the  sports  of  the  shining  palaestra,  a 
nude  maid  mingled  with  nude  men.  His  stealing 
you  away,  I  commend  ;  my  marvel  is  that  he  ever 
gave  you  back.  So  fine  a  spoil  should  have  been  kept 
with  constancy.  Sooner  would  this  head  have  left 
my  bloody  neck  than  you  have  been  dragged  from 
marriage-chamber  of  mine.  One  like  you,  would  ever 
these  hands  of  mine  be  willing  to  let  go  ?  One  like 
you,  would  I,  alive,  allow  to  leave  my  embrace  ?  If 
you  must  needs  have  been  rendered  up,  I  should 
first  at  least  have  taken  some  pledge  from  you  ;  my 
love  for  you  would  not  have  been  wholly  for  naught. 
Either  your  virgin  flower  I  should  have  plucked,  or 
taken  what  could  be  stolen  without  hurt  to  your 
virgin  state. 

163  Only  give  yourself  to  me,  and  you  shall  know 
of  Paris'  constancy  ;  the  flame  of  the  pyre  alone 
will  end  the  flames  of  my  love.  I  have  placed  you 
before  the  kingdoms  which  greatest  Juno,  bride 
and  sister  of  Jove,  once  promised  me  ;  so  I  could 
only  clasp  my  arms  about  your  neck,  I  have  held 
but  cheap  the  prowess  that  Pallas  would  bestow. 
And  I  have  no  regret,  nor  shall  I  ever  seem  in 
my  own  eyes  to  have  made  a  foolish  choice ;  my 
mind  is  fixed  and  persists  in  its  desire.  I  only  pray, 
O  worthy  to  be  sought  with  such  great  toils  !  that 
you  will  not  allow  my  hopes  to  fall  to  earth.     I  am 

209 


OVID 

nun  ego  coniugium  generosae  degener  opto, 

nee  mea,  erede  mihi,  turpiter  uxor  eris. 
Pliada,  si  quaeres,  in  nostra  gente  Iovemque  175 

invenies,  niedios  ut  taceamus  avos  ; 
sceptra  parens  Asiae,  qua  nulla  beatior  ora  est, 

finibus  inmensis  vix  obeunda,  tenet. 
innumeras  urbes  atque  aurea  tecta  videbis, 

quaeque  suos  dicas  templa  decere  deos.  180 

Ilion  adspicies  finnataque  turribus  altis 

moenia,  Phoebeae  structa  eanore  lyrae. 
quid  tibi  de  turba  narrem  numeroque  virorum  ? 

vix  populum  tellus  sustinet  ilia  suum. 
occurrent  denso  tibi  Troades  agmine  matres,  185 

nee  capient  Phrygias  atria  nostra  nurus. 
o  quotiens  dices  :   "  quam  pauper  Aehaia  nostra  est!" 

una  domus  quaevis  urbis  habebit  opes. 
Nee  mihi  fas  merit  Sparten  contemnere  vestram ; 

in  qua  tu  nata  es,  terra  beata  mihi  est.  190 

parca  sed  est  Sparte,  tu  cultu  divite  digna  ; 

ad  talem  formam  non  facit  iste  locus, 
hanc  faciem  largis  sine  fine  paratibus  uti 

deliciisque  decet  luxuriare  novis. 
cum  videas  cultus  nostra  de  gente  virorum,  195 

qualem  Dardanias  credis  habere  nurus  ? 
da  modo  te  facilem,  nee  dedignare  maritum, 

rure  Therapnaeo  nata  puella,  Phrygem. 
Phryx  erat  et  nostro  genitus  de  sanguine,  qui  nunc 

cum  dis  potando  nectare  miscet  aquas.  200 

°  Electra,  mother  of  Dardanus,  son  of  Jove. 
1  Apollo   with   his   music   caused    the   walls    to   rise    for 
Laomedon. 


THE   HEROIDES   XVI 

no  seeker  after  marriage  ties  with  the  nobly  born, 
while  myself  of  lowly  line,  nor  will  you  find  it 
disgrace,  believe  me,  to  be  my  wife.  A  Pleiad,"  if 
you  will  search,  you  will  find  in  our  line,  and  a  Jove, 
to  say  naught  of  our  ancestry  since  their  time ; 
my  father  wields  the  sceptre  over  Asia,  land  than 
which  none  other  has  more  wealth,  with  bounds 
immense,  scarce  to  be  traversed.  Unnumbered  cities 
and  golden  dwellings  you  will  see,  and  temples 
you  would  say  fit  well  their  gods.  Ilion  you  will 
look  upon,  and  its  walls  made  strong  with  lofty 
towers,  reared  to  the  tunefulness  of  Phoebus'  lyre.6 
Why  tell  you  of  our  thronging  multitudes  of  men  ? 
Scarce  does  that  land  sustain  the  dwellers  in  it. 
In  dense  line  the  Trojan  women  will  press  forward 
to  meet  you,  and  our  palace  halls  will  scarce  contain 
the  daughters  of  Phrygia.  Ah,  how  often  will  you 
say:  "How  poor  is  our  Achaia ! "  One  house- 
hold, any  one  you  choose,  will  show  a  city's 
wealth. 

\m  And  yet  let  me  not  presume  to  look  down  upon 
your  Sparta  ;  the  land  in  which  you  were  born  is 
rich  for  me.  But  a  niggard  land  is  Sparta,  and  you 
deserve  keeping  in  wealth ;  with  fairness  such  as 
yours  this  place  is  not  in  accord  Beauty  like 
yours  it  befits  to  enjoy  rich  adornment  without  end, 
and  to  wanton  in  ever  new  delights.  When  you 
look  on  the  garb  of  the  men  of  our  race,  what 
garb,  think  you,  must  be  that  of  the  daughters  of 
Dardanus?  Only  be  compliant,  and  do  not  disdain 
a  Phrygian  for  your  lord,  you  who  were  born  in  rural 
Therapnae.  A  Phrygian,  and  born  of  our  blood,  was 
he  who  now  is  with  the  gods,  and  mingles  water  witli 
the    nectar    for    their    drinking.       A    Phrygian    was 


p  2 


OVID 

Phryx  erat  Aurorae  coniunx,  tamen  abstulit  ilium 

extrenium  noctis  quae  dea  finit  iter. 
Phryx  etiam  Anchises,  voluerum  cui  mater  Amorum 

gaudet  in  Idaeis  concubuisse  iugis. 
nee,  puto,  conlatis  forma  Menelaus  et  annis  1  205 

iudice  te  nobis  anteferendus  erit. 
non  dabimus  certe  socerum  tibi  clara  fugantem 

lumina,  qui  trepidos  a  dape  vertat  equos  ; 
nee  Priamo  pater  est  soceri  de  caede  cruentus 

et  qui  Myrtoas  crimine  signat  aquas  ;  210 

nee  proavo  Stygia  nostro  eaptantur  in  unda 

poma,  nee  in  mediis  quaeritur  umor  aquis. 
Quid  tamen  hoc  refert,  si  te  tenet  ortus  ab  illis, 

eogitur  huic  domui  Iuppiter  esse  socer  ? 
heu  facinus  !  totis  indignus  noctibus  ille  215 

te  tenet  amplexu  perfruiturque  tuo  ; 
at  mihi  eonspiceris  posita  vix  denique  mensa, 

multaque  quae  laedant  hoe  quoque  tempus  habet. 
hostibus  eveniant  convivia  talia  nostris, 

experior  posito  qualia  saepe  mero  !  220 

paenitet  hospitii,  cum  me  spectante  lacertos 

inponit  collo  rusticus  iste  tuo. 
rumpor  et  invideo — quidni  tamen  omnia  riarrem  ? — 

membra  superiecta  cum  tua  veste  fovet. 
oscula  cum  vero  coram  non  dura  daretis,  225 

ante  oculos  posui  pocula  sumpta  meos  ; 
lumina  demitto  cum  te  tenet  artius  ille, 

crescit  et  invito  lentus  in  ore  cibus. 

1  annis  P  :  armis  G  u>. 

"  Tithonus,  son  of  Laomedon. 

6  Referring  to  Atrens  and  his  serving  to  Thyestes  his  own 
sons. 

2  I  2 


THE   HEROIDES    XVI 

Aurora's  mate  ; a  yet  he  was  carried  away  by  the 
goddess  who  sets  the  last  bound  to  the  advance  of 
night.  A  Phrygian,  too,  Anchises,  with  whom  the 
mother  of  the  winged  loves  rejoices  to  consort 
on  Ida's  ridge.  Nor  do  I  think  that  Menelaus, 
when  you  compare  our  beauty  and  our  years,  will 
find  higher  place  in  your  esteem  than  I.  I  shall 
at  least  not  give  you  a  father-in-law  who  puts  to 
flight  the  clear  beams  of  the  sun,  and  turns  away 
from  the  feast  his  affrighted  steeds ; b  nor  has  Priam 
a  sire,  who  is  stained  with  blood  from  the  murder 
of  bis  bride's  father,  or  who  marks  the  Myrtoan 
waters  with  his  crime  ; c  nor  does  ancestor  of  mine 
catch  at  fruits  in  the  Stygian  wave,  or  seek  for  water 
in  the  midst  of  waters.d 

213  Yet  what  avails  me  this,  if  one  sprung  from 
them  possesses  you,  and  Jove  perforce  is  father-in- 
law  to  this  house?6  Ah,  crime  !  Throughout  whole 
nights  that  unworthy  husband  possesses  you,  enjoy- 
ing your  embrace  ;  but  I — I  look  on  you  only  when 
at  last  the  board  is  laid,  and  even  this  time  brings 
many  things  that  pain.  May  our  enemies  have  such 
repasts  as  often  I  endure  when  the  wine  has  been 
set  before  us !  I  regret  my  being  a  guest,  when 
before  my  eyes  that  rustic  lays  his  arms  about  your 
neck.  I  burst  with  anger  and  envy- — for  why  should 
I  not  tell  everything  ? — when  he  lays  his  mantle 
over  your  limbs  to  keep  you  warm.  But  when  you 
openly  give  him  tender  kisses,  I  take  up  my  goblet 
and  hold  it  before  my  eyes ;  when  he  holds  you 
closely  pressed,  I  let  my  gaze  fall,  and  the  dull  food 

c  Pelops,  who  compassed  the  death  of  Oenomaus  in  the 
famous  race.  d  Tantalus. 

'  Menelaus'  wife  was  daughter  of  Jove  and  Leda. 

213 


OVID 

saepe  dedi  gemitus  ;  et  te — lasciva  ! — notavi 

in  gemitu  risum  non  tenuisse  meo.  230 

saepe  mero  volui  flammam  compeseere,  at  ilia 

crevit,  et  ebrietas  ignis  in  igne  fuit, 
multaque  ne  videam,  versa  cervice  recumbo  ; 

sed  revocas  oculos  protinus  ipsa  nieos. 
Quid  faciam,  dubito  ;  dolor  est  meus  ilia  videre,    235 

sed  dolor  a  facie  maior  abesse  tua. 
qua  licet  et  possum,  luctor  celare  furorem ; 

sed  tamen  apparet  dissimulatus  amor. 
nee  tibi  verba  damus  ;  sentis  mea  vulnera,  sentis  ! 

atque  utinam  soli  sint  ea  nota  tibi !  240 

a,  quotiens  lacrimis  venientibus  ora  reflexi, 

ne  causam  fletus  quaereret  ille  mei  ! 
a,  quotiens  aliquem  narravi  potus  amorem, 

ad  vultus  referens  singula  verba  tuos, 
indiciumque  mei  ficto  sub  nomine  feci !  245 

ille  ego,  si  nescis,  verus  amator  eram. 
quin  etiam,  ut  possem  verbis  petulantius  uti, 

non  semel  ebrietas  est  simulata  mihi. 
Prodita  sunt,  memini,  tunica  tua  pectora  laxa 

atque  oculis  aditum  nuda  dedere  meis —  250 

pectora  vel  puris  nivibus  vel  lacte  tuamque 

complexo  matrem  candidiora  love, 
dum  stupeo  visis — nam  pocula  forte  tenebam — 

tortilis  a  digitis  excidit  ansa  meis. 
oscula  si  natae  dederas,  ego  protinus  ilia  255 

Hermiones  tenero  laetus  ab  ore  tuli. 
214 


THE    HEROIDES    XVI 

grows  big  within  my  unwilling  mouth.  Many  a  time 
I  have  let  forth  groans  ;  and  you — ah,  mischief  that 
you  are  ! — I  have  marked  you  unable  to  keep  from 
laughing  when  I  groaned.  Oft  I  Would  have  quenched 
the  flame  of  love  in  wine,  but  it  grew  instead,  and 
drinking  was  but  fire  upon  the  fire.  That  I  may 
miss  the  sight  of  much,  I  recline  with  head  turned 
from  you  ;  but  you  yourself  straightway  recall  my 
eyes  again. 

235  What  I  shall  do,  I  know  not ;  I  suffer  when 
I  look  upon  these  things,  but  I  suffer  more  when  I 
lack  the  sight  of  your  face.  In  whatever  way  I 
am  allowed  and  have  the  power,  I  struggle  to  conceal 
my  madness ;  but  none  the  less  the  love  I  cover  up 
appears.  And  I  aiu  not  deceiving  you  ;  you  are 
aware  what  wounds  are  mine — you  are  aware  !  And 
would  that  they  were  known  to  you  alone  !  Ah, 
how  often  at  the  coming  of  my  tears  I  have  turned 
away  my  face,  lest  that  man  should  ask  the  reasons 
why  I  wept !  Ah,  how  often,  when  in  wine,  I  have 
told  the  tale  of  some  amour,  speaking  straight  to 
your  face  each  single  word,  and  have  given  you  hint 
of  myself  under  the  made-up  name  !  I  was  the  real 
lover — if  you  do  not  know.  Nay,  indeed,  that  I 
might  be  able  to  use  more  froward  speech,  not  once 
alone  have  I  feigned  I  was  in  wine. 

240  Your  bosom  once,  I  remember,  was  betrayed 
by  your  robe  ;  it  was  loose,  and  left  your  charms  bare 
to  my  gaze — breasts  whiter  than  pure  snows,  or  milk, 
or  Jove  when  he  embraced  your  mother.  While  I 
sat  in  ecstasy  at  the  sight — I  chanced  to  have  my 
goblet  in  hand — the  twisted  handle  fell  from  my 
fingers.  If  you  had  bestowed  kisses  on  your  child 
Hermione,  I  forthwith  snatched  them  with  joy  from 

215 


OVID 

et  modo  cantabam  veteres  fesupinus  amores, 

et  modo  per  nutum  signa  tegenda  dabam. 
et  comitum  primas,  Clymenen  Aethramque,  tuarum 

ausus  sum  blandis  nuper  adire  sonis,  260 

quae  mihi  non  aliud,  quam  formidare,  locutae 

orantis  medias  deseruere  preces. 
Di  facerent,  pretium  magni  certaminis  esses, 

teque  suo  posset  victor  habere  toro  ! — 
ut  tulit  Hippomenes  Schoeneida  praemia  cursus,  265 

venit  ut  in  Phrvgios  Hippodamia  sinus, 
ut  ferus  Alcides  Acheloia  eornua  fregit, 

dum  petit  amplexus,  Deianira,  tuos. 
nostra  per  has  leges  audacia  fortiter  isset, 

teque  mei  scires  esse  laboris  opus.  270 

nunc  mihi  nil  superest  nisi  te,  formosa,  precari, 

amplectique  tuos,  si  patiare,  pedes. 
o  decus,  o  praesens  geminorum  gloria  fratrum, 

o  love  digna  viro,  ni  love  nata  fores, 
aut  ego  Sigeos  repetam  te  coniuge  portus,  275 

aut  hie  Taenaria  contegar  exul  humo  ! 
non  mea  sunt  summa  leviter  destricta  :  sagitta 

pectora ;  descendit  vulnus  ad  ossa  meum  ! 
hoc  mihi — nam  repeto — fore,  ut  a  caeleste  sagitta 

figar,  erat  verax  vaticinata  soror.  280 

parce  datum  fatis,  Helene,  contemnere  amorem — 

sic  habeas  faciles  in  tua  vota  deos ! 
Multa  quidem  subeunt;  sed  coram  ut  plum  loquamur, 

excipe  me  lecto  nocte  silente  tuo. 
1  So  Hous. 
216 


THE    HEROIDES   XVI 

her  tender  lips.  And  now  I  would  sing  of  old 
amours,  lying  careless  on  my  back  ;  and  again  I 
would  nod,  making  signs  I  should  have  kept  hid. 
The  first  of  your  companions,  Clymene  and  Aethra, 
I  lately  ventured  to  approach  with  flattering  words  ; 
who  said  naught  else  than  that  they  were  afraid,  and 
left  me  in  the  midst  of  my  entreaties. 

263  Ah,  might  the  gods  make  you  the  prize  in  a 
mighty  contest,  and  let  the  victor  have  you  for  his 
couch  ! — as  Hippomenes  bore  off,  the  prize  of  his 
running,  Schoeneus'  daughter,  as  Hippodamia  came 
to  Phrygian  embrace,  as  fierce  Hercules  broke  the 
horns  of  the  Achelous  while  aspiring  to  thy  em- 
braces, Deianira.  My  daring  would  have  boldly 
made  its  way  in  the  face  of  conditions  such  as 
these,  and  you  would  know  well  how  to  be  the  object 
of  my  toils.  Now  nothing  is  left  me  but  to  entreat 
you,  beauteous  one,  and  to  embrace  your  feet,  so 
you  suffer  it.  O  honour,  O  present  glory  of  the 
twin  brethren,  O  woi-thy  of  Jove  to  husband  were 
you  not  the  child  of  Jove — either  I  shall  return  to 
the  haven  of  Sigeum  with  you  as  my  bride,  or  here, 
an  exile,  be  covered  with  Tacuarian  earth  !  It  is 
not  slightly  that  my  breast  has  been  pierced,  only 
by  the  arrow's  point ;  my  wound  is  deep — to  the 
very  bones !  This — for  I  recall  it — was  what  my 
truthful  sister  prophesied — that  I  should  be  trans- 
fixed by  a  heavenly  dart.  Do  not,  O  Helen,  despise 
a  love  ordained  by  fate — so  may  you  find  the  gods 
gracious  to  your  prayers  ! 

283  Many  things  indeed  come  to  my  mind  ;  but, 
that  we  may  say  more  face  to  face,  welcome  me  to 
your  couch    in    the    silent    night.      Or    do   you    feel 

217 


OVID 

an  pudet  et  metuis  Venerem  temerare  maritam     285 

castaque  legitimi  fall  ere  iura  tori  ? 
a,  nimium  simplex  Helene,  ne  rustica  dicam, 

hanc  faciem  culpa  posse  carere  putas  ? 
aut  faciem  mutes  aut  sis  non  dura,  necesse  est  ; 

lis  est  cum  forma  magna  pudicitiae.  290 

Iuppiter  his  gaudet,  gaudet  Venus  aurea  furtis  ; 

haec  tibi  nempe  patrem  furta  dedere  Iovem. 
vix  fieri,  si  sunt  vires  in  semine  morum,1 

et  Iovis  et  Ledae  filia,  casta  potes. 
casta  tamen  turn  sis,  cum  te  mea  Troia  tenebit,     295 

et  tua  sim,  quaeso,  crimina  solus  ego. 
nunc  ea  peccemus  quae  corriget  hora  iugalis, 

si  modo  promisit  non  mihi  vana  Venus  ! 
Sed  tibi  et  hoc  suadet  rebus,  non  voce,  maritus, 

neve  sui  furtis  hospitis  obstet,  abest.  300 

non  habuit  tempus,  quo  Cresia  regna  videret, 

aptius — o  mira  calliditate  virum  ! 
"res,  et  ut  2  Idaei  mando  tibi,"  dixit  iturus, 

"curam  pro  nobis  hospitis,  uxor,  agas." 
neclegis  absentis,  testor,  mandata  mariti !  305 

cura  tibi  non  est  hospitis  ulla  tui. 
huncine  tu  speras  hominem  sine  pectore  dotes 

posse  satis  formae,  Tyndari,  nosse  tuae  ? 
falleris — ignorat ;  nee,  si  bona  magna  putaret, 

quae  tenet,  externo  crederet  ilia  viro.  310 

ut  te  nee  mea  vox  nee  te  meus  incitet  ardor, 

cogimur  ipsius  commoditate  frui — 
aut  erimus  stulti,  sic  ut  superemus  et  ipsum, 
si  tam  securum  tempus  abibit  iners. 

1  morum    Merk.  :    amorum    P  G  V    Plan.  :    avoruni     s  N 
Hein. 

2  So  Madv. :    esset  et  P  G  V :   esset  ut    G  :  ivit  et    s :  is 
"  sed  et  "  Pa. 

2l8 


THE    HER01DES  XVI 

shame  and  fear  to  violate  your  wedded  love,  and 
to  be  false  to  the  chaste  bonds  of  a  lawful  bed  ?  Ah, 
too  simple — nay,  too  rustic — Helen  !  do  you  think 
that  beauty  of  yours  can  be  free  from  fault  ?  Either 
you  must  change  your  beauty,  or  you  must  needs 
not  be  hard ;  fairness  and  modesty  are  mightily 
at  strife.  Jove's  delight,  and  the  delight  of  Venus, 
are  in  stealthy  sins  like  these  ;  such  stealthy  sins, 
indeed,  gave  you  Jove  for  sire.  If  power  over  char- 
acter be  in  the  seed,  it  scarce  can  be  that  you,  the 
child  of  Jove  and  Leda,  will  remain  chaste.  Be 
chaste,  nevertheless — but  when  my  Troy  shall  hold 
you  ;  and  let  your  guilt,  I  beg,  be  with  me  alone. 
Let  our  sin  now  be  one  the  hour  of  marriage  will 
correct — if  only  what  Venus  promised  me  is  not  in 


vain 


299  But  even  your  husband  presses  you  on  to  this — 
by  deed,  if  not  by  word.  That  his  guest  may  find  no 
bar  to  theft,  he  absents  himself.  He  could  find 
no  time  more  suited  for  him  to  see  the  realms 
of  Crete — O  husband  marvellously  shrewd !  "  I 
enjoin  upon  you  in  my  stead  the  care  of  my  affairs, 
and  of  our  guest  from  Ida,"  he  said,  making  ready 
to  depart.  I  call  you  to  witness ;  you  neglect  the 
injunction  of  your  absent  lord  ;  you  are  not  caring 
for  your  guest  at  all.  Do  you  hope,  Tyndaris,  that 
so  senseless  a  man  as  this  can  know  well  the  riches 
of  your  beauty?  You  are  deceived — he  does  not 
know ;  if  he  thought  great  the  possessions  that  he 
holds,  he  would  not  entrust  them  to  an  outlander. 
Though  neither  my  words  should  move  you,  nor  my 
ardour,  I  am  driven  to  take  the  advantage  he  himself 
gives — or  I  shall  be  foolish,  even  to  surpassing  him,  if 
I  let  so  safe  a  time  go  idly  by.     Almost  with  his  own 

219 


OVID 

paene  suis  ad  te  manibus  deducit  amantem  ;  315 

utere  mandatis  simplicitate  viri ! 
Sola  iaces  viduo  tarn  longa  nocte  cubili  ; 

in  viduo  iaceo  solus  et  ipse  toro. 
te  mihi  nieque  tibi  eommunia  gaudia  iungant  ; 

candidior  medio  nox  erit  ilia  die.  320 

tunc  ego  iurabo  quaevis  tibi  nuniina  meque 

adstringam  verbis  in  sacra  vestra  1  meis  ; 
tunc  ego,  si  non  est  fallax  fiducia  nostra, 

efficiam  praesens,  ut  mea  regna  petas. 
si  pudet  et  metuis  ne  me  videare  secuta,  325 

ipse  reus  sine  te  criminis  huius  ero  ; 
nam  sequar  Aegidae  factum  fratrumque  tuorum. 

exemplo  tangi  non  propiore  potes. 
te  rapuit  Theseus,  geminas  Leucippidas  illi ; 

quartus  in  exemplis  adnumerabor  ego.  330 

Troia  classis  adest  armis  instructa  virisque  ; 

iam  facient  celeres  remus  et  aura  vias. 
ibis  Dardanias  ingens  regina  per  urbes, 

teque  novam  credet  vulgus  adesse  deam, 
quaque  feres  gressus,  adolebunt  cinnama  flammae,  335 

caesaque  sanguineam  victima  planget  humum. 
dona  pater  fratresque  et  cum  genetrice  sorores 

Iliadesque  omnes  totaque  Troia  dabit. 
ei  mihi  !  pars  a  me  vix  dicitur  ulla  futuri. 

plura  feres,  quam  quae  littera  nostra  refert.        340 
Nee  tu  rapta  time,  ne  nos  fera  bella  sequantur, 

concitet  et  vires  Graecia  magna  suas. 

1  So  Pa.:  sacra  iura  u>  :  tua  itira  Ehw. 
220 


THE    HEROIDES    XVI 

hands  he  has  brought  your  lover  to  you  ;  profit  by 
the  behests  of  your  artless  lord  ! 

317  You  lie  alone  through  the  long  night  in  a 
companionless  couch  ;  in  a  companionless  bed  I,  too, 
lie  alone.  Let  mutual  delights  join  you  to  me,  and 
me  to  you  ;  brighter  than  mid  of  clay  will  that  night  be. 
Then  I  will  swear  to  you  by  whatever  gods  you 
choose,  and  bind  myself  by  my  oath  to  observe  the 
rites  of  your  choice  ;  then,  if  confidence  does  not 
beguile  me,  with  a  plea  in  person  I  will  make  you 
wish  to  seek  my  realms.  If  you  feel  shame  and  fear 
lest  you  seem  to  have  followed  me,  I  myself  will 
meet  this  charge  without  you  ;  for  1  will  imitate 
the  deed  of  Aegeus'  son  and  of  your  brothers.  You 
can  be  touched  by  no  examples  nearer  than  these. 
Theseus  stole  you  away,  and  they  the  twin  daughters 
of  Leucippus ;  I  shall  be  counted  fourth  among 
such  examples.  The  Trojan  fleet  is  ready,  equipped 
with  arms  and  men  ;  soon  oar  and  breeze  will  make 
swift  our  way.  Like  a  great  queen  you  will  make 
your  progress  through  the  Dardanian  towns,  and  the 
common  crowd  will  think  a  new  goddess  come  to 
earth  ;  wherever  you  advance  your  steps,  flames 
will  consume  the  cinnamon,  and  the  slain  victim 
will  strike  the  bloody  earth.  My  father  and  my 
brothers  and  my  sisters,  with  their  mother,  and  all 
the  daughters  of  Uion,  and  Troy  entire,  will  bring 
you  gifts.  Ah  me!  I  am  telling  you  scarce  any  part 
of  what  will  be.  You  will  receive  more  than  my 
letter  tells. 

341  And  do  not  fear  lest,  if  you  arc  stolen  away. 
fierce  wai*s  will  follow  after  us,  and  might v  Greece 
will  rouse  her  strength.      Of  so  many  who  have  been 

22  I 


OVID 

tot  prius  abductis  ecqua  est  repetita  per  arma  ? 

crede  mihi,  vanos  res  habet  ista  metus. 
nomine  ceperunt  Aquilonis  Erechthida  Thraces,   345 

et  tuta  a  bello  Bistonis  ora  fuit ; 
Phasida  puppe  nova  vexit  Pagasaeus  Iason, 

laesa  neque  est  Colcha  Thessala  tei'ra  manu. 
te  quoque  qui  rapuit,  i*apuit  Minoida  Theseus  ; 

nulla  tamen  Minos  Cretas  ad  anna  vocat.  350 

terror  in  his  ipso  maior  solet  esse  perielo, 

quaque  timere  libet,  pertimuisse  })udet. 
Finge  tamen,  si  vis,  ingens  consurgere  bellum — 

et  mihi  sunt  vires,  et  mea  tela  noeent. 
nee  minor  est  Asiae  quam  vestrae  eopia  terrae  ;     355 

ilia  viris  dives,  dives  abundat  equis. 
nee  plus  Atrides  animi  Menelaus  habebit 

quam  Paris  aut  armis  anteferendus  erit. 
paene  puer  caesis  abducta  armenta  recepi, 

hostibus  et  causam  nominis  inde  tuli ;  360 

paene  puer  iuvenes  vario  certamine  vici, 

in  quibus  llioneus  Deiphobusque  fuit ; 
neve  putes,  non  me  nisi  eomminus  esse  timendum, 

figitur  in  iusso  nostra  sagitta  loco, 
num  potes  haec  illi  primae  dare  facta  iuventae  ?    365 

instruere  Atriden  num  potes  arte  mea  ? 
omnia  si  dederis,  numquid  dabis  Hectora  fratrem  ? 

unus  is  innumeri  militis  instar  erit ! 
quid  valeam  nescis,  et  te  mea  robora  fallunt ; 

ignoras,  cui  sis  nupta  futura  viro.  370 

a  Alexandras,  protector  of  men  (the  shepherds). 


THE    HEROIUES   XVI 

taken  away  before,  tell  me,  has  any  one  ever  been 
sought  back  by  arms  ?  Believe  me,  that  fear  of 
yours  is  vain.  In  the  name  of  Aquilo  the  Thraeians 
took  eaptive  Erechtheus'  child,  and  the  Bistonian 
shore  was  safe  from  war ;  Pegasaean  Jason  in  his 
new  craft  carried  away  the  Phasian  maid,  and  the 
land  of  Thessaly  was  never  harmed  by  Colchian 
band.  Theseus,  too,  he  who  stole  you,  stole  Minos' 
daughter;  yet  Minos  called  the  Cretans  ne'er  to  arms. 
The  terror  in  things  like  these  is  wont  to  be  greater 
than  the  danger  itself,  and  where  'tis  our  humour 
to  fear,  we  shame  to  have  feared  too  much. 

353  Imagine  none  the  less,  if  you  wish,  that  a  great 
war  is  set  on  foot — I,  too,  have  power,  and  my 
weapons,  too,  are  deadly.  Nor  is  the  resource  of 
Asia  less  than  that  of  your  land  ;  in  men  is  that 
country  rich,  and  richly  abounds  in  horses.  Nor 
will  Menelaus,  Atreus'  son,  have  spirit  more  than 
Paris,  or  be  esteemed  before  him  in  arms.  While 
yet  almost  a  child,  1  slew  the  enemy  and  got  back 
our  herds,  and  from  the  exploit  received  the  name 
I  bear  a  ;  while  yet  almost  a  child,  I  overcame  young 
men  in  varied  contest,  and  among  them  Ilioneus  and 
Deiphobus  ;  and,  lest  you  think  me  not  to  be  feared 
but  in  the  thick  of  the  fight,  my  arrow  is  fixed  in 
any  spot  you  choose.  Can  you  bespeak  tor  him  such 
deeds  of  first  young  manhood?  can  you  claim  for  the 
son  of  Atreus  skill  like  mine  ?  If  you  should  claim 
for  him  everything,  could  you  give  him  Hector  for  a 
brother?  He  alone  will  have  the  might  of  un- 
numbered warriors  !  My  powers  you  do  not  know, 
and  my  prowess  you  have  never  seen.  You  do  not 
know  the  man  whose  bride  you  are  to  be. 

223 


OVID 

Aut  igitur  nullo  belli  repetere  tumultu, 

aut  cedent  Marti  Dorica  castra  meo. 
nee  tamen  indigner  pro  tanta  sumere  feri'um 

coniuge.      eertamen  praemia  magna  movent, 
tu  quoque,  si  de  te  totus  contenderit  orbis,  375 

nomen  ab  aeterna  posteritate  feres 
spe  modo  non  timida  dis  bine  egressa  secundis  ; 

exige  cum  plena  munera  pacta  fide. 


XVII 

Helene   Paridi 

Nunc  oculos  tua  cum  violarit  epistula  nostros, 

non  rescribendi  gloria  visa  levis. 
ausus  es  hospitii  temeratis,  advena,  sacris 

legitimam  nuptae  sollicitare  fidem  ! 
scilicet  idcirco  ventosa  per  aequora  vectum  5 

excepit  portu  Taenaris  ora  suo, 
nee  tibi,  diversa  quamvis  e  gente  venires, 

oppositas  habuit  regia  nostra  fores, 
esset  ut  officii  merces  iniuria  tanti ! 

qui  sic  intra bas,  hospes  an  hostis  eras  ?  10 

Nee  dubito,  quin  haec,  cum  sit  tarn  iusta,  vocetur 

rustica  iudicio  nostra  querela  tuo. 
rustica  sim  sane,  dum  non  oblita  pudoris, 

dumque  tenor  vitae  sit  sine  labe  meae. 
si  ripn  est  ficto  tristis  mihi  vultus  in  ore,  15 

nee  sedeo  duris  torva  superciliis, 
fama  tamen  clara  est,  et  adbuc  sine  crimine  vixi,1 

et  laudem  de  me  riullus  adulter  habet. 
1  \i.\i  P  <!  w  :  lusi  many  MSS. 
224 


THE    HEROIDES   XVII 

371  Either,  then,  you  will  be  demanded  back  with 
no  tumult  of  war,  or  the  Doric  camp  will  yield 
to  my  soldiery.  Nor  yet  would  I  disdain  to  take 
up  arms  for  such  a  bride.  Great  prizes  stir  great 
strife.  And  you,  besides,  if  the  whole  world  shall 
contend  for  you,  will  attain  to  fame  among  men  for- 
ever more  !  Only,  take  hope,  cast  off  your  fears,  and 
leave  this  place,  for  the  gods  are  with  us ;  exact 
with  full  confidence  the  promised  boon. 


XVII 
Helen  to  Paris 

Now  that  your  letter  has  profaned  my  eyes,  the 
glory  of  writing  no  reply  has  seemed  to  me  but 
slight.  You  have  dared,  stranger,  to  violate  the 
sacred  pledge  of  hospitality,  and  to  tamper  with  the 
faith  of  a  lawful  wife  !  Of  course  it  was  for  this  that 
the  Taenarian  shore  l'eceived  you  into  its  haven 
when  tossed  on  the  windy  tides,  and  that,  come 
though  you  were  from  another  race,  our  royal  home 
did  not  present  closed  doors  to  you — for  this,  that 
wrong  should  be  the  return  for  kindness  so  great  ! 
You  who  so  entered  in,  were  you  guest,  or  were 
you  enemy  ? 

11  I  doubt  not  that,  just  though  it  is,  this  com- 
plaint of  mine  is  called  rustic  in  your  judgment.  Let 
me  by  all  means  be  rustic,  only  so  I  forget  not 
my  honour,  and  the  course  of  my  life  be  free  from 
fault.  If  I  do  not  feign  a  gloomy  countenance,  nor 
sit  with  stern  brows  grimly  bent,  my  good  name  is 
nevertheless  clear,  and  thus  far  I  have  lived  without 
reproach-,  and  no  false  lover  makes    his    boast  of  inc. 

225 


OVID 

quo  magis  admiror,  quae  sit  fiducia  coej)ti, 

spemque  tori  dederit  quae  tibi  causa  mei.  20 

an,  quia  vim  nobis  Neptunius  attulit  heros, 

rapta  semel  videor  bis  quoque  digna  rapi  ? 
crimen  erat  nostrum,  si  delinita  fuissem  ; 

cum  sim  rapta,  meum  quid  nisi  nolle  fuit  ? 
non  tamen  e  facto  fructum  tulit  ille  petitum  ;  25 

excepto  redii  passa  timore  nihil, 
oscula  luctanti  tantummodo  pauca  protervus 

abstulit ;  ulterius  nil  habet  ille  mei. 
quae  tua  nequitia  est,  non  his  contenta  fuisset — 

di  melius  !  similis  non  fuit  ille  tui.  30 

reddidit  intactam,  minuitque  modestia  crimen, 

et  iuvenem  facti  paenituisse  patet  ; 
Thesea  paenituit,  Paris  ut  succederet  illi, 

ne  quando  nomen  non  sit  in  ore  meum  ? 
nee  tamen  irascor — quis  enim  succenset  amanti  ? — 35 

si  modo,  quern  praefers,  non  simulatur  amor, 
hoc  quoque  enim  dubito — non  quod  fiducia  desit, 

aut  mea  sit  facies  non  bene  nota  mihi ; 
sed  quia  credulitas  damno  solet  esse  puellis, 

verbaque  dicuntur  vestra  carere  fide.  40 

At  peccant  aliae,  matronaque  rara  pudica  est. 

quis  prohibet  raris  nomen  inesse  meum  ? 
nam  mea  quod  visa  est  tibi  mater  idonea,  cuius 

exemplo  flecti  me  quoque  posse  putes, 
matris  in  admisso  falsa  sub  imagine  lusae  45 

error  inest ;  pluma  tectus  adulter  erat. 
nil  ego,  si  peccem,  possum  nescisse,  nee  ullus 

error  qui  facti  crimen  obumbret  erit. 

<*  Theseus.  h  Leda  and  the  swan. 

226 


THE   HEROIDES   XVII 

For  this  I  wonder  the  more  what  confidence  inspires 
your  enterprise,  and  what  cause  has  given  you  hope 
to  share  my  couch.  Because  the  Neptunian  hero" 
employed  violence  with  me,  can  it  be  that,  stolen 
once,  I  seem  fit  to  be  stolen,  too,  a  second  time  ? 
The  blame  were  mine,  had  I  been  lured  away  ;  but 
seized,  as  I  was,  what  could  I  do,  more  than  refuse 
my  will  ?  Yet  he  did  not  reap  from  his  deed  the 
fruitage  he  desired  ;  except  my  fright,  I  returned 
with  no  harm.  Kisses  only,  and  few,  the  wanton 
took,  and  those  despite  my  struggles  ;  farther  than 
that,  he  possesses  naught  of  mine.  Such  villainy  as 
yours  would  not  have  been  content  with  this — ye 
gods  do  better  by  me  !  he  was  not  a  man  like  you. 
He  gave  me  back  untouched,  and  moderation 
lessened  his  blame  ;  the  youth  repented  of  his 
deed,  'tis  plain.  Did  Theseus  repent  but  for  Paris 
to  follow  in  his  steps,  lest  my  name  should  sometime 
cease  from  the  lips  of  men  ?  Yet  I  am  not  angered 
— for  who  grows  offended  with  a  lover  ? — if  only 
what  you  profess  is  not  pretended  love.  For  I 
doubt  of  this  too — not  that  I  lack  ground  for  con- 
fidence, or  that  my  beauty  is  not  well  known  to  me  ; 
but  that  quick  belief  is  wont  to  bring  harm  upon  a 
woman,  and  your  words  are  said  to  lack  in  faith. 

41  You  say  that  others  yield  to  sin,  and  the  matron 
is  rare  that  is  chaste.  Who  is  to  keep  my  name 
from  being  among  the  rare  ?  For,  as  to  my  mother's 
seeming  to  you  a  fit  example,  and  your  thinking  vou 
can  turn  me,  too,  by  citing  it,  you  are  mistaken 
there,  since  she  fell  through  being  deceived  by  a 
false  outside  ;  her  lover  was  disguised  by  plumage.6 
For  me,  if  I  should  sin  I  can  plead  ignorance  <>t 
nothing;  there  will  be  no  error  to  obscure  the  crime 

227 

y     1» 


OVID 

ilia  bene  erravit  vitiumque  auetore  redemit. 

felix  in  culpa  quo  love  dicar  ego  ?  50 

Sed  x  genus  et  proavos  et  regia  nomina  iactas. 

clara  satis  domus  haec  nobilitate  sua  est. 
Iuppiter  ut  soceri  proavus  taeeatur  et  omne 

Tantalidae  Pelopis  Tyndareique  decus,2 
dat  mihi  Leda  Iovem  eygno  deeepta  parentem,        55 

quae  falsam  greinio  credula  fovit  avem. 
i  nunc  et  Phrygiae  late  primordia  gentis 

cumque  suo  Priamum  Launiedonte  refer  ! 
quos  ego  suspicio  ;  sed  qui  tibi  gloria  magna  est 

quintuSj  is  a  nostro  nomine  primus  erit.  60 

sceptra  tuae  quamvis  rear  esse  potentia  terrae, 

non  tamen  haec  illis  esse  minora  puto. 
si  iam  divitiis  locus  hie  numeroque  virorum 

vincitur,  at  certe  barbara  terra  tua  est. 
Munera  tanta  quidem  promittit  epistula  dives  65 

ut  possint  ipsas  ilia  movere  deas  ; 
sed  si  iam  vellem  fines  transire  pudoris, 

tu  melior  culpae  causa  futurus  eras, 
aut  ego  perpetuo  famain  sine  labe  tenebo, 

aut  ego  te  potius  quam  tua  dona  sequar  ;  70 

utque  ea  non  sperno,  sic  acceptissima  semper 

munera  sunt,  auctor  quae  pretiosa  facit. 
plus  multo  est,    quod  amas,   quod   sum   tibi   causa 
laboris, 

quod  tarn  per  longas  sj)es  tua  venit  aquas. 

1  sed  Houa.:  quod  r :  ea  P:  et  many  MSS. 
-  decus  P  :  genus  G  V  w. 

228 


THE   HEROIDES   XVII 

of  what  I  do.  Her  error  was  well  made,  and  her 
sin  redeemed  by  its  author.  With  what  Jove  shall  I 
be  called  happy  in  my  fault  ? 

51  But  you  boast  your  birth,  your  ancestry,  and 
your  royal  name.  This  house  of  mine  is  glorious 
enough  with  its  own  nobility.  To  say  naught  of  Jove, 
forefather  of  my  husband's  sire,  and  all  the  glory  of 
Pelops,  Tantalus'  son,  and  of  Tyndareus,  Leda  makes 
Jove  my  father,  deceived  by  the  swan,  false  bird  she 
cherished  in  her  trusting  bosom.  Go  now,  and 
loudly  tell  of  remote  beginnings  of  the  Phrygian 
stock,  and  of  Priam  with  his  Laomedon  !  Them  I 
esteem  ;  but  he  who  is  your  great  glory  and  fifth 
from  you,  you  will  find  is  first  from  our  name." 
Although  I  believe  the  sceptres  of  your  Troy  are 
powerful,  yet  I  think  these  of  ours  not  less  than 
they.  If  indeed  this  place  is  surpassed  in  riches 
and  number  of  men,  yours  at  any  rate  is  a  bar- 
barous land. 

65  Your  letter,  to  be  sure,  promises  gifts  so  great 
they  could  move  the  goddesses  themselves  ;  but, 
were  I  willing  to  overstep  the  limit  of  my  honour, 
yourself  would  have  been  a  better  cause  of  fault. 
Either  I  shall  hold  forever  to  my  stainless  name, 
or  I  shall  follow  you  rather  than  your  gifts  ;  and  if 
I  do  not  scorn  them,  it  is  because  those  gifts  are  ever 
most  welcome  whose  giver  makes  them  precious.  It 
is  much  more  that  you  love  me,  that  I  am  the  cause 
of  your  toils,  that  your  hope  of  me  has  led  you  over 
waters  so  wide. 

"  Helen,  Jove  ;  Paris,  Priam,  Laomedon,  llus,  Tros, 
Erichthonius,  Dardanus,  Jove.  The  usual  pedigree  makes 
Jove  seventh  from  Paris. 

229 


OVID 

Ilia  quoque,   adposita  quae  nunc  facis,  inprobe, 

mensa,  75 

quamvis  experiar  dissimulare,  noto — 
cum  modo  me  spectas  oculis,  lascive,  protervis, 

quos  vix  instantes  lumina  nostra  ferunt, 
et  modo  suspiras,  modo  pocula  proxima  nobis 

sumis,  quaque  bibi,  tu  quoque  parte  bibis.  80 

a,  quotiens  digitis,  quotiens  ego  tecta  notavi 

signa  supercilio  paene  loquente  dari  ! 
et  saepe  extimui  ne  vir  meus  ilia  videret, 

non  satis  occultis  erubuique  notis  ! 
saepe  vel  exiguo  vel  nullo  murmure  dixi :  85 

"  nil  pudet  hunc  .  "  nee  vox  haec  mea  falsa  fuit. 
orbe  quoque  in  mensae  legi  sub  nomine  nostro, 

quod  dedueta  mero  littera  fecit,  amo. 
credere  me  tamen  hoc  oculo  renuente  negavi — 

ei  mihi,  iam  didici  sic  ego  posse  loqui !  90 

his  ego  blanditiis,  si  peccatura  fuissem, 

flecterer  ;  his  poterant  pectora  nostra  capi. 
est  quoque,  eonfiteor,  facies  tibi  rara,  potestque 

velle  sub  amplexus  ire  puella  tuos  ; 
altera  vel  potius  felix  sine  crimine  fiat,  95 

quam  cadat  externo  noster  amore  pudor. 
disce  meo  exemplo  formosis  posse  carere  ; 

est  virtus  placitis  abstinuisse  bonis, 
quam  multos  credis  iuvenes  optare  quod  optas, 

qui  sapiant?  oculos  an  Paris  unus  habes  ?  100 

non  tu  plus  cernis,  sed  plus  temerarius  audes  ; 

nee  tibi  plus  cordis,  sed  minus l  oris,  adest. 
1  minus  PGa> :  magis  s. 

230 


THE   HEROIDES   XVII 

75  What  you  do  now  when  our  board  has  been 
spread,  oh,  shameless  one  !  I  also  note,  though  I 
try  to  feign — when  now  you  look  on  me,  wanton, 
with  those  bold  eyes  which  my  own  can  scarcely 
meet  when  they  assail  me,  and  now  sigh,  and  now 
again  take  up  the  goblet  nearest  me,  and  yourself, 
too,  drink  from  the  part  where  I  have  drunk.  Oh, 
how  often  have  I  noted  the  covert  signals  you  made 
with  your  fingers,  how  often  those  from  your  almost 
speaking  brows  !  And  oft  I  have  been  in  terror  lest 
my  husband  see  it,  and  have  reddened  at  the  signs 
you  did  not  well  conceal.  Oft  in  lowest  murmur,  or, 
rather,  with  no  sound  at  all,  I  have  said  :  "  He  has 
no  shame  for  anything  !  "  and  this  word  of  mine  was 
not  false.  On  the  round  surface  of  the  table,  too,  I 
have  read  beneath  my  name,  which  had  been  writ 
with  the  tracing  of  wine  :  i  love.  I  could  not  believe 
vou,  none  the  less,  and  signified  it  with  my  eyes 
— ah  me,  already  I  have  learned  that  thus  one 
may  speak !  These  are  the  blandishments,  had 
I  been  disposed  to  sin,  by  which  1  could  be  bent ; 
by  these  my  heart  could  be  taken  prisoner.  Your 
beauty,  too,  I  confess,  is  rare,  and  a  woman  might 
well  wish  to  submit  to  your  embrace  ;  but  let 
another  be  happy  without  reproach  rather  than  my 
honour  fall  before  a  stranger's  love.  Learn  from 
my  example  how  to  live  without  the  fair ;  there 
is  virtue  in  abstinence  from  what  delights.  How 
many  youths,  think  you,  desire  what  you  desire, 
and  yet  are  wise  ?  Or  are  you,  Paris,  the  only 
one  with  eyes  ?  You  see  no  more  clearly :  your 
daring  is  only  more  rash  ;  nor  have  you  more  spirit, 
but  less  of  modesty. 


231 


OVID 

Tunc  ego  te  vellem  celeri  venisse  carina, 

cum  mea  virginitas  mille  petita  procis  ; 
si  te  vidissem,  primus  de  mille  fuisses.  105 

iudicio  veniam  vir  dabit  ipse  meo. 
ad  possessa  venis  praeceptaque  gaudia,  serus ; 

spes  tua  lenta  fuit ;  quod  petis,  alter  habet. 
ut  tamen  optarem  fieri  tua  Troica  coniunx, 

invitam  sic  me  nee  Menelaus  habet.  110 

desine  molle,  precor,  verbis  convellere  pectus, 

neve  mihi,  quam  te  dicis  amare,  noce  ; 
sed  sine  quam  tribuit  sortem  fortuna  tueri, 

nee  spolium  nostri  turpe  pudoris  ave  !  ' 
At  Venus  hoc  pacta  est,  et  in  altae  vallibus  Idae  115 

tres  tibi  se  nudas  exhibuere  deae, 
unaque  cum  regnum,  belli  daret  altera  laudem, 

"Tyndaridis  coniunx,"  tertia  dixit,  "  eris  !  " 
credere  vix  equidem  caelestia  corpora  possum 

arbitrio  formam  supposuisse  tuo,  120 

utque  sit  hoc  verum,  certe  pars  altera  ficta  est, 

iudicii  pretium  qua  data  dicor  ego. 
non  est  tanta  mihi  fiducia  corporis,  ut  me 

maxima  teste  dea  dona  fuisse  putem. 
contenta  est  oculis  hominum  mea  forma  probari  ;  1 25 

laudatrix  Venus  est  invidiosa  mihi. 
sed  nihil  infirmo  ;  faveo  quoque  laudibusistis — 

nam  mea  vox  quare,  quod  cupit,  esse  neget  ? 
nee  tu  succense,  nimium  mihi  creditus  aegre  ; 

tarda  solet  magnis  rebus  inesse  fides.  130 

1  ave  Pa.:  habe  MSS. 
232 


THE    HEROIDES   XVII 

103  j  would  the  time  of  your  swift  keel's  coming 
had  been  when  my  maiden  hand  was  sought  by 
a  thousand  suitors  ;  had  I  seen  you,  of  the  thou- 
sand you  would  have  been  the  first.  My  husband 
himself  will  pardon  this  judgment  of  mine.  You 
come  late — to  joys  already  seized  on  and  possessed  ; 
your  hope  has  been  tardy  ;  what  you  seek,  another 
has.  Grant,  none  the  less,  that  I  longed  to  become 
your  bride  at  Troy,  even  so  think  not  Menelaus  holds 
me  against  my  will.  Cease,  I  pray,  to  pluck  with 
your  words  at  my  faltering  heart,  and  do  not  give 
pain  to  her  you  say  you  love  ;  but  allow  me  to  keep 
the  lot  that  fortune  has  given,  and  do  not  covet  to 
my  shame  the  spoil  of  my  honour. 

115  You  say  Venus  gave  her  word  for  this ;  and 
that  in  the  vales  of  Ida  three  goddesses  presented 
themselves  unclad  before  you  ;  and  that  when  one  of 
them  would  give  you  a  throne,  and  the  second  glory 
in  war.  the  third  said  :  "The  daughter  of  Tyndareus 
shall  be  your  bride  !  "  1  can  scarce  believe  that 
heavenly  beings  submitted  their  beauty  to  you 
as  arbiter  :  and,  grant  that  this  is  true,  surely  the 
other  part  of  your  tale  is  fiction,  in  which  1  am  said 
to  have  been  given  you  as  reward  for  your  verdict. 
I  am  not  so  assured  of  my  charms  as  to  think  myself 
the  greatest  gift  in  the  divine  esteem.  My  beauty 
is  content  to  be  approved  in  the  eyes  of  men  ;  the 
praise  of  Venus  would  bring  envy  on  me.  Yet  I 
attempt  no  denial ;  I  am  even  pleased  with  the 
praises  you  report — for  why  should  my  words  deny 
what  I  much  desire  ?  Nor  be  offended  that  I  am 
over  slow  to  believe  in  you  ;  faith  is  wont  to  be  slow 
in  matters  of  great  moment. 


2.33 


OVID 

Prima  mea  est  igitur  Veneri  plaeuisse  voluptas  ; 

proxima,  me  visam  praemia  summa  tibi, 
nee  te  Palladios  nee  te  Iunonis  honores 

auditis  Helenae  praeposuisse  bonis, 
ergo  ego  sum  virtus,  ego  sum  tibi  nobile  regnum!  135 

ferrea  sim,  si  non  hoc  ego  pectus  amem. 
ferrea,  crede  mihi,  non  sum  ;  sed  amare  repugno 

ilium,  quern  fieri  vix  puto  posse  meum. 
quid  bibulum  curvo  proscindere  litus  aratro, 

spemque  sequi  coner  quam  locus  ipse  negat  ?     1 40 
sum  rudis  ad  Veneris  fui'tum,  nullaque  fidelem — 

di  mihi  sunt  testes — lusimus  arte  virum. 
nunc  quoque,  quod  tacito  mando  mea  verba  libello, 

fungitur  officio  littera  nostra  novo, 
felices,  quibus  usus  adest !  ego  nescia  rerum  145 

difficilem  culpae  suspicor  esse  viam. 
Ipse  malo  metus  est  ;  iam  nunc  confundor,  et  omnes 

in  nostris  oculos  vultibus  esse  reor. 
nee  reor  hoe  falso  ;  sensi  mala  murmura  vulgi, 

et  quasdam  voces  rettulit  Aethra  mihi.  150 

at  tu  dissimula,  nisi  si  desistere  mavis  ! 

sed  cur  desistas  ?  dissimulare  potes. 
hide,  sed  occulte  !  maior,  non  maxima,  nobis 

est  data  libertas,  quod  Menelaus  abest. 
ille  quidem  procul  est,  ita  re  cogente,  profectus  ;  155 

magna  fuit  subitae  iustaque  causa  viae — 
aut  mihi  sic  visum  est.      ego,  cum  dubitaret  an  iret, 

"quam  primum,"  dixi,  "  fac  rediturus  eas  !  " 
omine  laetatus  dedit  oseula,  "res  "  que  "  domusque 

et  tibi  sit  curae  Troicus  hospes,"  ait.  160 

234 


THE    HEROIDES    XVII 

131  My  first  pleasure,  then,  is  to  have  found  favour 
in  the  eyes  of  Venus ;  the  next,  that  I  seemed  the 
greatest  prize  to  you,  and  that  you  placed  first  the 
honours  neither  of  Pallas  nor  of  Juno  when  you 
had  heard  of  Helen's  parts.  So,  then,  I  mean 
valour  to  you,  I  mean  a  far-famed  throne  !  I  should 
be  of  iron,  did  I  not  love  such  a  heart.  Of  iron, 
believe  me,  I  am  not ;  but  I  fight  against  my  love 
for  one  who  I  think  can  hardly  become  my  own. 
Why  should  I  essay  with  curved  plough  to  furrow 
the  watery  shore,  and  to  follow  a  hope  which  the 
place  itself  denies  ?  I  am  not  practised  in  the  theft 
of  love,  and  never  yet — the  gods  are  my  witnesses — 
have  I  artfully  made  sport  of  my  lord.  Even  now, 
as  I  entrust  my  words  to  the  voiceless  page,  my 
letter  performs  an  office  all  unwonted.  Happy  they 
who  are  no  novices  !  I,  ignorant  of  the  world,  dream 
that  the  path  of  guilt  is  hard. 

147  My  very  fear  is  a  burden,  I  am  in  confusion  even 
now,  and  think  that  the  eyes  of  all  are  on  my  face. 
Nor  do  I  think  so  groundlessly ;  I  have  caught  the 
evil  murmurs  of  the  crowd,  and  Aethra  has  brought 
back  certain  words  to  me.  But  you — do  you  feign, 
unless  you  choose  rather  to  desist  !  Yet  why  should 
you  desist  ? — you  have  the  power  to  feign.  Keep  on 
with  your  play,  yet  secretly !  Greater,  yet  not  the 
greatest,  freedom  is  given  me  by  Menelaus'  absence. 
He  is  away,  to  be  sure,  on  a  far  journey,  for  so  his 
affairs  compelled  ;  he  had  great  and  just  cause  for 
his  sudden  setting  forth — or  so  it  seemed  to  me. 
'Twas  I,  when  he  was  doubting  whether  to  go,  that 
said  :  "  Go,  but  see  that  you  return  as  soon  as  may 
be  !  "  Glad  at  the  omen,  he  kissed  me,  and,  "Look 
you  to  my  affairs,  and  to  the  household,  and  to  our 

2  35 


OVID 

vix  tenui  risum,  quern  dum  conpescere  luctor, 

nil  illi  potui  dieere  praeter  "  erit." 
Vela  quidem  Creten  ventis  dedit  ille  secundis ; 

sed  tu  non  ideo  cuncta  licere  puta  ! 
sic  meus  hinc  vir  abest  ut  me  custbdiat  absens —  165 

an  nescis  longas  regibus  esse  manus  ? 
fama  quoque  est  oneri ;  nam  quo  constantius  ore 

laudamur  vestro,  iustius  ille  timet, 
quae  iuvat,  ut  nunc  est,  eadem  mibi  gloria  dainno  est, 

et  melius  famae  verba  dedisse  fuit.  170 

nee  quod  abest  hie  me  tecum  mirare  relictam ; 

moribus  et  vitae  credidit  ille  meae. 
de  facie  metuit,  vitae  confidit,  et  ilium 

securum  probitas,  forma  timere  facit. 
Tempora  ne  pereant  ultro  data  praecipis,  utque     175 

simplicis  utamur  commoditate  viri. 
et  libet  et  timeo,  nee  adhuc  exacta  voluntas 

est  satis  ;  in  dubio  pectora  nostra  labant. 
et  vir  abest  nobis,  et  tu  sine  coniuge  dormis, 

inque  vicem  tua  me,  te  mea  forma  capit  ;  180 

et  longae  noctes,  et  iam  sermone  coimus, 

et  tu,  me  miseram  !  blandus,  et  una  domus. 
et  peream,  si  non  invitant  omnia  culpam  ; 

nescio  quo  tardor  sed  tamen  ipsa  metu  ! 
quod  male  persuades, utinam  bene  cogere  posses!  185 

vi  mea  rusticitas  excutienda  fuit. 
236 


THE   HEROIDES   XVII 

guest  from  Troy,"  he  says.  I  scarce  could  hold  my 
laughter  ;  and,  while  I  struggled  to  keep  it  back, 
could  say  to  him  nothing  except  "  I  will." 

168  Yes,  he  has  spread  sail  for  Crete  with  favouring 
winds  ;  but  think  not  for  this  that  everything  may  be  as 
you  choose  !  My  lord  is  away,  but  in  such  wise  that 
he  guards  me,  even  though  away — or  know  you  not 
that  monarchs  have  far-reaching  hands  ?  My  fame, 
too,  is  a  burden  to  me  ;  for,  the  more  you  men  persist 
in  your  praise  of  me,  the  more  justly  does  he  fear. 
The  glory  that  is  my  delight,  just  now  is  a  bane  as 
well,  and  it  were  better  I  had  cheated  fame.  Nor  let 
his  absence  cause  you  to  wonder  that  I  have  been 
left  here  with  you  ;  my  character  and  way  of  life 
have  taught  him  trust.  My  face  makes  him  fearful, 
my  life  makes  him  sure ;  he  feels  secure  in  my 
virtue,  my  charms  rouse  his  fear. 

175  You  ui'ge  on  me  that  opportunity  freely 
offered  should  not  be  wasted,  and  that  we  should 
profit  by  the  obliging  ways  of  a  simple  husband.  1 
both  desire  it  and  I  am  afraid.  So  far  my  will  is  not 
determined  ;  my  heart  is  wavering  in  doubt.  Both 
my  lord  is  away  from  me,  and  you  are  without  com- 
panion for  your  sleep,  and  your  beauty  takes  me, 
and  mine  in  turn  you  ;  the  nights,  too,  are  long, 
and  we  already  come  together  in  speech,  and  you — 
wretched  me  ! — are  persuasive,  and  the  same  roof 
covers  us.  May  I  perish  if  all  things  do  not  invite 
me  to  my  fall  ;  and  yet  some  fear  still  holds  me 
back  !  What  you  basely  urge  on  me,  would  I  hat 
you  could  in  honour  compel  me  to  !  You  should 
have    cast  out    by   force    the   scruples    of  my    rustic 

2  37 


OVID 

utilis  interdum  est  ipsis  iniuria  passis. 

sic  certe  felix  esse  coacta  forem. 
Dum  novus  est,  potius  coepto  pugnemus  amori ! 

flamma  recens  parva  sparsa  resedit  aqua.  190 

certus  in  hospitibus  non  est  amor  ;  errat,  ut  ipsi, 

cumque  nihil  speres  finnius  esse,  fuit. 
Hypsipyle  testis,  testis  Minoia  virgo  est, 

in  non  exhibitis  utraque  lusa  1  toris. 
tu  quoque  dileetam  multos,  infide,  per  annos  195 

diceris  Oenonen  destituisse  tuam. 
nee  tamen  ipse  negas ;  et  nobis  omnia  de  te 

quaerere,  si  nescis,  maxima  eura  fuit. 
adde,  quod,  ut  cupias  eonstans  in  amore  manere, 

non  potes.     expediunt  iam  tua  vela  Phryges  ;    200 
dum  loqueris  mecum,  dum  nox  sperata  paratur, 

qui  ferat  in  patriam,  iam  tibi  ventus  erit. 
cursibus  in  mediis  novitatis  ])lena  relinques 

gaudia  ;  cum  ventis  noster  abibit  amor. 
An  sequar,  ut  suades,  laudataque  Pergama  visam  205 

pronurus  et  magni  Laumedontis  ero  ? 
non  ita  contemno  volucris  praeconia  famae. 

ut  probris  terras  inpleat  ilia  meis. 
quid  de  me  ]>oterit  Sparte,  quid  Achaia  tota, 

quid  gentes  aliae,"2  quid  tua  Troia  loqui  ?  210 

quid  Priamus  de  me,  Priami  quid  sentiet  uxor, 

totque  tui  fratres  Dardanidesque  nurus  ? 
tu  quoque,  qui  poteris  fore  me  sperare  fidelem, 

et  non  exemplis  anxius  esse  tuis  ? 


lusa  s  :  insta  P  V  G  :  questa  Hein. 
aliae  P  s  :  Asiae  many  MSS. 


238 


THE    HEROIDES   XVII 

heart.  Wrong  sometimes  brings  gain  even  to  those 
themselves  who  suffer  it.  In  this  way,  surely  I  could 
have  been  compelled  to  happiness. 

189  While  it  is  new,  let  us  rather  fight  against  the 
love  we  have  begun  to  feel.  A  new-kindled  flame 
dies  down  when  sprinkled  with  but  little  water.  Un- 
certain is  the  love  of  strangers  ;  it  wanders,  like  them- 
selves, and  when  you  expect  nothing  to  be  more  sure, 
'tis  gone.  Hypsipyle  is  witness,  witness  is  the  Minoan 
maid,  both  mocked  in  their  unacknowledged  mar- 
riage-beds. You,  too,  faithless  one,  they  say  have 
abandoned  your  Oenone,  beloved  for  many  years. 
Nor  yet  do  you  yourself  deny  it ;  and,  if  you  do  not 
know,  to  inquire  into  all  concerning  you  has  been 
my  greatest  care.  Besides,  though  you  should  long 
to  remain  constant  in  love,  you  have  not  the  power. 
The  Phrygians  are  even  now  unfurling  your  sails  ; 
while  you  are  speaking  with  me,  while  you  are 
making  ready  for  the  hoped-for  night,  already  the 
wind  to  bear  you  homeward  will  be  here.  In 
their  mid  course  you  will  abandon  joys  yet  full  of 
freshness  ;  away  with  the  winds  will  go  your  love 
of  me. 

205  Or  shall  I  follow  as  you  urge,  and  look  upon 
the  Pergamum  you  praise,  and  be  a  bride  of  the 
grandchild  of  great  Laomedon  ?  I  do  not  so  despise 
the  heraldings  of  the  winged  talk  of  men  that  I 
would  let  it  fill  the  earth  with  my  reproach.  What 
will  Sparta  find  to  say  of  me,  what  all  Achaia,  what 
other  peoples,  what  your  Troy  ?  What  will  Priam 
think  of  me,  what  Priam's  wife,  and  all  your  many 
brothers  and  their  Dardanian  wives  ?  You,  too,  how 
will  you  be  able  to  hope  that  I  shall  keep  faith  and 
not  be  troubled  by  your  oavd  example?     Whatever 

239 


OVID 

quicumque  Iliacos  intra  verit  advena  portus,  215 

is  tibi  solliciti  causa  timoris  erit. 
ipse  mihi  quotiens  iratus  "  adultera !  "  dices, 

oblitus  nostro  crimen  inesse  tuum  ! 
delicti  fies  idem  reprehensor  et  auctor. 

terra,  precor,  vultus  obruat  ante  meos  !  220 

At  fruar  Iliacis  opibus  cultuque  beato, 

donaque  promissis  uberiora  feram  ; 
purpura  nempe  mihi  pretiosaque  texta  dabuntur, 

congestoque  auri  pondere  dives  ero  ! 
da  veniam  fassae — non  sunt  tua  munera  tanti ;       225 

nescio  quo  tellus  me  tenet  ipsa  modo. 
quis  mihi,  si  laedar,  Phrygiis  succurret  in  oris  ? 

unde  petam  fratres,  unde  parentis  opem  ? 
omnia  Medeae  fallax  promisit  Iason — 

pulsa  est  Aesonia  num  minus  ilia  domo  ?  230 

non  erat  Aeetes,  ad  quern  despecta  rediret, 

non  Idyia  parens  Chalciopeque  soror. 
tale  nihil  timeo — sed  nee  Medea  timebat ! 

fallitur  augurio  spes  bona  saepe  suo. 
omnibus  invenies,  quae  nunc  iactantur  in  alto,       235 

navibus  a  portu  lene  fuisse  f return. 
Fax  quoque  me  terret,  quani  se  peperisse  cruentam 

ante  diem  partus  est  tua  visa  parens  ; 
et  vatum  timeo  monitus,  quos  igne  Pelasgo 

Ilion  arsurum  praemonuisse  ferunt.  240 

utque  favet  Cytherea  tibi,  quia  vicit  habetque 

parta  per  arbitrium  bina  tropaea  tuum, 
sic  illas  vereor,  quae,  si  tua  gloria  vera  est, 

iudiee  te  causam  non  tenuere  duae  ; 

240 


THE    HEROIDES    XVII 

stranger  shall  have  entered  the  harbours  of  11  ion 
will  be  the  cause  of  anxious  fears  for  you.  You 
yourself,  how  often  in  anger  will  you  say  to  me  : 
"  Adulteress  !  "  forgetful  that  your  own  reproach  is 
linked  with  mine  !  You  will  be  at  the  same  time 
the  censor  and  the  author  of  my  fault.  Ere  that,  I 
pray,  may  earth  lie  heavy  o'er  my  face  ! 

221  But  you  say  I  shall  enjoy  the  wealth  of  Ilion 
and  a  life  of  all  things  rich,  and  shall  have  gifts  more 
splendid  even  than  your  promise  ;  yes,  purple  and 
precious  webs  will  be  given  me,  and  I  shall  be  rich 
with  heaped-up  weight  of  gold  !  Forgive  me  if  I  say 
it — your  gifts  are  not  worth  so  much  ;  I  know  not 
how,  my  land  itself  still  holds  me  back.  Who  will 
succour  me  on  Phrygian  shores  if  I  meet  with  harm  ? 
Where  shall  I  look  for  brothers,  where  for  a  father's 
aid  ?  All  things  false  Jason  promised  to  Medea 
— was  she  the  less  thrust  forth  from  the  house 
of  Aeson  ?  There  was  no  Aeetes  to  receive  the 
scorned  maid  home,  no  mother  Idyia,  no  sister 
Chalciope.  Naught  like  this  do  I  fear — but  neither 
did  Medea  fear  !  Fair  hope  is  often  deceived  in  its 
own  augury.  For  every  ship  tossed  now  upon  the 
deep,  you  will  find  that  the  sea  was  gentle  as  it  left 
the  harbour. 

237  The  torch,  too,  starts  my  fears — the  bloody 
torch  your  mother  brought  forth  in  vision  before 
the  day  of  her  travail  ;  and  I  shrink  at  the  words  of 
the  seers  who  they  say  forewarned  that  Ilion  would 
burn  with  Pelasgian  fire.  And,  just  as  Cvtluiv.t 
favours  you,  because  she  was  victorious  and  has  a 
twofold  trophy  won  from  the  verdict  you  gave, 
so  I  fear  those  two  that — if  your  boast  be  true — lost 
their  causes  by  your  judging;  and    I   do  not  doubt 

241 


OVID 

nee  dubito,  quin,  te  si  prosequar,  araia  parentur.  245 

ibit  per  gladios,  ei  mihi !  noster  amor. 
an  fera  Centauris  indicere  bella  coegit 

Atracis  Haemonios  Hippodamia  viros — - 
tu  fore  tarn  iusta  lentum  Menelaon  in  ira 

et  geminos  fratres  Tyndareumque  putas  ?  250 

Quod  bene  te  iaetes  et  fortia  facta  loquaris, 

a  verbis  facies  dissidet  ista  tuis. 
apta  magis  Veneri,  quam  sunt  tua  corpora  Marti. 

bella  gerant  fortes,  tu,  Pari,  semper  ama  ! 
Hectora,  quern  laudas,  pro  te  pugnare  iubeto ;       255 

militia  est  operis  altera  digna  tuis. 
his  ego,  si  saperem  pauloque  audacior  essem, 

uterer  ;  utetur,  siqua  puella  sapit — 
aut  ego  deposito  sapiam  fortasse  pudore 

et  dabo  cunctatas  tempore  victa  manus.  260 

Quod  petis,  ut  furtim  praesentes  ista  loquamur, 

scimus,  quid  captes  conloquiumque  voces  ; 
sed  nimium  properas,  et  adhuc  tua  messis  in  herba  est. 

haec  mora  sit  voto  forsan  arnica  tuo. 
Hactenus  ;  arcanum  furtivae  conscia  mentis  265 

littera  iam  lasso  pollice  sistat  opus, 
cetera  per  socias  Clymenen  Aethramque  loquamur, 

quae  mihi  sunt  comites  consiliumque  duae. 


242 


THE    HEROIDES   XVII 

that,  should  I  follow  you,  war  would  he  set  on  foot. 
Through  swords,  ah  me  !  our  love  will  have  to  make 
its  way.  Or  did  Hippodamia  of  Atrax  compel 
Haemonia's  men  to  declare  fierce  war  on  the  Cen- 
taurs— and  do  you  think  that  Menelaus  and  my 
twin  brethren  and  Tyndareus  will  be  slow  to  act  in 
such  righteous  wrath  ? 

251  As  for  your  loifd  vaunting  and  talk  of  brave 
deeds,  that  face  belies  your  words.  Your  parts  are 
better  suited  for  Venus  than  for  Mars.  Be  the 
waging  of  wars  for  the  valiant ;  for  you,  Paris,  ever 
to  love  !  Bid  Hector,  whom  you  praise,  go  warring 
in  your  stead  ;  'tis  the  other  campaigning  befits  your 
prowess.  That  prowess,  were  I  wise  or  something 
bolder,  I  would  employ ;  employed  it  will  be  by 
whatever  maid  is  wise — or  I  perchance,  forgetting 
modesty,  shall  learn  wisdom  and,  overcome  by  time, 
yield  in  tardy  surrender. 

201  You  ask  that  we  speak  of  these  things  in 
secret,  face  to  face.  I  know  what  it  is  you  court, 
and  what  you  mean  by  speech  with  me  ;  but  you 
are  over  hasty,  and  your  harvest  is  still  in  the 
green.  This  delay  perhaps  may  be  friendly  to 
your  wish. 

265  Thus  far  now  ;  let  the  writing  that  shares  the 
secret  of  my  heart  now  stay  its  furtive  task,  for  m}r 
hand  is  wearied.  The  rest  let  us  say  through  my 
companions  Clymene  and  Aethra,  the  two  who  attend 
and  counsel  me. 


243 

K    2 


OVID 

XVIII.. 
Leander  Heroni 

Mittit  Abydenus,  quam  mallet  ferre,  salutem, 

si  cadat  unda  maris,  Sesta  puella,  tibi. 
si  mihi  di  faciles,  si x  sunt  in  amore  secundi, 

invitis  oculis  haec  inea  verba  leges, 
sed  non  sunt  faciles  ;  nam  cur  mea  vota  morantur    5 

currere  me  nota  nee  patiuntur  aqua  ? 
ipsa  vides  caelum  pice  nigrius  et  freta  ventis 

turbida  perque  cavas  vix  adeunda  rates, 
unus,  et  hie  audax,  a  quo  tibi  littera  nostra 

redditur,  e  portu  navita  movit  iter  ;  1 0 

adscensurus  eram,  nisi  quod,  cum  vincula  prorae 

solveret,  in  speculis  omnis  Abydos  erat. 
non  poteram  celare  meos,  velut  ante,  parentes, 

quemque  tegi  volumus,  non  latuisset  amor. 
Protinus  haec  scribens,  "felix,  i,  littera  !  "  dixi,        15 

"  iam  tibi  formosam  porriget  ilia  manum. 
forsitan  admotis  etiam  tangere  labellis, 

rumpere  dum  niveo  vincula  dente  volet." 
talibus  exiguo  dictis  mihi  murmure  verbis, 

cetera  cum  charta  dextra  locuta  mea  est.  20 

at  quanto  mallem,  quam  scriberet,  ilia  nataret, 

meque  per  adsuetas  sedula  ferret  aquas  ! 
aptior  ilia  quidem  plaeido  dare  verbera  ponto  ; 

est  tamen  et  sensus  apta  ministra  mei. 

1  si  Pa.:  et  P :  tibi  G  V :  vel  s  :  ut  s  :  qui  s. 

a  The  story  of  Hero  and  Leander  was  very  popular  from 
the  time  of  Augustus  on,  but  is  not  found  in  Greek 
classical  literature.  Besides  Ovid,  Musaeus,  a  late  (ireek 
(at  least  500  A. D.),  is  the  only  prominent  poet  of  antiquity  to 

244 


THE   HEROIDES    XVIII 

XVIII 
Leander  to  Hero 

He  of  Abydos  sends  to  you,  Maid  of  Sestos,  the 
greetings  he  -would  rather  bring,  if  the  waves  of 
the  sea  should  fall."  If  the  gods  are  kindly  toward 
me,  if  they  favour  me  in  my  love,  you  will  read  with 
unwilling  eve  these  words  of  mine.  But  they  arc- 
not  kindly ;  for  why  do  they  delay  my  vows,  nor 
suffer  me  to  haslre  through  the  well-known  waters  ? 
You  yourself  see  how  the  heavens  are  blacker  than 
pitch,  and  the  straits  turbid  with  winds,  and  how  the 
hollowed  ships  can  scarce  set  sail  upon  them.  One 
seaman  only,  and  he  a  bold  one — he  by  whom  this 
letter  is  brought  to  you — has  put  out  from  the 
harbour ;  1  had  embarked  with  him,  but  that,  as  he 
loosed  the  cables  from  the  prow,  Abydos  all  was 
looking  down  on  him.  I  could  not  evade  my  parents, 
as  before,  and  the  love  we  wish  to  keep  hid  would 
have  come  to  light. 

15  Forthwith  writing  these  words,  "Go,  happy 
letter  !  "  I  said  ;  "soon  she  will  reach  forth  for  thee 
her  beautiful  hand.  Perchance  thou  wilt  even  be 
touched  by  her  approaching  lips  as  she  seeks  to 
break  thy  bands  with  her  snowy  tooth. 'J  Speaking 
such  words  as  these  in  lowest  murmur,  the  rest  I 
let  niv  right  hand  say  upon  the  sheet.  But  ah  !  how 
much  rather  would  I  have  it  swim  than  write,  and 
eagerly  bear  me  through  the  accustomed  waves  !  It 
is  more  fit.  I  grant,  fur  plying  the  stroke  upon  the 
tranquil  deep:   vet  also  apt  minister  of  what  I  feel. 

use  it.     Compare  Byron's  Bride  of  Abydon,  ami   Marlowe's 
Hero  and  Leander. 

245 


OVID 

Septima  nox  agitur,  spatium  mihi  longius  anno,       25 

sollicitum  raucis  ut  mare  fervet  aqnis. 
his  ego  si  vidi  muleentem  pectora  sonmum 

noctibus,  insani  sit  mora  longa  freti  ! 
rupe  sedens  aliqua  specto  tua  litora  tristis 

et,  quo  non  possum  corpore,  mente  feror.  30 

liitnina  quin  etiam  summa  vigilantia  turre 

aut  videt  aut  aeies  nostra  videre  putat. 
ter  mihi  deposita  est  in  sicca  vestis  harena  ; 

ter  grave  temptavi  carpere  nudus  iter — 
obstitit  inceptis  tumidum  iuvenalibus  aequor,  35 

mersit  et  inversis  l  ora  natantis  aquis. 
At  tu,  de  rapidis  inmansuetissime  ventis, 

quid  mecum  certa  proelia  mente  geris  ? 
in  me,  si  nescis,  Borea,  non  aequora,  saevis  ! 

quid  faceres,  esset  ni  tibi  notus  amor  ?  40 

tarn  gelidus   quod    sis,   num   te  tamen,    inprobe, 
quondam 

ignibus  Actaeis  incaluisse  negas  ? 
gaudia  rapturo  siquis  tibi  claudere  vellet 

aerios  aditus,  quo  paterere  modo  ? 
parce,  precor,  facilemque  move  moderatius  auram —  45 

imperet  Hippotades  sic  tibi  triste  nihil  ! 
Vana  peto  ;  jirecibusque  meis  obmurmurat  ipse 

quasque  quatit,  nulla  parte  coercet  aquas, 
nunc  daret  audaces  utinam  mihi  Daedalus  alas — 

Icarium  quamvis  hinc  ])rope  litus  abest !  50 

quidquid  erit,  patiar,  liceat  modo  corjms  in  auras 

tollere,  quod  dubia  saepe  pependit  aqua. 

1  et  inversis  Pa.:  et  ad  inversis  P  :  et  adversisa». 

"  Orithjda  of  Athens.  *  Aeolus. 

246 


THE    HEROIDES    XVIII 

25  It  is  now  the  seventh  night,  space  longer  than  a 
year  to  me,  that  the  troubled  sea  has  been  boiling 
with  hoarse-voiced  waters.  If  in  all  these  nights 
I  have  had  sleep  soothe  my  breast,  may  I  be  long 
kept  from  you  by  the  raging  deep !  Sitting  upon 
some  rock,  I  look  sadly  on  your  shores,  carried  in  my 
thoughts  to  where  in  body  I  cannot  go.  Nay,  my 
vision  even  sees — or  thinks  it  sees — lights  waking  in 
the  topmost  of  your  tower.  Thrice  have  I  laid  down 
my  garments  upon  the  dry  sand  ;  thrice,  naked, 
have  I  tried  to  enter  on  the  heavy  way — the  swollen 
billows  opposed  the  bold  attempts  of  youth,  and  their 
waters,  surging  upon  me  as  I  swam,  rolled  over  my 
head. 

37  But  thou,  most  ungentle  of  the  sweeping  winds, 
why  art  thou  bent  on  waging  war  with  me  ?  It  is 
I,  O  Boreas,  if  thou  dost  not  know,  and  not  the 
waves,  against  whom  thou  ragest  !  What  wouldst 
thou  do,  were  it  not  that  love  is  known  to  thee  ? 
Cold  as  thou  art,  canst  thou  yet  deny,  base  wind 
that  of  yore  thou  wert  aflame  with  Actaean  fires  ? a 
If,  when  eager  to  seek  thy  joys,  someone  were 
to  close  to  thee  the  paths  of  air,  in  what  wise 
wouldst  thou  endure  it  ?  Have  mercy  on  me,  I 
pray  ;  be  mild,  and  stir  a  more  gentle  breeze — so 
may  the  child  of  Hippotes  b  lay  upon  thee  no  harsh 
command  ! 

47  Vain  is  my  petition  ;  my  prayers  are  met  by  his 
murmurings,  and  the  waves  tossed  up  by  him  he 
nowhere  curbs.  Now  would  that  Daedalus  could 
give  me  his  daring  wings — though  the  Icarian 
strand  is  not  far  hence  !  Whatever  might  be  I 
would  endure,  so  I  could  only  raise  into  air  the  body 
that  oft  has  hung  upon  the  dubious  wave. 

247 


OVID 

Interea,  dum  cuncta  negant  ventique  fretumque, 

mente  agito  furti  tempora  prima  mei. 
nox     erat     incipiens — namque     est     meminisse 

voluptas —  55 

cum  foribus  patriis  egrediebar  amans. 
nee  mora,  deposito  pariter  cum  veste  timore 

iactabam  liquido  braechia  lenta  mari. 
luna  fere  tremulum  praebebat  lumen  eunti 

ut  comes  in  nostras  officiosa  vias.  60 

hanc  ego  suspiciens,  "  faveas,  dea  Candida/'  dixi, 

"  et  subeant  animo  Latmia  saxa  tuo  ! 
non  sinit  Endymion  te  pectoris  essfe  severi. 

flecte,  precor,  vultus  ad  mea  furta  tuos  ! 
tu  dea  mortalem  caelo  delapsa  petebas  ;  65 

vera  loqui  lieeat ! — quam  sequor  ipsa1  dea  est. 
neu  referam  mores  caelesti  pectore  dignos, 

forma  nisi  in  veras  non  cadit  ilia  deas. 
a  Veneris  facie  non  est  prior  ulla  tuaque ; 

neve  meis  credas  vocibus,  ipsa  vide  !  70 

quantum,  cum  fulges  radiis  argentea  puris, 

concedunt  flammis  sidera  cuncta  tuis, 
tanto  formosis  formosior  omnibus  ilia  est. 

si  dubitas,  caecum,  Cynthia,  lumen  habes." 
Haec  ego,  vel  certe  non  his  diversa,  locutus  75 

per  mihi  cedentes  nocte  ferebar  aquas, 
unda  repercussae  radiabat  imagine  lunae, 

et  nitor  in  tacita  nocte  diurnus  erat ; 
nullaque  vox  usquam,  nullum  veniebat  ad  aures 

praeter  dimotae  corpore  murmur  aquae.  80 

Alcyones  solae,  memores  Ceycis  amati, 

nescio  quid  visae  sunt  mihi  dulce  queri. 
1  ipse  Pv 
248 


THE    HEROIDES    XVIII 

53  Meantime,  while  wind  and  wave  deny  me  every- 
thing, I  ponder  in  my  heart  the  first  times  I  stole  to 
you.  Night  was  but  just  beginning — for  the  memory 
has  charm  for  me — when  I  left  my  father's  doors  on 
the,  errand  of  love.  Nor  did  I  wait,  but,  flinging 
away  my  garments,  and  with  them  my  fears,  I  struck 
out  with  pliant  arm  upon  the  liquid  deep.  The 
moon  for  the  most  shed  me  a  tremulous  light  as  I 
swam,  like  a  duteous  attendant  watchful  over  my 
path.  Lifting  to  her  my  eyes,  "  Be  gracious  to  me, 
shining  deity,"  I  said,  "and  let  the  rocks  of  Latmos 
rise  in  thy  mind !  Endymion  will  not  have  thee 
austere  of  heart.  Bend,  O  I  pray,  thy  face  to  aid  my 
secret  loves.  Thou,  a  goddess,  didst  glide  from  the 
skies  and  seek  a  mortal  love  ;  ah,  may  it  be  allowed 
me  to  say  the  truth  ! — she  I  seek  is  a  goddess  too. 
To  say  naught  of  virtues  worthy  of  heavenly  breasts, 
beauty  like  hers  falls  to  none  but  the  true  divine. 
After  the  beautiful  face  of  Venus,  and  thine  own, 
there  is  none  before  hers ;  and,  that  thou  mayst 
not  need  to  trust  my  words,  look  thou  thyself!  As 
much  as  all  the  stars  are  less  than  thy  bright  fires 
when  thy  silvery  gleam  goes  forth  with  pure  rays, 
so  much  more  fair  is  she  than  all  the  fair.  If  thou 
dost  doubt  it,  Cynthia,  thy  light  is  blind." 

75  These  words  I  spake,  or  words  at  least  not  differ- 
ing much  from  these,  and  was  borne  along  in  the  night 
through  waters  that  made  way  before  my  stroke. 
The  wave  was  radiant  with  the  image  of  the  reflected 
moon,  and  there  was  a  splendour  as  of  day  in  the  silent 
night;  no  note  came  anywhere  to  my  ears, no  sound  but 
the  murmur  of  the  waters  my  body  thrust  aside.  The 
Halcyons  only,  their  hearts  still  true  to  beloved  Ceyx, 
I  heard  in  what  seemed  to  me  some  sweet  lament. 

249 


OVID 

Iamque  fatigatis  umero  sub  utroque  lacertis 

fortiter  in  summas  erigor  altus  aquas, 
ut  procul  aspexi  lumen,  "meus  ignis  in  illo  est :      85 

ilia  meum,"  dixi,  "  litora  lumen  l  habent !  " 
et  subito  lassis  vires  rediere  lacertis, 

visaque,  quam  fuerat,  mollior  unda  mihi. 
frigora  ne  possim  gelidi  sentire  profundi, 

qui  calet  in  cupido  pectore,  praestat  amor.  90 

quo  magis  accedo  propioraque  litoi'a  fiunt, 

quoque  minus  restat,  plus  libet  ire  mihi. 
cum  vero  possum  cerni  quoque,  protinus  addis 

spectatrix  animos,  ut  valeamque  facis. 
nunc  etiam  nando  dominae  placuisse  laboro,  95 

atque  oculis  iacto  bracchia  nostra  tuis. 
te  tua  vix  prohibet  nutrix  descendere  in  altum — 

hoc  quoque  enim  vidi,  nee  mihi  verba  dabas. 
nee  tamen  effeeit,  quamvis  retinebat  euntem, 

ne  fieret  prima  pes  tuus  udus  aqua.  100 

excipis  amplexu  felieiaque  oscula  iungis — 

oscida,  di  magni,  trans  mare  digna  peti ! — 
eque  tuis  demptos  umeris  mihi  tradis  amictus, 

et  madidam  siccas  aequoris  imbre  comam. 
Cetera  nox  et  nos  et  turris  conscia  novit,  105 

quodque  mihi  lumen  per  vada  monstrat  iter, 
non  magis  illius  numerari  gaudia  noctis 

Hellespontiaci  quam  maris  alga  potest ; 
quo  brevius  spatium  nobis  ad  furta  dabatur, 

hoc  magis  est  cautum,  ne  foret  illud  iners.  110 

Iamque  fugatura  Tithoni  coniuge  noctem 

praevius  Aurorae  Lucifer  ortus  erat ; 

1  lument  P  :  mimen  s. 
250 


THE   HEROIDES    XVIII 

83  And  now  my  arms  grow  tired  below  the  shoulder- 
joint,  and  with  all  my  strength  I  raise  myself  aloft 
on  the  summit  of  the  waters.  Beholding,  far  off, 
a  light,  "  It  is  my  love  shines  in  yonder  flame," 
I  cried  ;  "  it  is  my  light  yon  shores  contain  !  "  And 
straight  the  strength  came  back  to  my  wearied  arms, 
and  the  wave  seemed  easier  to  me  than  before.  To 
keep  me  from  the  chill  of  the  cold  deep,  love  lends 
his  aid,  hot  in  my  eager  breast.  The  nearer  I 
approach,  and  the  nearer  draw  the  shores,  and  the 
less  of  the  way  remains,  the  greater  my  joy  to 
hasten  on.  When  in  truth  I  can  be  seen  as  well  as 
see,  by  your  glance  you  straightway  give  me  heart, 
and  make  me  strong.  Now,  too,  I  strain  in  my 
course  to  pleasure  my  lady,  and  toss  my  arms  in  the 
stroke  for  you  to  see.  Your  nurse  can  scarce 
stay  you  from  rushing  down  into  the  tide — for  I 
saw  this,  too,  and  you  did  not  cheat  my  eye.  Yet, 
though  she  held  you  as  you  went,  she  could  not  keep 
you  from  wetting  your  foot  at  the  water's  edge.  You 
welcome  me  with  your  embrace,  share  happy  kisses 
with  me — kisses,  O  ye  great  gods,  worth  seeking 
across  the  deep  ! — and  from  your  own  shoulders  you 
strip  the  robes  to  give  them  oyer  to  me,  and  dry  my 
hair  all  dripping  with  the  rain  of  the  sea. 

105  por  £]ie  resj- — night  knows  of  that,  and  our- 
selves, and  the  tower  that  shares  our  secret,  and  the 
light  that  guides  me  on  my  passage  through  the 
floods.  The  joys  of  that  dear  night  may  no  more  be 
numbered  than  the  weeds  of  the  Hellespontic  sea  ; 
the  briefer  the  space  that  was  ours  for  the  theft  of 
love,  the  more  we  made  sure  it  should  not  idly  pass. 

111  And  now  Aurora,  the  bride  of  Tithonus,  was 
making  ready  to  chase  the  night  away,  and   Lucifer 

251 


OVID 

oscula  congerimus  properata  sine  ordine  raptim 

et  querimur  parvas  noctibus  esse  moras, 
atque  ita  cunetatus  monitu  nutricis  amaro  115 

frigida  deserta  litora  turre  peto. 
digredimur  flentes,  repetoque  ego  virginis  aequor 

respiciens  dominam,  dum  licet,  usque  raeam. 
siqua  fides  vero  est,  veniens  hine  1  esse  natator, 

cum  redeo,  videor  naufragus  esse  mihi.  120 

hoc  quoque,  si  credes  :  2  ad  te  via  prona  videtur  ; 

a  te  cum  redeo,  clivus  inertis  aquae, 
invitus  repeto  patriam — quis  credere  possit  ? 

invitus  certe  nunc  moror  urbe  mea. 
Ei  mihi !  cur  animis  iuncti  secernimur  undis,  125 

unaque  mens,  tellus  non  habet  una  duos  ? 
vel  tua  me  Sestus,  vel  te  mea  sumat  Abydos  ; 

tarn  tua  terra  mihi,  quam  tibi  nostra  placet, 
cur  ego  confundor,  quotiens  confunditur  aequor  ? 

cur  mihi  causa  levis,  ventus,  obesse  potest  ?        130 
iam  nostros  curvi  norunt  delphines  amores, 

ignotum  nee  me  piscibus  esse  reor. 
iam  patet  attritus  solitarum  limes  aquarum, 

non  aliter  multa  quam  via  pressa  rota, 
quod  mihi  non  esset  nisi  sic  iter,  ante  querebar  ;   135 

at  nunc  per  ventos  hoc  quoque  deesse  queror. 
fluctibus  inmodicis  Athamantidos  aequora  canent, 

vixque  manet  portu  tuta  carina  suo  ; 
hoc  mare,  cum  primum  de  virgine  nomina  mersa, 

quae  tenet,  est  nanctum,  tale  fuisse  puto.  140 

et  satis  amissa  locus  hie  infamis  ab  Helle  est, 

utque  mihi  parcat,  nomine  crimen  habet. 

1  hinc  Ehw. :  hue  MSS. 

"  credes  Pa.:  credis  P &>  Plan.:  credas  s. 

«  Helle. 
252 


THE   HER01DES   XVIII 

had  risen,  forerunner  of  the  dawn ;  in  haste  we  ply 
our  kisses,  all  disorderly,  complaining  that  the  night 
allows  brief  lingering.  So,  tarrying  till  the  nurse's 
bitter  warnings  bid  me  go,  I  leave  the  tower  and 
make  for  the  chilly  shore.  We  part  in  tears,  and  I 
return  to  the  Maiden's  sea,"  looking  ever  back  to  my 
lady  while  I  can.  Believe  me,  it  is  true :  going 
hence,  I  seem  a  swimmer,  but,  when  I  return,  a 
shipwrecked  man.  This  too,  is  true,  will  you  but 
believe  :  toward  you,  my  way  seems  ever  inclined  ; 
away  from  you,  when  I  return,  it  seems  a  steep 
of  lifeless  water.  Against  the  wish  of  my  heart 
I  regain  my  own  land — who  could  believe  ?  Against 
the  wish  of  my  heart  I  tarry  now  in  my  own  town. 

125  Ah  me !  why  are  we  joined  in  soul  and 
parted  by  the  wave  ;  two  beings  of  one  mind,  but 
not  of  one  land  ?  Either  let  your  Sestos  take  me,  or 
my  Abydos  you ;  your  land  is  as  dear  to  me  as  mine 
is  dear  to  you.  Why  must  my  heart  be  troubled  as 
oft  as  the  sea  is  troubled  ?  Why  must  the  wind, 
slight  cause,  have  power  to  hinder  me  ?  Already  the 
curving  dolphins  have  learned  our  loves,  and  I  think 
the  very  fishes  know  me.  Already  my  accustomed 
path  through  the  waters  is  well  trod,  like  to  the  road 
pressed  on  by  many  a  wheel.  That  there  was  no 
other  way  open  than  this  was  my  complaint  before  ; 
but  now,  because  of  the  winds,  I  complain  that  this 
way,  too,  has  failed.  The  sea  of  Athamas'  child  is 
foaming  white  with  immense  billows,  and  scarcely 
safe  is  the  keel  that  remains  in  its  own  harbour ; 
such  were  these  waters,  I  judge,  when  first  they  got 
from  the  drowned  maid  the  name  they  bear.  This 
place  is  of  evil  fame  enough  for  the  loss  of  Helle, 
and,  though  it  spare  me,  its  name  reproaches  it. 

253 


OVID 

Invideo  Phrixo,  quern  per  freta  tristia  tutum 

aurea  lanigero  vellere  vexit  ovis  ; 
nee  tamen  officium  pecoris  navisve  requiro,    '  145 

dummodo,  quas  findani  corpore,  dentur  aquae, 
arte  egeo  nulla  ;  fiat  modo  copia  nandi, 

idem  navigium,  navita,  vector  ero  ! 
nee  sequor  aut  Helicen,   aut,  qua  Tyros   utitur, 
Areton  ; 

publiea  non  curat  sidera  noster  amor.  150 

Andromedan  alius  spectet  claramque  Coronam, 

quaeque  micat  gelido  Parrhasis  Ursa  polo  ; 
at  milii,  quod  Perseus  et  cum  love  Liber  amarunt, 

indicium  dubiae  non  placet  esse  viae. 
est  aliud  lumen,  multo  milii  certius  istis,  155 

non  errat  tenebris  quo  duce  noster  amor  ; 
hoc  ego  dum  spectem,  Colchos  et  in  ultima  Ponti, 

quaque  viam  fecit  Thessala  pinus,  earn, 
et  iuvenem  possim  superare  Palaemona  nando 

miraque  quern  subito  reddidit  herba  deum.         160 
Saepe  per  adsiduos  languent  mea  bracchia  motus, 

vixque  per  inmerisas  fessa  trahuntur  aquas, 
his  ego  cum  dixi :  "  pretium  non  vile  laboris, 

iam  dominae  vobis  colla  tenenda  dabo," 
protinus  ilia  valent,  atque  ad  sua  praemia  ten- 

dunt,  165 

ut  celer  Eleo  carcere  missus  equus. 
ipse  meos  igitur  servo,  quibus  uror,  amores 

teque,  magis  caelo  digna  puella,  sequor. 
digna  quidem  caelo  es — sed  adhuc  tellure  morare, 

aut  die,  ad  superos  et  mihi  qua  sit  iter  !  170 

a  Glaucus,    the  fisherman   who  ate   of  a  curious  grass  in 
which  fish  were  swimming  as  if  in  water  :  Met.  xiii.  905  tf. 
6  At  Olympia. 

•254 


THE    HEROIDES   XVIII 

143  I  envy  Phrixus,  whom  the  ram  with  gold  in  its 
woolly  fleece  bore  safely  over  the  stormy  seas  ;  yet  I 
ask  not  the  office  of  ram  or  ship,  if  only  I  may 
have  the  waters  to  cleave  with  my  body.  I  need  no 
art ;  so  only  I  am  allowed  to  swim,  I  will  be  at  once 
ship,  seaman,  passenger  !  I  guide  myself  neither  by 
H  el  ice,  nor  by  Arctos,  the  leading-star  of  Tyre  ;  my 
love  will  none  of  the  stars  in  common  use.  Let 
another  fix  his  eyes  on  Andromeda  and  the  bright 
Crown,  and  upon  the  Parrhasian  Bear  that  gleams  in 
the  frozen  pole  ;  but  for  me,  I  care  not  for  the  loves 
of  Perseus,  and  of  Liber  and  Jove,  to  point  me  on  my 
dubious  way.  There  is  another  light,  far  surer  for 
me  than  those,  and  when  it  leads  me  through  the 
dark  my  love  leaves  not  its  course ;  while  my 
eyes  are  fixed  on  this,  I  could  go  to  Colchis  or  the 
farthest  bounds  of  Pontus,  and  where  the  ship  of 
Thessalian  pine  held  on  its  course  ;  and  I  coidd 
surpass  the  young  Palaemon  in  my  swimming,  and 
him  whom  the  wondrous  herb  made  suddenly  a 
god." 

101  Often  my  arms  grow  heavy  from  the  unceasing 
stroke,  and  scarce  can  drag  their  weary  way  through 
the  endless  floods.  When  I  say  to  them :  "  No 
slight  reward  for  toil  shall  be  yours,  for  soon  you 
shall  have  my  lady's  neck  to  hang  about,"  forthwith 
they  take  on  strength,  and  stretch  forward  to  the 
winning  of  their  prize,  like  the  swift  steed  let  go 
from  the  Elean  starting-chamber.''  And  so  I  myself 
keep  eyes  on  the  love  that  burns  me,  and  guide 
myself  by  you,  maid  worthy  rather  of  the  skits. 
For  worthy  of  the  skies  you  are  — yet  tarry  still 
on  earth,  or  tell  me  where  I  also  may  find  a  way 
to    the     gods     above !       You     are     lure,     yet     your 

255 


OVID 

hie  es,  et  exigue  misero  contingis  amanti, 

cumque  mea  fiunt  turbida  mente  freta. 
quid  mihi,  quod  lato  non  separor  aequore,  prodest  ? 

mini  minus  haec  nobis  tani  brevis  obstat  aqua  ? 
an1  malim,  dubito,  toto  procul  orbe  remotus  170 

cum  domina  longe  spem  quoque  habere  meam. 
quo  propius  nunc  es,  flamma  propiore  calesco, 

et  res  non  semper,  spes  mihi  semper  adest. 
paene  maim  quod  arao,  tanta  est  vicinia,  tango ; 

saepe    sed,    heu,    laerimas    hoc  mihi  "paene" 
movet !  180 

velle  quid  est  aliud  fugientia  prendere  poma 

spemque  suo  refugi  fluminis  ore  sequi  ? 
Ergo  ego  te  numquam,  nisi  cum  volet  unda,  tenebo, 

et  me  felicem  nulla  videbit  hiemps, 
cumque  minus  finnum  nil  sit  quam  ventus  et  unda,  185 

in  ventis  et  aqua  spes  mea  semper  erit  ? 
aestus  adhuc  tamen  est.     quid,   cum   mihi  laeserit 
aequor 

Plias  et  Arctophvlax  Oleniumque  pecus  ? 
aut  ego  non  novi,  quam  sim  temerarius,  aut  me 

in  freta  non  cautus  turn  quoque  mittet  amor ;     1 90 
neve  putes  id  2  me,  quod  abest,  promittere,  tempus, 

pignora  polliciti  non  tibi  tarda  dabo. 
sit  tumidum  paucis  etiamnunc  noctibus  aequor, 

ire  per  invitas  exj)eriemur  aquas  ; 
aut  mihi  continget  felix  audacia  salvo,  195 

aut  mors  solliciti  finis  amoris  erit ! 
optabo  tamen  ut  partis  expellar  in  illas, 

et  teneant  portus  naufraga  membra  tuos  ; 
flebis  enim  tactuque  meum  dignabere  corpus 

et  "mortis,"  dices,  "huic  ego  causa  fui !  "  200 

1  ans:  nuni  PGm.  2  in  Dilthey  Ehw. 

a  Tantalus. 
256 


THE   HEROIDES   XVIII 

wretched  lover  has  but  small  part  in  you,  and  when 
the  sea  grows  turbid  my  heart  is  turbid,  too.  Of 
what  avail  to  me  that  the  billows  are  not  broad  that 
sunder  us  ?  Is  this  brief  span  of  waters  less  an 
obstacle  to  me  ?  I  almost  would  that  I  were  distant 
from  you  the  whole  world,  so  that  my  hopes  were 
far  removed,  together  with  my  lady.  Now,  the 
nearer  you  are,  the  nearer  is  the  flame  that  kindles 
me,  and  hope  is  always  with  me,  not  ahvays  she 
I  hope  for.  I  can  almost  touch  her  with  my  hand, 
so  near  is  she  I  love;  but  oft,  alas!  this  "almost" 
starts  my  tears.  What  else  than  this  was  the  catch- 
ing at  elusive  fruits,  and  pursuing  with  the  lips  the 
hope  of  a  retreating  stream  ?  a 

183  Am  I,  then,  never  to  embrace  you  except  when 
the  wave  so  wills,  and  shall  no  tempest  see  me 
happy  ?  and,  though  nothing  is  less  certain  than  the 
wind  and  wave,  must  winds  and  water  ever  be  my 
hope  ?  And  yet  it  still  is  summer.  What  when  the 
seas  have  been  assailed  by  the  Pleiad,  and  the  guardian 
of  the  Bear,  and  the  Goat  of  Olenos  ?  Either  I 
know  not  how  rash  I  am,  or  even  then  a  love  not 
cautious  will  send  me  forth  on  the  deep.  And,  lest 
you  deem  I  promise  this  because  the  time  is  not 
yet  come,  I  will  give  you  no  tardy  pledge  of  what 
I  promise.  Let  the  sea  be  swollen  still  for  these 
few  nights,  and  I  shall  essay  to  cross  despite  the 
waves  ;  either  happy  daring  shall  leave  me  safe, 
or  death  shall  be  the  end  of  my  anxious  love  !  Yet 
I  shall  pray  to  be  cast  up  on  yonder  shores,  and  that 
my  shipwrecked  limbs  may  come  into  your  haven  : 
for  you  will  weep  over  me,  and  not  disdain  to  touch 
my  body,  and  you  will  say  :  "  Of  the  death  he  met, 
I  was  the  cause  !  " 

257 


OVID 

Scilicet  interitus  offenderis  omine  nostri, 

litteraque  invisa  est  hac  mea  parte  tibi. 
desino — parce  queri !  sed  ut  et  mare  finiat  iratn, 

accedant,  quae  so,  fac  tua  vota  meis. 
pace  brevi  nobis  opus  est,  dum  transferor  isto  ;       205 

cum  tua  contigero  litora,  perstet  hiemps ! 
istic  est  aptum  nostrae  navale  carinae, 

et  melius  nulla  stat  mea  puppis  aqua, 
illic  me  claudat  Boreas,  ubi  dulce  morari  est ! 

tunc  piger  ad  nandum,  tunc  ego  cautus  ero,       210 
nee  faciam  surdis  convicia  fluctibus  ulla 

triste  nataturo  nee  querar  esse  fretum. 
me  pariter  venti  teneant  tenerique  lacerti, 

per  causas  istic  inpediarque  duas  ! 
Cum  patietur  hiemps,  remis  ego  corporis  utar ;       215 

lumen  in  adspectu  tu  modo  semper  habe  ! 
interea  pro  me  pernoctet  epistula  tecum, 

quam  precor  ut  minima  prosequar  ipse  mora  ! 


XIX 

Hero  Leandro 

Quam  mihi  misisti  verbis,  Leandre,  salutem 

ut  possim  missam  rebus  habere,  veni ! 
longa  mora  est  nobis  onmis,  quae  gaudia  differt. 

da  veniam  fassae  ;  non  patienter  amo  ! 
urimur  igne  pari,  sed  sum  tibi  viribus  inpar : 

fortius  ingenium  suspicor  esse  viris. 
ut  corpus,  teneris  ita  m.ens  inrirma  puellis — 

deficiam,  parvi  temporis  adde  moram  ! 

258 


THE   HEROIDES   XIX 

201  You  are  hurt,  no  doubt,  by  this  omen  of  my 
death,  and  my  letter  in  this  part  stirs  your  displeasure. 
I  cease — no  more  complain  ;  but,  that  the  sea,  too, 
may  end  its  anger,  add,  I  beseech,  your  prayers  to 
mine.  I  need  a  brief  space  of  calm  until  I  ei'oss  to 
you  ;  when  I  shall  have  touched  your  shore,  let  the 
storm  rage  on  !  Yonder  with  you  is  an  apt  ship-yard 
for  my  keel,  and  in  no  waters  rests  my  bark  more 
safe.  There  let  Boreas  shut  me  in,  where  tarry- 
ing is  sweet  !  Then  will  I  be  slow  to  swim,  then 
will  I  be  ware,  nor  cast"  revilement  on  the  unhear- 
ing  floods  again,  nor  complain  that  the  sea  is  rough 
when  I  fain  would  swim.  Let  me  be  stayed  alike 
by  the  winds  and  your  tender  arms,  and  let  there  be 
double  cause  to  keep  me  there  ! 

215  When  the  storm  permits,  I  shall  make  use  of 
the  oarage  of  my  arms ;  do  you  only  keep  ever  the 
beacon-light  where  I  shall  see !  Meanwhile,  my 
letter  in  my  stead  be  with  you  throughout  the  night. 
I  pray  to  follow  it  myself  with  least  delay  ! 


XIX 

Hero  to  Leander 

That  I  may  enjoy  in  very  truth  the  greeting  you 
have  sent  in  words,  Leander,  O  come !  Long  to 
me  is  all  delay  that  defers  our  joys .  Forgive  me 
what  I  say — I  cannot  be  patient  for  love  !  We  burn 
with  equal  fires,  but  I  am  not  equal  to  you  in 
strength  ;  men,  methinks,  must  have  stronger  natures. 
As  the  body,  so  is  the  soul  of  tender  women  frail — 
delay  but  a  little  longer,  and  I  shall  die  ! 

259 
s  2 


OVID 

Vos  modo  venando,  modo  rus  geniale  colendo 

ponitis  in  varia  tempora  longa  mora.  10 

ant  fora  vos  retinent  ant  unctae  dona  1  palaestrae, 

Hectitis  ant  freno  colla  seqnacis  equi  ; 
nunc  volucrem  laqueo,  nunc  piscem  ducitis  hamo ; 

diluitur  posito  serior  hora  mero. 
his  mihi  summotae,  vel  si  minus  acriter  urar,  15 

quod  faciarn,  superest  praeter  amare  nihil, 
quod  superest  facio,  teque,  o  mea  sola  voluptas, 

plus  quoque,  quam  reddi  quod  mihi  possit,  amo  ! 
aut  ego  cum  cara  de  te  nutrice  susurro, 

quaeque  tuum,  miror,  causa  moretur  iter ;  20 

aut  mare  prospiciens  odioso  concita  vento 

compio  verbis  aequora  paene  tuis  ; 
aut,  ubi  saevitiae  paulum  gravis  unda  remisit, 

posse  quidem,  sed  te  nolle  venire,  queror ; 
dumque    queror    lacrimae    per     amantia     lumina 
manant,  25 

pollice  quas  tremulo  conscia  siccat  anus, 
saepe  tui  specto  si  sint  in  litore  passus, 

inpositas  tamquam  servet  harena  notas  ; 
utque  rogem  de  te  et  scribam  tibi,  siquis  Abvdo 

venerit,  aut,  quaero,  siquis  Abydon  eat.  30 

quid  referam,  quotiens  dem  vestibus  oscula,  quas  tu 

Hellespontiaca  ponis  iturus  aqua  ? 
Sic  ubi  lux  acta  est  et  noctis  amicior  hora 

exhibuit  pulso  sidera  clara  die, 
protinus  in  summo  vigilantia  lumina  tecto  35 

ponimus,  adsuetae  signa  notamque  viae, 
1  mane  Bent. 
260 


THE   HEROIDES   XIX 

9  You  men,  now  in  the  chase,  and  now  husband- 
ing the  genial  acres  of  the  country,  consume  long 
hours  in  the  varied  tasks  that  keep  you.  Either 
the  market-place  holds  you,  or  the  sports  of  the 
supple  wrestling-ground,  or  you  turn  with  bit  the 
neck  of  the  responsive  steed  ;  now  you  take  the  bird 
with  the  snare,  now  the  fish  with  the  hook  ;  and  the 
later  hours  you  while  away  with  the  wine  before  you. 
For  me  who  am  denied  these  things,  even  were  I  less 
fiercely  aflame,  there  is  nothing  left  to  do  but  love. 
What  there  is  left,  1  do  ;  and  you,  O  sole  delight  of 
mine,  I  love  with  even  greater  love  than  could  be 
returned  to  me  !  Either  with  my  dear  nurse  I 
whisper  of  you,  and  marvel  what  can  keep  you  from 
your  way  ;  or,  looking  forth  upon  the  sea,  I  chide 
the  billows  stirred  by  the  hateful  wind,  in  words 
almost  your  own  ;  or,  when  the  heavy  wave  has  a 
little  laid  aside  its  fierce  mood.  I  complain  that  you 
indeed  could  come,  but  will  not ;  and  while  I  com- 
plain tears  coui'se  from  the  eyes  that  love  you,  and 
the  ancient  dame  who  shares  my  secret  dries  them 
with  tremulous  hand.  Often  I  look  to  see  whether 
your  footprints  are  on  the  shore,  as  if  the  sand  would 
keep  the  marks  impressed  on  it ;  and,  that  I  may 
inquire  about  you,  and  write  to  you,  I  still  am 
asking  if  anyone  has  come  from  Abydos,  or  if  anyone 
is  going  to  Abydos.  Why  tell  how  many  times  I 
kiss  the  garments  you  lav  aside  when  making  ready 
to  stem  the  waters  of  the  Hellespont  ? 

33  Thus,  when  the  light  is  done  and  night's 
more  friendly  hour  has  driven  out  day  and  set  forth 
the  gleaming  stars,  straightway  I  place  in  t lu- 
highest  of  our  abode  my  Watchful  lamps,  the  signals 
to  guide  you  on  the  accustomed  way.      Then,  draw- 

261 


OVID 

tortaque  versato  ducentes  stamina  fuso 

feminea  tardas  fallimus  arte  moras. 
Quid  loquar  interea  tarn  longo  tempore,  quaeris  ? 

nil  nisi  Leandri  nomen  in  ore  meo  est.  40 

"  iamne  putas  exisse  domo  mea  gaudia,  nutrix, 

an  vigilant  omnes,  et  timet  ille  sups  ? 
iamne  suas  umeris  ilium  deponere  vestes, 

pallade  iam  pingui  tinguere  membra  putas  ?  " 
adnuit  ilia  fere  ; 1  non  nostra  quod  oseula  curet,       45 

sed  movet  obrepens  somnus  anile  caput, 
postque    morae    minimum    "iam    certe    navigat," 
inquam, 

"  lentaque  dimotis  bracchia  iactat  aquis." 
paucaque  cum  tacta  perfeci  stamina  terra, 

an  medio  possis,  quaerimus,  esse  freto.  50 

et  modo  prospicimus,  timida  modo  voce  precamur, 

ut  tibi  det  faciles  utilis  aui*a  vias  ; 
auribus  incertas  voces  captamus,  et  omnem 

adventus  strepitum  credimus  esse  tui. 
Sic  ubi  deceptae  pars  est  mihi  maxima  noctis  55 

acta,  subit  furtim  lumina  fessa  sopor, 
forsitan  invitus  mecum  tamen,  inprobe,  dormis, 

et,  quamquam  non  vis  ipse  venire,  venis. 
nam  modo  te  videor  prope  iam  spectare  natantem, 

bracchia  nunc  umeris  umida  ferre  meis,  60 

nunc  dare,  quae  soleo,  madidis  velamina  membris, 

pectora  nunc  iuncto  nostra  fovere  sinu 
multaque  praeterea  linguae  reticenda  modestae, 

quae  fecisse  iuvat,  facta  referre  pudet. 
me    miseram !     brevis     est    haec    et     non    vera 
voluptas ;  65 

nam  tu  cum  somno  semper  abire  soles. 
1  fore  P  Vw. 
262 


THE    HEROIDES   XIX 

ing  with  whirling  spindle  the  twisted  thread,  with 
woman's  art  we  beguile  the  slow  hours  of  waiting. 

39  What,  meanwhile,  I  say  through  so  long  a 
time,  you  ask  ?  Naught  but  Leander's  name  is 
on  my  lips.  "  Do  you  think  my  joy  has  already 
come  forth  from  his  home,  my  nurse  ?  or  are  all 
waking,  and  does  he  fear  his  kin  ?  Now  do  you 
think  he  is  putting  off  the  robe  from  his  shoulders, 
and  now  rubbing  the  rich  oil  into  his  limbs  ?"  She 
signs  assent,  most  likely ;  not  that  she  cares  for  my 
kisses,  but  slumber  creeps  upon  her  and  lets  nod  her 
ancient  head.  Then,  after  slightest  pause,  "  Now 
surely  he  is  setting  forth  on  his  voyage,"  I  say,  "  and 
is  parting  the  waters  with  the  stroke  of  his  pliant 
arms."  And  when  I  have  finished  a  few  strands 
and  the  spindle  has  touched  the  ground,  1  ask 
whether  you  can  be  mid  way  of  the  strait.  And 
now  I  look  forth,  and  now  in  timid  tones  I  pray 
that  a  favouring  breeze  will  give  you  an  easy  course  ; 
my  ears  catch  at  uncertain  notes,  and  at  every 
sound  I  am  sure  thaf;  you  have  come. 

55  When  the  greatest  part  of  the  night  has  gone 
by  for  me  in  such  delusions,  sleep  steals  upon  my 
wearied  eyes.  Perhaps,  false  one,  you  yet  pass  the 
night  with  me,  though  against  your  will  ;  perhaps 
you  come,  though  yourself  you  do  not  wish  to  come. 
For  now  I  seem  to  see  you  already  swimming  near, 
and  now  to  feel  your  wet  arms  about  my  neck,  and 
now  to  throw  about  your  dripping  limbs  the  accus- 
tomed coverings,  and  now  to  warm  our  bosoms  in 
the  close  embrace — and  many  things  else  a  modest 
tongue  should  say  naught  of,  whose  memory  delights, 
but  whose  telling  brings  a  blush.  All  me !  brief 
pleasures    these,  and    not    the    truth ;    for    you    are 

263 


OVID 

firmius,  o,  cupidi  tandem  coeamus  amantes, 

nee  careant  vera  gaudia  nostra  fide  ! 
cur  ego  tot  viduas  exegi  frigida  noctes? 

cur  totiens  a  me,  lente  morator,1  abes  ?  70 

est  mare,  eonfiteor,  nondum  tractabile  nanti ; 

nocte  sed  liesterna  lenior  aura  fuit. 
cur  ea  praeterita  est  ?  cur  non  ventura  timebas  ? 

tarn  bona  cur  periit,  nee  tibi  rapta  via  est  ? 
protinus  ut  similis  detur  tibi  copia  cursus,  75 

hoc  melior  certe,  quo  prior,  ilia  fuit. 
At  cito  mutata  est  iactati  forma  profundi. 

tempore,  cum  properas,  saepe  minore  venis. 
hie,  puto,  deprensus  nil,  quod  querereris,  haberes, 

meque  tibi  amplexo  nulla  noceret  hiemps.  80 

eerte  ego  turn  ventos  audirem  laeta  sonantis, 

et  numquam  placidas  esse  precarer  aquas, 
quid  tamen  evenit,  cur  sis  metuentior  undae 

contemptumque  prius  nunc  vereare  fretum  ? 
nam  memini,  cum  te  saevum  veniente  minaxque     85 

non  minus,  aut  multo  non  minus,  aequor  erat  ; 
cum  tibi  clamabam  :  ",  sic  tu  temerarius  esto, 

ne  miserae  virtus  sit  tua  flenda  mihi  !  " 
unde  novus  timor  hie,  quoque  ilia  audacia  fugit  ? 

magnus  ubi  est  spretis  ille  natator  aquis  ?  90 

Sis  tamen  hoc  potius,  quam  quod  prius  esse  solebas, 

et  facias  placidum  per  mare  tutus  iter — : 
dummodo  sis  idem,  dum  sic,  ut  scribis,  amemur, 

flammaque  non  fiat  frigidus  ilia  cinis. 
1  m orator  VP1  s :  natator  co  P?. 
264 


THE    HEROIDES   XIX 

ever  wont  to  go  when  slumber  goes.  O  more  firmly  let 
our  eager  loves  be  knit,  and  our  joys  be  faithful  and 
true !  Why  have  I  passed  so  many  cold  and  lonely 
nights  ?  Why,  O  tardy  loiterer,  are  you  so  often 
away  from  me  ?  The  sea,  I  grant,  is  not  yet  fit  for 
the  swimmer  ;  but  yesternight  the  gale  was  gentler. 
Why  did  you  let  it  pass  ?  Why  did  you  fear  what 
was  not  to  come  ?  Why  did  so  fair  a  night  go 
by  for  naught,  and  you  not  seize  upon  the  way  ? 
Grant  that  like  chance  for  coming  be  given  you 
soon ;  this  chance  was  the  better,  surely,  since  'twas 
the  earlier. 

77  But  swiftly,  you  may  say,  the  face  of  the  storm- 
tossed  deep  was  changed.  Yet  you  often  come  in 
less  time,  when  you  are  in  haste.  Overtaken  here, 
you  would  have,  methinks,  no  reason  to  complain, 
and  while  you  held  me  close  no  storm  would 
harm  you.  I  surely  should  hear  the  sounding  winds 
with  joy,  and  should  pray  for  the  waters  never 
to  be  calm.  But  what  has  come  to  pass,  that  you 
are  grown  more  fearful  of  the  wave,  and  dread  the 
sea  you  before  despised  ?  For  I  call  to  mind  your 
coming  once  when  the  flood  was  not  less  fierce  and 
threatening — or  not  much  less  ;  Avhen  I  cried  to  you  : 
"  Be  ever  rash  with  such  good  fortune,  lest  wretched 
I  may  have  to  weep  for  your  courage  !  "  Whence 
this  new  fear,  and  whither  has  that  boldness  fled  ? 
Where  is  that  mighty  swimmer  who  scorned  the 
waters  ? 

91  But  no,  be  rather  as  you  are  than  as  you  were 
wont  to  be  before  ;  make  your  way  when  the  sea  is 
placid,  and  be  safe — so  you  are  only  the  same,  so  we 
only  love  each  other,  as  you  write,  and  that  flame  of 
ours  turn  not  to  chill  ashes.      I   do  not  fear  so  much 

265 


OVID 

non  ego  tarn  ventos  timeo  mea  vota  morantes,  95 

quam  similis  vento  ne  tuus  erret  amor, 
ne  non  sim  tanti,  superentque  pericula  causam, 

et  videar  merces  esse  labore  minor. 
Interdum  metuo,  patria  ne  laedar  et  inpar 

dicar  Abydeno  Thressa  puella  toro.  100 

ferre  tamen  possum  patientius  omnia,  quam  si 

otia  neseio  qua  paelice  captus  agis, 
in  tua  si  veniunt  alieni  colla  lacerti, 

fitque  novus  nostri  finis  amoris  amor, 
a,  potius  peream,  quam  erimine  vulnerer  isto,        105 

fataque  sint  culpa  nostra  priora  tua ! 
nee,  quia  venturi  dederis  mihi  signa  doloris, 

haec  loquor  aut  fama  sollicitata  nova, 
omnia  sed  vereor — quis  enim  securus  amavit? 

cogit  et  absentes  plura  timere  locus.  110 

felices  illas,  sua  quas  praesentia  nosse 

crimina  vera  iubet,  falsa  timere  vetat ! 
nos  tarn  vana  movet,  quam  facta  iniuria  fallit, 

incitat  et  morsus  error  uterque  pares, 
o  utinam  venias,  aut  ut  ventusve  paterve  115 

causaque  sit  certe  femina  nulla  morae ! 
quodsi  quam  sciero,  moriar,  mihi  ci-ede,  dolendo ; 

iamdudum  pecca,  si  mea  fata  petis  ! 
Sed  neque  peccabis,  frustraque  ego  terreor  istis, 

quoque  minus  venias,  invida  pugnat  hiemps.        120 
me  miseram  !   quanto  planguntur  litora  fluctu, 

et  latet  obscura  condita  nube  dies  ! 

266 


THE    HEROIDES    XIX 

the  winds  that  hinder  my  vows  as  I  fear  that  like 
the  wind  your  love  may  wander — that  I  may  not 
be  worth  it  all,  that  your  perils  may  outweigh  their 
cause,  and  I  seem  a  reward  too  slight  for  your 
toils. 

99  Sometimes  I  fear  my  birthplace  may  injure 
me,  and  I  be  called  no  match,  a  Thracian  maid,  for  a 
husband  from  Abydos.  Yet  could  I  bear  with  greater 
patience  all  things  else  than  have  you  linger  in  the 
bonds  of  some  mistress's  charms,  see  other  arms 
clasped  round  your  neck,  and  a  new  love  end  the 
love  we  bear.  Ah,  may  I  rather  perish  than  be 
wounded  by  such  a  crime,  may  fate  overtake  me 
ere  you  incur  that  guilt  !  I  do  not  say  these 
words  because  you  have  given  sign  that  such  grief 
will  come  to  me,  or  because  some  recent  tale  has 
made  me  anxious,  but  because  I  fear  everything — 
for  who  that  loved  was  ever  free  from  care  ?  The 
fears  of  the  absent,  too,  are  multiplied  by  distance. 
Happy  they  whom  their  own  presence  bids  know 
the  true  charge,  and  forbids  to  fear  the  false  !  Me 
wrongs  imaginary  fret,  while  the  real  I  cannot  know, 
and  either  error  stirs  equal  gnawings  in  my  heart. 
O,  would  you  only  come  !  or  did  I  only  know  that 
the  wind,  or  your  father — at  least,  no  woman — kept 
you  back !  Were  it  a  woman,  and  I  should  know,  I 
should  die  of  grieving,  believe  me  ;  sin  against  me 
at  once,  if  you  desire  my  death  ! 

119  But  you  will  not  sin  against  me,  and  my 
fears  of  such  troubles  are  vain.  The  reason  you 
do  not  come  is  the  jealous  storm  that  beats  you 
back.  Ah,  wretched  me !  with  what  great  waves 
the  shores  are  beaten,  and  what  dark  clouds  envelop 
jy  !      It  may  be  the  loving  mother  of 

267 


OVID 

forsitan  ad  pontum  mater  pia  venerit  Helles, 

mersaque  roratis  nata  fleatur  aquis — 
an  mare  ab  inviso  privignae  nomine  dictum  125 

vexat  in  aequoream  versa  noverca  deam  ? 
non  favet,  ut  nunc  est,1  teneris  locus  iste  puellis ; 

hac  Helle  periit,  hac  ego  laedor  aqua, 
at  tibi  flammarum  memori,  Neptune,  tuarum 

nullus  erat  ventis  inpediendus  amor —  130 

si  neque  Amymone  nee,  laudatissima  forma, 

criminis  est  Tyro  fabula  vana  tui, 
lucidaque  Alcyone  Calyceque  Hecataeone  nata,'2 

et  nondum  nexis  angue  Medusa  comis, 
flavaque  Laudice  caeloque  recepta  Celaeno,  135 

et  quarum  memini  nomina  lecta  mihi. 
has  certe  pluresque  canunt,  Neptune,  poetae 

molle  latus  lateri  conposuisse  tuo. 
cur  igitur,  totiens  vires  expertus  amoris, 

adsuetum  nobis  tui'bine  claudis  iter?  140 

parce,  ferox,  latoque  mari  tua  proelia  misce  ! 

seducit  terras  haec  brevis  unda  duas. 
te  decet  aut  magnas  magnum  iactare  carinas, 

aut  etiam  totis  classibus  esse  trucem  ; 
turpe  deo  pelagi  iuvenem  terrere  natantem,  145 

gloriaque  est  stagno  quolibet  ista  minor, 
nobilis  ille  quidem  est  et  clarus  origine,  sed  non 

a  tibi  suspecto  ducit  Ulixe  genus. 
da  veniam  servaque  duos  !  natat  ille,  sed  isdem 

corpus  Leandri,  spes  mea  pendet  aquis."  150 

1  utcumque  est  DUlhey  Ehw. 

2  ceuceque  et  aveone  P :  celiceque  et  aveone  G  :  ceyce  et 
aveone  V :  Calyceque  Ecatheone  (Hecataeone)  Hein. 

a  Nephele,  mother  of  Phrixus  and  Helle. 

B  Ino,  second  wife  of  Helle's  father  Athamas. 

c  "  Such  learned  enumerations  of  the  love  adventures  of 

268 


THE   HEROIDES   XIX 

Helle  has  come  to  the  sea,  and  is  lamenting  in  down- 
pouring  tears  the  drowning  of  her  child" — or  is  the 
step-dame,  turned  to  a  goddess  of  the  waters,  vexing 
the  sea  that  is  called  by  her  step-child's  hated  name  ?  ° 
This  place,  such  as  'tis  now,  is  aught  but  friendly 
to  tender  maids ;  by  these  waters  Helle  perished, 
by  them  my  own  affliction  comes.  Yet,  Neptune, 
wert  thou  mindful  of  thine  own  heart's  flames,  thou 
oughtst  let  no  love  be  hindered  by  the  winds — if 
neither  Amymone,  nor  Tyro  much  bepraised  for 
beauty,  are  stories  idly  charged  to  thee,  nor  shining 
Alcyone,  and  Calyce,  child  of  Hecataeon,  nor  Medusa 
when  her  locks  were  not  yet  twined  with  snakes,  nor 
golden-haired  Laodice  and  Celaeno  taken  to  the 
skies,  nor  those  whose  names  I  mind  me  of  having 
read."  These,  surely,  Neptune,  and  many  more,  the 
poets  say  in  their  songs  have  mingled  their  soft 
embraces  with  thine  own.  Why,  then,  dost  thou, 
who  hast  felt  so  many  times  the  power  of  love,  close 
up  with  whirling  storm  the  way  we  have  learned  to 
know  ?  Spare  us,  impetuous  one,  and  mingle  thy 
battles  out  upon  the  open  deep  !  These  waters,  that 
separate  two  lands,  are  scant.  It  befits  thee,  who  art 
mighty,  either  to  toss  about  the  mighty  keel,  or  to 
be  fierce  even  with  entire  fleets  ;  'tis  shame  for  the 
god  of  the  great  sea  to  terrify  a  swimming  youth — 
that  »lorv  is  less  than  should  come  from  troubling  any 
pond.  Noble  he  is,  to  be  sure,  and  of  a  famous 
stock,  but  he  does  not  trace  Ins  line  from  the  Ulysses 
thou  dost  not  trust.  Have  mercy  on  him,  and  save 
us  both!  It  is  he  who  swims,  but  the  limbs  of 
Leandcr  and  all  my  hopes  hang  on  the  selfsame  wave. 

gods  appear  to  have  been  a  form  of  poetry  cultivated  by  the 
Alexandrines.*'     Purser,  in  Palmer  p.  475. 

269 


OVID 

Sternuit  en  x  lumen  ! — posito  nam  scribimus  illo — 

sternuit  et  nobis  prospera  signa  dedit. 
ecee,  merum  nutrix  faustos  instillat  in  ignes, 

"eras  "  que  "  erimus  plures/'  inquit,  et  ipsa  bibit. 
effice  nos  plures,  evicta  per  aequora  lapsus,  155 

o  penitus  toto  corde  recepte  mihi ! 
in  tua  eastra  redi,  socii  desertor  amoris  ; 

ponuntur  medio  cur  mea  membra  toro  ? 
quod  timeas,  non  est !  auso  Venus  ipsa  favebit, 

sternet  et  aequoreas  aequore  nata  vias.  160 

ire  libet  medias  ipsi  mihi  saepe  per  undas, 

sed  solet  hoc  maribus  tutius  esse  fretum. 
nam  cur  hac  vectis  Phrixo  Phrixique  sorore 

sola  dedit  vastis  femina  nomen  aquis  ? 
Forsitan  ad  reditum  metuas  ne  tempora  desint,     165 

aut  gemini  nequeas  ferre  laboris  onus, 
at  nos  diversi  medium  coeamus  in  aequor 

obviaque  in  summis  oscula  demus  aquis, 
atque  ita  quisque  suas  iterum  redeamus  ad  urbes ; 

exiguum,  sed  plus  quam  nihil  illud  erit !  170 

vel  pudor  hie  utinam,  qui  nos  clam  cogit  amare, 

vel  timidus  famae  cedere  vellet  amor ! 
nunc  male  res  iunctae,  calor  et  reverentia,  pugnant. 

quid  sequar,  in  dubio  est ;  haec  decet,  ille  iuvat. 
ut  semel  intravit  Colchos  Pagasaeus  Iason,  175 

inpositam  celeri  Phasida  puppe  tulit ; 
ut  semel  Idaeus  Lacedaemona  venit  adulter, 

cum  praeda  rediit  protinus  ille  sua. 
1  et  MSS.:  en  Bent.  Hein. 

"  She  drops  water  into  the  flame  of  the  lamp,  either  to 
clear  the  wick  or  to  honour  the  omen. 
270 


THE    HEROIDES    XIX 

161  My  lamp  has  sputtered,  see  ! — for  I  am  writing 
with  it  near — it  lias  sputtered  and  given  us  favour- 
ing sign.  Look,  nurse  is  pouring  drops  into  auspicious 
fires."  "To-morrow,"  she  says,  "  we  shall  be  more," 
and  herself  drinks  of  the  wine.  Ah,  do  make  us 
mure,  glide  over  the  conquered  wave,  O  you  whom 
I  have  welcomed  to  all  my  inmost  heart !  Come 
back  to  camp,  deserter  of  your  ally  love  ;  why  must 
I  lay  my  limbs  in  the  mid  space  of  my  couch  ? 
There  is  naught  for  you  to  fear !  Venus'  self  will 
smile  upon  your  venture  ;  child  of  the  sea,  the  paths 
of  the  sea  she  will  make  smooth.  Oft  am  I  prompted 
myself  to  go  through  the  midst  of  the  waves,  but 
'tis  the  wont  of  this  strait  to  be  safer  for  men.  For 
why,  though  Phrixus  and  Phrixus'  sister  both  rode 
this  way,  did  the  maiden  alone  give  name  to  these 
wide  waters? 

165  Perhaps  you  fear  the  time  may  fail  you  for 
return,  or  you  may  not  endure  the  effort  of  the 
twofold  toil.  Then  let  us  both  from  diverse  ways 
come  together  in  mid  sea,  and  give  each  other  kisses 
on  the  waters'  crest,  and  so  return  again  each  to  his 
own  town  ;  'twill  be  little,  but  more  than  naught ! 
Would  that  either  this  shame  that  compels  us  to 
secret  loving  would  cease,  or  else  the  love  that  fears 
men's  speech.  Now,  two  things  that  ill  go  together, 
passion  and  regard  for  men,  are  at  strife.  Which 
I  shall  follow  is  in  doubt ;  the  one  becomes,  the 
other  delights.  Once  had  Jason  of  Pagasae  entered 
Colchis,  and  he  set  the  maid  of  the  Phasis  in  his 
swift  ship  and  bore  her  off;  once  had  the  lover 
from  Ida  come  to  Lacedaemon,  and  he  straight 
returned  together  with    his   prize.      But  you,  as    oft 


271 


OVID 

tu  quam  saepe  petis,  quod  amas,  tarn  saepe  relinquis, 

et  quotieris  grave  sit l  puppibus  ire,  natas.  1 80 

Sic  tamen,  o  iuvenis  tumidarum  victor  aquarum, 

sic  facito  spernas,  ut  vereare,  fretum  ! 
arte  laboratae  merguntur  ab  aequore  naves  ; 

tu  tua  plus  remis  bracchia  posse  putas  ? 
quod  eupis,  hoc  nautae  metuunt,  Leandre,  natare  ;  185 

exitus  hie  fractis  puppibus  esse  solet. 
me  miseram  !  cupio  non  persuadere,  quod  hortor, 

sisque,  precor,  monitis  fortior  ipse  nieis — 
dummodo  pervenias  excussaque  saepe  per  undas 

inicias  umeris  bracchia  lassa  meis  !  1 90 

Sed  mihi,  caeruleas  quotiens  obvertor  ad  undas, 

nescio  quae  pavidum  frigora  '2  pectus  habet. 
nee  minus  hesternae  confundor  imagine  noctis, 

quamvis  est  sacris  ilia  piata  meis. 
namque  sub  aurora,  iam  dormitante  lueerna,  195 

somnia  quo  cei'ni  tempore  vera  solent, 
stamina  de  digitis  cecidere  sopore  remissis, 

collaque  pulvino  nostra  ferenda  dedi. 
hie  ego  ventosas  nantem  del})hina  per  undas 

cernere  non  dubia  sum  mihi  visa  fide,  200 

quern  postquam  bibulis  inlisit  fluctus  harenis, 

unda  simul  miserum  vitaque  deseruit. 
quidquid  id  est,  timeo  ;  nee  tu  mea  somnia  ride 

nee  nisi  tranquillo  bracchia  crede  mari ! 
si  tibi  non  parcis,  dilectae  parce  puellae,  205 

quae  numquam  nisi  te  sospite  sospes  ero  ! 

1  sit  Vs  Bent.  Hows.:  fit  PG. 

2  So   Burm.:   quod    P:   quae   VG:   quid    6'2:    frigora    V : 
frigore  PG:  habent  s:  ha///  V:  habet  PG. 

272 


THE   HEROIDES   XIX 

as  you  seek  your  love,  so  oft  you  leave  her,  and 
whene'er  'tis  peril  for  boats  to  go,  you  swim. 

181  Yet,  O  my  young  lover,  though  victor  over 
the  swollen  waters,  so  spurn  the  sea  as  still  to  be 
in  fear  of  it !  Ships  wrought  with  skill  are  over- 
whelmed by  the  wave ;  do  you  think  your  arms 
more  powerful  than  oars  ?  What  you  are  eager  for, 
Leander — to  swim — is  the  sailor's  fear  ;  'tis  that 
follows  ever  on  the  wreck  of  ships.  Ah,  wretched 
me !  I  am  eager  not  to  persuade  you  to  what  I 
urge  ;  may  you  be  too  strong,  I  pray,  to  yield  to 
my  admonition — only  so  you  come  to  me,  and  cast 
about  my  neck  the  wearied  arms  oft  beaten  by  the 
wave  ! 

191  But,  as  often  as  I  turn  my  face  toward  the 
dark  blue  wave,  my  fearful  breast  is  seized  by  some 
hidden  chill.  Nor  am  I  the  less  perturbed  by  a 
dream  I  had  yesternight,  though  I  have  cleared 
myself  of  its  threat  by  sacrifice.  For,  just  before 
dawn,  when  my  lamp  was  already  dying  down, 
at  the  time  when  dreams  are  wont  to  be  true, 
my  fingers  were  relaxed  by  sleep,  the  threads 
fell  from  them,  and  I  laid  my  head  down  upon  the 
pillow  to  rest.  There  in  vision  clear  I  seemed  to 
see  a  dolphin  swimming  through  the  wind-tossed 
waters  ;  and  after  the  flood  had  cast  it  forth  upon 
the  thirsty  sands,  the  wave,  and  at  the  same  time 
life,  abandoned  the  unhappy  thing.  Whatever  it 
may  mean,  I  fear ;  and  you — nor  smile  at  my 
dreams,  nor  trust  your  arms  except  to  a  tranquil 
sea !  If  you  spare  not  yourself,  spare  the  maid 
beloved  by  you,  who  never  will  be  safe  unless  you 
are  so !     I  have  hope  none  (the  less  that  the  waves 


273 


OVID 

spes  tamen  est  fractis  vicinae  pacis  in  undis ; 

tu  '  placidas  toto  2  pectore  finde  vias  ! 
interea  nanti,3  quoniam  freta  pervia  non  sunt, 

leniat  invisas  littera  missa  moras.  210 


XX 

Acontius  Cydippae 

Pone  metum !  nihil  hie  iterum  iurabis  amanti ; 

promissam  satis  est  te  semel  esse  mihi. 
perlege  !  diseedat  sic  eorpore  languor  ab  isto, 

quod  nieus  est  ulla  parte  dolere  dolor  ! 
Quid  ])udor  ante  subit  ?  nam,  sieut  in  aede  Dianae,  5 

suspicor  ingenuas  erubuisse  genas. 
coniugium  pactamque  fidem,  non  crimina  posco ; 

debitus  ut  coniunx,  non  ut  adulter  amo. 
verba  licet  repetas,  quae  demptus  ab  arbore  fetus 

pertulit  ad  castas  me  iaeiente  manus  ;  10 

invenies  illic,  id  te  spondere,  quod  opto 

te  potius,  virgo,  quam  meminisse  deam. 
nunc    quoque    idem   timeo,  sed   idem  tamen    acrius 
illud  ; 

adsumpsit  vires  auctaque  flamma  mora  est, 
quique  fuit  numquam  pai*vus,  nunc  tempore  longo  15 

et  spe,  quam  dederas  tu  mihi,  crevit  amor. 

1  tu  PGw  :  turn  Pa.  2  toto  P  Vw  :  tuto  GlS. 

3  nanli  s  :  nandi  P  G^. 

a  In  the  temple  of  Diana  at  Delos,  Acontius  threw  before 
Cydippe   an   apple   inscribed:    "I  swear   by  the  sanctuary 

274       • 


THE   HEROIDES   XX 

are  broken  and  peace  is  near ;  do  you  cleave  their 
paths  while  placid  with  all  your  might !  Meanwhile, 
since  the  billows  will  not  let  the  swimmer  come,  let 
the  letter  that  1  send  you  soften  the  hated  hours  of 
delay. 


XX 

ACONTIUS    TO    CYDIPPE 

Lay  aside  your  fears  !  here  you  will  give  no  second 
oath  to  your  lover ;  that  you  have  pledged  yourself 
to  me  once  is  enough. a  Read  to  the  end,  and  so 
may  the  languor  leave  that  body  of  yours ;  that  it 
feel  pain  in  any  part  is  pain  to  me ! 

5  Why  do  your  blushes  rise  before  you  read  ? — for 
I  suspect  that,  just  as  in  the  temple  of  Diana,  your 
modest  cheeks  have  reddened.  It  is  wedlock  with 
you  that  I  ask,  and  the  faith  you  pledged  me,  not  a 
crime ;  as  your  destined  husband,  not  as  a  deceiver, 
do  I  love.  You  may  recall  the  words  which  the 
fruit  I  plucked  from  the  tree  and  threw  to  you 
brought  to  your  chaste  hands ;  you  will  find  that 
in  them  you  promise  me  what  1  pray  that  you, 
maiden,  rather  than  the  goddess,  will  remember. 
I  am  still  as  fearful  as  ever,  but  my  fear  has  grown 
keener  than  it  was ;  for  the  flame  of  my  love  has 
waxed  with  being  delayed,  and  taken  on  strength, 
and  the  passion  that  was  never  slight  has  now  grown 
great,  fed  by  long  time  and  the  hope  that  you 
had    given.       Hope    you     had    given ;    my    ardent 

of  Diana  that  I  will  wed  Acontius,"  which  she  read  aloud, 
thus  inadvertently  pledging  herself. 

275 

T    2 


OVID 

spem  inihi  tu  dederas,  meus  hie  tibi  credidit  ardor. 

noii  potes  hoc  factum  teste  negare  dea. 
adfuit  et,  praesens  ut  erat,  tua  verba  notavit 

et  visa  est  niota  dicta  tulisse  1  coma.  20 

Deceptam  dicas  nostra  te  fraude  lieebit, 

dum  fraudis  nostrae  causa  feratur  amor, 
fraus  mea  quid  petiit,  nisi  uti  tibi  iungerer,  unum  ? 

id  te,  quod  quereris,  conciliare  potest, 
non  ego  natura  nee  sum  tarn  callidus  usu  ;  25 

sollertem  tu  me,  erede,  puella,  facis. 
te  mihi  conpositis — siquid  tamen  egimus — a  me 

adstrinxit  verbis  ingeniosus  Amor, 
dictatis  ab  eo  feci  sponsalia  verbis, 

consultoque  fui  iuris  Amore  vafer.  30 

sit  fraus  huic  facto  nonien,  dicarque  dolosus, 

si  tamen  est,  quod  ames,  velle  tenere  dolus ! 
En,  iterum  scribo  mittoque  rogantia  verba  ! 

altera  fraus  haec  est,  quodque  queraris  habes. 
si  noceo,  quod  amo,  fateor,  sine  fine  nocebo  35 

teque  petam  ;  caveas  tu  licet,  usque  2  petam. 
per  gladios  alii  placitas  rapuere  puellas  ; 

scripta  mihi  caute  3  littera  crimen  erit  ? 
di  faciant,  possim  plures  inponere  nodos, 

ut  tua  sit  nulla  libera  parte  fides  !  40 

mille  doli  restant — clivo  sudamus  in  imo  ; 

ardor  inexpertum  nil  sinet  esse  meus. 
sit  dubium,  possisne  capi  ;  captabere  certe. 

exitus  in  dis  est,  sed  capiere  tamen. 


1  tulisse  POw  PIan.{?) :  probasse  u. 

2  usque  s  :  ipse  Pw  :  ipsa  0  Vs.         x  astute  Bent. 


276 


THE    HEROIDES   XX 

heart  put  trust  in  you.  You  cannot  deny  that  this 
was  so — the  goddess  is  my  witness.  She  was  there, 
and,  present  as  she  was,  marked  your  words,  and 
seemed,  by  the  shaking  of  her  locks,  to  have  accepted 
them. 

21  I  will  give  you  leave  to  say  you  were  deceived, 
and  by  wiles  of  mine,  if  only  of  those  wiles  my  love 
be  counted  cause.  What  was  the  object  of  my 
wiles  but  the  one  thing — to  be  united  with  you  ? 
The  thing  you  complain  of  has  power  to  join  you 
to  me.  Neither  by  nature  nor  by  practice  am  I 
so  cunning ;  believe  me,  maid,  it  is  you  who  make 
me  skilful.  It  was  ingenious  Love  who  bound  you 
to  me,  with  words — if  I,  indeed,  have  gained  aught — 
that  I  myself  drew  up.  In  words  dictated  by  him 
I  made  our  betrothal  bond  ;  Love  was  the  lawyer 
that  taught  me  knavery.  Let  wiles  be  the  name 
you  give  my  deed,  and  let  me  be  called  crafty — if 
only  the  wish  to  possess  what  one  loves  be  craft ! 

33  Look,  a  second  time  I  write,  inditing  words 
of  entreaty  !  A  second  stratagem  is  this,  and  you 
have  good  ground  for  complaint.  If  I  wrong  you 
by  loving,  I  confess  I  shall  wrong  you  for  ever, 
and  strive  to  win  you  ;  though  you  shun  my  suit, 
I  shall  ever  strive.  With  the  sword  have  others 
stolen  away  the  maids  they  loved  ;  shall  this  letter, 
discreetly  written,  be  called  a  crime  ?  May  the 
gods  give  me  power  to  lay  more  bonds  on  you,  so 
that  your  pledge  may  nowhere  leave  you  free  ! 
A  thousand  wiles  remain — I  am  only  perspiring 
at  the  foot  of  the  steep  ;  my  ardour  will  leave 
nothing  unessayed.  Grant  'tis  doubtful  whether 
you  can  he  taken  ;  the  taking  shall  at  le;ist  he  tried. 
The    issue    rests    with    the    gods,   but   you    will    be 

277 


OVID 

ut  partem  efFugias,  non  omnia  retia  falles,  45 

quae  tibi,  quam  credis,  plura  tetendit  Amor, 
si  non  proficient  artes,  veniemus  ad  anna, 

inque  l  tui  cupido  rapta  ferere  sinu. 
non  sum,  qui  soleam  Paridis  reprehendere  factum, 

nee  quemquam,  qui  vir,  posset  ut  esse,  fuit.  50 

nos  quoque — sed  taceo  !  mors  huius  poena  rapinae 

ut  sit,  erit,  quam  te  non  habuisse,  minor, 
aut  esses  formosa  minus,  peterere  modeste  ; 

audaces  facie  cogimur  esse  tua. 
tu  facis  hoc  oculique  tui,  quibus  ignea  cedunt  55 

sidera,  qui  flammae  causa  fuere  meae  ; 
hoc  faciunt  flavi  crines  et  eburnea  cervix, 

quaeque,  precor,  veniant  in  mea  colla  manus, 
et  decor  et  vultus  2  sine  rusticitate  pudentes, 

et,  Thetidis  qualis  vix  rear  esse,  pedes.  60 

cetera  si  possem  laudare,  beatior  essem, 

nee  dubito,  totum  quin  sibi  par  sit  opus, 
hac  ego  conpulsus,  non  est  mirabile,  forma 

.si  pignus  volui  vocis  habere  tuae. 
Denique,  dum  captam  tu  te  cogare  fateri,  65 

insidiis  esto  capta  puella  meis. 
invidiam  patiar  ;  passo  sua  praemia  dentur. 

cur  suus  a  tanto  crimine  fructus  abest  ? 
Hesionen  Telamon,  Briseida  cepit  Achilles  ; 

utraque  victorem  nempe  secuta  virum.  70 

quamlibet  accuses  et  sis  irata  licebit, 

irata  liceat  dum  mihi  posse  frui. 

1  inque  MSS.:  vique  Pa.  2  motus  Dilthey. 

278 


THE    HEROIDES   XX 

taken  none  the  less.  You  may  evade  a  part,  but  you 
will  not  escape  all  the  nets  which  Love,  in  greater 
number  than  you  think,  has  stretched  for  you.  If 
art  will  not  serve,  I  shall  resort  to  arms,  and  you 
will  be  seized  and  borne  away  in  the  embrace  that 
longs  for  you.  I  am  not  the  one  to  chide  Paris  for 
what  he  did,  nor  any  one  who,  to  become  a  husband, 
has  been  a  man.*  I,  too — -but  I  say  nothing !  Allow 
that  death  is  fit  punishment  for  this  theft  of  you, 
it  will  be  less  than  not  to  have  possessed  you. 
Or  you  should  have  been  less  beautiful,  would  you 
be  wooed  by  modest  means  ;  'tis  by  your  charms  I  am 
driven  to  be  bold.  This  is  your  work — your  work, 
and  that  of  your  eyes,  brighter  than  the  fiery  stars, 
and  the  cause  of  my  burning  love  ;  this  is  the  work 
of  your  golden  tresses  and  that  ivory  throat,  and  the 
hands  which  1  pray  to  have  clasp  my  neck,  and  your 
comely  features,  modest  yet  not  rustic,  and  feet 
which  Thetis'  own  methinks  could  scarcely  equal. 
If  I  could  praise  the' rest  of  your  charms,  I  should  be 
happier ;  yet  I  doubt  not  that  the  work  is  like  in  all 
its  parts.  Compelled  by  beauty  such  as  this,  it  is  no 
cause  for  marvel  if  I  wished  the  pledge  of  your  word. 
66  In  fine,  so  only  you  are  forced  to  confess  your- 
self caught,  be,  if  you  will,  a  maid  caught  by  my 
treachery.  The  reproach  I  will  endure — only  let 
him  who  endures  have  his  just  reward.  Why  should 
so  great  a  charge  lack  its  due  profit  ?  Telamon 
won  Hesione,  Briseis  was  taken  by  Achilles  ;  each  of 
a  surety  followed  the  victor  as  her  lord.  You  may 
chide  and  be  angry  as  much  as  you  will,  if  only  you 
let  me  enjoy  you  while  you  are  angry.     I  who  cause 

•  a  "  yjr  "  js  used  jn  two  senses — "  husband  "  and  "  man  of 
courage." 

279 


OVID 

idem,  qui  facimus,  factam  tenuabimus  iram, 

copia  placandi  sit  modo  parva  tui. 
ante  tuos  liceat  flentem  x  consistere  vultus  75 

et  liceat  lacrimis  addere  verba  sua,2 
utque  solent  famuli,  cum  verbera  saeva  verentur, 

tendere  submissas  ad  tua  crura  manus  ! 
ignoras  tua  iura  ;  voca  !  cur  arguor  absens  ? 

iamdudum  dominae  more  venire  iube.  80 

ipsa  meos  scindas  licet  imperiosa  capillos, 

oraque  sint  digitis  livida  nostra  tuis. 
omnia  perpetiar  ;  tantum  fortasse  timebo, 

corpore  laedatur  ne  manus  ista  meo. 
Sed  neque  conpedibus  nee  me  conpesce  catenis —  85 

servabor  firrao  vinctus  amore  tui  ! 
cum  bene  se  quantumque  volet  satiaverit  ira, 

ipsa  tibi  dices  :  "  quam  patienter  amat !  " 
ipsa  tibi  dices,  ubi  videris  omnia  ferre  : 

"tarn  bene  qui  servit,  serviatdste  mihi  !  "  90 

nunc  reus  infelix  absens  agor,  et  mea,  cum  sit 

optima,  non  ullo  causa  tuente  perit. 
Hoc    quoque — quantumvis 3    sit  scriptum  iniuria 
nostrum, 

quod  de  me  solo,  nempe  queraris  habes. 
non  meruit  falli  mecum  quoque  Delia  ;  si  non  95 

vis  mihi  promissum  reddere,  redde  deae. 
adfuit  et  vidit,  cum  tu  decepta  rubebas, 

et  vocem  memori  condidit  aure  tuam. 
omina  re  careant !  nihil  est  violentius  ilia, 

cum  sua,  quod  nolim,  numina  laesa  videt.  100 

1  flentem  G  Vs  Plan.:  flentes  Px :  flentem  liceat  a. 

2  sua  Pa.:  sui  P:  suis  G:  ineis  a> :  tuis  s. 

3  quantumvis  Pa.  at  first  :  quod  tu  via  G  Pa. 

280 


THE    HEROIDES   XX 

it  will  likewise  assuage  the  wrath  I  stirred,  let  me 
but  have  a  slight  chance  of  appeasing  you.  Let 
me  have  leave  to  stand  weeping  before  your  face, 
and  my  tears  have  leave  to  add  their  own  speech  ; 
and  let  me,  like  a  slave  in  fear  of  bitter  stripes, 
stretch  out  submissive  hands  to  touch  your  feet ! 
You  know  not  your  own  right ;  call  me  !  Why 
am  I  accused  in  absence  ?  Bid  me  come,  forthwith, 
after  the  manner  of  a  mistress.  With  your  own 
imperious  hand  you  may  tear  my  hair,  and  make  my 
face  livid  with  your  fingers.  I  will  endure  all ;  my 
only  fear  perhaps  will  be  lest  that  hand  of  yours  be 
bruised  on  me. 

85  But  bind  me  not  with  shackles  nor  with 
chains — I  shall  be  kept  in  bonds  by  unjielding  love 
for  you.  When  your  anger  shall  have  had  full 
course,  and  is  sated  well,  you  will  say  to  yourself: 
"  How  enduring  is  his  love  !  "  You  will  say  to  your- 
self, when  you  have  seen  me  bearing  all :  "He  who 
is  a  slave  so  well,  let  him  be  siave  to  me  !"  Now, 
unhappy,  I  am  arraigned  in  my  absence,  and  my 
cause,  though  excellent,  is  lost  because  no  one 
appears  for  me. 

93  This  further — however  much  that  writing  of 
mine  was  a  wrong  to  you,  it  is  not  I  alone,  you 
must  know,  of  whom  you  have  cause  to  complain. 
She  ofDelos  was  not  deserving  of  betrayal  with 
me  ;  if  faith  with  me  you  cannot  keep,  keep  faith 
with  the  goddess.  She  was  present  and  saw  when 
you  blushed  at  being  ensnared,  and  stored  away 
your  word  in  a  remembering  ear.  May  your 
omens  be  groundless !  Nothing  is  more  violent 
than  she  when  she  sees — what  I  hope  will  not 
be  ! — her  godhead  wronged.     The  boar  of  Calydon 

281 


OVID 

testis  erit  Calydonis  aper,  sic  saevus,  ut  illo 

sit  magis  in  natum  saeva  reperta  parens, 
testis  et  Actaeon,  quondum  fera  creditus  illis, 

ipse  dedit  leto  cum  quibus  ante  feras  ; 
quaeque  superba  parens  saxo  per  corpus  oborto     105 

nunc  quoque  Mygdonia  flebilis  adstat  humo. 
Ei  mihi  !  Cydippe,  timeo  tibi  dicere  verum, 

ne  videar  causa  falsa  monere  mea  ; 
dicendum  tamen  est.     hoc  est,1  mihi  crede,  quod 
aegra 

ipso  nubendi  tempore  saepe  iaces.  110 

consulit  ipsa  tibi,  neu  sis  periura,  laborat, 

et  salvam  salva  te  cupit  esse  fide, 
inde  fit  ut,  quotiens  existere  perfida  temptas, 

peecatum  totiens  corrigat  ilia  tuum. 
parce  movere  feros  animosae  virginis  arcus  ;  115 

mitis  adhuc  fieri,  si  patiare,  potest, 
parce,  precor,  teneros  corrumpere  febribus  artus ; 

servetur  facies  ista  fruenda  mihi. 
serventur  vultus  ad  nostra  incendia  nati, 

quique  subest  niveo  lenis  2  in  ore  rubor.  1 20 

hostibus  et  siquis,  ne  fias  nostra,  repugnat, 

sic  sit  ut  invalida  te  solet  esse  mihi  ! 
torqueor  ex  aequo  vel  te  nubente  vel  aegra 

dicere  nee  possum,  quid  minus  ipse  velim ; 
maceror  interdum,  quod  sim  tibi  causa  dolenjdi       125 

teque  mea  laedi  calliditate  puto. 
in  caput  ut  nostrum  dominae  periuria  quaeso 

eveniant ;  poena  tuta  sit  ilia  mea  ! 

1  tu  Ehw.  2  lenis  P  s :  levis  u  :  laetns  s. 

a  Meleager,  whose  mother  Althaea's  anger  was  inspired  by 
Diana. 
*  Niobe,  with  the  children  of  whom  she  boasted,  was  slain 


THE    HEROIDES    XX 

will  be  my  witness — fierce,  yet  so  that  a  mother* 
was  found  to  be  fiercer  than  he  against  her  own 
son.  Actaeon,  too,  will  witness,  once  on  a  time 
thought  a  wild  beast  by  those  with  whom  himself 
had  given  wild  beasts  to  death  ;  and  the  arrogant 
mother,  her  body  turned  to  rock,  who  still  sits 
weeping  on  Mygdonian  soil.6 

107  Alas  me  !  Cydippe,  I  fear  to  tell  you  the  truth, 
lest  I  seem  to  warn  you  falsely,  for  the  sake  of  my 
plea ;  yet  tell  it  I  must.  This  is  the  reason,  believe 
me,  why  you  oft  lie  ill  on  the  eve  of  marriage.6 
It  is  the  goddess  herself,  looking  to  your  good, 
and  striving  to  keep  you  from  a  false  oath  ;  she 
wishes  you  kept  whole  by  the  keeping  whole  of 
your  faith.  This  is  the  reason  why,  as  oft  as 
you  attempt  to  break  your  oath,  she  corrects  your 
sin.  Cease  to  invite  forth  the  cruel  bow  of  the 
spirited  virgin  ;  she  still  may  be  appeased,  if  only  you 
allow.  Cease,  I  entreat,  to  waste  with  fevers  your 
tender  limbs  ;  preserve  those  charms  of  yours  for  me 
to  enjoy.  Preserve  those  features  that  were  born  to 
kindle  my  love,  and  the  gentle  blush  that  rises  to 
grace  your  snowy  cheek.  May  my  enemies,  and  any 
who  would  keep  you  from  my  arms,  so  fare  as  I  when 
you  are  ill  !  1  am  alike  in  torment  whether  you 
wed,  or  whether  you  are  ill,  nor  can  I  say  which  I 
should  wish  the  less  ;  at  times  I  waste  with  grief 
at  thought  that  I  may  be  cause  of  pain  to  you,  and 
my  wiles  the  cause  of  your  wounds.  May  the  false 
swearing  of  my  lady  come  upon  my  head,  I  pray  ; 
mine  be  the  penalty,  and  she  thus  be  safe  ! 

by  Diana  and  Apollo.    A  "  weeping  Niobe  "  rock  was  pointed 
out  in  Mygdonia,  a  province  of  Phrygia. 
c  The  day  was  often  postponed. 

283 


OVID 

Ne  tamen  ignorem,  quid  agas,  ad  limina  crebro 

anxius  hue  illuc  dissimulanter  eo  ;  130 

subsequor  aneillam  furtim  famulumque  requirens, 

profuerint  somni  quid  tibi  quidve  cibi. 
me  miserum,  quod  non  medicorum  iussa  ministro, 

effingoque  raanus,  insideoque  toro  ! 
et  rursus  miserum,  quod  me  procul  inde  remoto,   135 

quem  minime  vellem,  forsitan  alter  adest ! 
ille  manus  istas  effingit,  et  adsidet  aegrae 

invisus  superis  cum  superisque  mihi, 
dumque  suo  temptat  salientem  pollice  venam, 

Candida  per  causam  bracchia  saepe  tenet,  140 

contrectatque  sinus,  et  forsitan  oscula  iungit. 

officio  merces  plenior  ista  suo  est ! 
Quis  tibi  perinisit  nostras  praecerpere  messes  ? 

ad  spes  alterius  quis  tibi  fecit  iter  ? 
iste  sinus  meus  est  !  mea  turpiter  oscula  sumis  !     145 

a  mihi  promisso  corpore  tolle  manus  ! 
inprobe,  tolle  manus  !    quam  tangis,  nostra   futura 
est ; 

postmodo  si  facies  istud,  adulter  eris. 
elige  de  vacuis  quam  non  sibi  vindicet  alter  ; 

si  nescis,  dominum  res  habet  ista  suum.  150 

nee  mihi  credideris — recitetur  formula  pacti ; 

neu  falsam  dicas  esse,  fac  ipsa  legat  ! 
alterius  thalamo,  tibi  nos,  tibi  dicimus,  exi  ! 

quid  facis  hie  ?  exi  !  non  vacat  iste  torus  ! 
284 


THE   HEROIDES   XX 

129  Nevertheless,  that  I  may  not  be  ignorant  of  how 
you  fare,  now  here,  now  there,  I  oft  walk  anxiously 
in  secret  before  your  door ;  I  follow  stealthily 
the  maid-slave  and  the  lackey,  asking  what  change 
for  good  your  sleep  has  brought,  or  what  your 
food.  Ah  me,  wretched,  that  I  may  not  be  the 
one  to  carry  out  the  bidding  of  your  doctors, a 
and  may  not  stroke  your  hands  and  sit  at  the  side  of 
your  bed !  and  again  wretched,  because  when  I  am 
far  removed  from  you,  perhaps  that  other,  he  whom 
I  least  could  wish,  is  with  you !  He  is  the  one 
to  stroke  those  dear  hands,  and  to  sit  by  you  while 
ill,  hated  by  me  and  by  the  gods  above — and 
while  he  feels  with  his  thumb  your  throbbing 
artery,  he  oft  makes  this  the  excuse  for  holding 
your  fair,  white  arin,  and  touches  your  bosom,  and,  it 
may  be,  kisses  you.  A  hire  like  this  is  too  great  for 
the  service  given  ! 

143  Who  gave  you  leave  to  reap  my  harvests  before 
me  ?  Who  laid  open  the  road  for  you  to  enter 
upon  another's  hopes  ?  That  bosom  is  mine  !  mine 
are  the  kisses  you  take !  Away  with  your  hands 
from  the  body  pledged  to  me !  Scoundrel,  away 
with  your  hands  !  She  whom  you  touch  is  to  be 
mine  ;  henceforth,  if  you  do  that,  you  will  be 
adulterous.  Choose  from  those  who  arc  free  one 
whom  another  does  not  claim  ;  if  you  do  not  know, 
those  goods  have  a  master  of  their  own.  Nor  need 
you  take  my  word — let  the  formula  of  our  pact  be 
recited  ;  and,  lest  you  say  'tis  false,  have  her  read 
it  herself!  Out  with  you  from  another's  chamber, 
out  with  you,  I  say!  What  are  you  doing  thei'e  ? 
Out!  That  couch  is  not  free!  Because-  you,  too, 
"  Administer  the  prescriptions. 

285 


OVID 

nam  quod  habes  et  tu  gemini  verba  altera  pacti,   155 

non  erit  idcireo  par  tua  causa  meae. 
haec    mihi    se    pepigit,   pater  hanc    tibi,    primus 
ab  ilia ; 

sed  propior  certe  quam  pater  ipsa  sibi  est. 
promisit  pater  hanc,  haec  et  iuravit  amanti ; 

ille  homines,  haec  est  testificata  deam.  160 

hie  metuit  mendax,1  haec  et  periura  vocari ; 

an  dubitas,  hie  sit  maior  an  ille  metus  ? 
denique,  ut  amborum  conferre  pericula  possis, 

respice  ad  eventus — haec  cubat,  ille  valet, 
nos  quoque  dissimili  certamina  mente  subimus  ;     165 

nee  spes  par  nobis  nee  timor  aequus  adest. 
tu  petis  ex  tuto  ;  gravior  mihi  morte  repulsa  est, 

idque  ego  iam,  quod  tu  forsan  amabis,  amo. 
si  tibi  iustitiae,  si  recti  cura  fuisset, 

cedere  debueras  ignibus  ipse  meis.  170 

Nunc,  quoniam  ferus  hie  pro  causa  pugnat  iniqua, 

ad  quid,  Cydippe,  littera  nostra  redit  ? 
hie  facit  ut  iaceas  et  sis  suspecta  Dianae  ; 

hunc  tu,  si  sapias,  limen  adire  vetes. 
hoc  faciente  subis  tarn  saeva  pericula  vitae —  175 

atque  utinam  pro  te,  qui  movet  ilia,  cadat  ! 
quern  si  reppuleris,  nee,  quern  dea  damnat,  amaris, 

tu  tunc  continuo,  certe  ego  salvus  ero. 
siste  metum,  virgo  !  stabili  potiere  salute, 

fac  modo  polliciti  conscia  templa  colas ;  180 

non  bove  mactato  caelestia  numina  gaudent, 

sed,  quae  praestanda  est  et  sine  teste,  fide. 

1  So  P2G  Va>  :  ille  timet  mendax  Dilthey  P1  in  erasure. 
286 


THE    HEROIDES    XX 

have  the  words  of  a  second  pact,  the  twin  of  mine, 
your  case  will  not  on  that  account  be  equal  with 
mine.  She  promised  herself  to  me,  her  father  her 
to  you ;  he  is  first  after  her,  but  surely  she  is 
nearer  to  herself  than  her  father  is.  Her  father 
but  gave  promise  of  her,  while  she,  too,  made 
oath — to  her  lover  ;  he  called  men  to  witness,  she 
a  goddess.  He  fears  to  be  called  false,  she  to  be 
called  forsworn  also ;  do  you  doubt  which — this  or 
that — is  the  greater  fear  ?  In  a  word,  even  grant 
you  could  compare  their  hazards,  regard  the  issue — 
for  she  lies  ill,  and  he  is  strong.  You  and  I,  too,  are 
entering  upon  a  contest  with  different  minds ;  our 
hopes  are  not  equal,  nor  are  our  fears  the  same. 
Your  suit  is  without  risk  ;  for  me,  repulse  is  heavier 
than  death,  and  I  already  love  her  whom  you, 
perhaps,  will  come  to  love.  If  you  had  cared  for 
justice,  or  cared  for  what  was  right,  you  yourself 
should  have  given  my  passion  the  way. 

171  Now,  since  his  hard  heart  persists  in  its  unjust 
course,  Cydippe,  to  what  conclusion  does  my  letter 
come  ?  It  is  he  who  is  the  cause  of  your  lying 
ill  and  under  suspicion  of  Diana ;  he  is  the  one 
you  would  forbid  your  doors,  if  you  were  wise. 
It  is  his  doing  that  you  are  facing  such  dire 
hazards  of  life — and  would  that  he  who  causes  them 
might  perish  in  your  place !  If  you  shall  have 
repulsed  him  and  refused  to  love  one  the  goddess 
damns,  then  straightway  you — and  I  assuredlv — 
will  be  whole.  Stay  your  fears,  maiden  !  You  will 
possess  abiding  health,  if  only  you  honour  the 
shrine  that  is  witness  of  your  pledge  ;  not  by  slain 
oxen  are  the  spirits  of  heaven  made  glad,  but 
by   good  faith,   which  should  be  kept   even    though 

287 


OVID 

ut  valeant  aliae,  ferrum  patiuntur  et  ignes, 

fert  aliis  tristem  sucus  amarus  openi. 
nil  opus  est  istis  ;  tantum  periuria  vita  185 

teque  simul  serva  meque  datamque  fidem  ! 
praeteritae  veniam  dabit  ignorantia  eulpae — 

exciderant  animo  foedera  lecta  tuo. 
admonita  es  modo  voce  mea  cum  l  casibus  istis, 

quos,  quotiens  temptas  fallere,  ferre  soles.  190 

his  quoque  vitatis  in  partu  nempe  rogabis, 

ut  tibi  luciferas  adferat  ilia  nianus  ? 
audiet  haec — repetens  quae  sunt  audita,  requiret, 

iste  tibi  de  quo  coniuge  partus  eat. 
promittes  votum — scit  te  promittere  falso  ;  195 

iurabis — scit  te  fallere  posse  deos  ! 
Non  agitur  de  me  ;  cura  maiore  laboro. 

anxia  sunt  vitae  pectora  nostra  tuae. 
cur  modo  te  dubiam  pavidi  flevere  parentes, 

ignaros  eulpae  quos  facis  esse  tuae  ?  200 

et  cur  ignorent  ?  matri  licet  omnia  narres. 

nil  tua,  Cydippe,  facta  ruboris  2  habent. 
ordine  fac  referas  ut  sis  mihi  cognita  primum 

sacra  pharetratae  dum  facit  ipsa  deae  ; 
ut  te  conspecta  subito,  si  forte  notasti,  205 

restiterim  fixis  in  tua  membra  genis  ; 
et,  te  dum  nimium  miror,  nota  certa  furoris, 

deciderint  umero  pallia  lapsa  meo  3  ; 
postmodo  nescio  qua  venisse  volubile  malum, 

verba  ferens  doctis  insidiosa  notis,  210 

1  cum  Hous.:  modo  MSS.  -  pudoris  s. 

3  humeris  .   .   .  meis  PIan.{?)  Merle.  Sedl.  Ehir. 

"  A  frequent  epithet  of  Diana. 
288 


THE   HER01DES   XX 

without  witness.  To  win  their  health,  some  maids 
submit  to  steel  and  fire ;  to  others,  bitter  juices 
bring  their  gloomy  aid.  There  is  no  need  of  these  ; 
only  shun  false  oaths,  preserve  the  pledg'e  you  have 
given — and  so  yourself,  and  me  !  Excuse  for  past 
offence  your  ignorance  will  supply — the  agreement 
you  read  had  fallen  from  your  mind.  You  have 
but  now  been  admonished  not  only  by  word  of 
mine,  but  as  well  by  those  mishaps  of  health  you 
are  wont  to  suffer  as  oft  as  you  try  to  evade  your 
promise.  Even  if  you  escape  these  ills,  in  child-birth 
will  you  dare  pray  for  aid  from  her  light-bringing a 
hands  ?  She  will  hear  these  words — and  then, 
recalling  what  she  has  heard,  will  ask  of  you  from 
what  husband  come  those  pangs.  You  will  promise 
a  votive  gift — she  knows  your  promises  are  false  ; 
you  will  make  oath — she  knows  you  can  deceive 
the  gods ! 

197  'Tis  not  a  matter  of  myself;  the  care  I  labour 
with  is  greater.  It  is  concern  for  your  life  that 
fills  my  heart.  Why,  but  now  when  your  life  was 
in  doubt,  did  your  frightened  parents  weep  with 
fear,  whom  you  keep  ignorant  of  your  crime  ?  And 
why  should  they  be  ignorant  ? — you  could  tell  your 
mother  all.  What  you  have  done,  Cydippe,  needs 
no  blush.  See  you  relate  in  order  how  you  first 
became  known  to  me,  while  she  was  herself  making 
sacrifice  to  the  goddess  of  the  quiver ;  how  at  sight 
of  you,  if  perchance  you  noticed,  I  straight  stood 
still  with  eyes  fixed  on  your  charms ;  and  how, 
while  I  gazed  on  you  too  eagerly — sure  mark  of 
love's  madness — my  cloak  slipped  from  my  shoulder 
and  fell  ;  how,  after  that,  in  some  way  came  the 
rolling  apple,  with  its  treacherous  words  in    clever 

289 


OVID 

quod  quia  sit  lectum  sancta  praesente  Diana, 

esse  tuam  vinctam  numine  teste  fidem 
ne  tamen  ignoret,  scripti  sententia  quae  sit, 

leeta  tibi  quondam  nunc  quoque  verba  refer. 
"  nube,    precor,"    dieet,    "cui    te    bona    numina 

iungunt ;  215 

quern  fore  iurasti,  sit  gener  ille  mihi. 
quisquis  is  est,  placeat,  quoniam  placet  ante  Dianae  !  " 

talis  erit  mater,  si  modo  mater  erit. 
Sed  tamen  ut  quaerat l  quis  sim  qualisque,  videto. 

inveniet  vobis  consuluisse  deam.  220 

insula,  Coryciis  quondam  celeberrima  nymphis, 

cingitur  Aegaeo,  nomine  Cea,  mari. 
ilia  mihi  patria  est ;  nee,  si  generosa  probatis 

nomina,  despeetis  arguor  ortus  avis, 
sunt  et  opes  nobis,  sunt  et  sine  crimine  mores  ;     225 

amplius  utque  nihil,  me  tibi  iungit  Amor, 
appeteres  talem  vel  non  iurata  maritum ; 

iuratae  vel  non  talis  habendus  erat. 
Haec  tibi  me  in  somnis  iaculatrix  scribere  Phoebe  ; 

haec  tibi  me  vigilem  scribere  iussit  Amor  ;         230 
e  quibus  alterius  mihi  iam  nocuere  sagittae, 

alterius  noceant  ne  tibi  tela,  cave  ! 
iuncta  salus  nostra  est — miserere  meique  tuique  ; 

quid  dubitas  unam  ferre  duobus  opem  ? 
quod  si  contigerit,  cum  iam  data  signa  sonabunt,  235 

tinctaque  votivo  sanguine  Delos  erit, 
1  ut  quaerat  s  :  et  quaerat  &>. 

"  For  the  beginning  of  the  ceremony. 

1  rrhe   sacrifices   attendant    upon    Acontius'    marriage   to 
Cydippe. 

290 


THE    HEROIDES   XX 

character ;  and  how,  because  they  were  read  in 
holy  Diana's  presence,  you  were  bound  by  a  pledge 
with  deity  to  witness.  For  fear  that  after  all  she 
may  not  know  the  import  of  the  writing,  repeat  now 
again  to  her  the  words  once  read  by  you.  "  Wed, 
I  pray,"  she  will  say,  "  him  to  whom  the  good  gods 
join  you  ;  the  one  you  swore  should  be,  let  be  my 
son-in-law.  Whoever  he  is,  let  him  be  our  choice, 
since  he  was  Diana's  choice  before  !  "  Such  will  be 
your  mother's  word,  if  only  she  is  a  mother. 

219  And  yet,  see  that  she  seeks  out  who  I  am,  and 
of  what  ways.  She  will  find  that  the  goddess  had 
you  and  yours  at  heart.  An  isle  once  thronged  by 
the  Corycian  nymphs  is  girdled  by  the  Aegean  sea; 
its  name  is  Cea.  That  is  the  land  of  my  fathers  ; 
nor,  if  you  look  with  favour  on  high-born  names, 
am  I  to  be  charged  with  birth  from  grandsires  of  no 
repute.  We  have  wealth,  too,  and  we  have  a  name 
above  reproach ;  and,  though  there  were  nothing 
else,  I  am  bound  to  you  by  Love.  You  would  aspire 
to  such  a  husband  even  though  you  had  not  sworn  ; 
now  that  you  have  sworn,  even  though  lie  were  not 
such,  you  should  accept  him. 

22y  These  words  Phoebe,  she  of  the  darts,  bade 
me  in  my  dreams  to  write  you  ;  these  words  in  my 
waking  hours  Love  bade  me  write.  The  arrows 
of  the  one  of  them  have  already  wounded  me  ; 
that  the  darts  of  the  other  wound  not  you,  take 
heed!  Your  safety  is  joined  with  mine  —  have 
compassion  on  me  and  on  yourself;  why  hesitate  to 
aid  us  both  at  once  ?  If  you  shall  do  this,  in  the 
day  when  the  sounding  signals0  will  be  given  and 
Delos  be  stained  with  votive   blood,6  a  golden  image 


291 


OVID 

aurea  ponetur  mail  felicis  imago, 

causaque  versiculis  scripta  duobus  erit : 

EFFIGIE   POMI  TESTATUR  ACONTIUS  HUIUS 

QUAE  FUERINT   IN  EO  SCRIPTA  FL'ISSE  RATA.  240 

Longior  infirmum  ne  lasset  epistula  corpus 
clausaque  consueto  sit  sibi  fine  :  vale  ! 


XXI 

Cydippe   Acontio 

Pertimlt,  scriptumque  tuum  sine  murmure  legi, 

iuraret  ne  quos  inscia  lingua  deos. 
et  puto  captasses  iterum,  nisi,  ut  ipse  fateris, 

promissam  scires  me  satis  esse  semel. 
nee  lectura  fui,  sed,  si  tibi  dura  fuissem,  5 

aucta  foret  saevae  forsitan  ira  deae. 
omnia  cum  faciam,  cum  dem  pia  tura  Dianae, 

ilia  tamen  iusta  plus  tibi  parte  favet, 
utque  cupis  credi,  memori  te  vindicat  ira ; 

talis  in  Hippolyto  vix  fuit  ilia  suo.  10 

at  melius  virgo  favisset  virginis  annis, 

quos  vereor  paucos  ne  velit  esse  mihi.1 
Languor  enim  causis  non  apparcntibus  baeret  ; 

adiuvor  et  nulla  fessa  medentis  ope. 
quam    tibi    nunc    gracilem    vix    haec    rescribere 

quamque  15 

pallida  vix  cubito  membra  levare  putas  ? 

1  (rood  MSS.  and  Plan,  do  not  contain  13 — end. 


a  The  chaste  favourite  of  the  goddess,  courted  by  Phaedra, 
who  compassed  his  death  because  of  his  refusal.     See  iv. 

292 


THE    HER01DKS    XXI 

of  the  blessed  apple  shall  be  offered  up,  and  the  cause 
of  its  offering  shall  be  set  forth  in  verses  twain  : 

BY  THIS  IMAGE  OF  THE  APPLE  DOTH   ACONTIUS  DECLARE 
THAT    WHAT     ONCE    WAS    WRITTEN     ON     IT     NOW    HATH 
HAD    FULFILMENT    FAIR. 

That  too  long  a  letter  may  not  weary  your 
weakened  frame,  and  that  it  may  close  with  the 
accustomed  end  :  fare  well  ! 


XXI 

CVDIPPE    TO    AcONTIUS 

All  fearful,  I  read  what  you  wrote  without  so 
much  as  a  murmur,  lest  my  tongue  unwittingly 
might  swear  by  some  divinity.  And  I  believe  you 
would  have  tried  to  snare  me  a  second  time,  did 
you  not  know,  as  you  yourself  confess,  that  one 
pledge  from  me  was  enough.  I  should  not  have 
read  at  all  ;  but  had  I  been  hard  with  you,  the 
anger  of  the  cruel  goddess  might  have  grown. 
Though  I  do  everything,  though  I  offer  duteous 
incense  to  Diana,  she  none  the  less  favours  you 
more  than  your  due,  and,  as  you  are  eager  for  me 
to  believe,  avenges  you  with  unforgetting  anger; 
scarce  was  she  such  toward  her  own  Hippolvtus." 
Yet  the  maiden  goddess  had  done  better  to  favour 
the  years  of  a  maiden  like  me  — years  which  I  fear 
she  wishes  few  for  me. 

13  For  the  languor  clings  to  me,  for  causes  that  do 
not  appear ;  worn  out,  I  find  no  help  in  the 
physician's  art.  How  thin  and  wasted  am  I  now, 
think  you,  scarce  able  to  write  this  answer  to  you  ? 

293 


OVID 

nunc  timor  accedit,  ne  quis  nisi  conseia  nutrix 

colloquii  nobis  sentiat  esse  vices, 
ante  fores  sedet  haec  quid  agamque  rogantibus  intus, 

ut  possim  tuto  scribere,  "dormit,"  ait.  20 

mox,  ubi,  secreti  longi  causa  optima,  somnus 

credibilis  tarda  desinit  esse  mora, 
iamque  venire  videt  quos  non  admittere  durum  est, 

excreat  et  ficta  dat  mihi  signa  nota. 
sicut  erant,  properans  verba  imperfecta  relinquo,      25 

et  tegitur  trepido  littera  coepta l  sinu. 
inde  meos  digitos  iterum  repetita  fatigat ; 

quantus  sit  nobis  adspicis  ipse  labor, 
quo  peream  si  dignus  eras,  ut  vera  loquamur ; 

sed  melior  iusto  quamque  mereris  ego.  30 

Ergo  te  propter  totiens  incerta  salutis 

commentis  poenas  doque  dedique  tuis  ? 
haec  nobis  formae  te  laudatore  superbae 

contingit  merces  ?  et  placuisse  nocet  ? 
si  tibi  deformis,  quod  mallem,  visa  fuissem,  35 

culj)atum  nulla  corpus  egeret  ope  ; 
nunc  laudata  gemo,  nunc  me  certamine  vestro 

perditis,  et  proprio  vulneror  ipsa  bono, 
dum  neque  tu  cedis,  nee  se  putat  ille  secundum, 

tu  votis  obstas  illius,  ille  tuis.  40 

ipsa  velut  navis  iactor  quam  certus  in  altum 

propellit  Boreas,  aestus  et  unda  refert, 
1  cauta  MSS. :  coepta  Dilthey. 
294 


THE    HEROIDES   XXI 

and  how  pale  the  body  I  scarce  can  raise  upon 
my  arm  ?  And  now  I  feel  an  added  fear,  lest 
someone  besides  the  nurse  who  shares  my  secret 
may  see  that  we  are  interchanging  words.  She 
sits  before  the  door,  and  when  they  ask  how  I 
do  within,  answers,  "She  sleeps,"  that  I  may  write 
in  safety.  Presently,  when  sleep,  the  excellent 
excuse  for  my  long  retreat,  no  longer  wins  belief 
because  I  tarry  so,  and  now  she  sees  those  coming 
whom  not  to  admit  is  hard,  she  clears  her  throat 
and  thus  gives  me  the  sign  agreed  upon.  Just 
as  they  are,  in  haste  I  leave  my  words  un- 
finished, and  the  letter  I  have  begun  is  hid  in  my 
trembling  bosom.  Taken  thence,  a  second  time  it 
fatigues  my  fingers ;  how  great  the  toil  to  me, 
yourself  can  see.  May  I  perish  if,  to  speak  truth, 
you  were  worthy  of  it ;  but  I  am  kinder  than  is  just 
or  you  deserve. 

31  So,  then,  'tis  on  your  account  that  I  am  so 
many  times  uncertain  of  health,  and  'tis  for  your 
lying  tricks  that  I  am  and  have  been  punished  ? 
Is  tins  the  reward  that  falls  to  my  beauty,  proud 
in  your  praise  ?  Must  I  suffer  for  having  pleased  ? 
If  I  had  seemed  misshapen  to  you — and  would  I 
had  ! — you  would  have  thought  ill  of  my  body,  and 
now  it  would  need  no  help ;  but  I  met  with 
praise,  and  now  I  groan ;  now  you  two  with  your 
strife  are  my  despair,  and  my  own  beauty  itself 
wounds  me.  While  neither  you  yield  to  him  nor 
he  deems  him  second  to  you,  you  hinder  his 
prayers,  he  hinders  yours.  I  myself  am  tossed  like 
a  ship  which  steadfast  Boreas  drives  out  into  the 
deep,  and  tide  and  wave  bring  back,  and  when  the 


295 


OVID 

cumque  dies  caris  optata  parentibus  instat, 

inmodicus  pariter  corporis  ardor  adest — 
ei  mihi,  coniugii  tempus  crudelis  ad  ipsum  45 

Persephone  nostras  pulsat  acerba  fores  ! 
iam  pudetj  et  timeo,  quamvis  mihi  conscia  non  sim, 

offensos  videar  ne  meruisse  deos. 
accidere  haec  aliquis  casu  contendit,  at  alter 

aceeptum  superis  hune  negat  esse  virum  ;  50 

neve  nihil  credas  in  te  quoque  dicere  famam, 

facta  veneficiis  pars  putat  ista  tuis. 
causa  latet,  mala  nostra  patent ;  vos  pace  movetis 

aspera  submota  proelia,  plector  ego  ! 
Die  mihi  *  nunc,  solitoque  tibi  ne  decipe  more  :       55 

quid  facies  odio,  sic  ubi  amore  noces  ? 
si  laedis,  quod  amas,  hostem  sapienter  amabis — 

me,  precor,  ut  serves,  perdere  velle  velis  ! 
aut  tibi  iam  nulla  est  speratae  cura  puellae, 

quam  ferus  indigna  tabe  perire  sinis,  60 

aut,  dea  si  frustra  pro  me  tibi  saeva  rogatur, 

quid  mihi  te  iactas  ?  gratia  nulla  tua.  est ! 
elige,  quid  fingas  :  non  vis  placare  Dianam — 

inmemor  es  nostri ;  non  potes — ilia  tui  est ! 
Vel  numquam  mall  em  vel  non  mihi  tempore  in 

illo  65 

esset  in  Aegaeis  cognita  Delos  aquis  ! 
tunc  mea  difficili  deducta  est  aequore  navis, 

et  fuit  ad  coeptas  hora  sinistra  vias. 
quo  pede  processi !  quo  me  pede  limine  movi  ! 

picta  citae  tetigi  quo  pede  texta  ratis !  70 

1  dicam  MSS.:  die  a!  Pa.:  die  mihi  Bent. 

"  Eager  and  spirited. 
296 


THE    HEROIDRS   XXI 

day  longed  for  by  my  parents  dear  draws  nigh,  at 
the  same  time  unmeasured  burning  seizes  on  my 
frame — ah  me,  at  the  very  time  of  marriage  cruel 
Persephone  knocks  at  my  door  before  her  day  ! 
I  already  am  shamed,  and  in  fear,  though  I  feel 
no  guilt  within,  lest  I  appear  to  have  merited  the 
displeasure  of  the  gods.  One  contends  that  my 
affliction  is  the  work  of  chance  ;  another  says  that 
my  destined  husband  finds  not  favour  with  the 
gods  ;  and,  lest  you  think  yourself  untouched  by 
what  men  say,  there  are  also  some  who  think  you 
the  cause,  by  poisonous  arts.  Their  source  is  hidden, 
but  my  ills  are  clear  to  see  ;  you  two  stir  up  fierce 
strife  and  banish  peace,  and  the  blows  are  mine  ! 

55  Tell  me  now,  and  deceive  me  not  in  your 
wonted  way  :  what  will  you  do  from  hatred,  when 
you  harm  me  so  from  love  ?  If  you  injure  one  you 
love,  'twill  be  reason  to  love  your  foe — to  save  me, 
I  pray  you,  will  to  wish  my  doom  !  Either  you  care 
no  longer  for  the  hoped-for  maid,  whom  with  hard 
heart  you  are  letting  waste  away  to  an  unworthy 
death,  or  if  in  vain  you  beseech  for  me  the  cruel 
goddess,  why  boast  yourself  to  me?— you  have  no 
favour  with  her!  Choose  which  case  you  will:  you 
do  not  wish  to  placate  Diana — you  have  forgotten 
me  ;  you  have  no  power  with  her — 'tis  she  has 
forgotten  you  ! 

05  I  would  I  had  either  never — or  not  at  that 
time — known  Delos  in  the  Aegean  waters  !  That 
was  the  time  my  ship  set  forth  on  a  difficult  sea,  and 
I  entered  on  a  voyage  in  ill-omened  hour.  With 
what  step"  I  came  forth  !  With  what  step  1  started 
from  my  threshold  !  The  painted  deck  of  the 
swift    ship — with     what    step    I    trod    it  !      Twice, 

297 


OVID 

bis  tamen  adverso  redierunt  carbasa  vento — 

mentior,  a  demens  !  ille  secundus  erat ! 
ille  secundus  ei-at  qui  me  referebat  euntem, 

quique  parum  felix  inpediebat  iter, 
atque  utinam  constans  contra  mea  vela  fuisset —     75 

sed  stultum  est  venti  de  levitate  queri. 
Mota  loci  fama  properabam  visere  Delon 

et  facere  ignava  puppe  videbar  iter, 
quam  saepe  ut  tardis  feci  convicia  remis, 

questaque  sum  vento  lintea  parca  dari !  80 

et  iam  transieram  Myconon,  iam  Tenon  et  Andron, 

inque  meis  oculis  Candida  Delos  erat ; 
quam  procul  ut  vidi,  "quid  me  fugis,  insula,"  dixi, 

"laberis  in  magno  numquid,  ut  ante,  mari  ?  " 
Institeram  terrae,  cum  iam  prope  luce  peracta         85 

demere  purpureis  sol  iuga  vellet  equis. 
quos  idem  solitos  postquam  revocavit  ad  ortus, 

comuntur  nostrae  matre  iubente  comae, 
ipsa  dedit  gemmas  digitis  et  crinibus  aurum, 

et  vestes  umeris  induit  ipsa  meis.  90 

protinus  egressae  superis,  quibus  insula  sacra  est,1 

flava  salutatis  tura  merumque  damus  ; 
dumque  parens  aras  votivo  sanguine  tingit, 

festaque  fumosis  ingerit  exta  focis, 
sedula  me  nutrix  alias  quoque  ducit  in  aedes,  95 

erramusque  vago  per  loca  sacra  pede. 
et  modo  porticibus  spatior  modo  munera  regum 

miror  et  in  cunctis  stantia  signa  locis  ; 

1  grata  est  Ps  Bent. 
2q8 


THE   HEROIDES   XXI 

none  the  less,  my  canvas  put  about  befoi*e  an 
adverse  wind — ah,  senseless  that  I  am,  I  lie  !— a 
favouring  wind  was  that !  A  favouring  wind  it  was 
that  brought  me  back  from  my  going,  and  hindered 
the  way  that  had  little  happiness  for  me.  Ah,  would 
it  had  been  constant  against  my  sails — but  it  is 
foolish  to  complain  of  fickle  winds. 

77  Moved  by  the  fame  of  the  place,  I  was  in  eager 
haste  to  visit  Delos,  and  the  craft  in  which  I  sailed 
seemed  spiritless.  How  oft  did  I  chide  the  oars  for 
being  slow,  and  complain  that  sparing  canvas  was 
given  to  the  wind  !  And  now  I  had  passed  Myconos, 
now  Tenos  and  Andros,  and  Delos  gleamed  "  before 
my  eyes.  When  I  beheld  it  from  afar,  "  Why  dost 
thou  fly  from  me,  O  isle  ?  "  I  cried ;  "art  thou  afloat 
in  the  great  sea,  as  in  days  of  yore  ?  " 

85  I  had  set  foot  upon  land ;  the  light  was  almost 
gone,  and  the  sun  was  making  ready  to  take  their 
yokes  from  his  shining  steeds.  When  he  has  like- 
wise called  them  once  more  to  their  accustomed 
rising,  my  hair  is  dressed  at  the  bidding  of  my 
mother.  With  her  own  hand  she  sets  gems  upon 
my  fingers  and  gold  in  my  tresses,  and  with  her  own 
hand  places  the  robes  about  my  shoulders.  Straight- 
way setting  forth,  Ave  greet  the  deities  to  whom  the 
isle  is  consecrate,  and  offer  up  the  golden  incense 
and  the  wine ;  and  while  my  mother  stains  the 
altars  with  votive  blood,  and  piles  the  solemn  entrails 
on  the  smoking  altar-flames,  my  busy  nurse  conducts 
me  to  other  temples  also,  and  we  stray  with  wander- 
ing step  about  the  holy  precincts.  *And  now  I  walk 
in  the  porticoes,  now  look  with  wonder  on  the  gifts 
of  kings,  and  the  statues  standing  evervwhere  ;  I 
°  The  (J reek  islands  are  masses  of  limestone. 

299 


OVID 

miror  et  innumeris  structam  de  cornibus  aranx, 

et  de  qua  paribus  arbore  nixa  dea  est,  100 

et  quae  praeterea — neque  enim  meminive  libetve 

quidquid  ibi  vidi  dieere — Delos  habet. 
Forsitan  haec  spectaris  a  te  spectabar,  Aconti, 

visaque  simplicitas  est  mea  posse  capi. 
in  templum  redeo  gradibus  sublime  Dianae —        105 

tutior  hoc  ecquis  debuit  esse  locus  ? 
mittitur  ante  pedes  malum  cum  carmine  tali — 

ei  mihi,  iuravi  nunc  quoque  paene  tibi  ! 
sustulit  hoc  nutrix  mirataque  "perlege  !  "  dixit. 

insidias  legi,  magne  poeta,  tuas  !  110 

nomine  coniugii  dicto  confusa  pudore, 

sensi  me  totis  erubuisse  genis, 
luminaque  in  gremio  veluti  defixa  tenebam — 

lumina  propositi  facta  ininistra  tui. 
inprobe,  quid  gaudes  ?  aut  quae  tibi  gloria  parta 

est?  115 

quidve  vir  elusa  virgine  laudis  habes  ? 
non  ego  constiteram  sumpta  peltata  securi, 

qualis  in  Iliaco  Penthesilea  solo  ; 
nullus  Amazonio  caelatus  balteus  auro, 

sicut  ab  Hippolyte,  praeda  relata  tibi  est.  120 

verba  quid  exultas  tua  si  mihi  verba  dederunt, 

sumque  parum  prudens  capta  puella  dolis  ? 
Cydippen  pomum,  pomum  Schoeneida  cepit ; 

tu  nunc  Hippomenes  scilicet  alter  eris ! 

"  A  great  wonder  in  its  time  ;  built  by  Apollo  of  the  horns 
of  his  sister's  sacrificial  victims. 

8  Latona,  mother  of  Apollo  and  Diana. 

c  Penthesilea  and  Hippolyte  were  queens  of  the  Amazons  ; 


THE    HEROIDES   XXI 

look  with  wonder,  too,  on  the  altar  built  of  countless 
horns/  and  the  tree  that  stayed  the  goddess  in  her 
throes,6  and  all  things  else  that  Delos  holds — for 
memory  would  not  serve,  nor  mood  allow,  to  tell  of 
all  I  looked  on  there. 

103  Perhaps,  thus  gazing,  I  was  gazed  upon  by  you, 
Acontius,  and  my  simple  nature  seemed  an  easy  prey. 
I  return  to  Diana's  temple,  with  its  lofty  approach 
of  steps — ought  any  place  to  be  safer  than  this  ? — ■ 
when  there  is  thrown  before  my  feet  an  apple  with 
this  verse  that  follows — ah  me,  now  again  I  almost 
made  oath  to  you  !  Nurse  took  it  up,  looked  in 
amaze,  and  "  Read  it  through  !  "  she  said.  I  read 
your  treacherous  verse,  O  mighty  poet  !  At  mention 
of  the  name  of  wedlock  I  was  confused  and  shamed, 
and  felt  the  blushes  cover  all  my  face,  and  my  eyes 
I  kept  upon  my  bosom  as  if  fastened  there — those 
eyes  that  were  made  ministers  to  your  intent. 
Wretch,  why  rejoice  ?  or  what  glory  have  you 
gained  ?  or  what  praise  have  you  won,  a  man,  by 
playing  on  a  maid  ?  I  did  not  present  myself  before 
you  with  buckler  and  axe  in  hand,  like  a  Penthesilea 
on  the  soil  of  Ilion  ;  no  sword-girdle,  chased  with 
Amazonian  gold,  was  offered  you  for  spoil  by  me,  as 
by  some  Hippolyte.0  Why  exult  if  your  words  de- 
ceived me,  and  I,  a  girl  of  little  wisdom,  was  taken 
by  your  wiles  ?  Cydippe  was  snared  by  the  apple,  an 
apple  snared  Schoeneus'  child  ;  d  you  now  of  a  truth 
will    be  a   second    Hippomenes  !     Yet   had  it  been 

the  former  was  slain  by  Achilles  at  Troy,  the  latter's  sword- 
belt  was  won  by  Hercules  as  his  sixth  labour,  and  she  was 
given  by  him  in  marriage  to  Theseus  for  his  aid. 

d  Atalanta,  who  lost  the  race  by  stopping  for  the  golden 
apples  dropped  by  Hippomenes. 

301 


OVID 

at  fuerat  melius,  si  te  puer  iste  tenebat,  125 

quern  tu  nescio  quas  dicis  habere  faces,1 
more  bonis  solito  spem  non  eorrumpere  fraude ; 

exoranda  tibi,  non  capienda  fui ! 
Cur,  me  cum  peteres,  ea  non  profitenda  putabas, 

propter  quae  nobis  ipse  petendus  eras?  130 

cogere  cur  potius  qaam  persuadere  volebas, 

si  poteram  audita  condicione  capi  ? 
quid  tibi  nunc  prodest  iurandi  formula  iuris 

linguaque  praesentem  testificata  dcam  ? 
quae  iurat,  mens  est.      nil  coniuravimus  ilia  ;  135 

ilia  fidem  dictis  addere  sola  potest, 
consilium  prudensque  animi  sententia  iurat, 

et  nisi  iudicii  vincula  nulla  valent. 
si  tibi  coniugium  volui  promittere  nostrum, 

exige  polliciti  debita  iura  tori  ;  140 

sed  si  nil  dedimus  praeter  sine  pectore  vocem, 

verba  suis  frustra  viribus  orba  tenes. 
non  ego  iuravi — legi  iurantia  verba  ; 

vir  mihi  non  isto  more  legendus  eras, 
decipe  sic  alias — succedat  epistula  porno  !  145 

si  valet  hoc,  magnas  ditibus  L'  aufer  opes  ; 
fac  iurent  reges  sua  se  tibi  regna  daturos, 

sitque  tuum  toto  quidquid  in  orbe  placet  ! 
maior  es  hoc  ipsa  multo,  mihi  crede,  Diana, 

si  tua  tarn  praesens  littera  numen  habet.  150 

Cum  tamen  haec  dixi,  cum  me  tibi  firma  negavi, 

cum  bene  promissi  causa  peracta  mei  est, 
confiteor,  timeo  saevae  Latoidos  iram 

et  corpus  laedi  suspicor  inde  meum. 

1  vices  Dilthey  Ehw.  2  ditibus  Hein.:  divitis  MSS. 


THE    HEROIDES   XXI 

better  for  you — if  that  boy  really  held  you  captive 
who  you  say  has  certain  torches — to  do  as  good  men 
are  wont,  and  not  cheat  your  hope  by  dealing  falsely  ; 
you  should  have  won  me  by  persuasion,  not  taken 
me  whether  or  no  ! 

129  Why,  when  you  sought  mv  hand,  did  you  not 
think  worth  declaring  those  things  that  made  your 
own  hand  worth  my  seeking  ?  Why  did  you  wish 
to  compel  me  rather  than  persuade,  if  I  could  be 
won  by  listening  to  your  suit  ?  Of  what  avail 
to  you  now  the  formal  words  of  an  oath,  and  the 
tongue  that  called  on  present  deity  to  witness  ?  It 
is  the  mind  that  swears,  and  I  have  taken  no  oath 
with  that ;  it  alone  can  lend  good  faith  to  words. 
It  is  counsel  and  the  prudent  reasoning  of  the  soul 
that  swear,  and,  except  the  bonds  of  the  judgment, 
none  avail.  If  I  have  willed  to  pledge  my  hand  to  you, 
exact  the  due  rights  of  the  promised  marriage-bed  ; 
but  if  I  have  given  you  naught  but  my  voice,  without 
my  heart,  you  possess  in  vain  but  words  without  a 
force  of  their  own.  I  took  no  oath — I  read  words 
that  formed  an  oath  ;  that  was  no  way  for  you  to  be 
chosen  to  husband  by  me.  Deceive  thus  other  maids 
— let  a  letter  follow  an  apple !  If  this  plan  holds, 
win  away  their  great  wealth  from  the  rich  ;  make 
kings  take  oath  to  give  their  thrones  to  you,  and  let 
whatsoever  pleases  you  in  all  the  world  be  yours  ! 
You  are  much  greater  in  this,  believe  me,  than 
Diana's  self,  if  your  written  word  has  in  it  such 
present  deity. 

151  Nevertheless,  after  saying  this,  after  firmly  re- 
fusing myself  to  you,  after  having  finished  pleading 
the  cause  of  my  promise  to  you,  I  confess  I  fear  the 
anger  of  Leto's  cruel  daughter  and  suspect  that  from 

3°3 


OVID 

nam  quare,  quotiens  socialia  sacra  parantur,  155 

nupturae  totiens  languida  membra  cadunt  ? 
ter  mihi  iam  veniens  positas  Hymenaeus  ad  aras 

fugit,  et  a  thalami  limine  terga  dedit, 
vixque  manu  pigra  totiens  infusa  resurgunt 

lumina,  vix  moto  eorripit  igne  faces.  160 

saepe  coronatis  stillant  unguenta  capillis 

et  trahitur  multo  splendida  palla  croco. 
cum  tetigit  limen,  lacrimas  mortisque  timorem 

cernit  et  a  cultu  multa  remota  sue», 
proicit  ipse  sua  deductas  fronte  coronas,  1G5 

spissaque  de  nitidis  tergit  amoma  comis  ; 
et  pudet  in  tristi  laetum  consurgere  turba, 

quique  erat  in  palla,  transit  in  ora  rubor.1 
At  mihi,  vae  miserae  !  torrentur  febribus  artus 

et  gravius  iusto  pallia  pondus  habent,  170 

nostraque  plorantes  video  super  ora  parentes, 

et  face  pro  thalami  fax  mihi  mortis  adest. 
parce  laboranti,  picta  dea  laeta  pharetra, 

daque  salutiferam  iam  mihi  fratris  opem. 
turpe  tibi  est,  ilium  causas  depellere  leti,  175 

te  contra  titulum  mortis  habere  meae. 
numquid,  in  umbroso  cum  velles  fonte  lavari, 

inprudens  vultus  ad  tua  labra  tuli  ? 
praeteriine  tuas  de  tot  caelestibus  aras, 

aque  tua  est  nostra  spreta  parente  parens  ?  180 

1  167,  168  before  165  Merl: 

a  A  reference  to  Oeneus,  whose  neglect  of  Diana  caused  the 
coming  of  the  Calydonian  boar. 

3°4 


THE   HEROIDES    XXI 

her  comes  my  body's  ill.  For  why  is  it  that,  as  oft 
as  the  sacraments  for  marriage  are  made  ready,  so 
oft  the  limbs  of  the  bride-to-be  sink  down  in 
languor  ?  Thrice  now  has  Hymenaeus  come  to 
the  altars  reared  for  me  and  fled,  turning  his 
back  upon  the  threshold  of  my  wedding-chamber  ; 
the  lights  so  oft  replenished  by  his  lazy  hand 
scarce  rise  again,  scarce  does  he  keep  the  torch 
alight  by  waving  it.  Oft  does  the  perfume  distil 
from  his  wreathed  locks,  and  the  mantle  he 
sweeps  along  is  splendid  with  much  saffron. 
When  he  has  touched  the  threshold,  and  sees 
tears  and  dread  of  death,  and  much  that  is  far 
removed  from  the  ways  he  keeps,  with  his  own 
hand  he  tears  the  garlands  from  his  brow  and 
casts  them  forth,  and  dries  the  dense  balsam  from 
his  glistening  locks ;  he  shames  to  stand  forth 
glad  in  a  gloomy  throng,  and  the  blush  that  was 
in  his  mantle  passes  to  his  cheeks. 

169  But  for  me — ah,  wretched  ! — my  limbs  are 
parched  with  fever,  and  the  stuffs  that  cover  me  are 
heavier  than  their  wont ;  I  see  my  parents  weeping 
over  me,  and  instead  of  the  wedding-torch  the  torch 
of  death  is  at  hand.  Spare  a  maid  in  distress,  () 
goddess  whose  joy  is  the  painted  quiver,  and  grant 
me  the  health-bringing  aid  of  thy  brother  !  It  is 
shame  to  thee  that  he  drive  aAvay  the  causes  of 
doom,  and  that  thou,  in  contrast,  have  credit  for  my 
death.  Can  it  be  that,  when  thou  didst  wish  to  bathe 
in  shady  pool,  I  without  witting  cast  eyes  upon  thee 
at  thy  bath  ?  Have  I  passed  thy  altars  by,  among 
those  of  so  many  deities  of  heaven  ?a  Has  thy  mother 
been  scorned  by  mine?''  I  have  sinned  in  naught 
b  Niobe's  boast  of  her  children  to  Leto. 

3°  5 


OVID 

nil  ego  peccavi,  nisi  quod  periuria  legi 

inque  par urn  fausto  carmine  docta  fui. 
Tu  quoque  pro  nobis,  si  non  mentiris  amorem, 

tura  feras  ;  prosint.  quae  noeuere,  manus  ! 
cur.  quae  succenset  quod  adhuc  tibi  pacta  puella     185 

non  tua  sit,  fieri  ne  tua  possit,  agit  ? 
omnia  de  viva  tibi  sunt  speranda  ;  quid  aufert 

saeva  mihi  vitam,  spem  tibi  diva  mei  ? 
Xec  tu  credideris  ilium,  cui  destinor  uxor. 

aegra  superposita  membra  fovere  manu.  190 

adsidet  ille  quidem,  quantum  permittitur.  ipse 

sed  meminit  nostrum  virginis  esse  torum. 
iam  quoque  uescio  quid  de  me  sensisse  videtur ; 

nam  lacrimae  causa  saepe  latcnte  cadunt. 
et  minus  audacter  blanditur  et  oscula  rara  195 

appetit 1  et  timidu  me  vocat  ore  suam. 
aec  miror  sensisse,  notis  cum  prodar  apertis  ; 

in  dcxtrum  versor,  cum  venit  ille,  latus, 
ncc  loquor,  et  tecto  simulatur  lumine  somnus, 

captantem  tactus  reicioque  manum.  200 

ingemit  et  tacito  suspirat  pectore,  me  quod 

offensam,  quamvis  non  mcrcatur,  habet. 
ei  mihi,  quod  gaudes,  et  te  iuvat  ista  voluntas  !  2 

ei  mihi,  quod  sensus  sum  tibi  fassa  meos  ! 
si  mihi  lingua  foret,3  tu  nostra  iustius  ira.  205 

qui  mihi  tendebas  retia,  dignus  era-. 
Scrims,  ut  invalidum  liceat  tibi  visere  corpus. 

es  procul  a  nobis,  et  tamen  inde  noces. 
mirabar  quare  tibi  nomen  Acontius  esset ; 

quod  faciat  longe  vulnus,  acumen  habes.  210 

1  appetit  Pa.:  accipit  MSS.:  admovet  Dilthey  Ehv\: 
applicat  IIous. 

-  voluntas  /.  F.  Hedsinger:  ista  voluntas  P :  ipsavoluptas 
Dilthty.  3  SoLv:  ei  mihi  lingua-  labat  Ehu\:  etc. 

306 


THE    HEROIDES   XXI 

except  that  I  have  read  a  false  oath,  and  been  clever 
with  unpropitious  verse. 

1S3  Do  you,  too,  if  your  love  is  not  a  lie,  offer  up 
incense  for  me ;  let  the  hands  help  which  harmed 
me  !  Why  does  the  hand  which  is  angered  because 
the  maiden  pledged  you  is  not  yet  yours  so  act  that 
yours  she  cannot  become  ?  While  still  I  live  you 
have  evervthing  to  hope ;  why  does  the  cruel  goddess 
take  from  me  my  life,  your  hope  of  me  from  you  ? 

1S9  Do  not  believe  that  he  whose  destined  wife 
I  am  lays  his  hand  on  me  to  fondle  my  sick  limbs. 
He  sits  by  me,  indeed,  as  much  as  he  may,  but  does 
not  forget  that  mine  is  a  virgin  bed.  He  seems 
already,  too,  to  feel  in  some  way  suspicion  of  me  ; 
for  his  tears  oft  fall  for  some  hidden  cause,  his 
flatteries  are  less  bold,  he  asks  for  few  kisses,  and 
calls  me  his  own  in  tones  that  are  but  timid.  Nor 
do  I  wonder  he  suspects,  for  I  betray  myself  by 
open  signs ;  I  turn  upon  my  right  side  when  he 
comes,  and  do  not  speak,  and  close  my  eyes  in 
simulated  sleep,  and  when  he  tries  to  touch  me  I 
throw  off  his  hand.  He  groans  and  sighs  in  his 
silent  breast,  for  he  suffers  my  displeasure  without 
deserving  it.  Ah  me,  that  you  rejoice  and  are 
pleased  by  that  state  of  my  will  !  Ah  me,  that  I 
have  confessed  my  feelings  to  you !  If  my  tongue 
should  speak  my  mind,  'twere  you  more  justly  de- 
served my  anger — you,  for  having  spread  the  net 
for  me. 

207  You  write  for  leave  to  come  and  see  me  in 
my  illness.  You  are  far  from  me,  and  yet  you  wrong 
me  even  from  there.  I  marvelled  why  your  name 
was  Acontius ;  it  is  because  you  have  the  keen  point 


3°7 


OVID 

certe  ego  convalui  nonduni  de  vulnere  tali, 

ut  iaculo  scriptis  eminus  icta  tuis. 
quid  tamen  hue  venias  ?  sane  miserabile  corpus, 

ingenii  videas  magna  1  tropaea  tui  ! 
concidimus  macie  ;  eolor  est  sine  sanguine,  qua- 

lem  215 

in  porno  refero  mente  fuisse  tuo, 
Candida  nee  mixto  sublueent  ora  rubore. 

forma  novi  talis  marmoris  esse  solet ; 
argenti  color  est  inter  convivia  talis, 

quod  tactum  gelidae  frigore  pallet  aquae.  220 

si  me  nunc  videas,  visam  prius  esse  negabis, 

"arte  nee  est,"  dices,  "ista  petita  mea," 
promissique  fidem,  ne  sim  tibi  iuncta,  remittes, 

et  cupies  illud  non  meminisse  deam. 
forsitan  et  facies  iurem  ut  contraria  rursus,  225 

quaeque  legam  mittes  altera  verba  mihi. 
Sed  tamen  adspiceres  vellem,  quod  et  ipse  roga- 
bas — 

adspiceres  sponsae  languida  membra  tuae  ! 
durius  et  ferro  cum  sit  tibi  pectus,  Aconti, 

tu  veniam  nostris  vocibus  ipse  petas.  230 

ne  tamen  ignores  ope  qua  revalescere  possim, 

quaeritur  a  Delphis  fata  canente  deo. 
is  quoque  nescio  quam,  nunc  ut  vaga  fama  susurrat, 

neclectam  queritur  testis  habere  fidem. 
hoc  deus,  hoc  vates,  hoc  et  mea  carmina  dicunt —  235 

at  desunt  voto  carmina  nulla  tuo  ! 
unde  tibi  favor  hie  ?  nisi  si 2  nova  forte  reperta  est 

quae  capiat  magnos  littera  lecta  deos. 

1  magna  Dilthey  :  bina  L  :  digna  van  Leunep. 

2  si  Pa.:  quod  L  :  forte  nova  iru. 


308 


a  'Akovtwv,  a  javelin,  iaculum. 

b  I.e.  pray  for  the  remission  of  my  oath. 


THE    HEROIDES   XXI 

that  deals  a  wound  from  afar."  At  any  rate,  I  am 
not  yet  well  of  just  such  a  wound,  for  I  was  pierced 
by  your  letter,  a  far-thrown  dart.  Yet  why  should 
you  come  to  me  ?  Surely  but  a  wretched  body  you 
would  see — the  mighty  trophy  of  your  skill.  I  have 
wasted  and  fallen  away  :  my  colour  is  bloodless,  such 
as  I  recall  to  mind  was  the  hue  of  that  apple  of 
yours,  and  my  face  is  white,  with  no  rising  gleam 
of  mingled  red.  Such  is  wont  to  be  the  fairness  of 
fresh  marble ;  such  is  the  colour  of  silver  at  the 
banquet  table,  pale  with  the  chill  touch  of  icy  water. 
Should  you  see  me  now,  you  will  declare  you  have 
never  seen  me  before,  and  say  :  "  No  arts  of  mine 
e'er  sought  to  win  a  maid  like  that."  You  will  remit 
me  the  keeping  of  my  promise,  in  fear  lest  I  become 
yours,  and  will  long  for  the  goddess  to  forget  it  all. 
Perhaps  you  will  even  a  second  time  make  me 
swear,  but  in  contrary  wise,  and  will  send  me  words 
a  second  time  to  read. 

227  But  none  the  less  I  could  wish  you  to  look 
upon  me,  as  you  yourself  entreated — to  look  upon 
the  languid  limbs  of  your  promised  bride  !  Though 
your  heart  were  harder  than  steel,  Acontius,  you 
yourself  woidd  ask  pardon  for  my  uttered  words.6 
Yet,  that  you  be  not  unaware,  the  god  who  sings 
the  fates  at  Delphi  is  being  asked  by  what  means 
I  may  grow  strong  again.  He,  too,  as  vague  rumour 
whispers  now,  complains  of  the  neglect  of  some 
pledge  he  was  witness  to.  This  is  what  the  god 
says,  this  his  prophet,  and  this  the  verses  I  read 
— surely,  the  wish  of  your  heart  lacks  no  support  in 
prophetic  verse !  Whence  this  favour  to  you  ? — 
unless  perhaps  you  have  found  some  new  writing 
the  reading  whereof  ensnares  even  the  mighty  gods. 

3°9 


OVID 

teque  tenente  deos  numen  sequor  ipsa  deorum, 

doque  libens  victas  in  tua  vota  manus ;  240 

fassaque  sum  matri  deceptae  foedera  linguae 

lumina  fixa  tenens  })lena  pudoris  luimo. 
cetera  cura  tua  est ;  plus  hoc  quoque  virgine  factum, 

non  timuit  tecum  quod  mea  charta  loqui. 
iairi  satis  invalidos  calamo  lassavimus  artus,  245 

et  manus  officium  longius  aegra  negat. 
quid,  nisi  quod  cupio  me  iam  coniungere  tecum, 

restat  ?  ut  adscribat  littera  nostra  :  Yale. 


310 


THE    HEROIDES   XXI 

And  since  you  hold  bound  the  gods,  I  myself  follow 
their  will,  and  gladly  yield  my  vanquished  hands  in 
fulfilment  of  your  prayers  ;  with  eyes  full  of  shame 
held  fast  on  the  ground,  I  have  confessed  to  my 
mother  the  pledge  my  tongue  was  trapped  to 
give.  The  rest  must  be  your  care  ;  even  this,  that 
my  letter  has  not  feared  to  speak  with  you,  is  more 
than  a  maid  should  do.  Already  have  I  wearied 
enough  with  the  pen  my  weakened  members,  and 
my  sick  hand  refuses  longer  its  office.  What  remains 
for  my  letter,  if  I  say  that  I  long  to  be  united  with 
you  soon  ?  nothing  but  to  add  :   Fare  well  ! 


311 


II 
THE    AMORES 


MANUSCRIPTS    AND    EDITIONS 
OF    THE    AMORES 

1.  Codex  Parisinus  8242,  formerly  called  Puteanus, 

of  the  eleventh  century,  the  best  manuscript. 
It  contains  I.  ii.  51 — III.  xii.  26;  xiv.  3 — xv.  8. 

2.  Codex    Parisinus    7311    Regius,    of    the    tenth 

century.     It  contains  I.  i.  3 — ii.  49. 

3.  Codex     Sangallensis      864,    of     the     eleventh 

century.      It    contains    I. — III.  ix.   10,  with 
omission  of  I.  vi.  46 — viii.  74. 

The  Amoves  were  printed  first  in  the  two  editiones 
principes  of  Ovid  in  1471 — one  at  Rome,  and  the 
other  at  Bologna,  with  independent  texts.  A 
Venetian  edition  appeared  in  1491.  They  appeared 
in  Heinsius  in  1661. 

The  principal  modern  editions  of  the  Amoves  are 
those  of  Heinsius-Burmann,  Amsterdam,  1727  ; 
Lemaire,  Paris,  1820;  Merkel-Ehwald,  Leipzig, 
1888;  Riese,  1889;  Postgate's  Covpus  Poetaviim 
Latinorvm,  1894  ;  Nemethy,  Budapest,  1907  ;  Brandt, 
Leipzig,  1911. 


3X4 


SIGNS    AND    ABBREVIATIONS 


P.  —  Parisinus. 

S.  =  Sangallensis. 
Hein.  =  Heinsius. 
Merk.  =  Merkel. 
Ehw.  =  Ehwald. 


Burni.  =  Burmann. 
Post.  —  Postgate. 
Nem.  =  Nemethy. 

Pa.  =  Palmer. 

Br.  =  Brandt. 


3<5 


IN   APPRECIATION    OF   THE 
AM ORES 

The  reader  will  not  look  to  the  Amoves  for  pro- 
fundity of  any  sort,  whether  of  thought  or  emotion. 
Except  in  a  general  way,  they  are  not  even  the 
expression  of  personal  experience,  to  say  nothing  of 
depth  of  passion.  Corinna  is  only  one  of  several  loves 
to  whom  the  poet  pays  literaiy  court,  and  it  is  more 
than  doubtful  whether  even  she  is  real. 

It  is  exactly  this  absence  of  the  serious  that  gives 
the  Amoves  their  peculiar  charm— a  charm  different 
from  that  of  either  Catullus,  whose  passion  is  real,  or 
Tibullus  and  Propertius,  who  also  sing  in  somewhat 
serious  strain.  For  all  of  his  much  loving,  the  poet 
of  the  Amoves  is  philosophic  in  love,  and  his  light- 
hearted  freedom  from  its  pains  finds  light  and  airy  ex- 
pression. No  small  number  of  them,  indeed,  are  but 
slightlv  connected  with  love,  and  only  a  very  few,  as 
I.  vii.  and  III.  xi.,  seem  prompted  by  anything  that 
approaches  genuine  feeling.  The  Amoves  are  above 
all  the  product  of  poetic  fancy ;  the  poet's  experi- 
ence with  love  of  course  contributes,  and  contributes 
abundantly — but  it  only  conti'ibutes ;  it  is  the 
element  that  serves  for  the  fusing  of  his  artist's 
instinct  with  the  literature  of  love  with  which  his 
mind  is  saturated — the  poetry  of  his  Greek  and 
Roman  predecessors. 

The  heart  that  indites  the  matter  of  the  Amoves  is 
no  less  free  from  suspicion  of  heaviness  than  the  hand 
that  obeys  the  heart ;  their  language  is  limpid, 
smooth,  and  flowing,  fit  medium  of  their  fluent  and 

316 


IN  APPRECIATION  OF  THE  AMORES 

limpid  thought.  For  handling  of  themes  of  t lit- 
literary  sort,  what  could  be  more  gracious  and 
elegant  than  I.  L,  xv.,  II.  i.,  xii.,  xviii.,  and  III.  i.,  ix., 
xv.  ;  or  what  more  exquisitely  light  and  playful,  to 
mention  a  few  of  the  many  on  amatory  themes,  than 
I.  ii.,  ix.,  II.  iv.,  ix.,  x.,  xii.,  xv.,  and  III.  iii.  ;  or  what 
more  pleasing  than  II.  xvi.  and  III.  ii.,  iii.  as  little 
pictures  of  ancient  life  ?  for  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  the  Amores  afford  us  many  a  reflection  of  the 
Rome  and  Italy  of  their  time. 

The  Amores  are  no  exception  in  the  literature  of 
love,  and  here  and  there  display  offences  against 
even  a  liberal  taste.  The  translator  has  felt  obliged 
to  omit  one  poem  entire,  and  to  omit  or  disguise  a 
few  verses  in  other  poems  where,  in  spite  of  the 
poet's  exquisite  art,  a  faithful  rendering  might  offend 
the  sensibilities  of  the  reader,  if  not  the  literary 
taste.  Such  omissions  and  disguises  are,  however, 
few ;  if  thev  are  even  too  few,  it  is  because  the 
scholar  shrinks  from  tampering  with  the  integrity  of 
the  poet's  work.  To  any  who  may  resent  either 
what  has  been  omitted  or  what  has  been  retained, 
the  translator  addresses  the  words  of  Howells, 
substituting  the  name  of  Ovid  for  that  of  Chaucer  : 

"  I  am  not  going  to  pretend  that  there  are  not 
things  in  Ovid  which  one  would  be  the  better  for 
not  reading ;  and  so  far  as  these  words  of  mine  shall 
be  taken  for  counsel,  I  am  not  willing  that  they 
should  unqualifiedly  praise  him.  The  matter  is  by 
no  means  simple  ;  it  is  not  easy  to  conceive  of  a 
means  of  purifying  the  literature  of'  the  past  without 
weakening  it,  and  even  falsifying  it  ;  but  it  is  best  to 
own  that  it  is  in  all  respects  just  what  it  is,  and  not 
to  feign  it  otherwise." 

3l7 


P.    OVIDI    NASONIS    AMORES 

LIBER   PRIMUS 

EPIGRAMMA   IPSIUS 

Qui  modo  Nasonis  fueramus  quinque  libelli, 
tres  sumus  ;  hoc  illi  praetulit  auctor  opus. 

ut  iam  nulla  tibi  nos  sit  legisse  voluptas, 
at  levior  demptis  poena  duobus  erit. 

I 

Arma  gravi  numero  violentaque  bella  parabam 

edere,  materia  eonveniente  modis. 
par  erat  inferior  versus — risisse  Cupido 

dicitur  atque  unum  surripuisse  pedem. 
"  Quis  tibi,  saeve  puer,  dedit  hoc  in  carmina  iuris  ?  5 

Pieridum  vates,  non  tua  turba  sumus. 
quid,  si  praeripiat  flavae  Venus  arma  Minervae, 

ventilet  accensas  flava  Minerva  faces  ? 
quis  probet  in  silvis  Cererem  regnare  iugosis, 

lege  pharetratae  Virginis  arva.coli?  10 


THE 

AMORES  OF  P.   OVIDIUS   NASO 

BOOK   THE   FIRST 

EPIGRAM  OF  THE  POET  HIMSELF 

We  who  erewhile  were  five  booklets  of  NTaso  now 
are  tliree  ;  the  poet  lias  preferred  to  have  his  work 
thus  rather  than  as  before.  Though  even  now  you 
may  take  no  joy  of  reading  us,  yet  with  two  book-, 
taken  away  your  pains  will  be  lighter." 

I 

Arms,  and  the  violent  deeds  of  war,  I  was  making 
ready  to  sound  forth — in  weighty  numbers,  with 
matter  suited  to  the  measure.  The  second  verse 
was  equal  to  the  first— but  Cupid,  they  say,  with  a 
laugh  stole  away  one  foot. 

5  "Who  gave  thee,  cruel  boy,  this  right  over 
poesy?  We  bards  belong  to  the  Pierides  ;  we  are  no 
company  of  thine.  What  if  Venus  should  seize  away 
the  arms  of  golden-haired  Minerva,  if  golden-haired 
Minerva  should  fan  into  flame  the  kindled  torch 
of  love  ?  Who  would  approve  of  Ceres  reigning  on 
the  woodland  ridges,  and  of  fields  tilled  under  the 
law  of  the  quiver-bearing  Maid?  Who  would  furnish 
"  The  Amores  as  we  have  them  are  a  second  edition. 

319 


OVID 

crinibus  insignem  quis  acuta  cuspide  Phoebum 

instruat,  Aoniam  Marte  movente  lyram  ? 
sunt  tibi  magna,  puer,  nimiumque  potentia  regna  ; 

cur  opus  adfectas,  ambitiose,  novum  ? 
an,  quod  ubique,  tuum  est?    tua  sunt  Heliconia 

tempe  ?  15 

vix  etiam  Phoebo  iam  lyra  tuta  sua  est  ? 
cum  bene  surrexit  versu  nova  pagina  primo, 

attenuat  nervos  proximus  ille  meos  ; 
nee  mihi  materia  est  numeris  levioribus  apta, 

aut  puer  aut  longas  compta  puella  comas."  20 

Questus  eram,  pharetra  cum  protinus  ille  soluta 

legit  in  exitium  spicula  facta  meum, 
lunavitque  genu  sinuosum  fortiter  areum, 

"quod"  que  "eanas,  vates,  accipe"  dixit  "opus!" 
Me  miserum  !  certas  habuit  puer  ille  sagittas.  25 

uror,  et  in  vacuo  pectore  regnat  Amor. 
Sex  mihi  surgat  opus  numeris,  in  quinque  residat : 

ferrea  cum  vestris  bella  valete  modis  ! 
cingere  litorea  flaventia  tempora  myrto, 

Musa,  per  undenos  emodulanda  pedes !  30 

II 

Esse  quid  hoc  dicam,  quod  tarn  mihi  dura  videntur 
strata,  neque  in  lecto  pallia  nostra  sedent, 

et  vacuus  somno  noctem,  quam  longa,  peregi, 
lassaque  versati  corporis  ossa  dolent  ? 


THE   AMORES   I.  ii 

forth  Phoebus  of  the  beautiful  locks  with  sharp- 
pointed  spear,  and  let  Mars  stir  the  Aonian  Lyre  ? 
Thou  hast  an  empire  of  thine  own — great,  yea,  all 
too  potent ;  why  dos.t  lay  claim  to  new  powers,  am- 
bitious boy  ?  Or  is  everything,  wheresoever,  thine  ? 
Thine  are  the  vales  of  Helicon  ?  Is  even  the  lyre 
of  Phoebus  scarce  longer  safely  his  own  ?  My  new 
page  of  song  rose  well  with  first  verse  in  lofty  strain, 
when  that  next  one — of  thy  making — changes  to 
slightness  the  vigour  of  my  work  ;  and  yet  1  have 
no  matter  suited  to  lighter  numbers — neither  a  bov, 
nor  a  maiden  with  long  and  well-kept  locks." 

21  Such  was  my  complaint — when  forthwith  he 
loosed  his  quiver,  and  chose  from  it  shafts  that  were 
made  for  my  undoing.  Against  his  knee  he  stoutly 
bent  moonshape  the  sinuous  bow,  and  "  Singer,''  he 
said,  "  here,  take  that  will  be  matter  for  thy  song!  " 

25  Ah,  wretched  me !  Sure  were  the  arrows  that 
yon  boy  had.  I  am  on  fire,  and  in  my  but  now 
vacant  heart  Love  sits  his  throne. 

27  In  six  numbers  let  my  work  rise,  and  sink  again 
in  five.  Ye  iron  wars,  with  your  measures,  fare  ye 
well !  Gird  with  the  myrtle  that  loves  the  shore 
the  golden  locks  on  thy  temples,  O  Muse  to  be  sung 
to  the  lyre  in  elevens  !  a 

II 

What  shall  I  say  this  means,  that  my  couch  seems 
so  hard,  and  the  coverlets  will  not  stay  in  place,  and 
1  pass  the  long,  long  night  untouched  by  sleep,  and 
the  weary  bones  of  my  tossing  body  are  filled  with 
°  In  elegiac  measure,  with  alternation  of  six-foot  ami  five- 
foot  verses. 

Y 


OVID 

nam,  puto,  sentirem,  siquo  temptarer  amore.  5 

an  subit  et  tecta  callidus  arte  nocet  ? 
sic  erit ;  haeserunt  tenues  in  corde  sagittae, 

et  possessa  ferus  pectora  versat  Amor. 
Cedimus,  an  subitum  luctando  accendimus  ignem  ? 

eedamus  !  leve  fit,  quod  bene  fertur,  onus.  1 0 

vidi  ego  iactatas  mota  face  creseere  rlammas 

et  vidi  nullo  eoncutiente  mori. 
verbera  plura  ferunt,  quam  quos  iuvat  usus  aratri, 

detraetant  pressi  dum  iuga  prima  boves. 
asper  equus  duris  contunditur  ora  lupatis,  15 

frena  minus  sentit,  quisquis  ad  arma  facit. 
acrius  invitos  multoque  ferocius  urget 

quam  qui  servitium  ferre  fatentur  Amor. 
En  ego  confiteor  !  tua  sum  nova  praeda,  Cupido  ; 

porrigimus  vietas  ad  tua  iura  manus.  20 

nil  opus  est  bello — veniam  pacemque  rogamus  ; 

nee  tibi  laus  armis  victus  inermis  ero. 
necte  comam  myrto,  maternas  iunge  columbas  ; 

qui  deceat,  eurrum  vitricus  ipse  dabit, 
inque  dato  eurru,  populo  clamante  triumphum,        25 

stabis  et  adiunctas  arte  movebis  aves. 
ducentur  eapti  iuvenes  captaeque  puellae  ; 

haec  tibi  magnificus  pompa  triumphus  erit. 
ipse  ego,  praeda  recens,  factum  modo  vulnus  liabebo 

et  nova  captiva  vincula  mente  feram.  30 

322 


THE    AMORES    I.  ii 

ache  ? — for  I  should  know,  I  think,  were  I  in  any 
wise  assailed  by  love.  Or  can  it  be  that  love  is 
stolen  into  me,  and  cunningly  works  my  harm  with 
covered  art  ?  Thus  it  must  be  ;  the  subtle  darts  are 
planted  in  my  heart,  and  cruel  Love  torments  the 
breast  where  he  is  lord, 

9  Shall  I  yield  ?  or  by  resisting  kindle  still  more 
the  inward-stealing  flame  that  has  me  ?  Let  me 
yield  !  light  grows  the  burden  that  is  well  borne. 
I  have  seen  flames  wax  when  fanned  by  move- 
ment of  the  torch,  and  I  have  seen  them  die  down 
when  no  one  waved  it  more.  Oxen  at  the  plough 
refusing  the  pressure  of  the  first  yoke  endure  more 
blows  than  those  that  pleasure  in  their  toil.  The 
mouth  of  the  restive  horse  is  bruised  by  the  hard 
curb,  and  he  feels  the  bridle  less  that  yields  himself 
to  harness.  More  bitterly  far  and  fiercely  are  the 
unwilling  assailed  by  Love  than  those  who  own  their 
servitude. 

19  Look,  I  confess !  I  am  new  prey  of  thine,  O 
Cupid  ;  I  stretch  forth  my  hands  to  be  bound,  sub- 
missive to  thy  laws.  There  is  no  need  of  war — 
pardon  and  peace  is  my  prayer ;  nor  will  it  be 
praise  for  thine  arms  to  vanquish  me  unarmed. 
Bind  thy  locks  with  the  myrtle,  yoke  thy  mother's 
doves;  thy  stepsire"  himself  shall  give  thee  fitting 
car,  and  in  the  car  he  gives  shaft  thou  stand,  while 
the  people  cry  thy  triumph,  and  shalt  guide  with 
skill  the  yoked  birds.  In  thy  train  shall  be  captive 
youths  and  captive  maids  ;  such  a  pomp  will  be  for 
thee  a  stately  triumph.  Myself,  a  recent  spoil,  shall 
be  there  with  wound  all  freshly  dealt,  and  bear  my 
new  bonds  with  unresisting  heart.  Conscience  shall 
a  Mai's. 


OVID 

Mens  Bona  ducetur  manibus  post  terga  retortis, 

et  Pudor,  et  castris  quidquid  Amoris  obest. 
omnia  te  metuent ;  ad  te  sua  bracchia  tendens 

vulgus  "  io  "  magna  voce  "  triumph e  !  "  canet. 
blanditiae  comites  tibi  erunt  Errorque  Furorque,     35 

adsidue  partes  turba  seeuta  tuas. 
his  tu  militibus  superas  hominesque  deosque  ; 

haec  tibi  si  demas  commoda,  nudus  eris. 
Laeta  triumphanti  de  summo  mater  Olvmpo 

plaudet  et  adpositas  sparget  in  ora  i-osas.  40 

tu  pinnas  gemma,  gemma  variante  eapillos 

ibis  in  auratis  aureus  ipse  rotis. 
tunc  quoque  non  paueos,  si  te  bene  novimus,  ures  ; 

tunc  quoque  praeteriens  vulnera  multa  dabis. 
non  possunt,  licet  ipse  velis,  cessare  sagittae  ;  45 

fervida  vicino  flamma  vapore  nocet. 
talis  erat  domita  Bacchus  Gangetide  terra  ; 

tu  gravis  alitibus,  tigribus  ille  fuit. 
Ergo  cum  possim  sacri  pars  esse  triumphi, 

parce  tuas  in  me  perdere,  victor,  opes !  50 

adspice  cognati  felicia  Caesaris  arma — 

qua  vicit,  victos  protegit  ille  manu. 

Ill 

Iusta  precor  :  quae  me  nuper  praedata  puella  est, 
aut  amet  aut  faciat,  cur  ego  semper  amem  ! 

324 


THE   AMORES    I.  iii 

be  led  along,  with  hands  tied  fast  behind  her  back, 
and  Modestv,  and  all  who  are  foes  to  the  camp  of 
Love.  Before  thee  all  shall  tremble ;  the  crowd, 
stretching  forth  their  hands  to  thee,  shall  chant  with 
loud  voice:  "Ho  Triumph!"  Caresses  shall  he 
at  thy  side,  and  Error,  and  Madness — a  rout  that 
ever  follows  in  thy  train.  With  soldiers  like  these 
dost  thou  vanquish  men  and  gods  ;  strip  from  thee 
aids  like  these,  thou  wilt  be  weaponless. 

39  All  joyously  as  thou  dost  pass  in  triumph,  thy 
mother  shall  applaud  from  Olympus'  heights  and 
scatter  upon  thy  head  the  roses  offered  at  her 
altars.  With  gems  to  deck  thy  wings,  with  gems 
to  adorn  thy  hair,  thyself  golden,  on  golden  wheels 
thou  shalt  ride  along.  Then,  too,  shalt  thou  touch 
with  thy  flame  no  few,  if  I  know  thee  well  ;  then, 
too,  as  thou  passest  by.  shalt  thou  deal  full  many 
a  wound.  Thine  arrows  could  not  cease,  even 
shouldst  thou  so  wish  thyself;  thy  fervid  flame 
brings  dole  with  its  heat  as  thou  comest  near. 
Such  was  Bacchus,  the  land  of  the  Ganges  overcome. 
Thou  wilt  be  dread  with  thy  span  of  birds ;  with 
tigers  dread  was  he. 

49  Since,  then,  I  am  thine  to  he  part  of  thy  sacred 
triumph,  spare  to  waste  upon  me,  O  victor,  thy 
power !  Look  but  on  the  fortunate  arms  of  thy 
kinsman  Caesar — the  hand  that  has  made  him  victor, 
he  uses  to  shield  the  vanquished. 


Ill 

Just  is  my  prayer:   let   the   maid    who   lias   lately 
made  me  her  prey  either  give  me  love,  or  give  me 

325 


OVID 

a,  nimium  volui — tantum  patiatur  amari ; 

audierit  nostras  tot  Cytherea  preces  ! 
Accipe,  per  longos  tibi  qui  deserviat  annos  ;  5 

accipe,  qui  pura  norit  amare  fide  ! 
si  me  noil  veterum  commendant  magna  parentum 

nomina,  si  nostri  sanguinis  auctor  eques, 
nee  meus  innumeris  renovatur  campus  aratris, 

temperat  et  sumptus  parous  uterque  parens — -     10 
at  Phoebus  comitesque  novem  vitisque  repertor 

hac  1  faciunt,  et 2  me  qui  tibi  donat,  Amor, 
et 3  nulli  cessura  fides,  sine  crimine  mores 

nudaque  simplicitas  purpureusque  pudor. 
non  mihi  mille  placent,  non  sum  desultor  amoris  :   15 

tu  mihi,  siqua  fides,  cura  perennis  eris. 
tecum,  quos  dederint  annos  mihi  fila  sororum, 

vivere  contingat  teque  dolente  mori ! 
te  mihi  materiem  felicem  in  carmina  praebe — 

provenient  causa  carmina  digna  sua.  20 

carmina  nomen  habent  exterrita  cornibus  Io, 

et  quam  fluminea  lusit  adulter  ave, 
quaeque  super  pontum  simulato  vecta  iuvenco 

virginea  tenuit  cornua  vara  manu. 
nos  quoque  per  totum  pariter  cantabimur  orbern,    25 

iunctaque  semper  erunt  nomina  nostra  tuis. 

1  hac  Pa.:  haec  Ps  :  hinc  Merk.  Nem.  Br. 

2  et  me  s  :  ut  me  P:  at  me  Merit.  Nem.  Br. 
s  et  MS8.  Nem.:  at  Ehw.  Br. 


326 


THE   AMORES   I. 


in 


reason  for  ever  to  love  !  Ah,  I  have  asked  too 
much — let  her  but  suffer  herself  to  be  loved  ;  may 
Cytherea  hear  my  many  prayers  ! 

5  Take    one    who    would    be    your    slave    through 

long   years:    take    one    who   knows    how    to   love  with 

pure  faith!  If  1  have  not  ancient  ancestry  and  great 
name  to  commend  me,  if  the  author  of  my  line 
was  but  a  knight,  and  my  fields  are  not  renewed 
with  ploughshares  numberless,  if  both  my  parents 
guard  frugally  their  spending — yet  Phoebus  and  his 
nine  companions  and  the  finder  of  the  vine  are  on  my 
side,  and  so  is  Love,  who  makes  me  his  gift  to  you, 
and  I  have  good  faith  that  will  yield  to  none, 
and  ways  without  reproach,  and  unadorned  sim- 
plicity, and  blushing  modesty.  I  am  not  smitten 
with  a  thousand — I  am  no  Hit-about  in  love-  :  you, 
if  there  be  any  truth,  shall  be  my  everlasting  care. 
With  you  may  it  be  my  lot  to  live  the  years  which 
the  Sisters'  threads  have  spun  for  me,  and  to  In- 
sorrowed  over  by  you  when  I  die  !  Give  me  yourself 
as  happy  matter  for  my  songs — and  my  songs  will 
come  forth  worthy  of  their  cause.  Through  song 
came  fame  to  Io  frightened  by  her  horns,  and 
to  her  a  lover  beguiled  in  guise  of  the  river-bird, 
and  to  her  who  was  carried  over  the  deep  on  tin- 
pretended  bull  while  she  grasped  with  virgin  hand 
his  bended  horns."  You  and  I,  too,  shall  be  sung 
in  like  manner  through  all  the  earth,  and  my  name 
shall  be  ever  joined  with  yours. 

°  Io  was  transformed  to  a  heifer,  Leda  was  loved  by 
Jove  as  a  swan,  and  Europa  was  carried  away  by  Jove  in 
the  form  of  a  bull. 


3*7 


OVID 


IV 


Vir  tuus  est  epulas  nobis  aditurus  easdem — 

ultima  coena  tuo  sit,  precor,  ilia  viro  ! 
ergo  ego  dilectam  tantum  conviva  puellam 

adspiciam  ?  tangi  quern  iuvet,  alter  erit, 
alteriusque  sinus  apte  subiecta  fovebis  ?  5 

inieiet  collo,  cum  volet,  ille  manum  ? 
desine  mirari,  posito  quod  Candida  vino 

Atracis  ambiguos  traxit  in  anna  viros ! 
nee  mihi    silva    domus,  nee  equo  mea  membra   co- 
haerent — 

vix  a  te  videor  posse  tenere  manus !  10 

Quae  tibi  sint  facienda  tamen  cognosce,  nee  Euris 

da  mea  nee  tepidis  verba  ferenda  Notis  ! 
ante  veni,  quam  vir — nee  quid,  si  veneris  ante, 

possit  agi  video  ;  sed  tamen  ante  veni. 
cum  premet  ille  torum,  vultu  comes  ipsa  modesto    15 

ibis,  ut  accumbas — clam  mihi  tange  pedem ! 
me  specta  nutusque  meos  vultumque  loquacem  ; 

excipe  furtivas  et  refer  ipsa  notas. 
verba  superciliis  sine  voce  loquentia  dicam  ; 

verba  leges  digitis,  verba  notata  mero.  20 

cum  tibi  succurret  Veneris  lascivia  nostrae, 

purpureas  tenero  pollice  tange  genas. 
siquid  erit,  de  me  tacita  quod  mente  queraris, 

pendeat  extrema  mollis  ab  aure  manus. 

"  The  story  of  the  fight  of  Centaurs  and  Lapiths  at  the 

wedding-feast  of  Pirithous  and  Hippodamia.  The  charms  of 

Hippodamia  were  such   that   the   Centaurs  tried   to   carry 
her  off. 

328 


THE   AMORES   I.  iv 


IV 


That  husband  of  yours  will  attend  the  same 
banquet  with  us  —  may  that  dinner,  I  pray,  be 
your  husband's  last!  Must  I  then  merely  look  upon 
the  girl  I  love,  be  merely  a  fellow-guest  ?  Is  the 
delight  of  feeling  your  touch  to  be  another's,  and 
must  it  be  another's  breast  you  warm,  reclining  close 
to  him  ?  Shall  he  throw  his  arm  about  your  neck 
whenever  he  wills?  No  longer  marvel  that  when 
the  wine  had  been  set  the  fair  daughter  of  At  rax 
drove  to  combat  the  men  of  ambiguous  form!8 
My  dwelling-place  is  not  the  forest,  nor  are  my 
members  partly  man  and  partly  horse — yet  I  seem 
scarce  able  to  keep  my  hands  from  you  ! 

11  Yet  learn  what  your  task  must  be,  nor  give  my 
words  to  the  East-wind  to  be  borne  away,  nor  to  the 
tepid  South  !  Arrive  before  your  husband — and  yet  1 
do  not  see  what  can  be  done  if  you  do  arrive  before ; 
and  vet,  arrive  before  him.  When  he  shall  press  the 
couch,  you  will  come  yourself  with  modest  mien  to 
recline  beside  him — in  secret  give  my  foot  a  touch  ! 
Keep  your  eyes  on  me,  to  get  my  nods  and  the 
Language  of  my  eyes;  and  catch  my  stealthy  signs, 
and  yourself  return  them.  With  my  brows  1  shall 
say  to  you  words  that  speak  without  sound  ;  you  will 
read  words  from  my  fingers,  you  will  read  word- 
traced  in  wine.  When  you  think  of  the  wanton 
delights  of  our  love,  touch  your  rosy  cheeks  with 
tender  finger.  If  you  have  in  mind  sonic  silenl 
grievance  against  me,  let  your  hand  gently  hold 
to  the  lowest  part  of  your  ear.      When    what    I   do 


329 


OVID 

cum  tibi,  quae  faciam,  mea  lux,  dicamve,  plaeebunt,  25 

versetur  digitis  anulus  usque  tuis. 
tange  manu  mensara,  tangunt  quo  more  precantes, 

optabis  merito  cum  mala  multa  viro. 
Quod  tibi  miscuerit,  sapias,  bibat  ipse,  iubeto  ; 

tu  puerum  leviter  posce,  quod  ipsa  voles.  30 

quae  tu  reddideris  ego  primus  pocula  surnam, 

et,  qua  tu  biberis,  bac  ego  parte  bibam. 
si  tibi  forte  dabit,  quod  praegustaverit  ipse, 

reice  libatos  illius  ore  cibos. 
nee  premat  inpositis  sinito  tua  colla  lacertis,  35 

mite  nee  in  rigido  pectore  pone  caput ; 
nee  sinus  admittat  digitos  babilesve  papillae  ; 

oscula  praecipue  nulla  dedisse  velis  ! 
oscula  si  dederis,  nam  manifestus  amator 

et  dicam  "  mea  sunt  !  "  inieiamque  manum.         40 
Haec  tamen  adspiciam,  sed  quae  bene  pallia  celant, 

ilia  mihi  caeci  causa  timoris  erunt. 
nee  femori  committe  femur  nee  crure  cohaere 

nee  tenerum  dwo  cum  pede  iunge  pedem. 
multa  miser  timeo,  quia  feci  multa  proterve,  45 

exemplique  metu  torqueor,  ecce,  mei. 
saepe  mihi  dominaeque  meae  properata  voluptas 

veste  sub  iniecta  dulce  peregit  opus, 
hoc  tu  non  facies ;  sed,  ne  fecisse  puteris, 

conscia  de  tergo  pallia  deme  tuo.  50 

vir  bibat  usque  roga — precibus  tamen  oscula  desint ! — 

dumque  bibit,  furtim  si  potes,  adde  merum. 

33° 


THE   AMORES    I.  iv 

or  what  I  say  shall  please  you,  light  of  mine,  keep 
turning  your  ring  about  your  finger.  Lav  your  hand 
upon  the  table  as  those  who  place  their  hands  in 
prayer,  when  you  wish  your  husband  the  many  ills  he 
desei'ves. 

29  The  wine  he  mingles  for  you,  be  wise  and  bid 
him  drink  himself;  quietly  ask  the  slave  for  the  kind 
you  yourself  desire.  The  cup  that  you  give  to  him 
to  fill,  I  will  be  first  to  take,  and  I'll  drink  from  the 
part  where  you  have  drunk.  If  he  chance  to  give 
you  food  that  he  has  tasted  first,  refuse  what  his  lips 
have  touched.  And  don't  allow  him  to  place  his 
arms  about  your  neck,  don't  let  your  yielding  head 
lie  on  his  rigid  breast  ;  and  don't  let  your  hidden 
charms  submit  to  his  touch  ;  and,  more  than  all,  don't 
let  him  kiss  you — not  once  !  If  you  let  him  kiss  you, 
I'll  declare  myself  your  lover  before  his  eyes,  and 
say,  "Those  kisses  are  mine!"  and  lay  hand  to  my 
claim. 

41  Yet  these  offences  I  shall  see,  but  those  that 
the  robe  well  hides  will  rouse  in  me  blind  fears. 
Bring  not  thigh  near  thigh,  nor  press  with  the  limb, 
nor  touch  rough  feet  with  tender  ones.  There  are 
many  things  I  wretchedly  tear,  because  there  are 
many  I  have  wantonly  wrought,  and  I  am  in  torment, 
see !  from  fear  of  my  own  example.  Oft  have  my 
lady-love  and  I  stolen  in  haste  our  sweet  delights 
with  her  robe  to  cover  us.  This  you  will  not  do ; 
but  lest  you  be  thought  to  have  done  it.  remove 
from  your  shoulders  the  conspiring  mantle.  Keep 
pressing  your  husband  to  drink — only  add  no  kisses 
to  your  prayers! — and  while  he  drinks,  in  secret  it' 
you  can,  keep  pouring  him   pure    vine.      If  once   we 

331 


OVID 

si  bene  conpositus  somno  vinoque  iacebit, 

consilium  nobis  resque  locusque  dabunt. 
cum  surges  abitura  domum,  surgemus  et  omnes,      55 

in  medium  turbae  fac  memor  agmen  eas. 
agmine  me  invenies  aut  invenieris  in  illo  : 

quidquid  ibi  poteris  tangere,  tange  mei. 
Me  miserum  !  monui,  paucas  quod  prosit  in  horas  ; 

separor  a  domina  nocte  iubente  mea.  60 

nocte  vir  includet,  lacrimis  ego  maestus  obortis, 

qua  licet,  ad  saevas  prosequar  usque  fores, 
oscula  iam  sumet,  iam  non  tantum  oscula  sumet  : 

quod  mihi  das  furtim,  hire  coacta  dabis. 
verum  invita  dato — potes  hoc — similisque  coactae  ;  65 

blanditiae  taceant,  sitque  maligna  Venus, 
si  mea  vota  valent,  ilium  quoque  ne  iuvet,  opto ; 

si  minus,  at  certe  te  iuvet  inde  nihil, 
sed  quaecumque  tamen  noctem  fortuna  sequetur, 

eras  mihi  constanti  voce  dedisse  nega  !  70 


Aestus  erat,  mediamque  dies  exegerat  horam  ; 

adposui  medio  membra  levanda  toro. 
pars  adaperta  fuit,  pars  altera  clausa  fenestrae ; 

quale  fere  silvae  lumen  habere  solent, 
qualia  sublucent  fugiente  crepuscula  Phoebo, 

aut  ubi  nox  abiit,  nee  tamen  orta  dies. 

332 


THE    AMORES    I.  v 

have  him  laid  to  rest  in  sleep  and  wine,  our  counsel 
we  can  take  from  place  and  circumstance.  When 
you  rise  to  go  home,  and  all  the  rest  of  us  rise, 
remember  to  lose  yourself  in  the  midst  of  the  crowd. 
You  will  find  me  there  in  that  crowd,  or  will  be  found 
by  me.  Wherever  you  can  touch  me  there,  lay 
hand  on  me. 

59  Miserable  that  I  am,  I  have  urged  you  to  what 
will  help  for  only  a  few  scant  hours ;  I  must  be 
separated  from  my  lady-love — night  will  command 
it.  At  night  your  husband  will  shut  you  in,  and  I 
all  gloomy  and  pouring  forth  my  tears,  shall  follow 
you — as  far  as  I  may — up  to  the  cruel  doors.  Then 
he  will  take  kisses  from  you,  yes,  then  he  will  take 
not  only  kisses ;  what  you  give  me  in  secret,  you 
will  give  him  as  a  right,  because  you  must.  Hut 
give  against  your  will — this  much  you  can  do — and 
like  one  made  to  yield  ;  let  your  favours  be  without 
word,  and  let  him  find  V'enus  ill-disposed.  If  my 
vows  have  any  weight,  I  pray  she  grant  him  no 
delight ;  if  not,  may  you  at  least  have  no  delight  from 
him.  But  whatsoever,  none  the  less,  shall  be  the 
fortune  of  the  night,  to-morrow  with  steadfast  voice 
tell  me  you  were  not  kind  ! 


'Tvvas  sultry,  and  the  day  had  passed  its  mid 
hour ;  I  laid  my  members  to  rest  them  on  the 
middle  of  my  couch.  One  shutter  of  my  window 
was  open,  the  other  shutter  was  closed  ;  the  light 
was  such  as  oft  in  a  woodland,  or  as  the  faint  ul<>\\ 
of  the  twilight  when  Phoebus  just  is  taking  Leave, 
or  when   night  has   gone    and   still   the   day  is   not 

333 


OVID 

ilia  verecundis  lux  est  praebenda  puellis, 

qua  timidus  latebras  speret  habere  pudor. 
ecce,  Corinna  venit,  tunica  velata  recincta, 

Candida  di vidua  colla  tegente  coma —  10 

qualiter  in  thalamos  famosa  Semiramis  isse 

dicitur,  et  multis  Lais  amata  viris. 
Deripui  tunicam — nee  multuni  rara  nocebat ; 

pugnabat  tunica  sed  tamen  ilia  tegi. 
quae    cum    ita    pugnaret,   tamquam    quae  vincere 
nollet,  1 5 

victa  est  non  aegre  proditione  sua. 
ut  stetit  ante  oculos  posito  velamine  nostros, 

in  toto  nusquam  corpore  menda  fuit. 
quos  umeros,  quales  vidi  tetigique  lacertos  ! 

forma  papillarum  quam  fuit  apta  premi !  20 

quam  castigato  planus  sub  pectore  venter  ! 

quantum  et  quale  latus  !  quam  iuvenale  femur  ! 
Singula  quid  referam  ?  nil  non  laudabile  vidi 

et  nudam  pressi  corpus  ad  usque  meum. 
Cetera  quis  nescit  ?  lassi  requievimus  ambo.  25 

proveniant  medii  sic  mihi  saepe  dies  ! 

VI 

Ianitor — indignum  ! — dura  religate  catena, 

difficilem  moto  cardine  pande  forem  ! 
quod  precor,  exiguum  est — aditu  fac  iaaua  parvo 

obliquum  capiat  semiadaperta  latus. 

334 


THE    AMORES    I.  vi 

sprung.  It  was  such  a  light  as  shrinking  maids 
should  have  whose  timid  modesty  hopes  to  hide 
away — when  lo !  Corinna  comes,  draped  in  tunic 
girded  round,  with  divided  hair  falling  over  fair, 
white  neck- — such  as  'tis  said  was  famed  Semiramis 
when  passing  to  her  bridal  chambei-,  and  Lais  loved 
of  many  men. 

13  I  tore  away  the  tunic — and  yet  'twas  fine,  and 
scarcely  marred  her  charms ;  but  still  she  struggled 
to  have  the  tunic  shelter  her.  Even  while  thus 
she  struggled,  as  one  who  would  not  overcome, 
was  she  overcome — and  'twas  not  hard — by  her  own 
betrayal.  As  she  stood  before  my  eyes  with  drapery 
laid  all  aside,  nowhere  on  all  her  body  was  sign  of 
fault.  What  shoulders,  what  arms  did  I  see — and 
touch  !  How  suited  for  caress  the  form  of  her 
breasts !  How  smooth  her  body  beneath  the  fault- 
less bosom  !  What  a  long  and  beautiful  side  !  How 
youthfully  fair  the  thigh  ! 

23  Why  recount  each  charm  ?  Naught  did  I  see 
not  worthy  of  praise,  and  1  clasped  her  undraped 
form  to  mine. 

25  The  rest,  who  does  not  know  ?  Outwearied,  we 
both  lay  quiet  in  repose. 

May  my  lot  bring  many  a  midday  like  to  this ! 


VI 

Janitor — unworthy  fate  ! — bound  with  the  hard 
chain,  move  on  its  hinge  the  surly  portal,  and  open 
it !  What  I  entreat  is  slight — see  that  the  door 
stand  but  half  ajar,  enough  to  receive  me  sidewise 
through    the    small    approach.       Long    loving   has 

335 


OVID 

longus  amor  tales  corpus  tenuavit  in  usus  5 

aptaque  subducto  corpore  membra  dedit. 
ille  per  exeubias  eustodum  leniter  ire 

monstrat  ;  inoffensos  dirigit  ille  pedes. 
At  quondam  noetem  simulacraque  vana  timebam  ; 

niirabar,  tenebris  quisquis  iturus  erat.  10 

risit,  ut  audirem,  tenera  cum  matre  Cupido 

et  leviter  "fies  tu  quoque  fortis  "  ait. 
nee  mora,  venit  amor — non  umbras  nocte  volantis, 

non  timeo  strictas  in  mea  fata  manus. 
te  nimium  lentum  timeo,  tibi  blandior  uni  ;  15 

tu,  me  quo  possis  perdere,  fulmen  habes. 
Adspice — et  ut  videas,1  inmitia  claustra  relaxa — 

uda  sit  ut  lacrimis  ianua  facta  meis  ! 
certe  ego,  cum  posita  stares  ad  verbera  veste, 

ad  dominam  pro  te  verba  tremente  tuli.  20 

ergo  quae  valuit  pro  te  quoque  gratia  quondam — 

heu  facinus  ! — pro  me  nunc  valet  ilia  parum  ? 
redde  vicem  mentis  !  grato  licet  esse  ;  quid  opstas  ?  2 

tempora  noctis  eunt ;  excute  poste  seram  ! 
Excute  !  sic  umquam  longa  relevere  catena,  25 

nee  tibi  perpetuo  serva  bibatur  aqua  ! 
ferreus  orantem  nequiquam,  ianitor,  audis, 

roboribus  duris  ianua  fulta  riget. 
urbibus  obsessis  clausae  munimina  portae 

prosunt ;  in  media  pace  quid  arma  times  ?  30 

1  et  ut  videas    Gronovias,  from   MSS.:   uti   videas   Ehw. 
Nem.  Br.:  et  omitted  Ps  :  invideas  s. 

2  quid  opstas  Hein.:  quod  optas  MSS.  Br.:   quis   obstat 
Nem. 

336 


THE   AMORES   I.  vi 

thinned  my  frame  for  practices  like  this,  and  has 
made  my  body  apt  thereto  by  wasting  away  my 
flesh.  Love  it  is  that  teaches  me  how  to  walk  softly 
past  the  watchful  guard ;  love  is  the  guide  that 
keeps  my  steps  from  stumbling. 

9  Yet  once  I  was  ever  in  fear  of  the  night  and  its 
empty  phantoms  ;  I  marvelled  at  whosoever  would 
venture  abroad  in  darkness.  Cupid  laughed  in  my 
ear,  with  his  tender  mother,  too,  and  lightly  said  : 
"  You,  too,  shall  become  valiant  !  "  And  without 
delay  came  love — no  shades  that  flit  by  night,  no 
arms  raised  up  to  deal  my  doom,  do  I  fear  now. 
You  alone  I  fear,  too  unyielding  to  my  wish  ;  on 
you  alone  I  fawn  ;  it  is  you  who  hold  the  thunderbolt 
can  ruin  me. 

1T  Look ! — and  that  you  may  see,  unloose  the 
pitiless  barriers — how  the  door  has  been  made  wet 
with  my  tears  !  Surely,  when  you  stood  stripped 
and  ready  for  the  scourge,  and  trembling,  it  was  I 
that  went  to  your  mistress  in  your  behalf.  So,  then. 
the  act  of  grace  which  once  availed  even  for  you — 
ah,  the  outrage! — is  the  same  act  now  to  avail  so 
little  for  me  ?  Render  the  return  I  merit !  'Tis 
in  your  power  to  be  grateful ;  why  do  you  hinder 
me  ?  The  hours  of  the  night  are  going  ;  away  with 
the  bar  from  the  door  ! 

25  Away  with  it  ! — and  so  may  you  be  forever 
lightened  of  your  long  chain,  nor  .have  to  drink  for 
all  time  the  waters  of  slavery  !  With  heart  of  iron 
you  listen  as  I  vainly  entreat,  O  janitor,  and  the 
door  stands  rigid  with  the  unyielding  oaken  brace. 
It  is  towns  beleaguered  that  look  for  protection  to 
the  closing  of  their  gates  ;  you  are  in  the  midst  of 

peace,  and  why  fear  arms?      What  will   you  do  to  an 

■ 

z 


OVID 

quid  facies  hosti,  qui  sic  excludis  amantem  ? 

tempoi'a  noctis  emit ;  excute  poste  serani  ! 
Non  ego  militibus  venio  comitatus  et  armis ; 

solus  eram,  si  non  saevus  adesset  Amor. 
hunc  ego,  si  cupiam,  nusquam  dimittere  possum  ;    35 

ante  vel  a  membris  dividar  ipse  meis. 
ergo  Amor  et  modicum  circa  mea  tempora  vinum 

mecum  est  et  madidis  lapsa  corona  comis. 
arma  quis  haec  timeat  ?  quis  non  eat  obvius  illis  ? 

tempora  noctis  eunt ;  excute  poste  seram  !  40 

Lentus    es :    an    somnus,    qui    te    male    perdat, 
amantis  * 

verba  dat  in  ventos  aure  repulsa  tua  ? 
at,  memini,  primo,  cum  te  celare  volebam, 

pervigil  in  mediae  sidera  noctis  eras. 
forsitan  et  tecum  tua  nunc  requiescit  arnica —         45 

heu,  melior  quanto  sors  tua  sorte  mea ! 
dummodo  sic,  in  me  durae  transite  catenae  ! 

tempora  noctis  eunt ;  excute  poste  seram  ! 
Fallimur,  an  verso  sonuerunt  cardine  postes, 

raucaque  concussae  signa  dedere  fores  ?  50 

fallimur — inpulsa  est  animoso  ianua  vento. 

ei  mihi,  quam  longe  spem  tulit  aura  meam  ! 
si  satis  es  raptae,  Borea,  memor  Orithyiae, 

hue  ades  et  surdas  namine  tunde  foris ! 
urbe  silent  tota,  vitreoque  madentia  rore  55 

tempoi-a  noctis  eunt ;  excute  poste  seram  ! 

1  So  Ehw.  Nem.  Br.:  te  Ps  :  prodit  MSS.:  perdat  P : 
amantis  Hein.:  amanti  P :  se  praebet  amanti  imlg.:  qui  te 
male  prodit  Post. 

a  The  repetition  of  a  line  as  a  refrain  occurs  also  in 
Heroides  ix.  In  employing  this  device,  Ovid  is  following 
Virgil,  Eel.  viii.,  and  Theocritus  ii.  One  of  many  modern 
examples  is  Spenser's  Epithalamium . 

338 


THE   AMORES   I.  vi 

enemy,  who  thus  exclude  a  lover  ?  The  hours  of 
the  night  are  going ;  away  with  the  bar  from  the 
door ! a 

33  I  come  with  no  following  of  soldiers,  and 
under  arms  ;  I  were  alone,  were  cruel  Love  not 
at  my  side.  Him,  even  should  I  wish,  I  can  nowhere 
dismiss ;  ere  that,  I  shall  be  divided  from  my  very 
self.  And  so,  you  see,  it  is  Love,  and  moderate 
wine  coursing  through  my  temples,  and  a  chaplet 
falling  from  my  perfume-laden  hair,  that  are  my 
escort.  Who  would  tremble  before  arms  like  these  ? 
Who  would  not  go  to  face  them  ?  The  hours  of 
night  are  going  ;  away  with  the  bar  from  the  door  ! 

41  You  are  unyielding  ;  or  does  sleep — and  may  it 
be  the  ruin  of  you  ! — give  to  the  winds  the  lover's 
words  your  ears  repulse  ?  Yet  at  first,  I  remember, 
when  I  wished  to  escape  your  eye,  you  were  wakeful 
up  to  the  midnight  stars.  It  may  be  that  you,  too, 
have  a  love,  who  is  resting  even  now  at  your  side — 
alas,  how  much  better  your  lot  than  mine  !  Could 
I  be  only  in  such  case,  come  hither,  hard  chains,  to 
me  !  The  hours  of  the  night  are  going ;  away  with 
the  bar  from  the  door  ! 

49  Am  I  deceived,  or  did  the  post  sound  with  the 
turning  of  the  hinge,  and  was  that  the  hoarse 
signal  given  by  a  shaken  door  ?  I  am  deceived — it 
was  only  the  beating  of  a  gusty  wind  upon  the 
portal.  Ah  me,  how  far  has  that  breeze  borne 
away  my  hope  !  If  thou  rememberest  well  thy  stolen 
Orithyia,  Boreas,  come  hither,  and  beat  down  with 
thy  blast  these  deaf  doors  !  Through  all  the  city 
there  is  silence,  and,  wet  with  the  crystal  dew,  the 
hours  of  the  night  are  passing  ;  away  with  the  bar 
from  the  door ! 

339 
z  2 


OVID 

Aut  ego  iam  ferroque  ignique  paratior  ipse,1 

quem  face  sustineo,  tecta  superba  petam. 
nox  et  Amor  vinumque  nihil  moderabile  suadent ; 

ilia  pudore  vacat,  Liber  Amorque  metu.  60 

omnia  consumpsi,  nee  te  precibusque  minisque 

movimus,  o  foribus  durior  ipse  tuis. 
non  te  formosae  decuit  servare  puellae 

limina,  sollicito  carcere  dignus  eras. 
Iamque  pruinosus  molitur  Lucifer  axes,  65 

inque  suum  miseros  excitat  ales  opus. 
at  tu,  non  laetis  detracta  corona  capillis, 

dura  super  tota  limina  nocte  iace  ! 
tu  dominae,  cum  te  p'roiectam  mane  videbit, 

temporis  absumpti  tarn  male  testis  eris.  70 

Qualiscumque  vale  sentique  abeuntis  honorem  ; 

lente  nee  admisso  turpis  amante,  vale  ! 
vos  quoque,  crudeles  rigido  cum  limine  postes 

duraque  eonservae  ligna,  valete,  fores  ! 

VII 

Adde  manus  in  vincla  meas — meruere  catenas — 
dum  furor  omnis  abit,  siquis  amicus  ades ! 
1  0  ianitor  ipso  Hein.  Ntm. 
34° 


THE   AMOURS    I.  vii 

57  Rise  I  myself,  better  armed,  with  iron,  and 
with  the  fire  I  cany  in  my  torch,  will  soon  assail 
your  haughty  dwelling!  Night, and  Love,  and  wine 
are  no  counsellors  of  self-restraint ;  the  first  knows 
naught  of  shame,  and  Liber  and  Love  know  naught 
of  fear.  All  things  have  I  tried,  and  have  moved 
you  neither  by  entreaty  nor  by  threat,  O  harder 
yourself  than  your  own  doors !  Not  you  were  the 
one  to  be  given  ward  of  my  beautiful  lady-love's 
threshold  ;  you  were  fit  only  to  guard  a  gloomy 
dungeon. 

05  Already  rimy  Lucifer  is  setting  in  motion  his 
axles,  and  the  bird  of  dawn  is  rousing  wretched 
mortals  to  their  tasks.  But  thou,  O  chaplet  torn  from 
my  unhappy  locks,  lie  thou  there  upon  the  unfeeling 
threshold  the  whole  night  through.  Thou,  when  she 
sees  thee  east  down  there  in  the  early  morn,  shalt 
be  a  witness  to  my  mistress  of  the  time  I  passed 
so  wretchedly. 

71  And  you,  despite  what  you  are.  farewell, 
and  receive  the  honour  of  my  parting  word ;  O 
unyielding,  undisgraced  by  the  admission  of  the 
lover,  fare  you  well  !  You,  too,  eruel  posts  with 
your  rigid  threshold,  and  you  doors  with  your 
unfeeling  beams,  you  fellow-slaves  of  him  who  guards 
you,  fare  you  well  ! 


VII 

O  friend,  if  any  friend  be  here,  put  the  shackle 
upon  my  hands — they  have  deserved  the  chain — till 
my   madness  all    is   past  !      For  madness   it  was   that 

341 


OVID 

nam  furor  in  dominam  temeraria  bracchia  movit ; 

flet  mea  vaesana  laesa  puella  manu. 
tunc  ego  vel  caros  potui  violare  parentes  5 

saeva  vel  in  sanctos  verbera  ferre  deos  ! 
Quid  ?  non  et  clipei  dominus  septemplicis  Aiax 

stravit  deprensos  lata  per  arva  greges, 
et,  vindex  in  matre  patris,  malus  ultor,  Orestes 

ausus  in  arcanas  poscere  tela  deas  ?  10 

ergo  ego  digestos  potui  laniare  capillos  ? 

nee  dominam  motae  dedecuere  comae, 
sic  formosa  fuit.  talem  Schoeneida  dicam 

Maenalias  arcu  sollicitasse  feras  ; 
talis  periuri  promissaque  velaque  Thesei  15 

flevit  praecipites  Cressa  tulisse  Notos ; 
sic,  nisi  vittatis  quod  erat  Cassandra  capillis, 

procubuit  templo,  casta  Minerva,  tuo. 
Quis    mihi     non    "  demens  ! "    quis    non     mihi 
"  barbare  !  "  dixit  ? 

ipsa  nihil  ;  pavido  est  lingua  retenta  metu.  20 

sed  taciti  fecere  tamen  convicia  vultus  ; 

egit  me  lacrimis  ore  silente  reum. 
ante  meos  umeris  vellem  cecidisse  lacertos  ; 

utiliter  potui  parte  carere  mei. 
in  mea  vaesanas  habui  dispendia  vires  25 

et  valui  poenam  fortis  in  ipse  meam. 
quid  mihi  vobiscum,  caedis  scelerumque  ministrae  ? 

debita  sacrilegae  vincla  subite  manus  ! 
an,  si  pulsassem  minimum  de  plebe  Quiritem, 

plecterer — in  dominam  ius  mihi  maius  erit  ?         30 

a  Atalanta. 
342 


THE   AMORES    I.  vii 

moved  me  to  raise  reckless  hands  against  my  lady- 
love ;  my  sweetheart  is  in  tears  from  the  hurt  of  my 
raging  blows.  'Twas  in  me  then  to  lay  hands  on 
even  the  parents  I  love,  or  to  deal  out  cruel  strokes 
even  to  the  holy  gods  ! 

7  Well  ?  did  not  Ajax,  too,  lord  of  the  seven-fold 
shield,  seize  and  lay  low  the  flocks  over  the  broad 
fields  ?  and  did  not  Orestes,  ill  avenger  exacting 
from  his  mother  ill  vengeance  for  his  sire,  dare  ask 
for  weapons  against  the  mystic  goddesses  ?  What ! 
Had  I  on  that  account  the  right  to  rend  the 
well -wrought  hair  of  my  lady-love  ?  And  yet  her 
disordered  locks  did  not  become  her  ill.  She  was 
beautiful  so.  Such,  I  should  say,  was  Schoeneus' 
daughter a  when  she  harried  the  Maenalian  wild  ; 
such  the  Cretan  maid  as  she  wept  that  the  headlong 
winds  of  the  south  had  borne  away  both  sails  and 
promises  of  perjured  Theseus  ;  thus  was  Cassandra — 
except  that  fillets  bound  her  hair — when  down  she 
sank  at  thy  shi'ine,  O  chaste  Minerva. 

19  Who  did  not  say  to  me  :  "  Madman ! "  who 
did  not  say:  "Barbarian!"  Herself  said  naught; 
her  tongue  was  kept  from  it  by  trembling  fear.  But 
her  face,  for  all  her  silence,  uttered  reproaches 
none  the  less ;  tears  charged  me  with  my  crime, 
though  her  lips  were  dumb.  I  would  that  my  arms 
had  sooner  dropped  from  their  shoulders  ;  I  could 
better  have  done  without  a  part  of  myself.  I  have 
used  my  maddened  strength  to  my  own  cost,  and 
myself  have  been  strong  to  my  own  hurt.  What 
have  I  with  you,  ye  ministers  of  blood  and  crime  ! 
Unholy  hands,  submit  to  the  shackles  you  deserve  ! 
What !  if  I  had  struck  the  least  of  the  Quirites 
among  the  crowd,  should  I  be  punished — and   shall 

343 


OVID 

pessima  Tydides  scelerum  monimenta  reliquit. 

ille  deam  primus  perculit — alter  ego  ! 
et  minus  ille  nocens.     mihi,  quam  profitebar  amare 

laesa  est ;  Tydides  saevus  in  hoste  fuit. 
I  nunc,  magnificos  victor  molire  triumphos,  35 

cinge  comam  lauro  votaque  redde  Iovi, 
quaeque  tuos  currus  comitatus  turba  sequetur, 

clamet  "  io  !  forti  victa  puella  viro  est !  " 
ante  eat  effuso  tristis  captiva  capillo, 

si  sinerent  laesae,  Candida  tota,,  genae.  40 

aptius  impressis  fuerat  livere  labellis 

et  collo  blandi  dentis  habere  notam. 
denique,  si  tumidi  ritu  torrentis  agebar, 

caecaque  me  praedam  feeerat  ira  suam, 
noime  satis  fuerat  timidae  inclamasse  puellae,  45 

nee  nimium  rigidas  intonuisse  minas, 
aut  tunicam  summa  deducere  turpiter  ora 

ad  mediam  ? — mediae  zona  tulisset  opem. 
At  nunc  sustinui  raptis  a  fronte  capillis 

ferreus  ingenuas  ungue  notare  genas.  50 

adstitit  ilia  aniens  albo  et  sine  sanguine  vultu, 

caeduntur  Pariis  qualia  saxa  iugis. 
exanimisartus  et  membra  trementia  vidi — 

ut  cum  populeas  ventilat  aura  comas, 
ut  leni  Zephyro  gi-acilis  vibratur  harundo,  55 

summave  cum  tepido  stringitur  unda  Noto  ; 
suspensaeque  diu  lacrimae  fluxere  per  ora, 

qualiter  abiecta  de  nive  manat  aqua. 

°  Venus,  in  battle  before  Troy. 
344 


THE    AMORES    I.  vii 

my  right  o'er  ray  lady-love  be  greater  ?  The  son  of 
Tydeus  left  most  vile  example  of  offence.  He  was 
the  first  to  smite  a  goddess" — I  am  the  second  !  And 
he  was  less  guilty  than  I.  I  injured  her  I  profes  ed 
to  love  ;  Tydeus'  son  was  cruel  with  a  foe. 

33  Go  now.  victor,  make  ready  mighty  triumphs, 
circle  your  hair  with  laurel  and  pay  your  vows  to 
Jove,  and  let  the  thronging  retinue  that  follow 
your  car  cry  out :  "  Ho  !  our  valiant  hero  has  been 
victorious  over  a  girl  !  "  Let  her  walk  before,  a 
downcast  captive  with  hair  let  loose — from  head  to 
foot  pure  white,  did  her  wounded  cheeks  allow  ! 
More  fit  had  it  been  for  her  to  be  marked  with  the 
pressure  of  my  lips,  and  to  bear  on  her  neck  the 
print  of  caressing  tooth.  Finally,  if  I  must  needs 
be  swept  along  like  a  swollen  torrent,  and  blind 
anger  must  needs  make  me  its  prey,  were  it  not 
enough  to  have  cried  out  at  tile  frightened  girl, 
without  the  too  hard  threats  I  thundered  ?  or  to 
have  shamed  her  by  tearing  apart  her  gown  from 
top  to  middle? — her  girdle  would  have  come  to  the 
rescue  there. 

49  But,  as  it  was,  I  could  endure  to  rend  cruelly 
the  hair  from  her  brow  and  mark  with  my  nail 
her  free-born  cheeks.  She  stood  there  bereft  of 
sense,  with  face  bloodless  and  white  as  blocks  of 
marble  hewn  from  Parian  cliffs.  I  saw  her  limbs  all 
nerveless  and  her  frame  a-tremble — like  the  leaves 
of  the  poplar  shaken  by  the  breeze,  like  the  slender 
reed  set  quivering  by  gentle  Zephyr,  or  the  surface 
of  the  wave  when  ruffled  by  the  warm  South-wind  : 
and  the  tears,  long  hanging  in  her  eyes,  came 
flowing  o'er  her  cheeks  even  as  water  distils  from 
snow    that    is    cast    aside.      'TVas   then    that    first    I 

345 


OVID 

tunc  ego  me  primum  coepi  sentire  nocentem — 

sanguis  erant  lacrimae,  quas  dabat  ilia,  meus.        60 
ter  tamen  ante  pedes  volui  procumbere  supplex  ; 

ter  formidatas  reppulit l  ilia  manus. 
At  tu  ne  dubita — minuet  vindicta  dolorem — 

protinus  in  vultus  unguibus  ire  meos. 
nee  nostris  oculis  nee  nostris  parce  capillis  :  65 

quamlibet  infirmas  adiuvat  ira  manus  ; 
neve  mei  sceleris  tarn  tristia  signa  supersint, 

pone  recompositas  in  statione  comas  ! 


VIII 

Est  quaedam — quicumque  volet  cognoscere  lenam, 

audiat ! — est  quaedam  nomine  Dipsas  anus, 
ex  re  nomen  habet — nigri  non  ilia  parentem 

Memnonis  in  roseis  sobria  vidit  equis. 
ilia  magas  artes  Aeaeaque  carmina  novit  5 

inque  caput  liquidas  arte  recurvat  aquas  ; 
scit  bene,  quid  gramen,  quid  torto  concita  rhombo 

licia,  quid  valeat  virus  amantis  equae. 
cum  voluit,  toto  glomerantur  nubila  caelo  ; 

cum  voluit,  puro  fidget  in  orbe  dies.  10 

sanguine,  siqua  fides,  stillantia  2  sidera  vidi  ; 

purpureus  Lunae  sanguine  vultus  erat. 
hanc  ego  nocturnas  versam  volitare  per  umbras 

suspicor  et  pluma  corpus  anile  tegi. 

1  retulit  P:  reppulit  usual  reading:  rettudit  Ehw.  Br. 

2  stillantia  usual  reading  :  stellantia  P  Nem. 

a  Meaning  "  thirst}7."  b  Aurora,  the  dawn. 

346 


THE   AMORES    I.  viii 

began  to  feel  my  guilt — my  blood  it  was  that  flowed 
when  she  shed  those  tears.  Thrice,  none  the  less,  I 
would  have  cast  myself  before  her  feet  a  suppliant ; 
though  thrice  thrust  she  back  my  dreadful  hands. 

63  But  you,  stay  not — for  your  vengeance  will 
lessen  my  grief — from  straight  assailing  my  features 
with  your  nails.  Spare  neither  my  eyes  nor  yet 
my  hair :  however  weak  the  hand,  ire  gives  it 
strength  ;  or  at  least,  that  the  sad  signs  of  my 
misdeed  may  not  survive,  once  more  range  in  due 
rank  your  ordered  locks. 


VIII 

There  is  a  certain — whoso  wishes  to  know  of  a 
bawd,  let  him  hear  ! — a  certain  old  dame  there  is  by 
the  name  of  Dipsas.  Her  name  a  accords  with  fact — 
she  has  never  looked  with  sober  eye  upon  black 
Memnon's  mother,  her  of  the  rosy  steeds.6  She 
knows  the  ways  of  magic,  and  Aeaean  incantations, 
and  by  her  art  turns  back  the  liquid  waters  upon 
their  source  ;  she  knows  well  what  the  herb  can 
do,  what  the  thread  set  in  motion  by  the  whirl- 
ing magic  wheel,  what  the  poison  of  the  mare  in 
heat.  Whenever  she  has  willed,  the  clouds  are 
rolled  together  over  all  the  sky ;  whenever  she  has 
willed,  the  day  shines  forth  in  a  clear  heaven.  I 
have  seen,  if  you  can  believe  me,  the  stars  letting 
drop  down  blood  ;  crimson  with  blood  was  the  face 
of  Luna.  I  suspect  she  changes  form  and  flits  about 
in  the  shadows  of  night,  her  aged  body  covered 
with  plumage.      I  suspect,  and  rumour  bears  me  out. 

347 


OVID 

suspicor,  et  fama  est.  oculis  quoque  pupula  duplex  15 

fulminat,  et  gemino  lumen  ab  orbe  venit.1 
evocat  antiquis  proavos  atavosque  sepulcris 

et  solidam  longo  carmine  findit  humum. 
Haec  sibi  proposuit  thalamos  temerare  pudicos  ; 

nee  tamen  eloquio  lingua  noeente  caret.  20 

fors  me  sermoni  testem  dedit ;  ilia  monebat 

talia — me  duplices  oeculuere  fores  : 
"  scis  here  te,  mea  lux,  iuveni  placuisse  beato  ? 

haesit  et  in  vultu  constitit  usque  tuo. 
et  cur  non  placeas  ?  nulli  tua  forma  secunda  est  ;   25 

me  miseram,  dignus  corpore  cultus  abest  ! 
tarn  felix  esses  quam  formosissima,  vellem — 

non  ego,  te  facta  divite,  pauper  ero. 
stella  tibi  oppositi  nocuit  contraria  Martis. 

Mars  abiit ;  signo  nunc  Venus  apta  suo.  30 

prosit  lit  adveniens,  en  adspice  !  dives  amator 

te  cupiit  ;  curae,  quid  tibi  desit,  habet. 
est  etiam  facies,  quae  se  tibi  conparet,  illi  ; 

si  te  non  emptam  vellet,  emendus  erat." 
Erubuit.    "  decet  alba  quidem  pudor  ora,  sed  iste,  35 

si  simules,  prodest ;  verus  obesse  solet. 
cum  bene  deiectis  gremium  spectabis  ocellis, 

quantum  quisque  ferat,  respiciendus  erit. 
forsitan  inmundae  Tatio  regnante  Sabinae 

noluerint  habiles  pluribus  esse  viris  ;  40 

nunc  Mars  externis  animos  exercet  in  armis, 

at  Venus  Aeneae  regnat  in  urbe  sui. 

1  venit  P:  micat  P1  Nem.  Br. 

"  Pliny,  N.H.  vii.  16,  17,  18,  speaks  of  women  with  double 
pupils. 

348 


THE  AMORES    I.  viii 

From  her  eyes,  too,  double  pupils  dart  their  light- 
nings, with  rays  that  issue  from  twin  orbs/'  She 
summons  forth  from  ancient  sepulchres  the  dead  of 
generations  far  remote,  and  with  long  incantations 
lays  open  the  solid  earth. 

19  This  old  dame  has  set  herself  to  profane  a 
modest  union  ;  her  tongue  is  none  the  less  with- 
out a  baneful  eloquence,  Chance  made  me  witness 
to  what  she  said  ;  she  was  giving  these  words  of 
counsel — the  double  doors  concealed  me  :  "  Know 
you,  my  light,  that  yesterday  you  won  the  favour  of 
a  wealthy  youth  ?  Caught  fast,  he  could  not  keep 
his  eyes  from  your  face.  And  why  should  you  not 
win  favour  ?  Second  to  none  is  your  beauty.  Ah 
me,  apparel  worthy  of  your  person  is  your  lack  !  I 
could  wish  you  as  fortunate  as  you  are  most  fair — 
for  with  you  become  rich,  I  shall  not  be  poor.  Mars 
with  contrary  star  is  what  has  hindered  you.  Mars 
is  gone  ;  now  favouring  Venus'  star  is  here.  How  her 
rising  brings  you  fortune,  lo,  behold!  A  rich  lover 
has  desired  you ;  he  has  interest  in  your  needs. 
He  has  a  face,  too,  that  may  match  itself  with 
yours  ;  were  he  unwilling  to  buy,  he  were  worthy 
to  be  bought. 

3fj  My  lady  blushed. 

"Blushes,  to  be  sure,  become  a  pale  face,  but 
the  blush  one  feigns  is  the  one  that  profits ;  real 
blushing  is  wont  to  be  loss.  With  eyes  becomingly 
cast  down  you  will  look  into  your  lap,  and  regard 
each  lover  according  to  what  he  brings.  It  may  be 
that  in  Tatius'  reign  the  unadorned  Sabine  fair 
would  not  be  had  to  wife  by  more  than  one  :  hut 
now  in  wars  far  off  Mars  tries  the  souls  of  men,  and 
'tis    Venus    reigns   in    the    city  of  her    Aeneas.      The 

349 


OVID 

ludunt  formosae  ;  casta  est,  quam  nemo  rogavit — 

aut,  si  rusticitas  non  vetat,  ipsa  rogat. 
has  quoque,  quas  frontis  rugas  in  vertice  portas,1     45 

excute  ;  de  rugis  crimina  multa  cadent. 
Penelope  iuvenum  vires  temptabat  in  artiu  ; 

qui  latus  arguei*et,  corneus  arcus  erat. 
labitur  occulte  fallitque  volubilis  aetas, 

et  celer  admissis  labitur  annus  equis.2  50 

aera  nitent  usu,  vestis  bona  quaerit  haberi, 

canescunt  turpi  tecta  relieta  situ — 
forma,  nisi  admittas,  nullo  exercente  senescit. 

nee  satis  effectus  unus  et  alter  habent ; 
certior  e  multis  nee  iam  invidiosa  rapina  est.  55 

plena  venit  canis  de  grege  praeda  lupis. 
Ecce,  quid  iste  tuus  praeter  nova  carmina  vates 

donat  ?  amatoris  milia  multa  leges.3 
ipse  deus  vatum  palla  spectabilis  aurea 

tractat  inauratae  consona  fila  lyrae.  60 

qui  dabit,  ille  tibi  magno  sit  maior  Homero  ; 

crede  mihi,  res  est  ingeniosa  dare, 
nee  tu,  siquis  erit  capitis  mercede  redemptus, 

despice  ;  gypsati  crimen  inane  pedis. 
nee  te  decipiant  veteres  circum  atria  cerae.  65 

tolle  tuos  tecum,  pauper  amator,  avos  ! 
quin,  quia  pulcher  erit,  poscet  sine  munere  noctem  ! 

quod  det,  amatorem  flagitet  ante  suum  ! 
Parcius  exigito  pretium,  dum  retia  tendis, 

ne  fugiant ;  captos  legibus  ure  tuis  !  70 

1  So  the  MSS.:  quae  .  .  .  portant  Burnt.  Ehw.  Nem.  Br. 

2  ut  .  .   .  amnis  aquis  N.  Hein.  Nem.         3  feres  Nem. 

a  The  wrinkles  are  those  of  feigned  austerity,  the  mask  of 
a  wanton  life. 

6  Apollo.  c  Slaves  offered  for  sale  were  thus  marked. 

35° 


THE   AMORES    I.  viii 

beautiful  keep  holiday  ;  chaste  is  she  whom  no  one 
has  asked — or,  be  she  not  too  countrified,  she 
herself  asks  first.  Those  wrinkles,  too,  which  you 
carry  high  on  your  brow,  shake  off;  from  the 
wrinkles  many  a  naughtiness  will  fall."  Penelope, 
when  she  used  the  bow,  was  making  trial  of 
the  young  men's  powers ;  of  horn  was  the  bow 
that  proved  their  strength.  The  stream  of  a  lifetime 
glides  smoothly  on  and  is  past  before  we  know,  and 
swift  the  year  glides  by  with  horses  at  full  speed. 
Bronze  grows  bright  with  use  ;  a  fair  garment  asks 
for  the  wearing  ;  the  abandoned  dwelling  moulders 
with  age  and  corrupting  neglect — and  beauty,  so 
you  open  not  your  doors,  takes  age  from  lack  of  use. 
Nor,  do  one  or  two  lovers  avail  enough  ;  more  sure 
your  spoil,  and  less  invidious,  if  from  many.  'Tis 
from  the  flock  a  full  prey  comes  to  hoary  wolves. 

57  "  Think,  what  does  your  fine  poet  give  you 
besides  fresh  verses  ?  You  will  get  many  thousands 
of  lover's  lines  to  read.  The  god  of  poets  himself6 
attracts  the  gaze  by  his  golden  robe,  and  sweeps 
the  harmonious  chords  of  a  lyre  dressed  in  gold. 
Let  him  who  will  give  be  greater  for  you  than  great 
Homer ;  believe  me,  giving  calls  for  genius.  And 
do  not  look  down  on  him  if  he  be  one  redeemed 
with  the  price  of  freedom ;  the  chalk-marked 
foot c  is  an  empty  reproach.  Nor  let  yourself  be 
deluded  by  ancient  masks  about  the  hall.  Take  thy 
grandfathers  and  go,  thou  lover  who  art  poor  !  Nay, 
should  he  ask  your  favours  without  paying  because 
he  is  fair,  let  him  first  demand  what  he  may  give 
from  a  lover  of  his  own. 

69  "  Exact  more  cautiously  the  price  while  you 
spread  the   net,  lest  they  take   flight ;  once  taken, 

351 


OVID 

nee  nocuit  simulatus  amor  ;  sine,  credat  amari, 

et 1  cave  ne  gratis  hie  tibi  eonstet  amor  ! 
saepe  nega  noctes.     capitis  modo  finge  dolorem, 

et  modo,  quae  causas  praebeat,  Isis  erit. 
mox  recipe,  ut  nullum  patiendi  colligat  usum,  75 

neve  relentescat  saepe  repulsus  amor, 
surda  sit  oranti  tua  ianua,  laxa  ferenti ; 

audiat  exclusi  verba  receptus  amans  ; 
et,  quasi  laesa  prior,  lionnumquam  irascere  laeso — 

vanescit  culpa  culpa  repensa  tua.  80 

sed  numquam  dederis  spatiosum  tempus  in  iram  ; 

saepe  simultates  ira  morata  tacit, 
quin  etiam  discant  oculi  lacrimare  coacti, 

et  faciant  udas  ille  vel  ille  genas  ; 
nee,  siquem  falles,  tu  periurare  timeto —  85 

commodat  in  lusus  numina  surda  Venus, 
servus  et  ad  partes  sollers  ancilla  parentur, 

qui  doceant,  apte  quid  tibi  possit  emi ; 
et  sibi  pauca  rogent — multos  si  pauca  rogabunt, 

postmodo  de  stipula  grandis  acervus  erit.  90 

et  soror  et  mater,  nutrix  quoque  carpat  amantem ; 

fit  cito  per  multas  praeda  petita  manus. 
cum  te  deficient  poscendi  munera  causae, 

riatalern  libo  testificare  tuum  ! 
Ne  securus  amet  nullo  rivale,  caveto  ;  95 

non  bene,  si  tollas  proelia,  durat  amor, 
ille  viri  videat  toto  vestigia  lecto 

factaque  lascivis  livida  colla  notis. 
munera  praecipue  videat,  quae  miserit  alter. 

si  dederit  nemo,  Sacra  roganda  Via  est.  100 

1  et  P :  at  vulg. :  sed  ed.  prin. 
"  Where  there  were  many  shops. 

352 


THE   AMORES    I.  viii 

prey  upon  them  on  terms  of  your  own.  Nor  is  there 
harm  in  pretended  love ;  allow  him  to  think  he  is 
loved,  and  take  care  lest  this  love  bring  you  nothing 
in  !  Often  deny  your  favours.  Feign  headache  now, 
and  now  let  Isis  be  what  affords  you  pretext.  After 
a  time,  receive  him,  lest  he  grow  used  to  suffering, 
and  his  love  grow  slack  through  being  oft  repulsed. 
Let  your  portal  be  deaf  to  prayers,  but  wide  to  the 
giver  ;  let  the  lover  you  welcome  overhear  the  words 
of  the  one  you  have  sped  ;  sometimes,  too,  when 
you  have  injured  him,  be  angry,  as  if  injured  first — 
charge  met  by  counter-charge  will  vanish.  But 
never  give  to  anger  long  range  of  time ;  anger 
that  lingers  long  oft  causes  breach.  Nay,  even  let 
your  eyes  learn  to  drop  tears  at  command,  and  the 
one  or  the  other  bedew  at  will  your  cheeks  ;  nor 
fear  to  swear  falsely  if  deceiving  anyone — -Venus 
lends  deaf  ears  to  love's  deceits.  Have  slave  and 
handmaid  skilled  to  act  their  parts,  to  point  out 
the  apt  gift  to  buy  for  you ;  and  have  them  ask 
little  gifts  for  themselves — if  they  ask  little  gifts 
from  many  persons,  there  will  by-and-bye  grow  from 
straws  a  mighty  heap.  And  have  your  sister  and 
your  mother,  and  your  nurse,  too,  keep  plucking  at 
your  lover ;  quickly  comes  the  spoil  that  is  sought 
by  many  hands.  When  pretext  fails  for  asking  gifts, 
have  a  cake  to  be  sign  to  him  your  birthday  is  come. 
95  "Take  care  lest  he  love  without  a  rival,  and 
feel  secure  ;  love  lasts  not  well  if  you  give  it  naught 
to  fight.  Let  him  see  the  traces  of  a  lover  o'er  all 
your  couch,  and  note  about  your  neck  the  livid  marks 
of  passion.  Above  all  else,  have  him  see  the  presents 
another  has  sent.  If  no  one  has  sent,  you  must  ask 
of  the  Sacred  Way."     When   you    have  taken   from 

353 


OVID 

cum  multa  abstuleris,  ut  non  tamen  omnia  donet, 

quod  numquam  reddas,  commodet,  ipsa  roga  ! 
lingua  iuvet  mentemque  tegat — blandire  noceque  ; 

inpia  sub  dulci  melle  venena  latent. 
Haec  si  praestiteris  usu  mihi  cognita  longo,  105 

nee  tulerint  voces  ventus  et  aura  meas, 
saepe  mihi  dices  vivae  bene,  saepe  rogabis, 

ut  mea  defunctae  molliter  ossa  cubent." 
Vox  erat  in  cursu,  cum  me  mea  prodidit  umbra, 

at  nostrae  vix  se  continuere  man  us,  110 

quin  albam  raramque  comam  lacrimosaque  vino 

lumina  rugosas  distraherentque  genas. 
di  tibi  dent  nullosque  Lares  inopemque  senectam, 

et  longas  hiemes  perpetuamque  sitim  ! 

IX 

Militat  omnis  amans,  et  habet  sua  castra  Cupido ; 

Attice,  crede  mihi,  militat  omnis  amans. 
quae  bello  est  habilis,  Veneri  quoque  convenit  aetas. 

turpe  senex  miles,  turpe  senilis  amor, 
quos  petiere  duces  animos  1  in  milite  forti,  5 

hos  petit  in  socio  bella  puella  vii-o.2 
pervigilant  ambo  ;  terra  requiescit  uterque — 

ille  fores  dominae  servat,  at  ille  ducis. 
militis  officium  longa  est  via  ;  mitte  puellam, 

strenuus  exempto  fine  sequetur  amans.  10 

1  Rautenberg  2  toro  Hein.  Merk. 

354 


THE   AMORES    I.  ix 

him  many  gifts,  in  case  he  still  give  up  not  all 
he  has,  yourself  ask  him  to  lend — what  you  never 
will  restore !  Let  your  tongue  aid  you,  and 
cover  up  your  thoughts — wheedle  while  you  despoil ; 
wicked  poisons  have  for  hiding-place  sweet  honey. 

105  a  jf  vou  fulfil  these  precepts,  learned  by  me 
from  long  experience,  and  wind  and  breeze  carry 
not  my  words  away,  you  will  often  speak  me  well  as 
long  as  I  live,  and  often  pray  my  bones  lie  softly 
when  I  am  dead." 

109  Her  words  were  still  running,  when  my 
shadow  betrayed  me.  But  my  hands  could  scarce 
restrain  themselves  from  tearing  her  sparse  white 
hair,  and  her  eyes,  all  lachrymose  from  wine,  and  her 
wrinkled  cheeks.  May  the  gods  give  you  no  abode 
and  helpless  age,  and  long  winters  and  everlasting* 
thirst ! 


IX 

Every  lover  is  a  soldier,  and  Cupid  has  a  camp  of 
his  own  ;  Atticus,  believe  me,  every  lover  is  a  soldier. 
The  age  that  is  meet  for  the  wars  is  also  suited  to 
Venus.  'Tis  unseemly  for  the  old  man  to  soldier, 
unseemly  for  the  old  man  to  love.  The  spirit  that 
captains  seek  in  the  valiant  soldier  is  the  same  the 
fair  maid  seeks  in  the  man  who  mates  with  her. 
Both  wake  through  the  night ;  on  the  ground  each 
takes  his  rest — the  one  guards  his  mistress's  door, 
the  other  his  captain's.  The  soldier's  duty  takes 
him  a  long  road  ;  send  but  his  love  before,  and  the 
strenuous  lover,  too,   will  follow  without    end.      He 


355 


OVID 

ibit  in  adversos  montes  duplicataque  nimbo 

Humina,  eongestas  exteret  ille  nives, 
nee  freta  pressurus  tumidos  causabitur  Euros 

aptaque  verrendis  sideva  quaeret  aquis. 
quis  nisi  vel  miles  vel  amans  et  frigora  noctis  15 

et  denso  mixtas    perferet  imbre  nives  ? 
mittitur  infestos  alter  speculator  in  hostes  ; 

in  rivale  oculos  alter,  ut  hoste,  tenet, 
ille  graves  urbes,  hie  durae  limen  amicae 

obsidet ;  liic  portas  frangit,  at  ille  fores.  20 

Saepe  soporatos  invadere  profuit  hostes 

caedere  et  armata  vulgus  inerme  manu. 
sic  fera  Threicii  ceciderunt  agmina  Rhesi, 
♦  et  dominum  capti  deseruistis  equi. 
saepe  maritorum  somnis  utuntur  amantes,  25 

et  sua  sopitis  hostibus  arma  movent, 
eustodum  transire  manus  vigilumque  catervas 

militis  et  miseri  semper  amantis  opus. 
Mars  dubius  nee  certa  Venus ;  victique  resurgunt, 

quosque  neges  umquam  posse  iacere,  cadunt.        30 
Ergo  desidiam  quicumque  vocabat  amorem, 

desinat.     ingenii  est  experientis  amor, 
ardet  in  abducta  Briseide  magnus  Achilles — 

dum  licet,  Argivas  frangite,  Troes,  opes ! 
Hector  ab  Andrcxmacn.es  conplexibus  ibat  ad  arma,  35 

et,  galeam  capiti  quae  daret,  uxor  erat. 
summa  ducum,  Atrides,  visa  Priameide  fertur 

Maenadis  effusis  obstipuisse  comis. 

a  Under  the  arms  of  Ulysses  and  Diomedes. 
356 


THE   AMORES    I.  ix 

will  climb  opposing  mountains  and  cross  rivers 
doubled  by  pouring  rain,  he  will  tread  the  high- 
piled  snows,  and  when  about  to  ride  the  seas  he 
will  not  prate  of  swollen  East-winds  and  look  for 
fit  stars  ere  sweeping  the  waters  with  his  oar.  Who 
but  either  soldier  or  lover  will  bear  alike  the  cold 
of  night  and  the  snows  mingled  with  dense  rain  ? 
The  one  is  sent  to  scout  the  dangerous  foe  ;  the 
other  keeps  eyes  upon  his  rival  as  on  a  foeman. 
The  one  besieges  mighty  towns,  the  other  the 
threshold  of  an  unyielding  mistress ;  the  other 
breaks  in  doors,  the  one,  gates. 

21  Oft  hath  it  proven  well  to  rush  on  the  enemy 
sunk  in  sleep,  and  to  slay  with  armed  hand  the 
unarmed  rout.  Thus  fell  the  lines  of  Thracian 
Rhesus, a  and  you,  O  captured  steeds,  left  your  lord 
behind.  Oft  lovers,  too,  take  vantage  of  the  hus- 
band's slumber,  and  bestir  their  own  weapons  while 
the  enemy  lies  asleep.  To  pass  through  companies  of 
guards  and  bands  of  sentinels  is  ever  the  task  both 
of  soldier  and  wretched  lover.  Mars  is  doubtful, 
and  Venus,  too,  not  sure ;  the  vanquished  rise 
again,  and  they  fall  you  would  say  could  never  be 
brought  low. 

31  Then  whoso  hath  called  love  spiritless,  let  him 
cease.  Love  is  for  the  soul  ready  for  any  proof. 
Aflame  is  great  Achilles  for  Briseis  taken  away 
men  of  Troy,  crush  while  ye  may,  the  Argive 
strength  !  Hector  from  Andromache's  embrace 
went  forth  to  arms,  and  'twas  his  wife  that  set  the 
helmet  on  his  head.  The  greatest  of  captains, 
Atreus'  son,  they  say,  stood  rapt  at  sight  of  Priam's 
daughter,6  Maenad-like  with  her  streaming  hair. 
*  Cassandra  and  Agamemnon. 

357 


OVID 

Mars  quoque  deprensus  fabrilia  vincula  sensit ; 

notior  in  caelo  fabula  nulla  fuit.  40 

ipse  ego  segnis  eram  discinctaque  in  otia  natus  ; 

mollierant  animos  lectus  et  umbra  meos. 
inpulit  ignavum  formosae  cura  puellae 

iussit  et  in  castris  aera  nierere  suis. 
inde  vides  agilem  nocturnaque  bella  gerentem.        45 

qui  nolet  fieri  desidiosus,  amet  ! 


X 

Qualis  ab  Eurota  Phrygiis  avecta  earinis 

coniugibus  belli  causa  duobus  erat, 
qualis  erat  Lede,  quam  plumis  abditus  albis 

callidus  in  falsa  lusit  adulter  ave, 
qualis  Amymone  siccis  erravit  in  agris,1  5 

cum  premeret  summi  verticis  urna  comas — 
talis  eras  ;  aquilamque  in  te  taurumque  timebam, 

et  quidquid  magno  de  love  fecit  amor. 
Nunc  timor  omnis  abest,  animique  resanuit  error, 

nee  facies  oculos  iam  capit  ista  meos.  10 

cur  sim  mutatus,  quaeris  ?     quia  munera  poscis. 

haec  te  non  patitur  causa  placere  mihi. 
donee  eras  simplex,  animum  cum  eorpore  amavi  ; 

nunc  mentis  vitio  laesa  figura  tua  est. 
et  puer  est  et  nudus  Amor  ;  sine  sordibus  annos     1 5 

et  nullas  vestes,  ut  sit  apertus,  habet. 

1  Argis  Burm. 

°  The  tale  of  Mars  and  Venus  and  Vulcan,  told  in  Odyssey 
viii.  266-369. 

6  I.e.  The  couch  on  which  he  wrote  his  verses  l}"ing  in  the 
shade. 

358 


THE   AMORES   I.  x 

Mars,  too,  was  caught,  and  felt  the  bonds  of  the 
smith  ;  no  tale  was  better  known  in  heaven."  For 
myself,  my  bent  was  all  to  dally  in  ungirt  idleness  ; 
my  couch  and  the  shade h  had  made  my  temper 
mild.  Love  for  a  beautiful  girl  has  started  me  from 
craven  ways  and  bidden  me  take  service  in  her  camp. 
For  this  you  see  me  full  of  action,  and  waging  the 
wars  of  night.  Whoso  would  not  lose  all  his  spirit, 
let  him  love  ! 


X 

Such  as  was  she  who  was  carried  from  the 
Eurotas  in  Phrygian  keel  to  be  cause  of  war  to 
her  two  lords ;  such  as  was  Leda,  whom  the  cunning 
lover  deceived  in  guise  of  the  bird  with  gleaming 
plumage  ;  such  as  was  Amymone,"  going  through 
thirsty  fields  with  full  urn  pressing  the  locks  on  her 
head — such  were  you ;  and  in  my  love  for  you  I 
feared  the  eagle  and  the  bull,  and  what  other  form 
soever  love  has  caused  great  Jove  to  take. 

9  Now  my  fear  is  all  away,  and  my  heart  is  healed 
of  straying ;  those  charms  of  yours  no  longer  take 
my  eyes.  Why  am  I  changed,  you  ask  ?  Because 
you  demand  a  price.  This  is  the  cause  that  will 
not  let  you  please  me.  As  long  as  you  were  simple, 
I  loved  you  soul  and  body  ;  now  your  beauty  is 
marred  by  the  fault  of  your  heart.  Love  is  both  a 
child  and  naked  :  his  guileless  years  and  lack  of 
raiment  are  sign  that  he  is  free.      Why  bid  the  child 


c  Sent  by  her  father   Panau.s   for   water,   sin:  attracted 
Neptune. 

359 


OVID 

quid  puerum  Veneris  pretio  prostare  iubetis  ? 

quo  pretium  condat,1  non  habet  ille  sinum ! 
nee  Venus  apta  feris  Veneris  nee  filius  armis — 

non  decet  inbelles  aera  merere  deos.  20 

Stat  meretrix  certo  cuivis  mercabilis  aere, 

et  miseras  iusso  eorpore  quaerit  opes  ; 
devovet  imperium  tamen  haec  lenonis  avari 

et,  quod  vos  faeitis  sponte,  coacta  facit. 
Sumite  in  exemplum  pecudes  ratione  carentes  ;       25 

turpe  erit,  ingenium  mitius  esse  feris. 
non  equa  munus  equum,  non  taurum  vacca  poposcit  ; 

non  aries  plaeitam  munere  captat  ovem. 
sola  viro  mulier  spoliis  exultat  ademptis, 

sola  locat  noctes,  sola  locanda  venit,  30 

et  vendit  quod  utrumque  iuvat  quod  uterque  petebat, 

et  pretium,  quanti  gaudeat  ipsa,  facit. 
quae  Venus  ex  aequo  ventura  est  grata  duobus, 

altera  cur  illam  vendit  et  alter  emit  ? 
cur  mihi  sit  damno,  tibi  sit  lucrosa  voluptas,  35 

quam  socio  motu  femina  virque  ferunt  ? 
Non  bene  conducti  vendunt  periuria  testes, 

non  bene  selecti  iudicis  area  patet. 
turpe  reos  empta  miseros  defendere  lingua ; 

quod  faciat  magnas,  turpe  tribunal,  opes ;  40 

turpe  tori  reditu  census  augere  paternos, 

et  faciem  lucro  prostituisse  suam. 
gratia  pro  rebus  merito  debetur  inemptis  ; 

pro  male  conducto  gratia  nulla  toro. 
1  condas  P. 

°  Sinus,  a  pocket-like  fold  in  the  ancient  garment. 
6  One  of  the  praetor's  panel. 
360 


THE   AMORES    I.  x 

of  Venus  offer  himself  for  gain  ?  He  has  no  pocket 
where  to  put  away  his  gain !  a  Neither  Venus  nor 
her  son  is  apt  at  service  of  cruel  amis — it  is  not 
meet  that  unwarlike  gods  should  draw  the  soldier's 
pay. 

21  'Tis  the  harlot  stands  for  sale  at  the  fixed  price 
to  anyone  soe'er,  and  wins  her  wretched  gains  with 
body  at  the  call ;  yet  even  she  calls  curses  on  the 
power  of  the  greedy  pander,  and  does  because 
compelled  what  you  perform  of  your  own  will. 

25  Look  for  pattern  to  the  beasts  of  the  field,  un- 
reasoning though  they  are  ;  'twill  shame  you  to  find 
the  wild  things  gentler  than  yourself.  Mare  never 
claimed  gift  from  stallion,  nor  cow  from  bull  ;  the 
ram  courts  not  the  favoured  ewe  with  gift.  'Tis  only 
woman  glories  in  the  spoil  she  takes  from  man,  she 
only  hires  out  her  favours,  she  only  comes  to  be 
hired,  and  makes  a  sale  of  what  is  delight  to  both 
and  what  both  wished,  and  sets  the  price  by  the 
measure  of  her  own  delight.  The  love  that  is  to 
be  of  equal  joy  to  both — why  should  the  one  make 
sale  of  it,  and  the  other  purchase  ?  Why  should 
my  pleasure  cause  me  loss,  and  yours  to  you  bring 
gain — the  pleasure  that  man  and  woman  both 
contribute  to  ? 

37  It  is  not  honour  for  witnesses  to  make  false 
oaths  for  gain,  nor  for  the  chosen  juror's  b  purse  to  lie 
open  for  the  bribe.  'Tis  base  to  defend  the  wretched 
culprit  with  purchased  eloquence ;  the  court  that 
makes  great  gains  is  base ;  'tis  base  to  swell  a 
patrimony  with  a  revenue  from  love,  and  to  offer 
one's  own  beauty  for  a  price.  Thanks  are  due  and 
deserved  for  boons  unbought ;  no  thanks  are  felt 
for  love  that  is  meanly  hired.      He  who  has  made 

361 


OVID 

omnia  conductor  solvit ;  mercede  soluta  45 

non  manet  officio  debitor  ille  tuo. 
parcite,  formosae,  pretium  pro  nocte  pacisci  ; 

non  habet  eventus  sordida  praeda  bonos. 
non  fuit  armillas  tanti  pepigisse  l  Sabinas, 

ut  premerent  sacrae  virginis  anna  caput ;  50 

e  quibus  exierat,  traiecit  viscera  ferro 

filius,  et  poenae  causa  monile  fuit. 
Nee  tamen  indignum  est  a  divite  praemia  posci ; 

munera  poscenti  quod  dare  possit,  habet. 
carpite  de  plenis  pendentes  vitibus  uvas  ;  55 

praebeat  Alcinoi  poma  benignus  ager ! 
officium  pauper  numerat  studiumque  fidemque; 

quod  quis  habet,  dominae  conferat  omne  suae, 
est  quoque  carminibus  meritas  celebrare  puellas 

dos  mea  ;  quam  volui,  nota  fit  arte  mea.  60 

scindentur  vestes,  gemmae  frangentur  et  aurum  ; 

carmina  quam  tribuent,  fama  perennis  erit. 
nee  dare,  sed  pretium  posci  dedignor  et  odi  ; 

quod  nego  poscenti,  desine  velle,  dabo ! 


XI 

Colligere  incertos  et  in  ordine  ponere  crines 
docta  neque  ancillas  inter  habenda  Nape, 

1  eligisse  P :  tetigisse  s :  pepigisse  sinistras  ed.  prin. 

a  The  Vestal  Tarpeia  asked  as  the  price  of  her  treason 
what  the  Sabines  had  on  their  left  arms,  meaning  their 
armlets  of  gold,  but  was  crushed  beneath  the  shields  they 
carried  there. 

362 


THE    A  MO  RES   I.  xi 

the  hire  pays  all  ;  when  the  price  is  paid  lie  remains 
no  more  a  debtor  for  your  favour.  Spare,  fair  ones, 
to  ask  a  price  for  your  love  ;  a  sordid  gain  can  bring 
no  good  in  the  end.  'Twas  not  worth  while  for  the 
holy  maid  to  bargain  for  the  Sabine  armlets,  only 
that  arms  should  crush  her  down  ; a  a  son  once 
pierced  with  the  sword  the  bosom  whence  he  came, 
and  a  necklace  was  the  cause  of  the  mother's  pain.6 

53  And  yet  it  is  no  shame  to  ask  for  presents  from 
the  rich ;  they  have  wherefrom  to  give  you  when 
you  ask.  Pluck  from  full  vines  the  hanging  clusters  ; 
let  the  genial  field  of  Alcinous  yield  its  fruits  !  He 
who  is  poor  counts  out  to  you  as  pay  his  service, 
zeal,  and  faithfulness  ;  the  kind  of  wealth  each  has, 
let  him  bring  it  all  to  the  mistress  of  his  heart. 
My  dower,  too,  it  is  to  glorify  the  deserving  fair  in 
song  ;  whoever  I  have  willed  is  made  famous  by  my 
art.  Gowns  will  be  rent  to  rags,  and  gems  and  gold 
be  broke  to  fragments;  the  glory  my  songs  shall 
give  will  last  for  ever.  'Tis  not  the  giving  hut  the 
asking  of  a  price,  that  I  despise  and  hate.  What  I 
refuse  at  your  demand,  cease  only  to  wish,  and  I 
will  give  ! 


XI 

Nape,  O  adept  in  gathering  and  setting  in  order 
scattered  locks,  and  not  to  be  numbered  among 
handmaids,    O  Nape  known    for  useful    ministry  in 

6  Knowing  that  the  Fates  had  decreed  his  death  in  case 
he  went,  Eriphyle,  for  a  necklace,  caused  her  husband 
Amphiarans  to  be  one  of  the  seven  against  Thebes,  ami  was 
slain  by  Alcmaeon,  her  son. 

36$ 


OVID 

inque  ministeriis  furtivae  cognita  noctis 

utilis  et  dandis  ingeniosa  notis 
saepe  venire  ad  me  dubitantem  hortata  Corinnam,    5 

saepe  laboranti  fida  reperta  mihi — 
aecipe  et  ad  dominam  peraratas  mane  tabellas 

perfer  et  obstantes  sedula  pelle  moras  ! 
nee  silieum  venae  nee  durum  in  pectore  ferrum, 

nee  tibi  simplicitas  ordine  maior  adest.  10 

credibile  est  et  te  sensisse  Cupidinis  arcus — 

in  me  militiae  signa  tuere  tuae  ! 
si  quaeret  quid  again,  spe  noctis  vivere  dices ; 

cetera  fert  blanda  cera  notata  manu. 
Dum    loquor,    hora    fugit.     vacuae    bene    redde 

tabellas,  15 

verum  continuo  fac  tamen  ilia  legat. 
adspicias  oculos  mando  frontemque  legentis  ; 

e  tacito  vultu  scire  futura  licet, 
nee  mora,  perlectis  rescribat  multa,  iubeto  ; 

odi,  cum  late  splendida  cera  vacat.  20 

conprimat  ordinibus  versus,  oculosque  moretur 

margine  in  extremo  littera  rasa  meos. 
Quid  digitos  opus  est  graphio  lassare  tenendo  ? 

hoc  habeat  scriptum  tota  tabella  "  veni  ! " 
non  ego  victrices  lauro  redimire  tabellas  25 

nee  Veneris  media  ponere  in  aede  morer. 
subscribam  :  "  veneri  fidas  sibi  naso  ministras 

DEDICAT,  AT  NUPER  VILE  FUISTIS  ACER." 


364 


THE   AMOHES    I.  xi 

the  stealthy  night  and  skilled  in  the  giving  of  the 
signal,  oft  urging  Corinna  when  in  doubt  to  come 
to  me,  often  found  tried  and  true  to  me  in  times 
of  trouble — receive  and  take  early  to  your  mistress 
these  tablets  I  have  inscribed,  and  care  that 
nothing  hinder  or  delay  !  Your  breast  has  in  it 
no  vein  of  Hint  or  unyielding  iron,  nor  ai-e  you 
simpler  than  befits  your  station.  One  could  believe 
you,  too,  had  felt  the  darts  of  Cupid — in  aiding 
me  defend  the  standards  of  your  own  campaigns  ! 
Should  she  ask  how  I  fare,  you  will  say  'tis  my 
hope  of  her  favour  that  lets  me  live  ;  as  for  the  rest, 
'tis  charactered  in  the  wax  by  my  fond  hand. 

lb  While  I  speak,  the  hour  is  Hying.  Give  her  the 
tablets  while  she  is  happily  free,  but  none  the  less 
see  that  she  reads  them  straight.  Regard  her  eyes 
and  brow,  I  enjoin  you,  as  she  reads ;  though 
she  speak  not,  you  may  know  from  her  face 
what  is  to  come.  And  do  not  wait,  but  bid  her 
write  much  in  answer  when  she  has  read ;  I  hate 
when  a  fine,  fair  page  is  widely  blank.  See  she 
pack  the  lines  together,  and  long  detain  mv  eyes 
with  letters  traced  on  the  outermost  marge. 

23  What  need  to  tire  her  fingers  by  holding  of  the 
pen  ?  Let  the  whole  tablet  have  writ  on  it  only 
this :  "Come!"  Then  straight  would  I  take  tin 
conquering  tablets,  and  bind  them  round  with  laurel, 
and  hang  them  in  the  mid  of  Venus'  shrine.  I 
would  write  beneath  :  ''  to  VENUS  naso  DEDICATES  his 
FAITHFUL  AIDS;  VET  BUT  NOW  YOU  WERE  ONLY  MEAN 
MAPLE." 


36s 


OVID 


XII 


Flete  meos  casus — tristes  rediere  tabellae 

infelix  hodie  littera  posse  negat. 
omina  sunt  aliquid  ;  modo  cum  discedere  vellet, 

ad  limen  digitos  restitit  icta  Nape, 
missa  foras  iterum  limen  transire  memento  5 

cautius  atque  alte  sobria  ferre  pedem  ! 
Ite  hinc,  difficiles,  funebria  ligna,  tabellae, 

tuque,  negaturis  cera  referta  notis  ! — 
quam,  puto,  de  longae  collectam  flore  cicutae 

melle  sub  infami  Corsica  misit  apis.  10 

at  tamquam  minio  penitus  medicata  rubebas — 

ille  color  vere  sanguinolentus  erat. 
proiectae  triviis  iaceatis,  inutile  lignum, 

vosque  rotae  frangat  praetei'euntis  onus  ! 
ilium  etiam,  qui  vos  ex  arbore  vertit  in  usum,  15 

convincam  puras  non  habuisse  manus. 
praebuit  ilia  arbor  rnisero  suspendia  collo, 

carnifici  diras  praebuit  ilia  cruces  ; 
ilia  dedit  turpes  ravis  l  bubonibus  umbras, 

vulturis  in  ramis  et  strigis  ova  tulit.  20 

his  ego  commisi  nostros  insanus  amores 

molliaque  ad  dominam  verba  ferenda  dedi  ? 
aptius  hae  capiant  vadimonia  garrula  cerae, 

quas  aliquis  duro  cognitor  ore  legat  ; 
inter  ephemeridas  melius  tabulasque  iacerent,  25 

in  quibus  absumptas  fleret  avarus  opes. 

1  ravis  JV.  Hein..:  rasis  P:  raris  Arund.:  raucis  many. 
366 


THE   AMORES   I.  xii 


XII 


Weep  for  my  misfortune — my  tablets  have  returned 
with  gloomy  news !  The  unhappy  missive  says : 
"  Not  possible  to-day."  There  is  something  in  omens  ; 
just  now  as  Nape  would  leave,  she  tripped  her  toe 
upon  the  threshold  and  stopped.  When  next  you 
are  sent  abroad,  remember  to  take  more  care  as  von 
cross,  and  soberly  to  lift  your  foot  full  clear ! 

7  Away  from  me,  ill-natured  tablets,  funereal 
pieces  of  wood,  and  you,  wax  close  writ  with  charac- 
ters that  will  say  me  nay! — wax  which  1  think  was 
gathered  from  the  flower  of  the  long  hemlock  by 
the  bee  of  Corsica  and  sent  us  under  its  ill-famed 
honey.  Yet  you  had  a  blushing  hue,  as  if  tinctured 
deep  with  minium — but  that  colour  was  really  a  colour 
from  blood.  Lie  there  at  the  crossing  of  the  ways, 
where  I  throw  you,  useless  sticks,  and  may  the 
passing  wheel  with  its  heavy  load  crush  you  !  Yea, 
and  the  man  who  converted  you  from  a  tree  to  an' 
object  for  use,  I  will  assure  you,  did  not  have  pure 
hands.  That  tree,  too,  lent  itself  to  the  hanging  of 
some  wretched  neck,  and  furnished  the  cruel  cross  to 
the  executioner;  it  gave  its  foul  shade  to  hoarse 
horned  owls,  and  its  branches  bore  up  the  eggs  of 
the  screech-owl  and  the  vulture.  To  tablets  like 
these  did  I  insanely  commit  my  loves  and  give  my 
tender  words  to  be  carried  to  my  lady  ?  More  fitly 
would  such  tablets  receive  the  wordy  bond,  for  some 
judge  to  read  in  dour  tones  ;  'twere  better  they 
should  lie  among  day-ledgers,  and  accounts  in  which 
some  miser  weeps  o'er  money  spent. 

3"7 


OVID 

Ergo  ego  vos  rebus  duplices  pro  nomine  sensi. 

auspicii  numerus  non  erat  ipse  boni. 
quid  precer  iratus,  nisi  vos  cariosa  seneetus 

rodat,  et  inmundo  cera  sit  alba  situ  ?  30 


XIII 

Iam  super  oceanum  venit  a  seniore  marito 

flava  pruinoso  quae  vehit  axe  diem. 
"  Quo  properas,  Aurora  ?   mane  ! — sic   Memnonis 
umbris 

annua  sollemni  caede  parentet  avis  ! 
nunc  iuvat  in  teneris  dominae  iacuisse  lacertis  ;  5 

si  quando,  lateri  nunc  bene  iuncta  meo  est. 
nunc  etiam  somni  pingues  et  frigidus  aer, 

et  liquidum  tenui  gutture  cantat  avis, 
quo  properas,  ingrata  viris,  ingrata  puellis  ? 

roscida  purpurea  supprime  lora  manu  !  10 

Ante  tuos  ortus  melius  sua  sidera  servat 

navita  nee  media  nescius  errat  aqua  ; 
te  surgit  quamvis  lassus  veniente  viator, 

et  miles  saevas  aptat  ad  arraa  manus. 
prima  bidente  vides  oneratos  arva  colentes  ;  1 5 

prima  vocas  tardos  sub  iuga  panda  boves. 
tu  pueros  somno  fraudas  tradisque  magistris, 

ut  subeant  tenerae  verbera  saeva  manus  ; 1 
1  15-18  omitted  by  P  s  :  elsewhere  after  10. 

a  They  were  tabellae  duplices,  double  tablets. 

6  Tithonus  was  immortal,  but  not  immortally  young. 

c  From   the   ashes    of    Memnon,    Aurora's    son,    king    of 


368 


THE   AMORES    I.  xiii 

27  Yes,  I  heave  found  you  double  in  your  dealings, 
to  accord  with  your  name."  Your  very  number  was 
an  augury  not  good.  What  prayer  should  I  make  in 
my  anger,  unless  that  rotten  old  age  eat  you  away, 
and  your  wax  grow  colourless  from  foul  neglect? 


XIII 

She  is  coming  already  over  the  ocean  from  her 
too-ancient  husband  b — she  of  the  golden  hair  who 
with  rimy  axle  brings  the  day. 

3  "  Whither  art  thou  hasting,  Aurora  ?  Stay  ! — so 
may  his  birds  each  year  make  sacrifice  to  the  shades 
of  Memnon  their  sire  in  the  solemn  combat  ! c  'Tis 
now  I  delight  to  lie  in  the  tender  arms  of  my  love  ; 
if  ever,  'tis  now  I  am  happy  to  have  her  close  by  my 
side.  Now,  too,  slumber  is  deep  and  the  air  is  cool, 
and  birds  chant  liquid  song  from  their  slender  throats. 
Whither  art  thou  hasting,  O  unwelcome  to  men, 
unwelcome  to  maids  ?  Check  with  rosy  hand  the 
dewy  rein  ! 

11  "  Before  thy  rising  the  seaman  better  observes 
his  stars,  and  does  not  wander  blindly  in  mid  water; 
at  thy  coming  rises  the  wayfarer,  however  wearied, 
and  the  soldier  fits  his  savage  hands  to  arms.  Thou 
art  the  first  to  look  on  men  tilling  the  field  with  the 
heavy  mattock  ;  thou  art  the  first  to  summon  the 
slow-moving  steer  beneath  the  curved  yoke.  Thou 
cheatest  boys  of  their  slumbers  and  givest  them  over 
to  the  master,  that  their  tender  hands  may  yield  to 
the  cruel  stroke  ;  and  likewise  many  dost  thou  send 

Ethiopia,  sprang  the  Menmonides,  birds  which  honoured  him 
in  the  manner  described. 

309 
H    B 


OVID 

atque  eadem  sponsum  multos  *  ante  atria  mittis, 

unius  ut  verbi  grandia  damna  ferant.  20 

nee  tu  consulto,  nee  tu  iucunda  diserto ; 

oogitur  ad  lites  surgere  uterque  novas, 
tu,  cum  feminei  possint  eessare  labores, 

lanificam  revocas  ad  sua  pensa  manum. 
Omnia  perpeterer— sed  surgere  mane  puellas,  25 

quis  nisi  cui  non  est  ulla  puella  ferat  ? 
optavi  quotiens,  ne  nox  tibi  eedere  vellet, 

ne  fugerent  vultus  sidera  mota  tuos  ! 
optavi  quotiens,  aut  ventus  frangeret  axera, 

aut  caderet  spissa  nube  retentus  equus  ! 2  30 

hivida,  quo  properas?  quod  erat  tibi  filius  ater,        33 

materni  fuerat  pectoris  ille  color. 
Tithono  vellem  de  te  narrare  liceret ;  35 

femina  non  caelo  turpior  ulla  foret. 
ilium  dum  reiugis,  longo  quia  grandior  aevo, 

surgis  ad  invisas  a  sene  mane  rotas, 
at  si,  quern  mavis,3  Cephalum  conplexa  teneres, 

clamares  :  "  lente  currite,  noctis  equi  !  "  40 

Cur  ego  plectar  amans,  si  vir  tibi  marcet  ab  annis  ? 

num  me  nupsisti  conciliante  seni  ? 
adspice,  quot  somnos  iuveni  donarit  amato 

Luna  ! — neque  illius  forma  secunda  tuae. 
ipse  deum  genitor,  ne  te  tarn  saepe  videret,  45 

commisit  noctes  in  sua  vota  duas." 

1  So    Withqf:    sponsum    cultos    P :    sponsum    consulti    s : 
sponsum  cives  Pa.:  atque  vades  sponsum  stultos  Ehw. 
3  31,  32  omitted  by  Ps  : 

quid,  si  Cephalio  numquam  flagraret  amore  ? 
an  putat  ignotam  nequitiam  esse  suam  ? 
3  mavis  Riese  :  malis  Merle.:  magis  P :  manibus  s. 

37° 


THE   AMORES   I.  xiii 

as  sponsors  before  the  court,  to  undergo  great  losses 
through  a  single  word.  Thou  bringest  joy  neither 
to  lawyer  nor  to  pleader  ;  each  is  ever  compelled  to 
rise  for  cases  new.  'Tis  thou,  when  women  might 
cease  from  toil,  who  callest  back  to  its  task  the  hand 
that  works  the  wool. 

25  "  I  could  endure  all  else — but  who,  unless  he 
were  one  without  a  maid,  could  bear  that  maids 
should  rise  betimes  ?  How  often  have  I  longed 
that  night  should  not  give  place  to  thee,  that  the 
stars  should  not  be  moved  to  fly  before  thy  face  ! 
How  often  have  I  longed  that  either  the  wind  should 
break  thine  axle,  or  thy  steed  be  tripped  by  dense 
cloud,  and  fall  !  O  envious,  whither  dost  thou  haste  ? 
The  son  born  to  thee  was  black,  and  that  colour 
was  the  hue  of  his  mother's  heart. 

35  a  j  Would  Tithonus  were  free  to  tell  of  thee  ; 
no  woman  in  heaven  would  be  known  for  greater 
shame.  Flying  from  him  because  long  ages  older, 
thou  risest  early  from  the  ancient  man  to  go  to 
the  chariot-wheels  he  hates.  Yet,  hadst  thou  thy 
favoured  Cephalus  in  thy  embrace,  thou  wouldst  cry  : 
'  Run  softly,  steeds  of  night !  ' 

4i  a  Why  should  I  be  harried  in  love  because  thy 
mate  is  wasting  with  years  ?  Didst  thou  wed  an 
ancient  man  because  I  made  the  match  ?  Look,  how 
many  hours  of  slumber  has  Luna  bestowed  upon  the 
youth  she  loves  !  a — and  her  beauty  is  not  second  to 
thine.  The  very  father  of  the  gods,  that  he  need 
not  see  thee  so  oft,  made  two  nights  into  one  to 
favour  his  desires."  b 


<*  Endymion. 

6  Jove  and  Alcmene,  mother  of  Hercules. 


B    B    2 


371 


OVID 

Iurgia  finiei'am.    scires  audisse  :  rubebat- 
nec  tamen  adsueto  tardius  orta  dies  ! 


XIV 

Dicebam  "  medicare  tuos  desiste  capillos  !  " 

tingere  quam  possis,  iam  tibi  nulla  coma  est. 
at  si  passa  fores,  quid  erat  spatiosius  illis  ? 

contigerant  imum,  qua  patet  usque,  latus. 
quid,  quod  erant  tenues,  et  quos  ornare  timeres  ?      5 

vela  colorati  qualia  Seres  habent, 
vel  pede  quod  gracili  deducit  aranea  filum, 

cum  leve  deserta  sub  trabe  nectit  opus, 
nee  tamen  ater  ei-at  nee  erat  tamen  aureus  ille, 

sed,  quam  vis  neuter,  mixtus  uterque  color —        10 
qualem  clivosae  madidis  in  vallibus  Idae 

ardua  derepto  cortice  cedrus  habet. 
Adde,  quod  et  dociles  et  centum  rlexibus  apti 

et  tibi  nullius  causa  doloris  erant. 
non  acus  abrupit,  non  vallum  pectinis  illos.  15 

ornatrix  tuto  corpore  semper  erat ; 
ante  meos  saepe  est  oculos  ornata  nee  umquam 

bracchia  derepta  saucia  fecit  acu. 
saepe  etiam  nondum  digestis  mane  capillis 

purpureo  iacuit  semisupina  toro.  20 

turn  quoque  erat  neclecta  decens,  ut  Threcia  Bacche, 

cum  temere  in  viridi  grainine  lassa  iacet. 
Cum  graciles  essent  tamen  et  lanuginis  instar, 

heu,  male  l  vexatae  quanta  tulere  comae  ! 
1   male  P  s  :  mala  wiilg. 

372 


THE    AMORES    I.  xiv 

47  I  had  brought  my  chiding  to  an  end.  You 
might  know  she  had  heard :  she  blushed — and  yet 
the  day  arose  no  later  than  its  wont ! 


XIV 

I  used  to  say:  "Stop  drugging  that  hair  of  yours  !" 
Now  you  have  no  locks  to  dye  !  Yet,  had  you  suffered 
it,  what  were  more  abundant  than  they  ?  They  bad 
come  to  touch  your  side  even  to  its  lowest  part. 
Yes,  and  they  were  fine  in  texture,  so  fine  that  you 
feared  to  dress  them ;  they  were  like  the  gauzy 
coverings  the  dark-skinned  Seres  wear,  or  the  thread 
drawn  out  by  the  slender  foot  of  the  spider  when  he 
weaves  his  delicate  woi'k  beneath  the  deserted  beam. 
And  yet  their  colour  was  not  black,  nor  yet  was  it 
golden,  but,  although  neither,  a  mingling  of  both 
hues — such  as  in  the  dewy  vales  of  precipitous  Ida 
belongs  to  the  lofty  cedar  stripped  of  its  bark. 

13  Add  that  they  were  both  docile  and  suited  to  a 
hundred  ways  of  winding,  and  never  caused  you 
whit  of  pain.  The  needle  did  not  tear  them,  nor 
the  palisade  of  the  comb.  The  hair-dresser's  person 
was  ever  safe ;  oft  has  my  love's  toilet  been  made 
before  my  eyes,  and  she  never  snatched  up  hairpin 
to  wound  her  servant's  arms.  Often,  too,  in  early 
morning  when  her  hair  was  not  yet  dressed,  she  has 
lain  half  supine  on  her  purple  couch.  Even  then,  in 
her  neglect,  she  was  comely,  like  a  Thracian  Bacchante 
lying  careless  and  wearied  on  the  green  turf. 

23  And  yet,  seeing  they  were  delicate  and  like 
to  down,  alas,  what  woes  were  theirs,  and  what 
tortures    they    endured  !     With    what    patience    did 

373 


OVID 

quam  se  praebuerunt  ferro  patienter  el  igni,  25 

ut  fieret  torto  nexilis  1  orbe  sinus  ! 
clamabam  :   "  scelus  est  istos,  scelus  urere  crines  ! 

sponte  decent ;  capiti,  ferrea,  parce  tuo  ! 
vim  procul  hinc  remove  !  non  est,  qui  debeat  uri ; 

erudit2  admotas  ipse  capillus  acus."  30 

Formosae  periere  comae — quas  vellet  Apollo, 

quas  vellet  capiti  Bacchus  inesse  suo ! 
illis  contulerim,  quas  quondam  nuda  Dione 

pingitur  umenti  sustinuisse  manu. 
quid  male  dispositos  quereris  periisse  capillos  ?         35 

quid  speculum  maesta  ponis,  inepta,  manu  ? 
non  bene  consuetis  a  te  spectaris  ocellis  ; 

ut  placeas,  debes  inmemor  esse  tui. 
non  te  cantatae  laeserunt  paelicis  herbae, 

non  anus  Haemonia  perfida  lavit  aqua  ;  40 

nee  tibi  vis  morbi  nocuit — procul  omen  abesto  ! — 

nee  minuit  densas  invida  lingua  comas, 
facta  manu  culpaque  tua  dispendia  sentis ; 

ipsa  dabas  capiti  mixta  venena  tuo. 
Nunc  tibi  captivos  mittet  Germania  crines  ;  45 

culta  triumphatae  munere  gentis  eris. 
o  quam  saepe  comas  aliquo  mirante  rubebis, 

et  dices  :  "  empta  nunc  ego  merce  probor, 
nescio  quam  pro  me  laudat  nunc  iste  Sygambram. 

fama  tamen  memini  cum  fuit  ista  mea."  50 

1  nexilis  wig.:  rexilis  P :  textilis  s:  nexilis  Burin.  Ntm. 

2  circuit  Martinon. 

"  Pliny  mentions  a  picture  of  Venus  rising  from  the  sea, 
by  Apelles. 

374 


THE   AMORES    I.  xiv 

they  yield  themselves  to  iron  and  fire  to  form  the 
close-curling  ringlet  with  its  winding  orb  !  I  kept 
crying  out :  "  'T  is  crime,  't  is  crime  to  burn  those 
tresses  !  They  are  beautiful  of  themselves ;  spare 
your  own  head,  O  iron-hearted  girl  !  Away  from 
there  with  force  !  That  is  no  hair  should  feel  the 
fire  ;  your  curls  themselves  can  school  the  irons  you 
apply  !  "         • 

31  The  beautiful  tresses  are  no  more — such  as 
Apollo  could  desire,  such  as  Bacchus  could  desire, 
for  their  own  heads  !  I  could  compare  with  them  the 
tresses  which  nude  Dione  is  painted  holding  up  of 
yore  with  dripping  fingers."  Why  do  you  lament  the 
ruin  of  your  ill-ordered  hair  ?  why  lay  aside  your 
mirror  with  sorrowing  hand,  silly  giri  ?  You  are 
gazed  upon  by  yourself  with  eyes  not  well  accustomed 
to  the  sight ;  to  find  pleasure  there,  you  must  forget 
your  old-time  self.  No  rival's  enchanted  herbs  have 
wrought  you  ill,  no  treacherous  grandam  has  laved 
your  hair  with  water  from  Haemonian  land  ; b  nor 
has  violent  illness  harmed — far  from  us  he  the  omen  ! 
— nor  envious  tongue  diminished  your  dense  locks. 
The  loss  you  feel  was  wrought  you  by  your  own  hand 
and  fault ;  yourself  applied  the  mingled  poison  to 
your  head. 

45  Now  Germany  will  send  you  tresses  from  captive 
women  ;  you  will  be  adorned  by  the  bounty  of  the 
race  we  lead  in  triumph.  O  how  oft,  when  someone 
looks  at  your  hair,  will  you  redden,  and  say  :  "  The 
ware  I  have  bought  is  what  brings  me  favour  now. 
'T  is  some  Sygambrian  woman  that  yonder  one  is 
praising  now,  instead  of  me.  Yet  I  remember  when 
that  glory  was  my  own." 

*  Thessaly  was  famed  as  the  home  of  sorcery. 

375 


OVID 

Me    miserum  !    lacrimas    male     continet     oraque 
dextra 
protegit  ingenuas  picta  rubore  genas. 
sustinet  antiques  gremio  spectatque  capillos, 

ei  mihi,  non  illo  munera  digna  loco  ! 
Collige  cum  vultu  mentem !  reparabile   damnum 

est.  55 

postmodo  nativa  conspiciere  coma.      • 


XV 

Quid  mihi,  Livor  edax,  ignavos  obicis  annos, 

ingeniique  vocas  carmen  inertis  opus  ; 
non  me  more  patrum,  dum  strenua  sustinet  aetas, 

praemia  militiae  pulverulenta  sequi, 
nee  me  verbosas  leges  ediscere  nee  me  5 

ingrato  vocem  prostituisse  foro? 
Mortale    est,    quod    quaeris,    opus,     mihi    fama 
perennis 

quaeritur,  in  toto  semper  ut  orbe  canar. 
vivet  Maeonides,  Tenedos  dum  stabit  et  Ide, 

dum  rapidas  Simois  in  mare  volvet  aquas  ;  10 

vivet  et  Ascraeus,  dum  mustis  uva  tumebit, 

dum  cadet  incurva  falce  resecta  Ceres. 
Battiades  semper  toto  cantabitur  orbe  ; 

quamvis  ingenio  non  valet,  arte  valet, 
nulla  Sophocleo  veniet  iactura  cothurno ;  15 

cum  sole  et  luna  semper  Aratus  erit ; 
dum  fallax  servus,  durus  pater,  inproba  lena 

vivent  et  meretrix  blanda,  Menandros  erit ; 


a  Homer,  Heeiod,  and  Calliinachus  are  the  first  three  poets 
referred  to. 

376 


THE   AMORES    I.  xv 

51  Ah,  wretched  me  !  Scarce  keeping  back  her 
tears,  with  her  right  hand  she  covers  her  face,  her 
generous  cheeks  o'er  painted  with  blushing.  The 
hair  of  yore  she  holds  in  her  lap  and  gazes  upon — 
alas,  me  !  a  gift  unworthy  of  that  place. 

55  Calm  your  heart,  and  stop  your  tears  !  Your 
loss  is  one  may  be  repaired.  Not  long,  and  you  will 
be  admired  for  locks  your  very  own. 


XV 

Why,  biting  Envy,  dost  thou  charge  me  with 
slothful  years,  and  call  my  song  the  work  of  an  idle 
wit,  complaining  that,  while  vigorous  age  gives 
strength,  I  neither,  after  the  fashion  of  our  fathers, 
pursue  the  dusty  prizes  of  a  soldier's  life,  nor  learn 
garrulous  legal  lore,  nor  set  my  voice  for  common 
case  in  the  ungrateful  forum  ? 

7  It  is  but  mortal,  the  work  you  ask  of  me  ;  but  my 
quest  is  glory  through  all  the  years,  to  be  ever  known 
in  song  throughout  the  earth.  Maeonia's  son  a  will 
live  as  long  as  Tenedos  shall  stand,  and  Ida,  as 
long  as  Simois  shall  roll  his  waters  rushing  to  the 
sea ;  the  poet  of  Ascra,  too,  will  live  as  long  as 
the  grape  shall  swell  for  the  vintage,  as  long  as 
Ceres  shall  fall  beneath  the  stroke  of  the  curving 
sickle.  The  son  of  Battus  shall  aye  be  sung  through 
all  the  earth  ;  though  he  sway  not  through  genius, 
he  sways  through  art.  No  loss  shall  ever  come  to 
the  buskin  of  Sophocles  ;  as  long  as  the  sun  and 
moon  Aratus  shall  live  on  ;  as  long  as  trickv  slave, 
hard  father,  treacherous  bawd,  and  wheedling  harlot 
shall  be   found,  Menander  will  endure ;   Ennius  the 

377 


OVID 

Ennius  arte  carens  animosique  Accius  oris 

casurum  nullo  tempore  nomen  habent.  20 

Varronem  primamque  ratem  quae  nesciet  aetas, 

aureaque  Aesonio  terga  petita  duci  ? 
earmina  sublimis  tunc  sunt  peritura  Lucreti, 

exitio  terras  cum  dabit  una  dies  ; 
Tityrus  et  segetes  Aeneiaque  anna  legentur,  25 

Roma  triumphati  dum  caput  orbis  erit ; 
donee  erunt  ignes  arcusque  Cupidinis  arma, 

discentur  numeric  culte  Tibulle,  tui ; 
Gallus  et  Hesperiis  et  Gallus  notus  Eois, 

et  sua  cum  Gallo  nota  Lycoris  erit.  30 

Ergo,  cum  siliees,  cum  dens  patientis  aratri 

depereant  aevo,  earmina  morte  carent. 
cedant  carminibus  reges  regumque  triumphi, 

cedat  et  auriferi  ripa  benigna  Tagi  ! 
vilia  miretur  vulgus  ;  mihi  flavus  Apollo  35 

pocula  Castalia  plena  ministret  aqua, 
sustineamque  coma  metuentem  frigora  myrtum, 

atque  ita  sollicito  multus  amante  legar  ! 
pascitur  in  vivis  Livor  ;  post  fata  quiescit, 

cum  suus  ex  merito  quemque  tuetur  honos.  40 

ergo  etiam  cum  me  supremus  adedei'it  ignis, 

vivam,  parsque  mei  multa  superstes  erit. 


378 


THE   AMORES    I.  xv 

rugged  in  art,  and  Accius  of  the  spirited  tongue, 
possess  names  that  will  never  fade.  Varro  and  the 
first  of  ships — what  generation  will  fail  to  know 
of  them,  and  of  the  golden  fleece,  the  Aesonian 
chieftain's  quest  ?  The  verses  of  sublime  Lucretius 
will  perish  only  then  when  a  single  day  shall  give 
the  earth  to  doom.  Tityrus  and  the  harvest,  and 
the  arms  of  Aeneas,  will  be  read  as  long  as  Rome 
shall  be  capital  of  the  world  she  triumphs  o'er ;  as 
long  as  flames  and  bow  are  the  arms  of  Cupid,  thy 
numbers  shall  be  conned,  O  elegant  Tibullus  ;  Gallus 
shall  be  known  to  Hesperia's  sons,  and  Gallus  to  the 
sons  of  Eos,  and  known  with  Gallus  shall  his  own 
Lycoris  be. 

31  Yea,  though  hard  rocks  and  though  the  tooth 
of  the  enduring  ploughshare  perish  with  passing 
time,  song  is  untouched  by  death.  Before  song  let 
monarchs  and  monarchs'  triumphs  yield' — yield,  too, 
the  bounteous  banks  of  Tagus  bearing  gold  !  Let 
what  is  cheap  excite  the  marvel  of  the  crowd ;  for 
me  may  golden  Apollo  minister  full  cups  from  the 
Castalian  fount,  and  may  I  on  my  locks  sustain  the 
myrtle  that  fears  the  cold  ;  and  so  be  ever  conned 
by  anxious  lovers  !  It  is  the  living  that  Envy  feeds 
upon  ;  after  doom  it  stirs  no  more,  when  each  man's 
fame  guards  him  as  he  deserves.  I,  too,  when  the 
final  fires  have  eaten  up  my  frame,  shall  still  live  on, 
and  the  great  part  of  me  survive  my  death/' 

a  This  charming  poem  is  a  literary  convention  :  compare 
Horace's  exeyi  monument um  (iii.  30),  and  Shakespeare's 
"  Not  marble  nor  the  gilded  monuments"  (Sonnet  lv). 


379 


LIBER   SECUNDUS 

I 

Hoc  quoque  conposui  Paelignis  natus  aquosis, 

ille  ego  nequitiae  Naso  poeta  meae. 
hoc  quoque  iussit  Amor — procul   hinc,  procul  este, 
severae  ! 

non  estis  teneris  apta  theatra  modis. 
me  legat  in  sponsi  facie  non  frigida  virgo,  5 

et  rudis  ignoto  tactus  amore  puer ; 
atque  aliquis  iuvenum  quo  nunc  ego  saucius  arcu 

agnoscat  flammae  conscia  signa  suae, 
miratusque  diu  "quo  "  dicat  "  ab  indice  doctus 

conposuit  casus  iste  poeta  meos  ?  "  10 

Ausus  eram,  memini,  caelestia  dicere  bella 

centimanumque  Gyen  1 — et  satis  oris  erat — 
cum  male  se  Tellus  ulta  est,  ingestaque  Olympo 

ardua  devexum  Pelion  Ossa  tulit. 
in  manibus  nimbos  et  cum  love  fulmen  habebam,   15 

quod  bene  pro  caelo  mitteret  ille  suo — 
Clausit  arnica  fores  !  ego  cum  love  fulmen  omisi  ; 

excidit  ingenio  Iuppiter  ipse  meo. 
Iuppiter,  ignoscas  !  nil  me  tua  tela  iuvabant ; 

clausa  tuo  maius  ianua  fulmen  habet.  20 

1  Gyan  several  MSS.-.  gygen  Ps. 
°  Sulmo  was  in  a  valley  with  plenteous  rains  and  streams. 
380 


BOOK   THE   SECOND 


I 

This,  too,  is  the  work  of  my  pen — mine,  Naso's, 
born  among  the  humid  Paeligni,ffl  the  well-known 
singer  of  my  own  worthless  ways.  This,  too,  have  I 
wrought  at  the  bidding  of  Love — away  from  me,  far 
away,  ye  austere  fair !  Ye  are  no  fit  audience  for 
my  tender  strains.  For  my  readers  I  want  the  maid 
not  cold  at  the  sight  of  her  promised  lover's  face, 
and  the  untaught  boy  touched  by  passion  till  now 
unknown ;  and  let  some  youth  who  is  wounded  by 
the  same  bow  as  I  am  now,  know  in  my  lines  the 
record  of  his  own  heart's  flame,  and,  long  wondering, 
say  :  "  From  what  tatler  has  this  poet  learned,  that 
hehas  put  in  verse  my  own  mishaps  ?  " 

11  1  had  dared,  I  remember,  to  sing — nor  was  my 
utterance  too  weak — of  the  wars  of  Heaven,  and 
Gyas  of  the  hundred  hands,  when  Earth  made  her  ill 
attempt  at  vengeance,  and  steep  Ossa,  with  shelving 
Pelion  on  its  back,  was  piled  upon  Olympus.  I  had 
in  hand  the  thunder-clouds,  and  Jove  with  the  light- 
ning he  was  to  hurl  to  save  his  own  heaven. 

17  My  beloved  closed  her  door !  I — let  fall  Jove 
with  his  lightning  ;  Jove's  very  self  dropped  from  my 
thoughts.  Jove,  pardon  me  !  Thy  bolts  could  not 
serve  me  ;  that  door  she  closed  was  a  thunderbolt 
greater  than  thine.     I  have  taken  again  to  my  proper 

3*i 


OVID 

blanditias  elegosque  levis,  mea  tela,  l'esumpsi  ; 

mollierunt  duras  lenia  verba  fores, 
carmina  sanguineae  deducunt  eornua  lunae, 

et  revocant  niveos  solis  euntis  equos  ; 
carmine  dissiliunt  abruptis  faucibus  angues,  25 

inque  suos  fontes  versa  recurrit  aqua. 
carminibus  cessere  fores,  insertaque  posti, 

quamvis  robur  erat,  carmine  victa  sera  est. 
Quid  mihi  profuerit  velox  cantatus  Achilles  ? 

quid  pro  me  Atrides  alter  et  alter  agent,  30 

quique  tot  errando,  quot  bello,  perdidit  annos, 

raptus  et  Haemoniis  flebilis  Hector  equis  ? 
at  facie  tenerae  laudata  j  saepe  puellae, 

ad  vatem,  pretium  carminis,  ipsa  venit. 
magna  datur  merces  !  heroum  clara  valete  35 

nomina  ;  non  apta  est  gratia  vestra  mihi  ! 
ad  mea  formosos  vultus  adhibete,  puellae, 

carmina,  purpureus  quae  mihi  dictat  Amor  ! 


II 

Quem  penes  est  dominam  servandi  cura,  Bagoe, 
dum  perago  tecum  pauca,  sed  apta,  vaca. 

hesterna  vidi  spatiantem  luce  puellam 
ilia,  quae  Danai  porticus  agmen  habet. 

protinus,  ut  placuit,  misi  scriptoque  rogavi.  5 

rescripsit  trepida  "  non  licet  !  "  ilia  manu  ; 

1  So  Merk.  Port.  N'em.-.  at  facies  tenerae  laudata  Ps  :  ut 
facies  tenerae  laudatast  Ehw.  Br. :  facie  Hein. 

382 


THE   AMORES   II.  ii 

arms — the  light  and  bantering  elegy ;  its  gentle 
words  have  softened  the  hard-hearted  door.  Song 
brings  down  the  horns  of  the  blood-red  moon,  and 
calls  back  the  snowy  steeds  of  the  departing  sun ; 
song  bursts  the  serpent's  jaws  apart  and  robs  him  of 
his  fangs,  and  sends  the  waters  rushing  back  upon 
their  source.  Song  has  made  doors  give  way,  and 
the  bolt  inserted  in  the  post,  although  of  oak,  has 
been  made  to  yield  by  song. 

29  Of  what  avail  will  it  be  to  me  to  have  sung  of 
swift  Achilles  ?  What  will  the  sons  of  Atreus, 
the  one  or  the  other,  do  for  me,  and  he  who  in 
wandering  lost  as  many  years  as  in  war,  and  Hector 
the  lamented,  dragged  by  Haemonian  steeds  ?  But 
a  tender  beloved,  at  my  oft  praising  of  her  beauty 
has  come  of  herself  to  the  poet  as  the  reward  for  his 
song.  Great  is  my  recompense  !  Renowned  names 
of  heroes,  fare  ye  well ;  your  favours  are  not  the  kind 
for  me  !  And  fair  ones,  turn  hither  your  beauteous 
faces  as  I  sing  the  songs  which  rosy  Love  dictates 
to  me  ! 


II 

You  whose  trust  is  the  guarding  of  your  mistress, 
attend,  Bagoas,  while  I  say  a  few  words,  but  apt. 
Yesterday  I  saw  the  fair  one  walking  in  the  portico — 
the  one  that  has  the  train  of  Danaus."  Forthwith — 
for  I  was  smitten — I  sent  and  asked  her  favours  in 
a  note.  She  wrote  back  with  trembling  hand  :  "  It 
is  not  possible  !  "  and  when  I  asked  why  "it  was  not 

a  The  portico  of  Augustus'  temple  of  Apollo  on  the 
Palatine,  with  the  fifty  daughters  of  Danaus  in  marble. 
Propertius  saw  its  dedication,  ii.  31. 

3*3 


OVID 

et,  cur  non  liceat,  quaerenti  reddita  causa  est, 

quod  nimium  dominae  cura  molesta  tua  est. 
Si  sapis,  o  custos,  odium,  mihi  crede,  mereri 

desine  ;  quem  metuit  quisque,  perisse  cupit.         10 
vir  quoque  non  sapiens ;  quid  enim  servare  laboret, 

unde  nihil,  quamvis  non  tueare,  perit  ? 
sed  gerat  ille  suo  morem  furiosus  amori 

et  castum,  multis  quod  placet,  esse  putet ; 
huic  furtiva  tuo  libertas  munere  detur,  15 

quam  dederis  illi,  reddat  ut  ilia  tibi. 
conscius  esse  velis — domina  est  obnoxia  servo ; 

conscius  esse  times — dissimulare  licet, 
scripta  leget  secum — matrem  misisse  putato  ! 

venerit  ignotus — postmodo  notus  erit.  20 

ibit  ad  adfectam,  quae  non  languebit,  amicam  : 

visat  !  iudiciis  aegra  sit  ilia  tuis. 
si  faciet  tarde,  ne  te  mora  longa  fatiget, 

inposita  gremio  stertere  fronte  potes. 
nee  tu,  linigeram  fieri  quid  possit  ad  Isim,  25 

quaesieris  nee  tu  curva  theatra  time  ! 
conscius  adsiduos  commissi  toilet  honores — 

quis  minor  est  autem  quam  tacuisse  labor  ? 
ille  placet  versatque  domum  neque  verbera  sentit ; 

ille  potens — alii,  sordida  turba,  iacent.  30 

huic,  verae  ut  lateant  causae,  finguntur  inanes  ; 

atque  ambo  domini,  quod  probat  una,  probant. 
cum  bene  vir  traxit  vultum  rugasque  coegit, 

quod  voluit  fieri  blanda  puella,  facit. 

384 


THE   AMORES    II.  ii 

possible,"  gave  this  reason,  that  your  guard  of  your 
mistress  was  too  strict. 

9  If  you  are  wise,  good  guardian,  cease,  believe  me, 
to  merit  hate  ;  whom  each  man  fears,  he  longs  to  see 
destroyed.  Her  husband,  too,  is  anything  but  wise  ; 
for  why  take  pains  to  watch  over  that  from  which, 
even  did  you  not  guard,  nothing  would  be  lost  ? 
But  let  him,  mad  fool,  do  as  his  passion  prompts  him, 
and  let  him  think  she  can  be  chaste  who  takes  the 
eye  of  many  ;  be  you  the  means  of  giving  her  stolen 
liberty,  that  she  may  render  back  to  you  the  freedom 
you  gave  to  her.  Be  willing  to  conspire  with  her — the 
mistress  is  bound  to  the  slave  ;  fear  you  to  conspire — 
you  can  pretend.  She  will  read  a  missive  by  hei-self 
— think  that  her  mother  sent  it !  One  comes  not 
known  to  you — in  a  moment  you  will  know  him 
well  !  She  will  go  to  a  sick  friend,  who  will  not  be 
ill — let  her  go  to  see  her ;  let  the  friend  be  ill  in 
your  judgment !  Is  she  late  in  coming  back,  you 
need  not  let  long  waiting  tire  you  out,  but  may  lay 
your  head  in  your  lap  and  snore.  And  make  it  not 
your  business  to  ask  into  what  happens  at  linen-clad 
Isis'  temple,  nor  concern  yourself  about  the  curving 
theatre  !  The  accomplice  in  a  secret  will  reap  con- 
tinual reward — and  what  is  less  labour,  too,  than 
keeping  silence  ?  He  is  one  favoured,  and  rules  in 
the  house,  and  feels  no  blows  ;  he  is  one  with  power 
— the  rest,  a  mean  crowd,  are  at  his  feet.  For  the 
husband  empty  reasons  are  fashioned  to  keep  the 
true  ones  hid  ;  and  both  master  and  mistress  approve 
what  the  mistress  alone  approves.  After  her  lord 
has  put  on  a  scowling  face  and  bent  his  brows,  he 
does  what  the  wheedling  wife  has  willed  shall  be 
done. 

3S5 


OVID 

Sed  tamen  interdum  tecum  quoque  im*gia  nectat,  35 

et  simulet  lacrimas  carnificemque  vocet. 
tu  contra  obicies,  quae  tuto  diluat  ilia  ; 

in  verum l  falso  crimine  deme  fidem. 
sic  tibi  semper  honos,  sic  alta  peculia  crescent. 

haec  fac,  in  exiguo  tempore  liber  eris.  40 

Adspicis  indicibus  nexas  per  colla  catenas  ? 

squalidus  orba  fide  pectora  career  habet. 
quaerit  aquas  in  aquis  et  poma  fugacia  captat 

Tantalus — hoc  illi  garrula  lingua  dedit. 
dum  nimium  servat  custos  Iunonius  Ion,  45 

ante  suos  annos  occidit ;  ilia  dea  est  ! 
vidi  ego  conpedibus  liventia  crura  gerentem, 

unde  vir  incestum  scire  coactus  erat. 
poena  minor  merito.   nocuit  mala  lingua  duobus  ; 

vir  doluit,  famae  damna  puella  tulit.  50 

crede  mihi,  nulli  sunt  crimina  grata  marito, 

nee  quemquam,  quamvis  audiat,  ilia  iuvant. 
seu  tepet,  indicium  securas  prodis  2  ad  aures  ; 

sive  amat,  officio  fit  miser  ille  tuo. 
Culpa  nee  ex  facili  quamvis  manifesta  probatur ;      55 

iudicis  ilia  sui  tuta  favore  venit. 
viderit  ipse  licet,  credet  tamen  ille  neganti 

damnabitque  oculos  et  sibi  verba  dabit. 
adspiciat  dominae  lacrimas,  plorabit  et  ipse, 

et  dicet :  "  poenas  garrulus  iste  dabit !  "  60 

quid  dispar  certamen  inis  ?  tibi  verbera  victo 

adsunt,  in  gremio  iudicis  ilia  sedet. 

1  in  verum  Ps:  in  vero  P.2  Ja. 

2  prodis  P :  perdis  wig. 

386 


THE   AMORES  II.  ii 

35  But  let  her  sometimes  none  the  less  cross  words 
with  you,  too,  and  feign  to  weep,  and  call  you 
executioner.  You,  in  turn,  will  charge  her  with  what 
she  can  safely  explain  away  ;  by  false  accusation  take 
away  faith  in  the  true.  In  this  way  will  your  honour 
ever  increase,  in  this  way  your  pile  of  savings  grow 
high.     Do  this,  in  short  time  you  will  be  free. 

41  Do  you  note  that  tellers  of  tales  wear  chains  tied 
round  their  necks  ?  The  squalid  dungeon  is  the 
home  of  hearts  barren  of  faith.  Tantalus  seeks  for 
water  in  the  midst  of  waters  and  catches  at  ever 
escaping  fruits — that  was  the  fate  he  got  for  his 
garrulous  tongue.  Juno's  watchman,  guarding  lo 
too  intently,  falls  before  his  time ;  she — becomes  a 
goddess  !  I  have  seen  in  shackles  the  livid  legs  of 
a  man  who  had  forced  a  husband  to  know  himself  a 
cuckold.  The  punishment  was  less  than  he  deserved. 
His  evil  tongue  brought  harm  to  two ;  the  hus- 
band suffered  grief,  the  wife  the  loss  of  her  good 
name.  Believe  me,  accusations  are  welcome  to  no 
husband,  nor  do  they  please  him,  even  though  he 
hear.  If  he  is  cool,  you  bring  your  traitorous  tales 
to  careless  ears ;  if  he  loves,  your  service  only  makes 
him  wretched. 

55  Nor  is  a  fault,  however  manifest,  an  easy  thing  to 
prove ;  the  wife  comes  off  unharmed,  safe  in  the  favour 
of  her  judge.  Though  he  himself  have  seen,  he  will 
yet  believe  when  she  denies,  accuse  his  own  eyes, 
and  give  himself  the  lie.  Let  him  but  look  on  his 
lady's  tears,  and  he  himself,  too,  will  begin  to  wail, 
and  say  :  "  The  gabbler  that  slandered  you  shall  pay 
for  it !  "  Why  enter  on  a  contest  with  odds  against 
you  ?  You  will  lose  and  get  a  flogging  in  the  end, 
while  she  will  look  on  from  the  lap  of  her  judge 

387 
c   c  2 


OVID 

Non  scelus  adgredimur,  non  ad  miseenda  coimus 
toxica,  non  stricto  fulminat  ense  manus. 

quaerimus,  ut  tuto  per  te  possimus  amare.  65 

quid  precibus  nostris  mollins  esse  potest  ? 


Ill 

Ei  mihi,  quod  dominam  nee  vir  nee  femina  servas 

mutua  nee  Veneris  gaudia  nosse  potes ! 
qui  primus  pueris  genitalia  membra  recidit, 

vulnera  quae  fecit,  debuit  ipse  pati. 
mollis  in  obsequium  facilisque  rogantibus  esses,  5 

si  tuus  in  quavis  praetepuisset  amor. 
non  tu  natus  equo,  non  fortibus  utilis  armis  ; 

bellica  non  dextrae  convenit  hasta  tuae. 
ista  mares  tractent  ;  tu  spes  depone  viriles. 

sunt  tibi  cum  domina  signa  ferenda  tua.  10 

banc  inple  meritis,  huius  tibi  gratia  prosit ; 

si  careas  ilia,  quis  tuus  usus  erit  ? 
Est  etiam  facies,  sunt  apti  lusibus  anni  : 

indigna  est  pigro  forma  perire  situ. 
fallere  te  potuit,  quamvis  habeare  molestus  ;  15 

non  caret  effectu,  quod  voluere  duo. 
aptius  ut 1  fuerit  precibus  temptasse,  rogamus, 

dum   bene  ponendi  munera  tempus  babes. 
1  at  Nim. 
388 


THE   AMORES    II.  iii 

63  'Tis  no  crime  we  are  entering  on ;  we  are  not 
coming  together  to  mingle  poisons  ;  no  drawn  sword 
flashes  in  our  hands.  What  we  ask  is  that  you  will 
give  us  the  means  to  love  in  safety.  What  can  be 
more  modest  than  our  prayers  ? 


Ill 

Miserable  me,  that  you  who  guard  your  mistress 
are  neither  man  nor  woman,  and  cannot  know  the 
joys  of  mutual  love  !  He  who  first  robbed  boys  of 
their  nature  should  himself  have  suffered  the  wounds 
he  made.  Readily  would  you  be  compliant  and 
yielding  to  lovers'  prayers,  if  you  had  ever  grown 
warm  with  love  for  any  woman.  You  were  not  born 
for  a  horse,  nor  for  the  strenuous  service  of  arms  ; 
the  warlike  spear  fits  noj  your  right  hand.  Let  men 
engage  in  those  ways  of  life  ;  do  you  lay  aside  all 
manly  hopes.  The  standards  you  bear  must  be 
of  your  mistress's  service.  She  is  the  one  for  you  to 
ply  with  deserving  deeds ;  hers  is  the  favour  to  bring 
you  gain  ;  should  you  lack  her,  what  then  will  be 
your  use  ? 

13  Then,  too,  she  has  charms,  and  her  years  are 
apt  for  love's  delights ;  'tis  a  shame  for  her  beauty 
to  perish  by  dull  neglect.  She  could  have  eluded 
you,  strict  guardian  though  you  are  called  ;  what 
two  have  willed  lacks  not  accomplishment.  Yet 
since  'twill  be  better  to  have  tried  entreaty,  we 
ask  your  aid,  while  you  still  have  power  to  place 
your  favours  well. 


;89 


OVID 


IV 


Non  ego  mendosos  ausim  defendere  mores 

falsaque  pro  vitiis  arma  movere  meis. 
confiteor — siquid  prodest  delicta  fateri ; 

in  mea  nunc  demens  crimina  fassus  eo. 
odi,  nee  possum,  cupiens,  non  esse  quod  odi  ;  5 

heu,  quam  quae  studeas  ponere  ferre  grave  est ! 
Nam  desunt  vires  ad  me  mihi  iusque  regendum  ; 

auferor  ut  rapida  concita  puppis  aqua, 
non  est  certa  meos  quae  forma  iuvitet  amores — 

centum  sunt  causae,  cur  ego  semper  amem.  10 

sive  aliqua  est  oculos  in  se  deiecta  modestos, 

uror,  et  insidiae  sunt  pudor  ille  meae  ; 
sive  procax  aliqua  est,  capior,  quia  rustica  non  est, 

spemque  dat  in  molli  mobilis  esse  toro. 
aspera  si  visa  est  rigidasque  imitata  Sabinas,  15 

velle,  sed  ex  alto  dissimulare  puto. 
sive  es  docta,  places  raras  dotata  per  artes ; 

sive  rudis,  placita  es  simplicitate  tua. 
est,  quae  Callimachi  prae  nostris  rustica  dicat 

carmina — cui  placeo,  protinus  ipsa  placet.  20 

est  etiam,  quae  me  vatem  et  mea  carmina  culpet — 

culpantis  cupiam  sustinuisse  femur, 
molliter  incedit — motu  capit ;  altera  dura  est — 

at  poterit  tacto  mollior  esse  viro. 
haec  quia  dulce  canit  nectitque  facillima  vocem,      25 

oscula  cantanti  rapta  dedisse  velim  ; 

390 


THE   AMORES    II.  iv 


IV 


I  would  not  venture  to  defend  my  faulty  morals 
or  to  take  up  the  armour  of  lies  to  shield  my 
failings.  I  confess — if  owning  my  short-comings 
aught  avails ;  and  now,  having  owned  them,  I  madly 
assail  my  sins.  I  hate  what  I  am,  and  yet,  for  all 
my  desiring,  I  cannot  but  be  what  I  hate  ;  ah,  how 
hard  to  bear  the  burden  you  long  to  lay  aside  ! 

7  For  I  lack  the  strength  and  will  to  rule 
myself ;  I  am  swept  along  like  a  ship  tossed 
on  the  rushing  flood.  'Tis  no  fixed  beauty  that 
calls  my  passion  forth — there  are  a  hundred  causes 
to  keep  me  always  in  love.  Whether  'tis  some  fair 
one  with  modest  eyes  downcast  upon  her  lap,  I  am 
aflame,  and  that  innocence  is  my  ensnaring  ;  whether 
'tis  some  saucy  jade,  I  am  smitten  because  she  is 
not  rustic  simple,  and  gives  me  hope  of  enjoying 
her  supple  embrace  on  the  soft  couch.  If  she  seem 
austere,  and  affects  the  rigid  Sabine  dame,  I  judge 
she  would  yield,  but  is  deep  in  her  deceit.  If  you 
are  taught  in  books,  you  win  me  by  your  dower  of 
rare  accomplishments ;  if  crude,  you  win  me  by 
your  simple  ways.  Some  fair  one  tells  me  Calli- 
machus'  songs  are  rustic  beside  mine — one  who 
likes  me  I  straightway  like  myself.  Another  calls 
me  no  poet,  and  chides  my  verses — and  I  fain  would 
clasp  the  fault-finder  to  my  arms.  One  treads 
softly — and  I  fall  in  love  with  her  step  ;  another 
is  hard — but  can  be  made  softer  by  the  touch  of  love. 
Because  this  one  sings  sweetly,  with  easiest  modu- 
lation of  the  voice,  I  would  snatch  kisses  as  she 
sings ;    this    other    runs    with    nimble     finger    over 

391 


OVID 

haec  querulas  habili  percurrit  pollice  chordas — 

tarn  doctas  quis  non  possit  amare  manus  ? 
ilia  placet  gestu  numerosaque  bracchia  ducit 

et  tenerum  molli  torquet  ab  arte  latus —  30 

ut  taceam  de  me,  qui  causa  tangor  ab  omni, 

illic  Hippolvtum  pone,  Priapus  erit ! 
tu,  quia  tarn  longa  es,  veteres  heroidas  aequas 

et  potes  in  toto  multa  iacere  toro. 
haec  habilis  brevitate  sua  est.  corrumpor  utraque  ;  35 

conveniunt  voto  longa  brevisque  meo. 
non  est  culta — subit,  quid  cultae  accedere  possit  ; 

ornata  est — dotes  exhibet  ipsa  suas. 
Candida  me  capiet,  capiet  me  flava  puella, 

est  etiam  in  fusco  grata  colore  Venus.  40 

seu  pendent  nivea  pulli  cervice  capilli, 

Leda  fuit  nigra  conspicienda  coma  ; 
seu  flavent,  placuit  croceis  Aurora  eapillis. 

omnibus  historiis  se  meus  aptat  amor, 
me  nova  sollicitat,  me  tangit  serior  aetas  ;  45 

haec  melior,  specie  corporis  ilia  placet.1 
Denique  quas  tota  quisquam  probet  urbe  puellas, 

noster  in  has  omnis  ambitiosus  amor. 


Nullus  amor  tanti  est — abeas,  pharetrate  Cupido  !- 
ut  mihi  sint  totiens  maxima  vota  mori. 

1  placet  Ps  et  al. :  sapit  Hein.  from  MSS. 

°  Examples  of  chastitj'  and  lust. 
392 


THE   AMORES    II.  v 

the  querulous  string — who  could  but  fall  in  love 
with  such  cunning  hands  ?  Another  takes  me  by 
her  movement,  swaying  her  arms  in  rhythm  and 
curving  her  tender  side  with  supple  art — to  say 
naught  of  myself,  who  take  fire  from  every  cause, 
put  Hippolytus  in  my  place,  and  he  will  be 
Priapus ! a  You,  because  you  are  so  tall,  are  not 
second  to  the  ancient  daughters  of  heroes,  and  can 
lie  the  whole  couch's  length.  Another  I  find  apt  be- 
cause she  is  short.  I  am  undone  by  both  ;  tall  and 
short  are  after  the  wish  of  my  heart.  She  is  not  well 
dressed — I  dream  what  dress  would  add  ;  she  is  well 
arrayed — she  herself  shows  off  her  dower  of  charms. 
A  fair  white  skin  will  make  prey  of  me,  I  am  prey 
to  the  golden-haired,  and  even  a  love  of  dusky 
hue  will  please.  Do  dark  locks  hang  on  a  neck 
of  snow — Leda  was  fair  to  look  upon  for  her  black 
locks ;  are  they  of  golden  hue — Aurora  pleased 
with  saffron  locks.  To  all  the  old  tales  my 
love  can  fit  itself.  Fresh  youth  steals  away  my 
heart,  I  am  smitten  with  later  years ;  the  one  has 
more  worth,  the  other  wins  me  with  charm  of 
person. 

47  In  fine,  whatever  fair  ones  anyone  could  praise 
in  all  the  city — my  love  is  candidate  for  the  favours 
of  them  all.6 


V 

No  love  is  worth  so  much — away,  Cupid  with  the 
quiver  ! — that  so  often  my  most  earnest  prayer  should 
be  for  death.     For  death  my  prayers  are,  whenever 

6  For  spirit,  compare  Thomas  Moore's  "  The  time  I've 
lost  in  wooing." 

393 


OVID 

vota  mori  mea  sunt,  cum  te  peccare  *  reeordor, 

ei  mihi,  perpetuum  nata  puella  malum  ! 
Non  mihi  deceptae  2  nudant  tua  facta  tabellae,  5 

nee  data  furtive  munera  crimen  habent. 
o  utinam  arguerem  sic,  ut  non  vincere  possem  ! 

me  miserum  !  quare  tarn  bona  causa  mea  est  ? 
felix,  qui  quod  amat  defendere  fortiter  audet, 

cui  sua  "  non  feci !  "  dicere  arnica  potest.  10 

ferreus  est  nimiumque  suo  favet  ille  dolori, 

cui  petitur  victa  palma  cruenta  rea. 
Ipse  miser  vidi,  cum  me  dormire  putares, 

sobrius  adposito  crimina  vestra  mero. 
multa  supercilio  vidi  vibrante  loquentes  ;  15 

nutibus  in  vestris  pars  bona  vocis  erat. 
non  oculi  tacuere  tui,  conscriptaque  vino 

mensa,  nee  in  digitis  littera  nulla  fuit. 
sermonem  agnovi,  quod  non  videatur,  agentem 

verbaque  pro  certis  iussa  valere  notis.  20 

iamque  frequens  ierat  mensa  conviva  relicta  ; 

conpositi  iuvenes  unus  et  alter  erant. 
inproba  turn  vero  iungentes  oscula  vidi — 

ilia  mihi  lingua  nexa  fuisse  liquet — 
qualia  non  fratri  tulerit  germana  severo,  25 

sed  tulerit  cupido  mollis  arnica  viro  ; 
qualia  credibile  est  non  Phoebo  ferre  Dianam,3 

sed  Venerem  Marti  saepe  tulisse  suo. 
"Quid  facis?"  exclamo,  "quo  nunc  mea  gaudia  differs? 

iniciam  dominas  in  mea  iura  manus  !  30 

1  peccare  Mueller  from  P:  peccasse  vulg. 

2  deprensae  Ehw. 

3  So  Bent. :  Phoebum  .  .  .  Dianae  MSS. 

394 


THE   AMORES    II.  v 

I  think  you  false  to  me — ah,  girl  born  for  my 
everlasting  ill ! 

5  No  intercepted  note  it  is  that  lays  bare  to  me 
your  deeds,  nor  the  secret  giving  of  gifts  that  ac- 
cuses you.  Oh,  would  that  my  charge  were  such 
that  I  could  not  win !  Wretched  me  !  why  is  my 
cause  so  strong  ?  Happy  he  who  dares  boldly  de- 
fend his  beloved,  to  whom  his  mistress  can  say,  "  I 
did  not  do  it !  "  Iron  of  heart  is  he,  and  too  much 
favours  his  own  pain,  who  would  win  a  bloodstained 
triumph  by  the  downfall  of  the  guilty. 

13  I  saw  your  guilty  acts  my  wretched  self  with 
sober  eye,  when  the  wine  had  been  placed  and  you 
thought  I  slept.  I  saw  you  both  say  many  things 
with  quiverings  of  the  brow  ;  in  your  nods  was  much 
of  speech.  Your  eyes,  too,  girl,  were  not  dumb, 
and  the  table  was  written  o'er  with  wine,  nor  did 
any  letter  fail  your  fingers.  Your  speech,  too,  I 
recognized  was  busied  with  hidden  message,  and 
your  words  charged  to  stand  for  certain  meanings. 
And  now  the  throng  of  guests  had  already  left  the 
board  and  gone  ;  there  were  left  a  youth  or  two, 
asleep  in  wine.  'Twas  then  indeed  I  saw  you 
sharing  shameful  kisses — it  is  clear  to  me  they 
were  kisses  of  the  tongue — not  such  as  sister  bestows 
on  austere  brother,  but  such  as  yielding  sweetheart 
gives  her  eager  lover  ;  not  such  as  one  could  think 
Diana  grants  to  Phoebus,  but  such  as  Venus  oft 
bestowed  on  Mars. 

29  a  What  are  you  doing  ?  "  I  cry  out.  "  Where 
now  are  you  scattering  joys  that  are  mine  ?  I  will 
lay  my  sovereign  hands  upon  my  rights.  Those 
kisses  are  common    to    you   with  me,  and   common 


395 


OVID 

haec  tibi  sunt  mecum,  mihi  sunt  communia  tecum — 

in  bona  cur  quisquam  tertius  ista  venit?  " 
Haec  ego,  quaeque  dolor  linguae  dictavit ;  at  illi 

conscia  purpureus  venit  in  ora  pudor, 
quale  coloratum  Tithoni  coniuge  caelum  35 

subrubet,  aut  sponso  visa  puella  novo ; 
quale  rosae  fulgent  inter  sua  lilia  mixtae, 

aut  ubi  cantatis  Luna  laborat  equis, 
aut  quod,  ne  longis  flavescere  possit  ab  annis, 

Maeonis  Assyrium  femina  tinxit  ebur.  40 

hie  erat  aut  alicui  color  ille  simillimus  horum, 

et  numquam  visu  x  pulchrior  ilia  fuit. 
spectabat  terram — terrain  spectare  decebat ; 

maesta  erat  in  vultu — maesta  decenter  erat. 
sicut  erant,  et  erant  eulti,  laniare  capillos  45 

et  fuit  in  teneras  impetus  ire  genas — 
Ut  faeiem  vidi,  fortes  cecidere  lacerti  ; 

defensa  est  armis  nostra  puella  suis. 
qui  modo  saevus  eram,  supplex  ultroque  rogavi, 

oscula  ne  nobis  deteriora  daret.  50 

risit  et  ex  animo  dedit  optima — qualia  possent 

excutere  irato  tela  trisulca  Iovi ; 
torqueor  infelix,  ne  tarn  bona  senserit  alter, 

et  volo  non  ex  hac  ilia  fuisse  nota. 
haec  quoque,  quam  docui,  multo  meliora  fuerunt,    55 

et  quiddam  visa  est  addidicisse  novi. 
quod  nimium  placuere,  malum  est,  quod  tota  labellis 

lingua  tua  est  nostris,  nostra  recepta  tuis. 
nee  tamen  hoc  unum  doleo — non  oscula  tantum 

iuncta     queror,    quamvis     haec    quoque     iuncta 
queror ;  60 

ilia  nisi  in  lecto  nusquam  potuere  doceri. 

nescio  quis  pretium  grande  magister  habet. 

1  visu  Hous. :  casu  MSS. 
396 


THE   AMORES    II.  v 

to   me   with  you — why   does  any  third    attempt  to 
share  those   goods  ?  " 

33  These  were  my  words,  and  whatever  passion 
dictated  to  my  tongue  ;  but  she — her  conscious  face 
mantled  Avith  ruddy  shame,  like  the  sky  grown  red 
with  the  tint  of  Tithonus'  bride,  or  maid  gazed  on 
by  her  newly  betrothed  ;  like  roses  gleaming  among 
the  lilies  where  they  mingle,  or  the  moon  in  labour 
with  enchanted  steeds,  or  Assyrian  ivoi*y  Maeonia's 
daughter  tinctures  to  keep  long  years  from  yellowing 
it.  Like  one  of  these,  or  very  like,  was  the  colour 
she  displayed,  and  never  was  she  fairer  to  look  upon. 
She  kept  her  eyes  on  the  ground — to  keep  them 
on  the  ground  was  becoming  ;  there  was  grief  in  her 
face — grief  made  her  comely.  Just  as  it  was,  and 
it  was  neatly  dressed,  I  was  moved  to  tear  her 
hair  and  to  fly  at  her  tender  cheeks — 

47  When  I  looked  on  her  face,  my  brave  arms 
dropped ;  my  love  was  protected  by  armour  of  her  own. 
But  a  moment  before  in  a  cruel  rage,  I  was  humble 
now,  and  e'en  entreated  her  to  give  me  kisses  not 
less  sweet  than  those.  She  smiled,  and  gave  me  her 
best  with  all  her  heart — kisses  that  could  make  irate 
Jove  let  drop  from  his  hand  the  three-forked  bolt ; 
I  am  in  wretched  torment  for  fear  my  rival  has  tasted 
them  as  sweet,  and  I  would  not  have  his  kisses  of 
the  same  seal.  Much  bettei-,  too,  were  these  than  I 
had  taught,  and  something  new  she  seemed  to  have 
learned.  Their  too  much  pleasing  was  an  ill  sign, 
for  her  kiss  was  voluptuous.  Yet  this  one  thing  is 
not  all  my  giief — I  complain  not  merely  that  her 
kisses  are  close,  and  yet  that  they  are  close  I  do 
complain  ;  those  kisses  could  have  been  no  wise  but 
lewdly  taught.  Some  master  has  had  a  great  reward 
for  his  teaching. 

h  397 


OVID 


VI 


Psittacus,  Eois  imitatrix  ales  ab  Indis, 

occidit — exequias  ite  frequenter,  aves  ! 
ite,  piae  volucres,  et  plangite  pectora  pinnis 

et  rigido  teneras  ungue  notate  genas  ; 
horrida  pro  maestis  lanieter  pluma  capillis,  5 

pro  longa  resonent  carrnina  vestra  tuba ! 
quod  scelus  Ismarii  quereris,  Philomela,  tyranni, 

expleta  est  annis  ista  querela  suis ; 
alitis  in  rarae  miserum  devertere  funus — 

magna,  sed  antiqua  est  causa  doloris  Itys.  10 

Omnes,  quae  liquido  libratis  in  aere  cursus, 

tu  tamen  ante  alios,  turtur  amice,  dole ! 
plena  fuit  vobis  omni  concordia  vita, 

et  stetit  ad  finem  longa  tenaxque  fides, 
quod  fuit  Argolico  iuvenis  Phoceus  Orestae,  15 

hoc  tibi,  dum  licuit,  psittace,  turtur  erat. 
Quid  tamen  ista  fides,  quid  rari  forma  coloris, 

quid  vox  mutandis  ingeniosa  sonis, 
quid  iuvat,  ut  datus  es,  nostrae  placuisse  puellae  ? — 

infelix,  avium  gloria,  nempe  iaces  !  20 

tu  poteras  fragiles  pinnis  hebetare  zmaragdos 

tincta  gerens  rubro  Punica  rostra  croco. 
non  fuit  in  terns  vocum  simulantior  ales — 

reddebas  blaeso  tarn  bene  verba  sono  ! 
Raptus  es  invidia — non  tu  fera  bella  movebas  ;         25 

garrulus  et  placidae  pacis  amator  eras. 

a  Ismarus  wronged  Philomela,  sister  of  Procne,  his  wife, 
and  the  two  slew  Itys,  his  son,  in  revenge. 

398 


THE   AM  ORES   II. 


VI 


Our  parrot,  winged  mimic  from  Indian  land  of 
dawn,  is  no  more — come  flocking,  ye  birds,  to  his 
obsequies !  Come,  all  ye  feathered  faithful,  come 
beat  your  breasts  with  the  wing,  and  mark  your 
tender  cheeks  with  the  rigid  claw ;  let  your  ruffled 
plumage  be  rent  in  place  of  mourning  hair,  and  in 
place  of  the  long  trumpet  let  your  songs  sound  out ! 
If  you,  Philomela,  are  lamenting  the  deed  of  the 
tyrant  of  Ismarus,a  that  lament  has  been  fulfilled  bv 
its  term  of  years  ;  turn  aside  to  the  hapless  funeral 
of  no  common  bird — great  cause  for  grief  is  Itys, 
but  belongs  to  the  ancient  past. 

11  All  ye  who  poise  your  flight  in  liquid  air,  O 
grieve — yet  thou  before  all  others,  friendly  turtle- 
dove !  The  life  that  you  two  shared  was  filled  with 
all  harmony ;  your  loyalty  was  long  and  firm,  and 
stood  fast  to  the  end.  What  the  youth  of  Phocis 
was  to  Argive  Orestes,  this  was  the  turtle-dove  to 
you,  O  parrot,  so  long  as  fate  allowed. 

17  And  yet,  of  what  avail  that  loyalty,  of  what 
your  rare  and  beauteous  colour,  of  what  that  voice 
adept  in  mimicry  of  sounds,  of  what  my  darling's 
favour  as  soon  as  you  were  hers  ? — ah,  hapless  one, 
glory  of  birds,  you  surely  are  no  more  !  You  could 
dim  with  your  wings  the  fragile  jasper,  and  your 
beak  was  Punic-red  with  ruddy  saffron  tinge.  On 
earth  there  was  no  bird  could  better  imitate  speech 
— you  rendered  words  so  well  in  your  throaty  tone  ! 

25  'Twas  envious  fate  swept  you  away — vou  were 
no  mover  of  battles  fierce  ;  you  were  a  prattling 
lover  of  placid  peace.      Look!  quails  are  ever  battling 

399 


OVID 

ecce,  coturnices  inter  sua  proelia  vivunt  ; 

forsitan  et  fiant 1  inde  frequenter  anus, 
plenus  eras  minimo,  nee  prae  sermonis  amore 

in  multos  poteras  ora  vacare  cibos.  30 

nux  erat  esea  tibi,  causaeque  papavera  somni, 

pellebatque  sitim  simplieis  umor  aquae, 
vivit  edax  vultur  ducensque  per  aera  gyros 

miluus  et  pluviae  graculus  auetor  aquae  ; 
vivit  et  armiferae  cornix  invisa  Minervae —  35 

ilia  quidem  saeclis  vix  moritura  novem  ; 
oecidit  ilia  loquax  humanae  vocis  imago, 

psittacus,  extremo  munus  ab  orbe  datum  ! 
optima  prima  fere  manibus  rapiuntur  avaris  ; 

inplentur  numeris  detei'ioi'a  suis.  40 

tristia  Phylacidae  Thersites  funera  vidit, 

iamque  cinis  vivis  fratribus  Hector  erat. 
Quid  referam  timidae  pro  te  pia  vota  puellae — 

vota  procelloso  per  mare  rapta  Noto  ? 
septima  lux  venit  non  exhibitura  sequentem,  45 

et  stabat  vacuo  iam  tibi  Parca  colo. 
nee  tamen  ignavo  stupuerunt  verba  palato  ; 

clamavit  moriens  lingua  :  "  Corinna,  vale  !  " 
Colle  sub  Elysio  nigra  nemus  ilice  frondet, 

udaque  perpetuo  gramine  terra  viret.  50 

siqua  fides  dubiis,  volucrum  locus  ille  piarum 

dicitur,  obscenae  quo  prohibentur  aves. 
illic  innocui  late  pascuntur  olores 

et  vivax  phoenix,  unica  semper  avis  ; 
explicat  ipsa  suas  ales  Iunonia  pinnas,  55 

oscula  dat  cupido  blanda  columba  mari. 

1  fiunt  N&m. 

"  Protesilaus,    the   first   of  the   Greeks   to   die  at   Troy ; 
addressed  in  Heroid.  xiii. 

400 


THE   AMORES    II.  vi 

with  their  kind  ;  and  perhaps  'tis  the  cause  of  their 
often  living  to  old-wives'  age.  You  were  sated  with 
very  little  ;  speech  you  loved  so  well  that  your  beak 
had  no  time  for  many  foods.  A  nut  was  your  fare, 
and  poppy-seeds  brought  you  sleep,  and  drops  of 
unmixed  water  drove  away  your  thirst.  The  greedy 
vulture  lives  on,  and  the  kite  that  traces  circles 
through  the  air,  and  the  daw,  the  harbinger  of  rain  ; 
the  raven,  too,  hated  by  armour-bearing  Minerva, 
lives  on — it,  at  least,  will  hardly  die  after  nine 
generations ;  the  parrot,  that  loquacious  image  of 
the  human  voice,  gift  brought  from  the  limit  of  the 
world,  is  no  more  !  Best  things  are  all  too  oft  first 
swept  away  by  the  greedy  hands  of  fate ;  the  worse 
are  suffered  to  fill  out  their  tale  of  years.  Thersites 
looked  upon  the  sad  funeral  of  him  of  Phylaee/1  and 
Hector  was  ashes  while  yet  his  brothers  lived. 

43  Why  call  to  mind  the  pious  vows  of  my  love  in 
her  fear  for  you — vows  swept  to  sea  by  the  gusty 
South  ?  The  seventh  dawn  came,  that  was  not  to 
bring  another  in  its  train,  and  Fate  stood  over  you 
with  distaff  empty  now.  Yet  the  words  were  not 
silenced  on  your  nerveless  palate  ;  your  dying  tongue 
cried  out :  "  Corinna,  fare  you  well !  " 

49  At  the  foot  of  a  hill  in  Elysium  is  a  leafy  grove 
of  dark  ilex,  and  the  moist  earth  is  green  with  never- 
fading  grass.  If  we  may  have  faith  in  doubtful 
things,  that  place,  we  are  told,  is  the  abode  of  the 
pious  winged  kind,  and  from  it  impure  fowl  are  kept 
away.  There  far  and  wide  feed  the  harmless  swans 
and  the  long-lived  phoenix,  bird  ever  alone  of  its 
kind  ;  there  the  bird  of  Juno  spreads  for  her  own 
eye  her  plumage,  and  the  winsome  dove  gives  kisses 
to   her  eager  mate.      Our  parrot,   welcomed  among 

401 


OVID 

psittacus  has  inter  nemorali  sede  receptus 

convertit  volucres  in  sua  verba  pias. 
Ossa  tegit  tumulus — tumulus  pro  corpore  magnus — 

quo  lapis  exiguus  par  sibi  carmen  habet :  60 

COLLIGOR  EX  IPSO  DOMINAE  PLACUISSE  SEPULCRO. 
ORA  FUERE  MIHI  PLUS  AVE  DOCTA  LOQUI. 


VII 


Ergo  sufficiam  reus  in  nova  crimina  semper  ? 

ut  vineam,  totiens  dimicuisse  piget. 
sive  ego  marmorei  respexi  summa  theatri, 

eligis  e  multis,  unde  dolere  velis  ; 
Candida  seu  tacito  vidit  me  femina  vultu,  5 

in  vultu  tacitas J  arguis  esse  notas. 
siquam  laudavi,  misero  petis  ungue  capillos  ; 

si  culpo,  crimen  dissimulare  putas. 
sive  bonus  color  est,  in  te  quoque  frigidus  esse, 

seu  malus,  alterius  dicor  amore  mori.  10 

Atque  ego  peccati  vellem  mihi  conscius  essem  ! 

aequo  animo  poenam,  qui  meruere,  ferunt  ; 
nunc  temere  insimulas  credendoque  omnia  frustra 

ipsa  vetas  iram  pondus  habere  tuam. 
adspice,  ut  auritus  miserandae  sortis  asellus  15 

adsiduo  domitus  verbere  lentus  eat ! 
1  tectas  Pa. 
402 


THE  AMORES  II.  vii 

them  to  this  woodland  seat,  attracts  to  himself  by 
his  words  the  feathered  faithful. 

5i'  His  bones  are  covered  by  a  mound — mound  such 
as  fits  his  body's  size — on  which  a  scant  stone  bears 
a  legend  that  just  fits  the  space  : — 

"  YOU      MAY     JUDGE      FROM     MY     VERY     MONUMENT     MY 
MISTRESS    LOVED    ME    WELL. 
I    HAD    A    MOUTH    WAS    SKILLED    IN    SPEECH    BEYOND    A 
BIRD." 


VII 

Am  I  then  to  stand  trial  on  new  complaints  for 
ever?  Grant  that  I  win,  I  am  wearied  of  fighting 
my  case  so  many  times.  If  I  have  looked  back 
on  the  highest  rows  of  the  marble  theatre,  you  pick 
out  one  of  the  many  women  there  as  a  ground  for 
grievance  ;  or  if  a  fair  beauty  has  looked  on  me 
with  unspeaking  face,  you  charge  that  in  her  face 
were  unspoken  signals.  If  I  have  praised  some  girl, 
poor  me  !  your  fingers  make  for  my  hair  ;  if  I  pick 
Haws  in  her,  you  think  I  am  hiding  a  crime.  If 
my  colour  is  good,  you  charge  me  with  coolness 
toward  you  also ;  if  bad,  with  dying  of  love  for 
another. 

11  I  would  I  were  even  conscious  of  some  wrong 
done  !  Those  who  have  merited  punishment  bear 
it  with  even  mind  ;  but  now  you  accuse  me  without 
reason,  and  by  lending  belief  to  every  groundless 
notion  yourself  keep  your  ire  from  having  weight. 
Look  at  the  long-eared,  pitiable  ass,  how  slowly  he 
moves,  broken  by  never-ending  blows  ! 

403 


OVID 

Ecce  novum  crimen  !  sollers  ornare  Cypassis 

obicitur  dominae  contemerasse  torum. 
di  melius,  quam  me,  si  sit  peecasse  libido, 

sordida  contemptae  sortis  arnica  iuvet !  20 

quis  Veneris  famulae  conubia  liber  inire 

tergaque  conplecti  verbere  secta  velit  ? 
adde,  quod  ornandis  ilia  est  operata  capillis 

et  tibi  perdocta  est  grata  ministra  manu — 
scilicet  ancillam,  quae  tarn  tibi  fida,1  rogarem  !  25 

quid,  nisi  ut  indicio  iuncta  repulsa  foret  ? 
per  Venerem  iuro  puerique  volatilis  arcus, 

me  non  admissi  criminis  esse  reum  ! 


VIII 

Ponf.ndis  in  mille  modos  perfecta  capillis, 

.  comere  sed  solas  digna,  Cypassi,  deas, 
et  mihi  iucundo  non  rustica  cognita  furto, 

apta  quidem  dominae,  sed  magis  apta  mihi — 
quis  fuit  inter  nos  sociati  corporis  index  ?  5 

sensit  concubitus  unde  Corinna  tuos  ? 
mini  tamen  erubui  ?  num,  verbo  lapsus  in  ullo, 

fiirtivae  Veneris  conscia  signa  dedi  ? 
Quid,  quod  in  ancilla  siquis  delinquere  possit, 

ilium  ego  contendi  mente  carere  bona?  10 

Thessalus  ancillae  facie  Briseidos  arsit ; 

serva  Mycenaeo  Phoebas  amata  duci. 
nee  sum  ego  Tantalide  maior,  nee  maior  Achille ; 

quod  decuit  reges,  cur  mihi  turpe  putem  ? 

1  So  Merk.:  qui  erat  P :  quae  sit  vidg.:  quia  erat  Pa. 
404 


THE   AMORES   II.  viii 

17  And  look  now,  a  fresh  charge !  Cypassis,  the 
deft  girl  that  tires  your  hair,  is  east  at  me,  accused 
of  wronging  her  mistress'  couch.  Ye  gods  grant  me 
better,  if  I  have  a  mind  to  sin,  than  find  my  pleasure 
in  a  love  of  mean  and  despised  lot !  What  man  that 
is  free  would  willingly  mate  with  a  slave,  and  clasp 
a  waist  that  was  cut  with  the  lash  ?  Add  that  her 
work  is  to  dress  your  hair,  and  she  pleases  you  with 
the  ministry  of  her  cunning  hand  ;  of  course  I  would 
tamper  with  a  servant  so  faithful  to  you  !  With  what 
issue,  except  to  be  repulsed,  and  then  betrayed  ? 
By  Venus  I  swear,  and  by  the  bows  of  her  winged 
boy,  I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  you  bring  ! 


VIII 

Perfect  in  setting  hair  aright  in  a  thousand  ways, 
but  worthy  to  dress  only  that  of  goddesses,  Cypassis, 
you  whom  I  have  found  in  our  stolen  delight  not 
wholly  simple,  apt  for  your  mistress'  service,  but  more 
apt  for  mine — who  is  the  tattler  has  told  of  our 
coming  together?  Where  did  Corinna  get  wind  of 
your  affair  with  me  ?  Can  I  have  blushed?  Can  I 
have  let  slip  a  single  word  that  gave  a  tell-tale  sign 
of  our  stolen  love  ? 

9  Well,  suppose  I  did  contend  that  he  who  could 
lose  his  heart  to  a  slave  was  out  of  his  senses  ?  The 
Thessalian  took  fire  at  the  charms  of  the  slave  Briseis; 
a  slave,  Phoebas,  was  loved  by  the  Mycrnean  chief' 
I  am  neither  greater  than  Tantalus'  son.  nor  greater 
than  Achilles  ;  why  should  I  judge  base  for  me  what 
was  fit  for  kings  ? 

405 


OVID 

Ut  tamen  iratos  in  te  defixit  ocellos,  15 

vidi  te  totis  erubuisse  genis  ; 
at  quanta,  si  forte  refers,  praesentior  ipse 

per  Veneris  feci  numina  magna  fidem  ! 
tu,  dea,  tu  iubeas  animi  periuria  puri 

Carpathium  tepidos  per  mare  ferre  Xotos  !  20 

Pro  quibus  officiis  pretium  mihi  dulce  repende 

coneubitus  hodie,  fusca  Cypassi,  tuos  ! 
quid  renuis  fingisque  novos,  ingrata,  timores  ? 

unum  est  e  dominis  emeruisse  satis, 
quod  si  stulta  negas,  index  anteaeta  fatebor,  25 

et  veniam  eulpae  proditor  ipse  meae, 
quoque  loco  tecum  fuerim,  quotiensque,  Cypassi, 

narrabo  dominae,  quotque  quibusque  modis  ! 

IX 

A 

O  numquam  pro  me  satis  indignate  Cupido, 

o  in  corde  meo  desidiose  puer — 
quid  me,  qui  miles  numquam  tua  signa  reliqui, 

laedis,  et  in  castris  vulneror  ipse  meis  ? 
cur  tua  fax  urit,  figit  tuus  arcus  amicos  ?  5 

gloria  pugnantes  vincere  maior  erat. 
Quid?  non  Haemonius,  quern  cuspide  perculit,  heros 

confossum  medica  postmodo  itivit  ope  ? 

"  Telephus,  incurably  Avounded,  was  told  by  the  oracle 
that  he  who  had  wounded  would  also  heal  him  (<5  rpaxras  Kal 
406 


THE   AMORES    II.  ix 

15  Yet.  when  she  fixed  her  angered  eyes  on  you,  I 
saw  the  blushes  completely  overspread  your  cheeks  ; 
but  how  much  more  contained  was  I,  if  you  happen 
to  remember,  when  I  swore  to  my  faithfulness  in 
mighty  Venus'  name  !  Thou,  goddess,  mayst  thou 
bid  the  warm  South-wind  sweep  o'er  the  Carpathian 
deep  the  false  oaths  of  a  harmless  heart  ! 

21  In  return  for  these  offices  to  you,  dusky  Cypassis, 
pay  me  to-day  the  sweet  price  of  your  caress  !  Why 
do  you  shake  your  head  and  refuse,  ungrateful  girl, 
and  feign  fresh  fears  ?  'Twill  suffice  to  have  earned 
tin-  favour  of  only  one  of  your  masters.  But  if  you 
stupidly  say  no,  I  shall  turn  informer  and  confess  all 
we  have  done  before  ;  I  shall  stand  forth  the  betrayer 
of  my  own  guilt,  and  tell  your  mistress  where  I 
have  met  you,  and  how  many  times,  Cypassis,  and 
how  many  ways,  and  what  they  were  ! 


IX 


O  Cupid,  never  enough  roused  in  my  behalf,  O  boy 
lodged  in  my  heart  and  doing  naught  for  me — why 
dost  harm  me,  the  soldier  who  have  never  left  tin- 
standards,  and  why  am  I  wounded  in  my  own  camp  ? 
Why  doth  thy  torch  burn  friends,  and  thy  bow 
transfix  them  ?  'Twere  greater  glory  to  vanquish 
them  that  oppose. 

7  What  ?  did  not  the  hero  of  Haemonia  afterward 
help  with  the  healer's  art  him  he  had  smit  and 
pierced  with  the   spear?*       The    huntsman  pursues 

la.crerat\.  a  yd  went  to  Achilles,  who  applied  to  the  wound  the 
rust  of  his  spear. 

407 


OVID 

venator  sequitur  fugientia ;  capta  relinquit 

semper  et  inventis  ulteriora  petit.  10 

nos  tua  sentimus,  populus  tibi  deditus,  arma ; 

pigra  reluctanti  eessat  in  hoste  manus. 
quid  iuvat  in  nudis  hamata  retundere  tela 

ossibus  ?  ossa  mihi  nuda  relinquit  amor. 
tot  sine  amore  viri,  tot  sunt  sine  amore  puellae  ! —  1 5 

hinc  tibi  cum  magna  laude  triumphus  eat. 
Roma,  nisi  inmensum  vires  movisset  in  orbeni, 

stramineis  esset  nunc  quoque  tecta  casis. 
Fessus  in  acceptos  miles  deducitur  agros  ; 

mittitur  in  saltus  carcere  liber  equus  ;  20 

longaque  subductam  celant  navalia  pinum, 

tutaque  deposito  poscitur  ense  rudis. 
me  quoque,  qui  totiens  merui  sub  amore  puellae, 

defunctum  placide  vivere  tempus  erat.1 


B 

"Vive"  deus  "posito"  siquis  mihi  dicat  "amore!"  25 

deprecer — usque  adeo  dulce  puella  malum  est. 
cum  bene  pertaesum  est,  animoque  relanguit  ardor, 

nescio  quo  miserae  turbine  mentis  agor. 
ut  rapit  in  praeceps  dominum  spuinantia  frustra 

frena  retentantem  durior  oris  equus  ;  30 

ut  subitus,  prope  iam  prensa  tellure,  carinam 

tangentem  portus  ventus  in  alta  rapit — 
sic  me  saepe  refert  incerta  Cupidinis  aura, 

notaque  purpureus  tela  resumit  Amor. 
]  Mueller  divides  the  poem. 

a  The  gladiator's  discharge  was   marked  by  th»  gift  of  a 
wooden  foil. 

408 


THE   AMORES    II.  ix 

the  quarry  that  flies ;  what  he  has  taken  he  leaves 
behind,  and  ever  strains  to  the  prey  ahead.  We,  a 
people  who  have  surrendered  to  thee,  feel  the  weight 
of  thy  weapons ;  with  the  foe  that  resists,  thy  hand 
is  slow  to  move.  Of  what  avail  to  blunt  thy  barbed 
arrows  on  naked  bones  ? — for  love  is  leaving  my 
bones  naked.  So  many  men  there  are  without  love, 
without  love  so  many  maids ! — there  is  thy  field  for 
great  and  glorious  triumph.  Rome,  had  she  not 
employed  her  powers  against  the  boundless  world, 
would  be  filled  even  now  with  straw-thatched  huts. 
19  The  tired-out  soldier  is  let  retire  to  the  acres  he 
received ;  the  l'ace-horse  free  from  the  course  is  sent 
to  the  pastures  ;  and  the  long  docks  receive  to  cover 
the  drawn-up  ship  of  pine,  and  the  harmless  foil a  is 
claimed  when  the  sword  has  been  laid  aside.  I,  too, 
who  have  served  so  oft  in  the  wars  of  woman's  love 
— 'twere  time,  my  labours  o'er,  I  lived  in  peace. 

B 

"Lay  aside  thy  loves,"  should  some  god  say  to  me,. 
ff  and  live  without  them,"  I  would  pray  him  not  ask 
it — even  so  sweet  an  evil  are  the  fair.  When  I  have 
grown  weary  of  love  and  the  ardour  of  my  heart  has 
cooled,  my  soul  is  somehow  seized  upon  by  a  whirl- 
wind of  wretchedness.  As  a  hard-mouthed  horse 
bears  headlong  in  flight  the  master  who  strives  in 
vain  to  hold  him  back  with  foaming  bit ;  as  on  a 
sudden,  when  land  is  now  all  but  gained  and  the 
keel  is  touching  the  haven,  the  wind  sweeps  it  out 
to  the  deep — so  am  I  oft  carried  away  again  by  the 
veering  gale  of  Cupid,  and  bright  Love  takes  up 
again  the  weapons  I  know  well. 

409 


OVID 

Fige,  puer  !  positis  nudus  tibi  praebeor  armis  ;         35 

hie  tibi  sunt  vires,  hie  l  tua  dextra  faeit  ; 
hue  tamquam  iussae  veniunt  iam  sponte  sagittae — 

vix  illis  prae  me  nota  pharetra  sua  est  ! 
infelix,  tota  quieumque  quiescere  nocte 

sustinet  et  somnos  praemia  magna  vocat !  40 

stulte,  quid  est  somnus,  gelidae  nisi  mortis  imago  ! 

longa  quieseendi  tempora  fata  dabunt. 
me  modo  decipiant  voces  fallaeis  amicae  ; 

sperando  certe  gaudia  magna  feram. 
et  modo  blanditias  dicat,  modo  iurgia  nectat  ;  45 

saepe  fruar  domina,  saepe  repulsus  earn. 
Quod  dubius  Mars  est,  per  te,  privigne  Cupido,  est  ; 

et  movet  exemplo  vitricus  anna  tuo. 
tu  levis  es  multoque  tuis  ventosior  alis, 

gaudiaque  ambigua  dasque  negasque  fide.  50 

si  tamen  exaudis,  pulchra  cum  matre,  Cupido,2 

indeserta  meo  pectore  regna  gere  ! 
accedant  regno,  nimium  vaga  turba,  puellae  ! 

ambobus  populis  sic  venerandus  eris. 


X 

Tu  mihi,  tu  certe,  memini,  Graecine,  negabas 
uno  posse  aliquem  tempore  amare  duas. 

per  te  ego  decipior,  per  te  deprensus  inermis — 
ecce,  duas  uno  tempore  turpis  amo  ! 

1  hue  N.  Hi  in.  2  rogantem  P2- 

410 


THE   AMORES    II.  x 

35  Transfix  me,  child !  I  have  laid  aside  my 
defences,  and  stand  unarmed  before  thee ;  here  is  a 
place  for  thy  powers,  here  thy  right  hand  may 
strike  ;  hither,  as  if  bid,  thine  arrows  come  now  of 
their  own  accord — they  scarcely  know  their  quiver 
because  of  me  !  Unhappy  he  who  can  rest  the  whole 
night  through,  and  calls  his  slumbers  a  great  boon  ! 
Fool  !  what  else  is  sleep  but  the  image  of  chill 
death  ?  As  for  repose,  the  fates  will  give  long  time 
for  that.  For  me — let  only  the  words  of  a  decen  ing 
sweetheart  lure  me  on;  mere  hoping,  will  surely 
bring  me  great  delight.  And  let  her  now  speak 
winningly,  and  now  still  chide  ;  let  me  oft  enjoy  my 
lady-love,  oft  go  repulsed  away. 

*7  That  Mars  is  inconstant,  thou,  his  step-son 
Cupid,  art  the  cause ;  thy  step-sire  wields  doubtful 
arms,  and  after  thy  example.  Thou  art  light,  more 
quick  to  feel  the  wind  than  thine  own  wings,  and 
dost  grant  and  deny  thy  joys  with  a  faith  that  is 
never  sure.  Yet,  none  the  less,  if  thou  and  thy 
beautiful  mother  will  heed  my  prayer,  come,  set 
up  your  thrones  in  my  heart  and  reign  there  for 
evermore  !  Let  the  fair,  too,  be  your  subjects  in 
that  realm — a  fickle,  fickle  throng  !  thus  will  you  be 
adored  by  peoples  twain. 


X 

T\v\s  you,  Graecinus,  'twas  surely  you,  I  remem- 
ber, who  declared  to  me  that  for  any  man  to  love 
two  maids  at  once  was  a  thing  impossible.  To  you 
I  owe  my  fall  ;  to  you  I  owe  being  caught  without 
my  arms — lo  !   to  my  shame   in   love    I   am    with    two 

411 


OVID 

utraque  formosa  est,  operosae  cultibus  ambae  ;  5 

artibus  in  dubio  est  haec  sit  an  ilia  prior, 
pulehrior  hac  ilia  est,  haec  est  quoque  pulchrior  ilia  ; 

et  magis  haec  nobis,  et  magis  ilia  placet ! 
errant  ut  ventis  discordibus  acta  phaselos 

dividuumque  tenent  alter  et  alter  amor.  10 

quid  geminas,  Erycina,  meos  sine  fine  dolores  ? 

non  erat  in  curas  una  puella  satis  ? 
quid  folia  arboribus,  quid  pleno  sidera  caelo, 

in  freta  collectas  alta  quid  addis  aquas  ? 
Sed    tamen    hoc    melius,    quam    si    sine    amore 

iacerem —  1 5 

hostibus  eveniat  vita  severa  meis  ! 
hostibus  eveniat  viduo  dormire  cubili 

et  medio  laxe  ponere  membra  toro  ! 
at  mihi  saevus  amor  somnos  abrumpat  inertes, 

simque  mei  lecti  non  ego  solus  onus  !  20 

me  mea  disperdat  nullo  prohibente  puella — 

si  satis  una  potest,  si  minus  una,  duae  ! 
sufficiam — graciles,  non  sunt  sine  viribus  artus  ; 

pondere,  non  nervis  corpora  nostra  carent ; 
et  lateri  dabit  in  vires  alimenta  voluptas.  25 

decepta  est  opera  nulla  puella  mea  ; 
saepe  ego  lascive  consumpsi  tempora x  noctis, 

utilis  et  forti  corpore  mane  fui. 
felix,  quern  Veneris  certamina  mutua  perdunt ! 

di  faciant,  leti  causa  sit  ista  mei  !  30 

Induat  adversis  contraria  pectora  telis 

miles  et  aeternum  sanguine  nomen  emat. 
quaerat  avarus  opes  et,  quae  lassarit  arando, 

aequora  periuro  naufragus  ore  bibat. 

1  So  Ps  :  lascivae  consumpto  tempore  X.  Hein. 
412 


THE    AMORES    II.  x 

maids  at  once.  Each  one  is  beautiful,  both  taste- 
ful in  their  dress  ;  in  accomplishment,  'tis  doubtful 
whether  the  one  or  the  other  is  first.  The  one 
is  fairer  than  the  other — and  the  other  is  also 
fairer  than  she  ;  one  pleases  me  the  more — and  so 
does  the  other,  too !  Like  a  yacht  that  is  driven 
by  contrary  winds,  my  love  is  now  for  the  one  and 
now  for  the  other ;  it  veers  about,  and  keeps  me 
torn  in  two.  Why,  O  lady  of  Eryx,  dost  thou  double 
endlessly  my  woes  ?  Was  not  one  love  enough  to 
keep  me  anxious  ?  Why  add  leaves  to  the  trees, 
stars  to  a  full  sky,  and  heaped-up  waters  to  the  deep 
seas? 

15  And  yet  'tis  better  thus  than  if  I  were  loveless 
and  alone — to  my  enemies  fall  the  austere  life  !  To 
my  enemies  fall  the  lot  of  sleep  in  a  lonely  bed,  and 
the  laying  their  limbs  loosely  in  its  midst.  But  for 
me — let  cruel  love  break  off  my  lazy  slumbers,  and 
may  I  not  be  the  only  burden  of  my  bed !  Let 
my  powers  be  waste  by  love,  and  no  one  say  me 
nay — if  one  suffices,  well ;  if  not,  then  two  !  I  shall 
meet  the  test — slender  my  limbs,  but  not  without 
strength  ;  'tis  bulk,  not  sinew,  my  body  lacks  ;  and 
delight  will  feed  the  vigour  of  my  loins.  No  fair 
one  has  ever  been  deceived  in  me ;  oft  have  I  made 
merry  through  all  the  hours  of  night,  and  reached 
the  morning  fit  and  strong.  Happy  he  whom  the 
mutual  strife  of  Love  lays  low  !  Ye  gods,  let  my 
end  come  from  such  a  cause  ! 

31  Let  the  soldier  give  his  breast  to  cover  with 
hostile  darts,  and  buy  eternal  glory  with  his  blood. 
Let  the  grasping  trader's  quest  be  wealth,  and  his 
perjured  mouth  drink  in  when  he  is  wrecked  the 
billow   his  ploughing  keel  has   tired.      But   for  me — 

4*3 


OVID 

at  mihi  contingat  Veneris  languescere  motu,  35 

cum  moriar,  medium  solvar  et  inter  opus ; 

atque  aliquis  nostro  lacrimans  in  funere  dicat  : 
"  conveniens  vitae  mors  fuit  ista  tuae  !  " 


XI 

Prima  malas  docuit  mirantibus  aequoris  undis 

Peliaco  pinus  vertice  caesa  vias, 
quae  concurrentis  inter  temeraria  cautes 

conspicuam  fulvo  vellere  vexit  ovem. 
o  utinam,  nequis  rerao  freta  longa  moveret,  5 

Argo  funestas  pressa  bibisset  aquas  ! 
Ecce,  fugit  notumque  torum  sociosque  Penates 

fallacisque  vias  ire  Corinna  parat. 
quid  x  tibij  me  miserum  !    Zephyros  Eurosque  timebo 

et  gelidum  Borean  egelid unique  Notum  ?  10 

non  illic  urbes,  non  tu  mirabere  silvas  ; 

una  est  iniusti  caerula  forma  maris, 
nee  medius  tenuis  conchas  pictosque  lapillos 

pontus  habet ;  bibuli  litoris  ilia  mora  est. 
litora  marmoreis  pedibus  signate,  puellae  ;  15 

hactenus  est  tutum — cetei'a  caeca  via  est. 
et  vobis  alii  ventorum  proelia  narrent ; 

quas  Scylla  infestet,  quasve  Charybdis  aquas  ; 
et  quibus  emineant  violenta  Ceraunia  saxis  ; 

quo  lateant  Syrtes  magna  minorque  sinu.  20 

haec  alii  referant  ad2  vos  ;  quod  quisque  loquetur, 

credite  !  credenti  3  nulla  procella  nocet. 


1  quam  N&m.  2  referant  ;  at  vos  vuhj.  Post. 

3  credenti  wig.:  quaerenti  Ehw.  from  P. 


414 


THE  AMORES    II.  xi 

may  it  be  my  lot  when  I  die  to  languish  in  Venus' 
embrace,  and  be  dissolved  in  the  midst  of  its  delight ; 
and  may  one,  dropping  tears  at  my  funeral,  say : 
"  Thine    was  a  death  accorded  with  thv  life  !  " 


XI 

'Twas  the  pine  felled  on  Pelion's  top  that  first 
taught  men  the  evil  paths  of  the  sea,  while  the  waves 
looked  on  in  Avonder — the  craft  that  rashly  sailed 
between  the  clashing  rocks  and  bore  away  the  wool 
sightly  with  yellow  flock.  O  that  the  Argo  had 
been  o'erwhelmed  and  drunk  the  waters  of  doom, 
so  that  no  one  should  trouble  with  oar  the  far- 
stretching  seas ! 

7  Lo !  Corinna  flies  from  the  couch  that  knows 
her,  and  the  Penates  she  has  shared',  and  makes 
ready  to  venture  forth  on  treacherous  paths.  Why, 
ah.  wretched  me  ! — must  I  fear  for  you  the  West- 
wind  and  the  East,  and  frozen  Boreas,  and  the  balmy 
South  ?  Xot  yonder  will  you  gaze  on  towns,  not 
upon  groves  ;  there  is  only  the  deep-blue  form  of 
the  unjust  sea.  Nor  do  the  waters  in  the  mid  of 
the  deep  have  delicate  shells  and  painted  pebbles  ; 
for  those  we  linger  on  the  thirsty  strand.  Print  ye 
the  strand  with  marble-white  feet,  fair  maids  ;  so  tal- 
is safe — the  rest  of  the  way  is  blind.  And  let  others 
tell  you  tales  of  battling  winds  ;  of  waters  that  Scvlla 
makes  dread,  or  Charybdis ;  of  rocks  where  the 
violent  Ceraunians  tower  from  the  sea ;  of  the  fold 
in  the  shore  where  the  Syrtes,  great  and  lessor,  lie 
in  wait.  These  things  let  others  tell  you  ;  whatever 
each  shall  say,  believe  it!  Believing  brings  no  harm 
from  any  storm. 

415 


OVID 

Sero  respicitur  tellus,  ubi  fune  soluto 

eurrit  in  inmensum  panda  carina  salum  ; 
navita  sollicitus  cum  ventos  horret  iniquos  25 

et  prope  tarn  letum,  quam  prope  cernit  aquam. 
quod  si  concussas  Triton  exasperet  undas, 
.  quam  tibi  sit  toto  nullus  in  ore  color  ! 
turn  generosa  voces  fecundae  sidera  Ledae 

et  "  felix/'  dicas  "  quern  sua  ten*a  tenet !  "  30 

Tutius  est  fovisse  torum,  legisse  libellos, 

Threiciam  digitis  increpuisse  lyram. 
at,  si  vana  ferunt  volucres  mea  dicta  procellae, 

aequa  tamen  puppi  sit  Galatea  tuae ! 
vestrum  crimen  erit  talis  iactura  puellae,  35 

Nereidesque  deae  Nereidumque  pater, 
vade  memor  nostri  vento  reditura  secundo  ; 

inpleat  ilia  tuos  fortior  aura  sinus ! 
turn  mare  in  haec  magnus  proclinet  litora  Nereus  ; 

hue  venti  spirent,  hue  agat  aestus  aquas  !  40 

ipsa  roges,  Zephyri  veniant  in  lintea  pleni,1 

ipsa  tua  moveas  turgida  vela  manu  ! 
primus  ego  adspiciam  notam  de  litore  puppim, 

et  dicam  :  "  nostros  advehit  ilia  deos  !  " 
excipiamque  umeris  et  multa  sine  ordine  carpam     45 

oscula.      pro  reditu  victima  vota  cadet ; 
inque  tori  formam  molles  sternentur  harenae, 

et  tumulus  mensae  quilibet  esse  potest.2 
lllic  adposito  narrabis  multa  Lyaeo — 

paene  sit  ut  mediis  obruta  navis  aquis ;  50 

1  pleni  Ps  :  soli  vulg.      2  esse  potest  Ps  :  instar  erit  mdg. 
"  Gemini,  Castor  and  Pollux. 


THE   AMORES   II.  xi 

23  Too  late  you  look  back  upon  the  laud,  when  the 
cable  is  loosed  and  the  curving  keel  is  rushing  out 
to  the  measureless  brine  ;  when  the  anxious  sailor 
shudders  at  unfavouring  winds,  and  sees  death  near, 
as  near  as  he  sees  the  water.  But  should  Triton 
smite  and  roughen  the  waves,  how  your  whole  face 
would  show  no  trace  of  colour !  Then  would  you 
call  for  aid  on  the  high-born  stars,  the  sons  of 
fruitful  Leda/'  and  say  :  "  Happy  she  her  own  land 
retains  ! " 

31  The  safer  course  was  fondly  to  keep  your  couch, 
to  read  your  books,  to  sound  with  your  fingers  the 
Thracian  lyre.  Yet,  if  the  flying  gale  must  bear 
away  my  empty  words,  may  Galatea  none  the  less  be 
kindly  to  your  craft !  'Twill  be  your  crime  if  such 
a  girl  is  lost,  O  daughters  divine  of  Nereus — yours 
and  your  sire's.  As  you  go,  remember  me,  and 
return  with  favouring  wind  ;  may  the  breeze  that 
then  fills  your  sails  be  a  stronger  one  !  Then  let 
mighty  Nereus  make  slope  the  sea  toward  these  our 
shores ;  hitherward  let  blow  the  winds,  hitherward 
the  tide  roll  the  waters  !  You  yourself,  pray  Zephyr 
strike  full  your  sheets,  you  yourself  stir  with  your 
baud  the  swelling  sails  !  I  shall  be  first  to  get  sight 
of  the  well-known  craft  from  the  shore,  and  shall 
say:  "•That  sail  bears  hither  my  gods!"  And  I 
will  take  you  in  my  arms,  and  wildly  snatch  kiss  on 
kiss.  The  victim  vowed  against  your  return  shall 
fall  ;  the  yielding  sands  shall  be  levelled  in  form 
of  a  couch,  and  some  mound  be  reared,  of  whatever 
sort,  to  serve  for  table. 

40  There,  when  the  wine  is  set,  you  will  tell  me 
many  a  tale — how  your  ship  was  all  but  engulfed  in 
the    midst    of    the    waters;    and   how.    while   hasting 

417 


OVID 

dumque  ad  me  properas,  neque  iniquae  tempora  noctis 

nee  te  praecipites  extimuisse  Notos. 
omnia  pro  veris  credam,  sint  ficta  licebit — 

cur  ego  non  votis  blandiar  ipse  meis  ? 
haec  mihi  quamprimum  caelo  nitidissimus  alto         55 

Lucifer  admisso  tempora  portet  equo  ! 

XII 

Ite  triumphales  circum  mea  tempora  laurus  ! 

vicimus :  in  nostro  est,  ecce,  Corinna  sinu, 
quam  vir,  quam  custos,  quam  ianua  firma,  tot  hostes, 

servabant,  nequa  posset  ab  arte  capi ! 
haec  est  praecipuo  victoria  digna  triumph o,  5 

in  qua,  quaecumque  est,  sanguine  praeda  caret, 
non  humiles  muri,  non  parvis  oppida  fossis 

cincta,  sed  est  ductu  capta  puella  meo  ! 
Pergama  cum  caderent  bello  superata  bilustri, 

ex  tot  in  Atridis  pars  quota  laudis  erat  ?  10 

at  mea  seposita  est  et  ab  omni  milite  dissors 

gloria,  nee  titulum  muneris  alter  habet. 
me  duce  ad  banc  voti  finem,  me  milite  veni ; 

ipse  eques,  ipse  pedes,  signifer  ipse  fui. 
nee  casum  fortuna  meis  inmiscuit  actis —  15 

hue  ades,  o  cura  parte  Triumphe  mea  ! 
Nee  belli  est  nova  causa  mei.     nisi  rapta  fuisset 

Tyndaris,  Europae  pax  Asiaeque  foret. 
418 


THE   AMORES   II.  xii 

home  to  me,  you  feared  neither  hours  of  un- 
friendly night  nor  headlong  winds  <>t'  the  south. 
All  I  shall  take  for  truth,  though  you  invent 
it  all — why  should  I  not  flatter  my  own  heart's  de- 
sires ?  May  Lucifer,  most  brilliant  in  the  lofty 
sky,  with  loose-reined  steed  full  quicklv  bring  that 
hour ! 


XII 

Come  lie  about  my  temples,  ye  laurels  of  the 
triumph  !  Victory  is  mine  ;  look,  Corinna  is  in  my 
arms,  whom  her  husband,  whom  her  keeper,  whom 
the  unyielding  door— such  a  troop  of  enemies  ! — all 
guarded  in  fear  she  be  taken  by  some  wile  !  Here 
is  a  victory  deserves  a  special  triumph,  for  no 
part  of  the  spoil  is  stained  by  blood.  It  is  no  lowly 
walls,  no  towns  girt  round  by  little  moats,  that  1 
have  taken  by  my  generalship — but  a  girl  ! 

9  When  Pergamum  fell,  o'erconie  in  a  war  two 
lustrums  long,  from  among  so  many  nun  what  part 
of  the  praise  fell  to  Atreus'  son?  But  my  glory  is 
a  thing  apart  for  me,  unshared  by  any  soldier  ;  and 
none  other  may  pretend  to  my  renown.  I  myself 
have  been  captain  in  the  march  to  my  prayed-for 
end,  I  myself  the  soldiery  ;  'tis  I  have  been  cavalry. 
'tis  I  have  been  infantry,  'tis  I  have  been  standard- 
bearer.  Nor  has  fortune  mingled  chance  with  my 
achievements — hither  come,  0  Triumph  won  by  care 
alone  ! 

17  Nor  is  the  cause  of  my  warfare  new.  Had 
Tyndareus'  daughter  not  been  stolen,  Europe  and 
Asia    would    have    been    at    peace.      'Twas    woman 

4*9 


OVID 

femina  silvestris  Lapithas  populumque  biformem 

turpiter  adposito  vertit  in  anna  mero  ;  20 

femina  Troianos  iterum  nova  bella  movere 

inpulit  in  regno,  iuste  Latine,  tuo  ; 
femina  Romanis  etiamnunc  urbe  recenti 

inmisit  soceros  armaque  saeva  dedit. 
Yidi  ego  pro  nivea  pugnantes  coniuge  tauros ;         25 

spectatrix  animos  ipsa  iuvenca  dabat. 
me  quoque,  qui  multos,  sed  me  sine  caede,  Cupido 

iussit  niilitiae  signa  movere  suae. 


XIII 

Dum  labefactat  onus  gravidi  temeraria  ventris, 

in  dubio  vitae  lassa  Corinna  iacet. 
ilia  quidem  clam  me  tantum  molita  pericli 

ira  digna  mea  ;  sed  eadit  ira  metu. 
sed  tamen  aut  ex  me  eoneeperat — aut  ego  credo  ;     5 

est  mihi  pro  facto  saepe,  quod  esse  potest. 
Isi,  Paraetonium  genialiaque  arva  Canopi 

quae  colis  et  Memphin  palmiferamque  Pharon, 
quaque  celer  Nilus  lato  delapsus  in  alveo 

per  septem  portus  in  maris  exit  aquas,  10 

per  tua  sistra  precor,  per  Anubidis  ora  verendi — 

sic  tua  sacra  phis  semper  Osiris  amet, 
pigraque  labatur  circa  donaria  serpens, 

et  comes  in  pompa  corniger  Apis  eat  ! 

n  The  Centaurs.  *  The  war  of  Aeneas  and  Turnus  over 

Lavinia,  daughter  of  Latinos. 

420 


THE    AMORES    II.  xiii 

turned  the  sylvan  Lapiths  and  the  double-membered 
folk a  to  unseemly  arms  o'er  wine;  'twas  woman 
moved  the  Trojans  a  second  time  to  set  new  wars 
afoot,  in  thy  realms,  O  just  Latinus6;  'twas  woman, 
when  the  city  still  was  young,  that  sent  against  the 
Romans  their  fathers-in-law,  and  put  the  cruel 
weapons  in  their  hands.0 

25  1  have  seen  bulls  contending  for  the  snowy 
mate  ;  the  heifer  herself  stood  by  to  see,  and  spurred 
their  hearts.  Cupid,  who  orders  many,  has  ordered 
me,  too — but  me  without  shedding  of  blood — to  take 
up  the  standard  for  his  campaigns. 


XIII 

Corinna,  rashly  seeking  to  rid  her  heavy  bosom  of 
its  load,  lies  languishing  in  peril  of  life.  Surely  for 
trying  without  my  knowledge  a  course  so  filled  with 
danger  she  merits  my  anger;  but  my  anger  falls 
before  my  fear.  And  yet,  either  'twas  I  that  caused 
her  trouble — or  so  I  believe ;  with  me,  what  might 
be  oft  is  held  for  truth. 

7  O  Isis,  thou  that  lovest  Paraetonium  and  Canopus' 
genial  fields,  Memphis,  and  Pharos  rich  in  palms, 
and  where  swift  Nile  glides  down  and  from  his 
broad  bed  comes  forth  to  the  waters  of  the  sea 
through  seven  mouths,  by  thy  sistrums  I  beseech, 
by  the  face  of  revered  Anubis— SO  may  loyal  Osiris 
ever  love  thy  rites,''  and  the  sluggish  serpent  glide 
about  thy  altar-gifts,  and  horned  Apis  be  thy 
comrade    in    the    pomp  ! — turn    hither  thy  counten- 


''  I'lie  tape  of  the  S.iliint's. 

d  Osiris,  husband  of  Isis,  was  worshipped  with  her. 


I  -  I 


OVID 

hue  adhibe  vultus,  et  in  una  parce  duobus  !  15 

nam  vitam  dominae  tu  dabis,  ilia  mihi. 
saepe  tibi  sedit  certis  operata  diebus, 

qua  tangit1  laurus  Gallica  turma  tuas. 
Tuque  laborantes  utero  miserata  puellas, 

quarum  tarda  latens  corpora  tendit  onus,  20 

lenis  ades  preeibusque  meis  fave,  Ilithyia  ! 

digna  est,  quam  iubeas  muneris  esse  tui. 
ipse  ego  tura  dabo  fumosis  candidus  aris, 

ipse  feram  ante  tuos  munera  vota  pedes, 
adiciam  titulum  :   "  servata  Naso  Corinna  !  "  25 

tu  modo  fac  titulo  muneribusque  locum. 
Si  tamen  in  tanto  fas  est  monuisse  timore, 

hac  tibi  sit  pugna  dimicuisse  satis  ! 


XIV 

Quid  iuvat  inmunes  belli  cessare  puellas, 

nee  fera  peltatas  agmina  velle  sequi, 
si  sine  Marte  suis  patiuntur  vulnera  telis, 

et  caecas  armant  in  sua  fata  manus  ? 
Quae  prima  instituit  teneros  convellere  fetus,  5 

militia  fuerat  digna  perire  sua. 
scilicet,  ut  careat  rugarum  crimine  venter, 

sternetur  pugnae  tristis  harena  tuae  ? 
1  Mm. :  tingit  MSS. 

a  There  was   a   temple   to   Isis   in    the   Campus  Martius. 
About  it  were  laurels,  and  the  Gallic  squadron  may  refer  to 

422 


THE   AM  ORES    II.  xiv 

ance,  and  in  one  spare  us  both  !  For  thou  wilt 
give  life  to  my  lady,  and  she  to  me.  Oft  has 
she  sat  in  ministration  to  thee  on  the  days  fixed  for 
thy  service,  where  the  Gallic  squadron  rides  near  thy 
laurel-trees." 

19  And  thou  who  hast  compassion  for  women  in 
their  pangs,  when  their  heavy  bodies  are  tense  with 
the  hidden  load,  do  thou  attend  in  mercy  and  give 
ear  to  my  prayers,  O  Ilithyia ! h  She  is  worthy  of 
aid  from  thee — do  thou  bid  her  live !  Myself 
in  shining  robes  will  offer  incense  on  thy  smoking 
altars,  myself  bring  votive  gifts  and  lay  them  at 
thy  feet.  1  will  add  the  legend :  "  Naso,  for 
Corinna  saved!"  Do  thou  but  give  occasion  for 
the  legend  and  the  gifts. 

27  And  you — if  it  be  right  amid  such  fear  still 
to  utter  warning — see  that  this  battle  be  the  end 
of  such  strife  for  vou  ! 


XIV 

Of  what  avail  to  fair  woman  to  rest  free  from 
the  burdens  of  war,  nor  choose  with  shield  in  arm 
to  march  in  the  fierce  array,  if,  free  from  peril  of 
battle,  she  suffer  wounds  from  weapons  of  her  own, 
and  arm  her  unforeseeing  hands  to  her  own  undoing  ? 

5  She  who  first  plucked  forth  the  tender  life 
deserved  to  die  in  the  warfare  she  began.  Can  it  be 
that,  to  spare  your  bosom  the  reproach  of  lines,  you 
would  scatter  the  tragic  sands  of  deadly  combat?8 

Roman  riders  on  Gallic  horses  in  the  neighbouring  exercise- 
grounds  :  Horace  Od.  i.  S. 
*  Goddess  of  birth.  c  A  reference  to  the  arena. 

423 


OVID 

si  mos  antiquis  placuisset  matribus  idem, 

gens  hominum  vitio  deperitura  fuit,  10 

quique  iterum  iaceret  generis  primordia  nostri 

in  vacuo  lapides  orbe,  parandus  erat. 
quis  Prianii  fregisset  opes,  si  numen  aquarum 

iusta  recusasset  pondera  ferre  Thetis  ? 
Ilia  si  tumido  geminos  in  ventre  necasset,  15 

casurus  dominae  conditor  Urbis  erat  ; 
si  Venus  Aenean  gravida  temerasset  in  alvo, 

Caesaribus  tell  us  orba  futura  fuit. 
tu  quoque,  cum  posses  nasci  formosa,  perisses, 

temptasset,  quod  tu,  si  tua  mater  opus  ;  20 

ipse  ego,  cum  fuerim  melius  periturus  amando, 

vidissem  nullos  matre  necante  dies. 
Quid  plenam  fraudas  vitem  crescentibus  uvis, 

pomaque  crudeli  vellis  acerba  manu  ? 
sponte  rluant  matura  sua — sine  crescere  nata  ;  25 

est  pretium  parvae  non  leve  vita  morae. 
vestra  quid  efFoditis  subiectis  viscera  telis, 

et  nondum  natis  dira  venena  datis  ? 
Colchida  respersam  puerorum  sanguine  culpant 

atque  sua  caesum  matre  queruntur  Ityn  ;  30 

utraque  saeva  parens,  sed  tristibus  utraque  causis 

iactura  socii  sanguinis  ulta  virum. 
dicite,  quis  Tereus,  quis  vos  inritet  Iaso 

figere  sollicita  corpora  vestra  manu  ? 
hoc  neque  in  Anneniis  tigres  fecere  latebris,  35 

perdere  nee  fetus  ausa  leaena  suos. 

a  Deucalion,  who  survived  the  flood,  and  with  Pyrrha 
renewed  the  race  by  casting  stones  backward  over  their 
heads. 

424 


THE    AMORES    II.  xiv 

If  vicious  ways  like  this  had  found  favour  with 
mothers  of  olden  time,  the  race  of  mortal  men  would 
have  perished  from  the  earth,  and  someone  must 
have  been  found  to  east  abroad  a  second  time  in 
the  vacant  world  the  stones  that  were  the  first 
beginnings  of  our  kind."  Who  would  have  crushed 
the  might  of  Priam  if  divine  Thetis  of  the  waves 
had  refused  to  bear  the  burden  hers  by  due  ?  Had 
Ilia  slain  the  twins  in  her  swelling  bosom,  'twould 
have  been  doom  to  the  founder  of  the  City  that  rules 
the  earth ;  had  Venus  laid  rash  hand  to  Aeneas 
in  her  heavy  womb,  the  world  to  come  would  have 
been  orphaned  of  its  Caesars.  You,  too,  though 
you  were  to  be  born  fair,  woidd  have  perished  had 
your  mother  tried  what  you  have  tried  ;  and  I  myself, 
though  a  death  through  love  was  to  be  my  better 
fate,  would  never  have  seen  the  day  had  my  mother 
slain  me. 

28  Why  cheat  the  full  vine  of  the  growing  cluster, 
and  pluck  with  ruthless  hand  the  fruit  yet  in  the 
green  ?  What  is  ripe  will  fall  of  its  self — let  grow 
what  has  once  become  quick ;  a  life  is  no  slight 
reward  for  a  short  delay.  Ah,  women,  why  will  you 
thrust  and  pierce  with  the  instrument,  and  give 
dire  poisons  to  your  children  yet  unborn  ':  Tin-  maid 
of  Colchis  stained  with  tin-  blood  of  her  children,  we 
condemn,  and  lament  the  murder  of  Itys  by  the 
mother  who  brought  him  forth  :  but  each  was  a 
cruel  parent,  each  had  tragic  reasons  for  avenging 
herself  on  the  husband  by  shedding  blood  that  she 
shared  with  him.  Tell  me,  what  Tereus  provokes 
you  on,  what  Jason,  to  pierce  your  bodies  with 
aggrieved  hand?  This  neither  tin  tigress  has  done 
in  jungles  of  Armenia,  nor  has  lioness  had  the  heart 

4*5 


OVID 

at  tenerae  faciunt,  sed  non  inpune,  puellae  ; 

saepe,  suos  utero  quae  neeat,  ipsa  perit. 
ipsa  perit,  ferturque  rogo  resoluta  eapillos, 

et  clamant  "merito!  "  qui  modo  cumque  videut.  40 
Ista  sed  aetherias  vanescant  dicta  per  auras, 

et  sint  ominibus  pondera  nulla  meis  ! 
di  faciles,  peccasse  semel  concedite  tuto, 

et  satis  est ;  poenam  culpa  secunda  ferat ! 


XV 

Anule,  formosae  digitum  vincture  puellae, 

in  quo  censendum  nil  nisi  dantis  amor, 
munus  eas  gratum  !  te  laeta  mente  receptum 

protinus  articulis  induat  ilia  suis  ; 
tarn  bene  convenias,  quam  mecum  convenit  illi,         5 

et  digitum  iusto  commodus  orbe  teras  ! 
Felix,  a  domina  tractaberis,  anule,  nostra  ; 

invideo  donis  iam  miser  ipse  meis. 
o  utinam  fieri  subito  mea  munera  possem  1 

artibus  Aeaeae  Carpathiive  senis  !  10 

tunc  ego  te  cupiam,  domina,  et  tetigisse  papillas, 

et  laevam  tunicis  inseruisse  manum — 
elabar  digito  quamvis  angustus  et  haerens, 

inque  sinum  mira  laxus  ab  arte  cadam. 
idem  ego,  ut  arcanas  possim  signare  tabellas,  15 

neve  tenax  ceram  siccaque  gemma  trahat, 

1  possim  wig. 
426 


THE    AMORES    II.  xv 

to  destroy  her  unborn  young;  yet  tender  woman 
does  it — but  not  unpunished  ;  oft  she  who  slays  her 
own  in  her  bosom  dies  herself.  She  dies  herself,  and 
is  borne  to  the  pyre  with  hair  unloosed,  and  all  who 
behold  cry  out :  "  'Tis  her  desert  !  " 

41  But  may  the  words  I  am  savin»  to  you  be 
carried  away  on  the  winds  of  heaven,  and  may  my 
ominous  speech  have  no  ill  end  !  Ye  gods  of  mercy, 
grant  she  has  sinned  this  once  in  safety,  'tis  all  I  ask  ; 
for  a  second  fault,  let  her  bear  her  punishment .' 


XV 

O  ring,  that  art  to  circle  the  finger  of  my  fair  lady, 
in  which  naught  is  of  value  but  the  giver's  love, 
mayst  thou  go  to  her  a  welcome  gift  !  May  she 
receive  thee  with  glad  heart  and  straightway  slip 
thee  on  her  finger ;  mayst  thou  fit  her  as  well  as 
she  fits  me,  and  press  her  finger  with  aptly  adjusted 
circle  ! 

7  Happy  ring,  thou  wilt  be  touched  by  the  hands 
of  my  lady-love  ;  already,  ah  me,  I  envy  my  own 
gift.  Ah,  might  I  suddenly  become  that  gift,  by 
the  arts  of  her  of  Aeaea,  or  of  the  ancient  one  of 
Carpathus  !  a  Then  would  I  wish  you,  my  lady,  both 
to  touch  your  breasts,  and  lay  your  left  hand  within 
your  tunic — I  would  slip  from  your  finger,  however 
tight  and  close  ;  I  would  grow  loose  with  wondrous 
art  and  fall  into  your  bosom.  Likewise,  to  help  her 
seal  her  secret  missives,  and  to  keep  the  dry,  clinging 
gem  from  drawing  away  the  wax.  I  should  first  touch 

■  Circe  and  Proteus,  both  adepts  in  the  art  of  trans- 
formation. 

427 


OVID 

umida  formosae  tangam  prius  ora  puellae — 

tantum  ne  signem  scripta  dolenda  mihi. 
si  dabor  x  ut  condar  loculis,  exire  negabo, 

adstringens  digitos  orbe  minore  tuos.  20 

non  ego  dedecori  tibi  sim.,  raea  vita,  futurus, 

quodve  tener  digitus  ferre  reeuset,  onus, 
me  gere,  cum  calidis  perfundes  2  imbribus  artus, 

damnaque  sub  gemma  perfer  euntis  3  aquae — 
sed,  puto,  te  nuda  mea  membra  libidine  surgent,     25 

et  peragam  partes  anulus  ille  viri. 
Inrita  quid  voveo  ?  parvum  proficiscere  raunus  ; 

ilia  datam  tecum  sentiat  esse  fidem  ! 


XVI 

Pars  me  Sulmo  tenet  Paeligni  tertia  ruris — 

parva,  sed  inriguis  ora  salubris  aquis. 
sol  licet  admoto  tellurem  sidere  findat, 

et  micet  Icarii  stella  proterva  eanis, 
arva  pererrantur  Paeligna  liquentibus  undis,  5 

et  viret  in  tenero  fertilis  herba  solo, 
terra  ferax  Cereris  multoque  feracior  uvis ; 

dat  quoque  baciferam  Pallada  rarus  ager  ; 
perque  resurgentes  rivis  labentibus  herbas 

gramineus  madidam  caespes  obumbrat  humum.    10 
At  mens  ignis  abest.      verbo  peccavimus  uno  ! — 

quae  movet  ardores  est  procul ;  ardor  adest. 

1  sit  labor  Ehw.  Br.:  si  trahar  N6m. 

2  perfundis  Ps  :  perfunderis  Hein.  Nem.  Br. 

3  perfer  euntis  MSS. :  fer  pereuntis  Dousa  Ehw.  Br. 
428 


THE   AMOKES  II.  xvi 

the  moist  lips  of  my  beautiful  love — only  so  thai  1 
scaled  no  missive  that  would  bring  me  pain.  If  you 
wish  me  given  over  to  the  casket's  keeping,  1  will 
refuse  to  leave  your  finger,  and  lessen  my  circle  to 
keep  firm  hold.  I  would  not  ill  become  you,  my 
life,  nor  be  a  burden  your  tender  finger  would 
refuse  to  bear.  Wear  me  when  you  spray  yourself 
with  the  warm  rain  of  the  bath,  nor  shrink  at  the 
harm  from  water  creeping  beneath  the  gem — but 
methinks  my  passions  would  rise  at  sight  of  your 
fairness,  and  I,  though  naught  but  that  ring,  would 
play  the  human  part. 

27  Why  pray  for  what  cannot  be?  Little  gift,  go 
on  thy  way;  let  my  lady  feel  that  with  thee  my 
true  love  comes  ! 

XVI 

Sulmo  holds  me  now.  third  part  of  the  Paelignian 
fields — a  land  that  is  small,  but  wholesome  with 
channelled  streams.  Though  the  sun  draw  nigh  and 
crack  tin-  earth  with  heat,  and  the  wanton  star  of  the 
Iearian  dog  blaze  forth,  the  acres  of  the  Paeligni  are 
wandered  through  by  the  liquid  wave,  and  green  iii 
the  tender  soil  rises  the  fruitful  plant.  "Rs  a  land 
rich  in  corn,  and  richer  still  in  the  grape  ;  here  and 
there  its  fields  bring  forth,  too,  the  berry-bearing  tree 
of  Pallas  ;  and  over  the  mead  whose  herbage  ever 
springs  again  along  the  gliding  streams,  the  grassy 
turf  hides  thickly  tin-  moistened  ground. 

11  But  my  heart's  flame  is  not  here.  I  was  wrong 
in  one  word!  she  who  (ires  my  heart  is  afar:  the 
fire   is    here.        No,    could    I    be   set    between     Pollux 

4-9 


OVID 

non  ego,  si  medius  Polluce  et  Castore  ponar, 

in  caeli  sine  te  parte  fuisse  velim. 
sdlliciti  iaeeant  terraque  premantur  iniqua,  15 

in  longas  orbem  qui  secuere  vias  ! — 
aut  iuvenum  comites  iussissent  ire  puellas, 

si  fuit  in  longas  terra  secanda  vias  ! 
turn  mini,  si  premerem  ventosas  horridus  Alpes, 

dummodo  cum  domina,  molle  fuisset  iter.  20 

cum  domina  Libycas  ausim  perrumpere  Syrtes 

et  dare  non  aequis  vela  ferenda  Notis. 
non  quae  virgineo  portenta  sub  inguine  latrant, 

nee  timeam  vestros,  curva  Malea,  sinus  ; 
non  quae  1  submersis  ratibus  saturata  Charybdis       25 

fundit  et  effusas  ore  receptat  aquas. 
Quod  si  Neptuni  ventosa  potentia  vincit, 

et  subventuros  auferet  unda  deos, 
tu  nostris  niveos  umeris  inpone  lacertos  ; 

corpore  nos  faeili  dulce  feremus  onus.  30 

saepe  petens  Heron  iuvenis  transnaverat  undas  ; 

turn  quoque  transnasset,  sed  via  caeca  fuit. 
At  sine  te,  quamvis  operosi  vitibus  agri 

me  teneant,  quamvis  amnibus  arva  natent, 
et  vocet  in  rivos  currentem  rusticus  undam,  35 

frigidaque  arboreas  mulceat  aura  comas, 
non  ego  Paelignos  videor  celebrare  salubres, 

non  ego  natalem,  rura  paterna,  locum — 
sed  Scythiam  Cilicasque  feros  viridesque  2  Britannos, 

quaeque  Prometheo  saxa  cruore  rubent.  40 

1  quae  s  :  qua  P  :  quas  old  editions.        2  vitreosque  N4m. 

a  The  images  of  the  gods  placed  at  the  stern.  Such  images 
were  on  the  "  ship  of  Alexandria  whose  sign  was  Castor  and 
Pollux,"  of  Acts  xxviii.  12.         b  Heroid.es  xviii.j  xix. 

c  Where  Prometheus  was  chained  while  preyed  upon  b}7 
the  vulture  sent  by  Zeus. 

43° 


THE   AMOKES    II.   xvi 

and  Castor,  with  vou  not  by,  I  would  not  wish  a  share 
in  heaven.  May  they  lit*  restless,  weighed  down 
by  ungracious  clay,  who  have  cut  long  roads  upon 
the  earth  ! — else  they  should  have  ordered  maids  to 
go  as  comrades  to  young  men,  if  long  roads  must 
needs  be  cut  upon  the  earth  !  Then  if,  shivering, 
I  were  setting  foot  on  the  windy  Alps,  so  only  my 
lady-love  were  with  me,  my  journey  were  made  with 
ease.  Were  my  lady-love  with  me,  I  should  dare  to 
steer  my  ship  through  the  Libyan  Syrtes,  and  spread 
my  sails  to  be  driven  by  the  unpropitious  South. 
I  should  feel  no  fear  of  the  monsters  that  bay  from 
the  maiden's  groin,  nor  shrink  at  thy  winding  gulfs, 
O  curving  Malea ;  nor  the  waters  which  Charybdis, 
sated  with  sunken  ships,  pours  forth,  and,  poured 
forth,  catches  back  in  her  jaws  again, 

27  But  if  the  windy  power  of  Neptune  holdeth  sway, 
and  the  wave  shall  sweep  away  the  gods  that 
should  aid  us,rt  O  place  your  snowy  arms  about  my 
neck  ;  I  shall  bear  the  sweet  burden  along  with 
easy  stroke.  Full  oft  the  young  lover  had  swum  across 
the  waters  to  see  his  Hero  ;  the  last  time,  too,  he 
would  have  swum  across,  but  the  way  was  blind.6 

33  But  here  without  you,  though  round  about  me 
are  fields  of  vines  with  their  busy  life,  though  the 
countryside  is  saturate  with  running  streams,  and 
the  rustic  summons  to  the  rivulets  the  flowing  wave, 
and  the  cool  breeze  caresses  the  branches  of  the 
trees,  I  seem  to  dwell  not  in  the  healthful  Paelignian 
land,  nor  in  my  natal  place,  my  father's  acres — but 
in  Scythia,  and  among  the  fierce  C'ilicians,  and  the 
woaded  Britons,  and  the  rocks  ruddy  with  Promethean 
gore.'" 


43  i 


OVID 

Ulmus  amat  viteni,  vitis  11011  deserit  ulmum  ; 

separor  a  domina  cur  ego  saepe  mea  ? 
at  mihi  te  comitem  iuraras  usque, futuram — 

per  me  perque  oculos,  sidera  nostra,  tuos  ! 
vei*ba  puellarum,  foliis  leviora  caducis,  45 

inrita,  qua  visum  est,  ventus  et  unda  ferunt. 
Siqua  mei  tamen  est  in  te  pia  cura  relicti, 

incipe  pollicitis  addere  facta  tuis, 
parvaque  quamprimum  rapientibus  esseda  mannis 

ipsa  per  admissas  concute  lora  iubas  !  50 

at  vos,  qua  veniet,  tumidi,  subsidite,  montes, 

et  faciles  curvis  vallibus  este,  viae  ! 


XVII 

Siquis  erit,  qui  turpe  putet  servire  puellae, 

illo  convincar  iudice  turpis  ego  ! 
sim  licet  infamis,  dum  me  moderatius  urat, 

quae  Paphon  et  fluctu  pulsa  Cythera  tenet, 
atque  utinam  dominae  miti  quoque  praeda  fuissem  5 

formosae  quoniam  praeda  futurus  eram  ! 
dat  facies  animos.      facie  violenta  Corinna  est — 

me  miserum  !  cur  est  tarn  bene  nota  sibi  ? 
scilicet  a  speculi  sumuntur  imagine  fastus, 

nee  nisi  eonpositam  se  prius  ilia  videt !  10 

Non,  tibi  si  facies  animum  l  dat  et  omina  2  regni — 

o  facies  oculos  nata  tenere  meos  ! — 
collatum  idcirco  tibi  me  contemnere  debes  ; 

aptari  magnis  inferiora  licet. 


1  animum  P(?)  s  :  nimium  wig. 

2  So  Owen  :  nomina  Ps  :  in  omnia  wig. 


W 


THE   AMORES    11.   xvii 

41  The  elm  loves  the  vine-,  the  vine  abandons  not 
the  elm  ;  why  am  I  oft  separated  from  the  mistress 
of  my  heart  ?  Yet  you  had  sworn  that  you  would 
ever  be  eomrade  of  mine — by  me  and  by  your  eyes, 
those  stars  of  mine  !  The  words  of  women,  lighter 
than  falling  leaves,  go  all  for  naught,  swept  away  by 
the  whim  of  wind  and  wave. 

47  Yet,  if  still  in  your  heart  is  some  feeling  of 
faith  toward  me  who  am  left  alone,  begin  to  make 
good  your  promises  by  deeds,  and  as  soon  as  you 
may,  with  your  own  hand  shake  the  rein  above  the 
flying  manes  of  the  ponies  that  whirl  your  light 
ear  along.  And  O,  wherever  she  passes,  sink  down, 
ye  hills,  and  be  easy  in  the  winding  vales,  ye  ways  ! 


XVII 

If  there  be  one  who  thinks  it  base  to  be  a  slave 
to  woman,  before  his  judgment  seat  shall  I  be  proved 
guilty  of  being  base  !  Yet  let  me  lose  my  name,  so 
she  consume  me  with  milder  fires  who  is  queen  of 
Paphos  and  wave-beaten  Cythera.  Ah,  would  I  had 
fallen  prey  to  a  merciful  mistress,  too,  since  I  must 
fall  prey  to  a  beauteous  one  !  Beauty  breeds  arro- 
gance. 'Tis  Corinna's  fair  face  makes  her  hard  with 
me  O  wretched  me  !  why  does  she  know  herself 
so  well  ?  Surely,  'tis  from  her  image  in  the  glass 
she  gets  her  haughtiness  and  she  never  sees  her 
image  before  her  toilet  is  made  ! 

11  Not  even  if  your  charms  do  give  you  pride  and 
promise  of  empire — ()  charms  born  to  captivate  my 
eyes  ! — should  vou  therefore  scorn  me  when  com- 
pared  wilh  yourself;  lesser  things   may  be   fitted  to 

433 

F    F 


OVID 

traditur  et  nymphe  mortalis  amore  Calypso  1 5 

capta  recusantem  detinuisse  virum. 
creditur  aequoream  Phthio  Nereida  regi, 

Egeriani  iusto  concubuisse  Numae, 
Vulcano  Venerem,  quamvis  incude  relicta 

turpiter  obliquo  claudicet  ille  pede.  20 

carminis  hoc  ipsum  genus  inpar  ;  sed  tamen  apte 

iungitur  herous  cum  breviore  modo. 
tu  quoque  me,  mea  lux,  in  quaslibet  aceipe  leges  ; 

te  deceat  medio  iura  dedisse  foro.1 
Non  tibi  crimen  ero,  nee  quo  laetere  remoto ;  25 

non  erit  hie  nobis  infitiandus  amor, 
sunt  mihi  pro  magno  felicia  carmina  censu, 

et  multae  per  me  nomen  habere  volunt ; 
novi  aliquam,  quae  se  circumferat  esse  Corinnam. 

ut  fiat,  quid  non  ilia  dedisse  velit  ?  30 

sed  neque  diversi  ripa  labuntur  eadem 

frigidus  Eurotas  populiferque  Padus, 
nee  nisi  tu  nostris  cantabitur  ulla  libellis  ; 

ingenio  causas  tu  dabis  una  meo. 


XVIII 

Carmen  ad  iratum  dum  tu  perducis  Achillen 

primaque  iuratis  induis  arma  viris, 
nos,  Macer,  ignava  Veneris  cessamus  in  umbra, 

et  tener  ausuros  grandia  frangit  Amor, 
saepe  meae  "tandem"  dixi  "  discede  "  puellae — 

in  gremio  sedit  protinus  ilia  meo. 
saepe  "  pudet !  "  dixi — lacrimis  vix  ilia  retentis 

"me  miseram  !  iam  te  "  dixit  "amare  pudet?  " 
1  foro  P :  toro  vuly. 

a  Ulysses.         *  Thetis  and  Peleus,  parents  of  Achilles. 
434 


THE    AMORES    II.  xviii 

the  great.  We  are  told  that  even  the  nymph  Calypso 
was  smit  with  love  for  a  mortal,  and  kept  him  for 
her  mate  against  his  will."  'Tis  believed  that  Nereus" 
sea-born  daughter  was  wed  to  the  Phthian  king,6  and 
Egeria  to  Numa  skilled  in  law ;  that  Vulcan  was  wed 
by  Venus,  though  when  he  leaves  the  forge  he  limps 
with  wretched  sidelong  gait.  This  very  kind  of 
verse  is  unequal ;  and  yet  the  heroic  line  is  fitly 
joined  to  the  shorter.  Do  you,  too,  C)  light  of  mine, 
take  me — on  whatever  terms  you  please  ;  let  it  suit 
you  dictate  law  to  me  as  if  in  the  midst  of  the  forum. 
25  I  shall  not  cause  you  to  complain,  nor  will  you 
be  glad  to  see  me  go  ;  this  will  be  no  love  we  shall 
need  to  disavow.  Felicitous  song,  instead  of  great 
possession,  is  mine,  and  many  a  fair  one  wishes  for 
glory  through  me ;  I  know  one  who  bruits  it  about 
she  is  Corinna.  To  have  it  so,  what  would  she  not 
have  given  ?  But  neither  do  the  cold  Eurotas  and 
poplar-fringed  Po,  far-separated,  glide  between  the 
same  banks,  nor  shall  any  but  you  be  sung  in  my  little 
books  ;  the  spur  to  my  genius  you  alone  shall  be. 

XVIII 

While  you,  Macer,  are  bringing  your  poem  to  the 
time  of  Achilles'  wrath  and  clothing  the  conspiring 
chiefs  with  the  war's  first  arms,  I  dally  in  the 
slothful  shade  of  Venus,  and  tender  Love  is  bringing 
to  naught  the  lofty  ventures  I  would  make.  Oft 
have  I  said  to  my  love:  "At  last  leave  me  to 
myself'!" — and  she  has  come  forthwith  and  sat  upon 
my  lap.  Oft  have  I  said:  "I  am  ashamed!'' 
—  scarce  keeping  back  her  tears,  she  has  answered  : 
"Poor    me!    are    vou    so    soon    ashamed     of    love?" 

435 


OVID 

inplicuitque  suos  circum  men  colla  lacertos 

et,  quae  me  perdunt,  oscula  mille  dedit.  10 

vincor,  et  ingenmm  sumptis  revocatur  ab  armis, 

resque  domi  gestas  et  raea  bella  cano. 
Sceptra  tauten  sumpsi,  curaque  tragoedia  nostra 

crevit,  et  huic  operi  quamlibet  aptus  eram. 
risit  Amor  pallamque  meam  pictosque  cothurnos      15 

sceptraque  privata  tarn  cito  sumj)ta  raanu. 
nine  qubque  me  dominae  numen  deduxit  iniquae, 

deque  cothurnato  vate  triumphat  Amor. 
Quod  licet,  aut  artes  teneri  profitemur  Amoris — 

ei  mihi,  praeceptis  urgeor  ipse  meis  ! —  20 

aut,  quod  Penelopes  verbis  reddatur  Ulixi, 

seribimus  et  lacrimas,  Phylli  relicta,  tuas, 
quod  Paris  et  Macareus  et  quod  male  gratus  Iaso 

Hippolytique  parens  Hippolytusque  legant, 
quodque  tenens  strictum  Dido  miserabilis  ensem      25 

dieat  et  Aoniae  *  Lesbis  amata  lyrae. 
Quam  cito  de  toto  rediit  meus  orbe  Sabinus 

scriptaque  diversis  rettulit  ille  locis  ! 
Candida  Penelope  signum  cognovit  Ulixis  ; 

legit  ab  Hippolyto  scripta  noverca  suo.  30 

iam  pins  Aeneas  miserae  rescripsit  Elissae, 

quodque  legat  Phyllis,  si  modo  vivit,  adest. 
tristis  ad  Hypsipylen  ab  Iasone  littera  venit ; 

det  votam  Phoebo  Lesbis  amata  lyram. 

1  Aoniae  Ps,  see  I,  i,  12:  Aeoliae  vulg. 

"  He  teaches  the  art  in  the  Ars  Amatoria. 
''  All  these  are  references  to  the  Heraidt  s: 
c  Sabinus  wrote  replies  to  the  letters  of  the  Heroides. 

436 


THE    AMORES    II.  xviii 

and  has  wound  her  arms  about  my  neck  and  given 
me  a  thousand  kisses,  to  my  undoing.  I  am  van- 
quished, and  summon  back  my  genius  from  the  taking 
up  of  arms  to  sing  of  exploits  at  home  and  of  my 
own  campaigns. 

13  None  the  less,  I  did  begin  to  sing  of  sceptres, 
and  through  my  effort  tragedy  grew  in  favour,  and 
for  that  task  no  one  more  fit  than  I.  Hut  Love 
laughed  at  my  pall  and  painted  buskins,  and  at  the 
sceptre  I  had  so  promptly  grasped  in  my  unkinglike 
hand.  From  this  ambition,  too,  the  worshipful  will 
of  my  lady  drew  me  away — for  she  liked  it  not— and 
Love  triumphant  drags  in  his  train  the  buskined 
bard. 

19  What  I  may,  I  do.  I  either  profess  the  art  of 
tender  love  a — ah  me,  I  am  caught  in  the  snares  of 
my  own  teaching  ! — or  I  write  the  words  Penelope 
sends  her  Ulysses,  and  thy  tearful  plaint,  abandoned 
Phyllis  ;  what  Paris  and  Marcareus  are  to  read,  and 
what  ungrateful  Jason,  and  Hippolytus,  and  Hip- 
polytus'  sire;  and  what  pitiable  Dido,  with  drawn 
blade  in  her  hand,  indites,  and  the  Lesbian,  loved  of 
the  Aonian  lyre.6 

27  How  quickly  has  my  Sabinus  returned  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth  and  brought  back  missives  writ  in 
far-distant  places  !c  Spotless  Penelope  has  recogni/ed 
the  seal  of  Ulysses;  the  stepdame  has  read  what  was 
penned  by  her  Hippolytus.  Already  devout  Aeneas 
has  written  back  to  wretched  Elissa,  and  a  letter  is 
here  for  Phyllis  to  read,  if  only  she  live.  A  missive 
grievous  for  Hypsipyle  has  come  from  Jason  :  the 
daughter  of  Lesbos,  her  love  returned,  may  offer  to 
Phoebus  the  lyre  she  vowed. 


437 


OVID 

Nee  tibi,  qua  tutum  vati,  Macer,  arma  canenti         35 
aureus  in  medio  Marte  tacetur  Amor. 

et  Paris  est  illic  et  adultera,  nobile  crimen, 
et  comes  extincto  Laudamia  viro. 

si  bene  te  novi,  non  bella  libentius  istis    ■ 

dicis,  et  a  vestris  in  mea  castra  venis.  40 

XIX 

Si  tibi  non  opus  est  servata,  stulte,  puella, 

at  mihi  fac  serves,  quo  magis  ipse  velim  ! 
quod  licet,  ingratum  est ;    qu  d  non  licet  acrius 
urit. 

ferreus  est,  siquis,  quod  sinit  alter,  amat. 
speremus  pariter,  pariter  metuamus  amantes,  5 

et  faciat  voto  rara  repulsa  locum, 
quo  mihi  fortunam,  quae  numquam  fallere  curet  ? 

nil  ego,  quod  nullo  tempore  laedat,  amo  ! 
Viderat  hoc  in  me  vitium  versuta  Corinna, 

quaque  capi  possem,  callida  norat  opem.  10 

a,  quotiens  sani  capitis  mentita  dolores 

cunctantem  tardo  iussit  abire  pede  ! 
a,  quotiens  finxit  culpam,  quantumque  licebat 

insonti,  speciem  praebuit  esse  nocens ! 
sic  ubi  vexarat  tepidosque  refoverat  ignis,  15 

rursus  erat  votis  comis  et  apta  meis. 
quas  mihi  blanditias,  quam  dulcia  verba  parabat 

oscula,  di  magni,  qualia  quotque  dabat ! 

438 


THE    AMORES    II.  xix 

35  Nor  do  you,  too,  Macer,  so  far  as  the  bard  may 
who  sings  of  arms,  leave  golden  Love  unsung  amid 
your  warlike  strain.  Both  Paris  and  she  who  loved 
him,  misdeed  far-famed,  are  in  your  song,  and  Lao- 
damia,  comrade  to  her  lord  in  death.  If  I  know  you 
well,  not  more  gladly  you  sing  of  wars  than  of  themes 
like  these,  and  are  passing  from  your  camp  to  mine. 


XIX 

If  you  feel  no  need  of  guarding  your  love  for 
yourself,  O  fool,  see  that  you  guard  her  for  me,  that 
I  may  desire  her  the  more  !  What  one  may  do 
freely  has  no  charm  ;  what  one  may  not  do  pricks 
more  keenly  on.  He  has  a  heart  of  iron  who  loves 
what  another  concedes.  Let  us  hope  while  we  fear 
and  fear  while  we  hope,  we  lovers,  and  let  repulse 
sometimes  be  ours  to  make  a  place  for  vows.  What 
care  I  for  the  fortune  that  never  troubles  to  deceive  ? 
May  nothing  be  mine  that  never  wounds  ! 

9  Corinna  the  artful  had  marked  this  weakness  in 
me,  and  shrewdly  recognised  the  means  by  which  to 
snare  me.  Ah,  how  often  has  she  feigned  an  aching 
head  when  wholly  well,  and  bid  me  go  away  when 
my  tardy  foot  delayed  !  Ah,  how  oft  has  she  feigned 
a  charge,  and  put  on  the  air — as  far  as  she  could 
with  a  guiltless  man— of  attacking  me  !  Thus,  when 
she  had  stirred  me  up,  and  fanned  into  flame  again 
the  cooling  fires,  she  would  be  friendly  once  more, 
and  compliant  to  my  prayers.  What  winsome  ways 
she  would  have,  how  sweet  she  would  make  her 
words  !  And  kisses,  O  great  gods,  what  kisses,  and 
how  many  she  would  give  ! 

439 


OVID 

Tu  quoque,  quae  nostros  rapuisti  nuper  ocellos, 

saepe  time  insidias,  saepe  rogata  nega  ;  20 

et  sine  me  ante  tuos  proiectum  in  limine  postis 

longa  pruinosa  frigoi-a  nocte  pati. 
sic  mihi  durat  amor  longosque  adolescit  in  annos  ; 

hoc  iuvat ;  haec  animi  sunt  alimenta  mei. 
pinguis  amor  nimiumque  patens  in  taedia  nobis        25 

vertitur  et,  stomacho  dulcis  ut  esca,  nocet. 
si  numquam  Danaen  habuisset  aenea  turris, 

non  esset  Danae  de  love  facta  parens  ; 
dum  servat  Iuno  mutatam  cornibus  Ion, 

facta  est,  quam  fuerat,  gratior  ilia  Iovi.  30 

quod    licet    et   facile    est    quisquis    cupit,    arbore 
frondis 

carpat  et  e  magno  flumine  potet  aquam. 
siqua  volet  regnare  diu,  deludat  amantem. 

ei  mihi,  ne  monitis  torquear  ipse  meis  ! 
quidlibet  eveniat,  nocet  indulgentia  nobis —  35 

quod  sequitur,  fugio  ;  quod  fugit,  ipse  sequor. 
At  tu,  formosae  nimium  secure  puellae, 

incipe  iam  prima  claudere  nocte  forem. 
incipe,  quis  totiens  furtim  tua  limina  pulset, 

quaerere,  quid  latrent  nocte  silente  canes,  40 

quas  ferat  et  referat  sollers  ancilla  tabellas, 

cur  totiens  vacuo  secubet  ipsa  toro. 
mordeat  ista  tuas  aliquando  cura  medullas, 

daque  locum  nostris  materiamque  dolis. 
ille  potest  vacuo  furari  litore  harenas,  45 

uxorem  stulti  siquis  amare  potest, 
iamque  ego  praemoneo  :  nisi  tu  servare  puellam 

incipis,  incipiet  desinere  esse  mea ! 
440 


THE   AMORES    II.  xix 

19  You,  too,  who  have  lately  stolen  my  eyes  away, 
see  that  oft  you  be  fearful  of  plots,  and  oft  when 
entreated  say  me  nay ;  and  allow  me  to  stretch 
myself  on  the  threshold  of  your  door  and  suffer  long 
cold  through  the  rimy  night.  Tis  thus  my  love 
grows  hardy,  and  keeps  on  waxing  through  long 
years  ;  this  is  what  helps  it ;  'tis  this  that  nourishes 
my  passion.  A  love  fed  fat  and  too  compliant  is 
turned  to  cloying,  and  harms  us,  like  sweet  fare  that 
harms  the  stomach.  Had  Danae  never  been  mewed 
in  the  brazen  tower,  Danae  would  never  have  been 
made  mother  by  Jove ;  as  long  as  Juno  guarded 
Io,  changed  to  a  horned  beast,  she  made  her  charm 
greater  than  before  to  Jove.  Whoever  desires  the 
unforbidden  and  easy,  let  him  pluck  leaves  from 
the  tree,  and  drink  water  from  the  mighty  stream. 
Would  any  fair  one  reign  long,  let  her  delude  her 
lover.  Ah  me,  may  I  not  meet  torment  from  my 
own  advice !  Yet,  come  what  may,  to  be  indulged 
is  a  bane  to  me — what  follows,  I  fly  ;  what  flies,  I 
follow  in  turn. 

37  But  you,  too  careless  of  your  pretty  dear,  begin 
already  at  nightfall  to  close  your  door.  Begin  to 
ask  who  it  is  that  so  often  stealthily  beats  on  your 
threshold,"  why  the  dogs  bay  in  the  silence  of  the 
night,  what  tablets  the  cunning  slave-girl  brings  and 
takes,  why  your  lady  rests  so  often  apart  from  you. 
Let  cares  like  that  gnaw  sometimes  into  your  marrows, 
and  jfive  me  place  and  matter  for  my  wiles.  Who 
would  make  love  with  the  wife  of  a  fool  could  steal 
the  sands  from  a  deserted  shore.  I  give  you  warning 
now  in  time  :  unless  you  begin  to  watch  your  lady, 
she  will  begin  to  cease  being  mine  !  1  have  borne 
0  An  ancient  way  of  knocking  at  the  door. 

441 


OVID 

multa  diuque  tuli ;  speravi  saepe  futurum, 

cum  bene  servasses,  ut  bene  verba  darem.  50 

lentus  es  et  pateris  nulli  patienda  marito ; 

at  mihi  concessi x  finis  amoris  erit ! 
Scilicet  infelix  numquam  prohibebor  adire  ? 

nox  mihi  sub  nullo  vindice  semper  erit  ? 
nil  metuam  ?  per  nulla  traham  suspiria  somnos  ?      55 

nil  fades,  cur  te  iure  perisse  velim  ? 
quid  mihi  cum  facili,  quid  cum  lenone  marito  ? 

corrumpit 2  vitio  gaudia  nostra  suo. 
quin  alium,  quern  tanta  iuvat 3  patientia,  quaeris  ? 

me  tibi  rivalem  si  iuvat  esse,  veta  !  60 

1  concessa  Mtrk.  2  corrumpis  Merit. 

3  tanta  iubat  P :  iubet  Post. 


442 


THE    A  MO  RES    II.  xix 

much,  and  for  long;  I  have  often  hoped  the  time 
would  come  when  you  would  watch  her  well,  that  I 
might  trick  you  well.  You  are  slow,  and  endure 
things  unendurable  to  any  husband  ;  but  ah  !  for  me, 
your  complaisance  will  be  the  end  of  lm  e  ! 

53  Unhappy  that  I  am,  shall  I  really  never  be  kept 
from  seeing  her?  Shall  the  night  never  threaten 
me  with  someone's  revenge?  Am  I  to  fear  nothing? 
Shall  I  heave  no  sighs  in  the  midst  of  my  slumbers? 
Will  you  do  nothing  to  give  me  reason  to  wish  you 
dead?  What  do  I  want  with  a  facile  husband — with 
a  husband  who  is  a  pander  ?  With  his  failing  he 
ruins  our  joys.  Why  not  seek  another,  whom  such 
long-suffering  pleases  ?  If  you  please  to  have  me 
your  rival,  forbid  it  ! 


443 


LIBER   TERTIUS 


I 


Stat  vetus  et  multos  incaedua  silva  per  annos  ; 

credibile  est  illi  numen  inesse  loco, 
fons  sacer  in  medio  speluneaque  pumice  pendens, 

et  latere  ex  omni  dulce  queruntur  aves. 
Hie  ego  dum  spatior  tectus  nemoralibus  umbris —    5 

quod  raea,  quaerebam,  Musa  moveret  opus — 
venit  odoratos  Elegeia  nexa  capillos, 

et,  puto,  pes  illi  longior  alter  erat. 
forma  decens,  vestis  tenuissima,  vultus  amantis, 

et  pedibus  vitium  causa  decoris  erat.  10 

venit  et  ingenti  violenta  Tragoedia  passu  : 

fronte  comae  torva,  palla  iacebat  humi  ; 
laeva  manus  sceptrum  late  regale  movebat, 

Lydius  alta  pedum  vincla  cothurnus  erat. 
Et  prior  "  ecquis  erit,"  dixit,  "  tibi  finis  amandi,      15 

O  argumenti  lente  poeta  tui  ? 
nequitiam  vinosa  tuam  convivia  narrant, 

narrant  in  multas  conpita  secta  vias. 
saepe  aliquis  digito  vatem  designat  euntem, 

atque  ait  '  hie,  hie  est,  quern  ferus  urit  Amor  !  '    20 
fabula,  nee  sentis,  tota  iactaris  in  urbe, 

dum  tua  praeterito  facta  pudore  refers. 

444 


BOOK   THE   THIRD 


I 

Ancient,  and  spared  by  the  axe  through  many 
years,  there  stands  a  grove  ;  yon  could  believe  a  deity 
indwelt  the  place.  A  sacred  spring  is  in  its  midst, 
and  a  cave  with  overhanging  rock,  and  from  everj 
side  comes  the  sweet  complaint  of  birds. 

5  Whilst  1  was  strolling  here  enveloped  in  wood- 
land shadows,  asking  myself  what  work  my  Must- 
should  venture  on — came  Elegy  with  coil  of  odorous 
locks,  and,  1  think,  one  foot  longer  than  its  mate. 
She  had  a  comely  form,  her  robe  was  gauzy  light, 
her  face  suffused  with  love,  and  the  fault  in  her  car- 
riage added  to  her  grace.  There  came,  too,  raging 
Tragedy,  with  mighty  stride  :  her  locks  o'erhung  a 
darkling  brow,  her  pall  trailed  on  the  "round  ;  her 
left  hand  swayed  wide  a  kingly  sceptre,  and  on  her 
foot  was  the  high-bound  Lydian  buskin. 

15  And  she  was  first  to  speak:  "Will  there  ever 
hi-  an  end  to  thy  making  love,''  she  said,  "  ()  poet 
ever  clinging  to  thy  theme  ?  Thy  worthless  ways 
are  the  talk  at  dinners  over  wine,  the  talk  at  the 
crossings  cut  by  many  roads.  Oft  someone  points 
with  finger  to  the  bard  as  he  passes,  and  says: 
'  He,  he  is  the  one  tierce  Love  is  burning  up  ! '  Thou 
art  not  ware,  but  thou  art  tossed  on  the  tongues  of 
all  the  city  while,  casting  away  all  shame.  I  lion 
bruitest    abroad    thy    deeds.       "lis    time    thou    weri 

445 


OVID 

tempus  erat,  thyrso  pulsum  graviore  moveri ; 

cessatum  satis  est — incipe  maius  opus  ! 
materia  premis  ingenium.  cane  facta  virorum.         25 

(  haec  animo,'  dices,  '  area  facta  meo  est  !  ' 
quod  tenerae  cantent,  lusit  tua  Musa,  puellae, 

priniaque  per  numeros  acta  iuventa  suos. 
nunc  habeam  per  te  Romana  Tragoedia  nomen  ! 

inplebit  leges  spiritus  iste  meas."  30 

Hactenus,  et  movit  pictis  innixa  cothurnis 

densum  caesarie  terque  quaterque  caput, 
altera,  si  memini,  limis  subrisit  ocellis — 

fallor,  an  in  dextra  myrtea  virga  fuit  ? 
u  Quid  gravibus  verbis,  animosa  Tragoedia,"  dixit,  35 

"  me  premis  ?  an  numquam  non  gravis  esse  potes  ? 
inparibus  tamen  es  numeris  dignata  moveri  ; 

in  me  pugnasti  versibus  usa  meis. 
non  ego  contulerim  sublimia  carmina  nostris  ; 

obruit  exiguas  regia  vestra  fores.  40 

sum  levis,  et  mecum  levis  est,  mea  cura,  Cupido ; 

non  sum  materia  fortior  ipsa  mea. 
rustica  sit  sine  me  lascivi  mater  Amoris  ; 

huic  ego  proveni  lena  comesque  deae. 
quam  tu  non  poteris  duro  reserare  cothurno,  45 

haec  est  blanditiis  ianua  laxa  meis ; 
et  tamen  emerui  plus  quam  tu  posse,  ferendo 

multa  supercilio  non  patienda  tuo. 
per  me  decepto  didicit  custode  Corinna 

liminis  adstricti  sollicitare  fidem,  50 

delabique  toro  tunica  velata  soluta 

atque  inpercussos  nocte  movere  pedes. 

"  The  staff  of  Bacchus,  patron-god  of  the  drama. 
446 


THE   AMORES    III.  i 

stirred  by  the  stroke  of  a  greater  thyrsus  ; a  thou 
hast  dallied  enough — enter  on  greater  work  !  Thy 
theme  obscures  thy  genius.  Sing  deeds  of  heroes. 
'This/  thou  wilt  say,  'is  the  race  for  my  soul  to 
run  !'  Thy  Muse  has  been  but  playing — with  matter 
for  tender  maiden's  song — and  thy  first  youth  has 
been  given  to  numbers  that  belong  to  youth.  Now, 
let  me,  Roman  Tragedy,  win  through  thee  renown  ! 
Thou  hast  the  inspiration  will  fulfill  my  needs." 

31  Thus  far  she  spake,  and,  stately  on  her  painted 
buskins,  shook  thrice  and  four  times  her  head  with 
its  clustered  hair.  The  other,  if  I  remember,  cast 
sidelong  eyes  on  me,  and  smiled — am  I  mistaken,  or 
was  a  branch  of  myrtle  in  her  hand  ? 

35  <:  Why  weary  me  with  your  heavy  words,  O 
haughty  Tragedy  ?  "  she  said  ;  "  or  can  you  never  be 
otherwise  than  heavy  ?  Yet  you  have  deigned  to 
suit  yourself  to  unequal  numbers  ;  in  assailing  me 
'twas  my  verse  you  used.  I  would  not  compare 
your  lofty  strains  with  mine  ;  your  queenly  hall  o'er- 
shadows  my  humble  doors.  I  am  but  light,  and 
Cupid,  my  heart's  fond  care,  is  light  as  well  ; 
myself  am  not  stronger  than  the  theme  I  sing.  The 
mother  of  sportive  Love,  without  me,  would  be  but  a 
rustic  jade  ;  to  be  go-between  and  comrade  to  this 
goddess  was  I  brought  forth.  The  door  which  you 
will  never  unbolt  with  your  austere  buskin — that 
door  lies  freely  open  before  my  blandishments  ;  and 
yet  I  have  earned  this  greater  power  than  yours  by 
bearing  much  your  haughty  brow  would  not  endure. 
Through  me  Corinna  has  learned  to  elude  her  guard 
and  tamper  with  the  faith  of  tight-closed  door,  to 
slip  away  from  her  couch  in  tunic  ungirdled  and 
move  in  the  night  with   unstumbling  foot.     O  how 

447 


OVID 

vel  quotiens  foribus  duris  incisa  J  pependi, 

non  verita  a  populo  praetereunte  legi  ! 
quin  ego  me  meniini,  dum  custos  saevus  abiret,        55 

aneillae  missam  delituisse  sinu. 
quid,  cum  me  mimus  natali  mittis,  at  ilia 

rumpit  et  adposita  barbara  mersat 2  aqua  ? 
prima  tuae  movi  felieia  semina  mentis  ; 

munus  babes,  quod  te  iam  petit  ista,  meura."       60 
Desierat.      coepi  :  "  per  vos  utramque  rogamus, 

in  vacuas  aures  verba  timentis  eant. 
altera  me  sceptro  deeoras  al toque  cothurno ; 

iam  nunc  contacto  magnus  in  ore  sonus. 
altera  das  nostro  victurum  nomen  amori —  65 

ergo  ades  et  longis  versibus  adde  brevis  ! 
exiguum  vati  concede,  Tragoedia,  tempus  ! 

tu  labor  aeternus ;  quod  petit  ilia,  breve  est." 
Mota  dedit  veniam — teneri  properentur  Amores, 

dum  vacat ;  a  tergo  grandius  urguet  opus  !  70 

II 

"  Non  ego  nobilium  sedeo  studiosus  equorum  ; 

cui  tarn  en  ipsa  faves,  vincat  ut  ille,  precor. 
ut  loquerer  tecum  veni,  tecumque  sederem, 

ne  tibi  non  notus,  quern  facis,  esset  amor, 
tu  cursus  spectas,  ego  te  ;    spectemus  uterque  5 

quod  iuvat,  atque  oculos  pascat  uterque  suos. 
O,  cuicumque  faves,  felix  agitator  equorum  ! 

ergo  illi  curae  contigit  esse  tuae  ? 

1  incisa  vtdg.:  infixa  xome  MSS.:  inlrsa  Ehw.from  s. 
a  mersat  Ehw.:  mersit  MSS. 
448 


THE  AMORES    III.  ii 

oft  have  I  been  graved  on  unyielding  doors,  not 
shaming  there  to  be  read  by  the  passer  by  !"  Nay, 
once  I  mind  I  was  sent  in  keeping  of  a  slave,  hid 
away  in  her  bosom  till  the  fierce  guard  went.  How, 
when  you  send  me  as  a  birthday  gift,  and  my  dear 
barbarian  rends  me,  and  drowns  me  in  the  water 
standing  near  ?  'Twas  I  who  first  made  swell  the 
fruitful  seeds  of  your  mind  ;  to  me  you  owe  it  that 
she  who  stands  yonder  claims  you  now." 

61  She  had  ceased.  I  began  :  "  By  both  and  each 
of  you  1  pray,  let  my  fearful  words  find  your  cars 
attentive.  One  honours  me  with  sceptre  and  lofty 
buskin  ;  my  tongue  already  feels  thy  touch,  and 
mighty  speech  is  on  my  lips.  The  other  gives 
everlasting  glory  to  my  love — come,  then,  and  join 
short  verses  with  the  long  !  Indulge  thy  bard  a 
short  space,  O  Tragedy  !  A  labour  eternal  art  thou  ; 
what  she  asks  is  but  brief." 

69  She  was  moved,  and  granted  my  prayer — let  the 
tender  Loves  come  hasting,  while  I  am  free  ;  close 
after  me  presses  a  greater  task  ! 

II 

"I  sit  not  here  because  fond  of  high-bred  horses  ; 
yet,  the  one  you  favour  I  pray  may  win.6  To  talk 
with  you  I  came,  and  to  sit  with  you,  so  that  you 
might  not  miss  knowing  the  love  you  stir.  You 
gaze  on  the  races,  I  on  you  ;  let  us  both  gaze  on 
what  delights,  both  feast  our  own  eyes. 

7  " O,  happy  driver,  whoe'er  he  be,  that  wins  your 
favour  !  Ah.  so  'twas  he  had  tin*  fortune  to  enlist 
your  concern  ?      Be  that  fortune  mine,  and  when   my 

"  The  lover  carved  verses  (elegy)  on  his  lady's  door. 

1  The  poet  is  relating  what  he  said  to  a  fair  one  at  t  he  races. 

449 

G    (i 


OVID 

hoc  mihi  contingat,  sacro  de  carcere  missis 

insistam  forti  mente  vehendus  equis,  10 

et  modo  lora  dabo,  modo  verbere  terga  notabo, 

nunc  stringam  metas  interiore  rota, 
si  mihi  currenti  fueris  conspecta,  morabor, 

deque  meis  manibus  lora  remissa  fluent, 
at  quam  paene  Pelops  Pisaea  concidit  hasta,  15 

dum  spectat  vultus,  Hippodamia,  tuos  ! 
nempe  favore  suae  vicit  tamen  ille  puellae. 

vincamus  dominae  quisque  favore  suae  ! 
Quid  frustra  refugis  ?  cogit  nos  linea  iungi. 

haec  in  lege  loci  commoda  circus  habet —  20 

tu  tamen  a  dextra,  quicumque  es,  parce  puellae  ; 

contactu  lateris  laeditur  ista  tui. 
tu  quoque,  qui  spectas  post  nos,  tua  contrahe  crura, 

si  pudor  est,  rigido  nee  preme  terga  genu  ! 
Sed  nimium  demissa  iacent  tibi  pallia  terra.  25 

collige — vel  digitis  en  ego  tollo  meis  ! 
invida  vestis  eras,  quae  tarn  bona  crura  tegebas  ; 

quoque  magis  spectes — invida  vestis  eras  ! 
talia  Milanion  Atalantes  crura  fugacis 

optavit  manibus  sustinuisse  suis.  30 

talia  pinguntur  succinctae  crura  Dianae 

cum  sequitur  fortes,  fortior  ipsa,  feras. 
his  ego  non  visis  arsi  ;  quid  net  ab  ipsis  ? l 

in  flammam  flammas,  in  mare  fundis  aquas, 
suspicor  ex  istis  et  cetera  posse  placere,  35 

quae  bene  sub  tenui  condita  veste  latent. 
1  ipsis  Mueller  :  istis  MSS. 
45° 


THE  AMORRS    III.  ii 

coursers  dash  from  the  starting-chamber,  with  fear- 
less heart  will  I  tread  the  car  and  urge  them  on, 
now  giving  the  rein,  now  striping  their  hacks  with 
the  lash,  now  grazing  the  turning-post  with  inner 
wheel.  Have  I  caught  sight  of  you  as  I  carter, 
I  will  stop,  and  the  reins,  let  go  from  my  hands, 
will  drop.  Yea,  how  mar  Pelops  came  to  falling  by 
Pisaean  spear  while  Looking  on  thy  face,  Hippodamia  ! 
Yet  he  won,  of  course  through  the  favour  of  his  lady. 
May  we  owe  our  victories,  all  of  us,  to  the  favour  of 
our  loves  ! 

19  "  Why  draw  back  from  me  ? — 'twill  do  no  good  ; 
the  line  compels  us  to  sit  close/'  This  advantage 
the  circus  gives,  with  its  rule  of  space — yet  you 
there  on  the  right,  whoever  you  are,  have  a  care  ; 
your  pressing  against  my  lady's  side  annoys.  You, 
too,  who  are  looking  on  from  behind,  draw  tip  your 
legs,  if  you  care  for  decency,  and  press  not  her  back 
with  your  hard  knee  ! 

2b  "  But  your  cloak  is  let  fall  too  far,  and  is  trailing 
on  the  ground.  Gather  it  up — or  look,  with  my 
own  fingers  I'll  get  it  up.  Envious  wrap  you  were, 
to  cover  such  pretty  limbs!  And  the  more  one 
looks — ah,  envious  wrap  you  were  !  Such  were  the 
limbs  of  fleet  Atalanta  that  Milanion  burned  to 
hold  up  with  his  hands.  Such  in  pictures  are  the 
limbs  of  upgirt  Diana  pursuing  the  bold  wild  beasts, 
herself  more  bold  than  they.  I  burned  before,  when 
I  had  not  seen  ;  what  will  become  of  me  now  that  I 
have?  You  add  flames  to  flame,  and  waters  to  the 
sea.  I  suspect  from  them  that  all  else,  too.  that 
lies  well  hidden  under  your  delicate  gown,  might 
please. 

a  There  were  lines  bo  Beparate  the  Beats. 

45  ! 
i.  a  'i 


OVID 

Vis  tamen  interea  faciles  arcessere  ventos  ? 

quos  faeiet  nostra  mota  tabella  manu. 
an  magis  hie  meus  est  animi,  non  aeris  aestus, 

captaque  femineus  pectora  torret  amor  ?  40 

dum  loquor,  alba  levi  sparsa  est  tibi  pulvere  vestis. 

sordide  de  niveo  corpoi*e  pulvis  abi  ! 
Sed  iam  pompa  venit — Unguis  animisque  favete ! 

tempus  adest  plausus — aurea  pompa  venit. 
prima  loco  fertur  passis  Victoria  piimis —  45 

hue  ades  et  meus  hie  fac,  dea,  vincat  amor  ! 
plaudite  Neptuno,  nimium  qui  creditis  undis  ! 

nil  mihi  cum  pelago  ;  me  mea  terra  capit. 
plaude  tuo  Marti,  miles  !  nos  odimus  arma  ; 

pax  iuvat  et  media  pace  repertus  amor.  50 

auguribus  Phoebus,  Phoebe  venantibus  adsit ! 

artifices  in  te  verte,  Minerva,  manus  ! 
ruricolae  Cereri  teneroque  adsurgite  Baccho  ! 

Pollucem  pugiles,  Castora  placet  eques  ! 
nos  tibi,  blanda  Venus,  puerisque  potentibus  arcu   55 

plaudimus  ;  inceptis  adnue,  diva,  meis 
daque  novae  1  mentem  dominae  !  patiatur  amari ! 

Adnuit  et  motu  signa  secunda  dedit. 
quod  dea  promisit,  promittas  ipsa,  rogamus  ; 

pace  loquar  Venei'is,  tu  dea  maior  eris.  60 

per  tibi  tot  iuro  testes  pompamque  deorum, 

te  dominam  nobis  tempus  in  onme  peti ! 

1  novae  ?s :  novam  many  MSS. 

a  Immediately  before  the  races  the  gods  were  carried  in 
procession  about  the  course. 

45  2 


THE  AMORES    III.  ii 

37  «  Would  you  like,  while  we  wait,  to  bid  soft 
breezes  blow  ?  Ill  take  the  fan  in  my  hand  and 
start  them.  Or  is  this  rather  the  heat  of  my  heart 
and  not  of  the  air,  and  does  love  for  a  woman  burn 
my  ravished  breast  ?  While  I  am  talking,  a  sprink- 
ling of  light  dust  has  got  on  your  white  dress.  Vile 
dust,  away  from  this  snowy  body  ! 

43  "  But  now  the  procession  is  coming — keep  silence 
all,  and  attend  !  The  time  for  applause  is  here — the 
golden  procession  is  coming/1  First  in  the  train 
is  Victory,  borne  with  wings  outspread — come  hither, 
goddess,  and  help  my  love  to  win  !  Applaud 
Neptune,  ye  who  trust  o'ermuch  the  wave  !  Naught 
will  I  with  the  sea  ;  I  choose  that  the  land  keep  me. 
Applaud  thy  Mars,  ()  soldier  !  Arms  1  detest ;  peace 
is  my  delight,  and  love  that  is  found  in  the  midst 
of  peace.  And  Phoebus — let  him  be  gracious  to 
augurs,  and  Phoebe  gracious  to  huntsmen  !  Minerva, 
turn  in  applause  to  thee  the  craftsman's  hands  !  Ye 
country  dwellers,  rise  to  Ceres  and  tender  Bacchus  ! 
Let  the  boxer  court  Pollux,  the  horseman  Castor ! 
We,  winsome  Venus,  we  applaud  thee,  and  thy 
children  potent  with  the  bow  ;  smile,  ()  goddess, 
upon  my  undertakings,  and  put  the  right  mind  in 
my  heart's  new  mistress  !  Let  her  endure  to  be 
loved  ! 

58  "  She  nodded,  and  by  the  movement  gave 
favouring  sign.  What  the  goddess  lias  promised, 
yourself  promise,  I  ask  ;  with  Venus'  permission  let 
me  say  it,  you  will  be  the  greater  goddess.  I  swear 
to  you  by  all  these  witnesses  and  by  the  train  of 
the  gods,  I  am  asking  you  to  be  for  all  time  to  come 
my  queen  ! 

453 


OVID 

Sed  pendent  tibi  crura,     potes,  si  forte  iuvabit, 

caneellis  primos  inseruisse  pedes, 
maxima  iam  vacuo  praetor  spectacula  circo  65 

quadriiugos  aequo  carcere  misit  equos. 
cui  studeas,  video,     vincet,  cuicumque  favebis. 

quid  cupias,  ipsi  scire  videntur  equi. 
me  miserum,  metam  spatioso  circuit  orbe  ! 

quid  facis  ?  admoto  proxumus  axe  subit.  70 

quid  facis,  infelix  ?  perdis  bona  vota  puellae. 

tende,  precor,  valida  lora  sinistra  manu  ! 
favimus  ignavo— sed  enim  revocate,  Quirites, 

et  date  iactatis  undique  signa  togis  ! 
en,  revocant ! — at,  ne  turbet  toga  mota  capillos,      75 

in  nostros  abdas  te  licet  usque  sinus. 
Iamque  patent  iterum  reserato  carcere  postes  ; 

evolat  admissis  discolor  agmen  equis. 
nunc  saltern  supera  spatioque  insurge  patenti ! 

sint  mea,  sint  dominae  fac  rata  vota  meae !  80 

Sunt  dominae  rata  vota  meae,  mea  vota  supersunt. 

ille  tenet  palmam  ;  palma  petenda  mea  est." 
Risit,  et  argutis  quiddam  promisit  ocellis. 

"  Hoc  satis  hie  ; 1  alio  cetera  redde  loco  !  " 

1  So  Hein.  from  MSS.:  hoc  satis  est  P:  hie  satis  est  Ehw. 

a  From  the  gates  of  the  carceres,  or  starting-chambers,  so 
arranged  that  each  driver  was  equally  distant  from  the  lines 
where  the  race  began. 


454 


THE  AMORES    III.  ii 

63  "  But  your  feet  are  dangling.  If  you  like,  you 
you  can  stick  your  toes  in  the  grating.  The  circus 
is  clear  now  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  shows,  and 
the  praetor  has  started  the  four-horse  cars  from  the 
equal  barrier."  I  see  the  one  you  are  eager  for.  He 
will  win  if  he  has  your  favour,  whoever  he  be. 
What  you  desire  the  very  horses  seem  to  know  !  Ah, 
miserable  me,  he  has  circled  the  post  in  a  wide 
curve  !  What  are  you  doing  ?  The  next  hugs  close 
with  his  axle,  and  gains  on  you.  What  are  you 
doing,  wretch  ?  You  will  lose  my  love  the  prayer  of 
her  heart.  Pull,  I  entreat,  the  left  rein  with  all 
your  might !  We  are  favoui'ing  a  good-for-naught — 
but  call  them  back,  Quirites,  and  toss  your  togas  in 
signal  from  every  side ! b  See,  they  call  them 
back  ! — but  for  fear  a  waving  toga  spoil  your  hair, 
come,  you  may  hide  your  head  in  the  folds  of  my 
cloak. 

77  "And  now  the  starting-chambers  are  unbarred 
again,  and  the  gates  are  open  wide  ;  the  many- 
coloured  rout  comes  flying  forth  with  reins  let  loose 
to  their  steeds.  This  time,  at  least,  get  past  them, 
and  bend  to  your  work  on  the  open  space  !  See 
that  you  fulfil  my  vows,  and  my  lady-love's  ! 

81  "  Fulfilled  are  my  lady-love's  vows,  but  my  vows 
remain.  Yon  charioteer  has  received  his  palm  ;  my 
palm  is  yet  to  be  won." 

83  She  smiled,  and  with  speaking  eyes  promised — 
I  know  not  what. 

84  "That  is  enough  for  here — in  some  other  place 
render  the  rest !  " 

6  The  dissatisfied  populace  could  thus  demand  a  fresh 
start. 


455 


OVID 


III 

Esse  deos,  i,  crede  * — fidem  iurata  fefellit, 

et  facies  illi,  quae  fuit  ante,  manet .' 
quam  longos  habuit  nondum  periura  capillos, 

tam  longos,  postquam  numina  laesit,  habet. 
Candida  candorem  roseo  suffusa  rubore  5 

ante  fuit — niveo  lucet  in  ore  rubor, 
pes  erat  exiguus — pedis  est  artissima  forma. 

longa  decensque  fuit — longa  decensque  manet. 
argutos  habuit — radiant  ut  sidus  ocelli, 

per  quos  mentita  est  perfida  saepe  mihi.  10 

scilicet  aeterno  falsum  iurare  puellis 

di  quoque,  concedunt,  formaque  nuraen  habet. 
perque  suos  illam  nuper  iurasse  recordor 

perque  meos  oculos  :  et  doluere  mei  ! 
Dicite,  di,  si  vos  inpune  fefellerat  ilia,  15 

alterius  meriti  cur  ego  damna  tuli  ? 
an  2  non  invidiae  vobis  Cepheia  virgo  est, 

pro  male  formosa  iussa  parente  mori  ? 
non  satis  est,  quod  vos  habui  sine  pondere  testis, 

et  mecum  lusos  ridet  inulta  deos  ?  20 

ut  sua  per  nostram  redimat  periuria  poenam, 

victima  deceptus  decipientis  ero  ? 
aut  sine  re  nomen  deus  est  frustraque  timetur 

et  stulta  populos  credulitate  movet ; 
aut,  siquis  deus  est,  teneras  amat  ille  puellas  25 

et  nimium  3  solas  omnia  posse  iubet. 

1  hie  crede  Ps  :  i,  crede  Hein. 

2  An  Riese  :  ad  P:  at  vulg. 

3  et  nimium  MSS:  Br.:  nimirum  Xem.;  et  mirum  Post. 

456 


THE   AMORES    III.  iii 


III 


Go,  believe  there  are  gods — she  swore  and  has 
failed  her  oath,  and  still  her  face  is  fair,  as 
'twas  before  !  She  has»  hair  as  Long  since  she  in- 
sulted the  gods,  as  she  had  still  un forsworn.  Be- 
fore, she  was  dazzling  fair,  and  her  fairness  was 
mingled  with  rosy  red' — the  rosy  red  still  glows  in 
her  snowy  cheeks.  Her  foot  was  small — her  foot 
is  still  of  daintiest  form.  She  was  tall  and  handsome 
— tall  and  handsome  she  remains.  She  had  sparkling 
eyes — like  stars  still  beam  the  eyes  by  which  she  has 
often  falsely  lied  to  me.  Surely,  the  gods,  too.  indulge 
the  fair  in  eternal  swearing  false,  and  beaut v  has  its 
privilege  divine.  By  her  own  eyes  not  long  ago 
she  swore,  I  mind  me,  and  by  mine — and  mine  have 
been  the  ones  to  smart ! 

15  Say,  O  ye  gods,  if  she  deceived  you  and  has 
gone  unpunished,  why  have  I  borne  the  pains  for 
another's  desert?  Or  is  Cepheus '.daughter  no  re- 
proach to  you — she  whom  you  hade  to  die  for  her 
mother's  ill-starred  beauty?"  Is  it  not  enough 
that  I  have  found  vour  witness  without  weight,  and 
that  unpunished  she  makes  the  gods  her  mirth  as 
well  as  me?  That  she  may  redeem  her  perjuries, 
am  1  to  suffer,  and,  though  deceived,  be  victim 
to  my  deceiver?  Either  God  is  a  name  without 
substance  and  feared  for  naught,  moving  peoples 
through  stupid  trustfulness,  or,  if  there  is  a  god, 
he  is  in  love  with  the  tender  fair,  and  too  quick  to 
ordain    that    they    a  lout     may   do    all    things.        'Tis 

a  Andromache  and  Cassiopeia. 

457 


OVID 

nobis  fatifero  Mavors  accingitur  ense  ; 

nos  petit  invicta  Palladis  hasta  manu. 
nobis  flexibiles  curvantur  Apollinis  arcus  ; 

in  nos  alta  Iovis  dextera  fulmen  habet.  30 

formosas  superi  metuunt  offendere  laesi 

atque  ultro,  quae  se  non  timuere,  timent. 
et  quisquam  pia  tura  focis  inponere  curat  ? 

certe  plus  animi  debet  inesse  viris  ! 
Iuppiter  igne  suo x  lucos  iaculatur  et  arces  35 

missaque  periuras  tela  ferire  vetat. 
tot  meruere  peti — Semele  miserabilis  arsit  ! 

officio  est  illi  poena  reperta  suo ; 
at  si  venturo  se  subduxisset  amanti, 

non  pater  in  Baccho  niatris  haberet  opus.  40 

Quid  queror  et  toto  facio  convicia  caelo  ? 

di  quoque  habent  oculos,  di  quoque  pectus  habent ! 
si  deus  ipse  forem,  numen  sine  fraude  liceret 

feniina  mendaci  falleret  ore  meum  ; 
ipse  ego  iurarem  veruni  iurare  puellas  45 

et  non  de  tetricis  dicerer  esse  deus. 
tu  tamen  illorum  moderatius  utere  dono — 

aut  oculis  certe  parce,  puella,  meis  ! 

IV 

Dure  vir,  inposito  tenerae  custode  puellae 
nil  agis  ;  ingenio  est  quaeque  tuenda  suo. 
1  suo  MSS.:  suos  Biese. 
a  Bacchus  was  born  from  the  thigh  of  Jove, 
458 


THE   AMORES    III.  iv 

against  us  men  that  Mars  girds  on  death-dealing 
sword ;  'tis  we  are  the  target  for  the  spear  from 
unconquered  Pallas'  hand.  For  us  are  bent  Apollo's 
flexile  bows  ;  on  us  descends  the  bolt  from  Jove's 
upraised  right  hand.  Fair  women  the  gods  on  high 
fear  to  offend  even  when  wronged,  and  stand  in 
awe  themselves  of  those  who  have  felt  no  awe  of 
them.  And  does  anyone  care  to  place  pious  incense 
on  their  altars  ?  Surely,  there  should  be  more 
courage  in  men  ! 

35  Jove  hurls  his  own  lightning  on  sacred  groves 
and  citadels,  and  forbids  his  bolts  to  strike  the  fair 
forsworn.  So  many  have  deserved  his  stroke — 
hapless  Semele  alone  has  burned  !  Her  own  com- 
plaisance brought  the  penalty  upon  her ;  yet,  had 
she  shunned  the  coming  lover,  the  father  would  not 
have  filled  the  mother's  office  in  Bacchus'  birth. a 

41  Why  complain  I,  and  scold  in  the  face  of  all 
heaven  ?  Gods,  too,  have  eyes,  gods,  too,  have 
hearts !  Were  I  myself  divine,  unharmed  might 
women  cheat  my  godhead  with  lying  lips.  I  myself 
would  swear  that  womankind  swore  true,  nor  let 
myself  be  called  a  god  of  the  austere  sort.  Yet 
you,  my  lady,  make  more  measured  use  of  their  gift 
— or  spare,  at  least,  my  eyes  !  b 


IV 

Hard  husband,  by  setting  a  keeper  over  your 
tender  wife  you  nothing  gain;  'tis  her  own  nature 
must  be  each  woman's  guard.      If  she  is  pure  when 

*  By  not  swearing  by  them  ;  see  v.  14. 

459 


OVID 

siqua  metu  dempto  casta  est,  ea  denique  casta  est ; 

quae,  quia  non  liceat,  non  facit,  ilia  facit  ! 
ut  iani  servaris  bene  corpus,  adultera  mens  est ;         5 

nee  custodiri,  ne  1  velit,  ulla  2  potest, 
nee  corpus  servare  potes,  licet  omnia  claudas ; 

omnibus  exclusis  irilus  adulter  erit. 
cui  peccare  licet,  peccat  minus  ;  ipsa  potestas 

semina  nequitiae  languidiora  facit.  10 

desine,  crede  mihi,  vitia  inritare  vetando ; 

obsequio  vinces  aptius  ilia  tuo. 
Vidi  ego  nuper  equum  contra  sua  vincla  tenacem 

ore  reluctanti  ful minis  ire  modo  ; 
constitit  ut  primum  concessas  sensit  habenas  15 

frenaque  in  effusa  laxa  iacere  iuba  ! 
nitimur  in  vetitum  semper  cupimusque  negata  ; 

sic  interdictis  imminet  aeger  aquis. 
centum  fronte  oculos,  centum  cervice  gerebat 

Argus — et  hos  unus  saepe  fefellit  Amor  ;  20 

in  thalamum  Danae  ferro  saxoque  perennem 

quae  fuerat  virgo  tradita,  mater  erat ; 
Penelope  mansit,  quamvis  custode  carebat, 

inter  tot  iuvenes  intemerata  procos. 
Quidquid  servatur  cupimus  magis,  ipsaque  furem     25 

cura  vocat  ;  pauci,  quod  sinit  alter,  amant. 
nee  facie  placet  ilia  sua,  sed  amore  mariti ; 

nescio  quid,  quod  te  ceperit,  esse  putant. 
non  proba  fit,  quam  vir  servat,  sed  adultera  cara  ; 

ipse  timor  pretium  corpore  maius  habet.  30 

indignere  licet,  iuvat  inconcessa  voluptas  ; 

sola  placet,  "  timeo  !  "  dicere  siqua  potest. 
1  ne  P:  ni  vulg.         2  ulla  Ps  :  ilia  wig. 
460 


THE    AMORES    III.  iv 

freed  from  even  fear,  then  first  is  she  pure;  she 
who  sins  not  because  she  may  not — she  sins  ! 
Grant  you  have  guarded  well  the  body,  tin-  mind 
is  untrue;  and  no  watch  can  be  set  o'er  a  woman's 
will.  Nor  can  you  guard  her  body,  though  you  shut 
every  door  ;  with  all  shut  out,  a  traitor  will  be  within. 
She  to  whom  erring  is  free,  errs  less;  very  power 
makes  less  quick  the  seeds  of  sin.  Ah,  trust  to 
me,  and  cease  to  spur  on  to  fault  by  forbidding  : 
indulgence  will  be  the  apter  way  to  win. 

13  But  recently  I  saw  a  horse  rebellious  againsl 
the  curb  take  bit  in  his  obstinate  mouth  and  career 
like  thunderbolt;  he  Stopped  the  very  moment  he 
felt  the  rein  was  given,  and  the  lines  were  lying  loose 
on  his  flying  mane  !  We  ever  strive  for  what  is 
forbid,  and  ever  covet  what  is  denied  ;  so  the  sick  man 
longingly  hangs  over  forbidden  water.  A  hundred 
eyes  before,  a  hundred  behind,  had  Argus — and 
these  Love  alone  did  oft  deceive;  the  chamber  of 
Danae  was  eternally  strong  with  iron  and  rock,  yet 
she  who  had  been  given  a  maid  to  its  keeping  be- 
came a  mother.  Penelope,  although  without  a  guard, 
remained  inviolate  among  SO  many  youthful  wooers. 

25  Whatever  is  guarded  we  desire  [he  more,  and 
care  itself  invites  the  thief ;  few  love  what  another 
concedes.  And  that  fair  one  of  yours  wins  not 
because  of  her  beauty,  but  because  of  her  husband's 
love  'y.  something  there  is,  they  think,  for  you  to 
be  smitten  with.  She  whom  her  husband  guards 
is  not  made  honest  thereby,  but  a  mistress  much 
desired;  fear  itself  gives  her  greater  price  than  her 
charms.  Re  wrathful  if  you  will,  'tis  forbidden 
joys  delight  ;  she  only  charms  whoe'er  can  say  :  "  I 
fear!"    And  vet  'tis   not    right    to  watch    a    free-born 

461 


OVID 

nee  tamen  ingenuam  ius  est  servare  puellam — 

hie  metus  externae  corpora  gentis  agat  ! 
scilicet  ut  possit  custos  "ego"  dicere  "feci,"  35 

in  laudem  servi  casta  sit  ilia  tui  ? 
Rusticus  est  nimium,  quern  laedit  adultera  coniunx, 

et  notos  mores  non  satis  urbis  habet 
in  qua  Martigenae  non  sunt  sine  crimine  nati 

Romulus  Iliades  Iliadesque  Remus.  40 

quo  tibi  formosam,  si  non  nisi  casta  plaeebat  ? 

non  possunt  ullis  ista  coire  modis. 
Si  sapis,  indulge  dominae  vultusque  severos 

exue,  nee  rigidi  iura  tuere  viri, 
et  cole  quos  dederit — multos  dabit — uxor  amicos.    45 

gratia  sic  minimo  magna  labore  venit ; 
sic  poteris  iuvenum  convivia  semper  inire 

et,  quae  non  dederis,  multa  videre  domi. 

Vi 

"  Nox  erat,  et  somnus  lassos  submisit  ocellos ; 

terruerunt  animum  talia  visa  meum : 
Colle  sub  aprico  creberrimus  ilice  lucus 

stabat,  et  in  ramis  multa  latebat  avis, 
area  gramineo  suberat  viridissima  prato,  5 

umida  de  guttis  lene  sonantis  aquae, 
ipse  sub  arboreis  vitabam  frondibus  aestum — 

fronde  sub  arborea  sed  tamen  aestus  erat — 
1  V  is  not  Ovid's,  Alerk.  L.  Mueller  :  it  is  in  Ps. 
462 


THE    A  MO  RES    III.   \ 

wife — let  this  fear  vex  women  of  other  blood  than 
ours  ! a  Is  your  wife,  forsooth,  to  be  chaste  merely 
that  her  keeper  may  say  :  "  I  am  the  cause  '' — merely 
for  the  glory  of  your  slave  ? 

37  He  is  too  countrified  who  is  hurt  when  his  wife 
plays  false,  and  is  but  slightly  acquaint  with  the 
manners  of  the  city  in  which  the  sons  of  Mars  were 
born  not  without  reproach — Romulus,  child  of  Ilia, 
and  Ilia's  child  Remus.  Why  did  you  marry  a 
beauty  if  none  but  a  chaste  would  suit  ?  Those 
two  things  can  never  in  any  wise  combine. 

43  If  you  are  wise,  indulge  your  lady ;  put  off 
stern  looks  and  do  not  insist  on  the  rights  of  a  rigid 
husband,  and  cherish  the  friends  your  wife  will 
bring — and  she  will  bring  many  !  You  will  be  in 
great  favour  thus,  and  with  very  little  effort  ;  thus 
will  you  find  yourself  ever  going  to  dine  with 
the  young,  and  at  home  see  many  presents  not  of 
your  giving. 


"'Twas  night,  and  slumber  weighed  my  weary 
eyelids  down — when  a  vision  terrified  my  soul. 
'Twas  on  this  wise  : 

3  "  At  the  foot  of  a  sunny  hill  was  a  grove  thick- 
standing  with  ilex,  and  in  its  branches  was  hidden 
many  a  bird.  Near  by  was  a  plot  of  deepest  green,  a 
grassy  mead,  humid  with  the  tricklings  of  gently 
sounding  water.  I  was  seeking  refuge  from  the 
heat  beneath  the  branches  of  the  trees — -though 
beneath  the  trees'  branches  came  none  the  less 
a  Slaves  ami  freedwomen. 

403 


OVID 

ecce  !  petens  variis  inmixtas  floribus  herbas 

constitit  ante  oculos  Candida  vacca  meos,  10 

candidior  nivibus,  tunc  cum  cecidere  recentes, 

in  liquidas  nondum  quas  mora  vertit  aquas  ; 
candidior,  quod  adbuc  spumis  stridentibus  albet 

et  modo  siceatam,  lacte,  reliquit  ovem. 
taurus  erat  comes  huic,  feliciter  ille  maritus,  15 

cumque  sua  teneram  coniuge  pressit  humum. 
Dura  iacet  et  lente  revocatas  ruminat  herbas 

atque  iterum  pasto  pascitur  ante  cibo, 
visus  erat,  somno  vires  adimente  ferendi,1 

cornigerum  terra  deposuisse  caput.  20 

hue  levibus  cornix  pinnis  delapsa  per  auras 

venit  et  in  viridi  garrula  sedit  humo, 
terque  bovis  niveae  petulanti  pectora  rostro 

fodit  et  albentis  abstulit  ore  iubas. 
ilia  locum  taurumque  diu  cunctata  relinquit —  25 

sed  niger  in  vaccae  pectore  livor  erat ; 
utque  procul  vidit  carpentes  pabula  tauros — 

carpebant  tauri  pabula  laeta  procul — 
illuc  se  rapuit  gregibusque  inmiscuit  illis 

et  petiit  herbae  fertilioris  humum.  30 

Die  age,  nocturnae,  quicumque  es,  imaginis  augur, 

siquid  habent  veri,  visa  quid  ista  ferant." 
Sic  ego  ;  nocturnae  sic  dixit  imaginis  augur, 

expendens  animo  singula  dicta  suo  : 
"  Quern  tu  mobilibus  foliis  vitare  volebas,  35 

sed  male  vitabas,  aestus  amoi-is  erat. 

1  ferendi  Bent.:  ferenti  Ps:  feraci  L.  Mutller. 
464 


THE   AMORES    III.  v 

the  heat — when  lo  !  coining  to  crop  the  herbage 
mingled  with  varied  flowers  there  stood  before  my 
eyes  a  shining  white  heifer,  more  shining  white 
than  snows  just  freshly  fallen  and  not  yet  turned 
by  time  to  flowing  waters ;  more  shining  white 
than  the  milk  that  gleams  with  still  hissing  foam, 
and  has  just  left  the  sheep  drained  dry.  A  bull  was 
companion  to  her,  a  happy  consort  he,  and  pressed 
the  tender  ground  beside  his  mate. 

17  «  While  he  lay  there,  slowly  chewing  the  grassy 
cud  that  rose  again,  and  feeding  a  second  time  on 
what  he  had  fed  on  before,  in  my  vision  I  thought 
that  sleep  took  away  his  power  of  holding  up  his 
head,  and  he  laid  its  horned  weight  upon  the  earth. 
Thither,  gliding  down  through  the  air,  on  pinions 
light,  came  a  crow,  and  settled  chattering  on  the 
verdant  ground,  and,  pecking  thrice  with  wanton 
beak  at  the  breast  of  the  snowy  heifer,  carried 
away  in  his  mouth  white  tufts  of  hair.  The  heifer, 
lingering  long,  went  away  from  the  place  and  from 
the  bull — but  a  darkly  livid  mark  was  on  her 
breast;  and,  seeing  bulls  afar  cropping  the  pastur- 
age— there  were  bulls  cropping  the  glad  pasturage 
afar — she  ran  quickly  thither  and  mingled  with 
those  herds,  choosing  the  ground  where  the  herbage 
was  more  lush. 

31  "  Come,  tell  me,  augur  of  visions  by  night,  who- 
e'er thou  art,  what  mean  those  things  I  saw,  if 
aught  they  hide  of  truth." 

:;:;  Thus  I  ;  and  thus  spake  the  augur  of  visions 
by  night,  weighing  in  mind  each  single  thing  I 
said  : 

35  "The  heat  you  wished  to  shun  beneatli  the 
fluttering  leaves,  and  shunned  but  ill,  was  the  heat 

465 
11    11 


OVID 

vacca  puella  tua  est — aptus  color  ille  puellae  ; 

tu  vir  et  in  vacca  conpare  taurus  eras, 
pectora  quod  rostro  cornix  fodiebat  acuto, 

ingenium  dominae  lena  movebat  anus.  40 

quod  cunctata  diu  taurum  sua  vacca  reliquit, 

frigidus  in  viduo  destituere  toro. 
iivor  et  adverso  maculae  sub  pectore  nigrae 

pectus  adulterii  labe  carere  negant." 
Dixerat  interpres.     gelido  mihi  sanguis  ab  ore         45 

fugit,  et  ante  oculos  nox  stetit  alta  meos. 

VI 

Amnis  harundinibus  limosas  obsite  ripas, 

ad  dominam  propero — siste  parumper  aquas  ! 
nee  tibi  sunt  pontes  nee  quae  sine  remigis  ictu 

concava  traiecto  cumba  rudente  vehat. 
parvus  eras,  memini,  nee  te  transire  refugi,  5 

summaque  vix  talos  contigit  unda  meos. 
nunc  ruis  adposito  nivibus  de  monte  solutis 

et  turpi  crassas  gurgite  volvis  aquas, 
quid  properasse  iuvat,  quid  parca  dedisse  quieti 

tempora,  quid  nocti  conseruisse  diem,  10 

si  tamen  hie  standum  est,  si  non  datur  artibus  ullis 

ultei'ior  nostro  ripa  premenda  pedi  ? 
nunc  ego,  quas  habuit  pinnas  Danaeius  heros, 

terribili  densum  cum  tulit  angue  caput, 
466 


THE    AMORES    III.  vi 

of  love.  The  heifer  was  your  love — that  colour 
matches  your  love.  You,  her  beloved,  were  the  bull 
with  the  heifer  for  mate.  The  pecking  of  her 
breast  by  the  crow's  sharp  beak  meant  a  pandering 
old  dame  was  meddling  with  your  mistress'  heart. 
The  lingering  long  e'er  the  heifer  left  her  bull 
was  sign  that  you  will  be  left  cold  in  a  deserted  bed. 
The  dark  colour  and  the  black  spots  on  her  breast 
in  front  were  signs  that  her  heart  is  not  without 
stain  of  unfaithfulness." 

45  The  interpreter  had  said.  I  was  cold  ;  the 
blood  fled  from  my  face,  and  before  my  eyes  stood 
deep  night. 


VI 

O  stream  whose  muddy  banks  are  choked  with 
reeds,  I  am  in  haste  to  see  my  lady-love — stay  for  a 
little  time  thy  waters  !  Neither  hast  thou  bridges, 
nor  hollowed  boat  to  carry  me  without  stroke  of 
oar  by  cable  stretched  across.  Small  wert  thou,  I 
remember,  nor  did  I  fear  to  cross,  and  thy  highest 
water  scarce  touched  my  ankles.  Now  the  snows 
have  melted  from  the  near-by  mountain,  and  thou 
art  rushing  on,  rolling  gross  waters  in  muddy, 
whirling  floods.  What  boots  it  I  have  hastened,  what 
that  I  gave  scant  hours  to  rest,  what  that  I  have 
linked  day  to  night,  if  I  yet  must  stand  here,  if 
by  no  art  I  may  press  with  my  foot  the  farther 
shore  ?  'Tis  now  I  wish  I  had  the  pinions  the  hero 
son  of  Danae  wore  when  he  bare  away  the  head 
thick-tressed  with  dreadful  snakes  ;a  now  I  wish 
a  Perseus,  slayer  of  the  Medusa,  with  winged  sandals. 

467 

H     H     2 


OVID 

nunc  opto  currum,  de  quo  Cerealia  primum  1 5 

semina  venerunt  in  rude  missa  solum. 
prbdigiosa  loquor  veterum  mendacia  vatum  ; 

nee  tulit  haec  umquam  nee  feret  ulla  dies. 
Tu  potius,  ripis  effuse  capacibus  amnis — 

sic  aeternus  eas — labere  fine  tuo  !  20 

non  eris  invidiae,  torrens,  mihi  crede,  ferendae, 

si  dicar  per  te  forte  retentus  amans. 
flumina  deberent  iuvenes  in  amore  iuvare  ; 

flumina  senserunt  i])sa,  quid  esset  amor. 
Inachus  in  Melie  Bithynide  pallidus  isse  25 

dicitur  et  gelidis  incaluisse  vadis. 
nondum  Troia  fuit  lustris  obsessa  duobus, 

cum  rapuit  vultus,  Xantlie,  Neaera  tuos. 
quid  ?     non  Alpheon  diversis  currere  terris 

virginis  Arcadiae  certus  adegit  amor  ?  30 

te  quoque  promissam  Xutho,  Penee,  Creusam 

Phthiotum  terris  occuluisse  ferunt. 
quid  referam  Asopon,  quern  cepit  Martia  Thebe, 

natarum  Thebe  quinque  futura  parens  ? 
cornua  si  tua  nunc  ubi  sint,  Acheloe,  requiram,        35 

Herculis  irata  fracta  querere  manu  ; 
nee  tanti  Calydon  nee  tota  Aetolia  tanti, 

una  tamen  tanti  Deianira  fuit. 
ille  fluens  dives  septena  per  ostia  Nilus, 

qui  patriam  tantae  tarn  bene  celat  aquae,  40 

fertur  in  Euanthe  collectam  Asopide  flammam 

vincere  gurgitibus  non  potuisse  suis. 
siccus  ut  amplecti  Salmonida  posset  Enipeus, 

cedere  iussit  aquam  ;  iussa  recessit  aqua. 

"  The  car  was  drawn  through  the  air  by  serpents. 
468 


THE   AMORES   III.  vi 

that  mine  were  the  car  from  which  first  came  the 
seeds  of  Ceres  when  cast  on  the  unfilled  ground. a 
But  the  wonders  whereof  I  speak  are  false  tales  of 
olden  bards  ;  no  day  e'er  brought  them  forth,  and 
no  day  will. 

19  Do  thou  choose  rather,  O  stream  poured  wide 
beyond  thy  capacious  banks — so  mayst  thou  flow  on 
for  ever — to  glide  within  thy  bounds  !  Thine,  O 
torrent,  will  be  hate  unbearable,  believe,  if  1  per- 
chance am  said  to  have  been  kept  by  thee — I,  a 
lover !  Rivers  ought  to  aid  young  men  in  love  ;  what 
love  is,  rivers  themselves  have  felt.  The  Inachus, 
they  say,  went  pale  for  Bithynian  Melie,  and  his 
chill  waves  felt  love's  warmth.  Not  yet  had  Troy 
been  under  siege  two  lustrums  when  Neaera  ravished 
thine  eyes,  O  Xanthus.  What  ?  did  not  Alpheus 
flow  in  far-separate  lands,  driven  by  faithful  love 
for  Arcadian  maid  ?  b  Thou,  too,  Peneus,  they  say 
didst  hide  away,  in  the  land  of  the  Phthiotes, 
Creusa,  promised  bride  to  Xuthus.  Why  call  to 
mind  Asopus,  smitten  with  Thebe,  child  of  Mars — 
Thebe,  destined  mother  of  daughters  five  ?  If  I 
ask  of  thee,  Achelous,  where  are  now  thy  horns, 
thou  wilt  complain  of  their  breaking  by  wrathful 
Hercules'  hand ;  what  neither  Calydon  could  win 
from  him,  nor  all  Aetolia,  Deianira  none  the  less 
alone  could  win.  Rich  Nile  yonder,  who  flows 
through  seven  mouths  and  hides  so  well  the  home- 
land of  his  mighty  waters,  'tis  said  could  not  drown 
out  with  his  own  floods  the  fires  Asopus'  child 
Euanthe  kindled  in  him.  Enipeus,  to  dry  himself 
for  the  arms  of  Salmoneus'  child,  bade  his  waters 
retire  ;  the  waters,  so  bid,  retired. 

*  Arethusa  was  pursued  from  Elis  to  Sicily,  under  the  sea. 

469 


OVID 

Nee  te  praetereo,  qui  per  cava  saxa  volutans  :  45 

Tiburis  Argei  pomifera  2  arva  rigas, 
Ilia  cui  placuit,  quamvis  erat  horrida  cultu, 

ungue  notata  comas,  ungue  notata  genas. 
ilia  gemens  patruique  nefas  delictaque  Martis 

errabat  nudo  per  loca  sola  pede.  50 

hanc  Anien  rapidis  animosus  vidit  ab  undis 

raucaque  de  mediis  sustulit  ora  vadis 
atque  ita  "  quid  nostras  "  dixit  "teris  anxia  ripas, 

Ilia,  ab  Idaeo  Laumedonte  genus  ? 
quo  cultus  abiere  tui  ?  quid  sola  vagaris,  55 

vitta  nee  evinctas  inpedit  alba  comas  ? 
quid  fles  et  madidos  lacrimis  corrumpis  ocellos 

pectoraque  insana  plangis  aperta  manu  ? 
ille  habet  et  silices  et  vivuni  in  pectore  ferrum, 

qui  tenero  lacrimas  lentus  in  ore  videt.  60 

Ilia,  pone  metus  !  tibi  regia  nostra  patebit, 

teque  colent  amnes.      Ilia,  pone  metus  ! 
tu  centum  aut  plures  inter  dominabere  nymphas  ; 

nam  centum  aut  plures  flumina  nostra  tenent. 
ne  me  sperne,  precor,  tantum,  Troiana8  propago ;    65 

munera  promissis  uberiora  feres." 
Dixerat.     ilia  oculos  in  humum  deiecta  modestos 

spargebat  teneros  flebilis  imbre  sinus, 
ter  molita  fugam  ter  ad  altas  restitit  undas, 

currendi  vires  ei'ipiente  metu.  70 

sera  tamen  scindens  inimico  pollice  crinem 

edidit  indignos  ore  tremente  sonos  : 

1  volutans  vuly.:  volutus  s. 

2  pomifera  Bent.:  ponifer  P  s  :  spumifer  vuly. 

3  Romana  P  s. 

"  Or  Rhea  Silvia,  mother  of  Romulus  and  Remus. 
470 


THE   AMORES    III.  vi 

45  Nor  do  I  pass  thee  by,  stream  tumbling  over 
the  hollowed  rocks  and  moisting  the  fruit-bearing 
acres  of  Argive  Tibur,  thee  whom  Ilia"  charmed,  ill 
kept  though  she  appeared,  with  hair  that  showed 
the  nail,  and  cheeks  that  showed  the  nail.  Be- 
moaning the  crime  of  her  uncle  and  the  wrongs  of 
Mars,  with  unshod  feet  she  wandered  through  lone 
places.  Her  did  eager  Anio  behold,  looking  forth 
from  his  sweeping  floods,  and  reared  from  amid 
the  wave  his  hoarse-toned  mouth,  and  "  Why  dost 
thou  anxiously,"  thus  spake  he,  "  tread  my  shores, 
O  Ilia,  blood  of  Idaean  Laomedon  ?  Whither  hath 
gone  thy  comely  raiment  ?  Why  art  abroad  alone, 
with  no  white  fillet  to  keep  thy  hair  bound  up  ? 
Why  art  thou  weeping,  and  staining  thine  eyes  with 
dropping  tears  ?  and  why  dost  lay  open  and  beat 
thy  breast  with  maddened  hand  ?  He  hath  both 
flint  and  native  uon  in  his  breast  who  can  look 
unmoved  on  the  tears  in  thy  tender  eyes.  Ilia,  lay 
aside  thy  fears !  To  thee  my  royal  hall  shall 
open,  and  thee  my  waves  shall  honour.  Ilia,  lav 
aside  thy  fears  !  Thou  shalt  be  mistress  among  a 
hundred  nymphs,  or  more  ;  for  a  hundred,  or  more, 
are  the  nymphs  that  dwell  in  my  stream.  Only 
spurn  me  not,  I  entreat,  thou  sprung  of  the  Trojan 
line ;  thou  shalt  win  gifts  of  greater  richness  than 
my  promise." 

67  He  had  said.  She  stood  with  modest  eyes 
downcast  upon  the  ground,  letting  spray  on  her 
tender  bosom  a  rain  of  tears.  Thrice  made  she 
to  flee,  and  thrice  stopped  she  beside  the  deep 
flood,  her  power  of  flying  swept  away  by  fear.  Yet, 
after  long  time,  rending  her  hair  with  unfriendly 
finger,  she  sounded  with  trembling  lips  the  words  her 

471 


OVID 

"  o  utinam  mea  lecta  forent  patrioque  sepulcro 

condita,  cum  poterant  virginis  ossa  legi  ! 
cur,  modo  Vestalis,  taedas  invitor  ad  ullas  75 

turpis  et  Iliacis  infitianda  focis  ? 
quid  moror  et  digitis  designor  adultera  vulgi  ? 

desint  famosus  quae  notet  ora  pudor  !  " 
Hactenus,  et  vestem  tumidis  praetendit  ocellis 

atque  ita  se  in  rapidas  perdita  misit  aquas.  80 

supposuisse  manus  ad  pectora  lubricus  amnis 

dicitur  et  socii  iura  dedisse  tori. 
Te  quoque  credibile  est  aliqua  caluisse  puella ; 

sed  nemora  et  silvae  crimina  vestra  tegunt. 
dum  loquor,  increvit 1  latis  spatiosior  2  undis,  85 

nee  eapit  admissas  alveus  altus  aquas, 
quid  mecum,  furiose,  tibi  ?     quid  mutua  differs 

gaudia  ?  quid  coeptum,  rustice,  rumpis  iter  ? 
quid  ?  si  legitimum  flueres,  si  nobile  rlumen, 

si  tibi  per  terras  maxima  fama  foret —  90 

nomen  habes  nullum,  rivis  collecte  caducis, 

nee  tibi  sunt  fontes  nee  tibi  certa  domus ! 
fontis  habes  instar  pluviamque  nivesque  solutas, 

quas  tibi  divitias  pigra  ministrat  hiemps  ; 
aut  lutulentus  agis  brumali  tempore  cursus,  95 

aut  premis  arentem  pulverulentus  humum. 
quis  te  turn  potuit  sitiens  haurire  viator  ? 

quis  dixit  grata  voce  "  perennis  eas  "  ? 

1  increscis  Ehiv. 

2  spatiosior  Bent.:  spatiosus  inPs:  spatiosius  Merk.  from 
Mar.  MS. 

a  Vesta's  fires,  brought  by  Aeneas  from  Trov. 
472 


THE  AMORES   III.  vi 

wrongs  called  forth  :  "  Oh,  would  that  my  bones  had 
been  gathered  and  laid  away  in  the  tomb  of  my 
fathers  when  they  yet  could  be  gathered  the  bones 
of  a  maid !  Why,  but  now  a  Vestal,  am  I  bid  to 
any  marriage-torch,  disgraced  and  to  be  denied  my 
place  at  Ilion's  altar-fires  ?  a  Why  tarry  I  alive  to 
be  pointed  out  a  jade  by  the  ringer  of  the  crowd  ? 
Perish  the  face  that  bears  the  brand  of  shame  and 
disrespect ! " 

79  Thus  far,  and  she  held  her  cloak  before  her 
tumid  eyes,  gave  up  all  hope,  and  so  threw  herself 
into  the  rushing  waters.  The  smooth-gliding  stream, 
they  say,  laid  his  hands  to  her  breast  and  bore  her 
up,  and  shared  with  her  the  rights  of  the  wedded 
couch. 

83  Thou,  too,  'tis  easy  to  believe,  hast  warmed 
for  some  fair  maid  ;  but  grove  and  forest  cover 
up  thy  fault.  Even  while  I  speak,  thy  waters  have 
grown  more  deep  and  wide,  and  thy  channel,  though 
deep,  contains  not  the  headlong  waves.  What  have 
I  with  thee,  mad  stream  ?  Why  dost  thou  defer 
the  joys  1  am  to  share  ?  Why  dost  thou,  churl, 
break  off  the  journey  I  have  begun  ?  What  ?  wert 
thou  called  rightly  stream,  wert  thou  a  river  of 
name,  were  thine  greatest  fame  o'er  all  the  earth  — 
but  thou  hast  no  name,  thou  art  but  gathered 
from  failing  rivulets,  and  hast  neither  fountain-source 
nor  fixed  abode  !  In  place  of  source  thou  hast  only 
the  rain  and  the  melted  snows,  riches  that  sluggish 
winter  serves  to  thee  ;  either  thou  runnest  a 
muddy  course  in  the  brumal  time,  or  hast  a  dried 
and  dusty  bed.  What  thirsty  fatcr  has  e'er  been 
able  then  to  drink  of  thee  ?  Who  in  grateful  tone 
has  said  of  thee :  "  Mayst  thou  flow  on  for  ever  ?  " 

473 


OVID 

damnosus  pecori  curris,  damnosior  agris. 

forsitan  haec  alios  ;  me  mea  damna  movent.       100 
Huie  ego,  vae  !  demens  narrabam  fluminum  amores  ! 

iactasse  indigne  nomina  tanta  pudet. 
nescio  quern  hunc  spectans  Acheloon  et  Inachon 
amnem 

et  potui  nomen,  Nile,  referre  tuum  ! 
at  tibi  pro  meritis,  opto,  non  candide  torrens,         105 

sint  rapidi  soles  siceaque  semper  hiemps  ! 


Villi 

Et  quisquam  ingenuas  etiamnunc  suspieit  artes, 

aut  tenerum  dotes  carmen  habere  putat  ? 
ingenium  quondam  fuerat  pretiosius  auro  ; 

at  nunc  barbaria  est  grandis,  habere  nihil, 
cum  pulchrae  dominae  nostri  placuere  libelli,  5 

quo  licuit  libris,  non  licet  ire  mihi ; 
cum  bene  laudavit,  laudato  ianua  clausa  est. 

turpiter  hue  illuc  ingeniosus  eo. 
Ecce,  recens  dives  parto  per  vulnera  censu 

praefertur  nobis  sanguine  pastus  eques  !  10 

hunc  potes  amplecti  formosis,  vita,  lacertis  ? 

huius  in  amplexu,  vita,  iacere  potes  ? 
si  nescis,  caput  hoc  galeam  portare  solebat ; 

ense  latus  cinctum,  quod  tibi  servit,  erat ; 
1  For  VII  see  p.  506. 

"  The  soldier  had  recently  been  enrolled  an  eques.     Ovid's 
474 


THE   AMORES    III.  viii 

Thou  art  a  current  harmful  to  the  flocks,  more 
harmful  to  the  fields.  These  wrongs  perhaps  touch 
others ;  me  my  own  wrongs  touch. 

101  To  a  stream  like  this — out  upon  it  ! — I  was 
fool  enough  to  tell  of  the  loves  of  rivers  !  I  shame 
to  have  uttered  unworthily  names  so  great.  To 
think  that, •  looking  on  this  nothing  of  a  stream,  1 
could  mention  your  names,  Aehelous  and  Inachus, 
and  thine,  O  Nile !  Indeed,  for  thee,  as  thou 
deservest,  O  torrent  aught  but  clear,  I  pray  that 
suns  be  ever  fierce  and  winter  ever  dry  ! 


VIII 

And  does  anyone  still  respect  the  freeborn  arts, 
or  deem  tender  verse  brings  any  dower  ?  Time  was 
when  genius  was  more  precious  than  gold  ;  but  now 
to  have  nothing  is  monstrous  barbarism.  When  my 
little  books  have  won  my  lady,  where  my  books 
could  go,  I  may  not  go  myself;  when  she  has  praised 
me  heartily,  to  him  she  has  praised  the  door  is  closed. 
Disgracefully  hither  and  thither  I  go,  for  all  my 
pod's  gift. 

9  Look  you,  a  newly-rich,  a  knight a  fed  fat  on 
blood,  who  won  his  rating  by  dealing  wounds,  is 
preferred  to  me  !  A  being  like  that  can  you,  my  life, 
embrace  with  your  beautiful  arms  ?  In  such  a  one's 
embrace,  my  life,  can  you  let  yourself  be  clasped  ?  If 
you  do  not  know,  that  head  used  to  wear  a  helmet ; 
a  sword  was  girt  to  the  side  that  now  serves  you  ; 

own  family  had  the  same  rank,  but  it  was  of  long 
standing.  Birth  or  the  possession  of  about  £3,200  deter- 
mined it. 

475 


OVID 

laeva    manus,     cui     nunc    serum    male    convenit 

aurum,  1 5 

scuta  tulit ;  dextram  tange — cruenta  fuit ! 
qua  periit  aliquis,  potes  hanc  contingere  dextram  ? 

heu,  ubi  mollities  pectoris  ilia  tui  ? 
cerne  cicatrices,  veteris  vestigia  pugnae — 

quaesitum  est  illi  eorpore,  quidquid  habet.  20 

forsitan  et,  quotiens  hominem  iugulaverit,  ille 

indicet !  hoc  fassas  tangis,  avara,  manus  ? 
ille  ego  Musarum  purus  Phoebique  sacerdos 

ad  rigidas  canto  carmen  inane  fores  ? 
discite,  qui  sapitis,  non  quae  nos  scimus  inertes,       25 

sed  trepidas  acies  et  fera  castra  sequi 
proque  bono  versu  primum  deducite  pilum  ! 

hoc  tibi,  si  velles,  posset,  Homere,  dari. 
Iuppiter,  admonitus  nihil  esse  potentius  auro, 

corruptae  pretium  virginis  ipse  fuit.  30 

dum  merces  aberat,  durus  pater,  ipsa  severa, 

aerati  postes,  ferrea  turris  erat ; 
sed  postquam  sapiens  in  munera  venit  adulter, 

praebuit  ipsa  sinus  et  dare  iussa  dedit. 
at  cum  regna  senex  caeli  Saturnus  haberet,  35 

omne  lucrum  tenebris  alta  premebat  humus, 
aeraque  et  argentum  cumque  auro  pondera  ferri 

manibus  admorat,  nullaque  massa  fuit. 
at  meliora  dabat — curvo  sine  vomere  fruges 

pomaque  et  in  quercu  mella  reperta  cava.  40 

"  The  badge  of  an  eques.  b  Danae. 

476 


THE    AMORES    III.  viii 

that  left  hand,  which  now  the  late-gotten  gold 
ring  so  ill  becomes/'  has  carried  a  shield  ;  that 
right  hand — touch  it ! — has  been  stained  with  blood. 
The  hand  by  which  someone  has  died — can  you 
touch  that  right  hand  ?  Alas  !  where  is  the  ten- 
derness of  heart  you  had  ?  Look  at  those  scars, 
marks  of  the  bygone  fight — that  man  has  earned 
with  his  body  whatever  he  has.  Perhaps  he  could 
even  tell  you  how  many  times  he  has  plunged  the 
steel  in  a  human  throat.  Do  you  touch,  greedy 
girl,  hands  that  tell  such  tales  ?  and  do  1,  the 
unstained  priest  of  Phoebus  and  the  Muses,  sing 
verses  all  in  vain  before  your  unyielding  doors  ? 
Ah,  ve  who  are  wise,  learn  not  what  we  know,  we 
sluggards,  but  to  follow  battle's  alarms  and  the 
fierce  tented  field,  and  marshall,  in  place  of  good 
verse,  the  foremost  spears  !  This,  Homer,  had  been 
thy  fortune,  didst  thou  wish. 

29  Jove,  knowing  well  that  naught  was  more 
potent  than  gold,  himself  became  the  price  of  a 
maid's  betrayal.6  So  long  as  there  was  no  gain  to 
get,  hard  was  the  father,  the  maid  herself  severe, 
brazen  the  door,  and  iron  the  tower ;  yet  when 
the  astute  lover  had  come  in  the  form  of  ;i  price, 
the  maid  herself  opened  her  arms  and  gave  her 
favours  at  command.  But  when  ancient  Saturn  had 
his  kingdom  in  the  sky,  the  deep  earth  held  lucre 
all  in  its  dark  embrace.  Copper  and  silver  and  gold 
and  heavy  iron  he  had  hid  away  in  the  lower  realms, 
and  there  was  no  massy  metal.  Yet  better  were 
his  gifts — increase  without  the  curved  share,  and 
fruits  and  honeys  brought  to  light  from  the  hollow 
oak.  And  no  one  broke  the  glebe  with  the  strong 
share,    no  measurer  marked    the  limit    of   the    soil, 

477 


OVID 

nee  valido  quisquam  terrain  scindebat l  aratro, 

signabat  nullo  limite  mensor  humum, 
non  freta  demisso  verrebant  eruta  remo  ; 

ultima  mortali  turn  via  litus  erat. 
Contra  te  sollers,  hominum  natura,  fuisti  45 

et  nirnium  damnis  ingeniosa  tuis. 
quo  tibij  turritis  incingere  moenibus  urbes  ? 

quo  tibij  discordes  addere  in  arma  manus  ? 
quid  tibi  cum  pelago — terra  contenta  fuisses  ! 

cur  non  et  caelum,  tertia  regna,  petis  ?  50 

qua     licet,     adfectas     caelum     quoque — templa 
Quirinus, 

Liber  et  Alcides  et  modo  Caesar  habent. 
eruimus  terra  solidum  pro  frugibus  aurum. 

possidet  inventas  sanguine  miles  opes, 
curia  pauperibus  clausa  est — dat  census  honores  ;    55 

inde  gravis  iudex,  inde  severus  eques ! 
Omnia  possideant ;  illis  Campusque  forumque 

serviat,  hi  pacem  crudaque  bella  gerant — 
tantum  ne  nostros  avidi  liceantur  amores, 

et — satis  est — aliquid  pauperis  esse  sinant !  60 

at  nunc,  exaequet  tetricas  licet  ilia  Sabinas, 

imperat  ut  captae  qui  dare  multa  potest  ; 
me  prohibet  custos,  in  me  timet  ilia  maritum. 

si  dederim,  tota  cedet  uterque  domo  ! 
o  si  neclecti  quisquam  deus  ultor  amantis  65 

tarn  male  quaesitas  pulvere  mutet  opes  ! 

1  findebat  vulg. 


473 


THE    AMORES    III.  viii 

they  did  not  sweep  the  seas,  stirring  the  waters  with 
dipping  oar  ;  the  shore  in  those  days  was  the  utmost 
path  for  man. 

45  Thine  own  genius,  O  human  kind,  hath  been 
thy  foe,  and  thy  wit  o'er  great  to  thine  own  undoing. 
What  boots  it  thee  to  girdle  cities  with  towered  walls  ? 
What  boots  it  to  place  the  weapon  in  hands  at 
strife  ?  What  was  the  sea  to  thee — with  the  land 
thou  shouldst  have  been  content  !  Why  dost  not 
aspire  to  the  skies,  too,  for  a  third  dominion  ? 
Where  thou  mayst,  thou  dost  pretend  to  the  skies 
as  well — Quirinus  has  his  temple,  and  Liber,  and 
Alcides,  and  Caesar  now.  We  draw  from  the  earth, 
instead  of  increase,  the  massy  gold.  The  soldier 
possesses  wealth  begotten  of  his  blood.  The  senate 
is  closed  to  the  poor — -'tis  rating  brings  office  ;  'tis 
that  gives  the  juror  weight,  'tis  that  makes  a 
pattern  of  the  knight ! 

57  Let  them  have  all ;  let  these  have  Campus  and 
Forum  slaves  to  them,  and  those  rule  the  issues 
of  peace  and  bloody  war — only  let  them  not  in 
their  greed  buy  away  our  loves,  and  let  them  leave 
something — 'tis  enough — for  the  poor  to  win  ! 
But  now,  though  she  I  love  match  the  austere 
Sabine  dames,  he  who  has  much  to  give  commands 
her  as  if  a  captive ;  while  I — am  denied  by  her 
guard  ;  when  it  comes  to  me,  she  fears  her  husband. 
If  I  chance  to  have  given,  both  guard  and  husband 
will  leave  me  the  whole  house  free  !  O  were  there 
only  some  god  to  avenge  the  neglected  lover,  and 
change  to  dust  gains  so  ill-got. 


479 


OVID 


IX 


Memnona  si  mater,  mater  ploravit  Aehillerm 

et  tangunt  magnas  tristia  fata  deas, 
flebilis  indignos,  Elegeia,  solve  capillos  ! 

a,  nimis  ex  vero  nunc  tibi  nomen  erit ! — 
ille  tui  vates  operis,  tua  fama,  Tibullus  5 

ardet  in  extructo,  corpus  inane,  rogo. 
ecce,  puer  Veneris  fert  eversamque  pharetram 

et  fractos  arcus  et  sine  luce  facem  ; 
adspice,  demissis  ut  eat  miserabilis  alis 

pectoraque  infesta  tundat  aperta  manu  !  10 

excipiunt  lacrimas  sparsi  per  colla  capilli, 

oraque  singultu  eoncutiente  sonant, 
fratris  in  Aeneae  sic  ilium  funere  dicunt 

egressum  tectis,  pulcher  lule,  tuis ; 
nee  minus  est  confusa  Venus  moriente  Tibullo,        15 

quam  iuveni  rupit  cum  ferus  inguen  aper. 
at  sacri  vates  et  divum  cura  vocamur  ; 

sunt  etiam  qui  nos  numen  habere  putent. 
Scilicet  omne  sacrum  mors  inportuna  profanat, 

omnibus  obscuras  inicit  ilia  manus  !  -0 

quid  pater  Ismario,  quid  mater  profuit  Orpheo  ? 

carmine  quid  victas  obstipuisse  feras  ? 
et  Linon  l  in  silvis  idem  pater  "  aelinon  !  "  altis 

djcitur  invita  concinuisse  lyra. 
adice  Maeoniden,  a  quo  ceu  fonte  perenni  25 

vatum  Pieriis  ora  rigantur  aquis — 

1  So  Ehw.:  aelinon — aelinon  vulg. 


Apollo  and  the  Muse  Calliope. 

"  Woe,  Linus,"  a  dirge.         c  Homer. 


480 


THE    AMORES    III.  ix 


IX 


If  Memnon  was  bewailed  by  his  mother,  if  a 
mother  bewailed  Achilles,  and  if  sad  fates  are 
touching  to  great  goddesses,  be  thou  in  tears, 
O  Elegy,  and  loose  thine  undeserving  hair  !  Ah, 
all  too  truthful  now  will  be  thy  name  ! — he,  that 
singer  of  thy  strain,  that  glory  of  thine,  Tibullus, 
lies  burning  on  the  high-reared  pyre,  an  empty 
mortal  frame.  See,  the  child  of  Venus  comes,  with 
quiver  reversed,  with  bows  broken,  and  lightless 
torch  ;  look,  how  pitiable  he  comes,  with  drooping 
wings,  how  he  beats  his  bared  breast  with  hostile 
hand !  His  tears  are  caught  by  the  locks  hanging 
scattered  about  his  neck,  and  from  his  lips  comes 
the  sound  of  shaking  sobs.  In  such  plight,  they 
say,  he  was  at  Aeneas  his  brother's  laying  away, 
when  he  came  forth  of  thy  dwelling,  fair  lulus  ;  nor 
was  Venus'  heart  less  wrought  when  Tibullus  died 
than  when  the  fierce  boar  crushed  the  groin  of  the 
youth  she  loved.  Yes,  we  bards  are  called  sacred, 
and  the  care  of  the  gods  ;  there  are  those  who  even 
think  we  have  the  god  within. 

19  Too  true  it  is,  death  rudely  profaneth  every 
sacred  thing,  and  layeth  darksome  hands  on  all  ! 
Of  what  avail  to  Ismarian  Orpheus  was  his  sire,  of 
what  avail  his  mother  ? a  Of  what  that  the  wild 
beast  stopped  in  amaze,  o'ermastered  by  his  song? 
The  same  sire,  'tis  said,  mourned  Linus,  too,  singing 
"aelinon  !  "  b  in  the  deep  wood  to  unresponsive  lyre. 
Add  to  these  Maeonia's  child,c  from  whom  as  from 
fount  perennial  the  lips  of  bards  are  bedewed  with 
Pierian  waters — him,  too,  a  final  day  submerged  in 

481 


OVID 

hunc  quoque  summa  dies  nigro  submersit  Averno. 

defugiunt x  avidos  carmina  sola  rogos  ; 
durat  opus  vatum,  Troiani  fama  laboris 

tardaque  nocturno  tela  retexta  dolo.  30 

sic  Nemesis  longum,  sic  Delia  nomen  habebunt, 

altera  cura  recens,  altera  primus  amor. 
Quid  vos  sacra  iuvant  ?  quid  nunc  Aegyptia  prosunt 

sistra  ?  quid  in  vacuo  secubuisse  toro  ? 
cum  rapiunt  mala  fata  bonos — ignoscite  fasso  ! —     35 

sollicitor  nullos  esse  putare  deos. 
vive  pius — moriere  ;  pius  cole  sacra — colentem 

mors  gravis  a  templis  in  cava  busta  trahet  ; 
carminibus  confide  bonis — iacet,  ecce,  Tibullus  : 

vix  manet  e  toto,  parva  quod  urna  capit !  40 

tene,  sacer  vates,  flammae  rapuere  rogales 

pectoribus  pasci  nee  timuere  tuis  ? 
aurea  sanctorum  potuissent  templa  deorum 

arere,  quae  tantum  sustinuere  nefas  ! 
avertit  vultus,  Erycis  quae  possidet  arce"s  ;  45 

sunt  quoque,  qui  lacrimas  continuisse  negant. 
Sed  tamen  hoc  melius,  quam  si  Phaeacia  tellus 

ignotum  vili  supposuisset  humo. 
hinc  certe  madidos  fugientis  pressit  ocellos 

mater  et  in  cineres  ultima  dona  tulit ;  50 

hinc  soror  in  partem  misera  cum  matre  doloris 

venit  inornatas  dilaniata  comas, 

1  defugiunt  J.  C.  J  aim  from  two  MSS.:  diffugiunt  vulg. 

a  Tibullus,  in  i.  3,  23-26,  refers  to  Delia's  devotion  to  Isis. 
The  sistrum  was  an  Egyptian  musical  instrument  used  in  her 
worship. 

482 


THE    AMORES    III.  ix 

black  Avernus.  'Tis  song  alone  escapes  the  greedy 
pyre.  The  work  of  bards — the  renown  of  the  toils 
of  Troy,  and  the  tardy  web  unwoven  with  nightly 
wile — endures  for  aye.  So  Nemesis,  so  Delia,  will 
long  be  known  to  fame,  the  one  a  recent  passion, 
the  other  his  first  love. 

33  What  boot  your  sacrifices  ?  What  now  avail 
the  sistrums  of  Egypt  ?  a  What  your  repose  apart  in 
faithful  beds  ?  When  evil  fate  sweeps  away  the 
good — forgive  me  who  say  it ! — I  am  tempted  to 
think  there  are  no  gods.  Live  the  duteous  life — 
you  will  die  ;  be  faithful  in  your  worship — in  the 
very  act  of  worship  heavy  death  will  drag  you  from 
the  temple  to  the  hollow  tomb  ;  put  your  trust  in 
beautiful  song — behold,  Tibullus  lies  dead  :  from 
his  whole  self  there  scarce  remains  what  the  slight 
urn  receives !  Is  it  really  thee,  thou  consecrated 
bard,  whom  the  flames  of  the  pyre  have  seized, 
and  is  it  thy  breast  they  have  not  feared  to  feed 
upon  ?  Flames  that  shrank  not  from  such  awful 
wrong  could  have  burned  the  golden  temples  of  the 
blessed  gods  !  She  turned  her  face  away  who  holds 
the  heights  of  Eryx  ;  some,  too,  there  are  who  say 
she  kept  not  back  the  tear. 

47  And  yet,  'tis  better  so  than  if  Phaeacian  land  b 
had  laid  mean  soil  o'er  thy  nameless  corse.  To 
this  'tis  due  that  at  least  thy  mother  closed  thy 
swimming  eyes  as  thou  didst  pass  from  life,  and 
bestowed  on  thy  ashes  the  final  boon  ;  to  this  'tis  due 
that  thy  sister  came,  with  hair  disordered  and  torn, 
to   share  the  poor  mother's  grief,  and  Nemesis,  and 

6  Corcyra,  where  Tibullus  had  once  been  dangerously  ill. 
In  i.  3,  3-10,  composed  at  the  time,  he  prays  to  be  spared 
from  death  away  from  his  mother,  sister,  and  Delia. 

483 
1  1  2 


OVID 

cumque  tuis  sua  iunxerunt  Nemesisque  priorque 

oseula  nee  solos  destituere  rogos. 
Delia  deseendens  "felicius"  inquit  "amata  55 

sum  tibi ;  vixisti,  dum  tuus  ignis  eram." 
cui  Nemesis  "quid"  ait  "tibi  sunt  mea  damna 
dolori  ? 

me  tenuit  moriens  deficiente  manu." 
Si  tamen  e  nobis  aliquid  nisi  nomen  et  umbra 

restat,  in  Elysia  valle  Tibullus  erit.  60 

obvius  huic  venias  hedera  iuvenalia  cinctus 

tempora  cum  Calvo,  docte  Catulle,  tuo  ; 
tu  quoque,  si  falsum  est  temerati  crimen  amici, 

sanguinis  atque  animae  prodige  Galle  tuae, 
his  comes  umbra  tua  est ;  siqua  est  modo  corporis 
umbra,  65 

auxisti  numeros,  culte  Tibulle,  pios. 
ossa  quieta,  precor,  tuta  requiescite  in  urna, 

et  sit  humus  cineri  non  onerosa  tuo  ! 


Annua  venerunt  Cerealis  tempora  sacri ; 

secubat  in  vacuo  sola  puella  toro. 
flava  Ceres,  tenues  spicis  redimita  capillos, 

cur  inhibes  sacris  commoda  nostra  tuis  ? 
Te,  dea,  munifieam  gentes  ubiquaque  loquuntur, 

nee  minus  humanis  invidet  ulla  bonis, 
ante  nee  hirsuti  torrebant  farra  coloni, 

nee  notum  terris  area  nomen  erat, 


484 


THE    AMORES    III.  x 

her  thou  lovedst  before,  added  their  kisses  to  those 
from  thine  own  kin,  and  left  not  desolate  thy  pyre. 
"  More  happily,"  spake  Delia,  descending  from  the 
pyre,  "  was  I  beloved  by  thee  ;  thou  wert  living  as 
long  as  I  kindled  thee."  To  whom  Nemesis,  "  Why," 
said  she,  "  do  you  mourn  for  a  loss  which  is  mine  ? 
'Twas  I  to  whom  he  clung  when  his  hand  failed 
in  death." 

59  Yet,  if  aught  survives  from  us  beyond  mere 
name  and  shade,  in  the  vale  of  Elysium  Tibullus  will 
abide.  Mayst  thou  come  to  meet  him,  thy  youthful 
temples  encircled  with  the  ivy,  and  thy  Calvus  with 
thee,  learned  Catullus  ;  thou  too,  if  the  charge  be 
false  thou  didst  wrong  thy  friend,  O  Gallus  lavish  of 
thy  blood  and  of  thy  soul.  To  these  is  thy  shade 
comrade  ;  if  shade  there  be  that  survives  the  body, 
thou  hast  increased  the  number  of  the  blest,  re- 
fined Tibullus.  O  bones,  rest  quiet  in  protecting 
urn,  1  pray,  and  may  the  earth  weigh  light  upon 
thine  ashes ! 


X 

The  time  for  Ceres'  yearly  festival  is  come  ;  my 
love  isin  retreat,  and  rests  alone/'  O  golden  Ceres, 
thy  delicate  tresses  crowned  with  ears  of  wheat,  why 
dost  thou  with  thy  festival  put  ban  upon  our  joys  ? 

5  Thee,  goddess,  do  people  everywhere  call  giver 
of  gifts,  nor  is  there  goddess  less  envies  men  their 
blessings.  Before  thee,  neither  did  shaggy  country- 
man parch  the  corn,  nor  known  upon  the  earth 
was  the  name   of  threshing-floor,  but  the  oak,  first 

"  The  festival  was  in  August,  and  accompanied  by  fasting 
and  other  abstinence. 

485 


OVID 

sed  glandem  quercus,  oracula  prima,  ferebant ; 

haec  erat  et  teneri  caespitis  herba  cibus.  10 

prima  Ceres  doeuit  turgescere  semen  in  agris 

falce  coloratas  subsecuitque  comas  ; 
prima  iugis  tauros  supponere  colla  coegit, 

et  veterem  curvo  dente  revellit  humum. 
Hanc  quisquam  lacrimis  laetari  credit  amantum       15 

et  bene  tormentis  secubituque  coli  ? 
nee  tamen  est,  quamvis  agros  amet  ilia  feraces, 

rustica  nee  viduum  pectus  amoris  habet. 
Cretes  erunt  testes— nee  fingunt  omnia  Cretes. 

Crete  nutrito  terra  superba  love.  20 

illic,  sideream  mundi  qui  temperat  arcem, 

exiguus  tenero  lac  bibit  ore  puer. 
Magna  fides  testi  :  testis  laudatur  alumno. 

fassuram  Cererem  ci'imina  nostra  puto. 
viderat  Iasium  Cretaea  diva  sub  Ida  25 

figentem  certa  terga  ferina  raanu. 
vidit,  et  ut  tenerae  flammam  rapuere  medullae, 

hinc  pudor,  ex  ilia  parte  trahebat  amor, 
victus  amore  pudor ;  sulcos  arere  videres 

et  sata  cum  minima  parte  redire  sui.  30 

cum  bene  iactati  pulsarant  arva  ligones, 

ruperat  et  duram  vomer  aduncus  humum, 
seminaque  in  latos  ierant  aequaliter  agros, 

inrita  decepti  vota  colentis  erant. 
diva  potens  frugum  silvis  cessabat  in  altis  ;  35 

deciderant  longae  spicea  serta  comae, 
sola  fuit  Crete  fecundo  fertilis  anno  ; 

omnia,  qua  tulerat  se  dea,  messis  erat  ; 

a  At  the  primeval  shrine  of  Jove  at  Dodona  were  oaks  whose 
rustling  was  oracular.       *  Cf.  Titus,  i.  12,  K^res  ael  \\nvaral. 

486 


THE   AMORES    III.  x 

of  our  oracles/  brought  forth  the  acorn  ;  this,  and 
the  herb  that  sprang-  from  the  tender  turf,  were  his 
food.  'Twas  Ceres  first  taught  the  seed  to  swell 
in  the  fields,  and  cut  with  sickle  the  coloured  locks 
of  the  corn ;  'twas  she  first  made  the  steer  bend 
neck  to  the  yoke,  and  turned  with  the  share's  curved 
tooth  the  ancient  mould. 

15  Does  any  think  this  a  goddess  to  joy  in  the 
tears  of  lovers,  and  to  see  fit  worship  in  the  torments 
of  lying  apart  ?  However  much  she  loves  her  fruitful 
fields,  she  is  yet  no  simple  rustic,  nor  has  heart  void 
of  love.  The  Cretans  will  be  my  witness — and  the 
Cretans  are  not  wholly  false.6  Crete  is  the  land 
proud  of  the  nurture  of  Jove.  'Twas  there  that  he 
who  sways  the  starry  heights  of  the  world  drank 
in  the  milk  with  the  tender  mouth  of  a  little  child. 

23  We  have  great  faith  in  their  witness — witness 
approved  by  their  foster-son.  Ceres  herself,  I  think, 
will  own  to  my  impeachment.  Under  Cretan  Ida 
the  goddess  had  seen  Iasius  with  sure  hand  piercing 
the  wild  beast's  side.  She  looked  on  him,  and  when 
her  tender  heart  had  caught  the  fire,  she  was  victim 
now  of  shame,  and  now  again  of  love.  Her  shame 
was  overcome  by  love  ;  you  might  see  the  furrows 
of  the  field  grown  dry  and  the  sown  grain  return- 
ing with  scantest  part  of  itself.  When  the  well- 
wielded  mattock  had  wrought  upon  the  acre,  and 
the  hooked  share  had  broken  the  dour  glebe,  and 
the  seed  had  gone  forth*  equal  over  the  broad 
plowed  fields,  the  deluded  husbandman  had  vowed 
in  vain.  The  goddess  potent  over  increase  dallied 
in  the  deep  woods;  fallen  from  her  long  tresses 
were  the  woven  spikes  of  corn.  Crete  only  was 
fruitful    with    fecund    year ;    wherever  the    goddess 

487 


OVID 

ipse1  locus  nemorum,  canebat  frugibus  Ide,2 

et  ferus  in  silva  farra  metebat  aper.  40 

optavit  Minos  similes  sibi  legifer  annos, 

optavit,  Cereris  longus  ut  esset  amor. 
Quod  tibi  secubitus  tristes,  dea  flava,  fuissent, 

hoc  cogor  sacris  nunc  ego  ferre  tuis  ? 
cur  ego  sim  tristis,  cum  sit  tibi  nata  reperta  45 

regnaque  quam  Iuno  sorte  minore  regat  ? 
festa  dies  Veneremque  vocat  cantusque  merumque  ; 

haec  decet  ad  dominos  munera  ferre  deos. 

XI  a 

Multa  diuque  tuli ;  vitiis  patientia  victa  est ; 

cede  fatigato  pectore,  turpis  amor  ! 
scilicet  adserui  iam  me  fugique  catenas, 

et  quae  non  puduit  ferre,  tulisse  pudet. 
vicimus  et  domitum  pedibus  calcamus  amorem ;         5 

venerunt  capiti  cornua  sera  meo. 
perfer  et  obdura  !  3  dolor  hie  tibi  proderit  olim  ; 

saepe  tulit  lassis  sucus  amarus  opem. 
Ergo  ego  sustinui,  foribus  tarn  saepe  repulsus, 

ingenuum  dura  ponerS  corpus  humo  ?  10 

ergo  ego  nescio  cui,  quern  tu  conplexa  tenebas, 

excubui  clausam  servus  ut  ante  domum  ? 

1  ipsa  Ntm.         2  Ide  vulg.:  Idae  P. 
3  So  vulg.:  perferre  obdura,  P1  Merk. 

488 


THE   AMORES    III.  xi 

had  bent  her  step,  all  was  rich  with  the  garner  ; 
Ida,  the  very  home  of  forests,  was  white  with 
harvest,  and  the  wild  boar  reaped  the  grain  in  the 
woodland.  Minos,  giver  of  laws,  wished  for  seasons 
ever  like  this,  wished  that  Ceres'  love  might  long 
endure. 

43  Because  lying  apart  was  sad  for  thee,  O  golden 
Goddess,  must  I  now  suffer  thus  on  thy  holy  day  ? 
Why  must  I  be  sad,  when  for  thee  thy  daughter 
is  found,"1  and  reigns  o'er  realms  of  lesser  state  than 
only  Juno's  ?  A  festal  day  calls  for  love,  and  songs, 
and  wine  ;  these  are  the  gifts  that  are  fitly  tendered 
the  gods  our  masters. 


XI  a 

Much  have  I  endured,  and  for  long  time ;  my 
wrongs  have  overcome  my  patience  ;  withdraw  from 
my  tired-out  breast,  base  love !  Surely,  now  I 
have  claimed  my  freedom,  and  fled  my  fetters, 
ashamed  of  having  borne  what  I  felt  no  shame  while 
bearing.  Victory  is  mine,  and  I  tread  under  foot  my 
conquered  love  ;  coui'age  has  entered  my  heart, 
though  late.  Persist,  and  endui'e  !  this  smart  will 
some  day  bring  thee  good  ;  oft  has  bitter  potion 
brought  help  to  the  languishing. 

0  Can  it  be  1«  have  endured  it — to  be  so  oft 
repulsed  from  your  doors,  and  to  lay  my  body  down, 
a  free  born  man,  on  the  hard  ground  ?  Can  it  be 
that,  for  some  no  one  you  held  in  your  embrace, 
I  have  lain,  like  a  slave  keeping  vigil,  befoi'e  your 
tight-closed  home  ?  I  have  seen  when  the  lover 
"  Proserpina. 

489 


OVID 

vidi,  cum  foribus  lassus  prodiret  amator, 

invalidum  referens  emeritumque  latus  ; 
hoc   tamen    est   levius,  quam  quod    sum  visus  ab 
illo—  15* 

eveniat  nostris  hostibus  ille  pudor  ! 
Quando  ego  non  fixus  lateri  patienter  adhaesi, 

ipse  tuus  custos,  ipse  vir,  ipse  comes  ? 
scilicet  et  populo  per  me  comitata x  placebas ; 

causa  fuit  multis  noster  amoris  amor.  20 

turpia  quid  referam  vanae  mendacia  linguae 

et  periuratos  in  mea  damna  deos  ? 
quid  iuvenum  tacitos  inter  convivia  nutus 

verbaque  conpositis  dissimulata  notis  ? 
dicta  erat  aegra  mihi — praeceps  amensque  cucurri  ;  25 

veni,  et  rivali  non  erat  aegra  meo  ! 
His  et  quae  taceo  duravi  saepe  ferendis  ; 

quaere  alium  pro  me,  qui  queat  ista  pati. 
iam  mea  votiva  puppis  redimita  corona 

lenta  tumescentes  aequoris  audit  aquas.  30 

desine  blanditias  et  verba,  potentia  quondam, 

perdere — non  ego  sum  stultus,  ut  ante  fui  ! 2 


Luctantur  pectusque  leve  in  contraria  tendunt 
hac  amor  hac  odium,  sed,  puto,  vincit  amor. 

odero,  si  potero  ;  si  non,  invitus  amabo.  35 

nee  iuga  taurus  amat ;  quae  tamen  odit,  habet. 

nequitiam  fugio — fugientem  forma  reducit  ; 
aversor  morum  crimina — corpus  amo. 


1  comitata  P:  cantata  Burnt,  from  Francf.  MS. 

2  Mueller  males  the  division. 


490 


THE   AMORRS   III.  xi 

came  forth  from  your  doors  fatigued,  with  frame 
exhausted  and  weak  from  love's  campaign  ;  yet  this 
is  a  slighter  thing  than  being  seen  by  him — may 
shame  like  that  befall  my  enemies  ! 

17  When  have  I  not  in  patience  clung  close  to  your 
side,  myself  your  guard,  myself  your  lover,  myself 
your  companion  ?  Be  sure,  too,  that  people  liked 
you  because  you  were  at  my  side  ;  my  love  for  you 
has  won  you  love  from  many.  Why  repeat  the 
shameful  lies  of  your  empty  tongue,  and  recall  the 
perjured  oaths  to  the  gods  you  have  sworn  to  my 
undoing  ?  Why  tell  of  the  silent  nods  of  young 
lovers  at  the  banquet  board,  and  of  words  concealed 
in  the  signal  agreed  upon  ?  Say  I  had  been  told  she 
was  ill — headlong  and  madly  I  ran  to  her  ;  I  came, 
and  she  was  not  ill — to  my  rival  ! 

27  Oft  bearing  such-like  things,  and  others  I  say 
naught  of,  I  have  hardened ;  seek  another  in  my 
stead  who  can  submit  to  them.  Already  my  craft 
is  decked  with  votive  wreath,  and  listens  undisturbed 
to  the  sea's  swelling  waters.  Cease  wasting  your 
caresses,  and  the  words  that  once  had  Aveight^I  am 
not  a  fool,  as  once  I  was  ! 


Struggling  over  my  fickle  heart,  love  draws  it  now 
this  way,  and  now  hate  that — but  love,  I  think,  is 
winning.  I  will  hate,  if  I  have  strength ;  if  not, 
1  shall  love  unwilling.  The  ox,  too,  loves  not  the 
yoke ;  what  he  hates  he  none  the  less  bears.  I  fly 
from  your  baseness — as  I  fly,  your  beauty  draws  me 
back  ;   I    shun    the    wickedness   of  your  ways — your 

491 


OVID 

sic  ego  nee  sine  te  nee  tecum  vivere  possum, 

et  videor  voti  nescius  esse  mei.  40 

aut  formosa  fores  minus,  aut  minus  inproba,  vellem  ; 

non  facit  ad  mores  tarn  bona  forma  malos. 
facta  merent  odium,  facies  exorat  amorem — 

me  miserum,  vitiis  plus  valet  ilia  suis  ! 
Parce,  per  o  lecti  socialia  iura,  per  omnis  45 

qui  dant  fallendos  se  tibi  saepe  deos, 
perque  tuam  faciem,  magni  mihi  numinis  instar, 

perque  tuos  oculos,  qui  rapuere  meos  ! 
quidquid  eris,  mea  semper  eris  ;  tu  selige  tantum, 

me  quoque  velle  velis,  anne  coactus  amem !  50 

lintea  dem  potius  ventisque  ferentibus  utar, 

ut,1  quamvis  nolim,  cogar  amare  velim. 


XII 

Quis  fuit  ille  dies,  quo  tristia  semper  amanti 

omina  non  albae  concinuistis  aves  ? 
quodve  putem  sidus  nostris  occurrere  fatis, 

quosve  deos  in  me  bella  movere  querar  ? 
quae  modo  dicta  mea  est,  quam  coepi  solus  amare,    5 

cum  multis  vereor  ne  sit  habenda  mihi. 
Fallimur,  an  nostris  innotuit  ilia  libellis  ? 

sic  erit — ingenio  prostitit  ilia  meo. 
et  merito  !  quid  eriim  formae  praeconia  feci  ? 

vendibilis  culpa  facta  puella  mea  est.  10 

1  ut  MSS.:  quam  Rautenberg. 
492 


THE  AMORES   III.  xii 

person  I  love.  Thus  I  can  live  neither  with  you 
nor  without,  and  seem  not  to  know  my  own  heart's 
piayer.  I  would  you  were  either  less  beauteous  or 
less  base  ;  beauty  so  fair  mates  not  with  evil  ways. 
Your  actions  merit  hate,  your  face  pleads  winningly 
for  love — ah  !  wretched  me,  it  has  more  power  than 
its  owner's  misdeeds. 

45  Spare  me,  O  by  the  laws  of  love's  comradeship, 
by  all  the  gods  who  oft  lend  themselves  for  you  to 
deceive,  and  by  that  face  of  yours,  to  me  the  image 
of  high  divinity,  and  by  your  eyes,  that  have  taken 
captive  mine  !  Whatever  you  be,  mine  ever  will 
you  be  ;  choose  you  only  whether  you  wish  me  also 
willing,  or  to  love  because  constrained  !  Let  me 
rather  spread  my  sails  and  use  the  favouring  breeze, 
that  I  may  wish,  though  against  my  will,  for  love's 
constraint. 


XII 

What  day  was  that,  ye  birds  not  white,  on  which 
you  chanted  omens  ill-boding  to  the  poet  ever  in 
love  ?  or  what  ill  star  shall  I  think  is  rising  on  my 
fate,  or  what  gods  shall  I  complain  are  moving  war 
against  me  ?  She  who  but  now  was  called  my  own, 
whom  I  began  alone  to  love,  must  now,  I  fear,  be 
shared  with  many. 

7  Am  I  mistaken,  or  is  it  my  books  of  verse 
have  made  her  known  ?  So  will  it  prove — 'tis  my 
genius  has  made  her  common.  And  I  desei've  it ! 
for  why  was  I  the  crier  of  her  beauty  ?  Through 
my  fault  she  I  love   has  become  a  thing  of  sale.      I 


493 


OVID 

me  lenone  placet,  duce  me  perductus  amator, 

ianua  per  nostras  est  adaperta  manus. 
An  prosint,  dubiimi,  nocuerunt  carmina  semper ; 

invidiae  nostris  ilia  fuere  bonis, 
cum  Thebe,  cum  Troia  foret,  cnm  Caesaris  acta,       15 

ingenium  movit  sola  Corinna  meum. 
aversis  ntinam  tetigissem  carmina  Musis, 

Phoebus  et  inceptum  destituisset  opus  ! 
Nee  tamen  ut  testes  mos  est  audire  poetas  ; 

malueram  verbis  pondus  abesse  meis.  20 

per  nos  Scylla  patri  caros  furata  capillos 

pube  premit  rapidos  1  inguinibusque  canes  ; 
nos  pedibus  pinnas  dedimus,  nos  crinibus  angues  ; 

victor  Abantiades  alite  fertur  equo. 
idem  per  spatium  Tityon  porreximus  ingens,  25 

et  tria  vipereo  fecimus  ora  cani  ; 
fecimus  Enceladon  iaculantem  mille  lacertis, 

ambiguae  captos  virginis  ore  viros. 
Aeolios  Ithacis  inclusimus  utribus  Euros  ; 

proditor  in  medio  Tantalus  amne  sitit.  30 

de  Niobe  silicerm  de  virgine  fecimus  ursam. 

concinit  Odrysium  Cecropis  ales  Ityn  ; 
Iuppiter  aut  in  aves  aut  se  transformat  in  aurum 

aut  secat  inposita  virgine  taurus  aquas. 
Protea  quid  referam  Thebanaque  semina,  dentes  ;  35 

qui  vomerent  flammas  ore,  fuisse  boves  ; 
1  rabidos  vulg.:  rapidos  P. 

a  Scylla,  daughter  of  Nisus,  king  of  Megara,  took  from  her 
father's  head  the  purple  lock  on  which  his  life  depended, 
and  was  afterward  changed  to  the  monster. 

b  Perseus  and  Mercury  ;  Medusa  ;  Perseus,  Pegasus,  and 
Andromeda. 

494 


THE   AMORES   III.  xii 

am  the  pander  has  helped  her  to  please,  I  have  been 
guide  to  lead  the  lover,  by  my  hand  has  her  door 
been  opened. 

13  Whether  verses  are  good  for  aught,  I  doubt ; 
they  have  always  been  my  bane,  and  stood  in  the 
light  of  my  good.  Though  there  was  Thebes,  though 
Troy,  though  Caesar's  deeds,  Corinna  only  has  stirred 
my  genius.  Would  that  the  Muses  had  looked  away 
when  I  first  touched  verse,  and  Phoebus  refused  me 
aid  when  my  attempt  was  new  ! 

19  And  yet  'tis  not  the  custom  to  heed  the  poet's 
witness  ;  my  verses,  too,  I  had  preferred  should 
have  no  weight.  'Twas  we  poets  made  Scylla  steal 
from  her  sire  a  his  treasured  locks,  and  hide  in  her 
groin  the  devouring  dogs  ;  'tis  we  have  placed  wings 
on  feet,  and  mingled  snakes  with  hair ;  our  song 
made  Abas'  child  a  victor  with  the  winged  horse.6 
We,  too,  stretched  Tityos  out  through  a  mighty 
space,  and  gave  to  the  viperous  dog  three  mouths; 
we  made  Enceladus,  hurling  the  spear  with  a  thousand 
arms,  and  the  heroes  snared  by  the  voice  of  the 
doubtful  maid.c  We  shut  in  the  skins  of  the  Ithacan 
the  East-winds  of  Aeolus  ;  made  the  traitor  Tantalus 
thirst  in  the  midst  of  the  stream.  Of  Niobe  we  made 
a  rock,  and  turned  a  maiden  to  a  bear.d  'Tis  due  to 
us  that  the  bird  of  Cecrops e  sings  Odrysian  Itys ; 
that  Jove  transforms  himself  now  to  a  bird,  and  now 
to  gold,  or  cleaves  the  waters  a  bull  with  a  maiden 
on  his  back.  Why  tell  of  Proteus,  and  those  Theban 
seeds,  the  dragon's  teeth  ;  that  cattle  once  there 
were  that   spewed  forth  flames  from  their  mouths  ; 

c  The  Sirens. 

d  Callisto,  transformed  by  Juno  and  placed  in  the  sky  by 
Jove  as  Ursa  Major.         e  Philomela,  the  nightingale. 

495 


OVID 

flere  genis  electra  tuns,  Auriga,  sorores  ; 

quaeque  rates  fuerint,  nunc  maris  esse  deas  ; 
aversumque  diem  mensis  furialibus  Atrei, 

duraque  percussam  saxa  secuta  lyram  ?  40 

Exit  in  inmensum  fecunda  lieentia  vatum, 

obligat  historiea  nee  sua  verba  fide, 
et  mea  debuerat  falso  laudata  videri 

femiria  ;  credulitas  nunc  mihi  vestra  nocet. 

XIII 

Cum  mihi  pomiferis  coniunx  foret  orta  Faliscis, 

moenia  contigimus  victa,  Camille,  tibi. 
casta  sacerdotes  Iunoni  festa  parabant 

per  celebres  ludos  indigenamque  bovem  ; 
grande  morae  pretium  ritus  cognoscere,  quamvis        5 

difficilis  clivis  hue  via  praebet  iter. 
Stat  vetus  et  densa  praenubilus  arbore  lucus ; 

adspice — concedas  numen  inesse  loco.1 
accipit  ara  preces  votivaque  tura  piorum — 

ara  per  antiquas  facta  sine  arte  manus.  10 

bine,  ubi  praesormit  sollemni  tibia  cantu, 

it  per  velatas  annua  pompa  vias ; 
ducuntur  niveae  populo  plaudente  iuvencae, 

quas  aluit  campis  herba  Falisca  suis, 
et  vituli  nondum  metuenda  fronte  minaces,  15 

et  minor  ex  humili  victima  porcus  hara, 
1  numinis  esse  locum  vylg. 

°  The  sisters  of  Phaethon,  the  charioteer,  were  changed  to 
trees,  and  their  tears  to  amber. 

496 


THE   AMORES    III.  xiii 

of  thy  sisters,  Auriga,  weeping  tears  of  amber  o'er 
their  cheeks rt ;  of  what  were  ships,  but  now  are 
goddesses  of  the  sea b ;  of  the  ill-starred  day  at 
Atreus'  maddened  tables,  and  the  rocks  that  followed 
at  stroke  of  the  lyre  ? 

41  Measureless  pours  forth  the  creative  wantonness 
of  bards,  nor  trammels  its  utterance  with  history's 
truth.  My  praising  of  my  lady,  too,  you  should  have 
taken  for  false  ;  now  your  easy  trust  is  my  undoing. 

XIII 

Since  she  I  wed  was  sprung  from  the  fruit-bearing 
Faliscan  town/  it  chanced  we  came  to  the  walls 
brought  low,  Camillus,  by  thee.  The  priestesses  were 
making  ready  chaste  festival  to  Juno,  with  solemn 
games  and  a  cow  of  native  stock ;  'twas  well  worth 
while  to  tarry  and  learn  the  rites,  though  the  way 
thither  is  a  toilsome  road  with  steep  ascents. 

7  There  stands  an  ancient  sacred  grove,  all  dark 
with  shadows  from  dense  trees  ;  behold  it — you  would 
agree  a  deity  indwelt  the  place.  An  altar  receives 
the  prayers  and  votive  incense  of  the  faithful — an 
artless  altar,  upbuilt  by  hands  of  old.  From  here, 
when  the  pipe  has  sounded  forth  in  solemn  strain, 
advances  over  carpeted  ways  the  annual  pomp  ;  snowy 
heifers  are  led  along  mid  the  plaudits  of  the  crowd, 
heifers  reared  in  their  native  meadows  of  Faliscan 
grass,  and  calves  that  threaten  with  brow  not  yet  to 
be  feared,  and,  lesser  victim,  a  pig  from  the  lowly  sty, 

*  Aeneas'  ships,  transformed  that  Turnus  might  not  burn 
them. 

''  Usually  called  Falerii.  Its  site  is  occupied  by  Civite 
Casteilana. 

497 


OVID 

duxque  gregis  eornu  per  tempora  dura  recurvo. 

invisa  est  dominae  sola  capella  deae  ; 
illius  indieio  silvis  inventa  sub  altis 

dicitur  inceptam  destituisse  fugam.  20 

nunc  quoque  per  pueros  iaculis  incessitur  index 

et  pretium  auctori  vulneris  ipsa  datur. 
Qua  ventura  dea  est,  iuvenes  timidaeque  puellae 

praeverrunt  latas  veste  iacente  vias. 
virginei  crines  auro  gemmaque  premuntur,  25 

et  tegit  auratos  palla  superba  pedes ; 
more  patrum  Graio  velatae  vestibus  albis 

tradita  supposito  vertice  sacra  ferunt. 
ore  favent  populi  tune  cum  venit  aurea  pompa, 

ipsa  sacerdotes  subsequiturque  suas.  30 

Argiva  est  pompae  facies  ;  Agamemnone  caeso 

et  scelus  et  patrias  fugit  Halaesus  opes 
iamque  pererratis  profugus  terraque  fretoque 

nioenia  feliei  condidit  alta  manu. 
ille  suos  doeuit  Iunonia  sacra  Faliscos.  35 

sint  mihi,  sint  populo  semper  arnica  suo  ! 


XIV 

Non  ego,  ne  peeces,  cum  sis  formosa,  recuso, 
sed  ne  sit  misero  scire  necesse  mihi  ; 

nee  te  nostra  iubet  fieri  censura  pudicam, 
sed  tamen,  ut  temptes  dissimulare,  rogat. 


THE   AMORES    III.  xiv 

and  the  leader  of  the  flock,  with  hard  temples  over- 
hung by  the  curving  horn.  The  she-goat  only  is  hate- 
ful to  the  mistress-deity  ;  through  her  tale-telling, 
they  say,  the  goddess  was  found  in  the  deep  forest 
and  made  to  cease  the  flight  she  had  entered  on." 
Now,  even  children  assail  the  tattler  with  their  darts, 
and  she  herself  is  prize  to  whoever  deals  the  wound. 

23  Wherever  the  goddess  will  pass,  youths  and 
timid  maidens  go  before,  sweeping  the  broad  ways 
with  trailing  robe.  The  maidens'  locks  are  pressed 
by  gold  and  gems,  and  the  proud  palla  covers  feet 
that  are  bright  with  gold  ;  in  the  manner  of  their 
Grecian  sires  of  yore,  veiled  in  white  vestments  they 
bear  on  their  heads  the  sacred  otfei'ings  of  old.  The 
crowd  keep  reverent  silence  as  the  golden  pomp 
comes  on,  with  the  goddess'  self  close  in  the  wake 
of  her  ministers. 

31  From  Argos  is  the  form  of  the  pomp  ;  when 
Agamemnon  fell,  Halaesus  left  behind  both  the  crime 
and  the  riches  of  his  fatherland,  and  after  wandering 
an  exile  over  land  and  sea  founded  with  auspicious 
hand  these  lofty  walls.  'Twas  he  who  taught  his 
Faliscans  the  holy  rites  of  Juno.  Ever  friendly  to 
me,  and  ever  to  their  folk,  may  those  rites  be. 


XIV 

That  you  should  not  err,  since  you  are  fail",  is  not 
my  plea,  but  that  I  be  not  compelled,  poor  wretch, 
to  know  it ;  no  censor  am  I  who  demands  that  you 
become  chaste,  but  one  who  asks  that  you  attempt 

"  A  story  not  otherwise  known. 

499 


K     K 


OVID 

non  peecat,  quaecumque  potest  peccasse  negare,        5 

solaque  famosani  culpa  professa  fecit. 
quis  furor  est,  quae  nocte  latent,  in  luce  fateri, 

et  quae  clam  facias  facta  referre  palani  ? 
ignoto  meretrix  corpus  iunctura  Quiriti 

opposita  populum  summovet  ante  sera  ;  10 

tu  tua  prostitues  faniae  peccata  sinistrae 

commissi  perages  indiciumque  tui  ? 
sit  tibi  mens  melior,  saltemve  imitare  pudicas, 

teque  probam,  quamvis  non  eris,  esse  putem. 
quae  facis,  haec  facito  ;  tantum  fecisse  negato,         15 

nee  pudeat  coram  verba  modesta  loqui  ! 
Est  qui  nequitiam  locus  exigat ;  omnibus  ilium 

deliciis  inple,  stet  procul  inde  pudor  ! 
hinc  simul  exieris,  lascivia  protinus  onmis 

absit,  et  in  lecto  crimina  pone  tuo.  20 

illic  nee  tunicam  tibi  sit  posuisse  pudori 

nee  femori  inpositum  sustinuisse  femur  ; 
illic  purpureis  condatur  lingua  labellis, 

inqne  modos  Venerem  mille  figuret  amor  ; 
illic  nee  voces  nee  verba  iuvantia  cessent,  25 

spondaque  lasciva  mobilitate  tremat ! 
indue  cum  tunicis  metuentem  crimina  vultum, 

et  pudor  obscenum  difiiteatur  opus  ; 
da  populo,  da  verba  mihi ;  sine  nescius  errem, 

et  liceat  stulta  credulitate  frui !  30 

Cur  totiens  video  mitti  recipique  tabellas  ? 

cur  pressus  prior  est  interiorque  torus  ? 
cur  plus  quam  somno  turbatos  esse  capillos 

collaque  conspicio  dentis  habere  notam  ? 
tantum  non  oculos  crimen  deducis  ad  ipsos ;  35 

si  dubitas  famae  parcere,  parce  mihi  ! 
mens  abit  et  morior  quotiens  peccasse  fateris, 

perque  meos  artus  frigida  gutta  Huit. 

500 


THE    AMORES    III.  xiv 

to  feign.  She  does  not  sin  who  can  deny  her  sin, 
and  'tis  only  the  fault  avowed  that  brings  dishonour. 
What  madness  is  this,  to  confess  in  the  light  of  day 
the  hidden  things  of  night,  and  spread  abroad  your 
secret  deeds  ?  Even  the  jade  that  receives  some 
unknown  son  of  Quirinus  is  careful  first  to  slip  the 
bolt  and  exclude  the  crowd ;  and  you — will  you 
expose  your  faults  to  the  mercy  of  evil  tongues 
and  be  the  informer  to  tell  of  your  own  misdeeds  ? 
Put  on  a  better  mind,  and  imitate,  at  least,  the 
modest  of  your  sex,  and  let  me  think  you  honest 
though  you  are  not.  What  you  are  doing,  continue 
to  do  ;  only  deny  that  you  have  done,  nor  be  ashamed 
to  use    modest    speech  in  public. 

17  There  is  a  spot  that  calls  for  wantonness ;  fill 
that  with  all  delights,  and  let  blushing  be  far  away. 
Once  you  are  forth  from  there,  straight  lay  all  lewd- 
ness aside,  and  leave  your  faults  in  the  couch  .... 
Put  on  with  your  dress  a  face  that  shrinks  from 
guilt,  and  let  a  modest  aspect  deny  the  harlot's  trade. 
Cheat  the  people,  cheat  me  ;  allow  me  to  mistake 
through  ignorance,  to  enjoy  a  fool's  belief  in  you  ! 

31  Why  must  I  see  so  often  the  sending  and 
getting  of  notes  ?  Why  that  your  couch  has  been 
pressed  in  every  place  ?  Why  do  I  gaze  on  hair 
disordered  by  more  than  sleep,  and  see  the  mark 
of  a  tooth  upon  your  neck?  You  all  but  bring 
your  sin  before  my  very  eyes ;  if  you  hesitate  to 
spare  your  name,  at  least  spare  me  !  My  mind  fails 
me  and  I  suffer  death  each  time  you  confess  your 
sin,    and    through    my    frame    the  blood  runs  cold. 

50I 


OVID 

tunc  amo,  tunc  odi  frustra  quod  amare  necesse  est  ; 

tunc  ego,  sed  tecum,  mortuus  esse  velim  !  40 

Nil  equidem  inquiram,  nee  quae  celare  parabis 

insequar,  et  falli  muneris  instar  erit. 
si  tamen  in  media  deprensa  tenebere  culpa, 

et  fuerint  oculis  probra  videnda  meis, 
quae  bene  visa  mihi  fuerint,  bene  visa  negato —      45 

concedent  verbis  lumina  nostra  tuis. 
prona  tibi  vinci  cupientem  vincere  palma  est, 

sit  modo  "  non  feci !  "  dicere  lingua  memor. 
cum  tibi  contingat  verbis  superare  duobus, 

etsi  non  causa,  iudice  vince  tuo  !  50 

XV 

Quaere  novum  vatem,  tenerorum  mater  Amorum ! 

raditur  hie  elegis  ultima  meta  meis  ; 
quos  ego  conposui,  Paeligni  ruris  alumnus — 

nee  me  deliciae  dedecuere  meae — 
siquid  id  est,  usque  a  proavis  vetus  ordinis  heres,      5 

non  modo  militiae  tm-bine  factus  eques. 
Mantua  Vergilio,  gaudet  Verona  Catullo  ; 

Paelignae  dicar  gloria  gentis  ego, 
quam  sua  libertas  ad  honesta  coegerat  arma, 

cum  timuit  socias  anxia  Roma  manus.  10 


502 


THE   AMORES   III.  xv 

Then  do  I  love  you,  then  try  in  vain  to  hate  what 
I  love  perforce  ;  then  would  I  gladly  be  dead — but 
dead  with  you  ! 

41  I  will  make  no  inquiry,  be  assured,  and  will 
not  follow  out  what  you  will  make  ready  to  hide  ; 
to  be  deceived  shall  be  as  a  duty.  If  none  the  less 
I  shall  find  you  out  in  the  midst  of  a  fault,  and  my 
eyes  perforce  shall  have  looked  upon  your  shame, 
see  you  deny  that  I  clearly  saw  what  was  clearly 
seen — my  eyes  will  yield  to  your  words.  'Twill 
be  an  easy  palm  for  you  —  to  be  victor  over  one  who 
is  eager  to  be  vanquished ;  all  that  you  need  is  a 
tongue  that  remembers  "I  did  not  do  it !  "  When 
you  may  win  the  day  by  a  mere  two  words,  if  you 
cannot  through  your  cause,  be  victor  through  your 
judge ! 


XV 

Seek  a  new  bard,  mother  of  tender  Loves  !  I  am 
come  to  the  last  turning-post  my  elegies  will  graze ; 
the  elegies  whose  poet  am  I — nor  have  these  my 
delights  dishonoured  me — child  reared  on  Paelignian 
acres,  and  heir,  if  that  be  aught,  of  a  line  of  grand- 
sires  far  removed,  no  knight  created  but  now  amid 
the  whirlwind  of  war. 

7  Mantua  joys  in  Virgil,  Verona  in  Catullus  ;  'tis  I 
shall  be  called  the  glory  of  the  Paelignians,  race 
whom  their  love  of  freedom  compelled  to  honour- 
able arms  when  anxious  Rome  was  in  fear  of  the 
allied     bands ; a     and     some     stranger,     looking    on 

a  The  Social  War,  90-89  B.C.,  by  which  Rome  was  com- 
pelled to  grant  citizenship  to  the  Italians.  The  Paeligni 
were  leaders. 

5°3 


OVID 

atque  aliquis  spectans  hospes  Sulmonis  aquosi 

moenia,  quae  campi  iugera  pauca  tenent, 
"  Quae  tantum  "  dicat  "  potuistis  ferre  poetam, 

quantulacumque  estis,  vos  ego  magna  voco." 
Culte  puer  puerique  parens  Amathusia  culti,  15 

aurea  de  campo  vellite  signa  meo  ! 
corniger  increpuit  thyrso  graviore  Lyaeus  : 

pulsanda  est  magnis  area  maior  equis. 
inbelles  elegi,  genialis.Musa,  valete, 

post  mea  mansurum  fata  superstes  opus  !  20 


504 


THE   AMORES    III.  xv 

watery  Sulmo's  walls,  that  guard  the  scant  acres 
of  her  plain,  may  say  :  "  O  thou  who  couldst  beget 
so  great  a  poet,  however  small  thou  art,  I  name 
thee  mighty !  " 

15  O  worshipful  child,  and  thou  of  Amathus, 
mother  of  the  worshipful  child,  pluck  ye  up  from 
my  field  your  golden  standards  !  The  horned  Lyaean 
hath  dealt  me  a  sounding  blow  with  weightier 
thyrsus ;  I  must  smite  the  earth  with  mighty  steeds 
on  a  mightier  course.  Unwarlike  elegies,  congenial 
Muse,  O  fare  ye  well,  work  to  live  on  when  I  am 
no  more ! 


5  °5 


OVID 


VII 


At  non  formosa  est,  at  non  bene  culta  puella, 

at,  puto,  non  votis  saepe  petita  meis  ! 
hanc  tamen  in  nullos  tenui  male  languidus  usus, 

sed  iacui  pigro  crimen  onusque  toro  ; 
nee  potui  cupiens,  pariter  cupiente  puella,  5 

inguinis  effeti  parte  iuvante  frui. 
ilia  quidem  nostro  subiecit  eburnea  collo 

bracchia  Sithonia  candidiora  nive, 
oseulaque  inseruit  eupide  luctantia  linguis 

lascivum  femori  supposuitque  femur,  10 

et  mihi  blanditias  dixit  dominumque  vocavit, 

et  quae  praeterea  publica  verba  iuvant. 
tacta  tamen  veluti  gelida  mea  membra  cicuta 

segnia  propositum  destituere  meum  ; 
truneus  iners  iacui,  species  et  inutile  pondus,  15 

et  non  exactum,  corpus  an  umbra  forem. 
Quae  mihi  ventura  est,  siquidem  ventura,  senectus, 

cum  desit  numeris  ipsa  iuventa  suis  ? 
a,  pudet  annorum  cum1  me  iuvenemque  virumque 

nee  iuvenem  nee  me  sensit  arnica  virum  !  20 

sic  flammas  aditura  pias  aeterna  sacerdos 

surgit  et  a  caro  fratre  verenda  soror. 
at  nuper  bis  flava  Chlide,  ter  Candida  Pitho, 

ter  Libas  officio  continuata  meo  est ; 
exigere  a  nobis  angusta  nocte  Corinnam  25 

mememini  numeros  sustinuisse  novem. 
Num  mea  Thessalico  languent  devota  veneno 

corpora  ?  num  misero  carmen  et  herba  nocent, 

1  cum   (quom)  Pa.:    quo  P.  Br.:    quod  vulg.:    cur  Merle.: 
quare  N6m. 

506 


THE   AMORES    III.  vii 

sagave  poenicea  x  defixit  nomina  cera 

et  medium  tenuis  in  iecur  egit  acus  ?  30 

carmine  laesa  Ceres  sterilem  vanescit  in  herbam, 

deficiunt  laesi  carmine  fontis  aquae, 
ilicibus  glandes  cantataque  vitibus  uva 

decidit,  et  nullo  poma  movente  fluunt. 
quid  vetat  et  nervos  magicas  torpere  per  artes  ?       35 

forsitan  inpatiens  sit  latus  inde  meum. 
hue  pudor  accessit  facti ;  pudor  ipse  nocebat ; 

ille  fuit  vitii  causa  secunda  mei. 
At  qualem  vidi  tantum  tetigique  puellam  ! 

sic  etiam  tunica  tangitur  ilia  sua.  40 

illius  ad  tactum  Pylius  iuvenescere  possit 

Tithonosque  annis  fortior  esse  suis. 
haec  mihi  contigerat ;  sed  vir  non  contigit  illi. 

quas  nunc  concipiam  per  nova  vota  preces  ? 
credo  etiam  magnos,  quo  sum  tarn  turpiter  usus,      45 

muneris  oblati  paenituisse  deos. 
optabam  certe  recipi — sum  nempe  receptus  ; 

oscula  ferre — tuli ;  proximus  esse — fui. 
quo  mihi  fortunae  tantum  ?  quo  regna  sine  usu  ? 

quid,  nisi  possedi  dives  avarus  opes  ?  50 

sic  aret  mediis  taciti  vulgator  in  undis 

pomaque,  quae  nullo  tempore  tangat,  habet. 
a  tenera  quisquam  sic  surgit  mane  puella, 

protinus  ut  sanctos  possit  adire  deos  ? 
Sed,  puto,  non  blande,  non  optima  perdidit  in 

me  55 

oscula  ;  non  omni  sollicitavit  ope  ! 
ilia  graves  potuit  quercus  adamantaque  durum 

surdaque  blanditiis  saxa  movere  suis. 
digna  movere  fuit  certe  vivosque  virosque  ; 

sed  neque  turn  vixi  nee  vir,  ut  ante,  fui.  60 

1  poenicea  wig.:  sanguinea  P s. 

5°7 


OVID 

quid  iuvet,  ad  surdas  si  cantet  Phemius  aures  ? 

quid  miserum  Thamyran  picta  tabella  iuvat  ? 
At  quae  non  tacita  formavi  gaudia  mente  ! 

quos  ego  non  finxi  disposuique  modos  ! 
nostra  tamen  iacuere  velut  praemortua  membra       65 

turpiter  hesterna  languidiora  rosa — 
quae  nunc,  ecce,  vigent  intempestiva  valentque, 

nunc  opus  exposcunt  militiamque  suam. 
quin  istic  pudibunda  iaces,  pars  pessima  nostri  ? 

sic  sum  pollicitis  captus  et  ante  tuis.  70 

tu  dominum  fallis  ;  per  te  deprensus  inermis 

tristia  cum  magno  damna  pudore  tuli. 
Hanc  etiam  non  est  mea  dedignata  puella 

molliter  admota  sollieitare  manu  ; 
sed  postquam  nullas  consurgere  posse  per  artes        75 

inmemoremque  sui  procubuisse  videt, 
"quid  me  ludis  ?  "  ait,  "quis  te,  male  sane,  iubebat 

invitum  nostro  ponere  membra  toro  ? 
aut  te  traiectis  Aeaea  venefica  lanis 

devovet,  aut  alio  lassus  amore  venis."  80 

nee  mora,  desiluit  tunica  velata  soluta — 

et  decuit  nudos  proripuisse  pedes  ! — 
neve  suae  possent  intactam  scire  ministrae, 

dedecus  hoc  sumpta  dissimulavit  aqua. 


5oS 


INDEX 

I.  HEROIDES 


Abydenus:  xvm.  l ;  xix.  100 
Abydos,  a  town  on  the  Hellespont, 

opposite  Sestus:    xvm.   12,  127; 

XIX.  29,  30 
Acastus,  a  Greek  prince:  xm.  25 
Aehaeiades,  women  of  Gre  ce :  m. 

71 
Achaia:  xvi.  187;  xvn.  209 
Achaius  :  vin.   13 
Acheloius  :  xvi.  207 
Achelous,  a  river-god:  IX.  139 
Achilles,  son  of  Peleus  and  Thetis, 

and  lover  of  Briseis :  ill.  25,  41, 

137;  vin.  45,  87;  XX.  69 
Acliillides,  Pyrrhns,  son  of  Achilles  : 

vin.  3 
Acliivi,  a  name  of  the  Greek-;  :  I.  21 
Acontius,  a  youth  of  Ceos,  in  love 

with  Cydippe  of  Athens  :  XX.  239  ; 

XXI.  103,  209,  229 
Actaeon,  transformed  to  a  stag  by 

Diana,    and   torn    by    his    own 

hounds  :  XX.  103 
Actaeus,  of  Acte,  an  old  name  for 

Attica  :  U.  6;  xvm.  42 
Actiacus  :  xv.  166,  185 
Aeacides,    Aeacus*    son,    Achilles : 

I.  35;  m.  87;  vm.  7,  33,  55 
Aeetes,    Aeeta,    father    of    Medea, 

king    of    Colchis:   vi.   50;    xii. 

29,  51 ;  XVII.  123 
Aeetiue,      daughter      of      Aeetes, 

Medea  :  VI.  103 
Aegaeus  :  xvi.  118;  xxi.  66 
Aegeus,    husband    of   Aetlira   and 

father  of  Theseus  :  x.  131 
Aegides,    descendants    of    Aegeus, 

king  of    Athens,  among    whom 

was    Theseus  :  II.    67 ;  IV .    59 ; 

XVI.  ::27 
Aegina,   bride  of    Jove,   mother  of 

Aeacua,  father  of  Peleus  :  in.  73 

OVID. 


Aegisthus,  son  of  Thyestes,  seducer 

of    Clytemnestra,    murderer    of 

Agamemnon  :  vm.  53 
Aeneas,    a   Trojan   hero,    lover   of 

Dido,  and  founder  of  the  Latin 

power:  vii.  9,  25,  26,29,  195 
Aeolis  :  XI.  5,  34 
Aeoltus  :  xv.  200 
Aeolus,  god  of  the  winds  :  X.  66 ; 

XI.  65,  95 
Aesonides,   Jason,   son   of   Aeson : 

vi.  25,  103,  109;  xii.  16. 
Aesonius  :  XII.  134;  xvn.  230 
Aetlira,  companion  of  Helen  :  xvi. 

259;  xvn.  150,  267 
Aetlira,  wife  of  Aegeus  and  mother 

of  Theseus  :  x.  131 
Aetna  :  XV.  11 
Aetnaeus  :  XV.  12 
Aetolis  :  IX.  131 
Afer  :  vn.  169 
Agamemnon  :  m.  83 
Agamemnoniu?  :  in.  38 
Agrios,  brother  of  Oeneus  :  IX.  153 
Alcaeus,  the  poet-friend  of  Sappho  : 

XV.  29 
Alcides,     Hercules,     grandson     of 

Alceus  :  ix.  75.  133;  xvi.  207 
Alcimede,  Jason's  mother  :  vi.  hi.") 
Alcyone,   transformed   to    a    king- 
fisher :  xvm.  81;  xix.  133 
Allecto,  one  of  the  Furies  :  n.  119 
Amazonius  :  iv.  2;  xxi.  1 19 
Ambracia,  a  town  in  Epirus  :  xv. 

164 
Amor :  IV,    11,    148:  vn.    32,    59; 

xv.     179;  xvi.     16,   203;  xvm. 

190;  XX.  28,  30,  46,  230 
Amphitryon,  husband  of  Alcmene, 

mother  of  Eercules  :  ix.  44 
Amymone,    daughtei    of    Danaus, 

loved  by  Poseidon  :  XIX.  131 

509 


INDEX 


Amyntor,  father  of  Phoenix,  in.  27 

Anactorie,  a  friend  of  Sappho  :  XV. 
17 

Aneluses,  father  of  Aeneas  :  vn. 
162;  XVI.  203 

Androgeus,  brother  of  Ariadne  and 
son  of  Minos  of  Crete,  who  im- 
posed on  Athens  the  tribute  of 
seven  youths  and  seven  maidens 
because  of  his  son's  death  there  : 
X.  99 

Andromache:  v.  107;  Tin.  13 

Andromede,  Andromeda,  daughter 
of  C'epheus,  rescued  by  Perseus  : 
XV. 36;  XVIH. 151 

Andros,  an  island  in  the  Aegean  : 
xxi.  81 

Anna  :  VII.  191 

Antaeus,  King  of  Libya,  the  famous 
wrestler  throttled  by  Hercules  : 
ix.  71 

Antenor,  a  Trojan  warrior,  coun- 
sellor of  Priam  :  V.  95 

Antilochus,  son  of  Nestor,  slain 
by  Meinnon  •  I.  15 

Antinous,  suitor  of  Penelope  :  I.  92 

Aouius,  of  the  Aoniau  mountains, 
in  Boeotia  :  ix.  133 

Apollo  :  VIII.  83;  XV.  23 

Aquilo,  the  north-wind:  XI.  13; 
XVI.  345 

Arabs  :  xv.  76 

Arctophylax,  Bootes  :  XVIII.  188 

Arctos,  the  Lesser  Bear  :  xvill,  149 

Argo,  the  ship  of  the  Argonauts  : 
VI.  65;  XII.  9 

Argolicus :  I.  25;  VI.  80;  vm.  74; 
sin.  71 

Argolides  :  vi.  81 

Argos  :  xiv.  34 

Ariadne,  daughter  of  Minos,  king 
of  Crete.  Having  aided  Theseus 
of  Athens  to  And  Ms  way  in  the 
Labyrinth  and  thus  slay  her  own 
brother  the  Minotaur,  she  flies 
with  him,  but  is  abandoned  by 
him  on  the  isle  of  Js'axos,  v.  hence 
her  letter  is  written  :  x.,  title 

Ascanius,  son  of  Aeneas  :  vn.  77 

Asia  :  xvi.  177.  355 

Atalanta,  daughter  of  Iasius  of 
Arcadia,  loved  by  Meleager  :  iv.  99 

Athamas,  son  of  Aeolus  and  father 
of  Phrixus  and  Helle  :  xvm.  137 

51° 


Athenae  :  n.  83 

Atlans,  Atlas,  who  supported  the 

world  :  IX.  18 ;  xvi.  62 
Atracis,     of     Atrax,     a     town  •  in 

Thessaly  :  xvn.  248 
Atreus,  father  of  Agamemnon  and 

Menelaus  :  vm.  27 
Aii  ides,   Atreus'  son,  Agamemnon 

or    Menelaus:  in.    39,    148;    v. 

101 ;  xvi.  357,  366 
Atthis,  a  friend  of  Sappho  :  XV.  18 
Auge,  a  princess  of  Arcadia,  loved 

by  Hercules  :  IX.  49 
Aulis,    the    port   from    which   the 

Greeks  sailed  for  Troy  :  xin.  3 
Aurora,  the  dawn-goddess  :  IV.  95; 

XV.  87;  xvi.  201;  xvm.  112 

Baccha  :  x.  48 

Bacchus :  iv.  47 ;  v.  115 ;  xv.  24,  25 
Belides,  descendant  of  Belus,  father 
of  Danaus  and  Aegyptus  :  xiv.  73 
Bicorniger,  Bacchus  :  xin.  33 
Bistonis,  Thracian  :  xvi.  346 
Bistonius,  Thracian,  from  the  Bis- 

tones  :  11.  90 
Boreas:  an.  15;  xvm.  39,    209; 

xxi.  42 
Briseis,  the  Mysian  captive  loved 
by  Achilles,  from  whom  she  was 
taken  by  Agamemnon  to  replace 
Chryseis,  his  own  love,  an  act 
which  caused  the  Wrath  of 
Achilles.  She  writes  to  reproach 
her  lover  for  not  claiming  her  : 
m.  1,  137;  xx.  69 
Busiris,  tyrant  of  Egypt,  who 
sacrificed  strangers  to  his  god  : 
IX.  69 

Calyce,  mother  of  Cycnus  :  xix  133 

Calydon,  home  of  the  famous  boar, 
in  Aetolia  :  xx.  101 

Canace,  daughter  of  Aeolus,  guilty 
with  her  brother  Macareus,  whose 
deep  love  -he  returns.  Discovered 
by  her  father,  and  bidden  to  take 
her  own  life,  she  writes  Macareus 
of  her  fate.  The  subject  is  un- 
pleasant, but  the  letter  one  of 
the  best:  xi.,  title 

Cartilage  :  vn.  11,  19 

Cassandra,  sister  of  Paris,  a 
prophetess  :  xvi.  121 


INDEX— HEROIDES 


Cea,  an  island  in  the  Aegean  :  XX. 

222 
Cecropis,  Athenian  :  x.  100 
Cecropius,   of   Cecrops,   Athenian  : 

x.  125 
Celaeno,  a  Pleiad  :  xix.  135 
Centaurus  :  xvn.  247 
Cephalus,    a    hunter    loved    by 

Aurora  :  iv.  93;  XV.  87 
Cepheius  :  XV.  35 
Cerberus,  a  monster  of  the  lower 

world  :  IX.  94 
Cerealis,  sacred  to  Ceres  :  iv.  07 
Ceyx,  husband  of  Alcyone  and  son 

of  Lucifer  :  xvm.  81 
Chalciope  :  xvu.  232 
Charaxus  :  xv.  117 
Cinyras,  loved  by  Venus,  and  father 

of  Adonis  :  IV.  97 
Clymene,    companion     of    Helen  : 

XVI.  259;  XVII.  267 
Colchi,    Medea's    horrre  :  xn.    23, 

159;  xvm.  157;  xix.  175 
Colchus:  VI.   131,    136;  XII.    1,   9, 

159;  XVI.  348 
Corona,  a  constellation,  the  Crown  : 

xvm,  151 
Corycius,  of  the  Corycian  cave  on 

Mt.  Parnassus  :   xx.  221 
Creon,  king  of  Corinth  :  xn.  54 
Cres  :  xvi.  350 
Cresius  :  xvi.  301 
Cressa,  the  Cretan  maid    Ariadne 

abandoned   by  Theseus   on    the 

isle  of  Naxos  :  n.  76;  IV.  2 
Cretaeus  :  x.  106 
Crete  :  x.  67;  xvn.  163 
Creusa,   daughter    of    Creon,    king 

of    Corinth,    Jason's    wife    alter 

Medea  :  xn.  54 
Cupido  :  xv.  215;  xvi.  115 
Cydippe,  a  maiden  of  Athens,  loved 

byAcontius:  xx.  107,   172,  202; 

XXI.  123 
Cydro,  a  friend  of  Sappho  :  xv.  17 
Cynthia,  the  moon-goddess  :  xvm. 

74 
Cytherea  :  xvi.  20.  138;  xvn.  241 
Cytheriacus,  of   Cythera,    the    isle 

near  which  Venus  rose  from  tin- 
sea  :  vii.  60 

Daedalus,  father  of  Icarus  :  XV] 0. 

49 


Danaus.  Danaan  or  Greek:  i.  :i; 
III.  86,  113,  127;  v.  93,  157; 
viii.  It.  24;  XIII.  62,  94,  131 

Danaus  driven  with  hh  fifty 
daughters  from  Africa  to  Argo 
by  his  brother  Aegyptus  with  his 
fifty  sons,  who  wished  to  slaj 
them  in  order  to  possess  th  whol 
kingdom.  I  •verta1  en  in  Argos, 
Dunaus  instiu  ted  his  daughters 
to  many  their  cousins  and  slay 
them  all:  xiv.  15,  79 

Daphne,  loved  by  Apollo  :  xv.  25 

Dardania,  Troy  ;  xvi.  57 

Dardanides,  descendant  of  Dar- 
danus,  Trojan:  XIII.  79;  XVII. 
212 

Dardanius  :  vm.  42;  xvi.  196,  333 

Dardanus,  Trojan:  vii.  158;  xm. 
140 

Daulias,  Daulian,  of  Daulis  in 
Phocis,  the  home  of  Tereus  :  xv. 
154 

Deianira,  daughter  of  Oeneus  and 
Althaea,  sister  of  Meleager,  and 
wife  oi  Eercules.  Hiving  re- 
ceived news  of  Oechali  i's  f  11 
and  Hercules'  passion  for  Iole, 
princess  of  the  place,  she  writes 
a  letter  of  indignation  and  re- 
proach. ^\s  she  i  rites,  the  mes- 
sage reaches  her  tin'  Hercules  is 
in  his  death  agony  on  Mount 
Oet.i,  poisoned  by  th  -  el"  ikof  the 
Centaur  Nessus,  which  she  ignor- 
antly  sent  him  supposing  it  a 
charm  to  bring  hack  his  love:  ix. 
L31,  14ii.  L52,  L58,  164;  XVI.  268 

Deiphobus,  hrother  of  Hector,  who 
married  Helen  after  Paris' death  : 
v.  ill ;  XVI.  362 

Delia,  the  Indian  goddess,  Diana  : 
iv.  40;  XX.  95 

Delos:  xx.  236;  XXI.  66,  77,  82, 
102 

Delphi  :  xxi.  232 

Demophoon,  son  of  Theseus  of 
Athens  and  lover  of  Phyllis, 
queen  of  Thrace  :  n.  1,  25,  98. 
1117,   147 

Deucalion,  the  Greek  Noah  :  xv. 
167,  170 

Diana  :  iv.  87;  xn.  69,  7";  w  :, 
173,211, 217;xxi.7,63,  105,  149 

ci  1 


INDEX 


Dido,  queen  of  Carthage,  en- 
amoured of  Aeneas,  who  touches 
at  her  city  after  the  fall  of  Troy, 
but  is  soon  bidden  by  the  gods  to 
continue  on  hU  way.  Learning 
of  his  intended  departure,  she 
writes  him  a  letter  of  mingled 
repro  ich,  entreaty,  and  despair  : 
VII.    7,  17,  68,  133,  168,  196 

Diomedes,  king  of  the  Bistones  of 
Thrace,  owner  of  man-eating 
horses  :  IX.  67 

Dodonis  :  VI.  47 

Dolon,  a  Trojan  spy  slain  by  Ulysses 
and  Diomedes  on  the  night  of 
their  expedition  to  the  camp  of 
Rhesus  :  I.  39 

Doricus  :  xvi.  372 

Dryades,  mythical  beings  of  the 
wood  :  rv.  49 

Dulichius,  of  Dulichium,  an  island 
near  Ithaca  :  I.  87 

Dysparis,  Paris  :  XIII.  43 


Eleleides,  followers  of  Eleleus,  or 

Bacchus,  from  their  cry  eleleu  : 

IV.  47 
Eleus,  of  Elis  in  Olympia :  xvm. 

166 
Eleusin  :  IV.  67 
Elissa,  Dido  :  vil.  102,  193 
Endymion,  the  shepherd  loved  by 

Diana  :  xvm.  63 
Enyo,     identified     with     Bellona. 

goddess  of  war  :  xv.  139 
Eos,  the  dawn  :  III.  57 
Ephyre,  old  name  of  Corinth  :  xn. 

27 
Erechthis,    Orithyia,    daughter    of 

Erechtheus,    king    of     Atherfs  : 

XVI.  345 
Erinys,  one  of  the  Furies  :  VI.  45 ; 

XI.  103 
Erycina,    epithet   of   Venus,    from 

her  mount  Eryx  in  Sicily  :  XV.  57 
Erymanthus.      a      mountain      of 

Arcadia  :  IX.  87 
Euenus,  a  river  of  Aetolia  :  IX.  141 
Europe,  or  Europa.  carried  off  by 

Jove  in  form  of  a  bull :  IV.  55 
Eurus  :  VII.  42;  XI.  9,  14;  XV.  9 
Eurybates,  herald  of  Agamemnon  : 

III.  9 


Eurymachus,  suitor  of  Penelope : 

I.  92 

Eurystheus,  king  of  Mycenae,  who 
imposed  the  twelve  labors  on 
Hercules  :  IX.  7,  45 

Eurytis,  Iole,  daughter  of  Eurytus, 
king  of  Oechalia  :  IX.  133 

Faunus  :  rv.  49 

Gaetulus,  of  a  certain  North  African 
tribe  :  vil.  125 

Gargara,  part  of  Ida  :  xvi.  109 

Geryones,  three-bodied  monster, 
owner  of  cattle  stolen  by  Her- 
cules :  IX.  92 

Gnosis,  Ariadne  of  Gnosus,  or 
Cnossus,  in  Crete  :  xv.  26. 

Gnosius.  Cretan  :  iv.  68 

Gorge,  sister  of  Deianira  :  IX.  165 

Graecia  :  III.  84 ;  XVI.  342 

Graecus  :  in.  2 

Graius:  v.  117,  118;  vm.  112; 
XII.  10,  30,  203;  XVI.  33 

Haemonis :  xm.  2 

Haemonius,  Thracian  :  VI.  23 ;  XII. 

127;  xm.  2;  XVII.  248 
Haemus,  a  mountain   of  Thrace  : 

II.  113 

Hebrus,  a  river  of  Thrace :  n.  15, 

114 
Hecataeon,  father  of  Calyce :  xix. 

133 
Hecate,    deity    of    enchantment : 

xii.  168 
Hector  :  i.  36 ;  in.  86 ;  v.  93 ;  xm. 

65,  68;  XVI.  367;  XVII.  255 
Hectoreus  :  I.  14 ;  III.  126 
Hecuba,  Priam's  queen  :  v.  84 
Helene,  of  Troy:  v.  75;  vm.  99; 

xvi.  281,  287;  XVII.  134 
Helice,  the  Great  Bear  :  xvm.  149 
Helle,  see  I'hrixus  :  xvm.  141 ;  xix, 

123,  128 
Hellespontiacus  :  xvm.    108;  xix. 

32 
Hercules,  son  of  Jove  and  Alcmena : 

IX.  18,  27,  129,  149 
Herculeus  :  IX.  57,  64 
Hermione,    daughter   of   Menelaus 

and    Helen,    given    in    marriagj 

against  her  will  by  Agamemnon 

to  Achilles'  son  Pyrrhus,  in  fulfil- 


512 


INDEX— HEROIDES 


nient  ot  a  promise  made  at  Troy. 
Her  letter  is  a  pathetic  appeal  to 
her  lover  Orestes,  Agamemnon's 
son  and  her  own  cousin,  to  whom 
she  had  previously  been  promised 
by  her  grandfather  Tyndareus, 
to  assert  his  right :  viii.  59 ;  xvi. 
256 

Hero,  a  maid  of  Sestus.  In  Mus- 
aeus,  a  late- Greek  poet,  she  i3 
priestess  of  Aphrodite:  xvm., 
xix.,  titles 

Hesione,  daughter  of  Laomedon, 
loved  by  Telamon,  and  mother  of 
Teucer  :  xx.  69 

Hiberus,  Spanish  :  ix.  91 

Hippodamia,  bride  of  Pelops  : 
VIII.  70;  XVI.  266;  bride  of 
Pirithous  :  XVII.  248 

Hippolyte  :  xxi.  120 

Hippolvtus,  son  of  Theseus  and 
Hippolyte  :  IV.  36,  164;  xxi.  10 

Hippomenes,  lover  of  Atalanta, 
who  won  the  race  with  her,  and 
herself,  hy  dropping  golden  apples 
to  delay  her  :  xvi.  265 ;  xxi.  124 

Hippotades,  Aeolus,  son  of  Hippotes , 
king  of  the  winds  :  xvin.  46 

Hvllus  :  ix.  44,  168 

Hymen:  VI.  44,  45;  ix.  134;  xii. 
137,  143;  XIV.  27 

Hymenaeus  :  II.  33;  xi.  101;  XII. 
143;  xiv.  27;  xxi.  157 

Hypermestra,  one  of  the  fifty 
daughters  of  Danaus  bidden  by 
their  father  to  slay  in  one  night 
their  husbands,  the  fifty  sons  of 
Danaus'  brother  Aegyptus.  She 
was  the  only  one  ti>  disobey,  and 
writes  from  the  prison  into  which 
herfath  rhas  cast  her  to  Lynceus, 
the  husband  she  spared  and 
helped  escape  :  xiv.  1,  53, 129 

Hypsipyle,  queen  of  Lemnos,  with 
"whom  Jason,  on  the  Argonautic 
expedition,  remained  two  years 
as  lover  and  promised  husband. 
She  writes  after  hearing  of  his 
flight  with  Medea  and  the  Golden 
Fleece  :  vi.  8,  69, 132, 152 ;  xvn. 
193 

Iarbas,  a  Gaetulian  prince  who 
courted  Dido:  vn.  125 

OVID 


Iardanis,  Omphale,  daughter  of 
Iardanus,  a  queen  of  Lydia  loved 
by  Hercules  :  ix.  103 

Iason,  leader  of  the  expedition  for 
the  Golden  Fleece  :  vi.  37,  77, 
119,  139;  XII.  151;  XIX.  175 

Icarius,  father  of  Penelope  :  I.  81 

Ida,  Ide:  v.  73, 138;  Xin.  53;  xvi. 
53,  110;  xvn.  115 

Idaeus  :  rv.  48;  vm.  73;  xvi.  204, 
303;  XIX.  177 

Idyia,  mother  of  Medea  :  xvil.  232 

Iliacus  :  XIII.  33;  XVII.  215,  221; 
xxi.  118 

llias,  a  woman  of  llion  :  xvi.  333 

Uioneus,  a  Trojan  :  XVI.  362 

Uios,  llion,  a  name  of  Troy  :  I.  48 ; 
vn.  151;  XIII.  53 

Iole,  princess  of  Oechalia,  loved  by 
Hercules  :  ix.  6,  133 

Ioniacus,  Ionian  :  ix.  73 

Iphiclus,  father  of  Protesilaus  of 
Phylace,  in  Thessaly  :  xni.  25 

Inachis,  of  Inachus,  Argive  :  Xiv, 
23,  105 

Inachius  :  xm.  134 

Io,  transformed  into  a  heifer, 
guarded  by  Argus,  delivered  by 
Hermes,  tormented  by  Juno'a 
gadfly,  and  changed  back  to 
human  form  in  Egypt,  where  she 
became  Isi3 :  referred  to  in  xrv.  84 

Irua,  the  beggar  in  Ulysses'  palace  : 
I.  95 

Ismarius,  of  Ismarus,  in  Thrace, 
Thracian  :  I.  46;  xv.  154 

Isthmos,  of  Corinth  :  vm.  69;  XII. 
104 

Italus,  Italian,  of  King  Italus  :  VII. 
9 

Itys,  son  of  Tereus  and  Procne  : 
XV.  154,  155 

lulus,  son  of  Aeneas,  called  also 
Ascanius:  vu.  75,  83,  137,  153 

Iuno  :  II.  41;  IV.  35;  v.  35;  VI. 
43,  45;  IX.  5,  11,  26,  45;  xn.87; 
xvi.  65;  xvn.  133. 

Iunoiiius  :  xiv.  84 

Inppiter:  m.  73;  IV.  36,  55,  163 
VI.  152;  vm.  48,  68,  78;  IX.  22 
X.  68;  XI.  18;  xm.  50,  144 
XIV.  28,  88  95,  99;  xvi.  72,81 
166,  175,  214,  252,  274,  292,  294 
xvn.  50,  53,  55;  xvm,  153 

513 


INDEX 


Lacaena,  Laconian,  Helen  :  v.  99 

Lacedaemon  :  I.  5 ;  vin.  11 ;  XVI. 
131;  xix.  177 

Laertes,  father  of  Ulysses  :  I.  98, 
105,  113 

Lamus,  a  son  of  Hercules  :  IX.  54 

Latmius,  of  Mt.  Latmos,  where 
Endymion  was  loved  by  Diana  :' 
xviil.  62 

Latois,  Diana,  daughter  of  Leto  : 
xxi.  153 

Laudamia,  wife  of  Protesilaus, 
Prince  of  Phyluce,  in  Thessaly. 
Detained  at  Aulis  with  the  Greek 
expedition,  he  receives  a  letter 
full  of  love  from  her,  warning 
him  of  the  prophecy  that  the 
first  of  the  Greeks  to  set  foot  on 
Trojan  soil  shall  die  :  xin.  2,  36, 
70 

Laudice,  a  beauty  :  XIX.  135 

Laumedon  :  xvn.  58,  206 

Leandru°,  a  youth  of  Abydos,  in 
love  with  Hero  of  Sestus  to  whom 
he  swam  across  the  Hellespont 
until  drowned  in  a  storm.  "When 
and  how  the  popular  story  arose 
is  not  clear.  The  simplest  theory 
is  to  hold  that  the  story  is  a  fact 
which  actually  occurred  in  the 
first  century  B.C.,  and  vhich  the 
Romans  became  acquainted  with 
in  the  time  of  Virgil." — Palmer, 
notes  to  xvm. :  xix.  l,  40,  150, 
185 

Leda,  mother  of  Castor  and  Pollux  : 
vra.  78;  xvi.  294;  xvn.  55 

Ledaeus  :  xm.  61 ;  xvi.  1 

Lemniades :  VI.  53,  139 

Lemnos  :  VI.  50, 117, 136 

Lernaeus,  of  Lerna,  the  home  of  the 
Hydra  slain  by  Hercules  :  IX.  115 

Lesbias  :  XV.  16 

Lesbis :  m.  36;  xv.  100,  199,  200, 
201 

Lesbos,  the  island  of  Sappho  :  XV. 
52 

Leucadius,  of  the  island  of  Leucadia, 
whence  legend  says  Sappho 
leaped :  xv.  166, 180,  187,  220 

Leucas,  Leucadia  :  xv.  172 

Leucippides,  daughters  of  Leucip- 
pus,  stolen  by  Castor  and  Pollux  : 
xvi.  329 

5H 


Liber,  Bacchus  :  xvm.  153 
Lucifer,  the  morning  star :  xvirr. 

112 
Lucina,  goddess  of  childbirth  :  VI. 

122;  XI.  55 
Luna :  xi.  46 
Lydus  :  IX.  54 
Lycia:  I.  19 
Lycurgus,    the     king    of    Thrace 

whose  hostility  to  Dionysus  was 

followed  by  madness  and  death  : 

n.  ill 
Lynceus,  the  only  one  saved  of  the 

fifty  sons  of  Aegyptus :  xrv.  123 
Lyrnesia,  of  Lyrnesus,   in  Mysia  : 

m.  45 


Macareus,  son  of  Aeolus  and  lover 
of  his  sister  Canace :  xi.  21 

Maeandros,  a  river  in  Asia  Minor  : 
vn.  2;  rx.  55 

Maenalius,  of  Mt.  Maenalus,  in 
Arcadia  :  iv.  99 

Maeonius,  Lydian  :  ix.  65 

Magnetis,  of  Magnesia,  a  country  of 
Thessaly  :  xix  9 

Mars  :  ni.  45,  88 ;  vi.  10,  32,  35 ; 
vn.  154;  xn.  41;  xv.  92;  xvi. 
372;  xvn.  253 

Medea,  daughter  of  Aeetes,  king  of 
Colchis,  and  wife  of  Jason,  whom 
by  her  enchantress'  art  she  aided 
to  gain  the  Golden  Fleece.  De- 
serted and  ordered  into  exile 
by  Jason,  who  marries  Creusa, 
daughter  of  Creon,  king  of 
Corinth,  with  her  children  and 
Jason's  she  leaves  the  palace  in 
transports  of  grief,  jealousy,  and 
rage,  and  writes  a  pasbionate 
letter  rilled  « ith  reproach  :  VI. 
75,  127,  128,  151 ;  XII.  5,  25,  182  ; 
xvn.  229,  233 

Medon,  suitor  of  Penelope  :  I.  91 

Medusa  :  xix.  134 

Melanthius,  goatherd  of  Ulysses 
and  friend  of  the  suitors :  I.  95 

Meleager,  son  of  Althaea  and 
hunter  of  the  Calydonian  boar: 
ix.  151 

Menelaus  :  v.  105 ;  vni.  37 ;  XIII. 
47,  73 ;  xvi.  205,  457 ;  xvn.  110, 
154,  249 


INDEX— HEROIDES 


Menoetiades,  Menoet  ius'  son  Patro- 

clus,   friend  of   Achilles:  I.   17; 

hi.  23 
Methymnias,  a  woman  of  Methymna 

in  Lesbos  :  xv.  15 
Minerva  :  v.  36 
Minois,  Ariadne,  daughter  of  Minos 

of  Crete  :  xvi.  349 
Minoius,  of  Minos :  iv.  61 ;  XVII.  193 
Minos,    king    of    Crete:    IV.    157; 

X.  91 ;  xvi.  350 
Minous,  of  Minos  :  VI.  114 
Minyae,    the    Argonauts  :  VI.    47 ; 

XII   65 
Mycenae  :  Agamemnon's    capital, 

vii.  165 
Mycenaeus  :  ill.  109;  v.  2 
Myconos,  an  island  :  xxi.  81 
Mygdonius,     Phrygian  :  XV.     142; 

XX.  106 
Myrtous,    of   the    island    Myrtos : 

XVI.  210 

Naias,  a  Naiad,  a  water-nymph  : 
XV.  162 

Neleius,    applied    to    Neleus*    son . 
Nestor :  I.  64 

Nemacus  :  IX.  61 

Neoptolemus,  son  of  Achilles,  also 
called  Pyrrhus  :  vm.  82,  115 

Neptunius  :  ill.  151 ;  IV.  109;  xvii. 
21 

Neptunus  :  xm.  129;  XIX.  129,  137 

Nereides,  daughters  of  Nereus, 
deity  of  the  ocean  :  v.  57 

Nereus,  son  of  Oceanus  and  Tethys, 
sea  deity,  father  of  Thetis,  the 
mother  of  Achilles:  m.  74;  ix. 
14 

Nesseus,  of  Nessus,  the  Centaur 
slain  by  Bercules  for  an  insult  to 
Deianira,  whom  he  was  ('.Trying 
across  the  Euentis.  In  his  list 
momi'iits  he  gave  her  some  of  his 
poisoned  blood,  or  his  tunic 
dipped  in  it,  ;;sa  supposed  love- 
charm  :  IX.  103 

Nestor,  of  Pylos,  an  aged  warrior 
and  counsellor  in  the  Urcek  army, 
I.  38,  63 

Nilus  :  XIV.  107 

Nisias,  a  Sicilian  woman  :  xv.  54 

Notus:  II.  12;  in.  58;  x.  30;  xi. 
13,  76 


Oebalis,  Spartan,  descendant  "f 
Oebalus,  father  of  Tyndarus : 
xvi.  128 

Oechalia,  a  city  of  Euboea  taken  by 
Hercules  :  IX.  1,  130 

Oenidcs,  son  of  Oeneus,  Meleager  : 
in.  92;  IV.  99 

Oenone,  a  river-nymph,  wife  of 
Paris  on  Ida  before  his  recognition 
as  Priam's  son.  Abandoned  by 
him  and  supplanted  by  Hel<n, 
she  writes  a  letter  of  reproach 
and  warning,  and  asserts  her  own 
faithfulness  :  v.  3,  22,  29,  32,  80, 
115,  138;  xvi.  97;  xvii.  196 

Oeta,  the  mountain  between 
Aetolia  and  Thessaly  on  which 
Hercules  died  :  ix.  147 

Ogygius,  of  Ogygus  of  Thebes, 
Theban,  applied  to  Bacchus  :  x. 
48 

Olenium  (pecus),  the  star  Capra: 
xvin.  188 

Orestes,  son  of  Agamemnon,  hus- 
band of  Hermione  :  vm.  9.  15, 
59,  101,  115 

Ormenis,  Astydamia,  grand- 
daughter of  Ormenus  :  ix.  50 

Pagasaeus,  of  Pagasae,  in  Thessaly, 
where  the  Argo  was  built  :  xvi. 
347;  XIX.  175 

Palaemon,  son  of  Athamas,  son 
of  Aeolus,  transformed  to  a 
marine  deity  :  xvm.  159 

I'alladius  :  xvu.  133 

I'allas  :  xvi.  65,  188 

Pallas,  meaning  the  olive-oil  of 
which  she  was  the  deity  :  xix. 
44 

Par,  :  IV.  171 

:i  Fate  :  xi.  105 

Paris,  who  gave  to  Venus  the  prize 
for  beauty,  and  was  aided  by  her 
in  the  rape  of  Belen.  Be  was  at 
first  a  sh'plienl  on  Mt.  Id.i,  and 
liter  recognised  as  a  son  of 
Priam:  v.  29,  82;  vin.  22;  xvi 
49,  83,  168,  858;  xvu.  33,  100, 
254;  xx.  19 

Farrhasia,  Arcadian,  from  the  t ri I >•  - 
of  the  Parrh.isii  :  xvm.  152 

Parthcnius,  of  Mt.  Parthi-nius  in 
Arcadia  :  IX.  49 

.SI5 


INDEX 


Pasiphae,  wife  of  Minos,  mother  of 
Ariadne,  Phaedra,  and  the  Mino- 
taur :  iv.  57 

Pegasis,  fountain-nymph,  a  term 
applied  to  Oenone  :  v.  3;  of 
Pegasus,  a  Muse  :  xv.  27 

Pelasgias,  Greek  :  ix.  3 

Pelasgis,  a  descendant  of  Pelasgus  : 
XV.  217 

Pelasgus,  king  of  Argos  :  xiv.  23 

Pelasgus,  the  adjective  :  XII.  83 ; 
xvii.  239 

Peleus,  husband  of  Thetis  and 
father  of  Achilles  :  in.  135 

Pelias,  of  Pelion,  a  mountain  in 
Thessaly  :  m.  126 ;  xii.  8 

Pelias,  usurper  of  Iolcus,  uncle  of 
Jason  :  vi.  101 ;  xii.  129 

Pelides,  son  of  Peleus,  Achilles  : 
vm.  83 

Pelopeius  :  vm.  27,  81 

Pelops,  son  of  Tantalus  and  father 
of  Atreus  and  Thyestes  :  vin.  47 ; 
xvn.  54 

Penates,  household  deities  :  III.  67 ; 
vn.  77 

Penelope,  wife  of  Ulysses,  who  was 
absent  ten  years  at  the  siege  of 
Troy,  and  did  not  reach  home  for 
ten  years  more.  Her  letter  is 
written  Dot  long  after  the  fall  of 
Troy :  I.  1,  84 

Penthesilea  :  xxi.  118 

Pergama,  Troy  :  I.  32,  51 ;  Hi.  152 ; 
xvn.  205 

Persephone,  daughter  of  Ceres : 
XXI.  46 

Perseus,  son  of  Jove  and  Danae  : 
xv.  35;  xviii.  153 

Phaedra,  daughter  of  Minos  and 
wife  of  Theseus,  of  vhoce  son 
Hippolytus,  a  chaste  devotee  of 
Diana,  she  is  enamoured.  Her 
letter  is  a  declaration  of  passion  : 
iv.  74,  112 

Phaon,  legendary  lover  of  Sappho  : 
XV.  11,  90,  123,  193,  203 

Phasiacus  :  xh.  10 

Phasias,  daughter  of  the  Phasis, 
Medea  :  vi.  103 

Phasis,  a  river  near  Colchis  :  VI. 
108;  xvi.  347;  xix.  176 

Phoebe,  sister  of  Helen :  vm. 
77 


Phoebe,  Diana,  the  moon-goddess : 
xv.  89;  xx.  229 

Phoebeus,  of  Phoebus  Apollo  :  xvi 
182 

Phoebus  :  I.  67 ;  x.  91 ;  xi.  45 ;  xui. 
103;  XV.  25,  165,  181,  183,  188 

Phoenix,  envoy  to  Achilles  :  in.  129 

Pherecleus,  of  Phereclus,  who  built 
the  ships  in  which  Paris  sailed 
to  carry  away  Helen  ;  xvi.  22 

Phrixeus  :  VI.  104;  xn.  8 

Phrixus,  who,  with  his  sister  Helle, 
escaped  through  the  air  on  the 
golden  ram  from  Ino,  their  step- 
mother. Helle  having  been  lost 
in  the  waters  afterwards  called 
the  Hellespont,  her  brother 
arrived  in  Colchis,  married  King 
Aeetes'  daughter  Chalciope,  and 
sacrificed  the  ram  to  Zeus 
(Jove).  Aeetes  hung  up  its 
golden  fleece  in  the  grove  of  Ares 
(Mars),  whence  it  was  taken  by 
Jason,  whose  usurping  uncle 
Pelias  had  sent  him  for  it  in  the 
hope  that  he  would  lose  his  life  : 
xviii.  143 ;  xix.  163 

Phrygia  :  ix.  128 ;  xvi.  143 

Phrygius  :  1.54;  V.  3, 120;  vn.  68; 
vin.  14;  xni.  58;  xvi.  107,  186, 
264;  XVII.  57,  227 

Phryx  :  xvi.  198,  203;  xvn.  200 

Phthias  :  vn.  165 

Phthius,  of  Phthia,  a  city  of 
Thessaly,  Achilles'  birthplace : 
in.  65 

Phylaceis  :  xm.  35 

Phylleides,  women  of  Phyllos  in 
Thessaly  :  XIII.  35». 

Phyllis,  queen  of  Thrace,  who 
sheltered  and  loved  Demophoon, 
son  of  Theseus  of  Athens.  His 
failure  to  keep  faith  and  return 
is  the  occasion  of  her  letter :  n. 
1,  60,  98,  105,  106,  138,  147 

Pirithous,  who,  with  his  friend 
Theseus,  descended  to  Hades : 
iv.  110,  112 

Pisander,  suitor  of  Penelope  :  I.  91 

Pittheius,  of  Pittheus,  king  of 
Troezen,  grandfather  of  Theseus  : 
IV.  107 

Pittheis,  daughter  of  Pittheus,  king 
of  Troezen  :  x.  131 


516 


INDEX— HEROIDES 


Pleioue,  wife  of  Atlas,  mother  of  the 
Pleiades,   grandmother   of   Her- 
mes :  XVI.  62 
Plias  :  xvi.  175;  xviii.  188 
Polybus,  suitor  of  Penelope  :  I.  91 
Polydamas,  friend  of  Hector  :  v.  94 
Pontus :  xn.  28 ;  xvm.   157 
Priamides  :  v.  11 ;  xin.  43;  xvi.  1 
Priamus,  king  of  Troy,  father   of 
fifty   sons,   among   whom   were 
Hector  and  Paris  :  I.  4,  34 ;  ill. 
20;  v.  82,  83,  95;  XVI.  48,  98, 
209;  xvn.  58,  211 
Procrustes,  the  robber  who  fitted 
his  victims  to  the  famous  bed  by 
stretching  them  or  cutting  them 
short :  n.  69 
Protesilaus,  see  Laudamia  :  xm.  12, 

16,  84,  150 
Pygmalion,  brother  of  Dido :  vn. 

150 
Pylos,  Nestor's  home  :  I.  63,  64, 100 
Pyrrhias,  a  woman  of  Pyrrha,  in 

Lesbos :  XV.  15 
Pyrrha,    wife    of    Deucalion :  xv. 

167,  169 
Pyrrhus,  son  of  Achilles,  also  called 
Neoptolemus  :  ni.    136 ;  VIII.    3, 
8,  36,  42,  103 

Rhesus,  a  Thracian  ally  of  Troy, 
slain  by  Ulysses,  who  stole 
his  horses  to  keep  them  from 
drinking  of  the  Xanthus  or  feed- 
ing on  the  plain  of  Troy.  An 
oracle  has  declared  that  Troy 
would  not  be  taken  if  the  horses 
thus  drank  and  fed  :  I.  39 

Rhodope,  a  mountain  in  Thrace  : 
II.  113 

Rhodopeius :  II.  1 

Samius,  of  Samos,  the  Homeric 
Cephallenia,  an  island  near 
Ithaca :  I.  87 

Sappho,  a  poetess  of  Mytilene,  in 
Lesbos,  about  600  B.C.,  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  coterie  of  literary 
women,  and  was  a  friend  of 
Alcaeus.  According  to  legend, 
she  was  enamoured  of  Phaon, 
and  leaped  from  the  Leucadlan 
Rock  in  the  hope  of  curing  her 
passion:  XV.  3,  155,  183,  217 


Saturnus,  father  of  Jove  :  iv.  132 
Satyrus,  a  woodland  creature  :  iv. 

171;  v.  135 
Schoeneis,   Atalanta,   daughter  of 

Schoeneus  :  xvi.  265 ;  xxi.  123 
Sciron,  the  robber  of  the  Scironian 

rocks,  slain  by  Theseus  :  H.  69 
Scylla :  xu.  123,  124 
Scyrius,  of  Scyros,  the  island  where 

Achilles  and  Pyrrhus  were  reared  : 

vm.  112 
Scythia  :  VI.  107 ;  Xil.  27 
Sestus,  a  town  on  the  Hellespont, 

opposite     Abydos  :  xvm.     127 ; 

also  the  adjective  :  xvm.  2 
Sicanus,  Sicilian  :  xv.  57 
Sicelis  :  xv.  51,  52 
Sidonius  :  ix.  101 
Sigeus,  or  Sigeius,  of  Sigeum,  near 

Troy:  I.  33;  xvi.  21,  275 
Simois,  a  river  near  Troy  :  I.  33 ; 

vu.  145;  xm.  53 
Sinis,  the  robber  who  tied  his  vic- 
tims to  two  pine  trees  which  he 

bent  down  for  the  purpose,  and 

then  let  spring  back  :  II.  70 
Sisyphius,  Corinthian  :  xn.  204 
Sithonis,  of  Sithonia,  part  of  Thrace ; 

used  for  Thracian  :  II.  6 
Sithonius  :  XI.  13 
Soror,  a  Fate  :  xv.  81 
Sparte  :  I.  65;  XVI.  189,  191;  XVII. 

209 
Stheneleius,    of    Sthenelus,    father 

of  Eurystheus  :  IX.  25 
Stygius,  of    the  river  Styx :    xvi. 

211 
Sychaeus,  Dido's  first  husband,  a 

Tyrian  :  vu.  97,  99,  193 
Sympleuades,    the    clashing    rocks 

through  which  the  Argo  passed  : 

xn.  121 


Taenaris,  of  Taenarus,  a  promon- 
tory of  Laconia :  xvi.  30;  xvn. 
6;  Helen  :  vm.  73 

Taenarius,  of  Taenarus  :  xm.  45; 
xvi.  276 

Talthybius,  herald  of  Agamemnon  : 
III.  9,  10 

Tanais,  a  river  of  Scythia  :  VI.  107 

Tantalides,  a  descendant  of  Tan- 
talus: VIII.  45,  122;  xvn.  :>4 


517 


INDEX 


Tantalis,  a  female  descendant  of 

Tantalus :  TO,  122 
Tegaeus,    of    Tegea,    a    town    in 

Arcadia :  ix.  87 
Telemachus,  son  of  Ulysses  :  I.  93. 

107 
Telamon,  a  Greek  hero  at  Trov  : 

in. 27;  xx.  69 
Tenedos,  an  island  in  the  Aegean  : 

xiii.  53 
Tenos,  an  island  in  the  Aegean  : 

XXI.  81 
Teucer,  son  of  Telamon,  and  brother 

of  Ajax  :  III.  130 
Teucri,  Trojans  :  vn.  140 
Teuthrantius,  of  Teuthras,  father 

of  Thespius,  king  of    Thespia  : 

ix.  51 
Thalia,  a  Muse  :  xv.  84 
Thebae  :  II.  71 
Therapnaeus,  of  Therapne,  a  town 

in  Lacedaemon  :  xvi.  198 
Theseus,  the   great  hero  of  Attic 

legend  :  n.  13;  IV.  65,  111,  119; 

V.  127, 128;  X.  3,  10,  21,  34,  35, 

75,  101,  110,  151;  XVI.  149,  329, 

349;  xvii.  33 
Thesides,  Hippolytus :  rv.  65 
Thessalia :  vi.  1 
Thessalicus  :  ix.  100 
Thessalis,  Thessalian  :  xiii.  112 
Thessalus  :  vi.  23 ;  xvi.  347 ;  xvm. 

158 
Thetis,    a   sea-nymph,    mother   of 

Achilles :  XX.  60 
Thoantias,  Hypsipyle,  daughter  of 

Thoas :  vi.  163 
Thoas,   father    of    Hypsipyle :  vi. 

114,  135 
Thrace  :  II.  84 
Thrax  :  II.  81 ;  xvi.  345 
Threicius  :  II.  108;  in.  118;  IX.  89 
Thressus :  xix.  100 
Thybris :  VII.  145 
Tiphys,     the    helmsman     of    the 

Argonauts :  vi.  48 
Tisiphone,  one  of  the  Furies  :  II. 

117 
Titan,  the  sun  :  vm.  105 ;    XV.  135 
Tithonus :  xvm.  Ill 


Tlepolemus,    a    Greek    (Rhodian) 
prince  in  the  Trojan    war,  slain 
by  Sarpedon  :  1. 19,  20 
Tonans,  the  Thunderer  :  IX.  7 
Trinacria,  Sicily  :  XII.  126 
Triton,  a  sea  deity  :  vn.  50 
Tritonis,  of  Pallas  Athena :  VI.  47n. 
Troas,  a  Trojan  woman  :  xin.  137  ; 
the  adjective  :  xni.  94 ;  xvi.  185 
Troezen,  to  the  south  of  Corinth  : 

IV.  107 

Troia:  I.  3,  4.  24,  49,  53;  V.  139; 

vm.  104;  XIII.  71,  87,  123;  XVI. 

92,  107.  295,  338 ;  XVII.  210 
Troicus  :  I.  28;  vn.  184  ;  XVII.  109, 

160 
Tros.  a  Trojan  :  I.  13 
Tydeus,  brother  of  Deianira  :   IX. 

155 
Tyndareus,  father  of  Helen  :  vm. 

31 ;  xvii.  54,  250 
Tyndaris,      Helen,      daughter     of 

Tyndareus  :  v.     91 ;  xvi.      100, 

308;  xvn.  US 
Typhois,    of    Typhoeus,    a    Giant 

buried  under  Aetna  :  xv.  11 
Tyrius  :  vn.  151 ;  XII.  179 
Tyro,  loved  by  Poseidon,  and  mother 

of  Pelias  and  Neleus  :  xix.  132 
Tyro3 :  xvm.  149 

Ulixes,  prince  of  Ithaca,  hero  in 
the  Trojan  War  :  1. 1,  35,  84 ;  m. 
129;  xix.  148 

Ursa,  the  Bear  :  xvm.  152 

Venus:  n.  39;  m.  16;  rv.  49,  88, 
97,  102,  136,  167;  v.  35;  VII  31; 
IX.  11;  XV.  91,  21.3;  xvi.  35,  65, 
83,  140,  160.  285,  291,  298;  xvn. 
115,  126,  131,  141,  253;  XVIU. 
69 ;  xix.  159 

Xanthus,   a   river  of  the   Troad : 

V.  30,  31;  xni.  53 

Zacynthos,  an  island  near  Ithaca  : 

1.87 
Zephyrus :   XI.  13;    xiv.  39;   xv. 

203 


5*» 


INDEX 

II.  AMORES 


Aisantiades,  Perseus,    descendant 

of  Abas  :  ni.  xii.  24 
Accins,  writer  of  tragedy  :  I.  xv.  19 
Achelous,  a  river  between  Aetolia 

and  Aearnania  :   in.  vi.  35,  103 
Achilles:    I.  ix.  33;    II.  i.  29,  viii. 

13,  xviii.  1 ;  rn.  ix.  1 
Aeaeus,  of  Aea,  Circe's  isle  :  I.  viii. 

5;  II.  xv.  10;  III.  vii.  79 
Aegyptius  :  ill.  ix.  33 
Aeneas:    I.  viii.  42;    II.  xiv.  17, 

xviii.  31 ;  III.  ix.  13 
Aeneius,  of  Aeneas  :   I.  xv.  25 
Aeolius  :  in.  xii.  29 
Aeonius  :  II.  xviii.  26 
Aesonius,  describing  Jason,  son  of 

Aeson  :  I.  xv.  22 
Aetolia  :  ni.  vi.  37 
Agamemnon  :  in.  xiii.  31 
Ajax,  the  Greek  hero  :  I.  vii.  7 
Alcides,  Hercules  :  m.  viii.  52 
Alcinous,  king  of  the  Phaeacians: 

I.  x.  66 
Alpes  :  II.  xvi.  19 
Alpheus,  a  river  near  Olympia  :  m. 

vi.  29 
Amathusia,  of  Amathus,  a  seat  of 

Venus  in  Cyprus  :  in.  xv.  15 
Amor :  I.  i.  26,  ii.  8,  18,  32,  hi.  12, 

vi.  34,  37,  59,  60,  x.  15;  II.  i.  3, 

38,  ix.  34,  xviii.  4, 15,  18,  19,  36; 

m.  i.  20,  43,  69,  iv.  20,  xv.  1 
Amymone,    daughter    of    Danaus, 

loved  by  Poseidon  :  I.  x.  5 
Andromache  :  I.  ix.  35 
Anien,    a   river    flowing   into   the 

Tiber  near  Rome  :  in.  vi.  51 
Anubis,    a    dog-headed    deity    of 

Egypt,  associated  with  Isis  and 

Osiris  :   II.  xiii.  11 
Aonius,    of    Aonia,    near    Mount 

Helicon  :  I.  i.  12 


Apis  :  II.  xiii.  14 

Apollo  :   I.  xiv.  31,  xv.  35 ;   m.  iii. 

29 
Aratus,  who  wrote  on  Astronomy  : 

I.  xv.  16 
Arcadia  virgo,  Arethusa  :  m.  vi.  30 
Argeus,  Argive  :  m.  vi.  46 
Argivus  :  I.  ix.  34;  in.  xiii.  31 
Argolicus  :  II.  vi.  15 
Argus,  the  many-eyed  guardian  of 

Io  :   in.  iv.  20 
Armenius  :  n.  xiv.  35 
Ascraeus,    Hesiod,    of    Ascrae    in 

Boeotia  :  I.  xv.  11 
Asia  :  n.  xii.  18 
Asopis  :  in.  vi.  41 
Asopos,  a  river  of  Boeotia  :  in.  vi. 

33 
Assyrius  :  n  v.  40 
Atalanta,    daughter    of    Iasius    of 

Arcadia  :  in.  ii.  29 
Atracis,  Hippodamia  of  Atrax  in 

Thessaly,  wife  of  Pirithous  and 

cause     of    the     fight    between 

Centaurs  and  Lapiths  :  I.  iv.  8 
Atreus  :  ill.  xii.  39 
Atrides,      Agamemnon,      son      of 

Atreus:  I.  ix.  37;  n.  i.  30,  xii.  10 
Auriga,  the  charioteer  Phaethon : 

III.  xii.  37 
Aurora  :  I.  xiii.  3;  n.  iv.  43 
Avernus,  the  lake   which  was  an 

entrance   to   the    lower   world : 

in.  ix.  27 

Bacche,  a  Bacchante  :  I.  xiv.  21 
Bacchus  :   I.  ii.  47,  xiv.  32;  ill.  ii. 

53,  iii.  40 
Bagous,  Bagoas  :  n.  ii.  1 
Battiades,  Callimachus  :  I.  xv.  13 
Bithynis  :  in.  vi.  25 
Blanditiae  :  I.  ii.  35 

5^9 


INDEX 


Boreas  :  I.  vi.  53;  II.  xi.  10 
Briseis,  the  Mysian  captive  loved 
by  Achilles  :  I.  ix.  33 ;  II.  viii.  1 1 
BritanDus  :  II.  xvi.  39 

Caesar:  1.  ii.  51;  11.  xiv.  18;  III. 
viii.  52,  xii.  15 

Callimachus,  of  Cyrene,  the  princi- 
pal Alexandrian  poet:  II.  iv.  19 

Calvus,  a  poet  of  Catullus'  time  : 
in.  ix.  62 

Calydon,  home  of  Deianira,  wife  of 
Hercules  :  in.  vi.  37 

Calypso,  a  nymph  who  loved 
Ulysses  :  n.  xvii.  15 

Camillus,  a  Koraan  general  of  the 
fourth  century  B.C. :   ill.  xiii.  2 

Campus,  i.  e.  Martius  :  in.  viii.  57 

Canopus,  a  town  near  Alexandria  : 
II.  xiii.  7 

Carpathius  senis,  Proteus  :  II.  xv. 
10 

Cassandra,  the  prophetess-daughter 
of  Priam  :  I.  vii.  17 

Castalius  :  I.  xv.  36 

Castor  :  II.  xvi.  13;  III.  ii.  54 

Catullus  :  in.  ix.  62,  xv,  7 

Cecropis,  Athenian  :  ni.  xii.  32 

Cephalus,  a  huntsman  loved  by 
Aurora  :  I.  xiii.  39 

Cepheia  virgo,  Andromeda,  daugh- 
ter of  Cepheus.  Her  mother  Cas- 
siopeia offended  the  Nereids  and 
Neptune  by  boasting  her  beauty, 
and  they  afflicted  Cepheus'  land 
with  a  sea-monster,  to  which 
Andromeda  had  to  be  exposed. 
She  was  rescued  by  Perseus  :  m. 
iii.  17 

Ceraunia,  a  promontory  of  Epirus  : 

II.  xi.  19 

Cerealia :  HI.  vi.  15,  x.  1 

Ceres :    I.  i.  9,  xv.  12 ;   n.  xvi.  7 ; 

III.  ii.  53,  vii.  31,  x.  3,  11,  24,  42 
Charybdis,  a  whirlpool :   II.  xi.  18, 

xvi.  25 
Chlide,  a  love  of  Ovid  :  m.  vii.  23 
Cilices  :  n.  xvi.  39 
Colchis,  Medea  :  II.  xiv.  29 
Corinna :   I.  v.  9,  xi.  5;   II.  vi.  48, 

viii.  6,  xi.  8,  xii.  2,  xiii.  2,  25, 

xvii.  7,  29,  xix.  9 ;  III.  i.  49,  vii. 

25.  xu.  16 
Corsicus  :  I.  xii.  10 

520 


Cressa,  Ariadne  :  I.  vii.  16 

Cretaeus  :  in.  x.  25 

Crete  :  m.  x.  20,  37 

Cretes  :  111.  x.  19 

Creusa,  daughter  of  Erechtheus  of 

Athens  :  ill.  vi.  31 
Cupido  :  1.  i.  3,  ii.  19,  vi.  11,  ix.  1, 

xi.  11,  xv.  27;  II.  v.  1,  ix.  1,  33, 

47,  51,  xii.  27;  in.  i.  41 
Cypassis  :  11.  vii.  17,  viii.  2,  22,  27 
Cythera,  an  island  sacred  to  Venus : 

11.  xvii.  4 
Cytherea,  Venus  :  1.  iii.  4 

Danae,  mother  of  Perseus,  loved  by 

Jove:   11.  xix.  27,  28;  m    iv. 

21 
Danaeius    heros,  Perseus,  son    of 

Danae  :  ni.  vi.  13 
Danaus  :  n.  ii.  4 
Deianira,  wife  of  Hercules  :   III.  vi. 

38 
Delia,  sung  by  Tibullus  :  in.  ix.  31, 

55 
Diana  :  II.  v.  27 ;  III.  ii.  31 
Dido  :  n.  xviii.  25 
Dione,  Venus  :  1.  xiv.  33 
Dipsas  :  I.  viii.  2 

Egeria,  a  nymph  who  counselled 

Numa,  king  of  Pome :  n.  xvii.  18 
Elegeia  :  in.  i.  7,  ix.  3 
Elissa,  Dido  :   II.  xviii.  31 
Elysius  :  n.  vi.  49;  in.  ix.  60 
Encelados,  a  Giant  who  fought  with 

Jove  :    III.  xii.  27 
Enipeus,  a  river  of  Thessaly :    HI. 

vi.  43 
Ennius,  father  of  Roman  poetry : 

I.  xv.  19 
Eous  :  I.  xv.  29 ;  11.  vi.  1 
Error  :  I.  ii.  35 
Erycina,  Venus  of  Mount  Eryx  :  II. 

x.  11 
Eryx,  a  mountain  in  Sicily,  sacred 

to  Venus  :  III.  ix.  45 
Euanthe,  loved  by  the  Nile :    m. 

vi.  41 
Europa  :  n.  xii.  18 
Eurotas,  river  of  Sparta:   1.  x.  1; 

n.  xvii.  32 
Eurus,  the  east  wind  :  1.  iv.  11,  ix. 

13;  n.  xi.  9;  in.  xii.  29 


INDEX— AMORES 


Faliscus,  of  Falerii,  an  Etruscan 
city  north  of  Rome  :  in.  xiii.  1, 
14,  35 

Furor  :  I.  ii.  35 

Galatea,    daughter    of    Nereus,    a 

sea  deity  :  II.  xi.  34 
Gallicus  :  IT.  xiii.  18 
(talltis,    father    of    Roman    elegy, 

friend  of  Virgil:    I.  xv.  29,  30; 

III.  ix.  64 
Gangetis,  of  the  Gauges,  Indian  : 

I.  ii.  47 
Germania  :  I.  xiv.  45 
Graecinus,  a  friend  of  Ovid  :  n.  x.  1 
Graius  :  ill.  xiii.  21 

Gyes,  Gyas,  a  Giant :  II.  i.  12 

Haemonius,  Thessaliau  :  I.  xiv.  40 ; 

II.  i.  32,  ix.  7 
Halaesus  :  in.  xiii.  32 

Hector  :   I.  ix.  35 ;   II.  i.  32,  vi.  42 

Heliconius  :  I.  i.  15 

Hercules  :  in.  vi.  36 

Hero,  of  Sestos,  loved  by  Leander  : 

II.  xvi.  31 
Hesperius  :  I.  xv.  29 
Hippodamia,  bride  of  Pelops  :  III. 

ii.  16 
Hippolytus  :   H.  iv.  32,  xviii.  24,  30 
Homerus  :  I.  viii.  61 ;  in.  viii.  28 
Hypsipyle,  queen  of  Lemnos  :    n. 

xviii.  33 

Iasius,  a  Cretan,  loved  by  Ceres  : 

HI.  x.  25 
Iaso,  leader  of  the  Argonauts  :  II. 

xiv.  33,  xviii.  23,  33 
Icarius:  II.  xvi.  4 
Ida,  Ide,  a  mountain  in  Phrygia  : 

I.  xiv.  11,  xv.  9 ;  in  Crete  :  in.  x. 

25,  39 
Idaeus  :  in.  vi.  54 
Ilia,    or    Rhea    Silvia,    mother   of 

Romulus  and   Remus :   II.    xiv. 

15;  III.  vi.  47,  54,  61,  62 
Iliacus  :  in.  vi.  76 
Iliades,  son  of  Ilia  :  in.  iv.  40 
Inachus,  Inachos,  a  river  of  Argos  : 

III.  vi.  25,  103 
Indus  :  n.  vi.  1 

Io,  loved  by  Jove,  and  changed 
to  a  heifer :  I.  iii.  21 ;  II.  ii.  45, 
xix.  29 


Isis,  a  deity  worshipped  especially 

by  women  :  I.  viii.  74;  n.  ii.  25, 

xiii.  7 
Ismarius,  Thracian  :   II.  vi.  7 ;   in. 

ix.  21 
Ithacus  :  ill.  xii.  29 
Itys,  son  of  Tereus  and  Procne  :  n. 

vi.  10,  xiv.  30;  III.  xii.  32 
lulus,  son    of    Aeneas,  also  called 

Ascanius  :  ill.  ix.  14 
Iuno  :  II.  xix.  29;  in.  x.  46,  xiii.  3 
Iunonius  :  n.  ii.  45,  vi.  55 
luppiter  :  I.  vii.  36,  x.  8;   Ii.  i.  15, 

17,  18,  19,  v.  52,  xix.  28,  30 ;   in. 

iii.  30,  35,  viii.  29,  x.  20,  xii.  33 

Lais,  a  courtesan  of  Corinth  :   I.  v. 

12 
Lapitha,  Lapithes,  a  wild  people  of 

Thessaly  :  II.  xii.  19 
Lares,  household  deities  :    I.  viii. 

113 
Latinus,  king  of  the  Latins  :  Ii.  xii. 

22 
Laudamia,  wife  of  Protesilaus  :  II. 

xviii.  38.   C/.  Heroides  xm 
Laumedon  :  in.  vi.  54 
Leda,  Lede,  mother  of  Helen  :  I.  x. 

3;   II.  xi.  29 
Lesbis  :   II.  xviii.  26,  34 
Libas,  a  love  of  Ovid  :  m.  vii.  23 
Liber,  Bacchus  :  I.  vi.  60;  ill.  viii. 

52 
Libycus  :  II.  xvi.  21 
Linos,  a  son  of  Apollo  :   III.  ix.  23 
Livor  :  I.  xv.  1,  39 
Lucifer,  the  morning  star  :  I.  vi.  65 
Lucretius,    author    of    De    Reruru 

Natura  :  I.  xv.  23 
Luna:    I.  viii.  12,  xiii.  44;    U.  v. 

38 
Lyaeus,  of  Bacchus,  wine  :    II.  xi. 

49;   in.  xv.  17 
Lycoris,  sung  by  Gallus  :  I.  xv.  30 
Lydius  :  hi.  i.  14 

Macareus,  son  of  Aeolus,  addressed 
by  his  sister-wife  Canace  in 
Heroid.  xi.  :    n.  xviii.  23 

Macer,  an  epic  poet,  friend  of 
Ovid  :   H.  xviii.  3,  35 

Maeonides,  Homer  :  I.  xv.  9 ;  in. 
ix.  25 

521 


INDEX 


Maeonis,  a  woman  of  Maeonia  :  II. 

v.  40 
Malea,  a  cape  of  the  Peloponnese  : 

II.  xvi.  24 
Mara  :  i.  i.  12,  viii.  29,  30,  41,  ix.  29, 

39 ;  n.  v.  28,  ix.  47,  xiv.  3,  xviii. 

36 ;  in.  ii.  49,  vi.  49 
Martia  :  m.  vi.  33 
Martigena,  son  of  Mars  :  ill.  iv.  39 
Mavors,  Mars  :  m.  iii.  27 
Melie,  a  nymph  :  in.  vi.  25 
Memnon,  King  of  Ethiopia,  son  of 

Aurora  :  I.  xiii.  3;  in.  ix.  1 
Memphis  :  u.  xiii.  8 
Menandros,      writer      of      Greek 

comedy.:  I.  xv.  18 
Mens  Bona  :  I.  ii.  31 
Milanion,  a  lover  of  Atalanta  :  m. 

ii.  29 
Minerva :   I.  i.  7,  8,  vii.  18 ;   II.  vi. 

35 ;   m.  ii.  52 
Minos,  king  of  Crete  :  in.  x.  41 
Musa  :  in.  i.  6,  viii.  23,  xii.  17,  xv. 

19 
Mycenaeus  :  n.  viii.  12 

Nape  :  I.  xi.  2,  xii.  4 

Naso  :  I.  epigram,  1 ;  xi.  27 ;  n.  i. 

2;  m.  xiii.  25 
Neaera,  a  nymph  :  ni.  vi.  28 
Nemesis,  sung  by  Tibullus  :  in.  ix. 

31,  53,  57 
Neptunus  :   n.  xvi.  27 ;   in.  ii.  47 
Nereides,  daughters  of  Nereus  :    n. 

xi.  36 
Nereis,  Thetis,  daughter  of  Nereus  : 

n.  xvii.  17 
Nereus,  a  sea  deity  :  H.  xi.  39 
Nilus  :  ii.  xiii.  9 ;  in.  vi.  40, 103 
Niobe  :  in.  xii.  31 
Notus,  the  south-wind  :    I.  iv.  12, 

vii.  16,  56;    H.  vi.  44,  viii.  20, 

xi.  10,  52,  xvi.  22 

Odrysius,  Thracian  :  m.  xii.  32 
Orestes,     son     and     avenger     of 

Agamemnon:  I.  vii.  9;  n.  vi.  15 
Orithyia,  daughter  of  Erechtheus, 

king  of  Athens,  carried  away  by 

Boreas  :  I.  vi.  53 
Orpheus,     son     of     Apollo     and 

Calliope  :  in.  ix.  21 
Osiris  :  II.  xiii.  12 

522 


Ossa,  a  mountain  in  Thessaly  :    n. 
i.  14 

Padus  :  II.  xvii.  32 

Paeligni,  a  people  of  Central  Italy  : 

II.  i.  1,  xvi.  37;  III.  xv.  17 
Paelignus  :  11.  xvi.  1,  5 ;  Hi.  xv.  3, 

8 
Pallas,  the  olive-tree  :  U.  xvi.  8 ; 

m.  iii.  28 
Paphos,  an  island  sacred  to  Venus  : 

n.  xvii.  4 
Paraetouium,  a  city  of  Libya  :   11. 

xiii.  7 
Parca,  a  Fate  :  n.  vi.  46 
Paris  :  n.  xviii.  23,  37 
Parius,  of  the  island  of  Paros :    1. 

vii.  52 
Peliacus,  of  Mount  Pelion  :  n.  xi.  2 
Pelion,  a  mountain  in  Thessaly  :  n. 

i.  14 
Pelops  :  ill.  ii.  15 
Penates  :  n.  xi.  7 
Penelope  :  1.  viii.  47;  II.  xviii.  21, 

29 
Peneus,  a  river  of  Thessaly  :  m.  vi. 

31 
Phaeacius,  of  Phaeacia,  a  country 

in  the  Odyssey  :  in.  ix.  47 
Pharos,  an  island  near  Alexandria  : 

11.  xiii.  8 
Phemius,  a  minstrel  in  the  Odyssey : 

in.  vii.  61 
Philomela,  sister  of  Procne,  changed 

to  a  nightingale  :  11.  vi.  7 
Phoceus  :  11.  vi .  15 
Phoebas,    Cassandra,    priestess    of 

Apollo  :   II.  viii.  12 
Phoebus :   1.  i.  11,  16,  iii.  11,  v.  5; 

II.  v.  27,  xviii.  34;    m.  ii.  51, 
viii.  23,  xii.  18 

Phrygius  :  1.  x.  1 

Phthius  rex,  Peleus  :   n.  xvii.  17 

Phylacides,  Protesilaus,  of  Phylace : 

u.  vi.  41 
Phyllis,  a  queen  of  Thrace,  deserted 

by  Demophoon  :  n.  xviii.  22,  32 
Pierides,  the  Muses  :  1.  i.  6 
Pierius,  of  Pieria,  the  home  of  the 

Muses,    near    Mount    Olympus : 

III.  ix.  26 

Pisaeus,  of  Pisa,  in  Elis  :  in.  ii.  15 
Pitho,  a  love  of  Ovid  :  ni.  vii.  23 
Pollux  :  11.  xvi.  13 ;  m.  ii.  54 


INDEX— AMORES 


Poutus  :  11.  xi.  14 

Priameis,      Cassandra,       Priam's 

daughter  :  I.  ix.  37 ;  H.  xiv.  13 
Priapus,  a  god  of  fertility  :  n.  iv.  32 
Prometheus  :  n.  xvi.  40 
Pudor  :  I.  ii.  32 

Punicus,  Phoenician  red  :  n.  vi.  22 
Pylius,  old  Nestor,  of  Pylos :    m. 

vii.  41 

Quirinus,  an  ancient  Roman  god  : 

HI.  viii.  51 
Quiris,  a  Roman  citizen  :  I.  vii.  29 ; 

HI.  ii.  73,  xiv.  9 

Remus  :  hi.  iv.  40 

Rhesus,  whose   horses  were  stolen 

by  Ulysses  and  Diomedes  :  I.  ix. 

23 
Roma:   I.  xv.  26;   H.  ix.  17;    HI. 

xv.  10 
Romanus  :  II.  xii.  23 
Romulus  :  HI.  iv.  40 

Sabinae:    I.  viii.  39,  x.  49;   H.  iv. 

15;  m.  viii.  61 
Sabinus,  a  poet  friend  of  Ovid  who 

wrote  replies  to  the  epistles  of 

the  Heroides  :  II.  xviii.  27 
Sacra  Via,  a  much-frequented  street 

leading  from  the  Roman  Forum  : 

I.  viii.  100 
Salmonis,  daughter  of  Salmoneus, 

mother  of  Neleus  and  Pelias  by 

Neptune,  who  assumed  the  form 

of  Enipeus  :  HI.  vi.  43 
Saturnus,  father  of  Jove  :  m.  viii. 

35 
Schoenei3,    Atalanta,   daughter   of 

Schoeneus  :  I.  vii.  13 
Scylla,    a    monster    dreaded    by 

sailors  :  n.  xi.  18;  HI.  xii.  21 
Scythia  :  II.  xvi.  39 
Semele,  bride  of  Jove,  mother  of 

Bacchus  :  III.  iii.  37 
Semiramis,  queen  of  Babylon  :    1. 

v.  11 
Seres,  a  people  of  the  far  east :   1. 

xiv.  0 
Simois,  a  river  near  Troy  :  1.  xv.  10 
Sithonius,  Thracian  :   hi.  vii.  8 
Sophoeleus  :   I.  xv.  15 
Sulmo,  Ovid's  birthplace  :    II.  xvi. 

1;  IU.  xv.  11 


Sygambra  :  I.  xiv.  49 
Syrtes,  dangerous  gulfs  off  Africa  : 
H.  xi.  20,  xvi.  21 

Tagus,  a  river  of  Spain :   I.  xv. 

34 
Tantalides,  Agamemnon,  descend- 
ant of  Tantalus :  u.  viii.  13 
Tantalus,  ancestor  of  the  Atridae  : 

IU.  xii.  30 
Tatius,  king  of  the  Sabines,  con- 
temporary   with    Romulus :     I. 

viii.  39 
Tellus,   the   earth-goddess :    h.   i. 

13 
Tenedos,  an  island  near  Troy :    I. 

xv.  9 
Tereus,    a    king    of    Thrace    who 

wronged  his  sister  and  wife  :   n. 

xiv.  33 
Thamyras,  a  minstrel  in  the  Iliad  : 

HI.  vii.  62 
Thebanus  :  ill.  xii.  35 
Thebe,  the  city  :   III.  xii.  15 
Thebe,  wife  of  Asopus  :   in.  vi.  33, 

34 
Thersites,  a  deformed  and  spiteful 

Greek  at  Troy  :  n.  vi.  41 
Theseus  :  I.  vii.  15 
Thessalicus  :  ill.  vii.  27 
Thessalus  :  n.  viii.  11 
Thetis,  mother  of  Achilles  :  n.  xiv. 

14 
Threicius  :    I.  ix.  23,  xiv.  21 ;    II. 

xi.  32 
Tibullus,  an  elegiac  poet  of  Ovid's 

time  :  I.  xv.  28;  hi.  ix.  5, 15,  39, 

60,  66 
Tibur,  a  town  near  Rome  :  hi.  vi. 

46 
Tithonus,  the  aged  and  immortal 

husband  of  Aurora  :    H.  v.  35 ; 

in.  vii.  42 
Tityos,  a  Giant  who  attempted  to 

wrong  Latona  :  HI.  xii.  25 
Tityrus,    a    shepherd    in    Virgil's 

eclogues  :  I.  xv.  25 
Tragoedia  :  in.  i.  11,  29,  35,  67 
Triton,  a  sea  deity  :  H.  xi.  27 
Triumphus  :  H.  xii.  16 
Troia  :  in.  vi.  27,  xii.  15 
Troianus  :  n.  xii.  21 ;  in.   vi.  65, 

ix.  29 
Tros  :  I.  ix.  34 

523 


INDEX 


Tydides,  Diomedes,  who  wounded 
Venus  in  battle  before  Troy  :  I. 
vii.  31,  34 

Tyndaris,  Helen,  daughter  of 
Tyndareus  :   II.  xii.  18 

Ulixes  :  II.  xviii.  21,  29 
Urbs,  Rome  :  H.  xiv.  16 

Varro,  Roman  poet  of  the  Argonau- 

tica  :  I.  xv.  21 
Venus :    I.  i.  7,  iv.  21,  66,  viii.  30, 

42,  86,  ix.  3,  29,  x.  17,  19,  33,  xi. 

26,  27;    II.  iii.  2,  iv.  40,  v.  28, 

vii.  21,  27,  viii.  8,  18,  x.  29,  35, 


xiv.  17,  xvii.  19,  xviii.  3;   in.  ii. 

55,  60,  ix.  7,  15,  x.  47,  xiv.  24 
Vergilius  :  ill.  xv.  7 
Verona  :  in.  xv.  7 
Vestalis  :  in.  vi.  75 
Victoria  :  in.  ii.  45 
Virgo,  Diana  :  I.  i.  10 
Vulcanus  :  n.  xvii.  19 

Xanthus,  a  river  in  the  Troad  :  in. 

vi.  28 
Xuthus,      husband      of      C'reusa, 

daughter      of      Erechtheus      of 

Athens  :  m.  vi.  31 

Zephyrus  :   I.  vii.  55;  II.  xi.  9,  41 


Richard  Clay  and  Sons,  Limited,  London  d-  hungay. 


LOEB    CLASSICAL     LIBRARY 

VOL  UMES  ALEE  AD  Y  PUELISHED  * 

APOLLONIUS   EHODIUS,   translated  by  R.    C.  Seaton,  of 

Jesus  College,  Camhridge.     1  volume. 

THE  APOSTOLIC  FATHERS,  translated  by  Kirsopp  Lake, 
of  the  University  of  Ley  den.     2  volumes. 

APPIAN'S  ROMAN  HISTORY,  translated  by  Horace  White, 
of  New  York,     4  volumes, 

THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ST.  AUGUSTINE,  translated  by 
W.  Watts  (1631).      2  volumes. 

BARLAAM  AND  IOASAPH,  translated  by  Harold  Mattingly 
and  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Woodward.     1  volume. 

THE  GREEK  BUCOLIC  POETS  (THEOCRITUS,  BION, 
MOSCHUS),  translated  by  J.  M.  Edmonds,  of  Jesus 
College,  Cambridge.     1  volume. 

CATULLUS,  translated  by  F.  W.  Cornish,  Vice-Provost  of 
Eton  College ;  TIBULLUS,  translated  by  J.  P.  Postgate, 
of  Liverpool  University;  PERVIGILIUM  VENERIS, 
translated  by  J.  W.  Mackail,  formerly  Professor  of  Poetry 
in  the  University  of  Oxford.     1  volume. 

CICERO,  LETTERS  TO  ATTIC  US,  translated  by  E.  0. 
Winstedt,  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  3  volumes. 
Volumes  I  and  II. 

CICERO,  DE  OFFICIIS,  translated  by  Walter  Miller.    1  vol. 

CICERO,  DE  FlItllBUS,  translated  by  H.Rackham,  of  Christ's 
College,  Cambridge.     1  volume. 

DIO  CASSIUS,  ROMAN  HISTORY,  translated  by  E.  Gary, 
of  Princeton  University.     8  volumes.      Volumes  I  and  II. 

EURIPIDES,  translated  by  A.  S.  Way,  of  the  University  of 
London.    4  volumes. 

*  All  volumes  can  be  supplied  separately. 


HORACE,  ODES  AND  EPODES,  translated  by  C.  E.  Bennett, 
of  Cornell  University.     1  volume. 

JULIAN,  translated  by  Wilmer  Cave  Wright,  ef  Bryn  Manor 
College.     3  volumes.      Volumes  I  and  11. 

LUCIAN,  translated  by  A.  M.  Harmon,  of  Princeton  Uni- 
versity.    8  volumes.      Volume  I. 

PETRONIUS,  translated  by  M.  Hescltine,  of  New  College, 
Oxford;  SENECA,  APOCOLOCYNTOS1S,  translated  by 
W.  II.  D.  Rouse.     1  volume. 

PHILOSTRATUS,  THE  LIFE  OF  APOLLONIUS  OF 
TYANA,  translated  by  F.  C.  Conybeare,  of  University 
College,  Oxford.     2  volumes. 

PLATO,  EUTHYPHRO,  APOLOGY,  CRITO,  PHAEDO, 
PHAEDRUS,  translated  by  II.  N.  Fowler.     1  volume. 

PROPERT1US,  translated  by  II.  E.  Butler,  of  the  i'nirersi/y 
of  London.     1  volume. 

QUINTUS  SMYRNAEUS,  translated  by  A.  S.  Way,  of  the 
University  of  London.     1  volume. 

SOPHOCLES,  translated  by  F.  Storr,  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.     2  volumes. 

SUETONIUS,  translated  by  J.  C.  Bolfe.     2  volumes. 

TACITUS,  DIALOGUS,  translated  by  Win.  Peterson  ;  AGRI- 
COLA  AND  GERJIANIA,  translated  by  Maurice 
Mutton.     1  volume. 

TERENCE,  translated  by  John  Saryeaunt,  of  Westminster 
School.     2  volumes. 


LONDON  :    WILLIAM     BEINEMANN,  21   BEDFORD  STREET 
NEW  YORK:    THE  MACMILLAN    CO.,    64    FlJJ&i    AVENUE 


I 


University  of  California  Library 
Los  Angeles 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


RENEWALS 


UCLA  ARTS  LIBRARY 
GENERAL  PHONE 

310/825-9188 


APR  1  1  ZU05 


Uj,isiia>v 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

AA    000  907  771     o 


l  '■ 


:.<>   ^ 


^^TitsarfT^K 


BHnP^""0 


'<Uis&*& 


i^s 


s&nv 


<V 


1 


K\a*< 


LfNlVCS^     a" 


£>JEGO' 


.mil 


^1 


