This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


THE 


HISTORICAL  LIBRARY 


or 


DIODORUS  THE  SICILIAN, 


iir 


FIFTEEN  BOOKS. 


TO  WHICU  ARE  ADDEB 


THE  FRAGMENTS  OF  DIODORUS, 


Those  published  bg  H.  Vaiesius^  L  IthodomarmuSf  mid  F.  Ursinns. 


TftANSLATBO  IT 


G.  BOOTH,  ESQ. 


IN  Tff^O  FOLUMES. 


VOL.  II. 


•       •  •    •- 


LONDON: 

yrioM  by  W.  M*DowaD,  rembertoo  Re  ^,  Gough  Square,  Pkct  Street* 

»0R  J,  DAVIS,  MILITARY  CHRONICLE  OFFICE,  14,  CHARLOTTE  STREIT, 

BLOOMSBURY;  AVD  to  be  had  Of  THE  BOOKSELLERS. 

1814,. 


r 


m 


THE  NI:■^V  YO-(K 

242876 

A8TCR,  LENOX  AND 
TH-DEN  FOUNDATIONS. 

leot         _ 


••:..!' 
:  /i/\. 


mODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  XV. 


PSEFACE. 

HAVING^  throughout  the  whole  work^  used  the  common  and  ac* 
customed  liberty  of  an  historian^  we  have  both  pnused  the  good,  and 
condemned  the  bad,  as  they  have  {alien  in  our  way,  to  the  end  that 
those  whose  genius  and  inclination  prompts  them  to  virtue  may  be 
the  more  encouraged  to  noble  actions,  in  hopes  of  having  the  glory 
of  their  names  continued  to  all  succeeding  generations;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  they  who  are  bent  to  wickedness  may  be  curbed  aii4 
restrained  from  the  heat,  at  least,  of  their  impiety,  by  those  marks  of 
dishonour  and  disgrace  fixed  upon  them. 

Since,  therefore,  we  have  brought  down  our  history  to  the  times 
wherein  the  Laced^Bmonians  fell  by  the  sudden  and  unexpected 
slaughter  at  Licuctra,  and  the  like  again  not  long  after  at  Mantinea^ 
whereby  they  lost  the  sovereignty  of  Greece,  we  judge  it  part  of  our 
province  to  keep  close  to  the  former  course  and  method  of  writing, 
and  tlierefore  by  the  way  in  the  first  place  to  blame  and  reprehend 
the  Lacedaemonians,  who  justly  deserve  it:  for  who  cannot  but  judge 
them  worthy  of  censure,  and  that  justly,  who,  having  a  well-settled 
empire  and  government  descended  to  them  from  their  ancestors,  and 
by  their  valour  supported  and  defended  for  the  space  of  above  five 
hundred  years,  should  now  in  a  moment  ruin  it  by  their  own  folly 
and  imprudence?  For  they  that  were  before  them  preserved  the 
grandeur  and  glory  of  their  conquests  by  their  lenity  and  tenderness 
towards  their  subjects;  but  these,  their  i)Osterity,  by  their  cruelty  to 
their  confederates,  and  pride  and  ambition  in  making  war  upon  the 
Greciaas,  most  deservedly  lost  all  by  their  rashuess  and  inconside- 
ntencss.    For,  those  that  hated  them  for  the  injuries  they  had  bc^ 

YoL.2.  No.  40.  M 


DI0D0RU9  SICULUS.  Book  XPi 

sasss£sft=====s==s=asaaa9BB5SS=asss=sssS 


fore  suffered,  greedily  took  the  advantage,  now  they  were  ]ow>  to  re- 
venge themselves  on  them  as  their  enemies.  And  they,  whose  fore- 
fathers were  never  before  conquered,  were  so  much  the  more  despised, 
by  how  much  they  deserved  the  greater  contempt,  who,  by  their  vices, 
bad  stained  the  virtue  and  glory  of  their  ancestors. 

The  Thebans,  therefore,  (who  for  many  ages  before  were  forced 
to  stoop  to  them  as  their  saperiors),  having  now  (beyond  all  men's 
expectations)  conquered  the  Lacedsemonians,  were  made  chief  com-* 
manders  of  Greece :  ^  but  the  Lacedaemonians,  after  they  had  once 
lost  their  hold,  could  never  after  recover  their  antient  glory  and 
dignity.  But,  enough  of  this;  we  sliall  now  return  to  the  course  of 
our  history. 

The  preceding  book,  the  fourteenth  in  order,  ends  with  the  rum 
of  Rhegium  by  Dionysius,  and  the  taking  of  Rome  by  the  Gauls, 
which  happened  the  jrear  next  before  the  expedition  of  the  Persians 
into  Cyprus,  agains^Evagonis.  We  shall  here  begin  this  book  with 
that  war,  and  end  it  with  the  year  next  preceding  the  reign  of  Pliilip, 
the  son  of  Amyntas. 


CHAP.  I. 

drtaxcrxcs's  expedition  against  Evagoras,  in  Cyprus.  The  actioiii 
there  at  sea  and  land.  Tlie  Lacedaemonians  begin  new  quanrls 
in  Greece:  asjirst  with  Mantinca.  Dionysius  gives  himself  to 
poetry.  Peace  concluded  with  Etmgoras  by  Orontas  the  Persian 
general.  Teribazus  brought  to  his  trial.  Judgment  uptm  cor*' 
rupt  judges.     Teribazus  acquitted* 

IN  Athens,  Mystichides  nns  archon;  and  at  Home,  three  tribunes 
were  invested  with  consular  authority,  Marcus  Furins,  Caius,  and 
JEmilius,  when  Artaxerxes,  king  of  Persia,  began  his  expedition  ar 
gainst  Ei'agoras,  king  of  Cyprus*  The  king  had  spent  much  time  in 
preparation  for  the  war,  and  raised  a  great  number  of  forces  both 
for  sea  and  hind  from  all  parts :  for  his  land-army  consisted  of  thret 
lumdred  thousand  horse  and  foot;  aod  he  equipped  a  fleet  of  above 


Chap.  L  DIODORUS  8ICULUS. 


three  hundred  gallies.  Orontas  was  made  general  of  the  land-army^ 
and  Teribazus,  a  man  highly  bonotfred  among  the  Persians^  admiral 
of  the  fleet.  These  headed  their  armies  at  Phocea  and  Cuma^ 
and  descended  to  Cilicia^  and  from  thence  passed  over  to  Cyprus, 
where  they  very  vigorously  bestirred  themselves  for  the  carrying  on 
of  the  war. 

In  the  mean  time  Evagoras  entered  into  a  league  with  Aeons, 
king  of  Egypt^  who  supplied  liim  with  a  great  number  of  men,  being 
liimself  then  at  war  with  the  Persians.  He  was  also  privately  furnished 
with  money  by  Hecatomnus,  the  governor  of  Caria,  to  help  him  to 
hire  foreigners.  And  several  other  enemies  of  Persia,  some  secretly, 
others  openly,  confederated  with  him  in  the  war.  He  had,  likewise, 
many  cities  of  Cyprus  under  his  command^  with  whom  joined  Tyre 
in  Phcenicia,  and  other  places.  Moreover,  he  had  a  navy  of  ninety 
sail,  of  which  twenty  were  from  Tyre,  and  the  rest  of  Cyprus.  His 
land-army  consisted  of  six  thousand  of  his  own  subjects,  but  those 
from  his  confederates  were  many  more ;  besides,  being  richly  sup- 
plied by  them  with  money,  he  hired  abundance  of  mercenaries* 
And  the  king  of  Arabia,  and  other  princes,  who  were  jealous  of 
the  king  ol'  Persia,  sent  him  great  forces.  Being  thus  supported^  he 
gpplted  himself  to  the  war  with  great  courage  and  resolution. 

And,  in  the  first  place,  with  his  privateers  (of  which  he  had  many) 
lie  intercepted  the  enemy's  transport-ships,  laden  with  victuals  and 
provisions,  and  sunk  some,  disabled  others,  and  took  several  besides; 
so  thai  there  began  to  be  great  scarcity  and  want  of  corn  in  the  Per- 
sian camp,  in  regard  the  merchants  durst  not  sail  to  Cyprus,  where 
that  great  army  and  body  of  men  were  got  together.    And  this  oc* 
casioned  a  great  mutiny  in  the  army;   for  the  mercenaries,  for  want 
of  bread,  knocked  some  of  their  officers  on  the  head,  and  filled  the 
camp  with  mutiny  and  tumult  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  Persian 
colonels,  and  admiral  of  the  fleet,  called  Gaos,  could  scarcely  quell  it. 
The  fleet,  therefore,  was  sent  toCilicia  for  provisions,  which  returned 
with  a  great  quantity  of  corn  from  thence,  by  which  the  camp  was 
ever  after  plentifully  supplied.    But,  as  to  Evagoras,  Acoris  sent  to 
him,  out  of  Egypt,  money,  corn,  and  all  other  things  necessary,  suffi- 
cient for  his  occasions, 

Evagoras,  finding  that  his  navy  was  far  too  weak  for  the  enemy, 
furnished  out  threescore  .ships  more,  and  sent  for  fifty  besides  from 
Acoris,  so  that  now  he  had  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  sail.  And,  having 
his  navy  thus  bravely  furnished  and  equipped  ready  for  a  battle  (af- 
ter he  had  some  time  trained  and  exercised  his  men,  not  without 
terror  to  his  enemies)  he  prepared  for  a  fight  at  sea.  But  it  hap* 
P^aed  th^t,  as  the  king's  fleet  passed  by  tgwards  Citium>  failing  sudm 


DIODORUS  SICULU9.  JBook  XK 


denly  upon  them,  in  an  orderly  line  of  bstrle,  he  gained  by  far  thie 
advantage,  fighting  in  good  order  with  ships  in  confusion  and  sepa* 
jrated,  (apd  with  premeditation  engaging  with  men  surprised  and 
taken  at  unawares),  he  presently,  at  the  first  onset,  routed  them: 
for,  charging  in  a  body  together,  upon  ships  dispersed  and  in  confa- 
sioo,  they  sdnk  and  took  several  of  them.  But  afterwards,  when  the 
Persian  admiral  and  other  officers  gathered  up  their  spirits,  they 
bravely  received  the  enemy's  charge,  so  that  the  engagement  grew 
very  sharp,  in  which  Evagoras  at  the  beginning  had  the  better;  but 
Gaos  with  great  courage  bearing  in  upon  him  with  his  whole  fleets 
the  Evagoreans  fled,  with  the  loss  of  many  of  their  gallies. 

The  Persians,  having  gained  this  nctory,  mustered  both  their  land 
and  sea-forces  at  Citium,  where,  furnishing  themselves  with  all  things 
necessary,  they  went  jointly  to  besiege  Salamb,  and  blocked  it  up 
both  by  sea  and  laud.  But  Teribazus,  after  the  sea-fight,  put  over 
to  Cilicia,  and  went  to  the  king  to  bring  him  the  news  of  the  victory, 
from  whom  he  brought  back  two  thousand  talents  for  the  carrying  oa 
of  the  war. 

Evagoras,  before  the  fight  at  sea,  had  routed  part  of  the  enemy's 
army  at  land,  which  much  encouraged  him  to  further  attempts;  but, 
after  his  sad  misfortune  at  sea,  and  that  thereupon  he  was  straitly 
besieged,  bis  spirits  ^rew  very  low.  However,  conceiving  it  ne- 
cessary to  continue  the  war,  he  put  the  supreme  power  into  the 
bands  of  his  son  Pythagoras,  and  left  him  to  defend  the  city,  and 
be  himseli  privately  in  the  uight,  undiscerned  by  the  enemy,  with 
ten  gallies  departed  from  Salamis,  and  sailed  into  Egypt,  where, 
having  audience  of  the  king,  he  endeavoured  to  persuade  him  to 
make  war  upon  the  king  of  Persia  with  all  the  power  he  had. 

While  these  things  were  on  foot  in  Asia,  the  Lacedaemonians 
(without  any  regard  to  the  league  made)  decreed  to  march  with  an 
army  against  Mantinea,  for  the  reasons'  following.  There  was  now 
peace  all  over  Greece,  by  the  negotiation  of  Antalcidas,  by  virtue 
whereof  all  the  cities  were  freed  from  garrisons,  and  governed  ac- 
cording to  their  own  laws.  But  the  Spartans  (naturally  ambitious, 
And  a  long  time  contriving  how  to  begin  a  war)  looked  upon  the  peace 
as  a  heavy  burden,  and  (coveting  to  gain  their  antient  dominion)  be* 
gan  to  endeavour  innovations.  To  this  end,  by  their  tools  and 
creatures,  they  stirred  up  seditions  in  the  cities,  and  thence  took  oc- 
casion to  disturb  the  present  state  of  afiairs.  For  they  who  were 
freed,  and  set  at  liberty  to  govern  according  to  the  laws  of  their  own 
country,  called  them  to  an  accounf  who  acted  as  magistrates  under 
the  LacedsBmonians,  and,  being  somewhat  severe  and  sharp,  (through 
the  fresh  resentment  of  the  late  injuries  suffered),  they  banished 


'  dap.  L  DI0D0RU8  STCULU8, 


tnany:  apon  this,  the  Lacetlsmonians  protected  those  who  were  de» 
pressed  by  the  contrary  faction,  and  restored  them  by  force  of  arms, 
and  by  that  means  first  imposed  upon  the  weaker  cities,  and  brought 
them  into  slavery;  but  afterwards  they  gave  laws  to  cities  and  places 
of  great  account,  uot  having  kept  the  league  two  years  together.  And 
now,  because  Mantinea  was  near  to  them,  and  full  of  valiant  men,  and 
by  the  peace  grown  very  rich,  they  were  jealous  of  it^  and  resolved  to 
bringdown  the  lordly  spirits  of  those  inhabitants:  in  the  first  place^ 
therefore,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  them,  to  require  them  to  demoUsh 
their  walls,  and  to  settle  ihemselves  again  in  those  five  villages  from 
whence  they  antlentiy  removed  to  Mantinea;  but  their  demands  be* 
ing  slighted,  they  forthwith  marched  thither  with  their  forces,  and 
besieged  the  city. 

Upon  this,  the  Mantineans  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  for  aid, 
but  the  Athenians  would  by  no  means  do  any  thing  that  might  be 
construed  a  breach  of  the  public  league;  so  that  they  valiantly 
defended  the  place,  and  opposed  the  enemy  with  their  own  forces. 
And  thus  Greece  now  began  again  to  be  embroiled  in  new  wars. 

In  Sicily,  Dionysius,  the  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  being  freed  from  tbe 
war  with  the  Carthaginians,  reigned  a  long  time  in  peace  and  pros* 
perity,  and  with  great  intention  of  mind  employed  himself  in  writing 
of  \erses,  and  sent  for  poets  far  and  near,  whom  he  had  in  high  es* 
teem,  and  made  his  familiars,  to  whose  judgment  and  opinions  he 
referred  the  censure  of  his  poems.  Being  flattered  by  these  in  pane* 
gyrics  of  praise,  for  their  own  interest,  he  grew  highly  conceited  of 
himself,  and  was  prouder  of  his  poems  than  of  his  conquests.  Phi- 
lozenus,  a  composer  of  dithyrambics,  and  one  familia|[  with  him,  a 
▼ery  excellent  poet  of  his  kind,  when  at  a  feast  some  of  the  foolish 
Ipverses  of  the  tyrant  were  recited,  he  was  asked  how  he  approved  of 
them,  who,  answering  something  too  freely  and  plainly,  incurred  the 
tyrant's  displeasure;  who,  looking  upon  himself  abused,  (through 
envy),  commanded  his  guard  to  carry  him  away  to  work  as  a  slave  ia 
the  quarries.  But  the  next  day,  through  the  mediation  of  friends,  he 
was  reconciled  to  him :  and  afterwards,  at  a  feast  to  which  he  had 
again  invited  the  same  persons,  when  he  was  in  his  cups,  he  highly 
extolled  his  own  poems ;  and  singing  some  of  them,  (which  he  thought 
none  could  excel),  he  asked  what  he  thought  of  those?  To  which  he 
answered  not  a  word,  but  called  for  Dionysius's  guards,  and  wished 
them  to  carry  him  away  to  the  quarries.  Dionysius  at  that  time,  for 
the  jest's  sake,  put  it  off  with  a  laugh,  thereby  (as  he  thought) 
taking  off  the  edge  of  the  reproof.  But,  not  long  after,  when  both 
Dionysius  and  the  rest  of  the  poets  wished  him  to  forbear  that  un- 


6  DIODORUS  SICULUlli  BooA  XfZ 

vBBsameEtmststamesssssss  sss=sssss=sssssssasssssssssssss^s=ssstt 

•easouable  freedom  of  ceosuriDg,  Philozeuus  made  a  promise  that 
teemed  to  be  a  paradox— That  for  the  future  he  would  both  speak 
the  truths  and  also  please  Dionysius  himself:  and  he  performed  his 
word;  for,  when  tlie  tyrant  afterwards  recited  some  verses  which  set 
forth  some  sad  and  mournful  passages,  he  asked  him  how  he  ap- 
proved of  them  ?  He  answered —Miserable !  therein  performing  what 
lie  had  promised,  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  word.  For  Dionysius  un- 
derstood it  as  if  he  meant,  the  subject  matter  of  the  verses  was  very 
sad  and  miserable,  and  set  forth  very  pathetically,  which  sort  of  poeqr 
was  rarely  attained  unto  but  by  those  who  were  of  the  higher  form  of 
poets;  and  therefore  he  looked  upon  himself  as  highly  applauded  by 
bim;  but  others  interpreted  what  he  said  with  more  truth,  that  (hat 
word  miserable  denoted  the  badnesj  of  his  verse. 

Not  far  unlike  to  this  was  that  which  happened  to  Plato  the  phi* 
losopher,  whom  Dionysius  sent  for  because  he  was  a  man  eminent 
in  philosophy,  and  for  some  time  at  the  first  he  greatly  honoured  him. 
But,  taking  offence  at  something  he  said  to  him,  he  hated  him  to 
that  degree,  that  he  ordered  him  to  be  brought  into  the  common 
market-place,  and  there  sold  as  a  slave  for  five  minas :  but  the  phi- 
losophers (who  consulted  together  on  the  matter)  afterwards  redeemed 

liim,  and  sent  him  back  to  Greece,  with  thb  friendly  advice ^That 

a  pliilosopher  should  very  rarely  converse  with  tyrants;  and  whea  he 
did,  he  should  be  of  a  gaining  behaviour. 

However,  Dionysius  went  on  with  his  study  of  poetry,  and  sent 
stage-players  that  could  sing  excellently  well  to  the  Olympic  games^ 
there  to  sing  his  verses,  who  indeed  at  the  first  caught  the  audi- 
tors by  the  ears  with  the  sweetness  of  their  voices;  but,  when  they 
considered  further  of  the  matter  and  composure  of  the  poems,  they 
went  away,  and  set  up  a  great  laughter.     When  he  heard  hov^ 
his  verses  were  despised  and  hissed  off  the  stage,  he  fell  into  a  fit 
of  melancholy,  which  growing  upon  him  day  by  day,  he  raged  at 
length  like  a  madman,  and  cried  out — ^Tlmt  every  one  envied  him» 
and  were  plotting  to  take  away  his  life,  till  it  came  to  his.  very  inti- 
mate friends  and  relations.    In  this  temper  he  arrived  at  last  to  that 
height  of  madness  and  melancholy,  that  he  put  many  of  his  friends 
to  death  upon  false  accusations,  and  banished  several  others,  amongst 
whom  were  Leptines,  his  brother,  and  Philistus,  men  of  valour  and 
undaunted  courage,  who  iiad  done  remarkable  service  for  him  in  the 
war.    They  fled  to  the  Thurians,  in  Italy,  and  were  there  in  great  . 
esteem  among  them :  but  afterwards  they  were  restored  to  the  ty- 
rant's favour  by  his  own  seeking,  and  were  not  only  brought  back  to 
Syracuse,  but  regained  bis  former  good  opinion,  and  enjoyed  th^ic 


f!ht^.  t.  DtODORUS  StCULUS. 


placef  of  power  and  aathority  as  they  did  before.  And  Leptioes 
HMTiied  Dionysius's  daughter^  And  these  were  the  transactions  of 
thisyear^ 

When  Dexitheus  bore  the  office  of  lord-chancellor  of  Athens,  and 
liocios*  Lacretius,  and  Servilius  Sulpitius,  were  Roman  eonstils, 
Evagoras,  king  ofSalamis,  returned  out  of  Egypt  into  Cyprus,  wfaere^ 
when  he  found  the  city  closely  besieged,  and  all  his  confederates  to 
have  deserted  him,  he  was  forced  to  send  ambassadors  to  seek  for 
terras  of  peace.  Teribazus,  who  had  the  sovereign  power  and  com^ 
BMDd,retamed  him  this  answer — ^That  he  would  make  peace  with  him, 
upon  condition  he  would  quit  all  the  cities  of  Cyprus,  and  be  content 
only  with  Salamis,  and  yield  a  yearly  tribute  to  the  king,  and  be  ob« 
aeivant  to  aH  his  commands,  as  a  servant  to  his  master:  to  which 
terms^  though  they  were  very  hard,  he  submitted,  excepting  tliat  one 
.JTIiat  he  should  be  obedient  in  all  things,  as  a  servant  to  his  mas« 
ter.  But  he  said,  he  would  agree  to  be  subject  to  him  as  one  king  to 
another:  which  Teribaens  would  not  consent  to.  Upon  this,  the* 
•ther  general^  Orontas^  who  envied  Tey'basus,  sent  letters  privately 
to  Aitaxerzes  to  accuse  him :  as  first*^-.Tbat  whereas  it  was  to  fat% 
power  to  take  Salamis  by  force,  hh  waved  it,  and  had  treated  with  the 
enemy,  in  order  to  bring  about  some  innovations  for  the  oominou  ad* 
vantage  of  them  both;  that  he  had  entered  into  9  private  league  with 
the  Lacedssmoniansj  that  he  had  sent  messengers  to  the  oracle  at 
Delphos,  to  consult  about  making  war  upon  the  king;  and,  as  a 
aoalter  of  the  greatest  concern,  that  he  might  gain  all  tiie  officers  of 
the  army  to  be  his  creatures,  he  had  bribed  them  with  gifts,  prefer^ 
aaents,  and  many  laige  promises.  When  the  king  had  read  these 
letters,  (beiieviog  all  to  be  true),  he  wrote  back  to  Orontas  to  seize 
upon  Teribazus,  and  to  send  him  forthwith  to  him:  whereupon  he 
executed  the  command;  and,  when  Teribazus  came  before  the  king, 
he  desired  he  might  be  brought  to  his  legal  trial,  upon  which  he  waa 
€H>mmitted  into  custody;  but  the  trial  was  long  deferred,  because  the 
king  presently  after  was  engaged  in  the  war  against  the  Cadusians. 

In  the  mean  time  Orontas,  now  chief  commander  of  the  army  ia 
Cyprus,  seeing  Evagoras  courageously  defend  the  place,  and  pcrceiv- 
log  his  own  soldiers  discontented  with  the  seizing  of  Teribazus,  and 
to  slight  his  commands,  and  fall  off  from  the  siege,  fearing  some  sud- 
den misfortune,  sent  to  Evagoras,  and  a  peace  was  concluded  upon 
the  same  terms  he  would  have  agreed  to  with  Teribazus.  And  thua 
Evagoras  (beyond  his  own  expectation)  freed  from  absolute  slavcrv, 
entered  into  a  league,  upon  conditions  that  he  should  pay  an  yearly 
tribute  to  the  king,  and  be  sovereign  lord  of  Salamis,  and  subject  to 

•  Titus. 


•  DIODORU8  8ICUI.U8.  Ihoh  XK 

ilie  king  no  otherwise  than  as  ooe  king  to  abother.  Anil  thus  ended 
tiie  Cyprian  war^which  was  span  out  nearly  ten  yean,  though  most  oC 
that  time  was  only  spent  in  preparation^  and  not  above  two  yearaoC  h 
ib  actual  war. 

But  Gaosy  the  Ticc-admiral  of  the  fleet,  who  had  Boarried  the 
daughter  of  Teribazus,  was  in  great  pain  lest  he  should  suffer  aoaoe- 
Ihing  or  other^  out  of  suspicion  of  bis  being  familiar  and  convenaiit 
withTeribazus:  therefore  he  resolved  to  be  beforehand  with  the  kiug^ 
and  to  that  end,  being  well  furrfished  with  a  brave  navy,  and  having 
the  love  of  the  sea-captains  and  oflScers,  he  began  to  adviaa  and  conb* 
aider  of  a  defection;  and  forthwith,  without  any  further  delay,  en» 
tered  into  a  league  with  Acoris,  king  of  Egypt,  against  the  great 
lung  of  Persia.  He  stirred  up,  likewise,  the  Lacedasmoniaas  by  his 
letters,  and,  amongst  other  large  and  glorious  promiaes,  he  engi^^ 
lie  would  assist  them  in  settling  their  a&in  in  Greece,  and  maintain- 
log  and  supporting  their  soveceignty.  And,  in  truth,  the  Spartana 
laid,  aome  time  before,  been  contriving  how  to  recover  the  sovereiga 
power  over  the  Grecians,  and  at  that  time  had  given  clear  indicatkma 
4by  their  disturbances)  of  their  design  to  enslave  the  cities.  Anck 
that  which  furthered  the  matter  ifras^  they  repented  of  the  peace 
laade  with  Artaxerxes,  because  they  were  charged  and  aecused  to 
liave  betrayed  all  the  Grecians  in  Asia  by  that  league  with  the  king; 
Aerefore  they  were  very  ready  to  catch  at  an  opportunity  to  ranear 
ike  war,  and  to  that  end  very  cheerfully  made  a  league  with  Gaoa. 

Afiter  Artaxerxes  had  ended  the  war  with  the  Cadusians,  he  brooghl 
Teribazus  to  his  trial,  and  referred  the  cognisance  of  his  cause  la  three 
honourable  persons.  Near  this  time  some  corrupt  judges  were  flayed 
alive,  and  their  skins  spread  round  the  judgment-seats,  that  those  that 
ml  there  might  always  have  an  example  before  their  eyes  of  the  pu- 
nishment due  to  injustice,  to  deter  them  from  the  like. 

The  accusers,  therefore^  of  Teribazus  produced  -against  him  the 
lettera  of  Orontas,  earnestly  pressing  them  as  sufficient  evidence  to 
convict  him.  On  the  other  hand,  Teribazus,  that  he  might  make  it 
eindently  appear  that  the  accusation  was  a  mere  scandal  contrived 
between  Orontas  and  Evagoras,  produced  the  agreement  betweei^ 
them,  whereby  Evagoras  was  to  obey  the  king  as  a  king  himself^  and 
BO  otherwise;  and  that  the  terms  upon  which  Teribazus  would  have 

made  peace  were That  Evagoras  should  be  observant  to  the  king 

as  a  servant  to  his  master.  And,  as  to  the  oracle,  he  brought  all  those 
Grecians  who  were  at  that  time  present,  to  testify..Tbat  the  god  re- 
turned not  any  answer  relating  to  the  death  of  any  person.  And^  as 
to  the  good  correspondence  between  him  and  the  Lacedsemonians, 
he  declared^  that  lie  entered  into  a  league  with  them  not  for  any  pri- 


Ckaff.  L  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  9 

vate  advantage  of  his  own,  but  for  the  profit  and  advantage  of  the 
Icing.  For  by  this  means  (he  told  them)  the  Grecians  in  Asia^  being 
divided  from '  the  Lacedaemonians,  were  made  better  subjects,  and 
more  obedient;  and,  going  on  with  his  defence,  he  put  the  judges  ia 
mind  of  his  former  remarkable  services  to  the  crown. 

Amongst  those  which  clearly  manifested  his  faith  and  loyalty  to 
the  king,  and  which  deserved  the  greatest  commendation,  and  chiefly 

(as  was  said)  won  the  king's  heart,  W4S  this ^That  when  the  king 

was  one  day  in  his  chariot  a-hunting,  two  lions  ran  fiercely  upon 
him,  and,  tearing  the  two  chariot-horses  in  pieces,  they  made  at 
Um,  at  which  instant Teribazus  came  fortunately  in,  killed  both  the 
lions,  and  so  rescued  the  king.  It  is  likewise  reported  of  him,  that 
he  was  a  person  of  'extraordinary  valour,  and  of  so  sound  and  solid  a 
judgment  in  council,  that  the  king  never  miscarried  when  he  followed 
his  advice. 

When  Teribazus  had  ended  what  he  had  to  say  in  his  own  defencfi^ 
ftll  the  judges  with  one  voice  acquitted  him,  and  pronounced  him  in- 
nocent of  all  the  crimes  and  offences  laid  to  his  charge.  But  the 
king  afterwards  sent  for  the  judges  to  him  severally,  and  exaouned 
every  one  by  himself,  upon  what  gropnds  of  law  they  pronounced  the 
accused  innocent.  To  whom  the  first  answered-^Tbat  the  matter 
of  the  accosation  was  uncertain  and  dubious,  but  bis  good  services 
were  clear,  apparent,  and  manifest  to  all.  Another  said.^That, 
though  those  things  objected  against  him  were  true,  yet  that  all  his 
faults  were  over-ballanced  by  his  deserts.  The  third  justified  his 
vote  to  discharge  him,  by  declaring.^That  he  had  no  regard  to'his 
merits,  because  the  king  had  rewarded  them  above  their  deserts;  but, 
upon  strictly  examining  the  nature  of  every  particular  charge,  it  did 
not  appear  to  him  that  the  party  accused  was  guilty  of  any  of  them. 
Upon  which  the  king  commended  the  judges,  as  just  and  upright 
men,  and  advanced  Teribazus  to  the  highest  places  of  honour.  But 
as  to  Orontas,  he  discarded  him,  as  a  false  accuser,  and  noted  hin^ 
with  all  the  marks  of  ignominy  and  disgrace*  And  thus  stood  afikirs 
in  Asia  at  this  time. 


Vot,2.  No.  40. 


10  BIODORUS  SICULU8»  Sook  XK 


CHAP.  n. 

3fn9Uviea  besieged  by  tlie  Lacedcemanians.  Dionysius  aims  ia 
gain  the  islands  of  the  Adriatic  sea.  The  Parii  build  Paros^ 
JHonysius^s  expedition  into  Etruria.  Prepares  for  war  against 
the  Carthaginians.  The  Sicilians  routed  at  Cronium.  The 
quarrel  beftveen  the  Clazomemans  and  those  of  Cuma,  about 
Zjeuce.  The  war  between  Amyntas  and  the  Olynthians.  Th€ 
LacedtBmonians  seize  the  citadel  of  Cadmea  at  Thebes.  JSuda^ 
nddas  breaks  into  the  country  of  the  Olynthians. 

In  Greece^  the  LacedsemoniaDd  pressed  on  the  siege  of  Mantinei^ 
tnd  the  Matitioeans  btavely  defended  the  place  all  that  summer:  for 
they  were  reputed  the  most  valiant  men  of  all  the  Arcadians,  and 
therefore  the  Spartans  in  former  times  were  used  to  account  those 
their  Purest  and  truest  friends  in  all  fights  and  engagements.  But, 
when  winter  drew  on,  and  the  river  running  under  the  town  swelled 
high  by  the  rains,  the  Lacedaemonians  damn^ed  up  the  river  with 
earth  and  rubbish,  and  turned  the  current  into  the  city;  so  that  all' 
the  place  round  about  was  like  to  a  standing  pool;  by  reason  wliereof 
the  bouses  fell  down,  which  amazed  them  of  Mantinea,  so  that  they 
were  forced  to  deliver  up  the  city;  which,  being  thus  taken,  the 
citizens  suffered  no  other  hardships  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  save 
only  that  they  were  ordered  to  return  to  those  antient  villages 
from  whence  they  originally  came :  they  were  forced,  therefore,  to 
leave  their  country,  and  to  settle  themselves  and  their  families  in  the 
villages. 

About  this  time  Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Syracuse  had  a  design  to 
gain  the  cities  lying  upon  the  Adriatic  sea;  and  that  which  chiefly 
moved  him  to  it  was,  because  he  coveted  to  be  master  of  the  Ionian 
sea,  (as  they  call  it),  to  the  end  that  he  might  liave  a  free  and  open 
passage  to  Epirus,  and  to  have  towns  and  places  for  his  ships  ready 
to  touch  at :  for  he  was  every  day  making  preparations  to  transport 
great  numbers  of  forces  intoEpirus,  and  to  riSe  and  plunder  the  rich 
temple  at  Delphos.  To  this  end  he  made  a  league  with  the  Illyriansj 
by  the  help  of  Alcetas  the  Molossian,  who  was  then  an  exile  at  Syra- 
cuse. And,  the  Illyrians  being  then  engaged  in  a  war,  he  sent  them 
two  thousand  soldiers,  and  five  hundred  Grecian  arms:  the  arm» 
they  distributed  amqngst  the  strongest  and  stoutest  of  their  mep,  and 
the  aujuliaries  they  mixed  here  and  there  in  several  of  their  owi}  cobh 


€3igp.  IL  DIODQRUS  siculus.  1 1 

panies  aud  regiments.  The  Illyrians^  having  now  raised  a  great 
army,  made  an  irruption  intoEpirus^  in  order  to  restore  Alcetas  to  his 
kingdom,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country  without  opposition  or 
coutruul.  Afterwards,  a  sharp  battle  was  fought  between  them  and 
the  Molossians,  in  which  the  Illyrians  were  victors,  and  killed  above 
fifteen  thousand  of  the  Molossians,  which  slaughter  of  the  Epirots 
being  made  known  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  they  sent  them  aid,  to 
curb  and  bridle  the  fierceness  and  cruelty  of  the  barbarians. 

During  the  transaction  of  these  aflfairs,  the  Parii*,  by  the  encou* 
ragemcnt  of  an  old  prophecy,  sent  forth  a  colony  to  the  Adriatic 
coast,  where  they  built  Paros,  by  the  help  of  Dionysius,  in  an  island 
60  called.  For,  not  many  years  before,  he  had  sent  a  colony  thither, 
and  built  the  city  Lissus;  by  the  advantage  of  which  place  (when 
he  had  little  else  to  do,  he  raised  an  arsenal  for  two  hundred  gallieSj 
and  walled  the  town  in  so  large  a  circuit,  that  it  exceeded  in  compass 
all  the  cities  of  Greece.  He  likewise  built  stately  schools  and  col- 
leges on  the  side  of  the  river  Anapusf^  with  temples  and  other  beauti- 
ful  fabrics,  to  advance  the  glory  and  greatness  of  the  city. 

And  now  ended  the  year,  when  Diotrephes,  for  the  next,  was  air-^ 
chon  of  Athens;  and  Lucius  Valerius,  and  Aulu§  Manlius,  were  Uo-> 
man  consuls.  At  i£lis  was  solemnized  the  ninety-ninth  Oiympiadt 
in  which  Dicon  the  Syracusan  won  the  prize.  At  this  time  the 
Parii  (who  were  now  seated  in  the  island  Paros)  walled  in  the  dty 
they  had  built  near  the  sea-side,  not  in  the  least  injuring  the  barba« 
rians,  the  antient  inhabitants  of  the  island,  but  allotted  them  a  place 
very  strong,  and  excellently  well  fortified*  But  this  nestling  of  the 
Gxeeks  was  a  great  eye-sore  to  the  natural  inhabitants;  therefore 
they  sent  for  the  Illyrians  bordering  upon  the  continent  over  against 
them,  who  passed  over  to  Paros  in  many  small  vessels,  to  the  num-* 
ber  of  above  ten  thousand  men,  and  fell  upon  the  Greeks,  and  killed 
many  of  them.  But  he  who  was  made  governor  of  Lissus  by  Die  • 
oysius,  with  a  great  fleet  set  upon  the  shipping  of  the  Illyrians,  and 
took  and  sunk  all  of  them,  killed  five  thousand  of  their  men,  and  took 
two  thousand  prisoners* 

Dionysius,  being  now  in  great  want  of  money,  began  an  expedi«i 
tion  with  threescore  gallies  into  Etruria^,  under  pretence  of  scours 
ing  the  seas  of  pirates,  but  in  truth  to  rob  a  famous  temple  in  those 
parts,  which  was  very  full  of  rich  gifts  and.donations.  It  stood  ia 
the  suburbs  of  Agylla,  a  city  of  Etruria^  where  was  the  arsenal 
which  they  call  the  Towers,  He  landed  in  the  night,  and,  forcing 
IP  at  break  of  day,  accomplished  his  design;   for,  there  being  but  a 

*  l^liroi^  m  island  of  the  i£gean  set,  near  Delos.         t  A  river  ii)  Sivii^, 
%  Tyrrli^nia  b^  the  Oratk^  but  niitalea. 


12  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Booh  XV. 


small  guafd  in  the  castle,  he  easily  overpowered  them,  rifled  the  tem- 
ple, and  tooic  out  ahove  a  thousand  talents. 

And,  though  they  of  Agylla  sallied  out  to  repel  the  enemy,  yet  he 
routed  them,  took  many  prisoners,  and,  after  he  had  wasted  and 
spoiled  the  country,  sailed  back  to  Syracuse,  where  he  raised  no  less 
than  five  hundred  talents  by  the  sale  of  the  spoifs.  Having  thus  filled 
his  cofl^ers,  he  raised  soldiers  from  all  parts,  and  got  together  a  great 
army;  so  that  it  was  evident  (to  the  apprehension  of  all)  that  he  de- 
signed war  against  the  Carthaginians.  And  these  were  the  things 
done  this  year. 

Afterwards,  the  dignity  of  archon  was  conferred  upon  Phanostra- 
tus,  at  Athens ;  and  the  Romans  made  four  military  tribunes  consuls^ 
Lucius  Lucretius,  Servius  Sulpitins,  Lucius*'  iEmilius,  and  Lucius 
Furius.  At  this  time  Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  being  pre- 
pared for  the  war  against  Carthage,  watched  for  a  fair  occasion  to 
colour  and  countenance  his  design,  Disceriiing,  therefore,  that  the 
cities  subject  to  the  Carthaginians  were  inclined  to  a  revolt,  he  re- 
ceived into  his  protection  as  many  as  would  come  to  him,  and  entered 
into  a  ieague  witli  them,  carrying  himself  with  great  complacency 
and  winning  beimviour.  Upon  this,  the  Carthaginians  first  sent  am- 
bassadors to  him,  and  demanded  the  restitution  of  the  cities^  which 
being  denied,  was  the  occasion  of  a  new  war. 

The  Carthaginians  therefore  entered  into  confederacies  with  their 
neighbours,  and  all  joined  together  in  the  war  against  the  tyrant. 
And,  because  they  prudently  foresaw  the  greatness  of  the  war,  they 
listed  soldiers  out  of  the  choicest  of  the  citizens,  and  laid  up  great 
sums  of  money,  wherewith  they  hired  a  vast  number  of  foreigners; 
and,  having  made  Mago  their  general  (who  at  that  time  bore  the 
title  of  king)  they  transported  many  thousands  of  soldiers  both  into 
Italy  and  Sicily,  for  they  had  decreed  to  make  war  upon  them  both 
at  once.  Dionysius  likewise  himself  divided  his  forces,  some  again'st 
the  Italiots,  and  others  against  the  Carthaginians:  whereupon  many 
light  skirmishes  happened  between  parties  here  and  there  every  day, 
but  nothing  was  as  yet  done  of  any  moment.  But  there  afterwards 
happened  two  great  battles  that  were  especially  famous  and  remark- 
able, in  one  of  which,  at  a  place  called  Cabala,  Dionysius  made  him- 
self noted  for  his  valour,  and  louted  the  enemy,  killing  above  ten 
thousand  of  them,  taking  five  thousand  prisoners,  and  forcing  tho 
rest  to  fly  to  a  hill  that  was  fortified,  but  altogether  without  water. 
In  this  flglit  Mago  their  general  was  killed,  behaving  himself  with 
great  gallantry  and  resolution.  The  Carthaginians,  terrified  with  the 
greatness  of  this  slaughter,  sent  forthwith  ambassadors  to  make  peaces 

•  Caius, 


Chap.  II.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  13 

with  Dionyslus;  but  he  returned  them  answer^  that  there  was  oxAf 
ooe  way  left  for  them  to  Inake  peace  with  him^  and  that  was,  forth- 
with  to  quit  all  the  cities  of  Sicily,  and  to  reimburse  all  the  charge 
of  the  war.  Thb  answer  was  looked  upon  as  harsh  and  proud; 
therefore  they  betook  themselves  to  their  old  arts  of  fraud  and  deceit: 
for  they  seemed  as  if  tliey  allowed  of  his  terms,  but  pretended  that  it 
was  not  in  their  power  to  deliver  up  the  cities  to  him;  therefore  they 
desired  a  truce  for  some  few  days,  that  they  might  consult  with  the 
Hiagistrates  concerning  this  aflair,  which  he  agreed  to.  He  was 
much  transported  at  the  truce,  havipg  now  a  prospect  presently  (as 
he  conceived)  to  be  lord  of  all  Sicily.  In  the  mean  time  the  Cartha- 
^nians  buried  Mago  their  king  with  great  pomp  and  state,  putting 
his  son  into  the  same  place,  who,  though  he  was  very  young, yet  there' 
were  marks  and  appearances  in  him  of  more  than  ordinary  wisdom 
and  valour.  This  new  general  spent  all  the  time  of  the  truce  in 
trainini^  and  disciplining  his  soldiers;  so  that,  what  with  his  ds^ily 
diligence,  exact  directions,  and  frequent  exercise  of  their  arms,  he 
had  an  army  both  readily  subject  to  command,  and  hardy  and  strong 
for  service.  And  now  the  time  of  the  cessation  expired,  and  the  ar- 
mies on  both  sides  came  hastily  into  the  field;  and  at  Cronium  was  a 
sharp  engagement,  where  God  gave  the  Carthaginians  the  victory,  ta 
make  amends  for  their  former  slaughter.  For  they  who  were  grown 
proud  and  boasting  by  their  victory  a  little  before,  were  now  as  low 
and  poor-spirited.  On  the  other  liand,  they  who  were  altogether  de- 
jected, and  in  despair,  by  reason  of  their  overthrow,  had  their  spirits 
on  a  sudden  raised  by  their  great  and  unexpected  success :  for  Lep- 
tines,  who  commanded  one  of  the  wings,  a  valiant  man,  signalized 
himself,  and  there  fell  in  the  bed  of  honoiu*,  after  he  had  made  a 
great  slaughter  amongst  his  enemies;  after  whose  fall  the  Carthagi- 
nians plucked  up  their  spirits^  and  at  length  put  their  enemies  to 
flight.  Dionysius,  with  those  choice  men  he  had  with  him,  at  the 
first  worsted  those  that  charged  him;  but,  when  the  death  of  Leptines 
was  known,  and  the  other  wing  was  discerned  to  be  broken  and  dis- 
persed, that  part  of  the  army  with  Dionysius  fled  likewise:  upon 
which,  the  whole  bo^y  betaking  themselves  to  their  heels,  the  Car- 
thaginians made  a  hot  pursuit,  and  gave  orders  that  no  quarter  siiould 
be  given;  so  that,  all  being  killed  that  came  to  hand,  every  place  for 
a  long  way  together  was  strewed  and  covered  with  dead  bodies.  Tlie 
Carthaginians,  in  revenge  of  their  former  loss,  had  made  so  great  a 
slaughter,  tliat,  when  the  slain  came  to  be  buried,  they  were  found 
to  amount  to  above  fourteen  thousand  Sicilians;  and  it  was  by  tbe 
advantage  of  night  only  that  the  rest  esc^iped.    The  Carthaginians^ 


14  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  JSooit  XK 

wessaBOBaBSsemBBBsaassi      ?     ■  ==ggaeBBBggsss==aai 

having  qow  gained  so  great  and  remarkable  a  victory,  returned  to 
Panormus:  however  (as  it  became  men)  they  used  their  prosperity 
with  great  moderation,  and  sent  ambassadors  to  Dionystus,  to  ofier 
him  terms  of  peace,  which  he  readily  embraced,  and  all  was  eoQ- 
cluded  upon  these  conditions  ,^That  both  sides  should  keep  wh^l 
they  had  before  the  war,  save  only  that  the  Carthagioians  should  bav<e 
the  city  and  territory  of  Selinus,  and  part  of  the  country  of  Agrigen- 
turn,  as  far  as  to  the  river  Alycum,  and  that  Dionysius  should  pay  n 
thousand  talenu  to  the  Carthaginians.  And  thus  stood  affiura  ia 
Sicily  at  that  time. 

In  Asia,  Gaos,  admiral  of  the  Persian  fleet,  who  had  lebelkd 
against  the  king,  after  he  had  engaged  the  Lacedemonians  aDd£gyp<« 
tians  to  his  interest,  was  murdered  secretly  by  some  person  unknown^ 
and  so  failed  of  his  designs.     After  whose  death  Tachos,  pursuin^p 
the  same  design,  got  an  army  together,  and  built  a  city  upon  a  high 
rock  joining  to  the  sea,  called  Leuce,  where  he  built  a.cha[rfe  to 
Apollo;  but  he  died  likewise  a  little  after:    upon  whose  death  the 
Clazomenians  and  they  of  Cuma  fell  at  strife  and  variance  for  the 
town,  which  at  first  they  went  about  to  decide  by  force  of  arms:  but 
afterwards,  by  the  advice  oi  some  person,  consulting  the  oracle  of 
Delphos,  to  know  to  which  of  the  cities  Leuce  should  belong,  the 
prophetess  answered — ^That  it  should  be  theirs  who  should  first  sacri* 
fice  at  Ticuce;  but  that  both  should  set  forth  from  their  cities  at  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  upon  one  and  the  same  day,  as  they  themselvea 
should  agree  upon.     Accordingly  tlie  day  was  set,  and  the  Cumani 
in  the  mean  time  looked  upon  themselves  to  have  the  advantage,  be^ 
cause  their  city  was  nearer  than  the  other.    But  the  Clazomenians^ 
though  they  were  more  remote,  yet  contrived  this  project  to  gaio 
their  end :  they  sent  some  of  their  citizens,  chosen  by  lot,  to  a  colony 
of  theirs  not  far  from  Leuce,  and  from  thence,  at  suu-rising,  they 
began  their  journey,  and  so  finished  their  sacrifices  before  th^m  of 
Cuma.     Having  thus  gained  Leuce  by  this  trick,,  in  memory  thereof 
they  appointed  an  yearly  festival,  which  they  called  Projihthasia,  from 
this  their  coming  first  to  Leuce.    These  things  thus  done,  all  rebel- 
lions in  Asia  were  at  an  end;  and  the  Lacedeemonians  now,  after  the 
death  of  Gaos  and  Tachos,  would  have  no  more  to  do  with  Asia,  but 
set  their  heads  at  work  how  to  advance  their  power  in  Greece.   Andj 
having  persuaded  some  of  the  cities,  and  forced  others  to  receive  their 
exiles,  they  possessed  themselves  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole^ 
manifestly  against  the  league  amongst  all  the  Grecians,  made  by  Aa* 
talcidas,  by  the  help  of  the  king  of  Persia. 
In  Macedonia,  king  Amyntas  (after  he  was  overcome  by  the  Illy- 


Chef.  It.  mODORTTS  StCULUS.  IS 

wmaBaamBommmmmmmBBsassssssssssssssssssssssss^^ 

lians,  in  despair  of  being  ti6le  to  help  himself)  bestowed  a  large  track 
of  land  apon  the  Olynthians^  which  lay  near  to  them^  as  never  think- 
ing to  foe  restored  again  to  his  kingdom.  The  Olynthians  enjoyed 
this  peace  for  some  time;  but,  when  the  kingxecovered  strength,  and 
was  reinstated  in  his  former  dignity,  he  demanded  restitution  of  the 
land^  which  the  Olynthians  denied.  Upon  which,  Amyntas  raised 
iMith  an  army  of  his  own,  and  entered  into  a  league  with  the  Liace- 
demonians,  and  prevailed  with  them  to  send  a  general  with  a  great 
afmy  against  the  Olynthians.  The  Lacedaemonians,  resolving  to  fiit 
in  those  parts  of  Thrace,  raised  an  army  out  of  their  own  citizens  and 
ooofederates,  Xm  the  number  of  ten  thousand  men,  over  which  thej 
made  Phoebidas,  the  Spartan,  general,  and  commanded  him  to  join 
with  Aniyntas,  and  noake  war  upon  the  Olynthians.  They  sent  out 
aflother  body  against  the  Phssuntines,  whom  they  subdued,  and  forced 
to  submit  10  their  government. 

About  this  time  the  two  Lacedsemonian  kings,  having  diflerent 
aentiiiients,  disagreed  one  with  another.  For  Agesipolis  was  a  lover 
of  peace,  and  a  just  and  wise  man,  and  therefore  declared  against 
oppressing  the  Greeks:  for  he  said  that  Spar<a  would  becotme  in&-« 
nous  amongst  all  the  people,  if,  after  they  had  been  instrumental  in 
makiag  the  Grecians  in  Asia  slaves  to  the  Persians,  they  should  now 
enslave  all  the  cities  of  Greece  to  themselves,  whose  liberties  they  had 
8Wom  in  the  common  league  to  preserve  inviolable.  On  the  other 
haiMl  Agesihus,  being  naturally  turbulent  and  inclined  to  war,  thirsted 
sAer  dominion  over  the  Grecians. 

AfUrwards,  when  Menander  was  lord-chancellor  of  Athens,  and 
jiix  military  tribunes,  Quintus  Sulpitius,  Caius  Fabius,  Cornelius  Ser* 
i^lius*,  Quintus  Servilius,  Sextus  Annius,  and  Caius  Marcius,  bore 
the  consular  dignity  at  Rome,  the  Lacedeemonians  seized  the  Cad- 
mea,  the  citadel  of  Thebes,  for  the  reasons  following  :.^They  had  for 
■ocne  time  before  considered  that  Boeotia  was  full  of  towns  and  cities, 
and  that  the  inhabitants  were  men  both  of  stout  hearts  and  strong 
bodks;  and  especially,  that  Thebes,  which  continued  to  that  day  in 
its  antient  state  and  grandeur,  was  even  the  guard  and  bulwark  of  all 
Boeotia;  therefore  they  were  afraid  lest,  at  some  fit  opportunity  or 
other,  they  should  become  lords  of  Greece :  for  tliis  reason  they  gave 
private  instructions  to  their  commanders,  to  seize  upon  the  Cadmea  as 
•oon  as  they  could  spy  a  fit  opportunity.  Phcebidas  the  Spartan  ge- 
neral, in  his  march  againi^t  the  Olynthians,  (remembering  his  instruc- 
tions), surprised  the  Cadmea,  which  so  enraged  theThebans,  that  they 

•  Scfviuj  Corneliu?, 


i6  DIODORUS  8ICULU9*  Bdok  XPl 


lose  in  arms^  but  were  beaten ;  and  he  banished  three  hundred  of  the 
most  eminent  citizens,  and  put  all  the  rest  into  a  great  fright:  and, 
leaving  there  a  strong  garrison,  marched  away  in  pursuance  of  the 
business  he  had  chiefly  in  hand. 

All  the  Grecians  everywhere  complained  of  the  Lacedemonians  for 
this  unworthy  act;  and  they  indeed  themselves  fined  Phoebidas  for  it^ 
but  could  not  be  brought  to  withdraw  the  garrison.  And  thus  the 
Thebans  were  robbed  of  their  liberty,  and  brought  under  the  power 
of  the  Lacedfiemonians.  But  the  Olynthians  resolutely  persisting  in 
the  war  against  Amyntas,  king  of  Macedon,  Phoebidas  was  ordered  to 
lay  down  his  commissioni  and  Eudamidaa,  his  brother,  was  made  ge- 
neral, and  sent  away  with  three  thousand  heavy-armed  men  to  carry 
on  the  war  against  the  Olyntliians,  who,  breaking  into  the  their 
country,  jointly  with  Amyntas  fell  upon  them ;  but  the  Olynthians  be- 
ing good  soldiers,  and  overpowering  the  other  in  number,  beat  them 
both.  Upon  t^is  the  Lacedsemonians  raised  a  great  army,  and  made 
Teleutias,  king  Agesilaus's  brother,  general,  whe  was  a  man  of  high 
esteem  among  the  citizens  for  his  valour,  who,  as  soon  as  he  entered 
the  borders  of  Olynthus,  was  joined  by  the  forces  of  Eudamidas; 
and  now,  being  strong  enough  to  fight  the  enemy,  he  first  spoiled  and 
wasted  the  country,  and  divided  the  prey  (which  he  had  got  together 
in  abundance)  amongst  the  Soldiers.  Afterwards,  the  Olynthians 
marched  out  with  their  own,  and  the  forces  of  their  confederates. 
Upon  which  the  armies  engaged,  and  at  the  beginning  the  battle  was 
doubtful;  but  afterwards,  the  fight  was  renewed  with  that  extraor- 
dinary courage 'and  resolution,  that  Teleutias,  bravely  acquitting  him- 
self, and  above  twelve  hundred.  Lacedaemonians  more,  were  there 
lulled  upon  the  place..  The  Spartans,  being  nettled  at  this  suc- 
cess of  the  Olynthians,  made  greater  preparations,  in  order  to 
repair  their  loss.  So,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Olynthians,  suspecting 
that  the  Lacedaemonians  would  bring  down  greater  forces  upon 
them,  and  that  the  war  might  continue  long,  furnished  themselves 
with  plenty  of  corn  and  provisions,  and  with  other  aids  from  their 
confederates. 

Demophilus  was  now  archon  at  Athens;  and  Publius  Cornelius^ 
Lucius  Virginius,  Lucius  Papirius,  Marcus  Furius*,' Valerius  Au- 
liusf,  Manlius{  Lucius,  and  Posthumius  Quintus§,  military  tri- 
bunes, were  consuls  at  Rome,  when  the  Lacedaemonians  decreed 
vnff  against  the  Olynthians,  and  made  their  king  Agesipolis  general 
ever  an  army  of  force  sufficient  for  the  expedition.    As  soon  as  bt 

*  Vtlerius,  t  Aolun  Maalitu.  |  Luciui.  §  Fostbamitta. 


XJSap.ITL  DiODORUs  sicuLUSi  17 

entered  the  enemy's  country,  he  joined  with  those  that  were  en- 
camped there,  and  forthwith  fell  to  action.  The  Olynthians  this  year 
fought  no  considerable  battle,  but  kept  the  king's  army  in  play 
<whom  they  were  afraid  to  encounter)  with  continual  bickering,  and 
light  and  frequent  skir&ishes. 


CHAR  III. 

Pelopidas  sent  general  by  the  LacecUsmonians  against  the  OlynthU 
ans.  A  great  plc^em  Cartilage,  2%e  Bwotian  war.  The  Cad- 
mea  re^taJcen.  A  confederacy  of  the  cities  against  the  Lacedce- 
numians.  Cleombrottis  attempts  to  surprise  the  PinBus  at  Athens. 
The  Athenians  seize  Acta  in  Eubesa.  Agesilaus  enters  Bcsoiia% 
7%e  sea-ifight  at  Naxos* 

AFTER  the  end  of  the  year,  Pytheas  wSts  treated  chief  magistrate 
of  Athens^  and  six  military  tribunes  bore  the  consular  authority  at 
Rome,  Titus  Quintius,  Lociu3  S^rvilius,  Lucius  Julius,  Aquilius* 
Decius,  Lucretius  Anchins^,  and  Servius  Sulpitius.  At  that  time  was 
solemnized  the  hundredth  Olympiad  at  Elis;  in  which  Dionysiodorus 
the  Tarentlne  bore  away  the  prize.  In  the  mean  time  Agesipolis^ 
kingof  Lacedaemon,  died,  in  tlie  fourteenth  year  of  his  reign;  and, 
his  brMher  Cleombrotus  succeeding  him,  reigned  nine  years.  But 
the  Laced&eiMnians  constituted  Pelopidas  general^  and  sent  him  forth 
against  the  Olyuthians.  He  swore  all  his  soldiers  to  be  true  and 
feithftil  to  him,  and  gained  many  victories,  managing  the  war  with 
die  ?aldor  and  conduct  that  became  a  good  general.  At  length,  im* 
pft)ving  his  good  fortune  and  frequent  successes^e  drove  the  Olyn- 
thiaiia  wt<bin  their  walls,  and^  penning  them  up,  so  terrified  them, 
that  he  forced  them  to  submit  to  the  Lacedsemonians  as  their  sove^ 
reigQ  lords.,  As  soon  as  the  Olynthians  were  enrolled  among  the 
coofcderates^f  the  Spartans>  many  other  cities  sought  to  come  under 
the  same  protection.  And  now  the  power  of  the  Laccdceiuonians 
Was  in  its  greatest  strength,  as  being  lords  of  all  Greece,  both  by  sea 
and  land:  for  theThqhans  were  overawed  by  a  garrison;  the  Corin- 
thians and  Afgix^^s  were  tired  out  with  wars  one  with  anothevf  and 
the  Athenian3>  for  their  'coyetousness  and  cruelty  exercised  among 

Vol.  2.  No.  40.  » 


18  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XK 

those  they  had  subdued,  were  despised  by  all  the  Grecians.  Oq  the 
otlier  hand,  all  were  afraid  of  the  Lacedemonians^  becaui^  they  werv 
▼cry  populous,  expert  soldiers,  and  unwearied  in  their  attempts;  in^ 
Bomuch  that  the  greatest  of  the  princes  io  those  times  (I  mean  the 
king  of  Persia,  and  DIonysius  the  tyrant  of  l^cily)  coorted  the  Spar- 
tans, and  were  ambitious  of  their  alliance. 

Afterwar4s,''when  Nico  governed  at  Athens,  and  six  military  tri- 
bunes were  created  consuls  at  Rome,  Lucius  Papirlus,  Caius  Come- 
lius,  Lucius  Manlius,  Caius  Serrilius,  Valerius  Aulius,  and  Quhitus 
Fabius,  the  Carthaginians  entered  with  an  army  into  Italy,  and  re- 
stored the  Hipponiats  to  their  city,  whence  they  had  been  ex-^ 
pelled,  and  kindly  received  all  the  exiles  tliat  came  in  to  liim  from 
all  part^. 

Not  long  after  a  great  plague  happened  in  Cbrthage,  which,  raging 
more  and  more,  swept  away  abundance  of  the  inhabitants,  insomuch 
that  they  were  in  great  danger  to  have  Mst  their  sovereignty:  for  tho- 
Africans  slighted  and  deserted  them,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Sardinia 
(supposing  they  had  now  a  fit  opportunity)  revolted,  a<nd  rose  up  in 
arms  against  them.  Moreover,  a  remarkable  judgment  of  Cvod  fell 
upon  Carthage  at  tins  time :  for  the  city  was  all  on  a  sudden  in  an 
uproar,  filled  with  tumult,  fear,  and  horror;  and,  OMiny  running  armed 
iHit  of  their  houses,  <as  if  an  enemy  had  entered  the  place),  fought, 
xWonnded,  and  killed  one  another  in  die  streets*  At  length,  the  god» 
being  appeased  by  Mcrifiees,  and  they  delivered  out  of  their  sad 
afflictions,  they  presently  subdued  the  Africans,  and  recovered  Sar* 
dinia. 

After  these  things,  wbenNausinicus  was  diief  governor  of  Athens^ 
and  four  military  tribune^,  Marcus  Cornelius,  Servilius  Quintius, 
Marcus  Furius,  and  Lucius  Quintius,  were  clothed  with  the  consu- 
lar dignity  at  Rome,  the  Boeotian  war  (so  oalted)  broke  out,  between 
the  B(BOtians  and  the  Lacedsmooiaos,  upon  the  accounts  folkywing  : 

.The  Lacediemonians,  against  all  law  and  justice,  fbreiUy  detained 

the  citadel  of  Cadmea,  and  hafd  forced  many  persons  ot  fnality  to  fl;^ 
out  of  their  own  country;  the  exiles  therefore,  upon  a  ^idnite  oon^ 
sultaUon  among  themselves,  (by  the  helpof  the  AtheniUBs)^  returned 
in  the  night  into  their  city,  and  in  the  first  place  killed  all  those  tliey 
judged  had  sided  with  the  Laeedsemoniws,  surprisfing  lhe«  in  their 
houses,  while  they  were  asleep;  then  they  stirred  up  all  the  tommoa  , 
people  to  appear  for  their  liberties;  upon  which  the  whole  city  of 
Thebes  readily  came  in  to  their  assistance,  and,  getting  iat»  a  body, 
surrounded  the  Cadmea  by  break  of  day.  In  the  mean  'dme  the  La- 
cedsemonian  garrison  that  was  in  the  citadel,  which  eomisted  of  ao 
fewer  than  fifteen  hundred  men,  sent  a  messenger  to  Sparta,  to  ii^ 


Cfmp.  III.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  I9 

form  them  of  the  iosurrection  in  Thebes^  and  to  desir^  aid  with*  all 
speed.  However^  they  from  the  bastions  in  the  citadel  beat  off  the 
besiegers,  killing  and  wounding  many.  U|K>n  this  the  Tlieban^^ 
coocludiog  that  great  forces  would  be  brought  out  of  Greece  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Lacedeenionians,  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens,  t^ 
put  them  in  mind  how  they  had  been  assisted  by  the  Thebans  at 
that  time  when  they  rescued  their  commonwealth  from  the  slavery 
they  suffbred  under  the  thirty  tyrants,  and  therefore  that  they  should 
press  them  that  they  would  hasten,  with  all  the  force  they  had,  to  help 
them  to  reduce  tbie  Cadroea,  before  any  aid  came  from  Sparta. 

The  people  of  Athens,  as  soon  as  they  heard  what  was  desired  by 
the  Thebans,  decreed  that  without  delay  a  strong  and -considerable 
army  should  be  sent  to  help  them  to  regain  tlieir  liberty,  both  to  de- 
monstrate their  gratitudeJor  their  former  services,  and  likewise  hop* 
iDg  thereby  so  to  oblige  the  Thebans  as  that  they  should  ever  find 
them  fast  and  constant  friends,  to  assist  them  at  all  times  against  the 
growing  and  boundless  power  of  the  Lacedemonians:  for  the  Tlie- 
bans  were  looked  upon  not  to  be  inferior  to  any  in  Greece  for  num* 
ber  or  valour  of  men.  In  conclusion,  the  Athenians  made  Demo« 
pbon  general  over  five  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse,  who 
drew  out  before  day  next  morning;  and  hastened  away  with  a  swift 
inarch,  that  he  might  be  before  the  Lacedsemonians;  however,  the 
people  ot  Athens  were  ready  and  prepared  to  march  out  with  all  theif 
forces  into  Boeotia,  if  the  Thebans  had  occasion  for  them.  Demo«> 
phon  with  great  expedition  (beyond  expectation)  appeared  m  view 
of  them  of  Thebes ;  and  soldiers  came  together  with  the  like  zeal  and 
earnestness  from  the  other  cities  of  Bceotia;  so  that  theThebans  had 
now  a  numerous  army,  consisting  of  no  less  than  twelve  thousand 
foot,  and  about  two  tliousand  horse,  and  all  cheerfully  and  readily 
bestirred  themselves  to  besiege  the  citadel.  The  army  divided  them- 
selves into  parties,  and  assaulted  the  place  by  turns,,  persisting  with- 
out any  cessation  night  and  day.  In  the  mean  time,  they  in  the 
eastle  (encouraged  by  their  officers)  bore  the  brunt  with  great 
courage,  hoping  to  receive  speedy  succours  from  the  Laced«mo- 
;  Dians  {  and,  indeed,  they  valiantly  stood  it  out  while  they  had  any  vic- 
tuals left,  killing  and  wounding  many  of  the  assailants,  having  the 
advantage  of  the  strength  of  the  fort;  but,  when  their  provisions 
grew  low,  and  the  Laced^Bmonians  lingered  in  sending  relief,  the  gar- 
rison began  to  mutiny. 

For  tlie  Lacedamonians  were  for  the  standing  of  it  out  to  the  last 
man,  but  the  auxiliaries  from  the  confederate  cities  (who  were  the 
greater  number)  were  for  delivering  it  up;  so  the  Spartans,  who  were 
but  feWj  were  forced  to  sunender  the  citadel]  and^  being  dismissed 


to  DfODORHS  SICULUS.  Book  XPi 

VsssaSBSSBSSSSSaSSSSSSS      ,  .  ■BgagggggBBBSBaM^M 

according  to  articles,  returned  to  Peloponnesus.  At  length  the 
Lacedeemonians  came  with  their  army  to  Thebes;  but,  having  lost 
theiropportunity,  through  the  slowness  of  their  march,  all  was  to  no 
purpose.  But  they  tried  three  of  the  officers  of  the  garrison  by  a 
council  of  war,  and  condemned  two  of  them  to  die,  and  imposed 
so  great  a  mulct  and  fine  upon  the  third,  that  he  was  never,  able  to 
pay  it.  Afterwards,  the  Athenians  returned  into  their  own  country, 
and  theThebans  spent  much  time  in  vain  in  the  siege  of  Thespis.  \ 
During  these  affairs  the  Romans  sent  a  colony  of  five  hundred  citi- 
zens into  Sardinia,  upon  terms  of  being  free  from  tribute. 

Afterwards,  when  Callias  was  lord-chancellor  of  Athens,  and  four 
military  tribunes,  Lucius  Papirius,  Mar.cus*  Publius,  Titus  Cx>rne- 
liusf,  and  Quintus  Lucius^,  were  honoured  with  the  consular  dig^ 
nity  at  Rome,  (after  the  Lacedemonians  iia^  miscarried  at  Thebes), 
the  Boeotians  took  courage,  and,  entering  into  associations,  raised  a 
great  army,  because  they  foresaw  that  the  Lacedaemonians  would 
presently  enter  with  a  strong  body  into  Boeotia. 

The  Athenians  likewise  sent  persons  of  the  greatest  quality  amongst 
them  to  persuade  the  cities  subject  to  the  LacedsemonjaDS  not  to  ne- 
glect the  present  opportunity  now  ofiered  to  recover  their  liberties  & 
for,  indeed,  the  Lacediemonians  were  grown  to  that  height,  that  they 
lorded  it  with  great  pride  and  oppression  over  their  subjects;  there-* 
fore  many  of  them  were  inclined  to  comply  with  the  Athenians.  The 
first  that  made  a  defection  were  those  of  Chios  and  Byaantium,  after 
them  Rhodes  and  Mitylene,  and  some  other  islands.  And  now  the 
commotions  and  disturbances  of  the  cities  of  Greece  more  and  more 
increasing,  many  of  them  joined  with  Athens;  upon  which  the 
people  of  Athens,  encouraged  by  this  confederacy,  decreed  a  general* 
diet  or  senate  of  some  chosen  out  of  every  city  from  among  all  their- 
allies,  to  consult  of  the  present  state  of  affairs.  And  it  was  agreed 
by  common  consent,  that  the  senate  should  sit  at  Athens,  and  that 
every  city,  whether  great  or  small,  should  send  only  one  representa-- 
tive,  and  every  one  should  be  governed  by  their  own  laws,  but  under 
the  conduct  and  administration  of  the  Athenians. 

However  the  Lacedemonians,  though  they  saw  the  current  and 
tide  so  strong  as  tiiat  they  were  not  able  to  stem  it,  yet  they  endea- 
voured all  they  could  by  fair  words,  and  many  specious  promises,  to 
court  the  deserters  to  return  to  their  obedience,  not  neglecting  in  the 
mean  time  to  prepare  for  the  war,  inasmuch  as  they  discerned  that  it 
would  he  great  and  of  long  continuance,  in  regard  the  Athenians  and 
other  Grecians  (met  together  in  that  public  assembly)  all  joined  witk 
the  Thebans. 

*  Pub)iu4.  I  Coni«liuf  Tito,  |  Lucius  Quiutios^ 


Chap.  m.  DIODORUS  SICUItTS.  SI 

Whilst  these  things  were  acting  in  Greece,  Acoris^king  of  Egypt^ 
for  some  time  before  bearing  a  gra(}ge  to  the  Persian  king,  raised  % 
great  army  of  foreigners  from  all  parts :  for,  giving  large  pay,  and 
being  otherwise  Tery  bountiful,  he  got  together  a  great  number  of 
Grecians  io  a  short  time,  who  listed  themselves  into  his  service.  Bu^ 
wanting  a  skilful  general,  he  sent  for  Chabrias  the  Athenian,  an  ex* 
cellent  commander,  and  one  liighiy  honoured  for  his  valour,  who  un- 
dertook the  employment,  but  without  the  consent  of  the  people^  and 
so  prepared  himself  with  all  diligence  for  the  war  against  the  Per- 
sians. But  Pharnabazus  (declared  commander-in-chief  by  the  king) 
having  made  great  preparations  of  money  for  the  war,  sent  messen- 
gers to  Athens  to  complain  against  Chabrias,  letting  them  know, 
that,  by  his  accepting  of  the  chief  command  under  the  king  of  Egypt, 
he  had  greatly  alienated  the  king  of  Persia  from  the' people  of  Athens. 
Then  he  demanded  that  they  would  send  to  him  Iphicrates,  to  assist 
him  in  the  command  of  the  army.  Upon  this  the  Athenians  (who 
2Dade  it  their  great  concern  to  stand  right  in  the  king's  good  opinion, 
and  to-  keep  Pharnabazus  firm  to  their  interest)  without  delay  re- 
called Chabrias  out  of  Egypt^  and  commanded  Ipliicrates  to  assist 
the  Persians. 

The  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  some  years  before  had  struck 
up  a  peace  amongst  themselves,  which  continued  to  this  very  time. 
But  after  that  Sphodrias  was  made  general  by  the  Spartans,  (a 
man  of  a  proud  and  haughty  spirit,  rash,  and  headstrong),  Cleombro-^ 
tus,  the  Lacedaemonian  king,  urged  liiin  on  to  surprise  the  Pirseus  at 
Athens  without  the  assent  of  the  EphorL  To  this  end,  being  fur- 
nished with  ten  thousand  heavy-armed  men,  he  attempts  to  enter  the 
Pireeus  in  the  night;  but,  the  treachery  being  detected  by  the  Athe- 
nians, his  project  came  to  nought,  and  he  returned  as  he  came:  and, 
though  he  was  brought  before  the  senate  at  Sparta  for  this  rash  an(l 
inconsiderate  action,  yet,  being  patronised  by  the  kings,  be  was, 
against  all  law  aud  justice,  discharged.  [The  Athenians^  being  in- 
censed with  this  apparent  abuse,  published  a,  decree—That,  in- 
asmuch as  the  Lacedsemonians  had  openly  violated  the  league,  that 
war  should  be  made  upon  them  for  the  repair  of  the  injury.  To 
this  end,  therefore,  Timotheus,  Chabrias,  and  Callistratus,  (men  of 
great  account  in  the  city,  who  were  made  generals  for  this  expedi- 
tion),  were  commissioned  to  raise  twenty  thousand  foot  of  cors- 
leteers,  and  five  hundred  horse,  and  to  equip  a  fleet  of  two  hun- 
dred sail. 

The  Athenians  likewise  brought  the  Tliebans,  as  members,  into 
the  public  senate,  upon  the  same  terms  and  conditions  with  the  rest. 
It  was  also  enacted,  by  the  sufirage  of  the  senate ...Tliat  the  lands 


piODORUS  SICULU9.  B&ok  XK 


wbieh  had  be€D  divided  by  lot  should  be  restored  to  the  antient  pro- 
prietors; aod  that  no  Athenian  should  ehallenge  a  right  to  a»j 
lands  that  ky  out  of  Attica.  By  this  fair  dealing  the  Athenians  re- 
gained the  lore  of  the  Grecians^  and  again  strengthened  themsehrcs 
in  their  government.  And  this  was  the  cause  which  moved  manj 
other  cities  of  Greece  to  side  with  the  Athenians.  The  chiefest  eiticv 
of  Eubcea  (except  Acta)  with  great  heat  and  zeal  entered  into  an 
Ittsoeiation  with  Athens,  But,  in  regard  they  of  Acta  had  received 
many  kindnesses  from  the  Lacedsemonians,  aod,  on  the  other  hand> 
bad  been  grievously  oppressed  and  harassed  by  the  Athenians,  they 
bore  an  implacable  hatred  towards  the  one,  and  stuck  close  and 
jrm  in  their  alliance  to  the  other.  In  the  whole,  there  were  seventy 
cities  that  entered  into  this  confederacy  and  association,  all  Which 
bad  Toices  upon  the  same  terms  and  conditions  in  the  senate*  So 
that  the  forces  of  the  Athenians  increasing  every  day,  and  those  of 
Sparta  decreasing,  these  two  cities  began  now  again  to  lie  in  equal 
bftllaince. 

.  The  Athenians  therefore  (who  saw  all  things  go  forward  accord-* 
iDg  to  tiieir  heart's  desire)  transported  forces  into  £uboea,  both  ta 
fix  their  confederates,  and  to  suppress  their  foes.  In  this  island  ooo 
Neogenes,  a  little  before  these  times,  with  the  assbtance  of  Juson 
irf'Pheris,  with  a  band  of  men,  had  seized  upon  the  citadel  of  Acta^ 
and  declared  himself  king  of  those  parts,  and  of  the  city  C^opus^, 
But,  governing  proudly  and  tyrannically,  the  Lacedaemonians  sent 
Therippidas  against  him,  who  at  the  first  would  have  persuaded  hioi 
by  fair  means  to  leave  the  castle;  but,  when  he  could  not  be  sa 
wrought  upon,  he  stirred  up  the  inhabitants  near  adjoining  to  recover 
their  liberty,  and  took  the  castle  by  storm,  and  restofcd  the  Oro^ 
pians  to  their  former  freedom.  For  this  reason  the  Hestismos  al** 
ways  loved  the  Lacedseroonians,  and  kept  a  firm  league  of  friendships 
irith  them.  But  Chabrias,  the  general,  with  the  forces  sent  from 
Athens,  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country  of  the  Hestisans,  and 
walled  Metropolis,  (as  it  is  called),  situated  upon  a  hill  naturally 
fortified,  apd  left  there  a  garrison;  and  he  himself  sailed  to  the  Cy^ 
clade  islands,  and  reduced  Pepar^thoa  i^id  Spiathos,  and  others  sab« 
ject  to  the  Lacedemonians. 

When  the  LacedsBmonians  saw  that  they  could  not  pnt  a  stop  to 
the  defection  of  their  confederates,  they  laid  aside  their  severity,  and 
took  other  measures  to  win  the  cities  by  more  gentle  methods :  and 
by  these  means  they  gained  upon  those  of  their  confederates  that  wero 
yet  left.    And  because  they  discerned  that  the  war  was  coming  on>a<« 

*  Id  EuboM,  now  N«gropont» 


— ggBegB—aaagga— ■BBeaac vum  i        ■.■.,..    .  .iggggga— fc— gjaaegfeggi 

pace,  tod  that  great  eare'was  required  for  the  maniigeaient  ef  their 
•ftiiB,  asKMig  other  preparations,  they  diligently  applied  themsdves  to 
put  their  army  into  a  better  posture,  and  more  aptly  to  dispose  of 
tkeir  tioops  and  regiments,  aod  to  have  their  forts  and  garrisons  move 
iuthfoUy  kept  and  secured:  for  tfiey  divided  their  cities  and  soldiers, 
nised  diere  Cor  the  present  war,  into  ten  parts:  the  first  were  Lacc- 
dmaooians;  the  second  and  third.  Arcadians;  the  fourth,  Elians; 
the  fifth,  Acfaaians;  the  sixth,  Corinthians  and  Megarensians;  the 
•eventh,  Sicyoniaos,  Phliastaos,  and  Actaaos;  the  eighth,  Aear^ 
oaiuans;  the  ninth,  Phocians  andLocrians;  the  last^  Olynthians  and 
4BoaiMlerates  of  Tltface.  The  manner  and  way  of  thrir  order  and 
■nnhalUng  was  this:  one  corsleteer,  or  Keavy-armed  soldier,  wbb 
aceouated  equal  to  two  lightly  armed;  and  one  horseman  to  fbnr 
beavy-Mmed  footinen.  The  army  thus  disposed,  king  Agesilaus  waa 
made  generalissimo  t  for  he  was  famous  both  for  his  valoiir  and  pra* 
deoee,  and  never  had  been  worsted  in  any  encounter  to  ttiat  veiy 
tioMB;  for,  as  he  wa»  highly  admired  in  other  wars,  ao  in  the  war 
fay  die  LacedfleiiKinianB  against  the  Persians,  he  routed  armies  Car 
greater  than  bis  own,  .nnd  bore  down  all  befopre  him,  wasting  and 
qpoiing  A  great  part  of  Aeia;  and  if  the  Spartans  had  not  called  him 
•  home  ^throc^  the  urgency  of  aflains  in  his  own  country)  he  had  not 
beco  far  from  ruining  the  whole  kingdom  of  Persia;  for  he  was  ^ 
aBMmery  brisk  and  daring,  and  yet  withal  prudent^  addicting  faim^ 
self'  togt«at  and  noble  actions;  and  therefore  the  iSjpartans  fwhed 
die  gieatness  of  the  war  required  a  skitftil  commatilder)  chose  h&m 
la  be  genemt  above  all  others. 

Upon  which,  Agesilaos  entered  Boeotia  with  above  eighteen  thou-^ 
aaiid  foot,  amongst  whom  were  five  regiments  of  Lacedesmoniana^ 
every  regiment  consisting  of  five  hiibdred.  '  The  Lacedaamoniaa 
band  called  the  Scirite^,  joined  not  With  the  rest  ot  the  army;  but 
kept  Hbcir  proper  post  round  about  the  king,  and  always  were  ready 
lo  suceour  that  part  that  was  most  prest  upoti*  And  because  it  waa 
made  tip  of  the  best  soldier^,  it  was  of  the  greatest  esteem  of  any 
pMt  of  the  army,  and  most  commonly  instrumental  to  the  gaining 
of  every  victory.  Besides  tl^e  foot  before  mentioned,  Agesilaus  had 
with  him  fifteen  hundred  horse.  As  soon  as  he  came  to  Tliespis  (a 
Lacediemonian  garrison)  lie  encamped  near  the  city,  to  refresh  hie 
army  after  their  long  march. 

When  the  Athenians  heard  that  the  Lacedaemonians,  hadientejed 
into  Boeotia,  they  forthwith  sent  five  thousand  foot  and  two  hundred 
horse  to  the  aid  of  Tliebes.    The  Thebans  liaving  niustered  and  ren- 
dezvoused their  forces,  possessed  themselves  of  a  hill  which  ran  out 
•  Thcso  were  comifionly  9\t  huDd*«d. 


'  iM  biODORUS  sicuLus;  JBdok  XK 

II  great  lengthy  distant  twenty  stages  from  the  city,  and  posted  them- 
selves there  for  the  advantage  of  the  ground,  (being  difficult  of  ac*^ 
cess),  and  there  waited  for  the  enemy:  for  the  great  reputation  of 
Agesilaus  did  so  terrify  them,  that  they  durst  not  engage  with  him 
upon  equal  terms  in  the  open  field.     Agesilaus  now  advances  with 
his  forces  against  the  Boeotians;  as  soon  as  he  came  near  the  enemy, 
(to  make  trial  whether  they  had  a  mind  to  fight)  he  sent  out  against 
them  some  light-armed  men,  which  were  soon  beaten  back  by  the 
Thebans  from  the  higher  ground:  upon  which,  to  strike  them  with 
more  terror,  he  drew  out  his  whole  army  In  battalia  upon  them. 
Whereupon,  Chabrias  the  Athenian,  commander  of  the  mercenaries^ 
ordered  the  soldiers  to  appear  in  a  posture  of  defiance  to  the  Lacedo 
monians:  and  to  that  end  to  stand  to  their  ranks  and  orders,  with 
their  shields  laid  down  at  their  feet,  and  with  their  speavs  advanced, 
so  to  present  themselves  to  the  view  of  the  enemy,  which  they  obeyed 
at  the  first  word  of  command.    Agesilaus  admiring  their  excellent 
order,  and  contempt  of  their  enemies,  thought  it  not  safe  to  attempt 
to  force  up  those  steep  places,  and  to  try  their  valour  at  such  disad-^ 
vantage,  having  experienced,  that  by  violent  pressing  upon  thero^ 
they  would  be  necessitated  to  stand  it  out  to  the  utmost  extremity. 
Therefore  he  did  all  he  could  to  provoke  them  to  descend  into  the 
open  plain;  but  when  he  could  not  get  them  to  stir,  he  sent  out  a 
phalanx  of  foot,  and  a  party  of  light  horse,  and  wasted  and  spoiled 
the  country  without  controul,  and  got  together  abundance  of  prey 
and  plunder.    But  those  that  were  ordered  to  attend  upon  AgesUaus 
as  his  council,  and  the  colonels  and  [captains  of  the  regiments  won-* 
dering  that  he,  being  ever  accounted  a  valiant  man,  and  a  good  sol- 
dier, and  now  furnished  with  an  army  far  stronger  than  the  enemy^ 
should  notwithstanding  wave  an  engagement,  Agesikus  gave  them 
this  answer .^That  now  the  Lacedaemonians  were  conquerors  without 
fighting,  since  the  Thebans  durst  not  move  out  of  their  place  to 
give  a  stop  to  the  spoiling  of  their  country:  and  if  he  should  force 
them  to  fight  after  they  had  willingly  yielded  the  victory,  the  un- 
certain fortune  of  war  might  be  such  as  might  on  a  sudden  ruin  the 
Lacedsemonians.     The  man  by  this  conception  seemed  modestly 
to  foretel  the  event;  for,  that  which  followed  after  did  clearly  evince 
•.i^That  what  he  said  was  the  oracle  of  God^  and  not  the  mere  voice 
of  a  man:  for,  the  Lacedaemonians  within  a  short  time  after,  when 
they  set  upon  the  Thebans  with  a  numerous  army^  and  forced  them 
to  fight  for  their  liberties,  involved  themselves  in  unspeakable  cala* 
mities;  for,  in  the  first  place,  when  they  were  routed  at  the  battle 
gf  Leuctra,  a  great  number  of  their  citizens  were  cut  oS,  amongst 
wbon  was  their  king  Cleombrotus*    And  afterwards  at  the  battle  of 


Chmp.  III.  DIODORU3  SICULUS.  35 


MaDtinea  they  were  utterly  ruined  $  and  (beyond  all  men's  thoughts 

of  any  such  thing)  quite  lost  the  sovereignty  of  Greece For,  in  this 

fight  (especially)  fortune  made  it  her  busines  to  bring  swift  destruc- 
tioD  upon  the  proud  and  haughty,  and  to  teach  men  not  to  aspire  be* 
yond  the  bounds  of  moderation  and  modesty.  So  that  Agesilaus 
acted  prudently  in  being  content  in  his  former  good  success,  and 
preserving  his  army  entire  without  loss  or  prejudice. 

Some  time  after,  Agesilaus  marchod  back  with  his  army  into  Pe- 
loponnesus; but  theThebans,  now  delivered  from  the  danger  they 
were  in  by  the  conduct  of  Chabrias,  highly  admired  his  witty  strata- 
gem ;  who,  though  he  had  performed  many  noble  exploits  in  the  wars^ 
yet  he  gloried  more  in  this  than  in  all  others  before,  and  by  the  fa« 
TOur  of  the  people  procured  statues  to  be  erected  in  memory  of  the 
project,  representing  the  thing  as  it  was  done. 

The  Thebans,  after  the  departure  of  Agesilaus,  set  upon  Thespis,  ■ 
and  killed  the  guard,  which  consisted  of  two  hundred  men;  but 
making  several  assaults  upon  the  city,  though  all  in  vain,  th>y  drew 
off,  in  order  to  return  with  their  forces  to  Thebes,  Upon  which^ 
Phebidas,  the  Lacediemonian,  the  governor  of  Thespis,( who  kept  the 
place  with  a  strong  garrison),  made  a  sally  upon  the  Thebans  in  their 
retreat,  and  through  hi3  pressing  on  too  rashly,  (after  many  wounds 
received,and  signalizing  his  valour),  he  lost  his  own  life,  and  the  lives 
of  above  five  hundred  of  his  fellows. 

Not  long  after,  the  Lacedemonians  marched  against  Thebes  with 
the  same  army:  and  then  again  theThebans  possessed  themselves  of 
some  other  places  th^t  were  of  difficult  access,  by  which  means 
they  did  indeed  hinder  the  wasting  and  spoiling  the  country,  but 
dared  not  at  first  to  engage  with  the  enemy  in  the  plain.  But  up^ 
on  the  appearance  of  Agesilaus  in  the  Van  of  the  army,  they  be* 
gao  to  march  slowly  towards  him,  and  after  a  long  time,  the  armies 
at  length  engaged  With  great  heat  and  fury.  At  the  first  Agesilaus 
had  the  advantage :  but  when  he  discerned  the  whole  city  of  Thebes 
to  sally  out  upon  him,  he  sounded  a  retreat :  whereupon  the  The- 
bans judging  themselves  nothing  inferior  to  the  Lacedeemouians, 
erected  a  trophy,  and  never  after  hesitated  to  engage  with  the  Spartaus. 
And  this  was  the  issue  of  the  fights  by  land. 

But  about  the  same  time  there  was  a  great  fight  at  sea,  between 
Naxos  and  Paros,  upon  this  occasion :  Pollis,  the  Lacedaemonian 
admiral,  had  intelligence  of  a  great  quantity  of  corn  that  was  pass- 
ing by  sea  to  Athens;  upon  which,  he  made  it  his  busihess  to  lie  in 
wait  to  surprise  the  transport  ships.  The  Athenians  being  informed 
of  the  design,  sent  out  a  fleet  to  guard  the  ships  loaden  with  the  pro- 
visions, and  brought  them  all  into  the  Piraeus. 
Vol.  2.   No.40,  s 


«6  DIODORUS  SICULUS,  Book  XV. 

After  this,  Chabrias  the  Athenian  admiral  sailed  with  the  whole 
fleet  to  Naxos,  and  besieged  it,  and  battering  it  with  his  engines^ 
used  his  utmost  endeavours  to  take  it  by  storm :  but  while  he  was 
earnest  in  prosecuting  his  design,  Pollis  the  Lacedaemonian  admnral 
came  up  with  his  fleet  to  the  assistance  of  the  Naxians:  upon  which 
the  fleets  engaged,  chargine  one  another  in  a  line  of  battle.  Pollis 
had  a  navy  of  sbttv-five  sail,  and  Chabrias  eighty-three.  Pollis  ia 
the  right  wing  valiantly  char /red  the  Athenians  in  the  left,  commanded 
by  Cedon  the  Athenian,  whom  he  killed,  and  sunk  his  vessel.  He 
fell  likewise  upon  others,  and  broke  some  of  them  in  pieces  with  the 
beaks  of  his  ships,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  Which  Chabrias  dis- 
cerning, he  ordered  some  ships  near  him  to  the  reli#f  of  those  that 
were  overpowered,  and  so  rescued  them.  H^  himself,  with  the  great- 
est part  of  the  fleet  under  his  command,  with  great  valour  broke  in 
pieces  and  took  many  of  the  enemy's  gallies.  But  however,  though 
he  obtained  the  victory,  and  put  the  enemy's  whole  fleet  to  flighty 
yet  he  would  not  pursue,  remembering  the  battle  at  Arginusas,where^ 
though  the  Athenians  were  victorious,  yet  the  people,  instead  of  a 
reward,  put  the  othcers  to  death,  only  because  they  did  not  bury  their 
parents  who  were  killed  in  that  fight.  Fearing  therefore  the  Kke  fate, 
he  waved  the  pursuit,  and  took  up  the  citizens  swimming  and  float- 
.  jng  here  and  there,  and  so  preserved  those  that  were  alive,  and  or* 
dered  the  dead  to  be  buried.  In  this  battle  the  Atheniao^ost  eigh-^ 
teen  gallies,  and  the  Lacedemanians  four-and-twenty]  eight  were 
taken  with  all  the  men. 

Chabrias,  crowned  with  this  glorious  victory,  returned  with  great 
and  rich  spoils  to  the  Piraeus,  and  was  received  by  the  citizens  with 
great  honour  and  acclamation.  This  was  the  first  victory  at  sea 
gained  by  the  Athenians  since  the  Peloponnesian  war;  for,  at  Cnidus 
they  prevailed  not  by  the  strength  of  their  own  forces,  but  by  the  as-» 
distance  of  the  king  of  Persia. 

While  these  things  were  acted  in  Greece,  Marcus  Manlius  was 
put  to  death  at  Rome  for  aspiring  to  the  monarchy. 


Ckap.  IV.  DIODORU9  SICULU8.  ^ 


CHAP.  IV. 

7!%t  TribalUans  make  incursions  into  Thrace.  Chabrias  the  Athe^ 
nian  general  assassitiated.  The  Tkehans  rout  the  Spartans  ai 
Chrchonsenus.  Artaxerxes  seeks  to  make  peace  among  the  Gre  \ 
dans.  Peace  concluded.  The  Thebans  only  disagreed.  The 
vommendatioH  of  Eiyaminondas.  Sedition^  in  several  cities  of 
Greece. 

WHEN  Cbariander  was  arclion  at  Athens,  and  Servius  Su1pltiuS| 
Lucius  Papirius,  Cornelius  Titus^,  and  -Marcus  Quintius-f,  four 
military  tribunes,  were  in. consular  dignity  at  Rome>  the  hundred  and 
first  olympiad  was  celebated  at  EHs,  and  Damon  of  Thurium  bore 
away  th^  prize.  At  that  time  the  TribalUans  in  Thrace  (being  in  great 
scarcity  <rfcorn)  made  an  incursion  with  tliirty  thousand  armed  men, 
into  the  territories  of  their  neighbours  to  get  provisions.  To  that  end 
they  entered  the  borders  of  the  Abderites  in  another  part  of  Thrace» 
and  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country  without  any  oppositions  and  hav-^ 
ing  kiaden  themselves  with  abundance  of  plunder>  they  returned  so 
carelesly  and  disordei ly,  as  that  the  whole  city  of  Abdera  falling  up- 
on them  when  they  were  scattered  and  dispersed,  killed  above  two 
thousand  of  them.  To  revenge  which,  the  exasperated  barbarianji 
made  a  second  inroad  into  the  country  of  the  Abderites.  But  they^ 
being  encouraged  by  the  late  victory,  and  strengthened  with  the  as-> 
sistance  of  the  neighbouring  Tliracians,  drew  up  in  battalia  against 
the  barbarians.  The  armies  furiously  engaged,  when  on  a  sudden 
the  Thracians  drew  off  and  left  the  Abderites  to  themselves,  who 
were  presently  hemmed  in  by  the  barbarians,  and  almost  every  man 
cut  off. 

As  soon  as  this  grievous  slaughter  of  the  Abderites  was  noised  a- 
broad,  and  they  were  now  ready  to  he  besieged,  Cliabrias  the  Athe 
nian  arrived,  with  his  army,  and  not  only  delivered  the  Abderites, 
but  drove  the  barbarians  out  of  the  country:  and,  after  he  had 
strengthened  the  city  with  a  strong  garrison,  he  was  basely  assas- 
sinated, but  by  whom  was  not  known.  Upon  this,  Tiinotheus  was 
made  admiral  of  the  Athenian  fleet,  and,  sailing  to  Ccphalenia,  he 
blocked  up  the  city  with  his  navy,  and  wrought  *ipon  the  cities  of 
Acarnania  to  side  with  the  Athenians.  Piesently  after,  he  entered 
into  a  league  with  Acetas,  king  of  the  Molussians;  atul  now,  having 
in  his  power  all  the  countries  subject  to  the  cities  in  those  parts,  li<p 
'  *  Marcui  Cornelius.  t  Titus  Quintius. 


n  DIOI^RUS  SICULUS.  BookXPl 

routed  the  Lacedemonians  in  a  sea-fight  at  Leucades;  and  all  thb 
he  did  in  a  very  short  time,  and  with  much  ease,  partly  by  fiur  words, 
and  partly. by  force  of  arms  and  his  excellent  conduct;  so  that  he  not 
only  gained  esteem  and  reputation  amoAgst  bis  own  fellow-citizens^ 
but  likewise  amongst  all  the  Grecians.  And  thus  was  it  with  Time- 
tbeus  at  this  time. 

Duribg  these  transactions,  the  Thebans  (with  fi?e  hundred  of  the 
most  valiant  men  of  their  city)  marched  against  Orchomenos,  and 
^rformed  an  exploit  worthy  of  memory.  The  Spartans  kept  this 
city  with  a  strong  garrison,  and,  making  a  sally  upon  the  Thebans, 
there  was  a  sharp  encounter,  in  which  they  routed  the  Lacedsemo* 
Diansj  though  they  were  double  in  number,  which  never  happened  to 
them  before  in  any  age;  but  the  thing  might  have  been  borne  well 
enough,  if  they  had  been  few,  and  had  been  conquered  by  the  far 
greater  number.  Henceforth  the  courage  of  the  Thebans  increased, 
and  they  grew  every  day  famous  for  their  valour;  and  now  it  was 
apparent,  that  they  were  likely  to  gain  the  sovereignty  of  all  Gpreece. 
As  to  the  writers  of  this  time,  Hermeias  of  Methymna  ends  bis  history 
of  the  afiiiirs  of  Sicily  with  this  year,  comprehended  in  ten,  but,  as 
otliers  divide  them,  in  twelve  books. 

The  year  following,  when  Hippodamus  was  chief  magistrate  of 
Athens,  and  four  military  tribunes,  viz.  Lucius  Valerius*;  Crispusf* 
I^Ianlius,  Fabius  Servilinst,  and  Sulpitius  Lucretius§,  were  Romaa 
consuls,  Artaxerxes  used  his  utmost  endeavour  to  quiet  all  things  ia 
Greece,  that  he  might  raise  the  more  mercenaries  for  the  carrying  oo 
the  war  against  the  Egyptians:  for  by  this  means  he  hoped  the  Gre* 
cians,  being  freed  from  domestic  broils,  would  be  in  a  condition  to  as- 
sist him  abroad.  To  this  end,,  he  sent  ambassadors  into  Greece,  to 
negotiate  in  this  afikir  amongst  all  the  cities.  And  this  embassy  was 
very  acceptable  to  the  Grecians,  who  were  nearly  tired  out  with  con- 
tinual wars;  so  that  a  general  peace  was  concluded  upon  these  condU 
tions — That  all  the  cities  should  for  the  future  be  governed  by  their 
own  laws,  and  all  the  garrisons  be  withdrawn.  And  there  were  cer- 
tain Grecians  appointed  as  commissioners  to  see  the  garrisons  drawn 
out ;  who  accordingly  went  to  every  city  where  there  was  any  soldiers, 
and  ordered  them  to  leave  the  place. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Thebans  only,  through  every  town,  disa- 
greed to  these  terms,  and  exempted  all  Bceotia,  as  tributary  only  to 
themselves :  but  the  Athenians  opposed  this  with  all  earnestness,  and 
this  affair  was  banded  in  the  common  assembly  of  the  Greeks,  by 
Callistratus,  a  tribune  of  the  people,  on  the  behalf  of  the  Athenians, 

*     *  Lucius  Valerius  Crispui.  t  Aulus  Manlius.  X  Servius  SuIpitiuK. 

i  Lucius  Lucretius. 


Chap.  IF.  DTODORUS  SICULUS*  S9 

mod  by  EpamiDODdas  on  the  behalf  of  the  Thebans;  after  which,  all 
the  rest  of  the  Grecians  persisted  in  their  resolution  to  stand  to  the 
league,  leaving  out  the  Hiebans,  who  (relying  upon  the  wisdom  and 
pradenee  of  Epaminondas)  boldly  opposed  the  decree  made  by  the 
general  assembly. 

For,  seeing  that  the  Lacedemonians  and  Athenians  .had  been  all 
doog  hitherto  contesting  for  the  sovereign  command  of  Greece,  and 
at  length  had  agreed  upon  these  terms — ^That  the  Lacedsemoniant 
should  have  the  command  at  land,  and  the  Athenians  at  sea,  thejr 
mete  veiy  uneasy  to  think  that  now  a  third  should  carry  away  the 
•oveieigDty  from  them  both;  for  which  reason  they  would  not  allow 
the  cfdes  of  Boeotia  to  be  under  the  power  of  the  Thebans.  But  the 
Thebans  {who  were  men  of  strong  bodies  and  stout  hearts,  and  had 
lately  beaten  the  Lacedemonians  in  several  fights)  bore  themselves 
very  high,  and  were  in  hopes  to  gain  the  sovereign  command  at  land. 
Neither  were  they  frustrated  in  their  design,  for  the  reasons  before 
neotiaoed,  and  likemse  because  they  had  at  that  time  many  exceU 
lent  officers  and  valiant  commanders,  amongst  whom  the  most  fiti- 
SDOus  weie  Pelopidas,  Gorgias,  and  Epaminondas;  which  last  was 
Slot  only  the  best  and  most  expert  commander  of  any  of  his  own 
country,  bat  even  of  all  the  Grecians^  and  was  likewise  a  man  of 
gveat  learning  in  the  liberal  sciences,  and  especially  in  the  Pytha- 
gorean philosophy;  beings  besides,  of  excellent  natural  parts,  and 
SBOther-wit,  it  was  no  wopder  if  he  exceeded  others  in  performing 
diose  things  that  were  more  than  ordinarily  remarkable.  For,  with  a 
small  body  of  men^  he  engaged  with  the  whole  power  of  the  Lacede- 
SMmians  and  their  confederates,  and  so  routed  those  (formerly  un- 
eonquerable)  warriors,  that  he  killed  their  king  Cleombrotus,  and  cut 
off  almost  the  whole  army  of  the  Spartans.  And,  by  the  advantage  of 
his  fisgular  wisdom,  and  virtuous  and  liberal  education,  such  things 
ivere  performed  by  him  as  were  admirable  beyond  all  expectation;  of 
which  we  shall  speak  more  fully  hereafter,  when  we  come  to  treat 
IMUticularly  of  those  things. 

But  now,  to  return  to  the  course  of  our  history.  It  was  agreed— 
That  every  city  should  govern  according  to  their  own  laws;  but 
presently  after,  all  the  cities  were  again  involved  in  great  tumults  and 
seditions,  especially  those  iu  Peloponnesus.  Some  few  of  these  had 
been  enslaved  in  the  late  domineering  time,  and,  being  now  restored 
to  their  democratical  government,  they  made  but  ati  ill  improvement 
of  it;  for  they  banished  many  honest  citizens  that  were  falsely  ac- 
cused, and  as  unjustly  condemned;  and,  by  the  prevailing  power  of 
ihe  seditious,  nothing  was  more  frequent  than  banishment  and  con- 
fiscation of  goods,  and  those  chiefly  were  the  sufterers  that  had  been 


so  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XK 

magistrates  in  the  time  of  the  LacedernQQiaii  government;  for,  be* 
cause  in  those  times  they  carried  it  something  imi>eriousIy  towards 
the  people,  not  with  that  regard  to  justice  as  they  ought,  now  that  the 
commonalty  were  restored  to  their  liberty,  they  too  much  resented 
their  former  injuries.^ 

The  exiles,  therefore,,  of  Phialia  were  the  first  that  consulted  and 
joined  together,  and  seued  upon  Herea,  a  strong  and  well  fortified 
castle,  and  from  thence  made  frequent  incursions  into  the  territories 
of  Phialia;  and,  at  the  time  when  the  feasts  of  Bacchus  were  cele- 
brated, (upon  the  sudden),  they  rushed  upon  the  people  in  the  theatre, 
and  cut  many  of  their  throats,  having  before  persuaded  a  consider* 
able  number  to  join  with  them  in  this  wicked  confederacy;  and 
afterwards  they  returned  to  Sparta.  Then  the  exiles  of  Corinth,  who 
were  in  great  numbers  at  Argos,  determined  to  force  their  own  re- 
turn. In  order  hereuntp,  some  of  their  servants  and  friends  were  re- 
ceived into  the  city;  but  the  thing  being  discovered  to  the  magis-^ 
trates,  they  could  not  lie  long  concealed,  but,  being  just  ready  to  be 
seized  (through  fear  of  punishment)  they  killed  oncf  another.  But 
the  Corinthians,  upon  suspicion  that  many  of  the  citizens  were  con- 
cerned in  the  plot,  put  several  to  death,  and  banished  others* 

In  the  city  of  Megara,  likewise,  some  were  contriving  how  to 
overturn  the  government,  who,  being  convicted  of  the  treason,  many 
were  put  to  death,  and  not  a  few  banished*  1^,  at  Sicyon,  many  wcra 
executed  upon  a  fuU  conviction,  for  endeavouring  to  bring  in  inno- 
vations. At  length  many  of  the  Pbialian  exiles,  having  seized  upon 
a  castle  in  that  territory,  got  together  a  great  army  of  mercenaries^ 
and  fought  with  the  townsmen,  and  got  the  day,  having  killed  above 
three  hundred  of  the  Phialians.  But,  not  long  after,  the  exiles  were 
betrayed  by  their  guard,  and  routed  by  them  of  Phialia,  with  the  loss 
of  six  hundred  men;  and  the  rest,  being  forced  out  of  the  country, 
fled  to  Argos.  And  such'  was  the  miserable  condition  of  Peloponnesus 
at  that  time. 


Chap.  V.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  .  SI 


CHAP.  V. 

The  Persiam  send  an  army  into  Egypt^  to  redjuce  the  revoUeHk 
Jphicrates  a  skilful  commander.  Sedition  at  Zacynthtu.  Plat<ea 
razed  by  the  Thebans.  TTie  Lacedcsmiomans  seize  upon  the 
island  Corcyra:  relieved  hy  the  Athenians  under  Ctesias.  Emi» 
goras  murdered  in  Cyprtis  by  an  eunuch.  Dreadful  earth* 
quakes  and  innundations  in  Peloponnesus.  A  great  comet  seen  m 
mjrreecem 

SOCRATIDRS  the  ensuing  year  was  arohon  at  Athens,  and  Quintal 
Crassus^,  Servilius  Cornelius,  Spurius  Papirius,  and  Fabius  Albusft 
four  military  tribunes,  executed  the  office  of  consuls  at  Rome.  At 
that  time  the  king  of  l^ersia  marched  against  the  Egyptians  (who  had 
revolted  some  time  before).  The  army  was  commanded  by  Phf^'na- 
bazus,  and  lj#hicrates  the  Athenian;  the  barbarians  by  Phamabazus» 
and  twenty  thousand  mercenaries  by  Iphicrates,  who  was  in  so  much 
favour  with  the  king  for  his  excellent  conduct,  that  he  intrusted  him 
with  that  command.  Pliarnabazus  Iiad  spent  many  years  in  prepara* 
tion  for  this  war.- 

Iphicrates,  therefore,  knowing  the  readiness  of  liis  tongue,  and  the 
slowness  of  his  actions,  one  day  accosted  him  in  this  manner-^That 
lie  wondered  that  one  who  was  so  voluble  in  his  speech,  -should  be 
so  slow  in  his  actions.  To  which  Pharnabazus  answered-JThat  he 
was  master  of  his  words,  but  the  king  of  his  actions.  When  the 
Icing's  forces  came  to  Acest^  in  Syria,  and  wer^  there  musteredt 
there  were  found  two  hundred  thousand  barbarians,  to  be  under  the 
conduct  of  Pharnabazus,  and  twenty  thousand  Grecians,  under 
the  command  of  Iphicrates.  The  number  of  the  navy  was  three 
bundred  gallies,  of  three  tier  of  oars  on  a  bank,  and  two  hundred  of 
thirty  oars  a-piece,  and  a  vast  number  of  transport- ships,  to  caiiy 
provisions,  and  other  things  necessary  for  the  army. 

About  the  beginning  of  the  spring  the  officers,  with  all  the  forces 
both  at  sea  and  land,  made  for  Egypt.  When  they  came  near  to  the 
river  Nile,  they  found  the  Egyptians  ready,  and  prepared  for  bat- 
tle; for  Pharnabazus  had  been  very  tedious  in  this  expedition,  and 
had  given  the  enemy  time  enough  to  prepare  for  their  defence :  for 
it  is  the  constant  practice  of  the  Persian  generals  (in  regard  they 
have  no  absolute  power)  upon  every  special  occ^Siioa  to  seqd  to  the 
*  Serviliu9.  t  J^ucios  i£iiirliiuu  t  Ace,  or  Ptolemais,  in  Phoenicii. 


38  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BookXV. 

king,  to  know  his  pleasure,  and  to  stay  till  they  receive  his  piirticuUur 
direction. 

In  the  mean  time,  Nectanabis,  the  king  of  Egypt,  had  perfect 
knowledge  of  the  strength  of  the  Persian  forces;  but  be  placed  hi^ 
greatest  confidence  in  the  strength  of  his  country,  the  entrance  into 
Egypt  being  very  difficult  on  every  side,  and  the  passage  bk>cked  both 
by  sea  and  land  by  the  seven  mouths  of  the  Nile.  For  at  every  mooth 
Where  the  Nile  falls  into  the  sea,  was  a  city  built,  with  large  forts  or 
castles  on  each  side  of  the  river,  joined  together  by  a  bridge  of  tim- 
ber, which  commanded  all  ships  that  passed  that  way,  and,  of  all 
these,  he  had  most  strongly  fortified  Pelusium;  for,  being  the  next 
frontier  town  towards  Syria,  they  conceived  the  eneipy  would  first 
attempt  to  enter  into  the  country  that  way :  therefore  they  drew  a 
trench  round  the  city,  and,  where  there  was  a  place  whereat  aay 
vessels  might  in  any  probability  enter,  there  they  raised  walls  to  ob^ 
struct  thcipassage;  and,  where  there  were  any  fords  by  which  the 
way  lay  open  into  Egypt  by  land,  he  brought  the  water  over  them; 
and,  where  any  ship  might  pass,  he  filled  up  those  places  with  stones 
and  rubbish :  by  which  means  it  was  very  difficult,  and  scarcely  pos- 
sible, either  for  ships  to  sail,  or  horse  or  foot  to  march.  Pharna^i- 
bazHs's  officers,  therefore,  seeing  Pelusium  so  strongly  and  wonder^ 
folly  fortified,  and  well  manned,  thought  it  most  advisable  to  for- 
bear to  attempt  entering  by  force,  and  rather  to  sail  to  some  other 
mouth  of  the  river,  and  endeavour  to  make  a  passage  for  the  ieet 
there.  Whereupon  they  put  off  to  sea  again,  and,  being  out  of 
sight,  that  they  might  not  be  discerned  by  the  enemy,  they  steered 
their  course  for  Mendesium*,  another  mouth  of  the  Nile,  where  the 
shore  runs  a  great  way  out  from  the  mun  land.  Here  they  landed 
three  thousand  men^  and  Pharnabazus  and  Iphicrates  assaulted  a  fort 
built  upon  the  very  mouth  of  the  river;  but  the  Egyptians  came 
down  with  three  thousand  horse  and  foot  to  the  relief  of  the  placet 
upon  which  there  was  a  sharp  engagement,  in  which  the  Egyptians^ 
being  overpowered  by  multitude,  (for  more  came  running  in  to  their 
assistance  from  the  ships),  were  hemmed  in,  and  a  great  slaughter 
made  amongst  them,  very  few  being  taken  prisoners;  the  rest  were 
forced  to  fly  into  a  little  town  hard  by;  but  the  soldiers  of  Iphicrates 
entered  pell  mell  with  those  of  the  garrison  into  the  place ;  and,  having 
thus  taken  it  by  force,  they  demolished  it,  and  carried  away  the  inha- 
bitants as  captives. 

After  this,  there  arose  a  difference  between  the  generals,  which 
brought  all  to  nought.  Iphicrates  learnt  from  the  captives,  that 
there  was  a  ganison  called  Memphis,  which  pUce  was  of  the  greatest 

*  Meudei. 


Chap,  ft  WodorUs  sIculu<».  33 

I  •  Ti  ■  -  I  t       m*'<^ 

cooseqaence  of  any  throughout  all  Egypt;  therefore  he  advised  that 
they  sbould  sail  with  the  fleet  thither  before  the  rest  of  the  Egyp- 
tian army  got  together;  hut  Pharnabazus  and  all  his  forces  were  for 
staying  till  all  the  Persian  land  and  sea-forces  came  up,  that  so  there 
might  be  less  danger  in  the  expedition.  But  Iphicratcs  then  offered 
to  undertake  the  reduction  of  the  city  with  those  mercenaries  that 
were  then  with  him,  if  he  might  but  have  the  liberty.  Upon  which, 
Pharnabazus  grew  envious  at  the  valour  and  confidence  of  the  man, 
and  began  to  be  fearful  Jest  all  Egypt  should  be  conquered  by  his 
arms  only,  and  therefore  denied  his  request.  Hereupon,  Iphicrates 
made  a  solemn  protestation  against  them,  declaring  that  all  this 
expedition  would  be  fruitless  and  vain,  through  their  neglect,  if 
tliey  let  slip  the  present  opportunity.  But  Pharnabazus  envied 
Iiim  the  more,  and,  very  undeservedly,  gave  him  opprobrious  lan- 
guage. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  Egyptians  (having  now  gained  more  time) 
put  a  strong  garrison  into  Memphis,  and  marched  with  all  their 
army  to  the  little  town  before  demolished;  and,  prevailing  in  sundry 
skirmishes  against  the  Persians,  they  never  let  them  rest,  but,  grow- 
ing still  sronger  and  stronger,  made  a  great  slaughter  of  them,  and 
grew  every  day  more  obstinate.  But  the  Persian  army,  having  now 
staid  a  long  time  about  this  qistle*,and  the  river  Nile  (by  force  of  the 
Etesian  winds)  beginning  to  overflow,  insomuch  as  that  all  the  land 
was  covered  with. water,  (whereby  Egypt  was  now  more  inaccessible, 
and  by  that  means,  as  it  were,  fortified),  the  commanders,  (because 
nature  seemed  to  fight  against  them),  resolved  forthwith  to  leave 
Egypt. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  they  returned  into  Asia,  Pharnabazus  re^ 
newed  the  quarrel  with  Iphicrates:  upon  which,  Iphicrates  (fearing 
he  should  receive  the  same  treatment  as  Couon  formerly  had)  con- 
sulted how  to  withdraw  himself  privately  from  the  camp.  To  this  end 
(having  prepared  a  vessel  for  his  purpose)  he  went  on  board  in  the 
nighty  and  so  sailed  to  Athens :  but  Pharnabazus  sent  ambassadors 
after  him,  and  accused  him,  as  being  the  occasion  of  tlie  miscarriage 
of  the  design  relating  to  the  reducing  of  Egypt;  to  whom  the  Atlie- 
nians  answered ^That,  if  he  were  guilty,  they  would  punish  him  ac- 
cording to  his  deserts :  but,  in  a  very  short  time  after,  they  made  him 
admiral  of  their  whole  fleet. 

In  this  place  we  think  it  not  much  beside  our  purpose  if  we  say 
something  concerning  what  is  reported  of  the  valour  of  Iphicrates. 
lie  is  said  to  have  been  a  very  skilful  commander,  and  of  a  quick 
and  ready  wit  in  contriving  any  useful  project  or  stratagem.    IJuv* 

♦  Th»  Lilllc  Town. 

Vol.  2.  No.  40.  v 


34  .  DIODORUS  StCULUS«  Sook  XK 

ing  therefore  gained  much  experience  and  judgment  io  martial  dis-* 
cipline,  by  his  long  and  continued  exercise  in  the  wars  of  Persia^  h6 
found  out  many  things  of  great  advantage  in  matters  of  war^  espe- 
cially he  employed  himself  in  contriving  the  making  of  new  sorts  of 
arms. 

It  was  hitherto  a  custom  among  the  Grecians  to  carry  great  and 
heavy  shields:  but^  because  these  by  their  weight  much  hindered  the 
soldiers  in  their  marcb^  he  changed  the  form  of  them^  and  ordiered 
targets  of  a  moderate  size  in  their  room:  in  which  alteration  he  bad 
a  respect  to  two  things^  one,  that  their  bodies  should  be  sufficiently 
defended,  and,  by  the  other,  that  by  their  lightness  they  might  be 
the  more  easily  managed.  Experience  presently  approved  the  in- 
vention, and  they  who  from  their  heavy  arms  were  before  called 
Hopliti,  heavy-armed  men,  were  from  these  new  targets  called  Pel- 
tasti,  targeteers.  He  changed  likewise  the  fiishion  of  their  spean 
and  swords.  The  spears  he  caused  to  be  made  half  as  long  agun  as 
they  were  before,  and  the  swords  longer  almost  by  two  parts. 
This  alteration  was  presently  approved  by  use  and  experience,  and 
the  reputation  of  the  general  was  highly  advanced  by  the  usefulness 
of  his  ingenious  inventions.  Lastly,  he  altered  the  very  soIdier*s 
shoes,  tiiat  they  might  be  sooner  put  on,  easier  to  march  with,  "and 
more  readily  cast  off;  and  therefore  th^y  are  called  at  this  very  day 
Iphicratics.  He  invented  many  other  things  belonging  to  niartial 
affairs,  which  would  be  too  tedious  here  to  relate.  But  thus  all  thair 
great  preparation  for  an  expedition  into  Egypt  came  to  nothing. 

During  these  affairs,  the  new  frame  of  government  throughckit  alt 
Greece  filled  the  cities  with  tumult  and  commotion;  and  because  of 
the  anarchy  in  most  places,  seditions  abounded.  Those  who  weVe'for 
im  oligarchy,  had  the  Lacedemonians  to  patronise  them;  and  those 
that  appeared  for  a  democracy  were  protected  by  the  Athenians :  for 
both  the  cities  for  awhile  kept  the  league  made  between  them  in- 
violable. But  upon  their  siding  with  the  cities,  (as  they  were  inclined 
to  the  one  or  the  other),  without  any  regard  to  the  former  articles  of 
the  peace,  they  presently  broke  out  into  war. 

At  that  time  the  inhabitants  of  Zacyn thus, -being  enraged  against 
their  magistrates,  (encouraged  thereunto  under  the  proetction  of  the 
Lacedaemonians,  and  provoked  with  the  memory  of  their  former  in- 
juries), drove  them  all  out  of  the  city;  who  fled  to  Timotheus  the  A- 
thcuian  admiral,  and  were  received  into  the  fleet,  and  joined  with 
him  in  the  war.  He  patronised  their  cause,  and  transported  theai 
iato!hcislaud,(where  they  seized  upon  a  strong  castle  called  Arcadia), 
and,u;  the  assistance  of  Timotheus,  very  much  molested  and  injured 
tlie  townsmen.    They  of  Zacynthus  desired  aid  of  the  lAcedffino-^ 


Ckt^.  V.  mODORUS  SICULUS*  35 

niabs^  who  firsts  (be£ore  they  would  begin  a  war)^  sent  to;the  people 
ofAthens,  and  by  their  ambassadors  accusedTimotheua:  but  when  they 
discerned  that  they  inclined  to  favour  the  exiles,  they  bestirred  them- 
s  selves  to  equip  out  a  fleet;  and  having  manned  thirty-five  gallies^ 
they  sent  them  to  the  aid  of  the  Zacynthians,  under  the  command  of 
Aristocrates. 

Whilst  these  things  were  in  doing,  some  in  Corcyra  that  favoured 
th^  Lacedfiemonians,  appeared  against  the  people,  and  sent  to  Sparta 
to  be  assisted  with  all  speed  with  some  shipping,  promising  to  de- 
liver up  Corcyra  into  their  hapds.  Upon  which,  they  (knowing  very 
well  the  importance  of  that  island  for  the  recovery  of  the  dominion 
at  sea)  hasteued  away  to  get  possession.  And  to  that  end  com- 
manded Alcidas  to  pass  over  to  Corcyra  with  two<-and-twenty  sail; 
they  giving  out,  that  this  fleet  was  to  go  for  Sicily,  but  in  truth  with 
a  design,  (under  colour  of  being  Criends  to  the  Corey rians),  by  the 
help  of  the  exiles,  to  sieze  upon  the  city.  But  the  iuhabitants  coming  to 
understand  the  fraud  andintended  cheat  ofthe  Lacedeemonians,  strong- 
ly fortified  the  place,  and  kept  diligent  watch  and  ward,  and  sent  am- 
bassadors to  Athens  for  assistance.  Upon  which  the  people  decreed  to 
send  succours  forthwith,  both  to  the  Corey  rians  and  to  them  of  Zacyn- 
thus;  whereupon  Ctesicles  was  presently  sent  to  Zacynthus  to  com- 
mand the  exiles :  but  the  fleet  to  be  sent  to  Corcyra  was  but  then  fitting 
out.  In  the  mean  time  they  of  Platsea  having  entered  into  a  league 
with  the  Athenians,  and  decreed  to  deliver  up  their  city  into  their  pro- 
tection, sent  for  a  garrison  from  Athens.  At  which  the  governor^ 
of  Boeotia  being  exceedingly  ofiended,  (to  prevent  the  Athenians)^ 
forthwith  led  out  a  great  army  against  the  Plateeans;  and  having 
entered  the  confines  of  Platsa,  (by  this  sudden  and  unexpected  ir- 
ruption), they  found  many  of  the  citizens  straggling  in  the  fields,  who 
were  presently  snapped  up  by  the  horsemen;  the  rest  fled  into  the 
city,  and,  having  no  confederates  to  assist  them,  were  furced  to  de- 
liver themselves  up,  upon  such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  enemy 
was  pleased  to  allow  them :  for  they  were  to  leave  the  city,  and  take 
with  them  only  their  household  goods,  and  never  more  ta  set  foot 
in  Bceetia.  After  this,  the  Thebans  razed  Platasa,  and  took  Thcs- 
pis  (that  sided  against  them)  by  assault.  The  Plataeans  fled  to  Athena 
witii  their  wives  and  children,  and  were  there  kindly  received  int(^ 
the  franchises  and  liberties  of  the  city.  And  in  this  condition  stood 
the  aflairs  of  Bo^tia  all  that  time.  The  Lacedsemonians  had  now 
sent  Mnasippus  with  a  fleet  of  sixty-five  sail,  and  fifteen  hundred  men 
under  his  comniand  to  Corcyra,  which,  after  he  arrived  at  the  island, 
and  had  taken  the  exiles  on  board,  he  sailed  into  the  haven,  and  pre** 
scntly  possessed  himself  of  four  of  their  gallies,  and  forced  the  rest 
qpon  land,  which  they  of  Corcyn^  burnt,  to  prevent  their  facing  into 


Sd  DiODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  XV. 

the  enemy 8  hands:    he  routed  them,  likewise,  in  a  land-fight, 
(though  they  had  advantageously  possessed  themselves  of  a  hill), 
insomuch,  that  all  the  Corcyrians  every  where  were,  in  fear  and 
amazement.    The  Athenians  had  some  time  before  sent  Timotheos^ 
the  son  of  Conon,  to  the  aid  of  the  Corcyrians,  with  a  navy  of  sixty 
sail;  but,  before  he  came  in  to  succour  them,  he  sailed  intoThracCf 
and  brought  over  many  of  the  cities  there  to  the  Athenian  interest, 
and  enlarged  his  fleet  with  thirty  sail:   but,  because  he  came  too 
late  to  the  assistance  of  them  of  Corey ra,  the  people  of  Athens  were 
very  angry  at  him,  and  took  away  his  commission;  yet,  when  he  re- 
turned to  Athens  with  a  great  number  of  ambassadors,  who  came 
along  with  him  to  confirm  the  leagues  with  the  Athenians,  and  be- 
sides, brought  in  the  fleet  in  good  order,  being  more  than  they  were 
by  thirty  sal),  the  people  rescinded  the  former  decree,  and  restored 
him  to  his  command.    Before  this  they  had  likewise  prepared  forty 
gallics  more,  (so  that  their  whole  fleet  was  fourscore),  and  had  made 
also  plentiful  provision  of  corn,  arms,  and  all  other  things  necessary 
for  tlic  war:  hut,  for  the  present,  they  sent  five  hundred  men  to  the 
aid  of  them  of  Corcyra,  under  the  command  of  Ctesias,  who  entered 
privately  in  the  night  into  Corcyra,  where  he  found  the  townsmen  in 
bad  circumstances,  by  the  sedition,  and  their  ill  management  of  af- 
fairs relating  to  the  war:  but  forthwith,  quieting  all  parties,  he  made 
h  hlsi  business  to  put  ail  things  in  a  posture  of  defence,  and  by  this 
ineans  put  heart  and  courage  into  th^  besieged.    In  the  first  place, 
he  made  a  sally,  and  cut  oft*  two  hundred  of  the  enemy*     Presently 
after,  in  a  sharp  engagement,  he  killed  Muasippus  and  many  of  his 
army.    And  now,  when  the  war  was  almost  at  an  end  in  Corcyra,  ar- 
rived Timotheus  and  Iphiqrates,  with  the  Athenian  fleet;  who,  coming 
too  late,  did  nothing  worth  remembering,  save  that  they  took  nine 
gallics,  men  and  all,  sent  by  Dionysius  out  of  Sicily  to  the  assistance 
of  the  Lacedsemonians,  under  the  command  of  Cassidas*  and  Crinip- 
pus,  and  by  the  sale  of  the  captives  raised  three  spore  t&lent$,  with 
which  they  paid  off  the  soldiers. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  ^icQcle^,  an  eunuch  in  Cyprus, 
treacherously  murdered  king  Evagoras,  and  made  himself  King  of 
Salamis.  In  Italy,  the  Romans  fought  with  the  Prene^tines,  and  routed 
and  killed  many  of  them. 

Afterwards,  when  Asteius  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  a^d  six 
military  tribunes,  viz.  Marcus  Furius,  Lucius  Furius,  Aulus  Ppsthu- 
mius,  Lucius  Lucretius,  Marcus  Fabius,and  Lucius  PosthumiuSj^ exe- 
cuted the  ofiice  of  consuls  at  Rome,  there  happened  such  dr^dfhl 
earthquakes  aud  innundations  in  Peloponnesus,  (throughout  all  the 

♦  Cissides. 


Chap.  V.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  37 

1    ■  ■*'■■'■    ■        '       ■  J  ■   ■  ■     ■        ■     ^.    ■ 

cities,  aDd  over  all  the  country),  that  are  incredible  to  relate.  For^ 
never  in  any  former  age  did  the  like  calamity  fall  upon  the  Gredaa 
cities^  whicli  were  now  swallowed  up^  together  with  their  inhabitants} 
and  certainly  some  divine  power  contrived  and  executed  this  remark- 
able ruin  and  destruction  of  mankind :  nay,  the  time  when  it  was 
done  added  to  the  greatness  of  the  calamity.  For  the  earthquakes 
happened  not  in  the  day,  (when  the  distressed  might  have  found  out 
some  way  or  other  to  have  helped  themselves),  but  in  the  night, 
when  the  houses,  by  the  violence  of  the  shake,  fell  down  in  confused 
heaps;  so  that  (by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  the  suddenness  of 
the  ruin)  men  were  in  that  perplexity,  that  they  knew  not  which 
way  to  turn  themselves  for  security;  insomuch  that  the  greatest  part 
of  the  inhabitants  (buried  in  the  rubbish  of  the  houses)  miserably 
perished.  But,  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  some  came  running  out  of  the 
houses,  and,  thinking  tbey  had  escaped  the  danger,  fell  into  a  far 
greater  and  unex])ected  niiscliicf ;  for,,the  sea  raged  to  that  degree, 
and  broke  tn  with  that  violence,  that  it  swallowed  up  them  and  their 
bouses  together. 

Two  cities  of  Achaia,  one  called  Helice,  and  the  other  Bura,  chiefly 
suRered  by  this  sad  accident :  of  which  two,  Helice  was  of  the  greatest 
account  of  any  of  the  cities  of  Achaia. 

There  was  a  very  hot  dispute  concerning  the  cause  of  this  evil* 
Indeed  the  natural  philosophers  do  generally  ascribe  all  such  events 
to  natural  causes,  and  necessary  circumstances,  and  not  to  any  divine 
hand;  but  they  who  have  more  reverend  thoughts  and  sentiments  of 
a  deity,  give  a  very  probable  account  of  this  matter:  that  this  de- 
struction was  the  effect  of  the  anger  of  the  gods^  for  the  impious 
violation  of  the  rights  of  religion,  of  which  we  shall  give  a  more 
particular  account.  The  three  cities  of  Ionia  were  accustomed  to 
have  a  general  assembly  of  all  the  lonians  at  Mycale,  and  there- 
abouts, where,  in  a  certain  solitary  place,  (according  to  antient  rites), 
tbey  offered  many  costly  sacrifices  to  Neptune;  which  Panionion* 
festivals  the  lonians,  not  being  able  to  solemnize^  at  that  place,  by 
reason  of  the  frequent  wars  and  disturbances,  they  removed  those  as- 
semblies to  a  more  secure  place  not  far  from  Ephesus.  But,  send- 
ing to  Delphos,  to  consult  there  with  the  oracle,  they  were  com- 
manded to  take  images  from  the  most  antient  altars  of  their  fore- 
fathers (meaning  from  Helice,  a  city  of  the  country  formerly  called 
Ionia,  but  now  Achaia).  Upon  this  they  declared  in  the  public  as- 
sembly of  the  Achaians  the  occasion  of  their  embassy,  and  desired 
them  to  grant  their  request.  But  they  of  Helice  had  an  antient 
prophecy^^Tliat  then  they  would  1^  in  the  greatest  danger^  when 
*  Pfto  loDum^  a  general  feitival  of  the  lobiaiu. 


HB  mODORVS  SICULU«»  Book  XFi 

^'  i  .'■■■■  ^ 

Jfte,Iopimi«|aAcri£bBd  upoQ  ti^  altar  of  Neptune.  Renaembering 
fhiB^  therefore^  thej  would  not  suflfer  the  lonians  to  take  the  images, 
idlegingi  that  lite  temple  was  not  common  to  all  the  Achaians,  bot 
peculiar  to  themselves  only.  The  same  addresses  wefe  made  ta 
them  of  Bura,  who  were  of  the  same  mind  with  those  of  Heliee. 
However,  the  lonians,  by  pablic  edict  of  the  Athenians,  (that  the 
prophecy  roq^it  be  fulfilled),  offered  sacrifices  upon  the  altar  of 
Kcptune.  UiK)n  this  they  of  ileiice  seized  upon  all  the  goods  of  the* 
loniansj  and  committed  the  ambassadors  to  prison,  and  so  carried  it 
Yery  impiously  towards  the  deity;  therefore  they  say  that  N<>ptune, 
being  angry,  to  revenge  himself  upon  their  impiety,  (by  these  earth- 
l|uakes  and  iniiundations  of  the  sea),  brought  this  grievous  calamity 
upon  those  cities.   And  that  it  was  done  by  him,  they  use  this  for  aa 

ivgumcnt That  it  is  generally  believed  that  this  god  hath  the  power 

of  innundations  and  earthquakes  in  his  own  hand;  and  that  Pelo- 
ponnesus had  been  ever  repi}ted  the  habitation  of  Neptune,  and  the 
country  dedicated  to  him,  and  that  all  the  Peloponnesian  cities  wor- 
shipped this  god  above,  all  others.  Besides  this,  they  give  a  further 
leason  of  this  sad  accident.  There  are  (as  they  say)  in  Peloponnesus 
great  cavities  under  ground,  which,  by  the  sea  flowing  here  an<| 
there  through  the  earth,  are  turned  into  great  ponds  and  lakes  of 
.Water.  And,  indeed,  it  is  very  certain  that  there  are  two  rivers  ia 
that  peninsula  which  apparently  fall  into  the  caverns  of  the  earths 
for  the  rivers  which  run  by  Pheneus*  in  former  ages  sunk  in  one 
place  into  the  earth,  and  became  invisible,  being  swallowed  up  ii^ 
these  caverns  under  ground.  Anotherf  was  lost  at  a  great  opening; 
of  the  earth  at  Stymphiust»  and  ran  unseen  under  ground  for  the 
•space  of  two  hundred  stages,  and  rose  up  again  near  the  city  of  Aigos^ 

To  what  is  related  is  further  added That  none  suffered  but  only 

they  who  were  guilty  of  the  impiety  before  meationed.  And  thia 
shall  suffice  to  be  said  of  the  earthquakes  and  innundatioos  in  Pelo- 
ponnesus. 

When  Alcisthenes  was  chief  magistrate  of  Athens,  and  eight  mill- 
tary  tribunes,  viz.  Lucius  Valerius§,  Publius  Ancius,  CSaius  Teren- 
tius,  Lucius  Menenius»  Caius  Sulpitius,  Titus  Papirius*  Lucius  ^Emi*« 
lius,  and  Fabius  Marcus||,  bore  the  consular  authority  at  Rome,  the 
hundred  and  second  Olympiad  was  celelyated  at  £lis,  wherein  Da- 
mon the  Hiurian  was  victor.  At  that  time  God  (by  some  signs  and 
prodigies)  foretold  the  fall  of  the  Lacediemonian  sovereignty  over 
Greece,  after  they  had  enjoyed  it  near  five  hundred  years  ;^  for  a 
great  comet  (which,  from  its  sliape,  x^ms  called  the  Fiery  Beam)  waa 

*  A  city  in  Artadia.  t  Kraienut  rifvr.  t  StyrophmJiis«  ia  Arcadii. 

$  LuciiM  Publiai  Volcrhu^  |  Murcut  Fubius. 


Chap.  P%  DiODOEUs  stcuLUS^  39 

seen  itt  tlie  heavens  several  nights.  And^  not  long  after,  the  Lace*- 
^bMioiiiana  beiag  overcome  in  a  great  battle,  suddenly  (beyond  ill 
Blends  imagination)  lost  their  dominion.  Some  among  the  natiml 
phiioia^herB  ascribe  the  origin  of  this  comet  to  proceed  from  fiati»- 
nl  causes,  and  say  that  diese  sort  of  meteors,  at  some  stated  timest 
do  ha{^n  of  necessity:  and  that  the  eminent  Chaldeans  in  Bab^ 
Ion,  and  other  astrdogers,  have  certainly  and  exactly  fordtoU  the 
«|ipeaniQce  of  these  comets;  and  that  it  is  not  sur|>rising  suek 
thkiga  do  happen  accordingly,  but  that  it  would  be  a  great  wonder 
if  they  did  not,  seeing  that  all  things  have  their  proper  eourses  aad 
turns;  and  at  leng^,  by  incessant  motions,  are  brought  into  aotioo 
ia  fixed  and  staf^  times  and  seasons.  It  is  related,  that  this 
comet  was  w^  very  light,  that  it  cast  a  shadow  upon  the  eanth  Uqf» 
the  noon. 


CHAP.  VL 

Artaserxes  tends  again  to  nuAe  peace  among  the  Oredansi  gfit 
comply  except  the  Tlkdku^is.  The  Spartcm$  rause  an  -  army  a'* 
gaintt  tie  Thebane.  Epaminondas  made  the  Theban  general. 
The  famous  haitle  of  Leuctra.  The  terrible  seditwns  and 
cruelties  in  Argos.  Jason  ofPhenB  stirs  up  the  Thgssakmifm 
to  gam  the  sovereignty  €f  Greece.  PoUydorus,  prince  qfPhefu» 
in  Oreece,  poisoned  by  his  brother  Alexander.  A  plot  to  de- 
pose  Alexander,  The  long  of  Macedonia  treated  with  to  thqt 
purpose, 

ABOUT  this  time  Artaxerxes,  king  of  Persia,  hearing  that  Greece 
was  fallen  into  new  broils,  sent  ambassadors  again,  to  exhort  them  ta 
live  in  peace  one  with  another,  according  to  the  late  establishment. 
The  Grecians  readily  complied  with  the  advice,  and  all  made  peace 
again  among  themselves,  except  the  Thebaus:  for  they  were  not  ad* 
mitted  into  the  league,  because  they  challenged  all  Bocotia  to  be 
under  their  own  government.  And  it  was  decreed  that  all  tlie  cities 
should  be  bound  by  oath  to  observe  the  league.  Being  therefore 
excluded,  (as  they  were  before),  they  kept  Boeotia  under  the  sole  juris- 
diction of  their  own  city.  Upon  which  the  Laced:emonians,  being 
enraged,  resolved  to  make  war  upon  tbem^  as  the  common  enejnies 


40  DiODORUs  sicuLUs.  JBook  XK 


of  Greece.  For  their  growing  power  began  to  be  suspected^  lest 
(being  masters  of  all  Bceotia)  they  should  some  time  or  other  find 
an  opportunity  to  deprive  Sparta  of  the  sovereign  command;  espc* 
cially,  because  they  were  a  warlijce  nation,  inferior  to  none  in  Greece^ 
and,  by  their  daily  exercise  in  the  public  schools,  their  bodies  became 
far  stonger;  and  besides,  they  had  many  valiant  commanders^  espe- 
cially  thref,  Epaminondas,  Gorgias,  and  Pelopidas.  ^And  to  this 
«inay  be  added,  that  the  Tbebans,  by  reason  of  the  nobility  of  their 
ancestors,  (who  were  famous  in  the  heroic  times),  were  of  proud  and 
lordly  spirits,  and  ever  aspiring  to  great  matters./  Upoo  this  ar^ 
count  the  Lacedaemonians  this  year  raised  an  army,  cooiposed  of 
their  own  citizens,  and  of  their  confederates^  and  prepared  thcmsielves 
for  war. 

When  Phrasichides  was  lord-cliancellor  of  Athens,  and  the  Rq» 
mans  appointed  eight  military  tribunes  to  execute  the  office  of  con- 
suls, viz.  Publius  Manlius,  Caius  Erenucius,  Caius  Sextius,  Tiberius 
Julius*,  Lucius  Labiniusf,  Publius  Flbonius,  Caius  Manlius,  and 
Lucius  Antistius,  the  Thebans,  excluded  from  the  common  league, 
were  forced,  by  their  own  strength  alone,  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  war 
against  the  Lacedaemonians :  for,  by  the  articles  of  the  peace,  (ratified 
and  confirmed  by  all),  none  of  the  cities  were  to  send  them  any  aid  or 
Telief.  Therefore  the  Lacedsemonians,  (now  that  the  Tliebans  were 
wholly  deserted),  decreed  a  war  against  them,  and  were  resohred  to 
subject  Thebes  to  the  Laced»roonian  states  And,  forasmuch  as  all 
observed  that  the  Lacedemonians  made  extraordinary  preparations, 
and  that  the  Thebans,  on  the  other  hand,  had  none  to  stand  by  them, 
every  body  was  of  opinion  that  they  would  he  easily  conquered  by  the 
Spartans.  And  therefore  all  that  wished  them  well  were  much  trou* 
bled  and  concerned  for  them,  to  see  their  inevitable  ruin  approaching. 
But  their  enemies,  on  the  contrary,  rejoiced  as  if  the  Thebans  were 
even  already  subdued. 

When  the  Lacedeemonians  had  raised  their  army,  they  created 
Cleombrotus  general;  and,  in  the  first  place,  sent  ambassadors  to 
Thebes,  to  demand  that  all  the  cities  of  Bceotia  should  be  allowed 
to  govern  themselves  according  to  their  own  laws;  and  that  Plataea 
and  Thespis  should  be  rebuilt,  and  that  those  territories  should  be 
restored  to  the  antient  proprietors.  To  which  the  Thebans  an- 
swered.-.That,  as  they  did  not  concern  themselves  with  the  mattexs 
of  Laconia,  so  the  Lacedsemonians  ought  not  to  meddle  with  the 
aflUrsofBoBotia*  Upon  receiving  this  answer,  the  Lacedaemonians 
(without  any  further  delay)  ordered  Cleombrotus  to  march  with  the 
army  against  Thebes.  And  the  Lacedaemonian  confederates  were 
*  I.iciM  JttUui.  t  Marcttt  Aitoitu. 


Clkap.  P^.  DtODORUS  stct;LU8.  41 

very  ready  to  joio  in  this  War^  hoping  that  th€  Boeotians  would  be 
sabdued  with  little  or  no  fighting,  and  without  any  great  labour 
or  paiDB. 

Marching  on,  therefore,  they  encamped  at  Chseronea,  and  there 
waited  for  their  confederates,  who  came  in  but  slowly.  In  the  meafi 
time  the  Thebans,  hearing  of  the  enemy^s  march,  sent  their  wivet 
and  children  for  security  to  Athens.  Then  they  made  Epaminondaa 
general  of  the  army,  and  intrusted  him  with  the  management  of  tlie 
whole  war,  joining  with  him  six  Bc^otians,  and  governors  of  Boeotia, 
ma  liis  council.  He  listed  whoever  was  of  an  age  able  and  fit  to  bear 
arms  among  the  Thebans,  and  likewise  among  the  other  Boeotians^  . 
aod>  having  now  an  army  not  above  six  thousand,  with  these  htf 
marehed  out  of  Thebes;  at  which  instant  of  time  some  prodigiea 
were  seen,  which  forboded  no  good  success :  for,  as  they  were  goin^ 
out  at  the  gates,  there  met  them  an  herald,  who  (according  to  antieni 
custom}  led  a  blind  man  (that  had  run  away)  and  cried  aloud -^Brin^ 
bim  not  out  of  Thebes,  nor  put  him  to  death,  but  carry  him  back  a<* 
gaio5  and  save  his  life.  The  old  men  took  this  cry  of  the  herald  for 
an  evil  sign;  but  the  young  men  held  their  peace,  lest,  by  their 
timoronsness)  they  should  seem  to  have  a  desire  to  dissuade  Epami-* 
Bondas  from  the  expedition  he  had  Utidertaken.  To  those  that  were 
pressing  upon  him  first  to  consider  Well  of  these  presages,  he  an* 
twered  in  this  verse.^ 

It  it  a  bappy  tign  to  ilglit  for  bis  eontitry. 

Such  a  ftnnk  resolution  had  no  sooner  abashed,  and  caused  al( 
those  that  were  timoirous  to  blush,  but  another  prodigy  more  fright* 
ftil  happened.  For  a  secretary  went  before,  carrying  a  javelin,  to 
which  a  scroll  was  annexed,  to  signify  that  the  army  was  to  obey  the 
orders  and  commands  of  their  generals.  It  fell  out  that  a  high  wind 
Uef^  otf  this  scroll,  and  fixed  it  upon  a  pillar  of  a  tomb,  in  which  very 
place  some  Laced^gmonians  and  Peloponnesians  who  formerly  fol- 
lowed Agesilaus  were  buried,  and  had  been  there  slain!  upon  which 
the  antient  men  again,  with  protestations,  dissuaded  him  from  going 
any  fiirther  with  the  army,  seeing  the  gods  so  evidently  opposed 
the  design.  But  the  general  returned  them  no  answer,  but  cheerfully 
narched  on,  preferring  at  that  time  the  honesty  and  justice  of  hia 
cause  before  uncertain  observations  and  conclusions  upon  signs  and 
prodigies.  And  though  Epaminondas,  who  was  a  great  philosopher, 
managed  all  this  affair  with  great  prudence  and  discretion,  yet  in  the 
mean  time  he  incurred  the  censure  of  many.  But  not  long  after, 
when  the  success  of  the  action  evinced  the  excellency  of  his  military 
conduct,  we  see  him  instrumental  in  performing  mapy  things  to  the 
great  advantage  and  service  of  his  country.     For  be  marched  away 

Vox.,  2.  No.  40.  « 


42  niODORUS  SICULUS.  Bdok  XPi 

directly,  and  gained  the  straits  near  Chseronea,  and  encamped  tbere« 
Cleombrotus,  when  he  heard  that  the  enemy  had  possessed  them- 
selves of  that  pass,  not  looking  upon  it  feasible  to  regain  it^  tomedT 
aside  another  way,  by  Phocis,  and  marched  along  by  the  sea-shcHre, 
where,  though  the  way  was  very  rugged  and  difficult,  yet  at  leogdi 
be  came,  without  any  prejudice,  to  the  confines  .of  Bceotia:  but  in 
bis  passage  he  took  some  small  towns,  and  gained  some  galUes* 
At  last  be  arrived  at  Leuctra,  and  there  encamped,  and  refreshed 
bis  army* 
.  In  the  mean  time  tlie  Boeotians,  marching  forward,  drew  near  to 
the  enemy;  and,  as  soon  as  they  recovered  the  hills,  and  saw  the 
greatness  of  the  Lacedaemonian  army,  covering  the  plains  of  Leuctra, 
they  were  not  ^  little  amazed.    Hereupon  the  Boeotarchs  called  a 
council  of  war^  to  consider  whether  it  were  advisable  to  go  on,  and 
fight  upon  such  unequal  terms,  or  else  to  march  back,  and  engage 
with  the  enemy  in  some  more  commodious  place.    It  happened  that 
upon  this  consultation  the  votes  were  equal :  for,  there  being  six  of 
these  Boeotarchs,  or  governors  of  Bceotia,  three  were  for  going  backj 
and  the  other  three  for  abiding  where  they  were,  and  to  try  tbdr 
fortune  by  a  battle,  of  which  l&st  number  Epaminondas  was  one. 
\Vhile  the  matter  stood  thus  doubtful,  and  nothing  could  be  deter- 
inined,  the  seventh  Bceotarch  at  length  came  in,  and  Epaminondas 
persuaded  him  to  give  his  vote  on  his  side,  and  so  he  carried  it«    And 
thus  it  was  determined  to  lay  all  at  stake,  and  try  it  out  by  a  battle. 
Epaminondas  then,  perceiving  that  the  soldiers  were  still  supersti- 
tiously  possessed  with  the  former  ominous  signs  and  prodigies,  en« 
deavoured,  by  all  the  art  and  industry  he  possibly  could,  to  removt 
these  opinions  and  suspicions  of  his  soldiers.    To  this  end,  npoQ 
some  persons  coming  newly  into  the  camp  from  Thebes,  he  caused  a 
report  to  be  spread  abroad,  that  all  the  arms  that  hung  up  in  Her- 
cules's  temple  were  ou  a  sudden  gone,  and  not  to  be  found,  and  that 
it  was  commonly  nobed  in  Thebes — ^That  the  antient  heroes  bad 
taken  them  away,  and  were  gone  out  to  th^  assistance  of  the  Tbe- 
bans.     He  suborne^^  likewise,  another  to  say  he  lately  came  up  oali 
of  Trophonius's^  cell,  and  he  affirmed  that  the  oracle  there  com** 
manded  him  to  tell  them — ^That,  when  tbey  had  gained  the  vktoiy 
at  Leuctra,  they  should  institute  the  Coronet  festivals  to  Jupiter* 
From  whence  arose  that  custom  of  keeping  a  yearly  solemnity  by  tlia 
Boeotians  at  Lebadea^   And  besides  this  skill  and  prudence  of  the  gf f 

*  This  Trophonius  was  said  to  be  the  son  of  Apollo,  and  bad  a  temple  at  Lebadca,  ia 
Bootia,  dedicated  to  him,  where  was  a  cave,  of  which  strauge  things  are  related  —  3<# 
liieph-  aod  others.  Fanaaii.  lib.  9,  c.  39,  *  larga  descriptioD,  tod  bj  hii  owa  opor^ 
•ace,  9$  ko  ttji. 


C^p.  FL  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  43 


iierml^  Leandras  the  Spartan  (who  was  banished  from  Lacedsemon^ 
and  then  in  arms  with  the  Tliebans)  was  not  a  little  serviceable  in  ' 
this  ai&ire   for^  being  called  into  the  assembly^  he  affirmed  that  the 

Spartans*  had  an  antient  prophecy That,  when  they  were  beaten  by 

the  Thebans  at  Leuctra^  they  should  lose  their  principality.  At 
length  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  who  uo'dertook  to  in- 
terpret the  oracles,  came  to  Epaminondas,  and  declared  that  it  was 
decreed  by  the  gods — ^Tiisit  a  great  slaughter  should  be  made  of  the 
Lacedaemonians  at  the  tombs  of  the  daughters  of  Leuctrus  and  Sch«- 
dasus,  for  the  reasons  herein  after  related.  Leuctrus  was  he  from 
whom  the  field  was  so  called ;  and  his  daughters,  and  the  daughters 
of  one  Schedasus,  virgins,  in  the  flower  of  their  age,  were  deflowered 
by  the  Spartan  ambassadors :  the  young  women,  not  able  to  endure 
that  great  dishonour  and  disgrace,  (with  many  imprecations  a-^ 
gainst  that  nation  who  sent  such  wicked  ambassadors),  laid  vio* 
lent  hands  on  themselves,  i  When  these  and  other  such  like'things 
were  alleged,  Epaminondas  called  the  soldiers  together,  and,  in 
an  oration  fitted  for  the  purpose,  encouraged  them  to  the  battle: 
upon  which  the  soldiers  (being  now  freed  from  their  supersti- 
tious conceits)  changed  their  minds^  and  longed  to  be  engaged  with 
the  enemy. 

About  this  time  came  some  auxiliary  forces  to  the  Thebans  from 
Tliessaly,  fifteen  hundred  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse,  under  the 
command  of  Jason.  This  man  advised  both  the  Thebans  and  the 
Lacedaemonians  (upon  consideration  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  events 
of  war)  to  agree  upon  terms  of  peace;  which  took  its  effect.  And 
now  Cleombrotus  withdrew  his  forces  out  of  Boeotia,  and  in  his 
inarch  a  great  army  from  the  LacedsBmonians  and  their  confederates, 
under  the  command  of  Archidamus,  the  son  of  Agosilaus,  met  him. 
For  the  Spartans,  seeing  the  courage  and  resolution  of  the  Boeotians, 
and  not  judging  it  advisable  to  slight  men  that  seemed  to  be  resolved, 
;iod  to  run  upon  the  pikes  at  all  adventures,  had  sent  forth  this  their 
mmy  (by  their  multitude  at  least)  to  give  a  chetk  to  the  insolence  of 
die  enemy.  Drawing  up,  therefore,  in  a  body  together,  (and  looking 
upon  it  as  a  base  and  mean  thing,  below  the  dignity  of  the  Spartans, 
fio  much  as  to  think  the  valour  of  the  Boeotians  worthy  of  any  re- 
gard), without  any  respect  to  the  late  league,  they  rashly  and  prct 
cipitately  returned  to  Leuctra,  where  they  found  the  Bceotians  (with 
.  great  earnestness)  expecting  and  desiring  a  battle.     Upon  this,  the 

armies  on  both  sides  were  drawn  up  in  Imttalia  in  this  manner ^Or^ 

the  part  of  the  Lacedffimonians,  Cleombrotus  and  Archidamus  the 
soil  of  Agesilaus  (both  descended  from  Hercules)  commanded  the  twq 
wings:  on  tlie  ot|ier  side,  Kpapinoudas  msirsballed  his  uriiiy  ^ft€r  i^ 


44  DiODORUS  6ICULUS.  Book  XV. 

new  and  peculiar  manner,  by  which  excellent  stratagemi  he  gained 
that  glorious  victory  never  to  be  forgotten;  foriie  chose  out  of  th^ 
whole  army  the  best  and  strongest  of  the  soldiers,  and  placed  theai 
in  that  wing  where  he  himself  would  command;  in  the  other  be 
placed  his  weaker  men,  with  a  command  not  to  abide  the  enemy's 
charge,  but,  by  a  soft  and  slow  retreat,  to  avoid  the  shock.  Having 
therefore  thus  ordcrt^d  an  oblique  phalanx,  he  resolved  to  try  the  for- 
tune of  the  day  with  the  other  wing,  under  his  command.  And  now 
the  trumpet >  sounded  a  charge  on  both  sides,  and,  at  the  first  onsets 
the  armies  set  up  a  ^reat  shout :  the  Lacedemonians  came  on  with 
hoih  their  wings  in  fashion  of  an  half  moon;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Boeotians  retreated  with  one  of  their  wings,  and  charged  fiercely  on 
the  enemy  with  the  other.  (When  they  came  to  the  sword's  pointy 
both  fought  very  desperately,  and  at  first  the  victory  was  very  doubt- 
ful, hilt  at  length  they  with  £paminondas,  by  their  valour  and  close 
order,  brokp  in  upon  the  Peloponnesians,  and  made  a  great  slaughter 
limongst  them ;  for  they  were  not  able  any  longer  to  bear  the  weight 
of  the  shock  wherewith  they  were  pressed,  but  some  were  slain 
downright  upon  the  spot,  others  mortally  wounded,  bravely  receiving 
all  their  wounds  upon  their  breasts.)  As  long  as  Oeombrotus  the 
LacedsBmonian  king  was  alive,  it  was  uncertain  which  side  would 
carry  away  the  victory,  because  he  had  a  strong  body  of  targeteers 
with  him,  who  fought  resolutely  in  his  defence:  but,  as  soon  as  be 
fell  down  dead,  (after  many  wounds  received,  and  much  valour  shewn 
on  his  part,  though  all  ineffectual)  they  thronged  together  about  his 
body,  where  they  were  hewn  down  in  heaps  one  upon  another.  And 
now  this  wing,  being  without  a  leader,  the  Epaminondians  charged 
the  Lacedsnionians  with  that  fierceness,  that  they  forced  them  by 
degrees  into  disorder.  However,  the  Lacedsemonians  fought  so 
bravely  for  the  body  of  their  king,  that  at  length  they  possessed  them« 
selves  of  it,  though  they  were  not  able  to  gain  the  day:  for  those 
choice  bands  with  Epaminondas  standing  to  it  as  unconquerable,, 
(encouraged,  likewise,  both  hy  the  words  and  example  of  their  leader)^ 
the  Lacedaemonians  at  length  (with  much  ado)  began  to  give  ground. 
And,  indeed,  at  first  they  did  not  (to  appearance)  break  their  order 
of  battle  in  their  retreat;  but,  when  the  slaughter  increased,  and 
they  had  now  no  commander  to  give  necessary  orders,  the  wliole 
army  fled  outright.  The  Epaminondians  pursued  them  close,  and, 
with  the  slaughter  of  a  multitude  of  their  enemies,  gained  a  glorious 
victory:  for,  by  their  engaging  with  the  most  famous  warriors  of 
Greece,  and  becoming  victorious  with  an  army  far  short  in  number 
to  their  enemy's,  they  highly  advanced  the  reputation  of  their  valour^ 
liut  £puu}iiioudas^  the  general,  was  judged  worthy  of  the  greatest 


dap.  FL  DIODOEU5  6ICULU9,  48 

boootir  aad  esteem,  because,  diiefly  by  his  valour  and  prudence,  he 
had  routed  those  commauders  of  Greece,  who  were  never  before  con* 
qaered.  The  Lacedemouians  lust  in  this  battle  no  fewer  than  four 
thousand  men:  of  the  Boeotians  were  killed  about  three  hundred* 
Afterwards  they  made  a  truce  for  the  burying  of  the  dead,  and  the  re* 
turn  of  the  LacedaBmonians  into  Peloponnesus.  And  this  was  th9 
issue  of  the  battle  of  Leuctra. 

The  year  following,  when  Dyscinetus  was  prsstor  of  Athens,  and 
fou^•military  tribunes,  Quintus  Servilius,  Lucius  Furius,  Caius  Li^ 
ciiinius,  andPubliusClelius,  executed  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome^ 
the  Thebaas  marched  with  a  great  army  against  Orohomenus,  with  m 
full  purpose  utterly  to  ruin  that  city.  But  they  were  advised  bjr 
£paminondas,  in  regard  they  sought  to  gain  the  principality  of 
Greece,  that  it  was  their  interest  to  use  their  victory  with  moderation. 
Whereupon  they  left  off  their  design,  and  received  the  Orchomeniana 
as  their  confederates :  afterwards  they  made  a  league  with  the  Pbo« 
ciftns  and  iEtolians,  and  so  returned  into  Bcedtia* 

At  that  time  Jason,  prince  of  Pheree*,  (whose  power  grew  every 
day)  invaded  Locrisf  with  a  great  army,  and  razed  Ueraclea^  in  - 
Trachinia,  after  it  was  betrayed  into  his  hands,  and  bestowed  their 
territories  on  the  Octeans^  and  Melieans.  Thence  marching  into  PeiT<- 
hsebia,  he  courted  some  of  the  cities  into  submission,  and  gained  others 
by  force  of  arms. 

The  Tbessalians,  seeing  him  mount  up  so  fast,  and  in  so  short  a 
time,  began  to  be  jealous  of  the  growth  of  his  power,  and  the  heat  of 
his  ambition. 

But  in  the  mean  time  there  arose  such  a  sedition,  followed  with 
such  butcheries,  in  Argos,  that  the  like  had  never  been  before  in  anj 
of  the  cities  of  Greece;  wiiich  new  and  unheard-of  cruelty  was  called 
by  the  Grecians  Scytalmn\\y  from  the  manner  of  the  slaughter  com- 
mitted. And  the  cause  of  the  tumult  was  this:  Ai^gos  was  governed 
by  a  democracy;  the  orators,  and  those  that  affected  popularity, 
stirred  up  the  mob  against  the  great  men  of  the  city;  which  caused 
them,  for  tlieir  own  preservation,  (and  to  free  themselves  from  the 
false  accusations  that  were  prosecuted  against  them),  to  plot  and 
contrive  how  to  overturn  the  democratical  government*  And  when 
some  who  were  suspected  were  called  in  question,  others,  fearing 
they  should  be  put  to  the  rack,  murdered  themselves.  For  one  iq 
the  height  of  his  torments  confessed,  and  accused  thirty  of  the  great«* 
est  men  of  the  city  to  be  in  the  conspiracy;  upon  which  the  people 
(witliQut  any  further  trial)  knocked  them  all  on  the  head,  and  confis-r 

*  In  Tbessaiy.  t  Ir  Thessaly.  t  Near  Pliocis  and  Parnassuf .  f  Ntaj 

lloum  Oeta  and  Tlicrmopjlsj  iu  Pbtbiotif.  ||  Knockiug  on  the  head  with  clubs. 


46  DIODORUS  SICULU9*  SooU  XPl, 

I  I    ■■       I  I      ■ n     I 

tnteA  thehr  estates.  And  whereas  there  were  many  others  seized,  apo» 
ittspicion  of  the  plot^  (and  the  false  accusations  managed  against 
them  by  the  orators  with  all  the  aggraration  imaginable)^  the  people 
weie  so  enraged,  that  whoever  were  accused  (of  whom  there  was  a 
vast  number,  and  all  very  rich)  were  condemned  to  death;  so  that 
there  were  executed  above  sixteen  hundred  of  the  greatest  and  most 
powerful  men  of  the  city :  neither  were  the  orators  themselves  spared  | 
ibr^  when  they  slackened  in  the  prosecution  of  the  calumnies,  (be* 
cause  they  were  afraid  lest  some  sudden  mischief  should  overtako 
them,  by  reason  of  the  extraordinary  cruelties  that  were  committed), 
the  people  concluded  that  they  had  deserted  their  cause,  which  put 
tbem  into  such  a  ferment  of  rage  and  fury,  that  they  killed  all  the 
orators  that  were  then  in  the  city;  which  seemed  to  be  executed  upon 
tbem  by  tlie  hand  of  some  revenging  deity,  as  a  reward  for  their  vil- 
lanies.  After  tlie  tumult  was  ceased,  the  people  returned  to  their 
former  quiet  and  peaceable  dispositions. 

About  this  time  Lycomedes  of  Tegea  persuaded  the  Arcadians  to 
join  together  in  one  body  of  a  commonwealth,  and  to  constiute  a 
|;eneral  council,  consisting  of  ten  thousand  men,  wlio  should  have 
absolute  power  to  determine  all  matters  relating  both  to  war  and 
peace*  But  a  tumult  happening  among  the  Arcadians,  the  contro- 
versy was  decided  by  the  8word>  many  being  killed,  and  above  four- 
teen hundred  banished,  some  to  Sparta,  others  to  Palantium*. 
Those  that  fled  tp  the  Palantines  were  by  them  delivered  up  into  the 
hands  of  tiveir  enemies,  who  cut  all  their  throats.  The  others  prc-t 
vailed  on  the  Lacedaemonians  to  make  an  inroad  into  Arcadia:  upoa 
which  Agesilaus,  king  of  Sparta,  with  an  army  made  up  of  the  citi- 
zens and  exiles,  broke  into  the  territories  of  Tegea,  because  they 
were  looked  upon  to  be  the  fomenters  of  all  the  broils  and  banish- 
ments amongst  the  Arcadians,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  the  countr]^ 
tirhich,  together  with  a  strigt  sieg^  laid  to  the  city,  greatly  tenified 
the  Arpadiaos. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  Jason,  who  ruled  at  Pherae,  (a 
luan  excellently  well  versed  in  military  affieiirs),  who  had  now  many 
of  the  neighbouring  countries  for  his  confederates,  persuaded  the 
Thessaliaus  to  endeavour  to  gain  the  sovereignty  of  Greece  to  them- 
selves. For  he  alleged,  that  whpever  would  fight  for  it  might  now 
gain  it  as  the  reward  of  their  valour:  for  it  was  evident  that  the 
I^acedaemouians  were  miserably  ruined  at  Leuctra,  and  the  Aihe^ 
nians  were  only  masters  at  sea,  and  theTbebans  far  unworthy  of  such 
a  dignity;  and  in  conclusion,  that  the  Argives  had  weakened  tbemr 
selves  by  their  own  civil  dissentions  and  bloody  broiU.^  Upon  tliis,. 

*  111  Arp«diu« 


€*«p.  Ft.  DIODORUS  SlCULtT^;  4/ 

the  Thessalians  made  Jason  general  of  all  their  forces^and  committed 
to  him  the  whole  management  of  the  war,  who,  having  now  received 
the  sapreme  command^  marched  into  some  of  the  neighbourii^ 
eoantries^  and  entered  into  a  league  with  Amyntas,  icing  of  Ma« 
cedonia* 

This  year  there  happened  what  was  very  remarkahlc:  for  three 
great  princes  died,  near  one  and  the  same  time;  Amyntas,  the  soa 
of  Tharrhaleus,  (after  he  had  reigned  in  Macedon  four-and-twentf 
years),  died,  leaving  behind  him  three  sons,  Alexander,  PerdiccaS| 
atrf  Philip.  Alexander  succeeded>  but  reigned  only  one  year.  'Hiea 
Agesipoits,  king  of  Laced«mon,  after  one  year's  reign,  died  lilcC''' 
wise;  his  brother  Cleomenes  succeeded  him,  and  sat  at  the  helili 
four-and-thirty  years.  At  last  Jason  of  Pherae,  whom  the  Tliessa- 
liftDs  had  lately  made  their  general,  (though  he  governed  with  great> 
moderation  and  kindness  towards  his  subjects),  was  assassinated  bj 
seven  young  men,  as  Ephorus  relates,  who  (in  hopes  of  praise  and 
commendation)  had  conspired  for  that  purpose;  but  others  write| 
that  he  was  murdered  by  his  brother  Poilydorus,  who  reigned  not 
above  one  year  after  him.  Here  Durius  the  Samian  begins  his 
iiistory  of  the  affairs  of  Greece.  And  these  were  the  things  don^ 
this  year. 

*  Afterwards,  when  Lysislratus  governed  in  cliief  at  Athens,  a  great 
sedition  arose  in  Rome,  for  some  were  for  making  of  consuls,  others 
were  for  creating  of  military  tribunes  in  their  room;  and  by  reason 
of  thb  dissentiofi  there  was  an  anarchy  for  some  time.  But,  at 
length,  six  military  tribunes  were  chosen,  which  were  Lucius  Ami- 
fius,  Caias  Verginius*,  Serulius  Sulpitius,  Lucius  Quintius,  Caius 
Cornelius,  and  Caius  Valerius.  About  the  same  time,  Poilydorus,  tho 
Pherean,  prince  of  Thessaly,  (when  he  was  drunk),  was  poisoned  by 
a  deadly  potion  given  him  by  his  brother  Alexander,  who  succeeded 
ktiii,  and  reigned  eleven  years.  And  as  he  got  into  the  throne  hf 
wickedness  and  injustice,  so  he  ruled,  (as  he  ever  designed),  with 
tyranny  aud  oppression;  and  whereas  all  those  before  him,  by  their 
moderation  and  kindness  to  their  subjects,  gained  the  love  and  good* 
will  of  all,  he,  by  his  severe  and  tyrannical  government,  became 
tlie  object  of  all  men's  hatred.  Therefore,  some  of  Larissa,  who 
fiom  their  high  birth  were  surnamed  Aleuadas,  (fearing  what  might 
he  the  effect  of  his  wickedness),  conspired  to  dethrone  him.  To 
this  end  they  made  a  journey  into  Macedonia,  and  treated  with  Alex- 
ander the  king,  in  order  to  assist  them  in  dcposiag  the  tyiant.^^ 
Vyhile  they  were  oegociating  this  affair,  Alc:^ander  the  Phericau  (liav 

*  Veluriti?, 


48  DlODORCs  siCOLUS.  Book  Xf « 


ing  intelligence  of  the  preparations  making  against  him)  raifted  m 
considerable  army,  designing  to  engage  with  the  enemy  in  Mactido-^ 
nia;  hot  the  king  of  Macedonia  being  joined  with  the  deserten, 
brought  his  forces  presently  to  Larissa^  and  so  prevented  him:  when 
he  came  there,  the  citizens  opened  the  gates  to  him,  and  so  he  ke^ 
came  master  of  all  but  the  castle,  whicii  he  afterwards  took  by  force. 
Hie  city  Cranon  likewise  surrendered  to  him^  and  he  promised  to 
festore  all  the  cities  to  the  Theasaliaas.  But  afterwards^  (not  vala* 
ing  his  word  or  honour),  he  garrisoned  them»  and  detiJned  them  all 
in  his  own  hands.  But  Alexander,  the  Phersean^  in  a  great  fright^, 
fled  to  the  city  Fher«a«  And  this  was  then  the  condision  of  ThetA 
saly« 


CHAP.  vn. 


JTke  Lacedaemonians  send  Polytropus  into  Arcadia;  who  is  staim^ 
and  his  party  routed  by  Lycomedes.  An  invasion  by  Epami'^ 
nandas  and  Pelopidas  into  Pelopoivnesus.  Sparta  besingodm 
The  antiquity  and  history  of  Messenia,  in  Greece.  PeUemt 
taken  by  the  Arcadians.  A  wall  drawn  between  Cenchrem  and 
the  Lechasumy  to  hinder  the  inroad  of  the  Thebeau  into  Pdo- 
ponnesus.  Epaminandas  breaks  through  into  Peloponnesus  f 
assaults  Corinth, 

IN  Peloponnesus^  in  the  mean  time^  the  Lacedamonians  seat  a 
thousand  heavy-armed  men  of  their  own  citizens,  and  five  hundred 
deserters  from  Argos  and  Boeotia,  into  Arcadia,  under  the  command 
of  Polytropus,  who,  when  he  came  to  Orchomenus,  in  Arcadiai  pot  a 
garrison  into  it^  being  a  city  that  favoured  the  Spartans.  But  hfco^ 
inedes  of  Mantinea,  (then  commander-in-chief  of  the  Arcadians)^ 
with  a  body  of  men  to  the  number  of  five  thousand,  marched  ag«Dst 
Orchomenus,  and,  upon  their  arrival^  the  Lacedsemonians  drew  out 
their  forces,  where  happened  a  sharp  engagement,  in  which  the  Lft« 
cedttmonian  general  was  slain,  and  two  hundred  more  with  him; 
the  rest,  by  the  hot  pursuit  ot  the  enemy,  were  forced  back  into  the 
ci^y.  However,  though  the  Arcadians  then  got  the  victory,  yet  thqf 
so  far  feared  the  power  of  Sparta,  that  they  durst  not  depend  upon 


Chap.  FIL  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  49 

their  bwo  strength  ia  contending  witli  the  Laccdsennonians,  and 
therefore,  taking  into  their  confederacy  the  Argives  and  the  Elians, 
they  first  sent  amhassadors  to  Athens,  to  desire  them  to  be  their  con- 
federates, which  being  denied,  they  then  addressed  themselves  to  the 
Thebans  for  the  same  purpose.  Upon  which  the  Boeotians  (together 
with  the  Phocians  and  Locrians,  their  confederates)  drew  out  their 
forces,  and  marched  directly  into  Peloponnesus,  under  the  command 
of  Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas :  for  all  the  other  Bcjeotarchs  had  wil- 
liugly  given  up  tlie  sole  and  absolute  command  of  the  army  to  those 
two,  being  men  eminent  fur  prudence  and  valour. 

When  they  entered  into  the  confines  of  Arcadia,  they  were  met 
by  all  the  Arcadians,  Elians,  Argives,  and  the  rest  of  their  confede- 
rates.   And  now  they  had  an  army  of  above  fifty  thousand  men,  and, 
after  a  council  of  war  held,  the  generals  resolved  to  march  forthwith 
to  Sparta,  and  to  waste  and  spoil  all  the  country  of  Laconia.    But 
the  Lacedaemonians,  having  lost  the  flower  and  strengtii  of  their 
young  men  in  the  battle  at  Ijcuctra,  and  many  in  several  other  fights 
here  and  there,  were  thereby  reduced  to  a  very  small  number  of 
fighting  men  of  their  own  citizens:  and  whereas  some  of  their  con- 
federates deserted,  and  others  were  brought  low  by  the  same  means 
as  those  before,  they  knew  not  which  way  to  turn  themselves.  '  So 
that  they  were  forced  to  seek  for  aid  and  assistance  from  them  (I 
mean  the  Athenians)  upon  whom  they  had  some  time  before  imposed 
thirty  tyrants,  and  whose  walls  they  had  demolished,  and  whose  city 
they  had  decreed  to  raze  even  to  the  ground,  and  lay  it  open  and 
common  with  the  rest  of  the  country  for  the  grazing  of  flocks  and 
herds.    But  necessity  has  no  law,  and  the  turns  of  fortune  are  in- 
vincible, through  which  tlie  Lacedaemonians  were  brought  into  that 
strait,  as  to  become  suppliants  to  their  most  implacable  enemies  for 
relief.     However,  they  were  not  deceived  in  their  hopes;  for  such 
was  the  brave  and  generous  spirit  of  the  Atheniaus,  that  they  feared 
not  the  power  of  the  Thebans,  but  decreed  to  assist  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians to  the  utmost  they  were  able,  though  they  were  now  ready 
even  to  be  swallowed  up,  and  made  perfect  slaves.    To  this  end  they 
listed  in  one  day  twelve  thousand  lusty  young  men,  and  forthwith 
ordered  Iphicratcs  the  general  to  march  away  to  the  assistance  of  tho 
Spartans.     Accordingly,  having  men  that  were  very  forward,   he 
hastes  away  with  a  swift  march.     Neither  were  the  Lacedaimonians 
less  active  or  forward ;  but  now,  even  when  the  enemy  were  en- 
camped in  the  borders  of  Laconia,  they  marched  out  of  Sparta  with 
all  the  strength  they  could  make,  which  was  but  small,  yet  with  the 
same  courage  and  valour  as  they  had  formerly  done. 

In  the  mean  time,  £paminondas's  army  conceiving  it  very  difli- 
VoL.  2,   No.  41.  M 


50  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XPl 

cult  to  enter  ioto  the  enemy's  country,  and  therefore  judging  it  wa9 
not  convenient  to  attempt  it  with  the  whole  army  togetlter^  they 
resolved  to  divide  their  forces  into  four  bodies^  and  so  to  make 
the  attack  in  several  places  at  once.  The  first  marched  to  the  city  o( 
Sellasia^  and  drew  off  tlie  inhabitants  of  tliat  territory  from  the  La- 
cediemonians.  The  Argives,  who  were  in  another  body^  upon  theur 
entrance  into  the  borders  of  Tagca,  engaged  with  tlie  guard  that 
kept  that  pass,  and  killed  the  chief  officer,  Alexander,  a  Spartan,  and 
two  hundred  aK)re  of  his  men :  amongst  whom  there  were  some  Boeo- 
tian exiles.  The  third  body,  in  which  were  the  Arcadians,  and  most 
in  numlx^r,  broke  into  the  country  called  Scirus,  where  Ischolaus  a 
man  of  great  valour  and  prudence,  kept  guard  with  a  considerable 
body  of  men.  This  brave  and  gallant  commander  performed  an  he- 
roic action,  worthy  to  be  recorded  to  all  posterity.  When  he  fore- 
saw that  both  he,  and  all  those  with  him,  were  sure  every  man  to  be 
cut  off  by  tlieir  engaging  with  so  great  and  unequal  a  number;  in- 
the  first  place  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  dishonour  to  the  Spartan  name 
to  desert  the  post  assigned  him,  and  yet  judged  it  to  be  much  for  the 
service  and  advantage  of  his  country  if  \ie  could  preserve  the  sol- 
diers. To  the  admiration  therefore  of  his  valour,  he  contrived  ft 
way  how  to  answer  tlie  ends  of  both;  wherein  he  bravely  imitated 
the  gallant  spirit  of  king  Leonidas  in  former  times  at  Thermopyle^. 
For  he  sent  away  to  Sparta  the  choicest  of  his  soldiers  that  were 
young  and  lusty,  to  the  end  they  might  be  helpful  to  their  country  ii> 
ligliting^now  that  all  lay  at  stake :  and  he  himself, with  those  that  were 
old,  kept  close  together,  and  in  a  brave  defence,  slaughtered  multi- 
tudes of  their  enemies;  biit  at  length,  being  surrounded  and  hem- 
jned  in  by  the  Arcadians,  lliey  were  every  man  of  them  cut  oflf. 

The  fourth  body  of  the  Elians  having  all  places  more  clear  and 
upcn  before  them,  arrived  at  length  at  Sellasia:  for  it  was  ordered 
that  all  the  forces  should  meet  together  at  that  place,  where,  being  alk 
now  joined,  they  marched  towards  Sparta,  and  wasted  the  country 
all  before  them  with  lire  and  sword.  And  now  the  Lacedemonians 
seeing  their  antient  country  liaconia  (which  had  never  known  what 
waste  and  si>oil  meant  for  the  space  of  five  hundred  years  before)  to 
be  thus  cruelly  harassed  and  destroyed,  could  no  longer  forbear, 
but  were  ready  to  run  upon  their  enemies  as^it  were  with  open  mouth. 
But  being  by  some  magistrates  that  came  from  the  city  commanded, 
not  to  hasten  away  too  far  out  of  the  bounds  of  their  country,  (IcsH 
some  other  should  make  an  inroad  into  it  in  the  mean  time),  and 
being  likewise  advised  to  recollect  themselves,- and  think  seriously  of 
defending  the  city,  with  much  ado  they  submitted  to  the  advice. 

In  the  meau  time,  Epaminondas  having  passed  hia  army  orcr  tKr 


Chap.FlL  DiODORUs  sicuLUS.  51 

^  '  ■'■  "■  ■  ,  g 

mountaiaTaygetus^aod  arrived  at  the  river  Eurotas,  (which  was  then 
very  high^  being  winter  time),  he  endeavoured  all  he  could  to  get 
over.  The  Laceds&monians  perceiving  how  his  troops  were  disor* 
dered  and  dbpersed  through  the  difficulty  of  the  passage,  laid  hold 
upon  this  fit  occasion  to  fall  upon  tliem.  Leaving  therefore  their 
wives,  children^  and  old  men,  as  a  guard  for  the  city,  they  made  out 
against  tlic  enemy  in  good  order^  with  all  the  young  and  strong  men 
of  the  town,  and  by  a  sudden  and  hot  charge,  cut  off  a  great  number 
in  their  passing  the  river;  but  the  Boeotians  and  i\rcadians  valiantly 
standing  their  ground,  surrounded  their  enemies^  However,  tlie 
Spartans,  after  they  had  killed  a  great  number  of  tiic  Bceotians,  at 
length  broke  tlifough,and  returned  to  the  city,  leaving  behind  them 
remarkable  instances  of  their  valour. 

Presently  after,  when  Epaminondas  came  up  with  h!s  wliole  army 
{to  the  terror  o^  the  inhabitants)  to  the  city,  the  Spartans,  by  the 
advantage  of  the  strength  of  the  places,  killed  great  numbers  of  them. 
And  now  all  hands  were  at  work,  and  very  earnest  to  gain  tike  city^ 
insomuch,  that  they  seemed  in  a  fair  way  to  take  Sparta  by  ttorm* 
But  the  assailants,  (through  their  over  heat  and  violence),  being  many 
of  them  kHled,  and  others  wounded,  Epaminondas  caused  a  trumpet 
to  sound  a  retreat,  and  so  called  them  off.  Presently  after,  the  The- 
bans  made  their  approacli  to  the  city,  and  challenged  the  Spartans  to 
come  forth  and  fight  with  them,  or  else  to  acknowledge  themselves 
inferior,  and  not  able  to  contend  with  them.  To  whom  they  an- 
swered  ^Tiiat  when  they  saw  tlieir  opportunity,  they  would  be  sure 

not  to  decline  fighting,  tliough  they  laid  all  at  stake.  The  army, 
therefore,  now  drew  off  from  the  siege,  and  having  wasted  and 
«poiled  all  Laconia,  and  loaded  themselves  with  rich  i>rey  and  plun- 
der, returned  into  Arcadia.  Afterwards  the  Athenians  (who  came 
too  late  and  did  nothing  woith  taking  notice  of)  marched  back  into 
Attica. 

In  the  mean  while,  four  thousand  men  came  to  the  assistance  of 
the  Lacedaemonians  from  their  confederates.  To  these  they  added  a 
thousand  helots  newly  manumitted  and  set  free,  and  two  hundred 
Boeotian  fugitives,  and  many  more  from  the  neighbouring  towns  and 
villages;  so  that  theywcre  now  strong enougli  to  cope  with  the  enemy. 
And  these  forces  being  kept  together,  and  daily  exercised,  grew  more 
and  more  daring,  and  fit  for  public  service  in  the  field. 

But  Epaminondas  being  naturally  inclined  to  things  tluit  were  great, 
und  ambitious  to  eternize  his  own  praise  and  honour,  persuaded  the 
Arcadians  and  the  other  allies  to  rebuild  and  replenish  Messene 
with  new  inhabitants,  (which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  LacedflBmo^ 
nians,  and  lay  waste  and  desolate  many  years),  it  being  most  coin-r 


53  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  Book  XPZ 


modiously  situated  for  invading  of  Sparta  at  any  time;  having  pro- 
cured their  consent,  he  inquired  after  all  thcantient  inhabitants  that 
were  living  in  any  place:  and  enfranchising  many  others  that  were 
willing  to  settle  themselves  there,  he  repaired  Messenc,  and  made 
It  very  populous,  and  divided  the  land  belonging  to  the  city  by  lot 
amongst  the  new  inhabitants,  and  filled  the  country  about  with  stately 
scats  and  beautiful  buildings,  and  so  raised  up  a  noble  Grecian  city 
out  of  its  ruins,  to  its  former  state  and  grandeur^  for  which  he  wos 
highly  honoured. 

1  conceive  it  will  not  be  amiss  in  this  place,  in  regard  that  Messene 
has  been  so  often  taken  and  ruined,  if  I  say  something  in  short  of 
this  city  from  its  beginning.  Antiently  the  family  of  Neleus  and 
Nestor,  to  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war,  possessed  it :  afterwards  Orestes, 
the  son  of  Agamemnon,  and  his  posterity,  enjoyed  it,  till  the  return 
of  the  llcracliilt'e.  Then  Cresphontes  chose  Messene  forhisshare, 
and  his  posterity  reigned  there  for  some  time;  but  they  being  eject- 
ed, it  came  into  the  power  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  became  lords 
thereof.  For  after  that  Telecles  king  of  the  Laced semonians  was 
slain  in  a  battle,  the  Messenians  at  length  were  subdued  by  the 
Spartans.  This  war  is  said  to  have  continued  twenty  years;  and 
that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  taken  a  solemn  oath — ^That  they  wouM 
never  return  to  Spurta  till  they  had  taken  Messene.  At  that  time 
were  born  those  called  the  Parthenite,  who  afterwards  enjoyed  the 
city  of  Tarcntum.  The  Messenians  in  after  times  being  oppressed 
by  the  Lsicedtemonians,  Aristomcnes  stirred  them  up  to  revolt,  aud 
destroyed  many  of  the  Spartans.  At  which  time  Tyrreus  the  poet 
was  sent  by  the  Athenians  to  the  Spartans  to  be  their  general.  But 
there  arc  others  who  say,  that  Aristomencs  flourished  in  the  time  of 
the  twenty-years  war.  The  last  war  made  upon  them  was  after  that 
terrible  eartliquako  which  almost  ruined  Sparta  and  destroyed  all 
its  inhabitants.  At  that  time,  those  that  remained  of  the  Messenians, 
(together  with  the  helots  who  revolted  with  them),  inhabited  Ithome, 
because  Messene  had  lain  waste  many  years  together  before  that 
time.  But,  being  unfortunate  in  every  encounter,  they  wore  at 
length  utterly  ruined,  and  driven  out  of  their  country;  and  settled 
themselves  in  Naupactus,  which  was  given  them  to  inhabit  by  the 
Athenians :  and  from  thence  some  removed  to  Ccphalenia,  and  others 
into  Sicily,  where  they  built  thecity  of  Messana,  so  called  from  them. 
And  now  the  Thebans,  in  the  last  place,  by  the  advice  ofEpaminon- 
das,  (who  invited  the  Messenians  from  all  places  where  they  were), 
rebuilt  Messene,  and  restored  to  the  new  inhabitants  all  the  autient 
territories  formerly  belonging  to  that  city.  And  thus  greut  aud  va- 
rious were  the  cliangrs  and  turns  of  Mcsscric. 


Chap.  VII.  mODORUS  SICULUS.  63 

J  -■■  I  ■  '  ■ 

Tlie  TliehaDs  having  dispatched  all  these  things  in  the  space  of 

eighty*five  days^  leaving  a  strong  garrison  for  the  defence  of  Mcs- 
scne,  returned  to  their  own  country.  And  the  Lacedemonians 
having  now  unexpectedly  rid  themselves  of  the  enemy^  sent  some  of 
Ihe  greatest  men  of  their  city  to  Athens;  and  upon  a  treaty  concern-^ 
ing  the  principality,  it  was  agreed  that  the  Athenians  should  be  mas- 
ters at  sea,  and  the  Lacedemonians  have  the  chief  command  Qt  land; 
but  afterwards  both  cities  executed  the  sovereignty  in  common. 

About  the  same  time,  the  Arcadians  created  Lycomedes  general, 
and  sent  him  away  with  five  thousand  strong  and  lusty  young  men 
to  besiege  Pcllene  in  Laconia:  who  took  it  by  storm,  and  put  above 
three  hundred  Lacedsemonians  there  in  garrison  to  the  sword:  and, 
]iaving  plundered  the  city,  a»*d  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country, 
returned  home  before  the  Lacedaemonians  could  send  them  any 
relief. 

The  Boeotians  (likewise  being  desired  by  the  Thessalians  to  free 
them  from  the  tyranny  of  Alexander  the  Phercan,  then  but  feeble 
and  almost  broken)  .>ctu  I'elopidas  with  a  strong  army  into  Thcssaly, 
with  orders  to  inuiM  ;e  ailairs  there  to  the  advantage  of  the  JJceo- 
tians.  When  he  ia.r.c  to  Larissu,  he  possesed  himself  of  the  castle 
then  garriso'crl  hy  Alexander;  thence  he  marched  into  Macedonia, 
and  made  a  Itjai^iio  with  king  Alexander,  and  received  Philip  his 
brother  as  an  hostage,  and  sent  him  to  Thebes,  And  having  per- 
fected whatever  he  thougiit  might  be  for  the  service  of  the  Bciiotians, 
he  returned  into  his  own  country. 

Things  standing  tlius,  the  Arcadians,  Argives,  and  Elians,  unanl* 
moubly  agreed  to  make  war  upon  the  Lacedfemonians,  and  to  that 
euAy  to  send  ambassadors  to  tiie  Boeotians,  to  persuade  them  tojoia 
with  them  in  the  war.  TIjey  accordingly  consented,  and  sent  forth 
an  army  of  seven  thousand  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse,  under  the 
command  of  Epaniinondas  and  the  other  Ba*otarchs.  The  Athe  • 
tiians  hearing  of  the  preparations  of  the  Bceotians  against  Pelopon- 
nesus, sent  an  army  against  them,  under  the  command  of  Chabrias 
their  general,  who,  when  he  arrived  at  Corinth,  raised  men  out  ofMe- 
gara,  Pellene,  and  Corinth,  and  made  up  an  army  of  ten  tliousand 
men;  who  being  joined  with  the  Lacedajmonians  and  other  confe- 
derates at  Corinth,  their  whole  forces  were  no  less  than  twenty 
thousand.  They  made  it  first  their  business  to  guard  all  the  pas- 
sages, and  to  do  all  they  could  to  prevent  the  Boeotians  from  break- 
ing into  Peloponnesus:  to  this  end  they  drew  a  wall  with  a  deep 
trench  from  the  Cenchreje  to  theLcchaeum*,  to  block  up  the  entrance 

*  The  narrow  pi«  of  Pflopotihcsus,  between  two  seas,  viz,  Lecliseuin,  l^in;;  uu  Uie 
v*tt.^\,  and  Cenchreic  iu  tlic  casi,  loriuing  the  harbour  of  Corialh. 


B4  DrODORUS  SICULUS.  BooJk  XP\ 

that  way.  The  thing  was  done  with  that  quickness  and  expedition, 
(through  the  multitude  of  hands  and  diligence  of  those  employed), 
that  the  place  was  fortified  before  the  Boeotians  could  reach  it. 

A»  soon  as  Epaminondas  came  np  to  the  place,  upon  diligent  view 
of  the  fortification,  he  discerned  that  that  part  kept  by  the  Lace- 
daemonians was  the  weakest,  and  therefore  did  all  he  could  to  draw 
tliem  out  to  a  fair  ficld-battic,  though  they  were  almost  three  times 
Iiis  number.     But  when  he  saw  they  would  not  stir,  but  kept  tbem« 
•elres  within  their  fortifications  and  trenches,  he  made  a  fierce  as- 
sault upon  them,  storming  them  in  every  part :  but  the  action  was 
hottest  and  sharpest  on  both  sides,  where  the  Lacedsemonians  were 
posted,  for  there  the  place  was  of  easiest  entrance,  and  most  difficult 
to  be  kept.    But  Epaminondas  having  with  him  tlie  flower  of  Tbebes> 
with  much  ado  heat  off  the  Lacedsemonians,  and  so  clearing  the  way, 
broke  in  with  his  forces,  and  laid  the  passage  open  Into  Peloponnesus, 
which  was  an  action  nothing  inferior  to  any  he  had  done  before. 
Hereupon,  he  forthwith  marched  to  Troezenc  and  Epidaurus,  and 
wasted  and  harassed  the  country  round  about,  but  could  not  Mkc 
the  cities,  bcin^;  very  strongly  garrisoned  j  but  Sicyon,  Fheuntc*, 
and  some  oth^TS  submitted    to  him.     Then  he  marched  with  hU 
army  against  Corinth :  and,  having  routed  the  townsmen  in  an  en- 
counter, he  pursued  them  to  the  very  walls:  where  some  of  the 
Boeotians,  puir'ed  up  with  their  good  success,  rashly  broke  through 
tht:  gates  into  the  city;  upon  which  the  Corinthians,  in  a  great  fright, 
shut  themselves  up  in  their  liouses.     But  Chabiias,  the  Athenian  ge- 
neral, both  cordially  and  faithfully  made  head  against  tlie  Boeotians, 
and  drove  some  of  them  out  of  the  city,  making  a  great  slaughter 
of  the  rest.     In  the  heat  of  this  action,  the  Boeotians  approached  to 
Corinth  with  their  whole  army  in  battalia,  to  the  great  terror  of  the 
inhabitants:  upon  which,  Chabrias,  with  his  Athenians,  forthwith 
made  a  sally  out  of  the  city,  and  having  possessed  himself  of  the 
lulls  adjoining,  there  bore  the  brunt  of  the  enemy's  charge.     On  the 
other  side  the  B<i.'otians  encouraged,  being  strong  of  body,  and  of 
long  experience  in  feats  of  arms,  doubted  not  but  to  rout  the  Athe- 
nians.    But  the  Chabrians  (by  the  advantage  of  the  higher  ground, 
rind  continual  succours  comirg  to  them  out  of  the  city)  so  defendecl 
themselves,  that  they  killed  and  grievously  galled  their  assailants,  ancj 
bi»at  them  olf:  so  that  the  Boeotians,  after  the  loss  of  a  great  num- 
ber of  their  men,  not  being  able  to  do  any  thing,  drew  off  their  forces, 
ButC'habriai  having  thus  baffled  the  enemy,  his  valour,  faithfulness, 
and  military  conduct,  was  cried  up,  and  greatly  admired. 

*   ri:f  a  b  tli». 


Chop.  PIII.  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  55 


CHAP.  VIIL 

Dionysitts  sends  Gauls  ami  Spaniards  to  the  assistance  of  the  La- 
cedafnanioHs,  Pelopidas  and  Jstnetiias  hnprisoned  by  AUx^- 
Mmder,  iyrmU  of  Phera.  The  Bwotifms  pursued  by  the  PAe- 
reans:  brought  off*  by  EpaminondaSy  then  a  private  soldier, 
TheJUght  between  the  Arcadians  and  LacedtEmoniaxis*  Dio^ 
nysius  falls  upon  the  Carthaginian  territories  in  Sicily.  Diotty* 
sius  dies.  T%e  cause  of  his  death.  The  cruelty  of  Aiexauder 
the  Pherean  at  Scotussa.  Epaminondas  breaks  again  into  Pe* 
toptmnesus.  Coos  peopled  and  walled.  The  etui  of  t/te  Laconic 
euulBwotian  war  by  tlie  medicUion  of  the  Persian  king. 

ABOUT  this  time  alrivcd  at  Corinth  two  thousand  Gauk  and  Spa- 
niards, sent  by  Dionysius  tiie  tyrant  to  the  Lacedemonians  from  Si« 
cily,  who  liad  five  months  [)ay  in  advance.  The  Grecians,  to  try  their 
miour,  drew  them  out  against  the  enemy;  who  so  far  approved them-^ 
fclves  stout  and  valiant  men,  that  they  routed  and  killed  many  of 
the  B<eottans  and  their  confederates.  And  after  they  had  been  verj 
useful  in  the  war,  and  procured  to  themselves  praise  and  esteem 
both  for  their  courage  and  service,  and  had  been  rewarded  according 
to  their  merits  by  tlie  Laced«fmouians,  they  were  sent  back  into  &{• 
cily  at  tlie  end  of  the  sunimer. 

After  these  things,  Philiscus,  ambassador  from  Artaxcrxes  king  of 
Persia,  came  into  Greece  to  persuade  the  Grecians  to  be  at  pt*ace 
among  themselves;  to  which  all  willingly  complied  except  theThe^ 
bans,  who  were  so  obstinate  that  they  refused  the  conditions,  hav« 
iog  before  brought  all  Boeotiainto  subjection  to  their  own  govern- 
aient  Tiiere  being  therefore  no  hopes  of  peace,  Philiscus  returned 
into  Asia,  leaving  behind  him  two  thousand  mercenaries,  who  re- 
ceived their  pay  for  the  service  of  the  Lacedaemonians. 

Whilst  these  things  were  doing,  £uphron  of  Sicyoii,  a  hold  and 
lash  fellow,  not  inferior  to  any  of  that  kind,  with  the  assistance  of  the 
Argives,  plotted  to  gain  the  sovereignty ;  and  to  that  end,  fortune  favour- 
ed him  so  far,  that  fothwith  he  banished  forty  of  the  citizens,  and  con- 
fiscated their  goods  and  estates,  by  which  he  raised  a  vast  sum  of 
money,  wherewith  he  hired  a  guard  of  foreigners,  and  so  possessed 
himrelf  of  the  command  of  the  city. 

Nausigencs  being  lord  chancellor  of  Athens,  and  four  militarv 
tribunes,  viz.  Lucius  Papirius,  Lucius  Menenius,  Servius  Cornelius-, 
and  Servius  Sulpitius.  executing  the  consular  authority  at  Rome, 


5G  moDORus  S1CUI.US.  Book  XVL 

t]ic  hundred  and  ttiird  olympiad  was  celebrated  at  Elis^  in  which  Py- 
thostratus  the  Athenian  carried  away  the  prize.  This  year  ^Ptolemy 
AloriteS;  the  son  of  Amyntas,  treacherously  murdered  his  brother 
Alexander^  and  governed  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia  for  the  space 
of  three  years.  At  the  same  time  Pelopidas  in  Uccutla,  emulatingf 
the  glory  of  Epaminondas,  and  perceiving  what  great  service  he  had 
done  in  Peloponnesus  for  the  commonwealth  of  Bceotia,  made  itbis 
business  to  advance  his  own  reputation,  by  enlarging  the  power  and 
sovereignty  of  the  Thebans  in  otiicr  parts  out  of  Peloponnesns. 
To  that  end,  and  joining  with  Ismenias,  (his  special  friend,  and  a 
man  of  great  esteem  for  his  valour),  he  took  a  journey  into  Thes- 
saly,  where,  upon  discourse  with  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Pherse,  (when 
he  never  expected  any  such  thing),  he  and  Ismenias  were  bothseized^ 
and  clapped  up  in  prison.  This  fact  highly  incensed  the  ^Fbebans, 
upon  which  they  sent  eight  thousand  heavy-armed  men,  and  six 
hundred  horse  into  Thessaly.  At  whose  coming  Alexander  was  in  a 
great  fright,  and  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  to  treat  with  them  for 
their  assistance.  Upon  this,  the  people  of  Athens  forthwith  des- 
patched thirty  sail,  and  a  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of 
Autocles;  but  while  he  sailed  round  Eubcea,  the  Thebans  en- 
tered Tliessaly.  And  thougii  Alexander  was  well  furnished  with 
foot,  and  exceeded  the  BcKOtians  in  horse,  yet  the  Boeotians  at  the 
first  concluded  they  should  put  an  end  to  the  war  by  one  fight,  es- 
pecially being  enforced  by  the  Thcssalians:  but  being  deserted  by 
them,  and  Alexander  assisted  by  the  Athenians  and  other  confede- 
rates, and  meat  and  drink  and  all  other  provisions  being  scarce,  the 
Boeotarchs  were  resolved  to  return  home,  and  accordingly  drew  off; 
and  in  their  march  througii  the  plain,  they  were  fallen  upon  in  the 
rear  by  Alexander's  horse,  who  killed  and  wounded  many  of  the  Boeo- 
tians. At  length,  not  being  able  either  to  keep  their  ground  or  go 
forward,  they  knew  not  which  way  to  turn  themselves,  or  wliat  to 
do;  and  to  aggravate  the  perplexity  they  were  in,  they  were  in  want 
of  food.  In  this  desperate  condition  Epaminondas  (who  was  then 
but  a  private  soldier)  was  chosen  general  by  the  army,  who  presently 
placed  the  best  and  choicest  of  tiie  light-armed  men,  and  the  horse 
in  the  rear.  With  these  he  repulsed  the  enemy  that  pressed  upon  the 
backs  of  the  Boeotians,  and  by  frequent  skirmishes,  (making  head 
as  occasion  served),  and  keeping  his  troops  in  good  order,  he  brought 
otr  the  army  safe.  Thenceforth  more  and  more  advancing  his  own 
reputation  by  his  noble  actions,  he  giiined  praise  and  renown  both 
amongst  his  citizens,  and  all  their  confederates. 

But  the  magistrates  of  Bccotia  set  great  fines  u|X)n  the  ofTieers 
and  leaders  in  this  late  expedition^  and  so  raised  a  great  deal  uif 


G/kp.  Fill.  moDORUs  siculus.  5/ 

money;  but,  in  regard  the  question  may  be  very  well  asked — How 
it  came  to  pass  that  so  great  a  man  was  placed  in  so  low  a  place  as 
a  common  soldier  in  that  expedition  into  Thessuly  ?  it  is  fit  a  reason 
should  be  given  in  justification  of  Epaminondas:  When  he  had  in 
the  fight  at  Corinth  beaten  off  the  Lacedaemonians  who  guarded  the 
fortification,  he  might  have  killed  a  great  number  of  them;  but  rest- 
ing satisfied  that  he  had  gained  the  pass,  he  forbore  all  further  pur«^ 
tuit.  Being  therefore  suspected  that  he  spared  the  Laccdssmoniant 
out  of  a  design  to  ingratiate  himself  into  their  favour,  those  that  en* 
vied  his  glory,  watched  an  opportunity  to  accuse  him  of  treason. 
Upon  which  the  people  were  so  exasperated,  that  they  deprived  him 
of  his  command,  and  Ordered  him  to  serve  as  a  common  soldier*  But 
having  by  his  noble  actions  wiped  off  those  stains  of  dishonour  cast 
iipoDhim,he  was  restored  by  the  people  to  his  former  dignity. 

Not  long  after,  a  sliarp  battle  was  fought  between  the  Laccdas- 
uonians  and  the  Arcadians,  in  which  the  former  obtained  a  famous 
victory;  and  was  the  first  fight  since  that  at  I^uctra,  wherein  they 
had  any  considerable  success.  There  were  above  ten  thousand  of  the 
Arcadians  slain,  and  not  one  man  lost  of  the  Lacediemonians.  The 
priests  at  Dodona  had  before  foretold— That  this  war  should  end  with- 
out any  mourning  on  the  part  of  the  Lacedsemonians.  After  this  bat- 
tle^ the  Arcadians  were  in  that  fear  of  the  Lacedemonians,  that  they 
built  the  city  called  Megalopolis,  in  a  place  commodiously  situated 
for  their  security,  and  brought  into  it  the  Menalians,  and  Parrha* 
tians,  out  of  twenty  villages  in  Arcadia.  And  this  was  the  state  of 
Greece  at  that  time. 

In  Sicily,  Dionysius  the  tyrant  having  raised  a  great  army,  resolved 
to  take  advantage  of  the  present  opportunity,  and  to  fall  upon  the 
Carthaginians,  who  were  then  but  in  a  very  weak  condition,  by  rca- 
con  of  the  plague  that  raged  amongst  them,  and  their  being  deserted 
by  many  of  the  Africans.  And  because  he  had  not  the  least  colour 
or  ground  for  the  war,  he  pretended  that  the  Carthaginians  encroach- 
ed and  made  incursions  into  his  country.  Having  therefore  an  army 
of  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  three  thousand  horse,  besides  a  navy  of 
three  hundred  sail,  with  these  he  invades  the  Carthaginian  territory, 
and  presently  won  Selinus  and  Entclla,  and  wastes  and  harasses 
all  the  country  round  about :  then  taking  £ryx,  he  at  length  besieg- 
ed Lilybsum :  but  the  strength  of  the  garrison  presently  forced  him 
to  raise  the  siege.  Afterwards,  being  informed  that  the  arsenals  be- 
longing to  the  Carthaginians  were  burnt  down,  and  therefore  con- 
ceiving their  whole  fleet  was  destroyed,  he  grew  secure  and  despised 
the  enemy;  so  that  he  laid  up  thirty  of  his  best  p:allic!»  in  ilie  havcu 
at  F: yx,  and  sent  all  the  rest  back  to  Syracuse,    But  the  Cartha- 

VojL.2.  No.  41.  I 


58  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XFi 

■  .       ■  ■  m 

ginians  having  forthwith  manned  two  hundred  sail^  and  entering  the 
port  at  Eryx  unexpectedly,  on  a  sudden  came  up  to  the  ships  there, 
and  carried  away  most  of  them  out  of  the  harhour:  but  winter  drawing 
on,  both  sides  made  a  truce,  and  returned  with  their  armies  to  winter* 
quarters.  And  not  long  after,  Dionysius  fell  sick  and  died,  having 
reigned  thirty-eight  years;  his  son  Dionysius  succeeded  him,  andgo- 
verncd  twelve  years. 

Here  it  will  not  be  a  matter  foreign  to  the  design  of  our  history. 
If  we  relate  the  cause  of  his  death,  and  what  happened  to  this  prince 
a  little  before  that  time. 

When  he  had  caused  a  tragedy  of  his,  called  the  Leneians,  to  be 
acted  at  Athens,  and  was  proclaimed  victor,  one  of  the  singers  or 
musicians  in  the  chorus,  hoped  to  gain  an  honourable  reward  by  bring- 
ing him  the  first  news  of  his  victory :  to  that  end  he  sailed  to  Co- 
rinth, and  thence  took  shipping  for  Sicily,  and,  with  afairw*ind,  ar- 
sived  at  Syracuse,  and  presently  gives  the  tyrant  an  account  of  his 
victory:  uiK>n  which,  he  was  so  transported  with  joy,  that  he  bounti- 
fully rewarded  tiie  man;  and  that  he  might  give  thanks  to  the  gods 
by  costly  sacrifices,  for  such  a  happy  piece  of  news,  he  made  splen- 
did entertainments,  in  feasting  and  drinking.    But  in  this  sumptu- 
ous reception  of  his  friends,  drinking  to  excess,  and  overcharging 
nature,  he  fell  into  a  most  violent  distemper,  which  killed  him.    He 
iiad  been  formerly  forewarned  by  an  oracle — ^That  he  should  then 
die,  when  he  should  overcome  those  who  were  better  than  himself. 
This  doubtful  prophecy,  he  applied  to  the  Carthaginians,  looking  upon 
them  to  be  more  powerful  than  he  himself.     And  upon  that  account, 
(though  he  was  often  fighting  witii  them),  it  was  his  custom  to  wave 
the  victory,  and  own  himself  to  be  overcome.     However,  he  was 
not  able  to  avoid  his  destiny.     For,  though  he  was  but  a  bad  poet, 
yet  by  the  judgment  of  the  Athenians,  he  carried  jiway  the  victory 
against  those  that  far  excelled  him  in  that  art:  so  that  his  victory 
over  them,  and  the  time  of  his  death,  very  well  agreed  to  the  sense 
of  the  oracle.     Dionysius  the  younger,  as  soon  as  he  came  to  the 
crown,  called  a  senate,  and  there  courted  the  people,  and  desired 
them  to  continue  the  same  good  will  and  respect  to  him,  that  they 
had  born  to  his  father.     Afterwards,  having  first  solemnized  his  fa- 
ther's funeral  with  great  pomp  and  state  at  the  king*s  gates  in  the 
castle,  he  ordered  the  affairs  of  hLs  kingdom  so  as  to  set  himself  fast 
on  the  throne. 

At  this  time  Polyzclus  was  arelion  at  Athens;  and  at  Rome^ 
(through  intestine  broils  and  seditions),  was  nothing  hut  an  anarchy. 
In  Greece,  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Phera!,  bearing  a  grudge  to  them 
of  Scotussa  in  Thessaly,  called  them  to  a  common  assembly ;  and  when 


CkaP'  VIII.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  39 

they  appeared^  he  encompassed  them  with  his  guard,  and  put  them 
every  one  to  the  sword,  and  threw  their  carcasses  into  the  ditches  over 
the  walls,  and  plundered  tlic  city. 

At  the  same  time,  Epaminondas  the  Thehan,  with  all  his  forces, 
broke  into  Peloponnesus,  with  whom  joined  the  Achaians,  and  several 
other  confederates,  and  restored  Dymon*,  Naupactusf,  and  Caly- 
donj,  to  their  aniicnt  liberties,  and  then  made  another  expedition 
into  Thes-saly ;  in  which  they  freed  Pelopidas  out  of  the  hands  of 
Al<^x.'M'der  ihc  tyrant  of  Piieric.  The  Pliliasians  were  about  the 
eame  tjnit:  besieged  by  the  Arjrives:  but  Chares,  sent  from  Athens  in 
aid  of  the  Pliliasians,  raised  the  siege,  having  routed  the  Argives  in  two 
battles,  and  so  returned  to  Athens. 

Ai  the  end  of  this  year  Ccphisidorus  was  chief  governor  of  Athens; 
and  four  military  tribunes,  clothed  witli  consular  dignity,  governed  at 
Rome,  viz.  Lucius  Furius,  Paulus  Manlius,  Servitius  Sulpitius,  and 
Servius  C(»rnelius.  At  that  time  Thcmesion  the  prince  of  Eretria 
took  Oropus,  belonging  to  the  Athenians,  hut  lost  it  again  on  a  sud- 
den. For,  the  Athenians  coming  upon  liim  with  far  greater  forces 
than  he  was  able  to  cope  with,  he  applied  himself  to  the  Thebans  for 
assistance,  and  delivered  the  city  into  their  hands, (as  a  pledge), which 
they  never  after  would  restore. 

While  those  things  were  acting,  they  of  Coos  seated  themselves 
in  the  city  they  now  enjoy§,  and  put  it  into  that  state  and  grandeur 
it  now  has.  For  it  was  made  very  populous,  and  a  large  wall  drawn 
round  about  it,  with  great  cost  and  expense,  and  furnished  with  an 
excellent  harbour.  From  this  time  forward,  it  grew  more  and  more, 
both  in  its  public  revenues,  and  in  the  private  wealth  and  riches  of 
its  inhabitants,  in  »o  much,  that  it  vied  with  the  chiefest  and  most 
famous  cities. 

During  these  transactions,  the  king  of  Persia  sent  ambassadors  to 
persuade  the  Grecians  to  ajj^ree  and  lay  aside  their  animosities  one 
against  another.  Upon  which,  the  Laconic  and  Boeotian  war,  (as 
they  called  ii),  which,  from  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Leuctra  had 
continued  above  five  years,  was  now  at  length  ended.  About  these 
times  flourished  several  famous  men,  worthy,  for  their  learning, 
to  be  ever  remembered.  As  Isocrates  the  orator,  and  his  scholars; 
Aristotle  the  philosopher,  and  Anaximenes  of  Lampsacus;  and  espe- 
cially Plato  the  Atiienian,  and  the  last  of  the  Pythagorean  philoso- 
phers.    Besides  these,  Xenophon  the  historian,  (now  very  old),  for 

*  Dymon,  or  Dymae,  a  cily  of  Ac:haiu.  t  A  rity  ofAeliuia  in  Lih;:!?,  now 

called  Lc  pan  to.  X  Cui^dunin  ^^tuiia,   about  seven  milcb  Irocn  ihc  sea. 

\  Cuosj  a  cliv  so  called  iu  the  IhIuiiJ  of  Cooi,  iu  the  iE<;can  sea. 


6o  DiODORus  sicuLus.  Book  XFi 

lie  ^nakcs  mention  of  the  death  of  Epaminondas^  which  happened  : 
shortly  after  this  time.    Aristippus  and  Antisthenes^  and  Echines  off 
Sphetus,  (one  of  the  scholars  of  Socrates),  were  living  at  this  time. 


CHAP.  IX, 


Neiv  quarrels  in  Greece.  TVte  battle  betioeeii  the  EUans  and  Arm 
cadiojis  near  Laasia.  The  quarrel  between  the  Pisates  and  then% 
ofElis  about  the  Olympic  gatnes.  A  fight  at  the  time  and  place 
of  thegatnes.  The  Theham  prepare  a  fleet  in  order  to  gain  the 
dominion  at  sea.  Hhodes^  Chios,  and  Byzantium,  broughtinie^ 
the  Th^bans  by  Epaminondas.  The  Thebans  make  war  upon 
Orchomeniis:  the  reason,  Orchomenus  razed.  The  Thessa* 
Hans  luar  ivith  Alexander  the  Pherean.  Pelopidas  hilled;  hU^ 
praises. 

THIS  year  Chion  was  chief  governor  at  Athens;  and  these  mJlitary  trir 
bunes  executed  the  consular  authority  at  Romc^viz.  Quintus  Scrvias^y 
CaiusVcturius,  Aulas  Cornelius,  Marcus  Cornelius^  and  Marcus  Fa- 
bius.  In  their  time,  while  all  Greece  was  at  peace,  on  a  sudden  neir 
quarrels  and  preparations  for  war  began  to  break  out  between  some  of 
the  cities.  For  the  cxilesofArcadiamadean excursion  outofEIis,  and 
seized  upon  tlie  strong  castle  of  Triphyliaf,  called  Lassia.  The  Ar- 
cadians and  Elians  had  been  quarrelling  a  long  time  about Triphylia: 
and,  upon  several  turns  of  fortune,  first  one  and  then  the  other  got 
the  possession;  which  being  at  that  time  in  the  hands  of  the  Arca- 
dians, the  Elians,  under  the  shelter  and  colour  of  the  Arcadian  fugi* 
tlvcs,  dispossessed  the  Arcadians.  They,  (enraged  at  this  affront  and 
injury),  by  their  ambassadors,  first  demanded  the  re-delivery  of  the 
place,  hut  their  demand  was  slighted;  thereupon  they  procured  the 
Athenians  to  join  with  them  in  the  war,  and  besieged  Lassia.  But 
the  Elians  came  presently  into  the  assistance  of  the  exiles:  upon 
which  a  battle  was  fought  near  Lassia^  in  which  the  Elians  were 
routed,  being  overpowered  by  numbers,  and  lost  above  two  hundred 
men.  The  seeds  of  war  being  now  sown,  the  controversy  be- 
tween the  Elians  and  the  Arcadians  grew  hotter  everyday:  for  the 
Arcadians,  pufied  up  with  the  late  victory,  presently  marched  their 
ar.iiy  into  the  country  of  £1is^  and  took  the  cities  MarganuSj  Cro^ 
pium,  Cyparissia,  and  Coryphasium. 

•  Scrvilius.  t  A  pari  of  the  country  of  Elis. 


Ohap.  IX.  DT0D0RU8  SICULUS.  6l 

In  the  interim  Ptolomseus  Aiorites,  in  Macedonia^ was  treacherously 
murdered  by  his  brotherPerdiccas  after  he  had  reigned  threeyears;  Per- 
diccas  succeeded  him,  and  enjoyed  the  kingdom  five  years. 

At  this  time  Timocraies  was  archon  of  Athens;  and  three  military 
tribunes  invested  with  consular  authority  ruled  at  Rome^  viz.  Titus 
Quintius,  Servilius  Cornelius^  and  Servius  Sutpitius.  The  hundred 
and  fourth  olympidJ  was  now  celebrated  by  the  Pisates  and  the  Arca- 
dians, where  Phocides,  the  Athenian,  was  victor. 

About  this  time  it  happened,  that  the  Pisates,  (upon  the  account 
of  some  old  fables  and  stories  they  had  amongst  them),  to  regain  the 
antient  honour  and  dignity  of  their  country,  challenged  it  as  their 
right  to  convene  and  manage  the  Olympic  games.  Judging  it  there- 
fore now  a  fit  time  to  dispute  this  matter,  they  took  in  the  Arcadians, 
the  enemies  of  the  Elians,  as  their  confederates  in  the  war:  with 
whose  aid  and  assistance  they  marched  against  the  Elians,  who  had 
then  appointed  the  games.  Whereupon  the  Elians,  with  all  their 
forces,  made  out  against  them;  upon  which  there  was  a  very  sharp  en- 
counter. The  Grecians  who  were  then  come  together  to  this  solem- 
nity, stood  as  spectators  with  crowns  upon  their  heads,  (out  of  reach 
of  all  danger),  and  at  every  brave  action  of  either  party  gave  great 
shouts.  The  Pisates  at  length  being  conquerors,  managed  the  sports  i 
but  the  Elians  never  accounted  this  olympiad  in  their  annals,  because 
they  looked  upon  it  to  be  acted  by  force,  and  against  law. 

During  these  transactions  of  affairs,  Epaminondas  the  Theban, 
(who  was  in  great  esteem  among  the  people),  made  a  speech  to  tlie 
citizens,  in  which  he  stirred  them  up  to  gain  the  dominion  of  the 
sea.  In  this  oration  (which  he  had  premeditated  long  before)  he 
diewed  them  that  the  thing  was  easily  done,  as  it  was  advantageous 
and  profitable  to  the  commonwealth;  and  amongst  other  things  he 

likewise  told  them ^That  being  sovereigns  at  land,  they  might  be 

easily  masters  at  sea.  For  although  the  Athenians  in  the  war  against 
Xerxes,  had  a  navy  of  two  hundred  sail  well  equipped  and  furnished, 
yet  they  were  under  the  command  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  had 
but  ten.  When  he  had  spoken  what  he  had  to  say  suitable  lo  the 
occasion,  he  brougiit  the  Thcbans  to  a  compliance. 

It  was  therefore  forthwith  decreed  by  the  people,  that  a  hundred 
gallies,  and  as  many  docks  should  be  built,  and  that  application  should 
be  made  to  the  Ilhodians,  Cliians,  and  Bizantines,  tor  their  assist- 
ance to  forward  the  work.  Epaminondas  himself  being  sent  away 
with  some  forces  to  the  beforemcntioned  cities,  so  terrified  Ijaches  the 
Athenian  general,  (who  was  sent  with  a  strong  and  well  furnished  fleet 
to  obstruct  the  designs  of  the  Thebans) ,  that  he  forced  him  to  sail  back, 
and  reduced  those  cities  to  the  obedience  of  Thebes :  and  no  doubt 


CZ-  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  Xf\ 

but  if  this  man  had  lived  some  time  longer,  he  had  gained  for  the 
Thcbans  the  sovereign  command  both  at  sea  and  land.  But  not  long 
after,  being  killed  at  the  battle  at  Mantenca,  (where  he  obtained  a 
famous  victory  for  his  country  by  his  own  fall),  all  the  prosperity  of 
the  Thebans  j)re5ently  died  (as  it  were)  with  him.  But  we  shall  treat 
of  these  tilings  more  particularly  and  distinctly  sliorlly  hereafter. 

About  the  same  time  likewise,  the  Thelwns  resolved  to  invade 
Orchomenus,  for  the  reasons  following: Some  of  the  Theban  fu- 
gitives had  a  purpose  to  change  the  government  of  Thebes  into 
an  aristocracy,  and  to  that  end,  joined  in  confederacy  with  three 
hundred  horsemen  of  Orchomenus.  These  horses  were  used  to  ren- 
dezvous at  a  certain  day  appointed  and  ordered  by  the  Tliebans,  and 
therefore  they  contrived  that  at  that  very  day,  (whenever  it  should  be), 
they  would  fall  upon  the  city.  And  seeing  there  were  many  others 
that  were  engaged  to  be  assisting  in  ettecting  this  design,  they  took 
a  fit  opportunity  at  length  to  meet  ti)gether.  Then  some  of  the 
chief  conspirators,  who  began  to  repent  of  the  treason,  discovered  all 
to  the  Boeotians,  and  by  betraying  their  fellows,  saved  their  own  lives. 
Upon  this  all  the  horsemen,  by  comm;iud  of  the  magistrates,  were 
seized,  and  being  af'ierwards  brought  r)eforc  the  senate,  they  were  all 
judii-  1  to  bo  put  to  death,  and  that  the  inh:\hitants  of  Orchomenus 
should  'jf  .sold  for  slaves,  and  their  city  razed  to  the  ground.  The 
Thebans  bad  born  au  old  grudge  towards  them  of  Orchomenus  for 
many  generations,  lu'cause  in  the  times  of  the  heroes*,  they  forced 
them  to  pay  tribute,  till  Hercules  set  them  free.  Having  therefore 
now  got  an  opportunity,  and  a  good  colour  (as  they  conceived)  to  re- 
venge themselves,  they  marched  with  their  forces  against  Orchoiiienus. 
And  presently  making  themselves  masters  of  the  city,  they  put  all  the 
men  to  the  sword,  and  sold  the  women  and  children  forslaves. 

At  this  same  tinK\  tlie  'J'hessalians  made  war  upon  Alexander,  the 
prince  ofriieric;  but,  being  often  beaten,  and  having  lost  many 
men,  they  solicited  the  Thebans  to  send  aid  to  them,  under  the  coai"* 
wand  of  IVlopidas:  for  they  knew  he.  was  a  brave-spirited  man  and 
an  excellent  commander,  and  an  inveterate  enemy  of  Alexander^ 
upon  account  of  his  late  imprisonmeut.  The  Boeotians  hereupon 
called  a  general  council,  and  gave  audience  to  the  ambassadors;  and^ 
having  heard  their  message,  they  readily  complied  in  all  things  to 
their  request,  and  forthwith  ordered  IVlopidas  to  their  assistance, 
with  seven  thousand  men,  who  presently  obeyed;  and,  just  as  he  was 
marching  out  with  the  army,  the  son  was  eclipsed,  which  prodigy- 
perplexed  many:  for  there  were  some  of  the  soothsayers  who  de- 
clared, that  by  this  marching  out  of  the  army,  the  sun  of  the  city 

•  Dr  demigod*. 


CAeip.  IX.  DiODORus  sicuLus.  €3 

should  be  eclipsed,  meaning  notliing  else  but  the  doatli  of  Peloi>ida$. 
However,  Pelopidas  (nothing  moved  with  what  was  said,  but  led  on 
by  his  inevitable  destiny)  marched  forward.     When  he  came  into 
Thessaly,  he  found  that  Alexander,  with  above  twenty  thousand 
men,  had  possessed  himself  of  the  higher  grounds:  u|K>n  thits  he  en- 
camped in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  and,  being  afterwards  joined  with 
theTliessalians,  he  fought  the  Pheraeans.    But  Alexander  prevailing, 
by  the  advantage  of  the  ground,  Pelopidas  (desiring  to  put  an  end  to 
the  dispute  by  his  own  personal  valour)  charges  up  to  Alexander 
iumself,  who,  with  those  select  bands  that  were  about  him,  valiantly 
«tood  his  ground;  upon  this  the  battle  grew  very  hot,  in  which  Pelo- 
pidas, acting  the  part  both  of  a  good  soldier  and  skilful  commander^ 
covered  the  place  with  the  bodies  of  his  enemies.    At  length  lie  put 
the  enemy  to  flight,  and  gained  the  victory;  but  he  himself  (through 
many  wounds  he  had  received)  fell  down  dead,  and  so  heroically 
cuded  his  days.     And  now  xMcxander,  being  conquered  in  anotlter 
battle,  and  thereby  having  all  his  forces  broken  in  pieces,  he  was 
forced,  upon  terms  of  peace,  to  restore  to  the  Thessalians  all  the 
towns  lie  had  before  taken,  and  to  deliver  Magnesia  and  Phthiotis, 
cities  of  Achaia,  to  the  Boeotians,  and  be  their  confederates,  and,  for 
the  future,  to  be  content  with  Pherae  only.     However,  though  the 
Thehans  gained  a  glorious  victory,  yet  they  declared  every  where  that 
they  were  conquered,  liecause  of  the  death  of  Pelopidas:    for  they 
looked  upon  the  victory  not  to  compensate  the  loss  of  so  brave  a  man. 
For  he  had  often  done  many  great  and  worthy  services  for  the  ad- 
vantage of  his  country,  and  niucli  enlarged  the  bounds  and  tenitorii's 
of  the  Theban  commonwealth:  as,  in  freeing  the  city  by  the  exik^, 
when  they  recovered  the  citadel  of  Cadniea,  all  generally  ascrilu'd 
ttiat  noble  action  to  Pelopidas;  which  was  the  chief  cause  of  all  the 
advantages,  and  happy  success  that  liappencd  to  the  Tiiebuus  after- 
wards.    Then,  at  the  fight  of  Tegea,  Pelopidas  was  liie  only  man  01* 
the  Boeotarchs  that  overcame  the  Laced«emoniiinsiy  the  most  potent 
people  of  all  the  Grecians;    which  was  the  first  time  the  Thehans 
erected  a  trophy  (for  the  greatness  of  the  victory)  over  the  Laceche- 
moaians.     Afterwards,  at  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  he  was  colonel  of 
the  sacred  band,  and  was  the  first  that  broke  in  upon  the  Lacedie- 
Dionians,  and  so  became  the  immediate  author  and  instrument  of  the 
victory.     Besides,  in  the  expeditions  against  the  Lacedccmoiiians, 
(being  general  of  seventy  thousand  men),  he  erected  a  trophy  for 
his  victory  over  them  in  the  very  face  of  Sparta,  wiio  ntvtr  kiu-w 
before  what  it  was  to  be  hehieged.     Being  bent  ambassador  to  ihe 
king  of  Persia,  to  negotiate  the  alTair  of  the  ecunmou  paeificaiion, 
he  gained  in  that  treaty  Meiseue  for  his  own  country,  whieh  the 


64  DrODORUS  SICULUS.  Booi  XK 

ThebaDS  rebuilt,  after  it  had  lain  desolate  tliree  hundred  years.  And 
now  at  last,  in  the  battle  against  Alexander^  (notwithsanding  he  hM 
exceeded  him  in  the  number  of  his  forces),  he  not  only  obtained  a 
glorious  victory,  but  became  famous  for  his  Extraordinary  valour^ 
though  with  the  loss  of  his  life.  And,  during  these  wars^  lie  was 
in  that  reputation  among  the  people,  that,  from  the  return  of  the 
exiles,  to  the  time  ot  His  death,  he  was  always  one  of  the  Boeotsrchss 
no  one  ever  before  being  thought  worthy  of  so  great  an  honour.  In- 
asmuch, therefore,  as  Pelopidas  was  thus  highly  esteemed,  and  gained 
the  reputation  of  all  for  his  courage  and  conduct,  it  is  fit  he  should  hav^ 
bis  due  commendation  from  us,  likewise,  in  this  our  history. 

About  the  same  time  Clearchus,  of  the  city  of  Heraclea,  aspired  ta 
the  sovereignty  of  Pontus^  and  prevailing  in  his  enterprise,  made  it 
his  whole  business  to  imitate  Dionysius  the  tyrant,  and  governed  the 
Heracleans  in  great  splendour  for  the  space  of  twelve  years. 

During  these  affairs,  Timotheus  the  Athenian  general,  having  witK 
him  both  sea  and  land-forces,  besieged  Toryne  and  Potidiea,  and  took 
them  by  storm^  and  razed  the  siege  of  Cyzicum. 


CHAP.  X. 

The  tear  between  the  Tegeans  and  Mantineans.  The  Bccotians 
side  with  the  Tegeans.  Epaminondas  made  general.  The  batth 
ofMantinea,  where  Epaminondas  was  killed;  hut  the  Laceda^^ 
monians  routed.     The  commendation  of  Epaminondas. 

AT  the  end  of  the  year,  Chariclides  was  created  lord-chancellor  of 
Athens;  and  Lucius  .^miiius  Mamcrcus,  and  Lucius  Sextius  Late- 
ranus,  Roman  consuls.  At  which  time  the  Arcadians  and  thePisates 
(by  compact  joining  together)  celebrated  the  Olympic  games  at 
Olympus,  and  possessed  themselves  both  of  the  temple,  and  all  the 
lichcs  that  were  there.  And,  because  the  Mantineans  carried  away 
and  converted  to  prophane  uses  many  of  the  dedicated  things,  these 
•acrilegious  persons  made  it  their  business  to  promote  and  carry  oa 
the  war  against  the  Elians,  lest,  if  peace  were  made,  they  should  be 
called  to  account  for  their  ill-gotten  goods.  And  therefore,  when 
the  rest  of  the  Arcadians  would  have  compromised  matters,  they 
stirred  up  sedition  against  their  own  countrymen.    Being,  therefore. 


Chap.  X.  DIODORU8  sicuLUS.  65 


divided  into  two  factions^  one  headed  by  the  Tegcans,  the  other  by 
the  Mantineans,  the  feud  grew  to  that  height,  that  at  last  they  deter- 
mined to  decide  th^  controversy  by  force  of  arms ;  and  they  of  Tegca 
sent  an  ambassador  to  the  Boeotians,  to  desire  their  assistance: 
whereupon  the  Boeotians,  without  delay,  made  Epaminondas  gene- 
ral,  and  sent  him,  with  a  strong  army,  to  the  aid  of  the  Tcgeans. 
But  the  Mantincans  (being  terrified  with  the  Boeotian  army,  and  the 
great  name  of  Epaminondas)  sent  their  ambassadors  to  the  principal 
enemies  of  the  Boeotians,  (the  Athenians  and  Lacediunionians),  to 
solicit  them  to  join  witli  the  Mantincans  in  the  war.  Great  forces, 
therefore,  being  raised  on  both  sides,  many  great  battles  were  fought 
in  Peloponnesus;  and  the  Lacedsjemonians,  as  soon  as  they  could, 
broke  into  that  part  of  Arcadia  lying  next  to  them.  About  the  same 
time  Epaminondas  was  marching  forward  with  his  army,  and,  being 
come  near  to  Mantinea,  he  heard  that  the  Lacedaemonians,  witli  all 
their  forces,  were  wasting  and  spoiling  the  territories  of  Togea;  con- 
ceiving, therefore,  that  Sparta  was  left  naked,  he  undertook  a  weighty 
afiair,  but  fortune  favoured  not  his  enterprise.  For  he  marched  with 
his  army  in  tiie  night  against  Sparta;  but  Agis,  king  of  Lacedojujon, 
(suspecting  the  craft  and  subtlety  of  Epaminondas),  prudently  con- 
jectured what  iK)ssibIy  might  be  designed:  tlieiefore,  to  prevent 
Epaminondas,  he  despatched  away  some  Cretan  couriers  to  Sparta, 
to  acquaint  them  that  the  Boeotians  were  just  then  upon  their  march, 
in  order  to  surprise  the  city,  and  that  he  himself  would  make  all  tlie 
haste  he  possibly  could  to  relieve  them  5  and  therefore  charged  them 
to  look  to  the  place,  and  not  in  the  least  to  be  afraid,  for  he  would 
be  with  them  presently.  The  Cretans  observed  their  orders  with  all 
exi^cdltion,  by  which  the  Ijaccdeemonians  (strangely,  and  on  a  sud« 
den)  prevented  the  ruin  of  their  country:  for,  if  the  stratagem  had 
not  been  discovered,  ICpaminondas  had  certainly  surprised  Sparta. 
So  that  the  policy  and  contrivance  of  both  the  generals  justly  chal- 
lenge tlieir  due  praise;  yet  the  prudent  care  of  a  skilful  commander 
must  here  be  especially  attributed  to  the  Lacedremonian.  Epami- 
nondas, having  now  marched  all  the  night  long,  at  break  of  day  came 
up  to  Sparta;  but  Agcsilaus,  who  was  left  to  guard  the  city,  (havinc^ 
had  intelligence  but  a  little  before),  did  what  he  could  to  put  the 
city  in  a  posture  of  defence.  To  tliis  end,  lie  commanded  the  boys 
that  were  of  any  considerable  bigness,  and  the  old  men,  to  the  roofs 
of  the  houses,  that  they  might  be  in  a  capacity  to  drive  back  the 
enemy  from  thence:  then,  placing  all  the  strong  and  lusty  men  in 
the  several  difficult  passes  that  led  into  the  city,  aiid,  blocking  up  all 
ether  places  where  possibly  an  entrance  mii^ht  be  made,  he  vaitcd  fwr 
the  coming  of  the  enemy, 

VoL.i>.   No.  41.  K 


66  DIODORUS  8ICULUS*  Sook  XK 


Epaminondas,  having  divided  his  army  into  three  parts,  made  an 
assault  round  the  town  at  one  and  the  same  time;  butj  when  he  dis* 
cerncd  in  what  order  the  Spartans  were  placed  to  oppose  him,  he 
presently  understood  that  his  design  was  discovered :  however,  thougk 
he  was  much  obstructed  by  the  strait  and  narrow  passages,  and  forced 
to  fight  in  small  parties  with  great  bodies  of  men  at  once,  and  manj 
were  killed  on  both  sides,  yet  he  would  not  draw  off  till  the  Lacede- 
monian army  came  up  near  unto  Sparta.  The  Spartans,  therefore, 
being  now  reinforced  in  such  great  strength,  and  night  coming  oOy 
he  left  off  the  assault. 

Then  he  was  informed  by  some  prisoners,  that  the  Mantinean% 
with  all  the  power  of  tlie  city,  were  hastening  towards  him,  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Lacediemonians :  upon  which  he  marclied  away, 
and  encamped  not  far  from  the  city.  But  presently,  commanding 
his  soldiers  to  cat  their  suppers,  and,  leaving  there  a  body  of  horse, 
whom  he  commanded  to  kindle  fires  all  the  night,  he  marched  away 
with  the  rest  of  the  army,  with  a  design  on  a  sudden  to  cut  off  all 
them  that  were  left  in  Mantinea.  The  next  day  (having  marched  a 
long  way)  he  unexpectedly  assaulted  them  of  Mantinea,  but  failed  ia 
his  design;  and,  though  he  had  (as  a  diligent  commander)  provided 
all  things  that  were  necessary,  yet  fortune  now  opposed  him,  and  so 
he  lost  the  prize.  For  as  soon  as  he  came  near  the  city,  which  was 
then  naked,  and  without  any  defence,  six  thousand  Athenian  auxili- 
aries entered  into  Mantinea  at  the  other  end  of  tiie  town,  under  the 
command  of  (legelocus,  a  person  of  good  esteem  among  the  citizens, 
who,  having  put  a  sufficient  garrison  into  the  city,  with  the  rest  stood 
in  l)attalia  ready  to  engage.  And  presently  appeared  the  armies, 
both  of  the  Lfacedsemonians  and  Mantineans.  And  now  every  ooe 
prepared  to  put  <i1l  to  tlie  hazard  of  a  battle,  and  therefore  sent  for 
their  allies  out  of  all  parts.  The  Elians,  Lacedaemonians,  Atlie-v 
nians,  and  some  others,  sided  witli  the  Mantineans:  their  forces  a- 
mounted  to  above  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse* 
The  most  considerable  persons  of  Arcadia  for  riches  and  valour,  toge- 
ther with  the  Achaians,  Ba^otians,  Argives,  and  some  of  the  Pclo- 
ponnesians,  and  other  confederates,  joined  with  the  Tegeans,  who 
amounted,  in  the  whole,  to  above  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  threq 
thousand  horse. 

And  now  the  armies  on  both  sides  took  the  field,  in  order  to  d€<« 
tide  the  matter,  and  drew  up  in  battalia;  and  the  soothsayers,  frooi 
the  view  of  tlie  sacrifices,  (offered  here  and  there),  declared  victory 
to  their  several  parties.  The  Mantineans,  and  the  rest  of  the  Arca- 
dians, (because  the  war  was  in  their  own  country),  were  in  the  right 
wijigj  supported  by  the  Lacedsemonian%  drawn  up  next  to  then. 


Chap.  X.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  dj 

Next  to  the  Lacedaemonians  were  placed  the  Elians  and  Achaiaiis^ 
and  some  others  of  the  weaker  part  of  the  army  completed  that 
wing.  The  left  wint^  consisted  of  the  Athenians.  On  the  other 
side,  the  Thebans  placed  themselves  in  the  left  wing,  op|X)site  to  the 
Arcadians;  and  the  Argives  held  the  right.  The  rest  of  the  army, 
£ubceans,  Locrians,  Sicyonians,  Messenians,  Maleans,  and  i£neians, 
and  the  other  confederates,  made  up  the  main  body.  The  horse  on 
both  sides  W'*re  placed  on  the  flanks.  The  armies  being  thus  drawn 
up,  while  they  stood  facing  one  another  for  some  time,  the  trumpets 
at  length  sounded  a  charge,  and  the  armies  set  up  so  great  a  shout, 
as  if  both  sides  were  assured  of  the  victory.  The  horse  from  tho 
winL's  first  charged  one  another,  with  the  greatest  fury  imagin<ible: 
the  Athenian  horse  charged  the  Thebans,  but  were  worsted,  not  so 
much  by  the  valour  and  hardiness  of  the  Thebans,  or  their  skill  in 
martial  affairs,  (for  in  these  the  Athenians  were  inferior  to  none),  as 
by  their  number,  and  being  better  armed  and  appointed,  and  far  ex- 
ceeding the  other  in  order  and  manner  of  battle.  For  the  Athenians 
had  very  few  darters  among  them,  wiiereas  the  Thebans  had  three 
times  as  many,  besides  slingers  and  archers  from  the  Thessalians, 
who  were  used  to  be  exercised  in  that  way  of  fighting  from  their 
childhood,  and  by  that  means  were  always  very  serviceable  in  all  en- 
counters. 

Tlie  Athenians  therefore,  what  with  being  galled  by  the  light- 
aimed  men,  and  overpowered  by  the  horse,  were  forced  to  fly.  Yet, 
because  they  fled  out  from  tlic  wings,  they  easily  repaired  the  damage 
they  had  sustained:  for  they  broke  not  into  their  own  foot  in  their 
flight,  but,  falling  in  with  some  Euboeans,  and  some  other  merce- 
naries, who  were  sent  out  before  to  take  possession  of  some  hills  near 
the  place,  (witli  whom  tliey  had  a  sharp  engagement),  they  put  every 
man  of  them  to  the  sword.  Fi)r  the  Theban  horse  did  not  pursue 
them  that  fled,  but  charged  in  upon  the  enemy's  foot,  with  a  design 
to  break  through  them;  upon  which  tho  dispute  was  very  hot  and 
sharp,  but  at  length  the  Athenians  fled  outright  i  but  the  colonel  of 
the  Elian  hoise  (who  was  in  the  rear-guard  of  the  army*)  succoured 
them,  and,  cutting  oiF  many  of  the  Boeotians,  renewed  tlie  fight. 
And  thus  was  tlie  rout  in  the  Athenian  left  wing  in  a  great  measure 
repaired  by  the  Elian  horsemen.  In  the  engagement  by  the  horse 
in  the  other  wing,  the  success  was  a  little  while  doubtful;  but,  within 
a  short  time,  the  Mantineans  were  put  to  the  rout,  by  the  multi- 
tude and  strength  of  the  Bcjeotian  and  Thcssalian  horsemen,  and, 
with  great  loss,  were  forced  to  fly  for  shelter  to  their  own  Uattaliou  of 

•  Tlic  Mautuican  army. 


6s  DIODORUS  sicuLUfl.  Book  XV. 

foot.    And  this  was  the  issue  of  the  engagement  between  the  horse. 
The  foot,  as  soon  as  they  engaged,  fought  with  wonderful  heat  and 
resolution.     Never  was  there  greater  armies  in  the  field  in  any  battle 
between  Grecians  and  Grecians;  nor  more  brave  and  excellent  com- 
manders^ or  that  ever  approved  themselves  with  more  valour  and 
courage:  for  the  Baeotiuus  and  Lacediemouians,  who  were  in  that 
age  counted  the  best  land -soldiers  in  the  world,  fronted  one  another^ 
and  began  the  onset  with  that  fury,  as  if  they  valued  not  their  lives  ia 
the  least.    They  first  began  witli  their  lances,  which  being,  for  the 
most  purt,  broken  in  pieces  by  the  violence  and  heat  of  the  cfaarge^ 
they  took  to  their  swords:    then,  setting  foot  to  foot,  all  sorts  of 
wounds,  curable  and  mortal,  slight  and  deadly,  were  given  and  re- 
ceived, without  remitting  any  thin^  of  their  first  heat  or  resolution; 
and  they  continued  in  this  ^harp  engagement  with  that  valour,  and 
such  a  long  time,  (neither  side  giving  the  least  ground),  that  victory 
seemed  to  liuver  over  bjih,  (uncertain  wijcre  it  would  fall);  for  every 
one  slighted  aiul  coniemned  danger,  and  (desiring  nothing  more  than 
to  make  hinjself  remai  kable  by  some  glorious  piece  of  service  for  hia 
country)  with  u  livave  gallantry  of  mind  coveted  to  exchange  life  for 
honour.    After  the  i)attle  had  continued  long,  and  none  were  able  to 
judge  who  would  be  the  conquerors,  Epaniinonuas  (conceiving  the 
present  state  of  the  parties  engaged  required  his  assistance]  resolved 
to  decide  the  matter,  with  the  hazard  of  his  own  life.     To  that  end 
taking  a  choice  band  of  the  most  able  men  he  iiad  with  him,  and^ 
dvawiiig  i!ii  m  up  in  close  order,  he  forthwith  charged  at  the  head  of 
them,  and  was  the  first  that  cast  his  javelin,  and  killed  the  Lacedie* 
incnian  general,  and  tlien  bn^ke  into  the  midst  of  his  enemies;  then 
others  prcisently  following,  (healing  down  all  before  him),  he  clovo 
asunder  tlie  enemy's  division:    for,  the  fame  of  Epaminondas,  and 
the  streiiirtli  of  tljai  body  he  then  had  with  him,  struck  such  a  terror 
into  tlie  Lacedaemonians,  that  they  turned  their  backs,  and  began  to 
make  awr.y;  upon  which  the  Boeotians  pursued  close,  and  killed  all 
that  were  in  the  rear,  ^o  that  heaps  of  carcases  covered  the  ground. 
At  length,  wIku  t!ie  Lacediemonians  perceived  that  the  fierceness 
and  heat  of  Epaminondas  had  precipitated  him  too  far,  they  all  in  a 
body  made  up  to  him,  throwing  an  infinite  number  of  darts  at  him, 
i>f  w':ich  he  put  by  some,  and  received  others  upon  his  target,  and 
plucke<l  others  out  of  his  body  with  his  own  hands,  and  threw  them 
back  into  the  face  of  the  one  my.     At  last,  while  he  was  most  heroi- 
cally ext'rtin;:  himself  to  ^ain  the  victory  for  his  country,  he  received 
2  m'^iiiil  \\f?'.i:id  in  his  l.rcast  by  a  dart,  thrown*  with  such  force,  as 

'  V'.  v;iC  A  ".'.IT?*-  •.  ii  "^;'  rtji: 


;  the  power  of  the  Ijodies.  The  trumpets,  therefore,  sounding  a 
rity  both  armies  drew  off;  and  i-acli  purty  erected  a  trophy,  both 
endinq:  to  the  victory.  For  the  Athenians  possessed  the  bodies 
M  those  Ivjbcrans  and  mercenaries  that  were  slain  at  the  hill: 
be  other  bide,  the  KcPiitians  that  had  routed  the  l^eedjRmonianSy 
«ere  masters  of  the  dead,  claimed  the  victory.  And,  for  some 
r,  neither  side  ^ent  any  trumpets  to  treat  for  the  burying  of  the 

d,  kst  they  that  were  first  should  he  thought  to  yield  the  day. 
t  at  last  the  Lrieedifmonians  first  sent  a  trumpet  to  procure  liberty 
»urT  their  men :    whereupon  all  were  buried  that  were  slaiQ  oa 

But  Kpaniinonda^i  (yet  living)  was  brought  back  into  the  camp; 
j.  v^-.tfi  the  pliy*»icians  that  were  sent  fur  told  iiim,  that  he  would 
ttainly  .lie  a«*  scon  as  the  dart  was  dniwn  out  of  his  body,  he  was 
(  at  nil  dantit'fl;  but  first  called  his  armour-bearer,  and  askcA 
hftiitM  lii^  >  jitlrl  was  safer  When  he  answered, it  was, and  shewed 
toJiim,  itu'u  he  in(}uiied,  which  side  had  got  the  day?  Tlie  youth 
ttkin:f  aiiNWiT,  liiai  the  1^'pfuians  were  victors,  **  Why  then,"  said 

e,  *'  Niiw  is  the  tirp.e  to  die,"  and  forthwith  ordered  the  dart  to  be 
nmn  "ut:  and,  when  all  hi*^  friends  round  about  him  cried  out,  and 

"iie,irith  irrent  lament;. ti'Mi,  ex|ires«»ed  himself  thus "  And  what! 

)EfNinii:ioiid.is  !  dost  iIkki  die  childless?"  "  No,  by  Jupiter  1"  said 
le,  **  Hut  i  leave  behind  me  two  daughters,  whereof  the  one  U 
i'iclriry  at  l^'uclra,  and  the  other  at  Mantinea.*'  And  so,  upon 
inwire  out  the  Ixad  of  the  dart,  l;e  quietly  breathed  out  his  last. 


monoRus  siculus.  Book  XPl 


and  some  other  Athenians;  and  Gelon,  the  son  of  Dinomenes,  in  Si- 
cilV)  and  some  others^  whose  sereral  excellencies,  if  any  will  com- 
pare with  the  military  art,  and  the  glory  of  the  arms  of  EpaminoD- 
das,  he  shall  soon  find  him  to  exceed  them  in  many  degrees.  For^ 
among  them,  some  one  peculiar  excellence  only  was  remarkable  in 
each  {articular  person;  but,  in  him,  a  constellation  of  virtues  were 
lioused  together :  for,  in  strength  and  comeliness  of  body,  volubility 
of  tongue,  gallantness  of  spirit,  contempt  of  wealth,  and  impartial 
justice,  (and  that  which  was  far  before  all  the  rest),  in  valour  and  skill 
in  martial  affairs,  (absolutely  necessary  for  a  general),  he  far  exceeded 
them  all.  When  alive,  he  gained  the  sovereign  power  for  his  coun- 
try; but,  by  his  death  they  lost  it  again,  and  their  affairs  declined  to 
the  worse  ever  afterwards;  and  at  length,  by  the  sloth  and  ignorance 
of  their  commanders,  they  were  utterly  ruined,  and  reduced  to  perfect 
slavery.  And  this  was  the  end  of  Epaminondas,  a  man  honoured 
and  esteemed  of  all. 

After  this  battle,  the  Grecians,  being  tired  out  with  continual  wars^ 
and  contented  now  to  draw  stakes,  put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  entered 
into  a  general  league,  offensive  and  defensive,  in  which  the  Messeniana 
were  included.  But  the  Ijaccdsemonians  (by  reason  of  the  implaca* 
He  hatred  they  bore  the  Messenians)  would  not  agree  to  the  articles 
of  peace :  and  therefore  they,  of  all  the  Grecians,  were  the  only  men 
that  swore  not  to  the  league.  As  to  the  writers  of  this  year,  Xeno* 
phon  the  Athenian  concludes  his  history  of  the  wars  of  Greece  with 
the  death  of  Epaminondas.  Anaximenes  likewise,  of  Lampsacus, 
wrote  the  first  part  of  his  history  of  the  Grecian  affairs,  from  the  ori- 
gin of  the  gods,  and  the  first  being  of  mankind,  to  the  battle  of  Man- 
tinea,  and  the  death  of  Epaminondas,  containing  almost  all  the  afiain 
both  of  the  Grecians  and  barbarians,  in  twelve  volumes.  Lastly, 
Philistus,  who  wrote  the  history  of  Dionysius  the  youngerj  in  tva 
bookSf  ends  them  here. 


CAap.  XL  DiODORUS  siculus.  71 


CHAR  XL 

jl  defection  from  the  Persiam  hi  Asia.  Tacfiosy  khg  of  Egypf^ 
declares  war  against  tlte  Persians,  The  war  between  Tachos 
4ind  his  son  Necianabis.  The  death  of  Artaxerjces  3Itienuau 
jtgesilaus  rottts  the  Egyptians  t/uit  pursued  him^  and  restortM 
Tachos  to  Ms  kingdom.  Quarrels  again  in  Greece,  after  tie 
battle  ofMoiitinea^  between  the  Megalopolitans  mui  the  neigh-^ 
boitring  towns.  Peparethos  besieged  by  Alexander  4if  Pber4Cm 
He  routs  Leosthenes  at  sea.  Chares^  the  Athenian  admiral  7 
his  villanies. 

THIS  year,  Molon  was  lord-cIianccUor  of  Athens;  and  Lucius  C!«- 
Ducius,  and  Quintus  Servilius,  Ruman  consuls.    In  their  times,  rii£ 
inhabitants  of  the  sea-coasts  of  Asia  made  a  defection  from  the  Pa*' 
aians;  and  some  of  the  governors  of  tlie  provinces,  and  chief  com- 
manders, began  neiv  broils,  and  rose  up  in  arms  against  Artaxcrxes* 
Tachos,  likewise,  king  of  Egypt,  declared  war  against  the  Persians^ 
and  employed  himself  in  building  of  ships,  and  raising  of  land-forces: 
he  brought  over,  also,  the  Lacedemonians  to  join  with  him,  and  hired 
many  soldiers  out  of  the  cities  of  Greece:  for  the  Spaitans  bore  a 
grudge  against  Artaxerxes,  because  he  had  ordered  the  Messeuians  to 
be  comprehended  in  the  public  league  among  the  Grecians,    l^k 
great  conspiracy  caused  tlie  Persian  king,  likewise,  to  exert  himself 
to  raise  forces:  for  lie  was  to  engage  in  a  war  with  the  king  of  Eg^'jyt, 
the  Grecian  cities  in  Asia,  the  Lacediemouians  and  their  couCede* 
rates,  and  the  lord-lieutenants  and  chief  commanders  of  the  sea 
coasts,  all  at  one  and  the  same  time.     Among  these,  Ariobarzanes, 
lord-lieutenant  of  Phrygiu,  was  tlie  chief,  who  had  possessed  himself 
of  the  kingdom  of  Mitliridates,  after  his  death:    with  him  joined 
JVIausolus,  prince  of  Caria,  who  had  many  consiilerable  towns  and 
«astles  under  his  command,  the  metropolis  of  which  was  Haliair* 
uassus,  wherein  was  a  most  stately  citadel,  the  ruyal  seat  or  palace 
of  Caria;    and  with  tlicse  were  confederated  Orontes,  governor  of 
Mysia,  and  Autophradatcs,  of  Lydia;  and,  of  the  Ionian  nation,  the 
Lycians,  Pisidians,  Pamphylians,  and  Cilicians;  and  besides  them, 
the  Syrians  and  Phoenicians,  and  almost  all  tliat  bordered  upon  the 
Asiatic  sea.     By  this  great  defection,  the  king  lost  one  huif  of  hi$ 
revenues,  and  what  remained  was  not  suilicient  to  defray  the  neces- 
sary ctiarges  of  the  war. 


7t  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book X Pi 

Those  who  revolted  from  the  king,  maiie  Orontes  general  of  the 
anny,  who,  after  he  had  received  the  command,  and  money  enough 
to  pay  twenty  thousand  hired  soldiers  for  one  whole  year,  betrayed 
the  confederates  that  had  so  intrusted  him.  For,  being  corrupted 
xvith  large  bribes,  and  promised  to  be  the  only  governor  of  all  the 
provinces  borderirig  upon  the  sea,  if  he  would  deliver  up  the  rebels 
into  the  power  of  the  king,  he  was  wrought  upon;  and,  in  the  execu- 
tion of  his  treachery,  he  first  seized  upon  them  that  brought  him  the 
money,  and  sent  them  prisoners  to  the  king;  and  then  betrayed  se- 
veral cities,  and  companies  of  hired  soldiers,  to  such  lieutenants  as 
the  king  had  sent  into  those  parts.  The  like  treachery  happened  ia 
Cappadocia,  which  was  accompanied  with  something  more  than  or- 
dinarily remarkable.  Artabazus,  the  king  of  Persia's  general^  had 
invaded  Cappadocia  with  a  great  army,  whom  Datames,  the  governor 
of  that  province,  opposed  with  a  strong  body  of  horse,  and  twenty 
thousand  foot,  of  mercenaries.  The  father-in-law  of  Datames^  and 
general  of  his  horse  (to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  king,  and  provide 
for  his  own  safety)  stole  away  in  the  night  with  the  horse  to  Arta- 
bazus,  having  so  agreed  with  him  the  day  before.  Datames  (encou- 
raging his  mercenaries  to  be  faithful  to  him,  by  promising  to  reward 
them  liberally)  with  all  speed  marched  after  these  treacherous  ras-- 
cals,  and  overtook  them  just  as  they  were  joining  the  enemy:  upon 
which  the  soldiers  of  Arta1)azus  likewise  fell  upon  these  runagate 
horsCy  and  killed  all  before  them.  For  Artabazus  (at  the  first  igno- 
rant, not  knowing  the  meaning  of  the  thing)  thought  that  he  who  had 
betrayed  Datames,  was  now  acting  a  new  piece  of  treason ;  therefore 
he  commanded  his  soldiers  to  fall  upon  the  horse  that  were  advan- 
cing towards  them,  and  not  spare  a  man.  So  that  Mithrobarzanes 
(for  that  was  the  traitor's  name)  being  got  between  them  that  took 
him  for  a  traitor,  and  those  that  pursued  him^  as  one  that  they  knew 
was  really  such,  was  in  an  inextricable  labyrinth :  being,  therefore^ 
in  this  strait^  (and  having  no  time  now  further  to  consider),  he  made 
it  his  business  to  defend  himself  with  all  the  resolution  imaginable^ 
and  so  plied  both  parties^  that  he  made  a  great  slaughter  amongst 
them.  At  length,  upwards  of  ten  thousand  men  being  killed^  Data- 
mes put  the  rest  to  flight,  and  cut  off  in  the  pursuit  great  numbers  of 
tium, and  at  length  caused  the  trumpet  to  sound  a  retreat,  and  called 
off  his  men.  Some  of  the  horsemen  that  survived  returned  to  Data- 
mes, and  begged  for  pardon;  the  rest  wandered  about,  and  knew  not 
whither  to  turn  themselves.  But  Datames  caused  his  army  to  sur- 
round five  hundred  of  those  traitors,  and  to  dart  them  to  death. 
And,  though  he  had  formerly  gained  the  reputation  of  an  excellent 
soldier,  yet  now^  by  this*  instance  of  bis  valour  and  prudent  couduct^ 


ChajK  XL  niODORus  sicui.us-  73 

his  name  grew  much  more  famous  than  before,  Artaxerxes,  the 
king,  being  informed  of  this  stratagem^  made  all  the  liastc  iie  could 
to  be  rid  of  Datames^  and,  within  a  sliort  time  after,  cut  him  oil*  by  an 
ambuscade. 

Whilst  these  things  were  In  acting,  Rheomithres  was  sent  by  the 
rebels  into  Egypt,  to  Tachos,  the  king,  and,  having  received  five 
hundred  talents,  and  fifty  sail  of  men  of  war,  he  returned  to  Leuce, 
ill  Asia,  and,  sending  for  many  of  the  revolted  lords  and  officers  to 
come  to  him  thither,  he  seized  them,  and  sent  them  all  away  prison- 
ers to  the  king;  and,  by  this  piece  of  treachery,  regained  the  king*s 
favour,  who  was  formerly  much  displeased  with  him. 

Now  Tachos,  king  of  Egypt,  had  prepared  all  things  necessary  for 
the  war:  for  he  had  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  sail,  ten  thousand  Grecian 
mercenaries,  and  four  score  thousand  Egyptian  foot.  He  gave  the 
command  of  the  ten  thousand  mercenaries  to  Agesilaus,  who  was 
sent  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  with  a  thousand  men,  to  the  aid  of  the 
Egyptians;  because  he  was  counted  the  best  soldier  of  any  among 
them,  and  had  the  repute  of  a  most  expert  commander.  Chabrias 
was  made  admiral  of  the  fleet,  who  was  not  sent  there  by  public  au- 
thority, but  (upon  the  persuasion  of  Tachos)  served  him  as  a  private 
man.  The  king  reserved  to  himself  the  chief  command  of  the  whole 
of  the  army.  But  Agesilaus  would  have  persuaded  him  to  continue  in 
Egypt,  and  to  manage  the  war  by  his  lieutenants;  but  he  would  not 
hearken  to  it,  though  he  advised  him  for  the  best.  For,  when  the 
army  was  far  distant  from  Egypt,  and  now  encamped  In  Phcjenicia, 
the  governor  of  Egypt,  whom  he  had  deputed  in  his  absence,  re- 
volted, and  sent  to  Nectanabis,  the  king's  son^,  to  take  upon  him 
the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  which  kindled  the  sparks  which  afterwards 
hroke  forth  into  a  most  cruol  and  bloody  war.  For  Nectanabis,  who 
had  been  made  general  of  the  Egyptian  forces,  and  some  time  bef(jre 
sent  out  of  PluKnicia  to  take  in  some  cities  of  Syria,  being  privy, 
and  consenting  to  the  treason  against  his  father,  drew  the  com« 
manders  of  the  army  by  large  gifts,  and  the  soldiers  by  as  large  pro- 
mises, to  join  with  him  in  the  war.  Egypt,  therefore,  being  now 
possessed  by  the  rebels,  Tachos  was  so  terrified  at  the  thing,  that  he 
fled  through  Arabia,  to  tlie  king  of  l\'ri>!a,  and  begged  his  pardon  for 
what  he  had  done;  whom  Artaxerxes  not  only  forgave,  but  made  him 
general  of  the  army  he  had  raibed  against  the  Egyptians. 

Not  long  after,  the  king  of  Persia  died,  having  reigned  throc-and- 
forty  years.  Ochus  succeeded  him,  and  governed  tinee-and-twenty 
years,  taking  upon  him  the  surname  of  Artaxerxes:  for,  Artaxeixes 
ruling  the  kingdom  with  great  justice  and  integrity,  and  being  an 

*  Or  rutiicrj  his  brother  or  ^istcrS  ^ob. 

Vol.  2,  No.  41.  1. 


74  niODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  Xt^. 

earnest  promoter  and  lover  of  peace,  and  prosperous  in  all  his  afTairSy 
the  Persians  decreed,  that  all  the  succeeding  kings  should  be  called 
by  his  name.  And  now  Tachos,  the  king  of  Egypt,  returned  to 
Agcsilaus,  and  presently  Nectanabis  led  above  an  hundred  thousand 
men  against  his  father,  and  dared  him  to  try  his  title  to  the  kingdom 
by  the  sword.  When  Agesilaus  discerned  that  the  king  was  fearful^ 
not  daring  to  engage,  he  heartened  him  up  all  he  could,  and  bid  him 
be  of  good  courage,  for  it  was  not  number,  but  valour,  that  carried 
away  the  victory.  But,  not  being  able  to  prevail,  he  was  obliged  to  . 
go  back  with  him  into  a  certain  large  city,  there  to  shelter  himself; 
where  they  were  presently  besieged  by  the  Egyptians,  who,  after  the 
loss  of  a  great  number  of  their  men  in  assaulting  the  town,  drew  a 
trench  and  a  wall  round  the  city,  which  was  finished  in  a  short  time^ 
by  having  many  hands  at  work.  At  length,  when  provision  failed^ 
Tachos  gave  up  all  for  lost:  but  Agesilaus  (encouraging  the  soldiers^ 
and  telling  them  ail  would  be  well)  in  the  night  broke  through  the 
enemy's  guards,  and,  to  admirationt  got  off  safe  with  all  his  men;  but 
the  Egyptians  (pursuing  close  at  their  heels,  and,  being  in  an  open 
champaign  country)  proposed  by  their  great  numbers  to  surrouad 
them,  and  so  cut  them  off,  every  man- 
But  Agesilaus  in  the  mean  time,  having  possessed  himself  of  « 
place  secured  on  both  sides  by  water  from  the  river,  (conveyed  through 
sluices  and  trenches  made  by  art),  waited  there  for  the  enemy.  And, 
having  drawn  up  his  men  in  such  order  as  best  suited  the  ground, 
(and  being  defended  by  the  arms  of  the  river,  so  that  he  could  not 
be  hemmed  in),  he  there  fought  with  the  Egyptians,  whose  numbers 
were  of  so  little  advantage  to  them  in  that  place,  and  the  valour  of  the 
Grecians  so  far  before  them,  that  Agesilaus  made  a  great  slaughter 
amongst  them,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  After  which  Tachos  was 
presently  restored  to  his  kingdom ;  and  he  rewarded  Agesilaus  (the 
only  instrument  of  liis  restoration)  by  many  honourable  gifts,  and  so 
dismissed  him,  wlio,  in  his  return  homewards,  fell  sick  at  Cyrcne,and 
there  died.  11  is  body  was  embalmed  with  honey,  and  brought  bacl^ 
to  Sj)arta,  where  he  was  royally  interred. 

Hitherto  thus  proceeded  matters  in  Asia.  But  in  Peloponnesus, 
though  after  tlic  battle  at  Muntinea  a  general  peace  was  made  among 
the  Arcadians,  yet  they  scarcely  observed  the  league  for  one  year,  but 
fell  into  new  broils  and  wars  with  one  another.  It  was  one  of  the  ar- 
ticles of  the  league,  that  every  one  should  return  from  the  battle  into 
their  several  countries.  Therefore  those  neighbouring  cities  that  had 
been  translated,  and  forced  to  seat  themselves  at  Megalopolis,  which 
then  they  bore  very  grievously,  now  of  their  own  accord  returned  to 
their  old  habilationsi :  but  the  other  Megalopolitaos  eodeavouredonce 


Chap.  XL  moDORUs  sicuLus.  75 

more  to  force  them  to  leave  their  ancient  scats.  Hence  arose  a  great 
contest :  they  of  the  old  towns  craved  the  assistance  of  the  Maiiti- 
neans  and  the  rest  of  the  Arcadians,  and  likewise  of  the  Elians  and 
other  confederates  of  the  Manlincans.  On  the  other  hand,  they  of 
Megalopolis  addressed  themselves  to  the  Athenians,  for  their  aid  and 
assistance;  who,  without  delay,  ordered  three  thousand  heavy-armed 

men,  and  three  hundred  horse,  under  the  command  of  Pammenes. 

Whereupon  he  marched  to  Megalopolis,  and  afterwards,  by  storming 
some  of  the  towns,  and  tenifying  otiiers,  he  forced  them  all  at  length 
to  return  to  Megalopolis.  And  thus  were  these  towns  reduced  into 
one  city,  and  the  tumults  which  came  to  this  height  appeased  and 
composed. 

Among  the  historians  of  this  time,  Athanis  of  Syracuse,  began  his 
history  of  Dion  with  this  year,  comprised  in  twenty-tlirce  books.  He 
continued  likewise  the  history  of  Philistus,  scveri  years  further  in  one 
book;  and^  treating  of  matters  summarily^  made  it  one  entire  and 
perfect  history. 

Afterwards,  whenNicophemus  was  chief  magistrate  of  Athens,  and 
Caius  Sulpitius  and  Caius  Licinius  executed  the  consular  authority 
at  Roma,  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Plicra*.,  fitted  out  several  privateers  to 
the  Cyclade  islands,  and  having  taken  some  oi"  them  by  force,  carried 
away  a  great  number  of  captives.    He  then  landed  his  soldiers  in  Pe- 
parethos*,  and  besieged  the  city.     But  the  Peparethians  being  re- 
lieved by  the  Athenian  garrison,  under  the  command  of  Leosthenes^ 
who  had  been  formerly  left  there,  Alexander  set  upon  the  Athenians 
themselves.     It  so  happened,  that  as  they  were  watching,  and  had 
set  a  guard  upon  Alexander's  fleet,  which  then  lay  at  Panormus,  he 
suddenly  fell  upon  them,  and  obtained  an  unexpected  victory:  for  he 
not  only  rescued  his  nicn  from  the  imminent  dangers  wherewith  they 
were  surrouiided  at  Panormus,  but  also  took  five  Athenian  gallies, 
one  of  Peparethos,  and  six  hundred  prisoners.     The  Athenians,  be- 
ing enraged  at  this  misfortune,  condemned  Ix:osthenes  to  death,  and 
confiscated  all  his  goods,  and  made  Chares  commander  in  his  stead, 
and  sent  him  with  a  considerable  fleet  into  those  parts;  who  spent 
his  time  only  in  searing  the  enemy,  and  oppressing  the  confederates. 
For  sailing  to  Coreyra,  a  confederate  city,  he  stirred  up  such  seditions 
and  tumults  thorc,  as  ended  in  many  slaughters,  rapines,  and  pluuv 
derings  of  men's  goods  and  estates;  which  caused  the  Athenians  to 
be  ill-spoken  of  by  all  the  confederates.     He  committed  many  other 
villanies;  and,  to  sum  np  all  in  a  i'cw  words,  he  did  nothiiu*-  but  what 
teptlt-'tl  to  the  disgrace  and  dibhonour  of  his  country. 

*  One  of  iLc  C-ycIadc  iiiaudsj  now  LruicDC, 


75  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XV. 

Dionysiodorus  and  Anaxis,  Boeotian  writers,  who  composed  a  his- 
tory of  Grecian  affairs,  end  their  relations  with  this  year.  And  now, 
having  given  an  account  of  those  affairs,  and  things  done  before  the 
reign  of  Pliilip,  according  to  our  first  design,  we  shall  put  an  end  to 
this  book.  In  the  next  following  shall  be  comprehended  whatever 
was  done  by  that  king,  from  the  beginning  of  his  reign  to  the  time 
of  his  death;  with  other  things  that  happened  in  the  known  parts  of 
the  world. 


7r 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  XVI. 


PREFACE. 

XT  is  the  duty  of  all  writers  of  history,  wlietlier  they  treat  of  the  ac- 
tions of  kings,  or  of  particular  cities,  to  relate  the  whole  from  the  be- 
ginning to  the  conclusion :  for  we  conceive  that  thereby  the  history 
is  both  better  remembered,  and  more  clearly  understood.  For  im- 
perfect relations,  witliout  knowledge  of  the  issue  of  what  is  begun, 
gives  an  unpleasant  check  to  the  diligent  reader's  eager  expectation. 
But  where  the  matter  is  drawn  down  by  a  continued  thread  to  the  end 
of  the  narration,  such  writings  make  the  history  complete  in  all  its 
parts  5  l)ut  more  especially,  if  the  nature  of  things  done  lead  the  writer 
as  it  weru  by  the  hand,  this  course  is  by  no  means  to  be  neglected* 

Since,  therefore,  w^e  are  come  to  the  affairs  of  Philip  son  of  Amyn- 
tas,  we  shall,  according  to  the  former  rule,  endeavour  to  comprehend 
in  this  book  all  the  actions  of  this  king.  For  he  reigned  as  king  of 
Macedon  two-and-tliirty  years,  and  who,  making  use  at  first  but  of 
small  means,  at  length  advanced  his  kingdom  to  the  greatest  in  Eu- 
rope; and  made  Macedon,  which  at  the  time  of  his  coming  to  the 
crown  was  under  the  servile  yoke  of  the  Illyrians,  mistress  of  many 
potent  cities  and  countries.  And  through  his  valour  the  Grecian  ci-  ^ 
ties  voluntarily  submitted  themselves  to  him,  and  made  him  general 
of  all  Greece.  And  having  subdued  those  that  robbed  and  spoiled  ♦  ^' 
the  temple  at  Dclphos*,  coming  in  aid  of  the  god  there,  he  was  made 
a  member  of  the  senate  of  the  Amphictyons;  and  as  a  reward  of  hi» 

*  The  riiocians. 


f9  moDORus  srcuLUs.  Book  XFI^ 


zeal  to  the  gods^  the  right  of  vothig  in  the  senate  which  belonged  to 
the  Phocians,  whom  he  had  overcome,  was  allotted  to  him*. 

After  he  orercame  the  Illyrians,  Pccones,  Thracians,  Scythians,  and 
the  countries  afljoining  to  them,  his  thoughts  were  wi&ollj  employed 
)iow  to  destroy  tlic  Persian  monarchy.  But,  after  he  had  freed  all 
the  Grecian  cities,  and  was  promised  forces  to  be  raised  for  the  expe-*. 
dition  into  Asia^  in  the  midst  of  all  his  preparations  he  was  prevented 
by  death :  but  he  left  those,  and  so  many  more  forces  behind  hint, 
that  his  son  Alexander  had  no  occasion  to  make  use  of  the  assistance 
of  his  confederates  in  overturning  the  Persian  empire.  And  all  those 
things  he  did  not  so  much  by  the  fa\x>ur  of  fortune,  as  by  the  great- 
ness of  his  own  valour:  for  this  king  excelled  most  in  the  art  of  a 
general,  stoutness  of  spirit,  and  clearness  of  judgment  and  apprehen- 
sion. But  {\\?X  we  may  not  in  a  preface  sut  forth  his  actions  before* 
.land,  we  siiall  proceed  to  the  orderly  course  of  the  history,  making 
^ome  short  remarks  on  ihc  times  that  went  before. 


CHAP,  I. 


Philip  J  a  hostage  at  Thehesj  mahes  his  escape;  heats  the  Atliemans  j 
Olid  afterwards  ?nakes  peace  with  them,  Suhdaes  the  PiconeSy  inid 
routs  the  lUyriaiis  and  makts peace  with  them* 

\VHEN  Callimcdes  was  archon  at  Athens,  in  the  hundred  and  fifth 
olympiad,  in  which  Porus  the  Cyrcniau  was  victor,  and  Cneius  Gc- 
nucius  and  Lucius  /Emilius  were  Roman  consuls^  Philip  the  son  of 
Amyntas,  and  father  of  Alexander,  who  conipiercd  the  Persians,  came 
to  the  crown  in  the  manner  following: 

Amyntas  being  brought  under  l)y  ihe  Illyrians,  was  forced  to  pay 
tribute  to  the  conquerors;  who  having  taken  his  youngest  son  Philip 
as  an  hostage,  drlivcred  him  to  be  kept  by  the  Thebans;  who  com- 
mitted the  youth  to  the  care  of  the  father  of  Lpaminondas  I,  with  ur- 

•  The  court  of  ihc  Aiiipltictvons  w;is  llir  LTrnt  ( nurt  of  CriTCf,  wliU'h  ••at  at  D*  iphov 

In  Fhocis  likf  t.>  llic  Stuu- Gtm  rul  at  Uic  Uji;  !■  .     Fc/J'f'*»  ?r'».  l'\  ,  jn  C.     l!i'>  Vliu. 

tiin.S  \v..t\  t'.4ii  \r.lt>  l;i  tliut  UhSfir.blv. 

t  Yu\\  'i»ri!ii  wxi  il."  f  itl;-:.-  "f  f.pdijilucn^iiii. 


Ohp.  /.  DIODORUS  STCl  lATS.  ^p 


ia%  to  look  to  bis  cliargc  with  all  diligenc  2,  and  lioiiourahly  to  educate 
id  instruct  him. 

A  Pvthagorcan  piiilosopber  was  at  tha*.  time  tutor  to  Epaminondas^ 

vitli  wliom  Pliilip  being  brou^irht  up^  he  improved  more  than  ordl- 

MTT  in  the  Pythagorean  pliilosophy.     And  both  these  scholars  ctn- 

plojiDg  the  utmost  of  their  {Ktrts  and  diligence  in  prosecuting  tliclr 

tfsdies,  both  by  that  means  became  famous  for  tlieir  virtuous  quali- 

fcstiODs.     £paminotidaS|  it  is  known  lo  all,  having  run  through  ma- 

mj  hizairds  and  difficulties,  beyond  all  expectation,  gained  the  sove- 

frintr  of  all  Greece  for  his  country.     And  Piiilip  having  the  same 

aArmtages,  shewed  himself  nolhing  infoiior  to  Epaminondas  inglo- 

mos  aehievements:  for  after  the  death  of  Amyntas,  his  eldest  soa 

Alennder  succeeded  him  in  the  kingdom;  but  rto1en;y  Aloritea 

■ordered  him  atid  DsurjK*d  the  govenuneut:  and  he  iiimseJf  was 

fcrred  the  same  sauce  by  Perdiecas;  who  being  afterwards  overcome 

ia  a  {Tcat  battle  by  the  iUyrians,  arid  killed  in  the  very  time  when 

fkar  wm  most  need  of  a  king,  Philim  the  brotlier,  made  his  escape 

aad  took  possession  of  the  kingdom,  now  in  a  very  shattered  co»- 

£non:  for  there  were  aUive  four  thousand  Macedonians  killed  in  ttie 

fight,  and  those  that  survived  were  in  such  consternation  and  fear  of 

ihe  lilvrians,  that  they  had  no  heiu*t  left  for  the  further  prosecution 

«f  thf  frar. 

About  tlic  same  time  the  Piconcs,  nel^libours  to  the  Macedonians, 

ioLontempt  of  them  wasted  their  countrv;  aiid  the  Illyrians  raised 

min  !:r'*ni  forces,  a?i(l  deslirned  another  expodliion  ai^ainst  the  Ma- 

wiiv:iiu:.s.     And,  t»»  .i.rjiavate  tliL' matter,  one  Pau^anias  *,  of  ihc 

fwalfifRily,  by  the  a  NJ^tanee  i.»f  llu'  kin ^  of  Thrace,  cnJeaViMired  to 

i-'ivilc  the  kingdom  </!"  Macedon.     The  Alljenians  likewise,  tnemies 

^  l*:.'.ilj>,  endtavourcil  to  restore  Arganis  *'  lo  tlje  Kini:Ji)m  ot  his  an- 

«^?«rs,  and  to  tliii  pnipnsc  Iwl  H<«iit  away  their  giMieral  Manriu^, 

•iflitlirre  thou>ai*.f!  will-aunet]  men.  and  a  incisi  exi-i-Hent  and  ucli- 

po.jfled  navy.     Hereupon  tlie  .Macedonians,  liy  ren^iMi  iif  tlie  late 

^•••at,  and  the  storm  that  then  threatened  iheni,  w-  le  in  lirtat  fear 

•id  peqdexity :  howe\er,  n<»t\vitlistah«lin:r  all  t!i<»  diiru-uhit-s  anti  fear 

of  thii^e  tiiin-j'^i  tiiac  weie  at  hand,  Piiiiijs  iioiliini:  diNvuui.iired  with 

f'f^r*  i!rr,jr!ful  cli»u«i'»  of  mi-^chiff  tl.<*  seemed  t.i  Uiuj;  nver  his  In  .hi, 

:r.  his  speeches  in  the  daily  asseni!>Iii  -»  retained  the  Maeeih>nians  in 

ilrlt  duty;    and,  by  lils  I'li-quenet.*   -uherei!!   he  cxtriled)   •^liiriiig 

:  i*m  up  to  he  c(»iiraL'''«'Vis,  reviv.'il   tiifir  di.H»j:inii  spiiiis-.     'i'l.Lii, 

^-Min-jf  iijitn)  irf«inninjr  the  millMiy  di-cii'liiif,  lie  i-'inj.i«  ti  1\  .11  in.  d 

l.»  men,  and  tiained  ti.em  cst-ry  d.iv,  le.u  l.in/  :i..ni  Ii.»\  l.»lijullc 

•  ':vu  •.:' L.  ft*:    w'     i  ::•  •   -v  -■.   r-  1  •:.'•     ...j'j..n  •.:  .'-l  •.,Jw.u4. 


fiO  DiojJORus  sicur.us.  Hook  XFfZ 


their  arms,  unci  otiier  posiu'es  uf  war,     >lc  llkcwisi'  instituied  thcB 
new  way  of  (!ra\vin«(  up  in  a  close  body,  imitating  tlic  licioesi  ai  Troy^ 
in  locking  their  sliields  to^'^Miher;  so  that  he  w:ts  the  fir^t  timt  foimd. 
out  the  Alacedonian  plialanx* 

He  was  very  courteous  and  winning  in  liis  converse,  and  gainedL 
the  people's  hearts  botti  by  liis  bounty  at  present,  and  his  generouft 
promises  of  future  rewards ;  very  wisely,  likewise,  (as  it  were  by  si^ 
many  engines),  defending  himself  against  the  many  and  various  dan* 
gers  that  were  pressing  upon  him.  For  when  he  discerned  that  the 
Athenians  made  it  their  chief  business  to  recover  Amphipolis,  and  that 
Argieus  was  endeavoured  to  be  restored  to  his  kingdom  for  that  end» 
he  left  the  city^  of  his  own  iiccord,  suffering  them  to  govern  them- 
selves according  to  their  own  laws. 

He  likewise  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  Pseones,  and  corrupted  some 
of  them  with  bribes,  and  ensnared  others  with  fair  and  winning  pro* 
mises,  and  for  the  present  made  peace  with  them.  He  likewise  pre- 
vented Pausanias  from  being  restored^  by  bribing  the  king  that  was 
ready  to  assist  him  for  that  purpose. 

In  tlic  mean  time  Manlius,  the  Athenian  admiral,  being  arrived 
at  Meihonet,  there  lay ;  but  he  sent  iEgaeus  forward  with  a  body  of 
mercenaries,  to  ilig«J.  Coming  to  the  city,  he  endeavoured  to  per- 
suade the  yEgKans  to  allow  of  his  return,  and  lo  appear  the  first  for 
his  restoration  to  tiie  kingdom;  but  none  consenting,  he  went  back 
to  Methone. 

Presently  after,  Philip,  advancing  with  a  well-appointed  army,  set 
npon  tlicm,  and  cut  ott'niany  of  the  mercenaries;  the  rest,  who  had 
fled  to  a  hill  near  at  hand,  (having  first  delivered  up  to  him  the  fugi* 
tivcs),  he  dismissed  by  agreement. 

Philip  being  coiKjueror  in  this  lirst  battle,  greatly  encoursiged  the 
Macedonians,  and  maiio  them  hearty  and  eager  to  undergo  furtiier 
toils  and  difliculties. 

Whilst  these  things  were  acting,  the  Thracians  planted  a  colony 
at  Crcmides,  as  it  was  heretofore  called,  wiiich  the  king  afterwards 
named  Philippi,  after  liis  own  name,  and  filled  it  with  inhabitants. 
I'Voni  this  time  Tlu'opumpus  of  Chios  begins  his  history  of  Philip, 
and  continues  it  in  fitty-eight  books,  of  which  live  are  controverted. 

Afterwards  nucharistus  was  archon  of  .Athens,  and  Uuintus  Ser- 
villus  and  i^ucius  Clmncius  were  consuls  at  Rome,  when  Philip 
sciii  auil>assadors  to  Athens  with  proposals  ot  peace,  and  prevailed 
v.iili  tlic  people,  upon  the  account  that  he  was  willing  to  quit  all 
\\\>  rijlit  in  Amphipolis. 

*  AiuphipulU.        X  Mctliunt'j  in  Macedonia.         %  /U-'^si,  in  Macedonia. 


Chap.  L  niODORUs  sicuLUS.  81 

Being  therefore  thus  freed  from  the  war  with  the  Athenians,  and 
hearing  that  Agis,  king  of  the  Pjeoncs,  was  dead,  he  judged  that  a 
fair  opportunity  was  ofTered  him  to  invade  the  Pa^ones ;  and  to  that 
end  he  entered  their  country  with  a  considerahle  army,  overcame 
them  in  battle,  and  forced  them  to  stoop  to  the  Macedonian  yoke. 

But  still  the  Illyrians*"  remained  an  eye-sore  to  him,  wb.om  his 
heart  and  all  his  thouglits  were  continually  at  work  to  bring  under. 
To  that  end  he  called  a  general  council,  and  by  a  speech  fitted  for 
the  occasion,  having  spirited  the  soldiers  to  the  w^ar,  he  led  an  army 
into  tlie  country  of  the  Ulyrians,  of  no  less  than  ten  tluiusand  foot, 
and  six  hundred  horse. 

Bardyllis,  king  of  tjie  Ulyrians,  hearing  of  his  coming,  first  sent 
ambitssadors  to  Thilip,  to  renew  the  league  between  them  upon  these 
terms — ^^Hiat  both  of  them  sliouid  keep  those  towns  that  they  then 
had.  To  w  b  i c  i  I  i*b  i  1 1 p  a ns wc rtd  — ^Tl lat  he  was  very  desi rous  of  peace, 
but  resolved  not  to  admit  cf  it  be  lore  the  Ulyrians  had  quitted  all  the 
towns  belonging  to  the  kingdom  of  Maeedon. 

The  ambu-siidors  ibcrefore  being  returned  without  effecting  any 
thing,  Bardyllis  (confiding  in  the  valour  of  his  soldiers,  and  encou- 
raged by  his  fonnt-r  victories)  marched  forth  against  his  enemies  with 
a  stron/;  arnjy,  having  with  him  ten  thousand  choice  foot,  and  five 
hundred  horse. 

When  the  armies  drew  near  one  to  another,  they  suddenly  set  up 
a  great  vhout,  and  so  conunenecd  the  attack.  Philip  being  in  the 
rigiit  wing  with  a  strong  body  of  Macedonians,  commanded  his 
horse  to  wheel  about,  for  the  ])urpose  of  charging  the  enemy  in  the 
flank;  and  he  himself  charged  the  front;  upon  which  there  was  a  hot 
engagement. 

On  the  other  side,  the  Ulyrians  drew  up  in  a  square  body,  and  va- 
liantly joined  battle. 

The  valour  of  both  armies  was  such,  that  the  issue  of  the  battle 
was  a  longtime  doubtful;  many  fell,  but  many  more  were  wounded; 
and  the  advantage  was  now  here,  and  then  there,  according  as  the 
valour  and  resolution  of  the  combatants  gave  vigour  and  life  to 
the  business. 

At  length,  when  the  horse  charged  both  upon  the  flank  and  rear, 
and  Philip,  with  his  stoutest  soldiers,  fought  like  a  hero  in  the  front, 
the  whole  body  of  the  Ulyrians  vvas  routed,  and  forced  to  fly  outright; 
%vhom  the  Macedonians  pursued  a  long  way.  After  many  were  killed 
in  the  pursuit,  Philip  at  length  gave  the  signal  to  his  men  to  retire^ 
and  erected  a  trophy,  and  buried  the  dead. 

*  Illyniim,  now  Dalmatian  aad  the  inbabitants  Dalmatianij  or  Sclavonians. 

Vol.  2.  No.  11.  u 


^C  DioDORus  sicuLus.  Book  XVL 

'•"\  .  1    'i:.'  lllyrians  sent  another  embassy,  and  procured  a  peace, 

K.v  ..     '.  ■<•*  .I'litted  all  the  cities  belonging  toMacedon.     There  were 

:'A  Illyiians  in  this  battle  above  seven  thousand  men.     Hav- 

i:-';  i|  r.s  :;ivcn  an  account  of  things  done  in  Macedonia  and Illyrium, 

1'.  J  ii.aii  now  relate  the  affairs  of  other  nations. 


CHAP.  11. 

The  actions  of  Dio7v/siifs  the  younger^  in  Sicily  and  other  part». 
Dio7i\s JlfjL,hf  to  Corinthy  and  his  return  to  Sicily.  Andromachus 
peoples  Tanroininiunu  The  ciril  wars  in  Kubwa.  The  social 
7var  between  the  yJthcnians  and  other  nations.  Philip  takes 
wlmphiptdis  and  of  her  cities.  IIisj)olicy  to  gain  the  Olynthians^ 
and  other  places  in  Greece. 

IX  vSicily,  Dionysius  the  younger,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  who  came  some 
time  before  to  tlie  kingdom,  (being  of  an  inactive  spirit,  and  much 
inferior  to  liis  faihcr),  under  the  veil  of  a  peaceful  and  gentle  dispo- 
bition,  endeavoured  to  cover  his  sloth  and  cowardice;  and  therefore, 
though  the  war  with  the  Cartliaginians  descended  upon  him  with  the 
kingdom,  yet  ho  made  peace  with  them. 

In  a  cnreicss  manner,  likewise,  he  made  war  for  some  time  upon 
the  Lucanians;  and  though  he  had  the  advantage  in  some  of  the  last 
fights,  yet  he  was  very  fond  of  the  terms  and  conditions  offered  for 
putting  an  end  to  the  war. 

He  l)uilt  two  cities  in  Apulia,  the  better  to  secure  the  passage  of 
his  shipping  through  the  Ionian  sea:  for  the  barbarians  dwelling  ou 
the  sea-coasis  had  a  great  number  of  pirates  wandering  about,  where- 
by the  Adriatic  sea  was  greatly  infested,  and  made  troublesome  to 
the  merchants. 

Afterwards  giving  himself  up  to  his  ease,  he  entirely  neglected  all 
warlike  exercises;  and  though  he  was  lord  of  the  greatest  kingdom 
in  Europe,  and  had  a  dominion  bound  fast  with  a  diamond,  (as  his 
father  was  used  to  boast),  yet  through  his  effeminate  sloth  and  idle- 
ness he  lost  it  on  a  sudden.  How  it  was  taken  from  him,  and 
how  he  conducted  himself  in  every  particular,  we  shall  endeavour 
now  to  declare. 

At  this  time  Ccphisidorus  was  lord  chancellor  at  Athens,  and 

*  Lucnnians^  in  Italy. 


Chap.  IT.  DIODORUS  SICIJLUS.  83 

Caius  Liclnius  and  Caius  Sulpitius  were  consuls  at  Rome;  when 
DioDj  the  brother  of  Hipparinus^  one  of  the  most  noble  persons 
among  the  Syracusans,  fled  out  of  Sicily;  and  afterwards^  by  the 
braveness  of  his  spirit,  and  his  excellent  accomplishments,  restored 
not  only  the  Syracusans,  but  other  Sicilians,  to  their  antient  liberties, 
by  these  means. 

Dionysius  the  elder  had  issue  by  both  his  wjvcs:  by  the  second 
wife,  the  daughter  of  Hipparinus,  (who  was  in  great  esteem  among 
the  Syracusans),  he  had  two  sons,  Hipparinus  and  Narsaeus.  Dion 
was  the  brother  of  this  second  wife;  a  man  well  skilled  in  philosophy, 
and  the  most  expert  soldier,  in  his  tinie>  of  all  the  Syracusans.  The 
nobleness  of  his  birth,  and  greatness  of  his  spirit,  made  him  suspected 
by  the  tyrant,  because,  upon  that  account,  he  seemed  to  be  a  fit 
instrument  to  overturn  the  tyranny.  Dionysius  therefore  fearing 
him,  determined  to  send  him  farther  away  from  him,  and  so  put  him 
to  death.  Dion,  perceiving  the  design,  at  first  discovered  it  to  some 
of  his  friends:  afterwards  he  fled  from  Sicily  to  Peloponnesus,  taking 
with  bim  his  brother  Megacles^  and  Cariclides,  the  general  of  the 
army  under  the  tyrant.  When  he  arrived  at  Corinth  he  solicited 
the  Corinthians  to  assist  him  in  the  recovery  of  the  liberty  of  Syra-^ 
cuse;  and  presently  collected  a  band  of  mercenaries,  and  employed 
himself  in  procuring  arms :  upon  which  many  volunteers  coming  in 
to  him  with  all  sorts  of  arms,  he  mustered  a  considerable  force  of 
mercenary  soldiers.  Then  having  hired  two  ships,  he  put  his  men 
and  arms  on  board ;  and  witii  these  only  passed  over  from  Zacy nthus^ 
(Dear  adjoining  to  Cephalenia)  to  Sicily;  and  commanded  Cariclides 
to  follow  presently  after  him  to  Syracuse,  with  a  few  gallies,  and 
other  ships  of  burden. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  Andromachus  of  Taurominlum,  »  7 
the  father  of  Timseus  the  historian,  a  man  eminent  both  for  his  riciics 
and  wisdom,  brought  together  from  all  parts  all  the  exiles  of  Naxos, 
(which  Dionysius  had  razed),  and  gave  them  the  hill  called  Taurus, 
lying  above  Naxos.  And  because  he  and  his  family  had  continued 
there  a  long  time,  he  called  it  Taurominium,  from  their  residence  in 
Taurus.  The  inhabitants  afterwards  grew  very  rich,  and  the  city  be- 
came famous  by  its  prosperous  increase  In  worldly  blessings.  But  in 
our  age  the  Taurominians  were  removed  from  their  country  by 
CsBsar,  and  the  city  received  a  Roman  colony. 

In  the  meantime  the  inhabitants  of  Euba^a  began  quarrelling  with 
each  other,  and  one  party  resorted  to  the  Bu::otians  for  aid,  and  the 
other  to  the  Athenians;  and  so  a  war  broke  out  throughout  all 
Kuboea.     But  though  there  were  many  light  skirmishc:>  between 

'^  Xyw  Zaut. 


84  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  Book  XVti 

thcm^  sometimes  the  Tiiebans  prevailing,  and  at  other  times 
Athenians,  yet  ihcy  never  fouglit  any  great  battle. 

At  length  the  island  being  wasted  by  this  civil  war^  and  many  \ 
men  destroyed  all  over  the  land,  with  much  ado  (being  made  more  ^^ 
wise  by  tiieir  own  slaughters)  they  came  to  an  agreement,  and  •  *  • 
peace  was  concluded:  and  the  Ba:otians  returning  lion>e,  laid  down  ^] 
their  arms.  -.^ 

The  Athenians  now  began  a  war  called  the  Social  War,  (which 
continued  three  years),  on  account  of  the  defection  of  the  Chians, 
Rhodians,  them  of  Coos,  and  the  Byzantines;  to  which  war  Chare» 
and  Chabrias  were  sent  with  an  army^  as  generals :  making  against 
Chios'^,  they  found  the  Chians  assisted  by  the  Byzantines,  Rhodians, 
Coians,  and  Mausolus,  the  petty  king  of  Canaf.  These  generab 
dividing  their  forces,  besieged  the  city  both  by  sea  and  land.  Chares 
commanded  the  land-forces,  and  assaulted  the  walls,  and  fought  with 
them  of  the  garrison  in  the  open  field,  who  made  sallies  upon  him« 
But  Cltabrias  was  engaged  in  a  sharp  fight  at  sea  in  the  very  harbour^ 
and  his  ship  being  pierced  through  with  the  beaks  of  the  enemy%  he 
was  greatly  distressed;  and  those  who  were  in  the  other  ships, 
thought  fit  to  comply  with  the  time,  and  so  fairly  ran  away.  But  the 
admiral  chusing  rather  to  die  gloriouly  than  give  up  all  dishonour- 
ably, in  defending  of  his  sliip  received  a  wound^  which  put  an  end 
to  his  life, 
yf  About  the  same  time,  Philip  king  of  INIaccdon,  after  his  victory 

over  the  Illyrians  in  that  great  battle,  having  subdued  all  them  that 
dwelt  as  far  as  to  the  marches  of  Lychnidus,  and  made  an  honour- 
able peace  with  them,  returned  hito  Macedonia.  And  having  thus 
by  liis  valour  raised  up  and  supported  the  tottering  state  and  condi- 
tion of  the  Macedonians,  his  name  l>ocamc  great  and  famous  among 
them.  Afterwards,  ])cing  pr<»voked  by  the  many  injuries  of  them  of 
Amphipolis,  he  marched  against  them  with  a  great  army,  and  apply- 
ing his  engines  of  battery  to  the  walls,  made  fierce  and  continual 
assaults,  and  by  the  battering  rams  threw  down  part  of  the  wall,  and 
entered  into  the  city  through  the  ruins,  with  the  slaughter  of  many 
that  opposed  him ;  and  forthwith  Kinished  his  chief  enemies,  and 
graciously  spared  the  rest. 

This  city,  by  reason  of  its  commodious  situation  m  Thrace,  and  its 
nci;;hb«)urhood  to  other  places,  was  of  great  advantage  to  Philip;  for 
he  presently  after  took  Pydna;  but  made  a  league  with  the  Olyn- 
thians,  and  promised  to  give  up  Potidea  to  them,  which  they  had  a 
Jong  time  before  much  coveted.     For  in  regard  the  city  of  the 

*  C'liioSi  of  the  same  uame  with  fbv  i!»laii'J  t  Caoi,  ia  Lttscr  Atia. 


Chap.  lit.  DIODORUS  SICULTJS,  85 

Olynthians  was  both  rich^  potent,  and  populous^  and  upon  that  ac- 
count was  a  place  of  great  advantage  in  time  of  war,  therefore  those 
tliat  were  ambitioas  to  enlarge  their  dominion,  strove  always  to  gain 
it:  so  that  both  the  Athenians  and  IMiilip  earnestly  contended 
which  of  them  should  prevail  in  having  them  for  their  confederates. 
But  however,  Philip  having  taken  Poiidea,  drew  out  tlie  Athenian 
garrison,  and  treated  them  with  great  civility,  and  suHcred  them  to 
return  to  Athens;  for  he  bore  a  great  respect  to  the  people  of 
Atheus,  because  that  city  was  eminent  and  famous  for  its  power 
and  grandeur. 

He  likewise  delivered  up  Pydna^  (which  he  had  subdued)  to  the 
Olynthians,  and  gave  them  all  the  grounds  and  territories  belonging 
to  it.     Thence  he  marched  to  Cremidcst,  which  he  enlarged,  and 
made  more  populous,  and  called  it  after  his  own  name,  Philippi, 
Besides,  he  ^o  improved  the  gold  mines  that  were  in  those  parts, 
(which  before  were  hut  inconsiderable  and  obscure),  that  by  build- 
ing of  work-houses  he  advanced  them  to  bring  in  a  yearly  revenue  of 
above  a  thousand  talents.     So  that  heaping  up  at)undance  of  riches, 
■  in  a  short  time,  by  the  confluence  of  his  wcahh,  he  advanced  the 
kingdom  of  Macedonia  to  a  higher  degree  of  majesty  and  glory,  than 
cverit  was  before:  for  he  coined  pieces  of  gold,  (called  from  him 
Philippics),  and  by  the  help  thereof,  raised  a  great  army  of  merce- 
oaries,  and  bribed  many  of  the  Grecians  to  betray  their  country. 
Of  all  which,  a  particular  account  shall  be  given  hereafter,  in  tlie 
coarse  of  the  history.    And  now  we  shall  bend  our  discourse  to  what 
folbws. 


CHAP.  III. 

tttoi'5  march  and  entry  hUf)  St/racJtst\  Ditvwshts  comes  to  the 
hlaiidj  apart  of  Syracuse:  assaults  the  wall  erected  from  sen  to 
9ea:  is  beaten  by  Dion,  Alcj'innler  of  Phcrcc  miirdrred  tjy  his 
^ife  and  his  two  brothers,  Philiji  relieves  the  lliessalians  from 
tkttivo  brothers. 

-AGATHOCLES  wns  archon  at  Athens,  and  Marcus  F:il>iiis,  and       '^'^ 
Caius  Publius,  or  Poetdius,  were  cunsuls  at  Koim*,  when  Dion,  the 
^  of  Hipparinus,  landid  in  Sicily,  to  i)ut  down  the  tyiiiiiiiy  of 

*    Uxdna,  in  Mace  lonui. 
\  Cremidea  iu  ^laccduniu,  ':al!L'd  rh:'i:.-L->i^  uu^v  rhilijtpo. 


86  DIODORUS  SICULiJS.  Book  XVh 


Dionysius.     This  Dion  in  an  admirable  manner  overturned   the 
greatest  dominion  in  I'2nroi.)e,  with  the  most  inconsiderable  forct 
that  ever  any  did  before  iiiu) :  for  wlio  would  ever  believe  that  a 
man  who  landed  with  only  two  ships  of  burthen^  should  overcome 
a  king  who  was  furnished  with  four  hundred  gallies;  had  an  army  of 
an  hundred  thousand  foot,  and  ten  thousand  horse;  and  was  pro^ 
vided  with  arms^  money,  and  provision,  suitable  and  sufficient  to 
supply  so  many  and  great  forces  as  we  have  related?  And  who  (ex- 
clusive of  what  we  have  before  said)  was  possessed  of  the  greatest 
of  all  the  Greek  cities ;   so  many  ports  and  arsenals,  castles  so 
strongly  fortified  and  impregnable,  and  such  a  number  of  potent 
auxiliaries !     But  that  whicli  much  forwarded  the  successes  of  Dion^ 
was  his  great  spirit,  and  valorous  resolution,  and  the  good-will  and 
liindness  which  the  people  whom  he  came  to  set  free  bore  towards 
Iiim.    And  that  which  was  more  than  all  these  was  the  sloth  and 
effeminacy  of  the  tyrant,  and  the  hatred  of  his  subjects.    All  tliese 
things  concentrating  at  one  moment,  produced  incredible  effects* 
But  to  leave  off  prefacing,  we  shall  now  begin  to  relate  affairs  more 
particularly. 

Dion  therefore  proceeding  from  Zacynthns,  near  to  Cephalenia^ 
arrived  at  Minoa,  (as  it  is  called),  in  the  territory  of  Agrigentum. 
This  city  was  built  by  Minos,  formerly  king  of  Crete,  at  the  time 
he  was  entertained  by  Cocalus,  king  of  the  Sicanians,  when  lie  was 
seeking  after  Decdalus. 

At  this  time  this  city  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Carthaginians,  whose 
governor  Parjilus,  Dion's  friend,  cheerfully  received  him.  Upoa 
this  encouragement  he  unloaded  his  ships  of  five  thousand  arms,  and 
intrusted  thein  with  Paralus,  desiring  him  to  furnish  him  with  car- 
riages to  convey  them  to  Syracuse  :  and  he  himself  with  a  thousand 
mercenaries  that  had  joined  him,  makes  to  the  same  place.  In  his 
march  he  prevailed  with  the  Agrigentincs,  Geloi,  some  of  the 
Sicanians,  and  the  Sicilians  that  Inhabited  the  midland;  the  Cama- 
rinians  likewise,  and  Madinicans,  to  join  with  him  in  freeing  the 
Syracusans  from  their  slavery;  and  with  these  he  marched  forward 
to  give  a  check  to  the  tyrant.  In  his  marcli,  armed  men  flocking 
in  to  him  from  all  parts,  in  a  short  time  he  had  an  army  of  above 
twenty  thousand  men.  And  besides  these,  many  Grecians  and  Mes- 
sanians  were  sent  for  out  of  Italy,  and  all  with  great  cheerfulness 
came  readily  to  him. 

As  soon  as  Dion  came  to  the  borders  of  the  Syraeusan  territorieSj 
a  nmhitude  of  unarmed  men,  both  out  of  the  city  and  country,  met 
1)  in :  for  Dionysius^  out  of  fear  and  jealousy  of  the  Syracusans,  had 
disarmed  many. 


Chap.  IIL  woDORus  sicuLUs.  8/ 

He  was  by  chance  at  tliat  time  at  the  cities  he  had  lately  built  ia 
Adria*,  with  a  great  army.  In  the  mean  time,  the  officers  that  were 
left  to  guard  the  city  endeavoured,  in  the  first  pLice,  to  retain  the 
citizens  in  their  duty,  and  to  prevent  their  defection;  but  when  they 
saw  they  could  not  by  all  the  means  they  could  use  bridle  the  im- 
petuous rage  of  the  people,  they  got  together  all  the  foreign  soldiers^ 
and  all  others  within  the  city  that  favoured  the  tyrant*s  party,  and^ 
having  completed  their  regiments,  resolved  to  fall  upon  the  rebels. 
Then  Dion  distributed  the  five  thousand  arms  among  the  Syracusans 
that  were  unarmed,  and  the  rest  he  furnished  as  well  as  he  could^  as 
arms  came  to  his  hands.  He  then  called  them  all  together,  to  a  pub- 
lic assembly,  and  told  them,  that  he  was  come  to  restore  the  Sicilians 
to  their  liberty;  and  to  that  end  commanded  that  such  officers  should 
he  created  as  were  fittest  to  be  made  use  of  for  that  purpose,  and  for 
the  utter  ruin  of  the  tyranny:  upon  which  they  all  cried  out,  with 

one  uuanimous  voice ^That  Dion  and  his  brother  Megacles  should 

be  chosen  generals,  and  invested  with  absolute  power  and  command. 
And  so,  without  dela}',  from  the  assembly  (having  first  disposed  the 
army  in  order  of  battle)  he  marched  strait  to  the  city;  and^  none  ap- 
pearing in  the  open  field  to  oppose  him,  he  confidently  entered  withiu 
the  walls^  and,  through  the  Acradinaf,  marched  on  into  the  forum,  and 
there  encamped,  none  daring  to  oppose  him:  for  there  were  no  fewer 
with  Dion,  in  his  army,  than  fifty  thousand  men.  And  all  thesc^ 
with  coronets  upon  their  heads,  entered  into  the  city,  led  by  Dion, 
Megacles,  and  thirty  Syracusans,  who  alone,  of  all  the  exiles  in  Pelo- 
ponnesus, were  willing  to  run  the  same  common  fate  with  their 
fellow-citizens. 

At  this  time  the  whole  city  exchanged  slavery  for  liberty,  and  for- 
tune turned  sorrow,  the  companion  of  tyranny,  into  pompous  mirth 
and  jollity :  and  every  house  was  full  of  sacrifices  and  rejoicing;  and 
men  burnt  incense,  every  one  upon  his  own  altar,  thanking  the  gods 
for  what  at  present  ihey  enjoyed,  and  putting  up  prayers  for  a  happy 
usue  of  affairs  for  the  time  to  come.  Then  were  heard  many  shouts 
of  joy  by  the  women  all  over  the  city,  for  their  sudden  and  unexpected 
uappiuess,  and  the  people  rejoicing  through  all  corners  of  tiie  town* 
There  was  then  neither  freeman  or  servant,  nor  any  stranger,  but  all 
*'cre  earnest  to  see  Dion,  who,  for  his  valour  and  courage,  was  cried 
up  by  all  above  what  was  fitting  for  a  man.  And  it  was  not  alto- 
gether without  some  reason,  the  change  being  so  great,  and  so  un- 
expected :  for,  having  lived  fifty  years  as  slaves,  through  so  long 
tttime  they  had  almost  forgotten  what  liberty  meant;  and  now,  by 

^  Tite  ( oasts  of  tlic  Adriatic  .sea. 
t  One  of  tlic  four  parts  of  Syracuse;  ihc  otlicrs  arc  llic  Island^  Tvche,  aiiJ  Xc»polifc 


<z 


88  DIODORUS  SICULU3.  Book  XVI. 

the  valour  of  one  man^  they  were  on  a  sudden  delivered  from  their 
calamity. 

About  this  time  DIonysius  staid  at  Caulonia  in  Italy;  but  sent  to 
Phili:iitus,  his  admiral,  who  was  then  with  the  fleet  about  the  Adriatic 
coasts,  and  commanded  him  to  sail  away  strait  for  Syracuse:  and, 
both  of  tht'm  sjiceding  awr.y  to  the  same  place,  Dionysius  came  to 
Syracuse  the  seventh  day  after  the  return  of  Dion.  And  now,  think* 
ing  to  put  a  trick  upon  the  Syracusans,  he  sent  ambassadors  to 
treat  of  peace,  by  v;h(>m  he  made  use  of  many  devices,  to  per- 
suade thcp),  thai  he  would  restore  the  democracy,  if  he  might  but 
liavc  some  renjuriwible  iionours  c<)nfcrr:*d  \\\.\y\\  him  by  t!\c  govern- 
ment, lie  c!c.i!t-.l,  ti;jr  iVii*,  ilr.it  Mnl:\f  ^i:dj;s  mi^lit  be  sent  to  himj 
with  v%iioi!ij  cj.liii)'--  ;i  soiiatc-,  he  might  j)iit  «iis  end  iu  the  war. 

TliC  SyiaLii.saiiS,  having  their  expectations  raised  to  so  high  a 
pitch,  sent  some  of  tlie  cliief  of  their  citizens  to  hiin  as  ambassadors, 
who  had  guards  presently  put  ujion  them,  and  Dionysius  one  day 
after  another  put  off  their  audience.  In  the  mean  time,  perceiving 
that  tlie  Syraeusans,  in  hopes  of  peace,  negleeteJ.  their  guards,  and 
were  unprepared  for  an  encounter,  he  opened  the  gates  of  the  Acro- 
polis^, in  tlie  Island,  and  suddenly  sallied  out  with  a  strong  and  well- 
appointed  party. 

Tiie  Syraeus'uis  liad  there  drawn  a  v/all  from  sea  to  sea,  which  the 
3)ionysiaiis  fiercely  assaulted,  with  a  great  shoat;  and,  having  en- 
tered it,  with  the  slaughter  of  many  of  the  guai  J.,  they  engaged  with 
the  rest  that  came  in  to  defend  it.  Dion,  therefore,  being  thus  de- 
luded, (against  the  articles  of  the  truce),  comes  down  with  a  strong 
party  to  oppose  the  enemy,  engages  them,  and  makes  a  great  slaugh- 
ter within  a  small  compass  of  ground:  for,  alth"ugh  the  fight  was 
but  a  small  distance  from  the  walls  within  the  town,  yet  a  vast  num- 
ber of  men  were  got  together  within  this  little  spot;  so  that  the 
Stoutest  men  on  both  sides  were  hotly  engaged.  The  large  promises 
urged  on  the  DIonysians  on  one  side,  and  hopes  of  liberty  stirred 
up  tl)e  Syraeu^ans  with  a  resolution  for  victory  on  the  other:  the 
obstinacy,  therefore,  on  both  sides  being  equal,  the  fight  was  a  long 
time  tloulitful;  many  fell,  and  as  many  were  wounded,  receiving  all 
their  wounds  uptm  their  bviasts:  for  those  thai  first  led  on  coura- 
geously, died  to  preserve  those  that  fidlowed;  those  that  were  next, 
coveied  ihr  heads  of  those  that  wen*  tired  out  with  their  shields,  and 
valiantly  underwent  all  manner  of  dangers,  ami  endured  the  utmost 
that  could  befal  them,  osit  of  tlieir  heat  and  zeal  to  come  olV  con- 
cjuerors.     But  Dion,  resolving  to  do  something  remarLtble  in  this 

•  A  *'.:?;!c  in  i  pljc?  calif'  *.ln  poit  oi' Svrn.rijjc. 


Chap.  III.  nioDORUs  siculus.  89 


engagement^  and  that  by  his  own  valour  lie  might  gain  th*;  day,  broke 
violently  into  the  thickest  of  his  enemies;  and,  laying  about  him 
hero-like,  hewed  down  multitudes,  and  wholly  broke  iu  pieces  the 
body  of  the  mercenaries,  and  was  left  alone  standing  in  the  midst 
of  the  enemy's  troops;  and,  tiiough  lie  was  aimed  at  l)y  abundance  of 
darts,  received  upon  his  buckler  and  helmet,  yet,  by  the  strength  and 
goodness  of  his  arms,  he  avoided  the  danger;  but,  receiving  a  wound 
upon  his  right  arm,  (througli  the  greatness  and  extremity  of  the 
pain),  he  began  to  faint,  and  was  not  far  from  falling  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy,  but  that  the  Syracusans  (highly  cencerned  for  the 
preservation  of  their  general)  charged  in  a  full  body  ujjon  the  Diony- 
sians,  and,  rescuing  Dion,  (now  almost  spent),  put  the  enemy  to 
flight.  And,  the  citizens  prevailing  at  another  part  of  the  wall, 
the  foreign  forces  of  the  tyrant  were  forced  to  fly  into  the  castle  ia 
the  Island. 

The  Syracusans  now,  having  gained  a  trlorious  victory,  and  con- 
firmed their  liberty  by  conquest,  set  up  a  tn)j)hy  in  defiance  of  the 
tyrant,  who,  being  thus  beaten,  and  now  perceiving  that  all  was  lost,  /  '5 
and  an  end  put  to  his  sovereignty,  fortified  the  castle  with  a  strong 
garrison;  then,  being  permitted  to  carry  oft' the  dead  bodies  of  ihosc 
that  were  slain,  to  the  number  of  eight  hundred,  he  buried  them 
honourably,  crowning  them  with  crowns  of  gold,  and  richly  clothing 
them  in  purple  robes.  By  this  extraordinary  honour  and  respect 
shewn  to  the  dead,  he  hoped  to  draw  in  others  more  readily  and 
cheerfully  to  venture  their  lives  for  the  support  of  his  principality. 
Then  he  bountifully  rewarded  them  that  had  valiantly  behaved  them- 
selves in  the  late  enjj:agement ;  and  sent  some  to  the  Syracusans,  to 
treat  upon  terms  of  peace.  But  Dion  studied  excuses  to  delay  the 
business,  and  in  the  mean  time  finished  the  rest  of  the  wall  witiiout 
any  interruption. 

Having  thus  deceived  the  enemy  with  an  expectation  of  peace,  as 
they  had  done  him  before,  he  admitted  the  ambassadors  to  audience: 
upon  which,  tliey  making  proposals  for  peace,  Dion  answered — ^That 
there  was  only  one  way  left  for  the  obtaining  of  a  peace,  and  that  was, 
forDionysius  to  lay  down  his  government,  and  be  contented  only  with 
some  honours  to  be  conferred  upon  him.  Which  answer  the  tyrant 
taking  in  disdain,  as  haughty  and  peremptory,  he  called  a  council 
cf  war,  to  consult  with  his  officers  Low  he  might  be  revenged  of  the 
Syracusans. 

He  abounded  with  all  things  except  corn,  and  was  likewise  master 
at  sea:  he  therefore  infested  the  country  with  depredations,  and,  by 
foraging,  for  some  time  got  irroviciyiis,  but  with  great  difficulty.    At 
Vol.2.  No.  41.  n 


90  monoRus  siculus.  Book  XVf. 

length  he  sent  forth  transiwrt-shlps  and  money  to  buy  corn  and  other 
provisions :  but  the  Syracusans,  tliough  they  had  but  few  gallies,  yet, 
at  fit  times  and  places,  they  surprised  the  merchants^  and  a  great  part 
of  the  corn  that  they  imported.  And  thus  stood  the  afl&irs  of  Syracuse 
at  this  time. 

i  ^f  But  in  Greece,  Alexander,  the  tyrant  of  Pherse,  was  murdered  by  his 
wife,  a  Tlieban,  and  his  two  brothers,  Lycophron  and  Tisiphonus. 
They  were  at  first  in  great  repute  for  having  killed  the  tyrant;  but 
afterwards,  growing  ambitious,  and  having  hired  many  foreign  sol* 
diers,  they  set  up  themselves,  and  put  to  death  many  that  were  averse 
to  their  designs ;  and,  having  got  together  a  strong  party,  they  kept 
tlie  sovereignty  by  force  of  arms. 

But  the  Aleuadse,  (as  they  are  called),  persons  famous  for  the  no- 
bleness of  their  birth,  conspired  to  oppose  the  tyrants;  but,  not  being 
able  to  perfect  so  great  an  undertaking  of  themselves,  they  procured 
the  assistance  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedon,  who  marched  into  Thes- 
8aly,  subdued  the  tyrants,  and  restored  the  cities  to  their  liberty,  and 
carried  himself  with  the  greatest  demonstrations  of  kindness  imagin- 
able towards  the  Thessalians;  so  that  ever  after,  in  all  his  wars,  not 
only  be,  but  his  son  Alexander,  had  them  to  be  their  constant  friends 
and  confederates. 

•  J  Among  the  writers,  Dcmophilus,  the  son  of  £phorus  the  historian, 
(who  continued  the  history  of  the  Sacred  War,  left  imperfect  by  his 
father},  began  at  the  time  when  the  temple  of  Delphos  was  seized 
and  robbed  by  Philomelus  the  Phocian.   3 5*7/  C 

That  war  continued  eleven  years,  till  such  time  as  the  sacrilegious 
robbers  of  that  temple  were  miserably  destroyed. 

.'Y  Odlisthcnes  likewise  comprehended  in  ten  hooks  the  affairs  of  the 

Grecians,  bringing  down  his  history,  in  a  continued  thread,  to  the 
spoiling  of  the  temple  by  the  wickedness  of  Philomelus:  and  Dyillus 

^  ^T'  the  Athenian  begins  his  history  from  this  sacrilege,  and  gives  an  ac- 
count of  the  affairs  of  Greece  and  Sicily  in  those  times,  in  sevea- 
teen  books. 


Chap.  IF.  DioDORUS  sicuLUS.  91 


CHAP.  IV. 

Thejirst  rise  of  the  Brutii  in  Itjah/,  Dionymts^s  admiral  invades 
the  Leontmes.  AJight  at  sea  between  Heraclides  and  Fhilistus, 
admirals  y  the  one  of  DionysiuSy  the  other  of  Dion,  ji  faction  in 
Syracuse.  Dion  leaves  the  Syracusans.  Tiieir  sad  condition. 
Relieved  by  Dion. 

WHEN  Elpinus  bore  the  chief  magistracy  of  Athens,  and  Marcus      /  IT 
Popilius  LienaSj  and  Cneius  Manlius  Imperiosus,  were  invested 
with  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome,  the  hundred  and  sixth  Olym- 
piad was  celebrated,  in  which  Porus,  of  Malia,  was  crowned  with 
victory. 

In  Italy,  a  promiscuous  multitude  got  together  about  Lucania  from 
several  p^i  is  of  the  country,  most  of  them  servants  that  had  run  away 
from  ihvW  ijiasters.  At  first  they  employed  themselves  in  robbing 
and  stealing,  and  presently,  by  a  common  practice  of  skulking  in  the 
fields,  and  making  incursions,  they  learnt  the  use  and  exercise  of 
martial  dibciplinc  and  feats  of  war;  and,  prevailing  in  several  en- 
counters against  the  inhabitants,  they  increased  to  a  vast  body  and 
number  of  men. 

In  the  first  place  they  took  and  plundered  the  city  of  Trojana; 
then,  seizing  upon  Arpinum  and  Thurium,  and  many  other  cities,  they 
formed  themselves  into  a  commonwealth;  and,  because  they  had 
many  of  them  been  servants,  tiiey  assumed  the  name  of  Brutii*.  And 
thus  the  nation  of  the  Brutii  grew  up  in  Ibily. 

At  this  time  in  Sicily,  Philistus,  Diouysius's  general,  sailed  to  / 
Rhegium,  and  transported  above  five  hundred  horse  to  Syracuse: 
and,  joining  to  these  a  greater  body  of  horse,  and  two  thousand  foot, 
he  invaded  the  Leoutines,  who  had  fallen  oft'  from  Dionysius.  Sur- 
prising, therefore,  the  walls  secretly  in  the  night,  he  possessed  himself 
of  part  of  the  city;  upon  which  there  was  a  hot  engagement,  and,  by 
the  help  of  the  Syracusans,  who  came  to  the  aid  of  the  Leontines, 
Philistus,  overpowered  with  numbers,  was  forced  out  ngain. 

In  the  mean  time  Heraclides,  Dion's  admiral,  being  left  in  Pelo- 
ponnesus, and  liindered  by  storms  and  contrary  winds,  (so  that  he 
could  not  arrive  at  Sicily  time  enough  to  be  assistant  to  Dion  in  his 
return  into  his  country,  and  to  be  helpful  in  rescuing  the  Syracusans 

*  Hither  Brettians;  for  ihcy  were  called  Brutii  bv  the  Romans, as  u  hiutish  people. 


I.  ^^. 


n 


9«  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XVL 

from  slavery),  arrived  at  length,  with  tiventy  sail  of  gallies^  and  fif- 
teen hundred  soldiers;  who,  heing  a  man  of  noble  birth  and  of  great 
esteem,  and  judged  worthy  of  so  great  a  trust,  lie  was  declared  admiral 
by  tiie  Syracusans,  and  he  and  Dion,  joining  head  and  hand  together, 
managed  the  war  against  Dionysius. 

About  the  same  time  Philistus,  being  made  lord-high-admiral  by 
Dionysius,  and  liaviiig  a  fleet  of  sixty  sail,  well  provided,  entered  the 
lists  in  a  sea-fight  with  the  Syracusans,  who  had  a  navy  not  fewer  in 
number  than  the  Dionysians.  Whereupon  there  was  a  sharp  fight, 
in  which  the  valour  of  Pnilistus  at  the  first  prevailed;  but  at  length, 
ocing  surrounded  by  the  enemy,  the  Syracusans  from  all  parts  making 
it  their  ^n.'at  business  to  take  him  alive,  he,  to  avoid  the  disgrace  and 
misery  usually  attendant  on  a  state  of  captivity,  killed  himself,  after 
he  hiul  scrvi  d  the  tyrant  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  and  had  signa- 
lizeil  his  faiihnilnrss  above  all  the  rest,  and  chiefest  of  his  friends. 
The  Syr.i'j'Snp.f^,  Ikmiic^  victors,  clrcw  the  mangled  body  of  Phil istui 
through  the  w  hulc  city,  and  at  length  cast  it  out  in  the  open  air, 
without  burial. 

Di-iiysiu^,  liavin;::  now  lo.^^t  the  most  valiant  of  all  his  friends,  and 
knowing;  not  wlicro  to  find  anotlicr  fit  for  the  place,  sent  ambassadors 
to  Dioi;,  with  an  offer  at  first  of  half  the  kingdom,  and  presently  after 

conscr.tcd  to  give  up  the  whole.     But,  when  Dion  answered ^That 

it  was  but  just  he  should  surrender  the  castle  to  the  Syracusans,  upon 
having  only  some  money,  and  some  marks  of  honour  conferred  up- 
on bin),  the  tyrant  hereupon  said — He  was  ready  to  deliver  up  the 
castle  to  the  people,  upon  condition  that  he  and  the  mercenaries, 
with  all  the  treasure  they  had  got,  might  pass  over  to  Italy.  Dion's 
advice  was,  that  the  terms  should  be  accepted:  but  the  people,  being 
wrought  over  to  a  contrary  opinion  by  the  importunate  orators,  op- 
posed Dion,  for  that  they  doubted  not  but  to  take  the  castle  by  storm. 
Dionysius  hereupon  committed  the  custody  of  the  castle  to  the 
stoutest  of  the  mercenaries;  but  he  himself,  having  brought  aboard 
all  his  treasures  and  household  goods,  without  being  discovered^  set 
sail,  and  landed  in  Italy. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Syracusans  were  divided  into  factions,  white 
some  were  for  Ileraelides  to  have  the  chief  command  of  the  array, 
and  likewise  the  sovereign  power,  because  he  was  judged  a  persoa 
that  wasi  not  ambitious  of  the  tyranny;  but  others  were  for  intrusting 
the  chief  p(»wer  and  authority  in  the  hands  of  Dion.  Moreover,  there 
w  ei  e  IT'  *  Jit  arrears  due  to  the  soldiers  that  came  out  of  Peloponnesus 
to  the  assistance  of  the  Syracusans.  The  city,  therefore,  being  very 
1  »\v  in  n.onry,  and  ilie  ^?^)ldiers  defrauded  of  their  pay,  they  gathered 
tlieiii.''jlvis  i  jit>  a  body,  bcini:  thicc  thousand  valiant  men,  all  old 


Chap.  IV.  moDORUs  siculus.  93 


and  expert  soldiers,  far  L*xceliing  tlic  Syracusans  in  courage:  these 
exhorted  Dion  to  go  along  with  them,  and  leave  the  Syracusans^  that 
they  might  be  revenged  of  them  in  due  time  as  a  con.mon  enemy; 
which  he  at  first  rcFued;  but  tlie  exigency  of  affairs  requiring  it,  he 
at  length  touk  upon  bim  the  command  of  the  foreigners,  and  joining 
hims«If  to  them,  mnrched  to  the  Leontines:  but  the  Syracusans  get-  ^ 
ting  into  a  body,  pursued  the  mercenaries,  and  engaged  them  in  their 
march,  but  vvtrc  forced  to  retire,  with  the  loss  of  a  great  number  of 
their  fellow  ciiizrns. 

Bui  Dion,  tlijugh  he  had  obtained  a  great  victory,  yet  he  was 
willing  to  forget  the  injuries  offered  him  by  the  Syracusans.  For 
when  they  sent  a  trumpet  to  liim  to  have  liberty  to  carry  off^  the 
bodies  of  the  dead,  he  not  only  agreed  to  that,  but  freely  discharged 
inany  prisoners  without  ransom.  For  many,  when  they  were  on  the 
point  of  being  knocked  on  the  head  in  the  pursuit,  declared  they  ' 
were  favourers  oi  Dion's  party;  and  by  that  means  escaped  present 
death. 

Afterwards  Dionysius  sent  Nypsius,  a  citizen  of  Naples,  a  valiant      /  ^ 
and  expert  soldier,  as  his  general,  and  with  him  transport-ships 
laden  with  corn  and  other  provisions,  who^  depturting  from  Locris^ 
made  strait  for  Syracuse. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  garrison -soldiers  of  the  tyrant,  in  the  castle, 
though  they  were  then  driven  to  the  utmost  extremity  for  want  of 
bread,  yet  endured  famine  for  some  time  with  great  resolution.  But 
at  length  nature  yielding  to  necessity,  and  having  no  prospect  of 
relief  any  other  way,  they  called  a  council  of  war  in  the  nighty  and 
resolved  to  surrender  the  castle  and  themselves  to  the  Syracusans  the 
next  day.  Night  therefore  being  now  ended,  the  mercenaries  sent 
trumpets  to  treat  for  peace,  which  was  no  sooner  done,  but  presently 
Nypsius,  at  spring  of  day,  arrives  with  the  fleet,  and  anchored  in  the 
port  of  Arethusa*.  Whereupon  their  present  necessities  were  sud- 
denly changed  into  large  and  plentiful  supplies  of  all  sorts  of  provi- 
sions. Then  the  general,  having  landed  his  men,  called  a  council  of 
war,  and  in  an  oration  suitable  for  the  occasion,  so  spoke  to  them, 
that  he  wrought  them  to  a  resolution  cheerfully  to  undergo  all  future 
hardships  to  the  utmost  extremity.  And  thus  the  Acropolis,  ready 
to  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  Syracusans,  was  unexpectedly 
preserved.  Hereupon  the  Syracusans  with  all  speed  manned  as 
many  gallics  as  they  had  at  hand,  and  suddenly  attacked  the  enemy, 
while  they  were  discharging  their  vessels  of  their  corn  and  provisions: 
^nd  although  this  incursion  was  sudden  and  unexpected,  and  that  the 

*  A  fountain  called  Aretbusai  iicnr  Syracuse. 


/ 


/ 


S4  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Boot  XI 

garrison  in  the  castle  opposed  the  enemy's  galleys  in  a  tumultna 
and  disorderly  manner,  yet  it  came  to  a  formal  sea  fight>  in  which  thl^ 
Syracusaiis  got  the  victory,  and  sunk  some  of  the  enemy's  ships^Vl 
tock  others,  and  forced  the  rest  to  the  shore.  Being  encouraged  witl| 
tliis  success,  they  offered  to  the  gods  abundance  of  sacrifices  for  thf  ^ 
victory:  but  giving  themselves  in  the  mean  time  to  quaffieg  an^j 
drinkintC]  and  likewise  slighting  them  in  the  castle  as  a  beaten  enemjfi^ '. 
O  they  vvere  careless  in  their  guards:  so  that  Nypsius,  desirous  to  re- 
pair his  late  loss  by  a  new  engagement,  orders  a  select  body  of  his ' 
men  in  the  night,  and  suddenly  assaults  the  wall  lately  built;  and 
finding  the  guard,  through  overmuch  confidence,  and  their  surfeiting 
and  drunkenness,  fallen  fust  asleep,  set  scaling  ladders  (made  for  the 
purpose)  to  tiie  walls;  by  which  means  some  of  the  stoutest  fellowa 
of  the  garrison  mounted  the  wall,  killed  the  ccntinels,  and  opened 
'  the  gates.  This  sudden  assault  being  made  upon  the  city,  the  Syra- 
cusan  commanders,  not  yet  recovered  of  their  drunken  fit,  endea- 
voured to  help  their  fellows  as  well  as  they  could.  But  through  their 
wine  not  knowing  how  to  use  their  hands,  some  were  knocked  on  the 
head,  and  others  took  to  their  heels.  And  now  the  city  being  tsiken^ 
and  almost  all  the  soldiers  issued  out  of  the  castle,  and  entered 
witiiiii  the  walls,  and  the  citizens,  by  reason  of  this  sudden  and  un- 
expected surprise,  and  the  confusion  that  was  amongst  them,  being 
even  at  their  wits  end,  all  places  were  filled  with  slaughter  and 
destruction:  for  the  tyrant's  soldiers  being  above  ten  thousand 
men,  and  in  good  order  and  discipline,  none  were  able  to  withstand 
them,  but  through  fear  and  confusion,  and  the  disorder  of  an 
ungovernable  multitude,  through  want  of  oflicers,  all  went  to  wreck. 
When  they  came  into  the  forum,  being  now  conquerors,  they  pre- 
sently rusiied  into  the  houses,  atid  ransacked  and  plundered  to  a  vast 
amount,  and  made  captive  a  great  multitude  of  women,  children,  and 
servants.  In  the  strait  and  narrow  passages,  and  some  other  places^ 
the  Syracusans  made  resistance,  and  never  ceased  fighting;  multi- 
tudes being  killed,  and  as  many  wounded.  And  even  all  the  night 
long  they  killed  one  another  as  they  happened  to  meet  in  the  dark; 
so  that  every  part  of  the  city  was  covered  and  strewed  with  dead 
carcasei. 
f^  ,-  As  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  light  discovered  the  greatness  of  the 

X  L  calamity  and  misery.  The  citizens  having  now  no  means  left  to  be 
delivered,  but  by  the  aid  and  assistance  of  Dion,  sent  forth  some 
horsemen  with  all  speed  to  the  city  of  the  Lcontines,  earnestly  ta 
entreat  him  that  he  would  not  sulFcr  the  country  to  be  a  prey  to  the 
enemy,  hut  that  he  would  pardon  their  foimer  miscarriages,  and 
commiserute  them  in  their  present  distress,  and  relieve  and  rais^ 


CRip.  IV.  DiODORUs  sicuLUS.  95 

up  their  country  from  that  low  and  despicable  condition  in  which 
they  tlien  were, 

Dion^  who  was  a  man  of  a  brave  spirit,  and  had  a  soul  well  prin- 
cipled with  the  rudiments  of  philosophy,  and  so  was  mild,  and  easy 
to  be  persuaded,  remembered  not  the  former  injuries  of  the  citizens^ 
but  bired  his  soldiers  to  march  away  to  the  expedition,  and  with  these 
he  made  a  swift  march  to  Syracuse,  and  came  to  the  Hexapylum^. 
TTierc  he  drew  up  bis  army,  and  marched  forward  with  all  speed; 
aod  there  met  him  above  ten  thousand  women  and  children,  and  old 
people^  who  fled  out  of  the  city,  who  all  prostrated  themselves  at  his 
feet,  and  beseeched  him  with  tears  that  he  would  rescue  them  from 
their  wretched  and  miserable  condition.  The  soldiers  of  the  castle 
having  now  accomplished  what  they  aimed  at,  after  they  had  plun-- 
dered  all  the  houses  about  the  forum,  set  them  on  fire,  and  then 
breaking  into  the  rest,  made  a  prey  of  all  they  found  in  them,  at 
which  very  nick  of  time,  in  the  very  height  of  their  rapines,  Dion 
forcing  into  the  city  in  many  places  at  once,  sets  upon  the  enemy, 
now  eager  in  plundering,  and  killed  all  he  met  as  they  were  carrying 
away  all  sorts  of  household  goods  bundled  u[>on  their  shoulders. 
For  coming  upon  them  on  a  sudden,  as  they  were  scattered  here 
and  there,  bringing  away  their  prey,  they  were  all  easily  knocked  on 
the  bead.  After  four  thousand  and  upwards  were  slain,  some  in  the 
houses,  and  others  in  the  streets  and  highways,  the  rest  fled  into 
the  castle,  and  shut  the  gates  upon  them,  and  so  escaped. 

Dion,  when  he  had  performed  this  exploit,  (the  most  glorious  of 
any  ever  before  done),  quenched  the  fire,  and  so  preserved  the  houses 
that  were  all  in  flames,  and  firmly  repaired  the  wall  that  fronted 
the  castle;  and  thus  by  one  and  the  same  piece  of  work,  he  both 
defended  the  city,  and  straitened  the  garrison  within  the  Acropolis. 
Then  he  cleansed  the  town  of  the  dead  bodies,  erected  a  trophy,  and 
aaerificed  to  the  gods  for  the  deliverance  of  his  country. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  people,  to  testify  their  gratitude  to  Dion, 
called  a  general  assembly,  and  by  an  unanimous  vote  made  him  chief 
governor,  with  full  and  absolute  power,  and  conferred  upon  him  the 
honours  due  to  a  demigod. 

Afterwards,  agreeable  to  the  glory  of  his  other  actions,  he  freely 
pardoned  all  that  had  maliciously  injured  him,  and,  by  his  frequent 
admonitions,  brought  the  people  to  mutual  pcaee  and  concord: 
for  all  the  citizens  of  all  ranks  and  degrees  highly  honoured  atul 
applauded  him,  as  their  great  benefactor,  and  as  the  only  saviuur 
of  their  country. 

*  The  six  gates  so  called. 


gS  DIODORUS  sicui-us*  BookXFI. 


CHAP.  V. 

The  continuance  of  the  Social  War.    Tphicrates  and  Timotheus 

joined  admirals  with  Chares,  by  the  Athenians.    Iphicrates  and 

Timothcus  accused  hy  Chares^  and  fined  a7id  removed.     Chares 

joins  with  PharnabazuSy  and  routs  the  Persians.     The  end  of 

the  Social  fFiar.    Philip  subdues  the  confederates. 

1  j  IN  Greece  the  Social  War  growing  on  apace,  wherein  the  ChianSj 
Rhodians,  Coians,  and  Byzantines,  joined  together  against  the  Athe- 
nians, gxetX  preparations  were  made  on  both  sides  to  decide  the 
quarrel  by  a  sea  fight.  The  Athenians,  though  they  had  rigged  out 
a  fleet  of  sixty  sail,  under  the  command  of  Chares,  yet  they  sent  forth 
others,  for  the  further  strengthening  of  them  tliat  were  employed 
before,  under  the  command  of  two  of  the  most  eminent  of  their  citi- 
zens, Iphicrates  and  Timotheus,  who  were  invested  in  equal  power  of 
command  with  Chares,  to  carry  on  tlie  war  against  their  rebellious 
confederates. 

On  the  other  side,  the  Ckians,  Rhodians,  and  Byzantines,  being 
furnished  with  an  hundred  sail  from  their  confederates,  waste  and 
spoil  the  islands  Imbros  and  Lemnos,  belonging  to  the  Atheuiana: 
thence  they  made  for  Samos  with  a  great  army,  and  harassed  thtt 
country,  and  besieged  tlie  city  both  by  sea  and  land.  Many  other 
islands,  likewise,  under  the  government  of  the  Athenians,  they  wasted 
and  spoiled,  and  by  that  means  amassed  a  treasure  for  carrying  ou 
the  war. 

The  Athenian  generals,  therefore,  joining  their  forces,  resolved  in 
the  first  place  to  besiege  Byzantium :  but  the  Chians  and  their  con* 
federates  raising  their  siege  at  Samos,  and  preparing  to  relieve 
Byzantium,  the  fleets  on  both  sides  met  in  the  Hellespont.  And 
now,  just  as  they  were  ready  to  engage,  there  arose  suddenly  a  violent 
tempest,  which  prevented  their  design.  However,  Chares  was  re- 
solved to  fight,  though  Nature  herself,  with  the  wind  and  seas,  con- 
spired against  him;  but  Iphicrates  and  Timotlieus,  by  reason  of  the 
storm,  refused.  Chares  (attesting  the  faithfulness  of  the  soldiers) 
accused  his  colleagues  of  treason,  and  wrote  letters  to  the  people  of 
Athens,  whereby  he  informed  them  that  they  declined  fighting  pur- 
posely out  of  design;  at  which  the  people  were  so  incensed,  that  they 
condemned  them  both;  and  having  fined  them  in  many  talents^  re- 
voked their  commissions. 


Chap.V.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  97 

Chares  now  having  the  sole  command  of  the  fleet,  designing  to  2^ 
tree  the  Athenians  from  charge  and  expense,  committed  a  very  rash 
act.  Pliarnabazus  liad  revolted  from  the  king,  and  was  now  ready  to 
engage,  with  a  very  small  force,  the  Persian  lord- lieutenants,  who 
had  in  their  army  seventy  thousand  men :  Chares  joins  this  man  with 
all  his  forces,  so  that  they  totally  routed  the  king's  troops :  and 
Pharnabazas,  in  gratitude  for  the  service,  gave  him  as  much  money 
as  was  sufficient  to  pay  all  his  soldiers.  This  act  of  Chares  was  at 
first  very  grateful  and  acceptable  to  the  Athenians;  but  when  the 
Icing,  by  his  aml)assadors,  complained  of  the  injury  done  him  by 
Chares,  they  altogether  changed  their  notes,  and  were  as  far  the  other 
way:  for  a  rumour  was  spread  abroad,  that  the  king  had  promised 
three  hundred  sail  for  the  aid  and  assistance  of  the  enemies  of  the  A- 
thenians:  upon  which  the  people  were  so  terrified,  that  they  decreed 
to  adjust  matters  with  the  revolters;  and  fmding  them  as  willing  to 
embrace  terms  of  peace  as  themselves,  the  business  was  easily  com- 
posed. And  this  was  the  end  of  the  Social  War,  after  it  had  continued 
four  years. 

In  the  mean  time,  in  Macedonia,  three  kings,  that  is  to  say,  of 
Thrace,  the  Pseones,  and  the  Illyrians,  confederated  against  Philip. 
These  princeSs  being  borderers  upon  the  Macedonians,  could  not 
brook^  without  envy,  his  growing  power:  and  though  they  had 
formerly  experienced  that  they  were  not  his  equal  match  singly, 
(being  not  long  before  conquered  by  him),  yet  by  joining  their 
forces  together,  they  confidently  concluded  that  they  should  be 
able  to  deal  with  him.  But  Philip  coming  suddenly  upon  them, 
while  they  were  raising  their  forces,  and  as  yet  without  any  formed 
troops  beir«g  in  readiness,  in  this  surprise  he  broke  them  in  pieces, 
and  obliged  them  to  yield  to  the  yoke  of  the  Macedonian  kingdom. 


Vol.  2.  No.4L 


QS  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XVI. 


CHAP.  VI. 

Thcbegmning  of  the  Sacred  or  P/iocian  war.  Philomelus  seizes 
the  temple  at  Delphos,  after  he  had  routed  the  Locrimis.  How 
f/ie  Oracle  at  De/phos  tvas  first  discovered;  and  the  beginning 
of  the  Tripod.  The  Athenians  and  others  join  with  PhUo^ 
tnelus, 

U  AFTER  Callistratus  was  created  archon  at  Athens,  and  Marcus 
Fabius  and  Caius  Plotius  consuls  of  Rome,  the  war  called  the  Sacred 
War  broke  forth,  which  continued  nine  years :  for  Philomelus  the 
Phocian,  (inferior  to  none  in  impudence  and  wickedness),  liaving 
seized  the  temple  at  Dclphos,  occasioned  the  Sacred  War,  on  the  ac- 
count following: 

After  the  Liacediemonians  were  routed  by  the  Thcbans  at  the 
battle  of  Leuctra,  the  Thebans  made  great  complaints  against  them 
in  the  court  of  the  Amphictyons,  for  their  seizing  of  Cadmea: 
upon  which  they  were  adjudged  to  pay  to  them  a  great  sum  of 
money.  The  Phocians,  likewise,  were  accused  and  condemned  by 
the  same  court,  to  pay  many  talents  to  the  use  of  the  oracle  at 
Delphos,  because  they  had  intruded  into  a  large  piece  of  land, 
called  Cirrha,  which  belonged  to  the  oracle,  and  had  tilled  aod 
ploughed  it. 

But  the  mulct  being  neglected  to  be  paid,  the  Ilieromemones* 
accused  the  Phocians  in  the  senate  of  the  Amphictyons,  and  prayed 
thcm^  if  the  money  were  not  paid,  that  the  lands  of  the  sacrilegious 
persons  might  be  confiscated,  and  devoted  to  the  deity.  They  re- 
required,  likewise,  that  the  others  who  were  condemned  (among 
whom  wore  the  Lacedaemonians)  should  pay  what  was  due  upon  that 
account ;  and  prayed,  that  unless  they  observed  what  was  so  ordered^ 
tliat  liicy  should  be  prosecuted  as  hateful  enemies  by  all  the  Grecians. 
This  decree  of  the  Amphictyons  being  ratified  and  approved  of  by  all 
the  Greeks,  the  country  of  the  Phocians  was  upon  the  point  of  being 
devoted  to  those  sacred  uses.     Philomelus,  who  was  in  the  greatest 

fbtcem  at  that  time  amongst  them,  told  the  people ^That  the  fine 

was  so  excessive,  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  paid;  and  to  suflTer 
their  country  to  be  sacrificed,  it  would  not  only  argue  them  to  be 
cowardly  and  poor-spirited,  but  he  dangerous  to  that  degree,  that  it 
would  tend  to  the  utter  rmn  of  them  and  their  families :  and  be  did 

*  The  priests  aud  olliccri  of  the  ttmple^ 


Chap.  VI.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  99 


all  lie  could  to  make  it  out,  that  the  decree  of  the  Amphictyons  was 
most  unjust^  and  highly  injurious,  irasmuch  as  for  a  little  and  incon- 
siderable spot  of  land,  they  had  im{)0scd  a  mulct  far  exceeding  the 
proportion  and  merit  of  theofFencc;  and  therefore  'idvised  them  to 
rescind  the  decree;  and  that  there  were  reasons  suificient  to  justify 
their  so  doing:  and  among  others  he  alledged,  that  heretofore  the 
oracle  was  under  their  power  and  protection:  and  cited  tlie  verses  of 
Homer,  the  most  antient  and  famous  of  all  tlie  poets,  as  a  witness 
of  the  truth  of  what  he  said,  who  speaks  to  this  efilect: 

Epi&trophus  and  Scliedius  did  command 
(IphitiKs'  valiant  sons)  the  Thociau  band, 
Wlu)  Cjparjs  and  Pitho  tiU'd.  Ogiih, 

Therefore  the  contest  is  to  be  for  the  custody  and  patronage  of  the 
temple,  which  he  said  belonged  to  the  ancestors  of  the  Pliocians ;  and 
that  if  they  would  commit  to  him  the  absolute  power,  as  chief  com- 
mander in  this  affair,  he  promised  to  manage  it  with  the  utmost  care 
and  dexterity. 

Upon  which,  the  Pliocians  (out  of  fear  of  the  mulct  imposed  upon  ^  ' 
them)  created  Piiiluuieius  sole  and  absolute  general.  Hereupon 
Philomelus  diligently  j^rsued  the  performance  of  his  promise;  and 
to  that  end  presently  made  a  journey  to  Sparta,  and  had  private 
conference  concerning  the  business  with  Archidamus,  king  of  the 
Lacedaemonians,  alledging,  that  it  was  as  much  the  interest  and 
concern  of  Archidamus,  as  his,  to  have  the  decrees  of  the  Amphic- 
tyons rescinded;  for  that  the  Amphictyons  had  likewise  unjustly 
injured  the  Lacedaemonians  by  givintr  judgment  against  them.  He 
thereupon  discovered  to  him  his  design  of  seizing  upon  the  temple 
at  Delphos;  and  that  if  he  prevailed  in  bringing  the  oracle  under  his 
care  and  patronage,  he  would  annul  all  the  decrees  of  the  Amphic- 
tyons. Archidamus  approved  well  of  what  he  said;  but  for  the 
present  would  not  appear  openly  to  be  aiding  in  the  matter,  but 
assured  him  that  l)e  would  join  in  all  things  privately,  in  supplying 
him  with  money,  and  mercenary  soldiers.  Philomelus  then  haying 
received  from  him  fifteen  talents,  and  <idding  as  many  more  of  his 
own,  raised  soldiers  from  all  parts:  a  thousand  he  listed  from  among 
the  Piiocians,  whom  he  called  Peltastates*.  And  after  he  had  col- 
lecied  a  considerable  force,  he  attacked  the  temple:  some  of  the 
Dclphians,  called  Thracidoe,  opposed  him;  but  those  he  slew,  and 
gave  up  all  they  had  as  plunder  to  the  soldiers.  He  commanded  the 
rest  (whom  he  perceived  to  be  in  no  small  fright)  to  be  of  good 
courage,  for  they  should  suffer  no  prejudice. 

•  Those  wbo  carried  short  shicldif 


100  DIOnORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XVI. 

^  And  noiv  the  report  of  the  seizing  the  temple  was  spread  far  aod 
near;  upon  which  the  Liocrians^  who  were  next  borderers,  inarched 
against  Philomelas  with  a  considerable  army^  and  fought  him  near 
Delphos,  but  were  routed;  and,  after  a  great  slaughter  made  amongst 
them,  fled  back  to  their  own  country. 

Philomelus,  puffed  up  with  this  victory,  cut  the  decrees  of  the 
Amphictyons  out  of  the  pillars,  and  destroyed  all  the  records  con* 
cerning  them  that  were  condemned.  In  the  mean  time,  he  caused 
reports  to  be  spread  abroad  in  every  place,  that  he  neither  designed  to 
rob  the  temple,  nor  commit  any  other  mischief,  but  only  to  recoyer 
an  antient  right  descended  to  them  from  their  ancestors;  and  to  that 
end  had  a  desire  to  make  void  the  unjust  decrees  of  the  Am phictyonSy 
and  so  to  defend  the  antient  laws  of  the  Phocians.  But  the  Boeotians^ 
IK  assembled  in  council,  made  a  decree  to  relieve  the  temple, and  forth- 
with raised  an  army. 

Piiilomelus  in  the  mean  time  drew  a  wall  round  the  temple,  and 
raised  many  soldiers,  and  added  to  their  pay  half  as  much  more  as 
their  due  amounted  unto ;  and,  making  choice  of  the  best  soldiers 
among  the  Phocians,  he  enrolled  them,  and,  in  a  short  time,  got  to- 
gether su  great  an  army,  as  amounted  to  no  less  than  five  thousand 
men :  so  that,  possessing  himself  of  all  the  passages  to  Delphos^  he 
became  formidable  to  his  enemies.  Then,  marching  into  the  terri- 
tories of  the  Locrians,  he  wasted  a  great  part  of  the  country,  and  at 
length  encamped  near  a  river  that  ran  close  by  a  very  strong  fort^ 
which  he  besieged;  but,  after  some  assaults,  not  being  able  to  take 
it,  he  raised  the  siege,  and  engaged  with  the  Locrians,  in  which  he 
lost  twenty  of  his  men,  whose  bodies  not  being  able  to  recover  by 
force,  he  sent  a  trumpeter  to  have  them  delivered. 

The  Locrians  denied  the  bodies,  and  made  answer ^That  there  was 

a  general  iuw  among  all  the  Grecians,  that  sacrilegious  persons  should 
be  cast  forth,  and  not  allowed  any  burial.  Highly  provoked  at  this 
repulse,  he  fought  again  with  the  Locrians,  and,  with  great  valour 
and  resolution,  slaughtered  some  of  his  enemies,  and  possessed  him- 
self of  their  bodies;  and  so  forced  the  Locrians,  in  exchange,  to  de- 
liver the  dead. 

And  now,  being  master  of  the  field,  he  ranged  up  and  don^,  and 
wasted  the  country  of  Locris;  and,  loading  his  soldiers  with  plunder^ 
returned  to  Delphos. 

Afterwards,  desiring  to  know  from  the  oracle  what  would  be  the 
issue  of  the  war,  he  forced  Pythia  the  prophetess  to  ascend  the  tri- 
pod, and  give  him  an  answer.  Since  mention  is  here  made  of  the 
tripod,  1  conceive  it  not  unseasonable  to  give  an  account  of  what  has 
been  handed  down  to  us  concerning  it  from  antient  times.    It  is  re* 


Chap*  VL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  101 

ported,  that  this  oracle  was  first  discovered  by  some  goats;  for  which 
reason  such  creatures  are  most  commonly  sacrificed  by  tiie  Delphians^ 
when  they  come  to  consult  the  oracle.  The  discovery  is  related  ia 
this  manner -.There  was  an  opening  or  gulpii  in  the  earth  in  that 
place,  now  called  ''  Adytum  of  the  Temple;"  about  this  the  goats 
straggled  as  they  were  feeding:  for  at  that  time  they  of  Delphos  had 
no  religious  regard  to  the  place.  It  often  Jiappeiicd  that  when  any 
goat  came  near  to  the  gulph,  and  looked  down,  it  would  full  a-Ieaping 
and  dancing  in  a  wonderful  manner^  and  make  an  unusual  noise,  far 
different  from  that  at  other  times.  A  shepherd  wondering  at  the  no« 
vclty  of  the  thing,  drew  towards  the  phice  to  learn  what  might  be  the 
cause;  and  looking  down,  he  acted  the  same  part  with  the  goatss 
for  as  they  were  moved  and  acted  upon  as  by  some  enthusiasm,  so 
he  likewise  was  inspired  with  a  spirit  of  prophecy.  The  news  pre* 
sently  spreading  abroad  among  tlie  inhabitants,  how  wonderfully  they 
were  affected  that  looked  down  into  the  chasm,  many  flocked  to  the 
place,  and  out  of  curiosity  made  experiments ;  and  as  many  as  came 
near,. were  always  acted  upon  with  a  spirit  of  divination.  For  these 
reasons,  the  place  was  accounted  the  residence  of  some  oracle:  for 
some  time,  therefore,  it  was  a  practice,  that  those  who  had  a  desire 
to  know  future  events,  would  approach  to  this  den,  and  there  return 
answers  of  things  that  were  to  come  one  to  another.  But  whereas 
many,  through  an  excess  and  transport  of  mind,  would  leap  into  the 
gulph,  and  so  were  never  more  seen,  it  was  judged  advisable  by 
the  inhabitants,  to  avoid  the  like  danger  for  the  future,  that  some 
one  woman  should  be  consecrated  prophetess,  and  that  by  her  the 
answer  of  the  oracle  should  be  delivered;  and  that  an  engine  should 
be  made  for  her,  whereon  she  might  sit;  and  by  that  means  be  in- 
spired without  any  danger,  and  give  answers  to  them  who  consulted 
her  concerning  future  events. 

This  machine  had  three  feet,  from  whence  it  tyias  called  the  Tii** 
pody  whose  figure  and  shape  almost  all  the' tripods* of  brass  made  to 
this  day  are  formed  to  imitate.  But  sufficient,  we  conceive,  is<said 
concerning  the  manner  of  discovering  the  seat  of  the  oracle,  and  for 
what  reasons  the  tripod  was  made. 

It  is  reported,  that  at  the  first,  virgins  were  assigned  to  this  office, 
because,  in  their  nature,  they  are  more  pure  and  harmless,  and  of 
the  same  sex  with  Diana;  and  besides,  as  they  were  judged  fittest  to 
keep  the  secrets  of  the  oracle.  But  it  is  said,  that  of  latter  times  one 
Thessalus  Echecrates,  coming  to  the  oracle,  upon  sight  of  the  virgin 
prophetess,  for  her  admirable  beauty,  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  ra- 
vished her;  which  wicked  act  caused  the  Delphians  to  make  a  law.^ 
Tlmt  no  young  virgin  for  the  future,  but  a  grave  woman  of  fifty  years 


lOS  moDORi-s  SICULU5.  Booh  XFL 


of  age  (in  a  virgin's  dress,  to  keep  up  the  memory  of  the  antienl 
mode  in  divination)  should  preside,  and  return  the  answers.  These 
are  the  old  fabulous  stories  that  are  told  coneerning  the  first  discovery 
of  the  oraele. 
'7  But  to  return  to  the  acts  of  Philomelus ;  who,  being  now  lord  of 
the  temple,  commanded  Pythia  to  answer  him  from  the  tripod,  ac- 
cording to  the  antient  rite  and  custom  of  the  country.  When  the 
prophetess  answered  him,  saying ^This  is  the  custom  of  the  conn- 
try;  he  commanded  her,  with  threats,  to  ascend  the  tripod:  where- 
upon she,  submitting  hy  force  to  the  authority  of  the  imposer,  an- 
swered him — ^That  it  w<ts  lawful  for  him  to  do  what  lie  pleased.  At  < 
which  he  was  very  jocund,  and  said  he  had  received  an  answer  fit  for 
bis  purpose;  and  thereupon  presently  caused  the  answer  to  be  re- 
corded, ar.d  exposed  to  be  read ;  that  so  it  might  be  evident  to  alt, 
that  the  god  ha:l  given  him  liberty  to  do  what  he  pleased.  Then  he 
called  a  general  asseml^ly,  and  rehearsed  to  them  the  divine  oracle» 
and  dcsircil  them  all  to  be  faithful  and  courageous;  and  then  betook 
himself  again  to  the  business  uf  the  war.  Moreover,  a  prodigy  ap- 
peared to  iiini  in  the  temple  of  Apollo:  for  an  eagle  hovering  over  it, 
and  at  length  casting  itself  down  to  the  ground,  pursued  the  pigeons 
(that  were  fed  and  kept  in  the  temple)  from  place  to  place,  so  that 
she  snatched  away  some  even  from  the  altars  themselves.  Those 
that  were  versed  in  interpreting  things  of  this  nature  declared,  that 
this  ]K)rtended  that  Fhilomelus  and  the  Phocians  should  possess 
themselves  of  ail  the  treasures  of  the  temple.  Being  greatly  puffed 
up  with  tliis  eiicuuragement,  he  singles  out  the  choicest  of  his  friends 
to  send  as  messengers  abroad,  some  to  Athens,  others  to  Lacediemon, 
and  others  to Tlubes, and  other  most  remarkable  cities  of  Greece, 

with  this  apology ^^Fliat  he  had  seized  upon  Delphos,  not  with  a 

design  to  commit  any  sacrilege,  but  to  regain  the  patronage  of  the 
temple  for  his  country;  and  declared,  that  he  was  ready  to  give  an 
exact  account  to  all  the  Greeks  uf  the  money,  and  all  the  dedicated 
gifts  there,  both  as  to  weight  and  number,  >\hoever  should  require 
the  same.  And  lastly  he  desired,  that  if  any,  out  of  envy  or  malice^ 
should  make  war  upon  the  Phocians,  that  they  would  rather  join  with 
,  '.  him  against  such,  or  at  least  stand  neuters.  The  ambassadors  ac- 
quitting  themselves  with  all  diligence  in  this  matter,  the  Athenians, 
Lacedaemonians,  and  some  others,  entered  into  the  confederacy,  and 
prcMuised  them  assistance;  but  the  Ha^otians,  with  the  Locrians, and 
some  others,  were  of  a  contrary  nruul,  who  took  up  arms  in  defence 
uf  the  oracle,  against  the  Photians.  Tiic'sc  were  the  things  done  in 
ih:*  C(rji>c  of  this  vear. 


I 


Ch^.  FIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  lOS 


CHAP.  VII. 

The  battle  at  PhiBdra,  between  P/dlomelus  and  the  Locrians,  Tlk9 
parties  engaged  in  the  Phocian  war.  The  battle  between  tJie 
JBceotimis  and  Phocians.  Philoinelas  killed.  Onomarvhus  rnade 
general:  his  dreams,  successes,  and  death. 

NOW  Diotimus  executed  the  office  of  archoii  at  Athens;  'and  Cneius  iL  y 
Manlius^  and  Caius  Martius,  of  consuls  at  Rome;  when  Philomelusy 
having  a  prospect  of  the  storm  of  war  tliat  was  rushing  in  upon  him^ 
hired  a  great  number  of  soldiers,  with  whom  he  joined  tlie  most  ex- 
pert and  choicest  of  tlie  Phocians.  Hut,  though  he  was  in  want  of 
money,  yet  he  still  forbore  to  meddle  with  the  sacred  treasures,  but 
got  sufficient  to  pay  the  mercenaries  out  of  the  estates  of  the  greatest 
men  among  the  Delphians.  When  he  had  raised  a  considerable 
army,  he  marched  into  the  field,  that  all  might  take  notice  that  he 
was  ready  to  fight  with  any  enemy  that  appeared  against  the  Plio- 
cians.  Upon  this  the  Locrians  made  out  against  him,  and  fought  •  -^ 
with  him  at  a  place  called  the  Rocks  of  Phiedra,  whom  he  routed, 
and  killed  multitudes  of  them,  and  took  many  prisoners,  and  forced 
•ome  of  them  to  cast  themselves  down  headlong  from  the  top  of 
the  rock. 

After  this  battle,  the  Phocians  grew  very  high-crested  upon  the 
account  of  their  prosperous  success.  The  misfortune,  on  the  otlier 
hand,  greatly  discouraged  the  Locrians;  they  sent,  therefore,  an  am- 
bassador to  Thebes,  to  desire  them  to  afford  their  assistance  both  to 
them  and  the  oracle.  The  Boeotians,  both  out  of  their  piety  towards 
the  gods,  and  for  confirmation  of  the  decrees  of  the  Aniphictyons, 
wherein  they  were  greatly  concerned),  solicited  hy  their  anjbassadors 
theThessalians,  and  others  of  the  Amphietyons,  to  join  with  them  in 
the  war  against  the  Phocians.  Upon  whicli  (after  that  the  Amphic7 
tyons  had  decreed  war  to  be  made  ui)on  the  Phi)cians)  there  arose 
great  uproars  and  factions  througliout  all  (ireoco.  Some  were  for 
assisting  the  oracle,  and  prosecuting  the  Phocians  with  revenge,  as 
guilty  of  sacrilege ;  others  were  for  defendini:  them.  And,  while  both  ' .'  S 
the  cities  and  countries  were  thus  distrnjtcd  in  their  councils,  the  Boeo- 
tians, Locrians,  Thessalians,  Perrha^heans,  the  Dorians,  Delopians, 
Athamancs,  Achaians,  Phtiiiots,  Magncsians,  /Eueians,  and  some 
others,  resolved  to  assist  the  god.  The  Athenians  and  Licedfcmo- 
<iians,and  some  others  uf  the  i'clopon^c:^ia^s,  joined  as  confederates 


104  mODORUS  SICULU8.  Book  XFT. 

with  the  Phocians.  The  Lacedaemonians,  with  some  others,  readily 
joinefl,  for  these  reasons,  viz.  When  tlie  Thebans  had  overcome 
them  in  tlie  battle  at  Leuctrny  they  prosecuted  tl)e  Spartans  in  the 
high  court  of  the  Amphictyons,  because  Piioebidas  the  Spartan  had 
seized  upon  Cadmca,  and  demanded  five  hundred  talents  in  com- 
pensation of  the  injury;  but  the  Lacedsemonians,  being  fined  so 
much,  and  not  paying  the  mulct  imposed  in  the  time  limited  by 
the  law,  the  Thebans  exhibited  a  new  complaint  against  them  for  the 
double  injury. 

The  Lacedaemonians  therefore,  being  condcmed  by  the  Amphic- 
tyons  in  a  thousand  talents,  and  being  much  indebted  and  behind- 
Iiand,  made  use  of  the  same  pretence  the  Phocians  did  before  (that 
is).»That  the  Amphictyons  had  pronounced  an  unjust  sentence 
against  them.    And  therefore  (though  it  was  for  the  public  good)  yet 
they  forbore  to  undertake  the  war  of  themselves,  upon  the  quarrel  of 
the  condemnation;  but  judged  that  it  might  carry  a  better  face,  if  they 
could  avoid  the  decree  of  the  Amphictyons,  under  the  covert  of  the 
Phocians.    For  these  reasons  they  were  very  forward  to  patronise 
their  cause;  and  in  the  mean  time  contrived  to  gain  the  tutelary 
right  of  the  temple  to  themselves. 
2  Q         And  now  upon  certain  information  that  the  Thebans  had  prepared 
a  very  great  army  against  the  Phocians,  Philomelus  resolved  to 
strengthen  his  forces  with  more  mercenaries :  but  in  regard  more 
money  was  requisite  for  carrying  on  of  the  war,  he  was  necessitated 
to  make  use  of  the  sacred  treasures,  and  therefore  rifled  the  templet 
And  because  he  promised  half  as  much  more  as  their  ordinary  pay  to 
the  mercenaries,  a  vast  number  of  men  flocked  in  to  him,  and  for  the 
sake  of  the  largeness  of  the  pay,  multitudes  listed  themselves :  but 
no  moderate  and  sober  man  gave  up  his  name  to  be  eurolled  in  the 
lists  of  the  army,  out  of  a  pious  and  religious  respect  to  the  oracle. 
In  the  mean  time  every  base  fellow,  that  for  the  sake  of  gain,  valued 
not  the  gods  in  the  least,  but  flocked  eagerly  to  Philomelus:  and  so 
in  a  short  time  he  got  together  a  strong  body  of  men,  who  were  im- 
patient to  share  in  the  sacred  treasures  of  the  temple.    And  thus 
abundance  of  wealth  was  the  means  whereby  Philomelus  presently 
formed  a  complete  army,  and  without  delay  marched  into  the  coun- 
try of  Locris  with  above  ten  thousand  horse  and  foot.    Tlie  Locrians 
being  joined  with  the  Boeotians,  met  him ;  whereupon  there  hap* 
pened  a  fight  with  the  horse  on  both  sides,  in  which  the  Phocians 
were  conquerors. 

Not  long  after,  the  Thessalians,  with  the  assistance  of  them  that 
bordered  upon  them,  to  the  number  of  six  thousand,  marched  into 
Locris,  and  engaged  with  the  Phocians  at  a  hill  called  Argola^  and 


CAap.  VII.  DIODORUS  SICITLUS-  105 

were  worsted.  Afterwards  the  Boeotians  coming  to  their  assistance 
with  thirteen  thousand  men,  and  the  Actseans  out  of  Peloponnesus, 
ID  assistance  of  the  Phocians,  with  fifteen  hundred,  both  armies  near 
one  and  the  same  place,  encamped  over  against  the  otiicr.  It  then  '^  f 
happened  that  a  great  number  of  the  mercenaries,  as  they  were  fo- 
raging, fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Boeotians ;  and  all  of  them  being 
brought  before  the  walls  of  the  city,  they  commanded  a  proclamation 
to  be  made,  that  those  men  who  had  joined  in  arms  with  the  sacrile- 
gious persons,  were  adjudged  by  the  Amphictyons  to  be  put  to  death, 
and  it  was  no  sooner  said  but  the  thing  was  executed,  and  all  were  run 
through  with  spears  and  darts.  This  so  exasperated  the  mercenaries 
of  the  Phocians,  that  they  earnestly  pressed  Philomclus  that  the 
enemy  might  be  dealt  with  in  the  same  manner,  and  would  not  suf- 
fer him,  by  their  restless  importunities,  to  be  quiet;  and  presently 
they  took  many  of  the  enemy,  as  they  were  dispersed  in  the  fields, 
and  brought  them  alive  to  the  general,  who  delivered  them  all  up  to 
the  soldiers,  to  be  darted  to  death.  By  this  retaliation,  it  came 
to  pass  that  the  enemy  left  ofT  this  insulting  and  cruel  kind  of  exe- 
cution. 

Afterwards,  both  the  armies  moving  into  another  part  of  the 
country,  and  in  their  march  passing  through  woods  and  rough  places, 
on  a  sudden,  and  unexpectedly,  the  forlorn  hopes  of  both  met  one 
another,  upon  which  they  at  first  skirmished,  but  at  length  it  came 
to  a  fierce  and  bloody  battle,  in  which  the  Boeotians,  overpowering  the 
Phocians  in  number,  totally  routed  them,  and  multitudes,  both  of 
the  Phocians  and  mercenaries,  were  slain  in  the  pursuit,  by  reason 
of  the  rough  and  difficult  passes  out  of  the  woods.  Philomelus,  In 
tliese  straits  and  exigencies,  behaved  himself  with  great  courage  and 
resolution,  and,  after  many  wounds  received,  was  forced  to  an  higli 
precipice,  and,  seeing  no  possible  means  of  escape,  and  fearing  the 
punishment  and  torments  prisoners  used  to  undergo,  cast  himself 
down  headlong  from  the  rock;  and  thus  (meeting  with  the  due  re- 
ward of  his  sacrilege)  he  ended  his  days:  but  his  colleague Ononiar- 
chus,  taking  upon  him  the  command  of  the  army,  marched  hack  with 
those  that  had  escaped  the  slaughter,  and  received  those  that  fled  as 
they  came  siiaggling  in  to  him. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  these  things  were  doing,  Philip  of  Ma- 
cedon  took  Methone,  pillaged  it,  and  laid  it  equal  with  the  ground; 
and  forced  all  the  villages  and  countries  to  submit  to  tiie  Mace- 
donian yoke* 

In  Pontus,  Ijcucon,  king  of  Bos])horus,  died,  after  he  had  reigned 
forty  years;  and  Spartacus,  his  son,  succeeded  him,  and  reigned  five 
years.     And,  in  the  mean  time,  the  war  began  between  the  Ro- 

\ou2.  No.  41.  P 


106  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XFl 


mans  and  the  Falisci^  in  which  there  was  nothing  done  worth 
taking  notice  of,  but  only  liarassing  the  country  of  the  Falisci  by 
incursions. 

In  Sicily,  Dion,  the  general  of  tlie  army,  was  murdered  by  the 
mercenaries  of  Zacynthus,  and  Callippus,  who  instigated  them  to 
the  act,  was  made  chief  commander  in  his  place,  and  enjoyed  it  for  the 
space  of  thirteen  months. 
"3  Q  When  Eudemus  executed  the  office  of  archon  at  Athens,  and  the 

Romans  intrusted  the  consular  dignity  wich  Marcus  Fabius  and 
Marcus  Popilius,  the  Boeotians,  after  the  victory  gained  over  the 
Phocians,  returned  with  their  forces  into  their  own  country,  sup- 
posing that  Philomelus,  the  author  and  ring-leader  of  the  sacrilege, 
(being  justly  punished  both  by  the  gods  and  men),  by  his  remarka- 
ble end  would  deter  others  from  the  like  piece  of  wickedness.  But 
the  Phocians,  having  at  present  some  respite  from  war,  went  again 
to  Delphos,  and,  calling  together  a  general  council  of  all  their  con- 
federates, tliey  consulted  concerning  the  renewing  of  the  war.  Those 
that  were  lovers  of  justice,  were  for  peace;  but  the  prophanc  and  im- 
pious, and  such  as  minded  only  their  gain  and  advantage,  were  for 
war,  and  used  their  utmost  endeavours  to  find  out  some  or  other  that 
would  patronise  their  wicked  designs. 

Onomarchus  therefore,  in  a  premeditated  speech,  (the  clilef  end 
of  which  was  to  advise  them  to  stick  to  what  they  had  before  re- 
solved), stirred  up  the  people  to  renew  the  war;  not  so  much  for  the 
advancement  of  the  public  good,  as  to  promote  his  own  private  ad* 
vantage.  For  he  had  many  mulcts,  as  well  as  others,  imposed  upon 
him  by  the  Amphictyons;  which,  not  being  able  to  pay,  and  there- 
fore judging  that  war  was  more  desirable  than  peace  as  to  his  cir- 
cumstances, by  a  plausible  sj)ecch  he  incited  the  Phocians  to  persist 
.  y  in  what  Philon;cUis  h:ul  begun.  Upon  which,  being  then  created 
general,  he  rein  forced  himself  with  many  foreign  soldiers,  and  re- 
cruited his  broken  troops;  and,  having  augmented  his  army  with  a 
muhitutlo  of  foreign  mercenaries,  he  made  great  preparation  to 
strengthen  himself  with  confederates,  and  other  things  necessary  for 
■20  the  carrying  on  the  war.  And  he  was  the  more  encouraged  in  Iii9 
■^  ^  design  by  a  dream  which  he  had,  which  did  presage  (as  he  thought) 
liis  future  greatness  and  advancement:  in  his  sleep  it  appeared  to 
him  as  if  the  bra/en  Colossus,  dedicated  by  the  Amphictyons,  untl 
standing  in  the  tem[)Ie  of  Apollo,  liad  by  his  own  hands  been  made 
higher,  and  much  biifj^er  than  it  was  before.  Hence  he  fancied, 
that  the  gods  poi  tended  that  he  was  to  become  famous  in  the  world 
fur  his  martial  exploits.  But  it  fell  out  quite  otherwise,  for,  on  the 
contrary,  it  signiiicd-^That  the  mulct  imposed  by  the  Amphictyonr 


Chap.  FJL  DiODORus  stculus.  I07 

upon  the  Phocians,  for  their  sacrilege  and  violation  of  the  treasures 
of  the  temple,  would  be  much  enhanced,  and  advanced  to  a  still 
greater  sum  by  the  hands  of  Onomarchus^  which  at  length  came 
to  pass. 

Onomarchusy  therefore,  after  he  was  created  general,  caused  a      •  2 
great  number  of  arms,  both  of  iron  and  brass,  to  be  made ;  and  coined 
gold  and  silver  money,  which  he  dispersed  among  the  confederate 
cities;  besought  particularly  to  gain  the  magistrates  by  these  baits 
and  largesses. 

Moreover  he  corrupted  many  of  the  enemy,  drawing  some  into  the 
confederacy,  and  working  upon  others  to  remain  neutral  in  the  mean 
time.  And  all  t!iis  he  easily  effected,  through  the  covetousness  of 
those  he  wrought  upon.  For  by  his  bribes,  he  prevailed  with  the 
Thcssalians,  the  most  considerable  of  the  confederates  on  the  other 
ride,  to  stand  neuter.  Those  amo^ig  the  Phocians  that  opposed  him, 
he  imprisoned,  and  put  to  death,  and  exposed  their  goods  to  public 
sale.  He  then  marched  into  the  enemy's  country,  and  took  Thronium 
by  assault,  and  sold  all  the  inhabitants  for  slaves.  The  Amphisse- 
oiaas,  likewise,  being  greatly  ten  ified,  he  forced  to  a  submission, 
and  possessed  himself  also  of  the  cities  of  the  Dorians,  and 
wasted  and  spoiled  the  country.  Thence  he  marched  into  Bceotia, 
and  took  Orchomcnus;  and  when  he  was  even  ready  to  lay  siege  to 
Chsronea,  he  was  worsted  by  the  Thebans,  and  so  returned  into  his 
own  country. 

About  this  time  Artabazus,  who  had  rebelled  against  the  king,  still 
continued  his  war  with  those  lord  lieutenants  of  the  provinces  that 
were  ordered  out  against  him.  At  the  first,  while  Chares,  the  Athe- 
nian general  assisted  him,  he  valiantly  stood  it  out  against  the  enemy. 
Bat  when  he  left  him,  wanting  aid,  he  made  his  application  to  the 
Thebans  for  relief;  who  iliercupon  sent  Pammenes  general,  with 
fiw thousand  men,  over  into  Asia;  who,  joining  with  Artabazus, 
routed  the  royalists  in  two  great  fights,  and  thereby  advanced  both 
bis  own  reputation,  and  the  glory  and  honour  of  his  country.  For 
't  excited  the  admiration  of  all  men,  that  the  Boeotians,  at  the  very 
"fl>e  when  they  were  deserted  by  the  Thcssalians,  and  in  the  most 
wiminent  danger  from  the  Phocian  war,  which  then  threatened 
*bein,  should  transport  forces  into  Asia,  and  be  conquerors  in  all 
flieir  engagements. 

In  the  mean  time  a  war  broke  out  between  the  Arglves  and  the       3  *!- 
I^cedaemonians,  who  beat  the  others  at  Ornea,  and  took  the  town, 
*^d  then  returned  to  Sparta,     Chares,  likewise,  the  Athenian  ge- 
^^ral,  with  his  fleet,  entered  the  Hellespont,  and  took  Sestos,  the 
JJiost  considerable  town  upon  that  coast,  and  put  all  the  young  mea 


108  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  X 

that  wore  able  to  bear  arms,  to  the  sword,  and  carried  away  the  i 
as  slaves. 
^  3  About  the  same  time,  Cersoblcptcs,  the  brother  of  Cotys,  cnc 

to  Philip,  but  in  league  with  the  Athenians,  delivered  up  all 
cities  in  Chersonesus  (except  Cardia)  to  the  Athenians,  who  sent 
lonies  thither  to  inhabit  the  towns,  which  were  to  be  divided  amoc 
them  by  lot. 
0  'i  Philip,  therefore,  discerning  that  the  Methoneans^  designed 

deliver  up  their  city  (which  was  of  great  moment  in  the  war)  to 
enemy,  laid  close  siege  to  it,  which  the  citizens  defended  for  sc 
time;  but  being  too  weak  to  cope  with  him,  they  were  forced  tos 

render  upon  these  condities ^That  all  the  citizens  should  depart 

of  Methone  with  all  their  clothes. 
5"^  Being  possessed  of  the  place,  he  razed  the  city  to  the  ground^  : 

divided  the  territory  among  the  Macedonians.    During  this  sic 
Philip  lost  an  eye  by  the  stroke  of  a  dart. 
'I  A  ■         Afterwards  being  invited  by  the  Thessalians,  he  marched  n 
^  his  army  into  Thessaly.     And  in  the  first  place,  in  aid  of  the  Thcs 

Hans,  he  f(»iight  with  Lycophron,  tyrant  of  Pherae. 

Lyeuplinu)  tiien  applied  to  the  Phocians  for  assistance,  who  the 
upon  sent  to  him  Phayllus,  the  brother  of  Onomarchus,  with  sei 
tliousand  men;  but  Philip  routed  the  troops  of  the  Phocians^  \ 
drove  them  out  of  Thessaly.  Upon  which  Onomarchus,  thinking 
be  lord  of  all  Thessaly,  came  to  the  assistance  of  Lycophron  with 
whole  army. 

Philip  opposed  him,  both  with  his  own  and  the  forces  of 
Thessalians,    but  Onamarchus,   overpowering   him    by   numbi 
routed  him  in  two  several  battles,  and  killed  many  of  the  Macci 
nians;  insomuch  as  Philip  was  brought  into  very  great  straits. 

His  soldiers  were  hereupon  so  dejected,  that  they  were  read) 
desert  him ;  but  with  much  ado,  and  many  persuasions,  he  at  len| 
brought  them  over  to  a  due  obedience,  and  within  a  short  time  al 
returned  into  Macedonia.  But  Onomarchus  made  an  expcdit 
into  Birotia,  and  fought  and  routed  the  Boeotians,  and  posses 
himself  of  Coronea. 

In  the  mean  time  Philip  marches  again  with  his  army  out  of  A 
cedon  into  Thessaly,  and  encamps  against  Lycophron,  the  tyrani 
Pherae,  who  being  too  weak  for  him,  sent  for  aid  to  the  Phocia 
promising  to  use  his  utmost  endeavour  to  order  and  dispose  of 
things  throughout  Tliessaly  for  their  ad\'antage.  Whereupon  Oi 
marchus  came  to  his  assistance  by  land  with  above  twenty  thouM 
foot  and  five  hundred  horse. 

•  Ip  Thrace. 


€ihap.  VIL  DTODORUS  SICULUS.  109 

Philip  having  persuaded  the  Tliessalians  to  join  with  him^  raised 
above  twenty  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse. 

Forthwith  a  bloody  oattle  was  fought,  in  which  Phih'p,  by  the  ad- 
vantage and  valour  of  the  Thessalian  horse,  got  the  day,  and  Onomar- 
chus  and  his  men  fled  towanls  the  sea. 

It  happened  that  Chares,  the  Athenian  admiral,  passed  by  with  a 
great  navy,  at  the  same  instant  as  a  cruel  slaughter  was  made 
among  the  Phocians,  and  therefore  those  that  fled  cast  away  their 
armsj  and  endeavoured  to  swim  to  the  galleys,  amongst  whom  was 
Onomarchus. 

In  conclusion  there  were  slain  of  the  Phocians  and  mercenaries 
above  six  thousand,  amongst  whom  was  the  general  himself;  and  no 
less  than  three  thousuL.d  were  taken  prisoners. 

Philip  handed*  Onomarchus ;  and  the  rest,  as  sacrilegious  persons^ 
he  caused  to  he  thrown  into  the  sea. 

Onomarchus  thus  coming  to  his  end,  Phayllus,  his  brother,  was 
created  general  of  the  Phocians;  and  he,  to  repair  the  damage  sus- 
tained, raised  great  numbers  of  foreign  mercenaries,  doubling  the 
former  and  usual  pay,  and  further  strengthened  himself  with  additions 
of  his  confederates;  he  likewise  made  a  great  number  of  arms^  and 
coiDed  both  gold  and  silver. 

About  the  same  time  Mausolus,  a  petty  king  of  Caria,  died,  after 
he  hiid  reigned  four-and- twenty  years.  To  whom  succeeded  Ar- 
temesia,  (who  was  both  his  sister  and  wife),  for  the  space  of  two 
years. 

At  that  time,  likewise,  Clearchus,  tyrant  of  Heraclca,  when  he 
Was  going  to  the  feast  of  Bacchus,  was  assassinated,  in  the  twelfth 
Tear  of  his  reign.  Timotheus,  his  son,  succeeded  iiim,  and  reigned 
fifteen  years. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Tuscans,  who  were  at  war  with  the  Romans, 
harassed  and  wasted  a  great  part  of  their  enemy's  territory,  making 
incursions  as  far  as  to  the' river  Tiber,  and  then  returned  to  their  own 
country. 

The  friends  of  Dion  raised  a  sedition  at  Syracuse  against  Callippus, 
but  being  dispersed  and  worsted,  they  fled  to  the  Leontines,  Not  long 
after,  Hipparinus,  the  brother  of  Dionysius,  arrived  with  a  navy  at 
Syracuse,  and  fought  and  beat  Callippus;  upon  which  he  was  driven 
out  of  the  city,  and  Hipparinus  recovered  his  father's  kingdom,  and 
enjoyed  it  for  two  years. 

t  Crucified. 


34 


*:* 


110  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  2 


CHAP.  Vlll. 

Fhaylius  cmitinues  ilie  Phodan  war.  Aryca  razed.  Phm 
dies  of  a  coiisumptum.  f^ar  betivcen  the  Lacedaemonians 
MegalopoUtaus.  Chccronea  taken  by  Phalcscus.  War  beiu 
the  Persians  J  Egyptians^  andPhwnicians.  Salaims^  in  Cypi 
besieged.  The  cruelty  of  Artaxerxes  Ochus  towards  the  Si 
nians.     The  calamity  ofSidon. 

^,  <  WHEN  Aristodamus  was  arclion  at  Athens,  and  Caius  Salpi 
bore  the  consulship  at  Rome,  the  hundred  and  seventh  olympiad' 
celebrated,  wherein  Smicrinus  the  Tarentlne  was  victor.  Ti 
Phayllus,  the  Phocian  general,  after  the  death  of  his  brother,  bcj 
to  repair  the  affairs  of  the  Phocians,  now  almost  at  the  last  exi 
mity,  through  the  late  rout  and  slaughter  of  the  soldiers, 
being  possessed  of  a  vast  treasure,  he  raised  a  great  army  of  mcr 
naries,  and  hrouglit  over  many  to  join  with  him  in  the  war.  / 
bei;ig  very  free  of  his  purse,  he  not  only  brought  over  private  n 
to  his  party,  but  also  prevailed  with  famous  cities  to  be  his  con 
derates:  for- the  Laced^t^monians  sent  him  a  thousand  soldii 
and  the  Achaians  two  thousand ;  but  the  Athenians  sent  him  1 
thousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse,  under  the  command 
Nausicles. 

Lyeophron  and  Pitholaus,  tjTants  of  Pheric,  after  the  death 
Onomarchus,  being  destitute  of  succours,  delivered  up  Pher^e  ii 
the  hands  of  Philip;  and  though  they  were  discharged  upon  th 
©aths  to  be  quiet,  yet  they  collected  two  thousand  mercenaries,  a 
went  over  to  Phayllus,  to  assist  the  Phocians:  and  not  a  few  of  t 
smaller  cities  assisted  them  by  their  bountiful  contributions  towa 
the  soldier's  pay.  For  gold,  feeding  and  kindling  men's  covetoi 
iicss,  from  a  prospect  of  gain  urged  them  foi;ward  to  grasp  at  th 
own  advantage.  Upon  these  encouragements  Phayllus  marcl 
with  his  army  into  Bceotia,  but  is  overcome  at  Orchomenum,  with  1 
loss  of  many  of  his  men. 

Afterwards,  there  was  another  battle  at  the  river  Cephisus,  whc] 
in  the  Boeotians  had  the  better,  and  killed  four  hundred,  and  to 
five  hundred  prisoners.  A  few  days  after,  a  third  fight  took  place 
Coronea,  where  the  Bopotiaus  had  again  the  advantage,  and  kill 
fifty  of  the  Phocians,  and  took  a  hundred  and  thirty  prisoners. 

But  having  done  at  present  with  the  affairs  of  the  Boeotians  a 


Ckap.  FTIL  DiODORUs  siculus.  Ill 

Phocians^  we  return  to  Philip,  who,  when  he  had  overcome  Onomar-  "9  ^ 
cbos  in  so  signal  a  battle,  freed  the  Pheraeans  from  tlic  yoke  of  tyran-  ^  ^ 
lijy  and  restored  the  city  to  liberty-  And  having  settled  all  other 
matters  in  Thessaly,  he  marched  towards  Pylos,  to  fight  with  the 
Phocians:  but  being  denied  passage  by  the  Athenians,  he  returned 
into  Macedonia,  which  kingdom  he  enlarged  both  by  the  help  of  his 
•word,  and  likewise  by  his  piety  towards  the  gods. 

In  the  mean  time  Phayllus  marched  with  his  army  towards  the 
Locrians,  called  Epicnemidii,  and  assaulted  and  took  by  force  some 
dties;  but  one  called  Aryca  he  gained  in  the  night  by  treachery,  but 
was  presently  repulsed  and  beaten  cut,  with  the  loss  of  two  hundred 
of  his  men.    Afterwards,  encamping  at  a  town  called  Abas,  the  Boeo- 
tians surprised  the  Phocians  in  the  night,  and  killed  a  great  number 
of  them*     Upon  which  success  they  were  so  encouraged,  that  tliey 
made  incursions  into  the  territories  of  the  Pliocians,  and,  harassing 
and  spoiling  the  country  round  about,  hea[>ed  together  abundance 
of  plunder.     But  in  their  return,  coming  to  relieve  Aryca,  which  was 
then  besieged,  Phayllus  fell  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  upon  them, 
and  routed  them ;  and  then  taking  the  city  by  storm,  plundered  it, 
and  razed  it  to  the  ground.    But  at  length  he  fell  into  a  lingering 
distemper*,  which  continued  a  long  time,  and,  after  great  torments 
in  his  body,  as  he  justly  deserved,  he  died,  leaving  Phaliecus  the  son 
of  Onomarchus,   (instigator  of  the  sacred  war),  to  be  general  of  the 
Phocians,  who  being  as  yet  but  a  very  raw  youth,  he  appointed  Mna- 
icas,  one  of  his  friends,  to  be  his  tutor  and  governor. 

Some  time  after,  the  Boeotians  attacked  the  Phocians  in  the  night, 
and  killed  Mnaseas  tlie  general,  and  two  hundred  of  his  soldiers.-^ 
Not  long  after,  in  an  engagement  between  a  party  of  hoi-se  at  Cha:- 
ronea,  Phalaecus  being  worsted,  lost  many  of  iiis  men. 

During  these  transactions,  there  were  great  commotions  in  Pelo-  2  C) 
pmnesus,  uix)n  these  occasions.  The  Lacedwmonians  fell  out  with 
them  of  Megalopolis ;  and  therefore  Archidamus,  liieir  general,  niaile 
incursions  into  their  borders:  with  which  the  Mcgalopolitans,  being 
Wghly  incensed,  and  not  being  able  to  contend  by  their  own  strength, 
*>ught  for  relief  from  their  confederates.  Upon  which  the  Aigives, 
Sicyonians,  and  Messcnians,  assisted  them  with  all  the  force  they 
<^ould  muster.  After  them,  theThebans  came  in  to  their  assistance 
*nh  four  thousand  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse,  under  the  command 
^  Cephision.  Being  thus  strengthened,  the  Megalopolitans  made 
^  expedition,  and  encamped  at  the  fountains  of  Aphieus.  On  the 
^W  side,  the  Lacedaemonians  were  joined  by  three  thousand  foot 
&om  the  Phocians,  and  by  an  hundred  and  fifty  horse  from  Lycophron 

*  A  cunsutDptioD.    Som»  sa^,  he  wus  burnt  in  the  temple  ut  Abai. 


112  DionoRUs  sicuLus.  Book  XFT. 

and  Pitholaus^  who  were  lately  deposed  from  tluir  government  over 
the  Pheracans.  And,  having  got  together  a  coni»iderable  army,  they 
encamped  at  Mantinea.  But,  marching  hence  to  Ornea,  a  city 
belonging  to  the  Argives,  they  took  it  before  the  enemy  could  come 
up  to  them;  for  this  place  was  in  league  with  the  Megalopolitans : 
and,  thougli  the  Argives  broke  forth  upon  them,  yet  they  were  over- 
come in  the  engagement,  and  lost  above  two  hundred  men. 

Then  the  Thcbans,  double  the  Lacedtcmonians  in  number,  but 
much  inferior  to  them  in  their  order  of  discipline,  came  upon  them ; 
upon  which  there  was  a  sharp  engagement,  and,  even  while  the  victory 
was  doubtful,  the  Argives  flagged,  and  made  away,  with  all  their  con- 
federates, to  their  cities.  But  the  LacediRmonians  entered  into  Ar- 
cadia, and  took  Elisunta  by  storm,  and,  after  thoy  had  plundered  the 
town,  returned  to  Sparta. 

Not  long  after  the  Thehans,  with,  their  confederates,  routed  the 
enemy  at  Tclphusa,  and,  with  the  slaughter  of  many  of  tliem,  took 
Anaxandrus,  the  general,  and  several  others,  to  the  number  of  sixty, 
prisoners.  Presently  after,  they  became  conquerors,  likewise,  in 
two  other  battles,  and  cut  off  many  of  their  enemies.  At  length, 
after  a  remarkable  victory  gained  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  the  ar- 
mies on  both  sides  returned  to  their  several  cities;  and,  the  Lace- 
daemonians and  Megalopolitans  entering  into  a  truce,  the  Thebaus 
returned  into  Ba^otia. 

In  the  mean  time  Phal.rcus,  continuing  still  in  Bueotia,  took  ChiB- 
ronea;  but,  upon  the  Thebans  coming  in  to  its  relief,  he  was 
forced  to  quit  it  again.  Afterwards,  the  Ba^otians  entered  Phocis 
with  a  great  army,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  a  great  part  of  it,  and 
harassed  all  the  country  round  about,  and  plundered  and  destroyed 
every  thing  that  was  in  their  way.  They  took  also  some  little  towns, 
and,  loading  themselves  with  abundance  of  plunder,  returned  into 
Boeotia. 

When  Thessalus  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  and  Marcus  Fa- 
bius  and  Titus  Quintius  executed  the  consulship  at  Rome,  the  The- 
bans, wearied  out  with  the  toils  of  the  Phocian  war,  and  brought 
very  low  in  their  treasure,  sent  amba«isadors  to  the  king  of  Persia  to 
solicit  that  king  to  supply  them  with  a  sum  of  money;  to  which  Ar- 
taxerxes  readily  consented,  and  without  delay  furnished  them  with 
three  hundred  talents.  However,  there  was  little  or  nothing  done 
this  year  worth  taking  notice  of  between  the  Ba^otians  and  Phocia'\s, 
except  some  skirmishes,  and  harassing  the  countries  of  each  other/ 

In  Asia,  the  Persian  king  having  invaded  ligypt  some  years  before 
with  a  numerous  army;  but,  miscarrying  in  his  design,  at  this  time 
renewed  the  war  against  the  Egyptians,  and  after  many  worthy  ac* 


Chdp.  nil.  mODORUS  STCULUS.  1  13 


tions  performed  by  his  valour  and  diligence^  he  recovered  Eji^pt, 
Phoenicia,  and  Cyprus.  But  that  the  history  may  be  made  more 
plain  and  evident,  we  shall  first  declare  the  causes  and  grounds  of 
the  war,  looking  back  a  little  to  tiie  times  proper  for  the  occasion. 

The  Egyptians  having  heretofore  rebelled  against  the  Persians, 
Artaxerxes,  surnamed  Ocluis,  notwithstanding,  sat  still  and  quiet, 
being  no  ways  adicted  to  arms.  And  though  armies  under  the  com- 
mand of  several  captains  had  been  sent  forth,  yet,  through  the  trea- 
chery and  unskilfulnoss  of  the  generals,  he  was  often  unfortunate  and 
unsuccessful.  On  which  account,  though  he  was  greatly  contemned 
by  the  Egyplians,  yet  his  love  to  his  ease  and  pleasure  had  that  as- 
cendency over  him^  as  to  induce  him  patiently  to  bear  the  disgrace. 
But  now,  whcrr  the  Phoenicians  and  kings  of  Cyprus,  in  imitation  of 
this  disloyalty  of  the  Egyptians,  and  in  coutonjpt  of  him,  were  all 
running  into  rebellion,  the  king  was  at  length  roused,  and  determin- 
ed to  make  war  upon  them.  But  he  jiulgcd  it  not  advisable  or  pru- 
dent to  manage  the  war  by  his  deputies  and  generals,  but  resolved 
to  go  himself,  and  try  his  own  fortune  and  conduct  in  the  defence 
and  preservation  of  his  kingdom.  To  that  end  he  made  great  pre- 
parations of  arms,  darts,  provi.sions,  and  forces;  and  raised  three 
hundred  thousand  foot,  and  thirty  thousand  horse;  and  rigged  out  u 
fleet  of  three  hundred  galleys,  besides  six  hundred  hhips  of  burden> 
and  other  transport  ships  for  all  sorts  of  provisions.  This  was  the  Hi 
origin  of  the  war  in  Phoenicia. 

In  Phoenicia  there  is  a  famous  city  called  Tripolis  its  name  agree- 
ing with  the  nature  of  the  place;  for  three  cities  are  contained  with- 
in its  bounds,  a  furlong  distant  from  one  another,  one  called  the  city 
of  the  Arcadians,  the  oilier  of  the  Sidonians,  and  the  third  of  the  Tyri- 
ans.  It  is  the  most  eminent  of  all  the  cities  of  Piicenicia,  being  that 
where  the  general  senate  of  all  the  Phaniieians  usually  meet  and  con- 
sult about  the  weighty  affairs  of  the  nation.  The  kings,  lords  lieu- 
tenants, and  generals  then  in  Sidon,  carrying  themselves  by  their  se- 
vere edicts  rigorously  and  haughtily  towards  the  Sidonians,  the  citi- 
zens being  so  abused,  and  not  being  longer  able  to  brook  it,  studied 
liow  they  migiit  revolt  from  the  Persians.  V\)ox\  which,  the  rest  of 
the  Phoenicians  being  wrought  upon  to  vioilicate  th.cir  liberty,  sent 
messengers  to  Nectanel)us  the  kirig  of  Egypt,  then  at  war  wiili  the 
Persians,  to  receive  them  as  confederates;  and  so  the  whole  nation 
f  ''»ared  for  war.  And  ns  Sidon  then  exceeded  all  the  rest  in  wealth, 
and  even  private  nicn  by  the  advantiige  v^  trade  had  grown  very  rich, 
they  built  a  great  number  of  ships,  and  raised  a  potent  army  of  mer- 
cenaries; and  both  arms,  darts,  and  provisions,  and  all  other  thing:* 
Dccessary  for  the  war,  were  prepared.     And  that  they  u)ii»iit  appear 

Vol.1?.  No.  41.  u 


1 1 4  DIOnORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XVt. 

first  in  tlic  war,  they  spoiled  and  ruined  the  king's  garden,  cutting 
down  uU  the  trees  where  the  Persian  kings  used  to  recreate  and  di- 
vert themselves,  llien  they  burnt  all  the  hay  which  the  lord- 
licutcnnnts  had  laid  up  for  the  use  of  the  horses.  At  last,  they  seized 
upon  the  Persians,  who  had  so  exulted  over  them,  and  led  them  to 
punishment.  And  in  this  manner  began  the  war  of  the  Persians 
with  the  Phcrnicians:  for  the  king,  being  informed  wliat  the  rebels 
had  so  impudently  done,  threatened  to  revenge  it  upon  all  the  inha- 
^.  /^  bitants  of  Phoenicia,  especially  upon  the  Sidonians.  To  this  end,  he 
I  ^  '  rendezvoused  all  his  army,  both  horse  and  foot,  at  Babylon,  and  pre* 
scntly  marched  away  against  the  Phoenicians.  In  the  mean  time, 
while  the  king  was  upon  his  march,  the  governor  of  Syria,  and  Ma- 
Z8RUS,  lord  lieutenant  of  Cilicia,  joined  together  against  the  Phceni- 
cians:  on  the  other  side,  Temnes,  king  of  Sidon,  procured  for  their 
assistance  four  thousand  Greek  mercenaries  from  the  Egyptians^  un- 
der the  command  of  Mentor  the  Uhodian ;  with  these,  and  a  body  of 
the  citizens,  he  eng-aged  with  the  lord  lieutenants,  and  got  the  day, 
and  expelled  them  out  of  Pho::nicia. 

While  these  things  were  acted  in  Phcenicia,  the  war  in  Cyprus 
began  at  the  same  time,  the  one  depending  much  upon  the  other. 
There  were  nine  great  cities  in  this  island,  under  whose  juris- 
diction were  all  the  other  smaller  towns.  Every  one  had  its  sepa- 
rate king,  who  managed  all  public  aflairs;  but  all  were  subject  to  the 
king  of  Persia. 

All  these  entered  into  a  cnnfederacy,  and,  after  the  example  of  the 
Phirnieians,  shook  oft' the  yoke;  and,  having  made  all  necessary  pre- 
parations for  the  war,  took  upon  them  the  absolute  power  and  sov&# 
rei^rnty  in  their  own  several  dominions. 

Artaxevses,  being  enraged  at  this  insolence,  wrote  to  Idrieus*, 
j)rince  of  t'aria,  (then  lately  come  to  the  throne,  a  friend  and  confe- 
derate of  the  Persians,  as  all  his  ancestors  were  before  him),  to  raise 
]iim  both  lai»d  and  sea-forces,  for  his  assistance  against  the  kings  of 
Cyprus,  rpon  wliicli,  he  forthwith  rigged  out  a  fleet  of  forty  sail^ 
and  sent  on  board  eight  thousand  mercenaries  for  Cyprus,  under  the 
tommand  of  Phocion  the  Athenian,  and  Evagoras,  who  had  been  for 
some  years  l)efi)re  king  of  the  island.  As  soon  as  they  landed  ia 
Cyprus,  they  marched  then  strait  to  Salamis,  the  greatest  of  the 
cities,  where  they  cast  up  a  trench,  and  fortified  tliemselvcs,  and  so 
closely  besieged  the  city  both  by  sea  and  land.  The  island  had 
continued  a  h)ng  time  in  peace  and  quietness,  and  therefore  was 
grown  vtry  rich;  so  that  the  soldiers,  who  had  now  the  power  to 
range  ovor  the  country,  had  got  together  great  trctisurcs:    wiiigli 

•  Or  llnricr<. 


Chmp.  FIIL  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  115 

plc'ity  R!?d  confluence,  being  noised  abroad,  many  on  tlic  opposite 
coiit'iu. -1*.  n  hopes  of  gain,  came  flocking  out  of  Syria  and  Cilicia, 
tv  i!:'*  I'cisian  camp.  The  army  of  Phocion  and  Evagoras  being  in- 
Ci<*ii>v(i  lo  double  the  number,  the  petty  kings  were  brought  into  great 
sr.r.iity,  and  much  terrified.  And  in  tiiis  condition  was  Cyprus  at 
thiiT  time. 

Ai>jut  this  time  the  king  of  Persia  marched  ivitli  his  army  from 
Ba';"  Ion,  and  made  towards  Phue.ncia:  but  Mentor,  general  of  the 
fcilonians,  when  he  heard  how  great  an  army  was  approaching,  and 
co'.isidi  rintj  how  unequal  in  numljer  the  rebels  were,  he  privately 
co-TN'.'lted  his  own  safety.  To  that  end  he  st*<;rci'y  despatched  away 
fron,  ."^idon  a  taithful  servant  of  his  own,  calledThessalion,  to  Artax- 
erxes,  promising  to  betray  Sidon  to  lii^n;  and  that  he  would  effec* 
tuslly  a  ..i'Jt  hii:)  in  subduini-  Eayp%  he  Iwjing  in  that  respect  more 
especially  able  to  stiVe  him,  iccause  he  was  well  act^uainied  with  all 
the  places  in  Egypt,  and  knew  exactly  the  most  convenient  passages 
over  ihe  river  Nile.  The  king  was  wonderfully  pleased  when  lie 
lieard  what  Thessalion  said,  and  promised  that  he  would  not  only 
pardon  Mentor  for  what  he  had  done,  but  would  bountifully  reward 
hiui,  it  he  performed  what  he  had  promised,  l^ut  Thessalion  further 
added,  that  Mentor  would  expect  that  the  king  should  confirm  his 
word  by  giving  out  his  ri^ht  hand.  Upon  which  the  king  was  so 
incensed  (as  being  distrusted)  that  he  gave  up  Thessalian  into  the 
bands  of  the  officers,  w*ith  command  to  cut  oH*  his  head.     When  he 

was  led  to  execution,  he  only  said  this ^Thou,  O  king,  doest  what 

thou  pleasest;  but  Mentor,  who  is  able  to  <iccomplish  all  I  have  said, 
will  perform  nothing  that  is  promised,  because  thou  refusest  to  give 
him  assurance  on  thy  part.  Upon  hearing  of  which,  the  king  altered 
his  mind,  and  commanded  the  officers  to  discharge  the  man ;  and  so 
he  put  forth  his  right  hand  to  Thessalion,  which  is  a  most  sure  and 
certain  earnest  among  the  Persians  of  performance  of  what  is  pro- 
inised.  Then  he  returned  to  Sidon,  and  secretly  imparted  to  Mentor 
what  he  had  done. 

Id  the  mean  time  the  king,  counting  it  his  greatest  happiness  if  he 
could  subdue  Egypt,  (which  he  had  before  attempted  in  vain),  sent 
ambassadors  to  the  chiefest  cities  of  Greece,  to  solicit  some  auxiliary 
forces  from  them.  The  Athenians  and  lyaced(«monians  returned 
answer — ^That  they  would  still  continue  friends  to  the  Persians;  but 
ihat  they  could  not  supply  them  with  forces.  But  theThcbans  comr 
inanded  a  thousand  heavy-armed  men  to  be  sent  to  the  asbistance  of 
the  king,  under  the  command  of  Lacrates.  The  Arrives  likcwiso 
furqbhed  him  with  three  thousand  men,  but  sent  no  captain  \S\\\\ 


1 16  DionoRus  sicui-LS.  Book  XFL 


'iT 


them,  because  tlie  kin^had  expressly  by  name  appointed  Nicostrat us 
to  command  them,  and  they  were  unwilling  to  contradict  liim.  He 
was  a  man  of  great  account,  both  as  to  council  and  execution,  having 
both  valour  and  prudence,  assistant  one  to  another.  And,  because 
he  was  of  vast  strength  of  body,  imitating  t^e^cules  in  his  arms,  he 
carried  both  a  club  and  a  lion's  sKin  in  every  battle.  Neither  were 
the  Grecians  who  inhabited  upon  the  ^ea-coasts  of  Asii  wanting  oq 
their  parts,  but  sent  out  six  thousand  men :  so  that  all  the  auxiliary 
forces  from  the  Grecians  amounted  to  ten  thousand.  But,  before 
these  came  up,  the  king  had  passed  through  Syria,  and  entered  Phoe- 
nicia, and  encamped  not  far  from  Sidon. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  the  king  spent  a  considerable  time  in 
making  pn  r  aration,  the  Sidonians  had  been  very  active  and  diligent 
in  furnishing  themselves  wiih  arms  and  provisions;  and  besides,  had 
drawn  a  trohlo  deep  and  broad  trend),  and  a  high  wall  round  the  city. 
They  had  likewise  a  brave  body  of  tall,  handsome,  and  stout  men 
of  the  citizens,  well  ext^cisedand  trained  up  in  njartial  discipline  out  of 
the  sehoDis:  and  this  eity  went  far  beyond  all  the  rest  of  the  cities 
of  riiaMiicia  for  wealth,  and  all  other  sumptuous  ornaments,  both  for 
state  and  grandeur:  and  that  which  was  not  t':.  least  among  the  resf, 
they  were  furnished  with  a  hundred  gal  lies,  of  three  and  five  oars  oa 
a  bank. 

And  nowTemnes*  became  a  party  with  Mentor  (who  commanded 
the  mercenaries  out  of  Egypt)  in  the  treachery,  and  left  Mentor  to 
keep  a  certain  quarter  of  the  city,  in  order  to  help  forward  the  exe- 
cution of  the  treason;  and  himself  went  out,  with  five  hundred  sol- 
diers, upon  a  pretence  to  go  to  the  common  assembly  of  the  Phoe- 
nicians: for  he  had  in  his  com|)any  a  hundred  of  the  best  quality  of 
the  citizens  to  be  senators,  as  was  pretended;  but  these  he  caused  to 
be  seized,  and  delivered  up  into  the  hands  of  Artaxerxes,  as  soon  as 
they  came  near  where  the  king  was,  who  received  him  as  his  friend, 
but  ordered  the  hundred  noblemen^  as  authors  of  the  rebellion^  to  be 
darted  to  death. 

Presently  after,  when  five  hundred  more  of  the  chicfest  of  the  Si- 
doniams  cnme  to  him  with  all  the  badges  of  submission  imaginable, 
he  called  'J'emncs  back,  and  asked  hitn  whether  he  was  able  to  deliver 
the  eity  into  his  hands,  (for  he  earnestly  desired  to  possess  himsetf 
of  the  place  upon  any  terms  whatsoever,  rather  than  upon  treaty,  te 
the  riid  that  the  utter  ruin  of  the  citizens  might  be  a  terror  to  the 
rest),  whin  Temnes  assured  him  he  was  able  to  effect  it,  the  king^, 
■r  iiiL'"  ^lill  iinplaeahle,  caused  all  (he  five  hundred  (who  carried  olive* 

'   !T..  rv  Aitulo:  jb  n::r  i.t  risni.'.'b  in  !i!C  (irvfk 


Chap.  nil.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  1 17 


branches  before  them,  as  supplicants  for  mercy,  and  as  tokens  of  sub- 
mission) to  l)e  shot  to  dcatli  with  darts.  Afterward:*,  Temncs  readily 
persuaded  tlie Egyptian  mercenaries  to  receive  him  and  the  kingwilhia 
the  wails;  and  so, by  this  treacherous  contrivance, Sidon  came  agaia 
into  the  hands  of  the  Persians.  Then  tiie  king,  judging  that  Temnc* 
could  do  him  no  further  service,  caused  iiis  throat  to  be  cut  likewise. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Sidonians  had  burnt  all  their  shipping  be- 
fore the  king  came,  lest  any  of  the  inhabitants,  consulting  their  owa 
safety,  should  get  awny  by  sea.  At  length,  when  the  Sidonians  saw 
that  the  enemy  had  entered,  and  many  thousands  of  men  ranging  here 
and  there,  and  dispersed  all  over  tiic  city,  they  shut  themselves  up, 
with  their  wives  and  children,  in  their  iiouses,  and  set  them  on  fire, 
and  SQ  were  all  consumed  together.  It  is  said  there  were  abovp  forty 
thousand  (with  household  servants)  tliat  perished  in  these  flames. 

After  this  destruction  of  the  Sidonians,  by  which  the  whole  city 
and  inluibitants  were  consumed  to  ashes,  the  king  sold  the  rubbish 
and  relicts  of  the. fire  for  many  talents:  for,  the  city  being  very  rich, 
there  was  found  a  vast  quantity  ol  gold  and  silver  meltL"!  down  by 
the  flames.  Thus  sad  was  the  calamity  under  which  the  Sidonians 
sufl'ered.  The  rest  of  the  cities,  being  terrified  with  this  destruction, 
■  presently  surrendered  themselves  to  the  Persians.  A  little  before 
this  Artemisia,  the  princess  of  Caria,  died,  having  governed  two 
years :  Idrleus,  her  brother,  succeeded  in  the  principality,  and  reigned 
seven  years. 

In  Italy,  the  Romans  made  a  truce  with  thcPraenestines,and  entered 
into  a  league  with  the  Samnitcs;  and  cut  off  the  heads  of  two  hundred 
and  sixty  in  the  forum,  of  those  that  sided  whh  the  Tarquins. 

In  Sicily,  Leptines  and  Callippus,  the  Syracusans,  being  furnished 
with  a  considerable  army,  besieged  Rhegium,  which  was  still  held  by 
a  garrison  of  Dionysius  the  younger;  anvl,  having  forced  out  thegarri- 
jton,  they  restored  the  Rhcgians  to  their  anticnt  government. 


118  nioDORL-s  sicuLUS.  Book  XFL 


CHAP.  IX. 

Era^aras  beheaded  in  Cyprus.  Artaxerxes  marches  against 
Eg]fpt^  and  gains  it  all  hy  the  policy  of  Mentor.  Loses  mamp 
(if  his  men  at  the  lake  of  Sorhon.  3fentor  advanced.  Mentor's 
stratagem  to  subdue  Uermeas^  prince  ofAtarnea.  Zena  razed 
by  Philip,  The  king  of  Egypt  abdicates  his  kingdom,  and  flies, 
to  Ethiopia, 

\f     AFTERWARDS,  Apollodorus  being  chief  magistrate  at  Athens, 

^     and  Marcus  Valerius  and  Caius  Sulpitius  Roman  consuls,  all  the 

chies  of  Cyprus  surrcfidered  themselves  to  the  Persians,  excepting 

Salamis,  which  was  then  besiep?d  by  Evagoras  and  Phocion,  and 

which  Protac^oras,  king  of  Salamis,  stoutly  defended. 

In  the  mean  time,  Kvngoras  endeavoured  to  regain  the  kingdom 
of  his  ancestors,  and  contrived  to  be  restored  to  his  antient  right,  by 
the  help  of  the  Persian  king.  But,  being  afterwards  accused  before 
ArtnxGixcs,  (who  thereupon  relieved  Protagoras),  he  laid  aside  all 
hopes  of  being  restored,  and,  having  afterwards  cleared  himself  of 
all  that  was  laid  to  his  charge,  he  was  intrusted  with  the  government 
of  a  larger  province  in  Asia,  which  he  so  misgoverned,  that  he  was 
forced  to  fly  again  into  Cypru*:,  where,  being  seized,  he  had  his  head 
fctruck  off.  But  Protagoras,  voluntarily  submitting  himself  to  the 
Persian  king,  kept  the  kingdom  of  Salamis^  without  any  rival,  for 
the  time  to  come. 

In  the  mean  time  the  king  of  Persia,  after  the  ruin  of  Sidon,  being[^ 
joined  by  the  forces  that  came  from  Argos,  Thebes,  and  the  antient 
cities,  marched  with  his  whole  army  against  Kgypt.  When  he  came 
to  the  Great  Lough*,  or  I-<ake,  through  igiioiancc  of  the  places,  he 
lost  part  of  his  army  in  the  bogs  there,  called  Barrathra.  But,  be- 
cause we  have  before,  in  the  first  book,  spoken  of  the  nature  of  this: 
lake,  and  the  strange  things  there  happening,  we  shall  now  forbear  ta 
roj)eat  them. 

Having  passed  these  giilphs,  he  came  to  Peluslum,  the  first  mouth 
of  the  river  Nile,  where  it  enters  into  the  sea.  Here  the  Grecians 
lay  close  to  the  city,  but  the  Persians  encamped  forty  furlongs  oflT. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  Egyptians  (in  regard  the  Persians  had  given 
ihein  a  long  time  to  prepare  all  things  necessary  for  the  war)  had 
made  Ftrong  defences  and  fortifications  at  all  the  mouths  of  thcNilCj^ 

•  ^' or  lion  i^  »lic  J-akc  of  ?ovlK>n. 


f^ap.  IX.  DIODORtJS  SICU  LU8.  1 1 9 

especially  at  Pelusium,  because  that  was  the  first  and  nK>st  conveni- 
ently situated;  where  five  thousand  men  were  in  garrison,  under  the 
command  of  Philophron.  The  Thebans,  above  all  the  Grecians, 
had  a  desire  to  give  evidence  of  their  valour,  and  to  that  end  ttiey 
first  of  all  valiantly  attempted  to  force  tlic  trench,  which  was  botk 
strait  and  deep,  and  carried  it;  but,  as  soon  as  they  had  gained  it, 
those  of  the  garrison  made  a  sally;  upon  which  there  was  a  sharp 
engagement,  insomuch  that  the  dispute  was  very  hot  on  both  sidefi, 
and  continued  ail  the  day,  the  night  scarcely  putting  an  end  to  the 
contest. 

The  next<lay  the  king  divided  the  Greeks  into  three  brigades;    ii^7 
each  of  which  had  a  Greek  commander,  with  whom  was  joined  a 
Persian  officer^  one  who  was  in  the  greatest  estimation  for  valour 
and  loyalty. 

The  first  brigade  was  of  the  Boeotians,  under  the  command  of 
Lacrates  a  Theban^  and  Rosaces  a  Persian.  This  Rosaces  was  de- 
acended  from  some  of  those  seven  Persians  who  de|K)sed  the  Magi, 
and  was  governor  of  Ionia  and  Lydia.  He  led  a  great  body,  both 
horse  and  foot,  all  barbarians. 

The  second  brigade  was  composed  of  the  Argivcs,  commanded 
by  Nicostratus,  with  wliom  was  Aristazanes  a  Persian,  who  was 
employed  as  an  envoy  in  all  the  special  afi^airs  of  the  king,  and 
next  to  Bagoas,  was  the  most  trusty,  and  the  ciiicf  of  his  friends. 
He  liad  five  thousand  soldiers,  and  four-score  gallics,  under  his 
command. 

The  third  brigade  was  led  by  Mentor,  he  who  betrayed  Sidon,  ^vlio 
formerly  commanded  the  mercenaries;  his  colleague  was  Bagoa?^ 
a  bold  fellow,  and  none  more  ready  in  executing  any  villany,  in  whom 
the  king  put  great  confulonce.  He  commanded  the  Greeks  that  were 
the  king*s  subjects,  and  a  great  body  of  barbarians,  besides  a  consi- 
derable navy.  The  king  kept  the  rest  of  the  army  with  himself,  and 
was  very  careful  iu  managing  and  overseeing  the  whole  concern  of 
tlie  war. 

The  army  of  the  Persians  thus  divided,  Neetanebus,  the  king  of 
Egypt,  (though  he  was  far  short  in  number),  neither  v^iiucd  the  mul- 
titude nor  the  division  of  the  Persian  troops:  for  he  had  in  his  nrmy 
twenty  thousand  Grecian  mercenaries,  as  many  Africans,  and  three- 
score thousand  Egyptians,  by  them  called  warriors;  and,  besides 
these,  was  furnished  with  an  incredible  number  of  rlvci -boats,  fitted 
to  fight  in  the  river  Nile.  Moreover,  he  had  defended  that  side  of 
the  river  towards  Arabia  with  many  castles  and  garrisons,  exactly 
fortified  with  trenches  and  strong  walls,  and  was  prepared  with  plenty 
«f  all  other  things  necessary  for  the  war.     But,  tluougli  imprudence 


120  DIODORUS  sicuLus.  Book  XVT. 


^  ^  and  want  of  good  advice,  he  lost  all.  The  chief  cause  of  the  mis- 
carriage was  his  IgnoraDce  how  to  manage  warlike  affairs,  and  his 
security^  upon  the  account  of  his  having  before  beaten  the  Persians; 
for,  at  the  time  of  that  success,  having  had  most  expert  commanders^ 
Diophantus  the  Athenian,  and  Lanius  the  Spartan,  who  were  both 
valiant  and  experienced  soldiers,  all  things  succeeded  according  to 
his  heart's  desire.  But,  being  now  conceited  of  his  own  sufficiencj 
and  ability  to  command  and  order  the  army,  he  would  admit  of  no 
other  assistant;  and  therefore,  through  want  of  skill  and  expcriencey 
nothing  was  managed  to  advantage,  or  becoming  an  expert  com- 
inandor. 

Having  therefore  strongly  garrisoned  the  towns,  he  himself,  with 
thirty  thousand  Egyptians,  five  thousand  Grecians,  and  half  of  the 
Libyans,  defended  the  passages  which  lay  most  open  and  easy  to 
invasions. 

Tilings  thus  ordered  on  both  sides,  Nicostratus,  who  commanded 
the  Argives,  having,  by  some  Egyptian  guides,  (whose  wives  and 
children  the  Persians  kept  as  hostages),  got  through  a  certain  cut  or 
ditch,  passed  over  with  his  fleet  to  a  place  as  far  out  of  sight  as  he 
could,  and  having  landed  his  men  there,  encamped.  Those  who 
kept  the  neighbouring  Egyptian  garrisons,  directly  they  learnt  where 
the  enemy  was  encamped,  speedily  marched  against  them  with  do 
less  than  seven  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  Clinus,  of 
the  Isle  of  Coos,  who  drew  up  his  men  in  battalia,  in  order  to  fight 
them :  on  the  other  side,  those  lately  landed,  likewise  put  themselves 
into  a  posture  of  defence;  when  a  sharp  engagement  ensued,  in 
which  the  Grecians  on  the  side  of  the  Persians  so  gallantly  behaved 
themselves,  that  they  killed  Clinus  the  general,  and  above  five  thou- 
sand of  the  rest  of  his  army. 

Upon  hearing  of  this  defeat,  Nectanebus  was  in  a  terrible  fright^ 
for  that  he  believed  the  rest  of  the  Persian  troops  would  easily  pass 
over  the  river.  Being  therefore  afraid  lest  the  enemy  would  bend  aU 
his  force  against  Memphis,  the  seat-royal,  he  made  it  his  chief  care 
and  concern  to  secure  this  place,  and  thereupon  marched  away  with 
the  army  he  had  to  Memphis,  to  prevent  the  besieging  of  it. 

Li  *'f  In  the  mean  time,  Ijaerates  the  Theban,  the  commander  of  the 
first  brigade,  pushes  on  the  siege  of  Pelusium;  and  having  drained 
the  water  out  of  the  trench,  and  turned  it  another  way,  he  raised  a 
mount,  and  there  ])laced  his  engines  of  battery  against  the  city. 
And  after  a  great  part  of  the  walls  were  battered  down,  the  Pclu- 
slans  raised  up  others  in  their  stead,  and  speedily  made  high  wooden 
towers. 
These  conflicts  upon  the  walls  continued  for  some  days^  during 


Chap.  IX.  niODORUS  SICULUS.  1 21 


which  time  the  Grecians  that  defended  the  place  valiantly  repelled 
the  assailants.  But  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  the  king's  departure  for 
Memphis,  they  were  so  aflfrighted,  that  they  sent  messengers  to  treat 
upon  terms  of  surrender.  Whereu{K)n  Lacrates  agreeing  with  them 
upon  the  sacred  tie  of  an  oath,  that  upon  their  delivering  up  Pclusium^ 
they  should  return  to  Greece  with  whatever  they  brought  with  them 
out  of  the  towti^  they  surrendered  the  place^  Then  Artaxerxes  sent 
Bagoas  with  a'garrison  of  Persians,  to  take  possession  of  Pelusium^ 
whose  soldiers,  when  they  entered  the  town,  took  away  from  the 
Grecians,  as  they  were  going  out,  many  of  those  things  that  they  had 
brought  with  them. 

Being  thus  abused,  they  took  it  heinously,  and  with  great  complaints 
called  on  the  gods,  as  witnesses  and  revengers  of  perjury  and  breach 
of  faith. 

Lacrates  being  justly  indignant  at  this  base  dealing,  attacked  the 
barbarians,  and  killed  some  of  them^  and  put  the  rest  to  flight,  and 
so  protected  the  Greeks  thus  injured  contrary  to  the  agreement  con- 
firmed by  oath.  And  though  Bagoas^  who  fled  amongst  the  rest> 
and  returned  to  the  king,  accused  Liacrates  for  what  he  had  done> 
yet  the  king  adjudged  that  the  soldiers  of  Bagoas  were  dealt  with 
according  to  their  merits,  and  punished  those  Persians  that  were 
authors  of  the  rapine.  And  in  this  manner  came  Pelusiura  into  the 
liands  of  the  Persians. 

But  Mentor,  commander  of  the  third  brigade,  recovered  Bubastisi 
and  many  other  cities,  to  the  obedience  of  the  Persian  king>  by  his 
own  stratagem.  For  whereas  all  these  cities  were  garrisoned  by  two 
sorts  of  i)eople,  Grecians  and  Egyptians;  Mentor  caused  a  report  to 
be  spread  abroad,  that  Artaxerxes  would  receive  most  graciously^  and 
pardon  all  those  that  of  their  own  accord  would  give  up  their  cities 
to  the  king;  and  on  the  other  hand>  that  all  such  as  he  might  take  by 
force,  should  fare  no  better  than  Sidon.  He  also  commanded  that  all 
the  gates^  should  be  opened,  and  that  all  who  wished  might  be  per* 
mitted  to  go  away.  So  that  all  the  Egyptian  captives  in  the  camp 
being  gone  without  any  opposition,  the  report  was  in  a  sluirt  time 
spread  abroad  through  all  the  cities  of  Egypt*  Whereupon  all  the 
towns  were  presently  filled  with  seditions,  through  quarrels  and  dis- 
sentions  between  the  Egyptians  and  the  foreign  auxiliaries*  For  all 
parties  strove  who  should  be  most  active  and  forward  in  betraying 
their  several  garrisons,  every  one  aiming  at  his  own  advantage,  by  an 
interest  In  the  favour  of  the  conqueror.  And  the  first  that  began  ^^  ^ 
was  Bubastis.     For  as  soon  as  Mentor  and  Bugoas  encamped  before      -   '. 

*  Gates  of  the  caiup. 

Vol.  2.  No.  41.  h 


122  DIODORUS  srcuLUS.  Book  XVt. 


the  city,  the  Egyptians,  unknown  to  the  Grecians,  sent  one  of  their 
countrymen  to  Uagoas,  and  |)romised  to  surrender  the  city  to  him,  if 
they  might  be  all  pardoned.  This  being  discovered  by  the  Grecians, 
they  pursued  and  seized  him  that  was  sent,  and  by  threatening  ami 
affrighting  him,  made  him  confess  the  truth  of  the  matter.  Upou 
wliich,  being  highly  enraged,  they  violently  attacked  the  Egyptiansj 
killed  some,  wounded  others,  and  drove  the  rest  into  a  narrow  corner 
of  tlie  city. 

They  that  were  thus  assailed,  gave  intelligence  to  Bagoas  of  what 
was  done,  and  entreated  him^  that  without  delay,  he  would  take 
possession  of  the  citV;  which  they  would  deliver  up  to  him  upon  \\\s 
approach^ 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Grecians  sent  a  herald  to  Mentor,  who  se-*" 
crctly  advised  them  to  set  upon  the  barbarians  as  soon  as  Bagoas  had 
entered  the  town.  Bagoas,  therefore,  having  entered  with  his 
Persians,  but  without  the  consent  of  the  Greeks,  as  soon  as  part  of 
the  soldiers  were  let  in>  the  Grecians  shut  the  gates,  and  suddenly 
attacked  the  barbarians,  and  killed  them  every  man,  and  took  Ba- 
goas himself  prisoner,  who,  coming  to  understand  that  there  was  na 
means  left  for  his  deliverance  but  by  Mentor,  he  earnestly  entreated 
him  to  interpose  for  his  preservation^  promising  that  for  the  future 
be  would  never  undertake  any  thing  without  his  advice.  Mentor 
prevailed  with  the  Grecians  to  discharge  him,  and  to  surrender  the 
city,  so  that  the  whole  success  and  glory  of  the  action  was  attributed 
to  him. 

Bagoas  being  thus  set  at  liberty  by  his  n>eans,  entered  into  a  solemn 
covenant  of  friendship,  uix)n  oath,  with  Mentor,  and  faithfully 
kept  it  till  the  time  of  his  death;  so  that  these  two  always  con- 
curring and  agreeing,  were  able  to  do  more  with  the  king,  than  all 
his  other  friends,  or  any  of  bis  kindred*  For  Mentor  being  made 
the  lord  lieutenant  of  Artaxerxes  over  all  the  Asiatic  shore,  was  ma- 
terially serviceable  to  the  king,  both  by  procuring  soldiers  out  of 
(iiecce,  and  by  his  faithful  and  diligent  administration  of  the  go* 
vcrnment. 

liagoas  cnninianding  all  as  viceroy  in  the  higher  parts  of  Asia, 
obtained  such  power,  through  his  consultation  with  Mentor,  on  all 
tiecasions,  that  he  had  the  kingdom  at  conmiand;  neither  did  Artax- 
rrxrs  any  thing  without  his  consent.  And  after  the  king's  death, 
liis  power  was  so  great  that  the  successors  were  ever  nominated  and 
appointed  by  him,  and  all  the  atFairs  oi  the  kingdom  were  so  entirely 
under  his  management,  that  he  wanted  nothing  but  the  name  of  a. 
king.    Will  we  bhall  relate  these  things  in  their  proper  place* 


CfiOp.  IX.  DIODORUS  SICULUSt  1 33 

After  the  surrendisr  of  Bub^stis,  the  rest  of  the  cities,  out  of  fear, 
submitted  and  delivered  up  themselves  upon  articles^  into  the  bands 
of  the  Persians. 

In  the  mean  while  Nectanebu$i  who  was  now  at  Memphis^  seeing  47/ 
the  quick  movements  of  the  enemy,  durst  not  venture  a  battle  in 
defence  of  his  sovereignty,  but  abdicating  his  kingdom,  pnckcd  up  a 
great  deal  of  treasure,  and  fled  into  Ethiopia.  And  so  Artaxerxes 
possessed  himself  of  all  Egypt,  and  demolished  the  w^lls  of  all  tlie 
cities,  especially  those  that  were  the  greatest,  and  of  the  most  ac- 
count; and  heaped  together  an  infinite  mass  of  gold  and  silver,  by 
despoiling  the  temples.  He  also  carried  aw^y  all  the  records  an4 
writings  out  of  the  mostantient  temples;  which  Bagoas  a  short  time 
after  suflcrcd  the  priests  to  redeem  for  a  great  sum  of  money.  Then 
be  sent  home  the  Greek  auxiliaries  with  ample  rewards  to  every  one 
according  to  their  deserts,  for  tiieir  services;  and  intrusting  Phe- 
Kcudates  with  the  government  of  Egypt,  he  returned  with  his 
army  laden  with  spoil,  triumphing  iu  the  glor}'  of  his  victory,  to 
Babylon. 

At  the  time  when  Callimachus  was  lord  chancellor  at  Athens,  and  f\^ 
Marcus  Fabius  and  Publius  Valerius  were 'Roman  consuls,  Artaxerxes 
advanced  Mentor  for  the  great  servif^es  he  had  done  him,  especially 
in  the  Egyptian  war,  above  all  his  friends;  and  that  he  might  put  2| 
mark  upon  his  valour  by  a  reward  more  than  ordinarv,  he  bestowed 
upou  him  a  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  rich  furniture  for  his 
liouse^  He  likewise  made  him  prefect  of  ail  the  Asiatic  shore,  and 
general  of  his  army,  with  absolute  power  to  suppress  all  rebellions  in 
those  parts. 

Mentor  being  in  near  alliance  and  l^indred  with  Artabazus  and 
Memnoii,  (who  had  not  long  before  made  war  upon  liie  Persians, 
QKd  had  now  fled  out  of  Asia,  to  Philip,  iu  Macedonia),  by  his  inte* 
rest  with  the  king  procured  their  pardon,  and  thereupon  sent  for  them 
both  to  come  to  him,  with  their  families:  for  Artabazus  had  by 
Mentor  and  Memnou*s  sister,  eleven  sons  and  ten  daujghters;  with 
which  numerous  progeny  Mentor  was  greatly  delighted,  and  ad- 
vanced the  young  men,  as  they  grew  up,  to  high  places  of  command 
\i\  the  army. 

The  first  expedition  which  Mentor  made  was  against  Hennias,  the     >  S 
prince  or  tyrant  of  Atarnea*',  who  had  rebelled  against  Artaxerxes, 
aod  was  possessed  of  many  strong  cities  and  castles:  upon  making 
bim  a  promise  to  procure  tiie  king's  pardon,  he  brought  him  to  a 
uarley;  and  upou  that  oceabiun  having  surprised  him,  he  Imprisoucd 

*  Alarnca.  in  Mvsia,  «)vcr  against  Lcsbo-. 


124  DIODORUS  SICULU?.  Book  XfTl 

him^  and  possessing  liimself  of  his  scal-ringi  he  wrote  letters  in 
his  name,  to  the  several  cities,  signifying  that  through  the  means  of 
Mentor  he  had  heen  restored  to  the  king's  favour:  and  he  sent 
away,  likewise,  with  those  that  carried  the  letters,  such  as  he  had 
ordered  to  take  possession,  in  the  name  of  the  king,  of  all  the  forts 
and  castles*  The  governors  of  the  cities,  giving  credit  to  the 
letters,  and  being,  likewise,  very  desirous  of  peace,  delivered  up 
all  the  towns  and  forts  to  the  king  in  every  place  throughout  the 
country. 

All  the  revolted  cities  hcing  recovered  by  this  trick  of  Mentor*Sj 
without  any  hazard  or  fatigue,  the  king  was  highly  pleased  with  him^ 
as  having  acted  the  part  of  a  brave  and  prudent  general. 

And  with  no  less  success,  partly  by  policy,  and  partly  by  force  of 
arms,  he  reduced  in  a  short  time  the  other  captains  that  were  in 
rebellion.  And  thus  stood  ailairs  in  Asia  at  this  time. 
^^  In  Europe,  P!iilij>,  king  of  Macedon,  made  an  expedition  against 
the  Cluileidcan*  ciiies,  and  took  Zena,  and  razed  it  to  the  ground^ 
and  caused  other  cities,  through  fear,  likewise  to  submit.  He  also 
made  another  attack  upon  Pherse,  and  cast  out  its  prince  Pitholaus, 
About  that  time  Spartacus,  king  of  Pontus,  died,  after  having  reigned 
five  years.  Pai  vsades,  his  brother,  succeeded  him,  and  governed 
ciglit-and- thirty  years. 


CHAP.  X. 

Philip  takes  Olf/uthns,  and  other  cities  in  the  Iltllesjwnl.  Hie 
Atheninns  jealous  of  Philip,  and  instigated  hj  Demosthenes^ 
PhiUrp's  policies*  The  value  of  the  riches  taAe?i  out  of  the 
temple  at  Delj}Jios.  Dionysius  sent  presents  to  DelphoSy  which 
were  taken  by  the  Athenians,  His  letter  to  the  Athenians,  2Tke 
temple  burnt.  The  end  of  the  Phocian  war.  The  punishments 
decreed  by  theAmphictyons  against  the  Phocians.  The  miseries 
of  the  sacrilegious  persons.     Timoleon  sent  to  Syracuse. 

^^  AFI^Kll  the  end  of  this  year,  Theophilus  ruled  as  archon  at  Athens^ 
and  Cains  Sulpitius  and  Caius  Quintius  executed  the  consular  dignity 
at  Koiiu*,  at  which  time  was  celebrated  the  hundred  and  eighth 
Olympiad,  in  which  IVyckii  of  Cyrenc  bore  away  the  crown  of  victory, 

•  III  Thrace. 


Chap.X.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  125 

At  the  same  time  Philip  made  an  expedition  against  the  cities  of  the 
Hellespont,  of  which  Micaberna  and  Torone  were  betrayed  into  his 
hands.  Then  he  made  against  Olynthus  (the  greatest  city  of  those 
parts)  with  a  very  numerous  army,  and  having  first  routed  the 
Olynthians  in  two  battles,  he  laid  siege  to  the  town ;  upon  which  he 
made  many  assaults,  and  lost  a  great  number  of  his  men  in  their 
approaches  to  the  walls.  At  length,  by  bribing  Euthycrates  and 
Lasthenes,  the  chief  magistrates  of  Olynthus,  he  entered  the  city  by 
treachery,  and  plundered  it,  and  sold  all  the  citizens  for  slaves,  and 
exposed  to  sale  all  the  prey  and  plunder  under  the  spear.  Whereby 
he  furnished  himself  with  abundance  of  money  for  carrj'ing  on  the 
war,  and  put  all  the  rest  of  the  cities  into  a  terrible  fright. 

Then  he  bountifully  rewarded  sucli  as  liad  behaved  themselves 
with  courage  and  valour,  and  having  exacted  vast  su[ns  of  money  from 
the  richest  of  the  citizens  of  the  surrounding  cities,  he  made  use  of 
it  to  corrupt  many  to  betray  their  country;  so  that  he  himself  often 
boasted  that  he  had  enlarged  his  dominion  more  by  his  gold  than  bj 
his  sword. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Athenians  being  jealous  of  the  growing 
greatness  of  Philip,  ever  after'sent  aid  to  them  whom  he  invaded  by 
his  arms,  and  despatched  ambassadors  to  all  the  cities  to  desire  them 
to  look  to  their  liberties,  and  to  put  to  death  such  of  their  citizens  as 
should  be  discovered  to  go  aboiit  to  betray  them,  promising  withal  to 
join  with  them  on  all  occasions.  At  length  they  proclaimed  open 
war  against  Philip. 

Demosthenes  the  orator  (at  that  time  the  most  eminent  in  politics 
and  eloquence  of  all  the  Grecians)  was  the  chief  instrument  that  in- 
cited the  Atiienians  to  take  ujion  them  tiie  defence  of  all  Greece: 
but  the  city  could  not  cure  that  desire  of  treason  that  infected  many 
of  the  citizens;  so  many  traitors  there  were  at  that  time  all  over 
Greece.  And  therefore  it  is  reported,  that  Philip  having  an  earnest 
desire  to  gain  that  once  strong  and  eminent  city,  and  one  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  place  telling  him  it  could  never  be  taken  by  force, 
he  asked  him  whether  it  were  not  possible  that  gold  mi^ht  mount 
the  walls;  for  he  had  learnt  by  experience,  that  those  who  could 
not  be  subdued  by  force,  were  easily  overcome  by  gold.  To  this 
end  he  had,  by  means  of  his  bribes,  procured  traitors  in  every  city; 
and  such  as  would  receive  his  money,  lie  called  jiis  friends  and 
guests.  And  thus  with  evil  communications  he  corrupted  men's 
manners. 

After  the  taking  of  Olynthus,  he  celebrated  Olympic  games  to  the      '*  'T 
gods,  in  commemoration  of  his  victory,  and  oflcred  most  splendid 
sacrifices;  and  in  regard  there  were  a  vast  number  of  people  collected 


?-> 


ISS  moDORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  XP7. 

f ogetlier,  he  set  forth  specious  sportSj  and  recreating  plays^  and  invited 
A  great  number  of  strangers  to  bis  feasts:  and  in  the  midst  of  hia 
cups  would  talk  courteously  and  familiarly  with  them^  and  drink  to 
many,  and  reacli  over  the  cup  to  them  with  his  own  iiands.     To  many 
he  gave  ricli  gifts,  and  made  large  and  liberal  promises  to  all,  to  the 
eiul  that  his  kindness  and  generosity  might  be  proclaimed  abroad 
by  tl'.cm  that  had  had  experience.     During  the  time  of  his  feasting, 
observing  Satyrus  the  stage-player  to  look  discontented,  and  knit  kis 
brow,  he  asked  him,  why  he  only  would  not  accept  of  the  fruits  of 
liis  bounty  and  gfwcrosity?  To  which  he  answered,  that  he  would 
Vipy  willingly  receive  a  certain  gift  from  him;  but  he  was  afraid  if 
lie  should  ask  it  openly,  he  would  deny  him.     Upon  which  the  king 
began  laughing,  and  bid  iiim  ask  what  he  pleased,  and  he  would  freelj* 
bestow  it  upon  him.     Ujxjn  whicii  he  desired  that  two  young  maids^ 
in  tiie  flower  of  their  age,  the  daughters  of  one  that  was  his  Uost^ 
might  be  given  to  him  from  among  the  captives ;  whose  liberties  he 
craved  not  to  maki^  any  gain  or  advantage  of  them  himself,  but  really 
to  give  them  portions  out  of  his  own  estate,  and  procure  them  hus* 
Uands,  and  likewise  to  prevent  their  being  injured  by  any  unworthy 
attempt.    The  king  so  approved  of  this  request^  that  he  not  only 
forthwith  ordered  the  virgins  to  be  delivered  to  Satyrus  without  ran-r 
$om,  but  bestowed  u])on  him,  likewise,  many  other  sich  gifts  and 
|)resent$,  as  special  marks  of  his  favour  and  bounty ;  so  that  maoyj 
excited    with  the   hopes   of   reward,    strove   which  should    serve 
Philip  most,  and  be  the  first  that  should  betray  their  country  into 
1)is  hands. 

The  next  year  Thcmistocles  was  archon  at  Athens,  and  Caiua 
Cornelius  and  Marcus  Popilius  were  Koman  consuls;  at  which  time 
the  UfEOtians  overran  the  country  ol  the  Pliocians  with  depreda- 
tions, and  beat  the  enemy  at  IJyanipolis,  killing  about  seventy  of 
them.  ]^jt  not  long  after,  engaging  with  the  Phocians  in  another 
battle,  they  were  routed  at  C'oronea,  and  lost  many  of  their  men. 
And  whereas  the  Phocians  were  possessed  of  some  small  towns  in 
Rcrotia,  the  15a*otians  made  an  inroad  upon  them,  and  shamefully 
.'.poiKMl  and  destroyed  all  their  standing  corn;  but  in  their  return 
were  beaten. 

While  these  thing'i  were  transacting,  Pliali'ccus,  the  general  of  the 
riiocianv,  bring  convicted  of  sacrilege,  in  converting  the  sacred 
trea>ure  oi  the  temple  to  his  own  use,  was  deprived  of  his  commis* 
sifjn,  jnifl  three  others  were  created  in  his  place,  viz.  DemocratcSi 
(  ;tUia«;,  and  Sophanes,  who  managed  the  business  and  trial  concern- 
\\\\s  the  >a(Ted  treasures,  at  such  time  a*;  the  Phocians  demanded  ai\ 
y  •»  ;;uiit  <i|'  iliein  that  iiad  the  di--i)0hiiig  ol  it,     'J1»e  greatest  [ait  of 


Gkytr.  X.  DIODOBLUS  SlCULtJS.  13T 

the  money  was  found  to  be  intrusted  in  the  hands  of  Philo;  wiio 
Dot  being  abie  to  give  a  clear  account,  was  condemned  ^  add  being 
put  upon  the  rack  by  order  of  the  generals^  he  named  many  of  his 
Kcomplices.  At  length,  being  tortured  to  the  utmost  extremity, 
he  died  upon  the  rack,  and  thus  came  to  an  end  worthy  of  his 
itapiety. 

The  robbers  indeed  restored  the  rest  of  the  money  (hat  was  left,      .  J 
bnt  they  themselves  Wf^re  put  to  death,  as  sacrilegious  persons.    Tlie 
first  of  the  former  generals,  Philomelus,  forbore  to  meddle  with  tfafi 
sacred  Ireasures;   but  his  brother  and  successor  Onomarchus  con- 
certed much  of  those  treasures  to  the  use  of  the  war.    The  tliird 
general,  Phayllus,  brother  of  Onomarchus,  while  he  executed  that 
eommand,  made  use  of  many  of  the  consecrated  things  of  the  tem- 
ple, for  the  paying  off  the  foreign  soldiers :  for  he  melted  down  and 
coined  into  money  the  hundred  and  twenty  golden  tiles  dedicated  by 
Croesus,  king  of  Lydia.    In  the  same  manner  he  dealt  with  the  three 
hundred  golden  bowls,  (or  viols),  every  one  weighing  two  minas; 
and  likewise  the  lion  and  woman  of  gold,  all  which  weighed  thirty 
talents  of  gold:  so  that  all  the  gold,  according  to  the  value  of  silver,, 
nonld  amount  to  four  thousand  talents.    And,  besides  these,  there 
were  things  in  silver,  dedicated  by  Crcrsus,  and  others,  carried  am'ay 
hj  all  the  generals,  in  their  several  times,  above  the  value  of  six 
thousand  talents:  so  that  the  whole  sum,  both  in  gold  and  sllver| 
mounted  to  above  ten  thousand  talents. 

TJiere  are  some  authors  who  say,  that  there  was  as  much  trea-  _J"  / 
tore  sacriiegiously  taken  away,  as  Alexander  afterwards  found  iii 
the  treasury  of  the  Persians.  Phaliecus,  likewise,  with  the  ofl&cers 
of  the  army,  went  about  to  dig  up  the  pavement  of  the  temple, 
heeause  some  person  had  told  iiim  that  a  vast  treasure  of  gold  and 
lilm  lay  under  it :  for  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  it,  he  brought 
in  the  testimony  of  that  mobt  antlcut  and  famous  poet  Homer, 
where  he  says  thus: 

Of  ail  the  gold  in  Piia:bus*  mnrblc  func, 
Whkh  Fvtiio's  rocky  treasuries  contain. 

And  just  as  the  soldiers  began  to  dig  near  to  the  tripod,  a  sudden 
Wrthquake  terrified  the  Pliociaiis^  so  that  the  gods  seeming  by  such 
'^nifest  token  to  threaten  vengeance  upon  thesacriligcous  persons, 
^hey  desisted.  But  the  first  author  of  that  impiety,  Philo,  (of 
^'woin  we  spoke  before) ,  in  a  short  time  after,  felt  tiie  just  vengeance 
*^»  the  deity.  But  notwithstanding  the  whole  guilt  of  tliis  impious  f 
Wcrilcge  be  imputed  to  the  Pliociaiis,  yet  both  ti^e  Ailienirais  and 
i^cedttimonians,  who  assisted  the  Pliocians,  were  partners  in  the 
*^?ncc,  for  they  had  more  iJioney  paid  to  them  than  was  proportion- 


If 8-  DionoRus  sicuLUS.  Book  XVL 

aY)Ie  to  the  number  of  the  soldiers  which  they  sent :  for  indeed  at  that 
very  time  the  Atlienians  carried  it  but  impiously  towards  the  oracle} 
for  but  a  little  before  tiiis  robbery  at  Delphos,  when  Iphicrates  lay 
with  the  Beet  before  Corcyra,  and  DionysiuSj  prince  of  Syracuse,  had 
sent  some  statues  of  gold  and  ivory  to  Olympus  and  Delphos,  he  by 
chance  intercepteil  the'  vessels  which  transported  them ;  and  having 
now  possession  of  the  dedicated  goods,  sent  to  Athens  to  know  how 
be  must  dispose  of  them ;  tiie  Athenians  bid  him  never  scrupulously 
examine,  or  make  inquiry  after  those  things  that  were  said  to  belong 
to  the  gods,  but  to  consider  how  to  provide  for  the  maintaining  of  tbe 
army.  In  obedience  to  which  decree  of  his  country,  be  exposed 
the  sacred  ornaments  of  the  gods  to  sale  under  the  spear.  Upon 
which  the  prince,  being  highly  incensed  against  the  Athenians,  wrote 
to  them  in  this  manner: 

Diomjsius^  to  tfie  Senate  toid  People  of  Athens. 

IT  is  not  fit  that  I  should  say  health  to  you,  since  ye  Iiave  been  so 
sacrilegious  against  the  gods,  both  by  sea  and  land}  and,  having 
intercepted  the  images  which  we  had  sent,  in  order  to  be  devoted 
to  the  gods,  you  have  converted  them  into  money,  and  so  have  pro-* 
phaoely  abused  the  mightiest  of  the  gods,  Apollo  at  Delphos^  and 
Jupiter  at  Olympus. 

This  affront  against  the  gods  the  Athenians  never  hesitated  at^ 
and  yet  they  were  accustomed  to  boast  and  glory,  that  the  god 
Apollo  was  their  ancestor.  The  Lacedsemonians  also,  though  they 
were  famous  amongst  all  nations  for  the  oracle  of  Delphos,  and  id 
the  most  weighty  affairs  do  consult  there  at  this  very  day,  yet  they 
never  scrupled  to  join  in  the  sacrilege  with  these  impious  robbers  of 
the  temi>le. 

But  now  the  Phocians,  who  had  three  towns  strongly  fortified  in 
Boeotia,  made  an  inroad  into  Boeotia,  and,  being  joined  by  great 
numbers  of  mercenaries,  wasted  and  spoiled  the  enemy's  country | 
and,  in  several  incursions  and  skirmishes,  got  the  better,  and  so  re* 
turned.  The  Bceotians  therefore,  being  overprcssed  with  the  bur-« 
then  of  the  war,  and  having  lost  many  of  their  soldiers,  and  besides^ 
being  in  great  want  of  money,  sent  ambassadors  to  Philip,  to  crave 
Iiis  assistance.  This  was  very  welcome  news  to  the  king,  to  see 
that  they  were  brought  low,  having  long  desired  to  have  their  Leuctra 
courage  curbed  and  tamed :  however,  he  sent  them  a  great  number 
of  men,  merely  upon  this  account,  lest  he  shoold  be  thought  to  be 
cureless  in  the  matter  concerning  the  spoiling  of  the  temple.    Thea 


Ch^.X.  DIODORUS  SICULUfl.  1S9 

the  Phocians  built  a  castle  at  a  town  called  Abse^  near  the  temple  of 
Apollo  {  at  which  time,  being  attacked  by  the  Bceotians,  some  of  them 
presently  fled,  in  disorder,  to  the  neighbourfhg  cities;  others,  to  the 
number  of  five  hundred,  got  into  the  temple,  and  there  perished. 
Many  other  things  happened  to  the  Phocians  at  that  time,  as  by  a 

'divine  hand;  but  that  which  was  most  remarkable  was  this ^I'hey       ,5* 

that  fled  into  the  temple  thought  themselves  safe  under  the  care  and 
protection  of  the  gods;  but  it  fell  out  quite  contrary,  for  divine  pro- 
vidence brought  condign  punishment  upon  these  sacrilegious  persons. 
There  were  many  straw  beds  round  about  the  temple,  and  it  happened 
that  the  fire  left  in  the  tents  of  those  that  fled  caught  hold  of  some  of 
them;  upon  whicli,  on  a  sudden,  the  flame  so  mounted  that  it  con- 
sumed the  temple,  with  all  those  that  fled  into  it:  for,  it  seems^ 
God  would  not  spare  these  sacrilegious  persons,  notwithstanding  all 
tlieir  supplications.  ^^C/s* 

Archias  was  then  lord- chancellor  of  Athens,  and  Marcus  ^milius 
and  Titus  Quinctius  were  invested  with  the  consulship  at  Rome, 
when  the  Phocian  war  (which  had  continued  ten  years)  was  ended  in 
the  following  manner: — When  both  the  Boeotians  and  Phocians 
were  brought  low  with  the  continual  fatigues  of  the  war,  the  Pho- 
cians, by  their  ambassadors,  craved  aid  of  the  Laccd^einonians,  who 
sent  them  a  thousand  heavy-armed  men,  under  tlic  command  of  Ar- 
chidamus,  the  king  of  Sparta.  In  like  manner  the  Boeotians  prayed 
assistance  from  Philip;  who  thereupon,  being  joined  by  theThessa- 
lians,  entered  Locris  with  a  great  army,  where,  finding  Phalaecus 
(restored  again  to  his  command)  with  a  considerable  body  of  mcrce- 
Duries^  he  prepared  to  fight  him.  PhaUecus  was  then  at  Nic^ea,  who, 
finding  himself  not  able  to  engage  with  Philip,  sent  ambassadors  to 
hiua  to  treat.  Thereupon  a  peace  was  concluded  upon  these  condi- 
tions—That Phalfiecus,  with  all  those  then  with  him,  might  march 
away  whither  they  thought  fit.  Wliereupon  Phah-ecus,  (after  ratifi- 
cation on  both  sides),  without  any  further  delay,  departed  with  those 
forces  he  had  with  him,  to  the  number  of  eight  thousand,  into  Pelo- 
ponnesus: and  the  Phocians,  now  hopeless,  gave  up  themselves  into 
the  power  of  Philip. 

The  king  having,  without  fighting,  unexpectedly  put  an  end  to  the 
Sacred  War,  joined  in  a  senate  with  the  Tliessalians  and  Ba^otians; 
in  which  it  was  decreed — .That  the  great  council  of  the  Amphic- 
tyons  should  be  assembled,  to  whose  decision  all  matters  should  be 
wholly  referred. 

By  them  afterwards  it  was  decreed — ^That  Philip  and  his  posterity 
should  be  received  as  members  into  the  council  of  the  Aniphictyons, 

Vol.  2.  No.  42.  s 


130  diOdoaus  siculus.  Book.xn. 

and  should  have  the  privilege  of  a  double  voice^  as  the  Phociilns 
(whom  he  conquered)  had  before :  that  the  walls  of  three  cities  ia 
Phocis  should  be  demolished :  and,  that  the  Phocians  should  never 
after  have  any  thing  to  do  with  the  teitiple^  or  be  members  of  the 
court  of  the  Amphictyons:  that  they  should  never  be  possessed  of 
horse  or  arms,  until  they  had  made  restitution  to  the  Oracle  cf  the 
money  they  had  sacrilegiously  taken  away.  Moreover,  that  the 
exiles  of  Phocis,  and  whoever  they  were  that  were  partners  with  tliem 
in  the  sacrilege,  should  be  accounted  accursed^  and  driven  out  of 
every  place.  Likewise,  that  all  the  cities  of  the  Phocians  shotild  be 
razed  to  the  ground,  and  turned  into  villages,  every  one  of  them  not 
to  contain  a1x)vc  fifty  houses,  and  not  to  be  less  than  one  furloog 
distant  from  each  other;  yet  tliat  the  Phocians  should  keep  their 
lands,  but  should  pay  a  tribute  to  the  oracle  every  yeAr  of  sixty 
talents,  until  they  had  paid  the  sum  entered  in  the  registers  at  the 
time  when  the  sacrilege  was  committed :  that  Philip,  with  the 
Boeotians  and  Thessalians,  should  set  forth  the  Pythian  games,  be- 
cause the  Corinthians  were  partners  in  the  impiety  with  the  Pho- 
cians: that  the  Amphictyons,  together  with  Philip,  should  break  in 
pieces,  upon  the  rocks,  all  the  arms  of  the  Phocians  and  mercenaries, 
and  then  burn  the  remains:  and  lastly,  that  they  should  deliver  up 
al)  the  hoise. 

When  they  had  despatched  this,  they  made  laws  and  orders  for  the 
restoring  of  tlie  oracle  to  its  former  state,  and  all  other  matters  re- 
lating to  religion  and  the  public  peace,  and  the  advancing  of  amity 
i.-  and  concord  amongst  the  (jrecians.  All  these  decrees  of  the 
Amphictyons  were  allowed  and  confirmed  by  Philip,  who  carried 
hin^self  towards  them  with  great  respect  in  all  things,  and  then 
marched  back  with  his  army  into  Macedonia,  and  not  onljf  par- 
chased  honour  by  his  piety  and  martial  conduct,  but  made  many  ad- 
r  vaiices  towards  the  future  enlargement  of  his  dominions:  for  he  had 
long  coveted  to  gain  the  sovereign  command  of  all  Greece,  and  to 
make  war  uj>on  the  Persians,  which  indeed  at  length  happened. 
But  of  these  things  we  shall  hereafter  give  a  particular  account  in 
their  due  time. 

;•  /  Ijct  us  now,  therefore,  return  to  what  properly  is  an  appendant, 

and,  of  course,  annexed  to  the  precedent  history:  yet  we  judge  it 
our  duty  first  to  relate  the  judgments  inflicted  by  the  gods  ujion  the 
sacrilegious  robbers  of  the  oracle;  for  vengeance  overtook  all  of  them 
in  iirencral,  not  only  those  who  were  the  chief  ringleaders,  but  even 
iIm  jn  that  had  the  least  hand  in  the  sacrilege. 

,  5  Philoinelus,  the  first  and  chief  contriver  of  seizing  the  temple,  by  a 


C$l^.  X  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  131 

certain  fate  of  wa^  was  brought  into  such  a  strait,  as  tliat  be  cast 
l^iiBself  headlong  from  tlie  top  of  a  rock. 

His  brother  Onomarchus,  having  taken  upon  hitn  the  cooinoand 
pf  Ih^  heartless  and  discouragpd  ^rfpy^  was  afterwards,  with  his 
Phocians  and  mercenaries,  totally  routed  in  Tli^ssaly,  and  be  himself 
Uk^t^  and  crucified. 

Ph|&yllqs,  the  third,  who  spoiled  the  oracle  of  the  greatest  part  of 
its  sacred  treasures,  that  he  might  not  altogether  escape  punishment^ 
wasted  away  by  a  (ipgering  disease*". 

Pli^l^cus,  the  last  of  them,  having  robbed  the  temple  of  all  that 
WA9  left,  wandered  vi|>  and  down  in  great  terror,  and  in  divers  hazards 
aqj  troubles,  for  a  long  time  together;  not  in  any  favour  to  him  more 
tban  the  rest  of  bis  confederates  in  wickedness,  but  that  he  might  be 
Ipog^  tormjented,  and  that  the  vengeance  executed  might  be  more 
remarkable  to  all  wherever  he  went.  After  his  flight,  whereby  he 
^scap^d  being  a  prisoner,  at  the  first  he  remained,  with  his  merce- 
naries, about  Peloponnesus,  and  maintained  his  soldiers  with  the 
jDpoey  hp  \^d  sacrilegiously  got  into  his  hands  from  the  temple. 
Afterwards  he  hired  some  great  transport-ships  at  Corinth,  and,  hav- 
ing foiir  other  small  vessels  pf  his  own,  he  pre[)ared  for  a  voyage 
iotp  {t^y  and  Sicily,  hoping  either  to  possess  himself  of  some  city  in 
those  parts,  or  that  he  ^d  his  men  might  be  epiployed  by  some  or 
other  as  mercenaries. 

There  was  at  tliat  time  a  war  broken  out  between  the  Lucanians 
Jipd  TafCQ^in^s*  He  pretended  to  the  soldiers  that  went  along  with 
him,  that  he  was  sent  for  by  the  Sicilians  and  Italians;  but,  when  he  /  H 
CfMf^  ioto  the  open  sea,  some  of  the  soldiers  who  were  on  hoard  in 
the  largest  vessel,  with  Phalsecus,  discoursed  among  themselves,  and 
4ecl9red  their  suspicious  one  to  another — ^That  it  was  but  a  pretence, 
.fmd  tbftt  Dpne  had  sent  for  them :  for  they  saw  no  commanders  go 
along  witli  him,  who  were  sent  from  any  that  desired  their  assist- 
ance; and  they  perceived  that  the  voyage  undertaken  was  long  and 
tedious,  ^nd  full  of  hazards :  and  therefore,  concluding  that  Phulaicus 
was  no  longer  to  be  credited,  (dreading  the  expedition  beyond  sea), 
they  conspired,  especially  the  officers  of  the  mercenaries,  aiul,  with 
their  drawn  swords,  so  threatened  both  Phala'.cus  and  the  pilot,  that 
they  compelled  them  to  tack  about,  and  return:  the  like  being  done 
in  the  other  ships,  they  all  came  back,  and  arrived  in  Peloponnesus; 
and,  being  rendezvoused  at  Malea,  a  promontory  of  Laconia,  they 
therefound  the  Gnossian  ambassadors, who  accidentally  were  co  me 
hither  to  list  some  foreign  soldiers.    After  some  discourse  had  passed 

*  A  consumption. 


132  mODORUS  SICCIATS.  Sook  XP7. 


53 


Cf 


between  them  and  Phaltecus^  and  the  other  officers,  the  pay  in  hand 
was  so  large,  that  all  of  them  sailed  away  with  the  ambassadors  to 
Crete;  and,  having'Janded^at  Gnossus*,  they  presently  took  the  city 
Lyctus  at  the  first  assault.  But  unexpected  assistance  came  in  sud* 
denly  to  the  expulsed  Lyctians:  for  the  Tarentines  being  at  that  time 
engaged  in  a  war  with  the  Lucanians,  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Lace- 
dsemonians,  from  whom  they  were  descended,  to  supply  them  with 
auxiliaries;  upon  which  the  Spartans,  upon  the  account  of  their 
kindred,  were  ready  to  assist  them ;  and  to  that  end  had  both  nand 
and  land  forces  ready,  under  the  command  of  Archidamus  the  king 
of  Sparta.  And  being  now  ready  to  set  sail  for  Italy,  at  that  very 
time  came  some  from  the  Lyctians,  earnestly  desiring  that  they  would 
help  them  in  the  first  place.  The  Lacedemonians  agfeed  to  it,  and 
passed  over  to  Crete,  where  they  routed  Phalsecus  and  his  mercena- 
ries, and  recorered  the  country  for  the  Lyctians. 

Then  Archidamus  made  for  Italy,  and  there  Assisted  the  Tares- 
tines,  and  was  killed  in  fight,  behaving  himself  with  great. Talonr 
and  resolution.  He  was  an  excellent  commander,  and  of  good  re- 
putation in  other  respects;  but  ill  spoken  of,  by  reason  of  his  joint- 
ing with  the  Phocians,  as  the  principal  promoter  and  author  of  the 
seizing  of  the  temple  and  city  of  Delphos.  He  was  king  of  Lace-^ 
daemon  three-and-twenty  years,  and  his  son  Agis  succeeded  him^  and 
continued  fifteen  years. 

Afterwards  all  the  mercenaries  under  Archidamus,  and  who  were 
concerned  in  the  robbing  of  the  oracle,  were  killed  by  the  Lacani^ 
ans.  But  Phalsecus  being  driven  out  of  Lyctus,  besieged  Sidonf ; 
and  while  he  was  preparing  his  engines  to  batter  the  ^^alls,  andmak** 
iug  his  approaches  to  the  city,  the  engines  were  set  on  fire,  and  con- 
sumed by  a  thunderbolt  from  heaven,  and  a  great  number  of  the  sol- 
diers who  endeavoured  to  save  them,  were  consumed  by  fire  from 
heaven,  amongst  whom  was  Phalaecus  himself:  though  there  be  some 
who  report,  that  he  was  run  through  the  body  by  one  of  his  own  soU 
diers  whom  he  had  provoked.  Those  soldiers  that  were  left,  were 
hired  by  the  Elian  exiles,  and  transported  into  Peloponnesus,  who 
assisted  them  against  their  own  countrymen.  But  the  Arcadians^ 
who  assisted  the  Elians,  routed  them,  and  killed  a  great  number  o£ 
the  mercenaries,  and  took  four  thousand  prisoners;  which  the  Ar- 
cadians and  Elians  divided  amongst  themselves;  and  the  Arcadians 
sold  those  under  the  spear  tliat  fell  to  their  share:  but  the  Elians  put 
nil  theirs  to  the  sword,  for  their  impiety  in  robbing  of  the  oracle. 
And  in  this  manner  all  the  sacrilegious  robbers,  and  those  that  too(( 

*  Or  Coosusi  a  cit^  in  Crete.  Lj9iw,  another  citj  io  Crete.       t  A  city  of  Crtt«. 


Chef.  X  BIODOAUS  SlCULUtr.  1^ 

part  with  them^  met  due  punishment  for  their  wickedness.    Like* 
wise  the  most  famous  cities  that  shared  with  them  in  their  impiety, 
being  afterwards  conquered  by  Antipater,  lost  both  their  authority 
and  liberty  at  once.    Moreover,  the  wives  of  the  most  principal    ^  J^ 
men  of  Phocis,  who  had  decked  themselves  with  necklaces  of  goll 
robbed  from  Ddphos,  met  with  the  deserved  punishment  of  thdr 
impiety.    For,  one  that  wore  the  chain  of  Helen,  turning  whore^ 
stained  all  the  glory  of  lier  beauty  by  prostituting  herself  to  every 
filthy  wretch.     Another  who  adorned  herself  with  tlie  ornaments  of 
Eriphyle,  in  a  fury  of  madness  and  rage,  had  her  house  set  on  fire 
by  her  eldest  son,  and  she  and  her  habitation  consumed  together. 
In  this  manner  (as  we  said  before)  those  that  dared  thus  to  despise 
and  contemn  the  deity,  were  overtaken  by  divine  vengeance.    On     #3 
the  contrary,  Philip,  who  appeared  in  defence  of  the  oradc,  evec 
prospering  from  that  time,  for  his  piety,  was  at  last  declared  su* 
preme  governor  of  all  Greece,  and  gained  the  largest  kingdom  ia 
£iirope.    And  now,  having  given  an  account  of  the  Sacred  War, 
ao  far  forth  as  we  judged  necessary,  we  shall  return  to  things  of  ano- 
ther nature. 

In  Sicily,  the  Syracusans,  labouring  under  intestine  seditions,  and  /  ^ 
enslaved  under  the  tyranny  of  many  that  lorded  over  them,  sent  am- 
bassadors to  Corinth,  to  desire  that  a  general  should  be  despatclied  to 
thexn,  who  might  take  charge  of  the  city,  and  give  a  check  to  the 
ambition  of  such  as  sought  to  tyrannise.  Upon  which,  it  seemed 
very  just  and  reasonable  to  the  Corinthians  to  help  those  who  were 
originally  descended  from  them;  and  therefore  they  decreed  to 
send  them  Timoleon,  the  son  of  Tiraodemus,  who  was  accounted 
tbe  most  valiant  and  expert  commander  among  them;  in  shorty 
he  was  a  person  every  way  virtuous :  but  there  was  one  thing  re- 
flsarkable  happened  to  him,  whicli  much  forwarded  his  being  chosen 
general. 

Timophanes,  his  brother,  the  richest  and  most  daring  man  among 
the  Corinthians,  had  some  tipie  before  given  evident  signs  of  his 
ambition  to  aspire  to  the  sovereignty.  For,  about  that  time,  having 
armed  and  got  together  a  company  of  lewd  fellows,  and  such  as  were 
in  debt,  and  needy,  he  went  up  and  down  the  market-place,  seeming 
Xiot  to  have  the  least  thoughts  of  the  principality,  but  in  truth  acting 
in  the  mean  time  as  an  absolute  tyrant.  But  Timoleon,  who  abhorred 
inonarchy,  at  the  first  advised  his  brother  to  forbear,  and  lay  aside 
such  projects  and  designs:  but  he,  being  not  only  regardless  of  wliat 
was  said  to  him,  but  rather  growing  every  day  more  audacious  and 
peremptory,  Tiinoleon,  because  he  could  not  work  upon  him  by 


134  BioDORUS  sicuiiUS.  Sook  J(^l% 

words^  killed  him  in  the  market-place.  Vpoa  which  4  gK%t  tuqiulf 
was  raised,  and  the  citizens,  upon  the  cooimissioD  of  so  horrid  w 
actj  ruDDing  in  and  flocking  together,  the  matter  came  to  a  faction 
and  sedition  in  the  city :  for  some  declared,  that  Timolepn,  who  had 
imbrued  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  a  citizen,  should  undei]go  tjif 
punishment  due  to  his  offence  by  the  law;  but  others  were  of  f 
contrary  opinion,  and  said,  that  he  deserved  rather  to  be  com^it|ld•dy 
as  one  that  had  despatched  a  tyrant  out  of  the  way. 

A  senate  therefore  was  called,  and  the  matter  brought  before  ik§ 
court,  where  his  enemies  most  bitterly  inveighed  against  bin);  but 
those  who  were  more  moderate  and  fovourable,  coqsulted  tagefher  to 
preserve  him.  And,  while  the  business  remained  in  debate^  not  ytit 
decided,  the  ambassadors  from  Syracuse  arrived,  and,  iippartipg  thor 
embassy  to  the  court,  they  very  seasonably  desired  a  general  to  br 
sent  them:  upon  which  the  senate  determined  to  send Timoleonf 
and,  that  he  might  the  better  behave  himself,  a  most  strange  pior 
posal  was  offered  him,  to  choose  as  he  pleased :   for  t|iey  let  him 

know ^That,  if  he  carried  himself  well  towanjs  the  SyracuMQV  ia 

his  command,  then  they  would  judge  him  to  be  one  that  bad  kilM  % 
tyrant;  but,  if  he  were  covetous  and  oppressive^  he  should  be  cpn- 
demned  as  a  murderer  of  his  brother. 

Timoleon  therefore,  not  so  much  out  of  fear  of  what  was  threatened 
by  the  senate,  as  excited  by  the  principles  of  his  own  innate  virtue 
managed  afikirs  in  Sicily  with  great  honour  and  reputation  to  him- 
self, and  advantage  to  the  Sicilians.  For  he  subdued  the  Carthagi- 
nians, rebuilt  the  Grecian  cities  which  were  destroyed  by  the  barbft* 
rians,  and  restored  all  Sicily  to  its  liberty.  Lastly,  having  gained 
Syracuse,  and  the  Greek  desolated  cities,  he  filled  them  all  with  inr 
habitants,  and  made  them  very  populous.  But  we  shall  treat  of  these 
matters  in  their  proper  place^  and  come  to  that  part  which  is  cohejpenl 
to  the  history. 


€hi^.  XL  DrODORUS  SICULtTS.  136 


CHAP.  XI. 

itimaleoH*s  expedition  into  Sicily.  The  Carthaginian  army  in 
Sicily.  Dianysius  returns  into  Syracuse:  is  beaten  by  Hicetas^ 
JERcetas  gains  Syracuse.  Timolcon's  escape  from  Bhegium. 
Jimoleon  routs  Hicetas,  and  gains  Syracuse.  Philip  invades 
the  Illyrians.  Dionysius  expeUed.  Tiinoleon  makes  good  laws^ 
PhiUp  invades  Thrace. 

NOW  Eubulus  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  and  Marcus  Fabhis  /  ^ 
iind  Serulius  Sulpitius  were  consuls  at  Rome.  At  this  time  Timp- 
leon  the  Corinthian,  advanced  by  the  Syracusans  to  the  sovereign 
command  of  all  their  forces,  prepared  for  his  voyage  into  Sicily,  and 
loosed  from  Corinth  with  four  gallies,  manned  with  seven  hundred 
mercenaries,  and  attended  with  three  skiffs.  In  his  passage  he  was 
joined  by  three  vessels  more  from  the  Leucadians  and  Corcyrians, 
and  so  with  ten  sail  |>assed  over  the  Ionian  sea.  In  this  voyage  aA 
unusaal  and  remarkable  thing  happened  toTimoleon,  the  providence 
of  the  gods  seeming  to  favour  his  undertaking,  and  thereby  to  point 
oat  the  future  fame  and  glory  of  his  actions.  For,  all  the  night, 
li  light  like  a  burning  torch  in  the  heavens  went  before  him,  till  the 
fleet  came  to  the  coasts  of  Italy:  for  he  was  before  told  Jit  Corinth, 
by  the  priests  of  Ceres  and  Proserpina,  that  in  the  night  the  goddesses 
appeared  to  them,  and  told  them,  that  the^  would  sail  along  with 
Tlmoleon  to  the  island  that  was  peculiarly  consecrated  to  them, 
lltooleon  therefore,  and  all  those  with  him,  were  very  cheerful,  un- 
dier  the  apprehension  that  the  gods  favoured  their  enterprise;  and 
thereupon  Tiraoleon  dedicated  one  of  the  best  of  his  ships  to  the 
goddesses,  and  ordered  that  it  should  be  called  the  Sacred  Ship*  of 
Ceres  and  Proserpina.  And  now,  when  tlie  fleet  came  safe  as  far  as 
Metapontum  in  Italy,  there  arrived  a  galley  which  had  the  Carthagi- 
nian ambassadors  on  board,  who,  upon  a  conference  with  Timo- 
Icon,  charged  him,  upon  his  peril,  not  to  begin  any  war,  or  so  much 
as  to  set  his  foot  upon  Sicily.  But  he,  being  encouraged  by  them  of 
Rhegium,  who  promised  to  join  with  him,  departed  with  all  haste 
from  Metapontum,  designing  by  his  speed  to  prevent  the  report  of 
his  coming:  for  he  was  in  great  fear  lest  the  Carthaginians,  who  were 
much  stronger  at  sea,  should  block  up  his  passage  into  Sicily.  There- 
fore he  made  oflF  with  all  speed  to  Rliegium. 

♦  Or  called  Ceres  and  Prostrpiua. 


136  WODOKUS  sicutus.  Book  JCrZL 


S7 


;? 


The  Carthaginians^  having  a  little  before  received  intelligence  that 
m  great  war  Mras  likely  to  break  out  througli  all  Sicily,  carried  them- 
selves with  all  civility  towards  the  confederate  cities;  and,  putting 
an  end  to  all  quarrels,  entered  into  leagues  of  anaity  and  friendship 
with  the  princes  of  the  island,  especially  with  Hicetas,  ^neral  of 
tke  Syracusans,  who  was  the  most  potent.  At  length  the  CartbagiF* 
Bians,  having  raised  a  great  number  of  forces  both  by  sea  and  land^ 
transported  them  into  Sicily,  under  the  command  of  Hanno,  their 
general.  They  had  with  them  a  hundred  and  fifty  sail  of  long  sfaqis, 
a  land-army  of  fifty  thousand  men,  three  hundred  chariots,  and  two 
thousand  carts  or  carriages,  drawn  by  two  horses  each;  and»  besides 
these,  a  great  number  of  arms  of  all  sorts,  and  engines  of  batterj, 
and  an  infinite  store  of  com,  provision,  and  all  other  things  necessary 
lor  war.  The  first  city  they  attacked  was  Entella;  and,  having 
wasted  and  spoiled  the  lands  round  about,  tliey  shut  up  the  inhabi* 
tants  by  a  close  siege.  The  Campanians  possessed  the  city  at  that 
time,  and,  being  terrified  at  the  multitude  of  their  enemies,  sent  finr 
aid  to  the  otlier  cities,  wlio  hated  the  Carthaginians;  but  none  of 
them  came  in  to  their  assistance,  except  those  of  Galena,  who  sent 
them  a  thousand  armed  men,  who  were  intercepted  by  the  Cartha* 
ginians,  and  every  man  cut  off.  The  Campanians,  who  inhabited 
jEtua,  at  first  prepared  to  help  them  of  Entella,  upon  the  account 
of  their  consanguinity;  but,  hearing  of  the  slaughter  of  the  Galeriaos^ 
they  judged  it  more  adviseable  to  sit  stilL  Dionysius  at  that  time 
had  regained  his  former  sovereignty  over  the  Syracusans.  Hicetas 
therefore  led  a  great  army  thither,  and  encamped  at  Olympus,  forti- 
fying himself  with  a  breast-work  and  a  trench,  and  drew  up  against 
Pionysius,  then  acting  as  a  tyrant  in  the  city.  But  he  protracted 
the  siege  for  some  time,  through  want  of  provision,  and  marched 
away  to  Leontium,  from  whence  he  first  moved.  But  Dionysius 
pursued  him,  and  fell  upon  his  rear,  which  occasioned  the  whole 
army  to  engage.  For  Hicetas  wheeled  about,  fought,  and  routed 
him,  killing  three  thousand  of  his  mercenaries  upon  the  spot^  and 
putting  the  rest  to  flight;  and  he  pursued  them  so  hotly,  that  he  fell 
pell-mell  with  him  into  the  city,  and  so  jiosscssed  himself  of  the 
whole  city  of  Syracuse,  except  the  Island.  And  thus  went  matters 
between  Hicetas  and  Dionysius  at  this  time. 

But  Timoleou,  arriving  at  Rhegium  the  third  day  after  the  taking 
df  Syracuse,  lay  with  his  fleet  in  the  port  next  to  the  city.  At  that 
time  came  into  the  port  twenty  Carthaginian  gallies.  The  Rhcgians^ 
favouring  Timoleon,  called  an  assembly,  and  proposed  terms  of 
compounding  matters :  so  that  the  Carthaginians,  supposing  Tirno-* 
leon  would  be  persuaded  to  return  home,  were  not  careful  to  place 


Chap.  XL  BiODORUs  8ICULUS.  137 

sufficient  guards:  Timoleon  therefore  himself  (not  giving  the  least 
ground  to  suspect  his  flight)  kept  close  to  the  court,  but  ordered, 
that  nine  of  his  ships  should  set  sail,  and  make  away  with  all  the 
haste  they  could.  In  the  mean  time,  while  the  thoughts  of  the  Car- 
thaginians were  intent  upon  the  speeches  of  the  Rhegians,  which 
were  lengthened  out  purposely  and  by  design,  Timoleon  privately 
withdrew  himself,  and  made  to  the  ship  that  was  left;  and,  hoisting 
sail,  be  thus  escaped.  The  Carthaginians,  thus  deluded,  endea- 
voured to  pursue  him;  but^  because  he  had  got  too  far  off,  and  night 
approached,  Timoleon,  with  his  whole  fleet,  arrived  safe  at  Tauro- 
minium*  Andromachus,  the  prince  of  that  city,  (who  always  was  a 
friend  to  the  Syracusans),  courteously  received  the  refugees,  and  was 
greatly  serviceable  to  them  in  their  avoiding  of  the  pursuers.  Hicetas 
afterwards,  with  an  army  of  five  thousand  men,  came  against  Adranumt 
and  encamped  near  the  city.  But  Timoleon,  drawing  some  regi- 
ments out  of  Taurominium,  marched  from  thence,  having  with  him 
at  the  most  but  a  thousand  men.  And,  going  out  of  the  town  in  the 
twilight,  he  reached  Adranum  the  next  day:  there  he  fell  upon 
the  Hicetians  at  the  very  time  they  happened  to  be  at  meat,  and 
broke  in  upon  their  camp,  and  killed  three  hundred,  and  took  six 
hundred  prisoners,  and  possessed  himself  of  all  the  camp.  To  this 
stratagem  he  added  another:  for  he  made  straight  away  with  all  speed 
to  Syracuse,  and,  despatching  his  march  with  great  activity,  he  broke 
into  the  city  on  a  sudden,  liaving,  by  the  swiftness  of  his  march,  ar- 
rived there  before  those  that  fled.  And  these  were  the  transactions 
of  this  year* 

Lycisco  ei^ccuted  the  office  of  archon  at  Athens,  and  Marcus  Va-  Q  Q 
lerius,  and  Marcus  Popilius,  were  created  Roman  consuls,  when  the 
hundred  and  ninth  Olympiad  was  celebrated,  wherein  Aristolocus 
the  Athenian  won  the  course.  This  was  likewise  the  first  time 
that  the  Romans  entered  into  a  league  with  the  Carthaginians.  In 
Caria,  Idrieus,  prince  of  the  Carians,  died,  after  he  had  reigned  seven 
years,  whom  Ada  (both  his  wife  and  sister)  succeeded,  and  governed 
four  years. 

In  Sicily,  Timoleon,  being  strengthened  with  the  confederacy  of 
them  of  Adranum  and  Tyndaris,  greatly  increased  his  army.  In  the 
mean  time  there  was  great  confusion  in  Syracuse,  because  Diony- 
sius  had  got  possession  of  the  Island,  Ilicetas  held  the  Achiadioa 
and  the  new  city,  and  Timoleon  the  rest  of  the  city;  and  lastly,  the 
Carthaginians  had  entered  the  great  harbour  with  a  fleet  of  an  hun- 
dred and  fifty  sail,  and  lay  near  encamped  with  an  army  of  fifty 
thousand  men.  And  now  Timoleon  was  in  great  perplexity,  being 
environed  by  so  many  enemies,  when  on  a  suddeu  the  tables  were 

Vol-.  Z'  Nq.  42,  T 


138  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XFL 

tamed.  Firsts  Marcus,  prince  of  Catana,  with  a  great  army^  came 
in  to  the  assistance  of  Timoleon.  Afterwards  many  of  the  forts  and 
castles  (out  of  a  love  of  liberty)  sided  with  him.  And  presently  the 
Corinthians  sent  ten  gallies  full  of  soldiers,  and  pay  for  tbem,  to 
Syracuse, 

By  these  supplies  Timoleon  took  heartland  the  Carthaginians  were 
so  discouraged  and  affrighted,  that  they  very  imprudently  sailed  out 
of  the  harbour,  and  drew  ofif  their  whole  army,  and  marched  away  inta 
their  own  territories.  Hicetas  being  thus  stripped  of  all  assistance, 
Timoleon,  now  stronger  than  the  citizens,  possessed  himself  of  all 
Syracuse.  Presently  after  he  received  Messana  (which  had  sided  with 
the  Carthaginians)  into  his  protection.  And  this  was  the  state  of 
Sicily  at  that  time. 

«7  In  Macedonia,  Philip,  who  bore  an  hereditary  hatred  against  the 

Illyrians,  and  had  with  them  an  everlasting  controversy,  invaded  their 
country  with  a  powerful  army,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  their  lands, 
and,  after  the  taking  of  many  towns,  returned  with  rich  booty  into 

yP  Macedonia.  Afterwards,  making  an  expedition  into  Thessaly,  he 
drove  all  tlie  tyrants  out  of  the  cities,  and,  by  this  means,  gained 
the  hearts  of  the  Thcssalians :  for,  by  gaining  them  to  be  his  allies, 
lie  hoped  easily  to  procure  an  interest  in  all  Greece;  and,  by  the 
issue,  it  appeared  so  afterwards :  for  the  bordering  Grecians  presently, 
in  imitation  of  the  Thessalians,  very  readily  entered  into  a  league 
with  Philip. 

7/}         Pythodorus  was  now  lord -chancellor  of  Athens,  and  Caius  Flaa-» 

'  tius,  and  Titus  Manlius,  executed  tlie  consular  dignity  at  Rome. 

At  this  time  Dionysius,  beitig  brought  into  great  extremity  of  dan* 
ger,  and  in  a  terrible  fright,  was  wrought  upon  by  Timoleon  to  sur- 
render the  castle,  and,  upon  condition  of  abdicating  the  govern- 
ment, had  liberty  safely  to  depart  to  Peloponnesus,  with  all  his  goods 
and  moveables. 

And  thus  he,  through  sloth  and  cowardice,  lost  this  so  eminent 
and  famous  a  principality,  bound  fast  (as  they  used  to  term  it)  with 
nn  adamant,  and  spent  the  rest  of  his  days  in  a  poor  and  mean  con- 
dition*; whose  change  of  fortune,  and  course  of  life,  exhibit  a  clear 
example  to  those  who,  like  fools,  boast  in  the  times  of  prosperity: 
for  he,  who  a  little  before  had  four  hundred  gallies  at  command,  not 
long  after,  in  a  small  skiff,  was  conveyed  to  Corinth,  and  became  a 
spectacle,  to  admiration,  of  a  wonderful  change.  Timoleon,  having 
possessed  himself  of  the  Island  and  castles  lately  held  by  Dionysius, 
demolished  ail  the  forts  and  palaces  of  the  tyrant  throughout  the  island^ 

*  It  if  liiid,  lie  kfpt  «  private  school  at  Corinth  till  bo  was  very  old.^  fust.  lib.  21. 


Chap.  XL  DioDORUS  sicuLUs.  139 

and  freed  all  the  towns  from  the  garrisons;  and  he  continually  em- 
ployed himself  in  framing  of  laws,  and  {nstituted  such  as  were  most 
proper  for  the  administration  of  the  democracy:  and,  in  his  making 
such  as  related  to  private  contracts,  he  had  a  special  regard  to  equality 
and  mutual  recompence.  Moreover,  he  appointed  a  chief  magis- 
trate to  be  yearly  chosen,  whom  the  Syracusans  call  the  Amphipolus* 
of  Jupiter  Olympus;  and  the  first  Amphipolus  was  Callimenes.  From 
hence  arose  the  custom  amongst  the  Syracusans  of  noting  their  years 
by  the  respective  governments  of  these  magistrates,  which  continues 
to  this  very  time  of  writing  this  history,  and,  though  the  frame  of 
the  government  he  now  changed :  for,  since  the  Romans  imparted  the 
laws  of  their  city  to  the  Sicilians,  the  office  of  the  Amphipolus 
lias  still  continued,  being  now  grown  old,  and  having  been  executed 
above  three  hundred  years.  And  thus  stood  the  afiairs  of  Si^rily  at 
that  time. 

In  Macedonia,  Philip,  having  persuaded  all  the  Greek  cities  in 
Thrace  to  concord  amongst  themselves,  made  an  expedition  against 
the  Thracians.  For  Cersobleptes,  the  Thracian  king,  was  continually 
destroying  the  Greek  cities  in  the  Hellespont,  and  harassing  and 
spoiling  the  country.  Therefore  Philip,  to  put  a  check  to  the  designs 
and  progress  of  the  barbarians,  invaded  them  with  a  great  army,  and 
was  so  victorious,  that  he  forced  them  to  pay  a  tenth,  as  a  tribute,  to 
the  kingdom  of  Macedonia.  And,  by  building  strong  towns  in  con- 
venient places,  he  curbed  the  insolence  of  the  Thracians.  The  Greek 
cities  therefore,  being  freed  from  their  fears,  with  great  eagerness 
entered  into  a  league  of  confederacy  with  Philip. 

As  to  writers,  Theopompus  of  Chios  composed  an  history  of  the 
acts  of  Philip,  in  three  books,  in  which  are  interwoven  the  affairs  of 
Sicily:  for, beginning  with  the  sovereignty  of  Dionysius  tlie  elder,  he 
comprehended  an  account  of  the  transactions  of  fifty  years,  and  ended 
with  the  expulsion  of  Dionysius  the  younger.  These  three  books  ar« 
from  the  forty-first  to  the  forty-thurd  year  of  the  fifty  years. 

*  Swant  of  Jupiter  Olympus. 


7/ 


140  DioDORUs  sicuLuar.  BookXn. 


11 


11 


CHAP.  XII. 

The  cbCts  ofTimolean  in  Sicily.  The  preparations  t^f  the  Cartha^ 
ginians  against  T^moleon.  The  remarkable  siege  of  Perinthut 
by  Philip.  Pexodorus  erpeJs  his  brother  Adam  from  the  princi- 
pality in  Carta.    Byzantium  besieged  by  PhiUp^ 

WHEN  the  chief  magistracy  of  Athens  was  in  the  hands  of  Sosi-^ 
genes;  and  Marcus  Valerius,  and  Marcns  Publius,  executed  the  office 
of  consuls  at  Rome>  Arybas,  king  of  the  Molossians,  died,  after  he 
had  reigned  ten  years,  leaving  the  kingdom  to  his  son  iEacidas,  the 
father  of  Pyrrhus;  but,  by  the  help  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  Alexander^ 
the  brother  of  Olympias,  succeeded  Arybas. 

In  Sicily,  Timoleon  marched  against  the  Leontines^  (to  whom 
Hicetas  had  joined  himself,  with  a  great  army^  and  in  the  first  place 
besieged  the  new  city  (as  it  was  called).  But  the  garrison  being 
Yery  strong,  they  easily  repulsed  the  assailants  >  and  thereupon  he 
raised  the  siege^  without  effecting  any  thing.  Then  he  made  for 
Engyum,  (at  that  time  under  the  tyranny  of  Leptines)^  and  plied  It 
with  continual  assaults,  being  very  earnest  and  intent  to  set  them  ftee, 
by'  the  expulsion  of  Leptines. 

While  Timoleon  was  thus  employed,  Hicetas  mardied  awa/  from 
Leontium  with  all  his  forces,  and  besieged  Syracuse  ^  but^  baTiDg 
lost  there  a  great  part  of  his  army,  he  liastened  back  1o  LeoDtium* 
Timoleon  at  length  so  terrified  Leptines,  that,  under  the  terms  of 
safe  conduct,  he  was  sent  away  to  Peloponnesus;  and,  hf  these  ba- 
nishments, Timoleon  exiK)sed  to  the  Grecians  the  trophies  of  his 
victory  over  the  tyrants.  And  forasmuch  as  Apolloniadcs  was  like* 
wise  under  the  power  of  Leptines,  he  received  the  Apoltonians  into  his 
protection,  and  restored  them,  as  well  as  theEngyans,  to  their  liberty. 
But  being  in  great  want  of  money,  so  that  he  knew  not  how  to  pay 
the  soldiers,  he  ordered  a  thousand  armed  men,  commanded  by  ex* 
pert  officers,  to  make  incursions  into  the  Cartliaginian  territories. 
These  harassed  the  country  fur  and  near,  and  got  together  abundance 
of  rich  plunder  and  spoil,  and  brought  it  to  Timoleon,  who  exposed 
all  to  public  sale,  and  raised  a  vast  sum  of  money^  whereby  he  paid 
the  soldiers  for  a  long  time  beforehand.  Presently  after,  he  pos* 
sessed  himself  of  Entella,  and  put  to  death  fifteen  of  the  citizens, 
who  adhered  to  the  Carthaginians,  and  restored  the  rest  to  their 
liberty*    Timoleon  growing  every  day  in  reputation  for  his  talour 


tJhap.  XIL  DIODORUS  srcULU^,  141 

and  conduct^  all  the  Greek  cities  throughout  Sicily  readily  submitted  to 
him^  and  be  as  readily  set  them  at  liberty  to  govern  by  their  own  laws. 
Kfany  cities  likewise  of  tlitSicani^  Sicilians,  and  other  countries  sub^ 
jecttothe  Carthagfnians,  sent  presently  their  ambassadors  to  hiai,ia 
order  to  be  received  into  a  league,  and  to  be  his  confederates. 

But  the  senate  and  people  of  Carthage  perceiving  that  their  <iffi- 
cers  were  sluggish  and  inactive  in  the  management  of  tlie  war,,  de- 
termined to  send  over  others  with  a  considerable  additional  force; 
and  to  that  end,  with  all  despatch,  they  raised  out  of  their  owncttjr^ 
and  from  among  the  Africans,  all  such  as  they  judged  able  to  bear 
arms  for  this  expedition.  And  besides,  they  took  care  to  be  pro* 
Tided  with  a  sufficient  stock  of  money,  and  listed  mercenariea  outdT 
Spain,  Gaul,  and  Ligurla^.  They  fitted  out  likewise  a  great  navy^ 
both  of  long  ships  and  others,  for  carrying  provision,  and  in  all  other 
respects  were  so  careful  and  diligent,  that  nothing  was  wanting  that 
was  necessary. 

At  the  time  when  Nicomachus  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens, 
and  Caius  Martius,  and  Titus  Manlius  Torquatus,  were  Roman  coo-* 
«uls,  Phocion  the  Athenian  subdued  and  expelled  Clitarchus  prince 
of  £retria,  whom  Philip  liad  set  over  that  city. 

In  Caria,  Pexodorusfy  the  younger  brother,  expelled  Adam  <mt 
of  the  principality,  and  reigned  five  years,  to  the  time  of  Alexan* 
dar's  expedition  into  Asia.     But  the  power  of  Philip  still  increasing, 
be  marched  with  an  army  against  Perinthust,wluch  favoured  the  A- 
thenians,  md  much  obstructed  him  in  his  designs.     He  pushed  on 
the  siege  therefore  with  all  eagerness,  and  to  that  end  incessantly 
battered  the  walls  with  iiis  engines,  from  time  to  time  relieving  those 
that  were  tired  with  fresh  men:  he  made  likewise  approaches  with 
towers  four  scdre  cubits  high,  mounting  much  above  the  walls, where- 
by he  greatly  annoyed  the  besieged,  being  so  high  above  them:  he  so 
plied  them  likewise  with  his  battering  rams,  and  undermined  the 
foundations  of  tlie  walls  to  that  degree,  that  a  great  part  of  them 
tumbled  down.    But  the  Periuthians  defended  themselves  with  tliat 
niour,  that  they  speedily  raised  up  a  new  wall ;  upon  which  there  were 
such  disputes  and  fighting,  the  one  to  gain,  and  the  other  to  defend 
the  wall,  that  it  was  to  be  admired. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  they  were  thus  eagerly  contending  on 
both  sides,  Philip  being  well  furnished  with  shot,  mightily  galled  them 
*ipon  the  wall.  But  the  Perinthians,  though  they  lost  many  nieu 
^very  day,  were  reinforced  with  supplies  of  men,  darts,  and  shot, 
from  Byzantium ;  so  that  thereby  becoming  of  equal  force  with  the 

•  In  Italy,  now  the  straits  of  Genoa.  t  Pizodarm. 

%  A  cii^f  m  Eubuid,  nuir  Nf  ^ropont. 


7i 


142  DIdDORUS  sicuLus.  Book  XFT. 


enemy,  they  took  courage,  and  valiantly  stood  to  it  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  their  country. 

However,  the  king  remitted  nothing  of  his  former  heat  and  dili- 
gence ;  and  dividing  his  army  into  several  battalions,  girt  the  city 
round,  and  relieving  his  men  by  turns,  assaulted  the  walls  continu- 
ally night  and  day.     He  had  an  army  of  thirty  thousand  men,  aad 
a  va3t  multitude  of  darts  and  engines,  both  for  battery  and  other 
7  <"     purposes;  so  that  the  besieged  were  very  sorely  pressed.     Tlie  siege 
having  now  continued  long,  and  many  of  the  townsmen  killed  and 
wounded,  and  provisions  growing  scanty,  the  town  was  on  the  point 
of  being  surrendered;  when  fortune  favouring  the  distressed,  hand- 
ed to  them  an  unexpected  deliverance.    For  the  growing  power  of 
the  king  being  noised  abroad  throughout  Asia,  the  king  of  Persia, 
who  now  began  to  suspect  the  greatness  of  Philip,  commanded  by 
lis  letters  the  lords  lieutenants  of  the  sea-coasts  to  assist  the  Perin- 
thiahs  with  what  forces  they  could.     Upon  which,  they  all  unani- 
mously sent  to  Perintbus  a  great  number  of  mercenary  soldiers^ 
plenty  of  coin,  sufficient  provisions,  weapons,  and  all  other  things 
necessary  for  war.     The  Byzantians  likewise  sent  thither  a  com- 
mander, and  the  best  of  their  soldiers.    The  forces  now  equal  on 
both  sides,  and  the  war  revived,  there  was  now  again  so  sharp  an  en- 
counter, both  to  gain  and  defend  the  city,  as  that  none  could  possibly 
exceed;  for  Philip,  by  the  continual  battering  of  the  rams,  brought 
down  part  of  the  wall,  and  by  his  shot  forced  the  besieged  from  the 
bulwarks,  so  that  he  made  his  way,  with  a  strong  body  of  men, 
through  the  ruins  of  the  wall,  and  scaled  the  bulwarks  that  were  be- 
fore cleared  of  them  that  should  have  defended  them.    The  matter 
being  disputed  hand  to  hand  at  the  sword's  point,  death  and  wounds 
followed,  inasmuch  as  the  rewards  of  victory  put  life  into  the  valour 
of  both  parties  r  for  the  Macedonians  being  assured  they  should  have 
the  plunder  of  a  rich  city,  and  likewise  be  honourably  rewarded  by 
Philip,  were  resolved  valiantly  to  undergo  all  hardships  whatsoever. 
The  besieged,  on  the  other  hand,  having  as  it  were  before  their  eyes 
the  miseries  attending  a  place  taken  by  storm,  with  generous  and 
undaunted  resolution  shunned  nothing  of  hazard  for  their  own  pre- 
servation, and  that  of  their  country.     The  situation  of  the  place  con* 
tributed  much  all  along  to  the  besieged  for  baffling  of  the  enemy: 
for  Perintbus  13  situated  on  the  sea-side,  upon  a  rising  neck  of  land, 
in  a  peninsula  stretched  out  a  furlong  in  length:  the  houses  are  close 
together,  and  very  high ;  for  one  stands  above  another,  according  to 
the  ascent  of  the  hill;  and  the  form  of  the  city  represents,  as  it  were, 
a  theatre.     And  therefore,  though  a  large  breach  had  been  made  in 
the  walls,  yet  they  within  were  but  little  prejudiced  thereby;  for  the 


'6 


Chap.  XIII.  PIODORUS  SICULU5.  143 

strait  and  narrow  passages  being  barricadoed^  the  higher  houses  were 
in  stead,  and  as  advantageous  as  a  wall.  Philip  therefore  having 
gained  the  wall,  after  much  toil  and  hazard,  found  another  far 
stronger,  made  by  the  situation  of  the  houses:  and  besides  all  these 
disadvantages,  he  saw  that  every  thing  necessary  for  war  was  readily, 
and  in  great  abundance,  sent  to  them  from  Byzantium ;  therefore 
be  divided  his  army  into  two  bodies;  the  one  half  he  left  with  the 
best  of  his  commanders  to  carry  on  the  siege,  and  with  the  rest  be 
marches  speedily  away  to  Byzantium,  and  lays  close  siege  to  it  on  a 
sadden.  Upon  which  the  townsmen  were  put  into  great  fear  and 
perplexity,  having  before  sent  away  their  soldiers,  arms,  and  other 
things  necessary  for  war,  to  the  Perinthians.  Tliese  were  the  things 
done  at  Perinthus  and  Byzantium  at  that  time.  Here  Ephorus,  one 
of  the  writers,  ends  his  history  with  the  siege  of  Perinthus.  In  his 
memoirs  he  comprehends  the  affairs  both  of  the  Greeks  and  barba- 
rians, from  the  ruturn  of  the  Heraclidae^,  for  the  space  of  almost 
seven  hundred  and  fifty  years ;  and  divides  his  history  into  thirty  books^ 
to  every  one  of  which  be  adjoins  a  preface.  Diyllus,  the  Athenian^ 
continues  this  history  of  Ephorus,  treating  of  the  actions  of  the  Gre* 
dans  and  barbarians  to  the  death  of  Philip, 


CHAP,  XIII. 

3ni^  Athemayis  aid  Byzantium.  Philip  raises  tlie  siege.  Tlie 
Carthaginians  transport  forces  into  Sicily.  The  remarkable 
victory  of  Jlmoleon  over  the  Carthaginians.  The  acts  of  Ti- 
moleon  in  Sicily.     The  works  of  Hiero  in  Sicily. 

WHEN  Theophrastus  was  lord  chancellor  at  Athens,  and  Marcus  IJ^ 
Valerius,  and  Aulus  Cornelius  Roman  consuls,  the  hundred  and  tenth  *  ' 
olympiad  began,  in  which  Anticles  the  Athenian  was  victor.  Philip 
then  besieging  Byzantium,  the  Athenians  judging  he  had  broken  the 
peace  they  had  made  with  him,  forthwith  fitted  out  a  great  fleet  a- 
gainst  him  in  aid  of  the  Byzantines;  whose  example  thoseof  Chios, 
Coos,  and  Rhodes,  and  other  Grecians  followed,  and  sent  auxiliaries 
to  the  same  nlace.  Whereupon,  Philip  being  startled  at  the  forces  of 
the  Grecians,  raised  both  his  sieges,  and  made  peace  with  the  Athe- 
nians and  the  rest  of  the  Grecians  that  were  in  arms  against  him. 

•  This  return  was  about  the  time  the  ark  wai  taken  by  the  Philislioesj  cightj  jcars 
after  the  ruin  of  Troy, 


144  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBook  XFL 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Carthaginians,  after  their  great  preparations, 
trsnsport  their  forces  into  Sicily,  which  with  those  that  were  before 
is  the  island,  amounted  to  seventy  thousand  foot;  and  horse, chariots, 
and  wagc^ons,  no  fewer  than  ten  thousand.  They  had  also  a  navy  of 
two  hundred  men  of  war,  and  above  a  thousand  transport  shij^s  for 
the  conveying  of  horses,  arms,  and  provisions.  Hmoleon,  though 
he  was  informed  of  this  great  preparation,  yet  was  not  at  all  aflfright- 
cd  with  the  barbarians,  though  his  army  was  but  smaU.  He  was  at 
thi»  time  engaged  still  in  war  with  Hicetas,  but  at  length  agreed  the 
natter,  and,  by  the  accession  of  his  forces,  greatly  increased  bisarroy, 

y^  And  nOw  he  judged  it  most  for  his  advantage  to  transfer  the  war  with 
the  Carthaginians  into  their  own  territory;  by  this  means  to  preserve 
the  country  of  his  confederates,  and,  on  the  other  side,  by  waste  and 
spoil,  to  weaken  the  enemy :  to  this  end,  he  forthwith  mustered  his 
army^  consisting  of  Syracusans,  mercenaries,  and  other  confederates; 
and,  in  a  general  assembly,  by  a  pithy  oration,  advised  them  to  be 
courageous,  for  that  all  now  lay  at  stake :  which  was  received  with 
general  acclamation,  and  all  pressed  him  without  delay  to  be  led  forth 
agtunst  the  enemy*  Whereupon  he  advanced,  not  haviag  withhisi 
above  twelve  thousand  men:  but  as  soon  as  he  came  into  the  con* 
fines  of  Agrlgentum,  there  arose  a  sudden  mutiny  in  his  camp;  for 
a  mercenary  soldier  called  Thrastus,  a  bold  and  impadeat  fellow, 
none  exceeding  him  in  that  respect,  (lately  a  companion  of  those 
Phocians  who  robbed  the  temple  of  Delphos),  committed  a  foct 
agreeable  to  his  former  villanies:  for  whereas  most  of  them  who  haA 
a  hand  in  that  sacrilege  were  overtaken  by  divine  vengeance,  (as  be- 
fore related),  this  fellow  only  seemed  to  have  escaped;  and  at  that 
time  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  mercenaries  to  a  defection :  for  he 

^  bawled  it  out ^^Fhat  Timoleon  was  crazed  and  distracted,  and  that 

be  was  leading  the  soldiers  to  certain  and  unavoidable  destruction: 
the  number  of  the  Carthaginian  army  (lie  said)  was  six  times  more 
than  they;  and  so  well  furnished  with  all  things  necessary  for  war, 
that  none  could  compare  whh  them;  and  yet  he  assured  them  of 
victory,  playing  away  the  lives  of  the  soldiers,  as  it  were,  at  dice,  be- 
cause he  was  not  able  to  pay  them  their  arrears,  which  had  been  ad- 
vancing for  a  long  time  together :  he  persuaded  them  therefore  to 
return  to  Syracuse,  and  demand  their  pay,  and  not  follow  Timoleon 
in  that  desperate  expedition. 

^1  ^f  This  discourse  was  not  unpleasant  to  the  mercenaries;  and  while 
they  were  just  ready  to  revolt,  Timoleon,  by  entreaties  and  large  pro- 
mises, at  length  prevailed  and  put  an  end  to  the  mutiny.  However, 
a  thousand  men  followed  Thrasius,  whose  punishment  was  deferred 
for  the  present.    And  in  the  mean  tiuie  Timoleon  wrote  to  hb  friends 


Ckap.  XIIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  145 


at  Syracuse  to  receife  the  deserters  oourteously,  and  pay  the  mer- 
cenaries their  wages;  and  so  by  this  means  he  altogether  extinguish* 
ed  the  fire  of  sedition ;  but  excluded  those  obstinate  mutineers  from 
the  glory  of  a  famous  victory. 

lo  the  mean  time,  having  with  fair  words  reduced  the  rest  to  their 
former  obedience,  he  marched  towards  the  ienemy,  who  lay  encamp- 
ed not  hv  off.  Then  he  called  the  army  together,  and  encouraged 
then  to  the  battle,  by  setting  forth  and  aggravating  the  sloth  and 
cowardice  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  putting  them  in  mind  of  the 
sncoesses  of  Gelon.  And  when  all  with  one  voice  cried  out  for 
fighting  without  delay  with  the  barbarians,  at  that  very  time  passed 
bjrsome  carriage-hprses  laden  with  bundles  of  parsley  to  strew  in  the 
tents.  Timoleon  thereupon  declared,  that  it  was  an  omen  of  victory; 
foTj  (as  he  said),  the  crown  at  the  Isthmian  games*  was  made  up  of 
the  same  herb.  Hereupon,  the  soldiers,  by  the  command  of  Timo- 
leoo^made  themselves  crowns  of  parsley;  and  with  these  round  their 
heads,  witli  great  joy,  marched  against  the  enemy,  as  if  thie  gods  had 
assured  them  of  certain  victory;  ^  by  the  bsue  it  appeared  to  be  r 
for  beyond  all  expectation  they  overcame  their  adversaries,  not  only 
fay  their  own  valour,  but  by  the  spepial  help  and  assistance  of  the 
gods.  For  Timoleon,  with  a  well-appointed  body  of  men,  marched 
down  from  the  tops  of  certain  hills  to  the  river;  and  upon  a  sudden, 
being  himself  in  the  middle  of  the  battle,  attacked  ten  thousand  of 
the  barbarians  that  were  but  newly  passed  over.  Upon  which,  there 
was  a  very  sharp  engagement,  in  which  the  valour  and  activity  of  the 
Greeks  so  far  prevailed,  that  a  mighty  slaughter  was  made  among 
the  barbarians.  Whilst  those  that  first  passed  over  took  to  their  heels 
and  fled,  the  whole  Carthaginian  army  came  over  the  river  in  order 
to  repair  their  loss.  Hereupon  the  battle  was  renewed ;  and  while  9"/) 
the  Carthaginians  were  with  their  multitude  hemming  in  the  Gre- 
dani  round,  on  a  sudden,  there  arose  such  a  violent  storm  of  hail, 
thonder^and  lightning,  with  a  raging  tempest  of  furious  winds,which 
beat  upon  the  hacks  of  the  Grecians,  but  fell  foul  upon  the  faces  of 
the  barbarians:  so  that  Timoleon-a  army  with  ease  endured  this  tem- 
pestuous shock;  but  the  Carthaginians,  not  able  to  bear  the  pressure 
of  so  many  adversaries,  being  at  the  same  time  hewn  down  by  the 
Grecians,  quitted  the  field  and  fled :  and  the  whole  body  made  to  the 
river,  where  both  foot,  horse,  and  chariots,  were  in  such  confusion 
mixed  one  amongst  another,  and  trodden  under  foot  one  by  another, 
and  pierced  through  their  bodies  by  one  another's  swords  and  spears^ 
that  a  miserable  slaughter  was  made  without  any  possibility  of  re- 

*  Gaoietui  honour  of  Neptune^  celebrated  every  fifth  ^ear*  in  the  Isthmus  near 
Corinth. 

Vol.  2.   No.  42.       '  v 


1^6  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XFL 

'        ■       '     ■  '  '  -'■■■'  -'        »- 

lief.  Others  being  forced  in  heaps  into  the  river  by  the  enemy's  horse, 
and  pursued  closest  their  backs^  after  receiving  many  wounds^  there 
perished.  And  many,  though  they  were  never  touched  by  the  enemy's 
swords,  yet,  through  fear,  and  the  throng  and  difficulties  of  passage 
over  the  river,  being  pressed  in  heaps  one  upon  aootbcr,  there  breathed 
out  their  last.  And  that  which  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  common 
destruction,  the  river  was  swolen  to  that  excessive  height,  that  maby 
(especially  such  as  attempted  to  swim  over  the  water  with  their  arms) 
were  drowned*  In  conclusion,  two  thousand  five  hundred,  who 
made  up  the  sacred  brigade  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  for  valoUr  and 
the  glory  of  their  arms,  and  greatness  of  their  estates,  excelled  all 
the  rest,  fought  valiantly,  and  were  cut  off  every  man.  Of  the  rest 
of  the  common  soldiers  there  were  ^lain  at  least  ten  thousand,  and 
above  fifteen  thousand  taken  prisoners.  Many  of  the  chariots  being 
broken  in  pieces  in  the  fight,  only  two  hundred  fell  into  the  haii^  tS 
the  Grecians ;  but  all  the  bag  and  baggage.  The  greatest  part  of  the 
arms  were  lost  in  the  river:  but  a  thousand  brigandines^,  and  ten 
thousand  shields,  were  brought  into  the  tent  of  Timoleon;  of  which 
some  were  hung  up  in  the  temples  at  Syracuse,  and  others  distribut- 
ed among  the  confederates :  others  were  sent  to  Corinth,  and  ordered 

(^y       to  be  dedicated  to  Neptune.    And  although  very  rich  spoils  were 

'^  '  taken,  (for  the  Carthaginians  abounded  in  gold  and  silver,  platef^ 
and  other  furniture  of  great  value,  according  to  the  grahdeiir  and' 
riches  of  their  country),  yet  he  gave  all  to  the  soldiers,  as  the  reward 
of  their  valour.  The  Carthaginians  that  escaped,  with  much  ad5 
got  to  Lilybffium,  in  such  fear  and  consternation,  that  they  durst  hdtr 
go  on  board  their  ships,  in  order  to  return  to  Africa;  as  if,  tKrbiigli- 
the  anger  of  the  gods,  they  should  be  swallowed  up  in  the  Lilybsisiil 
sea. 

As  soon  as  the  new^of  this  overthrow  was  brought  to  Cartl^figey 
their  spirits  were  mightily  broken,  and  they  expected  that  Tiroolcbtf 
would  invade  them  with  his  army  upon  the  first  opportunity  i  there- 
fore, they  forthwith  recalled  Cisco,  the  brother  of  Haiino^  froint 
liis  banishment,  and  being  a  stout  iban,  and  an  experienced  s?ldier, 
created  him  general.  But  looking  upon  it  hot  advisable  for  the  fu- 
ture tq  venture  the  lives  of  the  eitis^cns^they  resolved  to  hire  st>ldierd^ 
out  of  other  nations,  and  especially  from  among  the  Grecians,  not 
doubting  but  that  many  would  list  themselves,  by  reason  of  tlie  largo 
pay  promised  by  the  rich  Carthaginians.  They  sent  likewise  am-» 
bassadors  into  Sicily,  with  orders  to  strike  up  a  peace  upon  any  terin% 

, .  ^      whatsoever. 

5i  >.'.  After  the  end  of  this  year,  Lysimacbides  was  created  chief  ^otsi;- 

*  CoaUof  mailk  t  As  flag^ons^  cb^%Ac. 


(Skap.  XTII.  DioDonus  siculits.  147 

nor  of  Athens,  and  Quintus  Servilius,  and  Marcus  Rutilius,  bore  the 
office  of  consuls  at  Rome*  Then  Timoleon,  as  soon  as  he  returned 
to  Syracuse,  in  the  first  place  expelled  those  as  traitors  out  of  the 
city,  who  had  deserted  him  through  the  instigation  of  Thrasius.^ 
I%ese  being  transported  into  Italy^  they  seized  upon  a  sea<port  town 
of  the  Brettii*,  and  plundered  it.  Upon  which  the  Brettii  were 
sp  enraged,  that  they  forthwith  came  against  them  with  a  great  army,, 
taok  the  town  by  storm^  and  put  every  man  of  them  to  the  sword. . 
Aod  such  was  the  miserable  end  of  these  deserters  of  Timoleon,  as 
Cbe  just  punishment  of  their  former  villany. 

Afterwards  he  took  PosthuoHUS  the  tyrant^  and  put  him  to  death, 
irho  had  infested  the  seas  with  his  piracies,  and  came  at  that  time  into 
the  port  of  Syracuse  as  a  friend.  He  received  likewise  with  .all  de- 
monstrations of  kindness  five  thousand  persons,  whom  the  Corin* 
tliiaos  had  sent  over  to  plant  new  colonies*  The  Carthaginians  now, 
by  their  ambassadors,  having  earnestly  sued  to  him  for  peace,  he 
granted  it  to  them  upon  these  terms — ^That  all  the  Greek  cities 
should  be  set  free;  that  the  river  Lycus  should  be  the  bounds  be^ 
tvreen  the  territories  of  both  parties;  and,  that  the  Cartliaginians 
siiould  not  for  the  future  assist  any  of  the  tyrants  against  the.  Syra- 
cosans*  Having  afterwards  subdued  Hicetas,  he  ordered  him  an  ho^- 
Doarable  burial:  and  took  Mtna  by  storm,  and  put  all  the  Cam  pa- 
nians  to  the  sword*  And  he  so  terrified  Nicodemus  the  tyrant  of 
the  Centuripiaiis,  that  he  fled  out  of  the  city.  Then  he  forced 
Apolloniades,who  lorded  it  over  them  of  Argyra;  to  abdicate  the  go- 
▼ernment;  and  the  inhabitants  thus  freed,  he  enrolled  them  as  citi-  • 
sens  of  Syracuse.  To  conclude,  having  rooted  up  all  the  tyrants, 
throughout  the  whole  island,  and  freed  the  cities  fiom  their  oppres-* 
sioo^  he  received  them  all  into  his  protection^  and  they  became  his 
confederates.    Then  he  caused  proclamatiooio  be  made  throughout 

all  Greece That  the  senate  and  people  of  Syracuse  offered  houses 

and  lands  to  all  who  were  willing  to  be  members  of  the  common- 
wealth of  Syracuse;  upon  which,  many  came  flocking  over  as  to  the 
possession  of  a  new  inheritance*  At  length  forty  thousand  new  plan- 
ters had  their  shares  by  lot  in  those  lands  that  yet  remained  undi- 
vided within  the  territories  of  Syracuse;  and  ten  thousand  were  al- 
lotted to  Argyra,  being  a  very  large  and  pleasant  country. 

Not  long  after,  he  caused  all  the  antient  laws  of  Diocles  for  the 
government  of  the  Syracusans,  to  be  reviewed  and  amended.  Such 
part  of  them  as  concerned  private  commerce  and  inheritances  he 
altered  not;  but  those  that  related  to  the  administration  of  the  pub- 
lic government^  and  the  commonwealth,  he  amended  as  he  thou|;ht 


r5 


348  DIODORUS  StCULUS.  Book  XP7m 

most  expedient.  Cephalus,  a  CorinthiaD^  a  learned  and  prudent 
man,  was  chiefly  concerned  in  this  emendation  and  correctico  of  the 
laws.  When  this  business  was  finished,  he  translated  the  Leontines 
into  Syracuse,  and  greatly  enlarged  Camarina  with  moltitodes  of 
inhabitants.  And  to  sum  up  all,  he  brought  things  to  that  pass 
throughout  all  Sicily,  (now  through  bis  care  in  perfect  peace  and  tran- 
quillity), as  that  the  cities  in  a  very  short  time  abounded  in  wealth, 
and  all  earthly  blessings.  For  through  the  seditions  and  intesdne 
wars,  (which  Sicily  laboured  under  for  a  long  time  together),  and 
the  many  tyrants  that  set  up  for  themselves,  it  was  brought  to  that 
miserable  condition,  that  the  cities  were  de{K)pulated,  and  the  lands 
lay  waste  and  untilied,  and  no  crops  to  be  had  for  the  supply  of  daily 
food.  But  now  that  there  were  many  plantations  of  colonies  blessed 
with  a  constant  peace,  and  the  land  was  every  where  manured  and 
improved  by  the  labour  of  the  husbandman,  it  began  to  yield  all 
sorts  of  fruits,  which  being  vended  (with  great  advantage)  to  the 
merchants,  the  inhabitants  grew  exceeding  rich  in  a  very  short  time. 
And  this  abundance  of  wealth  occasioned  in  that  age  nuiny  stately 
structures  to  be  erected  up  and  down  in  honour  of  the  gods.  As  one 
among  the  rest  near  to  the  Island  of  Syracuse,  called  the  House  of 
Sixty  Beds,  built  by  Agathocles,  for  greatness  and  beauty  excelling 
all  the  works  in  Sicily;  and  beciiuse  (as  it  were  in  contempt)  it  over* 
topped  all  the  temples  of  the  gods,  (as  a  manifest  indication  of  their 
anger),  it  w*as  beaten  down  by  a  thunderbolt.  At  the  lesser  haven 
likewise,  there  were  towers  built  of  outlandish  stone,  in  which  were 
inscriptions  cut,  and  the  name  of  Agathocles,  who  raised  theuK 
Besides  these,  not  long  after,  were  built  by  Hiero  the  kingf,  an 
Olympus^  in  the  market-place^  and  an  altar  near  the  theatre  a  fur* 
long  in  length,  and  in  height  fgad  breadth  proportionable. 

In  the  lesser  cities  likewise,  as  in  Argyra,  (which  by  reason  of  the 
richness  of  the  soil,  as  aforesaid,  received  new  colonies),  he  built  a 
theatre,  (the  most  glorious  of  any  in  Sicily  next  to  that  at  Syracuse)^ 
and  erected  temples  to  the  gods,  built  a  court,  a  markel-plaeej 
and  stately  towers,  and  raised  over  the  tombs  and  monuments  many 
large  pyramids  of  admirable  workmanship. 

♦  A  temple. 


CSIk!p.XrFI  moDORUs  sicuLus.  149 

BssBBBsssaBsssssaaBsssssBssaBesaBaM 


CHAP.  XIV. 

Elatea  taken  by  Philip.  Great  consternations  in  Athens  for  fear 
of  Philip*  The  Bceotiansjoin  with  the  Athenians  through  the 
soiicitations  of  Demosthenes.  Pythany  a  famous  orator.  T%e 
battle  of  Cheeronea^  between  Philip  and  the  Athenians*  Xjf* 
sides  the  Athenian  general  put  to  death,  Philip  rebuked  by 
JOemades;  made  general  of  Greece.     Timoleon  dies. 

WHEN  Charondas  executed  the  office  of  lord-cliancellor  of  AthenSy 
and  Lucius  £iniIius,andCaius  Plotins,  were  Roman  consuls^  Philip 
king  of  Macedoo  being  in  amity  with  many  of  the  Grecians^  made 
it  hb  chief  business  to  bring  under  the  Athenians,  thereby  withmorQ 
ease  to  gain  the  sovereignty  of  Greece.  To  that  end^  he  presently 
poasessed  himself  of  Elatea,  and  brought  all  his  forces  thither^  with 
a  design  to  fall  upon  the  Athenians^  hoping  easily  to  overcome  them, 
in  regard  they  were  not  (as  he  conceived)  prepared  for  war,  by  rea- 
son of  the  peace  lately  made  with  thera;  which  fell  out  aceordinglj. 
For  after  the  taking  of  Elatea,  some  hastened  in  the  night  to  Athens, 
informing  them  that  Elatea  was  taken  by  the  Macedonians,  and  that 
Philip  was  designing  to  invade  Attica  with  all  his  forces.  The  A« 
thenian  commanders,  surprised  with  the  suddenness  of  the  thing,  sent 
for  all  the  trumpeters,  and  commanded  in  alarm  to  be  sounded  all 
night:  upon  which,  the  report  fiew  through  all  parts  of  the  city, 
and  fear  rouzed  up  the  courage  of  the  citizens.  As  soon  as  day  ap- 
peared, the  people,  without  any  summons  from  the  magistrate,  (as 
the  custom  was),  all  flocked  to  the  theatre.  To  which  place,  as  soon 
as  the  commanders  came,  with  the  messenger  that  brought  the  news, 
and  had  declared  to  them  the  business,  fear  and  silence  filled  the  the- 
atre,  and  none  who  were  used  to  influence  the  people  had  a  heart  to 
give  any  advice.  And  although  a  crier  called  out  to  such  as  ought  to 
declare  their  minds,  what  was  to  be  done  in  order  to  their  common 
security,  yet  none  appeared  who  offered  any  thing  of  advice  in  the 
present  exigency.  The  people  therefore,  in  great  terror  and  amaze- 
ment, cast  their  eyes  upon  Demosthenes,  who  stood  up  and  bid 
them  be  courageous,  and  advised  them  forthwith  to  send  ambassa- 
dors to  Thebes,  to  treat  with  the  Boeotians  to  join  with  them  in  de- 
fence of  the  common  liberty;  for  the  shortness  of  time  (he  said) 
would  not  admit  of  an  embassy  of  aid  from  the  other  confederates, 
for  that  the  king  would  probably  invade  Attica  within  two  days 5  aod 


S*} 


ISO  NOIK>RUS  SICULU9.  Sbok  XPL 


seeing  that  he  must  march  through  Bceotia,  the  main  and  only  assist* 
ance  was  to  be  expected  from  them.  And  it  was  not  to  be  doubted^ 
but  that  Philip,  who  was  in  league  with  the  Boeotians^  would  in  his 
l^  inarch  solicit  them  to  make  war  upon  the  Athenians.  The  people 
-J  approved  of  his  advice,  and  a  decree  was  forthwith  recorded^  that  an 
embassy  should  be  despatched  as  Demosthenes  had  advised.  Hot 
then  It  wfts  debated,  who  was  the  most  eloquent  person^  and  so  most 
fit  toAindertake  this  affair!  Whereupon,  Demosthenes  being  pitched 
oa  to  be  the  man,  he  readily  complied,  forthwith  hastened  away,  prevails 
with  the  Boeotians,  and  returns  to  Athens.  The  Athenians  thetefore, 
having  now  doubled  their  forces  by  the  accession  of  the  Boeotians^ 
began  again  to  be  in  good  heart;  and  presently  made  Chares  and  Ly- 
siclcs-' generals,  with  command  to  march  with  the  whole  army  into 
Bo»otta.  All  the  youth  readily  offered  themselves  to  be  enlisted^  and 
therefore  the  army  with  a  swift  march  came  suddenly  to  Chteronca  ia 
Boeotia*  The  Boeotians  wondered  at  the  quickness  of  their  approach^ 
and  were  thereupon  as  diligent  themselves^  and  hastening  to  theif 
tfms^  marched  away  to  meet  the  Atheniaus|  and  being  joiuedj  they 
Aere  expected  the  enemy* 

Philip  indeed  had  first  sent  ambassadors  to  the  council  of  the 
Boeotians,  amongst  whom  the  most  famous  was  Python;  for  he  was 
so  eminent  for  eloquence,  that  in  the  senate  he  was  set  up  to  encoun* 
lerDemostliencs  in  the  business  relating  to  the  confederacy,  excelling 
indeed  the  rest  by  far,  but  judged  inferior  to  Demosthenes.  De- 
Sfiosthcnes  himself,  in  one  of  his  orations,  glories  (as  if  he  had  done 
lome  mighty  thing)  in  a  speech  of  his  against  this  orator,  in  these 

words: ^'  Then  I  yielded  not  a  jot  to  Python,  strutting  in  hb  confi-> 

dence,  as  if  he  would  have  overwhelmed  me  with  a  torrent  of  words." 
However,  though  Philip  could  not  prevail  with  the  Bceotians  to  be 
his  confederates,  yet  he  resolved  to  fight  with  them  both.  To  this 
end,  (after  a  stay  for  some  time  for  those  forces  that  were  to  joio 
Urn),  he  marched  into  Bceotia  with  an  army  of  at  least  thirty 
thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse.  Both  armies  were  now  ready 
to  engage,  for  courage  and  valour  neither  giving  place  to  the  other; 
bat  as  to  number  of  men,  and  skill  in  martial  affairs,  the  king  was  far 
sapcrior.  For,  having  fought  very  many  battles,  and  for  the  most  part 
coming  off  a  conqueror,  he  had  gained  much  experience  in  matters  o{ 
war;  on  the  other  hand,  Iphicrates,  Chabrias,andTimotheus,  (the  A** 
tiicnian's  best  commanders),  were  now  dead;  and  Chares,  the  chief  of 
them  that  were  left,  differed  but  little  from  a  common  soldier,  as  ta 
/  tlie  wisdom  and  conduct  of  a  general.  About  sun-rising,  the  armies 
^'  on  both  sides  drew  up  in  battalia.  Tin*  king  ordered  his  son  Alex- 
kndor,  (nlio  wa^  thcu  newly  (omc  to  man's  estate,  and  had  cveu  at 


Chap.Xir.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUJ.  lAi 


tfaat  time  given  evident  demonstrations  of  bis  valour^  and  the  spright- 
Itness  of  his  spirit  in  managing  affairs),  to  command  one  wing,  joia- 
ing  with  him  some  of  the  best  of  bis  commanders.  He  himself^ 
with  a  choice  body  of  men,  commanded  the  other  wing,  and  placei 
<and  disposed  the  regiments  and  brigades  in  such  posts  and  statiooi 
as  the  present  occasion  required.  The  Athenians  marshalled  their 
army  according  to  the  several  nations,  and  committed  one  part  to  the 
Boeotians,  and  commanded  the  rest  themselves.  At  length  the  fir« 
mies  engaged^  and  a  fierce  and  bloody  battle  was  fought,  which  oon^ 
tinned  a  long  time  with  great  slaughter  on  both  sides,  tmcertaiii 
which  way  victory  would  incline,  until  Alexander,  earnest  to  give  ao' 
indication  of  his  valour  to  his  father,  charged  with  a  more  than  or« 
dinary  beat  and  vigour,  and,  being  assisted  by  many  stout  and  brava 
men,  was  the  first  tliat  broke  through  the  main  body  of  the  enemy- 
next  to  him,  with  the  slaughter  of  many,  and  bore  down  all  before 
btm;  and,  when  those  that  seconded  him  did  the  like,  tlien  the  regl- 
loents  next  to  the  former  were  broke  to  pieces.  At  length,  the  earth 
being  strewed  with  heaps  of  dead  carcases,  tiiose  with  Alexander  first 
put  the  wing  opposed  to  them  to  flight.  The  king  himself,  likewise^ 
«C  the  head  of  this  regiment,  fought  with  no  less  courage  and  lesohi- 
tion;  and,  that  the  glory  of  the  victory  might  not  be  attributed  to  his 
son,  he  forced  the  enemy  opposed  to  him  to  give  ground,  and  at 
length  totally  routed  them,  and  so  was  the  chief  instrument  of  the 
victory.  There  were  above  a  thousand  Athenians  killed  hi  this  bat^ 
tie,  and  no  fewer  than  two  thousand  taken  prisoners.  A  great  num-. 
ber  likewise  of  the  Boeotians  were  slaio>aud  many  fell  into  the.band^i 
of  the  enemy. 

After  the  battle,  Philip  set  up  a  trophy,  and,  Iiaviug  gi ven. liberty  ^ 
Ibr  the  burying  of  the  dead,  he  sacrificed  to  the  gods  for  the  victory^ 
and  distributed  rewards  to  the  soldiers  who  had  signalised  their,  valour^ 
according  as  every  one  had  deserved. 

Some  report,  that  Philip,  having  appointed  a  wanton  and  luiuiriouf. 
banquet  with  his  friends,  in  ostentation  of  his  victory,  in  his  cups- 
passing  through  the  throng  of  the  prisoners,' most  coiitumeliousl/; 
taunted  the  miserable  wretches  with  their. misfortune.  VVixerejupong 
Demadcs  the  orator,  one  of  the  captives,  spoke  boldly  to  iiim^  and' 
framed  a  discourse,  in  order  to  curb  the  pride  and  petulance  of  the. 
king,  in  words  to  this  eU'ect — "  Since  Fortune,  O  king,  has  repre.-. 
aented  thee  like  Agamemnon,  art  thou  not  ashamed  to  act  the  part: 
of  Thersites?"  With  this  sharp  reproof,  they  say,  Piulip,  was  so. 
Startled,  that  he  wholly  changed  liis  former  course,  and  uot  only  laid 
aside  the  coronets,  and  all  other  badges  of  priJe  and  wantonness  that 
attended  his  festivals^  but^  with  admiration,  reiccised  the  mau  that  had' 


r 


s 


ISS  DiODoAus  8ICULU8.  Boot  XFZi 

■BBsssesseBassssssssassssrsssssasssssssssa^^ 
reprehended  him^  and  advanced  him  to  places  of  hoDonr.  In  coo* 
elusion^  he  became  so  far  complaisant,  and  moulded  into  the  civiii* 
ties  of  Athens,  through  his  converse  with  Demadcs,  that  he  rekiaed 
all  the  captives  without  ransom;  and,  remitting  his  'pride  and 
haughtiness,  (the  constant  attendant  upon  victory),  he  sent  ambas- 
sadors to  Athens,  and  renewed  the  peace  with  them:  and,  placing  a 
garrison  in  Thebes,  made  peace  likewise  with  the  Boeotians*  Aher 
this  overthrow,  the  Athenians  put  to  death  Lysicles,  the  gencnl  of 
the  army,  opon  the  accusation  of  Lycurgus,  who  was  the  most  higlily 
preferred  of  any  of  the  orators  of  that  age.  He  had  esecnted  the 
office  of  lord-treasurer  of  the  city  (with  great  commendation)  for  the 
space  of  twelve  yean,  and  ail  his  life  long  had  been  in  great  iqm^. 
tation  for  hb  virtue  and  honesty;  but  a  most  bitter  accuser.  Tlie 
excellence  and  sharpness  of  whose  speech,  if  any  desire  to  know,  hs 
may  best  judge  by  his  words  used  against  Lysicles,  which  follow: 

^*  O  Lysicles,  thou  wast  the  general  of  the  army ;  andj  though  n 
thousand  citizens  are  slain,  two  thousand  taken  prisoners,  a  tiopl^ 
erected  to  the  dishonour  of  this  city,  and  all  Greece  enslaved,  wd 
all  this  done  thou  being  captain  and  general,  yet  darest  to  live  and 
Yiew  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  blushest  not  to  shew  thy  face  in  the 
forum,  thou  who  art  born  the  monument  of  thy  country's  shame  and 
dishonour!'* 

A  thing  very  remarkable  happened  at  this  time*  For,  when  this 
battle  was  fought  at  Chsronea,  the  same  day  and  hour  another  waa 
fought  in  Italy,  between  the  Tarentines  and  Lucanians,  in  which  Ar* 
chidamus,  the  king  of  Laccdsmon,  was  slain,  who  had  reigned  three* 
and-twenty  years.  Agis,  his  son,  succeeded  him,  and  governed  nine 
years.  About  that  time  likewise  died  Timotheus,  prince  of  Heraclea, 
in  Pontus,  in  the  fifteenth  yeapof  his  principality,  whose  brother Dio* 
nysius  succeeded,  and  reigned  two-and-thirty  years. 

Phrynicus  bore  the  office  of  chief  magistrate  of  Athens,  and 
Titus  Manlius  Torquatus,  and  Publius  Decius,  were  invested  with 
the  consular  dignity  at  Rome,  when  Philip,  bearing  himself  very 
haughtily,  on  account  of  his  victory  at  Chseronea,  and  having  struck 
a  terror  into  the  most  eminent  cities  of  Greece,  made  it  his  great 
business  to  be  chosen  generalissimo  of  all  Greece.  It  being  there- 
fore noised  abroad,  that  he  would  make  war  upon  the  Persians,  for 
the  advantage  of  the  Grecians,  and  that  lie  would  revenge  the  impiety 
by  them  committed  against  the  sacreds  of  the  gods,  he  presently  won 
the  hearts  of  the  Grecians. 

He  was  very  liberal  and  courteous  likewise  to  all,  both  private 
men  and  communities,  and  published  to  the  cities,  tliat  he  had  a 
desire  to  consult  with  them  concerning  matters  relating  to  the  pub- 


€^.  XF.  moDoRus  srcuLus.  1 53 

lie  good.  Whereapon  a  general  council  was  called,  and  held  at 
Corinth,  where  he  declared  his  design  to  make  war  upon  the  Persians, 
and  what  probable  grounds  there  were  of  success,  and  therefore  de^ 
sired  the  council  to  join  with  him  as'confederates  in  the  war. 

At  length  lie  was  created  general  of  all  Greece,  with  absolute 
poWrr,  and  thereopon  he  made  mighty  preparations  for  that  expedi- 
tion; andj  haring  ordered  what  quota  of  men  every  city  should  send 
IbHh,  he  return^  into  Macedonia.  And  thus  stood  the  aifiurs  and 
Croncems  of  Philip. 

'  In  Sicily,  Timoleon,  after  he  had  settled  all  things  in  right  and 
doe  order  in  Syracuse,  died^  having  governed  eight  years.  The  Syjra- 
cosaiM,  who.  highly  honoured  him  for  the  many  great  services  dotie 
to  tkeirtsountry,  buried  him  in  great  state  and  pomp,  and,  when  the 
body  was  to  be  brought  forth,  great  multitudes  were  got  together, 
and  tb6  Syraciisans  published  a  decree — That  two  hundred  minas 
should  be  expended  upon  the  charge  of  his  funeral,  and  that  his  me- 
mory should  be  honoured  yearly  for  ever  with  music,  ho#se-coursing, 
and  Gymoic  sports^  because  he  bad  subdued  the  barbarians,  planted 
colonies  in  the  greatest  Greek  city  in  Sicily,  and  rescued  the  Sicilians 
firom  slavery. 

About  this  time  Ariobarsanes*'  died,  in  the  twenty-sixth  year  of 
bis  reign,  and  was  succeeded  by  Mithridates,  who  reigned  five-and- 
tUrty  years. .  At  the  same  time  the  Romans  fought  with  the  Latins 
sa4  Caapanians,  near  the  city  Suessa,  and  routed  them,  and  confis- 
fifttad  part  of  their  lands;  and  Manlius  the  6onsul,  who  gained  the 
dsy^  tnamphsd  for  the  victory. 

*  King  of  PoDtiu. 


Vol.  i.  No.  42. 


154  DIODORUS  sicULt^s.  Book  XFL 


CHAP,  XV. 

Phil^  consults  the  oraek  at  Delphos.  Marries  his  daugUer'Cbo^ 
patra  to  the  king  ofEpirus.  Encouraged  to  the  Permm  war 
by  Neopt<denms*s  verses.  PluUp^s  pridom  IBs  murder.  The 
cause  of  it,  how  it  was  done,  and  by  whom. 

CI  I  WHEN  Pythodorus  was  chief  goTernor  of  Athens^  and  Quintas 
Publius,  and  Tiberius  ^oiilias  Mamercus,  were  Romao  consuls,  the 
hundred  and  eleventh  Olympiad  was  celebrated,  wherein  ClBonwntis 
Cletorius  won  the  prise.  In  this  year  Philip  began  the  war  against 
the  Persians,  and  forthwith  sent  Attalus  and  Parmenio  before  into 
Asia,  to  free  the  Greek  cities  there  from  slavery.  He  himaelf,  iir» 
tending  to  have  the  concurrence  of  the  gods,  consulted  the  oracle  at 
Delphos^  whether  or  no  he  should  be  victorious  over  the  king  of 
Persia.    The  answer  was  thus—^ 

The  ox  ii  crowned  when 's  end  is  near  at  hand. 
To  offer  bim  n  num  docb  readj  itand. 

Tills  doubtful  answer  Philip  construed  to  his  own  advantage,  as  if  the 
oracle  had  expressly  foretold,  that  he  should  lead  away  the  PeniUi 
Icing  as  a  victim  to  the  sacrifice:  but,  in  truth,  it  fell  out  quite  odier- 
wise,  and,  by  tlie  effect,  it  appeared  that  it  had  a  contrary  sigbifiefe- 
tion,  to  wit,  tliat  Philip,  in  a  tlirong,  at  the  time  of  a  sacred  festival, 
was  to  be  knocked  on  the  head  like  a  bullock  crowned  with  a  garland 
for  sacrifice. 

In  tlie  mean  time,  he  was  very  jocund,  as  if  he  had  conquered  Asia 
already,  and  concluded  the  gods  were  engaged  with  him  in  the  ex- 
pedition. Without  delay,  therefore,  he  offered  most  costly  and  mag* 
nificent  sacrifices,  and,  at  the  same  time,  solemnized  the  marriage  of 
bis  daut^fitcr  Cleopatra,  by  Olympias:  he  married  her  to  Alexander, 
king  of  Epirus,  brother  of  Olympias.  Having,  therefore,  a  desire  off 
a  considerable  appearance  of  the  Grecians  at  this  nuptial  festivity, 
conjoined  with  hb  religious  sacrifices,  he  made  most  pompous  pre*. 
paratioii  for  the  entertainment  of  his  friends  and  guests,  both  in  id»v 
sic,  diinelng,  and  feasting. 

To  this  end,  he  invited  those  that  were  his  special  friends  and 
familiars,  all  over  Greece,  and  commanded  his  servants  add  attend- 
ants that  they  should  invite  as  many  strangers  from  all  places  aft 
were  of  their  own  acquaintance.  And  his  main  design  in  all  this 
Was,  that  he  might  assure  all  the  Grecians  of  faia  Jundness  towardf 


Chap.Xn  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  155 

tbem,  and  testify  his  gratitude,  by  these  friendly  eDtertainmeots, 
for  the  hoQours  eonferred  upoD  him*    Avast  concourse  of  people,     O  ^ 
tberefbre,  were  got  together  from  all  parts,  to  the  solemnity  of  these     ^ 
nuptials,  which  were  magnificently  solemnized  at  £gea^,  in  Mace* 
donia,  with  all  sorts  of  sports  and  plays;  so  that  not  only  noblemea 
aod  persons  of  quality,  but  even  many  great  cities,  presented  Philip 
with  crowns  of  gold.    Among  the  cities,  Athens  made  one;  andy 
wheo  the  common  cryer,  with  a  loud  voice,  presented  the  crown 
sent  from  them  to  Philip,  he  closed  with  this.-jrbat  if  any  plotter 
of  treason  against  Philip  should  hereafter  flee  to  Athens  for  shelter, 
be  should  be  forthwith  delivered  up.    By  this  accidental  publication 
of  the  cryer,  it  seemed  to  be  intimated  (as  it  were  by  some  divine, 
providence)  that  some  piece  of  treachery  was  near  at  band  to  be 
executed. 

There  were  several  other  such  words  (as  by  a  divine  instigation) 
uttered,  which  portended  the  king's  death.  There  was  then  at  the 
iestivai,  Neoptolemus,  the  tragedian,  remarkable  above  all  others  for 
the  loudness  of  his  voice,  and  famous  and  eminent  in  other  respects* 
The  king  had  commanded  him  to  repeat  some  verses  which  he  luid 
been  ordered  to  compose,  especially  relating  to  the  Persian  expedition. 
Whereupon  he  began  to  recjte  a  witty  poem,  proper  (as  he  thought) 
tQ  Philip's  intended  passage  into  Asia,  wherein  he  set  forth  the  glory 
wd  greatness  of  tUip  Persian  king;  and>  though  he  was  so  famous  all 
the  world  over,  y^t  x\^i  fortune  would  son^e  time  ojt  other  bring  him 
down.    The  p^em  was  thus.^ 

YoQT  minds  are  higber  than  the  sk  j  o'ergroim. 
I1ie  greatest  part  of  oarth  jou  irisli  jour  own; 
Houses  to  houses  join;  fooU  wUhout  end, 
Yoq  wouli;!  j<mr  fist.%  as  well  as  laods  extent). 
|iui  ^oleful  dcaib^  alas!  fi\tbu|igli  ye  du 
Creep  towards,  'twill  gailup  uiiCu  yuuj 
Of  long  liupes  frry  shortly  cut  the  cine.. 

He  added  Ukewjse  others  in  the  same  sense  with  these^  But 
Philip,  resting  wholly  upon  these  recited,  his  thoughts  were  altoge- 
tlier  full  of  his  cQuqueriug  the  king  of  Persia;  and  he  much  revolved 
in  iiis  mind  th^  arvsw^r  given  him  by  the  oracle<L  whicl^  agreed  in  all 
|ioints  with  the  words  pf  the  tragedian. 

Alter  the  feast  for  that  ti^le  was  ended^  and  tbe  sports  were  to  be 
renewed  the  q^xt  day^  a  great  number  of  people  in  the  night  time 
flocked  into  the  theatre.  Apd  whereas  twelve  images  of  the  gods, 
(amongst  other  sumptuous  preparations),  nK>st  curiously  wrout^b^ 


156  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Seiik  XFI. 


9J 


and  richly  adorned)  were  brought  forth  in  pompous  procession^  the 
image  of  Philip,  clothed  like  the  gods  in  every  respect,  made  the 
thirteenth,  hereby  arrogating  to  himself  a  place,  as  if  he  woaid  be 
enthroned  among  the  gods*.  The  theatre  being  now  Aillj  he  him- 
self came  forth,  clothed  in  a  white  robe,  his  life-guards  following  him 
at  a  great  distance,  designing  thereby  to  evidence  it  to  all,  that  he 
judged  himself  secure  in  the  hearts  an4  affections  of  the  Grecians^ 
and  therefore  stood  not  in  need  of  the  guard  of  his  halberteers. 
While  he  was  thus  with  loud  and  joyful  acclamations  cried  iip  (as  it 
were)  to  the  stars,  and  the  whole  multitude  resounded  his  pruse^ 
upon  a  sudden,  and  beyond  all  men's  expectation,  he  was  treacher- 
ously murdered. 

But,  for  the  clearer  and  more  distinct  understanding  of  the  historf 
in  this  matter,  we  s|iall  first  relate  the  causes  and  grounds  of  this 
assassination. 

There  was  one  Pausauias,  a  Macedonian,' of  the  city  called  Orestis^ 
one  of  the  king's  esquires  of  the  body,  and,  for  his  beauty,  d^Iy 
beloved  by  him.  This  man,  taking  notice  how  much  another  yduth 
of  the  same  name  was  doated  on  by  Philip,  attacked  him  with  very 
foul  and  opprobrious  language,  telling  him  he  was  an  hermaphroditej 
for  that  he  4)rostituted  himself  to  the  lust  of  every  one  that  would. 
He  was  much  incensed  at  this  disgrace,  but  concealed  it  for  awhile, 
Afterw'ards,  consulting  with  Attains  what  was  to  be  done  for  the  fu- 
ture, he  determined  presently  after,  in  an  unusual  manner,  to  pot  an 
end  to  his  own  life.  ,  For,  within  awhile  after,  in  a  battle  wherein 
Philip  was  engaged  against  Pleuratus,  king  of  the.  Illyrians,  Pausanias 
in  the  heat  of  the  fight  interposed  himself  between  the  king  and  the 
enemy,  and  received  all  the  darts  upon  his  own  body  that  were  cast 
at  the  king,  and  so  died  upon  the  spot.  The  manner  of  hb  death 
being  noised  abroad,  Attalus,  one  of  the  courtiers,  and  in  great  es- 
teem with  the  king,  invited  the  other  Pausanias  to  a  feast,  and,  after 
he  had  made  him  drunk,  exposed  his  body,  thus  overcharged  with 
wine,  to  be  abused  by  the  filthy  Icists  of  a  company  of  base,  sordid 
feltowsf.  When  he  was  sober,  he  was  highly  enraged  at  the  abomi^ 
nable  abuse,  and  complained  against  Attains  to  the  king;  who, 
though  he  was  much  offended  at  the  wickedness  of  the  act,  yet,  by 
reason  of  his  relation  to  him,  and  because  he  had  at  present  ofecasibn 
to  make  use  of  him  in  his  service,  he  would  not  J>uni8h  him:  for  he 
was  uncle  to  Cleopatra,  whom  the  king  had  married  as  his  second 

*  Tlicre  were  twelve  chief  godi  among  the  Greeks,  who  were  called  Oljnpii;  tbcir 
nnnics  were,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Mercury,  Neptune,  Viilcan«  Apollu,  Juno^  Veita#  Minerva* 
Ceres,  Diana,  Vlmius. — Vide  Jfcrodotui  in  Ttrptichon, 

t  Mule-tenderi,  or  ostieri. 


Chap.  XK  woDORus  siculus.  157 

wife,  and  was  designed  general  of  the  army  sent  before  into  Asia, 
being  a  very  stout  and  valiant  man.  To  pacify  therefore  Pausania9, 
whose  spirit  was  higfafy  exasperated  at  the  intolerable  injui^  done 
likn,  he  bestowed  on  him  many  rich  gifts,  and  advanced  him  to  a 
more  honourable  post  in  his  ^ards.  But  Pausanias's  anger  was 
implacable,  and  therefore  he  determined  not  only  to  revenge  him- 
self upon  the  author  of  this  abuse,  but  upon  him  that  waved  doing 
him  justice  by  the  inflicting  of  punishment.  And  Hermocrates  the 
sophist  greatly  confirmed  him  in  this  his  resolution.  For  Pausanias 
conversing  with  him,  and  in  discourse  asking  him,  by  what  means  a 
man  might  make  himself  most  famous  ?.»The  philosopher  answered, 
by  killing  him  that  had  done  the  greatest  things;  for,  whenever  he 
is  named,  then  he  likewise  that  killed  him  will  be  sure  to  be  remem- 
bered. Pausanias,  making  use  of  this  answer  as  an  incentive  to  his 
rage,  the  restlc^ssness  of  his  disturbed  spirit  would  admit  of  no  further 
delay,  but  laid  his  design  in  the  time  of  the  festivals  in  this  manner: 
he  first  placed  iiorses  at  the  gates  of  the  city,  then  he  himself  re- 
turned and  stood  at  the  entrance  into  the  theatre,  with  a  Gallic 
sword  secreted  under  his  coat.  Philip  had  commanded  his  friends 
that  came  along  with  him  to  go  before  him  into  the  theatre,  and  his 
guards  were  at  a  considerable  distance  from  him :  whereupon  the 
traitor,  perceiving  that  the  king  was  alone,  ran  up  to  him,  and,  stab- 
bing him  in  the  side,  through  the  body,  laid  him  dead  at  his  feet^ 
and  forthwith  fled  to  the  horses  that  were  prepared  for  him  at  the 
gates.  Hereupon  presently  some  of  the  life-guards  ran  to  the  body, 
and  others  pursued  the  assassin,  amongst  whom  were  Leonatus, 
Perdiccas,  and  Attains.  Pausanias  nimbly  mounted  his  horse,  and 
made  so  swiftly  away,  that  he  would  certainly  have  escaped,  but  that 
a  branch  of  a  vine  caught  hold  of  the  heel  of  his  shoe,  and  so  en- 
tangled him  that  he  fell :  upon  which  Perdiccas,  with  the  others, 
came  upon  him  as  he  was  endeavouring  to  rise,  and,  after  many 
wounds  given  him,  there  slew  him.  And  thus  Philip  (the  most 
potent  of  all  the  kings  in  Europe  in  that  age,  and  who,  for  the  great- 
ness of  his  dominion,  associated  himself  for  ihajesty  into  the  number 
of  the  twelve  gods)  came  to  his  end,  after  he  had  reigned  about  four- 
and-twenty  years. 

Tliis  king,  from  very  small  beginnings,  gained  the  largest  dominion 
in  Greece;  and  he  is  judged  to  have  enlarged  the  bounds  of  his 
kingdom  not  so  much  by  arms,  as  by  his  fair  tongue,  and  his  com- 
plaisant and  courteous  demeanor  towards  all  he  had  to  deal  with : 
for  it  is  reported,  that  Philip  himself  would  often  boast  more  of  his 
military  art  and  policy,  and  of  the  gaining  of  his  enemies  by  fair 


^i' 


n 


159  DIODORUS  SICULU5*  BookXFL 

words^than  ii>  the  strength  and  valour  of  hb  soldiers  t  for  he  bad 
used  to  say— .That  the  honour  of  winning  of  battles  was  comrooo 
axid  due  to  the  rest  of  the  army  with  himself;  but  the  praise  and 
commenJation  due  to  afiability  and  a  pleasant  converse^  was  peculiar 
to  himself  alone. 

And  thus^  being  now  come  to  the  death  of  Philip^  we  shall  end 
(bis  book^  as  we  at  first  designed.  The  following  we  shall  begia 
with  the  succession  of  Alexander  into  his  father's  kingdom^  and  eiH 
^Tour  to  comprehend  all  his  actions  in  one  book. 


159 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  XVII. 


PREFACE. 

THE  former  book,  being  the  sixteemh  of  our  history,  began  with  the 

-teign  of  Philip,  the  son  of  Amyntas,  and  comprehended  not  <ni^ 

the  things  done  by  him  to  the  very  day  of  his  death,  bat  tiie  actions 

fitd  affiiirs  of  other  kings,  cities,  and  countries,  dtiring  the  spaee  d? 

foar^nd-twenty  years.     Having  now,  in  this,  to  declare  v/iat  bi^ 

Wed,  we  shall  begin  Ivith  the  reign  of  Alexander;  and,  in  treating 

*  of  the  actions  of  this  prince,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  we  shall 

tdce  along  with  us  the  most  remarkable  things  done  through  all  pai^ft 

of  the  worUL 

And  the  relations  (we  conceive)  will  be  the  better  remembered,  if 
things  be  methodically  digested,  as  it  were,  into  distinct  heads,  so  aji 
tbat  the  beginning  and  end  may,  as  by  one  thread,  be  knit  one  to  the 
other:  for  this  king  did  great  things  in  a  very  short  time,  and  ex* 
eelled  all  the  princes  that  ever  were  before  him  in  his  wanderfi4  a- 
(hievements,  effected  by  hts  own  valour  and  pdicy:.  for.be  con- 
^Qered  a  great  part  of  Europe,  and  almost  all  Asia,  within  the  space 
of  twelve  years;  so  that  his  fame  was  (deservedly)  advanced  to  that 
<)egree,  that  in  glory  he  surmounted  all  the  heroes  and  demi-gods. 

But  we  need  not  (we  judge)  in  a,  preface  anticipate  any  of  the 
worthy  actions  of  this  king;  for  the  particular  relations  tkemselve;^ 
^ill  sufficiently  evidence  his  greatness,  and  the  fame  and  glory  of  his 
i^&me.  Alexander,  therefore,  descended  from  Hercules  on  the  fa- 
ther's side,  and  from  Achilles  on  the  mother's,  seemed  to  derive  his 
valour,  as  well  as  his  person,  from  such  famous  ancestors. 

Tlie  time' thus  stated  for  this  present  relation,  we  return  to  the 
course  of  our  history. 


l60  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XFTI. 


CHAP.  I. 

I 

Conspiracies  of  the  eiiies  agmnst  Alexander.  The  Athenians  send 
ambassadors  to  Alexander,  to  beg  pardon.  He  is  made  general 
by  the  Amphictyons.  Attains  killed  by  Alexander's  commands 
The  loickedness  of  Bagoas.  Darius  commended.  Raises  forces. 
A  description  of  Mount  Ida.  Alexander  invades  the  lUyrisau, 
and  others.  Thebes  besieged  by  Alexander,  and  razed.  The, 
miseries  of  Thebes.  Prodigies.  Alexander  demands  DemoS" 
thenes  and  others  to  be  delivered  up  to  him  by  the  Athenians: 
their  anstver.  He  returns  into  Macedonia,  and  feasts  kk 
soldiers. 

WHEN  Evaenetus  was  lord-cbancelior  in  AtheDs,aDdLucioiFandSi 
aod  Caius  Manlius^  were  Roman  consuls,  Alexaod^  ascended  the 
throne,  and,  in  the  first  place,  executed  justice  upon  the  murderers  of 
his  father:  and,  when  he  had  with  great  care  celebrated  hb  fiweral^ 
he  set  in  order  the  great  concerns  of  the  kingdom  much  better  thtu 
most  expected:  for,  being  very  young,  and  upon  that  aceount  de«» 
pised,  he  sought  first  to  win  the  common  people  by  tail  words  and 
courteous  addresses.  Amongst  others,  he  told  them^  that  the  name 
of  the  king  only  ^was  changed,  hut  that  the  government  should  not 
be  managed  in  any  respect  worse  than  it  was  when  bis  father  was  alive. 
He  courteously,  likewise,  gave  audience  to  the  ambassadcnrs,  and  de» 
sired  the  Grecians  that  they  would  have  the  same  kindness  for  1 
as  they  had  for  his  father,  which  he  so  esteemed,  that  he  looked  ( 
it  as  part  of  his  inheritance.  Then  he  employed  himself  in  the  fire- 
quent  training  of  the  soldiers^  and  in  martial  exercises,  and  hrougbt 
the  army  readily  to  submit  to  his  commands.  Attains^  the  uncle  of 
Cleopatra,  Philip's  other  wife,  conspired  to  gain  the  kingdom;  and 
therefore  he  resolved  to  take  him  out  of  the  way.  For  Cleopatra  Was 
brought  to  bed  of  a  son  a  few  days  before  the  death  of  Philips  and 
Attains  was  sent  a  little  before,  as  general,  with  PanBcoki  his  eol- 
league,  with  an  army  into  Asia,  where,  by  hb  bribes  and  fair  tMg«ej 
^e  so  gained  the  hearts  of  the  soldiers,  that  th&  army  was  wholly  de- 
voted to  him :  and  therefore  the  king  conceived  he  had  just  cause  to « 
be  jealous  of  him,  lest,  if  he  should  side  with  the  Grecians,  (whom  he 
knew  were  hb  enemies),  he  should  by  that  means  gain  the  kingdoli|i 

*  M«niu9. 


Cl^9.  /•  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  101 

for  himself.  Therefore  he  made  choice  of  Hecateus,  one  of  his 
f  rieuds,  and  sent  him  with  a  considerable  army  into  Asia,  with  com* 
maud  to  bring  over  Attains  aliVe,  if  he  could;  and,  if  he  could  not 
effect,  that,  to  take  the  first  opportunity  to  kill  him.  When  he  came 
into  Adia,  he  joined  his  forces  with  Attalus  and  Parmenio,  and  watched 
a  fit  opportunity  to  execute  what  he  was  commanded. 

lu  the  mean  time,  Alexander  being  informed  that  many  of  tht 
Grecians  were  batching  some  mischief,  in  order  to  new  commotions, 
bis  thoughts  were  greatly  perplexed  and  disturbed.  For  the  Athe- 
nians (Df^mosthenes  stirring  them  up  against  the  Macedonians)  re- 
joiced at  the  news  of  Philip's  death,  and  resolved  that  the  Macedo- 
nians should  no  longer  domineer  over  Greece,  To  this  end,  they 
tent  over  ambassadors  to  Attalus,  and  privately  consulted  with  him 
concerning  the  management  of  the  whole  afikir,  and  stirred  up  many 
of  the  cities  to  assert  their  liberties.  The  i£tolians  made  a  decree 
to  recal  the  exiles  of  Acarnania,  whom  Philip  had  driven  out  of  their 
country.  The  Ambraciots,  by  the  persuasion  of  Aristarchus,  drove 
out  the  garrison  that  was  there,  and  restored  the  democracy.  The 
Thebans  likewise  decreed  to  cast  out  the  garrbon  that  was  in  the 
citadel  of  Cadmea,  and  that  Alexander  should  never,  with  their  con- 
tent, have  command  in  Greece.  The  Arcadians  also,  as  they  were 
the  only  people  that  refused  to  give  their  consent  that  Philip  should 
be  general  of  Greece,  so  they  now  rejected  Alexander.  The  rest  of 
the  Peioponnesians,  as  the  Argives,  Elians,  Lacedasmonians,  and 
.Bome  others,  were  with  all  their  might  for  their  own  government.  To 
co:w\iiiej  many  of  the  nations  beyond  Macedonia  waited  for  an  op- 
portunity to  rebel,  and  great  commotions  there  were  among  the  bar- 
barians in  those  parts. 

Notwithstanding  all  which,  and  the  fears  that  were  every  where 
in  the  kingdom,  and  though  he  was  but  a  youth,  yet  in  a  short 
time  (beyond  all  expectation)  he  overcame  all  those  difliculties,  and 
made  all  plain  and  clear  before  hiin,  reducing  some  to  their  duty 
by  fair  and  smooth  words,  and  others  through  fear  and  dread  of 
punishments ;  and  the  rest  he  comi)elled  by  force  to  stoop  to  his 
sovereignty. 

In  the  first  place,  he  so  far  gained  upon  the  Thessalians,  both  by 
promises  of  large  rewards,  and  by  his  smooth  and  courteous  language, 
(telling  them  how  near  of  kin  he  was  to  them  by  his  descent  from 
Hercules),  that  they  by  a  public  decree  declared  him  general  of 
Greece,  as  that  which  descended  to  him  from  his  father.  Having 
gained  this  point,  he  brought  over  the  bordering  nations  to  the  same 
^ood  opinion  of  him.    Then  he  went  to  Pylene,  and,  in  tlie  senate  of 

\ql.  3.  No.  42.  Y 


1^2  DioDORUs  8ICULUS.  Booi  XFIL 

the  Amphictyons  he  so  managed  his  matters,  that,  by  the  general 
coDsentof  all,  he  was  creiated  generalissimo  of  all  Greece.  He  as- 
sured the  Ambraciots,  in  a  kind  and  smooth  oration  made  to  them... 
That  he  had  that  kindness  for  them,  that  he  would  presently  restore 
them  to  that  liberty  which  they  so  lately  sought  to  recover.  But^  to 
strike  the  greater  terror  into  those  that  regarded  not  his  words,  be 
came  with  a  swift  march  with  an  army  of  IV^cedonians  in  an  hostile 
manner  into  Bceotia,  and,  encamping  near  the  Cadmea,  struck  a  ter- 
ror into  the  city  of  the  Thebans. 

About  the  same  time  the  Athenians,  hearing  of  the  king's  coming 
into  Bceotia,  slighted  him  no  longer:  for  the  quickness  of  the  youth^ 
and  his  diligent  despatch  of  .business,  greatly  terrified  the  revolters. 
Hereupon  the  Athenians  ordered  every  thing  they  had  in  the  country 
to  be  brought  into  the  city,  and  the  walls  to  be  repaired  and  guarded 
as  well  as  they  could;  and  sent  ambassadors  to  Alexander^  to  beg 
pardon  that. they  had  no  sooner  owned  his  sovereignty,  and  ordered 
Demosthenes  to  accompany  the  ambassadors:  but  he  came  not  with 
the  others  to  Alexander,  but  returned  from  Citheron  to  AthcDi; 
either  because  he  was  afraid,  upon  account  of  the  speeches  he  had 
publicly  made  against  the  Macedonians,  or  that  he  was  not  willing  to 
displease  the  Persian  king:  for  it  is  reported  that  he  had  received 
great  sums  of  money  from  the  Persians  to  beat  down  the  interest  of 
the  Macedonians  by  his  orations;  which  was  hinted  (they  say)  hf 
iEschines,  in  one  of  his  speeches,  wherein  he  upbraids  DemostheDCS 
for  taking  of  bribes  in  these  words — Now  the  king's  gold  plentifully 
bears  all  his  charges;  but  this  will  not  serve  his  turn  long,  for  cove* 
tousness  is  never  satisfied  with  abundance. 

But  to  proceed,  Alexander  returned  a  very  courteous  answer  to 
the  ambassadors,  which  freed  the  Athenians  from  their  fears^  and 
he  ordered  all  the  ambassadors  and  members  of  the  council*  to  meet 
him  at  Corinth;  where,  when  those  who  were  usually  members  or 
the  general  council  were  come,  the  king,  by  a  gracious  speech^  so 
prevailed  with  the  Grecians,  that  they  created  him  general  of  all 
Greece,  and  decreed  him  aid  and  assistance  against  the  Persians^  in 
order  to  revenge  the  many  injuries  the  Greeks  had  received  from 
them.  Having  thus  gained  the  honour  he  sought  for,  be  marched 
back  with  his  army  into  Macedonia. 

Having  now  given  an  account  of  the  affairs  of  Greece,  we  shall 
relate  next  what  things  were  done  in  Asia:  for.  Attains  presently 
upon  the  death  of  Philip,  began  to  set  up  for  himself;  and  to  that 

•  Of  the  Amphicfvons. 


CXtfp.  h     '  DIODORU.S  SICULUS.  T63 

end^  made  a  league  with  the  Athenians^  id  order  by  their  joint  con- 
currence to  oppose  Alexander,  But  aftierwards  he  changed  his  mind^ 
and  sent  a  letter  (written  to  him  by  Demosthenes)  to  Alexander^  and 
in  many  smooth  and  flattering  expressions^  endeavoured  to  clear  him- 
self of  all  those  crimes  and  miscarriages  that  were  laid  to  his  charge. 
However,  he  was  afterwards  killed  by  Hecateus,  according  to  the 
king's  command;  upon  which  the  Macedonian  army  in  Asia  laid 
aside  all  thoughts  of  a  defection,  for  that  Attains  was  now  gone,  and 
Parmenio  greatly  loved  Alexan\]er. 

But  as  we  are  now  about  to  write  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia,  it 
is  necessary  that  we  begin  our  relation  a  little  higher. 

Lately,  in  the  reign  of  Philip,  Ochus*  ruled  over  the  Persians, 
hated  by  all  for  his  ill  nature  and  cruelty  towards  his  subjects.  Ba- 
goas  therefore,  a  colonel  in  the  army,  and  an  eunuch,  but  a  wicked 
and  beastly  fellow,  poisoned  the  king  by  the  help  of  his  physician, 
and  placed  the  king's  youngest  son  Arses  upon  the  thrpne.  He  like- 
wise murdered  the  new  king's  brothers,  (who  were  yet  very  young), 
that  being  thus  bereft  of  his  relations,  he  might  be  more  observant 
to  himself. 

But  the  young  man  abhorring  the  wickedness  of  this  wretch,  and 
plainly,  by  many  tokens,  discovering  his  design  to  punish  him,  Bagoas 
fmelling  it  out^  murdered  Arses  and  all  his  children,  in  the  third  year 
of  his  reign. 

The  royal  family  being  thus  extinct,  and  none  of  that  race  left  who 
could  make  any  title  to  the  crown,  he  advanced  one  of  his  friends, 
called  Darius,  to  the  kingdom.  He  was  the  son  of  Arsanes,  the  bro- 
ther of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia.  But  the  fate  of  Bagoas  was  very 
remarkable;  for  having  habituated  himself  to  cruelty,  he  resolved  like- 
wise to  poison  Darius  in  a  medicinal  potion :  but  this  treason  being  dis- 
covered, the  king  sent  in  a  friendly  manner  to  speak  with  him;  and 
when  became  delivered  to  him  the  cup,  and  forced  him  to  drink  it  off. 
And  indeed  Darius  was  judged  worthy  to  enjoy  the  kingdom,  being 
looked  upon  as  the  most  valiant  man  among  the  Persians:  for  here- 
tofore, when  Artaxerxes  was  engaged  in  a  battle  against  the  Cadu- 
sians,one  of  the  enemy,  of  a  strong  body,  and  courageous  spirit,  chal- 
lenged any  of  the  Persians  there  present  to  a  single  combat;  which 
when  none  would  dare  to  undertake,  this  Darius  entered  the  list, 
and  killed  the  Cadusian.  For  which  he  was  highly  rewarded  by  the 
king,  and  gained  the  chiefest  reputation  for  valour  among  the  Per- 
f  ians.     And  for  this  reason  also,  he  was  accounted  worthy  of  th^ 

*  Dariut  Ochaf«  , 


1(54  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  Xf^L 

crown  of  Persia,  and  began  to  reign  about  the  same  time  that  Philip 
died,  and  Alexander  suc^ceeded  in  the  kingdom. 

The  valour  therefore  of  Alexander  meeting  with  such  a  miln  ai 
this  for  his  adversary  to  cope  with,  was  the  occasion  that  so  many  bat- 
tles were  fought  for  the  empire  with  that  resolution  as  they  were. 
But  these  matters  will  appear  more  clear  hereafter,  when  things  come 
to  b&  more  distinctly  and  particularly  related:  for  the  present  we  shall 
return  to  the  orderly  course  of  the  history. 

Darius*  being  advanced  to  the  throne  of  Persia,  a  little  before  the 
death  of  Philip,  he  was  contriving  how  to  avert  the  war  threatened^ 
and  bring  it  over  to  Macedonia  itself:  but  when  he  was  dead,  and  so 
the  king  freed  from  that  fear,  he  slighted  and  despised  the  youth  of 
Alexander:  but  being  for  his  volour,  and  activeness  of  spirit  in  des<* 
patch  of  business,  at  length  created  general  of  all  Greece,  the  £une 
and  valour  of  the  young  man  was  in  every  man's  mouth. 

And  Darius  now  began  to  look  about  him,  and  employed  his  chief 
care  to  raise  forces,  and  fitted  out  a  great  fleet,  and  made  choice  of 
^the  best  officers  he  could  procure  to  command  his  army,  which  was 
now  very  great  and  numerous ;  among  whom  Memnon,  the  Rhodian, 
was  one,  al)rave  man,  both  for  valour  and  discipline :  him  the  king 
commanded  to  march  to  Cyzicusf  with  five  thousand  men,  and  to 
endeavour  to  take  that  city:  who,  in  order  thereto,  marched  hit 
army  over  the  mountain  Ida.  Some  fabulously  report  that  this  moon«> 
tain  was  so  called  from  Ida  of  Meliseus.  It  is  the  highest  mouQtaill 
of  any  about  the  Hellespont.  In  the  middle  is  a  cave,  as  if  it  were 
made  on  purpose  to  entertain  the  gods,  in  which  it  is  reported^  that 
Alexander^  gave  judgment  concerning  the  goddesses. 

Here  it  is  said,  the  Idfiea  Dactyli§  were  born,  who  were  the  first 
that  were  taught  to  work  in  iron  by  the  mother||  of  the  gods. 

A  thing  also  very  wonderful  and  remarkable  is  ascribed  to  this 
place:  for,  at  the  rising  of  the  dog-star^,  there  is  such  a  serenity  and 
calmness  of  the  air  upon  the  top  of  the  mount,  as  if  it  were  there 
above  all  storms  and  winds;  and  then  even  at  midnight  the  sun  seems 
to  rise,  so  that  its  rays  appear  not  in  a  circular  form,  but  casts  abroad 
flames  of  j^re  here  and  there  at  a  great  distance,  so  that  it  seems  as 
if  flakes  of  fire  in  several  places  overspread  the  earth;  which,  withia 
a  little  while  after,  are  contracted  into  one  body,  till  they  come  to  the 

*  Darius  Codoroanus.         «  Cysicus,  an  island  in^lie  Propontis,  and  a  city  tlicre. 

X  This  was  PMris,  the  son  of  Priaoi,  called  Alexander,  who  decided  the  coatrover»j> 
between  Jono,  Minerva,  und  Venus,  bj  giving  the  gulden  apple  to  Venus  M  thefairvat. 
Pmui.  J.v.  c.  19. 

)  The  sons  of  Miaerfa  and  Apollo.  I  C^bete.  f  InAognft 


€1U^.  /.  DtODOKUB  SICULUS.  iSft 

m      .        ggessacgs  ■         „        '  .  ■  i> 

quantity  of  three  plethras*.  At  length,  when  the  day  is  at  hand, 
there  appears,  as  it  were,  the  complete  body  of^the  sun  enlighteninif 
ibe  airte  it  uses  to  do  at  other  times. 

But  to  proceed:  Memnon  having  passed  over  this  mountain,  as-» 
saults  Cyzicus  on  a  sudden,  and  was  very  near  surprising  af  it.  But 
fiuling  in  his  design,  he  harassed  the  country,  and  returned  loadeo 
with  a  rich  booty. 

In  the  mean  time,  Parmenio  took  Grynium  by  storm,  and  holdall 
flie  inhabitants  for  slaves.  Then  he  besieged  Pitane;  but  Memnoa 
appoaching,  the  Macedonians  in  a  fright  quitted  the  siege. 

Afterwards  Callas,  with  a  body  of  Macedonians  and  other  mer- 
cenaries, fought  with  the  Persians  in  the  country  of  Troas,  and  beif^ 
overpowered  with  numbers,  was  beaten,  and  forced  to  retire  to  Rhc- 
tium.    And  in  this  condition  was  Asia  at  that  time. 

Alexander  having  quieted  all  the  commotions  in  Greece,  mardied 
with  his  army  into  Thrace,  which  struck  such  terror  into  those  peo« 
pie  that  had  caused  tumults  and  disorders  there,  that  he  forced  theai 
to  submit  to  his  government.  Then  he  invaded  Pceonia  and  IHyriatt 
Bnd  the  people  bordering  upon  them,  and  having  subdued  those  ttmt 
liad  revoked,  he  likewise  brought  under  his  dominion  the  batbanaos 
next  adjoining.  While  he  was  engaged  in  these  wars,  he  received 
intelligence  that  many  of  the  Grecians  were  about  to  revolt,  and  that 
liH^nsiderable  number  of  the  Greek  cities,  particularly  Thebes,  had 
already  actually  rejected  his  sovereignty.  He  was  hereupon  in  a 
great  rage,  and  returned  into  Macedonia,  with  a  design  to  hastra 
into  Greece  to  quiet  the  tumults  and  disturbances  there. 

In  the  mean  time,  the^Thebans  were  intent  upon  driving  the  Ma-f 
cedonian  garrison  out  of  the  Cad  mea,  and  to  that  end  besieged  tlie  cita- 
del; and  had  no  sooner  done  so,  but  Alexander  was  presently  at  the 
city  walls,  and  lay  before  it  with  his  whole  army.  The  "^Itiebans^ 
before  Alexander's  approach,  had  so  begirt  the  Cadmea  with  a  deep 
trench,  and  a  strong  bancado  of  timber,  tirat  neither  relief  nor  pro« 
vision  could  be  brouglit  in  to  them.  They  had  sent  likewise  to  t<«e 
Orcadians,  Argives,  and  Eiians,  for  their  assistance;  and  solicited 
the  Athenians  by  their  ambassadors  to  join  with  them,  and  had  re« 
ceived  a  great  number  of  arms  freely  given  to  them  by  Demosthenes, 
with  which  they  armed  those  that  had  none. 

Among  those,  to  whom  theThebans  addressed  themselves  foras- 
iistancc,  the  Peloponnesians  had  sent  forces  as  far  as  to  the  Isthmus, 
and  there  ordered  them  to  make  a  halt  till  the  king  came,  who  was 
then  expected.    The  Athenians,  though  they  had  decreed  aid  to  the 

*  Three  hundred  feet.  t  Naw  Daimatia,  or  Sclavoiua« 


l66  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XWIE, 

Thebans^  yet  they  sent  no  forces  thither^  iDtending  first  to  obserrt 
bow  matters  were  likely  to  go. 

The  governor  likewise  of  the  castle  of  Cadmea  taking  notice  what 
great  preparations  the  Thebans  were  making  for  the  siege,  was  ^pery 
diligent  to  strengthen  and  fortify  the  walls,  and  had  furnished  the 
garrison  with  all  sorts  of  weapons. 

But  after  Alexander  had  arrived  unexpectedly,  and  on  a  sud^ 
den,  with  his  whole  army  out  of  Thrace,  and  that  it  was  uncertaia 
whether  any  assistance  would  come  in  to  the  Thebans,  the  forces  (rf 
the  enemy  far  exceeding  them  of  Thebes,  the  officers  called  a  counci^ 
of  war  to  consult  what  to  determine,  and  there  it  was  unanimously 
agreed  to  stand  out  in  defence  of  the  liberties  of  their  country; 
which  resolution  being  approved  of  by  all  the  citizens,  they  earn^stlj 
set  themselves  to  the  carrying  on  of  the  war. 

But  the  king  forbore  force  for  some  time,  to  the  end  they  might 
have  time  to  recollect  themselves,  not  thinking  that  one  city  only 
would  engaga  with  so  great  an  army.  For  Alexander  had  with  him 
above  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  three  thousand  horse,  all  old  expe^ 
lienced  soldiers,  (conquerors  almost  in  every  battle  under  Philip),  ia 
whose  valour  he  so  far  confided,  that  he  doubted  not  but  by  them  to 
put  an  end  to  the  Persian  monarchy,  j^owever,  if  the  Thebans  had 
yielded  to  the  present  difficulty  of  the  time,  and  had  sent  ambasaa* 
dors  to  the  Macedonians  with  terms  of  peace,  he  had  no  doubt  com- 
plied with  them,  and  granted  whatever  they  would  have  desired* 
For  he  wished  greatly  to  have  all  quiet  in  Greece,  and  to  be  free  and 
undisturbed  in  his  war  against  the  Persians.  But  when  he  saw  that 
he  was  slighted  by  the  Thebans,  he  resolved  to  destroy  the  city,  and 
by  that  means  to  terrify  all  others  who  for  the  future  should 
dare  to  rebel.  And  now  when  the  army  was  drawn  out  in  battalia 
ready  to  engage,  the  king  caused  proclamation  to  be  made  ..That 
.any  of  the  Thebans  should  have  liberty  to  come  in  to  liim,  and  who* 
soever  did,  should  enjoy  the  common  liberty  of  Greece.  On  the 
other  side,  the  Thebans,  to  shew  themselves  as  forward  in  their  am<v 
bition  as  the  enemy,  by  the  voice  of  a  crier  from  a  high  tower  madf 
another  proclamation — ^That  whosoever  had  a  desire  to  join  with  the 
great  king^  and  the  Thebans,  to  defend  the  liberties  of  the  Grecians, 
and  kill  the  tyrant  of  Greece,  sliould  be  received  by  them.  This 
touched  him  to  the  quick,  and  he  was  thereupon  so  enraged,  that  he 
vowed  all  sorts  of  deaths  to  the  Thebans,  and  so  commanded  the 
engines  to  be  prepared  in  order  to  an  assault,  and  other  things  to  be 
made  ready  for  an  engagement. 

In  the  mean  time^  the  Greeks  considering  the  utter  ruin  that  seem* 

*  Kio^  of  Perfia. 


t^ap.  I.  DIODORUS  SICULUS,  I67 

td  to  hang  over  the  heads  of  the  Thebans^  were  greatly  affected  with 
the  miseries  wherewith  they  were  likely  to  be  overwhelmed,  yet  none 
4urst  appear  to  relieve  the  city,  for  that  they  had  rashly  and  incon« 
siderateiy  brought apparant  destruction  upon  themselves:  however, 
the  Thebans  were  very  forward  and  resolute  to  venture  all  to  the  ut- 
most extremity,  though  they  were  a  little  startled  with  some  pre« 
pheeies  and  prodigies  from  the  gods.  The  most  remarkable  was,  that 
in  the  temple  of  Ceres,  a  slender  spider's  web  was  observed  to  spread 
out  itself  as  broad  as  a  cloak,  and  to  represent  the  rainbow  in  aa 
arched  circumference.  Concerning  which,  the  oracle  atDelphof 
gave  them  this  answer 

The  god  to  all,  bj  this  tign  gives  a  call : 
To  thee,  BcBotia,  first;  and  neighbours  all. 

And  the  oracle  in  their  own  country  returned  them  this  other.^ 

This  web  for  one  works  bane> 
'       And  for  another  gain. 

This  prodigy  happened  about  three  months  before  the  king  came 
against  Thebes.  About  the  time  of  the  king's  ajrival,  the  statues 
placed  in  the  forum  seemed  to  sweat  to  that  degree,  that  great  drops 
io  every  part  stood  upon  them.  Moreover,  the  magistrates  were  in« 
formed,  that  in  the  lake  of  Onchestus  were  heard  voices  like  the 
roaring  and  bellowing  of  oxen.  And  that  the  waters  in  Dirce  were 
to  the  view  as  if  they,  had  been  all  turned  into  blood.  There  were 
others  from  Delphos  that  reported,  that  the  roof  of  the  temple,  built 
by  the  Thebans  out  of  the  spoils  of  the  Phocians,  appeared  to  be 
besmeared  over  with  blood. 

Those  who  addicted  themselves  to  the  interpretation  of  prodigies 

said That  the  web  portended  the  departure  of  the  gods  from  the 

city;  by  the  colour  of  the  rainbow,  was  signified  various  troubles  and 
turmoils;  by  the  appearance  of  sweat,  extreme  miseries;  and  by  the 
blood,  slaughters  and  destructions  in  the  city. 

Therefore  they  advised  the  Thebans,  that,  insomuch  as  the  gods 
plainly  pointed  at  the  ruin  of  the  city — ^Thatthey  should  not  engage 
ia  fight  with  the  enemy,  but  rather  seek  to  agree  matters  some  other 
way,  which  was  much  more  safe. 

But  the  Thebans  abated  nothing  of  their  courage,  but  on  the  con- 
trary, pushed  forward  by  the  heat  of  their  spirits,  encouraged  one 
another  with  the  remembrance  of  their  famous  victory  at  the  battle 
of  Leuctra,  and  other  successes  gained  by  their  former  valour.  So 
that  trusting  more  to  the  valour  of  their  arms,  than  making  use  of 
prudent  councils,  they  ran  headlong  to  the  ruin  of  tliemselves  and 
their  country. 

In  the  mean  time  the  king,  within  the  space  of  three  days,  put 


l6S  DIODORUS  S1CULU8.     ^  JSook  XVU. 

all  tilings  in  order,  both  for  assaulting  the  city,  and  marshalUng  his 
army  for  battle.  His  army  he  divided  into  three  parts:  one  part 
lie  ordered  to  assault  the  out-wali;  another  to  fight  the  Tbebao 
trmy;  and  the  third  he  kept  for  reserves  to  relieve  his  men,  and  re- 
new the  fight  as  there  should  be  occasion.  But  the  Thebans  placed 
tbeir  horse  within  the  ramparts*  Their  slaves  that  were  manumit* 
ted,  the  exiles,  and  the  strangers  that  were  inhabitants,  were  ordered 
to  defend  the  walls:  and  the  Thebans  themselves  (though  they  were 
lar  inferior  in  number)  were  resolved  to  fight  those  Macedouiaoa 
commanded  by  the  king,  tliat  were  ready  to  make  the  assault. 

And  now  all  the  women  and  children  ran  to  the  temples,  to  make 
aopplication  to  the  gods  to  deliver  them  from  the  ruin  that  threatened 
them.  When  the  Macedonians  drew  near,  the  trumpets  sounded  a 
charge,  upon  which  both  armies  set  up  a  great  shout,  and  €very  one 
charged  that  battalion  to  which  he  was  appointed.  By  day-break 
the  darts  flew  one  at  another,  and  those  being  quickly  spent,  they 
fell  to  it  with  their  swords  hand  to  hand,  so  that  the  fight  presently  * 
was  very  sharp  and  bloody.  For  the  Macedonians,  through  their 
number  (far  exceeding  the  other)  and  the  fierceness  of  their  jcharge^ 
put  the  enemy  hard  to  it.  On  the  other  side,  the  Thebans  being 
stronger-bodied  men,  and  used  to  martial  discipline  by  their  con- 
tinual exercise  in  the  schools,  and  more  resolved  than  tlie  other,  re- 
solutely went  through  all  difficuUies  whatsoever,  so  that  many  were 
wounded,  and  multitudes  killed  on  both  $ides.  In  the  heat  of  th^ 
battle,  a  man  might  hs^ve  heard  shouts  for  victory,  and  groans  of  ij^ 
ing  men  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  the  Macedonians  often  cal- 
ling out  to  one  another,  not  to  stain  the  glory  of  their  forn\er  victories 
by  any  base  act  of  cowardice  in  the  present  engagement;  and  the 
Thebans  pressing  theirs  not  to  suffer  their  parents,  wives,  aud  chiU 
dren,  tQ  b^  miserable  captives,  and  all  their  families  ^ypoged  to  the 
rageful  lust  of  the  Macedonians,  but  that  they  would  remember  the 
battles  at  Leuctra  and  Mantinea,  and  the  noble  actions  for  which 
they  were  famous  all  the  world  over.  So  that  the  obstinate  resola« 
tion  of  botli  parties  occasioned  the  issue  of  the  battle  to  be  very 
doubtful  a  long  time. 

Alexander  perceiving  how  the  love  of  liberty  inflamed  the  courage 
of  the  Thebans,  and  that  the  Macedonians  began  to  faint,  com*^ 
manded  the  rpserves  to  relieve  them  that  were  engaged.  Upon  whicb^ 
the  Macedonians  coming  with  a  fierce  and  sudden  charge  upon  tli#  . 
Thebans,  now  even  tired  out,  bore  them  down  and  killed  multitudea 
of  them.  However,  the  Thebans  would  not  yield  the  enemy  th^ 
day,  but  stood  to  it  with  that  obstinacy,  that  they  slighted  all  mis- 
foriunc^^.  and  their  valour  so  strengthened  their  resolution,  lliat  thty 


Giap.  //  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  1^9 

cried  out^^That  the  Macedonians  must  own  themselves  worsted  by 

the  Thehans.     And  this  is  to  be  observed  of  them ^That  when  all 

ethers  (being  still  pressed  upon  by  their  enemies  with  fresh  supplies 
one  after  anotlier)are  wont  to  flag,  they  only  are  the  more  courageous^ 
even  when  their  wearied  enemy  is  relieved  by  fresh  reserves. 

While'  the  armies  were  thus  resolutely  engaged,  the  king  spied  a 
portal  without  any  guard,  and  sends  away  Perdiccas  with  some  regi- 
ments in  order  to  possess  himself  of  the  place,  and  so  break  into  the 
city.     Perdiccas  having  presently  executed  the  king's  command,  the 
Macedonians  through  this  little  gate  forthwith  rushed  Into  the  city. 
And  though  the  Thebans  had  a  good  while  before  worsted  the  enemy's 
first  battHlion,  and  were  now  engaged  with  the  second,  and  full  of 
hopes  of  a  perfect  victory,  yet,  when  they  understood  that  the  enemy 
had  possessed  themselves  of  a  part  of  the  city,  they  forthwith  retired 
within  the  walls.     And  then  both  the  horse  and  foot  hastened  back 
with  all  speed  into  the  city,  and  trod  many  of  their  fellow-citizens 
under  foot,  who  there  perished;  and  while  they  made  into  the  city 
in  this  trepidation  and  confusion,  many  were  killed  by  running  upon 
their  own  weapons  in  the  strait  and  narrow  passages,  and  by  falling 
into  the  trenches.    And  in  the  midst  of  this  distraction,  the  garrison 
out  of  the  castle  of  Cadmea,  issued  forth  lik?  a  rapid  torrent  upon 
the  backs  of  the  Thebans,  and  fell  upon  them  as  they  were  in  thia 
disorder  and  confusion,  and  cut  them  down  in  heaps.     The  city  be« 
ing  thus  taken,  multitudes  of  all  sorts  of  cruelties  were  acted  within 
the  walls.     For  the  Macedonians,  by  reason  of  that  insolency  of  the 
common  crier,  were  enraged  against  the  Thebans  beyond  what  the 
law  of  arms  would  allows  and  with  many  threats  in  their  mouths,  flew 
upon  the  miserable  people,  and  without  any  pity  or  compassion  put 
all  to  the  sword  that  were  in  their  way.     However,  among  all  these 
calamities,  the  courage  of  the  Thebans,  and  their  love  to  their  liberty, 
was  such,  that  they  were  so  far  from  minding  the  preservation  of  their 
.  lives,  as  that  when  they  met  any  of  their  enemies,  they  would  pro- 
voke them  of  their  own  accord  to  kill  them.     For  after  the  city  was 
taken,  not  a  Theban  asked  any  quarter  from  a  Macedonian,  not  a 
man  that  sordidly  bowed  down  at  the  feet  of  the  conqueror.    Neither 
had  the  enemy  any  pity,  notwithstanding  the  valour  of  the  miserable 
people;  nay,  the  whole  day  (though  it  was  long)  was  judged  too 
short  to  satiate  their  most  crqcl  revenge.      The   whole  city  was 
plundered,   poor   children,  boys  and    girls,  were  dragged  up  and 
down,  calling   upon  their  mothers,  hy  their  names,  wjth  most  la-, 
mentablc  outcries.     And  to  comprehend  all  in  a  few  words,  whole 
families,  with  all  their  kindred,  were  hurried  away,  and  the  whole 
body  of  the  people  brought  under  miserable  slavery.    Xbe  bodies  pf 
Vol.  2,  No,42.  % 


170  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  Book  XFIL 

some  of  the  Thebans^  as  they  lay  wounded  upon  the  ground,  though 
th^y  were  upon  the  point  of  expiring,  yet  clasping  their  enemy  in  their 
arms,  breathed  out  their  la3t  with  a  sort  of  joy  and  content  that  their 
epemy  died  with  them.  Others,  though  they  had  but  a  mere 
trunk  uf  a  spear  to  lean  upon,  yet  fought  with  whomsoever  they  met: 
and  so  by  that  last  attempt  made  it  evident,  how  far  they  preferred 
their  liberty  before  their  lives.  And  though  there  was  so  great  « 
slaughter  made,  that  every  part  of  the  city  was  filled  with  dead  car* 
casses,  yet  none  that  saw  the  miserable  condition  of  these  poor 
wretches  pitied  them.  For  even  the  Grecians,  as  the  Thespians^ 
Plateeans,  Orchomenians,  and  some  others  who  hated  the  Tbebans^ 
(and  who  then  l)ore  arms  under  the  king),  broke  in  with  others  into 
the  city,  and  amongst  these  dreadful  slaughters  executed  their  ma* 
lice  upon  them.  So  that  many  sad  spectacles  of  most  inhuman  cruelty 
might  be  seen  throughout  the  whole  eity,  Grecians  butchering  Ore* 
cians  without  any  compassion,  and  those  of  the  same  language,  blood, 
and  nation,  without  any  regard  to  any  of  these  obligations,  knocked 
on  the  head  one  by  another.  At  length,  when  night  came,  the 
bouses  were  pillaged,  women,  young  and  old,  were  dragged  out  of  the 
temples,  (whither  they  had  fled),  and  most  vilely  and  filthily  abused. 
There  were  killed  of  the  Thebans  above  six  thousand,  and  three 
thousand  made  captives,  and  a  vast  treasure  carried  away.  Above  five 
hundred  of  the  Macedonians  were  slain,  whom  the  king  took  care  to 
bury.  Presently  after,  the  king  caused  the  general  senate  of  Greece 
to  meet,  and  referred  it  to  their  determination  how  Thebes  should 
be  dealt  with.  When  the  matter  came  to  be  debated,  some  who 
hated  the  Thebans  were  for  putting  them  all  to  the  sword;  and  made 
it  appear  huwthey  had  joined  with  the  barbarians  against  the  Greeks^ 
For  in  the  time  of  Xerxes,  they  joined  as  confederates  with  the  Per- 
sians against  Gieece,  and  were  the  only  Grecians  that  were  honoured 
as  friends  by  the  Persian  king,  and  their  ambassadors  placed  and  pre- 
ferred before  kings.  These,  and  such  like,  being  remembered  and 
enforced,  they  so  incited  the  senators  against  the  Thebans,  that  they 
decreed ^I'hat  the  city  should  be  razed  to  the  ground,  and  the  cap- 
tives sold  fur  slaves;  that  all  the  fugitives  of  Thebes  should  be  driven 
out  of  all  parts  of  Greece,  and  no  Thcban  should  be  entertained  by 
any  Grecian,  llereupon  the  king,  according  to  the  decree,  razed 
the  city,  which  struck  a  terror  into  all  the  Grecians  that  had  revolted. 
By  the  sale  of  the  captives,  he  raised  four  hundred  and  forty  talents 
pf  silver. 

After  this,  he  sent  to  Athens  to  demand  ten  of  the  orators  to  be 
delivered  up  to  him,  (amongst  whom  Demosthenes  and  Lycurgus 
ift  ere  the  chieQi  because  they  had  stirred  up  the  people  againit  him^ 


Chap,  t  blODORus  8ICWLU«.  171 

Upon  which  a  general  assembly  was  called^  and  when  the  ambassa- 
dors were  introdaced,  and  had  delivel'ed  their  message,  the  people 
were  greatly  troubled  and  perplexed,  desiring  on  the  one  hand  to 
preserve  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  city,  and  on  the  other  hand 
to  consult  their  own  safety,  considering  the  destruction  ofThebes>  and 
that  some  imminent  mischief  might  befal  themselves;  and  thus  they 
were  made  more  cautious  by  their  neighbour's  misfortunes.  At 
length,  after  many  speeches  made  in  the  assembly  upon  this  account, 
l^hocion,  that  good  man,  who  differed  from  Demosthenes  in  his  poll- 
« tics,  stood  up  and  said^fhat  it  would  very  well  become  those  who 
were  demanded,  to  imitate  the  daughters  of  Leos^  and  the  Hyacid- 
thidesf,  by  offering  up  their  lives  of  their  own  accord  t6  prevent  th« 
ruin  of  their  country.  And  he  told  them^^That  it  was  baseness  and 
cowardice  to  refuse  to  die  for  the  preservation  of  the  city. 

At  this  motion  the  people  were  highly  incensed,  and  in  a  popular 
tumult  threw  Phocion  out  of  the  senate.  Then  the  people  (by  a  stu- 
died speech  made  by  Demosthenes)  being  moved  to  compassion,  de- 

chured That  they  would  defend  the  men  to  the  utmost.    At  length 

Demades,  wrought  upon  (as  is  reported)  by  the  friends  of  Demos- 
thenes, for  five  talents  of  silver,  gave  his  opinion  for  the  securing  and 
preserving  of  the  orators;  and  read  the  decree,  which  was  drawn  by 
himself  with  great  cunning  and  artifice,     tn  which  was  contained  an 

apology  for  the  orators^  and  a  promise ^That,  if  they  were  guilty^ 

they  themselves  would  punish  them  according  to  the  laws. 

The  people  approved  and  ratified  what  Demades  had  read,  and 

tent  him  with  some  others  to  the  king,  with  orders ;That  he  should 

intercede  likewise  on  the  behalf  of  the  Theban  exiles>  that  the  peoplt 
of  Athens  might  lawfully  receive  and  entertain  theroi 

Demades  wisely  managed  his  embassy,  and  by  his  eloquence  pre- 
vailed with  the  king  in  every  respect.  For  Alexander  both  pardoned 
the  orators,  and  granted  all  other  things  the  Athenians  desired. 

Then  the  king  marched  back  with  his  army  into  Macedonia,  and 
called  a  general  council  of  his  ofiicers  and  chief  friends,  and  when 
they  were  met  together,  he  asked  their  opinion — ^What  they  thought 
of  an  expedition  into  Asia?  When  it  was  fit  to  begin  the  war?  and 
how  it  was  to  be  managed?  The  counsel,  indeed,  of  Antipater  and 
Parmenio  was-^That  he  should  first  marry  and  have  issue  to  succeed 

*  Leos  bad  three  daughters,  Pasitheai  Theope,  and  Euhule,  who  were  willioglj  mi< 
•riiioed  to  put  an  end  to  a  plague  in  Athens. —  Suid, 

t  The  H^acinthidei  were  »ix  daughters  of  Erectheus  Ling  of  Athens,  wlio  olTe^ed 
themselves  to  be  sacrificed  to  gain  a  victorjr  fur  their  country  against  Euuiotpus  king  of 
Tbracv:  lo  named  from  a  village  called  Hvachiathus^  wh^e  they  were  laifrillccd.-* 


17^  DiODORUS  81CULUS.   '  Book  XFIL 

hiin,  and  then  set  apon  matters  that  were  crfso  great  weight  and  Gon<« 
cemment.  But  the  king,  who  was  Daturally  fierce^  and  eould  not 
endure  stops  and  delays  in  business,  rejected  their  advice.  For  he 
said-J[t  was  a  mean  and  unworthy  thing  for  him  who  watf  erested 
general  of  all  Greece,  and  had  the  command  of  an  army  that  never 
knew  what  it  was  to  be  conquered,  to  stay  at  home  merely  to  manyand 
beget  children.  Wherefore,  after  he  had  set  before  them  the  advan- 
tages of  the  war,  and  had  encouraged  them  to  undertake  it,  heofier« 
cd  most  magnificent  sacrifices  to  the  gods  at  Dium  in  Macedonia,  and 
exhibited  the  sports  and  plays  wliich  his  ancestor  Archilaus  bad  in- 
stituted to  Jupiter  and  the  muses.  This  solemnity  continued  nine 
days,  according  to  the  number  of  the  muses,  a  day  for  every  muse. 
He  provided  likewise  a  pavilion  which  would  contain  a  hundred  beds*, 
where  he  feasted  and  entertained  all  his  friends  and  commanders  of 
his  army,  and  ambassadors  of  cities. 

After  these  sumptuous  feasts  were  over,  (in  which  be  not  only 
kindly  entertained  a  vast  number  of  people,  but  likewise  distributed 
parts  of  the  sacrifices,  and  other  things  suitable  to  the  magnificence 
of  the  festival  amongst  his  soldiers),  he  rendezvoused  all  his  forces 
from  all  parts. 


CHAP.  It. 


Alexander  lands  his  army  in  Asia*  The  battle  at  Granicus.  JTie 
forces  of  the  Persians  and  of  Alexander.  Alexander  kills 
Spithrohates ;  near  being  killed  by  llhosaces.  Miletus  besieged 
and  taken,  Ada,  queen  of  CariUy  meets  Alexander.  Hali^ 
ramassns  besieged^  taken,  and  sacked.  The  strmige  act  of  the 
Slarmarcnses. 

CTESIDES  was  lord -chancellor  of  Athens,  and  Caius  Sulpitius^ 
and  Lucius  Papirius  consuls  at  Rome,  when  Alexander  at  the  Helles- 
pont passed  over  his  army  out  of  Europe  into  Asia.  Being  arrived 
at  Troas  with  sixty  sail  of  long  ships,  he  was  the  first  of  the  Mace- 
donians that  cast  a  spear  out  of  the  ship,  which  fixed  in  the  earth 
npon  the  shore,  and  then  leaped  out  of  the  vessel,  signfying,  that  by 
the  help  of  the  gods  he  had  taken  possession  of  Asia,  which  was 
conquered  by  his  spear. 
Then  be  sacrificed  to  the  gliosts  of  Achilles  and  Ajax,  performinf- 

*  Upon  which  thej  Ml  te  aesli 


\ 


DIOI>0RU8  SICULUS.  173 

gMMaaaMBaaattaMaMBMnBaaBBsgaggggBgii  mm  i  BSsmaasmeaBssammm 
all  other  rites  and  cenemooies  proper  to  the  veoeration  of  those  he- 
Mes.  When  that  was  done,  he  took  an  exact  account  of  theniMi- 
her  of  those  forces  he  had  transported,  which  were  found  to  aoKniiit 
to  thkteen  thomsaiid*  Macedonian  foot,  seven  thousand  oonfedemtes, 
and  fire  thousand  aiercenaries*  Parmenio  had  the  chief  commaad  of 
all  these.  Besides  these,  there  were  the  Odryset,Trebalilans,  and 
lUyrians,  to  the  number  of  five  thousand,  and  a  thousand  darters,  called 
Agprianes;  so  that  in  the  whole  there  were  thirty  thousand  foot.  For 
hone^  there  were  eighteen  hundred  raised  out  of  Macedonia,  under 
4be  oommaod  of  Philotas,  the  son  of  Parmenio.  As  many  out  o£ 
Thsiee,  commanded  by  Callas,  the  son  of  Harpalus.  Front  the  nest 
of  Greece,  six  hundred  led  by  Eurygius.  Besides  these,  there  wens 
fluae  hundred  Thracians  and  Poeonians  in  the  van,  whose  eommaader 
anas  Cassander.  The  whole  body  of  horse  was  four  tbcHisand  fife 
hundred^*  And  this  is  the  number  of  them  that  landed  in  Asiji  widi 
Alexander* 

In  the  ^mean  tiiue,  he  left  under  the  command  of  Antipater,  ia 
£ttfope,  twelve  thousand  foot,  and  eleven  diousand  five  bjundreA 
Ju)rse§. 

When  he  departed  from  Troas,  aad  came  to  the  temple  of  Mi*- 
aervall,  the  priest*  called  Alexander,  seeing  the  statue  of  Arbbar- 
scaaes  {tliat  had  been  lord-lieutenant  of  Phrygia)  Lie  prostrate  upoa 
the  ground  before  the  temple,  and  observing  several  other  good 

omens,  came  to  the  king,  and  told  him ^Tluit  he  would  be  oon- 

i}ueror  in  a  considerable  horse  engagement,  especially  if  he  fought 
in  Phrygia,  and  that  he  should  kill  a  great  commander  of  tlie  eoeiny 
ivith  his  own  hand*  And  these  things,  he  said,  were  foretold  him 
by  the  gods,  and  especially  by  Minerva,  who  would  be  assistant  to 
iiim  in  obtaining  his  victories. 

Alexander,  much  taken  with  this  prophecy,  and  relying  npoa  it, 
offered  to  Minerva  a  most  splendid  sacrifice,  and  dedicated  his  arms 
to  her,  and  took  away  others  (that  had  been  laid  up  there)  in  their 
•tead,  which  he  made  use  of  in  the  first  fight  afterwards,  and  gained 
a  most  glorious  victory  by  his  own  peculiar  valour«  But  this  hap« 
pened  some  few  days  after. 

In  the  mean  time,  tlie  Persian  lord-lieutenants  and  commanders, 
(who  through  their  sloth  were  not  able  to  put  a  stop  to  the  progress 
of  the  Macedonians),  met  together  to  consult  how  to  manage  the  war 
against  Alexander.  Memnon,  the  Rhodian,  one  there  amongst  them, 
(a  very  skilful  general),  was  not  for  fighting,  but  to  give  a  check  to 
the  Macedonians,  by  destroying  the  country  all  before  them,  that  so 

•  It  shoald  be  twelve  tIioustil(].  t  A  people  of  Tlirace,  of  the  city  Odryaaff. 

t  But  by  the  particnlarj,  they  amount  to  five  thousaud  one  hundred. 
i  The  Greek  is  %o,  bat  the  Li^tin  fifteen  hundred  horse.  ||  At  Iliuoi. 


17^  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  ^  XPIt^ 


tbey  might  not  be  able  to  march  forward  for  want  of  prorisioiis: 
was  for  bringing  over  both  land  and  sea  forces  into  Macedonia,  1 
that  means  to  make  that  the  seat  of  the  war.    Although  this  was 
sound  advice,  (as  the  event  made  it  afterwards  evident),  yet  the  rest 
of  the  commanders  would  not  hearken  to  it,  looking  upon  it  as  a    j 
thing  dishonourable,  and  much  reflecting  upon  the  valouf  of  the 
Persians. 

All  being  therefore  resolved  upon  a  battle,  forces  Were  brought  tx^ 
gether  from  all  parts,  and  the  lord-lieutenants  being  now  much  snpe* 
rior  in  number,  marched  towards  the  Hellespont  in  Phrygian  and  en* 
camping  close  by  the  river  Granicus,  having  the  river  for  a  defence 
between  them  and  the  Macedonians. 

Aleiuuider  having  intelligence  of  the  forces  of  the  barbarians,  mad« 
ft  swift  march,  and  came  up  so  close  to  the  enemy,  that  the  river  only 
sepa^ited  both  armies. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  barbarians  stood  in  battalia  at  the  foot  of 
the  hill,  judging  it  would  do  their  business  effectuAlly,  and  that  they  • 
ahould  be  sure  of  the  victory,  by  falling  upon  them  in  their  passage 
over  the  river,  and  by  that  means  breaking  in  pieces  the  Macedoniaa 
battalion*'.  But  Alexander  prevented  the  enemy,  and  with  great 
courage  passed  over  his  army  about  the  break  of  day,  and  drew  up  hit 
men  in  order  of  battle.  The  barbarians  drew  up  the  whole  body  of 
their  horse  against  the  Macedonians,  for  they  had  before  resolved  tm ' 
begin  tlie  fight  with  them.  Memnon  the  Rhodian,  and  Arsamenes 
the  lord-lieutenant,  with  their  several  regiments  of  horse,  were  ia 
the  left  wing,  supported  by  Arrites,  who  commanded  the  Paphla^ 
gonian  horse;  and  next  to  him  Spithrobates,  lord-lieutenant  of  Ionia, 
with  them  of  Hyrcania.  In  the  left  wing  were  two  thousand  Me* 
dian  horse,  under  the  conduct  of  Arrbeomithres,  and  the  like  number 
from  Bactria.  In  the  main  body  was  a  vast  number  of  horse  of  other 
nations,  of  the  best  and  most  experienced  soldiers ;  the  whole  amount* 
ing  to  above  ten  thousand  horse. 

The  Persian  foot  were  at  least  a  hundred  thousand  men,  who  stood 
drawn  up  behind  the  horse,  without  moving  a  foot,  because  they  con* 
eluded,  that  the  horse  themselves  would  serve  the  turn  to  rout  the 
Macedonians. 

And  now  the  horse  charged  with  great  resolution  onbothsides,  es«- 
pccially  the  Thessalians  in  tlie  left  wing,  under  the  command  of  Par* 
mcnio,  bearing  the  brunt  of  a  brisk  charge  with  undaunted  courage. 

Alexander  with  the  choicest  body  of  horse  in  the  left  wing,  setting 
spurs  to  his  horse,  was  the  first  that  charged,  and  rushing  into  tiM 
thickest  of  his  enemies,  made  great  slaughter  amongst  them.  The 
barbarians  fought  valiantly,  striving  to  outdo  the  Macedonians^  and 

*  rhalaax. 


Clb^*  -Wl  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  175 

fortune  at  this  time  brought  together  the  persons  of  the  greatest 
quality  into  tliis  place.  For  Spithrobates,  the  chief  governor  of 
the  province  of  Ionia,  a  Persian,  and  son-in-law  to  Darius^  a  very 
valiant  man^  charged  the  Macedonians  with  a  great  body  of  horse, 
seconded  by  forty  of  his  guard/  all  of  his  kindred,  and  inferior  to 
none  for  valour  and  courage.  With  these  he  put  the  enemy  hard 
to  it,  and  attacked  those  about  him  with  great  resolution,  killing 
some,  and  wounding  others :  and,  when  none  were  able  to  contend 
with  him,  Alexander  rode  up  to  the  barbarian^  and  fought  with  him 
hand  to  hand. 

Hereupon  the  Persian,  concluding  that  the  gods,  of  their  special 
favour  to  him,  had  given  him  the  opportunity  of  a  happy  combat^ 
(especially  if  by  his  valour  he  should  free  all  Asia  from  their  fears, 
and  by  his  own  hands  give  k  check  to  these  audacious  attempts  of 
Alexander  that  rung  through  all  the  world,  and  prevent  tlie  dishonour 
of  the  Persians),  was  the  first  that  cast  his  javelin  at  Alexander,  and 
with  such  force  and  violence,  that  it  pierced  through  his  buckler  and 
breast-plate,  into  his  right  shoulder-blade.    The  king,  plucking  out 
the  dart  with  his  own  hand,  threw  it  away,  and,  setting  spurs  to  his 
IkOTse,  flew  upon  the  Persian  lord- lieutenant  with  that  fierceness  and 
violence,  that  he  fixed  his  spear  in  the  middle  of  his  breast.     Upon 
which  the  battalions  of  both  armies  there  near  at  hand,  in  admiration 
of  such  a  piece  of  singular  valour,  set  up  a  great  shout.     But  the 
point  breaking  in  the  breast-plate,  so  that  the  spear  pierced  no  far- 
ther, the  Persian  made  at  Alexander  with  his  drawn  sword,  who, 
biviog  got  another  lance,  threw  it  directly  into  his  face,  and  pierced 
bim  through  the  head;  at  which  instant  Rhosaces,  brother  to  him 
that  was  killed,  came  swiftly  riding  up,  and  gave  the  king  such  a 
i>b)w,that  he  cut  through  his  helmet,  and  wounded  him  slightly  upon 
^  head;  and,  just  as  he  was  ready  to  second  his  stroke,  Clitus,  sur- 
oamed  Niger,  posted  up,  and  cut  oif  the  hand  of  the  barbarian. 

The  kikismen  of  the  two  brothers  (now  both  fallen)  came  round 
About  them,  and  at  the  first  plied  Alexander  with  their  darts,  and  then 
Ml  to  it  hand  to  hand,  and  ran  through  all  hazards,  that  they  might 
^'1  Alexander.  And,  Chough  he  was  environed  with  imminent  lia- 
^i^dsand  dangers  of  his  life,  yet  the  throng  of  his  enemies  did  not  at 
a"  daunt  him :  for,  though  he  had  received  three  strokes  through  hb 
breast- plate,  and  one  cut  upon  his  helmet,  and  had  bis  buckler,  which 
be  brought  from  the  temple  of  Minerva,  ilu-ice  pierced  through,  yet 
be  stirred  not  a  foot,  but  stood  his  ground  against  all  hazards  and 
difficulties  with  undauntedrcsolution. 

In  the  mean  time  other  brave  commanders  fell  round  about  him, 
amongst  whom  the  most  remarkable  were  Artyaxes,  and^  Pbarnaces 


IjS  BZODORUS  NCULUS.  Booi  XFIL    \ 

the  brother  of  Darius,  and  Mithrobarzanes,  the  commaader  of  tbo 
Cappadocians ;  so  that  many  great  officers  being  killed,  and  all  tfat 
troops  of  the  Persians  routed  and  broken  by  the  Taloor  of  the  Mace* 
donians,  the  first  that  fell  upon  Alexander  were  forced  to  take  W 
their  heels,  and,  after  them,  all  the  rest. 

In  this  battle,  by  the  confession  of  all,  the  Tatour  of  Alexander  wm 
cried  up  above  all  others;  and  he  was  reputed  the  chief  instmment  of 
the  victory.  The  Thessalian  horse  managed  their  troops  with  that  dcz- 
tcrity,  and  fought  with  that  brave  resolution,  that,  next  to  the  kmgf 
they  were  most  highly  applauded,  and  gained  exceeding  hoDoar  aad 
jeputatlon. 

After  the  horse  was  routed  and  fled,  the  foot,  running  in  one 
upon  another  in  confusion,  fought  awhile;  but,  amaaed  and  dejected 
with  the  flight  of  their  horse,  they  likewise  turned  their  backs  and 
BTNuIe  away. 

There  were  killed  in  the  Persian  army  above  ten  thousand  foot^ 
and  at  Iciist  two  tiiousand  horse^  and  above  twenty  thousand  takea 
prisoners. 

After  the  battle,  the  king  buried  those  of  his  that  were  slahi  wHb 
p-eat  solemnity,  by  these  honours  to  encourage  his  soldiers  to  fight 
the  more  n  ndily.  When  he  had  refreshed  his  army,  he  marched  for- 
ward through  Lydia,  and  came  to  Sardis,  which,  with  the  citadel,  and 
all  the  provisions  and  treasure  therein,  were  voluntarily  surrendered  t» 
fcim  by  Mithrenes*  the  governor. 

In  the  mean  time,  those  Persians  that  had  escaped  out  of  the  bat- 
tle, fled,  together  with  their  general  Memnon,  to  Miletus,  befora 
which  the  king  afterwards  came,  and  assaulted  it  continually  for  sc* 
veral  days  together,  still  relieving  his  men  from  time  to  time  mtb 
fresh  supplies.  The  besieged  at  first  easily  defended  themselves  from 
the  walls;  for  the  city  was  full  of  soldiers,  and  plentifully  furnished 
with  weapons  and  all  other  things  necessary  for  enduring  a  siege. 
But,  as  soon  as  the  king  began  fiercely  to  batter  the  walls  with  hit 
engines,  and  violently  to  push  on  the  siege  both  by  sea  and  land,  and 
the  Macedonians  had  forced  their  way  through  a  breach  of  the  walk^ 
putting  their  enemies  to  flight  in  that  part,  the  Milesians  forthwith 
prostrated  themselves  as  suppliants  at  the  king's  feet,  and  gave  up 
themselves  and  the  city  to  his  mercy.  Some  of  the  barbarians  were 
killed  by  the  Macedonians,  others  fled  out  of  the  city,  and  the  rest 
were  all  taken.  He  dealt  kindly  and  mercifully  with  the  Milesians; 
but,  as  for  the  others,  he  sold  them  all  for  slaves. 

And  now,  having  no  further  use  for  his  navy,  and  being  likewise 
6xprn5ive  to  maintain,  he  dismissed  his  fleet,  except  a  few  ships 

•  Vt  Miil.riuncs. 


Gft^.  II.    -  DioDoaus  sicuLus.  177 

which  he  detained  for  the  conveying  of  his  engines  of  battery,  and 
other  instruments  useful  for  the  besieging  of  tovirns;  among  which 
were  twenty  vessels  from  Athens. 

There  are  some  who  say,  that  this  discharging  of  the  fleet  proved 
Alexander  a  prudent  general :  for  Darius  being  on  his  march,  and 
it  .being  therefore  very  likely  that  a  great  battle  was  to  be  fought,  he 
conceived  that  the  Macedonians  would  fight  with  more  resolution 
when  they  saw  there  was  no  possibility  of  flight*  And  the  very  same 
project  he  contrived  at  the  battle  of  Granicus,  where  he  so  ordered  the 
matter,  that  the  river  should  be  at  the  backs  of  his  soldiers,  to  the  end 
that  none  might  have  a  thought  of  flying,  since  the  river  threatened 
certain  destruction  to  them  that  attempted  it. 

In  following  times  Agathocles,  king  of  Syracuse,  followed  this  ex- 
ample of  Alexander,  and  so  gained  a  glorious  victory.  For,  having 
transported  a  small  army  into  Africa,  he  set  all  his  ships  on  fire, 
to  take  away  all  hope  from  his  soldiers  of  escaping  by  flight;  by 
which  means,  being  forced  of  necessity  to  stand  to  it  courageously, 
he  overcame  many  thousands  of  the  Carthaginians  drawn  up  against 
him. 

After  the  taking  of  Miletus,  botli  Persians  and  mercenaries,  with 
their  cbiefest  commanders,  came  flocking  to  Halicarnassus.  This 
was  then  the  greatest  city  in  Caria,  in  which  was  a  palace  of  the  kings^ 
^rned  with  most  curious  turrets  and  citadels. 

About  the  same  time  Memnon  sent  away  his  wife  and  children  to 
Darius,  as  well  for  their  security,  as  to  induce  the  king,  having 
such  considerable  hostages  in  his  hands,  to  intrust  him  with  more 
confidence  in  the  management  of  the  war;  which  happened  accord* 
ingly:  for  Darius  presently  sent  letters  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
sea-coasts  of  Asia,  to  be  observant  in  every  thing  to  all  the  commands 
of  Memnon.  Being  made,  therefore,  general  of  the  whole  army,  he 
provided  all  things  necessary  for  the  defence  of  Halicarnassus  against 
a  siege. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  king  sent  away  his  engines  of  battery,  and 
com  and  provisions,  by  sea,  to  Halicarnassus,  and  he  himself,  with 
ius  whole  army,  marched  into  Caria,  and,  wherever  he  came,  he 
guned  upon  the  cities  by  his  smooth  tongue  and  courteous  behaviour. 
The  Greek  cities  especially  tasted  of  his  grace  and  favour^  for  be 
give  all  of  them  liberty  to  govern  according  to  their  own  laws,  and 
ordered  that  they  should  be  free  from  tribute,  declaring,  that  he  had 
undertaken  a  war  against  the  Persians,  for  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
the  Grecians. 

When  he  was  upon  his  march,  he  was  met  by  a  woman  of  noble 
l^irth,  called  Ada,  of  the  Uncage  of  the  king  of  Caria,  who,  upon 
Vol.  2.  No.  42»  aa 


178  niODORUs  stcuLtf s.  JBo(dk  XPtL 


discourse  with  him  concerDing  the  right  of  her  aneestbrs,  entreated  him 
to  restore  her  to  the  kingdom  of  her  grandfather^  which  he  gavtf  ilp  to 
hcr^  aud  bid  her  take  it  as  her  own ;  by  whioh  bounty  t6  the  Womaiit 
he  gained  the  hearts  of  the  Grecians,  and  all  the  cities  sent  their 
ambassadors  to  him;  and,  presenting  him  with  croWn^  of  gold,  pro- 
mised and  offered  to  serve  hiiii  in  all  things  to  tlie  utmost  of  their 
power. 

Alexander  now  encamped  near  to  the  city,  and  forthwith  assaulted 
the  town  in  a  furious  and  terrible  manners  for,  at  the  very  begin- 
ning,  his  soldiers  by  turns  stormed  the  walls  without  any  intermis- 
sion, so  that  the  conflict  continued  whole  days  together.  Afterwards^ 
he  brought  up  all  sorts  of  engines  to  the  walls,  and  filled  4p  the 
trenches  before  the  city,  by  the  help  of  three  machinies  called  snailsj 
and  then  with  his  rams  battered  down  the  towers  and  walb  that  ran 
along  between  them.  Part  being  thus  beaten  doWn,  he  engaged  iir 
the  breach  with  the  enemy,  and  endeavoured  to  force  his  way  into  the 
city  over  the  rubbish.  But  Memnon  easily  repulsed  the  Macedo- 
nians, (who  first  assaulted  the  ^all),  there  being  many  nten  within 
the  city;  and  in  the  niglit,  when  the  engines  were  brought  up,  he 
made  a  sally  with  a  great  body  of  men,  and  set  fire  to  tliem.  iTpoQ 
which  there  were  many  sharp  conflicts  before  the  Walls,  in  Which  the 
Macedonians  far  excelled  the  other  for  valour,  but  the  Petsiana  ex- 
ceeded them  in  number  of  men,  and  all  warlike  provisions.  Bat  those 
upon  the  walls  were  of  great  advantage  to  the  Persians  that  were  en- 
gaged in  the  sally,  by  galling  their  enemies  with  their  darts  and  ar- 
rows, attended  with  deaths  and  wounds;  shouting  of  men  and  sound- 
ing of  trumpets  every  where  echoed  in  the  air,  while  the  soldiers  on 
both  sides,  with  loud  acclamations^  applauded  the  noble  actions  ol 
their  several  parties. 

And  now  some  endeavoured  to  extinguish  the  mounting  flames  of 
the  engines,  and  others,  engaging  with  the  enemy,  made  a  grievous 
slaughter  among  their  adversaries.  Tliose  within  raised  up  other 
walls  much  stronger,  instead  of  those  that  were  battered  down.  The 
commanders,  with  Memnon,  being  in  the  front,  encouraged  their 
men  to  stand  to  it,  offering  great  rewards  to  such  as  valiantly  beliaved 
themselves:  so  that  it  was  incredible  with  what  lieat  and  spirit  every 
one  pushed  forward  to  win  the  day.  Then  might  be  seen  !K>me  car- 
licd  out  of  the  army  so  wounded  that  they  were  breathing  out  their 
last;  others  gathered  round  the  bodies  of  the  dead^  and  shalrply  en- 
gaged in  striving  to  carry  off  the  bodies,  in  order  to  their  burial; 
others,  but  even  now  tired  out  with  wounds  and  blows,  presently 
(through  the  encouragement  of  the  officers)  recovering  their  S|^&ritt^ 
fell  to  it  briskly  again. 


Cimp^  IL  DiODORUs  sicuLUS.  179 

«  Some  of  the  Macedonians  (anaong  whom  was  Neoptolemusi  an 
honourable  person}5  wer^  slain^  even  under  the  city  gates.  Aqd  now 
towers  and  two  flankers  were  battered  down;  upon  wliich  some 
drunken  soldiers  of  Perdiccas  rashly  in  the  night  mounted  the  walbi 
of  the  citadel :  but  Memnon,  understanding  what  plight  they  were* 
in,  made  a  saily^  apd|  being  much  superior  in  numbers,  repulsed  the 
IMacedouians^.and  killed  many  of  them,  which  being  noised  abroad^ 
the  Macedonians  came  flocking  in  to  the  aid  of  their  fellows;  upon 
which  there  Was  a  brisk  encounter.  At  length,  when  those  with 
Aiescander  appeared,  and  joined  with  the  rest,  the  Persians  flaggedji 
and  were  beaten  back  into  the  city.  Then  the  king  sent  a  trum- 
X^eter  to  make  a  truce,  in  order  to  carry  off  those  Macedonians  that 
were  slain  before  the  walls:  but  Ephialtes  and  Thrasybulus,  both 
Athenians,  apd  then  in  arms  for  the  Persians,  gave  advice  not  to 
suffer  the  dead  to  be  buried.  However,  Memnon  granted  what  the 
king  desired. 

Afterwards  Ephialtes,  in  a  council  of  war,  declared  bis  opinion.^ 
That  it  was  uot  advisable  for  them  to  stay  till  the  cnity  was  taken, 
and  so  to  be  made  prisoners,  but  for  all  the  officers,  with  the  merce- 
naries, to  venture  their,  live^  for  the  safety  and  security  of  the  rest^^ 
and  to  sally  upon  the  enemy  out  of  the  city.  Hereupon  Memnon, 
perceiving  Ephialtes  to  be  prompted  to  action  by  an  extraordinary 
impulse  of  valour,  and  placing  great  confidence  in  him  by  reason  of 
bis  courage  and  the  strength  of  his  body,  agreed  to  what  he  liad  ad- 
vised. In  order  to  which,  he  appointed  two  thousand  mercenaries, 
pf  the  best  soldiers  he  could  pick  out,  to  sally  with  him,  one  half  of 
whom  were  commanded  to  carry  along  with  them  lighted  fire-brands, 
and  the  other  to  fall  in  upon  the  enemy.  About  break  of  day  the 
gates  were  suddenly  flung  open,  and  the  regiments  issued  out,  and 
cast  their  fire-brands  among  the  engines;  upon  which  a  great  flame  ■ 
presently  appeared.  Ephialtes,  at  the  head  of  others  formed  into  a 
deep  phalanx,  charged  upon  the  Macedonians,  who  were  hastening  to 
preserve  and  defend  the  engines.  The  king,  quick  in  discerning 
what  was  to  be  done,  placed  the  chief  of  the  Macedonians  in  the 
front,  and  some  of  the  chiefest  soldiers  next,  in  order  to  support  them  ; 
and  to  these  he  added  a  third  battalion,  for  valour  exceeding  all  the 
rest.  The  whole  body  he  led  up  himself,  and  fell  upon  the  enemy, 
who  seemed  (through  their  firm  and  close  order)  to  he  impenetrable, 
and  not  to  be  broken  by  any  force  whatsoever. 

In  the  mean  time  he  commanded  others  to  go  to  defend  the  en« 
gines,  and  quench  the  fire.  Noise  and  clamour  filled  the  camps, 
and  the  trumpet  giving  the  alarm  to  battle,  they  fell  to  it,  fighting 


180  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  X FIT. 

lyith  more  than  ordinary  valour,  ambitious  to  purchase  bonoor  and 
renown.  The  Macedonians  easily  quenched  the  fire^  but  in  the  con- 
flict those  with  Ephialtes  got  the  better:  for^  with  whomsoever  he 
engaged,  (being  of  a  far  stronger  body  than  any  of  them),  he  certainly 
billed,  and  those  that  were  upon  the  new  wall  slew  many  with  their 
darts:  for  upon  this  wall  there  was  a  wooden  tower  erected,  an  ban* 
dred  cubits  high,  full  of  engines  for  shooting  of  darts  and  arrows. 

Many  therefore  of  the  Macedonians  being  killed,  and  the  rest  re* 
treating  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  darts,  and  Memnon  coming  in 
to  the  assistance  of  the  Persians  with  a  far  greater  number,  the  king 
hunself  knew  not  well  what  to  do.  While  those  that  issued  out  ot 
the  town  thus  prevailed,  on  a  sudden  the  tables  were  turned:  finr  tfie 
old  Macedonians  (who  by  reason  of  their  age  were  to  thb  time  dis- 
pensed with,  and  not  called  to  fight,  though  formerly  victorious  in 
many  battles  under  King  Philip)  now,  at  this  very  instant,  were 
stirred  up  to  their  antient  courage  and  resolution;  and,  being  both 
valiant  and  expert  soldiers,  (far  beyond  all  the  rest),  they  opbraided 
the  cowardice  of  the  fresh-water  soldiers,  who  turned  their  backs, 
with  most  bitter  taunts  and  reproaches.  These  presently  getdng  into 
a  body,  and  clapping  their  bucklers  one  into  another,  fell  in  upon  the 
enemy,  {tiovr  confident  of  an  assured  victory),  and,  having  killed 
Ephialtes,  and  many  others,  forced  the  rest  into  the  city;  and  the 
Macedonians,  being  mixed  with  the  others  in  the  night-time,  entered 
pell-mell  with  them  within  the  waHs;  but  the  king  ordered  a  retreat 
to  be  sounded,  and  so  they  returned  into  the  camp.  After  this, 
Memnon  and  the  rest  of  the  commanders  consulted  together,  and 
determined  to  leave  the  city.  In  execution  of  which  resolve,  they 
left  the  best  of  the  soldiers  to  keep  the  citadel,  with  sufficient  provi- 
sion and  all  other  things  necessary,  and  traqspprted  themselves,  with 
the  rest  of  the  citizens,  and  all  their  wealth,  into  Coos. 

Alexander  about  spring  of  day,  understanding  what  was  done, 
cast  a  trench,  and  built  a  rampart  upon  it  round  about  the  castle, 
and  razed  the  city  itself  to  the  ground.  Then  he  ordered  part  of  his 
army  to  march  farther  up  into  the  country,  in  order  to  force  other 
provinces  to  his  obedience.  These  forces  valiantly  brought  under 
the  power  of  Alexander  all  the  nations  as  far  as  to  the  borders  of  the 
Greater  Phrygia,  and  forced  them  to  find  provisions  for  their  army. 

Alexander  himself  subdued  all  the  sea-coast  of  Asia  to  Cilicia, 
gaining  many  cities  by  surrender,  and  taking  several  forts  and  castles 
by  storm,  amongst  which  \here  was  one  that  was  taken  after  a  won- 
derful manner,  which,  by  reason  of  the  rarity  of  the  thing,  is  not  to 
be  passed  over. 


Chap.  11.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  181 

tipsgggaa'.' f'ttM' 1  ,..         '  '■  '  'isu'H  '         'JUL 

In  the  utmost  borders  of  Lycia,  the  Marmareofies*,  who  inha* 
bited  upon  a  great  rock,  and  well  fortified,  fell  upou  the  rear  of  Alex- 
ander's army  in  their  march  thither,  and  slew  many  of  the  Macedo- 
nians, and  carried  away  a  great  number  of  prisoners  and  carriage- 
bcHses.    At  which  the  king  was  so  enraged^  that  he  resolved  to  be- 
siege the  place,  and  used  his  utmost  endeavour  to  gain  it.    But  the 
j^armarenses,  trusting  to  their  own  valour,  and  the  strength  of  the 
place,  manfully  endured  the  siege;  for  they  were  assaulted  two  day^ 
together  without  any  iutermission,  and  were  assured  that  the  king 
would  not  stir  from  thence  till  he  had  taken  thcrock.    The  antient 
men,  therefore,  at  the  first  advised  the  younger  to  forbear  standing  it 
out  with  such  violence,  and  to  make  peace  with  the  king  upon  as  good 
conditions  as  they  could;  which,  when  they  denied,  and  all  resolved 
to  part  with  their  lives  and  the  liberties  of  their  country  together,  the 
graver  men  then  advised  them  to  kill  all  the  old  men,  women,  and 
children,  and  that  those  who  were  strong  and  able  to  defend  them- 
selves should  break  through  their  enemy's  camp  in  the  night,  and  fly 
to  the  next  mountains.   The  young  men  approved  of  the  counsel,  and 
thereupon  an  edict  was  made..^That  every  one  should  go  to  his  cwa 
Iiouse,  and  eat  and  drink  plentifully  with  his  wife,  children,  and  re- 
htions,  and  then  expect  the  execution  of  the  decree.    But  some  of 
Ae  young  men  who  were  more  considerate  than  the  rest  (who  were 
about  six  hundred  in  the  whole)  judged  it  more  advisable  to  forbear 
killing  their  own  kindred  and  relations  with  their  own  hands,  but 
father  to  set  the  houses  on  fire,  and  then  to  sally  out  at  the  gates, 
and  make  to  the  mountains  for  their  security.    This  was  presently 
agreed  to,  and  the  thing  put  in  execution;  and  so  every  man's  house 
became  his  sepulchre :  and  the  young  men  themselves  broke  through 
the  midst  of  their  enemies,  and  fled  to  the  hills  near  at  hand.    And 
these  were  the  chief  things  done  this  year. 

^  Or  Marmarians. 


1S9  DioDORUS  sicuLUS.  JBook  XFJL. 


CHAP.  III. 

Mittflene  taken  by  Memnon,  Darius's  general.  His.  weeesseK^ 
He  dies.  Charidemus  the  Athenian  unjustly  put  to  decUh  bf^ 
Darius.  Alexander  falls  sick:  is  recovered  by  Philip.  Alex^, 
ander  seizes  Alexander  of  LyncesteSy  on  account  of  his  mother* 9^ 
letters.  Alexander  takes  Issus.  The  memorable  iaitle  a|, 
Jssusy  tahere  the  mot  her,  wife,  tivo  daughters ^  and  sonofDa^^ 
rius  were  taken.  Alexander's  noble  behaviour  towards  thenh, 
Darius' s  letters  and  offers  to  Alexander.  Dariiiis  prepares  Oifo-^ 
iher  army. 

BUT  \n  the  following  year,  wherein  Nicoerates  was  chief  goirernpr, 
of  Athens^  and  Cssio  Valerius,  and  Lucius  Papirius^  succeeded  in 
the  consular  dignity  at  Rome,  Darius  sent  a  great  sum  of  money  ta 
Memnon^  and  declared  him  general  of  all  his  forces.  Hereupoo  \^ 
raised  great  numbers  of  men  from  all  parts,  and,  fitting  out  a  MV|p 
of  three  hundred  sail,  applied  himself  with  great  diligence  to  thfl;: 
prosecution  of  the  war.  To  that  end,  he  brought  in  Chios  to  joia 
with  him.  Then  he  sailed  to  Lesbos,  and  presently  took  Antiss*^ 
Metbymna,  Pyrrha,  and  Erissa.  But,  as  for  Mitylene  and  Les- 
bos*, because  they  were  much  larger,  and  strongly  garrisoned  and 
well  provided,  he  gained  them  not  without  many  assaults^  and  the 
loss  of  many  of  his  men,  though  he  took  them  at  length,  with  much 
ado.  The  fame  of  this  action  being  presently  noised  abroad,  many 
of  the  Cyclade  islands  sent  ambassadors  to  him,  to  make  leagoes 
with  him.  Then  there  was  a  report  spread  abroad,  that  Memooo^ 
with  his  whole  fleet,  was  intending  to  invade  Eubcea,  which  put  all 
the  cities  into  a  great  consternation.  And  some  of  the  Grecians^ 
being  brought  into  the  confederacy  of  the  Persians^  were  heartened 
in  hopes  of  a  change  of  their  afiairs  for  the  better.  Besides,  Memnoo 
bad  corrupted  many  of  the  Greeks  with  money  to  sail  in  the  same 
bottom  with  the  Persians.  But  fortune  put  a  stop  to  the  progress  of 
this  roan's  success:  for  he  fell  sick  of  a  mortal  distemper,  and  died; 
and,  by  his  death,  the  affairs  of  Darius  went  backward:  for  the  kingf 
hoped  to  have  transferred  the  whole  weight  of  the  war  oat  of  Asia 
into  Europe. 

But,  when  he  heard  of  the  death  of  Memnon,  he  called  his  friends 
tpgcther,  and  asked  their  advice  .^Whether  he  should  send  a  general 

*  Lesbos,  a  citjr  in  Letbci.  t  OC  Persia. 


^ap.tlt.  DtODOHUS  ^ICULUS.  1S3 

tjpsgggaa'.' f'ttM' 1  ,..         '  '■  '   '  isu'H  '         'JUL 

iKTith  the  aniiy>  or  go  himself  in  person,  and  try  his  fortune  with  the 
Macedonians*    Some  were  of  opinion  tliat  the  king  should  go  hiiii<-> 
self,  for  they  said  that  the  Persians  would  then  with  more  cheerfuU 
ness  Venture  their  lives*    But  Charidemus  the  Athenian,  who  Was  in 
great  esteem  for  his  valour  and  prudence  as  a  general,  (for,  under 
Philip  he  gained  greht  reputation,  and  was  his  chief  and  principal  ad^ 
fiser  in  all  his  weighty  aflfairs),  advised  Darius  not  to  lay  the  kingdom 
lashly  at  stake,  but  still  to  continue  lord  of  Asia,  and  keep  the  govem- 
fti^nt  in  his  own  hand,  and  to  appoint  an  experienced  general  to  ma- 
nage the  concerns  of  the  war*    And  he  told  him,  that  an  hundred 
fliousand  men,  of  which  number  a  third  part  should  be  mercenaries 
oot  of  Greece,  were  sufficient  for  the  expedition,  and  engaged  that 
be  would  see  the  thing  accomplished.    The  kitig  at  first  agreed  Ixl 
what  he  said;  but  his  friends  peremptorily  rejected  this  advice,  sufi« 
pecting  that  Charidemus  sought  for  the  chief  command,  with  a  de« 
sign  to  give  up  all  into  the  power  of  the  Macedonians*     Hereupoa 
Charidemus  was  in  such  a  rage,  that  he  called  them  all  cowards  ^ 
with  which  words  the  king  was  much  more  offended  than  before! 
and  whereas  anger  never  suffers  a  man  to  consider  wisely  befora 
hand,  Darius  ordered  him  to  be  bound  in  it  belt,  (which  is  the  maiv* 
ner  of  the  Persians),  and  delivered  him  to  his  guards  to  be  put  t» 
death;  who,  when  he  was  being  led  to  execution,  cried  out_Thtt 
Qie  king  would  in  a  short  time  repent  of  what  he  had  done  in  this 
matter,  and  would  be  punished  for  that  unjust  judgment  against  liim 
by  the  loss  of  lus  kingdom.    Thus  fell  Charidemus  from  the  summit 
of  all  fak  hopes  and  expectations,  through  the  unseasonable  liberty  of 
his  tongue*    But  the  king,  as  soon  as  his  anger  was  over,  presendy 
repented  of  what  he  had  done,  and  accused  himself  as  guilty  of  a 
most  horrid  crime:  but  the  power  of  a  king  could  not  undo  that 
which  was  past  remedy.     Considering,  therefore,  how  valiaat  the 
Macedonians  were,  and  musing  upon  the  courage  of  Alexander,  he 
inquired  where  he  might  have  a  fit  person  to  succeed  Memooa  ia 
the  chief  command  of  the  army;  and,  when  none  could  be  foond,  he 
was  forced  to  run  the  hazard  himself  for  the  saving  of  his  kingdom. 
He  forthwith,  therefore,  ordered  all  his  forces  to  be  called  together 
from  all  parts,  and  to  rendezvous  at  Babylon.    Then  he  made  choice 
of  such  of  his  kindred  and  friends  as  he  thought  fit,  and  to  some  \yt 
gave  commands  in  the  army,  according  to  their  several  qualities, and 
others  he  appointed  to  attend  upon  his  person,  as  his  life-guards.    As 
soon  as  the  time  before  fixed  upon  for  the  expedition  was  come,  they 
all  rendezvoused  at  Babylon,  to  the  number  of  four  hundred  thousand 
foot,  and  an  hundred  thousand  horse.     Hence  he  marched  awav. 

-'  4  7 


184  DiODORus  sicuLUis.  Book  XPII. 

■ ■  ■■■"  *— ^■T^g;;^ 

with  thb  vast  number  of  men,  towards  Cilicia*,  taking  along  with 
bim  his  mother^  wife^  and  children^  that  is  to  say^  a  son  and  two 
daughters. 

In  the  mean  time,  Alexander  (while  Memnon  was  living)^  hear* 
ing  how  Chios  and  the  cities  of  Lesbos  were  surrendered  into  the 
Iiands  of  Memnon,  and  that  Mitylene  was  taken  by  storm,  and  that 
be  was  ready  to  invade  Macedonia  with  a  navy  of  three  hundred  mlj 
and  that  many  of  the  Grecians  were  upon  the  point  of  revolting)^ 
was  very  much  perplexed  and  discontented:  but,  as  soon  as  be  heard 
of  Memnon's  death,  his  mind  was  more  at  rest.  But  within  a  short 
time  after  he  fell  desperately  sick,  and,  growing  worse  and  worse^ 
sent  for  physicians,  who,  when  they  came,  were  all  afraM  to  adminis- 
ter any  thing,  looking  upon  him  as  irrecoverable:  but  there  was  one 
Philip  of  Acarnania,  (whose  practice  it  was  commonly  to  make  use  of 
desperate  medicines)^  who  promised  to  cure  him  by  a  potion :  the 
king  hereupon  readily  complied  with  this,  especially  because  be  heard 
Darius  was  on  his  march  from  Babylon.  Then  the  physician  de- 
livered the  potion,  which^  through  the  art  and  skill  of  Philip,  and  the 
advantage  of  the  natural  strength  of  the  patient,  presently  cuicd 
the  king;  who  being  thus,  beyond  all  hope^  recovered^  bouotifnllj 
Rwarded  the  physician^  and  received  him  into  the  number  of  his  most 
ftithful  friends. 

About  the  same  time  Alexander  received  letters  from  his  motherj 
wherein  (among  other  things  which  she  thought  fit  to  advise  him  of) 
she  wished  bim  to  have  a  care  of  Alexander  of  Lyncestest,  who  was 
a  very  valiant  man,  and  of  a  generous  disposition,  and  not  inferior  to 
any  for  his  faithfulness  to  Alexander.    But^  many  things  concurring 
that  seemed  to  fortify  the  accusation,  he  was  seized  and  committed 
to  custody,  in  order  to  his  legal  trial.   But  Alexander,  having  intelli* 
gence  that  Darius  was  within  a  few  day's  march,  sent  Pkrmenio  be* 
fore  with  the  army,  to  gain  the  passes  and  the  gates  ^9  as  they  were 
called;   who,  marching  away  with  all  speed,  possessed  himself  of 
them,  beating  off  the  barbarians,  who  were  there  before  him.    Da- 
rius, that  he  might  march  with  more  ease,  had  left  all  his  heavy  bag- 
gage and  rabble  behind  him  at  Damascus,  a  city  of  Syria.     Hence 
be  marcked  witli  all  the  speed  he  could,  hearing  that  Alexander  had 
previously  possessed  himself  of  all  the  difficult  passes  and  places,  as 
not  daring  to  fight  in  the  plain  and  open  field,  as  he  supposed.  The 
inhabitantj  of  all  the  places  through  which  Alexander  had  passed^ 
slighting   the    inconsiderable   number  of  the  Macedonians,  and 

*  Cilicii,  Dvw  CanmBia»  in  the  Tarkish  doainkmL  t  la  Hiftdtaii. 

X  Sjn«  Pilc»  or  ihc  g«t«t  of  Sjri^ 


Ch^.  IIL  DIODORUS  8ICULU$.  185 

frightened  at  the  approach  of  the  vast  army  of  the  Persians^  without 
moy  regard  to  Alexander^  sided  with  Darius^  and  readily  supplied 
the  Persians  with  provisions  and  all  other  necessaries,  and,  by  the 
rule  of  their  own  opinions,  adjudged  the  victory  before-hand  to  the 
barbarians* 

f  o  the  mean  time,  Alexander  had  possessed  himself  of  Issus*', 
(surprised  with  the  fear  of  his  army),  a  considerable  city  of  Cilicia; 
and^  understanding  by  his  spies  that  Darius  was  not  above  thirty 
furlongs  distant,  and  that  he  was  even  now  approaching,  with  his 
army  so  provided  and  in  that  order  as  to  make  them  terrible  to  all, 
he  judged  that  the  gods  highly  favoured  him,  in  putting  such  an  op- 
portunity into  his  hands,  as  that,  by  the  gaining  of  one  victory,  he 
should  ruin  the  whole  empire  of  Persia.  Hereupon  he  stirred  up 
the  spirits  of  his  soldiers,  (by  a  speech  for  the  occasion),  encourag'- 
ing  them  to  fight  manfully,  now  all  lay  at  stake.  His  regiments  of 
foot  and  squadrons  of  horse  he  posted  as  the  place  and  ground  would 
best  allow:  the  horse  was  placed  before  the  whole  body  of  the  foot, 
which  were  ordered  behind  so  as  to  support  and  relieve  the  horse. 
Being  in  the  right  wing  himself,  he  marched  on  towards  the  enemy 
with  the  choicest  of  the  horse.  The  Thessalian  horse  were  in  the 
left,  for  valour  and  skill  far  excelling  all  the  rest.  And  now  the 
armies  came  within  the  cast  of  a  dart  one  of  another,  upon  which 
there  flew  such  a  shower  of  darts  from  the  barbarians  against  them 
with  Alexander,  that,  through  their  multitude,  they  so  brushed  in 
their  flight  one  upon  another,  that  their  force  was  much  abated,  and 
they  did  little  harm.  Then  presently  the  trumpets  on  both  sides 
Bounded  a  charge,  and  the  Macedonians  were  the  first  that  set  up  a 
great  shout,  which  being  answered  hy  the  barbarians,  all  the  hills 
and  mountains  there  near  at  hand  echoed  with  the  noise.  But  the 
shout  of  the  barbarians  far  exceeded  the  other,  being  made  by  five 
hundred  thousand  men  at  once. 

Then  Alexander  looked  every  where  round  about  to  spy  out  Da- 
rius, whom  having  found,  he  made  at  him  (with  those  horse  that 
were  with  him)  with  all  the  speed  imaginable,  desiring  not  so  much 
to  conquer  the  Persians,  as  to  gain  the  present  victory  by  his  own 
personal  valour.  In  the  mean  time,  the  whole  body  of  horse  engaged, 
great  slaughter  being  made  on  both  sides;  but  the  valour  of  t))o>e 
engaged  caused  the  victory  to  hang  a  long  time  in  suspense,  appeai** 
ing  sometimes  here  and  sometimes  there,  by  changes  and  turns.  No 
dart  cast  or  stroke  given  by  any  was  in  vain,  but  did  some  execution, 
for  in  such  a  multitude  the  mark  was  sure  to  be  hit.  So  that  gre.  ^ 
numbers  were  wounded,  and  others,  fighting  to  their  last  breatl^ 

*  Imus,  now  LtAaato,  under  the  Turki, 

Vol.  2.  No.  42.  bb 


186  DIODORtJS  STCULOS.  Jtooh  XFtL 

chose  rather  to  lose  their  lives,  than  part  with  their  honour.  And 
the  officers,  at  the  head  of  their  regiments,  so  bravely  behaved  them* 
selves,  that  they  put  life  and  courage  into  the  commoD  soldieD* 
There  might  then  be  seen  all  sorts  of  wounds,  and  as  various  and 
sharp  contests  for  victory.  Oxathres,  a  Persian,  and  brother  of  Da- 
rius, a  very  valiant  man,  as  soon  as  he  saw  Alexander  make  so 
fiercely  at  Darius,  was  resolved  to  undergo  the  same  fortune  with  bis 
brother,  and  therefore  charged  Alexander's  body  with  the  best  of 
the  horse  he  could  make  choice  of  out  of  his  own  troops,  and,  know- 
ing that  his  love  to  his  brother  would  advance  his  fame  and  reputa- 
tion above  all  other  things  among  the  Persians,  he  fought  close  by 
liis  chariot,  and  with  that  courage  and  dexterity,  that  he  hid  many 
dead  at  his  feet;  and,  inasmuch  as  the  Macedonians  were  as  resolute 
on  the  other  side  not  to  move  a  foot^  the  dead  bodies  rose  up  in 
heaps  round  about  the  chariot  of  Darius.  And,  every  one  striving  to 
lay  hold  of  the  king,  both  sides  fought  with  great  obstinacy,  without 
any  regard  of  their  lives.  In  this  conflict  many  of  the  Persian  no- 
bility were  slain,  amongst  whom  were  Antixyes  and  Rheomitres,  and 
Tasiaces,  the  lord-lieutenant  of  Egypt.  And  many  of  the  Macedo- 
nians  likewise;  and  Alexander  himself  (compassed  round  by  the 
enemy)  was  wounded  in  the  thigh.  The  chariot-horses  of  Darius^ 
receiving  many  wounds,  and  frightened  at  the  multitude  of  carcases 
that  lay  in  heaps  round  about  them,  grew  so  unruly,  that  they  would 
have  hurried  Darius  into  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  if  he  had  not  ia 
this  extremity  caught  hold  of  the  reins  himself,  being  forced  thus  to 
make  bold  with  the  laws  of  the  Persians,  in  debasing  the  majesty  of 
the  Persian  kings.  In  the  mean  time,  his  servants  brought  to  him 
another  chariot,  and,  while  he  was  ascending  this,  there  arose  a  great 
tumult,  insomuch  that  Darius  himself  (by  the  enemy  pressing  hard 
upon  him)  was  in  a  great  terror  and  consternation;  which,  whea 
some  of  the  Persians  discerned,  tliey  began  first  to  fly,  and  the  horse 
that  were  next  following  the  example  of  their  fellows,  at  length  all 
made  away  as  fast  as  they  could.  ^Flie  places  being  narrow  and 
strait,  in  their  haste  they  trod  down  one  another,  and  many  perished 
without  a  stroke  from  the  enemy;  for  they  lay  in  heaps,  some  with 
their  arms,  others  without  them ;  some  held  their  naked  swords  so 
long  in  their  hands,  that  their  fellow-soldiers  ran  themselves  upon 
them,  and  so  were  slain.  But  many  got  away  into  the  open  pfain^ 
and,  by  the  swiftness  of  their  horses,  escaped  to  the  several  cities  of 
the  allies. 

During  this  ti^ne,  the  Macedonian  phalanx*  and  the  Persian  foot 
fought  awhile;   for  the  flight  of  the  korse  was  the  prelude  to  th» 
*  Battaliuo^  iboit  eight  tkoiuaud  fool. 


Chap.ni^  mODORUS  8ICULUS.  187 

victory.  The  barbarians  therefore  taking  to  tlieir  heels,  and  so  tnany 
thousands  making  away  through  the  same  strails,  all  places  there- 
abouts were  in  a  short  time  covered  with  dead  carcases;  but  the  Per- 
sians, by  the  advantage  of  night,  got  away  here  and  there  into  seve- 
ral places  of  shelter. 

The  Macedonians  therefore  left  off  the  pursuit,  and  betook  them- 
selves to  the  rifling  of  the  camp,  especially  the  king's  pavilion,  be- 
cause there  were  the  richest  booties;   so  that  there  was  found  and 
carried  thence  vast  sums  of  gold  and  silver,  and  exceeding  rich  gar- 
ments and  furniture;  an  abundance  likewise  of  treasure  belonging  to 
his  friends  and  kindred,  and  the  commanders  of  his  army :  for  the 
wives  not  only  from  the  king's  household,  but  from  the  families  of 
his  kindred  and  attendants,  mounted  in  chariots  glittering  with  gold, 
(according  to  the  custom  of  the  Persians),  accompanied  the  camp  in 
thfiit  march  from  place  to  place.     And  every  one  of  these  (through 
their  luxury  and  delicateness,  to  which  they  had  commonly  inured 
themselves)  carried  with  them  abundance  of  rich  furniture,  and  a 
multitude  of  beautiful  women.    But  the  captive  ladies  were  then  ia  « 
a  most  miserable  condition :  for  they  who  before,  by  reason  of  their 
nicety,  could  scarcely  be  placed  in  their  stately  chariots  so  as  to 
please  them,  and  had  their  bodies  so  attired  as  that  no  air  might 
touch  them,  now  rent  their  garments  in  pieces,  and^  scarce  with  one 
simple  veil  to  cover  their  nakedness,  threw  themselves  shrieking  out 
of  their  chariots,  and,  with  their  eyes  and  hands  lifted  up  to  heaven, 
cpist  themselves  down  at  the  feet  of  the  conquerors.    Some  witi^ 
their  trembling  hands  pulled  off  all  their  jewels  and  ornaments  from 
their  own  bodies,  and  ran  up  steep  rocks  and  craggy  places,  with 
their  hair  flying  about  their  ears;    and  thus  meeting  in  throngs  to- 
gether, some  called  for  help  from  those  who  wanted  the  relief  of 
others  as  much  as  themselves;  some  were  dragged  along  by  the  hair 
of  their  heads,  others  were  stripped  naked,  and  then  killed,  and  some- 
times cudgelled  to  death  with  the  heavy  ends  of  the  soldier's  lances* 
Nay,  even  all  manner  of  disgrace  and  contempt  was  poured  upon 
the  glory  of  the  Persians,  so  famous  and  honourable  heretofore  all  the 
world  over. 

But  the  more  sober  and  moderate  of  the  Macedonians,  seeing  that 
strange  turn  of  fortune,  much  pitied  the  condition  of  those  miser- 
able creatures,  who  had  lost  every  thing  that  was  near  and  dear  to 
them  in  this  worid,  and  were  now  environed  with  nothing  but  stran-* 
g^rs  and  enemies,  and  fallen  into  ipiserable  and  dishonourable  cap- 
tivity. But  the  mother  of  Darius,  and  his  wife,  and  two  daughters, 
pow  marriageable,  (and  his  little  son  especially),  drew  tears  from  the 
eyes  of  the  beholders ;  for  their  sad  change  of  fortune,  and  the  great* 


188  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  XFIP 

ness  of  their  sudden  and  unexpected  calamity,  (presented  thus  to 
their  view),  ecu  id  not  but  move  them  to  a  compassionate  considera- 
tion of  their  present  condition :  for,  as  yet,  it  was  not  known  whether 
Darius  was  alive  or  dead.  And  in  the  mean  time  they*  perceived  hist 
tent  pillaged  ai^d  rifled  by  armed  men,  who  knew  no  difference  of 
persons,  and  therefore  committed  many  indecent  and  unworthy  ac- 
tions, and  saw  likewise  all  Asia  brought  under  the  power  of  a  con- 
quering s>Nvord  as  well  as  themselves.  The  wives  of  tho  governors  of 
the  provinces  that  fell  at  theirf  feet  to  beg  protection,  were  so  far 
from  finding  relief,  that  they  themselves  earnestly  prayed  them  to 
rescue  them  out  of  their  present  calamity. 

Alexander's  servants,  having  possessed  themselves  of  Darius's 
tents,  prepared  the  tables  and  baths  which  were  used  by  Darius  him- 
self, and  lighted  up  many  lamps,  in  expectation  of  the  king,  that  at 
his  return  from  the  pursuit  he  might  take  possession  of  all  the  furni- 
ture of  Darius,  as  an  earnest  of  the  empire  and  government  of  all  Asia. 
Of  the  barbarians  there  fell  in  this  battle  above  an  hundred  and  twenty 
thousand  foot,  and  no  fewer  than  ten  thousand  horse.  Of  the  Mace- 
donians, three  hundred  foot,  and  an  hundred  and  fifty  horse.  And 
this  was  the  issue  of  the  battle  at  Issus. 

But  to  return  to  the  kings  themselves :  Darius  with  all  his  army 
being  thus  routed,  fled,  and,  by  changing  from  time  to  time  one 
horse  after  another,  the  best  he  had,  he  made  away  with  all  speedy 
to  escape  out  of  the  hands  of  Alexander,  and  to  get  to  the  governon 
of  the  upper  provinces.  But  Alexander,  with  the  best  of  his  horse 
and  chiefest  of  his  friends,  pursued  him  close  at  the  very  heekj 
earnestly  longing  to  be  master  of  Darius.  But,  after  he  had  ridden 
two  hundred  furlongs,  he  returned  at  midnight  into  the  camp;  and, 
having  refreshed  his  weary  body  in  the  baths,  went  to  supper^  and 
then  to  his  rest. 

In  the  mean  time,  one  came  to  the  mother  of  Darius,  and  told  her 
that  Alexander  was  returned  from  the  pursuit  of  Darius,  and  had 
possessed  himself  of  all  the  rich  spoils  of  his  tent.  Upon  which  there 
was  heard  a  great  shriek  and  lamentation  amongst  the  women^ 
and,  from  tiic  multitude  of  the  captives  condoling  with  the  queen  at 
the  sad  news,  all  places  were  filled  with  cries  of  anguish  and  herror. 
llie  king,  understanding  what  sorrow  there  was  among  the  women^ 
sent  Leonalus,  one  of  his  courtiers,  to  them,  to  put  an  end  to  their 
fears,  and  to  let  Sisygambis,  the  mother  of  Darius,  know  that  her 
son  was  alive,  and  that  Alexander  would  have  respect  to  their  former 
dignity;  and  that,  to  confirm  the  promise  of  his  generosity  by  his  ac- 

*  ihe  womcn-captivcsj  Dariuh's  wife,  children,  and  niotht^r. 
t  Of  the  fiuit II  and  quccn-inotlicr  of  lVrii:i. 


CM^.  ITT.  DiODORUs  sictJLUd,  ISg 

tions,  be  would  come  and  discourse  with  them  the  day  following* 
Whereupon  the  captives  were  so  surprised  with  the  sudden  and  happy 
turn  of  their  fortunes^  that  they  honoured  Alexander  as  a  god^  and 
their  fears  were  turned  into  exultations  of  joy. 

The  king,  as  soon  as^  it  was  light,  (with  Hephaestion,  one  of  the 
trustiest  of  his  friends)  went  to  visit  the  queens.  When  they  en- 
tered, being  both  habited  alike,  Sisygambis,  taking  Hephsstion  for 
the  king,  (because  he  was  the  more  comely  aad  taller  man),  fell 
prostrate  at  his  feet;  but  the  attendants,  by  the  nods  of  their  heads, 
and  pointing  of  their  fingers,  directed  her  to  Alexander:  whereupon, 
being  much  ashamed  and  out  of  countenance,  by  reason  of  the  mis- 
take, she  saluted  Alexatidcr  in  the  same  manner  she  had  done  the 

other.    Upon  which  he  lifted  her  up,  and  said Mother,  trouble  not, 

nor  perplex  yourself;  for  that  man  also  is  Alexander*  By  which 
courteous  and  obliging  title  of  mother  to  a  grave  and  honourable 
matron,  he  gave  a  clear  demonstration  of  the  respects  and  civilities  he 
intended  towards  them  all. 

Having  therefore  owned  her  for  a  second  mother,  he  presently 
confirmed  his  words  by  his  actions:  for  he  ordered  her  to  be  clothed 
in  her  royal  robes,  and  restored  her  to  all  the  honours  becoming  her 
former  state  and  dignity.  For  he  gave  her  all  her  attendants  and 
bousehold  servants  and  furniture  allowed  her  by  Darius,  and  added 
also  as  much  more  of  his  own  bounty.  He  promised  likewise  to  dis- 
pose of  the  young  ladies  in  marriage  far  better  than  if  their  father 
had  provided  husbands  for  them;  and  that  he  would  educate  the 
Icing's  little  son  as  carefully  and  honourably  as  if  he  were  his  own* 
Then  he  called  him  to  him,  and  kissed  him ;  and,  taking  notice  that 
he  was  not  at  all  ashamed,  nor  seemed  to  be  in  the  least  affrighted, 
turning  to  Hephcestion  and  those  about  him,  ^'  This  youth,  but  six 
years  of  age,''  said  he,  *^  carries  in  his  countenance  marks  of  a  stout 
and  brave  spirit,  above  his  age,  and  is  better  than  his  father."     He 

further  declared ^That  he  would  take  care  of  the  wife  of  Darius, 

that  she  should  want  for  nothing,  in  order  to  the  support  and  main- 
tenance of  her  royal  state  and  former  prosperity.  Many  other  kind 
and  gaining  expressions  he  used,  insomuch  that  the  ladies  fell  a- 
weeping  in  showers  of  tears,  out  of  transports  of  joy,  upon  account 
of  the  greatness  of  their  unexpected  felicity.  After  all,  he  at  length 
put  forth  to  them  his  right  hand  to  kiss,  upon  which  not  only  they 
who  were  immediately  honoured  with  those  kindnesses  set  forth  his 
praise,  but  even  the  whole  army  cried  ^^p  his  incomparable  grace  and 
clemency.  And,  indeed,  I  conceive  that  amongst  the  many  brave 
and  noble  acts  of  Alexander,  none  of  thom  were  greater  than  this,  or 
more  worthy  by  history  to  be  handed  down  to  posterity:  for  storming 


190  DIODORUS  S1CULU9.  Sook  XFIL 


ftod  taking  of  eities,  gaining  of  battles^  and  other  successes  io  war^ 
are  many  times  tlie  events  of  fortune^  more  than  the  effects  of  valour 
8ud  virtue;  but  to  be  compassionate  to  tbe  miserable,  and  those  that 
lie  at  the  feet  of  the  conqueror,  must  be  the  fruit  only  of  wisdom  and 
prudence.  For  many  by  prosperity  grow  haughty,  and  are  so  £ar 
swelled  with  pride  by  the  favourable  blasts  of  fortune,  that  they  are 
cveless  and  forgetful  of  tbe  common  miseries  of  mankind;  so  that 
it  is  common  to  sec  many  sink  under  the  weight  of  their  prosperous 
successes,  as  a  heavy  burthen  they  are  not  able  to  bear. 

Therefore,  though  Alexander  was  many  ages  before  us  who  are  now 
living,  yet  the  remembrance  of  his  virtue  justly  challenges  honour 
and  praise  from  all  those  that  succeeded  him  in  future  generations. 

As  for  Darius,  being  now  got  to  Babylon,  he  mustered  up  his 
broken  troops  that  had  escaped  from  the  battle  at  Issus;  and,  though 
lie  had  received  so  great  an  overthrow,  he  was  not  at  all  discouraged^ 
but  wrote  letters  to  Alexander,  whereby  he  advised  him  to  use  his 
good  fortune  and  success  moderately,  and  offered  him  a  great  sum  of 
iponey  for  the  ransom  of  the  captives :  he  promised,  likewise,  to  give 
up  to  him  all  that  part  of  Asia,  with  the  cities  which  lay  Qn  that  side^ 
within  the  course*  of  tbe  river  Halysf,  if  he  were  willing  to  be  his 
friend. 

Whereupon  Alexander  called  a  council  of  war,  and  laid  before 
tbem  such  letters  as  he  judged  most  for  his  own  advantage,  but  coa- 
^aled  the  true  ones;  by  which  contrivance  the  ambassadors  were 
dismissed  without  any  effect  of  their  embassy. 

Darius  therefore  concluding  that  things  were  not  to  be  composed 
by  letters,  employed  himself  wholly  in  making  preparations  for  war* 
To  this  end,  he  armed  those  soldiers  that  had  lost  their  arms  in  the 
late  unfortunate  battle,  and  raised  others,  and  formed  them  into  regi- 
ipents.  He  sent,  likewise,  for  the  forces  he  had  through  haste  left 
behind  him  in  the  upper  provinces  when  he  first  began  his  expeditioiu 
To  conclude,  he  was  so  earnest  and  diligent  in  recruiting  his  armyj^ 
that  they  were  now  twice  as  many  as  they  were  at  Issus;  for  they 
made  up  a  body  of  eight  hundred  thousand  foot,  and  two  hundred 
tliousand  horse,  besides  a  vast  multitude  of  hooked  chariots.  These 
epnsiderable  actions  were  the  events  of  this  year. 

*  This  was  all  Katoli^.  t  Now  Casilimerj  in  Fapblagoma^ 


CRop.  IV.  •  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  I9I 


CHAP.  IV. 

^kxamder  marches  towards  Egypt:  besieges  TSfte.  Prodfgiee 
at  Tyre.  The  Tyrians  bind  ApMo  with  goldai  chatns.  SHb 
ifwentions  of  the  Tyrimis  to  defefui  themselves.  The  adtamce^ 
sneni  of  BaUofninus,  a  poor  man,  to  be  king  of  Tyre.  Tim 
acts  ofj^gis  oftd  Amyntas.  Amyntas  killed,  and  all  his  sol^ 
diers.  Alexander  takes  Gaza  by  storm:  is  presented  by  tka 
Grecians. 

NICERATUS  was  chief  governor  of  Athens^  and  Marcus  AttiHot 
and  Marcus  Valerius  were  consuls  at  Rome,  when  the  hundred  i 
twelfth  Olympiad  was  celebrated^  wherein  Grylus  of  Chakedoa  ^ 
victor. 

Alexander,  after  the  battle  of  Issus,  caused  both  his  own,  and  ttiose 
likewise  of  the  enemy's  that  were  of  greatest  repute  for  valour,  to  lie 
buried.  After  he  had  sacrificed  and  given  thanks  to  the  gods,  lia 
bountifully  rewarded  ail  such  as  Iiad  valiantly  behaved  themselves^ 
every  one  according  to  his  merit.  After  which,  he  gave  liberty  to 
his  soldiers  for  some  days  to  recreate  and  refresh  themselves.  Tbeoee 
marching  with  his  army  towards  Egypt,  as  he  came  into  Phcenicia 
other  cities  readily  submitted  to  him,  and  were  received  into  his  pro* 
tection.  But  Tyre  was  the  only  city  which  obstinately  denied  him 
entrance,  when  he  desired  it,  in  order  to  sacrifice  to  Hercules  Tyriusj 
at  which  Alexander  was  so  enraged,  that  he  threatened  to  storm 
and  take  it  by  force  of  arms.  But  the  Tyrians  resolved  to  stand  it 
out,  because  they  thouglit  thereby  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  Da* 
rius;  and  that,  for  their  faithfulness  and  loyalty  to  him,  they  con« 
eluded  he  would  bountifully  reward  them,  who,  by  tliat  means,  had 
gained  him  more  time  to  recruit  his  army,  while  Alexander  was  de«* 
tained  in  a  troublesome  and  dangerous  siege.  And  besides,  they 
placed  their  confidence  in  the  strength  of  the  island,  and  their  plenti* 
ful  provision  of  all  things  necessary,  and  in  the  Cartbagiuiaus,  from 
whom  they  were  descended. 

The  king  therefore,  though  he  foresaw  that  it  would  be  a  very  dif- 
ficult matter  to  carry  on  the  siege,  by  reason  of  the  sea,  and  that  they 
were  so  well  provided  with  all  things  for  the  defence  of  the  walls, 
and  had  a  strong  navy,  and  that  the  city  was  separated  from  the 
continent,  so  that  nothing  could  be  effectually  put  in  execution,  yet 
he  judged  it  more  for  bis  honour  to  undergo  all  sorts  of  haaardsj  thaa 


19S  BIODORUS  6ICULUS.  Book  XFIJi 

...  ^  ■  .        y 

for  the  Macedonians  to  be  baffled  with  one  city,  and  tliat  too  not  al- 
together so  difficult  to  be  gained. 

He  forthwith  therefore  demolished  Old  Tyre,  as  it  was  then  called^ 
and  by  the  stones,  carried  by  many  thousands  of  men,  raised  a  mole 
two  hundred  feet  in  breadth,  which,  by  the  help  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  neighbouring  cities^  (who  were  all  called  in  for  that  purpose)^ 
was  presently  despatched.  The  Tyrians,  in  the  mean  time^  from 
their  ships  laughed  and  jeered  at  the  king,  and  asked  him  whether 
be  supposed  himself  stronger*  than  Neptune.  Afterwards,  when 
they  perceived  (beyond  whatever  they  thought  could  be  done)  that 
the  mole  still  increased,  and  was  likely  soon  to  be  finished^  they  de- 
creed to  transport  their  wives,  children,  and  old  people  to  Carthage; 
and  those  that  were  young  men  were  kept,  some  of  them  to  guard 
the  walls,  and  others  for  sea-serviee,  for  they  had  a  fleet  of  fourscore 
sail.  At  length  they  sent  away  part  of  their  wives  and  children^  in 
order  to  sail  by  the  enemy  for  Carthage ;  but,  being  prevented  by  the 
multitude  of  those  that  were  at  work,  and  not  in  a  fit  posture  to  fight 
at  sea,  they  were  all  forced  to  return,  and  abide  the  siege.  And, 
though  they  were  plentifully  supplied  with  engines  to  shoot  arrows^ 
darts,  and  stones,  and  all  other  machines  and  instruments  fit  and 
necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  walls  against  any  assault;  yet  they 
readily  furnished  themselves,  as  they  had  occasion,  with  many  more^ 
for  Tyre  was  full  of  gun-smiths,  and  artificers  of  all  sorts.  So  that, 
being  supplied  by  these  workmen  with  many  new-invented  engines^ 
every  place  round  the  walls  was  filled  with  them,  especially  towardt 
that  side  where  the  mole  was  raised. 

And  now  the  work  was  brought  by  the  Macedonians  within  the 
cast  of  a  dart,  when  presently  a  prodigy  from  the  gods  appeared  to 
them  who  were  thus  threatened :  for  the  working  of  the  sea  cast  a 
wliale  of  an  incredible  bigness  to  the  side  of  the  mole;  and  there  it 
lay,  without  doing  any  harm,  but  remained  there  a  good  while^  lean« 
ing  one  side  of  its  body  to  the  work,  which  struck  the  beholders  with 
much  terror  and  amazement.  After  it  was  gone,  and  relumed  into 
the  sea,  both  parties  went  to  their  divinations^  and  each  (severally 
concluding  as  they  would  desire  to  have  it)  made  this  constrac* 

tion ^That  by  this  sign  was  portended,  that  Neptune  would  aid  and 

assist  them. 

There  was  another  prodigy  likewise  happened,  which  greatly  a* 
mazed  the  common  people:  for,  when  the  Macedonians  were  at 
meat,  the  faces  of  those  that  broke  the  bread  seemed  to  be  all  over 
blowzy;  and  one  of  Tyre  affirmed  that  he  saw  a  vision,  by  which 
Apollo  told  him  that  he  would  forsake  the  city.  And,  because  the 
common  people  suspected  that  he  spoke  this  in  favour  of  Alezao* 


Chap^lFi  moDORus  sicuLiTs.  193 

der^s  party»  tlie  young  men  would  have  stoned  him  to  death,  but  he 
was  rescued  by  the  magistrates,  and  fled  into  the  temple  of  Her- 
cules; and  so,  through  his  pious  supplication,  he  escaped  so  immi- 
nent a  danger. 

Upon  this,  the  Tyrians,  to  prevent  Apollo's  leaving  the  city,  fas* 
tened  his  image  to  the  pedestal  with  golden  chains.  But  the  citi- 
cenSy  being  put  into  a  great  fright  by  the  increase  of  the  mole, 
loaded  many  little  boats  with  engines  to  shoot  arrows  and  darts, 
and  with  slingers  and  archers;  who,  setting  upon  them  that  were 
at  work,  wounded  and  killed  many  of  tijem :  for,  showers  of  arrows 
and  darts  being  discharged  upon  throngs  of  naked  men,  none  missed 
their  mark,  because  they  all  lay  open  and  exposed  to  every  shot, 
without  any  defence;  for  they  were  not  only  wounded  with  darts 
ID  front,  but  (through  the  narrowness  of  the  mole)  they  were  likewise 
galled  in  the  rear^  it  being  impossible  for  any  one  to  guard  both 
sides  at  once. 

Alexander  therefore,  that  he  might  repair  the  sudden  and  unex 
pected  loss,  with  all  the  speed  he  could  manned  as  many  ships  as  he 
had,  and  went  on  board  as  admiral  himself,  and  made  it  his  business 
to  get  into  the  haven  of  Tyre,  in  order  to  intercept  the  Phoenicians 
in  their  return.  Hereupon  the  barbarians,  fearing  that  if  he  gained 
the  haven  be  would  take  the  city  itself,  (those  who  should  defend  it 
being  now  out  at  sea),  made  all  the  haste  they  could  to  return  to 
the  city.  And,  indeed,  both  sides  plied  their  oars  with  all  their 
might,  in  order  to  be  the  first.  But  the  Macedonians  just  entering 
the  port  before  the  other,  the  Phoenicians  were  every  man  upon  the 
point  of  being  cut  off;  but,  forcing  their  way  through  their  enemies, 
they  returned  into  the  city,  with  the  loss  of  some  of  those  vessels 
whieh  lagged  behind.  However,  though  the  king  missed  of  his  de- 
sign, yet  he  eagerly  set  to  his  work  again  for  the  finishing  of  the 
mole,  and,  by  a  considerable  number  of  vessels,  guarded  the  work 
for  the  future. 

The  work  being  brought  near  to  the  city,  and  the  town  now  in  a 
probability  of  being  taken,  on  a  sudden  a  violent  storm  of  wind  arose, 
apd  tore  away  part  of  the  mole :  which  so  perplexed  Alexander,  that 
he  repented  of  having  begun  tlie  siege.  But,  however,  bein^  urged 
forward  by  an  unquenchable  thirst  after  glory,  he  caused  trees  of  an 
incredible  magnitude  to  be  cut  down  in  the  niountnins,  and  brought 
thither,  and  with  their  branches  and  earth  piled  together  gave  a  check 
to  the  violence  of  the  stream. 

Having,  therefore,  presently  repaired  the  breach  that  was  made, 
the  mole,  by  the  help  of  many  hands,  was  brought  again  within  the 
cast  of  a  dart,  and,  by  engines  mounted  upon  it,  he  battered  down 
Vou2.   No.  42.  cc 


194  DiODORus  sicuLirs.  BookXFlL 

the  walls,  and,  by  shot  with  darts  atid  arrows  out  of  engines,  beat  off 
the  enemy  from  the  bulwarks:  with  these,  likewise,  both  archers 
«nd  slingers  iplied  the  besieged,  and  grievously  wimnded  and  gvDed 
many  of  the  townsmen  upon  the  walls^  Btit  the  Tyrians,  being  ac* 
customed  to  the  sea,  and  having  many  artificers  and  contrivers  of 
engines,  used  many  arts  and  ingenious  inventions  to  preserve  them- 
selves: for,  against  the  shot,  they  contrived  wheels  with  many 
spokes,  which,  being  whirled  about  by  an  engine,  shattered  in  piecea 
some  of  the  darts  and  arrows,  and  turned  off  others,  and  broke  the 
force  of  all  the  rest :  and,  to  give  a  check  to  the  violence  of  the  stones 
that  were  shot  out  of  the  ballistas,  they  prepared  wool^packs,  and 
other  things  that  were  soft  and  pliant,  to  receive  them. 
.  But  the  king,  not  contented  to  assault  the  city  only  from  the  mole, 
girt  the  town  round  with  his  whole  fleet,  and  diligently  viewed  all 
parts  of  the  walls,  as  if  he  resolved  to  besiege  the  place  both  by  sta 
and  land.  Tlie  Tyrians  not  daring  to  engage  him  at  sea,  he  de-* 
atroyed  three  ships  that  were  then  by  chance  in  the  mouth  of  tha 
harbour,  and  then  returned  to  his  camp*  But  the  Tyrians,  that  they 
might  make  their  walls  as  strong  again  as  they  were  before,  raised 
another  wall,  ten  cubits  broad,  and  five  cubits  distant  from  the  for- 
mer, and  filled  the  empty  space  between  the  two  walls  with  earth 
and  stones. 

Alexander  likewise  made  a  battery,  by  joining  many  of  his  ships 
together,  and  planted  \x\Km  them  all  sorts  of  rams  and  battering  en- 
gines, whereby  he  beat  down  a  hundred  feet  of  the  wall,  and  at- 
tempted to  break  into  the  city  over  the  ruins:  upon  which  the  Ty- 
rians discharged  a  shower  of  darts  and  arrows,  and,  with  much  ado, 
repulsed  the  enemy,  and  the  night  following  repaired  that  part  of  the 
wall  which  had  been  battered  down. 

But,  after  that  the  passage  to  the  city,  by  the  joining  of  the  mole 
close  to  the  \\^ll$,  wa$  made,  as  if  it  had  been  a  i>eninsula,  there  vrere 
many  and  sharp  contests  both  to  gain  and  defend  the  walls:  for, 
though  they  had  imminent  destruction  before  their  eyes,  and  the 
miseries  attendant  upor>  a  town's  being  tJikea  by  storm,  yet  they  wera 
so  resolved  to  go  through  all  dangers,  that  they  despised  death  itself.^ 
For,  when  the  Macedonians  approached  with  towers  of  that  height 
that  they  equalled  the  battlements,  and  cast  out  planks,  whereof  one 
of  the  ends  lay  upon  the  top  of  the  ramparts,  and  so  by  a  bridg* 
mounted  the  walls,  the  Tyrians,  by  the  ingenuity  of  their  artificers, 
were  supplied  with  many  sorts  of  engines  and  weapons  for  their  ef- 
fectual defence:  as, amongst  others,  they  had  very  great  three-forlied 
hooks*^,  which  they  cast  close  at  hand,  and  therewith  wounded  then 
*  TridcuCs  ibt  inTriitiou  of  the  T\  imok 


CAqi*  IPl  DIOOORU8  SICULUS.  195 

ia  the  towers,  (to  which  were  fastened  cords,  one  end  whereof  they 
held  themselves),  and,  by  fixing  these  in  the  targets  of  their  ene- 
mies, they  plucked  them  out  of  their  hands :  for,  to  that  necessity 
and  strait  the  Macedonians  were  brought,  that  they  must  either  stand 
naked  and  exposed  (without  defensive  arras)  to  a  multitude  of  darts 
and  arrows,  and  so  be  wounded  to  death,  or  else,  out  of  a  point  of 
honour,  to  stick  to  their  arms,  and  so  perish,  by  being  plucked  head- 
long out  of  the  towers.  Others  threw  fishing-nets  upon  them  that 
were  engaged  upon  the  bridges  laid  to  the  walls,  and  so  entangled 
th^r  hands,  that  they  drew  them  off,  and  tumbled  them  headlong  to 
the  ground. 

Another  wonderful  invention  they  found  out  against  the  Macedo« 
Dians,  whereby  they  grievously  plagued  the  chiefest  of  their  ene* 
mies,  which  was  this :  they  filled  their  iron  and  brazen  shields  with 
sand,  and  heated  them  in  the  fire  till  the  sand  was  scorching  hot, 
which  by  an  engine  they  threw  upon  them  that  were  chiefly  engaged, 
whereby  they  were  cruelly  tormented;  for,  the  sand  getting  within 
their  breast-pktes  and  coats  of  mail,  and  grievously  scorching  their 
flesh,  no  remedy  could  be  applied  for  the  cure  of  the  maUdy:  so  that 
(though  they  made  most  bitter  complaints,  as  men  ui)on  the  rack) 
yet  there  were  none  who  were  able  to  help  them,  insomuch  that  they 
grew  mad  by  the  extremity  of  the  torture,  and  died  in  the  height  of 
inexpressible  torments. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Phoenicians  never  ceased  casting  fire-darts 
and  stones  at  their  enemies,  so  that  they  were  scarce  able  to  endure 
itp  the  multitude  was  so  excessive.  Moreover,  with  long  poles  with 
sharp  hookS;  at  the  end,  they  cut  the  cords  of  the  battering-rams  in 
pieces,  (which  forced  them  forwards),  whereby  the  force  of  the  en* 
gine  was  lost:  apd  they  shot  out  of  machines  for  the  purpose  large 
inassy  pieces  of  red  hot  iron  into  the  midst  of  great  multitudes  of 
the  assailants,  which,  by  reason  of  the  number  of  those  against  whom 
they  were  discharged,  were  sure  to  do  execution.  They  plucked, 
likewise,  men  in  armour  from  off  the  ramparts  with  iron  instruments 
palled  crows,  aad  others  shaped  like  men's  hands.  And,  having 
maqy  bands  at  work,  tliey  eluded  all  the  enemy's  engines,  and  killed 
multitudes  of  then).  And,  although  the  service  was  so  amazing, 
and  tl>e  conflict  so  sharp,  tliat  it  was  scarcely  to  be  endured,  yet  the 
Macedonians  remitted  nothing  of  their  antient  valour,  hut  made 
their  way  over  the  bodies  of  those  that  were  slain,  not  at  all  dis- 
couraged by  the  misfortunes  of  others,  In  the  mean  time,  Alex«> 
ander  battered  the  walls  with  inassy  stones  shot  out  of  his  engines, 
and  grievously  galled  the  besieged  with  arrows  and  darts,  and  all 
sorts  of  shot,  from  th^  wooden  towers.    To  prevent  this  mischief^ 


196  MKMntmr  simmos. 


AeiyriaiisplMedMrMe  whceb  bHbMtbe^ivril^ 
ramd  by  certain  engines,  ud  witb«MJe  tbcJr'riUwr >bl«ll«tik  IfM 
in  pieces,  or  so  tlirew  tliem  off;  tliat  ffacy  i^eta  inefllMttIb  '«*llii|'ii 
aUey  dir fiDree  of  tiie  stohes  shot  agninst  the  wall^  ihLf%metlS»jg^ 
tber  liides  end  siiins  Ajlisd'ofer  to  receive  them,  fiMeh^  liieelli^NMh 
what  was  soft  and  pliant,  tlieir  foife  was  thereby *amieli  nbtlift  ^'•^  . 
*  To  coDclttde,  the  Tyrian's  were  not  shmt  in  any  iMog  KhkiMll 
.their  valour  might  be  made  to  appear  Isr'  the  defenee  H  thff^^^Mllh 
And,  benig  sufficiently  supported  with>fnih  aid,  ihqf  we^lb-tiMtiMft 
coorageons,  atid'to^hat  degree,  thai  dtey  left  the  tidb  ntttf  faHftH 
and  leaped  out  upon  the  bridges  to  oppose  the  assailants,  ttd^tllll  ' 

•  to  hand,  fought  smartly  m  defence  of  jfliA'  eonntiy.*  Thf  ta'wftfVimm 
who,  with  axes, cut  oflF whole  Hoibs 'stoneo  of  «H ^thttt wme^ialMr 
way.  For,  among  the  rest,  there  was  OM'  AdmetOM^^^liltalfedMili 
captain,  a  stioog  and  vaKant  man^  %rhoi  ib  **  Mat-if 'Htf'CiMAk 

.with  the  Tyriansy  had  his  head^loren  in  the  mJJMJa  wWrajj^famjart! 

•soperished.  '-■.  w  v^-iswA    ' 

Alezander/seeing  that  the  Tjvians  had  the  best  of  i^-lNA  1i||jlk 

: aM>roachiog,  sounded  a  letreat.  AM,  faideed,«t  ftrat  hetaHiatglfhi 
of  ratting  the  siege,  and  going  on  with  his  expeditiort'tito'Ugy^ 

^But  he  presently  changed  hU  mind^looliing  upon  has  base  itfll  &j^ 

•bonoumble  to  giTe^upall  the  glory  to  thel>riinar«lid'ilhnMdtfHb 
set  himself  again  to  carry  on  the  siege,  though  he^had'orily  rtiM'i  lifMl ' 
friends  called  Amyntas,  the  brother  of  Andromenes^  wbo^ipprtiull  of 

•  his  resolution.  '-<         tw  i:  jii  c  uiuiA  itua 

Having,  therefore,  enoonii^d  the  Maeedonkns  'to  >MlAi  ^AiM, 
.aud  furnuhed  his  fleet  with  all  tlnngs  neetisiiyi  h^btiiiiWlfcMUl^f 
both  by  sea  and  kndt  and,  observingltbat  that  part  of wirsttlMr 
the  arsenal  was  weaker  than  ^  rest^he  bmiight  aH^his  |tfiiij 
(which  carried  his  best  engines),  chained  Ariit  togethlw^W^lliirilliiil, 
There  he  attempted  an  act  which  the  beholden  uimM^IM^Hli, 
though  they  saw  it  with  their  eyes.  For  he  cast  a'|ilaailr««Ma  % 
wooden  tower,  with  one  end  upon  the  battiameBts  of  the  waHs/an*^ 
bridge^  and  by  this  himself  alone  mounted  the  rampart,  not  regaafing . 
any  danger,  nor  in  the  least  affirig^bted  with  the  violent  awaalta  off tha 
TyfiADs;  ^^U  in  the  view  of  that  army  which  liaidteonqnifodPilte 
Persians,  be  shewed  bis  own  pcTBOoal  valour,  and  eallcd^to  ffawMhce* 
donians  to  follow  him,  and  was  the  first  tliat  came  hand  to  Indiidwidi 
the  enemy;  and,  killing  some  with  his  spear,  others  with  his  aWovd, 
.and  tumbling  down  many  with  the  boss  of  liis  buckle^  lie  thus  al* 
layed  the  courage  of  his  adversaries. 

lu  the  mean  time,  the  rams  battered  down  a  great  part  of  the  wall 
in  another  place.    Aud  row  .the  Macedoniatis  entered- through  the 


bmch  on  one  side,  and  Alexander  with  his  party  passed  over  the 
will  in  ftDother,  so  that  tlie  city  was  now  taken ;  yet  the  Tyrians 
Taibntly  exerted  themselves,  and,  encouraging  one  another,  guarded 
Mtti  blocked  op  all  the  narrow  passes,  and  fought  it  out  to  the  last 
man,  ioaomuch  that  above  seven  thousand  were  cut  in  pieces  upon 
the  place.  The  Icing  made  all  the  women  and  children  slaves,  and 
bang  np  all  the  young  men  that  were  left,  to  the  number  of  two 
thoosand.  And  there  were  found  so  creat  a  number  of  captives,  that, 
ihoogli  the  greatest  part  of  the  inhabitants  were  trnnsportf  d  to  Car- 
fhiCV,  yet  the  remainder  amounted  to  thirteen  thousand.  Into  such 
great  miseries  fell  thcTyrius,  after  they  had  endured  a  siege  of  scvea 
■Kmths  with  more  obstinacy  than  prudence. 

Then  the  king  took  a%vuy  the  golden  chains  from  the  image  of 
Apollo,  and  caused  that  grK)  to  be  called  Apollo  Philaxnndrus*. 
When  he  had  ofiered  splendid  sacrifices  to  Hercules,  and  rewarded 
thoM  who  liad  signalized  their  valour,  he  honourably  buried  the  dead, 
and  made  one  Ballominus  king  of  Tyre.  But  it  ^ouid  be  a  thing 
jnsily  to  be  condemned  to  neglect  to  give  a  further  account  of  this 
man,  whose  advancement  and  wonderful  change  of  condition  was  so 
cxtraordiiaary. 

After  Alexander  had  gained  the  city,  Strato,  the  former  prince,  by 
I  of  his  faithfulness  to  Darius,  was  deprived  of  the  command: 
rhich  the  king  gave  power  and  liberty  to  Hephaestion  to  tiestov 
the  kingdom  of  Tyre  upon  which  of  his  friends  he  pleased.  Hephscs- 
tioo  hereufion,  being  inclined  to  gratify  one  who  hud  courteously  en- 
tntained  him,  resolved  to  invest  him  with  the  principality  of  Tyre; 
hot  he,  though  he  was  very  rich  and  honourable,  above  the  rest  of 
hs  fellow-citi/ens,  yet  (because  he  was  nut  of  the  lineage  of  the 
ttDg»)  refu>ed  it.  Then  Hephxestion  wishid  him  to  name  some  one 
that  was  of  the  royal  blood;  he  thereupon  told  him  of  one  who  was 
i  ferr  pmdcut  and  good  man,  but  extremely  |KX)r.  Heph<f*stion 
hcrenpon  granted  the  principality  to  htm,  and  the  oHicer  assigned  for 
that  purpose  was  sent  away  with  the  royal  robes,  and  found  him  in 
in  orchard,  in  rags,  drawing  of  water  for  hi:»  hiie.  Having  intumicd 
him  of  the  change  and  alteration  in  his  cundtiion,  he  clothed  him 
with  the  robe  and  other  ornannMits  becoming  his  state  ami  di^^niity, 
and  then  introduced  him  into  the  foium,  and  there  declared  hiin 
kiugofTyre.  Which  unexpected  and  wonderful  occuirence  was  very 
acceptable  Vj  the  people. 

Thus  he  obtained  the  kingdom,  and  was  ever  after  a  most  fiiitliful 
friend  to  Alexander,  and  an  example  to  all  who  are  unacquainted  with 

*   1  bat  »,  •  loTrr  of  Alexander. 


19S  JMODOEUft  WWI#8. 


tbe  aaddeo  and  nurious  turaa  (rf  fortune  in  this  wwU*.  Hatiiigi 

fcUned  the  acts  of  Atesandq',  we  shaU  toni  taaflUnKelsiDirlteM^  , 

,'  lpEurope,Agisykiiig€rflAced«iiH»^ha?iDgenlMW^ 

aBerccnaries  who  escaped  from  the  iMttle  at  Uma^  h^gM  aqnie  mm 

diBturbances  ia  favour  of  Daiios;  for^  having  received  fimn  jhiei  a 

(rcat  sum  of  mooey  aad  a  fleet,  he  sailed.iataC|ete^WMi|^JH|faoif|f 

aaany  towns  there,  he  forced  them  to  side  with  the  Pepjpip, ;  .|ftffi|i 

tas  likewise,  an  exile  of  Macedonia,  who  had  fled  taDlvppSAa 

with  the  Persians  in  Cilicia,  escaping  with  i 

ant  of  the  battle  of  Issus,  passed  over  to  TripoBs, ».] 

^leauuader's  arrival;,  and  there  he  aiade  choice  miiffsot  ao>.pamr^, 

the  navy  as  would  transport  his  soldiers^  aod  bori^.thenil..  ^Iffitl^ 

these  he  sailed  to  Cyprus,  and  from  thence,  being  well  fiirafslis4;intii 

soldiers  and  shipping,  be  passed  over  to  Peloamiy.eiid,  hpfvj^fteppb 

feted  the  city^  he  pretended  tbatDariua  had  seitf  bmtt».t|e<biirig» 

neral,  because  the  late  governor  of  E|gypt  was  killed  in  tht.hattliljli 

Cilicia.    Thence  he  sailed  to  Memphis,  and  fouted  the  jnhphUtilP 

in  a  field-fight  near  to  the  city;  who  not  loi^;  after  |sU  i 

soldiers,  straggling  out  of  the  town,  and  pinndering  the  < 

they  were  in  that  disorder,  carrying  away  what  they  coiild.fSVMlr^  * 

Amyntas  and  evcfy  man  with  him. 

Id  this  manner  Amyntas,  as  he  was  prqectip^.  grciit  i 
suddenly  disappointed,  and  lost  his  life.  So  likewise  other 
|iod  captains  of  the  army  that  survived  the  battle . of  bsqs  rtill  adl^w^ 
to  the  Persian  interest :  for  some  secured  ^([ivenieni(  citieB  and  gpqr 
sons  for  Darius,  and  others  procured  severs}  provinces  to  rafse  solJiepn 
for  him,  and  provide  oth^r  things  necessary,  as  thepiesfiiit  eajgqifiy 
of  afiairsi  required.  ,j 

In  the  mean  time,  the  general  senate  of  Greece  made  a  decfee,Mit 
send  fifteen  ambassi|dofs  to  present  e  gfdden  crown.to  AlewDilcra.fli 
congratulation  of  his  victory  at  Issus,  who  was  at  tlu^t  tim^  hfsi^i^ 
Gaza,  a  garri^n  qf  the  Persians^i  which  he  tock  by  assaultgi  i^ftWiift 
two  months  siege* 


fik^.  ft  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  I99 


CflAP.  V. 

Maamder  tnakes  u  journey  to  tie  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammatu 
He  ispreaemM  by  the  Cyreneane.  The  description  of  the  place 
about  the  temple.  The  wonderful  properties  of  the  fimntaim 
SoUs.     The  bmlding  of  Aleximdria.     Alexander's  answer  to 

.  J}arius*s  mnbassadors.  Alexander  passes  over  the  river  Tigris 
with  great  hazard.    The  preparationa  on  both  sides  for  battle^ 

■  T%e  Persiams  routed  at  the  famous  battle  at  Arbeku 

ARISTOPHANES  was  now  chief  governor  of  Athens,  aodSparsufl 
Posthumins  and  Titus  Viturtas  were  invested  with  the  dignitj  of 
consuls  at  Rome,  when  Alexander^  after  the  taking  of  Gasa,  sent 
Amyntas  with  ten  sail  into  Macedonia,  with  orders  to  enlist  the 
stoutest  of  the  young  men  for  soldiers.  And,  in  the  mean  time,  he 
b'imself  marched  forward  with  tlie  whole  army  towards  Egypt,  and^ 
eomtng  there,  all  the  cities  submitted  to  him  without  fighting* 
For,  because  the  Persians  had  wickedly  violated  their  holy  rites,  and 
domineered  imperiously  over  them,  they  most  iiillingly  received  the 
Macedonians* 

*  Having  settled  his  aCiirs  in  E^3rpt,  he  undertook  a  journey  to  the 
temple  of  Ammon,  to  consult  with  the  oracle  there.  When  he  was 
in  the  midst  of  his  journey,  he  was  met  by  the  ambassadors  of  Cy- 
rene,  presenting  him  with  a  crown  and  other  rich  gifts,  among  which 
were  three  hundred  war-horses,  and  five  of  the  best  chariots,  drawn 
by  four  horses  each.  These  he  accepted,  and  made  a  league  of  peace 
and  amity  with  then;  and  then,  with  those  that  attended  him,  went 
forward  in  his  journey  to  the  temple.  When  they  came  to  the 
parched  and  dry  deserts,  (for  they  had  taken  water  along  with  them), 
diey  passed  through  a  region  which  was  notliing  but  heaps  of 
sand.  After  the  fourth  day  their  water  was  spent,  so  that  they  were 
in  an  extremity  of  distress.  While  they  were  in  this  great  per- 
plexity, and  knew  not  what  to  resolve,  a  sudden  and  unexpected 
shower  of  rain  then  falling,  supplied  all  their  present  necessities^ 
which  unexpected  preservation  they  imputed  to  the  kindness  and 
providence  of  the  gods. 

Having  furnished  themsehcies  out  of  a  valley  with  as  much  water 
as  was  sufficient  for  four  days,  in  that  time  they  passed  over  this 
dire  and  scorching  desert ;  but,  in  regard  there  was  no  visible  path, 
by  reason  of  the  great  heaps  of  sand,  those  who  led  the  way  told 


fiOO  DioDORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  XFIf^ 

the  king  that  there  were  crows,  which^  by  their  croaking  at  the  right 
hand,  directed  them  the  way  to  the  temple;  which  the  king  taking 
as  a  happy  omen,  and  thereupon  concluding  that  his  coming  was 
'  grateful  and  acceptable  to  the  gods,  he  went  forward  on  his  joumej 
with  more  cheerfulness.  The  next  place  he  came  to  was  called  the 
Bitter  Pond :  having  travelled  thence  a  hundred  furlongs,  he  paned 
by  the  cities  of  Ammon^  and  in  one  day's  journey  more  cane  to  the 
grove  of  the  god. 

The  scite  of  the  temple  is  surrounded  with  a  vast  dry  and  aaody 
desert,  waste  and  untilied ;  but  the  grove  itself  is  fifty  furlongs  broad, 
and  as  many  long,  full  of  pleasant  fountains,  and  watered  with  nm- 
ning  streams,  richly  planted  with  all  sorts  of  trees,  most  of  them 
bearing  fruit. 

The  temperature  of  the  air  is  a  constant  spring.  And,  tboagfa  all 
the  places  round  it  are  dry  and  scorching,  yet  to  all  that  live  there 
the  heavens  afford  a  most  healthful  climate.  It  is  reported  that  thia 
temple  was  built  by  Danaus  the  Egyptian. 

Towards  the  east  and  west  part  of  this  sacred  ground  the  Ethio^ 
pians  inhabit;  towards  the  north  the  Numidians,  a  people  of  Africa; 
and  towards  the  south  the  Nasamenes.  The  Ammoni,  the  inha-^ 
bitants  of  the  sacred  grove,  live  in  villages.  In  the  middle  of  the 
grove  is  a  castle  fortified  with  a  treble  wall:  within  the  first  stands 
the  palace  of  the  antient  kings;  within  the  other  was  the  Gyae- 
csum,  where  were  the  apartments  for  the  wives,  children,  and  kin- 
dred of  the  prince,  and  stood  as  a  common  fortress  and  guard  to  the 
whole  place;  and  lastly,  the  temple  itself,  and  the  sacred  lavrr, 
wherein  they  washed  the  sacrifices.  Within  the  third,  were  the 
lodgings  of  the  archers  and  darters,  and  guard-houses  of  those  who 
attend  as  guards  upon  the  prince  when  he  walks  abroad.  Not  tu 
from  the  castle,  out  of  the  walls,  stands  another  temple  of  Amittoiiy 
shaded  round  with  many  fruit-trees;  next  to  which  is  a  ibantain^ 
called  Solis,  from  the  natural  effects  of  it:  for  the  water  diflers  in  its 
temper,  according  to  the  several  hours  of  the  day.  For,  about  son- 
lising  it  Is  luke-warm;  afterwards,  as  the  day  comes  on,  it  grews 
colder  and  colder  every  hour,  till  noon,  at  which  time  it  is  at  the 
coldest ;  and  thenceforward,  till  evening,  the  cold  abates  by  degrees; 
and,  when  night  approaches,  it  waxes  liot  again,  and  increases  by 
little  and  little  till  midnight,  at  which  time  it  boils,  through  intense* 
ness  of  heat.  From  that  time  it  cools  by  degrees,  till  sun-risiog^ 
and  then  is  luko-warm  again,  as  it  was  before. 

The  image  of  the  god  is  adorned  in  every  part  with  emeralds  and 
other  precious  stones,  and  delivers  his  oracles  in  a  singular  and  un- 
usual way:   for  he  i>  carried  about  in  a  golden  ship  by  fourscora 


Chap.  V.  DiODORUs  sicuLUS,  sol 


priests,  who  make  to  that  place  whither  the  god  by  a  nod  of  his  head 
directs  them. 

There  follows  a  great  maltitude  of  matrons  and  young  virgins, 
singiiig  Pffians  ail  the  way  as  they  go,  and  setting  forth  the  praises  of 
the  idol,  in  songs  composed  after  the  style  and  custom  of  their  own 
country. 

When  Alexander  was  introduced  by  the  priests  into  the  temple, 
and  saw  the  god,  one  of  the  old  prophets  addressed  himself  to  him, 
and  said.^*^  God  save  thee,  my  son,  and  this  title  take  along  with 
thee  from  the  god  himself."  To  whom  he  made  answer ^^  I  ac- 
cept it,  my  father,  and  if  you  will  make  me  lord  of  the  whole  world, 
your  SOD  1  will  ever  be  called.''  Upon  which  the  priest  approached 
near  tlie  altar;  and  when  the  men,  (who  according  to  custom  lifted  up 
the  image),  at  the  uttering  of  some  words  as  signs  for  that  purpose, 

moved  forward,  the  priest  answered ^^  That  the  god  would  certainly 

bestow  upon  him  what  he  had  desired."  Thi&  was  very  acceptable 
to  Alexander. 

But  then  he  further  said "  I  entreat  thee,  O  God,  that  thou 

wouUst  let  me  know  what  I  have  yet  to  inquire,  and  that  Is,  whether 
I  have  executed  justice  upon  all  my  father's  murderers,  or  whether  any 
have  escaped?''  At  which  the  oracle  cried  out — ^<  Express  thyself 
better,  for  no  mortal  can  kill  tliy  father,  but  all  the  murderers  of 
Philip  have  suffered  just  punishment." 

He  added  further — '^  Tliat  his  wonderful  successes  and  prosperous 
achievements,  were  evidences  of  his  divine  birth:  for,  as  he  was 
never  yet  overcome  by  any,  so  he  should  be  ever  victorious  for  the 
time  to  come/' 

Alexander,  being  greatly  pleased  with  these  answers,  after  he  had 
bestowed  many  rich  and  stately  gifts  upon  the  oracle,  returned  back 
on  his  way  for  Egypt,  where  he  intended  to  build  a  great  city.  In 
order  whereunto,  wlien  he  came  there,  he  directed  the  overseers  of 
this  work  to  build  it  between  the  marshes  and  the  sea,  and  measured 
out  tlie  ground  himself,  and  marked  out  the  streets,  and  called  it 
Alexandria,  after  his  own  name.  It  had  a  very  commodious  situa- 
tion, being  near  to  the  haven  of  Pharos^.  He  ordered  and  con- 
trived the  streets  with  that  prudence  as  that  the  Etesian  winds 
should,  by  their  comfortable  gales,  refresh  all  parts  of  the  city:  for 
these  so  cool  the  air  by  their  breezes  from  the  great  seaf,  that  the 
inhabitants,  by  so  welcome  and  delightful  a  temperature  of  the  heat, 
are  very  healthy.     He  likewise  drew  a  large  and  wonderfully  strong 

*  Ao  island  near  Egjpt,  now  joined  to  Alexandria  by  a  brl(jgf*«  though  formerly  a 
da;j's  sail,  as  Honer  says. 

t  The  Mediterranean. 

Vol.  2.  No.  42,  J>p 


802  DI0D0RU9  SICULUS-  Book  XFIL 

wall  round  tlie  city;  and,  inasmuch  as  it  lay  between  a  large  pond  on 
the  one  side,  and  the  sea  on  the  other,  there  were  but  two  oanoir 
ways  and  passes  by  laud  to  h;  so  that  it  was  easily  defended  by  a 
small  guard.  The  city  was  in  form  like  unto  a  soldier's  coat^  one 
large  atid  beautifully^buiit  street  running  almost  ihrough  the  middle 
of  the  town,  in  length  from  gate  to  gate  forty  furlongs,  in  breadth  an 
hundred  feet,  adorned  with  most  stately  structures,  both  of  temples 
and  private  houses.  Alexander  likewise  built  a  large  and  stately 
palace,  of  most  admirable  workmanship;  and  not  only  Alexander^ 
but  all  the  succeeding  kings  of  Egypt  from  time  to  time,  to  our  pre- 
sent age,  have  enlarged  this  palace  with  most  costly  and  sumptuous 
buildings.  The  city  likewise  itself  has  been  enlarged  in  after  times; 
so  that  by  many  it  is  reported  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  noble 
cities  in  the  world ;  for  beauty,  rich  revenues,  and  plentiful  provision  of 
all  things  for  the  comfortable  support  of  roan^s  life,  far  excelling  aH 
others;  and  far  more  populous  than  any  other:  for,  when  I  was  la 
Egypt,  I  was  informed  by  them  that  kept  the  rolls  of  the  inhabitants.^ 
That  there  were  above  three  hundred  thousand  freemen  who  inhabited 
theire,  and  that  the  king  received  above  six  thousand  talents  out  of 
the  yearly  revenues  of  Egypt.  But,  when  the  king  bad  appointed 
some  of  his  friends  to  oversee  and  take  care  of  the  building  of  Alex* 
andria,  and  had  settled  all  the  afiairs  of  Egypt,  he  returned  with  bis 
army  into  Syria. 

As  soon  as  Darius  had  intelligence  of  his  coming,  he  got  all  his 
forces  together,  and  prepared  all  things  necessary  in  order  to  fight 
him :  for  he  ordered  the  swords  and  lances  to  be  made  much  longer, 
thinking  by  that  advantage  Alexander  gained  the  victory  in  Cilicia. 
He  provided,  likewise,  two  hundred  hooked  chariots,  dn^wn  by  four 
horses  each,  so  contrived  as  to  strike  terror  into  the  hcaits  of  his 
enemies:  for  in  every  one  of  them,  on  both  sides  the  horses  which 
drew  the  chariots  by  iron  chains,  darts  of  three  spans  long  were  fixed 
in  the  ycaks,vvith  their  points  full  in  the  faces  of  the  enemy.  Upon 
the  Irjwer  i>arts  of  the  axle-trees  were  two  others  fastened  exactly  a^ 
those  before,  pointing  into  the  faces  of  the  enemy,  but  longer  and 
broader;  and  at  the  top  of  them  were  fixed  sharp  hooks.  Having 
completely  furnisJicd  and  set  forth  his  army,  with  glittering  arms  and 
stout  commanders,  he  marched  from  Babylon  with  eight  hundred 
thousand  foot,  and  no  less  than  two  hundred  thousand  horse.  In  hif 
march,  the  Tigris  was  on  his  right,  and  the  Euphrates  on  his  left  hand; 
where  he  passed  through  a  very  rich  country,  abounding  in  forage 
for  his  liorse,  and  supplying  s.ufhcient  provision  of  all  things  for  bia 
ftoldieis. 

He  made  all  the  haste  he  could  to  reach  Nlneveb>  there  to  fight 


Chap.  K  DIODORUS  SICUIUS.  «03 

the  enemy,  because  it  was  a  large  and  champaign  country,  conveni- 
ent for  the  drawing  out  of  so  great  an  army.  When  he  came  to  a 
village  called  Arbela,  he  there  encamped,  and  every  day  drew  up  his 
army  in  battalia,  and  trained  and  exercised  them ;  for  he  was  much 
afraid  lest  among  so  many  nations^  differing  in  language  one  from 
another,  there  should  be  nothing  but  tumult  and  confusion  in  the 
heat  of  the  fight.  He  had,  indeed,  but  lately  before  sent  ambassa- 
dors to  Alexander,  to  treat  upon  terms  of  peace,  and  had  offered  to 
him  all  the  countries  lying  within  the  river  Halys,  and  two  thousand 
taleiks  of  silver;  and  now  he  sent  others  to  him,  m\xi:\\  commending 
him  for  his  generous  and  honourable  usage  of  his  mother  and  the 
rest  of  the  captives,  and  desired  to  make  peace  with  him,  and  offered 
all  the  land^  lying  within  the  river  Euphrates,  with  three  thousand 
talents  of  silver,  and  one  of  his  daughters  in  marriage;  and  further 

promised ^Tiiat  if  he  would  be  content  to  be  his  son^in^^law,  he 

should  be  joint  partner  with  him  in  the  kingdom. 

Alexander  imparted  all  these  proposals,  offered  to  Kim  by  Darius, 
to  his  friends,  wliom  he  called  together  for  that  purpose,  and  wished 
tbem  freely  to  deliver  their  opinions  in  this  matter.  When  none 
durst  speak  their  minds  in  a  business  of  such  great  importance.  Par- 

menio  stood  up,  and  said ^'  If  I  were  Alexander,  I  would  accept  of 

the  terms  offered,  and  make  peace.''  To  whom  Alexander  replied... 
**  And  if  I  were  Parmenio,  I  would  do  the  same/*  And  so,  uttering 
several  other  words  manifesting  a  greatness  and  nobleness  of  mind, 
he  rejected  the  conditions  offered  by  the  Persians;  and,  preferring 
honour  before  profit  or  other  advantage,  he  spoke  to  the  ambassadors 
in  this  manner^'  As  two  suns  in  the  heaven  would  disorder  the 
course  of  the  universe,  so  two  kings  reigning  together  upon  earth 
would  turn  all  into  tumult  and  confusion/'  Therefore  he  com- 
manded them  to  tell  Darius ^That  if  he  affected  the  superiority,  then 

to  come  and  try  it  out  with  him  for  the  whole  empire  by  the  sword; 
but,  if  he  preferred  wealth  and  ease  before  honour,  that  then  he 
should  submit  to  Alexander;  and  so  he  might  reign  over  others  as  a 
king,  but  yet  receive  his  kingdom  at  the  haqds  v)f  Alexander,  as  a  fruit 
of  his  bounty. 

Having  said  this,  he  presently  after  broke  up  the  assembly,  and 
marched  with  his  army  towards  tlie  enemy's  camp.  In  the  mean 
time  the  wife  of  Darius  died,  and  Alexander  buried  her  honourably 
according  to  her  quality.  When  Darius  received  Alexander's  answer, 
he  was  out  of  all  hopes  of  putting  an  end  to  the  war  by  letters  and 
messages,  and  therefore  he  trained  his  soldiers  every  day,  thereby 
making  them  more  ready  and  willing  to  observe  all  words  of  commaDd 
nrhciiCver  they  hb'Juld  engage, 


204  DIO0ORUS  SICULIT9.  Book  XFIL 

In  the  mean  while  he  sent  Mazseus,  one  of  his  faithful  friends, 
ivlth  a  batialion  of  stout  men  to  guard  the  passage  over  the  river 
Tigris^  and  secure  the  ford.  Others  he  commanded  to  bum  up  all 
X\\^  countiy  through  whicii  the  enemy  was  to  pass;  for  he  resolved 
to  make  use  of  the  river  as  a  defence  and  bulwark  against  the  enemy's 
approach. 

But  Mazaeus  observing  that  the  river  was  not  passable,  both  by 
reason  of  its  depth,  and  swiftness  of  its  stream,  waved  the  guarding 
of  it,  and  e/npL'yed  himself  in  wasting  and  destroying  the  country; 
conducting  that  when  that  was  done,  the  enemy  could  not  pass  that 
way  tlirough  want  of  provisions. 

Alexander,  when  h-  came  to  the  river  Tigris,  (being  informed  by 
the  inhabitants  where  the  ford  lay),  passed  his  army  over,  but  with 
very  great  toil  and  extreme  hazard;  for  the  water  came  up  above 
their  breasts,  and  several  were  taken  off  their  feet,  and  hurried  away 
by  the  violence  of  the  stream;  many  others,  likewise,  were  borne 
away,  and  perished  through  the  rapid  course  of  the  water,  involving 
itself  within  their  arms.  Alexander,  to  withstand  the  violence  of 
the  water,  ordi  red  his  men  to  stand  close  in  a  body  together,  like  a 
rampie:  against  the  stream  :  by  this  means  they  got  safe  over;  and 
after  so  much  danger  and  difficulty,  he  permitted  them  to  refresh 
themselves  fv)r<  ne  day.  The  next  day  he  marched  in  battalb  against 
the  enemy,  and  at  length  eneamped  near  to  them.  But  while  he 
revolved  in  his  mind  the  vast  number  of  the  Persian  army,  and  what 
gieat  dijlieulties  he  had  to  cepe  with,  and  that  now  all  lay  at  stake, 
he  s[)ont  ail  timt  night  in  anxious  thoughts  concerning  the  event. 
Bui  he  fell  into  so  deep  a  sleep  about  the  morning  watch,  that  though 
the  stin  was  now  up,  yet  he  could  not  be  awaked.  His  friends  at  the 
first  were  very  glad  of  it,  as  jud;^ing  the  longer  he  rested  the  more 
lively  he  would  be,  and  so  more  able  to  bear  the  fatigues  of  the  day. 
But  time  drawing  far  on,  and  the  king  still  fast  asleep,  Parmenio,the 
oldest  of  the  commanders,  gave  command  through  the  army  to  pre- 
pare for  an  engagement.  The  king  sleeping  still,  some  of  his  friends 
stept  in  to  him,  and  had  much  ado  to  awake  him.  While  all  won- 
dered at  a  thing  so  unusual,  and  expected  to  hear  the  cause  from 
himself,  "  Now,"  says  Alexander,  "  I  am  free  from  all  fear  and  care 
concerning  Darius,  who  has  brought  his  whole  strength  together  into 
one  place ;  for  by  one  day's  battle  for  the  trial  of  all,  I  shall  be  quit 
and  discharged  of  all  my  hazards  and  toils  for  the  time  to  come* 
Upon  which,  without  any  delay,  he  made  a  speech  to  encourage  his 
officers  to  pluck  up  their  spirits,  and  with  courageous  hearts  to  en- 
counter all  the  dangers  that  were  before  them.  Upon  which  he 
marched  in  battalia  against  the  barbarians^  with  the  horse  in  front  of 


Chap.  V.  DTODORUS  sicutus.  SOI 

bis  «nny.  The  right  wing  was  commanded  by  Clitas,  surnamed 
Niger,  wherein  were  other  special  friends  under  the  command  of 
Phtlotas,  tlie  son  of  Parmenio,  supported  by  seven  other  regiments 
of  horse  under  the  same  commander.  After  them  were  placed  the 
battalion  of  foot  called  Argyraspides^,  glittering  in  their  arms,  (most 
excellent  soldiers),  led  by  Nicanor  the  son  of  Parmenio;  to  support 
them  he  placed  next  the  squadrons  of  Elimeaf,  whose  leader  was 
Cenus.  In  the  next  squadron  stood  the  Oresteans  and  Lyncestians, 
whose  captain  was  Perdiccas;  next  to  these  was  Meleager  with  hb 
^uadron;  and  after  him  Polysperchon  commanded  the  Stympha- 
lians;  and  next  to  him  Philip  the  son  of  Balacrus  commanded  another 
squadron;  and  after  him  Craterus.  To  the  squadrons  of  horse 
before-mentioned  were  joined,  as  auxiliaries,  those  from  Peloponnesus 
and  Achaia,  together  with  the  Piithiots,  Malians,  Locrians,  and 
Phocians,  commanded  by  Erigyus  of  Mitylene.  After  these  were 
placed  the  Tliessalians,  (for  valour  and  horsemanship  far  beyond  all 
the  rest),  whose  commander  was  Philip.  Next  to  these  he  drew  up 
the  archers  from  Crete,  and  the  mercenaries  from  Achaia. 

Both  wings  were  drawn  up  into  the  form  of  an  half  moon,  that 
the  Macedonians  might  not  be  hemmed  in  by  the  multitude  of  the 
Persians.  The  king  provided  against  the  hooked  chariots,  that  they 
might  not  break  in  upon  them,  by  this  contrivance:  he  commanded 
the  foot,  tliat  when  the  chariots  advanced  near  in  their  career,  they 
should  strike  with  their  javelins  upon  their  shields  locked  one  into 
another,  that  the  horses,  frightened  with  the  noise,  might  start  back; 
bot  that  if  they  still  pressed  forward,  in  order  to  force  their  way,  that 
then  they  should  open,  that  so  they  might  shun  them  without  any 
prejudice.  He  himseff  took  upon  him  the  command  of  the  right  wing, 
and  drawing  up  in  au  oblique  line^  resolved  to  venture  himself  wher- 
ever there  was  any  danger. 

Darius  drew  up  his  army  according  to  the  distinction  of  the  several' 
nations,  and  advanced  against  the  enemy  in  that  wing  opposite  to 
Alexander.  And  now  both  armies  drew  near  one  to  another,  and  the 
trumpets  on  both  sides  gave  the  signal  for  battle,  and  the  soldiers 
made  at  one  another  with  a  great  shout,  and  forthwith  the  hooked 
chariots  rushing  forward  with  a  mighty  force,  greatly  amazed  and 
terrified  the  Macedonians.  For  Mazaeus,  the  general  of  the  liorse^ 
charging  with  a  great  body  close  after  the  chariots,  caused  them  ta 
be  more  terrible.  In  the  midst  of  the  action  a  mighty  crash  and  ■ 
dreadful  noise  was  made  on  a  sudden  by  the  foot  soldiers  striking 
with  their  javelins  upon  their  bucklers,  as  the  king  had  commanded  j; 

*  SUf  er  shields,  t  Elimea,  a  city  of  Maccdtmia. 


S06  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  Book  XFIL 


tipon  which  many  of  the  chariots  (through  the  fright  of  the  horses) 
were  turned  aside,  and  the  horses  being  altogetlier  ungovernatile^ 
made  away  back  again  into  the  Persian  army;  most  of  the  rest  of  the 
diariots  breaking  in  among  the  foot,  by  opening  to  make  way,  were 
eitlier  quite  destroyed  by  darts  and  arrows,  or  diverted.  Some  indeed 
fi)rced  their  way  with  that  violence,  that  with  their  hooks  they  bore 
down  all  before  them,  and  many  perished  by  several  sorts  of  deadly 
wounds.  For  such  was  the  force  and  violence,  together  with  the 
s}yarpness  of  the  hooked  scythes  contrived  for  destruction,  that  many 
had  their  arms  with  their  shields  in  their  hands  cut  off;  acid  not  & 
few  had  their  heads  so  suddenly  sheared  off,  that  they  tumbled  to  the 
ground,  with  their  eyes  open,  and  their  countenances  the  same  as 
when  they  were  alive.  Some  were  so  mortally  gashed,  and  cut 
tiirough  their  sides,  that  they  forthwith  fell  down  dead. 

When  the  armies  came  closer  together,  and  all  their  darts  and 
arrows,  both  from  their  bows  and  slings,  and  those  cast  by  the  handj 
were  spent,  they  fell  to  it  hand  to  hand.    The  first  charge  was  by 
the  horse,  the  Macedonians  being  in  the  right  wing  opposite  to  Da^ 
tins,  who  commanded  the  left  of  the  Persians,  in  which  were  his 
kindred  and  near  relations.     For  there  was  a  rcgimentof  a  thousand 
horse,  composed  only  of  such  as  were  in  the  greatest  reputation  and 
account  for  their  valour  and  special  love  to  the  king.    These  having 
him  a  spectator  of  their  valour,  readily  and  cheerfully  received  all  the 
darts  that  were  cast  at  the  king.    They  were  seconded  by  the  Mele- 
phoiians,  who  were  numerous  and  stout  men,  and  with  them  were 
joined  tlie  Mardians  and  Cissians,  men  admired  for  their  courage^ 
and  the  bulk  of  their  bodies.     Besides  these,  there  were  those  of  the 
king's  household,  and  some  of  the  stoutest  of  th^  Indians.     All  these 
made  a  fierce  charge  with  a  great  shout  upon  the  Macedonians,  wha 
were  put  very  hard  to  it  by  reason  of  their  multitude.    Mazseus^ 
likewise,  in  the  right  wing,  with  a  brave  body  of  hors^  charged  with 
tliat  briskness  that  he  laid  many  at  his  feet  at  the  first  onset.    TheQ. 
lie  ordered  two  thousand  Cadusian  horse,  and  a  thousand  more  of  the. 
Scythians,  to  take  a  compass  round  the  enemy's  wings,  and  to  break 
in  upon  the  trenches  that  defended  their  carriages;  who  presently 
thereupon  put  in  execution  what  they  were  commanded.    Tliaa 
having  forced  into  the  Macedonian  camp,  some  of  the  prisoners 
caught  up  arms  and  joined  with  the  Scythians,  and  rifled  the  car«» 
riages.    Upon  which,  through  the  suddenness  of  the  surprise,  a  great 
noise  and  clamour  arose  throughout  the  whole  camp.    Then  other 
prisoners  ran  in  to  the  barbarians.     But  Sisygambis,  the  mother  of 
Darius,  would  not  stir,  though  she  was  moved  to  it,  but  with  a  kind 
of  affectionate  regard  to  her  condition,  continued  in  the  same  plac^^ 


Chap,  f^  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  SO/ 

not  trusting  to  the  uncertain  turns  of  fortune,  nor  judging  it  fit  aiwl 
honourable  to  manifest  so  much  ingratitude  .towards  Alexandef. 
The  Scythians  having  at  length  rifled  most  of  the  carriages,  returned 
to  Mazffius,  and  gave  him  an  account  of  the  happy  success.  With 
the  like  good  fortune  that  body  of  horse  with  Darius  put  the  Mace* 
donians  (overpowered  with  numbers)  to  flight.  While  the  victory 
jeemed  thus  to  incline  to  the  Pei^ians  by  this  second  saccess,  Akx« 
ander  making  it  his  ohly  business  with  all  possible  speed  to  rally  his 
broken  forces,  and  to  repair  bis  losses,  charged  Darius  with  his  own 
brigade^  and  some  others  ;Of  the  bravest  horse  in  the  array,  Tbe 
Persian  king  received  the  enemy's  charge  with  great  resolution,  and 
,  fgliting  mounted  upon  his  chariot,  despatched  many  with  darts  that 
assaulted  him ;  neither  were  they  few  that  defended  him.  And  while 
both  kings  were  eager  to  destroy  each  other,  Alexander,  in  throwing 
a  dart  at  Darius,  missed  him,  but  killed  his  chariot-driver.  Upoa 
which  those  about  the  king  that  were  at  some  distance  set  up  a  great 
cry,  believing  tliat  the  king  was  killed;  and  forthwith  betook  them* 
selves  to  flight,  and  then  the  next  to  them  followed.  Presently  the 
troops  next  to  Darius  himself  gave  ground  by  degrees,  till  such  time 
as  be  was  left  naked  on  one  side;  and  then  lie  himself  in  a  great 
consternation  made  away  with  all  speed.  The  Persians  being  thus 
dispersed,  the  horse  in  their  flight  raised  so  great  a  cloud  of  duf^t, 
that  Alexander  and  his  men,  who  pursued  close  after  the  enemy, 
could  not  see  which  way  Darius  fled.  Nothing  was  heard  but  the 
groans  of  dying  men,  the  trampling  of  horses,  and  continual  noise 
and  lashing  of  whips.  In  the  mean  time  Mazseus  in  the  right 
wing  having  the  *  bravest  and  stoutest  horse  of  any  of  tlie  Per- 
sians, pressed  grievously  upon  those  troops  with  whom  he  was 
eogaged.  So  that  though  Parmeniq  with  the  Thessalian  horse,  and 
others  joined  with  them,  were  greatl^  distressed,  yet  he  bore  tlie 
hrunt  for  some  time,  and  at  first  through  his  own  valour,  and  the 
bravery  of  the  Thessalian  horse,  worsted  the  Persians;  but  the  horse 
with  Mazaeus,  by  their  number  bearing  down  the  other,  that  wing  of 
tbe  Macedonians  was  quite  routed,  so  that  a  great  slaughter  was  made, 
and  there  was  now  no  standing  before  the  barbarians.  Parmenio 
therefore  sent  horsemen  after  Alexander  to  entreat  his  assistance  with 
all  speed,  wlio  liastened  to  execute  the  orders  and  command  given: 
but  when  they  heard  that  a  great  part  of  the  army  liad  fled,  they  re- 
turned without  going  farther.  However,  Parmenio  bestirring  him- 
self, and  rallying  his  troops  as  well  as  he  could,  with  the  assistance 
of  the  Thessalian  horse  hewed  down  many  of  his  enemies,  and  at 
length,   with   much   difficulty,   put   the  barbarians  to  flight,  who 


f08  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  XVII. 

were  in  amazement  and  consternation  at  lieariog  that  Darius  bad 
fled. 

Darius  in  the  mean  time  being  an  expert  general,  and  helped  bjr 
the-tliick  cloud  of  dust,  took  not  his  course  strait  forward  like  the 
rest,  but  turned  a  different  way  $  and  so  being  not  discerned^  (bf 
reason  of  the  dust  rising  so  high),  escaped  clear  away,  and  brooght  aU 
those  that  went  with  him  safe  into  the  towns  and  villages  behind  Aft 
Macedonians. 

At  length  all  the  barbarians  taking  to  flight,  and  the  MaocdonlaBt 
killing  all  that  were  in  the  rear,  in  a  short  time  all  that  large  {Ada. 
was  covered  over  with  dead  carcases.  Tiiere  were  killed  ia  itSSf* 
battle,  of  the  barbarians,  horse  and  foot,  above  ninety  thousand  |Jd#^: 
the  Macedonians,  five  liundred  only,  but  great  multitudes  woundedt 
amongst  whom  Hephsestion,  one  of  the  bravest  of  Alexander's  ooai« 
manders,  and  captain  of  his  guard,  was  shot  through  the  arm  with  a 
dart.  Perdiccas,  Cenus,  Menidas,  and  some  others  likewise 
wounded.    And  this  was  the  issue  of  the  battle  at  Arbela, 


CHAP.  VI. 

The  Grecians  conspire  to  revolt.  Menmon  rebels  in  2%rae«; 
Antipater  marches  against  him.  The  LacediJetfumians  raise  am 
army;  arc  routed  by  Antipater,  and  Agis  their  king  killed* 

ARISTOPHON  was  at  that  time  lord  chancellor  of  Athens^  and 
Cneius  Domitius  and  Aulus  Cornelius  were  created  Roman  consals^ 
when  many  of  the  cities  of  Greece,  upon  the  news  of  the  victory  at 
Arbcla,  began  to  bestir  themselves  to  defend  their  antient  liberties, 
whilst  the  Persians  had  any  power  left  to  assist  them;  and  therefafe 
resolved  to  assist  Darius  with  money  to  raise  foreign  soldiers  from  all 
parts.  For  they  concluded  that  Alexander  durst  not  divide  his  army 
lest  he  should  disturb  them;  but  if  they  should  suffer  the  Persians  to 
be  destroyed,  they  were  not  able  of  themselves  to  defend  their 
liberties.  And  an  insurrection  iu  Thrace  encouraged  them  the  more 
to  revolt:  for  Memnon  being  sent  general  into  Thrace,  having  both 
courage  and  force  sufficient,  at  the  instigation  of  the  barbarians, 
rebelled,  and  with  a  great  army  now  appeared  in  open  war.  Upon 
which  Antipater  gathered  all  his  forces  together,  and  marched  through 


Ctiyi.  Vff-  SAOf^yvdt  sicyius*  a09 


Macedonia  into  Thrace^  against  Memnon.  Things  thus  falling  out, 
the  Lacedaemonians  judging  that  a  fair  opportunity  was  now  offered 
them  to  prepare  for  war,  solicited  the  Grecians  to  confederate  toge- 
ther for  their  remaining  liberties.  But  the  Athenians,  in  regard 
they  had  received  many  kindnesses  and  marks  of  honour  from  Alex- 
andeiy  beyond  all  the  rest  of  tht  dtiea,  continued  quiet  and  firm  iu 
tbrirdttly.  But  many  of  the  Pelo{ionnesians,  and  some  others, 
BDteied.  into  the  league,  and  emnoUed  their  names  as  soldiers  for  the 
WBOBf^  69  that,  oecordiog  as  £yery  city  was  able,  they  sent  foiih 
Ikit  jdboicfist  of  their  youth,  and  raised  an  army  of  twenty  thousand 
teiyU^  two  thousand  liiMrse.  Tlic  management  of  the  whole  war 
WriJeft  to  the  jjacedaea;iouians,  who  were  resolved  to  lay  all  at  stake, 
'  tnd  made  Agis  general.  Antipater  hearing  of  the  defection  of  tlic 
Ckveks,  composed  all  matters  relating  to  the  war  in  Thrace  as  well 
9$  \^  cp^ld^  Q^d  marched  with  all  his  forces  into  Greece,  .having  no 
1^  |]^D  ^rty  tbous^^  Greek  auidliaf ies  as  confederate^.  t)cre« 
llppn  a  great  .l^^atjtlf  ^^^A  fought,  wherein  l^g\&  (though  Jhe  behavej 
Uipsel^.wit^i  greaf:  valour  and  resi^lfUtion)  was  killed,  and  a^t  lengjtb 
the  jU^^^^^sBf^g^as,  Q^^v^g  3tpad  Xq  it  stoutly  for  ,a  lo^g  time)^ 
upon  t^^  confedierales  giving  groui^d,  ^ew^  retreated  toward^ 
Sfprtf .  T\^^  fell  ^  t^  |ya(;e(jbeaionians  aqd  their  cpufederates  ia 
thi^^tie,  <a|)oyi^  fiye  tl^^jusand  |threc  hundred:  of  those  with  Apti- 
pater  three  thousand  fiv^  hu^4f.eid* 

7|ief|S  wa^  one  thing  very  remarkable  concerning  the  d^^th  of 
A^.  Haying  fought  witjh  great  gallantry  and  resolution,  |ind  re** 
ceiye^  0)any  woun^,  \^  was  parried  off  by  the  soldiers  in  order  to 
be  brought  back  to  hi^  own  country,  but  being  surrounded  by  the 
cQej(9y,  zs^  fi;iding  no  likelihood  to  escape,  he  charged  his  soldiers 
forthi^.lth  to  be  gope,  and  preserve  themselves  for  the  future  service 
of  dieir  co^ijLtry.  IJe  hioaself  remained^  a°4  ^^^1^  ^i^  sword  vd  his 
hao^  fought  ^o.ut  i^pon  hiskpees^andikjlledseveral  of  the  assailants; 
till  a(  length  being  sjiot  through  the  body  with  a  dart,  he  there  died, 
after  he  h^jl  .^f^£Qc4  ^^A^  y^^rs-  Thu^  faf  for  £^rppe  \  yi%  ^hall  now 
f^tuf n  to  theafla'ur^  9i  Asig. 


Vol.  2.  No.  43.  bb 


210  DI0D0RU9  SICULUS.  Book  XFIf. 


CHAP.  VU. 

jtUxoiidcr  comes  to  Babylon.  J%e  wealth  found  there.  FUws 
his  troops  at  Sitacana.  The  riches  there.  Utence  goes  into 
the  country  of  the  Usians.  Marches  towards  PersepoSe.  A 
company  of  maimed  Greeks  met  jllexander:  his  bounty  to  thenu 
He  tahes  Persepolis:  gives  it  up  to  the  plunder  of  the  mMUn. 
TliB  riches  of  the  citadel  of  Persepolis.  Alexander^e  feusi  «f 
Persepolis.  Persepolis  burnt  at  the  instigation  of  Thais,  Ikh 
rius  murdered. 

DARIUS,  being  routed  at  Arbela,  fled  tovrards  tbe  bigber  prorinee^ 
to  the  end  that  be  might,  by  the  distance  of  the  place,  both  recniit 
bimself,  and  likewise  have  more  time  to  raise  a  new  army.  '  He 
came  first  to  Ecbatana,  where  he  stayed  for  some  time,  and  tbeie 
received  his  broken  troops  that  come  in  to  him,  and  aimed  agaio 
such  as  had  lost  their  arms.  He  sent  likewise  for  the  militia  oiit 
of  the  neighbouring  provinces,  and  despatched  messengers  to  the 
lord-lieutenants  and  commanders  in  Bactria  and  the  upper  prefee* 
tures,  wishing  them  to  abide  firm  to  him  in  their  faith  and  loyalty. 

In  the  mean  time,  Alexander  (after  he  had  buried  those  that  woe 
killed  in  the  battle)  entered  Arbcia,  where  he  found  abundance  of 
rich  furniture  of  the  king's,  and  vast  treasures  of  the  barbarians^  a- 
mounting  to  three  thousand  talents  of  silver.  But,  becanse  he 
judged  that  the  air  thereabouts  must  certainly  be  infected,  through 
the  smell  of  the  dead  bodies  that  lay  there,  he  presently  removed  his 
camp,  and  came  with  all  his  forces  to  Babylon,  where  he  was  cheer- 
fully received  by  the  inhabitants,  and  splendid  entertainment  aflfordcd 
to  the  Macedonians.  And  there  his  army  was  refreshed  afker  the 
many  toils  and  difficulties  they  had  undergone.  And  thus,  in  the 
confluence  of  all  things  desirable,  and  free  and  noble  entertainmeDt 
of  the  citizens,  he  continued  in  the  city  above  thirty  days.  Then  he 
made  Agatho  of  Pydna  governor  of  the  castle,  with  a  garrison  of 
seven  hundred  Macedonians.  To  Apollodorus  of  Amphipolis,  and 
Menetas  of  Peila,  he  gave  the  government  of  Babylon,  and  of  all 
the  prefectures  as  far  as  to  Cilicia,  and  ordered  them  to  raise  what 
forces  they  could.,  and  gave  them  a  thousand  talents  for  that  pur* 
pete.  He  made  Mithrencs,  who  betrayed  the  castle  of  Sardis,  lord- 
lieutenant  of  Armenia.  Of  the  money  that  he  found  in  BabyloUj  he 
gave  to  eixry  horseman  kix  minas;  to  every  au:uliarT,  five;  lo  each 


Chop,  nir^  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  SH 

of  the  Macedonian  phalanx,  two;  and  to  every  foreign  niercenary, 
two  months  pay. 

The  king  removing  from  Babylon,  as  he  was  on  his  march,  there 
came  to  him  recruits,  from  Antipater,  five  hundred  Macedonian  horse, 
and  six  thousand  foot;  six  hundred  Tliracian  horse,  and  three  thou- 
sand five  hundred  Trallians :  from  Peloponnesus  four  thousand  foot, 
and  almost  a  thousand  horse.  Among  these  were  sent  fifty  of  the 
sons  of  the  king's  special  friends  from  Macedonia,  designed  by  their 
fathers  to  be  of  the  king's  life-guard.  Having  received  these,  he 
marched  forward,  and  came,  after  six  decampments,  into  the  pro- 
Tioce  of  Sitacana.  And  here  he  stayed  several  days,  in  regard  the 
country  abounded  in  all  things  necessary  for  the  life  of  man,  and  be- 
cause he  had  a  mind  his  soldiers  should  refresh  themselves  after  their 
tedious  march :  and  had  a  purpose  likewise  to  take  a  more  exact  view 
Aod  account  of  his  troops,  and  to  enlarge  the  commands  and  govern- 
nents  of  his  captains  and  commanders,  and  so  to  strengthen  his  army, 
both  by  the  number  of  soldiers,  and  valour  of  their  officers.  All 
which  he  forthwith  put  in  execution ;  and  making  choice  of  the  most 
deserving  with  the  utmost  care  possible,  he  advanced  many  from  very 
considerable  places  of  trust  and  authority  to  much  higher  prefer-* 
ments,  by  which  means  he  both  promoted  his  officers,  and  gained 
their  hearts  and  affections  at  the  same  time.  He  took  care  also  for 
the  better  government  of  the  common  soldiers,  and  by  many  new  in« 
reutioos  put  every  thing  into  a  better  order  and  posture  than  they 
were  before.  To  conclude,  when  he  had  so  managed  every  thing  as 
that  he  had  gained  the  love  of  the  whole  army,  and  made  them  in 
all  points  observant  to  his  commands,  and  was  assured  for  valour 
they  would  give  place  to  none,  he  marched  forward,  in  order  to  finish 
by  fighting  what  further  remained.  When  he  came  to  the  province 
ofSusiana,be  presently  without  any  difficulty  gained  possession  of 
Suaa,  the  royal  city,  the  most  beautiful  palace  in  the  universe,  which 
was  voluntarily  surrendered  to  him  by  Abulites  the  lord- lieutenant 
of  the  province.  But  some  writers  have  said^fhat  this  was  done 
by  order  of  Darius  himself,  to  them  that  otherwise  would  have 
been  both  loyal  and  faithful  to  his  interest;  and  that  this  wasjJone 
by  the  Persian  king  for  this  end,  that  Alexander, being  taken  up  with 
matters  of  such  great  moment,  as  taking  possession  of  famous  and 
noble  cities,  and  loading  himself  with  vast  treasures,  Darius  might 
gain  more  time  for  the  raising  of  fresh  forces  for  the  carrying  on  of 
the  war, 

Alexander  therefore  having  possessed  himself  of  the  city  and  the 
king's  treasures,  found  there  above  forty  thousand  talents  of  uncoined 
gold  and  silver.    The  kings  had  preserved  this  treasure  untouched 


tl*                                DIODORUS  SIC!;LU9.  "ISodk  XFtt. 

M  iw^iMi— *■■■  ,■  i -  ..^mmmmj^^tmmmtmmmMJmfssBmiaamt^m 

for  many  at^es.  that  it  niii^bt  be  ready  to  resort  to  in  cas^  of  tome 
suddcii  and  unexficcicil  tu:  ii  of  fortune.  Besides  this,  there  was  like- 
wise nine  thousand  talents  in  coined  money  calfed  daric».  While 
Alex^incler  was  taking  an  account  of  this  wealth,  there  happepcJ 
something  that  was  very  remarkable.  The  throne  whereon  he  sat 
being  too  high  for  him,  so  that  his  feet  conld  not  foaeh  the  foot- 
stool, one  of  the  king's  Loys  observing  it,  brought  Darios's  table  asid 
placed  it  under  his  feet,  with  which  the  king  was  very  well  pleased,  and 
commended  his  care.  But  one  of  the  eunuehs  standing  at  the  side 
of  the  throne,  much  concerned  and  grieved  at  saeh  a  change  of  fer* 
fune,  burst  out  into  tears:  which  Alexander  perceiving—.**  What  31 
ddst  thou  see  (says  he)  that  thou  weepestso?"  To  whom  heaoswered.^ 
'*  I  was  once  Darius's  servant,  now!  am  yours;  but  because  I  cannot 
but  love  my  natural  lord  and  master,  I  am  notable,  wkhout  etfrcBH! 
s6rrow;  to  see  that  table  put  to  so  base  and  mean  a  use,  which  byimii 
was  so  lately  graced  and  honoured."  The  king,  upon  this  answer^ 
reflecting  upon  the  strange  change  of  the  Persian  monarchy,  began 
io  consider  that  he  had  acted  the  part  of  a  proud  and  insulting  eneoiy, 
not  becoming  that  humanity  and  clefnency  which  ouglit  to  beahcwii 
towards  captives ;  and  therefore  he  commanded  him  who  placed  the 
table  there,  to  take  it  away:  but  Philotas  standing  near  to  him  said.- 
It  is  not  pride  nor  insolence,  O  king!  being  done  without  your  com- 
mand; hut  it  falls  out  to  he  so  through  the  providence  and  pleasure 
of  some  (^vood  genius.  Upon  which  the  king  ordered  the  table  t6 
remain  wiicre  it  was,  looking  upon  it  as  some  happy  omen. 

After  this,  he  ordered  some  masters  to  attend  upon  Darius's  bmk* 
thcr,  his  daughters,  and  son,  to  instruct  them  in  the  Greek  tongue, 
and  left  them  ut  Susa.  And  he  himself  marched  away  with  the  Whole 
army,  and  after  four  decampments  came  to  the  riv^r  Tigris^  which 
rising  out  of  the  Uxian  mountains,  runs  first  through  a  tottgb  and 
craggy  country,  full  of  large  and  wide  channels,  for  the  space  of  a 
thousand  furlengs;  thence  it  passes  through  a  champaign  countij 
with  a  more  gentle  current,  and  having  made  its  way  for  the  space 
of  six  hundred  furlongs,  it  empties  itself  into  the  Persian  sea. 

Alexander  having  passed  the  river,  marched  towards  the  most  fruit- 
ful country  of  the  Uxians :  for  being  watered  in  every  part,  it  plenti- 
fully produces  fruits  of  all  sorts  and  kinds;  of  which,  being  in  their 
proper  season  dried  in  the  time  of  Autumn,  they  make  all  sorts  of 
sweetmeats,  sauces,  and  other  compositions,  both  for  neeessaiy  use 
and  pleasure,  and  the  merchants  convey  them  down  the  river  Tigris 
to  Babylon.  He  found  all  the  passes  strongly  guarded  by  Madetes, 
who  was  nearly  related  in  kindred  to  Darius,  and  had  with  him  a  strong 
and  well  disciplined  army.  While  Alexander  was  viewingthe  strength 


Ckd^  Pit,  DIOl>ORUS  SICULUS.  SftS 

of  th«  placed,  and  could  find  out  no  passage  through  those  steep 
rdeksy  an  inhabitant  of  the  country,  wtio  was  well  acquainted  with 
those  ways,  promised  Alexander  that  he  would  lead  his  soldiers 
thtoiigh  such  a  strait  and  difflcDlt  pathway,  as  that  they  should  stand 
at  length  over  the  heads  of  their  enemies :  hereupon  the  king  ordered 
tf  sifilill  party  to  go  along  with  him*     He  himself  in  the  mean  time 
used  his  utmost  endeavour  to  force  his  way,  and  for  that  purpose  set 
lipod  the  guards,  and  while  they  were  hotly  engaged,  (fresh  men  still 
sttpplytdgthe  room  of  them  that  were  weary),  and  the  barbarians 
iisorderedy  and  running  here  and  there  in  the  engagement,  on  a  sud- 
den the  soldiers  that  were  sent  away  appeared  over  the  heads  of  the  . 
guards  that  kept  the  passages;  upon  which  they  were  so  amazed, 
that  they  forthwith  fled,  and  so  the  king  gained  the  pass;  and  pre- 
tenlly  all  the  cities  throughout  all  Uxiana  were  brought  into  sub- 
jaetion.     Thence  he  decamped  and  marched  towards  Persia,  and  the 
fifth  day  came  to  a  place  called  the  Susian  Hocks,  which  were  before 
{>ossessed  by   Ariobarzanes,  with   five-and-twenty  thousand   foot, 
and  three  hundred  horse.    The  king  concluding  that  he  must  gain 
flie  pass  by  force,  led  his  troops  through  some  of  the  strait  and  craggy 
places  without  any  resistance,  the  barbarians  never  ofieriog  to  disturb 
him  till  he  came  to  the  mid- way,  when  they  bestirred  themselves, 
dad  threw  down  great  numbers  of  massy  stones  upon  the  heads  of 
the  Macedonians,  and  destroyed  multitudes  of  them.     Many  cast 
their  darts  from  the  rocks  above  upon  them,  which  failed  not'  to  do 
execution,  falling  among  such  a  throng  of  men  together :  others  with 
band-stones  repulsed  the  Macedonians  that  were  forcing  to  break  in 
upon  them ;  so  that  by  reason  of  the  difficulty  of  the  places,  the  bar- 
barians so  far  prevailed,  as  to  kill  multitudes,  and  wound  as  many. 
Alexander  not  being  able  to  prevent  this  miserable  slaughter,  and 
perceiving  that  not  one  of  the  enemy  fell,  or  was  so  much  as  hurt,  and 
that  many  of  his  own  men  were  slain,  and  almost  all  that  led  the  van 
ip?ere  wounded,  he  sounded  a  retreat,  and  marched  back  three  hun- 
dred furlongs,  and  then  encamped.    Then  he  inquired  of  the  inha- 
bitants, whether  there  was  any  other  way  to  pass,  who  all  answered , 

That  there  was  none,  but  that  he  must  go  round  many  days  journey. 
But  the  king  looking  upon  it  as  a  dishonourable  thing  to  leave  the 
bodies  of  them  that  were  slain  unburied;  and  as  disgraceful,  and  even 
owning  himself  to  be  conquered,  by  treating  for  liberty  to  bury  the 
dead,  he  commanded  the  captives,  as  many  as  were  there  at  hand, 
to  be  brought  to  him.  Among  these,  there  was  one  that  understood 
both  the  Persian  and  Greek  tongue,  who  declared,  that  he  was  a  Lycian, 
and  some  time  aijomade  a  prisoner  of  war  by  the  Persians,  and  that 
for  several  years  last  past  he  had  exercised  the  calling  of  a  shepherd 


fl4  DI0D0RU9  MCULU9.  Book  XFIL 

■■■■■■'  ■  '  m^mmmm^^mmmmmmmmmgmmmmmmaaaamm 

m  those  mountains*  and  by  that  means  had  perfect  knowledge  of  the 
country;  and  told  the  king,  that  he  could  lead  the  army  through  the 
woods,  and  bring  them  directly  upon  the  backs  of  then  that  guanM 
the  passes:  hearing  this,  the  king  promised  the  man  a  large  icwardji 
who  thereupon  so  conducted  him,  that  in  the  night,  with  great  !a- 
hour  and  toil,  he  got  to  the  top  of  the  mountains,  for  be  marched 
through  abundance  of  snow,  and  passed  through  a  country  ftdl  of 
steep  rocks,  deep  gulfs,  and  many  vallies*  Having  marched  through 
this  tract,  as  soon  as  he  came  in  siglit  of  the  guards,  he  presently  IdD* 
cd  the  first,  and  took  those  prisoners  that  were  placed  \%  the  next 
passv  The  third  guard  presently  ii^d,  and  so  he  gained  all  into  his 
own  power,  and  cutoff  the  greatest  part  of  Ariobamnea's  airnj^ 
Thence  he  marched  towards  Persepolis,  and  in  his  way  icceifcd 
letters  from  Teridates  governor  of  the  city,  whereby  he  signifiedl  te 
1iim.»That  if  be  hastened  away,  and  prevented  those  that  woe 
coming  to  relieve  Persepolis,  he  would  deliver  the  city  into  his 
bands*  Upon  which  he  made  a  swift  march,  and  passed  hb  mraqf 
over  the  river  A  raxes,  by  a  bridge  then  laid  for  that  purpose.  As  the 
king  was  on  his  march,  a  most  sad  spectacle  presented  itself,  which 
sdrrcd  up  just  hatred  against  the  author,  pity  and  compassioa  for  the 
irreparable  loss  of  those  that  suffered;  and  grief  and  sorrow  in  all  the 
beholders.  For  there  met  him  certain  Greeks,  whom  tlie  formes 
kings  of  Persia  had  made  captives  and  slaves,  and  fell  down  at  his 
feet^  they  were  near  eight  hundred,  most  of  them  old  men,  and  all 
maimed,  some  baving;^ their  hands,  others  their  feet,  some  their  cwSy 
and  others  their  noses  cut  off.  If  any  were  expert  in  any  art,  and 
had  made  a  cousidcrable  progress  therein,  all  his  outward  members 
were  cut  off,  but  such  only  as  were  necessary  for  the  management  of 
hb  art.  So  that  all  who  beheld  their  venerable  old  age,  and  the  sad 
mangling  of  their  bodies,  greatly  pitied  the  miserable  condition  of 
these  poor  creatures :  especially,  Alexander  so  pitied  their  sad  condH 
tion,  that  he  conld  not  refrain  from  weeping.  These  all  with  one 
voice  cried  out,  and  entreated  him,  that  he  would  succour  and  re% 
lieve  them  in  these  their  calamities.  Upon  which  the  king  called 
the  chiefest  of  them  to  him,  and  told  them,  that  he  would  take  spe-- 
cial  care  of  them,  and  promised  he  would  see  them  sent  honourahlj 
to  their  own  country,  as  became  the  dignity  of  his  person.  Upon 
which  they  consulted  together,  and  at  length  concluded .^That  it 
was  better  for  them  to  remain  where  they  were,  than  to  return  into 
their  own  country ;  for,  when  they  were  returned,  they  would  be 
scattered  here  and  there,  and  all  the  days  of  their  lives  be  mocked 
and  despised  on  account  of  their  sad  misfortunes.  But  if  they 
continued  together  as  fellows  in  their  misery,  the  calamity  of  their 


C^p.  VtL  D10D0B.U8  SltULO^  SIS 

fellow-safferers  would  be  an  allay,  and  some  comfort  to  every  one  of 
tiiem  in  their  own  adversities.  Upon  this,  they  made  a  secoml  ad« 
dress  to  die  king,  and  declared  to  him  wHat  they  had  resolved  upon^ 
and  desired  he  would  a£R)rd  such  relief  to  them  as  was  most  agreeaMe 
to  their  present  circumstances.  The  king  consented  to  what  they 
bad  determined,  and  ordered  to  each  of  them  three  thousand  dracti* 
mas*,  five  suits  of  raiment  to  every  man,  and  as  many  to  each  wo- 
man ;  and  to  every  one  of  them  two  yoke  of  oxen,  fifty  sheep,  and  as 
many  medimnasf  of  wheat  And  commanded  they  should  be  li>ee 
fimm  all  taxes  and  tribute,  and  gave  strict  chaige  to  the  officers  em- 
ployed,  tiiat  none  should  offer  them  any  injury.  And  thus  Alexan* 
ddr,  according  to  his  natnral  goodness  and  innate  liberal  generosilyy 
ooaaffortedthese  poor  miseraUe  people.  He  then  called  the  Macedo- 
mans  together,  and  told  them — That  Persepolis,  the  metropolis  of 
the  kingdom  of  Persia,  of  all  the  cities  of  Asia  had  done  most  mis- 
chief to  the  Grecians,  and  therefore  he  gave  it  up  to  tlie  plunder  and 
spoil  of  the  soldiers,  except  the  king^s  palace.  This  was  the  ricliest 
city  of  any  under  the  sun,  and  for  many  ages  all  the  private  houses 
were  foil  of  all  sorts  of  wealth,  and  whatever  was  desirable. 

The  Maeedonians  therefore  forcing  into  the  city,  put  all  the  men 
to  the  sword,  and  rifled  and  carried  away  every  man's  goods  and  es-* 
tJrte,  amongst  which  was  abundance  of  rich  and  costly  furniture  and 
ornaments  of  all  sorts.  In  this  place  was  hnr ried  away  here  and 
there  vast  quantities  of  silver,  and  no  less  of  gold,  great  numbers  of 
rick  garments,  some  of  purple,  others  embroidered  with  gold,  all 
which  became  a  plentiful  prey  to  the  ravenous  soldiers:  and  thus  the 
great  seat-royal  of  tbe  Persians,  once  famous  all  the  world  over,  wa9 
DOW  exposed  to  seorn  and  contempt,  and  rifled  from  top  to  bettom« 
For  though  every  placif  was  full  of  rich  spoil,  yet  the  covetousness 
of  the  Macedonians  was  insatiable,  still  thirsting  after  more.  And 
Aey  were  so  eager  in  plundering,  that  they  fought  one  with  another 
withdrawn  swords,  and  many  who  were  conceived  toliave  got  a  greater 
share  than  the  rest,  were  killed  in  the  quarrel.  Some  things  tliat 
were  of  extraordinary  value  they  divided  with  their  swords,  and  each 
took  a  share;  others  in  rage  cut  off  the  hands  of  such  as  laid  lioM  of 
a  thing  tliat  was  in  dispute.  They  first  ravished  the  women  as  they 
were  in  their  jewels  and  rich  attire,  and  then  sold  them  for  slaves^ 
So  that  by  how  much  Persepolis  excelled  all  tlie  other  cities  in  glory 
and  worldly  felicity,  by  so  much  more  was  the  measure  of  their  misery 
and  calamity.  Then  Alexander  seized  upon  all  the  treasures  in  the 
^tadel,  which  was  a  vast  quantity  of  gold  and  sliver  of  the  public  re* 

•  Near  one  hundred  pounjs. 
i  J^Tfry  mediffliia,  bv  so^ie  writer^),  cootaiiis  iiij;htcen  gallon);  lit>y  bushels. 


Sl6  DIODORU6  SICULUS.  B^^i  XVJL 

Tenues  tM  had  beea  there  collected  and  laid  up,  froip  die  timr  of 
Cyrus  the  first  king  of  Persia  to  that  day.  For  there  was  tl^re  Coim4 
a  hundred  aod  twenty  thousand  talentsj  reckoiung  tl>c  gold  after  thi^ 
jrate  of  the  silver. 

Part  of  this  treasure  he  took  for  the  use  of  thp  war,  t^nd  order^ 
another  part  of  it  to  be  treasur/ed  up  at  Susa.  To  this  purpose,  he 
ordered  that  a  multitude  of  mules  both  Cor  draught  apd  .carri^ige,  SMi4 
three  thousand  camels  with  pack-saddles,  sliould  be  brought  0|U  of 
^bylon,  &tesopotamia>  and  Susa  i  and  with  these  be  conveyed  d^X  tht 
treasure  to  the  several  places  he  hadappoiptjed.  Fo^  becayvs^  l^<fff^ 
tremely  hated  the  inhabitants,  he  was  resolved  not  to  trust  theninrtl 
«ny  tlung,  bat  uttjerly  to  ruin  and  dcstray  Perscpolis ;  of  whose  p»lm^ 
in  regard  of  its  stately  structure,  we  conceive  it  will  not  be  iiupffPljt 
sent  if  we  say  something.  This  stately  fabric,  or  citadel,  was  •hFi' 
rounded  with  a  treble  wall :  the  first  was  sixteen  cubits  high,  adorufoi 
with  many  sumptuous  buildings  and  aspiring  turrets.  The  sepp.n4 
was  like  to  the  first,  but  as  high  again  as  the  other.  The  third  wa$ 
drawn  like  a  quadrant,  foursquare,  sixty  cubits  high,  all  of  the  hardest 
marble,  and  so  cemented,  as  to  continue  for  ever.  Oq  the  four  «idca 
arc  brazen  gates,  near  to  which  are  gallowses*  of  brass  tweaty  cubits 
high;  these  raised  to  terrify  the  beholders,  and  the  other  for  theltettef 
strengthening  and  fortifying  of  the  place.  On  the  enstside  of  ,lihf 
citadel,  about  four  huiidred  feet  distant,  stood  a  mount  called  tba 
Royal.Mount,  for  here  are  all  the  sephulchres  of  the  kings,  OMtoy  «p« 
partmcnts  and  little  cells  being  cut  into  the  midst  of  the  rock;  Jpt^ 
which  cells  there  is  made  qo  direct  passage,  but  Uie  coffijps  vfilli  t^M 
dead  bodies  are  by  instruments  hoisted  up,  and  so  let  down  into  thcpt 
vaults.  In  this  citadel  were  many  stately  lodgings,  both  for  the  klog 
and  his  soldiers,  of  excellent  workmanship,  and  treasury  chambeEi 
most  commodiously  contrived  for  the  laying  up  of  money. 

Here  Alexander  made  a  sumptuous  feast  for  the  entertainment  of 
his  friends  in  commemoration  of  his  victory,  and  offered  magnificc»t 
sacrifices  to  the  gods.  At  this  feast  were  entertained  whores,  wlio 
prostituted  their  bodies  for  hire,  where  the  caps  went  so  high,  aii4 
the  reins  so  let  loose  to  drunkenness  and  debauchery,  that  many  yftx% 
both  drunk  and  mad.  Among  the  rest,  at  that  time  there  was  a 
courtezan  called  Thais,  an  Athenian,  that  said..  Alejuinder  would 
perform  the  most  glorious  act  of  any  he  ever  did,  if  while  be  was  feast- 
ing with  them,  he  would  burn  the  palace,  and  so  the  glory  and  cenowa 
of  Persia  might  be  said  to  be  brought  to  nothing  in  a  moment  by  the 
bauds  of  women.  This  spreading  abroad,  and  coming  to  the  ears  of 
the  young  men.,  (who  commonly  make  little  use  of  reason  when  drink  in 

*  Or  cruMcs  of  brut. 


CliaqK  Fit  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  917 

io  tbek  lieads)i  presently  one  cries  out: — ^^  Come  on,  brii^  us  fire- 
bmnds/'  and  so  incites  the  rest  to  fire  the  citadel,  fo  revenge  the  im- 
piety tke  Persians  bad  comiiiited,  in  destroying  the  temples  of  the 

Grecians.    At  this,  others  with  joy  set  up  a  shout,  but  said ^That 

so  brave  an  exploit  belonged  only  to  Alexander  to  perform. 

The  king,  stirred  up  at  these  words,  embraced  the  motion ;  upon 
which,  as  many  as  were  present  left  their  cups  and  leaped  upon  the 
table,  and  said — ^That  they  would  now  celebrate  a  victorious  festival 
to  Bacchus.  Hereupon,  multitudes  of  fire-brands  were  presently 
got  together,  and  all  the  women  that  played  on  musical  instruments, 
which  were  at  the  feast,  were  called  for,  and  then  the  king,  with  soogs, 
pipes,  and  flutes,  bravely  led  the  way  to  this  noble  expedition,  con- 
trived and  managed  by  this  whore,  Thais,  who  neit  after  the  king, 
threw  the  first  fire-brand  into  the  palace.  This  precedent  was  pre- 
sently followed  by  tlie  rest,  so  that  in  a  very  short  time,  the  whole 
fabric,  by  the  violence  of  the  fire,  was  consumed  to  ashes. 

It  is  very  observable,  and  not  without  just  admiration,  that  the 
sacrilege  and  impiety  of  Xerxes,  king  of  Persia,  (exercised  in  his  des- 
tn^ingthe  citadel  of  Athens),  should  so  many  years  after  be  revenged 
iu  the  same  kind,  by  one  courtezan  only  of  that  city  that  was  so  in- 
jured. 

After  these  things  thus  done,  Alexander  marches  against  the  rest 
of  the  Persian  cities,  and  having  taken  in  some  by  force,  and  others 
surrendered  upon  the  fame  and  report  of  his  lenity  and  moderation, 
he  made  after  Darius,  who  had  begun  to  raise  forces  out  of  Bactria, 
and  other  provinces ;  but  being  prevented  by  the  march  of  the  enemy, 
he  made  away  with  all  speed  out  of  Bactria  with  thirty  thousand  Per- 
rians  and  mercenary  Greeks,  and  in  his  return  was  treacherously 
murdered  by  Bessus,  the  lord-lieutenant  of  Bactria.  He  was  scarce 
dead,  when  Alexander  with  a  party  of  light  liorse,  came  up  to  tlie 
place  where  he  lay,  and  there  finding  him,  caused  him  to  be  honour- 
ably interred. 

But  some  do  report,  that  Alexander  finding  him  yet  alive,  Darius 
complained  of  his  sad  misfortune,  and  desired  him  that  he  would  see 
his  death  revenged,  which  Alexander  faithfully  promised.  He  forth- 
with indeed  pursued  Bessus,  but  he  being  a  long  way  before  him, 
escaped  into  Bactria,  so  that,  considering  it  impossible  to  overtake 
him,  he  marched  back.    This  was  the  state  of  affairs  in  Asia. 

In  Europe,  the  Lacedtemoniaus  being  routed  in  a  great  battle  by 
Antipater,  were  forced  to  send  ambassadors  to  him;  who  put  them 
ofi'till  the  meeting  of  the  general  assembly  of  Greece,  which  after- 
wards met  at  Corinth;  where,  after  many  things  were  bandied  and 
disputed  on  both  sides,  the  matter  was  at  length  left  to  the  decisioQ 

Vol.  2.  No.  13.  ff 


S18  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBook  XFIL 

of  Alexander.  Hereupon^  Antipater  received  the  chiefest  of  the  no- 
bility of  Sparta  as  hostages;  and  the  Lacedsemonians  sent  ambasst- 
dors  into  Asia^  to  beg  pardon  for  their  late  revolt. 


CHAP.  VIII. 

JBesstis  stirs  up  the  Bactrians.  Alexander  discharges  the  Oreek 
auxiliaries  with  rewards.  The  river  Stiboetes.  He  enters  Hyr- 
cania;  its  riclmess.  Enters  the  Mardian  country.  Loses  kis 
brave  horse;  which  is'restored.  Thalestris  the  jimazonian  queem 
meets  him.  He  falls  into  the  effeminacy  of  the  Persians.  Enters 
Drangina,  A  plot  against  Alexander.  Phihtas  and  others 
put  to  death.  Marches  agaitist  the  Arimaspi.  Subdues  Ara- 
chosia. 

WHEN  this  year  ended,  Cephisophon  executed  the  office  of  chief 
magistrate  at  Athens,  and  Caius  Valerius,  and  Marcus  Claudius,  were 
created  Roman  consuls.  At  that  time,  Bessus,  with  Nabarzanesand 
Barzacntes,  and  many  others,  after  the  death  of  Darias,  having  es- 
caped the  hands  of  Alexander,  came  intoBactria.  And  in  regard  be 
was  appointed  lord-lieutenant  of  that  country  by  Darius,  and  npon 
that  account  was  well  known  by  the  inhabitants,  he  persuaded  the 

people  to  stand  up  for  their  liberty,  and  told  them ^Tbat  the  sttna- 

tion  and  condition  of  their  country  was  such,  being  full  of  difficult 
passes,  and  very  populous;  that  they  had  an  extraordinary  advantage 
to  succeed  in  the  attempt,  and  promised  that  he  himself  would  take 
upon  him  the  whole  management  of  the  war. 

Hereupon  he  so  far  prevailed,  that  he  got  a  considerable  number 
to  join  him,  and  to  own  him  for  king.  Then  he  inlisted  men,  pre- 
pared arms,  and  procured  whatever  was  necessary  for  the  present 
state  of  his  affairs. 

In  the  mean  time,  Alexander  perceiving  that  the  Macedonians  had 
a  design  to  end  the  war  with  the  death  of  Darius,  and  to  return  to 
their  own  country,  he  called  them  together;  and  so  courted  them  by 
an  oration  fitted  for  that  purpose,  that  he  prevailed  with  them  readily 
to  go  on  with  the  expeditions  that  then  yet  remained.  Then  he  called 
together  all  the  Greek  auxiliaries, and  havinghighly  commended  them 
for  thrir  valour,  bestowed  upon  every  horseman  as  a  reward  a  talent, 
aud  every  foot  soldier  ten  minas,  and  discharged  them  from  further 


Giap.  Fin.  moDORus  siculus.  ftig[ 

service  in  the  army.  And  over  and  besides,  he  paid  to  every  one  of 
them  what  was  dae  to  them  for  their  common  pay,  and  gave  them 
likewise  sufficient  provision  to  carry  them  into  their  own  country; 
and  to  every  one  that  was  willing  still  to  continue  in  the  army,  he 
gave  three  talents.  He  gave  indeed  large/ewards  to  the  soldiers,  be- 
ing naturally  of  a  generous  disposition;  and  besides,  in  pursuingDa- 
rius  he  had  possessed  himself  of  a  vast  treasure:  for' he  had  received 
eight  thousand  talents  out  of  the  treasures;  and  besides  what  he  gave 
to  the  soldiers,  he  raised  thirteen  thousand  talents  by  the  sale  of  the 
caps,  flagons,  and  furniture.  And  it  was  believed^  that  what  was 
stolen  and  taken  away  by  force  was  much  more. 

Having  done  this,  he  marched  with  his  army  towards  Hyrcania, 
and  the  third  day  came  near  the  city  Hecatompylos*,  and  there  en- 
camped. Here  he  continued  some  days  to  refresh  his  army,  because 
the  country  was  exceeding  rich,  and  abounded  with  every  thing  for 
man's  use.  Thence  he  moved  forward  a  hundred  and  fifty  furlongs, 
and  encamped  near  a  very  high  rock,  at  the  foot  of  which  is  a  cave 
not  unbecoming  the  gods;  from  whence,  (as  the  spring-head),  issues 
the  great  river  Stiboetes.  Thence  it  runs  with  a  fierce  and  violent 
stream  for  the  space  of  three  furlongs,  till  it  dashes  itself  upon  a 
great  rock,  in  shape  like  a  woman's  pap,  under  which  is  a  vast 
gulf,  or  opening  of  the  earth,  into  which,  being  now  divided  into 
two  channels,  it  falls  down  with  tt  mighty  noise,  turned  all  into  froth 
and  spume,  and  there  runs  under  ground  three  hundred  furlougsf; 
and  then  appears  again,  as  if  that  were  its  spring-head.  Having  en- 
tered Hyrcania  with  his  army,  he  gained  all  the  towns  and  cities  as  far 
as  the  Caspian  sea,  which  some  likewise  call  the  Hyrcanian  sea.  It 
is  reported,  that  in  that  sea  are  many  serpents  of  an  extraordinary 
bigness,  and  fish  of  all  sorts,  much  difiering  in  colour  frum  those  in 
other  parts.  When  he  entered  farther  into  Hyrcania,  he  came  to  towns 
called  the  Fortunate  Towns,  which  are  so  in  deed,  as  well  as  in  name ; 
for  this  country  excels  all  the  rest  in  fertility  of  soil :  for  every  vine, 
they  say,  afibrds  a  metrete^  of  wine,  and  that  some  fig-trees  are  so 
very  fruitful,  that  they  will  bear  ten  medimnas  of  dried  figs ;  and  that 
what  are  left  upon  the  tree  after  harvest,  fall  upon  the  ground,  and 
spring  up  again  of  themselves,  and  bring  forth  abunchmce  of  fruit  to 
perfection.  There  is  a  tree  in  that  country  much  like  to  an  oak,  which 
distils  honey  from  its  leaves;  and  this  the  inhabitants  gather  lu  great 
plenty  for  their  own  use.  There  is  likewise  a  little  insect  in  this 
tract  called  an  Anthredon,  less  than  a  bee,  but  very  remarkable;  it 
j^ets  its  living  in  the  mountains,  sucking  the  flowers  that  grow  here 

*  From  its  huodred  gates.  f  About  fortj-three  oiilei. 

X  About  forty-niDe  qu^Mts. 


SeO  DIODORUS  8ICULU9.  9ook  XFIL 


and  there  in  those  places.  It  works  its  combs  within  hoUow  rocks, 
or  trees  shattered  or  made  hollow  by  the  thunderbolts^  and  there 
makes  a  liquor  not  inferior  to  any  for  sweetness. 

In  the  mean  time  Alexander,  while  on  his  march  through  Hyrcanta 
and  tlie  bordering  countries^  gained  great  reputation,  and  was  highly 
honoured  for  his  clemency,  in  carrying  himself  with  so  much  huma- 
nity towards  all  those  commanders  who  fled  away  with  Darius,  and 
afterwards  submitted  themselves  to  him:  so  that  fifteen  hundred 
brave  and  valiant  Grecians  (wlio  sided  with  Darius)  forthwith  came 
unto  him,  and  laid  themselves  at  his  feet,  whom  he  readily  pardoaed, 
and  placed  them  in  several  of  his  regiments,  and  allowed  them  the 
same  pay  with  the  rest. 

Having  run  through  the  sea-coasts  of  Hyrcania,  he  entered  the 
country  of  the  Mardi ;  who  being  a  warlike  nation,  slighted  the  grow- 
ing power  of  the  king,  and  shewed  him  not  the  least  respect,  either 
by  sending  ambassadors,  or  otherwise;  but  having  possessed  them- 
selves of  the  strait  passes  of  the  mountains  with  eight  thousand  men, 
stood  there,  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Macedonians.  Hereupon 
the  king  sets  upon  them,  kills  many,  and  drives  the  rest  witfiin  the 
straits.  But  while  he  was  burning  up  the  country  all  before  him,  it 
fell  out  that  (some  of  tiie  king's  boys  who  led  his  horses,  being  at 
some  distance  from  the  rest  of  the  army)  his  best  horse^by  a  sudden 
incursion  of  the  barbarians,  was  carried  away.  This  horse  was  given 
)ym  by  Demaratus  the  Corinthian,  and  the  king  bad  made  use  of  him 
in  all  his  battles  in  Asia.  When  he  was  bare-backed,  he  would  ad* 
mit  only  his  keeper  to  noount  him;  but  when  he  had  the  king^s  war- 
saddle,  and  the  rest  of  his  brave  trappings  upon  him,  he  would  not 
suffer  his  former  rider  to  get  upon  his  back,  nor  any  other  person  but 
Alexander;  and  to  him  he  would  down  upon  his  knees  for  the  kin^ 
to  get  into  the  saddle.  Because  of  these  excellent  properties  of  the 
horse,  the  king  was  the  more  grieved  and  troubled;  and  therefore  he 
ordered  the  trees  in  all  parts  of  the  country  as  he  went  to  be  hewn 
down,  and  caused  a  proclamation  to  be  made  in  their  own  natural 

tongue ^Tliat  unless  his  horse  were  restored,  he  would  waste  and 

destroy  all  before  him  with  fire  and  sword ;  which  he  began  presently 
to  put  in  execution.  Upon  which  the  barbarians  were  9o  teirified^ 
that  they  not  only  restored  the  horse,  but  brought  along  with  them 
many  rich  presents  for  the  king,  and  by  fifty  ambassadors  begged  his 
pardon.  Upon  whicli  the  king  accepted  some  of  the  most  honour- 
able among  them  for  hostages. 

When  he  returned  to  Hyrcania,  Thalestris,  queen  of  the  Am(izona 
met  him,  whose  dominions  lay  between  the  Phasis  and  Tbermodon, 
of  an  admirable  beauty,  and  strong  body,  greatly  honoured  in  her  own 


Ck^p.  Pitt  BfODORUS  ^CULOT.  'i«l 

^i^^■W^^^^|■^^^^M^^^■M^■■^^^^^^^i^^^M^^■^■^^y^^»^^■^^i^i^^■^^MM■^^■^^^^■^^^^i^^^» 

country  for  her  brave  and  manly  spnit.  She  presented  herself  to  the 
kki^,  with  three  hundred  Amazons  in  their  warlike  habits,  having^ 
left  the  rest  of  her  forces  on  the  borders  of  Hyrcania,  The  king  be- 
ing stmek  with  admiration  at  the  sudden  and  unexpected  approadi 
of  the  queen,  aqd  the  graceful  appearance  of  the  women,  asked  Tha- 
lesrtris — **  What  was  the  reason  of  her  journey  thither?**  Who  an- 
swered him f^  That  she  came  there  to  ha?e  issue  by  him;  for  she 

boked  upon  him  to  transcend  all  other  men  for  great  and  noble  ac- 
tioDs;  and  she  herself  to  exceed  all  other  women  both  in  body  and 
iBind,  as  to  the  strength  of  the  one,  and  courage  of  the  other:  and 
tkerefore  there  was  good  ground  to  hope  that  the  issue  of  such  pa- 
rents, would  excel  all  other  men  in  valour/'  The  king  was  greatly 
pleased  with  what  she  said,  and  gratified  her  request:  and  after  he 
had  conversed  with  her  for  the  space  of  thirteen  days,  he  presented 
her  with  honourable  gifts,  and  tlien  suffered  her  to  return  to  her 
own  kingdom. 

Alexander  conceiving  that  he  had  now  efiected  all  that  hedesignedp 
^itid  that  thdre  was  no  competitor  with  him  for  the  empire,  began  to 
4iKiulge  in  the  soft  and  effeminate  manners  of  the  Persians,  and  to 
imitate  the  luxury  of  the  Asiatic  kings:  and  therefore,  in  the  first 
place,  be  ordered  all  the  officers  of  the  court  to  be  Asiatics,  and  the 
nobility  of  Asia  to  foe  squires  of  the  body*,  amongst  whom  Oxathres, 
the  brother  of  Darius,  was  one«  He  put  likewise  the  Persian  diadem 
npon  his  head,  and  wore  the  white  cassock  and  belt,  after  the  manner 
of  the  Persian  kings,  and  all  the  rest,  except  the  Persian  hose  aad 
vestment,  called  the  Candys.  He  bestowed  likewise  purple  gowns 
upon  his  friends,  and  cloathed  all  his  horsemen  in  the  Persian  habit. 
He  began  likewise  to  carry  his  concubines  along  with  him  from  place 
to  place  as  Darius  used  to  do,  who  had  almost  as  many  as  the  days 
in  the  year,  and  were  the  greatest  beauties  that  could  be  found  through- 
out all  Asia.  These  stood  round  the  king's  bed  every  night,  that  he 
might  take  his  choice  of  whom  he  pleased  to  lie  with  him.  How- 
ever, for  the  most  part,  he  followed  the  antient  customs  of  his  an- 
cestors, and  used  the  other  but  seldom,  lest  he  sliould  offend  the 
Macedonians:  and  when  some,  notwithstanding,  complained  of  the 
king,  he  stopped  their  mouths  with  gifts  and  bribes. 

About  this  time  intelligence  was  brought  him  that  Satibarzanes, 
one  of  Darius's  lord-lieutenants,  had  killed  all  the  soldiers  he  had 
committed  to  his  charge,  and  was  joined  in  conspiracy  with  Bessus 
to  make  war  upon  the  Macedonians;  whereupon  he  marched  out 
against  him. 

Satibarzanes  had  got  all  Ims  forces  together  into  Chrotacana,  a  most 

•  The  Uctors,  who  carriCil  rods  U'forelhenjagialrates. 


e^f  DioDORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  XFII. 

noble  city  in  those  parts,  and  naturally  fortified;  but  as  soon  as  the 
king  came  in  sight,  being  terrified  with  the  greatness  of  the  king's 
army,  and  the  valour  of  the  Macedonians,  (which  was  now  cried  up  all 
the  world  over),  he  hastened  away  with  two  thousand  horse  to  Bessus, 
to  procure  help  from  him  with  all  speed.  The  rest  of  liis  forces  he 
ordered  to  make  to  a  mountain  near  at  hand,  wliich  was  full  of  stnk 
pas^^;  and  where  they  might  lie  close  and  secure  whea  they  doxst 
not  engage  with  the  enemy  in  the  open  field.  Upon  this,  the  kiof 
was  so  intent  and  diligent,  (as  he  always  was),  that  though  they  had 
sheltered  themselves  in  a  large  rock,  and  naturally  strong,  yet  he 
reduced  the  besieged  to  those  straits,  as  tliat  he  forced  them  to  sur- 
render themselves. 

Afterwards,  having  reduced  all  the  cities  in  this  province,  in  the 
space  of  thirty  days,  he  left  Hyrcania,  and  came  to  the  royal  city  of 
Drangina^,  where  he  encamped  and  refreshed  his  army. 

About  this  time  a  roost  wicked  plot  was  laid  against  AlezaDder, 
very  unworthy  the  goodness  of  his  disposition.  For  one  of  the  king^s 
friends,  called  Dimnus,  blaming  the  king  for  something  he  had  done, 
and  thereupon  becoming  enraged  at  him,  laid  a  plan  to  assassinate  him. 
This  man  had  a  catamite,  called  Nicomachus,  whom  be  dearly  loved; 
him  he  endeavoured  to  persuade  to  join  with  him  in  this  wicked  de- 
sign :  but  being  a  very  young  stripling,  he  discovered  the  whole  busi- 
ness to  his  brother  Ceballinus,  who,  (fearing  lest  some  other  should 
be  before  him  in  the  discovery),  resolved  to  make  the  first  mention 
of  it  to  the  king. 

Thereupon  he  goes  to  tlie  court,  and  first  meets  Philotas,  and  ac- 
quaints him  with  what  he  had  heard,  and  entreats  him  to  inform  the 
king  immediately  what  was  hatching  against  him. 

Philotas,  whether  through  covetousness,  or  tliat  he  was  one  of  the 
conspirators,  (it  is  not  certain),  inclined  not  to  make  the  discovery  of 
what  had  been  imparted  to  him :  for  though  he  went  to  the  king,  and 
had  a  long  discourse  with  him  of  divers  matters,  yet  he  told  him  no- 
thing of  what  Ceballinus  had  related  to  him.  But  when  be  canie  out, 
toM  Ceballinus,  that  he  had  not  had  as  yet  a  fit  opportunity  for  open- 
ing the  matter  to  the  king;  but  that  the  next  day  be  would  take 
him  aside  by  himself,  and  discover  all  that  Ceballinus  had  made  known 
to  him.  Philotas  neglecting  the  business  the  next  day  also,  Cehal- 
linus  was  afraid  lest  it  should  be  discovered  by  some  other  persout 
and  so  he  himself  should  be  in  great  danger:  therefore  he  waved 
Philotas,  and  went  to  one  of  the  king's  pages,  and  tells  him  the  whole 
plot,  wishing  him  forthwith  to  acquaint  the  king;  and  then  with- 
draws himself  into  the  armory,  and  there  lay  private.    The  page 

^  In  the  proTiucc  of  Drangina,  ia  PcniA, 


€h£^.  FITL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  t33 


took  the  opportunity  when  the  king  was  ia  the  bath,  and  related  to 
him  the  whole  matter  told,  him  by  Ceballinus,  and  that  he  then  lay 
hid  and  secret  in  the  armory.  At  this  the  king  was  greatly  startled, 
and  forthwith  ordered  Dimnus  to  be  seized;  and  now  fully  informed 
of  the  conspiracy,  sent  for  Ceballinus  and  Philotas.  When  every 
thing,after  strict  examination^  was  fully  discovered,  Dimnus  stabbed 
himself.  Philotas  confessed  his  neglect  in  not  making  the  discovery; 
bat  utterly  denied  that  he  bad  any  hand  in  the  conspiracy.  The  king 
hereupon  committed  the  examination  of  the  business  to  the  judgment 
of  the  Macedonians,  who  after  many  arguments  and  debat/es.j^roand 
coHf  condemned  Philolas  and  the  rest  of  the  conspirators  to  die;  a- 
mongst  whom  was  Parmenio,  who  was  ever  thought  to  have  been 
one  of  the  king's  most  faithful  friends.  And  though  he  was  not 
then  present,  yet  it  was  suspected  that  he  managed  the  business  bj 
bis-8on  Philotas. 

Philotas  therefore,  being  put  upon  the  irack,  confessed  the  whole 
plot;  and  so  he  and  the  other  conspirators  were  put  to  death,  accord- 
ing to  the  manner  of  their  own  country.  Alexander  Lyncestes  alsc;, 
(who  was  before  accused  of  a  conspiracy  against  the  king),  suffered 
in  the  same  manner.  He  had  been  now  three  years  in  custody,  but 
his  trial  was  deferred  till  that  time  for  the  sake  of  Antigonus,  who  had 
a  great  kindness  for  him,  and  between  whom  there  was  a  particular 
friendship  an2  familiarity.  But  being  then  brought  before  the  Ma- 
cedonian senate,  and  having  nothing  by  way  of  plea  to  say  for  him- 
self, he  was  executed  with  the  rest. 

Then  Alexander  despatched  messengers  upon  dromedary-camels, 
to  prevent  the  report  of  Philotas's  punishment,  and  by  that  means 
caused  Parmenio  the  father  of  Philotas  to  be  seized  unawares,  and 
put  to  death ;  he  was  then  governor  of  Media,  and  was  intrusted  with 
the  king's  treasures  in  Ecbatana,  which  amounted  to  a  hundred  and 
four  score  thousand  talents.  About  the  same  time  he  severed  from 
the  rest  of  his  army  all  such  as  had  given  out  harsh  expressions  against 
him,  and  grumbled  at  the  death  of  Parmenio,  and  all  those  who  had 
written-false  and  scandalous  letters  to  their  friends  in  Macedonia,  re- 
lating to  the  king's  affairs :  all  these  he  cast  into  one  company  or 
regiment  which  he  called  the  Unruly  Company,  lest  by  their  un* 
seasonable  jangling  and  prating,  they  should  corrupt  the  rest  of  the 
Macedonians. 

After  these  things  thus  done,  and  that  he  had  settled  his  affairs  In 
Drangina,  he  marched  against  the  Arimaspi,  (as  they  were  antiently 
called),butuow£vergetse^,  which  name  was  given  them  upon  the 

•  Benefactors. 


t24  nioooHOs  sicuLUS.  BookXFjUm 


fbltowiog  Account :  Cyrus,  (who  was  the  first  that  tianslated  the  c»- 
pire  from  the  Medes  to  the  Persiaos},  in  a  certeio  enpedkion  hs  had 
vndcrtakeiiy  being  brought  iuto  great  extremity  ia  a  baneft  eottDHy 
fov  waut  of  provisions,  insomuch  as  the  soldiers,  tosatisfy  their  bvBgtrj 
were  forced  to  eat  the  flesh  of  one  another;  the  Arimaspi  al  thai  tinie 
brought  to  his  army  thirty  thousand  carts  and  waggons  loader  witb 
pro¥i$frioiis.  And  therefore  the  king  being  unexpectedly  lelieYed  attd 
preserved,  not  only  acquitted  the*  people  from  paying  of  Iribuite  fsi 
Ibe  future,  but  bestowed  upon  them  many  other  privileges  and  bowi* 
tiful  rewards,  and  clianged  their  old  name  to  Evergetttw 

And  now  when  Alexander  came  into  their  country^  they  leceiadl 
bim  with  all  the  demonstrations  of  love  and  kindness^  and  be  lewudcA 
them  with  marks  of  his  grace  and  favour,  suitable  to  lus  state  ap4 
dignity.  And  returned  the  like  favour  to  the  Gedrosians  theiir  QC^|^ 
bours^  who  hud  enteitaincd  him  likewise  with  the  same  lespecti  and 
over  these  two  nations  he  mnAe  Teridates  governor. 

In  the  mean  time  while  he  staid  in  these  parts,  some  brought  biOl 
jnteliigence  that  Satibancancs  with  a  great  body  of  horse  out  of  Bac* 
tria,  had  entered  the  country  of  tlte  Arians,  and  hadwithdiaw»  ^ 
inhabitants  from  their  allegiance.  Upon  which  the  king  sent  apuQfll 
lum  part  of  the  army,  under  tlie  command  of  Erigyus  and  Staiaodin 
He  hiaeiself  in  the  mean  time  in  a  few  days  subdued  Araehqaia>  rai 
caused  them  to  submit  to  his  government.. 


CHAP.  IX. 

Alexander  nutrchrs  against  the  Parcpamisades.  His  troHitttmrn 
march.  Conies  to  mount  Caucasus.  A  battle  m  jhia  Zy  ^iurw 
ander's  officers  against  SatibarzaneSj  who  is  killed  m  a  smgh 
combat  by  Erigyus.  Besssus  brought  to  Alexander;  Aisfmtitk^ 
ment.  Alexander  AHls  some  barbarians  wiexpededfy^  efUt  iksjf 
had  surrendered  their  city.  He  marches  to  the  river  AtkiMk 
Mophis's  remarkable  delivery  up  of  himself  and  Me  oraiy. 

AT  the  end  of  this  year  Euthycritus  was  created  chief  govenoE  of 
Athene,  Lucius  Plottus,  and  Lucius  Papirius  executing  the  ofiicc  oT 
Ki)man  consuls.     At  this  time  was  celebrated  the  hundred  and  thir* 

tccuth  olympiad.    Then  Alexander  led  his  army  against  the  Para* 


€Aap.  /K'  mODORUS  STOULUS.  SS5 

paniisadei*  This  country  lies  vtrj  far  norths  and  is  covered  over  with 
ibow,  and  by  reason  of  the  sharpness  of  the  cold,  people  cannot  en- 
dure to  come  into  their  country.  The  greatest  part  oF  it  is  open  and 
plain,  withoat  any  trees,  and  has  in  it  many  towns  scattered  here  and 
tfceic.  The  roofi  of  their  houses  are  covered  with  tiles,  running  up 
in  shape  of  a  spire,  in  the  middle  is  a  hole  to  let  in  light,  and  to  eva- 
porate the  sm€>ke:  and  the  walls  of  their  houses  are  so  closely  jointed 
and  cemented,  that  the  inhabitants  ar  esufficiently  guarded  against 
the  cold.  By  reason  of  the  great  drifts  of  snow,  they  keep  within 
tfieir  bouses  the  most  part  of  the  year,  where  they  have  every  thing 
accessary  for  their  provision  laid  up  in  store.  They  cover  their  vines 
and  fruit'trcfs  all  the  winter  with  earth,  and  uncover  them  again 
when  the  spring  approaches.  The  nature  of  all  this  tract  is  such, 
diat  nothing  that  is  green  or  pleasant  is  seen  in  any  part  of  it;  but 
ittow  glittering  with  ice  covers  all  places.  No  sorts  of  fowls  or  birds 
bleed  here;  no  wild  beasts  feed  in  the  woods  or  forests;  insomuch^ 
as  that  there  is  neither  entertainment  for  any  stranger,  nor  hospita- 
iicj  OM  with  anctherthroaghout  the  whole  country.  Notwithstand- 
ing all  these  diffionlties,  yet  th<  king,  encouraged  by  the  hardiness  of 
^K  Macedonians;  and  pot  on  forward  by  his  own  daring  resolution, 
^fvereame  all  the  disadvantages  of  the  place.  But  yet  some  of  the 
mMknf  and  others  that  straggled  and  kept  not  up  with  the  rest,  were 
«o  tired,  that  they  were  left  behind.  Others,  by  the  brightness  and 
.dtarpness  of  the  snow,  and  reflection  thereof  upon  their  eyes,  were 
destroyed.  Nothing  could  be  seen  at  a  distance,  save  only  the  smoke 
that  discovered  the  villages;  which  was  a  sign  to  the  Macedonians 
that  there  were  inhabitants  not  far  off.  The  towns  being  thus  dis- 
covered and  gained,  the  soldiers,  after  their  great  hardships,  refreshed 
themselves  with  the  plentiful  store  of  provisions  they  found  in  the 
houses,  and  in  a  short  time  all  the  inhabitants  submitted. 

After  this,  he  marched  forward,  and  came  near  to  Caucasus,  where 
he  encamped.  That  mountain  by  some  is  called  Paropamisus :  hav- 
ing passed  over  the  breadth  of  the.  mountain  in  sixteen  days  marcb, 
he  bniit  a  city  called  Alexandria,  near  the  foot  of  the  mount,  at  a 
pass  which  opens  a  way  into  Media.  In  the  middle  of  Caucasus-  is  a 
rock  ten  furlongs  in  compass,  and  four  in  height,  wherein  the  inha- 
bitants pretend  to  shew  Prometheus's'^  cave,  the  fabulous  vulture's 
nest,  and  the  chains  and  fetters.  He  built  likewise  other  cities, 
etch  distant  a  day's  journey  from  Alexandria.  In  these  he  planted 
seven  thousand  of  the  barbarians,  three  thousand  of  those  that  fol- 
lowed the  camp,  and  as  many  of  the  mercenary  soldiers  as  would. 
*  See  this  itory  'm  Otid'i  Met«morphoii»,  lib.  i.  and  otbtr  pottt. 

Vol.  2.  No.  43.  oa» 


226  DIODORU9  81CULUS.  Book  XPU. 

Hence  he  marched  into  Bactria;  for  he  heard  that  Bessns  had 
usurped  the  crown,  and  liad  raised  a  numerous  army.  These  weie  tlie 
things  then  done  by  Alexander. 

In  the  meau  time,  the  commanders  that  were  sent  into  Aria,  there 
found  the  ring-leaders  of  the  rebellion,  with  a  strong  army,  under 
the  command  of  Satibarzanes,  an  experienced  and  valiant  generaL 
The  armies  encamped  near  to  one  another,  and  sometimes  would  en- 
gage in  considerable  bodies,  and  at  others  in  light  skurmishes,  by  a 
few  on  each  side.  At  length  it  came  to  a  general  battle,  and,  in  the 
midst  of  the  fight^  (wherein  the  valour  of  the  barbarians  was  aucfa 
that  the  issue  was  very  doubtful),  Satibarzanes  himself  (to  discover 
who  he  was)  pulled  off  his  helmet  with  his  own  hand,  and  challenged 
any  of  his  enemy's  commanders  to  fight  with  him  liand  to  hand :  upon 
which  Erigyus  made  up  to  him,  and  a  stout  combat  ensued,  in  which 
Erigyus  was  victor.  The  barbarians,  upon  the  death  of  their  general, 
were  so  disheartened,  that,  upon  receiving  quarter,  they  gave  up  theoH 
selves  to  the  king. 

In  the  mean  while,  Bessus  had  taken  upon  him  the  name  of  Idogf 
and,  having  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  invited  his  friends  to  feast  mdi 
him.  In  the  midst  of  his  cups,  he  began  to  quarrel  with  one  of  laf 
companions,  called  Bagodares,  and,  the  contest  growing  higher^  he 
fell  at  length  into  such  a  rage,  that  he  resolved  to  kill  him,  but 
changed  his  mind,  through  the  persuasion  of  his  friends.  Bagodares 
thus  narrowly  escaping  with  his  life,  fled  in  the  night  to  Aiexandert 
The  chief  of  the  commanders  (moved  by  the  consideration  of  hie  es- 
cape, and  stirred  up  by  hopes  of  rewards)  conspired  together^  and 
seized  iy>on  Bessus,  and  brought  htm  to  Alexander,  for  which  the 
king  bountifuliy  rewarded  them.  As  for  Bessus,  he  gave  him  np 
into  the  hands  of  Darius 's  brother,  and  the  rest  of  his  kindredj  to 
punish  iiim  in  such  manner  as  they  thought  fit,  who,  after  they  had 
put  hlai  to  all  manner  of  torments,  and  used  him  with  all  the  de^pitCi 
and  disgrace  imaginable,  cut  his  body  into  small  pieces,  and  hurled 
every  part  here  and  there  out  of  their  slings,  »»**«***♦ 

Here  the  history  is  broken  off]  anid  hit,  ifiz»  1.  Alemmda^M 
march  through  a  dry  country.  2.  Uie  defection  of  ike  Sogf^ 
diani  and  Bactrimis.    3.  Tlie  hunting  in  Baheutii^ 

Peace  being  made  upon  these  conditions,  and  ratified  by  mutual, 
oatlis,  the  queen^  migiitily  admired  the  brave  and  noble  spirit  of 

*  Queeu  uf  iMassaga,  io  IndU. 


CSap.IX,  moDORUfl  8ICULUS.  397 


Alexander^  and  sent  to  him  most  rich  presents^  promising  to  do 
whatever  he  pleased  to  command.  »**»**♦* 

Hare  liketvise  the  history  is  lost.  4.  -The  impiety  against 
Bacchus.  5.  The  death  of  Clitns  atid  Callisthenes.  6, 
fFars  with  the  Nautic^e.    J.-  His  marriage  with  Moxana. 

8.    €f  Nicaea, These  may  he  supplied  out  of  Archiany 

lib.  4,  and  Q.  Curtius,  lib.  7,  B. 

Thbn  the  mercenaries,  as  they  had  agreed^  forthwith  left  the  city> 
and,  having  marched  eight  hundred  furlongs,  encamped  without  any 
disturbance,  not  in  the  least  suspecting  any  thing  of  that  which  af- 
terwards happened :  for  Alexander,  hating  them  implacably,  pursued 
tfaem  with  a  considerable  body  of  men,  and  fell  upon  the  barbarians 
on  the  sudden,  and  cut  off  multitudes  of  them.  Upon  which  the 
mercenaries  first  cried  out,  that  he  had  violated  his  oath,  in  felling 
upon  them  in  that  hostile  manner,  and  called  upon  the  gbds  to  re- 
venge that  impious  cruelty  executed  upon  them.    But  the  king,  with 

a  loud  voice,  answered ^That  he  did,  indeed,  agree  that  they  should 

^it  the  city,  but  not  that  they  should  ever  be  accounted  as  friends 
to  the  Macedonians.  Hereupon  the  barbarians,  no  at  all  terrified  at 
the  desperate  condition  they  were  in*,  drew  up  in  a  body  in  a  ronnd 
ring,  placing  their  wives,  children,  and  women  in  the  middle,  that 
they  might  receive  the  enemy  on  every  side  with  less  hazard  and  pre* 
judice.  Being  therefore  desperate,  and  of  daring  spirits,  and  encou- 
raged by  their  successes  in  former  conflicts,  they  bravely  received 
the  enemy.  The  Macedonians,  on  the  other  hand,  resolving  to  be  in 
nothing  inferior  to  them,  the  engagement  was  very  sharp  and  terri- 
ble. For,  fighting  close  hand  to  hand,  man  to  man,  various  kinds  of 
death  and  wounds  appeared  every  where:  for  the  Macedonians,  by 
their  sarissasf,  pierced  through  the  brittle  shields  of  the  barbarians 
with  that  violence,  that  the  points  ran  into  their  very  bodies.  Tlic 
mercenaries,  likewise,  on  their  part  threw  their  lances  among  th(^ 
the  thickest  of  their  enemies,  upon  whom  (being  so  near)  they  were 
sure  not  to  fail  in  doing  execution.  When  a  great  number  of  them 
were  wounded,  and  as  many  killed,  the  women  took  up  the  arms  of 
those  that  were  slain,  and  joined  with  the  men  in  the  engagement : 
for  the  despcrateness  of  their  condition,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
work  in  hand,  forced  them  to  the  most  resolute  resistance  for  the  de-« 
fence  of  themselves.   Some  of  them  therefore  getting  arms,  defended 

♦  These  mcrcennries  were  the  Massauf  tT. 
t  ^ar'iMa,  :i  Muct  (Ionian  ^[icar  ur  Ihu^c. 


Sf  8  DIODOEUS  8ICULUS.  Boqt  X  FliZ^ 


their  busbaDds  with  shields;  others  that  had  no  arms  rushed  in  i 
the  enemy,  and  caught  hold  of  their  bucklers,  so  that  thej  i 
scarce  do  any  thing.  At  length  all  the  men,  together  with  their 
wives,  (who  valiantly  fought  to  the  last),  being  overpowered  bye  mul- 
titudes, died  upon  the  place,  preferring  an  honourable  death  before  s 
life  with  slavery  and  disgrace.  The  useless  and  unarmed  luhble,  to- 
geiher  with  the  women  that  were  left,  he  gave  to  his  horsemen. 
He  took  likewise  several  other  cities,  putting  them  to  the  sword  that 
opposed  him. 

Hence*  he  moved  forward  to  the  rock  called  Aornos;  for  htn 
those  inhabita^uts  that  survived  sheltered  themselves,  it  being  a  very 
strong  place.     It  is  reported,  that  the  antient  Hercules  attempted 
the  taking  this  place,  but  wrs  forced  to  quit  the  siege,  by  reason  of 
tcriible  earthquakes,  and  other  prodigies  of  the  guds,  that  happened 
there  at  that  time;  which  coming  to  the  ears  of  Alexander,  it  made 
him  far  more  eager  to  assault  the  place,  as  if  he  gloried  to  be  that 
god's  co-rival  both  in  might  and  power.     The  rock  was  an  hundred 
furlongs  round,  and  sixteen  high,  and  seemed  to  he  even  and  steep, 
and  every  where  round.    At  tlie  foot  of  the  rock  towards  the  south 
runs  the  Indus,  the  greatest  river  of  India :  other  parts  are  environed 
by  inaccessible  rocks  and  dreadful  precipices.    Alexander,  upon  view 
of  the  place,  concluded  that  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  take  it 
by  force.    At  thai  instant  there  came  to  him  an  old  man,  with  his 
two  sons,  who  iiad  a  long  time  lived  in  those  places,  in  a  very  poor 
and  low  condition :  he  had  there  a  little  cell  cut  in  the  rock,  wherein 
were  three  beds :  he  and  his  sons  lodging  together  in  this  place,  he 
was  very  well  acquainted  with  all  the  avenues  and  passages  round 
about.     When  he  came,  therefore,  to  the  king,  he  told  him  hia  con-* 
dition,  and  promised  to  lead  the  king  through  the  straits  and  craggy 
by-ways,  to  a  post  where  he  might  assault  the  barbarians  upon  the 
rock.     Hereupon  Alexander  promised  him  a  large  reward,  made  use 
of  his  conduct,  and  in  the  first  phice  possessed  himself  of  the  only 
passage  tiiat  led  up  to  the  top  of  the  rock :  and,  because  there  was 
no  other  way  to  pass,  he  so  blocked  up  the  besieged,  that  there 
was  no  relief  to  be  expected.    Then,  by  the  help  of  many  hands,  he 
raised  up  a  mount  from  the  foot  of  the  rock;  and  he  advanced  so 
close  up  to  the  enemy,  that  by  this  means  he  made  a  very  sharp  and 
vigorous  assault,  which  continued,  without  any  interruption,  night 
and  day,  for  the  space  of  seven  days.    At  the  beginning  the  barba- 
rians, by  advantage  of  the  height  of  the  fort,  prevailed,  and  cut  o£F 

^  Here  it  falls  in  with  tht  index  pUced  before  the  •CTCDtcentb  book  in  the  Greek 

-.*ditio:i  cf  Ulio'iumBCiius. 


CkMp.IX.  D10D0EU8  SICULUl.  tf9 

many  who  too  rashly  forced  in  upon  them:  but^when  the  battery 
wan  raiacd  up  to  its  due  height^  and  the  engines  for  shooting  of  darts 
and  other  warlike  instruments  were  brought  up,  and  that  the  reso« 
lotion  of  the  king  not  to  leave  the  assault  was  dbcemed,  the  besieged 
were  in  a  great  consternation,  fiut  Alexander,  wisely  foreseeing 
what  would  be  the  issue^  commanded  the  guard  that  he  had  left  at 
the  passage  to  withdraw^  that  so  the  enemy  might  have  free -liberty  to 
depart,  if  they  chose  it. 

Upon  which  the  barbarians,  affrighted  by  the  valour  of  the  Mace- 
donians, and  the  king's  brave  resolution,  in  the  night  left  the  fort« 
The  Indians  being  thus  frighted  with  a  scarecrow,  the  king  gained 
iht  rock  without  any  considerable  loss;  and  then,  having  rewarded 
his  g^ide,  marched  away  with  his  forces  to  other  places. 

About  that  time  there  was  one  Aphrices,  an  Indian,  that  lay  in 
those  parts  with  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  men,  and  fifteen  ele- 
phants :  him  the  Indians  killed,  and  brought  his  head  to  Alexander, 
and  by  that  means  gained  his  favour.  He  possessed  himself  likewise 
of  all  the  elephants  in  that  tract,  and  received  the  Indians  into  his 
protection.  Thence  he  moved  to  the  river  Indus,  where,  being  fur- 
nished with  some  ships  of  thirty  oars  a-piece,  with  them  he  made 
a  bridge  over  the  river,  and  continued  in  that  place  for  the  space  of 
thirty  days,  to  refresh  his  army,  and  there  offered  magnificent  sacfi- 
Hces  to  the  gods. 

After  he  had  passed  over  his  forces,  there  happened  something 
trousnal  and  remarkable »  one  Taxiles,  who  formerly  reigned  in  that 
country,  being  lately  dead,  his  son  Mophis  succeeded  him;  this 
Mophis  some  time  before  had  sent  an  ambassador  to  Alexander, 
when  he  was  in  Sogdiana,  to  offer  him  his  assistance  against  the 
Indians  that  were  then  preparing  to  oppose  him,  and  likewise  pro- 
mised to  deliver  up  his  kingdom  into  the  king's  hands.  When  the 
Icing  was  thirty  furlongs  distant,  Mophis  and  his  friends  marched  to- 
wards him  with  a  well-appointed  army,  and  elephants  adorned  and 
fitted  for  battle.  When  Alexander  saw  so  numerous  an  army  ad- 
vance, he  believed  the  Indian  had  made  a  cloak  of  his  promises  to 
cover  his  fraud,  and  by  that  means  to  surprise  the  Macedonians 
unawares;  therefore  he  commanded  the  trumpets  to  give  the  signal 
of  battle,  and  drew  up  his  army  in  bi\ttalia,  and  advanced  towards  the 
Indians.  But  Mophis,  being  informed  of  the  sudden  commotion  that 
was  amongst  the  Macedonians,  and  easily  judging  the  occasion, 
commanded  his  army  to  make  a  halt,  and  he  himself,  with  a  few  in 
his  compaoy,  posted  away,  and  presently  undeceived  the  Macedo- 
nians, by  delivering  up  himself  and  his  army  (which  was  the  strength 
of  the  kingdom)  into  the  power  of  the  king;  who  was  so  well  pleased 


tSO  DIODOKUS  Blcvi.Vif. '  Book  XFIL 

with  what  the  fanrbariftn  bad  done,  that  he  restored  him  to  hi»  king-* 
dom,  and  ever  after  found  Taxiles  (for  so  he  was  called)  his  conatant ' 
and  faithful  friend  and  associate.    And  these  were  the  tranaactioM 
of  this  year. 


CHAP.  X. 


jfltxander  avertomes  Ponu.  How  jfyes  are  tai^n,  Siftrng^ 
serpents  for  venoiu.  Large  trees.  He  marches  against  the 
Amlrastium,  Cat/iari,  and  against  Sophithes.  The  cusium  of 
thein  under  Sophifhes.  Indian  dogs.  Alexander  entertained  bp 
Phigeus.  The  Macedonians  refuse  to  march  against  the  6«n- 
daritic^  Alexander  leaves  momwients  behind  him  at  the  river 
Hydaspes.  JSicaa  atid  Bucc])halus  built.  The  Iberians  fnreseni 
Alexander.  He  routs  i/ie  Agalasscs.  Is  in  danger  in  tie 
river  Iiulusy  by  whirlpools.  3Iarches  against  the  Oxydraeee 
and  Maim.  Tlie  king  leaps  off*  the  wall  into  the  tounu  A. 
duel  between  Coragus  and  Dioxijtpus.  The  Sambestee  submii 
to  Alexander;  and  also  the  Sogdiani  and  Massmii.  Subdues 
Musicaiius,  Pottieanusy  and  Smnbics.    Poisoned  leeapans..    Tie 

,  Jung's  dreauu  Coines  into  the  main  ocean.  Comes  into  GlaAro- 
sia^  The  savagen'ess  of  the  people.  His  army  near  periAimg 
in  Gcdrosia.  Comes  into  Carmania.  Punishes  the  JSormeiat 
Coremours.  Nearchus  returns.  Islands  covered  at  high  tides. 
The  strafige  death  if  Calaitus.  Alexander  marries  Statintm 
Harpaius's  liLvury.  Alexander  seizes  tvi(h  his  own  hand  them 
that  had  mutinied. 

AT  tlie  time  when  Chremes  was  lord-chancellor  at  Athens,  and  PoI»-- 
lius  Cornelius  and  Aulus  Posthumius  executed  the  consalshqi  at 
Rome,  Alexander,  after  he  had  refreshed  his  army  in  the  province  of 
Taxiles,  marched  against  Poms,  prince  of  the  neighbouring  Indiana, 
who  had  in  his  army  above  fifty  thousand  foot,  three  thousand  hone, 
above  a  thousand  chariots,  and  a  hundred  and  thirty  elephants^  and 
was  coni^bderated  with  another  neighbouring  king,  called  Embisarvs^ 
not  inferior  in  power  to  Porus.  Alexander,  understaDiding  that  be 
was  nut  above  four  hundrinl  furlongs  distant  from  Porus,  advanced 
with  a  resolution  to  figiit  ium  before  the  other  joined  him.  Porus 
|,u-ii.:civiiig  him  to  approach^  drew  up  his  horse  in  two  wiugs;  bia 


Chap.  X.  DIOliORUS  SICULUS.  «st 

ckphuiU,  so  acootttred  as  to  terrify  his  enemies,  he  plaeed  at  eqail 
dlsUnoes  one  from  another  in  the  front,  and  lined  them  with  his 
armed  men,  who  were  commanded  to  guard  and  defend  them  from 
darts  and  arrows  in  the  flank.  The  wliole  army  drawn  up  thus  ia 
hatfalia,  seemed  like  a  city:  for  the  elephants  stood  like  so  many 
towers,  and  the  soldiers  placed  among  them  resembled  the  waUs« 
Alexander,  on  the  other  hand,  (observing  how  his  enemies  were  drawa 
up),  so  disposed  and  ordered  his  own  men  as  the  present  circum- 
stanees  of  his  affiurs  then  required. 

The  horse  engird  in  the  first  place,  and  tliereupon  almost  all  the 
Indian  chariots  wese  presently  broken  in  pieces;  afterwards  the  cle- 
|ibants  being  made  use  of,  (by  the  miglity  bulk  of  their  bodies,  and 
their  great  strength),  bore  down  and  trod  under  foot  many  of  the 
Macedonians;  others  were  catched  up  in  their  trunks,  and  tossei 
into  Che  air,  and  then  fell  down  again  with  great  violence  ^pon  the 
paith,  and  so  miserably  perished;  many,  likewise,  were,  so  rent  and 
torn  with  their  teeth,  that  they  died  forthwith.  However,  the  IVIa- 
cedooians  with  invincible  courage  endured  all  the  iuirdships  wiiere- 
Bfiik  tbcy  were  pressed,  and  with  their  sar^ssas  killed  the  soldiers  that 
guarded  the  elephants;  so  that  now  they  fought  upon  equal  terms: 
and  not  long  after,  the  beasts  bein^;  plied  with  darts  on  every  side, 
and  not  being  aUe  longer  to  endure  the  jnaoy  wounds  they  received, 
their  riders  were  not  able  to  rule  them,  insomuch  that  they  furiously 
rushed  backwards,  and  broke  in  upon  their  own  regiments,  and  trod 
many  of  them  under  foot,  which  caused  great  disturbance  and  con* 
fosion.  Upon  which  Porus,  mounted  upon  the  bravest  elephant, 
(seeing  how  things  were  likely  to  be),  commanded  forty  of  tliosc  that 
were  not  as  yet  startled  and  affrighted,  to  be  placed  round  about  him. 
And  with  these  lu;  made  so  desperate  and  fierce  a  chaigc,  that  he 
made  a  great  sUiughter  amongst  the  Macedonians;  especially,  being 
a  man  of  the  strongest  body  of  all  those  that  were  with  him;  for  lie 
was  five  cubits  high,  and  in  hulk  proportionable,  so  that*  Ills  breast- 
plate was  twice  as  big  as  any  of  the  rest  of  tlie  strongest  men  a- 
moogst  them,  and  he  threw  a  dart  with  as  great  force  us  if  it  had 
been  shot  out  of  au  engine.  But  this  extraordinary  strength  of 
Porus  did  not  at  all  terrify  the  Macedonians  that  were  pkced  in  the 
front  against  him :  Alexander  therefore  commanded  the  archers  and 
light-armed  men,  with  all  their  darts  and  arrows,  to  make  at  Porus 
himself,  who  did  as  they  were  commanded:  so  that  such  a  multi- 
tude of  archers  were  got  together  in  one  body,  and  suph  showers  of 
darts  and  arrows  poured  out  u]>on  him,  that  they  could  not  possibly 
miss  their  mark.  Porus  at  length,  (haviug  fought  with  great  valour 
au(} resolution),  by  a  multitude  uf  wounds,  lust  $a  much  blood  that  his 


fiSt  DioMRus  Bicvhvn.  Book  JTKEr. 

•ptrits  foiled  him,  and  he  fell  down  ffmn  hia  beast  to  the  grottfed. 
Upon  whichj  it  being  presently  spread  abroad  that  the  king  waa  dead, 
the  rest  of  the  Indians  fled,  and  thereupon  a  great  slaoghter  waa  aaada 
amongst  them. 

Alexander  having  thus  gahied  this  glorious  Tictory,  at  lengA  com* 
manded  his  trumpets  to  sound  a  retreat.  But  there  were  killed  ia 
this  battle  above  tweWe  thousand  Indians,  amongst  whom  were  two 
sons  of  Poms,  the  generals  of  his  army,  and  the  ehiefest  of  his  ooiii* 
manders.  There  were  taken  above  nine  thousand  prisoners,  and  tOmt* 
score  elephants.  As  for  Porus,  he  was  not  yet  quite  dead,  and  there- 
ibre  Alexander  recommended  him  to  the  care  of  the  Indiana  theM^ 
selves,  tor  the  dressing  of  his  wounds.  There  fell  of  the  Macedo* 
Bians  two  hundred  and  fourscore  horse,  and  above  seven  hudred 
fbor,  whom  the  king  took  care  to  have  decently  buried,  and  rewarded 
those  Aat  sunnved  who  had  merited  by  their  valour.  He  sacrificed^ 
likewise,  to  the  sun,  through  whose  fiivonr  and  assistance  he  had 
conquered  the  east.  The  neighbouring  mountains  being  clothed  fMk 
great  numbers  of  fir-trees,  cedars,  and  the  pitch-tree,  the  plaee  af* 
fords  plentiful  materials  for  the  building  of  ships;  and  therdbM  he 
built  as  many  here  as  he  had  occasion  for:  for  he  designed,  whea 
he  came  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  India,  after  he  had  subdued  those 
nations  that  lay  in  his  way,  to  pass  along  through  the  river  into  the 
ocean. 

In  the  mean  time,  he  built  two  cities  in  those  parts,  one  upon  the 
farther  side  of  the  river*  where  he  passed  over;  the  other  where  he 
overcame  Porus,  and  both  were  presently  perfected,  having  many 
hands  at  work. 

Porus  being  recovered,  he  restored  him  to  the  possessbn  of  his 
kingdom;  and,  because  there  was  plenty  of  all  sorts  of  provisions^ 
he  suffered  his  army  to  He  still  and  refresh  themselves  for  the  space 
of  thirty  days. 

There  are  some  things  very  remarkable,  and  worth  observing,  in 
the  mountains  near  where  they  encamped:  for,  besides  the  materiala 
for  shipping,  this  tract  abounds  with  serpents  of  a  vast  bigness,  six- 
teen cubits  in  length,  and  breeds  a  sort  of  apes  to  be  admired  both 
for  their  number  and  the  greatness  of  their  bodies.  The  nature  of 
the  beast  has  instructed  the  hunter  how  to  take  her:  for  they  are 
apt  to  imitate  every  action  they  see;  but,  because  of  their  strength 
and  natural  sagacity,  it  is  very  difficult  to  take  them  by  force.  There- 
fore some  of  the  hunters  anoint  their  eyes  with  honey,  and  others  put 
on  shoes  in  the  sight  of  the  apes;  and  some  there  are  that  clap  upon 
their  heads  looking-glassesf :    then  they  leave  some  shoes  behind 

^  RlTcr  Hydaipes.  t  Glaisei  roadt  hoUow  lik«  CApi. 


Ckap.  X  DIOOORUS  8ICULU9.  233 

i  *  ■  ■    — ^— —  ■ 

them,  with  banck  fixed  to  thero^  and  instead  of  honey  lay  bird'^lime, 
and  within  the  glasses  are  ropes  to  run  on  nooses*  When  they  are 
gone,  the  poof  creatures  begin  presently  to  imitate  what  they  saw  done, 
and  so  are  deluded;  for  their  eye-lids  are  glued  together,  their  feet 
are  fast  bound,  and  their  whole  bodies  held  by  the  snares;  and  so 
they  become  an  easy  prey  to  the  hunter. 

Afterwards,  Alexander  forced  Embisarus  (who  had  been  so  slow  in 
assisting  Poms,  and  was  now  in  a  consternation)  to  a  submission; 
and  then  he  passed  the  river  with  his  forces,  and  made  his  way  through 
a  most  fruitful  country :  for  here  are  strange  sorts  of  trees,  seventy 
cubits  high,  and  of  that  thickness  that  four  men  can  scarcely  compass 
them,  and  cast  a  shade  three  hundred  feet  distance. 

There  are  likewise  in  this  tract  multitudes  of  serpents  of  small 
bodies,  but  for  their  various  colour  most  remarkable:  for  thousands 
lie  like  rods,  yellow  as  brass;  others  have  very  rough  and  hairy 
breasts,  and  whoever  is  bitten  by  them  falls  down  dead  immediately. 
If  any  be  stung  by  them,  he  is  most  horridly  tormented,  aud  a  bloody 
sweat  issues  out  at  all  the  pores  of  his  body.  The  Macedonians,  to 
secnre  tliemselves  from  these  mischiefs,  hung  up  their  beds  on  the 
limbs  of  these  trees,  watching  the  greatest  part  of  the  night;  but  at 
length,  by  some  of  the  inhabitants,  they  were  directed  to  a  root  which 
was  an  antidote  against  the  poison. 

After  the  king  had  moved  from  thence,  he  was  informed  that 
Por4is,a  neighbouring  prince,  nephew  of  the  Poms  lately  vanquished, 
was  fled  out  of  his  kingdom,  and  gone  to  the  GandaritsB.  At  which 
Alexander  was  not  a  little  troubled,  and  thereupon  sent  Hephastion 
with  a  considerable  body  of  men  into  his  dominion,  and  ordered  him 
to  reduce  it  into  the  nature  of  a  province,  and  to  deliver  it  into  the 
hands  of  his  friend  Porus.  He  himself  marched  into  the  country  of 
the  Audrastians,  and  gained  some  of  their  cities  by  assault,  and  others 
by  surrender. 

Thence  he  came  into  the  country  of  the  Cathari,  where  by  the  law 
the  living  wives  are  burnt  together  with  their  dead  husbands;  and  the 
wickedness  and  treachery  of  one  woman,  who  poisoned  her  husband, 
was  the  occasion  of  this  law.  Tliere  the  king  burnt  down  to  the 
ground  the  greatest  and  strongest  town  of  all  others  in  those  parts, 
after  he  had  with  great  difficulty  and  hazard  taken  it  by  assault. 
The  inhabitants  of  another  town,  which  he  was  ready  to  assault, 
came  forth,  and  humbly  submitted  themselves  to  him,  upon  which  he 
spared  them. 

Hence  he  led  his  army  to  the  cities  belonging  to  Sopliithes,  which 
were  governed  by  moist  excellent  laws ;  amongst  the  rest  tiiey  strictly 
observe  this.^To  value  their  beauty  and  comely  proportion  above  all 

Vol..  2,  No.  43,  iiu 


SS4  DIODORU9  MCULUS.  Book  JLFIh 

Other  things;  and  therefore  they  carefully  examine  itnr^  part  of  tbe 
child  when  it  is  in  the  cradle,  and  such  as  are  sound  and  perfect  in 
every  limb  and  member,  and  likely  to  be  strong  and  comely,  they 
nurse  and  bring  up;  but  such  as  are  lame  and  deficient,  and  of  a  wmk 
habit  of  body,  they  kill,  as  not  worth  the  rearing.  They  hare  the 
same  regard  to  their  marriages;  for  without  any  regard  to  portion, 
or  any  other  advantages,  they  only  mind  the  beauty  of  the  perion, 
and  the  heallh  and  strength  of  their  bodies.  Hence  it  is,  that  those 
who  live  in  those  cities,  are  for  the  most  part  more  beautiful  and  comely 
than  others.  But  Sophithes  the  king  surpassed  all  the  rest  of  his 
subjects  for  admirable  beauty  and  stately  proportnn;  for  he  was  a« 
bove  four  cubits  high :  he  came  forth  from  his  royal  city,  and  gavt 
iip  himself  and  kingdom  into  the  hands  of  Alexander;  and  from  the 
bounty  of  the  victor  forthwith  received  it  back  again ;  and  thereupon 
he  nobly  feasted  Alexander  and  all  his  army  for  several  days  together. 
And  after  many  rich  presents  made  to  him,  he  presented  him  with  a 
hundred  and  fifty  dogs  of  a  wonderful  strength  and  bigness,  and  of 
other  most  remarkable  properties.  It  was  said  they  were  brought  forth 
by  tigers,  who  had  coupled  with  dogs.  Alexander  wishing  by  an  ex- 
periment to  try  their  strength  and  courage,  caused  an  exceeding  great 
lion  to  be  brought  into  the  circus,  and  then  loosed  at  him  two  of  the 
weakest  of  the  dogs;  which  proving  too  weak,  he  let  go  two  others. 
The  lion  i>eing  now  surrounded  by  four,  and  overpowered,  Sophithes 
sent  one  with  a  sword,  who  began  to  cut  off  the  right  tliigh  of  one 
of  the  dogs :  upon  which  the  king  called  out,  and  thereupon  the 
squires  of  his  body  ran  to  the  Indian,  and  held  his  hand :  but  So 
phithes  wished  them  to  let  him  alone,  and  promised  to  give  three  for 
that  one.  The  huntsman  therefore  laid  hold  again  on  the  dog's  thigh, 
and  cut  it  off  by  little  and  little ;  and  all  that  while  the  dog  neither 
howled  nor  made  the  least  noise;  but  held  fast  his  hold  till  he  fell 
down  dead  upon  the  lion. 

In  the  mean  time  Hephestion  returned  with  those  troops  before 
sent  along  with  him,  having  subdued  a  great  part  of  India  wherever 
he  came,  and  was  hereupon  honoured  by  the  king  with  all  deserved 
praises. 

Next  Alexander  marched  into  the  kingdom  of  Phigeus,  where  all 
the  Macedonians  were  welcomed  by  the  inhabitants,  and  Phigeus 
himself  meeting  him  with  rich  gifts  and  presents,  willing  to  receive 
from  him  his  kingdom  as  a  gift  of  his  bounty;  which  Alexander  ac- 
cordingly restored  to  him :  and  both  he  and  his  army  being  enter- 
tained by  Phigeus  for  two  days,  he  then  moved  forward  to  the  river 
Hydiispes,  which  is  seven  furlongs  over,  and  six  fathoms  deep,  uf  a 
very  fierce  stream,  and  difficult  to  pass,    lie  had  learned  from  Phi- 


Chap^X.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  5t3S 

geua^  that  beyond  the  Indus  was  a  vast  desert  of  twelve  day's  jour- 
ney; and  at  the  farthest  borders  thereof,  ran  the  Ganges,  two*and- 
twenty  furlongs  broadi  and  die  deepest  of  all  the  rivers  in  India:  and 
that  beyond  this  river,  there  dwelt  the  Tabresians,  the  Gandaritse^ 
whose  king's  name  was  Xaadrames,  who  had  an  army  of  twenty  thou- 
sand hocse,  and  two  hundred  thousand  foot^  two  thousand  chariots^ 
and  four  thousand  elephants*  The  king  «ould  not  believe  this  to  be 
troe,  and  therefore  sent  for  Poms,  and  inquired  of  him  whether  it 
was  so  or  not.  He  told  him  all  was  certainly  true ;  but  that  the  pre- 
sent king  of  the  Gandaritie  was  but  of  a  mean  and  obscure  extrac- 
tion, accounted  to  be  a  barber's  son.  For  his  father  'being  a  very  beau- 
tiful and  handsome  man,  the  queen  fell  in  love  with  him,  and  then 
murdered  her  husband;  and  so  the  kingdom  devolved  upon  the  pre- 
sent king, 

Alexander,  however,  though  he  perceived  that  the  expedition  a« 
gainst  the  Gandarite  would  be  very  difficult,  yet  through  a  desire 
heatUl  iiad  to  gain  further  glory,  would  not  wave  it;  but  confiding 
in  the  valourof  the  Macedonians,  and  the  answers  he  liad  received 
from  the  oraclos,  hoped  to  conquer  all  the  barbarians  wherever  he 
went:  for  he  remembered  that  at  Delphoshe  was  called  by  the  oracle 
Invinciide,  and  that  the  empjre  of  tlie  whole  world  was  promised  to 
him  by  Jupiter  Ammon.  But  discerning  that  his  soldiers  were  even 
tired  out  with  continual  marches,  (for  they  had  now  toiled  them- 
selves with  extreme  liazards  for  eight  years  together),  he  judged  it 
necessary  to  make  a  speech  to  his  army,  to  persuade  them  to  under- 
take with  him  this  expedition  against  the  Gandarite.  For  now  he 
had  lost  many  soldiers,  and  no  hopes  or  prospect  remained  of  ending 
the  war:  nay,  their  very  horse's  hoofs  were  worn  away  by  their  .con- 
tinual marches,  and  -many  of  «heir  arms  wasted  and  become  useless. 
And  besides,  all  their  Grecian  habits  and  clotlies  were -worn  out,  and 
they  were  forced  to  make  use  of  the  barbarian  stuff,  and  cut  the  Indian 
plaids  in  pieces  to  make  themselves  clothes.  And  it  happened  like- 
wise, about  that  time,  that  there  poured  down  from  heaven  fearful 
storms  of  rain,  with  terrible  thunder  and  lightning,  which  continued 
for  seventy  days  together.  All  which,  though  they  happened  cross 
to  his  designs,  as  he  conceived,  yet  he  judged  there  was  one  way  still 
left  fur  him  to  accomplish  what  he  so  much  desired,  and  that  was  by 
bounty  and  liberality  to  gain  the  hearts  of  his  soldiers.  To  that  end, 
he  gave  free  liberty  to  the  soldiers  to  ravage  and  plunder  all  over  the 
enemy's  country,  which  was  rich,  and  abounding  ia  all  good  things. 

While  the  army  was  thus  employed  in  spoilingand  plundering^  he 
called  together  the  soldier's  wives  and  all  their  children  $•  and  among 
the  wives  he  ordered  corn  to  be  distFibutad  every  monih;  and  com* 


i40  lilODORUS  8ICULIT9,  BooJt  XFTL 

fttieiigtb  of  lx)dy,  and  presence  of  mind^  that  it  seemed  as  if  two  of 
the  gods  were  to  fight  a  duel :  for  the  Macedonian^  for  his  stature 
and  the  brightness  of  his  arms,  looked  like  Mars^  Dioxippasy  (be- 
sides his  being  the  stronger  man),  in  his  carrying  of  a  great  elob^ 
and  actiTtty  in  feats  of  arms,  resembled  Hercales.  And  now  botb 
advanced  one  towards  another:  the  Macedoniao,  when  he 
near,  east  his  javelin  at  Dio3uppus,  which  he  avoided  by  a  little  i 
tion  of  his  body,  llien  Coragus  presently  made  at  him  with  his 
Macedonian  sarissa,  which  the  other  (advancing  forward)  broke  in 
pieces  witli  his  truncheon.  The  Macedonian  thus  twice  defeated, 
took  to  his  sword}  but,  while  he  was  drawing  it,  his  adversary  nade 
up  to  him,  and  prevented  him,  catching  bold  of  his  arm  with  Us  lefiL 
hand^  and  gave  him  such  a  blow  with  the  other,  that  he  laid  bira 
at  bis-  feeU  Wheo  he  had  him  upon  the  ground,  be  set  his  foot  wpeo 
his  neck,  and,  lifting  himself  up,  he  turned  about  to  the  ^ctators: 
upon  wlMch  all  the  people  set  up  a  great  shout,  in  admimtioD  of  what 
was  done,  and  at  the  strength  and  valour  of  the  man;  bat  the  king 
ordeccd  him  that  was  ftMled  to  be  let  go,  and  then  broke  up  the  aa- 
sembly^and  departed,  not  very  well  pleased  at  the  misfortune  of  hia 
countryman* 

But  Dioxippus  liaving  now  discharged  his  adversary,  weal  off  the 
ground,  and,  for  his  famous  and  remarkable  victory,  his  eountrymen 
set  a  coronet  upon  his  bead,  as  one  that  bad  advanced  the  honour 
and  reputation  of  the  Grecians.  But  fortune  suffered  not  this  amb  t» 
rejoice  long  in  his  victory;  for  the  king  ever  after  boreagradjge 
tolum,  and  the  king's  friends,  and  all  the  courtiers,  envied  biasr 
tbcrcfere  tliey  persuaded  one  that  waited  at  the  table  to  put  a  goldea 
cup  under  his  cushiony  and,  in  the  middle  of  the  feast  a  consplaint 
was  made  that  the  cup  was  stolen;  whereupon  search  was  made, and 
the  Gup  pretended  to  be  found  with  Dioxippus,  by  which  he  was 
greatly  disgraced,  and  put  out  of  countenance;  and  seeing  the  Ma- 
cedonians come  flocking  about  him,  he  rose  from  the  table,  and  left 
the  place,  and  went  to  his  lodging.  But  shortly  after,  he  wrote  a 
letter  to  Alexander,  complaining  of  the  foul  contrivances  of  his  ene- 
mies agiunst  him;  and,  after  he  had  delivered  it  talus  servants, to  be 
handed  carefully  to  the  king,  he  murdered  himself. 

It  was  certainly  ^n  imprudent  act  in  him  to  fight  with  a  Macedo- 
nian, but  far  more  folly  in  him  to  destroy  himself:  tlierefore  many 
wIm)  blamed  htm  for  this  piece  of  madness,  added  this  to  his  further 

disgrace ^That  a  great  body  and  a  great  wit  seldom  meet  together* 

When  the  king  read  the  letter,  he  was  exceedingly  troubled  at  his 
death,  and  would  often  cuuimcnd  him  for  his  valour;  and  he  ysha 


C9^p.X.  DIODORUS  SfCULUS.  SSJ 

cmioeBt  cicy  of  greatest  command  in  those  parts:  the  citkeiis  ireot 
out  to  the  Isiflg^  and  were  admitted  to  converse  with  him;  awl  d^fe 
they  renewed  the  memory  of  their  antient  kindred,  and  promised  to 
fierfom  all  ofices  of  respect  and  kindness,  as  became  so  near  rrim«- 
tioos;  and  sealed  and  confirmed  what  they  said  with  extmordtnary 
rich  {Mcsenls.  The  king  received  them  very  graciously,  and.ki  return 
pennitted  all  their  cities  to  govern  acoordiag  to  their  own  laws. 

Thence  he  moved  towards  the  bordering  nations,  amongst  whom 
he  fiound  the  Agalasses  had  raised  an  army  of  forty  thousand  foot,  and 
three  thousanf  horse :  Alexauder  fought  them,  and  routed  then ;  numj 
tipcre  killed  upon  the  spot,  and  the  rest  fled  into  holes  and  dens,  anl 
the  neighbouring  towns  and  villages;  which  being  afterwards  taken^ 
they  were  all  sold  for  slaves.  There  were  twenty  thousand  of  the  rest 
of  the  inhabitants  that  got  together  for  shelter  into  a  great  city, 
which  he  cook  by  storm,  although  the  Indians,  bkxckiog  up  tie  pasw 
aagesy  fought  resolutely  from  the  tops  of  their  houses,  and  killed  bwI- 
titades  of  the  Macedonians,  which  put  him  into  such  a  rage,  that  he 
aet  the  town  on  fire,  and  burnt  OKMtof  themin  it;  so  that  only  three 
thousand  remained,  who  fled  into  the  castle^  and  sued  for  pardon  and 
obtained  ic 

Then  he  with  his  friends  went  on  board  again,  and  sailed  down  the 
river  to  the  place  where  the  two  rivers,  (as  was  said  before),  and  like-' 
wisetlie  Indus,  now  met  together.  But  these  great  rivers  rushing  inone 
upon  another  in  one  and  the  same  place,  there  were  most  terrible 
whirlpools,  where  the  ships  tliat  fell  into  them  where  so  whirled  abon^' 
that  there  they  perished.  And  the  stream  was  so  fierce  and  viotent,' 
that  no  pilot  could  govern  their  ships;  so  that  two  long  ships  were 
sunk,  and  many  of  the  rest  driven  upon  the  sliore.  The  king's  ship 
was  likemse  catched  in  a  whirlpool,  and  he  himself  now  in' the  ut-^ 
most  extremity  and  danger  of  losing  his  life;  which  he  pcreeitiiBg^- 
stripped  himself  naked,  and  prepared  for  the  last  remedy. '  Wheir^ 
upon  liis  friends  came  round  the  ship,  endeavouring  with  all  their 
might  totake  in  the  king,  in  case  his  ship  perished.  A  great  huiiy 
and  confusion  there  was,  while  the  men  strove  with  the  violence  (^ 
tlic  waves,  but  the  river  overmatched  both  their  strength  anAskflfi 
Yet  the  king  with  great  difficulty,  by  the  help  of  the  ships,  #a(s  at 
length  brought  to  Und.  Being  thos'  unexpectedly  preserv<id^  her 
sacrificed  to  the  gods  for  liis  deliverance,  and  that  be  had,  like  aoo* 
ther  Achilles,  Gooquered  the  river  itself.  .  Thence  he  marched  against 
the  Oxydracee  and  Mallii,  populous  and  warlike  nations  of  In* 
dia,  whom  he  found  ready  prepared  with  an  army  of  ab^ve  fourscore 
thousand  foot,  and  ten  thousand  horse,  and  seven  hundred. chariots. 
These  people  were  at  war  amongst  themselves,  before  the  king  came 


838  DI0DORU5  SICULUS.  Bool  XPTL 

J  J-  —  ■  ■  — ^— —  ■' 

amongst  them  $  but,  being  terrified  at  his  approach,  they  were  ftmsed 
to  agree,  and  confederate  against  him;  aqd,  in  confirmatioa  of  their 
league,  they  mntually  disposed  of  ten  thousand  Tirgins  in  aairisffe, 
end  thereby  entered  into  affinity  one  with  another.    However,  they 
came  not  against  him  with  their  armies  into  the  field,  bat  afterwards 
fell  at  variance  one  with  another  concerning  the  chief  oomn»nd,  and 
drew  away  here  and  there  into  the  neighbouring  cities.    Alexander 
approaching  to  the  capital  city'^',  designed  without  any  further  de- 
lay to  assault  it;   but  one  Demophoon,  a  soothsayer,  dissuaded  die 
king  from  his  purpose,  alle^ng — That  by  certain  signs  and  prodigies 
|by  him  observed)  were  portended,  that  the  king  would  be  in  ex- 
treme danger  by  a  wound  received  in  this  siege;  and  therefore  en- 
treated him  that  he  would  wave  this  town,  and  apply  himself  to  aoone 
other  ai&ir.    Upon  this  the  king  was  very  angry,  because  he  discon- 
raged  the  soldiers;  therefore,  preparing  all  things  necessary  for  an 
assault,  he  himself  led  up  his  men  to  the  walls,  with  an  undented 
spirit,  eager  to  gain  the  place  by  force.    His  men  being  slow  in  fix* 
ing  the  engines,  (as  he  thought),  he  was  the  first  that  broke  through 
the  gate  into  the  city,  upon  which  many  were  hewn  down,  and  the 
rest  fled,  wliom  he  pursued  to  the  very  castle.   And,  because  the  Ma* 
eedonians  came  not  up  so  readily  to  make  the  assault  as  he  expected, 
he  took  a  scaling-ladder  himself,  and  set  it  to  the  castle-wall,  aod» 
holding  las  buckler  over  his  head,  mounted  the  ladder;  and  he  was 
so  quick,  that,  before  they  within  could  force  him  back,  he  had  gained 
the  top  of  the  wall.    None  of  the  Indians  durst  engage  him  hand  to 
hand,  but  they  so  plied  him  with  darts  and  arrows  at  a  distance,  that 
be  was  over  pressed. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Macedonians  had  applied  two  scaling' 
ladders;  but,  too  many  thronging  up  at  once,  the  ladders  broke,  and 
down  they  all  fell  to  tlie  ground.  The  king,  being  then  left  vridiout 
any  hope  of  relief,  grew  so  desperate,  that  he  did  wliat  is  worth  spe- 
cial remark,  and  almost  incredible:  for,  looking  upon  it  as  a  diminu- 
tion of  his  glory  to  make  a  retreat  down  amongst  his  own  soldiers^  he 
t^ped  off  the  wall,  with  his  arms  in  his  hand,  into  the  townt«  Then 
the  Indians  came  rushing  upon  him  in  droves,  and  he  received  their 
assault  with  great  resolution :  for,  having  a  tree  which  grew  near  to 
the  wall  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  wall  on  his  left,  he  more  easily 
defended  himself,  standing  his  ground  with  that  courage  and  resolu- 
tion as  became  a  king  that  had  performed  sueh  noble  acts,  coveting 
to  end  his  days  by  a  glorious  and  honourable  death.    Having  now 

^  Of  the  Oi3dracc,— Vid.  AppiUj  lib.  S;  Bell.  Cifil.  latter  end;  and  Cnrtirjb 
L  ii.  tecr.  5. 

t  CMlle-jard  raUier, 


Chap»  X.  DXODOKUs  SICULU9.  939 

received  many  cats  upon  his  helmet,  and  as  many  on  his  shield,  at 
length  I16  received  so  grievous  a  wound  under  one  of  his  breasts,  that 
it  brought  him  down  upon  his  knees.  Upon  which  the  Indian  that 
wounded  him  ran  (heedlessly). upon  him  to  give  him  another  blow; 
but  the  king  thrust  his  sword  through  his  body,  and  there  he  fell 
down  dead.  Then,  raising  himself  up  by  the  help  of  a  bough  of 
die  tree,  he  challenged  any  of  the  Iidians  who  had  a  mind  to  fight 
with  him. 

And  now  came  in  to  his  reliefPeucestes,  one  of  his  guard,  being 
one  of  the  first  that  had  by  other  ladders  scaled  the  wall,  and  after  him 
came  several  others;  so  that  the  barbarians  being  now  in  a  fnghl^ 
Alexander  was  at  length  rescued  and  preserved. 

The  city  being  thus  taken,  the  Macedonians  (being  enraged  upon 
account  of  the  king)  put  all  the  men  they  found  to  the  sword^  and 
filled  every  place  with  dead  carcases* 

In  the  mean  time,  while  the  king  lay  ill  of  his  wound,  the  Gft- 
cians  that  were  distributed  into  several  colonies  throughout  Bactria 
and  Sogdiana  (having  for  a  considerable  time  before  been  dissatisfied 
at  their  plantations  amongst  the  barbarians,  and  now  encouraged 
upon  the  report  that  Alexander  was  dead  of  his  wound)  rebelled  a^ 
gainst  the  Macedonians,  and  got  together,  to  the  number  of  about 
three  thousand,  and  endeavoured  with  all  their  might  to  return  into 
their  own  country;  but  they  were  every  man  cut  off  after  the  death 
of  Alexander. 

The  king,  after  he  was  recovered  of  his  wound,  appointed  a  so- 
lemn sacrifice  to  the  gods,  in  order  to  give  thanks  for  his  recovery^ 
and  sumptuously  feasted  all  his  friends.  In  his  feasting  and  drink- 
ing there  happened  a  circumstance  very  remarkable,  and  fit  to  be 
taken  notice  of:  amongst  other  friends,  there  was 'one  Coragus  a 
Macedonian  invited,  a  strong-bodied  man,  and  one  that  had  often 
behaved  himself  with  great  gallantry  in  several  encounters.  This 
man  in  his  cups  challenged  one  Dioxippus,  an  Athenian,  to  fight  a 
duel;  who  was  a  cliampion,  and  had  won  many  noble  prizes  and  vic« 
tones.  The  matter  was  pushed  forward  by  the  guests,  as  is  usual  at 
such  times.  Dioxippus  accepted  the  challenge,  and  the  king  ap« 
pointed  the  day. 

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  many  thousands  of  people  flocked  together 
to  see  the  combat.  The  king,  with  his  Macedonians,  favoured  Cora* 
gus;  the  Grecians  wished  well  to  Dioxippus.  The  Macedonian 
came  into  the  list  neatly  accoutred,  glittering  in  his  arms.  The 
Athenian  presented  himself  stark  naked,  all  over  anointed  with  oilj 
with  a  cap  upon  his  head.    Their  persons  were  both  so  admirable  for 


f 40  DIODORUS  8ICVLIT9,  SooA  XVIL 

strength  of  liody,  and  presence  of  mind,  that  it  seemed  as  if  two  of 
the  gods  were  to  fight  a  duel :  for  the  Macedonian^  for  his  stature 
and  the  brightness  of  his  arms,  looked  like  Mars^  Dkmippss,  (be- 
sides liis  being  the  stronger  man)^  in  his  carrying  of  a  great  elob^ 
aiid  activity  in  feats  of  arms,  resembled  Hercales.  And  now  bocb 
advanced  one  towards  another:  the  Macedonian,  when  be  cane 
near,  east  his  javelia  at  Dio3uppas,  which  he  avoided  by  a  little  mo- 
tion of  his  body,  llien  Coragus  presently  made  at  him  with  bb 
Macedonian  sarissa,  which  the  other  (advancing  forward)  broke  in 
pieces  with  his  truncheon.  The  Macedonian  thus  twice  defeated, 
took  to  his  sword;,  but,  while  he  was  drawing  it,  his  adversary  made 
up  to  him,  and  prevented  him,  catching  hold  of  bis  arm  with  Us  left 
baad^  and  gave  him  such  a  blow  with  the  other,  that  be  laid  him 
at  bis^  feet*  When  he  had  him  upon  the  ground,  he  set  bis  foot  vpoo 
bis  neck,  and,  lifting  himself  up,  he  turned  about  to  the  ^ctaton: 
upon  which  all  the  people  set  up  a  great  shout,  in  admimtion  of  wbat 
was  done,  and  at  the  strength  and  valour  of  the  man;  bat  tbe  king 
ordered  him  that  was  foiled  to  be  let  go,  and  then  broke  up  tbe  as- 
sembly, and  departed,  not  very  well  pleased  at  the  misfortune  of  bia 
countr>'man» 

But  Dioxippus  having  now  discharged  liis  adversary,  went  off  the 
ground,  and,  for  his  famous  and  remarkable  victory,  his  eountryoieB 
seta  coronet  upon  his  head,  as  one  that  had  advanced  the  honour 
and  reputation  of  the  Grecians.  But  fortune  suffered  not  this  bmid  to 
xcjoice  long  in  his  victory;  for  the  king  ever  after  boreagri^ 
to  him,  and  the  king's  friends,  and  all  the  courtiers,  envied  bimr 
tbcrcCbrc  tliey  persuaded  one  that  waited  at  the  table  to  put  a  gfdden 
cup  under  his  cushion ;  and,  in  the  middle  of  the  feast  a  compUni 
was  made  that  the  cup  was  stolen;  whereupou  search  was  made, and 
the  Gup  pretended  to  be  found  with  Dioxippus,  by  wbicb  be  was 
greatly  disgraced,  and  put  out  of  countenance;  and  seeing  tbeMn- 
cedonians  come  flocking  about  him,  he  rose  from  the  table,  and  left 
the  place,  and  went  to  his  lodging.  But  shortly  after,  he  wrote  a 
letter  to  Alexander,  complaining  of  the  foul  contrivances  of  bis  ene- 
sues  agiunst  him;  and,  after  he  had  delivered  it  to  bis  servants, to  be 
banded  carefully  to  the  king,  he  murdered  himself. 

It  was  certainly  ^n  imprudent  act  in  him  to  fight  with  a  Macedo- 
nian, but  far  more  folly  in  him  to  destroy  himself:  tlierefore  many 
who  blamed  him  for  this  piece  of  madness,  added  tbb  to  liis  further 

disgrace ^That  a  great  body  and  a  great  wit  seldom  meet  together* 

When  the  king  read  the  letter,  he  was  exceedingly  troubled  at  his 
death,  and  would  often  commend  him  for  his  valour;  and  he  who 


"Jhap.  X.  DIODORUS  91CUJLUS.  S41 

uidervalued  him  when  he  was  alive,  now  In  vain  wished  for  him  when 
\t  was  dead,  and  came  perfectly  to  understand  the  honesty  of  the 
oan,  by  the  knavery  of  his  accusers  and  slanderen. 

And  now  the  king  ordered  his  army  to  march  along  the  bank  of 
he  fiver  Indus,  over  against  his  fleet,  and  began  again  to  sail  down 
Dto  the  ocean,  and  in  his  passage  arrived  at  the  country  of  the 
iambestians.  These  people  for  number  and  courage  are  nothing  in* 
ieiiof  to  any  of  the  Indians,  and  their  cities  are  democratical  in  their 
[overnment. 

Having  intelligence  of  tlie  approach  of  the  Macedonians,  they 
tfooght  into  the  field  threescore  thousand  foot,  six  thousand  horse, 
ad  five  hundred  chariots.  But  when  the  fleet  drew  near,  they  were 
10  terrified  with  the  strangeness  of  the  sight,  and  the  fame  and  glory 
rf  the  Macedonians,  which  was  noised  abroad  in  all  places,  that  the 
dd  men  among  them  dissuaded  them  from  venturing  a  battle; 
ivfaereupon  diey  sent  fifty  of  the  best  quality  as  ambassadors  to  Alex- 
inder,  to  pray  hb  favour.  The  king  (upon  the  address  made  to  him) 
^nted  them  peace  as  they  desired,  and  received  large  and  honour- 
ible  .presents  (becoming  a  demigod)  from  the  inhabitants.  Then 
lie  received  the  submission  of  the  Sogdiani  and  Massanii,  who  bor« 
iered  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  Here  Alexander  built  another  city 
called  Alexandria,  on  tlie  banks  of  the  river,  and  furnished  it  with  a 
thousand  inliabitants.  Afterwards  he  arrived  at  the  kingdom  of  Mu- 
licanus*,  whom  he  took  aud  killed,  and  subdued  his  country.  Then 
be  came  to  the  territoryf  of  Porticanus,  and  took  two  cities  upon  the 
Bnt  assault,  and  gave  the  spoil  of  them  to  his  soldiers,  and  then 
Imrot  them.  Porticanus,  who  had  fled  for  shelter  into  the  castle, 
was  killed  fighting  in  hb  own  defence.  Then  he  took  all  the  cities 
within  his  dominion  by  assault,  and  razed  them  to  the  ground,  which 
struck  a  great  terror  into  the  neighbouring  inhabitants.  Next  he 
wasted  the  territories  of  Sambus^,  razing  many  of  the  cities,  and 
selling  the  citizens  for  slaves,  and  put  to  the  sword  above  fourscore 
thoosapd  barbarians.  These  were  the  plagues  the  Brachmanes  suf- 
fered. All  the  rest  who  submitted  (except  such  as  were  the  authors 
and  ring-leaders  of  the  defection)  he  pardoned.  In  the  mean  time, 
king  Sambus  got  away,  with  thirty  elephants,  into  the  farthest  parts 
beyond  the  river  Indus,  and  so  escaped. 

Amongst  the  Brachmaoes,  the  last  city  attempted  was  Harmatelia  §, 

•  Musicanus.— Strabo,  lib.  iv.  p.  694,701,  sayt  he  submitted,  (where  see  much  more), 
but  mfterwards  revolted,  tnd  was  crucified. 

t  Thii  territory  belongs  to  the  Ba«t«ns. — See  Sirabo,  ib. 

I  The  country  of  the  Brachmanes  who  bad  rerolied  after  submission.— See  Curiius,  1.  9. 

$  Harmatelia.— See  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  7:^3. 

Vol.  2.   No.  43.  n 


242  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Bdok  XFIL 

wliich  greatly  confided  in  the  valour  of  its  iuhabitanta,  and  the 
strength  of  its  situation.  Here  the  king  commaDded  some  few  of 
his  party  to  go  up  near  to  the  place,  and  provoke  the  citizens  to  ML 
upon  them^  and  then  to  appear  as  if  they  fled:  thereupon  five  hun- 
dred approached  to  the  very  walls,  who  for  their  inconsidenbie  mim- 
ber  were  contemned  by  the  enemy;  three  thousand,  therefore^  made 
a  sally  out  of  the  town  upon  them,  whereupon  they  took  to  their 
heels  as  if  they  had  been  in  a  great  fright.  But  the  king,  with  some  : 
few  of  his  troops,  fell  upon  the  backs  of  the  pursuers,  upon  which-a 
there  was  a  smart  engagement,  and  many  of  the  barbarians  we 
killed  and  taken.  But  a  great  number  of  those  that  were  killed  i 
wounded  on  the  king's  side  were  in  a  desperate  condition:  for  i 
barbarians  had  poisoned  the  heads  of  their  weapons  with  a  deadlpr 
poison,  which  made  them  more  courageous  and  forward  to  engage 
with  the  king.  This  strong  poison  is  made  of  certain  serpents  taken 
by  hunting,  which,  after  they  are  killed,  they  lay  out  and  expose  to 
the  heat  of  the  sun,  when  the  heat  does  so  fry  their  flesh  as  if  it 
were  melting  away,  from  which  distils  a  sweaty  mcristure,  wheieia 
the  poison  of  the  beast  is  conveyed,  and  may  be  discerned.  The 
working  of  this  deadly  poison  is  such,  that  a  numbness  and  stniudify 
presently  seizes  upon  the  body  of  him  that  is  wounded^  and  in  a 
short  time  after  follows  most  tormenting  pains,  convulsions^  and 
trembling,  wreaking  every  member  of  the  body.  The  skin  grows 
excessive  cold  and  black,  and  the  person  vomits  black  choler:  moie^ 
over,  a  black  frothy  matter  flows  from  the  wound,  which  causes  pa* 
trefaction,  and  presently  spreads  all  over  the  principal  parts  of  tlie 
body,  and  so  the  person  dies  in  a  most  miserable  manner.  And 
hence  it  was,  that  he  who  was  ever  so  slightly  touched  was  as  modi 
tormented  as  he  who  had  the  greatest  wounds.  After  all  that  were 
thus  wounded  were  dead,  the  king  grieved  for  none  so  much  as  ke 
did  for  the  misfortune  of  Ptolemy,  (who  reigned  afterwards),  and 
whom  at  that  time  he  dearly  loved.  There  happened  at  this  time 
something  extraordinarily  remarkable  in  reference  to  Ptolemy,  which 
some  ascribe  to  the  special  providence  of  God.  He  was  a  man  that 
was  beloved  of  all,  both  for  his  valour  and  his  wonderful  obliging  be- 
haviour to  every  one,  and  therefore  met  with  a  cure  worthy  his  kind 
and  gracious  disposition.  The  king  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  serpent 
with  an  herb  in  its  moutli,  which  told  him  the  nature  and  efficacy  of 
the  plant,  and  where  it  grew:  when  he  awoke,  he  presently  searched 
for  the  herb,  and  found  it,  and  when  he  had  bruised  it  made  a  poul*^ 
tice  of  it,  and  applied  it  to  Ptolemy's  body,  and  gave  him  a  potion  of 
the  juice  of  the  plant,  and  so  restored  him  to  perfect  health.  Others 
also,  when  they  came  to  know  the  sovereign  use  of  the  herb^  were 


Giap.  X.  mODORUs  siculus.  ^43 

eared  by  the  same\ineaiis.  But  wheii  Alexander  now  began  to  ap- 
{rfy  himself  to  the  siege  of  Harmatelia,  a  strong  and  well-fenced 
city,  the  inhabitants  all  came  forth  to  him,  and  begged  his  pardon, 
and  delivered  ap  themselves  and  their  city  into  his  hands,  and  so  es- 
caped punisliment* 

Then  sailing  with  his  familiar  friends  into  the  main  ocean,  he 
found  two  islands,  where  he  offered  most  magnificent  sacrifices,  and 
threw  many  golden  cups  of  great  value,  together  with  the  drink- 
oflerings,  into  the  sea.  At  length,  having  reared  up  altars  to  the 
honour  of  Tethys  and  Oceanus,  (supposing  now  that  he  had  finished 
the  voyage  he  intended),  he  returned  with  the  fleet  up  the  river,  and 
arrived  at  the  famous  city  Hyala'*.  This  city  is  under  the  same 
form  of  government  with  that  of  LacedsBmon :  for  there  were  two 
kings,  of  two  several  families,  succeeding  in  one  line,  who  had  the 
management  and  administration  of  their  wars;  but  the  chief  au- 
thority in  civil  a&irs  belonged  to  the  senate.  Here  Alexander  bnrht 
all  the  ships  that  were  leaky  and  defective,  and  delivered  the  rest 
of  his  fleet  into  the  hands  of  Nearchusf  and  some  others  of  his 
friends,  with  a  command  to  sail  all  along  the  sea-coast,  and  dili- 
gently observe  every  place,  till  they  came  to  the  entrance  into  the 
river  Euphrates.  He  himself  raised  his  camp,  and  marched  a  long 
way  into  the  country,  subduing  all  that  opposed  him,  and  using 
those  kindly  who  submitted  to  him:  for  the  inhabitants  of  Abisaris 
and  Gedrosia  he  brought  to  submission,  without  any  hazard  or  dif- 
ficulty. 

Afterwards,  marching  through  many  tracts  of  land  destitute  of 
water,  and  as  many  deserts,  he  came  to  the  borders  of  Neoris. 
There  he  divided  his  army  into  three  brigades:  the  first  he  gave  to 
Ptolemy,  the  other  to  Leonatus;.  the  former  he  commanded  to  ha- 
rass the  sea-coasu,  and  the  other  the  midland  and  champaign  part 
of  the  country.  He  Umself  wasted  and  spoiled  the  hilly  country 
and  mountainous  parts,  and  the  places  thereunto  adjoining:  so  that 
many  countries  being  invaded  all  at  one  and  the  same  time,  all 
places  were  filled  with  rapine,  fire,  and  slaughter,  from  whence  the 
loldiers  were  loaded  with  rich  booty,  and  many  thousands  perished 
by  the  sword. 

The  bordering  nations,  being  terrified  by  this  destruction  of  peo- 
ple, all  delivered  themselves  into  the  power  of  the  king{.    Here  the 

*  City  of  Hyala,  «t  the  mouth  of  the  n?er  ludui. 

t  This  navigation  described  by  Arrian,  lib.  vi.  p.  145;  and  Pliny^  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vu 
r.  23.  They  set  out  from  the  island  Patala,  and  city  X^Ienopolis,  as  by  Arrian^  lib.  <^, 
cap.  23.— Vid.  Ush.  Ann.  266,  and  269. 

t  In  Hambacia. 


344  DIOOORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  XFIL 

king,  having  a  desire  to  build  a  city  near  to  the  sea,  and  having  found 
a  safe  harbour,  and  a  convenient  place  near  to  it,  built  one  accord- 
ingly, and  called  it  Alexandria.    Then  he  entered  through  ways  made  ^ 
by  his  pioneers  into  the  country  of  the  Neoritee^^  and  preaently  ^ 
forced  them  all  to  submit* 

These  people  are  like  all  the  rest  of  the  Indians,  both  for  laws  andH 
manners,  except  iu  one  thing,  which  is  almost  incredible:  forthcs 
kindred  and  relations  of  those  that  are  dead  (all  stark  naked^  witic^ 
their  lances  in  their  hands)  carry  forth  the  dead  bodies  into  som^ 
wood  or  other  belonging  to  the  country,  and  there  strip  the  corpse 
of  all  its  burying-clothes  and  other  ornaments,  and  leave  the  bod— 
to  be  food  for  the  wild  beasts :  then  they  divide  the  garments  of  th^ 
deceased^  and  sacrifice  to  the  subterraneous  heroes,and  feast  all  thei^  j 
friends. 

Alexander  afterwards  marched  into  Gedrosia,  all  along  the  sei^* 
coast,  and  came  at  length  among  a  most  rude  and  savage  people. 
From  their  very  birth  to  their  old  age  they  never  cut  their  nails^  but 
suffer  them  still  to  grow;  and  the  hair  of  their  beads  all  grow  in 
locks,  never  combed  out.  They  are  of  a  swarthy  complexion,  (through 
the  parching  heat  of  the  sun),  and  cloth  themselves  with  the  skins  of 
wild  beasts.    They  feed  upon  the  flesh  of  whales  cast  up  by  the  sei. 
In  building  of  their  houses  and  cottages,  they  raise  up  their  walls  n 
is  usual,  but  the  roofs  are  laid  with  the  jaw-bones  and  ribs  of  whales, 
of  which  they  have  somers  and  beams  eighteen  cubits  in  length;  and 
for  tiles  they  use  the  whale-bone  and  fins  of  the  same  animal. 

When  Alexander  with  great  toil  had  marched  through  this  coon* 
try,  he  came  into  a  desolate  wilderness,  where  nothing  at  all  was  to 
be  had  for  the  support  of  man's  life.  So  that  many  dying  for  want 
of  food,  the  whole  army  was  not  only  altogether  discouraged^  but  the 
king  himself  was  then  overwhelmed  with  unusual  sorrow  and  anzietj 
of  mind:  for  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  most  miserable  thing  that  those 
who  by  the  valour  of  their  arms  had  conquered  all  wherever  thcj 
came,  should  now  ingloriously  perish  for  want  of  bread  in  a  barren 
wilderness.  Therefore  he  sent  away  the  swiftest  couriers  he  could 
find  into  Parthia,  Drangina,  Aria,  and  other  bordering  countries, 
with  orders,  that  with  all  speed  they  should  meet  him  upon  the  bor- 
ders of  Carmania,  with  dromedary  camels,  and  other  beasts  of  bur- 
then, loaded  with  bread  and  other  accessary  provisions :  these  hastened 
away  as  they  were  commanded,  and  procured  the  governors  of  the 
provinces  to  despatch  abundance  of  provision  to  the  place  appointed. 
By  this  extreme  scarcity  Alexander  lost  many  of  his  men,  and  this 
was  the  first  mischief  he  met  with  in  this  expedition.    Afterwardsj 

•  Orita, 


Chap.  X.  moDORUS  SICULUS.  245 

as  they  were  marching,  some  of  the  moantaineers  fell  npon  Leona- 
tus's  squadroDi  and  cot  otF  many  of  them^  and  then  made  back  to 
their  countrymen;  and  this  was  another  loss. 

When  they  had  at  length,  with  very  great  difficulties  and  hard- 
sfaipSi  passed  through  this  desert,  they  came  into  a  rich  and  populous 
country**.  Here  he  rendezvoused  his  whole  army,  and,  after  they  had 
refreshed  themselves,  celebrated  a  feast  to  Bacchus;  and,  dressed  up* 
io  make  a  show,  like  a  pageant,  he  led  the  dance  before  his  iarmy 
(which  marched  likewise  in  great  pomp  and  state)  for  the  space  of 
seven  days  together,  spending  all  that  time  in  revelling  and  drunken- 
ness all  the  way  he  went. 

When  this  was  over,  hearing  that  many  of  his  officers  and  gover- 
nors of  provinces  had  abused  their  power,  to  the  oppression  and  in* 
jury  of  many,  he  punished  them  according  to  their  demerits.  Which 
severity  of  the  king  being  spread  abroad,  many  who  were  conscious 
of  being  guilty  of  the  same  crimes^  began  to  fear  the  same  punish* 
ment;  and  therefore  some  who  commanded  the  mercenaries  made 
a  defection;  others  got  together  what  money  they  could,  and  fled: 
of  which  the  king  receiving  intelligence,  he  wrote  to  all  the  gover- 
nors and  lord-lieutenants  of  Asia ^That,  as  soon  as  they  had  read 

his  letters  they  should,  without  further  delay,  disband  all  the  mer- 
cenaries. 

About  the  same  time,  while  the  king  was  at  Salmuntisf,  a  sea- 
port town,  busy  io  making  stage-plays,  those  who  had  been  sent  to 
examine  all  the  sea-coasts  arrived  with  the  fleet,  who  forthwith  went 
into  the  theatre,  and  addressed  themselves  to  the  king;  and,  after 
they  had  made  their  obeysance,  they  acquainted  him  with  what  they 
had  done.  The  Macedonians  so  rejoiced  at  their  return,  that,  as  a 
testimony  of  their  joy,  they  set  up  a  great  acclamation,  and  filled  the 
whole  theatre  with  exultations.   Those  that  returned  from  the  voyage 

told  him ^Tliere  were  wonderful  tides  of  ebbing  and  flowing  in  the 

ocean,  and  that  at  low  water  in  the  farthest  parts  of  the  sea-coasts 
there  appeared  a  great  many  large  islands^  which  at  the  return  of  the 
tide  are  all  again  laid  under  water,  while  a  most  fierce  and  violent 
wind  comes  ofi'from  them  to  the  continent,  and  causes  the  water  to 
be  all  of  a  foam :  and,  as  the  greatest  wonder  of  all,  they  declared  tiiat 
they  met  with  whales  of  an  incredible  magnitude,  which  at  the  first 
so  terrified  them,  that  they  looked  upon  themselves  as  lost,  and  that 
they  and  all  their  ships  must  in  a  moment  perish  together;  but,  all 
of  them  at  once  setting  up  a  great  shout,  and  making  a  noise  by 

•  In  Cariuania. — Vid.  Curtiusj  lib.  9,  adjinem, 

t  SalmuDiib^  in  Uarmozia,  now  Ormus^  in  tbc  gnlf  of  Persia, 


246  DioDORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  XPIL 

striking  upon  their  arms,  and  sounding  of  trumpets^  the  moDttroiia 
creatures  were  so  terrified  with  a  thing  so  unusual^  that  they  made  l» 
the  bottom  of  the  deep. 

After  the  king  had  heard  this  relation,  he  ordered  the  sea-offiren 
to  sail  with  the  fleet  to  the  Euphrates;  and  he  himself  io  the  meaii 
time,  inarching  through  many  countries  with  his  anny,  came  at  btt 
to  the  borders  of  Susiana.  At  that  time  Calanus,  an  Indian,  a  great 
philosopher,  and  much  honoured  by  the  king,  ended  his  days  in  ft 
wonderful  manner.  Having  now  lived  to  be  seventy-three  yeais  oU^ 
and  during  all  that  time  had  never  experienced  any  sickness  er  the 
least  distemper,  he  proposed  to  put  an  end  to  his  own  life,  soppoauig 
tliat  now  both  nature  and  fortune  had  brought  him  to  the  utmost 
bounds  of  his  felicity  and  well-being  in  the  world^^  Being  semdl 
npoij,  therefore,  with  sickness,  which  grew  upon  him  more  and 
more  every  day,  he  desired  the  king  that  he  would  order  a  great  fa- 
neral  pile  to  be  erected,  and  that  when  he  had  placed  himself  npoa 
it,  some  of  his  servants  should  set  it  on  fire.  The  king  at  first  en* 
deavoured  to  diss  wide  him  from  this  purpose;  bat,  when  he  wmw 
he  would  not  be  moved,  he  promised  that  it  should  be  performed  a» 
bo  had  desired. 

The  thing  presently  spread  abroad,  and,  when  the  pile  was  finished^ 
multitudes  of  people  flocked  to  see  this  strange  sight:  and  there  Ca-- 
Unus  (according  to  the  rules  and  dictates  of  his  own  opinion)  with 
great  courage  ascended  the  pile,  and  both  he  and  it  were  consumed. 
together.  Some  who  were  present  judged  this  act  to  be  an  e&ct  oF 
madness,  others  nothing  but  a  piece  of  vain  glory,  though  some  thenp 
were  who  admired  his  noble  spirit  and  contempt  of  death;  and  the 
kjng  caused  him  to  be  honourably  buried. 

When  Alexander  came  to  Susa,  he  married  Statira,  Darias's  eldest 
daughter:  Drypetis,  the  younger,  he  married  to  Hephestion.  He 
gave  also  wives  to  the  chiefest  of  his  friends,  and  married  them  to  the 
noblest  ladies  of  Persia. 

About  this  time  thirty  thousand  Persians  (very  proper  and  hand- 
some  young  men,  and  of  strong  bodies)  came  to  Susa.  Tliese,  ac« 
cording  to  the  king's  command,  had  for  some  considerable  time  been 
getting  together,  and  had  been  trained  up  by  their  tutors  and  gover- 
nors in  martial  discipline;  and  all  of  them,  completely  famished 
with  Macedonian  arms,  encamped  before  the  city,  where  they  trained 
and  exercised  before  the  king,  and  approved  ihemselres  so  expert  ia 
the  management  and  handling  of  their  arms,  that  they  were  honoored 
by  him  with  large  and  rich  gifts :  for,  because  the  Macedonians  re- 
fused to  i^ass  over  the  rivt?r  Ganges,  and  in  the  common  assembly 
wouiu  mr.ry  time?  w'nh  a  jm:  r-.invw'f  oppose  the  king,  and  mock  at 


Oil^X  DIODORUS  SICULUB.  fUJ 

ilk  descent  from  Ammoa,  he  got  this  body  of  Persians  (who  were 
all  about  the  same  age)  to  be  as  a  curb  upon  the  Macedonian  pha* 
lanx.  And  these  were  the  things  wherein  Alexander  employed  him* 
selfar  that  time. 

Dttriog  this  Indian  expedition^  Harpalus,  wlio  was  made  by  Alex-^ 
aader  lord-high-treasorer  of  Babylon,  almost  as  soon  as  the  king  had 
b^va  his  march,  (hoping  he  would  never  return),  gave  himself  up 
ta  aM  manner  of  luxury  and  excess;  for  he  was  governor  of  a  very 
large  province.  In  the  first  place,  he  followed  a  lewd  coqrse  cff 
Coiciag  and  ravishing  ot  women,  and  committing  all  sorts  of  abonu* 
sable  acts  of  uncleanness  with  the  barbarians^  by  which  iuxurioor 
pimctioes  of  wickedness  he  wasted  the  treasure  committed  to  hitf 
dutfge.  He  ordered  great  multitudes  of  fish  to  be  brought  to  Una 
fifom  distant  Countries,  as  far  as  from  the  Red  Sea;  and  he  was  so 
|NPofuse  in  the  daily  provisions  for  his  table,  that  all  cried  shame  of 
Isim,  and  none  gave  him  a  good  word.  He  sent  likewise  for  a  £i- 
aootts  strumpet  from  Athens,  called  Pythonice,  to  whom  he  ga^'tt 
most  princely  gifts  while  she  lived,  and  buried  her  with  as  much 
state  when  she  was  dead,  and  built  for  her  a  most  magnificent  motia- 
anent  in  Athens. 

After  her  death  he  sent  for  another  courtesan  out  of  Attica,  called 
<jlycera,  with  whom  he  lived  at  such  a  height  of  voluptuousness  and 
expense,  as  exceeded  all  bounds;  but,  that  be  might  have  a  refuge 
to  fly  to,  in  case  oi  the  cross  and  destructive  blasts  of  fortune,  he 
made  it  his  business  chiefly  to  oblige  the  Athenians.  And  therefore, 
irhen  Alexander  returned  from  his  Indian  expedition,  and  had  cut  off 
the  heads  of  many  of  the  provincial  governors  for  their  mal-admints* 
tnitions,  Harpalus,  fearing  the  same  punishment,  bagged  up  five 
thousand  talents  of  silver,  and  raised  six  thousand  mercenary  sol- 
diers, and  so  left  Asia,  and  sailed  for  Attica.  But,  when  he  perceived 
that  none  were  forward  to  come  in  to  him,  heieft  his  soldiers  at  Te^ 
narus  in  Laconia,  and,  taking  part  of  the  money  with  him,  fled  to  the 
Athenians  for  protection:  but,  being  demanded  to  be  delivered  up, 
by  letters  from  Antipater  and  Olympias,  (having  first  distributed  large 
rewards  amongst  the  orators  that  had  pleaded  for  him,  and  managed 
his  concern  with  the  Athenians),  he  withdrew  himself,  and  fled  to  hb 
soldiers  at  Tenarus.  Thence  he  sailed  to  Crete,  and  tlierc  was  mur- 
dered by  Thimbron,  one  of  his  friends. 

The  Athenians  likewise  (examining  the  matter  concerning  tiic 
money  given  by  Harpalus)  condemned  Demosthenes,  and  several 
other  orators,  for  being  corrupted  by  him  with  bribes. 

About  this  time  Alexander,  at  the  celebration  of  the  Olympic 
games,  caused  public  proclamation  to  be  made  by  a  herald That 


348  DI0D0RU8  8ICULUS.  BookXFtL 

all  exiles  (except  robber^  of  temples  and  murderers)  should  return  to 
their  several  countries:  and  he  himself  picked  out  ten  thouiaod  of 
the  oldest  soldiers  in  his  army,  and  discharged  them  from  further 
service;  and^  being  informed  that  many  of  them  were  in  debt,  be 
paid  the  whole  in  one  day^  to  the  amount  of  no  less  than  ten  tbou* 
sand  talents.  The  rest  of  the  Macedonians  carrying  themselves  widi 
great  insolence  towards  him^  and  in  a  general  assembly  with  bawling^ 
and  noise  contradicting  him^  he  was  so  enraged  and  sharp  in  his  re- 
turns upon  them^  that  they  were  all  put  into  a  great  fright;  and  ia 
that  rage  he  was  so  daring,  that  he  leaped  down  from  the  tribunal, 
and  seized  upon  some  of  the  ring-leaders  of  the  mutiny  with  his 
own  hands,  and  delivered  them  to  the  lictors,  to  be  executed.  At 
kngth,  when  he  saw  that  the  disorders  and  mutiny  still  increased^ 
be  made  officers  of  such  of  the  Persians  as  he  thought  fit,  and  pre-^ 
ferred  them  to  the  chiefest  commands.  Upon  which  the  Macedo^ 
nians  recollected  themselves,  and  liad  much  ado  to  regain  Alexan- 
der's favour,  though  they  addressed  themselves  to  him  both  witb  pe^ 
titions  and  tears. 


CHAP.  XI. 

Alexander  ynixes  twenty  thousand  Persian  darters  with  his  amgf^ 
Marches  from  Siisa.  Bagistame  breeds  abundance  of  horses* 
Hephastian  dies  at  Ecbatana.  The  Lamian  war.  He  invades 
the  Cuss{ei.  Marches  towards  Babylon.  The  Chaldean  astro^ 
logers  dissuade  him  from  coming  thither.    He  enters  Babjflan. 

AFTERWARDS,  when  Anticles  was  chief  magistrate  of  Athens, 
and  Lucius  Cornelius  and  Quintius  Publius  were  consuls  at  Rome, 
Alexander  supplied  the  room  of  those  he  had  discharged  witb  Per- 
sians, and  chose  a  thousand  of  them  to  be  squires  of  the  body, 
conceiving  he  might  altogether  as  safely  trust  them  as  the  Mace- 
donians. 

About  this  time  Peucestes  came  with  twenty  thousand  Persian 
darters  and  slingers.  These  Alexander  intermixed  amongst  his  other 
soldiers,  by  which  means  the  army  was  brought  into  that  due  consti* 
tution,  that  they  were  readily  obedient  to  his  command.  There  were 
some  of  the  Macedonians  who  had  sons  by  the  captives^  whomj  upoD 


CAap.  XL  DiODORUs  siculus.  g49 

tiligent  inquiry  he  found  to  be  ten  thousand,  and  appointed  them 
nasters  to  instract  them  in  all  sorts  of  learning,  and  allowed  suffi* 
:ient  stipends  for  their  liberal  education. 

Then  he  rendezvoused  his  army,  and  marciied  away  from  Susa^ 
nd,  passing  the  river  Tigris,  came  to  the  villages  called  Carne,  and 
heie  encamped.  Thence  in  four  days  march  he  passed  through 
littace,  and  came  to  Sambea.  Here  he  rested  seven  days,  and  re- 
neshed  his  army.  Thence  in  three  days  he  marched  to  the  towns 
died  Celonee,  in  which  place  the  posterity  of  the  Boeotians  settled 
lemsclves  in  the  time  of  Xerxcs's  expedition,  and  there  remain 
Dto  this  day,  having  not  altogether  forgot  the  laws  of  their  country: 
ff  they  use  a  double  language,  one  learned  from  the  natural  inhabi* 
nts,  and  in  the  other  they  preserve  much  of  the  Greek  tongue;  and 
tiserve  some  of  their  laws  and  customs.  Thence,  when  it  grew 
iwards  evening,  he  decamped  and  turned  aside,  and  marched  to 
agistame,  to  view  tlie  country.  Tliis  country  abounds  in  all  man-^ 
er  of  fruit-trees,  and  whatever  else  conduces  either  to  the  profit  or 
leasure  of  mankind;  so  that  it  seems  to  be  a  place  of  delight  both 
3r  gods  and  men.  Afterwards  he  came  into  a  country  that  breeds 
od  pastures  an  innumerable  company  of  horses;  for  they  say,  that 
iiere  had  been  here  an  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  horses  that  ran  at 
asture  up  and  down  in  the  country;  but,  at  the  coming  of  Alex- 
ider,  there  were  only  sixty  thousand.  He  encamped  here  for  the 
lace  of  thirty  days.  Thence,  after  seven  encampments,  he  came 
£cbatana,  in  Media.    I'his  city  is  two  hundred  and  fifty  furlongs 

compass,  and  is  the  metropolis  of  all  Media,  where  abundance 
treasure  was  laid  up.  Here  he  staid  some  time,  and  refreshed 
^  army,  and  spent  his  time  in  feasting,  drinking,  and  stage-plays: 
^^hich  time  Hephaestion  (one  whom  he  loved  above  all  others) 
1  sick  of  a  surfeit,  and  died;  whose  death  very  much  grieved  the 
^g,and  he  committed  his  body  to  Perdiccas,  to  be  carried  to  Baby- 
^>  because  he  intended  to  bury  him  with  great  pomp  and  state. 
\Vhile  these  things  were  acting  in  Asia,  Greece  was  full  of  tumults 
Ad  seditions,  whence  broke  out  the  war  called  the  Lamian  War, 
tpon  this  occasion :  after  the  king's  order  to  the  lord-Iieuteoants  of 
ihe  provinces  to  disband  all  mercenary  soldiers,  and  the  execution 
)f  those  commands,  many  foreigners  that  were  casiiicred  went  strag- 
gling over  all  Asia,  and,  for  want  of  subsistence,  robbed  and  spoiled 
he  country,  tiH  they  all  came  into  one  body  alTcnarus,  in  Laconia: 
0  likewise  all  th^  governors  and  commanders  of  the  Persians  that 
fcre  left  got  together  what  men  and  money  they  could,  and  came 
U  to  Tenarus,  and  there  joined  their  forces  together.  There  th^ 
-eated  Leosthenes,  an  Athenian,  (a  brave-spirited  man),  general  oi 
Vol.  2,  No,  43.  KK 


250  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XFII. 

the  army;  who  then  called  a  council  of  war^  and^  after  having  eon- 
suited  concerning  the  management  of  the  war^  disposed  of  fifty 
talents  to  pay  the  mercenaries,  and  provided  arms  sufficient  for  the 
present  occasion.  He  sent,  likewise,  ambassadors  to  the  iEtoIians 
(who  were  disafiected  to  the  king)  to  join  with  them  in  arms.  And 
thus  Leosthenes  was  altogether  taken  up  in  necessary  preparations 
for  a  war,  of  the  greatness  of  which  he  had  then  a  clear  and  cTidrnt 
prospect. 

Alexander  now  marched  against  the  Cusssei,  who  refused  to  sub- 
mit to  his  government.  Tliis  people  are  a  yery  warlike  nation^ 
and  inhabit  the  hilly  and  mountainous  parts  of  Media;  and  there- 
fore, confiding  in  their  own  valour,  and  the  strength  of  their  country, 
never  would  be  brought  to  admit  of  any  foreign  prince  to  reign  over 
them,  and  were  never  subdued  during  all  the  time  of  the  Persittd  em- 
pire; and  at  that  time  they  were  so  very  high,  that  they  slighted  the 
valour  of  the  Macedonians. 

The  king  first  gained  the  passes,  and  then  wasted  a  great  purt  of 
the  country  of  Cussae;  and,  getting  the  better  in  every  engagement, 
killed  many  of  the  barbarians,  and  took  many  more  prisoners.  At 
length  the  Cusssei,  being  worsted  and  beaten  in  every  place,  and 
greatly  concerned  at  the  multitude  of  the  captives,  were  forced  to  re- 
deem their  country  by  the  loss  of  their  own  liberty ;  and  so,  giting  uf 
themselves  to  the  will  of  the  conqueror,  they  obtained  peace,  upon 
condition  that  they  should  be  loyal  and  obedient  for  the  time  to  come. 
Thus  Alexander  conquered  this  nation  in  the  space  of  forty  days; 
and,  after  he  had  built  some  cities  at  the  most  difficult  passes  id  tAe 
country,  he  marched  away. 

Socicles  was  now  archon  at  Athens,  and  Cornelius  Lentulus  antt 
Quintius  Popillus*  Roman  consuls,  when  Alexander,  after  the  con- 
quest of  tlie  Cussffii,  marched  thence  towards  Babylon.     He  alwajs 
rested  awhile  between  every  decampment,  and^  to  ease  his  amoy, 
moved  very  slowly.     When  he  was  about  three  hundred  furlodgs 
from  Babylon,  thu  Chaldeansf,  (as  they  are  called),  who  were  fiimous 
for  astrology,  and  used  to  prognosticate  future  events  by  the  obser- 
vation-of  the  stars,  (and  by  that  means  knew  that  the  king  would  die 
presently  after  he  entered  into  Babylon),  picked  out  some  of  the  most 
anticnt  and  expert  of  those  of  their  profession,  and  ordered  them  to 
signify  the  danger  to  the  king,  and,  with  all  the  arguments  they  could 
use,  to  dissuade  him  from  entering  into  the  city;  and  to  let  him  know 
that,  he  mi.L^ht  avoid  the  danger,  if  he  would  rebuild  the  sepulchre  of 
Bchis,  which  the  Persians  had  destroyed,  and  alter  his  purpose^  and 
piiss  by  the  city. 

*  Fub]iui.  t  Cluildetn  pricsti. 


CAap.  XIL^  DiODonvs  aicvLVS.  251 

BelepbaiUes  was  th^  leading  unao  of  the  Chaldeans  that  were  seat 
away;  but  be  was  afraid  to  address  himself  to  the  king,  and  there- 
fore privately  imparted  all  to  Nearchus,  (one  of  the  king's  familiar 
friends)^  and  desired  him  that  with  all  speed  be  would  acquaint  th^ 
king  with  the  whole  business*  Alexander  was  mueb  coAcerned  wbea 
Nearcbus  told  him  what  the  Chaldeans  had  prognosticated;  aud^ 
more  and  more  considering  and  pondering  in  his  thoughts  the  skill 
and  reputation  of  the  man,  was  in  no  small  consternation.  At  lengtjb 
he  sent  away  many  of  bis  friends  to  the  city,  but  he  himself  turne(l 
«side  aoother  way,  and  passed  by  Babylon;  and^  encamping  twp 
hundred  furlongs  distant  from  the  place,  he  there  rested.  At  this  all 
were  in  astonishment;  whereupon  many  philosophers  came  to  him^  as 
well  those  that  were  followers  of  Auaxagoras,  as  other  Grecians. 
When  they  came  to  understand  the  cause  of  his  fear,  they  earnestly 
opposed  what  was  said,  with  many  philosophical  arguments;  by 
which  he  was  so  convinced  and  changed,  that  he  contemned  all  sorts 
of  divination  whatsoever,  and  especially  that  of  the  Chaldeans,  which 
was  every  where  so  famous.  Therefore  now,  as  if  his  spirit,  before 
wounded,  had  been  cured  by  the  arguments  of  philosophers,  he  en« 
tered  Babylon  with  his  army,  where  (as  before)  the  soldiers  were 
kindly  entertained  by  the  citizens;  and  the  plenty  of  provisions  was 
«uch,  that  all  gave  up  themselves  to  ease  and  voluptuousness.  And 
th^e  were  the  things  acted  this  year. 


CHAP.  XII.  / 

Ambassadors  come  to  Alexander  from  all  parts.  He  buries  Htr 
phcBstion  with  great  state.  The  prodigies  before  Alexander's 
death.    His  death.    Darius* s  another  starves  fierself. 

AGESIAS  was  now  chief  magistrate  of  Athens,  and  Caius  PiEtellus 
and  Lucius  Papirius  consuls  at  Rome,  when  the  hundred  and  four- 
teenth Olympiad  was  celebrated,  in  which  Micinas  of  Rhodes  was 
victor.  At  this  time  ambassadors  came  to  Alexander  almost  from  all 
parts  of  the  world:  some  to  congratulate  his  victories,  others  to 
tender  him  crowns,  others  to  make  leagues  and  alliances  with  him, 
and  many  brought  him  very  rich  and  noble  presents;  and  some  there 
were  that  came  to  clear  themselves  from  fiUse  accusations:  for,  be- 


M«  Biumcos  sictTttTs.  16M^  J9ttr- 


tfdflt  thote  sent  from  the  dties^  states^  ti^  printet  ttff  Alii|»  i 
atAbftsswfen  addressed  thems^lTes  to  the  Uog  Crom  'Einiilpi  'mfi 
AfUcft.     Out  of  Africa^  the  CalihaginiaiiSy  and  db  I^lMkliM  fli 
liliyai  aad  all'  borderiog  vpon  the  sea-coasts  as  fiar  iii*IHniMMfi 
lUlars.    0«t  oTEoropei  the  Oreciiin  eities,  the  BfaimlMiiia^  4e 
HtyriaDs,  nbuiy  inhabiting  Adria^  Ae  Thracians,  and  tike  GaMsM^ 
a  peof»ie'  that  then  first  began  to  be  known  to  the  Gredans.   liise 
Idl  sent  their  ambassadorsj  of  whom  the  king  having  a  caialogM  ia 
uniting,  he  appointed  in  what  order  they  shoidd  be  sevenllj  adttitei 
to  their  andience.    And,  in  the  first  phwe,  those  were  Inliwdfcjil 
that  came  about  matters  of  religion;  then  thosie  wlio liiM{gbt  pst- 
aents;  next,  they  that  were  at  variance  with  the  peofdc  besBedUg 
upon  them;  then  those  were  admitted,  in  the  fburth  pheeyiib 
eamci  to  treat  upon  concerns  relating  to  their  own  comtry;  ad 
lastly,  those  whose  instructions  were  to  oppose  the  restbmtion  of  ib 
exiles.     And,  among  the  religious,  he  first  heard  them  of  Bl} 
.  after  them  the  ArootioDiaus,  Delphians,  and  Corinthidns}  thd  'Efh 
daoriaos  likewise,  and  others;  giving  to  them  the  pre-emiaenoej  oH 
of  reverence  and  veneration  to  the  temples.  •   He  made  it  fab  ^mt 
business  to  return  siich  grateful  answers  to  all  tlie  umlttWHrtlftWj  ss 
that  he  might  gain  the  good  will  and  affection  of  every  one  of  dieBB. 

When  all  this  ivas  over,  he  applied  himself  to  tlie  cddmtienif 
the  funeral  of  Hephfiestion;  and  contrived  (all  thift  pos8U>Iy  he  odaU) 
so  far  to  grace  it  with  funeral  pomp,  as  that  it  should  not  only  cx« 
ceed  all  that  ever  were  befor;?  it,  but  likewise  that  it.should  never  ha 
exceeded  by  any  that  was  to  come:  for  lie  most  dearly  Ipiwtd  him  (ss 
much  as  the  dearest  friends  that  we  have  heard  of  ever  loved  one 
another)  when  he  was  alive,  and  honoured  him  beyond  comparison 
when  he  was  dead.  He  honoured  him  more  than  any  of  his  friends 
while  he  lived,  although  Craterus  seemed  to  vie  with  him  tot  Alex- 
ander's affection:  for,  when  one  of  the  servants  said,. that  Cntems 
loved  Alexander  as  well  as  Hephsestion  did;  Alexander  answered j— 
That  Craterus  was  the  king's  friend,  and  Hephsestion.AlexandePs. 
And  at  tliat  time  when  the  mother  of  Darius  (through  a  mistake  npoQ 
the  first  view  of  the  king)  prostrated  herself  at  the  feet  of  He]piuBS- 
tion,  and,  coming  to  discern  her  error,  was  mneh  out  of  coonte- 
nance.^'^  Be  not  troubled,  mother,  (says  Alexander),  for  even  be 
is  another  Alexander.'*  To  conclude,  Hephsestion  had  anch  inleKat 
with  Alexander,  and  such  free  access  and  liberty  of  converse^  Aat 
when  Olympias  (who  eofvied  him)  accused  him  and  threatened  him 
by  her  letters^  he  wrote  to  her  back  again  with  severe  cliedcs,  and 
added  these  expressions^-.*^  Forbear  your  slanders  against  me,  aad 
bridle  your  anger,  and  cease  your  threats:  ^but,  if  yon  will  not^  I 


C%ap.  XH.  DIODOllUS  8ICULUS.  353 

'  ■  I    p '  ■  ■  '■       ■      ■ 

VHloe  them  not  in  the  least;  for  you  are  not  ignorant  that  Alexander 
must  be  judge  of  all/' 

The  king  therefore,  taken  up  with  the  preparations  for  the  funeral^ 
eommanded  the  neighbouring  cities  to  assist  as  much  as  pdssibly  they 
eoold  towards  its  pomp  and  splendour;  and  commanded  all  the 
people  of  Asia,  that  the  fire  which  the  Persians  call  the  Holy  Fire 
should  be  put  out,  till  the  exequies  of  this  funeral  were  fully  finished, 
18  was  used  to  be  done  in  the  funerals  of  the  kings  of  Persia;  which 
was  taken  to  be  an  ill  omen  to  the  king  himself,  and  that  the  gods 
did  thereby  portend  his  de&th.  There  were  likewise  other  prodigies 
happened  that  clearly  pointed  out  that  Alexander's  life  was  near  at 
an  end;  which  we  shall  presently  give  an  account  of,  when  we  have 
finished  our  relation  of  the  funeral.  In  order  to  this  funeral,  all  his 
chief  commanders  and  noblemen  (in  compliance  to  the  king's  plea- 
sure) made  medals  of  Hephsestion  graven  in  ivoiy,  and  cast  in  gold 
and  other  rich  metals.  Alexander  himself  called  together  a  great 
number  of  the  most  exquisite  workmen  that  could  be  had,  and  bi^ke 
down  the  wall  of  Babylon  ten  furlongs  in  length,  and  took  away  the 
brick  of  it;  and  then,  levelling  the  place  where  the  funeral  pile  was 
to  be  raised,  built  thereon  a  foursquare  pile,  each  square  taking  a 
furlong  in  length:  the  platform  he  divided  into  thirty  apartments, 
and  covered  the  roofs  with  the  trunks  of  palm-trees.  The  whole 
structure  represented  a  quadrangle.  Afterwards  he  beautified  it 
round  with  curious  ornaments :  the  lower  part  was  filled  up  with  two 
Jinndred  and  forty  prows  of  gallics  of  five  tier  of  oars,  burnished  widi 
gold;  upon  whose  rafters  stood  two  darters,  one  on  each  side  of  the 
beaks,  of  four  cubits  higli,  kneeling  upon  one  knee;  and  statues  of 
men  in  arms  five  cubits  high :  all  the  divisions  and  open  parts  were 
veiled  with  hangings  of  purple.  That  part  next  above  this  was  set 
with  torches,  of  fifteen  cubits  high,  in  the  middle  part  of  every  one  of 
which  (where  they  were  used  to  be  held)  were  placed  crowns  of  gold; 
at  the  top,  whence  the  flame  ascended,  were  fixed  eagles  with  their 
wings  displayed,  and  their  heads  stooping  downwards.  At  the  bottom 
of  the  torches  were  serpents,  ^Eicing  and  looking  up  at  the  eagles.  la 
the  third  range  were  exposed  all  sorts  of  wild  beasts  hunted;  in  the 
fourth,  centaurs  all  in  gold  combating  one  with  another;  the  fifth 
presented  alternately  to  the  view  lions  and  bulls  in  massy  gold.  In 
that  part  above  these  were  placed  the  arms  both  of  the  Macedonians 
and  barbarians;  the  one  signifying  the  victories  over  the  conquered 
nations,  and  the  other  the  valour  of  the  conqueror.  In  the  highest 
and  last  part  of  all,  stood  Sirenes,  contrived  hollow,  wherein  secretly 
were  placed  those  who  sang  the  mourning  song  to  the  dead.  The 
height  of  the  whole  structure  mounted  up  above  a  hundred  and  thirty 


864  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  B^ok  XVIL 


cnblts.  To  conclude,  both  commanders  and  common  soldieittj  am* 
Iia»sadors  and  the  natural  inhabitants^  so  strove  to  excel  one  aootber 
in  contributing  to  this  stately  funeral,  that  the  charge  and  cost  a- 
monnted  to  above  twelve  thousand  talents.  And  to  grace  it  the  more^ 
and  make  it  more  splendid,  he  conferred  several  other  honours  upon 
these  exequies.  At  length  he  commanded  all  to  sacrifice  to  him 
as  a  tutelar  god:  for  it  happened  that  Philip,  one  of  bis  nobility^  at 
tiiat  time  returned  iwm  the  temple  of  Ammon,  and  broagbt  word 
fnom  the  oracle  there — ^That  Hephiestion  might  be  sacrificed  unto  as 
a  demigod:  whereat  Alexander  was  very  glad,  hearing  tliat  the  Oracle 
kselr  was  an  approver  of  his  opinion;  and  thereupon  he  himself  was 
the  first  that  offered,  sacrificing  ten  thousand  beasts  of  all  kinds>  aad 
Biaking  a  magnificent  feast  for  all  the  multitude^ 

When  all  the  solemnity  was  over,  Alexander  gave  himself  up  to 
case  and  a  revelling  course  of  life :  and  now,  when  he  seemed  to  be 
at  the  summit  of  worldly  greatness  and  prosperity,  that  space  of 
life  which  he  might  have  run  through  by  the  course  of  nature  vraa  cot 
short  by  the  determination  of  fate;  and  God  himself,  by  many  s^na 
and  prodigies  shewn  in  several  places,  foretold  his  death*  For,  wben 
be  was  anointing  himself,  and  his  royal  robes  and  crown  that  while 
lay  upon  the  throne,  the  fetters  of  one  of  the  natural  inhabitants  that 
was  then  in  chains  unloosed  and  fell  off  of  their  own  accord,  and  the 
person,  not  being  discerned  by  any  of  the  watch,  passed  throu^  the 
court-gates  without  any  opposition,  and  made  strait  to  the  throne^ 
and  put  on  the  royal  robes  and  crown  upon  bis  head,  and  sat  iipoa 
the  throne  without  any  disturbance.  Which  action  being  noised  a» 
broad,  tlic  king  was  amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  the  thing,  and  went 
to  the  place,  and,  without  any  rebuke,  calmly  asked  tlie  man..*^  Wbo 
he  was,  and  who  advised  him  to  do  so?"  who  plainly  and  simply  an- 
swered  ^<  He  knew  nothing  at  all/'  This  strange  accident  was  re- 
ferred to  the  consideration  of  the  augurs,  by  whose  advice  the  poor 
wretch  was  put  to  death,  that  the  evil  portended  (if  any  were)  might  fall 
upon  his  own  head. 

Tl>e  king,  having  now  got  his  robes  again,  sacrificed  to  the  gods  his 
protectors :  but,  however,  he  continued  much  disturbed  and  perplexed 
in  his  mind,  and  then  began  to  reflect  upon  what  tlie  Chaldeans  had 
foretold;  and  fretted  against  those  philosophers  that  persuaded  him 
to  enter  into  Babylon,  but  admired  the  art  and  profound  wisdom  of 
the  Chaldeans.  To  conclude,  he  cursed  those  who,  by  subtle  aigu* 
ments,  had  disputed  against  the  necessity  of  fate. 

Not  long  after,  God  shewed  another  prodigy  concerning  the  change 
of  the  kingdom :  the  king  had  a  desire  to  see  the  haven*  at  Babylon; 

*  Thif  ho  had  ncwiv  made. 


Ckiqf.  Xrt.  DIODOftUS  SICULUS.  SSS 

and^  being  come  there^  he  went  on  board  with  some  of  hii  nobki 
that  attended  him;  and^  while  they  were  sailings  the  king's  ship  wm 
separated  from  the  rest,  and  tossed  to  and  fro  for  several  days  tc^e- 
ther,  so  as  that  he  wholly  despaired  of  his  life;  and,  being  at  Umgjfk 
eanried  tbfoogh  a  narrow  creek)  where  bushes  and  trees  grew  tfiiok 
upon  both  sides,  fab  turban,  or  diadem,  was  plucked  off  his  head  bf 
one  of  the  boughs,  and  hurled  into  the  water,  which  one  of  the  fiiarf* 
nen  seeing,  swam  to  it,  and,  for  the  better  securing  of  it,  clapped  k 
upon  his  own  head,  and  swam  back  to  the  ship.  After  he  had  wafi^ 
dered  op  and  down  three  days  and  three  nights,  he  returned  at  tenglk 
safe  with  his  diadem  to  his  friends,  and  again  consulted  the  sooth** 
sayers  concerning  this  prodigy,  who  advised  him  immediately,  with 
Mil  diligence,  to  offer  splendid  sacrifices  to  the  goda. 

But,  at  the  time  of  these  sacrifices,  he  was  invited  by  one  Mediiui^ 
aThessalian,  one  of  his  friends,  to  a  banquet;  where,  when  lie  wm 
in  his  cups,  and  even  drunk  with  wine,  he  quaffed  off  the  great  bowl' 
called  Hercules's  cup:  whereupon,  as  if  he  had  been  struck  with  k 
thmider-bolt,  he  gave  a  deep  sigh,  and  was  immediately  led  out  by 
Ills  nobles,  and  so  left  the  place.  Those  who  had  him  in  their  charge 
forthwith  laid  him  upon  his  bed,  and  there  diligently  attended  hiitt« 
His  distemper  increasing,  his  physicians  were  called  in;  but  they 
were  not  able  to  administer  any  thing  for  his  relief. 

At  length  his  sickness  was  so  violent,  and  his  pains  so  great,  tliat 
he  himself  desjtaircd  of  life,  and  in  that  condition  drew  off  his  ring 
from  his  finger,  and  delivered  it  to  Perdiccas.  His  commanders  thea 
asked  him "  To  whom,  Sir,  do  you  leave  the  kingdom?"  He  an- 
swered  "  To  the  most  deserving."     And  when  he  uttered  his  last 

words,  be  told  them ^Thut  the  cliiefest  of  his  friends  and  command- 
ers would  solemnize  his  funeral,  when  he  was  gone,  with  blood  and 
contention.  And  thus  died  Alexander,  when  he  had  reigned  twelve 
years  and  seven  months,  having  performed  such  mighty  acts  as  no 
king  ever  did  before  him,  nor  any  since,  to  this  day. 

But,  because  some  writers  diHer  as  to  the  cause  and  manner  of  his 
death,  affirming  that  he  was  poisoned  by  a  dtadly  potion  given  him, 
it  is  necessary  to  relate  what  they  have  reported  concerning  this 
matter.  They  say  that  Antipater,  whom  Alexander  had  made  his 
viceroy  in  Europe,  fell  out  with  Olympias,  the  king's  mother,  of 
which  at  first  very  little  notice  was  taken,  because  the  king  would 
not  hear  any  of  the  accusations  against  him.  But  afterwards,  the 
quarrels  and  heart-burnings  growing  still  higher,  the  king,  out  of  his 
piety  and  awe  to  the  gods,  conceived  it  his  duty  to  gratify  his  mother; 
whereupon  he  gave  many  apparent  signs  and  tokens  of  the  alienation 
of  his  affections  from  Antii)ater.     And,  as  further  fuel  to  the  flame. 


S56  DiODORus  SICULU9.  Book  XFIL 

the  putting  to  death  Parmenio  and  Philotas  did  not  a  little  terrify  and 
afiright  the  nobility:  and  therefore^  it  is  said^  Antipater  ordered  hia 
son,  who  was  Alexander's  cup-bearer,  to  put  poison  into  his  wine. 
But,  because  he  was  a  man  of  great  power  in  Europe  after  the  death 
of  Alexander,  and  that  Cassander,  his  son,  succeeded  him  in  the  king* 
domj  many  historians  durst  not  say  any  thing  in  their  writings  of 
poison.  However,  it  is  very  apparent  that  Cassander  was  a  great 
enemy  to  the  concerns  of  Alexander:  for  he  suffered  the  body  of 
Olympias,  after  she  was  murdered,  to  lie  with  disdain  unburied;  and 
he  made  it  his  great  business  to  rebuild  Thebes,  which  Alexander 
had  razed  to  the  ground. 

When  the  king  was  dead,  Sysigambis,  the  mother  of  Darius^  with 
abundance  of  tears,  bewailed  the  death  of  Alexander,  and  her  owa 
desolate  condition  upon  that  account,  insomuch  that,  to  the  last  mi- 
nute, she  would  neither  eat,  nor  see  the  light ;  and  so  the  fifkh  dqf 
after  died  of  hunger,  in  extreme  sorrow,  but  with  as  much  glory  and 
reputation. 

Having  now  brought  down  our  history  to  the  death  of  Alexander^ 
as  we  designed  in  the  beginning  of  this,  we  shall  proceed  to  give  aa 
account  of  the  acts  of  his  successors  in  the  following  book* 


S57 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  XVIII. 


PREFACE. 

HAGORAS  the  SamiaD^  and  some  others  of  the  antlent  natural 
sophers^  held  that  the  souU  of  men  were  Immortal^  and  that  to 
*X  future  events  at  the  very  point  of  deaths  when  the  soul  is  evea. 
ig  from  the  body^  is  the  effect  and  consequence  of  this  tnith* 
Ueh  Homer  witnesses^  when  he  brings  in  Hector^  while  he  Was 
breathing  his  last,  telling  Achilles,  that  he  would  die  within  a 
short  time  afterwards.  The  same  is  attested  of  many  others  of 
dmes,and  confirmed  especially  by  the  death  of  Alexander  the 
donian,  who,  dying  at  Babylon,  and  l>eing  asked  by  his  com- 
ers and  those  about  him,  at  the  time  he  was  breathing  bis  last 
lio  should  succeed  him?  he  answered — ^^  The  most  worthy; 
foresee,*'  says  he,  **  that  great  and  grievous  quarrels  amongst 
lends  win  be  the  sacrifices  to  me  after  my  funeral/'  Which 
med  accordingly;  for  the  cbiefest  of  his  commanders  contested  .^ 
iier  about  tlie  principality;  and  great  wars,  after  the  death  of 
inder,  broke  forth  amongst  them:  whose  actions  are  contained 
s  book,  which  will  clearly  evidence  to  the  studious  reader  the 
of  what  is  now  said. 

e  former  comprehended  all  the  things  done  by  Alexander,  to  the 
of  his  death.  This  present  book,  relating  the  actions  of  those 
ucceeded,  ends  with  the  year  next  before  the  reign  of  Agatho- 
wbich  makes  a  history  of  seven  years. 


L,  2.  No.  43.  LI. 


S58  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XFIIL 


CHAP.  L 

Quarrels  about  a  successor  to  Alexander.  Aridaus  made  kmg. 
The  provinces  divided  amongst  the  chirf  commanders.  Maitert 
contained  in  Alexander's  note-books.  Meleager  executed  bjf 
Perdiccas.  The  Grecims  revolt.  A  description  of  Asia.  Py- 
than  sent  against  the  revolting  Grecians^  who  were  all  cut  off. 
TheLamian  war:  the  cause  of  it.  Alexander's  epistle  to  ihe 
exiles.  Leosthenes,  tlie  Athenian  general.  Lamia  besiegedm 
Leosthenes  killed:  Antiphilus  placed  iti  his  room. 

V^EN  Cephisodorus  was  chief  ma^trate  of  Athens^  the  Romaiui 
created  Lucius  Furius  and  Decius  Jovius  consuls :  about  which  time, 
Alexander  being  now  dead  without  issue,  aod  so  the  goyemaeulj 
without  a  head,  there  arose  great  dissentioas  aod  diidewcest  about 
the  efi^e*  For  the  foot  were  for  settHig  up  Aridssus*,  (be  ion  of 
Philip,  a  weak-spirited  man^  labouring  under  man;  natitfial  infinni- 
ties:  but  the  chlefest  of  the  nobility  and  esquires  of  the  body  met 
together  in  council;  and,  being  joined  with  the  squadron  of  horse 
called  the  Social^  they  resolved  to  try  it  out  with  the  Macedomaa 
phalanx. 

Therefore  they  sent  the  miost  eminent  commanders,  among 
Meleager  was  the  chief,  to  the  foot,  to  require  them  to  obsecve  t 
mands.  But  Meleager,  (who  was  the  most  eminent  man  of  the  pha- 
lanx), as  soon,  as  he  came  to  the  battalion  which  was  of  the  greatest 
account  and  esteem  in  the  army,  he  said  nothing  at  all  of  the 
Dcss  for  which  they  were  sent;  but,  on  the  contrary,  highly  ( 
mended  them,  for  their  choice,  and  stirred  them  up  against  tke  < 
posers.  Whereupon  the  Macedonians  created  M^le^gcK  their 
tain,  and,  with  their  arms,  made  out  against  the  contijuy-  pasty* 
Those  of  the  king's  life-guard  and  esquires  of  the  body  marched 
likewise  out  of  Babylon,  in  order  to  fight;  but  the  most  interested 
and  popular  men  amongst  them  endeavoured  all  they  could  to  make 
peace  on  both  sides.  Upon  which  it  was  presently  agreed,  that  An* 
deus,  the  son  of  Philip,  should  be  made  king,  and  called  PUMp^  aod 
tliat  Perdiccas,  to  whom  the  late  king,  when  he  was  upon  the  point 
of  death,  delivered  his  ring,  should  be  invested  with  the  cieeutive 
power  of  the  kingdom ;  and  ordered,  that  the  esquires  of  the  body 

*  Arldsus,  tlkC  son  of  Pbilipi  bj  one  Philiiwa  of  LariMB«  a  •tniiiiptt.«-JiitiB|  I,  IS^ 

e.  t,  riut. 


Cftop.  /•  DIOOOEUS  8ICULI?9.  9S9 


and  the  chief  conBiaiiders  sfaould  govera  the  proviDces^  aad  all  be 
^dAsenrant  to  the  comHMUidfl  of  the  king  aad  Penliceas. 

Arideus  bciog  this  aiade  kiog^  he  balled  together  a  general  eoan- 
cil  of  the  chief  comnaiidert :  and  to  Ptolomy  Lagna  be  committed 
the  govcnuneiit  of  Egypt  $  loLaomedoa  of  Mitylene^  Syria;  to  Pbi- 
lotas,  Oiliciai  to  I^tiKm,  Media;  to  Eumenesi  Cappadoeia  and 
Pq>hlagODia,  and  the  bordering  eouBtriea,  which  w^re  never  entlered 
by  Alexander  all  the  tiaae  of  hia  waia  with  DariUa^  through  want  of 
convenient  opportunity.  To  Aittigonns  he  i^signed  the  command 
of  lifeia,  and  die  Greater  Phrygia;  tb  Gaasander^  Caria;.  to  Me- 
Icager*j  Lydia;  to Leenatus^  Phrygia  allalong  the  roast  df  the  Hel- 
lespont :  and  in  this  manner  were  tte  provinces  divided^  In  EaropOj 
Thnusct  with  the  nations  bchrdaring  npon  the  tea  of  Pbnttis,  wera 
committed  to  liyaimaehiis;  and  Macedonia,  with  those  bordering 
upon  i^  to  Antipater.  As  fcr  the  rest  df  the  Astatic  protinces^  It 
was  thought  most  advisable  not  to  alter,  bat  to  leate  them  onder  tie 
government  of  the  fioraer  lord-lientenants.  The  province  Mnt  ad» 
joinipg  was  intrusted  with  Taxiles,  and  the  kings  bordering  npon 
him:  bat  the  province  adjoining  to  Mount  Caucasiis  (called  Pno* 
pamisns)  was  assigned  to  Oayartes^  king  of  the  Bactrians,  wtiose 
daughter  Roxana  Alexander  had  married.  Araebosia  and  GedroA 
to  Siburtius;  Aria  andDrangina  to  Stasander  of  Soloe;  Bactflana 
and  Sqgdiana  were  allotted  to  Philip)  P^hia  and  Hyireania  toPhrai 
tapbernes;  Persia  to  Peucestes;  CarmaaiatoTlepoIemns;  Mediate 
Atiapes.  The  province  of  Babylon  to  Aichon;  and  Mesopotamia 
to  Arcesilaus*  Seleocus  be  created  gencfral  of  the  b^ave  brigade  of 
the  Social  horse*  Uephestion  was  the  first  commander  of  tfait  bri* 
gadoylhen  Psrdiocas^  and  the  third  was  thil  Seleiscus.  He  ordered 
tbalTaxiles  and  Porus  should  eiyoy  the  absolute  aathoiiHy  ^itUa 
their  own  kingdoms^as  Alexander  himself  bad  before  appoihtad.  TU 
can  of  the  -funeral,  aad  of  preppuifig  a  cbtiriof  to'  oobvey  the  kfi^'a 
body  to  Ammoo,  was  committed  to  Aridttus. 

But  as  for  Craterus,  the  most  noble  of  Alexander's  captains,  he 
was  some  time  before  sent  by  Alexander,  with  ten  thousand  of  the 
old  soldiers  that  were  discharged  from  further  service  in  the  Persian 
war,  into  Cilicia,  to  put  in  execution  some  instructions  in  writing 
given  him  by  the  king;  which,  after  the  king's  death,  hb  successors 
determined  should  be  no  further  proceeded  in :  for  Perdiccas,  finding 
in  the  kiag's  commentaries  not  only  the  vast  sums  of  mgney  intended 
to  be  expended  upon  the  funeval  of  HephiBstieto,  but  likewise  many 
other  things  of  extraordinary  cost  aad  charge  designed  by  the  kiug^ 
be  judged  it  far  more  advisable  to  let  them  alone;  but,  lest  he  should 

*  Meieager  fur  Menuidcr.^-Uih.  Aon.  S90|  Airianj  Jib.  3,  p.  5<». 


SSO  DIODORUS  SICULVS.  Book'XFITL 

seem  to  take  too  much  upon  him,  and  by  his  private  judgment  to  de- 
tract from  Alexander's  wisdom  and  discretion,  he  referred  all  these 
matters  to  the  determination  of  a  general  council  of  the  Macedoidans. 
Tiie  chief  and  the  most  considerable  heads  of  the  king's  purposes 
contained  in  his  books  of  remembrance  were  these 1.  That  a  thou- 
sand long  ships,  larger  than  those  of  three  tier  of  oars,  should  be 
built  in  Phoenicia,  Syria,  Cilicia,  and  Cyprus,  in  order  to  an  inmnon 
upon  the  Carthaginians,  and  others  inhabiting  the  sea-coasts  of  Africa 
and  Spain,  with  all  islands  adjoining,  as  far  as  Sicily.  2.  That  a 
plain  and  easy  way  should  be  made  strait  along  through  the  sea- 
coasts  of  Africa  to  Hercules's  Pillars.  3.  That  six  magnificent  tem- 
ples should  be  built,  and  that. fifteen  hundred  talents  should  be  ex- 
pended in  the  cost  of  each  of  them.  4.  That  arsenals  and  ports  sfaonhT 
be  made  in  places  convenient  and  fit  for  the  reception  of  so  great  a 
navy.  5.  That  the  new  cities  should  be  planted  with  colonies^  and 
that  people  should  he  transplanted  out  of  Asia  into  Europe,  and  others 
out  of  Europe  into  Asia,  to  the  end  that,  by  intermarriages  and  mutual 
affinities,  he  might  establish  peace  and  concord  between  the  two  mm 
continents  of  the  world. 

Some  of  the  temples  before  mentioned  were  to  be  built  in  Delos^ 
Dclphos,  and  Dodona;  some  in  Macedonia,  as  the  temple  of  Jupiter 
inDio;  Diana's  temple,  in  Amphipolis;  another  to  Minerva,  in 
Cyrnus*,  to  which  goddess  he  designed  likewise  to  build  a  temple  m 
Ilium  inferior  to  none  for  splendour  and  magnificence.  Lastly,  to 
adorn  his  father  Philip's  sepulchre,  he  designed  to  erect  a  monomeot 
equal  to  the  biggest  pyramid  in  Egypt,  seven  of  which  were  by  some 
accounted  the  most  stately  and  greatest  works  in  the  worid. 

These  things  being  laid  before  them,  the  Macedonians,  tfaoagh 
they  highly  commended  and  approved  of  Alexander's  designs,  yet, 
because  they  seemed  things  beyond  all  measure  impracticable,  they 
decreed  all  to  be  laid  aside.  Then  Perdiccas  caused  those  soldiers 
that  were  turbulent,  and  exceedmg  inveterate  against  him,  to  the 
number  of  thirty,  to  be  put  to  death :  afterwards,  out  of  a  private 
grudge,  he  executed  Meleager,  (who  betrayed  his  embassy,  and  car- 
ried on  the  mutiny),  as  one  tliat  sought  to  undermine  him. 

About  this  time  the  Grecians  in  the  upper  provinces  revolted,  and 
got  together  a  great  army;  against  whom  he  sent  Python,  one  of  the 
chiefcst  commanders.  But  we  conceive  it  much  conducing  to  the 
better  understanding  of  the  history  of  things  that  were  afterwards 
done,  if  in  the  first  place  we  declare  the  cause  of  the  revolt,  and  the 
situation  of  Avia,  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  provinces :  for,  by 
this  mcaus  laying  before  the  eyes  of  the  reader  a  map  of  the  coun- 

•  Corsica. 


Cht^.  L  DiODORUd  SICULUS.  S6l 

■  ■  -—^ 

tries,  and  the  distances  of  places  one  from  another^  the  relation  will 
be  more  plun  and  easy. 

■  From  Taurus,  therefore,  in  Cilicia,  to  Caucasus  and  the  eastern 
ocean,  a  ridge  of  mountains  stretch  forth  in  a  straight  and  continued 
line  throughout  all  Asia,  as  distinguished  by  several  peaks  and  risings 
of  the  bills  from  them ;  Mount  Taurus  has  gained  particular  names. 
By  this  means,  Asia  being  divided  into  two  parts,  one  rises  towards 
the  north>  the  other  descends  towards  the  south;  and,  according  to 
lliese  several  climates,  the  rivers  run  contrary  ways;  some  taking  their 
course  into  the  Caspian  sea,  others  into  the  Euxine,  and  some  into 
the  northern  ocean.  These  rivers,  lying  thus  opposite  one  to  another, 
part  empty  themselves  into  the  Indian  sea,  and  another  part  into  the 
•ocean  adjoining  to  this  continent;  some,  likewise,  fall  into  the  Red 
Sea.  In  this  manner,  likewise,  are  the  provinces  divided :  for  some 
lie  towards  the  north,  and  others  bend  to  the  south.  The  first  to- 
wards the  north  borders  upon  the  river  Tanais,  that  is  to  say,  Sog>» 
diana,  with  Bactria;  and  next  to  them  Aria  and  Pbrthia.  This  pnn 
▼ince  surrounds  the  Hyrcanian  sea*,  which  lies  within  its  limits  and 
bounds.  The  next  is  Media,  called  by  many  names,  from  the  places 
included  in  it,  and  is  the  greatest  of  all  the  provinces.  Then  follows 
Armenia,  Lycaonia,  and  Cappadocia,  all  of  a  very  sharp  and  cold 
adr.  Bordering  upon  these,  in  a  direct  line,  are  Piirygia,  both  the 
Greater,  and  that  adjoining  the  Hellespont;  in  an  oblique  line  lie 
Lydia  and  Caria.  Pisidia  stretches  forth  itself  in  length,  and  in  a 
parallel  line  equal  with  Phrygia  on  the  right  hand;  and,  on  the  side 
of  IMsidia  lies  Lycia.  The  Greek  cities  are  situated  upon  the  sea- 
coasts  of  these  provinces,  whose  names  it  is  not  necessary  for  our 
purpose  here  to  recite. 

Thus  situated  (as  we  have  related)  are  the  northern  provinces. 
As  to  the  southern,  the  first  is  India,  under  Mount  Caucasus,  a  very 
large  and  populous  kingdom ;  for  it  is  inhabited  by  many  Indian  na- 
tions, the  greatest  of  which  is  that  of  the  Gandaritfie,  against  whom 
Alexander  made  no  attempt,  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  their  ele- 
phants. This  territory  is  divided  from  the  farther  India  by  the 
greatest  river  in  those  parts,  being  thirty  furlongs  broad.  The  rest 
of  India,  (conquered  by  Alexander),  a  rich  and  fruitful  country,  and 
watered  by  many  rivers,  borders  upon  this  of  the  Gandaritfie:  within 
this  part,  besides  many  other  kingdoms,  were  the  dominions  of  Porus 
and  Taxiles.  The  river  Indus  (from  which  the  country  takes»  it 
name)  runs  through  it.  Separated  from  India,  next  to  it,  was  Are- 
chosia,  Gedrosia,  and  Carmania,  and  with  these  was  joined  Persia, 
wherein  arc  situated  the  provinces  of  Susiana  and  Si tacana.     Next 

*  Or  rather  adjuins  to  the  Hjrcuuiun  sea. 


262  DiODORUS  sicuLus.  BooA  XVUL 

HI  '  ■  asggggaaaasaasaaaBaea^ 

ibUows  the  province  of  Babylon,  extending  itself  as  fiur  as  to  Aimbia 
the  desert.  On  the  other  side,  where  begins  the  descent*,  you  have 
Mesopotamiaf,  lying  between  two  rivers,  JEk^hratas  aiidT%ris^  i 
whence  it  had  its  name* 

The  higher  Syria,  and  the  countries  upon  the  sea^coostst  i 
to  it,  as  Ciliciay  Pamphylia,  Syria  Cava§,  within  which  is  Phneoiciay 
Ke  close  to  the  province  of  Babylon.  Upon  the  borden  of  Syiio 
Cava,  and  the  desert  next  adjoining  to  it,  (thiough  whicb  nuu  tho 
river  Nile,  and  so  divides  between  Syria  and  Egypt),  appears  ^q^ 
itself,  the  best  and  richest  of  all  the  provinces.  All  these  < 
are  scorching  hot;  for  the  southern  clidaate  is  contrary  in  its  \ 
to  the  northern.  These  provinces,  (conquered  by  Alexander),  whick 
we  have  thus  described,  were  divided  amongst  the  chiefesi  of  Us 
commanders. 

But  the  Grecians  that  inhabited  the  upper  provinees,  who  (thiom§ 
fear  while  Alexander  was  alive)  endured  their  being  cast  iioitii  into 
the  utmost  corner  of  the  kingdom,  now,  when  he  was  dead,  bsiof 
urged  by  a  desire  to  return  into  their  own  country,  revoksd|,  and  to 
that  end  unanimously  chose  Pbik>,an£nean  born,  to  be  their  Qaptai% 
and  had  got  together  a  considerable  army  of  above  twenty  thousand 
foot,  and  three  thousand  horse,  all  old  expert  soldiers,  and  himse  and 
valiant  meo» 

Intelligence  being  brought  of  this  revolt,  Perdiccas  chose  by  lot 
out  of  the  Macedonian  squadrons  three  thousand  foot,  and  ei|^ 
hundred  horse.  Python,  one  of  the  squires  of  the  body  to  Alexai^ 
der,  a  man  of  a  high  spirit,  and  a  skilful  commander,  was  chosen  go* 
neral  by  the  army,  and  to  him  Perdiccas  delivered  the  soldiers  cboseii, 
as  is  l)efore  declared,  and  letters,  likewise,  to  the  lord-lieutenants, 
whereby  they  were  ordered  to  furnish  him  with  ten  thousand  loot  and 
eight  thousand  horse,  against  the  rebels.  Python,  being  a  man  of 
an  ambitious  spirit,  was  very  ready  to  undertake  this  expedition:  iut 
he  purposed  to  gain  by  all  fair  means  possible  these  revolting  Greeks^ 
and,  by  joining  their  forces  to  his  own,  to  set  up  for  himself,  and  se- 
duce all  those  ufqper  provinces  under  his  own  subjection.  But  Per- 
diccas, suspecting  his  design,  gave  him  express  orders«»That,  having 
overcome  those  rebek,  he  should  put  them  all  to  the  swoidy  and 
divide  the  spoil  amongst  the  soldiers.  Python  therefore  owtfched 
away  with  these  men  thus  delivered,  and,  when  lie  had  seceivod  thoso 
that  were  to  join  him  from  the  lord-lieutenants,  he  made  towards 
the  rebels  with  the  whole  army;  and,  luiving  by  a  certain  Enaan 

*  At  the  foot  of  Mount  Taonu  southward. 

t  McMpotaniM  tigniS«t  in  the  Greek  tongue  »  phioe  betvrccn  two  iWcki. 

X  The  Mcditerrauvau  acii.  $  Qi  CslofjKia« 


Oup.  I.  DIODORUS  sicuLirs.  Sfl^ 

JBHBB^^HIi^M^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^"  ■   •        — — — .^^^^ 

conrapted  LipodotVM^  wIki  eoammdol  a  brigade  of  three  tiioasand 
inea  aomif  dM  febds,  lie  rcmted  them  all:  fer^  in  the  height  of  the 
engageiea^  when  the  victory  was  doahtfel^  the  traitor  withdrew  from 
4ie  MSt  of  hit  feUow-soldiers,  Mid,  with  hb  three  thousand  men, 
flMWched  q^  to  the  top  ofa  ririog  groond;  whereupon  the  rest  (think- 
ioff  that  he  had  ted)  broke  all  their  ranks,  and  took  to  their  beds, 
lyken  i>riog  thtw  ii4etor,  sent  a  trumpet  to  the  rebels,  ordering  diem 
tD  laf  down  thrir  arms,  and,  upon  capitulation,  licensed  them  to  re«- , 
pair  evevy  omn  to  his  own  home.    It  was  no  small  jojr  to  Python  to 
aaa  things  bioi^ht  (o  such  a  pass  as  suited /directly  to  his  designs; 
Isr  lio  had  now  all  confirmed  by  oadi,  and  the  Grecians  intermisced 
\  the  Macedonians.    But  the  Macedonians,  remembering  die 
\  Pcfdlpeaa  had  given,  and  making  nothing  of  their  oaths,  broke 
fidth  with  the  Greeiatts  s  for  cm  a  sudden  they  f  cH  unexpectedly  upon 
dMm,  and  put  every  man  of  them  to  the  sword,  and  seized  upon  all 
they  had.    And  so  Python,  being  defeated  in  hb  design,'  returned 
wilk  the  Macedonians  to  Perdiecas.  And  dtts  was  the  state  of  affidrs 
ift  Asia  at  that  time. 

la  the  mean  time,  in  Europe,  the  Rhodkns  east  out  the  garrison  of 
tlw  Macedonians,  and  fireed  dieir  city;  and  the  Athentai^  began  a 
war  against  Atttipafetr,  which  was  called  the  Lamian  War.  Itisintbe 
fot  plaee  necessary  to  declare  the  causes  of  this  war,  that  the  pro* 
grass  of  k  aaay  be  the  better  understood. 

AleKaader,  a  little  before  his  death,  had  ordered  all  the  cjules  and 
outlawed  persons  of  die  Greckn  cides  to  be  recalled,  as  well  to  ad- 
vance bis  own  hononr  and  esteem,  as  to  gain  the  hearts  of  many  ia 
onsry  city  by  his  clemency,  who  might  stand  up  for  his  interest 
agmnst  the  innovations  and  defections  of  the  Grecians.  At  the  ap* 
psoaeh,  therefoe,  of  the  time  of  celebrating  the  Olympiads,  he  sent 
away  Ntcanor,  a  native  of  the  city  Stagira,  with  a  letter  concerning 
dm  restoration  of  the  banditties  of  Greece,  and  commanded  it  to  be 
proclaimed  by  the  common  cryer,  who  executed  the  command,  and 
read  the  ktter,  in  these  words — 

Kmg  Jleximder,  to  the  JBatuUttiet  of  the  Grecian  cities. 

WE  were  not  the  cause  of  your  banishment,  but  will  be  of  the  te- 
turn  of  you  all  into  your  own  country,  excepting  such  as  are  banished 
for  outrageous  crimes;  of  which  things  we  have  written  to  Autipater, 
requiring  him  to  proceed  by  force  against  all  such  as  shall  oppose 
your  restoration. 

Whbw  these  orders  were  proclaimed,  the  people  set  up  a  great 
^ut,  testifying  their  approbation :  for  those  of  them  that  were  pre- 


a64  DiODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XFTII. 


sent  at  the  solemnity  readily  laid  hold  on  the  king's  mcrey^aDd  le- 
turned  their  thanks  with  expressions  of  their  joy,  and  apfibuaea  of 
bis  grace  and  favour:  for  all  the  banished  men  were  then  got  toge- 
ther at  the  Olympiads^  above  the  number  of  twenty  thousand.   Maqy 
tliere  were  who  approved  of  their  restoration  as  a  pradent  act;    but 
the  ^toliaos  and  Athenians  were  mucb  offenddl  at  it;  lor  tlic^ 
^tolians  expected  that  the  GEnians  who  were  banished  out  fimD  ar 
mong  them  should  have  undeigone  due  punishment  for  their  cruBca:: 
for  the  king  had  made  a  great  noise  wiUi  his  threats^  that  he  wonU 
not  only  punish  the  children  of  the  (Enians^  but  that  be  hinnclf. 
would  execute  justice  upon  the  authors  themselves.    Wherevpoo; 
the  Athenians  would  not  agree  by  any  means  to  part  with  i 
which  they  had  divided  by  lot ;  but^  because  they  were  not  at  ] 
able  to  cope  with  Alexander,  they  judged  it  more  advisable  to mt  stilly 
and  watch  till  they  found  a  convenient  opportunity^  which  fortiiiM 
presently  offered  them:  for  Alexander  dying  in  a  short  time  after- 
wards^ and  leaving  no  children  to  succeed  him>  they  grew  confidcat 
that  they  should  be  able  not  only  to  regain  their  liberty,  bat  Ukewiit. 
the  sovereignty  of  all  Greece. 

The  vast  treasure  left  by  Harpalus^  (of  which  we  have  ptrticelarlf 
spoken  in  the  preceding  book),  and  the  soldiers  that  were  dJihanded 
by  the  lord-lieutenants  of  Asia>  were  great  supports  and  eocoaiage* 
ments  for  the  carrying  on  of  this  war;  for  there  were  eight  thonaand 
of  them  then  about  Tenarus^  in  Peloponnesus.  They  sent,  therelbie^ 
privately  to  Leosthenes  the  Athenian,  wishing  him  that,  without  tak* 
ing  notice  of  any  order  by  them,  of  his  own  accord  so  to  dispose  of 
matters  as  to  have  those  soldiers  in  readiness  when  occasion  ieqidred» 
Antipater  likewise  so  contemned  Leosthenes,  that  he  was  cardeas 
and  negligent  in  preparing  for  the  war,  and  so  gave  time  to  the  Athe- 
nians to  provide  all  things  necessary  for  that  affair. 

Hereupon  Leosthenes  very  privately  listed  these  soldiers,  and  (be* 
yond  all  expectation)  had  ready  a  brave  army :  for,  having  been  a 
Jong  time  in  the  wars  in  Asia,  and  often  engaged  in  many  great  batp. 
ties,  they  were  become  very  expert  soldiers.  These  things  wcie 
contrived  when  tlie  death  of  Alexander  was  not  generally  known; 
but^  when  a  messenger  came  from  Babylon,  who  was  an  eye^-witncss 
of  his  death,  the  people  of  Athens  declared  open  war,  and  sent  part  of 
the  money  left  by  Harpalus,  with  a  great  number  of  arms,  to  Leoa* 
thcncs,  charging  him  no  longer  to  conceal  or  palliate  the  matter,  but 
to  do  what  was  most  conducive  to  the  service  of  the  cimimonwcaltlu 
Whereupon,  liaving  distributed  the  money  among  the  soldiers,  as  he 
was  commanded,  and  armed  those  that  wanted,  he  went  into^toliay 
in  order  to  carry  on  the  war  with  the  joint  assistance  of  both  i 


Ckap.  I.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  '  305 

The  ^tolians  joided  very  readily,  and  delivered  to  him,  for  the  set- 
Ticcj  seven  thousand  soldiers.  Then  he  stirred  up  by  his  messengers 
the  Loerions  and  Phocians,  and  other  neighbouring  nations,  to  stand 
up  for  their  liberties,  and  to  free  Greece  from  the  Macedonian  yoke. 
Bnt  in  the  mean  time,  the  wealthy  men  among  the  Athjsnians  di9- 
snaded  them  from  the  war,  bat  the  rabble  were  for  carrying  it  on 
with  all  the  vigour  iomginable:  whence  it  came  to  pass,  that  they 
who  were  for  war,  and  had  nothing  to  live  upon  bnt  their  pay,  werte 
fiur  the  greater  number;  to  which  sort  of  men  Philip  was  used  to  say 
.^War  wras  as  peace,  and  peace  as  war.  Forthwith,  therefore,  the 
orators  (who  were  lo  a  body  together,  and  closed  with  the  hnmburs 
cf  the  people)  wrote  down  the  decree — ^That  the  Athenians  should 
take  opon  them  the  care  and  defence  of  the  common  liberty  of 
Greece,  and  should  free  all  the  Greek  cities  from  their  several  garri^ 
sons;  and  that  they  should  rig  out  a  fleet  of  forty  gallies  of  three 
tiers  of  oars,  and  two  hundred  of  four  tiers  of  oars;  and  that  all  Athe- 
nfams  under  forty  years  of  age  should  take  up  arms:  that  three  of 
the  tribes  diould  keep  watch  and  ward  in  Athens,  and  the  other  seven 
should  be  always  ready  to  march  abroad.    Moreover,  ambassadors 

were  sent  to  all  the  cities  of  Greece,  to  inform  them That  the  peo^ 

pie  of  Adiens  in  the  first  place  looked  upon  all  Greece  to  be  the  com^* 
mon  eonntry  of  every  Grecian,  and  that  they  had  heretofore  repulsed 
the  batborians  at  sea,  who  invaded  them  with  a  design  to  enslave 
Gfcece^  and  that  now  they  had  determined  to  oppose  the  Macedonians 
for  the  common  good,  with  their  navies,  lives,  and  fortunes. 

The  wiser  sort  of  the  Grecians  judged  the  Athenians  more  forward 
than  prudent  in  passing  this  decree,  and  what  they  had  designed 
seemed  to  carry  an  honourable  aspect,  but  nothing  of  profit  and  ad- 
vantage to  the  state:  for  that  they  made  a  stir  and  bustle  unseason- 
ably, and  began  a  war  against  mighty  and  victorious  armies  when 
thtfe  was  no  necessity  for  it;  and,  though  they  had  the  repute  of  a 
prudent  people,  yet  they  considered  not  the  notorious  ruin  and  de- 
straction  of  Thebes. 

However,  when  the  ambassadors  came  to  the  cities,  and  by  their 
usual  florid  way  of  address  had  heated  and  urged  them  on  to  the  war, 
many  confederated  in  the  league,  some  in  the  names  oi  their  several 
cities^  and  others  in  the  names  of  whole  countries.  As  for  the  rest 
of  the  Grecians,  some  sided  with  the  Macedonians,  and  others  stood 
neuter.  But  all  the  iEtolians  generally  (as  is  before  said)  entered 
into  the  confederacy;  and  after  them  all  theThessaliaiis,  except  them 
of  Pellene.  Likewise  the  QHtians,  except  the  Heracleans.  The 
Phthiotians  amongst  the  Achaians,  except  the  Thebans.  The  Elians, 
except  the  Malians.    Then  generally  all  the  Dorians,  Locriaus,  and 

Vol..  2.  NOf43.  MM 


366  DioDORus  SICULU8.  Book  XVIIT. 

Phocians  joined  in  the  league:  also  the  Eneans^  Clyxeans,  and  De- 
lopians.  To  these  joined  likewise  the  Athamaoes,  Leacadiana,  and 
Molcssians^  under  the  command  of  Aryptsus:  but  this  man  phjed 
the  impostor  in  the  confederacy,  and  afterwards  treacherously  aidrd 
the  Macedonians, 

A  small  part,  likewise,  of  the  IHyrians  and  Tbracians,  (out  of  hatred 
to  the  Macedonians)  came  into  the  league,  together  with  the  Caiys- 
ti6es  out  of  Euboea;  and  at  length  out  of  Peloponnesus  the  Aigives, 
Sicyonians,  Elians,  Messenians,  and  those  that  inhabited  Acta*:,  all 
these  befbre*named  confederated  with  the  Grecians. 

The  people  of  Athens  ako  sent  auxiliaries  to  Leosthenea,  out  of 
the  cities,  five  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse^  and  two  thousand 
mercenaries;  who  were  opposed  by  the  Boeotians  in  their  inarch 
through  Bceotia,  for  the  reasons  following: 

Alexander,  when  he  razed  Thebes,  granted  the  teiriUHrics.  of  the 
city  to  the  neighbouring  Boeotiatis,  who  divided  the  lands  of  <  those 
miserable  people  amongst  themselves  by  lot,  and  thereby  gained  hige 
possessions;  who,  understanding  that  the  Athenians  (if  thqr  pi»- 
vailed)  designed  to  restore  the  country  and  lands  to  the  TlidMUii» 
sided  with  the  Macedonians;  and,  while  the  Boeotians  were  en* 
camped  at  Phitsea,  Leosthenes  came  with  part  of  his  forces  into  Boeo- 
tia,  and,  drawing  up  the  Athenians  in  battalia,  fell  upon  the  inhabi- 
tants, routed  them,  and  set  up  a  trophy,  and  then  returned  to  Pyllene. 
Here  (after  blocking  up  all  the  passages)  he  encamped  for  some  tiiM^ 
expecting  the  Macedonian  army. 

But  Antipater,  who  was  left  viceroy  of  Europe  by  Alexander^  as 
soon  as  he  heard  of  his  death  at  Babylon,  and  of  the  divisions  of  the 
provinces,  sent  to  Cratcrus  in  Cilicia,  to  come  to  him  with  all  the 
forces  he  had  for  his  assistance:  for  he,  being  sent  away  j 
before  into  Cilicia,  had  ready  thirty  thousand  Macedonians,  who  \ 
dismissed  from  the  service  in  Asia,  with  which  he  was  returning  i 
Macedonia.  lie  likewise  solicited  Philotas  (who  had  the  province  of 
Phrygia  near  the  Hellespont  under  his  command)  to  assist  himj  and 
promised  to  him  one  of  his  daughters  in  marriage.  For,  as  soon  is  he 
heard  of  the  insurrection  of  the  Grecians  against  him,  he  leftSippM^ 
with  a  considerable  body  of  men,  general  in  Macedonia^  with  orden 
to  raise  many  more;  and  he  himself  marched  out  of  Macedonia  into 
Thessaly  with  thirteen  thousand  foot,  and  six  hundred  horse:  (for  at 
that  time  there  was  great  scarcity  of  soldiers  in  Macedonia,  by  reason 
of  the  recruits  sent  into  Asia);  with  these  forces  sailed  along  thi 
whole  fleet  near  at  hand,  which  Alexander  had  sent  into , 
\\\\h  a  vast  treasure  out  of  the  king's  treasuries. 

*  The  Ma-coasts. 


••* 


Chap.  L  DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


The  navy  consisted  of  a  hundred  and  ten  gallics  of  three  tiers  of 
oars.  The  Thessalians,  indeed,  at  the  beginning  joining  with  Anti- 
pater,  had  sent  to  him  many  capital  horses;  hot  afterwards,  being 
brought  over  by  the  Athenians  into  the  contrary  interest,  they  went 
off  with  their  horse  to  Leosthenes,  and  joined  the  Athenians  for  the 
recovery  of  the  liberties  of  Greece. 

The  Athenians  therefore  growing  very  strong,  by  many  thus  flock- 
ing in  to  them,  the  Grecians  overpowered  the  Macedonians,  and 
overcame  them  in  a  battle.  Antipater  being  routed,  not  daring  to 
abide  in  the  field,  nor  judcring  it  safe  to  return  into  Macedonia,  fled 
to  Lamia,  where  he  drew  his  army  into  the  city,  [repaired  the  wallsj 
furnished  himself  with  arms  ofienslve  and  defensive,  and  with  com 
and  other  provisions;  and  there  waited  for  further  supplies  and  re* 
inforcements  out  of  Asia. 

Ifeosthenes  with  all  his  forces  coming  op  close  to  Lamia,  fortified 
his  camp  with  a  deep  trench  and  rampart.  And  first,  he  drew  up 
his  anoy  in  face  of  the  city,  to  provoke  the  Macedonians  to  fight; 
but  they  not  daring  to  engage,  he  daily  assaulted  the  walls  with  fresh 
jnen  relieving  one  another.  But  the  Macedonians  made  a  stout  de- 
fence, and  many  of  the  Grecians,  through  their  rashness  and  impru* 
dence,  were  cut  off.  For,  having  a  strong  body  of  men  in  the  city, 
and  well  furnished  with  all  sorts  of  weapons,  and  the  walls  with  great ' 
expense  being  made  strong  and  well  built,  the  besieged  easily  beat 
off  the  enemy. 

Leosthenes  therefore  perceiving  he  could  not  gain  the  town  by 
force  of  arms,  blocked  it  up,  to  hinder  all  supplies  of  provisions, 
supposing  the  besieged* would  be  presently  subdued  by  famine  and 
want  of  bread.  To  this  end  he  raised  a  wall,  and  drew  a  deep  trench 
.  found  about  it,  and  so  penned  them  up.  Afterwards  the  iEtolians, 
being  called  away  upon  the  occasion  of  some  public  concerns,  got 
leave  of  Leosthenes  to  return  home,  and  so  they  all  marched  back  to 
^tolia. 

But  while  Antipater  with  hb  army  was  in  these  desperate  straits, 
and  the  city  nearly  lost  for  want  of  provisions,  fortune  on  a  sudden 
turned  the  scale  to  the  advantage  of  the  Macedonians:  for  Antipater 
made  a  sally  upon  them  that  were  busied  in  opening  the  trenches, 
where  Leosthenes  coming  in  to  their  relief,  received  a  blow  upon 
the  head  with  a  stone,  which  felled  him  to  the  ground,  and  so  was 
carried  off  half  dead  into  the  camp,  and  died  the  third  day  after:  he 
was  honourably  buried,  on  account  of  the  noble  services  lie  had  per- 
formed in  the  war.  The  Athenians  commanded  Hyperides  to  set 
forth  his  praise  in  a  funeral  oration,  who  was  esteemed  the  chiefest 
of  (he  orators  at  that  time,  both  for  his  eloquence,  and  his  particular 


SSS  PIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XFOI. 

hatred  of  the  Macedonians:  for  Demosthenea^  the  most  fiunoiis  ora- 
tor, was  then  fled,  beiog  condemned  as  if  he  had  received  bribes 
from  Harpalus.  Aotiphiius,  a  prudent  and  valiant  comrnander^  was 
created  general  in  the  room  of  Leosthenes.  And  this  was  the  state 
of  Europe  at  that  time. 


CHAP.  II. 

Ptolemy  gains  Egypt.  Leagues  with  jint^paier.  LysimadimB 
enters  Thrace.  Leonatus  comes  to  relieve  jfniipaier,  emd  is 
routed.  The  Gredoiis  beaten  at  sea*  Perdiceas  eonquere  Ari^ 
arathssj  prbice  of  Cappadocia;  crucifies  him;  delivers  tkepr^^ 
vince  to  Eumenes.  The  Grecians  quite  routed  by  Craierms  imi 
AfUipater.     The  Athenians  at  length  submit  after  off  the  reel 

.  but  the  Italians.  The  end  of  the  Lamian  war.  The  war  as 
Cyrene  by  Thimbnm.  Ophelas  routs  Thimbron.  Cyrene  gain^ 
ed  by  Ptolemy.  Larissa  sacked.  The  destruetion  of  the  /msi- 
rians  by  themselves.  Perdiceas  tweets  the  kingdom  of  Maes' 
don;  is  opposed  by  Antigonus.  The  JRtolians  bheked  up  ty 
Craterus  and  Autipater.  Antigonus  discovers  Perdieeas^s  de^ 
sign.  Peace  made  with  the  jEtolians.  Perdiceas  menrches  eh 
gainst  Ptolemy y  into  Egypt. 

IN  Asia^  Ptolemy,  one  of  those  that  had  a  share  in  the  dinskm  of 
the  provinces,  without  any  difficulty  possessed  himself  of  Egypt, 
and  carried  himself  with  great  mildness  and  winning  behaviour  to» 
wards  the  people;  and  having  a  treasure  of  eight  thousand  tafentSj 
^ised  an  army  of  mercenaries :  and  many  out  of  love  flocked  to  him 
upon  the  account  of  the  goodness  of  his  disposition. 

He  entered  into  a  league  with  Atipater^  when  he  was  assured  that 
Perdiceas  designed  to  dispossess  him  of  Egypt. 

At  that  time  Lysimachus  broke  into  some  parts  of  Thrace,  and 
found  Seuthes  the  king  encamped  with  twenty  thousand  foot,  and 
eight  thousand  horse.  But  Lysimachus,  though  he  had  not  above 
four  thousand  foot,  and  only  two  thousand  horse,  was  not  affrighted 
M'ith  the  multitude  of  the  enemy.  And  though  he  was  so  much  in- 
ferior in  number,  yet  his  valour  was  such,  tliat  he  entered  into  a  hot 
and  siiarp  engagement;  and  after  the  loss  of  a  great  number  of  his 


CSIop.  IT.  mODORUS  SICULUS.  S^ 

men,  but  many  more  of  the  enemy,  he  returned  to  his  camp  almost 
^ctorioQS.  Upon  which  both  armies  drew  off  the  field,  and  each 
made  greater  preparations,  in  order  to  decide  the  controversy  by  the 
sword. 

As  for  Leonatus,  he  promised  speedy  aid  to  Antipater  and  the  Ma* 
cedonians,  being  solicited  by  Hecatseus,  who  was  sent  to  him  for 
that  purpose.  Landing  therefore  in  Europe,  as  soon  as  he  came  into 
Macedonia,  he  raised  a  great  number  of  soldiers  there;  and  having 
got  together  an  army  of  above  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  about  two 
thousand  five  hundred  horsey  he  marched  through  Thessaly  against 
the  enemy. 

Hereupon  the  Grecians  drew  off  from  the  siege  of  Lamia,  burjned 
their  tents,  and  sent  away  all  their  sick  men  and  heavy  baggage  to 
Melitea;  and  with  the  rest  of  the  army  (ready  and  prepared  for  bat* 
tie)  marched  straight  away,  and  met  Leonatus's  forces  before  Anti 
pster  had  joined  liim,  and  their  two  armies  had  come  up  together. 
The  Grecians  in  the. whole  amounted  to  two-and-twenty  thousand 
foot,  (for  the  ^tolians  were  returned  home  some  time  before,  and 
many  others  of  the  Grecians  were  gone  into  their  own  country); 
and  as  tb  their  horse,  which  were  somewhat  about  three  thousand 
five  hundred,  they  fought  together  in  one  body;  amongst  whom 
were  two  thousand  Thessalians,  brave  and  vah'ant  men,  on  whose 
exertions  they  most  relied  for  obtaining  the  victory.  The  horse  oa 
both  sides  fought  stoutly  a  long  time,  when  the  Thessalians,  by  their 
extraordinary  valour  at  length  prevailing,  Leonatus  (although  he 
fought  with  great  courage  and  resolution)  was  driven  and  penned  up 
within  a  morass,  and,  oppressed  with  his  arras,  after  he  had  received 
many  wounds,  was  there  slain,  and  by  his  own  men  carried  off  dead 
to  the  carriages.  The  Greeks  having  now  gained  so  famous  a  vie* 
tory,  (in  which  Menon  the  Thessalian  commanded  the  horse),  the 
Macedonian  phalanx,  in  order  to  avoid  the  horse,  withdrew  from  the 
plain  and  open  field,  and  betook  themselves  to  the  steep  and  rocky 
hilb,  and,  by  the  strength  of  these  places,  were  there  able  to  defend 
themselves. 

However,  the  Thessalian  horse  attempted  to  break  in  upon  them, 
but,  through  the  disadvantage  of  the  places,  were  not  able  to  do  any 
thing.  The  Grecians  therefore  being  masters  of  the  field,  set  up  a 
trophy,  and  left  off  all  further  pursuit.  The  next  day,  as  soon  as 
Antipater  came  up  with  his  troops,  he  joined  himself  to  the  broken 
army,  and  so  all  the  Macedonians  making  one  camp,  he  took  on  him 
the  management  of  the  whole. 

But  perceiving  that  the  Thessalians  were  too  strong  for  him  in 
horse,  he  judged  it  most  advisable  to  be  quiet  for  the  present,  not 


270  DIODORUS  SICULUA.  '     BooJtXFUL 


daring  to  attempt  to  force  his  way  by  the  sword.  Aad  therefore  be 
inarched  off,  over  hills  ami  other  craggy  places,  not  easy  to  be  pin- 
sued.  Antiphilus  the  Athenian  general,  who  gained  this  victoiy 
over  the  Macedonians,  continued  with  his  army  in  Thessaly,  obsenr- 
ing  tlie  motions  of  the  enemy.  And  this  was  tlie  happy  success  at 
that  time  of  the  Grecians. 

But  because  the  Macedonians  were  masters  at  sea,  the  Atheiuans 
built  so  many  ships  more  as  to  make  up  their  fleet  a  hundred  and  se- 
venty sail :  but  the  Macedonian  fleet  consisted  of  two  hundred  and 
forty,  under  the  command  of  Clitus  their  admiral,  who  engaged  in 
two  sea  fights  at  the  Echinades  islands  with  Eetion  the  Athenian 
admiral,  in  both  of  which  he  beat  him,  sinking  many  o£  the  enemy's 
fillips. 

About  this  time  Perdiccas,  having  with  him  king  Philip  and  the 
king's  army,  undertook  an  expedition  against  Ariarathes,  prince  off 
Cappadocia,  who,  tliough  he  submitted  not  to  the  empire  of  the  Ma* 
cedonians,  yet  Alexander  being  busied  in  his  wars  with  Dariu%  pas-* 
sed  him  by,  so  that  he  enjoyed  the  principality  of  Cappadocia  a  long 
time  without  any  disturbance;  and  in  the  mean  time  lie  laid  up  a 
vast  sum  of  money  out  of  the  public  revenues,  and  raised  an  army 
of  foreigners  and  from  among  his  own  people :  and  claiming  the 
kingdom  as  his  own  just  right,  he  prepared  to  try  it  out  with  Per- 
diccas, having  an  army  of  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  fifteen  thousand 
horse.  At  length  it  came  to  a  battle,  in  which  Perdiccas  was  vic-^ 
tor,  who  killed  four  thousand  upon  the  spot,  and  took  six  thoosand 
prisoners,  amongst  whom  was  Ariarathes  himself,  whom,  together 
with  all  his  kindred  he  first  scourged,  and  then  crucified.  He  then 
pardoned  all  the  rest;  and  after  he  had  settled  affairs  in  Cappadocia^ 
be  delivered  up  the  province  into  the  hands  of  Eumenes  of  Cardia^ 
to  be  governed  by  him  as  his  share,  according  to  the  allotment  in 
the  first  agreen>cnt. 

About  the  same  time,  Craterus  arrived  in  Macedonia  out  of  Cili- 
cia,  in  order  to  assist  Antipater,  and  to  repair  the  losses  of  the  Kin- 
cedonians.  He  brought  along  with  him  six  thousand  foot  which 
Alexander  had  taken  over  with  him  at  first  into  Asia,  and  four  thou  • 
sand  of  those  he  had  inlisted  in  the  course  of  his  march,  besides  n 
thousand  Persian  darters  and  slingers,  and  fifteen  hundred  horse.... 
As  soon  as  he  came  into  Thessaly,  he  joined  his  forces  to  Antipater*s 
at  the  river  Peneus,  yeilding  the  chief  command  of  the  army  to  hinu 
The  whole  army,  together  with  those  that  came  with  Leonntus,  a* 
mounted  to  about  forty  thousand  foot,  three  thousand  darters  and 
slingers,  and  five  thousand  horse.  The  Grecians  at  that  time  eu« 
Cctmpcd  over  airuinst  them,  licing  much  inferior  in  number  to  the 


Chmp.  11.  oiODORUs  sicuLUS.  871 

enemy:  for  many,  by  reason  of  the  late  victory,  slighted  the  Mace- 
donians, and  ivere  leturaed  to  their  several  countries,  to  look  after 
their  own  private  affiiirs.  For  which  cause,  there  were  many  lelt  in 
the  camp  that  observed  no  due  order  or  discipline.  There  were  in 
the  whole  five-and-twenty  thousand  foot,  and  tliriee  thousand  five 
hundred  horse,  in  whom  they  pUced  great  confidence  of  victory,  by 
veason  of  the  valour  of  the  men,  and  the  plain  champaign  country 
that  lay  before  them.  At  length  Autipater  dKw  out  his  forces  every 
day  into  the  fieU,  to  provoke  the  Grecians  to  fight;  who  after  they 
iMd  waited  some  considerable  time  for.  the  return. of  their  soldiers 
4mt^  the  cities,  through  the  urgency  of  their  present  circumstances^ 
were  forced  to  venture  aa  eugagcuicut. 

Drawing  up  in  battalia,  therefore,  and  designing  to  decide  the 
■wtter  by  the  horse,  they  placed  them  in  the  van  before  the  foot^ 
whereupon  the  horse  on  both  sides  presently  fell  to  it;  and  while 
they  were  thus  holly  engaged,  and  the  Thessalian  horse  had  the 
better  of  the  day,  Antipatcr  broke  in  with  his  battalion  upon  the  foot, 
and  made  a  great  slaughter  among  them ;  so  that  the  Grecians  not 
beng  able  to  stand  the  shock  of  the  enemy,  who  bore  them  down 
with  their  multitudes  pouring  in  upon  them,  they  retreated  in  great 
liaste,  but  in  good  order,  to  the  fieistnesses  and  diflBcult  passes  near 
at  hand.  And  so  having  gained  the  higher  ground,  by  that  advan* 
ti^  they  easily  repulsed  the  Macedonians.  In  the  mean  time  the 
Grecian  horse,  though  they  had  the  better,  yet  perceiving  that  their 
loot  was  gone,  forthwitli  made  after  tliem:  and  by  this  means  the 
borse  (leaving  off  the  fight)  becoming  so  broken  and  dispersed,  that 
llie  Macedonians  got  the  cky.  There  were  slain  of  the  Grecians  in 
diis  battle  upwards  of  five  hundred,  and  of  the  Macedonians  about  a 
hondredand  thirty. 

The  next  day  Memnon  ,and  Antipfailus  called  a  council  of  war, 
where  it  was  debated,  whether  they  should  expect  aid  from  tlie  cities, 
asd  wait  to  see  if  soldiers  sufficient  could  be  rai^d,  and  so  try  it  out 
to  the  last;  or,  yielding  to  tlie  times,  and  bearing  their  present  dis- 
asters, they  should  send  agents  to  treat  for  terms  of  peace.  At  length 
tliey  concluded  to  send  heralds  to  treat  accordingly;  who  executing 
their  orders,  Antipater  answered  them ^That  he  expected  every  ci- 
ty should  treat  severally  by  its  own  ambassadors;  and  that  he  would 
not  upon  any  terms  make  a  general  peace.  But  the  Grecians  de- 
clined this  proposal,  and  therefore  Antipater  and  Craterus  besieged 
the  cities  of  Thessaly,  and  took  them  by  storm,  the  Grecians  not  be- 
ing able  to  relieve  them.  This  so  terrlBed  all  the  rest,  that  they 
transacted  the  affairs  of  their  several  cities  by  their  own  ambassa- 
dors; towards  whom  he  carrii^d  himself  with  all  demonstrations  of 


27*  Dioooaus  S1CULU8.  Book  XFtlf. 


courtesy  and  gaining  behaviour,  and  concluded  peace  frith  CTery  i 
of  them.    Every  city  therefore  being  desirous  to  provide  for  i 
safety,  all  of  them  by  that  means  obtained  peace.. 

But  the  ^olians  and  Athenians,  the  implacable  enemies  of  the 
Macedonians,  though  they  were  thus  deserted  by  tbehr  confedoatet^ 
consulted  with  their  commanders  about  carrying  on  the  war.    But 
Antipater  having  by  this  artifice  thus  broken  the  confederacy^  led  hm 
whole  army  against  the  Athenians;  upon  which  the  people,  bciiif 
deserted  by  their  confederates,  were  greatly  terrified^  and  knew  not 
which  way  to  turn  themselves;  and  all  havbg  their  eyes  upon  I>e». 
mades^  cried  out — That  he  should  be  sent  ambassador  to  Anti|Mterj 
to  treat  for  peace  in  their  behalf.    But  he  refused  tu  come  to  the  W9^ 
nate;  for  be  had  been  thrice  conden^ied  for  violating  the  hnvi^  and 
for  that  reason  become  infamous,  and  disabled  by  the  kw  to  tit  ia 
council.    But,  being  restored  by  the  people  to  his  former  credit  mA 
reputation,  he  forthwith,  together  with  Phocion  and  otheni  joined 
with  him  in  the  commission,  undertook  the  embassy.    When  Ati- 
pater  had  heard  what  they  had  to  say,  he  tidd  them  ..That  he  would 
make  peace  with  the  Athenians  upon  no  other  terms  but  upon  theii 
giving  up  all  they  had  into  his  hands:  for  the  same  answer  the 
Athenians  gave  to  Antipater  when  he  sent  ambassadors  to  them  at 
the  time  he  was  shut  up  in  Lamia.    Hereupon  the  people  not  \mag 
able  to  resist,  were  brought  to  the  necessity  of  giving  up  all  &e 
power  and  government  of  the  city  into  the  hands  of  Antipater; 
with  great  humanity  and  generosity  granted  their  city,  their  < 
and  all  other  things  to  them  back  again.    But  he  dissolved  die  g^ 
vernment  into  a  democracy,  and  ordered  that  the  value  of  every  per« 
son's  estate  should  be  the  rule  for  chusing  the  magbtrates;   na; 
that  those  who  were  worth  above  two  thousand  drachmas,  jnight  be 
capable  of  being  magistrates,  and  of  giving  votes  for  their  election. 
As  for  those  who  were  not  of  such  estates,  he  removed  them.as  tnr* 
bulent  and  factious,  not  suffering  them  to  have  any  thing  to  do  witk 
public  business;  and  granted  new  seats  and  estates  in  Theasaly  to 
any  that  would  remove  thither.    Upon  which,  above  two-and-twen^ 
thousand  of  that  description  of  citizens  were  transplanted  from  their 
own  country.   The  government  of  the  city,  and  country  belong  to  it^ 
was  given  to  the  rest,  who  had  estates  to  the  value  of  what  waa  before 
limited  and  appointed ;  of  whom  there  were  about  nine  thousand.— 
And  these  governed  the  state  for  the  future  according  to  the  laws  of 
Solon.    And  all  their  estates  were  left  to  them  entire  and  untouched. 
But  they  were  forced  to  receive  a  garrison  under  Menyllos  the  go* 
vcrnor  to  keep  them  in  awe,  and  prevent  new  stirs  and  disturben« 
CCS.    As  for  the  matter  of  Samos,  it  was  refened  to  the  decisson  off 


Chap.  11.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  273 

*'^— — ^'^■^^— ^^*^— ■    '    ^       '     '  '  '  " 

the  kings^.  And  thus  the  Atheaians  (beyond  their  expectation)  were 
kindly  used,  and  were  at  peace.  And  for  the  future,  (governing  the 
commonwealth  without  tumults  and  seditions,  and  quietly  following 
their  husbandry),  they  grew  very  rich  in  a  short  time. 

Antipater,  being  returned  into  Macedonia,  honourably  and  bounti- 
fully rewarded  Craterus  according  to  his  desert,  and  gave  him  Phila, 
his  eldest  daughter,  in  marriage;  and  then  Craterus  returned  into 
Asia  Antipater  carried  himself  with  the  same  moderation  and  win* 
Ding  l)ehaviour  towards  all  the  cities  of  Greece,  well  ordering  and 
reforming  their  governments,  wliereby  he  gained  praise  and  renown 
in  every  place. 

As  for  Perdiccas,  he  restored  the  city  and  territory  of  Samos  to 
the  Samiaus,  and  caused  all  those  that  had  been  exiles  above  three* 
and-forty  years,  to  return  into  their  country.  Having  now  gone 
through  the  occurrences  in  the  Lamian  war,  we  shall  pass  to  the  war 
in  Cyrene,  lest  we  should  straggle  too  far  into  times  much  distant 
from  the  continued  course  and  connection  of  the  history.  But,  to 
make  thibgs  more  clear  and  evident,  we  must  have  recourse  to  matters 
done  a  little  before. 

After  Harpalus  h^d  left  Asia,  and  at  length  arrived  with  his  mer- 
cenaries in  Crete,  as  is  related  in  the  preceding  book,  Thimbron^ 
one  of  his  special  friends,  (as  he  thought  him  to  be),  having  assassi* 
Dated  Harpalus,  possessed  himself  both  of  the  money  and  soldiers^ 
to  the  number  of  seven  thousand  men.  He  got  likewise  the  navy 
into  his  hands,  and,  putting  the  soldiers  on  board,  sailed  to  the  conn« 
try  of  the  Cyrenians ;  where,  joining  with  the  Cyrenian  exiles,  he 
made  use  of  their  conduct  for  the  prosecuting  of  his  designs,  because 
tliey  were  well  acquainted  with  the  ways  and  passes  in  the  country. 
Upon  the  approach  of  the  Cyrenians,  Thimbron  fought  them>  and 
routed  them,  killing  many  upon  the  spot,  and  taking  many  prisoners, 
llien  he  possessed  himself  of  the  port,  and  forced  the  conquered 
Cyrenians  (now  in  a  great  fright)  into  a  composition,  and  to  buy 
their  peace  at  the  price  of  five  thousand  talents  of  silver;  and  that 
they  should  deliver  to  him  one  b^lf  of  all  their  chariots  ready  and 
fitted  for  any  warlike  expedition.  He  sent  likewise  ambassadors 
to  other  cities,  soliciting  them  to  join  with  him,  as  if  he  purposed  to 
conquer  all  the  lower  Africa^  He  seized  likewise  upon  all  the  mer-> 
chants'  goods  in  the  haven,  and  gave  them  for  plunder  to  his  soldiers^ 
the  more  to  encourage  them  to  stick  to  him  in  the  war. 

But,  in  the  height  of  his  prosperity,  a  sudden  bkst  of  fortune 
brought  him  very  low,  upon  the  following  occasion.  Mnasiclosj^ 
one  of  hia  captains,  a  Cretan  born,  and  an  expert  conunander^  be- 

*  Ahdaens  and  AleitDder. 
Vol.  2,   No,  43,  NN 


274  DIODORU8  sicuLUS.  Book  XfTTI. 

■!'■■.  '  .  '"  "  'BagggggssagBaemg— fe 

gan  to  quarrel  with  him  about  the  division  of  the  sp6il;  and^  being 
of  a  bold  und  turbulent  spirit,  he  thereupon  deserted^  and  went  orer 
to  the  Cyrenians;  where,  miaking  great  complaints  oFThimbron'a 
cruelty  and  breach  of  faith,  he  persuaded  them  to  dissoiye  the  leagiMB^ 
and  assert  their  liberty.  Thereupon  they  stopped  their  handSj  and 
would  pay  no  more  of  the  talents  of  silver  agreed  npon^  having  ooly 
paid  sixty, 

Inimbron  hereupon  accused  them  of  treachery  and  breach  of 
faith,  and  seized  upon  eight  hundred  of  the  Cyrenians  that  were  in 
the  port,  and  laid  close  siege  to  Cyrene;  but,  not  being  able  to  pie* 
vail,  he  drew  off,  and  returned  to  the  port.  Tlie  Barceana  and  Hei- 
perians  aided  with  Thimbron :  wherenpon  the  Cyrenians  drew  part 
of  their  forces  out  of  the  city,  and  with  them  wasted  and  qpoiled  the 
neighbouring  territories  j  to  whose  assistance  Thimbron  (whoae  mi 
was  desired)  marched  out  vnxh  what  soldiers  he  had  then  leadjr  it 
hand.  The  Cretan,  taking  advantage  of  that  opportanhyj  when  be 
conceived  few  were  left  in  the  port,  advised  them  that  irere  feft  In 
Cyrene  to  attack  the  port,  who  readily  complied,  and  be  bimaelf  was 
the  principal  acter  in  the  attempt,  which  was  easily  acoonpliab^^  bf 
reason  of  Thimbron's  absence;  so  that,  whatever  merehandffee  #ai 
left  in  the  port  he  restored  to  the  merchants,  and  fortified  thebiMl 
with  all  the  care  and  diligence  imaginable. 

This  first  disaster  greatly  discouraged  Thimbron,  having  both  isM 
so  convenient  a  post,  and  likewise  his  carriages.  Bat  aftciliiili 
plucking  up  his  spirits,  and  taking  Taricheum  by  assanlt^  bb  bopci 
revived.  However,  not  long  after,  he  again  sustained  a  m^bty  loii: 
for  the  soldiers  belonging  to  the  fleet,  by  being  ekoluded  die  bftsboM^ 
were  in  great  want  of  provisions,  and  therefore  every  day  fovtd'e^ 
and  down  the  fields  to  get  what  they  could  for  the  supply  of 
necessities.  Thereupon  the  Africans,  lying  in  ambosbj  Ml 
them  as  they  were  roving  all  over  the  country,  and  killed  i 
of  them,  and  took  many  prisoners:  the  rest  escaped  to  tbdr  aMtn^ 
and  sailed  off  towards  the  confederate  cities;  but  they  trere 
taken  with  so  violent  a  storm,  that  many  of  their  ships  w^re 
lowed  up  by  the  sea;  and  of  the  rest,  some  ^ere  driven  to  Cjpraflib 
and  others  to  the  coasts  of  Egypt.  Notwithstanding  which  &- 
tresses,  Thimbron  went  on  still  with  the  war:  for  he  sent  sotne  ef 
his  friends  into  Peloponnesus,  to  inlist  soldiers  of  those  strangers  Aat 
were  then  still  at  Tenarus;  for  there  were  then  many  i 
wandering  up  and  down,  seeking  to  be  inlisted  by  any  that  wonld'4 
ploy  them,  to  the  number  of  two  thousand  five  hundred,  and  \ 
1'hnse  that  were  sent  took  these  into  pay,  and  set  sail  with 
siraiglu  towards  Cyrene;  before  whose  arrival  the  Cyrenians^  cocoa- 


CXipu  U.  DIODORUJI  $ICULU8.  375 

raged  by  their  suec^ascs,  had  fought  with  Thimhraiiy  and  bad  cat  off 
great  nambers  of  his  men :  by  reason  of  which  losses  Thimbron  gave 
up  all  for  lost  aa  to  the  war  against  Cyrene;  but  the  unexpected  ar- 
rival of  the  aoldiers  from  Teoaros  so  strengthened  his  army,  that  be 
took  ftesh  courage,  and  resumed  his  former  hopes  of  victory. 

The  Cyreoians,  peroeiving  that  the  war  was  renewed,  craved  8op« 
plies  from  the  neighbouring  Africans  and  Carthaginians;  and,  hav« 
ing  raised  an  army  composed  of  their  own  citizens  and  others,  to  the 
Bomber  of  thirty  thousand  men,  they  resolved  to  lay  all  at  stakes  and 
tsj  it  out  in  a  battle.  A  very  sharp  engagement  therefore  was  fought, 
in  Ahich  Thimbron  was  victor,  with  the  skughter  of  a  multitude  of 
bis  enemies;  which  cheered  up  his  spirits  to  that  degree,  as  if  he 
should  presently  be  master  of  all  the  neighbouripg  cities.  The  Cy* 
jwoians  after  this  %bt,  having  lost  all  their  commanders,  joined 
IMbiasiclus  the  Cretan  Urith  some  others  in  the  chief  command  of  the 
anpy*  But  Thimbron,  lifted  up  with  bis  victory,  besieged  the  haven 
of  Gyrene,  and  i|8i$aulted  the  city  every  day.  The  siege  contlnning 
loiig»  the  Cyrenians,  for  want  of  bread,  fell  out  one  with  another; 
nod  ibe  jabble  (being  the  greatest  in  number)  thrust  forth  the  rich 
flttt  of  the  dty ;  some  of  whom  fled  to  Thimbron,  others  into  Egypt. 
Those  in  Egypt  addressed  themselves  to  Ptolemy  for  assistance,  to 
Mp  diem  10  their  return,  and  prevailed  so  Cur  as  that  they  went 
lio^  with  great  forces  both  for  sea  and  land,  under  the  command  of 
i^belaa,  their  governor.  When  their  return  was  noised  abroa<^ 
^bMe  e^Ies  who  were  with  Thimbron  contrived  to  steal  away  in  the 
ail^ty  and  joined  with  those  that  were  arrived;  but,  being  detected, 
they  were  all  killed. 

The  ringleaders  of  the  sedition  in  Cyrene,  being  terrified  at  the 
rerbain  of  the  eiules,  made  peace  with  Thimbron,  and  resolved  to  join 
with  him  against  Ophelas.  But  Ophelas  routed  Tbimbron,  and  took ' 
him  prisoner,  and  recovered  all  the  towns,  and  delivered  the  cities, 
vrUh  thdr  territories,  into  the  hands  of  Ptolemy.  And  thus  the  Cy- 
l^maiis  and  the  neighbouring  cities  lost  their  former  liberty,  and  be- 
came subject  to  Ptolemy. 

Perdiccas  and  king  Philip  having  overcome  Ariarathes,  delivered 
the  province  to  Eumenes,  and  so  departed  out  of  Cappadocia.  When 
they  came  into  Pisidia,  they  determined  to  raze  those  two  cities, 
<Mie  of  the  Larissians,  the  other  of  the  Isaurtans:  for  in  the  li/e-tiine 
of  Akxander  they  had  killed  JSalacrus,  the  son  ot  (f icauor,  who  was 
afipoioted  to  be  their  general,  and  governor  of  the  province.  Larissa 
therefore  they  took  upon  the  first  assault,  and  put  all  that  were  able 
to  bear  arms  to  the  sword,  and  sold  all  the  rest  for  slaves,  and  laid 
the  city  even  with  the  ground.    As  for  the  city  of  the  Lsaurians, 


S76  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BookXFIIZ. 

it  was  large  and  well  fortified,  and  manned  with  resolute  and  stoat 
men ;  and  therefore,  after  they  had  assaulted  it  two  days  togethefj 
and  had  lost  a  great  number  of  men,  they  were  forced  to  draw  off: 
for  the  inhabitants,  being  plentifully  furnished  with  weapons,  and  all 
other  things  necessary  for  the  enduring  of  a  siege^  were  resolute  to 
undergo  all  hazards,  and  readily  sold  their  lives  for  the  defence  of 
their  liberty.  But  upon  the  third  day,  having  lost  many  of  thdr 
citizens,  insomuch  that  they  were  not  able  sufficiently  to  man  the 
walls,  they  put  in  execution  a  most  heroic  piece  of  resolution,  wor- 
thy for  ever  to  be  remembered.  For,  perceiving  that  they  we^  des* 
lined  to  inevitable  destruction,  and  had  not  force  sufficient  for  dieir 
defence,  they  judged  it  not  advisable  to  deliver  up  the  dty^  and  all 
that  they  had,  to  the  will  of  the  enemy,  because  their  certain  nunj 
with  the  most  barbarous  usage,  was  obvious  before  their  eyes. 
Therefore  they  all  unanimously  resolved  to  die  honourably  together: 
to  that  end.  In  the  night  they  shut  up  their  wives,  children,  and  pa- 
rents in  their  houses,  and  set  them  on  fire,  making  choice  by  diat 
means  to  perish  and  be  buried  together.  When  the  flame  mounted 
up  into  the  air,  the  Isaurians  threw  all  their  wealth,  and  every  thing 
valuable,  or  that  might  be  of  any  advantage  to  the  enemy>  into  the  fire* 
The  besiegers  were  struck  with  admiration  at  the  sight,  and  ran  here 
and  there,  seeking  where  to  break  into  the  city;  but  those  that  re- 
mained upon  the  walls  for  their  defence  threw  many  of  the  Blacedo- 
nians  down  headlong  from  the  battlements.  At  which  PcfdiecM 
was  much  surprised,  and  inquired  what  was  the  reason  that,  haTing 
Set  all  their  houses  and  every  thing  besides  on  fire,  they  were  so 
diligent  and  careful  to  defend  the  walls.  At  length,  when  Penliccas 
with  his  Macedonians  were  drawn  off  from  the  city,  the  rest  of  the 
Isaurians  cast  themselves  headlong  into  the  fire,  and  so  every  one's 
house  became  a  common  sepulchre  for  himself  and  all  bis  relations. 
Penliccas  the  next  day  gave  the  ransacking  of  the  city  to  the  sol* 
dicrs,  who  (when  the  fire  was  extinguished)  found  much  silver  and 
gold  in  the  rubbish,  the  city  having  been  rich  and  prosperous  a  long 
time  together. 

After  this  destruction,  Perdiccas  married  two  wives,  Nicsea  the 
daughter  of  Antipater,  to  whom  he  was  contracted;  and  Cleopatra, 
Alexander's  half  sister,  the  daughter  of  Philip  and  Amyntas.  Per- 
diccas indeed  had  entered  into  league  with  Antipater  before  he  was 
establislied  in  his  government,  and  upon  that  account  the  auirriage 
was  consummated.  But  after  he  had  gained  the  king's  forceSf  and 
became  possessed  of  the  supcrintcndency  and  administration  of  the 
affairs  of  the  kingdom,  he  clianged  his  mind:  for  affecting  the  kin^ 
dom,  his  design  was  to  marry  Cleopatraj  coucluding  that  for  her  sahs^ 


th(^.  IL  niODORUS  SICULITS.  £77 

and  by  her  authority,  the  sovereigo  power  would  be  yielded  up  to 
to  him  by  the  Macedouians.  But  because  he  had  no  mind  as  yet  to 
Jibcover  his  intentions^  and  to  comply  with  the  present  circumslAa- 
ces  of  affairs,  he  married  Nicea^  lest  Antipater  should  oppose  him 
in  his  projects.  Bat  Antigomis  smelling  out  what  he  was  contriv- 
ing, and  being  one  that  had  a  great  kindness  for  Antipater,  and'  the 
most  active  man  of  all  the  commanders,  Perdiccas  resolved  to  des- 
patch him,  and  take  him  oat  of  the  way. 

Loading  him  therefore  with  false  accusations  and  unjust  asper- 
sions, \iM  design  appeared  plainly  to  take  away  his  life.  But  Anti- 
gonos  being  a  crafty  man,  and  of  a  bold  spirit,  pretended  as  if  he 
woald  defend  himself  against  those  things  that  were  laid  to  his  charge; 
but  in  the  interim  he  secretly  prepared  for  his  flight,  and  in  the 
night,  with  his  servants  and  his  son  Demetrius,  went  on  board  some 
ships  that  belonged  to  Athens,  and  set  sail  for  Europe,  on  purpose  to 
confederate  with-  Antipater.  About  that  time  Antipater  and  Crate- 
xus  had  taken  the  field  against  the  ^tolians  with  thirty  thousand  foot, 
and  two  thousand  five  hundred  horse:  for  they  only  remained  un- 
conquered  of  those  that  werfe  engaged  in  the  Lamian  war.  But  the 
£tolians,  though  they  were  pressed  upon  by  such  mighty  forces,  yet 
were  not  at  all  discouraged;  but  having  got  together  ten  thousand 
brave  and  sprightly  men,  betook  themselves  to  the  difficult  passes  in 
the  mountains,  where  they  had  before  disposed  and  lodged  much  of 
their  wealth,  and  all  their  wives,  children,  and  old  peoi^e.  And 
though  they  had  quitted  the  cities  which  were  not  tenable,  yet  they 
placed^trong  garisons  in  those  that  were  fortified;  and  in  this  state 
undauntedly  waited  the  approach  of  the  enemy. 

Antipater  and  Craterus  therefore  having  entered  iEtolia,  when 
they  saw  all  the  cities  that  were  weak  and  untenable  forsaken  by 
their  inhabitants,  made  towards  those  that  were  posted  iu  the  fast- 
nesses of  the  mountains.  At  the  first  assault  they  made  upon  these 
dreadful  and  inaccessible  precipices,  they  lost  multitudes  of  their 
tnen ;  for  the  valour  of  the  iEtolians  being  supported  and  confirmed 
by  the  strength  of  the  places,  easily  repulsed  the  enemy,  who  ran 
themselves  upon  difficulties  that  were  insuperable.  But  afterwards, 
when  Craterus's  soldiers  had  secured  themselves  during  the  winter, 
by  huts  and  warm  tents,  the  iEtolians  were  obliged  to  endure  the  in- 
clemency of  the  season  in  places  covered  over  with  snow,  where 
they  remained  in  great  want  of  provisions;  so  that  they  were  redu- 
ced to  a  most  desperate  condition.  For  they  were  brought  to  that 
dilemma,  that  they  must  of  necessity  citlier  leave  the  mountains  and 
fight  with  an  army  far  superior  in  number  to  themselves,  and  against 
commanders  who  were  every  where  renowned  foi:  their  good  con- 


278  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  Book  XFIIL 

duct,  or,  if  they  remained  longer,  certainly  to  perish  with  bonger  and 
cold. 

And  now  all  hopes  of  deliverance  being  despaired  of,  luddenly  «nd 
unexpectedly  appeared  a  release  at  hand  from  all  their  miseries^  as  if 
some  god  in  an  especial  manner  had  had  compassion  of  such  hnm 
and  noble  souls :  for  Antigonos,  who  had  fled  out  of  Asia,  and  was 
BOW  come  bto  the  camp,  informed  them  of  what  Perdi^eas  was 
hatching  and  contriving;  and  that  having  mtrried  Cleopatrat  hm 
was  ready,  as  king,  to  come  over  with  his  army  into  Macedonii^  to 
wrest  the  kingdom  out  of  their  hands.  At  which  strange  and  qaex- 
pected  news,  Antipater  and  Crateriis,  and  all  those  with  them^  wen 
so  affrighted,  that  they  called  a  council  of  war,  where,  upM  oonsul- 
tation,  it  was  resolvedf  that  matters  should  be  compounded  snd  end* 
€d  with  the  ^olians  as  well  as  they  could;  and  that  forcts  should 
1>e  forthwith  transported  mio  Asia;  and  that  Cmterus  should  ho  ge- 
neiul  in  Asia,  and  Antipater  have  the  chief  command  in  Eojftipei 
that  ambassadors  should  likewise  be  despatched^to  Ptolemy^  who  was 
their  friend  and  an  enemy  to  Perdiccas,  and  designed  to  be  out  off  aa 
well  as  they,  to  move  him  to  join  with  them  as  a  confederato.  Hayn* 
upon  they  forthwith  struck  up  a  peace  with  the  iEttriiaos^  inlfndil^ 
notwithstanding  in  due  time  afterwards,  to  root  them  up  and  all 
their  families,  and  to  send  them  into  some  remote  and  desivt  oonwr 
of  the  world  far  from  Asia.  The  pacification  according  to  tbo  tsnns 
before  agreed  upon,  being  put  into  writing  and  signed^  thej  pitpani 
themselves  for  the  expedition. 

Perdiccas^  on  the  other  side,  calling  together  fab  friends  and  ge* 
neral  officers,  consulted  with  them  whether  he  should  transport  his 
army  into  Macedonia,  or  march  first  against  Ptolemy.  All  agrasing 
that  Ptolemy  was  first  to  be  conquered,  lest  he  shouU  ehstract  his 
expedition  into  Macedonia,  he  sent  JSumenes  on  before  with  a  con* 
sidersble  army,  to  secure  the  passes  at  the  Hellespont,  to  pievenjt  all 
passage  that  way :  and  he  himself  marched  out  of  Pisidia  with  tha 
whole  of  his  forces  towards  Egypt.  And  these  Wfrt  the  things  ( 
this  year. 


« 


Chi^.  IIL  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  979 


CHAP.  IIL 


JDtanr^dn  of  Alexander's  fimeral  chariot  Ptolemy  hommred  cp| 
JEg^.  Perdiccas  prepares  for  going  inio  Egypi  agabtMi  Pto* 
lemy.  Eamems  beats  Neopiolemusy  who  deserted.  The  baitte 
between  Eamenes  and  Craterus,  who  was  killed  w^h  NeopioUh 
mute.  Combat  between  Neoptolenms  and  JBumenes.  Perdkcais 
€omes  into  Egypt;  aasaulis  the  fori  called  the  Camd^e  Wall; 
kie  ndeerable  loss  in  the  river  NOe;  is  kUled.  Ptolemy  makes 
jlridaus  and  Pythm  protectors  of  the  kings.  JEuffMiiei  eoncfaw- 
nediodie.  The  JEtoHans invade  Th^saly.  Pofyperehon roais 
the  JStoUans.  !ne provinces  again  dividedby  Aridmue.  An^ 
tigonus  routs  Eumenes,  who  JKes  to  Nora.  Antigonms  besieges 
Nora.  Eunwnes*s  inveniion  to  exercise  the  horse.  PtoUmy 
gains  Syria  and  Phomicia  by  Nicanor. 

WHEN  Philoclet  was  chief  magistmie  «t  Athens,  and  Caios  Salpi- 
tins  and  Quintus  Aulius  were  created  RiMnan  consuls^  Aridssns,  to 
whom  was  committed  the  care  of  conveymg  Akunder^s  body  to  his 
scpQlchre,  having  now  the  chariot  ready  upon  which  it  was  to  be 
carried,  prepared  hinself  for  the  jonmey*    But,  forasmuch  as  the 
wiiole  business  and  concern  was  managed  as  beeame  tlie  majesty  of 
Alesander,  and  upon  that  account  did  not  only  exceed  all  odien  in 
fKxint  of  expense,  state,  and  pomp,  (for  die  charges  amounted  to  ma* 
ay  talents),  but  also  in  respect  of  curiosity  and  workmanship,  we 
Ihfaik  it  fit  to  recommend  something  to  posterity  in  writing  concern- 
ing it.     And  first,  a  coffin  of  beaten  goM  was  provided,  so  wrongiit 
by  the  hammer,  as  to  answer  to  the  poportioa  of  the  body;  it  was 
lialf  filled  with  aromatic  spices,  which  served  as  well  to  delight  the 
sense,  as  to  prevent  the  body  from  putrefoctk>n*    Over  the  coffin 
was  a  cover  of  gold,  so  exactly  fitted,  as  to  answer  the  higher  part 
every  way*    Over  this  was  thrown  a  curious  purple  coat  embroidered 
with  gold,  near  to  which  were  placed  the  arms  of  the  deceased,  that  - 
:he  whole  might  represent  the  acts  of  his  life.    Tiien  was  provided 
the  chariot,  in  which  the  body  was  to  be  conveyed ;  upon  the  top  of 
which  was  raised  a  triumqhant  arch  of  goI(%t  set  thick  and  studded 
over  with  precious  stones,  eight  cubits  in  breadth,  and  twelve  in 
length.     Under  this  roof  was  placed  a  throne  of  gold,  joined  to  the 
whole  work,  four  square,  on  which  were  carved  the  heads  of  Goat- 


f  80  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  Book  XVIIL 

harts  ^;  and  to  these  were  fastened  golden  rings  of  two  hands- 
breadth  in  diameter}  at  which  hung,  for  shew  and  pomp^  little  co- 
ronets of  various  colours,  which,  like  so  many  flowers^  a&rded  a 
pleasant  praspect  to  the  eye.     Upon  the  top  of  the  arch,  was  a  fringe 
of  network,  to  which  were  hung  large  bells,  to  the  intent  that  the 
sound  of  them  might  be  heard  at  a  great  distance.    On  both  sides 
the  arch,  at  the  corners,  stood  an  image  of  Victory  in  gold,  bearing 
a  trophy.    A  peristylium  t  of  gold  supported  the  archwork,  the  cha- 
piters of  whose  pillars  were  of  Ionian  workmanship.    WitliiD  the 
peristyiium,  by  a  network  of  gold  of  a  finger's  thickness  in  the  work- 
manship, hung  four  tables  Xj  one  by  another  equal  to  the  dimenaions 
of  the  wall,  whereapon  were  poartrayed  all  sorts  of  living  creatures. 
The  first  table  represented  a  chariot  curiously  wrought,  wherein 
Alexander  sat  with  a  royal  sceptre  in  his  hand.     About  the  king 
stood  his  life-guards  complete  in  their  arms;  the  Macedomans  on 
one  side,  and  the  Persians,  who  bore  battle-axes,  on  the  other;  and 
heftyre  them  stood  the  armour-bearers.     In  the  second,  elephants 
adovned  in  their  warlike  habiliments  Mkmed  them  of  the  gttard>  on 
which  sat  Indians  before,  and  Macedonians  behind,  armed  according 
to  the  manner  of  their  respective  countries.    In  the  third  might  be 
seen  squadrons  of  horse  drown  up  in  regular  battalia.    In  the  foorlh 
appeared  a  fleet  ordered  in  a  line  of  battle.    At  the  entrance  of  the 
arch  stood  lions  of  gold,  with  their  faces  towards  the  entrance. .«. 
From  the  middle  of  every  pillar  an  acanthus  §  of  gold  sprouted  up* 
in  branches  spiring  in  slender  threads  to  the  very  chapiters.    Over 
the  arch,  about  the  middle  of  the  roof  on  the  outside,  was  spread  a 
purple  carpet  in  the  open  air,  on  which  was  placed  a  vast  golden 
crown,  in  the  form  of  an  olive  coronet  ||,  which^  by  the  reflection  of 
the  sun*beams,  darted  such  an  amazing  splendor  and  brightnesi^ 
that  at  a  distance  it  appeared  as  a  flash  of  lightning.    Under  the 
seats  or  bottom  of  the  whole  work,  ran  two  axletrees^  about  which 
moved  four  Persian  wheels,  wlM>se  spokes  and  naves  were  overlaid 
with  gold,  but  the  fellows  were  shod  with  iron.    The  ends  and  outp 
parts  of  the  axles  were  of  gold,  representing  the  heads  of  lions,  each 
holding  a*  dart  in  his  mouth.    In  every  centre  of  the  arch,  about  the 
midway  in  the  length,  was  artificially  fixed  a  pole,  upon  which    ' 
the  whole  might  turn,  as  on  a  hinge;  by  the  help  whereof  the  areh 
might,  in  rough  places,  where  it  was  apt  to  be  shaken,  be  preservei 
from  being  overturned.    There  were  four  draft-trees,  to  every  one 

*  Tragi  laplii,  Gott'b arts,  bred  near  the  rirer  Phasis  in  Colchis. — Pliiu  I.  \  c.  SSw 
t  In  furm  rcsenibling  n  piasa. 
t  A  sort  of  writing  tables,  whether  of  brass,  stone,  or  wood.  * 

i  A  tree  so  called.  |i  Olive  coronets,  usually  worn  by  conqncrorL  #j 


Chap.  IJL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  S81 

q(  which  were  fixed  four  courses  of  yokes^  and  to  every  course  were 
bound  four  mules^  so  that  the  mules  were  sixty-four  in  number,  the 
most  choice  for  strength  and  bigness  that  could  be  got.  Every  mule 
was  adorned  with  a  crown  of  gold,  and  bells  of  gold  on  either  side  of 
tlieir  heads;  and  on  their  necks  were  fitted  rich  collars,  set  and 
beautified  with  precious  stones. 

And  in  this  manner  was  the  chariot  set  forth,  the  sight  of  which 
was  more  stately  and  pompous  than  the  report:  so  that  the  fame 
of  it  brought  together  multitudes  of  spectators :  for  the  people  out  of 
every  city  wherever  it  was  coming,  met  it,  and  ran  back  again  be- 
fore it;»  never  satisfied  with  tlie  delight  they  took  in  vewing  and  gaz- 
ing. And,  suitable  tb  so  stately  a  shew,  a  vast  quantity  of  work- 
men aod  pioneers,  who  levelled  and  smoothed  the  ways  for  its  pas* 
ai^^e,  attended. 

And  thus  Arideus,  who  had  spent  two  years  in  preparations, 
brought  the  king's  body  from  Bobylon  io  Egypt.    Ptolemy,  in  ho- 
'    Bour  of  the  ki<)g»  met  the  corpse  with  his  army  as  far  as  Syria,  where 
be  received  it,  and  accompanied  it  with  great  care  and  observance: 
for  he  had  not  resolved  as  yet  to  accompany  it  to  the  temple  of  Am- 
noD,  but  to  keep  the  body  in  the  city  ^  which  Alexander  himself  had 
built;,  the  most  famous  almost  of  any  chy  in  the  world.    To  this  end 
he  built  a  temple  in  honour  of  Alexander,  in  greatness  and  stateli- 
aess  of  structure  Jbecoming  the  glory  and  majesty  of  that  king;. and 
in  tills  repository  he  laid  the  body,  and  honoured  the  exequies  of  the 
dead  with  sacrifices  and  magnificent  shews,  agreeable  to  the  dignity 
of  a  demigod.     Upon  which  account  he  was  deservedly  honoured, 
not  only  by  men,  but  by  the  gods  themselves :  for  by  his  bounty  and 
generosity  be  so  gained  upon  men,  that  they  flocked  from  all  parts 
to  Alexandria,  and  cheerfully  inlisted  themselves  into  his  service, 
notwithstanding  the  king's  army  was  then  preparing  for  war  against 
Um:  and  though  he  was  in  imminent  danger,  yet  all  readily  ven- 
tured their  lives  to  preserve  him.    And  the  gods  tlicmselves,  for  his 
^rtue,  and  kind  obliging  temper  towards  all,  rescued  him  out  of  all 
'^is  hazards  and  difficulties,  which  seemed  insuperable :  for  Perdic- 
^M,  who  before  suspected  the  increase  of  his  power,  had  resolved, 
*^Ht]ging  the  kingsf  along  with  him,  upon  an  expedition  into  Egypt, 
^Hh  the  strength  of  his  army.     To  that  end  he  had  delivered  to  £ur 
^^nes  a  considerable  body  of  men,  with  a  sufficient  numbtr  of  offi- 
^^rs,  with  command  to  march  to  the  Hellespont,  to  prevent  the  p«s- 
"^ge  of  Antipater  and  Craterus  over  into  Asia.     Ainoiigst  tlie  com- 

^  Alexaodria.— See  Curtius,  ].  10.  c.  ult. — The  embairaed  body  wus  vicyred  by  Au. 
^^U8  in  Alexandria,  three  hundred  ycin  afterwards. — iuwt. 

^  These  kings  were  Arid«us  and  Aiexauder,  the  childreo  af  Alexander. 

^^^L.2.  No.  43.  oo 


<282  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BwJk  XVIIL 

manders  the  most  illustrious  were  Alcetas  his  brother^  dnd  Neoptole-* 
mus:  but  these  he  ordered  in  all  things  to  be  observant  to  EninfiieSy 
because  he  was  both  a  skilful  and  prudent  general^  and  a  constant 
and  faithful  friend.  Eumenes  therefore^  with  the  forces  delivered 
to  him,  came  to  the  Hellespont,  and  completed  his  army  with  horse 
(raised  out  of  his  own  province)  of  which  hb  troops  were  before  only 
deficient. 

But  after  Antipater  and  Craterus  had  transported  their  army  out 
of  Europe,  Neoptolemus,  out  of  envy  to  Eumenes,  (having  a  consi'* 
derable  body  of  Macedonians  under  bis  command),  secretly  sent 
messengers  to  Antipater,  and,  colleaguing  with  him,  contrived  hoir 
to  entrap  Eumenes:  but  his  treachery  being  discovered,  he  was  for* 
eed  to  fight,  and  lost  almost  all  his  men  in  the  battle,  and  was  very 
near  being  cut  off  himself.  Eumenes  being  thus  conquerar,  after 
this  great  slaughter.  Joined  the  remainder  of  those  that  were  left  to 
his  own  army;  and  so  by  this  victory  not  only  increased  his  tbrces^ 
but  strengthened  himself  with  a  great  number  of  Macedonians  that 
were  excellent  soldiers.  Neoptolemus  fled  off  the  field  with  three 
hundred  horse,  and  went  over  to  Antipater.  Whereupon  there 
was  held  a  deep  consultation  between  them,  in  reference  to  die 
concerns  of  the  war;  in  which  it  was  determined  to  divide  the  annj 
into  two  bodies;  one  to  march  under  Antipater  into  Cilicia  to  fight 
Perdiccas,  and  the  other  with  Craterus  to  fall  upon  Eumenes;  and 
when  he  was  routed,  then  Craterus  to  return  to  Antipater;  that  so 
the  whole  army  being  joined  together  in  one  body,  and  having  Ptole* 
my  their  confederate,  they  might  be  the  better  able  to  cope  mth  the 
king's  army. 

Eumenes  having  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  march,  collected  for* 
ces  together  from  all  parts,  especially  horse;  for,  because  he  had  not 
foot  able  to  cope  with  the  Macedonian  phalanx,  he  raised  a  great  bo- 
dy of  horse,  by  whose  assistance  he  hoped  to  be  in  a  condition  to 
overcome  the  enemy. 

And  now  at  length  the  armies  drew  near  to  each  other;  whereapoa 
Craterus  drew  up  his  men  together,  in  order,  by  a  set  speech  to  en- 
courage them  to  fight;  in  which  harangue  he  promised-^That  if 
they  were  conquerors,  they  should  have  all  the  pillage  of  th^  field,. 
and  all  the  bag  and  baggage  as  a  prey  to  their  own  use.     In  alW 
things  thus  encouraged,  he  drew  up  bis  army  in  battalia:  the  rights 
wing  he  commanded  himself,  and  the  left  he  gave  to  NeoptoIenaiiSb^ 
His  army  in  the  whole  consisted  of  twenty  thousand  foot,  DMist  ofli 
them  Macedonians,  men  famous  for  their  valour,  in  whom  he  placeitf 
the  confidence  of  his  victoiy;  with  these  there  i      chiid  along  with^ 
him  above  two  thousand  hoise^   Eumenes  had  likev      tweoig^dioa-- 


Chap*  III.  DioiiORUS  sicuLUS.  283 

sand  foot  of  difiereDt  nations,  and  five  thousand  horse^  on  whose  va*' 
lour  principally  lie  had  resolved  to  venture,  and  lay  all  at  stake  in 
this  battle. 

The  horse  on  both  sides  moving  forward  in  two  wings  a  great  way 
before  the  foot,  Craterus  with  a  body  of  choice  men  made  a  gallant 
cliarge  upon  the  enemy,  but  his  horse  stumbling,  he  was  thrown  out 
of  the  saddle  to  the  .ground,  and  not  being  known,  was  trajupled  un- 
der foot  by  the  confused  throng,  and  so  unfortunately  lost  his  life; 
upon  whose  fall  the  enemy  was  so  encouraged,  that,  dispersing  them* 
selves  over  the  field  of  battle,  they  made  a  terrible  slaughter.  The 
fight  wing  being  thus  distressed,  and  at  length  totally  routed,  was 
forced  to  retreat  to  the  foot.  But  in  the  left  wing  commanded  by 
Neoptolemus,  opposed  to  Eumenes,  there  was  a  very  sharp  engage- 
ment, thq  two  generals  singling  out  one  another:  for  being  known 
to  each  ether  by  their  horses,  and  other  special  marks,  they  fought 
hand  to  hand;  and  by  combating  thus  singly,  they  put  a  remark 
upon  the  victory:  for  after  they  and  tried  it  out  by  their  swords^ 
they  presently  began  a  singular  and  new  sort  of  encounter,  anger 
and  revenge  mutually  exciting  them.  For,  letting  their  bridles  fall 
on  their  horses'  necks,  they  catched  hold  of  each  other  with  their 
left  hands,  and  so  grappling  together,  their  horses  violently  pressing 
forward,  ran  from  under  them,  by  which  they  both  tumbled  to  the 
ground.  And  though  it  was  a  difficult  matter  for  either  of  them, 
after  so  violent  a  fall,  to  rise  again,  and  besides,  being  pressed 
down  by  the  weiglit  of  their  armour,  yet  Eumenes  rising  firsts 
so  desperately  wounded  Neoptolemus  in  the  ham,  that  he  lay  ham- 
strung, grovelling  upon  the  ground  i  and  by  reason  of  the  grievous- 
ness  of  the  wound,  he  was  not  able  to  raise  himself  upon  his  feet. 
But  the  stoutness  and  courage  of  his  mind  overcoming  the  weakness 
of  his  body,  he  got  upon  his  knees,  and  gave  his  adversary  three 
wounds  on  his  arm  and  thigh:  but  none  of  them  being  mortal,  (while 
they  were  yet  warm),  Eumenes  gave  Neoptolemus  a  second  blow  oa 
the  neck,  which  killed  him  outright. 

In  the  mean  time  a  great  slaughter  was  made  amongst  the  rest  of 

the  horse  on  both  sides;  so  that  while  some  were  killed  and  others 

wounded,  the  fortune  of  the  day  was  at  first  uncertain.    But  no 

sooner  was  it  noised  abroad  that  Neoptolemus  was  slain,  and  both 

wings  broken,  than  the  whole  body  of  horse  fled,  and  made  off  to 

the  phalanx,  as  to  a  strong  wall  of  defence.     But  Eumenes,  content 

With  keeping  his  ground,  and  the  possession  of  the  bodies  of  both 

the  generals,  sounded  a  retreat  to  his  soldiers.    Then  he  set  up  a 

trophy,  and  after  he  had  burled  the  slain,  he  sent  word  to  the  phalanxj^ 

^nd  to  those. that  were  thus  routed — ^That  whoever  wou^d,  should 


284  DiODORUs  sicuLus*  Scok  XFITT. 

Ill'  ■  'sssBssssssssssssssatesBsok  i      1 1  ■ 

have  liberty  to  take  up  arms  with  him,  or  to  go  wherever  thej  pleas- 
ed. The  Macedonians  accepted  of  these  terms  of  peace,  and,  opoQ 
oath  of  fidelity  given,  they  had  liberty  to  march  off  to  the  next  towus 
to  supply  themselves  with  provisons.  But  they  dealt  treacherously 
with  Eumenes;  for,  re-assembling  their  forces,  and  fomishiDg 
themselves  with  provisions,  in  the  night  they  stole  away  and  went 
to  Antipater.  Eumenes  indeed  did  all  he  could  to  revenge  this 
breach  of  their  oath,  and  to  that  end  he  forthvrith  endeavoured  tor 
pursue  the  phalanx;  but  by  reason  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy, 
and  his  own  indisposition  through  the  wounds  he  had  received,  he 
was  not  able  to  do  any  thing  effectually,  and  tlierefore  he  judged  jt 
better  to  refrain  from  any  further  pursuit. 

Having  therefore  gained  so  glorious  a  victory,  and  cut  off  two 
such  eminent  commanders,  his  name  became  very  fomous.  Anti- 
pater having  received  those  that  had  escaped,  after  tiiey  had  been  re-^ 
freshed,  hastened  away  to  Cilicia,  and  to  afford  assistance  to  Pt<rfe« 
my.  But  Perdiccas  hearing  of  the  victory*  gained  by  Enmenes, 
prosecuted  liis  expedition  into  Egypt  with  much  more  assnrtnee..^ 
When  he  came  near  to  the  river  Nile,  he  encamped  not  hx  firom 
Felusium ;  and  while  he  was  cleansing  an  old  sluice,  the  river  over* 
flowed  to  that  degree,  that  it  defeated  all  his  design,  and  mined  his 
works;  and  many  of  his  friends  deserted  his  camp,  and  went  over  to 
Ptolemy:  for  he  inclined  to  cruelty;  and  having  removed  the  r^tof 
the  captains  from  the  chief  commands,  he  made  it  hb  only  business 
to  be  sole  monarch  and  absolute  tyrant. 

Ptolemy  on  the  contrary  was  courteous  and  mild,  and  gave  free 
liberty  to  the  rest  of  the  captains  to  advise  him  in  all  his  enter- 
prises.  Besides,  he  had  put  strong  garrisons  into  all  the  convenient 
places  of  Egypt,  and  had  furnished  them  with  all  sorts  of  weapont, 
and  other  things  that  were  necessary.  By  which  means  he  succeeded 
in  every  thing  for  the  most  part  that  he  undertook,  while  many  that 
loved  the  man  cheerfully  exposed  themselves  to  undergo  all  haianb 
for  his  sake.  But  Perdiccas,  to  repair  his  losses,  called  together  the 
commanders,  and,  having  regained  some  by  gifts,  and  odiers  by' 
large  promises,  and  all  by  smooth  words,  he  was  so  far  euconraged, 
as  to  bear  up  against  the  hazards  and  diiBoulties  that  were  coming 
apace  upon  him.  And,  when  he  had  ordered  them  all  to  be  ready  for 
a  march,  about  evening  he  moved  from  thence  with  his  whirfe  armj. 
Not  acquainting  any  whither  he  would  lead  them,  he  marchedall  night 
with  a  stvift  march,  and  at  length  encamped  upon  the  banks  of  the 
Nile,  not  far  from  a  castle  called  the  Camel's  Wall. 

*  Hit  first  victory  over  NeoptoteiDus,  for  Perdiciiaft  was  killed* befoiMht  asm  of  Uija 
iiut  iirriv«4»  &>  ap^ra  aAevwarda.       ^  #  -       * 


■  « 


Chap.  III.  DtODORUS  8ICULU8.  285 

When  it  was  day  he  passed  his  army  over^^the  elephants  leading 
the  way,  and  next  to  them  the  targeteers,  with  those  that  carried  the 
scaling-ladders,  and  other  things  he  had  occasion  to  use  in  a  siege: 
his  best  horse  at  length  brought  fip  the  rear,  with  whbm  he  intended 
to  attack  the  Ptolemeans,  if  it  happened  that  they  appeared.    In  the 
middle  of  their  march  Ptolemy's  horse  shewed  themselves,  making 
forward  in  a  swift  career  for  the  defence  of  the  town;  who,  though 
they  hastened  to  enter  the  fort,  and  by  sounding  of  trumpets  and  shouts 
of  men  gave  sufficient  notice  of  their  approach,  yet  Perdiccas  was 
not  at  all  diverted  from  his  purpose,  but  boldly  led  up  his  army  close 
to  the  fort;  and  forthwith  the  targeteers  with  their  ladders  mounted 
the  wall,  and  those  that  rode  upon  elephants  threw  down  the  fortifi- 
cations, and  demolished  the  bulwarks.    Whereupon  Ptolemy,  with 
those  of  his  own  guard  about  him,  to  encourage  the  rest  of  his  offi- 
cers and  friends  manfully  to  behave  themselves,  catched  hold  of  a 
sarissa,  and  mounted  the  bulwark;   and  so,  being  on  the  higher 
ground,  struck  out  the  eyes  of  the  foremost  elephant,  itnd  wounded 
the  Indian  that  sat  upon  him;  and,  as  for  those  that  scaled  the 
walls,  he  hurled  them  down,  dreadfully  cut  and  wounded  (together 
with  their  arms)  into  the  river.    After  his  example  Ptolemy's  friends 
mliantly  exerted  themselves,  and,  by  killing  the  Indian  that  governed 
the  next  elephant,  the  beast  became  unserviceable.     The  assault 
continuing  long,  Perdiccas's  soldiers  assaulted  the  wall  by  turns, 
striving  with  all  the  vigour  imaginable  to  gain  the  fort  by  storm* 
On  the  other  hand,  Ptolemy,  calling  to  his  friends  now  to  approve 
their  faithfulness  and  loyalty  to  him  by  their  courage,  fought  like  a 
hero,  and  gave  an  example  of  valour  to  all  the  rest.    In  this  sharp 
dispute,  many  fell  on  both  sides.    The  Ptolemeans  had  the  advan- 
tage in  the  height  of  the  place,  and  the  Perdiccans  in  the  greatness 
of  their  number,  which  far  exceeded  the  other.   At  length,  the  whole 
day  being  spent  in  the  assault,  Perdiccas  raised  the  siege,  and 
marched  back  to  his  camp,  and  in  the  night  decamped,  and  with  a 
quiet  and  silent  march  caine  into  a  part  of  the  country  over  against 
Memphis,  where  the  Nile  (dividing  itself  into  two  parts)  makes  an 
island  sufficient  to  receive  and  encamp  the  greatest  army.    Into  this 
place,  therefore^  he  passed  over  part  of  his  army,  though  the  passage 
was  very  difficult,  through  the  depth  of  the  river;   For  the  water 
..  reaching  up  to  the  chin,  the  soldiers  could  not  stand  upon  their  legs, 
and  were  likewise  encumbered  with  their  arms.    Perdiccas  therefore, 
discerning  the  strength  and  violence  of  the  river,  placed  the^ephants 
on  the  left,  to  break  the  force  of  the  stream.    The  horse  went  on  the 
right,  by  wMbse  help  he  took  up  those  that  were  hurried  down  by 
the  current,^  aiM  set  them  safe  on  the  opposite  shore.    But  there 


ffi6  moDORus  sicuLUs.  Bock  XVIII. 

bAppened  io  this  passage  that  which  was  strange  and  unusual:  for^ 
when  the  first  had  got  over,  those  that  followed  were  in  veiy  great 
bazard;  for  the  river  rose  on  a  sudden,  without  any  apparent  cause, 
and  swept  away  whole  slicdes  of  bodies  at  a  timej  whicb  put  all  into 
a  eonsternatjon.    The  eause  of  thb  inundation  could  not  be  louiid 
<nil,  though  it  was  inquired  into.     Some  imputed  it  to  a  dyke  €r 
alttice  in  the  higer  grounds,  whose  banks  might  be  brdcen  down^and 
so  all  its  water  ran  into  the  Nile,  by  which  means  the  ford  was  so 
much  the  higher:  others  conceived  it  was  great  rains  that  fell  in  tbe 
lauds  above  whicb  increased  the  waters  of  the  river»     But  h 
Bcither  of  these    But  tlie  true  cause  why  tlie  passage  at  first 
without  danger,  was  because  the  sand  was  then  firm  and  unmoved; 
but  afterwards,  when  by  the  treading  of  the  horses  and  elephams^ 
and  tb^  passage  of  the  army,  the  sand  was  stirred  and  carried  away 
by  the  force  of  the  river,.the  ford  by  this  means  was,  as  it  were,  dug 
up,  and  made  into  holes,  and  so  the  passage  was  deeper  in  the  middle 
of  the  river.    Pordiccas  therefore,  not  being  able  to  pass  the  rest  of 
bis  army  over,  was  in  a  great  strait,  because  those  that  had  passed  to 
the  other  side  were  very  unequal  to  the  force  of  the  enemy,  and 
those  on  this  side  of  the  river  were  not  able  to  succour  them.    Here* 
upon  he  couima'ided  all  those  that  were  landed  in  tlie  island  to  re- 
turn.   The  army  thus  forced  to  repass  the  river^  those  that  could 
awim,  and  were  strong-bodied  men,  with  great  difficulty  recovered 
the  other  side  of  the  Nile;  but  most  of  them  lost  their  arms«    Tbe 
rest,  who  were  not  so  skilful,  some  of  them  were  drowned,  and 
others  were  carried  down  the  stream,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  tbe 
enemy.    Very  many  for  a  long  time  tossed  hither  and  thither,  were 
at  length  devoured  by  crocodiles.     Above  two  tliousand  having  pe- 
rished in  this  manner,  (among  whom  were  some  eminent  command- 
ers), the  hearts  of  the  soldiers  were  much  turned  against  Perdiccaa. 
But  Ptolemy  caused  all  those  bodies  to  be  burned  that  were  brought 
dead  down  tlie  river  to  him,  and,  having  performed  all  funend  obse- 
quies and  observances  due  to  the  dead,  he  sent  their  ashes  and  boues 
to  their  kindred  and  friends. 

This  far  more  enraged  the  spirits  of  tbe  Macedonians  against  Per* 
diccas,  and  knit  their  hearts  in  affection  to  Ptolemy.   When  tbe  night 
c^me  on,  the  camp  was  full  of  cries  and  lamentations,  that  so  many 
men  should  miserably  perish  without  a  stroke,  amongst  whom  there,  .^ 
were  no  fewer  than  a  thousand  who  were  swallowed  by  tbe  monstrous^ 
crocodiles. 

Hereupon  many  of  the  commanders  railed  against  Perdiccas;  and 
tliti  whole  phalanx  of  foot,  being  totally  disaftccted,  disMvered  tlieir 
hatred  b^  their  murmurings  and  threats:  aud^a  hundfed^  th|  chief  .  ' 


Chtgf.  III.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  287 

c^ommanders  deserted  hitn^  the  chiefest  of  whom  was  Python^  who  had 
eoDqoefed  the  rebellioiB  Greeks^  and  was  not  inferior  in  valour  and 
reputation  to  any  of  Alexander's  commanders.  Afterwards  some  of 
the  horse  entered  into  a  conspiracy,  and  made  to  his  tent,  and  in  a 
bodfy  fetl  upon  him,  and  killed  him. 

The  next  day,  when  the  soldiers  were  in  consultation,  Ptolemy 
came  to  them,  aod  saluted  the  Macedonians,  and  made  an  apology 
for  what  he  had  done.  And,  seeing  that  tliey  were  in  want  of  pro- 
visions, he  furnished  the  army  with  abundance  of  bread,  and  supplied 
die  camp  with  all  other  things  that  were  necessary.  But,  though  lie  ' 
was  upon  this  account  in  great  grace  and  favour  with  the  soldiers^ 
and  so  able  easily  to  gain  the  protectorship  of  tlie  kings,  yet  he  de- 
manded it  not,  but  bestowed  the  chief  command  upon  Python  aad 
Aridseus,  to  whom  in  gratitude  he  was  much  obliged.  For  when 
the  Macedonians  appointed  a  consultation  concerning  that  honour- 
able trust  and  high  command,  by  the  advice  of  Ptolemy  they  all 
unanimously  created  Python,  and  Aridseus  who  conveyed  the  king^s 
body,  to  be  protectors  of  the  kings,  investing  them  with  sovereign 
authority.  And  in  this  manner  Perdiccas,  after  he  had  enjoyed 
the  soverdgn  command  for  the  space  of  three  years,  lost  both  it 
and  his  life  together^  After  his  death,  news  was  brought,  that  £u- 
menes  had  gained  the  day  in  Cappadocia,  and  that  Craterus  aad 
Neoptolemus  were  both  slain :  which  news,  if  it  had  arrived  the  day 
before  Perdiccas*s  death,  that  prosperous  success  would  have  been 
a  protection  to  his  person,  so  as  that  none  durst  have  lifted  up  their 
hands  against  him. 

But  the  Macedonians  now  hearing  how  Eumenes  had  succeeded^ 
condemned  him  and  all  his  adherents,  to  the  number  of  fifty  k»rd% 
amongst  whom  was  Alcetas  the  brother  of  Perdiccas,  to  die*  And 
at  that  very  time  they  put  to  death  tliose  who  were  Perdiccas's 
chiefest  friends,  then  in  their  hands,  with  his  sister  Atalanta,  the 
wife  of  Attalus  the  admir^  of  the  fleet.  For  at,  and  after  the  death 
of  Perdiccas,  Attalus  lay  with  the  fleet  before  Pelusium;  and  when 
the  news  was  brought  him  of  the  death  of  Perdiccas,  and  his  wife^ 
he  departed  from  thence  and  went  to  Tyre;  where  Archelaus,  a 
Macedonian  governor  of  the  city  kindly  received  him,  and  delivered 
up  to  him  the  city,  and  faithfully  restored  to  him  the  money  intrust- 
fgtd  in  his  hands  by  Perdiccas,  to  the  amount  of  eight  hundred  ta* 
lents.  And  by  this  means  Attalus,  taking  up  his  residence  at  Tyre, 
received  all  Perdiccas's  friends  tliat  fled  to  him  from  th^j|amp  at 
Memphis. 
.  •  After  Antipater  had  gonfe  over  into  Asia,  the  iEtolians,  in  pursu- 
ance of  theif  league  ^ncludcd  with  Perdiccas,  -maiQfifhed  intf  Thes<r 


£88  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  XVin. 

saly,  with  a  design  to  divide  Antipater's  army.  They  had  twelve 
thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  horse  *,  commaDdedy  asgeoeralj 
by  Alexander,  an  iEtolian. 

In  their  march  they  besieged  the  Locrians  in,  Amphissaj  and  hft- 
lassed  their  country,  and  took  some  of  the  neighbouring  towns  and 
Tillages.  They  likewise  routed  Polycles,  Antipater's  general^  and 
killed  him,  together  with  a  great  number  of  his  men.  Of  the  pri* 
soners  they  took,  some  were  sold  for  slaves,  and  others  were  ran- 
somed. Afterwards,  they  broke  into  Tliessaly,  and  brought  over 
many  there  to  join  them  in  the  war  against  Antipater,  insomuch  as 
they  made  up  in  the  whole  a  body  of  five-and-twenty  thousand 
foot,  and  fifteen  hundred  horse;  while  they  were  taking  in  the  ci- 
ties, the  Acamanians  bearing  a  grudge  to  the  ^tolians,  invaded 
£toIia,  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country,  and  besieged  the  dties.... 
When  the  iEtolians  heard  what  danger  their  country  was  in,  they 
left  the  rest  of  their  forces  in  Thessaly  under  the  command  of  Me- 
non  of  Pharsalia,  and  they  themselves  speedily  marched  back  with 
their  own  soldiers  into  iEtolia,  and  struck  such  a  terror  into  the  Acer* 
nanians,  that  they  presently  relieved  their  country.  While  they 
were  thus  employed,  Polyperchon,  who  was  left  general  in  Macedo- 
nia, came  into  Thessaly  with  a  noble  army,  and  fought  and  routed 
the  enemy,  killing  Menon  the  general,  and,  cutting  off  most  of  his 
army,  soon  recovered  Thessaly. 

As  for  the  afiairs  of  Asia,  Aridseus  and  Python,  protectors  of  the 
kings,  leaving  the  river  Nile,  came  with  the  kings,  and  the  whole 
army,  to  Triparadisusf,  in  Higher  Syria]:.  There  Eurydice§,  the 
queen,  taking  upon  her  to  intermeddle  and  pry  too  curiously  into 
matters  that  concerned  her  not,  and  to  control  the  protectors.  Python 
and  his  friends  hereby  became  much  disgusted,  and,  perceiving  that 
the  Macedonians  were  more  observant  to  her  commands  than  to 
theirs,  they  called  a  council,  and  gave  up  the  protectorship.  Where^ 
upon  the  Macedonians  chose  Antipater  protector,  with  absolute  au« 
thority.  A  few  days  after  Antipater,  going  to  Triparadisus,  found 
Eurydice  stirring  up  the  Macedonians  to  a  sedition  against  him; 
whereupon  there  arose  no  small  mutiny  in  the  army.  Antipater 
hereupon  called  a  general  council,  and  so  argued  and  canvassed  the 
business  with  them,  that  he  alhiyed  the  Spirit  of  the  people,  and 
brought  Eurydice^  through  fear  of  him,  into  a  better  and  more  mo* 
iderate  temper. 

*  Or  rither  four  hundred. 

t  Triparadisus,  called  hy  PKnj,  Paradisus.—Nat.  Hist.  1. 1,  c.  t9.^The  triple  s«rdtib 

%  The  Higher  Seria,  or  what  is  called  Ccslosjria. 

}  Tlic  wife  of  Aridaes,  one  of  the  kings  of  Macedon* 


CAap.  IIL  DIODORUS  SICULITS.  289 


After  these  things  were  over,  Antipater  made  a  second  division  of 
the  prbviaces,  and  allotted  to  Ptolemy  that  whereof  he  was  then  in 
possession^  for  it  was  not  practicahle  to  remove  him,  hecause  it 
appeared  Ptolemy  had  gained  Egypt  as  a  conqueror.  Syria  he  gave 
to  Laomedon  of  Mitylene;  and  Cilicia  to  Philoxenus.     Of  the  other 

provinces,  he  assigned  Mesopotamia  and  Arbelitis  to  AmphimachusI 
the  province  of  Babylon  to  Seleucus;  and  Susiana  to  Antigonus*, 
because  he  was^the  first  occasion  of  the  overthrow  of  Perdiccas.  To 
Peucestes  he  granted  Persia ;  toTlepolcraus,  Carmania;  to  Python, 
Media;  and  to  Philip,  Parthia*.  Aria  and  Drangina  he  allotted  to 
Stasander  the  Cyprian;  Bactria  and  Sogdiana  to  Stasanor  of  So- 
lium, born  in  the  same  island;  Paropamisus,  to Oxyartcs,  the  father 
of  Ruxana,  whom  Alexander  married;  and  India,  bordering  upon 
Paropamisus,  to  Python,  the  son  of  Agenor.  Of  the  kingdoms  next 
adjoining,  that  which  bordered  upon  the  river  Indus,  continued  un- 
der tiie  power  of  Porus;   that  which  lay  next  to  the  Hydaspes,  re- 

^  mained  with  Taxiles :  for  these  kings  were  not  to  be  dispossessed 
but  with  the  royal  army,  and  a  skilful  and  expert  general.  As  to  the 
Bortbern  provincesf,  he  gave  the  government  of  Cappadocia  to  Ni- 
canor;  and  the  Greater  Phrygia  and  Ciliciat  to  Antigonus,  to  hold 
them  as  he  did  before.  Lastly,  to  Cassander  he  assigned  Caria;  to 
Clitus,  Iiycia§;  and  to  Aridttus,  Phrygia  at  the  Hellespont.  Anti- 
gonus he  appointed  general  of  the  royal  army,  and  commanded  him 
to  pursue  and  destroy  Eumenes.  To  Antigonus  he  also  joiaed  Cas* 
sander  and  Clearchus,  that,  if  he  secretly  projected  any  thing,  he 
might  be  discovered.  He  himself  marched  with  the  kings  and  his 
troops  towards  Macedonia,  that  he  might  conduct  the  kings  back  into 
their  own  country. 

Antigonus  therefore,  being  declared  absolute  commander  of  Asia, 
drew  the  forces  out  of  their  winter-quarters  to  fight  with  Eumenes; 
and  to  that  end  furnishing  himself  with  all  necessary  preparations  for 
the  war,  he  marched  towards  Eumenes,  who  then  lay  in  Cappadocia; 
where  one  called  Perdiccas,  one  of  his  chief  commanders,  had  de- 
serted him,  and  lay  encamped  with  three  thousand  foot  and  five 
hundred  horse  (that  followed  him)  about  three  days  march  distant. 
But  Eumenes  sent  out  Phenices  of  Tenedos  with  four  thousand  good 
foot,  and  a  thousand  horse  against  him;  who  with  a  swift  march  fell 
upon  the  rebels  on  a  sudden  in  the  night,  when  they  were  asleep, 
and  took  Perdiccas  and  all  his  army  prisoners,  about  tlie  second 
watch  of  the  night.  Eumenes  put  to  death  the  chief  rmgleaders 
oi  the  defection,  and  spared  the  rest  of  the  soldiers,  and  mixed  them 

^  For  Antigenes,  captain  oCithe  silter  targetcert.  t  The  Lesser  Asis. 

%  CUicit  far  Lvcia.  $  For  Lydia, 

Vol-.  2.  No.  44.  PP 


290  DioDORus  sicuLus,  Book  XFIIt 


amongst  his  own,  and  by  this  means  gained  all  their  affisctions. 
After  this  Antigonus,  by  a  correspondence  with  one  Apcdlonides, 
general  of  the  horse  on  Eumenes's  side,  by  large  promises  ao  efieeted 
the  business,  that  be  prevailed  with  him  to  betray  Eamenes,  and 
come  over  to  him  in  the  heat  of  the  fight.  Eumenes  was  then  en- 
camped in  Cappadocia,  in  places*  very  convenient  for  an  engagement 
with  horse.  Antigonus  therefore  made  thither  with  his  whole  anny^ 
and  possessed  himself  of  the  higher  ground  under  the  foot  of  the 
mountains.  He  had  at  that  time  above  ten  thousand  foot,  (of  whom 
most  were  Macedonians,  brave  and  valiant  men),  and  two  thousand 
horse,  and  thirty  elephants.  £umenes  had  no  less  than  twenty  thou- 
sand foot^  and  five  thousand  horse.  Presently  a  sharp  and  bloody 
battle  was  fought,  in  which  Antigonus  (through  the  sudden  and  un- 
expected desertion  of  ApoUonides  with  his  horse,  and  going  over  to 
the  other  side)  got  the  day,  killing  eight  thousand  men  of  the  enemy 
upon  the  place,  and  possessing  himself  of  all  their  bag  and  baggage; 
so  that  the  Eumeneans  (through  the  slaughter  that  was  made)  were 
in  a  consternation,  and,  by  the  loss  of  all  their  carriages,  were 
brought  to  an  utter  desperation.  Hereupon  Eumenes  designed  to 
fly  into  Armenia,  to  persuade  some  of  the  inhabitants  to  yna  with 
him  in  arms ;  but,  being  prevented  by  a  swift  pursuit,  and  pereeifinf 
his  men  to  run  away  from  him  to  Antigonus^  he  possessed  himsdf 
of  a  strong  fort  called  Nora.  It  was  indeed  very  small,  not  above 
two  furlongs  in  compass,  but  in  strength  impregnable:  for  the  houses 
were  built  upon  a  very  high  rock,  and  it  was  wonderfully  fortified  both 
by  nature  and  art.  Besides,  there  was  there  laid  up  great  store  of 
corn,  fuel,  and  other  things  of  that  kind;  so  that  all  who  fled  ftr 
shelter  thither  might  be  abundantly  supplied  with  all  things  neces- 
sary for  many  years  together.  Those  that  were  his  fast  friends  ac- 
companied him  in  his  flight,  and  resolved  at  the  last  and  utmost  ex 
tremity  to  die  with  him.  They  were  in  number,  both  horse  and  Ibot^ 
about  six  hundred. 

Antigonus  being  now  strengthened  with  the  forces  of  Eumenes, 
and  the  revenues  of  his  provinces,  and  having  got  together  a  great 
mass  of  treasure,  began  to  aspire  to  matters  of  higher  coneem:  ibr 
none  of  the  Asiatic  commanders  were  as  yet  so  potent  as  to  dare  to 
contend  with  him  for  the  sovereign  command.  For  the  present, 
indeed,  he  bore  a  fair  outside  towards  Antipater,  but  secretly  had  re- 
solved, that  when  he  had  firmly  settled  his  affairs,  he  would  neither 
regard  him  nor  the  kings.  And  in  the  first  pkce  he  blociccd  up 
them  in  the  fort  with  a  double  wall,  and  with  deep  trenches  and  wnks 
of  earth  of  a  wonderful  height.     Then  he'  entered  into  paileg^  with 

•  Id  the  couDtry  of  Orcjois,  iu  Capptdocw.— Vih.  Alio.  SOOU 


Ckap.IU.  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  ^1 


» willing  to  renew  their  antient  friendship,  and  i 
to  pennade  him  to  jcnn  with  him  as  an  associate  in  all  his  affinn. 
Bat  EuBieQes,  foreseeing  a  change  of  fortune  at  hand,  insisted  upon 
tenns»  and  AaV  degree  of  fiivour  which  seemed  very  unequal  and 
ttnfit  to  be  granted  to  one  in  his  present  circumstances:  for  he  re- 
qoiied^  as  of  right,  to  be  restored  to  all  his  provinces^  and  to  be  iiiilly 
acquitted  and  discharged  of  all  pretended  ofieoces  whatsoever.  An- 
tigonus  promised  to  acquaint  Antipater  with  his  demands,  and^lear- 
iflg  sufficient  strength  for  continuing  the  siege»  he  marched  against 
the  generals,  (who  were  moving  towards  him  with  all  their  forces), 
via.  Alcetas,  the  brother  of  Perdiccas,  and  Attalus,  the  admiral  of 
the  fleet.  Some  time  after,  Eumenes  sent  ambassadors  to  Antipater, 
to  treat  upon  terms  of  peace,  (amongst  whom  was  Hieronymus,  a 
cdooel,  who  wrote  the  history  of  the  successors)  •  In  the  mean  time 
lie  himself,  having  experienced  many  changes  and  turns  of  Ibrtniie^ 
viaa  not  at  all  discouraged,  knowing  very  well  what  quick  and  sud- 
dcm  allefalions  had  happened  on  both  sides.  For  he  taw  that  tlie 
Macedonian  kings  were  only  vain  and  insignificant  shadows  of 
princesi  and  the  many  valiant  conmumders  who  were  with  them  so 
vumaged  their  commands  one  after  another  as  to  seek  only  tbe  ad- 
vSnaceaaent  of  their  bwn  fMrivate  interests.  Therefore  he  hoped  (as 
it  afterwards  happened)  that  many  would  desire  his  assistance,  both 
upon  account  of  his  skill  in  martial  affiun^  and  of  his  constancy  and 
fiatUiitness. 

But  when  he  saw  that  the  horse  could  not  be  exercised  in  a  ^lace 
ao  strut  and  craggy,  and  so  were  unserviceable  for  horse  engage- 
BDientS,  he  ingeniously  found  out  a  new  and  unusual  way  for  the  ex- 
ercise of  them:  for  he  tied  up  their  heads  by  chains  to  a  post  or 
atnMig  stake,  and  drew  them  up  so  high  as  that  they  should  stand 
apoo  their  hinder  feet,  and  but  justtoucb  the  ground  with  the  ends 
of  ^tlieir  fore  feet.  Whereupon  the  horse  presently,  striving  to  get 
his  fore  feet  to  the  ground,  ^d  so  curvet  and  caper,  that  legs,  thighs, 
and  every  member  was  in  action,  and  by  this  motion  tlie  horse  was 
all  of  a  foam;  and  thus  they  were  all  exercised  to  the  highest  de- 
gree. He  himself  fed  of  the  meanest  food  with  the  rest  of  the  sol  • 
diets,  and,  by  thus  eating  with  them  in  common,  not  only  gained  to 
himself  the  love  of  all  his  fellow-soldiers,  but  caused  them,  to  be  at 
perfect  peace  and  concord  one  with  another.  In  the  mean  time, 
Ftolemy  in  Egypt  (Perdiccas  with  all  the  king's  army  being  broken 
ID  pieces)  enjoyed  that  country  as  a  conqueror:  and,  casting  his  eye 
upon  Phoenicia  and  Coelosyria,  (as  lying  very  commodiously  to 
Egypt),  he  used  bis  utmost  endeavour  to  possess  himself  of  the  cities 
of  those  countries.     To  that  end  he  created  Nicanor,  one  of  his 


299  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Bnok  XFIIL 

fiieDds,  general,  and  sent  him  into  those  parts  with  a  cooriderable 
army,  who,  coming  into  Syria,  took  Laomedon,  the  governor  of  that 
province,  prisoner,  and  brought  all  Syria  under  his  own  power*  He 
gained  likewise  ail  the  cities  of  Phcenicia,  and  put  ganisons  into 
them,  and,  having  in  a  short  time  finished  a  troublesome  ezpeditioD, 
returned  into  Egypt. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Antigonus  routs  Alcetas  in  Pisidia,  ami  takes  Attalu^.  Alceiat 
received  vUo  lerniesstis,  and  there  protected*  He  is  murdered 
there  treacherously:  his  body  inhumanly  iised  by  AntigtmMM. 
Antipaier*s  death.  Antipater  puts  Demeas,  one  of  the  Aihenitm. 
amhassadorsy  to  death.  Polyperchon  mcuie  chief  in  Macedonia, 
Cassander  conspires  to  put  him  out,  Antigonus*s  plots  to  be 
sovereign  ofalL  Aridicus  secures  himself  in  Phrygian  beeiegee 
Cyzicum,  Antigonus  goes  to  relieve  it.  Eumenes  got  out  qf 
Nora  by  Antigonus' s  order.  Antigofws's  further  acts.  7%e 
various  fortunes  of  Eumenes.  A  council  in  Macedonia  called 
by  Polyperchon  agabist  Cassander.  The  decree  of  the  counciL 
Polyperchon  invites  Olympias  out  of  Epirus  into  Macedouia. 
Writes  to  Emnenes  to  join  with  the  kings. 

AFTERWARDS,  when  Apollodorus  executed  the  oiBce  of  lord- 
chancellor  at  Athens,  and  Quintus  Publius  and  Quintus  Poplias*  were 
consuls  at  Rome,  Antigonus,  after  the  defeat  of  Eumenes,  detenniiRd 
to  march  against  Alcetas  and  Attalus :  for  those  only  remained  of  all 
Perdiccas's  friends  and  kindred  who  were  skilful  cummaDdei^  and 
bad  forces  sufficient  to  cope  with  him  for  the  sovereign  power.  To 
this  end  he  marclied  away  with  lus  whole  army  oat  of  Cappadocia, 
and  made  for  Pisidia,  where  Alcetas  then  lay,  and  came  with  a  swift 
inarch  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  to  Critopolis,  (as  it  was  called), 
having  marched  two  thousand  five  hundred  furlongs  in  seven  days 
and  seven  nights,  and  by  that  means  was  upon  them  before  they  were 
aware;  and  there  he  first  possessed  himself  of  certain  hills  and  other 
difficult  passes  in  the  country.  When  Alcetas's  party  had  intelli- 
^cDce  of  the  enemy's  approach,  they  presently  drew  up  a  pbalanxf 

*  Lucius  Paptciui.  t  Of  horse. 


in  order  of  btttle^  and  by  a  fierce  charge  endeavoored  to  drive  die 
horse  down  the  hilk^  who  ha4  now  gained  the  tops  of  the  monntains* 
Hereopon  began  a  sharp  engagement^  in  which  many  fiidUng  oft 
both  sldes^  Antigonus^  with  a  body  of  six  thoasund*  horse,  bore 
down  with  all  his  might  upon  the  enemy,  endeavouring  to  ent  off  all 
ways  and  means  of  retreat  to  Alcetas :  thb  done,  those  upon  the  tops 
of  the  mountains j  by  advantage  of  the  steepness  and  difficulty  o|  die 
places,  easily  put  the  phalanx  to  flight.    Hereupon  Alcetas's  men^ 
being  surrounded  with  the  multitude  of  their  enemies,  and  all  passes 
blocked  up  between  them  and  their  foot,  they  looked  upon  them* 
selves  all  as  dead  men.   Therefore,  seeing  no  other  remedy  or  means 
left  to  escape,  Alcetas  (with  the  loss  of  multitudes  of  his  men)  at 
length  with  much  ado  broke  through  his  enemies,  and  got  to  the 
foot.     Hereupon  Antigonus  marching  down  from  the  hills  with  his 
whole  army,  and  his  elephants,  the  enemy  (who  were  far  itiferior  in 
number)  were  mightily  terrified:  for  all  the  confedierates  were  not 
above  sixteen  thousand  foot,  and  nine  hundreit  horse;  whereas  the 
forces  of  Antigonus  (besides  elephants)  were  above  forty  thousand 
foot,  and  seven  thousand  horse.  Those  therefore  with  Alcetas  (^on* 
aidering  that  they  should  meet  with  elephants  In  the  front,  and  be 
•  sorrounded  with  multitudes  of  horse,  and  forced  to  engage  with  foot' 
te  exceeding  them,  both  in  number  of  men,  and  in  the  sldlfulness 
1^  their  arms,  and  besides  had  the  advantage  of  tbe  higher  gronnd) 
fell  into  confusion  and  amazement;  nay,  the  enemy  hastened,  and^ 
eame  upon  them  so  fieist,  that  they  were  not  able  to  draw  up  their  men 
in  due  order  of  battle;  so  that  the  whole  army  was  presendy  bnAen 
in  pieces,  and  Attains  Docimus  and  Fdlemo,  and  many  other  com- 
manders, were  taken  prisoners.     But  Alcetas,  with  his  life-guard, 
his  children,  and  those  Pisidians  that  sided  with  him,  got  intoTer- 
messus,  a  city  of  Pisidia.    Then  Antigonus  came  to  an  agreement 
with  the  captains,  his  prisoners,  and  the  rest  he  disposed  of  among  his 
own  troops,  using  them  with  all  humanity,  and  by  this  means  grefidy 
increased  his  army.   But  about  six  thousand  Pisidians  (valiant  men) 
resolved  to  stick  to  Alcetas,  and  promised  that  they  would  never  de- 
sert him  upon  any  terms  whatsoever:  for  they  loved  him  entirely,  for 
the  reasons  following: 

When  Alcetas,  after  the  death  of  Perdiccas^  had  no  confederates  in 
Asia,  he  determined  by  some  acts  of  kindness  or  other  to  engage  the 
Pisidians;  because  he  knew  he  should  thereby  gain  a  warlike  people, 
who  had  a  country  very  difficult  to  enter,  and  full  of  strong  f<Mrts,  to 
be  his  confederates.  Theirefore  in  every  expedition  he  always  be- 
stowed special  marks  of  honour  upon  them  above  all  the  rest,  of  his 
*  Tbe  Creek  is  so,  bat  the  Latin  it  six  hundred. 


294  BioDORus  SICULU8.  Book  XVIII. 

confederates:   for  he  so  divided  the  spoil  of  his  enemies,  that  the 
half  was  ever  allotted  to  them.    Moreover,  by  bis  ftmiliaritj  and 
freedom  in  converse,  daily  invitations  of  the  most  eminent  petatai 
amongst  them  to  his  table,  and  by  his  bounty  and  liberality  in  be- 
atowing  upon  them  many  large  gifts  and  rewards,  he  engrossed  to 
lumself  the  love  of  all:  so  that  now  (having  anchored  all  hia  bopci^ 
and  placed  his  chiefest  confidence  in  them)  he  was  not  frosUated  in 
bis  expectation :  for,  when  Antigonus  encamped  with  his  whole  army 
before  Termessus,  and  demanded  Alcetas  to  be  delivered  up  to  bias, 
(and  the  elders  of  the  city  had  determined  to  give  him  up),  all  the 
young  men  got  together,  and  resolved  to  run  all  hazards,  and  the  vt* 
most  extremity,  for  his  preservation.    Tlie  elders  ind^d  at  first  en- 
deavoured to  dissuade  the  young  men,  and  draw  them  off  from  theb 
lormer  resolve,  wishing  them  not  to  involve  their  country  in  war  lor 
the  sake  of  one  Macedonian.    But  when  they  saw  that  they  cooU 
ikot  allay  the  heat  of  the  young  men,  they  secretly  consulted  together, 
and  in  the  night  sent  away  a  messenger  to  Antigonns,  and  by  him 
fnithfully  promised — ^That  they  would  deliver  Alcetas  up  to  bhn,  ei* 
tber  dead  or  alive.    To  this  end,  they  desired  bim^JIIiat,  hf  as- 
saulting the  city  for  some  days,  he  would  deo^  the  yoong  omd  to 
sally  out,  and,  while  be  was  skirmishing  with  them,  to  feign  a  flight; 
by  this  means,  when  the  young  men  were  out  of  the  city,  and  boq^ 
in  pursuit,  they  should  have  an  opportunity  to  accomplish  their  de> 
sign.    Antigonus  assented  hereunto,  and  drew  off  from  the  city  aft  a 
further  distance,  and  so  urged  on  the  young  men  to  skirmbhM  and 
light  pickeerings.    The  elders  now,  discerning  Alcetas  left  ahme, 
employed  the  faithfullest  of  their  servants,  and  the  most  active  mm 
of  the  city,  (that  were  not  engaged  with  him),  and  with  them  (in  the 
absence  of  the  young  men)  set  upon  him;  but  could  not  take  him, 
for  he  killed  himself  with  his  own  band,  lest  he  should  fall  alive  into 
the  power  of  the  enemy :  but  they  laid  his  body  upon  a  bier,  casting 
over  it  a  coarse  cloth,  and  carried  it  out  of  the  gates,  and,  unkoowa 
to  them  that  were  skirmishing,  delivered  it  to  Antigonus.    By  this 
device  they  freed  their  country,  and  prevented  a  war;  but  they  could 
not  avoid  the  fury  of  the  young  men.    For  when  they  returned,  and 
understood  what  was  done,  (through  that  ardent  love  and  afiectioB. 
they  bore  Alcetas),  they  were  so  enraged  at  their  governors,  that  they 
first  possessed  themselves  of  a  part  of  the  city,  and  resolved  to  set 
the  houses  on  fire,  and  then  to  issue  out  with  their  arms,  and  betake 
themselves  to  the  mountains,  and  waste  and  destroy  all  the  country 
round  belonging  to  Antigonus.    But  afterwards  they  altered  their 
purpose  as  to  the  burning  of  the  city,  and  began,  by  robbing  and 
spoiling,  miserably  to  lay  waste  a  great  part  of  the  enemy's  country. 


€^p.  IF.  DIODORUS.SICULUS.  $95 

In  the  mean  time,  Antigonus  having  received  the  body  of  Alcetas, 
used  it  with  all  the  disgrace  and  contumely  imaginable  for  the  space 
of  three  days  together;  and  it  then  beginning  to  putrify,  contemptu- 
ously cast  it  out  without  any  burial,  and  sohfiarched  out  of  Pisidia. 

But  the  young  men  of  Termessus,  bearing  still  a  love  and  respect 
to  the  abused  body  of  the  dead,  took  it  up,  and  decently  buried  it. 
He  was  of  so  kind  and  obliging  a  nature,  that  there  was  something 
sbgular  in  him  of  love  and  respect  to  all  those  who  deserved  wel^ 
and  therefore  be  was  ever  towards  such  unchangeable  in  his  love  and 
aflbction. 

Antigonus  having  left  Pisidia,  made  towards  Phrygia  with  his  whole 
amy.  When  became  tothecity  of  the  Creteans,  Aristodemus  the  Mi- 
ksian  brought  with  him  the  news  of  An  tipater*s  death,  and  that  the  chief 
command,  together  with  the  protectorship  of  the  kings,  was  devolved 
upon  Poljrperchon  the  Macedonian.  He  was  pleased  with  the  news, 
and  now  his  hopes  were  exalted,  for  he  made  it  his  business  to  rule 
and  govern  all  the  affairs  of  Asia,  and  to  gain  the  absolute  and  sove- 
reign command  there  without  stooping  to  any.  And  thus  stood  the 
affiurs  of  Antigonus  at  this  time. 

In  Macedonia,  while  Antipater  was  seized  with  a  grievous  sickness^ 
(and  old  age  making  way  for  his  dissolution),  the  Athenians  sentDe 
nades  (who  was  looked  upon  as  one  that  had  managed  things  with 
the  Macedonians  with  a  great  deal  of  honesty  and  integrity)  ambas- 
sador to  Antipater,  to  desire  him  to  draw  out  the  garrison  from  Mu- 
niehia,  as  it  was  at  first  articled  and  agreed.  Antipater  at  the  first 
was  very  kind  to  Demades;  but  after  the  death  of  Perdiccas,  wben 
aome  letters  of  Demades,  amongst  others,  were  found  amongst  the 
king's  papers,  wherein  he  pressed  Perdiccas  to  hasten  with  all  spedd 
into  Europe  against  Antipater;  though  he  suppressed  his  resentment 
for  a  time,  yet  In  truth  he  bore  him  a  grudge.  Therefore  when  De« 
mades  had  delivered  his  message^  as  he  was  commanded,  and  had 
aomewhat  sharply  debated  the  matter  concerning  the  garrbon ;  An- 
tifiater,  without  giving  any  answei*,  committed  his  son  Demeas  (who 
was  joint  ambassador  with  his  father)  to  the  executioners^,  who  pre- 
sently carried  him  away  to  the  prison,  and  for  the  rcasous  before* 
mentioned  cut  off  his  head. 

Afterwards,  Antipater,  when  he  was  near  his  end,  appointed  Poly- 
perchon,  the  eldest  almost  of  all  Alexander's  captains,  and  one  in  great 
honour  and  reputation  with  the  Macedonians,  to  be  protector  of  the 
kings,  with  chief  and  absolute  authority.  And  his  sou  Cassander  he 
created Chiliarcht J  next  in  power  and  authority  to  Polyperchon.  This 

*  Our  sheriffs, 
t  Commander  of  one  thousand  men,  •  colonel. 


SQ6  .  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JSook  XFIIL 


office  was  first  made  a  place  of  honour  and  credit  by  the  Persian  kiags^ 
and  afterwards  by  Alexander  when  he  grew  great,  and  began  to  imitate 
this  and  other  customs  of  the  Persians.  But  Cassander  relished  not 
his  father's  ordering  of  matters^  and  judged  it  very  diahoDOontble  to 
his  family  to  have  one  that  was  nothing  related,  either  in  bkx>d  or 
affinity,  to  succeed  in  the  sovereign  command,  when  there  was  a  soa 
who  in  Macedonia  gave  apparent  and  pregnant  evidences  both  of 
valour  and  parts,  sufficient  to  govern  the  affiurs  of  the  state  in  the 
room  of  his  father. 

In  the  first  place  therefore,  he  took  a  journey  into  the  countiy  with 
some  of  his  friends,  where  having  both  leisure  and  opportunity,  he 
discoursed  with  them  about  the  chief  command,  and  dealt  with  every 
one  of  them  privately  apart  by  themselves,  to  contrive  ways  and  means 
for  him  to  gain  the  principality;  and  by  large  promises  prevailed  with 
them  to  join  together  in  their  assistance,  for  the  accomplishment  of 
what  he  desired.  He  likewise  privately  sent  ambassadors  to  Ptolemy, 
to  renew  the  league,  and  pray  his  assistance;  and  that  he  would  to 
that  purpose  help  him  with  shipping  out  of  Phgenicia,  and  send  them 
with  all  speed  to  the  Hellespont.  In  like  manner  he  sent  ambassa- 
dors to  the  rest  of  the  cities  and  captains,  to  solicit  them  to  join  with 
them  in  arms.  But  the  better  to  conceal  his  design,  and  that  he 
might  not  be  suspected,  he  spent  his  time  for  many  days  together  in 
hunting. 

But  Polyperchon  having  gained  the  guardianship  of  the  kings,  cal* 
led  together  a  general  council  of  bis  friends,  and  by  their  advice  sent 
for  Olymplas,  wishing  that  she  would  take  into  her  care  Alexander's 
son^,  who  was  then  but  a  child,  and  reside  for  the  future  as  queen- 
regent  in  Macedonia:  for  by  reason  of  the  quarrels  and  heart  burn- 
ings between  her  and  Antipatcr,  she  Iiad  withdrawn  herself  into 
Epirus. 

When  the  death  of  Antipater  was  noised  abroad  in  Asia,  stirs  and 
commotions  began  to  change  the  face  of  affiiirs  there,  while  they  that 
were  in  power  and  authority  made  it  their  business,  and  sought  every 
one  how  to  advance  his  own  particular  interest.  The  chief  of  whom 
was  Antigonus,  who  (upon  the  account  of  his  having  conquered  £u« 
menes  in  Cappadocia^  and  was  joined  with  his  forces,  and  Alcetasand 
Attains  in  Pisidia,  and  besides  was  appointed  by  Antipater  viceroy  of* 
Asia,  and  had  the  command  of  a  great  army)  bore  himself  very  h^h, 
and  swelled  with  pride  in  the  imagination  of  his  own  greatness.  And 
being  now  possessed  already  (in  his  own  conceit)  of  the  sovereigniyy 
he  resolved  neither  to  regard  the  kings  nor  their  guardians:  for  in  re- 
gard he  had  a  greater  army,  he  was  confident  he  could  possess  him** 

*  Aleiander^  one  of  the  kings. 


Cl^.  IF.  niODORUs  sicuLUS.  897 


self  of  all  the  treasures  laid  up  in  Asia,  seeing  there  was  none  able  to 
oppose  him.  He  had  then  in  his  army  threescore  thousand  foot,  and 
ten  thousand  horse,  and  thirty  elephants.  And  besides  these,  he 
doubted  not  but  to  raise  more,  whenever  he  had  occasion;  for  there 
was  money  enough  in  Asia  for  the  enlisting  of  soldiers  abroad  in  any 
place  where  he  pleased. 

Pondering  these  things  in  his  head,  he  sent  for  Hieronymns  the 
historian,  Euineues  the  Cardian's  special  friend  and  fellow-citizen, 
(he  who  fled  to  Nora),  and  having  brought  him  to  him  by  many  rich 
gifts  and  presents,  he  sent  him  as  an  agent  toEumenes,  with  instruct 
tjODs  to  desire  him  to  forget  the  battle  in  Cappadocia,  and  to  be  liis 
friend  and  confederate  in  the  war;  and  that  he  should  have  a  far 
larger  province,  and  much  tnore  wealth  than  ever  he  enjoyed  before : 
and  to  let  him  know — ^That  he  should  be  chiefest  of  his  friends,  and 
share  with  him  in  the  advantages  and  successes  of  all  his  designs. 

Then  without  any  further  delay  he  called  his  friends  together,'and 
imparted  to  them  the  whole  of  his  design;  «ind  to  those  who  were  of 
greatest  account  among  them,  to  some  he  allotted  provinces,  to  others 
commands  in  the  army ;  and  by  raising  the  hopes  and  expectations  of 
every  one  of  them,  he  made  them  all  very  forward  to  assist  him  in 
carrying  on  his  intrigues :  for  he  determined  to  pass  through  allAsia^ 
and  to  remove  all  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  and  bestow  them 
upon  his  friends. 

While  he  was  in  execution  of  these  projects,  Aridseus  the  gover* 
nor  of  Phrygia  at  the  Hellespont,  understanding  what  he  was  con- 
triving, resolved  to  secure  his  own  province,  and  to  that  end  put 
sufficient  garrisons  into  the  principal  cities,  and  marched  against 
Cyzicum,  being  the  greatest  and  most  important  city  of  all  others  for 
his  purpose.  He  had  with  him  above  ten  thousand  foot  of  mercena- 
ries, a  thousand  Macedonians,  five  hundred  Persian  darters  and  slingers, 
and  eight  hundred  horse,  together  with  all  sorts  of  engines  for  bat- 
tery, both  for  shooting  of  darts  and  casting  of  stones,  and  all  other 
things  necessary  for  the  carrying  on  of  a  siege.  He  came  u|>on  the 
:ity  on  a  sudden,  and  having  surprised  most  of  the  people  when  they 
vere  abroad  in  the  open  fields,  he  pressed  on  the  siege,  and  endea- 
voured to  force  the  inhabitants  (who  were  in  a  very  great  fright)  to 
"eceivea  garrison.  The  Cyzicaus,  though  they  were  thus  surprised, 
md  that  many  were  shut  out  that  were  in  the  fields,  and  those  that 
emained  were  altogether  unable  to  defend  the  place,  looking  upon  it 
IS  their  duty  to  assert  their  liberty,  cowardly  sent  forrii  ambassadors 
o  treat  concerning  the  raising  of  the  siege;  and  to  let  Aridffius 
;now....That  the  city  was  leady  to  submit  to  any  thing  he  thought 
it,  except  the  receiving  of  a  garrison :  but  in  the  mean  time  they 
Vol.  2.   No.  44.  QQ 


ZQS  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XFIH. 


secretly  armed  all  their  young  men  and  slaves  that  Were  fit  for  ser- 
vice, and  so  lined  the  walls  round  with  men  for  tlie  defence  of  the 
town.    But  Aridaeus  still  pressing  the  matter  for  the  receiving  of  a 

garrison,  the  ambassadors  answered ^That  they  would  acqurint  the 

citizens  with  his  demands;  which  be  consented  nntOi  ^and  so  dis- 
charged them :  and  being  thus  freed,  they  spent  all  that  day,  and  the 
night  nest  folloving,  in  preparations  for  the  holding  out  of  the  siege. 
Being  thus  deluded,  he  lost  the  opportunity  of  accomplishing  what  he 
designed:  for  the  Cyzicans,  in  regard  the  city  Was  very  strong,  and 
well  guarded  on  the  land  side  (for  it  was  a  peninsula)  and  beingmaa- 
ters  likewise  at  sea,  they  easily  repulsed  the  enemy.    Mortov^r,  thdy 
sent  to  them  of  Byzantium  for  soldiers,  and  darts,  and  all  other  thhi^ 
that  were  necessary  and  useful  against  an  assault,    All  which  Wefe 
speedily  and  readily  sent  to  them;  whereby  their  hopes  were  so  re- 
vived, that  they  were  the  more  encouraged  to  stiind  it  out  to  the  ut* 
most.    They  presently  likewise  put  forth  their  lotig  ships  to  sea, 
and  sailed  along  the coast,andtook]nthosethatwere  in  theficlda,-  and 
brought  them  back  into  the  city.    Having  therefore  tftiis  increased 
the  number  of  their  soldiers  (after  the  killing  a  great  nnmber  of  the 
besiegers)  they  forced  the  enemy  to  raise  the  siege;  wherenpon  Ari* 
deus  (cheated  by  this  stratagem  of  the  Cyzicans)  after  a  fhutless  at- 
tempt, returned  into  his  own  province. 

In  the  mean  time,  Antigonus  lying  at  Celaena,  was  informed  tf  dbe 
siege  at  Cyzicuro,  and  therefore  resolved  to  lay  an  obligation  on  that 
city  (then  in  danger  to  be  ruined)  to  favour  him  in  his  future  designs. 
To  that  end  he  detached  out  of  his  whole  army  twenty  thoosadd  df 
his  best  foot,  and  three  thousand  horse,  and  with  these  marched  awajr 
with  ali  speed  to  the  aid  of  the  Cyzicans ;  but  he  came  thither  a  litth 
too  late:  and  sO;  though  he  made  a  show  of  great  kindness  tothecitjr, 
yot  he  was  wholly  frustrated  in  his  design.  But  he  sent  ambaasn- 
dors  to  Aridieus,  to  c\])ostulntc  matters  with  him;  first-^Why  h^ 
dared  tobosicgea  Greek  confederate  city  without  any  provoeatien: 
then,  to  charge  him  with  open  rebellion,  and  with  a  purpose  to  make 
liimself  hbsolute  lord  and  sovereign  of  the  province.  Lastly,  to  coMS^ 
niand  him  to  depart  out  of  the  province,  and  tlience  forward  to  livt 
1  private  life,  and  content  liimself  with  only  one  city  for  his  anb- 
oistence. 

Aridieus  hearing  these  demands  of  the  ambassadors  (and  charging 
them  with  insolence)  told  them  he  would  not  leave  the  provtwce; 
but  that  he  would  j^^arrison  all  liis  cities,  and  was  resolved  t6  decide 
the  matter  with  him  by  the  sword. 

In  pursuance  of  what  he  hud  said,  (having  every  where  fortified 
his  towns  and  cities),  he  sent  away  a  general  with  part  of  his  iimiy> 


Chap.  IPi  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  399 

comouDding  him  to  join  with  Eameaes^  and  to  free  the  fort  from  the 
aiege^  and  Eumenes  from  the  straits  and  difficulties  wherein  he  then 
was,  and  to  persuade  him  to  be  his  confederate  in  the  war. 

Antigonus,  in  the  mean  timci  eager  to  be  revenged  on  Aridseus, 
sent  away  some  of  hb  forces  against  him;  and  he  himself  marched 
with  a  numerous  army  towards  L^dia^  with  a  purpose  to  depose  Clitus 
the  lord-lieutenant  of  that  province :  who  having  before  intelligence 
of  his  march,  garrisoned  all  his  principal  cities,  and  he  himself  sailed 
over  into  Macedonia,  to  inform  the  kings  and  Polyperchon  of  the 
revolt  and  impudence  of  Antigonus,  and  to  crave  their  aid  and  as« 
sistaoce* 

Antigonus  at  his  first  approach  had  £phesus  delivered  up  to  him, 
by  the  assistance  of  some  in  the  city:  afterwards,  when  if^chylus  the 
Rhodian  arrived  at  Ephesus  with  four  ships,  wherein  were  six  hun* 
dred  talents  of  silver  sent  out  of  Cilicia  to  the  kings  in  Macedonia, 
he  seized  upon  the  money,  alledging  that  he  had  occasion  to  use  it 
for  the  nttsmg  and  listing  soldiers;  by  which  act  he  sufficiently  de- 
clared to  the  worlds  that  he  was  altogether  designing  his  own  inte- 
rest, and  was  an  apparent  enemy  to  the  kings.  After  this,  he  be- 
sieged those  cities  that  stood  out,  some  of  which  he  took  by  assault^ 
and  others  he  gained  by  fair  words  and  promises. 

Having  now  related  the  acts  of  Antigonus,  we  shall  pass  over  to 
those  things  that  happened  to  Eumenes.  This  man  had  the  frequent 
experience  of  sudden  turns  and  changes  of  fortune,  being  sometimes 
in  low,  and  other  times  again  (beyond  all  expectation)  in  very  pros* 
perous  circumstances. 

In  former  times,  when  he  assisted  Perdiccas  and  the  kings,  he 
gained  the  province  of  Cappadocia,  and  those  places  that,  as  mem- 
bers, belonged  to  it,  where  lie  lived  in  the  height  of  prosperity,  com- 
manding both  men  and  money  at  his  pleasure:  for  he  conquered 
Craterus  and  Neoptolemus,  two  famous  captains,  who  then  com- 
manded the  before  unconquered  troops  of  the  Macedonians,  and 
killed  them  both  in  the  fight:  so  that  now  he  seemed  to  be  invinci- 
ble, when  on  a  sudden  his  fortune  was  so  changed,  that  he  was 
routed  by  Antigonus  in  a  great  battle,  and  forced  to  fly  with  a  few 
friends  to  a  very  little  fort  for  shelter.  Being  then  shut  up,  and 
litmmed  in  with  a  double  wall,  he  luid  no  friend  left  that  could  help 
bim  in  his  distress;  but  after  he  had  been  cooped  up  a  year  together, 
now  utterly  despairing  of  deliverance,  unexpectedly  and  on  a  sudden 
appeared  an  opportunity  of  freedom  from  all  his  troubles:  for  Anti- 
gonus, wlio  a  little  before  had  straitly  besieged  him,  and  earnestly 
souglit  tu  take  away  his  life,  (the  scene  being  changed),  now  soli- 
cits him  to  be  a  partner  with  hiio  in  his  concerns;  and  so  (upon  a 


300  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XFIII. 


mutual  stipulation  upon  oath  between  them)  he  wu  freed  from  the 
pressures  and  hardships  of  the  siege.  And  thus,  after  a  long  timei 
being  unexpectedly  delivered,  he  continued  awhile  in  Cappadociay 
where  he  again  got  together  his  old  friendSj  and  his -former  fellow- 
soldiers,  tl'.at  were  dispersed  and  scattered  up  and  down  in  the  coun- 
try; and  he  was  so  wonderfully  beloved,  that  many  of  his  associates  ^ 
and  companions*  in  the  same  hopes  and  expectations,  presently 
flocked  to  him,  ready  to  join  in  arms,  and  be  observant  to  all  his 
commands.  To  conclude,  within  a  very  few  days  he  had  got  toge- 
ther above  two  thousand  soldiers,  who  cheerfully  listed  themselfes, 
besides  those  five  hundred  friends  who  endured  the  siege  with  him  in 
the  fort :  and,  by  the  assistance  of  fortune,  he  was  at  length  raised  to 
that  height,  that  he  gained  the  king's  forces,  and  defsuded  the  inte- 
rest of  the  kings  against  all  thRt  dared  to  deprive  them  of  their  sove- 
reign authority.  But  we  shall  give  a  more  exact  accouat  of  these 
matters  shortly  hereafter,  in  their  proper  time  and  place.  And  so, 
having  now  in  short  related  the  affairs  of  Asia,  we  shall  pass  to  things 
done  in  Europe. 

Cassander,  though  he  was  excluded  from  the  chief  command  of 
Macedonia,  yet  was  not  at  all  discouraged,  but  resolved  to  gain  it; 
for  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  base  and  dishonourable  thing  that  the  so- 
vereign authority,  enjoyed  by  his  father,  should  now  be  managed  by  ^ 
others.  But  discerning  that  the  Macedonians  flavoured  PolyperehoD, 
he  privately  discoursed  with  some  of  his  friends,  and  then  sent  them 
(that  nothing  might  be  suspected)  to  the  Hellespont:  he  himself  in 
the  mean  time  continuing  for  some  days  together  in  the  country,  and 
spending  his  time  in  hunting,  made  every  one  believe  that  he  had  no 
thoughts  or  designs  of  aspiring  to  the  sovereign  command.  But 
when  he  had  got  all  things  ready  for  his  journey,  he  secretly  departed 
out  of  Macedonia,  and  proceeded  to  the  Chersonesus,  and  thence 
forward  to  the  Hellespont;  where,  passing  over,  he  went  to  Antigo- 
nus  in  Asia,  craving  his  assistance,  and  told  him  that  Ptolemy  wonld 
join  with  him.  Antigonus  readily  embraced  the  offer,  and  made 
him  large  promises  of  assistance,  and  engaged  forthwith  to  supply 
him  with  forces  both  for  land  and  sea  service.  But  all  thia  was  m>» 
thing  but  dissimulation,  pretending  that  he  joined  with  him  apoQ 
account  of  the  love  and  kindness  he  always  boie  towards  Antipater; 
whereas  in  truth  he  designed  to  divert  Pol]q>erchon  with  fierce  and 
bloody  wars,  to  the  end  that  he  might  with  more  ease  subdue  Asia  in 
the  mean  time;  and  so,  without  any  hazard, gain  the  sovereign  com- 
mand of  all  at  last. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  Polypcrchon,  the  protector  of  the 
Icings,  having  a  prospect  of  a  great  war  he  was  likely  to  have  irith 


Ckap.  IF.  DIODOauS  SICULUS.  301 

Cassander,  (and  conceiving  that  it  was  not  fit  to  undertake  any  thing 
without  consulting  first  with  his  friends),  assembled  all  his  captains^ 
and  all  those'  that  were  of  chief  authority  among  the  Macedonians, 
Andt  forasmuch  as  it  was  apparent  that  Cassander  was  strengthened 
with  the  forces  of  Antigonus,  to  gain  all  the  cities  of  Greece;  and 
that  some  of  them  were  garrisoned  with  his  fiather's  forces,  and  others 
were  governed  by  an  oligarchy,  influenced  chiefly  by  the  friends  and 
favourites  of  Antipater:   and  besides  ail  this,  that  Ptolemy,  who  had 
the  power  in  Egypt,  and  Antigonus,  who  had  openly  and  apparently 
deserted  ffee  kings,  were  confederates  with  Cassander;  and  that  both 
were  richly  stored  with  men  and  money,  and  had  the  command  of 
many  potent  cities  and  provilices:  for  these  reasons  he  appcnjateda 
consultation,  to  consider  how  the  war  should  be  managed  against 
them.    After  the  matter  had  been  banded  to  and  fro  with  variety  of 
opinions,  it  was  at  length  resolved  that  the  cities  of  Greece  should 
be  restortrd  to  their  liberties,  and  the  oligarchy  everywhere  aboiishad: 
for  by  this  means  they  conceived  they  should  weaken  the  interest  of 
Cassander,  and  much  advance  their  own  reputation,  and  gain  strong 
and  powerful  confederates.    Hereupon  they  that  were  present  forth- 
with sent  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  cities,  and,  wishing  them  to  be 
courageous,  promised  to  restore  them  to  their  several  democracies; 
and  they  delivered  to  the  ambassadors  the  decree  in  writincr,  that 
every  one  of  them  (when  they  returned  into  their  countries)  might 
the  better  inform  the  people  of  the  kindness  of  the  kings  and  captains 
to  the  Grecians.    The  decree  was  in  this  form: 

"  SINCE  it  has  ever  been  the  practice  of  our  ancestors  to  express 
their  acts  of  grace  in  the  many  instances  of  their  bounty  towards  the 
Grecians,  ourselves  are  likewise  desirous  to  preserve  and  keep  on 
foot  what  they  determined,  and  are  willing  to  evidence  to  the  world 
the  kindness  and  good  will  we  shall  ever  be  careful  to  preserve  to- 
wards the  Greeks :  and  whereas  it  is  well  known  that  even  in  the 
life-time  of  Alexander,  and  before  the  kingdom  devolved  upon  os^ 

we  were  of  opinion ^That  all  ought  to  be  restored  to  that  peace  and 

form  of  government  which  was  ordered  and  appointed  by  our  father 
Philip,  and  written  to  all  the  cities  at  that  time  concerning  that  affair: 
yet  afterwards  it  happened  that  some  unadvisedly,  when  we  were  fiir 
remote  from  Greece,  made  war  upon  the  Macedonians;  which  un- 
ruly persons  being  suppressed  and  subdued,  by  the  help  and  conduct 
of  our  captains,  many  cities  were  thereby  involved  in  great  troubles, 
and  brought  under  the  smart  and  sense  of  many  inconveniences: 
impute,  therefore,  the  cause  of  all  those  sufierings  (as  justly  you 
tuny)  to  those  commanders.    But  now,  in  reverence  and  due  regard 


30S  DIODORUS  8ICUUJS.  Book  XFIIL 


to  tliat  aotieDt  coiiackution^  we  graat  to  you  oar  peace,  and  the  wamm 
kinds  of  goTcrnmeut  whicli  you  enjoyed  under  Philip  and  Alennder^ 
and  full  power  and  autliority  to  manage  all  other  thingi,  aceonKng 
to  the  several  rules  and  orders  by  them  prescribed.  We  Kfcewisfl  lev 
cal  all  tliem  wbo  have  either  voluntarily  withdrawn  themselviesy  or 
have  been  forced  away  by  die  command  of  our  captains,  firoai  the 
time  that  Alexander  first  landed  in  Asia.    It  is  likewise  our  plea^ 

sure That  all  those  tlius  recalled  by  us  enjoy  their  estates  witboat 

^laarrelling  or  remembrance  of  former  injuries,  and  that  they  be  re* 
stored  to  ihe  franchises  and  liberties  of  their  several  ekies;  and 
whatever  decree  is  made  against  ihem,  let  it  be  abrogated,  except 
such  as  are  banished,  by  due  course  of  law,  for  murder  or  sacrikge* 
But  we  do  not  hereby  intend  to  recal  the  exiles  of  Megalopolis,  nor 
Polyeucriis,  who  are  condemned  for  treason ;  nor  the  Amphisseneans, 
Bor  thcTriccinans,  nor  the  Plmrcadonians,  nor  the  Heracleots.  But 
as  Oor  all  ot]>ers,  let  them  return  before  the  thirtieth  day  of  the  nsonth 
Xantbicus*.  But  if  tliere  be  any  laws  or  orders  made  by  Philip  or 
Alexander  against  them,  let  them  be  brought  to  us,  that  such  course 
may  be  taken  therein  as  may  be  most  for  the  service  and  advantage 
of  us  and  of  the  cities.  Let  the  Athenians  enjoy  all  other  things  as 
they  did  in  the  time  of  Philip  and  Alexander;  and  theOropiana  lioM 
Oropus  fis  now  they  do.  Yet  we  restore  Samos  to  the  Athenians, 
because  our  father  Philip  before  gave  it  to  them.  Let  all  the  Gre- 
cians make  a  law — ^That  none  take  up  arms,  or  act  any  thing  agaiut 
us;  otherwise,  that  such  be  banished,  and  forfeit  all  their  goods* 
And  we  have  ordered  that  Polypcrchon  shall'  manage  these  and  all 
other  nsatters:  and  let  all  be  observant  to  him  in  what  we  have -be* 
fore  written  to  you;  for  those  that  do  contrary  to  what  we  have  pre- 
scribed, we  shall  not  in  the  least  pardon/* 

This  decree  being  transmitted  to  all  the  cities.  Polyperchon  wrote 
to  Argos,  find  the  rest  of  their  cities,  commanaing  tliem^JTliat  all 
that  were  in  any  command  in  the  commonwealth  under  Antipater 
should  be  forthwith  banished;  and  that  some  should  be  put  to  dcathj 
and  their  estates  confiscated;  that,  being  reduced  to  extremity^  ibcy 
might  be  in  no  capacity  to  assist  Cassander.  He  sent  lettmrs  like- 
wise  to  Olympias,  Alexander's  mother,  who  was  then  in  £|Hrus>  iiar 
fear  of  Cassander,  to  entreat  her  to  return  with  all  speed  into  Mace* 
donia,  and  take  care  and  cliarge  of  Alexander's  little  son,  till  be  was 
of  age,  and  capable  to  take  upon  him  the  sole  management  of  af- 
fairs. He  wro^  moreover  to  Eumenes,  that  he  would  stick  to  the 
interest  of  the  kings,  and  not  league  by  any  means  with  Antigomis^ 

•  ApriL 


CaUtp.  V.  nioooRus  sicuLus.  ao3 

Mii  make  his  cl  c^  either  to  come  tftx  into  MacedoDia,  ia  order  to 
joki  with  him  ia  —  protectorship  of  the  kidgs,  or  abide  in  hmm^  aiid 
bo  teoeife  both  men  and  money  frbrii  theih  to  make  war  upon  Anci* 
^usj  who  had  now  openly  declared  himself  a  rebel  against  the 
kcHj^y  who  woold  be  sure  to  restore  him  the  prormce  wUch  Aiitigo^ 
nds  had  forced  finom  him^  and  Ukewise  all  other  privileges  iind  ad^ 
vantages  whieh  he  ever  at  any  time  before  enjoyed  ih  Ash.  And 
besides,  he  alledged,  that  it  became  Eomenes  above  all  other  med  lo 
pnMcct  the  royal  family,  as  consonant  to  all  those  demonstrations  of 
his  loyalty,  in  his  late  appearances  on  the  behalf  of  the  kings;  and  if 
he  stood  in  need  of  forces,  lie  himself,  together  with  the  kings.  Would 
eome  over  into  Asia  with  tlie  whole  ankiy.  These  were  the  transac* 
I  of  this  year. 


CHAP.  V. 

^Bkfperchcn  courts  Eumenes  to  assist  the  kings.  Burkenes's  prm-^ 
denee  amongst  the  Macedonian  captains,  Ptoletm^  sends  to  iks 
capttdns  and  otheUrs  not  to  assist  Eumenes.  jintigonus  contrives 
lo  HdU  Eumenes;  who  marches  into  Phoniidcu  Nicanor  do* 
tiites  the  AtliemafWj  and  still  keeps  Munychia,  and  st^btilefy  gets 
the  Pirceus.  Ordered  by  Olympias  to  deliver  the  Pinetss  and 
Munyehia  to  the  /ithe7iians;  but  he  shifts  it  cff.  Altramdn\ 
son  of  Polyperchofij  enters  Attica;  secretfy  corresponds  with 
Nicanor,  and  displeases  the  Athenians.  Phocion's  hard  usage 
ai  his  trial  in  Athens;  is  condetHned^  and  executed.  Cassander 
arrives  at  the  Pirteus.  Pofyperchon  comes  against  him,  but 
returns.  Besieges  Megaloj}olis;  but  is  there  completely  baffled^ 
and  his  elephants  destroyed  by  a  stratagem.  A  sea-fight  be* 
tween  Clitus  and  Nicanor.  Nicanor  beaten.  CKtus  afterwards 
routed  by  Nicanor ^  is  killed  in  his  flight  to  Macedonia.  Anti* 
ganus  goes  after  Eumenes.  Enmenes  near  losing  his  army  by 
the  breach  of  a  dyke  in  Babylonia.  Tfie  Greek  cities  revolt  to 
Cassander.  The  Athenians  make  peace  with  him.  He  kills 
Niccmor. 

ARCHIPPUS  being  chief  magistrate  of  Athens,  and  Quintus  iKIius 
and  Lucius  Papirius  Roman  consuls,  the  letters  from  Polyperchon 
vvcre  delivered  to  Eumenes  presently  after  his  release  out  of  the  fort; 


304  DiODORUS  SICULUS.  BookXFW. 

in  which  were  contained^  besides  what  was  before  declared—Thil 
the  kiogs  had^  of  their  bounty,  bestowed  npon  him  five  hnndrad  tih 
lents^  to  repair  the  losses  he  had  lately  sustained,  and  had  sent  IcttcB 
to  the  governors  and  treasurers  of  Cilicia  to  pay  to  him  the  said  fin 
hundred  talents,  and  what  other  monies  he  should  have  oecasioii  for, 
either  for  raising  of  soldiers,  or  any  other  necessary  uses.  And  Alt 
they  had  ordered  a  thousand  Macedonian  Axgyraspides^  with  their 
officers,  to  be  observant  to  him,  and  readily  and  cheerfully  to  scnc 
him  upon  all  occasions,  as  he  that  was  appointed  general,  with  fdl 
and  absolute  power  and  authority,  over  all  Asia.  There  came  lik&> 
wise  letters  to  him  from  Olympias,  by  which  she  earnestly  eotreatcd 
him  to  be  assistant  both  to  her  and  the  kings;  for  that  he  only  re- 
mained the  most  faithful  of  all  the  friends  they  had^  who  was  able  to 
relieve  the  desolate  state  and  condition  of  the  king's  fiuuily.  She 
likewise  desired  him  to  advise  her— Whether  it  was  better  for  her  to 
remain  still  in  Epirus,  (and  not  trust  him  who  claimed  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  kings^  but  in  truth  sought  the  kingdom),  or  to  return? 

Hereupon  Eumenes  forthwith  wrote  to  her  back  again That  he 

conceived  it  most  advisable  for  her  at  the  present  time  to  continue  in 
Epirus,  till  the  war  was  ended:  that  he  himself  was  resolved  to  be 
ever  faithful  and  constant  in  his  love  and  duty  towards  the  kings^ 
and  not  in  the  least  to  adhere  to  Antigonus,  who  was  aspiring  to 
gain  the  kingdom:  and  because  Alexander's  son,  by  reason  of  the 
tenderness  of  his  age,  and  the  covetousness  of  the  captains,  stood  in 
need  of  help,  he  looked  upon  it  as  his  duty  to  expose  himself  to  the 
utmost  hazards  for  the  preservation  of  the  kings.  Hereupon  he 
forthwith  commanded  all  his  soldiers  to  decamp,  and  so  marched  out 
of  Cappadocia,  having  with  him  about  live  hundred  horse^  and  above 
two  thousand  foot :  for  he  had  no  time  to  wait  upon  the  slow  march 
of  those  who  had  promised  to  join  with  him ;  because  a  great  army  of 
Antigonus  (under  the  command  of  Mcnander^)  was  near  at  hand, 
and  it  was  now  no  longer  safe  for  him  to  stay  in  Cappadocia,  being  a 
declared  enemy  of  Antigonus:  but,  though  this  army  came  three 
days  too  late,  (and  so  lost  their  opportunity),  yet  they  resolved  to 
pursue  the  troops  with  Eumenes;  but,  not  being  able  to  reach  him, 
they  returned  into  Cappadocia:  for  Eumenes,  making  long  marches, 
presently  recovered  Mount  Taurus,  and  so  got  into  Cilicia.  Here 
Antigencs  and  Tautamus,  the  captains  of  the  Argyraspides^  with 
their  friends,  (in  obedience  to  the  letters  of  the  kings},  met  Eu- 
menes, after  a  long  and  tedious  march,  and  joyfully  congratulated 
him  upon  his  unexpected  delivemnce  out  of  his  great  troubles,  pro- 
mising to  be  ready  on  all  occasions  at  his  command.    There  met 

*  Lcaader. 


hp.  Pi  DIODORUS  SICUtUS.  305 

II  likewise  about  three  thousand  Argyraspides  out  of  Macedonia, 
Ai  great  demonstrations  of  love  and  afftction.  This  sudden  and 
Host-  incredible  change  was  the  subject  of  every  body's  admiiration; 
len  they  considered  how  the  kings  and  Macedonians  (a  little  be- 
■e)  badt  condemned  Eumenes  and  all  his  followers  to  die^  and 
w,  having  forgot  that  sentence  denounced  against  him,  not  only 
nibned  him,  but  promoted  him  to  the  highest  place  of  command 
the  whole  kingdom.  And  it  was  not  witfiout  just  cause,  that  they 
lOcoRsidered  the  wonderful  changes  that  attended  Eumenes  should 
thus  affected — For  who  that  does  but  observe  the  diflferent  acci- 
ttB'in  the  course  of  man's  life,  would  not  be  amazed  at  the  various 
US  and  changes  of  fortune  to  and  fro,  first  on  one  side,  then  on 
other?  Or  who,  trasting  in  the  present  support  of  a  prosperous 
time,  would  upon  that  account  be  so  far  transported  as  to  forget 
»  infirmity  of  human  nature?  For  every  man's  life  (as  disposed 
d  ordered  by  the  providence  of  some  one  of  the  gods)  has  been 
Bquered  (as  it  were)  with  the  reciproctd  turns  of  good  and  evil  in 
ages  of  the  world.  So  that  it  is  a  wonder,  that  not  only  what  is 
BDge  and  unaccountable,  but  that  even  every  thing  which  happens. 
Mild  be  surprising  and  unexpected.  Therefore  who  can  suffl- 
iBtly  value  history?  For,  by  the  variety  and  cliange  of  aflairs  there 
iMsented,  a  cheek  is  given  to  the  pride  of  the  fortunate,  and  allays 
^  grief  and  misery  of  the  unprosperdus.  Which  things  Eumenes 
m  wisely  considering,  and  weighing  beforehand  the  instability  of 
tme,  he  managed  his  affairs  with  the  more  caution  and  prudence, 
r  thinking  within  himself,  that  he  was  but  a  stranger*,  and  had  no 
;bt  to  kingly  power  wad  authority,  and  that  the  Macedonians  (who 
ft  now  under  his  command)  not  long  before  had  judged  him  to 
i,  and  that  the  commanders  and  captains  were  all  inflamed  with 
s  heat  of  ambitions  designs,  he  conceived  that  in  a  short  time  he 
Duld  be  despised  and  envied,  and  at  length  be  brought  into  danger 
his  life:  for  none  are  willing  to  submit  to  the  commands  of  those 
it  they  look  upon  to  be  their  inferiors,  nor  to  be  lorded  over  by 
era  who  ought  rather  to  be  under  the  commands  of  others  them- 
Ives.  Seriously,  therefore,  pondering  these  things  within  himself, 
the  first  place  he  refused  to  accept  of  the  five  hundred  talents  er- 
red him  by  the  kings'  letters  for  the  repair  of  his  former  losses, 
d  refitting  of  himself  with  necessaries:  for  he  said — He  needed 
>t  so  large  a  sum,  seeing  he  pretended  to  no  principality  there; 
d  that  which  he  now  enjoyed  was  not  of  his  own  choice,  but  he 
is  forced  by  the  kings  to  undertake  the  present  service.  To  con- 
Lide,  he  said .That  by  reason  of  tlie  continual  fatigues  of  war  he 

♦  Of  Cardia,  in  the  Chersouesus  ofTbrace. 

Vol.  2.   No.  44,  rr 


S06  DI0D0RU9  SICULU9.  BwA  XVIIL 

was  so  wora  out^that  he  was  not  able  to  endure  those  hardships,  and 
retreats  from  place  to  place^  any  longer,  especially  because  that  a 
stranger  had  no  right  to  command,  and  by  law  was  excluded  fran 
the  authority  due  to  be  executed  by  such  as  were  of  the  same  natkm 
with  the  Macedonians :  for  he  said.^There  was  represented  to  him  a 
wonderful  apparition  in  his  dream,  which  he  judged  very  neccsaaij 
to  discover  to  them  all,  because  it  might  (as  he  conceived)  oondnce 
much  to  the  promoting  of  peace  and  concord,  and  the  public  goodi 
He  declared — ^That  in  his  sleep  Alexander,  the  late  king,  seemed  to 
appear  to  him,  (as  he  was  when  living),  adorned  in  hb  royal  robes, 
and  sitting  on  his  throf^e,  giving  out  orders  to  his  captains,  and  (as 
in  his  health)  disposing  and  managing  all  the  affidrs  and  conccros  of 
the  kingdom.  '^  Therefore,"  says  he,  '^  I  am  of  opinion .^That  a 
throne  of  gold  should  be  made  at  the  charge  of  the  king's  treasury, 
in  which  should  be  placed  the  diadem,  sceptre,  and  crown,  and  dl 
the  other  ensigns  of  royalty;  and  that  at  spring  of  day  all  his  captains 
should  offer  to  him  sacrifices,  and,  standing  together  near  the  thnme, 
should  receive  commands  in  the  king's  name,  as  if  he  were  alive  at 
the  helm  of  the  government.''  All  were  very  well  pleased  with  what 
he  said ;  and  thereupon  every  thing  was  presently  prepared  for  Ae 
purpose,  for  the  king's  treasury  was  very  rich;  and  that  stately  work 
was  forthwith  finished,  and  the  tlu'one  was  set  up,  whereoa  wen 
placed  the  diadem,  sceptre,  and  the  arms  he  used  to  wear.  Then 
was  placed  an  altar  with  fire  upon  it,  upon  which  all  the  captains, 
one  after  another,  cast  frankincense,  (taken  out  of  a  golden  casket), 
and  other  costly  sweet  odours,  and  adored  Alexander  as  a  god.  After 
this  were  ordered  a  great  number  of  seats,  upon  which  the  captaiDS 
and  great  commanders  sat  together,  and  there  consulted  and  debated 
all  the  weighty  and  important  affairs.  EuiQcnes  in  the  mean  time 
carrying  liimself  with  an  equal  respect  and  deference  in  all  public 
meetings  towards  all  the  captains,  and  suppling  them  with  fair  and 
courteous  language,  not  only  avoided  the  strokes  of  envy,  but  therein 
gained  all  their  hearts.  By  the  same  artifice  (through  the  prevalency 
of  superstition  relating  to  the  king)  he  so  elevated  the  liopes  and  ex- 
pectations of  the  whole  army,  as  if  some  god  were  to  be  their  gene- 
ral. In  like  manner  he  beliaved  himself  towards  the  Argyraapides, 
and  thcrel)y  so  gained  their  favour,  that  they  counted  him  highly 
worthy  to  be  the  protector  of  the  kings. 

Then  he  picked  out  the  fittest  persons  from  among  hb  friends,  and 
furnished  them  with  great  sums  of  money,  and  employed  them  to 
hire  soldiers  up  and  down  upon  large  pay.  Whereupon  some  of 
them  forthwith  went  into  Pisidia  and  Lycia,  and  tlie  IxHilering  coun- 
tries, and  diligently  put  in  execution  what  they  were  conunanded. 


Cktp.  r.  DI0DORU8  SICULUS.  30/ 

Oihen  went  into  Cilicia,  and  some  into  Coelosyria  and  Phoenicia, 
mad  othen  sailed  to  the  cities  in  Cyprus.  This  listing  of  soldiers 
bciof  Doised  abroad,  and  reported  what  large  pay  was  offered,  many 
camm  flocking  in  from  the  cities  of  Greece,  and  enrolled  their  names 
lor  this  service;  so  that  in  a  short  time  the)'  had  raised  above  ten 
1  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse,  besides  the  Argyraspides,  and 
!  who  came  along  with  him. 
The  forces  of  Eumenes  being  tlius  on  a  sudden  increased  to  an 
JMWfJihlf  number,  Ptolemy  arrived  with  the  fleet  at  Zaphyrium,  in 
CUicia,  and  sent  away  some  commanders  to  solicit  the  Argyraspides 
•PC  to  side  with  £umenes,  whom  all  the  Macedonians  had  con* 
demned  to  die.  He  sent  likewise  to  the  governors  of  the  garrison 
in  Qoinda*,  desiring  them  not  to  help  Eumenes  with  any  Qnoney, 
sad  he  would  bear  them  out:  but  no  man  regarded  what  lie  said, 
kseaose  the  kings,  and  their  protector  Polyperchon,  and  Olympias, 
Ac  Bother  of  Alexander,  had  written  to  them  to  be  obedient  in  all 
tbiDgB  to  Eumenes,  as  to  the  commander-in-chief,  and  general  of  the 
kii^dom. 

But  of  all  others,  Antigonus  was  most  displeased  and  uneasy  at  the 
giovth  and  advancement  of  Eumenes;  for  he  looked  upon  him  as 
dK  most  powerful  enemy  he  had  set  up  against  him  by  Polyperchon, 
!  he  had  deserted  the  kings :  therefore  he  resolved  by  some 
to  cut  him  off;  to  which  end  he  employed  one  of  his 
I,  Phiiotas,  and  delivered  to  him  lettera  to  the  Argyraspides, 
I  the  rest  of  the  Macedonians,  (that  sided  with  Eumenes),  and 
I  along  with  him  thirty  Macedonians  (who  were  crafty  and  fair- 
I  men)  with  orders  to  deal  with  Antigenes  and  Tautamus,  tiie 
us  of  the  Argyraspides,  privately  and  apart  by  themselves,  to 
facroy  Eumenes,  promising  tlicm  great  rewards,  and  larger  pro- 
riaccs;  and  that  they  should  likewise  apply  themselves  to  their  fcl- 
Isv-citiiens  and  acquaintances  amongst  the  Argyraspides,  and  by 
kibes  draw  them  to  cat  uflf  Eumenes :  but  they  were  not  able  to 
prevail  with  any  except  Tautamus,  one  of  the  captains  of  the  Argy- 
faqiides,  who  being  corrupted  by  bribes,  promised  not  only  for  him- 
self, but  undertook  to  draw  over  his  colleague  Antigenes  to  this  foul 
design:  but  Antigenes  being  a  prudent  and  faithful  man,  not  only 
fcfdsed,  but  prevailed  with  him  that  was  before  corrupted  to  alter  his 
purpose:  for  he  told  him — ^That  it  was  more  expedient  that  Eume- 
nes should  live  than  Antigonus:  for  he  being  already  grown  great, 
when  he  became  more  powerful,  would  thrust  them  all  out  of  their 
govemmcnu,  and  give  tliem  to  which  of  his  friends  he  pleased:  but 

*  Wbrre  tbc  kiUf(B'riibci{ucr  tor  .\«:«  wan  kept.— Stnbo,  1.  ii,  7^. 


808  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Book  Xf^tU. 


as  for  Eumenes,  beiDg  but  a  stranger,  he  durst  not  attempt  tOjgafai 
the  sovereign  authority,  but  woukl  be  content  ^ith  bis  present  ceflK 
inaod,  aad  to  gain  their  fayouf,  would  secure  to  them  their  inoviiice^ 
and  pel  haps  add  more  to  them.  And  in^tliis  manner  were  oU  the  fOO' 
jects  against  Eumenes  frustrated  and  brought  to  nought,  ':b  the 
mean  time  Pliilotas delivering  a  letter  of  Antigonus  to  thecommanden^ 
written  to  all  the  captains  and  soldiers  in  general;  theArgyraepideseoi 
other  Macedonians  got  together  by  themselves  unknown  to  Eumenes^ 
and  commanded  it  to  be  read  openly  to  them :  in  which  were  aecv^ 
sations  against  Eumenes,  and  advice  to  the  Macedoniana  forthwith 
to  seize  upon  him  and  put  him  to  death,  and  if  they  did  not,  thethe 
would  come  presently  and  fall  upon  them  with  his  whole  army,  and 
do  exemplary  justice  on  them  for  tlieir  disobedience.  Upea  the 
hearing  the  contents  of  these  letters,  the  Macedonians  and  their  cap- 
tains were  greatly  terrified:  for  one  of  tliese  two  was  unavoidaUc^ 
either  to  fall  under  the  revengeful  displeasure  of  Antigonus  by  adlier^ 
ing  to  the  kings,  or  be  punished  by  Polyperchon  and  the  kings  te 
observing  the  commands  of  Antigonus.  While  all  the  soldiers  weie 
in  these  distracted  thouglits,  Eumenes  comes  in  amongst  them^  end 
hearing  the  letters  read,  advised  them  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  kiDg^ 
and  not  to  give  any  regard  to  an  open  declared  rebel;  and,  Iiavisg 
spoken  many  things  pertinent  to  the  present  occasion,  he  not  only 
avoided  the  present  imminent  danger,  but  inclined  all  the  soldiers  to 
him  in  a  firmer  bond  of  duty  and  affection  than  ever  th^y  weie  be* 
fore.  And  thus  this  man,  who  was  again  on  a  sudden  eveninvahwd 
in  insuperable  dangers,  yet  was  so  wonderfully  fortunate,  as  thefdqf 
to  strengthen  himself  the  more.  Ordering,  therefore,  his  army  Is 
march,  he  made  for  Phoenicia,  and  endeavoured  to  get  ihippipg 
from  all  sea-towns  along  as  he  went,  in  order  to  make  up  a  skniag 
navy,  that,  by  having  a  fleet  in  Phoenicia,  he  might  be  master  of  the 
sea,  and  have  what  forces  he  pleased,  and  be  able  to  traDsportPofy* 
perchon  at  any  time  with  safety  out  of  Macedonia  into  Asia  against 
Antigonus.    To  this  purpose  therefore  he  continued  in  PhoBDieia. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  Nicanor  (who  held  Muayohis) 
hearing  that  Cassander  had  left  Macedonia,  and  was  gone  to  Antigs- 
uus,  and  that  Polyperchon  was  suddenly  expected  with  an  amy  io 
Attica,  earnestly  solicited  the  Athenians  to  stand  firm  in  their  afiinc- 
tions  to  Cassander.  But  when  none  would  consent  to  what  was  de-^ 
sired,  but  all  were  rather  for  the  garrison  to  march  away  widi  all 
speed,  at  first  he  over-persuaded  the  people  with  fair  words  to  for- 
bear  a  few  days,  and  that  he  would  afterwards  do  what  should  be 
moiit  for  the  good  of  the  city.    But  after  the  Athenians  had  been 


Chfp.  ^  DIODOEUS  SICULUS.  S09 

quiet  for  Adtae  days^  secretly  in  the  night  he  brought  soldiers  by  lit- 
tle and  Kttie  into  Munychia^  so  that  now  he  had  got  in  strength  suffi- 
cient to  defend  the  place,  and  to  oppote  those  who  designed  a  siege. 

Hereupon  the  Athenians,  perceiving  that  Nicanor  meant  nothing 
10  what  he  did  for  the  advantage  and  safety  of  the  city,  sent  a  mes- 
sei^ier  to  the  king  and  Polyperchon,  desiring  their  assistance,  ac- 
oordiog  to  the  purport  of  their  letters,  whereby  they  restored  the 
Grecians  to  their  liberties.  Then  they  had  frequent  assembfies  and 
ceosttltations  among  themselves  how  to  manage  the  war  against 
Nicanor:  and,  while  they  were  busying  their  heads  about  these  af- 
fairs, he  drew  out  many  of  his  mercenaries  secretly  in  the  nighl^ 
possessed  himself  of  the  walls  of  the  Pirseus  and  the  mouth  of  the 
harbour.  The  Athenians  hereupon  were  vexed  to  the  heart,  to  se^ 
hom  they  were  gulled  and  cheated  as  to  Munychia,  and  had  carelesly 
lost  the  Piraeus.  They  sent,  therefore,  some  of  the  greatest  persons 
of  quality,  and  such  as  were  Nicanor's  special  friends,  that  is  to  say, 
Phocion  the  sou  of  Phocus,  Conon  the  son  of  Timotheus,  and 
Clearchus  the  son  of  Nausicles,  as  agents  to  Nicanor,  to  debate  the 
late  transactions  they  had  with  him,  and  requiring  him  to  permit  them 
to  enjoy  their  laws  and  liberties,  according  to  the  late  edict  in  that 
behalf.  To  whom  he  answered  ..That  they  must  go  to  Cassander^ 
for  he  was  commissioned  by  him  to  be  governor  of  the  garrison,  and 
Ittd  no  power  to  treat  of  himself. 

About  this  time  came  a  letter  from  Olympias  to  Nicanor,  com- 
Bianding  him  to  deliver  Munychia  and  the  PirsBus  to  the  Atlienians. 
He,  understanding  that  the  kings  and  Polyperchon  bad  recalled 
Olympias  into  Macedonia,  and  committed  the  young  son  of  Alexan- 
der, to  her  care  and  tuition,  and  had  restored  her  to  her  former  royal 
state  and  dignity,  (the  same  that  she  enjoyed  when  Alexander  was 
Uviog),  merely  out  of  fear,  promised  to  deliver  them,  but  always 
eontrived  some  colourable  excuse  or  other,  and  so  protracted  the 
business.  The  Athenians  in  former  times  had  ever  a  great  esteem 
for  Olympias,  and  now  purposii^  (in  the  reality  of  their  aflections) 
to  celebrate  thosie  public  honours  which  were  decreed  to  her,  (and 
hoping  that  the  liberties  of  the  city  would  be  by  her  perfectly  re- 
stored to  them,  and  put  out  of  the  reach  of  ail  future  danger)  were 
very  jocund  and  exceedingly  pleased. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  promises  of  Nicanor  not  being  performed, 
Alexander,  the  son  of  Polyperchon,  came  with  an  army  into  Attica. 
The  Athenians  indeed  thought  that  he  came  to  restore  to  them 
Munychia  and  the  Pirffius  3  but  the  event  proved  the  contrary;  for  he 
seized  upon  both  for  the  service  of  the  war.  For  some  who  had  been 
Autipalcr's  fViends,  (and  among  them  Pllocion),  fearing  some  pu- 


310  DIODORUS  9ICULU9.  Booh  XFBl 

nisfafmenffrom  the  laws^  met  Alexfinder,  and^  adTising  bim  what  It 
ioj  persuaded  him  to  retain  the  forts  in  his  own  liands^  and  not  re- 
sture  them  to  the  Athenians  till  the  war  was  ended  with  ( 
Hereupon  Alexander  encamped  at  the  Pireas^  and  woaki  aoC  j 
the  Athenians  to  treat  with  Nicanor;  but^  by  his  separate  treatia 
with  him^  and  secret  and  private  transactions  of  affiurs  between  ibesi 
he  gave  manifest  indications  of  the  injary  designed  the  AtheaiBM; 
The  people  therefore  met  together  in  a  common  assembly^  nd  di^ 
posed  the  present  magistrates^  and  set  up  such  as  most  feyowed  At 
democracy,  and  condemned  those  that  favoured  the  oligarchy,  sana 
to  death,  and  others  to  banishment  and  confiscation  of  goods,  amoagN 
whom  Phocton  was  one,  who  had  the  chief  comBsand  in  the  tine  «f 
Antipater. 

These  being  all  forced  out  of  the  city,  fled  to  Alexander  the  aon 
of  Polyperchon,  and  endeavoured  to  engage  his  help  for  their  pre- 
servation. Alexander  kindly  received  them,  and  wrote  on  their  ke>- 
Iialf  to  his  father,  to  protect  Phocion  and  his  friends,  as  those  thai 
favoured  his  interest,  and  engaged  readily  to  afford  tlieir  assBtaoce 
in  all  hb  concerns:  the  Athenians  likewise  sent  an  embassy  toPcrif* 
perchon,  to  accuse  Piiocion,  and  to  solicit  for  tlie  restitution  of  M»- 
nychia,  and  the  restoring  them  to  their  antient  laws  and  libertiei; 
Polyperchon  indeed  had  a  very  great  desire  to  retain  the  Piraeus,  be- 
cause that  port  might  be  of  weighty  concern  and  importance  in  the 
carrying  on  of  the  war,  but  was  ashamed  to  act  contrary  to  the  edict 
divulged  by  himself;  and,  fearing  lest  the  Grecians  should  desert 
him  if  he  dealt  so  basely  with  that  city,  which  was  the  metropoKs, 
be  changed^  his  mind.  Having  therefore  heard  the  ai^bassadors,  he 
courteously  dismissed  those  from  the  Athenians  with  a  gracious  an- 
swer, but  seized  upon  Phocion  and  all  his  followers,  and  sent  them 
bound  to  Athens,  granting  power  to  the  people  either  to  pardon 
them,  or  put  them  to  death:  whereupon,  a  general  assembly  being 
called  in  Athens,  judgment  of  death  was  resolved  upon  Phocion  and 
the  rest  that  were  accused :  this  was  carried  on  by  thos^  who  had 
been  banished  under  Antipater,  and  others  tl)at  favoured  not  that  go* 
vcrnmcnt;  both  these  strongly  urged  to  have  them  put  to  death. 

The  sum  of  the  accusation  was  this.— .That  after  the  Lamian  war, 
they  endeavoured  for  the  most  part  to  enslave  their  country,  and  to 
abolish  the  democracy,  and  the  antient  lau^.  Time  being  allotted  ' 
to  the  accused  to  plead  their  cause,  Phocion  began  to  speak  for  him- 
self; but  the  people  tumultuously  cried  out  against  all  that  he  said, 
and  rejected  his  defence,  so  that  the  accused  knew  not  what  course 
to  take.  When  the  tumult  ceased,  Piiocion  began  agaiu  to  si)eak« 
whereupon  the  wliolc  muUitude  set  up  a  shout,  oD  purpose  lluit  what 


Chttp.V.  DIADORUS  SICULUS.  311 

be  said  sbould  not  be  heard:  for  the  commonalty  (having  been  re- 
cently excluded  from  any  share  in  the  administration  of  the  govern- 
ment^ and  now  lately  restored  to  theif  right  beyond  all  expectation) 
bore  an  inveterate  hatred  against  those  who  deprived  the  citizens 
of  their  bws  and  liberties. 

While  Phocion  was  thus  overborne,  and  even  in  a  dcsparate  con- 
dition, struggling  to  preserve  his  life,  those  that  were  next  to  him 
mderstood  the  justice  and  equity  of  his  cause^  but  those  at  a  distance 
could  hear  nothing  for  the  noise  and  clamour  that  was  made  by  the 
tunukuous  rabble,  but  only  discerned  the  various  trembling  mo- 
tions of  his  body,  occasioned  by  the  inevitable  danger  that  seemed  to 
dureaten  him.  At  length  Phocion,  in  despair  of  his  own  life,  cried 
cut  aloud,  desiring  the'm  to  condemn  him  to  die,  but  to  spare  the 
Test. 

But  the  common  people  being  fierce  and  inexorable,  some  of 
Fhocion's  friends  stood  up  to  make  his  defence.  Hereupon  the 
people  were  quiet  for  awhile,  and  heard  what  they  said  at  first;  but 
when  they  proceeded  to  urge  arguments  in  support  of  his  innocencCt 
they  were  rejected  with  tumultuous  and  contradicting  clamours:  at 
length  being  all  condemned  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  people, 
they  were  carried  away  to  the  gaol,  there  to  be  executed,  and  were 
ioUoved  by  many  honest  and  sober  men,  who  bewailed  their  condi- 
tion, and  the  greatness  of  their  misery :  for  upon  serious  consideration 
<tf  &e  inconstancy  of  every  man's  fortune,  it  terrified  many  to  see  that 
magistrates  and  persons  of  eminent  quality,  and  men  that  had  shewed 
many  acts  of  kindness  in  the  course  of  their  lives,  should  neither 
have  liberty  to  plead  for  themselves,  nor  otherwise  enjoy  the  benefit 
of  law.  But  many  of  the  rabble  being  incensed  against  Phocion  un- 
mercifully, even  rent  his  heart  in  pieces  with  scoi&  and  scorns,  and 
Utterly  upbraided  him  with  the  misery  of  his  present  condition.  For 
hatred  smothered  towards  men  while  in  prosperity,  when  it  breaks 
forth  with  anger  against  them  in  time  of  their  adversity,  becomes 
altogether  savage  and  implacable.  Being  therefore  all  put  to  death 
(according  to  the  custom  of  the  country)  by  drinking  a  potion  of  hem- 
lock, all  their  bodies  were  cast  forth  unburied,  out  of  the  bounds  and 
limits  of  Attica:  and  this  was  the  end  of  Phocion,  and  others  who 
sufiered  the  same  calamity  with  hiuu 

After  this,  Cassander  having  got  five*and-thirty  long  ships  and 
four  thousand  men,  sailed  into  the  Pirieus,  and  being  received  by 
Nicanor,  governor  of  the  fort,  possessed  himself  of  the  PiraBUS  and 
the  harbour:  but  Nlcanor  kept  Munychia  himself,  with  a  force  suf- 
ficient to  defend  the  place.  At  this  time  Polyperchon  and  the  kings 
Uy  in  Phocis;  where,  being  informed  of  Cassauder's  having  lauded 


312  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  JiPHK 

at  the  PirsBus^  Polyperchon  inarched  into  Attica,  and  eneaoiped  iic« 
the  Pir»us:  he  had  with  him  twenty  thousand  Macedonian  fiiot^aiid^ 
four  thousand  confederates^  a  thousand  horse,  and  sixty-fite  dc» 
pbants;  he  resolved  tlierefore  to  besiege  Cassander:  but  becane 
provisions  were  scarce,  and  the  siege  was  likely  to  be  long  and  tedious^ 
he  was  forced  to  leave  so  many  of  the  soldiers  in  Attica  as  the  oaoBtry 
was  able  to  sustain,  under  the  command  of  Alexander,  and  he  him* 
self  marched  into  Peloponnesus  with  the  greater  part  of  theamifytD 
reduce  the  Mcgalopolitans  to  tlie  obedience  of  the  kings;  for  they^ 
being  for  an  oligarchy,  sided  with  Cassander.  While  PolypcKboa 
was  busied  in  these  affairs,  Cassander  sailed  with  his  fleet  fe»  the 
^geans,  and  brought  them  in  to  join  with  him;  but  the  SalamiMM 
(who  were  disaffected)  he  closdy  besieged,  and  being  well  fiiroidiedr 
both  with  men  and  arms,  he  assaulted  them  several  days  together, 
and  reduced  them  to  very  great  extremities:  but  when  the  city. was. 
'  near  being  taken  by  storm,  Polyperchon  sent  a  consideraUe  force,^ 
both  by  sea  and  land,  to  attack  the  besiegers;  at  whose  approach 
Cassander  being  affrighted,  be  raised  the  siege,  and  sailed  back  to 
the  Eirttus.  Then  Polyperchon  passed  over  to  Peloponnetut,  to 
settle  matters  there  for  the  service  and  advantage  of  the  kings. 
Coming  there  he  called  a  senate,  and  spoke  to  them  concerning  their 
joining  with  him  as  confederates  in  the  war;  he  sent  likewise  ( 
missioners  to  the  cities  with  orders  to  put  to  death  them  that  ^ 
created  magistrates  in  the  oligarchy  by  Antipater,  and  to  restore  the 
people  to  their  antient  laws. 

Many  obeyed  the  order,  so  that  while  slaughters  and  baiuthiiieiila 
filled  the  cities,  they  that  favoured  Antipater's  party  were  mined  amd 
destroyed;  and  the  democratical  governments  being  restored  totfaenr 
antient  laws,  all  joined  with  Polyperchon.  The  Mcgalopolitans  only 
kept  firm  to  Cassander,  therefore  he  determined  to  besiege  their  cHy^ 
The  Mcgalopolitans  liearing  what  was  designed  by  PolyperdiOD» 
ordered  by  a  public  decree  that  every  thing  should  be  brought  into 
the  city  that  was  then  in  the  fields:  then  taking  an  account  of  their 
strength,  they  found  that  in  antient  citizens,  strangers,  and  servants^ 
they  were  in  number  fifteen  thousand  who  were  able  to  bear  arms; 
they  forthwith  therefore  formed  some  into  regiments,  others  they 
appointed  to  work  in  the  fortifications,  and  to  some  were  allotted  the 
care  and  charge  of  guarding  the  walls;  so  that  at  one  and  the  tame 
time  some  were  employed  in  drawing  a  deep  trench  round  the  city, 
some  carrying  earth  out  of  the  fields,  and  others  repairing  and  making 
up  the  breaches  in  the  walls;  others  hammering  of  arms,  and  othera 
were  busy  in  making  darts  and  artillery;  so  that  the  dangers  which 
threatened,  and  the  forwardness  of  the  inhabitants,  put  the  whole 


Chap.  Pi  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  313 

city  into  action :  for  tl^e  greatness  of  the;  king's  army,  and  the  wonder- 
ful strength  of  the  elepliants  that  attended  them,  was  noised  abroad 
in  every  place.  And  now  all  things  were  ready  and  prepared,  when 
Polyperchon  approached  with  his  army,  and  encamped  near  the  city, 
dividing  his  forces. into  two  camps,  one  of  Macedonians  and  another 
of  confederates;  and  then  brings  wooden  towers  to  the  walls,  of  that 
height  as  to  overtop  them ;  on  which  towers  men  were  placed  with 
all  sorts  of  weapon^,  and  with  these  he  drove  them  off  who  were  placed 
CD  the  ramparts. 

In  the  mean  time  the  walls  being  undermined,  and  the  props  and 
supporters  set  on  fire,  three  of  the  largest  towers  were  destroyed,  with 
the  ruin  of  the  like  number  of  turrets  placed  between  them*  This 
great  and  sudden  destruction  caused  the  Macedonians  to  set  up  a 
shout,  and  the  strangeness  of  the  thing  amazed  the  besieged :  and 
now  the  Macedonians  rush  through  the  breach  into  the  city,  and  the 
Megalopolitans,  before  in  parties,  now  all  together  (having  the  ad- 
vantage of  the  difficulty  of  the  place,  occasioned  by  the  rubbish)  made 
up  to  one  part,  and  bravely  bore  the  brunt  of  the  enemy's  attack,  and 
beat  them  off:  then  they  cast  up  another  work  of  earth  to  guard  the 
breach  I  and  working  night  and  day  without  intermission,  raised  ano- 
ther wall  between  them  and  the  enemy,  which  was  presently  com- 
pleted; for  being  furnished  with  everything  that  was  necessary,  and 
having  many  hands  at  work,  the  Megalopolitans  soon  repaired  the 
damage  sustai  ned.  As  for  those  that  assailed  thjsm  from  their  wooden 
towers,  they  annoyed  them  with  their  engines  of  artillery,  and  with 
darts  and  stones  out  of  bows  and  slings,  galled  and  wounded  many  of 
their  enemies.  After  many  were  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides, 
till  night  approaching,  Polyperchon  sounded  a  retreat,  and  drew  off 
his  men  into  the  camp. 

The  next  day  he  removed  the  rubbish  before  the  breach,  to  make  way 
for  the  elephants,  for  he  thought  by  the  strength  of  these  creatures  to 
break  through  into  the  city:  but  the  Megalopolitans,  by  the  help  and 
conduct  of  Damidcs,  (who  in  the  wars  under  Alexander  had  learnt  by 
experience  the  nature  and  use  of  the  elephants),  altogether  baffled  the 
enemy:  for  he,  makiqg  use  of  his  own  reason  and  industry  against 
the  strength  and  violence  of  the  beasts,  made  their  strong  bodies  use- 
less. For  in  a  great  number  of  planks  he  drove  sharp  spikes,  and 
then  strewed  them  here  and  there  in  deep  trenches  covered  with 
earth,  so  as  that  the  points  of  the  spikes  might  not  be  seen,  and  thus 
over  these  he  left  tlie  passage  into  the  city :  but  he  suffered  none  of 
the  soldiers  to  stand  in  front,  but  placed  a  great  number  of  darters 
and  archers,  and  engines  of  artillery  in  the  flank, 

Polyperchon  therefore  having  cleared  ihe  place,  and  now  approach* 
Vol.  1.  No.  -W,  s& 


314  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBook  XFIIL 

iDg  with  the  throog  of  iiis  elephants,  an  unexpected  misfortune  befel 
them :  for  none  appearing  in  front  to  oppose  them,  the  Indians  pressed 
them  forward  to  make  their  way  into  the  city,  who,  by  the  great 
weight  of  their  bodies  pressed  down  upon  the  spikes,  so  that  their 
feet  being  wounded,  and  even  pierced  through,  they  were  so  foundered 
that  they  were  neither  able  to  go  forward  nor  return  back :  and  besides, 
showers  of  all  sorts  of  darts  and  arrows  being  poured  upon  them  by 
the  flankers,  some  of  the  Indians  were  killed,  and  others  so  woonded 
that  they  were  disabled  from  further  service. 

In*  the  mean  time  the  elephants  (through  the  multitude  of  darts, 
and  the  strange  and  unusual  wounds  by  the  spikes)  were  so  cruelly 
tormented  that  they  forced  back  upon  their  own  men,  and  trod  many 
under  foot.  At  length  the  sMongest  and  most  formidable  aaumgst 
them  fell  down,  others  became  altogether  unserviceable,  and  some 
killed  many  of  ihcir  own  men. 

Upon  this  success  the  Megalopolitans  were  much  encouraged;  but 
Polyperchon  wished  he  had  never  undertaken  the  siege;  and  as  he 
could  stay  no  longer  there,  he  left  part  of  his  army  to  carry  it  on,  and  . 
betook  himself  to  more  urgent  affairs.  Then  he  sent  off  Clitus  the 
admiral,  with  the  fleet,  commanding  him  to  lie  upon  the  coasts  of 
the  Hellespont,  to  stop  the  passage  of  the  forces  put  of  Asia  into 
Europe,  and  to  join  with  Aridasus,  who  had  fled  to  the  city  of  the 
Ganians,  being  an  enemy  to  Antigonus.  After  he  had  passed  over 
the  Hel1esi)ont,  and  taken  in  the  cities  of  the  Propontis,  he  atreogtb- 
ened  his  army  with  the  forces  of  Aridaeus.  Nicanor,  the  governor 
of  Munychia,  on  the  other  side,  being  sent  off  with  the  whole  fleet 
by  Cassander,  sailed  to  those  parts  where  Clitus  lay:  he  joined  like* 
wise  with  the  navy  of  Antigonus,  so  that  he  had  a  fleet  of  above  t 
hundred  sail. 

Hereupon  there  was  a  fight  at  sea  near  Byzantium*,  in  which  Cli- 
tus was  conqueror,  and  sunk  seventeen  of  the  enemy's  ships,  aod.^ 
took  no  less  than  forty,  together  with  all  their  men.  The  rest  got 
into  the  haven  of  Chalccdon.  Clitus  being  thus  successful,  imagined, 
that  on  account  of  this  great  loss,  the  enemy  durst  not  again  engage 
at  sea. 

But  Antigonus  having  intelligence  of  this  defeat  of  the  fleet,  by  his 
industry  and  admirable  conduct,  quickly  repaired  it:  for  having  sent 
for  several  t^*ansport  ships  in  the  night,  from  the  Byzantines,  in  which 
he  put  darters,  slingers,  and  other  light-armed  men,  sufficient  for  the 
])resent  design,  and  in  the  night  transported  them  to  the  other  side; 
who,  attacking  the  enemy  at  land  before  day,  (who  had  left  their 
bhi|)s,  uiiJ  were  there  encamped),  put  Clitus  and  his  men  into  great 

•  Now  Cuu»tiuitiDopIc. 


p.  F.  DIODQRUS  SICULUS.  315 

lir  And  confusioo^  who  in  that  sudden  fear  and  amazement  leaped 
their  vessels,  so  that  through  the  incumbrance  of  their  luggage, 
the  multitude  of  their  prisoners^  there  was  a  great  tumult  an(^ 
irder. 

n  the  mean  time  Antigonus  had  fitted  out  some  long  ships,  and 
med  them  with  many  of  his  stoutest  foot  soldiers,  and  bid  them 
Uy  attack  the  enemy,  for  they  were  sure  to  be  conquerors.     Here- 

0  they  came  up  with  Nicanor  in  the  night,  and  about  break  of 
fell,  suddenly  upon  the  enemy,  still  in  confusion,  and  at  the  very 
;  charge  put  them  to  flight;  some  of  the  enemy's  ships  they  broke 
pieces  with  the  beaks  of  their  own,  and  brushed  o£F  the  oars  of 
srs;  some  they  gained  without  fighting,  being  delivered  up  by 
men  on  board.  At  length  all  the  rest  (except  the  admiral's 
i)  fell  into  their  hands.  Clitus  forsook  his  ship,  and  got  ashore, 
igoing  to  have  preserved  himself  by  getting  into  Macedonia; 

in  his  way  falling  amongst  some  of  Lysimachus's  soldiers,  he 

1  slain, 

Intigonus's  reputation  for  skill  and  prudence  in  the  management 
nartial  aflTairs,  was  much  advanced  by  this  remarkable  victory, 
reupon  he  was  very  earnest  and  intent  to  b^  master  at  sea,  and 
thout  the  least  doubt  of  the  matter)  to  gain  the  sovereignty  of 
a.    To  this  end  he  chose  out  of  his  whole  army,  twenty  thousand 
t,  and  four  thousand  horse,  of  the  most  active  men,  and  marched 
raids  Cilicia,  to  destroy  Eumenes  before  he  grew  too  strong.    But 
BQenes  knowing  the  hot  temper  of  Antigonus,  marched  into  Phoe- 
n,  to  regain  it  for  the  kings,  then  unjustly  detained  from  them  by 
demy :  but  not  having  an  opportunity  to  do  what  he  designed,  he 
i  Phoenicia,  and  marched  with  his  army  through  Ccelosyria,  to 
:  into  the  higher  provinces.    Afterwards  he  lost  some  of  his  men 
the  river  Tigris,  by  an  attack  upon  him  in  the  night,  by  some  of 
\  inhabitants.    In  the  like  manner  he  was  fallen  upon  in  the  pro- 
ice  of  Babylon,  by  Seleucus,  near  the  river  Euphrates,  and  was  in 
lat  danger  to  have  lost  all  his  army;  where  by  the  br^ch  of  a  dike 
.  whole  camp  was  very  near  being  overflowed  and  drowned.    But 
ting  his  wits  at  work  he  fled  to  a  high  bank  of  earth,  and  diverting 
5  water  another  way,  preserved  both  himself  and  his  army. 
And  so  beyond  his  expectation  he  escaped  Seleucus,  and  got  into 
rsia  with  fifteen  thousand  foot,  and  thirteen  hundred*  horse.     Ha- 
\g  refreshed  his  soldiers  after  all  their  toils  and  labours,  he  sent  to 
;  governors  and  captains  of  the  higher  provinces  to  furnish  him 
th  more  men  and  money.     Arid  in  this  state  were  the  affairs  of  Asia 
is  year, 

*  Thre«  thousand  in  tbe  oiArgiTu 


3l6  DioooRUS  sicuLUS.  Book  XFIIL 

But  as  for  Europe,  after  the  losses  and  misfortunes  of  PolTperchon 
at  Megalopolis,  many  of  the  Greek  cities  revolted  from  the  kings  to 
^assander.  And  because  the  Athenians  could  not  get  rid  of  the  gar- 
rison either  by  the  help  of  Polyperchon  or  Olympias^  one  of  the  most 
eminent  citizens  made  bold  to  say,  in  the  public  assembly .^That  it 
was  for  the  interest  of  the  city  to  close  with  Cassander.  At  first  there 
was  a  great  hurly-burly,  some  being  for  and  others  against  what  was 
said :  but  the  advantages  being  more  calmly  debated  and  considered, 
by  common  consent  it  was  at  length  agreed — That  peace  should  be 
made  with  Cassander,  upon  such  conditions  as  could  be  obtained  by 
their  ambasTsadors.  In  pursuance  whereof  (after  some  meedngs) 
these  were  the  terms  agreed  upon — ^That  the  Athenians  should 
quietly  enjoy  the  city,  the  territory,  and  all  the  profits,  together  wiih 
the  shipping  and  all  other  things,  and  should  for  the  future  be  friends 
and  confederates  with  Cassander;  but  that  Cassander  should  for  tbe 
present  hold  Munychia  till  the  war  was  ended  with  the  kings:  and 
that  the  commonwealth  should  pay  a  tribute  of  ten  minas;  and  that 
an  Athenian  should  be  constituted  protector  and  guardian  of  the  ci^, 
whoever  Cassander  pleased.  Whereupon  Demetrius  the  Phalerian 
was  chosen;  who  being  invested  with  tlie  office, kept  the  city  inpefw 
feet  peace,  and  behaved  very  obligingly  towards  all  the  citizens. 

After  this  Nicanor  brought  his  fleet  into  the  Ptrseus,  adorned  with 
the  beaks  of  ships  gained  in  the  late  victory;  on  account  of  whidi 
success  he  was  at  first  highly  honoured  by  Cassander,  but  afterwarb 
perceiving  that  he  grew  proud  and  haughty,  and  still  detained  Ae 
fort  of  Munychia  with  his  own  soldiers,  he  suspected  he  intended  to 
revolt,  and  therefore  laid  a  trap  for  him,  and  cut  him  off*  Then  hto 
marched  into  Macedonia,  where  many  of  the  inhabitants  revolted  to 
him:  many  likewise  of  the  Greek  cities  were  inclined  to  join  with 
Cassander*.  For  Polyperchon  appeared  to  be  slothful  and  careless 
in  managing  the  affairs  both  of  the  kingdom  and  the  allies.  Cis^ 
sander,  on  the  other  hand,  behaved  with  great  candour  towiards  allj 
and  approved  himself  industrious  in  the  management  of  publjc  affiiin^ 
so  that  he  gained  many  who  countenanced  him  in  his  seeking  to  obtain 
the  supreme  authority. 

But  as  Agathocles  became  tyrant  of  Syracuse  the  following  year^ 
we  shall,  as  we  designed  at  the  beginning,  put  an  end  to  this  bookj 
and  begin  the  next  with  the  advance  of  Agathocles  to  the  throne,  and 
go  on  with  tbe  affairs  proper  and  pertinent  to  our  history. 
*  Antiptter  in  the  Greeks  bat  erroncoai. 


v\ 


317 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BbOK  XIX. 


PREFACE. 

IT  is  an  old  sayings  (brought  down  to  us  by  tradition) — Tliat  none 
evcrtum  dcnaocracies,  but  men  that  overtop  others  in  power  and  in*  ' 
terest«  For  which  reason  some  cities  are  always  jealous  of  such  of 
their  fellow-citizens  as  grow  great  and  powerful^  and  therefocc  do 
what  they  can  to  depress  them :  for  when  men  are  in  power^  the  oesX 
«tep  Is  to  domineer  over  their  country;  and  with  those  tliat  (through 
Ae  greatness  of  their  interest  above  others)  have  grounds  to  expect 
the  sovereign  authority^  it  is  very  difficult  to  be  free  from  a  desire 
of  monarchy :  for  it  is  very  natural  for  those  that  are  ambitious^ 
«^en  they  liave  much^  to  thirst  after  more^  and  never  set  bounds  tp 
their  insatiable  ambition. 

The  Athenians  therefore^  upon  this  very  account,  made  a  law, 
wbibh  they  called  Ostracism^  for  the  banishing  such  as  grew  grea$ 
amongst  them;  not  so  much  to  punish  them  for  any  fault  they  had 
committed,  but  to  prevent  the  mischief  and  prejudice  to  their  coun- 
try, which,  by  their  power  and  interest,  they  were  in  a  capacity  to 
bring  upon  it:  for  they  remembered  (as  it  were  an  oracle)  what 
Solon  had  formerly  said,  who,  foretelling  the  tyranny  of  Pisistratus, 
composed  this  elegiac -i.. 

A  city  by  great  persons  is  o'erlhrown. 
And  fools  beneath  a  monarchy  do  groan. 

Of  all  other  places,  Sicily  was  most  infected  with  this  desire  of 
monarchy, before  the  Romans  reduced  it  into  the  form  of  a  province: 
for  the  cities,  deceived  by  the  flattery  of  the  orators,  advanced  incon- 
siderable men  to  that  height,  that  tliey  became  absolute  lords  over 
the  deluded  multitude. 


818  DiODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  XIX. 

But  the  advancement  of  Agathocles  to  be  prince  of  Syracuse  ii^ 
above  all  others^  the  most  singular  and  remarkable:  for  he  began  at 
first  in  very  mean  and  unlikely  circumstances^  but  at  last  he  involved 
not  only  Syracuse^  but  all  Sicily,  and  Libya  itself^  in  blood  and 
slaughter.  He  was  so  mean  and  low  in  the  world,  in  his  origin^  that 
he  followed  the  trade  of  a  potter;  from  whence  he  rose  to  that  height 
of  power  and  cruelty,  that  he  lorded  over  the  greatest  and  richest 
island  in  the  world,  and  for  some  time  gained  the  greatest  part  of 
Africa,  and  some  parts  of  Italy,  and  filled  the  cities  of  Sicily  with  . 
butcheries  and  oppressions.  None  of  the  tyrants  that  ever  were  be- 
fore him  committed  the  like  villanies,  or  exercised  such  barbaroui 
cruelties  upon  their  subjects :  for,  as  for  his  own  kindred,  he  put  them 
all  to  death,  root  and  branch;  and  he  so  plagued  the  cities,  that  he 
sometimes  butchered  all  that  were  at  men  and  women's  estate,  and 
would  cut  the  throats  of  multitudes  of  poor  innocents  for  the  faults 
of  a  few,  without  any  difference  or  distinction,  and  then  presently 
would  murder  whole  cities,  men,  women,  and  children. 

But  because  this  book,  with  others  that  follow,  comprehend  the 
'  tyranny  of  Agathocles,  omitting  any  further  preface  relating  there* 
unto,  we  shall  now  connect  things  coherent  with  those  that  were  be- 
fore related,  first  allotting  to  every  thing  we  treat  of  its  ^ut  and  pro- 
per time. 

In  the  preceding  eighteen  books,  wc  have  endeavoured  to  set  fbrtl^ 
whatever  was  done  in  the  known  parts  of  the  world,  from  the  hegjom 
ning  of  time,  to  the  year  next  l>efore  the  reign  of  Agathocletj  to 
which  time,  from  the  taking  of  Troy,  are  computed  eight  hundred 
and  sixty-six  years. 

In  this  book,  beginning  with  the  first  of  his  reign,  we  shall  end 
with  the  battle  fought  by  Agathocles  with  the  CarthaginianSj  con* 
taining  an  account  of  affairs  for  the  space  of  seven  years. 


CSlqi. /.  DIO:      RU8  8ICULI 


CHAP.  I. 

/igaikocles^i  parentage  and  educaiian:  Mm  rhk:  hU  straiagemsTx 

hi$  bloody  maseacre  ai  Syr  acme.     He  gains  the  sovereign 

'  power.     The  e^faire  of  Italy.     Ofynqriae  returns  into  3faee* 

-  donia  by  Polyperchon^s  means.    ThearmksrevoUtoher:   Her 

-  entelties.  She  murders  Eurydice^  and  Aridmus^  her  huAand. 
jffbirs  in  Asia.  Kumenes  and  Seleueus^  Eitsnenes  joined  by 
many  of  the  captains.     The  number  of  their  forces.     He 

'  tomes  to  Susa.    Attains  and  others  imprisoned  by  Aniigonus 
in  a  strong  castle;  seeking  to  escegpe,  are  afterwards  besieged, 
taken. 


AT  the  time  when  Demogenes  niled  as  chief  magistrtte  at  Athens, 
and  when  Lucius  Plotius  and  Manius  Fulbtns  were  Roman  consols, 
Agatbocles  became  tyrant  of  Syracuse.  That  things  as  they  were 
aeverally  done  may  be  more  <^learly  and  distinctly  understood^  we 
afadl  premise  a  few  things  concerning  thb  prince. 

Ccninus  of  Hhegium,  being  banished  from  hi»  country^  dwelt  at 
Tliermae  in  Sicily^  which  city  was  then  in  the  hands  of  the  Cartha- 
ginians. This  man  married  a  woman  of  that  place,  whoj  when  she 
was  big  with  child,  used  often  to  be  troubled  with  strange  dreams:^ 
being  therefore  much  perplexed  in  his^mind  concerning  this  embrie^ 
he  intrusted  this  afiair  with  some  de\'out  Carttmginians,  who  were 
then  going  to  Delphos,  and  desired  them  to  inquire  of  the  oracle 
concerning  this  child;  ^  wlio  faithfully  performing  what  they  were  en- 

joinedj  the  oracle  gave  this  answer That  that  chikt  would  brin^; 

dreadful  calamities  upon  the  Carthaginians  and  all  Sicily.  The 
fiither,  being  terrified  at  this  predictioni  exposed  the  child  in  the 
open  fields,  and  left  it  with  some  to  watch  and  observe  its  end. 
After  several  days^  it  still  continued  alive,  and  the  guard  left  with  it 
growing  remiss  and  careless,  the  mother  in  the  mean  time  stole 
tiie  child  away  in  the  night,  but  durst  not  bring  it  back  to  her  own 
house,  for  fear  of  her  husband;  but  she  intrusted  it  with  her  bro- 
ther Heraclides,  and  called  it  Agathocles,  after  the  name  of  her 
own  father. 

Where  being  brought  up,  he  grew  very  beautiful,  and  of  stren^h 
of  body  above  what  w^s  usual  at  his  age.  When  he  came  to  be  se- 
ven years  old,  Carsinus  was  invited  by  Heraclides  to  sacrifice^^  and 

*  To  a  fcust  at  a  sacrifice. 


320  DIODORU9  SICULVS.  Book  XIX. 

there  seeing  Agathocle?  playing  with  some  other  children  aboat  the ' 
same  age^  he  greatly  admired  both  his  strength  and  beauty;  and 
ivhen  his  wife  told  him — ^That  the  child  which  he  so  exposed,  if  be 
had  been  brought  up,  would  have  proved  as  manly  a  chiM  as  that  be 
then  saw,  he  answered,  that  he  was  sorry  for  what  be  had  done,  and 
then  fell  a- weeping:  whereupon  the  woman,  perceiving  that  what  she 
bad  done  would  be  very  pleasing  to  her  husband,  discovered  to  him 
the  truth  of  the  whole  matter;  whereat  he  was  mightily  pleased^aod 
took  away  his  son,  and,  out  of  fear  of  the  Carthaginians,  renoved 
with  all  his  family  to  Syracuse :  but,  being  but  a  poor  man,  he  taught 
bis  son,  then  a  child,  the  potter's  trade :  at  which  time  TimoIeoB  the 
Corinthian,  having  routed  the  Carthaginians  at  the  river  Cremissss, 
made  all  free  of  the  city  that  would  come  in  to  him,  amongst  whooi 
Carsinus  (with  Agathocles)  were  enrolled  as  citizens;  and  Caniaiis 
died  a  little  time  after* 

The  mother  of  Agathocles  had  in  a  certain  place  set  up  ber  aon'ii 
statue  in  stone,  upon  which  a  swarm  of  bees  fastened,  and  began  to 
make  their  wax- combs  upon  the  hips  of  the  statue:  wbicb  remark- 
able circumstance  being  related  to  those  who  apply  themselves  to 

studies  of  that  kind,  all  unanimously  agreed ^That  when  he  came 

to  be  a  man, he  would  be  famous;  which  happened  accordingly:  for 
I>emas,a  nobleman  of  Syracuse,  falling  in  love  with  Agathocles,  first 
supplied  him  liberally  with  every  thing  he  had  occasion  for,  so  that 
he  began  in  some  measure  to  taste  of  plenty;  afterwards  Denias> be- 
ing created  general  of  the  Agrigentines,  advanced  him  to  be  a  cdo-^ 
nel,  in  the  room  of  one  that  was  then  lately  dead.  He  was  indeed 
very  remarkable  and  of  great  esteem  before  he  was  an  officer,  vpmi 
account  of  the  strength  of  his  body;  for  in  the  time  of  training  and 
military  exercise,  he  bore  so  great  a  weight  of  armour,  and  carried 
such  mighty  weapons,  as  no  other  man  was  able  to  bear.  But  now» 
since  he  was  made  a  military  tribune,  his  fame  spread  abroad  much 
more  than  it  did  before;  for  he  was  eager  to  fight,  daring  in  action, 
and  bold,  nay,  impudent  in  his  harangues  to  the  people.  Deaas 
afterwards  fell  sick,  and  died;  and,  having  left  all  his  estate  to  his 
wife,  Agathocles  married  her,  and  so  was  esteemed  one  of  the  richest 
of  the  citizens. 

Afterwards,  the  Crotonians  being  besieged  by  the  Brutii,  the  Sy« 
racusans  sent  a  great  army  to  their  relief,  under  the  command  of 
Antander,  the  brother  of  Agathocles,  and  others;  but  the  sovereign 
command  and  chief  management  of  the  afiiiir  was  committed  to 
Ilcraclidcs  and  Sosistratus,  men  who  employed  themselves  all  their 
lives  long  In  assassinations,  murders,  and  all  kinds  of  wickedness 


Chap.  L  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  391 

and  debauchery;  which  the  book^  next  preceding  this  hath  particu- 
larly set  forth*  With  those  in  this  expedition  (by  a  decree  of  the 
people)  was  jbined  AgathocleSi  who  was  then  a  colonel;  and^  though 
he  had  remarkably  approved  his  valour  against  the  barbarians,  yet  he 
was  so  envied  by  Sosistratus,  that  he  altogether  disregarded  him, 
not  allowing  him  the  honour  due  to  his  demerits :  at  which  he  was 
so  exasperated,  that  he  accused  Sosistratus  and  his  followers  to  the 
people,  as  having  designs  to  advance  himself  to  the  monarchy.  But 
the  Syracusans  giving  no  regard  to  those  accusations,  Sosistratus, 
.  after  his  return  from  Crotona,  became  supreme  and  absolute  lord  of 
his  country. 

Agathocles  being  incensed  against  him,  first  (with  those  that  sided 
with  him)  remained  in  Italy,  and  endeavoured  to  possess  himself  of 
Ciotona;  but,  failing  in  his  design,  with  some  few  along  with  him, 
he  escaped  to  Tarentum,  where  he  was  entertained,  and  taken  into 
pay;  but,  committing  many  rash  and  inconsiderate  acts,  he  began  to 
be  suspected  of  some  intended  inuovation,  and  thereupon  his  com« 
mission  was  taken  from  him;  upon  which  he  got  together  the  exiles 
of  Italy,  and  relieved  them  of  Rliegium,  who  were  then  besieged  by 
Heraclides  and  Sosistratus.  Afterwards,  when  the  monarchy  was 
abrogated  at  Syracuse,  and  Sosistratus  was  expelled  out  of  the  city, 
he  returned  into  his  country.  And  in  regard  at  that  time  many  of 
the  nobility  who  were  for  an  oligi^chy  (to  the  number  of  six  hundred 
of  the  greatest  persons  of  quality)  were,  together  with  the  magis- 
trates, thrust  out  of  the  city,  a  war  broke  out  between,  the  exiles  and 
those  that  were  for  a  democracy,  and  the  Carthaginians  sided  with 
Sosistratus  and  his  exiles :  hereupon  there  were  daily  skirmishes  and 
drawing  up  of  armies  one  against  another,  in  which  Agathocles,  acting 
sometimes  as  a  private  soldier,  and  at  others  as  a  commander,  gained 
the  reputation  both  of  valour  and  policy;  for  always  upon  every  op* 
portunity  he  invented  some  stratagem  or  other  which  proved  advan- 
tageous to  his  party;  amongst  which  there  was  one  thing  especially 
to  be  remembered. 

The  Syracusans  had  encamped  near  to  Gela,  and  at  that  time  in 
the  night  he  broke  into  the  city  with  a  thousand  armed  men,  who 
were  presently  met  by  Sosistratus,  with  a  strong  and  well-ordered 
party,  who  forced  them  that  had  entered  back,  and  killed  three  hun- 
dred of  them :  the  rest,  looking  upon  themselves  all  as  lost,  endea- 
voured to  get  out  at  a  sally-port,  aiid  were,  beyond  ail  hope  and  ex- 
pectation, freed  from  their  present  imminent  danger  by  Agathocles: 

*  Nothing  ii  stid  of  them  iu  the  precediiig  book^  therefore  there  must  be  tome  mit- 
tmkc  or  oaiiiiion.  Rhodomtonus  thinks  liiere  was  either  another  book  betw.eoa  tbtso,  tr 
a  want  of  what  was  to  hare  beoa  iaierted  In  the  precoding  book,— See  hu  notei. 

Vol.  2.  No.  44.  it 


322  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  Book  XIX. 

for  he  fought  with  great  Talour  and  resolutton  at  the  head  of  his 
men,  and  received  seven  wounds;  and>  when  he  was  even  nsady  to 
fiftint^  (through  loss  of  blood)  and  the  enemy  bearing  down  upon 
him,  he  commanded  the  trumpeters  to  sound  a  charge  at  both  parts 
of  the  walls;  which  being  presently  done,  those  who  came  to  force 
out  those  that  had  entered,  could  not  discern  the  truth  of  the  thing, 
because  of  the  darkness  of  the  night;  and  therefore^  belteidng  that 
another  party  of  the  Syracusans  had  broken  in  at  both  places,  they 
made  a  haft,  and  pursued  no  farther:  and  so,  being  dinded  into  t|ro 
parts,  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpets,  they  forthwith  ran  together  to 
defend  thcr  walls.  In  the  mean  time  Agathocles,  with  his  soldiers^ 
having  thus  made  room  for  themselves,  got  safe  to  the  trenches;  and 
thus,  having  deluded  the  enemy,  he  not  only  wonderfully  preserved 
his  own  men  that  first  entered^  but  seven  hundred  more  who  came  in 
to  his  assistance. 

After  this,  Acestorides  the  Corinthian  being  created  general  at 
Syracuse^  Agathocles  was  thought  to  aspire  tb  the  monarchy  for  his 
good  service;  but  he  avoided  t)ie  danger  that  hung  over  his  head 
upon  that  account:  for  Acestorides  (not  willing  to  cut  him  ofl^  for 
fear  of  a  tumult)  commanded  him  to  depart  the  city^  and  ordered 
some  to  kill  him  in  the  night  as  he  was  making  away.  But  Agatho- 
cles, conceiving  what  the  general  was  plotting  against  hinftj  jiAed 
out  one  of  the  young  men  that  was  very  like  himself^  both  in  stature 
and  feature,  and  delivered  to  him  his  horse,  arms^  and  garmentSi 
and  by  this  means  subtilely  deceived  those  who  were  sent  out  to  be 
his  murderers)  but  he  himself  slinked  away  in  bye  paths^  in  a  poor 
ragged  coat;  and  his  pursuers,  by  the  arms  and  other  signs^  conjee- 
taring  that  the  other  was  Agathocles,  (the  darkness  of  the  aigfat  not 
permitting  a  perfect  discovery),  perpetrated  indeed  the  murder^  hut 
missed  the  person. 

Afterwards,  the  Syracusans  having  rc-admitted  the  exiles  that  were 
driven  out  of  the  city  with  Sosistratus,  and  having  made  peace  with 
the  Carthaginians,  Agathocles  himself,  now  an  exile,  raised  an  iinny 
of  his  own  in  the  heart  of  the  country,  at  which  not  only  the  citi- 
zens, but  the  Carthaginians  were  much  aSnghted^  and  therefoie 
he  was  courted  to  return  into  his  own  country;  and  when  he  came, 
being  conducted  into  the  temple  of  Ceres  by  the  citizens,  be  there 
swore  tiuit  he  would  do  nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  the  democracy. 

I^utting  on  therefore  a  cloak  of  dissimulatioui  as  if  he  would  pro- 
tect the  democracy,  and  having  deceived  the  people  by  divers  tricks 
and  devices,  he  was  made  general  and  conservator  of  the  peace,  till 
all  matters  siiould  be  appeased  amongst  the  exiles  that  were  retnraed 
to  the  city :  for  every  company  and  fraternity  were  divided  into  aany 


Chap^  I.  BIODORUS  8ICULUS.  3SS 

factions,  and  very  great  heart-burnings  there  were  between  private 
and  particular  persons:  but  the  senate  of  six  hundred,  that  was  ap- 
pointed to  govern  the  city  after  an  oligarchy,  was  most  fierce  against 
Agathocles's  party;  for  the  members  of  this  assembly  were  such  as 
ware  the  richest  and  of  the  best  quality  among  the  Syracusans. 

However,  Agathocles,  who  now  affected  the  sovereignty,  gained 
many  opportunities  for  the  accomplishing  of  his  designs :  for  he  had 
not  only  the  command  of  an  army  as  generalj  but  news  being  brought 
that  there  was  an  insurrection  in  the  interior  of  the  country  at  Erbita, 
he  gained  a  further  opportunity  to  increase  his  army,  And  raise  wliat 
men  he  pleased  without  suspicion.  Under  colour,  therefore,  of  his 
expedition  to  Erbita,  he  raised  men  out  of  Morgantium  and  <rtber 
cities  in  the  heart  of  the  country,  together  with  those  that  had  for- 
merly served  him  in  the  wars  against  the  Carthaginians;  for  all  these 
had  a  great  respect  for  Agathocles,  upon  the  account  of  the  many 
instances  of  his  kindness  towards  them,  throughout  the  whole  war. 
On  the  other  hand  they  hated  the  six  hundred,  who  had  been  a  part 
of  the  oligarchy  in  Syracuse,  and  no  less  abhorred  the  people  who 
forced  them  into  obedience.  Tliere  were  three  thousand  of  them 
that  were  thus  ready  with  heart  and  hand  to  overturn  the  democracy: 
To  these  he  joined  some  of  the  citizens,  who  by  reason  of  their  po- 
verty envied  the  power  and  pomp  of  the  great  ones. 

When  every  thing  was  ready,  he  ordered  the  soldiers  to  meet  him 
at  spring  of  day,  in  a  body,  atTimoleontium^;  and  he  himself  in  the 
mean  time  sent  for  Pisarchus  and  Decles,  who  seemed  to  be  the  most 
leading  men  among  the  six  hundred,  pretending  to  discourse  with 
them  concerning  the  public  good:  when  they  came  to  him,  accom- 
panied with  forty  of  their  friends,  he  pretended  he  was  to  be  betrayed 
by  them,  and  thereupon  seized  them  all,  and  accused  them  to  the 
soldiers,  declaring,  that  for  his  love  to  the  people,  he  was  likely  to  be 
hurried  away  to  destruction  by  the  six  hundred,  and  sadly  bewailed 
bis  miserable  state  and  condition ;  at  which  all  the  soldiers  were  so 
enraged  that  jthcy  cried  out,  that  revenge  should  be  presently  taken, 
without  any  further  delay,  upon  the  authors  of  such  injustice:  upon 
which  he  commanded  the  trumpets  to  sound  a  charge,  and  ordered 
his  soldiers  to  kill  those  that  were  the  ring-leaders  of  the  mischief, 
and  spoil  and  plunder  the  six  hundred,  and  all  those  that  sided  with 
them,  of  all  their  goods  and  estates. 

Hereupon  all  being  now  eagerly  set  upon  ravage  and  spoil,  the 
whole  city  was  filled  with  horror  and  confusion;  for  the  most  inno- 
cent of  the  citizens,  not  dreaming  of  -any  massacre  designed  against 
them,  ran  out  of  their  houses  into  the  streets,  to  learn  the  cause  of 

•  Xrar  SvrKCusr, 


3€4  DIODORU9  SICULUa.  Book  XIX 

sssBsasssssaasssssssssssasasssssssssssssetesssBBmmmmmBSSsaaa^^ 
the  uproar;  whereupon  the  soldiers^  partly  through  their  covetous- 
ness  to  enrich  thtmselves,  and  partly  through  madness  and  ngCt  fell 
upon  the  naked  people  (hat  (through  ignorance)  had  no  arou  to  de- 
fend themselves,  and  put  them  all  to  the  sword.  For  the  soldiers 
having  secured  all  the  narrow  lanes  and  passes  in  the  city,  the  citizens 
were  inhumanly  murdered^  some  w  their  houses^  and  others  in  the 
streets^  and  many  (altogether  innocent,  not  accused  of  tlie  least  fiault) 
weire  knocked  on  the  head  wliile  they  were  asking  the  reason  why 
they  were  to  be  killed.  For  the  common  soldiers  (having  now  all  ia 
their  hands)  made  no  difference  betwixt  friend  and  foe  j  but  be  was 
sure  to  be  reputed  an  enemy  where  most  was  to  be  gotten  by  his 
fall;  so  tliat  then  the  city  was  filled  with  violence,  murders,  alangh* 
ters,  and  all  kinds  of  wickedness:  for  some,  out  of  former  grudges 
spared  not  to  load  those  they  before  hated  with  all  sorts  of  disgrace^ 
having  now  full  sway  to  do  whatever  they  pleased;  others  judging  k 
an  act  of  prudence  to  enrich  themselves  by  the  massacre  of  them  that 
were  rich,  spared  no  means,  nor  omitted  any  contrivance  to  dcatraj 
them.  For  some  broke  down  the  gates  of  the  out-courts;  otheis,  hj 
ladders  ascended  the  house  tops;  and  some  fought  with  them  that 
defended  themselves  from  the  roofs  of  the  houses.  Nay,  there  was 
no  safety  even  to  them  who  fled  to  the  temples  under  the  shelter  of 
the  gods;  but  piety  towards  the  gods  was  crushed  and  borne  dowo 
by  the  cruelty  of  men :  and  these  things  Greeks  against  Greeks,  in 
their  own  country,  and  kindred  against  kindred  in  a  time  of  peace, 
without  any  regard  either  to  the  laws  of  nature,  or  leagues,  or  reve- 
rence to  the  gods,  dared  thus  audaciously  to  commit:  upon  which  ' 
account  not  only  friends,  but  even  enemies  themselves,  and  everf 
sober  man,  could  not  but  pity  the  miserable  condition  of  these  dis- 
tressed people.  All  the  gates  were  shut  up,  and  above  foor  thousaod 
were  killed  in  one  day,  for  no  other  fault  but  that  they  were  in 
greater  esteem  than  others:  of  those  that  endeavoured  to  fly,  sone 
in  running  to  get  out  of  the  gates  were  laid  hold  on,  others  who  cast 
themselves  over  the  walls,  escaped  to  the  next  towns.  Some,  tfarDogh 
fear  and  inconsiderateness  leaped  off  the  walls,  and  broke  their 
necks.  After  all  there  were  thrust  out  of  the  city,  as  exiles,  above 
six  thousaod,  of  whom  the  greatest  part  fled  to  Agrigcntum,  ^where 
they  were  received  and  entertained  with  that  humanity  as  was  agree- 
able to  their  present  condition.  But  those  of  Agatbocles's  faction 
(who  spent  the  whole  day  in  butchering  of  the  citizens)  were  not 
sparing  in  committing  their  rage  and  villanies  upon  the  women,  but 
thought  they  should  be  revenged  upon  them  that  escaped  death,  if 
they  could  l)ut  abuse  their  kindred  and  relations,  in  the  most  vile  and 
bcHNtly  manner  imaginable:  for  that  it  was  very  reasonable  to  think 


Ckap.L  DIODOEU8  StOULU.S.  dSB 

-smmmfmmBKaBaeaammBBBaaBBssaasssBsssss^^ 

that  It  HTMld  be  more  Intter  than  death  itself  to  hmbands  and  paieotB 
to  think  of  the  abUMS  of  their  wives,  and  the  ratifhings  of  their 
danghteti:  httt  from  hence  we  nhst  Ibibear  oooiposing  a  tniged|^as 
is  verj  tisual  with  other  writers,  especially  to  stir  tip  eompassion  to- 
wards them  that  are  inTolved  in  such  horrible  soKrings;  because 
none  will  eaqpect  an  express  accoont  of  efery  particnfaur,  when  the 
whole  is  so  ready  and  clear  to  be  understood.  For  they  that  durst 
impodently  at  mtd-day  murder  innocents  in  the  open  streets  and 
nuurfcet-place,  havfeno  need  of  a  writer  to  set  fiMtii  what  they  did  in 
Ae  houses  io  the  night,  aod  how  they  behaved  towards  mves  and  - 
young  maids  then  in  the  poiirer  of  their  enemies^  without  siny  protec- 
tion or  defence. 

But  Agathoeles,  after  he  had  glutted  Un^selfiRddi  the  slaujghter  of 
tiie  citilBens  two  whole  days,  brought  together  all  the  prisoners,  and 
released  Dinocrates,  on  account  of  an  oh)  friendship  with  himr  hut 
as  to  the  rest,  such  as  were  his  greatest  enemies  he  put  to  death, 
and  banished  the  others.  Then  catling  a  common  assembly,  he 
accused  die  six  hundred,  and  those  who  had  favoured  the  oligarchy, 
declaring  that  he  would  purge  the  city  of  all  those  who  idfi^cted  m 
^monarchy,  and 'restore  the  people  to  perfect  liberty;  and  that  he 
would  henceforth  stand  upon  equal  ground  with  them  all,  and  live 
a  private  life,  free  from  farther  cares  and  toils :  upon  saying  of  which 
he  threw  away  his  general's  coat,  and  put  on  a  jacket,  and  so  went 
'  hb  way,  making  a  show  of  himself  as  one  of  the  common  people. 
*  He  did  this  dissembUngly  to  act  the  part  of  a  commoner;  being  in 
Ac  mean  time  very  well  assured  that  diere  were  uMiny  of  his  brethren 
in  iniquity  in  the  assembly,  who  would  never  suffer  the  gendralship 
to  devolve  on  any  other. 

Hereupon  those  that  had  robbed  the  oiq>ressed  people  of  their 
goods,  immediately  cried  out,  and  with  a  loud  vdce  wished  him  not 
I  to  desert  them,  but  to  take  upon  him  the  entire  and  absolute  manage- 
'  mentofallaffiiirs.  At  first  he  appeared  to  be  very  shy;  but  being 
afterwards  more  earnestly  pressed  l>y  the  multitude,  he  told  them  he 
vras  wniiag  to  accept  of  the  chief  command  -as  general,  provided 
he  should  not  be  joined  with  any  other  colleague,  for  he  should 
never  be  willing  to  be  accountable  (as  the  law  then  was)  for  the 
miscarriages  and  irregularities  of  those  that  should  be  joined  with 
him  in  commission.  Hereupon^  the  people  having  agn^  that  the 
whole  power  should  be  in  him  alone,  tbeyvoted  him  general,  with 
full  and  absolute  authority;  so  that  for  the  future  he  plainly 
acted  the  part  of  a  monarch,  and  managed  the  affiiirs  of  the  whole 
city.  , 

The  Syracusaos,  ai|  yet  tame  and  quiet,  some  curbed  by  fear. 


3^  DtODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIX. 

and  others  kept  down  by  force^  durst  not  discover  (as  a  thing  fiin 
and  to  no  purpose)  the  heart-burnings  that  were  aaiODg  then. 

But  many  of  the  poorer  sort,  and  those  that  were  in  debr,  were 
much  pleased  with  this  revolution:  for  Agathocles  had  promised  in 
the  senate  that  all  former  debts  should  be  remitted  and  made  void, 
and  that  lands  should  be  allotted  and  shared  out  t»  the  poor.. 

After  lie  had  finished  these  things,  he  ordered  that  none  tow  tbt 
future  should  be  killed  or  otherwise  abused.  But  on  the  cootniy^ 
changing  bis  former  course,  be  carried  himself  with  a  grett  deal  of 
mildness  towards  the  people,  encouraging  many  with  lewaids,  and 
not  a  few  with  large  promises,  and  courting  all  with  smooth  wofdsy 
he  not  a  little  ingratiated  himself  into  the  favour  and  good  opiniooof 
the  people :  and  though  he  was  advanced  to  so  high  a  pitch  6f  ho- 
nour^  yet  he  put  not  on  a  diadem,  nor  sufiered  the  attendance,  of  a 
life  guard,  nor  allowed  any  difficulty  of  access  to  hi»  person,  whidk 
is  the  common  practice  of  almost  all  tyrants:  but  he  made  it  his 
business  chiefly  to  look  after  the  public  revenue,  and  the  making  and 
providing  all  sorts  of  weapons  and  arms :  he  built,  likewise,  other 
long  ships,  to  increase  and  strengthen  his  fleet:  and  Isstlj^.  he 
brought  many  of  the  cities  and  towns  in  the  heart  of  the  ccNiotiy  to 
stoop  to  his  authority.    And  thus  then  stood  thfe  afiiurs  of  Sicily. 

In  Italy  this  was  the  ninth  year  of  the  war  of  the  Romans  vidi  the 
Samnltes,  l)efore  which  time  there  luid  been  very  sharp  battles  and 
engagements  between  them;  but  then  (except  some  incarsioiis  iolo 
the  cneroy*s  country)  there  was  little  or  nothing  done  wortfi  taking 
iu)ticc  of,  only  some  forts  were  taken,  and  the  country  harassed*  But 
in  Apulia  the  Romans  wasted  and  spoiled  all  Daunia*^  and  having 
conquered  the  Canutiif  ^  received  hostages  of  them.  There  were  added 
likewise  two  other  tribes  to  the  former,  the  one  of  Falerinaj  and  die 
other  of  Ufentina. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  the  Crotonians  made  peace  with 
llie  Brutians ;  but  the  war  being  continued  another  year  with  the 
esilci^,  (who  were  expelled  by  the  people  for  their  conspiring  with 
Ileraclides  and  Sosistratus,  of  which  we  have  given  a  particular  ac- 
count in  the  former  bookt)  they  created  Parones  and  Mencdemus 
their  generals.  In  the  mean  time  the  exiles  went  to  Thorium,  and 
there  listed  three  hundred  mercenaries,  and  endeavoured  in  the 
night  to  break  into  the  city:  but  being  repulsed  by  the  CroConiaDs, 
they  encamped  on  the  confines  of  the  Brutians;  but  within  a  short 
time  after,  they  were  every  man  cut  off  by  a  much  stronger  party^  who 
sallied  out  of  the  city  against  them. 

*  Now  CapiUnia,  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples, 
t  C;ftQu:ii  in  Ti'MCC,  now  coJled  Chartrcs.  *  No  >ucb  tccooBt  uppcMi  there 


Chap.  L  DIODOftUS  8ICULU8.  .  327 

And  now  haTing  given  an  account  how  matten  went  in  Siciljr  and 
Italy,  we  shall  pass  to  the  things  done  in  other  parts  of  Europe. 

Eurydice  being  queen-regent  in  Macedonia,  as  soon  as  she  heard 
that  Olympias  was  preparing  for  her  return,  sent  an  express  to  Cas- 
aander,  then  in  Pelopooneus,  wishing  him  to  hasten  to  her  aid  and 
assistance;  and  in  the  mean  time,  by  her  bribes  and  promises,  she 
induced  the  most  active  men  among  the  JVfacedonians  to  favour  h^ 
designs* 

.  But  Polyperchon  got  an  army  together,  and  being  joinc^  with 
i£acidas  of  £[Hru8,  he  brought  back  Olympias,  with  Alexander's 
0on*,  into  the  kingdom.  And  hearing  that  Eurydice  vfas  at  Eutsea  ia 
Macedonia  with  an  army,  aiming  to  make  an  end  of  all  by  one  battle, 
lie  makes  swiftly  after  her;  and  presently,  as  soon  as  the  armies  en- 
camped one  over  against  the  otiier,  on  a  sudden  the  Macedonians  (in 
leverence  lo  Olympias,  and  calling  to  mind  the  many  advantages  and 
kindnesses  they  had  received  at  the  hands  of  Alexander)  turned 
about;  whereupon  king  Philipf  with  all  his  servants  were  presently 
taken.  Eurydice^,  likewise,  together  with  Polycles,  (one  of  her 
counsellors),  were  afterwards  taken,  having  before  returned  to 
AmphipoUs. 

Olympias  having  thus  gained  the  custody  of  both  the  kings,  and 
likewise  the  kingdom,  without  blood,  used  not  her  good  fortune  with 
-that  humanity  as  she  ought  to  have  done :  but  at  the  very  first,  impri* 
aoning  both  Eurydice  and  Philip  her  husband,  she  uised  them  veiy 
crmelly;  for  she  cooped  them  both  up  in  a  very  small  place,  where 
every  thing  for  their  necessary  use  was  delivered  to  them  through  a 
little  narrow  hole:  and  for  many  days  together  she  thus  (against  all 
law  and  conscience)  exercised  her  rage  and  revenge  upon  tliese  mise-> 
rabie  princes. 

But  when  she  perceived  that  the  Macedonians  spoke  ill  of  her,  out 
of  pity  and  conuniseraiion  towards  those  that  were  thus  miserably 
dealt  with,  she  delivered  Philip  to  certain  Thracians,  (after  he  had 
reigned  six  years  and  four  montlis),  to  be  stabbed  with  poniards. 
But  she  ordered  Eurydice  to  be  more  severely  dealt  with,  because 
ahc  was  so  free  of  her  tongue,  that  she  was  still  blabbing  it  out  that 
^he  was  fitter  to  rule  tlie  kingdom  than  Olympias :  and  therefore  siie 
sent  to  her  a  sword,  a  rope,  and  a  cup  of  poison,  bidding  her  choose 
which  she  would  to  despatch  herself  with,  neither  valuing  the  former 
state  and  dignity  of  the  injured  lady,  nor  commiserating  thecommoa 
lot  of  mankind ;  and  therefore  she  came  at  length  to  experience  the 
same  turns  of  fortune  herself,  and  came  to  an  end  every  way  becom* 

*  Wis  name  was  Alexander,  the  sou  of  Roxana.         t  AridatHS,  called  Philip, 
t  EurYdice  the  wife  ©f  Philip. 


33S  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  JBook  XIX 

ing  her  cruelty.  For  Enrydice^  in  the  pretence  of  the  penon  tbt  i 
brought  her  the  instruments  of  her  death,  pnyed  the  godi  tint  she 
might  have  the  like  present  sent  to  her;  and  then  hatriiig  bound  Vf 
the  wounds  of  her  husband,  as  well  as  the  shortness  of  tine  woril 
permit,  she  wrapped  him  up,  and  so  without  any  womanish  com* 
plaints,  or  any  base  dejection  of  spirit  through  the  greatness  of  her 
misery,  she  strangled  herself  with  her  own  garter. 

HaWog  made  an  end  of  these  two,  she  killed  Nicanor,  the  brodw 
of  Cassander:  then  she  picked  out  a  hundred  Macedonians,  of  Gis- 
Sander's  Ariends,  and  put  them  all  to  death.  Having  gratified  her 
revenge  by  these  cruel  acts,  many  of  the  Macedonians  were  incM 
to  hate  her  mortally  for  her  cruelty:  for  they  all  remembered  the 
words  of  Antipater,  who,  like  anorscle,  a  little  before  his  deaths  hal 
given  strict  charge  not  to  admit  thb  woman  to  govern  the  kingdoBi 
Olympias  therefore  managing  things  after  this  rate  in  Macedoniay  it 
clearly  pointed  out  a  revolution  in  the  state. 

In  Asia,  Eumenes  having  with  him  the  Argyraspides  under  their 
captain  Antigenes,  wintered  In  the  province  of  Babylon,  in  the  towns 
called  Canhee;  thence  he  sent  ambassadors  to  Seleucus  and  PfdHli, 
requiring  them  to  assist  the  kings,  and  that  they  would  join  with  hia 
in  the  war  against  Antigonus.  Python  was  appointed  lord-fieutenut 
of  Media,  and  the  other  of  the  province  of  Babylon,  when  the  leoooi 
division  of  the  provinces  was  made  in  Triparadlsus.  Seleucus  aa- 
swered,  that  he  and  those  with  him  would  supply  the  kings  widi 
whatever  they  wanted,  but  that  he  would  never  observe  any  of  the 
commands  of  Eumenes,  who  was  adjudged  to  die  by  the  oommoa 
suffrage  of  the  Macedonians.  After  many  disputes  relating  to  this 
resolution^  Python  and  Seleucus  solicited  Antigenes  and  the  Aigyru- 
pides  by  their  agents  to  cast  off  Eumenes. 

But  the  Macedonians  rejecting  what  they  required,  Eumenes 
commended  them  for  their  fidelity,  and  marched  away  and  came  to 
-  the  river  Tigris,  and  there  encamped,  three  hundred  furlongs  ftom 
Babylon:  for  he  designed  to  march  to  Susa,  because  he  intended  to 
raise  forces  out  of  the  higher  provinces,  and  to  make  use  of  the 
king's  treasures  as  there  should  be  occasion.  But  he  was  forced  to 
pass  the  riyer,  because  that  part  on  this  side  was  eaten  up  by  foraging 
and  deprepations,  and  the  country  on  the  other  side  was  yet  nn* 
touched,  and  afforded  plenty  of  forage  and  other  provisions  for  his 
army.  While  he  was  procuring  vessels  to  pass  over  the  river,  Seleu- 
cus and  Python  sailed  up  the  river  with  two  gallies  of  three  tiers  of 
oars^  and  many  other  small  vessels,  being  part  of  those  that  Alexander 
built  at  Babylon. 
As  soon  as  they  arrived  at  the  place  where  the  passage  was  intended. 


€kap.  L  DiODORUS  stcuLUS.  33g 

I  I       III!    w^M—        I      ■  r  II 

they  rettfcwed  their  solicitations  to  the  Macedonians,  to  persuade  them 
to  cadt  off  EBinenes,  and  not  to  abet  and  encourage  a  fellow  againat 
^then  who  was  but  a  stranger,  ahd  had  destroyed  multitudes  of  the 
Macedonians.  But  when  Antigenes  could  not  be  prevailed  with 
«ipoa  any  terms  whatsoever,  the  Seleucians  sailed  to  an  old  sluice, 
mud  brcrfce  down  the  head  of  it,  where  it  was  grown  up  through  length 
of  time;  upon  which  the  Macedonian  camp  was  surrounded  with 
water,  and  all  the  tract  of  ground  overflowed,  so  that  the  whole  army 
was  in  great  danger  of  being  utterly  lost.  All  that  day,  therefore, 
they  rested,  considering  and  advising  what  was  best  to  be  done  ia 
soeh  an  exigency.  The  next  day,  without  any  disturbance  from  the 
enemy,  they  transported  the  greatest  part  of  the  army  in  flat-bottomed 
boats,  to  the  number  of  thirty,  forced  forward  with  long  poles:  for 
Seleiici»  had  only  horse  with  him,  and  those  far  inferior  in  number 
t»  the  enemy.  And  now  night  approached,  when  Eumenes  (in  great 
pmn  for  his  carriages  left  behind)  caused  all  the  Macedonians  to  re- 
pass tlie  ri^r ;  and  then,  by  direction  of  one  of  the  natural  inhabitants, 
he  act  upon  cleansing  another  such  like  place,  by  which  the  water 
might  be  easily  diverted,  and  the  ground  all  round  about  drained  dry. 
Whieh  when  Sdeucus  perceived,  (intending  to  get  rid  of  them  out  of 
his  province  with  what  speed  he  could),  he  sent  ambassadors  to  them 
to  make  a  truce,  and  so  permitted  them  to  pass  over  the  river:  but 
forthwith  sent  expresses  to  Antigonus  in  Mesopotamia,  to  desire  him 
with  all  speed  to  come  down  with  his  army,  before  the  governors  of 
the  provinces  came  in  with  their  forces. 

Eumenes  having  now  passed  the  river  Tigris,  as  soon  as  he  came 
into  Susiana,  he  divided  his  army  into  three  bodies,  on  account  of 
the  scarcity  of  provisions;  and  thus  marching  through  the  country 
three  several  ways,  he  was  in  great  want  of  bread-corn,  and  therefore 
distributed  rice,  millet*,  and  dates,  with  which  that  country  abounded, 
tttoDgst  the  soldiers. 

Although  he  had  before  taken  care  to  send  away  the  king^s  letters 
to  the  lord-lieutenants  of  the  upper  provinces,  yet  he  then  again 
sent  expresses,  to  desire  them  all  to  meet  him  with  their  forces  iu 
Susiana.  At  which  time  it  so  happened  that  th^y  had  their  forces 
then  in  the  field,  and  were  got  together  for  some  other  reasons. 
Of  which  it  is  necessary  here  to  say  something  before  we  proceed 
farther. 

Python  was  lord-lieutenant  of  Media,  and  general  of  all  the  higher 

Satrapies,  by  nation  a  Parisian,  who  had  killed  Philotas  the  former 

general,  and  had  placed  Eudamus,  his  own  brother,  in  his  room. 

Upon  which  all  the  other  provinces  joined  together,  lest  they  should 

*  A  white  grain^  of  which  the  Indians  make  oil. 

Vol.  2.  No.  44,  vu 


330  DiODORus  sicuLUS.  JBocik  XDL 

be  served  in  the  same  way,  because  Python  was  of  areatleas  spirityand 
had  eugaged  himself  in  matters  of  high  importance.    Having  there- 
fore overcome  him  in  battle,  and  cut  off  moat  of  his  army^  tbey  dfove 
the  man  himself  out  of  Parthia,  who  first  soi^t  for  shelter  in  ] 
and  in  a  short  time  after  he  went  to  Babylon,  and  prayed  \ 
front  Saleucus,  and  that  they  might  join  together  in  one  < 
terest.    The  governors,  therefore,  for  these  causes  having  dnwn 
their  forces  together,  Eumenes's  messengers  came  to  the  anaics 
when  they  were  ready,  and  prepared  in  the  field.    Peucestes  was  the 
most  renowned  captain  of  them  all,  and  was  made  genenl  faf  a 
unanimous  assent.    He  was  formerly  squire  of  the  body  to  , 
der,  and  advanced  by  the  king  for  his  valour.    He  was  lord- 
of  the  greatest  part  of  Persia,  and  in  great  esteem  among  the  nathreai 
And  for  this  reason,  he  of  all  the  Macedonians  was  allowed  by  AlcK- 
ander  to  wear  a  Persian  gown,  because  he  thought  thereby  to  k 
tiate  himself  with  the  Persians,  and  engage  them  to  be  i 
to  all  hb  commands.     He  then  had  with  him  ten  thoosand  ] 
archers  and  slingers,  and  of  other  nations  (taken  into  die  nmk  of 
Macedonians)  three  thousand,  with  six  hundred  hone  of  Greds  and 
Thracians,  and  of  Persian  horse  four  hundred.    Polemon,  a  ] 
donian,  governor  of  Carmania,  had  fifteen  hundred  foot,  and  i 
hundred  horse.    Siburtius,  governor  of  Arachosia,  had  a  i 
foot,  and  six  hundred  and  ten  horse.    Androbazus,  likewiae,  was 
'  sent  from  Paropamisus  (of  which  province  Ozyartes  was  govcnwr) 
with  twelve  hundred  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse.    Stasander,  go» 
vemor  of  Aria  and  Drangina,  being  joined  with  the  Bactriana,  had 
with  him  fifteen  hundred  foot,  and  a  thousand  hmse.    Out  of  India 
came  Eudamus  with  five  hundred*  horse,  and  three  thousand  ibo^ 
and  a  hundred  and  twenty  elephants,  which  he  got  after  Alexander's 
death,  when  he  treacherously  slew  Poms.    There  were  in  the  whole^ 
with  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  above  eighteen  thoosand  and 
seven  hundredf  foot,  and  four  thousand  and  six  hundred  hone. 

When  all  these  came  into  the  province  of  Susiana,  and  joined  with 
£umenes,  a  public  assembly  was  called,  where  was  a  hot  dispnte 
cpnceming  the  choice  of  a  general.  Peucestes,  on  account  o£  hb 
bringing  most  men  into  the  field,  and  his  eminent  post  under  Alex* 
ander,  conceived  he  had  most  right  to  challenge  the  chief  oonmand. 
Antigcnes,  captain  of  the  silver  targcteerst,  insisted  upon  it,  that  tha 
wh^le  power  of  election  ought  to  be  committed  to  his  Maccdmuans, 
who,  under  Alexander,  had  conquered  Asia;  and  by  their  rafeor  had 
so  signalized  themselves^  as  to  gain  the  reputation  of  being  i 

*  Three  hundred  in  the  margin.— Uib.  Ann.  90/T» 
t  llie  particttUrs  Bftke  ood-and-tweoty  thousaad.  %  Argympite. 


Chap.  I.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  331 

queimbtr.  But  Eumenes  fearing  lest  by  their  divisions  tbey  should 
become  an  easy  prey  to  Antigonns,  advised  that  they  should  not  make 
one  general  only,  but  that  all  who  were  before  chosen  capbiins  and 
commanders  should  meet  every  day  in  the  king's  pavilion,  and  there 
consult  of  all  the  public  aflairs.  For  a  tent  had  been  before  erected 
to  Alexander^  and  his  throne  placed  therein,  to  which  they  used  to 
resort,  (ofiering  incense  as  to  a  god),  and  there  debate  all  matters  of 
weight  and  special  concern.  This  advice  being  approved  and  ap- 
plauded by  all,  they  met  there  every  day,  as  in  a  city  governed  by  a 
democracy.  Afterwards  being  come  to  Susa,  there  Eumenes  was 
supplied  with  what  monies  he  had  occasion  for  out  of  the  kings'  ex- 
efaequer.  For  the  kings  by  their  letters  had  ordered  the  treasurers, 
that  they  should  issue  to  Eumenes  alone  so  much  money  as  he  at  any 
time  required.  Hereupon  he  gave  the  Macedonians  six  months  pay 
before-hand,  and  to  Eudamus  (who  brought  the  elephants  out  Of 
India)  he  paid  two  hundred  talents,  under  colour  to  defray  the  charge 
and  expence  of  the  elephants,  but  in  truth  the  more  to  engage  him 
to  his  interest.  For  if  contests  should  arise,  that  party  would  have 
tbe  greatest  advantage  with  whom  he  sided,  by  reason  of  the  terror 
occasioned  by  the  use  of  these  beasts.  The  rest  of  tbe  governors 
every  one  maintained  their  own  soldiers  they  brought  with  them. 
This  done,  Eumenes  continued  for  some  time  in  Susa,  and  there  re- 
freshed hb  army. 

In  the  mean  time  Antigonus,  who  wintered  in  Mesopotamia,  re- 
solved forthwith  to  set  upon  Eumenes  before  he  grew  too  strong: 
but  when  he  heard  that  the  provincial  governors,  with  their  forces, 
together  with  the  Macedonians,  were  joined  with  hin),  he  let  his 
soldiers  rest,  and  made  It  his  busines  to  raise  more.  For  he  saw  that 
he  had  need  of  a  great  army,  and  reason  to  make  more  than  ordinary 
preparations  for  the  war. 

In  the  midst  of  these  preparations  Attains,  Polemon,  Docimuf;,  % 
Antipater,  and  Philotas,  who  before  were  commanders  in  Alcetas's 
army,  and  were  taken  prisoners  and  kept  in  an  extraordinary  strong 
castle,  hearing  of  Antigonus's  intended  expedition  into  the  higher 
provinces,  (conceiving  now  they  had  gained  a  fair  opportunity),  bribed 
some  of  their  keepers  to  suffer  them  to  escape.  Having  therefore  ^ 
procured  arms,  about  midnight  tliey  set  upon  the  guard:  they  them- 
selves were  but  eight  in  number,  (surrounded  with  four  hundred  men), 
yet  valiant  and  expert  soldiers,  through  their  experience  in  the  war 
with  Alexander.  Xenopithes,  the  governor  of  the  castle,  they  threw 
oiTfrom  the  walls,  headlong  down  a  steep  rock,  a  furlong  high;  and 
as  to  the  rest,  some  they  killed  upon  the  place,  and  others  they  hurled 
down,  and  then  set  the  houses  on  fire.    Hereupon  they  took  into  th^ 


33  f  DlODOftus  S1CULU8.  Boak  XM3L 

€ast1e  five  hundred  men  that  were  withoat,  opecdng  the  inoes  k 
was  indeed  very  well  stored  with  proviftionti  aad  all  ollitr  thioga  ■•» 
cessary :  but  they  consulted  together  whedier  it  w»  better  1 
there^  and  trust  to  the  strength  of  the  place^  waiting  far  relief 
Eumefnes,  or  to  get  away^  and  wander  about  in  the  caaao^sf^  i 
use  of  »  change  and  turn  of  fortune  when  it  might  happM. 
canvassing  and  disputing  there  was  on  both  sides:  Docimva  ^ 
leaving  the  place^  but  Attains  declared  he  was  not  aUe  to  endure  1»» 
bour^  by  reason  of  the  hardship  of  his  late  imprisoooieiit. 

Whilst  they  were  thus  at  variance  nmongst  tbemfelves^  dMm  fiva 
hundred  foot  and  four  hundred  horse,  were  drawn  oat  of  tbe  i 
bouring  garrisons,  and  got  together  in  a  body,  besides  three  i 
of  the  natural  inhabitants,  and  upwards,  gathered  from  all  parts  of  dw 
country;  these  created  one  from  among  themselves  to  be  their  gene- 
ral, and  laid  close  siege  to  the  castle. 

Being  therefore  thus  unexpectedly  again  cooped  up^  Doeiasne^  no* 
quainted  with  a  passage  under  ground,  where  no  guard  was  set^  bf  n 
private  messenger  kept  correspondence  with  Stratonice^  the  wife  of 
Antigonus,  who  was  not  far  distant  from  the  plaee:  and  nftewmiis 
he,  with  one  other  in  his  company,  through  this  pass  dipt  OQt  t6  berf 
but,  contrary  to  her  promise,  be  was  seised  and  secured*  And  belhsi 
came  out  with  him  undertook  to  conduct  the  enemy  into  the  eastle^ 
and  accordingly  brought  in  a  great  number,  and  with  them  gained  OM 
of  the  highest  rocks  within  the  fort. 

And  although  Attains,  and  all  tbose  witb  him,  were  far  inferior  ki; 
number,  yet  they  defended  the  place  courageously,  fij^iting  vaUantllf 
every  day,  till  at  length  they  fell  into  the  enemy's  hands^  afternmc 
of  sixteen  months. 


Ckmi^.  IL  DiODoaus  sifcuLus.  333 


CHAP.  n. 

AnHganus  marches  to  the  Tigris  after  Eumenes,  Eurnenes  cuts  of 
a  great  many  ofhU  men  there,  jintiganus  goes  into  Media. 
JSumenes  comes  to  Persepolis.  The  description  of  Persia.  Peu* 
cestes's  great  feast.  Eumenes^s  policy.  His  tale  of  the  Uoau 
A  battle  in  Pareteceniy  between  Aniigonus  and  Eumenes.  An- 
Ugoivus  returns  into  Media.  The  story  of  Ceteus*s  two  wives 
striving  which  should  be  burnt.  JButnenes  marches  to  Oabene^ 
Cassander  to  Macedonia.  Olympias  goes  to  Pydka :  i»  there 
besieged.  The  Epirots  forsake  their  icings  and  Join  with  Cas* 
Sander,  Antigonus  designs  to  surprise  Eumenes,  who  stops  hi^ 
march  by  a  stratagem.  The  last  battle  between  them  in  Oabene. 
JBumenes  basely  delivered  up.  Antigonus  returns  to  Media. 
The  dreaJ^l  earthquakes  in  the  country  ofRhageSk 

AFTERWARDS^  Democledes  was  chief  governor  at  Athens,  andr 
Caius  Junius  and  Quintus  i£milius  were  consuls  at  Rome.  At  that 
time  was  celebrated  the  hundred  and  sixteenth  Olympiad^  at  which 
Deinomeoes  the  Laconian  gained  the  victory.  About  this  titne  An- 
tigonus marched  out  of  Mesopotamia  and  came  to  Babylon,  and  made* 
a  league  with  Seleucus  and  Python,  and  having  strengthened  himself 
with  forces  received  from  them,  made  a  bridge  of  boats  over  the  river 
Tigris,  passed  over  his  army,  and  hastened  away  with  a  swift  march 
after  the  enemy.  Of  which  Eumenes  having  intelligence,  he  sent 
to  Xenophilus,  governor*  of  the  citadel  at  Susa,  not  to  give  any 
money  to  Antigonus,  nor  by  any  means  to  come  out  to  parley  with 
him. 

He  himself  marched  with  the  army  to  tlieTigris,  a  day*s  journey  dis* 
tant  from  Susa,  where  he  came  into  the  country  of  the  Uzians,  a  free 
people.  The  river  is  in  some  places  three,  and  in  others  four 
furlongs  broad.  The  depth  in  the  middle  of  the  channel  was  equal 
with  the  height  of  the  elephants.  It  runs  in  a  current  |from  the 
mpuntiuns  seven  hundred  furlongs,  and  empties  itself  into  the  Red 
sea.  There  are  many  sea-fish  and  whales  in  this  river,  which  appear 
chiefly  at  the  rising  of  the  dog-starf* 

The  Eumeuians  had  the  river  before  them  for  adefence,  and  man* 
ned  the  bank  all  along  from  the  head  of  the  river  to  the  sea  t«  with 
forts  every  where  built  upon  the  bank,  and  there  waited  for  the  ene- 

*  Or  treasurer.  t  In  the  dog-days:  about  the  end  of  July. 

X  The  Red  sea,  or  Persian  gulf. 


S34  DIODORUS  sicuLirs.  JSudXt  XIX 


tty'sapproacli.  But  because  these  forts  required  a  great  nmnber  of 
men  to  keep  them^  in  regard  they  stretched  out  a  great  length.  En- 
menes  and  Antigenes  solicited  Peucestes  to  send  for  ten  tbonaaal 
archers  more  out  of  Persia ;  who  at  first  refused^  compkiniog  how  he 
WIS  denied  to  be  general  of  the  army.  But  afterwards,  upon  matme 
deliberation  with  himself^  he  compTted,  concluding  that  if  Antenna 
prcTailed,  he  should  lose  both  his  province,  and  be  in  danger  of  Idi- 
ing  his  life  besides;  careful^  therefore,  to  preserve  his  own  interest, 
and  hoping  thereby  with  more  ease  to  gain  the  chief  command  hj 
Iiaving  more  men  than  any  of  the  rest,  he  brought  ten  thousand  ardiefs 

more  into  the  camp  according  to  their  desire. And  though  some 

of  the  Persians  were  distant  one  from  another  thirty  daya  aiaie&,yel 
they  had  placed  their  guards  with  that  art  and  exactness,  that  they 
aH  heard  the  word  of  command  in  one  and  the  same  day;  the 
son  of  which  is  worthy  remark:  for  Persia  is  full  of  long  and  i 
vallies,  and  is  full  of  high  watch-towers,  upon  which  were  placedi 
of  the  inhabitants  that  were  men  of  loud  and  strong  voices  r  when 
the  voice  was  heard  by  those  of  the  next  divisbn,  they  imparted  it  in 
the  same  manner  to  the  others,  and  they  again  to  the  rest,  one  after 
another^  till  what  was  commanded  came  at  length  to  the  end  of  Ae 
province. 

While  Eumenes  and  Peucestes  were  busy  about  these  aflhin^  As* 
tigonus  came  with  his  army  to  the  king's  palace  in  Susa,  and  'made 
Seleucos  lord-lieutenant  of  the  province,  and  leaving  with  lum  m  suf- 
ficient army,  ordered  him  to  besiege  the  citadel,  Xenophilus  the  troK 
surer  refusing  to  obey  his  commands;  but  he  himself  marehed  awaf 
with  bis  army  against  the  enemy,  through  a  hot  scalding 
very  dangerous  for  foreign  armies  to  pass.  Therefore  they  were  i 
to  march  in  the  night,  and  encamp  near  the  river  before  svn-ri&iDgt 
however,  he  could  not  secure  himself  from  all  the  inconveoieneiee 
and  mischiefs  of  that  country :  for  though  he  did  alt  that  was  possiMe 
for  him  to  do,  yet  through  the  excessive  heat  of  the  season,  fbdog 
about  the  rising  of  the  dog-stir*),helostagreat  multitude  of  his  aseii. 
Coming  at  length  to  the  river  Coprates,  he  prepared  wh&t  was  neces- 
sary for  the  passing  over  of  his  men.  This  river  issues  from  aaaoon- 
tainous  country,  and  runs  into  the  Tigris,  and  b  four  aeies  broad,  aai 
was  fourscore  furlongs  distant  from  Eumenes's  camp.  The  stream 
is  so  rapid  and  swift,  that  there  is  no  passing  over  without  boate  or  a 
bridge.  .  Having  therefore  got  together  a  few  flat-bottmned  boats,  in 
them  he  put  over  some  of  his  foot,  ordering  them  to  draw  a  trench 
and  cast  up  works  to  defend  it,  and  there  to  attend  tlie  coming  over 
of  the  rest. 

*  See  the  foregoing  page. 


€h^.  IL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  S39 


itt 


£iimeiies  having  iotelligeiice  by  his  scouts  of  the  enemy's  design^ ^ 
passed  over  the  bridge  of  Tigris  with  four  thousand  foot  and  thirteen 
hundred  horse,  and  found  above  three  thousand  foot  and  three  hun- 
dred horse  of  Antigonus's  army  got  over*;  and  no  less  than  six 
thousand  who  were  foraging  up  and  down  the  country :  these  he  sud- 
den^ set  upon  and  routed,  and  presently  put  the  rest  to  flighr. 
As  for  the  Maoedoniansi  ( whostood  their  ground) ,  being  overpowered 
by  numbers,  be  forced  them  all  to  the  river,  where  running  head- 
long into  their  boats,  and  overcharging  them,  they  $oi^  down:  upon 
which  many  of  them  endeavouring  to  swim,  some  few  of  them  es-  ^ 
caped,  but  the  rest  were  all  drowned.  Others  that  could  not  swim^ 
(judging  it  more  advisable  to  fall  into  the  enemy's  hands,  than  cer- 
tainly to  lose  their  lives  in.  the  river,  were  taken  prisoners,  to  the 
number  of  four  thousand.  Antigonus,  for  want  of  boats,  was  not 
Hble  to  help  them,  though  he  saw  such  multitudes  perish.  Concdv* 
i^g  therefore  that  it  was  impossUile  to  pass  the  river,  he  marched 
back  to  the  city  of  Badaca,  seated  on  the  river  Ulaie.  By  reason  of 
the  vehement  heat,  this  march  was  very  sweltering  and  troublesome, 
and  many  of  the  army  were  tired  out,  so  that  they  were  heartless,  and 
even  at  their  wits  end :  but  when  he  came  to  the  city  before  men- 
tioned, staying  there  some  days,  he  refreshed  his  army.  Thence  he 
judged  it  advisable  to  march  to  Ecbatana  in  Media,  and  making  that 
the  seat  of  war,  to  take  in  all  the  higher  provinces. 

There  were  two  ways  that  led  to  Media,  and  both  were  difficult; 
tluKt  over  the  mountains  was  pleasant,  and  the  high  way;  but  scorch- 
ing hot,  and  very  long,  almost  forty  days  journey.  That  through 
the  conntiy  of  the  Cosseans  was  strait,  narrow,  and  steep,  leading 
through  the  enemy's  borders,  and  barren  and  scaut  of  provisions, 
but  a  short  cut,  and  more  cool;  yet  it  was  not  easy  for  an  army  to 
march  this  way,  unless  agreement  were  first  made  with  the  barbarians 
who  inhabit  the  mountains. 

They  have  been  a  free  people  time  out  of  mind,  ajnd  iniiabit  in  caves, 
and  feed  upon  acorns  and  mushrooms,  and  the  salted  flesh  of  wild 
beasts.  But  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  dishonourable  thing  for  him  who 
commanded  so  great  an  army,  to  court  these  barbarous  people  with 
smooth  words,  or  gai  i  them  by  rich  gifts.  He  picked  out  therefore 
the  choicest  of  his  targeteers,  and  divided  the  archers  and  slingers, 
and  such  like  light-armed  men  into  two  bodies,  and  delivered  them 
to  Nearchus,  with  command  to  go  before  him,  and  first  secure  the 
straits  and  difficult  passes.  These  being  posted  all  along  in  the  way, 
he  himself  led  the  phalanx,  and  Python  commanded  the  rear. 

Tliey  that  were  sent  with  Nearchus  had  endeavoured  to  possess 

*  The  rirer  Coprates,  which  f»lli  ioto  tlic  Pasltigris. 


9$6  DiODORUS  8icuLt}s«  Book  XIX. 


themselves  of  m  few  watch-towers;  bat,. being  hindered «Bd  pie» 
vented  of  manjr,  and  the  most  necessary  and  ooMSBodiotn  plweih 
they  lost  many  of  their  soldiers,  and,  being  set  npon  on  eveiy  ride 
by  Uie  barbarians,  they  had  much  difficulty  in  making  dieir  waf 
through  them.  And  as  to  those  that  followed  AatigoBUSy  (hftving 
entered  the  straits),  they  fell  into  dangers  that  were  ittexiricables  te 
the  natives,  being  well  acquainted  with  the  pkures,  and  havbig  tefim 
possessed  themselves  of  the  steep  and  craggy  rocks,  cast  down  BMSf . 
stones  upon  the  heads  of  the  soldiers  as  they  passed  by;  and  beiiBei^ 
making  use  of  showers  of  arrows,  they  so  galled  them,  that  thej  weie 
neither  able  (through  the  inconveniency  of  the  place)  to  annoy  dirir 
enemies,  nor  avoid  their  shot:  and  in  regard  the  passage  was  rof 
craggy  and  difficult,  the  elephants,  horses,  and  heavy-anned  awn^ 
were  involved  both  in  toils  and  hazards  at  one  and  die  same  tOM^ 
and  in  no  capacity  to  help  themselves. 

Antlgonus  being  brought  into  these  straits,  now  repented  tlMd  he 
did  not  follow  the  counsel  of  Python,  who  had  advised  him  to  liive 
bought  his  passage  with  money*  But  after  the  loss  of  many  of  hk 
men,  and  the  rest  still  in  imminent  hazard,  after  nine  days  tiOvUe* 
some  march,  he  came  at  length  to  the  inhabited  parts  of  Media. 

One  mischief  after  another  thus  felling  upon  the  amqry  the  iotobi* 
Table  distresses  they  were  brought  into  stured  up  the  aohUers  to  cry 
out  against  Antigonus,  insomuch  that  they  gave  him  very  ! 
bitter  words. 

For  in  forty  days  time,  they  had  three  several  times  been  i 
slaughtered:  but  by  fair  words,  and  a  plentiful  supply  of  all  thims 
necessary,  he  at  length  quieted  them.  Then  he  commanded  I^rthoa 
to  go  oyer  all  Media,  to  get  together  horsemen,  and  horses,  \ 
riages,  which  he  easily  performed,  the  country  abounding  with  1 
and  cattle.  For  Python  returned,  bringing  along  with  him  two 
thousand  horsemen  and  a  thousand  horses,  ready  furnished,  and  iO 
many  loads  of  ammunition  as  that  the  whole  army  might  be  com- 
pletely armed;  together  with  five  hundred  talents  out  of  the  king's 
treasury. 

Antigonus  formed  the  horse  into  regiments,  and  distribated  Ae 
horses  among  those  that  had  lost  their  own,  and  gave  the  dranghft^ 
beasts  freely  among  those  that  wanted  them»  whereby  he  r^aioed  ths 
former  love  of  the  soldiers. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  and  captaina  d 
the  forces  with  Eumenes,  when  they  heard  that  the  enemy  waa  in 
Media,  were  of  various  opinions  what  to  resolve  upon :  for  Enmenea> 
Antigenes,  and  the  rest  who  came  up  from  the  sea-coasu,  were  for 
returning  thither  again.    But  those  who  came  from  the  higher  pro- 


Ckep.  11.  DiODORUs  sicuLus.  337 

▼inces  (upon  the  account  of  their  friends  and  relations  that  were  left 
at  home)  were  for  defending  those  parts.  The  contest  growing  hot, 
Eumeiies,  considering  that  one  part  of  the  army  (which  was  now  di- 
vided into  two)  was  not  strong  enough  to  cope  with  the  enemy,  com- 
plied  with  the  governors  of  the  upper  provinces.  Decamping  there- 
fore from  Pasitigris^  he  moved  towards  Persia,  and  came  to  the  royal 
seat  of  the'kingdom,  Persepolis,  at  the  end  of  four-and-twenty  days 
march. 

The  country,  in  the  first  entrance  into  it,  and  as  far  as  the  Ladders, 
(as  they  are  called),  is  flat  and  low,  exceeding  hot,  and  barren  of  pro- 
visions; but  the  rest  is  higher,  of  a  wholesome  air,  and  very  fruitful: 
wtierein  are  many  shady  vallies,  variety  of  pleasant  gardens,  natural 
walks  bounded  on  each  side  with  all  sorts  of  trees,  and  watered 
with  refreshing  springs.  So  that  those  "that  pass  this  way  many 
times  stop  here  and  solace  themselves  in  these  pleasant  places  with 
great  delight. 

Here  the  inhabitants  brought  in  to  Peucestes  abundance  of  all  kinds 
of  prey  and  booty,  which  he  largely  distributed  among  the  soldiers,  to 
gain  their  fevour  and  good  will.  In  this  tract  inhabit  the  most  war^^ 
like  of  the  Persians,  being  all  archers  and  slingers,  and  is  far  more 
populous  than  any  of  the  other  provinces. 

When  they  came  to  Persepolis,  the  king's  palace,  Peucestes  the 
governor,  and  general  of  the  province,  ordered  4  magnificent  sacrifice 
to  the  gods,  and  to  Alexander  and  Philip;  and  to  that  end  sending  al- 
most over  all  Persia  for  beasts  tcf  be  sacrificed,  and  abundance  of  all 
other  provisions  necessary  for  a  festival  aad  public  assembly,  he 
feasted  the  whole  army. 

lo  this  festival  the  guests  were  placed  in  four  rounds,  including 
one  within  another^  the  greatest  surrounding  all  the  rest,  which  was 
tea  furlongs  in  compass,  and  was  filled  with  mercenaries  and  con- 
federates. 

The  second  round  was  eight  furlongs,  in  which  were  placed  the 
Macedonian  silver  targeteers,  and  the  rest  of  Alexander's  fellow- 
soldiers.  The  other  circle  was  of  four  furlongs,  and  filled  with  in- 
ferior officers,  special  friends,  commanders,  and  horsemen. 

That  in  the  midst  of  all  was  two  furlongs,  wherein  the  generals, 
masters  of  the  horse,  and  the  nobility  of  Persia,  had  their  several  tents 
allotted  them;  and  in  the  midst  of  them  were  placed  the  altars  of  the 
gods,  and  of  Alexander  and  Philip. 

The  tents  were  made  of  green  boughs  of  trees,  covered  with  arras, 
and  all  sorts  of  tapestry  hangings,  Persia  plentifully  affording  every 
thing  for  pleasure  and  delight. 

The  rounds  were  at  that  convenient  distance  one  from  another,  a^ 
Vol.  2,   No,  44.  XX 


338  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  Book  XIX. 


that  the  guests  found  (nothing  of  trouble  or  uneasiness;  bat  every 
thing  that  was  prepared  was  near  at  hand.  All  being  thus  graoefolljr 
managed^  with  the  general  applause  of  the  common  soldiers^  thereby 
expressing  how  great  Peucestes  was  in  their  fevour  and  esteem,  he 
was  suspected  by  Eumenes^  who  conceived  that  Peucestes  did  this  to 
ingratiate  himself  with  the  army,  and  thereby  to  gain  the  sovereign 
command;  he  therefore  forged  a  letter,  by  which  he  raised  up  the 
spirits  of  the  soldiers,  and  made  them  more  courageous,  and  brought 
down  the  haughty  spirit  and  pride  of  Peucestes;  but  advanced  his 
own  reputation  with  the  army,  by  the  hopes  of  good  success  for  the 

future.    The  contents  of  the  letter  was  this ^That  Olympias^  with 

Alexander's  son,  (having  killed  Cassander),had  fully  recovered  Ae 
kingdom  of  Macedon;  and  that  Polyperchon,  with  the  main  power 
of  the  king's  army,  and  his  elephants,  had  put  over  into  Asia  aguost 
Antigonus,  and  was  then  in  Cappadocia.  This  letter  was  written  in 
Syriac  characters,  in  the  name  of  Orontas,  governor  of  Armenia,  ao 
intimate  friend  of  Peucestes.  These  letters  passing  as  authentic,  be- 
cause of  the  continual  (correspondence  between  him  and  the  krd- 
lieutenants,  Eumenes  ordered  them  to  be  carried  about,  and  shewn  to 
the  captains  and  most  of  the  soldiers.  Hereupon  the  whole  army 
changed  their  mind,  and  all  eyes  were  upon  Eumenes,  as  the  chidf 
fevourite,  and  therefore  they  resolved  to  depend  upon  him»  as  he  whose 
interest  in  the  kings  would  be  able  to  advance  whom  he  pleased^  and 
to  punish  whom  he  thought  fit. 

When  the  feasting  was  ended,  Eumenes,  the  more  to  terrify  diem 
that  were  regardless  of  his  orders,  and  who  affected  the  soverefpi 
command,  called  in  question,  in  due  form  of  law,  Siburtins^  the  go* 
vernor  of  Arachosia,  Peucestes's  special  friend:  for  Peucestes,  send* 
ing  away  some  horse  into  Arachosia,  had  secretly  commanded  Si* 
burtlus  to  intercept  the  carriages  coming  from  thence.  Whereupon 
Eumenes  brought  him  into  such  imminent  danger,  that  unless  he 
had  privately  withdrawn  himself,  he  would  have  been  killed  fay  the 
soldiers.  By  this  piece  of  policy,  having  terrified  others,  and  advanced 
his  own  honour  and  reputation,  he  put  on  a  new  face  again,  and  so 
gained  upon  Peucestes  with  smooth  words  and  large  promises,  that 
he  became  both  kind  and  courteous  to  him,  and  cheerful  and  ready  to 
afford  aid  and  assistance  to  the  kings.  Desiring  likewise  to  be  as* 
surcd  of  the  rest  of  the  governors  and  captains  by  some  pledges,  which 
might  engage  them  not  to  forsake  him,  he  pretended  to  want  money, 
and  desired  them  to  contribute,  every  one  according  to  his  ability,  to 
the  kings. 

Hereupon,  receiving  four  hundred  talents  from  among  so  many  of 
the  capUins  and  generals  as  he  thought  fit,  those  whom  he  bcfne 


Ckc^.IL  DIODO&US  8ICULUS.  339 

1  ■  ■  ,  ■  .1  II  ■      ■  '  ■  ssAgaat: 

suspected  of  treachery  or  desertioD,  became  most  faithfal  attend- 
ants aud  guards  to  bis  person,  and  stuck  close  to  him  in  all  en- 
counters* 

While  he  thus  prudently  managed  afiiurs,  and  was  providing  for 
the  future^  news  was  brought  by  some  who  came  out  of  Media,  that 
Antigonns  was  marching  with  bis  army  into  Persia:  whereupon  he 
moved  forward,  with  a  design  to  meet  and  engage  the  enemy. 

The  second  day  of  their  march  he  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  plen- 
tifully feasted  the  army,  wishing  them  to  continue  firm  and  feithful 
U>  him;  but,  wishing  to  comply  with  the  humour  of  his  guests,  who 
loved  to  drink  freely,  he  fell  into  a  distemper,  which  caused  him  to 
lay  by,  and  so  hindered  his  march  for  some  days. 

In  the  mean  time  the  army  was  greatly  dejected,  to  consider  that 
tl)e  most  expert  and  bravest  commander  of  all  the  generals  should  be 
now  sick,  at  the  very  time  (as  they  thought)  they  were  even  rea^  to 
fight  the  enemy. 

But  bis  distemper  abating,  and  after  a  little  time  having  recovered 
himself,  he  pursued  his  march,  Peucestes  and  Antigenes  leading  the 
van;  and  he  himself  in  a  litter  followed  after  with  the  elephants,  to 
prevent  disturbance  by  the  crowd,  and  the  inconveniency  by  the 
straitness  of  the  places  they  were  to  pass. 

And  now  the  two  armies  were  within  a  day's  march  one  of  the 
other,  when  the  scouts  on  both  sides  brought  an  account  of  their  ap* 
proacb,  and  what  numbers  they  were,  and  ways  they  took.  Where- 
apon  each  party  prepared  for  battle:  but  at  length  they  parted 
without  fighting;  for  there  was  a  river  and  a  deep  trench  between 
the  two  armies.  Both  indeed  were  drawn  forth  in  battalia,  but,  by 
reason  of  the  badness  of  the  ground,  they  could  dot  come  to  action: 
wherefore,  drawing  off  three  furlongs  distant  one  from  another,  they 
spent  four  days  in  light  skirmishes,  and  foraging  the  country  there- 
abouts, being  much  in  want  of  all  things  necessary.  The  fifth  day 
Antigonus,  by  his  agents,  again  solicited  the  governors  of  the  pro- 
vinces, and  the  Macedonians,  to  desert  Eumenes,  and  commit  them- 
selves to  his  protection.  For  he  promised  that  he  would  leave  to 
every  one  of  them  their  own  several  provinces,  and  would  bestow 
large  territories  upon  the  rest;  and  others  he  would  send  into  their 
own  country y  laden  with  honours  and  great  rewards;  and,  as  for 
those  that  were  willing  still  to  bear  arms,  he  would  give  them  places 
and  posts  in  the  army  suitable  to  their  several  circumstances:  but 
the  Macedonians  would  not  hearken  to  any  part  of  these  terms,  but 
sent  away  the  messengers  with  great  indignation  and  threats:  upon 
which  Eumenes  came  amongst  them,  and  gave  them  thanks,  with 
commendations  for  tlien*  fidelity,  and  told  them  an  old  story,  but  very 


340  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BooUXTX. 

suitable  to  the  preseut  occasion ^That  a  lion  falling  in  love  with  a 

young  lady,  treated  with  her  father  to  bestow  her  upon  him  in  mar- 

yiage;  who  answered ^That  he  was  very  willing  to  give  the  ycNing 

woman  to  be  his  wife,  but  that  he  was  afraid  of  his  claws  an4  teetli, 
lest,  when  he  was  married,  according  to  the  nature  of  his  kind,  he 
should  devour  the  poor  girl.  Hereupon  the  lion  beat  out  his  teetb^ 
and  tore  off  his  claws :  upon  which  the  father,  perceiving  that  now  he 
had  lost  whatever  before  made  him  formidable,  fell  upon  him,  and 
easily  cudgelled  him  to  death.  And  that  now  Antigonus  was  acting 
a  part  not  much  unlike  this:  for  he  courted  them  with  fair  promises^ 
till  such  time  as  he  could  get  the  army  into  his  power,  and  then  he 
would  be  sure  to  cut  the  throats  of  the  commanders.  This  fine  atocj, 
thus  handsomely  told,  was  highly  applauded  by  the  army;  and  here- 
upon he  dismissed  them. 

The  next  night  some  deserters  from  Antigonus  came  in,  and  gave 
intelligence,  that  he  had  ordered  his  army  to  march  at  the  second 
watch.  Hereupon  Eumenes,  upon  serious  thoughts,  and  musing  on 
what  his  designs  might  be,  at  length  hit  upon  the  truth  of  the  mat- 
ter, that  the  enemy's  purpose  was  to  march  to  Gabene,  which  was  a 
country  three  days  march  distant,  then  untouched,  abounding  in  corn 
and  forage,  sufficient  to  supply  the  greatest  army  plentifully  with  all 
sorts  of  provisions ;  and  besides,  it  was  a  place  of  great  advantage,  fall 
of  rivers  and  deep  ravins  that  were  impassable.  Contriving  there* 
fore  to  prevent  the  enemy,  he  put  in  execution  the  like  project; 
and  sent  away  some  of  the  mercenaries,  (whom  he  hired  with  mcK 
ney),  under  colour  of  runaways,  with  orders  to  inform  Antigbnos, 
that  Eumenes  would  fall  upon  his  camp  that  night.  But  Eumenes 
himself  sent  off  the  carriages  before,  and  commanded  the  soMieis 
with  all  speed  to  eat  their  suppers,  and  march:  all  which  was  pre- 
sently despatched. 

In  the  mean  time  Antigonus,  upon  the  intelligence  received  from 
the  deserters,  resolved  to  fight  the  enemy  that  night,  and  therefore 
put  a  stop  to  his  march,  and  placed  his  army  in  order  of  battle. 

During  which  hurry  of  Antigonus,  and  while  hfe  was  preparing  to 
meet  his  enemy,  Eumenes*  stole  away  with  his  army,  and  made  to- 
wards Gabene  before  him.  Antigonus  for  some  time  waited  with 
his  soldiers  at  their  arms;  but  receiving  intelligence  by  his  scouts, 
that  the  army  of  Eumenes  was  gone,  he  perceived  that  a  trick  was 
put  upon  him.  However,  he  went  on  with  what  he  had  before  de- 
signed; and,  to  that  end,  giving  the  word  of  command  to  his  armj 
to  march,  he  posted  away  with  that  haste  and  speed,  as  if  he  had  been 
in  a  pursuit. 
But  when  he  understood  that  Eumenes  had  got  six  honn  march 


CkapkU.  moDORUS  8ICUL17S.  341' 


Mfaa 


befofe  buaip  and  to  perceiTiog  Aat  he  was  not  tble  ct  so  great  a  dis- 
tance to  otertake  him  with  hu  whole  anny^  he  oontriTed  asfollowss 
he  delivered  the  rest  of  the  anny  to  I^thoo^  wUliog  that;  he  shooli 
comeeeMy  after  him;  and  he  himself  posted  away  with  the  horse. 
About  spring  of  day-he  came  up  with  the  rear  of  the  enemy's  army, 
aa  Aey  weie  marching  down  a  hill|  upon  the  Uxp  ai'iht  menn- 
tain  he  made  a  baltj  and  there  presented  himself  to  the  view  of 
Ae  enemy. 

•  Eumenc^Sy  at  a  cuioTenient  distahee,  seeing  the  enemy's  horsey  ooiw 
cdved  thaf  the  whole  army  was  near  at  hand^  and  therefore  made  a 
standi  and  drew  up  his  men  in  order  of  battle^as  if.Aey  shoold  fbitlU 
with  engage.  In  this  manner  these  two  genemls  pat  tricln  one  npott- 
another,  as  if  they  were  striving  which  shonld  outwit  the  othevi  there- 
by shewing,  that  all  their  hopes  of  victory  \kj  and  were  groonded  ap» 
on  their  own  stratagems. 

By  this  means,  therefore,  Antigonus  put  a  slop  to  the  eneaay^a* 
march,  and  gained  time  for  his  army  to  cmne  up  to  him$  which  at 
length  jcmiag  with  him^  he  drew  np  in  battalia^  and  in  that  order 
marched  down  the  hill  in  a  terrible  manner  npon  the  enemy.  The 
whole  army  (with  those  broaght  in  by  Python  and  Seleucos)  amounted 
to  above  eight-and-twenty  thousand  foot,  eight  thousand  five  hun- 
dred horse,  and  sixty-five  elephants.  Both  the  generals  ranged  didr  • 
armies  in  an  array  that  was  strange  and  unusual,  as  if  they  atrave 
which  should  excel  the  other  even  in  this  piece  of  art  also.  In  the 
left  wing  Eumenes  placed  Eodamns,  the  captain  of  the  elephants 
ftom  India,  who  had  with  him  a  body  of  a  hundred  and  fifky  hones 
in  front  of  these  were  drawn  up  two  squadrons  of  choice  hosse  armed 
with  laifces,  fifty  deep,  and  were  all  jmned  to  those  who  were  placed 
upon  the  rising  ground  near  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  Next  to  them 
was  drawn  up  Stasander,  with  nine  hundred  and  fifty  of»  his  own 
horse.  After -these,  he  ordered  Aftiphimachus^  l(»d-lieutenant  of 
Mesopotamia,  who  had  under  his  command  su  hnndied  hone* 
Next  to  them  were  drawn  up  the  horse  from  Arachosia,  lately  com- 
manded by  Siburtius,  but,  because  he  was  then  fled,  the  command 
was  given  to  Cephalus.  Close  to  these  were  five  hundred  horse . 
from  Paropamisus,  and  as  many  Thmcians  from  the  upper  colonies. 
In  the  van  of  all  these  stood  five-and-forty  elephants,  drawn  up 
in  the  form  of  a  half  moon,  lined  with  as  many  archers  and  slingem 
as  was  thought  fit. 

Then  he  drew  up  his  maiii  body  of  foot  in  a  phahnx  in  this  man* 
ner:  at -the  farthest  i^oinfwere  placed  above  six  thousand  foieign 
soldiers,  then  five  thousand  out  of  several  countries,  armed  after  the 
manner  of  the  Macedonians;  after  these  were  drawn  upon  more 


348  DIODORUS  9ICULU6. 

than  three  thousand  Argyiaspides^  but  men  never  oon%uerttd»  and  far 
their  valour  dreaded  by  the  enemy.    And  lastly^  after  ally  tbiea  i 
mnd  largeteert  of  the  life  guard;  which,  together  with  tke . 
pides^  were  commanded  by  Antigenes  and  TautamttS^    Aad  ui  thi 
▼an  of  this  phalanx  stood  forty  elephants,  lined  with  light-nitii 
men.    Next  to  the  phalanx  in  the  right  wing  he  drew  up  e^;lrt  hu« 
dred  of  Carmanian  horse,  under  the  command  of  TlepoliiBU^  tUm 
govemor  of  that  province;  and  after  them  nine  hundred  who  wcro 
called  Companions*    Then  the  squadron  of  A  ntigenes  and  PeacctleSp 
being  three  hundred  in  one  troop*    In  the  utmost  part  of  the 
was  placed  Eumenes's  own  regiment,  consisting  of  as  many  i 
and  before  these  was  a  forlorn-hope,  made  up  of  Eiimenes'a  j 
placed  in  two  bodies,  each  consisting  of  fifty  horse.    There  wna 
likewise  two  hundred  horse  drawn  up  in  four  squadrons,  aod  plaini 
in  the  Dank  at  a  distance  from  the  main  wing,  to  be  a  guard  to  dm 
part*    And  besides  all  these,  he  phM^  three  hundred  hofBe,  called 
out  of  all  the  provinces  for  strength  and  speed,  to.be  a  guard  to  the 
rear  of  his  squadron :  and  in  the  van  of  this  wing  thus  anajcd  i 
placed  forty  elephants,  for  the  better  defence  of  the  whcdc* 
nes's  whole  army  amounted  to  five-and*thirty  thousand  Ssotp  as 
thousand  and  one  hundred  horse,  and  one  hundred  and  fauitaoi 
elephants* 

Antigonus  observing  from  the  top  of  the  hills  bow  the  amj  of  tha 
enemy  was  drawn  up,  drew  up  his  likewise  so  as  might  be  moat  con* 
venient  to  the  present  circumstances.  For  taking  notaee  thai  Us 
enemy's  right  wing  was  very  strongly  guarded  with  horse  and  cle«r 
phantSy  he  fronted  them  with  the  choicest  of  his  own  horse^  who 
being  in  small  parties,  at  a  considerable  distance  one  from  anotbciy 
might  charge  in  manner  of  a  running  fight,  wheeling  off  one  aficK 
another,  and^  so  still  renew  the  fight  by  fresh  men.  And  bf  tUs 
SDcans  the  strength  of  that  part  of  the  enemy's  -  army,  wherein  thq^ 
placed  their  greatest  confidence,  was  wholly  eluded.  For  in  thia 
phalanx  he  had  placed  about  a  thousand  archers  and  lanceteen  on 
horseback,  out  of  Media  and  Armenia,  who  had  ever  been  used  to  thia 
way  of  charging  by  turns.  Next  to  them  were  drawn  up  two  thou- 
sand and  two  hundred  Tarentines,  who  came  up  with  him  fran  the 
sea-coasts,  who  were  men  very  expert  in  laying  ambuscadesy  and 
contriving  other  stratagems  of  war,  and  liad  a  great  respect  and  \ubA* 
nessforhim:  athousand,  likewise,  out  of  Pbrygia  and  Ljrdia;  fifkeen 
hundred  under  the  command  of  Python;  and  four  hundred  apeamen 
led  by  Lysanias.  After  all  these  followed  those  called  the  Anthippi*, 
anci  them  out  of  the  higher  provinces,  to  the  number  of  eight 

*  Antliippi :  u  ^  eneiyics  or  oppostn  of  the  1 


XSkgp.  tL  DIODORUS  STCULUS.  343 

4rod.  And  of  Ibis  body  of  hone  was  the  left  wing  completed  and 
made  up,  all  under  the  command  of  Python.  In  the  main  battle^  of 
foot  wei«  pkccd  in  the  front  nine  thousand  fore^nere;  next  to  them 
three  thoaaa«d  Lyciaas  and  Pamphilians,  and  above  eight  thoasand 
out  of  drrers  nations^  amed  after  the  Macedonian  msinner;  and  in 
the  rear  were  the  Macedonians^  to  the  number  of  eight  thoasaitd^ 
wlMch  Amipater  had  formerly  sent  as  recruits  when  he  took  upon 
him  the  government  of  the  kingdom.  In  the  right  wing  of  horse, 
dtooe  to  the  right  of  the  phalanx  of  foot^  were  first  placed  five  huii« 
died  mercenaries;  next  to  them  a  thousand  Thraetans^  and  as  aiAnj 
confisdarales;  and  close  after  ttiem  were  a  thousand  called  Ciompa* 
iiiofia.  These  wefe  all  commanded  by  Demetrius  the  son  of  Anti- 
0OIHIS9  which  was  the  first  time  he  appeared  in  arms  to  assist  hts 
fcther:  la  the  utmost  part  of  the  wing  were  placed  three  hundred 
korsC)  with  which  Antigonus  himself  engaged.  This  sqttadron  eoa- 
•isted  of  three  troops  of  his  servants,  and  as  many  of  others^  drawn 
up  in  equal  distances  one  from^another,  supported  by  a  hundred 
Tarentioes.  Round  this  wing  were  placed  thirty  of  the  strongest  of 
hh  elephants,  in  form  of  a  half-moon,  interlined  with  light -armed 
OMo:  many  of  the  other  elephants  he  placed  in  the  ftont  of  the 
phalanx  of  foot,  and  a  few  with  some  horse  in  the  fiank  on  the  left; 
The  army  arrayed  in  this  manner,  he  marched  down  upon  the  enemy^ 
in*  an  oblique  order:  for  he  ordered  the  right  wing  to  be  stretched 
oat  iur  in  length,  and  the  left  to  be  much  contracted,  designing  with 
lllis  to  make  a  running  fight,  and  to  engage  hand  to  hand  with  the 
other. 

And  now  the  armies  drew  near  one  to  the  other;  and  signal  of 
battle  being  given  on  both  sides,  shouts  echoed  one  to  another,  and 
the  trumpets  sounded  a  ctiarge.  And  first  the  horse  with  Python  fell 
on,  although  they  had  no  forlorn  either  of  men  or  elephants  for  a  firm 
defence;  yet  overpowering  the  enemy  in  number  and  swiftness,  made 
use  of  that  advantage:  but  lookiitg  upon  it  not  safe  to  encounter  the 
elephants  in  the  front,  they  wheeled  about,  and  poured  in  showers  of 
shot  upon  the  enemy  in  the  flank,  and  with  little  or  no  prejudice  to 
themselves,  by  reason  of  their  speed,  and  nimbleness  of  their  horses, 
for  they  sorely  galled  the  enemy,  who  were  neither  able  to  fall  upon 
tlie  assailants,  on  account  of  the  weight  of  their  arms,  nor  in  a  capa« 
city  to  avoid  them  as  occasion  required.  Hereupon  Eumenes  seeing 
how  the  right  wing  was  distressed  by  multitudes  of  archers  on  horse- 
back, sent  for  some  of  the  swiftest  horse  from  Eudamus,  who  com 
manded  the  left  wing;  and  by  this  body  of  horse  brought  in  from  the 
other  wing,  (though  it  were  but  small),  be  made  so  fierce  a  charge 
upon  the  enemy,  being  seconded  by  bis  elephants,  that  he  easily  put 


344  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Sook  XIX. 

the  Pythonians  to  flighty  and  pursued  them  as  far  as  to  the  foot  ot  the 
mountains. 

In  the  mean  while  the  foot  fought  stoutly  a  long  time  together; 
at  leugthj  after  many  falling  on  both  sides^  the  £umenian8  roated 
them  by  the  valour  of  the  silver  shields*.  For  though  they  were  now 
very  old,  yet  by  frequent  use  of  their  arms  in  many  battles,  they  si^ 
excelled  all  others^  both  as  to  courage  and  skill  in  their  weapons,  tint 
none  were  able  to  stand  before  them.  And  therefore  at  this  voj 
time,  though  they  were  only  three  thousand,  yet  they  were  the  chirf 
strength  and  support  of  the  whole  army. 

When  Antigonus  perceived  that  his  left  wing  was  routed,  and  die 
whole  phalanxf  put  to  flight,  though  he  was  advised  (seeing  that  part 
of  the  army  with  him  was  yet  entire)  to  retreat  to  the  mountains,  and 
receive  in  again  those  that  were  fled,  yet  he  would  not  hear  of  it;  bat 
prudently  making  use  of  the  present  opportunity,  both  saved  his  own 
men,  and  gained  likewise  the  advantage. 

For  the  Argyraspides,  with  Eumenes  and  the  rest  of  the  foo^  hav* 
ing  put  the  enemy  to  flight,  continued  their  pursuit  to  the  foot  of  the 
mountains:  upon  which  Antigonus,  through  an  open  pttsage  made 
in  the  enemies  main  body,  with  a  party  of  horse  fell  upon  tiie  flank 
of  Eudamus's  regiments,  which  were  in  the  left  wing,  and  by  this 
sudden  and  unexpected  charge  put  them  to  flight;  and  after  tke 
slaughter  of  multitudes,  sent  away  some  of  the  swiftest  of  his  horse 
to  recal  his  own  men  tliat  were  before  fled,  and  so  caused  them  to 
rally  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains.  And  Eumenes  also  percdvinf 
the  flight  of  his  men,  hastened  to  the  relief  of  Eudamus,  and  recalled 
by  sound  of  trumpet,  those  of  his  that  fled.  And  now  the  stars  be* 
gan  to  appear,  when  the  generals  having  recalled  their  flying  meUf 
on  both  sides  prepared  for  battle  afresh ;  such  was  the  heat  and  vigour 
both  of  the  officers  and  common  soldiers.  The  night  was  very  dear 
and  serene,  and  the  moon  at  full :  and  tlie  armies  being  about  four 
acres  distant  one  over  against  the  other,  the  clattering  of  arms,  and 
the  neighing  of  horses  seemed  on  both  sides  as  if  they  had  been  in 
the  midst  of  one  another.  It  was  now  midnight  when  they  had  drawn 
off  about  tliirty  furlongs  from  the  place  of  battle  where  the  dead  lay, 
and  by  reason  of  the  troublesomeness  of  the  march,  and  the  toils  and 
grievances  of  the  fight,  with  the  want,  likewise,  of  provisions,  both 
sides  were  but  in  a  bad  condition:  therefore  they  were  forced  to  leave 
off  fig)itingy  and  encamp,  Eumenes  had  a  design  to  have  marched 
back  to  the  slain,  in  order  to  have  buried  them,  as  a  sign  of  his  being 
absolute  victor,  but  the  army  refused,  and  all  were  instant  with  load 
cries  to  return  to  their  carriages,  which  were  then  at  a  great 

*  Argjrraipides.  t  BsttaJioD  of  foot. 


Chap.  IL  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  345 

from  them,  so  tliai  he  was  forced  to  submit.  For  seeing  there  were 
so  maoy  that  affected  the  chief  command,  he  had  no  power  to  move 
the  army  by  threats,  nor  saw  at  that  time  any  convenient  opportunity 
to  ^in  upon  them  ihat  were  obstinate  by  arguments  and  entreaties.. 
But  Antigonus,  on  tiie  contrary,  was  an  absolute  general,  without  any 
dependance  upon  the  popularity,  and  therefore  forced  the  soldiers  to 
encamp  near  the  do;id  bodies;  and  so  gaining  the  privilege  of  bury- 
ing the  dead,  he  raised  a  doubt  who  was  victorious,  saying — ^That  he 
who  had  power  to  bury  his  dead,  was  ever  to  be  esteemed  conqueror 
of  the  field. 

In  this  battle  there  were  killed  on  Antigonus's  side  three  thoa- 
saud  and  seven  hundred  foot,  and  fifty-four  horse,  and  above  four, 
thousand  wounded.  On  Eumenes's  party  were  slain  five  hundred 
mod  forty  foot,  but  very  few  horse,  and  above  nine  hundred  hurt. 

Aotigonus,  after  the  battle  was  over,  perceiving  that  the  spirits 
of  his  soldiers  were  very  low,  resolved,  with  all  the  haste  he  could^ 
to  remove  far  off  from  the  enemy's  camp,  and  tliat  his  forces  might 
anarch  the  more  readily,  he  sent  away  the  wounded  men  and  heavy 
baggage  to  a  town  near  at  hand.  Then  having  buried  the  dead,  about 
break  of  day  (detaining  with  him  the  herald  that  was  sent  to  him  by 
the  enemy  to  beg  the  bodies  of  the  dead),  even  at  that  very  hour  he 
commanded  the  soldiers  to  dine.  At  night  he  discharged  the  herald, 
and  gave  leave  to  come  and  bury  the  dead  the  next  day.  He  himself 
presently  at  the  first  watch  of  the  night  moved  with  his  whole  army, 
and  by  continued  and  long  marches  got  a  long  way  off  from  the 
enemy,  to  a  country  untouched,  where  he  had  plenty  of  provisions 
for  the  refreshing  of  his  army:  for  he  marched  as  far  as  to  Gamarga 
in  Media,  a  country  under  the  command  of  Python,  abounding  in  all 
things  for  the  maintaining  of  the  greatest  armies.  Eumenes  having 
intelligence  by  his  scouts  that  Antigonus  was  gone,  would  not 
follow  after  him,  botii  because  his  army  was  in  want  of  provisions, 
and  in  other  bad  circumstances^  as  likewise  because  he  had  a  great 
desire  to  inter  his  dead  in  the  most  solemn  manner  he  possibly 
could. 

Upon  which  occasion  a  strange  accident  occurred  at  this  time, 
very  unusual  and  dissoiiaiit  from  the  laws  of  tlie  Grecians:  for  there 
was  one  Ceteus,  who  commanded  them  that  came  out  of  India,  and 
fought  with  great  resolution,  but  died  in  this  battle;  he  left  two 
wives  behind  him,  who  toilowed  him  all  along  during  the  campaign: 
one  he  had  but  lately  married,  the  other  had  been  ni^  wife  for  som« 
years  bciore;  and  both  loved  their  husband  exceedingly.  It  had 
been  an  antient  custom  iu  India  for  men  and  women  to  marry  with 

Vol.  2.   No.  44.  yy 


346  DioDORUs  8icuLU».  JBook  XIX. 

their  own  mutual  likings  without  consulting  the  adnce  of  their 
parents.  And  in  regard  that  in  those  former  times  young  people 
would  rashly  marry  one  another,  and  often  repent  after,  as  being 
deceived  in  their  choice,  many  wives  were  corrupted,  and  thimigli 
their  inordinate  lusts  fell  in  love  with  other  men;  and  became  thef 
could  not  with  their  credit  and  reputation  leave  them  they  first  cbose, 
they  would  often  poison  their  husbands;  to  the  more  ready  elfectiiif 
of  which  thecountry'did  not  a  little  contribute,  by  bearing  many  and 
divers  sorts  of  poisonous  plants,  some  of  which  ever  so  little  bruised  and 
mixed  either  in  meat  or  drink,  certainly  kill  the  party.  This  wid»A 
art  growing  still  more  and  more  prevalent,  and  many  being  destroyed 
by  this  means,  and  though  several  were  punished  for  these  pieces  ef 
villany,  yet  othera  would  not  be  reclaimed,  nor  restrained  fron  the 

like  practices:  another  law  therefore  was  made That  wives  shoidd 

be  burnt  together  with  their  dead  husbands,  except  they  were  with 
child,  or  luid  born  children;  and  that  she  who  would  not  observe  the 
common  law  of  the  land,  should  remain  a  widow,  and  as  one  eon- 
victed  of  that  impiety,  should  be  excluded  from  all  sacred  rites,  and 
all  other  benefit  and  privilege  of  the  laws.  Thb  being  thus  esta- 
blished, henceforward  this  wickedness  of  the  wives  was  changed  into 
a  contrary  practice.  For  seeing  that  every  wife,  to  avoid  that  inssf- 
fcrable  disgrace,  was  voluntarily  to  die,  they  became  not  onlyearefal 
to  preserve  the  health,  and  provide  for  the  well-being  of  their  hii»* 
bands,  as  that  which  was  likewise  their  own  preservatiott;  but  Ae 
wives  strove  one  with  another,  as  who  slK>uld  gain  the  highest  pitch 
o(  honour  and  reputation.  An  example  of  which  fell  out  at  thb 
time.  For  although  by  the  law  one  only  was  to  be  burnt  with  the 
husband,  yet  at  the  funeral  of  Ceteus,  both  strove  which  shoald  die^ 
as  for  some  honourable  re^iard  of  their  virtue :  whereupon  the  matter 
was  brought  before  the  generals  for  their  decision.  The  yoonger 
declared,  that  tlie  other  was  with  child,  and  therefore  her  death  could 
not  satisfy  the  law:  the  elder  pleaded,  that  it  was  a  greater  piece  of 
justice,  that  she  who  was  before  the  otiier  in  yean,  should  be  prefer* 
cd  before  her  in  honour:  for  in  all  other  cases  the  constant  rule  if 
to  yield  more  honour  and  respect  to  the  elder  than  to  the  yoni^ger. 
The  captains  being  informed  by  the  mtdwives  that  the  elder  was  with 
child,  preferred  the  younger  before  the  other:  upon  which  she  lost 
her  cause,  went  out  weeping  and  wailing,  renting  her  veil  in  pieees, 
and  tearing  her  hair,  as  if  some  sod  and  dreadful  news  had  been  toM 
her.  The  other,  rejoicing  in  the  victory,  made  forthwith  to  the 
funeral  pile,  crowned  by  the  women  of  her  house  with  attires  calle|l 
mitres^,  and  by  her  kindred  brought  forth  most  richly  adorned^  nlo 

*  Auires  womcD  used  to  wear,  with  Ubels  banging  i 


Chap.  IL  DIODORUS  8ICU1U9.  347 

some  nuptial  festival,  setting  forth  her  praises  all  along  as  th^y  went, 
in  songs  fitted  for  that  occasion. 

As  soon  as  she  came  to  the  pile  she  threw  off  her  attire,  and  distii-^ 
bated  them  amongst  her  servants  and  friends,  leaving  these  behind 
her,  as  tokens  of  remembrances  for  them  that  loved  her.  Her  attire 
was  multitudes  of  rings  upon  her  fingers,  set  with  all  manner  of 
precious  stones  of  divers  colours.  Upon  her  head  were  a  great 
number  of  little  golden  stars,  between  which  were  placed  sparkling 
stones  of  all  sorts.  About  her  neck  she  wore  abundance  of  jewels, 
come  small  and  others*large ;  increasing  by  degrees  in  bigness  as  they 
were  put  on  one  after  another.  At  length  she  took  leave  of  all  her 
fieimily  and  servants,  and  then  her  brother  placed  her  upon  the  pile, 
and  to  the  great  admiration  of  the  people,  (who  flocked  thither  to 
aee  the  sight),  with  an  heroic  courage  she  there  ended  her  life. 

The  whole  army  solemnly  in  their  arms  marched  thrice  round  tbs 
pile  before  it  was  kindled:  she  in  the  mean  time  (disposing  of  her- 
self towards  her  husband's  body)  discovered  not  by  any  shrieks  or 
otherwise,  that  she  was  at  all  daunted  at  the  noise  of  the  crackling 
flames,  so  that  the  spectators  were  afiected,  some  with  pity,  and 
others  with  admiration,  and  extraordinary  commendation  of  her  re- 
solution. However  there  are  some  who  condemn  this  law  as  cruel 
and  inhuman* 

After  the  funeral  was  over,  Eumenes  marched  from  Fareteceni  to 
Gabene,  which  being  yet  untouched,  was  in  a  condition  to  supply 
the  army  with  all  things  necessary,  which  was  distant  from  Anti- 
gonus's  army  (going  through  the  countries  inhabited)  five-aud- 
twenty  days  journey;  but  passing  through  the  deserts,  (where  there 
is  no  water),  it  is  but  nine  days  journey;  being  thus  far  distant  one 
from  another,  he  there  wintered,  and  so  gave  his  army  time  to  refresh 
themselves. 

As  for  the  affairs  of  Europe,  Cassander,  while  he  lay  at  the  siege  of 
Tegsea,  hearing  of  the  return  of  Olympias  into  Macedonia,  and  of  the 
death  of  Eurydice  and  king  Philip,  and  what  was  done  to  the  sepul- 
chre of  loias  his  brother,  agreed  with  the  Tegseans,  and  marched 
with  his  army  into  Macedonia,  leaving  his  confederates  in  great 
trouble  and  perplexity.  For  Alexander  the  son  of  Polyperchon  was 
then  entered  Peloponnesus,  and  ready  to  set  upon  the  cities  with  a 
great  army.  And  the  iEtolians,  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  Olym- 
pias and  Polyperchon,  seized  upon  tlie  strait  passes  at  Pyl«,  and 
blocked  up  the  passage  to  stop  Cassander  in  his  march :  but  he  per- 
ceiving that  it  was  very  difficult  for  him  to  force  his  way  through 
those  narrow  straits,  by  tlie  help  of  some  ships  and  several  boats  out 


348  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIX. 


of  Eubcea  and  Locris,  passed  over  into  Thessaly.  And  hearing  that 
Polyperchon  lay  with  his  army  in  Perrhfiebia,  he  ordered  away  CalUtf 
his  general^  with  some  forces  to  fight  him.  In  the  mean  time  Dinias 
being  sent  away  to  secure  the  straits  of  Perrhaebia^  possessed  himself 
of  those  passes  before  the  forces  of  Olympias  could  reach  them. 

As  soon  as  Olympias  heard  that  Cassander  was  entering  Macedonia 
with  a  great  army,  she  created  Aristonus  general,  and  commanded 
him  to  fight  Cassander.  She  herself,  taVing  along  with  her  the  soa 
of  Alexander,  and  Roxana  his  mother,  and  Thessalonica  the  daughter 
of  Philipthe  son  of  Amyntas,Dcidamia  the  daughter  of  ^acidas  king  of 
Epirus,  and  sister  to  Pyrrhiis,  (who  afterwards  made  war  upon  the 
Romans),  and  the  daughters  of  Attains,  and  other  kindred  and  emi- 
nent relations,  entered  into  Pydna,  so  thnt  a  great  throng  of  people^ 
useless  and  unserviceable  for  war,  attc^nded  upon  her.  Neithei'waa 
there  provision  in  that  place  sufficient  for  such  a  multitude,  to  hold 
out  any  long  siege.  All  which  disadvantages,  though  they  were  clear 
evidences  of  the  greatness  of  the  danger,  yet  she  was  resolved  to  stay 
here,  expecting  many  Greeks  and  Macedonians  to  come  in  to  lier 
assistance  by  sea. 

There  were  with  her  some  horse  from  Ambracia,  and  many  of  the 
troops  of  the  household;  and  the  rest  of  Polyperchon's  elephants: 
the  others  had  been  before  taken  by  Cassander,  at  his  former  irrup* 
tion  into  Macedonia;  who  now  having  recovered  the  passes  at 
Perrhsebia,  so  as  that  he  had  his  way  open  to  Pydna,  beprt  the 
town  round  with  a  mud  wall  from  sea  to  sea;  and  sent  for  ship* 
ping,  and  all  sorts  of  weapons  and  engines  of  battery  from  hit 
confederates,  with  a  design  to  block  up  Olympias  both  by  set  and 
land. 

But  when  he  had  intelligence  that  i^lacidas  king  of  Epirus  was 
coming  with  a  strong  army  to  the  relief  of  Olympias,  he  delivered 
some  forces  to  the  command  of  Atarchias,  with  orders  to  meet  the 
Epirots,  who  presently  executing  what  he  was  commanded,  pOBsessed 
himself  of  the  passes  into  Epirus,  so  that  iEacidas  was  wholly  defeated 
in  his  design. 

For  the  Epirots  were  forced  against  their  wills  to  the  expedition 
into  Macedonia,  and  therefore  mutinied  in  the  camp:  however,  .£a- 
cidas,  desirous  by  any  way  possible  to  relieve  Olympias,  cashiered  all 
those  that  favoured  not  his  design;  taking  in  those  who  were  willing 
to  run  the  same  risk  with  himself;  he  was  indeed  very  forward  to  en* 
giige,  but  had  not  yet  force  enough ;  for  the  party  that  stuck  to  him 
WHS  very  small. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Epirots  that  were  sent  away  into  their  own 


estop.  JZ  DIObORUS  SICULU9.  399 

coontTj  revolted  from  the  king;  tnd  hb  people,  by  aeomniOD  decree 
of  the  sttte,  btoished  him  the  kingdom,  and  confederated  with  Gas- 
siinder ;  Hke  to  which  never  before  happened  in  Ejpimf  ^  6om  the  time 
that  Neoptolemns  the  son  of  Achilles  reigned  there.  For  the  kingdom 
ever  descended  from  the  father  bj  right  <rf  succession  to  the  son,  tiff 
this  time. 

Wlien  Cassander  was  thus  supported  by  the  confederaey  of  the  ^ 
l^rots,  and  *lmd  sent  Lyciscus  both  as  general  and  viceroy  into 
E|»rus,  they  in  Macedonia,  who  before  were  at  a  stand  whether 
dvey  should  confoderate  with  Olympias  or  not,  now,  (seebgfto  bopee 
lemaining  for  the  retrieving  her  aflhirs),  joined  with  Cassander.  8f> 
d»t  now  the  only  prop  remaining  to  rely  upoii  for  rdief  was  Poly- 
perchoo,«and  thb  was  presently  in'a  strange  manner  ahettered  and 
broken  in  pieces;  for  when  Callas,  who  was  sent  as  general  bf 
Cassander,  sat  down  with  his  army  near  to  Polyperchon  in  Perrfass* 
bia,  he  so  corrupted  most  of  his  soldiers  widi  hnge  bribes^  that  veij 
few  remained,  especially  of  those  that  were  looked  upon  to  be  most 
ftithful:  and  thus  low  were  the  affiurs  of  Olympias  sunk  in^  a  verf 
short  time. 

As  for  the  afiairs  of  Asia  at  tlm  time,  Antigonus  then  wintering  in 
Gadamah's,  otherwbe  Gadarlb,  looking  upon  his  army  too  weak  for 
iiie  en^my,  contriving  how  to  fall  upon  tiiem  unawares,  and  td  out- 
wit them.  Eumenes's  soldiers  were  so  scattered  and  dbpersed  ift 
dbeir  winter-quarters,  that  some  of  them  were  six  days  mardi  dbtaot 
one  from  another.  But  A nrigonos  judged  it  not  advisable  to  march 
Arough  the  countries  that  were  inhabited,  imth  in  r^ard  the 
journey  would  be  very  long  and  tedious,  and  likewise  presently 
known  to  the  enemy,  but  conceived  it  much  more  tar  hb  sMlvantage 
to  lead  his  army  through  the  dry  and  barren  deserts,  though  it 
were  far  more  troublesome,  for  that  it  was  much  the  shorter  eutf 
and  by  that  means  hb  march  would  be  secret,  and  so  he  might 
fell  upon  the  enemy  suddenly  and  unexpectedly^  as  they  lay  dis- 
persed and  scattered  in  their  quarters,  never  dreaming  of  any  sudi 
thing. 

Upon  these  considerations  he  commanded  his  soldiers  to  be  r^y 
for  a  march,  and  to  prepare  for  themselves  ten  days  victuals,  such 
as  need  not  the  fire.  He  himself  gave  it  out  that  he  would  march 
through  Armenia:  but  on  a  sudden,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of 
his  whole  army,  in  the  depth  of  winder*,  he  marched  towards  the 
deserts.  In  their  march  he  ordered  fires  to  be  made  in  the  day,  but 
to  be  put^ut  !a  the  night,  lest  that  any  seeing  them  far  off  frOm  the 

♦  The  winter  tropic. 


350  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIX*^ 

mountains^  might  discover  his  approach  to  the  ciieoiy:  fbr  the 
desert  was  almost  entirely  plain  and  champaign,  snrroonded  witk 
many  high  hills,  from  whence  it  was  easy  to  discover  the  fires 
from  a  great  distance  off.  But  when  the  army  had  spent  five  dap 
in  this  tedious  journey,  the  soldiers,  for  very  cold^  as  for  other 
necessary  uses,  fell  to  making  of  fires  by  night  as  well  as  by 
day;  which  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  wilderness  espying, 
they  immediately,  on  the  very  same  day,  sent  away  messeagcis 
upon  dromedaries,  to  give  intelligence  thereof  to  Eomenes  and 
Peucestcs.  This  beast  will  commonly  run  fifteen  bundled  far-» 
longs*  a  day. 

Pencestes  being  informed  that  the  enemy^s  army  was  seen  half 
way  of  their  march,  began  to  think  of  running  away  as  far  as  he 
cooldf,  being  afraid  the  enemy  would  be  upon  him  before  he  ceold 
get  the  forces  together,  from  every  quarter  where  they  then  lay  dis« 
persed.  Eumcnes  perceiving  the  fright  he  was  in,  bid  him  be  of 
good  heart,  and  continue  upon  the  edge  of  the  wilderness,  for  he 
had  found  out  a  way  that  Antigonus  should  not  comt  into  thoso 
parts  in  three  or  four  days.  And  having  done  that,  they  shonid  be 
able  within  that  time  easily  to  get  all  their  forces  together;  and  so 
the  enemy  being  tired  out,  and  starved  for  want  of  provisions,  wouU 
all  fall  into  their  hands.  Ail  wondered  at  this  strange  undertakings 
and  every  one  was  earnest  to  learn  what  it  was  that  should  give  a 
stop  to  the  enemy.  Eumenes  hereupon  commanded  all  the  captains 
and  soldiers  that  were  then  at  hand,  to  follow  him  with  a  great  DiUB-i 
ber  of  urns  full  of  fire,  and  then  chose  out  some  of  the  highest  groani 
in  the  country,  which  looked  every  way  towards  the  wilderness,  and 
there  marked  out  several  places,  within  the  compass  of  seventy 
furlongs,  and  allotted  to  every  captain  a  |)ost  distant  about  twenty 
cubits  one  from  another,  with  command  to  kindle  a  fire  in  the  n^ght 
in  every  place;  and  at  the  first  watch  to  make  the  greater  fires,  as 
if  they  were  then  still  upon  the  guard,  and  going  to  supper  and 
refreshing  themselves;  at  the  second,  that  the  fires  should  be  less; 
and  at  the  third  to  be  left  nearly  out  and  extinct;  that  so  at  a  dis- 
tance it  might  seem  as  if  the  army  were  certainly  there  encamped 
together. 

The  soldiers  observing  the  order  given  them,  some  of  the  inha* 
bitants  of  ttie  mountains  over  against  them  (friends  to  Python,  the 
governor  of  Media)  perceived  the  fire,  and  supposing  the  army  was 
really  there  encamped,  ran  down  into  the  plain,  and  informed  both 

*  Two  hundred  miles,  or  tliercabouts. 
t  To  the  utoiOAt  bounds  of  ihcir  wiutcr  quarterSi 


Cki^K  IL  DIODpRUS  SICULU9.  SSI 

Python  and  Antigonns;  who  being  amazed^  (and  as  it  were  tlimider- 
struck  at  this  strange  and  unexpected  news)  made  a  lialt,  and 
consulted  with  those  that  brought  them  the  news^  what  coarse  was 
best  to  be  taken.  For  men  tliat  were  tired  out,  and  in  want  of  every 
thing  that  was  necessary,  to  engage  with  an  enemy  prepared  and 
furnished  with  plenty  of  all  sorts  of  provisions,  was  alledged  to  be  a 
desperate  and  hasardous  adventure.  Concluding  therefore  that  they 
were  betrayed,  and  that  the  forces  of  the  enemy  were  drawn  together, 
(upon  intelligence  given  them  of  what  was  designed),  it  was  re- 
solved not  to  march  forward,  but  turn  aside  to  the  right;  and  so 
the  army  moved  into  both  parts  of  the  countries  inhabited,  to  the 
end  that  the  soldiers  might  refresh  themselves  after  their  toilsome 
ffiarch* 

In  the  mean  time,  Eumencs  having  by  this  stratagem  thus  de- 
luded the  enemy,  got  all  his  army  together  from  all  parts  where 
they  were  in  their  winter-quarters,  and  fortifying  his  camp  widi  a 
janpart  and  a  deep  trench,  he  there  recrived  his  confederates  as 
they  came  in  lo  him,  and  plentifully  fumtsfaed  his  camp  with  all  things 


But  Antigomis,  after  he  had  marched  through  the  desert,  reeeiviny 
intelligence  from  the  inhabitants  that  the  rest  of  Eumenes'a  fiMreeit 
had  almost  all  come  to  him,  but  that  his  elephants,  coming  out  of 
Aeir  winter  stations,  were  not  far  off,  with  a  very  slender  guanl^ 
sent  o«t  two  thousand  horse  lanceteers,  two  hundred  Tarentines, 
and  aH  his  light-armed  foot  to  intercept  them :  hr  by  setting  upon 
Aem  as  they  were  without  a  sufficient  guard,  he  hoped  he  might 
easily  nuJce  himself  master  of  them;  and  so  deprive  tlie  enemy 
of  the  main  strength  of  his  army.  But  Enmenes  fearing  the  worst 
tbat  might  happen  upon  tliat  account,  sent  away  (for  a  further 
guard)  five  hundred  of  his  best  horse,  and  three  thousand  light- 
armed  foot« 

As  soon  as  Antigonus's  soldiers  came  in  sight,  the  commanders  of 
the  elephants  drew  them  into  a  square,  in  the  form  of  a  tile,  and 
placed  the  carriages  in  the  middle,  and  so  marched  on.  They  were 
supported  in  the  rear  with  no  more  than  four  hundred  horse.  The 
enemy  then  pouring  in  all  their  force  upon  them,  and  pushing  on 
still  with  great  violence,  the  horse  in  the  rear  being  overpowered^ 
made  away.  The  masters  of  the  elephants  stood  for  some  tim^ 
galled  with  darts  and  arrows  on  every  side,  not  able  to  damage  or  touch 
the  enemy.  And  now,  when  they  were  just  ready  to  give  up  all,  the 
Eumeneans  unexpectedly  arrived,  aqd  extricated  them  out  of  all  their 
dangers,     A  few  days  after,  the  armies  encamped  within  forty  furlongs 


352  moDORUS  siculus.  Book  XIX. 

of  each  other;  and  now  being  about  to  lay  all  at  stake,  both  sidei 
prepared  for  action. 

Antigonus  drew  up  his  horse  in  two  wings,  and  committed  the 
left  to  Python,  and  the  right  to  hb  son  Demetrius,  where  he  himself 
intended  to  charge;  the  foot  was  in  the  middle  battle,  and  all  the 
elephants  he  placed  in  front  of  the  whole  army,  interlined  with  light- 
armed  men.  His  whole  army  was  twenty-two  thousand  foot,  and  nine 
thousand  horse,  besides  those  that  were  listed  in  Media;  and  sixty-fife 
elephants. 

When  Eumenes  understood  that  Antigonus  had  placed  himself  in 
the  right  wmg,  with  the  best  of  his  horse,  he  himself  fronted  him 
with  the  choicest  of  his  own,  in  the  left;  for  here  he  placed  most 
of  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  with  the  best  of  that  horse  which 
they  themselves  brought  into  the  field;  and  with  these  he  ventured 
himself. 

In  this  wing  too  was  Mithridates,  son  of  Ariobarzanes,  descended 
from  one  of  those  seven  Persians  who  slew  Smerdis,  one  of  the  Magiy 
a  man  of  exemplary  valour,  and  brought  up  in  the  feats  of  war  from 
his  very  youth.  In  front  of  this  wing  he  placed  sixty  of  his  best 
elephants,  drawn  up  in  form  of  a  half-moon,  interlined  with  light- 
armed  men. 

As  to  the  foot,  the  targeteers  were  placed  in  the  front,  then  the 
Argyraspides,  and  in  the  rear  all  the  foreigners,  and  those  that  were 
armed  after  the  manner  of  the  Macedonians,  and  so  many  elephants 
and  light  armed  men  were  placed  in  front  of  the  main  battle  of  foot 
as  was  thought  sufficient.  In  the  right  wing  were  drawn  up  such 
horse  and  elephants  as  were  judged  the  most  weak  and  feeble  of  all 
the  rest,  over  which  Philip  was  appointed  commander,  with  orden 
to  retire  leisurely  as  he  fought,  and  diligently  to  observe  the  event  of 
the  other  side. 

Eumcncs's  army  amounted  to  thirty-six  thousand  and  seven  hun« 
dred  foot,  six  thousand  and  fifty  horse,  and  a  hundred  and  fourteen 
elephants. 

A  little  before  the  battle,  Antigenes,  general  of  the  Argyraspides, 
had  sent  a  Macedonian  horseman  to  the  enemy's  plialanx,  with 
command  to  ride  up  as  close  to  them  as  he  possibly  could,  and  pro- 
claim with  a  loud  voice  what  he  had  ordered  him.  Hereupon,  when 
|ie  was  come  up  wjtbin  hearing  of  that  part  of  the  army  where 
Antigonus's  Macedonian  phahmx  was  drawn  up,  he  cried  out  with  a 
loud  voice,  thus — Oh  ye  villains !  ye  fight  against  your  fathers,  who 
ventured  their  lives,  aud  performed  all  those  noble  acts  with  Philip 
and  Alexander,  whom  you  shall  sliortly  experience  to  be  men  worthy 


iJhap.  IT. :  moDOMXJs  sictrLus.  85S 

iMost  kiDg%  andtiiote  former  conqutsts  !,,jnie  yoongeit  of  th^Aigy* 
«B8pide»  At  tbat  rime  were  at  least  dirae  icoie  yeiK'tfage^  ^ 
the  rest  were  seventy^  and  aome  older;  all  of  them  for  itreogdi  and 
akiU  is  their  wea|ioii8  aneonqaeiable:  for  cooiiataal  pntticeof  liidr 
arms  had  Mule  them  expert;  and  dariog;  \\,v.:-  .  :...  . 

Proclamadon  beiog  made^  as  we  have  before  said^  there  weremaoy 
i&arsh  words  aiid  di^eootented  speeches  cast  oat  ia  Aodgooos's  aittiy. 
That  they  should  be  forced  to  fight  against  thdr  own  coiuttrjmMit 
and  with  men  that  were  so  much  <rider  than  themselves,  lo-Eome* 
nes's  army,  on  the  other  hand,  they  were  contimiaHy  crying  out, 
while  the  army  was  drawing  op,  to  be  led  oot  against  the  enemy; 
\Somenes  seeing  the  alacrity  of  the  soldiers,  Hfted  up  the  ensign  of 
battle,  upon  which  forthwith  the  trumpets  sonnded  a  chaige,  and  die 
whole  army  set  i)p  a  shout  for  the  onset.  The  elephants  in  the  fiml 
place  fought  one  with  another;  then  the  horse  charged  oa  bodi 
aides.  The  field  Was  very  large,  sandy,  and  wafte,  so  that  ao  mneh 
dust  was  raised  by  the  trampUng  of  tlw  hones,  as  that  a  man  could  - 
not  see  what  was  done,  though  but  at  a  small  distance  frmn  him: 
which  Antigonus  observing,  immediately  sent  away  some  Mediaii 
borse,  and  a  body  of  Tarentines^  to  set  upon  the  baggage  of  tba 
enemy. 

For  be  hoped  by  lessoo  of  the  dost  that  was  raised  (as  the  diillf  !n 
trudi  prmred)  that  they  would  not  be  discerned,  and  that  if  he'  got 
possession  of  the  carriages,  he  should  easily  bring  the  whole  army  into 
his  power.  Hereupon  those  that  were  sent  forth  secredy  slipping  by 
the  enemy's  wing,  set  upon  the  pages,  scullion  boys*  and  others  thai 
were  with  the  baggage,  and  about  five  furkmgs  diMnt  from  the  plaea 
of  battle.  .  . 

There  they  found  a  multitude  of  useless  and  unservieesble  nbblCj 
and  a  very  small  guard  in  the  phure,  so  that  they  were  presently  put 
to  flight,  and  the  rest  all  fell  into  the  enemy's  bands.  lu  the  mean 
time,  Antigonus  charging  the  enemy  with  a  strong  body  of  horse,  s» 
terrified  Peucestes,  governor  of  Persia,  that  he^  with  his  hofse,  got 
oot  of  the  dust,  and  drew  fifteen  hundred  more  after  him.  But 
£umenes,  though  be  was  left  but  with  a  very  few  in  the  outskirts  of 
the  wing  where  he  was,  yet  accounted  it  base  to  flag  or  fly;  judging 
it  more  honourable  to  be  faithfuPto  his  word^  in  the  quarrel  of  the ' 
kings,  and  to  die  in  an  honest  and  just  cause  with  resolution,  made  a 
fierce  charge  upon  Antigopus;  so  that  now  there  was  a  sharp  dispute 
between  the  horse;  where  the  £umeneana  excelled  the  others  in 
heat  and  resolution^  but  the  Antigonians  tbem  in  number;  and  many 
fell  on  both  sides.  At  which  time  the  elephants  fighting  one  with 
another,  the  leader  on  £umenes*s  side  engaging  with  one  of  the 

Vol.  2.  No.  44.  zi 


354  DI0D0RU8  SICULUt.  Book  XIX. 

stoutest  of  the  other,  was  there  slain.  Hereupon,  Eumeaes  pcrceivw 
ing  his  horse  to  be  worsted  on  every  hand,  withdrew  with  the  rest  of 
the  horse  oat  of  the  fight,  and  passed  over  to  the  other  wing,  and 
jmned  himself  to  tliose  with  Philip,  whom  he  had  ordered  to  make 
a  leisurely  retreat.  And  thus  ended  the  engagement  between  the 
horse. 

But  as  to  the  foot,  the  Argyraspides  (or  silver  shields)  in  a  full  body 
flew  with  that  violence  upon  the  enemy,  that  they  killed  some  upon 
the  spot,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight,  for  they  were  not  to  be  withstood; 
who,  though  they  engaged  with  the  enemy's  main  battle,  yet  they 
signalized  both  their  valour  and  dexterity  to  Chat  degree,  that  they 
killed  above  five  thousand  without  the  loss  of  one  man,  and  pot 
the  whole  foot  to  flight,  though  they  were  hx  more  in  number  than 
themselves. 

When  Eumenes  understood  that  all  the  carriages  were  taken^ 
and  that  Peueestcs  was  not  far  ofl*  with  the  horse,  he  endeavoured  to 
rally  them  all  again,  and  to  try  their  fortune  in  a  second  ^gngcment 
with  Antigonus :  for  he  concluded,  if  he  prevailed  he  should  not  only 
recover  his  own  carriages,  but  likewise  possess  himself  of  the  enemy's : 
but  Peucestes  would  not  hear  of  fighting  any  more,  but  got  farther 
off",  so  that  Eumenes  was  forced  to  yield  the  day. 
'  Then  Antigonus  dividing  his  horse  into  two  bodies,  he  himself  with 
one  sought  how  to  entrap  Eumenes,  observing  which  way  he  made; 
the  other  he  delivered  to  Python,  with  orders  to  fall  upon  the  Aigy* 
raspides,  who  were  then  forsaken  by  their  horse;  who  forthwith  setting 
.upon  them,  as  he  was  commanded,  the  Macedonians  drew  ap  in  form 
of  a  square,  and  got  safe  to  the  river,  exckiming  against  F^eestes, 
as  the  cause  of  the  routing  of  the  horse. 

When  Eumenes  came  up  to  them  in  the  evening,  they  consulted 
together  what  was  then  best  to  be  done.  The  governors  of  the  pro- 
vinces were  for  returning  with  all  speed  into  the  higher  provinces; 
but  Eumenes  was  for  staying  where  they  were  and  fighting,  in  regard 
the  enemy's  main  battle  was  broken  and  cut  ofi;  and  that  they  were 
then  equal  in  horse  on  both  sides.  But  the  Macedonians  seeing  that 
they  had  lost  their  carriages,  wives  and  children,  and  all  that  was  dear 
to  them,  declared  they  would  neither  do  the  one  nor  the  other.  And 
so  at  that  time  they  parted  without  agreeing  in  any  thing.  But  after- 
wards the  Macedonians  secretly  corresponding  with  Antigonus,  seised 
and  delivered  Eumenes  into  his  hands.  And  having  received  their 
carriages,  and  faith  taken  for  security,  they  all  marched  away  toge- 
ther ;  whose  example  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  and  most  of  the 
other  captains  and  soldiers  followed,  forsaking  their  general^  chiefly 
consulting  their  own  safety  and  preservation. 


Chap.  IL  DIODOAUS  SICULU8.  365 

AntigoDus  having  thus  strangely  and  unexpectedly  possessed  him- 
self both  of  Eumenes  and  his  whole  army^  seized  upon  Antigenes^ 
captab  of  the  Argyraspides^  aad  pot  him  alive  into  a  coffin,  and  burnt 
him  to  ashes.  He  likewise  put  Eiidamus  to  death,  who  brought  the 
elephfmts  out  of  India;  and  Celbanus,  and  some  others;  who  appeared 
against  him  on  all  occasions.  But  Eumenes  he  put  in  prison,  and  took 
time  to  consider  how  to  dispose  of  him;  for  he  had  in  truth  a  great 
desire  to  have  gained  so  good  si  general  to  his  own  interest,  and  to  have 
obliged  him  upon  that  account ;  but  because  of  the  great  kindness  and 
strict  correspondence  which  passed  between  him  and  Olympias,  and 
the  kings,  he  durst  not  absolutely  rely  upon  him;  for  but  a  while 
before,  though  he  had  delivered  him  out  of  the  straits  he  was  in  at 
Kora  in  Phrygia,  yet  he  shortly  after  fell  in  and  sided  with  the  kings; 
and  therefore  upon  the  pressing  importunities  of  the  Macedonians  he 
put  him  to  death.  But  in  respect  of  his  former  familiarity  with  him, 
he  caused  his  body  to  be  burnt,  and  his  bones  to  be  put  into  an  urn, 
and  delivered  to  his  nearest  friends.  Amongst  those  that  were 
wounded  and  prisoners  was  Hieronymus  of  Cardia,  historiographer, 
who  having  been  ever  in  great  esteem  with  Eumenes  during  hb  life, 
alter  his  death  found  great  favour  also  with  Antigonus. 

Antigonus  returning  into  Media  with  his  whole  army,  spent  the 
ftst  of  the  winter  in  a  town  not  far  from  Ecbatana,  where^tbe  palace- 
voyal  of  that  province  stood.  He  distributed  his  army  here  and  there 
all  over  the  province,  and  especially  in  the  country  of  Rhages;  so 
called  from  the  calamities  it  had  miserably  suffered  in  formeftimes. 
For  being  heretofore  full  of  rich  and  populous  cities,  such  terrible 
earthquakes  happened  in  those  paru,  that  both  cities  and  inhabitants 
were  swallowed  up  together,  not  one  left,  and  the  very  face  of  the 
country  was  so  changed,  that  new  rivers  and  ponch  appeared  in  the 
loom  of  the  old. 


356  OIODORirS  SIC ULU9.    r  Book  XJOL 


CHAP,  m. 

ZTiff  inundaiions  at  Rhodes.  Aniigcfmis  kills  Python,  getting 
him  into  his  power  by  dissimulation.  Then  he  marches  into 
Persia.  BevoUers  from  Awtigomu  cuJt  qff  im  AMia.  He  cfi? 
vides  the  provinces  of  Ana,  and  contrives  to  destroy  all  the  Ar^ 
gyraspides.  Gets  great  treasure  m  Snsa.  Cassander  besieges 
Olympias  in  Pydna:  the  great  distress  to  which  it  was  redsieedf 
AmphipoUs  surrendered  to  Cassander.  He  kiUs  Olympias.  Mat^ 
ries  Tlhfssalonica:  builds  Cassandriia.  Imprisons  Roxanamsi' 
her  son  Alexander.  His  expedition  into  Peloponnesus  aguins^, 
Alexander  the  son  of  Pofyperchon.  The  histosy  cf  ThAeu 
Cassander  rebuilds  Thebes. 

ABOUT  this  time  happened  a  flood  near  the  eity  of  Rhodes^  wUeh 
destroyed  many  of  the  inhabitants.  The  first  flood  did  little  piqa* 
dice^  because  the  city  was  then  but  newly  built^  and  far  Inger  in 
compass;  but  the  second  was  more  mischievous,  and  destroyed  mul- 
titudes* The  last  happened  at  the  beginning  <tf  the  springy  accoDr 
panied  with  violent  storms  of  rain,  and  hail-stQoes  ot  an  inciedibk 
bigness;  for  they  were  a  mina  in  weight,  and  sometimes  anore,  wn 
that  they  not  only  beat  down  houses,  but  killed  many  men.  And  b 
regard  Rhodes  was  built  in  the  form  of  a  theatre,  and  that  the  ^ 
ran  for  the  most  part  into  one  place,  the  lower  parts  of  the  city  i 
presently  filled  with  water:  for,  the  winter  being  now  looked  opop 
to  be  over,  no  care  was  taken  to  cleanse  tlie  channels  and  aqoedocta; 
and  the  pipes  likewise  in  the  walls  were  choaked  up;  so  that  the 
waters  flowing  in  altogether  on  a  sudden,  all  the  ground  about  the 
Digma^,  (as  it  is  called),  and  the  temple  of  Bacchus,  was  filled  with 
water;  and  it  now  rising  up  like  a  standing  pond  to  the  temple  of 
iEsculapius,  all  were  in  a  consternation,  and  could  not  agree  toge* 
tlicr  what  sliouid  be  done,  in  order  ta  their  preservation.  Some  were 
for  making  to  tlie  ships,  and  others  for  hastening  to  the  theatre. 
Some  now  almost  surrounded  with  the  evil  that  threatened  them,  in 
great  terror  and  amazement  climbed  up  to  the  top  of  the  highest  al* 
tars,  and  others  to  the  top  of  the  pedestals  of  the  statues*  The  city 
being  in  this  danger  to  be  overwhelmed  and  ruined,  with  all  its  in- 
habitants, on  a  sudden  they  were  unexpectedly  delivered:  for  the 

*  Some  luouiHDcnt  in  tb«  towo,  in  memorj  of  tome  rtatrkibls  cttai; 
either  good  or  bad* 


Chap.  tlL'  DIODORUS  SICULUS,  997 

sa:sessssssSBsasaBBss!^      ,  '  .jufi  ii  i  iaaggg»aa— eaKgagge 

wall  bunt  asunder,  making  a  large  breach,  and  the  water,  which  be- 
fore stood  in  a  flood,  made  its  way  through,  and  ran  with  a  violent 
current  into  the  sea,  and  so  every  one  presently  had  free  passage  to 
hb  own  house. 

It  was  of  great  advantage  to  these  distressed  people  that  this 
inundation  was  in  the  day-time:  for  most  of  the  citizens  ran  to  the 
higher  parts  of  the  city  for  shelter.  And  another  advantage  was^ 
that  the  houses  were  not  built  of  tile,  but  of  stone;  so  that  those 
who  got  to  the  house-tops  escaped  without  any  great  damage :  how« 
ever,  there  perished  in  this  common  calamity  above  five  hundred 
souls;  and  some  of  the  houses  were  borne  down  to  the  ground,  and 
ethers-much  damaged  and  shaken.   And  in  this  danger  was  Rhodes. 

Antigonus,  while  he  wintered  in  Media,  discovered  Python  plot- 
ting to  draw  over  the  soldiers,  then  in  tlieir  winter-quarters,  partly 
by  bribes,  and  partly  by  fair  promises,  to  his  own  interest,  and  to 
make  a  turn  and  defection  in  thearmy.  But  Antigonus  covered  and 
concealed  his  design,  and  pretended  to  give  no  credit  to  the  in- 
formers, but  tb  chide  them  as  those  that  contrived  only  to  stt  him 
and  Python  at  variance  together.  In  the  mean  time,  he  caused  it  to 
be  nobed  abroad — ^That  be  intended  to  leave  Python,  with  a  consi- 
derable army  for  his  defence,  lord-lieutenant  of  ihe  higher  provinces; 
and  he  wrote  likewise  to  Python,  and  desired  him  to  hasten  to  him 
with  all  speed,  that,  after  tliey  had  consulted  together  on  some 
weighty  aflblrS)  they  might  forthwith  march  away  into  the  Lesser  Asia. 
Thus  he  managed  his  business,  thereby  to  remove  all  ground  of  sus- 
picion, and  to  get  the  poor  man  into  his  hands,  upon  an  expectattoa 
and  hopes  to  be  left  governor  of  thos^  provinces :  for  it  was  a  diflEn 
cult  matter  to  take  one  by  force  who  bad  been  in  such  great  repute 
with  Alexander,  and  for  his  valour  advanced  by  him  to  places  of  bo- 
Bour;  and  who,  being  then  governor  of  Media^  was  a  help  and  sup- 
port to  (he  whole  army. 

Python  was  at  that  time  in  the  farthest  parts  of  all  Media,  In  his 
winter-quarters,  and  had  now  corrupted  many,  who  had  promised  to 
join  with  him  in  the  defection.  His  friends  likewbe  acquainting  him 
by  their  letters  with  Antigonus's  purpose,  gave  him  an  expectation 
of  mighty  things:  and  thus  deceived,  he  went  to  Antigonus;  who, 
having  now  seized  his  prey,  brought  him  before  a  council  of  war,  even 
of  hb  own  confederates,  where  he  was  easUy  convicted,  and  forthwith 
had  his  head  cut  off. 

Hereupon  Antigonus,  gathering  all  his  army  together,  committed 
tlie  government  of  Media  to  Orontobates,  a  Median  born;  but  made 
Hippostratus  general  of  the  army,  who  had  three  thousand  five  hun- 
dred foreign  foot-soldiers  under  his  command.     He  himself,  takiog 


dSS  DTODORUS  SICULU9.  AoJfc  XI3^ 


with  him  the  body  of  his  army,  went  to  Ecbatanty  wbert  mmraig 
five  thousand  talents  of  massy  silver,  he  marched  into  Pom;  and 
it  coat  him  twenty  days  march  before  he  arrived  «t  the  cqiital  ditf 
Persepolis. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  Antigonus  was  on  his  inarchy  Pjftbon's 
friends,  who  were  concerned  with  him  in  the  oonqriracy^  (iIm  chief 
of  whom  was  Meleager  and  Menetas),  and  other  well-wbbciB  of 
Eumenes  and  Python,  who  were  scattered  abroad  into  comeiv,  SMl 
together,  to  the  number  of  eight  hundred  horse;  and  in  the  fifst  ] 
wasted  the  territories  of  the  Medes,  who  refused  to  join  with  i 
Then,  receiving  intelligence  where  Hippostrates  and  Orontobatca  hf 
encamped,  they  broice  in  upon  them  in  the  night,  and  were  ttCt  tu 
Arom  effecting  what  they  designed;  but  being  overpowered  by  i 
bers,  and  having  only  enticed  a  few  of  the  soldiers  to  join  with  t 
they  were  forced  to  retreat;  yet  some  of  the  nimblest  of  them  (all 
being  horsemen)  made  many  sudden  incursions  upon  the  eountrf, 
and  caused  a  great  consternation  and  confusion  amongst  them  9  bol 
they  were  at  last  enclosed  in  a  place  compassed  about  with  rodu^adl 
were  there  all  hilled  or  taken.    But  Meleager,  and  Cranes  the  Me- 
dian, and  some  of  the  better  sort  of  them,  stood  it  oat  to  the  lasfy  and 
died  with  their  swords  in  their  hands.    And  thb  was  the  cobditioa^f 
the  conspirators  in  Media. 

As  for  Antigonus,  when  he  came  into  Persia,  the  people  hoDoared 
him  as  a  king,  and  he  that  was  now  undoubtedly  absolute  lord  of  all 
Asia.  There  calling  together  a  council  of  his  nobility,  he  propounded 
to  them  the  matter  concerning  the  government  of  the  proviooes:  ia 
which  consultation  they  left  Carmania  to  TIepolemos,  and  Bactria  la 
Stasanor;  for  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  expel  them,  having  gained  tlia 
hearts  of  the  people  by  their  fair  deportment,  and  likewise  were  as- 
sociated  with  potent  confederates.  Eritus  he  sent  into  Aria;  who 
dying  shortly  after,  was  succeeded  by  Evagoras,  a  man  of  wonderfol 
valour  and  prudence.  Oxyartes  likewise,  the  fiither  of  Rotana^  was 
permitted  to  enjoy  the  province  of  Paropamisus,  as  he  did  belbre;  for 
neither  could  he  eject  him  without  a  long  expense  of  time  and  a  vcrf 
great  army. 

But  he  sent  for  Siburtius,  a  well-wisher  of  his,  out  of  Arachon^ 
and  bestowed  upon  him  the  government  of  that  province,  and  | 
him  the  most  turbulent  of  the  silver  shields,  under  colour  of  1 
him  in  the  war,  but  in  truth  with  a  design  to  have  them  all  cat  off) 
for  he  gave  him  private  instructions  to  employ  them  in  such  1 
as  that  by  degrees  they  might  all  be  destroyed.  Amoi^st  these  ^ 
those  that  betrayed  Eumenes,  that  vengeance  might  in  a  short  1 
after  overtake  these  perfidious  villaios  for  their  Ireaeheiy  gainst  their 


Chtlp.  III.  DIODORU8  SICULU8*  Sft^ 

i—aaa— aaBBgaae,  '  ,'  ^  '  n 

feoenkl.  For  princes,  by  reason  of  their  great  power,  may  reap  ad* 
▼antager  by  the  wicked  acts  of  others;  but  private  men  who  are  the 
•ctoifey  for  the  most  part,  are  by  those  means  brought  into  miserable 
disasters. 

Antigonus  moreover,  finding  that  Peucestes  was  much  beloved 
in  Persia,  made  it  one  of  his  first  pursuits  to  deprive  him  of  that  go« 
vemment.  At  "which  all  the  nativesv  greatly  repined5  and  a  chief 
man  amongst  them,  called  Thespias,  spoke  openly  against  it^  and 
said«.That  the  Persians  would  be  governed  by  no  other  man  but 
Peucestes:  whereupon  Antigonus  slew  Thespias,  and  made  Asde* 
piodorus  governor  of  Persia,  and  committed  to  him  a  considerable 
army;  and  he  held  on  Peucestes  with  vain  hopes  of  conferring  upon 
him  higher  preferments  elsewhere,  until  he  had  drawn  him  quite  out^ 
of  the  country. 

While  Antigonus  was  on  his  way  to  Susa,  XenophiluS,  who  had 
the  keeping  of  the  king's  treasure  there,  bein^  sent  by  Seleucus,  went 
and  met  him  at  Pteittgris,  and  ofiered  him  his  service  iu  whatsoever 
be  pleased  to  command  iiim.  Antigonus  received  him  very  gra« 
ciously,  and  seemed  as  if  he  honoured  him  above  all  the  friends  he 
had,  fearing  lest  he  might  alter  bis  mind,  and  keep  him  out  when  he 
eame  thither.  But  when  he  came  into  the  castle  of  Susa,  he  pos* 
sessed  himself  of  it,  and  there  seized  upon  the  golden  vine,  and  store 
of  other  such  rarities,  to  the  value  of  fifteen  thousand  talents:  all 
which  he  turned  into  ready  money,  besides  what  he  made  of  crowns 
of  gold,  and  other  presents  and  spoils  taken  from  the  enemy,  amount- 
ing to  five  thousand  talents  more,  and  a  like  quantity  collected  out  of 
Media,  besides  the  treasure  had  from  Susa;  so  that  in  the  whole  he 
heaped  tc^ether  five-and-twenty  thousand  talents.  And  thus  stood 
die  affairs  of  Antigonus  at  that  time. 

Since  we  have  treated  of  the  afiisiirs  of  Asia,  we  shall  now  pass  over 
into  Europe,  and  relate  what  was  done  there  concurring  and  cotem- 
porary  with  the  former.  Cassander  hanng  shut  up  Olympias  in 
Pydna  in  Macedonia,  could  not  assault  the  walls  by  reason  of  the 
winter  season ;  but  he  blocked  up  the  city  with  his  forces  on  every^ 
side,  and  dr%w  a  mud-wall  from  sea  to  sea;  and,  to  prevent  all  re- 
lief by  sea  as  well  as  by  land,  he  guarded  the  mouth  of  the  harbour 
with  his  own  shipping:  insomuch  that  their  provisions  being  almost 
spent,  the  besieged  were  reduced  to  that  extremity  of  want,  that  they 
were  nearly  starved;  for  they  were  brought  to  that  strait,  that  every 
soldier  was  allowed  but  five  chcenices*  of  bread-corn  every  month, 
and  the  elephants  were  fed  with  saw-dust.  At  last  they  killed  the 
.draught-beasts  and  horses  for  meat.^ 

*  AboMt  scTea  qnarts  and  bftlf  a  piut 


3^0  DIODORUS  SICULUfl.  Book  XIX 

While  the  city  was  in  this  state^and  Olymptas  earnestly  expecting 
foreign  aid^  the  elephants  pined  away  for  want  of  food.  And  the 
horsemen  that  were  foreigners  almost  all  died^  having  no  proportioa 
of  bread  allotted  them,  and  many  of  the  other  soldiers  fared  no  better. 
Some  of  the  barbarians,  (hunger  overcoming  what  nature  would  have 
other wbe  dreaded  and  abhorred),  fed  upon  the  carcasses  of  the 
dead. 

The  town  being  now  filled  with  dead  bodies,  the  colonels  and  cap* 
tains  of  the  king's  guard  buried  some,  and  threw  others  over  the  walls; 
insomuch,  as  not  only  the  queens,  (who  were  bred  up  delicately  dl 
their  days),  but  even  the  soldiers,  who  were  always  inured  to  hard* 
ships,  could  not  endure  the  sight  nor  stink  of  the  carcasses. 

AuA  now  the  spring  came  on,  and  the  famine  increased  every  day, 
whereupon  most  of  the  soldiers  came  up  in  a  body,  and  entreated  O* 
lympias  to  suffer  them  to  leave  the  place  because  of  the  scarcity^  who 
(not  being  able  to  supply  them  with  bread,  nor  in  a  condition  to 
raise  the  siege),  let  them  go;  and  they  were  all  kindly  received  by 
Cassander,  and  disposed  of  into  several  towns  and  cities  round  about* 
For  he  hoped  that  the  Macedonians  coming  to  understand  by  them 
how  weak  Olympias  was>  would  conclude  her  affiiirs  desperate  and 
without  remedy.  And  he  did  not  miss  the  mark  in  his  conjecture! 
for  they  who  were  just  now  sending  relief  to  the  besieged^  presendy 
altered  their  purpose,  and  sided  with  Cassander.  Only  Aristoous  and 
Monimus,  of  all  the  Macedonians  continued  firm  and  faithful  to 
Olympias,  of  whom  Aristonus  was  governor  of  Amphipolis^  and  the 
other  of  Pella.  At  length  Olympias  perceiving  that  many  went  over 
to  Cassander,  and  those  who  were  her  friends  were  not  able  to  help 
her;  without  further  delay  got  ready  a  galley  of  five  oars  on  a  bank^ 
with  a  design  to  rescue  herself  and  all  her  kindred  out  of  the  present 
danger:  but  being  discovered  to  the  enemy  hysooieof  the  descrteiSi 
Cassander  sailed  to  the  place  and  seized  the  vessel.  Whereapon 
Olympias  looking  upon  herself  in  a  desperate  condition,  sent  an 
herald  to  Cassander  to  treat  upon  terms  of  pacification;  but  he  in« 
sisting  upon  the  delivering  up  of  herself  to  his  mercy,  with  much  ado 
she  at  length  prevailed  only  for  the  preservation  of  her  person.  Be- 
ing therefore  now  possessed  of  the  city,  he  sent  some  away  tosanunoo 
Fella  and  Amphipolis. 

Monimus  the  governor  of  Pella  hearing  how  things  went  mth  O- 
lympias,  presently  surrendered;  but  Aristonus  at  first  resolved  to 
hold  out  and  maintain  the  cause  of  the  kings,  in  regard  he  had  a 
strong  garrison,  and  had  been  then  lately  prosperous  and  successfol. 
For  a  few  days  before  he  had  fought  with  Crate vas,  one  of  Cassander'a 
captains,  and  cut  off  many  of  the  eueiny^  and  drove  Cratevas  himsclft 


vith  two  thoumul  of  bis  inent  into  the  c^ty  Bodys  in  BiiaUuis  •nd 
there  be^uigod  hun»  took  faiin^  luid  dis^med  hiis,  aod  tben^  upoo  mu- 
tual pMgesjid  £uth  gtvci)  aod  taken,  discharged  him.  3ei(ig^Q- 
cottia^  upw  thia  account,  and  not  knowing  b|it  that  Eumeoes.waa 
still  living,  and  concluding  that  he  should  be  sur^jai  aid  and  falicf 
from  AleiMUHiqr  aad  Poljperchon,  he  refused  t9  surrender  Am- 
.  jpfaipolis. 

But  as  soon  as  he  received  letters  from  Olymplftii  (whi^reby  abe 
.commanded  him,  upon  the  £uth  of  hi^  former  engagement,!  |)q  rasioiv 
.^e  city),  he  observed  her  commands,  and  deVvered  it  up,  upoa  aa* 
aurauce  of  his  own  preservation.  But  Cassandera  perceiving  that  ba 
avas  a  man  of  great  interest,  by  reason  of  the  honours  conferred  qpon 
iiim  by  Alexander,  and  determining  to  tak^  all  such  out  of  the  way  as 
noight  he  in  a  capacity  to  make  any  disturbance,  by  tlie  help  of  Cn» 
tevas's  kindred,  he  put  him  also  to  death.  Thep  he  incited  die  ra* 
latioos  of  such  as  were  put  to  d^^ath  by  Olympias  to  prosecute  h«r  ia 
l)ie  general  assembly  of  the  Macedonians,  who  thereupon  ytry  readily 
complied  with  what  they  were  desired  to  dp;  and,  though  she  her* 
self  was  not  then  present,  nor  had  any  person  there  tp  plead  bar 
j^ause,  yet  the  Macedonians  condemned  her* to  die.  -Cas^ander  there- 
4ipon  sent  some  of  his  friends  tp  Olympias,  and  advised  her  to  gd 
oat  of  the  way,  and  promised  to  procure  for  her  a  ship,  and  to  cause 
bar  to  be  conveyed  safe  to  Athens.  And  this  h^  did  not  for  her  pro* 
*aervation,  but  that,  as  one  conscious  of  her  own  guilt  by  her  flighty  ic 
ipight  be  judged  a  just  vengeance  upon  her  if  she  was  cut  off  aa  sbp 
was  00  her  voyage:  for  he  was  afraid  as.  wi^)  of  the  fickle  dispoajr 
tbn  of  the  Macedoniaos,.as  of  the  dignity  of  her  perspn.  But  Qlyoi* 
pias  refused  to  fly,  and  said — She  was  ready  to  defend  ber  cauae  ba- 
fore  all  the  Macedonians. 

Cassaoder  therefore^  fearing  lest  the  people,  calling  Ip  mind  4nb 
worthy  acts  and  kindnesses  of  Philip  and  Aiexaoder  towards  the  whole 
fiation,  should  change  their  minds,  and  so  take  upon  them  tp  defend 
the  queen,  sent  to  her  a  band  of  two  hundred  soldieni  well  armed  and 
accoutred,  with  orders  to  despatch  lier  forthwith  $  who  rushipg  pn  a 
sudden  Into  tlie  palace,  as  soon  as  they  saw  her,  (in  r^verepce  to  her 
person),  drew  back,  without  executing  what  they  were  commanded. 
But  the  kindred  of  those  she  had  put  to  death,  both  to  ingratiate 
themselves  with  Cassander,  and  likewise  togratify.tbeir  own  revenge 
for  the  death  of  their  relations,  cut  her  throat,  she  not  in  the  least 
crying  out  in  any  womanish  terror  or  fear  to  spare  her.  In  thia 
manner  died  Olympias,  the  greatest  and  most  honourable  woman  ia 
the  age  wherein  she  lived,  daughter  of  Neoptolcmus,  king  of  Epirus; 
Vou2.  No.  44.  AAA 


362  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JfeioJfc  XIX. 

sister  of  Alexander*^  who  made  the  expedition  into  Italy;  wife  of 
Philip,  the  greatest  and  most  victorious  prince  of  all  that  ever  were 
before  in  Europe;  and  lastly,  the  mother  of  Alexander^  who  nefcr 
was  exceeded  by  any  for  the  many  great  and  wonderfial  things  that 
were  done  by  him. 

Cassander  now  seeing  all  things  go  on  according  to  his  heart's 
desire,  in  his  hopes  and  expectations  was  already  possessed  of  the 
kingdom  of  Macedon:  he  therefore  now  married  Thessaloinei» 
daughter  of  Philip,  and  sister  of  Alexander  by  the  same  fiither^  am* 
bitious  to  be  related  in  affinity,  and  esteemed  as  one  of  the  royal  ftp 
mily.  He  built  likewise  Cassandria,  (calling  it  after  his  own  name), 
in  Pellene,  and  peopled  it  with  inhabitants  drawn  out  of  the  dtiei 
of  the  Chersonesusf,  and  out  of  Potideea,  and  many  other  iaeigl^ 
bouring  cities,  and  placed  there  likewise  those  Olynthians  that  wen 
left,  of  whom  there  were  still  a  considerable  number.  To  tfiii 
city  he  joined  a  large  and  rich  territory,  and  made  it  his  earnM  ene 
to  advance  the  glory  and  splendour  of  this  place;  so  that  it  grew  op 
in  a  short  time  to  that  degree  of  power,  as  to  excel  all  the  cities  of 
Macedonia. 

Cassander  likewise,  resolving  to  cut  off  all  the  posterity  of  AIcx^ 
ander,  (that  there  might  be  none  of  his  line  left  to  succeed  in  the 
kingdom),  purposed  to  kill  the  son  of  Alexander,  and  Wwiana  hii 
mother.  But  for  the  present^,  being  willing  first  to  observe  what 
people's  discourses  were  concerning  the  cutting  off  of  OlympiaSy  and 
having  as  yet  no  certain  account  how  things  went  with  Antigomii 
he  committed  Roxana  and  her  son  close  prisoners  to  the  castle  at 
Amphipolis,  under  the  charge  of  Glaucias,  then  by  him  made  ga- 
vernor,  and  one  of  his  friends,  in  whom  he  placed  great  coofldeace* 
He  likewise  took  away  from  the  young  king  those  children  that  were 
bred  up  with  him  as  his  companions,  and  ordered  that  he  shoold  be 
no  longer  attended  as  a  king,  nor  regarded  otherwise  than  as  a  ptt* 
vate  person. 

And  now  ruling  the  kingdom  in  all  things  as  king»  he  royally  ai 
sumptuously  interred  Eurydice  and  Philip,  the  late  king  and  qncen^at 
Mgis ;  and  Cinna,  whom  Alcetas  had  put  to  death,  gracing  the  dead 
with  the  solemnity  of  funeral  s^xirts  and  plays. 

Then  he  raised  soldiers  out  of  Macedonia  for  the  expedition  rs- 
solved  upon  into  Peloponnesus.  While  he  was  employed  in  thcK 
affairs,  Polyperchon,  who  was  then  besieged  in  Naxos,  in  PenhoeUiy 
when  he  heard  of  the  death  of  Olympias^  in  despair  of  retrferiog  his 

*  Sister  of  AlcMuder.  tliat  u,  TynhoM^ 
f  The  Cbersonef  us  •(  PclIenc  ia  Duaca. 


Chy.I|Z-  DIQDORTO  SIOULUS.    .  9(b 

affitffi  io  Macedmia^  with  a  few  in  bis  company,  broke  out  of  the 
€iJ^,  and  iwsied  through  Thessaly^  together  with  iEaeidas,  and  caoM 
into  JBtolia^  where  be  judged  he  might  safely  abide^  and  observe  how  . 
things  went,  because  there  was  a  good  ondentaodiog  between  him 
and  that  nation* 

Bat  Cassander  having  now  nosed  a  considerable  annyt  marched 
out  of  Macedonia  with  an  intent  to  drive  Alexander  the  aop  <tf  Fo^- 
peichon  out  of  Peloponnesus:  for  he  with  his  army  was  the  only 
enemy  kft^  «nd  had  possessed  himself  of  many  convenient  posts  and 
towns  there.  ThroughThessaly  he  marched  without  any  opposition  { 
but  fimnd  the  pass  at  Pylai  guarded  by  the  ^tolians^  whom  having 
widi  mnch  difficulty  beaten  off^  he  came  into  BoeotU^  where^  getting 
all  the  Thebans  together  that  were  remaining  from  all  parts,  he  set 
about  re-pecf  ling  of  Thebes,  conceiving  that  now  he  bad  a  fair  op- 
portumty  put  into  his  hands  for  the  rebuilding  of  that  city,  famous 
both  ibr  its*  renowned  acUonis,  and  the  antient  stories  concerning^  it. 
And  by  so  good  a  work  he  concluded  he  should  reap  the  fruit  of  an 
immortal  fiune  and  glory. 

This  dtj  had  felt  very  many  changes  and  turns  of  fortune,  and 
Aose  to  the  utmost  eitremity,  being  sometimes  in  danger  of  being 
rased  to  the  ground.  Of  which  to  say  something  briefly  will  not  be 
any  foreign  digression. 

After  Deucalion's  flood,  when  Cadmus  had  built  the  citadel,  called 
Klwfm^  after  his  own  name,  the  people  called  Spartans,  or  Sparsans, 
fledied  thith^  in  droves,  called  so  by  some  because  they  flocked  to- 
gether from  all  places;  othtn  called  them  Thebigens*,  because  the 
natives  of  Thebes  were  forced  away  by  the  flood,  and  duipersed  here 
and  there  up  and  down  in  the  country.  When  these  were  again  re- 
lumed, they  were  afterwards  expelled  by  force  of  arpis  by  the  £n- 
chdensians,  and  then  even  Cadmus  himself  was  forced  to  fly  to  the 
Dlyrians.  After  this,  when  Amphion  and  Zethus  ruled^  and  there 
first  built  the  city,  (as  the  poetf  says). 

Who  fim  Tbttbct'  wftllt  with  mvm  piltm  did  nbt. 

The  inhabitants  were  again  expelled  when  Polydorus,  the  son  of 
Cadmus,  returned  into  the  kingdom,  where  all  things  were  then 
carelessly  managed,  by  reason  of  the  sad  condition  of  Amphioo|  for 
die  loss  of  all  his  children. 

Then  again  in  the  time  of  the  reign  of  his  posterity},  (when  all 
the  country  was  called  Boeotia,  from  one  Bceotus,  the  sori  of  Mela* 

•  Boro  at  Thebet.  t  Homer. 

X  Bit  Mven  foni  md  stven  daughters  by  Niohe  were  killed  b/  Jepiter  e&d  Diana 
with  ^rrowi.«*»Pa«i.  im  Bm^  DM.  lib.  4, 

^  The  petterity  of  Polyderai. 


S64  DIOnORUS  SICULUS.  BookXJX. 

nippe  and  Neptune,  who  reigned  there),  the  Thebans  were  ejcpelled 
the  third  time  by  the  Epigoni*  of  Argos,  when  they  took  the  dty  by 
force.  Those  that  escaped  of  them  who  were  expelled  Sed  to  Alal- 
comen®  and  the  mountain  Tilfossius;  but,  after  the  death  of  these 
Argives,  they  returned  into  their  own  country. 

In  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war,  when  the  Tliebans  were  tn  Asia, 
these  who  stayed  at  home,  together  with  other  Bceotians,  were  ex- 
pelled by  the  Pclasgians :  and  after  they  had  endured  many  and  Tarion^ 
calamities  in  the  course  of  near  four  generations,  (according  to  the 
Oracle  relating  to  the  crowsf)  they  returned,  and  inhabited  Thebes^ 

From  this  time  this  city  continued  in  a  state  of  prosperity  ncaily 
eight  luindred  jrears.  And  the  Thebans  at  the  beginning  bad  the  chief 
command  over  all  the  rest  of  their  country. 

Afterwards  when  they  attempted  to  be  sovereign  lords  of  all  Greece^ 
Alexander  the  son  of  Philip  took  it  by  storm,  and  razed  if  16  the 
ground.  In  the  twentieth  year  next  after,  Cassander,  to  make  him- 
seif  famous,  and  advance  his  own  reputation,  so  far  prevailed  with  the 
Boeotians  for  their  concurrence,  as  that  ho  rebuilt  the  city,  and 
restored  it  to  those  Thebans  that  were  then  renviining  of  the  old 
stock.  Many  of  the  Greek  cities  afforded  their  assistance  to  the  re* 
building  of  this  place,  out  of  compassion  to  the  distressed  cendhion 
of  the  Thebans>  and  the  antient  fame  and  glory  of  the  eh^.  The 
Athenians  built  tlie  greatest  part  of  the  walls,  and  others  assisted  ac- 
cording to  their  several  abilities;  and  contributions  were  seat  not 
only  from  all  parts  of  Greece,,  but  from  some  both  in  Sicily  and  Italy. 
And  thus  the  Thebans  came  to  be  restored  to  the  antient  seiat  of  theil 
ancestors.  Tlien  Cassander  moved  with  his  army  towanb  Pelopon* 
nesus;  and  when  he  found  that  Alexander  the  son  of  Pelyperchen 
had  fortified  the  isthmus  with  strong  guards,  he  turned  aMdeto  Me- 
gara;  and  there  he  fitted  out  some  boats,  and  in  them  transported 
his  elephants  to  Epidaurus,  and  the  rest  of  his  army  in  ^other  ships. 
Thence  coming  to  Argos,  he  forced  them  to  quit  their  confederacy 
with  Alexander,  and  join  with  Iiim.  Aften^'ards  he  brought  over  to 
him  all  the  cities  and  towns,  with  the  territories,  of  Messenia,  exee[ft 
Ithonle;  and  Hermonidcs  he  took  in  upon  articles  of  agreeknenir  bUI 
iipon  Alexander's  marching  down  to  fight,  he  left  two  thousand  men 
at  Geraniat,  near  the  isthmus,  uuder  the  command  of  IVloIycns^  and 
returned  into  Macedonia. 

*  The  postt*ruy  of  the  seven  captains  who  besieged  Tbebc»h 

t  This  story  of  the  crows  is — That  th«  oracle  said,  tlie  BoBotians  should  be  expelled 

wheo  they  saw  whitv  crows:  whiih  happened  aAerwards  by  playful  boys  panCiaf  crewt 

white,  «od  then  letting  ihcm  go.     A  little  while  after,  the  Beeoliaiis  ^»«K«}ecffd%yilK 

.f^Iians,    Sec  the  Aunot.  upon  Krasin.  Adag.  ( Ad  Corvou)  p.  37i. 

X  Gcraoia,  a  hill  near  the  iUhmo^,  in  Jirgtn. 


Chap.  IF.  DioDORUS  sifULUS.  365 


CHAP.  IV, 

Afitigwfcus's  miny  feasted  by  &leueus  in  Babylon.  Qumreb  with 
SekucnSf  who^fiies  to  Ptolemy,  ofid  is  Idndfy  received,  Pttdemf^ 
Seleucuty  Casmnder,  and  Lysimachus,join  agmnai  Antigetdsm* 
They  $end  ambasscubrs  to  Aim^  who  winters  in  Cilieia.\  Hegom 
into  PhoEsnda,  and  there  huUds  ships;  besieges  T^r^  The 
fraise  of  PhyUa,  wife  of  Demetrius.  Aristodenms  raises  fostea 
for  Antigonus  in  Peloponnesus.  The  acts  of  Ptolemy,  one  of 
jMigonus's  captains.  Antigonus's  policy.  Tyre  delivered, 
2fke  agreement  of  Ptolemy* s  captains,  and  the  rest  at  Cypnts. 
!the  acts  of  Seleucus.  A  fleet  comes  to  Aniigoiius  from  the 
HeUespont  and  Rhodes.  Things  done  in  Peloponnesus.  Ce»* 
sender's  etcts  there  and  in  Greece.  The  great  victory  by  sea  and 
landobtainedby  Polyclitus,  Seleucus*s  lieutenant:  he  is  rewarded 
by  Ptolemy.  Tlte  acts  of  Agathoclcs  in  Sicily.  Tlie  Romtms 
make  war  against  the  Samnites. 

AT  the  end  of  the  former  year,  Praxibulus  -was  created  diief  magrs-» 
trate  at  Athens^  and  Spurius  Nautius  and  Marcus  Popilins  bore  the 
office  of  consuls  at  Rome;  at  which  time  Antigonus  left  one  Asptsa, 
a  native,  governor  of  Susiana.  He  himself  resolving  to  carry  away 
with  him  all  the  money,  prepared  carriages  and  camels  for  that  pur- 
pose to  bring  it  down  to  the  sea-side;  and  so  having  it  along  with 
him,  marched  with  his  army  towards  Babylon,  which  he  readied  inr 
two-and-twenty  days  march;  where  Seleucus,  the  governor  of  the 
provinces,  received  hlni  with  royal  presents,  and  feasted  the  whole 
army.     But  wlien  Antigonus  demanded  an  account  of  the  revenney 

he  told  him He  was  not  bound  to  give  any  account  of  that  province 

which  the  Macedonians  had  bestowed  upon  him  as  a  reward  of  his 
service  in  Alexander's  life-time.  The  difference  growing  wider  and 
wider  every  day,  Scleucus,  remembering  Python's  fall,  was  thereupon 
the  more  afraid,  lest  Antigonus  should  catch  an  opportunity  to  put 
bim  also  to  death.  For  lie  seemed  to  have  a  design  to  cut  off  (as  soon 
as  he  possibly  could)  all  men  in  power,  and  such  as  were  in  a  capa- 
city to  struggle  for  the  chief  command:  whereupon,  for  fear  of  the 
worst,  he  forthwith  made  away  with  fifty  horse  only  in  his  company, 
lutending  to  go  into  Egypt,  to  Ptolemy:  for  his  kindness  and  cour- 
teous behaviour  towards  all  that  came  to  him  for  protection  and  shelter 


366  DIODORUS  6ICULU8.  Mook  XiX 

was  pndaed  in  every  place.  When  Antigonus  came  to  undeiittuid 
this,  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,  in  that  be  was  not  forced  to  destrojhia 
friend  and  potent  confederate,  but  that  Seleucus,  by  his  own  foluntiiy 
banbhment  had  seemed  to  deliver  up  the  province  of  tiisowoftccoffdj 
without  a  stroke  struck. 

Afterwards  the  Chaldeans  came  to  him,  and  foretold  that  if  Sdcacas 
got  absolutely  away,  he  should  be  lord  of  all  Asia,  and  that  id  abatdc 
between  them  Antigonus  himself  should  be  killed.  Whereupon 
being  sorry  that  he  had  let  him  go,  he  sent  some  away  to  pursue  him; 
but  having  followed  him  some  little  way,  they  returned  as  ihtf\ 
Antigonus  was  wont  to  slight  these  kind  of  divinations  in  oth«r  i 
but  at  this  time  he  was  so  amazed  and  affrighted  with  the  high  < 
and  reputation  of  these  men,  that  he  was  very  much  disturbed  in  Us 
thoughts:  for  they  were  judged  to  be  men  very  expert  and  sldlfbl^ 
through  their  exact  and  diligent  observation  of  the  stan:  mod  tbey 
affirm  that  they  and  their  predecessors  Iiave  studied  this  art  of  istio- 
logy  for  above  twenty  thousand  years.  And  what  they  had  fcrdoid 
concerning  Alexander's  death,  if  he  entered  intoBabyloo^  ^ 
true  by  late  experience.  And  in  truth,  as  those  predictions  < 
ing  Alexander  came  afterwards  to  pass,  so  what  they'  now  aud 
relating  to  Seleucus  was  likewise  in  due  time  accomplbhed.  Of 
which  we  shall  treat  particularly  when  we  come  to  the  times  prapct 
for  that  purpose. 

Seleucus,  when  he  was  got  safe  into  Egypt,  was  entertuned  by 
Ptolemy  with  all  the  expressions  of  kindness  and  affection  tbatmlgbt 
be;  where  he  bitterly  complained  against  Antigonus,  affirming  that 
his  design  was  to  expel  all  persons  of  eminent  quality  out  of  their 
provinces;  and  especially  such  as  were  in  service  under  Alexander; 
which  he  supported  with  arguments  from  Python's  being  put  to 
death,  and  Pcucestes  being  deprived  of  the  government  of  Penh, 
and  ffom  the  usage  he  himself  had  lately  met  with;  and  all  these 
though  they  had  never  done  any  thing  to  deserve  it,  but  rather  upon 
all  occasions  performed  all  the  acts  of  kindness  and  service  to  him 
that  was  in  their  power,  and  this  was  the  reward  they  obtained  for 
their  services.  He  reckoned  up,  likewise,  the  strength  of  his  fbrecSt 
his  great  treasure,  and  his  late  successes,  which  so  puffed  him 
up,  that  he  was  in  hopes  to  gain  the  sovereign  command  oier  all  the 
Macedonians. 

Having  by  these  arguments  stirred  up  Ptolemy  to  make  war 
against  him,  he  sent  some  of  his  friends  over  into  Europe,  to  pie* 
vail  with  Cassander  and  Lysimaclius,  with  tlie  like  argumentSj  to 
appear  iu  arms  against  Antigonus;  which  orden  being  forthwith 


Chtip.IPl  DIODORUS  SfCULUS.  3^ 

aecutedf  foandations  were  laid  for  a  migfaty  war,  wi^eh  afttrwania 
todc  plaoe.  -    .         . 

Antfgomia,  upon  many  probabk  coDJteetiiresy  coDcetYiogwlMct  waa 
Seleaciis*8  design^  sent  ambassadors  to  Ptolemy,  Cassandar,  iiall^f* 
aimachosy  to  desire  them  that  the  antient  friendship  might  te  piw 
aemd  and  maintained  aaooogst  themi    And  then,  haiiflB  9Mdi 
l^ytbon,  who  came  but  of  India^  lord-Ueutenant  of  the  piwviMa  «C 
Babylon,  he  broke  up  his  camp,  and  marched  towarda  Cificia.    Ai 
lOOD  as  he  came  to  Mallos*,  he  distributed  his  army  into  winter^ 
qaarters,  about  the  month  of  Novemberf :  and  he  received  out  of  tbft 
tieasury  in  the  city  of  Qoinda,  ten  thousand  talents,  and  eleven  tibgmf^ . 
aand  talents  out  of  the  yearly  revenues  d  Aat  province:  so  that  be 
\  very  formidable  both  in  respect  of  his  great  forces  and  the  vast- 
\  of  his  treasure.    And  now  being  removed  into  the  Upper  Syria^ 
ambassadors  came  to  him  from  Ptolemy,  Cassander,  and  I^tamAioMp 
mho  being  introduced  as  he  sat  in  council,  demanded  all  Cappadom 
suad  Lycia  to  be  delivered  up  to  Cassander:  Phrygia,  bordering  upon 
the  Hellespont,  to  Lysimachus;  all  Syria  lo  Ptcdemy;  and  the  pro* 
vince  of  Babylon  to  Seleucus;  and  all  the  cqmmon  stock  of  OMmigr 
"which  he  bad  incroached  upon  since  the  battle  witli  Em^fi||^  tbbe . 
shared  equally  amongst  them;  which  if  he  refused,  then  they  were 
to  let  him  know,  that  their  masters  intended,  with  their  joint  farces, 
to  make  war  upon  him.    Whereunto  he  answered  ioiq;Uy«Jrhat 
he  was  now  making  a  war  upon  Ptolemy;  and  thereupon  the  am* 
bassadors  returned,  without  any  effect  of  their  embassy:  and  npoa 
tbis  answer,  Ptolemy,  Cassander,  and  Lysimachus,  entered  into  a 
league  amongst  themselves,  and  gathered  their  forces  together,  and 
made  it  their  business  to  provide  arms^  and  all  other  things  neeeasaiy 
for  the  war. 

And  now  Antigonus  perceiving  how  many  great  and  potentadver* 
saries  had  confederated  against  him,  and  what  a  storm  was  ready  to 
-fall  upon  him,  sought  the  alliance  and  eoofbderacy  of  other  cities^ 
nations,  and  princes;  and  to  this  purpose  despatohed  Agesikms  to 
the  king  of  Cyprus,  Idomineus  and  Moschion  to  Rhodes,  and  one 
Ptolemy,  his  own  brother's  son,  with  an  army,  to  raise  the  siege^if 
Amisus,  in  Cappadocia,  and  to  drive  out  those  that  were  sent  thither 
by  Cassander.  He  commanded  him  likewise  to  go  to  the  Hellespont, 
and  fall  upon  Cassander,  if  he  attempted  to  pass  over  out  of  Europe 
into.  Asia.  He  also  sent  away  Aristodemus  the  Milesian^  with  a  thon- 
sand  talents,  with  orders  to  enter  into  a  league  of  amity  with  Alexander 
and  Poly  percbon,  and  to  hire  soldiers  and  make  war  upon  Cassander : 

*  In  Cilicia.  t  After  the  setting  of  Oriocu 


36s  nioDORUs  sicuLus.  JDm^  XIJL 

snd  he  himself  disposed  beacons  and  couriers  thnMighoat  all  Asiiii 
which  was  entirely  at  his  command^  hereby  to  give  and  get  knowlcdgs 
of  all  things  that  passed^  and  to  manage  his  afiEurs  the  more 
expeditiously. 

Having  taken  this  order,  he  marches  into  Phcenicia  to  provide  a 
fleet;  for  at  that  time  the  enemy  had  the  command  of  the  sea,  bdqg 
possessed  of  abundance  of  shipping,  when  he  himself  had  not  OM^ 
Encamping  near  to  Tyre,  designing  to  besiege  it,  he  sent  fof  tht 
petty  kings  of  Phoenicia,  and  governors  of  Syria,  and  treated  with 
them  to  join  him  in  the  building  of  ships,  because  all  the  sUps  that 
belonged  to  Phcenicia  were  then  with  Ptolemy  in  Egypt.     He  also 
gave  them  orders  to  bring  him,  with  all  speed,  four  millions  and  five 
hundred  thousand  bus»hels  of  wheat;  for  to  so  much  came  the  jearlj 
expense  of  his  army.   Then  he  got  together  hewers  of  timber^  sawyers^ 
and  ship  carpenters  from  all  parts,  and  caused  timber  to  be  brought 
down  from  Mount  Lihanus  to  the  sea  side,  employing  therein  eight 
thousand  men  to  work,  and  a  thousand  beasts  for  carriage.    This 
mount  runs  through  Tripolis,  Byblia,  and  Sidonis,  and  abounds  in 
most  beautiful  tall  cedars  and  cypress  trees.     He  appointed  three 
arsenals  in  Phoenicia,  one  at  Tripolis,  another  at  Byblia^  and  the 
third  at  Sidon;   a  fourth  he  had  in  Cilicia,  whither  timber  was 
brought  from  mount  Taurus;  and  a  fifth  in  Rhodes,  where  the  inha- 
bitanis  suffered  him  to  build  ships  of  timber,  conveyed  thither  at  his 
own  charge. 

While  Antigonus  was  thus  employed,  and  lay  encamped  bjthe 
sea-side,  Seleucus  came  with  a  fleet  of  a  hundred  sail  out  of 
Egypt,  quick  sailers,  and  royally  furnished,  and  in  a  scornful  man* 
ner  skirrcd  under  the  noses  of  thein,  which  not  a  little  troubled  the 
minds  of  his  new  associates,  and  those  that  joined  with  him  in 
the.  carrying  on  of  the  work.  For  it  was  very  apparent,  that 
the  enemy  now  being  masters  at  sea,  would  be  sure  to  waste  and 
spoil  those  who,  out  of  kindness  to  Antigonus,  had  joined  with  their 
adversaries. 

But  Antigonus  bid  them  be  of  good  cheer,  for  before  the  end 
of  summer,  he  said,  he  would  be  at  sea  with  a  fleet  of  five  hundred 
sail. 

Agesilaus,  in  the  mean  time  returned  from  his  embassy  out  of 
Cyprus,  and  brought  intelligence  that  Nicocreon,  and  the  most  potent 
kings  of  that  island,  had  already  jeined  Ptolejuy ;  nevertheless,  that 
Citticus,  Lapithius,  Marius,  and  Cyrcuites,  would  side  with  him: 
whereupon  he  left  three  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of 
Andronicusi,  to  maintain  the  siege  against  Tyre,  and  he  himself 


€^ap.  IV.  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  36^ 

xnarched  witi)  the  rest  of  the  army  against  Gaza  and  Joppa^  wluch 
atood  out  against  b.im^  and  took  them  by  force;  and  sach  of  Pto- 
lemy's men  whom  he  found  there,  he  took  and  distributed  among 
his  own  regiments^  and  placed  garrisons  in  both  those  cities^  to  keep 
jthem  in  obedience.  Which  done^  he  returned  to  his  standing  camp 
about  Tyre,  and  prepared  all  necessaries  for  a  siege  against  it.  At 
ihe  same  time  Aristo,  who  was  intrusted  by  Eumenes  to  carry'Cra- 
terus's  bones,  delivered  them  to  Phila  to  be  buried,  who  was  married 
^rst  to  Craterus,  and  at  that  time  to  Demetrius,  the  son  of  Antigo* 
nus,  who  was  a  woman  of  excellent  parts  and  prudence;  for  by  her 
prudent  behaviour  and  carriage  towards  every  soldier  in  the  army^ 
she  was  able  to  qualify  and  moderate  those  that  were  most  turbulent^ 
and  she  put  forth  the  daughters  and  sisters  of  those  that  were  poor, 
.at  her  own  charge,  and  prevented  the  ruin  of  many  tliat  were  falsely 
accused.  It  is  reported,  that  Antipater  her  father  (who  was  the  moat 
prudent  prince  that  governed  in  his  age)  wa3  used  to  consult  with 
Phila  his  daughter  in  the  most  weighty  aflairs,  while  she  was  yet  but 
a  girl.  But  the  prudence  of  this  woman  will  more  fully  appear  in  the 
following  narration,  and  when  things  tended  to  a  revolution,  and 
the  btal  period  of  Demetrius's  kingdom.  And  thus  stood  the  afiairs 
4)f  Antigonus  and  Phila  at  this  time. 

Amongst  the  captains  sent  away  by  Antigonus,  Aristodemus  passed 
over  to  Laconia,  and,  having  got  leave  of  the  Spartans  to  raise  sol- 
diers, got  together  eight  thousand  out  of  Peloponnesus;  and,  upoa 
conference  with  Polyperchon  and  Alexander,  joined  them  both  in  a 
firm  league  of  amity  with  Antigonus,  and  made  Polyperchon  general 
over  the  forces  in  Peloponnesus,  but  prevailed  with  Alexander  to  pass 
over  into  Asia  to  Antigonus. 

Ptolemsus,  another  of  his  captains,  going  into  Cappadocia  with  an 
army,  and  there  finding  the  city  of  Amisus  besieged  by  Asclepipdo* 
rns,  a  captain  of  Cassander's,  raised  the  siege,  and  secured  the  place; 
and  so,  having  sent  away  Asclepiodorus,  packing  up  certain  condi* 
lions,  recovered  that  whole  province  to  Antigonus;  and,  marching 
thence  through  Bithynia,  came  upon  the  back  of  Zibytes,  king  of  the 
Bithynians,  whilst  he  was  busy  in  besieging  two  cities  at  once,  that 
of  the  Assareniaus,  and  the  other  of  the  Chalcedonians,  and  forced 
him  to  raise  his  siege  from  both;  and  then,  falling  to  capitulations 
both  with  him  and  the  cities  that  were  besieged,  after  hostages  re* 
ceived,  removed  thenpe  towards  Ionia  and  L^ydia,  becai^se  Antigonus 
bad  written  to  him  to  secure  th^t  coast  with  all  possible  speed,  hav« 
ing  intelligence  that  Seleucus  was  going  into  those  parts  with  his 
fleet;  whhher  indeed  he  came,  and  besieged  flrythrse;  but,  hearing 
of  the  enemj^'s  approach,  left  it;  and  weal  away  as  he  came,    MeaUn 

S^U  %^  No.  45«  BM, 


370  DIODORUS  SICULUfl.  Aok  XlX. 

while  Alexander,  the  sou  of  Polyperchon,  chme  to  AotigoDiis,  whd 
made  a  league  with  him;  and  then,  calling  a  general  eoaneil  of  Ae 
army  and  the  strangers  resident  there^  declared  unto  them  how  €i»- 
aandef  had  murdered  Oljmpias,  and  how  villainoosly  he  had  dealt 
with  Rozana  and  the  young  king,  and  that  he  had  forced  Thessskmi- 
tm  to  marry  him,  and  that  it  was  very  clear'  and  erideilt  that  he  as^ 
pired  to  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia.  Moreover,  that  he  bad  planted 
^he  Olynthians,  the  most  bitter  enemies  of  the  Macedonians,  in  the 

«ity  called  after  his  own  name ^That  he  had  rebuilt  Thebes,  whkh 

was  razed  by  the  Macedonians.     Having  thus  incensed  the  amqr, 

he  made  and  wrote  an  edict That  Cassander  should  be  considered  sis 

an  open  enemy,  unless  he  razed  the  two  cities,  released  the  king  and 
Roxana  his  mother,  and  returned  them*safe  to  the  Macedonians;  and 
lastly,  unless  he  submitted  to  Antigonus,  as  general  and  sole  piDtectoc 
of  the  kingdom,  and  freed  alrthe  Greek  cities,  and  withdrew  all  the 
garrisons  out  of  them. 

When  the  army  iiad  approved  of  this  edict  by  their  snAagei,  he 
sent  couriers  away  to  publish  it  in  all  places:  for  he  hoped  that  faj 
this  means  all  the  Grecians,  in  expectation  of  having  their  Kbertiea 
restored,  would  be  his  confederates,  and  readily  assist  hfm  ill  lift 
war,  and  that  all  the  governors  of  the  higher  provinces,  wholieftM 
Suspected  him,  as  if  he  designed  to  deprive  the  postcfrity  of  AleAn- 
der  of  the  kingdom,  (now  that  it  clearly  appeared  that  he  took  vp 
arms  in  their  behalf),  would  observe  all  his  commands  of  tbeif  own 
accord. 

Having  despatched  all  these  matters,  he  sent  back  Alexander  irilh 
five  hundred  talents  into  Peloponnesus,  with  his  hopes  raised^  in  ex- 
pectation of  mighty  concerns :  and  he  himself,  with  ship^ng  hoik 
Rhodes,  and  others  he  had  lately  built,  set  sail  for  Tyre;  where,  be- 
ing now  master  at  sea,  he  so  blocked  it  up  for  thirteen  months  toge» 
thcr,  that  no  supply  of  Actuals  could  be  brought  thither,  and  there- 
by reduced  the  inhabitants  into  such  great  distress,  that  at  lei^gdi 
(upon  suflTering  the  soldiers  to  march  away  with  soihe  small  tld^fgs 
that  were  their  ovm)  the  city  was  surrendered  to  him  upon  ttrwB^ 
and  he  placed  a  garrison  in  it  for  its  defence. 

In  the  mean  time  Ptolemy,  hearing  what  a  declaration  Antigonds 
with  the  Macedonians  had  made  concerning  the  libeffy  of  the  <3ft- 
cians,  made  the  like  himself,  as  desirous  that  all  the  world  shonU 
take  notice  that  he  was  no  less  zealous  for  the  liberty  of  Greece  than 
Antigonus  was:  for  both  of  them,  well  considering  of  what  great 
mom^t  It  was  to  their  afiairs  to  gain  the  good  will  of  the  GredaaSj 
strove  one  with  another  which  should  oblige  them  mCMt'by  a(!ls  df 
grace.    Then  he  joined  to  bis  party  the  governor  of  Caria,  wlio  was 


Ck^p.  IF.  DiOBCMtUS  SICU|.U8i  SJl 

■  I— — —    ■  I  — |B,»»»^  ,  ..i— M 

H  mao  of  great  power^  and  had  many  great  cities  under  bis  cominand. 
Andt  tfaougk  be  had  before  sent  three  thousand  soldiers  to  the  kinga 
in  Cyprus,  yet  he  hastened  away  nuiny  more,  to  reduce  those  who  had 
there  sided  against  hiao.  Those  sent  were  ten  thousand,  under  the 
command  of  Myrmidon,  an  Athenian  born,  and  an  hundred  sail  of 
ships,  jcommanded  by  Polyclitus;  .and  the  general  over  all  he  made 
his  brother  Menelaus. 

These  coming  into  Cyprus,  joined  then  with  Seleucus  and  his  fleet, 
and  in  a  council  of  war  advised  what  course  was  fit  to  be  taken. 
The  result  of  which  was,  that  Polyclitus  with  fifty  sail  should  pass 
into  Peloponnesus,  and  there  should  make  war  upon  Aristodemus, 
Poljrperchoo,  and  his  son  Alexander:  that  Myrmidon  should  go 
with  an  army  of  foreigners  into  Caria,  there  to  help  Cassander  a- 
gainst  Ptolemy,  a  captain' of  Antigonus,  who  pressed  hard  upon  him; 
and  that  Seleucus  and  Menelaus,  staying  in^Cyprus,  should  bear  up 
Nicocreon  the  king,  and  the  rest  of  their  confederates,  against  their 
enemies. 

Having  thus  therefore  divided  their  forces,  Seleucus  went  and  took 
Cyrinia  and  Lapithus;  and,  having  drawn  over  Stasiecus,  king  of' the 
Malenses,  to  his  party,  he  forced  the  prince  of  the  Amathusians  to 
give  him  hostages  for  his  fealty  for  the  time  to  come.  As  for  the 
city  Citium,  (seeing  that  it  would  come  to  no  agreement  with  him)^ 
he  set  about  besieging  it  with  his  whole  army. 

About  the  same  time  came  forty  ships  out  of  the  Hellespont  and 
Rhodes,  under  the  command  of  one  Themison,  their  admiral,  to  An-* 
tigonus;  and  after  them  came  Dioscorides,  with  fourscore  more; 
and  besides  these,  Antigonus  had  a  navy  of  his  own  newly  built  in 
Phoenicia,  to  the  number  of  an  hundred  and  twenty  ships,  with  those 
that  he  left  at  Tyre;  so  that  he  had  in  the  whole  two  hundred  and 
forty  men  of  war,  of  which  there  were  ninety  of  four  tier  of  oars,  ten 
of  five,  three  of  nine,  ten  of  ten,  and  thirty  open  gallies. 

Antigonus  dividing  this  navy  into  squadrons,  sent  fifty  of  them  in^ 
to  Pekponnesus,  and  the  rest  he  committed  to  Dioscorides,  his  own 
brother's  son,  with  this  charge — That  he  should  guard  the  seas,  and 
help  his  friends  as  their  occasion  required,  and  that  he  should  gain 
unto  his  party  such  of  the  islands  as  hitherto  stood  out  against  him. 
And  in  this  posture  stood  the  afiairs  of  Antigonus. 

And  now,  having  related  the  things  done  throughout  all  Asia,  we 
shall  give  a  particular  account  of  the  afiairs  of  Europe. 

ApoUonides,  being  made  commander  of  the-Arpves  by  Cassander, 
in  the  night  broke  into  Arcadia,  and  surprised  the  city*  of  the  Stym- 
phalians.    And,  while  he  was  absent,  some  of  the  Argtves  (enemies 

*  St japh«liM>  iiear  lb*  Stj«pfaaUMi  La){e« 


372  DIODORU8  BicuLOd.  Booi  XDO 

to  Cassaoder)  corresponded  with  Alexander,  the  soti  of  Polypeiclionj 
and  promised  to  deliver  up  the  city*  into  his  hands:  but  ^ 
being  too  slow,  ApoUonides  came  to  Argos  before  him^  and  su 
five  hundred  of  the  conspirators  that  were  in  a  senate  in  the  Ifrpar 
neumf,  and  kept  them  in,  and  burnt  them  there  alive;  moat  of  die 
rest  he  banbhed,  and  some  few  more  he  took  and  put  to  deadu 

Cassander,  having  intelligence  that  Aristodemus  was  arrived  ia 
Peloponnesus,  and  that  he  had  listed  there  great  numbers  of  sol- 
diers, in  the  first  place  sought  to  draw  off  Polyperchon  fraDnAnti- 
gonus;  but  not  being  able  to  prevail,  he  marched  with  an  usf 
through  Thessaly,  and  came  into  Boeotia ;  where,  Imving  assisted  the 
Thebans  in  raising  of  their  walls,  he  passed  into  Peloponnesas,  aodf 
having  first  taken  Cenchr»a,  he  spoiled  and  harassed  all  the  teiritoij 
of  Corinth.  Then  he  took  two  castles  by  storm,  and,  upon  eondidm 
of  future  feith  and  allegiance,  dismissed  all  the  garrison  8cddien4at 
were  placed  there  by  Alexander.  Afterwards  he  besieged  QicImv 
menus,  and,  being  let  into  the  town  by  Alexander's  enemies^  he  pot 
a  garrison  into  the  city:  those  that  sided  with  Alexander  took  aanc- 
tuary  in  Diana's  temple,  whom  he  gave  up  to  the  dtixens,  to  do  witii 
them  as  tbey  thought  fit;  whercupoh  the  Orchomenians  drew  dica 
all  out  of  the  temple  by  force,  and,  against  the  conunon  laws  of  Gieece, 
put  them  all  to  death. 

Cassander  went  thence  into  Messenia,  but,  finding  the  eiqf  stnoagif 
garrisoned  by  Polyperchon,  he  did  not  think  fit  for  the  prcecnt  to 
besiege  it,  but  marched  into  Arcadia,  where  he  left  Damides  govcr* 
nor  of  the  cityt^  &Qd  returned  to  Argolides},  and  there  cdebntad 
the  Nemiean  games,  and  returned  into  Macedonia*  When  he  waa 
gone,  Alexander  with  Aristodemus  lay  before  the  cities  in  Pelopoa* 
nesus,  to  expel  the  garrisons  of  Cassander,  and  endeavouied  ail  he 
could  to  restore  the  cities  to  their  liberties:  which  eoming  to  tht 
ears  of  Cassander,  he  sent  to  him  Prepelaus,  to  work  upon  him  to  de- 
sert Antigonus,  and  enter  into  a  league  of  friendship  and  amity  with 
himself,  promising,  that  if  he  would  do  so,  he  would  give  him  tht 
sovereign  command  of  all  Peloponnesus,  and  create  him  genenl  of 
the  array,  and  would  advance  him  to  high  places  of  honour  end  |K* 
ferment.  Alexander,  seeing  that  he  was  now  likdy  to  eCtain  that 
for  which  from  the  beginning  he  made  war  upon  Casaanderj  entend 
into  a  league  with  him,  and  so  was  made  general  of  all  the  ibicea  in 
Peloponnesus. 

•  Argoa. 
t  A  pnblic  pltce  where  tlte  great  men  used  to  MCrifiee,  or  t  phct  wBece  »  coart  «■» 
kM  ^i^nging  to  tbe  leMte. 

I  St jnpfatlus.  i  Afgia.  . 


ChapB  tV.  Dioix>&U8  sicutus.  -a^J 


Si 


In  the  mean  time  PolycKtos^  Sdeociu's  lieutenant^  sailing  from 
Cyfims^  eanie  to  Cenchma,  where^  hearing  of  the  defection  of  Alex- 
ander^  and  finding  no  enemy  there  to  encounter^  he  chiinged  hi» 
eonrae,  and  set  sail  for  Pamphvlia;  and  from  thence  arAving  at 
Aphrodisiades  in  Cilicia,  he  there  understood  that  Theodotus^  admi* 
ml  of  Antigonus's  navy^  would  pass  by  from  Patara,  a  port  in  Lycia, 
frith  the  Rhodian  fleets  furnished  with  mariners  out  of  Caria)  and 
that  Perilaui  with  a  land«army  coasted  along  by  the  shore^  for  the 
defence  of  the  fleet,  if  necessary;  in  this  case  he  outwitted  them 
both;  for  he  landed  his  men  in  a  place  out  of  view,  where  the  land-^ 
army  must  of  necessity  pass,  and  himself  with  the  fleet  went  and 
lay  behind  a  foreland,  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  enemy;  then 
the  enemy's  foot  fell  into  an  ambush,  and  Perilaus  himself  was 
taken  prisoner,  and  all  his  men  either  killed  or  taken.  The  fleet  at 
aea,  seeing  the  land*army  engaged,  hastened  to  their  relief;  hat  thea 
Polyclitus  coming  upon  them  in  this  confusion,  with  his  shipo  drawn 
«p  in  a  line  of  battle,  put  them  easily  to  flight;  so  that  Polyditus  took 
all  their  ships,  and  most  part  of  the  men  in  them,  and  amongst  the 
rest  Theodotus  himself,  their  admiral,  sorely  martyred  with  wound^ 
<A  which  he  shortly  after  died. 

Polyclitus,  having  succeeded  ao  well  on  all  hands,  sailed  back  firH 
to  Cyprus,  and  then  to  Pelusium*,  where  Ptolemy  richly  rewarded  hioi 
for  so  great  a  service,  and  promoted  him  to  a  far  higher  dignity  and 
plaee  of  honour  than  he  was  in  before,  as  the  author  of  so  great  a 
▼ictory ;  but  released  Perilaus  and  some  other  prisoners,  whom  Ami- 
gonus  desired  by  a  messenger  sent  to  him  for  that  purpose.  And 
then  himself,  going  to  a  place  called  Ecregnia,  came  to  a  parley  with 
Antigonus;  but  Antigonus  refusing  to  grant  him  what  he  demanded^ 
he  left  him  and  returned. 

Having  now  given  an  account  of  the  «iflrairs  of  the  European  Greeks, 
both  in  Greece  and  Macedonia,  we  fhall  pass  over  to  tlie  {Nirts  lying 
towards  the  west. 

Agathocles,  prince  of  Syracuse,  having  possessed  himself  of  a  cas- 
tle belonging  to  the  Messenians,  promised  tb  restore  it  upon  rccdv- 
ingof  thirty  talents  of  silver;  which  when  the  Messenians  had  paid, 
he  not  only  broke  his  faith,  but  endeavoured  to  have  scieed  upou 
Messina  itself:  for,  being  informed  that  part  of  the  walls  were  fallea . 
down,  he  sent  a  party  of  horse  by  land  from  Syracuse,  und  he  himself 
in  some  ships  called  Hemioliasf,  went  by  sea,  and  arrived  in  the 
night  close  under  the  walls  of  the  city;  but  the  Messenians,  coming 
to  understand  his  design  beforehand,  wholly  defeated  him  in  what  he 
had  contrived :   however,  he  came  to  Mylas,  and,  upon  iayii^g  aicfe 

♦  In  Kg7J»t.  t  Bnrki  «r  fr»]{ti*«. 


37^  DIODORU5  SICULU5.  Book  Xlim 

to  the  castte,  had  it  delivered  up  to  him,  and  tbeo  return^  to  Sfsip 
ciue.  In  harvest-time  he  made  a  aecood  attempt  upon  Mftiimr, 
WEkd,  encamping  near  the  city,  made  continual  asaaulu^  hot  was  Ml; 
able  to  efiect  any  thing  considerable :  ibr  many  exiles  had  flockad 
into  this  place  from  Syracuse^  who,  both  for  the  sake  of-  thfir 
preservation^  and  out  of  hatred  to  the  tyrant^  fought 
geously. 

About  this  time  came  ambassadors  from  Carthage  arguing  the  < 
with  Aggthocles,  and  complaining  of  the  breach  of  articles;  aii^ 
making  peace  with  the  Messenians,  they  forced  the  tyrant  to ) 
the  castle*,  and  then  sailed  back  into  Africa. 

After  which  Agathocles  went  to  Abecenus,  one  of  his 
dties,  and  there  he  put  to  death  forty^  whom  (le  looked  upoa  to  be 
his  enemies. 

In  these  times  the  Romans  were  at  war  with  the  Samnitetj  w4 
todL  Ferentum  by  storm;  and  the  inhabitants  of  Nuceria  (caUad  At* 
&terna}  were,  by  the  persuasions  of  some  persons,  prevailed  nilh  U^ 
desert  the  Romans^  and  join  in  league  with  the  Sooioitca. 


CHAP.  V. 


The  acts  of  Jhristodemus,  jtntigcnus*s  general  in  PelqponnetiUk 
Th0  Dimeans  in  Achaia  seek  to  freis  themselves  from  rffwaw- 
der^s  garrison:  they  take  the  citadel.  Alexander,  son  qfPofy* 
perchon,  assassinated:  the  praise  of  Cratesipolis,  his  uj\fe.  The 
acts  of  Cassander  in  JEtolia,  and  other  parts  of  Greece.  Thf 
cruelty  of  the  Italians.  Cassander  sends  an  army  inio  Caria^ 
and  Aristotle  with  a  fleet  to  Lemnos.  The  acts  qf  Castanief^M 
army  in  Caria.  Antigonus  leaves  his  son  Demetrius  m  S^ria^ 
io  watch  Ptolemy.    Mis  troublesome  march  into  Asia,    The  eif^ 

'  fqArs  of  Sicily.  Acrotatus^s  misgovernment  and  crudties  iis  Si-' 
cily.    The  acts  of  Agathocles.     T/ie  dffairs  ofltafy. 


WHEN  the  former  year  was  ended,  Nicodorus  was  icreited  i 
at  Athens,  and  Lucius  Papirius  chosen  the  fourth,  and  Quiatns  Pab- 
lius  the  second  time  consul  at  Rome.  At  that  time  Aristodcinvb 
made  general  by  Antigonus,  hearing  of  the  defection  of  Akqmadeo 


C3k^  V.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  S7S 


the  son  of  Poljrperchon,  after  he  had  opened  die  justice  of  the  < 
before  the  senate  of  the  iUtoIians,  solicited  them  to  be  assistant  to 
the  afidrs  of  Antigonns.  Then  passing  into  Peloponnesus  with  the 
mercenaries,  found  Alexander  with  the  Elians  besieging Cyllene,  and» 
just  arriving  in  time,  raised  the  siege;  and  then,  leaving  a  garrison 
to  defend  the  place,  he  moTed  towards  Actria,  and  freed  Patre  from 
the  garrison  of  Cassander;  but  ^geae  he  took  by  force,  and,  being 
possessed  of  the  place,  was  ready  to  restore  the  i£g«ans  to  their  It* 
berty,  according  to  the  former  decree,  but  was  prevented  by  this  acd« 
dent.  The  soldiers  began  to  plunder;  and  upon  that  occasion  manj 
of  the  citizens  were  killed,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  town  was  bomt 
to  the  ground. 

After  which  he  sailed  back  into  £tolia«  The  Dymsei,  who  went 
awed  by  a  garrison  of  Cassander's  in  the  castle,  separated  their  dtf 
from  the  citadel  by  a  wall  drawn  round  it,  and,  encouraging  one  alio* 
dier  to  stand  up  for  their  liberties,  besieged  the  castle,  and  infested 
It  with  continual  assaults :  of  which  Alexander  receiving  intelligence^ 
he  came  upon  them  with  bis  army  on  a  sudden,  and  drove  then 
within  their  walls,  and  entered  pell  mell  with  them  into  the  dty,  and 
took  it.  Some  of  the  Dynueans  he  put  to  the  sword,  others  he  tm* 
prisoned,  and  many  of  them  he  banished.  After  Alexander  went 
away,  the  rest  of  them  were  quiet  for  a  little  while,  being  both  ter- 
rified with  the  greatness  of  the  late  calamity,  and  likewise  wanting 
the  assistance  of  their  confederates.  But  some  time  after,  they  mads 
application  to  Aristodemus's  mercenaries,  who  marched  tb  them 
firom  iEgsese:  whereupon  they  again  assaulted  the  citadel,  and  took 
itj  and  freed  the  city,  and  put  many  of  the  garrison  to  the  sword, 
And  put  to  death  such  of  their  own  citizens  as  favoured  Alexander's 
party. 

Amongst  these  turns  and  changes  of  fortune,  while  Alexander 
with  hb  army  was  marching  from  Sicyon,  he  was  killed  by  Alexion^ 
a  Sicyonian,  and  some  others,  who  pretended  to  be  his  friends.  His 
wife  Cratesipolis  after  his  death  took  upon  her  the  management  of 
mffiiirs,  and  kept  the  army  in  due  obedience.  Her  obliging  carriage 
and  botinty  was  such,  that  she  was  greatly  beloved  by  the  soldiers; 
for  she  was  continually  affording  all  the  help  she  could  to  them  that 
were  in  distress,  and  relieving  and  supporting  many  that  were  ia 
want:  besides,  she  was  a  woman  of  admirable  prudence  in  manag- 
ing affairs,  and  of  courage  beyond  the  natural  temper  of  her  sex. 
For  when  the  Sicyonians,  in  contempt  of  her,  (after  the  death  of  her 
husband),  rose  up  in  arms  for  the  recpvery  of  their  liberty,  she  ez6<« 
coted  her  revenge  by  cutting  ofi^  multitudes  of  them  in  a  field-battle^ 
and  crucified  thirty  of  those  she  had  taken  prisoners:  and  u>^  having 


Sj6  DIODORU8  8ICULUS.  JBook  X13L 

settled  the  affairs  of  the  city,  she  reigned  over  the  Sieyonianft,  h«r- 
iag  under  her  command  maltitades  of  soldiers  ready  upon  all  ooct- 
sions  for  any  undertaking,  though  ever  so  hazardous*  And  this  was 
then  the  state  and  condition  of  Peloponnesus. 

Cassander,  pereciving  that  the  ^tolians  assisted  Antigomis^  and 
were  then  likewise  engaged  in  a  war  with  their  neighbours  the  Acar* 
nanians,  judged  that  the  most  probable  way  to  bring  down  the  Muh 
lians  was  for  him  to  join  with  the  Acarnanians,  To  this  end,  ha 
marched  out  of  Macedonia  with  a  great  army,  and  came  ioto^tiriiay 
and  encamped  near  the  river  Camphylus.  Here  he  invited  the  Acaiw 
nanians  to  a  common  consultation,  where  he  set  forth  how  they  had 
been  vexed  for  many  generations  past  by  war  from  their  unruly  and 
troublesome  neighbours;  and  therefore  he  advised  them,  that  dwy 
should  leave  their  little  forts  and  castles,  (though  they  were  fortified]^ 
and  betake  themselves  to  a  few  cities,  lest,  being  so  diqiened  and 
scattered  in  their  habitations,  they  should  not  be  able  to  get  togethsr 
to  assist  one  another  when  tlie  enemy  at  any  time  should  sudden^ 
and  unexpectedly  break  in  upon  them.  The  Acarnaniaos  followed 
his  advice^  and  the  most  of  them  removed  to  Stratopolis,  whidi  ^ 
the  strongest  and  largest  of  their  cities.  The  (Eniada,  and 
others,  went  to  Saurion ;  the  Dorians,  with  the  rest,  to  Agriniun. 

Cassander  hereupon  left  Lyciscus  his  general  in  those  parts  with  a 
considerable  body  of  men,  with  orders  to  assist  the  Aearoanians;  and 
he  himself  marched  with  his  army  to  the  city  Leucades,  and  bj  treaty 
gained  them  for  confederates.  Then  with  a  swift  march  he  cama 
suddenly  into  Adria,  and  took  in  Apollonia  upon  his  first  i^iproadib 
Thence  marching  into  Illyria,  he  passed  over  the  river  Hebnis^  and 
fought  with  Glaucias,  the  lUyriau  king,  and  routed  his  army;  after 
which  he  made  peace  with  him,  upon  condition  that  he  should  not 
make  war  upon  any  of  his  confederates.  Then  he  took£{Hdamnns*> 
and,  placing  there  a  garrison,  returned  into  Macedonia^ 

After  Cassander  had  left  iEtolia,  the  iGtoIiaus  joining  tugathei^ 
to  the  number  of  three  thousand,  besieged  Agrinium,  girting  it  foond 
with  a  trench  and  a  breast-work.  But  the  inhabitants  that  came  bei« 
fore  out  of  the  country  treated  and  agreed  with  the  enemy-JIIuii 
upon  delivery  up  of  the  city,  their  persons  should  be  secure^  and 
Ihey  should  have  liberty  to  depart  and  leave  the  place.  Wherropa^ 
after  faith  given  for  their  security,  they  went  out;  but^when  they 
were  on  their  way,  the  ^toUans  falsely  and  treacherously^  when  tha 
others  never  suspected  any  thing,  pursued  them^  and  kilkd  themak 
most  every  man. 

.    *  EptdMnnuro^  bordtdng  upon  the  Adriatic  trt.    Now  mIM  Dvnmh 
Pynuchium. 


OlmF.  f^^  PI0Q0RU6  SICUJJJftfk  977 

II    •    ■  .1  Ji  ,  mJ" ...^.  ,...        ..r  ■ 

jSojindfiMm  ietiiiMd  ifito  M»fff4o«Wf  «i  aooaiM^e  bcird  tKMr 
.  dM  oMli  ia  <;iiirit<tlM|  h«d  Goiifedmitsd  w$k  IfMAmj  wd  SdeiiciMij 
wtfc^ jplpilpd  hf^ibft  »«ri.iP>t  over  «a  aroqr  Mito  Caria»  both  to  Jbejp 
the  eQ«Menites>  and  also  10  tip^  to.div6n.4iK(goi|ii(b  tM  ^^ 
hsiMLJfKKMinn  ID  ffameA9to£im>p^,.:|ji 
]caeii  J>etiiatriai,  I%aUiiM% and  ]>iQn}^kW|  gqmqor  of .t^jTort  of 
IfuDychia^  to  fit  oat  forthviEiith  twenty  ship^  for  LemiHifi :  who  there* 
«poo  preseotly  despatched  away  the  fhips,  .poder.  the  cpmoiaDd  of 
Aristotle,  their  admiial;  and  b^j.ariivMig,i^l4eDuiqfi^aQd  beipg  there 
'  joiaed  by  Sel^ucos^aod.  W  fi^j  pireyaiM  w\^k  1^  inhabitaota  to 
^mttm  ADt^oBB.  But  they  fikerwarda  reti<cu:t^  what  they  haid  be^ 
Sott  engaged,  to,  and  ithereupoo  )ie  wasted  aod  tiaraased  the  coantryj 
and  drew  a  trench  round  the  city,  and  besieged  it. 
.  Aboot  this  timeS^eucias  arrived  at  Coos;,  whose  coming  there  11^ 
ing  HQiaed  abvoad^  Dtoscsorides,  admiral  of  Antigonus's  jBeet,  sailed  to 
liemnoaj  and  drove  Aristotle  out  of  Itbe  ishmdjt  and  took  many  of  his 
aliip%  ipgesher  with  all  their  man  on  board. 

OmeCassander  and  Piqiehius  were  oom^iaoders  of  the  forces  aenl 
imo  Csm  by  Cassander;  who^  hearing  tha^  Ptolemy,  Antigonii8*s 
fcnenl  in  those  parts,  had  dislrihated  his  army  itoto  their  winterr 
quartfBiSt  and  that  he  hims^  wa^  busied,  in  burying  hb  father,  sept 
away  £npqlemus,  with  eight  thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse^  * 
to.  a  place  qalkd  Caprima,  io  Carta,  to  lie  in  ambusp^e  for  him 
tiMire:  but  Ptolemy  getting  notice  thereof  by  some  that  fled  over  to 
)MiB#.got  together  out  of  the  next  winter-quarters  eight  thousand 
daree  hundred  foot,  and  six  hundred  horse,  and,  falling  about  inid- 
oight  into  the  enemy's  trenches,  and  finding  them  nearly  all  fast' 
fskep,  took.EupoIemus  prisoner,  and  forced  all  his  men  to  surrender 
9i.  discretion.  And  tliis  was  then  the  condition  of  those  sentliy  Cas- 
aander  into  Asia* 

But  Antigonus,  perceiving  that  Cassander  aimed  at  the  sovereignty 
of :Asia»  left  his  son  Demetrius  in  Syria,  with  instructions  to  Inter* 
cqpt  Ptolemy's  men,  whom^he  suspected  were  then  coming  with  ^^ 
army  further  up  into  Syria;  and  for  that  purpose  left  with  bim  ten 
thousand  foot  of  other  nations,  two  thousand  Macedonians,  five  hun- 
dred out  of  Lycia  and  Pamphylia,  four  hundred  Persian  archers  and 
aliogers^  five  thousand  horse,  and  above  forty  elepliants;  and  four 
neo  kn  his  counsellors,  Nearchon,  Python,  son  of  Agenor,  who  came 
lately  from  Babylon,  Andronicus  of  Olynthus,  and  Philippus,  all 
men  of  mature  age  and  judgment,  and  such  as  had  attended  upon 
Alexander  in  all  hb  wars:  for  Demetrius  himself  was  but  a  young 
'  man,  not  above  two-and-twenty  year$  of  age.  Upon  iVntigonus  him- 
self, while  he  passed  with  the  rest  of  his  army  over  jMount  Ta'orns, 
Vol,  2.  No.45,  ccc  '       . 


s 


3f8  DIODORUS  sicuLUs.  Sook 

there  fell  a  mighty  snow,  wherein  he  lost  many  of  bis  men.  Wbeie- 
upon  he  returned  back  into  Cilicia,  where  he  found  out  a  better  mj 
to  pass  that  mountain^  and  with  little  damage  to  his  annyj^and  to, 
coming  to  Celsene  in  Phrygia,  he  there  put  his  army  into  winter- 
quarters.  Then  he  sent  for  the  fleet  out  of  Phoenicia,  of  which  Meffios 
was  admiral,  who  by  mere  chance  in  his  way  met  with  a  fleet  of  thirty- 
six  sail  belonging  to  the  city  of  Pydna,  and  defeated  them,  and  1mnq;|t 
the  ships,  with  all  their  men,  under  his  subjection.  In  thb  poatm 
stood  the  aflairs  both  of  Greece  and  Asia  at  this  time. 

In  the  mean  time,  in  Sicily,  the  exiles  of  Syracuse,  who  wen 
in  Agrigentum,  stirred  up  the  great  men  of  the  dty  not  to 
Agathocles  in  that  manner  to  make  a  prey  of  the  cities,  alleging, 
that  it  was  better  to  fall  upon  the  tyrant  before  he  grew  too  atmig^ 
than  toVait  till  he  was  in  greater  power,  and  then  to  be-  fereed  to 
contend  with  him,  when  it  was  more  hazardous.    Whereupon  Ac 
Agrigentines,  approving  of  this  adidce,  decreed  by  their  suflrages  war 
against  Agathocles;   and,  joining  in  confederacy  with  the  Geloans 
and  Messenians,  they  sent  some  of  the  exiles  to  the  Lacedemoiuttis, 
with  orders  to  procure  a  general  to  be  sent  to  them  from  theace:  toi 
they  suspected  that  some  of  their  own  citizens  were  too  modi  ift- 
clined  to  tyranny  themselyes;  but  judged  that  foreigners,  if  they  rs-^ 
membered  the  government  of  Timolcon  the  Corinthian,  would  better 
manage  the  public  aflairs.    When  they  arrived,  therefore,  in  Laco!- 
iiia,  they  found  Acrotatus,  the  sou  of  Jfiing  Cleomenes,  much  hated 
by  many  of  the  young  noblemen  at  home,  and  therefore  very  derif- 
ous  to  be  employed  abroad:  for  when  the  Lacedaemonians,  after  Ae 
fight  with  Antipater,  had  acquitted  those  that  escaped  out  of  that 
battle  from  all  censures  of  disgrace^  he  only  opposed  the  decree;  so 
that  many  were  ofTended  at  him,  especially  those  that -were  liable  to 
the  penalty  of  the  laws*    And  upon  that  account  they  had  laia  ia 
wait  for  him,  and  beaten  him,  and  were  constantly  seeking  to  eatn^ 
him :  being  therefore  for  this  reason  desirous  of  a  foreign  command, 
he  very  freely  complied  with  the  Agrigentines;  and  thereupon,  with- 
out the  order  of  the  ephori,  (resolving  upon  the  voyage),  he  set  sdl 
with  a  few  ships  for  Agrigentum:  but,  being  driven  back  by  a  storm 
into  Adria,  he  arrived  in  the  territory  of  the  ApoUoniates;  wheie, 
fiiidnig  the  city  besieged  by  Glaucias,  king  of  the  Illyrians,  he  per^ 
suaded  the  king  to  raise  the  siege,  and  enter  into  a  league  of  fnead- 
ship  with  the  ApoUoniates.    Then  he  sailed  to  IVuentom,  and  theic 
solicited  the  people  to  join  with  him  in  procuring  the  restoration  of 
the  Syracusans  to  their  antient  liberties,  and  so  fiur  prevailed,  tkai 
they  decreed  to  assist  them  with  twenty  ships:  for,  on  aeconat  of 
bis  kindred,  and  the  nobleness  of  bis  family,  his  words  were  of  gieaC 


€HUp.  V.  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  S79 

r  , , ,  ^ssssKSsssssSsxsssassssssxssssssssamssssBema^ 
weight  and  credit.  While  iheTareotiaes  were  making  prepantions, 
he  himself  sailed  to  Agrigentum^  and  there  took  upon  him  the  com- 
mand of  the  army;  whereupon  the  people  were  in  high  expectations, 
all  coodading  that  an  end  would  presently  be  put  to  the  tyranny: 
but,  in  a  short  time,  it  plainly  appeared  that  he  did  nothing  worthy 
either  the  nobility  of  hie  birth  or  the  reputation  of  his  country^  but 
on  the  contrary  became  more  cruel  than  the  very  tyrants  themselves, 
and  so  fell  into  the  hatred  of  the  people;  he  degenerated  likewise 
from  the  custom  of  his  country  in  his  manner  of  living,  and  so  in- 
dulged himself  in  voluptuousness,  that  he  seemed  more  like  a  Per- 
sian than  a  Spartan.  After  he  had  lavished  away  the  greatest  part 
of  the  public  revenues,  partly  by  his  misgovernment,  and  partly  by 
robbing  of  the  treasury,  in  the  conclusion  he  invited  Sosistratus  (the 
most  eminent  person  among  the  exiles)  and  one  who  had  been  a 
general  of  armies)  to  supper,  and  treacherously  killed  him,  not  having 
any  thing  in  the  least  to  lay  to  his  charge,  but  only  that  he  might 
take  out  of  the  way  a  stout  and  valiant  man,  and  on^  that  was  able  to 
discern  and  discover  his  miscarriages :  which  wicked  act  being  pre- 
sently noised  abroad,  the  exiles  in  a  body  came  upon  him,  and  every 
body  else  forsook  him,  and  in  the  first  place  they  deposed  him^  and 
presently  after  attempted  to  stone  him  to  death;  to  avoid  therefore 
the  rage  of  the  people,  he  stole  away  in  the  night,  and  landed  pri- 
vately in  Laeonia.  After  his  departure,  the  Tarentinea  recalled  the 
'  fleet  they  had  before  sent  into  Sicily* 

Hereupon  the  Agrigen tines,  Geloans,  and  McssenianSftl^the  me- 
diation of  Amilcar,  the  Carthaginian  general,  made  peace  with  Aga- 
thpcles,  the  conditions  of  which  werc^That  Heraclea,  Selinus,  and 
Himera,  part  of  the  Greek  cities,  should  belong  to  the  Carthaginians, 
pB  they  did  before;  all  the  rest,  under  the  power  of  the  Syracusans, 
slmuld  be  free  to  be  governed  by  their  own  hiws.  But  afterwards 
Agathocles,  when  he  saw  the  coast  clear,  and  Sicily  free  from  all  ap- 
pearance of  an  enemy,  fell  upon  the  cities,  and  without  any  difficulty 
brought  them  under  his  subjection;  and,  gaining  many  in  a  very 
short  time,  strongly  fixed  himself  in  the  principality.  For,  in  the 
multitude  of  his  confederates,  the  greatness  of  his  yearly  revenues, 
and  the  power  of  a  mighty  army,  he  grew  very  strong:  for,  besides 
his  confederates,  and  those  raised  from  among  the  Syracusans,  he  had 
of  mercenaries  ten  thousand  foot,  and  three  thousand  and  fifty  horse; 
he  furnished  himself  likewise  with  all  sorts  of  arms,  foreseeing  that 
the  Carthaginians  (who  had  smartly  rebuked  Amilcar  for  making  the 
peace)  would  in  a  short  time  make  war  upon  him*  And  such  was 
the  state  of  Sicily  at  this  time, 

in  luly,  the  Samnites,  having  now  been  at  war  with  the  Romans 


380  DioDOkus  sicuLUS.  Book  XIX 

'■"'■■  =g=ga= 

for  many  yean  last  past^  took  Philiftta,  wherein  was  a  strong  Roman 
garrison,  and  prevailed  with  the  Soranions  to  massacre  all  the  Ro- 
mans that  were  there,  and  to  confederate  with  the  Samnites. 

Afterwards,  while  the  Romans  were  besieging  Saticula^  they  came 
upon  them  with  a  strong  army,  resolving  to  raise  the  siege;  upon 
which  followed  a  sharp  engagement,  and,  after  many  killed  on  both 
sides,  the  Romans  carried  the  day;  and  then  presently jafter  they  took 
the  town,  and  gained  several  other  neiglibouring  towns  and  caatlei. 
And  now  the  war  was  brought  over  amongst  the  cities  of  Apvlia; 
whereupon  the  Samnites  listed  all  that  were  of  age  to  bear  armSy  x 
marched  out,  and  encamped  close  to  the  enemy,  being  now  i 
to  win  or  lose  all.  The  people  of  Rome  therefore,  to  prevent  the 
worst,  sent  thither  a  great  number  of  soldiers;  and,  becauae  thej 
were  accustomed  in  perilous  times  to  choose  one  of  the  most  noUe 
and  eminent  persons  to  be  their  general,  with  full  and  absolute  power 
and  authority,  they  therefore  pitched  upon  Quintus  Fabios  and  Qoin- 
tus  AuHus,  master  of  the  horse,  for  that  honourable  employment. 
These  generals  afterwards  fought  the  Samnites  at  Lantnlus,  where 
they  sustained  great  loss  of  their  men,  and  the  whole  army  fled  oat- 
right,  only  Aulus  (being  ashamed  of  the  dishonour)  oppioaed  tlie 
whole  body  of  the  enemy,  not  out  of  any  hopes  or  expectation  of 
gaining  the  victory,  but  to  have  it  manifest  and  apparent  to  ally  from 
his  own  valour,  that  his  country  was  unconquerable.  Not  sharing 
therefore  with  the  rest  of  the  citizens  in  the  dishonour  of  the  flight, 
he  diedifS&re  a  glorious  and  honourable  death. 

The  Romans  now,  fearing  lest  they  should  lose  all  Apalia,  sent 
colonies  into  Luceria*,  the  most  famous  city  of  all  those  parts;  and 
this  proved  of  great  advantage  to  them,  by  the  (reqnent  eraptions 
made  upon  the  Samnites :  for,  by  the  help  and  advantage  of  this  city, 
they  became  conquerors  not  only  in  this  war,  but  several  tiroes  aikcr- 
wards;  and  even  to  our  present  age  they  have  constantly  made  use 
of  this  city  as  a  strong  fort  and  citadel  of  war  against  all  the  neigh* 
l)ouring  nations. 

*  Lucerii>  now  Nocenu 


C%».  F7.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  381 

\  '  '  '  ■  ,   ,  ■ 


CHAP.  VI. 

Several  eities  revolt;  Lysimachus  comes  against  them.  Pkilqf, 
Cassander*s  general,  routs  the  Epirots  and  Italians.  CassaU" 
der  agrees  with  uintigonus.  Antigontis  gains  the  cities  in  Cariiu 
Cassander's  acts  in  Greece*  The  Samnites  routed  by  the  Ro^ 
mans.  Polemon  sent  by  Antigonus  into  Greece  to  set  the  cities 
at  liberty.  The  acts  of  Antigonus  and  Cassander.  Folemon^s 
ads  in  Greece  for  Antigonus.  Ptolemy  goes  against  Cyrene 
and  Cyprus;  and  then  against  Demetrius.  The  battle  tvith  De* 
metrius  at  Gaza.  Ptolemy  takes  Tyre.  The  acts  of  Antigo* 
nus's  commanders  in  Greece.  The  Epirots  make  Alcetas  king^ 
who  is  beaten  by  Lyciscusj  Cassander^s  general;  and  is  beaten 
again  by  the  other.  Cassander  goes  against  the  ApoUoniateSm 
Sdeucus  recovers  Babylon  with  a  small  army.  Demetrius  routs 
CiUes,  Ptolemy^s  general.  Ptolemy  returns  to  Egypt,  after 
wasting  Samaria,  Gaza,  Joppa,  S^c.  Athen€eus  sent  against 
the  Nabathasans  by  Antigontis.  The  customs  of  the  Arabians. 
Description  of  the  Asphaltites,  or  Lake  of  Sodom.  Demetrius 
sent  against  Seleucus  in  Babylon.  The  Wars  between  the  Ro^ 
mans  and  Samnites  in  Italy.  The  conduct  of  Agathocles  in  Si" 
city. 

THE  affiiirs  of  this  year  being  brought  to  this  conclusion^  Theo-> 
phrastus  became  chief  magistrate  of  Athens^  and  Marcus  Petilius  and 
Caius  Sulpitius  were  invested  with  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome... 
The  Callantinians^  the  inhabitants  of  those  parts  on  the  left  of  the 
Pontus^  cast  out  the  garrison  put  upon  them  by  Lysimachus,  and  re- 
covered their  liberty.  In  the  same  manner  the  Istrians  freed  their 
city,  and  confederated  with  the  neighbouring  inhabitants  to  join  to- 
gether in  a  war  against  their  prince.  The  Thracians  and  Scythians 
likewise  joined  with  their  neighbours ;  so  that  all  the  forces  together 
were  of  that  strength,  that  they  were  able  to  cope  with  the  most  po- 
tent army. 

Lysimachus  hearing  what  was  done,  marched  with  his  army  against 
the  rebels,  and  passing  through  Thrace,  when  he  had  got  over  mount 
Haemus,  encamped  near  Odcssus,  which,  upon  blocking  it  up,  the 
inhabitants  in  a  great  consternation  delivered  up  to  him.  Reducing 
likewise  the  Istrians  in  the  jame  manner,  he  marched  thence  against 
theCallantinians ;  about  which  time  the  Thracians  and  Scythians  came 
in  with  a  great  army  to  the  assistance  of  their  confederates.    Upon 


382  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  B90k  XIX 

which  Lysimachus  advancing,  faced  themj  and  forthwith  lifting  np 
his  ensigns  for  battle,  the  Thracians  were  so  terrified,  that  they  march- 
ed off  and  went  their  way.  But  he  engaged  the  Scythians  and  rooted 
them,  killing  a  great  number,  and  driving  the  rest  out  of  the  coun- 
try* Then  he  laid  close  siege  to  the  city  of  the  Callantinians,  settiuf 
all  bis  wits  at  work,  and  making  it  his  principal  and  only  bnsineiB 
how  he  might  be  revenged  on  the  authors  of  the  defection.  While 
he  was  engaged  in  this  project,  news  was  brought  him  that  Ant^o- 
nus  had  sent  two  armies  to  the  assistance  of  the  Callaotiniaoa,  one 
by  land  and  another  by  sea;  and  that  Lycon  the  admiral  was  frith 
the  fleet  in  Pontus,  and  that  Pausanias  was  encamped  with  a  great 
land  army  at  Hieron.  At  this  news  Lysimachus  was  much  concern- 
ed, and  thereupon,  leaving  a  considerable  body  of  troops  to  main- 
tain the  siege,  he  speedily  marched  off  with  the  main  strength  of  bis 
army  to  engage  the  enemy ;  and  being  ready  to  repass  mount  Haonas, 
he  found  Seuthes  king  of  Thrace,  who  had  revolted  to  Antifgoniis^ 
obstructing  his  passage  with  a  great  body  of  men :  upon  which  he 
engaged,  and  forced  his  way  through  the  barbarians,  with  the  lots  of 
a  great  number  of  his  own  men,  but  many  more  of  the  enemy. 

Tlicn  he  fell  upon  the  Pausanians,  finding  them  in  the  struts, 
whither  they  had  fled.  These  he  gained  by  force;  and  having  killed 
Pausanias,  he  discharged  some  of  the  soldiers  upon  ransoms  <um1  o» 
thers,  who  took  up  arms  with  him,  he  distributed  amongst  his  own 
troops.  And  thus  stood  the  affairs  of  Lysimachus.  But  wlien  this 
enterprise  failed,  Antigonus  sent  Telesphorus  into  Peloponnesus 
with  a  fleet  of  fifty  sail,  and  a  considerable  number  of  soldiers,  with 
orders  to  set  free  all  the  cities,  that  they  might  live  according  to  their 
own  ancient  laws.  This  he  did,  hoping  by  this  means  to  gain  credit 
amongst  the  Grecians,  as  one  that  really  Intended  the  procurement 
and  preservation  of  their  liberties  and  by  this  plan  he  concluded  bo 
should  find  out  how  matters  stood  with  Cassander. 

Telesphorus  therefore,  as  soon  as  he  arrived  in  Peloponnesus^went 
to  Alexander's  garrisons,  and  set  them  all  free,  except  Sicyon  and 
Corinth.  For  in  these  Poiyperchon  had  placed  great  numbers  Of 
soldiers,  trusting  to  them  and  the  strength  of  the  places. 

In  the  mean  time  Philip,  being  sent  by  Cassander  as  general  to 
moke  war  upon  the  i£tolians,  as  soon  as  he  came  with  his  army  into 
Acaruania,  the  first  thing  he  did  was  to  harass  and  spoil  ^tolia :  bat 
not  long  after,  hearing  tliat  i£acidas  king  of  Epirus  (who  was  re- 
stored to  his  kingdom)  had  raised  a  strong  army,  he  made  against 
him  with  all  speed;  for  he  endeavoured  all  he  could  to  fight  him  be« 
fore  the  /Ktolians  had  joined  him.  And  finding  the  &pirots  ready 
prepared  to  fight,  he  forthwith  engagc(],  and  killed  niultitudea  of 


CAeq).  VI.  moDORUs  sicuLui.  383 

theni)  and  took  many  prisoners;  amongst  whom  it  happened  that 
there  were  about  fifty  of  the  faction  who  were  the  instruments  of  re^ 
storing  Aacidas,  whom  he  sent  away  bound  to  Cassander.  After^* 
wards,  the  broken  troops  of  ^acidas  rallying  again,  joined  with  the 
/Btolians;  and  Philip  set  upon  them  and  routed  them  a  second  time^ 
with  the  slaughter  of  many,  amongst  whom  was  iEacidas  himself. 

Having  effected  such  great  matters  Ih  so  short  a  time,  the  iBtofi-* 
ans  were  so  terrified,  tluit  they  forsook  their  unfortified  cities,  and 
fled  with  their  wives  and  children  to  the  fastnesses  of  the  mountains, 
where  it  was  very  difficult  to  come  at  them*  And  this  conclusion  had 
die  afiairs  of  Greece  at  that  time. 

As  for  Asia,  Cassander,  though  he  was  chief  governor  there,  yet, 
oveipressed  with  the  weight  of  the  war,  agreed  with  Antigonua 
upon  these  terms — Tliat  he  should  deliver  all  the  soldiers  into  the 
hands  of  Antigonus,  and  should  grant  liberty  to  all  the  Greek  cities 
there,  to  govern  according  to  their  own  laws;  and  that  he  should 
keep  the  province  he  formerly  possessed  as  by  grant  from  him,  and 
should  be  ever  after  Antigonus's  firm  friend. 

And  for  the  true  performance  of  these  conditions,  he  delivered  to 
faini  his  brother  Agathonas  as  hostage:  but  in  a  short  time  after  he 
repented  of  what  lie  had  done,  and  got  his  brother  out  of  the  clutches 
of  those  who  had  him  in  custody,  and  sent  an  ambassador  to  Ptolemy 
and  Seleucus,  to  desire  them  to  send  him  aid  with  all  speed:  at 
which  Antigonus  was  highly  incensed,  and  sent  off  forces  both  by 
sea  and  land,  with  orders  to  set  free  all  the  cities,  and  created  Medius 
admiral  of  the  fleet,  and  Docimus  general  of  tlie  land  forces. 

These  commanders  coming  to  Miletus,  persuaded  the  inhabitants 
to  stand  up  for  their  liberties;  and  took  the  citadel  with  the  garrisoa 
therein,  and  restored  the  ancient  laws  to  the  cities. 

In  the  mean  time  Antigonus  took  Tralles;  and  then  lay  before  the 
city  of  Caunus,  and  sending  Ins  fleet,  took  that  likewise,  except  only 
the  castle;  about  which  he  cast  a  trench,  and  made  continual  assaults 
upon  it,  in  those  parts  where  there  was  any  hope  of  entry.  He  had 
sent  Ptolemy  to  the  city  of  lasus,  with  a  considerable  army;  but  he 
was  glad  to  return  again  to  Antigonus;  and  so  all  those  cities  in  Ca- 
ria  came  at  that  time  into  his  hands. 

Within  a  few  days  after,  came  ambassadors  from  the  i^tolians 
and  Boeotians,  with  whom  Antigonus  entered  into  a  league  of  con- 
federacy; but,  going  to  Cassander  to  the  Hellespont  to  treat  with  him 
for  a  peace,  he  returned  without  effecting  any  thing,  for  tliey  could 
not  agree  upon  any  terms.  Whereupon  Cassander,  casting  aside  all 
hopes  of  an  accommodation,  resolved  again  to  pursue  the  settlement 
of  his  affairs  in  Greece.    To  ibat  end  he  went  with  a  fleet  of  thirty 


384  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Mook  XEL 


sail,  to  the  city  of  Oreum*,  which  he  so  fiercely  assaulted,  that  he 
took  it  by  storm;  presently  upon  this  came  in  Telesphorus  from 
Peloponnesus,  with  twenty  ships  and  a  thousand  soldiers,  and  Ue- 
dius  out  of  Asia,  with  a  hundred  sail,  to  the  relief  of  Oreum,  who^ 
spying  Cassandcr's  ships  then  at  anchor  in  the  harbour,  burnt  finr 
of  them,  and  disabled  almost  all  the  rest*  But  the  Athenians  ( 
ing  in  to  their  relief,  Cassander,  in  scorn  and  contempt  of  the  < 
my,  fell  upon  them  afresh,  and  in  the  engagement  sunk  one,  and  look 
three,  together  with  all  their  men.  And  thus  were  affiiirs  then  m- 
naged  in  Greece. 

In  Italy,  the  Samnitcs  wasted  and  spoiled  the  towns  and  countij 
round  about  that  sided  with  their  enemies :  but  the  Roman  con- 
suls marched  into  those  parts  with  an  army,  in  order  to  sucooor 
their  confederates;  and  there  encamping  near  Cinna,  in  the  bee  of 
the  enemy,  they  allayed  the  fears  of  the  city.  A  few  days  after, 
the  armies'on  both  sides  drew  up  in  battalia,  and  fouglit  a  bloody 
battle,  wherein  multitudes  fell  on  both  sides ;  but  at  length  the  Ro- 
mans, breaking  through  the  main  body  of  their  enemies,  totally 
routed  them,  and  pursued  them  a  long  way,  and  killed  above  tea 
thousand. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Campanians,  (not  knowing  of  this  battle), 
in  contempt  of  the  Romans,  rebelled :  whereupon  the  people  of  Rone 
forthwith  sent  out  a  strong  army  against  (hem,  under  the  command 
of  Caius  Menius,  as  general,  with  absolute  and  unlimited  power,  with 
whom  was  joined,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Romans,  Marcus 
FoUius,  master  of  the  horse.  These  consuls  sitting  down  with  their 
army  near  Capua,  the  Campanians  at  first  resolved  to  fight  them;  bot 
afterwards,  hearing  of  tlie  rout  and  slaughter  of  the  Samnites,  and 
thinking  that  the  Romans  would  fall  upon  them  with  their  whole 
army,  made  peace  with  them :  for  they  gave  up  tlic  ringleaders  of  the 
defection,  who,  after  they  were  examined,  prevented  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  by  murdering  themselves.  But  the  cities  were  par- 
doned >  and  so  returned  to  their  former  allegiance. 

Tiie  furnicr  year  being  ended,  Polcmus  executed  the  place  of  the 
chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  and  Lucius  Papirius  the  fifth,  and  Caius 
Junius  ihe  second  consulate  at  Rome,  in  which  year  was  celebrated 
tiu'  hundred  :iud  seventeenth  Olympiad,  in  which  Parmenio  of  Mity- 
h'lu'  canicd  away  tiie  prize.  At  this  time  Antigonus  sent  Polemon 
iiu.»  (jivccc,  to  sot  at  liberty  all  the  Grecian  cities,  and  with  him  a 
hundicd  and  litty  long  ships,  under  the  command  of  Medius,  his  ad- 
mi  lai,  on  board  of  which  vessels  were  five  thousand  foot  and  five 
Having  made  a^ league  with  the  Rhodians,  he  re- 

*  In  £ub<su,  uow  X  r^roponL 


Chap.  tn[.  DIODORU8  SICULUS,  3^5 

1  ■■    lull.    I    ■  fill*.   Ill'    ■  •  ■        ■  ■  II  •      ■    . ..        I    ,.  _ 

ceived  likewise  ten  ships  of  war  more  from  them,  to  help  forward  the 
restoring  of  the  Greek  cities  to  their  liberties.  About  the  same 
time  Ptolemy*  arrived  in  the  harbour  of  Boeotia  (called  the  Deep) 
with  the  whole  fleet,  and  received  from  the  Bceotians  two  thousand ' 
two  hundred  foot,  and  thirteen  hundred  horse.  He  ^vlX,  likewise 
for  shipping  from  Oreum,  and  walled  Salganeaf^  and  there  rendez- 
voused his  whole  army ;  for  he  was  in  good  hopes  that  the  Chaki- 
dians  would, con  federate  with  him,  who  were  the  only  Euboaans  that 
were  garrisoned  by  the  enemy.  But  Cassander  was  jealous  of  Chal-* 
cis|,  and  therefore  raised  his  siege  before  Oreum,  and  sent  for  his 
forces  thither. 

Antigonus,  being  informed  that  the  armies  lay  encamped  one  ovet 
against  another  in  Euboea,  recalled  Medina  with  the  fleet  into  Asia^ 
and  forthwith  got  his  forces  together,  and  with  a  swift  march  made 
for  the  Hellespont,  with  a  design  to  pass  over  into  Macedonia^ 
that  he  might  either  seize  upon  it  while  Cassander  was  busy  in  £u- 
boea,  and  the  country  void  of  sufficient  defence;  or  that,  by  forcing 
him  to  come  in  with  aid  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom,  he  might 
thereby  divert  him  from  prosecuting  the  war  in  Greece,  and  ne-^ 
ccssitate  him  to  endeavour  for  the  preservation  of  his  concerns  nearer 
at  home. 

But  Cassander  coming  to  understand  what  he  designed,  left  Plis- 
tarchus  to  guard  Chalcis,  and  he  himself  marched  away  with  the 
whole  army,  and  took  Oropus  by  assault,  and  brought  over  the  The-t 
bans  to  be  his  confederates,  and  entered  into  a  truce  with  the  rest  of 
the  Boeotians;  and  having  so  done,  he  left  Eupolemus  to  defend 
Greece,  and  returned  into  Macedonia  with  his  head  full  of  care  con- 
cerning the  enemy's  march  into  that  country. 

When  Antigonus  came  to  the  Propontis,  he  solicited  the  ^yzan- 
tines  by  his  ambassadors  to  join  with  him  as  confederates;  but  it 
proved  that  there  were  there  at  the  same  time  agents  from  Lysi-* 
machus,  treating  with  them  not  to  engage  in  any  thing  either  against 
him  or  Cassander.  Whereupon  the  Byzantines  resolved  to  remain 
quiet  at  home,  and  stand  upon  equal  terms  of  peace  and  amity  with 
both  sides. 

This  unlucky  accident  giving  a  stop  to  Antigonus's  further  pro-^ 
gress  in  this  afikir,  together  with  the  approach  of  the  winter,  he  dis* 
tributed  his  soldiers  in  the  towns  round  about  into  their  winter- 
quarters. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Corcyreans  assisted  the  ApoUoniates  and 
them  of  Epidamnus,  and,  upon  terms  of  agreement,  sent  away  Cas- 

*  Antigpnas's  generml.        t  Salganeoi  in  B«otia,  otar  Chalcis.        %  la  Bceotia, 

Vol.  2.  No.  45.  ppp 


386  DIOnORUS  8ICULU8. 


Sander's  soldiers,  and  thereupon  restored  them  of  ApoUoBia  to 
antient  liberties^  and  EjHdamnus  they  delivered  up  to  GIattdai»ldif 
of  the  Illyrians. 

But  Ptolemy^  Antigonos's  general,  upon  Caasander's  vetum  bM 
Macedonia,  and  the  constematton  Chalds  was  in,  had  tlie  city  da« 
livered  up  to  him,  and  so  freed  the  Chaleidiaos  from  reochring  any 
further  garrison,  to  the  end  that  every  one  might  taka  notice  that 
Antigonus  was  sincere,  and  did  really  design  to  restore  all  thcGfcdi 
cities  to  their  liberties;  for  it  was  a  city  of  very  great  moment  and 
concern  to  sncb  as  were  ambitious  of  gaiatng  the  sevcreignCy  of 
Greece,  and  valued  a  place  of  strength  for  that  purpose. 

Polemon  likewise  took  Orop«s,  and  delivered  it  iq>  to  the  Boeo- 
tians, and  made  all  Cassander's  soldiers  prisoners  of  warf  and^  sAcr 
he  had  brought  in  the  Eretrians  and  Qirystiaas  to  join  as  coofBde* 
rates,  he  led  his  army  into  Attica,  Demetrius  Pbalerius  being  thca 
chief  magbtrate  of  the  city:  for  those  Athenians  that  desired  to  be 
restored  to  their  antient  hiws  bad  not  long  before  sent  privately  10 
Antigonus,  to  treat  with  ban  i^xin  that  accowst;  and  bow*  bei^g 
more  resolved  and  encouraged  upon  Pti^eafiy's  drawing  near  to  die 
city,  they  forced  Demetrius  to  make  a  truice,  and  send  an  agent  to 
Antigonus,  in  order  to  treat  of  a  league  with  himr 

Out  of  Attica,  Ptolemy  marched  into  Beeotia,  andt  toofc  the  cita- 
del Cadmea,  and  freed  the  Thebans  from  that  garrison.  Thence  be 
went  forward  into  Phocis,  and,  reducing  several  cities  there,  he  cast 
ont  tlie  garrisons  of  Cassander  in  every  place  wherever  he  came. 
Then  he  invaded  Locris;  and,  because  the  Opuntians  joined  with 
Cassander,  he  besieged  ttiem,  and  pressed  upon  the  place  witli  con- 
tinual assaults. 

About  the  same  time,  the  Cyrenians  revolted  from  Ptc»lemy,  king 
of  Egypt,  and  besieged  the  castle  there  so  fiercely,  as  if  they  would 
presently  Ivave  taken  it;  and  when  aocssengers  came  from  Alexandria, 
persuading  them  to  desbt,  tiicy  struck  off  their  beads,  and  fell  to 
work  against  the  castle  more  fiercely  than  before.  Ptolemy  being 
exceedingly  moved  liereat,  sent  one  Agb,  a  captain  of  his,  thither  with 
an  army,  and  withal  a  navy  to  assist  him  by  sea,  under  the  command 
of  Epenetus.  Agis  vigorously  pursuing  the  war  against  these  rebeb, 
took  Cyrene  by  storm,  and  committed  the  authors  of  this  sedition  to 
prison,  and  then  sent  them  bound  to  Alexandria,  and  disarnaed  the 
rest:  and  so,  having  set  things  in  order  there,  (as  be  saw  cause),  re* 
turned  into  Egypt. 

Ptolemy  having  had  thi»  good  success  at  Cyrene,  took  shipping, 
and  with  his  fleet  passed  over  out  of  Egypt  into  Cjrprus,  against  those 
who  rebelled  against  their  kings;  and^  having  seised  Pjrgaalion, 


eSkip.  PI.  ntOBORUS  «ICULU9.  3^7 

(whom  be  feitiMl  coiteiponding  with  Anfigofius),  he  put  him  to  death. 
rhen  he  todi  PMjdppus,  king  of  the  Lupithtt*,  and-^prlnee  ofCe- 
ryneafy  who  wto  suspected  of  a  revolt,  and  laid  them  fiist:  he  toolc 
likewise  Stasiecus,  a  petty  king  of  the  Malieanst,  and,  destroying 
their  city,  removed  the  inhabitants  from  thence  to  Paphos;  wliich 
iooe,  he  made  Nieocreon  commander  over  all  Cyprns^^and  gave  him 
tiie  cities,  together  with  the  revenues  of  all  the  kings  whom  he  had 
east  out  of  their  dominions,  and  then  went  with  his  army  into  ths 
Upper  Syria,  and  saked  the  cities  Posideum  and  Potamos,  of  the 
CariaQi«  That  done,  he  went  with  a  flying  army  intO'Cilicia,  apd 
ODok  Mallos,  and  spld  ail  the  inhabitants  for  slaves,  and  wasted  all 
the  region  thereabout;  and,  having  stored  all  his  army  with  rkh 
phuider,  sailed  back  again  to  Cyprus.  He  so  shared  with  his  soldiers 
in  all  hazards  and  dangers,  that  he  stirred  them  up,  by  his  example, 
cheerfully  and  readily  to  undergo  all  manner  of  difficulties. 

Meanwhile  Demetrius,  the  son  of  Antigonus,  kept  in  Coelosyria^ 
expecting  the  coming  of  the  Egyptians;  but  when  he  heard  of  the 
faking  of  so  many  cities,  he  left  Python  to  command  in  those  parts^ 
leaving  his  corsleteers  and  elephants  with  him,  and  he,  with  hb  horse 
aad  companies  of  light-armed  soldiers,  hastened  away  with  all  speed 
to  Cilicia,  to  aid  them  that  were  in  distress  there;  but  coming  too 
late,  and  finding  the  enemies  all  gone,  he  returned  speedily  to  his 
camp  again,  spoiling  many  of  his  horse  by  the  way;  for  in  six  days 
time  he  made  away  from  Mallos,  four^^and-twenty  days  journey,  by 
their  ordinary  stages;  so  that,  through  their  immoderate  speed  ia 
f  ravelling,  none  of  their  servants  or  horse-boys  were  able  to  keep  them 
company. 

Ptolemy  therefore,  seeing  all  go  every  where  as  he  would  have  tt, 
for  the  present  returned  into  Egypt.  But  not  long  after,  being  pre- 
vailed u|>on  by  Seleueus,  (for  the  hatred  that  he  bore  to  Antigonus), 
he  resolved  to  march  into  Coelosyria,  and  there  to  try  it  out  withDe* 
metrius:  wherefore,  gathering  all  his  army  tog^her,  he  marched 
from  Alexandria  to  Pelusium,  having  with  him  eighteen  thousand 
foot,  and  four  thousand  horse,  whereof  some  were  Macedonians,  and 
some  hired  soldiers :  as  for  the  Egyptians,  some  served  to  carry  their 
darts  and  weapons,  and  other  luggage  of  the  army,  and  some  for  sol- 
diers ;  and|  having  passed  the  desert  from  Pelusium,  he  encamped 
near  the  old  city  of  Graza,  in  Syria,  not  far  from  the  enemy« 

Demetrius,  on  the  other  side,  called  all  his  army  out  of  theif 
winter-quarters,  and  appointed  them  to  rendezvous  at  Graza,  there  to 
attend  the  enemy's  approach.  His  friends  indeed  advised  him  not 
to  fight  with  so  great  a  general,  who  had  the  advantage  of  a  far  mora 

*  In  Thessaly,  t  In  Arcidiii.  \  Maliciiusji  in  Tb^ualj. 


388  BIODORU8  sictJLUS*  Book  XIX. 

numerous  army;  but  he  rejected  their  counsel^  and  confideatly  pre- 
jnured  himself  for  battle,  though  he  was  then  but  a  mere  boy^and  was 
to  undertake  so  hazardous  an  engagement  without  his  father.  Gdl« 
ing  now,  therefore,  the  soldiers  as  they  stood  at  their  arms^  he 
mounted  an  ascent  raised  by  earth,  and  there  stood  as  if  he  were  b 
amaze  and  astonishment:  upon  which,  all  the  soldiers  cried  out  with 
one  voice ^'  Be  courageous;"  and  presently  there  was  a  deep  si- 
lence before  the  herald  could  command  it:  for,  because  that  he  had 
but  newly  taken  upon  him  the  sovereign  command,  none  took  any 
offence  at  his  deportment,  in  relation  either  to  civil  or  militaiy  af- 
fairs, which  is  frequently  the  lot  of  old  captains,  who  have  many 
times  all  their  faults  exposed  at  one  time : — For  the  common  people 
are  not  long  pleased  with  the  same  things;  and  whatever  grows  stale 
in  the  use,  has  a  pleasant  gust  in  the  change  and  alteratioo.  And 
besides,  the  expectation  of  his  coming  to  the  kingdom  (his  filths  be- 
ing now  old)  conjoined  in  his  succession  both  the  supreme  command 
and  the  good  will  of  the  people  together.  Moreover,  he  was  a  very 
proper  and  comely  person,  and,  being  clad  in  royal  armour,  appeared 
in  that  majesty  as  possessed  the  beholders  with  awe  and  reverence^ 
and  raised  up  the  spirits  of  the  army  with  high  expectations  of  great 
things  to  come.  He  was  likewise  of  a  mild  disposition,  becoming  a 
new  prince  and  general,  by  which  he  won  the  love  of  all^  insomuch 
that  even  those  who  were  not  as  vet  reduced  into  regular  regiments 
flocked  to  hvn:  ;o  receive  his  commands,  being  much  concerned  npon 
account  of  his  youth,  and  the  hazardous  battle  that  was  presently  to 
be  fought:  for  lie  was  not  only  to  try  the  fortune  of  war  against  a 
greater  nuir;biT  of  men,  hut  against  the  most  eminent  and  expat 
commanders  ol*  the  age,  Y^ioiemy  and  Seleucus,whohad  been  captains 
under  A'^^andcr  in  all  his  wars,  and  had  been  often  generals  of  their 
own  armies,  never  conquered  to  that  day. 

Demetrius  therefore,  after  he  had  with  winning  and  obliging  ex- 
pressions courted  the  soldiers,  and  promised  rewards  suitable  to  eveiy 
man*s  mt  ilt:  drew  up  the  army  in  battalia.  In  the  left  wing  (where 
he  hiuKscii  intended  to  be)  he  placed  first  two  hundred  choice  bone, 
amongst  whoiii,  with  other  of  the  nobility,  was  Python,  who  liad 
served  under  Alexander,  and  had  been  made  general  of  all  the  forces 
by  Antigunus,  and  fellow-partner  with  him  in  all  liis  concerns.  In 
the  fror..  ..e  placed  three  regiments  of  horse,  and  as  many  flankers  to 
support  them :  at  a  distance  out  from  the  wing  were  three  other  re- 
giments of  Tarentines,  to  the  end  that  five  hundred  horsemen  with 
iances,  and  a  hundred  Tarentines,  might  be  ready  at  hand  as  the 
king's  iitc-giK\rd.  Next  lie  placed  eight  hundred  horse,  which  were 
t'alkd  Associates;  and  after  thenj  filtcen  hundred  out  of  several  na- 


Chap.  VL  DI0D0RU8  sicuius.  389 

tioDs;  and  before  the  whole  wing  stood  as  a  guard  thirty  elephants^ 
lined  with  light-anned  men^  of  whom  a  thousand  were  darters  add 
archers,  and  five  hundred  Persian  slingers.  And  in  this  manner  was 
the  left  wing  drawn  up,  with  which  he  intended  to  make  the  onset: 
then  was  ranged  the  main  body^  consisting  of  eleven. thousand  foot, 
of  whom  two  thousand  were  Macedonians,  and  a  thousand  Lycians  and 
Pkmphylians,  and  eight  thousand  hired  soldiers. 

In  the  right  wing  he  drew  up  the  rest  of  the  horse,  to  the  number 
of  fifteen  hundred,  under  the  command  of  Andronicus,  who  had  or- 
ders to  keep  in  an  oblique  line^  and  make  a  running  fight  of  it,  still 
observing  how  it  went  with  Demetrius.  The  rest  of  the  elephants^ 
to  the  number  of  thirteen^  he  placed  before  the  main  body  of  the  foot, 
lining  them  with  as  many  light-armed  men  as  were  sufficient.  And 
in  this  manner  Demetrius  drew  up  his  army. 

As  for  Ptolemy  and  Seleucus,  at  the  first  they  made  it  their  busi* 
aess  to  place  their  greatest  strength  in  their  left  wing,  not  knowing 
what  the  enemy  designed :  but  being  afterwards  informed  by  their 
scouts  what  was  done,  they  forthwith  so  drew  up,  as  that  the  greatest 
strength  being  in  their  right  wing,  they  might  be  the  better  able  to 
engage  with  Demetrius  in  the  left;  and  therefore  in  that  wing  were 
drawn  up  three  thousand  of  the  best  horse,  amongst  whom  they  them- 
selves intended  to  charge.  Before  these  were  placed  those  who  bore 
an  artificial  palisado  before  them,  sharp-pointed  with  iron,  and  fas*^ 
tened  together  with  chains,  prepared  against  the  shock  of  the  ele- 
phants; for  this  being  drawn  out  in  length,  it  was  an  easy  matter  by 
this  means  to  put  a  stop  to  their  further  career.  In  the  front  of  this 
wing  were  placed  light-armed  soldiers,  who  were  commanded  to  ply 
the  elephants  and  their  riders  with  darts  and  arrows  as  they  came  on. 
The  right  wing  being  thus  drawn  up,  and  the  rest  of  tlie  army  so  dis- 
posed as  the  present  occasion  at  that  time  most  required,  they  led 
forth  the  army  with  a  great  shout  towards  the  enemy;  who,  on  the 
other  side,  drawing  down  upon  them,  the  fight  was  begun  by  the  horse 
in  the  fronts  of  both  wings,  where  the  Demetrians  liad  much  the  bet- 
ter; but  within  a  little  time  after,  the  Ptol cm ians  and  Seleucians 
(having  surrounded  the  wing)  made  a  fierce  charge  with  their  whole 
body,  upon  which  (through  the  resolution  of  both  parties)  there  fol- 
lowed a  very  sliarp  engagelnent.  Upon  the  first  onset  they  fought 
with  their  lances,  wlien  many  were  killed,  and  as  many  wounded, 
on  both  sides.  Then  they  fell  to  it  with  their  swords,  and  there, 
thronging  together,  thrust  one  another  through,  and  fell  in  heaps  to- 
gether. 

The  generals,  exposing  themselves  to  the  utmost  hazard,  led  on 
th:ir  nien^  and  encouraged  their  troops  to  stick  to  it  like  valiant  sol- 


390  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JSodJfe  XIX 

diers.    The  horse,  which  were  placed  to  guard  the  wings,  were  all 
brave  and  gallant  men;  and  having  their  commaudersj  who  fought 
together  with  them,  eye-witnesses  of  their  valour,  strove  to  oatvit 
each  other.    And  now,  when  the  fight  between  the  horse  b^d  becA 
a  long  time  doubtful^  the  elephants,  forced  on  by  the  Indians,  aiadc 
so  terrible  an  onset,  that  it  appeared  impossible  for  any  force  to  have 
stood  against  them.     But  when  they  came  up  to  the  pelisado,  tha 
darters  and  archers  sorely  galled  both  the  beasts  afid  their  ridersj  and 
being  still  forced  on,  and  whipt  by  the  Indians,  some  «rf  then  studs. 
upon  the  sharp  points  of  the  palisado,  with  which,  besides  the  bhiI* 
titude  of  the  darts  and  arrows  that  galled  them,  they  were  io  sodi 
pain  and  torment,  that  tl^y  caused  a  horrible  tumult  and  ronfusioni 
for  tliese  creatures,  in  plain  and  level  places,  bear  down  all  befim 
them;  but  in  those  which  are  rough  and  craggy,  they  are  of  no 
use  or  service,  because  of  the  tenderness  of  their  feet.     Ptolem 
therefore,  wisely  foreseeing  of  what  advantage  this  palisado  would  b^ 
by  that  means  frustrated  the  rage  and  fury  of  the  beasts.    At  leogtht 
most  of  the  Indians  that  rode  them  being,  killed,  all  the  elcphaali 
were  taken ;  upon  which  the  greatest  part  of  Demetrius's  hcwse  i 
in  such  a  consternation,  tliat  they  forthwith  fled;  and  he  himself  i 
left  with  a  very  few  that  attended  him;  but  not  being  able,  with  all 
the  arguments  he  could  make,  to  persuade  his  men  to  stand  thai 
ground,  and  not  forsake  him,  he  was  forced  likewise  to  retreat.    A 
great  part  of  the  horse  that  followed  the  other,  retired  in  good  order^ 
and  kept  themselves  unbroken  till  they  came  to  Gaza,  so  as  Aat  none 
of  the  pursuers  durst  hastily  fall  upon  them.    For  the  field  being  a 
large  open  plain,  they  had  the  more  liberty  to  draw  off  in  order  and 
retreat  in  a  formed  body.    Some  of  the  foot  also,  thinking  it  the  best 
course  to  forfake  their  colours  and  look  to  themselves,  cast  away  their 
arms,  and  followed  the  horse. 

About  sun-setting  Demetrius  passed  by  Gaza*;  but  some  of  the 
horse  left  him  and  entered  the  city,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  oat 
some  luggage.  The  gates  therefore  being  open,  and  the  streets  ik 
led  with  baggage  horses,  and  all  being  engaged  in  leading  and  carry- 
ing out  their  goods,  there  was  such  disorder  and  thronging  at  die 
gates,  that,  upon  the  approach  of  Pkolemy*s  troops,  it  was  impossiWa 
to  shut  them  to  prevent  their  entry;  so  that  the  enemy  breaking  ui» 
the  city  thus  fell  into  the  bands  of  Ptolemy.  And  such  was  the  is- 
sue of  this  battle. 

Demetrius,  without  stop  or  delay,  about  midnight  arrived  jt  Aao- 
tn^  t,  having  ridden  about  thirty  miles  from  the  place  of  battle  {..^ 

**  GuA,  in  Jud»tt,  where  Sftrapion  carried  awaj  the  gatet. 
t  A«dod,  in  Judxa,  now  a  •wall  nliagc  called  AUore. 


S^p*  ^-  DtODC      JS  8ICULU8.  89I 

Dii^nce  he  sent     ti  t  to  b<     tl     bodies  of  the  dead^  beiog  very 

ktiiDUS  of  perfoiuMug  tu«^  last  <  re  of  right  due  to  them  that  were 
laia.  Many  of  bis  nobility  were  there  killed;  amongst  whom,  tfw 
OKMt  eminent  were  Python,  joined  'm  equal  commiasion  with  him*' 
idf^  and  Beotus,  who  had  long  li?ed  with  Antigonus  his  father,  and 
f)u  eter  privy  to  all  his  designs,  and  partaker  of  all  his  councils* 
rhere  were  slaia  in  this  battle,  on  Demetrius's  side,  above  five  hi»- 
Iced,*  the  greatest  part  of  whom  was  horse,  and  the  chief  of  Us  oo* 
iS^tjl  and  more  than  eight  thousand  were  taken  prisoners. 

Ptolemy  and  Seleueus  not  only  granted  him  the  dead  bocUes,  hot 
lent  him  back  his  own  pavilion  with  all  the  furniture  belonging  to  il» 
md  all  tuch  prisoners  as  were  of  his  household,  free  and  without 
anaom;  moreover  letting  him  know,  that  they  fought  not  with  Anti« 
{Onus  for  these  things,  but  because  he  had  not  restored  to  the  go* 
nemors  those  provinces  that  were  conquered  by  their  joint  arms  ia 
be  Vfar  first  agsunst  Perdiccas,  and  then  against  Eumenes;  also  be* 
nuise,  after  that  he  bad  renewed  bis  league  of  friendship  with  Seleu* 
ms,  he  had. most  unjustly,  and  against  all  right,  deprived  him  of  the 
>fovinc€  of  Babylon.  Other  prisoners  Ptolemy  sent  into  Egypt^ 
ifidi  orders  to  distribute  them  amongst  the  several  regiments  in  his 

After  Ptolemy  had  with  great  pomp  and  solemnity  buried  those 
that  were  slain  in  the  battle,  he  marched  with  his  army  against  the 
ntks  of  Phoenicia,  besieging  some  and  persuading  others  to  yield« 
Demetrius  in  the  mean  time  (being  no  longer  able  to  bold  out)  des« 
palebed  away  a  messenger  with  letters  to  his  father,  to  pray  him'ta 
XMDe  speedily  to  his  assistance:  and  he  himself  going  to  Tripoli  in* 
Phoenicia,  sent  for  the  soldiers  that  were  in  Cilicia  and  elsewhere  in 
garrisons  remote  and  far  distant  from  the  enemies'  quarters  to  come 
to  huD«  But  Ptolemy,  still  keeping  with  his  army  in  tbe  open  fields 
marched  unto  the  coasts  of  Sidon,  and  encamping  near  Tyre,  sent 
to  Andronicus,  governor  of  the  garrison  there,  to  surrender  the  city 
!o  himi  making  him  large  promises  both  of  wealth  and  honour.  But 
lie  not  only  answered — That  he  would  never  betray  the  trust  which 
Antigonus  and  Demetrius  had  put  in  him,  but  also  used  many  revi^ 
ling  speeches  against  Ptolemy :  but  a  little  while  after  he  was  sur 
prised  by  a  mutiny  of  his  own  soldiers,  and  fell  into  his  hands;  and 
thereupon  expected  nothing  hut  death  fur  his  refusal  to  deliver  up  tbe 
city,  and  for  his  reviling  language.  But  Ptolemy  not  only  forgot 
the  injury  but  highly  rewarded  him,  and  took  him  into  the  number 
of  his  friends,  and  honourably  preferred  him.  For  this  prince  was  of 
a  most  a&ble  and  gentle  disposition,  and  very  kind  and  geuvrous, 

*  Ftv«  iboQMBd^  accurdini;  to  Piutsrck* 


392  DIODORUS  SICULDS.  Bobk 


x\bl 


which  much  contributed  to  the  increase  of  his  power,  and  lb  the  m^ 
vancement  of  his  lionour  and  reputation,  and  induced  many  npoo 
that  account  to  join  with  him,  as  his  allies  and  confederates.  Fork 
honourably  received  Seleucus  when  he  was  cast  out  of  Babylon^  and 
made  him  and  the  rest  of  his  friends  partners  with  him  in  that  plenty 
and  state  of  prosperity  which  he  himself  enjoyed :  and  therefbi^ 
when  Seleucus  desired  some  forces  from  him  to  go  along  with  \Sm  tD 
Babylon,  he  very  readily  granted  them,  and  besides  promised  Alt 
lie  would  assist  him  in  every  thing  to  his  power,  till  he  had  recover- 
ed his  former  government.  In  this  condition  stood  the  afiairs  of  Aaii 
at  that  time. 

In  Europe,  Telesphorus,  Antigonus's  admiral,  who  then  hy  widi 
.  the  fleet  at  Corinth,  seeing  how  Ptolemy  was  preferred  before  hin^ 
and  that  all  the  concerns  of  Greece  were  entrusted  to  his  banda^ae^ 
cused  Antigonus  upon  this  account,  and  delivered  up  to  him  those 
ships  be  had  with  him.  Then  picking  out  so  many  of  his  soldieivas 
were  willing  to  join  with  him  in  his  designs,  he  begkn  to  pat  dm 
in  execution.  And  pretending  to  be  in  amity  with  Antigonus^  he 
entered  Elis,  fortified  the  citadel,  and  enslaved  the  city.  He  Bk^ 
wise  robbed  the  temple  at  Olympus,  and  took  thence  above  fifty  ta- 
lents of  silver,  wherewith  he  raised  and  hired  foreign  soldiers.  And 
thus  Telesphorus,  out  of  envy  to  the  advancement  of  Ptolemy^  he- 
came  a  traitor  to  Antigonus. 

But  Ptolemy,  Antigonus's  general  in  Greece,  as  soon  as  he  heaid 
of  the  defection  of  Telesphorus,  and  that  he  had. seized  upon  the  ci- 
ty of  the  Elians,  and  robbed  the  temple  at  Olympus,  marched  mSk 
an  army  into  Peloponnesus:  and  coming  to  Elis,  razed  the  chadd 
to  the  ground,  restored  the  Elians  to  their  liberty,  and  the  money  la 
the  temple. 

Afterwards,  he  so  far  wrought  upon  Telesphorus,  that  he  regain- 
ed Cylene,  wherein  Telesphorus  had  put  a  garrbon,  and  restored  it  ta 
the  Elians. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  these  things  were  acting,  the  EphoCi^ 
iSEacidas  their  king  being  dead,  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  Aleefa^ 
who  had  before  been  banished  by  his  father  Arybilus.  This  Alcetai 
was  an  inveterate  enemy  to  Cassander,  and  therefore  l^ciscos^  C^ 
Sander's  general  in  Acarnania,  marched  with  an  army  into  Epirtet 
hoping  be  should  easily  depose  him,  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  beiof 
then  scarcely  well  settled. 

Lyciscus  for  this  purpose  encamping  at  Cassopia,  Alcetaa  sent  hit 
sons  Alexander  and  Teucrus,  to  all  the  cities,  to  raise  as  many  soI« 
diers  as  they  possibly  could;  and  he  himself  marched  fcwward  wtdi 
what  forces  he  had^and  wlieu  he  came  near  the  enemy  made  a  hil^ 
waiting  the  approach  of  his  sons. 


CAap.  n.  DI0D0RU8  SICULU9.  3^' 

But  Lyciscusy  who  far  exceeded  him  in  namber,  pressing  upon  him^  - 
the  Epirots  in  a  great  terror,  ran  over  to  the  enemy:  whereupon 
Alcetas  being  thus  forsaken,  fled  to  Eurymenas,  a  city  in  Epirus—1 . 
While  be  was  closely  besieged  in  this  place,  Alexander  arrived  with, 
assistance  to  the  relief  of  bis  father;  upon  which  followed  a  sharp 
engagement,  wherein  many  of  Lyciscus's  men  were  cut  off,  among 
whom,  besides  other  persons  of  great  account^  were  Micythus^  an  ex- 
pert captain,  and  Lysander  the  Athenian,  Cassander's  lord-lieutenant 
in  Leucadia. 

Afterwards,  Dinias  arriving  to  the  assistance  of  those  thus  worst* 
ed,  a  secbnd  engagement  took  place,  in  which  Alexander  and  Teucrus 
being  routed,  they,  together  with  their  father,  fled  to  a  strong  castle 
io  that  neighbourhood  for  shelter.  Lyciscus  presently  took  Eury- 
qnenas,  plundered  it,  and  razed  it  to  the  ground. 

Cassander  at  this  time  hearing  of  the  defeat  of  his  forces,  but  hav- 
ing no  intelligence  of  the  success  which  followed,  hastened  away  to 
£pirus  to  succour  Lyciscus.  But  when  he  came  to  understand  how 
well  matters  had  succeeded  with  him,  he  made  peace,  and  entered 
into  a  league  of  friendship  with  Alcetas.  Then  with  part  of  his  ar- 
my he  went  to  Adria  ^,  in  order  to  besiege  the  ApoUoniates  t,who  had 
cast  out  his  garrison,  and  joined  with  the  Illyrians.  But  the  inhabi- 
tants were  not  at  all  alarmed,  and  having  sent  for  help  from  their 
confederates,  they  drew  up  in  battalia  before  their  walls :  upon  which 
there  ensued  a  sharp  and  long  contested  action;  but  the  ApoUo- 
niates, overpowering  the  others  with  numbers,  put  their  enemies  to 
flight.  Cassander  therefore,  having  lost  many  of  his  men,  being  in 
want  of  sufficient  forces,  and  perceiving  winter  to  draw  on,  returned 
to  Macedonia. 

After  his  departure,  the  Leucadianst,  assisted  by  the  Corcyrians, 
drove  out  the  garrison  of  Cassander.  As  for  the  Epirots,  they  were 
quite  under  the  royal  government  of  Alcetas  for  a  time;  but  when 
be  grew  more  severe  and  tyrannical,  they  murdered  both  him  and 
his  two  sons,  Hesioncas  and  Nisus,  who  were  but  then  young  chil- 
dren. 

In  Asia,  Sclcucus  after  the  routing  of  Demetrius  at  Gaza  in  Syria, 
(receiving  from  Ptolemy  no  mere  than  eight  hundred  foot,  and  two 
hundred  horse)  marched  towards  Babylon  with  that  confidence  as  to 
believe,  that  though  he  had  no  forces  at  all  with  him,  yet  he  should 
be  able  to  go  up  into  tiie  higher  provinces  with  only  his  ownparticu* 

*  A  cit\  and  country  upon  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic  sea. 
t  The  inlmbitauU  of  Apollonia,  a  cily  of  Thracj. 
I  The  peopie  of  Ltucas  a  peninsula  near  to  the  Ambracian  gulf^  bordering  on  Epirus 
cnllcd  also  Nrriti5. 

Vol.  2.  No.  4''»  kke 


394  DioDO&us  fticuLUS.  .BMft  XtX 

lar  friends  ^ud  Bervants;  bring  verily  persuaded^  tiMit  the  BdbylttD- 
apa  (for  the  former  love  and  aflfection  they  bore  Uat)  iKiM  ntod^f 
come  in  and. side  with  him;  abd  that  now  he  bid  a  fair  oppoctad^ 
to  accomplish  bis  design^  Antigobus  being  with  Ua  army  at  a  gMt 
distance  from  the  place. 

However,  though  he  weAt  on  with  such  confidence  of  mtad^  ytt 
his  friends  that  were  with  Iiim,  (seeing  the  incontiderabte  nntaibar  of 
his  soldiers,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  great  strength  of  bis  < 
against  Wliom  he  was  marching,  and  the  abundance  of 
and  number  of  the  confederates  wherewith  they  were  aupplkd  fend 
furnished)  were  greatly  discouraged:  which  Selevciia  ohaenripg^  afek 
dressed  them  to  this  efiTect-^It  becomes  not  the  captaina  and  fdhnr 
soldiers  of  Alexander,  in  the  expeditions  of  war^  to  eonfide  Miy  bl 
the  strength  of  arms  and  confluence  of  wealth,  but  in  their  ] 
art  and  prudence  through  which  he  accomplished  gfeeat  and  ^ 
ful  things^  by  all  for  ever  to  be  admired:  but  it  is  onr  dtty  ititber  to 
believe  the  gods  who  have  assured  us  that  this  expedition  ahaH  hi 

successful.    For  he  told  them That  in  consulting  th^  oniclrtif  Aa 

Branchids^j  some  considerahle  time  before  the  god  called  hiili  }aagi 
and  that  Alexander  stood  by  him  in  his  sleep,  and  dearly  < 
to  him  the  royal  dignity  to  which  in  due  time  he  should  be  \ 
and  further  declared  .^That  whatever  was  great  and  glorious  i 
men  was  always  to  be  attained  by  hazards  and  toil.  And 
carrying  himself  fairly  and  amicably  to  all  his  soldiers  be  y 
ed  by  every  body,  and  all  were  willing  to  run  with  him  the  haaorf  tf 
this  desperate  enterprise. 

On  then  he  marched,  and  coming  with  them  into  MeaopoCaaiB 
he  ther^  dealt  with  such  Macedonians  as  he  found  dwelling  in  Ckr> 
Tffi,  and  come  of  them  by  persuasion,  and  some  of  them  by  phuB  fefccj 
he  drew  to  go  along  with  him  in  this  expedition.  Aa  soon  aa  he  en- 
tered into  Babylon,  the  inhabitants  came  in  flocking  to  hiflft,  and  of- 
fered him  their  service;  for  he  had  before  carried  himself  in  the 
most  obliging  mapner  to  all,  for  the  space  of  fbnr  years  tDgothar, 
when  lie  was  governor  of  the  province,  thereby  to  gain  the  good  wfll 
of  the  people,  and  to  secure  an  interest  for  himself^  if  at  any  titse  ftf- 
tcrwurds  he  should  have  an  occasion  to  contend  for  tfie  stfftHijgti 
command.  Polyarchus  also  came  in  to  him,  who  bor*  some  Und  of 
office  among  them,  with  above  a  thousand  men  completely  smicdi 
But  they  who  stood  for  Aiitigonus,  when  they  perceived^he  geneiil 
and  irresistible  inclination  of  the  multitude  towards  him,  fled  all  to 
the  castle,  which  was  commanded  by  Diphilus;  and  Seleocus  fe|l 

*   1  i.u  tc;ii;Ie  of  Apullo  Diilyniaiis  in  louiu,  wber^  the  pritfltti  ud 
called  BnuichJda!. 


Chap*  FL  DORUS  sicuLUs.  39^^ 

prcaemly  to  besiege  it^  and  having  taken  it  by  force,  delivered  such 
pf  his  children  and  friends  as  Antigonus  (when  Seleucos  for  fear  fled 
away  from  Babylon  into  Egypt)  had  there  committed  to  prison. 
This  401MS9  he  began  to  raise  soldiers  in  the  country,  and,  having 
hought  horses,  distributed  them  among  such  as  were  fit  to  ride  them. 
Aod  withal,  carrying  himself  with  all  fairness  and  affability  towards 
all  sorts,  made  them  all  ready  to  run  any  hazard  with  him,  and  so  in  a 
^hort  time  recovered  all  his  government  of  Babylon.  But  afterwards, 
liicaoor,  whom  Antigonus  had  made  governor  of  Media,  marched 
against  him  with  ten  thousand  foot,  and  seven  thousand  horse;  and 
Saleuous  without  delay  went  out  to  meet  him,  having  with  him  in 
all  a  little  above  three  thousand  foot  and  four  hundred  horse:  and 
paaaing  the  river  Tigrb,  when  he  heard  that  the  enemy  was  not  far 
ofi^  he  hid  his  men  in  the  fens  there  near  at  hand,  purposing  to  set 
OB  him  unawares;  who,  when  he  came  to  the  bank  of  the  Tigris, 
aad  foond  no  enemy  there,  went  and  encamped  near  to  a  post-house 
oC  the  king's,  little  thinking  the  enemy  had  been  so  near.  But  the 
night  fallowing  (through  a  careless  regard  and  contempt  of  the  enc- 
JBOji  not  keeping  a  due  watch)  Seleucus  fell  upon  him,  and  raised  a 
great  tumult  in  his  army;  for  the  Persians  putting  themselves  for- 
wardy  Evager,  their  general,  with  several  others  of  their  commanders 
ware  slain.  After  which  encounter,  the  greater  part  of  Nicanor's 
ariny,  as  well  on  account  of  the  present  danger  they  were  in,  as  for 
tha  disgust  they  had  to  Antigonus's  government,  left  him  and  came 
ovar  to  the  service  of  Seleucus*  Whereupon  Nicanor,  fearing  lest 
at  the  next  rencounter  his  soldiers  should  deliver  him  up  to  Seleu- 
cos, absolutely  stole  away  with  some  of  his  friends,  and  fled  through 
tha  desert.  Seleucus  having  by  this  means  got  a  potent  army  about 
him,  and  continued  his  fair  carriage  to  all  men  as  before,  easily  pro- 
cured the  provinces  of  Media  and  Susa,  and  other  countries  bordering 
thereupon,  to  come  under  his  subjection ;  and  sent  Ptolemy  word 
how  he  had  succeeded,  having  now  got  the  full  royal  power  and  ma- 
jesty into  his  hands. 

Ptolemy  continued  still  in  Coelosyria  after  the  gieat  victory  gain- 
ed over  Demetrius,  whom  he  heard  was  returned  out  of  Cilicia,  and 
lay  encamped  in  the  upper  Syria;  whereupon  he  sent  one  of  his  no- 
bility about  him,  called  Celles,  (a  Macedonian  born)  with  a  great  ar- 
my, commanding  him  either  to  drive  him  out  of  every  part  of  Syria, 
or  tp  coop  him  up  and  tread  him  to  dirt  where  ho  lay.  While  he 
was  upon  his  march,  Demetrius  understanding  by  his  scouts  that 
Celles  lay  carelessly  with  bis  army  at  Myus,  leaving  his  carriatrcs  be- 
bind  him,  marched  away  with  a  company  of  light  iufantry,  who  tra- 
velled all  night,  and  a  Utile  before  day  fell  in  upcn  Cclles's  camp, 


SQS  diodorus  sicuLUS.  Book  XIX 

took  it  without  striking  a  blow,  and  Celles  himself  priaooer;  by  wUeh 
victory  (it  was  judged)  that  he  was  quit  with  them  for  the  idnMr 
loss  he  had  sustained.  Yet  because  he  thought  Ptolemy  himself  iv 
coming  after  with  all  his  army,  he  therefore  pitched  his  camp  h  i 
place  where  he  had  a  bog  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  lough  on  the  otlNL 
Demetrius  wrote  letters  of  this  his  good  success  to  his  fiither  AntigSi 
Dus  wishing  him  either  to  send  an  army  speedily,  or  to  come  himidf 
in  person  into  Syria.  Antigoous  was  then  at  Celsenas  in  Phiypli 
and  having  read  the  letter  was  wonderfully  pleased  with  the  nemi 
both  because  the  victory  was  obtained  by  his  own  son's  conduct  (win 
was  so  young),  and  for  that  he  had  shewn  himself  to  be  a  man  wdi^ 
thy  to  wear  a  crown  hereafter.  Upon  this  news  he  himself  with  bb 
army  marched  out  of  Phrygia,  and  having  passed  over  mount  Taorai 
in  a  few  days  time  he  joined  with  Demetrius. 

Ptolemy,  hearing  of  the  coming  of  Antigonus,  called  a  council  of 
war  to  advise  whether  it  were  better  to  stay  where  he  was,  and  theie 
to  try  it  out  with  him  in  Syria,  or  to  return  into  Egypt  and  fight  with 
him  from  thence,  as  he  had  done  before  with  Perdiccas?  The  result 
of  the  council  waSi..That  he  should  not  hazard  himself  by  engaging 
with  an  army  far  more  numerous  than  his  own,  and  where  there  were 
such  multitudes  of  elephants,  and  all  under  the  command  of  a  gene- 
ral never  yet  conquered;  and  that  it  was  much  safer  for  him  to  figbl 
in  Egypt  where  he  would  be  better  supplied  with  provision  than  the 
cneiDy  could  be,  and  had  place!»  ol'  strength  wherein  he  might  confide, 
Determining  therefore  to  leave  Syria,  before  he  went  he  laid  waste 
and  destroyed  the  principal  cities  he  held  there  at  that  time  in  his 
possession^  as  Aolion  in  Syrophcenicia,  Joppa,  and  Samaria;  and  Ga* 
za  in  Syria,  llicn  taking  along  with  jiim  out  of  the  country,  whate- 
ver he  could  drive  or  carry  (loaded  with  wealth)  he  returned  int( 
r.gypt. 

Antigonus,  wlien  he  had  reeoverc<l  all  Syria  and  Phoenicia  withou 
striking  a  blow,  took  a  journey  into  the  country  of  the  Arabians,  call- 
ed the  Nabathaeans''^  3  for,  thinking  that  they  never  much  favourei 
his  proceedings,  he  appointed  one  of  his  nobHity,  called  Athenaeus 
with  four  thousand  four,  and  six  hundred  horse  to  fall  in  upon  them 
and  to  bring  away  what  spoil  lie  could  out  of  their  country. 

It  is  worth  our  pains  here  to  relate  the  manners  and  customs  o 
these  Ara})ians,  for  the  information  of  those  that  are  ignorant;  by  th* 
use  of  which  customs  they  have  hitlierto  secured  theniselves  and  pre 
served  their  liberty.  Tliey  live  in  the  phiin  and  open  fields,  callinj 
that  desert  their  country,  wherein  are  neither  inhabitants,  rivers,  no 
<:prings,  ^vhelcbY  any  enemy's  army  can  be  relieved.     It  is  a  Uiw  a 

*  Nubatli,  of  tb'>  icdd  of  IsbuiavJ. 


Chap,  P'L  DIODORU8  SICUL09.  397 

mongst  dien  neither  to  sow,  plant,  build  houses,  nor  drink  any  wine  j 
and  he  that  is  discovered  to  do  any  of  these  is  sure  to  die  for  it* 
And  the  reason  of  this  law  is,  because  they  conceive  that  those  who 
are  possessed  of  such  things  are  easily  (for  fear  of  losing  what  they 
have,  or  in  hopes  of  gaining  more)  forced  to  comply  with  the  will 
and  hnntour  of  those  that  are  more  powerful.  Some  of  them  breed 
ikp  camels,  others  employ  themselves  in  feeding  sheep,  roving  to  and 
fio  in  the  wilderness  for  that  purpose.  There  are  no  few,  indeed,  of 
the  Arabians,  that  though  they  give  themselves  to  the  pasturage  of 
cattle  in  the  deserts,  yet  are  far  richer  than  the  rest,  but  exceed  not 
ill  number  above  ten  thousand.  For  many  oi  them  use  to  carry  frank* 
ineense,  myrrh,  and  other  rich  perfumes  down  to  the  seaside,  which 
they  traffic  for,  and  receive  from  those  who  bring  them  from  Arabia 
the  Happy.  They  highly  priie  and  value  their  liberty,  and  when  any 
*  strong  armies  invade  them,  they  presently  fly  into  the  wilderness,  as 
to  a  strong  fort  and  castle,  for  refuge;  for  no  water  being  there  to 
be  had,  none  can  follow  them  tlirough  these  deserts:  but  as  to 
themselves,  they  have  a  sure  and  safe  retreat  by  the  help  of  earthen 
pots  and  vessels  hid  in  the  ground  prepared  before  hand.  For  the 
toil  is  a  fat  clay,  under  which  lies  a  soft  stone,  in  which  they  dig 
great  caves  very  narrow  at  the  entrance,  but  enlarging  by  degrees  as 
they  increase  in  depth,  till  they  come  at  length  to  that  bigness  as  to 
be  a  hundred  feet  square;  these  caves  they  fill  up  to  the  mouths 
with  these  vessels  filled  with  rain-water;  then  they  lay  all  even  with 
Ae  rest  of  the  ground  and  leave  certain  marks  where  to  find  the 
place,  known  to  none  but  themselves.  For  the  cattle  (driven  away 
along  with  them)  take  so  much  water  as  may  serve  them  for  three 
days,  lest  while  they  are  in  their  flight  in  dry  and  parched  places,^ 
they  should  ever  be  put  to  a  stop  by  the  continual  watering  of  their 
cattle. 

Their  food  is  flesh,  milk,  and  roots.  For  drink,  having  Abundance 
of  wild  honey,  and  a  sort  of  pepper,  they  mix  them  together  for  that 
purpose. 

There  are  likewise  other  kinds  of  Arabians,  some  of  whom  em- 
ploy themselves  in  husbandry,  selling  of  corn,  and  other  sorts  of 
provisions,  and  agree  with  the  Syrians  in  all  other  things,  except 
dwelling  in  houses.  And  such  were  then  the  customs  of  these  Ara- 
bians. 

Near  at  hand  there  was  a  public  meeting  of  these  Arabians*, 
whither  all  l)ordering  nations  used  to  come,  as  to  a  common  mart, 
to  sell  ofif  to  them  their  commodities,  and  to  buy  from  them  the  iVier- 
cliandize  of  their  country.    To  this  mart  the  Nabathroans  now  went, 

*  The  Nabathscam, 


398  DIOtX)RUS  SICULU9.  JBpoA  XiX 


leaving  their  wealth  and  old  meo^  with  theif  wiraa  «ad  cUMvcBj  op- 
90  the  top  of  a  rock.    The  place  was  very  strongs  but  unvalM,  ud 
dbtant  two  daya  journey  from  the  country  that  was  inhabited.   Adifr* 
aaBHS,  watchiog  hia  opportunity,  marched  speedily  to  thia  rockf  nip 
having  marched  out  of  the  province  of  Edom  the  apace  of  two  thm 
aand  two  hundred  fiirloogs  in  three  days  and  three  iughta»  kte  al 
midnight  (the  Arabians  knowing  nothing  of  hia  coming)  poiMMl 
himself  of  the  place :  of  the  soldiers  there  founds  some  he  p«t  to  ike 
awordj  and  others  he  made  prisoners,  and  such  M  were  wounded^  lib 
there  left  behind  him ;  and  he  carried  away  the  greatest  part  of  ^bA 
myrrh  and  frankincense,  with  five  hundred  talents  of  aihrorf  ood^ 
staying  there  not  above  three  hours,  for  fear  of  the  countiy'a  oomi^f 
io  upon  him,  presently  returned  ^gain.    A»A  Qow  be  and  faia  eok 
diers,  having  gone  two  hundred  furlongs,  could  go  no  fcrthti  ior 
extreme  weariness,  and  therefore  rested  there,  keepii^  neither  weftdi 
uor  ward,  presuming  that  the  country  people  could  9Qt  rendi  tUtlMV 
in  less  than  two  or  three  days  time.   But  the  Arabicms,  raof  ivji|g  io«> 
telligence  by  some  that  saw  the  army,  presently  go|  together^  left  tho 
fair,  and  returned  to  the  rock,  where,  being  mpr^  ftiUy  iofonrnd  kf 
tiie  wounded  men  of  what  was  done^  they  imm^diiitely  piinufd  tfco 
Greeks  with  all  possible  speed;  and,  because  Atbtnmis'e  mco  hcpl 
00  watch,  and,  after  their  long  journey,  lay  weary  n»i  fMl  Mlont 
some  of  the  prisoners  stole  away  from  them ;  from  whom,  whieo  tb^ 
countrymen  (whom  they  met)  had  learnt  how  the  enemy'a  ctmp  hfg 
they  hastened  to  the  place,  and,  coming  upon  theni  ^t  three  of  tho 
clock  in  the  morning,  fell  into  their  trenches,  to  the  number  of  eUgbl 
thousand  of  them,  and  cut  the  throats  of  some  sleeping  iq  Afir  ci^ 
bins,  and  others,  who  made  resi$tanc<r,  they  slew.    In  aboft,  tbiy 
utterly  destroyed  all  the  foot,  and  only  fifty  of  their  hQfPf  got  vmjn 
and  those  too,  for  the  most  part,  wounded.    And  thus  AtheMm^ 
though  he  began  well,  yet,  through  his  own  imprudepce,  leac  ill  ia 
the  dose.    And  therefore  some,  not  without  cause,  ere  of  o^oiPif 
that  it  is  easier  to  improve  misfortunes  to  the  best  advantage,  thu  i^ 
act  with  prudence  under  extraordinary  successes :  for  the  firitythrovgh 
fear  of  what  further  mischief  may  follow,  puts  a  man  oa  to  «  nmo 
exact  and  careful  management  of  his  concerns;  but,  by  pfoeperova 
adventures,  men  are  many  times  flattered  into  grps«  negligence  aoi 
security. 

The  NabathsBans,  having  thus  revenged  themselves  of  their  ene- 
mies, and  recovered  their  goods  again,  returned  to  the  rock;  aodj  bf 
a  letter  of  theirs,  written  to  Antigonus  in  Syriac  charaeteiv>  com- 
plained of  Athenseus,  and  the  wrong  he  had  dune  them,  and  CJtcOffd 
themselves.  To  whom  Antigonus  wrote  back  again,  cttnniii{gly  telling 


Clid^*  Vt.  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  3^9 

vaHBopEOMBa  — Baggggg       i  ^   i  i  i      '  ^sssssss^ 

theim  thAt  Atfa  ^  well  eMttgh  served  by  them,  blaming  him 

for  Ithtt  he  tutd  dotic,  and  assuring  them  that  be  had  given  him  nd 
iueh  orders.  This  he  did  to  cover  what  he  wias  really  designing  a«- 
gamst  them,  and  to  make  them  the  less  cautious,  that  thereby  bo 
l»ight  vridi  more  ease  ^fiectnally  accomplish  what  he  was  now.  coip- 
triving:  for,  without  some  stratagem,  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  over- 
'Oome  men  that  wander|;d  np  and  down  continually  here  and  there^ 
aad  had  the  wilderness  for  an  inaccessible  shelter  and  refuge  at  the 
last  extremity.  \ 

The  Arabians,  upon  the  receipt  of  the  letter,  rejoiced  that  they 
Memed  at  present  to  be  freed  from  their  great  fearsy  but  yet  they  did 
mH  wholly  rely  upon  his  letter;  but,  being  between  h<^  and  fear^ 
placed  spies  upon  watch-towers  and  other  high  places,  whence  they 
a^gfat  easily  see  afar  off,  when  any  enemy  made  an  incursion  into 
Atabia;  and  they  themselves  put  all  thin^  in  readiness,  waiting  for 
the  issue  and  event. 

But  Antigonus,  having  for  a  time  carried  himself  as  a  friend  to* 
wards  these  barbarians,  now  judged  that  he  had  a  fair  opportunity  to 
iiH  «pon  them,  having  brought  them,  as  it  were,  to  his  bait.  To  this 
•nd,  dierefore,  he  chose  out  of  all  his  army  four  thousand  light-armed 
fbot,  and  the  swiftest  he  could  find,  and  added  to  them  four  thousand 
iMMnK)  desiring  them  to  take  with  them  as  many  day's  victuals  as 
they  could  well  carry,  and  such  as  needed  no  cooking;  and,  assigning 
Dmietrias  his  son  to  command  them,  he  sent  them  away  about  the 
fint  watch  of  the  night,  with  this  charge,  that  he  should  by  all  means 
kc  revenged  on  them.  He  therefore  travelled  three  days  joomcy 
tfaiongh  the  desert,  hastening  to  fall  upon,  them  at  unawares.  Bat 
tkrir  scouts,  perceiving  the  first  approach  of  the  enemy  towards  their 
borders,  immediately  gave  notice  of  their  comii^  to  the  countiy : 
whereupon  they  presently  betook  themselves  to  their  rock,  where 
there  was  but  one  wAy  up,  and  that  made  by  art,  and  there  laid  alt 
tli^r  baggage,  and  left  a  sufficient  guard  to  keep  it;  and  the  rest 
went  and  drove  away  their  cattle,  some  to  one  place,  and  some  to 
another,  in  the  desert.  Demetrius,  when  be  came  to  the  rock,  and 
saw  all  the  cattle  driven  away,  presently  began  to  besiege  it;  but 
Ihey  that  were  within  manfully  defending  it,  by  the  advantage  xA  the 
place,  had  all  tlie  day  long  tlie  better  of  it,  so  that  Demetrius  was 
forced  at  last  to  draw  off.  The  next  day,  when  he  appioacbed  again 
with  his  forces  Xo  the  rock,  one  of  the  barbarians  cri»l  out..^^^  What 
wonldest  thou  have,  O  king,  Demetrius  ?  or  what  has  provdced  thee 
to  make  war  upon  us,  who  inhabit  the  wilderness,  and  in  pbces  where 
there  is  neither  water,  corn,  nor  wine,  nor  any  thing  else  whidh  you 
want?    But  as  for  us,  who  can  upon  no  terms  endure  to  be  skves. 


400  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIX, 

we  betake  ourselves  to  a  country  destitute  of  all  things  that  ate  of 
absolute  necessity  to  all  other  men;  and  we  choose  to  li^e  a  sotttaij 
life  altogether^  like  the  beasts  of  the  field,  without  doing  the  least 
harm  to  any  of  you.  Therefore  wc  intreat  you  Demetrius,  and  your 
father,  that  you  injure  not  us,  but  that  you  would  accept  of  some 
I>resents,  and  march  away  with  the  army  from  us,  and  receive  thi 
Nabathseans  into  the  number  of  your  friends  for  the  time  to  come. 
Neither  can  you  possibly  stay  here  many  days,  (though  you  had  ever 
so  great  a  mind  to  do  it),  for  want  of  water,  and  all  other  necessa- 
ries; neither  can  yuu  ever  force  us  to  change  our  course  of  life^ 
though  perhaps  you  may  take  some  poor  dispirited  prisoners,  who  wiD 
never  endure  to  be  brought  under  the  power  of  other  laws  and  ndci 
of  living." 

After  this  was  said,  Demetrius  drew  off  his  army,  and  wished  then 
to  send  ambassadors  to  him  to  treat  of  these  matters.  Hereupon  the 
Arabians  sent  their  oldest  men,  wlio  (using  the  same  arguments  with 
those  before  related)  persuaded  Demetrius  to  accept  of  such  gifts  as 
were  of  greatest  esteem  and  value  among  them,  and  so  put  an  end  to 
the  war.  Upon  hostages  therefore  given  him,  and  such  gifts  as  were 
agreed  upon  between  them,  he  drew  off  from  the  rock,  and  so^  re* 
moving  with  his  army  three  hundred  furlongs  off,  he  encamped  \ 
to  the  Lake  Asphaltites*,  the  nature  of  which  it  is  not  fit  to  pass  i 
witliout  giving  some  account  of  it. 

It  lies  in  the  midst  of  the  province  of  Edom,  and  stretches  fbrtb 
in  length  five  hundred  furlongs;  but  in  breadth  it  is  but  threescoie* 
The  water  is  very  bitter  and  stinking,  so  that  neither  fish,  nor  WBPf 
other  thing  used  to  the  water,  can  live  in  it;  and,  though  many  fe-' 
markahle  rivers  of  very  sweet  water  empty  themselves  into  it,  yet  k 
remains  as  corrupt  and  unsavory,  both  as  to  taste  and  smell,  as  ever 
it  did  before.  Every  year  there  rises  out  of  the  middfe  of  it  great 
nassy  pieces  of  bitumen  and  pitch,  sometimes  bigger  than  three 
plethrasf,  and  sometimes  a  little  less  than  one.  And  upon  that  ac- 
count the  barbarous  inhabitants  call  the  larger  pieces  bulls,  and  the 
lesser  calves.  Tliese  pieces  of  pitch  and  brimstone,  floating  upon 
the  water,  appear  at  a  distance  like  so  many  islands.  There  are  evi* 
dent  signs  that  forego  and  give  notice  of  the  casting  up  of  this  bita- 
minous  matter,  at  least  twenty  days  before:  for  a  horrid  smell  of 
brimstone  and  pitch  infects  the  air  round  about  the  lake  at  many  fiir- 
longs  distance,  and  all  metals,  whether  of  gold,  silver,  or  copper^ 
near  the  place,  change  their  natural  colour,  which  presently  retnros 
again  as  soon  as  the  brimstone  is  exhaled.    The  places  borderinf 

•  Aiiphnltites  or  ih«  Deed  Sea.     The  Lnke  ofStidcim 
t  Kv#»rv  pIrUira  \%  cni  hiindrrd  frrt. 


9.  FI.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  401 

it  are  so  burning  hot,  (by  reason  of  the  sulphur  and  brimstone 
r  ground)^  and  cast  forth  such  a  horrible  stench,  that  the  in- 
ants  are  very  unhealthy  and  short-lived :  yet  the  country  there- 
tSj  being  watered  with  many  pleasant  rivers  and  refreshing 
igs,  bears  abundance  of  palm-trees;  and  in  a  certain  vale  near 
is  place  grows  what  they  call  Balm^j  from  which  they  raise  a 
;  revenue,  inasmuch  as  this  plant  grows  in  no  other  part  of  the 
1  besides,  and  is  of  great  use  amongst  physicians,  for  the  healing 
:uring  of  wounds,  and  other  distempers.  The  inhabitants  oa 
sides  of  this  lake  are  so  earnest  to  carry  away  this  brimstone, 
they  fight  one  with  another;  and  they  bring  it  off  in  a  strange 
ler,  without  shipping:  for  they  cast  in  huge  bundles  of  bul- 
ss  fastened  close  together,  upon  which  three  or  more  of  them 
t  themselves,  two  of  whom  ply  the  oars  that  are  fastened  to  the 
ishes,and  the  third  carries  a  bow  and  arrows  to  defend  themselves 
i8t  such  as  attempt  to  make  up  to  them  from  the  opposite  shorc^ 
>  offer  them  any  violence.  As  soon  as  they  come  to  the  brim- 
s' they  get  upon  it,  and  hew  it  in  pieces  with  axes,  as  pieces  of 
t  out  of  a  soft  rock ;  and  so,  loading  the  bulrush  boat,  they  row 
.  If  any  fall  into  the  water,  through  the  deficiency  of  the  boat, 
sver  sinks,  as  in  other  waters,  though  he  knows  not  how  to  swim, 
jes  upon  the  water  a$  if  he  were  the  best  swimmer  in  the  world  .- 
his  lake  naturally  bears  up  any  thing  that  has  either  a  vegetative 
I  animal  life;  and  even  such  things  as  arc  solid,  and  seem  to  be 
out  pores,  as  silver,  gold,  lead,  or  the  like,  are  also  much  longer 
slower  in  sinking  than  when  they  are  cast  into  other  waters. 

this  profit  and  advantage  the  barbarians  reap  from  it:  thej 
tport  this  pitch  into  Egypt,  and  there  sell  it,  for  the  use  of  em- 
ling  the  dead;  for,  if  they  do  not  mix  this  with  other  aromatic 
»,  the  bodies  cannot  be  preserved  long  from  putrefaction. 
Qtigonus,  at  the  return  of  Demetrius,  having  heard  the  relidoa 
is  voyage,  blamed  him  for  making  peace  with  the  Nabatbaans, 
)g  that  those  barbarous  people,  having  so  escaped,  would  there- 
)  grow  more  insolei>t  than  before,  concluding  that  they  were  not 
ured  out  of  love  or  compassion  of  the  conqueror,  but  in  despair 
le  conquest;  but  he  commended  him  for  discovering  the  Lake 
baltites,  seeing  that  from  thence  he  might  raise  some  yearly  re- 
le  to  himself,  and  made  Hieronymus  Cardianus,  the  historiao,  his 
surer  for  that  revenue,  and  commanded  him  to  build  ships,'and 
er  together  all  the  bitumen,  or  liquid  brimstone,  tliat  could  be 
out  of  that  lake:  but  Antigonus  in  the  event  was  frustrated  of 
lopes;  for  the  Arabians,  coming  together  to  the  number  of  six 

•  The  Balm  Qf  Gilead. 
OL.  2.  No.  45.  FFF 


402  DIOnORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIX. 


thousand  men,  fell  upon  them  as  they  were  in  their  ships,  gather- 
ing this  brimstone,  and  shot  them  ahnost  all  to  death  with  their  ar-* 
rows;  whereby  Antigonus  lost  all  hopes  of  making  any  standing 
revenue  that  way,  and  forbore  all  further  prosecution  of  that  design, 
both  upon  account  of  the  miscarriage  already  experienced,  and  like- 
wise because  that  he  had  matters  of  greater  weight  and  concern  then 
in  his  head. 

For  about  that  time  a  courier  came,  and  brought  letters  to  bun 
from  Nicanor,  governor  of  Media,  and  others,  that  Seleucus  was  re- 
turned, and  prospered  in  those  parts :  whereupon  Antigonus>  bcin^ 
much  concerned  for  the  upper  provinces,  sent  his  son  Denietriii% 
with  five  thousand  Macedonian  foot,  and  ten  thousand  mercenaries, 
and  four  thousand  horse,  with  charge  that  he  should  marcU  to  the 
very  walls  of  Babylon,  and,  having  recovered  that  province^  should 
from  thence  march  down  to  the  sea.  Demetrius  hereupon  departed 
from  Damascus  in  Syria,  and  went  vigorously  on  to  fulfil  his  father's 
command.  But  Patrocles,  whom  Seleucus  had  made  president  of 
Babylon,  as  soon  as  he  heard  that  Demetrius  was  marching  into 
Mesopotamia,  not  daring  to  stay  his  coming,  (because  he  had  but  a 
small  power  about  him),  commanded  the  rest  to  leave  the  city,  and 
that,  passing  the  Euphrates,  they  should  fly  some  into  the  desert, 
others  over  tlie  Tigris  into  the  province  of  Susa,  and  to  the  Persian** 
Sea;  and  he  himself,  with  a  company  which  he  had  about  him,  trust- 
ing in  the  bars  of  the  rivers  and  dykes  of  the  country  thereaboutSi 
instead  of  so  many  fortresses  and  bulwarks  for  his  defence^  kept  him- 
self still  within  the  bounds  of  his  own  government,  and  studied  liow 
to  entrap  his  enemy,  sending  ever  and  anon  tidings  to  Seleucus  ia 
Media  how  things  went  with  him,  and  desiring  aid  to  be  si>eedily  sent 
to  him. 

Demetrius,  when  he  came  to  Babylon,  and  found  the  city  itself 
void  of  inhabitants,  begun  presently  to  besiege  the  forts  and  castles 
that  were  therein;  and,  having  taken  one  of  them,  gave  the  spoil 
thereof  to  his  soldiers:  but,  having  besieged  the  other  for  some  days 
together,  he  departed  in  haste,  leaving  Archelaus,  one  of  his  trusty 
friends,  to  maintain  the  siege,  with  five  thousand  foot  and  a  thousand 
horse;  and  he  himself,  seeing  the  time  run  out  which  his  father  had 
appointed  iiim  to  finish  his  work  in,  returned  with  the  rest  of  the  army 
into  the  Lesser  Asia, 

While  those  things  were  acting,  the  wars  between  the  Romans  and 
the  Samnitcs  continued  still  in  Italy,  wherein  there  were  daily  excur- 
sions into  one  another's  territories,  besieging  of  cities,  and  encamping* 
of  armies,  on  both  sides :  for  the  contest  between  the  most  Warlilte 
*  Tlic  Red  Sea  in  (he  Greeki  but  mittook. 


Chap.n.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  403 

**™'         ■  T"^'*^**y?**^T— — .  ■  .  ■  ^  ■■■■■"  r    ■"    ■      ,- 

nations  of  Italy  was,  wliich  should  gain  the  empire  and  sovereign 
command  of  the  whole^  upon  which  account  Qiany  great  battles  were 
fought.  '       • 

At  length  the  consuls  of  Home,  with  a  part  of  their  forces,  en- 
camped in  the  face  of  the  ^nemy,  watching  for  a  fit  opportunity  to 
fall  upon  them,  by  which  means  they  preserved  their  confederate, 
cities  from  annoyance  and  disturbance  by  the  enemy.     With  the 
rest  of  the  army  Quint  us  Fabius  the  dictator  took  Fretomanum,  anc| 
carried  away  tlie  persons  of  greatest  quality  that  were  enemies  to  the 
Romans^  to  the  number  of  upwards  of  two  hundred,  and  brought  them 
to  Rome,  and  exposed  them  as  a  public  spectacle  in  the  forum;  and 
whrn  he  had  scourged  them,  according  to  the  Roman  custom,  he  cut 
off  their  iaads.    He  made  likewise  an  inroad  into  the  enemy's  terri- 
tories, and  took  Celia,  and  the  citadel  of  Nota*,  with  abundance  of 
6poil,  and  divided  a  great  part  of  the  country  by  lot  amongst  the 
^olditTs.    The  Romans  hereupon,  encouraged  with  these  successes;^ 
wliich  happened  according  to  their  hearts  desire,  sent  a  colony  into 
tbe  island  called  Pontiaf. 

As  for  Sicily,  after  that  Agathocles  had  made  peace  with  the  Sici- 
lians, except  the  M essanians,  the  refugees  of  Syracuse  all  flocked  to 
Messana,  because  they  perceived  that  to  be  the  only  city  which  stood 
out  against  him.  Agathocles  therefore  with  all  speed  made  it  his 
business  to  break  their  confederacy,  and  to  that  end  sent  awayPasi- 
philus,  his  general,  with  an  army  toMes$ana,with  private  instructions 
to  do  what  he  thought  fit,  and  most  agreeably  to  the  circumstances 
of'aflkirs  as  he  should  find  theip;  hereupon  he  entered  the  country 
on  a  sudden,  and,  after  he  had  taken  many  prisoners,  and  got  much 
spoil,  he  solicited  the  Messanians  to  peace  and  an^ity,  and  that  they 
would  not  suifer  themselves  so  to  be  led  aside  as  to  join  with  the  im-^ 
placable  enemies  of  Agathocles. 

Upon  which  the  Messanians,  hoping  to  extricate  themselves  out  of 
the  war  without  fighting,  cast  out  all  the  Syracusan  fugitives,  and  re- 
ceived Agathocles  with  his  army  into  the  city;  who  at  the  first  carried 
himself  very  courteously  and  obligingly  towards  all,  and  courted  them 
to  admit  those  exiles  that  were  in  his  army  (and  had  been  by  them,  ac- 
cording to  law,  formerly  banished)  into  the  freedom  and  liberties  of 
the  city. 

But  afterwards  he  sent  for  such  out  of  Taurominium  and  Messana 
as  formerly  had  opposed  his  government,  and  put  them  all  to  death, 
to  the  number  of  six  hundred;  for,  intending  to  make  war  vipop  the 

•  A  city  in  Campania,  in  Italy, 
f  ronti2[>  IiisuKt,  in  the  Tuscan  Sea. — 9\'n\.  lib.  3,  c.  6,    Forcia^  ^  Uland  in  tiit 
spnjc  «a,  commonly  called  Porcv*. 


404  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Sook  XIX. 

Carthaginians,  lie  resolved  to  rid  himself  of  every  thing  that  looked 
like  an  enemy  in  Sicily.  The  Messanians  therefore^  seeing  thdr 
chief  citizens  cut  off  that  opposed  the  tyrant,  and  that  they  them- 
selves had  driven  those,  strangers  out  of  the  city  that  wished  them 
so  well,  and  who  would  have  been  their  main  strength  against  him, 
and  had  been  compelled  to  receive  those  who  had  formerly  been  con- 
demned for  their  notorious  crimes,  much  repented  themselves  of 
what  they  had  done;  but,  out  of  fear  of  the  power  of  the  conqueror, 
they  were  forced  to  stoop. 

Thence  he  moved  in  the  first  place  towards  AgrigentonHy  design- 
ing to  make  a  prey  also  of  this  city;  but  because  the  Carthaginiant 
were  there  lately  arrived  with  a  fleet  of  sixty  sail,  he  desisted  and 
left  off  that  project,  but  wasted  and  harassed  the  territories  of  the 
Carthaginians,  and  took  some  of  their  forts  and  castles  by  stormy  and 
gained  others  by  capitulation.  ^ 

Among  these  turmoils  Dinocrates,  captain  of  the  Syiacusan  cs- 
lies,  sent  to  desire  aid  of  the  Carthaginians  before  Agathocles  had 
brought  all  Sicily  under  his  sovereign  command;  he  himself  recdr- 
ed  all  those  exiles  wiiich  the  Messanians  had  banished  the  city,  and 
having  now  a  very  great  army,  sent  Nymphodorus,  one  of  his  prin- 
cipal friends,  with  part  of  the  army  to  the  city  of  the  Centnripians; 
for  this  place  being  a  garrison  of  Agathocles,  some  of  the  citizens 
had  undertaken  to  betray  it,  upon  condition  they  should  be  sufiercd 
to  gi>vern  according  to  their  own  laws.  Upon  this  encooragementi 
therefore,  breaking  into  the  city  in  the  night,  the  chief  commanden 
of  the  garrison  presently  took  the  alarm,  and  killed  both  Njrmphodo- 
Tus  and  all  the  rest  that  had  entered  within  the  walls*  Agathocles 
made  use  of  this  as  an  occasion  and  ground  to  accuse  the  Cenli^jpi- 
ans  of  contrivances  against  his  government,  and  cut  the  throats  of 
all  those  whom  he  supposed  to  be  the  ringleaders  of  the  defection. 

While  he  was  thus  employed  the  Carthaginians  entered  the  port 
at  Syracuse  with  a  fleet  of  fifty  sail,  but  all  that  they  did  there  wis 
the  sinking  of  two  transport  ships  (one  of  which  belonged  to  the  A- 
thenians)  and  cutting  off  the  hands  of  all  those  that  were  on  board: 
which  was  looked  u|X)n  as  a  piece  of  extreme  cmelty  towards  thoie 
who  never oflered  them  the  least  injury;  and  God  made  this  |irasent- 
ly  to  appear:  for  soon  after  some  ships  that  were  forced  from  the 
rest  of  the  fleet  about  Brutia  fell  into  the  hands  of  AgathocleSj  where 
those  Carthaginians  that  were  taken  received  the  same  ponishoicttl 
as  they  had  inflicted  on  their  prisoners. 

Rut  Dinocrates,  commander  of  the  exiles,  baring  with  him  abote 
three  thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse,  seized  upon  Gabu,  (« 
it  is  called),  invited  thither  by  the  inhabitants^  and  dttt  oat  i 


Gfop.  VU.  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  40S 

that  sided  with  Agatbocles,  aod  then  encamped  before  the  walk  of 
the  city. 

Agathocles  presently  sent  against  him  PasiphHus  and  Demopldltti, 
xvith  five  thousand  roen^  who  fought  with  the  refugees;  whose  cap« 
tains  were  Denocrates  and  Philonides^  who  commanded  separately 
in  the  two  wings.  The  battle  was  doubtful  for  a  long  time^  while 
both  armies  exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost.  But  Philonidea  be* 
ing  slain^  that  wing  fied^  and  Dinocrates  was  thereupon  forced  like- 
wise to  give  ground,  and  Pasiphilus  killed  many  of  them  in  the  pur- 
soity  and  recovered  Galata,  and  py t  the  authors  of  the  defection  to 
death. 

Agathocles  receiving  intelligence  of  what  was  done,  resolved,  to 
fall  upon  the  Carthagioians  with  his  whole  army,  who  had  then  pos- 
sessed themselves  of  the  hill  atGela,  called  E^nomos*.  To  that 
end,  without  any  further  delay  he  made  up  to  them,  and  as  soon  as 
ha  capie  near,  offered  them  battle,  being  pu£fed  up  with  the  success 
of  his  late  victory.  But  the  barbarians  durst  not  engage,  and  there* 
upon,  supposing  he  was  absolute  master  of  the  field  without  fighting, 
ha  returned  to  Syracuse,  and  adorned  the  chiefest  temples  there  with 
the  spoils.  And  these  were  the  actions  of  this  year  as  far  forth  as 
is  needful  for  us  to  give  an  account. 


CHAP.  VH. 


Cassander^  Ptolemy  ^  and  Lysimachus,  make  peace  mthAntigcnui, 
Casscmder  murders  Boxana  and  her  son.  The  governors  take 
the  title  of  kings  upon  them.  2%e  Carthaginians  raise  forces  a* 
gainst  Agathocles.  Four  thousand  Oelans  mwrdered  by  jtga^ 
thocles.  The  battle  between  Agathocles  and  Amilcar  the  Car-^ 
thaginian,  at  Himera.  Agathocles  routed.  Several  cities  revoU 
from  Agathocles* 

WHEN  Simonides  was  lord-chancellor  of  Athens^  and  the  Romans 
had  created  Marcus  Valerius  and  Publius  Decius  consuls^  Cassander, 
Ptolemy,  and  Lysimachus  made  peace  with  Antigonus^  the  form  of 
which  was  put  into  writing,  and  contained  the  terms  following:.^ 

*  That  Ih  wicked. 


406  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Book  XIX 

That  Cassander  should  be  the  sovereign  lord  of  all  in  Europe^  antfl 
Alexander^  the  son  of  Roxana,  came  to  full  age;  that  Lysimaclms 
should  have  the  chief  command  in  Thrace;  Ptolemy  shoald  enjoy 
the  sovereign  power  in  Egypt^  and  the  bordering  cities  in  Arabit 
and  Africa;  that  Antigonus  should  be  lord  of  all  Asia;  and  the 
Greeks  should  govern  according  to  their  own  laws.  But  these  coo^ 
ditions  they  observed  not  long;  but  every  one  took  one  occasion  or 
another  to  encroacli  upon  more  than  he  was  justly  entitled  to. 

Cassander  seeing  that  Alexander,  the  son  of  Roxana^  now  grew  tip 
towards  man's  estate,  and  hearing  how  it  was  the  discourse  of  some 
throughout  all  Macedonia,  that  it  was  now  fit  the  young  roan  shonM 
be  freed  from  his  prison,  and  assume  the  government  of  his  father's 
kingdom  into  his  own  hands ;  out  of  fear  of  being  supplanted  com- 
manded Glaucias^  the  keeper,  to  murder  both  Roxana  and  the  king^ 
and  to  hide  their  bodies  when  he  had  done,  and  by  all  means  possr- 
ble  to  conceal  their  deaths.  Tins  he  effectually  executed,  and  so  bj 
this  means  Cassander,  Lysimachus,  Ptolemy,  and  Antigonus  him- 
self, were  freed  from  all  grounds  of  fear  upon  the  account  of  the 
king.  For  now  all  the  seed  royal  being  extinct,  and  no /successor 
remaining,  every  one  of  the  captains  who  had  possessed  themselves 
of  provinces  or  cities  took  upon  themselves  the  titles  and  .stiles  of 
Icings ;  and  every  one  claiiped  the  province,  of  which  he  was  gover- 
nor, as  a  conquered  kingdom.  And  thus  stood  the  afiairs  in  Europe^ 
Asia,  Greece,  and  Macedonia. 

In  Italy,  the  Romans  marched  with  a  great  body  of  horse  and 
foot  against  Pollitium,  a  city  of  the  Alarucci ;  where  they  removed 
part  of  the  citizens  and  made  them  a  new  colony,  giving  them  Ite- 
lamna  (as  it  is  called)  to  inhabit. 

In  Sicily,  t!ie  power  of  Agathocles  increased  every  day,  his  forces 
growing  stronger  and  stronger.  Whereupon  the  Carthaginians  be- 
ing informed  that  he  had  gained  almost  all  the  towns  and  cities 
through  the  island,  and  that  their  captains  and  commanders  thexe 
were  not  able  to  cope  with  him,  they  resolved  to  pursue  the  war  with 
more  vigour.  To  this  end  they  forthwith  provided  a  fleet  of  a  huii- 
dred  and  thirty  sail  of  men  of  war,  and  made  Amilcar  (a  person  of 
eminent  quality)  general,  and  delivered  to  him  two  thousand  soldieis 
raised  out  of  the  city,  amongst  whom  many  were  men  of  note;  ont 
of  Africa,  ten  thousand;' from  Tyrrhenia  a  thousand  mercenaries 
and  two  hundred  charioteers ;  and  a  thousand  slingers  from  the  Ba- 
leares*.  They  provided  likewise  a  great  treasure,  all  sorts  of  wea- 
pons, store  of  corn,  and  all  other  things  necessary  for  carrying  on  the 

*  Tliref  islaDdf  io  the  MeUiterranf  an.  modernlj  called  M^'orea«  Miqorc^ 


CVUp.  VIL  bioDORCs  stcuLus.  4e7 

war,  as  they  had  occasiou  to  use.  And  now  when  tlie  whcfc  fleet 
had  hoisted  sail  and.  were  come  to  the  open  sea,  od  a  sudden  a  vao^ 
lent  storm  arose,  which  sunk  sixty  of  tlie  gallies,  and  broke  in  pieces 
two  hundred  of  the  ships  laden  with  corn  and  provisions.  The  rest 
of  the  fleet,  after  much  hardship  jat  sea,  with  great  difiicuky  got  ipio 
Sicily.  Many  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  Carthage  were  last  at  this 
time,  which  occasioned  a  public  lamentation  in  that  city.  For  wlie« 
any  misfortune  happens  to  that  place  greater  than  oidinary,  their 
custom  is  to  cover  the  walls  with  black  cassocks  or  cloaks. 

Amilcar  the  general,  after  he  had  landed,  mustered  tkose  that 
were  saved  from  the  storm;  and,  to  supply  those  that  were  lost,  ia- 
listed  foreign  mercenari^,  and  raised  others  from  among  the  confe- 
derates throughout  Sicily,  whom  he  incorporated  with  the  rest  of  the 
forces  that  were  there  before;  and,  carefully  providing  every  tUnff 
that  was  necessary  for  the  war,  he  kept  the  army  in  the  fieU,  fanviog 
under  his  command  about  forty  thousand  foot,  and  nearly  five  tiioii* 
sand  horse.  Therefore,  havin^g  in  a  short  time  recruited  himself, 
and  being  accounted  a  man  of  great  reputation  for  honesty  and  inte-^ 
grity,  he  not  only  revived  the  courage  of  the  confederates,  but  in  no 
small  degree  struck  a  terror  into  the  hearts  of  his  enemies. 

On  the  other  luind,  Agathocles  perceiving  that  he  was  greatly 
overpowered  by  the  Carthaginians  in  number  of  their  forces,  con- 
cluded, that  many  of  the  forts  and  castles,  and  those  cities  and  towns 
that  bore  him  a  grudge,  would  revolt  to  the  enemy ;  he  especially 
suspected  the  city  of  Gela,  because  he  understood  that  all  the  forces 
of  the  enemy  were  encamped  in  theiri  territories.  And  besktes,  no 
small  detriment  befei  him  at  this  time  in  his  fleet,  for  about  twenty 
sail,  which  then  happened  to  be  at  sea,  with  all  their  men,  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  Carthaginians.  However,  he  conceived  it  fit  to  put 
a  garrison  into  the  place  for  its  security,  but  durst  not  bring  any  for-* 
ces  openly  into  the  city,  lest  the  inhabitants  should  prevent  him, 
who  had  not  then  at  any  time  before  any  occasion  ofiered  them  to  re- 
bel, and  so  by  that  means  he  might  come  to  lose  a  town  which  had 
been  very  useful  and  serviceable  to  him.  Therefore,  to  prevent  sus* 
picion,  he  sent  soldiers  into  the  city  by  degrees,  a  few  at  a  time,  (as 
if  they  had  come  there  for  other  purposes),  till  he  had  got  so  many 
into  the  town  as  far  exceeded  the  citizens  in  number.  And  then  a 
while  after  he  came  thither  himself,  and  charged  the  Gelans  with 
a  traiterous  design  to  revolt;  however,  whether  this  were  true  or  not, 
or  that  they  were  falsely  accused  by  the  exiles,  or  that  his  design  was 
to  scrape  and  get  together  what  money  he  could,  he  put  to  death  a^- 
bout  four  thousand  of  the  Gelans,  and  confiscated  ail  their  estates  >» 
and  tiu-eateued  with  death  all  the  rest  who  did  not  bring  forth  all 


408  DtODORUS  SICULU9.  Jb^  ZEC 

tlieir  money,  whether  gold  or  silver,  coined  or  ODcoiiied.  Wtwrt^ 
iqiOQ  all  (out  of  fear  of  this  thundering  edict)  forthwith  obeyed  Ub 
commaad;  whereby  he  heaped  together  a  Tast  treasure,  and  becnie 
a  terror  to  all  his  subjects.  And  though  he  was  jiidged  to  act  yf/A 
too  much  cruelty  and  severity  towards  the  Gelansj  yet  he  ordcMd 
them  to  be  decently  buried  without  the  walls;  and  then  leaving  the 
city  with  a  strong  garrison,  encamped  over  against  the  enemy.  Ttk 
Carthaginians  possessed  the  hill  Ecnomos,  where  formerly  stood  tbk 
castle  of  Phaleris^as  b  reported,  where  they  say  the  tyrant. had  AA 
hnaen  boll  contrived  to  torment  oflenders,  by  putting  fire  oiider  i^ 
Aereby  causing  it  to  grow  scorching  hot.by  degrees.  And  thctefHt4 
by  reason  of  this  horrid  cruelty  executed  upon  poor.misemble  ( 
titres,  the  hill  was  called  Ecnomos*.  Agathocles  possessed  { 
of  another  castle  of  Phaleris  over  against  them,  which  he  calledPUk 
lereus;  between  both  armies  lay  a  river,  which  was  a  dcfenee  mnA 
bulwark  on  both  sides.  There  was  an  ancient  prc^hecy  that  a  gMt 
battle  should  be  fought,  and  multitudes  of  men  destroyed  about  i 
place;  and  it  being  uncertain  on  whicl/side  the  slaugfatari 
mainly  fill,  out  of  a  superstitious  awe  of  the  gods,  the  armies  liWi 
more  backward  and  slow  to  engage;  and  therefore  neither party^^  ftf 
a  long  time,  durst  pass  the  river  with  their  whole  fbrees,  till  a  add* 
den  and  unexpected  occasion  forced  them  to  fight.  For  the  Afirioinif 
making  a  sudden  incursion  upon  the  enemy,  stirred  lip  Agathodea  ta 
do  the  same:  For  when  the  Greeks  were  driving  away  their  catde^ 
and  some  carriage-horses  and  other  beasts  out  of  the  camp,  aoaba 
sallied  out  from  among  the  Carthaginians  to  pursue  them.  Bat  A* 
gathocles,  perceiving  what  the  enemy  would  do,  had  befbre  kid «tf 
ambuscade  of  stout  and  resolute  'men  near  the  river,  who,  aa  socw  at 
the  Carthaginians  liad  passed  the  river,  and  were  in  porsuh  of  tbcM 
that  were  driving  away  the  cattle,  rose  out  of  the  ambush,  and  felloHf 
them  as  they  were  in  disorder,  and  easily  routed  them  and  pot  theoif 
to  flight.  While  the  barbarians  were  thus  hewed  down,  and  flyh^ 
to  their  climp,  Agathocles,  looking  upon  it  now  as  a  fit  time  to  oh 
gage,  led  forth  his  army  against  the  enemy;  and,  iallihg  upon  thctif 
on  a  sudden,  presently  filled  up  a  part  of  their  trench  and  cut  thnmHU 
their  breast-work,  and  so  forced  their  camp.  The  Carthagiaii^' 
amazed  at  this  sudden  attack,  having  no  time  to  put  themsdvee  ia^ 
order  of  battle,  fell  in  as  fortune  led  them,  and  engaged  the  tnmaf' 
in  the  best  manner  they  could:  and  in  regard  the  hottest  woik  iriaf 
near  the  trench,  the  ground  all  thereabout  was  stirewed  vrith  dead* 
bodies;  for  the  chiefest  of  the  Carthaginians  made  to  the  dcfenee^ 
that  place  where  they  saw  the  camp  entered. 
*  SisoiQrin^  the  wicked  place. 


CAiq»i  #7/»  DI0D0RU8  ftlCuLUfl.  409 

Od  the  other  hind^  the  Agathocleans  encouraged  by  the  happy 
•access  of  their  «ttempt|  and  supposing  they  should  put  an  end  to 
the  war  by  this  oue  battle>  pressed  resolutely  upon  the  barb^^ans: 
Amilcar,  therefore^  perceivitig  that  his  men  were  too  weak^  and  that 
the  Grecians  were  continually  pouring  in  more  men  into  the  camp^ 
brings  op  a  thousand  stingers  of  the  islands  Baleares  who  wounded 
many  by  the  multitude  of  great  stokies  thrown  out  of  their  slings^ 
and  killed  many  that  were  forcing  Into  the  caitip,  and  broke  in  pieces 
the  shields  and  armour  of  many  of  their  assailants.  For  these  men 
being  used  to  cast  stones  of  three  pounds  weight,  were  always  rerj 
serviceable,  and  contributed  much  in  several  battles  to  the  gaining 
of  the  victory,  as  being  those  that  were  diligently  taught  and  well  ex- 
lercised  tn  the  art  of  slingiog  from  their  very  childhood.  And  now 
aft  this  tine  they  gained  the  point,  driving  the  Grecians  back  again 
beyond  the  out-works  of  the  camp.  But  Agathocles  broke  into  4ttii 
(9thcr  places;  and,  just  as  ttie  camp  was  forced,  unexpectedly  sue* 
cours  arrived  from  Carthage,  which  again  revived  the  spirits  of  the 
Gwthaginians,  and  those  in  the  camp  fought  the  enemy  in  the  front, 
and  the  new  supplies  hemmed  in  the  Gteeks  in  the  rear,  and  hewed 
them  down;  thus  the  fortune  of  the  day  turned  suddenly  knd  unex- 
pectedly. For  the  Greciatis  fled  outright,  some  to  the  river  Himera, 
and  others  to  their  own  camp,  which  was  forty  furlongs  distant; 
and  being  a  plain  and  champain  country,  they  were  pursued  with  no 
fewer  than  five  thousand  of  the  barbarian  horse,  so  that  the  plain  all 
along  was  covered  with  dead  bodies,  the  river  contributing  much  to 
the  destruction  of  the  Greeks.  For  the  pursuit  being  about  noon^ 
and  in  the  dog-days,  many  of  them  that  fled  were  so  parched  with 
thirst,  by  the  heat  of  the  weather  and  the  fatigue  of  the  fliglit,  that 
they  greedily  filled  themselves  with  salt-water,  insomuch  thut  as  ma->> 
ny  (who  had  not  the  least  hurt)  were  found  deadi  near  the  river  as 
were  killed  by  the  sword  in  the  pursuit.  There  were  killed  of  the 
barbarians  in  this  battle  about  five  hundred>  but  no  fewer  than  seven 
thousand  of  the  Greeks* 

Agathocles  being  thus  grievosuly  defeated,  after  he  had  received  all 
those  that  had  escaped,  burnt  his  camp  and  went  to  Gela»  But  he 
bad  caused  it  to  be  rumoured  abroad,  that  he  was  gone  away  for  Sy- 
racuse. It  happened  that  three  hundred  African  horse,  then  in  the 
country,  fell  in  among  some  of  Agathocles 's  soldiers,  who  told  them 
tliat  Agathocles  was  gone  back  to  Syracuse,  and  thereupon  the  horse- 
men entered  Gela  as  friends;  but,  being  thus  deluded,  they  were  all 
killed  by  darts.  Yet  Agathocles  shut  not  himself  up  in  Gela,  be* 
cause  he  could  not  get  safe  to  Syracuse,  but  that  he  might  divert  the 
Carthaginians  from  Syracuse  to  the  besieging  of  Gela,  that  so  by 

VoL.2t  No.45«  fioe 


410  DiODORus  sicuLUS.  Book  XDL 


that  means  the  Syracusans  might  have  leisure  eo  :h  o  get  in  their 
harvest,  while  he  protracted  the  time  at  Geku  Amilcar  indeed  it 
the  first  intended  to  have  besieged .  Gela,  but  bearing  that  there  mi 
there  a  strong  body  of  men  to  oppose  bim^  and  that  AgathiMslei  ev 
furnished  with  plenty  of  all  things  necessary^  be  laid  aside  that  d^ 
sign,  and  made  his  approaches  to  the  forts  and  castlesj  and  fari 
them  all  surrendered  to  biroi  and,  to  gain  the  good  (^ioioQ  of  tk 
Sicilians,  he  carried  himself  courteously  and  obligingly  towards  alL 
The  Camareans,  Leontines,  Cataneans,  and  Taurominians  sent  ooi- 
tinually  ambassadors,  and  made  their  applications  to  the  Carthii^ai* 
ans*  And,  a  little  time  after,  the  Messanians  and  Abaoenian^  aod 
many  other  cities  who  before  were  at  variance  amongst  themsebc^ 
all  went  over  to  Amilcar;  such  was  the  zeal  of  the  common  psopk 
after  the  late  defeat,  through  the  hatred  they  bore  against  the  tyiiat 
But  Agathocles  led  away  all  the  forces  that  were  yet  left  hia  H 
Syracuse,  and  there  repaired  the  ruinous  parts  of  the  walla^  and  Jit 
in  all  the  corn  and  fruits  out  of  the  fields  |  and  now  eontriasdlB 
leave  a  strong  garrison  for  the  defence  of  the  city,  and  In  lianspiit 
the  power  and  strength  of  the  army  into  Africa,  with  an  iaH/spX  la 
draw  the  war  out  of  the  island  into  the  continent.  We  shall  i 
fore,  as  we  at  first  designed,  begin  the  following  book  vrith  the  | 
lug  of  Agathocles  into  Africa. 


411 

— ^'— — — — ■  ■ '  -— 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  XX, 


PREFACE. 

THOS£  who  stuff  tbeir  histories  witb^long  and  tedious  harangues^ 
or  are  constantly  setting  forth  their  works  in  rhetorical  expressions^ 
are,  not  without  just  cause,  to  be  blamed.    For  besides  that  it  inter- 
rupts and  cuts  off  the  natural  course  of  the  history  by  an  unseasona* 
ble  introduction  of  set  and  contrired  speeches,  it  likewise  gives  an 
unpleasant  check  to  the  earpe^t  expectation  of  such  as  are  eager  to 
know  the  issue  of  the  matters  of  f4(!t«    Yet  it  is  no  ways  to  be  dis^ 
approved  for  such  as  desire  to  be  cried  up  for  eloquent  orators,  to 
compose  public  orations  and  speeches  made  by  ambassadors,  and  pa- 
negyrics of  praise  and  dispraise,  and  such  like.    For  they  that  ma- 
nage both  parts  well  and  distinctly  in  a  modest  stile  are  justly  to  b^ 
praised  and  commended  in  both  kinds  of  the  discourse.    But  there 
are  some  who  so  over-abound  in  rhetorical  flourishes,  that  they  make 
their  whole  history  but  as  an  appendix  as  it  were  to  the  other.    For 
suf^h  a  tedious  manner  of  writing  is  not  only  troublesome,  but,  in 
this  respect  likewise,  is  to  be  condemned.    That  although  the  writer 
seem  in  other  things  to  have  hit  the  mark,  yet  by  this  kind  of  writing 
he  seems  to  straggle  and  wander  from  the  due  course  both  of  time 
and  place;  and  therefore  they  who  read  such  sort  of  writings,  partly 
pass  over  such  artificial  and  framed  discourses,  though  they  be  ever 
so  apt  and  fit  to  the  purpose;  and  partly  tired  out  with  the  tedious 
and  unseasonable  digression  of  the  author,  leave  off  reading  altoge- 
iljer.     For  the  nature  of  history  is  simple,  and  in  every  pari  agreea- 
ble to  itself,  like  to  the  body  of  a  living  creature,  where  tli^  cutting 
off  of  one  member  is  the  deformity  of  thewhole^    On  tlic  other  side, 
that  which  is  duly  and  ordc^K   eomposed  keeps  within  its  proper 


419  BiopoRus  sicuLui.  SoolfXX. 

bounds^  and  the  coherence  of  the  whole  afibrds  a  clear  and  pleasant 
Tiew  and  understanding  of  the  matter  in  the  reading. 

However,  we  do  not  abandon  altogether  rhetoric  and  oratorictl 
flourishes  out  of  history:  for,  because  that  it  ouj^t  to  be  adorned 
with  variety,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  in  some  places  to  insert  these 
speeches  and  orations.  And  I  myself  would  not  be  deprived  making 
use  of  them  upon  such  occasions;  and,  therefore,  when  the  circiun* 
stances  of  the  matter  related  are  such  as  that  the  speech  of  an  am* 
bassador,  or  the  harangue  of  a  senator,  or  the  like,  fidl  in  natimllj 
and  easily,  he  that  does  not  then  put  himself  forth  to  the  utmost  ia 
this  kind  deserves  justly  to  be  censured  apd  condemned.  • 

A  man  may  be  able  to  give  many  reasons  why  rhetorical  adorn* 
ments  are  often  to  be  made  use  of.  For  amongst  qoaint  itfid  eh»- 
quent  discourses,  such  as  are  worthy  remsric,  and  bring  pioSt  and 
n^vantage  along  with  them  together  with  the  history,  are  by  no 
means  to  be  passed  over:  or  when  the  subject  treated  of  is  b^  and 
lofty,  of  things  famous  and  remarkable,  then  it  is  very  onbcepniiKKi 
and  not  in  the  least  to  be  endured,  that  the  manner  of  expressioQ 
sliould  sink  meanly  below  the  greatness  of  the  acts  related.  It  msj 
be  likewise  necessary  when  some  extraordinary  event  happent^  so  as 
that  we  are  forced  to  make  use  of  words  adapted  to  the  oeeauoay  ia 
order  to  clear  up  and  make  plain  the  dark  and  intricate  grounds  and 
reasons  of  such  an  accident.  But  what  we  have  said  of  these  thiiqp 
shall  suffice,  and  we  will  now  proceed  to  the  relation  of  those 
we  before  designed,  first  observing  the  time  where  we  are  now  j 
in  the  course  of  onr  history.  In  the  former  books  we  have  tacalcd 
of  the  affairs  both  of  the  Greeks  and  barbarians  from  the  most  an- 
tient  times  till  the  yenr  next  preceding  the  expediUon  of  Agatbodes 
into  Africa :  from  the  sacking  of  Troy  to  which  time  are  nra  ap 
eight  hundred  and  eighty-»three  years,  and  somethiog  more»  In  Aia 
book  we  shall  go  on  with  things  next  in  Qounos  ud  eoheieBi  widi 
the  former  rektion,  and  bepn  with  th^  descent  of  Agathodes  iaia 
Africa,  and  end  with  that  year  wherein  t^  kings  agreed  to  join  toge* 
ther  in  a  common  war  against  AQtigoni;is,  t^e  sop  of  Philip^  Comf|f% 
bending  the  transactions  of  nine  y^ars^ 


Ck^X  DIO|)ORV8  8ICULUS,  413 


CHAP.  I. 


Aguth/tkhs  demgm  to  invade  Africa.  His  crudty  purtued  in  his 
voffoge.  An  ttUfw  efihe  Sun  very  great.  Lands  m  Africa. 
Bums  his  ships.  ISm  successes  in  Africa.  Hanno  and  BrnniU^ 
car  made  generals  in  Africa.  BaUU  between  them  andAgatho* 
clesj  who  routs  them;  kUls  Nanno.  His  stratagem  by  owls 
The  cruel  superstition  of  the  Carthaginians  in  sacrificing  their 
children.  The  actions  at  Syracuse.  Actions  ofAgathocles  in 
Africa.  The  acts  of  Cassander  in  Macedonia.  Polyperchon 
endeavours  to  restore  Hercules,  the  son  of  Alexander.  The. 
miserable  destruction  of  Nicocles  and  his  fandfy  at  Cyprus. 
The  wars  of  Parisades's  sons,  king  of  the  Cimmerian  Bospho^ 
rus.  The  valour  of  Satyrus,  one  of  the  sons;  his  death.  Th^ 
sad  death  of  Eumelus,  another  of  the  sons. 


IN  the  cbancellorship  of  Hieromnemones  at  Athens^  and  the  con* 
Siilship  of  Caius  Julius  and  Quintus  i£miliu8  at  Rome;  Agathocles, 
being  routed  at  Himera  io  Sicily  by  the  Carthaginians,  and  haviiig 
lost  the  greatest  and  best  part  of  his  army,  fled  to  Syracuse;  where 
perceiving  that  he  was  forsaken  by  all  his  confederates,  and  that  the 
barbarians  bad  got  into  their  hands  almost  all  Sicily  (except  Syra-* 
cuse),  and  that  they  for  overpowered  him  by  their  forces  both  by 
tea  and  land,  undertook  a  very  rash  and  desperate  adventure.  For 
when  all  were  of  opinion  that  it  was  not  advisable  for  him  in  the 
least  to  endeavour  to  contend  with  the  Carthaginians,  he  even  then 
resolved  to  leave  a  strong  garrison  in  the  city,  and  with  the  choicest 
of  the  rest  of  his  forces  to  make  a  descent  into  Africa;  and  by  that 
means  he  hoped,  by  his  old  and  experienced  soldiers,  easily  to  van- 
quish the  Carthaginians,  who  (through  a  long  peace)  were  grown 
soft  and  delicate,  and  unexpert  in  their  arms ;  and  besides  hereby  he 
thought  that  their  confederates,  who  had  been  for  a  long  time  very 
uneasy  under  the  yoke  of  their  government,  would  take  an  occasion 
to  revolt.  And  what  most  induced  him  was,  that  by  this  sudden  and 
unexpected  invasion  he  should  load  himself  with  the  spoils  of  a  coun- 
try that  was  never  before  harassed,  and  that  abounded  in  the  conflu- 
ence of  all  sorts  of  worldly  blessings.  And  to  sum  up  all,  that  he 
should  by  this  course  draw  the  barbarians,  not  only  out  of  his  own 


414  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XX^ 

country^  but  out  of  all  Sicily,  and  transfer  the  war  entirely  orer  into 
Africa,  'which  hapf)ened  accordingly. 

.  For,  without  advising  with  any  of  his  friends,  he  made  AntftsdcTy 
his  brother,  governor  of  the  city,  leaving  with  him  a  considerable  gar* 
rison;  be  himself  listed  what  soldiers  he  thought  fit  for  his  purpose^ 
ordering  his  foot  to  be  ready  with  arms  at  the  first  call,  and  com- 
manded the  horsemen,  that  besides  arms,  they  should  every  one  cer* 
ry  along  with  him  a  saddle  and  bridle,  that  whenever  he  coald  get 
horses  he  might  liave  those  ready  to  mount  them  who  were  fumialwd 
with  all  things  necessary  for  that  purpose. 

For  in  the  late  battle  most  of  his  foot  were  cut  off,  but  most  of  lib 
horse  escaped;  but  their  horses  he  could  not  transport  into  Africa. 
And  to  prevent  all  stirs  and  commotions  (in  order  to  a  defiectioD) 
in  Syracuse  in  his  absence,  he  divided  kindred  and  relations  one  from 
another,  especially  brothers  from  brothers,  and  parents  from  childrefty 
taking  some  along  with  him  and  leaving  others  behind:  and  be  acted 
in  this  very  wisely;  for^  certain  it  was,  that  those  who  renuuned  in 
Syracuse,  although  tliey  hated  the  tyrant,  yet  would  attempt  nothing 
to  his  prejudice,  by  reason  of  their  natural  love  and  affection  to  t 
children,  and  near  relations,  and  kindred.    And  because  he  ' 
great  want  of  money,  he  took  the  estates  of  infants  out  of  the  \ 
of  their  guardians;  declaring,  that  he  would  have  a  ftr  greater 
of  them  than  they  had,  and  be  more  faithful  in  giving  then  as  ( 
count,  and  making  restitution  when  they  came  to  full  age.     He  bor- 
rowed likewise  much  from  the  merchants^  and  converted  to  hie  ovm 
*  use  some  of  the  sacred  treasures  of  the  temples;  and, took  the  jewck 
and  ornaments  from  the  women's  backs. 

Whereupon^  discerning' that  tbe  richer  sort  were  h^ly  diipTf ai 
ed  and  incensed  at  this  usage,  and  for  that  reason  hated  him^  he^eall*^ 
ed  a  general  assembly,  in  which  be  greatly  lamented  the  kte  over- 
throw,  and  the  dreadful  calamities  that  from  thence  seemed  to  hang 
over  their  heads.  He  told  them^  that  he  indeed  was  inured  to  hard* 
slups,  could  easily  endure  the  miseries  of  a  siege;  but  that  he  ahoald' 
{greatly  pity  tbc  citizens  if  they  should  be  blocked  up  and  forced  la 
undergo  the  like.  Tlierefore  he  ordered  those  that  were  not  wiUi0g 
to  suder  wliat  might  be  their  fortune  and  lot,  to  provide  for  the  aafe* 
ty  of  themselves  and  their  estates.  Upon  which,  the  most  wealthy 
t  iiizt.ns  (who  bore  a  mo<it  implacable  hatred  against  him)  forthwith 
1(  ft  tlie  city:  hut  )ie  prc^sently  sent  out  some  of  his  mercenaries  af* 
'« r  them.  Imd  cut  all  their  throats,  and  confiscated  their  eatates. 
j\u\\  thu?^  when  hy  nnv  nnj  the  same  act  he  had  both  enriched  him* 
sT'if,  and  llke^iso  piir»^Mi  the  ciiy  of  those  that  were  his  eneoues,  he 
nvAuv^iTi'irQi]  ail  \\ic  slaves  atiil  f'crvsint.^  thdt  were  (it  to  bcarorimi 


€kap.L  DIODORU6  SICUUTS.  415 

and  now,  having  all  things  in  readiness,  and  being  furnished  with  a 
fleet  of  sixty  sail,  he  only  waited  for  a  fair  wind.  His  design  being 
not  commonly  known,  some  reported  tlmt  he  intended  an  expedition 
into  Italy,  others  that  he  purpMod  to  waste  and  destroy  that  part  of 
Sicily  which  belonged  to  the  Carthaginians;  to  conclude,  every  body 
gave  them  (who  were  ready  to  sail)  all  up  for  lost  men,  and  con- 
demned the  folly  and  madness  of  the  prince.  The  enemy  at  that  time 
had  a  6eet  far  exceeding  him  in  number  in  the  harbour,  therefore  \m 
was  forced  for  some  days  at  the  first  to  lie  stilt  with  his  men  on 
board,  because  he  had  aot  an  opportunity  to  set  saih  Afterwards 
fiome  transport-ships  laden  with  corn  making  with  full  sail  towards 
the  city,  the  Carthagioians  pursued  them  with  their  whole  fleet: 
whereupon  Agathocles,  (before  almost  in  despair  of  accomplishing  his 
design),  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  open,  causing  the 
rowers  to  ply  their  oari  with  all  the  quickness  imaginable,  broke  out 
of  the  harbour.  # 

The  Carthaginians  being  now  come  up  near  to  the  transport-ships, 
and  fleeing  a  fleet  of  their  enemy's  ships  sailing  out  of  the  harbcwr, 
thought  at  first  that  they  came  to  secure  and  defend  the  corn-ships; 
whereupon  they  tacked  about,  and  prepared  to  fight:  but  when  they 
aaw  that  they  directed  their  course  straight  forward,  and  were  far  be- 
fore them,  they  pnfsued  them  with  all  the  sail  they  could;  and, 
while  these  were  striving  to  outsail  each  other,  the  trans|x>rt-sbips 
unexpectedly  escaped  the  danger,  and  plentifully  supplied  the  city, 
which  was  before  in  great  straits  for  want  of  corn  and  provisions. 
Agathocles  also,  though  closely  pursued  by  the  enemy,  by  the  ad- 
vantage of  the  night,  (beyond  all  hope),  got  safe  off  from  them*. 
The  next  day,  there  was  such  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  that  the  stars 
appeared  every  where  in  the  firmament,  and  the  day  was  turned  in- 
to night:  upon  wbicii  Agathocles 's  soldiers  (conceiving  that  God 
thereby  did  foretel  their  destruction)  fell  into  great  perplexities  and 
discontents  oonceroing  what  was  likely  to  befal  them.  Having 
therefore  sailed  six  days  and  six  nights,  early  in  the  morning  they 
suddenly  espied  the  Carthaginian  fleet  making  up  close  uixni  them ; 
upon  which  all  set  tliemselves  to  it  with  might  and  main  to  ply  their 
oars:  the  Carthaginians  concluding,  that  tngeilier  with  the  ships 
they  should  not  only  take  all  tiie  Syracusans  prisoners^  but  should 
deliver  their  country  from  the  present  imminent  danger:  the  Gre- 
cians, on  the  other  hand,  saw  apprent  destruction  to  themselves  be- 
fore their  eyes,  and  intolerable  bondage  and  slavery  to  all  their  kin- 
dred and  relations  tliey  had  lelt  ut  home,  if  they  did  not  recover  the 
abore  before  the  enemy.     And  now  Airica  was  in  view,  wheu  aU^ 

•  Tlii>  was  on  the  Jj>ih  of  August. —Uih.  Ann.  p.  S^3. 


4X6  l>IOI>ORUS  SICULtS.  SookXZ 


the  saibn  and  rowers  called  out  earnestly  one  to  anoAcr  to  curt 
themselves,  so  that  the  strife  and  pains  to  get  to  land  waa  incredibk. 
The  barbarians  indeed  were  more  swift  aailefs^  becavse  tiMy  wsK 
more  accustomed  to  the  sea  than  the  others]  bttt  the  Grecian  aUps 
kept  still  a  considerable  distance  before  tbem :  making  thcvefim  a» 
way  with  ail  the  expedition  imaginable,  when  they  came  near  dw 
shore,  they  leaped  out  of  their  ships  in  throngs  apoii  the  strandy  ■ 
if  they  had  been  contending  for  the  mastership  at  the  Gynnaslle 
games:-  for  the  first  squadron  of  the  Cartha^finian  fleet  was  come  up 
within  a  dart's  cast  of  those  in  the  rear  of  the  Grecian  fleet.  Afker^ 
therefore,  some  contest  for  a  while  with  Aeir  bows  and  rimgs,  (i 
few  only  of  the  barbarians'  ships  being  come  «p),  Agathocles  (ofcr» 
powering  the  other  by  number)  gidned  the  advantage  | 
the  Carthaginians  tacked  abont,  and  stood  oflT  a  little  above  tlw 
of  a  dart.  Hereupon  Agathocles  presently  laoded  bis  men  «t  •  ] 
called  the  Quarries,  and  drew  a  breast-work  for  the  secttfliy  of  Mi 
shipping  all  along  from  sea  to  sea;  and,  aftef  be  had  eflected  this 
bold  and  daring  attempt,  he  set  abont  anothet  far  anore  < 
for,  calling  together  such  of  his  captains  and  commanders 
wholly  deroted  to  him,  he  first  sacrificed  to  Ceres  andf  RraacrpiM, 
and  then  called  a  council  of  war;  where,  coming  into  the  asaenUy 
to  make  his  harangue,  splendidly  clothed  in  royld  robes,  and  with  hb 
crown  upon  his  head,  (after  a  few  things  premised,  to  make  an  in- 
troduction to  what  he  had  further  to  say),  he  told  them That  at  the 

time  they  were  pursued  by  the  Carthaginians  he  had  made  a  tow  to 
the  goddesses  Ceres  and  Proserpina,  the  protectresses  of  Sicily,  tiiat 
he  would  consecrate  all  the  ships  in  the  fleet  to  them,  by  homing 
them  all  into  so  many  burning  lamps;  and  therefore,  since  ihey  wefe 
now  safe,  and  were  delivered,  it  vms  just  and  fit  that  they  should  pay 
their  vows ;  and  he  promised,  that  if  they  fought  courageously,  lie 
would  return  them  far  more  than  those  ships  they  then  had :  for  the 
gods  by  the  sacrifices  did  fbrctcly  that  they  sipould  be  conquerors 
throughout  the  whole  war.  While  he  was  speaking,  one  of  hi»  ser- 
vants brouglit  him  a  lighted  firebrand,  which  catching  hold  of,  and 
commanding  the  like  to  be  delivered  to  the  rest  of  the  captains,  he 
invoked  the  goddesses,  and  was  the  first  that  nnde  to  the  admiraro 
vessel,  and,  standing  upon  the  stern,  commanded  the  rest  to  follow 
his  example:  whereupon  all  the  captains  of  the  vessels  set  fire  tO' 
their  ships,  and  forthwith  the  flame  mounted  aloft,  the  trumpets 
sounded  a  charge,  and  the  whole  army  set  up  a  shout,  and  all  as  one 
man  offered  up  their  joint  prayers  to  the  gods  for  their  safe  return  tO' 
tlieir  own  country.  And  all  this  was  done  by  Agathocles,  that  he 
night  necessitate  his  soldiers  to  fight^  without  cfer  thinking  of  turah 


Chap.  I.  t)tODOKvn  sicvLVs,  417 


iog  their  backs:  for  it  was  plaia  that,  having  no  shipping  left  for 
their  laat  refage,  they  could  not  have  the  least  hope  of  safety  in  any 
thing  but  by  being  absolute  conquerors.  Then  he  considered,  tlmt^ 
having  bnt  a  small  army,  if  he  would  guard  his  fleet  he  must  be 
forced  to  divide  ir,  and  so  should  not  be  strong  enough  to  venture  a 
battle;  and,  if  h^  left  the  ships  without  any  guard,  they  would  all  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  Carthaginians.  .  However,  while  the  whole 
navy  was  on  fire,  and  the  flame  spread  itself  roand  at  a  great  dis* 
tance,  the  hearts  of  tlie  Sicilians  quaked:  for  at  first,  being  deluded! 
by  the  juggling  tricks  of  Agathocles,  and  the  quickness  of  execution 
giving  them  no  time  to  consider^  they  all  consented  to  what  wast 
done:  but  when  they  had  leisure  distinctly  to  weigh  every  particu-* 
lar,  they  repented  themselves  of  what  they  had  done;  and,  pondering 
in  their  minds  the  vastness  of  the  sea  by  which  they  were  separated 
from  their  own  country,  they  utterly  despaired  of  their  safety  and 
preservation.  Agathocles  therefore,  designing  as  soon  as  possibly 
he  could  to  cure  this  pusilanimity  in  his  soldiers,  led  his  army  10  the 
great  dty^  (as  it  is  called)  within  the  dominions  of  the  Carthaginians. 
The  whole  country  through  which  they  marched  was  beautified  with 
gardens  planted  with  all  sorts  of  fruit-trees,  and  sluices  anci  canals 
were  cut  all  along  for  the  convenience  of  water,  by  which  thai  whule 
tract  was  every  where  abundantly  watered.  This  part  of  the  country 
was  likewise  full  of  towns  and  villages,  adorned  with  stately  houses, 
the  roofs  of  which  were  curiously  wrought,  all  setting  forth  the 
wealth  and  riches  of  their  owners.  The  houses  were  full  of  all  man- 
ner of  provision  of  every  thing  that  was  needful;  for  the  inhabitants 
(through  a  long  peace)  had  stored  up  their  treasures  in  great  abun- 
dance. The  country  is  planted  partly  with  vines,  and  partly  with 
olive-trees,  and  furnished  likewise  with  many  other  fruit-trees:  in 
another  part,  the  fields  are  pastured  with  flocks  of  sheep,  and  herds 
of  cows  and  oxen ;  and  in  the  neighbouring  fens  rqn  great  numbers  of 
breeding  mares.  And  what  shall  I  say  more?  Those  places  abound-^ 
ed  virith  plenty  of  all  things  for  the  use  of  man,  and  the  rather  so^ 
because  they  were  the  passessions  of  the  nobility  of  Carthage,  who 
laid  out  much  of  their  estates  and  wealth  with  more  than  ordinary 
curiosity  to  improve  them  for  their  delight  and  pleasure;  so  that  the 
fertility  and  sweetness  of  the  country  was  the  admiration  of  the  Sici- 
lians, and  rouzed  up  tiicir  drooping  spirits  in  the  yiew  they  had  of 
those  rewards  and  rich  returns,  which  they  judged  were  well  worthy 
the  hazards  to  be  run  by  the  conquerors  to  obtain  them.  Agathocles 
therefore,  perceiving  that  his  soldiers  were  now  recovered  from  their 

*  SaniHtlio  iu  the  Punic  language,  Whit«. 

Vol.  2,  No«  45,  uhh 


4 1 8  DIODORUS  SICULUfl.  Book  XX» 


despair  and  {ormer  melancholy  apprehensionsi  made  a  sodden  i 
upon  the  walls  of  the  city;  which  being  so  surprisiog  mod  unex- 
pected, and  the  citizens  unskilful  in  their  arms,  after  s  short  resist- 
ance be  took  the  city  by  stonn^  and  gave  the  plunder  df  the  town  to 
the  soldiers^  which  both  encouraged  and  enriched  them  At  oooe. 
Thence  he  forthwith  moved  with  his  army  to  Tunis*,  and  gained  iImI 
city,  which  is  two  thousand  furlongs  from  Carthage.  The  loldMi 
would  willingly  have  garrisoned  these  two  cities,  having  stos^d  and 
kid  up  in  them  the  plunder  they  had  got:  but  Agathocles  weighing 
what  was  most  expedient  in  his  present  circumstances,  after  he  had 
convinced  the  soldiers,  that  it  was  by  no  means  convenient  to  kaie 
any  place  to  fly  to  for  shelter,  till  they  had  conquered  the  enemy  if 
downright  fighting,  he  razed  the  cities  to  the  gtound,  and  i 
in  the  open  field.  In  tbe  mean  time,  the  Carthaginians  that  lay  i 
to  the  Sicilian  fleet  at  first  greatly  rejoiced  when  they  saw  their  a 
all  in  a  flame,  supposing  that  they  were  constrained  to  hum 
navy,  out  of  fear  of  their  enemies:  but  after  they  perceived  theai  to 
march  forward  up  into  tlie  country  with  their  whole  army,  and  ina- 
gining  what  they  intended  to  do,  they  then  concluded  that  the  bom* 
ing  of  the  ships  was  a  designed  mischief  to  them:  wlierenpoa  tiMy 
spread  leathern  hides  upon  the  forecastles  of  all  their  ships,  which 
IS  their  constant  custom  whenever  any  misfortune  seems  to  thicaten 
the  Carthagniian  commonwealth.  Moreover,  they  took  into  thair 
own  gallie.i  the  iron  beaks  out  of  Agathocles 's  ships^  and  aent  ex- 
presses to  Carthage,  to  give  them  u  particular  account  of  every  tiiiay 
that  iiad  happened.  But  before  these  messengers  reached  the  city, 
some  out  of  the  country,  who  had  discerned  Agatbocles's  fleet  to  he 
near  at  hand,  presently  ran  to  Carthage,  to  give  them  an  acooont: 
whereupon  the  citiz^ens  were  so  amazed  at  tbe  surprising  news  of 
such  an  unexpected  accident,  that  they  forthwith  concluded  that  their  . 
armies  in  Siciiy  ;veTe  utterly  cut  ofi^and  destroyed ;  for  that  it  was  not 
probable  that  Agathocles,  unless  he  were  victorious^  would  dare  to 
leave  Syracuse  naked,  without  any  garrison,  or  pasft  over  his  amy 
when  at  the  same  time  his  enemy  w^s  master  at  sea.  The  city  tlm^ 
fore  was  in  a  great  terror  and  confusion,  and  the  people  thronged 
into  the  market-place,  and  the  senate  met  together,  to  consult  what 
was  fit  to  be  done  in  the  present  exigency:  for  they  had  no  army  at 
hand  wherewith  to  fight  the  enemy;  besides,  the  common  citiaens 
being  raw  and  ignorant  in  matters  of  war,  were  altogetlier  lieartlcsSy 
and  every  body  thought  that  the  enemy  was  then  just  at  their  walls. 
Some  therefore  were  fur  sending  ambassadors  to  Agathocles^  to  pro^ 

•  White  TvoU. 


C%l./.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  419 

pose  tenns  of  peace^  who  might  likewise  at  the  same  time  discover 
the  posture  of  the  enemy;  others  were  for  wuting  till  th«y  sliould 
haye  perfect  intelligence  of  every  thing  that  was  done. 

While  the  city  was  in  tliis  hiirry  and  perplexity  arrired  those  that 
were  sent  from  the  admiral  of  the  fleet,  and  declared  to  them  all  that 
was  done:  whereupon  their  courage  revived;  and  the  senate  blamed 
all  the  oiScers  of  the  fleet,  that,  being  masters  at  sea,  they  should  be 
so  careless  as  to  suffer  the  enemy's  forces  to  make  a  descent  upoa 
Africa ;  and  thay  created  Hanno  and  Bomilcar  generals  of  their  ar- 
ny,  notwithstanding  they  were  at  private  feuds  between  themselves, 
and  that  antient  grudges  had  been  in  their  families  one  towards  ano- 
ther. For  they  thought  that  these  private  quarrels  would  tend  much 
to  the  common  advantage  of  the  city*  But  they  were  very  much 
mistaken :  for  Bomilcar  had  for  a  long  time  been  ambitious  of  the 
monarchy,  but  never  yet  had  an  opportunity  fitted  for  his  purpose  t» 
put  his  designs  in  execution,  and  therefore  he  greedily  embraced  the 
offer  of  such  a  command  as  was  exactly  agreeable  to  what  he  was 
aiming  at.  And  the  chief  cause  of  these  plots  and  contrivances  of 
his  was  the  severity  and  cruelty  of  the  Carthaginians :  for  they  ad- 
vance the  most  eminent  persons  to  be  generals  in  their  wars,  be- 
cause they  conclude  that  they  will  fight  with  more  resolution  than 
others,  when  all  lies  at  stake;  but  after  the  wars  arc  ended,  and 
peace  concluded,  then  they  briog  false  accusations  against  them^ 
and  most  unjustly,  through  envy,  put  them  to  death:  and  there<« 
fore  some  generals,  out  of  fear  of  those  unjust  sentences,  either  give 
up  their  commissions,  or  seek  to  become  absolute  monarchs,  as  Bo- 
milcar, one  of  the  Carthaginian  generals,  then  did ;  of  whom  we  shall 
speak  hereafter. 

The  Carthaginian  generals  therefore,  seeing  now  that  delays  were 
dangerous,  waited  not  for  soldiers  to  be  raised  out  of  the  country,  and 
from  the  cities  of  their  confederates,  but  led  out  the  citizens  them- 
selves into  the  field,  having  under  their  command  no  less  than  forty 
thousand  foot,  a  thousand  horse,  and  two  thousand  chariots;  and, 
possessing  themselves  of  a  hill  not  far  from  the  enemy,  drew  up  in 
battah'a.  Hanno  commanded  the  right  wing,  supported  by  those  of 
the  sacred  brigade :  Bomilcar  the  left,  making  his  phalanx  very  deep, 
because  the  nature  of  the  place  would  not  allow  him  to  extend  his 
wing  further  in  front;  the  chariots  and  horsemen  he  placed  in  the 
van,  to  the  end  that  with  those,  at  the  first  charge,  they  might  try 
the  courage  of  the  Greeks*  Agathocles,  on  the  other  side,  viewing 
liow  the  barbarians  had  drawn  up  their  army,  committed  the  right 
wing  to  Archagathus,  his  son,  delivering  to  him  two  thousand  five 
kundred  foot.    Then  he  drew  up  about  three  thousand  five  hundred 


420  DIODORU8  SICULUS*  Stmk  XX, 

Syracusaos :  next  to  tbem  three  thousand  mercenaries  o«t  of  GrMeei 
and  lasUy,  three  thousand  Samnites,  Tyrrhenians,  and  Celts.  He 
himself,  with  the  troops  of  the  household^  and  a  thousand  hcavy-araMd 
men,  commanded  in  the  left  wingi  opposite  to  the  Carthagioian  Sa- 
cred Brigade.  The  archers  and  slingers^  to  the  number  of  five  han- 
dred,  he  mixed  here  and  there  in  the  two  wings.  The  truth  wM^his 
soldiers  were  scarcely  all  armed;  and  therefore^  when  he  saw  some  of 
those  that  were  naked,  and  without  arms,  he  took  the  coven  and 
cases  of  the  shields,  and  stretched  tbem  out  upon  sticks  in  the  wonaA 
shape  of  a  shield,  and  so  delivered  them  to  the  unarmed;  however  im 
truih  useless,  yet  so  contrived  by  him,  to  the  end  that  those  who  i 
at  a  distance  (and  knew  nothing  of  the  stratagem)  should  look 
them  to  be  armed  men. 

Perceiving  likewise  that  the  .spirits  of  his  soldiers  weie  veqf  loWp 
and  much  discouraged,  by  reason  of  the  great  numbers  of  their  mMp 
mies,  he  let  out  several  owls  (which  he  had  before  prepared  for  that 
purpose)  into  divers  parts  of  the  camp,  here  and  there,  to  deliver  then 
from  their  fears ;  which  birds  flying  up  and  down  through  the  anoy, 
and  alighting  ever  and  anon  upon  their  shields  and  buckleni  eheeied 
up  the  spirits  of  the  soldiers,  all  taking  it  for  a  very  happy  omen^  be* 
cause  that  creature  is  sacred  to  Minerva.  These  sorts  of  tricks  ibd 
devices,  although  they  may  seem  to  some  to  be  foolish  and  vain^  yet 
They  have  many  times  been  the  causes  of  extraordinary  success,  es  it 
happened  likewise  at  this  time;  for  the  soldiers  by  this  means  grav- 
ing more  bold  and  courageous,  and  it  being  generally  noised  abroad 
that  the  goddess  plainly  foretold  that  they  should  be  victortoes,  thay 
more  resolutely  underwent  all  dangers  and  difficulties:  for,  when  the 
chariots  charged  fiercely  upon  them,  some  they  pierced  through  with 
their  darts  and  arrows,  others  they  avoided  and  suffered  to  pass  by, 
and  most  of  them  tliey  drove  back  into  the  midst  of  their  own  foot 
In  the  same  manner  they  received  the  charge  of  their  horse,  woandiog 
many,  and  putting  them  all  at  last  to  flight. 

When  they  had  thus  gallantly  behaved  themselves  in  the  first 
charge,  the  barbarians  began  to  fall  upon  them  with  their  whole  body- 
of  foot  at  once;  upon  which  there  was  a  very  sharp  engagement, 
wherein  Hanno,  with  that  body  of  men  called  the  Sacred  Brigade, 
(striving  to  win  the  day  by  his  own  valour),  made  a  fierce  cliwge  up- 
on the  Grecians,  and  hewed  down  many  of  them :  and,  though  he  was 
even  overwhelmed  with  showers  of  darts  and  arrows^  yet  he  fell  not; 
but,  receiving  one  wound  after  another,  he  still  went  on»  till,  being 
ovcrpressed  and  altogether  tired  out,  he  fell  down,  and  gave  up  his 
last  breath.  On  the  other  hand,  Agathocles's  soldiers  were  so  lifted 
up  with  cxpcctaiions  of  victory^  that  they  were  still  more  and  mcve 


Chap.  L  PIODORU8  8ICVLUS*  421 

couragooQs;  which  when  the  other  general  Bomilcar  came  to  under- 
stand, eoDCciving  that  the  gods  had  pat  an  opportunity  into  his 
hands  to  gain  the  tyranny,  he  reasoned  with  himself,  that  if  the  army 
of  Agathecles  were  destroyed,  be  could  not  moant  tlie  throne,  be- 
cause the  city  would  be  too  strong  for  him :  but  if  Agathocles  were 
conqueror,  aqd  by  that  means  broke  the  spirits  of  the  Carthaginians, 
then,  when  they  were  brought  low,  he  should  l>e  able  to  lead  them 
which  way  he  would ;  and  as  for  Agathocles,  be  concluded  he  should 
be  able  to  subdue  him  whenever  he  pleased.  Revolving  these  things 
m  his  mind,  he  began  to  face  about  and  retreat,  wishing  the  enemy 
should  take  notice  of  what  they  were  about  to  do:  then  telling  his 
soldiers  that  Hanno  was  slain,  ordered  them  to  keep  their  ranks  and 
get  to  a  rising  ground  there  near  at  hand,  for  that  was  now  the  last 
coarse  for  them  to  take.  But  the  retreat  looking  like  a  complete 
flight,  the  enemy  pressed  so  close  upon  them,  that  the  Africans  who 
were  in  the  rear,  supposing  that  those  who  were  in  the  front  of  the 
battle  were  routed,  likewise  fled. 

In  the  mean  time,  those  in  the  sacred  brigade  fought  bravely  for  a 
while  after  the  death  of  Hanno,  and  resolutely  pressed  forvrard  upon 
the  enemy  over  the  carcasses  of  their  fellow  soldiers;  but  when  thej 
perceived  that  most  of  their  army  was  fled^  and  that  the  enemy  was 
snrrounding  them  at  their  backs,  they  were  forced  likewise  to  give 
way  and  begone. 

The  whole  Carthaginian  army  being  thus  put  to  flight,  the  barba- 
rians made  towards  Carthage;  whom  Agathocles  pursued  but  a  little 
way,  and  then  returned,  and  took  the  pillage  of  the  field.  *  In  thb 
battle  were  slain  two  hundred  Grecians,  and  not  above  a  thousand 
Carthaginians,  though  some  have  written  above  six  thousand:  among 
otiier  rich  spoils  there  were  found  many  chariots  in  the  Carthagini* 
an  camp,  in  which  were  carried  above  twenty  thousand  pair  of  fetters 
and  manacles.  For,  concluding  that  they  should  easily  overcome 
the  Greeks,  they  agreed  to  make  as  many  prisoners  as  they  could^ 
to  throw  them  into  the  dungeons,  fettered  hand  and  foot;  but  Grod 
(I  conceive)  purposely  sets  himself  by  contrary  events  to  cross  the 
expectations  of  such,  who  proudly  before  hand  resolve  what  shall  ab- 
solutely be  done. 

Agatliocles  having  now  routed  the  Carthaginians  both  beyond  their, 
and  even  his  own  expectation,  blocked  them  up  within  theur  walls; 
and  thus  we  see  fortune,  whose  common  course  it  is  to  make  che*^ 
cjuer-work  of  good  and  bad  success,  of  defeats  and  victories  in  their 
several  turns,  now  humbled  the  conquerors  as  well  as  those  that  be- 
fore were  conquered.    For  the  Carthaginians,  after  they  had  beaten 


4St  mODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XJL 


Agathocles  in  Sicily  in  a  great  battle^  besieged  Syracuse;  ud 
Agatbocles  having  routed  them  in  Africa5  besieges  Carthage: 
that  which  was  most  to  be  admired  was^  that  this  pfince  x 
by  the  barbarians  in  the  island^  when  all  his  forces  were  with  hiss 
whole  and  entire;  but  now  is  victorious  in  the  contiiient  over  tha 
conquerors  with  a  piece  of  a  broken  and  shattered  army.    The  Cat- 
thaginians  therefore  concluding  that  this  miserable  misEortBijie  wai 
brought  upon  them  by  the  gods,  they  all  betook  themselves  to  pnyOi 
and  supplications  to  the  deity;  especially  thinking  that  Hercaletj  tht 
ttttelaj^d  of  their  country,  was  angry  at  them,  they  seut  a  vast  sos 
of  money,  and  many  otiier  rich  gifts,  to  Tyre.    For,  in  as  much  ii 
they  were  a  colony  which  originated  from  them,  they  used  in  i 
ages  to  send  the  tenth  part  of  all  their  revenues  as  an  offering  to  I 
god.    But  afterwards^  when  they  had  grown  wealthy,  and  their j 
Dues  had  greatly  increased,  they  began  to  slack  in  their  devotkMiyaBi 
sent  thither  but  a  small  pittance  to  their  god.    Being 
brought  to  repentance  by  this  remarkable  slaughter^  tbej  ] 
bered  all  the  gods  in  Tyre.    They  sent  likewise  out  of  their  1 
to  the  images,  golden  shrinea^  supposing  they  should  prevul  tha 
more  iu  averting  the  anger  of  the  god,  by  sending  sacred  gifti  io 
pacify  him.    They  gava  just  cause>  likewise,  to  their  god  Satsnipto 
be  their  enemy;  for  in  former  times  tliey  used  to  sacrifice  to  this  ggd 
the  sons  of  the  most  eminent  persons;  but  of  later  times  they  aecnfi 
ly  bought  and  bred  up  children  for  that  purpose:  and  nponatrict 
search  being  made,  there  were  found  amongst  them,  that  were  to  ha 
sacrificed,  some  children  that  had  been  changed,  and  put  ia  diepkoa 
of  others.    Weighing  these  things  in  their  minds,  and  now  Sfring 
that  the  enemy  lay  before  their  walk,  they  were  seized  with  such  • 
pang  of  superstition,  as  if  they  had  utterly  forsaken  the  religiiisi  af 
their  fathers.    That  they,  might  therefore,  without  delay,  rafoiai 
what  was  amiss,  they  offered  as  a  public  sacrifi^  two  hundred. of  thi 
sons  of  the  nobility;  and  no  fewer  than  three-  hundred  oiore  (i^ 
were  liable  to  censure)  voluntarily  offered  themselves  up:  faramnig 
the  Carthaginians  there  was  a  brazen  statue  of  Saturn  puttiqg  foith 
the  palms  of  his  hands  bending  in  such  a  manner  towards  the  earthy 
as  that  the  boy  who  was  laid  upon  them,  in  order  to  be  sacrificed^ 
should  slip  off,  and  so  fall  down  headlong  into  a  deep  fiery  fiiriuce»  / 
Hence  it  is  probable  that  Euripides  took  what  he  fiibuUnisly  idales 
concerning  the  sacrifice  iu  Taurus,  wher^  he  introduces  Iphv^Hl. 
-asking  Orestes  this  question— 

But  what  Mpulchre  will  mc  liMd  receive, 

»-4it  Uic  ^uif  of  M^ed  ilre  llien  ^le  bare: 


I.  /•  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  423 

The  antieot  fable  likewise  that  is  oommon  among  all  the  Grecians^ 
diat  Satum  devoured  his  own  children^  seems  to  be  confirmed  by 
this  law  among  the  Carthagiuians. 

But  after  this  change  of  affiurs  in  Africa,  the  Carthaginians  sent  to 
Amilcar  into  Sicily  to  hasten  over  to  their  assistance  with  all  speedy 
and  ordered  that  all  the  beaks  of  Agathocles's  ships  should  be  carri«- 
ed  to  him.  When  the  messengers  anived,  he  commanded  them  not 
to  say  any  thing  about  the  routing  of  their  forces,  but  to  spread  it 
abroad  among  the  soldiers,  that  the  fleet  and  land  army  of  Agathocles 
were  both  utterly  destroyed.  And  he  himself  sent  away  some  (who 
were  lately  come  from  Carthage)  to  Syracuse,  tc^ther  with  the  iron 
'  beaks,  to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  city,  and  to  tell  them  that  all 
their  forces  were  cut  off  by  the  Carthagiqians,  and  their  whole  navy 
burnt;  and  that,  if  they  would  not  believe  them,  the  beaks  of  their 
vessels  (there  shewed)  were  a  sufficient  evidence  of  the  truth  of 
what  they  related.  When  diey  that  were  in  the  city  heard  of  this 
overthrow  of  Agathocles,  many  believed  it:  but  the  leading  meai  of 
the  city,  wishing  to  keep  private  a  matter  that  was  yet  uncertain,  and 
to  prevent  tumults,  forthwith  dismissed  the  nsessengers,  and  sent 
them  away.  They  cast  out  of  the  city  likewise  the  kindred  and 
friends  of  the  exiles,  and  eight  thousand  at  least  of  others  who  seem- 
ed to  be  uneasy  under  the  government;  whereupon,  when  so  greats 
number  on  a  sudden  were  forced  to  leave  the  place  of  their  birth, 
the  city  was  full  of  confusion,  lamentatron,  and  crying  of  womea 
running  up  and  down  in  the  streets;  neither  was  there  any  boose  at 
this  time  which  had  not  its  share  of  weeping  and  mourning.  For 
they  who  favoured  the  tyrant  bewailed  the  ruin  of'  Agathocles,  and 
the  loss  of  their  sons;  others  wept  for  those  of  their  friends  whom 
they  supposed  were  all  cut  off  in  Africa;  others  grieved  and  mourn- 
ed for  them  that  were  compelled  to  forsake  their  houses,  and  the  gods 
of  their  forefathers,  and  who  were  neither  suffered  to  stay  nor  could 
get  well  out  of  the  city  by  reason  of  the  siege.  And  besides  these 
most  grievous  and  bitter  sufterings  which  they  laboured  under,  they 
were  compelled  to  fly  with  their  wives,  and  drag  along  with  them  their 
little  young  children;  but  Amilcar  courteously  received  and  secured 
the  exiles,  and  marched  to  Syracuse  with  his  army,  as  if  he  should 
forthwith  possess  himself  of  the  city,  upon  account  of  the  place  being 
destitute  of  inhabitants,  and  of  the  misery  those  were  in  (as  he  heard) 
who  were  left  behind:  however,  he  sent  messengers  before,  and  pro- 
mised pardon  to  Antander^  and  to  all  those  who  sided  witli  him,  if 
he  would  deliver  up  the  city  into  his  hands.  Upon  which  tiiere  was 
a  council  of  war  called  of  those  captains  that  were  in  the  greatest 
authority;  where,  after  much  debate  on  both  sides  of  thequestion« 


434  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XX. 

Antander  (who  was  naturally  a  poor  spirited  m«i,  and  of  a  Weak 
head,  and  mach  inferior  in  courage  and  resolution  to  his  brother) 
was  in  favour  of  delivering  up  the  town :  but  Eurymrton^  the  AtoH- 
an,  (whom  Agathocles  had  left  to  assist  his  brother  in  advice  and 
council)  was  of  another  opinioui  and  prevailed  with  them  all  to  hold 
out  till  they  had  certain  intelligence  of  the  truth.  WheretipoB  A- 
milcar,  coming  to  understand  the  resolution  of  the  townsmen,  pre« 
pared  all  his  engines  with  a  full  resolution  to  batter  down  the  walk. 

Agathocles,  after  the  late  battle,  built  two  ships,  each  of  thirty  oars }  * 
and  in  one  of  them  put  on  board  the  best  of  his  rowers,  with  Near- 
chus,oneof  the  most  faithful  friends  he  then  had  with  him,  and  sedtzr 
fhem  away  to  Syracuse,  to  give  an  account  of  his  viererry.  Hairinf' 
therefore  a  fair  wind,  on  the  fifth  day  (in  the  night)  they  arrived  ii» 
the  harbour  of  Syracuse,  and  at  break  of  day,  crowned  with  garlands^ 
and  singing  the  Psean  as  they  sailed  along,  they  made  for  the  city; 
which  being  perceived  by  the  Carthaginian  guard-ships,  they  pursiH 
ed  them  with  all  their  might,  and  the  other  not  being  far  before 
them,  there  was  a  great  content  between  the  rowers  on  both  sides. 
While  the  seamen  were  thus  contending,  both  the  besiegers  and  be- 
sieged understanding  the  matter,  ran  down  to  tlie  port;  and  each, 
fearful  of  the  event,  called  out  and  encouraged  every  one  their  own 
men.  And  now  the  ship  was  upon  the  point  of  falling  into  the  hands 
of  the  pursuers,  upon  which  the  barbarians  gave  a  shout;  but  the  ci- 
tizens not  being  able  otherwise  to  assist,  prayed  to  their  gods  for  the 
preservation  of  their  men  on  board.  The  pursuers  being  now  ready 
to  board  her  not  far  from  land,  she  got  within  a  dart's  cast  of  the 
shore,  and  by  the  help  of  the  Syracusans,  who  came  in  to  her  relief, 
narrowly  escaped  the  danger.  Amilcar  perceiving  that  the  citizens 
(upon  the  account  of  tlie  late  contest,  and  the  sudden  arrival  of  the 
intelligence  expected)  were  all  flocked  down  to  the  port;  and  there- 
upon conceiving  that  part  of  the  walls  were  left  undefended,  ordered 
the  stoutest  of  his  soldiers  to  rear  up  scaling  ladders ;  who,  finding 
there  no  guards,  mounted  the  walls  without  being  discerned;  and 
had  almost  possessed  themselves  of  an  entire  part  lying  between  two 
towers,  when  they  that  used  to  go  the  round  came  just  then  to  the 
place  and  discovered  them.  Upon  which  they  attacked  them  before 
any  relief  could  be  brought  to  the  assailants,  so  that  some  were  kill- 
ed, and  others  were  thrown  down  headlong  over  the  walls.  At  which 
Amilcar  was  so  morti fieri,  that  he  crew  oft  his  forces  from  the  city, 
and  sent  away  five  thousand  men  to  the  relief  of  Carthage. 

While  these  things  were  in  aetion  in  JSieily,  Agitthocles,  heintr 
now  master  of  the  field,  took  some  forts  and  castles  near  to  Carthaire 
by  storm;  and  other  cities,  some  out  of  fear,  and  some  through 


Chap.  L  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8.  4fi5 

hatred  of  the  CarthaginiaDs^  Tolantarily  smrendered  themselTes. 
Having  fortified  his  camp  near  Tunis,  he  left  there  a  sufficient  guards 
and  moved  towards  the  towns  lying  upon  the  sea«>coa8t ;  and  first  he 
took  by  storm  the  new  city,  but  acted  very  favourably  towards  the 
inhabitants ;  thence  lie  marched  to  Adrimetum,  and  besieged  it,  and 
confederated  with  Elymus,  king  of  Ldbya.  News  whereof  being 
brought  to  the  Carthaginians,  they  bent  all  their  arms  against  Tunis; 
and  possessed  themselves  of  Agathocles's  camp,  and  with  their  bat- 
tering rams  pressed  upon  the  city  with  continual  assaults.  Agatho- 
cles,  receiving  intelligence  of  the  slaughter  of  his  men,  leaving  the 
greatest  part  of  his  army  to  carry  on  the  siege,  and  taking  with  him 
bis  life-guard  and  a  small  body  of  men,  secretly  marched  up  to  the 
top  of  a  mountain,  whence  he  might  view  the  country  of  the  Adrime- 
tines,  and  likewise  the  Carthaginians  who  were  besieging  Tunis. 
In  the  night  he  commanded  his  soldiers  to  kindle  fires,  and  with 
them  to  occupy  a  large  tract  of  ground,  to  the  end  that  the  Cartha- 
ginians might  think  he  was  making  towards  them  with  a  strong  ar- 
my, and  that  the  besieged  might  conclude,  that  fresh  forces  in  vast 
numbers  were  come  up  to  him  to  his  assistance;  both  being  deeeiv« 
ed  by  this  stratagem,  were  caught  in  the  snare;  for  they  who  besieg« 
ed  Tunis  fled,  and  left  their  engines  behind  them;  and  the  Adrime- 
tines,  surprised  with  fear,  delivered  up  tlie  city,  which  was  gained, 
upon  certain  terms  agreed  upon,  but  Thapsus  he  afterwards  took  by 
storm;  and  he  took  several  other  cities  in  this  quarter,  some  by 
force,  and  others  upon  capitulation.  Having  at  length  gained  in  the 
whole  above  two  hundred  towns  and  cities,  he  resolved  upon  an  ex- 
pedition into  the  higher  Libya:  to  that  end  he  raised  his  camp,  and 
inarched  on  many  days  journey. 

Then  the  Carthaginians  marched  out  with  those  forces,  besides  o- , 
thers  which  were  sent  out  of  Sicily,  and  besieged  Tunis  a  second 
time,  and  recovered  a  great  part  of  the  country  that  was  then  in  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  When  couriers  came  from  Tunis^  and  gave  an 
account  of  what  the  Carthaginians  liad  done,  Agathocles  immediate- 
ly returned.  Being  come  within  two  hundred  furlongs  of  the  ene- 
my he  encamped,  and  commanded  his  soldiers  not  to  light  any  fires : 
then  making  a  sudden  march  in  the  night,  about  day-break  he  fell 
upon  those  who  were  wasting  and  harassing  the  country,  and  disor- 
derly roving  up  ^nd  down,  and  killed  above  two  thousand  of  them, 
and  took  many  prisoners,  which  was  a  great  step  to  his  many  succes- 
ses afterwards:  for  the  Carthaginians  being  reinforced  by  their  aids 
from  Sicily,  and  strengthened  by  their  confederates  in  Airica, 
thought  they  had  been  too  strong  for  Agathocles :  but  after  this  mis- 

VoL,  2.  No.  45.  Ill 


426  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  ZX 

■  ■  ■    ■      I 

fortune  the  barbarians  became  quite  dbpirited;  for  he  bad  orercome 
Elymus^  the  king  of  Libjra,  (who  had  deserted  him),  and  killed  like- 
wise the  general,  with  a  great  number  of  the  barbariaii9»  And  thus 
stood  affairs  in  Sicily  and  Africa  at  thb  time. 

In  Macedonia,  Cassander  came  in  to  the  assistance  of  Autoleimles, 
king  of  the  Psonians,  who  was  then  at  war  with  the  Autariats*,  and 
rescued  him  from  the  straits  and  dangers  he  was  in  at  that  time,  and 
transplanted  the  Autariats,  together  witli  their  wives  and  children 
that  were  then  with  them^  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand^  and 
phiced  them  near  the  mountain  Orbitausf. 

While  he  was  thus  employed,  Ptolemy,  Antigonus's  general  in  Pe- 
bponnesus,  who  was  intrusted  by  Iiira  with  an  army  in  these  parts, 
(took  a  pique  against  Antigonus,  thinking  he  was  not  rewarded  ac-  - 
cording  to  what  he  might  justly  expect),  revolted  and  joined  witk 
Cassander.  He  had  left  one  Phoenix,  one  of  his  confederates,  presi- 
dent of  the  province  adjoining  to  the  Hellespont,  and  sent  over  some 
soldiers  to  him,  wishing  him  to  take  care  of  the  castles  and  cities  there, 
and  henceforth  not  regard  any  orders  that  came  from  Antigonus. 

It  was  generally  agreed  by  Alexander's  captains,  as  part  of  their 
articles  among  themselves,  that  the  Greek  cities  should  be  all  restor- 
ed to  their  antient  liberties.  Therefore  Ploleniy,  king  of  Egypt, 
(accusing  Antigonus  of  having  placed  garrisons  in  several  Greek 
cities),  prepared  to  make  war  upon  him;  and  sent  Leonides,  a  cap-* 
tain  of  his  own,  into  Cilicia  Aspera,  and  there  possessed  himself  of 
certain  cities  and  places  belonging  to  Antigonus;  and,  moreover, 
sent  his  agent  to  some  cities  appertaining  to  Cassander  and  Lysima** 
chus,  that  they  would  follow  his  advice,  and  not  suHer  Antigonus  to 
grow  too  fast  in  power. 

And  as  for  Antigonus,  he  sent  his  younger  son  Philip  to  make 
war  u\nm  Phcenix,  atid  others  who  had  revolted  from  him  in  the 
Hellespont;  but  he  sent  his  son  Demetrius  into  Cilicia,  who  putting 
in  execution  what  he  had  in  command,  routed  the  captains  of  Ptolemy 
that  were  there,  and  recovered  the  cities* 

While  these  things  were  doing,  Polyperchon  (then  residing  in  Pe- 
loponnesus) still  aflecting  the  government  of  Maccdon,  cried  out  a- 
t^ainst  Cassander,  and  sent  for  Hercules,  a  son  of  Alexander  ^  by 
tiarsine,  out  of  Pergamus,  (now  seventeen  years  of  age),  and  sent 
about  to  tliosc  who  were  his  own  friends,  and  enemies  to  Cassander, 
to  assist  in  placing  this  young  man  in  his  father*s  kingdom.  He  so* 
licited  the  /Etolians  likewise  by  his  letters  to  assist  him  in  his  pre- 

*  A'  people  oi  DaliDHtia.  t  Orbelus,  a  Mountain  in  Macedonia. 

t  The  Great. 


Chap.  L  moDORUS  sicuLtrs.  4^ 

sent  design^  prmnising  that  they  should  find  more  grace  and  fovour 
from  him  than  at  any  time  hefore,  if  they  would  help  hin)  to  restore 
the  young  lad  to  his  father's  throne. 

All  things  going  on  to  his  wish,  and  the  ^tolians  coinplying  with 
his  request^  niady  others  came  flocking  in  to  restore  the  new  king, 
so  that  there  w^e  collected  together  above  twenty  thousand  foot,  and 
not  less  tbao  atboiiiand  horse.  AndtHiis  diligently  exerting  him- 
self in  the  undertakhig,  he  raised  what  money  he  cottld,  iahd  Mm 
some  to  solicit  his  fiAeiids  in  Macedonia  to  assist  him.  ^ 

In  the  mean  time,  Ptolemy  of  Egypt  liaving  all  Cyprus  under  hiis 
cdraihand/  and  findrog  that  Nicocles,  the  kitig  of  Paphos,  lleld  cop- 
respondeooe.  under-hand  with  Antigonns,*  sent  two  confidents  of  hh 
ownj  Argaos  and  CalKcrates,  with  instrbctiohs  to  destroy  Nicocles; 
.for  he  wa^  mucli  afraid  lest  some  others  also  should  fall  ofl^,  as  h^  had 
pefrceived  mahy  others  had  done  before.    Wherefore,  passing  Into 
Cyprus,  and  taking  with  them  a  certain  number  of  soldiers  from 
Menelaus,  wh6  comhianded  the  army  -there,  they  beset  the  house  of 
Nicocles  i  nM  theu  telling  him  what  (he  king's  pleasure  was,  advi»» 
ed  him  to  dispo!^  of  himself  for.  another  world.    He  first  begatffD  , 
clear  hhnself  of  what'  was  laid  to  his  charge,  but  when  he  saw  thUt 
BO-  man  hearkened  to  what  he  said,  he  drew  his  sword  and  slew  him^ 
self.    Axiothea,  his' wife,  hearing  of  her  husband's  death,- took  hel: 
daughters,  who  were  all  young  and  virgins,  and  cut  their  throatd^ 
tliat  tlf^y  might  not  fall  into  any  of  the  enemy's  hands>  and  was 
earnest  with  the  wives  of  Nicoeles's  brothers  to  accompany  her  in 
her  own  death ;  whereas  Ptolemy  had  given  no  order  concerningany 
.of  them,  save  only  to  preserve  them.    The  king^5  paliiee  therefore 
thus  filled  witii  the  sudden  and  unexpected  slaughters  and  dreadful 
spectacles,  so  terrified  the  brothers  of  Nicocles,  that  each  of  them 
shut  himself  in,  and  set  fire  to  their  houses,  and  slew  themselves. 
Thus  the  whole  race  of  the  kings  of  P^phos  came  to  a  tragical  and 
lamentable  end.     Having  given  ah  account  of  those  afiailrs  we  be* 
fore  promised,  we  sHkll  now  proceed  to  those  which  follow  next  in 
order. 

About  this  time  in  Pontus*,  after  the  death  of  Parisades,  king  of 
the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus,  his  sons  Eumelus,  Satyrus,  and  Plrytanis, 
contended  one  with  another  for  the  kingdom :  Satyrus,  the  eldest, 
was  appointed  successor  by  his  father,  who  reigned  eight-and'thiny 
years. 

Eumelus,  compacting  with  some  of  the  natives  adjoining,  raised 
an  army,  and  laid  claim  to  the  kingdom  agai^nst  his  elder  brother  j 

*  In  tlic  CiinmorL&n  Bosphorus,  near  the  Kusine  sea^  or  in  Xaaru!)  Chenonesas, 


438  mODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XX. 

■        ■  ■  ■  

of  which  Satyrus  being  informed,  went  against  him  with  a  great  ar- 
my, and,  passing  the  river  Thapsus,  when  he  came  near  his  qoarteia, 
fortified  his  camp  with  his  carts  and  waggons,  wherein  he  had  brought 
an  infinite  quantity  of  provisions;  and,  ranging  afterwards  his  Army 
in  the  field,  (after  the  manner  of  the  Scythian  kings),  he  led  the  main 
body  himself.    He  had  not  in  his  army  above  two*  thousand  Greeks, 
and  as  many  Thracians;  all  the  rest  were  Scythians,  which  came  to 
assist  him,  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand,  and  no  less  than  ten 
thousand  horse.     £umelus  was  assisted  by  Ariophames,  king  of 
Thrace,  with  twenty  thousand  horse,  and  two-and*twenty  thoosaDd 
foot.    Between  these  forces  a  bloody  battle  was  fought,  wherein  Si* 
tyrus  (who  had  with  him  a  choice  party  of  brave  horse)  encountered 
first  with  Ariophames  in  a  skirmish  of  ht>rse,  who  likewise  command- 
ed  the  middle  body  opposite  to  Satyrus,  where  many  fell  on  both  odes; 
but  at  length  he  forced  his  way  through,  and  put  the  barbarian  king 
to  flight,  and,  being  the  first  in  the  pursuit,  put  every  man  to  die 
sword  that  was  in  his  way.    But  when  he  heard  that  bis  brother  Ea- 
melus  in  the  right  wing  had  routed  the  mercenaries,  he  left  off  die 
pursuit,  and  made  up  to  the  succour  of  those  that  fled,  and  ] 
the  day,  and  utterly  broke  and  routed  the  whole  army,  putting  l 
all  to  flight;  so  that  he  gave  a  clear  testimony  that  he  justly  deserved 
tp  wear  the  crown,  as  well  upon  account  of  his  valour,  as  the  privi- 
lege of  his  birth. 

Ariopharnes  and  Eumelus  thus  beaten,  fled  into  the  king's  palaeett 
which  was  environed  by  the  river  Thasis,  of  an  exceeding  depth, 
so  that  the  place  was  of  difficult  approach :  it  was  sumninded  like« 
wise  with  steep  rocks  and  thick  woods,  into  which  there  were  only 
two  entrances  made  by  art,  one  leading  straight  to  the  palace,  de- 
fended with  high  towers  and  bulwarks :  the  one  on  the  other  side  was 
made  in  the  fens,  guarded  with  forts  and  towers  of  timber,  raised  opoa 
pillars  over  the  water.  The  place  being  very  strong,  Satyms  lint 
wasted  the  enemy's  country,  and  burnt  their  towns,  whence  he  car- 
ried a  vast  number  of  prisoners,  and  abundanc^of  spoil.  Afterwards 
lie  attempted  to  force  his  way  through  the  passes;  but,  losing  maoy 
of  his  men  at  the  bulwarks  and  towers,  he  was  forced  to  retreat.  Bat 
making  an  attack  upon  that  side  towards  the  fens,  he  took  the  tim- 
ber forts,  which  he  demolished,  and  then  passed  the  river.  Upon 
which  he  began  to  fell  a  wood,  througli  which  he  must  necessarily 
pass  to  the  palace;  and,  wliile  these  attempts  were  carrjring  on  in 
great  earnestness,  king  Ariopharnes,  fearing  lest  the  casde  should  be 
taken  by  storm,  valiantly  fell  upon  them,  perceiving  that  there  wu 
no  hopes  of  safety  remaining  but  in  an  absolute  victory.    He  placed 

*  One  tlioasand  io  Ihc  margin.  t  Ariopharoes**  palace. 


Chap.L  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  439 

likewise  archers  on  both  sides  the  passage,  by  whom  he  sorely  galled 
the  fellers  of  the  wood,  because  they  could  neither  see  the  arrows  ^ 
before  they  pierced  them,  nor  come  at  the  archers,  nor  return  the 
like  upon  them,  by  reason  of  the  thick  and  close  standing  of  the 
trees.  However,  Satyrus's  soldiers  continued  felling  the  wood,  and 
opening  a  way  to  the  palace,  for  three  days  together,  though  mih 
great  toil  and  hazard.  The  fourth  day  they  came  under  the  wall; 
but,  being  worsted  through  showers  of  arrows,  and  straightness  of  the 
places,  they  sustained  very  great  loss:  for  Meniscus  (who  led  the 
mercenary  companies)  having  got  in  at  a  passage,  (though  he  fought 
very  manfully),  was  nevertheless  (being  overpowered  by  tlie  multi- 
tude within)  forced  to  retreat;  whom  Satyrus  seeing  in  such  imrni-  ^ 
Dent  danger,  came  up  to  him  with  seasonable  relief,  and,  bearing  up 
against  the  enemy's  charge,  was  run  through  the  arm  with  a  spear, 
which  was  so  sore,  that  it  forced  him  to  retire  to  his  camp,  and  the 
next  night  he  died  of  the  wound,  having  reigned  scarcely  nine  months 
after  the  death  of  Parisades,  his  father.  Hereupon  Meniscus,  captaid 
of  the  mercenaries,  breaking  up  the  siege,  drew  off  the  army  to  a 
city  called  Gargaza,  and  from  thence  carried  the  king's  body  dowa 
the  river,  to  a  city  called  Panticap^um,  to  his  brother  Prytanis,  who, 
having  magnificently  buried  it,  and  laid  up  the  relicts  in  the  king's 
sepulchre,  went  presently  to  Gargaza,  and  there  took  into  his  hands 
the  army,  together  with  the  kingdom. 

Hereupon  came  the  agents  of  Eumclus  to  him  to  treat  concerning 
the  parting  of  the  kingdom  between  them  two,  which  he  would  not 
hearken  to.  Leaving  therefore  a  strong  garrison  at  Gargaza,  he  re- 
turned to  Panticapseum,  tiiere  to  settle  the  afiairs  of  his  kingdom* 
But  awhile  after,  Eumelus,  by  the  help  of  some  barbarians,  possessed 
himself  of  Gargaza,  and  sundry  other  towns  and  castles:  whereupon 
Frytanis  marched  with  an  army  against  him,  but  was  overthrown  in 
a  battle  by  his  brother;  and,  being  shut  up  within  a  neck  of  land 
near  the  Palus  Mffiotis,  was  forced  to  surrender  himself  upon  condi- 
tions, which  were  that  he  should  give  up  all  his  army,  and  depart  out  of 
the  kingdom. 

Nevertheless,  when  Prytanis  returned  to  Panticapseum,  which  is 
the  place  where  the  kings  of  Bosphorus  keep  the  standing  court, 
he  there  endeavoured  again  to  recover  his  kingdom;  but,  being 
foiled  there  again,  he  fled  to  a  place  called  the  Gardens,  and  was 
there  slain. 

Eumelus,  after  the  death  of  his  brother,  to  confirm  himself  in  the 
kingdom,  put  to  death  all  the  friends,  wives,  and  children  of  botli  his' 
brjthers,  Satyrus  and  Prytanis;  only  Parisades,  Satyrus's  son,  being 
bit  a  youths  escaped  his  bands:  for,  by  the  benefit  of  a  swift  horse. 


430  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBook  XX, 

he  got  away  out  of  the  city  to  Agarus,  king  of  the  Scythians.  But 
when  Euinelus  saw  that  the  people  repined  at  the  loss  of  their  friends, 
ivboo;  he  bad  murdered,  he  called  them  all  tqgether^  and  there  cs- 
ciised  himself,  and  restored  to  them  their  antient  formof  governpcBti 
and  to  tlie  citizens  of  Panticapseum  their  former  immaniiies,  ud 
promised  to  discliarge  them  of  all  kind  of  tributes,  sparing  no  &ir 
words  which  might  reconcile  the  hearts  of  the  peqple  to  himj  hf 
which  means  having  gained  their  good  opinions,  be  held  a  just  and 
moderate  liaud  over  them,  and  grew  afterwards  into  no  small ; 
lion  for  all  kind  of  virtue  among  them.  For  he  omitted  not  to  i 
the  Byzantines  and  Sinopians,  and  the  rest  of  tlieGrecwn  inhabitants 
of  Pontus,  by  all  the  demonstrations  of  kindness  imi^naUc:  for 
when  the  Callantiniaus  were  besieged  by  Lysimacbus,  and  wen 
hrouglu  to  great  distress  throagh  want  of  provisions,  he  entertained  a 
thousand  of  them  who  left  tlie  place  for  want  of  bread,  and  not  only 
granted  them  a  safe  protection,  but  allotted  to  them  habitntioDs  with* 
in  ike  city ;  and  divided  likewise  a  place  called  Psoa,  with  the  tfffii- 
tory  tliereunto  belonging,  among  them  by  lot.  And  for  the  beneit 
of  the  merchants  that  traded  to  Pont  us,  be  made  war  upon  the  bar- 
barous piratical  Heniochians,  and  them  of  Taurus,  with  the  Achis* 
ans,  and  scoured  and  cleansed  the  seas  of  them*  So  that  his  name 
was  advanced  to  the  skies,  (as  the  fruit  of  his  generosity),  not  only 
in  his  own  kingdom,  but  almost  all  the  world  over,  while  the  mer* 
chants  every  wl*ere  published  the  greatness  and  braveness  of  hb  spi- 
rit. Moreover,  he  much  enlarged  his  dominion,  by  the  addition  of 
a  considerable  part  of  the  country  of  the  barbarians  bordering  upon 
him,  and  advanced  the  fame  and  reputation  of  the  kingdom  above 
whatever  it  was  before. 

In  conclusion,  he  had  a  design  to  have  brought  under  all  the 
neighbouring  nations,  and  would  certainly  have  effected  in  a  short 
time  what  ]^  thus  designed,  if  he  had  not  been  prevented  by  death: 
for,  after  he  had  reigned  five  years  and  as  many  months,  he  ended 
his  days  by  a  sudden  and  unusual  accident:  for,  returning  home  out 
of  Scythia,  with  a  great  desire  to  be  present  at  a  certain  sacrifice^ 
and  making  towards  his  palace  in  a  chariot  with  four  horses,  coVered 
over  with  a  canopy,  the  horses  took  a  fright  at  the  canopy,  and  vio- 
lently ran  away  with  him,  the  coachman  not  being  able  to  stop  them 
iu  their  career:  upon  which Eumclus,  fearing  lest  he  should  be  borne 
away  headlong  *down  some  steep  rock,  threw  himself  out;  but  his 
sword  entangling  in  one  of  the  wheels,  he  was  hurried  away  by  the 
violent  motion  of  the  chariot,  and  killed  forthwith. 

It  is  reported  that  there  were  some  predictions  concerning  the 
death  of  Eumelus  au4  his  brother  Satyrus,  though  something  fooli&b 


Chop.  I.  DIODORUS  SICUEUS.  431 

and  vsuD,  yet  credited  by  the  inhabitants.  For  they  say,  that  the 
oracle  warned  Satyrus  to  be  aware  of  one  Musculus,  lest  he  should 
kill  him;  and  that  for  that  reason  he  would  not  suffer  .any  of  that 
name^  whether  bond  or  free,  to  abide  within  his  dominions;  and  tliat 
upon  that  account  he  was  afraid  both  of  house  and  field-mice^,  and 
continually  charged  the  children  to  kill  them,  and  stop  up  their 
boles.  .At  lengtby.whcn  he  bad  done  all  that  h«  ppMiUy  cottld  to 
avoid  his  ftite,  he  was  at  last  killed  by  a  wound  in  the  mnsAfe  of  his 
i|rm.  And  as  for  Eumelus,  that  he  was  charged  by  theotade  to 
take  heed  of  a  moving  house;  and  tlierefore  thait  he  durst  not  go  in- 
to his  house  before  his  servants  had  made  a  diligent  search  to  see 
tbat.both  the  roof  and  foundation  were  sound:  but  when  tliey  came 
toiindentand  that  the  canopy  placed  upon  the  chariot  was  the  occa- 
sion of  bis  deathy  every  one  concluded  that  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled. 
But  this  shall  suffice  concerning  the  affairs.of  the  Bos^>iiorus. 

In  Italy,  the  Roman  cpusuls  entered  the  country  of  the  Samnkesf 
wUh  an  army,  and  routed  them  in  a  battle  at  Talius.  But  the  routed 
party  afteiwards  possessing  themselves  x)f  abiil,  and  tlie  night -draw- 
ing oo>  the  Bomans  retreated  to  their  camp^;  but  the  next  day  the 
fight  was  renewed^  and  great  numbers  of  the  S:;muites.wei«  slain, 
and  above  two  thousand  two  hundred  were  taken  prisoners.  The 
Romans  being  thus  successful,  now  quietly  enjoyed  whatever  they  liad 
in  the  open  field,  and  brought  under  all  the  revolting  cities,  and  placed 
garrisons  in  Cataracta  and  Ceraunia,  |>laces  they  had  taken  by  assault^ 
mod  others  they  reduced  upon  terms  and  conditions. 

*  Mu«culut  M  a  Uu\e  mouM.  '' 

Y  Iq  die  Greek,  Italy  if  for  Sarauiuni,  aad  Italium  for  TaliuiOb 


3t  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BtmkXX^ 


CHAP.  IL 


TTie  ads  of  Ptolemy  in  Cilicia,  and  elsewhere.  Pofyperchcn  \ 
ders  Hercules,  Alexander's  son^  by  the  instigation  of  Cassamier, 
AndUar  taken,  and  put  to  death  by  the  Syracusofis.  His  head 
sent  to  Agathocles  in  Africa.  The  transactions  in  Sidfy.  At* 
chagathus,  Agathocles* s  son,  kills  Lysiscus:  he  and  his  son  » 
great  danger  by  the  army.  Affairs  in  Italy.  The  works  ef 
Appius  Claudius:  the  Appian  Way.  Ptolemy  comes  to  C9- 
rinth:  his  acts  there.  Cleopatra,  Alexander* s  sister,  killed  kf 
the  governor  of  Sardis.  The  further  acts  of  Agaihodes  in 
Africa.  Ophelas  decoyed,  and  cut  tff  by  Agathocles*  CjpAf* 
las*s  troublesome  march  to  Agathocles.  Lamias* s  cruelty,  asi 
the  story  of  her.  Bomikar  seeks  to  be  prince  of  Carthage,  kA 
is  put  to  death  by  the  citizens.  Agathocles  sends  the  spoils  if 
the  Cyrenians  to  Syracuse:  most  of  them  lost  in  a  storm.  Af" 
fairs  in  Italy. 

WHEN  Demetrius  Phalerios  was  lord-chancellor  of  Athens,  Quio- 
tus  Fabius  (the  second  time)  and  Caius  Martius  were  invested  with 
the  consular  dignity  at  Rome.  At  that  time  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt, 
hearing  that  his  captains  had  Jost  all  the  cities  again  in  Cilicia,  put 
over  with  his  fleet  to  Phaselis,  and  took  that  city  by  force,  and  from 
thence  passing  into  Lycia,  took  Xanthus  by  assault,  and  the  garrison 
of  Antigonus  that  was  therein.  Then  sailing  to  Caunus,  took  the  city 
by  surrender,  and  then  fell  upon  the  citadels  and  forts  that  were  in  it, 
and  took  them  by  assaults. 

As  for  Heraclcum,  he  utterly  destroyed  it;  and  the  city  Persicum 
came  into  his  hands  by  the  surrender  of  the  soldiers  that  were  put  to 
keep  it.  Then  sailing  to  Coos,  he  sent  for  Ptolemy  the  captain,  who 
was  Antigonus's  brother's  son,  and  had  an  army  committed  to  him  by 
Antigonus :  but  now  forsaking  his  uncle,  he  clave  to  Ptolemy,  and 
joined  with  him  in  all  his  affairs.  Passing  therefore  from  Colchis, 
and  arriving  at  Coos,  Ptolemy  the  king  at  first  received  him  very 
courteously;  yet  after  a  while,  when  he  saw  the  insolence  of  his  car- 
riage, and  how  he  sought  to  allure  the  officers  by  gifts,  and  held  se- 
cret cabals  with  them,  for  fear  of  the  worst,  he  clapped  him  up  in 
prison,  aud  there  poisoned  him  with  a  draught  of  hemlock :  as  for  the 


Chap.IL  DI0D0RU8  SICULU5,  433 

Koldiers  that  came  with  him^  be  made  them  his  qwu  by  large  pro- 
mises,  and  distributed  them  by  small  parcels  among  his  owq  army. 
Whilst  these  things  were  acting,  Polyperchon^  having  raised  a  great 
army,  restored  Hercules,  the  son  of  Alexander,  begotten  upon  Bar- 
^ine,  to  his  father's  kingdom.  And  while  he  lay  encamped  at  Stym* 
phalia,  Cassander  came  up  with  his  army,  and  both  encamped  near  to 
each  other;  neither  did  the  Macedonians  dislike  to  see  the  restoration 
of  their  king. 

Cassander  therefore,  fearing  lest  the  Macedonians  (who  are  natu* 
rally  inconstant)  should  revolt  to  Hercules,  sent  an  agent  to  Poly- 
perchon,  chiefly  to  advise  with  him  conc^ning  the  business  of  the 
king.  If  the  king  was  restored,  he  told  him,  he  must  be  sure  to  be 
under  the  commands  of  others;  but  If  he  would  assist  him,  and  kill 
the  young  man,  he  should  enjoy  the  same  privileges  and  honours  in 
Macedonia  that  ever  he  had  before.  And  besides,  that  he  should 
have  the  command  of  an  array;  that  h^  should  be  declared  genera- 
lissimo of  Peloponnesus;  and  that  he  should  share  in  the  principality, 
and  be  in  equal  honour  with  Cassander.  At  length  he  so  caught  and 
ensnared  Polyperchon  with  many  large  promises,  that  they  entered 
into  a  secret  combination,  and  Polyperchon  undertook  to  murder  the 
young  king,  which  he  accordingly  efieeted;  upon  which  Polyperchon 
openly  joined  with  Cassander  in  all  his  concerns,  and  was  advanced 
in  Macedonia,  and  received  (according  to  the  compact)  four  thousand 
JVlacedonian  foot,  and  five  hundred  Thessalian  horse;  and,  having 
listed  several  other  volunteers,  be  attempted  to  pass  through  Bosotia 
Into  Peloponnesus :  but  being  opposed  by  the  Boeotians  and  Pelo- 
ponne^ians,  he  was  forced  to  retire,  and  march  into  Locris,  where  he 
took  up  his  winter-c|uarters. 

During  these  transactions,  Lysimachus  built  4  city  in  Chersonesus, 
and  called  It  after  his  own  name,  LysimAchia.  Cleomenes,  king  of 
Lacedasmon,  now  died,  when  be  had  reigned  tlireescore  years  an^ 
ten  montlis,  and  was  succeeded  by  Aretas,  his  son^  who  ruled  lorty* 
four  years. 

Al^out  this  time  Amilcar,  general  of  the  forces*  in  Sicily,  having 
reduced  the  rest  of  that  island,  marched  witli  his  army  to  Syracuse, 
as  i^  he  would  presently  gain  that  city  by  force  of  arms:  and  to  that 
end  hindered  all  provision  from  coming  to  the  town,  having  been  a 
long  time  master  at  sea;  and,  having  wasted  and  destroyed  all  th^ 
corn,  and  other  fruits  of  the  field,  attempted  to  possess  hinisclf  of  all 
the  places  about  Olympias*  lying  before  the  town.  Then  he  resolved 
forthwith  to  assault  the  walls,  being  encouraged  thereunto  by  the  a^i^ 

•  A  STong  fort  near  tlic  tcftiplc  of  Jupiter  Ol^'nipu*, 

V04..  3.  No.  45  KK'ii 


434  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XX. 

gur,  who,  by  viewing  the  entrails  of  the  sacrifice,  foretold  that  he 
sliould  certainly  sup  the  next  day  in  Syracuse.  But  the  towDsmeOi 
suspecting  the  enemy's  design,  sent  out  in  the  night  three  thousand 
foot,  and  about  four  hundred  horse,  with  orders  to  possess  themselves 
of  Eurydus^,  who  presently  effected  what  they  were  commanded  to 
do.  The  Carthaginians,  thinking  to  surprise  the  enemy,  fell  on  about 
midnight.  Amilcar  commanded  the  whole  body,  and  led  them  np^ 
having  always  a  strong  party  near  to  support  him.  DinocraCeSy 
master  of  the  horse,  followed  him.  The  army  was  divided  into  two 
battalions,  one  of  barbarians,  and  the  other  of  Grecian  confederates. 
A  rabble  likewise  of  divers  other  nations  followed,  to  get  what  plao- 
der  they  could;  which  sort  of  people,  as  they  are  of  no  use  in  an 
army,  so  they  are  many  times  the  cause  of  sudden  alarms,  and  vain 
and  needless  fears,  which  often  occasion  great  mischief  and  pr^a- 
dice.  And  at  that  time,  the  passes  being  straight  and  rough,  the  driven 
of  the  carriages,  and  other  servants  and  attendants  of  the  army  that 
were  not  of  any  formed  companies,  quarrelled  one  with  another  for 
the  way,  and,  not  being  able  to  move  forward,  by  reason  of  the  throng, 
some  fell  to  downright  blows;  so  that  many  on  each  side  coming  in 
to  help  tliclr  several  parties,  a  great  tumult,  noise,  and  clamour  ran 
through  the  whole  army.  Upon  which  the  Syracusans  who  were 
posted  at  Euryclus,  understanding  the  approach  of  the  barbarians  by 
their  tumultuous  march,  and  having  the  higher  ground,  fell  in  upon 
the  enemy.  Some  from  the  high  places  where  they  were  potted 
galled  them  as  they  came  on  with  their  darts  and  arrows,  and  some 
prevented  them  by  gaining  the  necessary  passes,  and  so  blocked  up 
their  way.  Others  drove  those  that  fled  headlong  down  the  rocks; 
for,  by  reason  of  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  want  of  intelligence, 
they  thought  the  enemy  was  coming  upon  them  with  a  mighty  army; 
so  that  the  Carthaginians,  by  reason  of  the  disturbance  and  tumult 
amongst  their  own  men,  their  ignorancef  of  the  ways,  and  straightness 
of  the  passages,  were  at  a  stand,  and  confounded,  and  at  last  fled 
outright:  and  because  there  was  no  room  to  give  way,gteat  numbers 
of  them  were  trodden  under  foot  by  their  own  horse;  and  part  of  the 
army  fought  one  with  anotlicr,  as  if  they  had  been  enemiesj  led  inio 
the  error  by  the  darkness  of  the  night.  Amilcar  indeed  at  the  first 
received  the  enemy's  charge  witli  great  resolution,  and  called  out  to 
the  colonels  and  commaiiders  to  stand  to  it,  and  valiantly  bear  the 
brunt  with  the  rest.    But  afterwards,  being  deserted  by  his  soldien, 

*  Or  I^iir Villus,  a  fort  upon  the  lil;;)ir5t  pciiit  ol'  the  hill  over  the  citj  caUcd  tW 

t  For  suiue  made  nway  even  upon  the  appearance  of  the  entmy,  especially  bciB| 

pvniicd  op,  nud  in  amaze,  llircu^h  their  ignor.wce  of  tlie  J)Inccs. 


Chap.  IL^  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  435 

through  the  consterDation  that  was  amongst  them,  haviug  much  ado 
to  save  his  life^  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  tlie  Syracusans. 

Here  a  man  may  justly  observe  the  inconstancy  of  fortune^  and 
the  surprising  events  men  are  overtaken  with,  contrary  to  what  they 
expected.  For  Agatbocles^  not  inferior  to  any  in  valour^  and  who  • 
had  the  command  of  a  great  army  in  the  battle  at  Himera,  was  n^t 
only  beaten  by  the  barbarians,  but  lost  the  best  and  greatest  part  of 
his  army.  But  those  that  were  left,  and  penned  up  within  the  walls 
of  Syracuse,  with  a  small  handful  of  men  that  had  been  before  beat- 
en, not  only  routed  the  army  of  the  Carthaginians  by  whom  they 
were  besieged,  but  took  Amilcar  the  general,  one  of  the  noblest  of  tiie 
citizens  of  Carthage,  prisoner:  and  that  most  to  be  admired  is,  that 
a  small  body  of  men  by  an  ambuscade,  and  the  advantage  of  the 
place,  should  utterly  rout  an  army  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand 
foot,  and  five  thousand  horse.  So  this  is  very  true,  which  is  in  eve* 
ry  body's  mouth — Many  things  are  vain  and  to  no  purpose  in  war. 

After  this  flight,  the  Carthaginians  being  scattered  and  dispersed 
to  a  great  distance  from  one  another,  could  scarcely  be  collected  to- 
gether next  day.  But  the  Syracusans,  returning  to  the  city  with 
much  spoil,  delivered  Amilcar  to  those  that  were  resolved  to  revenge 
themselves  of  him.    Tliey  remembered  what  was  foretold  by  the 

augur ^That  he  should  sup  in  Syracuse  the  next  day :  the  truth  of 

which,  the  deity  now  confirmed  by  the  event.  The  kindred,  there- 
fore, of  them  that  were  slain,  led  Amilcar  bound  through  all  parts 
of  the  city;  and  after  they  had  most  horribly  tormented  him,  killed 
him  with  the  greatest  scorn  and  contempt  imagiqable.  Then  the 
principal  men  of  the  city  sent  his  head  to  Agathocles,  with  an  ex- 
press, to  give  him  an  account  of  the  late  victory. 

But  the  army  of  the  Carthaginians,  after  this  defeat,  though  they 
came  to  understand  what  was  the  cause  of  such  great  calamities 
and  misfortunes,  yet  were  scarcely  after  all  freed  from  their  fears  : 
and  because  they  wanted  a  general,  quarrels  arose  between  the  bar- 
barians and  Grecians.  The  exiles,  therefore,  and  the  rest  of  the 
Greeks,  made  Dinocrates  general  over  themselves:  and  the  Cartha- 
ginians intrusted  the  supreme  command  to  those  that  were  next 
in  dignity  to  the  late  general.  At  this  time,  when  the  Agrigentines 
perceived  that  Sicily  was  now  in  that  condition  as  that  it  might  be 
easily  gained,  they  began  to  seek  after  the  sovereign  command  of 
the  island  themselves :  for  they  supposed  that  the  Carthaginians 
were  not  able  to  cope  with  Agathocles  in  the  war;  and  that  Dino- 
crates, who  had  only  a  company  of  fugitives  about  him,  might  be 
easily  vanquished;  and  that  the  Syracusans,  who  were  grievously 
pressed  for  want  of  provisions,  would  npt  so  much  as  attempt  19 


43$  DIODORUS  SICUL0S.  JBook  XX, 

gain  the  sovereign  command.  And  lastly^  that  which  was  of  the 
greatest  weight  was,  that  inasmuch  as  they  took  up  anns  to  free  all 
the  Greek  cities,  they  concluded,  that  all  would  readily  concur,  bodi 
upon  the  account  of  the  hatred  they  mutually  bore  against  die  bar- 
barians, [and  the  natural  love  and  regard  they  all  had  to  the  tews  of 
their  own  country.  They  therefore  created  Xenodicus  general,  and 
sent  him  forth  to  the  war  with  a  considerable  army,  who  fordivMi 
makes  for  Gela,  and  by  some  of  his  friends  was  let  into  the  dfy  in 
the  night;  and  thus  gained  more  forces  in  the  town,  and  a  great 
deal  of  money,  at  one  and  the  same  time.  The  Gehins  having  thus 
recovered  their  liberty,  joined  in  the  war  with  the  whele  acrengdi 
and  power  of  the  city,  and  most  readily  applied  their  helfnog  bnkb 
for  the  restoring  all  the  cities  to  their  antient  laws. 

This  attempt  of  the  Agrigentines  being  noised  abfoad  thrMil^t 
the  whole  island,  a  sudden  desire  of  liberty  spread  over  all  the  cities; 
and  first,  the  Enneans  sent  agents  and  delivered  up  their  eity  to  the 
Agrigentines:  who,  freeing  this  city,  marched  on  to  EH)easii8  a  pt- 
rison  of  the  Carthaginians :  here  was  a  sharp  engagement,  but  the 
citizens  coming  in  to  the  assistance  of  the  Agrigentines,  the  j 
was  expulsed,  and  many  of  the  barbarians  were  killed,  and  five  ] 
dred  laid  down  their  arms  and  surrendered. 

While  the  Agrigentines  were  employed  in  these  affidrs,  aone  of 
Agathocles*s  soldiers  in  Syracuse,  having  taken  Ecbelta,  wisted  and 
harassed  the  country  of  the  Leontines  and  Camareans.  Thb  eah- 
niity  grievously  afflicted  the  cities^  because  the  country  was  laid  waste, 
and  all  the  com  and  fmits  destroyed :  whereupon  Xenodicus,  the  ge- 
neral, marched  into  those  parts,  and  drove  tlie  enemy  out  of  die 
country  of  the  Leontines  and  Camarenians,  and  then  retaking  Ecbel* 
tn,  which  was  a  very  strong  fort,  he  restored  the  democratical  go- 
vernment to  the  city,  and  struck  a  terror  into  the  Syraessans*  To 
conclude,  he  marched  up  and  down  to  tlie  several  garrisons  and  ci- 
ties, and  freed  them  from  the  Carthaginian  government. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Syracusans,  being  in  great  strails  and  per- 
plexity for  want  of  provisions,  when  they  understood  that  some  dups 
were  coming  with  corn,  fitted  out  twenty  gallics;  and,  nnderstaad- 
ing  that  the  barbarians  kept  but  a  slight  guard  where  tbey  lay,  they 
slipt  by  undiscerned,  and  got  as  far  as  the  Megareans,  and  there 
waited  for  the  merchants.  But  thirty  Carthaginian  galKes  makii^ 
up  to  them,  they  prepared  themselves  at  first  to  flght :  bift  bcSng 
presently  driven  on  shore,  they  left  their  ships  and  swam  out,  and  so 
escaped  to  a  certain  temple  of  Juno,  upon  which  there  was  a  sharp 
dispute  about  the  ships;  the  Carthaginians  threw  in  grappling iioDS, 
and  hauled  them  off  by  force  from  the  land>aud  so  took  tcnof  theSi? 


Chap.IL  DroDORUs  slcuLus.  437 

the  rest  i^ere  saved  by  some  help  that  came  in  out  of  tlie  cityr    And 
this  was  the  coodltiou  of  Sicily  at  that  time« 

In  Africa,  after  that  they  who  brought  the  Iiead  of  Amilcar  were 
arrived,  Agathocles,  as  sooo  as  he  liad  received  it,  rode  up  so  neaf  to 
the  enemy's  camp  as  that  his  voice  might  be  heard;  and  shewing 
them  the  head|  told  them  how  all  their  forces  in  Sicily  were  destroy- 
ed, which  presently  caused  most  bitter  mourning  and  lamentation 
among  the  Carthaginians,  who  bowed  down  themselves  in  adoration 
to  the  head  of  their  king,  (as  is  the  custom  of  their  country),  and 
looking  upon  his  death  to  be  their  own  calamity,  had  no  courage  to 
prosecute  the  war  further.  Agathocles  on  the  other  side,  lifted  up 
with  his  successes  in  Africa,  and  with  such  conflux  jce  of  prosperity^ 
carried  himself  high  in  mighty  hopes  and  expectations  for  the  future, 
as  if  he  had  been  now  out  of  the  reach  of  all  dangers.  But  fortune 
did  not  think  it  fit  to  suffer  things  to  run  on  in  the  same  course  of 
prosperity,  but  brought  him  under  the  most  imminent  hazards  and 
difficulties  from  his  own  soldiers.  For  one  Lyciscus,  one  of  his  col- 
onels, being  invited  by  Agathocles  to  supper,  when  he  was  heated 
with  wine,  and  in  his  cups,  began  to  rail  against  him  with  most  bit- 
ter imprecations.  But  Agathocles,  because  he  liad  a  great  esteem 
for  the  man  on  account  of  bis  valour,  passed  by  all  with  a  jest:  but 
Archagathus,  liis  son,  on  the  contrary  being  enraged  at  him,  retorted 
upon  him  with  bitter  reproaches  and  threats.  When  supper  wat 
ended,  and  every  one  was  returned  to  his  tent,  Lyciscus  contemptu* 
otisly  charged  Archagathus  as  an  inceftuous  adulterer  with  his  own 
step-mother;  for  he  was  judged  to  be  too  familiar  with  Alcia,  his  fa* 
ther's  wife.  Whereupon  Archagathus,  stii  red  up  to  a  degree  of  mad- 
ness and  rage,  snatched  a  lance  out  of  the  hands  of  one  of  the  guards 
and  ran  him  through  the  side,  wlio,  falling  down  dead,  was  carried 
into  his  tent  by  those  that  attended  him.  As  soon  as  it  was  day,  the 
friends  of  him  that  was  slain,  and  many  others  of  the  soldiers,  ran 
up  and  down,  and  (enraged  at  the  deed  which  was  committed)  filled 
the  camp  with  tumult  and  confusion.  Many  likewise  of  the  cap- 
tains, wlio  were  subject  *to  be  called  in  question  for  their  crimes, 
fearinj;  what  might  ensue,  made  use  of  the  present  occasion,  and 
stirred  up  tlie  soldiers  to  a  terrible  mutiny;  so  that  the  whole  army, 
inflamed  with  the  hatred  of  his  cruelty,  ran  to  their  arms  to  execute 
condign  punishment  upon  the  murderer.  At  length  they  resolved 
to  put  Archagatbas  to  death ;  and  that,  if  Agathocles  did  not  deliver 
up  his  son,  he  should  die  in  his  room :  besides,  they  demanded  of 
him  their  arrears,  and  chose  new  ofiiccrs  and  captains  to  command 
the  army.  At  length  they  possessed  themselves  of  the  walls  of  Tu- 
nis, and  inclosed  the  princes  with  their  guards.     This  mutiny  com« 


438  IMODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  XXt 


iDg  to  the  cars  of  the  enemy,  the  Carthaginians  sent  some  of  thdr 
own  men  to  persuade  the  soldiers  to  a  revolt^  promising  them  larger 
pay  and  ample  rewards :  whereupon  many  of  the  captains  promised 
to  bring  over  the  army  to  them.  But  Agathocles^  when  he  saw  he 
was  in  the  utmost  extremity  of  danger,  and  fearing  lest  if  he  were 
given  up  to  the  enemy  he  should  end  his  days  with  disgrace  and  dis- 
honour, concluded  that  it  was  mucli  better  if  he  must  suffer  to  be 
killed  by  the  soldiers:  whereupon  he  laid  aside  his  purple  robe^  and 
put  on  a  poor  country-fellow *s  habit,  and  came  into  the  midst  of 
tjiem ;  at  which  strange  sight  there  was  a  deep  silence,  and  many 
came  in  from  every  quarter  flocking  about  him,  where  he  made  a 
speech  to  them  adapted  to  tlie  present  occasion,  wherein  he  set  forth 
the  acts  he  had  done  to  that  time,  and  told  them  he  was  now  ready 
to  die,  if  they  (his  fellow -soldiers)  thought  fit  it  should  be  so«  For 
be  was  resolved  never  (like  a  coward)  to  make  exchange  of  his  honour 
for  his  life,  of  which,  he  said,  they  should  be  then  eye-witnesses; 
and  thereupon  drew  out  his  sword  as  if  he  would  run  himself  through: 
and  just  as  he  was  ready  to  thrust  it  into  his  body,  the  wlu>le  army 
cried  aloud  to  him  to  forbear,  and  all  gave  their  voices  generally.^ 
That  he  should  be  acquitted  and  discharged  from  all  further  accusa- 
tion. The  soldiers  then  wishing  him  to  put  on  his  royal  robes,  he 
returned  them  many  thanks,  shedding  many  tears,  and  then  cloath- 
ed  himself  again  as  became  his  state  and  dignity,  and  the  people  with 
cheerful  countenances  congratulated  the  reassumption  of  his  former 
power.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Carthaginians  expected  every  hoar 
that  the  Greeks  would  come  over  to  them. 

But  Agathoclcs,  that  he  might  not  lose  the  advantage  of  the  pre- 
sent occasion,  led  the  army  out  against  them;  for  the  Carthaginians 
expecting  continually  a  revolt  and  a  desertion  from  the  enemy's 
camp,  never  in  the  least  dreamed  of  what  was  really  in  agitation. 
But  Agathoclcs,  as  soon  ns  he  approached  the  enemy's  camp,  pre- 
sently commanded  hi^  men  to  sound  a  cliarge,  and  so  forthwith  fell 
in  upon  them,  and  cut  them  down  before  him.  The  Carthaginians 
being  surprised  by  this  sudden  attack,  after  the  loss  of  many  of  their 
men,  fled  to  their  camp.  And  thus  Agathoclcs,  who  was  near  losing 
his  life  through  the  rashness  of  his  son,  by  his  own  valour  not  only 
extricated  himself  out  of  the  snare,  but  completely  routed  his  ene- 
mies: but  they  who  were  the  heads  and  ring-leaders  of  the  mutiny, 
and  as  many  others  as  bore  a  grudge  to  the  prince,  to  the  number  of 
two  hundred  and  upwards,  vilely  deserted,  and  went  over  to  the  Car- 
thaginians. 

Having  now  gone  through  the  affairs  of  Africa  and  Sicily,  we 
shall  next  take  notice  of  what  was  done  in  Italy.    For  there  the  £- 


Chap.  IL  moDORUs  siculus.  439 

trascans  came  with  a  great  army  against  Sutrium,  a  Roman  colony: 
to  whose  defence  the  consuls  marched  out  with  great  forces,  and 
fought  and  routed  the  Etruscans,  and  pursued  them  to  their  very 
camp.  About  the  same  time  the  Samnites  (when  the  Roman  army 
was  abroad  at  a  great  distance^  without  the  least  fear  of  an  enemy)  be* 
sieged  the  lapyges,  allies  to  the  Romans:  therefore  the  consuls  were 
forced  to  divide  their  forces.  Fabius  continued  in  Etruria;  but 
Marcius  marched  against  the  Samnites^  and  took  the  city  of  Alifa 
by  storm^  and  freed  their  allies  from  the  siege  of  lapyges.  But  Fa« 
bios^  while  the  Etrurians  flocklsd  in  great  numbers  to  besiege  Sutri« 
tiiDj  slipt  secretly  by  the  enemy  through  the  bordering  country^  and 
made  an  incursion  into  the  higher  Etruria,  which  had  for  a  long 
time  been  free  from  all  manner  of  inroads  and  invasions;  where, 
breaking  in  on  a  sudden,  he  wasted  and  harassed  the  country  up  and 
down,  and  routed  those  of  the  irihabitants  that  made  head  against 
bim,  and  killed  many  of  them,  and  took  a  great  number  of  prisoners. 
Afterwards  he  overcame  and  killed  hiany  of  them  in  a  set  battle,  at  a 
place  called  Perusia,  and  put  that  people  into  a  great  consternation. 
He  was  the  first  of  the  Romans  that  ever  entered  into  those  parts 
with  an  army.  But  he  made  peace  with  the  Arretines  and  Crotoneans, 
and  them  of  Perusia ;  and  taking  the  city  called  Castula,  he  forced 
the  Etrurians  to  raise  their  siege  before  Sutrium. 

This  year  there  were  two  censors  created  at  Rome;  the  one  of 
whom  was  Appius  Claudius;  who,  with  the  concurrence  of  his  col- 
league, Caius  Plautius,  abrogated  many  of  the  antient  laws:  for,  to 
gratify  the  people,  he  made  no  account  of  the  senate.  He  brought 
water,  which  from  hitn  was  called  Appia,  into  Rome,  from  places  four 
Hirlongs  distant;  and  expended  a  vast  sum  of  money  in  this  work, 
received  out  of  the  treasury  by  consent  of  the  senate.  Then  he  laid 
a  causeway  of  hard  stones  the  greatest  part  of  that  road,  whidi  is 
from  him  called  Appia,  extending  from  Rome  to  Capua,  a  thousand 
furlongs  and  upwards;  and  with  great  cost  and  expense  levelled  all 
the  rising  grounds,  and  filled  up  all  the  holes  and  hollow  places, 
making  all  even  and  plain ;  but  hereby  drained  the  treasury  of  al- 
most all  the  money  that  was  in  it.  And  by  his  employing  himself 
in  promoting  the  public  good,  he  left  behind  him  an  immortal  me- 
morial. He  also  made  up  the  senate  not  only  of  the  nobility,  as  the 
antient  custom  was,  but  likewise  of  the  libertines*,  by  choosing  ma- 
ny of  them,  and  mixing  them  with  the  others,  which  the  patricians 
took  very  heinously.  Moreover,  he  gave  liberty  to  the  citizens  to  in- 
corporate themselves  into  what  tribe  they  thought  fit,  and  to  be  tax- 
^d  in  wliatcvcr  rank  they  j)lcasc(l. 

•  Su^:h  a^  !j.i(i  1  •  <  u  >1  iv:   i:id  were  set  free. 


440  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BookXJL 

At  lengthi  perceiving  how  greatly  he  was  envied  by  the  Dobilitf, 
he  avoided  the  storm  by  insinuating  himself  into  the  fiiTOur  of  the 
eommon  people,  and  making  use  of  them  aa  a  biihvaik  agftiut  the 
envy  of  the  patricians.  In  mustering  the  horse^  he  never  took  any 
man's  horse  from  him,  nor  removed  any  person,  however  mean,  ool 
of  the  senate  (when  once  chosen)  when  be  took  an  aceoont  of  die 
senators,  which  the  censors  used  to  dob  But  the  oooboIb,  bodioat 
of  envy,  and  to  gratify  the  nobility,  convened  a  senate  out  of  andiai 
were  enrolled  by  the  former  censors,  and  not  those  that  were  aUov* 
ed  by  him  i  but  the  people  opposed  them,  and  sided  with  Appiaai 
and  that  he  might  confirm  the  advancement  of  such  aa  were  of  B^iaa 
and  obscure  birth,  he  preferred  one  Caius  Flavius,  the  son  of  a  li* 
bertine,  to  the  office  of  aedile,  and  to  the  highest  phce  in  that  ofioSi 
And  this  was  the  first  Roman  bom  of  a  libertine,  that  ever  befcie 
was  advanced  to  that  honourable  situation.  Appius,  at  length  btt^g 
removed  out  of  his  office,  out  of  fear  of  the  senate's  malice^  kept  hii 
house  under  pretence  of  being  blind. 

Now  Charinus  was  chief  governor  at  Athens,  and  theRonaoa  ere* 
ated  Publius  Dccius  and  Quintus  Fabius  consuls.  And  at  £Iis  was 
celebrated  the  hundred  and  eighteenth  olympiad,  in  which  Apol* 
lonides  of  Tcgasa  bore  away  the  prize:  at  which  time  Plolefliyy sail- 
ing from  Myndus  along  the  islands  which  lay  in  his  way,  came  to 
Andres;  and,  putting  out  the  garrison  that  was  there,  restored  it  to 
its  former  lilierty :  thence  he  sailed  to  the  Isthmus,  and  received  Si* 
cyon  and  Corinth  from  Cratesipolis.  But  for  what  reaaoi 
on  what  account  he  took  these  eminent  cities  into  bis 
have  related  in  the  former  books,  and  therefore  we  shall  forlicar re- 
petition. He  designed  also  to  restore  the  rest  of  the  Greek  citici  la 
their  liberty,  judging  that,  by  gaining  the  hearts  of  the  Greeiana,  hi 
should  very  much  promote  his  own  interest.  But  when  tbe  Felo* 
ponnesians  were  ordered  to  provide  money  and  victuals,  but  peiftna- 
ed  nothing  of  what  they  agreed  to,  he  was  so  incensed  that  be  made 
peace  with  Cassander  upon  this  condition, ..Thai  each  of  thcai 
should  retain  the  cities  they  had  then  in  their  hands.  Then  haviog 
put  garrisons  into  Sicyon  and  Corinth,  he  returned  into  ligypt 

In  tlie  mean  time,  Cleopatra,  being  incensed  against  Antjgnaaii 
of  her  own  accord  inclined  to  Ptolemy,  and  left  Sardis  to  go  to  knii 
she  was  the  sister  of  Alexander,  the  conqueror  of  the  Persians^  lbs 
daughter  of  Philip,  son  of  Amyntas,  and  the  wife  of  Alexander  who 
undertook  an  expedition  into  Italy.  And  therefore  upon  the  aoeoaat 
of  the  nobleness  of  her  birth,  Cassander,  LysimachuSa  AntigoaaSi 
and  Ptolemy,  and  even  the  chicfest  of  Alexander's  captaioa  afttt  Us 
death,  were  every  one  ambitious  to  ninrry  her :  for  every  oqe  bofifd 


Chap.  IL  motJoftUs  slcuLtJS*  441 

by  this  marriage  to  draw  all  the  MacedoQians  after  him ;  and  there- 
fore each  coveted  to  be  related  to  the  royal  family^  looking  upon 
that  as  the  way  to  gain  the  sovereign  command  over  ail  the  rest. 
But  the  governor  of  Sardis,  whom  Antigonus  had  ordered  to  retain 
Cleopatra^  stopped  her  journey ;  and  afterwards,  by  the  order  of  An- 
tigonus, with  the  help  of  some  women,  privately  mUrdered  her. 
But  Antigonus,  who  would  no  ways  be  thought  guilty  of  her  death, 
struck  off  the  heads  of  some  of  those  tvomen  for  having  a  hand  in  her 
murder,  and  buried  her  with  all  the  magnificence  that  might  be^ 
And  such  was  the  end  of  Cleopatra,  before  any  solemnization  of  mar-* 
riage;  who  was  earnestly  coveted  as  a  wife  by  all  the  most  noble 
captains  and  generals  of  the  army. 

Having  now  gone  through  the  affairs  af  Asia  and  Greece,  we  shall 
pass  over  to  other  parts  of  the  world. 

In  Africa,  the  Carthaginians  sent  an  army  against  the  Numidians^ 
who  had  revolted  from  them,  in  order  to  reduce  them.  Upon  which^ 
Agathocles  left  his  son  Archagathus  with  part.of  the  army  at  Tunis; 
and  he  himself,  with  eight  thousand  foot>  £ind  eight  hundred  horse 
Qf  the  most  valiant  men  of  his  afmy^  and  fifty  African  carriages, 
made  after  the  enemy  with  all  possible  speed.  In  the  mean  iime> 
the  Carthaginians  being  come  among  the  Numidians  called  Suphons, 
caused  many  of  the  inhabitants  to  join  with  them ;  and  reduced  like- 
wise some  of  the  revolters  to  their  former  alliance  and  confederacy 
with  them;  but  when  they  heard  of  the  enemy's  approach  they  en- 
camped upon  a  high  piece  of  ground  lying  od  the  other  side  of  a 
deep  and  impassable  rlver,  to  secure  themselves  against  all  sudden 
attacks  and  incursions  of  the  enemy;  and  commanded  the  most  ac- 
tive Numidians  to  hinder  the  march  of  the  Grecians  by  constantly 
harassing  them  with  continual  attacks  ib  the  rear;  who  accordingly 
executing  their  commands,  Agathocles  sent  out  the  archers  and 
stingers  against  them;  and  he  himself,  With  the  rest  of  the  army, 
made  towards  the  enemy'^  camp.  But  the  Carthaginians^  under-" 
standing  his  design,  drew  the  army  out  of  the  camp,  and  stood  rang- 
ed in  battle  array,  ready  and  prepared  for  fight  r  as  soon  as  they  saw 
Agathocles^s  soldiers  pass  the  river,  they  fell  upon  them  in  a  full 
body,  and  made  a  great  slaughter  at  that  part  of  the  river  where 
it  was  so  difficult  to  pass;  and  in  this  endeavour  to  force  their  way 
through  the  river^  the  Greeks  as  fat  excelled  the  barbarians  in  valour, 
as  they  did  them  in  number  and  multitude.  While  both  sides  stood 
stoutly  to  it  for  a  long  time,  the  Numidians  in  each  army  left  off 
fighting,  expecting  the  issue  of  the  engagement^  with  a  design  to  rifle 
the  carriages  of  that  party  which  was  routed.  At  length  Agathocles 
with  those  brave  and  valiant  men  he  had  about  him,  broke  through 

VoL<2«   No«4S#  LLL 


4%2  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Bofdk  XX. 


that  part  of  the  enemy's  battalion  which  was  opposed  tohioiy  and  put 
thetn  to  flight,  and  the  rest  presently  followed  him;  only  the  Greci- 
an horse  that  sided  witli  the  Carthaginians,  under  the  command  of 
Clino,  bore  the  shock  of  the  Agathocleans,  who  prest  Tery  sore  up- 
on them;  upon  which  there  was  a  very  sharp  engagement,  and  ma- 
ny figliiitig  courageously  died  on  the  spot,  the  rest  by  good  fortone 
escaping:  then  Agathocles,  leaving  off  tlie  pursuit,  bent  all  \u$ 
strength  against  them  who  had  fled  back  into  the  camp;  but,  endea- 
vouring to  break  in  at  places  strongly  fonified  and  of  difficult  ap- 
proach, he  sustained  as  much  loss  as  the  Cartliaginians;  however, 
he  remitted  nothing  of  his  resolution,  but  being  lifted  up  with  his 
victory  still  pressed  upon  the  enemy,  confidently  concladiog  he 
could  force  the  camp.  In  the  mean  time  the  NumkUans  weie  very 
intent  in  observing  how  things  were  like  to  go,  but  could  not  fill 
upon  the  baggage  of  the  Carthaginians  because  both  armiea  were  so 
near  the  camp.  When  therefore  they  saw  that  Agathocles  vras  at  a 
great  distance,  and  the  guards  but  small  in  the  Grecian  camp^  they 
broke  in  there,  and  easily  killed  those  that  withstood  them,  and  took 
many  prisoners,  and  possessed  themselves  of  other  prey  aad  plonder. 
Which,  as  soon  as  Agathocles  came  to  understand,  he  hastened  thi- 
ther with  his  forces,  and  recovered  some  of  the  spoil:  huttheNami- 
dians  carried  most  away  with  them,  and  in  the  night  got  a  fcog  way 
oflffrom  the  place.  TIten  the  prince  erected  a  trophy,  and  divided 
all  the  booty  amongst  the  soldiers  that  none  might  repine  at  the 
losses  they  liad  sustained.  Tlie  Greeks  likewise,  that  sided  with 
the  Carthaginians,  he  committed  prisoners  to  a  castle;  who,  feaonng 
that  the  prince  would  revenge  himself  on  them,  in  the  night  fdl 
upon  the  guard  in  the  castle;  but  being  worsted,  they  got  Into  a  foit 
'jLud  sheltered  themstlvcs  there  to  the  number  of  a  thousand  at  least, 
amongst  whom  were  above  five  hundred  Syracusans.  As  soon  as 
A;^athocles  came  to  know  what  was  done,  he  marched  with  his  army 
thither,  where  after  terms  and  articles  agreed  upon,  those  complot- 
ters  came  forth  from  the  hold,  but  he  put  them  all  to  the  sword.  Be- 
ing crowned  with  this  victory,  and  having  done  all  that  he  possi^y 
could  contrive  for  the  subduing  of  the  Carthaginians,  he  sent  Ortho 
the  Syracusan  to  Cyrenc,  as  his  ambassador  to  Ophehs,  who  was 
one  of  Alexander's  captains  during  the  whole  of  the  late  wars,  and 
was  then  possessed  of  Cyrenc  with  the  neighbouring  cities,  and  had 
the  command  of  a  great  army,  and  was  contriving  how  to  enlarge  his 
dominions;  and  while  he  was  employing  his  mind  on  these  amhi* 
tious  projects,  the  agent  of  Agathocles  just  then  arrived  to  soliiut 
him  to  join  with  him  in  affording  his  assistance  to  subdue  the  Car- 
thaginians.    In  return  for  which  piece  of  service  Agathocles  pfOflM»* 


Chap.  IL  DiODOaus  siculus.  443 

ed  be  would  yield  up  to  him  the  sovereign  commaud  of  all  Africa^ 
and  that  he  himself  would  be  content  with  Sicily,  where^  being  free^ 
from  all  fear  of  future  dangers  and  troubles  from  the  Cartl)aginianS| 
he  sliould  be  able  with  ease  and  safety  to  reduce  tlie  whole  island  tp 
his  obedience.  And  if  he  should  have  a  desire  to  enlarge  his  domi*- 
nion^  he  said  that  Italy  was  near  at  hand,  where  he  might  gratify  his 
ambition  in  that  respect.  That  Africa  was  fai*  from  him,  separated 
by  a  large  sea,  and  that  he  came  not  into  it  of  choice,  but  was  driven 
tiiere  by  necessity.  This  therefore  coming  in  the  way  so  heighten* 
ed  him  in  his  former  hopes  that  he  readily  hearkened  to  him,  and 
sent  his  agent  to  Athens  to  pray  their  aid  and  association  in  this  war* 
For  he  had  married  from  thence  Eurydiec,  the  daughter  of  Miltiades, 
who  was  general  of  the  conquerors  at  the  battle  of  Marathon ;  and 
therefore,  upon  account  of  this  marriage,  and  other  acts  of  kindness, 
he  was  received  into  the  franchises  of  the  city;  many  of  tlie  Atheni- 
ans readily  hearkened  to  this  motion,  and  not  a  few  likewise  of  tlie 
other  Grecians  willingly  joined  in  this  expedition,  hoping  thereby  to 
have  the  sharing  of  the  ricliest  parts  of  all  Africa  witli  ail  the  wealth 
of  Carthage  among  themselves :  for  the  state  of  the  af&irs  of  Greece^ 
by  reason  of  the  continual  wars  and  quarrels  of  tl;ie  princes  among 
themselves,  was  but  in  a  Vjsry  weak  and  low  condition;  therefore 
they  concluded  they  should  not  only  reap  much  advantage,  but  be 
freed  likewise  from  those  pressing  evils  which  at  that  time  lay  hea- 
vy upon  them. 

Ophelas  at  length,  wbeii  he  had  made  plentiful  provision  of  all 
things  necessary  for  his  expedition  in  hand^  led  forth  his  army,  hav-f 
ing  with  him  above  ten  thousand  foot,  and  six  hundred  horse,  and  a 
hundred  chariots,  and  above  three  hundred  men  drivers  and  soldiers 
to  manage  them,  besides  extraordinaries  and  followers  of  the  camp 
to  the  number  of  ten  thousand  more;  many  of  whom  carried  their 
wives  and  children  with  their  stuff  and  baggage  along  with  them,  so 
that  they  looked  like  a  colony  going  to  be  planted.  Having  there- 
fore Inarched  eighteen  days  journey,  and  in  them  gone  three  thou^ 
sand  furlongs,  they  came  to  a  city  called  Automolus,  and  there  en- 
camped; thence  marching  forward,  they  came  to  a  mountain  shelv- 
ing down  dn  both  sidos  with  steep  and  sharp  rocks,  having  a  deep 
valley  in  tlie  midst,  out  of  which  rose  a  soft  stpnc  spiring  up  like  un- 
to a  sharp  rock,  at  the  foot  of  which  \v;is  a  wide  cave  overshadowed 
with  ivy  and  the  leaves  of  the  yew  tree,  in  wliich  it  is  reported,  queen 
Lamia,  a  lady  of  admirable  beauty,  formerly  dwelt;  but  for  her  cru- 
elty, they  say,  her  face  was  afterwards  transformed  into  the  shape  oji' 
a  beast;  for  it  is  reported  tliat,  being  bereaved  of  all  her  children'*^^ 

*  4U  bcr  phildccuj  \\ic^  say^  vere  killed  bv  Juno,  because  tkev  were  got  bjr  Jupiter 


444  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XX, 

she  took  it  so  grievously,  that  she  envied  all  other  women  that  had 
children,  and  commanded  the  poor  infants  to  be  plucked  out  of  their 
mothers'  arms,  and  foithwith  murdered.  And  therefore,  cveD  to 
this  day,  the  tale  of  this  woman  is  fresh  among  children^  and  with 
the  name  of  Lamia  they  are  presently  put  Into  n  great  fright.  More- 
over, being  much  given  to  drunkenness^  she  let  every  one  do  what 
they  pleased,  without  any  en(}uiry  after  mens*  manners)  and  because 
she  never  seriously  minded  what  was  done  in  her  province,  it  was 
believed  she  was  blind.  And  therefore  there  is  a  fable  told  by  sobk 
that  she  put  her  eyes  into  a  little  purse,  excusing  lier  drunken  soC* 
tishness  by  such  an  invented  tale,  as  if  that  was  the  reason  she  saw 
nothing.  That  she  was  in  Africa  one  brings  in  Euripides  for  v  wit- 
nessj  for  so  he  says.^ 

To  whom  Is  thtt  most  btteful  name  uakqown? 
Or  of  th*  Africtn  Lamia  Uie  spawn  i 

But  Ophelas,  removing  again,  travelled  with  gr^t  toil  and  labour 
through  a  dry  and  thirsty  country  full  of  wild  beasts;  for  they  did 
not  only  want  water,  but  bread  and  other  provision,  so  that  the  whole 
army  was  in  danger  of  perishing.  These  sandy  deserts  near  the  Syr- 
tes  were  pestered  with  noisome  serpents  and  all  sorts  of  hurtful 
beasts,  and  it  being  for  the  most  part  deadly  to  be  bitten  by  these  tc- 
nomous  creatures,  many  were  brought  into  a  sad  condition;  oat  of 
the  reach  both  of  friends'  help  and  remedy  from  medicines.  Fur 
some  of  ttie  serpents  were  of  the  same  colour  with  the  earth,  so  that 
none  could  sec  them  before  they  were  hurt,  so  that  many  treadiiif 
upon  them  were  stung  to  death.  At  last^  after  two  months  misera- 
ble marching,  with  much  difficulty  they  came  to  Agathocles's  campi 
where  they  pitched  their  camps  at  a  small  distance  one  from  ano- 
ther; on  the  other  hand  the  Carthaginians,  hearing  that  they  were 
come  up  to  him,  were  in  a  great  consternation^  seeing  the  great  for- 
ces that  were  making  against  them. 

Agathocles,  hearing  of  his  approach,  went  to  meet  hlqi,  and  ad- 
vised him  by  all  means  to  have  a  care  of  his  army  after  so  teduMis 
and  hard  a  journey,  and  to  see  them  well  refreshed.  He  himself  lay 
quiet  a  few  days,  observing  every  thing  that  wa$  done  in  the  neigli- 
bouring  camp.  At  length,  taking  his  q>portanity  when  the  greater 
part  of  Ophelas^s  army  were  gone  a-foraging  into  the  eoontrj,  and 
taking  notice  that  Ophelas  never  suspected  any  thing  of  what  he 
was  then  contriving,  he  suddenly  called  his  army  together,  and  be- 
fore them  accused  Ophelas  for  that,  being  called  for  as  an  assistant 
in  this  war,  he  went  about  to  betray  him ;  and,  having  incensed  the 
multitude,  drew  out  his  whole  army  in  battalia  against  him  and  his 
C>rcuians.    Ophelas^  growing  amazed  at  this  unexpected  altenrtwo, 


Chap.  IL  BI0D0R17S  SICULU8.  44S 

put  nevertheless  liicnself  and  the  men  he  had  with  him  in  a  postm'e 
of  defence :  but  the  enemy  being  too  quick  for  him,  and  he  too  weak 
for  them,  he  was  there  slain  upon  the  place.  Agathocles  persuaded 
those  that  were  left  to  lay  down  their  arms;  then  telling  them  what 
great  things  he  would  do  for  them^  he  got  the  whole  army  to  him- 
self. And  thus  Ophelas^  by  indulging  his  ambition^  and  being  over 
credulous^  came  to  this  fatal  catastrophe.  In  the  mean  time  Bomil* 
car  ,at  CArthage  was  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  put  in  execution 
what  he  had  a  long  time  been  hammering  in  his  brain  in  order  to 
^ain  the  sovereign  power  and  authority.  And^  although  he  had  se- 
veral times  fit  occasions  offered  him  for  that  purpose^  yet  alwayi 
9ome  light  and  inconsiderable  jcause  or  other  intervening^  put  a  stop 
to  his  design.  For  some  superstitious  persons  many  times  are  pre« 
paring  to  act  great  and  remarkable  pieces  of  wickedness^  and  yet  al« 
ways  choose  rather  to  delay  than  act,  to  put  off,  than  execute  the 
thing;  which  even  then  came  to  pass:  for,  concluding  that  he  had 
a  fair  opportunity  offered  him,  the  better  to  eflfect  his  purpose,  be 
sent  away  the  most  eminent  persons  of  the  citizens  that  were  about 
bim  on  an  expedition  against  the  Numidians,  that  he  might  Iiave  none 
of  the  nobility  at  hand  to  oppose  him;  but  then,  checked  by  his  own 
liears,  he  dur3t  not  reveal  to  any  his  design  of  gaining  the  principa- 
lity, and  so  let  the  matter  fall  again»  At  length  it  fell  out  that  be 
attempted  to  set  up  himself  at  the  very  same  time  that  Ophelas  was 
cut  off  by  Agathocles;  and  neither  of  them  knew  what  was  done  ia 
one  another's  camp.  For  Agathocles  knew  nothing  of  the  ambition 
of  the  other,  or  of  the  tumult  and  disorder  that  was  in  the  city,  whicb 
lie  might  at  that  time  have  easily  subdued:  for  if  Bomilcar  had  been 
surprised,  and  taken  iu  the  very  act,  he  would  have  chosen  rather  to 
have  joined  with  Agathocles,  than  to  have  given  up  himself  to  be 
punished  by  the  citizens.  Neither  did  the  Carthaginians  know  any 
thing  of  Agathoclcs's  falling  upon  Ophelas;  for  they  might  easily 
have  overcome  him,  by  joining  with  Ophelas.  But  I  suppose  both 
sides  were  well  enough  content  to  be  ignorant,  although  they  were 
things  of  great  weight  and  concern,  and  contrived  by  them  that  were 
near  one  to  another. 

For  Agatiiocles,  being  plotting  to  cut  offa  person  that  was  his  friend 
and  associate,  minded  not  to  inquire  after  any  thing  that  was  doing 
with  the  epcmy;  and  Bomilcar,  on  the  other  side,  contriving  how  to 
overturn  the  liberties  of  his  country,  cared  not  what  was  in  dotation 
in  Agalhocles's  camp,  whose  purpose  was  now  not  so  much  to  con- 
quer an  enemy,  as  to  subdue  his  own  fellow-citizens.  Matters  beinf 
thus,  here  some  may  find  fault  with  history,  seeing  many  things  of 
divers  natures  happening  at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  that  writers 


446  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XSL 


are  forced  to  break  in  with  new  matter  of  another  nature^  and  to  dl- 
Tide  between  things  done  at  the  same  instant^  that  the  truths  related 
may  delight  the  more.  But  to  answer  this,  the  history  that  is  denied 
tbb  liberty,  although  it  afterwards  represents  the  things  done,  yet  it 
postpones  tlie  true  pleasure  of  the  thing  to  too  great  a  distance  firom 
the  first  relation. 

Bomilcar  therefore^  picking  out  a  select  number  of  men  in  the 
New  Cit)^^^  (as  it  is  called)^  not  far  distant  from  the  dd  Carthage, 
dismissed  all  the  rest;  then,  having  called  together  fi?e  hundredf  of 
the  citizens  who  were  privy  to  his  design,  and  about  a  thousand  mer- 
cenary soldiers,  he  declared  himself  sole  monarch  of  the  Carthagini- 
ans. Tlien  he  divided  his  troops  into  five  bodies^  and  fell  upon  the 
city,  killing  all  that  he  met  in  the  highways;  upon  which  an  incre- 
dible terror  and  amazement  possessed  the  whole  city.  At  first,  the 
Carthaginians  suspected  that  the  town  was  betrayed,  and  that  tlie 
enemy  had  broke  in  by  that  means:  but  when  the  truth  was  known, 
the  young  men  marshalled  themselves,  and  made  against  the  tyrant, 
who  hastened  into  the  forum,  killing  all  he  met  in  the  streets,  and 
slaughtering  great  numbers  of  naked  and  unarmed  citizens.  But  the 
Carthaginians,  mounting  the  tops  of  the  houses  that  were  round  a- 
bout  ti)e  market-place,  cast  down  showers  of  darts  from  thence,  so 
that  the  conspirators  (the  place  being  altogether  exposed  to  the  shot) 
were  galled  most  grievously :  whereupon  in  a  full  body  they  forced 
their  way  through  the  narrow  passes,  and  got  into  the  New  City,  be- 
ing plyed  and  wounded  with  darts  and  arrows  all  along  as  tliey  came 
under  the  houses.  Then  possessing  themselves  of  a  hill,  (the  whole 
city  being  now  in  arms),  the  Carthaginians  drew  up  their  camp  in 
the  face  of  the  rebels.  At  length  they  sent  some  of  the  most  antient 
and  gravest  of  their  citizens  to  them,  and  remitted  what  was  past,  and 
so  all  things  were  peaceably  composed.  Towards  all  the  rest,  indeed, 
they  performed  their  articles,  and  (because  of  the  cloud  that  hoQg 
over  the  city)  passed  by  the  crimes  committed;  but,  without  any  re- 
gard to  their  oaths,  they  most  ignominiously  tormented  Bomilcar, 
and  put  him  to  death.  And  thus  the  Carthaginians,  when  their  cooh 
monwealth  was  near  upon  the  point  of  expiring,  recovered  their  an- 
tient form  of  govcrjiment. 

In  the  m<'an  time,  Agathocles  loaded  all  his  transport-ships  with 
spoils,  and  such  of  the  Cyrenians  as  he  found  not  fit  and  serviceable 
for  the  war  he  put  on  board,  and  sent  tliem  to  Syracuse;  but  a  fierce 
tempest  overtook  them,  in  which  some  of  the  ships  were  lost,  and  o- 
•'lers  WLir  cast  upon  xhv  Plihccir^ian  islands  bordering  upon  Italy, sa 
that  very  few  arrived  at  Syracuse. 


Cft<ip.  lit.  DIOt>ORU»  SlCULtTS.  447 

LI  I   I  'tf  '  ■'  '■.■■!r  "  "    ,■"■■■—    ■    "   ii  ■  ' 

In  Italy,  tbe  Rotnan  consols  assisted  the  MarsilianSi  (who  were 
sorely  oppr^sed  by  the  Samnites);  and  were  conqoerors,  killing  great 
tiumbM  of  the  etiemy  opon  the  place.  Then  they  marched  throogli 
the  country  of  die  Umbii,  and  invaded  Etmria,  then  at  war  with 
them,  and  todc  a  castle  caUed  Caprium  by  storm*  But  the  infaabif* 
tarns  sending  their  ambassadors  to  tneat  upon  terms  of  peace,  th^ 
iraade  peace  with  theTatquinfams  for  forty  years;  bat  with  the  rest  dP 
tiie  Etrurians  only  for  one  yean 


CHAP.  ni. 


toemetrius  frees  all  the  Orecian  cities:  takes  thePirans  ai  Alkem. 
Demetrius  Phalerius  Jfxes  to  Ptolemy.  Honours  given  to  JDe- 
metrius  in  At  hem.  He  sails  lo  Cyprus:  his  acts  there:  te* 
sieges  SaUtmis.  His  great  engifies.  Ptolemy  sails  to  Cyprus* 
Sea-Jight  bettoeen  Ptolemy  and  Demetrius,  wherein  Ptdlemy  bt 
routed.  Antigonus  takes  the  title  of  king ,  as  likewise  do  severet 
other  captains.  AgaihoCles*s  acts  at  UHca  in  Africa.  7^es  Km 
prisoners  to  a  great  engine.  TTle  sorts  qf  people  in  AfricOf 
Xenodochus  routed  in  Sicily  by  Agafhocles*s  iaptams.  The  eutM 
ofAgathocles  in  Sicily.  fFhat  was  done  by  Archagathas  in 
Africa.  Maschala  inhabited  by  some  tSreeks  that  came  Jrom 
Troy.  Apesy  their  custom  efmong  the  Pithecusee.  i%e  Car-* 
thaginians  draw  thirty  thousand  men  out  of  Carthage.  Jlfif- 
fortuiies  to  Agaihocles's  captains  in  Africa.  The  army  btoc^k^ 
up,  and  almost  starved.  Agathoetes  beats  the  Carthaginians  ett 
sea  near  Syracuse.  His  captain  Leptines  harasses  theAgrigen^ 
tines.  Agalhocles  feasts  the  Syracusans.  His  jocund  tender. 
IBs  cruelty.  Routed  in  Africa.  Carthaginian  camp  burrtU 
TJie  misfortune  afterwards  to  both  armies  by  one  cause.  Aga^ 
thocles  put  in  chains  by  his  otvn  men.  Steals  out  of  Africa.  The 
soldiers  kill  Ms  two  sons.  They  make  peace  with  the  Carthagi- 
nians. Agathocles's  exceeding  cruelty  at  JEgesta;  and  afters 
ivards  at  Syracuse. 

AT  the  end  of  the  year,  Aiiaxicrates  was  created  chicff  gi>rernor  of 
Athens,  and  Appius  Claudius  and  Luchis  Vulutius  consuls  at  Rome. 
At  this  time  Demetrius,  the  son  6f  Antigonus,  being fuTnfshed* with 


44ft  DioDORUS  SICULUS.  Book  X3L 

two  strong  armies^  one  by  land,  and  the  other  by  aea»  and  piovideil 
with  Weapons  and  all  other  necessaries  for  the  war,  set  firtth  horn 
Ephesos  with  full  orders  and  instructions  to  set  all  the  Grecian  cities 
at  liberty,  and  in  the  first  place  to  free  Athens^  which  was  then  hdd 
by  a  garrison  of  Cassander's.    To  tliis  purpose  he  arrited  at  the  PI« 
XflBos  with  his  fleet;  and  upon  his  first  arrival  caused  the  edict  to  be 
proclaimed,  and  then  assaulted  the  Piraeus  on  every  side.    But  Db- 
nysius,  the  governor  of  the  fort  Munychia,  and  Demetrius  PlialmnSi 
whom  Cassander  had  made  president  of  the  city,  with  a  strong  body 
of  men  beat  off  the  enemy  from  the  walls:  but  some  of  Antigoous't 
men  forced  their  way  near  the  slK)re,and  scaled  the  walls;  where- 
upon many  within  came  up  to  their  assistance,  and  in  this  manner 
was  the  Piraeus  taken.    Dionysius  the  governor  fled  into  Manydiii» 
and  Demetrius  Phalerius  into  the  city.    The  next  day  he,  with  soma 
others,  was  sent  by  the  city  to  Demetrius,  and,  after  he  had  treateil 
with  him  concerning  the  liberty  of  the  city,  and  his  own  preservi^ 
tioo,  he  prevailed  so  far  as  to  be  dismissed  with  a  safe  conduct,  and 
90,  without  any  further  care  or  concern  for  Athens,  he  fled  toThdicSy 
and  thence  to  Ptolemy  in  Egypt.    And  thus  he,  who  had  gtyvemed 
the  city  for  the  space  of  ten  years,  was  in  this  manner  thrust  oa<  of 
his  country.   The  people  of  Athens  being  hereupon  restored  to  tbetr 
fiberty,  decreed  public  honours  to  them  that  were  the  aathon  of 
their  deliverance.    Demetrius  forthwith  brought  up  his  engines  and 
battering-rams,  and  besieged  Munychia  both  by  sea  and  land.    Bat 
the  Diooysians  nude  a  stout  resistance,  and,  by  the  advantage  and 
difficulty  of  the  height  of  the  pkces  to  be  assaulted,  beat  off  the  De* 
metrians,  (for  Munychia  is  not  only  strong  by  nature,  bat  by  ttt  win, 
and  defended  by  high  walb),  tliough  Demetrius  indeed  far  exceeded 
the  other  in  number  of  men,  and  warlike  preparations.    At  length, 
after  the  assault  had  continued  for  the  space  of  two  days  togethOj 
many  of  those  within  being  wounded  and  killed  by  the  shot  from  the 
engines,  so  as  that  there  were  not  men  enough  left  to  defend  the 
place,  the  garrison-soldiers  began  to  flag.    In  the  mean  time  theDe* 
metrians,  who  assaulted  by  turns,  and  mutually  relieved  one  another 
with  fresh  supplies,  having  cleared  the  wall  by  their  shot,  broke  into 
Munychia,  and  so,  forcing  the  soldiers  within  to  lay  down  their  annsy 
they  took  the  governor  prisoner.     Having  despatched  this  business 
in  a  few  days  time,  Demetrius  demolished  Munychia,  and  entirdy 
restored  the  people  to  their  liberty,  and  entered  with  them  into  a 
league  of  peace  and  amity.    The  Athenians  therefore  nuide  a  deciee 
(which  was  written  by  Stratocles)«_That  golden  statues  of  Antigonut 
and  Demetrius  sltould  be  set  up,  and  mounted  upon  a  ehariotj  nezl 


Chap.  III.  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  449 

to  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton* ;  and  that  they  should  be  both  a- 
domed  with  crowns  of  gold  of  two  hundred  talents  weight  a-pieee; 
and  that  an  altar  should  be  erected  in  honour  of  them,  called  the 
Saviour's  Altar:  and  in  further  honour  of  them,  to  the  ten  tribes  of 
Athens  they  added  two  more^  called  the  Antigonian  and  Demetrian. 
And  thus  the  people  of  Athens,  after  they  had  been  stripped  of  all 
their  liberties  by  the  Lamian  tii'ar,  after  fifteen  years  were  restored  to 
their  antient  laws  and  government.  M egara  was  still  under  the  curb 
of  a  garrison ;  but  Demetrius  likewise  took  that  city,  and  restored 
the  people  to  their  former  privileges;  therefore  he  was  highly  ho- 
noured and  richly  presented  by  the  inhabitants  upon  this  account. 
Moreover,  when  the  Athenian  ambassador,  who  was  sent  to  Antigo- 
nus,  presented  to  him  the  decree,  he,  understanding  that  they  both 
Wanted  corn  for  necessary  provision,  and  timber  for  building  of 
ships^  sent  them  a  hundred  and  fifty  medimnas  of  wheat,  and  as  much 
timber  as  would  build  a  hundred  ships.  Then  he  withdrew  the  gar^ 
rison  out  of  Imbros,  and  restored  the  city  to  the  inhabitants.  After- 
wards he  wrote  to  his  son  Demetrius,  and  ordered  him  to  call  a  se- 
nate of  members  chosen  out  of  all  the  confederate  cities,  in  order  to 
consult  concerning  what  might  be  most  conducive  to  the  public  good 
of  all  Greece;  and  that  he  himself  with  all  speed  should  transport 
forces  into  Cyprus,  and  there  fight  Ptolemy's  captains.  In  obedi- 
ence to  his  father's  commands,  without  any  further  delay,  he  passed 
over  first  into  Caria,  and  moved  the  Rhodians  to  make  war  against 
Ptolemy^  who  were  slack  and  slow  in  the  matter,  willing  rather  to  be 
neuters,  and  keep  in  with  all  parties :  hence  first  grew  the  heartburn* 
ings  between  them  and  Antigonus.  Thence  be  sailed  into  Cilicia^ 
and,  furnishing  himself  there  with  shipping  and  men,  he  passed  over 
into  Cyprus  with  fifteen  thousand  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse,  and 
a  fleet  consisting  of  an  hundred  and  ten  ships  of  three  tier  of  oars 
a-piece^  of  singular  swiftness,  and  fifty-three  not  so  swift  as  the 
others,  but  men  of  war,  as  they  were;  besides  transport-ships  of  all 
sorts,  answerable  to  so  great  a  multitude  of  men  and  horses.  Being 
landed,  he  first  encamped  near  the  shore,  not  far  from  Carpasia,  and^ 
drawing  up  his  ships  to  land,  fenced  them  with  a  deep  trencii  and 
ramparts;  and  then  he  fell  upon  the  cities  next  at  hand,  and  took 
Urania  and  Carpasia  by  storm ;  and,  leaving  a  sufiicient  guard  to  de- 
fend his  trenches  about  the  fleet,  he  marched  to  Salamis. 

Menelaus,  appointed  by  Ptolemy  chief  commander  of  the  isle,  be- 
ing then  at  Salamis,  and  seeing  the  enemy  within  forty  furlongs  of 

*  Two  brothers  ttiat  killed  the  tyrant  Hyparcbas  in  Athens.— Qlymp.  0^^ 
Tbucjd.  h\sX, 

Vol.  2.  No.  46.  MMM 


450  DIODORUS  SICULUS.    .  JBook  XX, 

the  city,  drew  out  of^the  garrisons  adjoining,  to  the  number  of 
twelve  thousand  foot,  and  eight  hundred  horse,  and  went  out  t» 
meet  him,  and  fought  awhile;  but,  not  being  able  to  endure  the  ene- 
my's charge,  he  fled,  and  Demetrius,  pursuing  him  even  to  the  gttei 
of  the  ciry,  took  to  the  number  of  three  thousand  of  his  men,  and 
killed  a  thousand  upon  the  field.  The  prisoners  he  pardoned,  and 
distributed  them  among  his  own  men:  but  finding  that  they  were 
ever  ready  to  fly  over  again  to  Menelaus,  because  their  wealth  wai 
in  Ptolemy's  hands  in  Egypt,  he  shipped  them  all  away  to  Antigonui 
his  father. 

Antigonus  at  that  time  was  building  a  jcity  in  the  Upper  Syrian 
near  the  river  Orontes,  called  by  his  own  name  Antigonia^  Lajring  oat 
great  sums  of  money  upon  it,  and  taking  within  the  walk  seventy 
furlongs  of  ground :  for  the  place  itself  was  very  opportune  to  lie  as  a 
yoke  both  upon  Babylon  and  the  upper  provinces,  and  likewise  upon 
the  lower,  with  the  other  provinces,  as  far  down  as  to  Egypt.  But 
this  city  continued  not  long;  for  Seleucus  razed  it,  and  transplanted 
the  inhabitants  to  another,  built  by  himself,  called  Seleucia^  after  hb 
own  name.  But  we  shall  give  an  account  of  these  things  when  we 
come  to  the  time  proper  for  them. 

But  Menelaus,  after  he  was  thus  routed  in  Cyprus,  drew  all  hii 
engines  within  the  walls,  and  lined  all  the  bulwarks  and  battlements 
with  soldiers,  and  prepared  for  fighting,  observing  at  the  same  time 
that  Demetrius  was  doing  the  like.  He  despatched  likewise  a  mes- 
senger to  Ptolemy,  to  tell  him  what  had  happened,  and  to  denre 
more  help,  in  regard  the  afiairs  of  Cyprus  were  in  a  very  low  and 
dangerous  condition. 

Demetrius,  seeing  that  the  city  was  in  no  contemptible  conditioOy 
and  that  it  was  furnished  with  a  great  number  of  soldiers  for  its  de- 
fence, was  resolved  to  prepare  engines  of  an  extraordinary  bigness, 
and  all  sorts  of  battering  rams,  and  other  instruments  of  war^  that 
might  in  any  manner  terrify  the  besieged.  He  sent  likewise  tot 
workmen  out  of  Asia,  and  for  iron,  timber,  and  every  thing  else  thit 
was  necessary  to  be  made  use  of  in  the  works  he  designed.  And  now 
every  thing  being  ready  at  hand,  he  built  an  engine^  which  he  called 
Helepolis,  from  taking  of  cities,  forty-five  cubits  broad  on  every 
side,  and  ninety  in  height,  drawn  upon  four  strong  wheels,  eight  cu- 
bits high:  he  made  likewise  two  exceeding  great  battering  nunS| 
and  galleries  to  support  them.  He  put  several  great  shot  of  massy 
stones  in  the  lowest  story  of  the  Helepolis,  the  greatest  of  which 
weighed  three  talents:  in  the  middle  were  placed  very  great  ms- 
chines  to  shoot  darts  and  arrows;   in  the  highest  part  were  thgie 


Chap.ni.  DtODORUS  STCULUS.  451 

that  were  less,  and  a  great  store  of  stone-snot,  ancf  above  two  hun- 
dred men,  who  knew  the  manner  of  managing  all  these  deuces  to  the 
best  advantage. 

Bringing  np,  therefore,  his  engines  ^o  the  walls  of  the  city,  by 
showers  of  shot  he  there  swept  off  the  turrets  and  battlements,  and 
battered  down  the  walls  with  his  rams:  but  the  besieged  made  such 
obstinate  resistance,  and  opposing  engines  to  engines^  that  the  issue 
for  some  days  was  very  doubtful;  and  toil,  labour,  and  wounds,  were 
the  mutual  lot  and  portion  of  each  party.  At  length  the  wall  tumbled 
down, and  the  city  was  even  upon  the  point  of  being  taken  by  storm; 
but  night  coming  on,  both  sides  drew  off.  Then  Menelaus,  having 
a  diligent  eye  for  the  security  of  the  city,  lest  it  should  be  taken  by 
some  fresh  stratagem,  got  a  great  deal  of  dry  stuff  and  matter  toge- 
ther, and  cast  it  in  the  night  from  off  the  walls  upon  the  engines,  to- 
gether with  many  lighted  firebrands,  and  burnt  the  principal  of  them. 
On  the  mounting  up  of  the  flames,  the Demetrians  came  in  to  quench 
the  fire;  but  it  was  so  quick  and  furious,  that  the  engines  were  totally 
consumed,  and  most  of  the  men  that  were  in  them^ 

However,  Demetrius,  though  he  was  for  the  present  disappointed 
in  his  design,  yet  desisted  not  in  the  least,  hut  still  urged  on  the  siege 
both  by  sea  and  land,  supposing  that  time  at  last  would  crown  him 
with  victory. 

But  Ptolemy,  having  received  intelligence  how  his  forces  were 
roated,  set  sail  from  Egypt  with  an  army  well  furnished  both  for  sea 
and  land  service;  and,  arriving  at  Paphos  in  Cyprus,  took  boats,  and 
went  to  Citium,  two  hundred  furlong^  from  Salamis.  His  whole  fleet 
consisted  of  an  hundred  and  forty  long  ships,  the  biggest  whereof  was 
of  five  tier  of  oars,  and  the  least  of  four;  and  these  were  attended  by 
two  hundred  ships  of  bnrthen,  carrying  no  less  than  ten  thousand 
soldiers.  From  thence  Ptolemy  despatched  away  by  land  some  mes- 
sengers to  Menelaus,  to  bid  him  with  all  speed  to  send  him  (if  pos- 
sibly he  could)  those  ships  that  were  then  iq  the  port  of  Salamis^ 
which  were  sixty  sail:  for  he  was  in  hopes  that  with  this  addition, 
having  made  his  navy  two  hundred  sail,  (if  he  should  Come  to  a  sea- 
fight),  he  should  be  victorious.  But  Demetrius,  foreseeing  what 
might  be  in  contriving,  left  part  of  his  army  to  carry  on  the  siege, 
and  manned  all  his  vessels  wiih  the  best  of  his  soldiers,  and  placed 
his  engines  to  shoot  stones,  arrows,  and  darts  of  three  spans  in  length, 
upon  the  forecastles  of  his  ships.  Then  with  his  fleet,  top  and  top- 
gallant, ready  prepared  for  battle,  he  sailed  about  to  the  city,  and  an- 
chored about  a  dart's  cast  from  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and  there 
lay  all  nighty  both  to  prevent  that  fleet  in  the  p<>rt  firom  joining  with 


4S2  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Sook  XX. 

the  other,  and  likewise  waiting  the  coining  up  of  the  enemy^  being 
himself  then  prepared  to  fight  him.  , 

On  the  other  liahd,  Ptolemy  set  sail  for  Salamts;  and  in  regard  be 
had  with  him  in  bis  fleet  a  great  number  of  tenders,  bis  navy  seemed 
to  be  exceedin>r  great.  Demetrius,  hearing  of  tbe  enemy's  approftdii 
left  Antisthenes  the  admiral,  with  ten  ships  of  five  tier  of  oars,  to 
keep  in  the  fleet  that  was  in  the  harbour;  and  commanded  the  horw 
to  keep  near  the  sea-side,  to  be  ready  to  relieve  those  that  should 
swim  to  land,  in  case  any  misfortune  should  happen.  He  himself 
drew  up  his  fleet  in  a  line  of  battle,  and  made  towards  the  enemy, 
having  not  above  a  hundred  and  eight  sail,  with  those  taken  in  the 
forts  that  were  deserted;  the  greatest  of  which  ships  were  of  seven 
tier  of  oars,  but  the  roost  of  them  were  of  five.  In  the  left  wing  were 
seven  Phoenician  gallies  of  seven  tier  of  oars,  and  thirty  Atbenisn 
vessels  of  four  tier  of  oars,  commanded  by  Mcdius  as  admiral.  To 
support  these,  he  drew  up  ten  gallies  of  six  tier  of  oars>  and  as  many 
of  five,  conceiving  it  prudent  chiefly  to  guard  that  wing  where  he 
himself  intended  to  engage.  In  the  middle  division  he  placed  the  least 
ships,  under  the  command  of  Themisus,  the  Samian,  and  Marsyas,  the 
writer  of  the  affairs  of  Macedon.  The  right  wing  was  comoMinded  by 
Hc'gcslppus  of  Halicarnassus,  and  Pleistliias  of  Coos,  who  was  lord- 
high- admiral  of  the  whole  fleet. 

Ptolemy  at  the  first  made  with  all  the  sail  he  could  in  the  night 
time  towards  Salamis,  in  hopes  to  enter  the  port  before  the  enemy: 
but  at  break  of  day,  spying  the  enemy's  fleet  not  far  off  ready  drawn 
up»  he  likewise  forthwith  prepared  for  battle;   and  for  this  purpose 
ordered  his  transport-ships  to  'lie  off  at  sea  at  a  great  distance^  and 
drew  up  the  rest  in  a  line.    He  himself  commanded  in  the  left  wing, 
where  were  the  greatest  of  his  ships  ready  to  defend  him.    The  fleets 
being  thus  drawn  up,  both  sides  (according  to  antient  custom)  called 
(by  their  priests)  upon  their  gods,  and  the  whole  army  followed  tbe 
noise  and  cry  of  them  that  first  began.    But  tbe  princes,  seeing  noir 
all  (both  lives  and  fortunes)  ready  to  be  laid  at  stake,  were  both  in  no 
small  concern.    Demetrius  now,  not  a  quarter  of  a  league  diitant 
from  the  enemy,  gave  the  sign  of  battle  which  was  before  agreed  up- 
on, and  that  was  the  liftmg  up  of  a  golden  target  visible  to  the  whole 
fleet,  one  part  after  another.    Ptolemy  doing  the  same,  presently  the 
fleets  joined,  and  the  trumpets  sounded  a  charge,  and  both  annief 
setting  up  a  great  shout,  to  it  they  went  in  a  dreadful  and  teniUe 
manner.    At  first  they  made  use  of  bows,  and  engines  to  shoot  tr- 
rows,  stones,  and  darts,  by  which  many  on  both  sides  were  grievomlj 
galled  and  wounded. 


Chap.  in.  DI0D0RU8  8ICULUS.  4Mlt 

When  the  ships  came  side  to  side,  aod  fell  foul  with  grtat  Tiole&ee 
one  upon  another,  those  upon  the  decks  fell  to  it  with  thdr  lances 
and  speaiB,  and  die  row^rt  (encouraged  hf  them  that  (lalled  out  to 
them)  plied  their  oars  with  extraordinary  eagerness.  And  now  the 
vessels,  with  the  fierceness  and  violence  of  the  eharge^Were  so  pressed 
upon  each  side,  that  sooie  brushed  off  the  oars  one  of' another,  so 
that  they  could  neither  fly  nor  pursue,  abd  by  this  tneans  disabled  the 
soldiers  on  board  from  n^aking  a  vigorous  defence,  by  putting  a  chedt 
to  the  force  wherewith  they  might  otherwise  have  borne  down  updii 
their  enemy;  others  so  forced  with  the  beaks  of  their  ships  one  upott 
another's  poops,  that  they  rowed  a-*stem  from  time  to  time  to  repeat 
their  strokes.  In  the  mean  time,  those  upon  the  hatches  mutuallf 
wounded  one  another,  every  one  having  his  mark  nearvnd  plun  be* 
fore  him.  Some  of  the  captains  of  the  vessels  struck  the  broadsides 
of  their  adversary's  ships  with  that  violence,  that  the  beaks  studc  fast 
in  them,  whereupon  they  boarded  the  enemy's  ships,  giving  and  re« 
ceiving  wounds  and  blows  on  either  sidet  some  catching  hold  upon 
the  sides  of  ships,  when  they  missed  footing,  in  their  attempts  to 
board  the  other,  tumbled  headlong  into  the  sea,  and  were  forthwith 
run  through  with  the  lances  of  them  that  were  next  at  hand.  Some 
who  prevailed  in  the  boarding  of  theur  enemy,  killed  some  upon  their 
first  entrance,  and  drove  all  the  rest  in  heaps  one  upon  another,  and 
threw  them  overboard.  In  fine,  various  and  sudden  were  the  turns 
and  changes  of  fortune  in  this  battle,  while  th^y  that  were  worsted 
now,  were  presently  after  conquerors,  by  the  bright  of  Aeir  sUpa 
overtopping  their  adversaries;  and  then  i^n  the  oonquerora  wero 
brought  into  straits,  by  being  driven  into  bitd  stations^  and  by  other  un- 
accountable accidents,  which  frequently  happen  in  these  cases.  For 
in  land-fights  valour  apparently  carries  the  day,  when  no  iailttsual 
misfortune  intervenes;  but  in  sea«>fights  there nremany^ and  vluioni 
accidents  often  bccur,  which  sometimes  on  •  sodden  rain  then^ 
whose  valour  otherwbe  would  certainly  and  amM  jnstly  have  brought 
theip  off  victorious.  Of  all  the  rest,  Demetrius,  placing  himself 
upon  the  stern  of  his  galley  of  seven  tier  of  oars,  behaved  himself 
with  most  gallantry:  for,  when  he  was  surrounded  by  throngs  of  ene« 
mies  on  every  side,  he  so  exerted  himself,  that  he  strewed  the  decks 
with  them,  some  by  darts  at  a  distance,  and  others  by  his  lancei 
hand  to  hand :  showers  of  darts  and  other  weapons,  it  is  true,  were 
cast  at  him,  but  some  he  nimbly  declined,  and  others  be  received 
on  his  target  and  other  defensive  arms  that  he  then  wore.  In  thia 
conflict  there  were  three  that  stuck  close  to  him  as  assistants,  where- 
of one  was  run  through  arid  slain  with  a  lance^  and  the  other  tWd 
were  both  wounded.   But  at  length  Demetrius  lepolsed  his  eQemiei^ 


454  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Sook  XJL 

.  and  put  the  right  wing  to  a  total  rout^  and  forthwith  those  that  were 
next  to  them. 

Od  the  other  hand,  Ptolemy,  who  had  with  him  the  greatest  ships, 
and  the  best  soldiers,  easily  broke  that  party  that  opposed  him^  and 
put  them  to  flic^ht,  sinking  some  of  their  ships,  and  takiDg  othen^ 
with  the  men  in  them,  and  then  returning  from  the  porsuitj  thought 
to  have  done  the  like  with  the  rest:  but  when  he  came,  he  foood 
his  left  wing  totally  routed  by  Demetrius,  and  him  in  liot  pnnnit 
of  them;  upon  which  he  made  back  to  Citium.  But  Demetrius, 
being  now^  conqueror,  committed  his  men  of  war  to  Neoa  and  Buri* 
ehus,  with  orders  to  pursue  the  enemy,  and  to  take  up  such  as 
they  found  swimming  for  their  lives.  He  himself,  with  his  own 
ships  richly  adorned,  and  those  that  were  taken  of  the  enemy's,  towed 
along  after  small  skiffs,  returned  to  his  own  camp  and  port^  whence 
he  set  out. 

Meanwhile^  about  the  Tery  time  of  the  fight  at  sea,  Menefanu^ 
governor  of  Salamis,  sent  out  to  the  aid  of  Ptolemy  the  sixty  ships 
completely  manned  and  armed,  tinder  the  command  of  Menetius^ 
who,  engaging  with  those  ships  in  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  which 
were  set  to  keep  him  in, charged  through  them;  whereupon  they  fled 
for  safety  to  the  army  that  was  at  land.  ''But  when  the  Menetiua 
were  in  the  open  sea,  and  perceived  that  they  catne  too  late,  they 
returned  back  to  Salamis.  This  being  the  issue  of  this  fight,  there 
were  taken  above  a  hundred  transport-ships,  wherein  tliere  were  al* 
most  eight  thousand  soldiers:  of  ships  of  war  he  took  forty,  with  the 
men  in  them,  and  of  those  that  were  bilged  in  the  fight  about  fimr- 
score,  which  being  almost  full  of  water  in  the  hold,  they  hawkd  to 
land  under  the  camp  near  the  city.  Demetrius  had  twenty  of  his 
own  ships  much  damaged  in  this  fight,  which  yet,  being  refitted  and 
rigged  up  again,  proved  serviceable  as  before. 

Afterwards,  Ptolemy,  seeing  no  good  to  be  done  in  Cjrpms,  letumcd 
into  Egypt.  But  Demetrius,  having  taken  in  all  the  towns  and 
cities  of  the  island,  distributed  the  garrison-soldiers  among  his  own 
companies,  to  the  number  of  sixteen  thousand  foot,  and  six  hundred 
horse;  and  put  messengers  on  board  the  greatest  ship  in  the  flee^ 
and  sent  them  to  his  father,  with  an  account  of  the  victory  he  had 
gained. 

As  soon  as  Antigonus  received  the  news,  he  was  so  traasported 
with  the  greatness  of  the  victory,  that  he  put  a  diadem  upon  his  head» 
and  frdtn  that  time  assumed  the  stile  and  title  of  a  king,  and  allowed 
Demetrius  to  do  the  same.  And' Ptolemy  also,  not  at  all  willing,  to 
hang  the  bead  at  his  late  ill  success,  took  the  crown  and  title  of  a  Icing 
tp  himself  likewise;  and  in  all  his  letters  from  that  time  focwird  \ 


CUsp.  III.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  4SS 


himself  king : .  and  by  their  example^  other  governors  of  provinces,  «8 
Seleucus,  who  bad  lately  subdued  the  upper  provinces,  and  Lysima- 
chus,  and  Cassander,  who  held  the  provinces  first  allotted  to  them,  all 
proclaimed  themselves  kings. 

Having  now  spoken  sufficient  concerning  these  affiiirs,  we  sliidl 
proceed  to  give  a  distinct  account  of  things  further  done  in  Africa 
and  Sicily. 

Agathocles,  when  he  heard  that  the  governors  of  the  provinces  be- 
fbrementioned  had  taken  upon  them  the  dignity  of  crowned  beads, 
judging  himself  no  way  inferior  to  them,  either  as  to  the  strength  and 
power  of  their  arms,  largeness  of  his  dominions,  or  memorable  ac- 
tions, took  upon  him  likewise  the  name  and  title  of  a  king,  bat  yet 
did  not  think  fit  to  wear  a  diadem:  for,  from  the  very  time  of  h» 
first  aspiring  to  the  principality,  he  wore  a  crown,  after  the  manner 
of  a  priest,  which  he  never  laid  aside  all  the  time  he  was  in  cooteat 
for  the  tyranny. 

Some  say,  that  he  always  wore  this,  because  he  wanted  hair.   And 
now  he  made  it  his  business  to  do  something  worthy  of  the  honour* 
able  title  he  had  assumed,  and  therefore  he  led  his  army  against  the 
lebellious  Uticans;  and,  surprising  them  on  the.  sudden,  took  threes 
hundred  of  tliem  as  they  were  abroad  in  the  %elds.    At  the  first  he 
pardoned  them,  and  required  the  surrender  of  the  city;   but  those 
within  refusing  so  to  do,  he  built  an  engine,  and  banged  up  all  the 
prisoners  upon  it,  living  as  they  were,  and  so  brought  it  up  to  the' 
walls.    The  Uticans,  though  they  pitied  the  miserable  crditaies,  yel^ 
they  valued  more  their  common  liberty,  and  therefore  Ibed  the  widCb, 
and  resolved  to  abide  a  siege.    Whereupon  Agathdcles  furnished  hig' 
engine  with  shot,  siingers,  and  darters;  and,plyiDg  them  with  shot ^ 
from  his  machine,  began  the  siege,  and  so  terrified  them,  that  he 
even  cauterized  the  spirits  of  the  besieged.    Those  that  were  apon 
the  walls  at  first  scrupled  to  use  their  darts  and  arrowii  having  their - 
own  citizens  placed  before  them  as  their  marks,  aniongst  whom  were 
tome  of  the  chief  nobility:   but  the  enemy  still  pressing  on  with', 
more  viulence,  they  were  forced  to  endeavour  to  beat  o£F  them  that  - 
were  placed  in  the  engine;   and  here  it  happened  that  the  Uticans 
fell  into  a  sudden  and  unexpected  misfortune,  through  an  inevitable  ^ 
necessity.     For  the  Greeks  exposing  the  prisoners  they  took  abroad 
in  the  fields  to  be  marks  to  their  own  fellow-citizens,  they  were  con« 
strained  either  to  fall  into  the  enemy's  hands,  by  sparing  their  towns*  ' 
men,  or  unmeicifully  to  kill  a  great  number  of  miserable  creatures  in^ 
defending  the  city,  as  in  truth  it  happened.     For  while  they  re« 
pulsed  the  enemy  with  all  sorts  of  darts  and  arrows,  and  other  wea* 
pons,  the  same  time  as  they  wounded  and  galled  those  thatmaoiq^cd  ^ 


4B6  diodorus  siculus.  Book  XX, 


the  engine,  at  the  same  time  they  wounded  the  citbens  that  hong 
at  it,  shooting  some  through,  and  fastening  others  with  their  duts 
and  arrows,  as  with  nails,  to  that  part  of  the  machine  towards  wUeh 
the  body  happened  to  move,  so  that  their  ignominy  and  misfer* 
tune  resembled  that  of  the  cross.  And  thus  some  suffered  (as  for* 
tune  ordered  it)  by  the  hands  of  their  near  relations  and  friends^  a* 
tremity  and  necessity  not  allowing  any  consideration  of  aataral  re» 
lations. 

Agathocles,  perceiving  the  townsmen  to  defy  all  dhnger,  and  throw 
Dff  all  regard  and  affection  to  their  countrymen,  bcj^  the  city  nmnd^ 
and  made  a  violent  assault  upon  a  part  of  the  wall  where  it 
weakest^  and  there  broke  through  into  the  city;  upon  which  i 
fled  into  their  houses,  and  others  Into  the  temples.  Agathocles  be- 
ing enraged,  filled  all  places  with  blood  and  slaughter:  some  ^ 
lulled  in  the  heat  of  fight,  others  that  were  taken  prisoners 
hanged  up  afterwards,  and  those  that  fled  to  the  temples  and  altan 
were  altogether  frustrated  of  their  hopes.  After  he  had  rifled  and 
plundered  the  town,  he  left  a  garrison  in  it,  and  marched  to  the  cita- 
del called  the  Horse*castle,  naturally  defended  by  a  lake  adjoining 
to  it :  but  he  took  it  by  storm,  after  a  close  siege,  and  a  sharp  fight 
with  the  inhabitants  upon  the  water  with  his  gallies.  Thos^  biving 
subdued  the  cities,  he  brought  most  of  the  sea-coasts,  and  those  that 
inhabited  in  the  heart  of  the  country,  under  his  own  power^  acept 
the  Numidiana,  part  of  whom  made  peace  with  him,  and  the  rest  were 
in  continual  expectation  to  fight  it  out  to  the  last. 

Africa  was  at  that  time  divided  into  four  sorts  of  inhabitants^  dnt 
is  to  say,  the  Poeni,  who  inhabited  Carthage :  the  Libyan  Poeni^  who 
had  many  cities  upon  the  tracts  lying  to  the  sea-shore,  wfao^  being 
conjoined  in  affinity  by 'marriages  with  the  Carthaginians,  were  called 
by  this  name,  which  imported  the  denomination  of  both  people.  Hie 
most  antient  inhabitants,  and  most  numerous  of  all  the  rest,  were 
called  Africans,  who  bore  a  deadly  hatred  to  the  Carthaginiatis^  by 
reason  of  the  severity  of  their  government.  The  last  are  the  Nnmi» 
dians,  who  hold  a  vast  tract  of  Libya,  as  far  as  to  the  very  deserts. 

But  Agathocles,  though  he  was  now,  by  the  help  of  his  confiede* 
rates,  and  the  valour  of  his  own  army,  conqueror  over  the  Carthagi- 
nians, yet  being  much  concerned  for  the  aflbirs  of  Sicily^  he  buOt 
some  open  vessels  and  skifis,  rowed  with  fifty  oars  a-piece,  and  pat 
on  board  two  thousand  soldiers,  and  sailed  from  Africa  with  his  wfaok 
fleet  towards  Sicily,  leaving  his  son  Archagathus  chief  commander  and 
governor  of  Libya. 

While  these  things  were  acting,  Xenodochus  general  of  die  Agri- 
gentines  having  freed  many  of  the  cities,  and  raised  the  hopes  of  the 


Chap.  IIL  DIODORUS  6lCOtU9.  4if 

Sieilians  tbtil  they  should  aH  be  restored  td  tlieir  antient  liberties 
throughout  the  whole  island,  led  odt  his  Ibf^es  a^inst  Agat!hbcI^sV 
captains,  luhrto^  with  him  abo^e  ten  tfaoiksatad  foot,  a&d  alfnost  a  thou- 
sand horse.    Leptioes  and  D^mophilu^  on  the  otli^r  hand,  having  got: 
together  as  gMat  an  aroiy  as  p<MsibIy  they  6ou1d  out  of  Syracuse  and 
the  Aeighbouring  garrisons,  encamped  ligainst  him  with  eight  thou- 
aatid  and  two  hundred  foot,  and  twelte  hundred  hotse.    At  lehgtli' 
there  was  a  sharp  engagement  between  th^  tWo  armies,  in  which 
Xenodochus  was  routed,  and  lost  fifteeA  hundred  of  his  men,  and  was 
forced  to  fly  to  Agrigentum.    The  Agrigendnes,  Wealcened  by  this 
loss,  leftoif  their  honourable  design,  and  frustrated  the  hopes  where- 
with they  had  filled  the  hearts  of  the  confederates.    Presently  after  the 
battle,  Agathocles  landed  at  Selinus  in  Sicily,  and  shortly  forced 
the  Heracleots,  who  had  regained  their  liberty,  to  stoop  again  to  his 
government:  thence  marching  into  another  part  of  the  island,  he 
brought  under  the  Thermites,  (whose  city  was  held  by  a  Carthagi- 
nian garrison),  and  received  hostages  of  them.    Then  he  took  Cepha- 
losdis,  and  made  Leptlnes  governor.    Then  marching  up  Into  the 
heart  of  the  country,  he  attempted  to  have  entered  Centuripa  in  the 
pight  by  the  help  of  a  faction  he  had  in  the  city:  but  the  treachery 
being  discovered,  the  garrison-soldiers  fell  in  upon  him  and  drove  him 
out  of  the  town,  with  the  loss  of  above  five  hundred  of  his  men. 
After  this,  some  of  the  Apolloniats  sent  to  him,  and  promised  to  dcn 
liver  up  their  city;  whereupon  he  forthwith  made  thither.    But  the 
traitors  being  apprehended  and  punished,  he  made  nothing  of  it  the 
first  day;  bot  the  next,  after  many  hardships,  and  the  loss  of  many 
of  bis  men,  he  at  length  with  moch  ado  gained  the  place;  and  put- 
ting multitudes  of  the  Apolloniat?  to  the  sword,  he  gave  xhe  town  up 
to  the  plutider  of  his  soldiers.    While  Agathocles  was  thus  employ^ 
ed,  Dinocrates  the  captain  of  the  exiles  revived  the  jirosecution  of  the 
former  design  of  tlie  Agrigentines,-  and  declared  himielf  Protector 
of  the    con^inon  liberty,  and  got  together  great'  dutobers  wlio  camp 
flocking  to  him  from  all  parts.    Sori^e  out  of  a  natural  love  of  liberty^ 
and  others  out  of  fear  of  Agathocles,  were  at  his  deVotiop.     Having 
therefore  now  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  fifteen  hundred 
horse,  (who  were  all  accustomed  to  the  hardships  and  toils  of  exiles), 
he  took  the  field,  and  dared  Agathocles  to  a  battle.     But  Agathocles 
being  moch  inferior  in  numbers,  made  a  running  fight  of  it;  but  Di- 
nocrates still  pressing  close  at  his  heels,  often  gained  several  advan« 
tagcs  without  any  di$culty.    From  this  time  forward  things  began 
to  go  baclcwards  with  Agathocles,  oot^  only  in  Sicily,  but  also  in 
Africa.  For  Archagathus,  left  general  there,  after  his  father  was  gone^ 
sent  a  part  of  the  army  into  the  upper  countries^  under  the  comipancl. 
Vol.  2.  No,46\  <<inj? 


456  DIODORU8  8ICULUS.  Book  XX. 

of  Eumachus  and  at  first  was  successful;  for  Eumachos,  took  die 
great  city  Tocas,  and  subdued  many  of  the  DeighbouringNamidiaiis. 
Then  lie  took  another  town  called  Pbellina,  and  subdued  the  border- 
ing inhabitants  called  Asphodelodians,  who  are  as  black  as  the  £tlik>- 
pians.  He  gained  likewise  Maschala^  an  exceediog  laige  city^  an- 
tiently  inhabited  by  the  Greeks,  that  planted  there  in  their  retnm 
from  Troy,  as  we  have  before  related  in  the  third  book.  Afterwards 
he  brought  under  tiie  citadel  called  the  Horse-castle,  formerly  talcea 
by  Agathocles :  the  last  town  he  gained  was  Acris,  a  free  city^  the 
plunder  of  which  he  gave  to  his  soldiers,  and  sold  the  inbabitanta 
for  slaves;  and  so,  laden  with  spoil,  he  returned  to  Archagathusto  tiie 
camp. 

His  name  being  now  up  for  a  brave  aqd  valiant  inan,  he  under- 
took another  expedition  into  the  higher  Africa;  and  passing  by  the 
places  lie  had  before  lately  taken,  he  inconsiderately  broke  iDto  the 
city  called  Mittines :  but  the  barbarians  coming  upon  him  in  a  foil 
body  in  the  streets,  they  so  far  prevailed,  that  unexpectedly  they  drove 
him  out  of  the  town  again,  with  the  loss  of  a  great  number  of  his 
men.  Thence  he  marched  away  over  a  high  mountain,  two  hun- 
dred furlongs  in  length,  full  of  wild  cats;  there  no  kind  of  birds  breed, 
cither  in  trees,  holes,  or  elsewhere,  because  of  the  greedy  nature  of 
these  beasts.  Having  passed  over  these  mountains,  he  entered  into 
a  country  abounding  with  apes,  and  came  to  three  cities,  in  the  Greek 
language  called  Pithecusffi* :  but  their  customs  are  far  different  from 
purs;  for  those  apes  are  as  familiar  in  the  houses  as  the  inhabitmnti 
themselyes,  and  are  worshipped  as  gods,  as  the  Egyptians  do  dcgs. 
These  creati|rcs  come  and  take  meat  out  of  the  cellars  and  butteries, 
whenever  they  are  hungry,  without  any  disturbance;  and  parents 
use  to  name  their  children  after  these  apes,  as  we  do  after  the  gtids. 
Whoever  kills  any  of  them,  is  sure  to  die  as  a  notorious  atheistf: 
and  therefore  it  is  a  common  proverb  amongst  some  of  them,  if  a 
man  carry  himself  haughtily  and  proudly,  to  say...''  Tboa  hast 
drank  the  blood  of  an  ape."  Eumachus  took  one  of  these  cities  by 
storm,  and  razed  it  to  the  ground:  the  other  two  submitted.  Bat  vt^ 
ceiving  intelligence  that  the  bordering  barbarians  were  coming  against 
him  with  a  great  army^  he  hastened  away  as  fast  as  he  could  towards 
the  sea      asts. 

To  this  very  time  al|  things  succeeded  in  Libya  according  to  Ar- 
chagathus's  heart's  desire.  But  afterwards  tl^e  senate  of  Carthage 
y])on  more  mature  deliberation^  ordered  fheif  fprcefi  to  be  divided 

*  Pithecuta,  i.  e.  Tlie  city  of  apei. 
t  See  Erasmus  Adag.      (Siiuise  sanguinem  profudiise,  p.  49i)^  refenrtng  to  tbif  pfaMi 
where  ibis  piovcrb  is  applied  to  tboic  that  die  a  ? iqleat  de«th, 


Chap.  itL  l!>tODOfttJS  MCULU^.  45^} 

I  ■      .       f*  ^E  ■  I  ■  ,  ■ 

into  three  bodies^  and  to  march  out  of  the  city,  one  td  the  towns  upon 
the  sea  coasts,  another  into  the  heart  of  the  country,  and  the  third 
into  the  upper  Africa.  For  by  this  means  they  supposed  they  should 
free  the  city  both  from  the  siege  and  the  inconveniences  through 
scarcity  of  provisions  at  one  and  the  same  time.  For  being  that  all 
had  flocked  to  Carthage  from  everyplace  around,  the  city  was  in  very 
great  want,  having  now  spent  and  eaten  up  all  their  provisions,  sd 
that  they  had  nothing  left  to  subsist  upon ;  they  knew  likewise  that 
there  was  no  danger  that  the  city  should  be  taken  by  force^  because 
it  lay  so  close  to  the  sea,  and  was  so  well  guarded  by  the  strength  of 
the  walls,  so  that  it  was  then  even  inaccessible:  besides,  they. con- 
eluded  that  if  they  had  considerable  armies  in  the  field  ready  to  assist 
their  confederates  upon  occasion,  they  would  remain  firm  and  con- 
stant in  their  alliance.  And  that  which  was  of  more  weight  than  all 
the  rest,  they  hoped  that  by  this  means  the  cinemy  would  be  obliged 
to  divide  their  forces,  and  go  to  other  places  far  distant  from 
Carthage:  all  whidi  good  counsel  was  afterwards  crowned  with  suc- 
cess in  all  these  particulars.  For  sending  thirty  thousand  soldiers 
out  of  the  city^  there  was  not  only  provisions  sufiicient  fof  the  mer- 
chants that  were  left,  but  a  glut  atid  overplus  more  than  they  had  oc-* 
casion  to  use ;  and  those  confedettites  who  before  out  of  fear  were 
forced  to  join  with  the  enemy^  now  recollecting  themselves,  returned 
to  them  as  their  old  friends  and  allies.  Hereupon  Archagathus,  per- 
ceiving that  the  Carthaginian  armies  were  now  in  every  part  of  Af- 
rica, divided  likewise  his  army}  part  of  which  he  sent  to  the. sea* 
coasts,  half  of  the  rest  he  delivered  to  £schrioo,  and  the  other  \ih\i 
he  led  himself,  leaving  a  sufficient  .garrison  at  Tunis.  While  great 
armies  were  thus  marching  to  and  fro  all  over  the  conatry,  and  every 
one  expecting  a  sudden  revolution  at  band^  all  were  in  a  fear  and 
amazement,  in  expectation  of  what  would  be  the  eventa 

Hanoo,  who  commanded  that  part  of  the  forces  that  noiarcHed  up 
into  the  heart  of  the  country,  laid  an  ambuscade  for  Eschrion,  and 
surprising  him  on  a  sudden^  cut  off  above  four  thousand  of  his  foot 
and  two  hundred  of  his  horse,  amongst  whom  was  the  general  him<*> 
self.  Of  the  rest,  part  of  them  was  taken  prisoners,  and  the  remainder 
escaped  to  Archagathus,  who  was  five  hundred  furlon^Js*  from  tfaei 
place.  Himilco,  general  in  the  higher  Africa,  first  possessed  himself 
of  a  city  near  to  Eumacbus,  whose  army  was  overloaden  with  spoils 
taken  out  of  several  cities*  But  the  Grecians  notwithstanding  threw 
up  in  battalia,  and  offered  the  Carthaginian  general  battle;  where-' 
upon  he  left  a  part  of  the  army.ready  drawn  up  in  the  town,  with  this 

*  Akoat  silt/  miles. 


4SO  DIODOaus  SICULUSp 


order,  that  as  soon  as  tbey  taw  him  flj,  tbqr  ihwiU  sdif  < 

the  porsuen.    Marching  therefore  out  with  half  of  the  s 

gaged  the  enemy  almost  cloae  ander  their  camp,  and  ] 

as  if  he  had  been  io  a  great  fright;   wbercnpoa  Eumachss'a 

proud  of  cheir  victory,  pursued  them  in  disorder,  and  ib  dnr 

sioo  followed  them  dose  at  their  heels;  and  presently  on  a 

issued  out  from  another  part  of  the  city  the  body  btUm  i 

the  town,  and  at  one  word  of  coounand  set  up  a  great  i 

struck  tlie  pursuers  with  fear  and  astonbhment;  and,  the 

rians  falling  upon  the  other  that  were  in  disorder,  and  aimwiarf  he* 

s  ides,  the  Grecians  presently  fled :  but  the  enemy  having  blodnd  «p 

the  passage  to  their  camp,  the  Eumachians  were  forced  to  twa  vide 

to  the  next  hill,  where  they  wanted  water;  which  being  i 

by  the  Carthaginians,  they  almost  all  there  perished,  aooie  faj  i 

and  others  by  the  sword:  for  of  eight  thousand  foot,  tUity  oaiy  ca» 

caped,  and  of  eight  hundred  horse  only  forty. 

Archagathus  therefore,  being  thus  distressed,  left  Taua,  aad  w^ 
called  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  (he  had  sent  afaenad)  finom  all  pait^ 
and  sent  messengers  into  Sicily  to  give  an  aconnnt  to  Us  hAna  af 
what  had  happened,  and  to  entreat  him  to  hasten  oven 
with  all  speed.  Besides  these  misfortunes,  other  inconi 
mischiefe  overtook  the  Grecians;  for  all  their  coafederatsa  (caoapl  a 
very  few)  forsook  them,  and  all  their  enemies  joined  i 
encamped  just  in  front  of  them,  and  were  ready  to  swallow  tl 
For  Himilco  had  blocked  up  all  the  passes,  and  aecored  tka  ( 
from  all  inroads  of  the  enemy  far  a  hundred  fiirhMga  distaat;  aaidaa 
the  other  side,  Atarbas  had  placed  his  camp  farty  farloiigp  fnm  Ttti 
nis ;  so  that  the  Greeks,  liemmed  in  both  bj  sea  and  land,  ^ 
stan-ed  for  want  of  provisicms,  and  nothing  but  temr  and  i 
filled  every  place*  While  tbey  were  in  this  sad  and  dreadfal  i 
tion,  Agathocles,  receiving  intelligence  of  the  dcstractioa  of  I 
in  Africa,  had  prepared  seventeen  men  of  war  for  the  asshlaaoa  si 
Archagatlms.  But  his  affairs  in  Sicily  growing  every  day  woma  sad 
worse,  and  the  number  of  the  esiles  with  Dinoccates  'orfising  maai 
and  more,  he  left  the  management  of  the  war  ia  the  hkad  ta  Iap« 
tines  and  his  captains;  and  he  himself,  having  maancd  his si^ip% 
waited  only  for  an  opportunity  to  get  out,  far  at  that  tsiaa  lUrty  CW» 
tbaginian  ships  lay  in  tiie  momh  of  the  harbour*  But  sonaa  tiBM.afv 
ter,  when  eighteen  ships  came  in  to  his  assistance  fcom  Blrariay  ak 
had  passed  by  the  Cartliaginuias  in  the  night  into  the  haihoai^  Ipa 
took  that  occasion,  and  by  a  stratagem  deluded  thecaemy;  fav^ 
charged  part  of  his  fleet  to  lie  still  for  some  time,  while  he,  by  gMkinr 
out  of  the  port,  should  draw  oil  the  Carthaginians  to  pursue  him.  Out 


tbcrefope  he  want  witli  seveiKeen  sail,  with  aH  Ae  wiad  he  oonld 
make,  whom  the  enemy's  fleet  forthwith  pursued:  but  Agathodes^as 
sooB  at  he  saw  that  the  Etrariant  were  got  out  uf  the  hai^Knif ,  (ne- 
seotiy  taoked  about,  and  fell  upon  the  barfaarians;  upon  which  the 
CarthagiolaBS,  suvprised  with  the  uaexpeetedaess  of  the  thing,  and 
BOW  suiToiinded  by  the  gallies  of  titeir  enemies,  in  a  great  terror  made 
away  and  iled.  The  Grecians  then  took  five  of  their  ships,  together 
wkh  iIms  men  in  them  5  and  the  Carthaginian  admiral  (seeing  that  tha 
^liip  he  was  io  was  upon  the  point  of  being  taken)  killed  himself, 
preferring  death  before  eaptivhj,  which  then  (as  he  thought)  was 
jiist  at  band.  But  he  took  no  right  measures  at  tliat  time;  for  the 
ship,  by  the  help  of  a  happy  gale  of  wiofd,  got  off  with  the  loss  of 
the  Kttle  tnnket-saH*  Thus  Agathocles,  who  never  in  the  least 
kopjMl  to  overcome  the  Carthaginians  at  sea,  unespeetedly  beat  them 
in  a  sea-fight,  and,  being  thenceferth  flMSler  of  the  port,  he  se- 
cured tlie  |J4Ssage  for  the  benefit  of  the  merchants;  so  that  the  Sy- 
vacusaas,  having  provision  brought  in  fffom  all  parts,  instead  of  their 
former  scarcity  of  every  tiling  necessary,  presently  abounded  in  plenty 
of  all  things. 

Agathoeles,  lifted  up  with  Ats  success,  sent  Leptines  away  to  ha** 
tans  the  enemy's  eountj^,  and  especially  the  Agrigentines :  for  Xeno-' 
dochiis  was  in  disgrace  amongst  his  fellow-citizens,  and  blackened 
hy  his  adversaries  ui)on  account  of  his  late  overthrow,  so  that  he  was 
troubled  with  mutinies  and  seditions.  Therefore  Agathocles  com* 
manded  Leptines  to  make  it  his  business  to  draw  him  out  to  fight,  if 
lie  possibly  could ;  for  that  it  was  a  very  easy  thing  to  vanquish  aft 
army  that  was  in  divisions  and  mutinies  among  themselves,  and  that 
had  been  beaten  but  a  little  before;  which  afterwards  happened  ac- 
cordingly :  for  Leptines,  making  an  inroad  into  the  territories  of  the 
Agrigentines,  harassed  and  spoiled  all  before  th^m.  Xenodochus, 
k)oking  upon  himself  as  too  weak,  lay  quiet  isnd  still  at  first;  but, 
heing  called  a  coward  by  the  citizens,  he  marched  out  with  an  army 
nearly  as  many  as  the  enemy,  but  far  inferior  to  them  for  courage  and 
resolution;  because  the  citizens  had  lived  altogether  in  ease  and 
idleness,  but  the  other  had  been  used  to  lie  in  the  open  field,  and 
continually  inured  to  all  manner  of  hardships.  A  battle  therefore 
being  fought  between  them,  those  with  Leptines  presently  put  the 
Agrigentines  to  flight,  and  pursued  them  even  to  the  walls  of  Afri-> 
gentum.  There  were  killed  of  those  thus  routed  about  five  htmdred 
foot,  and  fifty  horse.  Tlic  Agrigentines  being  grievously  incensed 
lit  these  losses,  one  after  another,  summoned  Xenodochus  to  his  trial, 
as  the  occas^ou  of  two  overthrows  and  slaughters  of  the  citizens^ 


46i  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  BOoi  XXi 


who,  fearing  the  severity  of  the  sentence  he  wis  likely  to  &U  i 
fled  to  Gela. 

Agathocles,  having  conquered  his  enemifc^  both  at  sea  and  land  is 
a  few  days  time^  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  entertained  bia  friends 
with  sumptuous  feasts  and  rojral  banquetings*  In  the  time  of  hit 
feasting  and  quaffing,  he  laid  aside  all  his  ensigns  of  royalty  and  auH 
jesty,  and  appeared  as  one  of  the  meanest  among  thedi}  and  this  he 
did  in  the  first  place  to  gain  upon  the  good  will  of  the  people,  wUdi 
lie  sought  thus  to  purchase;  and  in  the  second,  that,  by  giving  every 
man  free  liberty  in  their  cups  to  say  what  they  pleased  of  hian,  he 
might  the  better  learn  how  every  one  stood  afiected  towards  I 
for,  by  the  force  of  wine,  truth  often  appears  from  behind  the  I 
ing.  He  was  naturally  of  a  jocund  and  jesting  temper,  and  woold 
not  sometimes  lose  his  jest  even  in  public  assemblies,  but  wonU  jeer 
the  very  senators,  and  mock  some  of  them  by  his  apish  imilatiottSi 
insomuch  that  he  would  often  set  the  people  laughing,  as  if  they 
had  seen  some  juggler  or  stageplayer.  For  he  would  go  alone  to  the 
public  assemblies,  attended  only  by  the  common  people^  much  differ* 
ing  from  the  practice  of  Dionysius  the  tyrant;  for  he  waa  ao  fearfol 
of  every  body,  that  he  would  let  the  hair  of  his  head  and  beard  grow 
to  excess,  that  the  principal  parts  of  his  body  might  not  be  at  the 
mercy  of  a  razor;  and  whenever  he  wanted  shaving,  or  poUing,  he 
burnt  ofi*  the  hair:  every  one  may  hereby  see,  that  the  only  guard 
for  tyranny  is  diffidence.  Moreover,  at  this  time  of  revelling  Aga- 
thocles  took  up  a  great  golden  bowl,  and  boasted,  that  he  never  left 
off  the  potter's  trade  before  he  had  made  cups  and  bowls  eacdy  of 
that  shape:  for  he  did  not  deny,  but  rather  glory  in  his  trade,  as  a 
foil  that  set  off  with  more  lustre  chat  high  state  and  dignity  to  whieh 
his  own  valour  had  advanced  him  from  a  mean  and  contemptibk 
calling. 

Once  when  he  besieged  one  of  the  considerable  cities,  the  soldieif 
from  the  walls  cried  out — ^**0 potter!  Sweep-chimney!  When  wilt 
thou  pay  thy  soldiers  ?"  To  whom  he  answered — *^  When  I  have  taken 
and  razed  this  place." 

When  he  had  found  out  by  the  craft  of  his  carousing  Mid  festind 
jollity  who  were  his  enemies,  he  invited  them  another  time  by  them- 
selves, together  with  five  hundred  other  Syracusans^  who  were  men 
of  brave  and  undaunted  spirits;  and  when  they  were  together,  he 
surrounded  them  with  his  mercenary  soldiers,  and  murdered  them 
every  man:  for  he  was  terribly  afraid  lest,  when  he  was  gone  into 
Africa,  they  should  recal  Dinocrates  and  the  refugees,  and  abrqgnte 
his  government. 


Chap.  III.  DiODORUS  sicuLUS.  46s 

Having  thus  settled  afikirs  id  order  to  the  establishing  himself  in 
the  principality,  (le  departs  from  Syracuse.  When  he  landed  in  Africa^ 
he  found  there  in  the  camp  nothing  but  want  and  desperation;  there- 
fore judging  it  most  for  his  advantage  to  fight,  he  made  it  his  busi- 
ness to  encourage  the  soldiers  to  engage  the  enemy,  and  thereupon 
drew  them  all  out  in  battalia,  and  ofiTered  the  J>arbarians  battle.  The 
remainder  of  the  foot  then  with  him  were  at  the  most  not  above  six. 
thousand  Grecians,  and  as  many  Celts,  Samnites,  and  Etrurians,  and 
almost  ten  thousand  Africans  of  those  that  stayed  with  him.  These 
Africans  are  a  treacherous  sort  of  men,  ever  upon  any  occasion  run- 
ning over  from  one  party  to  another.  Besides  these,  there  were  with 
him  fifteen  hundred  horse,  and  about  six  thousand  African  carriages. 
But  the  Carthaginians,  though  they  had  the  advantage  of  a  high* 
ground,  and  of  difficult  access,  yet  they  were  not  willing  to  venture 
all  at  once  with  men  that  were  desperate,  but  by  lying  still  in  their 
camp,  (where  they  had  plenty  of  provisions),  and  by  protracting  of 
time,  they  hoped  to  starve  the  enemy,  and  so  be  masters  of  their  camp 
without  fighting. 

Agathocles  therefore,  not  being  able  to  draw  the  enemy  forth  to  a 
battle  in  the  open  field,  and  being  necessitated  by  his  present  cir- 
cumstances to  attempt  something,  and  enter  upon  some  desperata 
action,  marched  up  with  his  whole  army  close  to  the  enemy^s  campi 
thereupon  the  Cartliaginians  made  out  against  him;  and,  though  they 
had  the  advantage  of  ground,  and  far  exceeded  him  in  number  of 
men,  yet  Agathocles,  pressed  hard  on  every  side,  for  some  time  re- 
solutely bore  up  against  them:  but  his  mercenaries  and  some  others 
at  length  giving  ground,  he  was  forced  to  retreat  to  his  camp.  The 
barbarians  pursued  them  close;  but,  to  gain  the  good  will  and  fevouf 
of  the  Africans,  they  passed  by  them  without  doing  any  execution: 
but  the  Greeks  (whom  they  knew  by  their  arms)  they  killed  all  along 
till  they  had  driven  the  rest  into  their  camp.  There  were  slain  of 
Agathocles's  men  at  that  time  three  thousand. 

The  next  night  a  sudden  and  unexpected  disaster  fell  upon  both 
the  armies:  for  the  Carthaginians,  when  they  were  sacrificing  the 
most  eminent  and  considerable  persons  among  their  prisoners,  in 
gratitude  to  their  gods  for  the  victory  they  had  gained,  the  flame 
rising  high  that  enwrapped  the  bodies  of  the  sacrificed  captives,  a 
fierce  wind  on  a  sudden  carried  the  flame  to  the  sacred  tabernacle 
npar  the  altar,  where  it  catched  and  burnt  it  down  to  the  ground | 
thence  it  proceeded  to  the  general's  pavilion,  and  the  officer's  tents 
next  adjoining:  upon  which  arose  a  mighty  consternation,  and  as- 
tonishment filled  the  whole  camp,  while  some  endeavouring  to  quench 
the  fire^  others  striving  to  carry  away  arms  and  rich  f^mitme^  wqr» 


464  vioDonvn  siculus.  'AM  XX, 


cansnmed  b j  tht  flames.  The  tents  were  made  of  reeda  and  i 
aBd  therefore  the  fire  (through  the  height  of  the  wind)  ngod  Ite 
morel  so  that  by  its  quichoess  it  prevented  all  bel|p  and  tnihfartfc 
tiiat  the  soldiers  eould  any  ways  contribute.  Tlie  whole  eaisp  bekif 
presently  in  a  flame,  many  in  straight  and  narrow  passes  were  inter- 
cepted by  the  fire,  and  burnt  to  death.  And  thos  they  pftBca&f 
pud  for  their  cruelty  to  the  captives,  suffering  the  like  pnniilnnent 
as  a  retaliation  of  their  impiety.  And  others,  who  tmntibiKlusly  widi 
woful  cries  got  out  of  the  camp,  were  pursued  by  another  and  greater 
misfortune:  for  those  Africans  that  were  in  Agathocles's  aroqr,  l9 
the  number  of  five  tiiousand,  deserted  the  Grecians,  and  Were  flyk|g 
to  the  barbarians.  When  those  that  went  out  to  scout  saw  tbale  dH 
serters  make  towards  the  Carthaginkin  camp,  thinking  the  whoit 
Grecian  army  was  at  hand  ready  to  fall  upon  them,  they  fbrfliwitb 
gave  intelligence  to  their  own  party,  that  the  enemy^a  whoie  mmf 
approached ;  which  being  noised  abroad,  confusion  and  dread  of  the 
enemy's  being  just  in  the  midst  of  them  ran  through  the 
camp ;  whereupon  every  one  placed  his  own  safety  in  the  i 
of  his  heels;  and  in  regard  no  word  of  command  was  given  by  any  of 
the  officers,  nor  any  ordejT  kept  among  the  soldiers,  those  that  fled 
fell  down  one  upon  another;  and  some  of  tliem  through  the  daarkncv 
of  the  night,  and  others  out  of  excess  of  fear,  fell  a-figbting  wid^ 
tl>eir  own  men,  not  knowing  who  they  were.  Tlie  mistake  still  < 
tinning,  and  increasing,  a  great  slaughter  was  made;  and  i 
^killed  hand  to  hand,  and  others  running  away  with  the  lost  of  their 
arms,  in  the  height  of  a  surprising  fear,  in  their  haste  fell  down  ita^ 
and  craggy  rocks,  and  were  dashed  to  pieces;  about  five  thousand  of 
them  being  destroyed,  the  rest  at  length  c!:ot  to  Carthage.  The  citioi 
zens  within  the  town  (deceived  by  the  report  of  their  own  men)  be^ 
lieved  they  were  routed,  and  that  the  greatest  j^art  of  tlie  arany  w» 
cut  off;  in  this  fright  they  opened  the  gates,  and  received  them  irfib 
great  terror  and  amazement  into  the  town,  fearing  lest  the  cnaqf 
should  likewise  break  in  at  the  lieels  of  them.  And  though  when  it 
was  full  day  they  came  to  understand  the  truth  of  the  matter,  yet  thqp 
could  scarce  allay  the  fears  they  had  been  in,  as  if  the  evils  were  stiK^ 
even  at  their  doors. 

About  the  same  time,  through  a  vain  fear  and  foolish  imaginatioi^ 
Agathoeles  fell  into  a  misfortune  something  of  the  same  kind*  For 
the  African  deserters,  after  the  burning  of  tlie  Carthaginian  emnf^ 
and  tlie  confusion  and  uproar  that  followed  therenpon,dant  not  i— fJi 
forward,  but  made  their  way  back  to  the  place  from  whence  thif 
came;  wly>m  some  of  the  Greeks  espying  to  make  towards  thm^ 
th^  took  thcfi\  to  be  the  Carthagioian  anny,  and  tberemion  gtf»iit» 


CAap.IIL  DT0D0RU8  8ICULU8.  405 

I  '  'I  II  III  I  Jiii  II  "  INI  1 1  I  I  gggsasBg  ■  I  i'  I  I  I  m 
telligence  to  Agathocles,  that  the  enemy  was  near  at  hand:  upoa 
which,  by  the  king's  order^  they  cried  out-^^'  Arms!  Arms!"  and 
forthwith  the  soldiers  came  pouring  out  of  the  camp  in  great  tumult 
and  confusion.  And  besides  all  this^  when  they  saw  the  flame  in  the 
enemy's  camp  mount  up  into  the  air^  and  heard  the  shouts  and  cries 
of  the  Carthaginians,  they  were  the  more  confirmed  in  their  opi* 
nion,  that  the  barbarians  were  making  towards  them  with  their  whole 
army. 

But  excess  of  fear  leaving  no  room  for  due  and  serious  considera- 
tion, horror  and  amazement  filled  the  whole  camp,  and  all  of  them 
took  to  their  heels;  and  the  Africans  being  presently  mixed  among 
them,  (the  night  causing  the  mistake),  every  one  opposed  him  that 
be  met  as  an  enemy,  and  being  all  the  night  long  dispersed  here  and 
there,  and  wandering  up  and  down  in  a  panic  fear,  there  perished  of 
them  above  four  thousand :  the  rest,  (with  much  ado,  at  length  coming 
to  understand  the  mistake),  returned  safe  to  their  camp.  And  in  this 
manner  both  armies,  deceived  by  the  vanity  of  war,  (as  the  commoa 
proverb  is),  fell  into  miserable  disasters.  After  which  misfortune, 
being  now  deserted  by  the  Africans,  and  having  not  sufficient  forces 
left  to  contend  with  the  Carthaginians,  he  resolved  to  leave  Africa: 
but  he  thought  it  impossible  to  transport  the  soldiers  with  him,  be-, 
cause  he  both  wanted  shipping,  and  heard  that  the  Carthaginians  were 
masters  at  sea,  and  lay  to  intercept  hb  passage:  and  he  concluded 
that  the  barbarians  (whose  forces  far  exceeded  his)  would  never  make 
peace  with  him,  but  rather  cut  off  every  man  of  them  that  first  set 
footing  upon  Africa,  to  deter  all  others  for  the  future  from  the  like 
attempt.  He  determined  therefore  to  slip  away  privately  with  a  few, 
and^take  along  with  him  his  younger  son  Heraclides;  for  be  feared 
lest  his  son  Archagathus,  being  a  daring  man,  and  one  that  had  beea 
too  familiar  with  his  step-mother,  would  plot  something  against  his. 
life.  But  Archagathus  perceiving  hb  design,  resolved  to  discover 
the  matter  to  those  captains  and  officers  who  would  be  able  to  defeat 
him  in  his  contrivance,  and  to  that  purpose  strictly  observed  his  mo-;  - 
tions:  for  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  base  and  unworthy  thing  that  he, 
who  had  undergone  a  good  part  of  the  toib  and  hazards  of  the  war. 
for  the  sake  of  his  father  and  brother,  should  be  now  left  alone  as  a 
prey  to  the  enemy,  without  any  hopes  of  deliverance.  He  informed 
therefore  some  of  the  captains  and  most  considerable  officers  of  the. 
intended  departure  of  Agathocles  and  hb  companions  the  next  night: 
whereupon  all  the  body  forthwith  made  up  to  him,  and  not  only  put 
a  stop  to  his  voyage,  but  acquainted  the  common  soldiers  how  ths^ 
plot  was  laid;  who  being  both  grieved  and  enraged  together,  laid  hold 
of  him,  and  bound  him,  and  so  committed  bim  to  custody.    An 

Vol.  2.  No.  46.  ooo 


466  DIODORUS  SICUL^S.  Beok  ZX. 


anarchy  following  hereupon,  there  was  nothing  but  tunralt  and  i 
fusion  throughout  all  the  camp:  and  when  night  canae  on,  a  mndar 
was  spread  over  the  camp,  that  the  enemy  was  just  falling  id  amongit 
them:  upon  which  all  were  so  possessed  with  a  panic  fear^tbrt^ 
having  none  to  command  them,  every  one  was  preparing  to  get  aw^; 
at  which  very  time  they  that  had  the  custody  of  the  prince  (in  as  great 
a  consternation  as  the  rest)  thought  that  some  or  other  called  them 
forth,  who  thereupon  came  out  with  Agathocles  in  his  chains  aloiy 
with  them;  at  which  sight  the  whole  army  was  so  afiected  with  pity 

and  compassion,  that  they  cried  out ^^  Loose  him,  let  him  goJ\ 

Being  freed  from  his  chains,  he  presently  after  mth  a  soiall  at* 
tendance  stole  away,  and  took  shipping  about  the  bcginoing  of  Oc- 
tober* in  the  night,  in  winter-time,  and  got  away.  And  thus  to  pie- 
serve  himself,  forsook  his  children;  whom  the  soldiers  presently, up* 
on  the  news  of  their  father*s  flight,  killed;  and  then  they  choae  cap- 
tains from  among  themselves,  and  made  peace  with  the  Carthaginiui 

upon  these  conditions,  viz. That  the  Greeks  should  receive  thiee 

hundred  talents,  and  should  restore  all  the  towns  they  then  faddy 
and  that  all  that  would,  might  take  up  arms  with  theCarthaginians^  and 
receive  the  usual  pay:  that  the  rest  should  be  transported  to  Sicily^ 
and  should  have  Selinus  for  their  habitation.  The  greatest  part  of 
the  soldiers,  who  were  feithful  to  what  they  had  agreed^  had  all  as 
faithfully  performed  to  them:  hut  those  cities  and  towns  that  held 
out  in  hopes  and  expectations  of  relief  from  Agathocles^  were  all  taken 
by  force  of  arms;  whose  several  governors  the  Cartfaapnians  craei* 
fied,  and  the  rest  they  bound  in  chains,  and  employed  theaa  to  till, 
and  repair  by  their  own  labours,  those  parts  of  the  country  that  Aey 
bad  before  wasted  and  destroyed.  And  thus  the  Carthaginians,  alter 
they  had  been  harassed  and  vexed  with  a  four-years  war^  reccitqei 
their  former  peace  and  liberty. 

In  this  expedition  of  Agathocles  into  Africa,  any  one  may  i 

most  remarkable  accidents,  and  the  divine  providence  in  the  ] 

ment  inflicted  upon  his  sons.    For,  being  routed  in  Sicily,  lie  kit 

the  greatest  part  of  his  army:  a  little  time  after,  he  overcame  the 

conquerors  with  a  very  inconsiderable  body  of  men  in  Afncn.    la 

Sicily,  being  thrown  out  of  all  the  cities,  he  was  cooped  up  by  a  doie 

siege  within  the  walls  of  Syracuse:  in  Africa,  he  guned  all  the  toirns^ 

except  Carthage,  and  closely  besieged  the  Carthaginians  in  that  city; 

by  which  fortune  seemed  to  make  it  her  business  to  let  eveiy  one  see 

what  power  she  had  to  retrieve  those  things  that  seemed  to  be  ioa 

desperate  condition.    But  after  that  Agathocles,  in  the  height  of  btf 

prosperity,  had  murdered  Ophelas,  against  all  the  laws  of  fricnddlip 

^  At  the  »ettiD^  of  Uie  Pleiadoi*  or  ieTea  tttn. 


Outp^UL  moDORus  aicuLus«  467 

■    ■  W  ^^^^^^^^^^  ■  ■"■•la  —^—^^1^— 

and  hospitaliiyj  God  made  it  manifefttly  apparent^  that  for  the  piece 
of  wickedness  acted  upon  that  man^  whatever  happened  to  him  after- 
wards was  ordered  and  dispensed  by  bis  own  hand:  fpr  the  very 
month  and  day  of  the  month  that  he  killed  Ophelas,  and  brought  over 
to  him  all  his  army,  the  veiy  same  day  and  month  he  ^gain  lost  both 
his  sons  and  his  army*  And  that  which  is  more  especially  to  be  ob- 
served was,  that  God,  as  a  just  law-giver^  inflicted  on  him  a  double 
punishment ;  for  he  who  had  most  wickedly  destroyed  his  friend,  was 
deprived  of  two  sons  together,  even  by  the  hands  of  those  that  came 
along  with  Ophelas.  This  remark  ought  not  to  o£fend  those  who 
slight  and  despise  such  providences. 

As  for  Agathocles,  as  soon  as  he  landed  in  Sicily,  by  a  hasty  flight 
out  of  Africa,  he  sent  for  part  of  his  forces,  and  marched  to  the  con- 
federate city  of  the  iEgestines ;  and,  being  in  want  of  money,  exacted 
the  greatest  part  of  the  estates  of  those  that  were  rich,  in  which  place 
were  ten  thousand  inhabitants.    This  many  of  them  took  very  hei- 
iiously,and  met  together  in  private  cabals;  but  Agathocles,  finding  out 
that  the  ^gestines  were  plotting  against  him,  brought  most  dreadful 
calamities  upon  the  city:  for,  drawing  all  the  poor  out  of  the  town,  he 
cut  all  their  throats  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  Scamander;  and  all 
those  who  seemed  to  be  richer  than  the  rest  he  put  to  severe  tor- 
tures, to  force  them  to  confess  how  much  money  they  had:  for  some 
be  broke  upon  the  wheel;  others  he  bound  to  his  engines  of  battery^ 
and  shot  them  away  like  stones;  and  of  others,  he  cut  out  the  ankle- 
Jbones  of  their  feet,  and  by  his  cruel  and  unmerciful  dealing  put  them 
to  most  horrible  torments.     He  invented  likewise  another  son  of 
punishment,  not  much  nnUkc  the  Phalarian  bull ;  for  he  made  a  hvA. 
of  brass  esLactly  after  the  shape  of  a  man,  wherein  were  several  open- 
ings and  hollow  places  on  every  side:  those  that  he  intended  to  tor- 
ment he  put  into  this  bed,  and  then  put  fire  under  it^  and  burnt  them 
to  death*    In  one  thing  this  engine  differed  from  the  bull,  that  those 
who  perished,  and  were  consumed  in  those  strait  and  narrow  holes, 
were  exposed  to  the  view  of  every  one.     He  would  likewise  break  in 
pieces  the  ankle-bones  of  some  of  the  rich  women  with  iron  pincers, 
and  cut  off  the  breasts  of  others;  and  wo|ild  sometimes  hiy  a  weight 
of  tiles  upon  the  loins  of  women  with  child,  till  he  forced  the  child 
to  leap,  as  it  were,  forcibly  out  of  the  womb.    While  the  tyrant  was 
in  this  manner  endeavouring  to  find  out  all  the  wealth  eveiy  body  had, 
and  the  whole  city  was  in  terror  and  astonishment,  some  burnt  them- 
selves and  their  houses  together,  and  others  hanged  themselves*  And 
thus  iEgesta,  in  one  black  and  doleful  day,  had  the  prime  and  flower 
of  her  youth  cut  off.    But  the  young  women  and  children  the  tyrant 
transported  into  Italy,  and  sold  them  to  the  Brutxi:  and,  that  tlie  very 


468  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XX. 


name  of  the  place  should  be  extinguished  and  forgottent  be  cdird  it 
Diccepolis^  and  granted  it  as  a  habitation  to  such  refugees  as  came 
over  to  hina* 

When  he  heard  of  the  murder  of  his  sons^  he  was  so  enraged  at 
those  he  had  left  behind  him  in  Africa^  that  he  sent  some  of  his  friends 
to  his  brother  Antander  at  Syracuse,  with  orders,  that  he  should  cut 
the  throats  of  all  the  kindred  and  relations  of  those  that  went  over  in 
the  Carthaginian  expedition;  who  thereupon  executing  what  he  wis 
commanded,  committed  such  slaughters  and  murders  as  never  occoned 
at  any  time  before:  for  he  not  only  hurried  away  to  destraction  young 
men  in  the  prime  of  their  age,  as  brothers,  fathers,  and  children; 
but  even  grandfathers  and  great-grandfathers,  if  they  happened  then 
to  be  living,  though  they  had  one  foot  even  in  the  grave,  and  ooold 
neither  see  nor  hear,  through  extremity  of  old  age :  nay,  even  infants 
carried  in  arms,  who  were  not  sensible  of  any  harm  designed  them 
before  they  felt  it;  they  dragged  away  likewise  to  execution  women, 
whether  they  were  servants  or  kindred  to  them  in  Africa,  or  whoever 
else  that  (by  their  death)  might  be  the  occasion  of  grief  and  sorrow  to 
them :  so  that,  while  a  vast  number  of  persons  of  all  ages  and  sexes 
were  hauled  away  to  execution  at  the  sea-shore,  where  the  bntcfaers 
stood  ready  for  them,  tears,  earnest  entreaties  upon  their  knees,  and 
woful  lamentations  appeared  every  where,  both  from  them  that  were 
butchered,  and  from  others,  who  so  far  compassionated  the  sad  con- 
dition  of  their  neighbours,  that  their  hearts  were  as  full  of  grief  at 
theirs  who  were  just  ready  to  die.  And  that  which  was  the  most 
grievous  of  all  was,  that  after  so  great  a  slaughter,  and  that  the  car- 
cases lay  cast  forth  upon  the  shore,  neither  kinsman  nor  friend  durst 
bury  them,  lest  any  of  them  should  be  thought  related  to  those  thrt 
were  dead.  The  multitude  of  them  that  were  murdered  upon  the 
shore  was  such,  that  the  sea  was  dyed  with  blood  a  long  way  off,  whieh 
presented  to  the  eye  at  a  great  distance  the  horridoess  of  that  baiba* 
rous  cruelty. 


Chap.  IV.  DI0D0RU8  SICULU8«  46^9 

— — — — ""■■^— — — ' 1  I  - 


CHAR  IV, 


AnHgonus^s  march  into  Egi/pt.  A  thvtpest  near  Uaphia^  wher^ 
he  lost  some  of  his  ships.  He  returns  into  S^ria.  Dinocratcs 
prevails  in  Sicily.  Agathocles  is  willing  to  resign  his  govern-' 
mmt;  but  Dinocrates  stands  off,  JVhat  was  done  in  Italy. 
Antigonus^s  tear  with  the  lihodians*  Rhodes  besieged  by  De- 
metrius. Agathocles  routs  Dinocrates's  great  army  with  a  fern 
men.  His  cruelty  to  those  that  sitbmitted  upon  terms j  where  he 
butchers  seven  thousand.  Dinocrates  in  favour  ivUh  Agathocles i 
he  betrays  the  confederates.    Further  transaetiatts  iti  Jtaly. 

THE  year  following,  Corybus  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  and 
Quintus  Martins  and  Publius  Cornelius  were  created  consuls  at  Rome. 
About  that  time  king  Antigonus  buried  his  youngest  son  with  royal 
pomp  and  splendour;  and,  calling  home  Demetrius  out  of  Cjrprus, 
commanded  his  whole  army  to  meet  at  his  new  city  Antjgoaia^  for 
he  purposed  to  march  from  thence  into  Egypt:  whert^f ore  leading 
the  foot  himself,  he  passed  through  Coelosyim^  having  an  army  of 
fourscore  thousand  foot,  and  above  eight  thousand  horse^  »nd  four* 
score  and  three  elephants.  He  made  Demetrius  admiral  of  his  fleet, 
giving  him  orders  to  keep  close  to  the  shore^  in  sight  of  the  land* 
army,  having  in  all  a  hundred  ai^d  fifty  Bghting  s^ips,  and  a  hundred 
more  of  burthen,  wherein  was  an  infinite  store  of  arms  of  aU  sorts: 
and  when  the  |)ilots  told  him,  that  they  were  to  stay  till  the  setting 
of  the  seven  stars,  which  would  be  the  eighth  day*  from  thence,  he 
condemned  them  for  being  too  timorous.  Coming  to  Gaza,  and  pur- 
posing to  fall  upon  Ptolemy  before  Jie  was  provided  for  him,  he  com- 
manded his  soldiers  to  take  with  them  ten  days  nctuals;  and, getting 
together  camels  out  of  Arabia,  he  loaded  on  them  a  hundred  and 
thirty  thousand  bushels  of  wheat,  and  an  infinite  store  of  hay  upoa 
other  beasts  of  burthen ;  and,  carrying  his  ammunition  on  carts,  went 
through  the  desert,  not  without  some  trouble  to  the  army;  for  they 
met  with  sum'ry  fens  and  dirty  places  by  the  way,  especially  about 
the  place  called  Barathra.  Demetrius  departing  from  Gaza  in  the  dead 
of  ni^ht,  was  for  many  days  together  becalmed;  so  that  the  lighter 
ships  were  obliged  to  tow  the  ships  of  burthcu  after  them  with  ropes* 
*  About  ihc  bf  giuuJn^  ol  AprU. 


470  DionoRUs  sicuLuik. 

But  after  this,  and  as  soon  as  the  seven  stars  were  set,  a  Donlwrly 
wind  arose,  and  fell  upon  them,  by  which  many  of  the  ships  ?dth 
four  tier  of  oars  a-piece  were  driven  on  shore  near  to  the  city  Raphii^ 
where  there  was  no  commodious  landing  for  them :  but  of  those  which 
carried  the  artillery,  some  of  them  were  sunk,  and  the  rest  recoTered 
Gaza  again.    Yet  some  of  the  best  of  them  bore  up,  and  came  under 
the  promontory  of  Cassius.    That  foreland  is  not  far  distant  from 
the  river  Nile,  but  is  not  a  place  fit  for  shipping ;  especially  if  any  tem- 
pest happen,  there  is  no  coming  near  it:  wherefore  every  ship  drop* 
ping  two  anchors  each,  two  furlongs  off  from  land,  were  obliged  to 
jide  out  in  a  huge  sea,  in  tlie  midst  of  a  thousand  dangers;  f<Ir  the 
fury  of  the  waves  was  such,  that  the  great  danger  was,  lest  both  meo 
and  ships  should  sink  down  together;  and  because  there  was  no  fit 
landing-place,  and  likewise  as  the  shore  was  guarded  by  the  enemy, 
the  vessels  could  neither  make  to  land,  nor  any  swim  oat  without 
extreme  hazard.    But  the  most  grievous  of  all  was,  that  they  had 
spent  all  their  fresh  water,  and  were  reduced  to  that  extremity  of 
want,  that,  had  the  tempest  lasted  but  one  day  longer,  they  must  all 
necessarily  have  perished  through  extreme  thirst.    But  in  this  greit 
extremity  of  theirs,  and  when  they  expected  nothing  but  deaths  the 
storm  ceased:   Antigonus  with  his  army  coming  to  the  place,  there 
encamped,  and  the  weather-beaten  men  came  on  shore,  and  refiresbed 
themselves  in  the  camp,  and  waited  for  the  ships  that  were  sepaimted 
from  them  by  the  storm*    Nevertheless  there  were  lost  in  this  tem- 
pest three  ships  of  five  tier  of  oars  each,  out  of  which  some  men  es« 
caped  alive  to  land.    From  hence  Antigonus  removed,  and  sat  down 
with  his  army  two  furlongs  distant  from  the  river  Nile.    But  Pto- 
lemy, having  manned  all  the  bank  of  the  river  with  strong  gamsons^ 
eent  some  in  river-boats,  with  commands  that,  going  as  near  the 
farther  bank  as  safely  they  could,  they  should  there  proclaim  .jrhat 
if  any  of  Antigonus*s  army  would  come  to  him,  he  would  give  liiB» 
if  a  common  soldier,  two  minas,  if  a  captain,  a  talent.    No  sooner 
was  this  proclamation  made,  than  a  multitude  of  Antigonus's  flseOy 
who  served  him  for  pay,  grew  very  desirous  to  be  gone;  yea,  and 
some  of  his  captains  too,  for  that  and  some  other  reasons,  had  n  niad 
to  go  also.    But  when  Antigonus  perceived  that  a  multitude  of  Us 
men  were  flying  away  from  him,  he  disposed  archers  and  slingen^ 
and  other  engines  of  war,  upon  the  shore,  to  keep  them  from  flyiof 
over  the  water  in  boats;  and  some  that  ran  away  he  overtook,  and  pot 
to  horrible  torments,  to  deter  others  from  the  like* 

Antigonus,  gathering  together  his  ships  that  came  in  after  the 
tempest,  though  later  than  him,  went  to  a  place  called  Psendostomoa, 
thinking  there  to  have  landed  some  of  his  men ;  but  he  found  a  strong 


a^.IP:  DIODOHTTf  SICULtri.  ifi 

gsrriaoii,  and  nns  btates  off  with  bows  and  alings^  and  other  engine 
of  war:  the  night  therefore  drawing  on,  he  went  his  way,  giving  or- 
ders to  the  masters  of  every  ship,  to  follow  the  admirars  lanthom^ 
and  to  mdce  to  the  month  of  the  river  Nile  which  is  called  Phagneti- 
cum:  but  the  next  morning,  finding  that  many  of  his  ships  had  lost 
their  way,  he  was  forced  to  come  to  anchor  there,  and  to  send  away 
the  swiftest  ships  he  had  to  seek  them  oat. 

The  time  thus  spent  and  protracted,  Ptolemy  being  advestised  off 
the  approach  of  the  enemy,  came  in  speedily  to  the  rdief  of  his  men^ 
and  rai>ged  bis  aro^y  all  along  the  shore.  Whereapon^  Demetriwi 
inding  no  possibility  of  landing  here  neither,  and  being  inibrmed 
that  the  country  adjoining  was  naturally  fenced  with  feaa  andmoorisb 
grounds,  be  set  sail  and  returned.  B«t  as  he  was  going,  the  wiodl 
struck  up  to  the  north,  and  with  a  mighty  tempest  drove  three  of  hig 
ships  of  four  tier  of  oars,  and  some  others  of  his  transport-shipsy  npoor 
the  shore,  all  which  came  into  Ptolemy's  bands^  the  rest  with  much 
ado  recovered  Antigonus's  camp.  Now  Pidemy  had  placed  strong 
garrisons  at  every  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  river  Nile,  and  had  an  ia« 
finite  number  of  river-boats  every  vAere  ready,  stored  with  darts  and 
fKngs,  and  men  which  knew  well  how  to  ose  them,  wfaick  gveatly 
vexed  and  troubled  Antigonus  ^  for  the  mouth  of  the  rivisr  at  Pdi^ 
slum  being  strongly  guarded  by  Ptolemy,  he  could  make  no^  use  ot 
hh  ships  at  ail :  and  for  the  land  forces,  diey  were  not  able  to  do  any 
thkig,  because  of  the  height  of  the  river:  and  that  whiehiWB 
by  his  long  tarrying,  boUi  food  for  men,  and  fodder  for  cattle^ 
tD  grow  scarce.  Wherefore  Antigonns  seeing  lus  araydiaheartc 
ened,  called  them  all  together,  and  propounded  it  to  the  aiptmam.,^ 
Whether  of  the  two  were  best,  to  stayandfight  it  ouli  now,  or  to  g» 
into  Syria  for  the  present,  and  to  return  again  bettec  piovide^ 
and  when  the  waters  should  be  lower?  And  when  every  nnm^s  voice: 
was  for  departing,  he  bid  his  soldiers  traa^  q>tbwtriiflcets;  and  sa 
with  his  navy  keeping  still  along  the  shore  by  them,  ht  returned 
into  Syria. 

Ptolemy  growing  glad  at  heart  that  the  enemy  was  thus  gone,  ot^ 
fered  sacrifice  to  his  gods  for  this  great  deliverance;  and  inade  withal 
a  most  magnificent  feast  for  his  nobles,  and  wrote  off  letters  toSe* 
leucus,  Lysimaehus,  and  Cassander,  of  his  prosperous  success,  in* 
forming  them  likewise,  how  a  multitudeofAntigonus's  men  had  fled 
over  to  him.  And  now  having  rescued  as  it  were  Egypt  a  second 
time,  and  obtained  it  by  his  sword,  judging' therefore  he  might  law^ 
fully  reckon  it  as  his  own,  he  returned  to  Alexandria. 

While  these  things  thus  passed  in  £gypt,  Diooysius*,  the  tyrant 
•  Stt  JEliAQ.  Vv.  Hiftor.  1.  9.  c  I9»  the  jlitneai  Qf  tifif  m^  , 


4f2  DIODORUS  8TCULUS.  Book  XXb 

of  Heraclea  in  Pontus^  died,  having  reigned  thirty- two  years:  and 
his  SODS  Zathras  and  Clearchus  succeeding  him  reigned  aventeea 
years. 

In  the  mean  time,  Agathocles  visited  ail  the  cities  in  Sicily  that 
were  under  his  command^  filling  them  with  garrisons^  and  poUiog 
them  for  money:  for  the  man  was  in  a  terrible  fright,  lest  when  he 
should  fall  under  a  cloud,  they  should  recover  their  liberty  by  foro^ 
of  arms. 

About  that  time,  Pasiphilus,  the  general,  hearing  of  the  death  of 
Agathocles 's  sons,  and  the  rout  of  his  forces  in  Libya,  held  the  tyimt 
in  contempt:  and  falling  offtoDinocrates,joined  in  confederacy  with 
him;  and  being  possessed  of  the  cities  which  were  before  committed 
to  his  care  and  trust,  he  enticed  and  drew  off  the  army  (then  under 
his  command)  from  the  tyrant  by  fair  promises,  and  hopes  of  mighty 
things. 

Agathocles  therefore  being  now  every  where  disappointed  and  fros* 
trated  of  his  hopes,  was  so  far  dejected,  that  he  sent  an  agent  to  Di» 
Bocrates,  and  offered  to  make  peace  with  him  upon  these  conditioiis^ 

viz. ^That  he  would  lay  down  his  sovereignty,  and  restore  Syracuse 

to  the  citizens;  and  that  Dinocrates  should  be  no  longer  ao  eule^ao 
that  he  would  deliver  up  two  castles,  Tharma  and  Cephaloedisy  ttH 
gether  with  their  adjoining  territories,  to  Agathocles.    Heie  aoBe 
may  justly  wonder  how  it  came  to  pass,  that  Agathocles,  who  waa  at 
all  other  times,  and  in  all  other  things  resolute  and  obstioate,  t 
sever  in  the  least  discouraged  when  his  condition  was  moat  < 
rate,  should  be  now  so  dastardly,  as  to  be  willing  to  give  op  all  into  the 
enemy's  hands,  without  striking  a  stroke  for  the  obtaining  and  com* 
passing  of  which  he  had  fought  so  many  and  great  battles :  and  that 
which  is  the  strangest  of  all,  was,  that  he  who  was  lord  of  Syrecaa^ 
and  of  many  other  cities,  and  had  a  considerable  navy  at  sea,  and  aa 
army  at  land,  should  become  so  weak-headed,  as  not  to  remember 
anything  of  that  which  happened  to  Dionysius;  for  when  bewai 
reduced  to  most  miserable  straits,  and  to  that  degree  of  fear  of  thoia 
mischiefs  that  hung  over  his  head,  as  that  he  was  altogether  hnprlf 
of  retaining  his  principality,  and  was  upon  the  very  point  of  moantiiif 
his  Iiorse,  and  flying  away  from  Syracuse;  Heloris,  one  of  the  most 
antient  of  his  noblemen  (to  put  a  stop  to  his  career)  said  to  himi.. 
**  TUesepulchre  of  a  king  is  honourable/'    And  the  like  to  this  is  what 
his  father-in-law,  Megacles,  said  to  him,  that — *^  He  who  ia  deprived 
of  a  kingdom,  should  part  with  it  so,  as  if  forced  from  between  his 
very  thighs,  und  not  as  one  making  a  voluntary  abdication/'    By 
which  serious  admonitions,  Dionysius  was  so  encooragedy  that  he 
went  through  every  thing  courageously,  though  ever  so  terrible,  and 


Chap.  IV.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  47* 


afterwards  mightily  enlarged  his  dominion,  and  continued  in  this 
height  of  prosperity  till  he  was  old^  leaving  the  greatest  principality 
in  Europe  to  his  children. 

But  Agathocles  not  in  the  least  encouraged  by  any  of  these  con«> 
siderations,  nor  considering  the  vanity  of  human  confidence  and  ex- 
pectations by  what  he  had  learnt  by  his  own  experience,  set  to  sale  so 
gr^at  a  principality  for  a  trifle  :  but  yet  the  proposals  took  noefiect; 
for  though  Agathocles  would  willingly  have  had  them  confirmed,  yet 
the  ambition  of  Dinocrates  rejected  them;  for  he  affected  an  ab- 
solute monarchy,  and  therefore  hated  the  Syracusan  democracy, 
and  was  better  pleased  with  the  command  (as  general  of  the  army) 
which  he  then  enjoyed:  for  he  had  at  that  time  under  his  command 
above  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  three  thousand  horse,  and  many  of 
the  largest  and  chiefest  cities ;  so,  though  he  was  called  only  general 
of  the  exiles,  yet  in  truth  he  had  the  majesty  and  authority  of  a  king; 
the  chief  and  absolute  power  of  every  thing  being  in  his  hands;  for 
if  he  returned  to  Syracuse,  he  concluded  he  must  of  necessity  be  no 
more  than  a  private  man,  and  be  reputed  but  one  of  the  many,  (for 
liberty  loves  equality),  and  subject  to  b^ undermined  and  degraded  by 
the  suffrage  of  every  demagogue  in  the  public  assemblies;  for  the 
common  people  are  ever  enemies  to  those  that  are  rising  men,  and 
speak  tiieir  minds  most  freely.  And  therefore  a  man  may  justly  say^ 
that  Agathocles  voluntarily  lowered  his  sails;  and  that  Dinocrates 
was  the  only  cause  of  whatever  good  was  done  by  this  prince  at  any 
time  afterwards.  For  Agathocles  often  sent  agents  to  him  to  solicit 
and  treat  about  the  conditions  of  peace,  still  insisting  upon  haying  the 
two  castles  for  his  subsistence,  and  he  as  often  contrived  some  spe- 
cious pretence  or  another,  to  dash  and  break  all  in  pieces;  some- 
times requiring  that  be  should  depart  wholly  out  of  Sioily,  and  at 
others,  that  he  should  give  up  his  children  as  hostages* 

Agathocles  therefore  smelling  out  his  design,  sent  agents  to  the 
exiles  to  accuse  Dinocrates  of  the  project  he  was  carrying  on,  to  ob- 
struct the  restitution  of  their  antient  liberties.  He  sent  likewise  an 
ambassador  to  the  Carthaginians,  and  made  peace  with  them  upoa 
the  following  conditions,  viz.-^That  all  the  cities  the  Carthaginians 
formerly  enjoyed,  should  be  forthwith  surrendered  to  them :  for  which 
he  received  of  tlie  Carthaginians  three  hundred  talents  of  gold,  aC'^ 
cording  to  the  account  and  value  of  silver}  but  as  Timeus  says,  a 
bundled  and  fifty  talents,  and  two  hundred  thousand  medimni*  of 
wheat.    Thus  stood  the  affairs  of  Sicily  at  that  time* 

*  Every  roedironusit  eighteen  gallons^  and  eight  galloni  make  a  bashd;  lothst  twa 
hundred  thousand  mediiuui  make  five  hundred  thousand  boabcls. 

Vol.  2,  No,  46  ppp 


474  DIODORUS  8ICULU8,  ^ook  XX» 


111  Italy  the  Samnites  took  Sora  and  Atia,  ((wo  canfedciimte  cities 
of  the  Romans),  by  storm,  and  sold  all  the  captives  foralaTca:  apoQ 
ivhichy  the  consuls  broke  in  with  mighty  forces  into  Jspygiflf  and  sit 
down  before  the  citySilviumi  agarrisop  of  the  Si^moiteSi  wlychthe 
Romans  took  by  assault  after  a  few  days  siege,  and  carried  awtyabon 
five  thousand  prisoners,  and  abundance  of  rich  spoil  and  booty.  Thai 
they  harassed  the  country  of  the  Sam nites,  cutting  down  allthctiee^ 
and  -making  bavock  and  spoil  wherever  they  came.  For  Rooae  hav- 
ing for  many  years  been  in  contest  with  this  nation  for  the  supreat 
command,  hoped  at  length,  that  the  enemy  being  stripped  of  all  thif 
})ad  throqghout  the  country,  would  be  forced  to  stoop  to  the  stroogvri 
and  to  that  end  they  continued  wasting  and  s|)oiling  the  cpoutryiiff 
months  together,  within  which  time  they  burnt  down  to  the  giuuad 
almost  all  the  towns,  and  rooted  up  every  plant  and  tree^  and  wbati 
ever  other  thing  that  might  yield  any  fruit  for  daily  food.  After  thipi 
the  ^giuetes*  proclaimed  war  for  the  injuries  done  them,  and  took 
l^iusinof  by  assault,  and  sold  the  territories  belonging  to  it^ 

After  the  end  of  this  year,  Xenippus  governed  at  Atheoa»  imdW 
cius  Posthumius  and  Tiberius  Minucius,  bore  the  office  of  couab 

at  Rome. About  this  time  the  Rhodians  were  at  war  with  AotigioaM 

upon  the  accounts  following: — ^The  city  of  Rhodes  ^aa  very  atn^ 
in  shipping,  and  the  best  governed  of  any  city  among  tli^  Grcelii^aad 
therefore  all  the  kings  and  petty  princes  strove  which  shouMfiiD  the 
greatest  interest  among  the  citizens,  every  one  endeavouring  to  have 
her  for  their  confederate.  But  foreseeing  afar  pff",  what  wooli  be  aoH 
for  her  advantage,  she  secretly  noiade  peace  with  all^  bat  woold  WfH 
meddle  with  any  of  the  wars  wherein  the  princes  were  cngagtd  OM 
against  another;  so  that  she  was  courted  and  richly  presented  by  evvy 
one  of  them,  and  grew  exceeding  rich  by  the  epjoymeot  of  n  hiag 
peace.  For  she  became  so  potent,  that  in  the  piratical  war,  nodcFr 
taken  for  the  common  good  of  all  Greece,  she  scpwered  theacas  aD4 
freed  them  from  pirates  at  her  own  charge. 

Alexander,  the  most  potent  prince  of  any  that  ii  recorded, 
ed  this  city  above  all  others;  for  there  he  l|iid  up  bis  but  will 
cerning  the  disposal  of  his  whole  kingdom,  and  hoDOuriog  her  ii 
other  respects,  advanced  her  to  the  state  of  a  royal  city.  Tbe  Bko^ 
dians  tiuis  in  amity  with  all  tlie  princes,  kept  themselves  (with  alt 
the  art  they  could)  from  giving  any  just  offence  by  outward  VP^*^ 
ance;  though  ip  their  hearts  they  most  fiivoured  Ptokmyt  fiorthqp 
were  mo<it  enriched  by  the  merchants  which  traded  thepce  into  lSupt| 
and  the  whole  city  was  maintained  and  supported  by  the  weakb  eC 
thai  kingdom ;  which  being  understood  by  AntigonuSj  be  did  all  k 

•  AiM^nJA;  or  Aiiag&v  in  ItaljT  i  *  city  of  the  UcroacL  t  \ 


eould  to  draw  them  off  from  siding  with  Ptoleoijr:  and  therefbi-e  at 
first,  when  he  Was  engaged  in  a  war  a^inst  Ptolemy  for  the  island  of 
Cyprus,  he  sent  ambassadors  thither  to  solicit  rhem  to  send  aid  add 
ilhippingtotlemetrias;  which  they  denying,  hb  conimanded  one  of 
his  admirals  to  gfo  with  his  fleet  agaihst  them,  Atid  intercept  add 
rifle  all  the  ships  that  proceeded  from  the  poi*f  of  Rhodes  for  Egypt. 
But  the  Rhodians  beating  the  adniira),  he  charged  them  to  be  thd 
aggressors  and  he^nhelr^  of  an  unjust  war,  and  threatened  to  besiegel 
their  city  with  the  Strength  of  his  whole  ahnyf  upon  which  the 
Rhodians  decreed  him  great  honours,  and  sent  aitibassadors  to  him 
to  entreat  him  that  he  would  not  fbrce  them  to  engage  in  a  war  a- 
gainst  Ptolemy,  contrary  to  the  league  they  had  made  with  biin:  bdt 
the  king  growing  more  enraged  at  this,  sent  Demetrius  against  them 
whh  the  army  and  all  manner  of  engines  for  a  siege;  who  were  there- 
vpbn  so  terrified  with  the  mighty  pdwer  of  the*  kidg,  that  at  first  they 
signified  to  Demetrius  by  their  ambassadors^  that  they  would  assist 
Aotigoniis  against  Ptolemy  t  but  afterwards,_#hen  h^  required  a  hun- 
dred of  the  nobility  for  hostages,  and  that  his  fieet  ftiight  be  admitted 
into  the  harbour,  they  concluded  that  he  de&igueil  to  surprbe  the  city  j 
.  Hud  therefore  they  prepared  for  war. 

Demetrius,  on  the  Other  liand^  rendezvoused  all  \\U  flfi^t  in  t lie  port 
Jrt  Eiorymna,  and  put  all  in  readiness  for  an  c?h perdition  to  Rliotlesj 
He  had  with  him  two  hundred  men  of  war  of  sevens  I  dimeitsK^is,  a 
hundred  and  seventy  ships  of  burthen,  in  which  were  carried  nbout 
folly  thousand  soldiers,  together  with  horse  and  auTtiliarieiG  from  i\\t 
pirates:  besides,  there  were  on  hoard  abundance  of  all  sor!s  of  dartsy 
arrows,  and  other  engines  fit  for  the  carry tni]^  q^j  of  au  assault.  Aud 
along  with  all  these  there  followed  almost  a  thousntid  vessels,  be-^ 
longing  to  private  men^  full  of  wares  and  merchandize.  And  where- 
as the  country  of  the  Rhodians  had  been  free  fr^Jin  all  dtviistatlons 
for  many  years  together,  a  vast  multitude  of  men  thar  had  ctuiclied 
tfiemselves  by  the  losses  of  others  in  the  war  flocked  iliithcr  ftom  all 
places.  Demetrius  therefore  drawing  up  fiis  fleet  in  a  line  of  Uittle^ 
aa  ready  prepared  for  a  sea-fight,  commanded  his  men  of  war  (which 
carried  engines  upon  their  forecastles  to  cast  darts  and  arrows  of 
three  spans  long)  to  sail  before;  and  the  transport-ships,  and  such  as 
had  horses  on  board,  they  that  rowed  in  lesser  vessels  towed  after 
them  by  cablc^ropes.  In  the  rear  came  the  Vessels  of  the  pirates,  and  it 
numerous  company  (as  is  before  said)  of  merchant-ships  laden 
with  corn  and  other  provisions;  so  that  all  the  sea  between  the 
bland  and  the  opposite  shore  seemed  to  be  covered  oter  with  ships^ 
which  struck  a  great  terrot  add  amazement  into  those  that  had  thd 
pvoapecl  from  the  city.    For  the  Rhodiaa  sohUera  who  were  placcA 


476  DionoKus  sicuLUS.  Book  JTX 

upon  the  walls  there,  waited  for  the  enemy's  approach:  the  old  men 
and  women  likewise  had  a  prospect  of  them  from  the  tops  of  their 
houses,  (for  the  city  was  in  its  situation  like  a  theatre);  and  all  bring 
amazed  and  terrified  with  the  greatness  of  the  fleet,  and  glittering  of 
the  arms,  were  in  no  small  perplexity;  for  all  they  had  in  this  world 
was  now  lying  at  stake. 

Demetrius  now  at  last  arrived  at  the  island,  and  landed  hu  men, 
and  then  encamped  near  the  city,  but  not  within  the  cast  of  a  dart: 
which  done,  he  forthwith  sent  out  some  of  the  pirates,  and  othen  fit 
for  the  purpose,  to  spoil  and  pillage  all  before  them,  both  by  sea  and 
land.  He  cut  down  also  all  the  trees  of  the  country  next  adjoiniog, 
and  razed  the  towns;  and  with  the  timber  and  materials  from  thence 
he  fortified  his  camp,  drawing  round  it  a  treble  trench^  and  maoy 
great  and  strong  ramparts;  so  that  by  the  misery  and  loss^  of  the 
enemy  he  efiectually  provided  for  the  securityof  his  troops.  Thcn^by 
the  labour  of  his  whole  army,  and  the  seamen  that  came  along  witk 
him,  in  a  few  days  he  enclosed  with  a  rampart  of  earth  all  that  partioa 
of  ground  lying  between  his  landing-place  and  the  city^aod  enkigcd 
the  haven,  for  the  more  commodious  riding  of  his  ships. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Rhodians  sent  ambassadors  to  him,  entreat* 
ing  him  that  he  would  not  do  any  thing  that  might  be  irrepwable: 
but  when  they  perceived  that  he  would  not  hearken  to  any  teims^ 
(laying  aside  all  hopes  of  composing  matters),  they  sent  messcDgen 
to  Ptolemy,  Lysiinachus,  and  Cassander,  praying  tlieir  assistaocey  be* 
cause  that  war  was  made  on  them  upon  their  account.  Both  inha* 
bitants  (that  were  not  free  of  the  city)  and  foreigners  (lately  ccane 
in)  were  admitted  to  take  up  arms,  if  they  thought  fit,  for  defence  of 
the  place;  the  rest  of  the  rabble  that  were  useless  they  put  forth  out 
of  the  city,  both  to  prevent  scarcity  of  provision,  and  lest  any,  uneasy 
under  the  present  circumstances  they  were  in,  should  betray  the  towo. 
Then  taking  an  account  of  the  number  ot  them  in  arms,  they  fonad 
that  there  were  of  the  citizens  six  thousand,  of  inhabitants  and  stimng* 

ers  one  thousand.     They  made  likewise  a  decree ^That  all  senrantt 

who  had  approved  tliemselvcs  honest  and  faithful  in  all  hazards  sod 
dangers  should  be  bought  oft'  from  their  masters,  and  set  free^  and 
enrolled  into  the  number  of  the  citizens.  Then  a  proclamation  m» 
made ^That  whosoever  died  in  the  war  should  be  buried  at  the  pub- 
lic charge,  and  that  his  parents  and  children  should  be  maintained 
out  of  the  city  treasury;  that  portions  should  be  given  to  tbedaqgh* 
ters  out  of  the  public  stock,  and  that  the  sons,  when  they  were  grown 
up,  should  be  crowned  and  adorned  in  the  theatre,  at  the  time  of  the 
festivals  of  Bacchus,  with  all  sorts  of  arms  and  armour.  With  these 
promises  all  were  presently  excited  to  stand  to  it  to  the  hsij  and  cn 


Chap.  IK  DioDORUs  siculus,  477 


dure  the  utmost  extremity;  and  then  they  made  it  their  busiuess  (aJ 
far  as  it  was  }X)ssiblc)  to  provide  all  other  things  that  were  iieci^ssary; 
for  all  l>eing^  unauimous^  the  rich  brouglit  In  thc^ir  moi^ey,  and  the 
smiths  and  other  workmen  earnestly  set  tliemselvcs  to  the  makinj^  of 
«rm$,  and  all  were  so  intent  upon  their  business^  that  evciTy  one  strove 
to  exceed  each  other*    Some  therefore  employed  themselves  in  mak- 
ing engines  to  cust  darts  and  lihuot  stones,  and  others  in  making  and 
pTepari[ig  other  things^  some  repairctl  the  walliti  where  they  were  de* 
fecttve,  and  many  loaded  men  with  stones  to  carry  to  the  walls. 
They  sent  out  likewise  three  awift-saiUng  vessels  against  the  enemy, 
and  the  merchants  that  brought  them  in  provisions  i  these  falling  sud* 
denly  upon  them,  sunk  many  of  the  merchant-ships,  the  cr^¥s  having ' 
gone  on  shore  to  rob  and  spoil  the  country,  and  burnt  no  few  that       i 
were  driven  up  to  land;  and  what  they  received  for  the  redemptioa      1 
of  captives  they  brought  with  them  back  into  the  city:  for  the.Rho-*      j 
dians  had  agreed  with  Demetrius  what  the  value  of  redemption  oa       ^ 
both  sides  should  be,  that  is,  for  every  freeman  a  thousand  drach-     ^^ 
mas,  and  for  every  servant  and  bondman  five  hundred.     Demetrius 
being  furnished  with  plenty  of  all  things  necessary  for  the  making  of 
engines,  began  to  make  two,  called  Testudoes,  the  one  against  the    .  . 
engines  tliat  cast  stones,  and  the  other  against  those  that  sliot  darts 
and  arrows;  these  they  placed  upon  the  fore-decks  of  two  transport- 
ships,  which  moved  from  place  to  place,  and  were  chained  close  to- 
gether: he  likewise  made  two  towers  four  stories  high  cnch,  htghet 
than  those  turrets  belonging  to  the  town  in  the  harbour,  buih  whieh 
likewise  were  placed  upon  two  ships  of  equal  height,  and  joined  one 
to  another,  that  both  might  be  equally  ballasted  when  they  were 
forced  forward.    He  built  likewise  a  rampnrt  upon  a  four-footed  piece 
of  timber  nailed  together,  to  float  upon  tlie  water,  in  order  to  beat  off 
the  enemy  in  any  attack  they  might  make  upon  the  ifhips  where  the 
engines  were  placed.    At  the  same  time  while  he  was  making  these, 
be  got  together  a  number  of  the  strongest  water-boats,  and  fenced 
them  round  with  boards  and  planks,  and  made  loop-holes  in  the  sides^ 
(to  shut  at  pleasure),  and  in  these  he  placed  engines  to  shoot  dart^ 
and  arrows  of  three  spans  long  at  a  great  distance,  together  with  such 
soldiers  as  knew  very  well  how  to  make  use  of  them,  and  with  them 
some  Cretan  archers.     Coming  up,  therefore,  with  his  ships  withia 
the  cast  of  a  dart,  he  sorely  galled  the  townsmen  with  his  darts  and 
arrows,  the  engines  in  the  ships  being  higher  than  the  walls  next  to 
the  harbour.     The  Rhodians,  on  the  other  hand,  understanding  that 
Demetrius  made  it  his  main  business  to  gain  the  port,  were  as  earnest 
in  providing  all  things  necessary  for  its  defence.     To  this  end  they 
mounted  two  engines  upon  a  rampart,  and  put  on  board  three  otherai 


I 

J 


4f  8  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Itdok  X^. 

f  *  '  1 

upou  two  transport-ships^  and  lay  with  them  at  the  nlooth  of  the 
little  harbour;  and  in  these  they  put  great  numbers  of  engitica  tat 
the  shooting  of  stones,  darts,  and  arrows,  of  all  sizes,  that  by  the  help 
of  these  they  might  repulse  the  enemy,  if  lie  either  attempted  to  kol 
men,  or  make  up  with  his  engines.  Besides  all  this,  they  bad  coo- 
trived  convenient  places  and  apartments  in  the  transport-^liips  whkk 
then  lay  in  the  harbour,  wherein  to  place  their  engines  aiid  dartSj  as 
they  had  occasion.  Both  sides  being  now  thus  ready  prepared,  and 
Demetrius  just  upon  the  pdiut  of  moving  into  the  barboura  with  his 
machines,  was  prevented  by  a  fierce  and  violent  storm  which  tfaett 
arose.  But  being  calm  all  the  night  afterwards,  he  sailed  op  secratfy^ 
and  seized  upon  the  highest  rampart  of  the  great  harboat^  and  forth* 
with  drew  a  mud  wall  about  it,  and  fenced  it  with  stones  and  pfambl 
of  timber:  then  he  landed  four  hundred  of  his  men,  and  placed  them 
there,  with  all  sorts  of  darts  and  weapons;  the  fort  was  five  pkthms 
distant  from  the  walls.  As  soon  as  it  was  light  they  came  op  wiA 
the  engines  into  the  port^  with  shouting  and  sound  of  trompety  thett 
with  their  small  shot,  which  did  execution  at  a  great  distance^  thcgf 
beat  off  those  that  were  building  the  wall  in  the  port,  and  with  thek 
battering  engines  broke  in  pieces  the  enemy's  machine^  and 
the  Wall  near  the  rampart  in  one  part,  and  battered  it  down  ii 
ther :  for  it  was  but  low  and  weak  at  that  time.  The  citizcM 
defended  themselves,  and  spent  all  that  day  in  Wounding  and 
iAg  wounds  from  their  enemies  i  but  night  drawing  on> 
towed  his  ships  by  cables  tied  to  smaller  vessels,  and  got  oflF  his  co* 
fines  out  of  the  reach  of  the  enemy's  artillery.  But  the 
took  fire  along  with  them,  and  in  boats  filled  with  combustible 
ter  pursued  theil*  enemies,  and,  coming  up  with  the  et^nes^  pot  fim 
to  the  matter  in  the  boats;  but  being  presently  beaten  off  by  darts  and 
arrows  from  the  floating  rampartj  they  were  forced  to  tach  aboul^ 
and  to  retire;  but  the  flame  raged  to  that  degree,  that  some  few  oidy 
having  extinguished  the  fire,  returned  in  the  boats;  and  the  gnHUesi 
part  of  them,  having  had  their  vessels  burnt  down  to  the  walev^  h)f 
swimming  only  saved  their  lives^ 

The  next  day  Demetrius  in  tlie  same  manner  made  his  ttttaeh  Ikeas 
the  sea,  and  ordered  that  an  assault,  with  shouting  and  suMid  ef 
trumpet,  sliould  be  made  on  every  side  from  the  land,  that  he 
strike  the  greater  terror  into  the  Rhodians,  while  innumeral 
surrounded  and  distracted  them  on  every  hand.  He  contimed  thus 
assaulting  the  town  for  the  space  of  eight  days  together,  shootieg  frstt 
his  engines  upon  the  rampart  stones  of  tlie  weight  of  a  tskntysod 
buttered  down  the  middle  walls  between  the  towers,  together  wkh  tfas 
towers  themselves;  the  soldiers  likewise  possessed 


Chmp.  IK  DIODOIttJS  8ICITttJ9.  «79 

of  the  wall  th^t  bced  the  harbours :  upon  which  the  RhodiaDS  all 
flocked  to  that  place,  and  there  they  sharply  fell  to  it,  and  CDgaged 
theeneiny;  and,  overpowSenDg  them  id  number,  with  the^  slaughter 
of  some  qt  them,  forced  the  rest  to  draw  o£  The  uneasy,  rough, 
and  uneven  passage  to  the  place,  (by  reason  of  many  heaps  of  great 
and  massy  stones  which  were  laid  before  the  walls  on  the  outside), 
was  of  great  advantage  to  the  besieged.  Many  of  the  enemy's  ves-v 
sels,  (in  th|s  midst  of  this  conAision),  manned  with  soldiers,  coming 
^p,  the  Rhodians  presently  tore  off  the  beaks  of  the  ship^,  and  by 
combustible  matter  and  firebrands  thrown  in  among  them,  burnt  the 
ships  themselves.  While  the  besieged  were  thus  hurried  and  dis^ 
tracted  in  defending  themselves,  theDemetrians  coming  in  with  their 
vessels  on  eyery  side,  set  scaling-ladders  to  the  walls,  and  pressetl 
on  with  the  greater  resolution,  being  assisted  in  all  parts  by  the  sol* 
diers  at  land,  who,  together  with  them  in  the  ships,  mutually  repeated 
their  shouts  and  acclamations.  And  now  many  boldly  and  resolutely, 
in  contempt  of  danger,  pressed  forward,  and  in  great  bodies  mbunted 
the  walls;  upon  which  followed  a  sharp  engagement,  the  assailants 
forcing  on  with  great  resolution  from  without,  and  the  besieged  with 
as  much  courage  flocking  together  to  defend  themselves  within.  At 
lengtii  the  Rhodians,  after  a  brave  resistance,  beat  off  the  assailants, 
killing  some,  and  taking  others  prisoners  that  were  wounded,  amongst 
whom  were  some  of  the  chiefest  commanders.  The  besiegers  being 
thus  baffled,  Demetrius  drew  off  his  engines  into  his  own  port,  and 
then  set  upon  repairing  both  them  and  his  ships. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Rhodians  buried  their  dead,  and  dedicatc4 
to  their  gods  their  enemy's  arms,  and  the  beaks  of  their  ships,  and 
repaired  those  parts  of  their  walls  that  were  beaten  down  by  the 
fngines.  " 

Demetrius  however,  after  seven  days  time  spent  in  refitting  hia 
battering  engines,  and  repairing  his  shipping,  having  now  all  thinga 
in  readiness,  entered  the  harbour  again:  for  be  made  it  his  main  bu« 
siness  to  be  absolute  lord  of  this,  and  to  intercept  all  provisions  thaf 
might  be  brought  in  to  the  relief  of  the  city.  When  he  came  within 
the  cast  of  a  dart,  he  threw  firebrands  (of  which  he  had  a  great  nun[i« 
her)  into  the  Rhodian  ships,  which  lay  scattered  here  and  there,  and 
shook  and  battered  the  walls  with  his  engines,  and  wounded  and  galled 
with  his  darts  and  arrows  whoever  appeared  in  view.  The  assault 
thus  ppntinuing,  to  the  great  terror  and  amazement  of  the  in«" 
habitants,  the  Rhodian  pilots  (in  great  fear  and  concern  for  the 
shipping)  extinguished  the  firebrands;  and  the  magbtrates  el  the 
city,  (whom  they  call  Prytanes),  seeing  that  the  port  was  now  eves 
upon  the  point  of  being  takeD>  efuri^tly  entrented  i^l  the  citizensj^ 


480  BIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XX. 

both  high  and  low  without  distinction^  resolutely  to  put  ta  their  iielp- 
iDg  hands  for  the  common  preservation  and  security  of  the  whole 
city.  Whereupon  many  readily  came  in',  and  manued  three  of  thdr 
strongest  vessels  with  the  hest  of  their  men,  giving  them  orders  to 
do  the  utmost  they  could  with  the  beaks  of  their  ships  to  siak  the 
enemy's  vessels  that  carried  their  engines.  Those  thus  sentoat, 
though  they  were  plied  with  showers  of  darts  and  arrows,  yet  by  the 
violence  of  their  cliarge  they  broke  in  pieces  the  rampart*  that  was 
fenced  with  iron,  and  so  shattered  their  ships  with  one  stroke  after 
another,  that  they  filled  them  with  water,  and  dismounted  two  of 
their  engines:  whereupon  the Demetrians  towing  hack  the  third  with 
cables,  the  Rhodians,  encouraged  by  their  success,  pressed  on  still 
with  Boore  boldness  than  prudence;  and  therefore,  being  pierced  and 
shattered  by  the  beaks  of  many  great  ships  that  surrounded  tliem, 
Execestus  the  admiral,  and  the  captain  of  the  gallics,  and  some 
others,  (being  badly  wounded),  were  taken  prisoners  f  the  rest  by 
swimming  got  to  their  own  men;  only  one  ship  was  taken  by  theDe* 
metrians,  and  the  rest  escaped  the  danger.  After  this  conflict,  Deme- 
trius made  another  engine,  which  was  thrice  as  big  as  the  former. 
Loth  in  height  and  breadth.  And  now,  being  just  upon  entering 
into  port,  there  arose  a  violent  south  wind,  which  suddenly  burrt 
CHit  of  a  cloud,  and  sunk  the  ships  which  were  advancing,  and  over-* 
turturd  the  engine.  Upon  which  the  Rhodians,  taking  advantage  of 
the  present  opportunity,  at  the  very  same  time  flung  opep  their  gates^ 
and  made  a  sally  upon  them  that  entered  the  port:  upon  which  there 
was  a  sharp  dispute  for  a  long  time  together;  and  because  that  Deme- 
trius could  not  come  up  to  the  assistance  of  his  men,  by  reason  of 
the  storm,  the  Rhodians  still  fell  upon  them  with  fresh  parties  one 
after  another,  so  that  the  Demetrians,  to  the  number  of  four  bun^ 
dred,  were  forced  to  throw  down  their  arms,  and  submit*  Mitt  this 
victory  gained  by  the  Rhodians,  there  arrived  to  thqir  aid  and  assist* 
ance  a  hundred  and  fifty  Gnossians,  and  five  hundred  men  sent  hf 
Ptolemy,  amongst  whom  were  some  Rhodians  tliat  were  soldiers  un- 
der tl>e  king's  pay.  And  thus  stood  matters  in  the  siege  of  Rhodes 
at  tliat  time. 

In  Sicily,  Agathoclcs,  not  being  able  to  compose  matteis  with 
Dinoerates  and  the  exiles,  marched  out  with  what  forces  he  bad  •• 
gainst  them,  looking  upon  it  as  absolutely  necessary  to  baxard  bis 
person,  and  resolutely  to  fight  it  out,  and  gain  all,  or  lose  alL  He  had 
not  with  him  above  five  thousand  foot,  and  eight  hundred  horse. 

Dinoerates  with  the  exiles,  seeing  that  the  enemy  came  faoldlj  on, 
went  out  with  as  much  earnestness  and  resolution  to  fight  theni^^ 
*  The  flottios  tUBpart^ 


C^ap.  IV.  DIODORUS  SICULUS;  481 

Cause  he  was  far  superior  to  the  Agathocleaas  in  number^  having  a- 
bove  five-and-twenty  thousand  foot^  and  three  thousand  horse.  Both 
armies  sat  dbwa  one  against  atiotber  at  ^  place  called  Gorgius.  At 
length  they  dr^w  up  in  battalia^  atid  fell  to  it;  and  the  fight  i^as  very 
sharp  for  a  while,  by  reason  of  the  heat  and  resolution  of  both  par-^ 
ties :  but  after  a  little  time  sonle  deserted  Dinocrates,  (to  the  num- 
ber of  two  thousand),  and  went  over  to  the  tyrant^  which  was  the 
ruin  of  the  exiles :  fgr  the  Agathocledns  were  thereupon  much  more 
encouraged  and  heartened;  but  those  with  Dinocrates  were  as  much 
amazed  and  dejected,  and,  thinking  that  many  more  went  off  than 
there  did^  tliey  all  took  to  their  heels.  Agathocles  pursued  them  a 
little  way ;  but  then  called  off  his  men  from  the  slaughter,  and  sent 
to  the  broken  troops  proposals,  that  all  differences  being  at  length 
laid  aside,  every  one  should  have  free  liberty  to  return  into  their  own 
country  :  for  they  found  by  experience  that  they  were  never  able  to 
overcome  him  by  force  of  arms^  being  even  now  routed,  when  they 
had  an  army  far  superior  to  his  in  number.  The  horse  indeed  all  es- 
caped to  the  castle  of  Ambicas ;  and  some  of  the  foot  the  night  fol- 
lowing got  away.  The  greatest  part  possessed  themselves  of  a  hill ; 
b.ut,  despairing  to  prevail  by  force  of  arms,  and  desirous  to  return  to 
their  kindred,  friends,  estates,  and  country,  made  peace  with  Aga- 
thocles. Having  therefor^  plighted  his  faith  to  them,  and  thereupon 
all  of  them  being  come  down  from  the  hill,  which  was  a  natural  for- 
tification, he  first  disarmed  them^  then  hemmed  them  in  with  his 
forces,  and  put  them  every  man  to  the  sword,  to  the  number  of  se- 
ven thousand,  (as  Timaeus  says),  but  as  others  have  written,  four  thou- 
sand. For  this  tyrant  never  in  the  least  valued  either  his  word  or 
oath,  and  increased  his  power  not  so  much  by  tb^  greatness  of  hid 
forces,  as  by  the  weakness  of  his  subjects,  fearing  more  his  confede- 
rates than  his  enemies.  Having  thus  cut  off  his  enemy's  army,  he 
received  the  rest  of  the  exiles  into  his  protection,  and,  receiving  Di- 
nocrates into  grace  and  favour,  made  him  general  of  part  of  the  army, 
and  intrusted  him  ever  after  in  his  most  weighty  afiaifs.  At  Wliictf 
every  man  may  justly  wonder  that  he^  who  was  so  jealous  and  sus- 
picious of  every  one  that  he  would  never  confide  in  any,  should  to  the 
last  maintain  a  firm  friendship  only  with  Dinocrates,  who,  having 
thus  betrayed  his  confederates  seized  upon  Pasiphilus  at  Gela,  and 
there  murdered  him,  and  delivered  up  all  the  castles  and  cities  to 
Agathocles,  bringing  all  his  enemies,  under  his  feet  in  two  years 
time. 

In  Italy,  the  Romans  subdued  the  Paliniahs,  and  took  their  coun-:^ 
try  from  them,  and  some  that  were  students  at  Rome  they  made  free 
of  tiie  city.     Afterward^  the  consuls  marched  out  against  the  Sam*: 

Vol.  2.  No.  46.  qqq 


4S2  niODORUS  SICULUS.  JSookXX. 

nites,  who  had  wasted  and  harassed  Phaleria,  and  in  a  battle  routed 
them,  wherein  they  took  twenty  standards,  and  two  thousand  priso- 
ncrs;  and,  after  they  had  taken  the  city  Bola  by  assault,  presently 
appeared  Caius  Gellius,  general  of  the  Samnites,  with  six  thousand 
men;  upon  which  there  was  then  another  sharp  engagement,  ia 
which  Gellius  himself  was  taken,  and  many  of  the  other  Samnites 
slain  and  taken  prisoners.  The  consuls  being  thus  successful,  re- 
covered Sora,  Harpina,  and  Serenia,  cities  of  their  allies^  which  bad 
been  before  taken  from  them. 


CFIAP.  V. 


j?7ie  siege  of  Rhodes  conthiKeiL  The  acts  of  the  sea-capiaitu  of 
the  Rhoiiians,  Peace  made  tvith  the  Rhodians.  The  acts  of 
^gathocles  in  the  Lijmri  islands.  The  acts  of  Demetrius  in 
Greece,  The  war  between  the  Tare^itines  and  Lucanians.  The 
acts  of  Cleo?ii/mus  the  Spartan.  Cassander  sends  to  Antigonus 
to  make  peace^  who  refuses.  L,t/simachns joins  with  Cassander^ 
and  so  does  Ptolemi/  and  Seleucus^  against  Antigonus:  he 
marches  against  Lysimachu^.  Demetrius* s  further  acts  in  Greece. 
Tfie  armies  of  Cassander  and  Demetrius.  Demetrius  leaves 
Greece  f  and  goes  with  his  armj/  to  his  father  in  AsiUy  after  peace 
made  with  Cassander.  The  viisfortunes  of  Plistarchus  at  sea* 
Ptolemy  besieges  Sidon^  but  returns  to  Egypt  upon  a  false  report, 
Seleucus  marches  from  Babylon  with  a  great  army. 


AFTER  the  former  year  had  run  its  course,  Phereclea  was  made 
chief  governor  of  Athens,  and  Publius  Scmpronius  and  PuhliusSll* 
picius  were  invested  with  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome.  At  the  same 
time  WHS  solemnized  the  hundred  and  nineteenth  Olympiad,  id  which 
Andromcncs  the  Corinthian  bore  away  the  prize.  About  this  time 
Demetrius,  who  lay  still  before  Rliodes,  seeing  things  did  not  sue* 
coed  as  to  his  attempts  made  at  sea,  resolved  to  assault  the  city  by 
land.  To  that  end  he  made  preparation  of  plenty  of  all  sort  of  tioH 
bcr,  and  framed  the  engine  called  Helepolis,  far  bigger  than  any  of 
the  former.  Its  basis  was  four  square;  every  side  was  olmost  in  length 
fifty  cubits,  made  up  of  four-square  pieces  of  timber^  bound  togttlMBr 


Chap.  K  DionoRUS  sicuLUS.  483 

by  plates  of  iron.  In  the  middle  part  he  placed  strong  planks  of 
timber,  a  cubit  distance  one  from  another,  for  those  that  forced  the 
engine  forward  to  stand  upon.  The  whole  was  moved  upon  eight 
strong  and  large  wheels,  whose  felloes  were  two  cubits  thick,  covered 
with  strong  iron  plates  :  across  over  the  spokes  were  contrived  An« 
tistreptas  *  to  turn  about  the  engine  in  a  trice  whenever  they  pleased. 
At  every  comer  of  the  machine  were  pillars  raised,  little  less  than  a 
hundred  cubits  high,  every  one  of  an  equal  length,  so  compacted  to* 
gether  as  that  the  whole  machine  was  nine  stories  high.  In  the  first 
were  three-and-forty  beds,  and  in  the  highest  nine  :  the  three  sides 
of  the  engine  were  lined  on  the  outside  with  iron  plates  fastened  with 
nails,  to  prevent  all  damage  from  fire  that  might  be  shot  or  cast  from 
the  city.  In  every  story  at  the  front  were  made  loop-holes,  propor* 
tionable,  and  in  shape,  to  the  nature  of  the  artillery  that  was  thence 
to  be  dischjirged.  To  these  were  shutters  (fastened  to  the  engine) 
to  draw  up,  for  the  better  defence  of  them  within  that  threw  the 
darts;  for  they  were  lined  with  skins  stuffed  with  wool,  to  deaden  the 
force  of  the  stone-shot.  Every  story  was  furnished  with  two  large 
ladders,  that  whatever  was  necessary  might  be  brought  in  to  them  at 
one  and  the  same  time  by  one,  while  others  were  going  down  upon 
other  occasions  by  the  other,  that  so  every  thing  might  be  despatched 
•without  tumult  and  confusion.  There  were  chosen  out  of  the  whole 
army  the  strongest  men  (to  the  number  of  three  thousand  and  four 
hundred)  to  move  the  engine  forward ;  of  whom  some  from  within^ 
and  others  placed  behind,  so  forced  it  forward,  that  art  and  strength 
together  much  facilitated  the  motion.  He  made  also  Testudoes  f,  by 
some  to  fill  up  treuches  and  ditches,  and  with  others  to  bring  up 
battering  rams :  he  made  likewise  galleries,  through  which  they  that 
were  employed  might  pass  and  repass  with  safety  at  their  pleasure. 
By  the  help  and  assistance  likewise  of  the  seamen,  he  plained  and 
laid  even  all  the  way  along  which  the  engines  were  to  be  brought  up, 
to  the  space  of  four  furlongs,  so  that  the  breadth  of  the  work  faced 
as  much  of  the  city-wall  as  consisted  of  six  divisious  between  the 
turrets,  and  of  seven  of  the  turrets  themselves.  The  multitude  of 
artificers  and  workmen  that  were  got  together  were  no  less  than  thirty 
thousand  men.  Every  thing  therefore  (through  multitude  of  hands) 
being  perfected  and  completed  sooner  than  could  be  imagined,  De- 
meuius  became  a  terror  to  the  Rhodians;  for  not  only  the  greatness 
of  the  engines,  and  the  multitude  of  men,  but  the  valour  and  dili- 
gence of  the  king  in  carrying  on  of  sieges  amazed  them  :  for  he  was 
extraordinarily  ingenious   in  iiiveniion,  and  contrived  many  things 

*  Instruments  to  turn  the  engine, 
t  Artificial  covers  orcr  men's  hczdi,  made  of  strong  timbfr  cq?«fed  with  ^aw  ajtina, 


464  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Hook  XX. 

beyond  all  the  art  and  industry  of  the  artificers,  whence  he  got  the 
name  of  Poliorcetes*:  for  he  was  so  fierce  and  violent  in  his  assaults, 
that  no  wall  seemed  to  be  so  strong  as  to  be  a  sufficient  defence  to 
the  besieged  against  him.  And  besides  he  was  so  tall  and  beautifuli 
that  he  looked  like  a  demi-god;  insomuch  tliat  those  wlio  came  to 
him  but  as  guests  and  strangers,  and  saw  his  graceful  mien,  clothed 
with  royal  majesty,  were  struck  with  admiration,  and  would  often  at- 
tend upon  him  in  his  expeditions,  merely  to  have  the  satisfaction  of 
looking  at  him.  Moreover,  he  was  of  a  high  and  noble  spirit,  and 
scorned  not  only  to  stoop  to  the  common  sort,  but  even  to  princes 
themselves.  And  that  which  was  most  strange,  and  peculiar  only  to 
himself  was,  that  in  times  of  peace  he  was  given  to  drunkenness  and 
banqueting,  to  dancing  and  rioting,  and  would  imitate  even  the  man- 
ners of  Bacchus  himself,  such  as  is  fahulously  reported  be  used  to 
practise  when  he  was  ppon  earth;  but  in  times  of  war  he  was  veiy 
active  and  serious,  insomuch  that  he  went  beyond  all  the  rest,  both 
as  to  his  head  and  hand,  when  any  thing  was  to  be  done.  For  in  his 
time,  and  by  his  contrivance,  were  made  the  greatest  darts,  and  such 
sort  of  engines  as  far  exceeded  all  other  nations  in  the  world:  and 
after  this  siege,  and  his  father's  death,  he  launched  forth  the  greatest 
ships  that  were  ever  before  seen.  In  the  mean  time  the  Rhodiani, 
perceiving  how  the  enemy's  works  went  on,  built  another  wall  witli- 
in,  answerable  to  that  which  was  now  presently  to  be  alsaulted ;  and 
to  this  purpose  they  used  the  stones  that  walled  in  the  theatre,  and 
pulled  down  some  neighbouring  houses  and  some  temples  for  the 
same  purpose,  vowing  to  the  gods  to  build  larger  and  fairer,  if  the 
city  were  preserved.  They  s^*nt  out  likewise  nine  ships,  and  cotot 
inanded  the  captains  that,  infesting  every  part,  and  surprising  what 
ships  they  could,  they  should  sink  some  of  those  they  took,  vU 
bring  others  into  the  city  harbour.  These  captains  divided  their 
squadron  into  thfee  parts;  Damopiiilus,  with  the  ships  which  the 
Khodians  called  Phalacidsef,  sailed  to  Carpathus^,  where,  surprising 
many  of  Demetrius's  fleet,  he  sunk  some,  and  burnt  others  that  were 
drawn  up  upon  the  shore,  making  choice  of  such  prisoners  as  miglit 
be  most  useful  and  serviceable ;  and  many  ships  that  were  carryiDg 
corn  and  other. fruits  out  of  the  island  he  brought  away  with  him  into 
his  own  country. 

Menedemus,  who  comipanded  three  small  gallies  §  between  two 
find  tliree  tier  of  oars,  made  for  Patara  and  Lycia,  and  there  found  a 
^hip  at  anchor,  and  burnt  her,  all  her  men  being  before  gone  off  t^ 

*  Foliorcetes^  city^taker.  t  Gatrd  tbipt. 

^  Carpathus,  an  island  between  Rhodes  and  Crate,  now  ScapABto. 

$  Tnemoltianij  sometbiug  les3  thaa  three  tier  of  aac^ 


Chap.  Fl  DIODORUS  SIC'ULUS.  484 

land;  he  took  likewise  many  of  the  enemy^s  transport* ships  which 
carried  provisions  to  their  camp,  and  sent  them  t^  Rhodes :  he  took 
also  a  ship  of  four  tier  of  oars  coming  out  of  Cilicia,  which  carried  a 
royal  rohe,  and  other  rich  furniturci  which  Phila,  Demetrins^s  wife^ 
had  curiously  wrought,  and  had  sent  as  a  present  to  her  husband. 
He  ordered  the  garments  to  be  conveyed  into  Egypt,  for  they  were 
purple  robes,  fit  for  none  to  wear  but  kings ;  but  the  ship  he  took 
away  with  him,  and  sold  all  the  seamen  he  had  taken,  both  out  of  the 
galley  of  four  tier  of  oars,  and  other  vessels.  Amyntas,  who  com- 
manded the  other  ships,  sailed  to  the  islands,  and,  falling  in  with 
some  of  the  enemy  that  were  conveying  away  something  of  use  for 
the  engines,  he  sunk  son^e  of  the  ships,  and  brought  in  others  to  tlie 
city,  in  which  were  taken  eleven  famous  artificers,  most  expert  artists^ 
in  making  of  darts  and  engines. 

After  this  was  called  a  general  assembly,  wherein  it  was  proposed 
that  the  statues  of  Antigonus  and  Demetrius  should  be  pulled  down, 
affirming,  that  it  was  a  thing  intolerable  that  enemies  and  besiegers 
of  the  city  should  have  the  same  honours  as  those  tliat  were  friends 
and  benefactors :  but  the  people  were  much  incensed  at  this  motion, 
and  checked  them  that  proposed  it  as  those  that  did  ill,  and  would 
not  sufTer  any  thing  in  diminution  to  the  honour  of  Antigonus,  there- 
by wisely  consulting  both  their  own  reputation  and  advantage :  for 
this  greatness  of  mind  and  soundness  of  judgment  in  a  democraticat 
government  redounded  amongst  nil  to  the  praise  of  the  besieged,  and 
softened  and  melted  the  spirits  of  the  besiegers  :  for  they  that  had 
set  at  liberty  the  Greek  cities,  who  had  testified  nothing  of  their  good 
will  towards  them  as  their  benefactors,  now  seemed  to  go  about  to 
enslave  that  city,  who  had  given  a  clear  and  evident  demonstration 
of  the  firmness  and  constancy  of  their  gratitude.  This  resoliitioa 
likewise  might  reasonably  be  concluded  to  be  of  singular  advantage 
to  them  in  the  worst  of  fortune  5  for  if  the  city  were  taken,  the  re^ 
inembrance  of  their  kindness  might  plead  and  prevail  for  their  par- 
don :  it  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Rhodians  manifested  singular  pru- 
dence in  the  management  of  this  affair. 

Demetrius  had  now  even  undermined  the  city,  when  a  deserter 
very  opportunely  came  in,  and  informed  the  city,  that  the  miners 
were  approached  almost  within  the  walls :  upon  which  the  Rhodians 
drew  a  deep  trench  all  along  the  wall  that  was  now  ready  to  be  tum- 
bled down,  and  forthwith  fell  to  countermining ;  and  at  length  met 
the  enemy  under  ground,  and  so  prevented  the  mine  from  proceed- 
ing any  further :  and  while  both  parties  guarded  the  mines,*  some  of 
»  Pemetrius's  soldiers  with  money  bribed  Athenagoras,  the  captain  of 


486  moDORUs  sicuLus.  Book  XX. 

the  guard  for  the  Rhodiaus.  He  was  a  Milesko,  sent  thither  by 
Ptolemy,  and  captain  of  the  mercenaries,  who  having  promised  to 
betray  the  city,  appointed  a  day  on  which  Demetrius  should  send  some 
one  of  the  chiefest  of  bis  commanders,  who  should  enter  in  the  night 
througli  the  mines  into  the  city,  and  find  out  a  place  fit  and  c«>Dve- 
sient  to  receive  the  soldiers.  Athcnagoras  having  now  raised  up  the 
hopes  and  expectations  of  the  Demetrians,  discovered  the  whole  in- 
trigue to  tlie  senate.  The  king,  according  to  the  compact,  sent  one 
cf  his  noblemen,  Alexander,  a  Macedonian  :  but  the  Khodians  seized 
bim  as  soon  as  he  peeped  out  of  the  mine;  but  vrowned  Athena-* 
goras  with  a  crown  of  gold,  and  for  a  reward  gave  him  five  talents 
of  silver ;  and  then  made  it  their  business  to  engage  the  rest  of  the 
mercenaries  and  strangers  to  be  faithful  to  the  people  att  the  ways 
they  could. 

However  Demetrius,  leaving  now  finished  all  his  engines,  and 
plained  and  laid  even  every  place  under  the  walls,  brought  up  h» 
Helepolis*  in  the  middle,  and  so  ordered  his  Testudoes  for  filling  up 
of  trenches  and  ditches,  (which  were  eight  in  number),  that  be  placed 
four  on  each  side  of  the  Ilelepolis.  To  each  of  these  was  adjoined 
a  gallery,  and  they  who  went  in  and  out  migiit  execute  wliat  was 
commanded  without  any  danger.  He  had  likewise  two  other  Testudoes 
that  bore  battering  rams,  far  larger  than  the  rest;  for  both  of  tkem 
were  a  hundred  and  twenty  cubits  long,  strongly  armed  with  iron,  and 
their  headsf  resembled  the  beak  of  a  ship,  and  were  easily  moved 
forward  by  the  help  of  wheels;  but  to  do  ell'ectual  execution,  they 
were  forced  on  by  a  thous;u)d  men  at  least. 

Being  ready  to  bring  up  his  engines  to  the  walls,  he  filled  eveiy 
Story  in  the  Helepolis  with  as  many  engines  for  shooting  of  stones, 
arrows,  and  darts,  as  each  would  hold.  Then  he  sent  his  sea-forcea 
to  the  haven  and  the  places  adjoining,  and  ordered  his  land-army  to 
tl)e  re!»t  of  the  wall  where  any  approach  could  possibly  ,be  made.  At 
length,  atone  signal  and  word  of  command  all  set  up  a  shout  toge^ 
ther,  and  with  great  violenve  stormed  the  city  on  every  side:  and  at 
the  very  time  that  the  walls  were  shaking  and  trembh'ng  with  tlic 
strokes  of  the  battering  rams,  and  stones  shot  from  the  engines,  in 
came  ambassadiirs  from  Cnidus,  and  intreated  him  to  forbear  all  fur* 
ther  proceedings  by  foi^ce  of  amis,  and  promised,  that  they  would  per- 
suade the  Khodians  to  submit  (as  far  as  it  was  possible)  to  his  com-i 
mands.  The  king  hereupon  remitted  his  heat,  and  ambassadors  were 
sent  from  boCli  sides,  who  banded  matters  tp  and  fro,  but  could  nol 
eome  to  any  agreement.     Whcreu|x>n  he  resolutely  rciiew^  the  aa^ 

.  *  The  great  ciigUte.  t  Ibe  raiu^'  lie^dj^ 


II  I     t       I  I  I  III-  I "  —^ 

sault,  and  battered  down  one  of  the  strongest  towers  built  of  foar* 
square  stone,  and  so  shook  the  whole  space  between  the  towers,  that 
the  besieged  could  not  pass  that  way  to  the  bulwarks. 

But  at  this  time,  king  Ptolemy  sent  a  great  fleet  with  provisions 
to  the  Rhodians,  in  which  were  three  hundred  thousand  Aitabaos^ 
of  corn,  beans,  and  peas.  'J^hese  making  a  straight  course  for  Rhodes, 
Demetrius  sent  shipping  after  them,  in  order  to  seize  the  provisions 
for  the  use  of  his  own  camp:  but  the  Ptoleitoians,  (hoisting  up  all 
their  sails),  by  the  favour  of  a  fair  gale  of  wind,  arrived  safe  at  thek 
port,  and  so  those  that  were  sent  after  thein  by  Demetruis  returned 
as  they  went,  Cassander  likewise  sent  ten  thousand  medironi  of 
barley  to  the  Rhodians,  Ad  Lysimachus  forty  tl&ousand  of  wheat,  and 
as  much  of  barley. 

The  town  thtis  supplied  with  plenty  of  provisions,  their  languisluii|( 
spirits  now  revived  ;  and  thereupon  judging  it  much  to  tiieir  ndvan^ 
tage  if  tliey  could  ruin  the  enemy's  engines,  they  got  together  abuci<^ 
dance  of  ^re-balls,  and  several  engines  for  shooting  of  (ire,  and 
placed  them  and  their  other  artillery  upon  tlie  waUs ;  a^d  the  next 
night,  about  the  second  watch,  they  suddenly  commenced  playing 
upon  the  enemy's  guard,  with  arrows,  darts,  stones,  and  other  wea«* 
pons 3  and  at  the  same  time  making  use  of  all  sorts  of  fire  engines^ 
they  grievously  wounded  and  galled  all  that  came  flocking  into  that 
part :  whereupon  the  Demetrians,  who  were  altogether  surprised  bf 
so  sudden  and  unexpected  an  attack,  being  mightily  conceroed  iot 
their  engines  and  their  other  works,  ran  all  in  a  body  togetliet  toi 
defend  them.  The  night  being  very  dark,  no  moon  appearifig^  Are* 
brands  flying  about  with  great  violence,  gave  light  to  the  night;  and 
darts  and  stones  from  the  catapults  and  baljstas,  not  duK^erned  when 
they  were  shot,  wounded  and  galled  many  of  the  combatants,  wha 
could  not  see  how  to  avoid  them.  And  now,  at  thia  very  tin^^  some 
of  the  iron  plates  fell  ofl^  from  the  great  engine,  and  the  fire-bcaods 
had  the  good  fortune  to  fall  upon  that  part  that  was  bare :  upon  which 
as  the  fire  increased,  Demetriiis  was  in  a  great  fright  lest  the  engine 
should  be  totail/  consumed;  and  therefore  he  endeavoured  to  pre^ 
vent  it  with  all  the  speed  possible,  and  to  quench  the  raging  flame 
by  the  water  before  prepared,  and  ready  in  the  apartments  of  the  en** 
gine  for  such  accidents*  At  length  he  called  together,  by  sound 
of  trumpet,  those  that  were  to  move  the  engines,  and  by  their  help 
removed  them  out  of  the  reach  of  the  darts*  When  it  was  day,  he 
ordered  the  boys  and  pages  in  the  army  to  gather  lip  all  the  darti 
and  arrows  shot  by  the  Rhodians.  because  be  had  a  desire,  by  oum^ 

*  Al^eryian  measure^  something  fn/ger  than  a  inediiDntM^  irfaicb  bvigfatecli  giilooft    ' 


48S  DiODoRus  9ICULUS.  Book  XX^ 

fl 

bering  of  these,  to  make  a  coojecture  Low  the  citizens  were  famish- 
ed and  providedi    These  boys  performing  wliat  they  were  com- 
manded, there  were  in  number  of  fire  brands,  and  other  vehicks  of 
fire  of  several  sizeSj  above  eight  hundred ;  and  of  darts^  oo  fewer 
than   fifteen   hundred.    This   vast  number  of  darts^  arrows,  fire- 
brands, and  balls,  shot  in  so  little  a  |K)rtion  of  the  night,  caused  him 
to  admire  the  store  and  provision  of  the  city  in  their  ammunitiooi 
and  likewise  their  great  charge  and  expense  in  providing  them...^ 
Then  he  set  about  repairing  his  engines,  burying  the  dead,  and  cur- 
ing those  that  were  wounded ;  during  which  time  the  citizens^  Lav- 
ing a  respite  from  the  assaults  and  batteries  of  the  engines^  built  a 
third  wall  in  the  shape  of  a  half  moon,  which  encompassed  all  that 
part  of  the  wall  which  lay  most  open  and  exposed  to  the  enemy's 
attacks.    And  besides  this,  they  drew  a  deep  trencli  round  that  part 
of  the  wall  which  was  ready  to  fall,  that  the  king  might  not  enter  oa 
a  sudden  at  the  first  push*    They  likewise  sent  out  some  sigrift  sail^ 
ing  ships  under  the  command  of  Amyntas,   who  made  over  to  the 
continent  of  Asia,  and  there  set  upon  some  privateers  tliat  were  com'' 
missioned  by  Demetrius :  they  had  three  open  vessels,  and  were  re- 
puted the  stoutest  men  the  king  had  in  bis  fleet.   After  a  short  fight, 
the  Rhodians  t6ok  both  the  ships  and  the  men^  among  whom  were 
Timocles,  the  chief  of  the  pirates*    They  likewise  fell  upon  tomt 
xberchant-ships,  and  took  some  light  vessels  laden  with  troro,  and 
with  these,  and  the  open  vessels  of  the  piratesj  they  secretly  passed 
by  the  enemy,  and  got  into  Rhodes. 

Demetrius  having  repaired  his  machines,  brings  them  aguo  op 
to  the  walls,  and,  with  showers  of  darts  and  arrows,  forced  the  be* 
sieged  from  the  bulwarks;  and  batterlBg  the  place  adjacent  with  hn 
rams,  he  beat  down  two  spaces  between  the  tower.  In  the  heat  of 
this  action  the  besieged  with  all  their  might  defended  the  middle 
tower,  and  were  continually  harassed  by  strong  parties  of  fresh  men 
one  after  another,  so  that  Aminias  their  chief  commander,  coun* 
geously  behaving  himself^  was  there  slain,  with  many  of  the  com* 
mon  soldiers* 

While  these  things  were  doing,  king  Ptolemy  sent  to  the  Rbo^ 
dians  as  much  corn  and  other  provisions  as  he  had  done  before;  and 
also  fifteen  hundred  soldiers>  under  the  command  of  Antigoous  a 
Macedonian. 

About  the  same  time  there  came  to  Demetrius,  about  fifty  ambas- 
sadors, from  Athens  and  other  cities  of  Greece,  all  soliciting  the 
king  to  compose  matters,  to  conclude  a  peace  with  the  Rhodiaos« 
Whereupon  there  was  a  cessation  of  arms,  and  many  harangues  wens 
now  made  to  the  people,  and  then  again  to  Demetrius,  but  tbqf* 


Qhap.  M  blODORUS  sicuLbs.  48fJ 

could  not  agree  upon  any  terms;  and  therefore  the  ambassadors  de-^ 
parted  without  effecting  any  thing. 

Demetrius  was  afterwards  contriving  to  make  an  attack  upon  x\\6 
city  in  the  night,  at  that  part  of  the  wall  which  had  fallen  down. — ^ 
To  this  end  he  picked  out  the  best  of  his  soldiers^  and  some  others 
fit  for  the  purpose,  in  all  to  the  amount  of  fifteen  hundred,  whom  he 
commanded  to  approach  the  walls  secretly,  about  the  second  watch* 
He  himself  stood  ready  with  the  rest  of  the  army,  and  gave  orders 
to  the  officers  of  every  regiment,  upon  a  signal  given,  to  set  up  a 
shout,  and  forthwith  to  make  an  assault  upon  the  city  both  by  sea 
and  laud;  who  all  executed  his  commands  accordingly:  and  pre- 
sently one  party  made  to  the  ruins,  and  killing  the  watch  at  the 
trench,  broke  into  the  city,  and  possessed  themselves  of  all  the  pla- 
ices round  the  theatre.  1  he  Rhodiatis  seeing  all  tiie  city  in  an  up 
roar  upon  the  knowledge  of  what  had  happened,  commaiidtrd  them 
that  guarded  the  port  and  the  walls,  every  one  to  keep  their  Several 
posts,  and  endeavour  to  beat  off  the  enemy  that  attempted  to  enter; 
They  in  the  town,  wiih  the  stoutest  of  the  citizens^  and  those  sol- 
diers who  had  lately  come  from  Alexandria,  attacked  them  that  had 
broke  in  within  the  walls:  but  as  soon  as  it  was  day^  Demetrius  lift^ 
ed  up  the  signal,  at  which  both  those  who  had  made  at)  attack  upon 
the  port,  and  those  around  the  walls,  set  up  a  shout  all  together^  to 
encourage  the  men  that  had  cTLtered^  and  wvrc  atiout  tlie  tluatre...^ 
^he  poor  women  and  children  throughout  the  whole  city  were  in  a 
state  of  terrible  fear  and  consternation,  as  if  ihe  towu  hud  bccQ  then 
actually  taken  by  storm. 

However^  a  sharp  encounter  took  place  between  the  RAdifttis  and 
those  that  had  entered  the  town  j  and  tfiuiigh  many  WW  <>*fflKHh  sides, 
yet  neither  of  them  at  the  firsit  guve  the  least  ground.  But  after 
awhile,  when  many  more  of  tJie  Kliodians  camo  flocking  tri^  resol- 
ved to  endure  the  greatest  extremity  in  fighting  for  their  cour^tiv, 
and  for  all  that  was  dear  to  them  in  the  world,  the  ting's  piirty  were 
overborn;  and  Alcimus  and'Mnntius,  the  commanders  of  the  purty^ 
after  many  wounds  received,  were  there  slain;  most  of  the  remain^ 
der  were  either  killed  upon  the  spot,  or  taken  prisoners;  but  some 
few  made  their  escape  and  got  to  the  king.  Many  likewise  of  the 
Rhodians  were  slain  at  the  same  time,  among  whom  was  Damotetis^ 
president  of  the  council,  a  man  most  renowned  for  his  valour.  De- 
metrius, although  he  judged  that  fortune  had,  as  it  were,  wrung  the 
city  out  of  his  haiids,  yet  prepared  for  another  assault.  But  his  fa-» 
ther  writing  him  to  make  peace  with  the  Rhodians  on  such  terms  and 
conditions  as  he  could  get,  he  watched  for  the  most  convenient  opJ 
portunity  that  might  attbrd  him  a  colourable  pretenee  lor  aa  agree 
Vol.  2.  No,  4(».  rbr 


490  DioDORus  sicuLUs.  Sook  XX 


mcnt  and  settlement  of  matters  between  t^iem.  Ptolemy  likewise, 
though  he  had  before  written  to  the  Rhodians  to  acquaint  them  that 
he  intended  to  send  them  a  great  quantity  of  com,  and  three  thoa- 
sand  men,  yet  afterwards  advising  them  to  treat  and  agree  with  An* 
tigonus  upon  any  reasonable  conditions,  they  all  inclined  to  peace. 
At  the  same  time  likewise,  the  iGtoHan  commonwealth  sent  ambas- 
sadors to  negotiate  a  pacification.    The  Rhodians  therefore  at  length 

struck  up  a  peace  with  Demetrius  upon  the  conditions  following: 

'^  That  the  city  should  remain  subject  to  its  own  laws,  and  should 
i>e  without  a  garrison :  that  they  should  enjoy  their  own  estates  and 
revenues :  that  they  should  join  with  Antigonus  in  his  wars  against 
all  persons  except  Ptolemy;  and  that  they  should  deliver  a  hundred 
citizens  as  hostages,  such  as  Demetrius  should  make  choice  of,  ex- 
cept such  as  were  magistrates.*'  And  thus  the  Rhodians,  after  a 
whole  year's  siege,  put  An  end  to  the  war,  honouring  those  with  jost 
rewards,  who  approved  themselves  honest  and  faithful  to  their  coao- 
try:  and  such  slaves  as  had  behaved  themselves  stoutly  and  Taliant* 
ly,  they  set  free,  and  enrolled  them  as  members  of  the  city.  The/ 
set  up  likewise  the  statues  of  the  kings,  Ptolemy,  Cassaoder,  and 
Lysimachus,  and  of  some  others  inferior  to  them,  who  yet  had  con* 
tributed  mucn  to  the  safety  of  the  place.  But,  that  they  might  ex- 
press their  gratitude  and  thankfulness  to  Ptolemy  above  all  the  rest^ 
they  sent  some  of  their  priests  to  consult  the  oracles  of  Amnion, 
whether  they  should  worship  Ptolemy  as  a  god  ?  And  being  an- 
swered that  they  should,  ttiey  consecrated  to  him  a  four-square 
grove  in  their  city,  building  on  every  side  thereof  a  gallery  of  a  fur- 
long in  length,  and  called  it  Ptolemseum,  or  Ptolemy's  gallery... 
They  repaired  also  the  theatre,  and  the  pans  of  the  walls  that  were 
thrown  down,  and  made  them,  and  all  the  other  places  which  hid 
been  damaged,  far  more  beautiful  and  glorious  than  they  were 
before. 

Demetrius,  having  ratified  the  peace  with  the  Rhodians,  (accord- 
ing to  his  father's  commands),  loosed  from  thence  with  his  whole 
army,  and,  passing  by  the  islands,  he  arrived  at  Aulis  in  Bceotii, 
minding  with  all  speed  to  set  the  Grecians  at  liberty;  for  Cassander 
and  Polyperchon,  grown  bold  through  the  absence  of  the  eneniy, 
iiad  nut  long  befcjre  wasted  and  harassed  many  parts  of  Greece. 
And  first  of  all  he  freed  the  city  of  the  Chalcidians  from  a  garrisoa 
of  the  Boeotians,  and  forced  the  Boeotians  (out  of  fear  of  him)  to 
fall  ofF  from  their  league  with  Cassander.  Afterwards,  confederating 
with  the  iEtolians,  he  prepared  to  make  war  upon  PoIyperchoD  and 
Cassander. 

During  these  transactions,  Eumelus,  the  king  of  the  Cimmeriaa 


Chap.  K  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  491 

Bosphorus^  IiaTing  now  reigned  six  years,  ended  his  days;  after 
whom  succeeded  Spartacus,  his  son,  who  reigned  twenty  years. 

Having  now  given  an  account  of  the  affairs  of  Greece  and  Asia,  wf 
shall  pass  over  to  other  parts  of  the  world. 

In  Sicily,  Agathocles  on  a  sudden,  and  without  any  provocation, 
invaded  the  inhabitants  of  the  Lipari  islands,  being  then  in  full  and 
perfect  peace  and  security,  and  exacted  from  them  fifty  talents  of 
silver.    At  which  time,  many  thought  that  it  was  spoken  from  a  iU 

vine  spirit,  when  it  was  said ^That  God  would  remarkably  pursue 

him  for  his  wickedness.  The  Liparians  then  desired  hiiPj  that  he 
would  give  some  time  to  make  up  the  money  that  was  short,  declar<« 
ing,  that  to  that  time  they  never  made  use  of  the  dedicated  treasures 
but  Agathocles  forced  them  to  give  him  the  money  that  was  in  the 
sacred  treasury*,  upon  some  of  which  was  stamped  the  im^ge  of 
j£olus,and  upon  others  Vulcan;  and  when  he  had  got  it,  he  get  sailj 
and  away  he  went:  but  there  arose  a  storm,  which  broke  in  piecea 
eleven  of  the  ships  that  carried  the  money:  which  gave  occasion  to 
many  to  conclude,  that  iEolus  (who  is  said  to  h^ve  command  of  the 
winds  in  those  parts)  executed  vengeance  upon  him  at  hb  first  set«< 
ting  forth;  and  that  Vulcan,  at  bis  latter  end,  punished  the  tyrant  iu 
his  own  country  according  to  the  just  desert  of  his  wickedness,  burn-* 
ing  him  alive  with  hot  coals:  for  it  was  one  and  the  same  justice  an4 
divine  will  that  forbore  and  passed  over  those  that  saved  and  preserved 
their  parents  at  the  foot  of  Mount  ^tna,  and  that  exerted  his  power 
in  punishing  those  that  had  impiously  prophaned  the  deity.  But  what 
b  now  said  concerning  the  return  and  misfortunes  of  Agathocles  shall 
be  further  confirmed,  when  we  come  to  the  time  proper  for  that  re-r 
lation;  but  now  we  must  apply  ourselves  to  w^at  was  done  in  those 
parts  of  Italy  that  lay  bordering  upon  one  another. 

The  Romans  and  Samnites,  after  a  war  of  t^o*and-twenty  yearf 
and  six  months  continuance,  by  their  mutual  ambassadors  at  length 
made  peace  one  with  another.  But  Sempronius^  oae  of  the  consutsj^ 
broke  into  the  country  of  the  i£qui,  and  took  ferty  towns  in  forty  days 
time  at  the  most;  and,  bringing  the  whole  country  into  absolute  siib*- 
jection  to  the  Roman  yoke,  returned  home,  and  most  worthily  and 
gloriously  triumphed.  But  the  Romans  entered  into  a  league  with 
the  Marsi,  Peligni,  and  Marrucini. 

When  the  last  year  was  ended,  Leostratus  was  chosen  chief  magi»* 
trate  of  Athens  for  this  succeeding,  and  Servius  Cornelius  and  Lucius 
Genucius  were  created  consuls  at  Rome.  In  the  time  of  whose  go« 
vernments,  Demetrius  resolved  to  make  war  upon  Cassander,  and  to 
f^sture  liberty  to  the  Grecians;  and  above  all  other  couctrns^  tp  put 


4Q2  DioDORUS  sicuLW.  Book  XX. 

the  affairs  of  Greece  into  a  good  and  happy  condition;  because  he 
hoped  by  the  liberty  granted  thereby  both  to  advance  his  own  reputa- 
tion^ and  also  to  break  those  captains  of  Cassander's  who  were  joined 
with  Prepelaus,  and  tiiat,  by  falling  upon  Cassander,  he  should  gaio 
the  sovereign  power  to  himself.  The  city  of  Sicyon  w^s  then  held 
by  a  garrison  of  Ptolemy  the  king,  of  which  Philip,  a  brave  and  gal- 
lant man,  was  governor:  upon  this  place  Demetrius  made  a  sudden 
attack  in  the  night,  and  l)roke  in  within  the  walls;  whereupon  the 
garrison -soldiers  presently  hurried  into  the  castle.  Demetrius,  being 
how  possessed  of  the  town,  posted  himself  between  the  houses  and 
the  citadel;  and  being  just  upon  the  point  of  bringing  up  his  en- 
gines, they  within  were  so  terrified,  that  they  surrendered  upon  terms, 
and  then  sailed  away  into  Egypt.  Afterwards,  having  prevailed  with 
the  Sicyonians  to  remove  and  settle  themselves  within  the  castle,  he 
laid  that  i)art  of  the  city  adjoining  to  the  haven  even  with  the  ground, 
which  was  a  place  before  every  way  strongly  fortified :  then  joining 
with  the  inhabitants,  and  helping  them  to  build  houses*,  and  re- 
storing them  to  their  former  liberty,  he  was  honoured  by  those  he  had 
thus  obliged  as  a  demi-god;  for  they  called  the  city  Demetriades, 
and  appointed  sacrifices,  festivals,  and  sports,  with  other  honours,  to 
be  yearly  celebrated  and  offered  in  memory  of  him  as  the  builder 
of  their  city.  But  time  and  turns  of  fortune  put  an  end  to  these 
solemnities. 

The  Sicyonians  therefore,  being  fixed  in  a  far  better  place  than 
they  were  before,  have  continued  there  from  that  very  time  to  this 
clay:  for  the  site  of  the  citadel  is  large  and  plain,  compassed  in  on 
every  side  with  inaccessible  rocks,  so  that  no  engine  can  possibly 
approach  or  come  near  it:  it  is  furnished  likewise  with  plenty  of  wa^ 
ter,  by  which  the  inhabitants  greatly  enriched  their  gardens  and  otn 
chards:  and  therefore  all  approved  the  wisdom  and  ingenious  con- 
trivance of  the  king,  who  had  provided  for  them  every  thing  conduc- 
ing to  their  pleasure  in  time  of  peace,  and  to  their  protection  and  se- 
curity in  time  of  war.  Having  settled  all  things  at  Sicyon,  he  marched 
thence  with  his  whole  army  to  Corinth,  which  Prepelaus,  Cassander's 
general,  then  held  with  a  strong  garrison;  where  being  presently  lei 
in  by  the  citizens  in  the  night,  (through  a  little  sally-port),  be  gained 
the  city,  together  with  the  havens.  The  soldiers  in  garrison  hereupon 
fled,  some  of  them  into  the  Sisyphiumf,  (as  it  is  called),  others  into 
tlie  citadel:  whereupon  the  engines  being  brought  up  to  the  fortifi- 
cations, after  much  toil  and  labour,  he  took  Sisyphium  by  storm. 
The  besieged  had  (before  he  entered)  all  fled  to  them  that  were  la 
tl>e  citadel;  but  he  so  terrified  them  also,  that  he  forced  thei^  ta 
•  lu  the  ciudek  t  Fdacc 


Chap.  r.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  49^ 

surrender:  for  this  king  in  assaults  was  not  to  be  resisted;  and  ift 
inventing  of  engines  for  the  assaulting  of  places  was  extmordinarilj 
ingenious. 

And  now,  although  he  restored  the  Corinthians  to  their  liberty,  yet 

he  put  a  garrison  into  the  citadel*,  because  the  citizens  desired  to 

continue  under  the  king'sf  protection  until  he  had  subdued  Cas« 

Sander:  and  so  Prepelaus,  having  thus  poorly  lost  Corinth^  went  to 

.  Cassander. 

Then  Demetrius  marched  into  Achaia,  and  took'Bata  by  assault; 
and  within  a  few  days  after,  he  had  Scyros  delivered  up  to  him,  and 
expelled  the  garrison  thence;  and,  moving  forward,  he  freed  all  tke 
rest  of  the  cities  of  Achaia.  Then  encamping  at  iSigenm,  b^  lay 
with  his  army  round  the  walls;  and,  upon  a  parley  with  Strotnbichtii 
the  governor,  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  town:  but  he  notonfy 
refused,  but  railed  against  Demetrius  from  the  wafis,  and'gave  him 
base  language;  whereupon  x\^  king  brought  tip  the  engines^  bol^ 
tered  down  the  wall,  and  took  the  city  by  storm,  and  there  crucified 
Strombichus,  (who  was  placed  there  as  governor  by  Polyperchon), 
and  about  fourscore  more  that  were  his  inveterate  enemies, 4)efore 
the  walls  of  the  town.  And  from  among  the  prisoners  he  picked 
out  two  thousand  mercenaries,  and  intermixed  them  amongst  his  own 
Regiments. 

After  the  taking  of  this  city,  they  who  held  the  neighbouring  forts 
and  castles  thought  it  to  no  purpose  to  oppose  the  king;  and  there* 
fore  all  surrendered  their  garrisons.  And  all  the  governors  of  cities^ 
seeing  that  Cassander  and  Folyperchon  sent  them  no  assistance,  and 
that  Demetrius  with  a  potent  army,  and  with  engines  the  greatest  tliat 
ever  came  into  the  field,  was  ready  to  fall  upon  them,  surrendered  all 
up  to  him.     And  thus  stood  the  affairs  of  Demetrius.    , 

In  Italy,  the  Tarentines  (being  at  war  with  the  Lncanians  and  tbe 
Romans)  sent  ambassadors  to  Sparta  desiring  aid,  and  that  Cleonymus 
might  be  sent  them  for  their  general.  The  Lacedsemonians  readily 
granted  the  general  that  was  desired;  and  the  Tarentines  sent  ships 
and  money,  wherewith  Cleonymus  raised  five  thousand  men,  and 
mustered  them  at-Tenarus  in  Laconia;  and  thence  by  a  short  cut 
sailed  toTarentum,  where  he  hired  as  many 'mercenaries  as  the  for- 
mer, and  listed  some  of  the  citizens:  in  the  whole  he  raised  above 
twenty  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse.  He  joined  to  his 
army  likewise  many  Greeks  of  Italy,  together  with  the  Messapians; 
whereupon  the  Lucanians,  being  terrified  with  the  greatness  of  his 
army,  made  peace  with  the  Tarentines:  only  the  Metapontians  stood 

•  Aero  Corintlio. 
t  Aatigonus'fl  prot^^tion^  who  bad  assumed  the  title  of  king,  at  it  Mtd  before. 


494  BIODORU8  8ICULU9.  Boot  XX. 

cS;  and  therefore  he  required  the  Lucaniana  to  join  with  hia  ia 
apoiiiog  and  harassing  their  country;  and  accordingly  making  uae  af 
a  fit  opportunity^  he  broke  in  upon  them,  and  put  them  into  a  teni- 
ae fright:  aodj  though  he  entered  into  the  city  as  a  friend^  yet  he 
Vapanned  the  citizens  out  of  six  tliousand  talents  of  aiirer  and  op* 
wards,  and  took  away  two  hundred  young  ladies  of  the  best  qiiaUt]f 
for  hostages,  not  so  much  to  secure  the  performance  of  tlie  kague^ 
as  to  gratify  his  own  brutish  lusts;  for  he  threw  off  his  Laconic  ha- 
bit, and  gave  up  himself  to  all  manner  of  voluptuousness,  and  brosght 
them  into  bondage  and  slavery  who  had  committed  theaiaelvea  l» 
lis  care  and  protection.  For,  though  he  had  so  great  att  anoy^  and 
so  well  provided,  yet  he  did  nothing  worthy  the  name  of  a  Spartaa 
He  determined,  indeed,  to  make  an  expedition  into  Sicily,  under  oo» 
lour  of  overturning  the  tyranny  of  Agathocles,  and  to  restore  the  Si« 
ctlians  to  their  antient  laws  and  liberties;  but  omitting  that  for  tha 
present,  he  sailed  to  Corcyra,  and,  having  taken  the  city,  got  there  a 
Tast  treasure,  and  garrisoned  the  place,  designing  to  make  use  of' 
that  as  a  town  and  citadel  of  war,  and  thence  to  manage  all  the  af* 
fairs  of  Greece.  Forthwith  ambassadors  came  to  him  from  Deme- 
Irius,  Poliorcetes,  and  Cassander,  severally,  to  solicit  him  to  join 
them  as  confederates;  but  he  joined  neither* 

Afterwards,  hearing  that  the  Tarentines  and  some  othen  badre* 
volted  and  deserted  him,  he  left  a  sufficient  garrison  at  Corcyra,  and 
with  the  remainder  of  his  forces  sailed  in  a  great  rage  into  Italy,  with 
a  resolution  to  execute  exemplary  punishment  Q|>on  those  who  had 
rebelled.  Arriving  at  the  very  place  where  the  barbarians  keptguaid^ 
lie  took  the  city;  and  after  he  had  sold  the  men  for  slaves^  he  de 
vastated  and  harassed  all  the  country.  He  took  also  a  town  called 
Triopiub  by  assault,  and  carried  thence  three  thousand  captivea,.^ 
But  about  this  time  the  barbarians  got  into  a  body,  and  attacked  his 
camp  in  the  night,  killed  above  two  hundred  of  his  soldiers,  and 
toi^k  about  a  thousand  prisoners :  and  on  the  back  of  this  misfortnna 
there  arose  a  violent  storm,  which  destroyed  twenty  of  hia  shipa  aa 
they  lay  at  anchor  near  his  camp. 

Being  grieved  and  plagued  with  these  misfortunes  falliiif  nna 
upon  the  neck  of  another*  Cleonymus  returned  with  his  finrcea  to 
Corcyra. 

The  former  year  being  past,  this  year  Nicocles  executed  the  office 
of  Lord  Chancellor  of  Athens,  and  Marcus  Livius  and  Marcus  i£* 
milius  were  consuls  at  Rome:  at  which  time  Cassander,  king  of 
Macedon,  perceiving  the  armies  of  his  enemies  to  increase^  end  that 
the  impending  storm  was  ready  to  fall  with  all  its  weight  n|X>n  hiffl^ 
was  in  much  ahurm  concerning  the  issue  of  the  event*  ,,  lie  there- 


Chap.  V.  niODORUS  8ICULUS.  ^49ft 

■  ■    ,   ■  -I        '■"  '  'I'r   ;'  '     — ? 

fore  sent  ambassadors  into  Asia  to  Antigonus,  to  entreat  faim  to-  be 
reconciled,  and  make  peace  with  him:  who  iSerceiy  and  rougtily  aa« 

swered ^That  he  would  own  no  peace  which  should  be  made  with 

liim,  unless  Cassander  would  deliver  up  all  into  his  hands.  At  this 
answer  he  was  greatly  terrified,  and  sent  for  Lysimachus  out  of 
Thrace,  to  venture  all  in  a  cemroon  lot  together:  for  at  all  times,  ui 
his  greatest  straits,  his  manner  was  to  have  recourse  to  him  for  f«« 
lief,  both  on  account  of  his  valour,  and  because  his  kingdom  bor- 
dered upon  Macedonia.  These  two  kings  therefore,  consulting  to* 
gether  how  to  manage  their  mutual  affiiirs  to  the  best  advantagei 
sent  ambassadors  to  Ptolemy  king*  of  Egypt,  and  %ci  Seleucus,  pri«ee 
of  the  higher  provinces,  giving  them  an  account  of  the  proud  an« 

swerof  Antigonus;  and  representing  to  them ^That  they  were  aM 

in  equal  danger  by  this  war;  for  if  Antigonus  gained  Macedoma,  he 
would  presently  swallow  up  the  rest;  and  that  he  had  upop  several 
occasions  given  a  clear  discovery  of  his  covetousness  and  ambitkm; 
and  that  he  would  have  none  to  participate  with  him  in  any  part  of 
the  empire;  and  therefore,  that  it  was  very  fit  and  expedient  tfaaC 
they  should  all  join  together  against  him. 

Ptolemy  and  Seleucus,  judging  what  was  said  to  be  certainly  true, 
readily  came  into  the  league,  and  raised  numerous  forces  to  assist  ia 
the  war.  However,  Cassander  judged  it  not  prudent  to  suffer  ths 
enemy  first  to  break  in  upon  him,  but  that  it  was  rather  for  hit  idk 
vantage  to  be  beforehand  whh  them,  and  fall  first  upon  tbeoi.  T# 
that  end  he  delivered  part  of  the  army  to  Lysimachus,  and  sent  a  ge^ 
neral  along  with  them;  and  he  himself  marched  with  tfie  reit  iiM 
Thessaly,  to  fight  with  Demetrius  and  the  other  Greciaos. 

Lysimachus  with  his  army  passed  over  out  of  Europe  into  Asia^ 
and  set  free  the  inhabitants  of  Lampsacus  and  Paros,  who  had-sidcd 
with  him  u[)on  their  own  accord:  but  taking  Sigsutn  by  asaaok,  bt 
placed  a  garrison  in  it:  and  then  ^ommittod  six  thousand  foot  mad 
a  thousand  horse  to  the  charge  of  Prepelaus,  and  sent  hiln  totake  tht 
cities  in  ^Eolia  and  Ionia:  but  he  himself  in  the  first  pl$oe •design- 
ed to  besiege  A  by  dos,  and  carried  along  with  him  darts,  battering 
rams,  and  other  engines  for  that  purpose.  But  a  great  number  of 
soldiers  being  sent  by  sea  from  Demetrius  fof  the  defence  of  the  ci- 
ty, he  laid  aside  his  design;  and  having  taken  the  Hellespont  and 
Phrygia,  he  went  forward  and  besieged  the  city  of  Synada,  where 
the  king's  *  magazine  lay;  and  at  the  same  time  drew  over  Docimus^ 
a  commander  of  Antigonus's  party,  to  join  the  common  causey  and 
by  his  help  took  both  Synada  and  other  forts  where  the  king's  trea- 
sures  were  laid  up, 

•  ABtSgomis. 


4g$  WODORUS  SICULUS«  Book  XJt 

Id  the  mean  time  Prepelaus,  who  was  sent  to  make  wmr  upon 
£olia  and  Ionia,  by  the  way  took  Adramyttium,  and  besieged  £[riie- 
sus;  and  so  terrified  the  inhabitants^  that  they  submitted :  and  find- 
ing there  the  hostages  which  the  Rhodians  had  given  to  Demetrinsi 
lie  sent  them  all  home  again  to  their  friends,  and  did  not  hurt  any 
of  the  Ephesians  in  their  persons ;  but  he  set  on  fire  all  the  ships  be 
found  in  the  harbour,  because  the  enemy  still  commanded  all  at 
sea,  and  because  the  issue  of  the  war  was  as  yet  uneertaiD.  After 
this^  he  joined  to  him  the  Teians  and  Golophonians.  But  as  for 
Erythrse  and  Clazomen»,  they  had  succour  sent  them  by  sea^  and 
therefore  he  could  not  take  them :  but  having  wasted  their  tenito* 
lies,  he  departed  for  Sardis ;  and  there  he  drew  over^  by  fair  wordsy 
Pheenix  and  Docimus,  two  of  Antigonus's  captains,  and  took  the 
city  itself,  all  but  the  castle,  into  his  protection.  As  fur  tha  castle^ 
Philippus,  a  friend  of  Antigonus's,  kept  it,  and  would  not  betray  his 
trust.  Antigonus  was  at  that  time  wholly  taken  up  in  making  sporta 
and  feasts  in  Antigonia,  and  had  proclaimed  great  pria^es  for  such  u 
would  put  in  for  them,  and  large  wages  to  all  expert  artificers  that 
could  be  found. 

But  when  he  heard  that  Lysimachus  was  come  into  Asia,  and  that 
his  soldiers  revolted  to  him  by  multitudes,  he  discontinued  bis  sports, 
and  distributed  among  the  wrestlers  and  artificers  no  less  than  two 
hundred  talents;  and  then  taking  his  army  with  htm,  leftSyria^  and 
by  long  marches  hastened  to  meet  the  enemy.  As  soon  as  he  came 
to  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  out  of  the  monies  which  he  took  with  him  from 
the  city  of  Quinda,  he  gave  his  army  three  months  pay  beforehand; 
and  besides  this,  he  brought  three  thousand  talents  along  with  him^ 
in  order  that  there  should  be  no  lack  of  money  if  need  shotdd  call 
for  it.  Then  passing  the  Taurus,  he  quickened  his  march  into  Cap* 
padocia,  and  reduced  all  the  cities  in  the  Upper  Phrygia  and  Laoo- 
Ilia  which  had  formerly  revolted  from  him;  and  these  served  him  ia 
the  wars  as  they  did  before. 

Then  Lysimachus,  hearing  of  the  enemy's  approach^  consalled 
with  his  council,  in  this  imminent  danger,  what  was  fittest  to 
be  done:  and  their  advice  was,  by  no  means  to  hazard  a  battle  till 
Seleucus  came  down  from  the  upper  provinces;  but  to  take  posses- 
sion of  the  strongest  places,  and  to  intrench  himself  in  the  best  man* 
ner  he  could,  with  ramparts^  palisades,  and  stakes,  and  there  await 
the  coming  of  the  enemy.  Lysimachus  having  heard  this  advice, 
put  it  seriously  into  execution:  and  Antigonus  on  the  other  hand, 
as  soon  as  he  came  near  his  camp,  drew  out  in  battalia,  and  eodea ' 
voured  to  provoke  Lysimachus  to  fight:  but  seeing  he  would,  no^ 
he  went  and  kept  all  the  passages  by  which  any  victuals  might  cooM 


Chap,  i\  DIODORUS  SiCULUS.  4^f 

jhui  the  camp-  Whereu|>on  Lysimachus  Karing  lest  he  siiould  fait 
into  the  hands  Df  the  enemy  ihrouglt  want  of  provisiotis,  removeil 
by  night;  and  huvln^^  marched  four  hundred  furlortgs,  came  to  Do- 
rylteuiti,  and  there  encamped  j  for  in  those  parls  there  was  ahun* 
dance  of  com  artd 'other  provision s^  having  a  river  at  the  back  of  him 
as  a  defence  to  his  camp.  Wlierefore,  liavhig  raised  a  work  aUd  en- 
closed it  with  an  exceeding  deep  treneh,  and  pallisadocd  it  witii 
three  r6ws  of  stakes,  he  made  all  sure  as  he  thought.  But  Antigd^  < 
nus  finding  the  enemy  gone,  pursued  him  with  all  speed;  and  com- 
ing near  to  vhe  place  where  he  by  intrenched,  and  seeing  no  dispo- 
sition hi  him  to  fight,  he  prescntiy  fell  to  wol'k  and  drew  another 
trench  around  his  camp,  in  order  to  hesiege  hirti  there;  tind  for  that 
purpose  caused  darts^  arrows^  and  catapults,  to  he  hrought  thither  to 
him.  And  tlibugh  uifiny  skirmishes  were  made  about  the  trenches, 
because  Lysimaclius's  men  tindeavourcd  by  their  darts  and  arrows 
to  drive  the  etiemy  from  their  works,  yet  AiUigonus's  party  had  stltl 
the  better  of  it  in  every  encounter.  For  in  process  of  time  Antigo- 
nus's  worka  came  to  be  almost  finished;  but  Lysimachus's  provi- 
sions began  to  fail;  who  therefore  talking  advantage  of  a  tempestu- 
ous night,  made  off  with  his  army^  and  through  mountainous  coun- 
tries reached  his  wiuter^quavters^  But  when  AnttgonUs  the  next 
tooniing  perceived  that  tliu  enemy  wds  grtiie,  he  also  marched  after 
him,  through  the  champaign  country;  hut  there  having  fallen  4 
great  quantity  of  rain,  and  the  ways  being  thereby  foul  and  decp^  he 
lost  many  of  bis  carriages,  and  some  of  his  men  also  in  that  journey ; 
and  the  whole  army  was  in  great  distress;  wbtrcfbrc,  in  order  t6 
spare  his  men,  and  the  winter  coming  on,  he  gave  up  the  pursuit ; 
and  casting  about  for  the  fittest  places,  he  disiribotcd  his  army  Int6 
winter-quarters.  But  on  receiving  intelligence  that  Seleucus  Wai 
tnarching  down  from  the  liigher  provinces  with  a  numerous  army^ 
he  sent  one  of  liis  friends  into  Greece  to  Demetrius,  commanding 
liim  with  all  speed  to  come  to  bim  with  his  forces.  For  be  was  ex- 
tremely alarmed,  lest  all  the  kings  joining  together  should  force  bint 
to  fight,  and  Ko  lay  all  at  stake  before  the  forces  out  of  Europe  could 
join  him. 

Lysimachus  in  the  like  rnadher  sent  his  aHny  to  bd  (]tlf(Hefed  id 
the  country  of  Salmonia,  having  made  large  provision  for  thfem  Dot 
of  Heraclea,  he  being  in  alliance  with  theiri  of  that  city :  for  he  ttiir^ 
ried  Amestris,  the  daughter  of  Oxyartes,  niece  to  the  late  king  Da- 
rius, whom  Alexander  gave  to  Craterus  to  Be  his  ivife,  and  now  at 
this  time  governess  of  the  city.  Atid  thus  stocrd  tbfe  affairs  of  Ai^iit 
At  that  time. 

But  as  to  the  afifairs  of  Ctreece^  Peihetrius  beHlg  at  AtbeoK^  iMi 
Vol,  2,  No.  49,  ••• 


498  DioDORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  XX. 

greatly  desired  to  be  iaitiated  into  the  sacred  mysteries  of  Ceres  and 
Eleusina:  but  io  regard  that  the  time  appointed  by  the  law,  and 
commonly  spent  by  the  Athenians  in  performing  the  ceremonies  of 
thb  solemnity,  was  very  long  and  tedious,  he  entreated  the  peopk 
that,  in  return  of  his  forn;er  kindness  to  them,  they  would  alter  their 
antient  custom;  which  they  agreed  to  do.  Whereupon  he  com* 
mitted  his  person  unarmed  into  the  hands  of  the  priests ;  and  thos 
being  initiated  before  the  legal  day,  he  departed  from  Athens,  and 
then  rendezvoused  both  his  fleet  and  land  army  at  Chalcisj  in  Bobo- 
tia:  but  hearing  that  Cassander  had  blocked  up  all  the  passes,  ha 
judged  it  unsafe  to  go  by  land  into  Thessaly,  and  therefore  sailed 
with  the  army  into  the  haven  of  Larissa,  and  there  landed  his  men; 
upon  which  the  city  was  immediately  surrendered  to  him :  but  the 
citadel  he  took  by  force  of  arms,  and  bound  all  the  addien  h 
the  garrison  in  chains,  kept  them  close  prisoners,  and  restored  the 
people  of  Larissa  to  their  antient  laws  and  liberties.  Then  he  took 
Prona  and  Pteleum.  Cassander  had  commanded  the  inhabitants  oC 
Pion  and  Orcbomenum,  two  cities  in  Thessaly,  to  remove  and  set- 
tie  at  Thebes:  but  Demetrius  put  a  stop  to  this  measure, 
der,  when  he  saw  that  every  thing  went  as  Demetrius  would 
it,  strengthened  the  garrisons  of  Pherse  and  Thebes,  and  rendexvons^ 
ed  his  forces  in  the  face  of  the  Demetrians.  His  whole  army  con- 
sisted of 'twenty-nine  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse.-.* 
Those  who  followed  Demetrius  amounted  to  fifteen  hundred  hone, 
at  least  eight  thousand  Macedonian  foot,  and  fifteen  thousand  mer- 
cenaries; and  out  of  the  cities  of  Greece  twenty-five  thousand; 
besides  several  regiments  of  light-armed  men;  and  a  dlsaritAj 
rabble  of  sordid  fellows  out  of  all  nations,  to  the  number  of  at  IcMt 
eight  thousand,  such  as  are  used  to  follow  camps  only  to  rob  and 
plunder  wherever  they  come :  so  that  the  whole  land  army  consisted 
of  fifty-six  thousand  men. 

The  armies  had  now  lain  opposite  to  each  other  for  several  days^ 
and  though  they  were  drawn  up  in  battalia  on  both  sides,  yet  neir 
ther  attempted  to  fight,  solicitously  expecting  to  hear  how  thiofl 
passed  in  Asia.  At  that  time,  Demetrius  entered  with  part  of  his 
army  into  the  city  of  Pherte,  being  invited  thither  by  the  inhabitants; 
and  took  the  citadel,  and  dismissed  all  Cassander's  soldiers  on  the 
terms  agreed  upon,  and  restored  the  Pherseans  to  their  former  libera 
ties. 

While  these  things  were  acting  in  Thessaly,  the  measepgen  fnm 
Antigonus  came  to  Demetrius,  who  delivered  his  £sther*a  command^ 
and  ordered  him  to  transport  his  forces  over  into  Asia,  with  all  the 
speed  imaginable. 


Cfu^.  V.  biODORus  sicuLtJil.     499 

Whereupon^  looking  upon  H  as  a  thin|^  of  absolute  Necessity  to 
obey  his  fiither^  be  fortbwith  concluded  a  peace  with  Cassander^ 
upon  condition  that  his  father  should  approve  of  it ;  not  in  the  l^t 
doubting  but  he  would  make  all  void,  whotef  be  knew  had  resolved 
to  put  an  end  to  the  war  by  no  other  meanaf  than'  by  force  of  arscis. 
However,  he  was  willing  to  manage  his  business  !k>,  that  he  should 
have  a  feasible  pretence  for  leaving  Greece,  and  not  to  resemble  « 
flight.    For  among  other  matters^  he  took  care  to  have  it  inserted 

in  the  articles  of  peace ^That  all  the  Greek  cities^  both  in  Greece 

and  Asia,  should  enjoy  their  antient  laws  and  liberties.  At  length, 
having  got  ships  together  to  transport  his  army  and  the  carriages; 
he  set  sail  with  his  whole  force,  and  steering  a  right  course  ihrougb 
the  islands  of  the  iEgean  sea,  came  to  Ephesus;  and"  there  landing 
his  army  encamped  before  it,  reduced  it  to  its  former  obedience; 
and  saiTered  the  garrison  which  Prepelaus  had  put  there  safely  to 
depart.  Then  putting  a  strong  garrison  of  his  own  into  the  castle^ 
went  off  with  the  rest  of  his  army  as  far  as  the  Hellespont,  where 
he  reduced  the  Lampsacenians  and  Parians,  and  other  revolted  ci- 
ties, to  his  subjection.  And  thence  going  to  the  mouth  of  Pontus^ 
encamped  near  the  Temple  of  the-  Chalcidonians,  and  there  forti- 
fied; which  done,  he  left  there  three  thousand  foot,  with  thirty  sail 
of  good  ships  to  guard  the  port,  and  sent  the  remainder  of  his  army 
into  winter-quarters  in  the  neighbourhood. 

About  this  time  Mithridates,  who  was  subject  to  Antigonns,  be«^ 
ing  suspected  of  favouring  Cjassauder^s  party,  was  slain  at  Cius,  in 
the  country  of  Mysia;  of  which,  and  of  Arthiras,  he  had  been  prince 
thirty-five  years.  His  son,  also  called  Mithridates,  succeeded  him 
in  his  principality,  and  added  to  his  dominions  Cappadocid  and 
Pbphlagonia,  Which  he  held  for  thirty-six  years. 

In  these  days  Cassander,  after  the  departure  of  Deinetriiii^,  reco^ 
vered  all  the  cities  lying  od  the  sea-coast^  and'  sent  Plistafcbus  in« 
to  Asia,  with  ah  army  of  twelve  tliottsand  foot,  and  five  hundred 
horse,  to  assist  Lysimachus.  But  Plistarchus  coming  to  the  mOutb 
of  Pontus,  found  that  strait  occupied  by  the  enemy:  andthereupoa 
despairing  of  any  passage  that  way,  went  to  Odes&us,  whidi  lies  be- 
tween ApoUonia  and  Galatia,  over  against  Heraclea,  where  a  part  of 
Lv.imachus's  army  lay.  But  not  having  shipping  enough  for  the 
transportation  of  all  his  forces  at  that  place,  he  divided  his  army  in- 
to three  parts.  The  first  landed  safely  at  Heraclea;  the  second  was 
defeated  by  the  enemy's  sliips  which  lay  at  the  straits  of  Pontus;  and 
the  third,  wlierein  Plistarchus  himself  was,  being  overtaken  by  a 
violent  tempest,  the  greatest  part  of  the  ships,  with  the  men  in  them, 
|)egshed.    Amoug  the  rest^  the  ship  in  which  he  was^  being  a  vessel 


500  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XX. 


pf  six  tiers  of  oars^  and  all  the  men  in  her,  (which  could  not  be  less 
than  five  hundred),  except  thirty-three,  (of  whom  Plbtarchos  was 
one),  were  ^i\  lost;  getting  upon  a  plank  when  the  &bip  went  to 
pieces,  he  was  cast  on  shore  half  dead :  but  recovering  a  little,  he 
was  afterwards  carried  to  Heraclea,  apd  there  recovering  his  strength, 
}ie  went  to  Lysimachus  in  his  winter-quarters,  after  having  lost  the 
greatest  part  of  his  army. 

About  the  sara^  time,  Ptolemy  coming  with  an  excellently  well* 
appointed  army  out  of  Egypt,  reduced  all  the  cities  of  Ccelosyria  to 
his  obedience.  But  when  he  lay  in  siege  before  Sidon^  there  camea 
false  rumour  to  him,  that  a  battle  had  beeh  fought,  wherein  Lysi- 
inachus  and  Seleucus  were  rputed  and  fled  to  Heraclea,  and  that 
Antigonus  was  thereupon  hastening  into  Syria  with  his  victorioos 
^rmy. 

Ptolemy  giving  too  easy  credit  to  this  repojt,  made  a  truce  with 
the  Sidonians  for  five  months;  and  putting  garrisops  into  other  ci-. 
ties  which  ho  had  taken  \\\  those  parts,  returned  into  Egypt. 

While  these  things  thus  passed,  two  thousand  Autariats,  and 
about  eight  hundred  Lycians  and  Pamphilians,  soldiers  belonging  to 
Lysimachus,  fled  over  to  Antigonus,  put  of  their  winter-quarters, 
and  Antigonus  entertained  them  very  courteously,  furnishing  them 
with  such  pay  as  they  said  Lysimachus  owed  theip,  and  also  rewarded 
them  with  large  sums  of  money  over  and  above- 
About  the  same  time  also  Seleucus,  with  a  gre^t  army,  cane 
down  out  of  the  upper  provinces  into  Cappadocia,  and  wintered  his 
army  under  tents  which  he  brought  with  him  ready  made.  His  ar- 
my consisted  of  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  abo^t  twelve  thoasand 
horse,  including  his  archers  on  horse-back,  and  four  hundred  and 
eighty  elephants,  and  a  hundred  iron  chariots.  Thus  these  kiogi 
j[oined  their  forces,  resolving  the  next  summer  to  decide  the  con- 
troversy by  the  sword.  But  we  shall  give  an  account  of  the  win 
among  these  princes  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  book,  accordio^K 
we  first  designed. 


TH£BMBi« 


THE  FRAGMENTS 


or 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


OUT  Of 


SOME  OF  HIS  BOOKS  THAT  ARE  LOST. 


soa 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


FRAGMENTS. 


TO  THE  READER. 

THE  hst  twenty  books  of  Diodonis  Siculss  are  entirdylost,  ex- 
cept some  eclogues  or  fragments  in  Fhotiu3*s  Bibliothecaj^  and 
others,  recovered  by  Hoes  Chelios^  and  published  by  LameoAit 
Ehodomaunus^  which  contained  an  account  of  albin  for  the  spaM 
of  two  hundred  aud  forty-four  yearSy  or  thereabcmtsf  that  is,  from 
the  end  of  the  hundred  and  uinteenth  olympiad^  (when  Antigonof 
f.d  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  vrere  routed  by  Ptolemsus  Laguft  and 
the  other  confederates,  A.  M.  3650)  ^  to  the  end  of  Uie  hundred 
and  eightieth  olympiad,  at  wUich  time  Julius  Caesar  made  his  firct 
expedition  into  Britain,  which  was  in  the  six  hundred  and  nioety- 
third  year  of  the  city  of  Rome,  aa  Eatiopins  aocoonta,  in.  Us  siitlii 
book. 

The  reader  is  desired  to  obsenre—JThat  these  being  but  ftigmntSj^ 
or  pieces  of  Diodorus,  recovered,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  rubbisli  oC 
antiquity,  the  relations  are  often  broken,  and  new  maittar  somelimgi. 
begun,  which  has  no  coherence  with  what  went  before. 

Where  they  are  broken,  they  are  noted  grnnrally  thwa^     j 
The  new  matter  is  easily  discenied  by  observation. 


504  THE  FRA(iMENTS  OF 


A  FRAGMENT 

Ota  of  the  Sixth  Aook  of  the  Bibliotheca  of  DiodorUs  ^wutuSy  ti^ 
ken  out  of  EuseUus  Pamphiluu  Book  11. 

THESE  therefore  are  the  most  remarkable  things  which  are  re- 
corded among  the  Atlantides  concerning  the  gods;  and  they  saj, 
the  Greciaos  use  the  same  rites  and  ceremonies.  The  same  thiogf 
Diodorus  says  in  the  third  book  of  his  history;  and  Diodorus  also 
confirms  the  same  theology  in  his  sixth  book,  from  the  history  of 

Evemerus  the  Messenian,  where  these  are  his  words The  antients 

held  two  opinions  (which  are  brought  down  to  posterity)  concerDiDg 
the  godis:  some  they  say  are  immortal  and  incorruptible^  as  the  taoi 
moon^  and  the  rest  of  the  stars;  and  likewise  the  winds,  and  dhcr 
things  of  the  Tike  nature^  for  none  of  these  have  either  begioniog  or 
end.  But  there  are  others,  tliey  say,  that  are  earthly  gods^  bat  foe 
their  good  deeds  to  the  benefit  of  mankindl,  have  attained  to  the 
highest  pitch  of  honoiir  and  glory;  and  such  were  Hercules*  Die- 
nysius  or  Bac(;hus  Aristseus,  and  such  like.  Of  these  terrestrial 
gods,  many  and  various  stories  are  related  by  historians  and  mytho* 
logists.  Among  the  historians,  Evemerus  has  composed  a  sacred 
history,  and  written  peculiarly  of  these  deities.  Among  the  mytho- 
logists,  or  poets,  Homer,  Hesiod,  Orpheus,  and  others  of  that  .sort^ 
have  feigned  most  prodigious  stories  of  the  gods.  We  shall  endea- 
vour briefly  to  ruh  over  what  has  been  written  by  both,  observing  a 
kind  of  middle  course.  Evemerus,  a  special  friend  of  king  Cassan- 
der,  being  forced  to  undertake  some  great  and  weighty  affairs,  and 
long  and  tedious  voyages  for  die  king,  they  say,  was  driven  to  a  vsrf 
distance  through  the  ocean,  southward ;  and  departing  from  Arabh 
Felix,  after  many  days  sail,  arrived  at  certain  islands  situated  in  the 
midst  of  the  ocean;  the  greatest  of  which  was  one  called  Panchaisi 
in  which  he  saw  the  people  very  sealous  and  eminent  for  religioof 
who  adored  the  gods  with  magnificent  and  pompous  sacrifices,  and 
rich  gifts  both  of  gold  and  silver.  They  say,  moreover^  that  thd 
island  is  consecrated  to  the  gods,  and  that  there  were  many  othef 
things  in  it  which  were  admirable,  both  for  their  antiquity  and  ex<* 
cellency  of  workmanship;  of  which  we  have  given  a  particular  ac 
count  in  the  preceding  books.    That  there  b  likewise  in  it^  lyoU 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  505 

p  of  a  high  mountain,  a  temple  dedicated  to  Jupiter  Triphy- 
)uilt  by  him  when  he  conversed  here  with  men,  and  governed 
fiole  world;  in  which  temple  there  is  a  golden  pillar,  whereon 
istinctly  described  in  Panchaian  tetters,  the  acts  of  Uranus ^^ 

1,  and  Jupiter.     Afterwards  he  says That  the  first  king  was 

IS,  a  just  and  good  man,  and  very  skilful  in  astrology;  and 
e  was  the  first  that  adored  the  heavenly  gods,  and  was  therefore 

Uranus :  and  that  he  begat  on  his  wife  Vesta  two  sons.  Pan 
aturn,  and  two  daughters,  Rhea  and  Ceres.  He  says,  morer 
that  Saturn  reigned  after  Uranus,  and  married  Rhea,  and  be- 
ipiter,  Juno,  and  Neptune;  and  that  Jupiter,  succeeding  Sa- 
married  Juno,  Ceres,  and  Themis:  on  the  first  of  which  he 
e  Curetes,  Proserpina  on  the  second,  and  Minerva  on  the 

and  that  afterwards  coming  to  Babylon,  he  was  entertained 
ilus.  And  that  from  thence  arriving  at  the  island  of  Panchaia, 
ttcted  an  altar  to  Uranus's  grandfather;  and  then  passing 
gh  Syria,  he  came  to  ptiude  Cassius,  from  whom  the  moun- 
ras  called  mount  Cassius.  Then  travelling  into  Cilicia,  he 
ime  Cilix,  the  lord  of  the  country;  and  having  at  last  passed 
gh  several  other  nations,  was  highly  honoured  by  all,  and  stiled 
.     When  he  had  delivered  these,  and  such  like  matters  con- 

3g  the  gods,  as  of  mortal  men,^he  subjoins  this <<  Let  this 

;refore  suffice  in  reference  to  Evemerus,  who  wrote  the  sacred 

itory." 

d  as  to  what  the  Greeks  fabulously  report  concerning  the  gods^ 

lall  endeavour  to  give  as  succinct  an  account  9s  we  can^  tracing 

eps  of  Homer,  Hesiod,  and  Orpheus. 


A  FRAGMENT. 


ge  Monachusy  or  the  Monk^  who  wrote  a  history  in  Greek,  out 
of  Diodormj  cancenung  the  Corinthian  kingdom* 

riNG  given  an  account  of  these  things,  it  remains  tha*  we  should 

speak  of  Corinth  and  Sicyon,  how  they  were  planted  and  inha- 

by  the  Dorians;   for  almost  all  the  nations  in  Peloponnesus. 

>t  the  Arcadians,  were  removed  from  their  antient  seats  at  the 

*  CceiuiD,  lieaTeA. 
)L.2,   No.  46  TIT 


506  tHE  FRAGMEKTS  OF 

time  of  the  return  of  the  Heraclids;  who^  leaving  out  Corinth  in  the 
division^  sent  messengers  to  Alethes,  and  gave  him  the  said  pnmDce, 
together  with  the  tfeighbouring  territory.  Thb  roan  became  very 
famous,  and  enlarged  Corinth,  where  he  reigned  thirty-eight  yean. 
After  his  death,  the  eldest  and  next  of  kin  ever  succeeded  in  the 
kingdom,  down  to  the  reign  of  Cypselus,  four  hundred  and  twenty-, 
seven  years  after  the  return  of  the  Heraclidse.  The  first  that  reigned 
at  Corinth  after  Alethes  was  Ixion,  who  held  the  kingdom  thirty-eiglit 
years;  after  whom,  Agesilaus  reigned  thirty-seven  years;  and  after 
them,  Prumnides  thirty-five  years,  and  his  son  Baccbis  as  long,  who 
was  the  most  famous  and  renowned  of  any  of  his  ancestors,  so  that 
those  who  reigned  after  him  were  not  called  Heradidse,  but  Bic- 
chides.  After  Bacchis,  Agilaus  enjoyed  the  throne  thirty  years;  Eii- 
damus,  twenty-five;  Aristomedes,  thirty-five,  who  after  his  death  kft 
behind  him  a  son  called  Telestas,  a  little  child,  who  was  deprived  of 
his  father's  kingdom  by  Agemon,  his  uncle  and  guardian,  who  reigDcd 
sixteen  years;  after  him,  Alexander  came  to  the  crown,  and  enjoyed 
it  twenty-five  years,  and  was  then  killed  by  Telestas,  who  had  been 
before  deprived  of  the  kingdom  of  his  ancestors,  which  he  now  re* 
gained,  and  possessed  it  twelve  years,  and  then  was  murdered  by  some 
of  his  own  kindred,  and  Automenes  reigned  in  his  stead  one  year: 
after  which  the  Bacchid®,  the  posterity  of  Hercules,  enjoyed  the 
kingdom  for  above  two  hundred  years,  and  all  governed  together  with 
equal  authority;  but  every  year  they  created  one  of  themselves  P»y- 
tanis,  who  had  the  power  of  a  monarch  for  ninety  years,  till  the  time 
of  Cypselus,  who  put  an  end  to  that  sort  of  government.  These  there^ 
fore  are  the  kings  of  Corinth.    Bacchis  reigned  thirty-five  yeafs» 


A  TRAGMENT. 


IVie  same  George  of  the  origin  of  the  Romans,  out  of  tie 
book  ofDhdorus  SiculuSm 


SOME  writers  have  erroneously  held,  that  Romulus,  who  built  Rome^ 
was  the  son  of  iEneas:  but  this  cannot  possibly  be  true,  since  thers 
were  many  kings  that  reigned  in  course  between  iEneas  and  Roma* 
1  ;s,  the  city  being  built  the  second,  year  of  the  seventh  Olympiai^ 


mODORUS  SIC0LU8.  50/ 

I  ■— ^fc— ^I^MMM^ili^l^^  ■lit  — — — m— — — ^— m^p 

»■'   ■  ■  ■!     ■     ■■  I      ■  *■         1.        I  11  >  ■       III  I  ■ 

which  was  above  four  huudred  and  thirty  years  after  the  Trojaa  war. 
For  iEneas  gained  the  kingdom  of  the  Latins  three  years  after  the 
destruction  of  Troy^  and  reigned  only  three  years^  and  after  hb  death 
was  adored  as  a  god.  Ascanius,  his  son^  succeeded  him,  and  built 
Alba,  called  at  this  day  Longa.  He  gave  the  city  this  naine  from 
the  river  which  was  then  called  Alba,  and  now  Tiber:  but  Fabius, 
who  wrote  an  history  of  the  Roman  aflairs,  speaks  otherwise  of  the 
naming  of  this  city.  For  he  tells  a  story,  thfit  ^ueas  was  foretold 
by  the  oracle,  that  a  four-footed  beast  should  shew  htm  the  way  to 
the  place  where  a  pew  city  should  be  built,  which  came  thus  to  pass: 
being  about  to  sacrifice  a  white*  sow  then  big  with  young,  she  made 
her  escape,  and  ran  away  to  a  hill,  whither  she  was  pursued,  and 
there  she  brought  forth  thirty  pigs,  ^oeas,  wondering  at  the  acci- 
dent, and  calling  to  mind  the  answer  of  the  oracle,  forthwith  went 
about  to  settle  inhabitants  in  the  place;  but  being  warned  by  a  vi^i- 
sion  in  the  night  to  desist,  and  not  to  build  till  after  thirty  jrears  then 
Bcxt  ensuing,  he  left  off  his  design  till  the  number  of  years  was 
completed. 

Here  follow  the  Eclogues  or  Fragments  of  Diodorus  Siculus,  out 
of  books  tweuty-one  to  twenty-suL  inclusive,  which  are  now  lost. 


BOOK  XXI, 


1.  ALL  vice  is  to  be  avoided  by  every  wise  man,  but  especially  co« 
vetousness:  for  this  (through  hopes  and  desire  of  gain)  prompts 
many  to  acts  of  injustice,  and  so  becomes  the  occasion  of  the  greats 
est  mischiefs  to  mankind;  for  being  in  ihe  very  highest  sphere  of 
wickedness,  it  involves  not  only  mean  men,  but  even  kings  them- 
selves, in  extreme  calamities.  For  Antigonus,  king  of  Asia,  as  an 
example  of  this  truth,  out  of  his  insatiable  desire,  beginning  a  war 
against  four  other  kings,  (who  joined  against  him),  viz.  Ptolemy  La-» 
gus,  king  of  Egypt,  Seleucus,  king  of  Babylon,  Lysimachus,  of 
Thrace,  and  Cassander,  the  son  of  Antipater,  king  of  Macedonia, 
perished  in  battlef,  being  shot  through  the  body  with  multitudes  of 
darts  and  arrows,  (though  afterwards  buried  in  a  royal  manner),  and 
}^is  son  Demetrius,  with  his  mother  Stratonlce,  who  were  then  in  Cin 

*  Alba  significi  white.  t  At  Luus  ia  JPlit^gia.— FJyt,  in  Pjnlif  t 


508  THE  FRAGMEKTS  OF 

licia,  were  forced  to  sail  away  wi(h  all  the  wealth  they  bad  toSaluniii 
ID  Cyprus,  that  remaininfi^  still  in  the  hands  of  Demetrius. 

2.  A^aMiocles,  king  of  Sicily,  burnt  all  the  Macedonian  fleetj  tod 
so  freed  Corcyra,  when  it  was  besieged  by  Cassander  both  by  tea  atd 
land,  and  very  near  and  likely  to  be  taken.  Oh  the  ratny  QDcerttin- 
tifs  of  war !  For  folly  and  fraud  many  tinnes  effect  as  great  tbiop  as 
true  valour  and  courage. 

S.  Agathoclt  s,  being  returned  to  the  re^t  of  his  artny  from  Gor- 
cyra,  when  he  heard  that  the  Ligurians  and  Tyrrhenians  (who  were 
Ills  nierceiuiry  soldiers)  had  assisted  those  who  killed  his  ton  Archi- 
gathus  in  his  absence,  put  theiti  all  to  the  sword,  to  the  ntmiberof 
two  thousand:  upon  which  account  the  Brutii  deserting  him,  he  re- 
solvea  to  besiege  their  city  called  iGthas*^.  But  the  barbarians  ia 
groat  numbers  falling  upon  him  suddenly  in  the  nighty  cat  off  four 
thousand  of  his  men,  and  so  he  returned  to  Syracuse. 

4.  Afrathocles  rigged  out  a  great  fleet,  and  sailed  into  Italy;  aadi 
liaving  a  design  to  march  his  army  to  Crotona,  he  sent  a  measeDgcr 
before  to  Menedemus,  king  of  Crotona,  who  was  his  particular  fnead, 
not  to  be  afraid  of  his  motion;  which  was  merely  to  deceive  him; 
and,  purposing  to  besiege  the  place,  he  gave  out  that  he  Was  sending 
a\%«4y  his  daughter  Lanassa  with  a  royal  fleet  toEpirus^to  manyher; 
and  by  this  fraud  he  came  upon  them  when  they  were  unprovided, 
and  never  suspected  him.  Thereupon,  applying  himself  with  tU 
earnestness  to  the  siege,  he  blocked  up  the  place  by  a  wall  drawn 
from  sea  to  sea;  and,  having  by  his  mines  and  batteries  ruined  the 
greatest  house  of  the  town,  the  Crotoneans  out  of  fear  opened  tbrir 
gates,  and  received  his  army  into  the  city,  who,  breaking  in  like  a 
flood,  first  rifled  all  the  houses,  and  then  put  all  the  men  to  the  sword, 
lie  likewise  made  a  league  with  the  neighbouring  barbarians^theja- 
pygians,  and  Peucetians,  furnishing  them  with  ships  for  piracj,  tod 
shared  with  them  in  the  robbery.  At  lengthy  having  pat  a  glurrisoo 
into  Crotona,  he*sailed  back  to  Syracuse. 

5.  Diallus  the  Athenian  writer  composed  a  general  history  li 
twenty-six  books,  and  Psaon  of  Platsea  another  in  thirty  books. 

6.  In  the  war  against  the  Hetruscans,  Gauls,  and  Samnites»  aal 
their  confederates,  the  Romans  destroyed  (when  Fabins  was  consol) 
a  hundred  thousand  men,  as  Duris  relates. 

7.  Antipater,  out  of  envy,  killed  his  own  mother.  Alexander^lus 
brother,  was  likewise  killed  by  Demetrius,  whom  Alexander  had  seat 
for  to  his  assistance.  Antipater,  the  murderer  of  his  mother.  Was  tlso 
served  the  same  sauce  by  Demetrius^  unwilling  to  have  a  partner  ia 
the  kingdom. 

*  JEim,  people  of  Sici^. 


WODORUS  STCULUS*  50^ 

8.  AgathotUs  raised  an  army,  and  sailed  over  into  Italy,  with  thirty 
tWusand  foot,  Tuid  two  thousand  horse;  and^  giving^  the  command  of 
the  fleet  to  Siitpo^  be  ordered  him  to  waste  and  spoil  the  country  of 
the  Brutii :  while  he  was  harassing  the  sea-coasts,  he  lost  many  of  hti 
ships  in  a  storm.  But  Agathocles,  by  the  help  of  his  battering  en- 
gines, took  the  city  dipponium;  which  so  terrified  the  Bvutiij  that 
they  sent  ambassadors  to  treat  with  him  upon  terms  of  pc&ce:  npon 
which  he  put  in  a  garrison,  and  carried  away  whh  him  six  hundred 
hostages,  and  returned  to  Syracuse.  But  the  Brutii  mUde  slight  X)t 
their  oath,  and  with  the  whole  poWer  of  the  city  fell  upon  the  gftrrison, 
and  slew  every  man,  and  afterwards  recovered  their  hostages,  Iki^d  freed 
tliemselves  from  the  yoke  of  Agathocles.  Lenity  is  to  be  prefertdi 
before  revenge. 

9.  Nf  ost  generals  of  armies,  when  they  are  brought  into  straits  attd 
diiBculttes,  (out  of  fear),  do  generally  humour  the  multitude. 

10.  When  the  Thebans  made  a  second  defectkm^  Demetrius  bat- 
tered down  their  walls,  and  took  the  city  hy  storm,  and  put  only  tea 
jnen  to  death,  who  were  the  ringleaders  of  the  rebellion. 

11.  Agathocles  sent  hisson  Agathocles  to  Demetrius,  to  enter  in- 
to a  league  with  hfm,  offensive  and  de%nsivc.  The  king  kindly  re-^ 
ceived  the  young  man,  and  bestowed  on  him  a  royal  robe,  and  many 
other  rich  and  princely  gifts,  and  sent  along  with  him  Oxythemes^  his 
special  friend,  under  colour  of  confirming  the  league^  but  in  truth  to 
be  a  spy  in  Sicily. 

12.  King  Agathocles,  after  a  long  peace  between  him  and  the 
Carthaginians,  at  length  rigged  out  a  fleet:  for  he  designed  to  trans- 
port an  army  into  Libya,  and  with  his  navy  to  hinder  the  exportation 
of  all  corn  and  provisions  from  Sardinia  and  Sicily  to  the  Carthagi- 
nians, who  by  the  last  war  had  gained  the  dominion  of  the  sea,  and 
thereby  had  secured  their  country  from  invasions.  And,  though 
Agathocles  had  a  well  furnished  fleet,  to  the  number  of  two  hundred 
gallies  of  four  and  six  tier  of  oars,  yet  he  failed  in  his  design,  by  rea* 
son  of  what  shortly  happened.  For  there  was  one  Menoo,  an  ^gis* 
tan,  a  beautiful  captive,  then  servant  to  ihe  king,  who  for  some  time 
conformed  himself  to  a  strict  compliance  with  the  king'^  humoux^ 
so  that  he  was  taken  into  the  number  of  his  beloved*  and  intimate 
friends.  But,  because  of  the  ruin  of  his  country,  and  the  di^onour* 
able  abuse  of  his  own  person,  he  bore  a  secret  hatred  to  the  king,  and 
watched  an  opportunity  to  be  revenged.  The  king,  because  he  HvtiM 
old,  intrusted  Archagathus  with  the  command  of  the  army:  he  wlu  the 
son  of  Archagathus,  who  was  killed  in  Libya,  and  was  king  Agatbo^ 
cles's  grandchild;  he  was  a  man  of  a  strong  body,  and  of  a  brtdve  tod 

*  His  catamite. 


1 


510  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 

generous  spirit,  far  above  all  the  rest  of  bis  family.  Wheu  he  wn 
encamped  with  the  army  near  i^tna,  the  king  bad  a  desire  to  pio- 
mote  his  son  Agathocles  to  be  his  successor  in  the  kingdom^  and  to 
titat  end  recommended  the  young  man  to  the  Syracusans^  and  de- 
clared his  purpose  and  design  to  have  him  succeed.  Afterwards  he 
sent  him  to  the  camp  with  letters  to  Archagathus,  which  ordered 
him  to  deliver  up  the  commaod  of  all  tbe  forces  both  by  sea  and 
land  to  bis  son:  upon  which  Archagathus,  perceiving  that  tbe  king- 
dom was  designed  for  another^ contrived  the  destruction  of  them  both: 
and  to  that  end  sent  a  messenger  to  Menon  of  iEgista,  who  per- 
suaded him  to  poison  the  king:  Archagathus  himself^  celebrating  a 
sacrifice  in  a  certain  island  where  Agathocles  then  lay  with  tbe  fleets 
invited  him  to  the  festival;  and  in  the  night  (when  be  was  dead. 
drank)  cut  his  throaty  and  threw  his  body  into  the  sea,  which  heiag 
afterwards  cast  up  by  the  violence  of  the  waves,  was  known  by  the 
inhabitants,  and  carried  to  Syracuse.  And  whereas  it  was  the  king's 
custom  always  after  supper  to  pick  his  teeth  with  a  quill,  now  rising 
from  the  table,  he  called  to  Menon  fur  his  tooth-picker,  who,  having 
dipped  the  end  of  it  in  poison^  delivered  it  to  the  king,  and  he,  never 
susptctifig  any  thing,  plied  ay  his  teeth  with  that  care  and  earnest-*^ 
ness,  that  none  of  his  gums  escaped  the  touch  of  jthe  poison.  Upon 
tills  the  king  began  by  little  and  little  to  be  very  ill,  which  was  sac* 
ccedcd  by  violent  torments  in  Lis  body  every  day.  Then  an  incur- 
able putrefaction  and  rottenness  covered  his  gums  and  teeth:  and 
now  drawing  near  to  his  end,  he  called  a  senate,  where  he  complained 
of  the  wickedness  of  Archagathus,  and  incited  the  people  to  take  re- 
venge of  him  for  his  villanics,  declaring  that  he  would  forthwith  re- 
store them  to  their  democracy.  Afterwards,  when  he  was  in  the  I'Ciy 
height  of  his  extremity,  Oxythemes  (who  had  been  there  a  little  be- 
fore, sent  by  king  Demetrius)  hurried  him  to  the  funerat  pile,  and 
burnt  him  while  he  was  yet  alive,  and  not  able  to  speak  by  reason  of 
the  foulness  and  filthiness  of  his  mouth  through  the  poison.  And 
thus  Agathocles,  for  the  many  slaughters  and  murders  of  bis  reign^ 
and  cruelties  towards  his  own  subjects,  and  impieties  against  the 
gods,  came  to  an  end  such  as  he  justly  deserved  for  bis  former  wick* 
ednesses,  after  he  had  reigned  twenty-eigtit  years,  and  lived  seventy-^ 
two,  as  Timaeus  the  Syracusan  relates,  and  Callias,  another  Syracu- 
san,  (who  wrote  two-and-twenty  books),  and  Antander  likewise^  the* 
brother  of  Agathocles,  an  historian.  TliQ  SyracqsanSjt  liaving  now 
regained  their  democratical  government,  confiscated  all  the  goods 
and  estate  of  Agathocles,  and  broke  down  all  bis  statues,  Menon^ 
in  the  mean  time,  who  had  plotted  and  executed  the  treason^  was  9% 
the  camp  with  Archa^athuS;,  having  fled  thither  from  Syracuse:  b^A 


BIODORUS  SICU  LtiS.  511 

I— ^fc— ^I^MMM^ili^l^—  ■111  I    ..iiii      ■        — — 1— — in— — — ^— m^i 

»■'   ■  ■  ■!     ■     *■  I    ■     I       .  1      ■  Jl         1.  I  1    11  >  ■       III     ..I  ■ 

now  begiDDing  to  look  very  big  upon  k^  as  being  a  man  .who  kad 
ruined  tlie  monarchy,  he  secretly  murders  Archagathas,  and  with 
fair  words  and  winning  behaviour,  brought  over  the  army  to  his  in- 
terest, and  determined  to  force  Syracuse  to  obedience,  and  gain  iho 
principality.  Hereupon  the  Syracusans  created  Hicetas  general 
against  Menon,  who  continued  the  war  for  some  time;  Menoa 
all  along  seeking  to  avoid  fighting,  and  could  by  no  means  be 
brought  to  engage.  But  when  the  Carthaginians  joined  with  Me« 
non,  by  which  he  became  far  stronger  than  tlie  Syracusatis,  thej 
were  forced  to  agree  with  the  Carthaginians,  and  delivered  four 
hundred  hostages  for  further  security  t)f  the  peace,  and  to  restore  all 
the  exiles.  However,  when  the  mercenary  soldiers  were  denied 
their  right  to  vote  in  the  choosing  of  magistratesi  the  city  was  pre** 
sently  in  an  uproar;  and  both  the  Syracusans  and  mercenaries  raa 
to  their  arms.  But  some  of  the  better  sort  interposed,  and  by  muck 
intercession  prevailed  with  both  parties  to  agree  upon  this  couditioa 
^That  the  soldiers  should  depart  out  of  Sicily  by  such  a  time,  and 
take  all  their  goods  along  with  them.  Hereupon  the  foreign  sol- 
diers left  Syracuse,  and  came  to  Messana,  where  they  were  reoeireA 
into  the  city  as  friends  and  confederates;  and  being  kindly  enter- 
tained in  their  houses,  in  the  night  they  massacre'd  all  their  hosts, 
and  marrying  their  wives,  seized  upon  the  city,  which  they  called 
Mamertina,  from  Mars,  which  in  their  own  country*  language  thqr 
call  Mamers. 

13.  For  they  who  are  not  members  of  the  democratical  govem-- 
nent,  are  not  admitted  by  the  tribune  of  the  people  to  give  their  euf* 
frages  anjong  those  that  are. 

14.  It  is  a  commendable  thing  to  be  ever  terrible  to  an  enemy^ 
and  always  kind  and  courteous  to  a  friend. 

15.  Since  at  that  time,  when  you  knew  not  what  was  best  and 
fittest  to  be  done,  you  were  caught  with  fair  and  enticing  words;  and 
now  when  you  see  calamity  upon  the  totmtry  indeed,  you  are  taught 
another  lesson.  For  sometimes  to  be  ignorant  of  things  which  may 
fall  out  in  this  life,  is  natural  to  mankind;  but  to  be  deceived  tvrice 
in  the  same  thing,  argues  a  man  to  be  a  fooL  And  the  ofteoer  we 
are  deceived,  the  greater  punishment  we  deserve.  Some  of  the  ci-. 
tizens  have  arrived  at  that  height  of  coyetousness,  that  they  would 
fain  raise  up  the  glory  of  their  families  by  the  ruin  of  their  country. 
For  they  who  have  so  wickedly  acted  in  assisting  others,  pray,  how 
have  they  been  used  by  them  ? 

16.  Offences  are  to  be  forgiven,  and  peace  to  be  kept  for  the  time 
to  come. 

*  Campania. 


512  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


17.  Not  they  that  offend,  but  they  who  repeot  not  of  their  offisn- 
ces,  ought  to  be  severely  punished. 

18.  Mercy  and  kindness  annong  men,  is  more  aotient  than  wntk 
and  revenge. 

19.  It  is  a  commendable  and  desirable  thing  to  lay  aside  all  ani- 
mosities, and  instead  thereof  to  return  to  friendship  and  amity.  For 
when  a  man  is  reduced  to  poverty  and  straits,  he  presently,  at  tht 
first  nod  as  it  were,  runs  to  his  friends. 

20.  Covetousness  being  naturally  ingrafted  in  men,  uo  man  can 
be  wholly  free  from  that  vice.  Pride,  and  a  tyrant's  robes,  ought  to 
be  left  at  home.  For  he  that  enters  into  a  free  city,  ought  to  ooo* 
form  himself  to  the  laws  of  the  place.  He  that  is  of  a  princely  fa- 
mily, and  comes  to  a  kingdom  by  hereditary  descent,  is  desirous  alss 
to  succeed  in  the  glory  and  reputation  of  his  ancestors.  For  it  is  a 
base  and  dishonourable  thing  to  carry  the  name  of  Pyrrhus  the  son 
of  Achilles,  and  yet  in  actions  to  imitate  Thersites*.  For  the  more 
honour  and  reputation  any  person  has  gained,  so  much  the  move 
regard  and  respect  will  he  have  for  them  who  were  the  instruments 
of  his  advancement  and  happy  successes.  Therefore  what  may  bt 
honourably  and  deservedly  obtained,  should  not  be  used  unjustly 
and  disgracefully,  when  it  is  etijoyed.  It  is  therefore,  gentlemen,  a 
commendable  thing,  by  the  example  of  other  men's  suflferings  and 
mistakes,  wisely  to  provide  for  our  own  security* 

21.  It  does  not  become  any  man  to  have  more  regard  to  stran- 
gers, than  his  own  kindred;  and  to  be  more  fearful  to  exasperate  an 
enemy,  than  careful  to  preserve  the  good  will  and  opinion  of  his 
allies.  . 


BOOK  XXII. 


1.  IT  is  the  natural  property  of  the  Epirots,  not  only  fo  fight  Ibr 
their  country,  but  to  run  all  hazards  likewise  in  the  defence  of  Uieir 
friends  and  allies. 

2.  Decius,  the  Roman  tribune  governor  of  Rhegium,  to  revenge 
his  country  of  king  Pyrrhus,  killed  all  the  inhabitants  except  the  wo- 
men, whom  he  sold  for  slaves>  and  seized  on  all  the  goods  and  estate* 
of  those  that  were  slain.  Tliese  were  Campanians,  who  acted  the 
same  cruelty  here  as  the  Mamertiues  did  when  they  massacre'd  all 

*  A  filthy  ogly  fellow  killed  by  Achillei  for  his  Mucinesa»  by  a  bos  oa  tb«  Mr. 


mODORUi  SICULU^i  flli 


the  Messanians.  Afterwards,  because  he  made  not  aiv  equal  distri- 
bution of  the  prey  and  plunder  taken  from  those  miserable  people^ 
he  was  banished  Rhegium  by  bis  own  country nren  the  Campanians. 
The  Mamertines  themselves  assisted  in  this  butchery:  and  with  the 
money  that  was  left,  hired  him  to  be  their  captain^  and  chief  com^ 
maoder.  Af^erwards^  a  distemper  falling  into  his  eyes,  he  advised 
with  a  skilful  physician,  who,  to  revenge  the  injuries  and  cruelties; 
done  to  his  country,  prescribed  an  application  of  cantharidesi  whick 
wholly  deprived  him  of  his  sight:  and  the  physician  himself  took 
care  to  withdraw  from  Messana.  In  the  mean  time,  there  were  these 
princes  in  Sicily,  Hicetas  at  i^yracuse,  Phiutiasat  Agrigentum,  Tyn-. 
darus  at  Tauromiuium,  and  some  others  in  the  lesser  cities:  Phin<^ 
tias  and  Hicetas  were  at  war  with  each  other,  and  fought  a  battle  at 
Hibleum,  in  which  Iliceias  was  conqueror.  Afterwards,  making 
several  incursions  upon  one  another,  and  robbing  and  spoiling  eve- 
ry where,  the  country  by  this  means  lay  untilled.  Hicetas^  puffed 
up  with  his  victor}',  engaged  the  Carthaginians  at  the  river  Terias, 

where  he  was  beaten  with  the  loss  of  a  great  number  of  his  men. ■, 

At  that  time  Phintias  built  Phintia,  and  planted  there  the  Gelans^ 
who  had  been  driven  out  of  their  country.  It  is  situated  by  the  sea-^ 
aide:  for  both  the  houses  and  walls  of  Gela  being  utterly  demolish- 
ed>  after  he  had  walled  in  Phintia,  and  made  a  stately  itiarket-place^ 
and  built  temples  for  the  service  of  the  gods^  he  transplanted  the 
people  of  Gela  thither.  When  he  committed  the  murder^  he  was 
hated  by  all  the  cities  under  his  government,  who  drove  out  all  the 
^rrisons,  among  the  first  of  whom  were  the  Agyreans; 

3.  King  Ptolemy  was  killed  by  the  Gaus^  and  the  whole  Madedo^ 
nian  army  utterly  destroyed. 

4.  A  Cadmean  victory  is  a  proverb^  meant  when  the  conquerors 
have  lost  abundance  of  men^  and  the  vanquished  are  but  little  th^ 
If  orse,  because  of  the  extent  of  their  empire. 

5.  Phintias,  the  builder  of  Phintia,  and  tyilunt  of  Agrf^nttlm,  in 

a  dream  had  a  representation  pointing  out  to  him  his  own  death..^^  . 
He  thought  he  saw,  as  he  was  hunting  the  hoar,  a  soW  fiercely  come 
up  to  him,  and  strike  him  on  the  side  with  her  teeth,  Which  so  pierc- 
ed him  that  he  died. 

6.  Hicetas,  after  he  had  reigned  nine  years  at  Syracuse,  ifras  d^- 
J»rived  of  his  kingdom  by  Thynion  the  son  of  Mameus. 

7*  Thynion  and  Sosistratus^  the  successors  of  Hicetas^  sent  agaffi 
for  king  Pyrrhus  into  Sicily. 

8.  The  Mamertines^  who  treaeberously  murdered  the  Messaniand^ 
having  entered  into  a  league  with  the  Carthaginians,  in  a  senate  d^ 
•reed  to  hinder  Pyrrhus  from  landing  in  Sicily*     Bat  lyndartis^ 

Vol.  2*  Nb*  4Bi  ¥W¥ 


514  THE  FRAGMENTS  6t 

tyrant  of  Taurominium,  sided  with  him,  and  was  ready  to  reeeife 
into  the  city  all  those  forces  that  joined  him. 

9.  The  Carthaginians  entered  into  a  league  with  the  RomHns^  and 
took  five  hundred  men  on  board  their  own  ships  and  sailed  over  to 
Rhegiufflj  and  began  to  assault  the  place,  but  at  length  raised  the 
siege;  and  having  set  all  the  timber  and  other  materials  on  fire, 
which  had  been  prepared  for  shipping,  they  put  to  sea^  and  there  hf 
to  observe  the  motions  of  Pyrrhus. 

10.  When  Thynion  had  the  command  of  the  Island*,  and  Sosistrt-* 
tus  lorded  it  over  the  Syracusans,  having  each  an  army  of  ten  thoa- 
sand  men,  they  broke  out  into  a  war  with  one  another;  but  beiof 
tired  out,  they  both  sent  ambassadors  to  Pyrrhus. 

1 1.  Pyrrhus  made  war  in  Italy  for  the  space  of  two  years  and  four 
months,  and  whilst  he  was  preparing  for  his  departure,  the  Cartha- 
ginians closely  besieged  the  Syracusans  both  by  sea  and  land.   They 
had  a  fleet  of  a  hundred  sail^  which  lay  in  the  great  haven;  aod  a 
land  army  of  fifty  thousand  men,  encamped  near  the  walls.    With 
these  they  penned  up  the  Syracusans  on  every  side,  and  wasting  and 
plundering  the  country  round  about,  they  even  converted  it  into  a 
desolate  wilderness.    Tlie  Syracusans  therefore,  wearied  oat  with 
the  war,  depended  only  upon  Pyrrhus,  in  regard  he  had  mairied 
Lanassa,  the  daughter  of  Agathocles,  of  whom  he  had  bcgotteD 
Alexander.    On  which  account  they  sent  daily  to  htm;  whereopoo 
shipping  his  men,  elephants,  and  other  provisions,  he  departed  fion 
Tarentum,  and  arrived  the  tenth  day  at  LcwTis:  thence  he  sailed,  af» 
tcr  his  landing  in  Sicily,  to  Taurominium;  and  there  being  jobed 
by  Tyndarus,  prince  of  that  city,  and  reinforced  by  him  with  more 
soldiers,  he  made  from  thence,  and  came  to  Catana;  where,  hmg 
magnificently  received  by  the  inhabitants,  and  laden  with  golden 
crowns,  he  lauded  his  nten,  with  which  he  marched  straight  to  Sy« 
racusc,  his  fleet  ready  prepared  for  an  engagement,  sailing  with  him 
all  along  the  coast.     When  he  came  near  to  Syracuse,  the  Cartha- 
ginians, having  sent  away  thirty  of  their  ships  for  necessary  provi* 
sions,  durst  not  venture  a  battle  with  those  that  remained  |  ao  that 
Pyrrhus  came  to  Syracuse  without  any  opposition;  the  Islaind  beiiif 
still  kept  by  Thynion,  and  tlie  rest  of  the  city  by  the  Syracnsut  anf 
Sosistratus.    For  he  had  Agrigentum  under  his  command,  and  ma- 
ny other  cities,  and  above  ten  thousand  soldiers.    And  having  the» 
reconciled  Thynion  and  Sosistratus,  and  the  Syracusans,  and  bfou^t 
them  all  to  a  right  understanding  among  themselves,  he  was  there- 
upon highly  esteemed  and  applauded.    The  king  received  weapons^ 
engines,  and  other  furniture  and  povisions  which  were  Uk  tho  dtj^ 

*  A  paH  of  the  city. 


blODORUS  SICULUS.  61A 


with  a  huodred  Hod  twenty  decked  fihips^  and  twenty  optn  Tetselff..^ 
But*  the  palace  belonged  to  Ennercs.  Tlie  whole  oavjr  tlierefore> 
includiDg  those  he  brought  along  with  bira,  consuted  of  two  hQQ<« 
dred  sail.  Whilst  he  was  thus  employed,  ambassadors  came  from 
the  Leoutines,  sent  to  him  from  HeracUdas  the  governor,  with  pro^ 
mise  to  deliver  up  the  city  into  his  hands,  with  the  garrisons,  ani 
four  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse.  There  were  then  many 
others  at  Syracuse,  who  promised  to  deliver  ap  their  cities  to  Pyrr* 
husy  and  to  join  him  in  the  war.  He  received  them  all  graciously, 
and  sent  them  back  to  their  several  countries,  expecting  to  be  short** 
ly  lord  of  Libya. 

12.  The  port  of  Corinth  is  called  LtchsBum. 

13.  Brennus,  king  of  the  Gauls,  made  an  inroad  into  Macedonia 
with  a  hundred  and  forty  thousand  targeteers,  and  ten  tho€isan4 
horse,  and  a  great  multitude  of  other  foreign  rabble,  and  many  ttier« 
chants,  together  with  two  thousand  carts  and  carriages.  He  madt 
great  liavock  and  slaughter,  with  a  design  to  ruio  them  utterly.  At 
last  he  broke  into  Greece,  and  fully  purposed  to  rifle  the  temple  at 
Delphos.  By  frequent  engagements  Qrennus  lost  myriads  of  hie 
men,  and  he  himself  received  three  desperate  wounds.  Being 
near  his  end,  he  called  his  army  together,  and  made  a  speech  to  the 
Gauls,  and  advised  them  to  kill  both  him  and  the  rest  of  the  wounded 
inen,  to  burn  their  carriages,  and  return  home  with  all  speed,  and 
make  Cichorius  their  king.  Brennus  at  length,  after  h^  had  drunk 
freely  of  wine,  ran  himself  through  the  body.  Cichorius,  ao  soon 
as  he  bad  buried  Brennus,  knocked  all  the  wounded  men  on  the  head> 
those  at  least  that  were  likely  to  be  starved  with  hunger  or  perished 
by  the  cold,  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand;  and  then  returned 
witli  the  remainder  the  same  way  they  came.  But  the  GrecianSji 
who  lay  in  ambush  in  the  strait  and  narrow  passages,  cut  off  all  Iheir 
rear,  and  took  most  of  their  baggage.  Marching  forward  to  Ther^ 
inopyl^e,  they  there  left  behind  them  twenty  thousniid  more  for  wat^t 
of  food.  At  length,  as  they  were  passing  thfough  the  country  o£ 
the  Dai  danians,  they  all  perished ;  and  not  one  man  returned  to  hi^ 
own  country. 

11.  But  Pyrrhus,  when  he  had  settled  all  things  at  Syracuse  lind 
Leoiitium,  marched  his  army  towards  Agrigentum;  and  while  on  his 
march,  he  was  told  by  soH>e  from  on  ship-board  that  they  had  drivea 
out  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  in  order  that  Phinlias  might  not  go-* 
yern  them;  and  promised  they  would  deliver  the  cily  into  hia  hsLwk^ 

a  SooketbiBg  is  w^uliog  iMfre.  for  it  seent  to  1i»t«  no  oohsfsnce  wilh  wliatit>4iU^«e 


6l6  THE  TRAGMEKT8  OF 


and  join  with  him  as  confederates  in  the  war.     Having  therefore  re« 
ceived  the  forces,  he  marched  straight  to  Agrigentum,  aiid  received 
the  city  and  soldiers  from  Sosistratus,  to  the  number  of  eight  thou- 
sand foot  and  eight  hundred  horse,  nothing  inferior  to  the  EpirotB. 
And  now  he  took  into  his  protection  thirty  cities  which  were  under 
the  command  of  Sosistratus.     Afterwards  he  sent  to  Syracuse  lor 
the  engines  of  battery,  and  all  the  arms  and  darts;  and  wheo  thej 
were  brought  to  him,  he  marched  into  the  territories  of  the  Cartha- 
ginians, having  an  army  with  him  of  thirty  thousand  foot  and  fifteeo 
hundred  horse,  and  some  elephants.    And  first  he  took  Hemclea,  a 
Carthaginian  garrison:   tlien  Aaones;  afterwards  the  SelinaotiDCS 
came  in  to  the  king,  with  the  Halicysans,  .figestioes^  and  many 
pther  cities.    Sryx  at  that  time  had  in  it  a  very  strong  CartbagintiQ 
garri9oo,  and  was  besides  naturally  fortified,  and  very  difficult  of  ap« 
proach.     Pyrrhus  was  resolved  to  storm  this  place;  and  for  that  par^ 
pose  brought  his  battering  rams  to  the  walls.    After  a  strong  de« 
fence  for  a  long  time,  the  king,  desirous  to  make  his  name  fiunous, 
in  imitation  of  Hercules,  was  the  first  that  entered  within  the  walk, 
and  fought  with  that  courage  and  resolution,  that  he  despatched  all 
the  Carthaginians  that  came  in  his  way.    At  length  succoars  cool- 
ing in  to  him,  he  took  the  town  by  storm :  then  leaving  there  a  strong 
garrison,  he  marched  to  Eginora,  a  very  strong  place,  and  pleasant- 
ly situated  near  Panormus.    The  inhabitants  surrendered  the  city. 
Thence  he  forthwith  made  for  Panormus,  which  had  the  hest  har- 
bour of  any  city  in  Sicily,  from  whence  in  has  its  name:  he  took  it 
likewise  by  storm.     Then  taking  the  fort  at  Ercte,  he  gained  all 
that  belonged  to  the  Carthaginians  except  Lilybieom.    Thb  city  was 
built  by  the  Carthaginians  after  Dionysius  the  Tyrant  had  ruined 
Motya:  for  those  that  were  left  alive  after  that  slaughter,  the  Car^ 
thaginians  placed  in  Ulybfieum.     Just  as  Pyrrhus  was  ready  to  be- 
siege this  place,  a  great  army  landed  there  out  of  Africa^  having  the 
advantage  of  being  masters  at  sea,  and  brought  with  them  abundance 
of  corn,  and  an  inpumerable  number  of  engines  and  weapooa  of  war. 
And  oe^ause  the  greatest  portion  of  the  city  lay  near,  to  the  aea^  tbcy 
were  principally  careful  to  guard  that  part  towards  the  main  land; 
and  for  that  purpose  they  raised  many  bulwarks  and  high  toweiSy  and 
drew  -i  1.:  ge  trench  to  prevent  an  approach  on  that  side.    Then  they 
sent  ambassadors  to  the  king  to  treat  upon  terriis  of  peace,  and  to 
offer  him  n,  great  sum  of  money :  but  the  king  refusing  the  money, 
they  desiied  that  he  would  permit  the  Carthaginians  to  keep  only 
Lilybseum.    But  the  confederates  who  were  then  assemhled  in  se- 
nate, and  the  representatives  of  the  several  cities,  sent  to  hiip,  and 
earnestly  entreated  him^,  that  be  wpi^ld  not  upon  anv  tenns  vluMef ^ 


mODORUS  STCULUS.  &IJ 

permit  the  barbariaiis  to  liHVe  any  footmg  in  Sicily^  but  drive  the 
CartbagiDJaDS  wlioUy  out  of  the  isUnd,  and  limit  their  power  at  sea. 
Upon  this  the  king  encamped  near  the  walls,  and  at  first  made  seve-* 
ra)  assaults^  one  after  another;  hut  the  Carthaginians^  being  well 
furnished  ix>th  with  men  aiid  othtr  oeces^aneSj  beat  hitii  oift  for  they 
had  so  vast  a  number  of  engines  that  cast  darts  and  stones,  that  the 
wall  eould  scarcely  contain  them;  which  being  all  plied  again??t  the 
assailants^  they  were  so  galled  and  cm  o%  that  Pyrrhus  was  forced  to 
draw  off  his  men.  Then  he  began  to  contrive  other  engines^  and  did 
all  he  could  to  undermine  the  walls:  but  the  Carthaginians  making  m 
stout  resistance^  and  the  place  being  all  of  rock^  be  was  now  out  of 
all  hopes  of  taking  it  by  force,  and  therefore  (after  two  months  lying 
before  it)  he  raised  his  siege.  And  now  he  designed  to  bend  hit 
force  elsewhere,  and  to  that  end  to  furnish  himself  with  a  great  fleet, 
in  order  to  be  master  of  the  sea,  and  to  transport  a  great  army  Into 
Africa. 

15.  When  the  Mamertines  in  Messana  grew  strongs  tliey  fortified 
many  castles,  and  put  garrisons  into  them ;  and  came  presently,  witb 
an  army  they  had  ordered  to  be  in  readiness,  to  the  relief  of  Messana. 
But  Hiero,  leaving  the  enemy's  country,  took  Myle  by  storm,  and 
brought  under  his  command  fifteen  hundred  »oldters,and  then  marched 
towards  Amesalus,  (which  lies  between  the  Centoripians**  and  the 
Agyreansf),  and,  thoogh  it  waa  a  strong  place,  and  had  many  sol- 
diers in  it,  yet  he  took  it  by  assaulr,  and  razed  it  to  the  ground;  but 
he  pardoned  all  the  garrison-soldiers,  and  joined  thcni  to  his  own 
army.  The  territory  he  gave  to  the  Centoripians  and  the  Agyreans* 
Afterwards  Hiero  (having  a  great  army)  marched  against  the  Mamer- 
tines, and  gained  Alese;  and,  being  readily  received  hy  the  Abaceni 
and  Tyndaridse,  he  gained  their  cities  also,  and  so  penned  tip  the 
Mamertines  into  a  strait  and  narrow  corner:  for  on  that  side  towards 
the  Sicilian  sea  he  was  lord  of  Tauromin turn,  a  city  near  Mes-'^ana^ 
and  towards  the  Etrurian  sea  he  commanded  the  Tyndaridie.  And 
now  making  an  incursion  into  the  territories  of  Messana,  he  encamped 
at  the  river  Lotanus,  having  with  htm  in  his  army  ten  thousand  foot, 
and  fifteen  hundred  horse*  The  Mamertines  encamped  over  against 
him  with  eight  thousand  foot,  and  but  fortyt  horse,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Cion,  who  called  the  augurs  together  to  constilt  the- issue 

of  the  battle  by  the  view  of  the  sacrifices;  who  answered ^Tliat  bv 

the  entrails  the  gods  foretold,  that  he  must  lodge  that  night  in  the 
enemy's  camp :  upon  this  he  was  transported  with  joy,  to  think  that 
he  should  be  master  of  the  king-s  camp.     Hereupon  he  forthwith 

*  Or  Centuripiau».-»Vid.  pottea.  t  Agyreani^  tbe  city  Agyrium. 

t  Tbii  teemi  to  be  a  mittak** 


1 


<^19  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


attempted  to  pass  the  river  with  his  hrcea  drawn  up  ia  battalia. 
Hiero,  on  the  other  side,  commaDded  two  hundred  exiles  of  Mes* 
#ana,  (who  were  stout  and  noted  men  for  their  valour),  with  whom 
)ie  joined  four  hundred  others  of  his  best  soldiers,  to  compass  a  bill 
called  Thorax,  there  near  at  hand,  and  so  to  come  round  upon  the 
back  of  the  enemy,  and  he  himself  in  order  of  battle  met  them  iq 
the  front.  Whereupon  the  armies  engaged,  both  horse  and  foot,  (the 
king  having  gained  a  rising  ground  near  the  river,  much  to  bis  ad* 
wantage).  The  issue  was  doubtful  for  some  time:  hot  they  that  were 
ordered  to  the  hill  on  a  sudden  fell  upon  the  Mamertines,  who  (be- 
ing but  raw  men,  and  tired  out)  were  easily  vanquished*  At  lengths 
|)eing  hemmed  in  on  every  side,  they  took  to  their  heels :  but  the 
Syracusans  pursued  them  so  close  with  their  whole  army,  that  they 
cut  them  off  every  man,  save  the  general,  who,  fighting  with  great 
valour,  at  length  fainted  by  the  many  wounds  he  received,  and  was 
taken  prisoner,  and  brought  half  dead  into  the  king's  camp,  and 
committed  to  the  care  of  the  surgeons;  thus  being  brought  to 
spend  the  night,  according  to  the  prediction  of  the  augers,  in  the 
enemy's  camp.  When  the  king  was  very  earnest  to  have  Cion 
cured,  some  came  to  the  king  with  horses  they  had  taken  in  the  fight: 
Itpon  which,  wiien  Cion  saw  his  son's  horse  among  the  rest,  he  con« 
eluded  he  was  killed;  whereupon  he  was  so  transported  with  passion, 
that  he  tore  in  pieces  all  the  bands  and  ligatures  of  bis  wounda»that 
by  his  own  death  he  might  honour  his  son*s.  The  Mamertines,  heaiw 
ing  that  both  their  general  Cion  and  their  whole  army  was  destroyedf 
resolved  to  go  and  humble  themselves  to  the  king  as  suppliants. 
However,  fortune  suffered  not  the  Mamertines  to  he  altogether  Joat 
and  undone.  For  it  happened  that  at  that  time  Hannibal,  the  Car* 
thaginian  general,  lay  at  the  island  Lipara;  who,  as  soon  as  be  heai4 
of  this  slaughter,  went  to  the  king  with  all  speed,  seemingly  to  eon* 
gratulate  his  victory,  but  in  truth  by  some  stratagem  to  circaniTeol 
him :  and  the  king,  trusting  to  the  Carthaginian's  word^  lay  stilly 
But  Hannibal,  going  to  Messana,  and  finding  the  Mamertines  ready 
to  deliver  up  their  city,  he  dissuaded  them,  and,  making  a  league 
with  them,  put  forty^  soldiers  more  into  the  city.  Thus  tlie  Muneis 
tines  (even  now  in  despair  by  reason  of  their  great  slaughter)  were  bf 
this  means  secured  from  present  danger.  As  for  HierOf  (being  ihun 
cheated  hy  the  Carthaginian  general,  and  so  discouraged  horn  bfn 
sieging  Messana),  returned  to  Syracuse,  after  his  many  snccessea^ 
Afterwards,  when  the  Carthaginians  as  v(qII  as  Hiero  had  tbtu  los( 
Messana,  they  had  an  interview,  and,  upon  second  thoughts^  eotere^ 
into  a  confederacy  to  besiege  the  city  with  their  jpint  forceSi^ 
*  A  oii^taLe  it  is  coocvif  ed.    See  beftfn?.  foL  pxecediQ|* 


DIODORUfI  ttCbLtJfl.  St^ 


BOOK  XXIIL 


1.  SICILY  h  one  of  the  finest  islands  in  the  world,  condiie{n|f  tttadft 
by  its  power  to  the  gaining  and  increase  of  a  larger  dominioii* 

2.  Hanno,  the  son  of  Hannibal,  as  aoon  as  he  arrifed  in  Sieiffi 
rendeKToosed  his  forces  at  Lfiljrbttum,  and  thence  marched  as  far  i§ 
Sefimis,  where  he  left  his  army  encamped  o^r  the  chjr;  bttt  he  him^ 
self  went  forward  to  Agrigentom,  and  fortified  the  citadeL   Theft  ImI 
brought  over  the  people  to  the  interest  of  the  Carthaginians^  afld  a# 
engaged  them  to  be  their  confederates.    After  he  returned  to  Ut 
camp,  ambassadors  came  to  him  from  Hiero,  to  cootuit  concewiing 
the  public  good  of  Sicily :  for  they  had  made  a  league  and  agrtemaK 
one  with  another  to  make  war  upon  the  Romans^  if  they  would  net 
forthwith  withdraw  all  their  forces  out  of  Sicily.    In  execution  «# 
which  they  both  marched  with  their  armies  to  Messana,  where  Hietm 
encamped  on  the  hill  called  Chalcidicus:   the  Carthaginians  inf 
with  theirs  near  the  monuments^,  and  possessed  themsehres  of  Ai§ 
anenal  called  IVIotias,  and  both  presently  hid  duse  siege  to Mta* 
aana.    As  soon  as  the  news  was  brought  to  Rome,  they  aenf  mmf  * 
Appios  Claadios,  one  of  the  consols,  with  a  great  army,  who  ramr 
to  Rheginm  with  all  speed,  and  from  thence  sent  ambassadors  W 
Hiero  and  the  Carthaginians  to  raise  their  siege,  and  promised  in  tf 
general  assembly  not  to  make  any  incursion  into  the  territories  of 
Hiero.    To  which  Hiero  answered ^.That  the  Mamertines,  for  their 
razing  and  ruining  of  Gcla  and  Camarina,  and  their  cruelty  and  mnik^ 
cdness  in  getting  the  possession  of  Messana,were  most  justly  bestegedi 
imd  that  it  did  not  become  the  Romans,  who  are  so  cried  up  in  erery 
pboe  for  their  justice  and  faithfulness,  to  protect  such  bloody  villainy 
who  had  contemptuously  broken  all  the  ties  and  bonds  of  faith  and 
truth  amongst  men.     And  if,  notwithstanding,  they  begin  a  war  itf 
the  defence  of  such  notoriously  wicked  men,  it  will  be  erident  and  ap- 
parent tcvail  mankind,  that  succour  to  them  that  are  in  dbtress  is  but 
a  mere  pretence  to  cover  their  covetousnessi  whereas  in  truth  their 
aim  is  to  gain  Sicily. 

3.  The  Romans  at  first  bore  four-square  shields,  but  afterwards, 
when  they  observed  the  Tyrrhenians  to  carry  brazen  shields,  they  got 
the  like,  and  conquered  them* 

4.  When  the  consul  landed  at  Metsana,  Hiero,  suspecting  thai 

^  CaMtf,  or  lod|iii|  pfa 


520  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 

.  '      ■  ■  /  T  I 

the  Carthaginians  had  made  way  for  him,  fled  himself  to  SynuruMf* 
l*he  Carthaginians  being  at  length  subdued,  the  consul  besiqpej 
£gesta,  and,  after  the  loss  of  a  great  numl)er  of  his  men,  returned  l6 
Messana« 

5.  When  both  consuls  arrived  in  Sicily,  they  besieged  the  city 
Adranum,and  took  it  by  storm.    And  while  they  were  besieging  the 
Centoripians*,  and  lay  encamped  at  the  brazen  balls  or  palaces,  first 
ambassadors  came  from  them  of  Leessina :  afterwards  other  cities  that 
were  terrified  with  the  Roman  armies  sent  ambassadors  for  terms  of 
peace>  promising  to  deliver  up  all  their  towns  into  the  hands  of  the 
Romans,  to  the  number  of  sixty-seven :  from  all  which  places  they 
marched  to  Syracuse^  to  besiege  Hiero,-  who,  seeing  the  uneasiness 
of  the  Syracusans  at  thb  preparation  against  them,  sent  ambassadors 
io  the  consuls,  to  negotiate  for  peace;   who  readily  agreed  to  the 
conditions,  designing  chiefly  the  war  against  the  Carthaginians.    A 
peace,  therefore,  was  concluded  for  fourteen  years,  and  the  Romans 
were  to  receive  one  hundred  and  forty  thousand  dracbmasf*    And, 
after  he  had  released  all  the  prisoners  to  them,  they  agreed  that  Sy* 
racu$e  and  all  the  cities  under  his  jurisdiction,  viz.  Acra,  Leontitun,^ 
Megara,  iElora,  Neatina,  and  Taurominium,  should  remain  in  tiie 
hands  of  Hiero.    In  the  mean  time,  Hannibal  was  come  as  fiir  as 
Xiphonia  to  the  aid  of  the  king;  but,  hearing  what  was  done,  he 
marched  back* 

6.  The  Romans,  after  they  had  besieged  the  towns  called  Adrooes 
and  Macella  for  a  long  time  together,  at  length  raised  their  sieges 
without  effecting  any  thing* 

7*  The  i£gestines,  who  were  the  first  brought  under  tjie  power  of 
the  Carthaginians,  revolted  to  the  Romans.  The  Alieneans  did  the 
like.  But  they  took  Hilarius,  Tyrittus,  and  Ascelum  by  force.  The 
Tyndaridse,  seeing  themselves  deserted,  (through  fear),  designed  to 
deliver  up  themselves  as  the  rest  had  done:  but  the  Carthaginians, 
suspecting  their  design,  took  the  chiefest  of  the  citizens  for  hostages^ 
and  carried  them,  and  th^  corn  and  wine,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  pto- 
visions  that  was  io  the  town,  to  Lilybeum. 

.  Philemon  the  comedian  wrote  ninety-seven  eomedies;  he  lived 
ninety-nine  years.  The  Unmans  that  besieged  Agrigentum,  and  that 
made  the  trenches,  and  cast  up  the  works,  were  one  hundred  thousand. 
At  length,  after  a  stout  resisunce^  the  Carthaginians  delivered  op 
Agrigentum  to  the  Romans* 
8.  After  the  siege  of  Agrigentum,  Hanno  the  elder  brought  ovex  a 

*  Or  Centuripians^  their  lowo  called  Ceaturipia.    Tb*  pcoplt  now  oAM  ' 

Centorlnaos. 
t  A  dracbraa  it  tCTea  peuce  fartUHif.  ^  , 


great  ariny  out  of  Africa  into  Sicily,  of  fifty  thousafid  foot,  and  six 
thousand  horse^  and  sixty  elephants.  Phiitnus  the  histonat),  of  AgrU 
genttim^  sets  forth  this  expedition.  Hanno  v^tth  all  these  forces 
ttiarched  from  Lilybeeam  to  Heracfea.  About  this  time  some  came  * 
and  offered  to  deliver  up  Erbesstis,  HannOj  in  prosecution  of  iU6 
War,  lost  in  two  battles  three  thousand  foot,  a  [id  two  hundred  horse, 
and  fouf  thousand  _  .^  .^  that  were  taken  prisoners.     In  the  mean  , 

time^  thirty  -of  his  elephants  died,  and  three  were  wounded,  T 

9.  There  was  likewise  the  eity  Entella.  .^  -jl  .^  Hanno  tbere^ 
^ore,  hy  his  prad^fit  fnanag'emeat,  by  Me  ^ratftgem  cut  off  both  hb 
open  and  secret  enemies  at  one  timei  And  after  they  had  lain  ihtts 
before  it  for  the  space  of  six  months,  Agrigearcuin  Was  ftt  length  de- 
livered ap  to  theiti,  and  they  carried  away  above  twetity-^four  thousand 
as  slaves.  But  the  komans  lost  thirty  tkousat^d  foot,  and  Utt  bun- 
dred  and  forty  horse.  But  the  Cartbagrniaos  fined  Haooo  Id  six 
thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  took  away  hts  (Mhdfimissioti,  afid  sent 
Amilcar  general  into  Sieily^  itl  his  room.  The  Romans  then  lArsleged 
Mystfatus,  and  for  that  purpose  devised  many  engmes:  but  after  se- 
ven months  time  they  laised  their  slege^  with  the  loss  of  a  great 
tiomber  of  their  men.  But  Amilear  fought  whh  the  Romans  at 
Therms,  and  routed  them,  killing  sut  tfaousaud  upon  the  place^  and 

it  was  not  far  from,  but  the  whole  army.  ^ ^ Hie  castle  Maea-^ 

ton  was  likewise  taken  by  the  Ho  mans.  Then  Camarina  was  be- 
trayed into  the  bands  of  Amilcar  the  Carthaginian^  and  not  long  after 
Enna  In  the  same  manner.  There  he  walli^d  in  Drepanum*,  and 
made  It  a  town  of  defence;  and,  after  he  iiad  transplanted  the  in- 
habitants of  Eryx  thither,  he  razed  the  city  to  the  ground^  except 
that  part  whieh  surrounded  the  temple.  But  the  Romans  took  My- 
fetratUs,  now  besieged  the  third  time,  and  levelled  it  to  the  ground, 
and  sold  the  inhabitants  for  slaves.  The  consul  afterwards  marched 
to  Camarina^  and  laid  siege  to  it^  but  could  not  reduce  ft.  But  at 
length,  by  the  help  of  some  engines  of  battery,  and  other  itistruments 
*f  war,  sent  to  htm  fVom  Hiero,  he  wton  the  place,  and  sold  most  of 
the  Camarineans  for  slaves.  Presently  afier^  lie  became  master  of 
Enna-by  treachery,  whefe  lie  put  the  garrison  to  the  sword^  ?Hve  sOrne 
Who  made  their  escape  out  of  the  town,  and  fled  to  tbeit!  cobfedemtet^ 
Thence  he  marched  to  Satana,  and  took  it  by  storm.  Then  pladng 
garrisons  in  other  cities,  he  made  ^ot  Camlcue,  a  castle  .belonging  to 
the  Agrigentines,  which  was  also  betrayed  and  delivered  op  to  hin!| 
and  tliefe  he  placed  a  garrison*.  About  this  time  Crbessu^  wai  de^*^^ 
ierted  by  its  inhabitants. -^«..^  But  the  river  AlycUS>  andtfatf^Jitl 
of  all  the  other.  —  -«-  — * 

*  Pre^auiiifl,  up«n  th«  proBMmtoi;  Qrepaniiai^  U9fif  SrjnN 
Vot«2.  No.4«  kJhsu 


TH£  FRAGMENTS  Of 


10.  A  prudent  man  oughl  either  to  resolve  to  conquer^  or  else  la 
submit  to  those  that  are  stronger  than  be. 

1 1.  All  men  in  time  of  adversity  are  apt  to  be  more  religious,  and 
more  frequent  in  devotion  tlian  at  other  times  s  but  in  times  of  pros- 
perity and  success,  they  make  slight  of  the  gods,  as  so  many  fables 
and  romances.  And  when  they  are  again  brought  into  troubleSj  thea 
they  run  again  to  their  natural  shelter. 

12.  It  is  much  more  easy  to  get  the  advantage  of  an  enemy,  whta 
a  man  will  be  advised,  and  be  willing  upon  all  occasions  to  rectify  bis 
own  mbtakes.  And  it  often  happens  that  they  who  are  carried  awsf 
to  the  same  ^ -^ 

Many  are  stirred  up  to  virtue  through  the  credit  and  repatatkm 
which  attend  upon  them,  that  employ  themselves  in  good  and  com* 

mendable  studies  and  exercises. -^ .— i 

For  not  being  able  to  bear,  as  an  over-heavy  burthen,  the  successes 
of  fortune  heaped  upon  him,  he  deprived  himself  of  most  of  the  |^ 
ly  of  his  actions,  and  involved  hb  country  in  great  calamities. 

..  Moreover,  when  the  Romans  had  transplanted  a  groil 

army  into  Africa,  under  the  command  of  Attilius  the  consul,  thej 
first  prevailed  over  the  Carthaginians,  and  took  many  of  their  towns 
and  castles,  and  destroyed  great  numbers  of  their  soldiers:  bat  as 
soon  as  Xantippus  the  Spartan,  whom  they  had  hired  to  be  their 
general,  came  out  of  Greece,  the  Carthaginians  totially  routed  the 
Romans,  destroyed  a  numerous  army.  Afterward*  they  fought  se* 
veral  battles  by  sea,  wherein  the  Romans  lost  many  ships,  and  a» 
bundance  of  men,  to  the  number  of  a  hundred  thousand.  .*...,^ 
The  honour  he  had  gained  before,  highly  aggravated  the  dbgract 
and  contempt;  and  by  his  own  example,  he  instructed  others  to  be? 
have  humbly  and  modestly  when  they  are  in  the  greatest  power  and 
authority.  And  that  which  stung  him  most,  was,  that  he  became  the 
scorn,  and  was  brought  into  the  power  of  those  whom  he  had  befoic 
proudly  trampled  upon  in  disdain :  and  now  he  had  deprived  himself 
of  all  pity  and  commiseration,  commonly  shewn  to  men  in  miseiy 
and  distress. 

For  those  that  before  were  conquerors  in  all,  be  now  altogether 
conquered:  and  those  who  formerly,  through  the  slaughter  made 
amoR^st  them,  expected  nothing  but  utter  destruction,  now,  by  the 
greatness  of  the  victory  by  them  on  the  other  hand  obtained,  be  in- 
cited to  slight  and  contemn  their  enemies.  .^ ... .,»  For  it  is  nd 
wonder  if  the  prudence  and  experience  of  a  general  effect  those 
things  which  seem  to  others  impossible:  for  all  things  are  easy  an4 
pobbiblc  to  ingenuity  and  diligence,  supported  by  skill  acquired  hf 


WODORUS  SICULUi.  S'«5 

experience. . —  -» For  as  the  body  b  the  servant  of  the  soul^ 

so  great  armies  are  governed  by  the  prudence  of  their  generals.  —  -i. 

The  senate  ordering  all  things  for  the  public  good. ..  _    Phi- 

lustus  then  wrote  his  history. 

But  the  Romans,  who  had  then  passed  over  Into  Africa^  andYoughft 
with  the  Carthaginians  a  battje  at  sea,  and  beaten  them,  and  cap^ 
tured  twenty-four  of  their  ships,  after  they  had  taken  on  board  those 
Romans  that  were  left  of  the  land  army,  as  they  were  saiMng  to  Si- 
cily, were  all  shipwrecked  near  Camarina,  and  lost  three  hundred 
and  forty  men  of  war,  besides  vessels  for  transporting  of  horses,  and 
other  transport-ships  to  the  number  of  three  hundred:  so  that 
all  the  coast  from  Camarina  to  Pachinus,  was  strewed  with  the 
carcasses'of  men  and  horses,  and  wrecks  of  ships.  Hiero  courteous- 
ly entertained  those  that  escaped,  and  supplying  them  with  meat 
and  drink,  clothes,  and  other  necessaries,  conveyed  them  safe  to 
Messana.  Carthalo  the  Carthaginian,  after  the  shipwreck  of  the 
Romans  besieged  Agrigentum,  took  it  and  burnt  the  town,  and  de- 
molished the  walls ;  and  those  that  were  left  fled  to  Olympius.  The 
Romans,  after  the  shipwreck,  fitted  out  another  fleets  of  two  hundred 
and  fifty  sail,  and  came  to  Cephalcedis,  which  was  delivered  up  to 
them  by  treachery.  Thence  they  marched  to  Drepanum,  and  laid 
siege  to  it,  but  upon  succours  brought  in  by  Carthalo,  they  drew  off, 
and  sailed  to  Panormus,  There  they  cast  anchor  in  the  harbour, 
even  under  the  walls,  and  landed  their  army,  and  then  drew  a  wall 
and  trench  round  the  city.  And  the  country  being  very  woody, 
even  up  to  the  city  gates,  they  had  the  advantage  to  raise  mounds 
and  bulwarks  all  iilong  from  sea  to  sea. 

Then  the  Romans,  by  continual  assaults  and  batteries,  beat  down 
the  v;alls,  and  entering  the  outward  forts,  put  many  to  the  sword; 
the  rest  fled  to  the  old  city,  and  sent  out  commissioners  to  the  con« 
6ul  to  treat  for  the  sparing  of  their  lives.  These  conditions  were 
agreed  upon,--That  every  person  who  paid  twoTX^inas  for  his  headj^ 
should  be  free.  Hereupon  the  Romans  entered,  and  forty  thousand 
were  sQt  free  for  the  ransom  agreed  upon;  the  rest,  to  the  number 
of  thirty  thousand,  were  sold  for  slaves,  together  with  the  spoils. — 
But  they  of  Jetae  drove  out  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  arid  delivered 
up  the  town  to  the  Romans.  So  did  the  Selinuntines,  Petrineana, 
Knaterineans,  and  Tyndaridse.  Then  the  consuls  leaving  a  garrison 
at  Panormus,  marched  off  to  Messana. 

The  year  following,  the  RoibaDS  designed  another  descent  into 
L/ibya,  but  being  prevented  from  landing  by  the  Canhaginia]]|i,'tfae]| 
f«turocd  to  P^noro^us,    Tbence,  Ja  t^  reti|CQi*9  Jlome^  .by  aaoK 


$24  THS  raAGMEKTS  Of 


ther  tenpest  they  lost  a  hundred  and  fifty  ships  of  war,  l^etidcs  tniis«- 
port  ships,  with  all  their  Isdiug  and  provisions.  About  tbU  timet  the 
gp^vnqt  of  Tlierms^  being  abroad  about  some  necessary  nfiairs,  «9i 
tak^n  prisoner  by  the  Homan  army;  and  during  his  copfinement  he 
treated  by  messengers  with  the  gf  oeral,  to  open  th^  iVites  of  tbe  ci« 
ty  to  hitti  in  the  night,  if  he  o^ight  be  released.  Tha  time  was  a* 
greed  upon,  and  lia  w^s  oidered  to  be  discharged;  and  a  thofisaa4 
ipen  wert^sent  thither  in  the  night,  who  came  there  at  the  time  ap- 
lioioted^  whereupon  he  opened  tbe  gates,  and  the  chiefest  persoai 
of  quality  oj^ly  entered,  giving  a  strict  diarge  to  the  guard,  to  shot 
the  gates  and  suiT^  no  one  else  to  enter;  and  ^ia  they  did,  tint 
totie  but  themselves  might  iiave  the  plunder  and  pillage  of  the  cily; 
};ml  t\^y  were  all  prftiently  knocked  on  tlie  head;  a  just  rewaid  for 
(heir  covetouspess !  But  at  anotlker  time  Theraua  and  Lipum  w«e 
given  up  into  the  hands  of  tbe  Bomana^  Yet  they  fiuled  of  Ihcii 
purpose  at  the  castle  of  Ercta,  though  they  besieged  it  wit^  forty 
thousand  foot,  and  one  thousand  horse.  .^  »^  ,1^ 

Asdrub«|l  the  Carthi^nian  general,  being  ill  spoken  of  by  hiaaot', 
dJers  for  pot  fighting,  marched  off  witli  the  whole  armj,  and  came  to 
Panormus,  through  tbe  straits  of  Selinus,  and  pas^ng  oirer  the  river 
B«er  to  the  town,  h^  encamped  close  to  the  walls  without  fortifying 
himself,  in  contempt  of  tbe  enemy.  And  now  agian  plenty  of  wine 
being  brought  ii)to  the  camp  by  the  ^aerchants,  the  CeUss  made 
themselves  diui^k;  and  wlvle  they  were  roaring  and  carousjpg^  and 
^Uipg  every  place  with  disorder  and  confusion,  Cecilius  the  consul 
broke  in  among  them,  and  totally  routed  them,  and  sent  sixty  ele* 
phants,  then  taken  in  ^he  fight,  to  Rome,  wj|uch  were  tbe  admiration 
f^f  all  ^p  Roisi^ans. 


'I-  Jif 


vooKxxiy. 


THfi  Oartfiaginiaqs,  after  t^y  had  ra«ed  the  city  of  SeltnqS|»  i 
planied  tlie  crtiaens  to  Lilyfaeum.  But  die  Bomana  sailed  with  hK( 
hundred  and  forty  long  gallies,  and  sixty  roui^d  vessels,  and  all  other 
^orts  of  shipping,  to  Panornius,  and  thenoe  to  Lilyhsanm,  wUcb  ch^ 
now  b^an  to  besiege;  and  fortified  tfaemselvea  bja  trondi  dassio 
all  along  Xrom  aea  to  sea.  Then  they  Gonstmcted  a^nea  to  %\mM 
atones,  Mttering  lams,  ai^  csiginea  ayot  only  toiiattar,  b^  p  floflk 


MO0OEUS  SICtTLUS*  f  9i 


ibt  stonrs  by  YioleDce  out  of  the  wallsp  and  all  other  thioigs  necM* 
IKiy  for  the  nisii)|(  of  OMMiDds  and  bulwarks.  Then  they  filled  fifr 
tacB  of  their  nMiod  vesieb  with  stones,  and  sunk  them  in  the  mooA 
t4  the  haAoor  to  choak  it  up.  The  Roman  army  amounted  to  thf 
munher  of  a  hundred  and  ten  thousand  men,  of  whom  sixty  thousand 
foot  and  seven  hundred  horse  were  ordered  to  carry  on  the  siege...^ 
Bat  four  tliousand  men  with  corn  and  provisions,  were  sent  frooi 
Carth^fe  to  the  besieged,  which  greatly  encounged  them,  and  Atar« 
bas*  their  governor.  When  the  Bomans  understood  that  the  city 
kad  been  relieved,  they  fiUcd  up  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  a  «teOD4 
timey  and  made  a  boom  with  anchors  and  great  pieces  of  timber:  but 
the  wind,  which  then  blew  high,  and  the  violent  suiges  of  the  ae^ 
brake  ic  all  in  pieces.  The  Humans  likewise  made  another  epgine 
to  cast  mighty  stones;  but  the  Carthaginians  raised  another  vndl 
iratUo,  and  the  Bomans  filled  up  the  city-trench  with  earth,  whidi 
was  sixty  cubits  broad,  and  fony  deep.  And  while  a  skirmish  wa9 
foaight  on  that  side  of  the  walb  towards  the  sea,  the  Romans  plaoe4 
an  ambush  on  the  other  side,  and  the  soldiers  within  making  saliiet 
out  of  the  tQwn,  to  help  them  that  were  engaged  at  the  sea  side,  tboso 
that  Uy  in  ambush,  having  scalii^  ladders  ready  mounted,  g»inA} 
the  first  wall;  wliich  being  known,  the  Carthaginian  commander  fell 
iiirioQsly  upon  them,  and  killed  ten  thousand  of  them  on  the  spo^ 
aod  pot  the  rest  to  flight,  and  burnt  all  the  Roman  engines,  batteri^f 
nuns,  instruments  to  cast  stones,  and  all  their  works  and  fortifica- 
tiooa.  After  this,  the  Carthaginians  seeing  that  their  horse  were 
of  no  use  to  them  in  tbe  strait  and  narrow  passages,  sent  them 
away  to  Drepanum.  Then  presently  came  in  strong  recruits  to  the 
Carthi^iniaos;  but  tbe  Romans,  by  the  burning  of  their  engines^ 
sofi  through  want  of  provisions,  and  the  breaking  out  of  the  fh/pm 
amoi^st  them,  were  reduced  to  great  difficulties,  (for  only  the  Ro- 
■Mns  and  their  confederates  eat  flesh),  and  so  great  a  distemyief 
seised  them,  that  in  a  very  few  days  ten  thousand  were  cut  o&,  so 
that  tliey  were  very  desirous  to  break  up  tbe  sic^;  but  Hiero,  kiiig 
of  Syractise,  sent  them  a  great  quantity  of  corn,  which  again  encon* 
tagod  them  to  continue.  After  thb  the  Romans  chose  another  con- 
sul, and  gi|ve  the  comoumd  of  the  army  to  Claudius  the  consul,  the 
SOD  of  Appius,  who  taking  charge  accordingly,  stopped  up  the  ^louth 
of  tbe  port  as  his  predecessor  had  done,  but  the  sea  bore  down 
and  cleared  all  away  a  second  time.  Moreover,  Claudius  thinking 
bim»elf  able  to  do  great  tbiogSj  equipped  two  hundred  and  ten  of  the 
telahvs>  and  aniuriiff  at  i>rc;pannm,  there  engaged  the  Cmhagi* 


fiaS  THE  FRAGMENTS  OT 

nians  id  a  sea  fight,  was  beaten,  and  lost  a  hundred  and  seventeen  o€ 
Us  ships,  and  twenty  thousand  men.  There  never  happened  so 
great  a  fight  at  sea,  and  so  absolute  a  victory,  either  among  the  Car* 
ibaginians,  or  any  others  about  these  times;  and  that  which  was  more 
fo  be  admired  was  ..That  though  the  Carthaginians  were  in  so  great 
danger,  and  had  only  ninety  sail,  yet  they  lost  not  one  man,  and  bad 
but  a  very  few  wounded. 

—  - ,. With  thirty  sail,  which  intercepted  the  corn  and  prt)- 

vlsions  belonging  to  the  Romans,  and  carried  it  to  Drepanam,  and 
taking  thence  every  thing  which  remained  that  was  useful,  they  came 
to  Liiyb«eum,  and  loaded  the  besieged  with  all  kinds  of  provisions. 
And  now  Carthalo  the  general  came  from  Carthage  with  seventy  long 
ships  or  men  of  war,  and  as  many  laden  with  corn,  who  also  set  npoa 
the  Romans,  and  sunk  some  of  their  vessels,  and  carried  off  four  o- 
Ihers  which  lay  at  anchor.    But  after  he  heard  that  the  Roman  fleet 
kad  sailed  from  Syracuse,  having  called  a  council  of  war,  he  proceed* 
cd  against  them  with  two  hundred  and  twenty  sail  of  the  best  ships 
Ire  had.    When  the  fleets  came  in  sight  of  each  other^  near  the 
coasts  of  Gela,  the  Romans^  struck  with  a  panic  fear,  tacked  about 
and  fled  to  Phintia,  deserting  all  their  transport-ships  laden  with 
provisions,  and  other  vessels,  behind  them.    But  the  CarthaginiaoSj 
making  a  swift  pursuit  after  them,  a  fierce  engagement  took  place; 
in  which  the  Carthaginians  sunk  fifty  of  their  great  men  of  war,  and 
sixty  other  long  galiies,  and  disabled  thirteen.    After  the  fight,  the 
Carthaginians  sailed  to  the  river  Alycus,  and  there  took  care  of  their 
wounded  men.     In  the  mean  time  Junius  the  consul,  not  knowing 
what  was  done,  left  Messana  with  thirty-six  long  galiies  and  many 
ships  of  burden,  and  having  passed  Pachynus,  and  gained  the  port  of 
Phintia,  upon  intellrgence  of  what  had  happened  he  was  amazed  j 
and  the  Carthaginians  making  up  upon  him  with  their  whole  navy, 
he  burnt  twelve  of  the  most  useless  of  his  ships,  and  sailed  with  the 
rest  towards  Syracuse,  hoping  to  be  succoured  by  HierG.     But  near 
Camarina  a  storm  arose,  which  drove  him  upon  the  shallows  and 
rocks,  the  winds  being  very  fierce  and  boisterous.    But  the  Garths* 
ginians  having  reached  Pachynus,  anchored  in  a  safe  and  secure  bar* 
hour.    The  Romans  being  thus  distressed,  lost  all  their  transport- 
ships  of  corn  and  provisions,  and  a  hundred  and  five  long  galiies,  so 
that  there  were  only  two  escaped;  and  of  those  which  were  lostj  most 
of  their  men  perished. 

Juijius,  with  those  two,  and  the  men  which  were  preserved,  came 
to  the  eamp  at  Lilybseum :  he  surprised  Eryx  in  the  night,  and  waH* 
ed  in  ^gothalus,  which  is  now  called  AccUus,  and  put  in  it  a  garxisoi^ 


i>lODORUS  SICULUS^  8ff 

of  eight  hundred  men.  But  wheh  Carthalo  had  intelligence  that  the 
places  about  £ryx  wire  possessed  by  the  enemy^  he  wafted  tfaittier 
a  conskierahle  body  of  men  in  the  n^ht,  and  assaulted  the  gitfrlsoli 
of  iGgotbalus,  and  took  the  castle  J  soniete  put  to  the  sword,  and 
the  remainder  fled  to  Eryx,  where  was  a  garrison  of  tlirec  thousand 
men.  Id  the  first  sea'^gbt  the  Romans  lost  thirty-fiv^  thousand  fiietU 
and  as  many  were  taken  prisoners^ 

In  the  territory  of  Catana  there  was  a  castle  called  ItaUuBdf  mhiA 
was  assaulted  by  Barcas  the  Carthaginian. 

^ For  the  counsels  and  stratagems  of  the  comtiMAd^i% 

being  communicated  to  their  friends,  were  discovered  by  aoRie  4e^ 
serters  to  the  enemy,  which  terrified  the  soldiers,  and  possessed  theat 
with  an  expectation  of  some  imminent  danger.  But  Baneas  uniwiog 
there  in  tl^e  night,  landed  his  men,  and  was  the  first  that  led  tbatfl 
to  Eryx,  {which  was  thirty  stages  distant),  took  the  city,  andp ut  mwl 
of  them  to  the  sword;  and  those  who  survived  h^  removed  to  Djw«« 
panum.  ^^  — . .—  .^ 

Always,  and  in  every  concern,  it  is  known  by  experience,  that  liitf 
observance  of  good  rule  and  order  has  produced  many  good  and  fftafk 
cfiects,  -^  — -.-—  •         '       » 

But  Calatinus  the  consul  sailed  into  Sicily  with  three  husdrd  lan|f 
gallies,  and  other  shipping,  to  the  number  of  one  thousand  ki  ilie 
whole,  and  anchored  at  the  mart-town  of  the  Eryxians*  Hantid  a!* 
so  arrived  in  the  sacred  island  from  Carthage,  with  two  hwidr«d 
and  fifty  long  gallies,  and  other  ships  of  burthea;  and  thence  fa# 
came  to  Eryx.  -^  *—  —  — 

The  Romans  fell  on,  and  a  sharp  and  obstinate  engagement  Aere 
was  on  both  sides,  in  which  the  Carthaginians  lost  a  hundred  and 
seventeen  ships,  among  which  were  twenty  with  all  their  men* 

But  the  Romanes .^eighty;  thirty  for  their  own  charg^mod 

expense,  and  fifty  to  divide  for  spoil)  and  six  thousand  prisoner!^  at 
Philinus  reports,  but  according  to  others,  four  thousand  and  tortft 

the  rest  of  the  fleet  ^t  safe  with  a  fair  wind  into  Carthage.       ^ 

For  valour  signified  nothing,  when  tlie  fleet  was  so  dispersed  that  k 
had  nobody  to  fly  to,  but  Was  by  the  sea,  as  it  were,  delivered  up  ia^-v 
to  the  hands  of  the  eneniy.  So  that  after  the  war  had  continued  be* 
tween  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians  for  the  space  of  twenty-four, 
years,  and  Lilybfieum  had  been  besieged  ten  years,  a  peace  was  rau^ 
tually  concluded. 


8t8  tilt  ntAOMCNfS  ov 


.fiOOKXXV. 

feiMCtJRUS  th«  t)hn(Nk>pher,  iti  hfs  boc^c  cttilM  IfncHnti^^  n^ft-s 

^^  That  a  religious  life  is  void  of  all  trouble  and  dbturbabce;  but  aft 
Itari^teouft  one,  ndthinc:  biit  trouble  and  sbrrtilir.*'  it  ccmtnm 
much  matter  in  brief  and  coticiae  senteftee^,  tending  ^^ntlj  to  At 
ycfortfmtioii  of  the  live^  and  mannets  of  men:  for  injiiatiee  it 
the  greatest  of  M  evils,  involving  not  only  private  tnen,  bitty  thit 
lire  diay.Bum  up  all  at  once^  nations,  kings,  and  kingdoms,  in  meM 
ttisertible  calamities.  .^  .^  .^  For  the  Spiiniards  gall  tbHn  of  dii 
Balearj  islands^  Africans,  Carthaginians,  and  Liguriana,  joid^  iMk 
them  of  Carthage^    And  the  slaves,  whose  parents  were  Gtedalrir 

en  one  side,  who  also  rebelled.  ^ ^^^ i    Then  it  wks  petkt&f 

8^en  by  experience,  how  far  the  diligence  of  an  expeft  ceminuidet 
cseelled  the  blind  and  headstrong  vulgar,  and  the  rash  Aild  $g< 
Borant  conduct  of  a  rude  common  soldier.  *^,^*^.m^^^  80  et-> 
cellent  a  thing  is  modesty  in  commanding,  that  it  enfeiiM  ndthilff 
beyond  the  power  of^  men.  .^^.  .j.  but  after  their  Aepartufe  oat 
of  Sicily,  the  Carthaginian  mercenaries  ix>se  up  ib  anttft  i^fUkiflt  tbedl 

for  these  reasons. »    They  were  unreasonable  and  etoenivi 

in  their  demilnds  for  the  horses  and  men  which  they  had  loot  in  S(« 

eily.  _  -; And  they  were  in  war  with  one  another  foul'  yeatfi 

and  as  many  months.  But  at  length  they  were  pet  te  death  by  BaN 
cos  the  general,  who  had  likewise  performed  mMobte  senrleea  in  fii«ly 
against  the  Romans* 

24  But  Amilcar  the  Carthaginian  general  in  a  shoft  time  lOcfeai* 
td  the  bounds  of  his  country;  for  he  advanced  with  hb  Beet  as  far 
as  the  pillars  of  Hercules  and  the  Gades  *.  This  dty  hi  a  colony  Of 
the  Phoenicians,  lying  on  the  farthest  corntr  of  the  earth,  on  the  tm* 
side,  and  hath  a  haven.  Having  subdued  the  Iberians  and  the  ToN 
tessians,  with  Istolottus,  the  general  of  the  Celtse,  and  his  bMbel) 
he  put  most  of  them  to  the  sword,  amongst  whom  Were  the  tHO 
brothers  and  several  other  honourable  persons.  And  he  HftcdteC 
into  his  own  army  three  tinmsand  of  them  that  were  ptiaontt^ 

But  Endortes  got  again  together  fifty  thousand  men,  but  fled  bo' 
fore  he  engaged,  and  betook  himself  to  a  high  hill }  where  betti|^  hdKk 
and  blocked  up  by  Amilcar,  he  decamped  again  in  the  night,  and 
most  of  his  army  were  cut  off.  Endortes  himself  at  length  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy,  arid  Amilcar  put  out  his  e^eSj  and  then  with 

^  Now  C.adij^  or  Cales^  is  tiie  siniritf 


btdDoku^  sicuttr^. 


thany  scof&  and  scorns  crucified  bim.  But  he  discharged  about  ten 
thousand  other  prisoners,  and  tdok  diany  cities  ^  some  by  fair  pro^ 
tnises  and  persuasions,  and  others  by  force. 

Then  Asdrubal,  the  son  of  Amilcar,  being  setlt  by  hi^  father-in- 
law  to  Carthage  a^inst  the  Numidians,  who  had  rebelled  agtunst  the 
iCarthaginians,  killed  eight  thousand,  and  took  two  thousand  prison- 
ers: the  rest  were  subdued  and  brought  under  tribute.  In  tlie  in* 
terim,  Amilcar  having  gained  thany  cities  in  Spain,  built  a  very  large 
town,  which^  from  its  situation,  hii  called  Acra  Leuca*  Having 
afterwards  besiisged  the  city  of  Helice^  he  sent  the  greatest  part  of 
bis  artny  and  elephants  into  winter-quarters  to  the  city  he  had  late* 
ly  built,  and  coutinued  with  the  rest  at  the  siege.  But  OrissUs  the 
king,  under  preteni!^  of  coming  in  as  a  friend  to  join  Amilcar,,  suc- 
coured the  besieged,  and  foi-ced  Amilcar  to  raise  the  siege  and  fly; 
His  sons  and  friends  he  ordef^ed,  for  their  safety,  to  take  one  rcfad  by 
themselves,  and  he  himself  took  anbther;  and  being  hotly  putsued 
by  the  king,  ih  crossing  a  great  river  he  wAi  forced  frdm  his  horse 
by  the  violence  of  the  stream,  and  was  drowned.  Biit  Hknnibal  and 
Asdriibal,  his  st^ns,  got  safe  to  Acra  Leuca^  or  the  white  citideh 

.A^    And  thdUgti  Amilcar  died  many  ages  before  our  time^ 

yet  history  has  left  an  epitaph  and  commemoration  of  bis  due  praise; 
But  Asdrubal  his  son-in-law,  so  sobh  as  he  heard  of  his  father-in- 
law's  death,  forthwith  marched  off,  and  came  to  Acra  With  upwards 
of  one  hundred  elephants.  Being  chosen  general  by  the  army,  [and 
also  by  the  Carthaginians^  he  picked  out  fifty  tliousand  foot,*  of  old 
experienced  soldiers,  six  thousand  horse,  and  two  hundred  elephants. 
in  the  first  place,  he  ruined,  and  totally  broke  in  pieces  the  troops 
of  king  Orissus ;  then  he  put  to  the  sword  kll  that  were  the  oceasioa 
of  Amiicar's  flight,  and  got  possession  of  twelve  cities;  and  at  length 
all  the  cities  of  Spain.  And  havifag  now  celebrated  a  new  marriage^ 
and  taken  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Spain  to  wife,  he  was  invested 
with  full  |K>wer  in  the  government,  by  all  the  Spaniards.  He  after^ 
wards  built  a  city  by  the  sea-shore,  which  he  called  Carthage  j  and 
after  this  another,  and  aspired  to  exceed  Amilcar  in  power  and  great- 
nesSb  He  had  in  his  army  sixty  thousand  foot,  eight  thousand  horsey 
and  two  hundrtd  elephants.  But  at  l^hgth  he  was  assassinated  by 
one  of  his  own  household,  having  been  general  nine  years. 

3.  The  CehsB  and  the  Gauls  entering  into  a  war  with  the  Ronlansj 
raised  an  army  of  two  hundred  thousand  men,  and  were  victorious 
in  the  first  battle,  and  likewise  in  the  second,  wherein  one  of  thi 
Roman  consuls  was  killed.  The  Romans  had  an  army  of  seventy 
thousand  foot,  and  seven  thousand  horse.  However,  although  they 
Vol*  2.  No.  4/*  yyy 


830  THB  Fragments  or 


were  worsted  in  the  two  first  battles^  yet  in  the  third  they  gained  a 
signal  victory,  killing  forty  thousand  upon  the  field  of  battle,  and 

taking  the  rest  prisoners. So  that  the  greatest  of  their 

kings  cut  his  own  throat:  but  the  other  was  taken  alive.  Afta 
this  brave  exploit^  i£milius  being  made  consul,  wasted  the  country 
of  the  Gauls  and  Celtas,  took  many  cities  and  castles,  and  filled  the 
city  of  Rome  with  spoils. 

4.  Hiero,  king  of  Syracuse,  supplied  the  Romans  with  corn  ia  the 
Celtic  war,  and  was  paid  at  the  conclusion  of  it. 

5.  The  army  being  in  went  of  a  general  after  Asdrubal  was  slaio, 
the  Carthaginians  unanimously  chose  Hannibal,  the  eldest  son  of 

Amilcar,  to  be  their  general. While  the  city  of  Sagon- 

tum  was  besieged  by  Hannibal,  the  citizens  got  together  all  the  riches 
in  the  temples,  and  all  the  silver  and  gold  in  the  houses,  nay,  evea 
the  very  jewels  in  the  women's  ears,  and  laid  them  in  a  heap,  and 
melted  them  down,  mixing  brass  and  lead  with  the  gold  and  silver, 
to  make  them  useless  and  of  no  value:  and  having  so  done,  they  all 
valiantly  made  a  sally,  and  fought  it  out  to  the  last  man;  and  ate 
having  made  a  great  slaughter  of  their  enemies,  were  all  killed  apoa 
the  field.  Tlie  mothers  likewise  first  killed  their  own  children,  and 
then  stilled  themselves  by  the  smoke  of  furnaces.  And  thus  Hanni* 
bal  gained  the  town  without  any  benefit  from  the  plunder:  wIioid, 
when  the  Romans  demanded  to  be  brought  to  trial  for  his  breach  of 
the  league,  and  could  not  prevail,  they  began  the  war  called  the  Haa- 
nibal  war. 


BOOK  XXVI. 


THERE  never  was  any  poet  or  historian,  nor  any  learned  man  of 
what  science  soever,  that  could  please  all  their  readers  in  every  thingt 
Neither  can  any  thing  that  is  mortal,  though  it  attain  its  end  and  de« 
sign,  gain  the  general  approbation  of  all,  so  as  to  be  wholly  free  from 
exception  and  censure.  For  neither  Phidias,  who  was  so  admired 
for  his  ivory  images;  nor  Praxiteles,  that  excellent  stone-cutter; 
nor  Apelles  or  Parrhasius,  who  both  attained  to  the  highest  pilch  of 
art  and  bkili  in  limning  and  painting;  could  ever  reach  to  that  de- 
gree of  happiness,  as  to  exhibit  any  piece  of  their  several  arts,  that 
wa:j  not  in  some  respects  capable  of  censure.    For  who  was  a  more 


DIODORUS   SICULUSL  531 


famous  poet  than  Homer;  or  an  orator  than  Demosthenes }  Whq 
more  just  than  Aristides  and  Solon?  Yet  joined  as  a  flaw  to  all  their 
excellencies^  there  is  an  oration  which  carps  at  them,  apd  makes 
them  as  if  they  were  all  igQorant  fellows.  For  indeed,  being  but 
men,  although  they  attained  to  eminent  perfection  in  their  several 
accomplishments,  yet  through  human  frailty,  they  failed  and  erred 
in  many  things.  However,  some  men  there  are  who  disclose  both 
their  envy  and  folly,  who  wilfully  omit  to  give  an  account  of  what 
is  commendable  and  praise-wortiiy ;  but  where  they  liave  any  colour 
to  find  fault,  there  they  fix,  and  are  unwilling  ever  to  leave  it,  en-p 
deavouring,  by  blackening  another,  to  set  forth  the  more  their  owa 
supposed  worth  and  excellence;  not  considering  that  ev^ry  art  ^nd 
peculiar  accomplishment  is  more  to  be  judged  of  by  inquiry  into  th^ 
thing  itself,  than  by  making  conclusions  from  the  partial  and  peev^ 
ish  passion  of  another.  But  any  candid  person  would  duly  appre- 
ciate this  industrious  folly  of  detraction,  whereby  an  individual,  by 

aspersing  another,  in  fact  lessens  his  own  reputation. -^  ..^ 

There  are  some  things  which,  by  a  certain  destructive  tendency,  are 
naturally  hurtful,  as  frost  and  snow,  which  destroy  and  blast  th^ 
fairest  and  most  pleasant  fruits;  and  the  resplendent  whiteness  of 
the  snow  so  dazzles  the  eyes,  that  it  almost  deprives  them  of  their 
sight;  and  so  some  men,  who  have  neither  wit  nor  will, to  do  any 
thing  that  is  commendable  themselves,  yet  have  malice  and  folly  e- 
nough  to  judge  and  condemn  the  actions  of  others.  But  it  is  the 
part  of  a  prudent  and  understanding  man,  always  to  attribute  due 
praise  to  those  who  by  their  industry  have  prosecuted  virtuous  dc-r 
signs :  and  where  any  have  not  been  so  successful  as  they  wished, 
not  to  taunt  at  the  infirmity  of  human  nature,_But  enough  of  these 
envious  men. 

2.  For  as  a  brave  champion,  after  he  has  spent  much  time  iq 
anointing  himself,  at  length  descends  into  the  lists.  _ .«,  «^  Hav-» 
ing  gained  great  experience  and  a  habit. 

3.  Menodotus  the  Corinthian  wrote  the  affairs  of  Greece  in  fourn 
teen  books.  And  Sosilus  the  liian*  wrote  the  acts  of  Hannibal  ia 
$even. 

4.  Among  the  Romans  a  legion  consisted  of  five  thousand  men. 

5.  Men  naturally  flock  to  those  who  are  in  prosperity,  but  domi-^ 

neer  over  those  who  are  brought  into  distress. . For  the 

soul  presently  to  undergo  a  mere  contrary  change,  which  is  in  it& 
pwn  nature  unchangeable, 

(j.  The  city  of  Rhodes  bemg  ruined  by  a  great  earthquake^  Hi^rq 

•  A  people  ia  the  island  o(  Corc^iai  or  Cor(H. 


539  THE  FRAGMBKTS  Of 


the  Syracusan  bestowed  six  talents  of  silver  towards  the  repairing  of 
the  walls,  and  silver  cauldrons  of  great  value,  l>esides  money;  aii4 
let  them  have  corn  free  from  duty. 

7*  That  which  i^  now  called  Philopolis^  was  heretofore  paUed  PU* 
ptis  of  Thebes,  over  all  Thessi|ly. 

8.  For  <oft  beds,  constant  delicate  ^e,  and  the  use  of  all  torts  of 
precious  ointments,  unfitted  them  for  toil  and  hardship. ..  —i.  •«. .— 
For  both  their  bodies  and  minds  were  habituated  to  eSeminacy  and 

luxury. . For  meil  naturally  cannot  well  brook  toil  and  paios^ 

find  low  diet;  but  delight  in  idleness  and  luxury.  For  Hannibal 
with  much  toil  and  care  gained  cities  both  from  the  Romans  and 
Brutians,  and  took  Crotona,  and  l>esieged  Rhegiam.  For,  from  di^ 
Pillars  of  Hercules  in  (he  westj  tp  Crotoqa^  hf  over^ran  all  the  fixft 
fnai)  territories. 


w» 


THE  FRAGMENTS 


p» 


DIODORUS  SICULUS, 


OUT  OF 


THE  BIBLIOTHECA  OP  PHOTJUS, 


1^''  '"f. 


»35 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


FRAGMENTS. 


BOOK  XXXI. 

WHILE  these  things  were  doiog,  ambassadors  came  to  Rome  from 
Khodes^  to  beg  pardon  for  what  they  had  done.  For  in  the  war  with 
Perseus  they  seemed  to  favour  the  king^  and  to  break  their  league 
with  the  Romans.  But  not  being  able  to  accomplish  any  thing  for 
whkh  ihey  were  sent,  they  were  greatly  dejected,  and  solicited  with 
tears  the  great  and  principal  men  of  the  city.  Whereupon,  being  in- 
troduced into  the  senate  by  Antonius,  one  of  the  tribunes  of  the  peo- 
ple, Philophron  was  the  first  that  opened  the  matter  and  business  of 
their  embassy:  and  after  him  Astimedes.  When  they  had  made 
many  arguments  and  apt  discourses  to  prerail  with  the  senate,  and 
at  last,  according  to  the  proverb*,  had  with  the  swan  concluded 
their  mournful  ditty,  they  received  suck  an  answer  as  presently  dis- 
pelled their  fears:  however,  they  were  sharply  reproved  and  fined 
for  their  offences.  So  that  it  is  evident  how  the  most  noblle  among 
the  Romans,  by  whom  the  greatest  affairs  are  managed,  strive  which 
shall  be  most  generous,  and  on  that  account  gain  most  honour  and 
reputation:  for  in  the  administration  of  public  affairs  elsewhere, 
one  envies  another.  But  the  Romans  praise  and  commend  one  ano- 
ther. So  that  while  all  endeavour  to  advance  the  public  good,  great 
and  glorious  things  are  achieved :  but  as  to  others,  while  they  aim  our 
ly  at  their  own  vain  glory,  and  envy  the  successes  of  each  other, 
they  ruin  their  country. 

2.  At  length  ^Emilius  took  Perseus,  the  last  king  of  Macedonia, 
who  bad  often  leagued  with  the  Romans,  and  as  often  appeared  in 
the  field  with  great  armies  against  them.  And  after  the  victory  .^- 
milius  triumphed  gloriously.  And  thougli  Perseus  was  brought  into 
so  great  miseries  and  calamities,  that  the  ruins  and  destructions 
wliieh  he  sufTercd  can  scarcely  be  paralleled  by  any  romance,  yet  he 
was  not  willing  to  part  with  life:  for  before  the  senate  had  deter- 
mined any  thing  relating  to  his  punishment,  one  of  the  chief  officers 

*  Sung  ibe  swaa  song, 


^38  THE  t^kAGMEKTS  6f 


of  the  city*  cast  both  him  arid  his  childreo  into  th^  giol  Albinos; 
l*his  prison  is  a  deep  dudgeon  of  th<i  bigness  of  a  chamber^  capable 
of  only  holding  nine  beds  at  the  most;  dark^  and  full  cff  all  sorts  of 
filth  and  nastiness,  by  teason  of  the  multitude  ttf  men  condemned  for 
capital  offences  who  from  time  td  time  were  thrust  down  there;  and 
in  general  roost  of  such  malefactors  were  put  into  this  place.  So  that 
many  being  shut  up  together  in  so  small  a  place,  those  miserable 
creatures  were  even  turned  into  beasts:  and  in  regard  the  meat^ 
drink,  and  other  necessaries  that  wete  brought  them,  were  juitibled 
together  in  one  chaos  and  heap  of  confusion,  there  arose  thence 
such  a  stench,  that  none  who  approached  were  able  to  endured  it.  In 
a  most  miserable  condition  Perseus  continued  here  for  the  space  of 
seven  days,  insomuch  that  he  begged  relief^  and  some  share  of  the 
food  of  those  strangers  in  prison,  who  had  only  a  stinted  allowance. 
They  out  of  compassion  to  this  miserable  man,  with  great  htimaoity 
ttndtearsintheireyes^gavehim  part  of  the  small  pittance  th«T  had,aod 
trithal  offered  him  a  s^ord  and  a  rope^  to  use  which  of  theni  h^  would 
at  his  pleasure,  for  patting  a  period  to  his  existence.  Yet  nothiog 
seems  so  sweet  as  life,  even  to  the  miserable;  for  though  they  suffer 
what  is  equivalent  to  death  itself  in  the  mean  time^  To  conclodei 
he  had  certainly  ended  his  days  in  this  extreme  misery^  if  Mareni 
£milius,  president  of  the  court,  out  of  respect  to  the  digoitjf  of  his 
person,  moved  by  the  natural  and  innate  humanity  of  the  Roma&Si 
had  not  with  some  indignation  moved  the  senate  in  his  behalf,  pitf^ 
ting  them  in  mind,  that  though  they  feared  not  men,  yet  they  should 
bear  some  awe  and  reverence  to  Nemesis  ^|  who  will  take  vengeance 
ou  them  that  use  their  power  with  pride  and  insolence^  Upon  this 
he  was  committed  to  a  more  moderate  confinement,  and  while  he 
was  consoling  himself  with  fresh  hopes,  he  ended  his  days  agreeably 
to  the  former  misfortunes  of  his  life :  for  after  he  had  lived  two  years 
in  this  fond  love  of  life>  having  displeased  his  barbarous  keeper^ 
they  would  not  suffer  him  to  sleeps  and  so  he  died. 

3.  The  kings  of  Cappadocia  say  that  they  sprung  from  CynM^ 
king  of  Persia.  They  affiirm  likewise,  that  they  are  descended  froa 
one  of  those  seven  Persians  that  killed  Magus.  And  they  draw 
down  their  pedigree  from  Cyrus  thus:.^That  Atossa  was  the  sister 
of  Cambyses,  and  daughter  of  Cyrus;  that  Gallus  was  the  son  of 
Atossa  and  Pharnaces,  king  of  Cappadocia,  Smerdis  the  soo  of  Gal- 
lus, and  Artanes  the  son  of  Smerdis,  and  Artanes  the  issue  of  Ana^ 
phas,  a  brave  and  valiant  man,  who  was  the  father  of  one  of  the  se« 
ven  Persians.  In  this  manner,  therefore,  do  they  make  out  their 
eonsanguluity  both  to  Cyrus  and  Anaphase  who  it  is  said  was  of  i^ 

*  Ibe  Goddess  of  RcTCuge. 


DIODORUB  SlCUlUS. 


wiout  £1  spirit*,  that  before  he  would  pay  tribute  to  the  Pcrsittnsi  lue 
abdicated  his  i^overnment  of  Cuppadoejn.     After  his  deaths  Atiapha:^, 
his  son^  refgLurd  In  his  stead;  who  dyitig^  left  two  sons^  Ditamus  and 
Arimiicus,  of  whom  Ditumus  took  upon  him  the  government,  a  war- 
like prince,  and  in  all  re^fiecis  accomplished  for  the  ttinj^dom;  who 
joining  in  battle  with  the  Persians^  and  conducting  himself  with  greit 
gallantry  and  resoltition,  was  killed  it)  the  fight ;  and  hU  sou  Arienn- 
nef  succeeded  him  iti  thr  kitigdum,     lie  had  two  sons,  Aiiftrathes 
and  Holophcrnes;  he  diird  after  he  had  reigned  fifty  yenr*;^  having 
done  nothing  memonibk ;  and  the  elder  of  his  sons,  Ariurathcs^  suc-^ 
teeded  him,  who  it  is  said  bore  so  great  and  tender  a  love  to  his  bro- 
ther, thai  he  advanced  hitn  to  tlie  highest  degree  of  honour  and  pro- 
ferment.    And  he  sent  him  to  join  the  Persians  in  the  war  H^iniL 
ilie  Egyptians,  who  aftt^rwardi  rcturtied  laden  with  many  and  large 
marks  of  i>onour  conferred  upon  him  by  Oehus,  for  his  vahjur,  and 
died  in  his  own  et^untry,  leaving  behind  hfm  two  sons^  Ariarailtes 
and  Arysses,  And  that  his  brut  her,  the  king  of  Cappadocia,  having  no 
legal  issue,  adopted  ArlarathisSj  his  bruther^s  eldest  sou.     About  this 
time  AU'xnt^dcr  the  Macedonii^n  king  ruined  the  Persian  empire,  and 
presently  afierwards  died.     But  Perdiccas,  who  had  ilte  chief  com- 
mand, ^ent  £umcues  as  general  in[o  Cappadocla^  whi>  subdtjed  and 
killi^d  Ariarathea,  and  brouj^lit  Cappadocia,  with  all  the  bordering 
territories  inio  the  power  6t'  Mie  Maeedoniuns^*     But  Arfar^thes^  the 
adopted  son  of  the  former  king,  despairing  for  the  present  ^o  rega'in 
the  kingdom,  fled  into  Armenia  with  n  few  follower*.     But  both  Eu* 
mcnts  and   Perdiccas  not  long  alter  dying,  aud  Antigonn;*  atid  Sa- 
leuctis  embroiled  in  a  war,  AriuratheS}  with  the  lielp  of  Arcloathuft^ 
king  of  Armcuia^  wlio  furnished  him  with  forces,  routed  and  kiUed 
Amyntas,  the  Macedoi^ian  general,  and  prt-sently  drovt^  all  the  Mi-* 
ccdojiian^  out  of  the  country^  and  recovered  his  kingdom*     He  had 
three  s(Mis,  the  eldest  of  whom,  Ariamnes,  succeeded  him;  who  join- 
ed in  aifinity  with  Antiochus  Thcos,  and  married  his  tldest  son  Ari- 
aratlies  to  Sciatonice,  Antiochus'^i  daughter.     And  for  the  great  lovfi 
he  had  to  him  above  all  his  children,  he  set  the  diadem  upoii  ht% 
head,  and  made  him  co* partner  with  htm  in  the  kingdom:  arid  after 
the  death  of  his  father  he  reigned  alone.     Then  he  dyings  his  soa 
Ariaratiics,  of  a  very  tender  age,  succeeded,  —  He  married  Antio" 
chide,  the  daughter  of  Antiochus  the  Great,  a  very  subtile  woman ; 
who,  because  she  bore  no  children,  to  make  up  that  defect,  contrived^ 
unknown  to  her  husband,  a  supposititious  birth>  asiC^she  had  born 
two  sons,  which  were  called  Ariarathes  and  Holopbernes.     But  not 
long  after,  she  conceived  in  reality,  and  unexpectedly  waa  delivered 
*  OthecB  saj,  it  fibould  be  eow«niice«' 

Vol.  2,  No.4?.  zzz 


1 


bSS  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


of  two  daughters  and  a  son  called  Mithridates.  Upon  this  she  ac- 
quainted her  husband  with  the  imposture^  and  so  wrought  upon  him, 
that  she  prevailed  with  him  to  send  away  the  eldest  of  the  two  sons, 
with  a  smalt  sum  of  money  to  Rome,  and  the  other  into  Ionia,  lest 
they  should  challenge  the  kingdom  from  him  that  was  lawful  heir  to 
the  crown,  who  after  he  came  to  man's  estate,  it  is  said,  was  called 
Ariarathes,  and  was  educated  in  all  the  learning  of  Greece,  and  wu 
a  person  accomplished  in  all  manner  of  virtuous  endowments.  That 
the  father,  who  was  wonderfully  beloved  by  the  son,  strove  all  he 
could  to  repay  his  son's  love ;  and  their  mutual  endeared  affectioiu 
one  towards  another  went  so  far,  that  the  father  would' have  given  up 
the  whole  kingdom  into  the  hands  of  the  son,  but  the  son  oo  the  o- 
ther  hand  told  him,  he  could  not  possibly  accept  so  great  an  advan- 
tage from  living  parents.  Therefore,  after  his  father  died,  he  suc- 
ceeded, spending  the  rest  of  his  life  very  virtuously,  and  in  the  stu- 
dy of  philosophy :  so  that  Cappadocia,  which  was  before  but  little 
known  to  the  Grecians,  was  now  a  desirable  place  of  residence  for 
all  learned  men.  He  renewed  the  league  of  peace  and  friendship 
with  the  Romans.  And  in  this  manner  is  the  pedigree  of  those  who 
have  hitiicrto  reigned  iu  Cappadocia,  brought  down  from  Cyrus. 

4.  For  statues  are  erected  to  such  Romans  as  are  of  noble  families, 
in  near  resemblance  of  the  persons,  and  according  to  the  whole  pro- 
portion of  their  bodies.  For  all  their  life  long,  they  have  some  who 
observe  their  mien  and  deportment,  and  the  special  remarks  of  every 
part  exactly.  Likewise  every  man's  ancestor  stands  in  that  habit, 
and  in  those  ornaments,  and  is  so  clearly  represented,  that  everyone 
knows  tlic  person  as  soon  as  he  looks  at  him,  and  to  what  degree  of 
honour  every  one  was  advanced,  and  what  share  and  interest  they  had 
in  the  commonwealth. 

5.  Memmius*  was  sent  general  with  the  army  into  Spain.  But 
the  Lusitanians,  (now  Portuguese),  just  upon  his  landing,  fell  upon 
him  and  routed  him,  and  cut  off  most  of  his  army.  When  this  suc- 
cess of  the  Iberians  was  noised  abroad,  the  Araucians,  who  looked 
upon  themselves  to  be  far  better  soldiers  than  the  Iberians,  slighted 
and  contemned  the  enemy;  and  upon  this  ground  and  confidence 
chiefly  it  was  that  in  their  general  council  they  determined  to  make 
war  on  the  Romans. 

•  llalbcr  Fulfiuj, 


DIODORUS  SICCLUS-  -  339 


1.  ALEXANDER  fled  out  of  the  fight  witli  five  himtlrcd  mm  to  a 
city  in  Arabia,  called  Abas,  to  Diodes  the  prince  there,  with  whom 
he  had  before  intrusted  his  soo  Anllochus,  a  child  of  very  tender  a  ere. 
Afterwards  the  chief  commanders  nho  were  about  [{cliudes,  and  hntl 
been  with  Alexander,  plotting  to  assassinate  Alexander,  <;ffnt  ofTsome 
messengers  privately  among  themselves,  promising  secvcily  to  rour* 
der  him.  Demetrius  consenting  lo  what  they  proposed,  they  became 
both  traitors  and  murderers  of  their  prince,  We  might  be  justly 
eondeinned  if  we  should  pass  in  sUence  that  which  happened  before 
the  death  of  Alexander,  although ,  from  the  strangeness  of  the  things 
it  is  almost  incredible.  King  Alexander,  a  little  before  these  tlqies^ 
consulted  with  the  oracle  in  Cilicia,  where  they  say  is  the  temple  of 
Apollo  of  Sarpedon:  and  it  is  reported  that  the  oracle  made  answer^ 

^That  he  should  take  heed  of  that  place  which  sl\ould  bring  forth  a? 

god  of  two  shapes.  This  divine  hint  was  then  taken  for  a  riddle:' 
but  after  the  king  was  dead,  the  truih  was  discovered  in  this  maii* 
ner.     Far  in  Abas,  a  city  in  Ar;ibia,  dwelt  one  Dlophamus  a  Mace^ 

donian. ^^fhis  man  married  ao  Arabian  woman,  by  whom  he  had  a 

son  called  after  his  own  name,  and  a  datij^^hter  called  Hcraldcs :  his 
son  died  when  he  w^s  young;  but  he  gave  a  portion  to  his  daughter 
when  she  was  grown  up,  and  married  her  to  one  Semiades,  who,  af- 
ter he  had  lived  with  his  bride  one  year,  undertook  a  long  journey. 
In  the  mean  time,  it  is  reported,  that  Hcraidcs  fell  into  a  strnngcdod 
wonderful  distemper,  such  ms  is  scarcely  credihlc.  For  she  had  a 
vehement  inflammation,  and  a  great  swelling  at  the  bottom  of  her 
belly,  which  increased  to  tliat  degree,  that  it  brought  her  loto  a  vio- 
lent fever.  The  physicians  conceived  it  was  an  ufccr  about  the  neck 
©f  tlR'  matrix:  refrigerating  medicines  and  phisters  were  tliereforc 
applied,  to  bring  down  and  cool  those  hot  burning  tumours*  Upon 
the  seventh  day  the  humour  burst,  aud  out  started  from  the  privy 
parts  c)F  llcraides,  a  man's  yard  with  the  testicles  compIete._Thi^ 
happened  when  neither  physician  nor  any  other  stranger  was  pre- 
sent, but  only  the  mother  and  two  servants;  who  with  thp  strange-. 
iiess  of  the  thing,  were  struck  with  amazement.  However,  they 
made  it  their  business  to  cure  her,  and  kept  all  secret  to  themselves. 
And  when  she  was  recovered,  she  still  wore  a  woman's  hahJi,  antl 
managed  the  aflairs  of  the  house  as  usual*  But  those  wlio  were  prt^ 
vy  to  what  had  bappeued,  suspected  her  to  be  a  hermaphrodite.  Aft4 


#• 


^ 


540  THK  FRAGMENTS  OF 


SO,  although  formerly  in  carnal  embraces  with  her  husband,  there 
might  be  no  natural  copulation,  yet  she  had  been  seen  frequently 
to  have  carnal  knowledge  of  women.     In  the  mean  time,  while  all 
things  were  kept  secret,  Semiades  returns  and  demands  his  wife,  as 
was  very  fit  and  reasonable.     And  being  continually  urgent  for  the 
society  of  his  wife,  the  father  refused,  and  yet  was  ashamed  to  de- 
clare the  reason ;  which  occasioned  great  dissension',  so  much  so,  that 
the  husband  resolved  to  sue  the  father  for  bis  wife:  so  that  this  won* 
der  was  exposed  to  public  view,  like  a  play  upon  the  stage,  hj  ncaos 
of  a  criminal  accusation.    The  person  contended  for  was  present  ia 
court  when  the  matter  was  debated  on  behalf  of  each  party:  con* 
cerning  which  the  judges  were  in  doubt  whether  the  power  and  au- 
thority of  the  husband  over  the  wife,  or  that  of  the  fiither  over  the 
daughter,  should  be  preferred.     At  length,  when  they  were  ready  fo 
give  sentence  tliat  the  wife  slKMiId  abide  with  her  huslmmti  she  htt4 
open  the  truth  of  the  whole  matter,  and  with  great  boldness  and  as- 
surance of  mind  threw  off  her  feigned  habit,  and  discovered  herself 
to  be  a  man  to  all  that  were  there  present,  and  in  a  surly  manner  ot- 
tered these  words: Can  any  compel  one  man  to  marry  another) 

Upon  which  all  were  amazed,  and  set  up  a  shout  of  admiration  at  the 
strangeness  of  the  thing.    Heraides  being  now  discovered,  after* 
wards,  as  is  reported,  changed  her  woman's  attire,  and  pnt  on  the 
habit  of  a  young  man.     And  it  is  likewise  said,  that  the  phyftieiaoSy 
when  they  saw  those  parts  of  the  woman,  judged  that  the  nature  of 
the  male  lay  hid  in  the  womb  of  the  female,  in  a  place  of  the  shape 
of  an  egg;  and  that  in  the  thin  scarf  or  skin  that  wrapped  about 
the  yard  was  an  unusual  hole  through  which  the  urine  passed.-   And 
therefore  they  declared,  that  the  place  first  being  pierced  and  vmit 
like  a  hollow  pipe,  should  be  turned  into  a  green  wound,  and  at 
length  brought  to  a  scab ;  and  when  the  yard  was  reduced  to  its  pro* 
per  shape,  that  suitable  remedies  should  be  applied  for  the  cure  of 
the  patient.     Heraides  was  afterwards  called  Diophantus,  and  served 
in  the  king's  camp  in  a  regiment  of  horse,  and  then  resided  with  the 
king  at  Abas.    At  that  time,  therefore,  when  the  king  came  to  Abaa» 
where  this  hermaphrodite  was  born,  was  the  meaning  o£  the  oracle 
understood,  v\ ;  i  h  had  been  dark  and  obscure  before.     It  is  reported 
that  Semiades  at  length,  through  the  love  he  bore  to  her,  upon  ae* 
count  of  their  former  familiarity,  and  through  shame  of  his  unnatu- 
ral marriage,  was  no  longer  able  to  bear  up,  but  after  he  had  left  all 
his  goods  to  Diophantus,  and  made  him  his  heir,  he  broke  his  heart 
and  died.     So  she  that  had  been  a  woman,  assumed  the  coomgr  of 
a  man ;  and  he  that  was  ever  a  man^  appeared  to  be 
mous  than  a  woman. 


DIODORUS  srCULUS.  541 

The  like  to  this  fell  out  about  thiny  years  ;ifter,in  the  city  of  Epi- 
dnufu^^*.  There  wa^  a  younj^  maid  in  Gpldaurus,  (as  the  report 
goes),  nn  orphan,  whose  name  was  Catlo.  This  maid  had  no  passage 
in  her  privy  parts;  but  about  the  pecten  there  was  a  place  li^e  na 
issue^  1  hrougli  which  the  urine  passed  tcver  from  the  time  of  her  birth. 
When  she  came  to  a  mature  age,  she  was  married  to  one  of  the  ciii- 
zenSj  with  whom  she  ItvccI  two  years,  and^  though  she  was  not  capa- 
ble of  natural  embraces  as  a  womanj  yet  she  was  forced  to  endure 
those  that  were  prefer  natural^  or  beside  nature.  But  afterwards  k 
toxnour  arose  near  the  pecten,  which  put  her  to  exceeding  torment^ 
so  that  many  physicians  were  sent  for  to  consult  together,  and  ali 
despaired  of  curing  her;  but  an  apothecary  undertook  the  care,  and 
made  an  incision  in  the  place,  whence  came  forth  a  man's  yard  with 
testicles,  but  solid,  without  any  passage.  And  when  all  were  amazed 
at  the  strangeness  of  the  thing,  the  apothecary  supplied  the  parts  with 
what  was  deficient.  First  he  made  an  incision  into  the  end  of  the 
yard,  and  pierced  it  even  to  the  uretor,  and^  thrusting  down  a  small 
silver  instrument,  brought  away  the  urine,  and  other  excrementitious 
humours;  but  the  place  where  iht  issue  was  he  first  turned  into  a 
green  Wdund,  and  then  healed  it  up.  Having  performed  this  extra- 
ordinary cure,  he  demanded  a  double  reward:  for  he  said  he  liad  un* 
dertakf  n  to  cure  a  sick  woman,  and  had  now  set  right  a  young  man. 
Callo  hereupon  laid  aside  her  wheel,  and  other  efieminate  employ- 
ments, and  took  upon  her  the  name  of  Gallon^  adding  only  the  last 
letter  N  to  her  former  name.  Some  say,  that  before  her  nansforma* 
tion  she  was  the  priestess  of  Ceres,  and  because  she  shewed  to  men 
those  things  that  were  not  to  be  seen,  this  judgment  fell  upon  her  for 
her  pro{>haneness.  They  report  that  at  Naples  and  several  other 
places  the  like  hath  happened:  not  that  the  two  sexes  of  man  and 
woman  are  really  formed  by  nature  ip  two  several  shapes,  (for  th2(t  is 
impossihie),  but  that  nature  is  deceived  in  fashioning  the  members 

ofahe  body,  to  the  amazement  and  deceit  of ^^ the  beholders. 

We  have  therefore  judged  these  strange  events,  which  are  brought 
down  to  us  lioth  by  writings  and  traditions,  worthy  to  be  taken  notice 
of,  in  respect  boih  of  their  pleasure  and  profit  to  the  readers:  for 
many,  lo<jKing  upon  such  things  as  these  as  monsters  in  nature,  are 
thereby  infected  with  a  kind  of  superstition;  not  only  privaie  men, 
but  whole  cities  and  nations.  For  it  is  reported,  that  a  little  before 
the  beginning  of  the  Marsian  war,  there  dwelt  an  Italian  near  Rome, 
who,  having  murried  such  a  one  as  is  before  described,  complained 
to  the  senate;  upon  which  they,  out  of  a  fond  superstition,  and  per- 
suaded thereunto  by  the  Tuscan  augurs,  ordered  the  hermaphrodite 

•  In  Peloponnesus. 


n 


542  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


to  l>e  burnt.     And  thus  (they  say)  this  poor  creature  was  most  un- 
justly doomed  to  destruction,  and  was  ignorantly  judged  a  monster^ 
because  she  had  some  resemblance  of  both  sexes.     And  Dot  long 
after  there  happened  the  like  at  Athens;  where,  the  thing  not  being 
understood,  they  say  the  man  was  burnt  alive.     Some  there  are  wbo 
tell  idle  stories  how  that  there  are  Hya^ne,  (for  so  th^y  call  such  is 
are  both  men  and  women)  who  have  cariKil  copulation  one  with  ano- 
ther, according  to  each  sc\,  by  turns  every  other  year;  when  in  truth 
there  is  no  such  thing.     For  although  both  sexes  have  a  peculiir 
and  distinct  nature,  without  participation  one  whh  another,  yet  bja 
laUe  formation  the  inconsiderate  spectator  may  be  imposed  upon: 
for  to  the  female  (which  is  naturally  such)  is  joined  something  Ukc 
unto  a  man's  yard,  and  so,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  natural  male 
something  like  to  the  privy  parts  of  a  woman.    The  same  reasoa 
holds  in  all  kind  of  living  creatures,  there  being  many  and  various  sorts 
of  prodigious  births;  but  sucli  as  never  receive  any  nourishment^  nor 
can  ever  come  to  any  peifcction.    But  what  hath  been  said  may  suf- 
fice for  the  reforming  this  superstition. 

i!.  They  say  that  the  walls  of  Carthage  were  forty  cubits  high,  aD(| 
twenty- two  broad,  but  though  liiey  were  so,  yet  the  Roman  Talour 
and  chuines  were  too  strong  for  all  their  defences  and  fortifications^ 
for  ihe  tiiy  was  taken  and  lazed  to  the  ground. 

3.  ^laiiassesk  (called  Masinis^a  by  the  Latins)  who  reigned  ia 
Afiioa,  am!  wus  always  a  iViend  to  the  Romans,  lived  ninety  years  ia 
sireni:ih  and  lirn)  lieahii,  and  left  ten  sons  beiiind  him  when  he  dieil» 
>;vlioni  ho  conunittcd  to  the  care  and  !:nardianship  of  the  Romans. 
He  was  of  a  stiong  body,  a!id  from  a  child  inured  to  hardship:  ia 
i\  liatevcr  business  he  was  eng.iiied  he  would  keep  close  to  it  all  the  daj 
ir.iuuwiable :  he  w<»uld  never  rise  from  his  seat  till  night,  spending 
x\\c  whole  day  in  laborious  projects  and  ecnirivances.  When  be  was 
vuoe  on  h.orsebaek  he  wiuilil  ride  continually  night  and  day,  and  ne- 
ver bo  woary.  A  gieat  instance  of  the  lualih  and  strength  of  his 
biHly,  wa^,  that  when  he  was  almost  ninety  years  of  age,  he  had  a 
son  but  four  years  old,  yet  of  a  very  stiong  Inxly.  lie  was  so  extra- 
ordinarily given  to  husbandry,  th.ii  he  left  to  every  one  of  his  son^ 
tin  tliousand  ploihras  of  land,  adorned  with  all  manner  of  delight- 
ful in\pnne...enis.  and  instruments  necessary  for  that  purpose.  He 
rei 'ned  with  crcai  commendation  sixtv  vears. 

I.  Nioomedes  after  he  had  routed  his  father  Prusias,  and  forced 
him  lo  tly  to  the  temple  of  Jupittr  for  shelter,  tiicre  killed  him,  and 
by  that  wicked  and  bloody  mui  Jer  got  possession  of  the  kingdom  of 
KMhinl.'u 


WioboRtrs  stctJLu*.  543 

5.  The  Lusitanians  at  first  not  having  an  expert  general,  were 
easily  vanquished  by  the  Romans;  but  after  Viriathus  became  their 
general,  they  did  them  much  mischief.  He  was  of  them  tlmt  inha- 
liited  the  sea-coasts,  a  shepherd  upon  the  mountains  from  his  child- 
hood; by  nature  of  a  healthful  constitution,  in  strength  and  agility 
of  body  far  exceeding  all  the  Iberians:  for  he  had  inured  himself  lo 
a  sparing  diet,  much  labour  and  toil,  and  to  no  more  sleep  than  was 
absolutely  necessary.  He  likewise  continually  carried  iron  weapom, 
and  was  famous  for  his  conflicts  both  with  Wild  beasts  and  robben, 
and  at  length  was  made  general;  upon  which  a  whole  drove  of  thieves 
and  rogues  on  the  sudden  flocked  about  him.  Being  very  successful 
ii\  many  battles,  h^  was  not  only  admired  for  his  other  excelleneies^ 
but  likewise  for  his  military  condudt.  Besides,  in  distribution  of 
the  sjioils  he  was  very  just^  alloting  to  every  man  proportionabljto 
his  merits  and  deserts.  Still  proceeding  and  prospering  he  approved 
himself  to  be  a  prince,  rather  tha^  a  thief  and  a  robber.  Heloaght 
several  battles  with  the  Romans  and  came  off  conqueror,  insomuch 
as  he  routed  Vitellius  the  Roman  general,  broke  his  army  and  took 
faim  prisoner,  and  then  put  him  to  deaths  And  many  other  brave 
exploits  he  performed,  till  Fabius  was  appointed  to  go  out  as  gene- 
ral against  him,  and  from  that  time  he  began  to  decline.  But  not 
long  after  rallying  his  men,  and  bravely  managing  the  matter  against 
Fabius,  he  forced  him  to  terms  dishonourable  to  the  Roman  frame* 
But  Ceepio  who  was  afterwards  general  against  Viriathus,  slighted 
all  the  former  conditions  as  of  no  effect,  and  often  routed  Viriathtis, 
whom  (now  being  reduced  to  those  straits,  asf  that  he  sued  for  terms 
of  peace)  he  caused  to  be  treacherously  assassinated  by  some  of  lilt 
own  servants:  and  striking  a  terror  into  Tantalus  his  successor,  acid 
all  his  army,  he  imposed  what  terms  and  conditions  he  pleased  upoa 
them,  and  in  the  conclusion  gave  them  the  city  and  land  about  for 
tlicir  habitation. 


BOOK  XXXIV. 


1.  KING  Antiochus*  besieged  Jerusalem,  But  the  Jews  stood  it 
out  for  some  time :  but  when  all  their  provision  was  spent,  they 
were  forced  to  send  ambassadors  to  him,  to  treat  upon  terms.  Many 
of  his  friends  persuaded  him  to  storm  the  city,  and  to  root  out  ths 

•  Silicic*. 


544  THE  FRAGMfeNtS  Ot 


whole  nation  of  the  Jews;  For  that  they  only  of  all  people,  hated 
to  converse  with  any  of  other  nations,  and  treated  them  all  as  fene- 
mies:  and  they  suggested  to  him  that  their  ancestors  were  drifco  oat 
of  Egypt,  as  impious  and  hateful  to  the  gods:  for  their  bodies  being 
overspread,  and  infected  with  the  itch  and  leprosy,  (by  way  of  expi- 
ation) they  got  tliem  together,  and  as  profane  and  wicked  wietches, 
expelled  them  out  of  their  coasts :  and  that  those  who  were  thus  ex- 
peiled,  seated  themselves  about  Jerusalem,  and  being  after  embo- 
died into  one  nation  (called  the  nation  of  the  Jews)  their  liatred  af 
all  other  men  descended  with  their  hlood  to  posterity.     And  thcvp- 
jfore  they  made  strange  laws,  and  quite  different  from  other  people! 
never  will  eat  nor  drink  with  any  of  other  nations,  or  wish  them  any 
prosperity.    For  said  they,  Antiochus  surnamed  Epiphanea  having 
subdued  the  Jews,  entered  into  the  temple  of  God,  into  whieb 
none  was  to  enter  by  their  law  but  the  priest;  in  which  when  be 
found  the  image  of  a  man  with  a  long  beard,  carved  io  stone  sitting 
upon  an  ass,  he  took  it  to  be  Moses  who  built  Jerusalem,  and  set- 
tled the  nation,  and  established  by  kw  all  their  wicked  cusUhbs  aad 
practices,  abounding  in  hatred  and  enmity  to  all  other  men.    AotK 
ochus  therefore  abhorring  this  their  contrariety  t6-  all  other  peoplti 
used  his  utmost  endeavour  to  abrogate  their  laws.    To  that  end  he 
sacrificed  a  great  swine  at  the  image  of  Muses,  and  at  the  altar  if 
God  that  stood  in  the  outward  court,  and  sprinkled  them  with  the 
blood  of  the  sacrifice.     He  commanded  likewise  that   the 
books,  whereby  they  were  taught  to  hate  all  other  natiooa, 
be  besprinkled  with  the  breth  made  of  the  swine's  fleah:  And  he  put 
out  the  lamp  (called  by  them  immortal)  which  was  ever  bomiiy 
in  the  temple.    Lastly  he  forced  the  high  priest  and  the  other  Jews 
to  eat  swine's  flesh.  Wlien  Antiochus's  friends  had  debated  and  con* 
sidered  of  these  things,  they  were  very  earnest  with  him  to  root  o^ 
the  whole  nation,  or  at  least  that  he  would  abrostate  their  laws,  and 
compel  them  to  change  their  former  manner  of  living  and  convena* 
tion.    But  the  king  being  of  a  generous  spirit,  and  mild  dispositiott 
received  hostages  and  pardoned  the  Jews:  but  demolished  the  walto 
of  Jerusalem,  and  took  the  tribute  that  was  due. 

2.  The  afliiirs  of  Sicily  after  the  overthrow  of_Cartbage—.— 
having  continued  successful  and  prosperous  for  the  space  of  sixty 
years ;  at  length  broke  out  the  servile  war  upon  the  following  occa** 
sions.  The  Sicilians  (through  the  enjoyment  of  a  long  peace}  being 
grown  very  rich,  brought  up  abundance  of  slaves;  who  beioigdri* 
ven  in  droves  like  so  many  herds  of  cattle  from  the  sefend  placet 
where  they  were  bred  and  brought  up,  were  stigmatised  with  certain 
marks  burnt  in  their  bodies:  those  that  were  young,  they  used  fee 


DIODORUS  SICU  LU».  ^45 

shepherds,'^  others  for  such  services  as  Ihey  had  occasion.  But  their 
masters  were  very  rigid  and  severe  with  them^  and  took  no  care  to 
provide  either  necessary  food  or  raiment  for  them,  insomuch  as  that 
most  of  them  were  forced  to  rob  and  steal,  to  get  necessaries :  so 
that  all  places  were  full  of  slaughters  and  murders,  as  if  an  army  of 
thieves  and  robbers  had  been  dispersed  all  over  the  island«  I  Thego-* 
vernors  of  the  provinces  (to  say  the  truth)  did  what  they  could  to 
suppress  them :  but  because  they  durst  not  punish  them,  in  regard 
to  their  masters,  who  had  the  S5le  command  and  power  over  their 
servants,  were  rich,  and  men  in  authority,  every  governor  in  his  se- 
veral province  was  forced  to  connive  at  the  thefts  and  rapines  that 
were  committed.  For  many  of  the  masters  being  Roman  knights^ 
and  judges  of  the  accusations  (brought  before  the  prsetors)  were  a 
terror  to  the  governors  themselves,  v  The  slaves  therefore  being  in 
this  distress,  and  vilely  beaten  and  scourged  beyond  all  reason,  were- 
now  resolved  not  to  bear  any  longer.  Therefore  meeting  together 
from  time  to  time  as  they  had  opportunity,  they  consulted  how  to 
free  themselves  from  the  yoke  of  servitude  they  lay  under,  till  at 
length  they  really  executed  what  they  had  before  agreed  upon.  There 
was  a  Syrian  a  servant  of  Antigenes  of  Enna,  born  in  the  city  of 
Apanea  a  magician  and  conjuror:  he  pretended  te  tell  future  events, 
(or  fortunes),  discovered  to  him,  as  he  said  by  the  gods  in  hia 
dreams,  and  imposed  upon  many  by  this  kind  of  practice.  TThen  he 
proceeded  further,  and  not  only  foretold  things  to  come,  revealed  to 
him  in  dreams,  but  pretended  that  he  saw  the  gods  when  he  was 
awake,  and  they  declared  to  him  what  was  to.  come  to  pass.  ^And. 
though  he  thus  juggled,  and  played  the  fool,  yet  by  chance  many 
things  afterwards  proved  true.  And  whereas  those  things  which  ne-< 
ver  happened,  were  by  none  censured,  but  those  which  did  come  to 
pass  were  every  where  applauded,  he  grew  more  and  more  into  es-i 
teem.  At  length  by  some  trick  of  art  or  other,  he  would  breath 
flames  of  fire  out  of  his  mouth  as  from  a  burning  lamp,  and  so 
would  propliepy  as  though  he  had  been  at  that  time  inspired  by  Apol-* 
lo.  /  For  he  put  fire  with  some  combustible  matter  to  feed  it,  into  a 
nut-shell  or  some  such  thing  bored  through  on  both  sides,  then  put^^ 
ting  it  into  his  mouth,  and  forcing  his  breath  upon  it  there  would  is-, 
sue  out  both  sparks  and  flames  of  fire.  Before  the  defection  this 
juggler  boasted  that  the  goddess  Syria  had  appeared  to  him,  and 
told  him  that  he  should  reign,  and  this  he  declared  not  only  toothers 
but  often  to  his  own  master,  f  The  thing  being  become  a  common 
jest  and  subjeet  of  lauq;hter,  Antigenes  was  so  taken  with  this  jest^ 
^nd  ridiculous  conceit  of  the  man,  that  he  took  £unus,  (for  so  he  w^ 
Vol.   2.  No.  47.  MA\ 


THE  rftAGM£KTS  Or 


^vLtii  him  to  fe:t^is  :jmc1  repasts,  audi 
I  tL)  niiD  concerning  i\\t  kingdotn^  be  wafi  a»kc^  bow  be  «rotttd 
tW  rvery  oitc  that  w;ts  there  prrMiit  At  thr  tiblc:  he  r««dibf 
went  on  with  hi&  «t*ry,  tind  told  them  thai  he  would  be  very  tiifwl  lo 
hU  mafltGrs^  and   lik«t  a  conjurur  uitng  many  mcmvtroiu  mak^l«d 
term»»  aikd  expreattion*,  Ite  %i£\  %\\\  tbe  f^ueAtu  n  Uug^biUj^,  u^vw  wbidi 
somo  of  ihrni  a^  a  reward  g^vc  bun  lur4,'ti  incM.%c:t  frum  the  tablc^  de-* 
siring  birn  to  remembej:  their  kindne*i.s  whanho  came  tohh  klnf^tkuaa 
but  all  this  jeKtfnn;  oame  ut  le»>^tfi  j^aUy  tiJ  urn!  in  the  adv4iicmi;  <>f 
htm  tt>  tbo  kingdom;  and  att  those  tvlio  at  Uie  feasts  by  way  of  ridU 
citle  bad  been  kind  to  bim,  be  rewarded  ju  earnest. 

But  the  beginning  of  the  deletion  was  in  this  awmncr, ''Tbctt 
was  one  Oamo|>bibis  of  Kiniii,  t^  mitn  by  venMm  of  his  woaJtb^  of  « 
great   spirit,  but   of  a  proud   und    hnugbty  dispositiim.     This  nraa 
above  all  mca&urc  w^a  cfuel  and  ^evero  to  his  itervant^;  and  hi&wif« 
Megallii  strove  to  cxee«d  her  husband  id  uII  kind  of  ertnfhy  and  ta- 
btimaahy  towards  the  tilaves.     U[)on  thii^,  ihey  tbat  bad  h^*n  tbtn 
crtjelly  u&td,  were  enm^^d  like  wild  beasts,  and  plotted  together  bo 
rise  in  arms  and  cut  the  throats  of  ihtir  mnsicrs.     To  tbb  end  they 
applied  themselves  tt^lLuuus,  and  dcxired  to  know  of  liim  wbetber 
the  Goda  ^'ou)d  succeed  them    in  tbeir  de^l^n.     He  eucouraj^in^ 
them  declared  that  tbey  should  pro&pcr  In  what  ihry  luid  in  hand, 
lining,  (afcording  to  bis    former  muiuier),  t^*n^junng  words  am!  trx- 
prcssioDs,    and  ckargiog  tliem  to  be  apeedy  in   thfiior  execation, 
\  I  Whereupon  they  forthwith  raised  a  body  of  four  huadred  sbtves^  and 
upon  the  first  opportunity,  on  a  suddeii<  broke  io  amed  ioto  the 
city  Enna,  led  by  their  captain  £untis,  by  bis  juggling  tricks^  fla- 
wing out  fire  at  bis  mouth.    Then  entering  the  bouses,  tbty  madcso 
great  a  slaugbter,  as  that  they  spared  not  even  tbe  suckling  ckUdrea, 
but  plucked  them  violently  from  their  mother's  breasts  and  dashed 
them  against  the  ground:  it  cannot  be  expressed  how  vilely  and  fil- 
thily,  (for  the  satisfying  of  their  lusts),  they  used  men's  wives  in  the 
very  presence  of  their  husbands.     With  these  villains  joined  a  mtd- 
titude  of  slaves  that  were  in  the  city,  and  first  executed  their  rage 
and  cruelty  upon  tbeir  masters,  aiul  then  fell  a  murdering  others. 
( '     In  the  mean  time  Eunus  heard  that Damophilus  aad  bis  wife  were 
in  some  ore  iird    near  the  city,  he  sent  therefore  some  of  his  rabble 
thither,  who  brought  them  with  their  bands  tied  behiod  their  backs, 
loading  them,  as   they  passed  along  with  scofib  and  scorns;  only 
they  declared  that  they  would  be  kind  in  every  respect  to  his  da^gb-* 
ter,  for  her  }iity  and  compassion  towards  the  servants,  and  her  rea^ 
diaess  always  to  be  helpful  to  them.   They  tliat  were  sent  for  Dama« 


UtODOHtJS  BttVLVB  6*f 

«^-L..^-.ji    I   I  ,iiM immmmmammmmmmBmammraaBB.  jiiiw^'i  i  uiiia=8BgMiii» 

philas  and  Mefallishis  wile  to  the  city^  brooght  them  itito  the  tlie«* 
atre^  wlitther  all  the  rabMe  thit  made  a  def^ctioa  flookccU  Tbmt 
Damophiltts  pleading  eafneitly  for  his  Wfe^  mtkd  moiring  many  vvStb 
what  he  satd^  Hcrttins  and  SUtnh  loaded  him  with  Inany  bitteir  mt^ 
cusations^  aod  cailed  him  a  cheat  and  disaetnbler;  and  tim  waitik^ 
What  woald  be  detemtiwed  by  the  people  cdncertiing  hini)  the  ontt 
ran  him  through  with  a  ivrord^  and  the  dthter  cat  off  his  head  witit 
an  axe.  Then  they  made  Eanas  king^  not  ibr  hit  Valour  or  akIU  itt 
martial  aftairs,  but  upo«)  the  account  of  bis  eat#«ordinary  joggling^ 
•^d  that  he  was  th«  bead  and  authM*of  the  defecttoni  and  for  that 
his  kiame  seemed  to  portend  and  tt)  be  a  good  otnen,  that  he  wbixld 
be  kind^  to  his  subjetts^^"^  Being  therefore  made  general^  (with^bn 
solute  power)^  to  order  and  dispose  of  ail  things  as  he  pleased^  an 
aioembly  whs  called,  and  he  put  ail  the  prisoners  t»  death  except 
such  as  were  Rkilfol  in  making  of  arms^  whoan  he  forthwith  set  on. 
work ;  as  for  Megallis  he  delivered  her  up  to  the  wiU  6f  the  wonae4 
slaves,  to  take  their  revenge  of  her  as  they  thought  fit  x  who  after 
they  had  whipped  and  tormented  her»  threw  htt  down  a  steep  preet*^ 
pice.  And  Eunus  hiuAself  killed  hia  own  master  Aati^kles  and  Py^ 
tho.  ^"^  At  length  putting  the  crown  upon  his  head,  and  graced  witi| 
all  the  ensigns  of  royalty,  he  caused  his  wife,  (who  was  a  Syrian^ 
and  of  the  same  city)  to  be  owned  as  queeti,  and  ohoee  saeh  as  b& 
judged  to  he  most  prudent  to  be  of  his  privy  coancih  Amongst 
whom  was  one  Achieus  by  name,  and  an  Achsean  by  nation^  a  Wis£i 
man  and  a  good  soldier  t  having  therefore  got  together  id  the  apace 
of  three  days  above  six  thousand  men,  armed  With  what  they  couhl 
by  any  ways  or  means  lay  their  hinds  upon,  and  being  joined  with 
others,  who  were  all  furnished  either  with  axes,  hatches,  slings^ 
bills,  or  stakes  sharpened  and  burnt  at  one  end,  or  With  spitsi  ho 
ravaged  and  made  spoil  all  over  the  country*  And  being  at  length 
joined  with  an  infinite  number  of  slaves,  they  grew  to  that  height 
and  boldness  as  to  engage  in  a  war  with  the  Roman  g«oeral8t  and 
often  in  several  battles  got  the  victory,  by  overpowering  them  with 
number;  having  now  with  him  above  ten  thousand  men. 
'  ^  tn  the  mean  time,  one  Cleon  a  Cilician  was  the  author  of  anothct 
defection  of  the  slaves,  and  now  ail  were  In  hopes  that  this  Unruly, 
rabble  would  fall  together  by  the  ears  one  with  another,  and  so  Sicily 
would  be  rid  of  them  through  the  mutual  slaughters  and  destruction^ 
amongst  themselves*  But  Contrary  to  all  men^s  hopes  and  expectaa 
tions,  they  joined  forces  together;  and  Cleon  Was  observant  in  ^vary 
thing  to  the  commatids  of  £unus,  and  aerved  gen^rftl  tinder  bitn  M 

*  Eunul>  lignifjring  in  Greek,  kM* 


548  rnt  FRAGMENTS  OP 

his  prince,  having  five  thousand  men  of  his  own  soldiers.    Thirty 
days  were  now  expired  since*  the  first  beginning  of  this  rebellion: 
I  \     and  presently  after  a  battle  was  fought  with  Lucius  Hypsius,  (wha 
coining  from  Rome  commanded  eight  thousand  Sieilians)^  in  whick 
fight  the  rebels  got  the  day,  who  were  then  twenty  thousand,  and  ia 
a  very  short  time  after,  their  army  increased  to  two  hundred  thousand 
men.    And  although  they  fought  with  the  Romans  themselves,  yet 
they  often  came  ofi*  conquerors,  and  were  very  seldom  beaten  J^This 
being  noised  abroad,  a  defection  began  at  Rome  by  one  hundred  and 
fifty  slaves,,  who  conspired  against  the  government;  the  like  in  At- 
tica by  one  thousand;  the  like  at  Delos,  and  many  other  places.  But 
diose  in  the  several  places  who  had  intrusted  their  concerns  in  their 
hands,  to  prevent  the  mischief  from  going  further,  made  a  quick  des- 
patch, and  fell  upon  them  on  the  sudden,  and  put  them  all  to  death, 
and  so  those  that  remained  and  were  ready  to  break  out  iato  rebel- 
lion, were  reduced  to  more  sound  and  sober  thoughts. 
}o     But  in  Sicily  the  disorders  more  and  more  increased:  for  cities 
were  taken,  and  their  inhabitants  made  slaves,  and  many  armies 
were  cut  off  by  the  rebels,  until  such  time  as  Rupilius  tiie  Romaa 
general  recovered  Taurominium,  after  the  besieged  had  been  reduced 
to  that  extremity  of  famine,  (hy  a  sharp  and  close  siege),  as  that 
they  began  to  eat  their  own  children,  and  the  men  their  wives;  and 
at  length  butchered  one  another  for  food.    There  he  took  Comaoos 
the  brother  of  Clcon,   who  was  endeavouring  to  escape  out  of  the 
city  while  it  was  besieged.  "^'At  last  Sarapion  a  Syrian,  having  be» 
trayedthe  citadel,  all  the  fugitives  fell  into  his  hands,  whomhavinf 
first  scourged,  he  afterwards  crucified.  Thence  he  marched  toEnoa, 
and  by  a  long  siege  reduced  them  into  such  Straits,  as  that  there 
was  no  hope  left   to  escape.     Afterwards  having  slain  CleoD  tbdir 
general^  (who  hud  made  a  sally  from  the  city  and  fought  like  a  hen>), 
he  exposed  his  body  to  open  view;  and  not  long  after  this  city  like- 
wise  was  betrayed  into  iiis  hands,  which  otherwise  could  never  have 
been  taken  by  force,  by  reason  of  the  natural  strength  of  the  place. 
'     And  as  for  Eunus,  he  like  a  coward  fled  with  six  hundred  of  Us 
guards  to  the  tops  of  certain  high  rocks,  where  those  that  were  witk 
him,   (foreseeing  their  inevitable  ruin,  for  Rupilius  pursued?  then 
closf),  cut  one  another's  throats.     But  Eunus  the.  joggling  king^ 
out  of  fear,  hid  himself  in  some  caves,  he  had  found  out  for  that 
purpose;  whence  he  was  plucked  out  with  four  others  of  iosgaug^ 
viz.  his  cook,  his  barber,  he  that  rubbed  him  in  the  Jbathj  Und-te 
that  in  the  midst  of  his  cups  was  his  jester.  ^Tp  conclude  he  was 
thrown  into  the  g;iol,  and  there  eaten  up  of  lice,  and  so  ended  his 
days  at  Morgautiuni*  by  a  death  worthy  the  former  wickedness  of  fais 

lu  Sicilj. 


DIODOBXJS  SICULUS.  ". —    B4Q 


life.     Kupilius  afterwards  with  a  small  body  of  men^  marching*  all 

over  Sicily,  presently  cleared  the  country  of  thieves  and  robbers* 

\     This  Eunus  king  of  the  robbers  called  himself  Antiocfaus^  and  all 


his  followers  Syrians.      ^     i  Ly) 


BOOK  XXXVI. 


ABOUT  the  time  that  Marias  in  a  great  battle  routed  Bocchus  and 
Jugurtha,  the  African  kings,  and  slew  many  thousands  of  the  Afri« 
cans,  and  afterwards  took  Jugurtha  himself,  (delivered  up  to  him  by 
Bocchus,  to  gain  favour  and  pardon  from  the  Romans  for  his  making 
war  upon  them),  the  Romans  themselves  were  in  great  perplexity^ 
by  reason  of  the  many  losses  they  had  sustained  by  the  Cimbriaos^ 
who  then  ravaged  and  harassed  all  the  country  of  Gaul*.  -  And  is 
further  aggravation  of  what  they  suffered,  at  the  very  same  time  eame 
some  out  of#Sicily,  who  gave  an  account  of  many  thoosand  slavfii 
that  were  there  risen  up  in  arms.  Whereupon  tbe  whole  Roman 
commonwealth  was  in  such  straits,  that  they  knew  not  which  way  to 
turn  themselves,  having  lost  sixty  thousand  men  in  Gaul,  ia  tli^  war 
against  the  Cimbrians,  and  they  had  not  then  soldiers  sufficient  for  a 
new  expedition.     And  besides,  (/before 'the  rebellion  of  the  slaves  la 

Sicily),  there  were  defections  that  disturbed tbe  state  in 

Italy:  but  they  were  short  and  inconsiderable,  as  if  God  had  ap<- 
pointed  these  for  omens  and  presages  of  the  great  rebellion  in  Sicily* 
The  first  rising  was  at  Nusi&riaf,  where  thirty  servants  entered  into 
a  conspiracy,  but  they  were  presently  executed.  The  second  was  at 
Capua  where  two  hundred  were  got  up  in  arms,  but  they  were  in  a 
short  time  suppressed.  The  third  happened  after  a  strange  manaci'^ 
which  was  thus,  there  was  one  Titus  Minutius  a  Roman  knight,  -wiio 
had  a  very  rich  man  for  his  father,  he  chanced  to  fall  in  love  with 
another  man's  servant  who  was  very  beautiful,  and  having  enjoyed 
her,  lie  was  the  more  wonderfully  inflamed,  and  even  to  madness^  in-* 
som  uch  as  he  would  needs  buy  her  of  her  master  5  who  being  with  much 
ado  prevailed  with  to  part  with  her,  the  lover  at  length  bought  her 
for  seven  AtticJ  talents,  and  limited  a  certain  time  for  the  payment 

*  Now  France. 
t  la  CumpaDia  in  Italy  niae. miles  from  (be  se»« 
$  130D/.  10*.  sterling. 


590  THs  fraomkkh  or 


6[  the  moncjj  to  which  time  the  greatness  6i  hfo  fttktr's  estate  pf^ 
cured  him  Credit:  but  now,  when  the  day  of  pajrmeDt  waft  eoroe^  he 
kid  not  the  money  tlien  ready»  but  prayed  forbeamnee  ft>r  thirty  dayt 
longer.  That  time  being  run  up,  the  creditor  then  deaiiandcd  hk 
money,  but  tlie  lover  knew  not  how  to  perform  his  word>  and  yet  his 
love  continued  still  as  hot  as  ever.  At  length  a  wicked  design  came 
into  his  head,  which  induced  him  to  lay  a  trap  for  them  that  de- 
manded the  money,  and  to  that  end  to  take  upon  him  the  state  and 
dignity  of  a  monarch.  To  which  purpose  he  bought  five  hundred 
arms  of  all  sorts,  and  ap|X)iDted  a  day  for  payment;  and  being  trusted, 
withdrawing  himself  privately  into  a  certain  field,  he  stirred  up  his 
own  slaves  to  a  defection,  to  the  number  of  four  hundred;  and,  put- 
ting on  the  diadem  and  purple,  and  assuming  iill  the  other  badgel 
and  ensigns  of  royalty,  declared  himself  king,  the  deliverer  of  the 
slaves.  In  the  first  place  be  caused  all  those  who  demanded  the  m«* 
ney  he  had  given  for  the  young  woman  to  be  scourged,  and  then  eat 
off  their  heads.  Then  he  entered  the  next  towns  with  his  armed 
slaves,  and  those  that  came  readily  to  join  with  him|  he  fnmuhcd  with 
arms,  and  killed  all  that  opposed  him.  Having  in  a  short  time  got 
together  above  seven  hundred,  he  divided  them  into  companies*;  and 
then  fortifying  and  intrenching  himself,  he  received  all  the  siavct 
that  ran  away  from  their  masters.  I1ie  rebellion  being  noised  at 
Kome,  the  senate  (by  the  help  of  prudent  advice)  put  a  stop  to  the 
mischief,  and  happily  suppressed  it. 

The  care  and  management  of  the  business  for  the  reducing  and 
punishing  of  the  fugitive  slaves  was  committed  to  Lucius  LacnlltB, 
who  was  the  only  general  that  was  then  iti  the  city,  who  raised  sit 
hundred  men  in  Rome,  and  with  them  the  same  day  marched  to  Ca* 
pua,  where  he  listed  four  thousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  honet 
When  Minutius  heard  with  what  speed  Lucullus  was  making  towafds 
him,  he  possessed  himself  of  a  strong  hill,  having  with  him  thfee 
thousand  five  hundred  men.  In  the  first  engagement  the  fktgltlvtSi 
by  the  advantage  of  the  higher  ground,  got  the  better :  afterwaidl 
JLuoullus  bribed  Apollonlus,  Minutius^s  general,  to  betray  Ms  oonfi^»- 
derates,  withal  p/omistng  him,  u|xhi  the  security  of  the  public  hlUkf 
that  he  should  have  his  (itrdon :  whereupon  he  began  the  work)  aad^ 
seizing  Minutius,  he  (to  avoid  the  punishment  he  feared  fcr  bis  ft»* 
bollion)  ran  himself  through  the  body  |  the  rest  were  all  presently  eet 
off,  eacept  A))Ollonius.  And  tliese  were  prologues  to  that  grtat  dt* 
fcction  in  Sicily,  whose  beginning  was  thus  occasioned.  Ia  the  aa^ 
pcdition  of  Marius  against  the  Cimbrians,  the  senate  had  given  a 

*  A  nompnnj  cmi^istcd  of  one  hundred  mtn,  of  whkli  the  cipuin  was 
ctlled  a  ctnturion. 


1 


DIODORUSI  SICULU9.  «51 

oatBmis^ion  to  raise  men  uut  of  the  countriea  beyond  llie  seas;  t4 
which  enr]  Mar!  us  sent  ambaanti^ors  tu  Ni  corned e«^  king  of  Bithyuta* 
to  l>t;lp  fiim  Willi  «anie  men;  but  lie  returned  answer^  tbat  most  tH 
ibc  Bitliyuluus  were  violirhtly  Uiken  Hw^y  for  slaves  by  the  ptibllcaQSt 
zn6  w^'re  dispersed  hercf  and  tliere  ihrough  tlie  provmces.     Upott 

vhrcii  the  senitie  decreed That  no  freeman  belonging  toanyof  thti 

Boman  Hlliea  aboutd  iti  any  pnivince  be  forced  to  be  servants  or 
^laves^  uod  tltat  the  }iro-cocT)iub  sliould  cake  care  to  s^c  theui  all  set  *i 

trte.  In  pouuaiicii  of  tUlu  older  Liclniuf  Nervs^  tbou  ^t^^ioi  m  Sif^ 
cily,  (having  first  consuliled  wkh  the  jud|^),  araniunktedl  ao  mnrnf 
that  in  a  few  daya  above  eight  hundred  were  set  at  liberty;  ao  that  all 
the  slaves  in  Sicily  were  herehjpceae&tlyencoiinigedlyaiidgiMihigh'^ 
crested,  in  hopes  of  liSerty*  The  magiatratea  therefore  addneaaai 
tliemselves  to  the  praetor^  or  pra-conaul,  and  deaired  him  to  forbear 
making  any  n(K>re  free.  Hereupon  be  (whether  brihed^  or  to  gaim 
favour)  laid  aside  the  former  determiaation  of  the  jadgea,  and  wMa 
checks  and  foul  words  sent  them  tfant  came  to  him  to  be  made  free 
Vack  to  their  masters.  Upon  this  tiie  servaats  entered  into  a  con- 
spiracy; and,  after  they  came  froaa  Syracuse^  and  ^'ere  got  togetbef 
at  the  grove  of  Palicum,  they  consulted  concerning  their  mtcoded 
rebellion.  This  boldness  of  the  slaves  hegan  to  make  a  noise  in  manj 
places  of  the  island.  Amoogat  others,  tliirty  servants  of  two  nek 
brothers  in  the  country  of  the  AnycUlhos  weie  the  first  that  appeared 
for  their  liberty,  whose  leader  was  one  Varius.  These  tn  the  fiisc 
place  killed  their  masters,  when  they  vviTe  asleep  ui  their  beds:  tlioa 
tliey  went  away  to  the  next  towns,  and  stirred  up  all  tlie  scrvanta 
and  slaves  there  to  appear  for  the  gaining  of  thr tr  liberty,  of  wlioai 
came  in  flocking  to  them  in  that  one  night  to  the  number  of  otie 
hundred  and  twenty,  and  upwards*  Upon  thl^t  they  possessed  them-* 
selves  of  a  place  naturally  strofi^  ol  itself,  which  tiiey  endea^-ourcd 
to  make  stronger  by  art  and  labour,  where  eighty  moi^  we!)  arn^rd 
came  in  to  them.  Liciuius  Nerva  hastened  out  against  theni^  with 
a  design  to  put  a  stop  to  their  ravages,  but  all  his  labour  ivas  in  vain. 
Seeing  therefore  that  the  place  was  not  to  be  taken  by  force,  he 
sought  how  to  gain  it  by  treachery;  for  he  had  prtv^itc  correspond- 
ence with  one  CaiusTitinius,  surnamed  Gadffius,  whooi  he  wrought 
upon  to  be  the  instrument  of  accomplishing  his  design,  promising 
him  safety  and  protection.  This  man  Iiad  been  condemned  to  die 
two  years  before,  but  had  made  an  escape,  and  had  robbed  and  mufw 
dered  many  freemen  in  that  province,  but  never  in  the  least  injured 
any  servant.  Tiiinius,  with  a  great  body  of  slaves,  came  to  thii^  ^oit, 
where  the  rebels  had  posted  themselves,  as  if  he  designed  to  join  wttk 
them  in  making  war  upon  the  Homatis;  who  being  wittingly  ao4 


received  by  th^ra,  and  for  his  valour  made  tlietr  gecKrst,  he  ft 

rayed  the  fort;    u\ton  wlncli  some  of  the  rebels  were 

lin  ,  and  the  rest,  out  of  fear  of  what  they  shotild  ioffcr  if 

iDcy  were  TaKeu  prisoners,  Ujicw  themselves  down  headlong  from  itw 

topof  thcTock.    And  in  this  maniii*r  was  the  first  rising  of  the  slam 

auppressed, 

Bui  the  soldiers  had  no  sooner  pot  to  their  quarters,  than  nevs 
was  brought  that  about  elglity  slaves  had  caused  a  tumult  to  be  raised, 
ind  had  cut  the  throat  of  Puhlius  Glomus,  a  Roman  knight,  and  ihat 
now  (heir  nuraher  was  much  increased.     And  to  aggravate  (he  mat* 
ter^  the  praetor,  being  ill  advised,  had  clisbauded  most  of  his  arm?, 
by  reitson  whereof  he  was  so  slow,  that  he  gave  time  lo  (he  rebels 
the  more  to  strengthen  themselves.     However,  be  marched  out  »- 
puQSt  them  with  those  he  then  had*     As  soon  as  he  ps^ed  the  river 
Alba,  he  turned  aside  from  the  fugitives,  who  weie  then  lodired  upoo 
MouT»t  Citprianus,  and  arrived  at  Heracica,     Upon  this,  a  report  be- 
ing spread  of  the  cowardice  of  the  general,  as  if  he  durst  not  attack 
theiD,  very  many  slaves  were  encouraged  to  join  in  the  defection* 
Many  therefore  flocking  in,  (furnishing  themselves  as  well  as  they 
could  for  a  battle),  there  were  above  ei^ht  hundred  in  seven  days 
time  that  took  up  arms;  and  presently  aftL-r  they  amounted  to  two 
thousand*     But  the  general  at  Heraclea»  being  informed  that  their 
number  was  iacrcasingj  sent  Marcus  Titinius  as  chief  commflnder 
against  them,  inforcing  him  witli  six  hundred  men  out  of  the  forts  at 
Bona.     This  Titinius  fought  the  rebels,  who  (having  the  advantage 
both  of  place  and  number)  routed  him,  and  killed  many  of  his  men, 
and  the  rest  threw  away  their  arms,  and  with  much  difficulty  saved 
themselves  by  flight.     By  this  means  the  runagades  on  a  stiddeo  got 
such  a  great  number  of  arms,  that  they  were  more  firmly  resolved  to 
persist  in  their  rebellion,  so  that  now  most  of  the  slaves  were  ii^ 
arms.    The  defection  e^ery  day  increasing,  the  number  amounted  itm, 
a  sliort  time  to  such  a  height  as  none  ever  suspected  it  could,  inso- 
much that  within  a  few  days  they  were  above  six  thousand;  who, 
having  now  called  a  council  of  war,  and  debated  on  matters  in  refer- 
ence to  the  management  of  affairs,  in  the  first  place  they  chose  a  king 
called  Salvius,  a  fortune-teller,  and  one  who  in  the  women's  sports 
and  shews,  with  his  pipes,  acted  the  part  of  a  fool  and  madman.    But 
having  now  gained  a  kingdom,  he  waved  living  in  cities,  as  being 
the  nurseries  of  sloth  and  effeminacy.     Afterwards,  he  divided  th6 
army  into  three  bodies,  over  each  of  which  he  appointed  a  captain, 
and  ordered  them  to  make  inroads  up  and  down  in  the  country,  and 
at  a  certain  time  and  place  all  to  join  again  in  one  body.     By  these 
depredations  they  were  so  stocked  with  horses  and  other  oattloj  tlia| 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  *      Sfi3 

in  a  short  time  they  had  above  two  thousand  horse^  and  no  less  than 
twenty  thousand  foot,  but  men  very  raw  and  ignorant  in  martial  af- 
fairs. Among  other  attempts^  th^y  fell  upon  Morgantium  witli  great 
fury,  (which  was  a  strong  and  well-fortified  cky}^  and  made  many 
fierce  and  continual  assaults  upon  it* 

The  Roman  general  marching  out  in  the  night,  as  if  be  Would  re-* 
lievc  the  city,  (having  with  him  about  ten  thousand  men  out  of  Italjr 
and  Sicily),  surprised  the  rebels  (busily  employed  in  tlie  siege)  on  a 
sudden;  and,  breaking  into  their  camp,  found  a  very  slender  guards 
but  a  great  number  of  prisoners,  and  abundance  of  plunder  of  all 
sorts,  and  with  great  ease  made  himself  master  of  all;  and,  when  he 
had  rifled  the  camp,  he  marched  away  towards  Morgantium  i  but  the 
rebels  turning  back  upon  him  with  great  fury,  and  having  the  advaa*^ 
tage  of  the  higher  ground,  soon  routed  bim»  and  put  all  his  army  to 
flight.    Whereupon  the  rebel  king  commaoded  proclamation  to  be 

made ^Tliat  none  should  be  killed  who.  threw  away  their  arms:  up«« 

on  which  most  cast  them  away,  and.iled.    By  this  means  Salvius 

both  recovered  what  he  had  lost  ia  bis  campi  add  gained  a  glorious 

victory,  and  much  spoil;  but  there  werd  not  killed  of  theltaltaos  iad 

Sicilians  above  six  hundred,  (which  was  oeim^ioiied  by  the  moderallkiq 

of  the  king),  but  four  thousand  were  token  prisoners^:  Upoathis 

victory,  many  coming  in  flocking  to  Salvius,  his  army  bectoie  double 

to  what  it  was  before,  and  he  was  now  absolute-  Hiaaler  of  the  £^ld^ 

so  that  he  again  sat  down  before  Morgantium^ and  proclaimed  liberty 

to  all  the  servants  that  were  there.   But  their  masters  promising  the 

same  to  them,  if  they  would  be  faithful,  and  join  with'themia  "tbe 

defence  of  tlie  place,  they  chose  rather  to  accept  o(  what  was  ofTelred 

by  their  masters,  and  fought  with  that  resolution,  that  they  forced  the 

enemy  to  raise  their  siege.    But  the  general  afterwards,  makio^ifoid 

all  that  was  promised  (as  to  manumitting  of  the  servants)  ocoariooed 

many  to  run  away  to  the  rebels.    After  this,  all  the  slaves  aiid  ster-* 

vants  in  the  territories  of  iEgesta  and  Lilybseum  werelikewisrinfeeted 

with  tl)is  desire  of  rebellion,  whose  leader  was  one  AthenidDj  a  valiant 

man,  and  a  Cilician.   This  man,  having  .the  charge  and  miuiagement 

of  the  concerns  of  two  rich  brothers,  and  being  an  excellent  astro* 

loger,  first  wrought  upon  those  to  join  with  him  over  whom  he 

had  some  sort  of  command,  to  the  number  of  two  hundred  :*  after* 

wards  tliose  that  were  bordering  round  about^  so  that  in  five  days 

time  there  were  got  together  above  one  thousand,  wlio  made  him 

king,  and  placed  the  diadem  upon  iiis  head.    This  man  resolved  to 

order  niattors  and  aftairs  so  as  never  any  did  before  him:  for  he  Tt^ 

ceived  not  all  promiscuously  that  came  in  to  him,  but  only  such  as 

were  of  stroo^  and  healthful  bodies,  to  bear  arms;  the  rest  he  forced 

Vol.  2.  No,  47«  bbbb 


TIIE  FRAGMENTS  OT 


■  ODtinae  id  the  stations  xhey  were  in,  and  every  one  in  his  pU«4F 

eotly  to  apply  himself  to  the  duty  incumbent  u|>on  hlmi  by 

ch  means  those  that  were  with  him  Iiad  plenty  of  promtonj.— . 

f         pretended,  that  by  the  stars  the  gods  foretold — That  he  should 

gaiQ  the  whole  kingdom  of  Sicilyj  and  therefore  he  was  to  rcfraia 

from  spoiling  the  country,  or  destroying  the  cattle  and  fruits  of  the 

earth,  ns  being  all  his  own.     At  length,  having  now  got  together  sbovt 

ten  thousand  men,  he  was  so  daring  aa  to  besiege  Lilyb^eum,  a  city 

Oom  its  strength  looked  upon  to  be  impregnable*     But  finding  it  i 

Tain  thing  to  proceed,  he  desisted  from  his  design,  pretending  he 

iid  it  by  commiind  from  the  gods,  by  whom  he  was  told^^Thit  if 

they  continued  the  siege,  they  would  certainly  fall  into  some  sud* 

den  misfortune. 

Accordingly,  \vhile  he  was  preparing  to  draw  off  from  the  cityj  i 
fleet  of  Moors  entered  the  harbour,  who  had  been  Bcni  to  the  assm- 
mnce  of  them  of  Li)yb»um,  under  tho  command  of  one  Gomon,  who 
in  the  night  surprising  Athenion's  army,  now  leaving  the  sirge  and 
marching  ofi^,  killed  a  great  number  of  them  and  wounded  as  many^ 
and  so  got  into  the  town.  This  was  the  occasion  that  his  former 
prediction  was  highly  admired  and  cried  up  by  the  rebels. 

At  the  same  lime  great  disorders,  and  all  sorts  of  calamities,  over- 
spread Sicily.  For  not  only  servants,  hut  freemen  that  were  reduced 
to  poverty,  committed  all  sorts  of  rapine  ai\i  acts  of  wickedness: 
fer  they  ihamefully  killed  all  before  them^  whether  bond  or  finee, 
that  none  might  be  left  to  tell  tales;  lo  that  those  who  were  in  the 
eities  scarcely  enjoyed  any  thing  that  was  their  own,  though  it  were 
with  them  within  the  walb :  But  as  for  that  wliicb  was  withool,  all 
was  swallowed  up  and  violently  seized  upon,  as  prey  taken  from  s 
eommon  enemy.  Many  other  things  against  the  laws  of  hQaiaoity 
were  impudently  committed  by  many  persons  throughout  the  whole 
of  Sicily. 

Salvius  likewise,  who  had  besieged  Morgantium,  after  he  had 
harassed  all  the  country,  as  far  as  the  territories  of  Leontium,  there 
mustered  his  army,  consisting  of  above  thirty  thousand  fighting  men. 
Then  sacrificing  to  the  heroes  of  Italy,  he  dedicated  one  of  his  royai 
robes,  in  gratitude  for  his  victories.  And  now  he  caused  himself  to 
he  proclain^ed  king,  and  was  called  by  the  rebels  Tryphoo*:  having 
a  design  to  possess  himself  of  Tricala,  and  there  to  build  a  palace, 
he  sent  to  Atheuion,  and  as  king  commanded  him  as  general  to  repur 
to  him.  Every  man  then  thought  that  Athenioo  would  endeavour  to 
gain  the  sovereignty  fur  himself,  and  by  that  means  the  rebels  woald 

*  Or  Tropboo,  rather  an  antient  soothMjer,  who  lived  in  a  cava,  intd  which  who* 
•oavar  deacendcdi  he  aaver  laughed  afterwards,      r* 


DtODOftUS  8ICULUS.  |5J^ 


be  divided,  and  so  a  speedy  period  would  be  put  to  the  wur.  But 
fortune  so  ordered  tbe  matter,  that  the  armies  of  the  fugitives  being 
thus  increased,  the  two  generals  were  unanimous,  and  agreed  very 
well  together*  For  Trypbon  marched  speedily  with  his  army  to  Tri-* 
eala,  and  Athenion  came  thither  to  him  with  three  thousand  men,  in 
every  thing  obsenring  the  commands  of  Trypbon  as  king.  Athenion 
bad  sent  the  rest  abroad  to  harass  and  spoi)  the  country,  and  to  bring 
over  as  many  as  they  could  to  join  with  them  in  the  defection.  But 
not  long  after,  Tryplion  suspected  that  Athenion  had  a  design  to  sup^ 
plant  him,  and  therefore  he  caused  him  to  be  seised  In  time.  TJie 
castle,  which  was  well  fortified  before,  he  made  stUi  more  strong,  an4 
adorned  it  likewise  with  many  stately  buildings.  After  which,  they 
say,  it  was  called  Tricala,  because  it  was  remarkable  and  famous  for 
three  things.^First,  for  springs  of  excellent  sweet  water;  secondly, 
for  vineyards,  and  olive  plantations,  and  rich  lands  for  tillage;  an4 
thirdly,  that  it  was  a  place  impregnable,  built  upon  a  high  and  inac- 
cessible rock.  After  he  had  drawn  a  line  of  eight  stages  round  about 
it,  for  the  building  of  a  city,  and  bad  encompassed  it  with  a  deep 
trench,  he  made  it  the  seat- royal,  being  a  place  abounding  in  plenty 
and  fatness  of  all  things  neceiBsary  for  the  life  of  man.  He  likewise 
built  there  a  stately  palace  and  a  market-place,  capable  of  jreeeiving 
a  vast  number  of  men.  He  chose  likewise  a  competent  number  of 
the  most  prudent  men  to  be  of  his  council,  and  made  use  of  them 
for  the  administration  of  justice.  Moreover,  whenever  he  sat  in  the 
courts  of  justice  himself,  he  put  on  a  long  gown*  edged  with  purple, 
and  a  coatf  studded  with  large  spots  of  purple.  Lastly,  he  appointed 
lictors  with  rods  and  axes  to  go  before  him,  and  took  great  care  thi^t 
all  other  ensigns  and  badges  of  royalty  should  be  observed. 

At  length,  Lucius  Licinius  Lucullus  was  chosen  general  by  tbe 
senate  of  Rome,  to  go  against  the  rebels,  who  had  with  him  fourteen 
thousand  Romans  and  Italians,  eighteen  thousand  Bitbynians,  Thes- 
salians  and  Acarnanians;  and  six  hundred  out  of  Ldicania,  under  ihi^ 
command  of  Cleptius,  an  expert  and  valiant  soldier;  and  also  six  < 
hundred  from  other  places;  in  the  whole  amounting  to  seventeefi 
thousand.  With  this  army  he  entered  Sicily:  whereupon  Trypbon 
released  Athenion,  and  advised  with  him  how  to  manage  the  war  a- 
gainst  the  Romans.  Tryphon  was  of  opinion,  that  it  was  the  safest 
way  to  continue  at  Tricala,  and  there  expect  the  enemy:  but  Athe- 
nion advised  rather  to  draw  out  and  fight  in  the  field,  than  to  sufiei 
themselves  to  be  besieged;  whose  counsel  prevailing,  tliey  marched 

*  The  Romftn  toga  prsBtextt,  which  was  white. 

1  Tlyc  coat  was  tlie  Roman  tonic,  cDbroklcrcd  with  larga  ttti4t  ofgeM  9r  |mr|Ui, 

called  naili^  Kt^i  the  whols  gataicot  was  callad  Tunica  laticlam. 


556  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 

out  and  encamped  near  Scirthsea,  with  no  fewer  than  forty  thousand 
men,  twelve  furlongs  distant  from  the  Roman  camp.  At  first  the 
armies  employed  themselves  every  "(lay  in  light  skirmishes;  but  at 
length  they  engaged,  and  while  victory  seemed  to  incline  sometimes 
on  one  side,  and  sometimes  on  the  other,  and  many  fell  on  both 
sides,  Athenion  came  on  with  two  hundred  choice  horse,  and  covered 
the  ground  round  about  him  with  the  bodies  of  his  enemies.  But 
being  wounded  in  both  knees,  and  then  receiving  a  thirds  he  was 
totally  unable  to  fight,  which  so  discouraged  the  rebels,  that  they 
fled  outright.  Athenion  lay  concealed,  as  if  he  were  dead,  and  so 
feigned  himself  till  night  came  on,  and  then  stole  away.  The  Ro- 
mans having  now  gained  a  glorious  victory,  forced  Tryphdn  himself 
to  take  to  his  heels,  and  in  the  pursuit  killed  at  least  ti^'enty  tlion* 
sand  men.  The  rest,  by  the  advantage  of  the  night,  got  to  Tricala, 
though  the  general  might  easily  have  cut  them  all  o£F,  if  be  would 
have  continued  the  pursuit.  Upon  this  rout  they  were  so  much  dis- 
couraged, that  it  was  proposed  amongst  them  that  they  should  re- 
turn to  their  masters,  and  submit  themselves  wholly  to  their  power 
and  pleasure:  but  those  who  advised  to  stand  it  out  to  the  last,  and 
not  to  give  up  their  lives  to  the  lusts  of  their  enemies,  prevailed  over 
the  other. 

Nine  days  after,  the  Roman  general  besieged  Tricala;  hut  aflter 
several  slaughters  on  both  sides,  he  was  obliged  to  draw  off  and 
leave  the  place.  Upon  this  the  rebels  recovered  their  spirits,  and  the 
general  on  the  other  hand,  either  through  sloth  and  negligence,  or 
corrupted  by  bribes,  neglected  entirely  the  proper  discbarge  of  his 
duty,  for  which  afterwards  he  gave  an  account  to  the  Romans.  Nei- 
ther did  Caius  Servilius,  who  succeeded  LucuHus,  do^  any  thing 
worth  remembering;  and  therefore  he  was  brought  to  judgment,  at 
l/ucullus  was  before,  and  banished.  In  the  mean  time  Tryphon 
died,  and  Athenion  enjoyed  the  kingdom.  And  what  with  taking  of 
cities,  and  wasting  and  spoiling  the  country,  without  controul  or  any 
opposition  from  Servilius,  he  got  together  a  great  deal  of  rich  booty 
and  plunder.  But  the  year  after,  Caius  Marius  being  chosen  at 
Rome  the  fifth  time  consul,  and  with  him  Caius  Aquiliua*,  Aqui- 
lius  was  made  general  against  the  rebels;  and  his  valour  so  far  ad- 
vanced his  success,  that  he  wholly  overthrew  them  in  a  great  battle; 
and,  like  a  hcroe,  fought  hand  to  hand  with  Athenion  the  king  of  the 
rebels,  and  killed  him,  but  was  himself  wounded  on  the  head.  Arid 
now  he  resolved  to  prosecute  the  war  against  the  remainder  of  them, 
who  were  about  ten  thousand;  and  though  they  fled  to  their  defence^ 
QOt  being  able  to  stand  against  him,  yet  Aquilius  alackeoc^  iMbn 

*  Marcui  Aquilius, 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  557 


resolution  in  the  least,  but  pursued  his  design  till  he  had  wholly 
broken  them  There  remained  now  only  a  thousand,  led  by  Satyrut^ 
whom  at  first  he  determined  ^to  reduce  by  force;  but  when  they 
made  their  submission  by  their  commissioners,  for  the  present  he 
remitted  their  faults;  but  when  they  were  brought  prisoners  to 
Rome,  he  ordered  them  to  fight  with  wild  beasts,  where  it  is  report- 
ed they  ended  their  lives  with  great  gallantry  and  nobleness  of  mind; 
for  they  scorned  to  fight  with  beasts,  but  thrust  one  another  through 
at  the  public  altars :  and  after  they  were  all  dead,  Satyrus  being  the 
last,  with  a  heroic  spirit  killed  himself*  And  this  was  the  tragical 
end  of  the  servants'  war,  after  it  h^d  qoptinued  for  the  space  of  al- 
most four  years. 


FROM  THE  SAME. 


ONE  Battaces,  a  priest  of  the  goddess  Rhea,  they  say,  came  to  Rome 
from  Pessinus,  a  city  of  Phrygia;  who  declared  he  came  thither  by 
command  of  the  goddess.  He  told  the  magistrates  and  senate,  tliat 
their  temple  was  prophaned,  and  that  a  public  expiation  ought  to  be 
made  in  the  name  of  the  Romans,  His  habit  and  other  orhaments 
of  his  body  were  very  strange,  and  altogether  unusual  at  Rome;  for 
he  bore  a  crown  or  mitre  of  a  vast  bigness,  and  a  flowered  gown 
embroidered  with  gold,  representing  the  state  and  dignity  of  a  king. 
After  he  had  spoken  to  the  people  from  the  bench,  and  instructed 
them  in  matters  of  religion,  he  was  honoured  with  public  entertain- 
ments, and  large  gifts  and  presents:  but  he  was  forbid  to  wear  a 
crown  by  Aulus  Pompeius,  a  tribune  of  the  people.  However,  be- 
ing brought  by  another  tribune  to  the  desk,  and  being  asked  how  the 
expiatory  sacrifices  shoold  be  made,  his  answers  were  stufled  with 
nothing  but  superstitious  rites  and  ceremonies.  At  length  things 
were  so  managed  that  he  was  driven  out  by  Pompeius's  faction,  with 
many  scorns  and  scoffs:  upon  which  he  went  to  his  inn,  and  never- 
after  appeared  abroad :  but  only  told  them  that  he  was  disgraced,  and 
that  the  goddess  was  reproached  and  dishonoured.  Presently  after 
Pompeius  fell  into  a  high  fever,  and  then  had  a  quinsey*,  whicfii  took 
away  his  speecii,  and  he  died  the  third  day.  Upon  which  it  was  the 
general  discourse  and  opinion  among  the  common  people,  that  he 
wa3  thus  punished  by  a  divine  hand,  for  his  profane  and  impious 
^  C^uaiiciiino  morbo;  oFj  a  dog'i  diseaie. 


TH£  FRAGMENTS  OF 


e  of  pddess  and  her  priest.     For  the  Romans  are  addkted 

I        iiiLivii  more  than  any  other  natiQn,     Aitd  tbcreforc  BatUccp 

Id        ^ooured  with  many  presents,  and  liberty  granted  to  him  to 

r  HIS  sacred  vestmeDtg,  with  all  their  ornaments^  the  day  he  it^ 

signed  for  his  departure^  he  was  coaducted  by  mulutudc5j  both  mta 

and  womeiij  i  ut  of  the  city. 


FROM  THE  SAME. 


was  a  CDstom  among  the  Roman  soldiers .^That  if  any  commm* 
der  of  an  army  fought  a  Uittle  and  killed  above  six  thousand  of  tbe 
enemy,  he  was  termed  emperor,  which  is  the  same  with  kjDgamooj 
the  Grecians. 


BOOK  XXXVIL 


THE  Marsian  war  took  its  name  from  the  authors  of  the  defeetioBi 
though  the  Italians  generally  made  this  war  upon  the  BooiaBt.  It 
is  said,  the  first  occasion  of  this  arose  from  the  proftiaeoess  and  lax- 
Dry  the  Romans  were  fallen  into,  who  were  formerly  frugal  aud  spar- 
ing in  their  way  of  living.  This  alteration  caused  great  heart-ban- 
ings  between  the  commonalty  and  the  senate:  for  when  the  senate 
prevailed  with  the  Italians  to  supply  the  city  with  provisioosy  aad 
upon  their  frequent  addresses  had  promised  to  eofranchiae  tbeai,  and 
make  them  free  citizens  of  Rome,  and  to  ratify  it  by  a  law,  and  the 
Italians  saw  nothing  performed  tliat  was  promised,  these  were 
the  sparks  which  at  length  broke  forth  into  a  flame  at  the  time  when 
Lucius  Marcius  Philippus,  and  Sextus  Julius*,  were  coosiak,  ia  the 
hundred  and  seventeenth  olympiad. 

Many  were  the  slaughters,  sieges,  and  sacking  of  towns  on  both 
sides,  during  this  war,  victory  hovering  sometimes  here  and  some- 
times there,  as  uncertain  where  to  fall,  giving  no  assurance  to  eitha 
party  which  of  them  she  favoured.  But  at  length,  after  the  shed- 
ding of  much  blood,  the  Romans  with  much  ado  got  the  better,  and 

•  Julius  Cbmt,  Gr.  ITOtli  OJymp.    Otiiers  tay  17td, 


DTODORUft  SICULUS.  Afg 


regained  their  former  power  and  sovereignty.    There  were  engaged 
against  them  in  this  war  the  Samnites^  Asculans,  Lucanians,  Pice- 
nians,  them  of  Nola*,  and  other  cities  and  nations:  amongst  which 
was  Corfiniumfy   a  large  and  famous  city,  greatly  frequented,  ia 
which  the  Italians  had  a  little  before  planted  a  colony.    Here  wcfe 
all  things  necessary  for  the  support  and  defence  of  so  great  a  eity, 
and  the  maintenance  of  the  government;  particularly  a  large  market- 
place and  court-house,  with  a  vast  treasure,  and  a  plentiful  stock  ef 
provisions  of  all  sorts.    They  bad  likewise  a  senate  consisting  of 
five  hundred  members;  out  of  which  were  chosen  those  reputed  fit 
to  execute  the  highest  places  in  the  magistracy,  and  to  manage  the 
weighty  affairs  of  the  commonwealth.      These  therefore  they  in- 
trusted with  the  management  of  the  war,  and  put  tbe  absolute  power 
of  disposing  of  all  their  concerns  into  the  hands  of  the  senators,  wlio 
made  a  law  that  two  consuls  should  be  chosen  every  year,  and  twelte 
generals.     At  which  time  Quintus  Pompoedius  Silo,  a  Marsiao,  (a 
person  of  the  highest  quality  in  his  country),  and  Caius  Apootua 
Motulus,  famous  for  his  noble  acts  above  the  rest  of  his  own  natioiiy 
were  chosen  consuls.    They  divided  all  Italy  into  two  parts,  and 
took  eacii  an  equal  share  for  the  executing  of  their  consular  autho- 
rity.   They  allotted  the  region  or  tract  from  the  Cercoli  (so  called) 
to  the  Adriatic  sea,  which  lies  to  the  north  and  west,  to  Pompcs^ut 
and  six  of  the  generals.    The  rest,  which  lay  to  the  south  and  cast, 
the  Italians  assigned  to  Motulus,  with  as  many  more  of  the  military 
officers.     Having  put  all  things  into  this  good  order,  and,  to  auM 
up  all,  having  ordered  all  things  according  to  the  antient  model  «f 
the  Roman  government,  they  set  themselves  more  intently  and  ear- 
nestly to  the  prosecuting  of  the  war,  and  called  the  city  itself  Italy. 
And  they  were  so  successful,  that  they  for  tbe  most  part  came  of 
conquerors,  till  Cneius  Pompeius  was  made  consul  and  getiaral^ 
who  with  Sylla,  deputed  by  Cato  the  other  consul,  often  routed 
them,  and  reduced  them  to  those  straits,  that  at  length  their  pow^ 
was  broken  in  pieces.     However,  they  still  continued  the  war,  bat « 
were  often  worsted  by  Caius  Cossius  general  in  Japygia^.    Being 
therefore  distressed  and  harassed  with  so  many  and  great  mischiefs, 
one  upon  the  back  of  another,  and  the  Marsians  and  other  nations 
falling  to  the  Romans,  they  forsook  their  new  city,  and  transplanted 
themselves  to  iEsernia,  a  city  of  the  Samnites,  under  the  condud^ 
of  five  generals;  of  whom  they  made  Quintus  Pompoedius  the  chiefs 

*  This  town  is  still  in  beiag*  situated  about  fourteea  miles  from  Naples, 
t  Corfmium,  in  Itaij;  a  city  of  the  Peligni,  it  is  now  called  P^enza^  and  is  under  the 

Duke  of  Florence. 
t  An  iitbrous  in  Italy,  called  Calabria, 


THE  FRAGMENTS  OT* 
»      -rrr— 


(or  his  valour  and  prudent  management  of  tUe  war;  who  wtth  flic 
consent  of  M  the  other  captaiuSj  raised  a  great  army>  which  with 
the  old  soldiers  amounted  to  the  numher  of  thirty  thousand.    And 
besides^  he  got  together  at  least  twenty  lliousand  foot,  and  one  ibou- 
sand  horse^  of  manumitted  slaves,  and  armed  them  as  well  as  tbe 
time  would  iiUow,     And  coming  to  an  engagement  with  the  Riimaus, 
whose  general  was  Mamcreus,  he  killed  a  few  of  them^  but  loec  u{^ 
wards  of  six  thou^iand  of  his  own  men* 

About  the  stmie  time  Motellus  took  the  famous  city  of  Vcausit 
ID  Apulia,  wfiich  had  in  it  a  great  number  of  &oldiera^  and  earritd 
>way  above  three  thousand  prisoners.  And  now  the  Koman«  ptt^ 
Tailed  every  day  more  and  more  against  tfieir  enemies:  so  tlmt  ik 
Italians  sent  ambassadors  to  Mithridates  king  of  Pontu^,  who  \id 
then  an  excellent  and  well  appointed  army,  to  entreat  him  to  mattfc 
into  Italy,  with  his  army,  to  oppose  the  Romans;  by  which  mcii% 
they  told  him,  that  their  power  would  be  easily  broken.  Mithridb* 
tes  answered,  that  he  would  march  into  Italy  as  soon  as  he  liad  sub* 
dued  Asia^  in  order  to  which  lie  was  then  engaged.  The  rebels  be- 
ing tticrefore  now  frustrated  iti  their  hopes  of  assistance^  and  of  sup- 
plies of  money^  were  greatly  disheartened:  for  there  were  but  a  few 
of  the  Samnites  remaining;  and  the  Sabelli  kept  themselves  clou 
within  Nolo,  as  did  also  Lamponius  and  Cleptius^  who  commanded 
what  were  left  of  the  Lucanians. 

The  Marsian  war  being  now  almost  at  an  end,  there  arose  again 
a  great  seditiom  in  Rome,  by  reason  of  tiie  coDtentious  arobitioQ  of 
many  of  the  Roman  nobility,  every  one  striving  which  shotild  be  ge- 
neral in  the  expedition  against  M itbridates,  impelled  thereto  by  tbe 
greatness  of  the  rewards  and  riches  to  be  reaped  in  that  war.     For 
Caius  Julius,  and  Gaius  Marius,  who  had  been  six  times  consul,  op- 
posed each  other;  and  the  people  on  that  occasion  were  divided, 
some  for  the  one  and  some  for  the  other.    There  were  likewise  other 
disturbances  about  the  same  time :  for  Sylla  the  consul  went  from 
Rome  to  the  forces  which  lay  near  to  Noia,  and  so  terriBed  many  of 
the  neighbouring  territories  and  cities,  that  he  forced  them  to  the 
obedience  of  the  Romans.    But  when  Sylla  was  engaged  in  the  war 
in  Asia  against  Mithridates,  and  Rome  was  filled  with  slaughters  and 
intestine  broils,  Marcus  Lamponius  and  Tiberius  Cleptiiiis^  generals 
of  those  Italians  who  were  left  remaining  in  Brutia,  not  being  able 
to  take  the  strong  city  of  iEsias,  after  a  long  time  they  had  lain  be- 
fore it,  left  part  of  their  army  to  maintain  the  siege,  and  fiercely  as« 
saultcd  llhegium,  in  the  expectation,  that  if  they  gained  this  place, 
they  might  with  ease  transport  their  army  into  Sicily,  and  so  become 
masters  of  the  richest  island  under  the  suu«    But  Caius  Urbanus, 


DfoDdRUs  srcuLtjfi.  5(>t 


the  eovernor  of  RHesfium^  eo  terrified  the  Italians  with  the  greatness 
of  hh  affnvt  and  hii»  vnst  preparatjons,  that  tlicy  drew  o\Y  from 
the  siege;  and  so  the  Rbegtans  were  delivered.  And  afterwards^ 
when  the  civil  wars  broke  forth  between  Darius  and  Syila,  part  of 
them  sided  with  Marius^  and  the  rest  with  Sylla)  and  itiost  of  them 
were  killed  in  the  war;  and  all  those  who  survived,  joined  the  con^ 
queror  Sylla.  And  thus  etxled  the  Marsian  war,  and  the  greatest 
home-bred  sedition  that  had  ever  before  occurred  among  the  Ro-» 
roans. 

2.  And  now  that  the  KUfslao  war  was  M  an  ehdj  a  second  great 
sedition  was  raised  in  Rome,  stirred  up  by  Sylla  and  Caius  Marius, 
a  young  man,  the  soa  of  Marina  who  had  been  seven  titties  constiU 
In  this  cotntnotion  many  thousands  of  ttien  perished:  at  length 
Sylla  prevailed ;  atid  being  created  Dictator,  he  called  himself  £«- 
paphroditus*;  which  vain-glorious  title  did  not  altogt^her  deceive 
him,  for  he  prospered  all  his  life  long^  and  died  a  natural  death  after 
all  his  victories.  But  Marias,  although  he  behaved  with  great 
gallantry  in  the  war  against  Sylhi,  being  at  let^h  routed)  fled  with 
fifteen  thousand  men  to  Pr<eneste,  where  he  was  besieged  a  long 
time:  at  length,  being  totally  deserted,  and  aeeibg  n0  way  of  ea*- 
cape,  he  earnestly  entreated  one  of  his  faithful  servants  to  afford 
him  his  helping  hand  to  extricate  him  from  the  piiesent  datlgers  and 
mischiefs  that  surrounded  him.  After  much  persuasion,  the  ser- 
vant at  one  stroke  put  an  end  to  his  master's  life,  and  then  irnme^ 
diaiely  killed  himself.  And  so  at  length  ended  this  civil  war..^ 
However,  sonle  relics  of  it  still  gave  Sylla  disturbance  for  some 
time,  till  those  who  joined  in  it^  with  some  others^  ilrere  suflpressed. 

But  aftrr  these  were  all  ruined  and  destroyed,  there  broke  out 
fiuch  a  flame  of  discord  between  Julius  Csesar  and  Pompey,  who  for 
the  great  and  eminent  services  he  had  done  the  Romans,  partly  by  the 
conduct  of  Sylla,  and  piartly  by  his  own  valour^  was  sirsamed  the 
Great,  that  the  Romans  were  again  itivolved  in  intestine  slaughters 
and  butcheries.  And  as  soon  as  Pompey  had  lost  all  his  army  in  a 
great  battle,  he  himself  was  afterwards  murdered  near  Alexandria. 
And  the  unbounded  power  of  the  consuls,  being  at  length  restrainect 
and  limited,  fell  wholly  into  the  hands  of  Ceesar  himself;  and  thus 
ended  the  sedition. 

But  after  Osar's  murder,  another  civil  war  broke  forth  Against 
Brutus  and  Cassius,  his  murderers,  which  was  managed  by  the  con- 
suls Lepidus  Aiitonius,  and  Octavius  Augustus.  When  this  war 
was  ended  l)y  dint  of  the  sword,'and  Cassius  and  Brutus  being  dead, 
not  long  after  the  secret  and  p:  ivate  grudges  and  quarrels  between 

*  Which  dignifies  beftutifuJ. 

Vol.  2.  No. 4/*  gccc 


t  THE   FRAGMENTS  OF 


Augustus  and  Aotony,  for  tlie  supreme  power,  broke  out  mto  open 
war:  and  nf^er  mucti  blood  spilt  on  both  side:3>  Augustus  gained  iht 
empire,  whicb  he.  beld  during  his  life,  having  now  WEived  his  con»u* 
lar  power  and  digaity*     "^ 


FROM  THE  SAME. 


CTNNA  and  Marius*,  ealUog  together  a  council  of  the  princtpRl 
officers,  consulted  what  ways  and  methods  were  best  to  be  laJtcu  fw 
the  better  settling  and  confirmlnf^  the  pcace^     At  length  tbey  re- 
solved to  put  to  death  the  greatest  persons  of  quality  that  were  ini* 
mical  to  them,  and  who  were  most  capable  of  making  a  disturbance 
nud  of  overturning  all  (heir  aflairs;  so  that  the  factious  party  beinj 
purged  out  from  among  them,  they  and  their  friends  might  goven 
fur  the  future  with  more  security,  according  to  their  own  will  anl 
pleasure.     Hereupon  all  regard  to  former  leagues  and  articles  w0 
ivhoUy  laid  aside;  persons  were  proscribed  and  butchered  in  every 
place,  without  behig  heard.     At  that  time  Quintus  Luctatius  Catulus 
who  hud  had  a  glorious  triumph  for  his  victory  over  the  Cimbrit 
and  had  more  than  an  ordinary  share  in  the  affections  of  the  pe<^le, 
was  accused  by  a  tribune  of  the  people  for  a  capital  offence,  who 
fearing  the  imminent  hazard  of  the  calumny,  made  his  application 
to  Marius,  to  entreat  him  to  interpose  for  his  deliverance,  (for  he  had 
been  his  friend  formerly,  but  through  some  suspicion  he  then  enter- 
tained of  him,  he  was  become  his  enemy) ;  but  he  answered  him-. 
Die  you  must.     Upon  this  Catulus,  perceiving  there  was  no  hopes 
of  Ins  preservation,  studied  how  to  die  without  disgrace;  to  whick 
end  he  destroyed  himself  by  a  strange  and  unusual  way:  for  he  shut 
himself  up  in  a  house  newly  plaistcred,  and  caused  a  fire  to  be  kindled, 
by  the  smoke  of  which,  and  the  moist  vapours  from  the  lime,  he  wu 
there  stifled  to  death. 

*  T)u9  was  long  before  In  time,  and  thereCore  comet  in  here  with  relation  to  toiB«  othu 
lu.iiter  bclorc  related,  but  now  loM}  for  this  sedition  wu  in  the  l7Sd  Oljzap. 

t  Danes 


DIODCttVS  8ICULU9.  tSS 


BOOK  XL. 

being  aboQt  to  write  of  the  war  against  the  Jewa,  we  esteem  it 
t  of  our  province^  before  we  proceed  further,  in  the  first  place 
J  to  relate  the  origin  ft  thb  nation,  and  their  laws.  In  antient 
I  there  happened  a  great  pbgue  in  Egypt,  and  many  ascribed 
ause  of  it  to  God,  who  was  offended  with  them.  For  there  be>v 
Dultitudes  of  strangers  of  scTeral  nations  who  inhabited  there, 
made  jose  of  their  foreign  rites  and  ceremonies  in  the  admiois- 
n  of  public  sacrifices,  the  antient  manner  of  worshipping  ihm 
,  practised  by  the  ancestors  of  the  Egyptians,  was  qnite  lost  and 
ftten.  Hence  it  was  that  the  natural  inhabitants  concluded, 
unless  all  the  strangers  were  driven  out,  they  should  ncTcr  be 
fimro  their  miseries.  Upon  which  they  were  all  espelled,  and 
DOSt  valiant  and  noble  among  them,  under  the  conduot  of  skil* 
CMnmanders,  as  some  relate,  after  many  great  hardships,  came 
Greece  and  other  places,  dt  whom,  amongst  other  leaders,  the 
Cunous  and  remarkable  were  Danaus  and  Cadinus«  The  great- 
art  of  the  people  went  into  the  country  now  called  Judea,  not 
om  Egypt,  and  at  that  time  altogether  desert  and  uninhabited, 
leader  of  this  colony  was  one  Moses,  a  very  wise  and  valiant 
.  who,  after  lie  had  possessed  himself  of  the  country,  amongst 
*  cities,  built  that  now  most  famous  city,  Jerusalem,  and  the 
pie  there,  which  is  so  greatly  reverenced  among  them.  He 
instituted  the  manner  of  God*s  worship,  and  the  holy  rites  and 
nonies;  and  made  laws  for  the  government  of  the  common* 
Ji,  and  reduced  them  into  methodical  order.  He  also  divided 
leople  into  twelve  tribes,  as  the  most  perfbct  number,  as  he 
eived;  because  of  answering  the  twelve  months,- which  make 
le  wliole  year.  But  he  made  no  representation  or  image  of  the 
»  because  he  judged  nothing  of  a  human  shape  was  applicable 
od:  but  that  the  heaven,  which  compasses  the  earth  around,  was 
•nly  God,  and  that  all  things  were  in  its  power.  But  he  so  or* 
I  the  rites  and  cereroouics  of  the  sacrifices,  and  the  manner  jmd 
of  their  conversations  as  tliat  they  should  be  wholly  diff*erent 
ail  other  nations :  for,  by  reason  of  the  expulsion  of  his  people, 
)mmanded  a  most  inhuman  and  unsociable  conversation.  He 
rd  out  likewise  the  greatest  persons  of  quality,  who  were  best 
to  rule  and  govern  the  people,  (then  embodied  into  one  nation)^ 
them  he  created  priests;  ^hose  duty  an4  ofiice  was  contint|ally 


c64  TBS  nAOUxam  ot 


to  attend  in  the  temple,  and  employ  themselves  in  the  public  ^ 
ship  and  service  of  God.  He  likewise  constituted  them  judges,  for 
the  decision  of  the  most  weighty  causes,  and  committed  to  their  care 
the  keeping  and  preservation  of  the  laws.  Therefore  they  say  that 
the  Jews  never  bad  any  king;  but  that  the  care  and  authority  of  go- 
verning the  people  was  always  submitted  io  him,  who  excelled  the 
rest  of  the  priests  in  prudence  and  virtue,  whom  they  cal)  the  chief 
priest)  and  him  they  i^ways  supposed  to  be  the  mtmongtr  and  ifr* 
terpreter  of  the  mind  and  commands  of  God  to  them.  And  tbey 
aay  that  he,  in  all  their  public  assemblies  and  other  meetings,  de* 
Clares  what  he  has  in  command;  and  for  that  reason  the  Jewn  are  m 
observant,  that  forthwith  they  prostrate  themselves  upon  the  groinrf, 
and  adore  him  as  the  high  priest,  and  interpreter  to  them  cif  the  o? 
racles  of  god.  But  io  the  conclusion  of  the  laws  this  is  mb|duied.ip» 
^*  Moses,  the  Messenger*  of  God,  tbus  ssith  to  tkf  Jews/*  This 
lawgiver  likewise  laid  down  many  ei(cellent  rulesi  md  inetraetions 
for  martial  affairs,  and  inured  the  youth  to  hardsblpi  and  dilHeuWei^ 
and  to  exercise  patience  in  all  miseries  and  distresses.  Moreofcr, 
he  undertook  many  wars  against  the  peighbpuring  nations,  and  gain* 
led  many  large  territories  by  force  of  arms,  and  gave  them  as  an  in* 
heritance  to  his  countrymen,  in  such  n^nnertis  that  every  one  s|iaKd 
alike,  saving  the  priests,  who  had  a  larger  portion  than  the  rea^  thsl 
having  nM>re,  they  might  continually  attend  upon  the  public  wofaiilp 
of  God  without  interruption.  Neither  was  it  lawful  for  any  m/ut  fn 
sell  his  inheritance  allotted  to  him,  lest,  by  the  covetonaneM  crfthoia 
that  buy,  others  should  become  poor,  and  so  the  natioii  beoooie  de* 
populated.  He  ordered  likewise  the  inhabitants  to  be  careful  in  the 
education  of  their  children,  who  are  brought  up  widi  very  little  cost 
or  charge;  and  by  that  means  the  Jewish  nation  was  alwnja  popt^^ 
lous. 

As  to  their  marriages  and  funerals,  he  apppinted  them  biwa  flineh 
different  from  all  other  people.  But  under  th^  empires  wbieb  ham 
risen  up  in  these  later  ages,  especially  in  the  fourth  monarchy  of  tka 
Persians,  and  in  the  time  of  the  Macedonian  eqipire,  which 
turned  the  former,  through  a  mixture  with  foreign  naliona, 
the  anti^nt  laws  among  the  Jews  have  been  changed  9q4  I 
pbsolete, 

*  Co  wlw  heaal  dwte  thiagt  Ihwi  CM. 


THE  FRAGMENTS 


o» 


DIODORUS  SICULUS, 


AS 


PUBLISHED  BY  HENRY  VALESIVS. 


rm»  ■■  -..li 


667 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


FRAGMENTS. 


TO  THE  HEADER. 

THESE  fragments  of  Diodorus  SicUlus,  were  first  collected  by  Coo^ 
stantine  the  seventh,  one  of  the  eastern  Emperors,  the  sod  of  Lea 
the  sixth.     He  began  to  reign  about  the  year  of  our  Ix>rd  911..^ 
He  got  together  from  all  parts,  books  of  all  sorts  of  learning,  in  or- 
der to  make  up  a  complete  library.    Out  of  the  several  authors,  be 
collected  such  observations  as  were  most  remarkable,  and  marshalled 
such  of  them  as  concerned  one  and  the  same  subject,  under  their 
several  distinct  heads.    The  heads  or  common  places  of  his  histori- 
cal collections  were  fifty-three  in  number;  and  made  up  a  hundred 
and  six  volumes.     For  he  divided  each  head  into  two  books;  in  the 
first  of  which  was  contained  what  was  said  of  that  particular  subject 
by  the  most  antient  authors,  or  such  as  wrote  universal  histories  from 
the  beginning  of  time.    In  the  second  are  collections  out  of  those 
authors  who  wrote  of  the  acts  and  a£birs  past,  in  the  time  of  the 
Ceesars.    That  common  place  wherein  are  these  fragments  of  Dio- 
dorus, is  one  of  the  fifty-three,  intituled  thuS— Of  Virtues  and  Vices. 
It  was  brought  out  of  Cyprus  to  Paris  by  Nicholas  Fabricius,  not 
long  before  the  fragments  were  pubtushed  by  Valesiu^^  as  appears  in 
his  epistle  to  Fabricius,  as  well  as  in  that  to  the  reader.    The  rest; 
of  the  fifty-three  heads  of  this  emperor  are  lost,  save  only  one,  inti- 
tuled thus Of  Embassies,  which  is  divided  into  two  volumes.    The 

first,  published  by  Fulvius  Ursinus,  where  collections  are  again 
made  out  of  Diodorus;  and  the  other  by  David  Hceschelius.  This 
account  of  the  preservation  of  these  fragments,  and  how  they  camt 
to  light,  I  conceived  was  needful  to  satisfy  the  reader,  to  the  end  he 
jnay  be  assured  that  he  is  not  imposed  upon  by  any  thing  fietitioui 
or  spurious. 


666  Tllt&  rRAGMEKTS  Of 


*BOOKVI. 

1.  CASTOR  and  Pollux^  who  were  also  called  Dioscuri^  are  tald  til 
be  eminent  above  oHierit  Ibr  valour,  andremaitable  in  their  aadtt* 
ance  in  the  expedition  with  the  Argonauts;  andafibrded  consider* 
able  help  to  them  that  were  hut  otherwise  very  weaki  and  to  say  ill 
in  a  word)  they  gained  in  all  places  exceeding  great  honour  and  re- 
potation  for  their  valour,  justice,  {Mety,  and  martial  skill  and  disci* 
pline,  and  were  always  ready  in  every  hazardous  exploit  with  sueh  aa 
weife  most  forward;'  and  therefore,  for  the  eminence  of  their  vahtti) 
Ihejr  were  reputed  tlie  aons  of  JuptM*;  and  after  their  daatba^  mtm 
honoured  with  divine  hoaours. 

2.  Epopeus,  king  of  Sicyon,  cliallenging  the  godato  m  cnmhat^  It 
that  end  destroyed  their  temples  and  altars. 

Su  Sisyphus  is  said  to  excel  all  others  in  craft  and  cunniogy  and 
by  looking  into  the  entrails  of  beasts^  declared  future  events. 

4.  SalmoneuB^  king  of  Elis,  was  proud  and  proihney 
the  gods,  and  preferrod  hn  own,  above  the  acta  of  Jupiter  J 
and  therefore,  out  of  an  engine*  which  sent  forth  a  niiighty  $imwi§ 
he  used  to  thunder,  and  never  offered  any  sacrifices,  or  dhaerved  aii| 
solemn  festivals  to  the  gods. 

5.  Tyro,  they  say,  was  Salmoneus's  daughter,  who  was  ao  calk4 
from  her  beauty  and  comeliness  of  persoOi 

6.'Adnietu8)  for  bis  justice  and  piety,  was  ao- approved  ondba* 
loved  of  the  gods^  that  when  Apollo  frli  into  tiie  dlspirnauie  €lJm 
piter,  he  was  ordered  to  be  a  servant  to  Admelus.  They -aij  lihamn^ 
that  Alceste  the  daughter  of  Pelias>  who  was  the  only  daugliter  tM 
was  innocent  as  to  the  murder  of  her  father,  was  married  to  Admetoi . 
on  account  o(  her  piety.  ^ 

7*  MelampQs  was  beloved  by  ApoHo^  for  his  eminent  virtues  end 
piety. 

&  When  Troy  was  taken  and  entered^  jfiaeaa,  with  4 
of  the  dtizeosyposseased  himself  of  part  of  tbed^joid  < 
bravely  and  valiantly  agaii^st  the  assaults  of  tlie  enemj»    When  the 
Greeks^  upon  the  terms  made,  agreed  that  each  of  them  ahonld  i 
Ty  away  as  much  of  their  goods  as  they  could,  all  of  them  lot . 
took  away  gold  and  sthrer,  and  whatever  else  was  esteemed  pteckm 


*  A  brMen  brMgc>  orer  wbicli  be  dranre  a  cbfttkt^  tO'faritala-  i 

Vii^.  .£oeid.  lib«  §,  ,  /. .;  >' .  ^or  1  • 


.^^AhSkifw.. 


iand  valuable  $  bUC'be  carried  away  only  his  old  father  upon  his  shoul- 
tlers.  The  Grecians  so  much  admired  this^  that  they  permitted  him 
to  make  choice  ef  wliat  part  of  his  wealth  and  his  household  goods 
he  pleased ;  upon  which,  taking  only  bis  liousehold  gods,  the  virtue 
atxi  piety  of  tire  man  astonished  them  more  than  before;  for  thejf 
perceived)  that  m  the  height  cf  bis  dangers  and  troubles,  his  chiefest 
care  was  to  disqhavge  his  duty  to  his  father,  and  hb  due  Itnd  pious 
regards  to  the  gods:  and  therefore,  it  is  said,  that  both  he,  and  the 
rest  of  the  Trojans  that  remained,  bad  liberty  given  them,  with  as«- 
surance  of  safe  passi^,  to, go  from  IVoy  lo  whatsoever  place  they 
pleased. 

f  9.  Romulus  Sylvfius  was  exceeding  pitHid  all  the  days  of  bis  Hf^^ 
and  a  contemner  c^f  the  gods.  When  Jupiter  thundered,  he  used 
to  command  his  soldiers,  upon  a  sign  given^  all  at  onoe  to  strike  on 
their  shields  with  their  swoids,  and  vaunted  that  it  was  a  greater 
Doise  than  tlie  other,  and  therefore  lie  was  struck  dead  with  a  thun*" 
4flerboltfc 

10.  About  this  time,  one  Malachus  became  king  of  the  chy  of 
Cuma,  by  ingratiating  himself  with  the  common  people,  and  accus-^ 
ing  and  calumniating  great  men  x  for  afterwards^  putting  to  deatb 
the  richest  of  the  citizens,  he  seized  their  estates,  and  with  the  wealth 
Ihus  got,  hired  a  strong  guard,  and  inspired  the  Cumani  with  dread 
sand  terror^ 

11.  Such  was  the  eminent  virtue  of  L»ycui^tts>  that  once  when  h^ 
came  to  Delphos,  the  oracle  saluted  him^with  these  verses*  Seek  in 
the  fragments  of  sentencesi 

While  the  Ladedfemonians  observed  the  laws  of  Lycurgtis^  frool 
a  mean  and  low  condition,  they  became  very  powerful,  and  held  the 
sovereignty  of  Greece  for  above  four  hundred  years.  But  when  by 
degrees  they  neglected  and  disregarded  one  bw  i^er  another,  and 
degenerated  into  sloth  and  voluptuousness,  and  b^aa  to  accumu« 
Jate  money  and  wealth,  they  lost  their  sovereign  aathority. 

12.  Whereas  the  Elians  were  full  of  strong  And  useful  fiien,  And 
had  a  well -governed  commonwealth,  the  Lacedsdmonians,  jealous  of 
the  increase  of  their  power^  endeavoured  all  they  could  to  make  them 
sacred,  that  so  being  at  peace,  they  might  gain  no  experience  in  mat<> 
ters  of  war;  to  that  end,  with  the  consent  of  all  the  Grecians^  they 
devoted  them  to  Jupiter;  and  therefore,  neither  when  Xerxes  broke 
into  Greece,  were  they  compelled  to  raise  soldiers,  but,  as  the  priests 
of  Jupiter,  and  overseers  of  the  games,  were  free^  Nor  in  the  civil 
wars  of  the  Greeks  did  any  molest  them,  all  endeavouring  to  preserve 
their  country  as  a  city  sacred  and  inviolable*  But  in  after  times>  th^ 
Elians  betook  themselves  to  arms  of  their  own  accord* 

Vol.2.  No.47«  PJ>D]| 


13,  The  twg  iKotbers,  Romulus  aiiJ  Remus,  being  tbu$  exposed 
in  a  cradle,  when  they  grew  up  to  men's  estate,  far  excelled  their 
equals  in  strengtli  and  eonieilness  of  tlieir  persons;  and  secured  ill 
the  shepherds  and  thefr  flciek^j  by  freeltjj;  them  from  the  thieves  that 
used  to  make  n  iftcy  of  them,  killlojr  some  iu  their  attempts  upop  the 
flocks,  and  taking  others.     And  besides  tlie  honour  they  g;:atned  by 
tiicir  valour,  they  were  greatly  beloved  by  <be  neighbouring  shep- 
herdsj  bolh  for  tlieir  familiar  converse,  and  their  civil  and  courteous 
behaviour  to  all  that  made  their  addresses  to  lbem<     The   security 
thererore  of  them  nil  being  lodged  hi  them,  most  persons  submittei 
to  them  of  their  own  accord^  and  were  obscrv:mt  of  [heir  command^ 
went  wheresoever  they  were  orde  ed  by  them. 
4.  Polychares  the  Messcnian,  a  man  of  noble  birth,  and  W 
h,  entered  into  a  strict  bond  of  familiarity  and  friendship  iritiv 
ephnus  the  Spartan,  who  taking  upon  him  the  protection  of  tto 
flocks  and  shepherds,  bef^an  to  covet  what  they  had;  but  his  trei- 
chery  was  soon  discovered :  for  having  sold  some  oxen^  together  with 
the  herdsmen  themselves,  to  foreign  merchants,  and  prete tiding  thai 
rohbirs  bad  carried  them  away  by  force,  it  happened  that  the  mer- 
chants sailing  by  the  coasts  of  Peloponnesus  towards  Sicily,  by  a  sud^ 
den  storm  were  cast  upon  the  land*     Hereupon  the  herdsmen,  tak* 
ing  advantage  of  the  nii^ht,  got  ashore;  and  being  well  acquainted 
with  the  piaccj  thvl  and  nuide  iheir  escape;  and  when  they  came  to 
Messena,  they  declared  the  whole  business  to  their  master:  where- 
upon Pulycliares  concealed  the  herdsmen,  and  sent  for  Eucephnus 
from  Laceda?mon;    who,  when  lie  came,  swore^  and  impudeotly 
stood  it  out,  that  the  shepherds  and  herdsmen  were  some  of  tbem 
forcibly  carried  away  by  robbers,  and  the  rest  were  killed:  upon  which 
Pulychares  forthwith  produced  the  herdsmen.     At  widch  Eticeph* 
Tius  was  amazed;  and  thus  plainly  convibtcd  of  falsehood,  preseotly 
began  to  beg  pardon,  and  promised  to  restore  all  the  cattU,  and  used 
many  words  to  regain  his  favour.     Polychares  therefore,  out  of  re;* 
gard  to  the  sacred  ties  of  friendship,  concealed  the  fact,  ftod  sent  bis 
son  with  Eucephnus  to  Lacedfiemon  to  recover  the  cattle.     JKut  Eu- 
ceplinus,  disregardful  of  his  promises,  murdered  the  young  man  that 
yvus  sent  along  with  him  to  Sparta.     Polychares,  enraged  at  this 
bloody  act,  required  the  Spartans  to  deliver  up  the  murderer.    But 
the  Lacedaemonians,  not  willing  to  comply  with  his  demands,  sent 
the  son  of  Eucephnus  with  letters  to  Messena,  wherein  Polychares 
v.as  ordered  to  come  to  Sparta,  and  there  to  abide  the  judgment  of 
the  ephori  and  the  kings,  concerning  the  matters  whereof  be  com- 
phiincd;  but  Polychares,  by  way  of  retaliatiooj  killed  the  son  of 


DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Sfl 

■  ■■  ■      '  ■■  -■-  ■  *      '         .^    ■.    .       II  ii'ii 

^ucephnus,  and  drove  away  a  prey  of  cattle  out  of  the  country  oi! 
Sparta. 

15.  Archias  the  Corinthian  falling  in  love  with  Actseon,  first 
courted  the  youth  with  presents  and  fair  promises;  but  not  bein&r 
able  to  prevail  by  reason  of  the  honesty  of  the  boy's  father,  and  the 
sobriety  and  modesty  of  the  young  nian  himself,  he  got  a  compaivy 
of  his  friends  together,  resolving  to  do  that  by  force  which  he  couM 
not  obtain  by  entreaty  and  fair  means.  Having  therefore  made  him-, 
self  drunk,  with  those  he  had  brought  along  with  him,  he  was  hur- 
ried on  to  that  degree  by  his  love-passion,  that  he  broke  forcibly  in-' 
to  the  house  of  Melissus,  and  took  away  the  boy  by  force;  but  his 
father  with  his  household  servants  laying  hold  of  his  son  to  detain 
him,  and  both  parties  earnestly  striving  to  get  him  one  from  the 
Other,  the  poor  child  was  pulled  to  pieces  among  them,  so  that  his 
sufferings,  and  manner  of  them,  occasioned  both  grief  and  admira^- 
tion  at  one  and  the  same  time;  for  the  youth  came  to  the  like  end 
with  him  tliat  bore  the  same  name*,  both  of  them  being  destroyed 
much  in  %he  same  manuery  by  those  that  came  in  to  their  assist* 
ance. 

16.  Agatliocles,  to  whom  was  committed  the  care  of  buildihg  a 
temple  to  Minerva,  paid  the  money  out  of  his  own  purse;  but  htt 
selected  the  best  and  largest  of  the  stones^  and  built  for  himself  a 
sumptuous  and  stately  house:  but  the  power  of  the  goddess  made  It- 
self evident,  in  destroying  Agathocles  with  a  thunderbolt,  and  burn- 
ing his  house;  and  the  Geomorians  confiscated  his  goods,  although 
his  heirs  proved  clearly  that  be  had  not  embezzled  any  of  the  sacrcrl 
treasure.  They  consecrated  likewise  the  carcass  of  his  house,  and 
made  it  a  place  inaccessible,  which  is  now  called  Embionteeum. 

17.  Pompilius,  king  of  Rome,  lived , peaceably  all  his  d^s^  and 
some  say  he  was  a  hearer  of  Pythagoras,  and  that  he  had  his  laws 
concerning  religion  from  him,  and  many  other  things  which  mucii 
advanced  his  reputation;  and  therefore,  though  he  was  a  stranger,  ho 
was  sent  for  to  take  upon  him  the  crown. 

18.  Diodes,  king  of  the  Medes,  when  all  sorts  of  wickedness  a* 
bounded,  was  eminent  for  justice  and  all  other  virtues. 

VJ,  The  Sybarites -were  addicted  to  gluttony  and  voluptuousnessy 
and  sucli  w^s  th<:ir  strife  and  study  to  be  luxurious,  that  they  love^i 
the  lohians  and  Thuscians  above  all  other  strangers,  because  those 
^morig  tlie  Greeks,  and  these  an^otig  the  barbarians,  were  most  lux-i 
urious  and  effeminate.  It  is  said  that  Mjndyrides  was  the  most  vo- 
luptuous of  any  of  the  Sybarites;  for  when  Clisthenes,  king  of  Si^ 
cyon,  was  victor  in  the  race  with  chariots  drawn  by  four  horse^^^  'd^i^ 
*  Act^son  «va^  torq  iu  pieces  bv  bit  own  ^o^ty 


THE  FKAGMENTS  OW 


i)  proclaimed  by  the  crier That  whosaevL^r  would  m*»Ty  Uii 

cfaugliter,  a  most  beautiful  lady,  should  come  to  Sicyoti  at  a  cefiaio 
day  appointed^  this  Mindyrjdes  set  out  from  SybarU  in  a  res^vl  of 
above  fifty  oars  of  a  side^  and  furnished  it  with  rowers  oiit  of  hb  owti 
family,  of  whom  some  were  fishermeu,  and  the  rest  were  fiivlers — 
And  vwljen  he  came  iuto  the  haven  of  Stcyon,  he  not  only  far  sur- 
passed all  bis  rivals  for  state  and  grandeur,  but  likewise  the  king 
himself,  although  the  whole  city,  out  of  vued  gU*ry,  pntfoidy  ciw- 
tributed  their  wealth  to  Clisthenes.  And  being  [nvsenily  afier  hii 
arrival  entertained  at  supper^  and  asked  by  one  who  »hfnihl  ^U  neit 
hiitiT  he  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  an  herald — Tltt 
lie  would  *it  next  the  bride,  or  by  himself  alone. 

20,  Hippometieji,  archon  of  Athen^t,  when  bts  daughter  had  plafrf 
tiie  whore,  punished  her  ultor  a  niosi  cruel  and  iuhuuuin  manner; 
for  he  shut  her  up  in  a  stable  with  a  horse  kept  *ome  days  wtthottt 
meat,  which  through  want  of  food  at  length  eat  up  the  miserable  and 
unfortunate  lady. 

:3L  Arcesihus,  kine  of  Cyrene,  hein^  grievously  aMieted  with 
many  pressing  calamiiieSj  cottsulted  the  oruclc  at  Dclphos;  to  whom 
ApoUo  answered — ^That  the  gtwls  were, angry  because  none  uf  ilic 
j(uceeccling  kings  since  Battus  governed  no  justly  and  riEfhteouAly  as 
he  didj  fv>r  he  reigned  oiihlly  nnd  genlly,  content  only  wUU  the  nnme 
pf  a  king;  and  that  which  was  most  commendafajf  of  all  was,  that 
he  carefully  kept  and  maintained  the  worship  of  the  gods;  bat  his 
successors  have  ever  since  reigned  tyrannically,  and  converted  the 
public  treasure  to  tlieir  own  private  use^  and  neglected  the  senrice  of 
the  gods. 

22.  Demonax  of  Mantinea^  was  the  arbitrator  to  allay  the  sedition 
among  the  Cyreneans,  a  person  of  great  honour  and  esteem  for  his 
wisdom  and  justice.  When  he  arrived  at  Cyrene  all  their  differences 
were  referred  to  him,  and  he  reconciled  the  cities  upon  these  terms 
^nd  conditions 

23.  Lucius  Tarquinius,  king  of  the  Romans,  being  carefully  edu- 
cated from  a  child,  and  much  addicted  to  the  liberal  sciences,  was 
greatly  admired  by  all  for  his  virtuous  qualifications;  and  therefore, 
when  he  attained  to  man's  estate,  he  was  in  great  favour  and  esteem 
with  Ancus  Martins  then  king  of  Rome;  and,  together  with  the  king, 
he  ordered  and  managed  many  of  the  weighty  affairs  of  the  kingdom. 
Being  very  rich  himself,  he  liberally  supplied  the  wants  of  otbers, 
and.was  courteous  and  obliging  to  all,  and  therefDre  cried  op  greatly 
for  his  wisdom. 

24.  Solon  was  the  son  of  Exechestides ;  he  was  an  Athenian,  aod 
his  ancestors  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Sabuoiai  for  wisdom  and 


DlQI>e9;V&  W>UL^S.  &73 


laarBing  h&  fajr  exfi^eM^  4U  of  his  time :  beiog  viituously  inoUoed  ia 
his  youths  he  ^ppUed  biv^elf  to  the  atudy  of  the  best  arts  and  sciea-» 
ces :  and  having  long  inured  hUaself  to  aU  aorta  of  leainiog,  he  be^ 
came  the  great  master  aod  cluimpi0a  of  eTerjh  virtue.  For,  being 
uoder  the  care  of  the  best  tutors  from  a  child>  when  he  gr«w  up  to 
man's  estate,  he  associated  with  sqch  as  were  esteemed  the  greatest 
philosophers ;  upon  the  account  of  which  conveise,  he  was  esteemed 
one  of  the  seven  wise  men,  and  was  not  only  preferred  before  al| 
the  rest,  but  likewise  before  all  others  that  wene  eminent  for  tlieir 
wisdom.  He  was  in  great  honqiir  for  making  q£  laws,  and  admiMd 
by  all  for  his  singular  prudence  in.  his  private  discourses  and  answere, 
and  in  giving  counsel  and  advice*  When  the  Athenians  became 
lonians  in  tlielr  manners,  and  in  a  high  degree  tuxurioua  audeflfemi- 
nate,  Solou  by  degrees  gained  them  to  the  love  of  virtue  and  honours- 
able  actions :  for  Hxu*modius  and  Aristogiton,  principled  by  his  laws 
and  discipline,  overturned  the  tyranny  of  Pisistratus. 

25.  There  was  one  Myson  of  Malea,  living  in  a  town  called  Che- 
na,  who  lay  most  commonly  in  the  fields,  obscure,  unknown  almost 
to  every  one,  upon  the  expelling  of  Periander  the  Corinthian  fof  hit 
tyranny  and  cruelty,  was  taken  into  the  society  of  one  of  the  sevea 
wise  men.  - 

26.  Chilo  lived  according  to  his  doctrine,  which  is  a  thing  rare  to 
be  found :  for  we  may  see  many  philosophers  in  our  age,  who  talk 
at  a  great  rate,  yet  their  manners  and  couvse  of  life  are  filthy  and  abo- 
minable, who  look  and  speak  like  grave  wise  men,  yet  by  their  ac- 
tions give  themselves  the  lie*  But  Chilo,  besides  his  virtuoua  life 
all  his  days,  conceived  and  uttered  many  excellent  things  worthy  of 
remark. 

27.  Pittacus  Mitylene,  was  a  man  not  only  to  be  adn)ired  for  his 
wisdom,  but  was  such  a  citizen  a$  Lesbos  never  before  produced  the 
like,  nor  is  ever  likely  to  do,  as  I  think,  till  it  produce  pleoty  of  sweet 
wine.  For  he  was  an  excellent  law-maker,  and  civil  and  courteooa 
towards  all  his  fellow  citizens  in  their  various  meetings  and  public 
assemblies,  and  freed  his  country  from  the  three  most  grievous  cala- 
mities, tyranny,  sedition,  and  war.  He  was  a  most  prudent  and  oour-r 
teous  man,  ever  ready  to  excuse  other  men's  faults,  and  tlierefore 
seemed  to  be  a  person  perfectly  virtuous  in  every  respect;  for  in 
making  of  laws,  he  was  prudent  and  politic,  faithful  to  his  word,  va-* 
liant  ill  war,  and  one  that  scorned  corrupt  lucre  and  gain. 

2S.  The  Prienians  say That  Bias  having  redeemed  fr^om  the 

hands  of  robbers  some  captive  Messenian  virgins,  persons  of  consi- 
derable quality,  he  took  thetn  into  his  own  house,  and  honourabi]^ 
entertained  them  as  his  own  daughters :  aod  wb»  their  lelatiOBi 


»  THE  FRACMENTJt  Or 


u^  kindred  i  ne  to  Priene  to  look  after  them^  he  rtstorcd  tbem  to 
their  fnendst,  vithout  ticking  any  thing  cither  for  their  dji^t  or  »* 
dcaiption ;  but  on  the  contrary  presented  tliem  with  many  gifts  oat 
of  his  own  estate^  And  dierefore  the  ladies  loved  him  as  their  own 
fAtber,  both  for  his  noble  entertainment,  and  the  targcoets  of  hh 
bounty;  £>o  that  when  they  rcturnt^d  home,  they  were  still  mindful  of 
bis  kindnesij  to  them:  and  therefore,  when  the  6sherii>en  of  Mcisc- 
M  drew  up  a  brazen  tripod  with  their  nets,  whereon  were  inscnbed 

these  words To  the  wisest!  they  proeured  It  to  be  given  to  Biis- 

He  was  the  tnost  rhetorieal  and  eloquent  man  in  his  time;  but  far 
diflerent  from  all  others  in  the  use  he  made  of  his  eloquenee ;  for  he 
was  wot  mercenary,  nor  atmtrd  at  gain,  Imt  practised  it  for  ihtf  lelief 
of  men  in  distress,  which  is  rare  now  to  be  found. 

29.  Cyrus,  ilie  son  of  Camhyscs  and  Mandane,  nephew  to  Astva- 
gfs  king  of  the  Medes,  for  valour,  prudtnce^  and  other  virtues,  ex-* 
celled  all  others  in  the  age  wherein  he  lived;  for  his  father  gave  bim 
1  royal  education,  encouraging  him  to  every  thing  that  was  high  and 
brave.  And  even  while  he  was  a  boy  be  gave  evident  tokcn»  of  Im 
attempting  great  things  at  onetime  or  another;  his  virtue  and  valour 
appearing  now  beforehand  so  evidently  while  he  was  but  a  ehitd^i 

^0.  Astyages,  king  of  the  Medes^  being  beaten  in  a  battle,  and 
forced  to  a  dishonourable  fiight,  was  enraged  at  his  soldiers,  and  dis- 
banded all  his  oilicer.^.  nnd  phced  others  in  their  steiid;  but  as  for 
those  that  were  the  occasion  of  the  flight,  he  picked  them  oat  of  all 
his  troops  and  put  them  to  death,  thinking  by  this  eicample  to  make 
the  rest  more  careful  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty  when  they  came 
to  fight;  for  he  was  naturally  cruel  and  implacable.  But  his  soldiers 
were  so  far  from  being  terrified  by  his  severity,  that,  in  hatred  of  hia 
cruelty  and  inhumanity,  every  odc  of  them  were  ready  to  revolt, 
and  to  that  end  began  to  meet  in  great  companies,  and  talk  trea-i 
ton,  stirring  up  one  another  to  revenge  the  deatlxs  of  their  fellow 
soldiers. 

31.  Cyrus,  they  say,  was  not  only  valiant  against  the  enemy,  but 
mild  and  gentle  towards  his  subjects;  and  therefore  the  Persians  call 
him  their  father. 

32.  One  Adrastus  a  Phrygian,  by  casting  a  dart  at  a  l)oar  lo  hunt- 
ing, accidentally  killed  Atys  the  son  of  Croesus,  king  of  L^dia;  and 
though  he  slew  him  unintentionally,  yet  he  said  that  he  himself  who 
killed  him  was  not  worthy  to  live,  and  therefore  entreated  Crcesua 
not  to  spare  bim,  but  forthwith  to  cut  !ils  throat  at  his  son's  sepul- 
chre. Croesus  w^s  indeed  at  first  in  a  rage  with  Adrastus  for  tlie 
death  of  his  son,  and  threatened  to  burn  him  alive;  but  when  he 

i  that  the  young  man  did  not  Sccck  to.  avoid  puuishmeut>  but 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  97^^ 

rather  voluntarily  offered  his  life  as  a  sacrifice  fur  the  deed,  his  anger 
was  appeased,  and  he  pardoned  him,  complaining  of  his  own  mis* 
fortune,  and  not  of  any  purpose  or  design  in  the  young  man^  ho#- 
ever,  Adrastus  went  privately  to  the  sepulchre  of  Atys  an(l  there  kill- 
ed himself. 

33.  Croesus,  king  of  Lydia,  pretending  to  send  Eurybatas  the  E- 
phesian  to  Delphos,  sent  him  in  truth  with  a  great  sum  of  money  in- 
to Peloponnesus  to  hire  soldiers 5  but  Eurybatus  fled  to  Cyrus,  king 
of  Persia,  and  discovered  to  him  all  Croesus's  designs:  and  therefore 
this  treachery  of  Eurybatus  was  so  remarkable  among  the  Grecians, 
that  when  they  would  upbraid  any  man  with  a  base  action,  they  call 
him  Eurybatus. 

34.  Cyrus  believing  that  CroesUs  was  a  religious  man,  because  a 
sudden  storm  of  rain  from  heaven  extinguished  the  fire  in  the  pile 
whereon  he  was  burnt,  and  calling  to  mind  the  saying  ofSoloo;  car- 
ried Croesus  along  with  him,  using  him  with  all  honor  and  respect, 
and  made  him  one  of  his  privy  council,  conceiving  him  to  be  a  pru- 
dent man,  who  had  familiarly  conversed  with  so  many  and  such  emi- 
nent persons  for  wisdom. 

85*  Servius  Tullius  king  of  Rome  reigned  forty-four  years,  and  ottt 
of  his  own  virtuous  disposition  ordered  many  things  for  the  good  of 
the  commonwealth.  . 

3G.  When  Thericles  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens  in  the  sixty^ 
first  olympiad,  Pythagoras  the  philosopher  flourished,  having  attain- 
ed to  the  highest  pitch  of  wisdom ;  a  man  worthy  to  have  his  memo- 
ry eternized,  if  ever  any  philosopher  deserved  it;  he  was  bora  at  Sa- 
nios»  though  some  say  at  Tyrrhenum.  His  speeches  were  uttered 
with  so  much  grace,  and  force  of  persuasion  that  almost  the  whole 
city  gazed  upon  him  daily,  as  if  some  god  had  been  before '  them, 
and  u  great  concourse  of  people  came  from  all  parts  to  hear  Urn. 
And  he  was  not  only  eminently  eloquent,  but  very  sober  and  grave, 
and  was  a  wonderful  example  for  young  men  to  imitate  in  the  course 
of  their  lives  iu  that  respect:  and  all  whom  he  conversed  with  he 
dissuaded  from  vain  pomp  and  luxury;  all  the  inhabitants  of  that 
country  (through  plenty  and  fulness  of  all  things  among  them)  beidg 
given  to  ef!'emliiacy  and  filthiness  both  of  body  and  mind* 

This  Pythagoras,  when  he  heard  that  Pherecydes  once  his  master 
was  very  sick  in  the  island  Delos,  forthwith  sailed  out  of  Italy  thi- 
ther; where  after  he  had  for  some  time  cherished  the  old  roan,  and 
used  his  utmost  endeavour  to  restore  him  to  health,  at  length,  through 
old  age  and  tlie  violence  of  his  distemper,  he  died,  and  Pythagoras 
carefully  buried  him;  and  so  having  performed  the  oflice  and  duty 
of  a  son,  as  to  a  father,  he  returned  into  Italy. 


Vy^  THE  tRAGMEKTS  OP 


S7.  Th«  PytlHigofeilns  (if  any  cf  their  society  fall  ifllto  dewy)  4i- 
vidfe  and  contribute  fn'oportions  of  thetr  jg^ods  w  Mia  that  it  "so  in 
1*rfrm,  as  if  tae  were  their  brother;  and  this  they  do,  «ot  •oly  u  to 
tifefn  that  are  daily  conversant  vfiAx  them,  but  HkeWise  to  ^  ochM 
of  the  same  sect  and  profession  wherever  they  be.  And  iberafin^ 
tme  Clinlias  of  Tfffentnm  when  he  understood  Vhat  Proran  «  Cyvmian 
nnd  a  Pythagoitfan,  by  Bome  misfortune  -or  cjther  had  lost  iill  fah«s« 
Ulte,  and  was  becoitie  exceeding  poor,  passed  miit  otft  of  Italy  to  Cy- 
I'ene  with  a  consriderabte  sum  of  money,  and  ffiode  fip  the  loss  of  Us 
fKttrimony  though  he  had  never  seen  him  before,  hut  ^oty  uaderatood 
%  heatsay  that  he  ivas  a  Pythagorean.  And  k  is  tepolted  that  ma- 
ny others  have  done  the  like.  And  they  have  not  only  soppKed  their 
cottipamoBs  with  money  in  their  wants,  but  lunre  hazarded  their  fer- 
son's  with  them  in  the  most  dangerous  times.  For  iti  the  H^gtt  of 
Dionysius  the  Tyrant  it  is  reported  that  one  Phrnrliasa  PjrthaigcAcaay 
Ivhen  by  fhe  contrivance  of  the  tjrrant  he  was  to  be  led  to  eseoatim, 
-desired  of  Dionysius  but  a  few  days  to  scale  his  faousehcAd  idUls» 
tind  provttii^  that  in  the  mean  thne  he  would  leave  ooe  «f  hkCrkAds 
to  suffer  in  his  stead,  if  he  returned  not.  Dionysrus  hareopoB  «MNh 
dering  whether  any  such  fricfnd  could  be  Ibond,  who  HFdiAd  be  wQ-* 
ling  to  be  cast  into  gaol  for  his  friend,  Phhitias  presently  called  Da^ 
mon  a  Pythagorean,  one  of  his  scholars,  who  forthwith  wtthootvay 
hesitation  became  his  hostage  to  die  in  his  rootn. 

Many  there  were  that  conmiended  this  singular  deaionatrtfckta  df 
)ove  and  kindness  to  his  friend,  o^ers  condemned  it  as  a  IbeKsli  Mi 
rash  act.  But  at  the  day  appointed,  all  the  people  ^fiooked  togethi^i 
very  eaniest  to  see  whether  he  «hat  had  left  his  pledge  wofoM  ^peifum 
his  word.  But  tlie  day  drawing  near  to  an  end,  everybody  began  » 
despair,  and  Damon  Was  led  forth  to  execution,  and  then  on  a  Md- 
deU)  at  the  very  last  moment  of  the  day,  Pbintlas  came  ratnanag  inl 
This  wonderful  friendship  and  kindness  for  each  other  was  adnifacd  • 
by  all;  and  Dionysus  pardoned  the  condemned  person^  and  dcsbrf 
that  he  himself  might  be  taken  into  the  society. 

SB.  The  Pythagoreans  'had  a  great  art  in  improving  iheir  llieai9* 
Ties,  and  to  that  end  employed  their  utmo^  care  and  diligence.  Fbr 
the  first  thing  they  did  con^tanffly  tffter  they  rose  firotti  (heif  beds  ik 
a  morning,  was  to  recollect  anfi  Call  to  midd  (every  thing  they  had 
done  the  day  before,  from  the  morning  to  the  evening:  and  if  they 
had  time  and  leisure,  they  would  go 'back  to 'examine  the 'adUons  dJF- 
the  second,  third,  and  fourth  days,  and  sometimcslartfaerj  eoaceivii^ 
it  rery  helpful  and  advantageous  for  improving  the  memoty^  and  Itt* 
creasing  knowledge. 

S9.  These  philosophers  inured  themselves  to  absttnciiee  bylUi 


DIODORUS  SICULV8.  ^fj 


means.  They  prepare  all  sorts  of  delicacies  and  laritiesy  such  as 
tables  are  furnished  with  at  solemo  feasts  f  and  after  they  have  gazed 
on  tbenei  for  a  considemble  time^  ob  purpose  to  whet  their  appetite^ 
which  naturally  desires  in  such  eaaea  to  be  gratified^  on  a  s«iddcn  the 
table  is  ordered  to  be  whipped  away^  and  thereupon  they  withdraw, 
without  tasting  any  of  the  dainties. 

40.  Pythagoras  commanded  his  disciples  to  forbear  taking  an  oath 
as  much  as  they  could;  but  when  they  had  once  taken  it,  to  be  care^ 
ful  to  keep  it.  Having  likewise  regard  to  what  was  convenient,  even 
in  the  acts  of  Venus,  he  advised  to  abstain  from  women  in  the  snin«> 
mer  time,  and  to  be  moderate  and  sparing  in  winter:  for  he  looked 
upon  all  carnal  copulation  to  be  hurtfuU  but  if  it  were  freqaene,  he 
saidy  it  impared  the  strength,  and  was  destructive* 

He  advised  likewise,  that  the  sacrificers  should  not  make  their  ad- 
dresses to  the  gods  in  rich  and  gaudy  habits,  hut  only  in  white  and 
clean  robes;  and  should  not  only  bring  before  them  bodies  free  froi|i 
gross  and  outward  wickednesses,  but  pure  and  undefiled  souls.  Com^ 
manding  these  and  mauy  such  like  things,  and  stirring  men  up  to 
sobriety,  valour,  constancy,  and  all  other  virtues,  he  was  adored  by 
the  Crotonians  as  if  he  had  been  a  god. 

<41.  One  Cylo  of  Crotona,  the  most  wealthy  and  eminent  man 
of  all  the  citizens,  being  desirous  of  being  received  into  the  society  of 
the  Pythagoreans,  was  rejected,  because  he  was  naturally  a  fierce  and 
stubborn  man,  seditious  and  ambitious.  At  which  he  was  so  en<» 
raged,  that  he  got  together  a  number  of  factious  persons  i^inst  the 
Pythagoreans,  and  began  to  rail  and  do  all  the  mischief  he  could  to 
them. 

42.  Lysis  the  Pytliagorean,  going  to  Thebes  in  Boeotia,  became 
tutor  to  Epaminondas,  and  instructed  him  in  all  the  ways  of  virtae; 
and  by  reason  of  his  excellent  endowments  adopted  him  to  be  his 
fion:  and  Epaminondas,  from  those  sparks  of  knowledge  he  had 
gained  from  the  Pythagorean  philosophy,  excelled  not  only  the  Tfae^ 
bans,  but  all  the  rest  of  the  Grecians  of  his  time,  in  patience,  fhiga^ 
lity,  and  all  other  virtues. 

43.  To  write  the  lives  of  persons  in  former  ages  is  indeed  a  diffi^^ 
cult  and  troublesome  task  to  the  historians,  but  very  profitable  to  o-. 
thers,  for  their  direction  iu  the  course  of  their  lives.  For  this  kind 
of  history,  by  recording  good  and  bad  actions,  graces  the^  memory  of 
the  good,  and  fixes  a  stain  upon  the  name  of  the  wicked,  by  sharing 
out  praise  and  disgrace  to  each  of  them  according  as  they  deserve  if* 
<^  For  praise  is  a  certain  reward  of  virtue  without  cost;  and  disgrace 
<*  is  the  punishment  of  vice  without  a  wound."  ,  And  therefore  it  is 
very  fit  that  every  oue  should  understand,  that  according  to.the  course 

Vol.  2,  No.  47.  VBX& 


6T^  THE  FRAGMENTS  Ot 

of  life  men  lead  here,  sach  will  be  the  account  and  remembrance  of 
them  afterwards  when  they  are  dead;  so  that  they  need  not  emplof 
all  their  thoughts  upon  marble  monuments^  which  are  set  op  only  in 
a  little  comer,  and  decayed  and  gone  in  process  of  time;  but  rather 
apply  their  minds  to  learning,  and  other  virtuous  qualifications,  which 
would  render  their  names  famous  over  all  the  world. 

Foe  time,  which  consumes  all  other  things,  preserves  these  to 
perpetual  generations;  and  the  older  they  grow,  the  more  fresh 
and  flourishing  it  presents  them.  For  they  that  have  gone  long 
ago,  are  still  in  every  man's  mouth,  as  if  they  were  now  at  this  very 
day  alive. 

44.  Cambyses  was  naturally  furious  and  even  a  madman^  and  the 
more  fierce  and  insolent  on  account  of  his  large  domioioo. 

Cambyses  the  Persian,  puffed  up  with  the  success  of  his  urns,  after 
the  taking  of  Memphis  and  Pelusium*,  insolently  demolished  the  aa» 
pulchre  of  Amasis,  an  antient  king  of  Egypt;  and  finding  hb  body 
embalmed  with  odoriferous  spices,  basely  and  inhumanly  cudgeled  it 
and  abused  it  with  all  manner  of  contempt,  and  afterwards  ordend 
it  to  be  burnt  to  ashes.  Fur,  because  the  Egyptians  never  burnt 
their  dead  bodies,  he  thought  by  this  means  he  sufficiently  revenged 
himself  of  the  man  who  was  dead  long  before. 

Cambyses,  when  be  prepared  for  his  expedition  against  the  iEtlu* 
opians,  sent  part  of  his  army  against  the  Ammonians,  and  commaod- 
ed  his  officers  to  rob  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  set  it  on  fire,aad 
make  all  the  people  around  captives. 

45.  Certain  Lydians  flying  away  to  avoid  the  tyrannical  govern* 
ment  of  Oroetes,  the  governor  of  the  province,  went  to  Samoa  with  a 
vast  treasure  of  gold,  and  humbly  addressed  themselves  to  Polycra- 
tes  for  relief;  who  at  first  courteously  entertained  ftiem,  but  notlo^g 
after  cut  all  their  throats,  and  robbed  them  of  their  money. 

46*.  Thcssalus  the  son  of  Pisistratus,  a  wise  and  prudent  awn^  WH 
luntarity  abdicated  the  sovereignty,  and  acted  only  as  a  private  maa, 
contented  merely  to  share  in  the  common  rights  and  liberties  of 
the  citizens,  for  which  he  was  held  in  high  esteem  and  repadh 
tion. 

But  his  brothers  Ilipparchus  and  Hippias,  being  rigid  and  emd, 
ruled  tyrannically  over  their  citizens.  After  they  liad  for  so 
grievously  oppressed  the  Athenians,  Hipparchus  fiilling  in  love  ^ 
a  beautiful  boy,  plunged  himself  into  pe^rilous  circumstances :  fat 
Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  joined  in  a  conspiracy  against  the  tyranff 
in  order  to  free  their  country  from  slavery:  but  Aristogiton  was  the 
chief  man  for  a  brave  and  resolute  spirit,  in  enduring  all  sorts  of  tor- 
ments with  patience  and  constancy,  who  in  the  most  periloos  tifl 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  $79 


was  especially  famous  for  two  things^  frnthfuloess  tb  his  friends^  and 
just  revenge  to  his  enemies* 

■  47.  Zeno  of  FMsy  being  seized  upon  for  a  conspiracy  agai  A  Ne- 
archus,  who  tyrannically  oppressed  the  country,  was  put  to  the  rack. 
When  the  tyrant  asked  him  who  were  his  fellow  conspirators;  he  re- 
plied, I  would  to  God  I  had  as  much  command  of  the  rest  of  my  bo« 
dy  as  I  have  of  my  tongue. 

Hereupon  the  tyrant  screwing  him  up,  and  tormenting  him  th^ 
more,  Zeno  for  sopie  time  courageously  endured  the  pain,  but  after- 
wards, to  free  himself  and  be  revenged  on  the  tyrant,  be  had  this  con- 
trivance— ^The  rack  being  extended  to  the  utmost,  he  feigned  as  if 
he  could  no  longer  bear  it,  and  therefore  cried  out  to  release  him 
and  lie  would  discover  all;  the  rack  being  thereupon  loosed,  he  de- 
sired the  tyrant  would  come  to  him  himself,  for  he  had  many  things 
to  discover,  which  required  secrecy.  Upon  which  he  came  readily 
to  him,  and  put  his  face  close  to  Zeno's  ear;  upon  which  he  took 
fast  hold  of  the  tyrant's  ear  with  hb  teeth  3  whereupon  the  guards 
came  running  in,  and  racking  him  to  the  utmost  they  could,  to  ibrcd 
him  to  let  go  his  hold,  he  fastened  histeefh  the  more  fiercely;  to 
that  the  guard  not  being  able  to  baffle  the  resolution  of  the  man,  the]^ 
were  forced  to  entreat  him  to  let  go :  and  by  this  trick,  he  was  released 
from  his  torments,  and  at  the  same  time  had  his  revenge  upon  the 
tyrant. 

48  Sextus,  the  son  of  Lucinius  Tarquinius,  kiqgof  the  Romans^ 
took  a  journey  to  the  city  of  Collatia,  and  there  lodged  at  the  house 
of  Lucius  Tarquinius,  the  king's  nephew,  whose  wife  was  called  Lu- 
cretia,  a  most  beautiful  lady,  and  renowned  for  her  chastity.    Sextus 
70se  up  in  the  night  and  broke  down  her  chamber  door,  when  she 
was  in  bed,  and  attempted  to  force  her,  her  husband  being  then  ia 
the  camp  at  Ardea,  and  with  his  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  threatened 
to  kill  her  unless  she  yielded,  and  told  her  he  had  a  slave  ready, 
whom  he  would  lay  naked  in  bed  with  her,  and  kill  them  both,  that 
it  might  be  said  she  was  justly  killed  in  *the  act  of  adultery,  and 
that  he  had  done  it  in  revenge  of  the  injury  done  his  kinsman..-. 
And  therefore  it  was  better  for  her  quietly  to  gratify  him  in  What  hfi 
desired,  promising  her  likewise  manylarge  and  rich  rewards,  and  to 
marry  her,  and  so  from  a  private  condition,  she  would  be  advanced 
to  the  state  and  dignity  of  a  queen.    Lucretia,  amazed  at  the  strange-i 
7)ess  and  suddenness  of  the  thing,  and  fearful  lest  it  should  b^ 
thought  she  was  killed  really  in  the  act  of  adultery,  was  quiet  at  that 
time.     Tiie  next  day,  when  Sextus  was  gone,  she  sent  for  all  her  ser- 
vants and  household,  and  desired  they  would  not  suffer  the  wicked-* 
DCS3  of  tt)e  man  to  go  unpunished,  who  had  violate^l  all  the  lawt  of 


580  TflS  nUlGMBNTS  OV 


friendship  liod  hospitality:  and  as  for  barsdf,  she  iaM,  it  ipasoot 
honourable  longer  to  survive  the  violation  at  her  ehaatit|r«  Ami  hav* 
ing  tl^  spoken,  she  stabbed  herself  with  a  4ag;gci^  and  ao  toeathed 
her  last. 

49'  Hippocrates,  king  of  Gela,  after  his  victoiy  over  the  Syiaca* 
sans,  when  he  encamped  near  the  temple  of  Jnpiters  to6k  the  chief 
priests,  and  some  of  the  principal  citizens  of  Syiaciiae»  who  bad  spoil- 
ed the  temple  of  some  of  the  consecrated  golden  veaa^  and  car- 
ried awi^  other  things,  especially  Jupiter's  cloafc^  wUch  was  made 
of  massy  and  solid  gold,  sharfdy  rebuked  them  aa  aacrilegioiia  per* 
sons,  and  commanded  them  forthwith  to  return  to  the  citj»  He 
himself  touched  none  of  the  things  devoted,  both  to  adtanee  the  ere* 
dit  and  reputation  of  bis  own  name,  as  likewise  jndlgiiv  iti^nfit  Csr 
him>  who  had  undertaken  so  great  a  war,  to  act  so  g^«nt «  piece  of 
impiety  against  the  gods.  Besides,  he  coooeived  fay  thb  iraw  ha 
should  stir  up  the  people  against  the  governors  of  Syfacnsa^  who  nd* 
ed  the  commonwealth  with  riigour,  bcg^ondaU  bonnda  4if  anodemlian 
or  equity. 

50*  Theron  of  Agrigentum,  for  wealth  and  nobilitjr  of  birtliy  and 
bis  courteous  carriage,  towards  even  the  meaoeat  of  iha  fMople,  mm 
pot  only  highly  honoured  amongst  the  citizens^  but  even  aflsoDgaU 
the  Sicilians. 

51  Cimon  the  sou  of  Miltlades,  when  his  father  died  in  the  i 
moa  gac4,  because  he  was  not  able  to  pi^  the  fine  ii 
him,  gave  up  himsffif  into  custody,  to  abide  in  prison  for  bia  fabler's 
mulct,  that  he  might  have  the  body  of  his  parent  to  bwy  it. 

52.  Cimon  was  very  eminent  when  he  was  a  civil  nagistii^ 
and  afterwards  became  a  bmous  general  in  the  waniy  and  psi^ 
formed  such  actions  by  his  valour,  as  are  worthy 
remembrance. 

59*  Those  of  Thermopylse  died  fighting  conragoooaly^ 
lour,  &c  ..^  ^  ^    Which  sare  published  in  the  llth  bocdt  of  Disr ' 
dor«s*s  history,  page  369,  of  the  present  edition. 

What  is  further  contained  in  tfie  manuscript,  I  havie  j 
mitted,  to  the  amount  of  twelve  foliod,  heoawM  thegrniv  k 
^be  history. 


.>'7-<J^.'. 


DfODOHUS  BICULV9  .%Bl 


FROM  THE  SAME.. 

1.  ANTICIONUS,  from  a  private  man,  advanoed  to  the  state  ani 
dignity  of  a  king,  was  the  iDOst  potent  priDce  of  any  of  his  time;  but 
not  contented  with  his  condition,  without  the  least  colour  of  right, 
was  prompted  by  his  ambition  to  grasp  at  the  dominions  of  other 
princes,  and  by  that  means  both  l<>fit  his  own,  and  his  Hfe  at  tins 
jame  time*. 

2.  When  Agathodes  heard  that  the  Ligurians  and  lynrbeniaiis 
had  mutinously  fallen  upon  his  son  Archagatfaus,  in  his  absence,  for 
their  pay,  he  put  them  all  to  the  sword,  to  the  namber  of  almost 
two  thousand. 

3.  The  Thracians,  who  had  taken  Agnthocies,  the  son  of  king 
Lysimachus,  in  a  battle,  sent  him  back  to  bis  &ther  with  several 
gifts;  by  this  means  hoping,  in  case  of  misfortunes,  to  shelter  them* 
selves  under  his  protection,  and  hereby  likewise  to  induce  him  free- 
ly to  restore  their  territory,  which  he  then  possessed:  ior  they  were 
out  of  all  iiopes  of  victory,  seeing  so  many  potent  kings  conlederaSed 
with  Lysimachus. 

4.  DromichGetes,  king  of  Thrace,  having  taken  Lynmadius  pri- 
soner, treated  him  with  every  kind  of  civility;  and  kissed  and  em- 
braced him,  calling  him  his  father,  and  brought  him  with  his  diilr 
dren  into  the  city  of  Helis.  And  when  the  Tfaracsans  came  in  a  bo- 
dy together,  and  demanded  that  the  captive  king  should  be  brought 
forth  and  put  to  death,  for  it  was  but  just  and  equal  that  they  who 
liad  adventured  their  lives,  should  dispose  of  the  captives  as  they 
tliought  fit ;  Dromichcetes  making  a  speech  against  potting  the  king 
to  death,  told  the  soldiers  that  it  was  for  the  public  good  to  preserve 
the  king:  for  if  they  killed  him  forthwith,  someothe^  would  tdie 
possession  of  his  kingdom,  who  periiaps  might  become  more  formi-, 
dable  to  th^m  than  Lysimachus.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  they  pre- 
served him,  that  favour  would  work  so  much,  as  in  gratitude  to  pro- 
duce a  favourable  respect  to  the  Thracians,  and  to  procure,  without 
running  any  risk,  tlte  restitution  of  all  those  forts  and  castles  which 
formerly  belonged  to  the  Thracians. 

The  army  then  agreeing  to  what  he  said,  he  brought  forth  all  the 

friends  and  servants  of  Lysimachus  whom  he  could  find  among  the 

captives,  and  delivered  them  to  him.    Afterwards,  when  he  ofiered 

a  solemn  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  he  invHed  Lysimachus  and  M  hit 

♦  AttbcbattJcoflssus, 


S82  THE  PRAGM£NTi  OF 

friends,  with  the  chief  officers  and  commaDden  of  the  Thrackiis  to 
soppen  And  having  prepared  two  apartments,  he  cowered  the  bedi 
whereon  Lysimachus  and  his  friends  were  to  sit,  with  rich  eupetl^ 
part  of  the  spoils  takea  in  battle;  bat  for  himself  and  tbe  rest  ^i  the 
Thracians,  the  coverings  were  but  poor  and  mean.  He  picpnreci 
Kfcwtse  two  sorts  of  suppers)  that  tw  Lysinmehus  JB4r|ik:frtc&dt 
consisted  of  all  sorts  of  raritks  and  noble  dishes^  set  npoa  sahev 
tables;  but  for  the  Thraciaos,  he  ordered  herbs  and  flesh  meanly 
dressed,  to  be  set  on  a  table  uncovered,  in  wooden  pUttten.  To  con- 
cUtde,  the  first  were  served  with  wine  in  gold  and  silver  hoifb}  IM 
lor  himself  and  his  Thracians,  he  ordered  cups  of  wood  iMid  iKicn^ 
after  the  mauner  of  the  Get»,  Afterwards^  in  the  he%ht  of  the 
leastt  be  filled  up  the  greatest  horn  with  wine,  and  calling  Lyaiva- 
dms  father,  asked  him  wbiQb  of  the  two  seeo^'d  to  )yai  more  prioer- 
ly,  a  Thracian  or  a  Macedonian  supper?  When  LgrsioDpeliwa  replied^. 

n  Macedonian. See  tbe  rest  in  the  fragments  of  fntences, 

5.  King  Demetrius,  after  he  had  forced  the  rest  of  the  caitiai  if  m 
sobmission,  conducted  himself  nobly  towards  the  Bopocianss  for  he* 
sides  the  fourteen  persons,  that  were  at  the  head  of  the  defiei^tiovit  he 
pardoned  ail  the  rest. 

(L  Arebaigathus  was  valorous  and  poQnigeo«Sjbe]fOQdli|si^s  |oc 
be  was  very  young. 

7.  Timieus  was  a  bitter  censprer  of  former  historians,  jret  in  other 

parts  of  his  history,  very  careful  to  declare  the  truth;  but  hie  liatred 

ef  Agathocles  was  such,  that  he  forged  many  things  concerning  bia 

actioiis;  for,  being  banislied  by  AgathcKles  out  of  tbe  island^  he 

could  not  be  revenged  of  the  tyrant  while  he  lived:  bnt  afiter  hh 

deatli,  be  loaded  him  with  reproaches  in  his  liistory,  to  mek^  hw  1 

mory  odious  to  all  posterity.     For  besides  the  vices  this  lung 

really  guilty  of,  he  imputed  many  others  to  him,  invented  hj  liini-i 

self,  and  always  lessened  his  prosperous  spccesses,  and  aggravated 

his  misrortunes  which  were  merely  casual,  and  turoed  them  upon- 

himself  as  the  cause  of  them,  through  his  own  ipiscarriages.    Foe 

whereas  all  knew  that  Agathocles  was^a  prudent  and  expert 

and  commander,  and  was  bold  and  courageous  in  the  greatest  ( 

cuhics,  he  is  all  along  in  his  history  contio^ally  calling  him  a  1 

headed  coward.    And  yet  who  is  there  tliat  is  ignonmt  that 

were  ever  under  meaner  circumstances  who  afterwarda  l\^taiiied  t/h 

such  a  degree  of  sovereignty  and  dominion?  for  his  povcrqr  end 

low  birth  was  such,  that  from  his  childhood  he  was  a  meanartifieer*:| 

but  afterwards  by  his  valour,  he  not  only  gained  the  sovereign  powei: 

over  all  Sicily,  but  conquered  a  great  part  of  Ita^  imd  Afpn^   jf^ 

♦  A  potter's  ¥m^ 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  583 


any  one  may  justly  wonder  at  the  vanity  of  Timaeus,  who  almost  in 
every  page  extols  the  valour  of  the  Syracusans,  and  yet  affirms  him 
who  conquered  them  to  be  the  greatest  coward  of  any  man  living...^ 
From  these  contradictions  add  iticoDsisttncies  it  is  clear  and  mani- 
fest, that  out  of  a  private  pique  and  disgust  he  betrayed  the  trust  of 
a  faithful  historian:  and  therefore  his  last  five  books,  wherein  are  se 
forth  the  acts  of  Agatliocles,  for  very  good  reason,  were  oerer  approve 
cd  by  any. 

8.  Callias,  likewjse  a  Syracusan,  deserves  as  much  to  be  censured 
as  the  other,  who  being  enriched  and  advanced  by  Agathoctes,  ne* 
ver  ceases  piaising  him  far  above  hi^  desert,  and  so  dtshooauiiiig 
history,  which  should  be  the  herald  of  truth.  For  whereas  Agatho-r 
cles  in  many  things  violated  both  the  laws  of  God  and  man,  lie  cries 
him  up  as  the  most  pious  and  righteous  man  in  the  world.  To  eon* 
dude,  as  Agathocles  took  away,  the  goods  of  the  citizens  by  force, 
and  most  wrongfully  bestowed  them  upon  this  writer,  so  this  admir- 
able historiographer,  by  way  of  requital,  loads  him  with  praises  of 
all  sorts  and  sizes.  But  in  my  opinion  it  were  no  difficult  task,  hf 
way  of  grateful  return,  to  repay  favours  received  from  jirioces,  bf 
moderate  and  due  praises  and  commendations^ 

9.  After  the  mercenary  soldiers*  had  agreed  with  the  Syracit- 
sans,  they  marched  off,  and  were  received  by  the  Messantattt  at 
friends  and  confederates:  and  being  thus  kindly  entertained  by  the 
citizens,  in  the  night  they  murdered  all  their  hosts,  and  took  their 
wives  as  their  own,  and  possessed  themselves  of  the  city. 

10.  When  Demetrius  was  a  prisoner  at  PelIa,JLysimachus  sent  an 
ambassador  to  Seleucus,  to  caution  him  not  to  suffisr  him  upon  any 
terms  to  get  out  of  his  hands,  being,  as  he  said,  an  insatiably  ambi- 
tious man,  and  one  continually  plotting  against  tlie  kings;  and  pro- 
mised lie  would  give  him  two  thousand  talents  if  he  would  put  De- 
metrius to  death.  But  Seleucus  sharply  rebuked  the  ambassadors, 
for  endeavouring  to  persuade  him  not  only  to  violate  his  iaith,  but 
to  commit  so  horrid  a  piece  of  wickedness  against  one  so  nearly  re- 
lated to  him.  But  he  wrote  a  letter  to  his  son  Antiochus,  who  was 
then  in  Media,  to  ask  his  advice  what  should  be  done  with  Deme- 
trius; for  he  had  resolved  to  release  him,  and  restore  him  honour- 
ably to  his  kingdom;  but  was  willing  likewise  to  have  the  favour 
acknowledged  by  his  son  Antiochusfj  who  had  married  Stratonice, 
the  daughter  of  Demetrius,  and  had  several  children  by  her. 

*  The  Mamertines.  t  Soter. 


B84  tnt  fHAGUMxm  tut 


BOOK  XjpL 

1.  WH£N  a  ganiaoo  was  pot  into  Rhcgi«a  hf  liie  Kdumm^  Die* 
cias,  a  Campaniany  a  covctoos  and  impudaiit  feUow>  acted  tlic  Iwt 
and  treacherous  part  of  the  Mamertines;  for  as  they  were  rcerivod 
as  fiiends  by  the  Messaniaiis^  and  aeiaed  opott  thab  city>  and  eat  the 
tbroats  of  all  the  McssaBiaiis  their  kndbtdsy  ui  thdr  tnm  fcoosai^ 
and  married  their  wives^  and  possessed  themselves  of  the  caMca  el 
those  they  had  murdered ;  so  the  Campanian  soUBefai  to  whoos,  with 
I>ecius,  the  garrison  of  Rhegiam  was  eomaaitted  by  the 
mih  the  like  perfidioosness  lulled  all  the  Rhegiana^  ^d 
their  goods  among  theaoselTeS)  possessed  tbemaelves  of  the  eity*^ 
But  Decins  the  governor^  afker  he  had  sold  the  goods  of  tiMiae  Btt»- 
serable  people,  and  shared  the  money  he  had  treacheioaaly  wnrni, 
was  expelled  from  Rhe^um  by  the  Canipaniaasi  his  eo^pactneis  ia 
this  wicked  act.  But  every  one  of  these  perfidioos  vUlaisa  at  lei^ 
met  with  their  just  reward:  for  Decius  being  seised  witk  ft  giiemm 
pain  in  his  eyes^  sent  for  an  eminent  physician  of  Rhegiun^  whcs 
to  revenge  the  wrong  done  to  his  country,  anointed  Deeina's  eyes 
with  cautharides,  and  by  this  means  having  made  him  ataik  bliady 
forthwith  quitted  Messana. 

2.  Phiotias  having  tyrannically  oppressed  his  dtiMBS,  and  pot  la 
death  many  of  the  wealthy  men,  bc^|^  to  be  hated  by  Us  salyects 
for  bis  cruelty;  and  therefore  all  being  ready  for  a  geneial  ddee* 
tion,  and  he  himself  reduced  to  great  straits,  on  a  suddea 
his  former  course,  and  ruling  more  moderately^  kept  his 
within  the  bounds  of  their  duty  and  obedience. 

3.  Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  king  of  Macedonia^  being  indeed  i 
and  altogether  unexpert  in  military  a£Eurs,  and  eatandly  laah 
weak-headed,  made  no  provision  for  any  thing  aa  he  o^ghlt 
therefore,  when  lie  was  advised  by  his  friends  to  wait  for  the  ea 
forces,  who  were  not  as  yet  come  up  to  him,  he  disiegnded  dMil 
counsel. 

4.  Apollodorus  affecting  the  sovereign  power^  aed  dcaiieaa  ta 
confirm  the  conspirators  in  what  they  had  undertaken^  aent  fori 
young  man,  one  of  his  friends,  under  colour  of  coauog  to  ancsifiesf 
and  when  he  came  he  offered  him  up  to  the  gods,  .and  gave  his  en* 
trails  to  be  eaten  by  the  conspirators,  and  drank  to  them  in  iua  Uood 
mixed  with  wine. 


A.^^^'^t^.    '.   M 


1>IODO&UB  SICVLVB.  Il85 


5.  The  same  ApoHodorus  armed  some  Gauls,  and  engaged  them 
witii  large  gifts,  and  made  use  of  tfaeni  for  his  life-guard,  beoause 
they  were  naturally  cruel,  and  ready  to  execute  any  viUaRy.  He 
raised  likewise  a  great  Mun  of  OKXiey,  by  confiscating,  and  eaiposing 
to  public  sale,  the  goods  of  the  weaitfay  citizens.  He  became  very 
powerful  in  a  short  tiaie,  by  increasing  the  pay  of  €he  soldiers,  and 
distributing  money  among  the  poorer  classes. 

Being  wholly  given  up  to  cruelty  and  oov^ifoosness,  be  squeeud 
money  from  the  •citizens,  and  forced  both  men  and  ivmnen,  by  racks 
and  torments,  to  bring  forth  all  <heir  fgM,  aj^  silver;  for  he  made 
xSse  of  one  Calliphon,  a  Siciiiaa  for  his  adviser,  a  proficient  in  tyran* 
ny,  who  had  been  long  bred  tip  a  courtier  among  many  of  the  iy^ 
jants  in  Sicily, 

S.  When  Pyrrhus  had  pkndered  jf^as,  the  seat-royal  of  the 
Icings  of  Macedonia,  he  left  there  a  garrison  of  Gaiils^  who  being  in^ 
formed  by  8on>e  persons  that  there  were  greait  treasures,  according 
to  antient  custom,  hid  to  the  sepulchres  of  the  Icings,  dug  up  ail  the 
tombs  and  divided  the  wealth  among  themselves,  but  S(C|ittered abroad 
the  bones  and  ashes  of  the  dead. 

However,  Pyrrhus,  thouglh  be  was  railed  at  for  this  piece  pf  iobn^ 
tnanrty,  yet  he  punished  not  tlie  barbarians,  because  he  made  use  of 
them  in  his  wars. 


mmef 


BOOK  XXIII. 

1 .  I  LOOK  upon  it  as  the  duty  of  an  historian  diligendy  to  obeiem 
tlie  stratagems  and  management  of  affairs  by  generals  on  both  sides : 
for  by  laying  open,  and  criticising  other  men's  faults,  the  Ijke  mis- 
carriage may  he  prevented  in  them  that  come  after.  And  on  the  o- 
ther  side,  by  commending  things  which  are  done  well,  others  ave 
stimulated  to  virtuous  actions.  For  who  ca|)  but  utterly  condemn 
the  pride,  iolly,  madness,  and  insolence  of  Attilius*?  who,  not  able 
to  bear  the  weight  of  his  prosperous  fortune,  both  lost  his  own  se- 
putation^  and  brought  n^any  great  mischiefs  and  calamities  upon 
his  country.  For  when  he  might  have  concluded  a  peace  with  the 
Cartliaginians,  honourable  and  advantageous  to  the  Romans,  but 

•  Attilius  Regulus. 

Vol.  2,  No,  47.  ffff 


586  THE  f  RACMEKTS  OY 


base  and  dishonourable  to  the  other,  and  bis  name  might  have  been 
for  ever  renowned  amongst  all  men  for  his  clemency  and  humanity, 
he  had  no  regard  to  any  of  these  things:  but  proudly  iDsulting  the 
distresses  of  the  afHicted,  stood  upon  such  terms  as  not  only  provok- 
ed the  Gods  to  anger,  but  forced  the  conquered,  by  reason  of  these 
unreasonable  conditions,  to  stand  it  out  resolutely  to  the  utmost  ex* 
tremity :  so  that  the  face  of  affairs  was  suddenly  changed^  insomucb, 
that  the  Carthaginians,  who  but  a  little  before  were  in  great  terror 
and  amazement,  on  account  of  their  late  rout,  and  despaired  of  any 
relief,  gathered  courage,  and  routed  and  cut  off  their  enemy's  army: 
and  upon  this  misfortune,  such  was  the  distress  and  amazement  of 
the  city  of  Rome,  that  they  who  were  before  esteemed  the  best  sol- 
diers in  the  world,  durst  not  engage  the  enemy  in  that  kind  any  more; 
and  therefore  this  is  the  longest  war  we  read  of  in  former  times... 
And  the  matter  was  now  to  be  decided  by  sea-fights,  in  which  a  vast 
number  of  ships,  both  of  the  Romans  and  their  confederates^  were 
destroyed;  and  a  hundred  thousand  men  perished  in  these  battles. 
And  it  is  easy  to  conceive  how  vast  a  treasure  must  be  expendedi 
sufficient  to  maintain  so  great  a  fleet  for  the  continuance  of  a  war  for 
fifteen  years.  But  he  who  was  the  author  and  occasion  of  ao  many 
miseries,  had  himself  no  small  share  in  the  calamity,  since  his  pre- 
sent dishonour  and  disgrace  far  over-balanced  his  former  glory  and 
reputation;  and  by  his  misfortune  others  are  taught  not  to  be  proud 
in  prosperity.  And  that  wiiich  was  most  cutting  and  grievous  was^ 
that  he  was  now  forced  to  endure  the  scofis  and  scorns  of  those  over 
whom  lie  had  before  exulted  in  the  time  of  their  calamity;  liaving 
entirely  debarred  himself  from  that  pity  and  commiseration  which  is 
usually  shewn  to  those  that  are  in  affliction.  But  as  for  Xantippos, 
he  not  only  delivered  the  Carthaginians  from  the  present  evils  whick 
hung  over  them,  but  ahogether  changed  the  face  of  afiairs;  for  be 
utterly  routed  the  Romans,  who  were  but  just  now  conquerors*  and, 
after  a  prodigious  slaughter,  raised  the  Carthaginians  to  such  a  height 
of  prosperity,  who  were  expecting  their  last  doom,  that  for  the  fa- 
ture  tliey  slighted  and  contemned  their  enemy. 

I'he  report  of  this  famous  action  being  circulated  over  almost  the 
whole  world,  every  one  admired  the  valour  of  this  general.  For  it 
api'eared  like  a  miracle  to  every  one,  that  there  should  be  such  a 
sudden  change  of  affairs,  by  one  man  only  joining  with  the  Cartha* 
giiiians,  and  tliat  they  who  were  but  lately  so  closely  besieged, 
should  on  a  sudden  besiege  the  enemy:  and  that  they  who  by  their 
valour  were  a  little  before  lords  both  of  sea  and  land>  should  be  DOir 
cooped  up  in  a  small  town,  expecting  every  day  to  become  a  p^ey  to 


DIODORU8  SICULUS.  ftSf 


their  enemies;  but  it  is  not  to  be  wonder<Kl  ftt^  since  the  pruclence 
and  wisdom  of  the  general  overcame  all  difficulties. 

2.  Amilcar  the  Carthaginian^  called  Barcas,  and  Hannibal  bia  son^ 
the  great  Carthaginian  generals,  are  reputed  the  greatest  captains 
that  ever  appeared  either  before  or  after  them,  and  by  their  victories 
greatly  enlarged  the  dominions  of  the  Carthaginians, 


BOOK  XXIV. 


1.  CLODIUS  coming  into  Sicily,  as  soon  as  he  had  received  th« 
charge  of  the  army^  which  then  closely  besieged  Lilybsum,  called 
the  soldiers  together,  and  began  bitterly  to  inveigh  against  the  con- 
suls from  whom  he  received  the  legions,  declaring  they  had  negli- 
gently  managed  the  war,  giving  themselves  up  to  wine,  luxury,  and 
voluptuousness,  and  that  they  were  really  more  besieged  than  the 
enemy.  But  this  man  being  naturally  hot  and  fiery,  and  somewhat 
crack-brained,  acted  many  things  rashly  and  like  a  madman.  For 
in  the  first  place,  imitating  the  indiscreet  actions  of  those  he  had 
before  censured,  he  attempted  to  raise  up  a  mole  in  the  sea  to  block 
up  the  haven,  with  so  much  the  more  imprudence,  as  the  fault  is  the 
greater  not  to  learn  to  profit,  by  before  seeing  the  mistakes  and  mis- 
carriages of  another,  than  to  run  into  an  error  upon  the  first  attempt. 
Being  likewise  naturally  cruel  and  severe  in  the  infliction  of  punish 
ment,  after  the  manner  of  his  ancestors,  he  was  inexorable  in  pu- 
nishing the  soldiers,  and  scourged  the  Roman  confederates  with 
rods.  To  conclude,  he  was  so  swelled  with  pride  on  account  of  bis 
noble  bii  til,  and  the  renown  of  bis  ancestors,  that  he  despised  every 
body  else, 

2.  Amilcar,  before  he  was  chosen  general,  was  noted  to  he  a  man 
of  a  magnanimous  spirit;  and  after  he  was  advanced  to  that  honour, 
he  deceived  not  their  expectation,  but.^  behaved  himself  as  a  noblQ 
Carthaginian,  in  every  thing  aiming  at  fame  and  renown,  and  des- 
pising dangers.  He  was  both  prudent,  valiant,  and  industrious,  thft 
best  king  and  the  most  valiant  general. 

3.  I^Ianno  was  naturally  of  an  aspiring  spirit  aud  thirsting  aftw 


588  THtf  PKACMBUn  OF 


glory,  and  having  a  great  army  which  lay  idle,  hoped  by  thk  expe- 
dition both  to  train  and  exercise  the  soldiers,  and  likewise  to  maiii* 
tain  them,  and  hy  that  means  to  ease  the  eity  ot  a  great  charge;  and 
besides,  to  perform  some  considerable  serrice,  which  might  prove 
both  honoarable  and  profitable  to  the  commonwealth. 

4.  When  Hanno  had  taken  Hecatompylos*,  and  the  eMers  of  die 
city  addressed  themselves  to  him,  and  begged  and  entreated  him  to 
shew  them  pity  and  compassion,  being  something  vain-glorious  at 
this  time,  he  preferred  mercy  to  severity^  and  took  three  thousand 
hostages,  and  preserved  the  city  and  the  estates  of  the  citizens  entire 
and  untouched:  for  which  he  was  highly  honoured  by  the  poor  peo- 
ple, and  the  soldiers  were  splendidly  and  liberally  entertained  by  the 
inhabitants  with  all  manner  of  rich  provisions. 

5.  But  the  mother  t  of  the  young  men  grievously  laid  to  heart  the 
death  of  her  husband,  and  conceiving  that  through  their  careless- 
ness  and  neglect  he  lad  lost  his  life,  she  incited  her  sons  to  use  the 
captives  most  cruelty  and  inhumanly,  for  they  were  thrust  into  a  little 
close  room,  by  reason  of  which  they  were  forced  to  throng  upon  one 
another  like  beasts;  and  after  they  had  been  kept  witiiout  meat  for 
five  days,  Bostar  |  died,  through  vexation  of  mipd  and  famine.  But 
Amilcar,  being  a  man  of  a  great  spirit,  held  out  still,  though  he  i 
no  hopes  of  relief:  but  told  her  how  careful  he  had  been  of  her  I 
band,  and  entreated  her  with  tears  to  compassion;  but  slie  was  so  lar 
from  being  touched  with  the  least  sense  of  humanity,  that  this  crnei 
woman  shut  up  the  carcass  with  him  for  five  days  together  in  that 
close  hole,  and  gave  him  meat  only  to  keep  him  alive,  that  he  might 
be  the  lofigcr  sensible  of  his  miserable  condition.  Amilcar  dow  de-i 
spairing  by  entreating  or  begging  to  move  her  to  pity,  began  to  call 
upon  Jupiter,  and  cry  out  to  the  rest  of  the  gods  who  tocdc.care  of 
mankind,  to  revenge  him  upon  the  woman,  and  repay  her  with  jost 
and  due  punishment. 

However,  in  the  midst  of  all  these  torments  he  was  kept  alive^ 
till,  through  the  mercy  of  the  gods,  or  some  good  fortune^  he  ' 
wonderfully  and  unexpectedly  delivered.  For  even  when  he 
upon  the  point  of  death,  through  the  stench  of  the  dead  body,  and 
other  miseries  he  laboured  onder,  some  of  the  meaner  servants  be* 
longing  to  the  house  told  it  to  some  others  abroad,  who,  io  iodigna* 
tion  to  such  cruelty  and  wickedness,  forthwith  informed  the  tribanes 
of  the  people  of  this  horrid  fact.  Whereupon,  when  it  was  ditoo-i 
vercd,  the  magistrates  sent  for  the  Attilii,  who,  for  branding  the  Ro^ 
|nan  name  with  such  a  dishonourable  mark  of  barbarous  crnehji 
•  Actrj  ftf  Thf  hri  fnjgjfpu        t  The  wiicof  Attilof.        |  Ou 


DI0DORU9  iStCULUS.^  589 


very  narrowly  escaped  beii^  put  to  death:  bat  the  magbttates 
threateoed  the  Attilii  severely  to  punish  them  if  they  did  not  for  the 
futnre  use  their  prisoners  ciftliy,  and  take  due  care  of  them*  They 
imputed  most  that  was  done  to  their  Bsother;  and  bnining  the  body 
of  Bostar^  sent  the  ashes  badt  to  his  own  country,  and  freed  Amilcar 
from  the  distress  and  calamity  he  groaned  under. 


BOOK  XXV. 


] .  THE  Carthaginlansy  who  bad  been  at  war  with  the  Romans  for 
the  possession  of  Sicily  now  four-and-twenty  years,  suffered  not  so 
much  by  that  war  as  they  did  by  their  mercenary  sol£ers  whoteAthey 
had  injured:  for  designing  to  defraud  them  of  their  pay,  they  were 
in  a  fair  ^^y  of  k)sing  both  their  sovereign  authority  and  their  coun^ 
try  together;  for  the  mercenaries  resented  the  injury  to  that  degree, 
that  they  forthwith  revohed,  and  brought  the  Carthaginians  into  mi- 
serable distresses. 

2.  The  Carthaginians  sent  a  trumpet  to  the  revolters,  to  desire  li- 
berty to  bury  them  that  were  slain  in  the  battle.  But  Spondius,  and 
the  rest  of  the  captains  of  t lie  revolters,  with  barbarous  cruelty  not 
only  denied  that,  but  warned  them  upon  their  peril  not  to  send  any 
more  messengers  to  the;m  on  any  account  whatever;  for  if  they  did, 
they  should  sutler  tiie  same  punishment.  And  they  then  made  au 
order,  that  every  Carthaginian  they  took  prisoner  should  be  put  to 
death  in  the  same  manner  they  before  mentioned  ^ere,  and  that 
their  confederates  who  happened  to  be  taken  should  have  their  hands 
cut  off,  and  so  sent  back  to  Carthage.  This  cruehy  of  Spondius  was 
the  reason  that  Amilcar  was  forced  to  cast  off  his  former  lenity, 
and  retaliate  the  same  cruelty  upoi^the  prisoners  taken  by  the  Car- 
thaginians :  and  therefore,  after  he  had  first  racked  and  tormented 
the  captives,  he  then  cast  them  to  the  elephants,  who  trod  and 
trampled  them  under  foot,  so  as  they  died  most  miserably. 

3.  The  Hippacrineans  ai>d  Uticans  revolted  from  the  Carthagini- 
ans, and  killed  the  Carthaginian  garrison,  and  threw  them  over  the 
walls,  an<l  would  not  sufier  them  to  be  buried,  though  it  was  desired 
by  the  Carthaginians. 

Amilcar,  sirnamed  Barcas,  performed  many  great  and  excellent 
services  to  the  advantage  of  his  country,  both  against  the  Romans  In 
Sicily,  and  in  Africa  against  the  mercemnriea  and  the  Liii^aiiis^  whb^ 


590  THE  FRAGMEHTS  OF 


revolted  from  the  Carthaginians,  and  stiaigbtly  beaieged  Carthage  ic^ 
aelf*  For  in  both  these  wars  he  performed  nobla  actioos  witb  greitt 
Taloor  and  prudence,  and  therefore  was  highly  honored  bjr  all  the 
citizens.  But  after  the  war  was  ended  in  Africa^  be  got  together  a 
body  of  lewd  fellows;  and  having  enriched  himself  with  the  BpoUg 
of  his  enemies,  and  by  his  actions  gained  a  great  interest  and  the 
love  of  the  people,  he  prevailed  so  far  as  to  be  created  generaUsauKi 
of  all  Libya  for  a  short  time. 


BOOK  XXVI. 


1.  HANNIBAL  was  naturally  of  a  warlike  spiriti  and  tfain«d  upaa 
martial  affairs  from  a  child;  and  having  been  for  many  years  tage« 
tlier  in  several  expeditions  with  the  greatest  captaio8»  he  aeqiiiRd 
much  experience  in  matters  of  war,  so  that  being  by  nature  pronqpt- 
in  feats  of  arms,  and  improved  likwise  by  daily  exerciae  far  a  lei^gtb 
of  time  in  the  wars,  he  plumed  himself  upon  it,  in  ezpectalkM  oC 
doing  great  things. 

2.  Minutius,  being  overcome  by  Hannibal,  it  was  evident  by  tba 
event,  that  he  ruined  all  by  bis  imprudence  and  unskilfulnesa;  bal 
Fabius,  by  his  valour  and  policy,  preserved  the  commonwealth. 

S*  Dorimarchus,  the  provincial  governor  of  the  ^fitoliana^  cooH 
mitted  a  most  notorious  act;  for  he  robbed  the  famous  temple  of 
Jupiter  DodonaBus,  and  afterwards  burnt  the  whole  of  it  except  tht 
treasury. 

4.  Hannibal's  army  having  for  a  long  time  together  glutted  theoi* 
selves  with  the  riches  and  pleasures  of  Campania^  became  wiioUy  de* 
generated:  for  their  luxury,  soft  beds,  ointments,  wid  all  aorlsat 
delicate  fare,  lessened  tlieir  courage,  rendered  them  unfit  to  enAM 
liardships,  and  caused  both  their  bodies  and  souls  to  aink  into  eft* 
minacy. 

5.  When  Hannibal  had  spoken  much  against  the  cmd^  ani 
malice  of  the  Romans,  or  rather  their  pride  and  arr^gamse^  be  pi|t 
the  sons  of  the  senators  to  the  sword,  and  their  relatkNiay  which  ha 
picked  out  from  the  rest  of  the  captives,  in  tliis  manne 
himself  upon  the  senate. 

G.  Hannibal  being  possessed  with  an  implacable  hatred 
the  Bx)mans,  picked  out  from  among  die  captives  auch  m.  lie  tlMW||ht 
Qt^st  for  single  combat^  matched  them  oqe  with  Wtimg^ltAMmt^ 


/-..j.1^-. 


DIODORUS  SlCULUSw  Spl 

manded  them  to  fight,  brothers  with  brothers,  fathers  with  children, 
and  kinsmen  with  kinsmen.  In  this  barbarous  injunctioo,  who  cati 
refrain  from  abhorring  the  cruelty  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  adaiir*- 
ing  tlu3  piety,  patience,  and  constancy  of  the  Romans,  in  tbe  midst 
of  their  most  grievous  sufferings!  For  though  they  were  tormented 
with  fire-goads  and  cruel  stripes,  yet  none  could  be  brought  to  lift 
up  tlieir  hands  against  their  friends  and  relations,  but  all  resolutely 
died  in  the  anguish  of  their  sufferings,  preserving  themselves  pure 
and  unspotted  from  the  guilt  of  destroy  ing*  one  another. 

7.  Wiien  Gelon  and  Hiero,  kings  of  Sicily,  were  dead  in  Syracuse, 
and  Hierouymus,  who  was  very  raw  and  young,  succeeded,  the  king- 
dom was  but  ill  supplied  with  a  governor;  for,  being  flattered  and 
soothed  up  by  his  friends,  he  fell  into  luxury,  debauchery,  and  ty- 
rannical cruehy.  For  he  ravished  many  men's  wives,  murdered  his 
friends  that  advised  him,  confiscated  the  goods  of  many  without  hear- 
ing them,  and  gave  their  estates  to  the  flattering  informers;  which 
£rst  stirred  up  the  hatred  of  the  people  against  him,  then  put  them 
upon  plotting,  which  broke  out  at  last,  and  ended  in  his  destruction, 
the  coinmon  lot  of  tyrants  in  such  cases. 

8.  When  Hieronymus  was  killed,  the  Syracusans  called  a  senate, 
where  it  was  decreed  that  all  the  kindred  of  the  tyrant  should  be  put 
to  death,  both  man  and  woman,  and  that  none  of  his  race  or  family 
should  be  left  alive, 

9.  When  the  dead  body  of  Sempronius  Gracchus  was  sent  by  IVIa* 
go  to  Hannibal,  the  soldiers,  seeing  it  lie  upon  the  ground,  cried  oat 
to  have  it  cut  in  pieces,  and  to  be  hurled  away,  piece  by  piece,  out 
of  slings.  But  Flannibal,  having  an  object  before  his  eyes  to  instruct 
him  in  the  uncertainty  and  inconstancy  of  fortune,  and  honouring 
and  admiring  likewise  the  valour  of  the  man,  said  it  was  an  unwor- 
thy thing  to  wreak  a  man's  anger  upon  a  speechless  carcass;  and 
afterwards  celebrated  his  funeral  with  all  the  marks  of  honour  and 

^  respect,  and  civilly  sent  his  bones  and  ashes  in  an  urn  to  the  Roman 
camp. 

9.  When  Syracuse  was  taken,  all  the  citizens  went  forth  to  meet 
Marcel! us  with  olive-branches  in  their  hands;  and  he  told  them  he 
would  spare  all  the  lives  of.those  that  were  freemen  of  the  city,  but 
all  their  goods  should  be  a  prey  for  his  soldiers. 

10.  Tlie  Carthaginians,  after  they  had  made  an  end  of  the  Libyc 
war,  severely  punished  the  Micatanian  Numidians,  with  their  wives 
and  children  ;  for  they  crucified  all  their  captives,  insomuch  as  their 
posterity,  ever  since  keeping  in  remembrance  the  cruelty  executed 
upon  their  forefathers,  are  most  implacable  enemies  to  the  Cartha- 
ginians. 


^ 


TBI  ntACME^TS  OF 


«e  vaJourof  Asdrubal  l£  not  to  be  parsed  over  in  sticftcr* 

le  SOD  of  Acnilcar  Barcaa,  tb^  brateftt  cnptaki  of  hjj  age, 

(iciltan  war  was  the  oniy  geucral  that  often  ovtrcAOK 

and  having  put  a  bmppy  eini  to  the  cjvll  witr^  wks  tlte 

led  over  with  an  urmyioio  Sp«m:  And  this  AnInthiaJ  ap^ 

HL  >tira  fton  not  unwoTtf^y  the  honour  and  <L]giuty  u(  suchl 

J  he  ^9s  gienerally  ovn^ned  to  be  the  best  soUli<:r,  cic\t  lo 

t  brother,  of  all  the  Canhaj^ntHO  comaiunders^  ^ndfce 

wets  tliereiore  by  Hanmbal  left  gf^ncral  <)f  all  tiic  forces  io  S,^ 

*  where  he  fought  nriatiy  battles  j  and  freqoently  freietag  his  army  from 

diibcult  straits^  he  ofteD  ran  himself  into  great  dmi^rs:  and  bci]|| 

lit  length  forced  tip  into  tlie  neart  o    the  coaotry,  farfrom  \he  io, 

^D  account  of  his  valour  he  got  to,      hnr  a  migfity  army^  ami  «t  litt 

came  unexpectedly  into  Italy. 

12*  Nahts^  king  of  Laceds^monj  murdct>cd  Pelop^^  ibe  eon  of  Lf* 
cnrgus  the  former  king,  wbeu  be  wtis  but  a  very  cbii<l;  for  be  w» 
afraid  when  be  was  j^own  up  to  man's  estute^  he  would  efttleavDur 
to  free  and  rescue  his  country,  on  account  of  hi;;  being  of  the  bl«)d- 
royal.  And  for  this  reason  he  put  lo  death  the  nobility  of  SparU, 
>&Dd  hired  the  basest  and  most  abject  ft^llavs^  wherever  he  coold 
find  them,  to  be  his  iife-guavd,  and  protect  bira  in  his  domLoioc, 
So  that  robbers  of  temples,  thieves,  highwaymen,  and  coodemued 
persons^  flocked  from  all  places  to  Sparta.  For,  iste(^ing  into  tbe 
throne  by  wiekedness,  he  bad  no  expectaticm  of  pieservsoi^  irhat  he 
had  so  wickedly  got,  but  by  the  help  of  fiuck  pMfaoe  aiiiiinpi«is 
fellows. 

13.  The  Cretans  fitted  cot  seyen  ships  for  pimcjr^  wni  rohbedina- 
ny  vessels  at  sea;  whereupon  the  merchants  being  altogatlKr dEs- 
couraged,  the  Rhodians  looking  upon  it  to  heloBgioithein  toxedsess 
this  mischief,  prdclaimeil  war  against  the  <}retans. 

14.  Pleminius  was  left  governor  of  Locris  by  Scipio^  aa4  beoiga 
profligate  wretch,  he  forced  open  the  treasuiy  of  iProterpioa,  and 
carried  away  all  the  sacred  valuables.     The  Locrians,  enraged '«l<fae 
fact,  addressed  themselvas  tothepeopleof  Rome,  sod «Dtfeated.tfaeir 
relief  according  to  their  usual  good  faith;  whereupon,  two  anlkacy 
tribunes  seem  much  offended  with  the  impious  act  oonMnhted,  sad 
sharply  rebuked  Pleminius;  not  that  they  were  renUy  angry 4rt  wiut 
was  done,  but  because  they  themselves  had  no  part  of  the  money.^ 
But  in  a  short  time  after,  the  goddess  revenged  their  impiety.  Fortbis 
was  reported  to  be  the  most  famous  temple  of  all  that  vreve  in  Ilil^'t 
and  in  all  ages  before  that  time,  through  the  care  of  the  inhabitaflt<) 
had  remained  safe  and  unviolated.     For  at  the  time  «ehen  Pyrrbos 
t^nsported  his  troops  out  of  Sicily  to  Locris.  and  bis  s^oldien  ^^ 


biotoORud  sictJLU^.  693 

pressing  upon  him  for  pay,  he  was  fort^ed  to  make  use  of  this  sacred 
treasure;  but  in  returning;  back,  they  say^  he  suffered  much>  his 
whole  fleet  being  dispersed,  shattered  and  torn  to  pieces  by  a  fierce 
and  violent  tempest,  and  therefore  Pyrrhus  himself^  out  of  a  rell-^ 
gious  reverence  for  the  goddess,  endeavoured  to  pacify  her,  and  re- 
turned every  penny  of  the  money  before  he  left  the  country.  But 
the  tribunes  before  mentioned,  pretending  to  abhor  the  sacrilege, 
sided  with  the  Locrians,  and  rebuking  Pleminius  for  the  crime> 
threatened  severely  to  punish  him*  The  quarrel  grbwing  hotter  and 
hotter,  it  came  at  length  to  blows>  and  the  tribunes  threw  Pleminius 
upon  tlie  ground,  and  bit  off  his  ears  and  nose,  and  sliced  off  both 
his  lips.  But  afterwards  PJeminius  caused  the  tribunes  to  be  seized, 
and  whipped  them  to  death  with  rods.  In  the  mean  time  the  se- 
nate and  people  of  Rome,  through  a  religious  awe  of  tlie  gods,  were 
in  great  concern  about  this  sacrilegious  act;  and  upob  this  occasion 
the  enemies  of  Publius  Scipio  having  got  an  opportunity  to  cast  dirt 
Upon  him,  accused  him  as  if  he  had  been  the  adviser  of  Pleminius, 
and  tliat  he  had  done  all  by  his  order  and  command*  Wljereupon, 
by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  two  tribunes  of  the  people  and  an  sSdile 
were  sent  into  Sicily,  with  orders  to  bring  Scipio  forthwith  to  Rome^ 
{f  they  found  that  the  sacrilege  had  been  committed  by  his  com- 
mand or  contrivance;  but  if  they  could  not  discover  any  such  thing, 
that  then  they  should  suffer  him  to  transport  the  forces  into  Africa. 
While  they  were  upon  their  journey,  Scipio  sent  for  Pleminius,  and 
cast  him  into  gaol;  and  every  day  with  great  care  and  diligence  ex- 
ercised the  soldiers;  of  which  the  tribunes, of  the  people  so  much 
approved,  that  they  highly  commanded  bin).  But  Pleminius  being 
brought  bound  to  Rome,  the  senate  forthwith  cbmniitted  him  to  pri- 
son, and  a  short  time  after  he  died  there  in  custody*  His  goods  wer^ 
all  devoted  to  Proserpina,  and  what  they  were  deficient  10  making 
Jsatisfaction,  was  decreed  by  the  senate  to  be  supplied  otit  of  ih^ 
public  treasury;  and  that  it  should  be  death  for  any  soldier  to  with-^ 
hold  apy  goods  or  money  whatsoever  he  mi^ht  have  in  his  Iiands> 
which  had  been  taken  from  the  treasury  of  Proserpiiia^a  temple;  and 
further  decreed,  that  the  Locrians  should  be  free. 

15.  Scipio,  when  he  saw  Syphax  among  other  prisonet-s  led  up  id 
him  in  chains,  at  the  first  fell  a-weeping,  to  consider  the  former 
royal  state  and  dignity  of  the  person :  resolving  therefore  to  use  his 
fortunate  success  with  moderation  and  humanity,  commanded  that 
Syphax  should  be  freed  from  his  chains,  and  gave  up  his  tent  to  hin^^ 
for  the  reception  of  himself  and  the  royal  family;  and  retaining 
liim  still  as  a  prisoner^  yet  with  all  the  liberty  imaginabk>  often 
courteously  conversed  with  him,  and  entertained  him  at  his  tdble» 

Vol.2.  No.  47*  6GG0 


5f)4  THE  FRAGMENTS  Of 

I  ■'    •       t^         ■  f  ■  ,  ^     I'l 

IG.  Sophonisba,  who  was  the  wife  of  Masinissa^  and  afterwards  of 
Syphax>  but  being  taken  prisoner  was  afterwards  recovered  by  Ma- 
sinissa,  was  a  woman  of  admirable  beauty,  and  by  her  cunning  tricks 
and  charming  devices  could  obtain  Whatevei'  she  pleased :  and  be- 
ing confederated  with  the  Carthaginians  her  countrymen,  plied  her 
husband  every  day  to  fell  off  from  the  Romans;  which  when  Sy- 
phax  was  assured  of;,  he  acquainted  Scipio  with  the  design,  and  cau- 
tioned him  to  have  a  special  care  of  that  woman.  All  which  bein^ 
confirmed  by  Laelius,  Scipio  commanded  the  lady  to  be  brought  to 
him^'which  Masinissa  refusing,  he  threatened  him  severely ;  at  which 
Masinissa  was  so  alarmed,  that  he  ordered  that  some  persons  should 
be  sent  from  Scipio  to  fetch  her  away.  'But  in  the  interim  he  went 
into  his  tent,  and  forced  Sophonisba  to  drink  a  cup  of  poison. 

1  /•  Scipio,  through  his  clemency  and  compassion  towards  all  the 
prisoners  he  took,  for  ever  after  was  secure  of  Masinissa,  as  a  faith* 
ful  and  constant  confederate. 

18.  Hannibal  called  together  his  confederates,  and  told  them  that 
he  must  -of  necessity  pass  over  into  Africa,  and  that  he  had  provided 
shipping  for  all  those  that  were  willing  to  go  along  with  bim;  some 
agreed  to  the  thing;  but  as  to  those  that  chose  rather  to  continue  in 
Italy,  he  compassed  round  with  his  army,  and  gave  his  soldiers  liber- 
ty to  pick  out  as  many  of  them  as  they  pleased  to  be  their  captives; 
and  the  rest,  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand  foot>»aod  three  tho«« 
sand  horse  he  put  to  the  sword,  together  with  a  vast  nomber  of 
cattle, 

J  9.  Four  thousand  horse  of  those  that  went  over  to  Masinissa  af- 
ter the  rout  of  Syphax,  deserted  him  and  came  in  to  Hannibal  t  bat 
he,  enraged  at  them,  compassed  them  round  with  his  army,  and  shot 
them  all  to  death  with  darts  and  arrows,  and  divided  their  horses  a- 
mongst  his  soldiers. 

20.  Scipio  sent  ambassadors  to  Carthage,  but  the  common  people 
,  were  on  the  point  to  have  knocked  them  all  on  the  head:  but  the  so- 
ber men  of  the  city  preserved  them  from  that  imminent  danger,  and 
got  them  on  ship- board,  in  order  to  send  them  back  to  Scipio*s  camp: 
but  those  who  were  popular,  and  sided  with  the  people  of  Carthage, 
ordered  the  master  of  the  vessel,  that  when  the  ship  wherein  the  am- 
bassadors were  began  to  sail,  he  should  throw  all  overboard,  which  he 
performed  accordingly. 

However,  the  ambassadors  swam  to  land  and  got  safe  to  Scipio: 
but  the  gods  within  a  short  time  after,  by  a  remarkable  Instance,  evi- 
denced their  power  to  punish  those  who  designed  so  wicked  an  act. 
Fur  it  happened  about  that  time  the  Carthaginian  ambassadors  were 
iciurnin^  from  Uonic,  and  were  driven  by  a  storm  into  the  midst  of 


DIODORU9  SICULUS.  69& 

tlie  Roman  fleet,  and  brought  to  Seipio;  and  when  all  cried  cot  to 
retaliate  the  wickedness  of  the  others  upon  the  heads  of  the  ambas- 
sadors that  were  then  taken,  Scipio  utterly  refused,  saying — ^That 
they  themselves  ought  not  to  do  that  for  which  they  blamed  the  Car- 
thaginians. They  were  therefore  all  discliarged,  and  p^me  safe  to 
Carthage,  ^nd  highly  e!{;tolled  the  pi^ty  of  the  Romans, 

21.  Philip,  king  of  Macedon*,  persuaded  Picoeardus  the  iGtoIian, 
a  daring  man,  to  become  a  pirate,  ^nd  to  that  e^id  ddivered  to  him 
twenty  ships,  with  orders  to  exfi^t  tribute  from  the  islands,  and  assist 
the  Cretans  against  Rhp4es«  Hereupon,  according  to  his  orders,  he 
robbed  and  spoiled  the  merchants;  and  wasting  the  islands,  screwed^ 
abundance  of  money  from  them. 

22.  Philip  the  Macedonian  kingf^  had  with  him  one  Heraclides 
a  Ti^rentine,  a  wicked  fellow,  who  in  private  was  constantly  buzzing 
calumnies  and  false  accusations  against  his  best  friends  in  his  ear, 
and  incited  him  at  length  to  that  degree  of  impiety,  that  he  put  five 
of  the  senators  to  death;  so  that  the  king's  afiairs  declined,  and  be- 
came worse  and  worse :  for  undertaking  wars  frivolously  and  unne- 
cessarily, he  was  in  danger  of  having  lost  his  ^hole  kingdom  to  the 
Romans;  for  none  of  h^  friends  durst  speak  freely  to  him  or  advise 
him,  all  dreading  his  stubborn  and  haughty  temper.  He  also  made 
war  upon  the  Pardanians  without  the  least  provocation^  and  slew  ten 
thousand  of  them  in  battle. 

23.  This  king  Philip  of  Macedon,  be^des  his  rooted  covetousness,^ 
was  so  lifted  up  with  his  prosperous  successes,  that  he  put  his  friends 
to  death  without  any  legal  trial  or  just  cause,  and  robbed  and  spoil- 
ed the  temples  and  sepulchres*     In  like  manner  Antiochus  attempt- 
ing to  rob  the  temple  of  Jupiter  in  i£iymais:{,  there  received  a  just 
overthrow,  with  the  loss  of  his  life  and  the  total  ruin  of  his  army. 
And  both  of  them  conceiting  that  their  armies  were  invincible,  lose* 
all  in  one  battle,  and  were  forced  to  receive  laws  imposed  upon  therai 
by  others;  and  imputed  their  misfortuaes  to  their  own  miscarriages,^ 
and  acknowledged  themselves  behpldipg  to  the  humanity  and  gene- 
rosity of  the  victors,  for  the  pardon  of  their  offences;  and,  according 
to  the  desert  of  their  own  wicked  actions,  they  saw  their  kingdoms, 
through  the  anger  of  the  gods,  grievously  plagued  and  afflicted.    But 
the  Rymaus  then,  and  ever  after,  beginning  no  wars  bui  upon  just 
and  honourable  principles,  and  having  a  sacred  regard  to  their  leagues 
and  oaths,  were  always  deservedly  assisted  by  the  gods  in  all  thei^ 
counsels  and  designs. 

*  This  was  Philip  the  falser  of  Ferse\jLs«  the  last  kiug  of  Macedon. 

t  The  same  Philip* 

^  iu  Persia. — Sec  this  story  in  1  Mac.  c.  6,  ▼.  1,  *,  3L 


596  tRH  FftAGMiSMtS  6t 


24.  Th6  saifie  Philip  being  in  extreme  want  of  prbriMdiij  obnti* 
noally  wasted  and  spoiled  the  coantry  of  AttatiU^  Up  to  the  -wXf 
gates  of  Pergamena*.  He  ruifaed  likewise  t(i0  tediflletf  in  tlie  waSfi^ 
urbs  of  Pergamas,  especially  Nicephorus,  wliich  was  ezeedHiilgricli: 
besides  several  other  sumptuous  fabrics;  for  out  of  hatred  to  IbtB!* 
lus^  because  he  could  not  cdtch  hirn^  he  vente^  |^is  iii|e  iipoii  thes6 
places. 

25.  Philip  entering  into  Attica,  encamped  at  CyotiMrges,  and  af- 
terwards burnt  i^ca^amia,  demolished  the  sep^ldifes^  and  robbed  ^ 
temples  of  the  gods;  and  gratifying  his  rage  antl  fory^  aa  if  he  hal 
been  only  incensed  against  the  people  of  Athens^  and  bot  agabat  tlia^ 
gods  themselves,  as  he  was  evil  spoken  df  before,  $d  he  waa  ifb# 
hated  of  all,  and  in  a  short  tim^  he  was  ovetlaken  by  the  vengeaneaof 
the  gods,  for  he  was  nearly  being  ruined  by  his  .Owi\'\|iipnldeoe^  bftt 
preserved  by  the  clemency  of  the  Romans.  ^ 

26:  Philip  perceiving  he  was  hated  by  altiiost  all  th^  ttieiMioiuailiiy^ 
for  his  ^indness  to  Hcraclidea,  pot  him  in  prison.  Thii  HteadBdiei 
was  a  Tarentine,  a  notorious  wicked  fellow,  wbd  frM|  a  mUA  adl 
gentle  prince,  changed  Philip  into  a  fierce  aod  cmel  tyrant^  and  fit 
which  he  t  was  exceedingly  hati^d  by  all  thei[jr^iati$j  ai  w<^.iiAa.' 
Macedonians. 

27*  The  name  and  fame  of  Hannibal,  was  ciibulated  Of«r  afftlia 
world,  and  therefore  in  every  city  and  town  wherever  he  canie^  tfacj 
assembled  in  great  multitudes  to  see  him* 

28.  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  for  some  time  reigoed  irith  grei^ 
commendation :  but  afterwards  corrupted  by  parasitei^  lie  began  ta 
form  a  dislike  towards  his  tutor  Aristomenes,  for  the  freedom  lie  tdek 
in  telling  him  of  his  faults,  who  had  all  along  managed  ereiy  HiSag 
with  great  prudence,  and  whose  advice  Ptolemy  had  befinr^  Mlfitii 
as  his  father;  but  at  length'he  sent  him  out  of  the  world,  hg  fiij^ciiijl. 
him  to  drink  a  cup  of  poison  |.  From  that  time  incieaaing  ib  fero- 
city, and  making  use  of  tyrannical  cruelty  instead  of  ttgfi  ^vMianff^ 
he  was  hated  by  the  Egyptians,  and  not  far  offfiom  the  loaa  of  Hii 
kingdom. 

29.  There  is  a  temple  not  far  from  Chalcis,  called  Delium,  lAM 
a  considerable  number  of  Roman  soldiers  who  weie  eareleialy  Slu- 
ing about  to  indulge  their  curiosity,  were  suddenly  eat  off  hy  iASi^  i 
chus§,  in  a  time  of  peace,  and  before  any  war  was  prpc1aiine4«  1^ 
which  the  king  was  greatly  condemned  and  censured  by  theOraidniJ^ 
as  occasioning  a  war  with  the  Romans.    And  thereli^  Ittaia  Ah 

*  Or  PergioM,  one  ofHie  letea  ebardM  ot'AtUi 
t  Ucraclidev  |  Uemldck.  f 


iilODOtttJS  8ICULUA.  5^7 


jninius,  who  was  then  in  Corinth,  called  gods  and  men  to  witness^ 
that  it  was  the  king  who  first  began  the  war. 

30.  Antiochus  wintered  at  Demetrius  *,  where  he  laid  aside  all  car^ 
of  warlike  affairs,  being  then  aboTe  fifty  years  of  age.  But  he  fell  in 
love  with  a  young  lady  f,  and  married  her,  and  set  forth  most  magni- 
ficent shews  and  public  games;  by  which  meai^s  he  not  only  weak- 
ened his  own  body,  and  effeminated  his  mind^  but  enfeebled  the 
courage  of  his  s^fwy;  and  therefore  his  soldiers,  who  had  passed  the 
winter  in  luxury  iin^  voluptuousness,  when  they  were  dr^wn  out^ 
could  neither  endure  hunger  nor  thirst,  nor  any  Qther  hardship;  but 
some  of  th(^  fel]  ^ick^  aqd  others  i||raggled  about  here  aqd  theire  fat 
from  their  colour^. 

31.  King  Antipchus  Cfteiog  the  cities  of  Thessaly  inclining  to  the 
Romans,  and  the  $low  motion  of  the  forces  he  expected  out  6f  Asitj 
and  tiie  carelessness  and  sloth  of  t)ie  ^tolians,  continually  fratnitif 
and  pretending  one  excuse  after  anQthei*,  was  in  great  anxiety,  and 
very  uneasy;  so  that  he  was- highly  iQ^ensed  at  those  who  advised 
him  to  begin  the  war,  at  a  time  when  he  he  was  unprepared,  and 
had  no  confederates,  but  only  the  i£toliaDS.  But  he  greatly  admired 
Hannibal  for  his  prudence,  who  advised  him  to  the  contrary,  and 
therefore  now  reposed  all  his  confidence  in  him;  and  whereas  he 
suspected  him  before,  he  made  use  of  him  as  his  most  trusty  friend 
and  counsellor. 

32.  Antiochus,  wholly  disheartened  by  his  late  rout,  determined 
to  leave  Europe,  and  in  Asia  to  act  on|y  on  the  defensive.  He  there- 
fore ordered  all  the  Lysimachians  to  quit  the  city  t,  and  pass  over 
into  Asia :  for  which  every  body  censured  him  as  being  guilty  of  a 
very  imprudent  act,  whirrtby,  without  an  effort  being  made,  he  gave 
up  into  the  hands  of  x^e  eneuiy  a  city  so  advantageously  situated,  as 
might  have  provid  a  clit- ck  to  ihe  passage  of  his  troops  out  of  Europe 
into  Asia,  which  aftt^rwards  proved  to  be  the  case;  forScipio  seizing 
on  Lysimachia  thus  deserted,  made  great  advantage  of  it  in  transport- 
ing his  army. 

33.  Marcus  Fulvius  the  prfBtor§,  was  deservedly  punished  for  his 
abuse  of  the  Roman  confederates  in  Liguria:  for  he  disarmed  the 
Cinomani,  (who  received  him  as  a  friend  and  ally),  although  he  could 
find  nothing  against  them;  which  matter  reaching  the  ears  of  the 
consul,  he  ordered  him  to  restore  the  arms,  and  imposed  a  mulct 
upon  him. 

34.  King  Antiochus  being  in  want  of  money,  and  hearing  there 

*■  h\  Thessaly.  f  Of  Chalcis,  daughter  of  Cleoproltmai . 

X  Lysliuaciiia  in  the  Hellespont. 

'§  Chief  justice,  or  governor  of  a  piovince;  or  chief  fomouiii^er  iatn  uwj. 


59»  THE  FRAGMENTS  OT. 

were  vast  treasures  of  gold  and  silver^  and  other  precious  jeweUyOf* 
ferings  made  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  B^lns,  to  M)jmm$f  sesolvedl 
to  rifle  it.  Comiog  therefore  into  the  proviooe  of  JEiymaii,  and 
pretending  that  the  inhabitants  of  that  place  had  rabed  a  war  i^9St. 
biin,  he  robbed  the  temple^  and  got  together  a  great  sum  of  money; 
lut  in  a  sliort  time  after>  the  gods  executed  vengeance  opoiD  Urn  fior 
tliis  sacrilege. 

3S«  Philopoemen,  governor  of  Achaia,  was  both  au  ^aLcdlent  aol-t 
dier  and  a  statesman^  who  all  his  life  long  was  of  ^  hhumlesa  conver- 
sation, and  (i&d  been  frequently  praetor*  Having  governed  the  com- 
S|iouwealth  for  forty  years  together,  he  muck  ^^vanced  the  alBuia  of 
Achaia,  and  was  always  afiable  and  coA^rteous  eveii  to  the  meanest 
persons,  and  though  for  his  virtue  h^  was  admired  both  hj  the  Gfe* 
ciana  i^nd  Ronuins,  yet  he  came  to  an  unfortunate  e^dt  but  hj  a  din 
vine  providence  his  unhappy  e&it  was. recompensed  afker  kb  death 
with  divine  honours;  for  besides  what  was  publicly  decreed  by  tha. 
Achaians  in  honour  of  him,  the  citizens  hoik  a  temple  ia  zemem^ 
brance  of  him,  and  appointed  a  buU  for  a  yeigrly  si^rifice  to  hioo^  and 
ordered  young  men  to  sipg  hyn;\ns  ii^  praise  and  comiqend^itiop  of 
his  noble  acts.  \, 

3G.  Hannibal  was  the  most  expert  general,  and  p^rfgnoed  dm 
greatest  enterprises  of  any  of  the  Carthaginians:  he  was  oevec  troa^ 
bled  with  any  mutinies  in  his  army,  but  by  his  prudent  condtict  kep( 
tbcm  in  their  duty  and  orderly  discipline*  although  they  dtflBnred  as 
much  from  one  another  in  their  several  hun^ours,  asi  they  did  in  theia 
various  languages. 

For  whereas  those  of  his  own  nation  were  accustomed  upon  verf 
slight  occasions  to  desert  and  fly  over  to  the  enemy,  npoe  under  hiq 
dared  ever  attempt  any  such  thing. 

And  though  he  marched  from  place  to  place  with  ?ery  great  armia^ 
yet  he  never  wanted  either  money  or  provisions*  And  thut  which  ii( 
most  remarkable  is,  that  the  foreigners  and  mercenary  soldien  kive^ 
him  as  well,  if  not  more,  than  his  own  countiymen  didi^ 
therefore  his  army  in  cxf^ct  discipline,  he  performed. the  gceater  i 
more  renowned  actions,  l^or  be  made  war  on  the  most  potent  uk 
tions,  and  wasted  and  harassed  almost  all  Italy,  for  the  apeoe  of  at) 
venteen  years.  He  was  so  victorious  in  every  battle  he  foi^gfal^  wfd 
made  such  terrible  slaughter^  ^mong  them  who  were  reputed  the  loed^ 
of  the  world,  that,  on  account  of  the  prodigious  multitades  that  ww| 
cut  off  by  him,  none  durst  look  him  in  the  face^  or  fogpig^  hig^  jg^ 
battle. 

He  likewise  laid  many  cities  in  ashes,  which  he  had  taken  faj  staviji 
and  almost  depopulated  Italy,  which  was  before  full  qf  pcMle;  all 


rtlODORUS  SlCtJLUS.  Ag^ 

tvhich,  as  they  were  accomplished  by  the  strength  and  wealth  of  hi» 
own  fellow-citizens,  so  likewise  by  great  numbers  of  foreign  ailxi'^ 
liaries  and  confederates,  those  Who  by  their  unaniniUy  were  uncon-^ 
qacrable,  he  overcame  by  policy  and  warlike  stratagems;  and  so  tnadb 
It  evident,  that  as  the  soul  governs  the  actions  of  the  body,  so  a  ge- 
neral rules  and  directs  all  to  a  right  end  in  an  army 

37.  P.  Scipio,  when  he  was  but  very  young,  performed  great  and 
wonderful  things  in  Spain,  beyond  the  expectations  of  all ;  and  hav- 
ing beaten  the  Carthaginians,  delivered  his  country  from  immit;ient 
perils,  and  compelled  Hannibal,  ^ho  Was  tiot  to  be  overcome  bj 
force  of  arms,  to  leave  Italy  without  fighting  a  stroke;  and  at  las^ 
by  his  valour  and  military  conduct,  overcame  Hannibal  in  a  great  bat- 
tle, and  brought  Carthage  under  the  Roman  yoke. 

38.  Leocritus,  general  of  king  Pharnaccs,  after  he  had  often  as^ 
saulted  the  city  of  Pius*,  at  length  forced  the  mercenary  soldiers 
who  defended  the  place,  to  surrender  the  town  on  the  condition --^ 
That  they  should  be  safely  conducted  to  what  place  soever  they  pleas* 
«i  to  go:  who,  when  they  were  marched  out  of  the  city,  and  brought 
on  their  way  according  to  the  capitulation,  Leocritus,  (who  was  or*- 
dercd  by  Pharnaccs  to  put  them  all  to  the  sword,  because  they  had 
formerly  incensed  him),  against  the  faith  of  the  articles,  as  they  were 
upon  their  march,  fell  upon  them  with  darts^  and  slew  them  every 
man. 

39.  Seleucus  having  raised  a  great  army,  and  on  his  march  to  as- 
sist Pharnaces,  was  now  ready  to  pass  mount  Taurus,  but  calling  to 
mind  the  league  the  Romans  had  made  with  his  father,  by  which  it 
was  not  lawful 

40.  But  they  who  had  committed  such  a  notoriously  wicked  act^ 
and  had  murdered  Demetrius  f,  escaped  not  divine  justice.  For  those 
who  contrived  the  false  accusations  from  Rome,  within  a  short  time 
after  incurred  the  king's  displeasure,  and  were  put  to  death.  And  as 
for  Philip  himself,  he  was  restless  all  the  days  of  his  life  after,  and 
so  much  troubled  in  mind  for  the  murder  of  so  hopeful  a  son,  that  he 
did  not  survive  above  two  years,  but  pined  away  with  extreme  grief* 
And  Perseus,  the  author  and  contriver  of  the  whole,  being  conquered 
by  the  Romans,  and  flying  to  Samothracia,  by  reason  of  the  wicked«« 
ness  of  the  act  perpetrated  by  him  in  the  murder  of  his  brother,  could 
find  no  sanctuary  in  that  holy  temple. 

41.  Tiberius  Gracchus  being  sent  lieutenant-general  into  Spain> 
vigorously  managed  tlic  war:  for  though  he  was  very  young,  yet  for 
valour  and  prudence  he  excelled  his  equals  in  age,  and  gave  such 

*  Rntiicr  Tcios. 
t  TI>c  son  of  Philip,  king  of  Maccdou,  Uic  father  of  PefsvoK 


$00  taK  HUOM£KTA  <Mf 

E=asas«=ss 


^ideot  signs  of  ioing  grW  tWogBj  that  kt  wf^  pNVOvd^  94- 

42.  Paulus  ,£tniiitt8,  tht  coilsvl  and  |ltitrott  iDf  ^  lfaQe4oiu«]B|» 
«iw  a  man  eminent  6>r  nobknesp  at  binb)  fiudeiioey  wd  romriinfw 
of  person,  and  thereEoie  all  marks  of  honour  were  conferred  on  hip 
by  the  Romans  his  couotrymen.  Every  one  echoed  forth  Us  piiiie 
while  alive,  and  When  dead  his  fame  and  renown,  (together  widi  the 
profit  and  advanuge  prociired  by  his  valour  to  the  fioitiiiio&wctltl^f 
aurvived  him* 

43.  Antiochus*,  n0w  recently  Hdvanced  to  the  ihrdoe  of  Syrisy 
hfegan  a  Hew  course  of  life,  unusual  with,  kings  and  primaes*  For  at 
£xst,  he  would  steal  out  of  his  palace  unknowu  to  atiy  of  hb  attend* 
ants,  and  walk  about  the  cjty,  calling  one  or  another  to  hiai  where  hi 
came  as  he  thought  fit.  Then  he  took  a  pride  In  being  fiuniliarand 
drinking  with  ordinary  fellowsiand  mean  and  poor  travellers  and  stnoh 
gers;  and  if  perchitnce  he  discerned  any  young  men  met  together  |ft 
celebrate  a  festival,  he  would  presently  join  them>  with  hia  cop  10  hii 
band,  ^nd  become  one  of  the  choir;  so  that  many  were  often ao 
stmtled  with  the  strangeness  of  the  things  that  they  would  rail  awsyl 
and  others  through  fear  were  struck  with  amasementj  not  nblc  toaqr 
o  word*  Lastly,  he  would  kjr  aside  the  royal  robes,  nod  pot  on  a 
Roman  gown  f;  and  in  imitation  of  the  candidates  at  Booiet  who 
were  soliciting  preferment,  would  salute  and  hug  every 
fejUow  he  met  in  the  street,  sometimes  desiring  they  would 
choice  of  him  to  be  asdile,  and  at  other  times  to  be  a  firibaue  of  tkr 
people. 

Having  at  length  obtained  the. office  he  desired,  he  would  aoMl 
himself  updn  an  ivory  tribunal,  and>  after  the  manner  of  the  Roman% 
bear  causes;  and  was  so  earnest  and  diligent  in  the  decisioii  of  coii» 
troversies,  both  between  foreigners  and  citizens,  that  the  aaoat  pr^ 
dept  and  serious  among  them  knew  not  what  to  think  of  luoi,  oral 
what  he  aimed  or  designed;  for  some  gave  a  fiivourable 
tion  of  it>  others  accounted  it  folly>  and  some  no  other  than 
right  madness. 

44.  After  Eumenes  was  way^laid,  and  tiews  eametoi 
that  he  was  dead^  Attalus,  rather  too  rashly^  married  the  qneeas  hul 
Eumenes  returning  a  little  time  after,  took  no  nbtioeoM^  botm* 
braced  his  brotber>  and  behaved  with  the  same  respect  tonuida  luv 
as  he  did  before. 

45.  Cptys,  king  of  Thhice,  was  valiant  in  war,  aDdpradetttiaUs 
counsels,  and  highly  to  be  commended  for  bis  oare  and  diligeMO  ju 
all  other  respects:  besides  all  which  he  was  of  sif^iilar  1 

*  The  Third.  f  dOlcdl 


'v^i^alk^^A:^. 


blODORUS  SICULU9.  COt 

^    -  -  »  ■'  ■         ■  ■   ■  ■      I  .1         ■     - 

and  sobriety;  and  that  which  vi*as  most  remarkable  for  his  honour  and 
commendation  was.^Tbat  heiwas  altogether  free  from  tlie  oatural 
vices  of  the  Thracians,  '.\ 

4G.  Perseus  havidg  taken  Chlilesfta  by-stonh,  piit  all  tiiit  were 
able  to  bear  arms  to  the  sword;  and  tl^bereas  five  hundred  of  the 
garrison  soldiers  threw  themselves  into  a  fort,  and  treated  for  their 
lives^  the  king,  upon  their  laying  dowd  their  arms,  gave  t-hem 
quarter,  and  liberty  to  be  gone.  But  when  they  were  out  of:  the 
town,  and  on  their  march>  according  to  the  terms  granted  them> 
the  Macedonians,  whether  at  theii"  owti  instigation,  or  by  order 
from  the  king  is  uncertain,  pursued  them  and  slew  them  every 
man. 

47.  Charopes  the  £pirot,  and  son  of  that  Chari[ypiis  who  in  the  war 
against  Philip  sent  a  guide  to  Titus  Flaminius,  to  direct  him  through 
the  strait  and  difficult  passes  in  the  mountains,  by  which  means  the 
Romans  unexpectedly  passing  those  place8>  possessed  themselves  of 
the  straits;  this  Charopes,  I  say,  being  bred  up  at  Rome,  iipou  the 
account  of  the  good  services  of  his  grandfather  to  the  Romans,  had 
great  interest  with  the  most  eminent  persons  of  quality,  and  berng  a 
fellow  of  most  extraordinary  malice  and  impudence,  was  continually 
at  Rome  accusing  and  slandering  the  chiefest  persons  of  quaKty  at 
Epirus,  so  that  by  ter/ifying  all  that  were  in  a  capacity  to  (>pfK>se 
him,  he  became  as  it  were  absolute  lord  and  master  of  all  Epiros* 
^*  Cephalus*  therefore,  and  others  who  were  oppressed  by  his  ca- 
^^  lumnies,  were  forced  to  confederate  with  Perseus,"  and  to  that 
#nd  sen  I  messengers  to  him  into  Macedonia,  and  by  them  promised 
to  deliver  Epirus  into  his  hands. 

48.  King  Eumenes  being  out  of  all  hopes  of  taking  Abdera, 
which  he  then  besieged,  dealt  underhandedly  with  one  PVthon,  a 
chief  man  among  the  Abderites,  who  by  his  servants  and  freemen^  to 
the  number  of  two  hundred,  guarded  the  strongest  [wirt  of  the  city* 
This  man,  being  corrupted  by  bribes,  and  won  by  fair  promises,  let 
bim  in  at  the  gates,  and  so  Eumenes  gained  the  city.  But  Python^ 
receiving  but  a  poor  and  mean  reward  for  his  treason,  and  seeing  be« 
fore  his  eyes  the  utter  ruin  and  destruction  of  his  country,  repented 
i>f  what  he  had  done,  and  pined  away  with  grief* 

49.  When  an  opportunity  was  put  into  the  hands  of  Perseus  to 
cut  oft'  the  whole  army,  he  loitered  not  far  off,  i  bout  Dium  in  Mace-^ 
donia,  careless  and  negligent  in  the  very  nick  of  time,  wherein  only 
by  a  shout  and  sound  of  trumpet  he  might  have  surprised  and  taken 
all  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  who  were  then  shut  up  and  enclosed 
within  steep  and  craggy  rocks;  and,  as  the  king  was  negligent,  «a> 

*  This  is  omitted  in  the  Greek. 

Vol.  2.  No.  47.  hhhh 


6ot  taBnAOWMntu 


the  Mactdoniaa  guaiik  thst  w«fe  pkeed  iipomllw 

tuns  were  in  like  manner  «t  carelete  in  their  wefteli  m  tbeir  Micnl 

posts. 

50.  Fersens,  lodkfaif  npon  all  to  be  lort^  and  hdng  aitegslliu  Jis- 
comagedy  emmanded  Nieo^  hk  lord^treasnrerj  t»tliMiir*all  Am  bmn- 
ney  and  treasare  at  Phoeis*  into  the  sea» 

He  sent  away  likewise  Aadronicos^  the  sqaiieof  his  bodly^  tellMa* 
saloniea^  with  orders  'forthwith  to  bom  his  wholB  fact;  who  canip 
neeordingly  to  Thessalonica,  bat  with  a  design  to  act  more  paodandy | 
for  he  forbore  to  ezeeute  his  orders^  hoping^  by  presenrfaig  dM  i 
ping^  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  Romans. 

51.  Perseus  in  the  mean  time  pulling  down  all  the  golden  i 
at  Dionf^  ordored  all  the  inhabitants,  with  their  witns  and  eUkkpen^ 
to  remove  along  with  him  to  Pydnat,  than  which  (a  nuui  ansy  JM[^ 
say)  nothing  was  more  impmdently  done  by  Peneos  dnrinf  tUs  wnr«  • 

52.  At  this  time  the  Cydoniates§  committed  a  moat  impioan  ns^ 
against  all  the  laws  and  customs  of  Greece;  for,  being  leedtnd  kjf 
the  Apolkmiatsl  into  the  city  as  friends,  in  timir  rrf  pnann^  ihf  J  sriwi 
upon  the  place,  and  pat  all  the  men  to  Ae  sword,  and  diwMad  ihak 
wives  and  children  among  themselves,  and  took  pnssnaaiou  of  iha 
whole  territory. 

53.  King  Antiochus,  when  he  had  routed  die  JSgypdanayOnd  nrigld 
have  cut  them  off  every  man,  rode  about  and  called  ont  to  his  amn 
to  forbear  killing  them,  but  rather  to  take  them  pijaonan^  tnm 
which  counsel  he  reaped  considerable  advantage  in  n  short  tiasn;  fo^ 
upon  the  account  of  his  humanity,  he  presently  gained  Pidaainkn^anl 
not  long  after  all  Egypt. 

54.  But  we  cannot  (observing  the  method  we  hi^ve  pmpoaadia 
ourselves)  pass  by  the  cowardice  of  Ptolemy  |  for  who  ean  tet  jnd^ 
him  of  a  most  efieminate  spirit  who  would,  without  n  stiobn  i 
give  up  so  great  and  rich  a  kingdom,  when  theue  was  not  dm 
danger  at  haod,  and  tlie  enemy  at  so  great  a  distance  ftnoi  Umt 
which  efieminacy,  if  it  had  been  natural,  would  perfaapa  hnvn  hmk 
more  excusable;  but,  it  being  apparent  from  the  thing$  ht 
Vk*ards  did  that  he  was  a  prince  inferior  to  none  for 
resolution,  tbb  sloth  must  needs  be  imputed  to  hb  i 
the  eunuch  Eulaius,  who,  breeding  him  up  from  hb  eUUboad  ka 
pleasures,  and  womanish  recreations,  emasculated  the  rigoar  of  kii 
spirit. 

*  Phocion,  or  PhocuB«  »  town  in  TheiMlj.        t  In  Thcntlj.  '     f  Ta 

§  llie  inhabiUnti  oTCjdoniay  an  kland  nea 
t  ApollouU^  a  city  in  Afi;  tipon  tli«  lea-soaits;  anatbcr  la 


•i>iam>Rut  sietji.^^  603 

55.  Kiog  AntiochcM  seemed  to  all  to  be  a  prudent  and  active 
prince,  and  worthy  of  the  kingdom  in  every  respeci,  exoepttng  that 
ope  miscarriage  at  Pelusium. 

56.  When  Perseus  understood  that  a  choice  body  of  Gauls  liad 
passed  the  river  Ister^  in  order  to  assist  him,  he  greatly  rejoiced^  and 
sent  messengers  into  Msedica  to  hasten  their  march  with  all  speed. 
But  the  general  of  the  Gauls  demanded  present  pay  according  to  the 
agreement,  to  the  villue  of  about  five  hundred  talents,  which  Perseus 
through  his  natural  covetoUsness,  refusing  to  pay^  though  be  had 
Y»efore  promised  it,  the  Grauls  returned  back  into  their  own  country, 

57.  Paulus  iEmilius,  as  soon  as  he  had  received  the  legions,  called 
t}iem  together,  and  put  life  and  spirit  into  the  hearts  of  his  soldiers; 
for  he  was  now  above  sixty  years  of  age,  and  a  man  of  great  repute  and 
authority  among  the  Romans,  for  his  noble  services  to  the  state  t 
and  he  had  invented  many  new  and  subtile  stratagems  in  th4t  war,  and 
by  his  valour  and  policy  had  overcome  the  Macedonians, 

58.  Perseus  desirous  to  have  many  to  go  along  with  him,  when  he 
fled  by  sea,  brought  out  to  them  money  and  rich  furniture,  to  the 
value  of  sixty  talents,  to  take  and  carry  away  with  them*  Afterwards^ 
when  he  arrived  at  Galepsus,  he  told  his  companions  that  some  cS 
those  things  that  he  had  suffered  them  to  carry  away,  were  formerly 
the  goods  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  desired  they  would  forthwith 
restore  them  to  him,  and  he  would  repay  them  to  the  value  in  money  | 
to  which  all  readily  consented,  and  he  received  every  thing  back  again^ 
but  never  made  good  his  promise* 

59.  Alexander  was  of  a  far  different  temper  from  Perseus^  fort,he 
former  was  of  a  brave  and  noble  spirit,  and  gained  an  empire  like  to 
the  greatness  of  his  mind.  On  the  contrary,  the  other  throng  hi3 
sordid  covetousness,  lost  the  assistance  of  the  Craulsi  iind  by  such 
like  gross  miscarriages,  utterly  ruined  an  antient  floUriikin^  king« 
dom, 

60.  After  the  flight  of  Perseus,  Lucius  iEmilijos  begaii  to  seek  fof 
his  younger  son  Publius  Africanps,  who  was  the  natural  soi|  of 
v£milius,  but  the  adopted  son  of  Scipio,  who  overcame  JH[anniba^ 
At  that  time  he  was  a  yoqth  about  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  under 
the  care  and  tutorage  of  his  father,  in  that  great  and  perilous  war^ 
so  that  afterwards  he  became  as  famous  a  general  as  his  father^ 
Being  at  length  found  out,  and  brought  safe  into  the  cainp,  th^ 
consul  w^s  at  rest,  and  freed  from  that  anxiety  of  mind  h^  li^Qure4 
under;  for  he  loved  him  with  more  than  a  paternal  affectipOt 

61.  iSmilius,  by  his  civil  and  courteous  u^ge  qf  P^rseus^  enter- 
tainiog  him  at  his  table,  and  receiving  him  into  all  public  oo^n^ils^ 

*  A  i>roTiDce  of  Xbracc  ne«r  ] 


604  THE  FRAGMENTS  Of       ' 

ssssssssBBsaBSsasss 

gave  evident  demoDstrations,  that  as  he  was  a  terror  to  hte  enemies 
in  the  open  field,  so  he  was  mild  and  merciful  to  them  that  were 
subdued :  wliich  course  being  followed  by  others,  Rome  became 
mistress  of  the  world,  without  envy,  and  so  contiDued  as^  long  as  it 
made  use  of  such  noble  generals, 

62.  For  in  former  times  when  the  Romans  had  overcome  those 
two  potent  kings  Antiochus  and  Philip,  they  not  only  forbore  iaflict- 
ing  punishment,  but  restored  them  to  their  kingdoms,  and  took  them 
into  the  number  of  their  allies.  And  io  these  later  times,  after 
many  battles  fought  with  Perseus,  and  overcoming  maoy  great  ha- 
zards and  difficulties,  and  after  they  had  possessed  themselves  of  all 
Macedonia,  beyond  all  men's  hopes  and  expectations,  they  proclaimed 
liberty  to  all  the  cities ;  whicb  favour  neither  the  Macedonians  nor 
any  body  else  could  ever  expect  should  have  been  granted  by  the 
Romans,  because  they  were  very  conscious  to  themselves  hair  mnch 
they  hud  injured  the  Roman  state.  For  they  judged  (and  thmt  most 
justly)  thut  there  was  no  room  left  for  mercy,  being  tluit  they  had 
before  been  pardoned  former  wrongs  and  injuries. 

But  the  senate  forgot  all  that  was  past,  and  carried  themselves 

towards  them  with  great  clemency  and  generosity.     For  tliey  suflfiered 

Perseus  to  go  at  large,  only  with  a  keeper,  a  punishment  less  than 

his  demerit,  who,  against  the  faith  of  his  league,  and  the  (ri>ligatioB 

of  his  kindred  and  alliance  to  the  Romans,  had  most  unjustly  made 

war  upon  them;  and  they  set  free  all  the  people  of  Macedonhy 

(whom  by  the  law  of  arms  they  might  have  made  perpetoal  slaves), 

and  with  that  readiness  and  nobleness  of  mind,  beyond  all  that  the 

conquered  themselves  could  have  desired.    The  Illyrians,  likewiscii 

whom  they  had  subdued,  they  suffered  to  use  their  own  laws;  Cpr 

they  made  it  more  their  concern  to  do  what  became  the  majesty  and 

grandeur  of  the  Ri^mans,  in  carrying  it  nobly  towards  others,  withoot 

piide  and  insolence  in  prosperity,  than  that  they  looked  upon  the 

barbarians  any  way  worthy  of  such  favour. 

6S.  The  senate  decreed  the  Macedonians  and  Illyrians  to  be  free, 
and  that  they  should  pay  but  half  of  that  tribute  to  the  Romans  wUdi 
they  paid  to  their  own  kings. 

64.  Perseus  thus  thrown  into  the  gaol,  miserably  ended  hisdi^in 
such  sad  and  uncomfortable  circumstances. 

The  rest  is  to  be  found  in  the  Fragments,  Book  31,  in  Pbotns's 
Bibliotheca,  at  the  end  of  Diodorus  Siculus,  Fragment  2. 

G5.  The  general  of  the  Gauls  being  retuucd  Irom  the  pursnit  of 
the  enemy,  gathered  the  captives  together,  and  committed  a. most 
horrid  piece  of  wickedness;  for  he  picked  out  the  choiGest  and 
strongest  young  men  amongst  them,  and  sacrificed  tbeni  to  the  godS| 


BTODORUS   8ICULUS.  60S 

as  if  the  immortal  deities  are  pleased  with  such  sacrifices.  The  rest 
he  shot  to  death,  with  darts,  most  of  whom^  of  antient  acquaintaacey 
he  well  knew;  however,  former  friendship  was  no  argument  to  spare 
a  man  of  them.  Thus  are  barbarians  pufied  up  with  prosperous 
successes. 

66,  Eumenes,far  difierent  from  Perseus,  not  only  paid  his  soldiers 
what  was  their  due  pay,  bat  bestowed  qn  them  several  gifts  besides, 
with  promises  of  more  afterwards,  whereby  he  gained  all  their 
hearts,  and  held  them  fast  to  his  interest*  But  Perseus,  when  twenty 
thousand  Gauls  were  near  at  hand  ready  to  assist  him,  through  his 
niggardliness  refused  their  aid  and  assistance;  butEumenes,  though 
he  was  nothing  near  so  rich  as  the  other,  obliged  his  mercenaries  aud 
all  others  that  might  be  helpful  to  him  by  his  bounty  and  liberality. 
And  therefore  Perseus,  sinking  below  the  generosity  of  a  king,  and 
enslaving  himself  to  a  covetous  and  sordid  parsimony,  lived  to  see 
all  the  wealth  he  had  heaped  up  together,  with  his  whole  kingdom, 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  conqueror.  But  the  other,  preferring 
victory  before  any  thing  else,  not  only  freed  his  own  kingdom  from 
the  imminent  dangers  it  laboured  under,  but  brought  the  whole  na- 
tion of  the  Gauls  into  subjection. 

67.  Some  of  the  counsels  and  acts  of  Antiochus  were  both  princely 
and  admirable,  others  so  poor  and  mean,  that  they  were  justly  des- 
pised and  ridiculed.  For  when  he  celebrated  public  games,  he  first 
acted  contrary  to  the  manner  and  practice  of  all  other  kings;  for  they, 
when  they  were  strengthening  themselves  all  they  could  with  men 
and  money,  it  was  their  greatest  care  to  keep  all  private  and  secret, 
out  of  fear  of  the  Roman  greatness:  but  he,  on  the  contrary,  invited 
to  his  sports  the  most  eminent  persons  from  all  parts  of  the  world, 
and  most  magnificently  adorned  every  part  of  his  palace;  and  thus 
bringing  together  all  the  riches  of  his  kingdom  into  one  place  to  be 
exposed,  as  it  were,  upon  a  stage,  to  the  view  of  all,  he  occasioned 
every  thing  he  did  to  be  known  and  blazed  abroad. 

68.  And  in  thestate,  grandeur,  and  variety  of  those  famous  games, 
Antiochus  far  excelled  all  the  princes  that  ever  were  before  him; 
but  that  part  which  he  himself  acted  in  those  may-games,  was  vcty 
despicable  and  contemptible.  For  he  would  ride  up  and  down 
among  all  that  solemn  assembly  upon  a  little  nag,  meanly  accoutred,  , 
bidding  some  go  on,  others  to  stop,  and  commanding  this  and  that, 
as  best  pleased  his  own  fancy;  so  that  if  his  diadem  had  been  off, 

^  none  would  have  believed  him  to  have  been  a  king,  who  scarce 
represented  the  garb  and  mttu  of  a  common  officer*.  All  the  time 
of  the  public  entertainment  he  stood  at  the  door,  and  introduced 

♦  A  lictor. 


€06  TIIE  FRAGMENTS  Of 


some,  and  ordered  others  to  sit  down^  and  ushered  in  the  semnts 
thftt  brought  in  the  dbhes.     Sometimes,  also,  be  would  go  to  some 
one  of  the  guests,  and  sit  down  by  him,  and  at  other  times  laj  him* 
self  along  on  the  floor,  and  then  would  start  up  on  a  sudden,  and  hop 
Dp  and  down,  sometimes  placing  dishes  of  meat  upon  the  table,  and 
other  times  washing  the  drinking  cups,  and  diligently  obeenring  every 
thing  round  the  room,  would  pledge  those  that  drank  to  him  standing, 
sporting  and  jesting  with  those  that  were  merrily  disposed.    When 
it  drew  towards  evening,  and  most  were  gone,  he  was  wrapt  up  ia 
linen,  and  brought  in  by  the  auticks,  and  laid  upon  the  ground;  and 
presently  after  (as  if  he  were  called)  he  started  upon  a  sudden  naked, 
and  in  a  jocund  humour  danced  in  most  ridiculous  gestures  with  th« 
mimics  and  stage-players;  insomuch  as  all  l>eing  put  out  of  oounte* 
nance  through  shame  withdrew  and  left  the  place.    Every  one  indeed 
that  came  to  the  solemnity,  as  often  as  they  cast  their  eyes  upon  di^ 
sumptuous  furniture,  and  the  stately  and  magnificent  order  Aod  dis^ 
posal  of  the  whole,  in  the  celebration  of  the  sports  and  games^ 
admired  both  the  king  and  the  riches  of  his  kingdom;  but  when  they 
looked  upon  the  king  himself,  and  his  irregular  actions,  they  scares 
believed  it  was  possible  that  so  many  vices  and  ^rtuea  could  be 
found  to  concentre  in  one  and  the  same  person. 

69.  When  the  solemnity  was  ended,  Tiberius  Gracchus  arrived  as 
an  ambassador  sent  to  inspect  the  aflairs  of  Syria,  whom  the  king 
received  and  entertained  with  so  much  kindness  and  civility,  that 
Gracchus  did  not  in  the  least  suspect  any  ill  designs  in  the  king,  nor 
discerned  that  he  took  any  thing  amiss  in  relation  to  what  was  done 
in  Kgypt.  But  Antiochus  in  truth  was  far  from  such  a  tamper^  but 
was  altogether  a  mortal  enemy  to  the  Romans. 

70.  Ptolemy  being  driven  out  of  his  kingdom,  and  on  his  journey 
to^  Rome  by  land,  it  was  made  known  to  Deml^trius,  the  son  ot 
Seleucus,  who,  surprised  with  his  misfortune,  gave  an  instance  of  his 
royal  and  generous  disposition.  For  forthwith,  attended  with  his 
servants,  and  taking  with  him  a  royal  robe,  a  diadem,  and  a  horse 
adorned  with  trappings  of  gold,  he  went  to  meet  Ptoleniiy,  and  cams 
up  to  him  at  the  twenty-sixth  stone*^  distant  from  the  city^  whoa 
(after  he  had  courteously  embraced  him)  he  advised  to  put  oU  the 

^  royal  robes,  and  to  make  use  of  the  other  ensigns  of  royalty,  and  sgi 
enter  into  the  city  as  became  the  dignity  of  his  person,  lest  he  should 
^e  despised :  Ptolemy  was  muqh  taken  with  him  for  his  estrwrnlinaiy 
kindness,  but  was  so  far  from  accepting  what  was  o£feredf  that  Ihi 
entreated  Demetrius  he  might  rather  stop,  and  take  up  his  abode  9% 
some  smc^ll  village  in  the  way. 

*  fivery  ttoae  was  s  mile:  two  hundred  fiirlongi. 


mDDORUS  ftICULUS«.  60/ 

7 1  Antipater  having  breathed  out  hU  last  m  the  midsC  of  thete 
torments^  they  bring  Asclepiades,  governor  of  the  ctty»  crying  out 
that  Timotheus  was  the  contriver  of  the  whole  scene  of  this  mischU^ 
and  that  it  was  through  his  persuasions  that  the  young  man  so  in^ 
piously  and  unjustly  put  his  biother  to  death.  Hereupon  when  all 
the  great  men  and  commanders  began  to  smell  out  the  whole  design 
and  contrivance^  and  to  commiserate  the  sad  condition  of  those  that 
suffered  such  cruel  torments,  Timotheus  was  iki  a  great  fright,  aadi 
loosed  the  rest  that  were  condemned  from  their  torments,  and  after-' 
wards  put  them  privately  to  death. 

'  72.  Philopater,  surnamed  Ariarathes,  being  now  come  to  the 
crdwn  after  the  death  of  his  father,  the  first  thing  be  did  was  the  «&* 
lebrating  his  father's  funeral  in  great  pomp  and  state;  afterwards^ 
caressing  his  friends,  great  officers,  and  commanders,  and  the  rest  of 
his  subjects,  he  gained  the  good  will  of  all  sorts. 

73.  When  Ariarathes  had  restored  Mithrobuzanes  to  his  father's 
kingdom,  Artaxias  king  of  Armenia,  still  infected  with  his  old  vice 
of  covetousness,  sent  an  ambassador  to  Ariarathes  to  solicit  han  to 
join  with  him,  and  kill  one  of  the  brothers  that  were  then  in  his 
hands,  and  divide  Sophene*  between  them.  But  Ariarathes  greatly 
abhorred  such  a  piece  of  cruelty  and  treachery,  and  smartly  rebuked 
the  ambassadors,  and  wrote  a  letter  to  Artaxias,  wherein  he  advised 
him  to  forbear  such  wicked  practices;  which  carriage  of  Ariarathes 
mucii  advanced  his  fame  and  reputation;  and  Mfthrobuzanes,  through 
the  faithfulness  and  integrity  of  him  to  whom  he  fled  for  shelter,  re-^ 
gained  his  father's  kingdom. 

74.  Lucius  iEmilius,  who  conquered  Perseus,  and  was  fi  consul 
and  censor,  and  the  bravest  man  of  his  age  of  all  the  Romans,  died 
about  this  time;  whose  death,  when  it  was  generally  known,  espC'o 
cially  at  the  time  of  his  funeral,  caused  such  a  general  sorrow  aniA 
lamentation,  that  not  only  artificers  and  ether  sorts  of  common  people 
fiocked  together,  but  the  senate  and  all  the  magistrates  of  the  city 
prepared  every  thing  that  was  necessary  for  the  gracing  of  his  funeraL 
And  all  persons  of  the  free  towns  and  cities  bordering  upon  Rome^ 
that  could  possibly  attend  at  the  day,  came  in  flocking  together,  both 
to  see  and  honour  the  solemnity. 

73.  Such  as  i^imilius  was  reported  for  his  wealth  while  he  live^ 
Buch  he  appeared  to  be  wheO  he  was  dead.  For  though  he  was  the 
only  person  in  his  time  that  enriched  the  treasury  at  Rome  with 
plenty  of  gold,  brought  with  him  out  of  Spain,  and  had  the  command 
of  all  the  riches  of  Macedonia,  and  was  clothed  with  absolute 

*  A  cuuntrjf  la  X»idj  l/orderiug  upon  tby  Ureatet  Armcuk, 


608  THE  FkAGMENTS  Of 


authority  in  all  those  places,  yet  he  was  so  far  from  converting  any- 
thing to  his  private  use,  that  when  his  two  adopted  sons .  after  hb 
death,  possessed  themselves  of  his  estate,  out  of  all  his  goods  thej 
were  not  able  to  raise  so  much  as  would  be  sufficient  to  render  to  bb 
wife  her  just  dowry,  without  selling  some  of  his  lands;  and  tbenefoire 
some  have  preferred  him  for  his  abstemiousness  and  freedom  from 
covetousness  before  Aristides  and  Epaminondas,  who  were  so  famous 
and  eminent  among  the  Grecians  upon  that  account:  for  they  only 
refused  money  that  was  oifered  them  by  such  as  thereby  designed  and 
aimed  at  their  own  advantage ;  but  this  man  meddled  not  with  any 
thing,  where  he  had  possession  of  all,  and  might  have  taken  to  his  use 
as  much  as  he  pleased. 

And  if  any  look  upon  thb  as  a  thing  incredible,  let  such  consider 
that  they  must  not  judge  of  the  sobriety  and  moderation  of  the  an- 
tient  Romans  by  the  griping  covetousness  of  those  at  this  day:  for 
in  truth  in  this  our  age  the  Romans  exceed  all  other  nations  in  their 
insatiableness  after  riches./  But,  since  we  now  revive  the  memory  of 
so  excellent  a  person,  we  shall  briefly  say  something  of  Scipio,  hb 
son,  he  who  afterwards  razed  Numantia^  lest  ignorance  of  his  care 
and  diligence  in  the  study  of  the  most  excellent  and  commendable 
arts  and  sciences  shoul({  occasion  incredulity  that  he  should  attain  to 
such  an  eminency  in  all  virtuous  qualifications.  Publius  Scipio,  there- 
fore,  was  the  natural  son  of  Lucius  ^milius,  who  conquered  PeisenSf 
as  we  have  before  declared;  but  was  the  adopted  son  of  Scipio,  who 
conquered  Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginians,  and  so  by  adoption  Scipio 
Africanus,  the  most  eminent  of  all  the  Romans  that  ever  were  before 
him,  was  his  grandfather. 

Scipio  thus  nobly  descended,  and  taken  into  so  famous  a  familyf 
approved  himself  not  the  least  unworthy  the  glory  and  renown  of  hb 
ancestors.  For  he  was  brought  up  and  instructed  from  his  childhood 
in  the  learning  of  tiie  Greeks;  and,  when  he  was  eighteen  years  id 
age,  applied  himself  to  the  study  of  philosophy,  under  the  inspection 
of  Polybius  of  Megalopolis,  the  historian,  his  tutor,  with  whom  he 
continued  a  considerable  time;  and,  increasing  in  all  manner  of  vir* 
tue,  he  not  only  excelled  his  equals  in  years,  but  those  for  older  than 
himself,  in  sobriety,  affability,  generosity,  and  all  other  virtuous  qoa* 
lifications.  But  before  he  began  to  study  philosophy,  it  was  etery 
body's  opinion  that  he  was  but  dull  and  blockish,  and  very  unworthy 
to  be  heir  to  so  great  a  family.  In  the  first  place  he  made  it  hb  chief 
care  and  business  to  be  sober,  as  conducing  much  to  the  commenda- 
tion of  his  youthful  age,  which  was  then,  at  his  years,  a  very  diflicult 
task.  For  the  youth  at  that  time  were  hurried  away  by  filthy  lusts, 
and  an  excess  of  intemperance^  wiUi  an  impetuous  current^  some  to 


broDORus  siculUs* 


sodomy,  others  to  whores,  ^lutnmy,  diunkennesSj  revellings,  and 
such  like  luxurious  and  voluptuuas  courses:  for  the  Romans  pre- 
sently Icafni  the  effeminate  manacrs  of  the  Greeks  in  this  kind 
through  the  long  continuance  of  the  Pensian  war;  and  besides,  hav- 
ing gained  aljundatice  of  wealih|  they  ^cre  plentifully  supplied  witii 
fuel  to  feet)  their  luxury. 

7G.  But  Seipio  followed  another  course  of  life,  dnd  combating 
with  all  his  natural  corrupt  lusts,  as  with  so  many  wild  beasts,  with- 
in the  space  of  five  years  attained  to  a  fixed  atid  habitual  state  of  so- 
hriety  and  temperance.  To  which  all  giving  their  testimony,  and 
generally  crying  him  up  upoti  that  account,  he  then  put  forth  him-^ 
self  in  acts  of  bounty,  generosity,  and  liberality,  it)  distributing  his 
money  for  xlre  good  of  others:  for  which  sort  of  virtue  he  had  an  ex- 
ample in  his  father  i£milius,  under  whose  instrut^tion  he  was  long 
l)red  up,  and  now  exhibited,  as  it  were,  H  perfett  copy  of  his  virtue: 
but  fortune  likewise  presented  him  an  eminent  occasibd  of  expresft^ 
ing  ins  liberality.  For  when  iEmilia  the  wife  of  the  great  Scipio,  the 
sister  of  i£milius  who  conquered  Perseus,  died^  and  left  a  great 
estate  behind  her,  of  which  Scipio  was  heir;  he  first  gave  an  in- 
stance of  his  generous  disposition  upon  this  occasion.  For  his  mo- 
ther Papiria  being  cast  off  long  before  the  death  ef  his  father^  had 
lived  a  considerable  time  separate  from  her  husband,  in  a  far  mean- 
er condition  than  became  one  of  her  noble  birth:  but  i£milia  the 
mother  of  his  adopted  father  leaving  behind  her  a  great  inheritance, 
besides  other  riches,  had  a  rich  robe  and  woman's  gown,  together 
with  a  splendid  retinue  of  household  servants,  as  being  the  wife  of 
the  great  Scipio,  and  so  sharer  with  him  in  his  estate  and  fortune: 
all  these  Scipio  nobly  bestowed  upon  his  mother,  in  which^tately 
habit,  when  she  appeared  in  public  amongst  the  ladies  of  quality, 
the  bounty  and  generosity  of  the  young  man,  and  his  piety  towards 
his  motiier,  were  highly  applauded,  first  among  the  women,  and  thea* 
among  all  companies  and  societies  of  men,  throughout  the  whole 
city.  This  piece  of  liberality  was  looked  upon  by  the  whole  city^ 
not  only  as  a  thing  commendable,  but  even  wonderful,  especially 
at  Rome,  in  which  city  none  easily  part  with  any  thing  they  have 
to  another.  After  this  there  being  a  great  sum  of  money  owing  to 
the  daughters  of  the  great  Scipio,  as  their  dowries*;  and  whereas 
by  the  Roman  laws  the  party  that  was  to  pay  such  portions,  had  li-« 
berty  to  pay  them  in  three  years  time,  by  a  certain  proportion  every 
year,  he  paid  the  whole  down  at  once.  Afterwards,  when  his  natural 
father  ^miiius  was  dead,  and  he  and  his  brother  Fabius  were  cotisti-* 
luted  joint  heirs  of  his  estate,  Scipio  did  another  honourable  act, 

•  Portiortf. 

Vol..  2.  No.  48.  nil 


6 10  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


well  worthy  to  be  remembered.  For  when  he  knew  that  his  brother 
had  far  less  than  himself^  he  freely  bestowed  upon  him  his  own 
share  of  the  inheritance,  amounting  to  above  sixty  talents^  and  so 
made  his  brother  as  rich  as  himself:  which  act  being  generally  cried 
up^  he  did  that  which  was  further  remarkable;  for  when  Fabius  was 
resolved  to  exhibit  single  combats  by  gladiators  at  the  funeral  of  his 
father,  yet  was  not  well  able  to  bear  the  great  charge  it  would  re- 
quire, Scipio  bor€  half  of  the  cost  and  expense  out  of  bis  own  purse. 
A  little  time  after,  when  his  mother  died,  he  was  so  far  from  taking 
again  what  he  had  before  bestowed  upon  her,  that  he  gave  not  only 
them,  but  all  the  rest  of  his  mother's  inheritance  to  his  sisters,  al** 
though  no  part  of  her  estate  by  the  laws  belonged  to  them.  Thas 
Scipio  being  cried  up  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  all  persons,  for 
his  generosity,  he  grew  every  day  more  and  more  famous  and  re- 
nowned, which  he  attained  unto,  not  so  much  by  greatness  of  ex- 
pense, as  by  choice  of  fit  opportunities  to  express  his  kindnesses, 
and  an  art  of  conferring  his  gifts  and  benefits  upon  proper  objects. 

He  gained  likewise  a  just  reputation  for  his  chastity  without  any 
cost  or  charge,  but  only  by  his  moderation  and  sobriety,  from 
whence  likewise  he  reaped  the  great  benefit  of  health  and  strength  of 
body,  and  following  this  course  during  his  life,  he  enjoyed  a  reward 
of  his  temi)erance  with  great  pleasure  and  delight.  And  as  for  all 
the  parts  of  valour,  which  is  a  virtue  absolutely  necessary  eveiy 
where,  especially  among  the  Romans,  he  was  not  in  the  least  want- 
ing or  negligent,  in  that  respect  fortune  affording  him  a  special  op- 
portunity to  approve  himself;  for  the  Macedonian  kings  being  much 
given  to  hunting,  Scipio  by  far  surpassed  them  all. 

77*  After  the  Romans  had  conquered  Perseus,  (orratherCbaropea), 
they  put  some  of  them  to  death  who  had  sided  with  the  Macedooians, 
and  others  they  sent  to  Rome.  But  Charopes  being  cloathed  with 
an  absolute  power  and  authority  in  Epirus,  because  he  seemed  to  be 
a  great  favourer  of  tiie  Romans,  at  first  dealt  with  the  Epirots  some- 
thing gently  and  mildly,  but  afterwards  growing  every  day  more 
proud  and  insolent,  he  turned  every  thing  in  Epirus  upside  down. 
For  by  false  accusations  against  the  richest  men,  he  banished  somr, 
put  others  to  death,  and  confiscated  their  goods:  and  he  not  only 
squeezed  money  from  men,  but  from  women,  by  the  help  of  bis  mo* 
ther  Philota;  who  was  more  tlian  a  woman  in  cruelty  and  wicked*^ 
ness.  Many  likewise^  who  were  accused  to  be  plotting  against  the 
Romans,  he  gave  up  into  the  hands  of  the  people,  who  were  all 
condemned  to  die. 

78.  Orophcrnes  having  deposed  his  brother  Ariarathes»  wbeo  he 
ought  to  have  cianagcd  ills  afiaiib  with  the  greatest  prudence  imagi- 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Oil 


nable,  and  iogratiated  himself  into  the  hearts  of  his  people  by  kind  • 
ness  and  acts  of  grace  and  favoor^  intended  no  such  matter:  but  be- 
ing wholly  intent  on  scraping  up  money  together^  he  wickedly  put 
many  to  death ;  he  gave  to  Timotheus  fifty,  and  king  Demetrius  se- 
venty talents,  and  promised  in  a  short  time  to  pay  other  four  hundred 
talents ;  and  besides,  to  add  to  them,  six  hundred  more :  at  which,  dis- 
cerning that  the  Cappadocians  were  greatly  incensed,  he  began  to 
rob  and  spoil  every  body,  and  confiscate  the  goods  of  the  nobility; 
and  having  treasured  up  a  vast  sum  of  money,  he  intrusted  four 
hundred  talents  with  the  Pirenians,  to  serve  him  at  a  turn  mid 
change  of  fortune,  which  were  afterwards  fiiithfully  repaid  him. 

79.  Ptolemy  the  elder,  having  presently  by  the  multitude  of  bis 
forces  penned  up  his  brother*,  by  Iei  close  siegef,  and  reduced  thend 
to  the  utmost  extremity,  yet  pardoned  him;  induced  thereunto,  both 
by  his  natural  clemency,  and  the  nearness  of  relations,  and  his  awe 
and  fear  of  the  Romans :  and  he  did  noc  only  pardon  him,  but  en^ 
tared  into  a  league  with  him,  according  to  which,  he  was  to  beeonr> 
tent  as  the  younger  brother  with  Cyrene,  and  with  a  certain  propor- 
tion of  wheat  every  year.  And  thus  a  war  between  brothers,  which 
had  wholly  alienated  their  affections  one  from  the  other,  and  was  con- 
tinued to  the  utmost  hazard  of  them  both,  was  on  a  sudden  endi^d 
upon  moderate  terms  and  conditions. 

80.  When  Orophernes  discerned  that  his  afiairs  declined  much  to 
the  worse,  he  resolved  to  satisfy  his  mercenary  soldiers  as  soon  as  he 
could,  lest  they  should  mutiny  for  want  of  their  pay:  but  being  at 
present  straitened  through  scarcity  of  money,  he  was  necessitated 
to  rifle  Jupiter's  temple,  situated  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Ariadne^ 
which  before  had  been  ever  preserved  sacred  and  inviolable^  and  by 
this  means  he  paid  his  soldiers  all  their  arrears. 

81.  Prusias  king  of  Bithynia,  being  altogether  disappointed  in  his 
design  of  taking  Attalus,  destroyed  and  laid  waste  the  sacred  grove 
called  Nicephorius,  which  lay  under  the  walls  of  the  cityt,  and  ri- 
fled the  temple  itself,  and  took  away  the  slatues,  and  the  images  of 
the  gods;  and  among  the  rest,  the  famous  statue  of  iEsculapius, 
said  to  be  one  of  the  curious  pieces  of  Phipomachus,  and  robbed 
the  place  of  nil  its  sacred  and  consecrated  goods  and  treasure.  Fot 
which  sacrilege,  the  gods  in  a  short  time  after,  inflicted  upon  him 
deserved  punishment:  for  most  of  his  land- army  perished  by  thd 
bloody  flux;  and  the  like  calamity  happened  to  his  naval  forces,  for 
by  a  sudden  storm  in  the  Propontis,  most  of  his  ships  with  their  sol. 
cjiers  and  rowers  together  were  sunk  j  and  sotpe  few  were  cast  upoft 

*  ETcrgftes.  t  In  tlie  crtj,  ^  per^amoi, 


6l2  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 

the  land,  and  shipwrecked.    And  these  were  the  first  puDishmcnts 
inflicted  upon  Prusias  for  his  impiety. 

52.  The  Cretans  arriving  at  Siphnos,  besieged  the  city,  and  the 
inhabitants  partly  through  fear,  and  partly  through  feigned  and  de- 
ceitful promises  admitted  them  into  the  city;  the  Cretans  first  pro- 
mising that  none  of  the  inhabitants  should  receive  the  least  preju- 
dice; but  wlien  they  were  entered,  according  to  the  usual  treachery 
and  perfidiousness  of  the  Cretans,  they  both  carried  them  all  away 
captives,  and  rifled  and  robbed  all  the  temples  of  the  gods;  and  so 
loaded  with  spoil,  hoisted  up  sail,  and  made  back  for  Crete.  Bat 
in  a  short  time  after,  they  paid  dear  for  this  treachery,  the  gods  pre* 
sently  executing  vengeance  upon  them  for  their  impiety;  for  out  of 
fear  of  some  enemies  that  overpowered  them  in  shipping,  they  were 
forced  to  loose  out  of  harbour  in  the  night,  and  most  of  their  ships 
by  a  sudden  storm  were  sunk  at  sea,  and  others  were  cast  upon  land, 
and  dashed  in  pieces  upon  the  rocks,  where  all  in  them  miserably 
perished ;  some  few  that  consented  not  to  this  perfidious  dealing  es- 
caped. 

53.  Philip  the  son  of  Aroyntas,  coming  to  a  kingdom  then  sub- 
ject and  tributary  to  the  Illyrians  by  his  arms  and  skill  in  martial  af- 
fairs, restored  it  to  its  former  liberty,  and  by  his  mild  and  gentle 
usage  of  those  he  subdued,  he  enlarged  his  kingdom  above  any  that 
Mas  in  Europe.  For  having  beaten  the  Athenians  in  a  great  battle, 
(who  contended  with  him  for  the  principality  of  Greece),  he  buried 
all  their  dead  that  fell  in  the  fight,  whom  they  had  left  in  the  opep 
iit'ld,  and  sent  back  above  two  thotisand  prisoners  to  their  own 
country,  without  any  redemption:  so  that  they  who  before  had  con- 
tended with  him,  hearing  of  his  generous  usage  of  their  fellow  citi- 
zens, vohrntarily  yielded  up  to  him  the  sovereignty  W  Greece;  and 
so  what  he  could  not  accomplish  by  so  many  battles  and  hazards, 
merely  hy  his  mildness  and  humanity  he  obtained  with  the  free  and 
ununimous  consent  of  his  enemies.  But  what  he  had  got,  he  after- 
wards maintained,  by  striking  a  fear  and  terror  into  the  hearts  of  his 
enemies,  for  he  razed  the  |>opulous  city  of  Olynthus  to  the  ground. 
In  the  same  manner  his  son  Alexander,  by  the  ruin  of  Tliebes,  de- 
terred the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  (who  were  plotting  against 
him)  froiu  \x\r  designed  revolt.  And  his  civil  and  generous  us^ 
of  the  prisoners  in  the  Persian  war,  was  such,  that  he  gained  the 
hearts  of  the  Asiatics,  not  so  much  by  his  valour,  as  his  mildness 
and  humanity.  But  in  later  times,  the  Romans  thirsting  after  «  uni- 
versal monarchy,  in  a  great  measure  obtained  their  ends,  by  the 
force  of  liieir  arms,  btit  their  clemency  toward  such  as  they  had  con- 
(^uercd,  added  much  to  the  increase  and  enlargement  of  their  con? 


DIOI>ORUS  SICULUS  6l3 

quests.  For  they  were  so  far  from  cruelty,  or  being  rigorous  in  ex« 
ecuting  punishment  upon  those  they  had  subdued,,  that^they  seemed 
to  carry  it  towards  them  rather  as  friends  than  as  enemies.  For 
when  the  conquered  expected  the  utmost  severity  of  revenge  from 
the  conquerors,  they  left  no  room  for  any  others  to  exceed  them  in 
humanity,  and  clemency:  forsojne  they  made  free  of  the  city,  with 
others  they  joined  in  affinity  by  marriages,  others  they  set  free  to 
govern  according  to  their  own  laws;  and  to  sum  up  all,  none  un- 
derwent any  severity  by  being  conquered,  funher  than  what  was  fit. 
And  therefore,  upon  the  account  of  this  extraordiuary  clemency, 
kings,  cities,  and  countries,  generally  sheltered  themselves  under 
the  protection  of  the  Romans.  But  when  they  were  lords  almost  of 
tlie  whole  world,  then  they  strengthened  and  confirmed  themselves 
in  their  dominions,  by  severity,  and  razing  of  towns  and  cities,  to 
strike  a  terror  into  their  enemies.  For  they  utterly  destroyed  Corinth 
in  Acbaia,^  Carthage  in  Africa,  Numantia  in  Spain,  and  rooted  up 
the  kingdom  of  Macedonia,  in  the  ruin  of  Perseus,  and  became  a 
terror  to  many. 

84.  The  Romans  make  it  their  great  care,  that  the  wars  they  be- 
gin, he  upon  just  grounds,  and  therefore  never  resolve  upon  any 
thing  rashly,  or  inconsiderately. 

85.  Publias  Scipio,  (who  was  afterwards  simamed  Africanus, 
and  was  then  a  tribune*,  when  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  Romans 
made  liglit  of  their  terms  and  articles  made  with  their  enemies, 
though  confirmed  by  their  solemn  oatlis),  most  religiously  observed 
and  kept  his  promises  with  the  besieged,  and  used  them  with  all  hu- 
manity and  clemency  when  they  fell  into  his  hands.  His  faith  and 
integrity  therefore  being  noised  abroad  all  over  Africa,  none  surren- 
dered up  themselves  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  unless  Scipio 
joined  in  signing  of  the  articles. 

86*.  When  there  were  only  three  Ronaans  killed  in  the  skirmish, 
;ind  were  left  lying  upon  the  ground  unburied,  all  were  very  much 
troubled  and  concerned  at  it.  But  Scipio  with  the  consent  of  the 
consul  wrote  a  letter  to  Asdrubal,  to  desire  him  to  bury  those  Romans : 
who  presently  ordered  the  thing  to  be  done;  and  when  all  was  per- 
formed sent  their  ashes  to  the  consul,  which  added  much  to  the  ho- 
nour of  Scipio,  as  one  whose  authority  was  prevalent  even  with  the 
enemies  themselves. 

8/.  The  counterfeit  Philip,  having  beaten  the  Romans  in  a  great 
battle,  became  proud,  cruel, and  tyrannical;  there  was  not  a  wealthy 
person  which  he  put  not  most  wickedly  to  death,  upon  false  ac- 
cusations: he  spared  not  his  own  intimate  friends,  but  despatched 

•  Colonel. 


6l4  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


many  of  them  out  of  the  way;  for  he  was  Datarally  fierce  and  cme), 
proud  and  haughty  in  all  his  familiar  iutercourses,  audi  at  last  deeply 
CDgaged  in  covetousness,  and  all  manner  of  vice. 

88.  The  Romans  had  such  a  kiudness  for  Publius  Scipio,  tluU 
though  neither  his  age  nor  the  laws  did  qualify  him^  yet  tbey  endea- 
voured with  all  their  might  to  elect. him  consul. 
.  89.  Calphurnius  the  consul,  after  he  had  some  towns  delmred  up 
to  hini  upon  articles,  contrary  to  the  terms  agreed  upon,  and  against 
his  faith  and  engagements,  razed  them  to  the  ground,  and  therefocc 
in  all  his  designs  and  contrivances  afterwards,  he  was  disappointed 
as  a  faithless  and  treacherous  person,  as  if  some  deity  set  himsdf 
against  him;  for  he  attempted  many  things,  but  was  never  able  to 
effect  any  thing. 

90.  King  Prusias  being  both  of  an  ugly  visage,  and  a  mean  and 
effeminate  presence,  was  mortally  listed  by  the  Bithynians. 

91.  After  the  taking  of  Carthage,  Scipio  gave  liberty  to  the  Sici- 
lian ambassadors  to  search  among  the  spoils,  and  ordered  every  one 
to  carry  back  into  their  several  cities  such  things  as  had  formerly 
be^n  taken  away  from  them  by  the  Carthaginians :  upon  which  were 
^und  many  statues  and  pictures  of  famous  men,  of  exquisite  work* 
manship,  besides  many  things  devoted  and  consecrated  to  the  gods, 
some  of  silver  and  others  of  gold;  among  which,  was  the  ftimoos 
Fhalarian  bull  of  Agrigentum,  made  by  Perillus,  for  the  tyrant 
Plialaris,  who  caused  the  artificer  himself  to  make  the  first  esperi- 
meut  of  his  own  art,  by  executing  that  sort  of  punishment  upoa 
him,  which  he  had  invented  for  the  torturing  of  others* 

92.  In  our  time  Caius  Julius  Ceesar,  sirnamed  for  the  greatness 
of  his  actions  Divus^,  when  almost  a  hundred  years  after  be  saw  the 
ruins  and  rubbish  of  Corinth,  was  so  compassionately  afiectcd,  and 
withal  desirous  to  make  himself  glorious,  that  he  put  forth  himsdf 
to  the  utmost  to  rebuild  the  city.  And  therefore  it  is  but  just  that 
th^  humanity  and  clemency  that  was  eminent  in  this  man,  should 
be  allowed  its  just  and  due  praises,  and  that  his  virtue  should  be  re- 
corded in  history,  for  an  everlasting  remembrance  to  his  eternal 
praise  and  honour.  For  when  his  ancestors  were  extreme  in  their 
severity  against  this  city,  he  rectified  their  excesses  by  hu  own  leoi* 
ty  and  moderation,  preferring  mercy  before  cruelty.  Besides,  he 
far  excelled  all  that  were  ever  before  him  in  the  greatness  of  his  ac- 
tions, and  upon  the  account  of  his  virtuous  qualifications,  was  sir* 
named  Divus.  To  conclude,  this  man  was  the  most  fiimoos  and  rt^ 
nowned  for  eminency  of  birth,  fluency  of  tongue,  the  art  of  war^i. 
and  contempt  of  riches,  of  any  whatsoever  that  was  io  hi»  a^, 

*  Divine. 


DI0D0RU9  SICULUS.  6l5 


93.  Viriathixsof  Lusitania,  the  captain  of  therobb^ft,  wt^jttit 
and  exact  in  distributing  the  spoil,  and  those  who  bad  valiantly  be- 
liaved  themselves  in  battle,  he  would  liberally  reward  according  to 
their  several  iperits,  aud  he  never  converted  any  of  the  public  mo- 
nies to  his  own  private  use,  and  therefore  the  Lusitaniaiis  never 
shrunk  or  drew  back  from  any  hazardous  undertaking,  when  be 
commanded  them,  and  was  their  leader,  honouring  him  as  the  com- 
mon benefactor  and  saviour  of  their  country. 

94.  Plautius  the  Roman  prietoi^  greatly  misgoverned  his  province, 
being  therefore  condemned  by  the  people,  because  he  luid  disho^ 
floured  his  government,  he  fled  from  Rome. 

95.  In  Syria,  king  Alexander,  being  far  unfit  for  to  high  a  ita- 
tion,  by  reason  of  his  sloth  and  meanness  of  spirit,  gave  up  the 
government  of  Antioch  to  Hierax  and  Diodotus*. 

96.  The  kingdom  of  Syriaf,  being  now  brought  low,  .add  De* 
metrius  being  only  the  surviving  branch  of  the  royal  stock,  belieV'> 
ing  himself  to  be  out  of  all  danger,  disregarded  the  deportment  of 
the  former  kings,  who  studied  to  ingratiate  themselves  into  the  good 
opinion  of  their  people,  by  their  aflable  and  courteous  behaviour: 
but  he  growing  every  day  more  and  more  unsufieiable,  fell  at  length 
to  downright  cruelty,  and  all  sorts  of  heinous  enormities.  Tti6 
cause  of  all  which  is  not  only  to  be  attributed  to  his  own  corrupt  dis" 
position,  but  to  one  of  his  friends,  who  had  the  management  of  all 
the  affairs  of  the  kingdom :  for  being  a  wicked  and  rash  fellow,  h6 
incited  by  l)is  flattery,  the  young  man  to  all  manner  of  wickedness* 
At  first  therefore,  he  put  to  death  all  that  had  sided  against  him  in 
the  war,  with  unusual  sorts  of  punishments.  Afterwards,  when  the 
Antiochians  taunted  and  jeered  at  him,  as  they  were  wont  to  do, 
he  got  together  a  company  of  mercenary  soldiers  against  them,  and 
oommanded  that  they  should  be  disarmed,  but  the  Antiochians  refus>» 
ing  to  deliver  them;  some  he  killed  as  they  fell  into  his  hands, 
others  he  murdered  in  their  own  houses,  together  with  their  wivei 
and  children;  upon  which  a  great  uproar  being  raised  in  the  city, 
he  burnt  down  most  of  the  town  to  the  ground,  and  many  that 
were  accused  to  be  heads  of  this  commotion,  were  put  to  death,  and 
their  estates  confiscated,  and  brought  into  the  king's  exchequer: 
and  therefore  many  of  the  citizens,  both  out  of  fear  and  hatred  to 
Demetrius,  fied  out  of  the  city  and  wandered  up  and  down  all  Sy-» 
ria,  watching  for  a  fit  time  and  opportunity  to  be  revenged.  In  the 
mean  time  Demetrius,  hated  of  every  body,  raged  notwithstanding 
ill  slaughters,  banishments,  and  confiscations,  far  exceeding  his  fa- 

*  XJsh.  An.  470.  before  Christ,  140. 
i  In  the  Greek  it  is  i£g>'pt,  but  mistaken  I  conc^ve^ 


6l6  THE  PRAGM£NTS  OF 

tber  in  cruelty:  for  he  was  far  from  royal  clemency  aod  kindae&^; 
but  exercising  a  tyrannical  and  arbitrary  power,  oppressed  his  sub- 
jects with'  most  grievous  and  unsufferable  calamities.  lasomuch  as 
the  kings  of  this  family,  for  their  oppressions,  were  liated  by  all, 
those  of  the  other^,  were  as  much  beloved  for  their  moderatioo  and 
clemency;  so  that  through  the  mutual  plots  and  circumventing 
contrivances  of  the  heads  of  both  these  families,  one  a|?ainst  ano- 
ther, Syria  was  always  full  of  stirs  and  commotions:  and  the  con* 
mon  people  themselves,  through  the  flattery  and  fair  promises  of 
those  kings  that  sought  to  succeed  the  otlier,  were  so  led  aside^  as 
that  they  still  delighted  in  change. 

97.  The  Aradiansf  growing  high  crested  and  insolept,  abused  the 
Maratheniant  ambassadors,  who  crying  out  against  their  impiety, 
challenged  the  sacred  regard  that  ought  to  be  luui  to  supplianu,  and 
the  security  and  protection  due  to  ambassadors,  upon  which,  some 
of  the  audacious  young  fellows,  presently  knocked  them  on  the 
head.  Then  these  murderers  and  their  co-partners  got  together  in 
a  general  assembly,  and  adding  one  piece  of  wickedness  to  anothcr» 
contrived  an  impious  and  vile  design  against  the  Maratbenians;  for 
taking  the  rings  off  the  fingers  of  them  that  were  murdered,  thej 
wrote  letters  to  the  Maratbenians,  as  from  the  ambassadors,  bv 
which  they  informed  them,  that  the  Aradians  would  within  a  shoft 
time  send  them  aid,  to  the  end  that  the  Maratbenians  might  receive 
the  Aradian  soldiers  into  their  city,  and  so  be  surprised,  thinking 
they  were  really,  and  without  fraud,  sent  to  them  as  auxiliaries.  But 
the  Aradians  failed  in  their  wicked  design,  for  when  they  had  laklaQ 
embargo  upon  all  the  ships,  that  none  might  discover  their  treachery 
to  the  Marathenians,  a  certain  seaman,  a  neighbour  to  the  Maratbe- 
nians commiserating  their  condition,  and  being  accustomed  to  sail 
in  the  neighbouring  sea,  took  a  ship,  and  in  the  night  passed  over 
that  narrow  cut,  about  eight  furlongs  in  breadth,  and  discovered  the 
fraud  of  the  Aradians  to  the  Marathenians;  the  Aradians  therefim, 
when  they  understood  their  plot  was  discovt^red,  forbore  sending  the* 
letters. 

98.  Ptolemy  Physcon,  the  brother  of  Philometor,  began  hb 
reign  most  wickedly;  for  charging  many  with  plots  against  his  life, 
he  put  them  all  to  death,  with  most  cruel  torments,  others  for  pre- 
tended crimes  invented  by  himself,  he  banished  and  confisoUed 
their  estates:  by  which  cruelties,  in  a  short  time,  his  subjects  wer; 

^  Of  Alexander  Dale,  who  pretended  to  be  the  son  of  Aatiocbot  "EfUphutm^F^mh 
phus  lib.  13.  c.  3.     1.  Mac.  101.     U»h.  An.  465. 
t  Of  Aradus  island.  X  Of  Marttbos  ia  PbOBnictt* 


DIODORUS  SlCULUS.  6 1  f 


SO  enraged,  that  they  all  hated  him  mortally;  however,  he  reigned 
fifteen  years, 

99.  Viriathus,  when  at  his  marriage  many  gold  and  silver  eupsj 
and  all  sorts  of  rich  carpets  of  exquisite  workmanship,  were  set 
forth  to  grace  the  solemnity,  he  held  them  all   upon  the  point  of  a 
lance,  not  with  admiration  of  such  rich  and  splendid  furniture,  but 
rather  in  scorn  and  contempt;     Aftef^  when  he  had  upon  this  occa- 
sion  spoken  many  things^    \Vith  tniith  wisdom  and  prudence,  he 
Concluded  with  many  emphatical  expressions^  and  with  this  one, 
very  remarkable*,  for  by  this  saying  he  signified,  that  it  was  the 
greatest  imprudence  imaginable^  to  trust  in  goods  of  fortune^  which 
are  so  uncertain;  especially,  since  it  was  apparent,  that  all  those 
highly  esteemed  riches  of  his  fathen-in-law,  were  liable  to  be  a  prey 
to  him   that  might  carry  them  away  upon  his  spear's  point;   further 
he  added,  that  his  father-in-law  ought  rather  to  thank  him,  for  that 
nothing  of  his  own  was  given  by  his  father- in-lawj  to  him  who  was 
lord  and  owner  of  all.     Viriathus  therefore  at  that  time,  neither 
washed  nor  sat  down,  although  he  was  earnestly  entreated  so  to  do. 
And  whereas  the  table  was  plentifully  furnished  with  rich  dishes  of 
meat,  he  only  distributed  some  bread  and  flesh  amongst  them  that 
came  along  with  him.     After  he  had  a  little  more  than  tasted  the 
meat  himself,  he  ordered  his  bride  to  be  brought  to  him,  and  having 
sacrificed  after  the  manner  of  the  Spaniards,  he  mounted  her  on 
horseback)  and  forthwith  carried  her  away  to  his  apartments  in  the 
mountains:  for  he  accounted  sobriety  and  temperance  the  greatest 
riches,  and  the  liberty  of  his  country  gained  by  valour^  the  surest 
possession.     In  his  leagues  and  treaties  he  was  very  careful  and  ex- 
actly faithful  to  his  word,  and  spoke  plainly  and  sincerely  what  he 
intended,  instructed  therein  (without  any  other  arts)  by  his  own  na- 
tural principles  of  honesty  and  fair  dealing. 

100.  Demetrius,  while  he  staid  at  Laodicea,  spent  his  time  in 
banqueting,  and  such  like  luxury;  and  yet  exercised  his  tyranny  on 
many  in  the  mean  time,  not  at  all  bettered  by  his  afBictions; 

101.  Tiie  Cnossians  contended  for  the  sovereignty  of  the  island^ 
which  they  alledged  belonged  to  them,  both  upon  the  account  of  tl\^ 
antient  dignity  of  the  city,  and  the  glory  and  renown  of  their  an- 
cestors in  tlie  heroic  times.  For  some  say  that  Jupiter  was  brought 
up  amongst  them,  and  that  Minos,  who  had  the  dominion  of  the 
seas,  was  bred  up  by  Jupiter,  at  Cnossus>  and  excelled  all  othef 
xncn  in  virtuous  accomplishments^ , 

102.  But  in  Egypt,  king  Ptolemy  for  his  cruelty,  was  hated  by 
all  his  subjects :  for  his  manners  were  not  to  be  compared  with  his 

*  Here  something  is  wantiog. 

Vol.  2.  No,  48*  KUit 


^18  THE  tRAQHSms  Of 


brother  Philometor^s;  for  be  was  of  a  mild  and  gentle  nalore,  but 
the  other  fierce  and  cruel;  and  therefore  the  people  loDged  fior  I 
change^  and  earneatly  waited  for  a  fit  opportanity  to  revolt. 

103.  At  the  time  when  Ptolemy,  (after  the  solemn  muiper  of  the 
jEgyptians))  was  enthroned  at  Memphis,  his  queen  Cleopatra  wm 
delivered  of  a  son,  at  which  be  es:ceedingly  rejoiced,  and  cdlcd  him 
Memphites,  because  be  was  born  ip  the  city  Memfdiia^  at  thetUnt 
of  his  solemn  inauguration.  But  while  he  was  celebmtioghis  son's 
birth  day,  he  forgot  not  his  usual  cruelty,  for  be  ordeced  aone  af 
Cyrene,  (who  had  brought  him  intai^pt),  to  be  pat  to  death,  ba^ 
oause  they  rebuked  bim  something  too  freely,  upon  the  acconnt-  of 
the  strumpet  Irene. 

104.  After  Diegylis  king  of  Thrace,  came  to  the  thiooe,  be  waii 
so  pufibd  up  with  his  prosperity,  that  he  began  to  rule  over  his  pea* 
pie  not  as  his  subjects  and  friends,  but  to  domineer  o?er  then,  assa 
many  slaves  and  bondmen:  for  he  put  many  good  and  honeat  Una* 
cians  by  tortures  to  death,  and  abused  with  the  liigbest  marin  of  da^ 
grace  many  others :  for  he  spared  neither  woman  nor  boj  liiat  mm 
handsome  and  beautiful,  and  stuck  not  at  stripping  men  ottt  of  «| 
they  had,  by  force  and  strong  hand,  but  filled  all  bis  dominkMia  wA 
rapine  and  violence.  He  plundered  and  spoiled  likewise  the  ddn 
of  Greece  that  bordered  u|K)n  him,  and  abused  some  of  the  capttvai^ 
and  put  others  to  death  wkh  exquisite  toTrments.  After  he  had  tabo 
the  city  Lysiroachia,  (which  belonged  to  Attalus),  he  \mpMt  h  daitv 
to  the  ground,  and  picked  out  the  greatest  persons  of  qoafity  fmm 
amongst  the  captives,  and  put  them  to  death  with  strange  aivl  aiK 
heard  of  tortures:  for  he  cut  off  the  heads,  hands,  and  fect'of  Mf 
children,  and  hung  them  about  their  parent's  necks,  andexchaqfll 
the  members  of  men  and  women  on^  from  another.  Of  aoma  te 
cut  off  their  hands,  and  clove  them  down  the  small  of  the  bmki 
and  sometimes  woul.d  cause  the  members  to  be  canied  ahom  ofM 
the  top  of  their  spears,  so  that  he  far  exceeded  Phalarja«himae)l^  ail 
Apollodorus  the  tyrant  of  the  Casisandrians.  His  barharitjr  h  wMMt 
evident  in  this  one  instance  following  L-^When  he  waa  celehouim 
his  nuptials,  after  the  ancient  manner  of  the  Thraeiapa^  he  cal9h|i 
up  two  young  men  of  Greece  that  were  travellings  vh^.'WV^iinl^yMi^ 
to  Attulus,  and  were  brothers,  both  very  beautifnl.  11k|  t|Oi  HH 
fully  attained  to  man's  estate,  and  thp  other  was  n|Mhor4ei^PS  Wk 
it;  Diegylis  causec]  then)  both  to  be  introduced  crotam^t  wMl  pik 
lands,  after  the  manner  of  the  victims:  the  younger  faaillg,hudialitA 
and  extended  at  length  by  the  officer,  as  one  readv.to  i^HtJUtmollai 
the  middle,  the  tyrant  cried  out,  that  kings  a  ui 
not  to  oQ'cr  the  like  sacrifices;  hereupon  th^  elder 


DtODORlfS  SifcUtlTSi  GjIQ^ 


mentation,  out  of  endeatcd  love  to  his  bi-other,  irttei*poi56d  hirhself 
between  him  and  the  sword ;  upon  which  Diegylis  comnianded  he 
should  be  likewise  luid  along,  and  then  doubling  his  cruelty,  at  one 
stroke  despatched  them  both,  the  spectators  all  applauding  so  noble 
a  piece  of  dexterity.  Many  such  like  wicked  acts  Were  committed 
by  him. 

105.  When  Attains  understood  that  Diegylis  was  liated  by  all  his 
subjects  for  his  cruelty  and  covetousness,  he  took  a  quite  contrary 
course :  and  therefore,  when  he  had  taken  many  Tliracian  prisoners 
captive,  and  freely  released  them  all,  there  were  many  that  spread 
abroad  his  fame  for  his  generosity  and  clemency :  and  when  many 
of  the  Thracian  nobility  out  of  hatred  to  Diegylis,  fled  to  him,  and 
were  kindly  received,  and  the  thing  came  ttf  be  known,  Diegylis 
tortured  the  hostages  of  them  that  were  fled  with  the  most  grievous 
torments.  Many  of  whom  that  were  very  yourig,  and  of  tender  age, 
he  pulled  in  pieces,  limb  from  limb,  and  of  others  he  cut  off  their 
hands,  feet,  and  heads;  some  he  crucified,  and  others  he  hung  upoQ 
trees;  many  women  likewise,  who  were  persons  of  quality,  he  stig- 
matised before  they  were  put  to  death,  and  prostituted  them  to  the 
lust  of  every  vile  fellow,  in  a  mbst  barbarous  manner  giving  up  hini- 
self  to  all  manner  of  fiUhiness.  Which  as  it  clearly  evidenced  his 
unparalleled  cruelty,  so  it  moved  many  of  the  spectators,  who  had 
but  the  least  sense  of  humanity,  with  pity  and  commiseration. 

106.  When  Pom pey  was  preparing  to  besiege  the  city  Laghus,  the' 
Numantians  willing  to  assist  their  countrymen,  sent  to  theni  in 
the  nigiit  four  hundred  soldiers;  whom  the  Lagnetians  at  first  rea- 
dily received,  and   bountifully  rewarded  as  their  saviours.     But  in 
a  few  days  after,  dreading  a  siege,  they  treated  with  Pompey,  to  de- 
liver up  the  town  upon  terms,  insisting  only  upon  sparing  their  lives. 
Biit  when  Pompey  would  admit  of  no  conditions,  unless  the  Nu- 
mantians were  delivered  up  to  him,  the  Lagnetians  ai  first  shrunlc  af^ 
the  thoughts  of  such  a  wicked  act  against  their  benefactors,  and 
therefore  resolved  to  stand  it  out  to  the  utmost;  but  being  afterwards* 
reduced  to  the  utmost  extremity,  they  sent  to  Pompey  to  acquaint 
htm  they  were  ready  to  redeem  their  own  lives  by  the  destruction  of 
their  contecleratcs;  which  the  Numantians  coming  to  understand, 
they  sei   ujon  the  citizens  unexpectedly  in  the  night,  and  made  a 
grievous   slaughter  amongst  them.     Pompey  having  intelligence  of^ 
this  tumult  and  hustle  in  the  town,  forthwith  set  scaling  Itldders  to 
the  walls,  and  took  the  city,  arid  put  all  the  JjagTictians  to  the  sWbrdj, 
but  generously  discharged  all  the  Numantian  auxiliaries,  to  tik  niiifi^'^ 
ber  of  two  hundred;  both  paying  the  men  that  Were  so  unwohhtly 
brought  into  such  e.\tremity  and  distress^  as  likewise  hereby  design^ 


THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


to  gain  tlie  good  will  and  opinton  of  the  NumsiDtiam  towards 
,  Homans.  Afterwards  he  razed  the  city  to  the  ground. 
107-  Aisaces  king  of  the  Parthians  being  a  mild  and  graciotu 
piiiice,  was  exceedingly  prosperous  and  successful,  and  greatly  en- 
larged the  bounds  of  his  empire;  for  he  conquered  all  before  him, 
as  far  as  to  India,  (where  Povus  reigned  formerly),  with  a  great  deal 
of  ease:  and  though  lie  was  advanced  to  that  degree  of  power  and 
authority,  yet  lie  inclined  not  in  the  least  to  pride  and  luxury,  av  is 
common  with  princes  in  such  cases^  but  was  kind  to  his  subjects, 
and  valiant  in  the  field  against  his  enemies:  and  having  subdued k- 
veral  nations^  gathered  together  a  system  out  of  the  best  of  thdr 
laws,  and  imparted  tliem  to  Iiis  Punhians. 

108,  Variaihus  was  buried  by  the  Lusitanians  with  great  pomp 
tiudfitatc;  for  two  hundred  gtudlHtors  were  niMched  singly  with  as 
many  morej  and  fought  duels  at  iiis  sepulchre,  in  honour  of  the  re- 
markable valour  of  this  man.  For  he  was,  as  is  agreed  by  all,  vali* 
ant  in  dangers,  piudont  and  careful  in  providing  whatever  was  ne- 

'  ccssary,  and  that  which  was  most  of  all  considerable  was,  that  whilst 
he  commanded  he  was  more  beloved  than  ever  any  was  before  himi 
For  in  dividing  tlie  spoil  he  never  served  himself  with  any  thing  aboT^^c 
^ny  of  tlie  restj  and  of  those  things  which  fell  to  his  share^  hcofcco 
rewarded  tliem  that  had  behaved  themselves  valiantly,  and  relieved 
those  soldiers  that  were  mobt  in  want*  He  was  likev^tsc  of  incredi- 
ble sobriety  and  vigilance,  not  sparing  any  labour,  or  drawing  back 
from  any  hazard,  not  to  be  overcome  in  the  least  by  ease  or  plea* 
sures.  Tlie  arguments  of  h!s  virtuous  qualifications  ar^  evident  aod 
demonstrable:  for  being  general  of  the  Lusitanifins  for  the  space  of 
eleven  years,  during  all  that  time  his  soldiers  were  not  only  peaceable 
without  any  mutinies,  but  remained  unconqqerable;  but  after  his 
death  the  forces  of  the  Lusitanians  in  a  short  time  after  were  broken 
and  dispersed,  being  deprived  of  such  a  general. 

109,  Ptolemy  for  his  cruelty,  murders,  filthy  lusts^  and  deformed 
body,  (whence  he  was  called  Physco,)  was  hated  by  all.  But  Hierax 
his  general  being  an  expert  soldier,  and  popular  in  all  general  as- 
semblies, and  a  man  of  a  great  spirit,  took  upon  him  the  govern- 
ment :  for  when  Ptolemy  wanted  money^  and  the  soldiers  for  want  of 
pay  were  ri^dy  to  revolt  to  Galiestes,  he  put  a  stop  to  their  mutiny 
by  paying  off  their  arrears  out  of  his  own  purse. 

1 10,  Tiie  ^Egyptians  altogether  condemned  Ptolemy  when  they 
saw  him  so  childish  in  his  speeches,  drowned  in  filthy  lusts^  and  his 
body  emasculated  by  his  intemperance. 

iU.  ^milius*  the  consul  being  of  a  heavy  and  unweildy  bodyj^ 

^  Marcus  ^l^miliut. 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  ftgl  , 

by  reason  of  his  bulk,  and  too  muph  pampering  of  ^himself^  was^, 

very  unfit  for  martial  aflfairs. 


BOOK  XXXIV. 

\ .  ABOUT  this  time  there  arose  so  great  a  mutiny  and  sedition  of  the 
slaves  in  Sicily,  as  no  age  before  could  ever  parallel^  in  which  many 
cities  suffered,  were  miserably  ransacked,  and  innumerable  multi-r 
tudes  both  of  men,  women,  and  children,  fell  into  most  grievous  ca- 
lamities; and  the  whole  island  was  now  upon  the  point  of  falling 
into  tlie  hands  of  the  slaves,  who  designed  no  other  bounds  should 
be  put  to  their  exorbitant  power,  than  the  absolute  destruction  of 
their  masters. 

And  these  things  fell  out  when  none  in  the  least  suspected  them; 
but. those  who  were  accustomed  to  pierce  deep  into  the  grounds  and 
causes  of  all  events,  concluded  that  this  was  not  a  thing  that  hap- 
pened merely  by  chance.  For  the  inhabitants  of  this  rich  island 
growing  wanton  with  too  much  plenty,  fell  into  luxury  and  volup- 
tuousness, and  then  into  pride  and  insolence.  For  those  reasons 
the  cruelty  of  tlie  masters  towards  their  servants,  and  the  hatred  of  the. 
servants  towards  their  masters  raging  and  increasing  more  and  more 
every  day,  at  length  a  fit  opportunity  offering  itself,  their  hatred 
broke  forth^  and  many  thousand  slaves  on  a  sudden,  without  any 
sign  or  appearance  of  any  such  thing  before^  got  in  a  body  together 
to  cut  the  iliroats  of  their  masters. 

And  tlie  same  thing  happened  in  Asia^  almost  about  the  same 
time.  For  when  Aristonicus*^  without  any  colour  of  rights  sought 
to  gain  the  kingdom  of  Asia,  all  the  slaves,  by  reason  of  the  cruelty 
of  their  masters,  joined  with  him,  and  filled  many  towns  and  cities 
wlti)  blood  and  slaughter. 

1 '  ^.  In  like  manner  those  that  had  large  possessions  in  Sicily  bought 
np  whole  gaols  to  till  their  lands — some  they  sti^ckled,  others  they 
overcharged  witii  hard  labour,  and  branded  and  stigmatized  every 
one  of  them :  so  that  such  a  multitude  of  slaves,  even  like  a  deluge, 
overflowed  all  Sicily,  that  the  excessive  number  may  seem  incredi- 
ble to  all  that  hear  of  it;  for  all  the  rich  men  of  Sicily  vied  with  the 
Italians  for  pride,  covetousness,  and  vicious  practices;  for  many  of 
iic  Italians  who  had  great  numbers  of  servants^  accustomed  tbei^. 
*  £ase  brother  to  AttuI OS  kiB|(  of  PergaiBiM, 


622  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


shepherds  to  tliat  degree  of  rapine  and  licentiousDesSj  as  that  they 
suffered  them  to  roh  and  steal  for  want  of  necessary  subsistence  from 
them  themselves/^  Which  liberty  being  once  granted  to  those  men 
who  had  strength  of  body  sufficient  to  enable  them  readily  to  execute 
any  villany,  together  wilh  time  and  leisure,  and  through  want  of 
subsistence  were  reduced  to  the  utmost  extremity  of  attempting  aoy 
thing  for  their  supply;  these  unruly  fellows  in  a  short  time  were  ripe 
and  complete  in  wickedness.  At  first  they  used  to  murder  travellers 
upon  the  highway,  when  only  one  or  two  were  together:  afterwards 
they  would  in  bodies  enter  into  little  villages,  in  the  nighty  and  pil- 
lage ])oor  men's  houses,  and  forcibly  carry  away  whatever  they  fouod^ 
and  killall  thatopposed  themt^  At  length  growing  everyday  more  and 
more  audacious,  there  was  neither  security  in  the  roads  in  Sicily 
for  travellers  in  the  night,  nor  safety  in  thoir  houses  for  them  that 
dwelt  in  the  country,  but  all  places  were  full  of  rapine^  robberies,  and 
murders.  And  because  the  shepherds  and  herdsmen  were  furnished 
with  arms,  and  inured  to  lie  night  and  day  in  the  open  fields,  they 
every  day  grew  more  bold  and  daring:  for  carrying  clubs  and  lances 
and  long  staves,  and  covered  with  the  skins  of  wolves  and  wild  boars, 
they  looked  with  a  most  dreadful  and  terrible  aspect  as  the  children 
of  Mars.  Besides,  every  one  had  a  guard  of  great  mastiff  dogs  to 
attend  theni9  and  guzzling  down  milk,  and  glutting  themselves  with 
flesh,  and  all  sorts  of  other  food  and  provision,  they  resembled  beasts 
both  in  souls  and  bodies.  So  that  the  whole  island  seemed  as  if  it 
had  been  full  of  soldiers  roving  up  and  down  in  everyplace,  oras  if 
all  the  daring  slaves  were  let  loose  by  their  masters  to  act  the  part  of 
madmen.'  It  is  true  indeed  that  the  Roman  pretors  and  governors 
did  what  they  could  to  suppress  this  insolence  of  the  slaves  $  but 
because  they  durst  not  punish  them,  by  reason  of  the  potency  of 
their  masters,  they  were  forced  to  suffer  the  country  to  be  infested 
with  robl)eries;  for  whereas  most  of  their  masters  were  Romaa 
knights,  who  liad  judicial  authority  at  Rome,  and  were  used  to  choose 
judges  out  of  the  equestrian  order  in  the  causes  of  the  pretors  and 
the  proconsuls,  who  were  summoned  to  appear  before  them  aftef 
their  provincial  authority  was  deterrtiined,  the .  magistrates  were 
upon  good  grounds  afraid  of  them. 

.  3.  The  Italians,  who  had  large  possessions  in  Sicily,  and  theieforfc 
bought  many  slaves,  everyone  of  whom  they  stigmatized  with  oiiifa 
on  their  cheeks,  and  oppressed  them  with  hard  labour,  and  yet  de-' 
frauded  them  of  their  wages  and  subsistence. 

4*  There  was  one  Damophilus  of  Euna,  a  wealthy  man,  bttt  wp 
proud  and  arrogant;  this  man  tilled  a  large  ccmipass  of'landly  liadP 
a  va&t  stock  of  cattle,  and  initiated  the  luxury  and  crueltj  of  the 


DIODORUS  6ICULUS.  623 


Italians  towards  their  slaves.  For  being  carried  in  a  coach  drawn 
by  stately  horses,  he  traversed  the  country  up  and  down,  ji^uarded 
with  a  company  of  armed  slaves;  he  carried  likewise  about  with  him 
continually  many  beautiful  boys,  flatterers  and  parasites ;^ind  in  the 
city  and  villages  had  his  silver  vessels  curiously  wrought,  and  ali 
sorts  of  purple  carpets  of  very  great  value;  and  made  magniHceot 
feasts  and  entertainments,  after  tl^  state  and  grandeur  of  a  king,  in 
pomp  and  expense  far  surpassing  the  Persian  luxury,  and  as  much 
as  all  other  men  in  pride  and  arrogance.  For  being  rude,  and  n^ver 
bred  up  with  learning,  or  any  liberal  education;  and  having  heaped 
up  a  great  deal  of  wealth,  and  himself  left  to  a  licentious  liberty, 
without  controul;  he  6rst,  froni  fullness  and  plenty  became  insolent, 
and  at  last  was  a  plague  to  himself,  and  the  occasion  of  bringing  many 
miseries  and  calamities  upon  the  countryj^For  having  bought  many 
slaves,  he  abused  them  in  the  highest  degree;  and  those  that  wcr« 
free  horn  in  their  own  country,  and  taken  captives  in  war,  he  stig«> 
inatizcd  in  their  cheeks  with  the  sharp  points  of  iron  pins,  some  of 
whom  he  sent  bound  in  fetters  to  the  gaols;  and  to  others  that  were 
ordered  to  look  after  the  cattle  in  the  fields,  he  neither  allowed  olothet 
nor  food  sufficient  to  satisfy  nature. 

^  5.  The  barbarity  and  cruelty  of  this  Damophilu$  was  such,  that 
never  a  day  passed  wherein  lie  scourged  not  his  slaves,  without  the 
least  cause  or  occasion.  And  his  wife  Megallis  was  as  cruel  as  hkn-* 
self,  towards  the  maid  servants,  and  other  sVaves  that  fell  into  h^r 
hands.  Hie  slaves  therefore  being  thus  provoked  by  the  cruelty  of 
their  master  and  mistress,  concluding  they  could  not  be  brought  into 
a  worse  condition  than  they  then  were,  rose  up  all  on  a  sudden. 
'^  jr.  In  Sicily  Damophilus  had  a  young  daughter  of  a  very  gentle 
and  courteous  disposition,  .who  made  it  her  business  to  relieve  and 
heal  those  slaves  that  had  been  abused  and  scourged  by  her  parents^ 
and  to  bring  meat  to  them  that  were  in  prison;  so  that  she  was  won- 
derfully beloved  by  all  the  servants,  insomuch,  as  in  remembrance  of 
her  former  kindness,  all  had  compassion  of  her,  and  were  so  far  from 
offeiiug  any  violence  or  injury  to  the  young  maid,  that  every  one  of 
them  made  it  their  business  to  preserve  her  chastity  unviolated;  and 
chose  some  out  of  their  own  company,  the  most  expeditious  amongst 
them,  to  conduct  her  to  Catana  to  some  of  her  friends. 

7.  After  Eunus  was  declared  king,  he  put  many  to  death,  and 
spared  only  those  that  for  the  sake  of  his  prophecies  commended  him 
at  their  feasts,  to  which  his  master  Antigenes  used  to  bring  him  to 
make  sport ;  those  likewise  that  were  so  kind  as  in  a  jest  to  give  him 
part  of  the  dainties  with  them,  he  preserved;  so  that  the  strange 
turn  of  fortune  was  to  be  admired,  and  that  kindQC3S  shewed  to 


624f  THB  FRAGMEKT8  OF 


such  mean  aud  iDconsiderable  pers<  1  oo  lo  great  fiivov' 

and  re^ect^  at  a  time  when  it  was  so  «*clcOu.v  ».«•  •v«iaoiiable. 
i/3  8.  About  the  same  time  broke  out  another  rebellion  of  the  slaics; 
one  Cleon  a  Sicilian  near  Mount  Taurus^  inured  to  rollberics  fRMn  a 
boy,  being  appointed  td  look  to  the  horses  in  their  pastures  ia^Sicilj, 
beset  the  highways,  and  committed  heinous  mufderi  op  and  down 
the  country.  This  fellow  hearing^  of  the  good  fortune  of  Eoiras  aad 
his  followers,  hairing  persuaded  some  of  the  neighboorin^  slaves  to 
join  with  him,  on  a  sudden  revolted,  Wasted  and  spoiled  the  ci^  of 
Agrigentumt  and  all  the  neighbouring  country  round  aboal. 

9.  In  Asia,  Attalus  being  newly  come  to  thecrowni  began  to  ma* 
nage  afiairs  in  a  way  quite  diflferent  from  all  the  former  kiagi;  6r 
they  by  their  clemeticy  aud  kindness  to  their  subjects,  reigned  pras- 
perously  and  happily  themseWes,  and  were  a  blessing  to  the  kia^ 
dom;  but  this  prince  being  of  a  cruel  and  bloody  disposition,  op*' 
pressed  his  subjects  with  many  slaughters,  and  grievoos  calaoiitiei: 
suspecting  that  some  of  his  own  relations  that  Were  potent  and 
men  of  interest,  were  plotting  against  him^  be  resolved  to  rid  Uoh' 
self  of  them.   To  that  end  he  picked  out  some  of  the  most  eofeibns 
and  bloody  fellows  from  among  his  barbarian  mercenary  mAdknf 
and  hid  them  in  certain  vaults  in  the  palace ;  and  then  sending  iir~: 
Such  of  his  friends  and  kindred  as  he  was  most  jealous  of,  vrheailiri  . 
had  them  there,  he  cut  all  their  throats  by  those  bloody  execndoncai -; 
of  his  cruelty,  and  forthwith  ordered  their  wives  and  childrett  Is  tltf^ 
put  to  death  after  the  same  manner.  « 

The  rest  of  bis  father's  friends  that  either  had  command  in  dis 
army,  or  were  governors  of  cities,  he  either  caused  to  be  i 
ously  assassinated;  or  seizing  them,  murdered  them  and  their  ft 
lies  together.    Being  therefore  hated  not  only  by  his  sabjeets, 
by  all  the  neighbouring  nations,  all  within  his  domiaionSy 
voured  as  much  as  they  could  to  bring  about  a  revolution  and  i 
of  government. 

10k  Tiberius  Gracchus  was  the  son  of  Tiberius  who  bad  lif#rftnli# 
consul,  and  a  man  very  famous,  both  as  to  the  swoid 
He  was  likewise  the  grandchild  of  Publius  Scipio  by  bis  i 
that  Scipio  who  conquered  Hannibal  and  the  Carthi^iniana* 
nobly  born  on  both  sides,  he  excelled  all  his  equals  in  age,  in  \ 
judgment  and  elocution,  and  indeed  in  all  manner  of  leaming^'sSlhst: 
he  was  not  afraid  to  enter  the  lists  with  any  that  dared  to  oppose  liiab  ^ 

11.  The  Syrian  slaves  cut  off  the  hands  of  those  they  toolT  pifr 
souers,  not  at  the  wrists,  but  hands  and  arms  togethern, 

li»  The  senate  dreading  the  anger  of  the  |  onstilted  it^t 

Sibyl's  books,  and  sent  ambassadors  into  Sicily^  i  s»ed  tli^oi^^b 


DfODORUS   STCULUS.  B2S 

the  whole  island,  eretted  altars  to  Jupiter  ^tnetift,  atid  offered  so- 
lemn sacrifices  to  him,  enclosing  tbe  altars  round  with  stone  walls  to 
exclude  al)  but  those  of  rlie  several  cities,  who  after  the  customs  of 
their  own  country,  were  used  to  oBer  sacrifices  to  him. 

13<  Gorgus  was  of  Morgantium*,  surnamed  Camhalus,  a  principal 
man  for  wealth  and  authority  in  the  city.  Going  abroad  to  hun^ 
and  failing  in  amongst  a  company  of  r6bherS|  he  took  to  his  he^Is 
to  get  into  the  town,  who  being  by  chancd  tnet  by  Goirgus  hb  father 
on  horseback,  the  father  forthwith  leaped  off  hi^  horse,  and  desii'ed 
his  son  to  mount,  and  make  away  with  all  sfieed  into  the  city ^  butiis 
the  son  was  dot  willing  to  prefer  hia  dwn  pteservatioii  before  that  of 
his  father,  so  the  father  could  not  bear  the  death  of  his  son  by  avoid- 
ing the  danger  himself.  And  thus  while  they  Wiere  with  teafs  eti^ 
treating  one  another,  and  striving  to  etce^d  e^<ih  other  in  endearing 
natural  affections,  the  love  of  the  father  in  contest  with  the  love  of 
the  son,  they  were  overtaken  by  the  thieves,  and  both  killed  upon 
the  place. 

14.  Zibelmius  the  son  of  Diegylis  following  his  father's  steps  in 
cruelty,  enraged  at  what  the  Tliracians  had  done,  proceeded  to  ibut 
degree  of  implacable  severhyj  and  bcigiit  of  wickedness,  that  he 
put  to  death  all  that  had  displeased  him,  with  their  whole  families, 
and  upon  most  sliglit  and  frivolous  occfisions  cut£ome  in  pieces  limb 
from  limb,  crucified  others,  and  sawed  several  asunder.  He  killed 
likewise  little  children  before  their  parent's  faces,  and  infants  at 
their  mother's  breasta,  and  having  cut  them  in  pieces,  dished  up 
their  members  as  curiosities  for  their  kindred  to  feast  upon,  reviving 
as  it  were  those  antient  repasts  and  entertainments  of  Tereusf  and 
Thyestes.J  At  length  the  Thracians  seized  upon  his  person  ;  but  it 
was  scarce  possible  to  punish  him  according  to  his  deserts.  For  how 
could  one  body  suffer  the  puuishmcnt  justly  due  for  tlie  cruellies  and 
injuries  committed  against  a  whole  nation?  However,  to  the  utmost 
of  their  power  they  repaid  him  with  all  the  scorn  and  contempt,  and 
totremityof  torture  upon  his  bodyj  they  could  invent. 

15.  Ptolemy  Physcon,  when  he  saw  his  sister  Cleopatra  was  so 
great  an  enemy  to  him,  ^nd  could  not  revenge  himself  otherwise 
upon  her,  contrived  a  most  notorious  piece  of  vUlany  for  that  pur- 
pose. For  he  imitated  the  cruelty  of  Medea,  murdering  her  son 
Memphites,  begotten  by  himself,  who  was  then  in  Cyprus,  and  a 

*  Now  Georgeto  in  the  kingdosu  of  Naples. 
i  Tcrcus  a  king  of  Thrace.     See  the  ttory  of  Tereas  Progne  aod  PhiloiBehH-0?idj 

Met.  lib.  6.    His  panUfameDt  hj  his  oim  subjects. 
i  TLjcstes  feasted  b^  his  brother  Atreos  king  of  Hjeenm,  with  his  own  sons  begotlea 
upon  Atreus's  wife— ^fid,   Ifet. 
You  2.  No,  48,  LLLi 


T 


686  THE  FIIAGM£NT8  OP 

erjr  yoang  boy:  nd not  conteDt  with  thig, he Gommttcda  bimom 
wicked  act:  for^  cutting  off  the  child's  Umbt^  bo  pot  dwmlii  i 
ebesti  and  delivered  them  to  one  of  his  guard  to  be  oonveied  to  Alex- 
andria; and  whereas  Cleopatra's  birthday  was  then  near  at  hand, 
he  commanded  that  in  the  night  next  before  that  day,  be  shoaM 
set  down  the  chest  at  the  palace  gi^tes;  which  being  accordingly 
executed,  Cleopatra  made  great  lamentation,  and  all  the  people  were 
in  a  great  rage  against  Ptolemy. 

.16.  Atheneus,  Antiochu^'s  general,  in  a  short  time  met  with  a 
just  and  due  reward  for  his  insolencies  and  abuses  in  all  phees 
whereTcr  he  quartered  in  his  march:  for  being  the  first  that  fled, 
and  forsook  Antiochus  in  the  heat  of  the  fight^  eoming  to  some  ef 
the  towns  where  he  had  abused  his  quarters,  all  shut  their  doois  npoa 
him,  and  every  one  refused  to  help  him,  either  with  meat  or  diink^ 
so  that  he  wandered  up  and  down  the  country,  till  at  kngdi  be  wss 
fiunished  to  death. 

17>  HegelochnSjgeneral  of  Ptolemy  Physcon,  sent  against  llaisjsi 
the.  Alexandrian  general,  took  him  prisoner,  and  cut  off.  all  his 
army.  When  Msrsyas  was  brought  before  the  king,  and  all  ooa- 
tluded  that  he  would  forthwith  put  him  to  some  cruel  death,  Ptokny 
pardoned  him,  beyond  all  men's  expectation :  for  now  he  bcgui  to  if- 
pent  of  hb  former  cruelties,  and  endeavoured  to  regain  the  people'i 
love  and  favour  by  acts  of  clemency. 

IS.  Evemerus,  king  of  Parthia,  born  in  Hyrcania,  exceeding  all 
Other  princes  in  cruelty,  omitted  no  sorts  of  torments  he  could  is* 
vent.  For  many  of  the  Babylonians,  upon  slight  grounds,  with 
their  whole  families,  he  made  slaves  and  sent  them  into  Media  to  be 
sold.  He  burnt  likewise  to  the  ground  the  market-place,  and  some 
of  the  temples  in  Babylon,  and  razed  the  fairest  and  most  beautiful 
parts  of  the  city. 

19.  Alexander  surnamed  Zabinas,  when  those  renowned  captains 
Antipater,  Ponius,  and  iEropus,  revolted  from  him^,  and  seized  upoa 
Laodicea^  he  at  length  took  the  city:  however,  he  generously  spared 
them  all.  For  he  was  of  a  mild  and  gentle  disposition,  and  pleasing 
temper,  and  of  a  wonderful  affability  in  his  converse  or  discourse, 
and  was  therefore  greatly  beloved  of  every  body. 

20.  When  Caius  Sextius  had  taken  the  city  of  the  Gauls,  andsoU 
the  inhabitants  for  slaves,  one  Crato  who  was  led  in  cliains  witli  the 
rest,  came  up  to  the  consul,  as  he  sat  upon  the  tribunal,  and  told 
him  he  had  ever  been  a  friend  to.  the  Romans,  and  for  that  reason  had 
suffered  many  injuriesj  and  had  undergone  many  stripes  and  scourge 
ings  from  his  fellow  citizens:  upon  which  Sextius  forthwith,  witk 

*  To  Sclcucu^  Dcmetriu*^  «ua  of  Kic4tior. 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  62/ 

— ^ ^    ,  ,  ,  .       ■  =^=^ 

all  the  demonstration  of  kindness^  as  of  a  kinsman,  released  him 
from  his  bonds,  and  restored  him  his  goods;  and  for  his  good  will  to 
the  Romans,  gave  him  power  to  set  free  nine  hundred  of  the  citizens, 
«uch  as  he  himself  thought  fit.  For  the  consul  was  more  generous 
and  bountiful  to  Crato  than  he  expected,  to  the  end  t]ie  Gauls  might 
see  how  exactly  just  the  Romans  were,  both  in  their  punbhments  and 
rewards. 

21.  Alexander  not  being  very  confident  of  the  multitude,  both  in 
tegard  of  their  rawness  in  martial  affairs,  and  their  natural  incon- 
stancy, and  hankering  after  innovations,  would  not  adventure  upon  a 
pitched  field;  but  having  got  together  as  much  money  as  he  could^ 

yout  of  the  public  treasuries,  and  pillaged  the  temples,  resolved  by 
night  to  steal  away  into  Greece.  But  whilst  he  attempted,  by  th« 
help  of  some  of  his  barbarians,  to  plunder  Jupiter's  temple,  he  was 
seized  upon,  and  himself  and  whole  army  had  like  to  have  been  cut 
off:  but  he  soon  escaped  out  of  their  hands,  and  made  towards  Seleu-> 
cia.  But  the  Seleucians  having  heard  beforehand,  of  his  savage  sa- 
crilege, shut  their  gates  against  Him;  and  failing  there  of  his  {>urposig 
he  went  to  Pusidium,  and  never  after  departed  from  the  sea  coast. 

22.  After  Caius  Gracchus  was  killed  by  the  hands  of  his  own  ser- 
vant, Lucius  Vitellius  who  had  been  one  of  his  particular  friends, 
^as  the  first  that  got  his  body;  and  was  so  far  from  being  troubled 
at  his  death,  that  he  cut  off  his  head,  and  carried  it  to  his  own  house^ 
thereby  giving  a  remarkable  instance  of  his  cruelty  and  covetpusness. 
For  when  Lucius  Opimius*",  the  consul  by  proclamation,  promised  to 
reward,  iiim  that  should  bring  to  him  Gracchus's  head,  with  the 
weight  of  it  in  gold,  Vitellius  bored  a  hole  in  the  neck,  and  drawing 
cot  the  brains,  poured  in  melted  lead  ip  the  room.  Th^n  be  brought 
the  head  to  Opimius,and  returned  with  the  promised  reward;  but  was 
afterwards  hated  by  all  to  the  day  of  his  death,  as  a  betitay^r  of  hU 
friend.     The  Flacci  were  also  all  put  to  death. 

23.  In  Libya  the  two  kings  drew  up  their  armies  one  against  ano^ 
fher,  and  Jugurtha  routed  the  Numidians  in  a  great  battle,  slaying 
many  of  them;  whereupon  Adherbal  his  brother  fled  to  Cirta,  where 
being  straitly  besieged,  he  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome  to  entreat 
them  not  to  suffer  a  king  that  was  their  friend  and  ally  to  be  utterly 
ruined:  whereupon  the  senate  forthwith  sent  messengers  into  Nu-» 
midia  with  orders  to  Jugurtha  to  raise  his  siege:  which  he  disregard- 
ipg,  they  sent  another  embassy  vested  with  power  and  authority:  but 
that  was  as  fruitless  as  the  other ;  and  at  length  Jugurtha,  straitly 
blocking  up  the  city  tpund,  through  extrepfiity  of  famine  forced  it  to 
9Hrrender,  and  most  unnaturally  slew  his  brother  as  he  was  goui(^ 

♦  Vid.  Plio.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  33.  c.  % 


62R  niZ  FRAGMENTS  OF 


out  of  the  city  with  his  children,  and  leaving  the  kingdoro>  beaeech- 
ing  him  only  to  spare  his  lifci  neither  regarding  the  l^ws  of  nature 
and  consanguinity,  nor  of  arms,  in  sparing  those  that  beg  for  quar- 
ter: he  likewise  scourged  all  the  Italians  to  death  that  aided  with  his 
brother. 

24.  Publius  Scipio  Nasica,  the  consul,  was  a  man  reoovned  both 
for  his  virtue  and  nobleness  of  birth;  for  he  was  of  the  same  familj 
with  Africanus  and  Hispanicus;  of  whom  the  first  conquered  Afri- 
ca^ the  other  Asia,  and  the  third  Spain;  and  from  th«ncc  gained  the 
several  surnames  before  mentioned:  and  besides  theeminency  of  Lis 
birth,  his  father  and  grandfather  were  the  most  eminent  men  of  the 
city;  for  lK)th.  of  them  were  presidents  of  the  senate*;  and  the  first 
that  gave  their  votes,  and  delivered  their  opinions  in  all  public  mat- 
ters, to  the  time  of  their  deaths.  Hi$  grandfather  upon  an.  occasioa 
was  judged  by  the  senate  the  best  man  of  all  the  Roman  citixeas. 
For  it  beingfound  written  in  the  Sybil's  books^JThattbe  RonDianashoaU 
build  a  temple  in  honour  of  the  great  mother  of  the  gods^  and  ahooU 
bring  her  image  from  Pcssious  in  Asia»  and  meet  it  out  of  the  citf 
with  all  the  orders  and  degrees  of  the  citizeps  in  soleom  pomp  and 
Slate,  and  tjiat  the  Ixest  man  should  le^d  the  men,  nnd  the  best  wo- 
man be  at  the  head  of  the  women,  wh^i^  they  rc<;eived  the  inage  of 
the  goddess:  the  senate  performipg;  all  that  wa3  prf sccil^d  by  dn 
Sybil's  writings,  judged  Publius  Na^ica  to  be  the  beat  man,  ^ndVa* 
Icria  t^ie  best  woman.  Fur  h^  was  not  only  eminent  for  bis  piety  to- 
wards the  gods,  but  of  siitgular  prudence  in  gQveroingapd  ordeiiaf 
mutters  of  state,  and  of  a  piercing  judgment.  For  when  Marcos 
Ccito  who,  was  surnamed  Demosthenes,  in  daliverJQg  bin  opinion  ia 
the  senate,  was  ever  and  anon  ai&rming.^That  Carthage  most  be 
razed,  thouglv  nothing  wf^  in  debate  concerning  it,  but  t^e  leoali 
was  consulting  of  other  matters ;  Publitis  Nasica.  was  ever  ofjk  coa* 
trary  opinion,  that  Carthage  was  to  be  preserved^  in  whjkh  dififv 
ence  of  opinions  it  seemed  a  matter  of  great  di%ulty  to  tj^  senate 
which  of  the  two  was  most  advisable ;  but  those  that  w^re  accpuntad 
the  best  statesmen  amongst  them,  preferred  the  opinion,  of  .Nmmbi. 
For  they  conceived,  that  the  power  and  grandeur  of  the  Romans  mu 
not  to  be  judged  of  by  the  rain  and  destructipn  of  other  citips^  but 
rather  hy  its  sovereign  power  and  authority  oyer  such  ao  are  aeeonnt* 
cd  the  most  potent.  Besides,  if  Carthage  stood,  out  of  fear  of  thit 
city  the  Romans  would  be  kept  within  the  bounds  of  tb^^r  di|ty,  aod 
in  peace  and  concord  among  themfelves^  and  tbq.cpmi|KM|msliii 
would  be  forced  to  carry  it  towards  their  subjects  witk)noi]pinodcia.<* 
tion  and  clemency;  which  things  usually .^trengtbcp^  aqd  ( 

*  ChairracD,  orsptaken* 


^lOBQRrVS  SICULUS*  ^Sg 


sorts  of  governments:  but  i£  Carthi^  the  rival  city  be  oAce  de-* 
stroyed^  what  can  be  expected  but  civil  wara  amoog  the  SonnaM 
themselves,  and  the  hatred  likewise  of  all  their  allies  for  thct  pridtt 
and  covetousness  of  the  Roman  magistrates;  all  which  aceordiogiy 
happened  to  the  Romans  after  the  destruction  of  Carthage.    For 

turbulent  factions.  Agrarian  laws,  grievous  revolts,  of  confed^ratM, 
continual  and  destructive  civil  wars,  andall  theothernuschiefipi  which 
Publius  Scipio  foretold,  came  to  pass:  his  son  Nasica  afterwards^ 
when  he  was  well  in  years,  ordering  the  senate  to  follow  him,  killed 
Tiberius  Gracchus  with  his  own  hands,  when  he  was  contriving  to 
set  himself  up  and  take  upon  him  the  government.  At  the  commis- 
sion of  which  act^  the  commons  being  in  an  uproar  and  exasperated 
against  the  authors  of  the  murder,  and  the  tribunes  of  the  peopb 
asking  every  one  of  the  ii^nators  man  by  man,  being  brought  before 

'  them,  wIk)  it  was  tliat  killed  Gracchus:  every  one  out  ot  the  feac 
of  the  rage  of  the  ))eople,  denied  the  fact,  and  made  use  of  shifting 
and  im)>ertinent  ai>swers:  but  when  it  came  to  Naaiea,  he  owned, 
that  he  killed  him  with  his  own  liand;  and  forther  declared,  that  the 
designs  of  Gracchus  in  aspiring  to  be  absolate  monarch,  was  a  secret 
to  all  other  persons,  but  very  well  known  to  him  and  the  senate^ 

'Whereupon  the  people,  though  they  were  much  troubled  at  the  iact^ 
yet  being  moved  by  the  boldness  and  authority  of  the  man,  from 
thenceforth  rested  quiet  and  said  no  nv>re.  This  Scipio  Nasica  like«> 
wise,  (son  of  the  former  Nasica),  who  died  consul  this  year,  was  of 
an  unspotted  conversation  all  his  days,  never  tainted  or  oormpted 
with  bribes:  and  being  endowed  with  philosophical  principles,  he 
was  not  only  a  philosopher  in  words,  but  in  truth;  so  that  he  inhe*- 
lited  both  the  glory  and  virtues  of  his  ancestors. 

25.  Antiochus  Cyzenicus,  as  soon  as  he  got  into  possession  of  the 
kingdo^ii,  applied  himself  to  revelKngs  and  luxury,  and  courses  al* 
together  unbeseeming  kiogs^  For  being  extremely  addicted  to  an* 
tics,  stage  players,  and  all  sorts  of  jugglery  he  karned  iheit  art» 
with  a  great  deal  of  vehemency ;  he  applied  hiiiiseif  also  to  poppit* 
playing,  and  phiced  his 'Chiefest -delight  in  ntaking  the  images  of 
living  creatures  in  bulk  five  cubits,  covered  oyer  with  gold  and  silvery 
to  move  of  themselves,  and  other  engines  of  that  nature.  But  as 
for  warlike  engines  and  testudoes,  called  helepoles,  whose  prepara- 
tions and  magnificence  belonged  to  princes,  and  were  commonly  of 
great  use,  he  was  altogether  wanting  in  them.  Moreover,  he  was 
much  addicted  to  unseasonable  huntings,  and  oftentimes  would  steal 
out  privately  by  night,  with  a  servant  or  two,  to  hunt  boars,  lions^ 
and  leopards;  so  that  many  times  he  was  in  danger  of  his  life  by  hi 
rashly  encountering  these  wild  beasts* 


630 


TIIE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


26.  Micipsa^  son  of  Masinissa  king  of  Nomidia,  bad  maDy 
ehildren;  bat  above  them  all  he  loved  Adherbal  bis  eldest,  and 
Uiempsaland  Micipsa;  the  last  of  which  was  the  mildest  prince  of 
«n  the  kings  of  Numidia^  and  sent  for  the  most  learoed  men  out 
of  Greece  be  could  hear  of,  and  spending  his  time  with  them  in  im- 
proving himself  in  all  sorts  of  liberal  sciencesi  and  especially  in 
philosophy,  be  enjoyed  bis  kingdom,  together  with  hb  study  of  phi- 
losophy td  his  old  age. 

27.  Contoniatus,  the  petit  prince  of  Jontora  in  Gaul,  was  emi- 
nent fpr  bis  prudence  and  skill  in  martial  affairs:  be  was  a  friend  and 
an  ally  of  the  Romans,  being  formerly  brought  up  in  Rome,  and  so 
seasoned  with  virtue  and  civility;  by  the  help  «f  the  Romans  he 
gained  that  principality  in  Gaul. 

28.  Caius  Marius,  one  of  the  ambassadors,  was  slighted  by  the 
proconsul,  as  one  of  the  meanest  of  them'.  The  rest  who  were  of 
eminent  birth,  and  in  high  place,  were  honoured  and  respected 
by  il>e  proconsul.  But  as  for  the  other  who  was  said  to  have  been 
but  a  publican,  and  had  much  ado  to  get  into  the  lowest  form 
amongst  the  magistrates*,  Metellus  made  no  account  of  him. 
Though  in  truth,  all  the  rest  loved  their  ease  and  avoided  the  camp, 
yet  Marius,  having  been  often  employed  in  the  wars  in  desperate  ad- 
ventures, seemed  highly  to  resent  the  injury  and  affront.  But  ad- 
dicting himself  with  great  application  of  mind  to  martial  affairs,  he 
became  a  most  expert  soldier;  and  being  naturally  of  a  warlike  spt* 
lit,  in  a  short  time  be  grew  very  famous;  and  for  his  generosity  and 
courteous  deportment,  and  his  affable  carriage  in  all  meetings  to- 
wards all  that  were  under  his  command,  he  gained  the  hearts  of  all 
the  soldiers,  who  studying  to  make  grateful  returns  for  his  kindness, 
fought  the  more  cheerfully  and  courageously,  to  the  end  they  might 
advance  the  honour  and  reputation  of  their  general :  and  if  any  other 
at  any  time  happened  to  be  sent  to  command  them,  the  soldiers  oq 
purpose  in  the  very  height  of  the  battle  would  fight  more  carelessly; 
so  that  most  commonly  things  miscarried  and  came  to  nought  when 
any  other  commanded  the  army;  but  when  Marius  was  general,  the 
Romans  were  ever  conquerors, 

*  The  proconsul. 


DIODORU8  SICULUS.  631 


BOOK  XXXVI. 


I.  THE  rebellious  slaves  did  not  only  Wast6  and  destroy  Sicily^  bnt 
those  that  were  free,  who  had  neither  lands  nor  gbods^  betook  them* 
selves  to  rapine  and  robberies^  and  ravaged  up  and  down  in  the  coun- 
try in  flocks  and  droves;  they  drove  away  whole  herds  of  cattle; 
robbed  the  barns  in  the  towns  and  villages,  and  carried  away  the 
corn  and  other  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  killed  every  one  they  met, 
without  distinction  of  either  bond  or  free,  that  noTie  might  be  left  to 
tell  tales  of  thei^  murders  and  cruelties.  For  as  there  wrs  at  this  time 
an  anarchy  in  Sicily,  having  no  Roman  pretor  that  exercised  any 
jurisdiction,  all  ran  headlong  and  committed  many  and  gri!at  exior- 
mities  with  impunity^  so  that  all  places  were  fuU  of  rapines  and  rob^ 
beries,  and  the  goods  of  the  rich  made  a  prey  to  force  and  violence: 
and  they  who  a  little  before  were  noted  and  eminent  amongst 
their  fellow  citizens  for  their  wealth,  by  a  sudden  change  of  fortune 
were  not  only  treated  with  the  greatest  contempt  and  scorn  imagina-^ 
blc,  and  robbed  of  all  they  had  by  tlieir  slaves,  but  were  forced  to  bear 
unsufferable  abuses  from  them  that  were  freemen  of  the  same  coun- 
try. And  therefore  none  could  scarcely  call  any  thing  hla  own  with  in 
t];e  city  gates;  but  what  was  witliout^  they  looked  upon  as  quite  lost, 
and  to  he  an  irrecoverable  prey  to  the  robbers.  To  conclude,  confu- 
sion and  utter  subversion  of  law  and  justice,  raged  throughout  all 
the  cities  and  towns  in  the  country.  For  the  rebels  after  they  had 
wasted  the  country,  out  of  hatred  to  their  masters,  and  insatiable 
covetousness,  beset  the  high  ways  and  made  them  impassablCp  And 
those  slaves  that  were  yet  within  the  cities  sick,  but  In  their  hearts 
longing  for  an  opportunity  to  rebel,  were  a  dread  and  terror  to  their 
masters. 

2.  Saturninus  the  tribune  being  a  man  of  profuse  life,  and  questor 
in  the  province  of  Ostia,  ordering  all  the  corn  to  be  carried  away  to 
Rome,  for  his  mal-administration  of  the  government  was  rebuked 
by  the  senate,  and  divested  of  his  authority,  and  the  province  com- 
mitted to  the  care  of  another.  But  afterwards  leaving  off  his  former 
luxurious  course  of  life,  and  growing  sober  in  his  conversation^  he 
was  chosen  tribune  of  the  people. 

3.  Whereas  for  two  years  together  in  every  public  assembly  Q^ 

Mctellus's  restoring  from  banishment  was  taken  into  debate His 

Hon  traversing  the  market-place  with  his  beard  and  hair  overgrown^ 


fist  fiik  fftAGifnm  d» 

and  id  a  nasty  gannent^  with  teafs  io  his  eyes^  prostmted  himseir  •! 
die  feet  of  every  eitisBeOt  entreating  them  to  recid  his  fiither.  Bat  the 
people,  though  they  were  very  backward  to  make  a  precedent  tat 
exiles  for  the  time  to  come  Co  hdpe  ioit  return,  against  the  laws, 
yet,  in  compassion  to  the  young  man,  and  being  moved  with  the  im- 
portunity of  his  entreaty,  they  recalled  Metellu^  fifom  banishmeot,ind 
saraamedthetMFlttHftrhbfetoglklilr  ifi^^  MM  eat«  he  kel  el 
Usfiitber. 

4.'The  RomMi  fomiftrly,  bdttg  guMtWi  hyj|diid  mA  WhidesdH^ 
laws  and  coasiiitttions^  by  d^ffUM  fii^fw  to  ihAt  M^glif  of  powir, 
that  at  lengA  theygain«d  the  gtCateM  eidplfe  of  ai^r  thMt  UsiMf 
makes  menttoo^of.  But  of  kktef  thiws,  atier  ihejr  bid  conqutrrf 
aosmy  oationsittid  bttd  so  loi^. Indulged  fbeittsetvei  ih  the  Mjoymcit 
of  an  nnloterropled  peace,  they  deeEiked  fidm  their  ililti^iit  ihmeti^ 
to  wieked'  and  destructive  oiMdMs*  Fb^  the  yMbg  iSieD^  cit|oyii^ 
rest  and  case  from  war,  whh  pienty  of  ill  thiigs  Io  l»6  ffeiel  to  thdr 
lusts,  gait  tMnselves  up  to  taaury  and  Intempenince;  for  in  ite 
city  piodlgriity  irb  pvfettfed  befato  frtigiifrty,  and  Hiring  at  ease  lj^ 
fbie  the  serviee  of  the  camps  mti  he  that  wMed  all  his  tinlie  in  lu* 
loptuousness,  and  not  he  tiMif  was  of  a  virtnoctt  and  sober  couseim^ 
tion,  was  aecuuuted  hf  aH  to  be  the  only  hippy  man*  Antf  tbcrdfaii 
aumptucms  feasts,  most  ffsgrant  ofMments,  floweieo^and  esBbioi-  ^ 
dered  carpets,  rich  and  s^rteiy  furniture  for  their  ban<iueting  roomsi 
curiously  wrdught  with  gold,  silver,  ivory,  and  such  like  roateriab^ 
were  then  cried  up  every  wllere.  Wine  tliat  was  but  of  an  ordiaary 
quaKty  they  would  not  touch,  but  only  Falernian*  and  Chian,  tntf 
such  tike  pleasant  wmes:  the  choicest  fish  Kkewise,  and  every  thio{; 
of  the  best  sort,  was  provide  to  gratify  their  shameless  luxury.  The 
young  gallants  likewise  wore  garments  of  the  finest  and  softest  wool,  r 
woven  so  fine,  as  that  they  were  even  transparent,  and,  for  their 
slender  webh,  altogether  Kke  uqto  women's  gowns.  AH  these  things, 
serving  to  nourish  luxury  and  voluptuousness,  (to  their  rutn  and  de- 
struction), being  generally  coveted  by  all,  in  ashort  time  grew  to  cx« 
cessive  rates:  for  a  hogshead  of  Falemian  wine  was  sold  for  a  hua- 
dted  drachmas,  and  a  hogshead  of  salted  fish  from  the  Pontic  sea  for 
four  hundred,  dkilfol  cooks  were  sold  for  four  talents  a-piece,  and 
delicate  and  beautifUl  boys  for  many  talents.  And  whereas  all  with 
full  swing  gave  themselves  up  to  this  luxurious  course  of  life,  some 
of  the  governors  in  the  provinces  used  their  utmost  crtdeavour  to  re- 
form these  enormities;  and  to  that  end,  being  in  high  places,  and  s0 
most  observable^  by  reason  of  the  eminence  of  their  stations,  they 

*  Of  Fdlemus,  in  CampMiii^  in  Uie  kingdom  of  Naples,  now  cmlled 
T«rra  dM^n?  aro. 


DIObORUS  SrCULlJS;  63i 


framed  their  awn  lives  50  as  to  be  examples  of  virtue  and  liberal  edu- 
cation to  others, 

5.  QutDtus  Mutltu  Scaevdiii  used  his  utmost  endcavoiir  to  tefortit 
other  men's  corrupt  manners  by  his  ovi^n  virtaous  example.  For^ 
when  he  was  sent  proconsul  tnto  A^ia^  he  made  choice  of  Quintus 
RutUius^j  his  most  intimate  friend,  for  his  legate,  and  ever  took  hir 
advice  in  the  management  of  his  government^  and  makitig  of  tawsi 
All  the  costs  and  expences  both  of  himself  add  his  retinue  he  ordered 
to  be  defrayed  ont  of  his  own  purse  j  and  by  hts  moderation  and  fru-^ 
galityj  together  with  his  just  and  upright  deatirtg,  he  freed  the  pro- 
vince from  its  former  miseries  and  oppressions:  for  the  proconsuls 
of  Asia  that  \vere  before  him  confederated  with  the  publtcaas,  (in 
whose  hands  at  that  time  was  the  administration  of  justice  at  Rome) 
and  filkd  the  whole  province  with  tire  pressures  of  their  illegal  ex- 
actions^ 

6.  Mutius  Scttvolsi  mahftging  his  government  with  all  possible 
diligence  and  integrity^  did  not  only  suppre^  ail  false  accusations^ 
but  rescrained  the  injuries  and  oppressions  cotnmltted  by  the  pt^li-* 
cans*  For  as  often  as  any  who  had  been  oppressed  by  those  ioU 
gatherers  made  their  address  to  Inm,  he  commissioned  upright  judges^ 
by  whom  he  condemned  them  wheresoever  he  came^and  forced  them 
to  pay  tlie  mulct  imposed  upon  them  to  the  persons  they  had  in}uredt 
hut  fnr  rttVnces  that  deserved  deatli^he  gave  sentence  of  death.  One 
of  the  chief  of  these  publicans,  who  h^td  contracted  with  liis  master 
for  his  freedom  for  a  great  sum  of  money,  before  he  was  manumtttcd, 
he  condemned  to  die^  and  cruciBed  him. 

7-  Those  that  were  condemned  by  the  judges,  he  delivered  over  to 
the  persons  injured^  to  be  by  them  carried  away  to  prison;  so  tiiai 
they  wfio  before,  through  their  insolence  and  covetonsnessj  com* 
mitted  all  manner  of  injustice^  were  unexpectedly  hurried  away  to 
the  guol  by  those  whom  they  had  injured.  Moreover^by  discharging 
his  own  expenses  and  the  expenses  of  his  retinue  out  of  his  own  prj^- 
rate  purse,  he  soon  inclined  the  hearts  of  all  the  province  towards  the 
people  of  Rome. 

8.  Lucius  Asellius  (whose  father  was  a  questor)  being  sent  pretof 
into  Sicily,  finding  in  the  province  great  havock  and  devastation;  by 
his  prudent  management  of  things  in  a  short  time  restored  it  to  its 
former  state  and  condition*  For^  after  the  example  of  Scsvbla,  he 
made  choice  of  his  intimate  friend  Caius  Sempronias  Longtis  for  his 
legate,  and  joined  with  him  Publius,  the  famous  Roman  knight,  for 
his  counsellor^  who  then  resided  at  8yrflcuse^  afid^  bilides  tbc  fbods 
of  fortune^  was  eminent  for  the  virtues  of  his  mind»  His  piety  to* 
•  Publiua  BatHiat  Ruiiit. 

Vol.  2.  No.  48*  MITMK 


6:m  the  fragmekts  or 


wiurds  the  gods  is  safficlently  testified  by  his  sacriBces^  gifts,  and  a- 
doming  of  the  temples:  and  the  quick  and  lively  use  of  all  his  senses 
io  the  last  momebt  of  his  life  was  an  evident  afgamefit  of  his  sobriety 
and  temperance :  .and  his  learning  and  coarteous  dispositioD  are  9p* 
pareht  from  the  great  value  and  esteem  he  ever  bad  of  learned  mafr, 
and  his  bounty  and  liberality  out  of  his  own  purse  towards  then  tiiat 
applied  themselves  to  the  study  of  the  liberal  arts  and  ideneM^ 
Asellius^  assisted  with  the  advice  of  those  two  men,  who  coiitinaei 
with  him  under  the  same  roof,  and  sat  with  him  in  judgment  apoa 
the  bench,  made  it  his  daily  care  to  reform  and  set  M  things  ri^ 
again  in  the  province. 

9.  In  the  courts  of  justice,  he  aimed  at  the  public  good,  and  cleared 
the  court  of  all  sycophants  and  false  accusers ;  and  it  Waift  his  ehief 
care  to  relieve  the  poorest  man,  and  those  that  were  less  able  te  hel^ 
themselves:  for  whereas  the  other  pretors  committed  the  care  af 
orphans  and  widows  that  were  destitute  of  friends  tt»  tutors  and  guar- 
dians tliat  were  strangers^  he  looked  after  them  hialself^  tad  deckM 
their  causes  with  all  the  care  and  diligence  imaginable,  and  wii  a 
great  relief  to  the  oppressed.  And  as  long  as  he  was  goremor  af 
Sicily,  continually  using  his  utmost  endeavour  to  suppresa  both  pti* 
vate  and  public  injuries,  he  at  length  settled  the  prorinee  in  its  for- 
mer state  of  happiness  and  prosperity. 

10.  Marcus  Livius  Drusus,  though  he  was  very  yonng^  yet  Was 
adorned  with  whatever  was  commendable,  either  in  reference  to  bb 
body  or  mind:  for  he  was  the  son  of  a  renowned  father^  wtm  was  sin- 
gularly beloved  of  the  people  of  Home,  both  upon  the  account  of  Uf 
noble  birth  and  virtuous  qualifications.  And  he  himself  for  elo- 
quence excelled  all  his  equals  in  age,  and  all  his  Asllow-citizens  h 
wealth  and  riches :  and  upon  the  account  of  his  faithfulness  to  hii 
word,  he  gained  a  very  great  interest  and  authority  among  the  citi- 
zens; and,  being  likewise  of  a  great  spirit,  seettaed  to  be  the  onlf 
patron  of  the  senate. 


BOOK  XXXVII. 


1 .  POMPCEDIUS,  general  of  the  Marsi*,  attelnpt^  inritetf  igMf, 
but  a  most  rush  and  inconKidemte  act:  fi>r  fte^Altd  Mt  ten  thoth 

•  A  pi'^Vt^e  in  Flftljr. 


DioDORUs  siinrUM 


3aiid  5oMi«rs  from  amofigst  those  who  \ver«  afraid  of  su^ering  due 
punislioient  for  their  oflcnccs^  and^  coniiiunding  them  to  hide  their 
swords  under  their  coats^  marched  with  them  towards  Kome^  with 
a  design  to  b«^t  ihe  senate  round  witb  this  rabbU,  and  to  dr- 
mQiul  the  freedom  of  theeuy^  and^  if  he  could  not  prevail ,  to  Iny  the 
city  waste  witli  fire  and  sword.  Being  by  chanec  wet  upon  the  road 
by  Caius  Doaiitlus,  he  asked  }Jm-^"  Whither  goest  thou^  Pompo*-* 
dius,  with  so  great  a  company?*'  who  answcrcd^^To  Rome^  for  that 
he  was  sent  foi  hy  tlie  trihnncs  of  tlte  people,  to  be  reeeived  into  tho 
f*eedoTU  of  the  city.  But  Domitius  ruplied,  saying — ''  Thou  ruayest 
obmiD  what  thou  seekeat  for  with  far  more  ease,  and  much  more 
honesty,  if  thou  didst  not  make  up  to  tiic  senate  in  a  hostile  manner: 
lor  the  senate  will  not  be  compelled^  but  entreated  and  petitioned,  to 
bestow  that  grace  and  favour  upon  the  Latins,  who  are  their  allies 
and  confederates,''  The  man  being  taken  with  tlus,  as  with  a  divine 
Jtdmonition  from  heaven,  and  over-persuaded  with  what  Domitlus 
had  said,  forthwith  returned  home,  And  thus  Domitius,  by  his  sea* 
^onahle  and  prudent  advice,  delivered  his  country  from  dreadful  mis-^ 
chiefs  that  threatened  u,  addressing  himself  to  Pompoedius^  much 
better  than  Servilius  the  proconsul  did  to  the  Pieentians:  for  he 
spoke  not  to  them  as  to  freemen  and  allies,  but  as  to  slaves,  and  in-^ 
suited  tliem  with  the  greatest  scorn  and  contempt  imaginable,  and 
Thfcateued  and  terrified  them  to  that  degree,  that  he  stirred  up  the 
contt^derate^,  to  the  ruin  and  destruction  both  of  himself  and  others. 
But  Doinitius  on  the  contrary,  by  his  mild  and  calm  discourse,  allayed 
tkc  fury  and  violence  of  the  t-uiiiged  multitude. 

^,  There  was  one  Agamemnon,  a  Citician,  for  his  many  wicked 
pranks  and  slaughters  of  the  confederates,  was  committed  to  prison 
iu  Asculum^  by  the  Homaus,  Tliis  man  being  released  by  the  Pi- 
(cntians,  in  gratitude  for  the  kindness  shewn  him,  fought  resolutely 
oil  their  side;  and,  being  inured  to  robberies  from  a  boy,  joining 
jvith  oUiers  of  the  like  gang,  he  waated  and  spoiled  the  enemy's 
cp  wintry, 

3*  Tiie  inhabitants  of  the  city  Pinnate  for  their  constant  fidelity 
to  the  Romans,  fell  into  most  dreadful  calamities;  for,  being  obsti- 
nately resolved  not  to  desert  the  Romans,  (without  any  touch  or  BeDs< 
of  natural  aflectiou),  wtre  forced  to  see  their  child'e.nicnocived  oq  tli* 
iiead  before  their  eyes.       , 

4.  Lucius  Sylla  bravely  and  gallafttly  fwrforincd  most  nobi^  aC'* 
tlons,  and  his  fame  and  reaowD  was  biasQioed  all  Qver  the  city^  ^^Jt 
the  people  of  Rome  judged  him  worthy  of  the  CQpsu]9bip>  lov'^io^ 

*  A  city  iu  ApttU«r  h»  Itfklj,  t  ^^tiUj^ 


636  THI&  FRAGMENTS  O* 


upon  him  a^  a  man  eminent  both  for  valoar  and  conduct  in  martial 
affairs :  to  conclude,  it  was  apparent  that  he  was  likely  to  anive  at 
the  highest  pitch  of  glory. 

5.  Mithridates  having  conquered  the  Roman  generals  in  Asia,  and 
taken  many  prisoners,  sent  them  all  home  clothed,  and  with  provi- 
sions in  their  knapsacks*  This  mild  passage  was  cried  up  everf 
where,  and  all  the  cities  generally  came  flocking  in  to  him;  inaomoch 
that  ambassadors  came  to  him  from  all  cities,  inviting  him  by  their 
public  decrees  to  come  in  to  them,  oalling  him  their  god  and  deli* 
verer:  and,  upon  notice  of  the  king*s  approach,  the  people  came 
huddling  out  of  the  several  cities  in  white  garments,  to  salute  him, 
and  received  him  with  great  joy  and  acclamation. 

6.  Mithridates-s  party  sweeping  all  before  them  in  Asia,  as  fbey 
wenjt  without  control,  all  the  cities  strangely  revolted  from  the  Ro- 
mans; and  as  for  the  Lesbians,  they  resolved  not  only  to  yield  up 
themselves  to  the  king,  but  to  deliver  up  Aquilius  also,  who  flew 
away  to  Mitylene,  and  lay  there  to  be  cured  of  a  disease.  Where- 
upon they  sent  to  his  lodgings  a  company  of  choice  yonths,  stout 
and  resolute,  who  came  rushing  into  the  room  where  Aquilius  was, 
and  took  him  aud  bound  him,  supposing  he  would  be  a  most  nue 
present,  and  very  acceptable  to  Mithridates:  but  Aquilius,  though  he 
was  but  as  yet  a  youth,  performed  a  most  noble  and  heroic  act ;  fbr^ 
preferring  death  before  disgrace,  and  the  punishments  of  a  slave,  he 
prevented  them  that  were  ready  to  hurry  him  away,  and  killed  him* 
self:  with  which  desperate  act  those  that  came  to  take  him  along. 
with  them  were  so  terrified,  that  they  durst  not  approach  him.  His 
valour*  and  resolution,  therefore,  was.  cried  up  every  where,  who,  bj 
the  putting  an  end  to  his  own  life,  had  rescued  himself  with  an  un^ 
d.iunted  courage  from  the  torments  designed  to  be  executed 
him. 

7*  In  order  to  a  sea-fight,  the  Rhodians  were  overnuitched  in  i 
thing  but  in  the  nuRfiber  of  ships;  and  in  all  other  respects  they  y 
far  superior,  as  being  the  better  pilots,  knew  better  how  to  Older 
their  ships  and  ply  the  oars,  had  the  more  sprightly  soldiers,  and  die 
more  expert  commanders:  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the  Capped^ 
cians  were  but  fresh -water  soldiers,  seldom  exercised  at  aea-flghtSy 
and,  which  commonly  proves  the  bane  of  all,  did  all  tumnltnous^ 
and  without  any  order.  It  is  true,  indeed,  they  were  as  cheerfal  and 
ready  to  engage  as  the  Rhodians,  because  they  were  to  fight  just  in- 
der  the  king's  eye,  and  therefore  desired  to  approve  theur  kjalty  and 


•  But  Plin.  Ntt  Hist.  lib.  3S,  c.  3,  sayt,  MitKridatet  poued  aelled  foM  &&9M  Uk 

throat,  for  bij  cofetouMiew.— Uib.  Ana.  StS. 


DIODORUfi  81CULUS.  6d7 


affection  to  him;  and^in  regard  tfaey  only  overpowered  their  enemies 
In  number  of  ships,  they  used  idl  the  arts  and  coDtrivances  they  could 
devise  to  surround  and  hem  them  in. 

8.  Caias  Marlqs  was  the  most  renowned  person  of  any  of  his  time^ 
when  he  was  young:  be  was  ambitious  of  honour  and  glory,  free 
from  covetousness,  and  performed  many  noble  acts,  both  in  Europe 
and  Africa,  so  that  his  name  was  fiimous,  and  cried  up  in  all  places. 
But  when  he  grew  old,  and  coveted  the  riches  of  Icing  Mithridates, 
and  the  wealth  of  the  cities  of  Asia^  and  sought,  against  the  laws,  to 
have  the  province  which  was  allotted  to  Cornelius  Sylla  transferred 
to  him,  he  fell  justly  into  many  calamities;  for  he  not  only  missed 
those  riches  which  he  coveted,  but  lost  all  that  were  his  own,  the 
questors,  by  reason  of  his  extAiordinary  covetousuess,  being  sent  to 
seize  upon  all  his  goods  for  the  public  use.     He  was,  moreover,  by 
the  judgment  of  the  people  condemned  to  die;  but  escaped  that  pu- 
nishment by  flight,  and  wandered  solitarily  and  alone  up  and  ^own 
Italy,  and  at  length  got  into  Numidia,  pour  and  destitute  of  alt  things*     - 
Afterwards,  when  the  civil  wars  broke  out  in  Rome^  he  joined  with 
those  that  were  judged  enemies  to  tlie  Remans,  und,  being  victori- 
ous, he  was  not  contented  with  his  return  into  his  own  country j  but 
raised  great  commotions  io  the  commonwealth.     But  at  length  hav* 
ing  gained  the  seventh  ronsulshipj  and  by  his  owti  misfortunes 
learned  the  inconstancy  of  fortune,  he  was  unwilling  to  put  thin^ 
to  a  hazard  any  more :  and  therefore,  foreseeing  the  dreadful  war  SylU 
was  bringing  upon  his  country,  he  murdered  himself;  but,  leaving 
behind  him  the  seeds  of  a  most  grievous  war,  he  involved  his  son  amd 
country  in  most  dreadfulculamitiesi  for  his  son  being  forced  lo  con- 
tend with  an  enemy  more  potent  that)  himself,  he  most  miserably 
perished  (upon  taking  of  the  city)  in  a  vnult,  whither  he  fled  to  hide 
himself.     And  the  people  of  Utime,  and  cities  of  Italy,  having  bc«a 
now  long  engaged  in  a  cruel  wnr,  fell  under  many  dreadful  calamities. 
For  two  principal  men  of  the  city,  Scaevola  and  Crttssus,  without  any 
course  of  legal  proceedings,  were  murdered  in  the  senate;  wliose  " 
cruel  murder  plainly  evidenced  the  greatness  of  those  miseries  that 
then  threatened  both  the  city  and  all  Italy:  for  the  gres test  part  of 
the  senate,  and  the  most  eminent  men  of  the  city,  were  slaughtered 
by  Sylla,  and  no  less  than  one  hundred  thousand  soldiers  were  sUig 
either  in  mutinies  or  battles;  and  all  these  miseries  were  at  first  oc- 
casioned by  the  covetousness  only  of  Marius. 

9.  Lucius  Cornelius  Merula,  who  was  chosen  consul  in  the  room 
of  Cinna,  when  Cinna  agreed  to  peace,  upon  condition  that  be  might 
be  rtstored  to  the  consulship,  approved  himself  a  good  citizen^  and 


638  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 

evidenced  his  extraordinary  love  to  bis  couBtij:  for,i 
self  to  the  senate  and  people,  and,  disoouniog  GOBCcraiog  what  Ufkit 
most  tend  to  the  public  good,  he  prouused  that  be  woiiU  hr  the  pn>- 
curer  of  peace :  and  whereas  he  was  choaeo  consiil  much  ^uost  his 
wil]^  lie  declared  he  would  now  freely,  of  his  owa  accord»  give  op 
his  authority  into  the  hands  of  Cinoa;  upon  which  he  fbrlhvith  sur- 
rendered his  consulship,  and  became  a  private  maa.  The  araate 
hereupon  sent  ambassadors  to  Cinna,  and,  having  agreed  with  Un 
upon  the  terniC)  of  peace,  introduced  bim  into  the  city. 

10.  Lucius  Sylla,  being  greatly  straitened  for  want  of  moBey, 
riflt'd  three  temples  that  were  full  of  devoted  gold  and  silver,  that  is, 
the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Dclphos,  of  Esculapius  at  £{Mdaunis,  aod 
the  famous  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Olympus;  oat  of  which  last  he  car- 
ried Hway  a  vast  treasure,  fur  it  bad  never  before  beeo  vkdated.  Bat 
as  to  the  temple  at  Delphos,  the  Phocions,  in  the  time  of  the  sacisd 
war,^ad  drained  it  of  its  wealth.  When  Sylb,  therefore,  bad  thai 
heaped  up  a  mighty  mass  of  gold  and  silver,  and  other  ireasare,  he 
was  sufficiently  furnished  with  money  to  carry  on  the  war  ia  Italy. 
But  having,  without  all  fear  or  sense  of  religion,  thus  robbed  the 
temples^  he  consecrated  a  piece  of  laud  to  the  gods,  for  the  maia- 
tiiiniiig  of  yearly  sacrifices,  in  lieu  of  the  money;  and  would  often, 

in  a  joke  and  jest,  say .That  he  was  sure  to  be  victorious  in  all  ea- 

couiiters,  who  had  tlie  gods  for  his  assistants,  and  for  that  cad  hid 
helped  him  with  money. 

11.  Fimbria,  having  out-run  Flaccus,  and  got  a  loag  way  before 
him  in  his  luaich,  thought  he  liad  now  gained  a  aiost  coavenicat 
opportunity  for  some  commotion  or  other;  and  therefore,  that  hf 
might  endear  the  soldiery  to  him,  be  permitted  them  to  make  iocar- 
sions  into  the  countries  of  their  allies,  and  make  what  havock  they 
pleased  therein,  and  to  take  captive  every  one  they  met  with.  The 
soldiers  very  readily  embraced  the  license,  so  that  withiu  a  few  days 
they  had  scrambled  together  abundance  of  wealth  by  their  plaadtf* 
ing.  But  those  that  had  been  spoiled  of  their  goods  went  to  meet  the 
consul,  and  made  bitter  complaints  to  bim  of  the  injuries  tbey  had 
received,  who  being  much  troubled  at  the  business,  commanded  them 
to  follow  him,  and  he  himself  would  see  restitution  aiade  to  evcij 
one  that  had  sutl'ered;  and  accordingly  with  threats  he  Ammn«iwl#J 
Fimbria  to  return  forthwith  to  the  owners  whatsoever  had  beenttkeu 
away  from  them.  But  Fimbria  laid  all  the  blame  upoa  ilie  soldiev^ 
who  did  this  without  any  commission  from  him;  but  covertly  he  ad- 
vised them  not  to  regard  the  consul's  command,  aor  suflBur  that  to  he 
taken  from  them  which  tbey  had  got  by  the  law  of  arms:  upoa  tbis^ 


when  Flaccas  commkhded  rHtitation  to  b^  made  of  thefr- rtf^d^, 
adding  threats  to  bis  commands,  th^  sdldkts  rHiisled  tO  obey,  so  tb8t 
there  followed  a  great  mutiny  in  the  camp. 

12.  Fimbria,  having  again  ei^ossed  thfe  Hdlcspont,  afrimated  bb 
soldiers  to  rapines  and  all  kinds  of  villanies,  exacted  money  from  this 
cities,  and  divided  it  amongst  the  soldiers,  Wh6,  having  obtainlfd  aa 
UBcontrouled  h'cense,  did  what  they  please  J;  and  allar^d,  moreover^ 
with  the  hopes  Of  a  htge  income,  loved  Fimbria  as  one  who  had  de- 
served extremely  well  Of  tile  whole  army.  Moreover,  thOie*citieythit 
had  stood  out  algainst  him,  when  he  baci  tAen  them^  be  gave  tbem  t6 
the  plunder  of  his  soldtets,  and  so  be  dealt  with  NrcOm^dia. 

13.  The  same  Fimbria  being  admitteci  itito  Cyzicum,  professing 
himself  a  friend  to  the  pla^e,  as  sOob  as  be  wHS  got'  in,  began  to  im^- 
peach  all  the  wealthiest  of  them,  and  charge  thbiti'#ith  some  crime  cfr 
other.  Two  of  these,  the  principal  m^if  bl^  the  dty,  aftet  he  had 
passed  sentence  on  them,  he  caused  to  be  wbi|^pM  With  rod$,  to  ter- 
rify the  rest,  and  afterwards  strudc  oiF  their  hi^ad^^tihtlset  thehrgbodi 
to  sale,  and  forced  others,  otit  of  feiir,  to  ^V^  blm  all  tHey  had,  as  k 
ransom  for  their  lives.  '  ur.  .     .     v.  >    . 

14.  Cn.  Pompeius  addicted' ItiMsdf  to  marVial  afltifrS)  at^d  Muted 
himself  to  the  hardships  and  fatigues  of  War,  so  that  in> a  short' time 
he  became  very  expert  in  military  mattet^i'  fb)r,  casting  bflf  afl  iloth 
and  effeminateness,  he  was  always,  nigfttllnd'diifyi'doIhgisOmifthf^ 
or  other  that  was  useful  and  mlvahtageofiM  fbr  tna^tet^'rektittg  to  ^f\ 
for  he  was  very  sparing  in  his  diet,  eat  bib  ifheat  sittings  atW  ^Itbgethet 
forbore  baths,  and  sudh  liW  delists.     H6  Allotted  But  a*w  houts 
of  the  night  for  sleep,  and's^ent  the  rest  in  the  cares  of  a  geneiral^ 
rehiting  to  what  he  was  toptit  in  cjtecutioA  the  tiext  day^  so  that,  by 
bis  constant  forethoughts  of  th^imcrttain  events  of  #at,  be  b^andi 
a  most  expert  comttittnd^r.    And  therefore,  whereas  another  6oUkl 
scarce  in  the  same  time  fit  hitnieH  to  talrt  iipon  him  the  ehaf^'tdf 
an  army  already  raisfedj  in  that  '^ime,iand  n^uc^  k^,  betaised  thi^nl^ 
trainedyand  disdplined  them.    And  whin  the  nkWs^t  his  famous  ex*» 
ploits  was  brought  to  Rome,  every  body  at  ferst,  reflecting  upon  bin 
youth,  more  than  thinking  upon  his  valour,  slighted  him,  supposing 
that  the  messengers  stretched  in  their  relations,  and  made  things  look 
bigger  than  in  truth  they  were.     But  when  the  certain  event  con- 
firmed the  former  report,  the  senate  sent  out  Junius*  against  bim^ 
whom  he  routed,  and  put  to  flight. 

15.  Lucius  Scipio's  army  being  corrupted,  revolted,  and  went  over  to 
Sylla:  Scipio  now  looking  upon  himself  as  a  lost  man,  Sylla  sent 
to  him  a  party  of  horse,  to  conduct  him  whithersoever  he  pleased. 

•  Junius  Brutus. 


640  THE  FRAGMENTS  0f 


Being  therefore  forced  in  a  moment  to  lay  aside  the  •nstgn^  of  his 
aathority,  he  was  forthwith,  by  the  courtesy  of  Sylh,  brought  in  a 
private  habit  to  the  place  he  desired.  But  presently  after  he  resumeil 
the  ensigns  of  his  authorityi  and  again  marched  forth  with  a  consi- 
derable army. 

16.  Id  the  mean  time  the  persons  of  the  greatest  quality  at  Rome, 
by  false  accusations,  were  put  to  death,  amongst  whom  QatntusMu* 
tius  Scsvola,  the  chief  priest,  a  most  honourable  and  vinuous  per- 
son, camt  to  an  unworthy  end,  only  the  Romans  were  fortunate  iu 
this,  tliat  the  high  priest  died  not  in  the  most  sacred  place:  for  the 
cruelty  of  the  murderers  was  such,  that  they  kid  him  upon  the  very 
altar*,  and  there  cut  his  throat,  so  that  by  his  own  blood  he  extin- 
guished that  fire  which,  out  of  a  religious  devotion,  from  antieot  times 
was  ever  kept  burning. 

17*  The  names  of  those  that  were  proscribed  being  fixed  up  in  the 
market-place,  on  a  sudden  a  multitude  of  people  cauie  flocking  iu  to 
read  it,  of  whom  very  many  pitied  those  that  were  thus  coudemned 
to  die.  Bult  one  amongst  the  rest,  a  most  malicious  and  insolent 
fellow,  gloried  over  the  miserable  condition  of  the  afflicted,  and  bawled 
out  most  spiteful  words  against  them,  whom  some  incensed  deity 
forthwith  repaid  with  a  just  revenge:  for  by  chance  reading  bb  own 
name  as  one  proscribed  at  the  bottom  of  the  roll,  he  ptresently  threw 
his  gown  over  his  head,  and  began  to  fly  through  the  thickest  of  the 
people;  but,  being  known  to  one  that  stood  next  to  himi  who  disco- 
vered him  to  be  one  condemned,  he  was  instantly  surrounded  and 
seized,  and  then  put  to  death,  to  the  great  joy  of  all  tliat  heard  it. 

18.  Cneius  Pompeius,  being  a  long  time  pretor  in  Sicilyj  applied 
himself  to  the  business  of  the  courts  of  justice,  andj  deciding  both 
public  and  private  controversies,  discharged  his  office  with  so  much 
diligence  and  integrity,  that  none  ever  merited  more  connaendataaoi 
for,  though  he  was  but  two-and-twenty  years  of  age^  a  time  whiek 
might  have  drawn  him  off  by  foolish  youthful  lusts,  yet  he  carried 
himself  with  so  much  gravity  and  sobriety  all  the  while  he  was  in  Si- 
cily, that  the  virtue  of  the  young  man  was  much  adndred  by  all  tbt 
Sicilians. 

•  01  Vcsu. 


A^ 1^  I      J ,',  '       „    ,   ■       HI    ^     > 


THE  FRAGMENTS 


QP 


DIODORUS  SICULUS, 


CON CB BUI NO 


EMBASSIES. 


PUBLISHED   BY  FULVIUS  URSINU8. 


Vol,  ::.  No.  48,  nnnn 


nr 


643 

■■11)11     'I'        li  I  iiii  11  -IB 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


1  ji.i  Mill  I..II  u,n.  o,--,.^ 

FRAGMENTS. 

•  -  ■    III 


TO  THE  READER. 

THESE  few  fragments,  together  with  those  of  PolyUtis^  Dionysiu* 
Halicarnassus,  Dion  Cassius^  and  Appian^  were  published  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1581,  by  Fulvius  Ursinus,  a  Roman  born,  and  omi- 
nently  learned :  but  for  a  further  and  more  particular  account  of 
them,  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  epistle  to  the  fragments  gf  Valerius^ 
placed  next  before  these;  and  therefore  ha^e  now  nothing  further 
to  add,  but  an  acknowledgment  of  thanks  due  to  a  learned  person 
in  Oxford,  through  whose  candour  the  book  out  of  which  the  transla- 
tion of  these  fragments  was  made  was  brought  to  hand  for  perusal. 


BOOK  XXXVIL 


1.  IN  the  reign  of  TuUus  Hostilius,  king  of  the  Romans,  the  Af- 
bani,  jealous  of  the  growth  of  the  Roman  power,  pretended  that  the  ' 
Romans  committed  thefts  and  robberies  in  their  country,  and  there"* 
fore  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  demand  justice,  with  instructions^ 
that  if  they  did  not  liearken  to  them,  to  denounce  war  against  them. 
Hostilius,  the  king  of  Rome,  understanding  tliat  they  sought  occasion 
to  pick  a  quarrel,  and  begin  a  war,  commanded  his  friends  and  offi- 
cers to  entertain  the  ambassadors  courteously,  and  persuade  them  to 
peace  and  amity,  fiut  the  king,  not  willing  hastily  to  give  them  au- 
dience, sent  some  in  the  mean  time  to  the  Aibani,  with  orders  and 
Instructions  like  to  those  of  the  Aibani  to  him;  ordering  this,iis 
prompted  thereunto  by  that  antient  custom,  according  to  which  X\^ 
old  Romans  studied  nothing  more  than  that  their  wars  should:  be  just 


&44  THE  FJU^Btkirrs  Of 


jmd  WImrantable:  for  he  was  very  caatious  lest,  not  being  able  to  find 
.  ont  the  first  authors  of  the  depredations,  or  socb  u  were  to  be  de- 
livered up  to  the  demauds  of  justice,  he  should  be  thought  to  be  die 
first  fomeuter  of  aa  usjust  war.  But  it  faliiug  out  that  the  ambasst* 
dors  that  wera  sent  to  Alba  were  first  denied  justice,  upon  the  thirtt* 
^h  day  they  denounced  war  against  the  Albani.  The  Alban  ambas* 
sadon,  according  to  their  desires,  received  answer^JThat  they  bciof 
the  first  that  denied  doing  justice,  the  Romans  wtere  they  who  now 
denounced  war  against  them.  And  these  were  t)tie  reasons  that  die 
people  who  were  before  allied  by  marriages,  and  at  mutual  amitj 
one  with  another,  now  became  enemies,  and  alienated  'one  bom 
another, 

2.  When  Cambyses,  king  of  Persia,  was  lord  of  all  Egypt,  the 
Libyans  and  Cyreneans,  confederating  with  the  Egyptians,  sent  pe- 
sents,  and  promised  entire  obedience  and  subjection  to  their  cofD% 
xnands. 

3.  Hie  ambassadors  that  were  sent  from  Nabis  and  Flamininds* 
to  Rome,  concerning  the  terms  of  peace,  after  they  had  opened  t9 
the  senate  the  matters  given  them  in  charge,  the  senate  decreed  the 
articles  to  be  confirmed,  and  tliat  all  their  garrisons  should  be  re- 
moved, and  their  forces  drawn  out  of  all  paru  of  Greece.  When 
Flamininus  heard  of  the  senate's  decree^  he  summoned  all  the  -nobi* 
Hty  of  Greece  from  all  parts,  to  meet  in  a  general  council,  where  he 
t'ehearsed  to  them  the  great  kindnesses  and  good  will  of  the  Romaos 
towards  the  Grecians,  and  apolo^rized  for  the  matter  relating  to  Na- 
bis, because  they  did  in  that  alFair  as  much  as  they  were  able.  He 
told  them  likewise,  that,  according  to  their  desire,  all  tiie  inhabitant* 
of  Greece  should,  he  free,  and  eased  of  all  their  garrisons,  and,  above 
all,  be  governed  by  their  own  laws.  But  he  begged  that  the  Greek* 
would  so  far  gratify  him  as  to  inquire  what  Italian  servants  were  a- 
mong  them,  and  to  discharge  them  within  thirty  days;  which  was 
done  cccordingly. 

4.  The  senate  again  gave  audience  to  the  Grecian  ambassadoni 
and  caressed  them  with  very  tair  words,  desirous  to  have  them  earnes: 
and  forward  in  the  prusccution  of  the  war  against  Antlochusf,  whlck 
thty  suddenly  expected.  They  gave  answer  likewise  to  the  ambas* 
sadors  of  Philipt — That  becau!»c  he  maintained  his  fidelity,  they 
would  free  him  from  tribute,  and  discbarge  his  son  Demetriu!»§. 
And  to  those  that  came  from  Antiochus  they  appointed  ten  of  the 
senate  to  hear  what  they  said  they  had  in  cliarge  from  the  kiuf. 

*  Titus  Quietus  l^amimnus,  hot  Flamiiilas^  as  Plutarch  sayii  for  FUoitiitn'ii  war* 
putricbn  extrartion,  but  Fkifnuiius  of  plebeian. — See  I.itv,  lib'  S5?. 

i  Tbc  GMAt  .      ;  KiBg or^ftageJmiu*        ^  H  ho  wm  wi  jMsingc— Lir.  iib.^ . ' 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  64^ 

When  the  commissioDcrs  sat,  one  of  the  ambassadors  named  Menip« 
pus,  president  of  th«  embassy,  declared,  that  they  came  to  make  up 
a  league  of  friendship  and  confederacy  between  t£e  Rdmaos  a^nd 
Antiochus.  But  he  said  that  the  king  greatly  wondered  for  what 
manner  of  reason  the  Romans  should  lay  their  commands  upon  him^ 
what  parts  of  Europe  he  should  make  his  concern;  what  cities  h« 
should  not  meddle  with,  nor  collect  the  tributes  of  some  tliat  were . 
in  arrear;  that  it  was  not  usual  for  those  that  are  making  a  treaty 
upon  equal  terms,  but  for  the  conquerors,  to  impose  in  such  a  man- 
ner; and  that  their  ambassadors  who  were  sent  to  him  toLysimacbia 
iniperiously  charged  him  with  these  things:  that  Antiochus  wai  not 
at  war  with  the  Romans,  and,  if  they  had  a  mind  to  enter  into  aa 
alliance  and  league  with  him,  he  was  ready.  Fiamintnu$  answered 
^rhere  were  two  things  propounded  by  the  senate,  let  him  choose 
which  of  them  he  would;  and  that  is — If  he  would  relinquish  all 
his  pretences  in  Europe,  the  Romans  would  not  meddle  with  hit 
concerns  in  Asia:  and  if  this  did  not  please  him,  then  t|iey  were  to 
let  the  king  know,  that  the  Romans  would  assist  their  friends  ancV 

allies,  when  oppressed.    The  ambassadors  replied ^They  could  not 

agree  to  any  thing  that  might  in^pair  the  king's  sovereignty.  The 
next  day  the  senate  told  the  Grecians — ^That  if  Antiochus  did  busy[ 
himself,  and  intermeddle  with  any  thing  in  Europe,  the  Romans 
would,  with  all  the  care  and  diligence  imaginable,  set  free  all  the 
Greeks  that  were  in  Asia.  The  Grecian  ambassadors  hc^reupoo  ap- 
proved of  all  by  an  applause;  but  the  king's  ambassadors  entreated 
the  senate  that  they  would  consider  into  what  dangers  and  miseries 
both  parties  would  be  brought,  and  not  to  be  rash  in  their  resolves^ 
but  that  they  would  give  the  king  time  to  consult,  and  themselves  to 
be  better  advised  about  these  things. 

5.  As  to  the  yEtolian  ambassadors  that  sought  for  peace,  the  se« 

nate  decreed ^That  they  should  either  give  up  all  their  country  to 

the  Romans,  or  forthwith  pay  to  them  a  thousand  talents  of  silver. 
Upon  this  severe  answer  (never  suspecting  any  such  thing  would 
have  been  enjoined)  they  were  seized  with  great  fear;  and,  seeing 
that  they  had  adhered  to  the  king*,  they  fell  into  inextricable  straits 
and  perplexities,  not  having  any  means  left,  or  way  open,  to  escape 
utter  ruin. 

().  Antiochus,  hearing  that  the  Romans  had  passed  over  into  Asia, 
sent  Hcraclides  of  Byzantium  to  treat  with  the  consul  about  a  peace^  ' 
with  ofl^rs  to  bear  half  of  the  charges  of  the  war,  to  give  Up  Lamp- 
sacus,  Smyrna,  and  Alexandria,  upon  the  account  of  which  cities  he 
couccivcd  the  war  broke  forth :  for  those  were  the  first  pf  all  the 
•  ^ilil^p  of  ?.Iaccd«n. . 


■  ■  n      I 


Grtek  cities  of  Asia  that,  by  tbeir  aoBhassadors  to  Ifca  acttate,  pf^ni 
Ibt  assiatanca  of  the  Romans  £ar  tlte  ioegaiBuig  of  diair  liberty. 

7«  Antiochus  prooused  PuUiiis  Scipio^  tiie  preaSitet  of  tlia  ceao- 
dly  to. release  iua  sod  without  nuiauin^  whom  be  ba4  taken  priMHMr 
when  he  lay  about  the  island  Euboaa;  and  besides  thi%  that  he  wooM 
give  him  a  greet  sum  of  money,  upon  the  obtaining  of  a  peace.  Set* 
pio  answered — That  he  would  return  the  idog  thanka  for  the  rclme 
of  his  son,  but  that  he  did  not  want  those  sums;  and  in  requital  of  m 
femarhable  a  kindness,  he  advised  him  o  a  friend  not  lo  withstaad 
.4ie  Romans,  of  whose  valour  he  had  had  experience.  But  Antiochns 
jndgine  those  terms  to  be  harder  than  ware  fit  to  be  complied  wilk, 
sejeeted  his  advice.  .    \" 

S.  In  Rome,  before  the  overthrow  of  Antbchus,  die  ambMsadofs 
fiom  the  Atolians  being  brought  into  the  senate,  and  not  in  ife  least 
micusing  the  faults,  but  setting  forth  the  great  services  the  iEtpliaas 
had  performed  to  the  Roman  state,  one  of  the  senate  rose  up,  sad 
asked  tlie  ambassadors,  whether  the  iEtolians  had  given  up  thcss- 
aelves  tot  the  protection  of  the  Romans?  The  ambassadors  beiag 
hereupon  silent  and  dumb,  the  senate,  suspecting  that  the  JBtolians 
fixed  their  hopes  in  Antiochus,  sent  them  back  into  Greece  with  t 
fruitless  embassy. 

9.  Antioclius,  laving  aside  all  thoughts  of  war,  sent  ambassadors 
to  the  consul,  to  ask  pardon  for  his  miscarriages,  and  to  procure  a 
peace  upon  any  terms  that  possibly  might  be  had.  The  coosol, 
keeping  close  to  ihe  moderation  and  clemency  of  his  country,  aod 
advised  likewise  by  his  brother  Publius^,  agreed  to  a  peace,  upoo 
these  conditions — ^That  the  king  should  leave  all  Europe  to  the  Ro- 
mans, and  part  likewise  with  all  the  countries  and  cities  lying  on  thh; 
^ide  the  Taurus:  that  he  should  give  up  all  his  elephants  aod  loag 
ships,  and  pay  all  the  charges  and  expenses  occasioned  by  the  wir, 
which  were  computed  at  fifteen  thousand  Euboean  talents:  that  bf 
should  deliver  up  ittto  their  hands  Hannibal  the  Carthaginian,  aiu)  < 
Thoas  the  ^Etolian,  and  some  others,  and  give  twenty  hosts^,  I 
such  as  the  Romans  should  nominate.  Antiochus,  out  of  a  io&g- 
ing  desire  of  pence,  having  accepted  these  conditions,  was  freed  froc 
the  war. 

10.  After  the  overthrow  of  Antiochus,  there  came  ambassadon 
from  all  the  cities  and  states  of  Asia,  some  concerning  the  freedoc 
of  their  cities,  others  i  elating  to  congratulations  for  the  good  services 
they  had  done  for  Rome,  in  joining  in  the  war  against  Antkichas. 
To  all  whicli  the  senate  gave  great  encouragement,  and  said  tbfT 
would  send  ten  commissioners  into  Asia,  who,  with  the  geociaUt, 

•  P.  Scipio.— Vi^.  Lit.  ]ib.  38.  f  FttloTi, 


mODOEUS  16ICULUS«  $4f 


shmiM  bring  all  orders  with  ihem.  When  the  ambassftdors  were  fe« 
turned  tnto  their  own  countries,  the  ten  comnrisskmers,  with  Scipior 
uad  iEmilius,  met  in  council  together,  and  deoveed,  thiit  the  re^ons 
on  this  side  Taurus  should  he.ghFen  to  Eameiies,  and  the  eiephanls. 
But  Caria  and  Lycia  they  assigned  to  the  RhocKans.  Tliey  ordered 
likewise  that  such  cities  as  paid  tnbote  to  Eomenes  should  be  sob- 
ject  to  him,  but  that  such  as  were  tribntary  to  AotiecliUB  should  be 
freed  from  all  tribute  whatsocwrr. 

1 L  When  the  Galatian^^  ambassadors  came  10  Onehis  MaDlius  ihe 
proconsul  to  treat  for  peace,  he  answei«d«.^e  wmild  come  to  tenns 
of /peace  with  them  wlien  their  kings  eaoie  to  him. 

i2.  The  same  coming 'i mo  tLycaoiua,  brovght  oom  that  was  ivtft 
from  Antiochus,  and  the  yearly  tribute  of  a  thousand  talents,  accord-^ 
ing  to  the  articles  of  peatce. 

IS.  The  general  Assembly  of  the  Achaians  coming  together  in 
Peloponnesus,  the  Roman  commissioners  met  them,  and  declaiieil, 
that  the  senate  was  much  displeased  at  itie  demolishing  of  the  walls 
of  Lacedaemon,  which  was  done  by  the  states  of  dkchaia  when  Aey 
were  lords  of  Sparta,  and  had  brought  the  Lacedemonians,  as  mem- 
bers, into  the  same  coaunonwealth.  To  this  assembly  canie  the  am* 
bassadors  of  £umenes,  and  bronght  along  with  them  a  preaent  <3S 
twemy t  talents,  out  of  whicfi  the  king  intended  that  tlte  charge  <tf 
such  as  were  members  of  the  Aefaaian  senate  abcNiM  be  ddfirayed.  But 
the  Acliaians,  disliking  the  disposal  of  she  mon^,  cefuaod  the  gift. 
Thither  likewise  came  ambassadors  from  Seleucua,  to  renew  the 
league  formerly  made  between  ttie  Achatans  and  Amiochus,  whacli 
league  they  renewed,  and  accepted  the  present  sent  from  him. 

14.  Ambassadors  coming  to  Rome  from  the >king8  and  pisinces  of 
Asia,  those  princes  with  Attalus  had  a  noble Jivoeption;  for  they 
were  met  with  great  state  and  pomp,  and -presented  with  rich  ^ifts, 
and  other  extraordinary  marte  df  respect  and  ^our :  fortlieae  princes 
were  fast  friends  to  theiRomans,  and  observant  in  every  thing  to  tlie 
senate;  and  besides,  having  courteously  entertained  above  lili  ot Iters 
those  Romans  that  came  to  visitthequeen^,  they  weve  judged  worthy 
of  the  most  honourable  reception.  For  these  peasons  the  senate, 
having  heard  ull  the  ambassadors,  and  especially  desirous  to  gratify 
the  princes  that  belonged  to  Eumenes,  returned  them  a  graciousan- 
i)wer;  for  they  signified  that  they  would  «end  delegates  from  the  ae- 
rate to  put  a  full  end  to  the  war  with^Pharnaces. 

15.  llie  defrauding  of  creditors  in  Thessaly  setting  all  in  a  fko^e 

♦  Gallogreefes.  t  Polyb.  Leg.  41,  one  hundred  and  t«reBty*tafeiltf. 

i  Strutonicc,  upon  the  news  ofEumeiTes,  4i<r  htiibitnd^'being  dead. — See  Lir. 

lib.  42, 


648  TH8  FRAGMENTS  OF 


among  the  iEtoliaus^  and  every  city  being  filled  whh 
tumults;  the  senate  suspected  that  all  this  confnsioa  was  oraaedhf 
Perseus*,  and  declared  to  his  ambassadon  that  ^buf  troold  ac^oit 
him  of  other  crimes  whereof  he  was  accused  :•  but  u  to  Us  geeciof 
of  Abrypolis  king  of  Thrace  out  of  his  kingdon^  thcj 
Perseus,  to  rectifyt  what  he  had  done. 

16.  When  Arpalus,  Perseus's  ambassador  was  silent,  die 
so  far  honoured  Eumenes  as  to  present  him  with  an  ivocy  ehaiioc}, 
and  conferred  upon  him  other  honours^  and  with  special  ImTOor  tad 
lespect  sent  him  away  into  Asia. 

17*  The  same  day  the  senate  decreed  the  war  against  Peiaais^ 
and  declared  it  to  the  ambassadors^  bat  returned  no  antwer;  fcod 
commanded  the  consuls  expressly  lo  rqect  them||  in  the  MteasbBa^ 
and  ordered  that  the  ambassadors  and  all  tha  Macedonians  shosU 
that  very  day  depart  out  of  Rome,  and  within  ilbixtj  daja  ont  of 
Italy. 

18.  Ptolemy§,  king  of  E^t,  knovring  that  hia  aneeatofi  M 
been  formerly  lords  of  Ckslosyria  made  great  preparatiooa  to  grit 
that  justly,  even  by  the  law  of  nati6ns  that  was  before  lost  by  an 
unjust  war.  Antiochus^  having  intelligence  of  these 
sent  ambassadors  to  Rome,  commanding  them  toaoqnsint  the 
that  Ptolemy  had  begun  an  unjust  war  against  him;  bot  be 
named,  sent  ambassadors  to  make  his  defence,  and  to  infbnn  tbsss^ 
nate  how  Antiochus,  against  all  right  and  justice,  lorded  it  over  Corli^ 
Syria,  being  Ptolemy's  own  inheritan«:e,  descended  to  bim  fhon  iS 
ancestors.  But  he  ordered  them  to  renew  friendship  with  the  Bfe>^ 
mans,  and  to  endeavour  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  against  Peitens.  ^ 

19.  Ambassadors  came  to  Rome  from  Rhodes  to  clear  tbcmsdias 
of  tiiose  crimes  that  were  charged  against  them^  lor  in  the  WS^' 
against  Perseus  they  seemed  in  their  hearts  to  lean  to  tlie  kin^  anf^^ 
tu  be  loose  in  their  friendship  towards  the  Roasam;  bot  |Hmhil|[  \ 
tlie  aversion  and  displeasure  of  the  senate  agaiast  tlieaa,  thcf 
greatly  dejected;  and  when  one  of  the  pretors^  jrlio 
gether  an  assembly,  stirred  up  the  people  to  a  war  agi 
diaus,  they  were  exceedingly  afrahl  upon  the  account^  tiicir  istrilli 


try,  and  teil  into  tliat  consternation,  that  they  put  on  mowaiag  Jotf; 
bits,  not  any  longer  making  their  <  lands,  or  soliciyng  alhwrttiPr 
usual  treedom  of  friends,  but  depreatiog  with  tcais,  thnt 
irremediable  might  be  decreed  agai    t  them.    Bnt  oon  «C 

*  King  of  Macedon— Lir.  Ub.  4S.  f  To  Bcnd  lOt 

;t  Cluuc  of  lUte.  H  Peneos'i  AmbuMdon.  $ 

^  f  4ntiochai£pipliaBfis.—Aa^  0^.141^ 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  ^49 

.  .i ..       I.      I  III,  .1  ■  ■  ■  ■     - 

t)unes^  introduciDg  them  into  the  senate^  and  violently  plucking 
down  the  pretor  from  the  desk,  who  was  stirring  them  up  to  the 
war,  he  caused  them  to  speak,  who  saying  many  things  in  a  way  of 
humhie  supplication,  received  such  an  answer  as  altogether  freed 
them  from  their  excessive  fears;  but  for  some  of  their  crimes  they 
were  sharply  rehuked. 

20.  About  this  time  came  ambassadors  to  Rome  from  all  parts  t6 
congratulate  their  victories:  the  senate  courteously  received  them  all, 
and  returning  them  gracious  answers,  presently  sent  them  back  into 
their  own  country. 

21.  About  this  time  there  being  many  ambassadors  arrived,  the 
senate  first  despatched  those  that  came  along  with  Attalus.  For  the 
Romans  were  jealous  of  Eumenes,  by  reason  of  some  letters  that 
were  intercepted,  by  which  it  appeared  that  he  had  confederated  witH 
Perseus  aijainst  the  Romans,  being  likewise  accused  by  many  am* 
bassadors  that  came  out  of  Asia,  and  especially  by  those  that  were 
sent  from  king  Prussiasf,  and  the  Gallogreeks;  those  with  Attalus 
readily  answered  to  every  article  of  the  charge,  and  not  only  cleared 
themselves  of  all  the  crimes,  but  returned  home  with  much  honour 
and  reputation  However,  the  senate  did  not  altogether  lay  aside 
the  suspicion  of  Eumenes:  but  pitching  upon  Caius,  sent  him  away 
strictlv  to  observe  his  affairs  and' motions. 

22  Prussias  became  unworthy  of  the  royal  dignity,  spent  his  days 
basely  and  sordidly,  in  flattering  his  superiors;  and  when  the  Roman 
ambassadors  ea'ne  to  him,  he  threw  aside  the  ensigns  of  royalty,  the 
diadem  and  the  purple,  and,  imitating  exactly  the  garb  of  the  Roman 
libertines,  met  the  ambassadors  with  his  head  shaven,  and  wearing 
a  white  cap,  and,  having  on  the  gown  and  shoes  of  a  manumittedT 
slave,  so  saluted  the  ambassadors,  declaring  himself^to  be  a  liber- 
tine of  the  Romans,  than  which  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  find  a  more 
dishonourable  title;  and  many  other  such  mean  things  he  had  done 
before.  And  when  he  came  to  the  portico  of  the  senate  house^ 
standing  at  the  door  straight  over  against  the  senators,  he  fell  down 
prostrate  upon  both  hands,  kissing  the  threshold,  and  cried  out  with 
a  loud  voice  to  them  as  they  sat,  all  health  I  ye  gods!  the  saviours! 
not  sparing  any  high-soaring  compliments  of  unmanly  flattery  and 
effeminacy.  And  moreover,  making  a  speech  in  the  senate  agree- 
able to  his  sordid  deportment,  he  proceeded  so  far  as  is  a  shame  for 
me  to  write.  But  the  senate  being  offended  at  many  things  he  said, 
returned  him  an  answer  suitable  to  his  flatteries.  For  the  Romans  are 
eager  chiefly  to  conquer  a  stout  and  courageous  enemy. 

*  Marcus  Antonius.— Liv.  lib.  45.  t  King  of  Billjjnia. 

Vol,  2.  No.  4S.  oooo 


656  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


23.  Ambassadors  came  to  Rome  both  from  the  yoonger  and  the 
elder  Ptolemy,  An  account  of  affairs  being  given  to  those  in  the  as- 
sembly,  the  senate,  upon  hearing  of  part,  decreed-^^TIiat  theaipbasM- 
dors  from  the  elder  Ptolemy*  should  depart  out  <rf  Italy  within  five 
days  at  most,  and  the  confederacy  be  broken  off.  But  that  ambas* 
sadors  should  be  sent  to  the  younger  Ptolemy f  to  declare  to  him  the 
good  will  of  the  senate,  and  those  things  that  had  been  signified  to 
his  brother. 

24.  About  the  one  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  olympiad,  ambassadois 
came  from  Ariarathes:^  bringing  a  crown  of  the  value  of  ten  thousand • 
pieces  of  gold,  signifying  the  good  will  the  king  bore  to  the  Romaoi^ 
and  that  upon  their  account  he  had  prohibited  marriage  and  amity 
with  Demetrius;  which  was  attested  and  confirmed  by  the  ambai* 
sadors  from  Greece.  The  senate  commended  Ariarathes,  and  ac- 
cepted the  crown,  and  sent  back  to  him  such  presentsy  as  vrere  of 
greatest  esteem  among  the  Romans. 

25.  At  the  same  time  ambassadors  came  from  Demetrius  bKngi^f^ 
likewise  a  crown  of  the  value  of  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  aad 
those  prisoners  that  were  guilty  of  the  murder  of  Octavius:  but  At- 
senate  had  a  long  debate,  what  was  best  and  most  advisable  to  do  ia 
these  concerns;  at  last  they  accepted  the  crowu,  but  would  not  re^ 
ceive  Isocrates§  and  Leptincs^  that  were  offered  to  be  delivered  ip 
to  them. 

26.  The  Celtiberians,**  after  the  victory,  wisely  foresctiog  wiMt 
would  follow,  sent  ambassadors  to  the  consul  to  treat  for  peace,  bet  he 
looking  upon  it  necessary  to  keep  up  the  grandeur  and  magoaoioiiqr 

of  his  country,  made  answer That  they  must  eitlier  give  up  aU  H 

the  Romans,  or  else  be  victors  in  the  war. 

27*  When  the  Romans  were  at  war  with  the  Carthaginiaiu,  At 
Carthaginians  hearing  that  they  were  sailing  to  lilybssum,  and  oil 
in  the  least  makinga  descent  upon  them,  sent  ambassadors  toRoBC^' 
and  by  them  delivered  up  both  themselves,  and  all  the  conceniiflf' 
their  country  to  the  Romans.  .  The  senate  accepting  the  sumodfli 

of  their  country,  gave  this  answer ''Since  the  Carthagioiaos  aie  •. 

well  advised,  the  senate  returns  them  their  country,  their  laws,  tlMir 
temples,  their  sepulchres,  their  liberties,  and  their  estates|"  (oottf^ 
all  mentioning  their  city    Carthage,  for  that  was  coDeealcd 

*  PtolciDj  Pliilonietor.  t  Ptoleoy  ETergclM. 

X  King  of  Cappadocia. 

|!   A  staflT  and  an  ivor^  chariot,  or  chair  of  ttatc— Polyb.  Leg.  Itt. 

§  IsocraleSf  the  grammarian,  defended  it.^-Polyb.  Leg.  Itt.  1M» 

^  L^ptiucs  slabbed  Cneius  OctaTiua,  the  Roman  lefttc,'  i 

•*  Spaoiardj. 


ii'j^i^lJiJr^dM 


PIODORUS  SICULUS.  €51 


these*  kind  concessions),  if  they  would  give  three  hundred  sons  of  the 
senators  as  hostages,  and  obey  the  commands  of  the  consuls.  The 
Carthaginians,  thinking  hereby  to  be  free  from  the  war^sent  the  hos- 
tages^, not  without  great  lamentation*  Afterwards  the  consuls  came 
to  Uticaf,  and  the  Carthaginians  again  sent  ambassadors  to  ask  what 
further  commands  the  Romans  would  lay  upon  them;  but  when  the 
consuls  told  them  they  must  deliver  up  their  arms  and  engines  with- 
out fraud,  lliey  at  first  (because  of  the  war  against  AsdrubalJ)  took  it 
hfavlly :  however,  they  brought  in  two  hundred  thousand  arms  pf  all 
sorts,  and  two  thousand  engines.  Afterwards  the  Romans  again  sent 
fonimancls  to  the  Carthaginians,  to  send  some  persons  of  their  se- 
nate, to  whom  they  would  declare  their  further  command,  who  ac- 
cordingly sent  thirty  of  the  noblest.  Manilius  the  senior  consul  told 
them,  tliat  it  was  the  senate's  pleasure  they  should  leave  the  city 
they  inhabited,  and  build  another  eighty  furlongs  distant  from  the 
sea :  but  the  ambassadors  crying  out  for  mercy  and  compassion,  all 
of  tliem  cast  tliemselves  to  the  ground,  uttering  many  lamentable 
complaints  with  tears,  upon  which  great  confusion  was  raised  in  the 
assembly;  and  when  the  Carthaginians  were  a  little  recovered  out  of 
their  consternation,  one  only^  named  Blannus,  delivering  himself  in 
the  natural  language  of  the  auditory,  debated  the  matter  with  great 
.heat  and  earnestness,  attended  with  an  undaunted  presence  of  mind^ 
wiiieh  moved  the  auditors  to  pity  and  commisseration. 

28.  Tiie  Romans  being  unmoveable  in  their  decrees  as  to  the  raz- 
ing of  Carthage,  the  senate  commanded  them  forthwith  to  depart 
toCarthaire,  and  to  declare  to  the  citizens  what  things  were  decreed;. 
but  some  of  the  ambassadors  refusing  to  return  to  their  country,  fled 
each  of  them  wherever  they  could;  the  rest,  choosing  rather  to' re- 
turn, went  home,  having  thus  finished  a  doleful  embassy.  When  the 
people  came  thronging  together  to  meet  them,  they  gave  them  not  a 
word,  but,  beating  their  heads,  stretching  out  their  hands,  and  invo- 
catinir  their  gods,  they  went  on  to  the  court,  and  informed  the  senate 
whai  things  were  commanded.  ' 

29.  The  Aradiaiis,  supposing  they  had  got  an  opportunity  to  de- 
stroy those  of  Maratl-os§,  sent  privately  to  Ammonius,  viceroy  of 
the  kingdo  j'll,  and,  with  a  bribe  of  three  hundred  talents,  prevailed 
uitli  iii  io  deliver  u|)  Marathos;  whereupon  Ammonius  sent  Isa- 
doro  to  tl  e  Maraihoniatis,  who  by  his  speech  was  to  pretend  some 
otiier  iiKiitcrs,  but  in  truth  went  to  seize  upon  the  city,  and  to  deliver 
It  up  to  the  A  radians.     Tlie  Marathonians,  being  ignorant  that  they 

*   io  L.'^  '  .ium.  t  See  Eutrop.  lib.  4.    Flor.  lib.  2.  c^l5.    Livy,  Epitore.  lib.  49, 

I  Their  general.  §  A  city  of  PhoiQicia. 

H  Qi'  Syrift,  uodvr  Alexander  ]3«1|. 


6m  the  FRAGMBim  OF 


were  designed  for  destruction,  yet  observing  thsf  tbe.Araduuis  weic 
higher  in  the  king-s  favour  than  themselves,  refased  the  kiiifr*s  iol<« 
diers  entrance  into  their  city,  and  resolved  to  make  their  addresses  as 
suppliants  to  the  Aradians.  They  forthwith  therefbie  sent  ten  of  the 
most  eminent  of  their  eldest  citizens  as  ambassadors  to  Aradus*,  vslio 
bK>ught  with  them  an  humble  address  and  supplioatton,  and  the  old- 
est images  of  their  gods  which  they  bad  in  their  city,  hoping  that 
upon  the  account  of  their  kindred,  and  moved  with  reverence  to  their 
gods,  the  Aradinns  would  be  appeased,  and  their  anger  diverted.  As 
soon  as  they  landed,  according  to  the  commands  given,  they  addressed 
themselves  as  suppliants  to  the  people:  but  the  Arediana  being  in- 
censed,  they  slighted  the  usual  and  common  laws  of  suppliafits^aad 
cast  off  ail  reverence  of  their  kindred's  images,  and  tlieir  gods,  and 
therefore  broke  the  images,  and  trampled  them  moat  shaasefullf  aur 
der  their  feet,  and  attempted  to  stone  the  amhi^ssadors;  hut  soa» 
•f  the  senators  interposing  themselves  between  tbena  and  the  rage  of 
the  people  (scarce  restrained  from  stoning  them,  nqtwithataiidingthe 
reverence  they  owed  the  senators)  commanded  them  to  be  eoaviya^ 
to  prison ^^ 

SO.  The  Numantiansf  and  Termissianst  sent  anihassadon  to  the 
Romans,  to  treat  of  a  peace,  which  was  granted  ta  them  upon  these 
conditions.»That  they  should  each  deliver  up  their  citica  to  the 
Komans,  three  hundred  hostages,  nine  hundred  foldier'a  coats,  three 
hundred  hides,  eight  hundred  war-horses,  and  all  their  anns,  and  that 
they  should  be  friends  and  allies  to  the  Romans.  There  being  a  ifPf 
appointed  for  the  performance  of  these  conditions  by  the  cities,  sB 
was  done  according  to  the  articles;  but  when  at  last  it  eaine  lo  Ae 
delivering  up  of  their  arms,  there  arose  a  certain  geneiooa  regret  aad 
lamentation,  and  a  courageous  resolution  in  the  pc^lace  to  ttgm 
their  liberties.  Therefore  they  were  angry  one  at  another  that  tiwy 
should  ever  consent  that  they  should,  like  women,  strip  thewieiics 
of  their  arms:  wherefore,  repenting  of  those  things  timt  were  di* 
creed,  the  fathers  accused  their  sons,  children  their  parents,  aad 
women  their  husbands;  and  so,  coming  to  themaelves  again,  ie» 
solving  not  to  deliver  up  their  arms,  they  renewed  the  war  i 
Romans. 

31.  Tryphon§  from  a  private  man  being  made  king, 
all  he  could  to  establish  the  government  in  himaelf  by  a  decree  of  tkt 
senate :  wherefore,  preparing  a  golden  medal  of  victory  weigbinglsa 

*  An  island  over  against  Pbomicia.  t  NmiABtMi  in  Spaia. 

%  Gerroissnni  in  Spain  —See  PatercaL  Uk  t.  c.  4b 

$  Called  DiodotbSj  one  of  Alexaod«r  BaU'i  coaioMUidef%  hm§  sffljiht     I  Ifaca  t^ 

d9.cl3.v.31«M    LiT.lik.a%a0w 


itil^ftt'kimrl 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  6d3 


thousand  crowns,  he  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  present  it  to  the 
people,  not  doubting  but  that  he  should  obtain  from  them  the  ap«< 
pellation  of  king,  considering  that  the  present  which  he  sent  was  not 
only  very  rich  in  itself,  but  one  whose  name  carried  along  with  it  the 
happy  prognostication  of  victory.  But  he  found  the  senate  far  more 
subtle  than  himself,  whose  prudence  prompted  them  to  a  dislike  of 
those  that  deceitfully  circumvent  others:  for  they  received  the  pre- 
sent, and  the  good  omen,  together  with  the  profit;  but,  instead  Of 
Tryplion's  name,  the  senate  decreed  that  the  title  of  the  kicig*  wh^ 
Was  treacherously  murdered  should  be  engraven  upon  it;  and  by  so 
doing  they  approved  themselves  haters  of  his  wickedness  in  mur- 
der! itg  of  the  child,  and  such  as  would  not  accept  x)f  the  presents  of 
wicked  men. 

32.  There  come  with  Scipio  Africanus  other  ambassadors  to  Alex- 
andria, to  view  the  whole  kingdom.  Ptolemyt  met  them  in  pomp 
and  state,  with  a  great  retinue,  and  feasted  them  sumptuously,  and, 
going  about  with  them,  shewed  them  his  palace  and  treasury.  But 
theyl,  heing  persons  eminent  for  virtue,  contented  themselves  with 
a  spare  diet,  aiid  such  as  was  wholesome,  scorning  that  rich  provision, 
as  prejudicial  both  to  mind  and  body.  As  for  those  things  which 
the  king  esteemed  as  rarities  and  admirable,  they  only  glanced  their 
eyes  upon  them,  and  looked  on  them  as  things  of  no  value:  but 
what  was  really  worth  their  eyeing,  those  things  they  viewed  most 
exactly ;  as  the  situation  of  the  city,  and  its  capacity,  and  particularly 
the  Pharos§,  and  what  belonged  thereunto.  Thence  likewise  they 
sailed  to  Memphis,  j^nd  took  notice  of  the  goodness  of  the  country,, 
the  conveniencies  of  the  river  Nile,  the  number  of  the  cities,  the  io- 
flnite  thousands  of  inhabitants,  the  fortification ||  of  Egypt,  and  the 
excellence  of  the  country,  how  well  it  was  provided,  both  as  to  the 
security  and  extent  of  an  empire:  and,  having  admired  both  the  po*^ 
pulousness  of  Egypi,  and  the  convenience  of  the  places  therein,  they 
were  of  opinion  that  the  kingdom  of  Egypt  would  easily  swell  into  a 
vast  empire,  if  it  once  had  masters  answerable.  After  the  ambassa- 
dors had  well  viewed  Egypt,  they  went  to  Cyprus,  and  from  thence 
into  Syria,  in  short,  they  passed  through  most  parts  of  the  world: 
and,  currying  themselves  soberly,  to  admiration  in  all  places  wherever 
they  came,  they  gained  exceeding  honour  and  reputation;  and,  tra^ 

^  Antiochus  Theos,  Alexander  Bala*s  son,  whose  guardian  TryphoB  wis.    Set 

Justin,  lib.  36.  c.  1. 

t  Ptoleiny  Evergetes,  the  second  sornamed  Physcon. 

^  r.  Scipio  Africanus,  Spiirius  Mummiu  ,  L.  Metellos.— See  Cicero  in  Somnio  Scip. 

§  Tbe  Pharos  at  Alexandria,  which  gave  light  to  seamen  in  tilt  night. 

\  Natural  forlificttion.'-^ee  Xxfj,  £pit.  libi  59/ 


^54  THE  FRAGMENTS  OF 


veiling  througli  roost  parts  of  the  world,  with  the  general  mpfbmit 
of  all,  they  returned  home.  For  those  that  were  at  diflenoce^  thqr 
reconciled  oue  to  another;  others  they  persuaded  to  do  rigbt  aod 
justice  to  those  that  complained  against  them;  those  that  were  ioi- 
pudently  obstinate  they  were  necessitated  to  curb  aod  reatraio  by 
•  force;  uud  such  causes  as  were  difficult  to  be  detenniaed  they  tiaiis- 
mitted  to  the  senate.  Conferring  both  ^ith  kings  and  their  people, 
aod  renewing  all  former  leagues,  they  increased  the  love  of  all  aorta 
to  the  Roman  government;  and  so  all  applying  themselves  in  their 
several  countries  to  choose  fit  persons,  they  sent  amluissadors  toRome^ 
and  highly  applauded  the  delegates  with  Scipio,  aod  the  senate  te 
employing  such  men. 

Sd  Bocchus,  king  of  Libya,  having  sharply  rebuked  those  that 
would  have  persuaded  him  to  make  war  upon  the  Bomana,  sent  eom- 
missioners  to  Marius,  craving  pardon  for  his  crimes,  and  desiring  la 
enter  into  a  league,  made  many  promises  to  be  serviceable  to  the  Ro- 
mans for  the  time  to  come.  But  Marius  ordering  him  to  send  am^ 
bassadors  to  the  senate,  to  treat  of  these  matters,  the  king  observed 
bis  directions,  and  sent  accordingly.  Upon  which  thcseoate  an- 
swered  ^That  Bocchus  should  in  every  respect  be  received  into  grace 

and  favour,  if  he  could  prevail  with  Marius.  Marius,  desirous  to 
.  have  Jugurtha^  the  king  his  prisoner,  Bocchus,  willing  to  serve  hiiii» 
sent  for  Jugurtha,  as  if  he  would  discourse  with  him  about  bnsioev 
of  concern  to  tliem  both,  and  by  this  means  seized  him,  and  delireied 
him  bound  to  Lucius. Sylla  the  questor,  who  was  sent  out  for  that 
purpose;  and  so,  hy  the  misfortune  of  this  prince,  he  bought  hisjows 
safety,  and  escaped  punishment  from  the  Romans. 

34.  Ambassadors  came  from  king  Mithridates  to  Home,  with  a 
great  sum  of  money,  in  hopes  by  that  to  corrupt  the  senate.  Satofw 
ninust,  thinking  that  now  he  had  an  advantage  against  the  senate^ 
reproached  and  abused  the  embassy  at  a  great  rate;  the  senators  in* 
stjgated  tlie  ambassadors,  and  promised  to  assist  thpm,  who  thoe* 
upon  called  Saturninus  in  question  for  this  abuse.  There  being  then 
'raised  a  mighty  popular  tumult,  by  reason  of  the  violation  of  the  aoi* 
bassadors,  and  of  that  constant  abhorrence  theJRomans  have  of  sock 
notorious  affronts,  Saturninus  (who  was  now  condemned  to  die  faf 
the  senate,  his  proper  judges  in  such  cases)  fell  into  most  nckinf 
fears  and  perplexities ;  and,  because  of  the  great  commotions  aod  ta* 
mults  that  were  raised,  in  a  consternation  he  betook  himself  for  shcl- 

*  King  of  Numidia,  father-in-Uw  of  Bocchus. — See  Lit.  Epit.  KK  Sf,  61^  SS^  Stf« 
Flor.  lib.  3.  c.  1.      ,  .     N  •     ■ 

t  L.  AppulciusSataroinas, « tribune  of  the  people,  Iieted  the  teoatsspsnil 
Sc«  fior.  lib.  3.  e.  16...  Uwy  l^pilopw  li^  9* 


is/t>i!?, 


DIODORUS    SICULUS.  655 


tcr  to  the  pity  those  commouly  find  that  are  unfortunate;  therefore, 
throwing  off  his  rich  apparel,  putting  on  a  mean  and  sordid  habit,- 
and  suffering  his  beard  to  grow,  he  ran  up  and  down  to  the  tumul- 
tuous throngs  of  people  throughout  the  city,  fallii>g  down  upon  his 
knees  to  some,  catching  others  fast  by  the  hands,  begging  with  tears 
that  they  would  assist  him  in  his  present  calamities,  declaring  that 
he  was  factiously  oppressed  by  the  senate  against  all  right  and  jus- 
tice, and  suffered  all  this  for  the  good  will  he  bore  the  people;  that 
the  sciiate  were  his  enemies,  accusers,  and  judges.  The  mob  here- 
upon, being  all  in  an  uproar,  (affected  by  his  prayers  and  entreaties), 
many  thousands  of  them  ran  to  the  tribunal,  and  unexpectedly  for 
that  time  rescued  him;  and,  with  the  assistance  of  the  people,  he 
was  again  declared  tribune. 

35.  Mark  Antony*  made  a  peace  with  the  Cretans,  which  they  kept 
for  ijonie  time;  but  afterwards,  calling  together  a  general  council  tQ 
consider  what  was  most  advisable  for  them  to  do  in  order  to  their  ad- 
vantage, ilic  more  aniient  and  prudent  amongst  them  counselled  to 
send  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  make  defence  against  those  accusa- 
tionsf  that  were  brought  against  them,  andj  by  fair  words  and  en- 
treaties, to  work  upon  the  senate  for  a  reconciliation  To  this  end 
they  despatched  thirty  chosen  out  of  the  most  eminent  men  as 
ambassadors,  who,  privately  visiting  the  senators  at  their  several 
houses,  and  courting  them  with  fine  words,  secured  those  that  made 
up  the  assembly;  and,  being  introduced  into  tiie  senate,  they  made 
their  defence  against  the  matters  objected  against  them  with  great 
prudence,  exactly  setting  forth  their  good  services, and  their  associa- 
tioiis  with  the  seriate,  desiring  that  they  might  be  restored  to  their 
former  amity  and  confederacy.  The  senate,  pleased  with  what  they 
said,  gave  forth  a  decree,  by  which  they  not  ouly  acquitted  the  Cre- 
tans of  the  crimes  laid  to  their  charge,  but  declared  them  confede- 
rates and  friends  to  the  state.  But  Lcntulus,  surnamed  Spinther, 
got  t!ic  decree  reversed;  however,  the  Cretans  were  dismissed.  But 
tlic  semte  had  often  debates  concerning  the  Cretans,  alleging,and  at 
length  concluding,  that  they  joined  with  the  pirates,  and  were  shar* 
ers  in  the  robberies;  and  therefore  they  decreed  tliat  the  Cretans 
sl.ould  ser.u  in  all  their  ships  to  Rome,  even  to  a  skiff  of  four  oars, 
and  reoign  the  tlircc  hundred  famous  hostages  J,  and  send  awayLas- 

•  1 1.e  fivther  of  [Marl;  Antony,  who  married  Cleopatra. — See  Liir.  Epit.  lib.  97,  was 

routed  at  aea  l;y  tke  Crclnus. 

t  'i  iic  ^ jMte  Lid  decreed  war  agaiufet  theiu,  because  tbcy  assisted  MithridaUs  b/  their 

piracies. — Apj)ian,  leg.  30.    Dio.  leg.  37, 

*  'Iht.'.'t-'  i\)cy  l;ad  of  the  Koiuaiis, — See  Dion.  leg.  S7, 


656  THE  FRAGMBNTS  Ot 

tbenes*  and  Panares,  and  amongst  them  pay  four  thoannd  talents 
of  silver.  The  Cretans,  hearing  what  was  decreed^  went  into  a  con- 
sulfation  about  these  commands  imposed  upon  them;  and  the  more 
prudent  amongst  them  advised  that  they  should  be  obsenrant  in  all 
things  enjoined  on  them:  but  those  that  were  of  Lasthenes's  perty, 
and  guilty  of  the  same  crimes,  and  fearing  lest,  being  sent  for  to 
Rome,  they  sliould  be  there  punished  for  their  offences,  stirred  up 
the  people  to  a  sedition,  advising  them  to  maintain  those  liberties 
that  they  had  ever,  time  out  of  mind,  enjoyed. 

*  r.aMfacncs  bad  fought  with  Aatonku* 


^-    . 


^'^.JfL'^iJlt'C/. 


THE  SUPPLEMENT 


To 


DIODORUS  SICULUS, 


REFERRED  TO 


IN  BOOK  XVII ^VoL.  2.   Pages  226,  22?. 


Vol.  2.  No.  48.  WW 


♦         *v 


659 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


SUPPLEMENT. 

r     '    ir  fa 


SUP.  I. 

Alexander  J  marching  throttgh  a  dry  country ,  loses  jnany  of  his 
soldiers  for  want  of  «c;a/tfr..^Curtius^  lib.  vii.  c.  5. 

ALEXANDER  himself,  with  a  band  of  light-armed  men,  marcbiDg 
all  the  night,  entered  the  deserts  of  Susiana*.  The  total  want  of 
water,  with  the  thoughts  of  their  desperate  condition^  (as  is  btfore 
declared),  inflamed  their  thirst  before  they  had  a  real  desire  to  ikink; 
for,  for  the  space  of  four  hundred  furlongs j  not  the  least  lake,  or  any 
thing  that  was  moist,  appeared.  The  scorching  sun  fired  the  sands, 
which,  when  inflamed,  burnt  up  all  round  about  like  a  raging  fire: 
bence,  tlirough  the  excessive  heat  of  the  earthy  arose  a  mist  which  ob- 
scured the  ligiit,  and  all  the  plain  seemed  no  other  than  as  if  it  bad 
been  the  vast  ocean. 

Their  march  in  the  night  was  tolerable,  because  their  bodies  were 
refreshed  by  the  dew  and  coldness  of  the  air,  before  the  rising  of  the 
sun;  but  when  light  appeared,  the  heat  began,  and  drought  dried  up 
all  their  natural  moisture,  so  that  both  their  mouths,  and  their  very 
entrails,  were  altogether  parched  up  with  scorching  heat;  and  there- 
fore first  their  spirits,  and  then  their  bodies,  began  to  faint.  It  was 
grievous  to  them  either  to  stand  still  or  go  forward.  Some  few  of 
them,  by  the  help  of  those  who  knew  the  country,  had  got  water, 
which  quenched  their  thirst  for  a  little  while;  but  the  heat  increas- 
ing, their  desire  of  drink  was  again  the  more  inflamed;  and  therefore 
whoever  had  any  wine  or  oil,  it  was  instantly  guzzled  down,  and  the 
present  pleasure  of  drinking  was  so  great,  that  it  banished  all  fear  of 
thirst  for  the  future.  Those  that  had  thus  swelled  themselves  with 
immoderate  drinking,  could  neither  carry  their  arms,  nor  march  for- 
ward; and  those  seemed  to  be  in  a  far  better  condition  who  wanted 
*  Mistaken  b^  Curtius  for  the  dciertsofSogdiaoa, 


660  tte;  SUi^^LEMEMT  TO 

water,  than  they  who,  by  pouring  it  down  to  excess,  were  forced  to 
vomit  it  up  again*  Those  that  were  about  the  king,  seeing  hioi 
grieved  and  much  perplexed  with  these  misfortunes,  entreated  him  to 
mind  and  take  care  of  himself;  for  his  courage  wis  the  only  life  and 
relief  of  his  drooping  army.  While  they  were  thus  advising  bim,  two 
of  those  that  were  sent  before  to  mark  out  a  conrenient  place  where 
to  encamp,  came  with  water  in  their  vessels  for  the  use  of  their  chil- 
dren who  were  in  the  army,  and  whom  they  knew  were  not  able  to 
hold  out  without  drink:  these  meeting  the  king,  one  of  them  apenti 
his  vessel>  and  filled  a  cup  which  he  had  with  him,  and  ofiered  it  to 
the  king,  who  received  it,  but  asked  him  for  whom  the  water  wis 
brought,  who  answered — That  it  was  for  his  children:  upon  whiel^ 

returning  the  cup  full  as  it  wad *^  t  cannot  find  in  my  heart,"  says 

he,  '^  to  drink  it  alone,  and  it  is  too  little  to  be  divided  amoo|St 
them  all;  away  therefore  with  all  speed,  and  give  it  your  cUidfCi, 
for  whom  it  was  brought.'*  At  length  he  came  to.  the  river  Qxns, 
about  evening,  but  a  great  part  of  the  army  was  left  behind:  be 
commanded  therefore  fires  to  be  kindled  upon  a  high  movntdili  that 
those  who  followed  slowly  after  might  know  they  wen  not  far  final 
the  camp.  He  commanded  likewise  those  that  were  ill  the  w^ 
(having  suflScieutly  refreshed  themselves  both  with  meat  aod  innki 
to  fill  all  sorts  of  vessels  wherein  water  might  be  carried,  andhHp 
their  companions  that  were  behind.  But  those  who  dmnk  inoiaiode- 
rately  quenched  their  natural  heat  by  surfeit,  and  died  presently,  hy 
which  means  he  lost  far  more  men  than  he  had  done  bcfiice  ia  aqr 
baule. 


SUP.  n. 

Alexander  destroyed  all  the  Brmchtdas,  fas  trmtam  to  ikfi-Gn- 
cians) ,  whom  antiently  the  Persians  fortxd  to  remove  from  thet 
oivn  habitations  to  t/ie  farthest  part  of  the  kmgdom.,.,JEm^m, 
lib.  vii.  c.  6. 

HE  came  to  a  little  town  where, the  Branch!^  inhabttftd^  who 
bcrctofore  remov^  from  Miletus,  by  the  command  oFXerfcei,  whsa 
I.e  returned  out  of  Greece,  and  settled  themselv^  in  this  piaee:  dMf 
w  ere  those  who  violated  the  temple  called  Didymfeus*^  tb  I 

*  Oavc  Xerxes  the  rtclica  that  were  in  it.— Stnba^  lik«  IC 


DIODORUS  StCULUS.  661 


themselves  with  Xerxes.  The  customs  and  manners  of  their  coun- 
tr}'  were  not  as  yet  wholly  laid  aside,  but  they  spoke  a  kind  of  broken 
language,  neither  perfect  Greek  nor  barbarian.  They  therefore  re* 
ceived  the  king  very  joyfully,' a6d  gave  up  themselves  and  their  city 
into  his  hands.  He  thereupon  called  together  the  Milesians  that 
were  in  his  army,  who  bore  an  old  grudge  and  inveterate  hatred 
nc^ainst  the  Branchidae,  and  left  it  therefore  to  these  Milesians, 
whose  ancestors  had  been  betrayed  by  them,  to  do  with  them  what 
they  thought  fit,  either  to  remember  the  injury,  and  so  tevenge  them- 
selves; or,  considering  the  original  of  the  Branchidse,  who  were 
their  countrymen,  upon  that  account  to  spare  them*  When  they 
could  not  agree  amongst  themselves  what  to  resolve  upon,  the  king 
told  tliem,  that  he  himself  would  take  time  to  consider  what  was  fit-^ 
test  to  be  done.  The  next  day  the  Branchidai  meeting  him^  be 
ordered  them  to  go  along  with  him ;  and  when  he  came  to  the  city^ 
he  entered  the  gate  with  a  select  detachment,  having  in  the  meaa 
time  ordered  the  phalanx  to  surround  the  walls,  and,  upon  a  sign 
given,  to  raze  the  city  to  the  ground,  which  had  been  a  nest  for  the 
traitors,  and  to  put  them  all  to  the  swor.d,  man,  woman,  and  child. 
Hereupon,  being  all  disarmed,  they  were  knocked  on  the  bead  ia 
every  place  up  and  down,  and  no  stop  could  be  put  to  their  cruelty 
by  ticat  ness  of  language,  or  the  prayers  and  entreaties  of  the  poor  and 
x!iiserable  people.  '      .. 

At  length  they  razed  the  walls  to  the  very  bottom  of  the  founda- 
tion, that  there  might  not  remain  so  much  as  the  least  sign  where  it 
had  once  stood.  Neither  stopped  they  here;  for  they  not  only  cut 
down,  but  rooted  up  the  sacred  groves,  that  they  might  leave  all  a  vast 
and  solitary  desert,  barren,  without  so  much  as  a  root  in  the  ground; 
1^  hich  executions,  had  they  been  inflicted  upon  the  first  actors  of  the 
treason,  might  have  been  judged  a  just  revenge,  and  not  the  effects 
cf  cruelty,  as  they  seemed  to  be;  for  now  the  posterity,  who  had  neve? 
&o  much  as  seen  Miletus,  (and  therefore  could  not  betray  it  to 
Xcijkcs;,  suffeicd  for  the  faults  of  their  ancestors.  — 


662  THE  8UFPLEMKNT  TO 

■t     I'     <  *  sssaKsaaasammBammmmmm 


SUP.  III. 

T%e  kmg  led  his  mrmg  against  the  Sogdians  and  Segfihians. 
Arrianus^  lib.  iv« 

IN  the  mean  time  the  bar barians  that  bordered  next  to  the  river,  sv- 
prised  the  Macedouians  who  were  placed  in  garrispni  in  Scjthia,  and 
put  them  all  to  the  sword,  and  fortified  the  cities,  for  their  greater 
9ecurify.     MaAy  of  the  Sogdians  joined  with  them  in  tlie  defection, 
being  solicited  thereunto  by  those  that  had  aeixed  upon  Bessos,  who 
likewise  drew  away  after  them  some  of  the  Baetrians,  either  because 
they  were  afraid  of  Alexander,  or  because  (as  they  gave  the  reason 
Ibr  their  rebellion)  Alexander  had  summoned  a  senate  of  the  gover- 
nors of  the  province  to  meet  at  Zariaspa,  the  greatest  cky  tlnere,  from 
which  convention  they  saw  no  ground  to  hope  for  any  good  lo  them- 
selves.  When  intelligence  was  brought  to  Alexander  of  these  things, 
he  forthwith  commanded  his  foot  in  every  regiment  to  prepare  scaling 
ladders;  and  he  himself  marched  away  with  his  army  to  a  ci^  called 
Craaa,  which  was  next  to  the  camp,  and  lay  first  in  his  way;   for  it 
was  said  the  barbarians  had  fled  into  seven  towns  of  that  country. 
He  sent  Craterus  to  Cyropolis,  the  greatest  of  all  the  citieSy  and*  ia 
-jcliich  a  great  number  of  the  barliarians  had  sheltered  thennaelvcs* 
The  king  commanded  him  to  encamp  near  the  city,  imd  to  fortify  bis 
camp  with  a  trench  and  wall  drawn  round,  and  place  such  engines 
;ipon  his  bulwarks  as  he  saw  occasion  to  use,  tliat  the  townsawfi, 
being  busy  in  assaulting  Craterus,  might  have  no  leisure  to  come  in 
tg  the  assistance  of  other  cities.    The  king  himself,  at  soon  as  he 
came  to  Gekz»j  forthwith  at  the  first  approach  commaaded  hit  men 
to  set  Stealing  ladders  round  the  walls,  which  were  but  of  earth,  aod 
rot  very  Ugh«     Upon  wliich  the  slingers,  darters,  and  archers,  to- 
gether with  the  foot,  made  an  assault/plicd  and  galled  them  that  de* 
fended  the  walls  with  their  durts,  and  shot  out  of  the  engines;  so  that 
by  showers  of  darts  and  arrows  the  wall  was  presently  cleared  of  its 
defendants,  and  the  scaling-ladders  in  a  trice  were  set  to  the  walls, 
and  the  Macedonians  entered,  and  put  all  the  men  to  the  sword,  (for 
so  Alexander  had  commanded),  but  the  women  and  children,  with 
the  rest  of  the  prey,  they  carried  away.     Thence  the  king  forthwid^ 
marched  to  another  city,  (fortified  much  like  unto  Gaza),  which  he 
took  much  after  tiie  same  manner  the  very  same  day,  and  uealt  with 
the  prisoners  after  tiic  same  manner  as  with  them  at  Gaza.     After 


DIODORTJS  S1CULUS*  663 

this  he  made  to  a  third  city,  which  he  took  the  next  Any,  upon  tl)c 
first  assault. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  he  was  reducing  these  citiei  with  \m  foct» 
he  sent  away  his  hone  to  two  oCber  neighboqring  citieE,  with  crder^ 
to  watch  them,  lest  the  inhabitants,  hearing  of  tfce  taking  of  the  cit  tes 
bordering  upon  them,  and  of  the  king's  near  approach,  should  fly  and 
leave  the  cities,  so  that  he  should  not  be  able  to  pursiie  with  any 
hopes  of  overtaking  them.  And  indeed  it  fell  out  as  he  thoaght, 
which  evidenced  the  sending  forth  of  the  horse  to  be  necessary:  for 
the  barbarians,  who  still  were  possessed  of  two  other  cities,  seeing  the 
smoke  of  the  city  which  was  burnt,  and  was  over  against  them, 
(besides  some  who  escaped  out  of  the  OTerthfx>w  brought  them  news 
of  the  city  being  taken),  with  all  speed  in  whole  droves  fled  out  of  the 
cities,  and  fell  in  among  the  horse~  that  Were  sent  forth ^  and  nialt!> 
tudes  of  them  were  knocked  on  the  head. 

The  king  having  taken  and  razed  these  £ve  towns  in  the  spitce  of 
two  days,  marched  away  to  Cyropolis,  the  greatest  of  their  cttice. 
The  walls  of  this  city  were  higher  than  any  of  the  rest,  the  town  be- 
ing built  by  Cyrus:  and,  forasmuch  as  there  were  many  5;tout  men 
and  good  soldiers,  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  were  got  together 
into  this  place.  The  Macedonians  cpuld  not  easily  (like  the  other 
places)  take  it  at  the  first  assault;  and  therefore  Alexander  ordered, 
that  with  the  battering-rams  and  other  engines  they  should  batter  the 
walls,  and  wherever  any  breach  was  made,  there  forthwith  to  makc^ 
an  assault.  But  the  king,  observing  the  channeLof  the  nver  (which 
ran  through  the  city  likt  a  little  brook)  to  be  then  dry^  and  not  con- 
tiguous or  near  the  walls,  but  affording  a  direct  passage  for  hh  sol- 
diers into  the  city,  he  took  with  him  his  guard,  targeTt^crs,  archers, 
and  the  Agrians,  (the  barbarians  being  then  busy  in  observing  the 
engines,  and  those  that  managed  them),  and  secretly  with  a  few  at 
first  entered  through  the  channel  into  the  city,  and  broke  down  Hie 
gates  that  were  in  that  part,  and  readily  let  in  the  rest  of  the  sol- 
diers: upon  which  the  barbarians,  perceiving  the  city  to  he  entered, 
nevertheless  fell  upon  Alexander's  soldiers,  and  fought  stoutly  and 
r^olutely,  in  which  conflict  Alexander  received  a  blow  on  hB  head 
and  neck  with  a  stone.  Craterus,  and  many  others,  were  wounded 
with  darts  and  arrows;  but  at  length  the  barbarians  were  driven  oat 
of  the  market-place.  In  the  mean  time  those  that  assaulted  the  walls 
entered,  all  being  clear  of  those  that  should  have  defended  them.  In 
the  first  conflict,  at  the  entering  of  the  city,  there  were  slain  of  the 
enemy  about  eight  thousand,  the  rest  (for  they  were  above  eighteen 
jhoasand  who  had  put  themselves  there)  fled  into  the  castle,  who, 
after  one  day's  siege,  for  want  of  water,  surrendered  thmsehres.  The 


684  THE  SUPPLEMENT  TO 

seveath  city  the  king  took  at  the  first  assault:  Ptolemy  indeed siys 
that  it  was  surrendered;  but  Aristobulus  relates,  that  it  was  taken  hf 
t^totm,  aud  that  all  in  it  were  put  to  the  sword.  Ptolemy  writes,  that 
all  the  prisoners  were  dbtributed  in  the  army,  and  ordered  to  be  kept 
bound  till  the  king  left  the  country,  lest  anyone  of  them  that  refolted 
should  be  left  behind. 

While  these  things  were  on  foot,  the  army  of  the  Asiatic  Scythius 
came  to  the  banks  of  the  river  Tanais^,  because  they  beard  that  some 
of  the  barbarians  inhabiting  beyond  the  river  had  revolted  fron 
Alexander;  ^nd  their  aim  therefore  was,  that  if  there  were  any  con- 
siderable def^tion,  they  likewise  might  act  their  part  in  fialling  upos 
the  Macedonian^,    At  the  same  time  intelligence  was  brought,  that 
Spitam^es  bad  besieged  those  that  were  left  in  garrison  in  the  ess* 
tie  of  Patachades.    Alexander  therefore  sent  Andromachus,  Mede^ 
menus,  and  Caranus  against  Spitamenes,  with  sixty  horse  of  the  so^ 
•  cial  band,  and  eight  hundred  of  the  mercenaries,  who  were  under 
the  command  of  Caranus;   but  of  foot  there  were  fifteen  hundred 
mercenaries :  with  them  the  king  joined  in  oommissioo  one  Phar-t 
nuches  for  an  interpreter,  a  Lycian  by  nation,  who  was  well  skilled 
in  the  language  of  the  barbarians,  and  therefore  was  judged  a  fit  pci^ 
son  to  transact  matters  with  them. 

The  king  having,  in  the  space  of  twenty  days,  walled  the  cityf  bt 
had  before  designed  to  build,  gave  it  the  Greek  mercenaries,  to  be 
inhabited  by  them,  and  to  such  neighbouring  barbarians  as  liada 
mind  to  remove  their  habitations,  and  dwell  there,  and  to  some  of  the 
Macedonians  that  were  unable,  and  unfit  to  bear  arms. 

Afterwards,  having  sacrificed  to  the  gods  after  the  manner  of  his 
country,  and  exhibited  the  Gymnic  sports  and  horse-courses,  find- 
ing that  the  Scythians  did  not  march  back  and  leave  the  river,  but 
threw  their  darts  over,  (for  it  was  there  very  narrow),  and,  after  their 
barbarous  manner,  gave  out  most  opprobrious  and  railing  language 
against  Alexander,  as,  that  he  durst  not  fight  with  the  Scythians; 
and  if  he  did,  he  should  find  by  experience  how  great  a  difierence 
there  was  between  the  Scythians  and  the  barbarous  Asiatics.  The 
king,  being  provoked  at  these  things,  resolved  to  pass  the  river,  add 
fall  upon  them,  and  commanded  leather  boats  to  be  made  ready  for 
that  purpose.  Having  therefore  sacrificed  for  his  good  success,  the 
entrails  of  the  beasts  promised  nothing  that  was  prosperous,  which 
made  him  very  uneasy,  but  he  bore  it  very  patiently,  and  staid  there. 
The  Scythians  still  continuing  their  slight  and  contemptuous  htu- 

*  Not  Tanais,  which  fallit  into  the  Lake  Maeotis,  but  another  called  laxarte*.— >S<« 

n.  Nat  Hist.  I.  6.  c.  16. 

i  Called  Alexandria,  upon  the  bunks  of  laxarttts,  iinpropcrljr  called  Tanait. 


fiidijottx^s  8icuLusi  665 


guage,  he  again  sacrificecl^  and  when  Aristander  the  sdothsayer  de- 
clared that  danger  was  portended^  Alexander  answered  ii-It  was  bet- 
ter to  undergo  the  most  extreme  hazard,  than  for  him,  who  hid  con- 
quered all  Asia,  to  be  a  scorn,  a  tnocking-stock  to  the  Scythians,  as 
l)arius,  the  father  of  Xerxes,  was  heretofore.  Aristander,  on  the 
Dtlier  side,  replied,  that  he  would  not  declare  any  thing  to  the  king^ 
but  what  was  portended  by  the  gods,  though  Alexander  had  rather 
hear  other  things.  However,  Alexander's  boats  being  now  ready^ 
And  his  army  standing  all  in  arms  at  the  river's  brink,  he  ordered^ 
that  upon  a  sign  given  th«y  should  discharge  the  engines  against  th(i 
Scythians  that  rode  over  against  them  from  the  other  side;  whicb 
done,^ome  of  them  were  wounded  with  the  darts,  and  one  of  theiii 
especially  was  pierced  with  a  dart  through  his  buckler  and- breast- 
plate, and  fell  down  dead  from  his  horse.  But  the  barbarians  being 
terrified  with  darts  that  wounded  them  at  so  gi^at  a  distance,  and 
With  tlie  fall  of  that  valiant  man,  by  degrees  drew  off  fatther  from 
the  hank  of  the  river.  Alexander  discerning  them  to  be  in  disorder 
by  the  strokes  of  the  darts,  with  sound  of  trumpet  passed  over  th^ 
river  at  the  head  of  his  army;  and  the  archers  and  slingers  being  first 
sent  over,  he  commanded  them  to  ply  the  Scythians  with  their  sling» 
and  arrows,  lest  they  should  fall  in  upon  the  phalanx  as  they  wer^ 
passing  over,  before  all  his  body  of  horse  had  recovered  the  other 
side.  When  all  had  now  gained  the  farther  bank  of  the  river,  he  first 
fell  upon  the  Scythians  with  one  of  the  squadrons  of  the  Social  Re- 
giment, and  four  regiments  of  those  that  were  armed  with  sarissas*^ 
whose  shook  the  Scythians  bravely  bore  up  against,  and  surrounded 
them  with  their  horse;  so  that  many  overpowering  them,  \tho  wer^ 
but  few,  the  Scythians  easily  kept  themselves  whole  and  entire« 
Alexander  thereupon  mixing  his  archers  and  Agrians,  and  other  select 
troops,  (over  whom  Balacrus  had  the  command),  fell  in  upon  tli^ 
Scythians,  and,  being  now  on  both  sides  mixed  together,  the  kio^ 
ordered  three  squadrons  of  horse  oP  the  Social  Band,  and  all  his  horse 
that  were  darters,  to  charge  in  upon  the  Scythians;  and  he  himself^ 
Ht  the  head  of  the  rest  of  the  horse,  made  straight  upon  them,  so  that 
now  they  were  not  able  any  longer  to  keep  their  horse  io  a  ringj  aar 
before;  for  the  horse  pressed  sore  upon  them  at  the  same  time,  and 
the  light-armed  men,  being  mixed  with  the  horse,  they  suffered  not 
the  enemy  with  any  safety  to  wheel  about  with  their  horse  to  surround 
them.  Upon  which  the  Scythians  were  put  to  a. total  flightj  and  tt*» 
bout  a  thousand  killed,  and  a  hundred  and  fifty  taken  prisoners^ 
amongst  whom  was  Satrices>  one  of  theil*  two  generals^ 


Vbt.  2»  No.  48*  UMcl 


666  THE  SUPPLEMEKT  lt> 


SUP^  IV. 


7f%€  Sogdian  noblefnen,  being  led  fwth  to  he  put  to  deaths  were 
unexpectedly  freBerved,„^C\xtX\\xSy  lib.  vii.  c.  10. 

SOME  of  the  prisoners  of  the  Sogdians>  of  Doble  birth^  and  proper 
handsome  men^  were  brought  before  the  king;  who,  as  soon  as  they 
understood  by  an  interpreter  that  they  were  to  die,  they  began  to 
sing,  skip,  and  dance,  as  men  transported  with  joy,  using  many  hs- 
biviotls  gestures  of  their  bodies.  The  king  admiring  the  greatness  of 
their  courage  at  the  approach  of  death,  commanded  them  to  be 
brought  to  him,  and  asked  them,  why  they  were  so  excessively  merry, 
when  death  was  even  before  their  eyes  ?  who  answered — iThat  if  they 
had  been  put  to  death  by  any  other's  command,  they  should  hiff 
been  as  sad  at  the  apprehension  of  death  as  other  men;  but  since 
they  were  sent  out  of  the  world  by  so  great  a  king,  who  was  conqueror 
of  the  world,  they  celebrated  their  honourable  death  (which  ail  ?!• 
liant  men  wish  for)  with  songs  of  mirth  and  jollity,  after  the  custon 
and  manner  of  their  country.  The  king,  wondering  at  their  courage, 
asked  them,  whether  they  would  not  be  his  enemies,  if  he  were  so 
kind  and  generous  as  to  suffer  them  to  live:  they  answered _Thef 
never  were  his  enemies,  but,  as  invaded,  opposed  him  to  defend 
themselves;  and  if  any  made  trial  of  them  by  fair  means,  and  not  by 
force  and  injury,  they  would  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost,  that 
none  should  exceed  them  in  grateful  offices  of  respect.  Then  be 
asked  them  what  pledges  they  would  give  of  loyalty  ?  they  replied— 
Their  lives,' which  they  had  received  from  him,  and  which  they  would 
give  him  up  again  upon  his  demand.  Nor  did  they  fail,  by  breack 
of  promise:  for  those  that  returned  into  their  own  country  kept  their 
countrymen  in  due  obedience;  four  of  them,  whom  he  kept  for 
squires  of  his  body  proved  as  true  and  faithful  to  the  king  as  any  of 
the  Macedonians. 


DTODORUS  8ICULVS.  667 


SUP,  V, 

Alexander  punislied  the  Bactrians,  and  subdued  the  Sogdians  a 
second  time,  and  built  cities  in  convenient  places  to  punish  the 
revolters. Arrianus,  lib.  iv. 

ALEXANDER  himself  marched  again  to  the  river  Oxus;  for  h» 
resolved  to  march  agaiust  the  Sogdians^  having  heard  that  many  of 
them  had  put  themselves  into  forts  and  castles,  and  refused  to  obiey 
the  provincial  governors  the  king  had  placed  over  them.  At  the  time 
he  was  encamped  near  the  river  Oxus,  two  springs  rose  out,  of  the 
earth,  near  to  Alexander's  pavilion,  the  one  of  water,  and  the  other 
of  oil :  of  which  prodigy  Ptolemy  L^gus  forthwith  informed  the  King 
as  soon  as  he  heard  of  it:  whereupon  Alexander  without  delay,  at  the 
command  of  the  priest,  sacrificed.  Aristander  the  priest  told  tbe 
king,  that  the  fountain  of  oil  portended  labour,  but  victory  at  last, 
the  fruit  of  toil  and  paip.  •  Marching  therefore  away  with  part  of  his. 
army  against  the  Sogdians,  he  left  in  Bactria  Polyperchon,  Attains, 
Gorgias,  and  Meleager,  to  be  a  guard  in  that  country,  both  to  keep 
them  in  obedience  that  were  reduced,  and  to  subdue  the  others  who 
had  fallen  o?L  from  their  allegiance.  Having  divided  his  arn^y  into 
five  parts^  he  gave  the  command  of  three  x>f  them  to  Hephsestioo;  a 
fourth  part  to  Coenus  and  Artabazus;  he  himself,  with  the  fifth,  en- 
tered the  country  leading  towards  Maracanda.  The  rest  entered 
Tvherever  each  of  them  could,  and  stormed  the  forts  of  those  who  had 
possessed  themselves  of  them,  and  others  they  tdok  ^n  upon  surren-t 
der.  After  all,  the  forces  (having  first  ran  over  the  greatest  part  of 
the  country)  joined  together  at  Maracanda;  he  sent  forth  Hephssr 
tion  to  bring  colonies  into  the  cities  of  the  Sogdians:  Cceni^s  atid 
Artabazus  he  ordered  against  the  Scythians,  because  he  heard  that 
Spitainenes  was  fled  to  them.  He  himself  with  the  rest  of  the  army  ' 
entering  into  So^diana,  easily  reduced  the  rest  of  the  pities  that  ha^ 
'^volted. 


668  THE  8UPPLBMX19T  Jf^ 


SUP.  VI, 

The  Sqgdians  revoked  a  third  titne;  and  iheg  thai  befook  thnh 
selves  to  the  top  of  the  rock  were  taken.,.^AjtiBnx}s,  lib,  it, 

AFTERWARDSI,  at  the  beginDiog  of  the  spring,  he  nmithedioi 
rock  to  which  he  heard  many  of  the  Sogdians  had  fled;  and  here  H 
was  said  that  the  wife  and  daughters  of  Oxyaites^  had  sbeltend 
themselves:  for  Oxyartes  placed  them  here  as  in  a  hold  that  wis  ioi- 
pregnable,  he  himself  being  one  that  had  rerolted  fpom  Alexioder, 
And  the  king  was  the  more  earnest,  because  that^  when  this  roek  «» 
taken,  there  appeared  no  fort  left  in  Sogdiana  that  could  enco«iii{t 
them  to  a  defection.  When  he  came  to  the  rock,  be  found  it  steep 
and  inaccessible  on  erery  side,  and  that  the  barh|\nans  had  brougkl 
in,  provision  for  a  long  siege,  aud'tbat  the  depth  of  the  snow, « it 
made  the  approach  of  the  Macedonians  more  difficult,  90  it  fombfaed 
the  barbi^rians  with  plenty  of  water.  However  Alexander  resolved 
to  assault  the  rock.  Tl\e  proud  and  contemptuous  answer  likewise 
()f  the  barbarians  stirred  up  rage  and  ambition  in  Alexander  at  one 
aiid  the  same  time.  For  whereas  at  a  parley  with  them  he  promised 
tliem,  that  if  they  would  surrender,  they  should  all  have  liberty  to 
return  safely  home;  they  barbarously  scoffed  at  him,  and  bid  him 
seek  some  soldiers  that  had  wings,  who  might  thus  take  the  rock,  for 
they  feared  no  other  mortals.     Upon  which  Alexander  commanded 

proclamation  to  be  made  by  an  herald ^That  he  would  bestow  twelre 

talents  as  a  reward  upon  him  that  should  first  mount  the  rock,  and  so 
the  second,  and  the  third,  in  their  due  order,  should  every  one  re- 
ceive a  reward,  till  it  came  to  the  last  that  ascended  the  rock,  who 
.  should  receive  three  hundred  darics;  the  hopes  of  which  reward 
stirred  up  the  Macedonians,  who  were  eager  before  to  fall  upon  tbem 
of  their  own  accord.  Three  hundred,  therefore,  of  those  that  were 
accustomed  to  climb  rocks  being  drawn  out,  they  furnished  tbea- 
selves  with  crampirons,  (wherewith  they  fastened  their  tents),  that 
they  might  fix  ihem  in  the  snow  where  it  was  hard  frozen,  and  in 
other  parts  of  the  rock  where  there  was  no  snow,  and  to  them  they 
tied  strong  cords,  and  in  the  night  made  to  that  part  of  the  rock 

*  Curtiut  Gills  him  Arimares,  lib.  Tii.  c.  11 :  for  by  Strabo,  Oxyartes  bad  placed  hk 
daughten  in  Sisimithrte,  a  rock  in  Bactria,  where  Aleiander  married  one  of  them^  aaoied 
Aosaiuu— Strabo,  lib.  xi.  p.  517. 


DIODORU8  6ICULU6.  SSQ 

that  was  steepest  and  highest,  and  therefore,  as  they  conceived^  least 
guarded ;  and  with  the  cramps,  some  fastened  in  the  rock,  and  otbera 
in  the  snow  that  was  frozen,  they  scrambled  up  from  place  to  place 
till  they  gained  the  top:  but  of  these^  thirty  perished  in  endeavour*- 
Ing  to  get  up,  so  that  their  bodies  could  not  be  found  to  be  buried^ 
being  lost  in  the  depth  of  the  snow;  the  rest  about  break  of  day  re« 
covered  the  top,  and  by  shaking  of  the  linen  clothes  gave  notice  to 
the  army  that  they  had  gained  the  place,  for  that  sign  Alexander  had 
commanded  them :  upon  which  a  trumpeter  was  forthwith  sent  out 
with  command  to  the  Barbarians  that  they  should  without  any  furr 
ther  delay  surrender  themselves,  for  that  he  had  now  found  soldiers 
thai  had  wings,  who  had  possessed  themselves  of  the  top  of  the  rock ; 
and  at  the  same  time  the  soldiers  that  had  gained  the  rock,  presented 
themselves  in  view  to  the  Barbarians,  who  being  amazed  at  such  an 
unexpected  sight,  supposing  them  to  be  more,  and  better  firmed 
than  indeed  they  were,  gave  up  themselves;  the  sight  of  a  few  Ma- 
cedonians was  so  terrible  to  them.  There  were  there  taken  prison- 
ers many  of  the  wives  and  children  of  the  Barbarians,  and  amongst 
them  the  wife  and  daughters  of  Oxyartes:  Oxyartes'a  son  likewise^ 
ivho  was  about  th^  age  of  nine  years. 


SUP.  VII. 

Of  the  hunting  in  Bahastis,  and  the  multitude  ef  wild  beasts  there. 
Curtius,  lib.  vii.  c.  1, 

HAVING  given  a  gracious  audience  to  the  ambassadors,  he  stayed 
waiting  for  HephaBstion  and  Artabazus,  who  having  afterwards  joined 
liim,  he  came  into  the  country  called  Bazaria.  Of  the  riches  of  the 
barhariafis  in  those  places,  there  can  be  no  greater  argum en  1,  than 
the  multitude  of  stately  wild  beasts  that  range  in  large  woods  and 
forests  in  that  country.  The  frequent  spacious  woods  pleasantly 
watered  with  many  refreshing  springs.  They  are  walled  round,  ia 
which  are  built  towers  for  stands  to  view  the  hunting  of  the  beasts. 
One  of  these  chases  had  remained  free  and  untouched  for  the  space 
of  four  generations,  which  Alexander  entering  with  his  army,  be 
commanded  the  game  in  all  parts  to  be  rouzed;  amongst  whicfa^ 
when  a  lion  of  a  vast  bigness  set  upon  the  king,  Lysimachus^  who 
was  afterwards  king*^  happening  to  be  next  to  Alexander^  offered  t# 

*  Of  Thrtce.        ^  — ^ 


670  THE  SUPPLBMBMT  TO 

make  at  the  beast  with  his  huDtiogspear,  the  king  pat  him  bf^  wd. 
bid  him  be  gone,  addiog  that  the  lion  might  be  killed  bjr  himielf  m 
well  as  by  Lysimachus.    This  Lysimachus  had  before,  ia  m  himtiBf 
in  Syria,  killed  an  ei^ceediog  great  lion  with  bis  own  hand,  bat  bt 
bad  been  even  at  the  point  of  deAth^  his  left  shoulder  haviog  been, 
in  that  encounter,  rent  and  torn  even  to  the  very  bone.    Hie  1ua§, 
twitting  him  with  tliis,  shewed  more  valour  afterwards  in  action  Aan 
be  did  before  in  this  expression ;  for  he  not  only  stood  the  ^east^  hat 
killed  him  at  one  blow.    The  story  that  was  foo\ish\y  sprmi  abnial, 
that  the  king  gave  up  Lysimachus  to  be  devoored  fagr  n  lion,  foss^  I 
believe,  f^pm  this  accident  before  related^  but  the  BfacedoniaaByi 
though  the  king  was  thus  happily  delivered^  yet  accoidiqg  lo  lk» 
custom  of  their  country,  established  a  decree,  that  he  ahoold  aot 
bunt  on  foot  without  a  guard  of  hb  captains  and  friends.    The  Uflf 
having  killed  four  thousand  brave  wild  beaits,  U9^t^  with  1 
Army  in  the  forest. 


SUP.  VIIL 

jflexcmder's  qffince  agaimt  Bacchus,  andhu  murdar  mf 
his  ru/7«— ^rriauus,  lib,  iv, 

TO  declare  in  this  place  the  death  of  Clitus,  and  the  fool  aet  ef 
Alexnnder  in  that  matter,  though  it  happened  some  little  tpie  aftcfji 
yet  1  judge  it  not  altogether  out  of  couw.  The  Maeedoniana,  it  is 
said,  have  a  certain  day  sacred  to  Bacchus,  add  Alexander  was  an- 
customed  to  sacrifice  to  Bacchus  every  year  upon  that  day;  but  at 
that  time  he  neglected  Bacchus,  and  sacrificed.toOtttor  »nd  PoUux; 
and  from  that  time  he  appointed  sacrifice  to  them,  with  f£it.%ting  al-* 
ways  at  that  day.  And  whereas,  now  the  company  bad  heeci  a  con- 
siderable time  quaffing  and  carouzing,  (for  Alexander  bad  now  I<^m- 
ed  to  imitate  the  Barbarians  in  his  cups,}  and  all  wrrc  heated  nrith 
wine,  a  discourse  happened  concerning  the  Dioscuri^,  bow  to  it* 
rive  their  original  from  Jupiter,  and  set  aside  that  of  Tindarus^  uave 
who  were  present  to  flatter  the  king,  which  sort  of  creatures  are 
ever  pernicious  both  to  the  persons  and  concerns  of  kiof^s,  aad  ^re 
ever  at  hand,  delivered  their  judgment  t»«t  CMinr  «nit  PoUoit  wtrc 
not  in  the  least  respeist  to  be  compared  ^d  hta  biiTa 

*  Cattoraad]  '      :   '    •- 


■  ■'    "■  ■  ■  ^'It. 


and  noble  actions:  others  in  their  cups  did  not  spare  Hercules  him- 
self, but  said  that  envy  was  the  cause  that  debarred  mortals  frooi 
the  honours  that  were  due  to  them  from  those  among  Whom  they 
conversed.  But  Clitus  who  ever  heretofore  hated  Alexander's  imi- 
tation of  the  manners  of  the  barbarians,  and  the  discourses  of  hii 
flatterers,  having  now  his  spirits  something  raised  with  wine,  was 
•  not  able  to  bear  tiiose  contempts  cast  upon  the  gods,  nor  that  by  an-^ 
dervaluing  those  acts  of  the  ancient  heroes,  so  thankless  a  piece  of 
service  should  be  paid  to  the  king.  And  declared  that  Alexander 
had  neither  done  such  wonderful  things  as  they  cried  him  up  for^ 
neither  did  he  do  any  of  them  himself  alone,  but  the  praise  of  a 
great  number  of  them  was  due  to  the  valour  of  the  Macedbnians. 
But  Alexander  was  much  enraged  at  these  words  of  Clitus;  neithert 
indeed,  can  T  commend  him  in  what  he  said,  for  I  am  of  opinion  it 
had  been  much  more  prudent  for  him  in  this  time  of  carouzing  to 
have  held  his  peace,  as  well  as  to  forbear  joining  with  others  in  this 
sordid  vice  of  flattery :  and  whereas  some  called  to  mind  the  acts  of 
Philip,  and  did  all  they  could  most  unjustly  to  bear  down  and  make 
slight  of  all  he  did  as  nothing  at  all  memorable^  in  the  mean  time 
caressing  and  extolling  of  Alexander,  Clitus  now  not  himself^  began 
to  advance  the  actions  of  Philip,  and  vilify  Alexander  and  his  achiev<^ 
ments:  and  cast  it  in  the  kings  teeth,  now  raging  like  a  madman, 
amongst  other  things,  how  he  had  at  the  river  Granicus,  in  the 
charge,  in  the  horse  engagement  preserved  him,  and  impudently 
stretching  out  his  right  hand,  cried  out—'^  This  hand^  O  Alexander, 
preserved  thy  life  in  that  battle:*'  Alexander  not  being  able  longer 
to  endure  the  unbridled  passion  of  Clitus,  or  his  base  language,  or 
Lis  reproaches  cast  upon  him,  in  a  rage  leaped  out  towards  hkn,  but 
was  held  back  by  them  that  were  round  about  him;  on  the  other 
hand  Clitus  let  fly  all  the  reproachful  words  he  could  devise,  sur- 
passing all  bounds.  The  king  with  a  loud  voice  called  out  for  the 
Argyraspides,  and  no  man  regarding  him,  he  cried  out  again  that  he 
was  now  in  the  same  condition  Darius  was  in,  when  he  was  seized 
and  led  away  by  Bessus  and  his  accomplices,  and  tliat  there  was  no- 
thing left  him  but  the  name  of  a  king.  His  friends  then  could  not 
hold  him  any  longer,  but  springing  from  them,  some  say  he  snatch- 
ed a  lance  out  of  the  hands  of  one  of  his  guards,  and  with  that  run 
Clitus  through,  and  killed  him;  others  report  it  was  with  a  sarissa 
delivered  to  him  by  one  of  the  guard;  Aristobulus  gives  no  account 
when  this  mad  fit  of  Alexander's  arose;  but  says  all  the  fault  was 
wholly  in  Clitus ;  for  that  when  Alexander  in  a  rage  rushed  up  and 
made  at  him  to  kill  him,  he  at  a  back  door  shifted  out  of  the  way, 
and  got  quite  out  of  the  trendies  into  the  fort  to  Ptolemy  the  si«i.of 


6/8  tOB  SUFPLBitBIlT  M 

aoBBtttta 


I«gii8,  a  squire  of  the  body,  ftt  ooold  not  eobluii  hiffuwlff  IM 
innst  needs  come  beck  again}  and  ligbtingopon  AiesaBdcrwbsn || 
was  calling  oat  for  Clitas.^^  Here  is  Clitus,  Alenoder/^  sndhn 
li|N>n  wUeh  the  king  ran  him  iltlroiigh  with  a  sarissa:  aa  I  ranaotm 
greatly  blame  Clitos  for  bis  insolence  to  the  lungt  so  I  am  tnmUsA 
tut  Aleiander  on  the  other  side,  becniise  at  that  time  he  tBgrnnA 
hiflsself  as  goilty  of  two  vices  together^  anger  and  drankenncss;  li 
he  Ofertaken  with  either  of  wfaicbf  did  not  in  the  least  beeoBM  %^, 
barman*    Bat  yet  again  I  mnst  praise  Aleiander  upon  aiiothtfra^ 
ooont,  that  presently  he  repented  of  the  fool  ael  he  had  -""*mpillrfi 
For  some  who  write  of  the  aifidrs  of  Aleiander^  aay^  that  heiH 
die  end  of  the  spear  against  the  wall,  and  attempted  t»  nui  hiwsflf 
npon  the  poin^  because  his  life  seemed  hatefial  to  hinS|  haijtg 
through  his  drankenness  destroyed  his  friend«    Bot  many  wrifsm^l 
not  mention  tbis«    Bot  when  he  was  upon  his  bed  he  lay  lamsalts^, 
calling  and  repeatinf  still  the  name  of  ClitiAu    Ijanieea^  the  dii|^ 
ter  of  Dropidus,  who  had  bronght  op  Aleaander>  received  finni  him 
now  he  was  a  man,  a  large  reward  for  his  edueatiom  a)i^  hsdlsst 
two  sons  in  the  war,  fighting  for  the  king,  and  had  her  hipther  now 
hilled  by  his  own  hand:  he  cried  out  he  was  the  mardmcrel  hip 
friends,  and  would  neither  eat  nor  drink  for  three  daya  spada,  flor 
take  any  care  of  himself  what  became  of  him.    Some  of  Btcdwe'e 
priests  told  him  that  these  misfortunes  befel  him  beeaose  ht  )mA 
neglected  to  sacrifice  to  Bacchus*    His  friends  had  much  ado  to  per- 
suade him  to  eat  or  drink  aqy  thing  to  refresh  him.     But  at  last  he 
sacrificed  to  Bacchus;  siuce  it  was  not  displeasing  to  him  that  that 
misfortune  should  be  imputed  rather  to  the  anger  of  the  god,  than 
to  his  own  wickedness. 


SUR  IX. 

0/  the  death  of  CkUUthetus.^^AiritLU^^  lib,  it« 

AS  to  Ae  adoration  of  Alexander,  how  Calisthenes  opposed  him,  ii4 
what  relates  to  it,  it  is  reported,  that  it  was  agreeid  between  Alc»r 
ander  and  the  sophisters,  and  some  of  the  nobility  of  theMedesaod 
Persians  that  attended  upon  him,  that  in  the  time  of  their  feasthig 
a  discourse  should  be  started  concerning  this  matter.  Anaaarchns 
was  the  persou  that  begaa,  and  declared,  that  Alexander  bad  mons 


DioDoRUS  sicuLirs,  673 


right  to  be  accounted  a  god^  than  either  Bacchus  or  Hercates,  not 
duly  for  the  greatoess  of  his  noble  acttons^  but  because  Bacchus  was 
a  Theban,  a  meer  stranger,  having  no  comTnunicatio^  with  the 
Macedonians;  and  Hercules  was  of  Argos,  as  much  a  stranger  as 
the  other,  save  that  Alexander  was  of  the  same  stoek,  being  from  the 
Heradidffi;  and  it  is  far  more  just  and  equal  for  the  Macedoni- 
ans to  adore  their  own  king  with  divine  honours  than  any  other.  And 
on  doubt,  he  said,  was  to  be  made  but  they  would  pay  to  him  divine 
honours  when  he  was  dead;  therefore  it  b  much  better  to  adore  him 
as  a  god  while  he  was  alive,  than  when  he  was  dead,  when  their  di- 
vine worship  of  him  would  be  of  no  advantage  to  him.  When  th^ae 
and  other  things  to  the  same  purpose  were  said  by  Anaxarchu^; 
those  who  were  of  the  same  pack  praised  all  that  was  spoken,  an4 
declared  they  would  forthwith  adore*  him:  but  many  of  the  Mace^ 
donians,  who  condemned  Anaxarchua's  speech,  held  their  peace. 

But  Callisthenes  in  the  midst  of  the  silence  spoke  thus: 

^^  Indeed,  Anaxarchus,  I  count  not  Alexander  unworthy  of  any 
honour,  how  great  seever  it  be,  that  is  fit  to  be  ascribed  to  men;  hut 
there  are  prescribed  differences  amongst  men  between  divine  and 
human  honours,  amongst  many  others  in  the  building  of  tenqples  ^ 
and  erecting  of  statues;  for  to  the  gods  we  consecrate  oratories^  and 
offer  sacrifices  and  drink  offerings:  to  the  gods  are  sung  hymns;  men 
are  praised  but  not  adored :  kisses  in  salutations  are  given  to  men^ 
but  the  gods  are  placed  on  high,  and  it  is  not  lawful  to  touch  th^m; 
atod  therefore  they  are  worshipped  with  adoration.  Solemn  times  of 
dancings  are  performed  to  the  gods,  and  Psans  sung  to  them.  Nei« 
ther  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  insomuch  as  the  honours  given  to  the 
gods  are  various ;  some  sort  of  honours  given  to  one,  and  others  to 
another,  especially  those  honours  of  later  times.  Nay,  those  honours 
given  to  some  of  the  heroes  differ  from  divine  honours.  It  is  not 
therefore  fit  to  confound  thdse  things,  nor  to  advance  men  above 
themselves  and  all  mankind  be^des,  and  to  degrade  the  gods,  by 
worshiping  them  with  the  same  worship  wherewith  we  adore  men. 
Alexander  himself  would  not  suffer  any  private  man  to  usurp  the  re« 
gal  dignity  and  honours  due  to  himself,  though  he  gained  them  by 
the  unjust  suffrages  of  the  people:  much  more  justly  therefore  may 
the  gods  be  angry  if  any  mortal  man  assume  to  himself  divine  ho* 
nours,  or  accept  them  from  others.  However,  let  Alexander  be  es- 
teemed, as  in  truth  he  is,  by  many  degrees  the  most  valiant  of  them 
that  are  valiant,  the  greatest  king  amongst  all  other  kings,  and 
amongst  generals  the  most  worthy  to  command.  But  as  for  thee, 
naxarclias,  it  is  thy  du  ty  above  any  other  to  instruct  Aletander  in 
these  things  that  have  been  spoken,  and  to  deter  h|m  ftom  the  con* 
*  Tbif  adoration  wu  by  pibatlTatioiu 

Vol.2.  No«48«  RaHn 


mt 


6^4  THE  SUPPLEMEirr  TO 


trary;  for  thy  conversation  he  daily  makes  ose  of,  in  order  to  im* 
prove  in  wisdom  and  learning.  Neither  does  it  become  thee  to  be  the 
beginner  of  this  discourse,  but  rather  to  remember  that  thoa  art 
not  advising  Cambyses  or  Xerxes,  but  the  son  of  Philip,  descended 
from  Hercules  and  Achilles,  whose  ancestors^aroe  out  of  Argos  into 
Macedonia^  and  maintained  their  empire  not  by  arbitrary  power,  but 
by  ruling  according  to  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  Macedonians. 
But  divine  honours  were  not  conferred  upon  Hercules  himself  by 
the  Grecians  while  he  was  living,  nay,  nor  when  he  was  dead,  before 
the  oracle  at  Dt^lphos  commanded  t\^  he  should  be  worshipped  as  a 
god.  But  if  there  be  but  few  that  are  in  the  country  of  the  barba* 
rians,  we  ought  to  entertain  the  same  sentiments  with  them.  And 
I  earnestly  entreat  thee,  Alexander^  to  remember  Greece,  for  whose 
sake  this  expedition  was  undertaken  by  thee,  in  order  to  add  Asia  to 
Greece:  And  now  consider  whether,  when  yon  return  thither,  you 
can  be  able  to  compel  the  free  people  of  Greece  to  adore  you  as  a 
god,  or,  excepting  them  of  Greece,  you  can  impose  this  duhonoor 
and  slavery  upon  the  Macedonians  only,  or  whether  it  be  fit  that 
quite  diflerent  honours  be  there  allowed  you,  since  the  Grecians 
confer  only  those  that  are  human,  according  to  the  custom  and  man* 
ner  of  the  Greeks,  when  at  the  same  time  only  die  barbarians  wor* 
ship  you  as  a  god  after  the  manner  of  the  barbarians.  But  if  it  be 
objected,  that  Cyrus,  son  of  Cambyses,  was  the  first  of  all  mortal 
men  that  was  adored  by  men  as  a  god,  and  that  since  that  time  this 
adoration  has  continued  amongst  the  Medes  and  Persians;  yet  yon 
arc  to  consider  how  his  pride  was  curbed  by  the  Scythians,  a  poor 
and  indigent  people.  And  how  other  Scythians  again  reduced  Dih 
rius  to  more  sober  thoughts  of  himself,  and  the  Athenians  snd  Li* 
cedaemouians,  Xerxes;  and  Clearchus  and  Xenophon,  Artaxenes, 
with  only  ten  thousand  men ;  and  Darius  now  overcome  by  Alexan- 
der, when  at  that  time  no  divine  honours  were  decreed  to  him." 

When  Callisthenes  had  spoken  these,  and  other  things  to  the  same 
purpose,  Alexander  took  it  very  heiuously;  but  what  he  said  wsi 
very  grateful  and  acceptable  to  the  Macedonians;  which  being 
known,  Alexander  sent  some  to  urge  the  Macedonians  to  remember 
tlie  adoration  of  the  king;  upon  which  there  being  a  great  sileoee, 
those  among  tho  Persians  that  were  most  eminent  for  birtb^  and  ho- 
nourable forage,  all  rose  up  together,  and  adored*  him.  But  Leo* 
iiatus,  one  of  Alexander's  friends,  when  he  saw  one  of  the  Pcnnm 
sordidly  prostrating  himself,  he  fell  a-laughing  at  the  poor  and  men 
gesture  of  the  Persian;  at  which  Alexander  was  at  first  vciyas; 
gry,  but  was  afterwards  pacified.  Some  write,  that  the  king  dnnk 
in  a  golden  bowl  to  them  with  whom  he  had  made  the  i 
*  Pronratcd  tbenselYti. 


D10D0RU9  STCUtUJ* 


adore  him  in  a  ring  as  they  sat,  and  ibat  the  first  that  pletlpcd  hiTU, 
presently  arose  and  adored  him,  and  then  kissed  hinij  and  50  in  order 
the  rest  did  the  same^  one  after  anotherp  But  when  it  came  to  Cal- 
listhenes's  turn,  he  rose  up,  and  drank  off  the  bowl,  and  when  he 
had  done,  (without  adoring  him,)  drew  near  to  the  kin^  to  kiss  him. 
Alexander  was  then  accidenlly  discoursing  with  Hcphicstion,  and 
therefore  did  not  mind  whether  he  omitted  the  adoration  or  not.  But 
Demetrius  the  son  of  Pythonax,  one  of  Alexander's  friends,  observ* 
ing  when  Callisthenes  approached  to  kiss  Alexander,  informed  him 
that  Callisthenes  had  not  adored  him,  upon  which  the  king  turned 
away  from  him;  and  therefore  Callisthenes said^  he  must  now  be  dis- 
carded with  the  loss  of  a  kiss. 

I  cannot  indeed  praise  either  any  of  these  things  that  tended  to 
Alexander's  dishonour,  or  the  moroseness  of  Callisthenes ;  for  I  con- 
ceive it  had  been  enough  for  him  modestly  to  have  carried  himself^ 
and  for  him  who  would  serve  the  king,  to  promote  his  affairs  lo  the 
best  advantage,  as  far  as  ever  he  was  able:  and  therefore  I  am  of  opi- 
nion, that  Callisthenes  was  not  without  just  cause  hated  by  Alexander 
by  reason  of  the  unseasonable  liberty  of  his  speech  and  foolish  male- 
pertness.  For  which  reason,  I  believe,  credit  was  more  easily  given 
afterwards  to  his  accusers,  by  whom  he  was  charged  to  be  in  the  con- 
spiracy with  the  pages  against  the  king's  life,  and  to  others  who  af- 
firmed that  they  were  put  on  to  it  by  him. 

The  conspiracy  was  thus:  there  was  an  order  formerly  made  by 
Philip,  that  from  among  the  sons  of  the  Macedonian  nobility,  when 
they  grew  up  to  men's  estate,  choice  should  be  made  of  some,  from 
time  to  time,  to  attend  upon  the  king,  both  to  be  squires  of  his  body, 
and  gentlemen  of  his  bedchamber:  these  youths,  when  the  king  was 
about  to  ride,  received  the  horses  from  the  querries,  and  led  them  to 
the  king,  and  after  the  Persian  manner  helped  him  to  mount,  aind 
waited  upon  him  whenever  he  went  forth  a-hunting:  among  these^ 
there  was  one  Hermolaus,  the  son  of  Sopolides,  who  studied  philo- 
sophy, and  was  scholar  to  Callisthenes.  The  report  is,  that  a  wild 
boar  in  the  course  of  hunting  meeting  Alexander,  this  Hermolaus 
prevented  the  king,  who  was  aiming  at  him,  and  killed  the  boar.  The 
king  hereupon  being  in  a  rage  to  have  the  opportunity  of  killing  the 
boar  snatched  out  of  his  hand,  commanded  that  the  youth  should  be 
whipped  in  the  presence  of  all  the  other  pages,  and  have  his  horse 
taken  from  him:  which  disgrace  he  not  being  able  to  bear,  opened 
his  mind  to  Sostrates,  the  son  of  Amyntas,  one  of  his  companions^ 
of  the  same  quality,  and  his  bosom  friend,  and  declared  to  him  that 
his  life  would  be  but  a  burthen  to  him,  unless  he  could  revenge  the 
injury  done  him  upon  Alexander;  and  it  was  no  difficak  matter  ta 
persuade  Sostrates,  being  his  special  fritad^  to  join  with  him  in  this 


M 


676  tun  iUPPLBBOHT  W 


traitoious  ooospinicy.    Antipater  likewise,  die  won  of  AMlqModom, 
lord  lieutenant  of  Syria,  Epimenes  the  son  of  Aneoa,  and  And* 
elet  the  son  of  Theocritus,  together  with  Philotas,  the  son  of  Gv^ 
sides  the  Thracian,  were  all  brought  in  by  him  to  join  in  the  sane 
treason.    The  night  that  it  came  to  Antipater's  turn  to  wait  in  the 
bedchamber,  was  the  time  pitched  upon  to  lill  Alexander  when  he 
was  asleep.    But  it  happened,  as  some  write,  tliat  Alexander  thsi 
very  night  sat  up  drinking  till  morning.    But  Aristobalns  aays»  thit 
a  certain  woman  of  Syria,  pretending  to  be  divinely  inspired,  still 
followed  Alexander  from  place  to  place,  whom  Alexander  and  his 
courtiers  at  first  ridiculed;  but  when  what  she  had  foretold  was  still 
verified  by  the  event,  slie  was  no  longer  despised  by  Alexander,  bat 
was  freely  admitted  to  the  king  both  by  night  and  by  day,  and  often 
was  in  his  bcdcliamber  when  he  was  asleep.     It  is  said  at  that  time 
this  prophetess  by  chance  met  the  king  as  he  came  from  his  caps, 
and  entreated  him  to  return  to  his  companions,  and  spend  the  whole 
night  in  drinking.    Alexander  judging  U  might  be  a  divine  warning, 
returned,  and  by  that  means  disappointed  the  traitorous  designs  of 
the  pages. 

The  next  day,  Epimenes  the  son  of  Arseus,  one  of  the  conspim- 
tors,  discovered  the  whole  mutter  to  his  friend  Carides,  the  son  of 
Menandcr,  Carides  to  Eurylochus,  the  brother  to  Epimenes;  Euy- 
lochus  going  into  Alexander's  tent,  revealed  all  to  Ptolemy  the  son 
of  I^gus,  the  squire  of  the  king's  body,  and  he  to  Alexander,  who 
forthwith  ordered  all  that  Eurylochus  had  named  to  be  seiaed) 
^'ho  being  apprehended,  upon  their  examination  confessed  dmr 
treason,  and  discovered  some  others. 

Aristobulus  indeed  says,  tli.it  they  declared  Callisthenes  stirred  thm 
up  to  undertake  this  piece  of  villany,  which  Ptolemy  likewise  cob« 
firms :  but  there  are  some  others  that  give  anotiier  account  of  this 
matter,  viz.  That  Alexander  perfectly  hated  Callisthenes,  and  be- 
cause there  was  a  great  intimacy  between  him  and  Hennolaos,  he 
was  easily  wrought  upon  by  the  informers  to  suspect  Callisthenei. 

Some  likewise  say,  that  Hermolaus  being  brought  before  the  Mi^ 
cedonians,  confessed  that  he  himself  plotted  the  treason,  nod  thuk 
was  not  in  the  power  of  any  free-born  man  to  endure  the 
and  (lUhonour  Alexander  had  brought  upon  him;  and  then  ] 
up  all  that  Alexander  in  that  kind  had  done;  to  wit,  the  UDJa 
of  Philotas,  and  with  far  more  Injustice  his  putting  to  death 
nio,  Philotas 's  faiher,  and  the  rest  that  were  then  killed;  thei 
of  Clitus  through  his  drunkenness,  his  assuming  the  habit  of  Ae 
Medes,  the  edict  for  his  adoration,  not  yet  recalled,  haa  cuomiag 
and  drunken  doxing;  which  vile  courses  he  not  being  able  telte  li 
endure,  was  earnest  to  regain  liberty  both  for  himself  aal  d»  iMtil 


MODORUS  8ICULUS.  ,  Bff" 


the  Macedonians.  Hereupon  Hermolaus  and  the  reist  thM  were 
seized  were  stoned  to  death  by  the  by-standers.  But  Ariatobultw 
aiys,  that  Callisthenes  was  carried  about  with  the  army  in  chains^  and 
died.  Ptolemy  says  he  was  first  racked,  and  afterwards  hanged,  o 
tlkat  these  authors,  though  of  great  credit  and  repute,  and  who  were 
themselves  present  in  the  army,  and  attending  upon  Alexander  at 
the  very  time  when  these  things  were  acted,  yet  cannot  agree  abovt 
a  matter  whereof  there  could  be  no  doubt  at  all  at  the  time  when  h 
was  done. 


SUP.  X. 

The  king*s  expedition  against  the  Nauticans,  or  NoMvans;  and 

the  destructtom  of  many  of  his  army  by  a  grea4  mattm 

Curtius,  lib.  viii.  c.  4. 

THESE  things  being  thus  set  in  order,  the  third  moutli  he  marched* 
out  of  his  wiuter-quarters  towards  a  country  called  Gabazat-    The 
first  day  he  had  an  easy  march;  the  next  day  was  not  as  yt.t  stormy 
or  gloomy,  but  something  darker  than  the  day  before,  not  without 
a^me  threateaing  of  a  storm  at  hand.    The  third  dny  the  whole 
heavens  flashed  with  lightning,  sometimes  light,  then  presently  dark 
wiiich  not  only  amazed  the  eyes,  but  terrified  the  hearts  of  the  dis- 
tracted army.     The  air  resounded  with  continual  thunder^  and  thuD<- 
derbolts  up  and  down  seemed  to  be  shot  from  the  clouds;  the  army, 
even  struck  deaf  with  the  thunder,  as  men  astonisi  id,  dui-st  nei- 
ther march  nor  stand  still.    Then  on  a  sudden  fell  down  a  storm  of 
hail  like  a  violent  torrent.    At  first  they  covered  themselves  with 
their  shields,  but  presently  their  benumbed  and  frozen  hands  let  fall 
their  arms,  neither  did  they  know  towards  what  place  or  country  to 
move  themselves,  the  violence  of  the  storm  being  greater  tlmn  could 
possibly  be  avoided,  turn  themselves  which  way  soever  they  would. 
Tiieir  ranks  and  order  therefore  being  broke,  they  wandered  through 
the  woodj  in  parties  as  they  could;  and  many  fainting  rather  with 
fear  than  through  weariness,  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  although. 
the  fierceness  of  the  cold  had  frozen  the  hail;  others  leaned  them- 
selves to  the  bodies  of  trees,  which  was  to  many  both  a  support  and 
defence.     Neither  were  they  deceived  in  choosing  out  a  place  to  die 
in,  when  their  natural  heat,  overcome  by  the  cold,  left  them  im- 
moveable, 

Cut  it  was  a  grateful  sloth  to  them  that  were  tired  out,  neither  did 

*  From  >'aura,  pr  Ntutica.  t  Ita  So^diana*  *  Or  foic«L 


1 

1 
4 


*(578 


THE  SUPPLEMENT  TO 


they  count  it  irksome  to  find  rest  by  death ;  for  the  eoM  was  not  odW 
intense,  but  also  not  likely  to  abate,  and  the  dark  shades  of  the 
wood^  besides  the  storm,  which  was  as  the  night,  suppressed  and 
kept  out  the  light,  that  common  comfort  and  refreshment;  The 
king  only  was  patient  under  this  sad  misfortune,  and  walked  round 
his  camp,  and  brought  together  the  dispersed,  and  lifted  up  them 
that  were  down,  shewing  them  the  smoke  that  came  from  chiraneys 
afar  off,  advising  every  one  to  take  the  nighest  refuge.  Neither  did 
any  thing  conduce  more  to  their  safety,  than  to  see  the  king,  who 
bad  taken  more  pains  than  they,  yet  most  unwearied  of  any,  and 
therefore  were  ashamed  to  leave  him.  But  necessity,  more  forcibly 
than  reason  in  their  distresses,  found  out  a  remedy  for  the  cold :  for 
hewing  down  the  trees  with  their  axes,  they  set  the  heaps  of  wood  up 
and  down  on  fire,  so  that  you  would  have  thought  all  the  wood  had 
been  in  a  flame,  and  scarce  any  place  left  for  the  army  to  lodge.  This 
heat  presently  enlivened  their  benumbed  limbs,  and  by  degrees  their 
spirits,  which  the  cold  had  even  closed  up,  began  freely  to  pass. 
Some  were  entertained  in  the  houses  of  the  barbarians  which  were 
hid  from  them  in  the  late  wood ;  but  now  their  necessity  had  disco- 
vered others  lodged  in  their  tents,  which  though  wet,  yet  were  more 
tolerable,  the  fury  of  the  storm  being  somewhat  abated.  This  un- 
happy accident  sweeped  away  a  thousand  soldiers,  and  other  mean 
attendants^  upon  the  camp.  It  is  reported,  that  some  were  found 
standing  at  the  side  of  the  trees,  and  seemed  not  only  as  if  they  ha^ 
been  alive,  but  as  if  they  had  been  discoursing  one  with  another  in 
the  same  posture  as  they  were  in  when  they  died% 


SUP.  XI. 


Haw  Alexander  falling  in  love  with  Roxana,  married  her^  miA 
induced  many  of  his  friends  to  marry  the  daughters  of  the 
chief  men  among  the  barbarians.,i.^Ati'mnus,  lib.  iv. 

ROXANA,  the  daugliterof  Oxyartes,  was  there*  likewise,  avirgia 
ripe  for  marriage,  whom  Alexander's  fellow-soldiers  judged  to  be 
the  most  beautiful  lady  of  all  Asia,  next  to  the  wife  of  Darius.  Upon 
sight  of  her  Alexander  fell  deeply  in  love,  yet  would  not  by  any 
means  use  her  dishonourably  as  a  captive;  neither  did  he  <<iMflin  to 

*  Scullioni,  lionie*bojt|  &c 

t  lu  ibc  rock<»JbcXbre  mcDtioaed^  in  Sogdiana  ;  but  Slrabo  mjh  it  waft  at  iht  ntjk  Vi 

Bacinm,    See  before. 


DK^DORUS  81CULU».  6fg 


take  her  for  his  wife;  which  act  of  Alexander,  I  conceive,  was  mors 
worthy  of  praise  than  reprehension.  And  as  for  Darius's  wife,  who 
was  esteemed  the  most  -beautiful  lady  of  all  Asia',  be  neither  was 
tainted  with  so  much  as  an  unlawful  desire  towards  her,  nor  did  he^ ' 
as  a  domineering  lord,  command  her  to  his  bed,  though  he  was  then 
in  the  heat  of  his  youth,  and  the  highest  pitch  of  worldly  prosperity) 
which  two  conditions  are  apt  greatly  to  provoke  men^to  be  very  inju-* 
rious  to  others:  but  he,  out  of  a  reverence  to  her  person,  spared 
her;  herein  evidencing  his  great  continency,  and  prompted  likewise 
thereunto  by  a  desire  of  bis  own  honour  and  reputation. 


SUP.  XII. 

His  breaking  into  IndlUy  and  his  putting  all  to  the  stvord  in  the 

Jirst  country  he  entered^  to  be  a  terror  to  the  rest. 

Arrianus,  lib.  iv. 

IN  the  middle  of  the  spring  Alexander  removed  with  his  army  out 
of  Bactria  towards  India,  and  left  Amyntas  there  with  three  thousand 
five  hundred  horse,  and  ten  thousand  foot.  Having  passed  the  Cau- 
casus, in  ten  days  he  came  to  Alexandria,  which  he  had  built  in  Pa- 
ropamisus  at  his  first  expedition  into  Bactria,  and  put  out  the  gover- 
nor there  for  his  bad  behaviour  in  the  place,  and  then  peopled  the  city 
with  more  inhabitants  out  of  the  neighbouring  countries,  and  such 
of  his  Macedonians  as  were  grown  unserviceable  for  the  war,  and 
made  Nicanor,  one  of  his  associates,  governor  of  the  city;  but  ap- 
pointed Tyriaspes  commander  of  the  whole  region  of  Paropamisus, 
and  of  all  that  territory  or  province  as  far  as  the  river  Cophas. 
Tl\ence  he  went  to  the  city  of  Nicaea,  and  there  offered  sacrifice  to 
Minerva,  and  then  marched  to  the  river  Cophas,  and  sending  a 
herald,  commanded  Taxiles  and  the  rest  of  the  governors  of  tht 
countries  lying  beyond  the  river  to  come  to  him.  Taxiles  and  other 
petty  princes  came  first  and  met  him,  bringing  him  large  presents, 
such  as  were  most  esteemed  in  India,  promising  likewise  to  send  him 
five-and-twenty  elephants.  He  there  divided  his  army,  and  sent 
HephsEstion  and  Perdiccas  into  the  country  called  Peucelaoijs,  to- 
wards the  river  Indus,  together  with  the  troops  of  Gorgias,  Clitus^ 
and  Meleager,  and  half  the  horse  of  the  Social  Band,  and  all  the  mer- 
cenary horse,  commanding  them  to  take  in  by  fair  means  or  foul  all 
the  towns  which  lay  in  their  way,  and  that  when  tlu*y  came  to  the 
bank  of  the  river  Indus,  they  should  prepare  all  things  that  were  ne- 
cessary to  pass  over.    And  with  them  wa£  sent  Taxiles  and  other 


n 


680  THE  SUPPLEMENT  TO 

commanders  of  those  pnrts,  to  put  ia  execiitioD,  when  they  came  to 
the  river  Indus^  what  Alexander  had  commanded. 

Astes,  the  governor  of  the  country  of  Peucelaotis,  oStriog  to  re- 
volt,  lost  both  himself  and  the  city  which  he  put  himself  into:  ftr 
Hephmstion  came  and  besieged  it,  and  after  thirty  dajrs  time  took  if, 
and,  killing  Astes,  n:ade  one  Sangttus  governor  of  it,  who  a  little  be- 
lore,  forsaking  Astes,  had  fled  over  to  Taxiles^  which  madeAlenader 
the  more  confidr  in  him  ever  after. 

'Alexander,  with  his  Ijand  of  silver  targeteers,  and  the  horse  of  hn 
fellow-cavaliers  that  went  not  with  Hephsestion,  and  the  troop  of 
horse  called  Asseteri,  together  with  his  archers,  Agrians,  and  bone- 
lancers,  marched  into  the  countries  of  the  Aspians,  Phyrseans,  and  Aio- 
sacans;  and,  going  on  his  way  to  the  river  Choaspes,  (which  was  for 
the  most  part  mountainous  and  rocky),  and  having  at  last  passed  that 
river,  he  commanded  Craterus  to  come  after  him  &ir  and  softly  with 
the  foot;  and  himself,  taking  with  him  the  whole  body  of  his  bone^ 
and  eight  hundred  Macedonian  foot-targeteers  on  borseback,  mardied 
away  at  a  great  rate,  because  he  heard  that  the  people  of  the  coontry 
were  fled,  some  to  the  mountains^  others  to  fenced  cities,  and  all  to 
make  head  against  him.     Having  attacked  the  first  of  these  ckies 
that  lay  in  his  way,  those  which  came  forth  to  oppose  him  he  voateA 
at  the  first  charge,  and  drove  them  back  into  the  town,  but  was  hioH 
self  wounded  with  a  dart  in  the  shoulder,  which  pierced  throagh  Us 
breast-plate;  but  the  wound  was  but  slight,  the  breast-plate  repelUiig 
the  force  of  the  dart.     Ptolemy  Lagus,  and  Leonatos,  were  likewise 
wounded.    Then  Alexander,  observing  what  part  of  the  wall  was 
fittest  to  pitch  upon  for  an  assault,  encamped  close  to  the  city,  just 
against  that  part.    The  n^xt  day,  early  in  the  morning,  the  Macei^ 
douians  took  the  outward  wall  with  little  difficulty,  for  the  city  wsi 
doubly  walled.     At  the  inner  wall  the  inhabitants  made  some  resist^ 
ance;  but  when  the  Macedonians  had  once  scaled  the  walls,  and  the 
townsmen  felt  the  arrows  showering  down  about  their  ears,  not  bei^g 
able  longer  to  endure,  the  soldiers  within  broke  out  of  tliegateSjSBd 
ran  every  man  his  way  to  the  mountains,  many  of  whom  the  Mace<i 
douiuns  killed  in  the  pursuit;  and  all  the  prisoners  (being  in  a  nfS 
because  the  king  was  wounded)  they  put  to  the  sword*     Many  es- 
caped to  the  mountains,  which  were  not  far  off  from  the  city, 
laid  the  city  level  with  the  ground,  he  marched  away  with  I 
to  Audaca,  another  city. 


MOOORU8  StCULUS.  681 


SUP.  XIII. 

kindneis  to  the  city  ofNyMaj  upon  the  account  of  hie  detceni 
frotn  Bacchus. ArriiDUSi  lib.  ir. 

it  reeion,  ioto  wliich  Aleiaoder  enteredi  lying  between  Um 
Coplias  and  Indus,  b  situated  Njta,  a  city  built  (as  is  rt* 
)  by  Dionysius*,  at  that  time  when  he  commanded  in  India, 
his  Dionysius  was,  and  when^  or  from  whence  he  brought  ia 
Hies  at^ainst  the  Indians,  I  cannot  conjecture:  wiiether  it  was 
leban  from  Tliebes,  or  he  from  Troolus  in  Lydia,  who  led  an 
rem  thence  against  the  Indians.  But,  though  he  |jasscd  into 
ny  warlike  nations,  at  that  time  altogetlier  unknown  to  the 
t,  yet  he  subdued  none  of  them  but  the  Indians.  Tliis  only  I 
isfied  in,  that  those  fables  which  the  antients  have  written  con- 
^  the  gods  are  not  too  curiously  to  be  pried  into:  for  such 
[s  as  do  not  otherwise  deserre  much  credit,  yet  when  they 
I  to  speak  of  the  gods,  they  seem  not  to  be  altogether  in* 
e. 

oon  as  Alexander  came  With  his  army  to  Nysa,  they  sent  Acn- 
he  chief  man  of  the  city  to  him,  with  thirty  others  of  the 
I  men  of  the  place,  entreating  him  to  leave  the  city  free  to 
d  Bacchus.  When  the  ambassadors  were  introduced  into  the 
pavilion,  and  saw  him  as  yet  dusty  with  his  march,  clad  in  all 
lour,  with  his  helmet  uixin  his  head,  and  his  Unce  in  his  haod^ 
d  at  the  sight  of  him,  they  fell  flat  upon  the  groand«  and  were 
a  long  time  together:  but  after  Alexander  had  commanded 
to  rise,  and  cheer  up,  Acuphis  thus  began .1^''  The  Nyscans 
t,  O  kin^,  that  in  reverence  to  Bacchus  you  would  leave  the 
tfc,  and  the  inhabitants  to  govern  by  their  own  laws:  for  Dio- 
I  after  lie  had  conquered  the  Indians,  and  was  about  to  return 
Grecian  sea,  built  this  city  for  those  soldiers  who  were  unser- 
le  for  war,  (being  of  Bacchiu's  family),  as  a  perpettul  mouu- 
to  posterity  of  his  expedition  and  victoryi  as  your  majesty  has 
Alexandria  at  mount  Caucasus,  and  another  in  Egypt,  and  many 
» some  finished,  and  others  now  in  building,  having  now  per- 
1  much  more  than  our  Dionysius  did:  and  he  called  the  city 
from  his  nurse  so  named,  and  the  country  NyssEui;  and  the 
jiin  which  hangs  over  the  city  he  was  pleased  to  call  Meros, 
I  is  a  thigh),  because,  according  to  the  fables,  be  was  cberisbrd 
iter's  thigh.  Since  that  time  we  have  dwelt  in  Nysa  as  a  free 
ind  have  lived  at  ease  under  the  use  of  our  own  laws.    And 

*  Btcdiuf. 
L.  2.  Ho.  48.  w^% 


6R2  the  supplement  to 


that  this  place  was  built  by  Bacchus,  this  one  thing  may  be  a  de- 
monstration  ^That  ivy  grows  no  where  in  India,  but  in  this  city." 

This  speech  of  Acuphis  was  very  pleasing  to  Alexander;  for  he  had 
a  great  desire  that  those  things  should  be  believed  which  were  re- 
lated concerning  Bacchus*s  peregrination,  and  would  have  none  to 
doubt  but  that  Nysa  was  built  by  Bacchus,  because  that  he  himself 
was  now  come  as  far  as  Bacchus  ever  came,  and  was  still  desirous  to 
go  farther  than  he  ever  did;  and  he  was  of  opinion  that  the  Mace- 
donians, out  of  emulation  to  the  acts  of  Bacchus,  would  willingly 
5vith  himself  undergo  further  toils  and  labours.     He  granted  there- 
fore liberty  to  the  Nysa?ans,  and  that  they  should  govern  according 
to  their  own  laws.     And  when  he  understood  what  their  laws  were, 
and  how  they  were  under  the  govcrnmcMit  of  an  arils tocracy,  he  com- 
mended tlu'ir  constitution,  and  commanded  them  to  furnish  him  with 
three  hundred  horsemen,  and  send  him  a  hundred  of  those  that  were 
of  the  aristocracy,  (who  were  three  hundred  in  all),  such  as  he  wooU 
choose.     Acuphis  was  one  of  the  number  of  them  that  were  picked 
out,  whom  the  king  had  made  governor  of  the  whole  province  of 
Nysfjea.     It  IS  reportec]  that  Acuphis  smiled  at  these  demands,  and 
that  Alexander  asking  him  why  he  laughed,  Acuphis  answered.. 
*'  How  is  it  possible,  O  king,  for  the  city  to  be  well  governed,  when 
it  is  stripped  of  a  hundred  good  men  all  at  once?  But  if  your  majesty 
have  a  kindness  for  the  city,  be  pleased  to  accept  of  three  hundred 
horsemen,  (and  more,  if  you  think  fit);  but,  as  for  a  hundred  of  the 
best  men  of  the  city,  which  you  desire,  be  pleased  to  be  content  with 
two  hundred  of  the  worst,  that  whensoever  you  return  I)ither  a^in, 
you  may  find  that  the  city  h.as  maintained  and  kept  up  her  antieot 
state  and  grandeur."     With  these  words  (because  he  judged  them 
prudently  spokon)  Alexander  was  persuaded,  and  commanded  only 
tiie  three  hundrod  horsemen  to  be  sent  him ;  and,  as  for  the  three  hun- 
dred of  the  chief  of  the  city,  he  neither  desired  them,  nor  any  others 
in  their  stead.     J^ut  Acuphis's  son,  and  nephew  by  his  sister,  were 
sent  to  Alex:iniU-r. 

Afterwards  AlexandtM-  had  a  longing  desire  to  sec  that  city.  In  which 
the  Nvsieans  boast  tliat  ijiere  are  some  monuments  ofDionysius;  aud 
to  go  likewise,  accompanied  by  some  horse  of  his  friends,  and  a  re- 
giment of  foot,  to  the  moiititain  Meros,  that  he  might  see  the  hill 
grown  Over  with  ivy  and  laare!,  and  t!ic  sliady  groves,  which  abounded 
with  nil  son'z  of  wild  ])cm  ts.  The  ivy  was  a  very  pleasant  sight  to 
the  Macc(|.nia:^s,  »iot  iiavii;::^  si-cn  any  for  a  long  time;  for  India 
bears  no  ivy,  neitlur  those  places  wlicre  vines  grow.  Of  the  ivy  tbct 
won;  garlaiKls  on  t!;cir  hiMcis,  singing  praise  to  Bacchus,  with  all  hb 
titles  and  appoU:ifions.  Alexander  there  sacrificed  toBacchns^  and 
l<;a»ted  with  hi^  fiicndb. 


P10D0RU8  $icyj(.v^  AlA 


SUP.  XIV. 

Hmvj  having  taken  a  strong  city  called  MassagOy  he  put  to  the  sword 

all  t/ie  mercenary  soldiers  that  had  fought  valiantfy. 

Arriainus^  lib.  iv. 

WHEN  the  barbarians  heard  of  Alexander's  coming,  they  durst  not 
abide  him  in  a  body,  but  broke  up  their  army,  and  dispersed  them- 
selves, every  one  as  they  could,  into  several  c^tiesj  purposing  there  to 
stand  upon  their  guard. 

Alexander  marched  first  with  his  army  to  Massaga^,  the  greatest 
city  of  that  countryf.  Approaching  therefore  with  bis  aripy  close  tp 
the  city,  the  barbarians  (having  got  >nto  the  town  for  their  assistance 
seven  thousand  mercenary  Indiums  noui  tiiu  i[ii>4.i  ^win^  ui  IiiJIa) 
made  a  fierce  sally  upon  the  Macedonians  as  lliey  lay  encamped. 
Alexander,  perceiving  that  the  fight  was  likely  to  be  under  the  city 
walls,  designed  to  draw  off  the  enemy  to  a  faviiicr  distance,  lest  when 
they  fled  (which  he  clearly  foresaw  tboy  would)  they  might  with  ease 
(being  so  very  near)  get  into  the  town,  and  so  escape:  perceivtfig 
therefore  the  barbarians  pouring  out  upon  tbem,  he  forthv^ith  com- 
manded his  Macedonians  to  wheel  ^bout,  and  make  to  a  hill  about 
seven  furlongs  distant  from  the  river  Curscus,  where  he  had  purposed 
to  encamp.  The  enemy  hereupon  emboldened,  (the  Muccdoniana 
seeming  to  give  back),  in  great  confusion  and  disorder  hotly  pursued 
them.  But  when  they  were  got  wit  Inn  the  cast  of  a  dart,  upon  a 
sign  given  by  Alexander,  the  phalanx  furiously  turned  upon  them; 
but  first  indeed  the  horse  that  were  darters,  tbe  Agrians,  and  archers, 
made  an  excursion,  and  engaged  with  the  batbartans;  but  Alexander 
led  the  phalanx  in  battalia  himself^  The  Indians,  amazed  at  ihe  sud* 
den  and  unexpected  turn,  when  it  came  lo  the  sword's  point,  fled 
tack  into  the  city.  Two  hundred  of  them  were  killed  iii  the  puj- 
tuit,  but  the  rest  got  within  the  walls, 

Alexander  presently  drew  up  his  main  division  of  Macedonians 
before  the  walls,  and  from  thenee  was  slightly  wounded  by  uu  arrow- 
Struck  into  his  heelj.  The  next  day  the  engines  heing  brought  up  to 
the  walls,  part  of  tbem  were  ea^illy  hiittcred  down,  upon  which  (the 
Macetionians  endeavouring  to  force  their  way  through  the  ruins 
the  Indians  stoutly  withstood  them,  insomuch  that  Alexander  for  that 
day  sounded  a  retreat,  and  called  off  his  men.  But  the  next  day  the 
Macedonians  renewed  the  assault  with  greater  vigour,  bringing  up  a 
wooden  tower  to  the  walls,  out  of  which  the  archers  pouring  showew 

^      •  Mazaga.  t  The  country  of  the  Assacenians^ 

;  Curli  uij  1.  8.  «.  10,  lays  tlic  calf  of  th?  leg. 


1^ 


684  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8. 


of  darts  and  arrows,  grievously  galled  the  Indians.     Bat  yet  with  all 
these  devices  they  were  not  able  to  enter.     The  third  day  the  main 
body  of  the  Macedonians  being  again  led  up  to  the  walls,  a  bridge 
was  cast  out  of  the  wooden  tower  over  that  part  of  the  wall  that  was 
broken  down,  upon  which  bridge  the  king  ordered  the  Argyraspides, 
who  had  before  taken  Tyre  after  the  same  manner;  but  when  with 
great  courage  and  resolution  they  had  got  upon  it,  with  too  much 
weighty  it  yielded  and  broke,  and  it  and  the  Macedoniaas  tumbled 
down  together.     The  barbarians  rejoicing  at  the  accident,  set  up  a 
great  shout,  and  plied  tl)e  Macedonians  with  stones,  and  all  sorts  of 
darts  and  arrows,  or  whatever  was  at  hand,  or  that  they  could  come  at; 
and  others  issuing  out  through  narrow  sally-ports  that  were  placed 
between  the  turrets,  knocked  thenron  the  head  while  in  that  disorder 
and  confusion.     Alexander  sent  Alcetas  with  a  party  to  take  care 
of  the  wounded  men,  and  to  call  the  besiegers  off  into  the  camp.  The 
fourth  d^y  he  cast  another  bridge,  with  other  devices,  upon  the  n'alls; 
but  the  Indians  (as  long  as  the  governor  of  the  place  was  alive)  va- 
liantly repulsed  the  Macedonians  i  but  when  he  was  killed  by  a  dart 
from  the  engines,  and  many  of  their  men  lost  by  continual  assaults, 
and  others  wounded  and  become  thereby  unserviceable,  they  seat  to 
Alexander,  who  was  very  ready  and  willing  to  spare  such  stout  and 
valiant  men.     He  agreed  therefore  with  the  mercenary  Indians,  tliat 
they  should  take  up  arms  with  him,  and  join  themselves  to  his  army. 
Hereupon  they  marched  out  of  the  city  by  themseh'cs,  and  encamp- 
cd  on  a  hill  opposite  to  the  Macedonians,  with  a  design  to  fly  away 
in  the  night  to  their  own  country,   because  they  would  not  figbt 
against  the  other  Indians.     When  Alexander  was  informed  hereof, 
the  same  night  he  surrounded  the  hill  with  his  forces,  and  put  them 
every  one  to  the  sword,  and  took  the  city,  now  without  these  that 
should  defend  it,  by  storm,  and  in  it  the  mother  and  daughter  of  As- 
sacenus.    On  Alexander's  side  there  were  only  tweaty-five  killed 
during  the  whole  siege. 


FIMS. 


685 

■  J,. -J    ,.  ■  1,.   .,■,,..,      ,1  .J  ■' — >iM 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  I. 

Cm  A  p.  1 .  Of  the  first  generation  of  men.  How  the  world  fint  began.  Men's  first  i 
ucr  of  life,  and  who  were  the  first  men.  First  rae a  in  £gjrpt.  Who  were  the  ioost 
aotieot  gods  of  E|.'ypt.  Of  their  demi-gods.  Sol,  Saturn,  Rhea,  Jupiter,  Juno,  and 
Vulcnn,  rngned  in  Ktrjrpt.  Of  Osiris  and  Isis.  The  acts  of  Osiris  and  fsis.  Hermei^ 
bis  jnveDtions      Osiris  preparer  for  his  expedition  through  the  world,  a^d  to  that  end 

raises  a  grrat  army. 2.  The  coniiiinatien  of  Osiris's  expedition  through  iKthiopia, 

all  Arabii,  India,  and  Europe.  Buried  by  Isi»  and  Mercury.  How  he  was  killed. 
His  death  revenged  by  Isis  and  Orus.  Two  bulls.  Apis  and  Mnevis,  worshipped  ia 
Egypi.  Piuces  discussed  where  Osiris  and  Isis  were,  buried.  Stories  of  the  E^ptiaH 
priests.  Their  years.  Lunar  years,  giani»,  laws  about  marriage.  Osiris  and  Isis, their 
pillars  and  inscriptions.  Colonies  out  of  Egypt.— 3.  The  description  of  £gjpc 
Of  the  lake*  of  Serbim  The  nature  of  the  river  Nile.  The  cata'racts:  the  mouths o( 
the  Nile.  The  (ruit»  of  Egypt.  The  beasts,  crocodile.  £ic.  Several  opinions  cob- 
aerning  the  inundation  of  the  Nile.  4.  The  first  way  of  living  of  the  Kgyptiaaas 
gods  and  denii-^ods,  their  reigns  in  Egypt.  The  aiitient  kings  of  Kgypt:  Menia,&8;, 
Their  several  wurks.  Thebes  built  by  Bosiris.  Tbe  stately  sepulchrea,  obelilka,  and. 
terople»  there.  A  description  of  Osyroandyas's  sepulchre.  Memphis  built  by  Uebo- 
teus  Metis's  lake.  Se^ostris,  or  Sesoosis;  bis  famous  expedition,  and  great  workiw 
-• — 5.  The  acts  of  Sesostris  the  Second.  Of  Ammosis,  Actisanes,  Mendesy  Prolm 
or  Cetes.  Rem  phis,  Cheramis,  (the  great  pyramids  built  by  bim),  Ccphres,  MyceriMM^ 
Bocchuri!»,  and  Sahach.  The  reign  of  twelve  kings  in  Egypt  PsammeticbiM  SeiCei^ 
one  of  the  kings,  gained  the  whole;  two  hundred  thousand  of  his  army  forsake  bio^ 
and  settle  themselves  in  ./Ethiopia.  Apries  succeeds  long  after.  Amasis  rcbelii»  uid 
next  succeeds;  and  Apries  is  strangled  by  the  people.  Amasis  the  last  king,  to  tbm 
time  of  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  Canibyses.-*— 6.  The  casioms  of  .tbe  Egyptiaai, 
Of  their  kings.  Of  their  hourly  employment,  sacrifices,  diet,  &c.  Tbeir  buriaia.  TIm 
division  ot  Egypt.  Their  trades  in  Egypt.  Courts  of  justice.  Tbeir  law  proceed- 
ings. The  several  laws  of  Egypt.  Beasts  and  birds  adored  in  Egypt,  ea  lions,  wolves^ 
cats,  the  bird  Ibis,  kites,  &c.    Costs  in  their  burial  of  these  creatures.    Reasons  given 

for  this  adoration. 7.  Why  the  crocodile  is  worshipped.    Some  sorts  of  herbs  end 

roots  nut  tHten.  Why  other  creatures  are  worshipped.  The  manner  of  tbeir  burieli. 
The  law.iiiakers  in  Egypt.  Learned  men  of  Greece  made  joornies  into  Egypt,  as  Or- 
pheus, Humer.  Plato,  Solon,  Pythagoras,  Ace.  Several  proofs  of  this,  as  tbeir  religious 
rites,  fables.  &c.  in  Greece,  of  Egyptian  extraction.  The  exquisite  art  of  the  itoae* 
carvers  in  Egypt, 

BOOK  IL 

CnAP.  1.  Ninus,  the  first  king  of  Assyria:  his  acts:  he  invades  Babylonia,  Media,  and 
overruns  several  uthcr  countries.  Nineveh  built  by  him:  the  description  of  it:  mar- 
ries Seniiramis:  her  descent.  Derceto,  the  Philistine's  Dagon.  His  expeditjoD  •• 
gainst  Bactria :  he  dies.  Serairamis  builds  Babylon,  and  several  strange  works  there; 
as  a  pass»ag«  under  water,  Jupiter's  temple,  &c.  Hanging  gardeni  in  Babyhili.  A 
van  »tonc  cut  out.   The  strange  property  of  a  morass.    Her  itvtxtl  eipeditiona,  TW 


686  CONTENTS. 


'wonrlerful  lake  inEthionia:  their  burials  there.  Semirainis's  expeditioD  into  India. 
Her  mock  elephants.  Her  expedition  proves  fruitless.  She  surrenders  h«r  kiogdoa 
to  N'inyas  her  son  :  her  end.— 'J.  Ninvas  Miccecds  Seniiramis.  His  close  and  slo^ 
lul  manner  of  lite.  The  reign  of  Sardaiiupalus.  His  luxury  and  etTeininacj.  lid 
epitaph.  Deposed  by  Arbaces  the  IMcde;  and  the  Assyrian  empire  overturned.  Ni- 
neveh razed. 3.    Of  tiic  antient  Chaldeans,  and  their  philosophy.     I'he  p*aaets» 

and  their  cour:ie.  I1ic  empire  of  the  Medes,  and  their  king).  A  descripiion  of  Iik 
dia:  the  antient  manners  and  customs  of  the  people.    Their  laws,  and  tribes.    A  de* 

•cription  of  Scylhia.     Of  tlic  Amazoni.     Of  the  Hyperboreans. 4.   A  descriptioa 

of  Arabia  the  J>csert,  Happy,  6cc.  Metals,  precious  stouts,  beasts,  &c.  A  descrip> 
tion  of  Taprubanc,  in  the  Suutliern  Ocean,  now  called  Ceylon,  or  Zeilan«  The  Utuigt 
things  ther«.     How  discovered  by  lambulus. 


BOOK  III. 

Chap.  1,  Of  the  Ethiopians:  their  letters,  laws,  arms,  religion,  and  foAersIa.  Descrlp* 
tion  of  several  parts  of  the  country.      Manner  of  making  gold.     The  Ichthyoph^ges, 

their  several  ttoris,  and  way  of  living. 2.   Chelonophages:   the  manner  of  taking 

sea-tortoises.  The  Cetivores,  or  whale-caters.  The  sea-coasts  over  agtiinst  Babylon; 
their  manner  of  taking  of  fish.  Tiie  llizophaues,  or  roat-eaters.  Tho»e  called  Sper> 
matophagrs  and  Hylophage*,  Hylogones,  or  Hunters;  their  taking  of  wild  beasts:  the 
Kiephnni  fighters;  how  they  are  taken:  the  Simoes,  StruthophagcSj  Acridoph«go«  or 
locust-eaters;  their  miserable  deaths.  Cynomolges:  the  country  of  the Troglodjrttt. 
"Wild  beasts:  the  terrible  wild  bull.  Serpents:  that  great  one  brought  alive  to  Alex- 
andria.  3.  A  de>cription  of  the  coasts  and  countries  on  both  sides  the  Arabian 

gulf,  or  Red  sea  The  perfumes  of  .\rabia  the  Happy.  The  Fortunate  Islands.  A 
description  of  part  of  Libya:  the  spectres  near  the  Syrtes.— — 4.  Of  the  Amaioni  of 
Africa.  Their  acti:  rooted  out  by  Hercules;  and  the  Gorgoas  by  Perseus.  ThcAto 
laniides,  and  the  gods  among  them.  The  orit;in  of  theTitauc?.  The  acts  of  Basilca^ 
or  Cybele,  said  to  be  born  in  Phrygia.  The  origin  of  Atlas  and  Saturn.  A  long  at* 
count  given  of  Bacchus,  and  the  several  Bacchuses  there  ware.  A  detcriptioa  of  tha 
grotto  in  Ny<a,  where  he  was  bro\ight  up.  The  buildin<:  of  tbe*temple  of  Ammon  by 
him.  The  seveial  Herculeses.  lite  monster^  /Lgidci  and  Campes  killed  by  Minerva 
and  Bacchus. 

BOOK  IV. 

Chap.  1.  Wlint  the  Grecians  say  further  of  Bacchus.  The  story  of  Priapjs.  Of  Hir- 
maphroriilu^.  Ofthe  Muses.  The  birlh  uf  Hertulej«;  ami  his  twelve  l:ibnLPi  enj«ir.itl 
him  by  Kuryslheus.  His  wandering  expccliimns  ihro«iL.li  Aliica,  Spain,  France,  lid!/, 
and  Sicily.      His  seltinc;  up  two  pillars  at  (jades,  and  his  otlier  acts  by  the  vay.     The 

story  ot  C)rpheu<i. 2.  An  account  of  Atlas  and  hi)  dauglit«rs,  called  Allnntides  and 

Hespe^tJe^».  Tiic  Amazons  routed  by  Ihcieus  in  Atuca.  The  further  acts  of  Her- 
cules: lie  goes  auaiiisi  Laomedon,  king  of  Troy  ;  and  otlier  acts.  The  story  of  Me* 
leug"*r,  >oij  ol  kiuj;  (Kneus.     Amalthaia's  Horn.      llercule»'s  further  acts.      Hisdeiflb 

by  a  poisoiictl  sliirt. 3.    Of  the  Aigivuaiiis,  ISledra,  and  the  daughters  of  Pebas. 

How  ilie  Argonauts  i/iiiiicd  the  L;ol<ien  iicece.  Tite  pranks  of  Mcdcu.  'J'he  acts  ui 
Ja^on.  Tl<e  cruelly  of  Prlias  towdrds  Jason's  kindred;  how  he  wa>  killed  by  hi»  own 
dHiii:liler<),  lliruu^ti  Mi  dea's  eharm*i.  Medea  burns  tlic  king  ot  Corintirs  palace,  and 
him  in  it.     The  iui>eral>le  end  ot"  .luvui.      Of  the  Heraclidie,  and'thcir  return  m  Pc- 

loponnosus. ii)    J'he   Jn.ts  of  The>eu.H.      The  .Minotaur  m  Crtte.      Androfi^us  the 

son  of  Miijos  niuvdered  hy  Kjjeus.     Ariatliie,  diughittr  ot  Minu»,.iii  love  withTtukeu'^. . 
Aiiaiiiie's  crown.      Kgtu>,  km;;  of  Alliens,  k;llb  hnuseif.      Tiieseus's  death.       The  »jr 
of  ri;«  hcH  hy  the  seven  capiai  js.      1  he  Lyrgoni  renew,  the  war.      The  f>ed;grcc»  of  ll.* 
lujrois  ill   Ifiv.      Of  the  I'cntati!'!,  Hud  l.apilhx.      The  pcdiiirces  ol  K'^cuiapius,  .i!a- 
C"U;,    -\]ax,    Pelops,  Tantalus,   (Kin)nian>.       Darditnu^'.s   posterity,  to    Pnaiu,  king  of 

Troy. b.   Of  Datdalus,  and  hi-,  work*  in  Crete,  bicily,  and  elicwhere.      His  tiight 

into  S.eily  :  Minos  invades  Sinly  ;  the  luanner  of  his  death  there.  'I  he  famous  ten* 
pie  of  the  Cureles,  or  Corybanlcs,  m  Sicily,  built  hy  the  posterity  of  the  Cretans  that 
caui!  u. ere  with  Minos.  The  pi  di^ree  of  Ari^t.Tjus;  his  acts;  his  son  Acteoti.  Vl 
Kryx.  Wnus's  temple  at  V.r\\  in  Sif;iiy  ;  the  fame  oi  it.  Of  Daplmis  the  shephctd^ 
A  description  of  the  HercaQ  mountain:?.     Of  Orion.     Of  the  straits  uf  M^s^ana. 


CONTENTS.  687 


BOOK  V. 

Chip.  1 .  A  description  of  Sicily.  The  /Eolides,  or  IJpara  Isfandf.  Of  Malta,  Oau1u!i« 
Cercina,  Corsica,  Sardinia,  Pityiisa,  and  ilie  Baleares. 2.  Of  Madeira,  Britajn^ 

^^aUia.  Celtibeha,  Iberia,  Tyrrheniu,  and  of  the  inhabitants,  and  their  latviHnacDS- 
toras. — '— 3.  Ot'Gedrosia.  Of  the  i»les  of  the  Arabian  sea.  Of  the  holy  island.  Of 
Fanchxa.     Of  Samothracia.    Of  Naxos,  Sy me,  Naa<ius,  Calydna,  Nbyrus,  Ca^patfans. 

Of  Riiodes,  and  of  Chersoncsui. 4.  Of  Crete:  the  fii^t  inhabitants.     Of  the  Idaei 

Dactyli.  or  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Hyperion,  Proiuetheus.  Mnemosyne,  Themis,  Ceres, 
Neptune,  Pallas.  Jupiter's  race;  as  the  Muses  VulctfQ,  Mars,  ice.  Of  the  antient 
Hercules,  Britumartis,  Pluto.  Rhadaraanthus's  justice.  Of  Lesbos*  Deucalion*! 
flood.     Of  the  blessed  islands.     Of  Teiiedos  and  the  Cyclades. 


BOOK  XI. 

Chap.  I.   Of  Xerxe^'s  expedition  into  Greece,  and  the  battle  of  Thermopyt»,  and  the 

sea-fight  at  Salamis. 2.    How  the  Curthaginians  invaded  Sicily,  and  were  ronted 

by  Ge'on. 3.  The  victory  of  the  Greeks  over  Mardonius  at  Plataui. 4,  Of  tlie 

£|Tiit  with  the  Persians  by  tiie  Grecians  in  Ionia  at  Mycale.— — 5.  Death  and  dam- 
niendatiun  of  Gelou,  king  ol[ Syracuse:  and  rebuilding  Athens  by  the  policy  of  Tbe- 

niistocles. G,  The  enlarging  of  the  haven  at  Athens  by  'Hiumistocles.    The  treasoo 

ot  Pau&aiiias,  und  the  justice  of  Aristides. 7.  Hiero  king  of  Sicily  prepares  to  be- 
siege A^'igcnturn;  discovers  the  treason  of  them  of  Himera  to  Thcron  their  prioc«« 
ExpeN  (he  Cataneans  and  Kaxians. 8.  TheLacedsnionians  quarrel  with  the  Athe- 
nians for  the  dominion  of  the  sea. S».  Hiero  breaks  the  power  of  ilie  Etruscans  by 

tea. 10.   The  war  between  the  Tarentines  and  the  Japygian5.— ^11.  The  death 

of  ThcroM,  prince  of  Agrigentum,and  the  tyranny  of  his  son  Thrasideus,  tvbo  abdicated 
the  guvcmment,  nud  killed  himself.     Three  hundred  of  the  family  of  the  FAbit  slain 

at  one  (line. 1^2.  The  malice  of  the  Lacedaemonians  against  Themistocles,  and  hit 

bani'ilKiicnt.     His  praise. 13.  Cimon,  the  Athenian  general,  gains  many  places  for 

ti:c  Athenians;  routs  the  Persians  by  a  stratagem  at  Euryroedon.-»-— 14.    A  great. 

cartliqiiakc  in  Sparta;  the  war  upon  them  by  the  Helots  arid  Messenians. 15.  The 

YTAT  \}c.xv/tn:\\  the  Argives  and  the  Mycenaeans. 16.   The  *death  of  Hiero. 17. 

Thr:i3yb»jlus,  king  of  Syracuse,  deposed  by  force  of  arms  for  his  tyranny.— 18.  Th« 

murder  ol  Xerxes  by  Artnbanus. 19.   The  war  between  the  Athenians  and  th« 

.<£giniau.s. ^0.  The  Egyptians  revolt  from  the  Persians.     New  troubles  in  Sicily. 

— ■ — '2  \ .  Tiie  Persian  expedition  into  Egypt.  Wars  in  Sicily. 22.  The  war  be- 
tween tlie  E|?ii'.iu:ians  and  the  Athenians. 23.  The  war  between  the  Corinthiani 

ttiul  iM(  garc£n5. 24.  The  war  between  the  Athenians  and  the  Boeotians.— —25. 

The  Athenians  iiivr.de  the  Spartans  by  Tolroides. — —26.  The  war  in  Sicily  befVr^eu 
the  Ai^fMcaui  an  1  tiie  Liiybsans.     The  custom  of  writing  upon  an  o!ive-Ieaf  th« 

names  of  such  as  v.erc  to  be  banisheU  in  Sicily*  called  Petnlism. iH.    Pericles 

raakcs  a:i  inroad  into  Peloponnesus.  Besieges  Sicyonf.  Phaylus  in  Sicily  made  ad- 
D^iral  eg  li.ist  tiic  Tjnhenian  pirates;  is  corrupted,  and  banished.  The  origin  of  the 
Palici:  and  the  stories  of  the  temple,  and  wonders  of  the  Craters  in  Sicily.«fi=^28. 
The  coniirsts  betneen  Deuectius  und  ihc  Agrigentincj.  His  strange  sirbmisiion  to  the 
Syracuixans,  who  bcut'  him  to  CoriLtb,  with  prombe  to  supply  him  with  oecetoaries. 

BOOK  XIL 

Cuv*.  1.    Cimon  'the   .\thenian  admiral.     His  expedition  into  Cyprus.     Peace  con-. 

,  c'u'lcd  between  the  Persians  and  Athenians.  Ciinon  dies  in  Cyprus.— —2.  TheMfis 
g:ui!iii5  rcv(/!t  from  t!ie  Alln  miuii«,  and  are  beaten.     The  Athenians  rouletl  at  Clixro- 

iicrt  hv  thf  J'poiians.     Many  ciiies  loroTt.     A  peace  is  cuiieludod. 3.  The  war 

h\  i-.v.  Ml  the  A';rigenllnes  and  Syracusans  in  Sicily.  Thfc  war  between  the  Crotonians 
;i:)fl  the  'yy  tiiius.     Sjbaris  razed.     The  building  of  Thuriuin.     Charon  das  *s  good 

iaw.^  inlhiiriu  i.      Ilis  reniarkaMe  dea\h.'    The  \nv.5  ofZaleucus  of  Locris. 4.'  Of 

th  -  Dt'cenuiri  in  liourr,  cliosci'i  (o  nuke  laws'.  The  Ww  '£etwcMi'  the  Thurtans  and 
Tar.'n'ine.^.  The  $;id  st.»rv  i>f  the  daughter  of  one  Lucins  VwginKis'in  Rome,  Which 
cuuk'.  J  d  diiturbanre  and  ^reat  sedition.     The  law  uf  the  Twelve  X*hlet.     Peace  all 


ff88  Contents. 


over  the  world. 5.  The  war  between  the  SainUns  and  the  Milctiant.      A  seditioa 

in  Sanios,  which  revolts  from  the  Athenians.     The  war  in  Sicily,  by  the  Svracu^aata- 

gainst  the  Frinacriaus.i 6.  The  Corinthian  war  against  Corcjra.     PotidcB  revolii 

from  llif  Atheniitn.H.  Quarrels  in  Thuriuin.  Melon's  year.  Heraclea  in  IiaU  baih. 
Potide.i  bc:iieged  by  Ph(»rmio.— 7.  The  Peloponnesian  war.  Potiden  revcilis;  be- 
sieged hy  the  Athenian^ and  is  surrendered  upon  articles.  Nicias  male  the  Athcaiaa 
Admiral.     Gorgins.  an  escellent  orator,  sent  Iroro  Leontiom  in  Sicily  to  Alliens.     A 

peace  concluded,  after  the  war  had  continued  ten  years. 8    The  coniiuuancc  of 

the  Pclopunnesian  war.  The  war  by  the  Romans  hgainst  the  Ftdeoates,  li»r  pultiog 
their  ambitssadors  to  death  The  quarrels  between  the  Egesieans  and  tbeSchnnntixxfs 
in  Sicily.  The  expedition  of  the  Athenians  against  Sicily,  vnder  Nicias,  being  the  tii- 
tacntb  year  of  the  PeloponucMan  war. 


BOOK  XI  IT. 

Chap.  1.  The  Athenian  fleet  rigged  out  for  Sicily,     Alcibiadcs  aecQscd;  flics:  is  coi- 
demned ;  goes  out  of  Italy  to  Sparta.     The  Syracu>ans  send  for  aid  to  Lacedjemoc. 

Cylippus  is  sent  to  them.    The  battle  at  Syracuse. •?.  The  Lacedsmoniaas  iavade 

Attica.  The  fight  at  sea  between  the  Syracusaus  and  Athenians.  Euryniedon  and 
Demosthenes  arrive  in  Sicily.  A  plague  in  the  Athenian  camp.  Anuiher  fight  be- 
tween the  Syracusans  and  Athenians.    The  latter  routed  at  sea.   The  .^tllenians  ruined 

in  Sicily.     Nicholaus*s  long  oration      Gylippus's  answer. 3.  Diode*  insiiiotcd 

laws  for  Sicily :  suffered  by  one  of  his  own  laws.  Three  hundred  appointed  tu  govern 
in  Athens.  The  .Athcniann  beaten  at  sea  by  the  Lacedaemonians  at  Orupav.  Aici- 
biades  recalled  from  banishment. -"—4.  The  government  by  four  hundred  abrogated 
in  Athens.  The  victory  by  the  Athenians  over  the  Lacedaemonian*  at  sea,  between 
Sestos  and  Abydos.  The  Persian  garrison  driven  out  of  Antandroa  by  the  help  of  the 
Lacedamouiuns.  Twenty-two  years  of  the  Peloponnesidn  wnr  ended.  Hen  Thncy- 
dides  ends  his  history. -^5.  Commotions  in  Sicily.  The  Carthagiaiaoi  invited  thi- 
ther by  the  Egesteans.  A  sea-fight  at  Dardanium  becwe?n  the  Athenians  and  Lace- 
damonians.     A  sedition  in  Corcyra.     The  sea-fight  atCyaicuro;  and  at  ClanM  by 

land,  wherein  the  Athenians  were  victors. 6.  The  Spurtans  sue  for  peace.     The 

speech  of  Endius.  The  .-Athenians  refuse.^— 7.  Hannibal  the  Carthaginiao  iovadec 
Sicily.     The  miserable  destruction  of  Selinas.     The  ruin,  likewise,  Af  Ifimera.     Ths 

acts  of  Herroocratcs  in  Sicily. 8.   Thrnsyhulu^  aisaults  Ephesus.     The  Lacedv 

monians  besiege  Pylos;  sarreiidor  C'holccdon.  besieged  by  Theraoienes;  and  after- 
wards Uyeantium,  which  was  betrayed  to  Alcibiaden. iK  Theramenes  and  Ald- 

biades  return  to  Athens;  are  admired  by  the  people.  Lysandcr  made  general  by  tbc 
Lacedaemonians.  Antiochus,  one  of  the  Athenian  generals,  beaten  at  Ephesn*,  in  a 
sea-fight.  Agis  surprises  part  of  the  ^alis  of  .Athens;  but  was  beaten  off.  Alcihiadts 
accused  for  assaulting  Ctima,  a  confederate  cit^'.  Conon  made  admiral  iu  his  place. 
10.  Hermocrales  killed  at  Syracuse,  attempting  to  surprise  it.  \  1.  The  acts 

of  Cailicratides,  the  Lucedxmoninn  ijenerai.    The  fijj:ht  at  sea,  in  the  liarboar  at  Mity- 

ler.e,  between  Cunon  and  Callicraudes. 12.  Therms  bnilt  in  Sicily  by  theCartha- 

ginians.  They  raise  forces  to  invade  Sicily.  The  noble  temple  at  Agri^eatum.  The 
antient  grandeur  of  (hat  city  The  riches  of  GeiiiaH.  a  citiien  there,  and  ioina  ochcn. 
Agrigenium  besieged.  The  SyrHcus^ins  under  DaphnSTut  rout  tbe  Carthaginiani  near 
Agrigentum.  Amiicar  seiacs  the  Syracusan  fleet,  and  takes  all  the  provisi«int  foiag  M 
Agrigeiitum,  which  was  afterwunis  quitted  by  the  inhabitants.     Tbeir  miserable  cob- 

dition.      The  Pbalarinn  bull. 13.    The  S^tmcushu  oflicers  accused.      Dioajfio* 

made  general  of  the  Syracusans.  lie  moves  to  have  the  eiiles  recalled.  He  it  in- 
vested with  the  sole  commar.d.  At  length,  by  several  artifice*,  he  gains  tlic  aoTerci|a- 
ty.^— 14.  The  famous  battle  of  Arginusai'  at  sea,  wherem  the  Athenians  were  vic> 
tors.    The  officers  accused  for  nut  burying  the  dead.    The  speech  of  Diomedon.   The 

death  of  Sophocles. 15.  Lysaiider  made  sole  admiral  of  the  Lacedsmonlaa  flccC 

He  tukeb  Caramium.  The  ruin  of  the  Athenian  fleet  at  £gos  Poiamos.  Albena  taken 
by  Lvsauder.  The  end  of  the  I'eluponnesian  wir. — ^16.  Agrigentua  tacked  by 
Amilcur  the  Cartliagi'.ian.  i'hc  Carttiaginiaiis  besiege  Gela.  Dicinysios  goet  n>  the 
aid  of  Gela.  The  ^kJ^nll^hcs  before  (iela.  Camarina  deserted  by  tlie  order  pfAie* 
nysiu^.  The  soldiers  enraged  at  Diony-iius;  he  hasten*  loSyraeate.  Aailcar  HMfcet 
peace  with  Diunysius,  and  returns  to  Carthage,  llic  end  of  the  fiiat  f'lflTn|jlin 
war  against  Dionysius. 


CONTENTS.  689 


BOOK  XIV. 

Chap.  1.  A  peace  between  the  Athenians  and  Lacedxmonians.  The  Athenians  dis* 
agree  about  the  manner  of  their  government.  The  government  by  thirty.  The  cru- 
elty of  the  thirty  tyrants;  and  especially  towards  Theraroenes. 2.   ^ionysius'i 

projects  to  strengthen  him^lf  in  the  sovereignty  of  Sicily.     The  Syracusans  revolt. 

They  are  dispersed. 3.  The  Lacedaemonians  estahlish  an  oligarchy  in  every  city. 

Dionysiuii  disurras  the  Syracusans.  Alcibiades  killed;  the  manner  of  his  death* 
Clearchus's  tyranny  in  Byzantium.  The  battle  of  Porus  against  his  countrymen  tha 
Lacedxmonians.    Lysander  projects  to  deprive  the  HeracVidx  of  the  sovereign  power. 

4    Diony«»iiis's  actions  in  Sicily.     The  Oropians  subdued  by  the  Thebans.     The 

Lucedxmoiiians  quarrel  with  the  Elei.     Dionysius  fortifies  the  £pipol3e. 5.  Tli* 

war  between  Cyrus  and  his  brother  Artaxerxes.  king  of  Persia,  Cyrus  routed.  The 
Grecian  forces  in  difficulties;  their  brave  behaviour,  and  long  and  troublesome  march 
out  of  Persia  into  Greece.— 6.  Thrasybulus  opposes  the  thirty  tyrants.  The  cru- 
elty of  Psnmmetichus,  king  of  Egypt,  towards  his  old  friend  Tamos,  who  fled  to  him 
for  succour  from  the  Persians.  Dercyllidas  sent  general  against  tlie  Persians  into 
Asia.  Conon  made  admiral  of  the  Persian  fleet.  7.  The  war  between  the  Rhe- 
ginns  and  Dionysius:  he  prepares  to  make  war  upon  the  Carthaginians.  Most  of  the 
cities  submit  to  Dionysius.  He  returns  to  the  siege  of  Motya.  It  is  taken.  Forces 
sent  from  Carthage  against  Dionysius.  A  sea-fight  between  the  Carthaginians  and  the 
Sicilians.  Syracuse  besieged.  The  speech  of  Theodorus  against  Dionysius.  A  grie- 
vous pl.igne  in  the  Carthaginian  army.  A  great  destruction'^ftire'Carthaginian  fleet 
in  the  harbour  of  Syracuse.     The  miserable  condition  of  Amilcar  in  his  own  country. 

The  troublt^s  of  the  Carxhaginians. 8.  Agesilaus  made  general  against  the  Persians 

bv  the  Lacedaemonians;  goes  to  Rphesus.  They  send  to  the  king  of  Egypt  for  aasist- 
ance.  Tiie  Persians  routed  at  Sipylos  by  Agesilaus.  Tissaphernes'a  head  cut  off  in 
a  hath  at  Larissa.  The  war  between  the  Phocians  and  Baotians. 9.  The  confe- 
derate war  by  tlie  A  reiver  and  others  against  the  Laccdxmoniacs.  The  battle  at 
Aricus.  The  fi^ht  at  NeraTa.  Pisander  the  LacedsDmonian  admiral  routed  in  a  sea- 
fi^ht  ui  Ciiidus  by  the  Persian  fleet,  commanded  by  Conon  the  Athenian.  Corinthiaa 
Avar  against  tlie  Liicedxmonians  and  the  great  sedition  there.— -10.  Quarrel  betweea 
the  Uhr<jians  and  Dionysius.  Mago  the  Carthaginian  settles  afilairs  tu Sicily.  Routed 
at  Abucene  by  Dionysius.  Rhegium  nearly  surprised  by  Dionysius.  Acts  of  Iphi- 
,crate.s  at  Corinth,  Phlius,  and  Sicyon.  Amyntas  lost  his  kingdom  of  Macedonia,  but 
was  resiured.  The  Romans  take  Veii;  dedicate  a  golden  cup  to  Apollo.  Tlieir  am- 
bassiidors  are  taken  by  the  pirates  of  the  Lipari  islands,  but  discharged  by  TimasU 

theu^. 1 1 .   Acts  of  Thrasybulus,  the  Athenian  general.     The  Carthaginians,  under 

I^Iago,  begin  a  new  war  in  Sicily  against  Dionysius.  Peace  concluded.  Rhodes  falls 
off  from  liic  .Athenians.  Evagoras  becomes  king  of  Salamis,  in  Cyprus.  Makes  war 
against  the  Persians.  Acts  of  Thimbron,  the  Lacedaemonian  general,  in  Asia.^-— 12. 
Dionysius's  expedition  against  Rhegium.  War  between  the  Lucanians  and  Tharians, 
in  Italy.  The  Thuriaiis  cut  off  by  their  own  rashness.  Lcptincs  generously  saved 
tliose  (hat  swam  to  his  siiips,  though  he  was  ■  friend  to  their  enemies.  Dienysius's 
secuiid  expedition  into  Italy:  besieges  Caolonia,  and  rents  Helorit.  Makes  peace 
with  the  Rhegians.  Razes  Cauionia  to  the  ground,  and  transplants  the  inhabitants  to 
Syracuse.     Watches  an  occa&iun  to  be  revenged  on  them  of  Rhegium.     Besieges  it. 

He  sends  rich  chariots  to  the  Olympic  games.     His  poetry  ridicnled. 13.  Peace 

of  Anialcidiis.  War  by  the  Persians  against  Evagoras  in  Cyprus.  Miserable  condi- 
tion of  llhe^iuni.  Its  surrender.  Cruel  usage  of  Philo,  the  governor  of  Rhegium, 
and  of  his  !,ou.  Expedition  of  the  Gauls  against  Italy.  The  Romans  routed  by  the 
G:iui:i  at  the  river  Allia.  Rome  taken  by  the  Guuls.  The  Romans  besieged  in  the 
Capitol.  The  Vuhci  revolt  from  the  Romans.  The  Gauls  runted  by  Marcus  Furius 
in  their  relurn.     All  cut  off  afterwards  in  the  plains  of  Trausium, 


BOOK  XV. 

<^nAP.  1 .  Artaxcrxrs's  expedition  against  Evagoras,  in  Cypma.  Tlie  actions  there  at  sr» 
and  land.  The  Laccdxiuonians  begin  new  quarrels  in  Greece:  as  first  with  Mauli- 
iica.  Dionysius  gives  himself  to  poetry.  Peace  concluded  with  £vag«iras  by  Orontaa 
tlie  Persian  general.     Teribazus  brought  to  bis  trial.    Judgment  opon  corrupt  judges. 

%lOL,  2.  No.  48.  TTTT 


690 


CONTENTft- 


TeribaztiB  acquitted. 2.  Mantinca  beviegcd  bj  the  Lacederooniana.     Dionjtiui 

aims  to  guiu  the  islands  of  the  Adriatic  sea.  The  Parii  build  Paroa.  Dionjsiiu*s  tz* 
pedition  into  Etraria.  Prepares  for  war  af»ain»t  the  Carthaginians.  The  Siciliaai 
routed  at  Croninm.  Quarrel  between  the  ClaaomeHians  aud  those  of  Coma»  about 
Lcuoe.  War  between  Ainyntas  and  the  Oijiithians.  The  Lacedjemonians  wciwe  the 
citadel  of  Cadniea  at  Thebes.     Eudamidas  breaks  into  the  coontry  of  the  Oljotlilans. 

3.  Pelopidas  sent  general  by  the  Laccdjemonians  against  tlie  Oly  nlhiant.  A  great 
plagoe  in  Carthage.  BiBotian  war.  Cadmea  re-taken.  Confederacy  of  tbe  cities  a- 
gaiust  tiie  Lacedsnionians.  Cleonibrotos  attempts  to  surprise  the  Pirsus  at  Athens. 
Tlie  Athenians  aeize  AcU  in  Eubcsa.     Agesilaos  enters  Boeotia.     Sea-fight  at  KasM^ 

4«  The  Triballiaas  make  incursions  into  Thrace.  Chabrias  the  j\tlieniau  general 
assa&sinatod.  The  Thebans  root  the  Spartans  at  Orchomenus.  Artaxcrzes  seeks  t» 
make  peace  anx>ng  the  Grecians.     Peace  concluded.     The  Thebans  only  disagreed. 

Commendation  of  Epaminoudas.     Seditioiu  in  several  cities  of  Greece. ^5.  Tba 

Persians  send  an-ariuy  into  Egypt,  to  reduce  the  revolters.  Iphicratcs  a  skilful  con- 
Bkander.  Sedition  at  Zacynthus.  PlatKa  razed  by  the  lliebaus.  The  Lacedamo* 
ni^iis  seise  upon  the  island  Corey ra :  relieved  by  the  Athenians  under  Ctcsias.  £va- 
goras  murdered  in  Cyprus  by  an  eunuch.     Dreadfel  earthquakes  and  inundations  ia 

Peloponnesus.     Great  comet  seen  in  Greece. 6.  Artaxerxes  sends  again  to  maks 

peace  among  the  Grecians.  All  comply  except  the  Thebans.  The  Spartans  raise  aa 
army  against  the  Thebans.  Epaiuinondas  made  the  Theban  general.  Famous  battle 
of  Leuctra.  Terrible'seditions  and  cruelties  in  Argos.  Jason  of  Fheras  stirs  up  tba 
Thessalonians  to  gain  the  sovereignty  of  Greece.  Polly  dor  «>«  prince  of  Pher*  ia 
Gteece,  poisoned  by  his  brother  Alexander.  A  plot  to  depose  Alexander.  King  of 
M^edonia  treated  with  to  that  purpo5e.— ^7.  The  Lacedamonians  send  Polytropai 
into  Arcadia ;  who  is  slain,  and  his  party  routed  by  Lycoreedes.  An  inrasiun  by 
Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas  into  Peloponnesus.  Sparta  besieged.  Antiquity  sod 
history  of  Mcssenia,  in  Greece.  Pellene  taken  by  the  Arcadians.  A  wall  drawn  h^ 
tween  Cenchrex  and  the  Lechwum,  to  hinder  the  inroad  of  the  Thebans  into  Peloi 
ponnesus.  Epaniinondas  breaks  through  into  Peloponnesus :  assaults  Corinth. -"-S. 
Dionysius  sends  Gauls  and  Spaniards  to  the  assistance  of  Uie  Lacedsmonians.  Pelo- 
pidas and  Ismcnias  imprisoned  by  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Pherae.  The  Bomiians  por> 
sued  by  the  Phereaus:  broui^ht  oil  by  Epaniinondas,  then  a  private  soldier.  Fij^ 
between  the  Arcadians  und  Lacedaemonians.  Dionysius  falls  upon  the  C«rtkagioiia 
territories  in  Sicily.  Dionysius  dies.  Cause  of  his  death.  Cruelty  uf  Alexander  lbs 
I*herean  at  Scoiussu.  Epaniinondas  breaks  again  into  Peloponnesns.  Coos  peopled 
and  walled.     End  af  the  Laconic  and  Boeotian  war,  by  the  mediatioo  of  the  PeniiB 

k  ing. 9.  New  quarrels  in  Greece.     Battle  between  the  Elians  and  Arcadians  acv 

Lassia.  Quarrel  between  Uie  Pisatcs  and  them  of  Elis  about  the  Olympic  games.  A 
tight  at  the  time  and  place  of  the  games.  The  Thebans  prepare  a  fleet  in  order  u 
gain  the  dominion  at  sea.  Rhodes,  Chios,  and  Byzantium  brought  over  to  the  TVs* 
bans  by  Epaniinondas.  The  Thebans  make  war  upon  Orchoracngs:  the  reason.  Or* 
choiucnus  raxed.  The  Thessalians  war  with  Alexander  the  Pberean«  Peiopidtf 
killed:  his  praises.— -—10.  War  between  the  Tegenns  and  Alantineans.  The  Ba» 
tians  side  with  the  Tegcans.  Epaminondas  made  general.  Battle  of  \Iantinea,  what 
Epaminondas  was  killed;  but  the  Lacedaemonians  routed.  Coinmcndalioa  of  Effr 
niinoudas.— - 1 1.  Defection  from  the  Persians  in  Asia.  Tacbos*  king  of  Egypt,  d^ 
clares  war  against  the  Persians.  The  war  between  Tachos  and  his  son  Nmaaafcr 
Death  of  Artaicrxes  Mnemon.  Agesilaus  routs  the  Egyptians  that  pana«d  him.aA 
restores  Tachos  to  his  kingdom.  Quarrels  again  in  Greece,  after  the  battle  of  ifa» 
tinea,  l>etween  the  Megalopolitans  and  the  neighbouring  towns.  Pcparetbos  bcMfsl 
by  Alexander  of  Pbcrsn.  Jle  routs  Leosthenes  at  sea.  Charci^  the 
ral:  his  viliaiiics. 


BOOK  XVL 

CiiAT.  1-  Philip>  •!  hostage  ::t  TItebes,  makes  his  escape;  beats  the  Athenimi.  andil^ 
tcr wards  makes  peace  with  tliera.  h;ubdues  the  Pasones;  and  ronta  the  Il^riaM^ai 
uiHkes  peace  with  them.-— —2.  Actions  of  Dionysius  the  younger  in  Skilj  aad  otkr 
pnrts.  DionS  flight  to  Corinth,  and  his  return  to  Sicily.  Andromacbas  pcoplcn  Tir 
roininium.  Civil  wars  in  Eubuca.  Social  war  between  the  Atheniuia  aad  other  H^ 
tious.  Philip  takes  Amphipolis  and  other  cities*  His  policy  to  gjua  the  Ol* 
aad  other  places  in  Greece. 3.  Diun*s  march  and  entry  iatoS^i 


CONTENTS.  $91 

'        . ^ 

cones  to  tbc  ItUod,  •  port  of  S/racote :  ommJci  the  wall  erected  ftom  lem  to  tfo:  li 
beaten  bj  Oioo.  Alcsaad«ir  of  Pherc  Barderod  bjr  bu  wife  and  kb  two  brotbcft. 
Pbilip  relievef  tlie  TbeaalaaM  ftooi  tbe  two  brotbeta.  4.  First  rne  or4bo  Brolii  ia 
Italjr.  DionjtiiM's  adoiiral  iarodefl  tbt  Leoatinea.  A  6gfat  at  aea  between  HcracIWei 
and  Pbiiittos,  adomab.  tbe  one  of  DioayBiw,  tbe  otber  of  Dioo.  A  faction  ift  Sym- 
rnse.  Dion  leoTei  tbe  Sjracosaot.  Thdr  lad  oonditioii.  Reliefod  bj  Piea.  ■■  ■ 
l>.  CoDtinaanco  of  tbe  Social  War.  Ipbicratca  and  Tiaotbefs  joined  ad«irmlt  witb 
Chares  bj  tbe  Atbtniam.  Ipbicratca  and  Tiaotbeot  aecuted  bj  Cbaret,  and  fined 
and  removed.  Cbarea  j^ws  wicb  Pbamaboni»  and  rooti  tbo  Petaiana.  End  of  tko 
Social  War.  Pbilip  anbdMs  tbe  confedormtoa.  .6.  Beginninf  of  tbe  facrid  or 
Ph'ician  war.  Pbalomeloa  j^aea  tbe  teaple  at  I>clpbot,  after  be  bad  rooted  tbe  L»- 
crtatis.  How  the  oracle  at  Delphot  was  irrt  discovered ;  and  tbe  begimBg  of  Cbe 
Tripod.  Tbe  Athenians  and  others  join  witb  PbilooMlaa.— — 7.  Battle  at  Pbadii, 
between  Philonaehu  and  tbe  Locriana.  Partiea  engafed  in  tbe  Pbodnn  war.  Battif 
between  tbe  Bootians  and  Pbociant.  Pbilomdaa  kilbrC  Onuaatcboe  aade  geaaral : 
bis  dreamt,  snecenes,  and  death.— 8.  Pbajrilaa  coatinnet  the  Pbooan  war.  Arjfcn 
razed.  Pha>  lias  diet  of  a  consvmption.  War  betareca  tbe  Lnoedaaeniaat  Hid  He* 
falopolitaut.  Ch»ronea  uken  bj  Pbalmcaa.  War  between  tbe  Petihotb  Fgjptiae^^ 
and  Phmniciana.    Salamit,  in  Cypres,  besieged.   Crodljof  ArtucnesOohnaieweida 

the  Sidoniant.   Calamitj  of  Sidoo 9.  Evagorat  bebcnded  inCjrprea.  Artaaeraet 

aarchet  against  Egvpt.  and  gains  it  all  bj  tbe  policy  of  Iffenier.  Latet  mmny  of  bk 
men  at  tbe  lake  of  Sorbon.  Mentor  adraaced.  IffeMar'i  «inlage«  to  tebdet  Hei* 
meat,  prince  of  Alamra.     2>na  raaed  by  Pbilipb     Kmg  of  Egypt  ebdieatea  bit  kii^ 

dum,  and  fiiet  to  Ethiopia. 10.  Pbilip  takaaOlynriMt»and  otber  ciberte  tbeBei- 

Irspori.  The  Athenians  jeakrat  of  Pbilip,  and  itigalid-  hw  Dfurtwiai.  Philip*i 
policies.  Valae  of  the  ricbet  taken  oet  of  tbe  temple  at  Delpbet.  Piaayiint  tenl 
pfocDts  to  Delph'is,  which  were  taken  by  tbe  Aihcniant.  Hm  ktirr  to  tbo  Atbeniani, 
Temple  burnt.  End  of  the  Pbocian  war.  Peniihmenta  deuacd  by  tbe  Aapbictyena 
against  the  Phoeians.  Miseries  of  tbe  sacniegioos  peraaoa.  TiaieleaB  atne  la  ^fa- 
cose.— 1 1.  Timole«m*t  expedition  into  Sicily.  Carthaginian  annj  wSaeilj.  &e» 
ajtiws  rf tarns  into  Syracosf* :  it  beatea  by  Hicetat.  Hieetnt  gains  Syraente.  Ttee*  ' 
ieon*s  escape  Irom  Rhegiam.  Tnaoleon  roeU  Hicetat^  and  gaint  Syiecnte.  Pbilip 
invades  the  liiyncns.     Oionysias  eipelled.     limoleon  makes  go^  laara.     Pbilip  iu- 

vadct  1  hr4c«>. 12.  Acts  of  TioKileoo  in  Stcily.    Preparations  of  tbe  Cartbaginsana 

against  Tirooleon.  Remarkable  Mcgc  of  Perintbnt  by  Philip.  Pesodomt  expeb  bia 
brother  .Adam  from  tlie  principality  n  Caria.  Bynntiam  bctieged  by  PhiKp.— 13. 
The  Athenians  aid  Bysantiam.  Philip  raites  tbe  siege.  Tbe  Canbaginiana  transport 
tnrreft  into  Sicily.  Kemarkable  victory  of  Timoleon  o^r  tbe  Cartbaginiaat.  Acta  of 
Timoleun  10  Sicily.  Works  ot'Hirro  inSicily.— «»I4.  Elatea  taken  by  Pbilip.  Great 
ctinftteriMiion^  m  Athens  fur  fear  of  Philip.  Tbe  Bcotians  join  witb  tbe  .^tbeniai% 
ihroui;h  the  »olicitatKint  of  UcMMslbenes.  Python,  a  famoos  orator.  Battle  of  Cbai* 
roura.  bn  •»  een  Pbilip  and  the  Athenians.  Ly tirlct  the  .%tbenMn  jtcneral  put  to  death. 
Philip  r<  biiLtd  by  Uemades;  made  general  of  Greece.    Timaleon  diea.  15.  Phi- 

lip  cotisults  ilie  oracle  at  Delphot.  Marries  bis  dao|(bter  Cleopatra  to  tbe  kinf  of 
Epirus.  Kncuitragrd  to  the  PetMaa  war  by  Neoptulrmtis't  verses,  PbUip*t  pcti:e, 
Hi>  murder.    Cau»e  of  it,  buw  it  wat  dune*  and  by  whom. 


BOOK  XVII. 

Cii  A  r.  1 .  Conspiracies  of  tbe  dtiet  against  Ale&andrr.  Tbe  Athenians  send  ambattador^ 
11  Alesander.  to  beg  pardon.  He  is  saadc  general  by  tbe  Ampbictyuns.  Attalaa  killed 
t.^  Alcunder's  comuNUid.  Wickcdocas  of  Bagoas.  Damis  cuaMnended.  Raisca 
f  >rce«.  l>esciipiion  of  moent  Ida.  Alcaaader  invades  the  lil^riant  and  otbrrt. 
Thebes  besieged  by  Alexander,  aad  raaad.  Miteries  of  Thebot.  Pradigiet.  Alex- 
ander demandt  Ueatutibenet  and  etbata  ta  be  delivcrad  ap  to  him  by  ib«  Atbnaiaas: 

their  answer.     He  retamt  into  Maordonsa*  and  faatu  bis  soldien. 2.  Alriaadir 

lands  bb  army  ia  Asia.  Baiile  at  Omnicat  forces  of  tbe  PerMaat  and  of  AWaan- 
der.  Alexander  killtSpMbrobalra;  near  being  billed  by  Rbetaart.  Milemt  biairgid 
and  taken.  Ada,  queen  of  Caria,  maett  Aletaader*  Halicamasaes  besieged,  lakan, 
•nd  sacked.  Strange  act  of  tbe  Mar»ariBiW.  X  Mitykae  lakca  by  Mi—^ 
Darius's  general.  Utt  tocciatca.  He  dial.  Cbaridimat  tbe  Athenian  najaiUy  pat 
10  death  by  l>ariet.  Alexander  Ibllt mtbt  ii  laeaeeiad  by  PbilipL  Alesaader  teiaea 
AUaander  of  LyoccMet,  aa  accoait  of  bii  ■otbet'i  lettng.    Aleiaader  takai  ^a%| 


692 


CONTENTS. 


Memornblc  battle  at  Issus,  where  tlic  iii<>ther,  wife,  two  daughters,  ind  sod  of  D«nnt 
were  t.iki'ii       Alexander's  noble  bebavimir  towards  thriii.     Dariuii*s  letters  aad  offers 

to  AlexHiioir      D.iniis  prepares  aitoilier  ariuv. 4.    Alexander   murcfaes  toward« 

Kg)rpt:  betir^et  T^re.  Priidiuic%  at 'I'xre  I'he  Tjriana  bind  Apullo  with  golden 
chains.  Inventions  itf  the  l)  rians  tu  defend  themitelvcs.  Advancement  ol  Balloniiiias, 
a  pnnr  man,  to  be  kin^  ot  T^re.     Aetii  ol  Avis  and  Amyntas.      Aui^  ntas  killed,  and  all 

lii^  sotdieis.     Alexander  takes  Gazii  by  storm:  is  presented   by  the  Greciaits. 

5.  Alexander  mukesi  a  journey  to  the  tciuple  ol  Jupiter  Amnion.  He  is  presented  by 
thcCyreneans.  De»cription  of  the  place  about  the  temple.  Wonderful  properties  of  t)ic 
fountain  Solis.  Duildin^  of  Alex<indria.  Alexander**  answer  to  Darius**  ambassadors. 
Alexander  passes  over  the  river  Tigris  with  great  hazard.  Frcparatioiu  on  both  sides 
for  battle.     The  Pcri>ians  routrd  at  the  famous  battle  at  Arbela.  6.  The  Grecians 

conspire  to  revolt.  iVIeiunon  rebels  in  Thrace.  Antipater  marches  against  him.  The 
Laced.r.monians  raise  an  army;  are  routed  by  Antipater,  and  Agis  ibcir  king  killed. 
->— 7.  Alexander  comes  to  Jtabylon.  Wealth  found  there.  Views  his  troops  at 
Sitacuna.  Jliehe»  there.  Thence  gues  into  the  country  of  the  Uxians.  Marclirs 
tovfaills  Persepolis.  Company  of  maimed  Greeks  meet  Alexander:  his  bounty  to  them, 
lie  lakes  Pcmepolis:  f;ives  it  up  to  the  plunder  of  the  soldiers.  Riches  ot  the  citadel 
of  Persepolis.     Alexander's  feast  at  FerM!(H>lis.     Persepolis  bnrnt  at  il.e  iusli^iktiuQ 

of  i'liais.  Darius  mnrdered 8.  Be»>>u>  btirit  up  the  Bacirians.    Alexander  discharget 

the  Greek  auxiliaries  with  rewards.  River  Stiboetes.  He  chtcrs  Hy rcani^ ;  its  rich- 
nuss.  Knters  the  Mardian  country.  Loses  his  brave  hor«e;  <Thich  is  restored.  Tba« 
leHtris  the  Amazonian  queen  Uieet>  liini.  He  falls  into  the  elTeminacy  of  the  Persians. 
Kurrrs  Drangina.     Plot  u^ain^t  Alexander.     Philotas  and  others  put  to  death.     He 

niHrehi-s  aL;uinst  the  Ariiuu>pi.     Subdues  Arachosia, 9.  Alexander  marches  against 

tilt:  P.iiopiiniisadus.  His  truublesome  luaich.  C*onies  to  mount  Caucasus.  Buttle  in 
Aria  by  Alexander's  olfKers  a{:ainst  Satibarsanes,  who  is  killed  m  a  single  combat  by 
Kri^yus.  Bes»us  brou;;lit  to  Alexander;  hi»  punishment.  Alexander  kill*  aoiue  bar- 
barianb  unexpected! \,  alter  the\  bad  ^urreinU'red  their  city  ile  inarchealu  thenver 
Indus.      MMphiit's  remarkable  delivery  up  of  hiinselt  and  his  army.  10.  Ali-xandcr 

overcomes  I'uius.  How  ape»  are  taki.n.  Stran<>e  serpents  for  venom.  Large  trees. 
He  ninrcliei  at::iinst  the  And''a»tian>,  Catliari,  and  against  Sopbithes.  Custom  ot  tfaein 
nnder  Sophithes.  Indian  dogs.  Alexander  entertained  by  .Phiiseus.  The  Macedo- 
nians rrfu>e  to  march  ■^ain>t  the  (iandarita*.  Alexander  leaves  nionuiiicnls  behind 
In lu  at  the  river  H^daspes.  Nicu'a  and  Bucephalus  built.  The  Iberians  prcscac 
Alexander.  He  routs  the  Agalas-e.s.  Is  in  danger  in  the  river  Indus  by  whirlpools. 
JVIurclie.t  ajjainst  the  Oxydraca*  and  IMalJii.  'Ihc  king  leaps  off  the  wall  into  the  town. 
J)ue!  hiiween  C'oru^usand  Dioxippu.v  The  Sanibeiitai  submit  to  Alexander ;  andalHi 
the  Su^diani  and  IMassani.  Subduis  Mu^icanus,  Port:cHnus,  and  Sanibu».  PoiKined 
weapons.  The  kingN  dream.  Comes  into  the  main  ocean.  Conies  into  Gedrosia. 
^avugenes<i  of  the  people.  His  army  near  )M:ri!>hiog  in  Gedrosia.  Conies  into  Car- 
MiMiiii.  Puniniirs  the  Hurmeial  (joreinourn.  Nearchus  returns.  Islands  cu\cred  at 
l.igii  lide>.  Strauiie  death  of  (^'nianus.  _^\lcx_iuider  marries  Statira.  Harpti I u»'»  luxury. 
Alexander  i'-'iro^  with  his  uwn  hand  them  that  had  mutinied.^— 1 1.  Alexander  mixes 
twenty  !hous-.ui'l  Per>iun  darters  with  hi)  army.  Marches  from  Susir.  Bagikt^me 
hri-.itls  aliiiiid.iiuH' of  horse*!.  Ilepha:!>(i«ii  diesat  Ecbatana.  The  ijimiaii  war.  He 
iu\adf>  ili<  Cu^s.fi.  .M.irches  towards  )tabyloii.  The  Chaldean  astrologers  dissuade 
Iiiiii  iron]  eoiiiiii^  ihilhcr.      llv  entets  Babylon.  1*J.   Ambassadors  cume  to  Alex- 

ander from  nil  part;!.  He  buries  He|>lia.-Ation  with  great  state.  Prodigies  before 
Alexander'^  death.     His  death.     Dariu^'^  motlicr  starves  herself. 


BOOK  XVIII. 

Cmm>.  1.  Quiirv'l.s  nbnut  a  successor  to  Alexander.  Afid«us  made  king.  The  pn^ 
vinee.v  divided  amunu.si  the  chief  rommaiiiiers.  Matters  contained  iii  Alexander*! 
note-bc;ol.s.  Meh-at:er  executed  by  Perdiccus.  The  GrecisDS  revolt.  0escriplioB 
of  Asi'i.  Pytlicn  :>eiii  ai;ai!i>t  the  revolting  Grecians,  who  were  all  cut  uffi  The  La- 
nii:in  war:  the  eaiiMe  ot  it.  Alexander^  epistle  to  the  exiles.  Leustlieiiea»  Ihe  Atlia* 
man  ueiioral.     Lamia  hr^eped.     l^o^theiies  killed;  Antjphilus  placed  in  his  rwua. 

'J.  l\ohiiiY  gains  F.i:ypt.     Leagues  with  Antipater.     Lysimachns  enters  Thrac«» 

Li-i^n.itu  ( oiiH-.i  to  relieve  Antipater,  and  is  routed.  The  Greciana  beaten  at  ic^ 
Periiiee.1^  >:on4ner.-i  :\ri;>i-:ithes,  pvince  of  (.'appadocia;  crucifies  him ;  delivcn  tbc  pi^ 
\ia^c  to  Luiuenes.    The  Gicciuus  (juitc  ruuicd  by  Cratcras  and  Aiilipatier«    TBs 


CONTENTS.  693 


Atbeuiaoii  at  length  iiibinit,  after  all  the  rcit  bai  the  i^-'Coliaos.  End  of  the  Lamiaa 
wiir.  War  in  Cyrcne  by  Thinibrun.  Ophelai  routes  Thimhron.  Cyrene  gained  bj 
Ptuleray.  Lariisa  tacked.  Dckiructhin  of  the  Itaurians  by  themselves.  Perdiccas 
atTects  the  kingdom  of  Macedun ;  is  opposed  by  Antigonus.  The  iEtolians  blocked 
up  by  Cratf  ru»  and  Antipdter.     Antii^unus  discnTers  Pcrdiccas's  design.     Peace  made 

With  the  iEioliaus.     Perdiccus  marches  against  Ptolemy,  into  Kgypt. 3.  DcKrip- 

tion  o(  Ale  lander's  funeral  chanut.  Ptolemy  honoured  in  E^ypt.  Perdiccas  prepares 
for  going  into  E^'ypl  a^^aintt  Ptalemy.  Eumenes  beats  Neuptolemus,  who  deserted. 
Battle  between  Eumenes  and  Citilerus,  who  was  killed  with  Veoptolemus.  Combat 
between  Ncwpiolemus  and  Eumenes.  Perdiccas  comes  into  Egypt;  assaults  the  fort 
called  the  CBiiier«  Wall;  his  iimerablc  lost  in  the  river  Nile;  u  killed.  Ptoleraj 
luakc)!  Ahdx'us  and  P3  ihon  protectors  of  the  kincs.  Eumenes  condemned  to  die.  llie 
j^jolinnt  invade  Thc»>aly.  Pulyprrclion  routi  the  ;Ktolijn«.  The  provinces  agaia 
divided  by  Aruixus.  Antigonus  routs  Eumenes,  who  flies  to  Nora.  Antigonus  basieget 
Nora.     Eumenek's  invention  to  exercise  the  horse.     Ptolemy  gains  Syria  and  Pbirui* 

cia  by  Nicaiior. 4.  Antigonus  routs  Alcetas  in  Pisidia,  and  lakes  AttaJai.     Alcelaa 

received  intu  Termessus,  and  thrre  protected,  lie  is  mtirdertd  there  treacherously: 
his  body  iiiliuiuanly  used  by  .\niigoiius.  Antipnter'sdeath.  Anti pater  puts  Onaeaf^ 
one  of  the  Athriiian  ainhj^wdors,  to  death.  PoUperchon  made  chivl  In  Macedonia, 
C!a»^aiidi'r  coi»pire»  to  put  him  out.  .Aiitigonus's  plots  to  be  sovcnrigii  of  all.  Ath 
dL'u»  ^i'(  iirrs  hiuitelf  in  Phryt'ia:  besieises  (  ycicum.  Antigonus  grit^  to  reheve  it. 
Kuiiifiit »  gut  uut  of  Nura  b^  AiiligonusS  order.  Anti^oiiui's  further  acts.  Vaiiova 
joriune^  oi  Eumenes.  CouiiliI  ui  .Macedonia  called  hy  Pohpcrchon  agaimt  Cntson- 
dcr.     Decree  u(  (he  ouiicil.     Piily|H:rthnii  intitii  (jlympius  out  ol  Epirus  into  Ma- 

Lrdiiiiid.      \Vrilr»To  KuiueiH  ^loj'Mit  With  llie  kings. j.   Poiv prrchon courts  Eume* 

iii-i  to  a«s<it  the  king*.  EaineiimS  pru.ii'iice  anioii;;M  (iie  .Miiccdonian  captains. 
Pt  U my  M*iiiii  (u  (he  captains  and  otliir»  n'il  tuasMtit  Eumenes.  Aiilii:oiiuscoitlrivet 
til  Lill  Eo'«iriir»;  wliu  ill  irchf'i  into  I'hiSiiicu.  Nicantir  deceives  the  Aiheiiunt,  and 
^till  ki'cp*  Muu^rlii^,  and  »ulitiU'ly  get»lhc  Pirsi'us.  Urdcred  by  blympiaslu  deliver 
I  he  Pirxu^  4nii  M  liny  c  Ilia  lu  the  Athtm.insi  but  he  shill^  it  otT.  Aleiaiiflf-r,  son  of 
i^ulypcrcliuii  fillers  .Aldcj;  secretly  ('orr*-!;)4iiids  witli  Nicaiior,  and  displeusvi  th« 
A(hi-iiiMii«.  Phocion'k  li.ini  uvugf  al  his  iru!  iti  Athens;  i»  condeiuiiod  and  executed. 
C'a«»jii(lrr  arrivn  at  thv  Pii:i'u».  Pulvptrthon  coiues  a^ainil  him,  bur  relunis.  Be« 
•ii*j:i*  .Mr;:alii^iiili<;  hut  i«  (here  ci/iii|il<.li  I3  hafflrd.  and  lii^  eft  phaiKs  destroyed  bj« 
sir^tagcni  Sea  light  beltM-ni  L'litusand  Niikiior.  Nicmioi  bi alen.  Ciitusaflerwarda 
rtJ'tlL'd  hy  Nii-tiiiirp  is  killeil  in  his  lli^hl  to  M.ici'doiiiii.  .\nti^oiius  gi>es  altrr  Eume- 
nei.  EuiiK'Uti  near  lo«iii^  ink  army  by  the  bmch  of  a  dyke  in  l«ghylonia.  The 
(Lirri-L  cities  revolt  lo  Cdssaiidcr.  The  Athenians  make  peace  with  hini.  He  killi 
^  icauor. 

UOOK  XIX. 

Cii4r.  1.  A::.illiorlr»'<  parr-nta^e  ami  eduratioii:  hisri»e:  his  stratagems :  his  bloodj 
m.t*'»aLK  at  >\rat:iffte.  lie  »:<iiii»  tiic  M>%erri|£ii  |>uv»rr.  I  lie  al)air%  t«f  ||&|y.  Ofim- 
pias  returns  iut(»  .M.icedouia  bv  Poly  |n  rciiu'i's  niean*.  '1  hr  armies  revnJl  to  her.  ||ct 
crip-iiici.  Slir  niunJers  Eur^dicr,  ami  Aridxui  her  hu*bdiii.  ArUirs  in  Asu. 
I.'i.iiriits  diid  '*'-]rur!M.  Euiuriicv  juiH-  ii  hy  iiMiiy  uf  tii<>  ra;i|aiii«..  Nuiiitier  of  their 
tire«-v  lit-  L..iiir«  (o  Su\*,  .Vitd'u^  and  cthtrs  inipriwned  by  .\nti|>iiiiiji  m  a  sirotig 
ca»t:r.  xeliii..'  |if  csl  ipe  *tr  allrrwar.i^  fif*.e^td,  ami  taken. —  -J.  Auti^iiiiut 
lubrcdcii  ii>  |tj(-  I'ljii* iiiii-r  EuiiieiiCt.  K'.i:iii-iii-«  lui«  ■  li.i  .leat  iiiaii\  u|  In*  lui  n  rhcrr. 
A'lti^nnua  gii*  s  mill  .Media.  Euiui'iir*  i..iu-  «  lu  IVrM-pniii.  iJi-^Liiptiitu  iil  I'ema. 
PcuvoCCvS  |:rcat  leakt.  Kuiii*-iii-**«  p>i!iiy.  I  In  ldl«  ul  the  imu.  li^.iJe  in  Parrlr* 
criii,  hf-iwrrii  .Viiti|{unu«  and  l«uiii(-iiri,  .ViitU'-uu*  •'rtu'il*  liitu  MrJia.  .St'ifw  of 
t'etcut'stwo  «:si-«,  •iriviiig  t»lii<:li  «huuld  be  bijriit.  Eiiiiiiiies  luartiii  1  to  (jabrne; 
Caiiiiiidi  r  to  .Mac  •iuina.  ijl\  nipia*gijes  lu  Pj^Uiu;  i«  llirrc  !N-^jf|;rd.  I  he  Euirols 
forsake  ilit-ir  kiiii:,  .md  juiii  with  Castaniit-r.  Aiitigwiins  <lr«i|Cii%  tu  vuipri^e  Eiinirnes, 
who  itop«  Ut\  lUdich  hy  a  sirala^cm.  Lait  battle  bi-lMem  Ihi  111 111  Uarreitr.  Euiaenra 
basely    lirl.trrrd    u,*,      Aiiligoiius  rrlUi'iiS  (u    Mniia.      Urculliil   earihqiukrs   in  th« 

ctfjiiiry  Iff  Iihji{i-Y. 3.  Liundaiixii*  ut  Kl.o<ieK     Aiiti^nnui  ailf«  PyilKin,  f:rlting 

liim  t^it  I  hit  iMj«cr  b\  i!i«B;iia.aiiriii.  Pien  hr  inar(.he«  luiu  Prnu.  Kckullm  froia 
Ant;»-iitus  c  il  oif  i.i  .Meiiia.  He  divi*(«  ihr  prutnicii  ul  .\ma,  and  roiitn%ri  to  dc^ 
Iru^t  M.l  the  Ar;;^iaipid'  I.  (n  tf  great  trf-ii«urc  i(^|ma.  C'aMaiidei  bciic^rs  Olyiiipiaa 
i.i  P\oita:  ilie  ;;rfai  iliflrrs*  tu  wbich  it  was  red>i(.cd.  Amphipvlu  lurrei.dered  to 
Cas«ai;dcr.     He  kdls  O.rmpias.     Marries  Tbcsfttlouicei.     Build*  CaaMudna,     Ia« 


694 


CONTENTS. 


prikunk  Kuiana  and  her  ton  Alexander.  His  eKpedition  int»  Pelopoonetat  against 
Aiexaudor  the  sioii  of  Folyp«rchon.     Hutory  af  Tbcbet*     CuMiider  rebQiJdiK  Tliebcx. 

4.  Autigonua's  army  feasted  by  Scleucus  in  Babylon.     Qaarreii  with  SeleocBS^ 

vho  flies  to  Piuleav,  and  it  kiiully  received.  Ptolemy,  Selcucus,  Caasaader, 
and  LynimuchiLS  join  again:it  Antigunus.  They  send  ambassadors  to  hiai«  who  irinten 
in  Cilicia.  He  goes  into  Phuiuicia,  and  there  builds  ships:  besieges  Tjie.  Praiaa 
of  Phyiia,  wife  of  Demetrius.  Arisiodemus  raises  forces  for  Antigonos  in  Pelopoo- 
■esus.  Acts  of  Ptolemy,  one  of  Antigouu&'s  captaina.  Antigonos's  policy.  Tyre 
delivered.  The  agreement  of  Ptvleuiji's  captains,  and  the  rest  at  Cypms.  Tbe  acts 
of  Seleucus.  A  fleet  comes  to  Antigouu»  frum  the  Hellespont  and  Rhodes.  Things 
done  in  Peloponnesus.  Cassander's  acts  there  and  in  Greece.  Gieat  victory  by  sea 
and  land  obtained  by  Polyclitus,  Scleucus's  lieutenant:  he  is  rewarded  by  PtoFeny. 
Acts  of  Agalhocles  in  Sicily.     The  llomuns  make  war  against  tbe  Saronitei,  j,     ^ 

Tbe  acts  of  Aristodemas^  Antigonus's  general  in  Peloponnesus.  The  Dimeans  in 
Achaia  seek  to  free  themselves  from  Cassauder's  garrison :  they  take  the  citadel. 
Ale&aiidcr,  son  of  PolyperchoUi  assassinated.  Praise  of  Cratesipolis,  Ins  wife.  The 
acts  of  Cussander  in  /Ltulia,  and  other  parts  of  Greece.  Cruelly  of  the  i£loIians. 
Cassander  sends  an  army  into  Caria,  and  .Aristotle  with  a  fleet  to  Lemuos.  The  acts  of 
Cas^ander's  army  in  Caria.  Antigouu«  leaves  his  son  Deroetnus  in  Syria,  to  watch 
Ptolemy.     His  troublesome  march  into  A&ia.     Tlie  afi*iiirs  ol  Sicily.     Acraraiiu's  mis- 

irovernment  and   cruelties  in   Sicily.     Acts  oi  Agathocles.     Aliairs  of  Italy 

6.  Several  cities  revolt:  Lysimachus  comes  against  then.  Pliilip«  Caa»ander's  gene- 
lal,  routs  the  Epirois  and  iEtolians.  Ca»sander  agrees  with  Antiguous.  Antigonos 
gains  the  cities  in  Caria.  Cassandrr':)  acts  in  Greece.  The  Samuites  routed  by  the 
Koiu:>-.  Polemon  scut  h}' Aatigonus  into  Greece  to  set  the  cities  at  liberty.  Acts  -| 
of  Ai  r^oausand  Cussander.  Poieroon's  acts  in  Greece  fur  Anligouas.  Pt»le«aygocs 
agai.rst  'Jyrene  and  Cyprus;  and  thcD  against  Demelriuj.  Battle  with  Dexuet.-ius*at 
Gaza.  PtoleiLy  takes  Tyre.  Acts  of  Auiigonus's  commanders  in  Greece.  Tha 
ILpirots  niBke  Alceia*  king,  who  is  beaten  by  Lyciscus,  Cussander*a  general;  and  is 
beaten  fagjaiu  by  the  other.  Cassander  r^ues  against  the  Apolloniales.  ^leucus  reco- 
vers Babylon  with  a  small  army.  Demetrius  routs  Ciltes,  Ptolemy's  general.  Piuleay 
returns  lo  Egypt,  alter  wasting  Samaria,  Ga»,  Joppa,  &c.  Athcnaeus  sent  ':|,aanst 
tbe  Nabathacaiis  by  Autigouus.  Custouu  of  the  Arabians.  Description  of  the  AspbaU 
tites,  or  Lake  of  Sodom.  Demetrius  sent  against  Seleucus  in  Babylon.  Wanbctwean 
the  Romans  and  Samuites  in  Italy.  Conduct  of  Agathocles  in  Sicily.  7.  Casaandcr^ 
Ptolemy,  and  Lysimaclius,  make  peace  with  Aiitigoi.>u8.  Cassander  mnrdera  Roiana., 
and  her  son.  The  governors  take  the  title  of  kings  upon  tlicm.  Tbe  Cartbagniiaas 
raise  iorces  against  Agathocles.  Four  thousand  G^hins  murdered  by  Ag^thodef. 
Battle  between  Agathocles  and  Amilcar  tiie  Carthaginian^  at  Uimcra.  Agatbocica 
lottied.     Several  cities  revolt  from  As<ttliocles. 


BOOK  XX. 

Qbav.  1.  Agathocles  designs  to  invade  Africa.  His  cruelty  porsoed  in  Lis  Toyage. 
Eclipse  of  the  sun,  very  great.  Lands  in  Africa:  burru  his  ships.  His  successes  in 
Africa.  Hanuo  and  Bomilcar  made  generals  in  Africa.  Battle  between  them  and 
A(;^thocIes,  who  routs  them,  and  kills  Hanno.  His  stratagem  by  owls.  Cruel  super* 
MiiidU  u(  the  Cariliuginiaus  lu  sacrificing  their  children.  Actions  at  Syracuse.  Acts 
of  Agathocles  in  Africa.  Acts  of  Cassander  in  Macedouia.  Polypercbuii  endeavoara 
tu  tcslure  Hercules,  the  son  of  Alexander.  Miserable  destruction  of  Nicoclesand 
)ii»  family  ut  Cyprus.  Wars  of  Parisades's  sons,  king  of  the  Ciraiueriau  Bospburus. 
Valour  of  Satyr  us,  one  ol  the  sons;  his  death.     Siid  death  of  Eumelas,  anotber  of  the 

sous. 2.  Acts  of  Piolcmy  in  Cilicia  and  elsewhere.     Polyperchon  murders  Her« 

cules,  Alexander's  son,  hy  the  instigation  of  Cassander.  Aimlcar  taken^  and  put  to 
deatii  by  the  Syracus>tns.  His  head  sent  to  Agathocles  in  Afnca.  Traoaactiuiis  in 
Sicily.  Archagathus,  the  son  of  Agathocles*  kills  Lyciscus;  he  and  his  son  in  gfvat 
danger  by  the  army.  AlTairsin  Italy.  Works  of  Appius  Claudius:  the  Appiuiw^« 
Ptolemy  comes  to  Corinth:  hi:*  acts  there.  Cleopatra,  Alexander**  sister,  killed  by 
the  governor  of  Sardis.  Furtlirracts  of  .\gath(»cles  in  Airica.  Ophelaa  decoyed  and 
cot  ofl'  by  Agathocles.  Ophrlas's  trouble^oiue  march  lo  Agathocles.  Lauiiaa's  cruchy, 
and  ttie  story  of  her.  lioinilcar  seeks  to  be  prince  of  Carthage,  but  is  pnt  to  death 
by  the  citijceiw.  Agathocles  seiid^  the  s)mmIs  of  the  Cyreneans  to  Syracme:  noit  ^ 
tbem  lost  in  a  storm.    Aflfairs  m  Italy. J.  Deuictrius  fcacs  all  tlMGiccfHi  tilifi; 


CONTENTS-  69$ 

takes  the  Pinrus  at  Albeaa.  Denetriut  Pbalerioi  flies  to  l^olemj.  Ilonourt  givea 
to  Denetrioi  ki  Atheot.  He  m<U  to  CjfruM:  hit  acts  there :  betJc^  StUmiiu  Hit 
great  eopinef .  Ptolemy  Mih  to  Cypres.  Sea  ligbt  betweea  Pt'  ii  .^y  and  Demetrius. 
wherein  Ptolemy  is  routed.  Aatigoniu  takes  the  title  of  king,  as  likewise  do  several 
other  captains.  Agathocies^s  acu  at  Utica  in  Africa.  Tics  his  prisoners  to  a  great 
cngio'^  'Die  sorts  ot  people  in  Africa.  Xenodochus  rooted  in  Sicily  by  Agathocic/i 
captains.  Acts  of  Agatbocles  in  Sicily.  What  was  done  by  Archagathtu  in  Africa^ 
UfschsU  itthahaed  by  some  Greeks  that  camflfr^a  Trcgr^.  Apes«  their  custom  among 
Che  Pithecasc.  The  Carthaginians  draw  thirty  thousnod  omo  eat  of  Carthn|;e.  Mi»> 
fortanes  to  Agathocies's  caiMains  in  Africa.  The  army  blocked  up,  and  :^imost  starred. 
Agathocles  be^ts  the  Carthaginians  at  sea  near  Syracuse.  His  captain  Leptines  ha- 
rasses  the  Agrigentines.  Agathocles  feasts  the  Syracnsaas.  Uis  jocund  temper:  hit 
cruelly.  Routed  in  Africa.  Caitbaginian  camp  buriit.  Misfortune  afterwards  t* 
both  armies  by  one  cause.  Agathocles  put  in  chains  by  his  own  men.  Steals  oat  id 
Africa.     The  soldiers  kill  his  two  sons.     They  make  peace  with  the  CarthaginiaiM. 

Agathocles's  eiceediog  cruelty  at  iEgesta;  ai:d  afterwards  at  Syracuse. i.  Anti- 

gonus's  march  into  Egypt.  Lost  some  of  his  ships  in  a  tampeat  near  liaphi^  H« 
retams  intu  Syria.  Dinocrates  prevails  In  Sicily.  Agathocles  is  willing  to  resign  hit 
govenimeut;  but  Dinocrates  stands  off.  What  was  done  in  Italy.  Autigonos's  war« 
with  the  Rhudians.  Rhodes  besieged  by  Deiuetrins.  Agathocles  rouis  Dmocratcs*! 
great  army  with  a  few  men.  His  cruelly  to  those  who  submitted  upon  terms,  whert 
lie  butche-s  seven  thousand.  Dinocrates  in  favour  with  Agathocles;  he  betrays  the 
conltfieraies.  Furtlier  transactions  in  Italy.^— 5.  Siege  of  Rhodes  coatinned. 
Acts  of  the  sea-captains  of  the  Rhodians.  Peace  made  with  the  Rhodians.  Acts  of 
Agtkthocles  in  tiM  Lipsra  islands.  Acts  of  Demetrias  in  Greece.  War  between  the 
Tarcntines  and  Lucaniaos.  Acts  of  Cleonymus  the  Spartan.  Cassandcr  sends  t* 
Antigonus  to  make  peace,  who  refuses  Lysiiuachus  joins  with  Cjssander,  and  m 
does  Ptolemy  and  Seleacas,  sgainst  Antigonus:  he  marches  agaiast  Lysimachus, 
Demetrius's  I'oriher  acts  in  Greece.  The  armies  of  Cassander  and  Drmetrius.  De* 
meuius  leaves  Greece,  and  goes  with  his  army  to  his  father  in  Asia,  alter  peace  nada 
with  Castander.  The  misfortunes  of  Plistarchos  at  sea.  Pi«ileiuy  besieges  Sidoo^ 
Uit  returns  to  Egypt  npon  a  laJse  report.  Seleucus  marches  ftom  Babylon  with  ■ 
great  amy, 

FRAGMENTS,  SUPPLEMENT, 

Ac.  &c. 


i  ■!■; . 


\..lt'> 


■■'.     t 


:  ■   i 


(■•! 


I         f 


