Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


THE 


HISTORICAL  LIBRARY 


OF 


DIODORUS  THE  SICILIAN, 


IN 


FIFTEEN  BOOKS. 


t  TO  WRICB  Aftl  ADDB» 


I 


THE  FRAGMENTS  OF  DIODORUS, 


AVD 


ThoujnMished  by  H.  Falesius,  L  Bhodomaimus,  and  R  Urtinut. 


TftAVtLATlO  BY 


G.  BOOTH^  ESQ. 


\/J\r  TWO  VOLUMES. 

\ 


VOL.1. 


•  •     • 


• 


•    •        •  • 


•      «         •        •   • 
.  ,  ■     .     •    •  •  •    • 

t  •    •     • 


LONDON: 

fO»  J.OAVIl,lllLlTARYCIIROSICLEorFICE,fcS5EXSTRlET,8TRAND;AHp 

TO  BE  UAD  OV  THE  BOUKSiiLLERS. 

1814. 


imfM 


[the  N'liVv'  V      ".■ 

PU3L1CL"''^    ■ 

ASTCR,  LF'  C./.  A-  0^ 


•       '     •  • 


r 


•  ■ 


•     •  t 


TO  THE  READER. 


SO  many  are  the  encomiums  of  history,  both  by  ancient  and  mo- 
dern authors,  that  littk  or  nothing. can  be  further  added  to  what  is 
already  extant  upon  that  subject;  and  therefore  I  shall  wave  troub- 
ling myself  or  the  reader  with  discourses  of  that  kind,  but  leave  every 
judicious  person  to  his  own  experience,  which  is  the  best  judge,  and 
will  give  the  surest  testimony  to  the  truth  of  these  commendations. 
He  that  rests  barely  on  the  matter  of  fact  related  in  history,  pleases 
his  fancy  for  a  moment  while  he  is  reading,  but  never  improves  his 
judgment  to  make  it  useful  in  conversation,  or  in  the  management 
of  public  afikirs.  He  gains  no  more  than  children  by  hearing  a  win- 
ter tale,  and  strange  stories  of  this  brave  hero^  and  that  mighty  giant, 
who  did  wonders  in  the  land  of  Utopia*  The  profitable  reader  is  he 
that  not  only  seeks  to  please  his  fancy,  but  makes  use  of  his  reason 
ID  observing  chiefly  the  wonderful  providence  of  God,  in  ruling  and 
governing  the  world  in  all  ages  to  this  day ;  his  setting  up  and  pull- 
ing down  of  states,  kingdoms,  and  empires,  in  certain  periods  of  time; 
his  justice  in  punbhing  wickedness,  and  therein  the  confirmation  of 
his  truth  and  holiness;  to  see  and  consider  his  wisdom,  in  ordering 
and  disposing  of  one  event  for  the  effecting  of  his  purpose  in  another. 
To  observe  the  causes,  progress,  and  end  of  this  or  that  accident,  this 
war,  that  revolution,  this  success,  and  that  miserable  disaster,  are  the 
main  and  chief  ends  and  designs  of  reading  of  history;  whereby  tlie 
understanding  and  memory  are  not  only  furnished  with  notions  of 
things  done,  and  long  since  past,  but  the  judgment  is  improved  with 
that  moral  prudence  (and  sometimes  religious  too)  as  to  be  careful 
to  avoid  the  rocks  others  have  before  split  upon;  and  to  imitate  the 
virtue  and  honourable  actions  of  others  (at  least  for  the  sake  of  repu- 
tation that  attends  upon  them  in  this  world).  Here  may  be  found 
L  examples  which  may  justly  put  Christians  to  the  blush,  who  come  not 
I    up  to  the  moral  virtues  of  poor  heathens  heretofore  Aunous  (upon 

L 


f 


IV  TO  THE  READER. 

I  II    I     III  ■  '    ■■  >  '        '  .,■■■■,  I     ■■M 


that  account)  in  the  ages  wherein  they  lived;  as  Themistocles  for 
his  faithfulness  to  his  country^  Aristides  for  his  justice^  Scipio  for 
his  chastity^  Cato  for  his  sobriety,  and  several  others  for  eminent 
and  virtuous  qualifications.  The  present  author,  and  his  history,  is 
well  known  among  the  learned  to  be  a  treasury  of  ancient  history. 
Amongst  others,  Henry  Stephen,  in  his  tract  of  Diodorus,  gives  him 
this  honourable  encomium:  Quantum  solis  lumen  inter  stellasy 
tantum  inter  omnes^  quotquot  ad  riostra  te^npora  pervenerunt,  his* 
taricos  (si  utilitas  potius,  quam  voluptatis  aurium  habenda  est 
ratio)  noster  hie  Diodorus  eminere  dici  potest.  And  Justin  Martyr, 
and  some  others,  call  him  the  most  famous  author  of  all  the  Greek 
Historians.  Amongst  other  excellencies  of  this  author,  he  is  pecu- 
liarly observable  to  have  a  regard  and  respect  to  the  providence  of 
God  in  the  affairs  of  the  world;  and  is  the  only  ancient  author  that 
takes  notice  in  the  course  of  his  history  of  the  times  wherein  the 
most  famous  historians,  philosophers,  and  poets  flourished.  Our  au- 
thor himself  lived  about  three-score  years  before  our  Saviour's  birth, 
in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,  and  the  reign  of  Augustus,  and  wrote  a 
general  history  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  his  own  time,  in 
forty  books,  called  the  Historical  Library,  of  which  only  fifteen  are 
extant,  the  rest  lost  by  the  injury  of  time.  The  five  first  are  pro- 
perly the  mythological  part  of  the  history,  more  uncertain,  and  full 
of  Egyptian  and  Grecian  fables;  but  very  useful  for  the  understand- 

i-  ing  of  ancient  authors,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Assyrian  monarchy. 

They  give  an  account  of  the  affairs  of  the  world  from  tiie  beginning 
of  time  (known  to  the  heathens)  to  the  Trojan  war  exclusively:  the 
five  next  in  order  are  perished,  which  is  the  reason  the  eleventh  book 

J  immediately  follows,  which  begins  with  the  expedition  of  Xerxes  into 

^  Greece,  and  from  thence  the  history  is  continued  in  five  books  to 

%  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Philip  King   of  Maccdon,  father 

I- 

of  Alexander  the  Great;  and  from  the  reign  of  Philip,  in  five  more,  to 
the  expedition  of  Selcucus  Nicanor  into  Cappadocia,  containing  au 
account  of  things  done  for  the  space  of  one  hundred  and  seventy- 
nine  years. 
/  The  books  are  divided  into  chapters,  for  the  ease  of  the  reader, 

I  who  may  thereby  the  better  pause  and  breath  when  he  thinks  fit;  and 

I  to  supply  a  chronological  table  in  the  ten  last  books,  the  distinction 

I 


TO  TH£  READER. 


of  times  is  observed  in  the  notes^  both  by  the  olympiads  and  the 
Christian  era;  for  the  relations  in  the  first  five  1xx)ks  were  long  be* 
fore  the  olympiads  began^  and  tlie  history  is  so  ancient^  that  the  cer- 
tain times  of  persons  and  things  there  related  are,  for  the  most  part, 
unknown  or  very  uncertain. 

To  the  present  translation  is  added  that  of  the  excerpts  or  frag- 
ments of  some  of  those  books  of  Diodorus  Siculus  that  are  lost^  col- 

* 

lected  by  Photius  in  his  Bibliotheca,  and  by  others,  annexed  at  the 
end  of  the  edition  of  Diodorus  published  by  Rhodomannus.  You 
have  here  likewise  a  further  addition  of  the  excerpts  of  Valesius,  pub- 
lished by  him  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1634. 

After  the  Fragments,  there  is  a  Supplement  taken  out  of  Quintus 
Curtius  and  Arrianus,  to  fill  up  a  great  chasm  in  Diodorus,  (book 
sevcnteendi),  where  that  part  of  his  history  is  lost.  As  those  authors 
had  their  materials  from  him,  (as  is  not  doubted  among  the  learned), 
so  it  is  hut  a  piece  of  common  gratitude  to  help  him  over  the  ditch  by 
a  staff  made  out  of  his  own  pile.  That  the  matter  contained  in  this 
supplement  is  that  which  is  wanting  in  Diodorus,  is  apparent  not 
only  from  some  part  of  the  broken  history  that  is  there,  but  from  the 
index  immediately  before  the  seventeenth  book  in  Rhodomannus*s 
edition,  where  the  heads  of  the  subject  matter  are  to  be  found  in 
their  order  together,  but  nothing  of  them  in  the  body  of  the  his- 
tory. The  said  heads  are  placed  over  every  distinct  subject  in  the 
said  supplement. 

But  as  to  the  translation  of  the  whole,  it  may  be  very  well  expected 
some  apology  should  be  made,  or  reason' given  for  translating  the  five 
first  books,  which  appeared  in  the  English  tongue  above  forty  years 
ago.  To  give,  therefore,  satisfaction  in  tiiat  particular,  we  can  truly 
and  sincerely  say,  it  was  not  undertaken  without  some  regret,  not 
willin.'^  to  seem  a  captious  censurer  of  otlier  men's  Jabours;  there- 
fore, to  obviate  that  suspicion,  we  are  willing  to  be  an  advocate  to 
excuse  what  was  before  done  in  this  kind,  as  to  those  five  books;  ioi 
the  errors  and  defects  that  appear  in  the  former  translation  are  clijjny 
occa.sioned  by  an  old  Latin  edition  of  Diodorus,  whcrcunto  the  nnuyi. 
lator  wholly  applied  himself,  having  at  that  time  (without  (kjuhi)  no 
better  an  edition  to  direct  him.  At  the  first  it  was  designed  to  have 
spared  so  much  time,  becau'?c  they  had  been  befort?  translated:  l>ur. 


-4     ■ 


71  TO  THE  READER. 


\i 


f 

r 

f 


often  hearing  the  former  censured^  and  a  new  translation  desired  of 
those  five  books^  (which,  tlirough  a  mistake,  are  divided  by  the  old 
Latin  edition  into  six,  by  taking  the  first  book  to  be  two,  because  it 
13  in  two  parts),  we  were  the  more  inclined,  and  at  length  resolved^ 
to  endure  the  toil ;  though  withal  we  might,  perhaps,  fall  under  cen- 
gore,  in  undertaking  to  reform  the  errors  of  another,  and  yet  prove  as 
much,  if  not  more  fiiulty  ourselves. 

But  whatever  it  be,  we  here  present  it  to  the  judgment  of  the  inge- 
nuous reader,  together  with  the  other  books,  entreating  him  to  accept 
what  he  judges  worthy  his  approbation,  and,  with  a  favourable  cen- 
sure, to  pass  by  the  errors  and  mistakes  he  may  espy  in  the  perusal. —. 
As  for  the  carping  Momus,  if  the  whole  were  in  all  respects  exact  and 
complete,  (which  were  a  vanity  to  pretend),  it  were  far  more  likely 
from  such  to  meet  with  a  cavilling  sarcasm,  than  to  be  indulged  with 
any  favourable  acceptance. 


THE  PREFACE. 


ALL  mankind  are  under  a  great  obligation  of  gratitude  to  those 
that  have  written  universal  histories;  forasmuch  as  there  has  beea 
an  honourable  contest  amongst  them  by  their  labours  and  pains^  to 
be  helpful  to  others  in  the  due  conduct  and  management  of  the 
common  affairs  and  concerns  of  this  present  life.  For  whereas  they 
usher  in  a  sort  of  wholesome  instruction^  without  any  hazard  to  the 
person;  so  they  thereby  also  procure  to  their  readers  art  and  skill  in 
politics  above  the  ordinary  rate^  with  great  ease  and  security.  For 
knowledge  gained  by  experience,  though  it  brings  a  man  to  an  aptness 
to  be  quick  in  discerning  what  is  most  advisable  in  every  particular 
case,  yet  such  knowledge  is  attended  with  many  toils  and  hazards. 
And  thus  he  that  was  the  most  experienced  man  among  the  heroes*^ 
viewed  many  cities,  and  came  well  to  understand  and  pry  into  the 
minds  and  tempers  of  men,  yet  it  was  with  many  troubles  and 
misfortunes:  but  knowledge  of  what  was  well  or  ill  done  by  others, 
gained  by  history,  carries  along  with  it  instructions,  freed  from  those 
misfortunes  that  others  have  before  experienced. 

Besides,  these  historians  have  used  their  utmost  diligence  to 
reduce  all  men,  in  their  consideration  of  them,  (who  are  united  and 
related  one  to  another  in  the  same  common  nature  and  original, 
though  far  distant  each  from  the  other  as  to  place  and  time),  under 
one  and  the  same  head,  and  common  order,  as  if  they  were  servants 
herein  to  the  Divine  Providence.  For  as  Providence  having  mar- 
shalled the  stars  (visible  to  us)  in  a  most  beautiful  frame  and  order, 
and  likewise  conjoined  the  natures  of  men  in  a  common  analogy  and 
likeness  one  to  another,  incessantly  wheels  about  every  age,  as  in  a 
circle,  imparting  to  each  what  is  before  by  fate  shared  out  and 
allotted  for  them;  so  these  historians,  by  committing  to  writing  the 


Vlll  THE  PREFACE. 


common  actions  of  men  through  the  whole  world,  as  if  they  were  the 
aflbirsonlyof  one  city,  represent  their  labours  as  one  entire  account^ 
and  common  repertory  and  treasury  of  human  transactions.  For  it 
is  a  desirable  thing  to  be  in  a  capacity  to  make  use  of  the  mistakes  of 
others,  the  better  to  order  the  course  of  our  own  lives,  and  in  the 
various  events  and  accidents  that  may  befal  us,  not  to  be  then  at  a 
loss,  and  seeking  what  is  to  be  done,  but  rather  to  be  able  to  imitate 
what  has  been  well  done.  And  certainly,  as  to  counsel  and  advice, 
all  prefer  ancient  men  before  those  that  are  young,  because  of  their 
|)rudence  gained  by  a  long  experience.  But  history  goes  as  far 
beyond  the  knowledge  of  old  men,  as  we  are  sure  it  does  surmount 
all  their  experience  in  multitude  of  examples.     So  that  any  man  may 

m 

justly  look  upon  it  as  a  thing  most  profitable  and  advantageous,  to 

make  use  of  this  upon  all  occasions  and  accidents  of  this  life.    As 

for  young  men,  it  teaches  them  the  wisdom  and  prudence  of  the  old, 

and  increases  and  improves  the  wisdom  of  tlie  aged:  it  fits  private 

jnen  for  high  places;  and  stirs  up  princes  (for  the  sake  of  honour. 

and  glory)  to  those  exploits  that  may  immortalize  their  names.    It 

encourages  likewise  soldiers  to  fight  the  more  courageously  for  their 

country,  upon  the  hopes  of  applause  and  commendation  after  their 
« 

deaths:  and  as  a  curb  to  the  impious  and  prophane,  it  restrains 
them  in  some  measure,  upon  the  account  of  being  noted  to  posterity, 
with  a  perpetual  brand  of  infamy  and  disgrace. 

What  shall  I  say  ?  In  hopes  of  having  the  memory  of  their  good 
acts  recorded  to  posterity  by  historians,  some  have  built  cities,  others 
have  applied  themselves  to  the  promulgation  of  good  and  wholesome 
laws :  many  also,  upon  this  account,  have  set  their  wits  at  work  to 
invent  arts  and  sciences  for  the  good  of  mankind.  And  whereas 
complete  happiness  is  made  up  of  all  perfections  centering  in  one, 
history  consequently  is  to  bear  away  the  prize,  which  is  the  cause  of 
all  those  commendable  and  glorious  effects;  for  it  is  most  certain^ 
she  is  the  preserver  of  the  virtues  of  worthy  men  in  posterity;  ah 
eternal  witness  to  the  cowardice  and  impiety  of  others ;  and  a  bene- 
factor to  all  mankind  in  general.  For  if  a  fine  spun  story,  consisting 
merely  of  fictions  told  of  things  done  among  the  spirits  below,  tends 
much  to  the  promoting  of  piety  and  justice,  how  much  more  then* 
may  we  conclude  that  hbtory,  the  most  noble  assertrix  of  truth,  and 


THE  PREFACE.  Itt 


Tery  metropolis  (as  it  were)  of  all  philosophy,  may  adorn  the 
manners  of  men  with  principles  of  justice  and  honesty?  For  there 
is  not  a  man  (through  the  infirmity  of  human  nature)  that  lives 
scarce  a  moment  of  an  enth'e  eternity,  but  is  extinguished  and  gone 
for  ever  after  this  life;  and  with  those  who  never  did  anything 
commendable  in  their  life*time,  all  their  enjoyments  and  comforts 
perish  with  them.  But  those  who  have  signalized  themselves  by 
virtuous  actions,  are  made  famous  in  every  age,  their  praises  being 
proclaimed,  as  it  were,  by  a  divine  voice  from  history. 

I  judge  it  therefore  honourable  and  commendable,  and  a  piece  of 
admirable  wisdom  and  prudence,  to  purchase  that  glory  which  is 
immortal,  with  labours  and  sufferings  that  are  but  short  and  tem- 
poral. It  is  confessed  by  all,  concerning  Hercules,  that  while  he 
was  here  upon  earth,  he  voluntarily  undertook  great  and  continual 
labours,  and  ran  through  many  dangers,  that,  by  doing  good  to  man- 
kind, he  might  gain  the  reward  of  an  immortal  fame.  And  as  to 
other  men,  some  are  honoured  as  heroes,  others  deified  as  gods,  and 
all  by  the  help  and  advantage  of  history,  which  has  transmitted  their 
virtues  to  posterity,  and  caused  the  rjemembrance  of  them  to  be  im- 
mortal. Other  monuments  endure  but  for  a  little  time,  and  are  often 
ruined  and  destroyed  by  various  accidents;  but  the  force  and  vigour 
of  history  pierces  through  the  whole  world,  and  time  itself,  (which 
consumes  all  other  things),  is  its  keeper,  handing  it  down  to  posterity 
for  ever. 

History  likewise  conduces  much  to  make  a  man  eloquent,  than 
which  nothing  is  more  commendable;  for  by  this  Grecians  excel 
barbarians,  and  the  learned  those  that  are  ignorant:  and  by  this 
art  alone  it  is,  that  one  single  person  many  times  prevails  over  mul- 
titudes. 

To  concludcWhatever  is  done,  appears  to  be  such  either  as  to 
quantity  or  quality,  as  the  eloquent  rhetorician  is  pleased  to  make  it. 
And  such  we  call  good  men,  men  of  high  esteem  for  excellent  ian- 
guage,  as  those  that  by  that  qualification  have  attained  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  virtue.  But  this  art  of  speaking  well,  is  divided  into  several 
parts:  that  part  which  is  poetical,  seems  t«  delight  more  than  to 
profit  the  auditor;  that  which  relates  to  making  of  laws  tends  more 
to  coercion  than  instruction;  and  the  other  parts  either  contribute 

Vol.  I.    No.  32.  c 


THE  FRBFACE. 


nothing  at  all  to  oar  well-being;  6r  they  are  as  hurtftiil  one  way,  as 
they  are  ufeefal  and  profitable  another ;  and  aom^  of  then  eVen^  oppoae 
the  truth  with  downright  Mies. 

But  history  only  (wherein  words  and  things  agree)  comprehends 
in  writing,  what  is  both  pleasant  and  profitaUie;  for  who  cannot 
discern  but  that  it  persuadeil  to  justice;  condenkna  th^  wicked  and 
vicious;  praises  the  good,  and  greatly  improves  the  underttiME&ding  of 
the  readers  ?  And  therefore,  when  we  saw  these  sort  of  writers  deser^ 
vedly  in  great  esteem,  we  were  stirred  up  to  an  earnest  study  of 
prosecuting  the  same  subject. 

But  when  we  seriously  consider  the  aotfiors  that  have  been  before 
us,  though  we  highly  approve  of  their  oiiethod  and  design,  as  fiur  as 
we  may  justly;  yet  we  conceive  their  writings  are  not  aJtoglether 
composed  to  the  due  measure  of  profit  and  advanti^e  as  they  ought 
to  be.    For  whereas  to  profit  the  reader,  it  is  necessarily  requisite, 
that  many  and  various  circumstances  of  afiairs  |>e  related;  many  set 
forth  the  wars  only  of  one  nation,  or  one  single  city;  for  very  few 
have  begun  their  histories  from  ancient  times,  or  have  made  it  their 
business  to  write  of  the  afiairs  of  all  nations  in  general,  to  these  our 
days.    And  those  that  do,  some  of  them  fix  no  certain  time  to  the 
several  transactions  they  write  of;  and  others  altogether  pass  over  the 
aflfairs  of  the  barbarians.    And  some  there  are  that  never  mention 
the  ancient  mythologies,  but  slip  them  by,  because  of  the  difficulty 
of  the  subject.    Some  that  have  begun  to  write,  have  been  prevented 
by  death,  and  so  have  left  their  works  imperfect.    And  none  who 
have  hitherto  set  themselves  to  thb  business,  have  brought  down 
their  history  below  the  times  of  the  Macedonians :  for  some  have 
broke  off  at  Philip,  others  at  the  acts  of  Alexander,,  and  others  at  his 
successors  or  posterity.    And  although  many  great  and  considerable 
actions  since  those  times,  to  these  our  days,  have  been  upon  the 
stage,  yet  no  historian  has  hitherto  undertaken  to  set  them  forth  in 
one  entire  tract,  by  reason  of  the  tediousness  of  the  work.    And 
in  regard  that  in  those  writings  which  we  have,  the  rimes  and 
actions  that  have  been  comprehended  in  them,  are  huddled  together 
in  several  volumes,  written  by  various  and  several  authors,  it  is  a 
very  difficult  matter  either  to  understand,  or  remember  them. 
Having  therefore  diligently  perused  and  examined  the  tracts  of  the 


TSK  mVAiCE.  Xi 


w&wnl  autlMNPs^  I  detemiofdi  to  oompQae  an  es^re  bistorjr^  from 
whicli  tikt  jseider  nugfaftro^i  midi  ad(V»Btta|fe9  with  little  kboar  and 
paina:  lor  he  wha  endeavcam^  to  the  iHmoat  at  his  pover>  to  com* 
prcheod  io  his  wjitin^  the  nemoiaUe  aflbirs  and  actions  of  the 
whole  wiorld,  (as  of  one  siogk  ct^),  biin^ng  down  his  historj  from 
the  moat  amacnt  tfmea  to  his  jbiwa  age,  though  he  set  upon  a  woric 
eefltaialy  very  hhorionsy  yet  he  will  perform  that  which,  when  fi- 
nished, will  be  undoubtedly  most  useful  and  profitable.  For  hence, 
erery  man  may,  as  out  of  a  common  fountain,  dmw  what  is  conve- 
nient and  serviceible  for  his  own  private  use*  For  as  to  them  that 
have  a  desire  to  emf^y  themselves  in  tumbling  and  turning  over  so 
many  aathom,  first,  aueh  esBAOt  /easily  get  so  many  books  together  as 
are  necessary  lor  their  use;  and  then  again,  by  reason  of  the  diflfering 
rriatinns  and  midtitude  of  authors,  they  can  scarcely  understand  the 
matters  related. 

But  one  gcneml  hiatory,  io  xme  entire  tract,  as  it  may  be  quickly 
and  readily  perused,  so  the  understancyag  of  the  subject  nuitter,  with 
far  more  ease,  goes  along  with  the  reading.  Yea,  this  sort  of  history 
ezceb  all  others,  as  far  as  the  whole  is  more  useful  than  the  part;  as 
the  entire  thing  is  more  desirable  than  that  which  is  divided;  and 
that  whidi  fixes  the  exact  periods  of  time,  more  than  that  which 
leaves  ^  time  uncertain  and  unknown,  when  things  related  were 
done. 

Fercaving,  therefore,  that  such  a  work  would  be  of  mighty  use 
and  advantage,  but  that  it  would  require  both  a  long  time,  and  a 
great  deal  of  labour  and  pains,  we  spent  thirty  years  time  in  the 
composing  of  it;  and  for  that  purpose  travelled  ttirough  a  great  part 
of  Asia  and  Europe,  with-  many  hazards  and  difficulties,  tliat  we 
ourselves  might  be  eye  witnesses  of  most  of  the  parts  and  places  that 
were  necessary  ior  the  carrying  on  of  our  design  in  this  work.  For, 
diioogh  the  ignorance  of  places,  not  only  common  writers,  but  even 
those  who  are  reputed  the  most  eminent,  have  committed  many 
errors  and  mistakes.  Tiie  chief  cause,  and  that  which  most  helped 
forward  the  design,  (which,  though  thought  impossible,  is  now  fully 
completed  and  perfected),  was  the  strong  and  constant  desire  we  had 
of  composing  such  a  work.  Many  helps  likewise  were  afibrded  to 
us  at  Rome,  for  the  carrying  on  pf  what  we  had  undertaken  iu  this 


«n  THE  PREFACE. 


kind.  For  that  noble  city,  whose  power  is  stretched  out  as  far  as  to 
the  utmost  comers  of  the  earth,  (being  that  we  had  been  there  a  long 
time  an  inhabitant),  famished  us  with  many  things  ready  at  hand  for 
our  purpose.  For  being  born  in  Agyrus  in  Sicily,  and  having  in  a 
great  measure  learnt  the  Roman  language,  by  means  ot  the  frequent 
commerce  of  Romans  in  that  island,  I  diligently  collected  out  of 
their  ancient  records,  what  I  found  concerning  the  memorable  actions 
of  this  empire. 

We  have  begun  our  history  with  the  mythologies  handed  down  to 
us,  as  well  those  of  the  Grecians  as  of  the  barbarians,  seriously 
weighing  and  considering,  as  far  as  we  were  able,  what  every  one  of 
them  have  related  of  things  done  in  ancient  times.  Having  now 
finished  what  was  designed,  though  not  yet  exposed  to  public  view, 
before  that  be  done,  we  shall  declare  something  briefly  concerning 
the  whole  work. 

Our  first  six  books  comprehend  the  affairs  and  mythologies  of  the 
ages  before  the  Trojan  war,  of  which  the  three  first  contain  the  bar<.> 
barian,  and  the  next  following  almost  all  the  Grecian  antiquities. 
In  the  eleven  next  after  these,  we  have  given  an  account  of  what  has 
been  done  in  every  place  from  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war,  till  the 
death.of  Alexander.  In  the  three-and-twenty  books  following,  we 
have  set  forth  all  other  things  and  affairs,  till  the  begiu'ning  of  the 
war  the  Romans  made  upon  the  Gauls;  at  which  time  Julius  Cfiesar 
the  emperor,  (who  upon  the  account  of  his  great  achievements  was 
suraamed  Divus*)  having  subdued  the  warlike  nations  of  the  Gauls, 
enlarged  the  Roman  empire,  as  far  as  te  the  British  isles;  whose 
first  acts  fall  in  with  the  first  year  of  the  hundred  and  eightieth 
olympiad,  when  Herodes  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens.  But  as  to 
the  limitation  of  times  contained  in  thb  work,  we  have  not  bound 
those  things  that  happened  before  the  Trojan  war,  within  any  certaia 
limits,  because  we  could  not  find  any  foundation  whereon  to  rely  with 
any  certainty. 

According  to  Apollodoms,  we  have  accounted  fourscore  years 
f^om  the  Trojan  war,  to  the  return  of  the  Heraclides:  from  thence 
to  the  first  olympiad,  three  hundred  and  twenty-eight  years,  com<- 
puting  the  times  from  the  Lacedsemonian  kings:    from  the  first 

^  A  Divine  pttwon,  or  •  Go4. 


THE  PREFACE.  Xllt 


olympiad  to  the  beginning  of  the  Gallic  war,  (where  our  history  euds)^ 
are  seven  ^lundred  and  thirty  years:  so  that  our  whole  work,  (com- 
prehended in  forty  books),  is  an  history  which  takes  in  the  affairs  of 
eleven  hundred  and  thirty-eight  years,  besides  those  times  that  pre- 
ceded the  Trojan  war. 

We  have  been  the  more  careful  to  premise  these  things,  that  the 
reader  might  have  the  clearer  prospect  into  the  nature  of  the  whole 
tract;  and  that  those  who  commonly  take  upon  them  to  polish  and 
amend  books,  may  be  at  least  prevailed  with  not  to  corrupt  other 
men's  works.  Whatever,  therefore,  through  the  whole  history,  is 
written  well,  let  no  man  envy:  what  slips  there  are,  (through  igno* 
ranee),  those  who  have  more  knowledge  are  veiy  welcome  to 
amend. 

And  now,  having  finished  what  we  thought  fit  to  premise,  we  shall 
endeavour  actually  to  perform  what  we  before  prombed,  as  to  the 
uniting  of  the  history. 


■11      ■  '  ,  ■ '  '      *  ■-  —  'J- 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  L 


CHAP.  I. 

Of  the  Jlrst  Qeneration  of  Men*  How  the  fFortd  first  hegmt. 
3Ien*$fiT$t  mamner  of  lAfe,  and  who  were  the  first  Men.  Fir^ 
Men  in  JEggpt.  VTho  were  the  most  andent  Oods  of  Egyfi^ 
Of  their  Demy  Gods.  Sol,  Satwn,  Rhea,  Jupiter,  Jwmn^ 
and  Fukem,  reigned  in  Egypt.  Cf  Osiris  and  Ms.  2%e  Att$ 
of  Osiris  andlsis.  Hermes,  Ms  Inventions.  Osiris  prepares 
for  his  EmpedMion  through  the  fForldf  and  16  that  end  raises  A 
greed  jvmy. 

WHAT  notions  they  had  of  the  gods.^who  first  instituted  divine 
wcMihip^  and  what  is  fabulously  related  of  every  one  of  the  deities, 
(because  the  subject  requires  much  to  be  said),  we  shall  distiuctly 
set  forth:  and  whatever  we  conceive  to  be  pertinent  to  the  present 
history,  we  shall  discourse  of  severally  and  dbtinctly,  that  nothing 
worth  observation  may  be  omitted.  And  we  shall  here  give  aa 
accurate  account  (as  far  as  the  antiquity  of  the  matters  will  admit)  of 
the  generation  and  original  of  mankind,  and  of  the  aflkirs  and  trans* 
actions  of  all  parts  of  the  known  worlds  drawing  down  our  history 
from  the  most  ancient  times. 

Of  the  origin,  therefore,  of  men,  there  are  two  opinions  amongst 
the  mo^  famous  and  authentic  naturalists  and  historians. 

Some  of  these  are  of  opinion,  that  the  world  had  neither  beginning 
jioT  ever  shall  have  end;  and  likewise  say,  that  mankind  was  from 
eternity,  and  that  there  never  was  a  time  when  he  first  began  to  be. 
^Others,  on  the  contrary,  conceive  both  tlie  world  to  be  made,  and  to 
ne  corruptible,  and  that  there  was  a  certain  time  when  men  haii  first 
m  being. 

For  whereas  all  things  at  the  first  were  jumbled  together,  heaven 
and  earth  weif  in  one  mass,  and  had  one  and  the  same  form :    but 


l6  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  L 

afterwards^  (tliey  say),  when  cerporeal  beings  appeared  one  after  ano- 
ther^ the  world  at  length  presented  itself  in  the  order  we  now  se)e; 
and  that  the  air  was  in  continual  agitation,  whose  fiery  part  ascended 
together  to  the  highest  place,  its  nature  (by  reason  of  its  levity)  tend- 
ing always  upwards;  for  which  reaison  both  the  sun^  and  that  vast 
number  of  the  stars,  are  contained  within  that  orb.  That  the  gross 
and  earthy  matter,  (clotted  together  by  moisture),  by  reason  of  its 
weight,  sunk  down  below  into  one  place,  and  continually  whirling 
about;  the  sea  was  made  of  the  humid  parts;  and  the  muddy  earth 
of  the  more  solid,  as  yet  very  moorish  and  soft,  which  by  degrees  at 
first  was  made  crusty  by  the  heat  of  the  sun;  and  then,  after  the  face 
of  the  earth  was  parched,  and,  as  it  were,  fermented,  the  moisture 
afterwards,  in  many  places,  bubbled  up,  and  appeared  as  so  many 
pustules  wrapt  up  in  thin  and  slender  coats  and  skins,  which  may  be 
even  seen  in  standing  ponds  and  marish  places;  when,  after  the  earth 
has  been  pierced  with  cold,  the  air  grows  hot  on  a  sudden,  without  a 
gradual  alteration.  And  whereas  moisture  generates  creatures  from 
beat,  as  from  a  seminal  principle,  things  so  generated,  by  being  in- 
wrapt  in  the  dewy  mists  of  the  night,  grew  and  increased,  and  in  the 
day  solidated,  and  were  made  hard  by  the  heat  of  the  sun ;  and  when 
the  births  included  in  those  ventricles  iiad  received  their  due  propor- 
tion, then  those  slender  skins,  being  burst  asunder  by  the  heat,  the 
forms  of  all  sorts  of  living  creatures  were  brought  forth  into  the 
light,  of  which  those  tliat  had  most  of  heat  mounted  aloft,  and  were 
fowl,  and  birds  of  the  air;  but  those  tliat  were  drossy,  and  had  more 
of  earth,  were  numbered  in  the  order  of  creeping  things,  and  other 
creatures  altogether  used  to  the  earth.  Then  those  beasts  that  were 
naturally  watery  and  moist,  (called  fishes),  presently  hastened  to  the 
place  connatural  to  them;  and  when  the  earth  afterwards  became 
more  dry  and  solid  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  the  drying  winds,  it 
had  not  i>ower  at  length  to  produce  any  more  of  the  greater  living 
creatures;  but  each  that  had  an  animal  life  began  to  increase  their 
kind  by  mutual  copulation.  And  Euripides,  the  scholar  of  Anaxa- 
go'ras^  seems  to  be  of  the  same  opinion  concerning  the  first  genera* 
tion  of  all  things;  for  in  his  Menalippe  he  has  these  verses: 

A  roast  confus*d,  lieaven  and  earth  once  were 

Of  one  form ;  but  after  separation. 

Then  men,  trees^  beasts  of  tb'eacib,  with  fowls  of  th'air 

First  sprung  up  in  their  generation. 

But  if  this  power  of  the  earth  to  produce  living  creatures  at  the 
first  origin  of  all  things  seem  credible  to  any,  the  Egyptians  do  bring 
testimonies  of  this  energy  of  the  earth,  by  the  same  things  done  there 
at  thb  day.    For  they  say,  that  about  Thebes  in  £^pt,  after  the 


Chap.  1.  DIODORUS  SICULUd.  1 7 

overflowing  of  the  river  Nile,  the  earth  thereby  being  covered  with 
mud  and  slime,  many  places  putrify  through  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and 

« 

thence  are  bred  multitudes  of  mice.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  out 
of  the  earth,  when  it  is  hardened,  and  the  air  changed  from  its 
due  and  natural  temperament,  animals  are  generated;  by  which 
means  it  came  to  pass,  that  in  the  first  beginning  of  all  things, 
various  living  creatures  proceeded  from  the  earth.  And  these  are 
the  opinions  touching  the  original  of  things^. 

But  men  they  say,  at  first,  led  a  rude  and  brutish  sort  of  life,  and 
wandered  up  and  down  in  the  fields,  and  fed  upon  herbs,  and  the 
natural  fruits  of  the  trees.     Their  words  were  confused,  without  any' 
certain  signification  ^  but  by  degrees  they  spoke  articulately,  and 
making  signs,  and  giving  proper  terms  to  every  thing  upon  occasion* 
At  length  their  discourse  became  intelligible  one  to  another:  but' 
being  dispersed  into  several  parts  of  the  world,  they  spoke  not  all 
the  same  langtuige,  every  one  using  that  dialect  proper  to  the  place, 
as  his  lot  fell :  upon  which  account  there  were  various,  and  all  sorts ' 
of  languages  in  the  world ;  and  these  associations  of  men  first  planted 
all  the  nations  of  the  world. 

But  forasmuch  as  what  was  useful  for  man's  life,  was  not  at  the 
beginning  found  out,  this  first  race  of  mankind  lived  a  laborious  and" 
troublesome  life,  as  being  as  yet  naked,  not  inured  to  houses,  nor 
acquainted  with  the  use  of  fire,  and  altogether  destitute  of  delicacies 
for  their  food.  For  not  knowing  as  yet  how  to  house  and  lay  up 
their  food,  they  had  no  barns  or  granaries  where  to  deposit  the  fruits 
of  the  earth;  and  therefore  many,  through  hunger  and  cold,  perished 
in  the  winter :  but  being  at  length  taught  by  experience,  they  fled 
into  caves  in  the  winter,  and  laid  up  such  fruits  as  were  fit  to  keep; 
and  coming  by  degrees  to  the  knowledge  of  the  usefulness  of  fire, 
and  of  other  conveniences,  they  began  to  invent  many  arts  and  other 
things  beneficial  for  man's  life.  What  shall  we  say?  Necessity 
was  man's  instructor,  which  made  him  skilful  in  every  thing,  being 
an  ingenious  creature,  assisted  (as  with  so  many  servants)  with  hands, 
speech,  and  a  rational  soul,  ready  to  put  every  thing  in  execution. 
But  what  we  have  here  said  concerning  the  first  generation  of  man- 
kind, and  his  way  of  living  in  old  time,  may  suffice,  designing  to 
keep  within  due  bounds. 

And  now  we  shall  apply  ourselves  to  recount  those  things  that 

•The  wiser  antients  have  here  asked  this  pertinent  question — Grant  that  heat  unfolds 
and  draws  fortii  thestminal  principle — Who  first  formed  that  seiuinal principle;  that  is, 
who  inclosed  the  Tutare  full  grown  form  in  the  seed  ?  The  fact  of  the  mice  is  as  ridicQious 
as  H  is  false. 

Vol-.  1.  No.  31.  B 


18  DIODOHUS  SICULUS;  Book  L 

hare  been  done  in  all  the  known  parts  of  the  worid^  whereof  there  is 
any  memorial  handed  down  to  us. 

Wiio  were  the  first  kings^  we  ourselves  can  neither  ass«t^  nor 
agree  with  those  historians  who  aflSrm  they  know;  for  it  is  not  pos- 
sible that' the  account  given  of  affairs  should  be  so  antient  as  to  be 
contemporary  with  the  first  kings;  and  if  any  should  admit  any  such 
thin^,  yet  it  is  apparent,  that  all  the  historians  esetant  lived  long' aftmr 
those  times.  For  the  Greeks  themselves  are  not  only  in  the  dark 
concerning  the  antiquity  of  nations^  but  many  of  the  barbarians  also, 
who  call  themselves  natural  inhabitants,  and  boast  themselves  to  be 
the  first  of  all  other  men  who  h^e  found  out  things  beneficial  to 
mankind,  and  to  have  committed  to  writing,  things  done  among 
them  many  ages  before.  And  as  for  us,  we  determine  nothing  cer- 
tainly of  the  antiquity  of  particular  nations,  nor  which  nation  is 
antienter  than  another,  or  how  many  yeats  one  was  before  anodier. 
But,  that  we  may  attain  the  scope  and*  end' we  have  before  designed, 
we  shall  distinctly  set  forth  in  these  chapters,  what  is  reported- 
concerning  things  done  in  the  several  nations,  and  the  antiquity  of 
them.  (^  \j   ^K  ^    yw^^    \     \K.ji^  ^vi,..  ■-% 

We  shall  first  speak  of  the  barbarians;  not  that  we  judge  them 
more  antient  than  the  Grecians,  (ds  S^horus  aflBrms),  but  that 
we  are  willing,  in  the  first  place,  to  relate  many  considerable  things 
<rf'  them;  that,  when  we  come  afterwards  to  the  history  of  the 
Greeks,  we  may  not  confound  their  antiquity  with  the  other^  which 
areof  a  foreign  nature  to  them.  And  because  the  gods  are  fabulously 
repcHTted  to  be  bom  in  Egypt ;  and  the  fii*st  observation  of  the  motion 
of  the  stars  being  attributed  to  them,  and  that  there  are  many  remark* 
able  and  famous  actions  of  renowned  men  recorded  to  be  done 
amongst  them,  we  shall  begin  whh  the  affairs  of  Egypt. 

The  Egyptians  report,  that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world,  the- 
first  men  were  created  in  Egypt,  both  by  reason  of  the  happy  climate 
of  tlie  country,  and  A\e  nature  of  the  river  Nile.  For  this  river 
being  very  fruitful,  and  apt  to  bring  forth  many  animals,  yields,  of 
itself,  likewise  food  and  nourishment  for  the  tfamgs  pfoduced.  For 
it  yields  the  roots  of  canes,  the  fruit  of  the  lote«tree,  the  Egyptian 
bean,  that  which  they  call  Corseon,  and  such  like  rarities  for  man's 
food,  always  ready  at  hand. 

And  that  ail  living  creatures  were  first  prodi^eed  among  them,  they 

use  this  arguliient that  evefi  at  this  day,  about  Thebes,  at  certain 

times,  such  vast  mice  are  bred,  that  it  causes  admiration  to  the 
beholders;  some  of  which,  to  the  breast  and  fore-feet,  are  animated, 
and  begin  to  move,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  (which  yet  retains  the 
nature  of  the  soil)  appears  without  form*    Whence  it  is  manifest^ 


tihap.I.  DiODORUS  SICULU8.  19 


mmm 


rthat  in  the  beginniDg of  the  worlds  through  the  fertUenessof  the   ^:iv^ 
MO\\y  theifirst  men  were  fbrmed  in  -Egypt,  being  that  in  no  other 
parts  of  the -world  «ny  of  these  creatures  are  produced;  only  io 
Egypt  tliese  super  natural' births  may  be  seen. 

And  that  wemay  sum  i^>  all  in  a  word :  if  in  the  time  of  'Deuca> 
lion's  iloadj  the  greateat  'part  only  of  all  living  ereatures  were 
-destroyed,  then  of  such  as  were  so  preserved,  it  is  very  probable  that 
*tliose  in  Egypt,  especially,  were  of  the  number,  whose  inhabitants 
he  m^der  the  south  polgj^and  the  country  for  the  most  part  without 
-rain :  or,  if  all  thatliadli^geae  perished,  (as  some  affirm),  and 
that  the  earth  produced  animals  anew,  yet  they  say,  that  notwith- 
standiog  this,  the  chief  production  of  things  animated  is  to  be 
ascribed  to  this  country.  For  they  affirm,  that  if  the  showers  which 
"fiilliniiDy  other  places  were  warmed  with  the  same  heat  tliat  is  in 
«£gypt,  the  air  would  be  of  that  temperature,  as  that  it  would  aptly 
.  conduce  to  the  generation  of  animals,  as  at  first,  in  the  begifming  (tf 
the  world.  For  even  at  this  day,  such  births  may  be  seen  (in  the 
waters  that  have  lain  long)  over  all  the  watered  country  of  Egjrpt. 
•For  they  affirm,  that  when  the  river  returns  into  its  channel,  and 
the  sun  dries' the  mud,  living  creatures  are  generated,  some  per- 
fectj  others  half  formed,  even  cleaving  to  the  soil  whence  they  are 
produced. 

The  first  generation  of  men  in  Egypt,  therefore,  contemphittng 
the  beauty  of  the  superior  world,  and  admiring  with  astonishment 
the  frame  and  oitier  of  the  universe,  supposed  there  were  two  chief 
gods  that  were  eternal,  that  is  to  say,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the  first 
of  which  they  called  Osiris,  and  the  other  Isis,  both  names  having 
proper  etymologies;  for  Osiris,  in  the  Greek  language,  signifies  a 
thing  with  many  eyes,  which  uMiy  be  very  properly  applied  to  the 
sun,  darting  his  rays  into  every  corner,  and,  as  it  were,  with  *so  many 
eyes^  viewing  and  surveying  the  whole  land  «nd  sea ;  with  which 
agrees  the  poet  .^ 

The  wa.  frtn^i  Mtj  sphere,  all  teet  and  bears. 

'Some^  also,  df  the  antient  Greek  mythologists  call' Osiris  ^Diony- 
sius,  and  surname  him  Sirius,  amongst  whom  Eumolpus  in  his 
Bacchanal  verses.^ 

Dionjiios  dart*  bi»  fiery  rajs. 

Aad  Orpheus.... 

.  He*s  oalied.  Pkanetes  and  Dionysins. 

Some  likewise  set  himforth  clothed  with  the  spotted  skin  of  a  fawn, 
(called  Nebris),  from  the  variety  of  stars  that  surround  him. 

Isis  likewise,  being  interpreted,  signifies  antient,  that  name  being 
ascribed  to  the  moon  from  eternal  generations.    They  ^d,.  likewise. 


so  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  L 


to  her^  horns,  because  her  aspect  is  such  ia  her  increase^  and  in  her 
decrease^  representing^  a  sickle;  and  because  an  ox,  among  the 
Egyptians,  is  offered  to  her  in  sacrifice.  They  hold  that  these  gods 
govern  the  whole  world,  cherishing  and  increasing  all  tilings;  and 
divide  the  year  into  three  parts,  (that  is  to  say,  spring,  summer,  and 
winter),  by  an  invbible  motion,  perfecting  their  constant  course  in 
that  time :  and  though  they  are  in  their  natures  very  difiering  one 
from  another,  yet  they  complete  the  whole  year  with  a  most  excellent 
harmony  and  consent.  «Tbey  say  that  these  gods  in  their  natures  do 
contribute  much  to  the  generation  of  all  things,  the  one  being  of  a 
hot  and  active  nature,  the  other  mobt  and  cold,  but  both  havibg 
something  of  the  air;  and  that  by  these,  all  things  are  both  brought 
forth  and  nourished:  and  therefore  that  every  particular  being  in  the 
universe  is  perfected  and  completed  by  the  sun  and  moon,  whose 
qualities,  as  before  declared,  are  five;  a  spirit  or  quickening  efficacy^ 
heat  or  fire,  dryness  or  earth,  moisture  or  water,  and  air,  of  which 
the  world  does  consist,  as  a  man  made  up  of  head,  hands,  feet,  and 
other  parts.  These  five  they  reputed  for  gods ;  and  the  people  of 
Egypt,  who  were  the  first  that  spoke  articulately,  gave  names  proper  to 
their  several  natures,  according  to  the  language  they  then  spake. 
And  therefore  they  called  the  spirit  Jupiter,  which  is  such  by  inter* 
pretation,  because  a  quickening  influence  is  derived  from  this  into 
all  living  creatures,  as  from  the  original  principle ;  and  upon  that 
account  he  is  esteemed  the  common  parent  of  all  things.  And  to 
this  the  most  famous  poet  of  the  Greeks  gives  testimony,  where 
speaking  of  this  god  he  says 

Of  locu  and  godi  the  father. 

Fire  they  called  by  interpretation  Vulcan,  and  him  they  had  in 
veneration  as  a  great  god,  as  he  that  greatly  contributed  to  the  gene- 
ration and  perfection  of  all  beings  whatsoever. 
^  The  earth,  as  the  common  womb  of  all  productions,  they  called 
Metera,  as  the  Greeks  in  process  of  time,  by  a  small  alteration  of  one 
letter,  and  an  omission  of  two  letters,  called  the  earth  Dcmctra,  which 
was  antiently  called  Gen  Metera^  or  the  mother  earthy  as  Orpheus 
attests  in  this  verse — 

The  mother  earth,  Demetcr  also  call'd^ 
Brings  forth  most  richly — 

Water  or  moisture,  the  antlents  called  Oceanus ;  which  by  inter- 
pretation is  a  nourishing  mother,  and  so  taken  by  some  of  the  Gre- 
cians, of  which  the  poet  says  thus — 

The  father  of  the  gods  the  ocean  is, 
Tctbys  the  mother  call'd— 

But  the  Egyptians  account  their  Nile  to  be  Oceanus,  at  which  all 


Chap.  L  BIODORUS  SICULUS.  SI 


the  gods  were  born*  For  in  Egypt  only^  among  all  the  countries  in 
the  worldj  are  many  cities  built  by  the  antient  gods,  as  by  Jupiter^ 
Sol,  Mercury,  Apollo,  Pan,  Elithia,  and  many  others. 

To  the  air  they  gave  the  name  of  Minerva,  signifying  sometliing 
proper  to  the  nature  thereof,  and  called  her  the  daughter  of  Jupiter, 
and  counted  a  virgin,  because  the  air  naturally  is  not  subject  to  cor- 
ruption, and  is  in  the  highest  part  of  the  universe;  whence  rises  the 
&ble  that  she  was  the  issue  of  Jupiter's  brain:  they  say  she  is  called 
also  Tritc^eneia,  or  thrice  begotten,  because  she  changes  her  na- 
tural qualities  thrice  in  the  year,  the  spring,  summer,  and  winter; 
and  that  she  was  called  Glaucopis,  not  that  she  hath  grey  eyes,  (as 
some  of  the  Greeks  have  supposed,  for  that  is  a  weak  conceit),  but 
because  the  air  seems  to  be  of  a  grey  colour,  to  the  view.  They  re- 
port, likewise,  that  these  five  gods  travel  through  the  whole  world, 
representing  themselves  to  men  sometimes  in  the  shapes  of  sacred 
living  creatures,  and  sometimes  in  the  form  of  men,  or  some  other 
representation.  And  this  is  not  a  fable,  but  very  possible,  if  it  be 
true,  that  these  generate  all  things :  and  the  poet  who  travelled  into 
Egypt,  in  some  part  of  his^works,  afiirmsthis  appearance  as  he  learnt 
it  from  their  priests — 

The  godf  also*  like  strangon  come  from  far« 
In  diTers  ibapes  within  the  towns  appear. 
Viewing  men's  good  and  wiciied  acts — 

And  these  are  the  stories  told  by  tlie  Egyptians  of  the  heavenly  and 
immortal  gods.  And  besides  these,  they  say  there  are  others  that  are 
terrestrial,  which  were  begotten  of  these  former  gods,  and  were  ori- 
ginally mortal  men,  but  by  reason  of  their  wisdom  and  beneficence 
to  all  mankind,  have  obtained  immortality,  of  wliich  some  have  been 
kings  of  Egypt :  some  of  whom,  by  interpretation,  have  had  the  same 
names  with  the  celestial  gods,  others  have  kept  their  own  proper 
names.  For  they  report  that  Sol,  Saturn,  Rhea,  Jupiter,  (surnamed 
by  some  Ammon),  Juno,  Vulcan,  Vesta,  and  lastly.  Mercury,  reigned 
in  Egypt;  and  that  Sol  was  the  first  king  of  Egypt,  whose  name  was 
the  same  with  the  celestial  planet  called  Sol. 

But  there  are  some  of  the  priests  who  affirm  Vulcan  to  bo  the  first 
of  their  kings,  and  that  he  was  advanced  to  that  dignity  upon  the 
account  of  being  the  first  that  found  out  the  use  of  fire,  which  was 
so  beneficial  to  all  mankind.  For  a  tree  in  the  mountains  happening 
to  be  set  on  fire  by  lightning,  the  wood  next  adjoining  was  presently 
all  in  a  flame;  and  Vulcan  thereupon  coming  to  the  place,  was 
mightily  refreshed  by  the  heat  of  it,  being  then  winter  season;  and 
when  the  fire  began  to  fail,  he  added  more  combustible  matter  to 
it^  and  by  that  means  preserving  it,  called  in  other  men  to  enjoy 


S8  DIOt>OKU8  SICULUS.  Bookl. 

the  benefit  of  that  whieh  he  himself  was  the  finthiveiitor^  es  be 
gave  out. 

Afterwards  they  aay  Satam*  ra^goed^  and  married  his  akter'Rhis^ 
-and  that  he  begat  of  her  Osiris  andlsis;  but  others  say»  Jupiter  and 
Juno,  who  far  their  great  virtues^  nikd  over  ill  the  world.    That  of 
Japiter  and  Jano  were  bora  five  gods^  one  npon  every  day  of  the  five 
Egyptian  intercahury  dayaf.    The  names  of  diese  gods  are  Osiris^ 
Isisj  Typhon^  Apollo^  and  Venus.    That  Osiris  was  interpieted 
Bacehosy  and  Isis  pkinly  Ceres.    That  Osiris  married  Isis^  and  after 
he  came  to  the  kingdom^  did  mach^  and  performed  many  things  lor 
the  eommon  benefit  and  advantage  of  mankind.    For  he  was  th^  first 
that  forbade  men  eating  one  another;  and  at  the  same  time  Isis  found 
out' the  way  of  making  of  bread  of  wheat  and  barley^  which  befoM 
grew  here  and  there  in  the  fields^  amongst  other  common  herbs  and 
grass^  and  the  use  of  it  unluxnmi  and  Osiris  teaching  the  way  and 
manner  of  tillage^  and  well  management  of  the  fruits  of  the  earthy 
this  change  of  food  became  grateful;  both  because  it  was  naturally 
sweet  and  delicious^  and  men  were  thereby  restrained' from  the  mu- 
tual butcheries  one  of  another:  for  an  evidence  of  this  first  finding 
out  the  use  of  these  fruits^  they  alledge  an  antient  custom  among 
them :  for  even  at  this  day^  in  the  time  of  harvest^  the  inhabitants 
ofier  the  first  fruits  of  the  ears  of  corn^  howling  and  wailing  about 
the  handfuls  they  ofier^  and  invoking  this  goddess  Isis :  and  this  they 
do  in  return  of  due  honour  to  her  for  that  invention  at  the  first.    In 
some  cities  also^  when  they  celebrate  the  feast  of  Isis,  in  a  pompous 
procession,  they  carry  about  vessels  of  wheat  and  barley,  in  memory 
of  the  first  invention,  by  tlie  care  and  industry  of  this  goddess. 
They  say,  likewise,  that  Isis  made  many  laws  for  the  good  of  human 
society,  whereby  men  were  restrained  from  lawless  force  and  violence 
one  upon  another,  out  of  fear  of  punishment.     And  therefore  Ceres 
was  called  by  the  ancient  Greeks,  Themophorus>  that  is,  lawgiver, 
being  the  princess  that  first  constituted  hmrs  for  the  better  govern- 
josent  of  her  people. 

Osiris  moreover  built  Thdbes,  m  ^gypt,  whb  an  hundred  gates, 
and  called  it  after  his  mother's  name:  but  in  following  tiases,  it  was 
called  Diospolis,  and  Thebes;  of  whose  first  founder  not  only  histo- 
rkns,  but  the  priests  of  Egypt^  themselves,*  are  much  in  doubt.  .For 
aoose  say  that  it  was  not  built  by  Osiris,  but  many  years  after,  by  a 
Ung  of  Egypt,  whose  history  we  shall  treat  of  hereafter,  in  its  proper 

*  Tbii  Sttarn  if  judged  opon  good  groandf  to  bt  If  oalk  Boccard,  Pbtleg.  lib.  i.  c 
1.  (.  1.    StiUingOrig.  Sm.  Ub.  5.  c.  5.  lect.  8. 

t  These  were  Sto  dayi  added  to  tbe  end  of  emj  yeer,  to  arice  ap  tbfir  HMmer 
year,to€OBiiitsfd«Sdsy«»    8se  tbe  leMOQ^  Orig.  Stcr.  90,  91. 


Chaih  Z  DIODORUS  SICULVSi  S3 

■jl^^^B^BilBBiBHIiBHBH^BHBHHBIHBHH^BHHHiHBHBBHBBM^BIBiHBB^HBHIBHH^IHHHip 

j^bce^  They  report,  likewiaey  that  he  built  two  magoiflcent  temples^ 
Mid  dedicated  them  to  his  parents,  Jupiter  and  Juno;  and  likewise 
two  goMea  altars^  the  greater  to  the  great  god  Jupiter;  the  other  to 
hia  fiither  Japiter,  who  bad  formerly  reigned  there^  whom  they  call 
Ammon.  That  he  also  erected  golden  altars  to  odier  gods^  and  insti- 
tilled  their  several  rites  of  worship,  and  appmnted  priests  to  have  the 
oversight  and  care  of  the  holy  things.  In  the  time  of  Osiris  and  Isis, 
projectors  and  ingenious  artists  were  in  great  hononr  and  esteem ; 
and  therefore  in  Thebes  there  were  then  goldsmitibs  and  braziers^ 
who  made  arms  and  weapons  for  the  killing  of  wild  beasts,  and  other 
instruments  for  the  husbanding  of  the  ground,  and  improvement  .o£ 
tillage;  besides  images  of  the  gods,  and  altars  in  gold.  They  say 
that  Osiris  was  much  given  to  husbandry,  that  he  vras  the  son  of 
Jupiter,  brought  op  in  Nysa,  a  town  of  Arabia  the  happy,  near  to 
Egypt,  called  by  the  GredksDionysius,  from  his  father,  and  the  place 
of  his  education.  The  poet  in  his  hymns  makes  mention  of  Nysa,  as 
bcnrdernig  upon  Egypt,  where  he  says — . 

fWr  off  from  Pbeniee  ttandi  tlie  sacred  Nyte* 
Wbflre  Hrams  of  Bgypl'i  Nik  begin  to  rise. 
On  aonntaiu  high  with  pleasant  woods  adprn'd. 

Here  near  unto  Nysa,  tliey  say  he  found  out  the  use  of  the  vine, 
and  there  planting  it,  was  the  first  that  drank  wine;  and  taught 
others  how  to  plant  it  and  use  it,  and  to  gather  in  their  vintage^  and 
to  keep  and  preserve  it.  Above  all  others  he  most  honoured  Hermes, 
one  of  an  admirable  ingenuity,  and  quick  invention,  in  finding  out 
what  might  be  useful  to  mankind*  Tiiis  Hermes  was  the  first  (as 
they  report)  that  taught  how  to  speak  distinctly  and  articulately,  and 
gave  names  to  many  things  that  had  none  before.  He  found  out  * 
letters,  and  instituted  the  worship  of  the  gods;  and  was  the  first 
that  observed  the  motion  of  the  stars,  and  invented  music ;  and  taughe  - 
the  manner  of  wrestling;  and  invented  arithmetic,  and  the  art  el 
curious  graving  and  cutting  of  statues.  He  first  found  out  the  harp 
vrith  three  strings,  in  resemblance  of  the  three  seasons  of  the  year^- 
causing  three  several  sounds,  the  treble,  base,  and  mean.  The  treble 
to  represent  the  summer;  the  base,  the  winter;  and  the  mean,  the 
spring.  He  was  the  first  that  taught  the  Greeks  eloquence;  thence 
he  is  called  Hermes,  a  speaker  or  interpreter.  To  conclude,  he  was 
Osiris's  sacred  scribe,  to  whom  he  communicated  all  his  secrets,  and 
was  chiefly  steered  by  his  advice  in  every  thing.  He  (not  Minerva, 
as  the  Greeks  affirm)  found  out  the  use  of  the  olive-tree,  for  the 
making  of  oil.  It  is  moreover  reported,  that  Osiris  being  a  prince 
of  a  public  spirit,  and  very  ambitious  of  glory,  raised  a  great  army, 
with  which  he  resolved  to  go  through  all  pajrts  of  the  world  that  were 


94  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  L 


\ 


inhabited^  and  to  teach  men  how  to  plant  vinesi  and  to  sow  wheat 
and  barley.  For  he  hoped  that  if  he  could  civilize  men^  and  take 
them  off  from  their  rude  and  beast-like  course  of  lives^  by  such  a 
public  good  and  advantage^  he  should  raise  a  foundation  amongst  all 
mankind,  for  his  immortal  praise  and  honoiur,  which  happened 
accordingly.  For  not  only  that  age,  but  posterity  ever  after  honoured 
those  among  the  chiefest  of  their  gods,  that  first  found  out  their 
proper  and  ordinary  food.  Having  therefore  settled  his  affairs  in 
Egypt,  and  committed  the  government  of  bis  whole  kingdom  to  his 
wife  Isis,  he  joined  with  her  Mercury,  as  her  chief  counsellor  of 
state,  because  he  far  excelled  all  others  in  wisdom  and  prudence. 
But  Hercules,  his  near  kinsman,  he  left  general  of  all  his  forces 
within  his  dominions,  a  man  admired  by  all  for  his  valour  and  strength 
of  body.  As  to  those  parts  which  lay  near  Phoenicia,  and  upon  the 
sea-coasts  of  them,  he  made  Busiris  lord  lieutenant,  and  of  Ethiopia 
and  Lybia,  Anteus. 

Then  marching  out  of  Egypt,  he  began  his  expedition,  taking  along 
with  him  liis  brother,  whom  the  Greeks  called  Apollo.  This  Apollo 
is  reported  to  have  discovered  the  laurel-tree,  which  all  dedicate 
especially  to  this  god.  To  Osiris  they  attribute  the  finding  out  of 
the  ivy-tree,  and  dedicate  it  to  him,  as  the  Greeks  do  to  Bacchus : 
and  therefore  in  the  Egyptian  tongue,  they  call  Ivy,  Osiris's  plant, 
which  they  prefer  before  the  vine  in  all  their  sacrifices,  because  this 
loses  its  leaves,  and  the  other  always  continues  fresh  and  green: 
which  rule  the  antients  have  observed  in  other  plants,  that  are  always 
green,  dedicating  myrtle  to  Venus,  laurel  to  Apollo,  and  the  olive- 
tree  to  Pallas. 

It  is  said  that  two  of  his  sons  accompanied  their  father  Osiris  in 
\  this  expedition,  one  called  Anubis^  and  the  other  Macedo,  both  valiant 
men:  both  of  them  wore  coats  of  mail,  that  were  extraordinary  re- 
markable, covered  with  the  skins  of  such  creatures  as  resembled  them 
in  stoutness  and  valour.  Anubis  was  covered  with  a  dog's,  and  Ma<* 
cedo  with  the  skin  of  a  wolf;  and  for  this  reason  these  beasts  are 
religiously  adored  by  the  Egyptians.  He  had  likewise  for  his  compa- 
nion, Pan*,  whom  the  Egyptians  have  in  great  veneration ;  for  they 
not  only  set  up  images  and  statues  in  every  temple,  but  built  a  city 
in  Thebides  after  his  name,  called  by  the  inhabitants  Chemmin, 
which  by  interpretation  is  Pan's  city.  There  went  along  with  them 
likewise,  those  that  were  skilful  in  husbandry,  as  Maro  in  the  plant- 
ing of  vines,  and  Triptolemus  in  sowing  of  corn,  and  gathering  in 
the  harvest. 

♦  The  fame  with  CiiBin. 


Cht^.  11.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  26 


rfhB 


CHAP.  11. 

The  Canivmaiwn  of  Chiris's  Expedition  through  Ethiopia^  all 
Arabia^  India^  ofid  Europe.  Buried  by  Isis  and  Merairy. 
How  he  was  killed.  His  Death  revenged  by  Isis  and  Orus, 
Two  Bullsy  ^pis  mid  Mnetnsy  worshipped  in  Egypt.  Places 
discussed  where  Osiris  and  Isis  were  buried.  Histories  of  the 
Egyptian  Priests.  TYieir  Years ^  Lunar  Years.  Giojnts.  Laws 
about  Marriage.  Osiris  and  Isis,  their  Pillars  and  Inscriptions. 
Colonies  out  of  Egypt. 

ALL  things  being  now  prepared^  Osiris  having  vowed  to  the  gods 
to  let  his  hair  grow  till  lie  returned  into  Egypt,  marched  throOgh 
Ethiopia;  and  for  that  very  reason  it  is  a  piece  of  religion,  and 
practised  among  the  Egyptians  at  this  day,  that  those  that  travel 
abroad,  suffer  their  hair  to  grow,  till  they  return  home.  As  he  passed 
through  Ethiopia,  a  company  of  satyrs  were  presented  to  him,  wlio 
(as  it  is  reported)  were  all  hairy  down  to  theh'  loins :  for  Osiris  wag 
a  man  given  to  mirth  and  jollity,  and  tooK  great  pleasure  in  music 
and  dancing;  and  therefore  carried  along  with  him  a  train  of  musi*- 
cians,  of  whom  nine  were  virgins,  most  excellent  singers,  and  expeit 
in  many  other  things,  (whom  tiic  Greeks  call  muses),  of  whom 
Apollo  was  the  captain ;  and  thence  called  the  Leader  of  the  Muses^ 
upon  this  account  the  satyrs,  who  are  naturally  inclined  to  skipping, 
dancing,  and  singing,  and  all  other  sorts  of  mirth,  were  taken  in  as 
part  of  the  army:  for  Osiris  was  not  for  war,  nor  cafne  to  fight  bat- 
tles, and  to  decide  controversies  by  the  sword,  every  country  receivin«J 
him  for  his  merits  and  virtues,  as  a  god.  In  Ethiopia,  havifag  in* 
stnicted  the  inhabitants  in  husbandry,  and  tillage  of  the  ground, 
and  built  several  stately  cities  among  them,  he  left  there  behind  hirh 
some  to  be  governors  of  the  country,  and  others  to  be  gathcreis  df 
his  tribute. 

While  they  were  thus  employed,  it  is  said  that  the  river  Nile, 
about  the  dog-days,  (at  which  time  it  uses  to  he  the  ht^test),  broke 
down  its  banks,  and  overflowed  the  greatest  part  of  Egypt,  and  that 
part  especially  where  Prometheus  governed,  insomuch  as  almost  ail 
the  inhabitants  were  drowned;  so  that  Prometheus  was  near  unto 
killing  of  himself  for  very  grief  of  heart :  and,  from  the  sudden  and 
violent  eruption  of  the  waters,  the  river  was  called  Eagle. 

Hercules,  who  was  always  for  high  and  difficult  enterprises,  and 
ever  of  a  stout  spirit,  presently  made  up  the  breaches,  and  fumed  the 

Vol.  1.  No.  32.  f\ 


26  DIODOHU8  SICULUS.  '    Book  L 

river  into  its  channel,  and  kept  it  within  its  antient  banks;  and 
therefore  some  of  the  Greek  poets  from  this  fact  have  forged  a  fable^ 
that  Hereules  killed  the  eagle  that  fed  upon  Prometheus's  heart. 
The  most  antient  name  of  this  river  was  Oceaines^  wbich^  in  the 
Greek  pronunciation  is  Oceanus;  afterwards  called  Eagle,  upon  the 
violent  eruption.  Lastly,  it  was  called  Egyptus,  from  the  name  of  a 
king  that  there  reigned;  which  the  poet  attests,  who  says 

In  tir  river  of  £gy ptus  then  I  placed 
The  gallics  swift. 

For  near  Thonis  (as  it  is  called)  an  antient  mart  town  of  Egypt, 
this  river  empties  itself  into  the  sea. 

The  last  name  which  it  still  retains,  it  derives  from  Nileus,  a  king 
of  those  parts. 

.  Osiris  being  come  to  the  borders  of  Ethiopia,  raised  high  banks  on 
either  side  of  the  river,  lest,  in  the  time  of  its  inundation,  it  should 
overflow  the  country  more  than  was  convenient,  and  make  it  marisb 
and  boggy ;  and  made  flood-gates  to  let  in  the  water  by  degrees,  as 
far  as  was  necessary.  »  Thence  he  passed  through  Arahia,  bordering 
upon  the  Red  sea  as  far  as  to  India,  and  the  utmost  coasts  that  were 
inhabited ;  he  built  likewise  many  cities  in  India,  one  of  which  he 
called  Nysa,  willing  to  have  a  remembrance  of  that  in  Egypt  where 
he  was  brought  up.  At  this  Nysa  in  India,  he  planted  ivy,  which 
grows  and  remains  here  only  of  all  other  places  in  India,  or  the  parts 
adjacent.  He  left  likewise  many  other  marks  of  bis  being  in  those 
parts,  by  which  the  latter  inhabitants  are  induced  to  believe,  and  do 
affirm  that  this  god  was  born  in  India. 

He  likewise  addicted  himself  much  to  hunting  of  elephants;  and 
took  care  to  have  statues  of  himself  in  every  place,  as  lasting  monu- 
ments of  his  expedition.  Thence  passing  to  the  rest  of  Asia,  he 
transported  his  army  through  the  Hellespont  into  Europe;' and  in 
lliracc  he  killed  Lycurgus,  king  of  the  barbarians,  who  opposed  hiin 
in  his  designs.  Then  he  ordered  Maro  (at  that  time  an  old  man)  to 
take  care  of  the  planters  in  that  country,  and  to  build  a  city,  and  call 
it  Maronea,  after  his  own  name.  Macedo,  his  son,  he  made  king  of 
Macedonia,  so  calling  it  after  him.  To  Triptolemus  he  appointed 
the  culture  and  tillage  of  the  laud  in  Attica.  \  To  conclude,  Osiris 
having  travelled  through  the  whole  world,  by  finding  out  food  fit  and 
convenient  for  man's  body,  was  a  benefactor  to  all  mankind.  Where 
vines  would  not  grow,  and  be  fruitful,  he  taught  the  inhabitants  tq 
make  drink  of  barley,  tittle  inferior  in  strength  and  pleasant  flavour 
to  wine  itself.  He  brought  back  with  him  into  Egypt  the  most  pre* 
cious  and  richest  things  that  every,  place  did  afford;  and  for  the  many 
benefits  and  advantages  that  he  was  the  author  of^  by  the  commoa 


CSflop.  //.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  27 

I.  '■  '■  '  I'  ■  ■ 
consent  of  all  men,  be  gained  the  reward  of  immortality  and  honour 
equal  to  the  heavenly  deities. 

After  his  death,  Isis  and  Mercury  celebrated  his  funeral  with  sa- 
crifices and  other  divine  honours,  as  to  one  of  the  gods,  and  insti- 
tuted many  sacred  rites  and  mystical  ceremonies,  in  memory  of  the 
mighty  works  wrought  by  this  hero,  now  deified.  Antiently  the 
Egyptian  priests  kept  the  manner  of  the  death  of  Osiris  secret  in 
their  own  registers  among  themselves;  but  in  after-times  it  fell  out, 
that  some  that  could  not  hold,  blurted  it  out,  and  so  it  came  abroad. 
For  they  say  ihat  Osiris*,  while  he  governed  in  Egypt  with  all  jus- 
tice imaginable,  was  murdered  by  his  wicked  brother  Typhon ;  and 
that  he  mangled  his  dead  body  into  six-and-twenty  pieces,  and  gave 
to  each  of  his  confederates  in  the  treason  a  piece^  by  that  means  to 
bring  them  all  within  the  same  horrid  guilt,  and  thereby  the  more 
to  engage  them  to  advance  him  to  tlie  throne,  and  to  defend  and 
preserve  him  in  the  possession. 

But  Isis,  the  sister  and  wife  likewise  of  Osiris,  with  the  assist- 
ance of  her  son  Orusf,  revenged  his  death  upon  Typhon  and  his 
accomplices,  and  possessed  herself  of  the  kingdom  of  Egypt.     It  is 
said  the  battle  was  fought  near  a  river  not  far  off  a  town  now  called 
Antfiea  in  Arabia,  so  called  from  Anteus,  whom  Hercules  slew  in 
the  time  of  Osiris.     She  found  all  the  pieces  of  his  body,  save  his 
privy  members;  and  having  a  desire  to  conceal  her  husband's  buriaU 
yet  to  have  him  honoured  as  a  God  by  all  the  Egyptians,  she  thus 
contrived  it.     She  closed  all  the  pieces  together,  cementing  them 
with  wax  and  aromatic  spices,  and  so  brought  it  to  the  shape  of  a 
man  of  the  bigness  of  Osiris;  then  she  sent  for  the  priests  to  her, 
one  by  one,  and  swore  them  all  that  they  should  not  discover  what 
she  should  then  intrust  them  with.     Then  she  told  them  privately, 
that  they  only  should  have  the  burial  of  the  king's  body;  and  re- 
counting the  many  good  works  he  had  done,  charged  them  to  bury 
the  body  in  a  proper  place  among  themselves,  and  to  pay  unto  him 
all  divine  honour,  as  to  a  God.     That  thc^y  should  dejrlicate  to  him 
one  of  the  beasts  bred  among  them,   which  of  them  they  pleased, 
and  that  while  it  was  alive,  they  should  pay  it  the  same  veneration 
as  they  did  before  to  Osiris  himself;  and  when  it  was  dead,  that  they 
should  worship  it  with  the  same  adoration  and  worship  given  to  Osiris. 
But  being  willing  to  encourage  the  priests  to  these  divine  offices  by 

*  Th'u  Osiris  vras  murdered  about  the  time  .Tncob,  with  hia  whole  familj,  oame  into 
Kgypt  :  as  by  Hclvicus  Cro.  An.  Miih«1.  iJ239.  Vid.  Sir  Wrtlter  Rawl.  Iiistury«  lib. 
2.  part  1.  cap.  2.  »cct.  5.     That  this  Orisis  was  Misraim,  the  Sun  of  Cham. 

f  In  the  time  of  this  Orus,  Jacob  is  said  to  coiue  into  Kgjpt.  Sir  Walter  Ri^wL 
lib.  9.  part  1.  e.  ?.  sect.  5.  Hclvictis  wyt  ia  the  time  of  Osiris,  An.  Mud.  3259.    '• 


M  niOI>ORUS  SICULUS.  Book  I. 


*    i  ."mtlOTBHnHHBnHMfv-awa-cr- 


profit  and  advantage^  she  gave  them  tlie  third  part  of  the  couatry 
for  the  maintenaDce  of  the  service  of  the  God»  and  their  attend- 
ance  at  the  altars. 

In  memory^  therefore^  of  Osiris 's  good  deeds,  being  incited  there- 
unto by  the  commands  of  the  queen,  and  in  expectation  of  their 
own  profit  and  advantage,  the  priests  exactly  performed  every  thing 
that  Isis  iiijoincd  them;  and  therefore  every  order  of  the  priests  at 
this  day  are  of  opinion  tliat  Osiris  is  buried  among  them.  And 
they  have  those  beasts  in  great  veneration,  that  were  so  long  since 
thus  consecrated;  and  renew  their  mournings  for  Osiris  over  the 
graves  of  those  beasts.  There  are  two  sacred  bulls  especially,  the 
one  called  Apis,  and  the  other  Mnevis,  that  are  consecrated  to 
Osiris,  and  reputed  as  gods  generally  by  all  the  Egyptians.  For 
tills  creature  of  all  others  was  extraordinarily  serviceable  to  the  first 
inventors  of  husbandry,  both  as  to  the  sowing  corn,  and  other  ad* 
vantages  concerning  tillage,  of  which  all  reaped  the  benefit.  Lastly, 
they  say,  that  after  the  death  of  Osiris,  Isis  made  a  vow  never  to 
marry  any  other  man,  and  s|>ent  the  rest  of  her  days  in  an  exact  ad- 
ministration of  justice  among  her  subjects,  excelling  all  other 
princes  in  her  acts  of  grace  and  bounty  towards  her  own  people; 
and  therefore,  after  her  death,  she  was  numl^ered  among  the  gods, 
and,  as  such,  had  divine  honour  and  veneration,  and  was  buried  at 
Memphis,  where  they  shew  her  sepulchre  at  this  day  in  the  grove  of 
Vulcan. 

Yet  there  are  some  that  deny  that  these  gods  arc  buried  at  Mem-- 
phis;  but  near  the  mountains  of  Ethiopia,  and  Egypt,  in  the  isle  of 
Nile,  lying  near  to  a  place  called  Philas,  and  upon  that  account  also 
named  the  Holy  Field.  They  confirm  this  by  undoubted  signs  and 
marks  left  in  this  island,  as  by  a  sepulchre  built  and  erected  to 
Osiris,  religiously  reverenced  by  alt  the  priests  of  Egypt,  wherein 
are  laid  up  three  hundred  and  threescore  bowls,  which  certain  priests 
appointed  for  that  purpose,  fill  every  day  with  milk,  and  call  upon 
the  Gods  by  name,  with  mourning  and  lamentation.  For  that  cause 
none  go  into  the  island  but  priests.  The  inhabitants  of  Thebes 
(which  is  the  most  ancient  city  of  Elgypt)  account  it  a  great  oath, 
and  by  no  means  to  be  violated,  if  a  man  swear  by  Osiris  that  lies 
buried  at  Philas. 

The  several  parts,  therefore,  of  Osiris  being  found,  they  report 
were  buried  in  this  manner  before  related;  but  his  privy-members 
(they  say)  were  thrown  into  the  river  by  Typhon,  because  none  of 
his  partners  would  receive  them;  and  yet  that  they  were  divinely 
honoured  by  Isis;  for  she  commanded  an  image  of  this  very  part  to 
be  ^et  up  in  the  temples,  and  to  be  religiously  adored ;  and  in  all 


Clhap.  IT.  DIODORUS   SICULUS.  9Q. 


their  ceremouies  and  sacrifices  to  this  god^  she  ordered  that  part  ta 
be  held  in  divine  veneration  and  honour.  And  therefore  the  Gre- 
i^ans,  after  they  had  learned  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  feasts 
of  Bacchus,  and  the  orgian  solemnities  from  the  Egyptians,  in  all 
their  mysteries  and  sacrifices  to  this  god,  they  adored  that  member 
by  the  name  of  Phallus. 

From  Osiris  and  Isis,  to  the  reign  of  Alexander  the  Great,  who 
built  a. city  after  his  own  name,  the  Egyptian  priests  reckon  abova 
ten  thousand  year$*,  or  (as  some  write)  little  less  thanthree-and* 
twenty  thousand  years.  Tliey  affirm,  that  those  that  say  this  god 
Orisis  was  born  at  Thehes  in  Boeotia,  of  Jupiter  and  Semele,  relate 
that  which  is  false.  For  they  say  that  Orpheus,  after  he  came  into 
Egypt,  was  initiated  into  the  sacred  mysteries  of  Bacchus  or  Diony- 
sius,  and  being  a  special  friend  to  the  Thebans  in  Boeotia,  and  of 
great  esteem  among  them,  to  manifest  his  gratitude,  transferred  the 
birth  of  Bacchus  or  Osiris  over  into  Greece. 

And  that  the  common  people,  partly  out  of  ignorance,  and  partly 
out  of  a  desire  they  had  that  tliis  God  should  be  a  Grecian,  readily  re- 
ceived these  mysteries  and  sacred  rites  among  them ;  and  that  Or- 
pheus took  tlie  occasion  following  to  fix  the  birth  of  the  god  and 
bis  rites  and  ceremonies  among  the  Greeks :  as  thus,  Cadmus  (they 
say)  was  born  at  Thebes  in  Egypt,  and  amongst  other  children  begat 
Semele :  that  she  was  got  with  child  by  one  uiiknown,  and  was  de« 
livered  at  seven  months  end  of  a  child  very  like  to  Osiris,  as  the 
Egyptians  describe  him.    But  such  births  are  not  used  to  live,  either 
because  it  is  not  the  pleasure  of  the  Gods  it  should  be  so,  or  that 
the  law  of  nature  will  not  admit  it.    The  matter  coming  to  Cadmus** 
ear,  being  before  warned  by  the  oracle  to  protect  the  laws  of  his 
country,  he  wrapt  the  infant  in  gold,  and  instituted  sacrifices  to  be 
offered  to  him,  as  if  Osiris  had  appeared  again  in  this  shape;  and 
caused  it  to  be  spread  abroad,  that  it  was  begotten  of  Jupiter,  thereby 
both  to  honour  Osiris,  and  to  cover  his  daughter's  shame.    And 
therefore  it  is  a  common  report  among  the  Grecians,  tbat  Semele, 
the  daughter  of  Cadmus,  was  got  with  child  by  Jupiter,  and  by  him 
bad  Osiris. 

In  after-times,  Orpheus,  by  reason  of  his  excellent  art  and  skill 
in  music,  and  his  knowledge  in  theology,  and  institution  of  sacred 
rites  and  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  was  greatly  esteemed  among  the 

*  These  must  be  understood  luoarj  jfeari  of  thirty  dajs,  ai  the  Egyptians  used  to 
account.  Vid.  Plut.  Numa.  Lact.  Jib.  2.  c.  12.  p.  ItS.  Orus  the  Son  of  Osiris,  was 
iwm  An.  Mond.  1778.  Alexander's  Conquest  of  Egypt,  An.  Muu.  S661.  which  is 
1889  years  after,  which  makes  up  i9,996  lunar  years,  and  15  days»  which  cornea  near 
to  this  acconnt  of  Diodorua.    Orig.  Sacr.  c.  5« 


$0  DIODORUS  9ICULUS.  Book  L 

Grecians^'  and  especially  was  received  and  entertained  by  the  The- 
banS)  and  by  them  highly  honoured  above  all  others;  who  being  ex- 
cellently learned  in  the  Egyptian  theology,  brought  down  the  birth 
<H  the  ancient  Osiris,  to  a  far  later  time,  and  to  gratify  the  Cad- 
meads  or  Thebans,  instituted  new  rites  and  ceremonies,  at  which  he 
ordered  that  it  should  be  declared  to  all  that  were  admitted  to  those 
mysteries,  that  Dionysius  or  Osiris  was  begotten  of  Semele  by  Jupiter. 
The  people,  therefore,  partly  through  ignorance,  and  partly  by  being 
deceived  with  the  dazling  lustre  of  Orpheus's  reputation,  and  with 
their  good  opinion  of  his  truth  and  faithfulness  in  this  matter  (espe- 
cially to  have  this  god  reputed  a  Grecian,  being  a  thing  that  hu- 
moured them)  began  to  use  these  rites,  as  is  before  declared.     And 
with  these  stories  the  mythologists  and  poets  have  filled  all  the 
theatres,  and  now  it  is  generally  received  as  a  truth  not  in  the  least 
to  be  questioned.     To  conclude,  the  priests  say,  that  the  Grecians 
have  arrogated  to  themselves  both  their  Gods  and  demy-gods  (or 
heroes),  and  say  that  divers  colonies  were  transported  over  to  them 
out  of  Egypt :  for  Hercules  was  an  Egyptian,  and  by  his  valour 
made  his  way  into  most  parts  of  the  world,  and  set  up  a  pillar  ia 
Africa;  and  of  this  they  endeavour  to  make  proof  from  the  Grecians 
themselves.     For  whereas  it  is  owned  by  all,  that  Hercules  assisted 
the  gods  in  the  giants'  war,  it  is  plain  that  at  that  time  when  the 
Grecians  say  Hercules  was  born,  the  earth  had  not  then  strength  to 
produce  giants,  neither  were  there  any  in  those  days,  that  is  to  say, 
in  the  age  next  before  the  Trojan  war;  bat  rather  (as  the  Egyptians 
affirm)   at  the  first  generation  and   beginning  of  mankind;  from 
which  time  the  Egyptians  account  above  ten  thousand  years  ;M)ut 
from  the  Trojan  war,   not  twelve  hundred :  and  according  to  this 
computation  of  the  Egyptians„a  club  and  lion*s  skin  may  agree  well 
enough  with  the  antient  Hercules;  for  the  use  of  arms  not  being 
at  that  time  found  out,  men  fought  with  clubs  and  staves,  and  co- 
vered their  bodies  with  beasts'  skins.     This  ancient  Hercules  they 
say  was  the  son  of  Jupiter,  but  know  not  who  was  his  mother:  but 
he  who  was  the  son  of  Alcmena,  they  affirm  was  born  above  ten 
thousand  years  after  the  other,  and  was  called  at  first  Alceus ;  but 
afterwards  Hercules,  not  that  he  had  that  honourable  surname  from. 
Juno  (as  Matris  says)  hut  assumed  to  himself  the  name  out  of  emu- 
lation, desirous  to  do  as  great  things  as  the  antient  Hercules,  and  so 
to  inherit  as  well  his  fame  and  glory  as  his  name. 

Moreover,  the  Grecians  have  a  very  ancient  tradition,  which  agrees 
with  the  Egyptians,  that  Hercules  freed  the  earth  from  wild  beasts; 
which  cannot  possibly  be  applied  to  him  who  flourished  about  the 
times  of  the  Trojans,  when  most  parts  of  the  world  were  free  from 


Ckap.  IL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  31 

_  _       _  _  _  • 

^J^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^™        .      ■  ■ -    — ^-^^^  -    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ . • ^^^^^T^^J^^^^^y 

such  annoyances,  by  improvement  of  lands  and  multitudes  of  po* 
pulous  cities.  But  the  reduction  of  the  world  to  a  more  civil  course 
of  living,  agrees  best  with  the  antient  Hercules,  when  men  were  at 
yet  vexed  and  plagued  with  wild  beasts;  and  especially  in  Egypt, 
whose  upper  part  is  a  wilderness,  and  full  of  wild  beasts  at  this  very 
day.  And  it  is  but  very  reasonable  to  think  that  Hercules  should 
mind  the  prosperity  and  welfare  of  Egypt,  his  own  country,  and  free 
the  land  from  beasts,  and  so  deliver  it  into  the  hands  of  the  hus- 
bandman, to  be  improved  by  tillage;  and  that  upon  this  account  he 
was  honoured  as  a  God. 

They  report  likewise,  that  Perseus  was  born  in  Egypt,  and  that 
the  Grecians  have  transferred  from  thence  the  birth  of  Isis  into 
Argos,  inventing  a  story  that  she  Was  the  same  with  lo,  who  was 
metamorphosed  into  a  bull.  And  indeed  there  are  great  differences 
and  disputes  concerning  these  gods :  for  some  call  the  same  goddess 
bis,  others  call  her  Ceres;  some  Thesmophorus,  others  Luna,  others 
Juno,  and  some  by  all  these  names. 

They  term  Osiris  sometimes  Serapis,  sometimes  U/onysius,  and 
sometimes  Pluto;  then  again  Ammon;  sometimes  Jupiter,  and  oftea 
Pan.  There  are  some  likewise  that  say,  Serapis  is  the  same  whom 
the  Grecians  call  Pluto. 

The  Egyptians  report  that  Isi3  found  out  many  medicines  for  the 
recovery  of  men's  health,  being  very  expert  in  the  art  of  physic;,' 
and  contrived  many  remedies  for  that  purpose;  and  therefore  even 
XK)w  when  she  is  advanced  to  an  immortal  state,  she  takes  pleasure 
ia  curing  men's  bodies;  and  to  those  that  desire  her  assistance,  in 
their  sleep  she  clearly  manifests  her  presence,  and  affords  ready  and 
cffisctual  relief  to  them  that  stand  in  need  of  it. 

For  clear  proof  of  all  this,  they  say,  they  have  not  only  the  usual 
&bles  of  the  Greeks,  but  the  undoubted  evidence  of  the  fact  to  con- 
firm it;  and  that  almost  the  whole  world  bears  testimony  to  this,  by 
the  respect  and  honour  they  pay  to  this  goddess  upon  the  account  of 
^  great  fame  in  curing  of  diseases:  for  in  sleep  she  is  present  with 
persons,  and  applies  remedies  to  the  sick,  and  wonderfully  cures 
^hote  that  are  her  votaries.  That  many  that  have  beengiven  up  by  the 
physicians  as  incurable,  have  been  restored  by  her;  and  that  many 
ihat  have  been  blind  and  lame,  who  have  sought  to  her  for  help, 
have  been  perfectly  restored  to  their  former  sight,  and  soundness 
of  body. 

lliey  say  she  found  out  a  medicine  that  would  raise  the  dead  to 
life,  with  which  she  not  only  raised  her  son  Orus,  that  was  killed  by 
the  Titans,  and  found  dead  in  the  water,  but,  by  that  application,  mude 


92  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  L 


mttlmimmm  mi      ■  ■■ 


him  immortal.  •  Tliis  Orus  was  the  last  of  the  gods  diat  reigiu!d[  in 
Egypt,  after  the  tr/mslation  of  Osiris  his  fatlier.  This  Orus,  tlicy 
Bay,  by  interpretation  is  Apollo,  who  being  taught  by  his  mother  Isis, 
the  art  of  physic  and  divination^  was  very  beneficial  to  mankind  in 
these  respects. 

The  Egj'ptian  priests  in  theJr  computation  of  time  do  reckon 
abov«  three  and  twenty  thousand  years  from  the  reign  of  Sol,  to  the 
passage  of  Alexander  the  Great  into  Asia. 

In  their  fabulous  stories  they  say,  that  the  most  ancient  of  their 
god's  reigned  twelve  hundred  years,  and  the  latter  no  less  than  three 
hundred  years  a-piece.  Whereas  this  great  number  of  years  seems 
incredible,  some  have  not  stuck  to  affirm  that  the  motion  of  the  sun 
not  being  then  known,  the  year  was  reckoned  according  to  the  course 
of  the  moon;  and  therefore  the  solar  ye^r,  consisting  then  but  of 
three  hundred  days,  some  of  them  were  sure  to  live  twelve  hundred 
lunary  years;  and  even  at  this  day  now  that  there  are  twelve  montlis 
in  the  year,  many  live  a  hundred  solar  years. 

The  like  they  say  of  them  that  reigned  three  hundred  years:  for 
in  their  time  (they  say)  the  year  was  made  up  of  four  months,  every 
four  applicable  to  each  of  the  three  seasons  of  the  solar  year,  that  is 
to  say,  spring,  summer,  and  winter;  which  is  the  reason  that  some 
lif  the  Grecians  call  years  Haras,  seasons;  and  historical  annals^ 
Iforogrtqjhy, 

The  Egyptians  moreover  among  their  fables  report,  that  in  the 
time  of  Isis,  there  were  men  of  vast  bodies,  whom  the  Grecians 
call  Giants,  and  whom  they  place  in  their  temples  in  prodigious 
shapes,  who  are  whipt  and  scourged  by  them  that  sacrifice  to  Osiris. 
Some  idly  give  forth,  that  they  sprang  from  the  earth,  when  at  first  it 
gave  being  to  living  creatures.  Others  report,  that  from  many  ex- 
traordinary things  done  by  men  of  strong  bodies,  the  fables  and 
stories  of  giants  arose.  But  in  this  most  agree,  that  for  the  war  they 
raised  against  the  gods  Jupiter  and  Osiris,  they  were  all  destroyed. 

It  was  a  law  likewise  (they  say)  in  Egypt,  against  the  custom  of 
all  other  nations,  that  brothers  and  sisters  might  marry  one  with 
another^  which  accordingly  was  prosperous  and  successful  in  the 
marriage  of  Isis,  who  married  her  brother  Osiris,  and  after  his  death 
made  a  vow  never  to  marry  any  other  man;  and  after  she  had  re- 
venged her  husband's  death  upon  his  murderers,  she  governed  the 
kingdom,  and  reigned  justly  all  her  days ;  and  did  good  universally 
to  idl  sorts  of  people,  obliging  them  with  many  and  extraordinary 
benefits  and  advantages.  And  for  her  sake  it  is  a  custom  among 
ihemi  that  they  honour  a  queen^  and  allow  her  more  power  and  au* 


CAb^.  IL  diodorus  siculus.  33 

thority  than  a  king :  and  in  their  contracts  of  marriage  authority  is  \ 
given  to  the  wife  over  her  husband^  at  which  time  the  husbands  ] 
ipromise  to  be  obedient  to  their  wives  in  all  things. 

Isis  was  buried  at  Memphis^  where  at  this  day  her  shrine  is  to  be 
seen  in  the  grove  of  Vulcan  :  although  some  affirm,  that  these  gods 
lie  buried  in  the  Isle  of  Nile,  at  Philas,  as  is  before  said.  Neither 
am  I  ignorant  that  some  writers  say,  their  sepulchres  are  at  Nysa  in 
Arabia;  whence  Dionysius  is  called  Nysseus;  there  they  say  is  a  pillar 
erected  to  each  of  the  deities  with  inscriptions  of  sacred  letters  upon 
them;  in  one  of  which,  that  belonging  to  Isis,  are  these  words : -«. 
^^  lam  Isis,  queen  of  all  this  country,  the  scholar  of  Mercury: 
^^  what  laws  I  have  made,  none  ought  to  disannul.  I  am  the  eldest 
^^  daughter  of  the  youngest  god,  Saturn.  I  am  the  wife  and  sister 
*^  of  king  Osiris.  1  am  she  that  6rst  found  out  corn  for  man's  use. 
'*  I  am  the  mother  of  king  Orus.  I  am  she  that  arises  in  the  dog- 
'^  star.  The  city  Bubastus  was  built  in  memory  of  me.  Farewell, 
'^  rejoice  O  Egypt  that  was  my  nurse,  that  brought  me  up.'' 

Upon  Osiris's  pillar  are  these  that  follow: ''My  father  was 

*'  Saturn,  the  youngest  of  all  the  gods.  I  am  Osiris,  that  led  an 
*'  army  through  all  the  nations,  as  far  as  to  the  deserts  of  India, 
"  and  in  the  countries  lying  to  the  north,  as  far  as  to  the  head 
''  springs  of  the  river  Ister;  and  to  other  parts,  as  far  as  to  the 
''  ocean.  I  am  the  eldest  son  of  Saturn,  a  branch  of  a  famous 
''  noble  stock,  cousin  german  to  the  day.  There  is  not  a  place  in 
"  the  world  where  1  have  not  been  \  and  what  I  have  discovered,  I 
"  have  imparted  to  all." 

,  So  much  of  the  inscriptions  on  the  pillars  (they  say)  maybe 
reed;  the  rest  is  defaced  and  worn  out  through  length  of  time.  Thus^ 
therefore,  many  disagree  concerning  the  sepulchres  of  these  gods, 
Wcause  the  priests,  who  were  secretly  instructed  in  the  perfect 
loKmledge  of  these  matters,  would  not  suffer  them  to  be  spread 
ftbioad,  out  of  fear  of  those  punishments  that  such  were  liable  unto, 
^  revealed  the  secrets  of  the  gods. 

They  repott,  that  afterwards  many  colonies  out  of  Egypt  wer# 
&persed  over  all  parts  of  tlie  world :  that  Belus  (.who  was  taken  to 
^  the  son  of  Neptune  and  Lybra)  led  a  colony  into  the  province  of 
^bylon,  and  fixing  his  seat  at  the  river  Euphrates,  consecrated 
priests,  and,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Egypt-ians,  freed  them 
^m  all  public  taxes  and  imposition^  These  priests  the  Babylo-' 
^nt  call  Chaldeans,  who  observe  the  motions  of  the  stars,  in  iniita'* 
^  of  the  priests,  naturalists,  and  astrologers  of  Egypt.  Tlmt 
iWaus  likewise  took  from  thence  another  colony,  and. planted 
^m  in  Argos,  the  most  antient  city  almost  of  all  Greece.  And 
Vol.  U    No.d2.  .     f 


34  Dionoiius  sicuLUS.  Book!. 

'     ■  — — — —  ,,,^^1^,^ 

that. the  people  of  Colchos,  in  Pontus,  and  the  Jews  lying  between 
Arabia  and  Syria,  were  colonies  out  of  Egypt;  and  that  therefore  it 
b  an  antient  custom  among  these  nations,  to  circumcise  all  their 
inale  children  after  the  rites  and  customs  received  from  the  Egyp- 
tians. That  the  Athenians  likewise  are  a  colony  of  the  Saits,  which 
came  out  of  Egypt,  and  are  their  kindred, .  they  endeavour  to  "prove 
by  these  arguments;  (that  is  to  say)  that  they  only  of  all  the  Greeks 
call  the  city  Astu,  from  Astu  a  city  among  those  people  of  the 
Saits:  and  that  for  the  better  government  of  the  commonwealth^ 
they  divide  their  people  into  the  same  ranks  and  degrees  as  they  in 
Egypt  do,  to  wit,  into  three  orders ;  the  first  of  which  are  called 
Eupatride,  employed  for  the  most  part  in  studying  the  liberal  arts 
and  sciences,  and  are  advanced  to  the  highest  ofBces  and  places  of 
preferment  in  the  state,  as  the  priests  of  Egypt  are.  The  second 
order  of  men  are  the  rustic  and  country  people^  who  are  to  be  sol- 
diers, and  take  up  arms  upon  all  occasions  for  the  defence  of  their 
country,  like  to  those  who  are  called  husbandmen  in  Egypt^  who 
furnish  out  soldiers  there.  In  the  third  rank  are  reckoned  tradesmen 
and  artificers,  who  commonly  bore  all  the  necessary  and  public 
offices,  which  agrees  exactly  with  the  orders  and  usage  among  the 
Egyptians. 

They  say  likewise,  that  there  were  some  of  the  Athenian  generals 
that  came  out  of  Egypt.  For  they  affirm,  that  Peteos  the  father  of 
Menestheus,  who  was  a  captain  in  the  Trojan  war,  was  an  Egyptian, 
and  afterwards  was  king  of  Athens.  That  the  Athenians  had  not  wit 
enough  to  find  out  the  true  reason  why  two  natures  were  ascribed  to 
him;  for  every  man  knows  that  he  was  called  half  a  beast,  that  is, 
Iialf  a  man,  and  half  a  beast;  and  the  true  ground  was,  because  be 
was  a  member  of  two  several  commonwealths,  a  Grecian  and  a  bar* 
barian.  Erechtheus  likewise,  one  of  the  kings  of  Athens,  they  say 
was  an  £g)'ptian,  which  they  prove  by  these  arguments,  viz.  That 
whereas  there  was  a  great  drought  (as  all  confess)  almost  over  all  tlie 
world,  except  Egypt  only  (because  of  the  peculiar  property  of  the 
place)  which  destroyed  both  men  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth  together, 
Erechtheus  transported  a  great  quantity  of  corn  to  Athens  out  of 
Egypt,  because  they  and  the  Egyptians  were  of  the  same  kindred; 
with  which  kindness  the  citizens  were  so  afiected,  that  they  advanced 
him  to  the  kingdom.  After  which,  he  instituted  the  festivals,  and 
taught  the  Egyptian  rites  and  mysteries  of  Ceres  in  Eieusina. 

They  say,  moreover,  that  it  is  reported  upon  good  ground,  that  the 
goddess  hersHslf  came  into  Attica  at  that  time  when  corn  and  oih^ 
goodly  fruit  in  her  name  were  transported  thither;  and  that  there- 
forest  seemed  as  if  she  had  again  renewed  tbe  invention  of  aeed,  as 


CAiy».  ///•  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  35 

she  did  at  the  beginning.  Lilcewise  that  the  Athenians  theniseWes 
confctSi  that  in  the  reign  of  Erechtheus,  when  the  drought  had  burnt 
up  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  Ceres  came  thither  and  gave  them  corn. 
And  that  the  rites  and  mysteries  of  this  goddess,  were  then  begun  in 
£Ieusina,  and  that  the  sacrifices  and  antient  ceremonies,  both  of  the 
Athenians  and  Egyptians,  are  one  and  the  same:  and  that  they  took 
the  original  of  their  Eumolpidfle  from  the  Egyptian  priests,  and  their 
heralds  from  their  Pastophori.  Further,  that  only  tha  ^Grecians 
swear  by  the  name  of  kis,  and  that  in  all  their  manners  and  customs, 
they  are  altogether  like  the*  Egyptians.  These  and  many  other  such 
like  arguments  they  bring  to  maintain  this  colony,  more  (I  think)  out 
of  ambition,  because  of  the  glory  and  renown  of  that  city,  than  any 
ground  of  truth  tliey  have  for  their  assertion.  To  conclude,  the 
Egyptians  say,  that  many  parts  of  the  world  were  planted  by  their 
ancestors,  by  colonies  sent  from  thence,  by  means  of  the  state  and 
grandeur  of  their  kings,  and  the  vast  number  of  their  people.  Which 
reports  not  being  supported  with  sufficient  arguments,  nor  attested  by 
credible  authors,  we  think  them  not  worthy  of  any  further  account. 
Bat  thus  much  we  thought  fit  to  say  of  the  Egyptian  Theology.   ' 


CHAP.  III. 

The  Description  of  Egypt.    Of  the  Lake  of  Serbon.  The  Nature 

of  the  River  Nile.     The  Cataracts;  the  Mouths  of  the  Nile. 

The  Fruits  of  Egypt.     The  Beasts^  Crocodile,  Sfc.    Several 
Opinions  concerning  the  Inundation  of  the  Nile. 

AND  now  we  shall  endeavour  to  treat  distinctly  of  the  country 
itoclf,  and  the  river  Nile,  and  other  things  worthy  of  remark.  The 
Jtnd  of  Egypt  almost  lies  wholly  to  the  south,  and  is  naturally  for- 
tified, and  the  most  pleasant  country  of  any  of  the  kingdoms  round 
'  •boot  it.  For  on  the  west  it  is  defended  by  the  deserts  of  Libya,  full 
<rf  wild  beasts,  running  out  a  vast  way  In  length;  where  the  passage 

4*^  isbotbxlifficult,  and  extremely  hazardous,  through  want  of  water 
*nd  other  provision.    On  the  south  it  is  environed  with  the  cataracts 
of  Nile,  and  the  mountains  adjoining.     For  from  the  country  of  the 

.  • ,  Troglodites,  and  the  higher  parts  of  Ethiopia,  for  the  space  of  five 

timusand  and  five  hundred  furlongs,  there  is  no  passing  either  by 

I  hnd  or  water,  without  such  a  measure  of  provision  as  a  king  himself 

<ouki  only  be  furnished  with.    Those  parts  towards  the  east^  art 


I 


36  DiODOftUS  sicuLtJs.  JBooi  T. 

MmBeaMmmmuamwmmmmmmmmmmammmmaBmmmmmmmmmammmmmammmummmmi 

partly  secured  by  the  rirer,  and  partly  surrounded  by  tlie  deserts  tad 
by  tbe  marshes  called  the  Baratbra.  For  there  is  a  lake  between. 
Ccelo-Syria  and  Egyj^,  very  oarrowi  but  exceeding  deep,  even  to  a 
wonderi  two.,  hundred  furlongs  in  lengthy  called  Serbon:  if  any 
through  ignorance  approach  it^  they  are  lost  irrecoverably;  for  the 
el^annel  being  very  narrow,  like  a  swadling-band,  and  compassed 
round  with  vast  heaps  of  sand,  great  quantities  of  it  are  cast  into  the 
lake,  by  the  continued  southern  winds,  which  so  cover  the  surface 
of  the  water,  and  make  it  to  the  view  so  like  unto  dry  land^  that  it 
cannot  possibly  be  distinguished;  and  therefore  many,  unacquainted 
with  the  nature  of  the  place,  by  missing  their  way,  have  been  there 
awallowed  pp,  together  with  whole  armies.  For  the  sand  being  trod 
upon,  sinks  down  and  gives  way  by  degrees,  and  like  a  malicious 
cheat,  deludes  and  decoys  them  that  come  upon  it,  till  too  late,  when 
they  see  the  mischief  they  are  likely  to  fail  into,  they  begin  to  sup-* 
port  and  help  one  another,  but  without  any  })05sibility  either  of  re* 
turning  hack,  or  escaping  certain  ruin;  for,  sinking  into  the  gulf, 
they  are  neither  able  to  swim  (the  mud  preventing  all  motion  of  the 
body)  nor  in  a  capacity  to  wade  out,  having  nothing  firm  to  support 
them  for  that  purpose;  for  sand  and  water  being  mixed  together,  the 
nature  of  both  is  thereby  so  changed,  that  there  is  neither  fording, 
DOT  passing  over  it  by  boats.  ''''Being  brought  therefore  to  this  pass, 
without  theleast  possibility  of  help  to  be  afforded  them,  they  go  toge- 
ther with  the  sand  to  the  bottom  of  the  gulf,  at  the  very  brink  of  the 
bog;  and  so  the  place,  agreeable  to  its  nature,  is  called  Barathrum,  x^ 

Having  spoken  of  the  three  boundaries  of  Egypt,  by  which  it  u 
distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  continent,  we  now  proceed  to  the 
next. 

The  fourth  side  is  nearly  surrounded  with  a  vast  sea,  without  any 
harbours,  being  a  very  long  and  tedious  voyage,  and  very  difficult  to 
find  any  place  of  landing.  For  from  Parcetonium  in  Africa,  to  Jop- 
})a  in  Coelo- Syria,  for  the  space  almost  of  five  thousand  furlongs, 
there  is  not  one  safe  harbour  to  be  found,  except  Pharus.  Then  again 
all  along  the  coasts  of  Egypt,  the  sea  is  full  oi  rocks  and  sands,  not 
discernible  by  mariners  unacquainted  with  the  places;  so  that  when 
they  look  upon  themselves  as  safe,  and  to  have  escaped  the  danger  of 
the  seas,  and  make  with  great  joy  to  land  (wanting  skill  to  steer 
imght)  they  are  on  a  sudden  and  unexpectedly  shipwrecked.  Others 
inconsiderately,  because  they  cannot  see  the  land,  in  regard  it  lies  so 
low,  are  carried  either  into  the  bogs,  or  to  the  deserts.  And  in  this 
inanner  is  Egypt  naturally  guarded  on  every  side.  It  is  of  a  long 
fonq  OF  shape ;  that  part  that  lies  along  to  the  sea  coast  stretchea 
forth  itself  in  length  two  thousand  furlongs ;  but  to  the  south  it  runs 


Chap.  IIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  3f 


almost  six  thousand  furlongs.  It  was  antiently  the  most  populous 
country  in  the.world,  and  at  this  day  not  inferior  to  any.  'It  was 
formerly  full  of  famous  towns,  and  had  in  it  above  eighteen  thousand 
oities^  as  is  to  be  seen  registered  in  their  sacred  records :  and  in  the 
time  of  Ptolemy  Lagus,  there  were  reckoned  above  three  thousand^ 
which  remain  still  to  this  day.  Once  they  say  in  a  general  account 
taken  of  all  the  inhabitants,  they  amounted  to  seven  millions;  and  at 
this  time  are  not  less  than  three  millions  of  people.  And  therefore 
they  say  that  their  kings  by  the  help  of  such  a  multitude,  left  behind 
them  in  their  great  and  wonderful  works,  eternal  monuments  of  their 
state  and  grandeur;  which  we  shall  by  and  by  distinctly  treat  of;  but 
at  present  we  shall  speak  of  the  nature  of  the  Nile,  and  of  the  pro- 
perty of  the  soil. 

The  Nile  runs  from  the  south  towards  th^  north  from  spring-heads 
hitherto  unknown,  for  they  are  in  the  utmost  borders  of  Ethiopia^ 
where,  by  reason  of  the  vast  deserts,  and  extremity  of  heat,  there  is 
no  coming.     It  is  the  greatest  of  all  other  rivers,  and  runs  through 
many  countries,  and  therefore  has  many  large  turnings  and  wind- 
ings, sometimes  making  its  way  to  the  east  and  Arabia,  and  then 
again  to  the  west  and  Libya.    For  it  runs  down  from  the  moun- 
tains of  Ethiopia,  till  it  empties  itself  into  the  sea,  at  least  twelve 
thousand  furlongs,  accounting  the  several  windings  it  makes  in  the 
way.     In  its  course  it  makes  many  islands;  amongst  many  others 
ia  Ethiopia,  one  remarkable  for  its  greatness,  called  Meroes,  two- 
and-twenty  furlongs  broad.    But,  in  the  lower  places,  its  swelling 
waves  grow  narrower,  and  the  current  divides  itself  into  two  chan- 
nels towards  the  continents  that  lie  on  either  side  the  island.     One 
of  the  currents  bends  towards  Africa,  and  is  at  length  swallowed  up 
in  a  bed  of  sand  of  an  incredible  depth:  the  other  makes  its  course 
towards  Arabia,  on  the  other  side,  and  falls  into  deep  guts  and  vast 
bogs,  inhabited  round  by  divers  nations;  entering  at  last  into  Egypt, 
it  keeps  no  direct  course,  but  turns  and  winds  here  and  there  in 
some  places  ten  furlongs  in  breadth,  in  others  less,  sometimes' 
running  towards  the  east,  then  to  the  west,  and  sometimes  back 
again  to  the  south.     For  mountains  stand  on  both  sides  the  river, 
and  take  up  a  large  tract  of  ground;  and  the  river,  forcing  itself 
with  great  violence  against  strait  and  narrow  precipices,  the  water  is 
driven  back,  and  flows  over  the  neighbouring  fields;  and  after  it 
has  run  a  considerable  way  towards  the  south,  it  returns  at  length  to 
its  natural  course.     And  though  this  river  is  thus  remarkable  above 
all  others,  yet  this  is  especially  observable  in  it,  that  its  stream  runs 
calm  and  smooth,  without  any  violent  surges,  or  tempestuous  waves, 
except  at  the  cataracts;  a  place  of  ten  furlong  being  so  called. 


38  DIODORUS  sicuLUS«  Book  T. 

nioniDg  down  in  a  precipice,  io  a  strait  and  narrow  passage  amongst 
steep  rocks  j  the  whole  is  a  rugged  shelvy  gulf,  where  there  lie 
inaoj  great  stones,  like  huge  rocks.  The  water  dashing  violently 
against  these  rocks,  is  beaten  back,  and  rebounds  the  contrary  way, 
bj  which  are  made  wonderful  whirlpools,  and  by  the  repeated  influxt 
the  whole  place  is  covered  with  froth  and  foam^  to  the  ao  small 
amazement  of  the  beholders :  for  the  river  there  runs  down  with  as 
quick  and  violent  a  current^  as  an  arrow  out  of  a  bow.  Sometimes 
it  biqppens  that  (these  rocks,  and  the  whole  gulf  being  covered  with 
the  vast  quantity  of  the  waters  of  the  Nile)  some  ships,  driven 
with  contrary  winds,  are  hurried  down  the  cataract,  but  there  is  no 
possibility  of  sailing  up  against  it,  the  force  of  the  stream  baffling 
all  the  art  of  man*  There  are  many  cataracts  of  this  kind,  but  the 
greatest  is  that  in  the  confines  of  Ethiopia  and  Egypt. 

How  the  river  Nile  makes  several  islands  near  Ethiopia  (amongst 
which  Meroe  is  the  chief)  b  before  declared.  In  this  island  is  a 
famous  City  of  the  same  name^  which  Cambyses  built,  and  called  it 
after  the  name  of  his  mother  Meroe.  This  island  is  said  to  be  of 
the  sltape  of  a  shield,  and  for  greatness  exceeding  all  the  rest  of  the 
islands  in  those  parts,  being  three  thousand  furlongs  in  length,  and 
a  thousand  in  breadth,  having  in  it  many  cities^  of  which  Meroe  is 
the  noblest.  The  island  is  surrounded  towards  the  coasts  of  Libya 
with  vast  heaps  of  sand,  all  along  close  to  the  river,  and  towards 
Arabia  run  along  steep  rocky  mountains.  It  is  said  there  .are  in  it 
mines  of  gold,  silver,  iron,  and  brass,  a  great  number  of  ebony  trees^ 
and  all  sorts  of  precious  stones.  To  conclude,  there  are  so  many 
islands  made  by  this  river,  that  it  is  scarcely  credible.  For  besides 
those  islands  in  that  part  of  Egypt  called  Delta,  there  are  (they  say) 
seven  hundred,  some  of  which  the  Ethiopians  inhabit,  and  sow 
with  millet;  others  are  so  pestered  with  serpents,  baboons,  and  all 
kinds  of  hurtful  beasts,  that  it  is  dangerous  to  come  into  them* 

The  river  Nile,  parting  itself  into  several  channels  in  Egypt,  makes 
that  part  called  Delta,  so  called  from  the  shape  resembling  that 
Greek  letter.  The  two  sides  of  this  Delta  are  fashioned  by  the  two 
extreme  branches  of  the  river;  the  foot  of  this  letter  isthesea^ 
where  the  seven  mouths  of  the  Nile  disgorge  themselves.  For 
there  are  seven  places  called  mouths,  through  which  it  empties  itself 
into  the  ocean.  The  first,  lying  to  the  most  eastward  channel,  is  at 
Pelusium,  called  Pelusaicum;  the  second  Taniticum;  the  third 
Mendisium;  the  fourth  Phatuiticum;  the  fifth  Sebenyticum;  the 
sixth  Bolbitinum,  and  the  last  Canopicum  or  Herculeum,  as  some 
call  it.  There  are  some  other  mouths  made  by  art,  of  which  it  is 
not  material  to  write.    At  every  of  the  moutlis  is  a  city  built  oo. 


CAtip.  III.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  8$ 


either  side  of  the  river,  defended  with  strong  guards  and  bridges 
on  each  bank.  From  Pelasaicinn  as  far  as  to  the  Arabian  golf,  and 
the  Red  Sea,  Is  a  canal  cut  out.  Necos  the  son  of  Psatneticus,  was 
the  first  that  began  this  work,  and  after  birn  Darius  the  Persian  car* 
rted  it  on,  bat  left  it  unfinished,  being  told  by  some  that  if  be  cut  it 
through  the  isthmus,  all  Egypt  would  be  drowned,  for  that  the  Red 
Sea  lay  higher  than  Egypt.  The  last  attempt  was  made  by  Ptoiemj 
the  second,  who  cut  a  sluice  across  the  isthmus  in  a  more  con* 
venient  place,  which  he  opened  when  he  had  a  mind  to  sail  down 
that  way,  and  then  presently  after  shut  up  again;  which  contri^nee 
proved  very  useful  and  serviceable.  The  river  which  runs  through 
this  cut  is  called  Ptolemy,  after  the  name  of  the  maker.  Wliere  it 
figdls  into  the  sea,  there  is  a  city  built  called  Arsinoe.  Delta  is  of 
the  shape  of  Sicily :  both  sides  are  seven  hundred  and  fifty  furlonga 
in  length,  and  the  foot  which  lies  along  the  sea -coast,  is  th^een 
hundred  furlongs. 

This  island  has  in  it  many  dikes  and  sluices  cut  by  art,  and  is  the 
most  sweet  and  pleasantest  part  of  Egypt;  for  being  enriched  and 
watered  by  the  river,  it  produces  all  sorts  of  grain  and  other  fruits; 
and  by  the  yearly  overflowing  of  the  river,  the  face  of  the  ground  is 
still  Gootinually  renewed,  and  the  inliabitants  have  an  easy  way  to 
water  it  by  means  of  a  certain  engine,  invented  by  Archimedes  the 
Syracusan,  which  from  its  form  is  called  Clioclia.  And  whereas  the 
Mile  flows  gently  over  it,  it  brings  along  with  it  much  soil,  which 
resting  in  low  and  hollow  grounds,  makes  very  ricii  marshes.  For 
in  these  places  grow  roots  of  several  tastes  and  savours,  and  fruits 
and  herbs  of  a  singular  nature  and  quality,  which  are  very  useful 
both  to  the  poor,  and  those  that  are  sick ;  for  they  do  not  only  afford 
plentifully  in  every  place  things  for  food,  but  all  other  things  neces- 
sary and  useful  for  the  life  of  mnn.  There  grows  in  great  plentf 
Lotus,  of  which  the  Egyptians  make  bread  for  the  nourishment  of 
man's  body.  Here  is  likewise  produced  in  plenty  Ciborium,  called 
Uie  Egyptian  bean.  Here  are  divers  sorts  of  trees,  amongst  which 
tfiose  called  Persica,  whose  fruit  is  of  wonderful  sweetness:  this 
plant  was  brougiit  out  of  li^thiopia  by  the  Persians,  when  Cambyses 
eonquered  these  places.  The  sycamore  (or  Egyptian  fig-tree) ;  some 
of  them  bear  mulberries,  others  a  fruit  like  unto  figs,  and  bear  ati 
the  year  long;  so  that  a  man  may  satisfy  his  hunger  at  any  time. 
After  the  fidling  of  the  waters  of  the  river,  they  gather  the  fruit) 
called  Bates,  which,  for  their  sweet  and  delightful  laste,  are  at  eii« 
tertainments  served  up  at  last  course  as  delicious  desserts. 

The  Egyptians  make  a  drink  of  barley,  called  Zythus,  for  srarll 
aod  sweetness  of  taste  not  mucii   inferior  to  wine.    Tliev  make  a- 


40  DIODORU8  9ICULUS.  BmA  t 

liquor  like  oil  for  the  feeding  of  their  lamps,  of  the  juice  of  a  plaoC 
which  they  call  Cici.  There  are  many  other  pknts  which  grow  id 
£gypt  of  admirable  use,  which  would  be  too  tedious  here  to  enu* 
merate. 

The  river  Nile  breeds  many  creatures  of  several  forms  and  shapes^ 
amongst  which,  two  are  especially  remarkable,  the  crocodile  and  the 
liorse,  as  theyare  called:  amongst  these,  thecrocodileof  the  least  crea- 
ture becomes  the  greatest;  for  it  lays  an  egg  much  of  the  bigness  of 
that  of  a  goose,  and  after  the  young  is  hatched,  it  grows  to  the  length 
of  sixteen  cubits,  and  lives  to  the  age  of  a  man :  it  wants  a  tongue^ 
but  has  a  body  naturally  armed  in  a  wonderful  manner.  For  its 
skin  is  covered  all  over  with  scales  of  an  extraordinary  hardness; 
many  sharp  teeth  are  ranged  on  both  sides  its  jaws,  and  two  of  them 
are  much  bigger  than  the  rest.  This  monster  does  not  only  devour 
men,  but  other  creatures  that  come  near  the  river.  His  bites  are 
sharp  and  destructive,  and  with  his  claws  he  tears  his  prey  cruelly  ia 
pieces,  and  what  wounds  he  makes,  no  medicine  or  application  caa 
heal.  The  Egyptians  formerly  caught  these  monsters  with  hooksj 
baited  with  raw  flesh ;  but  of  later  times,  they  have  used  to  take  theai 
with  strong  nets  like  fishes :  sometimes  they  strike  them  on  the  head 
with  forks  of  iron,  and  ^o  kill  them*  There  is  an  infinite  multitude 
of  these  creatures  in  the  river  and  the  neighbouring  pools,  in  regard 
they  are  great  breeders,  and  are  seldom  killed :  for  the  crocodile  is 
'  adored  as  a  god  by  some  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  for  strangers  to  hoot 
and  destroy  them  is  to  no  purpose,  for  their  flesh  is  not  eatable.  But 
nature  lias  provided  relief  against  the  increase  of  this  destructive 
monster;  for  the  ichneumon,  as  it  is  called  (of  the  bigness  of  a  little 
^^i)^  running  up  and  down  near  the  water  side,  breaks  all  the  fgga 
laid  by  this  beast,  wherever  he  finds  them;  and  that  which  is  most  to 
be  admired  is,  that  he  dees  this  not  for  food  or  any  other  advantage^ 
but  out  of  a  natural  instinct  for  the  mere  benefit  of  mankind. 

The  beast  called  the  River  Horse,  is  five  cubits  long,  four-footed^ 
and  cloven-hoofed  like  to  an  ox.  He  has  three  teeth  or  tushes  oa 
either  side  his  jaw,  appearing  outwards  larger  than  those  of  a  wild 
boar ;  as  to  his  ears,  tail,  and  his  neighing,  he  is  like  a  horse.  The 
whole  bulk  of  his  body  is  not  much  unlike  an  elephant;  his  skin  ia 
firmer  and  thicker  almost  than  any  other  beast.  He  lives  both  on 
land  and  in  water;  in  the  day  time  he  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  river^ 
and  in  the  night  time  comes  to  land,  and  feeds  upon  grass  and  corn* 
If  this  beast  were  so  fruitful  as  to  bring  forth  young  every  year,  he 
would  undo  the  husbandman,  and  destroy  a  great  part  of  the  corn  ef 
Egypt.  He  is  likewise  by  the  help  of  many  hands  often  caught, 
being  struck  with  iustrumeats  of  iron;  for,  when  he  if  found,  thej. 


Chap.IIL  DI0D0RU8  SICULU9.  41 

hem  him  round  with  their  boats,  and  those  on  board  wound  him 
with  fbrked  instruments  of  iron,  cast  at  him  like  so  many  darts ;  and 
having  strong  ropes  to  the  irons,  they  fix  them  in  him ;  they  let 
him  go  till  he  loses  his  blood,  and  he  then  dies.  His  flesh  is  extra- 
ordinary hard,  and  of  ill  digestion.  There  is  nothing  in  his  inner 
parts  that  can  be  eaten,  neither  his  bowels,  nor  any  other  of  hit 
entrails. 

Besides  these  before  mentioned,  the  Nile  abounds  with  multitudes 
of  all  sorts  of  fish :  not  only  such  as  are  taken  fresh  to  supply  the  in- 
habitants at  hand,  but  an  innumerable  number  likewise  which  they 
salt  to  send  abroad.  To  conclude,  no  river  in  the  world  is  more  bene* 
ficial  and  serviceable  to  mankind  than  the  Nile. 

Its  inundation  begins  at  the  summer  solstice,  and  increases  till  the 
equinoctial  in  autumn;  during  which  time,  he  brings  in  along  with 
him  new  soil,  and  waters  as  well  the  tilled  and  improved  ground^ 
as  that  which  lies  waste  and  untilled,  as  long  as  it  pleases  the  hus- 
bandman ;  for  the  water  Sowing  gently  and  by  degrees,  they  easily 
divert  its  course,  by  casting  up  small  banks  of  earth;  and  then,  by 
opening  a  passage  for  it,  as  easily  turn  it  over  their  land  again,  if  they 
see  it  needful.  It  is  so  very  advantageous  to  the  inhabitants,  and 
done  with  so  little  pains,  that  most  of  the  country  people  turn  in 
their  cattle  into  the  sowed  ground  to  eat,  and  tread  down  the  corn, 
and  four  or  five  months  after,  they  reap  it.  Some  lightly  run  over 
the  surface  of  the  earth  with  a  plow,  after  the  water  is  fallen,  and 
gain  a  mighty  crop  without  any  great  cost  or  pains :  but  husbandry 
amongst  all  other  nations,  is  very  laborious  and  chargeable,  only  the 
Egyptians  gather  their  fruits  with  little  cost  or  labour.  That  part  of 
the  country  likewise  where  vines  are  planted,  after  this  watering 
by  the  Nile,  yields  a  most  plentiful  vintage.  The  fields  that  after  the 
inundation  are  pastured  by  their  flocks,  yield  them  this  advantage^ 
that  the  sheep  yean  twice  in  a  year,  and  are  shorn  as  often.  This 
increase  of  the  Nile  is  wonderful  to  beholders,  and  altogether  in* 
credible  to  them  that  only  hear  the  report;  for  when  other  rivers 
about  the  solstice  fall  and  grow  lower  all  summer  long,  this  begins 
to  increase,  and  continues  to  rise  every  day,  till  it  comes  to  that 
height  that  it  overflows  almost  all  Egypt;  and  on  the  contrary,  in  the 
same  manner,  in  the  winter  solstice,  it  falls  by  degrees  till  it  wholly 
returns  into  its  proper  channel.  And  in  regard  the  land  of  Egypt 
lies  low  and  champaign;  the  towns,  cities, and  country  villages,  that 
are  built  upon  rising  ground,  (cast  up  by  art),  look  like  the  islands 
of  the  Cyclades.  Many  of  the  cattle  sometimes  are  by  the  river  in* 
tercepted,  and  so  are  drowned;  hut  those  tliat  fly  to  the  higher 
grounds  ar^  preserved.  During  the  time  of  the  inunds^tioo,  the 
Vol.  1.  No.  32.  Q 


48  DTODOaUS  StCULUS*  Book  I. 

cattle  are  kept  id  the  countrj  towns  and  small  cottages^  where  thej 
have  food  and  fodder  before  laid  up  and  prepared  for  them.  But  the 
common  people,  now  at  liberty  from  all  employments  in  the  field,  in* 
dulge  themselves  in  idleness,  feasting  every  day,  and  giving  them- 
selves up  to  all  sorts  of  sports  and  pleasures.  Yet  out  of  fear  of  the 
inundation,  a  watch-tower  is  built  in  Memphis,  by  the  kings  of 
Egypt,  where  those  who  are  employed  to  take  care  of  this  concem, 
observing  to  what  height  the  river  rises,  send  letters  from  one  city  to 
another,  acquainting  them  how  many  cubits  and  fingers  the  river 
rises,  and  when  it  begins  to  decrease;  and  so  the  people,  comiqg  td 
under<»tand  the  fiiU  of  the  waters,  are  freed  from  their  fears,  and  nil 
presently  have  a  foresight  what  plenty  of  corn  they  are  like  to  have; 
and  this  observation  has  been  registered  from  time  to  time  by  the 
Egyptians  for  many  generations. 

There  are  great  controversies  concerning  the  reasons  of  the  over- 
flowing of  the  Nile,  and  many,  both  philosophers  and  historians,  have 
endeavoured  to  declare  the  causes  of  it,  which  we  shall  distinctly  re- 
late, neither  making  too  long  a  digression,  nor  omitting  that  which 
is  so  much  banded  and  controverted.    Of  the  increase  and  spring- 
heads of  the  Nile,  and  of  its  emptying  itself  at  length  into  the  S^ 
and  other  properties  peculiar  to  this  river  above  all  others,  though  it 
be  the  greatest  in  the  world,  yet  some  authors  have  not  dared  to  say 
the  least  thing:  some  who  have  attempted  to  give  their  reasons,  have 
been  very  wide  from  the  mark.     For  as  for  Hellanicus,  Cadmus^ 
Hecatieus,  and  such  like  antient  authors,  they  have  told  little  bilt 
frothy  stories,  and  mere  fables.     Herodotus,  above  all  other  writers^  . 
very  industrious,  and  well  acquainted  with  general  hbtory,  m^Ade  it  - 
his  business  to  find  out  the  causes  of  these  things ;  but  what  he  aays 
is,  notwithstanding,  very  doubtful,  and  some  things  seem  to  be  repug* 
rant  and  contradictory  one  to  another.    Thucydides  and  Xem^pbon^ 
who  have  the  reputation  of  faithful  historians,  never  so  much  es  touch 
upon  the  description  of  any  place  in  Egypt.    But  Ephorus  and  Theo^ 
pompus,  though  they  are  very  earnest  in  this  matter,  yet  they  have 
not  in  the  least  discovered  the  truth. 

But  it  was  through  ignorance  of  the  places,  and  not  through  neg-t 
ligence,  that  they  were  all  led  into  error.  For  antiently,  none  of  the 
Grecians,  till  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphusy  ever  went  into  Ethio- 
pia, or  so  much  as  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  Egypt.  For  those  places 
were  never  frequented  by  travellers,  they  were  so  hasardous,  till  that 
king  marched  with  a  Grecian  army  into  those  parts,  and  so  made  a 
more  perfect  discovery  of  the  country. 

No  writer  hitherto  has  pretended  that  he  himself  ever  saw,  or 
heard  of  any  one  ^Ise  that  affirmed^  he  bad  seen  the  spring-heads 


CA^.  tIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  4» 

ragggggii  IB,  I.   \*inBaBtmaaM^mmaammKmmmKmmmszmKmBmmmmmmmmmmBai 

of  tiie  Nile :  all,  therefore,  amounting  to  no  more  than  opinion  and 
conjecture,  the  priests  of  Egypt  affirm  that  it  comes  from  the  ocean, 
which  flows  roun4  the  whole  earth.  But  nothing  that  they  say  is 
upon  any  solid  grounds,  and  they  resolve  doubts  by  things  that  are 
more  doubtful ;  and  to  prove  what  they  say,  they  bring  arguments  that 
have  need  to  be  proved  themselves. 

But  the  Troglodites  (otherwise  called  Molgii),  whom  the  scorch- 
ing heat  forced  to  remove  from  the  higher  parts  into  those  lower 
places,  say,  that  there  are  some  signs,  whence  a  man  may  rationally 
conclude,  that  the  river  Nile  rises  from  streams  which  run  from  many 
ountains  or  spring-heads,  and  meet  at  last  in  one  channel,  and  there* 
fore  to  be  the  most  fruitful  and  richest  river  of  any  that  is  known  in 
the  world. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Isle  of  Meroe  (who  are  most  to  be  credited 
upon  this  account),  are  far  from  inventing  so  much  as  any  probable 
arguments;  and  though  they  live  near  to  the  place  in  controversy,  are 
io  hr  from  giving  any  certain  account  of  this  matter,  that  they  call 
the  Nile,  Astapus ;  which,  in  the  Greek  language,  signifies  water 
that  issues  oat  of  a  place  of  darkness ;  so  that  they  give  a  name  to  the 
river,  to  denote  their  ignorance  of  the  place  from  whence  it  springs. 
But  that  seems  the  truest  reason  to  me,  that  looks  to  be  furthest  from 
fiction  and  studied  contrivance.  Yet  I  am  not  ignorant,  that  He- 
rodotus who  bounds  Libya  both  on  the  east  and  west,  with  this 
river,  ascribes  the  exact  knowledge  of  it  to  the  Africans,  called  Nasa  • 
mooes,  and  says,  that  the  Nile  rises  from  a  certain  lake,  and  runs 
through  a  large  tract  of  ground,  down  all  along  through  Ethiopia: 
but,  neither  ar^  the  sayings  of  the  Africans  in  this  behalf,  (as  not  al* 
tegether  agreeable  to  truth),  nor  the  affirmation  of  the  writer,  (who 
proves  not  what  he  says),  to  be  of  absolute  credit.  But  enough  con* 
cerning  the  spring-heads  and  course  of  the  Nile: let  us  now  ven- 
ture to  treat  of  the  causes  of  the  risings  of  this  river. 

Tbales,  who  is  reckoned  one  of  the  seven  wise  men  of  Greece  is  of 
opinion,  that  the  £tesian  winds  that  beat  fiercely  upon  the  mouth 
of  the  river,  give  a  check  and  stop  to  the  current,  and  so  hinder  it 
from  falling  into  the  sea,  upon  which  the  river  swelling,  and  its  chan- 
nel filled  with  water,  at  length  overflows  the  country  of  Egypt,  which 
lies  flat  and  low.  Though  this  seems  a  plausible  reason,  yet  it  may 
be  easily  disproved:  for  if  it  were  true  what  he  says,  then  all  the 
rivers  which  run  into  the  sea  against  the  Etesian  winds,  would  over- 
flow  in  like  manner;  which  being  never  known  in  any  other  part  of 
the  world,  some  otiicr  reason,  and  more  agreeable  to  truth  must 
of  uecessity  be  sought  for.    Anaxagoras  the  philosopher,  ascribes  ti>c 


44  BIODORUS  SICULUS.  .^^Boot  T. 

cause  to  the  melting  of  the  snow  in  Ethiopia,  whom  the  poet  EUirU 
pides  (who  was  his  scholar)  follows,  saying  thus.^ 

The  pleatant  itretini  of  th*  river  ITile  fonekef^ 
Which  flowbig  frea  the  Negro'tpuched  lead* 
Swells  big  when  Ui'  melting  mow  to  tb'  river  tnkei» 
Comei  falling  down,  end  of  erflowi  the  ftrsad. 

Neither  is  it  any  hard  task  to  confute  this  opinion^  since  it  is  appa- 
rent to  ally  that  by  reason  of  the  parching  heats,  there  is  no  snow  in 
Ethiopia  at  that  time  of  the  year.  For  in  these  countries  there  is  not 
the  least  sign  either  of  frost,  cold,  or  any  other  effect  of  winter,  es- 
pecially at  the  time  of  the  oYcrflowing  of  the  Nile;  and  suppose  there 
be  abundance  of  snow  in  the  higher  parts  of  Ethiopia,  yet  what  is 
affirmed,  is  certainly  false;  for  every  river  that  is  swelled  with  snow, 
fiimes  up  in  cold  fogs,  and  thickens  the  air;  but  about  the  Nile  only^ 
above  all  other  rivers,  neither  mists  gather,  nor  are  there  any  cold 
breezes,  nor  is  the  air  gross  and  thick,  Herodotus  says,  that  the  Nile 
is  such  in  its  own  nature,  as  it  seems  to  be  in  the  time  of  its  increase; 
for  that  in  winter,  when  the  sun  moves  to  the  south,  and  runs  its  daily 
course  directly  over  Africa,  it  exhales  so  much  water  out  of  the  Niky 
that  it  decreases  against  nature;  and  in  summer,  when  the  sun  re* 
turns  to  the  north,  the  rivers  of  Greece,  and  the  rivers  of  all  other 
northern  countries,  fall  and  decrease;  and  therefore,  that  it  is  not  so 
strange  for  the  Nile  about  summer  time  to  intrease,  and  in  winter 
to  felt  and  grow  lower.  But  to  this  it  may  be  answered,  that  if  the 
sun  exhale  so  much  moisture  out  of  the  Nile  in  winter  time,  it  would 
do  the  like  in  other  rivers  in  Africa,  and  so  they  must  fiiU  as  well  as 
the  Nile,  which  no  where  liappens  throughout  all  Africa;  and  tliere* 
fore,  this  author's  reason  is  frivolous ;  for  the  rivers  of  Greece  rise 
not  in  the  winter,  by  reason  of  the  remoteness  of  the  sun,  but  by 
reason  of  the  great  rains  that  fiill  at  that  time, 

Democritus  the  Abderite  says,  that  the  northern  countries,  and 
not  tliose  towards  the  south,  (as  Anaxagoras  and  Euripides  say),  arc 
subject  to  snow;  for  that  it  is  clear  and  evident  to  every  body,  that  in 
thi  northern  parts,  drifts  and  heaps  of  snow  lie  congealed  at  the  time 
of  the  winter  solstice ;  but  in  summer,  the  ice  l>eing  melted  by  the 
bei|t  of  the  sun,  the  land  becomes  very  wet,  which  causes  many  thick 
mists  to  appear  upon  the  hills,  from  the  vapours  rising  from  the 
earth.  These  vapours,  he  says,  are  driven  about  by  the  Etesian 
winds,  till  they  fall  upon  the  highest  mountains,  which  are,  (as  be 
affirms,  in  Ethiopia),  and  by  the  violent  impression  tlicy  make  upon 
tiic  tops  of  these  mountains,  great  storms  and  showers  of  rain  are  oe« 
rasiooed,  which,  about  the  time  of  the  Etesian  winds>  cause  the  rivcf 


CKiyu  ni.  DI0D0RU8  81CULUS.  46 


to  rise.  But  if  any  will  diligently  observe  the  time  and  season  of  the 
year  when  this  falls  out,  he  may  easily  answer  this  argument;  for  the 
Nile  b^ns  to  swell  at  the  time  of  the  summer  solstice,  when  there 
are  no  Elesian  winds ;  and  after  the  autumnal  equinox,  when  those 
winds  are  past,  it  fidb  again.  Inasmuch,  therefore,  as  certain  expe* 
rience  to  the  contrary,  answers  all  arguments,  be  they  ever  so  proba- 
ble, the  man's  diligence  and  ingenuity  is  to  be  commended;,  but  his 
affirmations  and  opinions  are  by  no  means  to  be  relied  upon.  And 
I  wave  this,  that  it  is  evident  that  the  Etesian  winds  oome  as  often 
from  the  west,  as  from  the  north.  For  not  only  the  north-east  windip 
called  Aparctie,  but  those  of  the  north*west,  called  A  rgeste,  go  under 
the  name  of  the  Etesian  winds.  And  whereas  he  affirms,  that  the 
greatest  mountains  are  in  Ethiopia,  as  it  wants  proof;  so  likewise,  all 
grounds  for  credit  and  belief  as  is  evident  from  the  thing  itself. 

Ephorus,  who  gives  the  last  account^  the  thing,  endeavours  to 
ascertain  the  reason,  but  seems  not  to  find  out  the  truth. 

The  whole  land  of  Egypt  (says  he)  is  cast  up  from  the  river,  and 
the  soil  is  of  a  loose  and  spungy  nature,  and  has  in  it  many  large 
cliffii  and  hollow  places,  wherein  are  abundance  of  water,  which  in 
Ae  winter  time  is  frozen  up,  and  in  tlie  summer  issu^es  out  on  every 
side,  like  sweat  from  the  pores,  which  occasions  the  river  Nile  to  rise* 
This  writer  does  not  only  betray  his  own  ignorancae  of  the  nature  itf 
places  in  Egypt,  that  he  never  saw  them  himself,  but  likewise,  that 
lie  never  was  rightly  inlbrmed  by  any  that  was  acquainted  with  them. 
For  if  the  overflowing  of  the  Nile  should  proceed  from  Egypt  itself,  it 
could  not  flow  above  the  land  of  Elgypt,  where  it  passes  through  rock 
and  mountainous  places.  For,  as  it  takes  its  course  through  Ethiopia 
for  above  the  space  of  six  thousand  furlongs,  it  is  at  its  full  height 
before  ever  it  reach  Egypt ;  and  therefore,  if  the  river  Nile  lie  lower 
than  the  caverns  of  congested  earth,  those  clefts  and  hollow  places 
must  be  above,  towards  tlie  superficies  of  the  earth,  in  which  it  is 
impossible  so  much  water  should  be  contained.  And  if  the  river  lie 
higher  than  those  spongy  caverns,  it  is  not  possible  that  from  hollow 
places,  much  lower  than  the  river,  the  water  should  rise  higher  than 
the  river.  Lastly,  wlu>  can  imagine  that  waters  issuing  out  of  holes 
and  hollow  parts  of  the  earth,  should  raise  the  river  to  such  a  height, 
as  to  overflow  almost  all  the  land  of  Egypt  ?  But  I  let  pass  this  vain 
imagination  of  casting  up  the  soil,  and  lodging  of  waters  in  the 
boweb  of  the  earth,  being  so  easily  to  be  confuted.  The  river  Mean* 
der  hath  cast  up  a  great  tract  of  land  in  Asia,  whereas,  at  the  time  of 
the  rising  of  the  Nile,  nothing  of  that  kind  in  the  least  can  be  seen. 

In  the  same  manner  the  river  Archelous  in  Arcadia,  and  Cephesus 
ia  Boeotia,  which  runsdov\u  from  Phociea^  have  cast  up  great  (juan- 


46  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  Mook  I: 


tities  of  earthy  by  both  which  the  writer  is  convicted  oJP  fiittity :  ai&d 
indeed  no  man  is  to  expect  any  certainty  from  Ephortis^  who  may  be 
palpably  discerned  not  to  make  it  hb  business  in  many  things  to  de« 
Glare  the  truth.  The  philosophers  indeed  in  Memphis  have  «irged 
stnmg  reasons  for  the  increase  of  tiie  Nile,  which  are  hard  to 
be  confuted;  and  though  they  are  improbable,  yet  many  agree 
to  them.  For  they  divide  the  earth  into  three  parts,  one  of  whieh 
is  that  wherein  we  inhabit;  another  quite  contrary  to  these  pllices  In 
the  seasons  of  the  year;  the  third  lying  between  these  two,  whieh 
they  say  is  uninhabitable  by  reason  of  the  scorching  heat  of  the  sun  ; 
and  therefore,  if  the  Nile  should  overflow  in  the  winter  time,  it  would 
be  clear  and  evident,  that  its  source  would  arise  out  of  our  zone,  be* 
cause  then  we  have  the  most  rain :  but  on  the  contrary,  being  that  it 
rises  in  summer,  it  is  very  probable  that  in  the  country  opposite  to 
us  it  is  winter  time,  where  then  there  is  much  rain,  and  that  those 
floods  of  water  are  brought  down  thence  to  us :  and  therefore  that 
none  can  ever  find  out  the  head-springs  of  the  Nile,  because  the 
river  has  its  course  through  the  opposite  zone;  which  is  uninhabit- 
ed. And  the  exceeding  sweetness  of  the  water,  they  say,  is  the  con- 
firmation of  this  opinion;  for  passing  through  the  torrid  zone,  the 
water  is  boiled,  and  therefore  this  river  is  sweeter  than  any  other  io 
the  world;  for  heat  does  naturally  dulcorate  waten  But  this 
reason  is  easily  refuted ;  for  it  is  plainly  impossible  that  tlie  river 
should  rise  to  tliat  height,  and  come  down  to  us  from  the  opposite 
zone;  especially  if  it  be  granted  that  the  earth  is  round.  But  if  any 
yet  shall  be  so  obstinate  as  to  affirm  it  is  so  as  the  philosophers  have 
said,  I  must  in  short  say,  it  is  against,  and  contrary  to  the  laws  of 
nature. 

For,  as  they  hold  opinions  which  in  the  nature  of  the  things  can 
hardly  be  disproved,  and  place  an  inhabitable  part  of  the  world 
between  us  and  them  that  are  opposite  to  us,  they  conclude,  that  by 
this  device,  they  have  made  it  impossible,  and  out  of  the  reach  of 
the  wit  of  man  to  confute  them.  But  it  is  but  just  and  equal,  tliat 
those  who  affirm  any  thing  positively,  should  prove  what  they  say, 
either  by  good  authority  or  strength  of  reason.  How  comes  it  about 
that  only  the  river  Nile  should  come  down  to  us  from  the  other  op^ 
posite  zone?  Have  we  not  other  rivers  that  this  maybe  as  well  ap<^ 
plied  to?  As  to  the  causes  alledged  for  the  sweetness  of  the  water, 
they  are  absuf d :  for  if  tlie  water  be  boiled  with  the  parching  heat, 
and  thereupon  becomes  sweet,  it  would  have  no  productive  quality, 
cither  of  fish  or  other  kinds  of  creatures  and  beasts :  for  all  water 
whose  nature  is  changed  by  fire,  is  altogether  incapable  to  breed  any 
living  thing;  and  therefore  as  the    nature  of.  the  Nile  contra- 


CAqp.  J7Z  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  47 

dictf  lhi0  decoction  and  boiling  of  the  water^  we  condudc  that  the 
oyidi  alledged  of  its  increase  are  false. 

The  opinion  of  (Eaopides  of  Chios  is  this:  the  waters  (says  he^ 
that  are  under  the  earth  in  sumoier  time^  are  cold,  and  warm  in.  the 
^Vaoter^  as  we  see  by  experience  in  deep  wells;  for  in  a  sharp  winfar 
they  are  the  least  cold»  but  in  summer  they  are  the  coldest  of  any 
€idier  lame ;  and  therefore,  saith  he,  there  is  good  reason  that  the 
Nile  iu  the  winter  should  grow  low  aod  contracted,  because  the  heat 
10  the  bowels  of  the  earth  exhales  much  oi  the  water,  which  caonot 
be  supplied,  in  regard  no  rains  fall  in  Egypt.  But  in  sooinier  tioK^ 
when  the  waters  that  lie  deep  iu  the  earth  are  no  longer  exhaled, 
then  the  channel  of  the  riTer,  according  to  the  order  of  nature^  filb 
without  aoy  obstruction.  But  to  this  it  may  be  answered,  that  many 
rivers  in  Africa,  whose  mouths  lie  parallel  with  tliis  river,  aod  rua 
the  like  course,  yet  overflow  not  like  the  Nile.  For  on  the  contrary 
they  rise  in  winter,  and  fall  in  summer,  which  clearly  eviuces  his 
falsity,  who  endeavours  with  a  shew  of  reason  to  oppose  the  truttu 
But  to  the  true  cause,  Agartharchides  of  Cnidus  comes  nearest.  For 
he  says,  that  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Ethiopia,  there  are  yearly 
continual  rains  from  the  summer  solstice  to  the  equinox  in  autumn, 
and  therefore  there  is  just  cause  for  the  Nile  to  below  in  the  winter, 
which  then  flows  only  from  its  own  natural  spring-heads,  and  to 
overflow  in  summer  through  the  abundance  of  rains.  And  though 
none  hitherto  have  been  able  to  give  a  reason  for  these  inundations, 
yet  he  says  his  opinion  is  not  altogether  to  be  rejected;  for  there  are 
many  things  that  are  contrary  to  the  rules  of  nature,  for  which  none 
are  able  to  give  any  substantial  reason.  That  which  happens  in  some 
parts  of  Asia,  he  says,  gives  some  confirmation  to  bis  opinion.  For 
ia  the  confines  of  Scythia,  near  Mount  Caucasus,  after  the  winter 
b  over,  he  affirms,  that  abundance  of  snow  falls  every  year  for  many 
days  together :  and  that  in  the  northern  parts  of  India,  at  certain 
times,  there  falls  abundance  of  bail,  and  of  an  incredible  bigness: 
and  that  near  the  river  Hydaspes,  in  summer  time,  it  rains  con- 
tinually; and  the  same  happens  in  Ethiopia  for  many  days  together; 
and  that  this  disorder  of  the  air  whirling  about,  occasions  many 
storms  of  rain  in  places  near  adjoining;  and  that  therefore  it  is  no 
wonder  if  the  mountainous  parts  of  Ethiopia,  which  lies  much  higher 
than  Egypt,  are  soaked  with  continual  rains,  wherewith  the  river  be- 
ing filled,  overflows;  especially  since  the  natural  inhabitants  of  the 
place  affirm,  that  thus  it  is  in  their  country.  And  though  these  things 
now  related,  are  in  their  nature  contrary  to  those  inourownclimat»:s, 
yet  we  are  not  for  that  reason  to  disbelieve  them.     Fur  with  us  the 


48  DioDORus  sicvLvn.  Book  L 


soatb  wind  is  doudj  and  boisterous,  whereas  iD  Ethiopia  it  is  odm 
and  clear;  and  that  the  north  winds  in  Europe  are  fierctand  violent^ 
Vat  in  those  regions  low  and  almost  insensible. 

But  however,  (after  all),  though  we  could  heap  up  variety  of  argo- 
nents  against  all  these  authors  concerning  the  inundation  of  the  Nile, 
yet  those  which  we  have  before  alledged  shall  suffice,  lest  we  shoald 
transgress  those  bounds  of  brevity  which  at  the  first  we  proposed  to 
ourselves.  Having  therefore  divided  thb  book,  because  of  the  large* 
ness  of  it,  into  two  parts,  (having  before  determined  to  keep  within 
moderate  bounds),  we  shall  now  end  the  first  part  of  thb  treatise,  and 
continue,  in  the  other,  those  thing^s  that  are  further  remarkable  in 
Egypt  coherent  with  those  before,  beginning  with  the  actions  of  the 
kings  of  Egypt,  and  the  antient  way  of  living  among  the  Egyptians^ 


•«Bv«miaH 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  I. 


■<■■■<■ 


PART  SECOND. 


CHAP.  IV. 

The  Jlrst  way  of  Living  of  the  Egyptians:  Gods  and  Demi'- 
GodSf  their  JReigns  in  Egypt.  The  antient  Kings  of  Egypt, 
MeniSf  Sfc.  Their  several  Works.  Tliehes  built  by  Busiris. 
The  stately  Sepulchres,  Obelisks^  and  Temples  there.  A  2>«- 
scription  of  Osyfnamfyas*s  Sepulchre.  Memphis  built  by  Ucho" 
reus.  Meris's  Lake.  Sesostris  or  Sesoosis,  his  famous  JSjt- 
pedition,  andgrecU  /forks* 

THE  first  book  of  Diodorus  is  divided  into  two  parts,  by  reason  of 
the  greatness  of  it ;  the  first  whereof  is  as  a  preface  to  the  whole 
work,  and  in  which  an  account  is  given  of  what  the  Egyptians  say 
concerning  the  beginning  of  the  world,  of  the  first  creation  of  the 
universe,  and  of  those  gods  that  built  cities  in  Egypt,  and  called 
them  after  their  own  names;  of  the  first  men,  and  their  antient 
way  of  living;  of  the  worship  of  the  gods,  and  the  building  of  tem- 
ples by  the  Egyptians.  Moreover,  of  the  situation  of  Egypt,  and 
what  strange  things  are  related  of  the  Nile;  the  causes  of  its  inun- 
dation, and  the  various  opinions  of  philosophers  and  historians  con* 
ceming  it:  wherein  likewise  is  set  down  the  confutations  of  the 
several  wiiters.  In  this  we  shall  handle  and  go  through  those  mat- « 
ters  that  have  a  dependence  upon  the  former. 

After  we  have  distinctly  set  forth  the  antient  way  of  living  among 
the  Egyptians,  we  shall  then  begin  with  their  first  kings,  and  declare 
the  acts  of  every  one  of  them  successively  down  to  Amasis. 

They  say  th^  Egyptians  in  antient  times  fed  upon  nothing  but 
\o^  I.  No,  32,  H 


50  DIODORUS  SICITLUS.  Book  L 

roots  and  herbs,  and  colewort  leaves,  which  grew  in  fens  and  bogs^ 
having  first  tried  the  taste  of  them :  but  above  all,  and  most  com* 
monly,  they  fed  U[K)n  the  herb  called  Agrostis,  because  it  was 
sweeter  than  ^ny  oth^ry  apd  wa^  very  pounshing  to  ineo's  bodies: 
and  it  is  very  certaia,  that  Ihc  cattle  miicli  covet  it^  and  grow  very 
fat  with  it.  At  this  day,  therefore,  superstitious  persons,  in  memory 
of  its  usefulness,  when  they  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  they  worship  them 
with  their  hands  full  of  this  herb:  for  they  conceive  man,  from  the 
frame  of  his  nature  and  frothy  constitution,  to  be  a  watery  creature, 
something  resembling  the  fttOfiy  and  murifib  ground,  and  that  be 
hath  more  need  of  moist  than  of  dry  food.  They  say  the  Egyp- 
tians afterwards  fell  to  another  course  of  diet,  and  that  was  eating 
of  fish,  wherewith  they  vrere  pl^tifoUy  f  applied  by  the  river,  espe- 
cially after  the  inundation,  when  it  was  returned  within  its  former 
bounds:  and  they  ate  likewise  the  flesh  of  some  cattle,  and  clothed 
themselves  with  their  skins.  That  tl^ey  made  their  houses  of  reeds, 
of  which  there  are  some  marks  amongst  the  shepherds  of  Egypt  at 
this  dayt  who  care  for  no  other  bouses,  but  $uch  like,  which  they 
say,  serves  their  turn  well  enough.  Afterwards,  in  process  of  time, 
after  many  ages,  they  fell  to  those  fruits  which  were  made  more  apt 
and  fit  for  man*s  food,  amongst  which  was  bread  made  of  Lotus, 
which  invention  some  attribute  to  Isis,  others  to  Mepis,  one  of  the 
anticnt  kings:  the  priests  indeed  do  make  Hermes*  the  inventor  of 
all  arts  and  sciences,  but  say,  that  their  kings  fouqd  out  all  things 
necessary  for  the  support  of  men's  lives;  and  therefore  that  king- 
doms antieutly  were  not  inheritable,  but  given  to  such  as  hgd  been 
most  useful  and  serviceable  to  the  people,  thereby  either  to  induce 
tlieir  kings  to  be  kind  and  beneficial  to  all  their  subjects,  or  for  that, 
(as  most  agreeable  to  the  truth),  it  was  a  law  registered  In  their 
sacred  records  comaianding  then)  so  Jo  do. 

At  the  first,  (as  some  of  them,  «.  c.  the  priests  have  fabulously 
reported),  the  gods  and  demi-gods  reigped  in  Egypt  for  tb?  space 
almost  of  eighteen  tliousaiid  years,  the  Jast  of  whic|i  was  Orys, 
the  son  of  Isis,  Aftervv^rd^,  tjiey  say,  that  men  reigned  there  for  the 
space  of  fifteen  thousand  years,  to  the  hundred  and  eightieth  Olym- 
piad, at  which  time  I  myself  came  into  Egypt  in  the  reign  of  Pto- 
lemy, who  took  upon  him  the  nanje  of  Dionygius  the  younger.  Most 
of  their  kings  were  natives  of  the  country. »  There  were  a  few  in 
the  mean  time  that  were  Ethiopians,  Persians,  and  MacedgnJans. 
Four  of  them  that  were  Ethiopians,  reigned  not  in  a  continued  liqe, 
but  at  .several  times,  for  the  space  of  thirty -^ix  years  or  thereabouts: 
from  the  time  that  Cambyses  conquered  the  nation,  the  Persians 

•  JMcrcurjr, 


Chap.  IF.  DK>DORU8   8ICULU9.  il 


oe 


reif  Ded  for  the  space  of  a  hundred  and  thirty-five  years,  reckoniog 
the  defections  of  the  Egyptiaos  within  the  time  occasioned  by  the 
intolerable  cruelty  of  the  goTernors^  and  their  impiety  against  the 
Egyptian  gods.  Last  of  all^  the  Macedonians  ruled  there  for 
the  space  of  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  years.  The  rest  of  the 
princes  were  Egyptians,  to  the  number  of  four  hundred  and  seventy 
men^  and  five  women.  The  Egyptian  priests  keep  registers  in  their 
temples  of  all  their  kings  successively,  from  many  generations  past; 
to  what  greatness  and  majesty  every  one  of  them  arrived;  what 
were  their  particular  tempers  and  inclinations,  and  their  actions  in 
their  several  times.  To  write  particularly  of  every  one  of  them,  aa 
it  would  be  tedious,  so  it  would  be  altogether  superfluous,  inasmuch 
as  many  things  concerning  them  are  insignificant,  and  of  no  use; 
and  therefore  we  have  limited  ourselves  to  treat  only  of  those  matter! 
that  are  most  remarkable  and  worthy  of  remembrance. 

After  the  gods,  (they  say),  Menis  was  the  first  king  of  Egypt.  He 
taught  the  people  the  adoration  of  the  gods,  and  the  manner  of 
divine  worship;  how  to  adorn  their  beds  and  tables  with  rich  cloths 
and  coverings,  and  was  the  first  that  brought  in  a  delicate  and  sump- 
tuous way  of  living. 

Many  ages  after,  reigned  Gnephachthus,  father  of  Bocchoris  the 
wise ;  who,  leading  an  army  into  Arabia,  through  many  barren  and 
desert  places,  his  provision  failed,  so  that  for  the  space  of  one  day 
he  was  forced  to  take  up  with  such  mean  food  as  the  common 
people,  among  whom  he  happened  then  to  be,  could  supply  him 
with,  which  he  ate  so  heartily,  and  relished  with  so  much  delight, 
as  for  the  future  he  forbade  all  excess  and  luxury,  and  cursed  that 
king  who  first  brought  in  that  sumptuous  and  luxurious  way  of 
living;  and  this  change  and  alteration  of  meat,  and  drink,  and  bed- 
ding, was  so  delightful  to  him,  that  he  ordered  the  curse  beforcmen- 
tioned,  to  be  entered  in  the  sacred  records  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter 
at  Thebes;  which  was  the  chief  reason  why  the  fame  and  reputation 
of  Menis  became  to  be  clouded  in  future  generations. 

They  say,  the  posterity  of  Gnephachthus,  to  the  number  of  fifty- 
two,  reigned  for  the  space  Of  fourteen  hundred  years;  in  which 
time  there  is  found  nothing  worthy  of  remark. 

Afterwards  reigned  Busiris,  and  eight  of  his  posterity  after  him ; 
the  last  of  which  (of  the  same  name  with  the  first)  built  that  great 
city  which  the  Egyptians  call  Heliopolis,  the  Greeks  Thebes;  it 
was  in  circuit  a  hundred  and  forty  furlongs,  adorned  with  stately 
public  buildings,  magnificent  temples,  and  rich  donations  and  reve- 
nues to  admiration;  and  tliat  he  built  all  the  private  houses,  some 
four,  and  others  five  stories  high.    And  to  sum  up  all  in  a  word^ 


5S  DfODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  T. 


MMto 


made  it  not  only  the  most  beautiful  and  stateliest  city,  of  Tjgypt, 
but  oi  all  others  in  the  w«rld.  The  fame,  therefore,  of  the  riches 
and  grandeur  of  this  city  was  so  noised  abroad  in  every  place^  that 
the  poet  Homer  takes  notice  of  it  in  these  words:—. 

•  •  • • Nor  Thebef  so  mocb  renofm'd, 

Whose  courts  with  nnexhansted  wealth  abouod. 
Where  through  a  hundred  gates  with  marble  arch» 
To  battle  twenty  thousand  chariots  mareh. 

Although  there  are  some  that  say  it  had  not  a  hundred  gates;  but 
that  there  were  many  large  porches  to  th?  temples,  whence  the  city 
was  called  Hecatompylus,  a  hundred  gates,  for  many  gates:  yet 
that  it  was  certain  they  had  in  it  twenty  thousand  chariots  of  war; 
for  there  were  a  hundred  stables  all  along  the  river  from  Memphis 
to  Thebes  towards  Libya,  each  of  which  were  capable  to  hold  two 
hundred  horses,  the  marks  and  signs  of  which  are  visible  i^  this 
day:  and  we  have  it  related,  that  not  only  this  king,  but  the  suc- 
ceeding princes  from  time  to  time,  made  it  their  business  to  beau- 
tify this  city ;  for  that  there  was  no  city  under  the  sun  so'  adorned 
with  so  many  and  stately  monuments  of  gold,  silver,  and  fvory,  and 
multitudes  of  Colossuses  and  obelisks,  cut  out  of  one  entire  stone. 
For  there  were  there  four  temples  built,  for  beauty  and  greatness  to 
be  admired,  the  most  antient  of  which  was  in  circuit  thirteen  fur- 
longs, and   five-and-forty  cubits  high,  and  had  a  wiall  four-and- 
twenty  feet  broad.     The  ornaments  of  this  temple  were  suitable  to 
its  magnificence,   both  for  cost  and  workmanship.    The  fabric  hath 
continued  to  our  time,  but  the  silver  and  the  gold,  and  ornaments 
of  ivory  and  precious  stones  were  carried  away  by  the  Persians^ 
wlicn  Cambyses  burnt  the  temples  of  Egypt.     At  which  time  they 
say  those  palaces  at  Persepolis  and  Susa,  and  other  parts  of  Media, 
(famous  all  the  world  over),  were  built  by  the  Pei^ians,  who  brought 
over  these  rich  spoils  into  Asia,  and  sent  for  workmen  out  of  Egypt 
for  that  purpose.     And  it  is  reported,  that  the  riches  of  Egypt  were 
then  so  great,  that  in  the  rubbish  and  cinders  there  were  found  and 
gathered  up  above  three  hundred  talents  of  gold,  and  of  silver  no 
less  than  two  thousand  and  three  hundred. 

There,  they  say,  are  the  wonderful  sepulchres  of  the  antient  kings, 
which,  for  state  and  grandeur,  far  exceed  all  that  posterity  can  attain 
unto  at  this  day.  The  Egyptian  priests  say  that,  in  their  sacred  re- 
gisters, there  are  entered  seven-and-forty  of  these  sepulchres;  but 
in  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Lagus,  there  remained  only  seventeen,  many 
of  which  were  ruined  and  destroyed  when  I  myself  came  into  those 
parts,  which  was  in  the  hundred-and-eightieth  olympiad.  And 
these  things  are  not  only  reported  by  the  Egyptian  priests,  out  of 


Ckap.  IF*  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  53 

their  sacred  records^  but  many  of  the  Grecians,  who  travelled  to. 
Thebes  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Lagus,  and  wrote  histories  of  Egypt, 
(among  whom  was  Hecateus),  agree  with  what  we  have  related* 
Of  the  first  sepulchres,  (wherein  they  say  the  women  of  Jupiter 
^were  buried),  that'of  king  Osymandyas  was  ten  furlongs  in  circuit  j  at 
the  entrance  of  which  they  say,  was  a  portico  of  various*coloared 
marble,  in  length  two  hundred  feet;  and  in  height,  five-and-forty 
cubits :  thence  going  forward,  you  come  into  a  four-square  stone 
gallery,  every  square  being  four  hundred  feet,  supported,  instead  of 
pillars,  with  beasts,  each  of  one  entire  stone,  sixteen  cubits  high, 
carved  after  the  antique  manner.  The  roof  was  entirely  of  stone; 
each  stone  eight  cubits  broad,  with  an  azure  sky,  bespangled  with 
atars.  Passing  out  of  this  peristylion,  you  enter  into  another  por- 
tico, much  like  the  former,  but  more  curiously  carved,  and  with 
more  variety.  At  the  entrance  stand  three  statues,  each  of  one 
entire  stone,  the  workmanship  of  Mcmnon  of  Sienitaa.  One  of  these, 
made  in  a  sitting  posture,  is  the  greatest  in  all  Egypt,  the  measure 
of  his  foot  exceeding  seven  cubits;  the  other  two,  much  less  than 
the  former,  reaching  but  to  his  knees;  the  one  standing  on  the  right, 
and  the  other  on  the  left,  being  his  daughter  and  mother.  This 
piece  is  not  only  commendable  for  its  greatness,  but  admirable  for 
its  cut  and  workmanship,  and  the  excellency  of  the  stone.  In  so 
great  a  work  there  is  not  to  be  discerned  the  least  flaw,  or  any  other 
blemish. 

Upon  it  there  is  this  inscription: — ^^  I  am  Osymandyas,  king  of 
**  kings;  if  any  would  know  how  great  I  am,  and  where  I  lie,  let 
*'  him  excel  me  in  any  of  my  works." 

There  was  likewise  at  this  second  gate,  another  statue  of  his 
mother,  by  herself,  of  one  stone,  twenty  cubits  in  height;  upon  her 
bead  were  placed  three  crowns,  to  denote  she  was  both  the  daughter, 
wife,  and  mother  of  a  king.  Near  to  this  portico,  they  say  there  was 
another  gallery  of  Piazzo,  more  remarkable  than  the  former,  in  which 
were  various  sculptures,  representing  his  wars  with  the  Bactrians, 
who  had  revolted  from  him,  against  whom  (it  is  said)  he  marched 
with  four  hundred  thousand  foot,  and  twenty  thousand  horse;  which 
army  he  divided  into  four  bodies,  and  appointed  his  sons  generals  of 
the  whole. 

In  the  firsr  wall  might  be  seen  the  king  assaulting  a  bulwark,  en* 
yironed  with  the  river,  and  fighting  at  tlie  head  of  his  men  against 
some  that  make  up  against  him,  assisted  by  a  lion,  in  a  terrible  man- 
ner; which  some  afhrm,  is  to  be  taken  for  a  true  and  real  lion,  which 
the  king  bred  up  tame,  which  went  along  with  him  in  all  his  wars, 
and  by  bis  great  strength,  ever  put  the  enemy  to  flight.  Others  make 


34  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  L 


this  cunatractioD  of  it,  that  the  king  being  a  man  of  extraordinary 
coonKe  and  strength,  he  was  willing  to  trumpet  forth  his  ows 
praises,  setting  forth  the  brarery  of  his  own  spirit,  by  the  representa^ 
tkm  of  a  lion. 

In  the  second  wall,  was  carved  the  captives  dragged  after  the 
king,  represented  without  Iiands  and  privy  members ;  which  was  to 
signify,  that  they  were  of  effeminate  spirits,  and  had  no  hands  wlieQ 
tlicy  came  to  fight. 

The  third  wall  represented  all  sorts  of  sculptures,  and  curious 
images,  in  which  were  set  forth  the  king's  sacrificing  of,  oxen,  and 
his  triumphs  in  that  war. 

In  the  middle  of  the  peristylion,  open  to  the  air  at  the  top,  was 
reared  an  altar  of  shining  marble,  of  excellent  workmanship,  and  for 
largeness  to  be  admired. 

In  the  last  wall  were  two  statues,  each  of  one  entire  stone,  seven- 
and-twenty  cubits  high :  near  to  which,  three  passages  opened  out  of 
the  peristylfon,  into  a  stately  room,  supported  with  pillars  like  to  a 
theatre  for  music;  every  side  of  the  theatre  was  two  hundred  feet 
square.    In  this,  there  were  many  statues  of  wood,  representing  the 
pleaders  and  spectators,  looking  upon  the  judges  that  gave  judg- 
ment.   Of  these,  there  were  thirty  carved  upon  one  of  the  walls.   In 
the  middle  sat  the  chief  justice,  with  the  imai^e  of  truth  hanging 
about  his  neck,  with  his  eyes  closed,  having  many  books  lying  before 
him.     This  signified  that  a  judge  ought  not  to  take  any  bribes,  but 
csught  only  to  regard  the  truth  and  merits  of  the  cause. 
y    Next  adjoining,  was  a  gallery  full  of  divers  apartments,  in  which 
were  all  sorts  of  delicate  meats,  ready  dressed  up.     Near  l>€reuntOy 
is  represented  the  king  himself,  curiously  carved,  and  painted  in  glo- 
rious colours,  offering  gold  and  silver  to  the  gods;   as  much  as  he 
yearly  received  out  of  the  gold  and  silver  mines.  The  sum  was  there 
inscribed,  (according  to  the  rate  of  silver),  to  amount  unto  thirty-two 
roillious'of  minas.^  Next  hereunto,  was  the  sacred  library,  whereon 
was  inscribed  these  words,  viz.  The  cure  of  the  Mind.    Adjoining  to 
this,  were  the  images  of  all  4he  gods  of  Egypt;  to  every  one  of  whom 
the  king  was  making  offerings,  peculiarly  belonging  to  each  of  them^ 
that  Osiris  and  all  his  associates,  who  were  placed  at  his  feet,  might 
understand  his  piety  towards  the  gods,  and  his  righteousness  towards 
men.  -  Next  to  the  library,  was  a  stately  room,  wherein  were  twenty 
beds  to  eat  upon,  richly  adorned  ;  in  this  house,  were  the  images  of 
Jupiter  and  Juno,  together  with  the  kings;  and  here  it  is  supposed, 
the  king's  body  lies  interred.   Round  the  room  are  many  apartments^ 
wherein  are  to  be  seen  in  curious  painting,  all  the  beasts  that  are  ac- 
counted sacred  in  Egypt.     Thence  are  the  ascents  to  the  top  of  the 


CAflp.  IV.  DIODORUS  filCULCS.  55 


whoie  monument  of  the  sepulchre,  which  being  mounted,  appears  a 
bonier  of  gold  round  the  tomb,  of  three  hundred  and  sixty^five  cubits 
in  compass,  and  a  cubit  thick;  within  the  division  of  every  cu^ 
bit,  were  the  several  days  of  the' year  engraven,  with  the  natural 
rising  and  setting  of  the  stars,  and  their  significations,  according  to 
the  observations  of  the  Egyptian  astrologers.  This  border,  they  say^ 
was  carried  away  by  Cambyses  and  the  Persians,  when  he  conquered 
Egypt.  In  thb  manner  they  describe  the  sepulchre  of  king  Osyman- 
dyas,  which  seems  far  to  exceed  all  others,  both  for  magniBcence 
and  ciuriosity  of  workmanship. 

The  Thebans  boast  they  were  the  most  antient  philosophers  and 
astrologers,  of  any  people  in  the  world,  and  the  first  that  found  out 
exact  rules  for  the  improvement  both  of  philosophy  and  astrology; 
the  situation  of  their  country  being  such  as  gave  them  an  advantage 
over  others,  more  clearly  to  discern  the  rising  and  setting  of  the 
stars:  and  that  the  months  and  years  are  best  and  most  prcfperly  or- 
dered, and  disposed  by  them ;  for  they  measure  tlieir  days  according 
to  the  motion  of  the  sun,  and  not  of  the  moon ;  and  account  thirty 
days  to  every  month,  and  add  five  days  and  a  quarter  to  every 
twelve  months;  and  by  this  means,  they  complete  the  whole  year: 
but  they  add  no  intercalary  months,  nor  subtract  any  days,  as  it  is  the 
custom  with  many  of  the  Greeks.  But  these  of  Thebes  seem  most 
accurately  to  have  observed  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon ;  and 
from  them  do  so  manage  their  prognostications,  that  they  certainly 
foretel  every  particular  event. 

The  eighth  of  this  king's  race,  called  after  the  name  of  his  father, 
Uchoreus,  built  Memphis,  the  most  famous  city  of  Egypt.  For  he 
chose  the  most  convenient  place  for  it  in  all  the  country,  where  the 
Nile  divides  itself  into  several  branches,  and  makes  that  part  of  the 
country  called  Delta,  so  named  from  the  shape  of  the  Greek  letter 
Delta,  which  it  resembles.  The  city  being  thus  conveniently 
situated  at  the  head  of  the  river,  commands  all  the  shipping  that  sail, 
up  it.  He  built  it  in  circuit  a  hundred  and  fifty  furlongs,  and  made 
it  exceeding  strong  and  commodious  in  this  manner:  for  the  Nile 
flowing  round  the  city,  and  at  the  time  of  its  inundation  covering  all 
round  on  the  south  side,  he  easts  up  a  mighty  rampart.of  earth,  both 
for  a  defence  to  the  city  against  the  raging  of  the  river,. and  as  a 
bulwark  against  an  enemy  on  land;  on  every  other  side,  likewise,  he 
dug  a  broad  and  deep  trench,  which  received  the  violent  surges  of  the 
river,  and  filled  everyplace  round  the  rampart  with  water,  which  for- 
tified the  city  to  admiration.  , 

This  place  was  so  commodiously  pitched  upon  by  the  builder,  that 
most  of  the  kings  after  him  preferred  it  before  Thebes,  and  removed 


56  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8.  Book  £ 


the  court  thence  to  this  place :  from  that  time,  therefore^  the  onagm* 
ficence  of  Thebes  began  to  decrease,  and  Memphis  to  increase  ta 
the  times  of  Alexander  king  of  Macron,  who  built  a  city  called  after 
his  own  name,  near  the  sea,  and  planted  it  with  inhabitants,  which 
all  the  succeeding  kings  of  Egypt  still  made  it  their  business  to  en- 
large:  for  some  beautified  it  with  royal  palaces,  some  with  ports  and 
arsenals,  and  others  with  magnificent  buildings  and  rich  donations^ 
that  it  is  judged  by  most  to  be  second,  if  not  the  first  city  of  the 
whole  world. 
But  we  shall  treat  of  this  particularly  in  its  proper  time  and  place. 
^'^Sut  the  builder  of  Memphis  after  he  had  finished  the  raknpart  and 
trench,  built  palaces  not  inferior  to  others  built  elsewhere;  yet 
much  below  the  state  and  grandeur  of  the  former  kings*  For  the 
inhabitants  of  this  country  little  value  the  short  time  of  this  present 
life;  but  put  an  high  esteem  upon  the  name  and  reputation  of  a  vir- 
tuous life  after  death ;  and  they  call  the  houses  of  the  living,  inns, 
because  they  stay  in  them  but  a  little  while;  but  the  sepulchres  of 
the  dead  they  call  everlasting  habitations,  because  they  abide  in  the 
graves  to  infinite  generations.  Therefore  they  are  not  very  curiont 
in  the  building  of  their  houses;  but  in  beautifying  their  sepulchres 
they  leave  nothing  undone  that  can  be  thought  of. 

Some,have  thought  that  the  city  of  which  we  have  just  now  spdcen^ 
was  so  called  from  the  daughter  of  the  founder,  and  tell  a  &bulous 
story,  that  the  river  Nile,  in  the  shape  of  a  bull,  fell  in  love  with  her, 
and  begat  £gyptus,  famous  among  the  inhabitants  for  his  admirable 
virtue,  from  whom  the  whele  country  was  called  Egypt;  for,  coming 
to  the  crown  by  descent,  he  was  exceeding  kind  to  his  subjects^  juat 
and  diligent  in  all  his  afiairs,  and  therefore  was  judged  justly  to  merit 
honour  and  esteem  from  all,  and  for  his  gracious  disposition  gene* 
rally  applauded. 

After  the  death  of  this  king,  and  twelve  descents,  Meris  came  to 
the  crown  of  Egypt,  and  built  a  portico  in  Memphis  towards  the 
north,  more  stately  and  magnificent  than  any  of  the  rest.  And^  a 
little  above  the  city,  he  cut  a  dyke  for  a  pond,  bringing  it  down  in 
kngth  from  the  city  three  hundred  and  tweuty-five  furlongs,  whoae 
use  was  admirable,  and  the  greatness  of  the  work  incredible.  They 
say  it  was  in  circuit  three  thousand  and  six  hundred  furlongs;  and  in 
many  places  three  hundred  feet  in  depth.  Who  is  he,  therefore,  that 
^^onsiders  the  greatness  of  this  work,  that  may  not  justly  ask  the 
question  ..How  many  ten  thousand  men  were  employed,  and  bow 
many  years  were  spent  in  finL$hing  it?  Considering  the  benefit  an4 
advantage,  (by  thb  great  work),  brought  to  the  government,  none 
ever  sufficiently  could  extol  it,  according  to  what  the  truth  of  th0 


Ckap.  IF.  DiODORUS  sicuLUS.  '  57 

thiDg  deserved.  For  being  that  the  Nile  never  kept  to  a  certaiu^nd 
coDstEDt  height  in  its  inundation^  and  the  fruitfulness  of  the  country 
ever  depended  upon  its  just  proportion^  he  dug  tliis  lake  to  receive 
such  w^ter  as  was  superfluous,  that  it  might  neither  immoderately 
overflow  the  land,  and  so  cause,  fens  and  standing  ponds,  nor  by 
flowing  too  little,  prejudice  the  fruits  of  the  earth  for  want  of  water. 
To  this  end  he  cut  a  trench  along  from  the  river  into  the  lake,  four* 
score  furlongs  in  length,  and  three  hundred  feet  broad;  into  tliis  he 
let  the  water  of  the  river  sometimes  run,  and  at  other  times  diverted  it,, 
and  turned  it  over  the  fields  of  the  husbandmen,  at  seasonable  times, 
by  means  of  sluices  which  he  sometimes  opened,  and  at  other  times 
shut  up,  not  without  great  labour  and  cost;  for  these  sluices  could 
DOt  be  opened  or  shut  at  a  less  charge  tban  fifty  talents.  This  lake 
continues  to  the  benefit  of  the  Egyptians  for  these  purposes  to  our 
very  days,  and  is  called  the  lake  of  Myris  or  Meris  to  this  day. 

The  king  left  a  place  in  the  middle  of  the  lake,  where  he  built  a 
sepulchre  and  two  pyramids,  one  for  himself,  and  another  for  his 
queen,  a  furlong  in  height;  upon  the  top  of  which  he  placed  two 
marble  statues  seated  in  a  throne,  designing,  by  these  monuments,  to 
perpetuate  the  fame  and  glory  of  his  name  to  all  succeeding  genera- 
tions. The  revenue  arising  from  the  fish  taken  in  this  lake,  he  gave 
to  his  wife  to  buy  her  dresses,  which  amounted  to  a  talent  of  silver 
every  day.  For  there  were  in  it  two-and-twenty  sorts  of  fish,  and  so 
vast  a  number  were  taken,  that  those  who  were  employed  continually 
to  salt  them  up,  (though  they  were  multitudes  of  people),  could  hardly 
perform  it.  And  these  are  the  things  which  the  Egyptians  relate  of 
Meris. 

Seven  descents  after,  (they  say),  Sesostris  reigned,  who  excelled 
all   his  ancestors  in  great  and  famous  actions.     But  not  only  the 
Greek  writers  differ  among  themselves  about  this  king,  but  likewise 
the  Egyptian  priests  and  poets  relate  various  and  different  stories 
coDcerning  him.  We  shall  relate  such  as  are  most  probable  and 
agreeable  to  those  signs  and  marks  tliat  are  yet  remaining  in  Egypt 
to  confirm  them.    After  his  birth  his  father  performed  a  noble  act, 
and  becoming  a  king,  he  caused  all  throughout  Cgypt,  that  were 
born  the  same  day  with  his  son,  to  be  brought  together;  and  toge- 
ther with  his  son  to  be  bred  up  with  the  same  education,  and  instruct'- 
V^  in  the  same  discipline  and  exercises,  conceiving  that,  by  being 
thus  familiarly  brought  up  together,  and  conversing  with  one  ano- 
ther, they  would  be  always  most  loving  and  faithful  friends,  and  the 
best  felloW'Soldiers  in  all  the  wars.  Providing,  therefore,  every  thing 
for  the  purpose,  he  caused  the  boys  to   be   exercised  daily  in  the 
schools  with  hard  and  diiBcult  labours;  as  that  none  should  eat  till 
Vol.  1.  No.  32.  i 


SS  BIODORUS  8ICULUS.  JBo^  /. 

he  had  run  a  hundred  and  fourscore  furlongs* :  and  by  this  means^ 
when  they  came  to  be  at  men's  estate,  they  were  fit  either  to  be  com* 
manders,  or  to  undertake  any  brave  or  noble  action,  both  in  respect 
of  the  vigour  and  strength  of  their  bodies,  and  the  excellent  endow* 
meuts  of  their  minds. 

Sesostris  in  the  first  place  being  sent  with  an  army  into  Arabia,  by 
bis  father,  (with  whom  went  bis  companions  that  were  bred  up  witb 
him),  toiled  and  troubled  himself  with  the  hunting  and  killing  of 
wild  beasts;  and  then  having  at  last  overmastered  all  his  fatigues  and 
wants  of  water  and  provision,  he  conquered  all  that  barbarous  nation, 
which  was  never  before  that  time  subdued.  Afterwards,  being  sent 
into  the  western  parts,  he  conquered  the  greatest  part  of  Libya,  be- 
ing as  yet  but  a  youth.  Coming  to  the  crown  after  the  death  of  his 
father,  encouraged  by  his  former  successes,  he  designed  to  subdue 
and  conquer  the  whole  world.  Some  report  that  he  was  stirred  up  by 
bis  daughter  Athyrte  to  undertake  the  gaining  of  the  empire  of  the 
world;  for,  being  a  woman  of  an  extraordinary  understanding,  she 
made  it  out  to  her  father,  that  the  conquest  was  easy:  others  en- 
<iouraged  him  by  their  divinations,  foretelling  his  successes  by  the 
entrails  of  the  sacrifices,  by  their  dreams  in  the  temples,  and 
prodigies  seen  in  the  air. 

There  are  some  also  that  write,  that  when  Sesostris  was  bom^  Vul- 
can appeared  to  his  father  in  his  sleep,  and  told  him  that  the  child 
then  born  should  be  conqueror  of  the  universe;  and  tliat  that  was  the 
reason  why  his  father  assembled  all  of  the  like  age,  and  bred  them  up 
together  with  his  son,  to  make  way  for  him  with  more  ease  to  rise 
to  that  height  of  imperial  dignity :  and  that  when  he  was  grown  to 
man's  estate,  fully  believing  what  the  god  had  foretold,  he  undertook 
at  length  this  expedition. 

To  this  purpose  he  first  made  it  h»  chief  concern,  to  gain  the  lore 
and  good  will  of  all  the  Egyptians,  judging  it  necessary  in  order  to 
eiSect  what  he  designed,  so  far  to  engage  his  soldiers,  as  that  they 
should  willingly  and  readily  venture,  nay,  lose  their  lives  for  their  ge- 
nerals, and  that  those  whom  he  should  leave  behind  him,  should  not 
contrive  or  hatch  any  rebellion  in  hb  absence :  to  this  end,  therefore, 
he  obliged  every  one,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  working  upon 
some  by  money,  others,  by  giving  them  lands,  and  many  by  free  par* 
dons,  and  upon  all  by  fair  words,  and  affable  and  courteous  beht* 
viour.  He  pardoned  those  that  were  condemned  for  high  treasoi^ 
and  freed  aH  that  wercin  prison  for  debt,  by  paying  what  they  owed^ 
4df  wliom  there  was  a  vast  multitude  in  the  gaols. 

lie  divided  the  whole  country  into  thirty-six  parts)  which  the 

•  T*cnty-ieTcn  isilef. 


Chop.  IF.  MODORUS  SICULUS.  &9 

I  ■  '  n 

EgjrptuiDS  call  Nomi,  over  every  one  of  which  he  appointed  a  go* 
venior,  who  should  take  care  of  the  king's  revenae,  and  manage  all 
other  affiurs  relating  to  their  several  and  respective  provinces.  Oat 
of  these  he  chose  the  strongest  and  ablest  men,  and  raised  an  army 
answerable  to  the  greatness  of  his  design,  to  the  number  of  six  hun- 
dred thousand  foot,  and  twenty- four  thousand  horse,  and  twenty- 
ieven  thousand  chariots  of  war:  and  over  all  the  several  regiments 
and  battalions,  he  made  those  who  had  been  brought  up  with  him 
commanders,  being  such  as  had  been  used  to  martial  exercises,  and 
from  their  childhood  hot  and  zealous  after  that  which  was  brave  and 
virtuous,  and  who  were  knit  together  as  brothers  in  love  and  afiec- 
tion,  both  to  the  king  and  one  to  another;  the  number  of  whom  were 
above  seventeen  hundred. 

Upon  these  companions  of  his,  he  bestowed  large  estates  in  landSy 
in  the  richest  parts  of  Egypt,  that  they  might  not  be  in  the  least 
want  of  any  thing,  reserving  only  their  attendance  upon  him  in  the 
wars* 

Having  therefore  rendezvoused  his  army,  he  marched  first 
against  the  Ethiopians,  inhabiting  the  south,  and  iiaving  conquered 
them,  forced  them  to  pay  him  tribute  of  ebony,  gold,  and  elephant's 
teeth.. 

Then  he  sent  forth  a  navy  of  four  hundred  sail  into  the  Red  Sea, 
and  was  the  first  Egyptian  that  built  long  ships.  By  the  help  of  this 
fleet,  he  gained  all  the  islands  in  this  sea,  and  subdued  the  border- 
ing nations  as  far  as  to  India.  But  he  himself  marching  forward 
with  his  land  army,  conquered  ail  Asia :  for  he  not  only  invaded 
those  nations  which  Alexander  the  Macedonian  afterwards  subdued^ 
but  likewise  those  which  he  never  set  foot  upon.  For  he  both  pass- 
ed over  the  river  Ganges,  and  likewise  pierced  through  all  India  to 
the  main  ocean.  Then  he  subdued  the  Scythians  as  far  as  to  the 
river  Tanais,  which  divides  Europe  from  Asia;  where  they  say  he 
left  some  of  his  Egyptians  at  the  lake  iV(peotis,  and  gave  origin  to 
the  nations  of  Colchis ;  and,  to  prove  that  they  were  originally  Egyp' 
tiaoa,  they  bring  this  argument,  that  they  arc  circumcised  after  the 
manner  of  the  Egyptians,  which  custom  continued  in  this  colony  as 
it  did  amongst  the  Jews.  In  the  same  manner  he  brought  into  his 
subjection  all  the  rest  of  Asia,  and  most  of  the  islands  of  tiie  Cy- 
clades.  Thence  passing  over  into  Europe,  he  was  in  danger  of  Ig- 
sing  his  whole  army,  through  the  difficulty  of  the  passages,  and  want 
of  provisions.  And,  therefore,  putting  a  stop  to  his  expedition  in 
Thrace,  up  and  down  in  all  his  conquests,  he  erected  pillars,  where- 
on were  inscribed,  in  Egyptian  letters,  called  hieroglyphics,  these 


Co  DIODORUft  SICULUS.  Book  /. 


words: ^'  Sesostris,  king  of  kings,  and  lord  of  lords,  subdued  thb 

**  country  by  his  arms." 

Among  those  nations  that  were  stout  and  warlike,  he  carved  upon 
those  pillars  the  privy  members  of  a  man :  amongst  them  that  were 
cowardly  and  faint-hearted,  the  secret  parts  of  a  woman ;  conceiving 
that  the  chief  and  principal  member  of  a  man  would  be  a  clear  evi- 
dence to  posterity  of  the  courage  of  every  one  of  them.  In  some 
places  he  set  up  his  own  statue,  carved  in  stone,  (armed  with  a  bow 
and  a  lance),  above  four  cubits  and  four  hands  in  height,  of  which 
stature  he  himself  was. 

Having  now  spent  nine  years  in  this  expedition,  (carrying  him- 
self courteously  and  familiarly  towards  all  his  subjects  in  the  raeaa 
time),  he  ordered  the  nations  he  had  conquered,  to  bring  their  pre- 
sents and  tributes  every  year  into  Egypt,  every  one  proportionable 
to  their  several  abilities:  and  he  himself,  with  the  captives  and  the 
rest  of  the  spoils,  (of  which  there  were  a  vast  quantity),  returned  into 
Egypt,  far  surpassin:r  all  the  kings  before  him  in  the  greatness 
of  his  actions  and  achievements.  He  adorned  all  the  temples  of 
Egypt  with  rich  presents,  and  the  spoils  of  his  enemies.  ITien  he 
rewarded  his  soldiers  that  bad  served  him  in  the  war,  every  one  ac- 
cording to  their  desert.  It  is  most  certai^n  that  the  army  not  only 
returned  loaded  with  riches,  and  received  the  glory  and  honour  of 
their  approved  valour,  but  the  whole  country  of  Egypt  reaped  many 
advantages  by  this  expedition. 

Sesostris  having  now  disbanded  his  army,  gave  leave  to  his  com* 
panions  in  arms,  and  fellow  victors,  to  take  their  ease,  and  cnjoj  the 
fruits  of  their  conquest.  But  he  himself,  fired  with  an  earnest  de- 
sire of  glory,  and  ambitious  to  leave  behind  him  eternal  monuments 
of  his  memory,  made  many  fair  and  stately  works,  admirable  both 
for  their  cost  and  contrivance,  by  which  he  both  advanced  his  own 
immortal  praise,  and  procured  unspeakable  advantages  to  the  Egyp- 
tians, with  perfect  peace  and  security  for  the  time  to  come.  For, 
beginning  first  with  what  concerned  the  gods,  he  built  a  temple  in 
all  the  cities  of  Egypt,  to  that  god  whom  every  particular  place  most 
adored ;  and  he  employed  none  of  the  Egyptians  in  his  works,  bat 
finished  all  by  the  labours  of  the  captives;  and  therefore  be  caused 

an  inscription  to  be  made  upon  all  the  temples  thus ^'  None  of  the 

•*  natives  were  put  to  labour  here."  It  is  reported  that  some  of  the 
Babylonian  captives,  because  they  were  not  able  to  bear  the  fatigue 
of  the  work,  rebelled  against  the  king;  and  having  possessed  them- 
selves of  a  fort  near  the  river,  they  took  up  arms  against  the  Egyp- 
tians, and  wasted  the  country  thereabouts :  but  at  length  having  got 
a  pardon,  tht* y  chose  a  place  for  their  habitation,  and  called  it  after 


C/uqf.  IV.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  6l 

the  name  of  that  in  their  own  country,  Babylon.  Upon  the  like 
occasion,  they  say,  that  Troy,  situated  near  the  river  Nile,  was  so 
called:  for  Menelaus,  when  he  returned  from  Ilium  with  many  pri<- 
soners,  arrived  in  Eg}'pt,  where  the  Trojans  deserting  the  king^ 
seized  upon  a  certain  strong  place,  and  took  up  arms  against  the 
Greeks,  till  they  had  gained  their  liberty,  and  then  built  a  famous 
city  after  the  name  of  their  own.  But  I  am  not  ignorant  how  Cte- 
sias  the  Cretan  gives  a  far  different  account  of  these  cities,  when 
he  says,  that  some  of  those  who  came  in  former  times  with  Semi- 
nimis  into  Egypt,  called  the  cities  which  they  built  after  the  names 
of  those  in  their  own  country.  But  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  know 
the  certain  truth  of  these  things:  yet  it  is  necessary  to  observe  the 
difierent  opinions  concerning  them,  that  the  judicious  reader  may 
have  an  occasion  to  inquire,  in  order  to  pick  out  the  re^il  truth. 

Sesostris  moreover  raised  many  mounds  and  banks  of  earth,  to 
which  he  removed  all  the  cities  that  lay  low  in  the  plain,  that  both 
man  and  beast  might  be  safe  and  secure  at  the  time  of  the  inunda- 
tion of  the  river.  He  cut  likewise  many  deep  dykes  from  the  river, 
all  along  as  far  as  from  Memphis  to  the  sea,  for  the  ready  and  quick 
conveying  of  corn  and  other  provisions  and  merchandize,  by  short 
cuts  thither,  both  for  the  support  of  trade  and  commerce,  and  main* 
tenance  of  peace  and  plenty  all  over  the  country:  and  that  which 
was  of  greatest  moment  and  concern  of  all,  was,  that  he  fortified  all 
parts  of  the  country  against  incursions  of  enemies,  and  made  it  diffi* 
cult  of  access ;  whereas,  before,  the  greatest  part  of  Egypt  lay  open 
and  exposed  either  for  chariots  or  horsemen  to  enter.  But  now,  by 
reason  of  the  multitude  of  canals  drawn  all  along  from  tlie  river,  the 
entrance  was  very  difficult,  and  the  country  not  so  easily  to  be  invaded. 
He  defended,  likewise,  the  east  side  of  Egypt  against  the  irruptions 
of  the  Syrians  and  Arabians,  with  a  wall  drawn  from  Pelusium 
through  the  deserts,  as  far  as  to  Heliopolis,  for  the  space  of  a  thou- 
sand and  five  hundred  furlongs.  He  caused  likewise  a  ship  to  be 
made  of  cedar,  two  hundred  and  fourscore  cubits  in  length,  gilded 
over  with  gold  on  the  outside,  and  with  silver  within;  and  this  he 
dedicated  to  the  god  that  was  most  adored  by  the  Thebans.  He 
erected  likewise  two  obelisks  of  polished  marble,  a  hundred  and 
twenty  cubits  high,  on  which  were  inscribed  a  description  of  the 
large  extent  of  his  empire,  the  great  value  of  his  revenue,  and 
the  number  of  the  nations  by  him  conquered.  He  placed  likewise  at 
Memphis,  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  his  and  his  wife's  statues,  each 
of  one  entire  stone,  thirty  cubits  in  height,  and  those  of  his  sons, 
twenty  cubits  high,  upon  this  occasion.  After  his  return  from  his 
great  expedition  into  Egypt,  being  at  Pelusium,  his  brother  at  a 


€9  DIODORUS  S1CULU5.  Book  /• 


feast  haviQg  iuvited  him,  together  with  his  wife  and  children^  plotted 
tgainst  bis  life ;  for^  beiog  all  overcome  by  wine,  and  gone  to  rest, 
he  caused  a  great  quantity  of  dry  reeds,  (long  before  prepared  for  tbe 
purpose),  to  be  placed  lound  the  king's  pavilion  in  the  nigbt,  and  f^et 
them  all  on  fire;  upon  whicli  tlie  flame  suddenly  mounted  aloft; 
and  tittle  assistance  tite  king  had  either  from  his  servants  or  life- 
guard, who  were  all  still  overloaden  with  wine:  upon  which  Sesos- 
tris  with  his  hands  lift  up  to  heaven,  calling  upon  the  gods  for  help 
for  his  wife  and  children,  rushed  through  the  flames  aod  escaped^ 
and  so  being  thus  unexpectedly  preserved,  he  made  oblations  as  to 
other  of  the  gods,  (as  is  before  said),  so  especially  to  Vulcan,  as  he 
by  whose  favour  be  was  so  remarkably  delivered. 

Althougli  Scsostris  was  eminent  in  many  great  and  worthy  actiooa, 
yet  tlie  most  stately  and  magnificent  of  all,  was  that  relating  to  the 
priaces  in  his  progresses.  For  those  kings  of  the  conquered  na- 
tions, who  through  his  favour  still  held  their  kingdoms,  and  such  aa 
had  received  large  principalities  of  his  free  gift  and  donation,  caaie 
with  their  presents  and  tributes  into  Egypt,  at  the  times  appointed, 
whom  he  received  with  all  tlie  marks  of  honour  and  respect;  save 
that  when  he  went  into  the  temple  or  the  city,  his  custom  was  to 
cause  the  horses  to  be  unharnessed  out  of  his  chariot,  and  in  their 
room  four  kings,  and  other  princes  to  draw  it;  hereby  thinking  to 
make  it  evident  to  all,  that  there  was  none  comparable  to  him  for 
valour,  who  had  conquered  the  most  potent  and  famous  princes  iu 
tbe  world.  This  king  seems  to  have  excelled  all  others  that  ever 
were  eminent  for  }X)wer  and  greatness,  both  as  to  his  warlike 
achievements,  the  number  of  his  gifts  and  oblations,  aod  his  won* 
derful  works  in  Egypt. 

*  After  he  had  reigned  three-and-thirty  years,  he  fell  blindy  and 
wilfully  put  an  end  to  his  own  life;  for  wliieh  he  was  admired  opt 
only  by  priests,  but  by  all  the  rest  of  the  Egyptians ;  for  that  as  be 
had  before  manifested  the  greatness  of  his  mind  by  his  actiona,  ao 
now  his  end  was  agreeable,  (by  a  voluntary  death),  to  the  gkuy  of 
his  life. 

The  fame  and  renown  of  this  king  continued  so  fresh  down  to 
posterity,  that  many  ages  after,  when  Egypt  was  conquered  by  the 
Persians,  and  Darius  the  father  of  Xerxes  would  set  up  his  slatue 
at  Memphis  above  that  of  Sesostris,  the  chief  priest  in  the  debating 
of  the  matter  in  the  conclave  boldly  spoke  against  it,  declaring  thit 
Darius  had  not  yet  exceeded  the  noble  acts  of  Sesostris.  The  king 
was  so  far  from  resenting  this,  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  was  ao 
pleased  and  taken  with  this  freedom  of  speech,  that  he  said  he  would 
endeavour,  (if  he  lived  as  long  as  the  other  did),  to  be  nothing  in* 


Chap.  Pi  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  61^ 

'■'■■"  ■!     ■■      ■■       J»  I.         IJl. 

I 

ferior  to  him ;  aod  wished  them  to  corn  pare  things  done  propor^ 
tionaUy  to  the  time^  for  that  this  was  the  justest  examination  and 
tml  of  Talour.    And  thus  much  shall  suffice  to  be  said  of  Sesostris. 


CHAP.  V. 

The  Acts  of  Sesostrls  the  Second.  Of  Ammosls^  AcHsane9f 
MendeSy  Proteus  or  CeteSy  Remphis,  Chemmisy  (the  great  Py^ 
ramids  built  by  him),  CephreSj  Mycerinus,  Bocc/toriSy  Saback. 
The  Reign  of  Twelve  Kings  in  Egypt.  Psammetichus  Suites, 
one  of  the  Kings,  gained  the  whole;  Tkvo  Hundred  Thousand 
of  his  Army  forsake  him,  and  settle  thetnselves  in  Ethiopia. 
Aprks  succeeds  long  after.  Amasis  rebels,  and  next  succeeds; 
and  Apries  is  strangled  by  the  People,  Amasis  the  last  King^ 
to  the  Time  of  the  Conquest  of  Egypt  by  Cambyses^ 

THE  son  of  Sesostrls  succeeded  his  fatlier  in  the  kingdom,  and 
took  tipon  him  the  same  name,  yet  performed  nothing  remark- 
able by  his  arms;  but  the  affliction  and  misery  that  befei  him 
was  observable;  for  he^became  blind,  as  his  father  did  before  him, 
deriving  the  malady  either  from  his  father  in  his  birth,  or  as  a  judg- 
ment upon  him  for  his  impiety  against  the  river,  against  wliich,  (as 
it  is  fabulously  reported),  he  threw  his  javelin;  whereupon,  falling 
undet  this  misfortune,  he  was  forced  to  apply  himself  for  help  to  the 
gods,  whom  he  sought  to  appease  with  many  offerings  and  sacrifices 
for  a  long  time  together,  yet  could  find  no  relief,  till,  at  the  end  of 
ten  years  he  was  directed  by  the  oracle  to  go  and  worship  the  god 
at  HeKopolis,  and  wash  his  face  in  the  urine  of  a  woman  that  never  had 
known  any  other  man  besides  her  own  husband.  Hereupon  he 
began  with  bis  own  wife,  and  made  trial  of  many  others,  but  found 
none  honest  except  a  gardener's  wife,  whom  he  afterwards  marrie4 
when  he  was  recovered. '  All  the  adulteresses  he  caused  to  be  burnt 
in  a  little  village,  which,  from  this  execution,  the  Egyptians  called  the 
Holy  Fieldy  to  testify  his  gratitude  to  the  god  of  Heliopolis  for  this 
great  benefit.  At  the  command  of  the  oracle,  he  erected  two  obe- 
lisks, each  of  one  entire  stone,  eight  cubits  in  breadth/  and  a  hun* 
drcd  in  heighr,  and  dedicated  them  to  the  deity. 

After  this  Sesostrls  the  second,  were  many  successions  of  kings 
hr  Egypt,  of  whom  there  is  nothing  worth  remark  to  be  found.  But 
many  ages  after,.  Ammosis  came  to  the  crown,  who  carried  it  tyrun« 


64  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  L 

Dically  towards  his  subjects.  For  he  put  many  to  death  against  all 
law  and  justice,  and  as  many  he  stripped  of  all  they  had,  and  turned 
them  out  of  their  estates,  and  carried  himself  haughtily  and  proudly 
ia  every  thing  towards  all  persons  he  had  to  deal  with.  This  the 
poor  oppressed  people  endured  for  a  time,  while  they  had  no  power 
to  resist  those  that  overpowered  them.  But  as  soon  as  Actisanes 
king  of  Ethiopia  invaded  him,  (having  now  an  opportunity  to  dis- 
cover their  hatred,  and  to  revenge  themselves),  most  of  his  subjects 
revolted  from  him,  so  that  he  was  easily  conquered,  and  Egypt  be- 
came subject  to  the  kings  of  Ethiopia. 

Actisanes  bore  bis  prosperity  with  great  moderation,  and  carried 
himself  kindly  and  obligingly  towards  all  his  subjects.  Against 
robbers  he  contrived  a  notable  device,  neither  putting  them  that 
were  guilty  to  death,  nor  wholly  acquitting  or  discharging  them 
from  punishment.  For  he  caused  all  that  were  guilty,  to  be  brought 
together  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  after  a  just  and  strict 
inquiry,  and  certain  knowledge  of  their  guilt,  he  ordered  all  their 
noses  to  be  cut  off,  and  banished  them  into  the  utmost  parts  of  the 
desert;  and  built  a  city  for  them,  called,  from  the  cutting  off  of 
tlie  noses  of  the  inhabitants,  Rhinocorura,  which  is  situated  In  the 
confines  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  in  a  barren  place,  destitute  of  all  man- 
ner of  provision.  All  the  country  round  about  is  full  of  salt  and 
brackish  ponds,  and  the  wells  within  the  walls,  afford  but  very  little 
water,  and  that  stinking  and  very  bitter.  And  he  sent  them  to  this 
place  on  purpose  that  they  migiit  not  for  the  future  do  any  more 
hurt,  nor  lie  lurking  and  unknown  among  other  men.  But,  being 
banished  to  such  a  barren  place,  void  almost  of  all  things  necessary 
for  the  support  of  man's  life,  (men  naturally  contriving  all  manner 
of  arts  to  prevent  starving),  they  wittily  found  out  a  way  to  supply 
their  wants.  For  they  cut  up  out  of  the  neighbouring  fields,  reedsj 
and  slit  them  in  several  pieces,  and  made  long  nets  of  them,  and 
placed  them  several  furlongs  all  along  upon  the  shore,  with  which 
they  catched  the  quails,  (which  came  flying  over  the  sea  in  great 
flocks),  and  by  that  means  sufiiciently  provided  for  themselves. 

After  thb  king's  death,  the  Egyptians  recovered  their  liberty,  and 
set  up  a  king  of  their  own  nation  to  rule  over  them,  Mendes,  (whom 
some  call  Marus),  who  never  undertook  any  warlike  design,  but- 
made  a  sepulchre  for  himself  called  a  labyrinth,  not  to  be  admired 
so  much  for  its  greatness,  as  it  was  inimitable  for  its  workmanship. 
For  he  that  went  in,  could  not  easily  come  out  again,  without  a 
very  skilful  guide.  Some  say  that  Dfedalus,  who  came  into  Egypt^ 
admired  the  curiosity  of  this  work,  and  made  a  labyrinth  for  Minos 
king  of  Crete,  like  to  this  in  Egypt,  in  Which  they  fabulously  relate 


Chap.  V.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  66 

the  MiDotaur  was  kept.  But  that  In  Crete  was  either  ruioed  by 
some  of  their  kings^  or  came  to  nothing  through  length  of  time^  but 
that  in  Egypt  continued  whole  and  entire  to  our  days. 

After  the  death  of  this  M endes,  and  five  generations  spent,  (dur- 
ing which  time  there  was  an  interregnum),  the  Egyptians  chose  one 
Cetes,  of  an  ignoble  extraction,  to  be  their  king,  whom  the  Gre* 
cians  call  Proteus ;  this  fell  out  in  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war.  This 
prince,  they  say,  was  a  magician,  and  could  transform  himself  some- 
times into  the  shape  of  a  beast,  other  times  into  a  tree,  or  appear- 
ance of  fire,  or  any  other  form  and  shape  whatsoever.  And  this 
agrees  with  the  account  the  priests  of  Egypt  give  of  him;  from 
his  daily  converse  with  the  astrologers,  they  say,  he  learnt  this  art. 
The  Greeks  raised  this  story  of  transformation,  from  a  custom 
amongst  the  kings;  for  the  Egyptian  princes  used  to  wear  upoa 
their  heads,  (as  badges  of  their  royal  authority),  the  shapes  of  lions, 
bulls,  and  dragons;  and  sometimes  to  fix  upon  their  heads  sprouts  of 
trees,  fire,  and  strong  perfumes  of  frankincense,  and  other  sweet 
odours.  And  with  these  they  both  adorned  themselves,  and  struck 
a  terror  and  superstitious  awe  into  the  hearts  of  their  subjects  at  ont 
and  the  same  time. 

After  the  death  of  Proteus,  his  son  Remphis  succeeded  him,  who 
spent  all  his  time  in  filling  his  coffers,  and  heaping  up  wealth. 
The  poorness  of  hb  spirit,  and  his  sordid  covetousness  was  such, 
that  they  would  not  suffer  him  to  part  with  any  thing,  either  for  the 
worship  of  the  gods,  or  the  good  of  mankind;  and  therefore,  more 
like  a  good  steward  than  a  king,  instead  of  a  name  for  valour  and 
noble  acts,  he  left  vast  heaps  of  treasure  behind  him,  greater  than 
any  of  the  kings  that  ever  were  before  him :  for  it  is  said  he  had  a 
treasure  of  four  hundred  thousand  talents  of  gold  and  silver. 

After  this  king's  death,  for  seveA  generations  together,  there 
reigned  successively  a  company  of  kings,  who  gave  themselves  up 
to  sloth  and  idleness,  and  did  nothing  but  wallovV  in  pleasures  and 
luxury;  and  therefore  there  is  no  record  of  any  great  work,  or  other 
thing  worthy  to  be  remembered  that  ever  any  of  them  did,  except 
Nile,  who  called  the  river  after  his  own  name,  which  was  before 
called  Egyptus.  For  being  that  he  cut  many  canals  and  dykes  in 
convc^pient  places,  and  used  his  utmost  endeavour  to  make  the  river 
more  useful  and  serviceable,  it  was  therefore  called  Nile. 

Chemmis,  the  eighth  king  from  Remphis,  was  of  Memphis,  and 
reigned  fifty  years.  He  built  the  greatest  of  the  three  pyramids, 
which  were  accounted  amongst  the  seven  wonders  of  the  world. 
They  stand  towards  Libya,  one  hundred  and  twenty  furlongs  from 
Memphis,  and  forty-five  from  the  Nile.    The  greatness  of  these 

Vol.  \.    No.  32.  K 


€6  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  /. 

workSj  and  the  excessive  labour  of  the  workmen  seen  in  them,  do 
even  strike  the  beholders  with  admtratio'n  and  astonishment.  The 
greatest  being  four-square^  took  up,  on  every  square,  seven  hundred 
feet  of  ground  in  the  basis,  and  above  six  hundred  feet  in  height^ 
spiring  up  narrower  by  little  and  little,  till  it  came  up  to  the  point, 
the  top  of  which  was  six  cubits  square.  It  is  built  of  solid  marble 
throughout,  of  rough  work,  biit  of  perpetual  duration :  for  though  it 
be  now  a  thousand  years  since  it  was  built,  (some  say  above  three 
thousand  and  four  hundred),  yet  the  stones  arc  as  firmly  jointed,  and 
the  whole  building  as  entire  and  without  the  least  decay,  as  they 
were  at  the  first  laying  an  erection.  The  stone,  they  say,  was 
brought  a  long  way  off,  out  of  Arabia,  and  that  the  work  was  raised 
by  making  mounts  of  earth ;  cranes  and  other  engines  being  not 
known  at  that  time.  And  that  which  is  most  to  be  admired,  is 
to  see  such  a  foundation  so  imprudently  laid,  as  it  seems  to  be,  in 
a  sandy  place,  where  there  is  not  the  least  sign  of  any  earth  cast  up, 
nor  marks  where  any  stone  was  cut  and  polished;  so  that  the  whole 
pile  seems  to  be  reared  all  at  once,  and  fixed  in  the  midst  of  heaps 
of  sand  by  some  god,  and  not  built  by  degrees  by  the  hands  of  men. 
Some  of  the  Egyptians  tell  wonderful  things,  and  invent  strange 
febles  concerning  these  works,  affirming  that  the  mounts  were  made 
of  salt  and  salt-petre,  and  that  they  were  melted  by  the  inundation  of 
the  river,  and  being  so  dissolved,  every  thing  was  washed  away 
but  the  building  itself.  But  this  is  not  the  truth  of  the  thing;  but 
the  great  multitude  of  hands  that  raised  the  mounts,  the  same  car- 
ried back  the  earth  to  the  place  whence  they  dug  it;  for  they 'say, 
there  were  three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  men  employed  in  this 
work,  and  the  whole  was  scarce  completed  in  twenty  years  time. 

When  this  king  was  dead,  his  brother  Cephres*  succeeded  him, 
and  reigned  six-and-fifty  years:  some  say  it  was  not  his  brother,  but 
his  son  Chabryis  that  came  to  the  crown :  but  all  agree  in  this,  tliat 
the  successor,  in  imitation  of  his  predecessor,  erected  another  py« 
ramid  like  to  the  former,  both  in  structure  and  artificial  workiAan- 
ship,  but  not  near  so  large,  every  square  of  the  ba(^is  being  only  a 
furlong  in  breadth. 

Upon  the  greater  pyramid  was  inscribed  the  value  of  the  berbs^ 
and  onions  that  were  spent  upon  the  labourers  during  the  works, 
which  amounted  to  above  sixteen  hundred  talents. 

There  is  nothing  written  upon  the  lesser:  the  entrance  and  ascent  is 
only  on  one  side,  cut  by  steps  into  the  main  stone.  Although  the 
kings  designed  these  two  for  their  sepulchres,  yet  it  happened  that 

*  Cephres,  Chabryis.  Supposed  to  reign  in  the  time  of  DftTid,  aud  the  beginoiBg 
of  SoiotooD's  reigiif  Ilelv.  ChroD.  42* 


CAap.  K  BiODORUS  sicuLua.  6y 


— — ..-  »  ..j: 


ueither  of  them  were  there  buried.     For  the  people,  beipg  iacensed 
at  them  by  the  reason  of  the  toil  and  labour  they  were  put  to^  and 

the  cruelty  and  oppression  of  their  kings,  threatened  to  drag  their  ^ 
carcases  out  of  their  graves,  and  pull  them  by  piece-meal,  and  cast 
them  to  the  dogs ;  and  therefore  both  of  ti\cm  upon  their  beds  oom- 
maoded  their  servants  to  bury  them  in  some  ol)scure  place. 

After  him  reigned  Myccrinus,  (otherwise  called  Cherinus),  tha. 
son  of  him  who  built  the  first  pyramid.  This  prince  began  a  thirds 
but  died  before  it  was  finished;  every  square  of  the  basis  was 
three  hundred  feet.  The  walls  for  fifteen  stories  high  were  of  black 
marble,  like  that  of  Thebes,  the  rest  was  pf  the  same  stone  with  tha 
other  pyramids.  Though  the  other  pyramids  went  beyond  this  ia 
greatness,  yet  this  far  excelled  the  rest  in  the  curiosity  of  the  struc- 
ture, and  the  largeness  of  the  stones.  On  that  side  of  the  pyramid 
towards  the  north,  was  inscribed  the  name  of  the  founder  Myceri-* 
nus.  This  king,  they  say,  detesting  the  severity  of  the  former  kings, 
carried  himself  all  his  days  gently  and  graciously  towards  all  his  sub- 
jects, and  did  all  that  possibly  he  could  to  gain  their  love  and  good 
will  towards  him;  besides  other  things,  he  expended  vast  sums  of 
money  upon  the  oracles  and  worship  of  the  gods;  and  bestowing 
large  gifts  upon  honest  men,  whom  he  judged  to  be  injured^  and  to 
be  hardly  dealt  with  in  the  courts  of  justice. 

There  are  other  pyramids,  every  square  of  which  are  two  hundred 
feet  in  the.  basis;  and  in  all  things  like  unto  the  others,  except  in 
bigness.  It  is  said  that  these  three  last  kings  built  them  for  their 
wives. 

It  is  not  in  the  least  to  be  doubted,  but  that  these  pyramids  far 
excel  all  the  other  works  throughout  Egypt,  not  only  in  the  greatness 
and  costs  of  the  building,  but  in  the  excellency  oi  the  workmanship: 
for  the  architects,  (they  say),  arc  much  mere  to  be  admired  thau 
the  kings  themselves  that  were  at  the  cost.  For  those  performed  all 
by  their  own  ingenuity,  but  these  did  nothing  but  by  the  wealth 
Iianded  to  them  by  descent  from  their  predecessors,  and  by  the  toi 
and  labour  of  other  men. 

Yet,  concerning  the  first  builders  of  these  pyramids,  there  is  no 
consent,  either  amongst  the  inhabitants  or  historians.  For  sonie  sayj^ 
they  were  built  by  tlie  kings  before  mentioned,  some  by  others. 

As  that  the  greatest  was  built  by  Armeus,  the  second  by  Amasis, 
and  the  third  by  Inaronas.  liut  some  say,  that  this  last  was  the  se* 
pulchre  of  one  Khodopides,  a  courtezan,  ^nd  was  built  in  remem** 
brance  of  her,  at  the  common  charge  of  some  of  the  governors  of  tU^ 
provinces,  who  had  amours  with  her. 


€%»  DIOnORUS  SICULUS.  )Book  L 

■C— — — rtfcgggSB  I  '  l«SSSSgSBSSSSSS 

Bocchoris*^  was  the  next  who  succeeded  in  the  kingdom,  a  very 
little  man  for  hody,  and  of  a  mean  and  contemptible  presence ;  but 
as  to  his  wisdom  and  prudence,  far  excelling  all  the  kings  that  ever 
were  before  him  in  Egypt. 

A  long  time  after  him,  one  Sabachf,  an  Ethiopian,  came  to  the 
throne,  going  beyond  all  his  predecessors  in  his  worship  of  the  gods, 
and  kindness  to  hb  subjects.   Any  man  may  judge,  and  have  a  clear 
evidence  of  hisgentle  disposition  in  this,  that  when  the  laws  pit>- 
nounced  the  severest  judgment,   (I  mean  sentence  of  death),  he 
changed  the  punishment,  and  made  an  edict,  tliat  the  condemned 
persons  should  be  kept  to  work  in  the  towns  in  chains,  by  whose 
labour,  he  raised  many  mounts,  and  made  many  commodious  canals, 
(Conceiving  by  this  means,  he  should  not  only  moderate  the  severity 
of  the  punishment,  but  instead  of  that  which  was  unprofitable,  ad- 
vance the  public  good,  by  the  service  and  labours  of  the  condemned. 
A  man  may  likewise  judge  of  his  extraordinary  piety,  from  his  dream, 
and  his  abdication  of  the  government;  for  the  tutelar  god  of  Thebes, 
seemed  to  speak  to  him  in  his  sleep,  and  told  him,  that  he  could  not 
long  reign  happily  and  prosperously  in  Egypt,  unless  be  cut  all  the 
priests  in  pieces,  when  he  passed  through  the  midst  of  them  with  his 
guards  and  servants;  which  advice  being  often  repeated,  he  at  length 
sent  for  the  priests  from  all  parts,  and  told  them,  that  if  he  staid  in 
Egypt  any  longer,  he  found  that  he  should  displease  God,  who  never 
at  any  time  before,  by  dreams  or  visions,  commanded  any  such  thing. 
And  that  he  would  rather  be  gone  and  lose  his  life,  being  pure  and 
innocent,  than  displease  God,  or  enjoy  the  crown  of  Egypt,  bystain^ 
ing  his  life  with  the  horrid  murder  of  the  innocent.  And  so  at  lengthy 
giving  up  the  kingdom  into  the  hands  of  the  people,  he  returned  into 
Ethiopia.    Upon  this,  there  was  an  anarchy  for  the  space  of  two 
years;  but  the  people  falling  into  tumults  and  intestine  broils  and 
slaughters  one  of  another,  twelve  of  the  chief  nobility  of  the  king- 
dom  joined  in  a  solemn  oath,  and  then  calling  a  senate  at  Memphis^ 
and  making  some  laws,  for  the  better  directing  and  cementing  of 
them  in  mutual  peace  and  fidelity,  they  took  upon  them  the  regal 
power  and  authority.    After  they  had  governed  the  kingdom  very 
amicably  for  the  space  of  fifteen  years,  (according  to  the  agreement 
which  they  had  mutually  sworn  to  observe),  they  applied  themselves 
to  the  building  of  a  sepulchre,  where  they  might  all  lie  together; 
that,  as  in  their  life  time,  they  had  been  equal  in  their  power  and  au- 

*  Bocchoris,  in  the  reign  of  UnUh«  king  of  Jadab,  An.  Man.  S2S3.     Befora  Chriit, 
T66.   HeW.  Cbron. 

f  Sabtcon,  or  Sabtco,  who  joined  with  Hotbes,  king  of  Israel 


Chap.  V.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  6^ 

thority,  and  had  always  carried  it  with  love  and  reipect  one  towards 
another  ;809  after  death,  (being  all  buried  together  in  one  place) ,  they 
migiit  continue  the  glory  of  their  names,  in  one  and  the  same  monu- 
ment. To  this  end,  they  made  it  their  business  to  excel  all  their  pre* 
decessors  in  the  greatness  of  their  works :  for  near  the  lake  of  Mens 
in  Libya,  they  built  a  four-square  monument  of  polished  marble, 
every  square  a  furlong  in  length,  for  curious  candngs,  and  other 
pieces  of  art,  not  to  be  equalled  by  any  that  should  come  after  them. 
When  you  are  entered  within  the  wall,  there  is  presented  a  stately 
ftibric,  supported  round  with  pillars,  forty  on  every  side,  llie  roof 
was  of  one  entire  stone,  whereon  was  curiously  carved,  racks  and 
mangers  for  horses,  and  other  excellent  pieces  of  workmanship;  and 
painted  and  adorned  with  divers  sorts  of  pictures  and  images;  wbertt 
likewise  were  pourtrayed,  the  resemblances  of  the  kings,  thetemplesj 
and  the  sacrifices,  in  most  beautiful  colours.  And  such  was  the  cost 
and  stateliness  of  this  sepulchre,  begun  by  these  kings,  that,  (if  they 
had  not  been  dethroned  before  it  was  perfected),  none  ever  after 
could  have  exceeded  them  in  the  state  and  magnificence  of  their 
works.  But  after  they  had  reigned  over  Egypt  fifteen  years,  all  of 
them  but  one  lost  their  sovereignty  in  the  following  manner: 

Psammeticus  Saites*,  one  of  the  kings,  whose  province  was  upon 
the  sea  coast,  tra£Bcked  with  all  sorts  of  merchants,  and  especially 
with  the  Phoenicians  and  Grecians;  by  this  means,  enriching  "lis 
province,  by  vending  his  own  commodities,  and  the  importation  of 
those  that  came  from  Greece,  he  not  only  grew  very  wealthy,  but 
gained  an  interest  in  the  nations  and  princes  abroad;  upon  which 
account,  he  was  envied  by  the  rest  of  the  kings,  who  for  that  reason 
made  war  upon  him.  Some  antient  historians  tell  a  story^  that  these 
princes  were  told  by  the  oracle,  that  which  of  them  should  first  pour 
wine  oat  of  a  brazen  phial,  to  the  god  adored  at  Memphis,  should  be 
sole  lord  of  all  Egypt.  Whereupon  Psammeticus,  when  the  priest 
brought  out  of  the  temple  twelve  golden  phials,  plucked  off  his  hel- 
met, and  poured  out  a  wine-offering  from  thence;  which  when  his 
colleagues  took  notice  of,  they  forebore  putting  him  to  death,  but  de- 
posed him,  and  banished  him  into  the  fens,  bordering  upon  the  sea' 
coast.  Wliether,  therefore,  it  were  this,  or  envy,  as  it  is  said  before, 
.  that  gave  birth  to  this  dissension  and  difference  amongst  them,  it  is 
certain  Psammeticus  hired  soldiers  out  of  Arabia^  Caria,  and  Ionia, 
and,  in  a  field-fight  near  the  city  Moniemphis,  he  got  the  day.  Some 
of  the  kings  of  the  other  side  were  slain,  and  the  rest  fled  into  Afri- 
ca, and  were  not  able  further  to  contend  for  the  kingdom. 

*  PnjBmetictti.  Axu  Man.  828#.  Aat.  Cb.  669.   Timtj-ointh  jear  of  MaaMtctb, 

Jkiftg  of  Jodftb. 


70  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Book  I. 

Psammeticus  having  now  gained  possession  of  the  whole,  built  a 
portico  to  the  east  gate  of  tiie  temple  at  Meniphisj  in  honour  of  that 
god,  and  incooipassed  the  temple  with  a  wall,  supporting  it  with 
Colossuses  of  twelve  cubits  high,  in  the  room  of  pillars.  He  bestow- 
ed likewise  upon  his  mercenary  soldiers  many  large  rewards  over  and 
above  their  pay  promised  them. 

He  gave  them  also  a  place  called  Stratopedon  to  inhabit,  and  di- 
vided amongst  them  by  \oi  a  large  piece  of  land,  a  little  above  the 
mouth  of  Pelusium,  whom  Amasis,  (who  reigned  many  years  after), 
transplanted  to  Memphis.  Being  therefore  that  he  had  gained  the 
kingdom  by  the  help  of  his  stipendiary  soldiers,  he  intrusted  them 
chiefly  in  the  concerns  of  the  government,  and  entertained  great 
numbers  of  strangers  and  foreigners,    w 

Afterwards  undertaking  an  expedition  into  Syria,  (to  honour  the 
foreigners),  he  placed  them  in  the  right  wing  of  his  army;  but  out 
of  slight  and  disregard  to  the  natural  Egyptians^  he  drew  them  up  in 
the  left;  with  which  aifront  the  Egyptians  were  so  incensed,  that 
above  two  hundred  thousand  of  them  revolted,  and  marched  away 
towards  Ethiopia,  there  to  si:ttle  themselves  in  new  habitations.  At 
first  the  king  sent  some  of  bis  captives  after  them,  to  make  an  apo- 
logy for  the  dishonour  done  them;  but  these  not  being  hearkened 
unto,  the  king  himself,  with  some  of  his  nobility,  followed  them  by 
water.  But  they*  marched  on,  and  entered  Egypt,  near  the  river 
Nile,  where  he  earnestly  entreated  them  to  alter  their  purpose,  and 
to  remember  their  gods,  their  country,  wives,  aud  children:  they  all 
cried  out,  (beating  upon  their  shields,  and  shaking  their  spears), 
that  as  long  as  they  had  arms  in  their  hands,  they  could  easily  gain 
another  country ;  and  then  turning  aside  the  flaps  of  their  coats,  they  < 
shewed  their  privy  members,  bawling  out,  that  as  long  as  they  were 
so  furnished,  they  should  never  want  wives  or  children.  Possessed 
with  this  resolution  and  magnanimity  of  mind,  they  despised  every 
thing  that  by  all  others  are  highly  prized  and  valued,  and  settled 
themselves  in  a  rich  and  fruitful  soil  in  Ethiopia,  dividing  the  land 
amongst  themselves  by  lot. 

Psammeticus  laid  this  greatly  to  heart,  and  made  it  his  business 
to  settle  the  affairs  of  Egypt,  and  to  increase  his  revenues,  and  enter- 
ed into  league  with  the  Athenians  and  other  Grecians,  and  was  very 
kind  and  liberal  to  all  strangers  that  came  into  Egypt.  He  was  so 
taken  with  the  Grecians,  that  he  caused  his  son  to  be  instructed  in 
the  Grecian  learning.  He  was  certainly  the  first  of  all  the  kings 
ol  Egypt  that  encouraged  foreigners  to  traffic  in  his  country,  giving 
Mife  conduct  to  all  strangers  that  sailed  hither.  Fur  the  former 
kings  allowed  no  strangers  to  come  into  Egypt,  and  if  any  did  arrive. 


f2  DK)DORUS  8ICU  LU 8.  ^  BooU  J. 


CHAP.  VI. 

J%e  Customs  of  the  Egyptians.  Of  their  Kings.  Of  their 
Hourbf  Emplojfmentj  Sacrifices^  Diet,  Sfc,  Their  Burials.  The 
division  of  Egypt.  Their  Trades  in  Egypt.  Courts  of  Jus- 
tice.  Their  Law  Proceedings.  The  several  Laws  of  Egypt. 
Beasts  and  Birds  adored  in  Egypt,  as  Lions,  Wolves,  Cats, 
the  Bird  Ibis,  Kites,  Sfc.  Costs  in  their  Burial  of  these  Crea^ 
tures.    Reasons  given  for  this  Adoration. 

SINCE  sufficient  hath  been  said  of  the  Egyptian  kings  from  the 
most  antient  times,  to  the  death  of  Amasis,  (leaving  for  awhile 
what  remains  till  a  more  proper  time),  we  shall  now  give  a  tfrief  ac- 
count of  those  laws  and  customs  of  the  Egyptians  that  are  most  to 
be  admired^  and  may  especially  delight  and  profit  the  reader.    For 
many  of  the  antient  customs  of  the  Egyptians  were  not  only  allowed 
by  the  natural  inhabitants,  but  were  greatly  admired  by  the  Grecians^ 
so  that  every  learned  man  earnestly  coveted  to  travel  into  Egypt  to 
learn  the  knowledge  of  their  laws  and  customs,  as  things  of  great 
weight  and  moment:  and  though  the  country  antiently  forbade  all  re- 
ception of  strangers,  (for  the  reasons  before  alledged),  yet  some  of 
the  antlents,  as  Orpheus  and  Homer,  and  many  of  later  times^    as 
Pythagoras  the  Samian,  and  Solon  the  lawgiver,  ventured  to  travel 
hither.     And  therefore  the  Egyptians  affirm  that  letters,  astronomy, 
geometry,  and  many  other  arts  were  first  found  out  by  them;  aud 
that  the  best  laws  were  made  and  instituted  by  them.    To  confirm 
.which,  they  alledge-this  as  an  undeniable  argument,  that  the  nadve 
kings  of  Egypt  have  reigned  there  for  the  space  of  above  four  thou- 
sand  and  seven  hundred  years,  and  that  their  country,  for  all  that 
time  has  been  the  most  prosperous  and  flourishing  kingdom  in  the 
world,  which  could  never  have  been  so,  if  the  inhabitants  had  not 
been  civilized,  and  brought  up  under  good  laws,  and  liberal  educa- 
tion in  all  sorts  of  arts  and  sciences.    But  we  shall  omit  what  Hero* 
dotus  and  other  writers  of  the  Egyptian  history  relate,  who  wilfully 
pursue  and  prefer  prodigious  stories  before  truth,  and  relate  a  com- 
pany of  fictions  merely  for  sport  and  diversion  sake,  and  shall  give 
an  account  of  such  things  as  we  have  carefully  perused  and  ezamin* 
ed  recorded  in  their  books  by  the  Egyptian  priests. 

The  first  kings  of  Egypt  lived  not  after  the  way  and  manner  oi 
other  monarchs,  to  do  what  they  list,  without  controul;  but  in 
every  thing  conformed  themselves  to  their  laws,  not  only  in  the 


Cikp.  V7.  DIODORUS  SICUI.U9.  J3 


^mm 


public  acJmiDistratioa  of  the  government,  but  in  their  daily  private 
conversation,  d^A  tl^eir  very  meals  and  diet.  For  araon^  their  at- 
tendants, they  had  neither  slaves  for  servants,  nor  such  as  were  born 
in  their  houses ;  but  the  sons  of  the  chiefest  of  the  priests,  (after  they 
attained  to  the  age  of  twenty  years),  brought  up  and  educated  mor,e 
nobly  than  any  other  of  the  rest  of  the  Egyptians;  that  having 
such  noble  attendants  upon  liis  person,  (of  the  best  and  highest 
rank  in  the  kingdom)  to  be  always  witli  him  night  and  day,  he  might 
not  do  any  thing  that  was  base  and  blame-worthy.  For  no  prince  is 
apt  to  be  very  wicked,  except  he  have  some  ready  at  hand  to  encou- 
rage him  in  his  lusts. 

There  were  hours  set  apart  in  the  night  as  well  as  the  day,  wherein 
the  king  was  to  do  sometiiing  enjoined  him  by  the  laws,  and  not  to 
indulge  himself  in  lus  pleasures. 

When  he  rose  in  the  morning,  the  first  thing  he  was  to  do,  was 
to  peruse  all  the  public  letters  and  advices  sent  from  all  parts,  that 
he  might  order  his  concerns  the  better,  by  liaving  perfect  know- 
ledge of  all  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom.  Then  washing  himself,  and 
putting  on  his  splendid  robes,  and  the  ensigns  and  badges  of  lua 
royal  authority,  he  went  to  sacrifice  to  the  gods. 

When  the  victims  were  brought  to  the  altar,  it  was  the  custom 
for  the  high  priest,  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  people  standing 
round  about  him^  to  pray  with  a  loud  voice  for  the  health  and 
prosperity  of  the  king,  who  righteously  ruled  and  governed  his  sub'* 
jects,  wherein  he  recounted  all  the  virtues  of  the  prince,  his  piety 
towards  the  gods,  his  kindness  to  his  people;  how  continent,  justf 
magnanimous  and  faithful  be  was;  how  bountiful,  apd  what  & 
master  he  was  over  all  inordinate  appetites  and  passions;  how  he 
was  mild  and  gentle  in  inflicting  punishments  upon  offenders,  less 
than  their  deserts,  and  bountiful  in  distributing  of  his  rewards* 
When  the  priest  had  uttered  these  and  such  like  commendations, 
he  at  last  pronounced  a  curse  upon  all  such  oflfences  and  miscar<* 
nagea  as  had  been  ignorantly  committed;  yet  withal,  clearing  the 
king^  and  laying  all  the  blame  and  guilt  upon  his  ministers  and  ad- 
Tisers.  And  this  the  priest  did  that  he  might  thereby  induce  and 
perauade  the  king  to  an  awe  of  the  gods,  and  to  live  so  as  might  be 
pleasing  to  them;  and  likewise  by  praise  and  comniendatiou  rather 
gently  to  win  upon  him,  than  by  harsh  and  rugged  rebukes  to  drive 
kim  to  the  practice  of  virtuous  actions.  Afterwards,  when  the  king 
had  viewed  the  entrails,  and  finished  his  sacrifices,  the  priests  read 
out  of  the  sacred  records,  the  edicts,  laws,  and  most  useful  and  re- 
markable actions,  of  such  as  were  most  famous  iu  tlieir  generation4, 
that  the  prince  might  seriously  consider  and  ponder  upon  what  was 

Vol,  !•  No.  S2,  jl 


74  DioDORus  srcuLUs.  BooJk  L 

most  commendable  in  those  examples,  and  imitate  them  accordinf 
to  the  rules  there  prescribed.  For  there  were  not  onlj  set  times  al- 
lotted for  despatch  of  public  business,  and  administration  of  justice^ 
but  likewise  for  taking  the  air,  bathing,  lying  with  the  queen^  and 
almost  every  action  of  their  lives. 

The  custom  was  likewise  for  the  kings  to  feed  upon  plain  and  or* 
dinary  meat,  as  veal  and  goose,  and  to  drink  wine  according  to  a 
stinted  measure,  which  might  neither  overcharge  their  stomachs, 
nor  make  them  drunk.    Such  a  moderate  diet  was  prescribed^  as 
that  it  seemed  rather  to  be  ordered  by  a  skilful  physician  for  health 
sake,  than  by  a  law-maker.    It  is  indeed  to  be  admired  andverj 
strange,  that  the  king  should  not  be  left  to  his  liberty  for  hb  daily 
food;  but  much  more  is  it  to  be  admired,  that  he  could  not  do  any 
public  business,  condemn  or  punish  any  man  to  gratify  his  own  hu- 
mour or  revenge,  or  for  any  other  unjust  cause;  but  was  bound  to 
do  according  as  the  laws  had  ordered  in  every  particular  case.    The 
kings  observing  those  rules  according  to  the  antient  custom,  were  so 
far  from  thinking  it  dishonourable,  or  being  uneasy  under  itf  that 
they  looked  upon  themselves  to  live  most  desirable  and  happy  Uvea; 
and  judged  that  all  other  men  who  inconsiderately  indulged  their 
natural  appetites,  did  many  things  that  were  attended  with  great 
losses,  or  apparent  hazards  at  the  least ;  yea,  that  som^  though  they 
know  beforehand  that  what  they  were  about  |to  do  was  ill  and  un- 
justifiable,'yet,  overcome  either  with  love  or  hatred,  or  some  other 
unruly  passion,  committed  the  wicked  act  notwithstanding;  and 
therefore  they  were  resolved  to  follow  the  rules  of  living,  before 
approved  of  by  wise  and  prudent  men,  and  not  to  fall  into  the  least 
irregularity.    The  kings,  therefore,  carrying  this  even  hand  towards 
all  their  subjects,  were  more  beloved  by  them  than  by  their  own 
kindred  and  relations :  for  not  only  all  the  orders  of  the  priests,  but 
the  whole  nation  together,  were  more  concerned  for  the  health  and 
prosperity  of  their  kings,  than  they  were  for  their  wives  and  chil* 
dren,  or  their  private  interests  in  their  goods  and  estates;  and  there- 
fore, as  long  as  these  wholesome  laws  were  observed  amongst  them, 
they  preserved  their  government  without  stain  or  blemish  for  many 
ages  under  the  king's  before  mentioned,  living  in  the  hei^t  of  all 
worldly  happiness :  and  besides  all  this,  were  conquerors  of  many 
nations,  and  grew  exceeding  rich,  and  their  provinces  were  beau- 
tified with  many  stately  magnificent  works,  and  then:  cities  adorned 
with  many  rich  gifts  of  all  sorts. 

What  the  Egyptians  performed  after  the  deaths  of  every  of  their 
kings,  clearly  evidences  the  great  love  they  bore  to  them.  For  ho- 
nour done  him  that  cannot  possibly  know  it,  (in  a  grateful  return  of 


Chap.  FI.  DIODO&US  8ICULU8.  7& 

m  fanner  benefit),  carries  along  with  it  a  testimony  of  sincerity  with- 
out die  least  colour  of  dissimulation.    For  upon  the  death  of  every 
king,  the  Egyptians  generally  lament  with  an  universal  mournings 
rend  their  garments,  shut  up  their  temples,  inhibit  sacrifices,  and  all 
feasts  and  solemnities  for  the  space  of  seventy-two  days :  they  cast 
dost  likewise  upon  their  heads,  and  {prd  themselves  under  their 
breasts  with  a  linen  girdle;  and  thus  men  and  women,  two  hundred 
or  three  hundred  sometimes  in  a  company,  twice  a-daygo  about 
singing  mournful  songs  in  praise  of  the  deceased  king,  recalling  hit 
▼irtues,  (as  it  were),  from  the  very  grave*    During  that  time,  they 
neither  eat  flesh,  nor  any  thing  baked  or  heated  by  the  fire,  and  ab- 
stain from  wine  and  all  sumptuous  fare :  neither  dare  any  use  baths 
or  ointments,  beds  trimmed  up,  or  indulge  themselves  with  women. 
But  every  one,  (as  if  they  had  lost  their  dearest  beloved  cliild),  is 
in  mourning  and  sadness,  and  spends  all  these  days  in  lamentation. 
In  the  mean  time  all  things  are  prepared  in  a  stately  manner  for  the 
funeral,  and  the  last  day  the  coiSn,  with  the  body  enclosed,  is  set  at 
the  entrance  into  the  sepulchre :  and  there,  according  to  the  law,  ia 
honour  of  the  deceased,  all  the  actions  of  his  life  are  rehearsed^ 
vhere  every  one  that  will,  has  free  liberty  to  accuse  him.    But  all 
the  priests  set  forth  his  praise,  mentioning  all  the  noble  actions  of 
his  life;  and  many  thousands  of  people  met  together  at  the  bringing 
forth  of  the  body,  (if  the  king  have  ruled  well),  second  the  priests 
with  a  tumultuous  cry  and  noise  of  approbation:  but  if  he  have  go* 
vemed  otherwise,  they  are  hush  and  still :  and  therefore  many  of 
the  kings,  (through  the  dislike  of  the  people),  have  not  been  ho- 
noured with  any  funeml  pomp  or  solemn  burial;  upon  which  ac- 
count the  succeeding  kings,  (not  only  for  the  reasons  before  men- 
tioned, but  because  they  fear  the  abuse  of  their  bodies  after  death, 
and  everlasting  disgrace  and  dishonour),  have  studied  how  to  acquit 
themselves  by  just  9nd  virtuous  actions.    These  are  the  most  rc- 
iparkable  manners  and  customs  of  the  antient  kings  of  Egypt. 

The  whole  land  of  Egypt  is  divided  into  several  parts,  which  the 
Greeks  call  Nomoi,  over  every  one  of  which  is  appointed  a  lord 
lieutenant,  or  provincial  governor,  who  b  intrusted  with  the  adminis- 
tration of  public  aiiairs  in  the  province*  The  whole  country  like-* 
wise  is  divided  into  three  parts,  whereof  the  first  is  allotted  to  the 
priests,  who  are  highly  reverenced,  and  are  in  great  authority  among 
the  people,  both  for  their  piety  towards  the  gods,  and  their  great 
wisdom  and  learning  wherein  they  instruct  the  people.  And  out  of 
their  revenues,  they  provide  sacrifices  throughout  all  Egypt,  and 
inaintain  their  families  igid  servants,  and  procure  all  other  things 
l^ec^sarjr  for  themselves;  for  they  judge  it  not  IsiydvX  by  any  meanS| 


7'  blODOEUS  SICULUS.  Book  I. 

that  the  wonhip  of  the  gods  should  he  altered,  (but  always  per- 
formed by  them  after  the  same  manner),  nor  that  those  who  are  the 
public  ministers  of  state  should  want  any  thing  that  is  necessary. 
For  these  are  always  at  the  king's  elbow,  as  the  chief  of  his  privy 
counsel,  who  assist,  advise,  and  instruct  him  upon  all  occasions.* 
By  the  help  of  astrology,  and  viewing  the  entrails  of  the  sacrifices, 
they  divine  and  foretel  future  events,  and  out  of  the  records  in  the 
sacred  registers  from  things  done  in  former  times,  they  read  pro- 
fitable lectures  for  present  use  and  practice.  For  it  is  not,  (as 
emong  the  Grecians),  that  one  man  or  one  woman  only  executes 
the  priest's  offire,  but  in  Egypt,  many  are  employed  in  the  sacrifices 
and  worship  of  the  gods,  who  teach  the  same  way  and  manner  of 
service  to  their  children  and  posterity.  They  are  free  from  all  pub- 
lic taxes  and  impositions,  and  are  in  the  second  place  to  the  king  in 
honour  and  authority.  The  second  portion  belongs  to  the  king,  aa 
his  revenue  to  support  his  royal  state  and  dignity,  and  maintain  the 
charge  of  his  wars,  and  to  enable  him  to  reward  those  that  have 
been  eminent  for  their  virtue  and  public  service,  with  gifts  accord- 
ing to  their  deserts;  and  inasmuch  as  this  portion  brings  in  a  plen- 
tiful provision  for  all  these  purposes,  the  {leople  are  not  oppressed 
with  taxes  and  heavy  im[K)sitions.  The  last  portion  belongs  to  the 
soldiers,  who  at  a  word  are  ready  at  the  king's  commands  for  every 
expedition ;  that  they  who  venture  their  lives  in  the  wars,  being  en- 
deared  to  their  country  by  that  plentiful  share  and  proportion  al- 
lotted them,  may  more  cheerfully  undergo  the  hazards  of  war.  For 
it  would  be  an  irrational  thing  to  intrust  the  safety  and  preservation 
of  the  whole,  with  them  who  have  nothing  in  their  country  that  is 
dear  or  valuable  to  them  to  fight  for.  And  the  chief  reason  why  so 
large  a  share  is  allotted  to  them,  is,  that  they  might  more  readily 
marry,  and  by  that  means  make  the  nation  more  populous;  and  so 
there  might  be  no  need  of  foreign  aids  and  assistances.  Besides, 
that  children  descended  from  soldiers,  would  be  apt  to  imitate  the 
valour  of  their  ancestors,  and,  minding  arms  from  their  very  child- 
hood, would  at  length,  (through  their  natural  courage  and  skill  in 
their  arms),  become  unconquerable. 

Tlie  nation  likewise  is  distinguished  into  three  othejr  classes  and 
orders  of  men,  shepherds,  husbandmen,  and  artificers.  The  hus- 
bandmen take  the  land,  (fit  for  tillage  and  bearing  of  other  fruits), 
of  the  king,  the  priests,  and  the  swordmeo,  U[K)u  an  easy  rent, 
and  take  up  all  their  time  in  this  business;  and  because  they  are 
bred  up  from  their  very  infancy  in  country  aflkirs,  they  are  the  most 
skilful  husbandmen  of  any  other  nation  in  the  world.  For  they 
know  exactly  the  nature  of  the  land,  the  inundation  of  the  waters. 


chap.  Pi.  DIODORtTS  WCULUS.  77 


«KMMa 


seed-time,  and  harvest,  and  the  gathering  in  of  the  other  fruits  of 
the  earth,  partly  from  the  knowledge  gained  from  their  anceston^ 
and  partly  from  their  own  particular  experience. 

The  way  and  manner  of  the  shepherds  is  the  same,  who  beio^ 
used  to  look  after  the  flocks  and  herds  from  father  to  son,  make  it 
their  whole  employment  to  feed  and  pasture  them.  They  have  in* 
d6ed  learnt  many  things  from  their  ancestors  concerning  the  best 
way  of  governing  and  feeding  their  flocks,  but  not  a  few,  by  tlieiif 
own  study  and  invention.  And  that  which  is  chiefly  to  be  admired^ 
is,  that  their  industry  is  such  in  these  matters,  that  they  that  keep 
poultry  and  geese,  not  content  with  the  ordinary  way  of  breedio|^ 
these  creatures,  (as  amongst  other  people),  but  by  their  wit  and 
ingenuity,  cause  them  to  increase  to  an  infinite  number,  for  tbey  do 
not  suffer  them  to  hatch,  but,  to  admiration,  force  out  the  young 
with  their  hands  with  so  much  art  and  skilly  that  it  is  done  as  ef- 
fectually as  by  nature  itself. 

Arts  and  trades  likewise,  among  the  Egyptians,  are  greatly  im* 
proved  and  brought  to  their  highest  perfection.  For  it  is  a  rule  only 
among  the  Egyptians,  that  no  mechanic  or  other  artificer  is  to  be  of 
any  other  trade  or  employment,  or  to  be  reckoned  among  any 
other  order  or  class  of  the  commonwealth,  than  such  as  by  the 
law  is  allowed,  and  taught  them  by  their  parents;  to  the  end  that 
neitber  envy  attending  magistracy,  nor  public  business  of  the  state^ 
nor  any  thmg  else  might  interrupt  them  in  the  diligent  improvement 
of  their  trades.  In  other  places,  we  see  artificers  and  tradesmen 
busied  about  many  other  things,  and,  (to  gratify  their  covetousness)^ 
not  to  stick  to  any  one  employment.  For  some  apply  themselves  to 
husbandry,  others  to  merchandise,  and  some  follow  two  or  three 
trades  at  once.  A  nd  many  who  run  to  the  public  assemblies  in  cities, 
under  a  democratical  government,  by  bribes  and  rewards  enrich 
themselves,  to  the  damage  and  prejudice  of  the  commonwealth.  But 
in  Egypt,  if  any  tradesman  meddle  in  civil  affairs,  or  exercise  any 
more  than  one  trade  at  once,  he  is  grievously  punished.  And  in  this 
manner  the  antient  Egyptians  divided  their  commonwealth,  and 
every  order  took  care  to  preserve  themselves  entire,  as  that  which 
they  had  learnt,  and  had  been  handed  down  to  them  from  their  an- 
cestors. They  were  likewise  extraordinarily  careful  concerning  their 
coarts  of  justice,  for  they  looked  upon  just  sentences  and  decrees, 
pronounced  from  the  seats  of  justice  on  both  sides,  to  be  of  great 
weight  and  moment  to  the  advancement  of  the  public  good.  For 
they  knew  very  well,  that  men's  miscarriages  would  be  best  reform- 
ed, if  offenders  were  duly  punished,  and  the  injured  and  oppressed 
icUeved :  and,  on  the  contrary,  they  foresaw,  that  if  the  punishment 


78  DI0D0RU9  SICULU9.  Book  Z 

due  by  the  law  to  malefactors  could  be  bought  off  for  monqr,  favoor, 
or  aflfection^  then  nothing  but  disorder  and  confusion  would  eater 
into  all  orders  and  societies  of  men  among  them :  and  theretore^  to 
prevent  this,  (with  good  efiect),  they  chose  men  of  the  greatest  re- 
putation out  of  the  chiefest  cities  to  be  their  judges :  as  out  of  He* 
liopolis,  Thebes,  and  Memphis;  which  assembly  of  the  judges  was 
nothing  inferior  to  the  Areopagite  in  Athens,  or  the  senate  at  Spar- 
ta.   Out  of  these,  (being  thirty  in  number),  they  chose  one^  the 
most  eminent  among  them,  to  be  president,  and  in  his  room  the  city 
tent  another.    The  judges  received  their  salaries  from  the  king^  but 
the  president  had  the  greatest  allowance ;  about  his  neck  be  wore  a 
golden  chain,  at  which  hung  a  picture  representing  truths  set  with 
precious  stones.  When  the  president  put  on  his  chain,  it  was  a  sign 
that  he  was  about  to  hear  causes.  And  when  the  eight  books  wherein 
the  laws  were  written  were  laid  before  the  judges,  it  was  the  custom 
that  the  plaintiff  should  exhibit  his  complaint  in  writing,  distinctly  and 
particularly,  setting  forth  wherein  he  was  injured,  and  how,  and  the 
Talue  of  his  damage  sustained.    On  the  other  side  the  defendant  or 
the  party  accused,  after  a  copy  bad  of  his  adversary's  libel,  answered 
in  writing  to  every  particular,  either  by  denying  or  justifying,  or 
pleading  something  in  mitigation  of  damages.    Then  the  plaintiff 
replied  in  writing,  and  the  defendant  rejoined.    After  the  litiganta 
bad  thus  twice  exhibited  their  libels,  it  was  then  the  part  of  the 
thirty  judges  to  consider  amongst  themselves  of  the  judgment  to  be 
pronounced,  and  incumbent  upon  the  president  to  turn  the  effigy  ci 
truth  towards  one  of  the  litigants.    And  thb  was  the  usual  manner 
of  proceeding  in  the  courts  of  justice  among  the  Egyptians.  For  it 
was  judged,  that  by  the  harangues  of  lawyers,  a  cloud  was  cast  upon 
the  truth  and  justice  of  the  cause;  inasmuch  as  the  arts  of  rheto* 
ricians,  the  juggling  tricks  of  dissemblers,  and  the  fears  of  them 
that  are  like  to  be  overthrown  in  their  cause,  have  wrought  upon 
many  to  wave  the  strictness  of  the  law,  and  to  turn  aside  from  the  rule 
of  justice  and  truth :  and  indeed  it  b  often  found  by  experience,  that 
offenders,  brought  to  the  bar  of  justice,  by  the  help  of  a  cunning 
orator,  or  their  own  rhetorical  flourishes,  (either  through  a  fidlacy 
put  upon  the  court,  or  taking  insinuations,  or  melting  compassions 
wrought  by  the  speaker  on  the  judge),  liavc  escaped:  therefore  the 
Egyptians  concluded,  that  if  all  the  accusation  was  put  into  writing, 
and  consideration  had  barely  of  what  was  there  set  down,  the  sen- 
tence would  he  more  exact  and  just.    And  so  by  that  means  crafty 
and  ingenious  fellows  would  be  no  more  favoured  than  those  that 
were  more  dull,  nor  the  experienced  artist  more  than  those  tbatwer^; 
ignorant  and  unskilful,  nor  th^  aud^ciQUs  li^  more  than  those  th4t 


iJhap.  VL  BIODORUd  SICULU8.  79 

we  modest  and  sincere;  but  all  would  have  equal  justice,  in  regard 
sufficient  time  was  allowed  by  the  law^  both  for  the  parties  to  an- 
swer each  other,  and  for  the  judges  to  consider  and  give  judgment 
opoQ  the  allegations  of  both  sides. 

And  since  now  we  are  come  to  mention  the  laws^  we  conceive  it 
will  not  be  foreign  from  our  history  to  give  an  account  of  such  laws 
cf  the  E^gyptians  as  are  either  remarkable  for  their  antiquity,  or 
strange  and  different  from  all  others,  or  that  may  be  any  way  useful 
and  profitable  to  the  studious  readers. 

1.  Andj  in  the  first  plac^,  those  were  to  die  who  were  guilty  of 
peijary^  being  such  as  committed  the  two  greatest  crimes;  that  is^ 
impiety  towards  the  gods,  and  violation  of  faith  and  truth,  the  stron|;« 
est  bond  of  human  society. 

2.  If  any  upon  the  road  saw  a  man  likely  to  be  killed,  or  to  be 
vicdently  assaulted,  and  did  not  rescue  him,  if  he  were  able,  he  was 
to  die  for  it.  And  if  in  truth  he  were  not  able  to  defend  him,  yet  he 
was  bound  to  discover  the  thieves,  and  to  prosecute  them  in  a  due 
course  of  law.  If  he  neglected  this,  he  was,  according  to  the  law, 
to  be  scourged  with  a  certain  number  of  stripes,  and  to  be  kept 
fHthout  food  for  three  days  together. 

8.  False  accusers  were  to  suffer  the  same  punishment  as  those 
wlioffl  they  falsely  accused  were  to  have  undergone,  if  tliey  had  after* 
wards  been  convicted  of  the  offence. 

4.  All  the  Egyptians  were  enjoined  to  ^ve  in  their  names  in  wri- 
ting, to  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  shewing  how  and  by  what 
means  they  got  their  livelihood.  He  that  gave  a  false  account  ia 
sueh  cascj  or  if  it  appeared  he  lived  by  robbery,  or  any  other  unjust 
eourse,  he  was  to  die;  which  law  it  is  said  Solon  brought  over  out 
0f  Egypt  into  Athens. 

5.  He  that  wilfully  killed  a  freeman ;  nay,  a  very  bond  slave,  was 
by  the  law  to  die;  thereby  designing  to  restrain  men  from  wicked 
actions^  as  having  no  respect  to  the  state  and  condition  of  the  person 
suffering,  but  to  the  advised  act  of  the  offender;  and  by  this  care  of 
slaves,  men  learned  that  freemen  were  much  less  to  be  destroyed. 

6.  Parents  that  killed  their  children,  were  not  to  die,  but  were  forced 
for  three  days  and  nights  together  to  hug  tliem  continually  in  their 
arms^  and  had  a  guard  all  the  while  over  them,  to  see  tliey  did  it; 
for  they  thought  it  not  fit  that  they  should  die,  who  gave  life  to  their 
children;  but  rather  that  men  should  be  deterred  from  such  attempts! 
by  a  punishment  that  seemed  attended  with  sorrow  and  repentance. 

7*  But  for  parricides,  they  provided  a  most  severe  kind  of  pu- 
nishment: for  those  that  were  convicted  of  this  offence,  were  laid 
apoii  thorns^  and  burnt  alive,  after   they  had  first  mangled  the 


80  DIODORUS  8ICULU9.  Book  /• 

members  of  tbeir  bodies  with  sharp  canesj  piecemeal,  about  tl^e 

bigness  of  a  man's  thumb.    For  they  counted  it  thp  most  wickcid 
act  that  man  could  be  guilty  of,  to  take  away  the  lives  of  them  from 

whom  they  had  their  own, 

8.  Those  that  were  with  child,  were  not  to  be  executed  till  they 
were  delivered,  which  law  was  received  by  many  of  the  Grecians, 
judging  it  very  unjust  for  the  innocent  to  suffer  with  the  offenderj 
and  two  to  die  for  the  offence  of  one  only.  Besides,  inasmuch  as 
the  crime  was  maliciously  and  advisedly  committed,  it  was  unrea- 
sonable that  the  child  that  understood  not  what  was  done,  should 
undergo  the  same  punishment.  And  that  which  is  of  the  greatest 
consideration,  is,  that  it  was  altogether  unjust,  (being  the  mother 
was  only  accused  and  condemned  as  guilty),  the  child,  (common 
both  to  father  and  mother),  should  lose  its  life;  for  that  judge  is  as 
unjust  that  destroys  the  innocent,  as  he  that  spares  him  that  is  guilty 
of  murder. 

9.  These  are  the  capital  laws  which  are  chiefly  worthy  of  praise  and 
commendation;  as  to  others,  those  concerning  military  af&irs,  pro- 
vided that  soldiers  who  ran  away  from  their  colours,  or  mutinied, 
though  they  should  net  die,  yet  should  be  otherwise  punished  with 
the  utmost  disgrace  imaginable;  but  if  they  afterwards  wipe  off  their 
disgrace  by  their  valour,  they  are  restored  to  their  former  post  and 
trust.  By  thus  inflicting  of  a  punishment  more  grievous  than  deaths 
the  lawgiver  designed  that  all  should  look  upon  disgrace  and  infamy 
as  the  greatest  of  evils :  besides  it  was  judged,  that  those  who  were  put 
to  death,  could  never  be  further  serviceable  to  the  common  wealth; 
but  such  as  were  degraded  only,  (through  a  desire  to  repair  their  repu* 
tation),  might  be  very  useful,  and  do  much  service  in  time  to  come. 

10.  Such  as  revealed  the  secrets  of  the  army  to  the  enemy,  were 
to  have  their  tongues  cut  out. 

11.  They  that  coined  false  and  adulterated  money,  or  contrived 
false  weights,  or  counterfeited  seals ;  and  scriveners  or  clerks  that 
forged  deeds,  or  razed  public  records,  or  produced  any  forged  con- 
tracts, were  to  have  both  their  hands  cut  ofl^  that  every  one  might 
auffer  in  that  part  wherewith  he  had  offended  in  such  a  manner  as 
not  to  be  repaired,  during  tbeir  life;  and  that  others,  warned  by  so 
severe  a  punishment,  might  be  deterred  from  the  commission  of  tb^ 
like  offence. 

12.  In  relation  to  women,  the  laws  were  very  severe:  for  he  that 
committed  a  rape  upon  a  free  woman,  was  to  have  his  privy  mem- 
bers cut  off;  for  they  judged  that  three  most  heinous  offences  were 
included  in  that  one  vile  act,  that  is,  wrong,  defilement,  and  baa« 


C^|l•  VI.  PI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  81 

-i— ■g**^''-^*™— ™**—^*"^    ■  ■  ■        ■  ■  ■  ■      '^  ■■  ^  ■  ■   ^ 

13.  In  case  of  adultery,  the  nan  was  to  have  a  thousand  lashes 
with  rodsj  and  the  woman  her  nose  cut  o£  For  it  was  looked  upon 
very  6t»  that  the  adulteress  that  tricked  up  herself  to  allure  men  to 
wantonness,  should  be  punished  in  that  part  where  her  charms  chiefly 
lay. 

14.  They  say  that  Bocchoris  made  the  laws  concerning  merchan- 
dise. As  to  tiiese,  it  was  a  law,  that  if  a  man  borrowed  money,  and 
the  lender  had  no  writing  to  shew  for  it,  and  the  other  denied  It  upon 
hit  oath,  he  should  be  quit  of  the  debt;  to  that  end,  therefore,  in  the 
first  place,  they  were  to  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  as  men  making  con* 
science,  and  tender  and  scrupulous  in  taking  of  an  oath.  For  it  being 
clear  and  evident,  that  he  that  swears  often  again  and  again,  at  last 
loaes  his  credit;  every  man  to  prevent  that  mischief,  will  be  very  cau« 
tjous  of  being  brought  to  an  oath.  Moreover,  the  lawgiver  had  this 
design,  that  by  grounding  a  man's  credit  and  reputation  wholly  upon 
the  integrity  of  his  life  and  conversation,  every  one  would  be  induced 
to  honest  and  virtuous  actions,  lest  he  sliould  be  despised  as  a  man 
of  no  credit  or  worth.  Besides,  it  was  judged  a  most  unjust  thing, 
not  to  believe  him  upon  his  oath^  in  that  matter  relating  to  his  con- 
tract, to  whom  credit  was  given  in  the  self-same  thing,  without  an 
oath  before. 

15.  For  those  that  lent  money  by  contract  in  writing,  it  was  not 

lawful  to  take  usury  above  what  would  double  the  stock;  and  that 

payment  should  be  made  only  out  of  the  debtor's  goods;  but  his  body 

was  not  to  be  liable  in  any  wise  to  imprisonment:   and  those  were 

counted  the  debtor's  goods,  which  he  Imd  either  earned  by  his  labour, 

or  had  been  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  just  proprietors.     But  as  for 

their  bodies,  they  belonged  to  the  cities  where  they  inhabited,  who  had 

-in  5«»«rest  in  them  for  the  public  service,  both  in  times  of  peace  and 

^«-' .  for  that  ic  was  an  absurd  thing  for  him  who  was  to  venture  his 

i'  . .   i  1*4  country,  to  be  carried  to  gaol  for  a  debt  by  his  creditor, 

(u  It  snouid  so  happen),  and  that  the  public  safety  should  be  hazard* 

^  to  gratify  the  covetousness  of  some  private  men.  This  law  seems 

^  have  been  established  iu  Athens,  by  Solon,  which  he  called  Si* 

<scbthy,  freeing  all  the  citizens  from  being  imprisoned  by  their  credi* 

tors  for  debt.    And  some  do  justly  blame  many  of  the  law-makers  of 

Greece,  that  they  forbade  arms,  plows,  and  other  things  absolutely 

necessary  for  labour,  to  be  taken  iu  pawn,  and  yet  permitted  them 

^^  should  use  them  to  be  imprisoned* 

1S«  There  is  a  very  remarkable  law  among  the  Egyptians,  con* 
ceroiog  tlieft.  Those  that  enter  into  the  list  of  thieves,  are  to  give 
'Q  their  names  to  one  who  is  their  chief  and  head,  and  whatever  they 
^^^1,  they  engage  to  bring  to  him.    They  that  have  lost  any  things 

Vo^.  1.  No,  32.  M 


82  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  I. 

are  to  set  down  in  writing  every  particular,  and  bring  it  to  him,  and 
set  forth  the  day,  hour,  and  place,  when  and  where  they  lost  their 
goods.  Every  thing  being  thus  readily  found  out,  after  the  things 
stolen  are  valued,  the  true  owner  is  to  pay  a  fourth  part  of  the  value, 
and  so  receive  his  goods  again.  For  being  it  was  not  possible  to  re- 
strain all  from  thieving,  the  law>maker  found  out  a  way  that  all  might 
be  restored,  except  a  small  proportion  for  redemption. 

The  Egyptian  priests  only  marry  one  wife,  but  all  others  may  have 
as  many  wives  as  they  please;  and  all  are  bound  to  bring  up  as  many 
children  as  they  can,  for  the  further  increase  of  the  inhabitants,  which 
tends  much  to  the  well-being  either  of  a  city  or  country.     None  of 
the  sons  are  ever  reputed  bastards,  though  they  be  begotten  of  a 
bond-maid,  for  they  conceive  that  the  father  only  begets  the  child, 
and  that  the  mother  contributes  nothing  but  place  and  nourishment. 
And  they  call  trees  that  bear  fruit  males,  and  those  that  bear  none, 
females;  contrary  to  what  the  Grecians  name  them.  iThey  bring  up 
their  children  with  very  little  cost,  and  are  sparing  upon  that  account, 
to  admiration :   for  they  provide  for  them  broth,  made  of  any  mean 
and  poor  stuff  that  may  easily  be  had;  and  feed  those  that  are  of 
strength  able  to  eat  it,  with  the  pith  of  bulrushes,  roasted  in  the  em- 
bers, and  with  roots  and  herbs  got  in  the  fens;  sometimes  raw,  and 
sometimes  boiled;  and  at  other  times  fried  and  boiled.     Most  of 
their  children  go  barefooted  and  naked,  the  climate  is  so  warm  and 
temperate.  It  costs  not  the  parent  to  bring  upachild  to  man's  estate, 
above  twenty  drachmas ;  which  is  the  chief  reason  why  Egypt  is  so 
populous,  and  excels  all  other  places  in  magnificent  structures*    The 
priests  instruct  the  youth  in  two  sorts  of  learning;  that  which  they 
call  sacred,  and  the  other,  which  is  more  common  and  ordinary.    In 
arithmetic  and  geometry,  they  keep  them  a  long  time:  for  in  regard 
the  river  every  year  changes  the  face  of  the  soil,  the  neighbouring  in- 
habitants are  at  great  difference  among  themselves  concerning  the  boon- 
daries  of  their  land,  which  cannot  be  easily  known  but  by  the  help  of 
geometry.  And  as  for  arithmetic,  as  it  is  useful  upon  other  occasionSy 
so  it  is  very  helpful  to  the  study  of  geometry,  and  no  small  advan- 
tage to  the  students  of  astrology ;  for  the  Egyptians,  (as  well  as  some 
others), arc  diligent  observers  of  the  course  and  motions  of  the  slars; 
and  preserve  remarks  of  every  one  of  them  for  an  incredible  number 
of  years,  being  used  to  this  study,  and  to  endeavour  to  outvie  one 
another  therein,  from  the  most  antient  times.   They  have  with  great 
cost  and  care,  observed  the  motions  of  the  planets;  their  periodical 
motions,  and  their  stated  stops;  and  the  influences  of  everyone  of* 
them,  in  the  nativity  of  living  creatures,  and  what  good  or  ill  they, 
ibreatiew ;  and  very  often  they  so  clearly  discover  what  is  to  come  in 


Chap.  VI.  DIODORUS  SICUtUS.  83 


± 


the  coarse  of  men's  lives^  as  if  they  pointed  at  .the  thing  with  the 
point  of  a  needle.  They  frequently  presage  both  famine  and  plenty; 
grievous  diseases  likely  to  seize  both  upon  man  and  beast;  earth- 
quakes, inundations,  and  comets;  and  through  long  experience,  they 
come  to  the  foreknowledge  of  such  things  as  are  commonly  judged 
impossible  for  the  wit  of  man  to  attain  unto.  They  affirm,  that  the 
Chaldeans  in  Babylon  are  Egyptian  colonies,  and  that  their  astrolo- 
gers have  attained  to  that  degree  of  reputation,  by  the  knowledge 
they  have  learned  of  the  Egyptian  priests.  / 

The  rest  of  the  common  people  of  Egypt,  (as  we  have  before  de- 
clared), are  trained  up  from  their  very  childhood  either  by  their 
parents  or  kindred,  in  all  manner  of  arts  and  trades  whereby  to  get 
their  livelihood. 

They  teach  but  a  very  few  to  write  and  read;  but  tradesmen  espe- 
cially learn  both.  It  is  not  the  custom  there  to  learn  the  art  of 
wrestling  or  music;  for  they  think  that  by  the  exercise  of  daily  wrest- 
ling, the  youth  improve  in  their  strength  hut  for  a  little  time,  and 
that  with  a  great  deal  of  hazard,  but  gain  no  advantage  at  all  as  to 
the  health  of  their  bodies.  And  as  for  music,  they  look  upon  it  not 
only  unprofitable,  but  that  it  also  makes  men  soft  and  efTeminate. 

To  prevent  diseases,  they  make  use  of  clysters  and  purging  po* 
tions,  abstinence,  and  vomits;  and  this  they  repeat  sometimes  for 
several  days  tc^ether,  and  other  times,  every  third  or  fourth  day.  For 
in  all  manner  of  food,  (they  say),  the  greatest  part  of  it  is  superflu- 
oos,  which  breeds  diseases,  and  therefore  the  aforesaid  method, 
whereby  the  root  of  the  disease  is  plucked  up,  (they  say),  is  a  mighty 
help  both  to  the  preservation  and  recovery  of  health.  For  the  phy- 
sidaos  have  a  public  stipend,  and  make  use  of  receipts  prescribed  by 
the  law,  made  up  by  the  antient  physicians;  and  if  they  cannot  cure 
the  patient  by  them,  they  are  never  blamed;  but  if  they  use  other 
medicines,  they  are  to  suffer  death,  in  as  much  as  the  law-maker  ap- 
pointed such  receipts  for  cure,  as  were  approved  by  the  most  learned 
doctors,  such  as  by  long  experience  had  been  found  effectual. 

Tlie  adoration  and  worshipping  of  beasts  among  the  Egyptians, 
seems  justly  to  many  a  mos^stra^ge  andxinaccountable  thing,  and 
worthy  of  inquiry;  for  they  worship  some  creatures  even  above  mea- 
sure^  wlien  they  are  dead,  as  well  as  when  they  are  living;  as  cats, 
ichneumons,  dogs,  kites,  the  bird  ibis,  wolves,  and  crocodiles,  and 
many  other  such  like.  The  cause  of  which  1  shall  endeavour  to  give, 
having  first  premised  something  briefly  concerning  them.  And  fiist 
of  all,  they  dedicate  a  piece  of  land  to  every  kind  of  creature  they 
adore,  assigaiog  the  profits  for  feeding  and  taking  care  of  them.  To 
soaHS  of  these  deities,  the  Egyptians  give  thanks  for  recovering  tiieir 


84  DI0D0RV8  SICULUS.  Btndk'L 

-     ■  ■     ■     ■       ■ ■   '        ■■■■■■  '  ■■■■tJ-'--  ^i» 

children  from  sickness,  as  by  shaving  their  beads,  and  weighing  tkt 
hair,  with  the  like  weight  of  gold  or  silver;  and  then  giving  that 
money  to  them  that  have  the  care  of  the  beasts.  To  the  kites,  while 
they  are  flying,  they  cry  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  throw  pieces  of 
flesh  for  them  upon  the  ground,  till  such  time  as  they  take  it.  To 
the  cats  and  ichneumons,  they  give  bread  soaked  in  milk,  stroaking 
and  making  much  of  them;  or  feed  them  with  pieces  of  fish,  taken 
in  the  river  Nile.  In  the  same  manner  they  provide  for  the  other 
beasts  food  according  to  their  several  kinds.  They  are  so  far  from 
not  paying  this  homage  to  their  creatures,  or  being  ashamed  of  them, 
that  on  the  contrary,  they  glory  in  them,  as  in  the  highest  adoratioa 
of  the  gods,  and  carry  about  special  marks  and  ensigns  of  honour  for 
them  through  city  and  country;  upon  which  account,  those  that  hare 
the  care  of  the  beasts,  (being  seen  afar  oflF),  are  honoured  and  wor- 
shipped by  all  by  falling  down  upon  their  knees.  When  any  one  of 
them  die,  they  wrap  it  in  fine  linen,  and  with  howling,  beat  upon 
their  breasts,  and  so  carry  it  forth  to  be  salted;  and  then,  after  having 
anointed  it  with  the  oil  of  cedar  and  other  things,  which  both  give  the 
body  a  fragrant  smell,  and  preserve  it  a  long  time  from  putrefaction, 
they  bury  it  in  a  secret  place.  He  that  wilfully  kills  any  of  these 
beasts,  is  to  sufler  death;  but  if  any  kill  a  cat,  or  the  bird  ibis,  whe- 
ther wilfully,  or  otherwise,  he  is  certainly  dragged  away  to  death  by 
the  multitude,  and  sometimes  most  cruelly,  without  any  formal  trial 
or  judgment  of  law.  For  fear  of  this,  if  any  by  chance  find  any  of 
these  creatures  dead,  they  stand  aloof,  and  with  lamentable  cries,  and 
protestations,  tell  every  body  that  they  found  it  dead.  And  such  is 
the  religious  veneration  impressed  upon  the  hearts  of  men  towards 
these  creatures,  and  so  obstinately  is  every  one  bent  to  adore  and 
worship  them,  that  even  at  the  time  when  the  Romans  were  about 
making  a  league  with  Ptolemy,  and  all  the  people  made  it  their  great 
business  to  caress  and  shew  all  civility  uiul  kiiuhiess  imaginable  to 
them  that  came  out  of  Italy,  and  through  fear  strove  all  they  could 
that  no  occasion  might  in  tiie  least  be  given  to  disoblige  them,  or  be 
the  cause  of  a  war;  yet  it  so  happened,  that  upon  a  cat  being  killed 
by  a  Roman,  the  people  in  a  tumult  ran  to  his  lodging,  and  neither 
the  princes  sent  by  the  king  to  dis5uade  them,  nor  the  fear  of  the 
Romans,  could  deliver  the  person  from  the  rage  of  the  people,  though 
he  did  it  against  his  will;  and  this  I  relate  not  by  hearsay,  'but  was 
myself  an  eye-witness  of  it,  at  the  time  of  my  travels  into  Egypt.  If 
these  things  seem  incredible  and  like  to  fables,  those  that  we  shall 
hereafter  relate,  will  look  more  strange.  For  it  is  reported,  that  aC 
a  time  when  there  was  a  famine  in  Egypt,  many  were  driven  to  thtc 
strait,  that  by  turns  they  fed  one  upon  another;  but  not  a  min 


Chop.  VI.  DI0B0RU8  SICULUS.  8S 

accufed  to  have  in  the  least  tasted  of  any  of  these  sacred  creatures* 
Nftjy  if  a  dog  be  found  dead  in  a  house,  the  whole  family  shave  their 
bodies  all  over,  and  make  great  lamentation ;  and  that  which  is  most 
wonderful  is,  that  if  any  wine,  bread,  or  any  other  victuals  be  in  the 
house,  where  any  of  these  creatures  die,  it  is  a  part  of  their  supersti- 
tioD,  not  to  make  use  of  any  oi  them  for  any  purpose  whatsoever.  And 
when  they  have  been  abroad  in  the  wars  in  foreign  countries,  they 
have  with  great  lamentation  brought  with  them  dead  cats,  and  kites 
into  £g3npt;  when  in  the  mean  time,  they  have  been  ready  to  starve 
ficir  want  of  provision.  Moreover,  what  acts  of  religious  worship 
tbef  performed  towards  Apis  in  Memphis,  Mncvis  in  HeKopolis,  the 
^oat  in  Mendes,  the  crocodile  in  the  lake  of  Meris,aod  the  lion  kept 
in  LeoBtopolis;  and  many  other  such  like,  b  easy  to  describe,  but 
wttj  difficult  to  believe,  except  a  man  saw  it.  For  these  creatures 
are  kept  and  fed  in  consecrated  ground  enclosed,  and  many  great  men 
provide  food  for  them  at  great  cost  and  charge;  for  they  constantly 
give  them  fihe  wheat  flour,  frumenty,  sweat- meats  of  all  sorts,  made 
up  with  honey,  and  geese,  sometimes  roasted,  and  sumetimes  boiled^ 
and  for  such  as  fed  upon  raw  flesh,  they  provide  birds.  To  say  no 
more^  they  are  excessive  in  their  costs  and  charges  in  feeding  of  these 
creatures;  and  forbear  ikK  to  wash  them  in  hot  baths,  to  anoint  them 
with  the  most  precious  unguents,  and  perfume  them  with  the  sweet- 
est odours.  They  provide  likewise  for  them  most  rich  beds  to  lie 
upon,  with  decent  furniture;  and  are  extraordinarily  careful  about 
their  generating,  and  coition  one  with  another,  according  to  the  laws 
of  nature.  They  breed  up  for  every  one  of  the  males,  (according  to 
thdr  kinds),  the  most  beautiful  she  mate, and  call  them  their  concu- 
bines or  sweet-hearts,  and  are  at  great  cofts  and  charges  in  looking 
to  them. 

When  any  of  them  die,  they  are  as  mnch  concerned  as  at  tlie 
death  of  their  own  children,  and  lay  Oift  m  burying  them  as  much 
as  all  their  goods  are  worth,  and  far  nior««''  For  when  Apis,  through 
old  age,  died  at  Memphis,  after  the  death  of  Alexander,  and  in  the 
leign  of  Ptolemy  Legus,  his  keeper  not  only:s|>ent  all  that  vast  pro- 
vision he  had  made,  in  burying  of  him^  iMt  borrowed  of  Ptolemy 
fifty  talents  of  silver,  for  the  same  purpose/  ^And  in  our  time,  some 
of  the  keepers  of  these  creatures  have  la^lied  tiway  no  less  than  a 
hundred  talents  in  the  maintaining  of  them;  To  this  may  be  further 
added,  what  is  in  use  among  them  conceitiing  the  sacred  ox,  which 
they  call  Apis.  After  the  splendid  funeral  of  Apis  h  over,  those 
priests  that  have  the  charge  of  the  business,  seek  out  another  calf, 
•8  like  the  former  as  possibly  they  can  find;  and  when  they  have 
found  one,  an  end  is  put  to  all  furtlier  mourning  and  lame^itation: 


86  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  L 


and  sach  priests  as  are  appointed  for  that  purpose,  lead  the  young' 
ox  through  the  city  of  Nile,  and  feed  him  forty  days.  Then  they  put 
him  into  a  barge,  wherein  is  a  golden  cabin,  and  so  transport  him  as 
a  god  to  Memphis,  and  place  him  in  Vulcan's  grove.  During  the 
forty  days  before  mentioned,  none  but  women  are  admitted  to  see 
him,  who  being  placed  full  in  his  view,  pluck  up  their  coats,  and 
shew  their  privy  parts.  Afterwards,  they  are  forbid  to  come  into  the 
sight  of  this  new  god.  For  the  adoration  of  this  ox,  they  give  this 
reason.  They  say,  that  the  soul  of  Osiris  passed  into  an  ox;  and 
therefore,  whenever  the  ox  b  dedicated,  to  this  very  day,  the  spirit  of 
Osiris  is  infused  into  one  ox  after  another,  to  posteriry.  But  some 
say,  that  the  members  of  Osiris,  (who  was  killed  by  Typhon),  were 
thrown  by  Isis  into  an  ox  made  of  wood,  covered  with  ox-hides^  and 
from  thence  the  city  Busiris  was  so  called.  Many  other  thinga 
they  fabulously  report  of  Apis,  which  would  be  too  tedious  particu-* 
larly  to  relate.  But  in  as  much  as  all  that  relate  to  thb  adoration  of 
beasts  are  wonderful,  and  indeed  incredible,  it  is  very  difficult  to  find 
out  the  true  causes  and  grounds  of  this  superstition.  We  have  be- 
fore related,  that  the  priests  have  a  private  and  secret  account  of  these 
things,  in  the  history  of  the  gods;  but  the  common  people  give  these 
three  reasons  for  what  they  do.  The  first  of  which  is  altogether  fa- 
bulous, and  agrees  with  the  old  dotage :  for  they  say,  that  the  first 
gods  were  so  very  few,  and  men  so  many  above  them  in  number,  and 
so  wicked  and  impious,  that  they  were  too  weak  for  them,  and  there- 
fore transformed  themselves  into  beasts,  and  by  that  means  avoided 
their  assaults  and  cruelty.  But  afterwards,  they  say,  that  the  kings 
and  princes  of  the  earth,  (in  gratitude  to  them  that  were  the  first  au- 
thors of  their  well-being,  directed  how  carefully  those  creatures 
whose  shapes  they  had  assumed),  should  be  fed  while  they  were  alive, 
and  how  they  were  to  be  buried  when  they  were  dead.  Another  reason 
they  give  is  this:  tbeantieutJEgyptians,  they  say,  being  often  defeated 
by  the  neighbouring  uations,  by  reason  of  the  disorder  and  confusion 
that  was  among  them  m  dsawing  up  of  their  battalions,  found  out  at 
last  the  way  of  carrying  slaadards  or  ensigns  before  their  several  regi- 
ments; and  therefor9»  uicy  painted  the  images  of  these  beasts,  which 
DOW  they  adore,  and  fixed  them  at  the  head  of  a  spear,  which  the  offi- 
cers carried  before  thtm,  and  by  this  means,  every  man  perfectly 
knew  the  regiment  he  bekmged  unto;  and  being  tliat  by  the  obscrvar 
tion  of  this  good  order  and  discipline,  they  were  often  victorious, 
theyascrihed  their  drliverance  to  these  creatures;  and  tomaketo  them 
a  grateful  return,  it  was  ordained  for  a  law,  that  none  of  these  crea- 
tures, whose  representations  were  formerly  thus  carried,  stiould  be 
killed^  but  religiously  and  carefully  adored^  as  is  before  related.  TTba 


Chap.  FT.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  8/ 

third  reason  alledged  by  thenii  is  the  profit  and  advantage  these  crea- 
tures bring  to  the  common  support  and  maintenance  of  human 
life.    For  tlie  cow  is  both  serviceable  to  the  plow,  and  for  breediof 
oihers  for  the  same  use.    Th6  sheep  yeans  twice  a-year,  and  yields 
wool  for  clothing  and  ornament,  and  of  her  milk  and  cream  am 
made  large  and  pleasant  cheeses.    The  dog  is  useful  both  for  the 
guard  of  the  house,  and  the  pleasure  of  hunting  in  the  field,  and 
therefore  their  god  whom  they  call  Anubis,  they  represent  with  a 
dog's  head,  signifying  thereby,  that  a  dog  was  the  guard  both  to 
Osiris  and  Isis.    Others  say,  that  when  they  sought  for  Osiris,  dogs 
guided  Isis,  and  by  their  barking  and  yelling,  (as  kind  and  faithful 
associates  with  the  inquisitors),  drove  away  the  wild  beasts,  and 
diverted  others  that  were  in  their  way;  and  therefore  in  celebrating 
the  feast  of  Isis,  dogs  lead  the  way  in  the  procession.     Those  that 
firsc  instituted  this  custom,  signifying  thereby  the  antient  kindness 
and  good  service  of  this  creature.    The  cat  likewise  is  very  ser- 
viceable against  the  venemous  stings  of  serpents,  and  the  deadly 
bite  of  the  asp.    The  ichneumon  secretly  watches  where  the  cro- 
codile lays  her  eggs,  and  breaks  them  in  pieces,  and  that  he  does 
with  a  great  deal  of  eagerness,  by  natural  instinct,  without  any  ne- 
cessity for  his  own  support;  and  if  this  creature  were  not  thus  ser- 
viceable, crocodiles  would  abound  to  that  degree,  that  there  would  be 
no  sailing  in  the  Nile:  yea,  the  crocodiles  themselves  are  destroyed 
by  this  creature  in  a  wonderful  and  incredible  manner.     For  the 
ichneumon  rolls  himself  in  the  mud,  and  then  observing  the  cro- 
codile sleeping  upon  the  bank  of  the  river  with  his  mouth^wide  open, 
suddenly  whips  down  through  his  throat  into  his  very  bowels,  and 
presently  gnaws  his  way  through  his  belly,  and  so  escapes  himself, 
with  the  death  of  his  enemy.     Among  the  birds,  the  ibis  Is  ser- 
viceable for  the  destroying  of  snakes,  locusts,  and  the  palmer  worm. 
The  kite  is  an.enemy  to  the  scorpions,  horned  serpents,  and  other 
little  creatures,  tliat  both  bite  and  sting  men  to  death.     Others  say, 
that  this  bird  is  deified,  because  the  augurs  make  use  of  the  swift 
flight  of  these  birds  in  their  divinations.     Others  say,  that  in  antient 
time,  a  book  bound  about  with  a  scarlet  thread  (wherein  were  written 
all  the  rites  and  customs  of  worshipping  of  the  gods),  was  carried 
by  a  kite,  and  brought  to  the  priests  at  Thebes:  for  which  reason 
the  sacred  scribes  wore  a  red  cap,  with  a  kite's  feather  in  it. 

The  Thebans  worship  the  eagle,  because  she  seems  to  be  a 
royal  bird,  and  to  deserve  the  adoration  due  to  Jupiter  himself.  They 
say,  the  goat  was  accounted  amongst  the  number  of  the  gods,  for 
the  sake  of  his  genitals,  as  Priapus  is  honoured  among  the  Gre- 
eians:  for  this  creature  is  exceeding  lustful,  and  therefore  they  say 


M  DIODORVS  SICULUS.  Book  h 


thfit  member,  (the  instrument  of  generatioQ)^  is  to  be  highly  bo* 
nour^d,  as  that  from  which  all  living  creatares  derive  their  origioaL 
They  say  that  these  privy  parts  are  not  only  accounted  sacred  among  thtt 
Egyptians^but  anoong  many  others  are  religiously  adored  i»tbe  tkneof 
titeir  aolemn  rites  of  religious  worship,  as  those  parts  that  are  tbecames 
of  generation.  And  the  priests,  who  succeed  in  the  ofike^  d»» 
scended  to  them  from  their  fathers  in  Egypt,  are  first  initiated  into 
the  service  of  this  God.  For  this  reason  the  Pans  aod  Satyfs  are 
greatly  adored  among  them,  and  therefore  they  have  images  of  them 
set  up  in  their  temples,  with  their  privy  parts  erected  like  to  the 
goat,  which  they  say,  b  the  most  lustful  creature  in  the  world.  By 
this  representation  they  would  signify  their  gratitude  to  the  gods^ 
for  the  populousness  of  their  country. 

Tlie  sacred  bulls  Apis  and  Mnevis,  (they  say),  they  honour  as 
gods  by  the  command  of -Osiris,  both  for  their  usefulness  in  huo* 
bandry,  and  likewise  to  keep  up  an  honourable  and  lasting  nembry^ 
of  those  that  first  found  out  bread^corn  and  other  firuits  oi  the  earth* 

But  however,  it  is  lawful  to  sacrifice  red  oxen,  because  T^plMNi 
seemed  to  be  of  that  colour,  who  treacherously  murdered  Osiris^ 
and  was  himself  put  to  death  by  Isis,  for  the  murder  of  her  husbamt 
They  report  likewise,  that  antiently  men  tliat  bad  red  hair^  like 
Typhon,  were  sacrificed  by  the  kings  at  the  sepulchre  of  Osiris,  And 
indeed,  there  are  very  few  Egyptians  that  arc  red,  but  many  that  ase 
strangers :  and  hence  arose  the  fable  of  Busiris's  cruelty  towards  stran- 
gers amongst  the  Greeks,  not  that  there  ever  was  any  king  called  Basi« 
ris;  but  Osiris*s  sepulchre  was  so  called  in  the  Egyptian  langnagcw 
They  say,  they  pay  divine  honour  to  wolves,  because  they  oome  eo 
near  in  their  nature  to  dogs,  ibr  they  are  very  little  diffisreat^  and 
mutually  engender  and  bring  forth  whelps. 

They  give  likewise  another  reason  for  their  adoration^  but  maet 
fabulous  of  all  other;  for  they  say,  that  when  Isis  and  her  son  Oroa 
were  ready  to  join  battle  with  Typhon,. Osiris  came  up  from  the 
shades  below  in  the  form  of  a  wolf,  and  assisted  them;  and  therefore 
when  Typlion  was  killed,  the  conquerors  commanded  that  beast  tO 
be  worshipped,  because  the  day  was  won  presently  upon  his  ap^ 
earing. 

'  Some  affirm,  that  at  the  time  of  the  irruption  of  the  Ethiopiana 
into  Ei^ypt,  a  great  number  of  wolves  flocked  together^  and  dnyve 
the  invading  enemy  beyond  the  city  Elephantina,  and  therefore  that 
piovincc  is  called  I^ycopolitana;  and  for  these  reasons  came  these 
heusts  before  mentioned,  to  be  thus  adored  and  worshipped. 


Chap.  FIT.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  89 


« 


■r  ■■■' 


CHAP,  VII. 

IFAjf  the  Crocodile  is  worshipped.  Some  sorts  of  Herbs  and  Roots 
jnot  eaterin  Why  other  Creatures  are  worshipped.  The  man* 
ner  of  their  Burials.  T/ie  iMw-makers  in  Egypt.  Learned 
Men  of  Greece  made  JoUmtfi  irifcTEgypfi  as  Orpheus,  Homer, 
PlatOy  Solon,  Pythagoras,  8fc.  Several  Proofs  of  this,  as 
their  Religious  Rites  ^  Fabhs,  Sfc.  in  Greece,  of  Egyptian  Eay 
traction.     The  exquisite  Art  of  the  Stone-carvers  in  Egypt* 

NOW  It  remains,  that  we  speak  of  the  deifying  the  crocodile,  of 
which  many  have  inquired  what  might  be  the  reason ;  being  th^t 
these  beasts  devour  men,  and  yet  are  adored  as  gods,  who  in  the 
mean  time  are  pernicious  instruments  of  many  cruel  accidents.  To 
this  they  answer,  that  their  country  is  not  only  defended  by  the 
river,  but  much  more  by  the  crocodiles ;  and  therefore  the  (hicves 
out  of  Arabia  and  Africa,  being  afraid  of  the  great  number  of  these 
creatures,  dare  not  pass  over  the  river  Nile,  which  protection  they 
should  be  deprived  of,  if  tliese  beasts  should  be  fallen  upon  and 
utterly  destroyed  by  the  hunters* 

But  there  is  another  account  given  of  these  things:  for  one  of 
the  antient  kings,  called  Mcnas,  being  set  upon  and  pursued  by  his 
own  dogs,  was  forced  into  the  lake  of  Meris,  where  a  crocodile,  (a 
wonder  to  be  told),  took  him  up  and  carried  him  over  to  the  other 
side,  where,  in  gratitude  to  the  beast,  he  built  a  city,  and  called  it 
Crocodile;  and  commanded  crocodiles  to  be  adored  as  gods,  and  de- 
dicated the  lake  to  them  for  a  place  to  feed  and  breed  in.  Where  he 
built  a  sepulchre  for  himself  with  a  four-square  pyramid,  and  a  la- 
byrinth greatly  admired  by  every  body.  In  the  same  manner  they 
relate  stories  of  other  things,  which  would  be  too  tedious  here  to 
recite.  For  some  conceive  it  to  be  very  clear  and  evident,  (by  se- 
veral of  them  not  eating  many  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth),  that  gam 
mod  profit  by  sparing  has  infected  them  with  this  superstition  :  for 
some  never  taste  lentils,  nor  other  beans;  and  some  never  eat 
either  cheese,  or  onions,  or  such  like  food,  although  Egypt  abounds 
with  these  things.  Thereby  signifying,  tliat  all  should  learn  to  be 
temperate;  and  whatsoever  any  feed  upon,  they  should  not  givc^ 
themselves  to  gluttony.  But  others  give  another  reason;  for  thoy 
say  that  in  the  time  of  the  antrent  kings,  the  people  being  prone  to 
sedition,  and  plotting  to  rebel,  one  of  therr  wise  and  prudent  princca 
divided  Egypt  into  several  parts,  and  appointed  the  worship  of  soxo^ 

yoh,  1.     No.  33.  N 


90  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  JBooA  J^ 

^  I     "  ■■      ■     ■——^1    m«    ■    ■  Mil  I     1—^———  II      I     ■  — 

beast  or  other  in  every  part,  or  forbade  some  sort  of  food,  that  by 
that  means  every  one  adoring  their  own  creature,  and  slighting  that 
which  was  worshipped  in  another  province,  the  Egyptians  might 
never  agree  amongst  themselves.  And  this  is  evident  from  the 
effects;  for  when  one  country  despises  and  contemns  the  religious 
rites  and  customs  of  their  neighbours,  this  always  begets  heart  burn- 
ings among  them.  But  some  give  this  reason  for  deifying  of  these 
creatures :  they  say,  that  in  the  beginning,  men  that  were  of  a  fierce 
and  beastly  nature,  herded  together  and  devoured  one  another;  and 
being  in  perpetual  war  and  discord,  the  stronger  always  destroyed 
the  weaker.  In  process  of  time,  those  that  were  too  weak  for  the 
other,  (taught  at  length  by  experience),  got  in  bodies  together,  and 
had  the  representations  of  those  beasts,  (which  were  afterwards 
worshipped),  in  their  standards,  to  which  they  ran  together  when 
they  were  in  a  fright,  upon  every  occasion,  and  so  made  up  a  con- 
siderable force  against  them  that  attempted  to  assault  them.  This 
v^as  imitated  by  the  rest,  and  so  the  whole  multitude  got  into  a  body; 
and  hence  it  was  that  that  creature,  which  every  one  supposed  was 
the  cause  of  iiis  safety,  was  honoured  as  a  god,  as  justly  deserving 
that  .idoration.  And  therefore,  at  this  day,  the  people  of  Egypt  differ 
in  their  religion,  every  one  worshipping  that  beast  that  their  ances- 
tors did  in  the  beginning.  To  conclude,  they  say,  tliat  the  Egyp- 
tians, of  all  other  people,  are  the  most  grateful  for  favour^  done 
them,  judging  gratitude  to  be  the  safest  guard  of  their  lives,  inas- 
much as  it  is  evident,  that  all  are  most  ready  to  do  good  to  them, 
with  whom  are  laid  up  the  treasures  of  a  grateful  mind  to  make  a 
suitable  return.  And  for  these  reasons,  the  Egyptians  seem  to  ho* 
nour  and  adore  their  kings,  no  less  than  as  if  they  were  very  gods. 
For  they  hold  that  without  a  divine  providence,  they  never  could  be 
advanced  to  the  throne;  and  being  they  can  confer  the  greatest 
rewards  at  their  will  and  pleasure,  they  judge  them  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature.  Now,  though  we  have  said  perhaps  more  thao  is 
needful  of  their  sacred  creatures,  yet  with  this,  we  have  set  forth 
the  laws  of  the  Egyptians,  which  are  very  remarkable.  Bat,  when 
a  man  comes  to  understand  their  rites  and  ceremonies  in  burying 
their  dead,  he  will  be  struck  with  much  greater  admiration. 

For  after  the  death  of  any  of  them,  all  the  friends  and  kindred 
of  the  deceased  tluow  dirt  upon  their  heads,  and  run  about  through 
the  city,  mourning,  and  lamenting,  till  such  time  as  the  body  be 
interred,  and  abstain  from  baths,  wine,  and  all  pleasant  meats  in  the 
mean  time,  and  forbear  to  clothe  themselves  with  any  rich  attire. 
Tin  V  have  three  sorts  of  funerals:  the  stately  and  magnificent,  the 
moderate,  and  the  meanest.    In  the  first,  they  spend  a  taknt  of 


Chap.  VIL  DiODORUft  sicuLUS.  91 

silvor;  in  the  secoodi  twenty  miuas;  in  the  last,  they  are  at  very 
small  charges.    They  that  have  the  charge  of  wrapping  up,  and 
burying  the  body,  are  such  as  have  been  taught  the  art  by  their  an* 
cestors.    These  give  in  a  writing  to  the  family  of  every  thing  that  is 
to  be  laid  out  in  the  funeral,  and  inquire  of  them  after  what  manner 
they  would  have  the  body  interred.    When  every  thing  is  agreed 
upon,  they  take  up  the  body,  and  deliver  it  to  them  whose  office  it  is 
to  take  care  of  it.    Then  the  chief  among  them,  (who  is  called  the 
scribe),  having  the  body  laid  upon  the  ground,  marks  out  how  much 
of  the  left  side  towards  the  bowels  is  to  be  incised  and  opened,  upon 
which  the  Paraschistes,  (so  by  them  called),  with  an  £thiopian  stone, 
dissects  so  much  of  the  flesh,  as  by  the  law  is  justifiable,  and  having 
done  it,  he  forthwith  runs  away,  might  and  main,  and  all  there  pre- 
sent pursue  him  with  execrations,  and  pelt  him  with  stones,  as  if  he 
were  guiky  of  some  horrid  offence,  for  they  look  upon  him  as  an 
hateful  person,  who  wounds  and  offers  violence  to  the  body  in  that 
kind,  or  does  it  any  prejudice  whatsoever.    But  as  for  those  whom 
they  call  the  Taridieutie,  they  highly  honour  tliem,  for  they  are  the 
priest's  companions,  and,  as  sacred  persons,  are  admitted  into  the 
temple.    As  soon  as  they  come  to  the  dissected  body,  one  of  the 
TaricheutiB  thrusts  up  his  hand  through  the  wound,  into  the  breast 
of  the  dead,  and  draws  out  all  the  intestins,  but  the  reins  and  the 
heart.  -  Another  cleanses  all  the  bowels,  and  washes  them  in  Phoe- 
nician wine,  mixed  with  diverse  aromatic  spices.     Having  at  last 
washed  the  body,  they  first  anoint  it  all  over  with  the  oil  of  cedar 
and  other  precious  ointments  for  the  space  of  forty  days  togetlier; 
that  done,  they  rub  it  well  with  myrrh,   cinnamon,  and  such  like 
things,  not  only  apt  and  effectual  for  long  preservation,  but  for 
sweet-scenting  of  the  body  also,  and  so  deliver  it  to  the  kindred 
of  the  dead,  with  every  member  so  wiiole  and  entire,  that  no  ])art  of 
the  body  seems  to  be  altered,  till  it  come  to  tiie  very  hairs  of  the  eye- 
lids, and  the  eye- brows,  insomuch  as  the  beauty  and  shape  of 
the  £ice  seems  just  as  it  was  before.  «By  which  means,  many  of  the 
Egyptians  laying  up  the  bodies  of  their  ancestors  in  stately  monu- 
ments, perfectly  see  the  true  visage  and  countenance  of  those  that 
were  buried,  many  ages  before  they  themselves  were  burn.     So  that 
in  viewing  the  proportion  of  every  one  of  tlieir  bodies,  and  the  linea- 
ments of  their  faces,   they  take   exceeding  great  delight,  even   as 
much  as  if  they  were  still  living  among  them.     Moreover,  the  friends 
and  nearest  relations  of  the  dead  acquaint  the  judges  and  the  rest 
of  their  friends  with  the  time  prefixed  fur  the  funeral  of  bucli  a 
one  by  name,  declaring,  that  such  a  day  he  is  tu  pass  the  lake.     At 
wliich  time  forty  judges  appear   and  sit  together  in  a  seuncircle, 


9t  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book^* 


mam 


in  a  place  beyond  the  lake;  wliere  a  ship,  (before  provided  by  such 
as  have  the  care  of  the  business),  is  haled  up  to  the  shore,  governed 
by  a  pilot,  whom  the  Egyptians  call  Charon.  And  therefore  tbey 
say,  that  Orpbcds  seeing  this  ceremony  when  he  was  in  Egypt,  in- 
vented the  fable  of  hell,  partly  imitating  them  in  Egypt,  and  partly 
adding  something  of  his  own ;  of  which  we  shall  speak  particulftrly 
hereafter*  The  ship  being  now  in  the  lake,  every  one  is  at  liberty 
by  the  law,  to  accuse  the  dead  before  the  coffin  be  put  aboard ;  and 
if  any  accuser  appears,  and  makes  good  his  accusation,  that  he  lived 
an  ill  life,  then  the  judges  give  sentence,  and  the  body  is  debarred 
from  being  buried  after  the  usual  manner;  but  if  the  informer  be 
convicted  of  a  scandalous  and  malicious  accusation,  he  is  very  ae* 
vercly  punished.  If  no  informer  appear,  or  that  the  information 
prove  false,  all  the  kindred  of  the  deceased  leave  oiF  mourning,  and 
begin  to  set  forth  his  praises;  but  say  nothing  of  his  birth,  (as  ia 
the  custom  among  the  Greeks),  because  they  account  all  in  Egypt 
to  be  equally  noble.  But  they  recount  how  the  deceased  was  edu* 
cated  from  a  cliild,  his  breeding  till  he  came  to  man's  estate,  bia 
piety  towards  the  gods,  and  his  justice  towards  men,  his  chastity  and 
other  virtues,  wherein  he  excelled;  and  they  pray  and  call  upon  the 
infernal  deities  to  receive  the  deceased  into  the  society  of  the  just. 
The  common  people  take  it  from  the  other,  and  approve  of  all  that  is 
said  in  his.  praise  with  a  loud  shout,  and  set  forth  likewise  bis  virtoes 
with  the  highest  praises  and  strains  of  commendation,  as  he  that  is 
to  live  for  ever  with  the  just  in  the  kingdom  of  Jove.  Then  they 
(that  have  tombs  of  their  own)  inter  the  corpse  in  places  appointed  for 
tliat  purpose;  they  that  have  none  of  their  own,  build  a  smaH  apart- 
ment in  their  own  houses,  and  rean  up  the  coffin  to  the  sides  of  the 
strongest  wall  of  the  building.  Such  as  are  denied  common  burial, 
either  because  they  are  in  debt,  or  convicted  of  some  horrid  crime, 
they  bury  in  their  own  houses;  and  in  after  times  it  often  happens, 
that  some  of  their  kindred  growing  rich,  pay  off  the  debts  of 
the  deceased,  or  get  him  absolved,  and  then  bury  their  ancestor 
with  state  and  splendour.  For  amongst  the  Egyptians,  it  is  a  sacred 
constitution,  that  they  should  at  their  greatest  costs  honour  their 
parents  and  ancestors,  who  are  translated  to  an  eternal  habitation^ 
It  is  a  custom  likewise  among  them,  to  give  the  bodies  of  their 
fjarents  in  pawn  to  their  creditors,  and  they  that  do  not  presently  re* 
deem  them,  fall  under  the  greatest  disgrace  imaginable,  and  ate  de* 
uicd  burial  after  their  deaths.  One  may  justly  wonder  at  the  anthers 
of  this  excellent  constitution,  who  both  by  what  we  see  practised 
among  the  living,  and  by  the  decent  burial  of  the  dead,  did,  (as  mneh 
as  pobdibly  lay  within  the  power  of  men),  endeavour  to  promote  bo« 


C/a^.  Vn.  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  93 

Hcsty  and  faithful  dealing  one  with  another.    For  the  Greeks,  (a$  to 
what  concerned  the  rewards  of  the  just,  and  the  punishment  of  -the 
impious),  had  nothing  amongst  them  but  invented  fables,  and  poeti- 
cal fictions,  which  never  wrought  upon  men  for  the  amendment  of 
their  lives;  but  on  the  contrary,  were  despked  and  laughed  at  by  the 
lewder  sort.    But  among  the  Egyptians,  the  punishment  of  the  bad, 
and  the  rewards  of  the  good,  being  not  told  as  idle  tales,  but  every' 
day  seen  with  their  own  eyes,  all  sorts  were  warned  of  their  duties, 
and  by  this  means  was  wrought  and  continued  a  most  exact  reforma- 
tion of  manners  and  orderly  conversation  among  them*   .For  those 
certainly  are  the  best  laws  that  advance  virtue  and  honesty,  and  in- 
stnict  men  in  a  prudent  converse  in  the  world,  rather  than  those  tliat 
tend  only  to  the  heaping  up  of  wealth,  and  teach  men  to  be  rJclu 
•   And  now  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  speak  of  the  legislators  of  Egypt^ 
who  establlslied  such  laws  as  are  both  unusual  elsewhere,  and  admi- 
mUe  in  themselves.  After  the  antient  way  of  living  in  Egypt,  which 
was,  (according  to  their  own  stories),  in  the  reigns  of  the  gods  and 
demigods;  they  say  that  M^$xis>  ^  °^&°  of  ^Q  lieroic  spirit,  and  &- 
moos  in  his  generation  for  a^mmendable  life,  was  tlie  first  tliat  in- 
stituted written  laws,  feigning  tliat  he  received  them  from  Mercury, 
and  that  from  them  would  accrue  great  benefit  and  advantage  to  the 
public.    The  same  device  Minos  used  among  the  Grecians  in  Crete, 
andLycurgus  among  the  Lacediemonians :  the  first  pretending  he  had 
them  from  Jupiter,  and  the  other  from  Apollo.    This  contrivance,  it 
is  said,  iias  been  made  use  of  amongst  divers  other  nations,  who  Iiave 
reaped  much  advantage  by  observing  such  laws.     For  it  is  reported, 
|hat  among  the  Aramaspi,  Zathraustes  pretended  he  received  his  laws 
from  a  good  genius;  and  that  Zamolxis,  amongst  the  people  called 
the  Gretes,  patronised  his  by  Vesta;  and  among  the  Jews,  that  Moses 
alleged  the  god  called  Jao,  to  be  the  author  of  his.    And  this  tliey 
did  either  because  they  judged  such  an  invention  (which  brought 
about  so  much  good  to  mankind)  was  wonderfully  commendable, 
and  of  a  divine  stamp;  or  that  they  concluded  the  people  would  be 
more  observant,  out  of  a  reverend  regard  to  the  majesty  and  authority 
ef  those  who  were  said  to  be  the  law-makers.    The  second  law- 
maker of  Egypt,  they  say,  was  &isyches,  a  very  wise  and  prudent 
prinee,  who  added  to  the  former,  and  made  excellent  laws  also  re- 
lating to  the  honour  and  worship  of  the  gods.   He  is  reported  to  have 
found  out  geometry,  and  to  have  taught  the  art  of  astronomy.    The 
third  whom  they  cry  up,  is  Sesostris;  who  not  only  excelled  all  the 
kings  of  Egypt  in  his  warlike  achievements,  but  framed  laws  for 
military  discipline  among  the  Egyptians,  and  put  every  thing  in  due 
order  relating  to  military  aftuirs. 


94  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Book  h 

The  fourth  law-maker  they  say  was  king  Bocchoris^  m  wise  and 
prudent  man;  he  established  every  thing  that  concerned  the  kings, 
and  prescribed  exact  rules  and  laws  for  the  making  of  contracts.  He 
was  so  wise,  and  of  so  piercing  a  judgment  in  his  decisions,  that 
many  of  his  sentences,  for  their  excellency,  are  kept  in  memory  to 
this  very  day.  He  was,  they  say,  of  a  very  weak  constitution  of  bo^y 
and  extraordinarily  covetous. 

After  him,  king  Amasis  employed  himself  in  the  framing  of  laws, 
for  the  direction  of  the  Nomarchi,  in  their  several  governments, 
which  reduced  all  the  provinces  of  Egypt  into  due  order.  It  is  said, 
he  was  a  most  wise,  just,  and  good  man,  for  which  he  was  advanced 
to  the  throne  by  the  Egyptians,  though  he  was  not  of  the  bk)od- 
royal.  It  is  reported,  tlwt  when  the  Eleans  were  about  to  celebrate 
the  Olympic  games,  and  sent  their  ambassadors  to  him  to  advise  them 
how  they  might  manage  those  sports  most  justly,  he  answered, 
^^  That  the  way  to  do  that,  was  for  none  of  the  Eleans  to  be  parties 
**  in  the  contest/* 

Polycrates,  the  petty  king  of  Samos,  entered  into  a  league  of 
frien<khip  with  him :  but  when  he  heard  how  Polycrates  oppressed 
his  subjects,  and  injured  strangers  that  came  into  his  country,  he  sent 
ambassadors  to  him  to  advise  to  moderation ;  but  not  being  able  to 
persuade  him,  he  at  length  sent  a  letter  to  him,  to  let  him  know  be 
dissolved  and  renounced  the  league  that  was  betwixt  them ;  sayings 
'^  He  was  not  willing  forthwith  to  be  involved  in  grief  and  sorrow,  for 
^^  that  he  perfectly  foresaw  the  miserable  fall  that  would  presently 
"  overtake  one  who  governed  so  tyrannically."  He  was  greatly  ad- 
mired, they  say,  by  the  Grecians,  both  for  his  kind  and  gentle  disposin 
tion,  and  for  that  which  he  said  having  shortly  after  befel  Polycrates. 

Darius,  the  father  of  Xerxes,  is  said  to  be  the  sixth  who  made 
laws  for  the  government  of  the  Egyptians.  For,  with  hatred  and  ab- 
horrence of  the  impiety  of  Cambyses  his  predecessor,  for  his  pro- 
fening  the  temples  in  Egypt,  he  made  it  bis  business  to  approve  his 
reverend  regard  towards  the  gods,  and  his  kindness  towards  men;  for 
he  familiarly  conversed  with  the  Egyptian  priests,  and  learned  their 
theology,  and  acquainted  himself  with  the  things  and  transactions  re- 
corded in  their  sacred  registers,  whereby  he  came  to  understand  the 
heroic  spirit  of  the  antient  kings,  and  their  kindness  towards  their 
subjects,  which  caused  him  to  imitate  them  in  the  like;  and  upon  that 
account  he  was  so  highly  honoured  amongst  them,  that,  while  he  was 
alive,  he  gained  the  title  of  a  god,  which  none  of  the  other  kings  ever 
did;  and  when  he  was  dead,  the  people  allowed  him  all  those  an- 
tient honours  due  and  accustomed  to  be  done  to  the  former  kings  of 
Egypt  after  their  deaths.    And  these  arc  the  men^  (they  say),  wlio 


I 


OIU^.  FIL  DiODomus  siculus.  95 

Bsmaammmmmmm 


omnposed  the  laws  of  Egypt)  tkat  are  so  celebrated  aod  cried  up 
amongst  other  people.  But  in  after  timesi  (tb^y  say),  many  of  their 
excellent  laws  were  abrogaled  by  tiie  Macedonians,  who  came  to  be 
lords  and  kings  of  Egypt. 

Having  now  given  an  account  of  diese  things,  it  remains  we  should 
declare  how  many  wise  and  learned  men  among  the  Grecians  jour- 
nied  into  Egypt  in  antient  times,  to  understand  the  laws  and  scien* 
COS  of  die  country.  For  the  Egyptian  priests,  out  of  their  sacred 
records  Telate,  that  Orpheus,  Musaeus,  Melampodes,  Dssdalus,  Ho- 
mer the  poet,  Lycurgus  the  Spartan,  Solon  the  Athenian,  Plato  the 
philosopher,  Pythagoras  the  Samian,  Eudoxus  the  mathematician^ 
DdBOcritus  the  Abderite,  and  (Enopides  the  Chtan,  all  came  to 
them  in  Egypt,  and  they  shew  certain  marks  and  signs  of  all  these 
being  there.  Of  some,  by  their  pictures;  and  of  others,  by  the  names 
of  places,  or  pieces  of  work  that  Iiave|  been  called  after  their  names. 
And  they  bring  arguments  from  every  trade  that  is  used,  to  prove  that 
every  thing  wherein  the  Grecians  excel,  and  for  which  they  are  ad- 
mired, was  brought  over  from  Egjrpt  into  Greece.  For  they  say, 
that  Orpheus  brought  over  most  of  the  religious  rites  and  ceremonies^ 
both  as  to  what  concerns  the  celebration  of  the  Orgia,  and  relating  to 
his  wandering  up  and  down,  and  the  whole  entire  fable  of  hell;  for 
that  the  ceremonies  and  rites  of  Osiris  agree  in  every  thing  with 
those  of  Bacchus,  and  that  those  of  Isis  and  Ceres  are  one  and  the 
same,  differing  in  nothing  but  the  name.  And  whereas  he  introduces 
the  wicked  torinented  in  hell,  the  Elysian  fields  for  the  pious  and  just, 
and  the  fictitious  appearances  of  ghosts,  (commonly  noised  abroad), 
they  say  he  has  done  nothing  but  imitated  tlie  Egyptian  funerals.  And 
that  the  feigning  of  Mercury  to  be  the  conductor  of  souls,  was  de* 
rived  from  the  old  Egyptian  custom,  that  he  who  brought  back  the 
dead  body  of  Apis,  (when  he  came  to  the  place),  delivered  it  to  him 
who  represented  Cerberus,  which  being  communicated  by  Orpheus 
to  the  Greeks,  Homer,  in  imitation  of  him,  inserted  it  in  his  poem, 

Cjlleniiu  leads  t%  the  infernal  strand » 

The  hero's  ghost^  arm'd  with  bis  golden  wand. 

And  then  he  adds. 

They  reach  th'  effluxes  of  the  swelling  sea». 
Then  Leuca's  rock;  thence  on  thetr^course  they  keep 
To  the  son's  portals,  and  the  iand  of  sleep; 
When  straight  they  come  into  a  flow'ry  roead, 
Wherc^  after  death,  departed  souls  reside. 

The  name,  (they  say),  ofOceanus  here  mentioned,  is  attributed 
to  the  river  Nile,  for  so  the  Egyptians  in  their  own  language  call  it; 
by  the  sun's  portals  is  meant  Heliopolis;  the  meadow  feigned  to  be 


96  DIODORUS  81CULU9.  ^    Book  L 

the  habitation  of  the  dead,  (they  say),  is  the  place  bordering  upon 
the  lake  called  Acherusia,  near  to  Memphisi  surrounded  with  plea- 
sant ponds  and  meadows,  with  woods  and  grores  of  lotos  and  sweet 
canes;  and  that  therefore  he  feigned  those  places  to  be  inhabited  by 
the  dead,  because  that  many  of  the  Egyptian  funerals,  and  such  as 
were  the  most  considerable  were  there;  the  dead  bodies  being  car- 
ried over  the  river  and  the  lake  Acherusia,  and  there  interred.  And 
that  other  fictions  among  the  Grecians  concerning  hell  i^;ree  with 
those  things  that  are  done  in  Egypt  even  at  thb  day.  For  the  ship 
which  transports  the  dead  bodies  is  called  Baris,  and  that  for  the  fare 
an  halfpenny  is  paid  to  the  ferryman,  who  is  called  in  their  own  couft* 
try  language,  Charon.  They  say  likewise,  that  near  to  these  places 
is  the  temple  of  black  Hecates,  and  the  gates  of  Cocytus  and  Letbe> 
made  up  with  brazen  bars;  and  besides  these,  there  is  another  gate 
of  truth,  next  to  which  stands  the  headless  image  of  justice.  There 
are  many  others  of  these  Grecian  fictions  remaining  still  in  Egypt^ 
which  both  in  name  and  practice  continue  there  to  this  day.  For  in 
the  city  of  Acanthus,  beyond  the  Nile,  towards  Libya,  about  an  hun- 
dred and  twenty  furlongs  from  Memphb,  stands  an  hogshead  full  of 
holes,  into  which,  (ttiey  say),  three  hundred  priests  every  day  poor 
in  water  carried  out  of  the  riverNiie*  llie  fable  likewise  of  the  ass  is 
acted  at  a  solemn  festival  not  far  from  thence,  where  a  mania  twist* 
inga  long  rope,  and  many  that  follow  him  are  as  fast  undoing  what 
he  had  before  wrought. 

The  Egyptians  further  say,  that  Melampodes  brought  into  Greeed 
the  rites  and  solemnities  of  Bacchus,  and  the  fabulous  story  of  Sat- 
turn  and  the  Titans,  and  the  entire  history  of  the  sufferings  of  the 
gods  out  of  Egypt.  And  they  say  that  Dsedalus  imitated  the  labyrinth 
there,  which  remains  to  this  very  day,  built  at  first  by  Mendes,  or^ 
(as  some  report),  by  king  Marus,  noany  years  before  the  reign  of  Mi- 
nos. They  af&rm  likewise,  that  the  antient  statues  of  Egypt  are  of 
the  same  size  and  proportion  with  those  set  up  by  DsBdalus  in  Greece  | 
and  that  the  stately  porch  of  Vulcan  in  Memphis,  was  the  handy- 
work  of  Daedalus,  and  that  he  was  in  such  high  esteem  among  them, 
that  they  placed  his  statue  of  wood,  (made  by  his  own  hands),  in  the 
temple;  whom  at  length,  for  his  ingenuity  and  excellent  inventions^ 
they  honoured  as  a  god;  for  in  one  of  the  islands  belonging  to  Mem- 
phis, a  temple  dedicated  to  Dsfsdalus  is  resorted  unto  by  the  inhabi- 
tants at  this  day. 

That  Homer  came  into  Egypt,  amongst  other  arguments,  they  en- 
deavour to  prove  it  especially  by  the  potion  Helen  gave  Telemachtts, 
(in  the  story  of  Mcnelaus),tocause  him  to  forget  all  his  sorrows  past. 
For  the  poet  seems  to  liave  made  an  esuict  experiment  of  the  potion 


^hmfiTFIL  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  97 

NepeotheSf  which  he  says  Heleo  received  from  Polymnestes,  tlie 
wife  of  ThuQU««  and  brought  it  from  Thebes  in  Egypt;  and  indeed  in 
that  city,  even  at  this  day,  the  women  use  this  medicine  with  good 
success:  and  they  say,  that  in  antient  limes,  the  medicine  for  the 
cure  of  anger  and  sorrow,  was  only  to  be  found  among  the  Diospoii- 
tans;  Thebes  and  Diospolis  being  by  them  affirmed  to  be  one  and 
the  same  city.    And  that  Venus,  from  an  antient  tradition,  is  called 
by  tl)e  inhabitants.  Golden  Venus;  and  that  there  is  a  field  so  called, 
within  the  liberties  of  Memphis:  and  that   Hdmer  derived  from 
Egypt  his  story  of  the  embraces  between  Jupiter  and  Juno,  and  their 
travelling  into  Ethiopia;  because  the  Egyptians  every  year  carry  Jii« 
piter*s  tabernacle  over  the  river  into  Africa,  and  a  few  days  after 
bring  it  back  again,  as  if  the  god  had  returned  out  of  Ethiopia:  and 
that  the  fiction  of  the  nuptials  of  these  two  deities  was  taken  from  the 
solemnization  of  their  festivals,  at  which  time  both  their  tabernacles, 
adorned  with  all  sorts  of  flowers,  are  carried  by  the  priests  to  the  top 
of  a  mountain.     To  these  they  add,  that  Lycurgus,  Solon,  and  Plato, 
borrowed  from  Egypt  many  of  those  laws  which  they  established  in 
their  several  commonwealths.     And  that  Pythagoras  learnt  his  mys* 
terious  and  sacred  expressions,  the  art  of  geometry,  arithmetic,  and 
transmigration  of  souls,  in  £2gypt.    They  are  of  opinion  likewise, 
that  Democrates  was  five  years  in  Egypt,  and  in  that  time  much  im- 
proved himself  in  the  art  of  astrology.    So  they  say,  that  CEnopides 
by  his  familiar  converse  with  the  priests  and  astrologers,  amongst 
other  advantages,  gained  especially  the  knowledge  of  the  periodical 
motion  of  the  snn;  and  came  to  know  that  his  course  is  contrary  to 
that  of  the  stars:  and  that  Eudoxus  likewise,  by  studying  astrology  in 
Egypt,  left  many  useful  monuments  of  his  art  behind  him  in  Greece, 
for  which  his  name  was  famous.     Lastly,  they  say,  that  the  most  fa- 
mous statuaries  of  antient  time  lived  amongst  them  for  some  time,  as 
Telecles  and  Theodorus,  the  sons  of  Khfiecus,  who  made  the  statue 
of  Apollo  Pythius  in  Samos;  for  it  is  said,  that  one  half  of  this  sta- 
tue was  made  by  Telecles  in  Samos,  and  the  other  part  was  finished 
by  Theodorus  in  Ephesus;  and  that  there  was  such  an  exact  symme- 
try of  parts,  that  the  whole  seemed  to  be  the  work  of  one  and  the 
same  hand:  which  art,  (they  say),  the  Grecians  were  not  at  all  ac-» 
quainted  with,  but  that  it  was  in  frequent  use  among  the  Egyptians. 
For  with  them  the  exact  cut  of  a  statue  is  not  judged  of  by  the  eye 
and  faqcy,  (as  it  is  by  the  Greeks),  but  after  that  they  have  cut  out 
the  stone,  and  wrought  every  part  by  itself,  then  they  measure  the 
exact  pro|)prtJou  of  the  whole,  from  the  least  stone  to  the  greatest. 
For  they  divide  the  wholehody  into  twenty^one  parts,  and  one- fourth, 
which  makes  up  the  symmetry  and  entire  proportion.     Upon  whichj) 
Vo|^  J.  No.  33f  P 


98  moDORus  sicuLUs.  Book  I. 

after  the  workmen  have  agreed  among  themselves  as  to  the  bigness  of 
the  statue,  they  go  away,  and  every  one  of  them  carve  their  several 
parts  so  exact ly,  according  to  their  just  proportions,  that  the  singu- 
lar^kiil  ot  these,  workmen  is  wonderful  and  amazing.  And  thus  the 
statue  in  Samos,  which,  (according  to  the  art  and  skill  in  Egypt), 
was  cut  in  two  from  the  head  to  the  privities,  exactly  in  the  middle, 
yet  notwithstanding  was  equally  proportioned  in  every  part.  And 
they  say,  that  it  exactly  resembles  the  statues  in  Egypt,  having  its 
hands  stretched  out,  and  its  thighs  in  a  walking  posture.  But  we 
have  now  said  enough  of  such  things  as  are  remarkable  and  worthy  of 
memory  in  Egypt.  In  the  next  book,  (according  to  what  we  pur- 
posed in  the  beginning  of  this),  we  shall  give  an  account  of  things 
done  elsewhere,  and  of  other  fables  and  stories,  beginning  with 'the 
actions  of  the  Assyrians  in  Asia^ 


99 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  IL 


PREFACE. 

The  former  fiook^  (being  the  first  ot  the  whole),  contains  the 
ftfiairsof£gypt;  among  which  are  related  what  is  fkbulously  reported 
of  the  gods  of  Egypt,  and  what  strange  and  wonderful  accounts  are 
given  of  the  nature  of  the  Nile,  and  other  things  concerning  that  riyef. 
'  We  have  spoken  there  likewise  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  their  antient 
kings,  and  their  several  actions^  and  have  added  the  building  of  the 
pyramids,  reckoned  amongst  the  seven  wonders  of  the  world.  We 
bave  likewise  set  forth  their  laws  and  courts  of  justice,  and  tlie  strange 
adoration  of  beasts  in  Egypt.  Lastly,  the  manner  of  their  burials> 
and  the  Greeks  that  were  famous  for  learning,  and  travelled  into  Egypt, 
and  brought  over  from  thence  many  useful  and  profitable  arts  and 
sciences  into  Greece.  In  this  next  Book  we  shall  describe  the  things 
done  in  Asia  in  antient  times,  beginning  with  the  Assyrian  empire. 


rfMMMMaMMa^BHHa.rtak 


CHAP.  I. 

Ninus  the  first  King  of  Assyria;  his  acts;  he  invades  Baby- 
hniaj  Media,  and  overruns  several  other  countries,  Nineveh 
built  by  him;  the  description  of  it;  matries  Semiramis;  her 
descent.  Derceto,  the  Philistine's  Dagon,  His  expedition 
against  Bcu:tria;  he  dies.  Semiramis  builds  Babylon^  and  se* 
verat  strange  works  there;  as  q  passage  under  water ,  Jtipi^ 
ter*s  temple,  fyc.  Hanging  gardens  in  BaJjylon.  A  vast  stone 
cut  out.  The  strange  property  of  a  morass.  Her  several  caf- 
peditions.  Tlie  wonderful  lake  in  Ethiopia;  their  burials 
there.  Semiramis^s  expedition  into  India.  Her  mock  ele* 
phants.  Her  expedition  proves  fruitless.  S/ie  surrenders  her 
kingdom  to  Ninyas  her  son;  her  end* 

ASIA  was  antiently  governed  by  its  oWn  native  kingi,  of  wliom 
there  is  no  history  extant,  either  as  to  any  mem()rable  actions  they 
performed^  or  so  mach  u  to  their  namfi« 


100  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  Ih 

Ninus*  is  the  first  king  of  Assyria  that  is  recorded  in  history;  be 
performed  many  great  and  noble  actions;  of  whom  we  hare  designed 
to  set  forth  something  particularly. 

He  was  naturally  of  a  warlike  disposition^  and  very  ambitious  of 
honour  and  glory,  and  therefore  caused  the  strongest  of  his  young 
men  to  be  trained  up  in  martial  discipline,  and  by  longand  continual 
exercise  inured  them  readily  to  undergo  all  the  toils  and  hazards  of 
war. 

Having  therefore  raised  a  gallant  army,  he  made  a  league  with 
Arieus  king  of  Arabia,  that  was  at  that  time  full  of  strong  and  vali* 
ant  men.  For  that  nation  are  constant  lovers  of  liberty,  never  upon 
any  terms  admitting  of  any  foreign  prince:  and  therefore  neither  the 
Persian,  nor  the  Macedonian  kings  after  them^  (though  they  were 
most  powerful  in  arms),  were  ever  able  to  conquer  them.  For  Arabia 
being  partly  desert,  and  partly  parched  up  for  want  of  water,  (unless 
it  be  in. some  secret  wells  and  pits  known  only  to  the  inhabitants), 
cannot  be  subdued  by  any  foreign  force. 

Ninus  therefore,  the  Assyrian  king,  with  the  prince  of  Arabia,  his 
assistant,  with  a  numerous  army,  invaded  the  Babylonians  then  nest 
bordering  upon  him :  for  the  Babylon  that  is  now,  was  not  built  at 
that  time;  but  the  province  of  Babylon  had  in  it  then  many  other 
considerable  cities^  whose  inhabitants  he  easily  subdued,  (being  rude 
and  uncxpcrt  in  matters  of  war),  and  imposed  upon  them  a  yearly 
tribute;  but  carried  away  the  king  with  all  his  children  prisoners, 
and  soon  after  put  them  to  death.  Afterwards  he  entered  Armenia 
with  a  great  army,  and  having  overthrown  some  cities,  he  struck  ter- 
ror into  the  rest«  and  thereupon  their  king  Barzancs,  seeing  himself 
unable  to  deal  with  him,  met  him  with  many  rich  presents,  and  sub- 
mitted himself;  whom  Ninus,  out  of  his  generous  disposition,  cour- 
teously received,  and  gave  him  the  kingdom  of  Armenia,  upon  con- 
dition he  should  be  his  friend  for  the  future,  and  supply  him  with 
men  and  provision  for  his  wars,  as  he  should  have  occasion. 

Being  thus  strengthened,  he  invaded  Media,  whose  king  Pharnus 
coming  out  against  him  with  a  mighty  army,  was  utterly  routed,  and 
lost  most  of  his  men,  and  was  taken  prisoner  with  his  wife  and  seven 
children,  and  afterwards  crucified. 

Ninus  being  thus  successful  and  prosperous,  his  ambition  rose  the 
higher,  and  his  desire  most  ardent  to  conquer  all  in  Asia,  which  lay 
between  Tanais  and  the.Nile;  (so  far  does  prosperity  and  success  in 
getting  much,  inflame  the  desire  to  grin  and  compass  more).     la 

*  Ninusj  Ann.  Mud.  2757.  Usher's  Ann.  Time  of  Deborah;  but  generally  Cbr»» 
nclogcrs  make  him  farmorc  anlieot;  Ann.  Mud.  1^000,  Aut.  («br.  h>jO,  aboat  tbe  liaM 
of  Abraham*!  birth. 


Chap.  t.  DIODOHUS  SICULUS.  lOl 

order  hereunto,  he  made  one  of  his  friends  governor  of  the  province 
of  Media,  and  he  himself  in  the  mean  time  marched  against  the  other 
provitices  of  Asia,  and  subdued  them  all  io  seventeen  years  time,  ex* 
cept  the  Indians  and  Bactrians.  But  no  writer  has  given  any  ac« 
coant  of  the  several  battles  he  fough^  nor  of  tlie  number  of  those 
nations  he  conquered;  and  therefore  following  Ctesias  the  Cnidian, 
we  shall  only  briefly  run  over  the  most  famous  and  considerable 
countries*  He  over-ran  all  the  countries  bordering  upon  the  sea^ 
together  with  the  adjoining  continent,  as  Egypt  and  Phoenicia, 
Ccelosyria,  Cilicia,  Pamphylia,  Lycia,  Caria,  Plirygia,  Mysia  and 
Lydia;  the  province  of  Troas  and  Phrygia  upon  the  Hellespont;  to- 
gether with  Propontis,  Bithynia,  Cappadocia,  and  the  barliarous 
nations  adjoining  upon  Pontus,  as  far  as  to  Tanais;  he  gained  like- 
wise the  country  of  the  Cadusians,  Tarpyrians,  Hyrcanians,  Da- 
cians,  Derbians,  Carmanians,  Coroneans,  Borchanians,  and  Par- 
thians.  He  pierced  likewise  into  Persia,  tlic  provinces  of  Susiana, 
and  tlut  called  Caspiana,  through  those  narrow  straits,  which,  from 
thence  are  called  the  Caspian  gates.  He  subdued  likewise  many  other 
kss  considerable  nations,  which  would  be  too  tedious  here  to  re« 
count*  After  much  toil  and  labour  in  vain,  because  of  the  difficulty 
of  the  passes,  and  the  multitude  of  those  warlike  inhabitants,  he  was 
forced  to  put  offhis  war  against  the  Bactrians  to  another  opportunity. 

Having  marched  back  with  his  army  into  Syria,  he  marlced  out  a 
place  for  the  building  of  a  stately  city:  for,  inasmucli  as  he  had  sur- 
passed all  his  ancestors  in  the  glory  and  success  of  his  arms,  he  wa5i 
resolved  to  build  one  of  that  state  and  grandeur,  as  should  not  only 
be  the  greatest  then  in  the  world,  but  such  as  none  that  ever  should 
come  after  him,  should  be  able  easily  to  exceed* 

The  king  of  Arabia,  he  sent  back  with  his  army  into  his  own 
country,  with  many  rich  spoils,  and  noble  gifts.  And  he  himself 
having  got  a  great  number  of  his  forces  together,  and  provided 
money  and  treasure,  and  other  things  necessary  for  the  purpose, 
built  a  city  near  the  river  Euphrates,  very  famous  for  its  walls  and 
fortifications;  of  a  long  form ;  for  on  both  sides  it  ran  out  in  length 
above  an  hundred  and  fifty  furlongs;  but  the  two  lesser  angels  were 
only  ninety  furlongs  a-piece;  so  that  the  circumference  of  the  whole 
was  four  hundred  and  fourscore  furlongs.  And  the  founder  was  not 
herein  deceived^  for  none  ever  after  built  the  like,  either  as  to  the 
largeness  of  its  circumference,  or  the  stateliness  of  its  walls.  For 
the  wall  was  an  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  so  broad  as  three  cha- 
riots might  be  driven  together  upon  it  a-breast :  there  were  fifteen 
hundred  turrets  upon  the  walls,  each  of  them  two  hundred  feet  hi^^h. 
He  appointed  the  city  to  be  inhabited  chiefly  by  the  richesr  Assy- 


102  DIODORUS  SICULUS«  Book  II4 


rians,  and  gave  liberty  to  people  of  any  other  nation,  (to  as  many 
as  would),  to  dwell  there,  and  allowed  to  the  citizens  a  large  terri*- 
tory  next  adjoining  to  them^  and  called  the  city  after  his  own  name 
Ninus,  or  Nineveh. 

When  he  had  finished  his  work  here,  he  marched  with  an  armjr 
against  the  Bactrians,  where  he  married  Semiramis;  who  being  so 
famous  above  any  of  her  sex,  (as  in  history  it  is  related),  we  cannot 
but  say  something  of  her  here  in  this  place,  being  one  advanced 
from  so  low  a  fortune,  to  such  a  state  and  degree  of  honour  and 
worldly  glory. 

There  is  a  city  in  Syria,  called  Ascalon,  near  which  is  a  deep  lake 
abounding  with  fish,  where  not  far  o£f  stands  a  temple  dedicated  to 
a  famous  goddess  called  by  the  Syrians  Derceto*.  She  represents  a 
woman  in  her  face,  and  a  fish  in  all  other  parts  of  her  body,  upoQ 
the  account  following,  as  the  most  judicious  among  the  inhabitants 
report;  for  they  say,  that  Venus,  being  angry  at  this  goddess,  caused 
her  to  fall  into  a  vehement  pang  of  love  with  a  beautiful  young 
man,  who  was  among  others  sacrificing  to  her,  and  was  got  with 
child  by  him,  and  brought  to  bed  of  a  daughter;  and  being  ashamed 
afterwards  of  what  she  had  done,  she  killed  the  young  man,  and  ex- 
posed the  child  among  rocks  in  the  desert,  and,  through  sorrow  and 
shame  cast  herself  into  the  lake,  and  was  afterwards  transfcnrmed 
into  a  fish;  whence  it  came  to  pass,  that  at  this  very  day  the  Syrians 
eat  no  fish,  but  adore  them  as  gods.  They  say  that  the  infant  that 
was  exposed,  was  both  preserved  and  nourished  by  a  most  wonderful 
providence,  by  the  means  of  a  great  flock  of  pigeons  that  nestled 
near  to  the  place  where  the  child  lay:  for  with  their  wings  they 
cherished  it,  and  kept  it  warm ;  and  observing  where  the  herdsmen 
and  other  shepherds  left  their  milk  in  the  neighbouring  cottages, 
took  it  up  in  their  bills,  and  as  so  many  nurses  thrust  their  beaks 
between  the  infant's  lips,  and  so  instilled  the  milk :  and  when  the 
child  was  a  year  old,  and  stood  in  need  of  stronger  nourishment, 
the  pigeons  fed  it  with  pieces  of  cheese  which  they  picked  out  ftom 
the  rest:  when  the  shepherds  returned,  and  found  their  cheeses 
picked  round,  they  wondered,  (at  first),  at  the  thing;  but  observing 
afterwards,  how  it  came  to  pass,  they  not  only  found  out  the  caiiae, 
but  likewise  a  very  beautiful  child,  which  they  forthwith  carried 
away  to  their  cottages,  and  made  a  present  of  it  to  t\^  king's  super* 
Intendent  of  his  flocks  and  herds,  (whose  name  was  Simma),  who, 
(having  no  children  of  his  own),  carefully  bred  up  the  young  lady 
as  if  she  had  been  his  own  daughter,  and  called  her  Semiramis,  a 
denomination  in  the  Syrian  language  derived  from  pigeons,  which 

*  Thit  wtf  tbt  PluliitiAe'i  Dagoo.— 0?id,  Met.  Uk  4. 


Chap.  L  DIODORUS  sicutus.  103 


the  Syrians  ever  after  adored  for  goddesses.    And  these  are  the 
stories  told  of  Semiramis. 

Being  now  grown  up,  and  exceeding  all  others  of  her  sex  for  the 
charnis  of  her  beauty,  one  of  the  king's  great  officers  called  Menon, 
was  sent  to  take  an  account  of  the  king's  herds  and  flocks:  this 
man  was  lord  president  of  the  king's  council,  and  chief  governor  of 
Syria,  and  lodging  upon  this  occasion  at  Simma's  house,  at  the  sight 
of  Semiramis,  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  with  much  entreaty  obtained 
her  from  Simma,  and  carried  her  away  with  him  to  Nineveh,  where 
he  married  her,  and  had  by  her  two  sons,  Hypates  and  Hydaspeas 
and  being  a  Woman  of  admirable  parts  as  well  as  beauty,  her  has«> 
band  was  altogether  at  her  devotion,  and  never  would  do  any  thing 
without  her  advice,  which  was  ever  successful. 

About  this  time  Ninus  having  finished  his  city,  (called  after  his 
own  name),  prepared  for  his  expedition  against  the  Bactrians;  and 
having  had  experience  of  the  greatness  of  their  forces,  the  .valour  of 
their  soldiers,  and  the  difficulties  of  passing  into  their  country,  be 
raised  an  army  of  the  choicest  men  he  could  pick  out  from  all  parts 
of  his  dominions;  for  because  he  was  baffled  in  his  former  expedi- 
tion, he  was  resolved  to  invade  Bactria  with  a  far  stronger  army  than 
he  did  before.  Bringing  therefore  his  whole  army  together  at  a  ge- 
neral rendesvous,  there  were  numbered,  (as  Ctesias  writes),  seven- 
teen hundred  thousand  foot,  above  two  hundred  and  ten  thousand 
horse,  and  no  fewer  than  ten  thousand  and  six  hundred  hooked  cha- 
riots.  This  number  at  the  first  view  seems  to  be  very  incredible; 
but  to  such  as  seriously  consider  the  largeness  and  populousness  of 
Asia,  it  cannot  be  judged  impossible.  For  if  any,  (not  to  say  any  thing 
of  the  eight  hundred  thousand  men  that  Darius  had  with  him  in  his 
expedition  against  the  Scythians,  and  the  innumerable  army  Xerxes 
brought  over  with  him  into  Greece),  will  but  take  notice  of  things 
done  lately,  even  as  of  yesterday,  he  will  more  easily  credit  what 
we  now  say.  For  in  Sicily,  Dionysius  led  only  out  of  that  one  city 
of  Syracuse,  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  twelve  thou- 
sand horse;  and  launched  out  of  one  port,  a  navy  of  four  hundred 
«iil,  of  which  some  were  of  three  tiers  of  oars,  and  others  of  five: 
and  the  Romans,  a  little  before  the  times  of  Hannibal,  raised  in 
Italy,  of  their  own  citizens  and  confederates,  an  army  little  less 
than  a  million  of  fighting  men;  and  yet  all  Italy  b  not  to  be  com- 
pared with  one  province  of  Asia  for  number  of  men.  But  this  may 
sufficiently  convince  them  who  compute  the  antient  populousness  of 
the  countries  by  the  present  depopulations  of  the  cities  at  this  day. 

Ninus  therefore  marching  with  these  forces  against  the  Bactrians, 
^vided  his  army  into  two  bodies,  because  of  the  straitness  and  diffi- 


104  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  IL 


calty  of  the  passages.  There  are  in  Bactria  many  large  and  popu- 
lous  cities^  hut  one  is  more  especially  faniousj  called  Bactria,  in 
which  the  king's  palace,  for  greatness  and  magnificenccj  and  the 
citadel  for  strength,  far  excel  all  the  rest. 

Oxyartes  reigned  there  at  this  timei  who  caused  all  that  wereable^ 
to  bear  arms,  and  mustered  an  army  of  four  hundred  thousand  meo. 
With  these  he  met    the    enemy  at    the  straits  entering  into  his 
country,  where  he  suffered  Ninus  to  enter  with  part  of  his  army. 
When  he  saw  a  competent  number  entered,  he  fell  upon  them  in  the 
open  plain,  and  fought  theni  with  that  resolution,  that  the  Bactriaos 
put  the  Assyrians  to  flight,  and  punning  them  to  the  next  mountains^ 
killed  a  hundred  thousand  of  their  enemies;  but  after  the  whole  army 
entered,  the  Bactrians  were  overpowered  by  numbers,  and  were  bro- 
ken, and  all  fled  to  their  several  cities,  in  order  to  defend  every  one 
his  own  country.     Ninus  easily  subdued  all  the  rest  of  the  forts  and 
castles;  but  Bactria  itself  was  so  strong  and  well  provided,  that  he 
could  not  force  it;  which  occasioned  a  long  and  tedious  siege,  so  thai 
the  husband  of  Scmiramis,  (who  was  there  in  the  king's  camp),  being 
love-sick,  impatient  of  being  any  longer  without  his  wife,  sent  for 
ber,  who  being  both  discreet  aed  courageous,  and  endowed  with  other 
noble  qualifications,  readily  embraced  the  opportunity  of  shewing  to 
the  world  her  own  natural  valour  and  resolution;  and  that  she  might 
with  more  safety  perform  so  long  a  journey,  she  put  on  such  a  gar- 
ment as  whereby  she  could  not  be  discerned  whether  she  were  a  man 
or  a  woman ;  and  so  made,  that  by  it  she  both  preserved  her  beauty 
from  being  scorched  by  the  heat  in  her  journey,  and  likewise  was 
thereby  more  nimble  and  ready  for  any  business  she  jtleased  to  un* 
dertake,  being  of  herself  a  youthful  and  sprightly  lady;  and  this  sort 
of  garment  was  in  so  high  esteem,  tliat  the  Modes  afterwards^  when 
they  came  to  be  lords  of  Asia,  wore  Seniiramis's  gown,  and  the  Per« 
sians  likewise  after  them. 

As  soon  as  she  came  to  Bactria,  and  observed  the  manner  of  the 
siege,  how  assaults  were  made  only  in  open  and  plain  places  most 
likely  to  be  entered,  and  that  none  dared  to  approach  the  citadel,  be- 
cause of  its  natural  strength  and  fortification,  and  that  they  withia 
took  more  care  to  defend  the  lower  and  weaker  parts  of  the  walls^ 
than  the  castle,  where  they  neglected  their  guards,  she  took  some 
with  her  that  were  skilful  in  climbing  up  the  rocks,  and  with  them» 
with  much  toil,  passed  over  a  deep  trench,  and  possessed  herself  of 
part  of  the  castle;  whereupon  she  gave  a  signal  to  them  that  were  asr 
saulting  the  wall  upon  the  plain.  Then  they  that  were  within  the  city^ 
being  suddenly  struck  with  a  panic  fear  at  the  taking  of  the  castle^ 
in  desperation  of  making  any  further  defence,  forsook  the  walls. 


Chc^.  L  DIODORUS  SICULU8*  105 

aaasssggsgsaggBaeggg"    i  sasssssssssssss^ssi  '■'■■■■  ,  i      ,s 

The  city  being  taken  in  this  manner^  the  king  greatly  admired  the 
valour  of  the  woman,  and  bountifully  rewarded  her,  and  was  presently 
uo  passionately  affected  at  the  sight  of  her  beauty^  that  he  used  all  the 
arguments  imaginable  to  persuade  her  husband  to  bestow  his  wife 
upon  himj  promising  him  as  a  reward  of  his  kindness^  to  give  him 
his  daughter  Sosana  in  marriage:  but  he  absolutely  refused;  upon 
which  the  king  threatened  him,  that  if  he  would  not  consent^  he 
would  pluck  out  his  eyes. 

Menon  hereupon  out  of  fear  of  the  king's  threats,  and  over- 
powered with  the  love  of  bis  wife,  fell  into  a  distracted  rage  and 
madness,  and  forthwith  hanged  himself.  And  this  was  the  occasiou 
of  the  advancement  of  Semiramis  to  the  regal  state  and  dignity. 

Ninus  having  now  possessed  himself  of  all  the  treasures  of  Bactria^ 
(where  was  abundance  of  gold  and  silver),  and  settled  his  affairs 
throughout  the  whole  province  of  Bactria,  retui;oed  with  his  army  to 
his  own  country. 

Afterwards  he  had  a  son  by  Semiramis,  called  Ninyas,  and  died, 
leaving  hb  wife  queen  regent.  She  buried  her  husband  Ninus  ia 
the  royal  palace,  and  raised  over  him  a  mount  of  earth  of  a  wonderful 
bigness,  being  nine  furlongs  in  height,  and  ten  in  breadth,  as  Ctesiaa 
says:  so  that  the  city  standing  in  a  plain  near  to  the  river  Euphrates^ 
the  mount  (many  furlongs  off)  looks  like  a  stately  citadel.  And  it  ia 
said,  that  it  continues  to  tliis  day,  though  Nineveh  was  destroyed  by 
the  Medes  when  they  ruined  the  Assyrian  empire. 

Semiramis^  was  naturally  of  an  high  aspiring  spirit,  ambitious  to 
excel  all  her  predecessors  in  glorious  actions,  and  therefore  employed 
all  her  thoughts  about  the  building  of  a  city  in  the  province  of 
Babylou;  and  to  this  end  liaving  provided  architects,  artists,  and  all 
otlicr  necessaries  for  the  work,  slie  got  together  two  millions  of  men 
out  of  all  parts  of  the  empire,  to  be  employed  in  the  building  of  the 
city.  It  was  so  built  as  that  the  river  Euphrates  ran  through 
the  middle  of  it ;  and  she  compassed  it  round  with  a  wall  of  three 
hundred  and  sixty  furlongs  in  circuit,  and  adorned  with  many  stately 
turrets;  and  such  was  the  state  and  grandeur  of  the  work,  that  the 
walls  were  pf  timt  breadth,  us  that  six  chariots  abreast  might  be 
driven  together  upon  them.  Their  height  was  such  as  exceeded  all 
men's  belief  that  heard  of  it,  (as  Ctesias  the  Cnidian  relates).  But 
Clitarchus,  and  those  who  afterwards  went  over  with  Alexander  into 
Asia,  have  written,  that  the  walls  were  in  circuit  three  hundred  and 
sixty-five  furlongs;  the  queen  making  them  of  that  compass,  to  the 
end  that  the  furlongs  should  be  as  many  in  number  as  the  days  of 

*  Scffilrainif  icignedy  Ann.  Mund.  m06,  Ant.  Cbr.  9944.     Fetftviut  Myi,  Abrahaia 
w^s  born  in  the  24th  yeu  o(  her  reigu,  lib.  1,  c.  3. 

Vol,  1.  No,  33,  p 


•0 


106  DIODORUS  SICULUd.  '  Book  It. 


the  year:  they  were  of  brick  cemented  with  brimstone;  in  height^  as 
Ctesias  says,  fifty  orgyas;  but  as  some  of  the  later  writers  report^  but 
fifty  cubits  only,  and  that  the  breadth  was  but  a  little  more  than  what 
would  allow  two  chariots  to  be  driren  in  front.  There  were  two 
hundred  and  fifty  turrets,  in  height  and  thickness  proportionable  to 
the  largeness  of  the  wall.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  there 
were  so  few  towers  upon  a  wall  of  so  great  a  circuit,  being  that  in 
many  places  round  the  city,  there  were  deep  morasses;  so  that  it  was 
judged  to  no  purpose  to  raise  turrets  there,  where  they  were  so 
naturally  fortified :  between  the  wall  and  the  houses,  there  was  a 
space  left  around  the  city  of  two  hundred  feet. 

That  the  work  might  be  the  more  speedily  despatched,  to  each  of 
her  friends  was  allotted  a  furlong,  with  an  allowance  of  all  expenses 
necessary  for  their  several  parts,  and  commanded  all  should  be 
finished  in  a  year's  tkne;  which  being  diligently  perfected  with  the 
queen's  approbation,  she  then  made  a  bridge  over  the  narrowest  part  of 
'^  the  river,  five  furlongs  in  length,  laying  the  supports  and  pillars 
of  the  arches  with  great  art  and  skill  at  the  bottom  of  the  water, 
twelve  feet  distance  from  each  other.  That  the  stones  might  be 
the  more  firmly  joined,  they  were  bound  together  with  hooks  of  iroo, 
and  the  joints  filled  up  with  melted  lead.  And  before  the  pillars 
she  made  and  placed  defences,  with  sharp  pointed  angles,  to  receive 
the  water  before  it  beat  upon  the  flat  sides  of  the  pillars,  which 
caused  the  course  of  the  water  to  run  round  by  degrees  gently  and 
moderately,  as  far  as  to  the  broad  sides  of  the  pillars,  so  that  the  sharp 
points  of  the  angles  cut  the  stream,  and  gave  a  check  to  its  violence, 
and  the  roundness  of  them  by  little  and  little  giving  way,  abated  the 
force  of  the  current.  This  bridge  was  floored  with  great  joists  and 
planks  of  cedar,  cypress,  and  palm  trees,  and  was  thirty  feet  in 
breadth,  and  for  art  and  curiosity,  yielded  to  none  of  the  works  of 
Semiramis.  On  either  side  of  the  river  she  raised  a  bank,  as  broad 
as  the  wall,  and  with  great  cost  drew  it  out  in  length  an  hundred 
furlongs.  She  built  likewise  two  palaces  at  each  end  of  the  bri4ge 
upon  the  bank  of  the  river,  whence  she  might  have  a  prospect  over 
the  whole  city,  and  make  her  passage  as  by  kejrs  to  the  most  conve- 
nient places  in  it,  as  she  had  occasion.  And  whereas  the  Euphrates 
runs  through  the  middle  of  Babylon,  making  its  course  to  the  soath, 
the  palaces  lie  the  one  on  the  east,  and  the  other  on  the  west  side  of 
the  river ;  both  built  at  exceeding  costs  and  expense.  For  that  on  the 
west  had  an  high  and  stately  wall,  made  of  well  burnt  bricks,  sixty 
furlongs  in  compass;  within  this  was  drawn  another  of  a  round 
circumference,  upon  which  were  pourtrayed  in  the  bricks  before  they 
were  burnt,  all  sorts  of  living  creatures,  as  if  it  were  to  the  life,  laid 


Cho^  1.  DIODORUS  9ICULU8.  107 

with  great  art  io  curious  colours.    This  wall  was  in  circuit  forty 
furlongs^  three  hundred  bricks  tbick^  and  in  height  (as  Ctesias  says) 
a  hundred  yards,  upon  which  were  turrets  a  hundred  and  forty  yards 
Ugh.    The  third  and  most  inward  wall,  immediately  surrounded  the 
pakce^  thirty  furlongs  in  compass,  and  far  surmounted  the  middle 
wall»  both  in  height  and  thickness;  and  on  thb  wall  and  the  towers 
were  represented  the  shapes  of  all  sorts  of  living  creatures,  artificially 
expressed  in  most  lively  colours.    Especially  was  represented  a 
general  bunting  of  all  sorts  of  wild  beasts,  each  four  cubits  high  and 
upwards;  amongst  these  was  to  be  seen  Semirambon  horseback^ 
striking  a  leopard  through  with  a  dart,  and  next  to  her,  her  husband 
Ninus  in  close  fight  with  a  lion,  piercing  him  with  his  lance.    To 
this  palace  she  built  likewise  three  gates,  under  which  were  apart- 
ments of  brass  for  entertainments,  into  which  passages  were  opened 
by  a  certain  engine.    Tliis  palace  far  excelled  that  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river,  both  in  greatness  and  adornments.    For  the  outermost  wall 
of  that  (made  of  well  burnt  brick)  was  but  thirty  furlongs  in  compass. 
Instead  of  the  curious  portraiture  of  beasts,  there  were  the  brazen 
statues  of  Ninus  and  Semiramis,  the  great  ofiicers,  and  of  Jupiter^ 
whom  the  Babylonians  call  Belus;  and  likewise  armies  drawn  up  in 
battalia^  and  divers  sorts  of  hunting  were  there  represented,  to  the 
great  diversion  and  pleasure  of  the  beholders.    After  all  these  in  a 
low  ground  in  Babylon,  she  sunk  a  place  for  a  pond,  four-square, 
erery  square  being  three  hundred  furlongs  in  length,  lined  with 
brick,  and  cemented  with  brimstone,  and  the  whole  6ve-and-thirty 
feet  in  depth :  into  this  having  first  turned  the  river,  she  then  made 
a  passage  in  form  of  a  vault,  from  one  palace  to  another,  whose 
arches  were  built  of  firm  and  strong  brick,  and  plaistered  all  over 
on  both  sides  with  bitumen,  four  cubits  thick.    The  walls  of  this 
vault  were  twenty  bricks  in  thickness,  and  twelve  feet  high,  beside 
and  above  the  arches ;  and  the  breadth  was  fifteen  feet.     This  piece 
of  work  being  finished  in  two  hundred  and  sixty  days,  the  river  was 
turned  into  its  antient  channel  again,  so  that  the  riv<^r'  flowing  over 
the  whole  work,  Semiramis  could  go  from  one  palace  to  the  other, 
without  passing  over  the  river.     She  made  likewise  two  brazen  gates 
at  either  end  of  the  vault,  which  continued  to  the  time  of  the  Persian 
empire.    In  the  middle  of  the  city,  she  built  a  temple  to  Jupiter, 
whom  the  Babylonians  call  Belus,  (as  we  have  before  said),  of  which 
since  writers  difier  amongst  themselves,  and  the  work  is  now  wholly 
decayed  through  length  of  time,  there  is  nothing;  that  can  with  cer^ 
tainty  be  related  concerning  it:  yet  it  is  apparent,  it  was  of  an  exceeding 
great  height,  and  that  by  the  advantage  of  it,  the  Clialdean  astrologers 
exactly  observed  the  setting  and  rising  of  the  stars.    The  whole  was 


108  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Booh  It. 

■'     "  •■  ■  I  gggggg 

built  of  brick,  cemented  with  brimstone,  with  great  art  and  cost. 
Upon  the  top  she  placed  three  statues  of  beaten  gold  of  Jupiter, 
Juno,  and  Rhea.  That  of  Jupiter  stood  upright  in  the  posture  as  if 
he  were  walking;  he  was  forty  feet  in  height,  and  weighed  a  thousand 
Babylonish  talents.  The  statue  of  Rhea  was  of  the  same  weighty 
sitting  on  a  golden  throne,  having  two  lions  standing  on  either  side, 
one  at  her  knees;  and  near  to  them  two  exceeding  great  serpents 
of  silver,  weighing  thirty  talents  each.  Here  likewise  the  image  of 
Juno  stood  upright,  and  weighed  eight  hundred  talents,  grasping  a 
serpent  by  the  head  in  her  right  hand,  and  holding  a  sceptre  adorned 
with  precious  stones  in  her  left.  For  all  these  deities  there  was 
placed  a  common  table  made  of  beaten  gold,  forty  feet  long,  and 
fifteen  broad,  weighing  five  hundred  talents;  upon  which  stood  two 
cups,  weighing  thirty  talents,  and  near  to  them  as  many  censers, 
weighing  three  hundred  talents:  there  were  there  likewise  placed 
three  drinking  bowls  of  gold,  one  of  which,  dedicated  to  Jupiter, 
weighed  twelve  hundred  Babylonish  talents,  but  the  other  two  six 
hundred  each;  but  all  those  the  Persian  kings  sacrilegiously  carried 
away.  And  length  of  time  has  either  altogether  consumed,  or  much 
defaced  the  palaces  and  the  other  structures;  so  that  at  this  day  but 
a  small  part  of  this  Babylon  is  inhabited,  and  the  greatest  part  which 
lay  within  the  walls,  is  turned  into  tillage  and  pasture. 

There  was  likewise  an  hatiging  garden  (as  it  is  called)  near  the 
citadel,  not  built  by  Semiramis,  but  by  a  later  prince,  called  Cyrus,' 
for  the  sake  of  a  courtesan,  who  being  a  Persian  (as  they  say)  by 
birth,  and  coveting  meadows  on  mountain  tops,  desired  the  king  by 
an  artificial  plantation  to  imitate  the  lands  in  Persia.  This  garden 
was  four  hundred  feet  square,  and  the  ascent  up  to  it  was  as  to  the 
top  of  a  mountain,  and  had  buildings  and  apartments  out  of  one  into 
another,  like  unto  a  theatre.  Under  the  steps  to  the  ascent,  were 
built  arches  one  above  another,  rising  gently  by  degrees,  which 
supported  the  whole  plantation.  The  highest  arch  upon  which  the 
platform  of  the  garden  was  laid,  was  fifty  cubits  high,  and  the  garden 
itself  was  surrounded  with  battlements  and  bulwarks.  Tlie  walls 
were  made  very  strong,  built  at  no  small  charge  and  expense,  being 
two-and- twenty  feet  thick,  and  every  sally-port  ten  feet  wide:  over 
the  several  stories  of  this  fabric,  were  laid  beams  and  summers  of 
huge  massy  stones,  each  sixteen  feet  long,  and  four  broad.  The  roof 
over  all  these  was  first  covered  with  reeds,  daubed  with  abundance 
of  brimstone;  then  upon  them  was  laid  double  tiles  pargeted  togethes 
witfi  a  hard  and  durable  mortar,  and  over  them  after  all,  was  a  covering 
with  sheets  of  lead,  that  the  wet  which  drenched  through  the  earthy 
might  not  rot  the  foundation.    I'pon  all  these  was  laid  earth  of  « 


Chap.  t.  DtODbRUS  StCULUd.  109 

conTcnient  depths  sufficient  for  the  growth  of  the  greatest  trees^ 
When  the  soil  was  laid  even  and  smooth,  it  was  planted  with  all 
sorts  of  trees^  which  both  for  greatness  and  beauty,  might  delight  the 
spectators.  The  arches  (wliich  stood  one  above  another,  and  by 
that  means  darted  light  sufficient  one  into  another)  had  in  them  many 
stately  rooms  of  all  kinds,  and  for  all  purposes.  But  there  was  one 
that  had  in  it  certain  engines,  whereby  it  drew  plenty  of  water  out 
of  the  river  through  certain  conduits  and  conveyances  from  the 
platform  of  the  garden,  and  nobody  without  was  the  wiser,  or  knew 
what  was  done.    This  garden  (as  we  said  before)  was  butlt  in  later 


But  Semiramis  built  likewise  other  cities  upon  the  banks  of  the 
Euphrates  and  Hgris,  where  she  established  marts  for  the  vending  of 
merchandise  broi^ht  from  Media  and  Paretacenes,  and  other  neigh- 
bouring countries.  For  next  to  the  Nile  and  Ganges,  the  Eupiirates 
and  Tigrb  are  the  noblest  rivers  of  all  Asia,  and  have  their  spring* 
heads  in  the  mountains  of  Arabia,  and  are  distant  one  from  anotlier 
fifteen  hundred  furlongs.  They  run  through  Media  and  Paretacena 
into  Mesopotamia,  which  from  its  lying  in  the  middle  between  these 
two  rivers,  has  gained  from  them  that  name;  thence  passing  through 
the  province  of  Babylon^  they  empty  themselves  into  the  Red  sea. 
TItese  being  very  large  rivers,  and  passing  through  divers  countries^ 
greatly  enrich  the  merchants  that  traffic  in  those  parts;  so  that  the 
neighbouring  places  are  full  of  wealthy  mart  towns,  and  greatly 
ndvaoced  the  glory  and  majesty  of  Babylon. 

Semiramis  likewise  caused  a  great  stone  to  be  cut  out  of  the 
mountains  of  Armenia,  an  hundred  and  twenty-five  feet  in  lengthy 
and  five  in  breadth  and  thickness;  this  she  conveyed  to  tiie  river  t)y 
the  help  of  many  yokes  of  oxen  and  asses,  and  there  put  it  on  board 
a  ship,  and  brought  it  safe  by  water  to  Babylon,  and  set  it  up  in  the 
most  remarkable  highway  as  a  wonderful  spectacle  to  all  beholders. 
From  its  shape  it  is  called  an  obelisk,  and  is  accounted  one  of  tlis 
seven  wonders  of  the  world.  There  are  indeed  many  remarkable  and 
wonderful  things  to  be  seen  in  Babylon ;  but  amongst  these,  the  great 
quantity  of  brimstone  that  there  flows  out  of  the  ground,  is  not  to  be 
the  least  admired,  which  is  so  much  that  it  not  only  supplied  all  their 
occasions  in  building  sucii  great  and  mighty  works,  but  the  common 
people  profusely  gather  it,  and  when  it  is  dry,  burn  it  instead  of  fuel; 
and  thougli  it  be  drawn  out  by  an  innumerable  company  of  people, 
as  from  a  great  fountain,  yet  it  is  as  plentiful  as  ever  it  was  before. 
Kear  this  fountain  there  is  a  spring  not  big,  but  very  fitTcc  and 
violent,  for  it  casts  forth  a-  sulphurous  and  gross  vapour,  which 
suddenly  kills  every  living  creature  that  comes  near  to  it;  for  the 


1 10  DIODdRUS  8ICULUS.  3ook  tL 

breath  being  stopped  a  long  time,  and  all  power  of  Tespiratioa 
taken  away  by  the  force  of  the  exhalation,  the  body  presently  swcUi 
so^  that  the  parts  about  the  langs  are  all  ia  a  flame. 

Beyond  the  river  there  is  a  morass,  about  which  is  a  crusty  earth; 
If  any  unacquainted  with  the  place  get  into  it,  at  first  he  floats  upon 
the  top,  when  he  comes  into  the  middle  he  is  violently  hauled  away, 
and  striving  to  help  himself,  seems  to  be  held  so  fast  by  somethiog 
or  other,  that  all  his  labour  to  get  loose  is  in  vain.  And  first  his 
feet,  then  his  legs  and  thighs  to  his  loins  are  benumbed;  at  length 
his  whole  body  is  stupified,  and  then  down  he  sinks  to  the  bottom^ 
and  presently  after  is  cast  up  dead  to  the  surface.  And  thus  much 
for  the  wonders  of  Babylon. 

When  Semiramis  had  finished  all  her  works,  she  marched  with  a 
great  army  into  Media,  and  encamped  near  to  a  mountain  called 
Bagistan;  there  she  made  a  garden  twelve  furlongs  in  compass:  It 
was  in  a  plain  champaign  country,  and  had  a  great  fountain  in  h, 
which  watered  the  whole  garden.  Mount  Bagistan  is  dedicated  to 
Jupiter,  and  towards  one  side  of  the  garden  has  steep  rocks  seventeen 
furlongs  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  She  cut  out  a  piece  of  the 
lower  part  of  the  rocl^  and  caused  her  own  im^ge  to  be  carved  apoQ 
it,  and  a  hundred  of  her  guard  that  were  lanceteera  standing  rMnd 
about  her.  She  wrote  likewise  in  Syriac  letters  upon  the  rock... 
Thai  Semiramis  oicended  from  the  plain  to  the  top  ef  ike 
mountain  by  laying  the  packs  and  fardels  ^  the  beaste  thai 
followed  her  one  upon  another. 

Marching  away  from  hence,  she  came  to  Chaone,  a  city  crfMedtt, 
where  she  encamped  upon  a  rising  ground,  from  whence  she  took 
notice  of  an  exceeding  great  and  high  rock,  where  she  made  another 
very  great  garden  in  the  middle  of  the  rock,  and  built  upon  it  atatelj 
houses  of  pleasure,  whence  she  might  both  have  a  delightfttl  prospect 
into  the  garden,  and  view  the  army  as  they  lay  encamped  bekyw  in 
the  plain;  being  much  delighted  with  this  place  she  staid  here  a 
considerable  time,  giving  up  herself  to  all  kinds  of  pleasuics  and 
delights,  for  she  forbore  marrying  lest  she  should  then  be  deposed 
from  the  government,  and  in  the  mean  time  she  made  choice  <rf  tha 
handsomest  commanders  to  be  her  gallants ;  but  after  they  had  kin 
with  her  she  cut  off  their  heads. 

From  hence  she  nurched  towards  Ecbatana,  and  arrived  at  tha 
mountain  Zarcheum,  which  being  many  furlongs  in  extent,  and  full 
of  steep  precipices  and  craggy  rocks,  there  was  no  passing  but  by 
long  and  tedious  windings  and  turnings.  To  leave  therefore  behind 
her  an  eternal  monument  of  her  name,  and  to  make  a  short  cut  for 
her  passage,  she  caused  the  rocks  to  be  hewn  down,  and  the  vallcjs 


Chap.  L  DI0D0RU8  SICU  LVS.  Ill 


t^^amm 


to  be  filled  up  with  earthy  and  so  id  a  short  time,  at  a  rast  ex* 
pense,  laid  the  way  open  and  plain,  which  to  thb  day  is  called  Senu« 
ramis's  Way. 

When  she  came  to  Ecbataoa,  which  is  situated  in  a  low  and  even 
plain,  she  built  there  a  stately  palace,  and  bestowed  more  of  her  care 
and  pains  here  tlian  she  had  done  at  any  other  place.  For  the  city 
wanting  water  (there  being  no  spring  near)  she  plentifully  supplied 
it  with  good  and  wholesome  water,  brought  hither  with  a  great  deal 
of  toil  and  expense,  after  this  manner:  there  is  a  mountain  called 
Orontes,  twelve  furlongs  distant  from  the  city,  exceeding  high  and 
steep  for  the  space  of  five-and-twenty  furlongs  up  to  the  top;  on  the 
other,  side  of  this  mount  there  is  a  great  mere  which  empties  itself 
into  the  river.  At  the  foot  of  this  mountain  she  dug  a  canal  fifteen 
feet  in  breadth  and  forty  in  depth,  through  which  she  conveyed  water 
in  great  abundance  into  the  city.  And  these  are  the  things  which  she 
did  in  Media. 

Afterwards  she  made  a  progress  through  Persia  and  all  the  rest  of 
ber  dominions  in  Asia,  and  all  along  as  she  went  she  plained  all  the 
way  before  her,  levelling  both  rocks  and  mountains.  On  the  other 
band,  in  champaign  countries  she  would  raise  eminences,  on  which  she 
would  sometimes  build  sepulchres  for  her  oi&cers  and  commanders, 
and  at  other  times  towns  and  cities.  Throughout  her  whole  expedi- 
tions she  always  used  to  rabe  an  ascent,  upon  which  she  pitched  her 
own  pavilion,  that  from  thence  she  might  have  a  view  of  her  whole 
army.  Many  things  which  she  performed  in  Asia  remain  to  this  day, 
and  are  called  Semiramis's  Works. 

Afterwards  she  passed  through  all  Egypt,  and  having  conquered 
the  greatest  part  of  Libya,  she  went  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Am- 
fluon,  and  there  inquired  of  the  oracle  how  long  she  should  livej 
which  returned  her  this  answer,  2%ai  she  should  leave  this  warld^ 
and  qfterwardi  be  for  ever  honoured  by  some  nations  in  Asioy  when 
Ntnyas  her  son  should  be  plotting  against  her. 

When  she  had  performed  these  things,  she  marched  into  Ethiopia, 
and  having  subdued  many  places  in  it,  she  had  an  oppoflunity  to  see 
what  was  there  very  remarkable  and  wonderful.  For  they  say,  there 
b  a  four-square  lake,  an  hundred  and  sixty  feet  in  circuit,  the  water  of 
which  b  in  colour  like  unto  vermilion^  and  of  an  extraordinary  sweet 
flavour,  much  like  unto  old  wine;  yet  of  such  wonderful  operation, 
that  whosoever  drinks  of  it  goes  presently  mad,  and  confesses  all  the 
faults  that  ever  he  had  been  before  guily  of;  but  some  will  scarce  be- 
lieve thb  relation. 

The  Ethiopians  have  a  peculiar  way  of  burying  their  dead ;  for, 
after  they  have  embalmed  the  body,  they  pour  round  about  it  melted 


119  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  IL 

glassy  and  then  place  it  upon  a  pillar,  so  that  the  corpse  may  be  plainly 
seen  through  the  glass,  as  Herodotus  has  reported  the  thing.  But 
Ctcsias  of  Cnidus  affirms  that  he  tells  a  winter-tale,  and  says,  that  it 
is  true^  indeed,  that  tl&e  body  is  embalmed,  but  tliat  glass  is  not  poured 
upon  the  naked  body,  for  the  bodies  thereby  would  be  so  scorched 
and  defaced  that  they  could  not  possibly  retain  any  likeness  to  the 
dead:  and  that  therefore  they  make  an  hollow  statue  of  gold,  and  put 
the  body  within  it,  and  then  ponr  the  melted  glass  round  upon  thia 
statue,  which  they  set  upon  some  high  place,  and  so  the  statue  which 
resembles  the  dead  is  seen  through  the  glass,  and  thus  he  says  they 
used  to  bury  those  of  the  richer  sort;  but  those  of  meaner  fortunes 
they  put  into  statues  of  silver;  and  for  the  poor  they  make  statues  of 
potter's  clay,  every  one  having  glass  enough,  for  there  is  abundance 
to  be  got  ip  Ethiopia,  and  ready  at  liand  for  all  the  inhabitants.  But 
we  shall  speak  more  fully  of  the  customs  and  laws  of  the  Bthiopians^ 
and  the  product  of  the  land,  and  other  things  worthy  of  remark,  pre* 
sently,  when  we  come  to  relate  their  antiquities  and  old  fables  and 
stories. 

Semiramis  having  settled  her  affairs  in  f^gypt  and  Ethiopia,  re* 
turned  with  her  army  into  Asia  to  Bactria ;  and  now  having  a  great 
army,  and  enjoying  a  long  peace,  she  had  a  longing  desire  to  perform 
some  notable  exploit  by  her  arms.     Hearing,  therefore^  that  the  lo* 
dians  were  the  greatest  nation  in  the  whole  world^and  had  tlie  largest 
and  richest  tract  of  land  of  all  others,  she  resolved  to  make  war  upoa 
them.    Stabrobatcs  was  at  that  time  king,  who  had  innumerable 
forces,  and  many  elephants  bravely  accoutred  and  fitted  to  strike  ter- 
ror into  the  hearts  of  his  enemies.     For  India,  for  the  pleasantness 
of  the  country,  excelled  all  others,  being  watered  in  every  place  witH 
many  rivers,  so  that  the  land  yielded  every  year  ^  double  crop;  and 
by  that  means  was  so  rich  and  so  abounded  with  plenty  of  all  things 
necessary  for  the  sustenance  of  man*s  life,  that  it  supplied  the  inha- 
bitants continually  with  such  things  as  made  them  excessively  ricb^ 
insomuch  as  it  was  never  known  that  there  was  ever  any  famine  a- 
mongst  them,  the  climate  being  so  tiappy  and  favourable;  ^d  upoQ 
that  account,  likewise,  there  is  an  incredible  number  of  elephiMits^ 
which  for  courage  and  strength  of  body  far  excel  those  in  Afciciu 
Moreover  this  country  abounds  in  gold,  silver,  brass,  iron,  aud  prp-« 
cious  stones  of  all  sorts,  both  for  profit  and  pleasure.    All  which  be- 
ing noised  abroad,  so  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Semiramis,  that  (though 
hhe  hud  no  provocation  given  her)  yet  she  was  resolved  upon  the  war 
against  the  Indians.     But  knowing  that  she  had  need  of  great  forcesj^ 
she  sent  despatches  to  all  the  provinces,  with  command  to  the  gover- 
nors to  libt  the  choicest  young  men  they  could  find^  ordering  the  pro* 


Vhap.  L  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8.  1 13 

-T-^''^'— ——■*—*— ————^— ^  ■  ■■    "    ■ ■  ■    — * 

portion  of  soldiers  every  province  and  country  should  send  forth^  ac- 
cording to  the  largeness  of  it;  and  commanded  that  all  should  fur- 
nish themselves  with  new  arms  and  armour^  and  all  appear  in  three 
years  time  at  a  general  rendezvous  in  Bactria,  bravely  armed  and  ae« 
GO«tred  in  all  points.  And  having  sent  for  shipwrights  out  of  Phoe** 
nicia,  Syria,  Cyprus,  and  other  places  bordering  upon  the  sea*eoastSj 
she  prepared  timber  for  them  fit  for  the  purpose,  and  ordered  them  to 
build  vessels  that  might  be  taken  asunder  and  conveyed  from  place 
to  place  wherever  she  pleased.  For  the  river  I,ndus  bordering  upon 
that  kingdom,  being  the  greatest  in  those  parts,  she  stood  in  need  of 
many  river-boats  to  pass  it,  in  order  to  repress  the  Indians.  But 
being  there  was  no  timber  near  that  river,  she  was  necessitated  to 
convey  the  boats  thither  by  land  from  Bactria.  She  further  consi* 
dered,  that  she  was  much  inferior  to  the  Indians  in  elephants,  (which 
were  absolutely  necessary  for  her  to  make  use  of),  she  therefore  con- 
trived  to  have  beasts  that  should  resemble  them,  hoping  by  thb  means 
to  strike  a  terror  into  the  Indians,  who  believed  there  were  no  ele* 
phants  in  any  place  but  in  India. 

To  this  end  she  provided  three  hundred  thousand  black  oxen,  and 
distributed  the  flesh  amongst  a  company  of  ordinary  mechanics  and 
such  fellows  as  she  had  to  pby  the  coblers  for  her,  and  ordered  them^ 
by  stitching  the  skins  together,  and  stuffing  them  with  straw,  to  imi4 
tate  the  shape  of  an  elephant,  and  in  every  one  of  them  she  put  a 
man  to  govern  them,  and  a  camel  to  carry  them,  so  that  at  a  dis** 
tance  they  appeared  to  all  that  saw  them,  as  if  they  were  really  such 
beasts. 

They  that  were  employed  in  this  work  wrought  at  it  night  and  day 
in  a  place  which  was  walled  round  for  the  purpose,  and  guards  set  at 
every  gate,  that  none  might  be  admitted  either  to  go  in  or  out,  to  the 
end  that  none  might  see  what  they  were  doing,  lest  it  should  be  noised 
abroad,  and  come  to  the  ears  of  the  Indians. 

Having  therefore  provided  shipping  and  elephants  in  the  space  of 
two/years,  in  the  third  she  reixleavoused  all  her  forces  in  Bactria. 
Her  army  consisted  (as  Ctesias  says)  of  three  millions  of  foot,  two 
hundred  thousand  horse,  a  hundred  thousand  chariots,  and  a  hun- 
dred thousand  men  mounted  opon  camels  with  swords  four  cubits 
long.  The  boats  that  might  be  taken  asunder  were  two  thousand; 
which  the  camels  carried  by  land  as  they  did  the  roock-elepbants,  as 
we  have  before  declared.  The  soldiers  made  their  horses  familiar 
with  these  feigned  beasts,  by  bringing  them  often  to  them,  lest  they 
should  he  terrified  at  the  siglit  of  them  ^  which  Perseus  imitated  many 
ages  after  when  he  was  to  fight  with  the  Romans,  who  had  elephants 
in  their  army  out  of  Africa.     However,  this  contrivance  proved  to  ha 

Vol.  1.    No.Sa.  ^ 


114  Dioi>ORUS  sicvLUS.  Book  tl. 

of  no  advantage  either  to  him  or  her,  as  will  appear  in  the  iaave 
herein  a  little  after  related. 

When  Stabrobatea  the  Indian  king  heard  of  these  great  armies^ 
and  the  mighty  prepatations  toiade  against  him,  he  did  all  he  eoold 
to  excel  Semiramis  in  every  thing.  And  first  he  built  df  great  canes 
four  thousand  river- boats:  for  abundance  of  these  ctoes  grow  m 
India  about  the  rivers  and  fens,  so  thick  as  a  man  can  scarce  fiB:dioBi; 
and  vessels  made  of  these  reeds  (they  say)  are  exceeding  QsefU,  be* 
cause  they  will  never  rot  or  be  worm-eaten. 

He  was  very  diligent,  likewise,  in  preparing  of  arms,  and  going 
from  place  to  place  throughout  all  India,  and  so  raised  a  tu  greater 
army  than  that  of  Semiramis.  To  his  former  number  of  elephants 
he  added  more,  which  lie  took  by  hunting,  and  furnished  them  ril 
iMth  every  thing  that  might  make  them  look  terrible  in  the  foce 
of  their  enemies;  so  that  by  their  multitude,  and  the  completenesa  of 
their  armour  in  all  points,  it  seemed  above  the  streAgth  and  power 
of  man  to  bear  up  against  the  violent  shock  of  these  creatures. 

Having  therefore  made  all  these  preparations,  he  sent  ambaasaddrt 
to  Semiramis  (as  she  was  on  her  march  towards  him)  to  ctaipikin- 
and  upbraid  her  for  beginning  a  war  without  any  provocation  or  in* 
jury  offered  her;  and  by  his  private  letters  taxed  her  with  her  wfaorish 
course  of  life,  and  vowed  (calling  the  gods  to  witness)  that  if  hetsoo* 
quered  her  he  ^yottld  nail  her  to  the  cross.  Wiien  she  read  the  letter, 
she  smiled,  and  said,  the  Indian  should  presently  have  a  trial  of  lier 
valour  by  her  actions.  When  she  came  up  with  her  army  to  tbe  river 
Indus,  she  found  the  enemy's  fleet  drawn  up  in  a  line  of  battle;  wherew 
npon  she  forthwith  drew  up  her  own,  and  having  manned  it  with  the 
stoutest  soldiers,  joined  battle,  yet  so  ordering  the  matter  as  to  have  her 
land-forces  ready  upon  the  shore,  to  be  assisting  as  there  ahould  be 
occasion.  After  a  long  and  sharp  fight,  with  marks  of  valour  on  bodi 
sides,  Semiramis  was  at  length  victorious,  and  sunk  a  thoiisand  of  the 
enemy's  vessels,  and  took  a  great  number  of  prisoners.  PaflRsd  up 
with  this  success,  she  took,  in  the  cities  and  islands  that  kjintte 
river,  and  carried  away,  an  hundred  thousand  captives.  After  ibh, 
the  Indian  king  drew  off  his  army,  (as  if  he  fled  for  fear),  but  in  troth 
to  decoy  his  enemies  to  pass  the  river. 

Semiramis  therefore  (seeing  things  fall  out  according  to  her  wi^) 
laid  a  broad  bridge  of  boats  (at  a  vast  charge)  over  the  river,  iatad 
thereby  passed  over  all  her  forces,  leaving  only  threescore  thousand 
to  guard  the  bridge,  and  with  the  rest  of  her  army  pursued  the  In^ 
dians.  She  placed  the  mock-elephants  in  the  front,  that  the  enemy** 
scouts  might  presently  inform  the  king  what  multitudes  of  elepfaantf 
she  bad  in  her  army :  and  she  was  not  deceived  in  her  bopeij  for 


Cftiilk  £  PIOIXIRUS  6ICULUS.  115 


wh^  the  9pif  s  ggv^  «i>  hfipount  to  the  lodiaiis  what  a  great  multitude 
of  tbei^  cieaturea  were  advaucipg  towards  them,  they  were  all  in 
amaze^  inquiring  amoog  themselves,  whence  the  Assyrians  should 
\^  supplied  with  such  a  vast  uumb^sr  of  elephants:  bat  the  cheat 
^ould  not  be  long  conqealedf  for  some  of  Semiramis's  soldiers  being 
laid  bjr  the  beisls  for  their  qarielesness  upon  the  guard,  (through  fear 
pf  further  pjunisbm^n^),  made  .their  escape  and  fled  to  the  enemy,  and 
undeceived  tliem  fis  lo  the  elephants;  upon  which  the  Indian  king 
was  mightily  encouraged,  and  caused  notice  of  the  delusion  to  be 
spread  through  the  whole  army,  and  then  forthwith  marched  with  all 
Usfor^  agaipst  the  Assyrians;  Semiramis,oo  the  other  hand,  doing 
the  Ukfip  When  they  approached  near  one  to  another,  Stabrobates 
ibe  Indian  king  friaced  his  horse  and  chariots  in  the  van-guard,  at  a 
gqpd  distance  before  the  main  body  of  his  army.  The  queen  having 
plijced  her  mock-elej^Qts  at  the  like  distance  from  her  main  body, 
valiantly  received  her  enemy's  charge;  but  the  Indian  horse  were 
moat  strangely  terrified;  for  in  regard  the  phantasms  at  a  distance 
seined  to  be  real  elephants,  the  horset  of  the  Indians  (being  inured 
to  those  creatures)  pressed  boldly  and  undauntedly  forward;  but 
when  tbey  came  near  and  saw  another  sort  of  beast  than  usual, 
imd  tb^  amell  and  every  thing  else  almost  being  strange  and  new  to 
them,  they  broke  in  with  great  terror  and  confusion,  .one  upon  ano- 
ihcr^  so  that  they  cast  some  of  their  riders  headlong  lo  the  ground, 
and  ran  away  with  others  (as  the  lot  happened)  into  the  midst  of  their 
enemies:  whereupon  Semiramis,  readily  making  use  of  her  advan- 
tage, with  a  body  of  choice  men  fell  in  upon  them,  and  routed  them, 
forcing  them  back  to  their  main  body :  aud  though  Stabrobates  was 
noaiething  astonished  at  this  unexpected  defeat,  yet  he  brought  up 
his  foot  against  the  enemy,  with  his  elephants  in  the  front:  he  bim- 
jself  «K9S  in  the  right  wing,  mounted  upon  a  stately  elephant,  and  made 
a  fierce  charge  upon  the  queen  herself,  who  happened  then  to  be  op- 
posite to  him  in  the  left.  And  though  the  mock-elepbants  in  Semi- 
ramis's  army  did  the  like,  yet  they  stood  the  violent  shock  of  the 
other  but  a  little  while;  for  the  Indian  beasts  being  lK)th  exceeding 
Strong  and  stout^  easily  bore  down  and  destroyed  all  that  opposed 
them,  so  that  tliere  was  a  great  slaughter ;  for  some  they  trampled 
under  foot,  others  they  rent  in  pieces  with  their  teeth,  and  tossed  up 
others  with  their  trunks  into  the  air.  The  ground  therefore  being 
coverjed  with  heaps  of  dead  carcases,  and  nothing  but  death  and  de- 
/itruction  to  be  seen  on  every  hand,  so  that  all  were  full  of  horror  and 
imaazement,  none  durst  keep  their  order  or  ranks  any  longer.  Upon 
which  the  whole  Assyrian  army  fled  outright,  and  the  Indian  king  en- 
.counteied  with  Semiramis^  and  first  wounded  her  with  an  anow  in 


Il6  DIODORU9  SICULUS.  BoeklL 

^SSSSSSSSSSaKSSSSSSSSaSSSBSSMSOBOBSSSSSSSSSe^ 

the  arm,  and  afterwards  with  a  dart  (in  wheeling  about)  in  the  shoul- 
der; whereupon  the  queen  (her  wounds  not  being  mortal)  fled^  and 
by  die  swiftness  of  her  horse  (which  far  exceeded  the  other  that  par* 
sued  her)  she  got  off.  But  aU  making  one  way  to  the  bridge  of 
boats,  and  such  a  vast  multitude  of  men  thronging  together  in  one 
strait  and  narrow  passage,  the  queen's  soldiers  miserably  perished  By 
treading  down  one  another  under  foot,  and  (which  was  strange  and 
unusual)  horse  and  foot  lay  tumbling  promiscuously  one  over  another. 
When  they  came  at  length  to  the  bridge,  and  the  Indians  at  their 
heels,  the  consternation  was  so  great,  that  many  on  both  sides  the 
bridge  were  tumbled  over  into  the  river.  But  when  the  greatest  part 
of  those  that  remained  had  got  over,  Semiramb  caused  the  cords  and 
tenons  of  the  bridge  to  be  cut,  wliich  done,  the  boats  (which  were 
before  joined  together,  and  upon  which  was  a  great  number  of  In* 
dians  not  in  the  pursuit)  being  now  divided  into  many  parts,  and  car- 
ried here  and  there  by  the  force  of  the  current,  multitudes  of  the  In- 
dians were  drowned,  and  Semiramis  was  now  safe  and  secttve,  hav- 
ing such  a  barrier  as  the  river  betwixt  her  and  her  enemies*  Wbere^ 
upon  the  Indian  king,  being  forewarned  by  prodigies  from  heaven, 
and  the  opinions  of  the  soothsayers,  forbore  all  further  puisoit.  And 
Semiramis,  making  exchange  of  prisoners  in  Bactria,  returned  with 
scarce  a  third  part  of  her  army. 

A  little  time  after,  Semiramis  being  assaulted  by  an  eunuoh  through 
the  treacherous  contrivance  of  her  son,  remembered  the  former  an* 
swer  given  her  by  the  oracle  at  the  temple  of  Ammon,  and  therefore 
passed  the  business  over  without  punishing  of  him  who  was  chiefly 
concerned  in  the  plot:  but  surrendering  the  crown  to  him,  commanded 
all  to  obey  him  as  their  lawful  king,  and  forthwith  disappeared,  as  if 
she  had  been  translated  to  the  gods,  according  to  the  wofds  of  the 
oracle.  Tliere  are  some  which  fabulously  say  she  was  metamoiphosed 
into  a  pigeon,  and  that  she  flew  away  with  a  flock  of  those  biidi  that 
lighted  upon  her  palace:  and  hence  it  is  that  the  Assyrians  adore  a 
dove,  believing  that  Semiramis  was  enthroned  amongst  the  goda. 
And  this  was  the  end  of  Semiramis,  queen  of  all  Asia,  except  India, 
after  she  had  lived  sixty-two  years,  and  reigned  forty-two.  And 
these  are  the  things  which  Ctesias  the  Cnidian  reports  of  her  in  his 
history. 

Athenseus,  and  some  other  writers,  affirm,  that  she  was  a  most 
beautiful  strumpet,  and  upon  that  account  the  king  of  Assyria  fell  ia 
love  with  her,  and  at  first  was  taken  into  his  favour;  and  at  lengtk 
becoming  his  lawful  wife,  she  prevailed  with  her  husband  to  grant 
her  the  sole  and  absolute  authority  of  die  regal  government  for  the 
space  of  five  days.    Taking  therefore  ujion  ber  the  sceptre  and  royal 


Chap.  M.  moDORUs  stcuLtrs.  117 

BMntk  of  the  kingdom^  the  firet  daj  she  made  a  sumptuous  banquet^ 
and  magDificent  entertainments^  to  which  she  invited  the  generals  of 
the  flnny^  and  all  the  nobility,  in  order  to  be  observant  to  all  her  oom- 
mtadt.  The  next  day,  having  both  great  and  small  at  her  back,  she 
oonsiitted  her  husband  to  the  goid:  and  in  regard  she  was  of  a  bold 
and  dviag  spirit^  apt  and  ready  to  undertake  any  great  matters,  she 
easily  gamed  the  kingdom,  which  she  held  to  the  time  of  her  old  age^ 
aad  beeame  fiunous  for  her  many  great  and  wonderful  acts:  aud 
afe  the  things  which  historians  variously  reUte  concerning  her# 


CHAP.  IL 


NhufrnM  nuxeedi  Semhrumis.  Him  dose  and  slaihful  mmmer  qf 
life.  The  reign  of  Sarddnapahu.  Hu  luxury  and  ^embmcjf^ 
IKsefUapk.  Deposed  by  Arbace$  the  Mede;  andthe  Asj^ntm 
emtpire  onertumed.    Nineveh  razed. 

AFTER  her  death,  Ninyas,  the  son  of  Ninus  and  Semiramis^ 
neceeded,  and  reigned  peaceably,  nothing  at  all  like  his  mother  ton 
valour  and  martial  afikirs.  For  he  spent  all  bis  time  shut  up  m  tut 
pidace,  insomuch  as  he  was  never  seen  of  any  but  of  his  concuhioea 
and  eunuchs;  for  being  given  up  wholly  to  his  pleasures,  he  shook 
off  all  canes,  and  every  thing  that  might  be  irksome  and  troublesome, 
placing  all  the  happiness  of  a  king  in  a  sordid  indulgence  of  all  sorts 
of  voluptuousness.  But  that  he  might  reign  the  more  securely,  and 
be  feared  of  all  his  subjects,  every  year  he  raised  out  of  every  province 
a  certain  number  of  soldiers,  under  their  several  generals ;  and  having 
farottght  tliem  into  the  city,  over  every  country  appointed  such  go«> 
remors  as  he  could  most  confide  in,  and  were  most  at  his  devotion. 
Ai  the  end  of  the  year  he  raised  many  as  more  out  of  the  provinces, 
and  sent  the  former  home,  taking  fiist  of  them  an  oath  of  fidelity. 
And  this  he  did,  that  bis  subjects,  observing  how  he  always  liad  a 
great  army  ready  iu  the  field,  those  of  them  that  were  iuclined  to  be 
refractory  or  rebel  (out  of  fear  of  punishment)  might  continue  firm  in 
their  due  obedience.  And  a  further  reason  likewise  for  this  yearly 
change  was,  that  the  officers  and  soldiers  might  be  from  time  to 
time  disbanded  before  they  could  have  time  to  be  well  acquainted  one 
with  another.  For  length  of  time  iu  martial  employments  so  improves 
the  skill,  aud  advances  the  courage  and  resolution  of  the  commanders, 


118  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Boqk  ff, 

that  many  times  they  ponspire  against  their  priocesj  and  wholly  fM 
off  from  their  allegiance. 

His  living  thus  close  and  unseen,  was  a  covert  to  ifai^  Tpliiptiimi 
coarse  of  his  life,  and  in  the  mean  time  (as  if  he  bad  bren  a  j^d) 
none  durst  in  the  least  mutter  any  thing  against  hkn»  And  in  Ikii 
nanner  (creating  commanders  of  his  army»  constituting  of  govemoif 
in  the  provinces,  appointing  the  chamberlains  and  officem  nf  Uf 
househoM,  placing  of  judges  in  their  several  countriesp  and  Ofdedng 
and  disposing  of  all  other  matters  as  he  thought  fit  most  for  kU  Mn» 
advantage)  he  spent  his  days  in  Nineveh. 

After  the  same  manner  almost  lived  all  the  rest  of  the  kings  tar 
the  space  of  thirty  generations,  in  a  continued  line  of  succesMon 
from  fother  to  son,  to  the  very  reign  of  Sardanapalus*;  in  whose 
time  the  empire  of  the  Assyrians  devolved  upon  the  Medes,  after  it 
had  continued  above  thirteen  hundred  and  sixty  years,  as  Ctesias 
the  Cnidian  says  in  his  second  book.  But  it  is  needless  to  recite 
their  names,  or  how  long  each  of  them  reigned,  in  legard  neoe  of 
them  did  any  thing  worth  remembering,  save  only  that  it  niqr 
deserve  an  account  how  the  Assyrians  assisted  the  TrcganSp.bj 
sending  them  some  forces  under  the  command  of  Memnon  the  spa 
of  Tithon. 

For  when  Teutamus  reigned  in  Asia,  who  was  the  twentieth  from 
Ninyas  the  son  of  Semiramis,  it  is  said  the  Grecians,  under  their 
general  Agamemnon,  made  war  upon  the  Trojans,  at  which  time  the 
Assyrians  had  been  lords  of  Asia  above  a  thousand  years.  For 
Priam  the  king  of  Troy,  (being  a  prince  under  the  Assyrian  empire» 
when  war  was  made  upon  him),  sent  ambassadors  to  crave  aid  of 
Teutamus,  who  sent  him  ten  thousand  Ethiopians,  and  as  many  oof 
of  the  province  of  Susiana,  with  two  hundred  chariots,  under  the 
conduct  of  Memnon  the  son  of  Hthon.  For  this  Tithon  at  that 
time  was  governor  of  Persia,  and  in  special  favour  with  the  king 
above  all  the  rest  of  the  princes:  and  Memnon  was  in  the  flower  of 
his  age,  strong  and  courageous,  and  had  built  a  palace  in  the  citadel 
of  Susa,  which  retained  the  name  of  Memnon  ia  to  the  time  of  the 
Persian  empire.  He  paved  also  there  a  common  highway,  which  ia 
called  Memnon's  way  to  this  day.  But  the  Ethiopians  of  Egypt 
question  this,  and  say,  that  Memnon  was  their  countryman,  and  shew 

*  Sardantpmlm.— The  Aatjruui  emptf c,  down  to  Sardanapalot,  oontinued  1S60  jeanw 
Tbi*  ii  Juctiu's  tccount,  aad  agrees  best  with  the  holy  acriptures:  ao  Velleius  Patcrcoluy 
agrees;  and  the  reign  of  Belui  or  Nimrod,  fifty-Sve  years.  The  begiDoing  of  his  reign 
faih  in  Ann.  Mon.  1718.  And  Sardanapalui's  fall  was  in  Ann.  Mun.  SOTS,  in  the  19tb 
of  JchH«  3iS  years  before'tte  taking  of  Babylon  by  Alexander  the  Great,  Ant.  Chr.  8ft. 
Vid.  Uclviciu's  Chron. 


dqlK  IE  OfODOEUS  8ICULU8.  1 19 

wmmmmmmmmmmmmmBmKmtxsssarsssssssagasaBsssssBssBmKaammaBomm^ 


MVeml  atttfont  paltees  wbidi  (they  say)  retain  hh  name  at  this 
bdng  called  M emnon's  palaces. 

Notwithstanding,  however  it  be  as  to  this  matter,  yet  it  has  been 
genlarally  and  constantly  held  for  a  certain  tmth,  that  Memnon  led 
to  Tnj  twenty  tfaousaad  foot,  and  two  hundred  chariots,  and  signa* 
Und  Us  imloor  with  great  honour  and  reputation,  with  the  death  and 
detraction  of  many  of  the  Gredcs,  till  at  length  he  was  slain  by  aa 
stolmsuade  laid  for  him  by  the  Thessalians.  Bat  the  Ethiopians 
recovered  his  body,  and  burnt  it,  and  brought  bach  his  bones  to 
TIthon.  And  these  things  the  baibarians  say  are  recorded  of  Meimxm 
in  the  histories  of  their  kings. 

Saidanapalus,  the  thirtieth  from  Ninus,  and  die  last  icing  of  the 
Aasyrians,  exceeded  all  his  predecessors  in  sloth  and  luxury;  for 
besides  that  he  was  seen  of  none  out  of  his  family,  he  led  a  most 
elftmkuite  life:  for,  wallowing  in  pleasure  and  wanton  dalliances,  he 
elothed  himself  in  women's  attire,  and  spun  fine  wool  and  purple 
amoDgst  the  throngs  of  his  whores  and  concubines.  He  painted 
likewise  his  face,  and  decked  his  whole  body  with  other  allurements 
like  a  irtrampet,  and  was  more  lascivious  than  the  most  wantoa 
courtesan.  H«  imhated,  likewise,  a  woman's  voice,  and  not  only 
duly  inured  himself  to  such  meat  and  drink  as  might  incite  and  stir 
up  his  lascivious  lusts,  but  gratified  them  by  filthy  Catamites,  as  well  ^ 
as  wholes  and  strumpets,  and  without  any  sense  of  modesty,  aburing 
both  sexes,  slighted  shame,  the  concomitant  of  filthy  and  impure 
actions,  and  proceeded  to  such  a  degree  of  voluptuousness  and  sordid 
vneleanoess,  that  he  composed  verses  for  his  epitaph,  with  a  com- 
mand to  his  successors  to  have  them  inscribed  upon  his  tomb  after 
his  death,  which  were  thus  translated  by  a  Grecian,  out  of  the 
barbarian  language 

Hac  babeo  qua  edi«  qoBqae  eziatarata  libido. 
Haosit,  at  ilia  jaceat  multa  ac  praclara  relicta. 

What  onct  I  gorg*d  I  now  enjoy^ 
And  wanton  Initi  me  itill  employ. 
All  other  thingi  by  mortals  pris'd« 
Are  left  at  dirt  by  me  despb'd. 

Being  thus  corrupt  in  his  morals,  he  not  only  came  to  a  misemble 
end  himself,  but  utterly  overturned  the  Assyrian  monarchy,  which 
had  continued  longer  than  any  we  read  of. 

For  Arbaces  a  Mede,  a  valiant  and  prudent  man,  and  general  of 
the  forces  which  were  sent  every  year  out  of  Media  to  Nineveh,  was 
stirred  up  by  the  governor  of  Babylon  (his  fellow  soldier,  and  with 


I  so  Df  OnORU S  8ICVLU9.  Book  IK 

iiiirii-'Ti'       II  r"  I         "^ rm — n       ■ —■ 

whom  be  bad  contracted  an  intimate  fiimiliarity)  to  twreillutiw  ihm 
Assyrian  empire.  This  captain's  name  was  Beleata^  a  moat  hmmm 
Bahylooian  priest,  one  at  those  called  Clialdeans,  expert  ki  astioiagy 
and  divination;  of  great  reputation  upon  the  account  of  foroteilii^ 
fatnre  events,  which  happened  acoordingly.  Amongst  otbais^  ha 
told  his  friend,  the  Median  general^  that  he  should  depose  SifdiUMiM 
paltts,  and  be  lord  of  all  his  dominions*  Arbaces  hereupon  hfwirfcenin|| 
to  what  he  said,  promised  him,  that  if  he  succeeded  in  his  attmnpCy 
Belesis  should  be  chief  governor  of  the  province  of  Babylon.  Befaig 
therefore  fully  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  what  was  faretcdd,  as  if  he 
had  received  it  from  an  oracle,  he  entered  into  an  association  witfi 
the  governors  of  the  rest  of  the  provinces,  and  by  feasting  and 
Caressing  of  them,  gained  all  their  hearts  and  afiectioos*  He  made 
it  likewise  his  great  business  to  get  a  sight  of  the  king,  that  he  might 
observe  the  course  and  manner  of  his  life;  to  this  end  he  bestowed 
a  cup  of  gold  upon  an  eunuch,  by  whom  being  introduced  into  the 
king's  presence,  he  perfectly  came  to  understand  his  lasciviousnesa 
and  effeminate  course  of  life.  Upon  sight  of  him,  be  oontcmoed  and 
despised  him  as  a  vile  and  worthless  wretch,  and  thereupon  wii 
much  more  earnest  to  accomplish  what  the  Chaldean  had  befinrs 
declared  to  him.  At  length  he  conspired  with  Belesis  sa  fiup>asthat 
he  himself  persuaded  the  Medes  and  Persians  to  a  defection,  and  the 
other  brought  the  Babylonians  into  the  confederacy.  He  ia^arted 
likewise  his  design  to  the  king  of  Arabiaf  who  was  at  this  time  Ua 
special  friend. 

And  now  the  year's  attendance  of  the  army  being  at  an  cttdy 
troops  succeeded,  and  came  into  their  place,  and  the  former 
sent  every  one  here  and  there,  into  their  several  countries.  Heieupoa 
Arbaces  prevailed  with  the  Medes  to  invade  the  Assyrian  empii^  Md 
drew  in  the  Persian  in  hopes  of  liberty,  to  join  in  the  confederacy* 
Belesis  in  like  manner  persuaded  the  Babylonians  to  stand  up  for 
their  Iibei*ties.  He  sent  messengers  also  into  Arabia,  and  gained 
that  prince  (who  was  both  his  friend,  and  had  been  his  guest)  for  a 
confederate. 

When,  therefore,  the  yearly  course  was  run  out,  all  these  (with  a 
great  number  of  forces)  flocked  together  to  Nineveh,  in  shew  to  serve 
their  turn,  according  to  custom,  but  in  truth  to  overturn  the 
Assyrian  empire.  The  whole  number  of  soldiers  now  got  together 
out  of  those  four  provinces,  amounted  to  four  hundred  thousand 
men.  All  these  (being  now  in  one  camp)  called  a  council  of  war, 
in  order  to  consult  what  was  to  be  done. 

Sardanapalus  being  informed  of  the  revolt,  led  forth  the  ibrces  of 


Ckap^n.  DIODORUS  StCtJLUS.  ISl 

*— — — MM^— — WMW^^M^MiM   I  _-       _  -  1  -    -  — ■ \ ^"" 

the  rest  of  the  provinces  against  them ;  whereupon  a  battle  being 
fought^  the  rebels  were  totally  routed,  and  with  a  great  slaughter 
were  forced  to  the  nnountains  seventy  furlongs  from  Nineveh. 

Being  drawn  up  a  second  time  in  battalia,  to  try  their  fortune  in  the 
fields  and  now  faced  by  the  enemy,  Sardanapalus  caused  aproclfima- 
tioD  to  be  made  by  the  heralds,  that  whosoever  killed  Arbaces  the 
Mede,  should  receive  as  a  reward,  two  hundred  talents  of  gold,  and 
double  the  sum  to  him  (together  with  the  government  of  Media) 
who  should  take  him  alive.  The  like  sum  he  promised  to  such  as 
should  kill  Belesis,  or  take  him  alive.  But  none  being  wrought  upon 
by  these  promises,  he  fought  them  again,  and  destroyed  many  of  the 
rebels,  and  forced  the  rest  to  fly  to  their  camp  upon  the  hills. 
Arbaces  being  disheartened  with  these  misfortunes,  called  a  council 
of  war,  to  consider  what  was  fit  further  to  be  done :  the  greater  part 
were  for  returning  into  their  own  countries,  and  possess  themselves 
of  the  strongest  places,  in  order  to  fit  and  furnish  themselves  with 
all  things  further  necessary  for  the  war.  But  when  Belesis  the 
Babylonian  assured  them  that  the  gods  promised,  that  after  many 
toils  and  labours  they  should  have  good  success,  and  all  should  end 
well,  and  had  used  several  other  arguments,  (such  as  he  thought 
best),  he  prevailed  with  them  to  resolve  to  run  through  all  the  hazards 
of  the  war. 

Another  battle  tlierefore  was  fought,  wherein  the  king  gained  a 
third  victory,  and  pursued ^the  revolters  as  far  as  to  the  mountains 
of  Babylon.  In  this  fight  Arbaces  himself  w;is  wounded,  though 
he  fought  stoutly,  and  slew  many  of  the  Assyrians  with  his  own 
hand. 

After  so  many  defeats  and  misfortunes,  one  upon  the  neck  of 
another,  the  conspirators  altogether  despaired  of  victory,  and  therefore 
the  commanders  resolved  every  one  to  return  to  their  own  country. 
But  Belesis,  who  lay  all  that  night  star-gazing  In  the  open  field, 
prognosticated  to  them  the  next  day,  that  if  they  would  but  continue 
together  fivft  days,  unexpected  help  would  come,  and  they  would  see 
a  mighty  change,  and  that  afiairs  would  have  a  contrary  aspect  to 
what  they  then  had;  for  he  affirmed,  that  through  his  knowledge  in 
astrology,  he  unde**tood  that  the  gods  portended  so  much  by  the 
stars;  therefore  he  entreated  them  to  stay  so  many  days,  and  make 
trial  of  his  art,  and  wait  so  long  to  have  an  experiment  of  the  goodness 
of  the  gods. 

All  being  thus  brought  back,  and  waiting  till  the  time  appointed, 

news  on  a  sudden  was  brought  that  mighty  forces  were  at  hand,  sent 

to  the  king  out  of  Bactria.     Hereupon  Arbaces  resolved   with  the 

stoutest  and  swiftest  soldiers  of  tlie  army,  forthwith  to  make  out 

You  1.  No.  S3,  ft 


122  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  IL 

against  the  captains  thativere  advancing,  and  either  by  fair  words  to 
persuade  them  to  a  defection,  or  by  blows  to  force  them  to  join  with 
them  in  their  design.  But  liberty  being  sweet  to  every  one  of  thena^ 
first  the  captains  and  commanders  were  easily  wrought  upon^  and 
presently  after  the  whole  army  joined^  and  made  up  one  entire  camp 
together.  It  happened  at  that  time,  that  the  king  of  Assyria  not 
knowing  any  thing  of  the  revolt  of  the  Bactrians,  and  pufied  up  by 
his  former  successes^  was  indulging  his  sloth  and  idleness,  and 
preparing  beasts  for  sacrifice,  plenty  of  wine,  and  other  things  ne- 
cessary in  order  to  feast  and  entertain  his  soldiers. 

While  his  whole  army  was  now  feasting  and  revelling,  Arbaces 
(receiving  intelligence  by  some  deserters  of  the  security  and  intem- 
perance of  the  enemy)  fell  in  upon  them  suddenly  in  the  night; 
and  being  in  due  order  and  discipline,  and  setting  upon  such  as  were 
in  confusion,  he  being  before  prepared,  and  the  other  altogether 
unprovided,  they  easily  broke  into  their  camp,  and  made  a  great 
slaughter  of  some,  forcing  the  rest  into  the  city. 

Hereupon  Sardanapalus  committed  the  charge  of  the  whole  army 
to  Salemenus,  his  wife's  brother,  and  took  upon  himself  the  defence 
of  the  city.  But  the  rebels  twice  defeated  the  king's  forces^  once  in 
the  open  field,  and  the  second  time  before  the  walls  of  the  city; 
in  which  last  engagement  Salemenus  was  killed,  and  almost  all  hi^ 
army  lost,  some  being  cut  off  in  the  pursuit,  and  the  rest  (save  a  very 
few,  being  intercepted,  and  prevented  from  entering  into  the  city, 
were  driven  headlong  into  the  river  Euphrates;  and  the  number  of 
the  slain  was  so  great,  that  the  river  was  dyed  with  blood,  and  retained 
that  colour  for  a  great  distance,  and  a  long  course  together. 

The  king  being  afterwards  besieged,  many  of  the  nations  (through 
desire  of  liberty)  revolted  to  the  confederates;  so  that  Sardanapalus, 
now  perceiving  that  the  kingdom  was  like  to  be  lost,  sent  away  hi» 
three  sons  and  two  daughters,  with  a  great  deal  of  treasure,  into 
Paphlagonia,  to  Cotta,  the  governor  there,  his  most  entire  friend ; 
and  sent  posts  into  all  the  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  in  order  to  raise* 
soldiers,  and  make  all  other  preparations  necessary  to  endure  a  siege. 
And  he  was  the  more  encouraged  to  this,  for  that  he  was  acquainted 
with  an  antient  prophecy.  That  Nifieveh  could  never  be  taken  hy 
force^  till  the  river  became  the  citys  enemy;  which  the  more 
encouraged  him  to  holdout,  because  he  conceived  that  was  never 
likely  to  be;  therefore  he  resolved  to  endure  the  siege  till  the  aids 
which  he  expected  out  of  the  provinces  came  up  to  him. 

The  enemy  on  the  other  liand,  grown  more  courageous  by  their 
successes,  eagerly  urged  on  the  siege,  but  made  little,  impression  on 
the  besieged,  by  reason  of  the  strength  of  the  walls;  for  ballistea  to 


Ch(^.  XL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  1^3 

cast  stones^  testudos  to  cast  up  mounts,  and  battering  rams,  were 
not  known  in  those  ages.    And  besides  (to  say  truth)  the  king  had 
been  very  careful   (as  to  what  concerned  the  defence  of  the  place) 
plentifully  to  furnish  the  inhabitants  with  every  thing  necessary. 
The  siege  continued  two  years,  during  which  time  nothing  was  done 
to  any  purpose,  save  that  the  walls  were  sometimes  assaulted,  and 
the  besieged  penned  up  in  the  city.    The  third  year  it  happened  that 
the  Euphrates,  overflowing  with  continual  rains,  came  up  into  a  part 
of  the  city,  and  tore  down  the  wall  twenty  furlongs  in  length.    The 
king  hereupon  conceiving  that  the  oracle  was  accomplished,  in  that 
the  river  was  an  apparent  enemy  to  the  city,  utterly  despaired;  and 
therefore,  that  he  might  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  he 
caused  a  huge  pile  of  wood  to  be  made  in  his  palace  court,  and  heaped 
together  upon  it  all  his  gold,  silver,  and  royal  apparel,  and  enclosing 
his  eunuchs  and  coucubines  in  an  apartment  within  the  pile,  caused 
it  to  ,be  set  on  fire,  and  burnt  himself  and  them  together;  which 
when  the  revolters  came  to  understand,  they  entered  through  the 
breach  of  the  walls,  and  took  the  city,  and  clothed  Arbaces  with  a 
Toyal  robe,  and  committed  to  him  the  sole  authority,  proclaiming  him 
king.     When  he  had  rewarded  his  followers,  every  one  according 
to  his  merit,  and  appointed  governors  over  the  several  provinces^ 
Belesis  the  Babylonian,  who  had  foretold  his  advancement  to  the 
throne,  put  him  in  mind  of  his  services,  and  demanded  the  govern- 
ment of  Babylon,  which  he  had  before  promised  him.     He  told  him 
likewise  of  a  vow  that  he  himself  had  made  to  Belus,  in  the  heat  of 
the  war,  that  when  Sardanapalus  was  conquered,  and  the  palace  con« 
sumed,  he  would  carry  the  ashes  to  Babylon,  and  there  raise  a  mount 
near  to  his  temple,  which  should  be  an  eternal  monument  to  all  that 
sailed  through  the  Euphrates,  in  memory  of  him  that  overturned  the 
Assyrian  empire.     But  that  which  in  truth  induced  him  to  make  this 
request  was,  that  he  had  been  informed  of  the  gold  and  silver  by  an 
eunuch  (that  was  a  deserter)  whom  he  had  hid  and  concealed:  Ar- 
baces, therefore,  being  ignorant  of  the  contrivance  (because  all  the 
rest  besides  this  eunuch  were  consumed  by  the  king)  granted  to  him 
liberty  both  to  carry  away  the  ashes,  and  likewise  the  absolute  go- 
vernment of  Babylon  witliout  paying  any  tribute.    Whereupon  Be- 
lesis forthwith  prepared  shipping,  and  together  with  the  ashes  carried 
^^ay  most  of  the  gold  and  silver  to  Babylon,    But  when  the  king 
came  plainly  to  understand  the  cheat,  he  committed  the  examination 
^nd  decision  of  this  theft  to  the  other  captains  who  were  his  assist- 
^i^ts  in  the  deposing  of  Sardanapalus.     Belesis  upon  his  trial  con- 
fosed  the  fact^  and  thereupon  they  condemned  him  to  lose  his  hcad« 


Ifi4  DIODORUS  StCULUS.  Sook  II. 


7iut  the  king  being  a  man  of  a  noble  and  generous  spirit,  and  wil- 
ling to  adorn  the  beginning  of  his  reign  with  marks  of  his  grace 
and  mercy,  not  only  pardoned  him,  but  freely  gave  him  all  the'gold 
and  silver  which  had  been  carried  away;  neither  did  he  deprive  him 
of  the  government  of  Babylon,  which  at  the  first  he  conferred  upon 
him,  saying,  Thnl  his  former  good  services  overbalanced  the  m* 
juries  aftenvards.  This  gracious  disposition  of  the  king  being  noised 
abroad,  he  thereby  not  only  gained  the  hearts  of  his  people^  but  was 
highly  honoured,  and  his  name  famous  among  all  the  provinces,  and 
all  judged  him  worthy  of  the  kingdom  who  was  so  compassionate 
and  gracious  to  offenders. 

The  like  clemency  he  shewed  to  the  inhabitants  of  Nineveh;  for 
though  he  dispersed  them  into  several  country  villages,  yet  he  re- 
stored  to  every  one  of  them  their  estates,  but  razed  the  city  to  the 
ground. 

The  rest  of  the  silver  and  gold  that  could  be  found  in  the  pile  (of 
which  there  were  many  talents)  he  conveyed  to  Ecbatana^  the  seat 
royal  of  Media. 

And  thus  was  the  Assyrian  empire  overturned  by  the  Medes^y  after 
it  had  continued  thirty  generationsf;  from  Ninus,  above  fourteen 
hundred  years. 


S=2E 


CHAP.  III. 

Of  the  antient  Chaldeans^  and  their  philosophy.  The  planets ,  and 
their  course.  The  empire  of  the  Medes,  and  their  kings.  A 
description. of  India:  the  antient  inanners  and  customs  of  the 
people.  Their  lawSy  and  tribes.  A  description  of  Scythta.  Of 
the  Amazons.     Of  the  Hyperboreans. 

HERE  it  will  not  be  amiss  to  say  something  of  the  Chaldeans  (as 
the  Babylonians  call  them)  and  of  their  antiquity,  that  nothing  worth 
remark  may  be  omitted. 

They  being  the  most  antient  Babylonians,  hold  the  same  station 
and  dignity  in  the  commonwealth  as  the  Egyptian  priests  do  in  Egypt; 

*  Ano.  Mund.  3080.     Before  Cbritt  868. 
t  Herodotus  saj«^  lib.  i.  c.  95/  but  5^0  years  from  Ninus,  which  Usher  follows;  t^ 
that  Ninus  fail»  in  with  the  tiroes  of  Deborah^  at  is  before  observed,  against  the  strea^k 
of  almost  all  chronologc-rs. 


Chap.lJI.  MODORUS  SICOLUS.  125 

for,  being  deputed  to  divine  offices,  they  spend  all  their  time  in  the 
study  of  philosophy,  and  are  especially  famous  for  the  art  of  astrology. 
They  are  mightily  given  to  divination,  and  foretel  future  events,  and 
employ  themselves  either  by  purifications,  sacrifices,  or  other  en- 
chantments to  avert  evils,  or  procure  good  fortune  and  success.  They 
are  skilful,  likewise,  in  the  art  of  divination  by  the  flying  of  birds^ 
and  interpreting  of  dreams  and  prodigies;  and  are  reputed  as  tru4 
oracles  (in  declaring  what  will  come  to  pass)  by  their  exact  and  diU<* 
gent  viewing  the  entrails  of  the  sacrifices.  But  they  attain  not  t5 
this  knowledge  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Grecians  do:  for  the 
Chaldeans  learn  it  by  tradition  from  their  ancestors,  the  son  from  the 
father,  who  are  all  in  the  mean-time  free  from  all  other  public  offices 
and  attendances;  and  because  their  parents  are  their  tutors,  they 
both  learn  every  thing  without  envy,  and  rely,  with  more  confidence 
upon  the  truth  of  what  is  taught  them;  and  being  trained  up  in  thb 
learning  from  their  very  childhood,  they  become  most  famous  philo* 
sophers  (that  age  being  most  capable  of  learning  wherein  they  spend 
much  of  their  time).  But  the  Grecians  for  the  most  part  come  raw 
to  this  study,  unfitted  and  unprepared,  and  are  long  before  they  at* 
tain  to  the  knowledge  of  this  philosophy:  and  after  they  have  spent 
some  small  time  in  this  study,  they  are  many  times  called  off  and 
forced  to  leave  it,  in  order  to  get  a  livelihood  and  subsistence.  And 
although  some  few  do  industriously  apply  themselves  to  philosophy^ 
yet,  for  the  sake  of  gain,  these  very  men  are  opiniative,  and  ever 
and  anon  starting  new  and  high  points,  and  never  fix  in  the  steps  of 
their  ancestors.  But  the  barbarians,  keeping  constantly  close  to  the 
same  thing,  attain  to  a  perfect  and  distinct  knowledge  in  every  par- 
ticular. 

But  the  Grecians  cunningly  catching  at  all  opportunities  df  gain, 
make  new  sects  and  parties,  and  by  their  contrary  opinions  wrangling 
and  quarreling  concerning  the  chiefest  points,  lead  their  scholars  in- 
to a  maze;  and  being  uncertain  and  doubtful  what  to  pitch  upon  for 
certain  truth,  their  minds  are  fluctuating  and  in  suspense  all  the  days 
of  their  lives,  and  unable  to  give  a  certain  assent  unto  any  thing. 
For  if  any  man  will  but  examine  the  most  eminent  sects  of  the  philo- 
sophers, he  shall  find  them  much  differing  among  themselves,  and 
even  opposing  one  another  in  the  most  weighty  parts  of  their  philo- 
sophy. But  to  return  to  the  Chaldeans/they  hold  that  the  world  is 
eternal,  which  had  neither  any  certain  beginning,  nor  shall  have  any 
end;  but  all  agree,  that  all  things  are  ordered,  and  this  beautiful  fa- 
bric is  supported  by  a  divine  providence,  and  that  the  motions  of  the 
heavens  are  not  performed  by  chance,  and  of  their  own  accord,  but 
by  a  certain  and  determinate  will  and  appointment  of  the  gods. 


12$  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  IL 


if 


Therefore^  from  a  long  observation  of  the  stars^  and  an  exact 
knowledge  of  tlie  motions  and  influences  of  every  one  of  them^ 
lirherein  they  excel  all  others>  they  foretel  many  things  that  are  to 
come  to  pa3s. 

They  say  that  the  five  stars  which  some  call  planets^  but  which  they 
call  Interpreters,  are  most  worthy  of  consideration^  both  for  their  mo- 
tions and  their  remarkable  influences,  especially  that  which  the  Gre- 
cians call  Saturn*  The  brightest  of  them  all,  and  which  often  portends 
many  and  great  events,  they  call  Sol ;  the  other  four  they  name  Mars> 
Venus^  Mercury,  and  Jupiter,  with  our  own  country  astrologers. 
They  give  the  name  of  Interpreters  to  these  stars,  because  these  only^ 
by  a  peculiar  motion,  portend  things  to  come;  and,  instead  of  in- 
terpreters, do  declare  to  men  beforehand  the  good  will  of  the  gods^ 
whereas  the  other  stars  (not  being  of  the  number  of  the  planets) 
have  a  constant  ordinary  motion.     Future  events  (they  say)  are 
pointed  at  sometimes  by  their  rising,  and  sometimes  by  their  settings 
and  at  other  times  by  their  colour,  as  may  be  experienced  by  those 
that  will  diligently  observe  it;  sometimes  foreshowing  hurricanes^  at 
other  times  tempestuous  rains,  and  then  again  exceeding  droughts* 
By  these,  they  say,  are  often  portended  the  appearance  of  comets^ 
eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  earthquakes,  and  all  other  the  varioaa 
changes  and  remarkable  efibcts  in  the  air,  boding  good  and  bad^  not 
only  to  nations  in  general,  but  to  kings  and  private  persons  in  parti- 
cular.    Under  the  course  of  these  planets,  they  say,  are  thirty  8tars> 
which  they  call  counselling  gods,  half  of  whom  observe  what  is  done 
nnder  the  earth,  and  the  other  half  take  notice  of  the  actions  of  men 
upon  the  earth,  and  what  is  transacted  in  the  heavens.    Once  every 
ten  days  space  (they  say)  one  of  the  highest  order  of  these  stars  des^ 
cends  to  them  tliat  are  of  the  lowest,  like  a  messenger  sent  from  them 
above;  and  then  again  another  ascends  from  those  below  to  them 
above,  and  that  this  is  their  constant  natural  motion  to  continue  for 
ever.    The  chief  of  these  gods,  they  say,  are  twelve  in  number,  to 
each  of  which  they  attribute  a  month,  and  one  sign  of  the  twelve  in 
the  zodiac. 

Through  these  twelve  signs  the  sun,  moon,  and  the  other  five  pla* 
nets  run  their  course.  The  sun  in  a  year's  time,  and  the  moon  in  the 
space  of  a  month. 

To  every  of  the  planets  they  assign  their  own  proper  courses, 
where  are  performed  variously  in  lesser  or  shorter  time  according  as 
their  several  motions  are  quicker  or  slower.  These  stars,  they  say, 
have  a  great  influence  both  as  to  good  and  bad,  in  men's  nativities; 
and  from  the  consideration  of  their  several  natures,  may  be  foreknown 
what  will  befal  men  afterwards*    As  they  foretold  things  to  come  to 


C%ap.  ///•  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  ISJT 

Other  kings  formerly,  so  they  did  to  Alexander,  who  conqaered 
Darius,  and  to  his  successors  Antigonus  and  Seleucus  Nicanor;  and 
accordingly  things  fell  out  as  they  declared,  which  we  shall  relate 
particularly  hereafter,  in  a  more  convenient  time.  They  tell  likewise 
private  men  their  fortunes,  so  certainly,  that  those  who  have  found 
the  tiling  true  by  experience,  have  esteemed  it  a  miracle,  and  above 
the  reach  of  man  to  perform.  Out  of  the  circle  of  the  zodiac  they 
describe  four-and-twenty  stars,  twelve  towards  the  north  pole,  and  at 
many  to  the  south. 

Those  which  we  see,  they  assign  to  the  living;  and  the  other,  that 
do  not  appear,  they  conceive  are  constellations  for  the  dead;  and 
they  term  them  judges  of  all  things.  The  moon,  they  say,  b  in  the 
lowest  orb ;  and  being  therefore  next  to  the  earth  (because  she  is  so 
small)  she  ^nishes  her  course  in  a  little  time,  not  through  the  swift- 
ness of  her  motion,  but  the  shortness  of  her  sphere.  lu  that  which 
they  af&rm,  that  she  has  but  a  borrowed  light,  and  that  when  she  is 
eclipsed,  it  is  caused  by  the  interposition  of  the  shadow  of  the  earth, 
they  agree  with  the  Grecians* 

Their  rules  and  notions  concerning  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  are  but 
weak  and  mean,  which  they  dare  not  positively  foretel,  nor  fix  a 
certain  time  for  them.    They  have  likewise  opinions  concerning  the 
earth,  peculiar  to  themselves,  affirming  it  to  resemble  a  boat,  and  to 
be  hollow ;  to  prove  which,  and  other  things  relating  to  the  frame  of 
the  world,  they  abound  in  arguments :  but  to  give  a  particular  account 
of  them,  we  conceive  would  be  a  thing  foreign  to  our  history.    But 
this  any  man  may  justly  and  truly  say,  that  the  Chaldeans  far  exceed 
all  other  naen  in  the  knowledge  of  astrology,  and  have  studied  it  most 
of  any  other  art  or  science.    But  the  number  of  years  during  which 
the  Chaldeans  say  those  of  their  profession  have  given  themselves 
to  the  study  of  this  natural  philosophy,  is  incredible;  for  when 
Alexander  was  in  Asia,  they  reckoned  up  four  hundred  and  seventy 
thousand  years  since  they  first  began  to  observe  the  motions  of  the 
stars.     But  lest  we  should  make  too  long  a  digression  from  our 
intended  design,  let  this  which  we  have  said  concerning  the  Chal- 
deans suffice. 

Having  now  therefore  spoken  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  and  its 
translation  to  the  Medes,  we  shall  return  to  that  part  of  our  history 
from  whence  we  broke  off. 

Whereas  remarkable  authors  have  differed  among   themselves 
ftbout  the  large  empire  of  the  M edes,  we  conceive  we  shall  not  stray 
from  the  duty  of  true  and  faithful  historians^  if  we  compare  the  diffe- 
rent relations  of  writers  One  with  another. 
Herodotus  indeed,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Xerxes^  says  that  the 


1 28  DIODORUS  SICULt  S*  Book  IJL 

m.       '  ■  ■  — >*— ^—     ' ■        ■  I    w     I    I       I  — ^Mfc— i>fc«^«^  II  , , 

Bhw^        ■  ■       ■    ■  I     ■    rri     1    1  — *  1 ■-     -■       — n     ^■^—^■■i^^    i  ^mi       ii^  ■     -       iii         i  i    ■■  i  ■  ■  i^i  m\    m  amm-^imt^l^^ 

Assyrians  were  conquered  by  the  Medes  after  they  had  held  the  em- 
piri  of  Asia  for  the  space  of  five  hundred  years:  that  thence,  for 
many  ages  after,  there  was  no  one  king  that  liad  the  sole  and  absolute 
authority  of  the  empire,  but  that  the  cities  in  every  place  enjoyed 
their  own  laws  in  a  dcmocratical  government.  At  length,  after  the 
course  of  many  years,  he  says  one  Cyaxares,  renowned  for  his  justice^ 
was  advanced  to  the  throne)  and  that  he  was  the  first  that  subdued 
the  neighbouring  nations  to  the  Medes,  and  gave  beginning  to  that 
empire;  whose  posterity  afterwards  brought  under  the  bordering 
countries,  and  enlarged  their  dominions,  and  continued  their  empire 
to  the  time  of  Astyages,  (who  was  conquered  by  Cyrus  and  the 
Persians),  of  whoili  we  shall  now-only  give  a  touch  in  shorty  and  shall 
treat  more  distinctly  and  particularly  hereafter,  when  we  come  to  the 
times  more  proper  for  this  purpose.  For  in  the  second  year  of  the 
seventeenth  Olympiad  (as  Herodotus  says)  Cyaxares  was  elected  king' 
by  tlie  Medes.  But  Ctesias  the  Cnidian,  who  was  later  than  Hero* 
dotus,  and  lived  about  the  time  of  Cyrus's  expedition  against  hie 
brother  Artaxerxes,  (for  being  then  taken  prisoner,  for  hb  skill  ia 
physic,  he  was  taken  into  the  king's  favour,  and  continued  with  him 
in  gieat  lionour  and  esteem  for  the  space  of  seventeen,  years).  Out 
of  the  public  records  (in  which  the  Persians,  by  force  of  some  lavr 
made  for  that  purpose,  had  in  order  of  time  noted  and  registered  the 
antient  afiairs  and  things  done  in  the  kingdom)  he  industriously 
picked  out  every  thing  that  was  remarkable,  and  methodically  com- 
posed them  into  an  history,  and  brought  them  over  into  Greece. 

In  this  history  he  declares,  that  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyriaa 
empire,  all  Asia  was  under  the  power  of  the  Medes,  and  that  Arbeces^ 
who  overcame  Sardanapalus,  (as  is  before  related),  was  sole  monarch: 
and  that  after  he  had  reigned  eigbt-and-twenty  years,  his  son 
Mandauces  succeeded  him,  who  reigned  over  all  Asia  fifty  yeaie. 
After  him  reigned  Sesarmus  thirty  years;  then  Artius  fifty;  after 
whom  succeeded  Arbianes  two-and- twenty  years;  and  then  followed 
Arsseus,  who  reigned  forty  years.  In  his  time,  it  is  said,  a  great  wer 
broke  out  between  the  Medes  and  the  Cadusians,  upon  the  occasions 
following.  One  Parsodcs,  a  Persian,  for  his  valour,  prudence^ 
and  other  virtues,  was  a  man  highly  honoured,  and  dearly  beloved 
of  the  king,  and  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  in  the  king's 
council. 

This  man,  taking  some  oifence  at  a  sentence  pronounced  against 
him  by  the  king,  fied  with  three  thousand  foot  and  a  thousand  horse 
to  the  Cadusians,  where  he  married  the  sister  of  the  most  potent  man 
amongst  them:  and  not  only  rebelled  himself,  but  persuaded  the 
whole  natiou  of  the  Cadusians  to  a  general  revolt^  and  to  stand,  vlf 


dkap.  in.  DIODORUf  SICULUS.  1S9 

ior  their  liberties:  whcreupoo  he  was  presently  (upoo  the  accouut  of 
Ills  noted  valour)  made  general  of  the  war.  And  now  hearing  that 
nighty  forces  were  preparing  against  him,  he  raised  no  less  than  two 
hondred  thousand  men  out  of  the  country  of  the  Cadusians,  and 
pitched  his  camp  upon  the  borders  of  the  province;  and  though  king 

An«us  came  against  him  with  eight  hundred  thousand  men,  yet 
Aunodes  routed  him,  and  killed  above  fifty  tiiousand,  and  drove  the 
test  out  of  the  country.  Upon  this  victory  he  was  so  honoured  and 
admired,  that  the  inhabitants  forthwith  made  him  their  king;  after 
which  he  vexed  and  tired  out  Media,  with  continual  incursions,  and 
Vrtsted  and  destroyed  all  places  round  al>out  him.  His  name  therefore 
being  grown  famous,  and  now  waxing  old,  and  drawing  near  to  the 
end  of  his  days,  be  enjoined  his  successor  (with  the  denunciation  of 
Bioftt  dreadful  execrations)  never  to  make  peace  with  the  Medcs,  and 
Ef  tbey  did,  he  wished  tlmt  both  the  whole  nation  of  the  Cadusians, 
Uftd  his  own  posterity,  might  be  rooted  out  and  perish  together.  And 
fbr  this  reason  the  Cadusians  were  ever  after  enemies  to  the  Medes, 
never  subject  to  their  kings,  till  Cyrus  transferred  the  empire  to  the 
Persians. 

After  the  death  of  Artsus,  Artynes  was  king  of  the  Medes,and  reigned 
IWD-and-twenty  years;  after  him  Artibarnas  fourteen  years,  in  whose 
le^n  the  Parthians  revolted  and  delivered  up  both  their  city  and  coun* 
try  into  the  bands  of  the  Sacie;  whereupon  arose  a  war  between  the 
Smcm  and  the  Medcs,  which  continued  many  years,  and  after  many  bat- 
tles fought,  and  great  slaughter  on  both  sides,  at  length  peace  was  made 

■pen  these  conditions ^Tliat  the  Parthians  should  return  to  their  an- 

lient  subjection,  and  that  both  sides  should  quietly  enjoy  whatever  they 
did  before,  and  should  ever  after  be  friends  and  confederates.  Za- 
Ban  at  that  time  was  queen  of  the  Sace,fi  woman  of  a  warlike  spirit, 
farczceediog  any  of  ber  sex  among  the  Sacss  for  courage  and  activity 
in  martial  afbirs.  For  this  nation  is  remarkable  for  brave -spirited 
spooien  that  use  to  go  oat  to  the  wars  as  fellow-soldiers  with  the  men  $ 
and  tbey  say  that  this  Virago  was  extraordinarily  beautiful,  and 
admirable  for  courage  and  council  in  all  her  afiairs.  For  she  con- 
focred  the  neighbouring  princes  who  Imd  proudly  oppressed  the 
and  civilized  the  most  part  of  the  country,  and  built  many 
,  and  every  way  improved  and  enriched  her  people;  and  tliere- 
bre  the  citizens,  after  her  death,  in  gratitude  for  the  many  advantages 
they  enjoyed  by  her,  and  to  preserve  the  memory  of  her  virtues, 
built  fur  her  a  sepulchre  far  higher  than  any  ut  tl:e  rest.  For  they 
reared  up  for  her  a  pyramid  triangular,  from  the  foundation  three 
fufloogs  broad  on  every  side,  sptrmg  up  in  a  sharp  ptiint  at  the  top  a 
furlong  in  height.    Tbey  placed  likewise  upon  her  tomb  a  Colossus 

Vol.  1.  No.  33.  • 


13d  DIODORUS  SICULUS#  Booi  t£ 


in  gold  representing  her^  and  adored  her  as  a  demi-goddess,  and 
performed  all  other  things  wilh  more  state  and  grandeur  than  to  any 
of  her  predecessors. 

After  the  death  of  Astibara,  king  of  the  Medes^  who  died  old  in 

Ecbatana^  his  son  Apandas   (whom  the  Grecians  call  Astyages) 

succeededi  who  being  conquered  by  Cyrus  the  Persian^  the  empire 

'  devolved  upon  the  Persians.    Of  which  we  shall  write  distinctly  in 

its  proper  place. 

Having  therefore  said  enough  (as  we  conceive)  of  the  empire  of 
the  Assyrians  and  Medes,  and  the  differences  among  writers  con- 
cerning them^  w&  shall  pass  over  to  India,  and  give  a  particular 
account  of  things  said  to  be  done  there. 

India  is  of  a  quadrangular  form,  one  side  lying  towards  the  east^ 
and  the  other  to  the  south,  environed  and  washed  by  the  great  ocean  $ 
that  side  on  the  north  is  divided  by  the  mountain  Hemodus  firom 
Scythia,  where  the  Sacss  inhabit :  the  fourth  part  towards  the  west^ 
is  bounded  with  the  river  Indus,  the  greatest  of  all  others  next  to  the 
river  Nile. 

The  whole  extent  of  India,  from  east  to  west,  is  eight-and-twenty 
thousand  furlongs  j  and  from  north  to  south  two  and  thirty  thousand 
furlongs.  The  extent  of  India  being  thus  very  large,  it  seems  most 
of  any  other  part  of  the  world  to  lie  under  the  tropic  of  Capricorn* 
And  in  many  remote  parts  of  India,  the  sun  casts  no  shadow^  neither 
is  the  north  pole  seen  there  in  the  night,  nor  any  of  the  constellation 
called  Arcturus  in  the  utmost  parts;  and  for  this  reason^  they  say^ 
the  shadows  bend  towards  the  south. 

The  mountains  of  India  abound  with  all  sorts  of  fruit  trees,  and 
the  fields  every  where  clothed  with  fruits  of  the  earth,  full  of  pleasant 
plains,  watered  with  many  fivers;  so  that  the  country  bears  two  crops 
in  the  year.  It  breeds  likewise  divers  sorts  of  creatures,  both  volatile 
and  terrestrial,  for  strength  and  largeness  remarkable  above  others. 
It  aifords  plentiful  pastures  for  multitudes  of  mighty  elephants^  in 
so  much  as  those  kind  of  beasts  which  are  bred  there,  are  far  stronger 
than  those  in  Africa.  And  therefore  many  of  them  being  taken  in 
hunting,  and  inured  to  martial  exercises,  are  of  great  use  and 
advantage  to  them  for  the  obtaining  of  victories.  And  such  is  the 
plenty  there  of  all  sorts  of  fruits,  that  the  men  are  taller  and  bigger 
than  any  elsewhere ;  and  the  air  is  so  pure,  and  the  water  so  clear 
and  wholesome,  that  by  the  help  of  tliese  natural  advantages,  the 
inhabitants  are  very  quick  and  ingenious  in  any  art  or  professi(Hi« 
As  the  earth  is  fruitful  in  the  producing  plenty  of  pleasant  fruils,  so 
in  the  bowels  of  it  are  to  be  found  all  sorts  of  metals :  for  it  abounds 
in  mines  of  gold  and  silver,  brass,  iron>  and  tiui  and  ncbly  affords  idl 


€K^,  ///.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  131 

~      I        ^ii^— — ^— w^Mi— — B^— — ^— ^— — «»  —— ».  II  I  w  I   I    I     I      «  ■  ■»■■         ■  ■  I   ■  n    •      m 

Other  things  useful  both  as  to  pleasure  and  profit,  and  likewise  for 
service  in  times  of  war.  Besides  corn,  abundance  of  millet  grows 
there^  being  richly  watered  by  the  overflowing  of  the  rivers :  there  is 
likewise  great  store  of  all  sorts  of  pulse  and  rice^  and  that  which  they 
call  Bosphorus^  and  many  other  fruits  for  the  sustaining  of  man's 
life.  To  all  these  may  be  added  many  other  fruits  useful  for  food^ 
and  likewise  as  many  fit  for  the  feeding  of  cattle,  of  which  it  would. 
be  too  tedious  to  write  particularly.  And  for  this  reason  it  is  said» 
that  there  is  never  any  famine  in  India,  or  want  of  victuals;  for  being 
that  the  land  there  bears  two  crops  every  year,  once  in  the  winter, 
about  the  time  of  wheat  seeding  among  other  nations,  and  the  other 
about  the  timet)f  the  summer  solstice,  when  rice,  bosphorus,  sesamus, 
and  millet  are  used  to  be  sown ;  at  both  these  times  the  Indians  reap 
very  plentiful  harvests.  And  if  one  harvest  happens  to  miss,  the 
other  is  sure  to  make  amends  for  it.  Besides  there  are  many  fruits 
which  grow  naturally  of  themselves,  and  the  marshes  afford  for  men's 
food,  abundance  of  roots  of  a  most  sweet  and  delicious  taste.  For  all 
the  fields  almost  of  the  whole  country  are  watered  in  summer  time 
with  the  sweet  waters  of  the  overflowing  rivers,  and  with  the  rains 
from  heaven,  which  fell  constantly  at  certain  times  every  year,  in  the 
summer;  and  the  roots  in  the  marshes  (especially  of  the  canes)  are 
perfectly  boiled  by  the  heat  of  the  sun.  There  are  laws,  likewise,  in 
India,  which  conduce  much  to  the  preventing  of  famine  among 
them.  Amongst  other  people,  by  devastations  in  time  of  war  the 
land  lies  untitled;  but  amongst  the  Indians,  husbandmen  (as  sacred) 
are  never  touched,  so  that  though  the  armies  fight  and  engage  even 
under  their  very  noses,  yet  they  arc  never  in  the  least  prejudiced. 
For  though  the  armies  on  both  sides  slaughter  one  another,  yet  they 
never  hurt  the  husbandman,  as  one  who  is  a  servant  for  the  common 
good  and  advantage  of  them  all ;  neither  do  they  burn  their  enemy's 
country,  or  cut  down  their  trees  or  plants. 

Moreover,  in  India  are  many  great  navigable  rivers  which  descend 
into  the  plains  froni  the  mountains  in  tlie  northern  parts,  (where  they 
have  their  spring-heads)  and  at  length  all  meet  together  and  fall  into 
the  river  Ganges,  which  is  thirty  furlongs  in  breadth,  and  takes  its 
course  from  the  north  to  the  south,  and  so  empties  itself  into  the 
main  ocean,  passing  by  in  its  course  the  nation  of  the  Gandarides 
lying  on  the  east,  where  are  bred  multitudes  of  most  monstrous  ele- 
phants. No  foreign  king  hitherto  ever  conquered  that  part  of  tlie 
country,  all  strangers  dreading  the  number  and  strength  of  those 
creatures.  Even  Alexander  himself,  who  conquered  all  Asia  besides^i 
left  only  the  Gandarides  untouched.  For  when  he  came  with  his 
whole  army  as  far  as  to  the  river  Ganges,  and  had  subdued  all  th% 


132  DIODORUS  srcuLUS.  Book  IL 

Indians  behind  him,  as  soon  9s  he  understood  that  the  Gandarides 
had  four  thousand  elephants  fitted  and  completely  furnished  for  war^ 
he  wholly  desisted  the  further  prosecution  of  his  design  against  them. 
Much  like  to  the  river  Ganges  is  that  called  Indusj  which  runs  with 
a  swift  course  likewise  from  the  norths  and  fails  into  the  ocean,  and 
divides  India  from  the  rest  of  Asia;  and  in  its  course  through  wide 
and  spacious  plains  takes  in  many  navigable  rivers^  amongst  which 
the  most  famous  are  Hipanis,  Hydaspes,  and  Arcesinea.  There 
are  many  other  rivers  also  which  pass  through  several  parts  of  India 
which  enrich  the  country  with  pleasant  gardens,  and  all  sorts  of 
fruits. 

The  philosophers  and  naturalists  of  this  country  give  this  reason 
why  there  are  so  many  rivers,  and  such  plenty  of  water  in  India. 
They  say  that  the  adjacent  countries,  the  Scythians,  Bactrians,  and 
Arianians,  lie  higher  than  India,  whence  (from  good  reason)  they 
conclude  that  the  rains  flowing  down  by  degrees  into  the  lower  coun- 
tries, so  water  them  that  they  make  many  large  rivers :  but  above  all 
the  other  rivers  of  India,  that  they  call  Silla  (which  springs  fiom  a 
fountain  of  the  same  name)  has  a  peculiar  property:  for  this  only  of 
all  the  others,  will  not  admit  any  thing  thrown  into  it  to  swim,  butin 
a  wonderful  manner  swallows  up  every  thing,  and  forceably  diaws  it 
to  the  bottom. 

Moreover  India  being  of  the  largest  extent  of  all  others,  by  to,  is 
inhabited  by  many  diilercnt  nations  (of  whom  none  are  foreigbersj 
but  all  natural  inhabitants) :  and  they  say  that  no  strangers  ever 
planted  amongst  them,  nor  they  themselves  ever  sent  forth  any 
colonies  into  other  countries;  and  they  tell  stories  that  antiently  the 
inhabitants  fed  only  upon  herbs  and  roots  that  grow  in  the  fields',  and 
clothed  themselves  with  wild  beast's  skins,  as  the  Grecians  did;  and 
that  arts  and  other  things  conducing  to  the  well-being  of  man's  life 
were  found  out  by  degrees,  necessity  pressing  upon  a  creature  that 
was  rational  and  ingenious,  and  had  likewise  the  further  helps  and 
advantages  of  hands,  speech,  and  quickness  of  invention  tO  find  out 
ways  to  relieve  himself. 

Some  of  the  most  learned  of  the  Indians  have  given  an  account  of 
the  antiquity  of  their  country,  of  which  it  is  our  part  here  to  say 
something  in  short. 

Tiiey  say,  that  in  antient  tiuie,  when  men  lived  scattered  and 
dispersed  here  and  there,  Bacchus,  with  a  great  army  from  the  west^ 
overran  all  India,  which  at  that  time  had  no  considerable  city  in  it 
able  to  make  any  resistance ;  and  that  a  plague  (through  the  violent 
and  parching  heat)  destrc^ing  many  of  his  soldiers,  they  say,  that 
prudent  general  drew  his  army  out  of  the  plains  to  the  tops  of  the 


Chap.  III.  DidDORUS  SICULUS.  133 

'    .   I      ggggggggss  '  ,     ■  ■■■■        '     '  sa 

mouDtaios^  where  (by  means  of  the  cool  blasts  of  the  refreshing  air^ 
and  drinking  of  the  spring-waters  there  at  hand)  they  were  restored 
to  their  former  health;  and  that  the  place  where  his  army  was  thus 
recovered^  was  called  the  Thigh;  hence  the  Grecians  frame  a  story 
of  this  god  to  this  day,  that  Bacchus  was  bred  in  the  Thigh.  After- 
wards (they  say)  he  diligently  employed  himself  in  sowing  and  plant* 
ing  divers  fruit-trees,  and  imparted  the'hrt  to  the  Indians,  and  found 
out  the  use  of  wine,  and  other  things  conducing  to  the  comfort  of 
man's  life.  He  built  likewise  stately  cities,  and  removed  the  villages 
to  more  commodious  situations;  and  instituted  the  manner  of  divine 
worship,  and  made  laws,  and  set  up  courts  of  justice;  and  at  lastj 
for  the  many  excellent  inventions  imparted  to  the  Indians,  he  was 
esteeemed  as  a  god,  and  obtained  immortal  honours.  They  report 
that  he  had  a  regiment  of  women  in  his  army,  and  that  in  the  heat  of 
battle  he  made  use  of  timbrels  and  cymbals,  the  trumpet  being  not 
at  that  time  found  out:  and  that  after  he  had  reigned  over  all  India 
for  the  space  of  two-and-iifty  years,  he  died  of  extreme  old  age,  leav« 
ing  the  kingdom  to  his  sons,  who  enjoyed  it^  and  their  posterity  after 
them,  successively,  till  many  ages  after  the  regal  authority  was  abro- 
gated, and  the  cities  were  governed  by  a  democracy.  These  are  the 
things  related  of  Bacchus  and  his  posterity  by  the  inhabitants  of  the 
mountainous  parts  of  India. 

Hiey  say,  moreover,  that  Hercules  was  born  amongst  them,  and^ 
like  the  Greeks,  furnish  him  with  a  club  and  a  lion's  skin;  and  for 
strength  and  courage  that  he  excelled  all  other  men,  and  cleared  both 
sea  and  land  of  monsters  and  wild  beasts :  that  of  many  wives  he  be* 
gat  many  sons,  but  only  one  daughter.  Amongst  these  sons,  when 
they  were  grown  up,  he  divided  India  into  equal  parts,  and  appointed 
each  to  be  king  over  their  several  shares,  allotting  likewise  one  part 
of  the  kingdom  to  his  daughter,  whom  he  carefully  brought  up  under 
his  own  eye.  It  is  said  that  he  built  many  cities,  the  most  famous  of 
which  is  called  Palibothra,  in  which  he  built  a  stately  palace,  and 
planted  it  with  a  great  number  of  inhabitants,  and  fortified  it  round 
with  deep  trenches,  filled  with  water  from  the  river.  And  at  length 
after  his  death  he  was  honoured  as  a  god.  His  posterity  reigned  for 
many  ages  together,  and  performed  many  noble  actions;  but  never 
made  any  foreign  expeditions,  or  sent  forth  any  colonies  into  other 
parts ;  and  though  that  after  the  course  of  many  years  most  of  the 
cities  reduced  themselves  under  the  power  of  a  democratical  govern- 
ment, yet  there  were  some  of  the  Indians  that  flourished  under  a 
monarchy,  till  the  very  time  that  Alexander  invaded  that  country. 

Although  the  Indians  have  laws  peculiar  to  themselves^  differing 


134  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  JT0 

from  all  other  people,  yet  one  especially  is  most  remarkable^  instituted 
by  their  antient  philosophers,  which  is  this : 

It  is  an  established  law-^That  none  amop^t  them  should  be  ft 
servant ;  but  that  every  one  being  free,  all  sl^idd  be  honoured  with 
equal  respect:  for  they  that  know  that  they  are  neither  to  be  superior 
nor  inferior  to  any,  are  ready  to  undergo  all  the  shocks  of  fortune  with 
courage  and  resolution*  For  it  is  a  foolish  thing  to  make  laws  for  an 
equality  amongst  all,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  to  order  inequality  of 
estates. 

All  the  people  of  India  are  divided  into  seven  ranks;  the  first  is 
philosophers,  who  are  least  in  number,  but  chiefest  in  esteem:  for 
they  are  free  from  all  public  offices ;  and  are  neither  subject  them* 
selves  to  any,  nor  any  subject  to  them.  Yet  they  are  made  use  of  by 
their  friends  to  offer  sacrifice  for  them  while  they  are  alive,  and  to 
perform  the  solemn  exequies  at  their  funerals  when  they  are  dead,  as 
persoi»  who  are  greatly  beloved  of  the  gods,  and  skilful  in  matters 
relating  to  the  affairs  of  the  dead  in  the  shades  below;  for  which  piece 
of  service  they  are  highly  honoured,  and  presented  with  many  rich 
gifts:  especially  they  much  advantage  the  Indians  in  general,  at  such 
times  as  being  admitted  into  the  public  assemblies,  at  the  beginning 
of  every  year  they  foretel  droughts,  rains,  winds,  and  diseases,  and 
other  things  convenient  and  useful  for  the  auditors  to  be  informed  of; 
for  so,  both  king  and  people  being  forewarned  of  things  to  come^ 
provide  against  them,  and  always  prepare  something  or  other  that 
may  be  of  advantage  to  them  in  such<;ases. 

And  if  any  of  the  philosophers  prove  afterwards  to  be  mistaken  io 
his  prognostication,  he  undergoes  no  other  punishment,  save  only 
that  he  is  evil  spoken  of,  and  is  to  be  silent  ever  after  while  he  lives. 

The  second  rank  or  tribe  is  of  the  husbandmen ;  these  are  more  in 
number  than  any  of  the  rest :  these  likewise  are  free  from  the  militia, 
and  all  public  offices,  and  spend  all  their  time  and  care  about  tilling 
and  improving  the  lands. 

No  enemy  ever  does  them  any  prejudice;  but  out  of  a  due  regard 
to  the  common  good,  forbear  to  injure  them  in  the  h^ast  degree;  and 
therefore,  the  land  being  never  spoiled  nor  wasted,  yields  its  fruits  in 
great  abundance,  and  furnishes  the  inhabitants  with  plenty  of  victuals 
and  all  other  provision.  The  husbandmen  live  in  the  fields  with  their 
wives  and  children,  and  never  meddle  with  the  concerns  of  the  cities. 
They  pay  the  king  his  tribute  out  of  the  fruits  of  the  ground:  for  all 
the  land  of  India  belongs  to  the  king,  and  no  private  roan  has  any 
land  of  his  own.  Besides  the  tribute,  the  fourth  part  of  the  fruits  ar^ 
paid  to  the  king. 


Chap.  m.  M0150RUS  SICULOT.  135 

The  third  tribe  comprehended  the  herdsmen  and  shepherds,  add 
all  sorts  of  feeders  of  cattle;  and  these  neither  lived  in  the  cities  nor 
villages^  but  in  tents>  and  by  hunting  cleared  the  land  both  of  wild 
beasts  and  hurtful  birds;  and  by  this  exercise  all  India  was  freed  from 
ravenous  creatures  which  abounded  in  the  country,  both  birds  and 
wild  beasts  of  all  sorts,  that  eat  up  and  devoured  the  seed  and  fruiti 
of  the  husbandman* 

The  fourth  cliiss  and  order  of  men  amongst  them  was  made  up. 
of  the  mechanics^  some  of  whom  were  employed  in  making  of  arms, 
and  others  of  tools  for  tillage  and  husbandry,  and  other  serviceable 
utensils*  This  order  is  not  only  free  from  all  taxes  and  impo* 
sitions,  but  is  allowed  a  yearly  proportion  of  com  out  of  the  king's 
granaries. 

The  fifth  is  the  militia  (the  second  for  number)  who  in  times  of 
peace  live  idle  lives,  and  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  their  pleasures. 
All  the  soldiers,  with  the  war-horses  and  elephants,  are  kept  and 
maintained  out  of  the  king's  treasury. 

The  sixth  tribe  are  the  ephori,  who  are  the  inquisitors,  and  have  a 
diligent  and  observant  eye  upon  every  thing  that  is  done  througliout 
all  India,  and  upon  any  discovery  inform  the  king  of  what  they 
know;  and  when  there  is  no  king,  the  princes  and  principal  ministers 
of  state* 

In  the  seventh  rank  are  reckoned  the  senators,  such  as  have  place 
in  the  great  and  general  councils :  these  are  the  fewest  in  number^ 
but  of  greatest  dignity  for  their  birth,  and  highest  esteem  for  their 
wisdom  and  prudence.  Out  of  these  are  chosen  the  king's  privy- 
council,  governors  of  provinces,  judges,  generals  of  armies  in  times 
of  war,  and  other  principal  officers. 

These  are  the  parts  into  which  almost  all  India  is  divided. 
It  is  not  lawful  for  any  to  marry  out  of  the  tribe  to  which  he  be- 
longs, nor  to  exercise  any  other  trade  or  calling  than  that  wherein  he 
has  been  bred  up,  as  for  a  soldier  to  employ  himself  in  husbandry,  or 
for  an  artificer  to  turn  philosopher. 

India  breeds  the  largest,  most  courageous,  and  strongest  elephantf 
of  any  other  place.  This  creature  does  not  couple  with  the  female 
in  any  strange  or  unusual  manner  (as  some  say)  bat  as  horses  and  all 
other  four-footed  beasts.  They  go  with  young  at  the  least  sixteen 
months,  at  the  most  eighteen.  They  bring  forth,  for  the  most  part 
(like  mares)  but  one  at  a  time,  which  the  dam  suckles  till  it  be  six 
](ears  old. 

Most  of  the  inhabitants  live  very  long;  the  oldest  attain  to  two 
hundred  years. 

In  India  there  are  magistrates  appointed  to  take  care  of  strangers^ 


1 S6  OIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  It, 

to  see  that  no  injury  be  offered  them;  and  if  any  of  tbem^be  sick^ 
these  magistrates  provide  physicians^  and  in  all  other  respects  are 
very  careful  of  them;  and  if  they  die,  they  bury  them;  and  whatever 
goods  or  monies  they  leave  behind,  they  give  it  to  their  kindred* 

Their  judges  are  very  diligent  in  deciding  suits  brought  before 
them;  and  severely  punish  offenders.  But  this  short  account  shall 
suffice  concerning  India  and  its  antiquities.  And  now  we  shall  say 
something  particularly  of  the  Scythians,  which  border  upon  the 
other* 

The  Scytliians  anti^ntly  enjoyed  but  a  small  tract  of  ground 
but  (through  their  valour)  growing  stronger  by  degrees,  they  enlai^ged 
their  dominion  far  and  near,  and  attained  at  last  to  a  vast  and  glorious 
empire* 

At  the  first  a  very  few  of  them,  and  those  very  despicable  for  their 
mean  original,  seated  themselves  near  to  the  river  Araxes.  Afterwards 
one  of  their  antlent  kings,  who  was  a  warlike  prince,  and  skilful  ia 
arms,  gained  to  their  country,  all  the  mountainous  parts  as  far  as  to 
mount  Caucasus,  and  all  the  champaign  country,  to  the  ocean,  and 
the  lake  Mseotis,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  plain  to  the  river  Tanais.  Thea 
they  tell  a  story,  that  a  virgin  was  born  among  them  of  the  earth,  of 
the  shape  of  a  woman  from  the  middle  upwards,  and  of  a  viper  down* 
wards:  and  that  Jupiter  begot  of  her  a  son  called  Scythes;  they  say, 
that  from  this  prince  (being  more  eminent  than  any  of  his  ancestors) 
the  people  were  called  Scythians :  there  were  two  brothers  that 
descended  from  this  king,  that  were  remarkable  for  valour,  the  one 
called  Palus  and  the  other  Napas.  These  two  brothers,  after  many 
glorious  actions  done  by  them,  divided  the  country  between  them, 
and  from  their  own  names  called  one  part  of  the  inhabitants  Pdians^ 
and  the  other  Napians. 

Some  time  afterwards  their  posterity  becoming  famous  and  emi- 
nent for  valour  and  martial  aflairs,  subdued  many  territories  beyond 
Tanais. 

Then  turning  their  arms  the  other  way,  they  led  their  forces  as  fiur 
as  to  the  river  Nile,  in  Egypt,  and  having  subdued  many  nations  lying 
between,  they  enlarged  the  empire  of  the  Scytliians  as  far  as  to  the 
eastern  ocean  one  way,  and  to  the  Caspian  sea  and  the  lake  of  Mceotif 
another* 

This  nation  prospered  still  more  and  more,  and  had  kings  tlial 
were  very  famous;  from  whom  the  Sacans,  the  Massageties,  and  the 
Arimaspanis,  and  many  others  called  by  other  names  derive  their 
origin.  Amongst  others,  there  were  two  remarkable  colonies  that 
were  drawn  out  of  the  conquered  nations  by  those  kings;  the  one 
they  brought  out  of  Assyria,  and  settled  in  the  country  lying  betwee|i 


Chap.  III.  DIODORUS  StCULUtS.  13/ 

PapblagODiaandPontus;  the  other  out  of  Media^  which  they  placed 
near  the  river  Tanais,  which  people  are  called  Sauromatians^  who 
many  years  after,  increasing  in  number  and  power,  wasting  the 
greatest  part  of  Scythia,  and  rooting  out  all  that  they  conquered^ 
totally  ruinated  the  whole  nation.  Afterwards,  the  royal  line\ 
failing,  they  say,  women  remarkable  for  courage  and  strength  of 
body,  reigned  instead  of  kings*  For  in  these  nations,  women,  like 
men,  are  trained  up  for  the  wars,  being  nothing  inferior  to  men  for 
courage. 

Henceforward  many  and  great  things  were  done  by  famous  woroen> 
not  only  in  Scythia,  but  in  the  neighbouring  nations.  For  when 
Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  the  most  powerful  prince  in  his  age,  led  a 
mighty  army  into  Scythia,  the  queen  of  Scythia  routed  the  Persian 
army^  and  taking  Cyrus  himself  in  the  battle  prisoner,  afterwards 
crucified  him.  And  such  was  the  valour  of  the  Amazons,  after  they 
had  thus  strengthened  themselves,  that  they  not  only  overran  their 
neighbours,  but  conquered  a  great  part  both  of  Europe  and  Asia* 
But  since  now  we  have  begun  to  speak  of  the  Amazons,  we  conceive 
it  not  impertinent  if  we  here  relate  cursorily,  those  things  concerning 
them,  which  for  the  strangeness  of  the  matter  may  seem  to  resemble 
romantic  fables. 

There  was  heretofore  a  potent  nation  seated  upon  the  river  Ther- 
modon,  governed  always  by  women,  as  their  queens;  in  which  the 
women,  like  men,  managed  all  their  martial  afiairs.  Amongst  these 
female  princes  they  say  there  was  one  that  excelled  all  the  rest  for 
strength  and  valour,  who  got  together  an  army  of  women,  and  having 
trained  them  up  in  martial  discipline,  first  subdued  some  of  her 
neighbouring  nations  5  afterwards,  byher  valour  growing  more  famed 
and  renowned,  she  led  her  army  against  the  rest,  and  fortune  favouring 
her  arms,  she  was  so  pufied  up,  that  she  called  herself  the  daughter 
of  Mars,  and  ordered  the  men  to  spin  wool,  and  do  the  women's 
work  within  doors. 

She  made  laws  also,  whereby  she  enjoined  the  women  to  go  forth 
to  the  wars,  and  the  men  to  be  as  slaves,  and  do  all  tlie  servile  work 
at  home.  Therefore,  when  any  male  child  was  born,  they  broke  their 
thighs  and  arms,  to  render  them  useless  and  unfit  for  war:  and  as  to 
the  females,  they  seared  off  the  right  breast,  lest  it  should  be  a  hin« 
derance  to  them  in  fight :  and  hence  they  were  called  Amazons.  At 
length,  grown  eminent  for  policy  and  skill  in  military  afikirs,  she  built 
a  large  city  called  Themiscyra,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Thermodon, 
and  beautified  it  with  a  stately  palace.  She  was  very  exact  ia  mar- 
tial discipline,  and  keeping  goodvrdcr:  she  first  conquered  all  the 
neighbouring  nations,  as  far  as  to  the  river  Tanais;  and  haviog 

Vol.  1.    No.  33.  T 


138  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BobJc  IL 

performed  all  these  noble  exploits^  (they  say)^  in  a  battle  she  after- 
wards fought/ (having  first  signalized  her  valour)  i  she  ended  her  days 
like  an  hero.  Upon  her  death  her  daughter  succeeded  her  in  the 
kingdom,  who,  imitating  her  mother's  valour,  in  some  exploits 
excelled  her:  for  she  caused  the  girb  from  their  very  infancy,  to  be 
exercised  in  hunting,  and  daily  trained  up  in  martial  dbcipline. 
Then  she  instituted  solemn  festivals  and  sacrifices  to  be  ofiered  to 
Mars  and  Diana,  called  Tauropoli.  Slie  advanced  her  arms  beyond 
Tanais,  and  brought  under  all  the  nations  as  far  as  to  Thrace.  Then, 
returning  to  her  own  country  with  a  rich  booty,  she  erected  stately 
temples  to  tliose  deities  before  mentioned,  and  gained  the  hearts  of 
her  subjects  by  her  easy  and  gentle  government.  Afterwards  she 
undertook  an  expedition  against  them  that  lay  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river^  and  added  a  great  part  of  Asia  to  her  dominion,  and  extended 
her  arms  as  far  as  to  Syria. 

After  her  death,  the  crown  descended  still  to  the  next  of  kin,  and 
every  one  in  their  time  governed  with  great  commendation,  and  ad- 
vanced the  honour  and  renown  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Amazons. 

Many  ages  after  (the  fame  and  renown  of  the  Amazons  being 
spread  abroad  all  the  world  over)  they  say,  that  Hercules,  the  son  of 
Jupiter  and  Alcmena,  was  enjoined  by  Eurystheus  to  fight  Hippolyte^ 
the  Amazon  queen,  and  to  strip  her  of  her  belt.  Upon  which  he 
made  war  upon  the  Amazons,  and  in  a  great  battle  routed  thero^  and 
took  Hippolyte,  and  her  belt  together,  which  so  weakened  them,  that 
the  neighbouring  barbarians,  knowing  their  low  condition,  despised 
them ;  and  remembering  what  ruin  and  destruction  they  bad  formerly 
made  amongst  them,  so  wasted  them  with  continual  war,  that  not  so 
much  as  the  name  of  Amazons  is  now  to  be  found  any  where  in  the 
world.  For  a  few  years  after  Herculcs's  time,  the  Trojan  war  brdce 
forth,  at  which  time  Penthesilea,  queen  of  those  Amazons  that  were 
left,  and  daughter  of  Mars,  having  committed  a  cruel  murder  among 
her  ow  n  people,  for  the  liorridness  of  the  fact  fled,  and  after  the  death 
of  Hector,  brought  aid  to  the  Trojans;  and  though  she  bravely 
behaved  herself,  and  killed  many  of  the  Greeks,  yet  at  Ust  she  was 
slain  by  Achilles,  and  so  in  heroic  actions  ended  her  days.  This, 
they  say,  was  the  last  queen  of  the  Amazons,  a  brave-spirited  woman, 
after  whom  the  nation  (growing  by  degrees  weaker  and  weaker)  was 
at  length  wholly  extinct :  so  that  these  later  ages  look  upon  ail  those 
old  stories  concerning  the  valiant  acts  of  the  Amazons,  to  be  but 
mere  fictions  and  fables.  Now,  since  we  have  thus  far  spoken  of  the 
northern  parts  of  Asia,  it  is  convenient  to  observe  something  relating 
to  the  antiquity  of  the  Hyperboreans. 
Amongst  them  tiiut  have  written  old  stories  much  like  fables* 


Chap.  III.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  139 

Hecateas  and  some  others  say,  that  there  is  an  island  in  the  oceaa 
over  against  Gaul,  (as  big  as  Sicily)  under  the  arctic  pole,  where  the 
Hjrperboreans  inhabit;  so  called,  because  they  lie  beyond  the  breezes 
of  the  north  wind.  That  the  soil  here  is  very  rich,  and  very  fruitful ; 
and  the  climate  temperate,  insomuch  as  there  are  two  crops  in  the 
year. 

They  say  that  Latona  was  bom  here,  and  therefore,  that  they  wor- 
ship Apollo  above  all  other  gods;  and  because  they  are  daily  singing 
songs  in  praise  of  this  god,  and  ascribing  to  him  the  highest  honours, 
they  say  that  these  inhabitants  demean  themselves,  as  if  they  were 
Apollo*s  priests,  who  has  there  a  stately  grove  and  renowned  temple, 
of  a  round  form,  beautified  with  many  rich  gifts.  That  there  is  a  city 
likewise  consecrated  to  this  god,  whose  citizens  are  most  of  them 
harpers,  who,  playing  on  the  harp,  chant  sacred  hymns  to  Apollo  in 
the  temple,  setting  forth  his  glorious  acts.  The  Hyperboreans  use 
their  own  natural  language;  but  of  long  and  aotient  time  have  had  a 
special  kindness  for  the  Grecians,  and  more  especially  for  the  Athe- 
nians and  them  of  Delos.  And  that  some  of  the  Grecians  passed 
over  to  the  Hjrperboreans,  and  left  behind  them  divers  presents,  in- 
scribed with  &eek  characters;  and  that  Abaris  formerly  travelled 
thence  into  Greece^  and  renewed  the  antient  league  of  friendship  with 
the  Delians. 

Tbey  say,  moreover,  that  the  moon  in  this  island  seems  as  if  it 
were  near  to  the  earth,  and  represents  in  the  iieice  of  it  excrescences 
like  spots  in  the  eanh.  And  that  Apollo  once  in  nineteen  years 
comes  into  the  bland  j  in  which  space  of  time  the  stars  perform  their 
courses,  and  return  to  the  same  point;  and  therefore  the  Greeks  call 
the  revolution  of  nineteen  years  the  Great  Year.  At  tliis  time  of  his 
a(^>earance  (they  say)  that  he  plays  upon  the  harps,  and  sings  and 
dances  all  the  niglit,  from  the  vernal  equinox  to  the  rising  of  the 
Pleiades,  solacing  himself  with  the  praises  of  his  own  successful  ad« 
ventures.  The  sovereignty  of  thb  city,  and  the  care  of  the  temple 
(they  say)  belongs  to  the  Boreades,  the  posterity  of  Boreas,  who  hold 
the  principality  by  descent  in  ^  direct  liqe  from  that  ancestor. 


3es 


1 40  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  IL 

-^  "  I     ■[■      III      I  Mil  •         i— — ^  II  I 


CHAP.  IV. 

^  description  of  Arabia  the  Desert,  Happy,  SfC.  Metals,  precious 
stones,  beasts,  Sfc.  A  description  of  Taprobane  in  the  Southern 
Ocean,  now  coiled  Ceylon^  or  Zeilan*  The  strange  things  there. 
How  discovered  by  lambulus. 

HAVING  now  finished  these  foregoing  relations,  we  shall  bend  oar 
discourse  to  the  other  parts  of  Asia  not  yet  spoken  of,  and  chiefly  to 
Arabia. 

This  country  is  situated  between  Syria  and  Egypt,  ai^  is  divided 
into  several  nations.  On  the  ea^t,  the  Arabians  called  the  Nabatheans 
inhabit  a  tract  partly  desert,  and  in  other  parts  without  water,  and 
there  is  very  little  of  it  that  bears  any  fruit;  and  therefore  the  inha- 
bitants live  by  robbing  and  stealing;  and,  for  that  end  roving  up  and 
down  the  countries  far  and  near,  they  vex  the  inhabitants  with  their 
continual  incursions  and  robberies,  it  being  a  very  difficult  matter  to 
subdue  them.  For  in  the  dry  country  they  have  wells  dug  in  con- 
venient places,  unknown  to  strangers,  whither  they  fly  for  refuge,  and 
arc  safe:  for,  knowing  where  the  waters  lie  hid  and  private,  upon 
opening  of  the  wells  they  are  largely  supplied;  but  strangers  who 
pursue  them  (unacquainted  with  those  fountains)  either  perish  for 
thirst,  or,  falling  into  many  other  disasters,  and  quite  tired  oat^ 
scarcely  ever  return  home:  and  therefore  these  Arabians  (being  that 
they  are  not  to  be  conquered)  are  never  enslaved,  nor  ever  admit  any 
foreign  prince  over  them,  but  preserve  themselves  continually  in  per- 
fect liberty;  and  therefore  neither  the  Assyrians  antiently,  nor  the 
Medes  and  Persians,  nor  the  very  Macedonians  themselves,  were  ever 
able  to  conquer  them ;  who,  though  they  often  marched  with  great 
armies  against  them,  yet  they  ever  failed  in  their  designs. 

In  the  country  of  the  Nabatheans,  there  is  a  rock  strongly  fortified^ 
to  which  there  is  an  ascent  but  one  way,  through  which  a  few  only 
at  a  time  mount  up  to  cast  down  their  fardels.  There  is  likewise  a 
large  mere  which  produces  brimstone,  from  whence  they  raise  no 
small  revenue :  it  is  five  hundred  furlongs  in  length,  and  sixty  in 
breadth:  the  water,  for  smell,  stinks,  and  is  bitter  in  taste,  so  that 
neither  fish,  nor  any  other  living  thing  using  the  water,  can  live  there. 
There  are,  indeed,  great  rivers  whose  waters  are  exceeding  sweet, 
which  empty  themselves  into  the  lake,  and  yet  it  stinks  notwith- 
standing. Every  year  the  brimstone  rises  up  out  of  the  middle  of  the 
mere,  some  pieces  two,  and  others  three  plethras  square  in  quantity 


Chap.  IV.  DIQDORUS  SICU  LUS.  141 

The  greater  pieces  the  inhabitants  call  bulls,  and  the  lesser  calfs. 
When  the  brimstone  swims  upon  the  water,  it  represents  at  a  distance 
the  form  of  an  island.  There  are  apparent  ngns  of  casting  up  of  the 
brimstone  twenty  days  before;  for,  every  where  round  the  lake,  for 
many  furlongs  distant^  a  steam  arises,  with  a  stinking  smell,  and  all 
gold,  silver,  or  brass  near  those  places,  change  their  natural  colour; 
but  return  to  their  former  when  all  the  brimstone  is  exhaled.  And 
inasmuch  as  all  places  near  adjoining  are  corrupted  with  a  fire  and 
stinking  stench,  it  infects  men's  bodies  with  diseases,  and  shortens 
their  days.  However,  this  region  abounds  with  palm-trees,  because 
it  is  watered  with  wholesome  rivers  and  springs.  In  a  valley  there* 
abouts  grows  that  which  they  call  balsam:  whence  they  gain  a 
plentiful  revenue,  in  regard  this  plant  grows  in  no  other  parts  of  the 
world;  which  affords  likewise  excellent  medicines  for  the  use  of  the 
physician. 

''^Tlie  other  Arabia,  adjoining  to  this  barren  and  dry  country  ArabiH, 
^o  far  excels  it,  that  for  its  fruitfulness  and  plenty  of  all  other  good 
things,  it  is  called  Arabia  the  Happy,  It  plentifully  produces  ca- 
lamus and  mastick,  and  other  aromatic  platits,  and  breathes  out  all  sorts 
of  fragrant  smells  from  the  trees,  and  abounds  with  divers  kinds  of 
sweet  gums,  which  distil  from  them.  The  farthest  parts  likewise  of 
Arabia  produce  myrrh  and  frankincense,  (so  grateful  to  the  gods), 
which  is  carried  all  the  world  over. 

Upon  the  mountains  grow  in  abundance  not  only  firs  and  pine- 
trees,  but  tall  cedars,  junipers,  and  the  tree  called  Agyreus;  and 
many  other  fruitful  plants,  which  yield  not  only  a  pleasant  taste,  but 
a  most  sweet  and  delicious  smell  to  those  that  come  near  them.  The 
very  nature  of  the  soil  itself  is  odoriferous  and  useful  for  sweet  per- 
fumes; and  therefore  in  some  places  of  Arabia,  in  digging  of  the 
ground,  they  find  sweet-scented  veins  of  stone  metal,  which  furnish 
the  inhabitants  with  large  quames,  who  build  houses  of  the  stone  cut 
out  of  these  delphs;  and  when  the  rain  falls  upon  them,  the  metal  in 
the  stone  melts,  and  runs  within  the  joints  of  the  building,  and  so 
binds  all  together,  that  the  wall  seems  to  be  all  of  one  piece.  In 
Arabia  are  found  mines  of  pure  gold,  called  gold  without  fire;  for  it 
is  not  extracted  out  of  the  little  pieces  of  drossy  metal  by  melting  Ln 
the  fire,  as  in  other  places,  but  it  is  pure  and  refined  at  the  first  dig- 
ging it  out  of  the  earth,  every  piece  about  the  bigness  of  a  chesnut, 
and  of  so  bright  and  glorious  a  colour,  that  this  gold  adds  an  ex- 
ceeding beauty  and  lustre  to  the  most  precious  stones  that  are  set 
in  it. 

Arabia  is  so  rich  in  all  sorts  of  cattle,  that  many  provinces  (em- 
ploying themselves  only  as  herdsmen  and  shepherds)  live  fully  and 


143  DIODORUS  StCULUS.  Book  II. 


contentedly  without  the  use  of  corn.  That  part  joining  upon  Asia 
breeds  vast  multitudes  of  exceeding  great  wild  beasts;  for  the  lioia 
and  leopards  here  are  far  more  numerous,  and  larger  and  stronger 
than  any  in  Africa;  to  which  may  be  added  those  they  call  the  Baby- 
lonian tigers.  It  produces,  likewise,  beasts  of  a  double  nature  and 
mixed  shape;  amongst  whom  are  those  that  are  called  Struthocameli, 
who  have  the  shape  both  of  a  camel  and  an  ostrich.  For  in  the  bulk 
of  their  bodies  they  are  as  big  as  a  camel  newly  foaled,  having  upon 
their  heads  small  hairs  and  great  and  black  eyes;  in  shape  and  colour 
they  are  like  to  camels,  having  long  necks,  and  very  short  beaks 
turning  inwards,  and  sharp  at  the  point;  they  have  wiags  also  of  soft 
and  hairy  feathers;  they  are  supported  with  two  strong  thighs^  and 
are  cloven  hoofed,  so  that  this  creature  seems  to  be  both  terrestrial 
and  volatile,  a  land-beast  and  a  bird :  but  being  not  able  to  fly,  bj 
reason  of  the  bulk  of  her  body,  slie  runs  upon  the  ground  as  swift  aa 
if  she  flew  in  the  air;  and  when  she  is  pursued  by  horsemen,  with 
her  feet  she  hurls  the  stones  that  are  under  her  with  that  f<M^e  aa  if 
they  were  sent  out  of  a  sling,  and  many  times  kilk  the  pursuers  with 
the  blows  and  strokes  they  receive.  When  she  is  near  being  takeOt 
she  thrusts  her  head  under  a  shrub  or  some  such  like  cover;  not  (as 
some  suppose)  through  folly  and  blockishness,  as  if  she  would  not  see 
any  pursuers,  or  be  seen  of  them,  but  because  her  head  is  the  ten- 
derest  part  of  her  body,  she  seeks  to  secure  that  part  all  manner  of  wayi 
she  can ;  for  nature  teaches  all  creatures  to  seek  not  only  to  preserve 
themselves,  but  their  kind;  through  a  natural  instinct  and  love  (rf 
life  prompting  them  to  perpetuate  their  species  by  a  constant  propt* 
gation. 

Those  creatures  called  Cameleopards  partako  of  both  kinds,  as  is 
denoted  by  their  name.  They  are,  indeed,  less  than  camels,  and 
lower  crested;  but  in  their  heads  and  eyes  like  unto  leopards:  ia 
the  bunch  upon  their  backs  they  resemble  camels;  but  in  colour^ 
hair,  and  in  the  length  of  their  tails,  they  are  in  nature  leopards. 

There  are  likewise  bred  tragelaphi  and  bufiels,  and  miuiy  other 
creatures  of  a  double  shape,  partaking  of  sevei^  natures;  which 
would  require  a  long  discourse  to  describe  every  one  of  them  parti- 
cularly. For  it  is  very  reasonable  to  conceive  that  by  the  viviQriiig 
heat  of  the  sun  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  world,  many  sorts  of 
wonderful  creatures  are  there  bred.  And  upon  this  account  it  is,  that 
there  are  crocodiles  and  river-horses  in  Egypt;  and  great  numbers 
and  divers  sorts  of  elephants,  serpents,  and  other  beasts,  and  (amongst 
the  rest)  dragons  of  an  unusual  bigness  and  fierceness  in  Ethiopia 
and  the  deserta  of  Africa ;  and  for  the  same  reason  it  b,  that  there  are 
elephants  in  India  more  than  elsewhere  for  their  number>  and  excel-* 


Chtq^.  IF.  DIODOBU8  SICULUS.  143 

ling  all  others  in  strength  and  the  bulk  of  their  bodies.  In  these 
parts  also  are  produced,  by  the  influence  of  the  sun,  not  only  several 
kinds  of  living  creatures,  but  divers  sorts  of  precious  stones,  commend- 
aUe  both  for  the  variety  of  their  colours,  and  their  sparkling  lustre 
and  beauty. 

.Cfystal  (they  say)  is  produced  of  the  purest  water,  congealed  and 
hardened,  not  by  cold,  but  by  the  power  of  the  sun;  so  that  it  con* 
tinoes  for  ever,  and  receives  many  shapes  and  colours,  according  as 
the  spirits  are  exhaled. 

The  smaragdine  and  beryl,  (as  they  are  called),  which  are  found  in 
die  copper- mines,  are  said  to  have  their  colour  from  their  mixture 
with  sulphur:  and  that  the  chrysolite,  produced  by  the  heat  of  the 
sua,  receives  its  tincture  from  a  hot  and  fiery  exhalation.  And 
therefore  it  is  said  that  those  stones  called  pseudocrists  are  made  of 
crystad  calcined  by  the  goldsmith's  fire.  By  the  heat  of  the  suu, 
likewise,  are  produced  rubies,  which  difier  one  from  another  as  there 
is  naore  or  less  light  enclosed  in  them  in  the  concretion.  And  for  the 
same  reason  the  feathers  of  birds  difier  in  colour,  so  that  some  are  all 
over  of  a  purple  dye,  others  only  spotted  here  and  tl>ere.  For  some 
things  seem  red,  others  yellow,  some  green,  and  many  of  a  golden 
cobur,  according  to  their  position  to  the  light.  To  conclude,  innu* 
merable  sorts  of  colours  (very  difficult  to  be  reckoned  up)  are  occa<* 
sioned  by  this  means;  which  we  see 'is  done  by  the  reflection  of  the 
sou's  beams  upon  the  rainbow.  Whence  the  naturalists  agree, 
that  even  the  various  colours  of  things  above  proceed  from  their  di- 
versity of  heat,  the  lively  operation  of  the  sun  causing  their  several 
forms  and  shapes;  and  that  the  various  colours  of  flowers,  and  even 
of  the  earth  itself,  proceed  from  the  efiicacy  of  the  sun,  whose  natu- 
ral operations  the  arts  of  men  (as  nature's  scholars)  imitate,  fram* 
iog  variety  of  colours  in  painting  and  embroidery:  and  that,  as  co- 
lours are  formed  by  light,  so  smells  of  fruits,  variety  of  tastes,  great- 
ness of  living  creatures,  and  tiie  natural  constitution  of  every  thing, 
and  the  several  propenies  of  the  earth,  are  caused  by  the  heat  of  the 
sun,  which  makes  both  the  earth  and  water  fruitful  with  its  cherish- 
ing heat,  and  is  the  parent  of  every  creature;  and  therefore  neither 
the  marble  of  Paros,  nor  any  other  stone,  (though  ever  so  admira- 
ble), are  comparable  to  the  scones  in  Arabia,  which  exceed  all  others 
for  lustre,  weight,  and  delicacy.  This  singular  property  (as  I  have 
said)  every  thing  is  clothed  with  by  the  power  of  the  sun  in  this  re* 
giou:  for,  by  its  heat  it  concretes,  by  exhalation  hardens,  and  by  its 
light  beautifies. 

Hence  it  is  that  birds  arc  of  a  liot  nature,  swift  of  flight,  and  decked 


144  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  Sook  IL 

t  ■      ■  ■  ■  '  '■  ' 

most  with  variety  of  colours  ia  those  regions  that  are  direetly  under 
the  scorching  heat  of  the  sun. 

'For  in  the  province  of  Babylon  are  bred  many  peacocks,  beautified 
with  various  colours;  and  in  the  farthest  parts  of  Syria,  parrots,  por* 
phyrios,  meleagrides,  and  many  strange  birds  of  various  natures  and 
colours.  The  like  may  be  said  of  other  parts  of  the  world,  where 
the  climate  is  the  same;  as  of  India,  the  parts  about  the  Red  Sea^ 
of  Ethiopia,  and  some  parts  of  Africa.  But  the  eastern  parts  being 
richer  and  more  fruitful,  breed  larger  and  more  noble  creatures. 

Those  creatures  that  are  bred  in  other  countries  have  natures  agree* 
able  to  the  goodness  of  the  soil.  So  as  to  the  trees,  the  palm-trees 
of  Africa  bear  but  small  and  indigested  fruit:  but  in  Coelosyria  the 
dates,  which  they  call  Cariots,  excel  all  others  for  pleasant  juiee^ 
sweetness,  and  largeness.  Yet  in  Arabia,  and  in  the  province  oi 
Babylon  grow  far  larger  than  those,  in  quantity  six  fingers  round, 
some  of  a  yellow,  some  scarlet,  and  others  of  a  purple  dye,  delightful 
both  to  the  eye  and  grateful  to  the  taste.  The  palm-trees  are  very 
tall,  straight,  and  smooth  to  the  top.  The  branches  grow  near  to 
the  head,  but  not  all  in  the  like  manner.  For  some  have  their 
branches  growing  round  them  on  every  side  here  and  there,  and  be« 
tween  them,  the  fruit  bursting  out  in  clusters  through  the  bark. 
Others  represent  a  burning  lamp,  their  spiring  branches  surrounding 
only  one  part  near  the  top.  Others,'  whose  boughs  clasp  on  every 
part  round  the  tree,  and  guarded  on  both  sides  with  a  double  row  of 
tender  sprouts,  represent  something  painted  or  inscribed. 

That  part  of  Arabia  lying  to  the  south  is  called  Arabia  th|$  Happy; 
the  Arabians  that  inhabit  the  inner  parts  live  pastoral  lives,  and  in 
tents.  They  have  great  herds  of  cattle,  and  are  continually  in  vast 
and  large  pastures.  That  region  which  lies  between  them  and  Arabia 
the  Happy,  is  desert,  without  water,  as  we  have  before  observed. 
The  places  towards  the  west  are  sandy  deserts,  so  that  all  that  travel 
there  direct  their  course  (as  mariners  at  sea)  by  the  Bear  star.  The 
other  part  of  Arabia  stretching  towards  Syria  is  full  of  husbandmen 
and  divers  sorts  of  merchants.  These,  by  their  traffic  and  merchaa* 
dize,  by  importing  and  exporting,  plentifully  furnish  all  other  parts 
round  about  with  what  things  they  want.  That  part  bordering  upon 
the  ocean  lies  about  Arabia  the  Happy,  and  there  (by  many  rivers 
falling  down  together)  are  made  many  large  ponds  and  lakes  up  and 
down  in  the  country:  and  because  large  tracts  of  ground  are  watered 
by  the  rivers  and  the  rains  that  fall  in  the  summer  time,  they  have  a 
double  harvest.  This  place  breeds  troops  of  elephants  and  other 
beasts  of  vast  proportion,  and  likewise  of  double  shapes  and  strange 


Chap.  IFi  DIODORUS  SICULUSi  1 49 

,         .  .  ^1  ^  ■■■■■■■,        ,  Sg-; 

kinds;  and  also  abundance  of  tame  cattle,  especially  ox^n  and  sheep^ 
ii^hich  have  very  great  and  thick  tails.  There  are  there  bred  in  like 
ikianner  a  sort  of  camels  far  beyond  all  others  (both  bare  and  rough) 
and  the  bunch  upon  their  backs  twice  as  big  as  any  others,  and  there-» 
fore  they  are  called  dityles.  Some  of  these  bring  in  great  profit 
both  by  their  milk  and  their  flesh.  Others,  accustomed  to  burthens^ 
will  carry  twenty  bushels  of  corn  upoti  their  backs;  which  being 
of  smaller  bodies,  but  swifter  thart  the  rest,  are  used  to  runnings 
and  despatch  a  vast  tract  of  ground,  especially  in  the  dry  and  deserc 
country. 

These  beasts  are  useful  in  times  of  war;  for  in  battles  they  carry 
two  archers  sitting  back  to  back,  the  one  to  oppose  them  that  at- 
tack them  in  the  fronts  and  the  other  to  repulse  such  as  fall  upon 
them  in  the  rear. 

Although  this  discourse  of  Arabia  and  the  things  there  bred  and 
produced  may  perhaps  seem  to  be  too  tedious,  yet  the  observing  reader 
Biay  find  in  it  many  things  worthy  to  be  known. 

And  now  we  purpose  to  say  something  briefly  of  a  certain  island* 
lying  in  the  southern  ocean,  and  of  the  wonders  there,  giving  first  an 
exact  account  by  what  means  it  came  to  be  discovered. 

There  was  one  lambulus,  from  his  youth  studious  and  learned* 
After  the  death  of  his  father  (who  was  a  merchant)  he  applied  him* 
self  likewbe  to  that  calling;  but  as  he  travelled  through  Arabia  to 
that  part  of  the  country  where  spices  most  aboundedj  he  and  all  his 
company  fell  into  the  hands  of  thieves. 

And  first  he  was  made  a  shepherd,  together  with  another  of  his 
fellow-captives*  Afterwards  he  was  again  taken  by  Ethiopian  skulk* 
ers,  and  carried  away  into  the  maritime  parts  of  Ethiopia.  And  they 
were  thus  stolen  and  carried  away,  that  (being  strangers)  by  them 
they  might  purge  and  expiate  the  land.  For  the  Ethiopian  inhabi- 
tants there  had  a  custom  antiently  used  among  them,  and  appointed 
by  the  oracles  of  the  gods  twenty  generations  before,  that  is,  six 
hundred  years,  (every  generation  comprehending  thirty  years),  that 
the  land  should  be  purged  by  two  men  that  were  strangers.  They 
prepared,  therefore,  a  little  ship,  yet  sufficient  to  endure  the  storms 
at  sea,  and  easily  to  be  governed  by  two  men.  Upon  this  ship  they 
put  the  men  ou  board,  with  six  month's  provision,  that  (according 
to  the  direction  of  the  oracle)  they  might  sail  away  in  a  dhect 
course  towards  the  south,  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  fortunate  island, 
where  they  might  find  people  that  were  gentle  and  kind,  with  whom 
they  might  live  happy  lives.     And  that  if  they  arrived  safe  at  the  is* 

*  Taprobane,  now  CejIoQ  or  Zeilao^  ia  scripture  called  OpUir,  as  Bocbart  prorei. 

Vol.  1.  No.  33.  u 


146  DIODORUS  StCULUS*  Book  IT. 

land  (they  told  them)  their  own  nation,  from  whence  they  came, 
should  enjoy  peace  and  prosperity  for  six  hundred  years  to  cone. 

But  if  they  were  affrighted  with  the  length  of  the  voyage,  and 
should  return  again,  they  told  them,  that,  like  impious  wretches,  and 
destructive  to  the  nation,  they  should  undergo  moet  severe  punnh- 
mcnts.  Then,  they  say,  the  Ethiopians  kept  a  festival  upon  the 
sea-shore,  and,  after  splendid  sacrifices,  crowned  the  pui^tors  with 
garlands,  and  sent  them  away,  and  so  perfected  the  purgaticm  of 
the  nation.  These  two  men  (they  say)  being  tossed  for  four  mootha 
together,  having  passed  over  a  vast  ocean  (after  many  storms  and 
hardships  at  sea)  at  last  arrived  at  the  island  designed  in  the  fourtk 
month. 

The  island  is  of  a  round  form,  five  thousand  furlongs  in  com- 
pass. When  the  men  drew  near  to  shore,  some  of  the  inhabitanta 
came  to  meet  them,  and  brought  the  ship  into  harbour :  whereupoa 
many  more  flocked  in,  and  thronged  about  the  strangers,  wonder* 
ing  how  ever  they  got  hither;  however,  they  courteously  received 
them,  and  entertained  them  with  what  their  country  could  afibrd. 

The  inhabitants  are  much  unlike  to  us  in  these  parts  of  the  world, 
both  as  to  their  bodies,  and  their  way  of  living;  but  among  them- 
selves, they  are  for  form  and  shape  like  one  to  another,  and  in  sta* 
ture  above  four  cubits  high.  They  can  1)€nd  and  turn  their  bones 
somewhat  like  unto  nerves;  and  as  the  nervous  parts,  after  motkm 
ended,  return  to  their  former  state  and  iK)sit!on,  so  do  their  bones. 
Their  bodies  are  very  tender,  but  their  nerves  far  stronger  than  omv, 
for  whatever  they  grasp  in  their  hands,  none  are  able  to  wrest  out  of 
their  fingers.  They  have  not  the  least  hair  on  any  part  of  their  bo- 
dies, but  upon  their  heads,  eye-brows,  eye- lids,  and  chins;  all  other 
parts  are  so  smooth,  that  not  tlie  least  down  appears  .any  where. 
They  are  very  comely  and  well  shaped,  hut  the  holes  of  their  ears  are 
much  wider  than  our's,  and  have  something  like  little  tongues  grow- 
ing out  of  them.  Their  tongues  liave  something  in  them  singular 
and  remarkable,  the  effect  both  of  nature  and  art;  for  they  have 
partly  a  double  tongue,  naturally  a  little  divided,  but  cut  further  in- 
wards by  art,  so  that  it  seems  two,  as  far  as  to  the  very  root,  and 
therefore  there  is  great  variety  of  speech  among  them,  and  they  not 
only  imitate  man's  voice  in  articulate  speaking,  but  the  various  chat- 
terings  of  birds,  and  even  all  sorts  of  notes  as  they  please;  and  that 
which  is  more  wonderful  than  all  is,  that  they  can  speak  perfectly  to 
two  men  at  once,  both  in  answering  to  what  is  said,  and  aptly  carry- 
ing on  a  continued  discourse  relating  to  the  subject  matter  in  hand; 
so  that,  with  one  part  of  their  tongue  they  speak  to  one,  and  with  the 
other  part  to  the  other. 


Ckof^IF.  DIODORUS  sicutus.  147 


wtm 


This  island  is  under  a  oaost  exceUcnt  aod  moderate  climate  (lying 
under  the  equator)  neither  aeorcbed  with  beat,  nor  pinched  with 
cold ;  there  they  have  ripe  fivit  all  the  year  long>  as  the  poet  says. 


Apples  aod  pears  alwajt  both  ripe  and  green. 
With  grapes  and  figs  may  ever  there  be  seen. 


The  days  and  nights  are  there  always  of  an  equal  length;  neither 
ia  there  any  shadow  at  noon-day,  because  the  sun  is  directly  in  the 
lenith  over  head*  They  live  divided  into  tribes,  according  to  their 
Idndred,  and  into  distinct  societies;  yet  so  as  that  there  are  not  above 
four  hundred  admitted  into  any  one  tribe  or  society.  Tliey  live  in 
meadows,  where  they  are  plentifully  supplied  with  all  things  necessary 
for  food,  by  what  the  earth  produces :  for  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  and 
the  temperature  of  the  air  b  such,  that  com  (more  than  enough)  growa 
there  of  itself.  Plenty  of  calamus  likewise  is  produced  there,  whose 
fruit  has  the  appearance  of  white  vetches.  When  they  have  ga- 
thered it,  they  steep  it  in  hot  water,  till  it  pufis  up  to  the  bigness  of 
a  pigeon's  egg;  then  bruising  it,  and  rubbing  it  skilfully  in  their 
hands,  they  knead  it  into  dough,  and  then  bake  it  and  eat  it,  being 
exceeding  sweet  and  delicious  bread  to  the  taste.  There  are  both  hot 
and  cold  large  baths,  as  well  for  the  curing  as  preventing  distempers, 
Leing  exceeding  sweet  and  pleasant.  They  are  learned  in  all  sorts 
of  scieaces,  especially  in  astrology.  They  use  eight -and-twenty  par- 
tieular  letters  for  their  alphabet,  and  seven  characters,  every  one  of 
which  are  formed  four  different  ways.  They  live  long  generally,  with*? 
out  ever  being  sick,  to  an  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  age. 

Those  that  are  lame,  or  have  any  other  weakness  or  infirmity  of 
body  (according  to  the  severe  law  of  their  country)  they  put  to  death. 
They  write  not  cross  over  the  sheet  as  we  do,  but  begin  at  the  top  of 
the  leaf,  and  go  on  in  one  direct  line  down  to  the  bottom.  They 
have  a  law  that  they  may  live  to  such  a  certain  number  of  years,  and 
when  those  are  run  up,  they  despatch  themselves  by  a  strange  kind 
of  death ;  for  there  is  an  herb  of  a  double  nature,  that  grows  among 
them,  upon  which,  if  any  one  lies  down,  he  silently  passes  away 
and  dies,  without  any  sense  of  pain,  as  if  h^  were  in  a  sweet  sleep. 
They  never  marry,  but  make  use  of  women  promiscuously,  and  breed 
up  the  children  so  begotten  (as  common  to  them  all)  with  equal 
care  and  affection  to  one  as  well  as  to  another.  The  children,  while 
they  are  tender  infants,  are  often  changed  by  the  nurses,  that  they 
cannot  be  known  by  their  mothers;  and  therefore,  by  tliat  means, 
there  being  no  ambition  among  them,  they  live  in  great  concord  and 
amity,  without  any  sedition  or  tumphs.    There  are  l^e^sts  among 


148  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  B^Ok 

,     ■  ,      ■  .  ^1  1     "■■'■■■■'     , 

them  very  small^  but  of  an  admirable  property  as  to  their  flesh,  and 
the  excellent  virtue  that  is  in  their  blood.  Their  bodies  are  round, 
and  something  like  to  a  tortoise,  divided  by  too  streaks  which  run 
down  the  back;  at  each  end  of  every  streak  they  have  an  eye  and  a 
mouth;  so  that  they  have  four  eyes  to  see  with,  and  four  mouths  to 
feed  with:  but  the  meat  they  eat,  is  conveyed  through  one  throat, 
and  hence  into  the  belly,  the  common  receptacle  of  all :  and  so  in 
like  manner  they  have  but  one  gut,  nor  but  one  of  every  other  of  the 
inner  parts :  they  have  many  feet  placed  round  their  bodies,  and 
make  use  of  them  to  go  on  what  side  they  will.  There  is  a  marvel- 
ous virtue  in  the  blood  of  this  little  creature,  for  it  presently  in  an 
instant  closes  all  cuts  and  gaping  wounds  in  every  body  that  has  still 
life  in  it;  and  if  a  hand,  or  any  other  member  of  that  kind  (that  is 
not  vital)  be  cutoff,  by  the  application  of  this  blood  (while  tbewonnd 
continues  green)  it  heals  up  again. 

JBach  society  of  these  inhabitants  keep  many  great  birds  of  a  sin- 
gular nature,  by  which  they  try  the  courage  of  their  children;  for 
they  place  them  upon  the  bird's  backs,  and  as  many  of  them  as  sit 
fast  when  the  birds  take  their  flight,  they  bring  up;  but  those  that 
faint  and  are  terrified^  they  throw  away,  as  such  as  can  never  endure 
hardship  any  long  time,  nor  have  any  generous  spirit  in  them. 

In  every  tribe  or  society,  the  eldest  governs  the  rest  as  king,  and 
all  yield  him  perfect  obedience.  If  the  first  put  himself  to  death  (ac- 
cording to  the  law)  after  he  has  lived  an  hundred  and  fifty  years, 
the  next  to  him  in  age  succeeds  in  the  chief  command  and  authority. 

The  sea  that  surrounds  this  island  is  very  rough,  and  causes  very 
great  and  high  tides,  but  the  water  is  fresh  and  sweet.  The  Bear 
Star,  and  many  others  visible  with  us,  are  never  seen  here. 

These  islands  are  seven  in  number,  equal  in  bigness  one  to  ano- 
ther, and  of  the  same  distance  one  from  another,  and  the  same  laws 
and  customs  are  used  in  all  of  them :  and  though  these  islands  af- 
ford plenty  of  provision  out  of  the  natural  growth  of  the  country  to 
all  the  inhabitants,  yet  they  use  them  not  luxuriously,  but  are  frugal, 
and  gather  only  so  much  as  will  serve  their  turns.  They  do  indeed 
cook  for  themselves  flesh-meat,  and  all  other  sorts  of  victuals  both 
roasted  and  boiled,  but  as  for  sauces,  and  other  delicate  inventions 
of  that  kind  by  cooks,  and  the  various  tastes  and  savours  contrived 
for  curious  palates,  they  are  altogether  ignorant  of  them. 

For  gods  they  worship  especially  the  whole  frame  of  heaven,  be- 
cause it  comprehends  all  things;  and  next  to  that  the  sun,  and  then 
all  the  celestial  bodies.  By  various  wajrs  of  fishing  and  fowling, 
they  catch  fish  and  fowl  of  all  sorts.    There  are  among  them  a- 


Chap.  IK  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  149 

bandance  of  fruit-trees,  and  vines^  and  olive-trees,  whence  they 
draw  great  quantities  of  oil  and  wine. 

Here  are  exceeding  great  serpen ts>  which  yet  do  no  harm  to  any; 
nay,  their  flesh  is  good  meat  and  very  sweet.  Tbey  make  their  gar- 
ments of  a  soft  and  fine  cotton,  contained  in  certain  reeds  and  canes. 
This  cotton  tbey  dye  with  the  shell-fishes  called  Ostreses,  made  up 
in  balls,  and  mixed  and  wrought  amongst  the  wool,  and  so  with 
ptKt  pains  make  themselves  garments  of  a  purple  colour. 

It  produces  Jiving  creatures  of  difierent  natures  from  all  others, 
and  even  incredible  because  they  are  unusual. 

Their  way  of  feeding  is  according  to  a  prescribed  rule;  for  they 
do  not  eat  all  sorts  of  meats  together  at  one  and  the  same  time,  nor 
the  same  always;  but  upon  some  certain  days  fish,  other  fowl, some- 
times the  flesh  of  land-cattle,  at  other  times  olives;  and  on  other 
days,  very  low  and  mean  diet.  They  help  one  another  in  their  call- 
ings and  employments  by  turns :  some  employ  themselves  in  fish« 
ing,  others  in  manufactures,  and  others  in  other  things  useful  and 
profitable  to  the  commonwealth.  Some  at  certain  times  do  exercise 
public  offices,  except  those  who  are  grown  old.  Upon  their  festival 
days,  and  times  of  invocation  upon  their  gods,  they  celebrate  their 
praises  both  in  acclamations  and  songs;  especially  the  sun,  to  whom 
they  devote  themselves  and  their  islands. 

Their  dead  they  carry  to  the  sea-shore  at  the  fall  of  the  tide,  co- 
vering them  with  a  little  sand,  that  at  the  time  of  full  sea  heaps  of 
sand  may  be  raised  higher  upon  them. 

Those  canes  whence  tbey  gather  fruit  to  eat,  are  the  compass  of 
a  crown  in  thickness;  they  say  that  towards  the  full  of  the  moon 
they  increase,  and  towards  the  new  moon  they  proportionably  de- 
crease. 

The  water  of  their  hot  springs  is  sweet  and  wholesome,  and  ever 
continues  warm,  never  growing  cold,  unless  it  be  mixt  with  wine  or 
cold  water. 

After  lambulus  with  his  companion  had  continued  in  this  island 
seven  years,  they  were  (as  wicked  and  vile  fellows)  ejected.  Hav- 
ing therefore  their  ship  fitted  out,  and  furnished  with  provision,  they 
set  sail,  and  after  they  had  continued  their  voyage  for  above  four 
months  together,  they  fell  at  length  upon  the  sandy  shallows  of  In- 
dia, where  lambulus's  companion  was  drowned,  and  he  himself  after- 
wards cast  upon  a  certain  village,  and  forthwith  carried  away  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  place  to  the  king,  then  at  a  city  called  Polyboihia, 
many  days  journey  from  the  sea;  where  he  was  kindly  received  by 
the  king,  who  had  a  great  love  for  the  Grecians,  and  was  very  stu- 


150  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  IL 

% 

dioQS  in  the  liberal  sciences.  At  length  (having  obtained  provision 
from  the  king)  he  first  sailed  into  Persia,  and  thence  safely  arrived 
in  Greece.  This  lanibulos  committed  all  these  adventures  to  vrrit* 
ingy  and  gave  an  account  of  many  things  relating  to  the  affairs  of 
India^  before  unknown  to  strangers.  But  having  now  performed 
what  we  promised  in  the.  beginning  of  this  book^  we  shall  bereoukke 
an  end. 


151 


DIODORUS  SICULUS- 


BOOK  III. 


PREPACK 

THE  first  of  the  two  Boolcs  preceding^  contains  the  acts  of  the 
antient  kings  of  Egypt^  and  the  fabulous  history  of  the  Egyptian 
gods;  of  those  things  reported  of  the  river  Nile;  of  their  fruits^ 
divers  Icinds  of  beasts,  the  situation  of  the  country,  and  of  tbeir 
laws  and  courts  of  justice.  In  the  second  are  comprehended  the 
afiairs  of  Asia,  the  acts  of  the  Assyrians  in  antient  times,  and 
amongst  them  the  birth  and  advancement  of  Semiramis;  how  she 
built  the  city  of  Babylon,  and  many  other  cities,  and  invaded  the  In- 
dians with  a  mighty  army.  We  have  treated  there  likewise  of  the 
Chaldeans,  and  their  art  in  astronomy;  of  Arabia,  and  the  wonderful 
things  there;  of  the  Amazons;  and  lastly,  of  the  Hjrperboreans,  and 
the  island  of  Taprobane.  In  the  ensuing  book,  pursuing  such  things 
as  are  coherent  with  those  that  went  before,  we  shall  treat  of  the  E- 
thiopians  and  Africans,  and  of  the  Atlantic  islands. 


CHAP.  I. 


Of  the  Ethiopians  ;  their  letters  y  latvSy  artnSy  religion  y  and  funerals. 
Description  of  several  parts  of  the  country.  Manner  of  making 
gold.  The  IchthyophageSy  their  several  sorts,  and  way  of  living. 

THE  Ethiopians  say,  that  they  were  the  first  men  that  ever  were  in 
the  world ;  and  that,  to  prove  this,  they  have  clear  demonstrations. 
For  they  say,  they  are  natives  of  the  country,  and  not  strangers  that 
came  to  settle  there;  and  arc  therefore,  by  general  consent,  almost 
of  all  men,  called  Autochthones;  and  that,  in  every  man's  opinion,  it 
is  most  probable,  that  those  who  inhabit  the  south,  were  the  first  liv- 
ing men  that  sprang  out  of  the  earth.     For  being  that  the  heat  of  the 


152  DionoRUS  sicuLUs.  BookllL 

sun  at  first  exhaled  the  moisture  of  the  earthy  and,  in  the  first  produc- 
tion of  all  things,  influenced  it  with  a  quickening  virtue,  they  say^ 
it  is  very  rational  to  conclude,  that  those  places  nearest  to  the  sun 
should  have  been  the  first  parents  of  all  living  creatures. 

It  is  affirmed  among  them,  that  they  were  the  first  that  instituted 
religious  worship  and  pompous  sacrifices,  with  solemn  assemblies^ 
and  other  things  used  in  the  service  and  to  the  honour  of  the  gods: 
and  they  hold,  that  the  sacrifices  of  the  Ethiopians  are  the  most  ac- 
ceptable to  the  gods  of  any  other;  and  in  testimony  hereof,  they  pro* 
duce  the  most  antient  poet,  and  of  the  greatest  authority  amongst  the 
Grecians,  who  in  his  Iliad  introduces  Jupiter,  with  the  rest  of  the  gods 
travelling  in  Ethiopia  to  the  anniversary  sacrifice  and  solemn  festival 
prepared  for  them  by  the  Ethiopians. 

For  Jove  and  all  the  gods  are  gone  to  feait 
With  pious  Etliiopians  in  the  west 

And  they  say,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  gods  reward  them  for  their 
piety,  for  that  they  were  never  brought  into  subjection  by  any  foreign 
prince,  but  always  remained  a  free  people,  and  at  perfect  peace  among 
themselves.  And  though  many,  and  those  most  potent  princes^like- 
wise,  have  invaded,  yet  none  have  succeeded  in  their  attempts.  For 
Cambyscs,  making  in  upon  them  with  mighty  forces,  was  in  danger 
both  to  have  lost  his  life  and  his  whole  army.  And  Semiramis^  who 
was  so  famous  both  for  her  skill  and  success  in  arms,  having  entered 
but  a  little  way  into  Ethiopia,  presently  saw  it  was  to  no  purpose  to 
think  of  conquering  that  nation. 

Hercules,  likewise,  and  Bacchus,  who  ran  through  the  whole  worlds 
forbore  only  the  Etliiopians,  being  awed  by  the  piety  of  that  people^ 
and  discouraged  with  the  difficulty  of  the  attempt. 

The  Ethiopians  likewise  say,  that  the  Egyptians  are  a  colony  drawn 
out  from  them  by  Osiris;  and  that  Egypt  was  formerly  no  part  of  the 
continent,  but  a  sea,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world;  but  that^  after- 
wards, it  was  by  degrees  made  land  by  the  river  Nile,  which  brought 
down  slime  and  mud  out  of  Ethiopia.  And  that  that  country  was  made 
dry  land,  by  heaps  of  earth  forced  down  by  the  river,  they  say,  is  ap- 
parent by  evident  signs,  about  the  mouths  of  the  Nile.  For  always^ 
every  year,  may  be  seen  fresh  heaps  of  mud  cast  up  at  the  mouths 
of  the  river  by  the  working  of  the  sea,  and  the  land  increased  by  it. 
Moreover,  they  affirm,  that  most  of  the  Egyptian  laws  are  the  same 
with  those  in  Ethiopia,  the  colony  still  observing  the  customs  of  their 
ancestors ;  and  that  they  learnt  from  the  Ethiopians  the  custom  of 
deifying  their  kings,  and  their  care  and  costs  in  tlieir  burials,  and  such 
like  things  used  amongst  them;  besides  the  making  of  statues^  and 
the  characters  of  their  letters.    For  whereas  the  Egyptians  have  com-* 


Chap.  /«  DIODORUS  SICX7LU8.  1 63 

moD  and  ordinary  characters  used  promiscuously  by  all  the  inhabi* 
Unts^  and  likewise  those  they  call  sacred^  knowu  only  by  the  priests^ 
privately  taught  them  by  their  parents;  yet  the  Ethiopians  use  both 
those  sorts  without  any  difference  or  distinction.  The  several  col- 
Itgsg  of  the  priests  (they  say)  observe  one  and  the  same  order  and 
discipline  in  both  the  nations.  For  as  many  as  are  so  consecrated  for 
divine  service^  are  wholly  devoted  to  purity  and  religion,  and  in  both 
countries  are  shaven  alike,  and  are  clothed  with  the  like  stoles  and 
attire,  and  carry  a  sceptre  like  unto  a  plow-share,  such  as  their  kings 
likewise  bear,  with  high  crowned  caps  tufted  at  the  top,  wreathed 
round  with  serpents  called  asps;  by  which  is  seemed  to  be  signified^ 
that  those  who  contrive  any  thing  against  the  life  of  the  king  are  as. 
sure  to  die,  as  if  they  were  stung  with  the  deadly  bite  of  the  asp* 
Many  other  things  they  report  of  their  antiquhy,  and  of  a  colony  of 
them  heretofore  carried  away  into  Egypt,  of  which  it  is  necessary 
further  to  write. 

But  lest  we  should  omit  things  that  are  antient  and  remarkable,  it 
Is  fit  something  should  be  said  of  the  Ethiopic  characters^  and  of  those 
which  the  Egyptians  call  hieroglyphics. 

The  Ethiopic  letters  represent  the  shapes  of  divers  beasts,  parts 
and  members  of  men's  bodies,  and  artificers'  tools  and  instruments. 
For  by  their  writing  they  do  not  express  any  thing  by  composition  of 
syllables,  but  by  the  signification  of  images  and  representations,  the  . 
meaning  of  them  being  engraven  and  fixed  in  the  memory  by  use 
and  exercise.  For  sometimes  they  draw  the  shape  of  a  kite,  croco-^ 
diie^  or  serpent,  sometimes  the  members  of  a  man's  body,  n!$  the  eye^ 
the  hand,  the  face,  and  such  like.  The  kite  signifies  all  things  that 
are  quickly 'despatched;  because  this  bird  flies  the  swiftest  almost  of 
any  other.  For  reason  presently  applies  it  by  a  suitable  interpreta- 
tion to  every  thing  that  is  sudden  and  quick,  or  of  such  nature,  as 
.  perfectly  as  if  they  Iiad  been  spoken.  The  crocodile  is  the  emblem 
d  malice ;  the  eye  the  preserver  of  justice,  and  the  guard  of  the  body. 
Amongst  the  members  of  the  body,  the  right  hand,  with  open  fingers^ 
signifies  plenty,  the  left,  with  the  fingers  close^  preservation  and  cus- 
tody of  men's  goods  and  estates. 

Th^  same  way  of  reasoning  extends  to  all  other  parts  of  the  body, 
and  the  forms  of  tools  and  all  other  things;  for  being  that  they  dili- 
gently pry  into  the  hidden  signification  of  every  thing,  and  have 
their  minds  and  memories  daily  employed  with  continual  exercise^ 
they  exactly  read  and  understand  every  thing  couched  within  the 
hieroglyphics. 

A  great  part  of  the  Ethiopian  laws  differ  very  much  from  other 
nations,  especially  those  which  concern  the  election  of  their  kings : 

Vol.  1.  No.  S3.  x 


154  DionORus  sicuLus.  Book  HI. 


for  they  pick  out  the  best  of  their  priests  out  of  every  rank  and  order^ 
and  whomsoever  of  those  so  chosen,  their  revelling  god  (which  tbej 
carry  about  according  to  custom)  does  first  lay  hold  of^  the  people 
make  king,  and  forthwith  fall  down  upon  their  knees,  and  worship 
as  a  god,  and  render  him  other  honours,  as  he  to  whom  the  authority 
of  the  chief  magistrate  is  committed  by  divine  providence. 

Being  so  elected,  he  orders  the  course  of  his  life  according  as  the 
law  has  prescribed;  and,  governing  in  all  other  respects  according  to 
the  customs  of  the  country,  he  neither  confers  rewards,  nor  inflicts 
punishments  u[)on  any,  but  according  to  the  antient  laws  ratified  and 
approved  by  his  ancestors  from  the  beginning. 

It  is  a  law  among  them ^That  no  subject  shall  be  put  to  death, 

nor  condemned  to  die,  though  he  be  ever  so  guilty :  but  one  of  the 
lictors  is  sent  to  the  criminal,  bearing  before  him  the  badge  or  sign  of 
death;  upon  sight  of  which,  the  party  goes  home  and  kills  himself. 
It  is  not  lawful  to  change  his  punishment  by  wilful  banishment^  and 
flying  into  other  countries,  as  it  is  the  custom  of  the  Greeks.  And 
therefore  they  reixirt,  that  one  once  preparing  to  fly  out  of  Ethiopia, 
after  the  sign  of  death  was  sent  to  him  by  the  king,  that  his  mother 
discerning  his  design,  fastened  her  garter  about  his  neck,  and  he  ne- 
ver in  the  least  lifted  up  his  hands  to  hinder  her,  but  underwent  all- 
till  he  was  strangled  to  death,  lest  he  should  leave  behind  him  a  blot 
and  stain  upon  his  kindred  and  family.  And  above  all,  that  custom 
is  most  strange  which  relates  to  the  death  of  the  kings;  for  those 
priests  that  arc  employed  in  the  service  of  the  gods  at  Meroe,  who  are 
here  of  greatest  authority,  whensoever  they  please,  they  send  a  mes- 
senger to  the  king,  commanding  him  to  put  himself  to  death;  for 
that  such  is  the  |»leasure  of  the  gods,  and  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  any 
to  despise  the  commands  of  the  gods;  adding  also  other  reasons, 
which  a  plain  and  honest  mind,  inured  to  an  antient  and  constant 
custom,  (and  not  being  furnished  with  sufficient  arguments  to  e- 
vince  the  unreasonableness  of  the  commands),  is  easily  induced  to 
believe. 

And  so  in  former  ages,  the  kings,  without  force  or  compulsion  of 
arms,  but  merely  bewitched  by  a  fond  superstition,  observed  the  cus- 
tom; till  Ergamenes,  a  king  of  Ethiopia,  who  reigned  in  the  time  of 
Ptolemy  the  Second,  (bred  up  in  the  Grecian  discipline  and  philoso- 
phy), was  the  first  that  was  so  bold  as  to  reject  and  despise  such  com- 
mands. For  this  prince,  assuming  the  spirit  and  courage  becoming 
a  king,  marched  with  a  considerable  body  of  men  to  the  place  (very 
dilTiculi  of  access)  where  stood  the  golden  temple  of  the  Ethiopians, 
and  there  cut  the  throats  of  all  the  priests;  and  having  abolished  that 
antient  barbarous  custom,  reformed  what  appertained  to  the  servico 


Chap.  L  moDORUS  siculus:  135 


of  the  gods  in  such  manner  as  he  thought'  fit.  There  is,  moreover* 
a  strange  and  wonderful  law  amongst  the  great  officers  of  the  king's 
household,  which  continues,  they  say,  to  this  very  day.  For  it  is  a 
custom  amongst  the  Ethiopians,  that  if  the  king  be  maimed  or  debi' 
litated  upon  any  occasion  in  any  member  of  his  body,  all  his  house- 
hold servants  do  the  same  thing  to  themselves :  for  they  hold  it  a 
base  and  unworthy  thing,  that  if  the  king  be  lame,  for  his  servants  to 
attend  upon  him  with  whole  and  sound  limbs,  and  not  all  to  be  lame 
as  well  as  he.  **  And  that  it  is  a  thing  most  unworthy  of  true  and  firm 
friendship,  not  to  sympathize  and  bear  a  share  both  in  prosperity  and 
adversity,  in  sorrow  and  sadness,  and  in  the  pains  and  deficiencies  of 
the  body.  They  say,  moreover,  that  it  is  a  custom  for  the  king's  do- 
mestic servants  to  put  themselves  to  death  when  their  kings  die,  and 
such  death  they  account  honourable,  and  as  a  testimony  of  their  sin- 
cere love  to  their  prince;  and  therefore  it  is  no  easy  matter  for  the 
Ethiopians  to  assassinate  any  of  the  king's  friends,  being  that  both 
they  and  the  king  are  careful  and  solicitous  for  the  mutual  preserva- 
tion of  each  other. 

These  are  the  laws  of  those  Ethiopians  that  inhabit  the  capital 
city  and  the  island  Meroc,  and  those  tracts  that  lie  next  unto  Egypt* 
But  there  are  many  other  Ethiopian  nations,  whereof  some  dwell  on 
both  sides  the  riicer  Nile,  and  in  the  islands  in  the  river;'  others  bor- 
der upon  Arabia,  and  some  are  seated  in  the  heart  of  Africa.  The 
greatest  part  of  these,  especially  those  in  and  about  the  river,  are 
blacks,  flat  faced,  have  curled  hair,exoeedin&r  fierce  and  cruel,  and  in 
their  manners  like  beasts,  not  so  much  in  their  natural  temper  as  in 
their  studied  and  contrived  pieces  of  wickedness.  Their  whole  bo- 
dies are  filthy  and  nasty,  and  their  nails  long  like  wild  beasts,  and 
cruel  one  towards  another.  They  have  a  shrill  voice,  and  in  regard 
they  are  never  taught  by  any  how  to  lead  a  more  civilized  course  of 
life,  (in  that  way  of  education  as  others  are),  they  mightily  diSer  from 
us  in  all  their  manners. 

Some  of  them  carry  shields  made  of  the  raw  hide  of  an  ox,  and 
short  lances;  others,  darts  with  forked  points:  sometimes  they  use 
bows  of  wood  four  cubits  long,  and  discharge  their  arrows,  by  forcing 
the  bow  with  the  help  of  their  foot,  and  when  their  shafts  are  spent, 
they  fail  on  with  clubs.  They  arm  likewise  their  women,  till  they 
attain  to  such  an  age ;  many  of  whom  use  to  hang  a  brstss  ring  at 
their  lips.  Some  of  them  never  wear  any  clothes,  but  go  naked  all 
tlieir  lives  long,  and  shelter  themselves  from  the  scorching  heat 
of  the  sun  only  with  such  helps  and  defences  as  in  their  way  they 
can  meet  withal.  Some  of  them  cut  off  sheep's  tails,  and  bind  them 
about  their  loins  to  qover  their  privities:  others  make  use  of  beast's 


156  moDOHus  8ICULU8.  Book  in. 


skins  for  ibb  parpote.  Some  there  are  that  are  ckHhed  vottod  their 
loins  with  breeches  made  of  the  hair  of  their  heads;  for  the  nature  of 
tlie  ground  is  such  that  the  shee^  carry  no  fleeces. 

Their  meat  is  a  certain  fruit  that  grows  about  the  pools  sod 
marshes :  some  pluck  off  the  tender  branciies  of  small  trees^  and 
with  them  cover  themselves  from  the  heat  of  the  southern  son.  Sone 
sow  Sesamus  and  Lotus :  and  others  li?e  upon  oertaio  tender  roots 
of  canes.  And  many  of  them  that  are  good  archers  maintain  theoa* 
selves  with  abundance  of  fowl  they  kill.  But  moat  of  them  livo  opoa 
flesh,  milk,  and  cheese.  Those  that  inhabit  the  parts  above  Meroo 
have  two  opinions  concerning  the  gods. 

Some  of  them  say  they  are  eternal  and  incorruptible :  amongst 
which  they  reckon  the  sun,  moon,  and  the  entire  universe,  Othera 
they  conceive  were  at  first  mortal  men,  but  for  their  virtue  and  their 
benefits  procured  to  mankind,  purchased  immortal  honour.  They 
especially  worship  Isis,  Pan,  Hercules,  and  Jupiter,  whom  they  ae* 
count  to  be  the  greatest  benefactors  to  mankind.  But  some  few  of 
the  Ethiopmns  are  of  opinion  that  there  are  no  gods  at  all:  and 
these  fly  to  the  marshes  from  the  sun  when  it  rises,  as  from  an  im- 
placable enemy. 

They  have  laws,  likewise,  different  from  all  other  natioM,  aboofc 
their  fiinerab.  Some  throw  tlieir  dead  into  the  river,  as  looking  Qpom 
that  to  be  tbe  best  sort  of  burial.  Others,  by  pouring  upon 
melted  glass,  keep  them  in  their  houses ;  because  they  think  it 
convenient  or  decent  tliat  their  countenances  should  not  be 
by  their  kindred,  or  that  they  should  be  forgotten  by  their  posterity* 
Some  bury  them  in  earthen  coffins,  about  their  temples;  andio 
swear  by  their  names  is  counted  the  most  sacred  oath.  Those  that 
are  most  beautiful  some  of  them  choose  to  be  their  king,  jodgiog 
that  regal  power  and  beauty  are  always  the  gifts  of  fortune.  Others 
intrust  tiie  royal  power  in  the  hands  of  the  most  industrious  sheplierda^ 
as  such  as  would  make  it  their  business  to  take  most  care  for  the  good 
of  tiieir  subjects.  Others  bestow  the  kingdom  upon  those  that  are 
richest,  judging  soch  only  most  able,  by  their  riches,  to  supply  the 
wants  of  tlidr  people. 

There  are  others  that  are  for  the  advancing  them  to  the  throne, 
who  are  most  Approved  fur  their  valour ;  because  they  judge  those 
that  are  conqueron  to  be  most  worthy  of  honour. 

That  part  of  the  country  in  Libya  that  borders  upon  the  Nile,  is  the 
most  pleasant  and  ricliest  for  all  manner  of  provision;  fortheeao- 
Tbssts  alFord  the  Boost  advantageous  shelters  against  the  parching 
heat  of  the  sun,  and  therefore  the  Ethiopians  and  Africans  qearrel, 
and  are  at  continual  wars  one  with  another  for  the  possession  of  tliet 


CKcy*  Z  DiODOftUB  9ICU  tUB.  1 VJ 

— — — — — i— — — *— ^  ^i-*— — 1       I  ■  III  _j 

pl«iet»  Herds  likewise  of  elephants  out  of  the  higher  Libf  a,  (ae  some 
write)  ^  eomc  dowo  into^  tboae  parts,  because  of  the  abundance  of  pai^ 
ture^  and  the  sweetness  of  it.  For  there  are  wonderful  morassea^ 
mbounding  io  ail  sorts  of  food,  all  akmg  the  banks  of  the  rirer^  and 
here  they  are  held  by  the  mouth,  when  they  taste  the  sweetuess  of 
those  reeds  and  canes  that  grow  here,  and  so  eat  up  the  food  of  the 
jtihdbiitania;  and  therefore  the  people  are  forced  to  resort  to  these 
places  for  relief,  (bein^  shepherds,  and  livuig  in  tents),  maluAg  that 
their  country  where  they  can  find  the  most  plenty. 

The  herds  of  elephants  of  which  we  before  hinted,  leave  the  upper 
parts  for  want  of  pasture,  which  is  presently  burnt  up  there  by  the 
iMat  of  the  sun.  For,  by  reason  of  the  scorching  heat,  and  want 
both  of  spring  and  river  water,  the  grass  is  parched  up,  aod  none  to 
be  had. 

Some  write,  that  in  the  deserts  and  other  wild  places,  (as  they  are 
called),  are  bred  a  world  of  serpents  of  a  wonderful  bigness.  Thes^ 
{tkey  say),  with  great  fury  and  violence,  set  upon  the  elephants  tt 
t\ie  brink  of  the  waters,  clasping  tliemselves  in  many  circles  round 
their  thighs,  and  sticking  fast  there  so  long,  as  that  at  length  the 
beasts  (tired  out  by  their  great  and  weighty  hulk)  fall  down  in  a 
ffwi—ipg  sweat  to  the  ground;  upon  which,  others  in  multitudes  com- 
ing in«  they  presently  devour  tbesi,  and  that  with  ease,  the  poor 
ereataires  being  ao  unwieldy,  as  scarce  able  to  move  themselves*  If 
for  some  reason  or  other,  they  succeed  not  in  their  attempt,  (out  cf 
eagerness  ts^  their  natural  food),  tiiey  pursue  not  <he  elephants  to  the 
river's  bank  before  mentioned :  for  they  say  diese  vast  serpents  avoid 
ail  they  can  the  open  fields,  and  abide  about  the  feet  a&d  hollows  of 
the  ooountains,  in  deep  holes  aod  caves.  And  hence  it  is,  that  they 
leave  not  ihose  places  so  fit  for  tbdr  shelter  and  defence,  nature  teach** 
ing  every  creature  to  make  use  of  that  which  is  most  helpful  io  it,  and 
io  avoid  what  is  hurtful. 

And  thus  much  we  have  thouglit  fit  to  say  of  the  Ethiopians  and 
their  country:  and  now  something  is  to  be  said  of  the  historians^ 
for  many  have  written  such  things  concerning  Egypt  and  Ethiopia 
as  deserve  not  the  least  credit.  Inasmuch  as  the  authors  were  either 
too  icasy  lo  believe  lies,  or  else  in  sport  and  for  diversion  invented 
dtem  themadves. 

But  Agatfaarchifdes  of  Cnidus,  in  liis  second  bock  of  the  sSbin  of 
Asia;  Artemidorus  tlie  Epbesian,  in  his  eighth  book  of  geography; 
and  some  others  that  were  natural  Egyptians,  who  have  written  his* 
tories  of  the  things  bereiobefore  by  us  related,  have  in  their  writings 
nearly  pursised  the  truth.  And  I  myself,  in  the  time  of  my  travelling 
and  sojoumiag  in  Egypt,  associated  with  many  of  the  priest^^  and 


158  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BoohllL 


conferred  with  many  ambassadors  and  others  sent  out  of  Ethiopia^ 
whence^  having  exactlj  come  to  the  knowledge  of  every  things  and 
having  likewise  examined  the  several  relations  of  the  historians^  have 
framed  and  moulded  my  history  so  as  to  suit  with  those  things  wherein 
all  of  them  agreed  and  consented. 

But  this  shall  suffice  to  be  said  of  the  western  Ethiopians. 

We  sliall  now  speak  a  little  of  those  inhabiting  the  southern  parts> 
and  towards  the  lied  sea.  But  it  is  fit  first  that  we  say  somethibg 
of  the  making  of  gold  in  these  parts. 

In  the  confines  of  Egypt,  and  the  neighbouring  countries  of  Ara- 
bia  and  Ethiopia,  there  is  a  place  full  of  rich  gold  mines,  out  of 
which,  with  much  cost  and  pains  of  many  labourers,  gold  is  dug. 
The  soil  here  naturally  is  black,  but  in  the  body  of  the  earth  run 
many  white  veins,  shining  with  white  marble,  and  glistering  with  all 
sorts  of  other  bright  metals;  out  of  which  laborious  mines  those  ap- 
pointed overseers  cause  the  gold  to  be  dug  up  by  the  labour  of  a  vast 
multitude  of  people.  For  the  kings  of  Egypt  condemn  to  these 
mines  notorious  criminals,  captives  taken  in  war,  persons  sometimes 
falsely  accused,  or  such  against  whom  the  king  is  incensed;  and 
that  not  only  they  themselves,  but  sometimes  all  their  kindred  and 
relations  together  with  them,  are  sent  to  work  here,  both  to  punbh 
them,  and  by  their  labour  to  advance  the  profit  and  gain  of  the  king:. 
There  are  infinite  numbers  upon  these  accounts  thrust  down  into 
these  mines,  all  Itound  in  fetters,  where  they  work  contiDoally^ 
without  being  admitted  any  rest  night  or  day,  and  so  strictly  guarded, 
that  there  is  no  possibility  or  way  left  to  make  an  escape.  For  they 
set  over  them  barbarians,  soldiers  of  various  and  strange  languages, 
so  that  it  is  not  possible  to  corrupt  any  of  the  guard,  by  discours* 
ing  one  with  another^  or  by  the  gaining  insinuations  of  a  familiar 
converse. 

The  earth  which  is  hardest  and  full  of  gold  they  soften  by  patting 
fire  under  it,  and  then  work  it  out  with  their  hands:  the  rocks  thus 
softened,  and  made  more  pliant  and  yielding,  several  thousands  of 
profligate  wretches  break  it  in  pieces  with  hammers  and  pickaxes. 
There  is  one  artist  that  is  the  overseer  of  the  whole  work,  wlu>  marks 
out  the  stone,  and  shews  the  labourers  the  way  and  manner  how  he 
would  have  it  done.  Those  that  are  the  strongest  amongst  them 
that  are  appointed  to  this  slavery,  provided  with  sharp  iron  pickaxes, 
cleave  the  marble-shining  rock  by  mere  force  and  strength,  and  not 
by  art  or  slight  of  hand.  They  undermine  not  the  rock  in  a  direct 
line,  but  follow  the  bright  shining  vein  of  the  mine. 

They  carry  lamps  fastened  to  their  foreheads  to  give  theib  light, 
being  otiirrways  in  perfect  darkness  in  the  various  wiudiogs  and 


Cluytl.  /•  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  1 59 

turniogs  wrought  in  the  mine;  and  having  their  bodies  appearing 
sometimes  of  one  colour  and  sometimes  of  another  (according  to  the 
nature  of  the  mine  where  they  work)  they  throw  the  lumps  and 
pieces  of  the  stone  cut  out  of  the  rock  upon  the  floor.  And  thus 
they  are  eroptoyed  continually,  without  intermission,  at  the  very  nod 
of  the  overseer  or  tax-master^' who  lashes  them  severely  besides.  And 
there  are  little  boys  that  attend  upon  the  labourers  in  the  mine,  and 
with  great  labour  and  toil  gather  up  the  lumps  and  pieces  hewed  out 
of  the  rock  as  they  are  cast  upon  the  ground,  and  carry  them  forth 
and  lay  them  upon  the  bank.  Those  that  are  about  thirty  years  of 
age  take  a  piece  of  the  rock  of  such  a  certain  quantity,  and  pound  it 
in  a  stone  mortar  with  iron  pestles  till  it  be  as  small  as  a  vetch,  then 
those  little  stones  so  pounded  are  taken  from  them  by  women  and 
older  men,  who  cast  them  into  mills  that  stand  together  there  near  at 
band  in  a  long  row,  and,  two  or  three  of  them  being  employed  at  one 
mill,  they  grind  it  so  long  till  it  be  as  small  as  fine  meal,  according 
to  the  pattern  given  them.  No  care  at  all  is  taken  of  the  bodies  of 
these  poor  creatures,  so  that  they  have  not  a  rag  so  much  as  to  cover 
their  nakedness,  and  no  man  that  sees  them  can  choose  but  roust 
commiserate  their  sad  and  deplorable  condition.  For  tliough  they 
are  sick,  maimed,  or  lame,  no  rest,  no  intermission  in  the  least,  is 
allowed  them :  neitlier  the  weakness  of  old  age,  nor  women's  infir- 
mities, are  any  plea  to  excuse  them;  but  all  are  driven  to  their  work 
with  blows  and  cudgelling,  till  at  length,  overborn  with  the  intoUer- 
able  weight  of  their  misery,  they  drop  down  dead  in  the  midst  of  their 
insufferable  labours;  so  that  these  miserable  creatures  always  expect 
worse  to  come  tlian  that  which  they  then  at  present  endure,  and 
therefore  long  for  death,  as  far  more  desirable  tlian  life. 

At  length  the  masters  of  the  work  take  the  stone  thus  ground  to 
powder,  and  carry  it  away  in  order  to  the  perfecting  of  it.  Tliey  spread 
tlie  mineral  so  ground  upon  a  broad  board,  somewhat  hollow  and 
lying  shelving,  and,  pouring  water  upon  it,  rub  it  and  cleanse  it,  and 
so  all  the  earthy  and  drossy  part  being  separated  from  the  rest  by  the 
water,  it  runs  off  the  board,  and  tlie  gold,  by  reason  of  its  weight,  re« 
mains  behind.  Then  washing  it  several  times  again,  they  first  rub 
it  lightly  with  their  hands;  afterwards  they  draw  up  the  earthy  and 
drossy  matter  with  slender  spuoges  gently  applied  to  the  powdered 
dust,  till  it  be  clean  pure  gold.  At  last  other  workmen  take  it  away 
by  weight  and  measure,  and  these  put  it  into  earthen  urns,  and,  ac- 
cording to  the  quantity  of  the  gold  in  every  urn,  thry  mix  with  it 
some  lead,  grains  of  salt,  a  little  tin,  and  barley  bran.  Then  cover- 
ing every  pot  close,  and  carefully  daubing  them  over  with  clay,  they 
put  them  in  a  furnace^  where  they  abide  five  days  and  nights  togc- 


160  viODORVs  8ICULU.S.  Book  ILL 

ther;  ibeu,  after  they  have  stood  to  cool  a  convenient  lime^  DotUog 
of  the  other  matter  is  to  be  found  in  the  pots,  but  only  pure  refiocd 
gold,  some  little  thing  diminished  in  the  weight. 

And  thus  is  gold  prepared  in  the  borders  of  Egypt,  and  perfaot^d 
(jnd  completed  with  so  many  and  so  great  toils  and  vexations.  And 
tlierefore  I  cannot  but  conclude  that  nature  itself  teaches  u»,  that  ai 
gold  is  got  with  labour  and  toil,  so  it  is  kept  with  difficulty,  crcatta 
every  where  the  greatest  cares,  and  the  use  of  it  mixed  both  with 
pleasure  and  sorrow* 

Yet  the  invention  of  those  metals  is  very  antient,  being  found  ant 
and  made  use  of  by  the  antient  kings. 

Now  We  shall  treat  of  those  nations  that  lie  scattered  along  the 
coasts  of  the  Red  sea,  and  through  Troglodyta  and  the  southern  partt 
of  Ethiopia. 

And  first  we  shall  speak  of  the  Ichthyophages,  who  inhabit  the 
sea-coasts  all  along  as  far  as  from  Carmania  and  Gedrosia,  to  the  uU 
termost  point  of  the  Red  sea,  which  runs  up  into  the  land  an  ia^ 
credible  long  way,  and  at  the  entrance  into  it  lies  bounded  oo  one 
side  vnth  Ambia  the  Happy,  and  with  the  country  of  the  Troglodytes 
on  the  other. 

Some  of  the  barbarians  go  stark  naked,  and  their  wivea  and  cfaildfen . 
are  as  common  among  them  as  their  flocks  and  herds.    Tliey  know 
nothing  either  of  pleasure  or  sorrow  but  what  is  natural,  like  brnlt 
beasts,  and  have  no  apprehension  either  of  good  or  evil.    Thej  in* 
habit  not  far  from  the  very  brink  of  the  sea  shore,  where  there  are 
not  only  deep  caves,  but  craggy  cliffs,  and  strait  and  narrow  valliea, 
divided  naturally  into  many  crooked  windings  and  turnings;  which 
being  of  their  own  nature  useful  to  the  inhabitants,  they  make  up  the 
passages  both  in  and  out  with  heaps  of  great  stones,  and  make  use  of 
those  places  instead  of  nets  to  catch  their  fish.    For  when  the  tide 
comes  in  and  overflows  the  coasts  (as  it  does  twice  every  day  about 
the  third  and  ninth  hour)  and  the  sea  covers  the  strand  up  to  the 
brinks  of  the  banks,  together  with  the  tide  it  brings  in  a  vast  number 
of  all  sorts  of  fish  within  the  land,  which  at  the  first  are  kept  within 
those  parts  next  to  the  sea,  but  afterwards  for  food  disperse  them« 
selves  about  those  hollow  caverns  3  but  when  the  tide  ebbs,  and  the 
water  by  degrees  leaves  the  hollows,,  and  reflows  through  those  heaps 
of  stones,  the  fish  within  those  caverns  are  left  destitute  of  water. 
Upon  which  all  the  barbarians,  (as  if  they  were  roused  up  by  one  ge- 
neral shout),  with  their  wives  and  childreo,  flock  to  the  place.    Yet 
they  divide  themselves  into  several  companies,  and  each  run  with  aa 
hideous  shout  to  their  several  places,  as  if  a  prey  were  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly  presented  to  tbem.    Tiien  the  women  and  children 


CSbip.  /.  -  DIODORUS  StCULUS.  101 


a 


gather  the  little  fish  next  to  the  shore,  and  throw  them  upon  the  dry 
land  as  fast  as  they  can  gather  them;  and  the  men  and  more  able 
people  busy  themselves  in  catching  the  great  and  strong  fish;  for  the 
sea  not  only  casts  up  the  huge  lobsters,  lampreys,  and  dog-fish,  but 
also  the  sea  calves,  and  many  such  like,  both  of  strange  names  and 
shape.  They  master  not  these  creatures  with  arms  made  by  tho 
artist,  but  strike  them  through  with  the  sharp  goat's  horns,  and 
wound  and  cut  them  with  rough  stones  broken  ofF  from  the  rock* 
For  necessity  in  every  thing  instructs  nature  what  to  do,  and  readily 
complies  with  that  which  seems  most  useful  and  advantageous  in  the 
present  exigency. 

After  they  have  got  their  number  in  heaps  together,  they  carry 
away  tbeir  booty,  and  put  all  they  h^^ve  caught  into  stone  pots  turned 
towards  the  south:  the  fish  being,  as  itivere  even  by  fire,  fried  by 
the  heat  of  the  sun ;  after  a  small  time  they  turn  them  upon  the  other 
side,  then  they  take  them  by  the  tails  and  shake  them,  and  the  flesh 
thus  scalded  and  softened  by  the  sun,  falls  of;  but  the  bones  they 
heap  together  in  one  place,  and  keep  them  for  theif  use,  as  shall  be 
hereafter  related*  Then  they  boil  their  flesh  in  a  little  stone  poi  for 
a  certain  time,  mixing  with  them  the  seed  of  a  fruit  called  Paliurus. 
By  working  of  this  togetlier,  it  becomes  a  lump  of  one  and  the  same 
colour,  and  this  seems  as  if  it  were  a  sauce  to  their  meat.  At  last, 
this  that  is  thus  brought  into  a  body  they  spread  upon  long  tiles,  and 
lay  it  forth  to  dry  in  the  sun ;  which,  after  it  has  been  dried  a  little, 
(lying  down  together)  they  merrily  feed  upon,  and  eat  not  according 
to  weight  and  measure,  but  as  every  one  thinks  fit,  making  their  na- 
tural appetite  the  measure  of  their  repast.  For  they  have  always 
enough  of  this  store  to  resort  unto,  as  if  Neptune  performed  the  office 
of  Ceres.  Yet  somcilmes  the  sea  rises  so  high,  that  all  the  shores 
are  overflowed  for  many  days  together,  so  that  none  dare  attempt  to 
come  near;  in  the  mean  time,  therefore,  (wanting  food)  they  first 
gather  shell-fish  of  such  a  vast  magnitude,  as  that  some  of  tliem 
weigh  four  minas.  These  they  break  in  pieces  with  huge  great  stones, 
and  eagerly  guttle  up  the  raw  fish  in  them,  which  are  in  taste  much 
like  oysters. 

If  by  storms  and  winds  the  sea  continues  long  in  a  high  tide,  and 
that  they  are  hindered  by  tempestuous  weather  from  taking  of  fi^h, 
they  first  (as  is  said  before)  betake  themseves  to  the  shelUfish;  and 
when  these  fail,  they  run  to  the  heaps  of  bones,  and  from  among 
them  pick  out  those  that  are  fresh  and  moist,  and  divide  them  one 
joint  from  another,  and  some  they  presently  gnaw  in  pieces  with  their 
teeth,  and  others  that  are  more  hard  they  bruise  with  stones,  and 
feed  upon  them  like  so  many  beasts  in  their  dens.    And  thus  they 

Vol.  1.  No.  33.  y 


1^  moDcmus  9feuLU9.  BookttL 

prtmde  dry  fcod  for  them8elT€s:  and  as  to  that  which  is  moist  and 
juicy^  their  use  of  it  is  wonderful  and  past  belief:  for  they  ibh 
eontimiany  for  four  dajrs  saccessiifely,  In  the  mean  time  eating  mer-* 
rily  together  in  great  flodis  and  eompanies,  congratukting  one  ano- 
ther with  harsh  and  discordant  songs  without  any  melodious  harmony} 
dien  ihey  fail  promiscuously^  as  every  man's  lot  chances,  to  company 
with  their  women,  for  procreation  sake;  minding  no  business^  nor 
taking  any  care  for  any  thing,  haring  so  much  plenty  ready  at  hand. 
But  the  fifth  day,  they  go  in  drores  to  get  drinl^  to  those  tracts  lying 
under  the  feet  of  the  mountains,  where  are  many  springs  of  sweet 
water,  whither,  likewise,  the  shepherds  drive  their  flocks  tat  the  sama 
purpose.  Neither  do  they  differ  much  from  herds  of  cattle^  aa  they 
go  making  a  horrid  noise,  without  any  articulate  voice.  In  this  pro* 
cession  the  mothers  carry  their  sucking  children  continually  fai  their 
arms,  and  the  fiithers  after  they  are  weaned;  but,  after  they  are  five 
years  old,  they  run  before  their  parents  very  jocund  and  playful^  as  if 
they  were  going  to  some  delightful  and  pleasant  recreation.  For, 
not  being  of  a  froward  and  discontented  temper,  they  plaoe  their 
ehiefest  good  in  having  sufficient  to  supply  their  necessities^  never 
seeking  any  further  addition  to  their  happiness  in  gaining  more* 
When  they  come  to  the  shepherds'  watering  places,  they  gorge  them- 
selves with  water  to  that  degree^  that  when  they  return  tfaej  6an 
scarce  walk,  they  are  so  heavy  and  unwieldy. 

All  that  day  they  eat  nothing,  but  every  one  lies  groveling  upon 
the  ground  like  a  drunken  man,  with  their  bellies  almost  burst,  and 
scarce  able  to  breath.  And  the  next  day  they  fall  a  feeding  upon 
their  fish;  and  this  course  and  round  they  run  in  this  manner  of 
feeding  all  the  days  of  their  lives.  But  those  people  who  live  thus 
within  the  strait  narrow  caves  near  to  the  sea-shore,  by  reason  of  the 
plainness  and  meanness  of  their  diet,  though  they  are  scarce  ever 
sick,  yet  are  far  shorter-lived  than  our  own  countrymen. 

As  for  those  other  that  live  farther  beyond  the  gulf,  their  vray  of 
living  is  much  more  strange,  who  naturally  never  covet  any  drink, 
nor  are  affected  with  any  passion :  for  their  lot  falling  to  be  in  the 
deserts,  in  places  unfit  for  human  habitatk>n,  tliey  feed  plentifully,  by 
catching  of  fish,  but  matter  not  any  other  food;  and  in  regard  they 
eat  their  fish  slaby,  and  ahnost  raw,  they  are  so  far  from  coveting 
drink,  that  they  know  not  what  it  is  to  drink.  They  are  therefore 
contented  with  what  Providence  has  provided  for  them,  accounting 
themselves  liappy  in  this  respect,  that  they  are  not  alfected  with  that 
troublesome  passion,  the  sense  of  want.  And  that  which  is  most  to 
be  admired  is,  that  they  so  far  exceed  all  other  men  in  freedom  from 
boisterous  passions,  that  what  we  sliall  now  reUite  is  squrce  credible^ 


Ckap.  M  DIODCMIVS  6I6ULV8. 

CSaBBBSBBBBHaBBeaSSSSSSSaSSSBSSSBSBSSSSaSEaSS 


Bui  nany  Egjptiaa  mcrchantt^  wbo  in  tbek  v^iyage  tbiiouf k  tim 
Bfid  flct  have  arrived  at  tha  country  of  the  Irbtbyophafeiy  have 
avowed  it  to  Old  to  be  a  certain  troth,  that  they  are  not  in  the  kfllt 
moved  with  any  thing.  And  Ptdemy  the  Third,  %riM>  had  a  great 
desire  to  hunt  the  elephants  that  were  bred  in  that  country^  teat 
Simia,  one  of  his  friends,  to  view  the  place;  whO|  being  famished 
with  sufficient  provision  for  his  jouvney^  ^caotly  and  diligently  ob« 
served  the  manner  of  those  nations  lying  along  the  sca^sbore^  as  Ag^ 
tharcbides  of  Cnidos  the  historian  relates.  Amongst  other  things  he 
says,  that  the  Ethiopians  in  those  parts  are  not  affected  with  any  d)a- 
torbing  passion;  that  they  never  drink,  nor  have  the  least  up- 
petite  or  inclination  thereunto,  for  the  reasons  before  mentaoiied* 
He  affirms,  moreover,  that  they  have  no  converse  or  discourse  with 
any  stranger,  nor  are  moved  or  concerned  at  the  sight  of  any,  but, 
fixing  their  eyes  upon  them,  are  no  more  moved  nor  afiected  thaa  m 
if  no  person  at  all  were  near  them.  Nay,  if  they  be  assaulted  (he 
says)  with  drawn  swords,  tbey  will  not  stir;  and  though  tiiey  are  hutt 
and  wounded,  yet  they  are  tx)t  in  the  least  provoked.  Neithev  are 
the  common  people  at  all  concerned  when  any  of  the  rest  are  hnrt  d» 
injured;  but  many  times  when  their  wives  and  children  are 
before  their  eyes,  they  stand  insensible,  as  if  nothing  of  pn 
were  done  to  them,  shewing  no  sign  either  of  anger  or  eompassfos; 
and  therefore  they  say,  they  speak  not  a  word,  but,  upon  sueh  an 
occasion,  only  act  a  part  with  a  mimic  gesture  of  their  hands*  And 
that  which  is  mo^t  of  all  to  be  admired,  the  sea-calves  (whidh 
are  very  familiar  with  them)  like  men,  help  them  to  catch  fish. 
Tiiese  different  and  distinct  people  are  yet  exceeding  faithful  to  one 
another,  in  securing  one  another's  children  from  harm  and  pre^^ 
judice,  and  preserving  their  several  habitations  from  foroe  and  an- 
crcachment;  and  though  tl>ey  are  of  different  stocks,  yet  they  pt«oe-> 
ably  and  afiectionately  converse  one  with  another,  withotft  offdridg 
the  least  injury  on  either  side. 

And  though  this  way  of  living  together  be  somewhat  strange  yet 
through  long  custom,  and  constant  use  and  practice,  of  becanse  they 
find  it  necessary  and  condueing  to  their  mutual  advantage,  it  is  still 
continued  among  them  to  this  day^ 

These  nations  inhabit  not  after  the  ayidiMr  of  the  other  Iektb]FO^ 
phages,  but  have  divers  sorts  of  dwellingji,  atcording  as  their  seveia) 
circumstances  happen  to  be ;  some  live  in  caves  lying  most  commoidy 
to  the  north,  by  which  they  have  the  advantage  of  being  refircsiiod  not 
only  by  the  depth  of  the  covert,  but  by  the  cooling  breezes  of  the 
northern  air«  For  those  towards  Uie  sKHitb  seorch  Uko  a  fieiy  ftr- 
nace,  aody  hy  reason  of  t^e  viol^  bei|t|  n^^  «mu»  ^aa  oodtifa  ihmu 


Iff4  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Mook  TIT. 

Others  that  cannot  otherwise  fiumbh  themselves  with  caves  that  lie 
northward,  gather  the  ribs  of  whales  (which  the  sea  casts  up  in  abnn- 
dance)  and  then  bending  them^  tie  them  together  at  both  endsy  and 
cover  them  with  sea-grass,  and  so  rest  under  those,  guarded  from 
the  parching  heat  of  tiie  sun,  as  by  the  cover  of  a  shady  arch ;  which 
art  and  contrivance  they  are  taught  by  their  own  necessities. 

A  third  sort  of  lodgings  these  Ichthyophages  have  are  these: 
about  those  places  grow  abundance  of  fir-trees,  which  are  watered  by 
the  sea,  and  bear  very  thick  leaves,  and  fruit  like  unto  chesnuts: 
the  boughs  and  leaves  of  these  trees  they  interlace  one  within  ano- 
ther, and  so  make  for  themselves  a  thick  and  close  shade,  and  live 
merry  and  jocund  lives,  under  this  their  new  canopy^  both  in  land 
and  in  water  at  one  and  the  same  time,  being  hereby  guarded  from 
the  sun  by  the  shade  of  the  trees,  and  the  natural  heat  of  the  place 
being  mitigated  by  the  continual  fluctuations  of  the  sea,  and  their 
bodies  refreshed  with  the  cooling  air  of  some  winds  that  blow  at  cer- 
tain  seasons.    But  to  proceed,  as  to  the  fourth  sort  of  dwellings:.-^ 

In  this  place  there  has  been,  from  the  beginning  of  time,  a  vast 
heap  of  moss,  like  a  mountain,  cast  up  by  the  sea,  which  is  so  firm 
by  the  constant  heat  of  the  sun,  that  it  is  become  solid  and  cemented 
together  with  sand.  In  this  they  dig  caves  of  a  man's  height,  that 
part  over  head  they  leave  for  a  roof,  but  below  they  make  long  pas* 
sages  or  galleries  to  go  in  or  out,  one  over  against  another.  Here 
they  abide  with  ease,  protected  from  the  heat  of  the  sun;  and  about 
the  time  the  tide  comes  in,  out  they  start,  and  then  for  that  time  em- 
ploy themselves  in  fishing;  and  at  the  ebbing  of  the  tide,  after  they 
have  fed  deliciously  together  upon  the  fish  they  have  caught,  they 
iiy  again  to  their  several  caves.  They  bury  their  dead  only  at  low 
water;  and  at  that  time  they  cast  their  carcases  upon  the  shore,  and 
there  let  them  lie  uncovered,  to  be  carried  away  by  the  nest  tide. 
And  so  after  all,  having  spent  all  their  days  in  a  strange  and  unusual 
course  and  way  of  living,  they  themselves  at  last  in  their  buriab  be« 
come  food  for  the  fishes. 

But  there  is  one  nation  of  the  Ichthyophages  whose  habitations  are 
so  strange,  that  inquisitive  men  are  very  much  puzzled  about  them. 
For  some  of  them  dwell  upon  steep  and  dangerous  hollows,  which, 
time  out  of  mind,  have  been  unaccessible  to  mankind,  as  far  as  ap- 
pears:  for  over  their  heads  are  exceeding  high  rocks*  rugged  and 
steep  every  way;  and  on  both  sides  they  are  blocked  up  with  im^ 
passable  precipices;  and  before,  the  sea  is  a  guard  and  boundary  to 
them,  so  that  the  best  footman  cannot  come  at  them.  Neither  have 
they  any  use,  or  so  much  as  knowledge,  of  boats  or  ships,  as  we  have. 
Hence  (the  thing  baiog  so  intricate  and  doubtful)  we  may  justly  con* 


Chap.  IT.  DiODORUs  sicuLUS.  165 

sstsssaessat      '  11  ■   ,  ,  '  mm 

clode  that  they  are  Aborigines^  and  were  ever  in  this  place,  without 
any  certain  time  of  their  first  generation ;  which  some  naturalists 
doubt  not  to  affirm  of  all  other  works  of  nature  whatsoever.  But, 
forasmuch  as  the  perfect  knowledge  of  things  of  this  nature  is  far 
above  our  comprehension,  we  may  easily  conclude,  that  those  know 
but  little,  who  are  the  most  inquisitive,  and  soaring  so  high  as  to 
know  all;  who  may  perhaps  tickle  men's  ears  with  a  probable  fancy, 
but  never  really  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. 


CHAP.  II. 

CheUmophages:  the  manner  of  taking  sea-tortoises.  The  CetU' 
voreSy  or  fFhale^eaters.  The  sea- coasts  over  against  Babylon; 
their  manner  of  taking  offish.  The  Eizophages,  or  Moot' 
eaters.  Those  called  Spermatophages  and  Hylophages,  Ifybh- 
gonesy  or  Hunters;  their  taking  of  tvild  beasts:  the  Elephant^ 
fighters;  how  they  are  taken:  the  SimoeSy  Struthophages,  Acri- 
dophageSj  orLocust-eaters;  their  miserable  deaths.  Cynomolges  : 
the  country  of  the  Troglodytes.  '  Wild  beasts:  the  terrible  wild 
bull.     Serpents:  that  great  one  brought  alive  to  Alexandria.    * 

SOMETHING  likewise  is  to  be  spoken  of  the  Chelonophages,  to 
shew  the  whole  course  and  manner  of  their  way  of  living. 

There  are  a  vast  number  of  islands  in  the  ocean  near  to  the  oon- 
tinent,  very  small  and  of  a  low  situation^  barren  both  as  to  tillage  and 
the  natural  fruits  of  the  earth.  Amongst  these  islands  (because  they 
are  so  near  one  to  another)  there  are  no  storms  or  tempests:  for  the 
force  of  the  waves  are  broke  by  the  promontories  of  these  blands  that 
shoot  out  into  the  sea,  and  therefore  abundance  of  sea-tortoises  lie 
in  and  about  these  places,  seeking  relief  under  tlie  eovert  of  this  calm 
and  quiet  shelter.  In  the  night  they  lie  at  the  bottom  of  the  water 
feeding,  but  in  the  day  time  appear  above  water,  in  that  part  of  the 
sea  that  flows  through  the  midst  of  the  islands,  and  lie  sleeping  with 
their  shells  erect,  exposed  to  the  sun,  and  seem  to  resemble  a  little 
skiff  turned  with  the  keel  upwards;  for  they  are  of  a  wonderful  big- 
ness, no  less  than*  a  small  fishing  boat. 

The  barbarians  that  inhabit  these  islands,  taking  the  opportunity, 
quietly  and  silently  swim  to  these  sea-tortoises,  and,  assailing  them 
on  both  sides^  some  they  thrust  forward  to  the  shore,  others  they  lift 


l66  DXODORUS  SICUL9S.  Mook  BC 


immm 


up  till  thejr  bare  turned  them  upon  their  backs ;  then  they  that  are 
OD  each  side  guide  and  direct  the  creature  to  land  like  a  riiip  by  the 
steal,  lest  the  tortoise  should  tora  itself  again,  and  so  by  its  natunl 
strength  in  swimming  escape  from  them  into  the  sea:  and  while  thej 
are  thus  employed,  one  of  the  company  swims  to  shore  before  with  a 
long  rape  tied  at  one  end  to  the  fish,  and  then  draws  him  to  laod^ 
those  that  assisted  at  the  taking  of  him  following  close  after*  When 
be  is  brought  into  the  bland,  they  fry  the  fish  a  little  while  in  the 
sun,  and  then  feed  upon  it  merrily  together.  The  shells  being  in 
shape  like  to  boats,  are  very  useful  to  the  inhabitants;  for  they  use 
them  both  to  sail  in  to  the  contUient  to  get  fresh  water,  and  likewise 
for  roofs  to  cover  their  cottages,  turning  the  hollow  parts  downwards. 
So  that  nature's  bounty  has  provided  for  them  by  one  gift  many  use- 
ful advantages,  as  food,  vessels,  shipping,  and  habitations. 

Not  far  from  these,  upon  the  sea-shore  in  the  continent,  dwell 
other  barbarians,  far  diflferent  in  their  way  of  living,  called  Cettvorei^ 
who  feed  upon  whales  cast  up  by  chance  by  the  sea.  Sometimes 
they  have  plenty  of  food,  by  reason  of  the  vast  proportion  of  these 
creatures ;  but  at  other  times,  for  want  of  them,  they  are  almost 
starved,  and  are  forced,  through  want  of  food,  to  gnaw  pieces  of  old 
stinking  bones,  and  to  suck  the  ends  of  the  rotten  ribs. 

So  many  are  the  nations  of  the  Ethiopians  who  feed  upon  fish;  and 
this  is  their  manner  of  lining,  eoncluding  thb  account  in  a  brief  and 
nummary  way« 

But  the  sea-coasts  over  against  the  province  of  Babylon  border 
upon  a  fruitful  country,  abounding  in  all  sorts  of  froit-tfees,  where 
there  is  such  plenty  of  fish,  that  they  are  more  than  the  inhabitants 
can  consume:  for,  upon  the  sea-shore  they  set  such  a  number  of 
canes,  and  so  interwoven  one  within  another,  that  they  are  like  to  a 
net  spread  all  along  by  the  sea-side.  In  every  of  which  works,  these 
are  many  little  portals  wrought  and  interlaced  with  reeds,  and  are 
tossed  this  way  and  that  way  with  an  easy  motion.  These  open  by 
tlie  tide,when  the  sea  flows  in  upon  the  land,  and  when  it  returns  into 
the  channel,  they  shut  again.  So  that  through  these  portals,  with 
the  efflux  of  the  sea,  the  fish  slip  every  day,  and  when  it  ebbs,  thej 
are  left  behind,  because  tliey  cannot  pass  with  the  water  througk 
those  canes  thus  knit  and  wrought  together:  and  therefore  near  ta 
the  sea-side  sometimes  may  be  seen  heaps  of  fish  panting  for  wantef 
water,  which  those  that  have  the  care  and  oversight  of  this  business 
gather  and  carry  away.  Hence  they  have  both  plenty  of  food,  and 
raise  a  large  revenue  besides.  Some  of  the  inhabitants,  when  the 
shore  is  dry,  and  the  country  lies  flat,  draw  broad  slniccs  from  the 
sea  many  furlongs  to  their  cottages,  at  the  ends  of  wbidt  they  place 


wears  ntde  of  twigs^  which  open  when  the  tide  eomes  in,  andl' 
shut  agidn  when  the  sea  goes  out;  and  then,  the  water  flowii^ 
thnmgh  the  narrow  mouths  of  the  portals,  the  fish  remain  behind  m 
the  altuees,  and  there  they  take  out  every  time  as  many  as  they  haiFe 
occasion  to  use. 

Having  gone  through  all  tliose  people  bordering  upon  the  sea-ootsts 
as  far  as  from  the  province  of  Babylon  to  the  Red  sea,  we  shall  tiow 
proceed  to  give  an  aecount  of  the  other  nations* 

lo  Ethiopia  above  Egypt,  near  to  the  river  Asa,  inhabit  a  people 
called  Rizophages,  wlio  get  up  the  roots  of  the  canes  that  grow  in  the 
marshes,  and  first  wash  them  very  clean,  then  they  bruise  and  pound 
them  with  stones  till  they  are  soft  and  pliant;  afterwards  they  lay  a 
handful  of  them  in  the  sun  till  they  are  broiled;  and  tbis  is  the  food 
they  live  upon  all  their  days.  But  though  they  live  in  plenty,  and 
are  at  constant  peace  with  one  another,  yet  they  are  miserably  infested| 
and  often  Allien  upon,  by  the  lions  that  abound  in  those  parts:  fer 
the  air  being  scorching  hot,  they  come  out  of  the  deserts  into  the 
country  of  the  Rizophages,  both  for  shelter  from  the  heat,  and  to 
hunt  the  lesser  beasts  for  prey;  so  that  when  the  Ethiopians  come  out 
of  the  marshes,  they  are  torn  in  pieces  by  these  creatures;  for,  beia^ 
unarmed,  they  are  unable  to  withstand  the  strength  of  the  lions:  and 
the  whole  nation  would  certainly  be  utterly  destroyed,  if  Pktwideoce 
had  not  provided  a  remedy  in  this  case;  for,  about  the  beginning  of 
the  dog-days,  when  there  b  not  the  least  wind,  there  comes  in  such  a 
multitude  of  gnats  (larger  than  those  that  are  conraionly  seen)  that 
the  inhabitants  are  forced  to  fly  into  the  marshes,  and  so  avoid  them : 
and  the  lions,  partly  tormented  by  their  biting  and  stinging  of  them, 
and  partly  terrified  with  their  humming  and  buzzing,  run  far  away  out 
of  the  country. 

Next  to  these  are  those  nations  called  Hylopliages  and  Spermato- 
phages.  The  last  of  these  gather  in  great  plenty  fruits  which  All 
from  the  trees  in  the  summer-time,  and  so  feed  on  them  without 
taking  any  further  pains.  The  rest  of  the  year  they  feed  upon  a  cer- 
tain sweet  herb  which  grows  in  the  shady  valleys;  which  being  a  solid 
plant,  and  having  a  stalk  like  to  a  turnip,  it  sufficiently  supplies  the 
want  of  other  necessary  food. 

But  the  Hylopliages,  together  with  their  wives  and  children,  go 
into  the  fields  and  climb  the  trees,  and  feed  upon  the  buds  and 
tender  branches;  and  by  constant  usage  and  practice  are  so  nimble 
in  getting  up  to  the  top  of  the  highest  branch,  that  it  seems  almost 
incredible.  They  skip  from  tree  to  tree  like  so  many  birds,  and 
mount  up  upon  the  slenderest  branches  without  the  least  hazard. 
For,  being  very  slender  and  light  bodied  people,  if  their  feet  fail,  they 


168  BIODORUS  SICULU9.  Book  IHr 

catch  hold  with  their  hands;  nay,  if  they  fall  down  firom  the  Teiy 
top,  they  are  so  light  they  get  no  harm.    They  easily  chew  cTeiy. 
juicy  twig  of  the  tree,  and  as  easily  concoct  them.    They  always  go 
naked,  and  make  use  of  their  wives  promiscuously,  and  therefore  all 
-their  children  they  look  upon  to  be  common  amongst  them.    They, 
sometimes  quarrel  one  with  another  for  places  of  habitation;  their 
arms  are  clubs,  with  which  they  both  defend  themselves,  and  pound, 
in  pieces  their  conquered  enemy.    Many  of  them  are  often  fiumshed 
to  death  when  they  grow  blind,  being  deprived  of  so  neeessaiy  a 
member  for  the  procuring  of  sustenance. 

The  next  adjcnning  country  is  inhabited  by  the  Ethiopian  Hylo- 
gones,  called  Hunters,  who  are  indeed  but  few,  but  live  after  a  pecu* 
liar  and  strange  manner,  answerable  to  their  name;  for  the  land  be- 
ing infested  with  multitudes  of  wild  beasts,  is  very  terrible  to  live  in, 
and  very  little  running  water  is  to  be  found;  therefore,  for  fear  of 
the  beasts,  the  inhabitants  sleep  all  night  in  trees;  and  in  the  morn- 
ing they  go  to  the  pools  of  water  with  their  arms,  where  they  bide 
themselves  among  the  boughs,  and  spy  in  the  mean  time  oat  of  the 
trees :  then,  when  the  sun  grows  hot,  the  wild  bulls  and  leopards,  and 
a  great  number  of  other  wild  beasts,  come  running  to  the  waters, 
(being  scorched  with  heat  and  thirst)  and  do  so  gorge  themselvea 
with  drinking,  that  they  are  ready  to  burst,  upon  which  the  Ethio- 
pians leap  out  of  the  trees,  and  set  upon  the  beasts  (that  can  scarcely 
stir  or  move)  with  clubs  burnt  at  the  end,  stones,  and  darts,  and  IdU 
them  with  ease :  thus,  dividing  themselves  into  companies,  they  fimsh- 
their  pursuit,  and  feed  together  upon  the  prey  they  have  caught: 
very  rarely  it  is  that  any  of  them  are  killed,  even  by  the  fiercest  or 
strongest  of  them,  but  by  slight  they  overcome  might.  If  they  misa 
of  their  prey,  they  wash  the  skins  of  those  they  have  formerly  taken, 
and  lay  them  upon  a  fire  made  for  the  purpose,  and  scorching  off  the 
hair  under  the  ashes,  and  dividing  the  skin  amongst  themselves,  with 
this  hard  fare  they  satisfy  their  hunger.  They  teach  the  boys  to  cast 
darts  exactly  to  hit  a  mark,  and  if  they  miss,  they  suffer  them  not  to 
eat.  And  by  this  means  (through  pinching  hunger)  they  become  ex- 
cellent archers. 

Not  far  from  these,  towards  the  west,  inhabit  the  Ethiopians  that 
are  called  Elephantophages.  Tiiey  dwell  in  large  and  woody  fo- 
rests, where,  from  the  tops  of  the  highest  trees,  they  diligently  ob- 
serve the  motions  and  walks  of  the  elepliants.  But  they  set  not  up- 
on the  entire  troops  at  once,  (for  that  were  to  little  purpose),  but  with 
wonderful  courage  single  ihem  out  as  they  come  near  to  them.  For 
when  the  beast  approaches  to  the  right  side  of  the  tree,  where  he  that 
watches  for  him  lies  bid,  just  as  the  elephant  passes  by,  he  catches 


Chup.  IL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  I69 


nsss 


liold  of  his  tail  with  his  Iiands,  and  clasps  his  feet  close  to  his  left 
thigh:  then  with  his  right  hand  he  lays  hold  of  a  sharp  axe,  (bound 
upon  bis  shoulder,  and  manageable  by  one  hand),  and  with  that  gives 
him  one  wound  after  another^  whereby  he  cuts  the  nerves  and  sinews 
of  the  elephant's  right  ham,  guiding  and  governing  his  body  in  the 
mean  time  by  his  right  hand.  This  feat  is  performed  with  that  ad- 
mirable quickness  and  aqtivity,  as  if  the  combat  had  been  designed 
to  be  ended  no  otherwise  than  by  the  loss  of  one  of  their  lives.  For, 
what  could  be  expected  (since  the  nature  of  the  thing  cannot  admit 
of  any  other  conjecture)  but  either  the  man  roust  die,  or  the  beast  be 
overcome?  The  beast,  being  thus  ham-strung,  not  able  to  turn  him- 
self round,  by  reason  of  the  slowness  of  his  motion,  sinks  sometimes 
on  that  side  where  he  is  wounded,  and  falls  down,  and  together  with 
himself  kills  the  Ethiopian.  Sometimes  the  elephant  dashes  the  man 
against  a  tree  or  a  stone,  and  with  his  weight  presses  upon  liim  till  he 
has  killed  him.  Some  of  the  elephants,  overmastered,  (througii  the 
smart  and  torment  of  tiieir  wounds),  never  regard  him  that  wounds 
tbem^  but  run  so  long  up  and  down  the  plain,  till  the  Ethiopian  be« 
hind,  by  his  continual  hacking  and  cutting  in  one  and  the  same  place, 
cuts  his  sinews  in  pieces,  and  at  length  altogether  disables  him,  and 
brings  him  down :  whereupon  the  Ethiopians  run  in  flocking,  and, 
cutting  off  collops  of  his  flesh  while  he  is  yet  alive^  feed  and  feast 
themselves  merrily  together. 

Some  of  the  neighbouring  Ethiopians  take  the  elephants  without 
any  danger  of  their  lives  at  all,  overcoming  force  by  slight.  For  this 
creature,  when  he  is  full,  after  feeding,  differs  from  all  other  four* 
footed  beasts  in  disposing  of  himself  to  sleep.  For  he  cannot  bend 
his  knees  and  lie  down,  but  sleeps  leaning  his  body  to  the  side  of  a 
tree;  so  that  the  tree,  by  his  frequent  resort  to  it,  and  pressing  upon 
it,  withers  and  rots;  there  being,  therefore,  many  signs  and  footsteps 
of  the  elephant's  walks,  by  which  the  hunters  of  this  prey  discover 
wbere  he  rests  himself;  they  having  found  out  the  tree,  saw  it  a  lit* 
tie  above  the  ground  till  it  be  almost  ready  to  fall,  then  rubbing  out 
the  marks  of  their  feet,  they  go  away  before  the  elephant  comes  tiiere, 
who  afterwards,  in  the  evening,  being  full  fed,  makes  to  his  usual 
resting-place;  and  as  soon  as  he  leans  with  the  weight  of  his  whole 
body  to  the  tree,  down  it  falls,  and  the  beast  along  with  it,  and  there 
lies  all  night  with  his  heels  upward,  for  he  cannot  possibly  rise.  As 
soon  as  it  is  day,  they  that  sawed  the  tree  come  to  the  place,  and  there 
kill  the  poor  creature  without  any  hazard,  and  build  themselves  huts, 
where  they  stay  till  they  have  eaten  him  up. 

Next  to  these  nations  upon  the  west  inhabit  those  Ethiopians  called 
Simoes :  to  the  south  lie  the  nation  of  the  Struthophages;  for  among 

Vol.  1.  No.  S4.  2 


170  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBooklU. 

them  is  a  sort  of  bird  of  a  mixed  nature,  partly  a  fowl  and  partly  a 
beast,  and  thenee  it  has  its  name.  She  is  little  less,  than  the  greatest 
hart:  nature  has  formed  her  with  a  long  neck,  a  round  body  with 
wings,  but  a  tender  and  small  head,  yet  she  has  strong  thighs  and 
legs,  and  her  feathers  are  forked ;  and  she  is  so  heavy  and  unwieldy^ 
that  she  cannot  fly  above  the  earth,  but  she  runs  along  with  that 
swiftness  that  she  scarce  touches  the  ground.  With  a  brisk  gale  of 
wind  she  mounts  up  her  wings,  and  makes  forward  as  swift  as  a  ship 
with  her  sails  spread  under  sail.  Against  the  pursuer  she  defends 
herself  with  flinging  of  stones,  which  she  throws  with  that  violence 
out  of  her  feet  as  out  of  a  sling;  but  when  the  wind  is  low^  her 
wings  flag,  and  so,  being  deprived  of  that  natural  help,  she  is  easily 
taken.  There  are  a  great  number  of  those  birds ;  and  by  divers  arts 
and  devices  the  barbarians  easily  take  multitudes  of  them^  and  feed 
upon  their  flesh,  and  make  use  of  their  skins  both  for  vestments  and 
coverlets  for  beds. 

But  when  these  Struthophages  are  set  upon  by  the  Ethiopians 
called  Simoes,  for  arms  they  use  the  horns  of  the  Oryxes*,  with  which 
they  repel  the  assaults  of  their  enemies.  For  they  are  very  great, 
and  sharp  at  the  ends ;  and  these  sort  of  beasts  do  there  so  abound, 
that  their  horns  are  found  scattered  up  and  down,  and  so  they  become 
of  special  use  to  the  inhabitants. 

A  little  distant  from  these  are  the  Acridopliages,  bordering  upon 
the  deserts ;  they  are  smaller  than  other  men,  of  lean  and  meager  bo- 
dies, and  exceeding  black.  In  these  parts  in  the  time  of  the  spring 
the  south  winds  rise  high,  and  drive  an  infinite  number  of  locusts 
out  of  the  desert,  of  an  extraordinary  bigness,  furnished  with  most 
dirty  and  nasty-coloured  wings;  and  these  are  plentiful  food  and 
provision  for  them  all  their  days.  They  have  a  strange  and  peculiar 
way  of  catching  them ;  for  in  their  country  there  is  a  laige  and 
deep  vale,  extending  far  in  length  for  many  furlongs  together:  all 
over  this  they  lay  heaps  of  wood  and  other  combustible  matter,  of 
which  they  have  plenty  in  every  place,  and  when  the  swarms  of  lo- 
custs are  driven  thither  by  the  force  of  the  winds,  then  some  of  the 
inhabitants  go  to  one  part  of  the  valley,  and  some  to  another,  and  set 
the  grass  and  other  combustible  matter  on  fire,  which  was  before 
thrown  among  the  piles ;  whereupon  arises  a  great  and  suffocating 
smoke,  which  so  stifles  the  locusts  as  they  fly  over  the  vale,  that  they 
go  not  much  ferther  before  they  fall  down  dead  to  the  ground*  This 
destruction  of  them  is  continued  for  many  days  together,  so  that 
they  lie  in  great  heaps :  the  country  being  full  of  salt,  they  gather 

*  The  Oryx  is  a  bf ait  as  big  as  a  roe-bucJ(,  and  bat  a  boro  so  hard  and  ibarp  thml 

it  will  pierce  brass. 


Chap.  JZ  JDIODORUS  sicuLUS.  171 

these  heaps  together,  and  season  them  sufficiently  with  this  salt, 
which  gives  them  an  excellent  relish,  and  preserves  them  a  long  time 
sweet  without  the  least  putrefoction,  so  that  they  have  food  ever 
ready  at  hand  from  these  insects  daring  all  the  rest  ot  the  year:  for 
they  neither  concern  themselves  with  flesh  or  fish,  (being  far  remote 
from  the  sea),  nor  have  any  other  provision  for  their  support  and  sus- 
tenance. They  are  a  little  sort  of  people,  very  swift  of  foot,  but  ex- 
ceeding short-lived,  for  they  that  live  the  longest  never  exceed  forty: 
and  as  tlie  manner  of  their  death  is  strange  and  wonderful,  so  it  is 
sad  and  most  miserable :  for,  when  they  grow  old,  winged  lice  breed 
in  their  flesh,  not  only  of  divers  sorts,  but  of  horrid  and  ugly  shapes. 
Tins  plague  begins  first  at  the  belly  and  breast,  and  in  a  little  time 
eats  and  consumes  the  whole  body.  He  that  is  seized  with  this  dis- 
temper, first  begins  tp  itch  a  little,  as  if  he  had  the  &cab,  pleasure 
and  trouble  being  mixed  together.  But  afterwards,  when  the  lice 
begin  to  break  out  at  the  skin,  abundance  of  putrid  matter  (accom- 
panied with  intollerable  sharp  pain)  issues  out  with. them.  Hereupoa 
the  sick  person  so  tears  himself  in  pieces  with  his  own  nails,  that  he 
eighs  and  groans  most  lamentably,  and  while  he  is  thus  scratching  of 
himself,  the  lice  come  pouring  out  in  such  abundance  one  after  ano* 
ther,  as  out  of  a  vessel  full 'of  holes,  and  thus  they  miserably  close 
and  end  their  days.  Whether  this  proceeds  from  the  nature  of  their 
food,  or  the  temper  of  the  air,  is  uncertain. 

Upon  this  nation  there  borders  a  large  country,  rich  in  fair  pas- 
tures, but  desert  and  unifihabited;  not  that  there  never  were  any 
people  there,  but  that  formerly,  when  it  was  inhabited,  an  immode- 
rate rain  happened,  which  bred  a  vast  company  of  spiders  and  scor* 
pions:  and  (as  they  write)  these  creatui'es  did  so  increase,  that 
though  at  the  first  the  whole  nation  attempled  to  destroy  these  im- 
placable enemies  of  their  country,  yet  they  were  not  able  to  master 
them,  (for  whosoever  was  bit  or  stung  with  them,  immediately  fell 
down  dead),  so  that  not  kowing  where  to  abide,  or  how  to  get  food, 
they  were  forced  to  fly  to  some  other  place  for  relief.  And  this  is 
not  at  all  incredible,  for  we  are  assured  by  very  good  and  substantial 
historians,  that  far  more  strange  and  wonderful  things  than  those 
have  happened  in  the  world.  For  in  Italy  field-mice  bred  in  such 
vast  numbers,  that  they  forced  the  inhabitants  out  of  the  country. 
In  Media  great  flocks  of  sparrows  ate  up  all  the  standing  corn,  so  as 
the  people  were  forced  to  remove  elsewhere.  The  people  called  Au- 
tariats  were  forced,  by  frogs  bred  in  the  clouds,  which  poured  dowa 
upon  them  instead  of  rain,  to  forsake  their  country,  and  fly  to  these  ( 
parts  where  they  are  now  settled.  And  who  is  there  that  is  not  well 
acquainted  by  anticnt  histories,  how  among  those  many  labours  Her- 


r 

\ 
\ 


172  mODORUS  6ICUL0S.  Sookllh 


cules  undertook  to  eternize  his  name,  his  driving  those  devouring 
birds  out  of  the  marshes  of  Stymphalides  was  one?  And  some  cities 
of  Libya  were  altogether  depopulated  by  lions  breaking  in  upon  them. 
And  these  instances  we  have  given  to  convince  those  that  are  apt  to 
question  whatsoever  historians  relate  that  seem  strange  and  unusual* 
But  to  return  to  the  orderly  course  of  our  history. 

The  soutlicrn  border  is  inhabited  by  men  whom  the  Grecians  call 
Cynomones,  or  Cynomolges;  but  by  the  neighbouring  barbarians 
they  are  called,  in  their  own  country  language,  wild  £thiopiaiis. 
They  wear  long  beards,  and  keep  up  numbers  of  fierce  dogs  to  get 
them  food:  for,  from  the  beginning  of  the  summer  solstice  to  the 
middle  of  winter,  an  innumerable  number  of  Indian  oxen  come  into 
their  country.  The  reason  of  this  is  unknown ;  for  it  is  uncertun  whe- 
ther they  fly  from  cruel  wild  beasts,  which  in  troops  set  upon  them, 
or  that  they  do  it  from  want  of  pasture,  or  upon  some  other  account, 
(the  effect  of  nature,  the  parent  of  all  wonders),  which  man^s  reasoa 
cannot  comprehend.  These  oxen  are  so  numerous,  that  the  inhabi- 
tants are  not  able  to  master  them ;  therefore  they  set  loose  their  dogs 
upon  them,  and,  by  hunting  them,  take  many,  of  which  they  eat  some 
fresh,  and  others  they  salt  up. 

Many  other  beasts  they  kill  with  these  large  dogs,  and  by  this 
means  live  upon  flesh.  The  nations  that  lie  farthest  south  live  the 
lives  of  beasts  under  the  shapes  of  men. 

But  it  yet  remains  to  speak  of  two  other  nations]  the  Ethiopians 
and  the  Troglodytes :  but  of  the  Ethiopians  mention  is  made  else- 
where, and  therefore  now  we  shall  treat  of  the  Troglodytes,  The 
Grecians  call  them  Nomades;  for  they  live  pastoral  lives,  in  the 
manner  of  shepherds,  and  are  divided  into  tribes  under  a  monarchi- 
cal government,  and  enjoy  their  wives  and  children  in  common, 
except  only  the  wife  of  the  king;  yet  if  any  of  them  happen  to 
lie  with  her,  he  is  only  fined  by  the  king  in  a  certain  number  of 
sheep. 

When  the  Etesian  winds  blow,  (at  which  time  there  falls  abundance 
of  rain),  they  feed  upon  milk  and  blood  mingled  together,  and  boiled 
for  a  little  time.  Afterwards,  when  the  pastures  are  burnt  up  with 
the  scorching  heat  of  the  sun,  they  fly  into  the  low  marshes,  where 
they  often  fight  one  with  another  for  convenient  pastures  for  their 
flocks:  those  cattle  that  grow  old,  or  are  sick,  they  knock  on  the 
head,  and  eat  them;  and  from  these  always  they  have  their  food  and 
sustenance:  and  therefore  they  never  call  any  father  and  mother, 
but  only  a  bull,  an  ox,  a  goat,  or  a  sheep,  of  which  they  call  the 
males  fathers,  and  the  females  mothers,  because  they  have  their  daily 
food  from  these,  and  not  from  their  parents.    Their  ordinary  drink 


C/kp.  JZ  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  173 


■^ 


is  a  liquor  strained  out  of  the  plant  called  Fkliurus :  but  the 
for  the  noblemen  and  persons  of  quality  b  made  of  the  juice  of  a  flower 
no  better  than  the  worst  of  our  wines.  Because  of  their  cattle^  they 
often  shift  and  remove  from  one  pasture  to  another^  and  are  very 
cautious  and  careful  not  to  stay  long  in  one  place. 

Their  whole  bodies  are  naked,  except  about  their  loins,  which  they 
cover  with  beast's  skins.  All  the  Troglodytes  are  circumcised,  like 
the  Egyptians,  except  those  who,  by  i:eason  of  some  accident,  are 
called  cripples;  for  these  only,  of  all  those  that  inhabit  these  straits^ 
have  from  thfir  infancy  that  member  (which  in  others  is  only  circum* 
cised)  wholly  cut  off  with  a  razor.  Among  the  Troglodytes,  those 
called  Megahareans  for  arms  beat  round  shields  made  of  the  raw 
hides  of  oxen,  and  clubs  bound  round  with  iron  at  the  thick  ends; 
the  rest  are  armed  with  bows  and  spears. 

When  they  are  dead,  they  lie  them  neck  and  heels  with  the  twigs 
and  branches  of  the  plant  Paliurus;  then  they  carry  the  body  to  the 
top  of  a  hill,  where,  with  great  sport  and  laughter,  they  pelt  it  with 
stones  till  it  be  covered  over;  and  then  they  stick  up  a  goat's  horn 
upon  the  heap,  and  so  leave  it  without  the  least  sense  of  pity  or  com- 
passion. They  fight  not  one  with  another  out  of  any  spleen  or  rage 
one  against  another,  like  the  Grecians,  but  merely  for  their  flourishing 
pastures.  In  the  beginning  of  their  fights,  they  make  their  onsets 
with  throwing  of  stones;  after  some  wounds  given  on  both  sideSf 
they  fall  to  it  with  their  bows  and  arrows,  whereupon  great  numbers 
are  slain  in  a  short  time;  for,  by  long  experience  they  become  good 
marksmen,  and  being  all  naked,  are  exposed  to  every  shot.  At 
length  their  old  women,  by  their  entreaties,  put  an  end  to  their 
conflicts,  (whom  they  greatly  reverence,  for  it  is  unlawful  to  do 
them  the  least  harm),  and  therefore,  as  soon  as  they  see  them  come 
towards  them,  they  cease  casting  their  darts  immediately,  and  all  are 
quiet. 

When  they  grow  so  old  that  they  cannot  follow  the  flocks,  they  tie 
themselves  by  their  necks  to  an  ox's  tail,  and  so  put  an  end  to  their 
days:  and  if  any  defer  his  death,  any  one,  as  a  friend,  may  first  ad* 
snonish  him,  and  then,  if  he  does  it  not,  the  Other  may  cast  a  rope 
about  his  neck  and  strangle  him.  In  the  like  manner  it  is  lawful  to 
put  to  death  any  that  become  lame,  or  are  seiz'd  with  any  desperate 
and  incurable  distemper:  for  they  count  it  the  highest  and  greatest 
offence  for  any  one  to  love  his  life  when  he  is  able  to  do  nothing 
worth  living.  And  therefore  all  the  Troglodytes  are  of  sound  bodies 
and  of  a  strong  and  healthful  age,  none  exceeding  three  score.  But 
this  shall  suffice  conceruing  the  Troglodytes.     Yet  if  this  account 


]  74  DIODORUS  8ICULU9.  Book  JIT. 

•eeiD  strange  to  any,  and  this  manner  of  living  incredible,  let  bitt  the 
climate  of  Scythia  be  compared  with  that  of  the  Trogtodytes^  and 
then  this,  our  relation,  may  easily  gain  belief:  for  there  is  so  great  a 
difference  between  our  climate  and  their's  of  which  we  write,  that 
the  different  natures,  being  weighed  and  considered  distinctly,  are 
acarce  credible.  For  in  some  places  of  Scythia,  by  the  extremity  of 
coM,  the  greatest  rivers  are  so  frozen,  that  vast  armies  and  chariots 
may  pass  over  them ;  and  wine  and  other  liquors  do  so  congeal,  that 
they  must  be  cut  with  knives  and  hatchets.  And  most  strangely  and 
wonderfully  men's  fingers  and  toes  drop  off  with  nibbing  against  their 
clothes,  and  their  eyes  grow  dark  and  dim.  Neither  can  the  fire  cast 
any  warmth  or  heat;  and  by  the  force  of  cold  even  brazen  statues 
are  burst  asunder;  and  at  these  seasons,  they  say,  the  clouds  are  so 
thick  and  gross,  thai  there  is  neither  thunder  nor  lightning  in  those 
parts.  Many  other  things  there  happen  which  seem  incredible  to 
the  ignorant,  but  are  intollerable  to  them  that  feel  them  by  experi- 
ence. But  in  the  utmost  coasts  of  Egypt  aud  the  Troglodytes,  the 
son  is  so  scorching  hot  at  mid-day,  that  two  standing  together  cannot 
see  each  other,  by  reason  of  the  thickness  of  the  air.  Neither  is  it 
safe  for  any  to  go  without  shoes  in  these  parts,  for  if  they  do,  the 
soles  of  their  feet  are  presently  blistered  all  over;  and  except  men 
have  something  ready  to  drink,  to  quench  their  thirst,  they  forthwith 
ftint  and  die,  the  violence  of  the  heat  quickly  exhaling  all  the  mois- 
ture  out  of  a  man's  body:  and,  moreover,  if  any  do  put  meat  and 
water  into  a  brazen  pot,  and  set  it  in  the  open  sun,  it  is  presently 
boiled,  without  fire  or  fuel.  But  the  inhabitants  of  both  these 
countries  are  so  far  from  seeking  to  avoid  these  uncomfortable  eir- 
cnmstances,  that  they  choose  rather  to  be,  as  it  were,  ever  dying 
here,  than  to  be  forced  to  live  another  sort  of  life  elsewhere*  And 
thus  every  country  is  beloved  by  its  own  natural  inhabitants,  and  a 
long  usage,  even  from  the  time  of  childhood,  overcomes  the  incon- 
veniences of  an  intemperate  climate.  These  great  differences  of 
climates  are  sometimes  not  far  asunder;  for,  from  the  lake  Mttotis, 
(where  some  of  the  Scythians  inhabit,  in  the  midst  of  extreme  oold 
and  biting  frost),  many  with  a  fair  wind  sail  to  Rhodes  in  ten  days 
time;  thence,  in  four  days  more,  they  reach  to  Alexandria;  thence 
crossing  the  river  Nile,  they  recover  Ethiopia  (most  commonly)  the 
tenth  day;  so  that  it  is  not  above  four-and-twenty  day's  sail  from 
the  coldest  to  the  hottest  climates  in  the  world.  And  therefore  it  is 
DO  wonder  that  there  is  such  diversity  of  food,  manners  and  bodies  so 
far  differing  from  our's,  when  there  is  so  great  a  contrariety  of  cli* 
mates  in  so  small  a  distance  one  from  another. 


€9^p.  JX  DI0D0RU8  9ICULUS.  I7S 

Having  ^ven  a  dbdoct  account  of  nations,  and  their  strange  and 
wittsaal  manners  and  customsj  something  now  is  to  be  said  pardco* 
larly  oonceming  the  wild  beasts  bred  in  those  eoontries. 

There  is  bred  in  Ethiopia  a  creature  called,  from  the  nature  of  the 
Wasty  a  Rhinoceros,  for  courage  and  strength  equal  to  the  ele« 
phanty  but  not  so  tall.  His  skin  is  exceeding  hard,  and  of  the  eokNnr 
4»f  boK*  He  has  a  flat  horn  growing  out  a  litde  above  his  nostrils, 
as  hurd  as  iron.  He  is  always  at  war  with  the  elephant  for  bis  pas- 
tattf  and  for  that  purpose  whets  hb  horn  against  a  great  stone;  in 
the  conflict  he  gets  under  the  belly  of  the  elephant,  and  cuts  and 
gashes  him,  as  if  it  were  with  a  sword ;  and  by  this  means  his  eaemf 
bleeds  to  death,  and  thus  he  destroys  many  of  them.  But  if  the  de- 
pliant  prevent  bim  from  coming  under  his  b^Iy,  he  catches  the  Bhi- 
Doceros  up  in  his  trudc,  and  easily  overcomes  him,  being  far  stronger 
in  body,  and  wounding  deeper  with  the  strides  of  his  tushes. 

Sphinxes  are  bred  near  to  the  Troglodytes  in  Ethiopia,  not  nradi 
onlike  thoee  which  the  limners  draw,  save  that  they  differ  only  ia 
beii^roagfa.  They  are  of  a  gentle  nature,  veiy  docile,  apt  to  loam 
smy  thing  presently  that  is  taught  them. 

Those  that  are  called  Cynocephales  resemble  ugly-faced  mea^ 
mnd  are  continually  snarling  and  grumblii^.  This  creature  is  ex« 
ceedittf^y  nudicious,  never  to  be  tamed ;  and,  from  his  eye-brows,  looks 
with  a  most  surly  countenance.  Tlie  females  are  extraordinary  re** 
markable,  for  having  their  privy  parts  continually  banging  down  out 
cf  their  body. 

The  beast  called  Cepus,  so  named  from  the  beauty  of  hb  body,  and 
die  comeliness  of  proportion.  He  has  the  face  of  a  lion,  and  in  all 
other  parts  is  like  to  a  panther,  except  that  for  his  bigness  lie  is  as 
large  as  m  deer.  Of  all  these  strange  beasts,  none  is  so  fierce  as  the 
wild  bull,  which  feeds  upon  flesh,  and  is  altogether  invinciblet  he  it 
larger  than  any  tame  bull,  and  as  swift  as  any  horse,  and  his  mouth 
b  wide  even  up  to  hb  eyes:  he  is  exceeding  red,  hb  eyes  greyer  thaa 
a  lion's,  and  sparkling  in  the  night  like  fire.  His  horns  have  a  woo«* 
derful  property,  for  he  can  move  them  as  well  as  his  ears,  and  when 
he  fights  keeps  them  fast  and  immoveable.  His  hair,  contrary  to  all 
other  beasts,  stands  on  end.  He  is  so  exceeding  fierce,  that  he  will 
set  upon  the  strongest  creature  whatsoever,  and  feeds  upon  the  flesh 
of  such  as  he  destroys.  He  destroys  the  flocks  and  herds  of  the  in« 
habitants,  and  in  a  terrible  manner  fights  with  troops  of  shepherds 
and  whole  armies  of  dogs  at  once.  It  is  said  his  skin  is  impenetrable; 
and  therefore,  though  many  .have  attempted  to  kill  him,  yet  none 
were  ever  able  to  effect  it.  If  he  fall  into  a  pit,  or  be  taken  any  other 
^ay  by  snares  or  gins  laid  for  him,  he  choaks  and  stifles  himself 


176  DIODORUS  SICULU9*  Booh  III. 

with  his  unruly  rage,  aud  will  not  suffer  any  man  to  come  near  hioi, 
though  ever  so  gently :  and  therefore  the  Troglodytes  justly  accouDt 
this  beast  the  strongest  of  all  others;  to  whom  nature  has  given  the 
stoutness  of  a  lion,  the  swiftness  of  a  horse,  and  the  strength  of  a 
bull ;  and  which  cannot  be  conquered  by  the  sword^  which  subdues 
all  other  things. 

There  is  another  creature  among  the  Ethiopians,  called  a  Crocut^ 
of  a  mixed  nature,  between  a  dog  and  a  wolf,  more  fierce  than  them 
both,  and  exceeding  all  others  for  his  tearing  and  biting.  Let  the 
bones  be  ever  so  great,  he  presently  gnaws  them  in  pieces,  and 
digests  them  immediately,  as  soon  as  they  come  into  his  stomach. 
Some  historians  (who  love  to  tell  strange  things)  report  that  this 
beast  will  imitate  the  voice  and  speech  of  a  man,  which  we  cannot  in 
the  least  credit. 

The  inhabitants  bordering  upon  the  deserts  say  that  there  are  in 
these  parts  divers  sorts  of  serpents,  of  an  incredible  bigness;  for 
those  that  say  they  have  seen  some  a  hundred  cubits  long,  are  looked 
upon  to  be  liars,  not  only  by  me,  but  by  every  one  ebe.  But  to  gain 
the  more  credit  to  their  fabulous  relation,  they  add  a  story  far 
more  absurd  and  improbable.  For  they  say,  that  when  these  vast 
creatures  lie  rolled  up  in  a  round  in  the  open  plain,  every  circle 
lying  one  upon  another,  they  seem  like  hills  to  those  that  are  at  a 
distance.  But  who  can  easily  believe  there  are  any  such  monstroas 
creatures? 

But  we  shall  say  something  of  the  greatest  serpents  (that  ever  were 
seen)  which  were  brought  to  Alexandria  in  nets,  discoursing,  by  the 
way,  of  the  manner  of  the  hunting  and  taking  them. 

For  Ptolemy  the  Second,  being  very  much  given  to  the  hunting  ctf 
elephants,  for  that  purpose  encouraged,  with  great  rewards,  many 
that  were  skilful  hunters  of  the  strongest  wild  beasts,  and  not  ^paring 
costs  (in  gratifying  the  pleasure  he  took  in  this  kind)  he  got  together 
great  ntultitudes  of  elephants,  which  he  trained  up  for  his  wars;  by 
which  means  many  strange  beasts,  which  were  never  seen  befcnre,  be- 
came known  to  the  Grecians. 

Upon  these  considerations  some  of  the  huntsmen,  knowing  the 
generosity  and  bounty  of  the  king  in  his  rewards  for  things  of  thia 
nature,  agreed  together,  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives,  to  bring,  if  it 
were  but  one  of  these  monstrous  serpents,  alive  to  the  king,  to  Alex- 
andria. It  was  a  bold  and  difficult  undertaking;  but  fortune  crowned 
the  enterprise,  and  prosperity  effected  the  attempt.  They  spied  a 
serpent  lying  in  the  standing  pools,  thirty  cubits  long,  still  and  quiet, 
us  it  is  wont  to  do  at  all  times,  save  when  he  spies  any  beast  come 
to  the  water  to  drink,  and  then  he  suddenly  lea{»8  out,  and  with  bit 


€lhapiIB,  DioDokuii  stcuLU8.  177 

widt  jiwS)  and  the  windiog  himself  round  about  their  bodiesi  holds 
them  so  &st  as  that  they  can  never  escape)* 

Hereupon  these  personsy  considering  he  was  so  verjr  iotigi  and  na* 
tnrally  doll  and  slow^  conceiTed  some  hopes  of  causing  ~him  in 
gins  and  chains^  haring  ail  things  ready  and  prepared  for  the  pur«« 
pose}  but  the  nearer  they  came  to  himi  the  more  they  were  terrified^ 
and  when  they  saw  his  eyes  lundle  Uhe  sparks  of  fircj  his  tongue 
slapping  about  his  jaws,  his  terrible  hissings  the  sharpness  of  his 
sodes,  his  rustling  among  the  reeds  and  bushes  when  he  began  to 
stir  himself,  the  greatness  of  his  terrible  teeth,  his  horrible  aspect 
and  high  round  whereiinto  he  had  wound  himself,  they  grew  wan  and 
pale  with  escesslve  fear,  and  with  trembling  bands  cast  the  gin  upon 
bis  tail ;  upon  which,  as  soon  as  it  touched  him,  the  monster  rolled 
about  with  a  terrible  hiss,  and  lifting  up  himself  above  the  head  of 
the  first  that  approached  himi  he  snapped  him  up,  and  tore  him  in 
IHeces«  The  secolul  he  catched  by  the  winding  of  his  tail,  at  a  great 
distance,  when  he  was  making  away,  and  (winding  himself  round 
him)  held  him  fast  round  the  middle  of  bis  Lelly.  Hereupon  the 
vest  were  so  affrighted,  that  away  they  fled;  liowever,  they  did  not  so 
leave  the  monster,  Cmt  the  hopes  of  the  king's  bounty  overcame  the 
fear  of  the  inuninent  danger;  and  therefore,  what  tliey  could  not  do 
by  force,  they  endeavoured  to  effect  by  art,  making  use  of  the  follow* 
ing  contrivance.  Tliey  made  a  toil  of  bulrushes,  in  shape  like  to  a 
bosom  net,  large  enough  to  receive  and  hold  the  beast;  observingi 
therefore,  his  hole,  and  the  time  when  he  w^iit  out  to  feed,  and  when 
he  returned,  as  soon  as  he  was  gone  forth  to  hunt  for  bis  usual 
prey,  they  stopped  up  the  mouth  of  bis  den  with  great  stones  and 
earth,  and  near  to  it  dug  another  hole,  and  there  placed  the  toil  made 
of  bulrushes,  just  over  against  the  mouth  of  the  hole,  that  the  en* 
trance  might  be  plain  and  open.  Then,  as  he  returned  from  feedingi 
the  darters,  slingers,.and  a  great  number  of  horsemen,  with  trum- 
peters and  other  assailants,  set  upon  him,  and  the  monster  (as  he 
came  nearer  to  them)  pricked  up  his  bead  far  above  the  heads  of  the 
horsemen,  but  none  of  the  whole  troop  of  hunters  durst  come  near 
him,  being  made  cautious  by  tlie  former  misfortune;  but  many  cast 
darts  at  him  all  at  once  at  a  great  distance;  so  that,  by  the  sight  of 
the  horaesy  multitudes  of  great  dogs,  and  the  noise  of  trumpets,  they 
terrified  the  beastj  and  pursued  him  cautiously  by  degrees,  till  he 
came  to  hb  bold,  lest,  by  pressing  too  hard  and  close  ui)on  him,  he 
should  be  too  much  provoked  and  eorasred* 

Now,  approaching  near  to  the  mouth  of  tlie  den  before  prepared 
for  him,  they  all  at  once  made  a  great  noise  with  beating  upon  their 
arms ;  and  so,  with  such  a  muUjti^de  of  men,  and  the  noise  and  sound 

YOL.  U  No,  94« 


17 A  DIODORUS  SICULU8«  Afokjttl 


of  trumpets,  they  exceedingly  terrified  the  monster^  who,  not  fiodiiig 
his  former  hold,  and  fearing  the  hunters,  flies  into  the  mouth  of  that 
which  was  open  and  near  at  hand.  In  the  mean  time,  while  he  was 
filling  the  net,  by  rolling  of  himself  round  in  it,  some  forthwith  rode 
up  with  full  speed  to  the  place,  who  (before  the  beast  could  wind  up 
himself)  tied  up  the  mouth  of  the  net,  which  was  to  the  top  made 
very  long,  on  purpose  for  quickness  of  despatch  in  this  business. 
Then,  with  all  speed,  they  put  rollers  under  the  massy  weight  of  the 
net,  to  lift  it  up,  and  so  drew  it  forth.  The  serpent,  being  thus  shut 
up,  hissed  most  dreadfully,  gnawing  the  bulrushes  with  his  teeth, 
and  tossing  himself  to  and  fro,  as  if  he  were  just  leaping  out  of  the 
net^  which  the  hunters  exceedingly  fearing  he  would  do,  drew  him 
out  upon  the  ground,  and  liy  often  pricking  him  in  the  tail,  caused 
him  to  snap  and  bite  there,  where  was  most  sensible  of  pain.  At 
length  they  brought  him  to  Alexandria,  and  presented  the  beast 
to  the  king;  a  most  strange  monster,  and  almost  incredible.  And  to 
admiration  this  creature  was  afterwards  made  tame :  for,  keeping  him 
low,  in  want  of  food,  he  abated  in  his  fierceness,  so  as  by  degrees  ta 
be  very  gentle.  Ptolemy  liberally  rewarded  the  hunters,  and  kept 
and  fed  the  serpent  thus  tamed,  a  most  wonderful  sight  to  all  stranger* 
that  travelled  into  his  kingdom. 

It  may  not,  therefore,  be  judged  altogether  incredible  (or  accounted 
a  fable)  what  the  Ethiopians  have  related,  since  so  vast  a  monster 
has  been  ex|)osed  to  open  vitw.  For  they  affirm  that  there  have  been 
seen  serpents  amongst  them  of  that  extraordinary  bigness,  that  they 
have  not  only  devoured  cows  and  bulls,  and  other  beasts  of  that  size, 
but  have  even  fought  with  elephants  themselves :  for  they  so  wrap 
tliemselves  round  their  thighs,  and  hold  them  so  fast,  that  they  are 
not  able  to  move  or  stir,  and,  pricking  up  their  heads  from  under 
the  elephant's  trunk,  and  looking  direct  ui>on  them  full  in  the  face, 
with  the  fiery  rays  that  dart  out  of  their  eyes,  strike  them  blind,  so 
that  they  fall  down  to  the  ground  as  if  they  were  struck  with  a  flash 
of  lightning,  and  when  they  are  down,  they  tear  them  in  pieces. 

And  now,  since  we  have  given  a  clear  and  sufficient  account  of 
Ethiopians  and  Troglodyta,  and  the  bordering  countries  as  far  as  ta 
the  torrid  zone,  and  of  the  southern  coasts  and  climates  of  the  Red 
sea,  and  the  Atlantic  ocean,  we  shall  proceed  to  the  description  of 
the  other  parts  bordering  upon  the  Arabian  gulf,  which  we  have 
learnt  partly  from  tlie  public  records  in  Alexandria,  and  partly  ftom 
those  that  have  seen  the  places  themselves.  For  this  part  of  the  In- 
habited world,  as  likewise  the  British  isles,  and  the  places  lying  far 
to  the  north,  are  the  least  known  of  any  other.  But  we  shall  describe 
those  northern  parts  which  border  upon  the  frigid  zone,  together 


Clk^  ni.  DIODORUB  tlCULUS.  179 

with  the  British  isle.^y  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  acts  of  Caius 
Oesar,  who  enbrged  the  bounds  of  the  Roman  empire  as  far  as  to 
those  parts,  and  by  his  means  we  come  to  the  knowledge  of  all  tliosc 
countries  which  were  altogether  unknown  to  us  before. 


CHAP.  III. 

Adexeription  of  the  const$  and  cmnitrtes  on  both  sides  the  Arabian 
fyi{f\  or  lied  sea.  The  perfumes  of  Arabia  the  ITappt/.  The 
Fortnnafe  Istands.  A  desrriiititm  of  part  of  Libya:  the  Spec^ 
tres  near  the  Syrtes. 

THE  Arabian  gulf  (as  it  is  called)  empties  itself  into  the  Southern 
ocean,  and  stretches  out  many  furlongs  in  length;  where  it  falls  into 
the  sea.  it  is  both  bounded  with  Arabia  andTroglodyta.  It's  breadth 
both  at  the  mouths,  and  where  it  is  lost  in  the  sea,  is  about  fifteen 
furlongs.  But  from  the  port  of  Panormus,  the  opposite  shore,  is 
one  day's  saili>tg:  the  greatest  breadth  is  at  Mount  Tyrceus  ttnd 
Macaria,  where  the  sea  is  Tery  rough  and  tempestuous;  nor  can  land 
be  seen  from  one  side  to  another;  and  from  thence  it  grows  narrower, 
till  it  falls  into  the  ocean. 

In  the  sea  are  many  great  islands,  between  which  the  passage  for 
•hips  u  very  narrow,  and  the  water  Tcry  rough.  And  this,  in  short, 
b  the  situation  of  this  gulf.  We  shall  begin  at  the  utmost  parts  of 
this  sea,  and  describe  the  coasts  on  both  sides,  and  what  is  remarica* 
ble  ill  each,  as  if  we  were  sailing  along. 

And  first,  we  shall  give  an  account  of  the  coast  on  the  right  hand, 
the  seat  of  the  Troglodytes:  the  Troglodytes  take  up  all  this  part  as 
lar  as  to  the  vast  deserts.  All  along  the  shore  on  this  right  side, 
bom  the  city  of  Arsinoe,  mariners  meet  with  many  rivers  of  salt- 
water, potuing  down  from  the  ruck<  into  the  sea. 

After  the  passing  these  running  fountains,  appears  a  mountain 
in  a  vast  and  large  plain  of  a  red  colour,  which  dazzles  the  eyes  of 
ill  thoM  that  look  earnestly  upon  it.  At  the  foot  of  this  mountain 
tf  with  an  entrance  of  many  windings  and  turniiiirs  into  it, 
by  die  name  of  Aphrodites;  in  this  are  three  islands,  two  of 
whh  figs  and  olives;  but  the  third  has  neither,  yet 
embers  of  those  birds  they  call  Meleagrides. 
joa  aail  through  a  vast  gulf,  called  Filthy^  or  .\eatbar« 


IJIO  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  .    Book  III. 

<  ■  — — .^*— 

tus;  and  near  unto  it  is  an  exceeding  deep  current,  making  a  penhi-* 
aula,  carrying  ships  through  a  narrow  strait  into  the  open  sea  on 
the  other  side.  In  sailing  along  by  these  places,  there  lies  an  ishnd, 
surrounded  with  a  deep  sea,  fourscore  furlongs  in  length,  called  the 
Serpent's  Island,  because  that  in  former  times  it  abounded  with  di- 
vers sorts  of  dreadful  serpents;  but  in  after-times,  by  the  diligence 
of  the  kings  of  Alexandria,  it  was  ao  improved,  that  now  there  is  not 
the  least  sign  of  any  such  beast  there.  But  it  is  not  to  be  omitte4 
for  what  reason  this  island  was  with  so  much  charge  improved:  the 
chief  reason  was,  for  that  in  this  isli^qd  was  found  the  topaz,  a  re« 
splendent  stone,  of  a  delightful  aspect,  like  to  glass,  of  a  golden  co- 
lour,  apd  of  admirable  brightness ;  and  therefore  all  were  forbidden  ta 
set  footing  upon  that  place;  and  if  any  landed  there,  he  was  present- 
ly put  to  death  by  th^  keepers  of  the  island.  These  keepers  were 
few,  and  lived  a  most  miserable  life.  And  lest  the  stones  should  be 
stolen  and  carried  off,  there  was  not  a  ship  left  there;  and  if  any  by 
chance  pass  near  to  these  places,  (out  of  fear  of  the  king),  they  sail 
away  as  ftir  off  as  they  can.  The  provision  that  is  imported  is  com- 
monly soon  spent,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  that  grows  naturally 
in  the  island;  and  therefore,  when  their  store  grows  low,  all  the  in- 
habitants of  the  village  sit  upon  the  shore,  waiting  and  longing  for  the 
arrival  of  the  provision-rships;  and  if  they  stay  longer  than  ordinary, 
the  people  are  driven  to  the  utmost  desperation. 

This  stone  grows  in  the  rocks,  darkened  by  the  brightness  of  tlie 
sun;  it  is  not  seen  in  the  day,  but  shines  bright  and  glorious  in  the 
darkest  night,  and  discovers  itself  at  a  great  dissance.  The  keepers 
of  the  island  disperse  themselves  into  several  places  to  searoh  for  this 
stone,  and  wherever  it  appears,  they  mark  the  place  with  a  great 
vessel,  of  largeness  sufficient  to  cover  the  sparkling  stone;  and  then, 
in  the  day  time,  go  to  the  place,  and  cut  out  the  stone,  and  deliver 
it  to  those  that  are  artists  in  polishing  of  them. 

Then,  sailing  on  farther  from  these  parts,  appear  many  of  those 
nations  palled  th^  Ichtbyophages,  dispersed  along  the  sea^shore;  an4 
many  lik^wisp  of  those  Troglodytes  called  Nomades;  several  moun- 
tains likewise  present  themselves  in  this  course,  as  far  as  to  the  haven 
called  Safe-port,  which  gained  this  name  from  sopie  Grecians  that  first 
sailed  into  these  parts,  and  there  arrived  safe. 

Thence  passing  on,  the  gulf  begins  to  grow  narrower,  and  bendi 
its  course  towards  Arabia :  and  the  peculiar  property  of  the  plaots  is 
$ucb,  that  both  the  nature  of  the  sea,  and  the  soil,  seem  to  be  changedi 
for  the  land  appears  very  flat  and  low,  without  any  hills  or  rising 
ground,  and  the  sea  seems  to  l)e  muddy  and  green  all  over,  and  m 
aot  above  two  fathoms  and  a  half  deep.    This  greenness  is  not  as- 


Cht^.in.  DtODORUS  StCULUS.  Itl 


■iM 


cribed  to  the  nature  of  the  water,  but  to  the  abundance  of  moss  and 
sea-grass  that  grows  at  the  bottom,  and  casts  their  colour  through  the 
water. 

Thb  part  is  very  safe  and  commodious  for  small  ships  with  oars» 
because  the  sea  is  there  very  calm,  and  no  roughness  of  the  waves 
for  many  leagues;  and  there  they  take  abundance  offish^  But  the 
mariners  that  transport  elephants  run  into  great  and  desperate  hat* 
zards,  by  reason  of  the  strong  built  ships  they  use  for  that  purpose^ 
and  the  depth  of  water  they  draw.  For  oftentimes  they  are  so  driven 
by  the  violence  of  the  winds,  at  full  sail  in  the  night  time,  that  they 
are  either  split  upon  the  rocks,  or  stranded  upon  some  of  the  deep 
sanded  necks  of  land  thereabouts ;  and  there  is  no  going  for  the  mari* 
ners  out  of  the  ship,  because  the  ford  is  above  the  height  of  any  man; 
neither  can  they  force  the  ship  in  the  least  forward  with  their  poles  s 
and  although  they  throw  all  overboard  but  their  victuals,  yet  {even 
while  they  have  provision)  they  are  reduced  to  the  utmost  extremt* 
ties;  for  neither  island,  promontory,  or  ship,  is  to  be  seen  in  these 
parts,  being  desert,  and  seldom  frequented  by  mariners. 

And  to  the  oth^r  inconveniences,  this  further  is  an  addition  |  the 
violent  waves  on  a  sudden  raise  up  such  heaps  of  sand  out  of  the 
channel,  and  so  enclose  the  ship,  as  if  men  on  purpose  had  fixed  it  fo 
some  continent :  being  plunged  into  this  calamity,  at  first  they  only 
gently  and  modestly  breathe  out  their  complaints  to  a  doleful  wil« 
derness,  wliich  regards  them  not,  yet  not  altogether  despairing  of 
deliverance. 

For  often,  by  the  raging  working  of  the  sea,  the  ship  is  mounted 
tip  on  high  above  the  heaps  of  sand,  and  so  the  poor  crei^tures  that 
were  in  this  desperate  condition  are  unexpectedly  (as  by  som^  god^ 
assisting  them  out  of  an  engine)  delivered.  But  if  this  help  from 
God  do  not  intervene,  ^hen  their  provision  grows  low,  the  stronger 
throw  the  weaker  overboard,  that  the  meat  that  is  left  may  last  the 
longer  for  the  support  of  those  few  that  remain :  but  at  length,  when 
all  hope  of  safety  is  gone,  and  provision  spent,  these  few  die  far  more 
miserably  than  those  that  perished  before :  for  these,  in  a  moment 
of  time,  give  up  that  breath  which  nature  had  given  them,  but  those 
(by  prolonging  their  misery,  and  dividing,  as  it  were,  their  sorrows 
into  several  parts)  die  at  last  with  more  lingering  torments.  The 
ships,  being  in  this  miserable  manner  deprived  of  their  pilots  and 
mariners,  continue  a  long  time  as  so  many  solitary  sepulchres;  and 
at  length,  being  buried  in  heaps  of  sand,  their  lofty  ma^ts  and  main- 
yards  remain  only  spectacles  to  move  compassion  in  them  that  see 
them  afar  off:  for,  by  the  king's  command,  the  monuments  of  these 
misfortunes  are  not  to  be  touched,  but  are  to  remain  ivi  8ea*m?^rks  to 


I9t  DIODORUS  SICU1.U8.  Book  IIL 


marioers  to  aToid  those  daDgerous  places.  It  lias  been  an  antient 
repof t  among  the  Ichthyophages^  (the  inhabitants  of  those  tracts) 
continued  down  to  them  from  their  forefathers,  that  by  a  mighty  re* 
flux  of  the  sea  (whicti  happened  in  former  days)  where  the  sea  ia  tlivs 
green^  the  whole  gulf  became  dry  land^  and  appeared  green  all  OTcr^ 
and  that  the  water  overflowed  the  opposite  shore,  and  that  all  the 
ground  being  thus  bare  to  the  very  lowest  bottom  of  the  galf»  the 
water,  by  an  extraordinary  high  tide,  returned  again  into  the  antient 
channel^. 

The  navigation  from  Ptolemaisf  to  the  promontory  of  Taurus  hac 
been  described  when  we  spoke  of  Ptolemy's  pleasure  in  hunting  of 
elephants :  from  Taurus  the  sea-coasts  turn  towards  the  east. 

Here,  from  the  time  of  the  summer  to  the  winter  solstice,  the  sun 
casts  the  shadow  to  the  south,  contrary  to  wliat  it  docs  with  us.  This 
country  is  watered  with  rivers  flowing  down  from  the  FsehariiB 
mountains,  (<is  they  are  called),  and  is  divided  into  many  spacioiv 
plains,  which  produce  mallows,  cardamum,  and  extraordinary  palm-* 
trees,  und  divers  other  fruits  of  an  unsavory  taste,  altogether  unknown 
to  us.  The  south  parts  of  this  country  are  full  of  elephants,  wild 
bulls,  lions,  and  other  wild  beasts.  In  passing  over  to  this  coast^ 
there  lie  several  islands  in  the  way,  which  arc  altogether  barren  as 
to  any  fruit  that  is  grateful,  but  in  them  are  bred  strange  sorts  of 
birds,  and  wonderful  to  view  and  observe.  From  hence,  sailing 
forward,  the  sea  is  exceedingly  deep,  and  abounds  with  mighty  great 
whales,  which  yet  do  no  harm,  unless  any  (by  chance)  run  upoa 
their  erected  fins;  for  they  cannot  pursue  the  sliips,  because  when 
they  rise  up  towards  the  top  of  the  water,  they  are  struck  blind 
by  the  brightness  and  splendour  of  the  sun.  These  are  the  utmost 
bounds  of  Troglodyta  (known  to  us)  environed  with  the  Psebaiiaa 
promontories. 

And  now  we  shall  pass  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  gulf,  and  take 
a  view  of  the  regions  lying  towards  Arabia,  beginning  again  at  that 
part  of  tlie  sea  which  is  called  Neptunium,  because  Ariston  erected 
there  an  altar  in  honour  of  Neptune,  when  Ptolemy  sent  him  to  dis^ 
cover  the  Arabian  coast  as  far  as  to  the  ocean.  From  thence  to  the 
mouth  of  the  gulf,  is  a  place  along  the  sea-coast,  of  great  esteem 
among  the  inhabitants  for  the  profit  it  yields  them;  it  is  called  the 
Ciardcu  of  Palm-trees,  because  they  abound  there,  and  are  so  very 
fruitful,  that  they  yield  sufiicicnt  both  for  pleasure  and  necessity. 
But  the  whole  country  next  adjoining  is  destitute  of  rivers  and  brooks^ 
and,  lying  to  the  south,  is  even  burned  up  by  the  heat  of  the  sun; 

*  This  wems  to  1ms  the  paiMge  of  the  ^nraelitei  over  the  Red  tea. 
t  {^tolemais^  aot  io  riKuticiit  but  that  hordering  upon  the  Kcd 


\ 

I 

auipi^lA <>iODOEtrt  mc^W9. tm 

mm§  thwuif cw  tMi  frmtfiii  tnet  that  llet  tnoiigit  drf  Mid  bmwtt  ine^ 
giMS^  (In*  femole  from  tillage  add  improvement),  and  yet  aflMb 
aMh  pleiity  of  food  aDd  provisieQ^  h  juttly  by  the  barbariaiis  dedi^' 
<8feed  to  the  godi.  Fbr  there  are  in  h  OMny  fonntaiut  and  nmoibif 
•CimuM  ai  c(dd  as  ioow,  by  which  means  the  fegiao  Irom  oik  eldv 
tt  the  other  is  always  green  and  flourishing,  and  very  sweet  and  plei^ 
saM  40  the  view.  In  this  place  there  is  an  antientahar  of  hard  slxme^ 
«4tb  an  inscription  in  old  and  itt^bleoharaetera;  where  a  fiMA  aal^ 
a  ffaoman  (that  execute  here  the  priest's  ofice  doriog  their  lives)  hMni* 
the  charge  of  the  grove  and  ahar.  They  are  peraons  of  ^[oality  smI 
gasac  men  that  abide  here,  and  for  fear  of  the  beasts^  have  their  btods 
(tbey  rest  upon)  in'^he  trees. 

The  tnartneriMMing  by  this  ooontry  of  pakns,  arrives  sit  an  IsfanMl 
aenr  to  apiomoniory  of  the  cootineDt,  which  is  called  the  Iriand  of 
Sen'Calvea,  from  the  gveat  moltitndesof  those  ereatures  that  IreqfoeaNs 
fUaplaee.  The  4ea  here  so  abounds  with  tbem^  that  it  is  to  the  ai^ 
ttimtioa  af  the  beholders. 

The  promontevy  that  shoots  o«t  towards  this  idand  lies  over  against 
Petra  in  Arabia  and  Palestine.  •  It  is  said  that  the  Gerrhcnns  imt 
Mfneaos  biii^  out  of  the  higher  Arabisi  frankincense  and  other  ode^ 
itteroas  guam  int^this  feUod.  '      ^ 

The  coast  next  adjoining  has  been  antiently  inhabited  by  thcMar^ 
Mswans^  and  itfterwards  by  the  GaryndAneans  thdf 'heigbbQan^  ejbo 
got  poasession  in  this  manner.  ? 

At  the  festffal  celebrated  every  fifth  year  in  the  palm  coatitry^  a 
great  concourse  of  the  neighbours  meet  together  from  dl  parts,  baA 
to  saerifiee  stall-fed  camels  to  the  gods  of  the  grove,  and  likewise  id 
enrry  soase  of  the  spring-water  that  rises  there  back  into  dietr  owa 
country,  which  tbey  say  is  physical. 

Hie  Garyndaneans  tricing  the  opportunity  when  tlie  Mammcanst 
were  gone  to  the  feast,  cut  the  throats  of  all  those  that  remain4.<d 
nt  home,  and  lay  in  wait  for  those  that  retamed,  and  in  tlu^ir  way 
homeward,  slew  all  them  likewise ;  and  so,  the  coiiritfy  being  byi 
this  means  depopulated,  they  divided  that  fruitful  region,  aad^  thosei 
rich  pastures  for  flocks  and  herds,  by  lot  amongst  themsehres. 

But  this  coast  has  very  few  luirbours  iti  it,  by  reason  of  tbe  many 
vast  mountains  that  lie  ail  along  as  they  sail ;  from  whence  is  pre- 
sented to  the  view  such  variety  of  coloans,  that  tliey  afford  a  most^ 
wonderful  and  delightful  prospect  to  the  passengers  at  sea  as  they 
sail  along. 

The  promontory  of  Alainites  next  salutes  them  tliat  sail  on  for- 
ward, full  of  towns  and  villages  inlmbited  by  the  Arabians  called 
Nabathcans.    Tbey  possess  a  large  country  all  along  the  sea-coast;: 


184  0IODORU8  SICULV  9*  Afi}k  UL 


MhB«a 


and  go  &r  likewise  up  into  the  land:  this  tract  Is  very  populoas,  aod 
•zceediog  rich  in  cattle.  Once  they  lived  justly  and  honestly,  con- 
tent with  the  sustenance  they  had  from  their  flocks  and  herds;  but 
after  that  the  kings  of  Alexandria  allowed  liberty  to  merchants  to 
traffic  in  the  Red  sea,  they  not  only  robbed  them  that  were  ship* 
wrecked,  but  provided  little  skifis,  and  acted  the  pirates,  and  spoiled 
all  other  merchants  that  trafficked  in  those  seas,  iiiiitating  the  Tan- 
nans  of  Pontus  in  cruelty  and  inhumanity.  But  afterwards,  bein^ 
beaten  in  a  fight  at  sea  by  some  galleys  sent  out  against  them,  they 
were  punished  according  to  tlieiiT  demerits. 

After  the  passing  of  these  tracts^  follows  a  flat  champaigD  coantry^ 
watered  in  every  part;  which  (by  the  advantage  of  the  many  springs 
and  fountains  that  are  in  it)  alx)unds  in  rich  pastures,  and  produces 
great  plenty  of  medica  and  lotus,  as  high  as  a  man.  Here^  in  these 
pastures,  are  fed  not  only  an  infinite  number  of  cattle  of  all  sorti^ 
but  of  wild  camels,  harts,  and  red  and  fallow  deer.  This  extraordinary 
plenty  invites  lions,  wolves,  and  leopards,  out  of  the  deserts,  wiA 
whom  the  shepherds  and  herdsmen  are  foreed  to  have  conflicts 
night  and  day  for  the  preservation  of  their  flocks  and  herds:  and 
thus  the  richness  of  the  country  occasions  mischief  and  prejudice. 
For  nature  often  distributes  her  gifts  with  a  mixture  of  good  and 
cviL 

In  sailing  farther  along  by  this  champaign  country,  the  gulf  oflfars 
to  the  view  something  strange  and  wonderful  i  for  it  shoots  up  with 
a  bending  course  into  the  inland  parts^  five  hundred  furlongs  in 
lengthj  walled  in  on  both  sides  with  high  and  steep  rocks,  so  that  both 
the  entrance  and  passage  is  very  difficult :  for  the  rocks  that  lie  under 
water  so  stop  up  the  entrance^  that  it  is  scarce  possible  to  enter  into 
the  gulf,  or  come  out ;  and  by  the  continual  dashiug  of  the  floods  with 
the  violence  of  the  winds  beating  upon  the  shore,  it  foams  terribly, 
and  rages  on  every  side  the  rock. 

The  people  that  inhabit  these  parts  are  called  Bizomenians,  and 
live  upon  wild  beasts  taken  in  hunting.  Here  is  a  sacred  temple  in 
high  veneration  among  all  the  Arabians^ 

Tliree  islands  are  adjoining  to  the  shore  of  these  tracts^  which  have 
many  ports:  the  first,  which  is  desert,  they  say  is  consecrated  to  lm$m 
There  remain  the  foundations  of  the  antient  buildings  and  jnllars^ 
whereon  are  inscriptions  in  barbarous  characters ;  the  rest  are  as  much 
defaced  and  ruined,  yet  they  are  shaded  with  olive  trees  planted  here 
and  there,  much  difierent  from  our's. 

Beyond  these  islands  there  are  steep  rocks,  hard  to  pass,  all  along 
the  shore,  for  the  space  of  a  thousand  furlongs  x  for  there  is  ncK* 
ther  port  nor  anchorage  for  8hip8>  nor  any  wood  which  can  afibrd 


Glkyw  WL  M0D0RU8  stcuLUi.  185 

^■■■MMBMaBgBaeaaBagaagBaggsgggsssgaassssg  m  ggesgagggBBi 

uj  paentary  relief  to  marinersy  be  they  in  ever  so  great  wants  and 
cstemities*  To  tliis  shore  adjoins  a  mountain  roofed  over  witl^ 
cniggy  rocks  of  a  stupendous  height;  and  at  the  foot  are  many  sharp 
slielves^  which  lie  under  water^  and  behind  them  many  winding  hpl- 
lowSf  worn  wide  by  the  raging  waves  dashing  one  upon  another;  and 
the  sea  being  very  deep,  when  a  storm  beats  upon  them^  and  the 
water  rebounds^  they  make  a  noise  like  a  mighty  thunder;  and  part 
of  the  waves  dashing  against  those  huge  rocks,  mount  up  in  a  curl^ 
and  foam  to  admiration;  and  part  being  swallowed  up  within  these 
caverns,  cause  such  a  terrible  whirlpool,  that  they  that  are  driven 
(against  their  wills)  near  to  these  places,  are  ready  to  die  for  fear. 
The  Arabians  called  Thamudanians  inhabit  this  coast. 

Next  adjoining  to  this  perilous  sea  is  a  mighty  great  gulf,  which 
waahes  many  islands  dispersed  in  it  here  and  there^  to  the  view  not 
nmch  unlike  to  the  Echinades*. 

All  along  this  coast^  which  is  very  long  and  broad,  lie  high  heaps 
of  black  sand. 

Thence,  sailing  forward,  is  presented  to  the  view  a  peninsulaf^ 
where  there  is  the  most  famous  port  of  any  mentioned  by  histofvms^ 
called  Carmutha:  for  it  lies  under  a  large  key,  where  the  gulf,  as' it 
inclines  to  the  west^  is  not  only  wonderfully  pleasant  to  the  view^  but 
fiur  more  commodious  than  any  other. 

A  woody  mountain  hangs  over  it,  a  hundred  furlongs  in  compass. 
The  mouth  of  the  haven  is  two  hundred  feet  broad,  affording  a  very 
calm  and  safe  harbour,  where  two  thousand  sail  may  ride :  the  water, 
moreover,  is  exceeding  good  and  sweet,  a  large  river  emptying  itself 
into  it.  In  the  middle  of  it  lies  an  island  full  of  good  water,  and  fit 
for  gardening.  To  conclude,  it  is  in  every  respect  like  to  the  port 
at  Carthage,  called  Cothon,  the  commodiousness  of  which  we  shall 
speak  of  in  its  proper  place.  By  reason  of  the  quietness  and 
sweetness  of  the  water,  abundance  of  fish  come  into  it  out  of  the 
ocean. 

Sailing  forward,  appear  five  exceeding  high  mountains,  spiring  up 
like  the  pyramids  of  Egypt,  so  close  as  if  they  all  united  into  one  at 
the  point:  thence  the  gulf  appears  in  a  round  form,  surrounded  with 
large  and  high  promontories :  in  the  very  middle  of  whicli  rises  a 
hill,  in  form  of  a  table,  upon  wliich  stand  three  temples  of  a  wonder- 
ful height,  dedicated  to  gods  unknown,  indeed,  to  the  Greeks,  but  in 
great  honour  and  veneration  with  the  inhabitants.  Hence  the  coast 
shoots,  out  forward  a  long  way,  abounding  with  fountains  and  fresh 
water.    On  this  coast  is  the  mountain  Chubinus,  covered  over  with 

*  LiUle  islands  near  Acarnaoia  in  Orecct. 
t  Or  an  itthom^  of  Cbvsoaciai. 

VoL.1,    No,  34.  BB 


180  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  Book  Itt. 

■  ,        .  ,  ■  I  ■     ■     «  II  — ^— — — — ^ilW^ 

divers  shady  woods.  The  country  lying  at  the  foot  of  the  monnttin  is 
inhabited  by  Arabians  called  Debse^  who  employ  themselves  in  feed* 
log  herds  of  camels,  which  they  make  use  of  in  their  most  weighty 
concerns :  for  they  ride  upon  these  when  they  charge  their  enenqr, 
carry  upon  them  tlieir  victuals^  and  use  them  upon  every  speedy  del* 
patch;  they  drink  their  milk,  and  feed  upon  their  flesh,  and  with 
their  dromedary  camels  they  presently  run  over  all  the  countiy* 
There  runs  a  river  through  the  country  which  carries  along  inth  it 
such  abundance  of  gold  sand,  that  at  the  mouth  of  it,  where  it  fidb 
into  the  sea,  the  soil  seems  to  shine  and  glister  like  gold;  but  the 
making  and  refining  of  gold  is  altogether  unknown  to  the  inhabi* 
tants.  They  entertain  not  all  sorts  of  strangers,  but  only  the  Bobo* 
tians  and  the  Peloponnesians,  by  reason  of  the  antient  familiarity  of 
Hercules  with  this  nation,  as  they  have  fabulously  received  it  from 
their  ancestors. 

The  region  next  adjoining  to  this,  (which  is  not  so  burning  hot  at 
those  near  unto  it,  but  often  covered  with  thick  clouds,  whence  fdl 
snow,  and  seasonable  showers,  which  moderate  the  heat  of  the  lur) 
b  inhabited  by  the  Alilseans  and  Gasandians,  another  people  of  Arabia. 
The  land  there  is  rich,  and  capable  of  bringing  forth  any  Icind  of 
grain  or  fruit  whatsoever;  but,  through  the  unskilfulness  of  the  in- 
habitants, who  addict  themselves  chiefly  to  fishing,  the  ground  m  not 
tilled  and  improved  as  it  ought.  Abundance  of  gold  is  got  there  out 
of  several  hollows  in  the  earth,  not  refined  by  melting  of  little 
pieces,  but  growing  there  naturally  pure,  which,  from  the  nature  of 
it,  is  called  jtpyros*.  The  least  piece  of  it  is  as  big  as  an  ordinary 
nut-kernel,  the  greatest  not  much  bigger  than  a  large  nut.  The  io. 
habitants  wear  them  about  their  arms  and  necks,  interlaced  with 
several  bright  sparkling  stones.  But  as  they  abound  in  gold,  so 
they  are  as  much  wanting  in  iron  and  brass,  and  therefore  they  ex- 
change gold  with  the  merchants  for  the  like  weight  in  iron  and 
brass* 

Next  to  these  inhabit  those  Arabians  called  Carbi,  and  next  to 
them  the  Sabeans,  the  most  populous  of  any  of  the  Arabians,  for  they 
possess  Arabia  the  Happy,  exceeding  rich  in  all  those  things  which 
we  esteem  most  precious;  and  for  breeding  of  cattle  of  all  sorts,  the 
most  fertile  country  in  the  world ;  for  the  whole  country  is  naturally 
perfumed  all  over,  every  thing  almost  growing  there  sending  forth 
continually  most  excellent  odours.  On  the  sea-coasts  grow  balsam 
and  cassia,  and  another  herb  of  a  strange  and  peculiar  property,  which 
while  it  is  fresh  is  delightful  and  strengthening  to  the  eyes,  but  kept 
a-while,  presently  loses  its  virtue.   Higher  in  the  heart  of  the  coua- 

^  Gold  without  fir?. 


Ck9^  Xlf.  PIODORUS  SICULUS.  1 8/ 

wmammmmmaBBaaBasBsassi     i    '■■'        i',    ' ■  ■    .       jg 

tryt  are  shady  woods  and  forests^  graced  and  beautified  with  statelj 
trees  of  fraDkinceose  and  mynh^  palm-trees^  calamus^  and  cinnamon, 
and  such  like  odoriferous  plants:  for  none  can  enumerate  the  several 
natures  and  properties  of  so  great  a  multitude,  or  the  excellency  of 
those  sweet  odours  that  breathe  out  of  every  one  of  them.  For  their 
fioagrancy  is  snch,  that  it  even  ravishes  the  senses  with  delight,  as  a 
thing  divine  and  unutterable;  it  entertains  them  that  sail  along  by 
the  coast  at  a  great  distance  with  its  pleasures  and  delights.  For  in 
^ring-time  the  winds  from  off  the  land  waft  the  air,  perfumed  with 
the  sweet  odours  of  myrrh  and  other  odoriferous  plants,  to  those  parts 
of  the  sea  that  are  next  to  them.  And  these  spices  have  nothing  of 
a  &int  and  languishing  smell,  as  those  that  come  to  our  hands,  but  a 
strong  and  vigorous  odour  that  strongly  pierces  all  their  senses  to  the 
utmost  of  their  capacity:  for  the  wafts  of  air  dispersing  the  perfumes 
of  these  odoriferous  plants,  abundance  of  pleasant,  healthful,  and 
strange  variety  of  scents  (proceeding  from  the  richest  spices)  are  con- 
veyed to  them  that  sail  near  unto  the  coast.  For  this  sweet  smell 
comes  not  from  fruit  bruised  in  a  mortar  (whose  strength  is  in  a  great 
measure  decayed)  or  from  spices  made  up  in  divers  sorts  of  vessels 
for  transportation;  but  from  the  ripeness  of  the  fruit  as  it  grows,  and 
from  the  pure  and  divine  nature  of  the  plant  itself.  So  that  they 
that  have  the  advantage  of  these  sweet  odours,  seem  as  if  they  were 
entertained  with  that  feigned  meat*  of  the  gods  called  Ambrosia; 
since  those  excellent  perfumes  cannot  have  a  name  ascribed  them 
transcending  their  worth  and  dignity. 

Yet  fortune  has  not  imparted  to  men  an  entire  and  unmixed  feli- 
city in  these  things,  but  has  joined  some  inconveniences  with  these 
advantages,  to  correct  them  who  (through  a  constant  confluence  of 
earthly  blessings)  have  usually  despised  and  slighted  the  gods. 
For  these  fragrant  forests  abound  with  red*  serpents  of  a  span  long, 
whose  bite  is  deadly  and  incurable.  They  strike  a  man  with  a  violent 
assault,  leaping  up  in  his  very  face,  leaving  him  besmeared  with  his 
own  blood. 

There  is  something  very  remarkable  amongst  these  people,  as  to 
them  that  have  been  long  sick :  for,  being  that  things  of  a  more  than 
ordinary  piercing  operation  pass  quick  through  the  pores  of  the  body, 
and  so  discuss  the  stubborn  matter,  there  follows  a  dissipation  of 
humours,  and  the  party  becomes  curable:  therefore  they  burn  brim- 
stone  mixed  with  goat's  hair  under  the  noses  of  the  sick,  that  by  a 
contrary  smell  they  may  discuss  and  drive  out  those  sweet  and  fra- 
grant odours  that  have  overpowered  the  spirits  of  the  sick;   for  that 

*  Or  fiery  serpents.   So  Agtitharcliidas,  in  Plutarch,  Sjmp.  lib.  8^  c  9«  ooncetniog  Uis 
little  serpents. 


188  DI0D0RU8  SICUL08.  B09k  Ht 

which  18  good  in  itself,  is  profitable  and  delightful,  used  modeimtel]^ 
and  seasonably;  but  an  immoderate  enjoyment,  and  beyond  a  doe- 
proportion  of  time,  loses  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  the  bleaaiDf 
bestowed. 

The  capital  city  of  thb  nation  b  called  Saba^,  and  stands  opcm 
an  high  hill:  they  are  governed  by  kings  who  inherit  the  crown  bf 
descent;  yet  the  honour  allowed  them  by  their  subjects  is  such,  at 
that  they  are  in  some  respects,  notwithstanding,  in  a  sort  of  bondage 
and  slavery:  for  though  they  seem  to  be  privileged  in  this^  that  thej 
have  a  sovereign  and  absolute  power  in  making  of  laws^  and  are  not 
to  give  an  account  of  any  of  their  actions  to  their  subjects;  yet  they 
are  as  unhappy  in  this,  that  they  are  never  to  stir  out  of  their  peltce^ 
for  if  they  do,  the  people  stone  them  to  death,  for  so  they  are  com- 
manded by  an  antient  oracle. 

This  nation  not  only  excels  all  the  neighbouring  barbarians  ia 
weahh,  but  all  other  people  whatsoever,  for  plenty  of  every  thing  that 
is  accounted  precious :  for  in  their  traffic,  for  a  thing  of  a  very  smaU 
weight  they  receive  a  greater  sum  of  money  than  any  other  merchanCi 
that  sell  goods  for  silver. 

Being,  therefore,  that  they  never  were  conquered,  by  reason  of  the 
largeness  of  their  country,  they  flow,  as  it  were,  in  streams  of  gold 
and  silver,  especially  at  Saba,  the  seat-royal  of  their  kings:  their 
vessels,  and  all  their  cups  are  ef  gold  and  silver^  and  likewise  their 
beds,  cliairs,  and  stools,  have  their  feet  of  silver;  and  all  other  their 
household  stuff  is  so  sumptuous  and  magnificent^  that  it  is  incredi« 
ble.  The  porticoes  of  their  houses  and  temples  are  some  of  them 
overlaid  with  gold,  and  silver  statues  are  placed  upon  some  of  the 
chapiters  of  the  temples.  The  doors  and  roofs  of  their  inner  rooms 
are  adorned  with  many  golden  bowls,  set  with  precious  stones.  The 
like  wonderful  cost  they  are  at  throughout  their  whole  building,  adorn* 
ing  them  in  some  parts  with  silver  and  gold,  in  others  with  ivory  and 
precious  stones,  and  other  things  of  great  value:  for  they  have  en- 
joyed a  constant  and  uninterrupted  peace  for  many  ages  and  genem- 
tions,  being  very  far  remote  from  those  whose  covetousness  prompts 
them  to  advance  their  gain  by  the  riches  of  others. 

The  sea  there  is  of  a  very  white  colour,  so  that  a  man  may  as  justly 
wonder  at  the  strangeness  of  the  thing,  as  be  inquisitive  what  dionld 
be  the  cause. 

Near  hereunto  are  the  Fortunate  Islands,  full  of  walled  towns^ 
where  all  the  sheep  and  cattle  are  exceeding  white,  and  none  of  the 
females  bear  any  horns.  The  merchants  from  all  parts  resort  to  these 
islands^  especially  from  Potana^  built  by  Alexander  the  Great^  upon 

*  Or  Sabe,  froa  Seba,  the  eJdeft  son  of  Cbiu*. 


tkip^E^.  DTODORITS  8TCULU8.  I89 

the  hmb  of  the  river  Indii8>  tbst  there  might  be  a  commo^os  port* 
town  for  shipping  upon  those  coasts:  bat  of  this  .coanttyand  its  in^ 
habitants  we  have  said  enough. 

And  now  we  are  not  to  omit  what  wonders  are  seen  th^re  in  the 
heavens:  what  is  sud  of  the  North  Pole*  is  greatly  to  be  admired^ 
and  pots  all  mariners  at  a  stand :  for^  during  the  month  which  the 
Athenians  call  Memaderionf,  none  of  the  seven  stars  are  seen  abont 
Ae  Bear^  till  the  first  watch  of  the  night;  and  in  ParidonX,  not  till 
die  second:  in  the  following  months^  few  of  these  (it  is  said)  ara 
seen  by  them  at  sea^  nor  any  of  the  planets  at  all.  As  ftn*  the  res^ 
aome  of  them  seem  to  be  greater  at  the  time  of  their  rising  than  they 
do  vrith  us,  others  not  to  rise  and  setin  the  same  manner.  Nor  that 
die  snn  (as  with  us)  enlightens  the  air  upon  the  approach  of  its  ris* 
ingf  but  even  while  it  is  dark  nighty  strangely  and  on  a  sudden  ap- 
pears^  dardng  forth  his  refulgent  rays?  and  therefore  there  both  day 
and  sun  appear  together.  They  say  it  rises  out  of  the  middle  of  the 
sea  like  a  burning  coal,  and  shoots  forth  great  sparks  of  fire,  and  ap» 
pears  not  in  a  round  form,  (as  it  seems  to  do  with  us),  but  like  to  a 
pillar,  something  thicker  than  ordinary  towards  the  head ;  and  diat 
it  slunes  not  bright,  nor  casts  forth  any  rays,  till  one  o'clock,  but 
glows  like  fire  in  the  night,  without  light ;  at  two  o'clock,  it  resem* 
bles  the  form  of  a  shield,  and  sends  forth  on  a  sudden  a  fiery  scorch* 
ing  light,  even  to  admiration.  But,  near  the  time  of  its  setting,  its 
elfects  are  contrary;  for,  during  the  space  of  two  (or,  as  Agatharchidas 
of  Cnidus  says)  three  hours  before  (which  b  the  most  pleasant  part  of 
the  day  to  the  inhabitants)  he  both  enlightens  the  world  by  his  rays^ 
and  abates  in  his  heat  as  he  sets  by  degrees. 

The  west,  south,  north-west,  and  east  winds  blow  here,  as  in  other 
parts  of  the  world;  but  the  south  winds  never  blow,  nor  are  ever 
known,  in  Ethiopia.  But  in  Troglodyta  and  Arabia,  the  south  winds 
are  so  exceeding  hot,  that  they  sometimes  set  whole  woods  on  fire; 
and,  though  the  inhabitants  run  into  their  cottages  for  shelter,  yet 
Aey  faint  and  pine  away  with  heat;  therefore  north  winds  are  justly 
judged  the  best,  which  run  through  the  whole  earth,  and  are  always 
cool  and  refreshing. 

Having  now  given  an  account  of  these  countries,  it  will  well  agree 
with  the  course  of  our  history,  to  describe  Libya,  bordering  upon 
Egypt;  for  in  Cyrene,  the  Syrtes,  and  in  the  midlands,  inhabit  four 
sorts  of  Africans:  those  called  Nasomones  possess  the  parts  towards 
the  south;  the  Auchises  the  west;  the  Marmarides  inhabit  that 
large  tract  lying  between  Cyrene  and  Egypt,  as  far  as  to  the  sea-coast : 

■ 

*  Bear.  t  Dccsmbcr.  |  Jaiiwry. 


190  BIODORUS  8ICULU&  Book  IIL 

the  Macs,  the  most  populous  of  all  the  rest,  have  their  habitalioiis 
near  the  Syrtes. 

Some  of  these  beforementioDed  people  are  husbandmen,  as  hanii^ 
fertile  lands,  fit  for  all  sorts  of  tillage :  others  are  shepherds  and 
herdsmen,  who  employ  themselves  in  feeding  of  cattle,  and  w^^yq^aia 
themselves  and  families  by  that  means.  Both  sorts  are  under  a 
kingly  government,  not  living  altogether  like  wild  beasts,  or  on* 
civilized.  A  third  sort  there  b,  that  are  neither  subject  to  any  Mmg^ 
nor  have  any  knowledge  of  good  or  bad,  or  regard  to  right  or  wrongs 
but  live  continually  upon  spoil  and  robbery:  they  make  sudden 
eruptions  out  of  the  deserts :  these  rob  and  steal  whatever  b  in  their 
way,  and  then  presently  make  away  back  to  their  foicmer  lurking 
boles. 

All  these  rude  Libyans  lie  in  the  fields  in  the  open  air,  and  live 
like  wild  beasts,  contriving  how  they  may  be  most  cruel:  they  af- 
fect neither  dainty  food,  nor  civil  raiment,  but  are  clothed  in  goat's 
skins. 

Their  princes  have  neither  city  nor  town,  but  live  in  castles  near  the 
sides  of  rivers,  where  they  lay  up  all  their  stores.  They  command  all 
their  subjects  once  a-year  to  take  an  oath  of  allegiance :  those  that 
are  obedient  and  observant  of  them,  they  protect  as  friends  and  asao* 
ciates:  those  that  refuse  to  submit,  they  condemn  to  die,  and  prose- 
cute them  with  fire  and  sword,  as  thieves  and  robbers.  Their  arms 
are  suitable  to  the  nature  of  their  country  and  their  own  dbposition; 
for,  being  nimble,  and  inhabiting  a  country  for  the  most  part  cham- 
paign, they  go  to  the  field  in  times  of  war,  each  with  their  darts,  and 
a  bag  filled  with  stones.  But  they  use  neither  sword  nor  helme^ 
nor  any  other  arms,  but  make  it  chiefly  their  business  to  be  quick  end 
nimble  in  pursuing  and  retreating;  and  therefore  are  very  active  in 
running,  and  slinging  of  stones,  care  and  continual  exercbe  improT* 
ing  natural  habits.  They  are  neither  just  nor  faithful  to  strangers 
in  any  of  their  compacts. 

The  country  about  Cyrene  is  a  fat  soil,  and  very  fertile:  it  not  only 
abounds  in  corn,  but  in  wine  and  oil,  fruit-trees  and  pastures^  and  is 
watered  with  many  rivers. 

But  those  parts  that  lie  far  south  are  barren  and  dry,  without  water, 
and  look  like  the  sea,  where  there  is  no  variety  of  objects,  but  all  on 
every  side  waste  and  desert;  over  which  there  is  no  possibility  of 
passing,  and  therefore  there  is  neither  bird  nor  four-footed  beast  to 
be  seen,  except  it  be  deer  or  oxen :  neither  b  there  so  much  as  any 
plant,  or  any  thing  else  for  the  eye  to  fix  upon;  for  the  parts  fiurther 
up  into  the  land  (for  a  long  way  together)  are  all  full  of  heaps  of 
sand.    And  as  it  b  destitute  of  all  things  for  the  support  of  man's 


a^  lit  DIODORUA  81CULU8. 


life,  to  it  abounds  as  much  in  serpents  of  all  shapes  and  sizes,  espe- 
cially those  which  they  call  Cerestes^  whose  bites  are  mortal,  and 
tbey  themselves  of  the  same  colour  with  the  sand;  and  therefore, 
not  being  discerned  or  distinguished  from  the  soil,  many  (treading 
iipoD  them  unawares)  run  the  hazard  of  losing  their  lives* 

It  is  reported  that  this  sort  of  serpents  once  entered  Egjrpt,  and 
depopulated  a  great  part  of  the  country. 

There  is  likewise  a  strange  and  wonderful  thing  often  happens  ia 
tUs  country,  both  in  the  deserts  and  that  part  lying  near  to  the 
Syrtes.  For  some  time,  and  most  commonly  in  calm  weather,  there 
appear  in  the  air  the  shapes  of  diveis  living  creatures,  some  standing 
still,  others  moving,  some  flying,  others  pursuing,  and  are  of  that 
monstrous  bigness,  that  they  greatly  terrify  such  as  are  ignorant  of 
the  nature  of  them.  Some  of  them  pursue  men,  and  when  they  take 
hold  of  them,  a  chilliness,  with  a  trembling,  seizes  upon  all  parts  of 
their  bodies;  and  therefore  strangers,  unaccustomed  to  such  things, 
are  ready  to  fall  down  dead  with  fear;  but  the  natural  inhabitants 
(being  used  to  them)  regard  them  not. 

Some  natural  philosophers  endeavour  to  give  a  reason  for  these 
strange  apparitions,  which  look  indeed  like  mere  invented  fables : 
they  say  that  there  are  never  any  winds  in  this  country,  and  if  there 
be  any,  they  are  very  small  and  inconsiderable,  and  that  the  s^r  is 
often  so  wonderfully  serene,  that  it  is  altogether  without  the  least 
notion,  in  regard,  that  near  those  parts  there  are  neither  woods, 
deep  valleys,  nor  swelling  hills;  neither  are  there  any  great  rivers 
that  run  through  the  country,  nor  any  sort  of  grain  or  other  fmits 
that  grow  there;  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  from  whence  any 
vapours  can  arise,  which  are  the  productive  matter  of  winds*  The 
air,  therefore,  being  thick  in  this  dry  and  sandy  region,  the  same 
things  happen  here  in  Libya  as  do  upon  rainy  days  elsewhere,  where, 
in  the  clouds,  various  shapes  and  forms  may  be  observed :  because 
the  air,  being  concreted,  transforms  itself  into  many  shapes,  which, 
being  wafted  up  and  down  with  gentle  gales,  and  with  often  brush- 
ing one  upon  another,  are  consolidated,  and  carried  about  hither  and 
thither. 

At  length,  when  the  air  is  serene  and  calm,  these  phenomena, 
by  their  weight,  foil  to  the  earth  in  that  shape  that  each  have  ae« 
cidentally  before  received;  and  being  that  there  is  nothing  at  hand 
to  dissolve  it,  what  sort  of  living  creature  soevor  it  meets  with,  it 
cleaves  to  it. 

And  as  for  that  motion  to  and  fro  which  they  seem  to  have  (they 
•ay)  it  is  not  directed  by  any  voluntary  faculty;  for  that  it  is  impos- 
sible any  inanimate  things  should  have  a  will  either  j^o  Ay  or  pursue; 


igi  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Booh  III. 

■■■■■■  ■  ■  .ggaagsBaaaggB 

but  the  living  creatures  to  which  they  adhere  are  the  secret  causes  of 
their  several  motions. 

For,  in  their  going  forward,  they  drive  the  air  before  thenif  and- 
therefore  the  spectre,  which  is  made  up  of  air,  seems  gradually  to 
go  forward,  and  resemble  one  that  flies;  and  by  the  rule  of  contraries^ 
when  the  body  to  which  it  approaches  goes  back,  the  resemblances 
appear  as  if  they  pursued;  forasmuch  as,  being  but  empty  and  aiiy 
images,  they  are  attracted  by  the  more  solid  bodies;  for,  by  the  force 
of  the  attraction  the  other  way,  they  move  again  towards  the  fore* 
parts  of  the  body  attracting;  and  whether  the  flying  animated 
bodies  turn  or  stand  still,  the  spectre  is  still  with  it;  and  then  it  ift 
no  strange  thing,  or  unreasonable,  for  the  image  to  dissolve  whea 
it  joins  to  a  solid  animate  body,  and  so,  by  diffusing  itself,  to  afiiect  it 
with  a  chilling  cold. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Of  the  Amazons  of  Africa.  Their  acts:  rooted  out  by  Hercules  i 
and  the  Gorgons  by  Perseus.  7^  Atlantides,  mid  the  goda 
among  them.  The  origin  of  the  Titanes.  Uie  acts  of  Hosj* 
lea,  or  Cybele,  said  to  be  bom  in  Phrygia.  The  origin  of  Attas 
and  Saturn.  A  long  account  given  of  Bacchus,  and  the  severed 
Bacchuses  there  were.  A  description  of  the  Grotto  in  Nyut^ 
where  he  was  brought  up.  The  building  of  the  temple  of  Am» 
mon  by  him.  The  several  Herculeses.  The  monsters  JSBgides 
and  Campes  killed  by  SUnerva  and  Bacchus. 

HAVING  now  run  over  those  things  before  mentioned,  it  will  be 
pertinent  in  this  place  to  relate  what  is  reported  concerning  the  an* 
tient  Amazons  of  Africa:  for  many  have  been  persuaded  into  this 
error,  as  to  believe  that  there  never  were  any  but  those  that  inhabited 
upon  the  banks  of  the  river  Thermodon  in  Pontus;  but  in  truth  it  is 
quite  otherwise,  for  those  in  Africa  were  far  more  antient  and  fiunons 
than  any  of  the  rest. 

Though  we  are  not  ignorant  that  the  account  to  be  given  of  these 
will  seem  very  strange,  and  a  mere  novelty  to  the  readers,  being  that 
the  race  of  those  Amazons  were  extinct  long  before  the  Tmgan  war; 
but  these  viragoes  about  the  river  Thermodon  flourished  not  long  be* 
fore  these  our  days :  for  what  wonder  is  it  that  the  latter  (the  kaow^ 


CktfK  IF.  DIODORUS  SICULUS*  1^3 

ledge  of  whom  is  so  fresh)  should  seem  more  reoowued  thaa  the  more 
antient^  who  are  altogether  uoknown  (through  length  of  time)  to  the 
greatest  part  of  mankind  ? 

Forasmucli^  therefore^  as  many  things  are  reported  of  them  both 
by  the  antient  poets  and  historians,  and  also  by  many  later  authors, 
we  shall  likewise  endeavour  to  give  a  distinct  and  orderly  account  of 
their  actions,  following  the  example  of  Dionysius,  who  wrote  the  his- 
tory of  the  Argonauts  and  Bacchus,  and  many  other  actions  performed 
in  aotient  times. 

Id  Africa  there  was  not  one  race  only  of  women  who  were  famous 
for  valour  and  warlike  exploits:  for  we  are  informed  that  the  Gor- 
goQs  (against  whom  Perseus  made  war)  for  courage  and  valour  were 
eminent:  how  famous  and  potent  they  were,  may  be  gathered  hence, 
inasmuch  as  that  son  of  Jupiter*  (the  most  eminent  hero  among 
the  Grecians  in  his  time)  made  choice  of  this  expedition  as  the 
greatest  and  most  uoble  enterprise.  And  as  for  the  Amazons,  of 
whom  we  are  now  about  to  write,  their  valour  was  most  eminently 
remarkable,  if  we  compare  them  with  the  greatest  spirited  women  of 
our  own  times. 

In  the  western  parts  of  Africa,  upon  the  borders  of  those  tracts 
that  are  inhabitable,  there  were  antiently  a  nation  under  the  govern- 
ment of  women,  whose  manners  and  course  of  living  were  altogether 
different  from  ours.  It  was  the  custom  for  those  women  to  manage 
all  matters  of  war;  and,  for  a  certain  time  keeping  themselves  vir- 
gins, they  went  out  as  soldiers  into  the  field,  and,  after  so  many  years 
spent  in  their  warfare,  they  accompanied  with  men,  for  the  preser- 
vation of  posterity ;  but  the  magistracy,  and  all  public  offices,  they 
kept  wholly  in  their  own  hands,  and  the  men  (as  the  women  do  with 
us)  looked  to  the  household  affairs,  submitting  to  whatever  was  thought 
fit  to  be  done  by  the  wives,  and  were  not  upon  any  terms  admitted 
to  intermeddle  in  martial  affairs,  or  to  command,  or  be  in  any  public 
authority,  which  might  any  ways  encourage  them  to  cast  off  the  yoke 
of  their  wives. 

As  soon  as  any  child  was  born,  they  delivered  it  to  the  father  to 
nurse  it  up  with  milk  and  other  meat  agreeable  to  its  age.  If  it  were 
a  girl,  they  seared  off  its  paps,  lest  they  should  be  burthensome  when 
they  grew  up,  for  they  looked  upon  them  to  be  great  hindrances  iu 
fighting;  and  from  the  searing  of  their  paps,  the  Grecians  called 
them  Amazons. 

It  is  reported  they  inhabit  an  island  called  Hisperia,  because  it  lies 
to  the  west,  near  to  the  morass  called  Tritoois:  thb  fen,  they  say, 
IS  near  to  the  ocean,  which  surrounds  it,  and  i^  called  Tltronis, 

*  Pfiteus* 

^ou  1.  No.  34.  CG 


194  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  A>ok  tit. 


■Ub 


from  a  river  that  runs  iato  it,  called  Titron.  This  morass  bordera 
upon  Ethiopia,  under  the  greatest  mountain  in  those  parts,  called  by 
the  Grecians  Atlas,  extending  itself  to  the  ocean. 

This  island,  they  say,  is  very  large,  abounding  with  all  sorts  of 
fruit-trees,  which  supply  the  inhabitants  with  food :  that  they  bavib 
many  herds  of  cattle,  and  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  which  feed  their 
possessors  both  with  their  milk  and  flesh :  but  that  they  had  no  sort 
of  com,  for  that  in  those  times  they  knew  not  what  it  was. 

These  Amazons,  therefore,  for  valour  eminent  above  all  others, 
and  heated  with  an  ambitious  desire  of  war,  first  subdued  all  the  ci- 
ties of  this  island  (except  one  called  Mena,  accounted  sacred)  inha- 
bited now  by  the  Ethopians,  called  Ichthophages :  it  is  often  scorched 
with  many  eruptions  of  fire,  which  break  out  of  the  earth,  and  its 
liowels  are  enriched  with  precious  stones,  which  the  Grecians  call 
anthraces*,  sardesf,  and  smaragdos:^* 

Afterwards,  having  subdued  many  of  the  neighbouring  Africans 
and  Numidians,  they  built  a  great  city  in  the  morass  Tritonis,  which 
for  the  shape  of  it  was  called  Chersonesus. 

Then  being  further  instigated  by  their  innate  valour  and  courage^ 
they  attempted  greater  matters,  and  invaded  many  other  countries. 
And  first  they  attacked  them  upon  mount  Atlas,  a  soft  sort  of  people^ 
who  enjoyed  a  rich  country  full  of  great  cities;  among  whom  (in 
those  parts  bordering  upon  the  ocean)  the  gods  first  had  their  ori- 
gin, as  the  Grecians  fabulously  report,  of  whom  a  particular  ac- 
count shall  be  given  hereafter. 

To  tills  end,  when  Merina  was  queen  of  the  Amazons,  she  raised 
an  army  of  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse,  for  they 
were  very  exact  and  diligent  in  training  up  horses  for  the  war.  The 
armour  they  wore  for  coats  of  mail,  were  the  skins  of  vast  serpents, 
with  which  sort  of  creatures  Africa  abounds.  But  for  offensive  arms, 
they  carried  swords,  darts,  and  bows,  in  which  they  were  so  expert, 
that  with  these  they  not  only  broke  their  enemies*  battalions,  but 
when  they  pursued  them  upon  their  flight,  they  were  sure  to  hit  their 
mark. 

Entering,  therefore,  the  country  of  the  Atlantides,  in  a  battl«t 
they  rooted  them  that  inhabited  Cercenc,  and  pursued  them  so  close, 
that  they  entered  pell-mell  with  them  that  got  within  the  walls^  and 
took  the  city:  and  to  strike  a  greater  terror  into  their  neighbourft, 
they  executed  horrid  cruelties  upon  the  conquered :  for  they  pat  all 
the  men  to  the  sword,  and  having  razed  the  city  to  the  ground^  car- 
ried away  captive  all  the  women  and  children,  llie  nob'eof  thii 
destruction  being  spread  all  over  the  country,  the  rest  of  the  Atlan* 

*  Carbuncles.  f  Sardouixci.  X  Emeraldi. 


€%!•  IF.  DioooRus  sicuLua.  19$ 

tides  (b^ing  struck  with  a  panic  fear)  submittedj  and  delivered  mp 
all  their  cities:  whereupon  Marina  received  them  all  into  her  favour^ 
and  n^ade  a  league  with  them^  and  in  the  room  of  that  which  was 
destroyed,  built  another  city,  calling  it  after  her  own  name,  and  peo* 
pled  it  witi)  th^  captives,  and  with  such  as  were  willing  to  come  there 
to  inhabit. 

In  the  mean  time  being  presented  by  the  Atlantides  with  manv 
rich  gifts,  and  decreeing  to  her  (with  a  general  consent)  many  high 
honours,  she  not  only  graciously  accepted  those  marks  of  their  kind- 
ness, but  promised  she  would  for  the  future  endeavour  to  merit  the 
good  opinion  of  the  whole  nation. 

Being,  therefore,  often  infested  by  their  envious  neighbours  the 
Gorgons,  Merina,  to  gratify  the  Atlantides  (who  addressed  themselves 
to  her  for  that  purpose)  with  an  army  invaded  the  country  of  the 
Gorgons,  where,  joining  battle  with  them,  the  engagement  was 
smart,  in  which  the  Amazons  got  the  day,  and  killed  great  numbers 
of  their  enemies,  and  took  three  thousand  prboners;  the  rest  flying 
into  woods,  Meriiiu  (designing  utterly  to  root  up  the  nation)  endea- 
voured to  set  the  woods  on  fire;  but  not  being  able  to  effect  it^  she 
returned  with  her  army  into  the  confines  of  her  own  country,  wlier^^ 
by  reason  of  her  late  victory,  being  secure  and  careless  in  setting  her 
watcli,  the  prisoners  killed  many  of  her  Amazons  with  their  own 
swords  as  they  were  asleep;  but  at  length,  being  surrounded  by  the 
whole  army  (fighting  it  out  to  the  last)  they  were  every  man  killed 
upon  the  spot.  Then  Merina  erected  three  funeral  piles,  and  burnt 
up  ail  those  of  her  army  that  were  slain,  and  raised  up  as  many 
mounts  of  earth  over  them,  which  are  at  this  dav  called  the  Amazon's 
sepulchres. 

The  Gorgons,  notwithstanding,  were  afterwards  of  great  power,  till 
the  reign  of  Medusa,  at  wlilch  time  they  were  conquered  by  Perseus. 
At  length  both  they  and  the  Amazons  were  utterly  extirpated  by 
Hercules,  at  the  time  when  he  travelled  into  the  western  parts,  and 
erected  the  pillar  in  Africa.  For  it  was  a  thing  intollerable  to  him, 
who  made  it  his  business  to  be  renowned  all  the  world  over,  to  sufier 
any  nation  to  be  governed  any  longer  by  women. 

It  is  reported,  likewise,  that  by  an  earthquake  the  tract  towards 
the  ocean  opened  its  mouth,  and  swallowed  up  the  whole  morass 
Tritonis. 

Merina  likewise  overran  a  great  part  of  Africa,  and,  passing  into 
Egypt,  made  a  league  with  Orus  the  son  of  Isis,  who  then  reigned 
there.  She  made  war  also  upon  the  Arabians,  and  destroyed  many 
of  them:  afterwards,  having  subdued  Syria,  the  Cilicians  met  her 
with  presents,  and  submitted  themselves;  whom  (upon  the  account 


1 96  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  III. 

they,  of  their  own  accord  gave  up  all  into  her  hands)  she  by  an  edict 
ordained  to  be  a  free  people,  and  for  that  reason  they  are  called  the 
free  Cilicians  to  this  day.  Afterwards,  having  conquered  the  natkuis 
about  Mount  Taurus  (who  were  both  men  of  strong  bodies  and  stout 
hearts)  she  descended  through  the  greater  Phrygia  to  the  sea*; 
thence,  passing  through  the  maritime  tracts,  she  put  an  end  to  her 
expedition  at  the  river  Caicus:  out  of  her  new  conquests  she  picked 
out  the  most  convenient  places  for  the  building  of  cities,  and  built 
many  there,  among  others  one  after  her  own  name;  the  rest  she 
called  after  the  names  of  the  chief  commanders  of  her  army,  as  Cymes, 
Pitanes,  and  Princia,  situated  upon  the  sea-coasts;  others  she  buik 
up  higher  into  the  continent. 

She  possessed  herself  likewise  of  serveral  islands,  particularly  Les- 
bos, where  she  built  Mitylcne,  calling  it  after  the  name  of  her  sister, 
who  went  along  with  her  in  the  expedition.  Whilst  she  was  busy  in 
taking  other  islands,  she  was  endangered  by  a  storm  at  sea,  where, 
offering  up  her  prayers  to  the  motherf  of  the  gods  for  deliverance,  she 
was  driven  upon  a  certain  desert  island,  which  she  consecrated  to  the 
beforementioned  goddess,  being  admonished  so  to  do  by  a  dream  | 
and  there  she  erected  altars,  and  offered  magnificent  sacrifices.  This 
island  is  called  Samothrncia,  which,  according  to  the  Greek  dialect, 
signifies  the  Sacred  Island.  But  there  are  some  historians  that  say, 
it  w«!s  formerly  called  Samos,  and  from  some  Thracians  that  came 
to  inhabit  there,  Samothracia.  After  that  the  Amazons  were  returned 
into  the  continent,  they  fabulously  report,  that  the  mother  of  the 
gods  (being  delighted  with  this  island)  placed  there  her  sons,  called 
the  Corybantes.  In  the  records  of  their  sacred  mysteries,  it  is  de* 
clared  who  was  their  father;  and  she  herself  (they  say)  taught  them 
the  rites  and  mysteries  that  are  now  in  use  in  that  island,  and  insti* 
tuted  and  appointed  a  sacred  grove,  and  an  inviolable  sanctuary. 

About  these  times  (they  say)  one  Mompsus,  a  Thracian,  banished 
byLycurgus,  king  of  Thrace,  with  an  army  invaded  the  country  of 
the  Amazons:  his  associate  was  one  Sipylus,  who  was  likewise 
banished  out  of  Scy thia,  bordering  upon  Thrace.  They,  with  Sipylns 
and  Mompsus,  overcame  the  other  in  a  battle,  in  which  Merina  the 
Amazon  queen,  and  many  more  of  the  Amazons,  were  slain.  In  pro* 
cess  of  time,  (after  the  Thracians  had  overcome  them  in  several  en- 
gagements), they  say,  that  those  that  remained  of  the  nations  of  the 
Amasons  retired  into  Libya.  And  such  was  the  end  of  the  Amizo- 
nian  expedition  out  of  Africa. 

And  now,  since  we  have  made  mention  of  the  Atlantides,  we  judge 

*  The  Mediterranean, 
t  Cjbele,  or  Vcita,  the  mother  of  the  godi. 


k  notr  impeitkient  to  felate  what  tlie  Adtntides  Mmlomij  report 
oopeertliog  the  genealogy  of  the  gods^  not  mueh  dHftring  fioa  the 
fiMes'of  idle  Greeks. 

The  Athntidee  inhabited  m  rich  ooontiy  bordering  npon  tfie  oeea9» 
miAwLn.  toteemcd  to  excel  all  their  neighboon  in  ciril  recepUoa 
nad  onleitaiMBent  of  atrangers ;  and  they  boast  that  the  gods  wna 
bora  ammigst  theniy  and  say  that  the  most  firnious  poet  amongst  flit 
Grecians  does  confirm  this  their  assertion^  where  he  briofs  in  Juno 
speaidng  thus.^ 

The  itflMMl  boondi  of  earth  ht  offl  wf, 
Wbere  TIm^  «id  Omsd  boMt  to  be 

Tbepeientf  of  the  gods.  ••••••  .\^ 

Tliey  say  that  Uranus  was  their  first  king,  who  caused  the  people 
(who  flien  wandered  np  and  down)  to  dwell  in  towns  and  cities,  and^ 
redncing  them  from  a  lawless  and  savage  coorse  of  life,  taught  them 
to  use  and  lay  up  the  frnits  of  the  earth,  and  many  other  things  nseM 
for  man's  life.  It  is  said  he  had  under  his  dominion  the- greatest  past 
of  the  world, especially  towards  the  west  and  the  northern  parti:  and 
that,  bring  much  addicted  to  astrology,  he  prognosticated  many 
fldngs  that  were  come  to  pass  in  the  world;  and  measured  the  year 
according  to  the  course  of  the  son,  and  the  months  according' to  the 
motion  of  the  moon,  and  divided  the  days  into  hours;  and  flierefove 
flie  people,  as  at  that  time  ignorant  of  the  constant  motion  of  tha 
stars,  did  so  admire  his  prognostications,  that  it  grew  into  a  common 
opnion  among  then!,  that  he  was  a  god;  and,  when  he  was  dead, 
(by  reason  of  his  deserts,  and  art  in  astronomy),  they  honoured  him 
as  a  god. 

The  starry  heaven  was  called  after  his  name,  because  that  he  was 
so  £uniliarly  acquainted  with  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  stars,  and 
other  things  happening  in  the  etherial  world;  and  for  that  his  merits 
transcended  all  the  honours  that  could  be  attributed  to  him,  he  was  ^ 
called  the  eternal  king  of  the  universe.  ^^ 

They  report  that  this  Uranus  had  five^and-forty  children,  by  sevo- 
xal  wives,  and  eighteen  of  these  were  by  one  Titea,  who  had  each  of 
them  a  peculiar  name,  but  all  in  common  called  Titanes,  from  their 
notber  Titea,  who  for  her  wisdom  and  beneficence  was  after  her 
death  reputed  a  goddess  by  those  whom  she  had  obliged  by  her  kind* 
nesses,  and  was  called  Terra. 

Of  Uranus  and  Titea  were  born  several  daughters,  of  whom  two 
were  most  famous  above  the  rest,  Basilea  and  Rhea,  by  some  called 
Pandora.  Basilea  being  the  eldest  (and  most  prudent  and  discreet) 
bred  upi  her  brothers  with  the  care  and  afiectioo  of  a  mother,  and 
therefore  was  called  the  Great  Mother. 


I9S  PIODOEUS  81C0t.U8.  M^iOm 

After  the  death  of  her  ftther^  bj  the  general  aoffin^  of  the  paoplt 
and  eonaeot  of  her  brothers,  she  was  elected  qneeiij  beiof  m  yft  • 
Tiigin,  and  remarkable  for  her  modesty  and  chastity.  She  was  hf^g 
snwiUing  to  marry ;  but  afterwards  (detsiriag  to  leaye  heka  <^  her 
own  body  to  succeed  in  the  kingdom)  she  married  Hypcriop^  imi  of 
Iier  brothers^  whom  she  most  dearly  loved,  by  whom  aba  bad  two 
children,  Helio*  and  Selenef,  who  for  their  beauty  and  modeHj  wtfT 
the  admiration  of  all;  her  other  brothers  (they  say)  partly  out  9f  opvy 
at  the  issue,  and  partly  out  of  fear  lest  Hyperion  shpuk)  assuflW^  the 
kingdom  entirely  to  himself,  committed  a  notorious  wicked  act;  for^ 
entering  into  a  conspiracy,  they  assassinated  Hyperion,  and  drowned 
Helio  (then  a  tender  infant)  in  Erldanus^. 

Upon  the  discovery  of  this  sad  disaster,  Selene,  who  passiomlely 
loved  her  brother,  threw  herself  down  headlong  from  the  bouie-top; 
and  the  mother,  while  she  was  seeking  for  her  son  at  the  river  ai^ 
with  grief  fell  asleep,  and  dreamed  that  she  saw  Helioa  standing  by 
her  to  comfort  her,  and  wished  her  not  to  grieve  too  mucb^  au^  af- 
flict herself  for  the  death  of  her  children;  for  the  Titanes  sbonld  ck* 
ecute  due  revenge  upon  the  malefactor,  and  that  he  and  his  sister,  by 
the  providence  of  the  gods,  were  to  be  deified,  so  a#  that  which  beioef 
was  called  the  Hofy  Fire  in  Heaven  should  tlieo  be  called  HeK^ 
and  that  which  before  had  tlie  name  otMene  should  then  be  tanned 
Selene. 

When  she  awaked  slie  told  her  dream,  and  repeated  all  her  o^ 
fortunes,  and  then  entreated  her  subjects  that  they  would  adorn  bar 
deceased  children  as  gods,  and  that  none  for  the  future  would  OMar 
near  her. 

Presently  afterwards,  in  a  furious  rage  of  madness,  (tdciog  her 
daughter's  gingling  gewgaws)  she  wandered  up  and  dowu,  with  bep 
hair  dishevelled  about  her  ears;  and, playing  like  a  mad  wobmiq  opcm 
a  timbrel  and  cymbal,  she  was  even  a  terror  to  the  spectators:  ^nd 
while  every  body  pitied  her  miserable  condition,  and  some  attensptad 
to  lay  hold  of  her,  there  arose  on  a  sudden  a  terrible  storm  of  rain, 
thunder,  and  lightning,  and  she  was  never  seen  after.  The  pcofrff 
hereupon,  admiring  this  prodigy,  began  to  transfer  the  nani^  of 
Helios  and  Selene  (in  honour  of  them)  to  the  sun  and  the  adoon  in 
the  heavens;  and  being  persuaded  that  the  mother  was  a  goddfpa, 
they  erected  altars,  and  (with  the  noise  oS  timbrels  and  tinkling  of 
cymbals,  and  other  things  Agreeable  to  her  circumstances)  o0bred 
sacrifices,  and  instituted  other  divine  rites  and  ceremonies  in  boBMr 
of  her. 
But,  however,  Phrygia  is  said  to  be  the  birth-place  of  this  goddeaa: 

*  Hclioj  that  is«  the  lun,        t  Selene^  that  ic»  Uie  nooa.        t  Tbc  dvw  Poj  la  flaly. 


Cktip.  iK  D1006IIUS  8iCCLU§.  199 


IMM 


for  the  Inhtbitants  fabulously  report,  that  MsBooes  heretofoi^  rdgned 
iti  ftiiygia  and  Lgrdia,  and  that  he  tnarried  Dindylna,  and  upon  her 
begat  a  daughter^  wliich  he  unnaturally  etpoted  in  the  mountain 
Cybdus;  and  that  there,  by  a  dirine  providence,  leopards  and  other 
fieree  and  wild  beasts,  nourished  the  child  with  their  own  milk:  but 
shepheidesses  thereabouts,  observing  what  was  done,  and  (admiring 
the  strangeness  of  the  thing)  took  away  the  child,  and  called  it,  from 
the  place,  Cybele.  The  young  lady  growing  up  both  in  strength 
aad  years,  was  admured  by  all  for  her  beauty,  modesty,  and  inge* 
dttity :  for  she  was  the  first  that  invented  the  pipe,  composed  of  many 
reedS)  and  the  timbrel  and  cymbal,  in  sports  and  dances:  she 
taught  likewise  how  to  cure  (by  pui^ng)  diseases  both  in  children 
and  eattk. 

Vtfc  her  extraordinary  love  to  children,  whom  she  often  restored  to 
health,  by  singing  and  lulling  them  in  her  arms,  she  was  called  by 
all  the  Mother  of  the  Mount*.  Mafsyas  the  Phrygian  (they  wf) 
was  very  much  with  her,  and  the  chiefest  of  all  her  lovers:  thnf 
flsan,  it  is  sud,  was  mighty  ingenious^  and  wonderftilly  ehaste.  Hh 
ingenuity  they  gather  hence,  that^  imitatii^  the  sound  of  a  pipe 
composed  of  many  reeds,  he  found  out  how  one  single  pipe  might 
Hiake  the  same  harmony:  and  as  an  argument  for'  his  chastity 
(they  say)  he  never  bad  to  do  with  any  woman  all  the  days  of  his 

Cybele  being  now  ripe  of  years,  loved  a  young  man,  one  of  the  na- 
tives, first  called  Atys,  afterwards  Pkpas :  this  youth  she  accompanied 
with,  and  was  got  with  child,  about  wiiich  time  she  was  owned  by 
her  parents,  and  received  by  her  father  into  his  palace,  as  a  virgin; 
but  being  afterwards  Informed  of  the  miscarriage  of  his  daughter^ 
caused  Atys  and  her  nurses  to  be  put  to  death,  and  thehr  bodies  to 
lie  exposed  without  burial:  whereupon  (they  say)  Cybele  (tlitoogh 
the  love  she  bore  to  the  young  man,  and  overwhelmed  with  grief  for 
her  nurses,  fell  into  a  furious  madness,  and  ran  out  into  tlie  fields 
where,  all  alone,  with  her  hair  about  her  ears,  she  filled  die  whole 
country  with  the  noise  of  her  timbrel,  and  her  wailing  and  lamenta- 
tions. But  Marsyas,  pitying  her  miserable  condition,  and  prompted 
thereunto  by  the  remembrance  of  his  antlent  love  and  kindness  he 
had  for  her,  followed  her  wherever  she  went;  and  coming  together 
at  lengrh  to  Bacchus  in  Nysn,  found  there  Apollo,  then  in  great  es« 
teem  for  his  skill  in  playing  upon  the  harp,  invented  by  Mercury. 
There  Marsyas  contended  with  Apollo  who  should  be  accounted  the 
greatest  artist,  and  the  Nysians  were  to  be  the  judges.  And  first 
Apollo  played  only  upon  his  harp.     But  Marsyas^  as  soon  as  he  had 

*  Mater  montaiia. 


900  DIODORUS  SICULU9»  Book  IZL 

winded  his  hautboy  (tickling  their  etn  with  the  novelty  of  the  melodj^ 
and  the  sweetness  of  hb  notes)  seemed  far  to  excel  his  rival.  Then 
they  made  a  match  that  they  should  both  make  a  second  trial  of  their 
skill  before  the  judges :  Apollo,  therefore,  leading  the  way,  first  be^ 
gan  as  before,  and  added  to  the  melodiousness  of  his  harp  the  har«» 
mony  of  his  voice,  and  by  tliat  means  gained  the  victory  over  the  ap- 
plause formerly  won  by  the  hautboy.  At  which  Marsyas  was  in  a  rage^ 
and  said,  that  he  was  highly  injured  in  not  being  allowed  the  pre- 
eminence, for  that  they  ought  to  judge  by  the  art  in  playing,  and  not 
in  the  voice  and  in  singing,  and  that  according  to  that  rule,  trial 
should  be  made,  and  judgment  given  concerning  the  melody  and 
harmony  between  the  harp  and  hautboy;  and  that  it  was  unjust  to  laj 
in  the  balance  two  arts  against  one.  To  which,  it  is  said,  Apollo  an- 
swered, that  he  did  no  more  than  the  other;  for  that  Marsyas  did  the 
same  thing,  when  he  tuned  his  hautboy  with  his  breath,  and  therefore^ 
either  both  ought  to  be  allowed  the  same  privilege,  or  both  should  be 
restrained  from  making  use  of  their  moutlis,  and  their  hands  only 
should  be  the  instruments  of  evidencing  the  excellency  of  their  art 
and  skilL  What  Apollo  said  seemed  most  just  and  reasonable  to  all 
the  auditors.  Then  there  was  a  third  contest  between  them,  in 
which  Marsyas  was  again  overcome;  but  Apollo  was  so  incensed  with 
his  vying  with  him,  thr«t  he  flayed  him  alive :  but  presently  after  he 
was  so  sorry  for  what  he  had  done,  that  be  broke  in  pieces  all  the 
strings  of  his  harp,  and  destroyed  that  music  wliich  he  himself  bad 
invented.  But  it  was  afterwards  revived;  for  the  muses  restored  the 
meane,  Linus  the  string  called  the  tenor,  and  Orpheus  and  Thamy- 
ris  the  two  strings  called  the  base,  and  next  to  the  base. 

They  say  that  Apollo  consecrated  both  the  liarp  and  hautboy  to  Bac- 
chus, and  left  them  in  his  cave;  and  afterwards,  falling  in  love  with 
Cybele,  wandered  up  and  down  with  her  as  far  as  to  the  Hyperbo^ 
rean  mountains*. 

And  whereas  there  was  a  plague  and  famine  in  Phrygb,  the  Phry- 
gians inquired  of  the  oraclef  how  they  should  be  freed  from  the  ca- 
lamity they  lay  under,  it  is  said  the  god  commanded  them  ta  bory 
Atys,  and  adore  Cybele  as  a  goddess. 

Tlie  Phrygians,  therefore,  (because  they  could  not  find  any  part 
of  his  body,  through  length  of  time  since  he  was  killed)  made  a  sta- 
tue for  him,  which  they  followed  as  to  his  burial,  with  howling,  lap 
mentations,  and  other  honourable  ceremonies  proper  for  his  fanaralf 
and  so  made  an  atonement  for  their  former  offence;  which  solemnity 

*  H  jperboreaa  tigniSes  very  far  umth,  bj  which  the  Mitientf  ntt  t»  txprCH  tte  fur- 
thftC  paru  of  the  world, 
t  Of  Apollo  at  Delphei. 


Cfu^.  IV.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  801 

— — ^  ■  ■  ■    ■  -  ■  ■— ^— — ^—i — — — — ^— ■—    I  n   mmtamm^mmS^ 

they  constantly  observe  to  this  very  day,  and  oflfer  yearly  sacrifices  to 
Cybele,  who  formerly  erected  altars  to  the  gods  there.  In  honour 
of  this  Cybele,  they  built  a  magnificent  temple  in  Pessinunte,  a  city  of 
Phrygia,  and  instituted  solemn  sacrifices  and  divine  worship  to  her, 
which  work  was  advanced  by  the  assistance  of  king  Midas.  They 
placed  leopards  and  lions  standing  by  the  statue  of  the  goddess,  be- 
cause it  was  generally  believed  she  was  nursed  up  by  them.  And 
these  are  the  things  which  the  Phrygians  and  the  Atlantides,  the  in* 
habitants  of  the  coasts  bordering  on  the  ocean,  do  report  of  this  mo- 
ther of  the  gods. 

After  the  death  of  Hyperion,  they  report  that  the  children  of 
Coelus^  divided  the  kingdom  amongst  themselves ;  amongst  whom 
Atlas  and  Saturn  were  the  most  renowned.  The  country  bordering 
upon  the  ocean  fell  by  lot  upon  Atlas,  who  called  the  people  there 
Atlantides,  and  the  greatest  mountain  in  the  world  Atlas,  after  his 
own  name. 

They  say  that  he  was  an  excellent  astrologer,  and  was  the  first  that 
discovered  the  knowledge  of  the  sphere ;  whence  arose  the  common 
opinion,  that  he  carried  the  world  upon  his  shoulders;  noting,  by  this 
fancy,  his  invention  and  description  of  the  sphere.  The  most  emi* 
nent  among  his  many  sons  was  Hesperus,  for  piety  towards  the  gods, 
and  justice  and  kindness  towards  his  subjects.  Being  upon  the  top 
of  Mount  Atlas,  to  observe  the  motion  of  the  stars,  he  suddenly  va* 
Dished  in  a  tempest.  The  people  hereupon,  much  lamenting  the  loss 
of  him,  that  they  might  for  ever  honour  him,  called  the  brightest  star 
in  the  heavens  after  iiis  namef. 

Atlas  likewise  had  seven  daughters,  who  were  all  called  after  their 
father's  name,  Atlantides;  but  their  several  proper  names  wereMaia, 
Electra,  Taygeta,  Asterope,  Merope,  Halcyone,  and  Celseno.  All 
these  were  got  with  child  by  several  heroic  princes,  and  even  by  some 
of  the  gods  themselves,  and  bore  divers  sons,  who  were  the  first  an- 
cestors of  several  nations,  and  for  their  virtuous  qualifications  were 
afterwards  called  gods  and  demi-gods. 

So  Maia,  the  eldest,  was  got  with  child  by  Jupiter,  and  bore 
Mercury,  the  inventor  of  many  arts  and  sciences  for  the  use  of 
mankind. 

All  the  rest,  likewise,  had  sons  who  were  famous  in  their  times, 
some  of  which  gave  beginning  to  whole  nations,  others  to  some  par- 
ticular cities :  and  therefore  not  only  some  of  the  barbarians,  but 
likewise  some  among  the  Greeks,  refer  the  origin  of  many  of  the 
antient  heroes  to  these  daughters  of  Atlas :  for  they  were  iu  great  re- 
putation for  wisdom  and  justice;   and  therefore,  when  they  wer« 

*  Uranus.  t  Hesperus/ the  morniog  star. 

Vol.  1.  No.  34.  do 


fl02  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  lit. 


dead,  wrre  adored  as  goddesses,  and  fixed  is  the  consteUadon  of  thm 
Pkiadt's*. 

Nymphs  were  commonly  called  Atlantides,  because  nymplia  is  a 
general  term  in  this  country  applied  to  ail  women. 

They  say  that  Saturn,  the  brother  of  Atlas,  was  extFaordiDtrily  prop* 
phane  and  covetous ;  and,  marrying;  bis  sister  Rhea,  he  begat  Jupiter^ 
afterwards  surnamed  Olympus.  There  was  another  Jupiter,  tbe  hro* 
ther  of  Coelus,  and  king  of  Crete,  but  much  inferior  for  glory  and  re- 
nown to  the  latter:  for  this  latter  was  lord  of  the  world;  but  the  en- 
tient  Jupiter  was  only  king  of  the  island  before-named,  and  had  ten 
sons,  whom  they  called  Curetes,  and  called  the  island  Ida,  after  the 
name  of  his  wife,  where  he  himself  was  buried,  the  remains  of  whose 
sepulchres  are  to  be  seen  at  this  day. 

However,  the  Cretans  relate  several  stories  of  these  Jupiten^  of 
whom  we  shall  write  distinctly  when  we  come  to  their  history. 

Saturn  reigned  (they  say)  over  Sicily,  Africa,  and  Italy,  and  en- 
larged his  dominion  over  all  the  western  parts  of  the  worlds  and  by 
garrisons  and  strong  forts  placed  in  convenient  places,  kept  hit  sub- 
jects every  where  within  the  bounds  of  their  duty:  and  hence  h  i$p 
that  at  this  very  day,  in  the  western  parts  of  Sicily,  the  high  mounts 
still  to  he  seen  here  and  there  are  called  Croniaf. 

Jupiter  (they  say)  ii*as  the  son  of  Saturn,  who,  contrary  to  what 
his  father  did  before  him,  carried  himself  justly  and  courteously  to- 
wards all,  and  therefore  he  was  called  Father  by  all  his  subjects.  He 
succeeded  in  the  kingdom,  either  as  given  up  to  him  by  his  fether^  or 
set  u|)on  the  throne  by  his  subjects,  out  of  hatred  to  his  father:  and 
though  Saturn  afterwards,  by  the  help  of  the  Titans,  made  war  upon 
his  son,  yet  Jupiter  overcame  him  in  a  battle,  and  so  gained  the 
kingdom ;  and  aftenvards  he  ran  through  the  whole  world,  doing  good 
to  all  mankind:  and  because  he  was  of  a  strong  body,  and  endowed 
with  all  virtuous  qualifications  of  mind,  he  easily  conquered  the  whole 
world.  He  chiefly  made  it  his  business  to  punish  the  impious,  and 
to  do  good  to  all  his  people;  and  therefore  (after  he  left  the  world) 
he  was  called  ZenaXj  from  life,  because  he  was  the  first  that  taught 
men  to  live  well:  and  therefore  they  of  whom  he  had  desenred  well 
rewarded  him  with  this  honour,  that  he  was  unanimously  by  all 
placed  in  the  highest  heavens,  and  called  a  god,  and  supreme  lord  of 
all  the  earth.  And  this  is  the  full  account  (distinctly  related)  of  alt 
the  gods  mentiont- d  and  recorded  by  the  Atlantides. 

And  forasmuch  as  before,  in  the  account  we  gave  of  the  Egyptian 
antiquities,  we  came,  in  the  course  of  the  general  history,  to  the  ge- 
nealogy of  Bacchus  (whom  the  Greeks  call  Dionysius)  and  his  acts..^ 

*  Tb«  levtn  ttan.  f  Saturn's  CMties.  %  Zeui. 


€9h9^  UK  moDOltUS  SlCULtTS.  90S 


^a— — ^— M^iWMi 


We  eooeehf^  it  fit  here  to  fldd  what  the  €hreciaaii  hare  delivered 
to  posterity  concerdlng  this  ^:  bat  id  regard  the  antient  hbulotif 
historians  and  f^oets  hKve  ^eo  different  accoants  of  Bacchus,  and 
have  related  many  monstrous  stories,  it  is  very  difficult  to  set  forth 
Iraly  his  genealogy  and  acts.  For  some  say  there  was  hot  one  Dio- 
nysiils*,  oithenr  that  there  were  three.  But  some  say  there  never  waf 
any  such  man,  but  conceive  thiit  wine  is  to  be  taken  for  Dionysius* 
We  shall,  therefore,  in  short  run  over  distinctly  what  is  said  by  every 
one  of  them. 

The  naturalists  who  speak  of  this  god,  and  call  wine  Bacchus,  say, 
that  the  earth,  amongst  other  plants,  naturally  produced  the  vine,  and 
that  it  was  not  planted  or  found  out  at  the  first  by  any  whatsoever. 
Id  confirmation  whereof,  they  instance  in  wild  vines,  which  in  many 
places  at  this  day  bear  grapes  of  themselves,  as  well  as  if  they  were 
husbanded  and  improved  by  the  care  and  industry  of  men :  and  that 
Bacchus  was  by  the  antients  called  JKm^^ert,  because,  when  the  vine 
is  planted  in  the  earth,  and  begins  to  grow,  that  is  to  be  esteemed 
the  first  birth;  the  second,  when  it  shoots  forth  branches,  and  puts 
forth  fruit,  and  brings  them  to  ripeness  and  perfection :  and  so  the 
first  birth  of  this  god  is  to  be  judged  to  proceed  from  the  earth,  aodi 
the  second  from  the  vine  itself. 

The  fabulous  writers  likewise  feign  a  third  generation  of  Bacchus^ 
that  he  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Ceres,  and  that  some  men  of  the 
earth  pulled  him  in  pieces,  and  boiled  bis  parts;  and  that  Ceres  ga- 
thered his  members  together  again,  and  renewed  and  revived  him* 
Which  fictions  the  natural  philosophers  explain  according  to  natural 
reason;  for  he  is  said  (they  say)  to  be  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Ceres, 
because  the  vine  is  nourished  by  the  earth  and  the  rain  from  heaven, 
and  so  produces  fruit;  whence  comes  wine,  by  pressing  of  the  grape. 
That  the  boiling  of  his  members,  signifies  the  operation  of  makii)^ 
the  wine,  which  many  boil  to  render  it  more  strong  and  fragrant. 
That  his  members  were  pulled  in  pieces  by  eanhly  men  afterwards, 
and  joined  together  again,  and  he  restored  to  his  former  state,  de- 
notes no  more,  but  that,  after  the  vintage  and  pruning  of  the  vines 
at  the  season  of  the  year,  the  earth  causes  them  to  fiouiish  again,  and 
to  be  as  fruitful  as  ever  they  were  before.  For  it  is  certain,  that  by 
Ceres  the  antient  poets  and  other  fabulous  authors  mt^ant  the  mother 
earth:  and  agreeable  hereunto  are  those  things  that  are  delivered  in 
the  verses  of  Orpheus,  and  which  are  exhibited  in  the  celebration  of 
the  sacred  mysteries,  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  ordinary  person 
particularly  to  treat  of. 

In  the  same  nsanner  the  naturalists  explain  his  being  .the  son  of 

*  Bacchus.  t  Two  mofbtxil 


t04  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  BmA  WL 

«C       I  ■     ■  ■   ■  ■      — — ^— — ^—i — »— — — ^— — — — ■  n  1^— i» 

Semcle;  for  they  say  that  the  eartli  was  by  the  antients  called  Thion 
and  iScmele;  Scmele*,  because  the  worship  of  this  goddess  was 
splendid  and  pompous :  and  Thyonf^  from  the  frequent  sacrifice* 
which  were  offered  to  her. 

He  is  feigned  to  be  begotten  of  Jupiter  twice^  because,  it  beings 
supi)osed  that  the  vines,  with  other  plants,  were  destroyed  in  Deu-^ 
calion's  flood,  and  that  it  afterwards  sprung  up  again;  therefore,  whi 
this  god  appeared  again,  as  if  lie  had  sprung  up  by  a  second  birth 
he  was  feigned  to  be  born  out  of  Jupiter's  thigh.  And  these  are 
opinions  of  them  wlio  take  Bucchus  for  nothing  else  but  the  use  and 
strength  found  out  to  lie  in  wine. 

But  those  fabulous  authors  that  say  this  god  was  a  man,  unani- 
mously attribute  to  him  the  finding  out  and  first  planting  of  the  vine, 
and  every  thing  that  belongs  to  the  use  of  wine.  But  whether  tliere 
were  more  than  one  of  that  name,  they  differ  among  themselves. 
Some  affirm  there  was  but  one,  and  this  very  Bacchus  who  taught  the 
use  of  wine,  and  gatlicring  of  grapes,  and  with  an  army  overran  the 
whole  world,  and  first  instituted  the  rites  and  festivals  of  the  Sac^ 
ihunaUiU  Some  (as  1  have  before  declared)  have  aiBrmed,  that  there 
were  three  that  lived  at  several  times,  and  have  given  an  account  of 
the  actions  of  each  of  them. 

Of  whom  (they  say)  the  most  anticnt  was  born  in  India,  and  there* 
forei  in  regard  that  country  (through  the  temper  of  the  climate,  and 
richness  of  the  soil)  naturally  produced  vines,  they  affirm  he  was  the 
iirst  that  ta^ight  the  way  of  pressing  of  !J:rapcs,  and  found  out  the  usA 
of  wine;  and  employotl  himself  likewise  in  pruning  of  fig-trees,  and 
otiicr  fiuit-trros  of  a  larger  .size,  and  taught  others  the  same  art:  and 
in  iHMU'lusion,  that  ho  found  out  whatever  appertained  to  the  vine. 
Antl  hrniv  lu*  was  called  the  PresHM\J,  and  the  Hoarded,  because  it 
is  (he  eustoni  auion^i^  the  Indians  to  let  tiieir  beards  grow  all  their 
days  witiu)ut  cutting  them. 

ThiN,  thcv  say,  is  the  Bacchus  tliat  overran  the  whole  world  with 
his  iuins«  and  found  out  the  manner  of  planting  of  vines,  and  the 
pressing  itf  grapes  with  wine- presses,  ar.d  hence  was  surnamcd 
Isfthvtts^  as  before^  and  imparted  what  he  had  discovered  to  others; 
liy  which  advantages  he  so  gained  the  hearts  and  respects  of  all  men, 
that  when  he  was  dead,  they  adored  lum  with  divine  honours.  At 
this  day  they  shew  the  place  of  his  birth  in  India,  and  many  cities 
theie  iu  their  own  proper  language  called  after  his  name.  Many 
other  tilings  they  relate  of  thi:»  Indian  Bacchus,  which  is  too  tedioua 
hcie  to  leheaisc. 

^  Krom  the  («rrek  w«rd  Smne.  which  »i^n;f.r9  splendkil^ot  bc^atifol. 


dip.  IF.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  S05 


Another  Bacchus  (they  say)  there  was  who  was  the  son  of  Jupiter 
Bind  Proserpina,  or  as  some  think,  of  Ceres.  This  they  say,  was  the 
Brst  that  taught  how  to  plough  with  oxen, when  men  before  tilled  the 
jfTound  with  their  own  handy  labours,  and  invented  many  other  things 
uweful  for  the  art  of  husbandry,  that  the  countryman  might  not  be 
dverlaid  with  his  labours.  By  these  advantages  and  benefits  to  man- 
kind, he  gained  suoh  reputation  and  esteem,  that  he  was  by  all  ador- 
ed as  a  god,  and  divine  worship  and  solemn  sacrifices  were  offered 
in  honour  of  him.  In  all  his  images  and  statues  he  was  painted  and 
engpraven  with  horns,  as  well  to  signify  the  nature  of  this  second 
Bacchus,  as  to  denote  how  great  a  benefit  and  advantage  accrued  to 
the  husbandmen  by  the  invention  of  the  plough. 

A  third  Bacchus  they  say,  was  born  at  Thebes  in  Boeotia,  of  Ju- 
piter and  Semele,  the  dauther  of  €admus ;  for  Jupiter  being  in  love 
with  her,  by  reason  of  her  extraordinary  beauty,  is  said  frequently 
to  lie  with  her;  at  which  Juno  was  so  inflamed  with  jealousy,  tliat 
•he  resolved  to  be  revenged  upon  the  girl,  and  to  this  end,  (minding 
.to  deceive  her),  she  appeared  in  the  shape  of  one  of  her  servants,  and 
persuaded  Semele,  (who  never  suspected  any  sinister  design),  that  it 
was  very  fitting  that  Jupiter  should  lie  with  her  in  the  same  splen- 
dour, and  glorious  appearance  as  he  did  with  Juno:  whereupon  Se- 
miele  over-persuaded  Jupiter,  that  he  would  honour  her  in  his  ad- 
dresses in  the  same  manner  as  he  did  Juno;  upon  which  he  visited 
her  in  thunder  and  lightning,  which  killed  the  young  lady,  causing 
her  to  miscarry,  and  Jupiter  forthwith  clapped  up  the  infant  within 
his  thigh,  and  when  he  was  come  to  the  full  time  of  his  birth,  he 
conveyed  liim  to  Nysa  in  Arabia,  where  being  nursed  by  nymphs,  lie 
was  called  from  his  father  and  the  place  Dionysius^.  Being  a  very 
beautiful  young  man,  he  spent  the  time  of  his  youth  in  dancing, 
plays,  and  all  manner  of  sports  and  pleasures  with  young  women. 

Afterwards  he  got  together  an  army  of  women  armed  with  lances, 
and  adorned  with  garlands  of  flowers,  and  marched  with  them  through 
all  parts  of  the  world,  teaching  men  his  misterious  rites  and  cere- 
monies, yet  imparting  them  only  to  those  that  lived  virtuously  and 
piously.  He  every  where  likewise  instituted  festival  days,  and  general 
meetings  for  sports  and  dancings,  and  composed  differences  both  in 
cities  and  countries;  and  instead  of  wars  and  seditions,  established 
peace  and  concord  amongst  them.  And  when  the  noise  of  his  com- 
ing to  any  place  was  spread  abroad,  and  how  kind  he  was  to  all,  and 
how  great  a  benefactor  he  was  in  improving  and  civilizing  the  man- 
ners of  men,  they  ran  out  flocking  from  all  parts  to  receive  him. 
Sat  some  few  proud  and  impious  persons  despised  him,  and  gave 

*  In  Greek*  Dis  is  Jupiter,  and  N^sa,  the  place  »o  called. 


flOS  DI0O0RU8  8ICDLV9.  jMb  OL 

fiDTth  that  he  carried  women  along  with  him  to  gratify  Us  Inatt,  tod 
that  he'  taught  his  rites  and  ceremonies  merely  to  commit  wfaoie* 
dom  with  strange  women ;  but  of  these  he  took  a  tfpeedy  revenge; 
ior  whenever  he  exerted  his  divine  power  in  punishing  the  wicked^ 
aometimes  he  struck  them  with  madness,  and  at  other  times 
them  to  be  torn  in  pieces  by  the  hands  of  the  women ;  and 
times  by  hb  sovereign  skill  in  martial  aiiairs,  caused  his  enemief 
suddenly  to  be  slain.  For  instead  of  the  lances^  he  ordered  hie  Bac- 
cliantes  to  carry  darts  wrapt  round  with  ivy  at  the  pcnnts,  with  whidi 
(on  a  sudden  and  unexpectedly)  they  assaulted  and  wounded  to  death 
the  kings  that  were  ignorant  of  the  stratagem^  and  thereibae  dea- 
pised  and  contemned  them,  because  they  were  women. 

Amongst  them  that  were  punished  by  him,  the  most  considerable 
and  eminent  were  Pentheus  the  Grecian,  and  Myrrhanus  thelndiaii 
king,  and  Lycurgus  of  Thrace.  For  Bacchus  intending  to  transport 
his  forces  out  of  Asia  into  Ekirope,  made  a  league  with  Lyciugna 
king  of  Thrace,  whose  country  was  washed  by  the  Hellespont.  As 
soon  as  Bacchus  had  transported  his  Bacchantes  into  the  country,  oim 
of  his  allies  (as  he  thought  Lycurgus)  commanded  his  soMim  to 
set  upon  Bacchus  and  all  his  mad  crew  in  the  night,  and  to  cut  tboni 
all  o£  Of  which  Bacchus  being  informed  by  one  of  the  infaabi-' 
tants,  called  Tharops,  he  was  not  a  little  amazed,  because  he  had  but  m 
few  with  him,  the  strength  of  his  army  being  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Hellespont;  upon  which  he  himself  secretly  passed  over  to  his 
army:  but  Lycurgus  in  the  mean  time  cut  the  throats  of  alt  hb 
Bacchantes  that  were  left  behind,  in  a  place  called  Nisius.  As  sooa 
therefore  as  Bacchus  had  transported  his  forces,  he  fought  the  Thra- 
cians,  and  overcame  them;  and  having  taken  Lycurgus  prisoner, 
first  plucked  out  his  eyes,  and  after  he  had  put  him  to  all  sorts  of 
torments  he  could  devise,  and  used  him  with  all  the  contempt  and 
disgrace  imaginable,  he  nailed  him  to  the  cross.  Afterwards,  in  re* 
compense  to  Tharops  for  the  kindness  shewed  him,  he  advanced  bim* 
to  the  kingdom  of  Thrace,  and  taught  him  the  manner  of  celebrating 
the  mysteries  of  his  solemnities  called  Orgia. 

CEagrus  the  son  of  Tharops,  succeeded  his  father  in  the  Uiigw 
dom,  being  instructed  by  him  in  the  same  mysterious  rites  and  cere«' 
monies.  CEagrus  afterwards  taught  them  Orpheus  his  seo^  who 
(being  eminent  for  his  learning  and  ingenuity)  changed  manytUngtf 
in  the  Orgia.  Hence  those  rites  and  mysteries  first  iostitiMed  i^ 
Bacchus  were  afterwards  called  Orpheoy 

But  some  of  the  poets,  among  whom  is  Antimachas,  say,  Lyeiir«' 
gus  was  not  king  of  Thrace,  but  of  Arabia;  and  that  be  freaeher* 
ously  set  upon  Bacchus  and  his  Bacchantes  in  Nysa  in  Arabia:  and 


Ohyb  tfi  DIODORU8  8ICU  LU8.  SH>Sr 

fuitber  Mate,  that  Bacchus  having  every  where  punished  the  wicked 
mod  rewarded  the  good,  returned  out  of  Iiidia,  mounted  upon  m 
elephant,  into  Thebes;  and  because  he  spent  three  years  in  his  es* 
pedition,  the  Grecians  celebrate  the  festivals  called  Trieteriou 
And  report,  that  being  leaden  with  the  spoils  of  so  great  an  expedl* 
tioQ,  he  was  the  first  that  was  brought  in  triumph  into  the  country; 
These  are  the  genealogies  of  Bacchus,  according  to  the  unanimiKlf 
conientof  all  the  ancients. 

But  many  of  the  cities  of  Greece  contend  for  the  place  of  his 
birth;  for  the  Eleans,  Naxians,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Eleuthere,  the 
Teiaos,  and  many  others,  appropriate  liis  birth  each  particularly  to 
themselves.  And  the  Teians,  for  confirmation  of  what  they  say,  bring 
thb  argument,  that  there  is  a  spring  in  their  city,  which  at  some 
eertain  times  streams  forth  most  rich  and  fragrant  wine:  and  as  to 
the  rest,  some  of  them  shew  parcels  of  land  dedicated  to  him;  and 
othen  (from  ancient  tradition)  sacred  groves  and  consecrated  tem- 
ples. But  in  truth,  since  this  god  has  left  behind  him  many  tokens 
of  his  beneficence,  and  likewise  of  his  personal  presence  in  rnoil 
parts  of  the  world,  it  is  no  wonder  that  every  one  afiirms  that  his 
own  country  and  city  was  the  place  that  wks  most  especially  dear 
to  Bacchus. 

The  poet  in  his  hymns  confirms  what  we  have  before  declared^ 
where,  speaking  of  those  that  doubt  the  place  of  his  birth,  brings  him 
in  as  born  at  Nysa  in  Arabia  in  this  manner...^ 

Some  Dracanus,  Icaras  some,  some  Naxos  narae. 
Places  from  which  the  divine  Bacchus  caroe. 
From  Thebes  some,  and  from  thj^  curling  streams, 
AlphsBus,  othert  say :  all  sill j  dreams. 
Thee,  father  Jove,  in  secret  brought  to  hght. 
Fearful  of  men's*  and  his  fair  Juno's  sight. 
On  Njsa's  mount  adorn'd  with  pleasant  woods. 
Far  from  Phoenician  coasts,  near  Egypt's  floods. 

Yet  I  am  not  ignorant  that  the  Africans  inhabiting  the  sea-coasts^, 
do  themselves  challenge  the  birth-place  of  this  god,  and  say  that 
what  things  are  reported  to  be  done  by  him  were  done  among  them, 
and  shew  many  marks  and  signs  to  prove  what  they  say,  which  re- 
main among  them  to  this  very  day:  and  in  further  confirmation 
hereof  many  of  the  antient  historians  and  poets,  and  likewise  a  great 
part  of  the  modern  writers  do  agree  in  this  thing  concerning  him. 

And  that  we  may  not  omit  any  thing  that  is  said  of  Bacchus,  we 
shall  range  under  distinct  heads  what  the  Africans  have  related  con* 
ceming  htm,  and  wherein  the  Grecian  historians  have  agreed  with 
theoD,   and  lastly,  what  account  is  given  of  him  by  Dionysius, 


208  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BooJk  lit 


■• 


vi\iO  composed  a  history  of  the  antient  stories  and  fables:  for  he  btf 
written  a  history  of  Bacchus^  of  the  Amazons,  of  the  expedition  of 
the  Argonauts,  and  the  war  of  Troy,  and  many  other  things ;  annex- 
ing therennto  several  poems  of  the  antient  mythologists  and  poets. 
He  says  that  Linus  was  the  first  that  invented  rhimes  and  mnsic 
in  Greece:  and  that  Cadmus  brought  letters  out  of  Phoenicia, 
and  was  the  first  who  taugnt  the  Grecians  to  pronounce  them,  and 
gave  them  their  several  names,  and  formed  their  distinct   charac- 
ters: hence  these  letters  are  all  generally  called  Phoenician  let- 
ters, because  they  were  brought  over  out  of  Phoenicia  into  Greece; 
but  they  were  afterwards  called  Pelasgian  characters,  because  the 
Pelasgians  were  the  first  that  understood  them  after  they  were  brought 
over.    He  says  that  tl)is  Linus,  being  an  excellent  poet  and  musi* 
cian,  had  many  scholars,    amongst  whom  there  were  three  that 
were  the  most  famous,  Hercules,  Thcmyris,  and  Orpheus.     Hercu- 
les learnt  to  play  upon  the  harp,  but  was  very  dull  and  unapt  to 
learn,  insomuch,  that  he  was  sometimes  boxed  and  beaten,  at  which 
he  was  at  length  so  enraged,  that  he  killed  his  master  by  a  blow  with 
his  harp.    Thcmyris  was  very  ingenious,  and  gave  himself  wholly 
to  music:  and  grew  so  eminent  therein,  that  he  would  boast  he  could 
sing  more  sweetly  and  melodiously  than  the  Muses  themselves;  at 
which  the  goddesses  were  so  enraged,  that  they  both  deprived  him 
of  his  art,  and  struck  him  blind  besides,  as  Homer  affirms  in  these 
verses : 

TlK'ra^'ri.s  then  by  th'  iMusies  via»  en?icd 
And  of  his  art  the  Thraciau  they  diipriv'd. 

And  then  again : 

Th' enraged  goddesses  then  struck  him  blind 
That  th*  way  to  sing  or  play  be  could  not  find. 

Of  Orpheus,  the  last  of  his  scholars,  we  shall  speak  more  parti- 
cularly when  we  come  to  what  concerns  him. 

This  Lin  us  (they  say)  wrote  in  Pelasgian  letters,  the  acts  of  the  first 
Bacchus,  and  left  other  stories  in  his  writings  behind  him.  Or- 
pheus, likewise,  it  is  said,  used  the  same  characters,  and  Pronapides^ 
Homer's  master,  an  ingenious  musician.  Thymaetes  also^the  son  of 
Thymsetus,  the  son  of  Lcomedon,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Orpheus^ 
and  travelled  through  many  parts  of  the  world,  as  far  as  to  the  west- 
ern parts  of  Libya  to  the  very  ocean:  this  Thymaetes  visited  likewise 
(they  say)  Nysa,  the  place  where  Bacchus  was  brought  up,  as  is  re- 
ported by  the  antient  inhabitants;  where  being  instructed  by  the 
Nysiansj^he  wrote  a  poem  called  Phrygia,  of  the  particular  actions 
of  this  god,  in  very  old  language  and  character.  Amongst  other 
things,  he  says,  that  Ammon,  a  king,  reigning  in  some  part  of  Li- 


(^ap.  IV.  t>iODOitus  sicuLUS.  S09 

bya,  married  Rhea  the  daughter  of  Ccelus^  sister  of  Saturn  and  the 
other  Titans;  and  that  when  he  came  first  to  the  kingdom^  he  met 
with  a  beautiful  virgin  called  Amalthsea^  upon  the  Ceraunean^ 
mountains^  and  falling  in  love  with  her^  begat  a  son  of  her^  who 
was  afterwards  famous  and  admirable  both  for  strength  and  comeli- 
ness of  person ;  afterwards  he  made  Amalthtea  queen  of  the  neigh- 
bouring nations^  which  in  its  situation  being  in  shape  of  an  ox^s  horn^ 
was  therefore  called  the  Western  Horn,  and  that  the  soil  is  so  veijr' 
rich>  that  it  abounds  with  vines  and  all  other  sorts  of  fruit-trees. 
Being  possessed  of  this  country,  she  called  it  after  her  own  name^ 
Amalthsea's  Horn,  And  therefore  posterity  call  every  rich  piece  of 
land  that  abounds  with  fruit-trees,  Amalthaea's  Horn. 

But  Aromon  fearing  the  rageful  jealousy  of  Rhea,  concealed  his 
adultery,  and  privately  sent  away  the  child  afar  off  to  the  city  Nysa^ ' 
which  lies  in  an  island  almost  inaccessible,  surrounded  by  the  river 
Triton,  into  which  there  is  but  one  strait  and  narrow  entrance,  called 
the  Nysian  gates. 

The  land  there  is  very  rich,  abounding  with  pleasant  meadows, 
gardens,  and  orchards,  watered  on  every  side  with  refreshing  streams; 
wherein  grow  all  sorts  of  fruit-trees  and  vines,  which  grow  of  them- 
selves,  for  the  most  part  running  up  on  the  sides  of  trees.  A  gentle, 
cooling  and  refreshing  wind  pierces  through  the  whole  island,  which 
makes  the  place  exceeding  healthful,  so  that  the  inhabitants  live* 
much  longer  here,  than  any  in  the  neighbouring  countries.  The 
first  entrance  into  the  island  runs  up  a  long  vale,  shaded  all  along 
with  high  and  lofty  trees,  so  thick,  that  only  a  dim  and  glimmer- 
ing light  passes  through;  but  the  fiery  beams  of  the  sun  enter  not 
in  the  least  to  offend  the  passenger.  In  passing  along,  issue  ma- 
ny sweet  and  crystal  springs,  so  that  the  place  is  most  pleasant 
and  delightful  to  them  that  have  a  desire  there  to  divert  themselves. 
When  you  are  out  of  this  vale,  a  pleasant  and  very  large  grotto,  of 
a  round  form,  presents  itself,  arched  over  with  an  exceeding  high  and 
craggy  rock,  bespangled  with  stones  of  divers  resplendent  colours ; 
for,  being  chequered,  some  sparkled  with  purple  rays,  some  with 
azure,  and  others  darted  forth  their  refulgent  beauty  in  divers  other 
colours,  no  colour  being  ever  known  but  might  be  seen  there. 
At  the  entrance  grew  trees  of  a  strange  and  wonderful  nature,  some 
bearing  fruit,  others  always  green  and  flourishing,  as  if  they  had  been 
created  by  nature  to  delight  the  sight :  in  these  nested  all  sorts  of 
birds,  whose  colour  and  pleasing  notes,  even  ravished  the  senses  with 
sweet  delight:  so  that  ail  the  place  around  imparted  a  sort  of  divine 
pleasure,  not  only  to  the  eye,  but  the  ear;  the  sweetness  of  natural 

*  Id  Aiia«  n««r  the  Caspiaa  set. 

Vol.  1.    No,  34.  jbe 


5^10  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  lit* 

■  ■     "    "  ^        ■    ■     "   -— — 

notes  far  excelling  the  artificial  harmouy  of  all  other  music  whatso- 
ever.    Passing  through  this^  appears  a  hirge  and  spacious  grotto,  la 
every  part  enlightened  by  the  bright  rays  of  the  sun:  b^re  grow  va* 
rious  sorts  of  flowers  and  plants^  especially  cassia^  and  others  that 
perpetually  preserve  their  sweet  odours  in  their  natural  strengths 
Here  are  to  be  seen  the  many  pleasant  apartments  of  the  nymphs^ 
(composed  of  various  flowers^  planted  in  that  order  by  wise  nature's 
hand,  and  not  by  man's  art)  fit  to  receive  even  the  gods  themselves*. 
Within  all  this  pleasant  round,  is  not  a  flower  or  leaf  to  be  aeeim 
withered^  or  in  the  least  decayed;  so  that  the  spectators  are  not  QoIyQ 
delighted  with  the  sight,  but  even  transported  with  the  pleasuies  of 
the  fragrant  smells  and  sweet  odours  of  the  place. 

To  this  cave  the  child  was  brought  by  Ammon^  and  committed 
to  the  care  of  Nysa,  one  of  the  sisters  of  Arista&us,  to  be  brought 
up;  but  ordered  Arist^us  himself  tube  his  tutor,  who  was  a  prudeDt^ 
honesty  and  very  learned  man :  and  that  the  child  might  he  the  bet- 
ter secured  against  the  mischievous  contrivances  of  his  stepmother 
Rhea,  to  these  was  joined  Minerva,  to  be  his  guardian,  whom  the 
river  Triton,  they  say,  brought  forth  a  little  before  these  times;  and 
therefore  from  thence  she  was  called  Tritonides*.     They  report  that 
this  goddess  lived  a  virgin  all  her  days,  and  that  being  likewise  en- 
dued with  extraordinary  wisdom,  she  found  out  many  arts  and  sci- 
ences; and  that  her  strength  of  body,  and  manly  courage  was  such^ 
that  she  employed  herself  in  feats  of  arms,  and  went  out  to  the  wars. 
Amongst  her  other  actions^  this  was  one  remarkable,  that  she  killed 
ifSgides  a  terrible  monster,  before  esteemed  invincible.     It  was  the 
birth  of  Terraj  and  (in  an  horrible  manner)  naturally  breathed  forth 
flames  of  fire  at  her  mouth.    This  monster  first  appeared  io  Phrygia^ 
and  burnt  up  the  whole  country,  which  is  therefore  called  burnt  Pliry* 
gia  at  this  day.     Afterwards,  she  bent  her  course  to  the  places  about 
mount  Taurus,  and  burnt  and  destroyed  all  the  woods  and  foresia  all 
along,  as  far  as  to  India:  thence  she  moved  towards  the  sea-coasts, 
and  burnt  down  the  cedars  upon  mount  Libanus  in  Pheenicia:  thence 
passing  through  Egypt,  she  burnt  up  Libya,  as  far  as  to  the  western 
shore^  till  at  length  she  set  on  fire  all  the  woods  upon  the  Ccrau* 
nian  mountains.     The  earth  being  thus  all  in  a  flame,  and  the  ioha* 
bitauts  partly  consumed,  aud  partly  through  fear,  having  forsaken 
their  country,  Minerva  (they  say)  eminently  furnished  both  with 
wisdom  and  courage,  killed  this  monster;  and  wore  its  akin  upoa 
her  breast,  to  be  both  as  a  breast-plate  and  coat  of  mail  against 
future  encounters,  and  likewise  as  a  memorial  of  her  valomr  and  gkK 
rious  victory. 

*  Or  Tritoangeacf^  because  she  first  appeared  in  •  virgiti*s  habit  at  the  rifer  Triton. 


iWra,  the  mother  of  this  monster,  being  hereat  enraged,  in  revenge 
limHigbt  forth  the  giants,  thoise  implacable  enemies  of  the  gods,  which 
were  afterwards  destroyed  by  Japiter,  with  the  assbtance  #f  Minerva, 
Btcchas,  and  other  deities. 

But  as  for  Dionysius,  bred  up  in  Nystj  and  instructed  in  the  mo^t 
learned  arts  and  sciences,  he  grew  not  only  eminent  for  the  strength 
And  beauty  of  his  body,  and  endowments  of  his  mind,  but  for  his  in- 
ventions of  tilings  useful  for  man's  life.  For,  while  he  was  but  as 
y^t  a  mere  boy,  he  found  out  the  nature  and^ise  of  wine,  discovering 
the  pressing  of  the  clusters  of  the  vine,  and  drying  of  the  grapes,  to 
the  end  to  store  th^*m  up  lor  future  use.  He  found  out,  likewise, 
what  ground  was  most  proper  for  the  planting  of  every  thing,  and  in 
hopes  of  attaining  unto  immortal  honour  for  the  great  benefits  and  ad- 
faatages  of  those  things  by  him  discovered,  he  communicated  his  in* 
ventions  to  mankind. 

Wlien  his  fattie  and  glory  was  noised  abroad  in  every  place,  Rhea, 
(it  18  said),  enraged  at  Ammon,  endeavoured  to  seize  Dionysius :  bat 
being  disappointed  in  her  design,  she  forsook  Ammon,  and,  returnitig 
to  her  bruttiers  the  Titans,  married  her  brother  Saturn,  who,  at  the 
instigation  of  Rhea,  with  the  other  brothers,  made  war  upon  Ammon, 
and  in  a  battle  routed  him.  That  Ammon,  by  reason  of  famine,  was 
forced  to  fly  into  Crete,  and  married  Geta,  one  of  the  daughters  of  the 
Cnretes,  then  reigning  there,  and  witli  her  gained  the  sovereignty  of 
the  island,  and  called  it  after  his  wife's  name  Geta,  which  was  before 
ealled  Id^a. 

Saturn,  they  say,  having  gained  the  kingdom  of  Ammon,  governed 
eruelly,  and  marched  witli  an  army  10  Nysa,  against  Dionysius,  who, 
hearing  of  the  n>uting  of  his  father,  and  the  confederacy  of  thelltans 
against  iiim,  raised  soldiers  in  Nysa,  two  hundred  of  which  were  ht^^ 
op  with  him,  who,  as  they  were  eminent  for  valour,  so  they  wer6 
great  lovers  of  Dionysius.  He  confederated,  likewise,  with  the  neigh- 
bouring Libyans,  Africans,  and  the  Amazons,  of  whom  We  have  be- 
fore related,  tbat  they  were  both  valiant,  arid  used  to  send  great  forcea 
abroad  into  other  countries,  and  had  brought  many  parts  of  the  Wort  J 
under  their  dominion.  They  Wefe  brought  (they  say)  into  this  con- 
federacy chiefly  for  the  Srtke  of  Minerva,  who  pursued  the  sarne  way 
and  cour9e  of  life  as  they  did;  for  the  Ama:^Ons  wefe  both  warriors 
and  virgins.  The  army  with  Dionysius  wfts  divided  into  two  bodies* 
the  men  commanded  by  him,  and  the  wopden  by  MioerVsl;  fttid  \ti 
this  order  they  made  a  violent  charge  upt)rt  the  Titans:  the  engage- 
ment was  very  hot,  and  great  numbers  fejl  on  both  sides;  at  length,' 
upon  a  wound  given  to  Saturn,  Dionysius  gained  the  day,  Whtt  sig- 
nalized bis  valour  in  this  battle  above  all  others^  Th^  Titans  t|\e^ 


sit  DIODORUS  81CULUS.  Sook  ITL 

I  iL  ,       I    I  ssssssssssstaBSBSsssssassem^ 

fled  to  the  places  formerly  belonging  to  AmmoD,  and  Dtonysiuiy  with 
a  great  nunober  of  prisoners,  returned  to  Nysa,  where  he  surroanded 
them  with  his  soldiers,  and  then,  in  an  harangue,  accused  the  Titans; 
so  that  all  thought  they  must  every  man  be  put  to  the  sword:  bitt 
forthwith  pardoning  them  all,  he  gave  them  liberty  either  to  go  bome, 
or  to  take  up  arms  with  him :  upon  which  they  all  chose  to  serve  him, 
and  upon  the  account  of  their  sudden  and  surprising  deliverance^  all 
adored  him  as  a  god.  Then,  giving  to  each  of  them  a  cup  of  wine^ 
as  a  sacred  pledge  of  their  fidelity,  he  caused  them  man  by  man  to 
swear  that  they  would  serve  him  faithfully,  and  fight  for  him  to  the 
end  of  the  war. 

This  rite  and  ceremony  of  pledging  their  faith  on  both  sidesy  by 
pouring  out  and  drinking  of  wine,  being  then  first  begun,  was  after- 
wards imitated  by  posterity,  and  truces  and  leagues  in  times  of  war 
were  called  Libations*.  • 

Dionysius  afterwards  undertaking  a  war  against  Saturn,  and  march- 
ing out  of  Nysa  with  all  his  forces  for  that  purpose,  they  report  that 
Aristaeus  his  tutor  was  the  first  that,  with  great  solemnity,  ofiered 
sacrifices  to  him  as  to  a  god.  It  is  said  the  noblest  of  the  Nyssaansy 
called  Sileni,  were  his  companions.  For  Silenus  was  the  first  that 
reigned  in  this  island,  who  is  so  very  antieut,  that  none  knows  his 
origin :  and  forasmuch  as  he  had  a  tsiil  growing  out  at  his  mropy 
his  posterity,  partaking  of  his  nature,  had  the  same  badge.  Diony- 
sius  therefore  marched  away  with  his  army,  and,  (after  much  toil 
aud  hazard  for  want  of  water,  passing  through  many  deserts  infested 
with  wild  beasts),  came  at  length  toZabirnaf,  a  city  of  Ldbya^  and 
there  encamped:  near  to  this  place  he  killed  the  monster  (the  spawn 
of  Terrat,  called  Campe),  which  had  destroyed  many  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, for  which  he  was  in  high  reputation  among  the  people  for  his 
valour.  He  raised  a  mount  of  earth  over  this  monstrous  beast  he  had 
killed,  to  the  end  to  leave  an  everlasting  monument  of  his  valour  to 
posterity,  which  remains  to  this  very  day.  Thence  he  inarched 
against  the  Titans,  causing  his  army  to  pass  quietly  and  orderly 
through  all  places,  carrying  hitnself  courteously  and  civilly  towards 
all,  assuring  every  body  that  he  undertook  this  expedition  for  no  other 
reason  but  to  punish  the  impious,  and  benefit  all  mankind:  so  that 
the  Libyans,  admiring  his  good  order  and  discipline,  and  the  greatness^ 
of  hb  mind,  largely  supplied  his  army  with  provision,  and  freely  joined 
with  him  as  confederates* 

And  now  approaching  near  to  the  city  of  Ammon,  he  routed  Satora 
again  before  the  walls,  who  afterwards  set  the  city  on  fire  in  the  nighty 
with  a  purpose  to  destroy  the  antient  palace  of  Ammon^  and  he  him- 

*  Prtak  oSMngs,  t  Xtcira.  t  Xbe  e«ith  Booster^  Cmnpe, 


CSkp.  IV.  DIODORU8  SICUtUS.  %  13 

^SSSBBSTSSSSSSSSSSSZ  "     I  ^sssssssssssssssssost 


lelf^  with  his  wife  Rhea,  and  others  of  his  distressed  friends,  secretly 
fled  out  of  the  city.  But  Dionysins  was  nothing  like  to  him  id  hb 
temper;  for  he  not  only  pardoned  Saturn  and  Rhea,  whom  he  had 
taicen  prisoners,  upon  the  account  of  being  his  kindred,  but  entreated 
them  that  for  the  future  they  would,  as  hb  parents,  love  iiim,  and  live 
with  him  as  his  choicest  and  most  beloved  friends;  so  that  Rhea  loved 
him  all  her  life  long  as  dearly  as  her  own  son,  but  the  love  of  Satuni 
was  deceitful*.  About  this  time  Saturn  and  Rhea  had  a  son  bom^ 
called  Jupiter,  who  was  advanced  to  many  pbces  of  honour  by  Dio* 
nysius,  and  afterwards  became  king,  upon  the  aq/count  of  hb  virtuous 
qualifications. 

The  Africans  had  informed  Dionysius  before  the  fight,  that  Aamxm 
at  the  time  he  was  driven  out  of  hb  kingdom,  foretold,  that  after  a  cer- 
tain time  hbson  Dionysius  would  recover  hb  father's  kingdom,and  that 
he  should  enlarge  hb  dominion  over  the  whole  world,  and  should  be 
adored  as  a  god*  Dionysius  hereupon,  concluding  that  the  prophecy 
would  certainly  take  efiect,  be  built  a  temple  and  a  city  to  hb  ftther^ 
and  having  ordered  him  to  be  worshipped  as  a  god,  constituted  priests 
for  the  oracle. 

It  b  reported  that  Aramon  was  pourtraycd  with  a  ram's  head,  be« 
cause  he  always  wore  a  helmet  in  the  wars  of  that  shape. 

There  are  some  that  report  he  had  horns  naturally  growing  out  at 
hb  temples;  and  hence  it  is,  that  his  son  Dionysius  b  represented  ia 
the  same  manner;  and  modern  authors  do  deliver  it  as  a  most  certaia 
truth,  that  thb  god  was  horned. 

When  be  had  built  the  city,  and  settled  the  oracle,  they  say,  he 
first  consulted  with  this  new  god,  concerning  his  intended  expedi- 
tions, and  that  his  father  answered  him,  that  by  doing  good  to  all 
mankind,  he  should  attain  to  an  estate  of  immortality.  Being  thus 
encouraged,  he  first  invaded  Egypt,  and  made  Jupiter,  the  son  of 
Saturn  and  Rhea,  king  of  the  country,  though  he  was  then  but  a  boy : 
but  appointed  Olympus  his  assistant  and  tutor,  by  whose  instructions 
he  attained  to  a  high  degree  of  virtue  and  noble  endowments,  and 
thence  was  called  Jupiter  Olympus. 

Dionysius  was  said  to  have  taught  the  Egyptians  the  manner  of 
planting,  and  use  of  the  vine,  and  to  keep  and  store  up  wine,  apples*^ 
and  other  fruits^  His  fame  was  now  so  noised  abroad  in  every  place, 
that  none  durst  oppose  him,  but  all  submitted  of  their  own  accord, 
and  with  praises  and  sacrifices  adored  him  as  a  god.  Passing  thus 
(they  say)  through  the  whole  world,  he  plaiKted  and  improved  the 
countries  all  along  as  he  went,  and  by  his  good  acts  obliged  all  man- 
kind to  a  grateful  remembrance,  by  rendering  him  immortal  houour; 


S14  DIODORUft  SfCULUS.  JOook  Itt. 

and  whereas  ail  men  ha¥e  divers  sentiments  of  the  rest  of  the  gods^ 
yet  they  all  agree  in  the  immortality  of  Bacchus :  for  there  is  odcher 
Greeli  nor  barbarian,  but  have  tasted  of  his  grace  and  bounty;  jm, 
even  those  that  inhabit  the  most  barren  countries^  altogether  ^nf|f 
for  the  planting  of  vines,  learnt  of  him  how  to  make  drink  of  barley^ 
little  inferior  in  deliciousness  of  taste  to  wine. 

They  say,  moreover,  that  Dionysius  witli  a  swift  march  hastened  ovC 
of  India  to  the  sea'*^,  and  there  found  the  Titans  passing  over  with 
great  forces  into  Crete,  agarost  Ammon.  And  whereas  Jupiter  in  the 
mean  time  had  brought  over  forces  out  of  Egypt  to  the  assistance  of 
Ammon,  and  a  great  war  was  broke  out  in  that  island,  Dioayriat 
forthwith,  together  with  Minerva  and  others  (reputed  to  be  gods) 
transported  aids  to  tiiem  in  Crete.  Hereupon  was  fought  a  graat  bat* 
tie,  wherein  the  Dionysians  were  victors,  and  the  Titans  were  eveiy 
man  cut  olT. 

After  Ammon  and  Bacchus  were  translated  to  a  state  of  immorta* 
lity,  (and  all  the  Titans  now  utterly  extinct)  Jupiter  became  lofd  of 
the  universe,  none  daring  to  be  so  impious  as  to  oppose  him. 

These  are  the  things  which  the  Libyans  say  were  doue  by  ttie  first 
Bacchus,  the  son  of  Ammon  and  Amalthaea. 

The  second  Bacchus  (they  say)  was  son  of  Jupiter,  by  lo,  the 
daughter  of  Inachus,  and  reigned  in  Egypt,  and  there  taught  the 
manner  of  divine  worship  and  sacrifices. 

The  third  was  the  issue  of  Jupiter  and  Semele,  and  was,  among  the 
Grecians,  a  rival  of  the  other  two  before  mentioned:  for,  making  it 
his  business  to  imitate  them,  he  likewise,  with  a  great  army,  marched 
through  the  whole  world,  and  set  up  many  pillars  at  the  utmost 
bounds  of  his  several  expeditions,  and  planted  and  improved  likewise 
the  countries  as  he  went.  And  as  the  auticnt  Bacchus  listed  the 
Amazons  into  his  army,  so  did  this  other  women.  He  took,  like« 
wise,  much  care  and  pains  about  the  Or^ia  and  sacred  rites  and  cere* 
monies,  some  of  which  he  reformed,  and  added  others.  But  because 
of  the  length  of  time,  the  first  invention  and  finding  out  of  thioga  is 
unknown  to  many,  this  last  Bacchus  only  inherits  the  glory  and  re- 
putation belonging  to  the  former,  which  misfortune  not  only  befel 
him,  but  Hercules  after  him. 

For  whereas  there  was  antfeutly  two  of  the  same  naiQe;  ooe^ 
them  (and  the  more  antient)  is  said  to  have  flourished  in  Egypt,  wbo^ 
having  overcome  a  grcaW^art  of  the  world,  erected  a  pillar  in  Africa. 
The  other  was  born  in  Crete,  and  was  one  of  the  ItUti  Daci^Hj  he 
was* a  juggler^  but  likewise  a  good  soldier,  and  instituted  the  Olya* 
pic  games. 

*  He  Mcditermncao. 


G&qp.  JK  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  1ft  15 

The  last  was  the  son  of  Jupiter^  by  Alcmena^  born  a  little  before 
the  Trojan  war:  he  travelled  through  many  parts  of  the  world  to  ex- 
ecate  the  commands  of  Eurystheus^  and  succeeded  in  all  his  enter- 
prises; he  erected  a  pillar  in  Europe. 

His  name  being  the  ^ame^  and  his  actions  much  like  to  those  of 

the  former^  was  the  occasion  that  what  things  were  done  by  the  an- 

'tient  Herculeses,  after  their  deaths  were  by  posterity  solely  ascribed 

to  him^  as  if  there  never  had  been  any  but  one  Hercules  in  this 

world. 

Amongst  other  evident  proofs  that  there  were  more  than  one  Dio- 
nysius^  or  Bacchus^  this  very  fight  of  the  Titans  makes  it  clear: 
for  it  is  generally  acknowledged^  that  Diooysius  was  with  Jupiter  ia 
the  war  against  the  Titans,  and  they  say  that  it  is  an  absurd  and 
indecent  thing  to  account  Semele  contemporary  with  the  Titans, 
and  to  affirm  that  Cadmus,  the  son  of  Agenor,  was  more  antient 
than  the  celestial  gods*.  And  these  are  the  things  which,  the 
Libyans  relate  of  Bacchus.  Thus,  having  now  performed  our  pro- 
mise made  at  the  beginning,  we  shall  here  put  an  end  to  this  third 
book. 

*  The  godf  of  Olj^ropus. 


117 


DIODORUS  SICULUS- 


BOOK  IV. 


PREFACE. 

I  AM  not  ignonuit  that  the  writers  of  antiquities  in  many  things 
Call  short  of  the  truth  in  their  rebitions.   For  being  that  antient  things 
are  (as  it  were)  scraped  out  of  the  rubbish  with  very  great  difficulty, 
they  greatly  perplex  the  hutoriau.     And  because  the  supnutation  of 
times  wherein  things  were  done  cannot  now  be  so  exact  as  to  infer 
aD  iniallible  argument  for  the  truth  of  the  actions  related,  therefore 
it  is  that  the  reader  despises  the  authors  of  the  history :  and  the  muU 
titode  aod  variety  of  the  gods,  demi-gods,  and  otiier  famous  men^ 
whose  genealogies  are  to  be  treated  of,  add  much  more  to  the  diffi- 
culty.   And  the  greatest  vexation  of  all  is,  that  the  writers  of  anti- 
quities and  mythologies  differ  exceedingly  ih  their  relations  one  from 
another:  and  therefore  the  most  famed  and  notdd  historians  of  later 
timet  have  altogether  waved  treatises  of  antient  things,  and  applied 
themselves  to  composing  histories  only  of  such  as  have  happened  in 
times  a  little  befinre  their  own.  For  Ephorus  the  Cumiean,  tlie  scho- 
lar of  laoerateSy  designing  to  write  a  general  history*  passing  over 
matters  of  former  ages,  began  his  writings  with  the  return  of  the  If  e- 
raclides*;  Callisthenes  and  Theopompus,  who  were  contemporary, 
ibilowed  tha  same  method,  and  waved  all  matters  of  antiquity.     But 
I  am  of  a  contrary  opinion  from  them  in  this  matter,  and  therefore, 
the  more  fully  to  discharge  what  I  have  unJertaken,  have  resolved 
with  the  greatest  care  and  diligence  I  can,  to  treat  of  the  antiquities 
of  antient  times:  for  there  are  many  things,  and  such  as  are  very  re- 
markable, that  have  been  done  by  the  gods  and  demi-gfHl^,  and  other 
famous  men,  to  some  of  whom  posterity,  for  their  good  actions  to  the 

*  Xmm  9i%mmmm\  tlw  ptophttt  tifbtj  jtan  after  th«  dcttractivn  g|  Troj. 

Vobl.Nd.S4.  n 


218  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book IF. 

general  benefit  of  mankind,  have  attributed  divine  honoars^  as  to 
gods,  and  have  adored  others,  by  instituting  sacrifices  to  them  as 
demi-gods.  But  the  due  praises  of  all  these  worthies  are  published 
to  the  world  by  history,  to  the  succession  of  perpetual  generatioDs. 

In  the  three  former  books  we  have  treated  of  the  aflfairs  of  other 
nations,  and  of  their  gods ;  of  the  description  of  places  in  the  sevenl 
countries,  of  the  wild  beasts  and  other  living  creatures  bred  amongst 
them,  and  whatever  we  judged  worthy  of  remark,  or  strange  and 
wonderful. 

In  this  book  we  shall  set  forth  the  antiquities  of  the  Grecians  from 
the  most  antient  times,  and  therein  treat  of  the  gods  and  demi-gods^ 
and  of  all  others  that  have  been  famous  and  remarkable  in  fests  of 
arms  in  times  of  war,  or  have  found  out  what  has  been  beneficial  to 
mankind  in  times  of  peace,  or  such  as  have  been  law-makers. 

We  shall  begin,  therefore,  with  Dionysius,  of  Bacchus^  because  he 
is  the  most  antient,  and  did  the  most  benefit  to  makind. 

In  the  former  books  we  have  shewed  how  that  some  of  the  barba* 
rians  have  challenged  the  birth  of  this  god  to  be  amongst  them.  For 
the  Egyptians  say,  that  their  god  Osiris  is  the  same  whom  the  Gre* 
clans  call  Dionysius;  and  that  he  went  through  the  whole  vorld>  and 
first  found  out  the  use  of  wine,  and  taught  men  how  to  plant  the  rintf 
and  that,  for  this  great  benefit  to  mankind,  all  generally  agree  that 
he  attained  to  a  state  of  immortality. 

The  Indians  likewise,  with  no  less  confidence  say,  that  he  was 
born  among  them,  and  that  he  shewed  the  way  and  manner  of  plant- 
ing the  vine,  and  discovered  the  use  of  wine;  which  having  befine 
declared,  we  shall  now  deliver  what  the  Grecians  report  coDceming 
this  god. 


CfiOp.t.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  219 


CHAP.  I. 

¥Fhat  the  Grecians  say  further  of  Bacchus.  The  story  ofPriaptts, 
Of  Hermaphroditus.  Of  the  Muses.  The  birth  of  Hercules ; 
and  his  twelve  labours  enjoined  him  by  Eurystheus,  His  wan- 
dering  expeditions  through  Africa^  Spain^  France^  Italy ,  Sicily, 
His  setting  up  two  pillars  at  Gades^  and  his  other  acts  by  the 
way.     The  story  of  Orpheus. 

r 

CADMUS*,  (they  say)  the  son  of  Agenor,  being  sent  out  of  Phoe- 
nicia by  the  king  his  father,  to  seek  Europa,  was  commanded  to  bring 
her  back,  or  he  himself  never  to  return  into  Phoenicia.  After  many 
long  and  tedious  travels  through  many  countries,  not  being  able  to 
find  the  lost  lady  in  any  place,  despairing  of  ever  returning  into  his 
own  country,  he  came  at  length  into  Boeotia,  and,  by  command  of 
the  oracle,  built  Thebes,  where  he  resided,  and  married  Hermione, 
the  daughter  of  Venus,  by  whom  he  had  Semele,  Ino,  Autonoe^ 
Agave,  and  Polydorus.  Semele  was  so  beautiful,  that  Jupiter  fell  in 
love  with  her,  and  lay  with  her;  but  making  his  addresses  in  a  mean 
and  ordinary  mannerf,  she  looked  upon  it  as  if  he  did  it  in  contempt 
of  her,  and  therefore  earnestly  entreated  him  to  come  to  his  embraces 
with  her  in  the  same  manner  as  he  did  when  he  lay  with  Juno. 
Whereupon,  decking  himself  in  his  divine  majesty,  he  approached 
to  her  in  thunder  and  lightning,  and  so  lay  with  her  in  light  and 
splendour:  but  Semele  being  great  with  child,  and  not  able  to  bear 
the  flashes  of  lightning  that  shot  round  about  her,  miscarried,  and  she 
herself  was  consumed  by  the  flame;  and  then  Jupiter  took  away  the 
infant,  and  delivered  it  to  Mercury,  with  orders  to  convey  him  to 
the  cave  in  Nysa,  (which  lies  between  Phoenicia  and  the  river  Nile) 
and  there  to  recommend  him  to  the  care  of  the  nymphs,  to  be  care- 
fully bred  up.  Hence  from  Jupiter,  whom  the  Greeks  call  Dis, 
and  Nysa,  he  was  called  Dionyslus,  as  Homer  in  his  hymns  wit- 
nesseth  in  this  distich  i 

Far  off  from  Plicenice  stands  the  sacred  Nyse, 
Where  streams  of  Egypt's  Nile  begin  to  rise, 
On  moantain  high  with  pleasant  woods  adornM. 

Being  brought  up  by  the  nymphs  in  Nysa,  they  say,  he  found  out 
the  use  of  wine,  and  taught  the  way  and  manner  of  planting  the 
vine;  and,  going  almost  into  all  parts  of  the  world,  he  civilized  many 

*  Tljii  of  Cadmus  was  Ann.  Mund.  2660,  in  the  time  of  Gideon^  before  Christ  1288. 

t  SikniJv. 


y     19-^  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  Jfook'ST. 


nations  and  countries,  so  that  he  was  highly  honoured  of  all.  He 
found  out  likewise  the  mannerof  making  drink  of  barley^  which  some 
call  Zythus,  for  taste  and  fragrant  smell  not  much  inferior  to  wine, 
and  this  art  he  especially  taught  them  whose  country  was  not  fit  for 
planting  or  producing  of  vines.  He  led  along  with  him  an  arnqr, 
not  only  of  men,  but  of  women^  to  execute  punishments  upon  impious 
and  wicked  men. 

In  Bceotia,  (in  gratitude  to  his  own  country)  he  set  free  all  the 
cities,  and  upon  the  account  of  this  freedom,  built  a  city,  and  called 
it  Eleuthera*. 

After  he  had  spent  three  whole  years  in  an  expedition  into  India, 
he  returned  with  many  rich  spoils  into  Bceotia,  and  was  the  first  in 
triumph  mounted  upon  an  Indian  elephant.  Therefore  the  Boeotiang, 
and  the  rest  of  the  Grecians  and  Thracians^  to  keep  up  the  memarj 
of  the  Indian  expedition,  instituted  solemn  sacrifices  every  third  year 
to  Bacchus,  called  Trieterica,  at  which  time  they  are  of  opinion  this 
god  appears  among  men;  and  therefore  every  third  year,  in  mmof 
towns  of  Greece,  the  festivals  of  Bacchus,  called  Bacchanalia,  aie 
celebrated  by  a  company  of  women  and  virgins,  who  (according  to 
the  solemn  rites)  carry  javelins  decked  with  flowersf,  and  run  aboat 
like  furies,  hallooing  and  setting  forth  the  praises  of  the  god.  The 
married  women  likewise  run  to  these  sacrifices,  and  fill  the  air  with 
loud  and  solemn  hymns  to  Bacchus,  as  if  he  were  then  present 
amongst  them,  in  imitation  of  the  Mas nades|,  which  heretofore  (at  is 
said)  went  along  with  Bacchus.  Amongst  many  others  who  were 
impious  and  wicked,  he  especially  inflicted  punishment  upon  Pen- 
theus  and  Lycurgus.  But  because  the  invention  and  use  of  wine  is 
very  grateful  to  mankind  for  its  pleasant  relish,  and  its  strengthening 
and  enlivening  of  the  body,  it  is  the  custom  at  supper-time,  when 
pure  and  unmixed  wine  is  freely  oflered  to  all,  to  call  upon  the  good 
genius;  but  after  supper,  when  the  wine  is  mixed  with  water,  to  call 
upon  Jupiter  Soter§:  for,  from  pure  and  unmixed  wine  many  times 
proceeds  madness;  but,  tempered  and  allayed  with  the  liquor  that 
descends  from  Jove||,  it  truly  cheers  and  refreshes  the  spirits,  and 
cures  men  of  their  madness  and  intoxication.  Amongst  all  the 
gods,  (they  say)  Bacchus  and  Ceres  deserve  most  to  be  honoured  by 
mankind,  because  they  were  by  their  good  inventions  most  benefited: 
for  he  found  out  the  most  pleasant  drink^  and  she  the  most  strength* 
ening  food. 

They  report  tliat  there  was  another  Bacchus,  or  Dionysius,  much 

*  In  Greek*  Freedom.  t  Called  Thynet. 

X  Maoftdse,  women  that  acted  like  furioat  mad  women. 
$  Jupiter  tbc  S«f  iour.  |  Water  called  tbc  liquor  of  Jove. 


Ckap^  L  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  S91 


more  antient  than  thb,  the  soa  of  Jupiter  and  Proserpina,  called 
by  aome  Sabazius,  at  whose  birth  sacrifices  were  celebrated  ia  se« 
crety  and  in  the  night,  by  reason  of  the  filthy  commixtures  that  wei« 
then  amoqg  them.  It  is  said,  he  was  ef  a  very  sharp  wit,  and  was  the 
first  that  taught  how  to  yoke  oxen,  and  by  them  how  to  plough  ami 
sow  the  ground,  whence  they  feign  him  to  have  horns.  They  say, 
likewise,  that  the  son  of  Semele'*^  was  of  later  times,  of  a  slender  and 
delicate  shape  of  body,  and  most  comely  feature,  exceeding  amorous^ 
and  addicted  to  the  sports  of  Venus:  that  he  carried  about  with  him 
multitudes  of  women  in  his  army,  furnished  with  lances  wrapped 
about  with  all  sorts  of  flowers :  and  that  the  muses  attended  him  in 
his  expedition,  virgins  excellently  learned,  who  by  their  melodious 
singing,  dancing,  and  other  pleasant  diversions,  exceedingly  delighted 
the  god. 

Silenus,  it  is  said,  was  his  master,  his  foster  father^  and  associate 
in  his  wars,  and  was  an  excellent  instructor  and  teacher,  and  contri* 
bated  much  to  the  improvement  of  Bacchus  in  virtue,  and  the  ad- 
vancement of  his  reputation  and  honour. 

In  the  time  of  battle  he  was  furnished  with  warlike  weapons,  and 
a  coat  of  mail  covered  with  a  panther's  skin;  in  time  of  peace,  when 
he  celebrated  solemn  festivals,  and  came  into  the  general  assemblies^ 
he  was  clothed  with  splendid  and  delicate  apparel;  and  to  prevent 
the  head-ach  by  drinking  of  too  much  wine,  he  wore  a  mitre  upon 
his  head,  and  was  called  Mitrophorusf.  This  gave  occasion  to  kings 
afterwards  to  wear  diadems. 

They  say  be  was  called  Bimater,  because  both  Dionysiuses  had 
one  father,  but  several  mothers;  but  the  younger  succeeded  the  elder 
in  the  like  remarkable  actions ;  and  therefore  posterity,  through  ig- 
norance of  the  truth,  and  both  having  had  one  and  the  same  name, 
concluded  that  there  was  but  one  Dionysius. 

They  attribute  to  him  the  carrying  of  a  rod,  for  the  reasons  follow- 
ing: when  wine  was  first  found  out,  it  was  dran|^  pur^j  not  mixed 
with  water,  so  that  in  many  meetings  and  solemn  festivals,  many 
times  men  drank  to  that  excess,  that  they  grew  mad  and  furious,  and 
beat  one  another  with  clubs  and  staves,  insomuch  as  some  were  grie- 
vously wounded,  and  others  were  killed ;  at  which  Dionysius  was 
•much  offended,  and  though  he  did  not  altogether  forbid  the  drink- 
ing of  unmixed  wine,  because  it  was  so  pleasant  and  delicious,  yet 
instead  of  clubs  he  ordered  the  use  of  wands  and  small  rods. 

Men  have  given  him  many  surnames,  according  to  the  several  acts 
or  circumstances  of  his  life.     For  he  is  called  Baccbaeus,  from  the 

*  Dionysiui  of  Thebes.  t  The  Miter-wearer. 

X  Biuiater,  baviog  twu  motben. 


222  nioDORUs  sicuLUs.  Bookir. 


BacchflB*,  that  accompanied  him;  Lenseusf^  from  the  pressing  of 
grapes  at  the  wine-press;  Bromius^  or  Thunderer,  because  of  tbe 
crash  of  thunder  that  was  at  the  time  of  his  birth;  and  for  the  same 
reason  he  was  called  Fircbornt :  hq  was  sumamed  likewise  Thri* 
ambusy  because  he  was  the  first  (of  whom  ever  any  mention  was 
made)  that  triumphed,  when  he  returned  laden  with  many  spoils  In- 
to his  country  from  his  Indian  expedition.  Many  other  names  were 
assigned  him,  whicli  would  be  both  too  tedious  particularly  to  recite, 
and  likewise  foreign  to  the  design  of  this  history. 

They  held  that  he  had  two  faces§,  because  there  were  two  Diony^ 
siuses ;  the  antient  Dionysius,  who  always  wore  a  long  beard,  because 
all  in  antient  times  let  their  beards  grow;  and  this  later  Bacchus,  who 
was  a  spruce  young  man,  as  we  have  before  declared.  But  some  say 
that  a  double  countenance  was  assigned  him,  because  of  the  two  spe- 
cial qualities  wherewith  drunkards  are  affected,  being  either  raving 
mad,  or  transported  with  mirth. 

They  sny,  likewise,  that  he  carried  satyrs  along  with  him,  who  by 
their  dancing  and  skipping  in  his  sports  and  plays,  made  the  god  ex- 
ceeding merry.  To  conclude,  as  the  muses  pleased  and  delighted  him 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  liberal  sciences,  so  the  satyrs,  with  their 
fricks  and  antic  and  ridiculous  gestures  and  actions,  completed  the 
happiness  and  comfort  of  his  life. 

It  is  reported,  likewise,  he  invented  plays,  and  set  dp  theatres^ 
and  instituted  music-schools,  and  freed  all  musicians  that  went  along 
with  him  in  his  expeditions  from  public  taxes;  and  hence  it  is,  that 
])ostcrity  (after  the  example  of  Dionysius)  have  created  societies  of 
musicians,  and  decreed  that  all  of  that  profession  should  be  free. 

But,  that  we  may  keep  within  due  bounds,  we  shall  here  put  an 
end  to  our  discourse  concerning  Bacchus  and  his  actions  in  antient 
times. 

And  now,  since  what  is  antiently  reported  of  Priapus  is  (as  we  con- 
ceive) pertinent  to  this  liistory  of  Bacchus,  we  shall  here  proceed  to 
give  an  account  of  him. 

The  nntients  feign  that  Priapus  was  the  son  of  Bacchus  and  Venos, 
induced  thereunto  by  a  probable  argument, which  is  this— That  when 
men  are  drunk,  they  are  naturally  prone  to  venery;  and  some  say, 
that  when  the  antient  mythologists  would  name  a  man's  yard,  they 
called  it  Priapus;  and  therefore,  that  the  privy  parts  (f>ecause  they 
are  the  instruments  of  generation,  and  support  the  constant  and  con- 
tinual succession  of  mankind)  have  received  divine  honour. 

*  Bacchx,  liovrling  or  inoiirniog  women.  t  Lcnos,  a  wine-press. 

t  Pyri-^enf.  $  I^ifonui?. 


Chap.  L  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  2fS 

'  '  '  "    ■ 

The  Egyptians  tell  this  story  concerning  Priapus :  they  say,  that 
the  Titans  in  antient  times  treacherously  assassinated  Osiris^  and  di- 
vided his  members  into  equal  parts^  and  that  every  one  privately  car- 
ried away  a  part  out  of  the  palace,  only  his  privy  members  they  threw 
into  the  river,  because  none  would  meddle  with  them:  but  Isis  (they 
say)  after  a  diligent  inquiry  made  concerning  the  murder  of  her  hus- 
band, and  having  revenged  his  death  u^wn  the  Titans,  by  conjoining 
his  dismembered  parts,  reduced  them  to  a  human  shape,  and  delivered 
the  body  to  the  priests  to  be  buried,  and  commanded  that  Osiris 
should  be  adored  as  a  god,  and  appointed  the  shape  of  his  privy  mem- 
ber (which  only  was  wanting,  and  could  not  be  found)  to  be  set  up 
as  a  sacred  relict  in  the  temple,  and  (o  be  honoured  likewise  as  a 
deity:  and  these  are  the  things  which  the  antient  Egyptians  feign 
concerning  the  origin  and  divine  worship  of  Priapus*,  Some  call  this 
god  Ithyphallus,  others  Typhon.  He  is  not  only  worshipped  in  tiie 
temples  in  the  cities,  but  in  tlie  fields  and  villages,  where  he  is  re- 
puted the  guardian  and  keeper  of  their  vineyards  and  orchards,  and 
say  tliat  if  any  steal  their  goods,  he  inflicts  punishment  upon  Uiem 
for  it«  This  god  is  not  only  honoured  in  the  festivals  of  Bacchus, 
but  in  all  other  sacred  solemnities,  where,  with  sport  and  ridicule,  his 
image  is  presented  to  the  view  of  all. 

They  feign,  likewise,  that  Hermaphroditus  had  the  like  origin,  wjio 
being  sprung  from  Hermes*  and  Aphroditef^  was,  from  their  two 
names  joined  together,  so  called.  Some  s^y  that  this  Hermaphrodi- 
tus is  a  god,  who  at  SQme  certain  times  appears  to  men,  and  is  natu- 
rally both  man  and  woman ;  in  beauty  and  slenderness  of  his  body 
be  represents  a  woman,  but  in  strength  and  manly  countenance, 
a  man.  Others  account  these  births  for  monsters,  which  being  but 
rare,  portend  sometimes  both  good  and  bad  by  turns;  but  enough  of 
these. 

Here  it  is  fit  to  say  something  of  the  muses  (of  whom  some, men- 
tion is  made  in  the  history  of  Bacchus).  Most  of  the  writers  of  an- 
tiquities, and  those  of  greatest  authority,  say  they  were  the  daughters 
of  Jupiter  and  Mnemosyne^.  Some  few  of  the  poets  (among  whom 
b  Alcman)  say  they  were  the  issue  of  Ccelus  and  Tcrra§.  They  dif- 
fer, likewise,  about  their  number,  for  some  reckon  three,  others  nine; 
but  the  number  nine,  by  the  authority  of  the  most  famous  authors, 
(such  as  Homer,  Hesiod,  and  some  others  of  the  like  esteem)  has 
prevailed  before  all  others :  for  thus  says  Homer 

The  muses  uine  with  voicei  swecl  do  chaut. 

•  Mercury.  t  Venui.  X  Memory. 

^  Cisluni  and  Terra,  Heairen  and  Earth- 


V 


St4  DIODORU9  8ICULU9/  Jfeoft  /Ft 

Hesiod  likewise  sums  up  tbeir  names  in  these  Terses^.* 

Clio,  Thalia,  and  Melpomeoe, 
Likewiie  Erato  and  Terpsicboref 
Polymnia^  Urania,  Eaterpe, 
And  one  bejond  tliem  all.  Calliope. 

To  each  of  these  they  attribute  their  peculiar  art  in  particular 
sorts  of  sciences,  as  poetictlPharmony,  dancing,  singing,  astrology^ 
and  the  rest  of  the  liberal  arts.  They  are  said  by  most  to  be  vir- 
gins, because  liberal  sciences  seem  to  be  uncomipt  and  wtuoot 
qualifications. 

They  are  called  muses,  from  the  Greek  word  Mousa,  which  ilgtii* 
fies  the  teaching  of  things  commendable  and  profitable,  and  such  aa 
are  unknown  to  them  that  are  instructed.  They  apply  likewiie  to 
each  a  particular  reason  of  their  several  names.  Clio,  they  say,  is  ao 
called^  because  she  advances  men's  names  to  the  skies,  in  assisting 
the  poets  to  resound  their  praise.  Euterpe,  because  she  delights  her 
auditors  with  wholesome  and  commendable  instructions.  Thalia, 
from  the  constant  glory  and  honour  that  attends  upon  learning. 
Melpomene,  is  so  called  from  melody,  by  which  means  she  inainoatM 
herself  with  delight  into  the  minds  of  men.  Terpsichore,  becauie 
she  delights  her  scholars  with  those  pleasures  that  result  from  learn* 
ing.  Erato,  because  she  procures  love  and  respect  to  learned  men 
from  all.  Polymnia,  from  the  many  hymns  whereby  she  advaacea 
tlie  renown  of  her  poets,  and  crowns  their  names  with  imadortal 
praise  and  glory.  Urania,  because  those  that  are  taught  and  tkn- 
proved  by  her  are  even  lifted  up  to  heaven.  Lastly,  Calfiope^  fram 
the  sweetness  of  her  voice,  that  is,  her  elegant  language  and  csuict 
composures  of  her  verse,  whereby  she  gains  the  general  applaose  of 
her  learned  auditors. 

Having  treated  sufiiciently  of  these  matters,  we  shall  now  bend  our 
discourse  to  the  things  done  by  Hercules. 

I  am  not  ignorant  that  those  who  write  of  the  actions  of  the  an* 
tients,  especially  of  the  acts  of  Hercules,  meet  with  many  difficul- 
ties; for,  of  all  the  great  actions  that  ever  were  done  in  the  wwld, 
those  of  Hercules  fiir  exceed  all  that  ever  have  been  recorded.  A 
most  diflScult  task  therefore  it  b  to  give  such  an  account  of  what  thiii 
hero  did  as  may  be  agpreeable  to  the  worth  and  dignity  of  his  actions, 
or  to  frame  such  a  discourse  as  may  equalize  the  greatness  of  them, 
for  which  he  attained  to  a  state  of  immortality.  For,  inasmuch  tf 
things  that  are  anticnt  and  unusual  are  judged  incredible  by  moat,  it 
Is  absolutely  necessary,  though  with  the  diminution  of  this  god*a 
glory,  to  omit  some  of  his  acts,  lest,  by  relating  all,  the  whole  iiia* 


Tlhaf^fi  DlOI>01ltS  8tC0LV8.  f95 

tory  be  rejeeted  asfabttloos.  Fbr  some  unreasonably  expect  as  clear 
evidence  for  things  that  are  antient  as  for  those  done  in  our  own  age^ 
and  judge  of  the  greatness  of  actions  (which  makes  them  seem  incre* 
dible)  according  to  the  rule  of  things  done  in  the  present  time,  and  ' 
estimate  4he  strength  of  Hercules  acc(»diog  to  the  weak  measure  of 
men's  streng^  now. 

And  so,  by  reason  of  the  greatness  and  strangeness  of  things  ft* 
lated,  hbtory  suflfers  in  its  credit  and  reputation.  But  in  old  stories* 
the  truth  ought  not  to  be  search^  into  too  critically  and  punctually; 
for>  in  the  plays  and  theatres,  though  we  do  not  believ^  for  certatn 
that  there  ever  were  such  creatures  as  centaurs,  or  creatures  of  t 
double  nature,  of  several  species,  nor  such  a  one  as  Gerion,  that  haA 
three  bodies,  yet  we  favourably  receive  and  entertain  those  fables, 
and  with  a  general  applause  advance  the  honour  of  the  godf.  How 
unjust  is  it,  then,  that  men  should  forget  the  labours  of  Hercules 
while  he  was  here  upon  earth  ?  Whereby  he  did  good  to  all  the  worlds 
jand,  instead  of  rendering  him  his  due  praises,  to  calumniate  him  whom 
our  ancestors  with  unanimous  consent,  for  his  eminent  virtue,  ho* 
nonred  with  divine  honours. 

And  what  can  be  more  impious,  tlian  not  to  preserve  and  defend 
that  religious  respect  to  this  god  which  they  by  their  example  have 
recommended  to  us  ?  But,  letting  these  matters  pass,  we  shall  relate 
the  things  done  by  him  from  the  beginning,  according  as  the  poeb 
and  the  most  antient  mythologists  havie  handed  them  down  to  us. 

Perseus  (they  say)  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  by  Danae,  the  daughter 
of  Acrisius,  and  that  Perseus  begat  Electryon  of  Andromeda,  the 
daughter  of  Cepheus,  and  that  Electryon  begat  Alcmena  of  Eurydice 
the  daughter  of  Peiops,  and  that  Jupiter  (deceiving  Alcmena)  Itcf 
with  her,  and  begat  Hercules :   so  that  by  this  genealogy  Hercules 
descended  from  the  chiefest  of  the  gods,  both  immediately  by  hb 
mother,  and  more  remotely  by  his  great  grandfather  Perseus.     His 
virtue  and  valour  were  not  only  evident  from  his  acts,  but  might  be 
concluded  and  foreseen  by  what  happened  before  be  was  bom :  fbr 
when  Ju|Nter  lay  with  Alcmena,  he  lengthened  the  night  threefold^ 
so  that,  spending  so  much  time  in  procreating' this  child  was  a  sign 
how  extraordinary  strong  he  was  likelf  to  be.    They  say  that  Jupiter 
lay  not  with  her  out  of  any  amorous  pang  of  love,  as  with  other  wo- 
men, but  merely  for  procreation  sake :  and  therefore,  willing  that  hts 
embraces  at  this  time  should  be  lawful,  he  forbore  all  violence;  and 
knowing  that  the  woman's  chastity  was  such,  that  no  arguments 
would  prevail  with  her,  he  deceived  her  by  taking  upon  him  the  shape 
of  Amphitryon. 

*  In  Djtboiogici.  t  That  is,  Herculrt/  who  carried  awaj  Oerion's  oxen. 

Vol.  1.  No.  34,  M 


f 36  moDORus  sicuLUS.  JBbQ&  ifC 


And  DOW  the  time  of  her  delivery  drew  Digh>  when  Jupiter^  fiiU  of 
thoughts  concerning  the  birth  of  Hercules,  in  the  presence  of  all  At 
gods  declared,  that  he  would  make  him  king  of  the  Peraiansi  who  ww 
to  be  born  that  day.  Whereupon  Juno,  enraged  with  jealousy,  with 
the  assistance  of  Ilithyia*  her  daughter,  gave  a  check  to  the  delivery 
of  Alcmena,  and  brought  forth  Eurystheus  before  his  fuUthne.  Bat 
though  Jupiter  was  thus  outwitted  by  Juno,  yet,  that  he  might  per- 
form his  promise,  he  took  care  to  preserve  the  honour  and  reputatiM 
of  Hercules;  and  therefore  it  is  reported,  that  he  prevailed  with  Jana 
to  consent,  that  Eurystheus  being  made  king  according  to  his  pro* 
mise,  Hercules,  (who  should  be  subject  to  him),  performing  twelve 
Jabours,  (such  as  Eurystheus  should  impose  upon  him),  should  be  talceii 
into  the  society  of  the  immortal  gods» 

Alcmena  being  delivered  (out  of  fear  of  Juno's  jeahmsy)  exposed 
the  child  in  a  place  which  is  now,  from  him,  called  Hercules's  Field. 
About  which  time  Minerva,  together  with  Juno,  walking  abroad, 
found  the  infant,  and,  much  admiring  his  beauty,  Minerva  persuaded 
Juno  to  give  it  suck :  the  child  drawing  the  breast  with  more  vio« 
lence  than  at  his  age  was  usual,  Juno,  not  able  to  endure  the  paiiiy 
cast  away  the  infant,  whom  Minerva  took  up,  and  brought  home  to 
his  mother,  to  be  nursed  by  her.  The  accident  here  seems  very 
strange  and  remarkable :  for  the  mother,  who  owed  a  natural  af- 
fection to  her  own  child,  exposed  him  to  destruction;  but  she  wht> 
hated  him,  as  a  step-mother,  (unknowingly)  preserved  her  natural 
enemy. 

Afterwards  Juno  sent  two  serpents  to  devour  the  child:  bathe 
took  them  with  both  his  bauds  by  their  throats,  and  strangled  them. 
Upon  which  account  the  Argives  (coming  to  understand  what  was 
done)  called  him  Herculesf,  because  Juno  was  the  occasion  of  his 
glory  and  fame,  for  he  was  before  called  Alcides.  Others  are  naaned 
by  their  parents,  but  he  gained  his  name  by  his  valour. 

In  after  times  it  happened  that  Amphitryon,  being  banished  fioii 
Tyrinthe,  settled  himself  in  Thebes;  here  Hercules  was  educated, 
here  he  was  instructed  and  greatly  improved  in  all  laudable  exercises, 
insomuch  that  he  excelled  ail  others  in  strength  of  body,  and  also  ib 
the  excellent  endowments  of  his  mind. 

Being  now  grown  up  to  man's  estate,  he  first  freed  Tliebes  fimn 
tyrannical  slavery,  and  thereby  made  a  grateful  return  to  the  eoantry 
where  he  was  bred.  The  Thebans  at  that  time  were  under  the  ty* 
ranny  of  Erginus,  king  of  the  Minyanst^  who  every  jrear  exaeted 
tribute  from  them,  not  without  scorn  and  contempt.     Hereulca, 

*  Ilithyia,  a  goddess,  assistant  to  tkose  in  travail.  t  Harculei  tignifieib  the  gwrj 

•f  Juuo,  who  is  flailed  in  Greek.  lUra.        t  Or  Orcbemeniaos;  a  people  of  HietMlj. 


CKq^  Jb  DioiMHtus  aicuiivs.  n^ 

ibeiidoie^  oat  at  «U  discoorafiMl  with;  the  gretlDess  of  the  bondige 
they  hboartd  aoder,  attempted  a  glorious  piece  of  eenrice.  For  whea 
those  who  weie  sent  fram  the  MtQj»  to  effect  the  tribute  ctrHed  k 
insolently  towards  the  people,  he  cat  off  their  ean>  and  cast  them  oa^. 
of  the  city;  whereupon  Ergious  demanded  the  dcIiTery  up  of  the 
malefactor,  and  Creon^  the  prince  of  Thebes,  (dreading  the  potency 
of  JErgiuus)  resolved  to  deliver  him  upi  but  Hercoles  stirred  up  the 
young  men  of  the  city  to  arm  themselves^  in  order  to  recover  the  ii<& 
berty  of  their  country,  and  to  that  end  took  away-  all  the  arms  that 
were  in  the  temples,  formerly  dedicated  to  the  gods  by  their  anees^ 
tors,  of  the  spoik  of  their  enemies;  for  none  of  the  cifizcDs  had  aoy 
mms  of  their  own,  by  reason  the  Miuyans  had  disarmed  the  city;  so 
that  the  Thebans  had  not  the  least  thought  of  a  revolt. 

Intelligence  being  brought  that  Erginus  with  an  army  appniaefaed 
the  city>  Hercules  set  upon  him  in  a  strait  passage  (where  a  maltitvda 
was  of  little  u^e)  sod  killed  Ergintas,  and  cut  off  almost  his  wbolo 
army.  He  fell  likewise  suddenly  upon  the  city  of  the  OrchomeoianSy 
entering  unexpectedly,  and  burnt  the  palace  of  the  Minyae,  and  raaed 
the  city  to  the  ground. 

The  &ime  of  this  notable  exploit  was  presently  noised  over  all 
Greece,  while  ^uch  a  sudden  and  unexpected  achieveoMnt  was  the 
subject  of  every  man's  admiration,  and  Creon  the  king  (wonderftilljr 
taken  with  the  valour  of  the  young  man)  gave  him  his  daughter  Me* 
gttra  tq  wife,  and  committed  to  him  the  care  and  charge  of -the  city, 
as  if  h^  had  been  his  own  son. 

But  iE^urysttieus,  king  of  Argos  (jealous  of  Hercules's  growing 
greatness,  sent  for  him  to  perform  the  kbours  he  was  to  impose  upon 
bim,  whjch  he  refusing,  Jupiter  commanded  him  to  obey  king  Eurys- 
tbeus;  whereupon  Hercules  went  to  Delphos,  and  inquired  of  the 
oracle  concerning  this  matter,  who  answered  him.-.That  it  was  tbe- 
pleasure  of  the  gods,  that  he  should  perform  twelve  labours  at  - 
the  command  of  Eurystheus,  and  that  when  he  had  finished  them,  he 
should  receive  the  reward  of  immortality.  Hereupon  Heroules  be<- 
came  exceediBg  sad  aod  melanclioly;  for  he  judged  it  very  much  be« 
low  him  to  be  at  the  beck  of  his  inferior,  and  to  disobey  his  fitther 
Jupiter  a  second  time  he  concluded  was  both  unprofitable  and  im* 
possible.  While  he  was  in  this  perplexity,  Juno  struck  him  with 
madness;  being  tbeiiefQre»  through  the  discomfiture  of  his  mind-,  be* 
come  distracted,  and  by  the  growth  of  his  distemper  altogethef  a  nuid* 
man,  be  desigiied  to  murder  lolaus,  who  saving  himself  by  flight, 
he  fell  upon  bis  own  children  by  Megssra,  who  were  next  in  his 
way,  and  struck  them  through  with  his  darts,  as  if  they  had  been  his 
enemies. 


828  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  IP. 


As  soon  as  he  came  again  to  himself^  and  understood  hb  error,  he 
almost  sunk  under  the  weiprht  of  his  misery,  (being  pitied  by  ereiy 
body),  and  shut  himself  up  iu  his  own  house  a  long  time  firom  the  con- 
verse and  society  of  men- 

At  length,  time  moderating  his  grief,  resolving  to  undei^  all  the 
difficulties  tiiat  were  enjoined  him,  he  went  to  Eurystheus,  who  ia 
the  first  place  commanded  him  to  kill  the  lion  in  the  forest  of  Ne- 
niea*,  which  was  of  a  monstrous  bigness,  not  to  be  pierced  or  wounded 
by  sword,  spear,  or  stones,  and  therefore  not  to  be  dealt  with  but  by 
mere  force  and  strength  of  hand.  His  walks  were  commonly  between 
MycenflB  and  Nemea,  near  the  mountain  (from  what  happened  to  it) 
called  Trctosf.  For  at  the  foot  of  this  hill  there  was  a  den,  in  which 
this  monster  used  to  lurk.  Hercules  here  meeting  with  him,  laid 
liold  of  him,  whereupon  the  beast  beginning  to  fly  to  his  den,  he  re- 
aolutely  pursued  him,  (having  before  stopped  up  one  of  the  mouths 
of  the  (Icn),  and  so  hdth  dosed,  where  he  got  the  lion  by  the  throat, 
and  strnngled  him  with  his  arms.  Then  he  clothed  himself  with  his 
•kin,  (which  was  l)ig  enough  to  cover  his  whole  body,  and  ever  after 
worr  it  us  ii  drtVnco  in  all  conflicts. 

I  life  Ncoond  task  was  to  kill  the  hydra  of  Lerna.  This  monster  had 
A  hundred  necks  rising  out  of  one  body,  and  upon  every  neck  a  ser- 
pentine hend,  iind  when  one  of  these  was  cut  off,  two  others  grew  op 
ill  Itfi  hteiid;  and  therefore  this  monster  was  accounted  invincible, 
anil  not  without  good  reason,  for,  from  the  part  that  was  lost,  arose n 
doutdr  av«iii<itanre  in  its  room.  Against  this  difficulty  he  invented 
ilii*i  niiiitngeni;  ho  cominunded  lolaus  to  sear  the  part  that  was  cut 
oH  with  a  liiehrandt  that  thereby  the  blood  might  be  stopped,  by 
\\\\W\\  lueatiN  the  beast  was  killed,  and  he  dipped  the  points  of  hb 
daitM  ill  the  nionstei's  gall,  that  wherever  they  struck,  the  woond 
ntinhl  he  inruiablo. 

Tlio  ihiid  ronmiaiid  was  that  he  should  bring  the Eryraanthean 
liom  (wliM'li  ii»vrd  al)Out  in  the  plains  of  Arcadia)  to  him  alive.  This 
urnniMl  to  he  ii  most  dillieult  task:  for  he  that  fought  with  this  beast 
niijihl  to  he  NO  fiiibtle  as  diligently  to  watch  the  exact  time  and  fittest 
ti|i|iiiiitiiiiiy  ill  the  maiiageinent  of  the  conflict;  for  if  he  should  let 
lihii  iio  while  he  was  in  his  full  strength,  the  champion  was  in  danger 
III  he  rent  in  pieeeH  with  his  tushes;  and  if  he  wounded  him  too  sore, 
mill  hii  killeil  him,  his  labour  was  lost,  and  his  victory  imperfect. 
I  lii^i'veri  he  no  prudently  managed  the  combat,  that  he  brought  the 
Um\  mIivk  to  ICurystheus,  who  was  so  terrified  to  see  him  come  hunry« 
hiH  ivhIi  the  htmr  u|nju  his  shoulders,  that  he  hid  himself  in  a  brazen 

ItHg^lMMldi 

*   I  liU  liirrat  will  in  Acbuia.  f  Trctot,  bored  tbroDgh, 


Ckap.L  DI0D0RU8  8ICULIT8.  8S9 

III  die  meMi  time  Heicoles  subdaed  the  centaurs.  Upon  this  occft* 
sion :  there  was  one  Pholas  among  the  centaurs,  from  whom  the 
ne^bfmriog  mountain  was  called  Pholoe;  thb  same  having  en- 
tertained Hercules  as  his  guest,  took  up  an  hogshead  of  wine  that 
had  for  a  long  time  been  buried  in  the  earth:  for  it  is  reported^ 
that  this  wine  was  antiently  deposited  in  the  hands  of  a  certain  cen* 
tanr  by  Bacchus,  who  commanded  that  it  should  be  broached  at  diat 
▼ery  time  when  Hercules  came  thither;  who  now  happening  to  be 
there,  the  fourth  age  after,  Pholus,  remembering  Bacchus's  com* 
flsand,  opened  the  hogshead;  whereupon,  the  wine  being  old,  and 
exceeding  strong,  the  flavour  of  it  reached  to  the  neigbouring  cen- 
taurs, and  struck  them  all  with  a  fit  of  fury  and  madness;  whereupon 
they  all  came  in  troops,  and  in  a  terrible  tumult  assaulted  Pholus'a 
house,  to  carry  away  the  prey,  insomuch  that  Pholus,  in  a  great  fright,- 
kid  himself. 

But  Hercules  unexpectedly  set  upon  the  aggressors;  for  he  was 
to  fight  with  those  who  from  the  mother  partook  of  the  nature  of  the 
gods,  were  as  swift  as  horses,  as  strong  as  double-bodied  beasts,  and 
were  endued  with  the  understanding  and  prudence  of  men. 

Some  of  these  centaurs  assailed  him  with  fir-trees  plucked  up  by  the 
roots,  others  with  huge  and  massy  stones,  some  with  lighted  fire- 
brands, and  others  with  axes,  with  whom  he  undauntedly  entered  die 
list,  and  fought  with  that  bravery  as  was  agreeable  to  the  glory  of  his 
former  actions. 

Their  mother  Nephele*  assisted  them  by  a  violent  storm  of  rain, 
which  was  no  prejudice  to  them  that  were  four-footed,  but  he,  that 
had  but  two,  had  by  this  means  a  troublesome  and  slippery  standings 
however  Hercules,  with  wonderful  valour,  overcame  them  that  had 
so  many  and  great  advantages  above  him,  killing  most  of  them,  and 
putting  the  rest  to  flight.  Of  those  that  were  slain,  the  most  remark- 
able were  Daphnis,  Argeus,  Amphion,  Hippotion,  Oreus,  boples, 
Melanchetes,  Thereus,  Dupo,  and  Phrixus:  and  every  one  of  those 
that  fled  came  afterwards  to  condign  punishment;  for  Homadus  (be- 
cause he  ravished,  in  Arcadia,  Atalcyona,  the  sister  of  Eurystheus) 
was  slain  by  Hercules, for  which  his  generosity  was  greatly  admired: 
for,  though  he  hated  his  enemy  upon  his  own  private  account,  yet  he 
judged  it  a  commendable  piece  of  humanity  to  have  compassion  on  a 
woman  in  her  afflicted  condition,  upon  the  account  of  her  dishonour 
and  disgrace. 

Somewhat  remarkable  likewise  happened  to  Pholus,  Hercules's 
friend :  for,  burying  the  centaurs  that  were  killed,  (upon  the  account 
of  bis  kindred  and  relation  to  them)  plucking  a  dart  out  of  one  of 

*  A  cloud. 


t90  DIODORUS  BlCUhVS.  BboklPi 


tbeoiy  he  elmDced  with  the  point  mortally  to  woand  himself^  of  ^Uch 
he  died^  whom  Hercules  wtth  great  pomp  and  atate  horiad  d  tht 
foot  of  the  moiint,  which  fell  out  to  be  far  more  |;lorioaa  ttaui 
Ifae  iBost  stately  moDubaeiit;  for  the  mouDtain  being  called*  Phlda^ 
pieserres  the  memory  of  him  buried  there^  not  by  ehancteis  aod  faK 
sGiiptionjy  but  by  similitude  of  name.  In  the  same  InankiiBr  he 
killed  Cliiron*  (emioent  for  his  art  in  physic)  by  cbadcCf  with  ika 
thfowii^  of  a  dart.  But  this  that  has  been  said  of  the  centaim  dhall 
suffice. 

Afterwards  Hercules  received  a  further  command,  that  beshoall 
^e  the  swift  hart  that  had  goMen  horns,  and  bring  him  to  ibt  king. 
This  he  performed  more  by  art  and  subtlety,  than  strength  of  hedys 
for  scmie  say  he  took  her  in  a  net,  otliers  by  tracing  her  to  the  pleet 
where  she  rested,  and  there  laying  hold  of  her  when  she  was  asleep; 
but  others  say  that  lie  ran  her  down,  and  so  gained  her  by  swiftMae 
of  foot*  However  it  were,  it  is  certain  he  perfomied  ihis  hdMMir  not 
by  force  or  any  hazard,  but  by  art  and  skill. 

Being  next  commanded  to  drive  away  the  birds  that  were  abdet 
the  Stymphalian  lake,  by  art  and  contrivance  he  easily  pecfarmad 
this :  for  there  were  an  innumerable  number  of  birds  in  those 
which  destroyed  and  ate  up  all  the  fruits  in  the  neighbonriMiod^ 
they  were  so  numerous,  that  no  force  could  prevail  to  get -rid  of  tbern. 
Being,  therefore,  there  was  need  of  art  and  contrivance  in  this  mat* 
ter,  he  invented  a  brazen  pan,  and,  by  the  mighty  sound  k  made, 
by  sriking  upon  it,  frighted  tlie  birds,  and  by  the  continual  ncnae  drove 
them  at  length  quite  away,  so  that  the  lake  was  never  infested  lirith 
tiiem  afterwards. 

This  labour  being  now  at  an  end,  Eurysthcus,  in  contempt  of  hia^ 
commanded  him,  without  any  assistant,  to  cleanse  Augias's  stable^ 
in  which  were  vast  heaps  of  muck  and  dirt,  which  had  been  giulwr* 
ing  together  for  many  years.  Hercules,  therefore,  to  avoid  the  igeo- 
miny  of  this  contempt  cast  upon  him,  scorned  to  carry  out  the  mock 
and  dung  upon  his  shoulders,  but  in  one  day's  time,  without  any  dia* 
grace  to  himself,  cleansed  the  stable,  by  turning  the  course  of  the 
river  Peneus  through  it;  in  which  thing  the  ingenuity  of  Hjeitfulca  ie 
admirable,  who  so  executed  the  proud  command  of  his  doikiioeerii^ 
master  as  to  avoid  every  thing  that  was  base  and  unbecoming,  the  gkAj 
of  his  immortal .  honour. 

Next  was  imposed  upon  him  the  bringing  the  bull  out  of  Cretc^ 
with  which  (they  say)  Pasiphae  fell  in  love.  To  this  endy  theiefove^ 
lie  sailed  into  the  island,  and,  by  tlie  assistance  of  king  MinoSj  tmiUH 

*  Another  centaur. 


€Aq9.  /.  DtODORUS  SICULUS.    '  SSl 

ported  the  beast  (for  which  he  had  made  so  long  a  Toyage}  itHo 
Peloponnesus* 

Haring  performed  this  task^  he  instituted  the  Olympic  games,  and 
for  that  purpose  chose  out  a  place  he  judged  most  convenient  for  tbe 
reception  of  such  a  pompous  assembly,  which  were  the  fields  all 
along  the  banks  of  the  river  Alpheus*  Here  he  ordered  the  solem- 
nity of  these  games  to  the  honour  of  his  father  Jupiter,  and  appointed  . 
fo  tbe  victors  a  crown  for  a  reward,  minding  the  general  good  and 
benefit  of  mankind,  without  taking  any  advantage  to  himself.  In 
every  exercise  he  was  viptor,  without  any  ofiposition ;  for,  by  reason 
of  his  remaAable  strength  and  valour,  none  durst  contend  with  faim^ 
although  the  contests  were  of  a  contrary  and  different  nature  one  hdtn 
another:  for  it  is  a  hard  matter  even  for  a  mighty  champion  hi  Com- 
bat always  to  win  the  prize  in  a  course,  and  as  difficult  for  thosi 
that  are  usually  victors  in  small  contentions  to  prevail  against  thetli 
that  are  eminent  in  greater  contests.  Hercules,  therefore,  prevailed 
in  all  these  games^  carrying  away  the  prize  from  tlie  chiefest  amonig 
tbem* 

And  here  we  are  not  to  omit  giving  an  account  of  the  rewards  given 
to  him  by  the  gods  for  his  virtue;  for,  when  he  retired  himself  from 
wmrs^  and  betook  himself  to  his  ease  and  quietness,  and  to  foHow 
sports,  panegyrics,  and  festivals,  every  one  of  the  gods  presented  him 
widi  their  several  gifts* 

Minerva  gave  hitn  an  embroidered  hood,  Vulcan  a  club  and  a 
breast-plate;  and  between  these  two  was  a  contest  who  should  excel 
in  their  several  arts,  whilst  the  one  wrought  and  bestowed  what  was 
for  pleasure  and  ornament  in  time  of  peace,  and  the  other  what 
was  for  defence  in  time  of  war.  Neptune  presented  him  with  horses. 
Mercury  with  a  sword,  Apollo  a  bow,  and  taught  him  the  art  of 
archery.  And  Ceres,  to  expiate  the  slaughter  of  the  centaurs,  insti- 
tuted in  honour  of  Hercules  some  small  mysteries.  But  concern- 
ing the  birth  of  this  god,  this  is  remarkable;  for  the  first  woman 
upon  earth  that  Jupiter  lay  with  was  Niobe,  the  daughter  of  Pha^ 
Toneus,  and  the  last  was  Alcmena,  who  was  in  the  sixteenth  age 
after  Niobe,  as  the  mythologists  say.  From  the  time  of  her*  an- 
cestors, he  began  to  beget  men,  and  at  length  ended  in  this  Alc- 
mena, and  would  never  after  have  any  thing  to  do  with  any  mor- 
tal, or  beget  any  issue,  never  expecting  to  beget  a  more  excellent  off*- 
spring. 

Afterwards,  when  the  giants  fought  with  the  immortal  gods  at 
Pallene,  Hercules  aided  the  gods,  and,  after  a  great  slaughter  made 
by  him  of  those  sons  of  the  earth,  he  became  greatly  renowned.    For 

*  Alcmena's  ancestors. 


tSS  .  DIODORUS  SICULtJR.  JBook  IFi 

■  ■.  -T  .         ■       ssSagggggggsBs" 

Jupiter  called  those  only  gods  of  Olympus  who  assisted  him  in  tht 
war,  by  this  title  of  honour  to  distinguish  the  courageous  from  tht 
coward;  which  surname  he  gave  to  Bacchus  and  Hercules^  though 
their  mothers  were  mortals,  not  only  because  they  were  the  ofipring 
of  Jove,  but  likewise  for  that  they  were  like  him  in  virtuous  qoalifica* 
tions,  doing  good  generally  to  all  mankind. 

But  Prometlieus*,  because  he  stole  fire  from  heaven,  and  handed 
it  to  men,  was  clapped  in  chains  by  Jupiter,  who  caused  an  eagle  to 
seize  and  feed  continually  upon  his  liver;  but  Hercules,  seeing  that 
he  suffered  so  much  for  his  kindness  to  mankind,  shot  the  bird  with 
an  arrow,  and  then,  having  pacified  Jove,  freed  this  common  benefac- 
tor from  all  furtlier  trouble. 

Afterwards  he  was  enjoined  to  bring  away  Diomedes  king  ofThrace's 
mares,  which  were  kept  in  stalls  of  brass,  and  (by  reason  of  their 
strength  and  fierceness)  tied  up  in  iron  chains.  Their  provender  was 
not  from  the  product  of  the  earth,  but  they  were  fed  with  the  flesh  of 
miserable  strangers  that  came  thither,  cut  in  small  pieces  for  that 
purpose.  Hercules,  to  gain  |>ossession  of  them,  laid  their  own  master 
Diomedes  before  them,  who,  satiating  their  hunger  by  his  flesh  who 
bad  wickedly  taught  them  to  feed  upon  flesh,  thereby  became  tame 
and  manageable.  Eurysthcus,  when  tliey  were  brought  to  him,  de- 
dicated them  to  Juno,  and  their  breed  continued  to  the  time  of  Alex- 
ander the  Great.  When  he  had  performed  this  labour,  he  sailed  with 
Jason  to  Colchis,  to  bring  away  the  golden  fleece  by  force  of  arms. 
But  of  this  wc  shall  speak  when  we  come  to  the  expedition  of  the 
Argonauts. 

Then  he  was  commanded  to  strip  Hippolyta  the  Amazon  of  her 
belt.  Hereupon,  resolving  upon  a  war  against  the  Amazonsj  he 
sailed  into  Pontus,  from  him  called  Euxiuusf,  and,  arriving  at  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Thermodon,  he  encamped  near  the  city  The- 
miscyra,  the  seat-royal  of  the  Amazons;  and  first  he  demanded  the 
belt  to  be  delivered  to  him,  which  being  refused,  he  joined  battle 
with  them. 

The  choice  and  most  noble  of  the  Amazons  were  drawn  up  against 
Hercules,  the  rest  of  the  army  opposed  the  other  ordinary  troops^  so 
that  there  was  a  very  sharp  engagement.  The  first  that  fought  band 
to  hand  with  him  was  Aella,  so  called  from  her  swiftness;  but  she 
found  her  enemy  swifter  than  herself:  the  second  was  Philippis^  who 
upon  the  first  onset  received  a  mortal  wound,  and  fell  down  dead. 
Then  Prothoe  entered  the  list,  who,  they  say,  seven  times  baflled  her 

*  Prometheus  is  judged  to  be  Nuah  b^  tonie,  andMa^g  tht  tvn  of  Jspliet^y  otlMfS. 
See  Gale's  Court  of  the  Gtntiles,  p.  1,  c.  6/  teet.  4. 
t  The  Kuxiue  sea. 


■        *  ? . . ^^^  -_^_.  -_■  -  --■  _*.^ 

enemy  in  single  combat;  but  she  being  at  length  slain,  he  killed  the 
fiNirth,  called  Eribea.  She  was  so  confident  in  her  strength  and  feats 
of  arms,  that  she  used  to  boast  she  needed  none  to  second  her;  bat, 
meeting  with  one  stronger  than  herself,  she  presently  experienced  the 
vanity  of  her  boasting. 

After  these  Cetenus,  Eurysea,  and  Phoebe,  companions  with  Diana 
hi  hunting,  (who  never  used  to  miss  their  mark,  yet  now  could  none 
of  them  hit  one),  in  defending  one  another,  were  all  killed  together 
upon  the  spot.  Then  he  overcame  Deianita,  Asteria,  Marpes,  Tec* 
messa,  and  Alcippe.  The  last  mentioned  had  vowed  perpetual  vir- 
ginity, and  kept  their  oaths,  but  could  not  preserve  their  lives.  Me- 
knippe*  also,  the  queen  of  the  Amazons,  (who  was  famous  and 
highly  admired  every  where  for  her  valour),  then  lost  her  kingdcan. 
The  chief  of  the  Amazons  being  thus  cut  off,  he  forced  the  rest  to 
By,  and  killing  most  of  them  in  the  pursuit,  wholly  destroyed  and 
rooted  up  that  nation.  Of  the  prisoners  he  gave  Antiope  to  The* 
seus,  but  Melanippe  he  discharged,  having  first  taken  from  her 
her  belt. 

After  this,  a  tenth  labour  was  imposed  upon  him  by  Em7stheii% 
and  that  was  to  drive  away  the  oxen  ol  Gerion  that  pastured  in  Ibe- 
ria near  to  the  ocean.  Hercules,  perceiving  he  could  not  perfonn, 
this  task  without  much  trouble  and  great  preparation,  set  fordi  • 
brave  fleet,  add  manned  it  with  such  a  number  of  seamen  and  soldters 
as  such  an  expedition  justly  required:  for  it  was  noised  abroad 
through  the  whole  world,  that  Chrysaor  (so  called  from  his  riches) 
king  of  Iberiaf,  had  three  sons^,  strong  bodied  men,  and  famous  U» 
martial  affairs,  and  that  each  of  them  had  great  armies  of  valiant  men 
constantly  at  hand  attending  upon  them,  which  was  the  reasom  £u- 
lystheus  imposed  this  task  upon  him,  conceiving  this  expedition  was 
greater  than  he  was  ever  able  to  perform :  but  Hercules  undertook 
this  with  as  much  confidence  as  he  bad  done  those  before,  and  com* 
manded  forces  to  be  raised  in  Crete,  whence  he  resolved  to  set  forth, 
this  island  being  the  most  convenient  port  from  whence  to  make  any 
expedition  into  any  part  of  the  world.  Before  he  set  sail,  mighty 
honours  were  conferred  upon  him  by  the  inhabitants;  in  grateful  le* 
turn  for  which  favours  he  freed  the  island  from  wild  beasts,  so  that 
no  hurtful  creatures,  inch  as  bears,  wolves,  serpents,  and  such  like, 
remained  there  ever  after.  He  did  these  things  in  reverence  to  the 
island,  because  it  was  reported  that  Jupiter  was  bred  and  born  there. 
Loosing  thence,  he  arrived  at  Libya.    Here,  in  the  first  place,  ho 

*  Melanippe,  she  was  rather  sister  to  Antiope,  wfap  was  qneeD.     See  Nat.  Coqieiii 
lib.  7,  c.  9.  t  Spain. 

X  Of  whom  this  Gerion  was  one,  whom  the  poeta  Mgn  to  bave  tbife  boiHet. 

Vof^  1.  No«  34«  UH 


334  DIQDORUS  SiCULVS.  JSdoft  IW. 

challenged  and  slew  Anteeus,  (famous  for  bis  great  strengdi  and  akSI 
ID  wrestling),  who  was  used  to  kill  the  strangers  he  wrestled.mth^ 
after  he  had  mastered  thera.  Then  he  destroyed  the  wild  beasts  in 
the  deserts,  and  made  Africa  so  quiet  and  improveable,  (which  wa0 
before  full  of  hurtful  creatures),  that  every  part  was  fit  for  tilii^, 
and  planting  of  fruit-trees;  the  whole  country  productive  of  wine 
and  oir*  In  short,  he  so  improved  Libya,  (which,  by  reason  of  the 
multitude  of  wild  beasts,  was  before  uninhabitable),  that  ne  country 
in  the  world  afterwards  exceeded  it  for  fertility  and  richness  of  soil. 
In  like  manner  he  so  purged  the  nation  from  wicked  men  and  insolent 
tyrants,  that  he  put  all  the  cities  into  a  flourishing  state  and  condiciDO« 
It  is  therefore  reported  that  he  was  prosecuted  with  the  hatred  and 
opposition  of  all  sorts  of  dreadful  wild  beasts,  and  of  wicked  men; 
for,  when  he  was  an  iiifaut  in  his  cradle,  he  was  assaulted  by  serpentSt 
and,  when  he  was  a  man,  he  was  vexed  and  perplexed  with  the  com* 
mands  of  a  proud  and  unjust  tyrant. 

After  the  killing  of  Antieus,  he  went  into  I^gypt,  where  he  slew 
the  tyrant  Busiris,  who  murdered  all  strangers  that  landed  there. 
After  he  had  [uisscd  over  the  sandy  deserts  of  Libya,  he  found  •  ibr- 
tile  aud  well  watered  country,  in  which  he  built  an  extraordinmy 
great  city,  from  the  number  of  its  gates  called  Hecatompylon*,  which 
coutinued  in  a  flourishing  condition  till  of  latter  times  that  the  Car^ 
thaginians,  with  a  great  army,  (commanded  by  eminent  eaptaios)* 
took  it. 

Hercules  having  passed  through  a  great  part  of  Africa,  arrived  ia 
the  ocean  near  Gadesf,  where  he  erected  two  pillars,  one  on  each  side 
the  strait  upon  the  continent. 

Thence  (with  his  fleet  sailing  along  with  him)  he  passed  over  into 
Iberia,  where  he  found  the  sons  of  Chrysaor  with  three  migb^  nr- 
xnies.  These  at  a  distance  he  challenged  to  a  single  combat^  end 
having  at  length  slain  ^he  three  generals,  he  gained  Iberia,  and  drove 
away  those  remarkable  herds  of  cattle. 

In  the  mean  time,  as  he  travelled  through  Spain,  he  was  nn^gnifi- 
centiy  entertained  by  a  petty  prince  in  the  country,  (who  was  a  pious 
and  just  roan),  in  return  for  which,  he  bestowed  upon  him  some  of 
the  cattle;  and  he  again  consecrated  them  all  to  Hercules, and  every 
year  sacrificed  to  him  one  of  the  fairest  bulls  that  were  bred  of  thern^ 
some  of  which  sacred  breed  remain  in  Iberia  to  this  day. 

And  now,  because  we  have  before  made  mention  of  Heieuks's  piU 
lars,  we  conceive  it  fit  in  this  place  to  say  something  further  cenecni- 
ing  them. 

Hercules,  when  he  arrived  at  the  utmost  coasts  of  both  continents 

*  li«catoi»pjIoiv  a  hondrtd  s*tcj<  t  Or  in  die  Aniti  acsr  Csdsb 


Cl^p.  f.  mODORUS  SICULUS.  i35 

adjoining  to  the  ocean^  resolved  to  set  up  these  pillars  as  lasting 
monuments  of  his  ^pedition.  Hiat  his  work,  therefore,  might  be 
famous  to  all  posterity^  it  is  said,  that  he  much  enlarged  both  the 
mountains  on  each  side,  by  making  great  mounds  for  a  long  way  into 
the  sea ;  so  thut,  whereas  before  they  lay  in  the  sea  at  a  great  dis- 
tance one  from  another,  he  made  the  passage  so  narrow,  that  the 
great  whales  firom  that  time  could  not  pass  out  of  the  ocean  through 
those  straits  into  the  Mediterranean ;  and,  by  the  greatness  of  the 
work,  the  glory  of  the  workman  is  preserved  in  everlasting  remem- 
brance. 

But  there  are  some  of  a  contrary  opinion,  and  affirm  that  the  con- 
tinents once  joined  together,  and  that  be  cut  a  trench  through  them^ 
whereby  he  opened  a  passage,  and  so  brought  the  ocean  into  our  sea* 
But  every  man  may  judge  of  this  matter  as  he  thinks  fit.  The  like 
he  did  before  in  Greece :  Tor,  when  the  large  champaign  country 
about  Tempe  was  all  over  a  standing  lake,  he  cut  sluices  through  the 
lower  grounds,  and  through  those  trenches  draiped  all  the  Water  out 
of  the  lake,  by  which  means  were  gained  all  those  pleasant  fields  of 
Thessaly  as  far  as  to  the  river  Peneus.  But  in  Boeotia  be  did  quite 
contrary;  for  he  caused  the  river  which  ran  through  the  country  of 
the  Minyse  to  overflow  the  whole  region,  and  turn  all  into  a  standing 
pool.  What  he  did  in  Thessaly  was  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  Gre- 
cians, but  that  in  Boeotia  he  did  to  punish  the  Minyse,  because  they 
oppressed  the  Thebans. 

Hercules  having  committed  the  government  of  the  kingdom  of 
Iberia  to  the  chiefest  of  the  inhabitants,  marched  away  with  his  army 
into  CelticH^,  and  overran  the  whole  country,  and  put  an  end  to  their 
usual  impieties  and  murdering  of  strangers. 

And  whereas  a  vast  multitude  from  all  nations  came  and  listed 
themselves  of  their  own  accord  in  his  army,  having  such  a  number, 
he  built  a  famous  large  city,  which  he  called,  from  his  wandering  ex- 
pedition, Alesiaf*  But  because  many  of  the  barbarians  from  the 
neighbouring  places  were  mixed  among  the  citizens,  it  happened  that 
the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  (being  much  inferior  in  number)  learnt 
the  barbarian  manners  of  the  other.  The  Celtae  at  this  day  have  a 
great  esteem  and  honour  for  this  city,  as  being  the  chief  and  metro- 
polis of  all  Gaul;  and  ever  since  the  time  of  Hercules  it  has  remained 
free,  never  taken  by  any,  to  our  very  days;  till  at  length  Cuius  Cie- 
sar,  who  (by  reason  of  the  greatness  of  his  actions)  was  called  Divus, 
took  it  by  storm,  and  so  it  came  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans. 
With  the  rest  of  the  Gauls  Hercules,  marching  out  of  Gaul  into  Italy, 
as  he  pasiied  over  the  Alps,  levelled  and  opened  those  rough  and  dif- 

*  Fraoce.  t  Or  Alexia,  Arra#. 


236  DIODOKUS  SIC0LU8.  JBook  IV- 


ficult  ways  (that  were  scarce  passable)  to  make  way  for  his  army  and 
carriages.    The  barbarians  who  inhabited  those  mountainous  parts 
were  used  to  kill  and  rob  armies,  in  the  strait  and  craggy  places, 
as  they  happened  to  pass  this  way;  but  he  subdued  them,  and  put  to 
death  the  perpetrators  of  those  wicked  practices,  and  so  made  the  pas- 
sage safe  this  way  to  all  posterity.    Having  passed  the  Alps,  he  con- 
tinued his  march  through  Gaul,  as  it  is  now  called,  and  came  into 
Liguria,    The  Ligurians  inhabit  a  rough  and  barren  soil,  but  being 
forced  by  continual  lal>our  and  toil,  it  produces  some  little  corn  and 
other  fruits :  the  people  here  are  short  and  low,  but  by  reason  of 
their  constant  labours  well  set  and  strong;  for  they  are  far  from  being 
idle  and  luxurious  livers,  and  therefore  are  very  active  and  valiant  io 
time  of  war.    To  conclude,  because  all  these  neighbouring  regions 
are  plied  with  continual  laboOrs  and  paius,  (for  that  the  land  requires 
it),  it  is  the  custom  for  the  women  to  work  and  labour  in  tliat  kind  as 
well  as  the  men;  and  whereas  the  women  as  well  as  the  men  work 
for  hire,  there  fell  out  a  remarkable  accident  concerning  one  of  these 
women,  strange  and  unusual  to  any  of  our  female  sex.    Being  great 
with  child,  and  falling  in  labour  in  the  midst  of  her  work  amongst 
the  men,  without  any  noise  or  complaint  she  withdrew  herself  into  a 
certain  grove  there  near  at  hand,  and  there  being  delivered,  she  co- 
vered the  infant  with  leaves,  and  hid  it  among  the  shrubs,  and  then 
returned  to  her  work  again,  without  the  least  sign  of  having  borne  a 
child,  and  continued  with  her  fellow-labourers  in  her  work  as  she  did 
before.     But  the  infant,  crying  and  bawling,  discovered  the  whole 
matter;  yet  the  overseer  of  the  workmen  would  by  no  means  be 
persuaded  to  suffer  her  to  leave  her  miserable  employment,  till  he  that 
hired  her,  pitying  her  condition,  paid  her  her  wages,  and  dis- 
charged her. 

Hercules,  after  he  had  gone  through  Liguria  and  Tuscany,  eor 
camped  at  Til)er,  where  Rome  now  stands,  built  many  ages  after  by 
Hamulus,  the  son  of  Mars,  The  natural  inhabitants  at  that  time  in- 
habited a  little  town  upon  a  hill,  now  culled  Mount  Palatine,  Here 
Potitius^  and  Pinarius,  the  most  eminent  persons  of  quality  among 
them,  entertained  Hercules  with  all  the  demonstrations  of  kindness 
imaginable,  and  presented  him  with  many  noble  presents.  There 
are  now  at  Rome  antient  monuments  of  these  men;  for  the  most  no- 
ble family,  called  the  Pinarii,  remains  still  among  the  Romans,  and 
is  accounted  the  most  antient  at  this  day.  And  there  are  Potitius*f 
stone  stairs  to  go  down  from  Mount  Palatine,  (called  after  his  iiame}^ 
adjoining  to  that  which  was  antiently  his  house. 

Hercules  being  much  pleased  with  the  civil  entertainment  of  the 

*  Cacius  io  the  Greek. 


Ckap.  ,L'  DIOOOEU8  6ICULU8.  33/ 

Paladiies^  foretold  them,  that  whosoever  should  dedicate  the  teath 
of  their  goods  to  him>  after  he  was  traoslated  to  the  gods,  should  l)e 
ever  after  more  prosperous  j  and  this  dedication  has  been  ev^  s^oee 
constantly  used  to  this  day :  for  many  of  the  Romans,  not  only  suoli 
as  are  of  mean  estates,  but  the  great  and  rich  men,  (having  experi- 
enced how  riches  have  flowed  in  upon  them  after  the  decimadpn  of 
their  goods  to  Hercules),  have  dedicated  the  tenth  part  of  th^ir  sub- 
stances^ which  have  been  of  the  value  of  four  thousand  talents:  for 
LueoUns  (the  richest  almost  of  all  the  Romans  in  his  time)  valued, 
his  estate,  and  consecrated  the  tenths  to  this  god,  and  feasted  conti- 
nually with  prodigious  charge  and  expence.  The  Romans  after- 
wards built  a  magnificent  temple  near  the  river  Tiber,  in  honour  of 
this  god,  and  instituted  sacrifices  to  him  out  of  the  tenths, ..'-,,...   . , 

Hercules  marching  from  Mount  Palatine,  passed  tbr^^h  the  ma- 
ritime coasts  of  Italy,  as  they  are  now  called,  and  came  ipto  the  ciuMD- 
paign  country  of  Cume,  where  (it  is  said)  there  were  men  in&QBOua 
for  their  outrages  and  cruelties,  called  giants.  This  plfu^e  js  ajbo 
called  the  Phlegrean  pUin,  from  a  hill  which  antiently  vomited  out 
fire,  like  unto  MtnA  in  Sicily,  npw  called  Vesuvius,  which  jetfunii 
many  signs  and  marks  of  its  antieot  ijpruptions. 

These  giants,  hearing  of  Herculef '9  approach,  met  him  in  battle, 
army,  and,  fighting  with  the  force  and  cruelty  of  gtantsy  Hercu)e» 
(with  the  assistance  of  the  gods)  overcame  them,  and  cutting  off.a^ott; 
of  them,  quieted  that  country.  These  giants  were  called  sons  of  the^ 
earth,  by  reason  of  the  vast  bulk  of  their  bodies.  These  are  the  things 
that  some  report  (whom  Tima&us  follows)  concerning  the  destruction. 
of  the  giants  of  Phlegrsea. 

Leaving  the  plains  of  Phlegrsea,  he  came  to  the  sea,  where. he 
performed  some  remarkable  works  about  the  lake  Avemus,  (as  it 
is  called),  which  is  consecrated  to  Proserpine.  It  is  situated  be- 
tween Micenus  and  Diciarcheos,  near  the  hot  baths,  five  furlongs  in 
circuit,  and  of  an  incredible  depth.  The  water  of  this  lake  is  ex- 
ceeding clear,  and  the  mighty  depth  of  it  casts  a  blue  colour  upon 
the  surface. 

It  is  reported  that  there  was  antiently  here  an  oracle,  where  they 
conjured  the  infernal  spirits,  which  the  ktter  ages  abolished* 
Whereas  this  lake  extended  as  far  as  to  the  sea,  it  is  said  Hercules^ 
by  casting  up  of  earth,  so  stopped  up  its  current,  that  he  made  the 
way  near  the  sea,  now  called  the  Herculean  way.  Andtlies^arq 
the  things  he  did  there. 

Marching  thence,  he  came  to  a  certain  rock  in  the  country  of  the 
Posidonians,  where,  they  report,  a  kind  of  a  miracle  happened.  A 
certain  huntsman  (famous  all  over  the  country  for  his  brave  exploits) 


i238  Diot>oitVS  si^LUB.  BtoAsjyt 

was  used  formerly  to  fix  the  heads  and  feet  of  all  the  gvitne  he  took 
to  trees,  as  an  offering  to  Diana :  but  hsTing  then  teken  o  gMrt  wiM 
boar>  (in  contempt  of  the  goddess),  he  boasted,  and  dodared  be  wooU 
only  consecrate  the  bead  to  her;  and  forthwith*  according  to  what 
he  said^  hung  it  upon  a  tree.  It  being  then  summer-tittie,  about 
noon,  he  laid  him  down  to  skep^  during  which  time,  the  bund  that 
fintened  the  head  broke,  and  so  it  fell  down  upon  him  asheslept,  and 
killed  him.  And  there  is  no  reason  to  wonder  at  this,  when  tnaoy 
of  the  like  kind  are  reported  to  have  happened,  by  which  the  goddess 
has  revenged  herself  on  the  impious.  But  the  contrary  happened  to 
Hercules,  for  the  sake  of  his  piety;  for,  when  he  came  to  the  boidet^ 
of  Rhegium  and  Locris,  being  wearied  with  his  march,  and  hid  down 
to  rest,  they  say  he  was  disturbed  with  the  noise  and  creakii^  of  the 
grasshoppers,  whereupon  he  entreated  the  gods  to  fiee  hhn  fiom 
that  disturbance,  who  heaitl  his  prayers :  for  the  grasshoppers  flew 
away,  not  only  for  that  time,  but  none  were  ever  seen  there  at  any 
time  after. 

When  he  came  to  the  narrowest  passage  over  the  sea,  he  caused 
the  ca^ttle  to  swim  over  before  him  into  Sicily,  and  he  himself  catched 
hold  of  one  of  the  horns  of  the  oxen,  and  in  that  manner  iwam 
along  for  the  space  of  thirteen  furiongs,  as  Timsens  reports  ffae  mat* 
ter.  Afterwards,  desiring  to  go  round  the  island,  he  went  on  his 
journey  from  Peloriados  to  Erys,  and,  passing  along  the  shore,  the 
nymphs  opened  the  hot  baths  for  him,  where  he  refreshed  faiaudf 
after  his  tedious  journey.  These  baths  i;\*ere  two  in  number,  the  He* 
merian  and  Egestean,  so  called  from  the  places.  After  Hercules  eamc 
into  the  country  of  Eryx,  Eryx  the  son  of  Venus  and  Bula,  the  ktng 
of  the  country,  challenged  Hercules  to  wrestle  with  him.  Both  sides 
proposed  the  wager  to  be  won  and  lost;  Eryx  laid  to  stake  his  king- 
dom, but  Hercules  his  oxen ;  Ervx  at  first  disdained  such  an  unequal 
wager,  not  fit  to  be  compared  with  his  country;  but  when  Herenles, 
on  the  other  side,  answered,  that  if  he  lost  them,  he  should  lose  to* 
gether  with  them  immortality,  Eryx  was  contented  with  the  con* 
dition,  and  engaged  in  the  contest :  but  he  was  overcome,  and  so  was 
stripped  out  of  the  possession  of  his  country,  which  Hercuks  gave 
to  the  inhabitants,  allowing  them  to  take  the  fruits  to  their  own  use, 
till  some  one  of  his  posterity  came  to  demand  it,  which  afterwarda 
happened :  for,  many  ages  after,  Dorieus  the  Lacedsmoiuan  (sail- 
ing into  Sicily)  recovered  his  ancestor's  dominion,  and  there  built 
Heraclea,  which,  growing  great  on  a  sudden,  became  the  object  ol 
the  CarthagiDians'  envy  and  fear,  lest,  growing  stronger  than  Car- 
thage itself,  it  should  deprive  them  of  their  sovereignty;  and  for  that 
reason  they  besieged  it  with  a  mighty  army,  and  took  it  by  force,  and 


monoRus  siculus.  S3^ 

nztfd  it  to  the  ground;  of  which  we  shall  speak  particularly  in  its 
proper  place. 

Hercules  having  viewed  Sicily  rounds  came  to  the  city  now  caHe4 
Sjmcuse^  wbere^  when  he  came  to  be  informed  of  the  rape  of  IVqk 
terpine^  he  oflTcred  magniEcent  sacrificea  to  the  goddesses^  and  at 
Cyane  sacrificed  the  goodliest  of  his  bullS|  and  ordered  the  inhabl* 
tants  to^  sacrifice  yearly  to  Proserpine^  and  observe  an  anniversaiy 
festival  at  Cyane.  Then  travelling  through  tlie  heartof  the  coiiotry 
with  his  oxen,  he  was  set  upon  by  the  Sicani,  with  a  strong  body  ^ 
men ;  whom,  after  a  cruel  battle,  he  routed,  and  cut  off  most  of  thcm^ 
amongst  whom  (it  is  reported)  there  were  captains  of  extraordinary 
valour,  who  are  honoured  as  demi-gods  to  this  day;  to  wit,  Leoeas* 
pis,  Pedicrates,  Buphonas,  Caugates,  Cygaus^  and  Crytidas.  Thence 
he  passed  through  the  country  of  the  Leontines,  and  much  admired  the 
pleasantness  of  the  territory;  and,  by  reason  of  the  singular  respect 
he  found  from  the  inhabitants,  he  left  there  eternal  monuments  of 
his  presence. 

ilmong  the  Agyrineans  something  remarkable  happened  cooeem<» 
ing  him;  for  they  kept  magnificent  festivals, and oflfered sacrifices  to 
him,  as  to  the  gods  themselves,  which  was  the  first  time  he  approved 
of  such  worship,  n£ver  before  allowing  any  sacrifice  to  himself:  but 
now  the  deity  itself  ratified  his  divinity;  for,  not  far  from  the  d^^ 
in  a  rocky  way,  the  oxen  made  impressions  with  their  feet,  as  if  it 
bad  been  in  wax ;  and  the  same  thing  likewise  happening  to  Hercules 
himself,  caused  him  to  conclude,  that  (his  tenth  labour  being  now 
perfected)  his  immortality  was  in  part  sealed  to  him,  and  therefore 
he  refused  not  the  yearly  solemnity  of  sacrifices  instituted  in  honour 
of  him  by  the  inhabitants.    That  he  might,  therefore,  manifest  his 
gratitude  to  them  for  the  honours  conferred  upon  him,  he  caused  % 
pond  to  be  sunk  near  the  city,  four  furlongs  in  compass,  which  he 
called  after  bis  own  name,    l^e  impressions,  likewise,  made  by  tko 
boo&  of  his  cMLen,  he  named  after  himself,  and  consecrated  a  grove* 
to  Gerion,  as  to  a  demi-god,  whom  the  inbabitaats  religiously  wor« 
ship  at  this  day.    He  built  likewise  there  a  famous  temple  in  honour 
of  lolaus,  his  associate  in  his  expedition,  and  appointed  he  should  be 
honoured  with  yearly  sacrifices,  which  are  observed  at  this  day;  for 
all  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  let  their  hair  grow,  without  cutting, 
from  their  very  births,  in  honour  of  lohuis,  till  they  make  an  ofiering 
of  them  to  him,  and  gain  the  favour  of  the  god  by  costly  and  magni- 
ficent sacrifices.    Such  is  the  holiness  and  miyesty  of  this  temple, 

*  Or  built  a  t«»pli^ 


f 40  DIonORUS  SICtJLtTS.  Jhoklf^. 


^■MM 


that  whosoever  do  not  observe  these  holy  rites,  they  are  stricken 
dumb,  and  are  like  dead  men :  but  as  soon  as  any  recollects  himself^ 
and  vows  to  offer  his  sacrifices,  and  gives  a  pledge  to  the  god  for  that 
purpose,  they  are  presently  restored  to  their  former  heakh*  The 
inhabitants,  therefore,  very  fitly  call  the  gate  where  these  sacred  so- 
lemnities are  performed  Heraclea.  They  every  year,  lilcewise^  wiA 
great  earnestness,  celebrate  the  Gymnic  sports*,  and  horse-races; 
whither  all  the  people,  both  bond  and  free,  flocking,  they  privmtelj 
taught  their  servants  how  to  worship  this  god,  how  to  celebrate  the 
solemn  sacrifices,  and  to  perform  when  they  met  together  the  nered 
rites  and  festivals. 

After  this,  Hercules  passed  over  his  oxen  again  into  Italy,  and  in 
his  marching  along  by  the  sea-coasts,  he  killed  one  Lacinius  that  was 
stealing  some  of  his  oxen.  There  he  buried  Croton,  and  erected  a 
stately  monument  over  him,  whom  he  had  unfortunateJy  slain^  and 
foretold  that  in  time  to  come  there  should  be  built  a  frimoiis  city; 
called  after  the  name  of  him  that  was  there  buried.  Having  at  length 
inarched  round  about  Adria,  and  all  the  coasts  of  that  gulf^  on  foot^ 
he  passed  through  Epirus  into  Pelopountsus. 

Having  finished  his  tenth  labour,  £urystheus  imposed  anoAer 
task  upon  him,  and  that  was,  that  he  should  bring  Cerberus  out  of 
hell.  Preparing  himself,  therefore,  to  perform  this,  to  be  better 
enabled  thereunto,  he  went  to  Athens  to  be  initiated  into  the  naya- 
terions  rites  of  Elusina,  where  Musseus  the  son  of  Orpheus  w«s  then 
high  priest. 

And  because  we  have  now  occasion  to  mention  Orphens,  we  con- 
ceive it  will  not  be  amiss  here  to  give  a  short  account  of  him.     He 
was  the  son  of  CEagrus,  and  by  birth  a  Thracian,  for  in  the  art  of  music 
and  poetry  far  excelling  all  that  ever  were  recorded.     For  he  eORi« 
posed  a  poem,  for  sweetness  and  smoothness,  the  subject  of  all  men's 
admiration :  and  he  grew  so  eminent  in  this  art,  that,  by  the  mthdj 
of  his  music,  he  was  said  to  draw  even  wild  beasts  and  trees  after 
him;  and  being  naturally  very  studious,  he  attained  to  an  extraordi- 
nary  degree  of  knowledge  in  the  antient  theology.     He  improved 
himself,  likewise,  very  much  by  travelling  into  Egypt,  so  that  he  was 
acHTounted  to  excel  the  most  accomplished  person  among  all  theGrc* 
eians  for  his  knowledge  both  in  divinity  and  sacred  mysteries,  in 
music,  and  in  poetry.    He  was  one,  likewise,  in  the  expedition  of  the 
Argonauts,  and  for  the  exceeding  love  he  had  to  his  wife,  (with  an 
admirable  courage)  descended  into  hell,  and  there  so>  ench^te^ 


*  WreitliDgfy  qti«itingt|  &c. 


•CS^9.  /,  DIOOORUS  SICULU8.  241 

L 

Proserpine  with  the  sweetness  of  his  music,  that  she  gratified  him  so 
ikr  as  to  suffer  him  to  carry  back  his  wife  along  with  him,  that  died  a 
little  before. 

In  like  manner,  they  say,  Bacchus  hereupon  raised  his  mother  Se- 
mde  from  the  shades  below,  and^  enduing  her  with  immortality,  sur- 
named  her  Thyone. 

Having  now  done  with  this  digression  relating  to  Orpheus,  we 
return  to  Hercules:  when  he  entered  the  infernal  regions,  (the 
inythologists  say),  Proser[rine  kindly  received  him  as  her  brother, 
and  gave  him  liberty  to  loose  Theseus  and  Pirithous  from  their  chains; 
and  at  length,  contrary  to  the  expectations  of  all  men,  brought  up 
the  dog*  tied  in  his  chain,  and  presented  him  to  open  view. 

The  last  labour  enjoined  him  was  to  fetch  away  the  golden  a{q>leB 
of  the  Hesperides,  to  which  purpose  he  passed  over  a  second  tira^ 
into  Africa-  The  mythologists  vary  in  their  writings  concerning  this; 
for  some  affirm  that  there  were  really  golden  apples  in  some  of  t\\^ 
gardens  of  the  Hesperides,  guarded  continually  by  a  terrible  dragon. 
Others  say,  that  there  are  sheep  of  exquisite  beauty  in  the  Hespe- 
rides, and  that  from  thence  they  are  poetically  called  golden  apple% 
as  Venus,  from  her  beauty,  is  called  golden  Venus.  Others  will 
have  it,  that  the  fleeces  upon  the  sheep's  backs  are  of  that  admirably 
colour,  that  they  glitter  like  gold,  and  thence  have  been  so  called. 
And  by  the  dragon  they  understand  the  shepherd  of  the  flocks,  who» 
being  a  man  of  a  strong  body  and  stout  heart,  preserved  the  flocks, 
and  killed  the  thieves  that  attempted  to  steal  them. 

But  let  every  one  judge  of  this  matter  as  he  thinks  best  himself: 
for  Hercules  killed  the  keeper,  and  brought  away  the  apples  or  sheep 
(which  soever  they  were)  to  Eurystheos,  trusting  now,  that  since  all 
his  tasks  were  performed,  (according  to  the  oracle  of  Apollo),  h« 
ibould  be  rewarded  with  immortality. 

•  Cerberus, 


Vol.  1.   No.  34.  fi 


f  4S  DIODORUS  SICULU8. 


I' 


CHAP,  n. 


An  aeemmi  ofJtlas  and  his  daughters,  eatted  jManHdii 
perides.  The  Amazons  routed  by  Theseus  mAUica.  '  t%sfikt» 
ther  acts  of  Hercules;  he  goes  against  Laomedon,  Ui^  qf  ^^Vvy/ 
emd  other  acts.  The  story  of  Me^eager,  son  ef  king  fEiumi 
AmaUhata*s  Horn.  Hercules* s  further  aets.  MlsdaeUlk  tjf  m 
poisoned  shirt. 

BUT  we  ate  not  to  ptnit  what  is  said  of  Atlas^  and  the  origin  of  llie 
Hesperides.  In  the  country  called  Hesperis,  lived  two  fiunouf  bro- 
thers, Hesperns  and  Atlas.  They  were  possessed  of  moat  lovelj  ahcqp^ 
of  a  ruddy  and  golden  colour,  for  which  cause  the  poets  in  their  piuaae 
called  them  golden  apples*. 

'  Hcsperis,  the  daughter  of  Hesperus,  was  married  to  his  bitidief 
Atlas,  whence  the  country  was  called  Hesperis ;  by  her  Atba  haila^ 
iren  daughters,  which  from  their  father  ^'ere  called  AdantldeSi  and 
from  their  mother  Hesperides.  Busiris,  king  of  Egypt,  having  %  greil 
desire  to  enjoy  these  virgins,  by  reason  of  their  extraotdinarj  bcmCy, 
aent  out  some  pirates,  with  orders  to  seize  these  ladles,  and  bring 
them  away  to  him. 

About  this  time  Hercules,  being  employed  in  his  lastf  labourj 
killed  Antifius  in  Libya,  who  compelled  those  strangers  that  came  in- 
to  his  country  to  wrestle  with  him,  and  inflicted  condign  paniahment 
upon  Bosiris  in  Egypt,  who  sacrificed  all  strangers  that  arrired  there 
to  Jupiter.  Afterwards,  passing  over  the  river  Nile,  he  came  into 
Ethiopia,  and  killed  Ematheon,  the  Ethiopian  king,  who  bad  dial- 
lenged  him  to  a  battle;  and  then  he  again  set  upon  the  task  enjaned 
him.  In  the  mean  time  the  thieves  hurried  away  the  girls  oat  of  a 
garden  where  they  were  playing,  and  in  great  haste  got  to  their  alups; 
whom  Hercules  met  with  upon  a  certain  shore,  where  they  were  re* 
freshing  themselves,  and  being  informed  by  the  virgins  of  die  rapCj 
he  killed  all  the  thieves,  but  delivered  the  girls  to  Atlas  their  fiither} 
for  which  kindness  he  was  so  grateful,  that  he  not  only  readily  aa* 
sisted  him  with  what  things  were  needful  for  the  accomplishment  of 
wliat  he  had  then  in  hand,  but  willingly  taught  him  the  art  of  astro* 
logy :  for  he  bestowed  much  of  his  care  and  pains  in  the  study  of  this 
art;  and  because  he  had  a  curiously  wrought  sphere  of  the  atars,  he 
was  said  to  carry  the  whole  world  upon  his  shoulders.  In  the  like 
manner  Hercules,  transferring  the  doctrine  of  the  spheres  to  the 

*  Melon,  in  Greek,  si^iiet  botb  a  ibeep  and  an  apple.  t  Seoond. 


CAap.  la  DIODORUS  SICULUS«  S43 

Greeks,  j^aiDed  a  name,  as  he  that  from  Atlas  took  upon  himself  the 
burden  of  the  whole  world,  the  Greeks  darkly  signifying  thereby  what 
then  happened  between  him  and  Atlas. 

While  Hercules  was  thus  employed,  they  say,  those  Amazons  that, 
were  left  gathered  all  in  a  body,  from  all  parts  of  the  nation,  to  the 
river  Thermodon,  with  a  design  to  revenge  themselves  upon  the  Gre- 
cians for  the  losses  they  sustained  by  Hercules;  and  they  bore  a  par^- 
ticular  grudge  and  hatred  to  the  Athenians,  because  that  Theseus 
carried  away  captive  Autiope,  (or,  as  others  write},  Hippolyte,  queea 
of  the  Amazons. 

Being  tlierefore  joined  with  the  Scythians,  as  their  confederate^ 
they  raised  a  great  army,  with  which  the  Amazonian  leaders,  passing 
over  the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus,  marched  through  Thrace,  and  pierced 
through  a  great  part  of  Europe,  and  encamped  at  length  in  Attica^ 
at  a  place  which,  from  them,  is  now  called  the  Amazonian  Field. 
Tlieseus,  having  intelligence  of  their  approach,  marched  out  against 
them  with  an  army  raised  from  among  the  citizens,  taking  along  with 
him  Antiope,  by  whom  he  had  now  hb  son  Hippolytus.  Battle  be* 
ing  joined,  those  with  Theseus,  through  the  valour  of  the  AthenianSf 
won  the  day,  and  slew  part  of  the  Amazons  upon  the  spot,  and  drove 
all  the  rest  out  of  Attica.  There  Autiope,  in  the  defence  of  her  bus* 
band,  fought  bravely,  and  died  in  battle  like  a  hero.  Those  Amazons 
that  remained,  despairing  of  ever  being  able  to  recover  their  country, 
went  away  with  the  Scythians,  their  confederates,  into  Scythia,  and 
there  seated  themselves. 

But  having  spoke  sufficiently  of  these^  we  return  to  Hercules| 
who,  having  now  finished  all  his  labours,  was  told  by  the  oracle,  that 
it  was  a  thing  very  necessary,  that  before  he  was  translated  to  the 
gods,  he  should  plant  a  colony  in  Sardinia,  and  make  his  sons  of  the 
stock  of  the  Thespiadfe,  governors  of  the  island.  He  therefore,  with 
his  nephew  lolaus,  passed  over  thither  with  the  boys,  because  they 
were  yet  very  young.  Here  we  think  it  convenient  to  premise  some* 
thing  concerning  the  birth  of  these  young  boys,  that  we  may  more 
clearly  give  an  account  of  the  colony.  Thespis  was  of  the  most  no- 
ble family  among  the  Athenians,  the  son  of  Erectheus,  and  prince  of 
a  territory  so  called  from  him.  He  had  of  many  wives  fifty  daugh- 
ters. This  Thespis  being  desirous  that  his  daughters  should  have 
issue  by  Hercules,  who  was  as  yet  but  very  young,  but  of  strength  of 
body  beyond  the  usual  course  of  nature  at  that  age,  invited  him  to  a 
sacred  festival,  and  there  nobly  entertained  him,  and  sent  for  his 
daughters  severally,  one  after  another;  Hercules  lay  with  them  all, 
and  got  them  with  child,  and  so  became  both  a  husband  of  fifty 
wives,  and  a  father  of  fifty  sons;  all  which  (being  called  by  the  gene* 


S44  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  '  Atok  IK 


SK 


ral  name  of  Thespiad»  in  obedience  to  the  oracle,  when  they  were 
grown  up,  he  ordered  them  to  be  sent  away,  to  plant  a  colony  in  Sar- 
dinia; and  because  lolaus  was  admiral  of  his  whole  fleet,  and  his 
companion  in  all  his  expeditions,  he  committed  the  care  of  the  colony 
of  these  Thespians  to  him.  But  two  of  the  fifty  remained  in  Thebes, 
whose  posterity  (they  say)  continue  there  in  great  honour  and  esteem 
at  this  day;  and  seven  more,  whom  they  call  Demuchi*,  resided  in 
the  city  of  Thcspis,  whose  posterity  (they  say)  were  the  principal  men 
of  the  city  within  the  time  of  man's  memory.  All  the  rest,  and 
whosoever  else  would  go  along  with  them,  lolaus  transported  into 
Sardinia;  and,  having  overcome  the  inhabitants  in  battle,  the  plea- 
santest  part  of  the  island,  and  that  which  was  most  champaigD,  he 
divided  by  lot,  which  at  this  day  is  called  lolaion.  And  be  so  im- 
proved the  island,  and  planted  it  with  fruit-trees,  that  it  became  af- 
terwards a  bone  of  contention :  for,  from  that  time  it  grew  so  fiunoua 
for  the  riches  and  fruitfulness  of  the  soil,  tliat  the  Carthaginians, 
growing  rich  and  powerful,  so  coveted  this  island,  that  they'  fought 
many  battles  to  gain  it;  of  which  we  shall  speak  hereafter  in  its  pro- 
per place. 

After  lolaus  had  settled  his  colony,  he  sent  fdr  Daedalus  out  of 
Sicily,  and  employed  him  in  building  many  stately  structures,  whicfaT 
remain  to  this  day,  and,  from  the  name  of  the  architect,  are  oalled 
D^datus's  Worksf.  He  built  likewise  stately  and  sumptuous  publie 
schools  for  all  manner  of  exercises,  and  courts  of  justice,  with  many 
otiier  such  works  conducing  to  the  happiness  and  well-being  of  man's 
life :  he  called  also  the  inhabitants  lolaians,  after  his  own  mune^ 
theThespiads  allowing  him  that  honour  as  their  father:  for,  on  the 
account  of  his  faithful  service  to  them,  they  so  loved  him,  that 
they  called  him  father.  Whence  it  came  to  pass  in  after  times, 
that  they  who  sacrificed  to  this  god,  call  lolaus  father,  as  the  Persians 
did  Cyrus. 

Afterwards  lolaus  returned  into  Greece,  and  arrived  at  Sicily,  where 
he  staid  a  considerable  time» 

About  that  time  some  of  his  fellow-travellers,  (taken  with  tli^ 
pleasantness  of  the  island)  there  seated  themselves;  and  being  mixed 
among  the  Sicani,  they  continued  there,  and  arc  in  great  esteem  with 
the  inhabitants.  But  lolaus  is  especially  honoured,  to  whom^  for 
the  general  good  he  did  in  many  cities,  temples  and  groves  ans  built^ 
and  divine  worship  instituted  as  to  a  demi*-god.  This  cofony  it  fa* 
mous  upon  the  account  of  a  remarkable  circumstance;  for  the  oracle 
commanded  that  all  persons  of  this  colony  should  be  freemen,  and 
that  their  posterity  for  ever  should  so  continue,  which  freedom  is  ef- 

*  Dcmucljif  gOTcmort  of  tiie  people.  t  Dftdilli. 


Chaf.It.  DIODOKUS  StCULUS.  849 


■<■ 


fectoaily  eDJoyed  at  this  very  day:  for  many  barbarians  being  mixed 
with  this  colony,  in  process  of  time  the  whole  colony  became  barba- 
rous; and,  removing  themselves  to  the  mountains,  inhabited  in  placed 
inaccessible,  where,  being  used  to  flesh  and  milk,  (having  many 
herds  and  flocks  of  cattle),  they  never  made  use  of  bread-corn,  and 
being  that  they  live  in  caves  under  ground,  they  hate  easily  avoided 
the  miseries  of  war;  and  therefore,  thoogii  both  the  Carthagini- 
ans and  Romans  have  often  attempted  to  subdue  them  by  force 
ef  arms,  yet  all  has  been  in  vain.  But  let  this  now  suffice  that  hat 
been  said  concerning  lolaus  and  the  Tbespiadse,  and  their  colony  in 
Sardinia. 

Hercules  having  now  finished  all  his  labours,  gave  his  wife  Me* 
gara  to  tolaus,  suspecting  that  to  have  issue  by  her  would  be  unfor- 
tunate, by  reason  of  the  miserable  disaster  that  befcl  hi^r  formet  chil- 
dren; and  for  this  reason  he  sought  after  another  wife^  (less  to  be 
suspected),  by  wIkmh  he  might  have  more  children.   In  order  where- 
unlo,  he  desired  lole,  the  daughter  of  Eurytus,  prince  of  (Echiilia, 
in  marriage.    But  Eurytus  (fearing  the  misfortune  of  Megara)  told 
him  he  would  consider  of  it.    Hercules  looking  upon  this  as  a  de- 
nial, to  revenge  himself  for  the  dishonour  put  upon  him,  drove  away 
Ettrytns's  horses :  but  Iphitus,  the  son  of  Eurytus,  suspecting  how  the 
matter  was,  came  toTii^nthus  to  seek  them ;  where  Hercules  brought 
him  up  to  the  top  of  a  high  turret,  and  bid  him  look  round  about, 
to  see  whether  he  could  spy  the  horses  pasturing  in  any  place :  Iphi« 
tus  not  discerning  any  of  them,  Hercules  complained  he  had  falsely 
accused  him  of  theft,  and  thereupon  threw  him  down  headlong  from 
the  top  of  the  tower.     For  which  wicked  act  being  punished  with  a 
grievous  disease,  he  went  to  Neleus  at  Pylus,  and  entreated  him  to 
expiate  his,  offence  :    whereupon  Neleus  consulted  concerning  this 
matter  with  his  sons,  who  all  declared  (except  Nestor  the  youngest) 
that  no  expiation  ought  to  be  allowed.     Then  he  went  to  JDeipho- 
bus,  the  son  of  Hippolytus,  and  desired  him  to  expiate  him.     But 
finding  still  no  remedy  for  his  disease,  he  consulted  at  the  oracle  of 
Apollo  wliat  he  should  do  to  be  cured;   who  answered  him  that  he 
should  be  easily  freed  from  his  distemper,  if  he  were  sold  for  a  valu- 
able price,  and  the  money  given  to  Iphitus*s  cliildren.     In  obedi- 
ence, therefore,  to  the  oracle,  (forced  through  the  violence  of  the 
distemper)  with  some  friends  he  passed  over  into  Asia,  and  there 
sufl^ered  one  of  his  servants  to  sell  him ;  and  sold  he  was  as  a  slave 
to  Omphale,  the  daughter  of  Jardanus,  and  queen  of  the  Mieones^ 
(for  so  the  Lydians  were  formerly  called),  and  the  seller  gave  the 
price  to  the  children  of  Iphitus^  according  to  the  command  of  the 
oracle. 


946  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  iK 


mm 


Hercules  hereupon,  being  recovered  of  his  distemper^  diligently 
served  Omphale,  and  cleared  the  land  of  robbers  tliat  infested  it;  foMr 
some  of  the  thieves,  called  Cercopes,  (who  had  done  abundance  ef 
mischief),  he  killed;  others  he  brought  bound  before  the  queen.  He 
killed  also  Sileus  with  a  spade,  who  forced  all  strangers 'that  came 
thither  to  work  in  the  vineyards.  He  recovered  likewise  the  spoils 
by  force  of  arms  from  the  Itones,  that  wasted  a  great  part  of  the  king- 
dom with  their  depredations,  and  took  and  razed  their  city  to  the 
ground,  from  whence  they  made  all  their  excursions.  Omphale> 
admiring  the  valour  and  noble  exploits  of  the  man,  after  she  came  to 
understand  who  he  was,  and  from  whence  descended,  not  only  mana^* 
mitted  him,  but  married  him,  by  whom  she  had  Lamon.  He  had  a 
son  likewise  before,  called  Cleolaus,  begotten  in  the  time  of  his  servi- 
tude, of  one  of  his  fellow*servants. 

Returning  afterwards  into  Peloponnesus,  he  led  an  army  agidnsi 
Laomedon,  king  of  Troy,  for  some  Injuries  received  from  him.  For 
he  had  denied  to  deliver  the  horses  he  had  promised  him  for  the  kill* 
ing  of  the  whale  at  the  time  that  he  accompanied  Jason  by  force  of 
arms  to  bring  away  the  golden  fleece,  of  which  we  shall  presently 
treat  particularly  in  the  history  of  the  Argonauts.  But  being  at  that 
time  prevented  from  revenging  himself  by  reason  of  the  expedition 
wherein  he  was  engaged  with  Jason,  he  picked  out  a  fit  opportunity 
afterwards,  and  sailed  (as  some  say)  with  eighteen  ships  against  Troyf 
but  as  Homer  says,  with  six  only  in  the  whole^  who  introduces  Tie* 
polimus  in  these  words : 

But  Hercul«t  my  father,  as  it  said. 
The  lions  strong  in  Taieor  did  exceed. 
That  only  with  six  ships  and  slender  force, 
For  Laoniedon's  horses  took  his  course; 
And  then  besieg'd  and  took  the  citj  Troy, 
And  many  of  her  people  did  destroy. 

Hercules,  therefore,  when  he  arrived  in  the  country  of  Troas, 
marched  straight  with  a  valiant  number  of  men  to  Troy,  but  left  Oi- 
deus  the  admiral,  the  son  of  Amphiaraus,  with  the  fleet,  to  be  ready 
to  assist  him  as  occasion  served.  In  the  mean  time  Laomedon  being 
surprised  by  the  sudden  advance  of  the  enemy,  in  a  great  hurry  raised 
as  many  forces  as  the  shortness  of  the  time  would  admit  him  to  do^ 
and  led  them  against  the  fleet,  hoping,  by  burning  it,  to  put  a 
speedy  end  to  the  war.  Oicleus  the  admiral  met  the  enemy,  and 
was  killed  at  the  first  onset;  the  rest  being  forced  to  their  ships,  stood 
off  to  sea« 

Laomedon  then  returned  and  fought  with  Hercules,  and  he  and 
most  of  his  men  were  cut  off.    Hereupon  Hercules  presently  took 


C9l«p.  IL  BIODORUS  SICULUS.  S47 

the  rity  by  stonn,  and  put  many  of  the  inhabitants  that  opposed  him 
to  the  sword,  but  advanced  Priam  (for  his  justice)  to  his  Other's 
throne.  He  was  the  only  son  of  Laomedon  who  disapproved  what  his 
lather  did,  and  advised  that  the  horses  should  be  delivered  to  Hercules 
according  to  the  contract.  Hercules,  to  crown  Telamon's  valour  with 
an  honourable  reward,  gave  him  Hesione,  the  daughter  of  Laomedon, 
to  wife :  for  he  was  the  first  that  in  this  storm  made  his  way  into  the 
city,  at  the  very  strongest  part  of  the  castle  wall,  where  Hercules 
himself  made  the  assault. 

After  his  return  into  Peloponnesus  he  made  war  upon  Augeas,  for 
defrauding  him  of  his  promised  reward;  but  after  a  battle  fought  with 
the  Eleans,  without  efiPecting  any  thing  further  at  that  time,  he  re* 
turned  to  Olenus,  who  had  before  entertained  hiro  as  his  guest,  whose 
daughter  Hippolyte  was  at  that  time  just  married  to  Axanus.  Her* 
cttles  being  then  there,  killed  Eurytion  the  centaur,  for  offering  vio* 
lence  to  Hippolyte  at  the  time  of  her  marriage. 

Being  returned  to  Tirynthe,  Eurystheus  (moved  upon  some  suspi« 
cion  of  treason  or  other)  banished  him,  with  his  mother  Alcmena, 
and  likewise  Epbicle  and  lolaus,  out  of  the  kingdom.  Being  thus 
forced  away,  he  resided  at  Pheneus  in  Arcadia;  where  he  heard  that 
the  sacreds  of  Neptune,  in  a  solemn  procession,  were  sent  to  the 
Istmos  under  the  conduct  of  Eurytus  Uie  son  of  Augeas:  whereupon 
he  hasted  away,  and  set  upon  Eurytus  on  the  sudden  near  toCleone^ 
where  Hercules's  temple  now  stands,  and  killed  him.  Afterwards 
entering  the  country  of  Elis  with  a  potent  army,  he  killed  also  king 
Augeas,  and  took  the  city  by  storm,  and  recalled  Phyleus  into  his 
country,  and  gave  up  the  city,  together  with  the  kingdom,  into 
his  hands.  For  he  was  banished  by  his  father,  for  ordering  tlie 
reward  to  be  given  to  Hercules,  being  chosen  an  arbitrator  betweea 
them. 

Afterwards  it  happened  that  Tyndarus  was  banished  from  Sparta 
by  Hippocoon,  whose  sons  likewise,  being  twenty  in  number,  had 
killed  Hyionus,  the  son  of  Lyoimnius,  Hercules 's  special  friend* 
Hercules  understanding  what  they  had  done,  m^de  war  upon  them, 
and  in  a  great  battle  routing  them,  slew  multitudes  of  them,  and  took 
Sparta  by  storm,  and  restored  Tyndarus,  the  father  of  the  Dioscuri^, 
to  the  kingdom  upon  this  condition,  that  (inasmuch  as  he  had  gained 
it  by  conquest)  he  should  keep  it,  and  hereafter  deliver  it  up  entire 
to  his  posterity.  In  iliis  battle  there  were  very  few  killed  on  Hercu- 
les's  side,  amongst  whom  were  those  famous  men  Iphiclus,  and  se- 
venteen sons  of  Cepheus,  for,  of  twenty,  three  only  escaped.  On  the 
other  side,  there  fell  Hippocoon  himself,  with  ten  of  his  soos^  and  a 

*  Caitor  and  Pollux. 


f48  DIODORUS  SICUtVS.  ^hqklFi 


great  nomber  of  the  Spartans.  After  this  battle^  be  retiinMd  i^ 
to  Arcadia^  and  resorted  to  king  Aleus^  whose  daughter  A^ga  bf 
stealth  he  lay  with^  and  got  with  child^  and  then  went  to  Stjrmplwlwk 
Aleus  being  ignorant  of  what  was  done^  afterwards  discofertd  tbr 
matter  by  the  swelling  of  his  daughter's  belly,  and  tbera^poo  asked 
lier  who  was  the  father;  who  answered,  she  was  forced  bj  Her* 
eules.  Her  father  not  giving  any  credit  to  what  she  stU,  dc^ 
liTered  her  to  a  Nauplian  whom  he  confided  in^  and  ordered  lum  to 
drown  her. 

Auge  being  carried  away  for  Nauplia*,  in  her  voyage  fell  in  b- 
bour  near  the  mountain  Partlienius,  and  turned  aside  into  a  wood 
near  adjoining,  under  colour  of  discharging  the  necessities  of  nature^ 
and  there  was  delivered  of  a  son,  which  she  left  hid  among  tbe 
•hmbs:  then  she  went  away  with  the  Nauplian,  and  came  at  length 
to  Nauplia,  a  port  in  the  territory  of  Argos,  and  so  was  unexpectedly 
preserved :  for  the  Nauplian  was  not  willing  to  drown  her^  as  the 
lung  had  commanded,  but  gave  her  to  certain  strangers  of  Caritj  who 
were  then  setting  sail  for  Asia,  who  took  her  away,  and  add  her  to 
Teuthras,  king  of  Mysia.  In  the  mean  time,  the  child  that  war  left 
in  Mount  Partlienius  was  found  sucking  a  hind,  by  some  aliep» 
herds  belonging  to  king  Corythus,  who  brought  it  to  tlieir  master: 
Corythus  willingly  received  it,  and  educated  and  brought  it  up  as  his 
own  son,  and  named  him  Telephus,  from  the  hindf  that  suckled  hiak 
When  he  was  grown  up  to  man's  estate,  he  went  to  the  oracle  at 
Delphos,  to  inquire  who  was  his  mother,  where  he  was  answered^tkai 
he  must  repair  to  Teuthras,  king  of  Mysia:  having  found  out  his  mo- 
ther, and  it  being  now  known  who  was  his  father,  he  was  in  high  cs* 
teem  and  reputation,  so  that  Teuthras,  who  had  no  heir  male^  married 
him  to  his  daughter  Agriopc,  and  adopted  him  his  hcur  and  auceessor 
to  the  kingdom. 

In  the  mean  time  Hercules,  the  fifth  year  after  his  banishment  into 
Phcneus,  being  exceedingly  grieved  for  the  deaths  of  Hyionus  the  sob 
of  Lycimnius,  and  of  his  lirother  Iphiclus,  wliolly  abandoned  Arcadia 
and  Peloponnesus,  and  bi'ing  accompanied  with  multitudes  of  the 
Arcadians,  went  to  Calydon,  a  city  of  i£tolia.  And  having  now  Dei-> 
titer  wife  nor  lawful  issue,  he  married  Deianira,  the  daughter  of  (£• 
Mcus,  Meleager  being *then  dead. 

And  here  it  will  not  be  amiss  to  make  a  small  digression,  and  de« 
dare  what  happened  to  Meleager. 

Gilneus,  upon  a  great  plenty  of  corn,  in  gratitude  sacrificed  to  all 
the  crods,  but  only  Diana:  at  which  the  goddess  being  enraged^  sent 
among  ihcm  that  so  famed  and  migiity  Calydonian  boar,  which  wasted 

*  Nauplialia,  a  citv  in  Argoi.  t  Elaphos  is  a  hind  in  Grcejc, 


Chap.  II.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  £49 


and  spoiled  all  the  neighbouring  region,  and  killed  and  destroyed 
most  of  their  cattle.     Meleager,  the  son  of  CEneus,  being  then  in 
the  flower  of  his  age  and  full  strength,  and  not  inferior  to  any  for  va- 
lour, associated  himself  with  many  other  gallants  to  hunt  this  boar. 
He  being  the  first  that  wounded  the  beast  with  his  dart,  by  the  gene- 
ral consent  of  all  carried  away  the  spoil  and  honour  of  the  day,  which 
was  the  boar's  skin.     Atalanta,  the  daughter  of  Eclieneus,  was  one  of 
his  associates  in  this  hunting;  and  therefore  Meleager  (being  much 
in  love  with  her)  presented  her  with  the  skin,  attributing  to  her  the 
glory  of  the  action.     But  the  sons  of  Thestius,  his  fcliuw- hunters, 
took  it  most  heinously  that  a  stranger  should  be  preferred  to  ihem, 
and  no  regard  be  had  to  the  nearness  of  kindred  that  was  between 
them  and  Meleager.     To  defeat  her,  therefore,  of  Meleager's  gift, 
they  lay  in  wait  for  her,  and  fell  upon  her  in  her  return  to  Arcadia, 
and  took  away  the  skin  by  force.    But  Meleager  (for  the  love  he  bore 
to  Atalanta)  being  much  troubled  at  the  affront  and  disgrace  offered 
her,  took  upon  him  the  defence  of  her  cause,  and  at  first  advised  tiie 
aggressors  to  restore  what  they  had  violently  taken  away.     But  when 
he  could  not  prevail,  he  slew  them.     They  were  the  brothers  of  Al- 
tbea^  his  mother,  who  so  immoderately  grieved  for  their  deaths,  that 
she  poured  out  most  heavy  curses  against  her  son,  and  wished  the 
gods  would  cut  him  off,  wiio  heard  her  prayer,  and  killed  him.   Some 
there  be  that  feign  that  when  Meleager  was  born,  the  destinies  ap- 
peared  to  Althea  in  her  dream,  and  foretold  that  Meleager  her  son 
should  die  when  a  brand  that  was  then  in  the  fire  should  he  con-* 
sumed.     His  mother  thereupon,  conceiving  the  life  of  her  son  de- 
pended upon  the  preservation  of  the  firebrand,  laid  it  up  very  care- 
fully: but  being  incensed  at  the  death  of  her  brothers,  she  threw  it 
into  the  fire,  and  so  hastened  her  son's  death.     But  afterwards  re- 
penting, and  grievously  afHicted  for  what  she  had  done,  she  hanp^ed 
herself*.     In  the  mean  time  Hipponous  in  Olenumf,  being  incensed 
at  his  daughter  Peribcea,  because  she  said  she  was  with  child  by  Mars, 
sent  her  to  (Eneus  in  ii^tolia,  and  desired  him  that  he  would  fortlw 
with  put  her  to  death:  but  he  having  lately  lost  both  his  son  aqd  his 
wife,  would  not  kill  the  lady,  but  married  her,  and  begat  of  herTydeus. 
But  let  this  suffice  concerning  Meleager,  Althea,  and  CEneus. 

Hercules,  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  Calydonians,  diverted  the  river 
AchelousI  into  another  chauiiei,  which  he  cut  for  it,  and  by  that 
means  watered  a  great  part  of  the  country,  and  made  ii  exceedingly 

•  Ovid  sa^s  slic  stubbed  herself.  ♦  Olenuiri,  a  citj  in  Acbaia. 

X  Vide  Ovid.    Vide  Sirabo.     Ic  hud  tivo  mouths  »eprescnling  iwo  horns,  one  of  which 
wai  dammed  up  by  Hercules:  the  stream  roars  like  a  wild  bull. 

Vol.  1.  No.  35.  kk 


250  DioiSoRUs  sicuLUS.  Book  f^ 


fruitful,  which  gare  occasion  to  the  poetical  fables,  that  Hercales 
fought  with  Achch'us*,  transformed  into  the  sliape  of  a  bull,  and  in 
tlie  conflict  cut  off  one  of  his  horns,  and  gave  it  to  the  Atolians: 
this  they  call  AniaUhsa*s  Horn,  in  which  (the  poets  feign)  grow  all 
manner  of  summer  fruits,  as  erapes,  apples,  and  such  like.  By  the 
horn  they  darkly  signify  the  new  course  of  the  river  Acheloufly 
bending  like  a  horn  throtigh  the  other  channel :  hy  the  apples,  pome- 
granates, and  grapes,  they  denote  the  fruitfulness  of  the  soil  wa* 
tered  hy  tlie  river,  and  the  plenty  of  fruitful  plants.  By  terming 
it  Amalthffia'st  Horn,  they  signified  the  strength  of  him  tlvtt  cut  tha 
ditch. 

Afterwards  f  Icrculos  assisted  the  Calydonians  in  the  war  against 
the  Thesproti,  and  took  the  city  Ephyra  by  storm,  and  slew  thdr 
king  Philsus;  and,  lying  with  his  daughter,  who  was  his  prisoner, 
on  her  he  begat  TIepoIemus.  The  third  year  after  his  marriage  to 
Dejanira,  Eurynonius,  the  son  of  Architelus,  (then  a  young  boj) 
serving  (Eneus  at  table,  Hercules,  for  some  small  mistake  in  his  at* 
tendance,  gave  him  such  a  box  on  the  ear,  (that,  much  against  his 
will)  he  killed  the  poor  boy;  for  which  misfortune  he  was  so  grieired, 
that,  with  his  wife  Dejanira,  and  Flyllus  his  son  by  her,  who  was 
then  a  young  child,  he  voluntarily  banished  himself  out  of  Calydonia* 
In  his  journey,  when  he  came  to  the  banks  of  the  river  Evenus,  he 
found  Nessus  the  centaur,  who  carried  people  over  the  ford  for  hire* 
Dejanira  being  the  first  that  he  carried  over,  the  centaur  fell  in  love 
with  her  for  her  beauty,  and  attempted  to  ravish  her;  whereupon  she 
cried  out  for  help  to  her  husband,  who  presently  shot  him  through 
the  body  with  an  arrow.  The  centaur,  through  the  grievousness  of 
his  wound,  dying  in  the  very  act  of  his  nipe,  had  only  time  to  tell 
her,  that,  for  the  great  love  he  bore  her,  he  would  teach  her  a  reci|)e 
for  the  procuring  of  love  by  force,  whereof  Hercules  shoold  never 
after  be  familiar  with  any  other  woman  besides  herself,  and  tliat  was, 
that  she  should  anoint  Hcrcules's  under  garment  with  th:*  blood  that 
issued  from  his  wound,  mixed  together  with  oil  and  some  of  his  seed 
that  fell  from  him;  and  having  thus  said,  he  immediately  breathed 
out  his  last. 

Dejanira  observed  what  directions  he  had  given  her,  and,  mixing 

the  seed  of  Nessus  with  his  blood  which  dropped  from  the  arrow,  kept 

•  it  privately  in  a  little  box  for  Hercules.     Hercules  having  passed  the 

*  The  son  of  Oceanus  and  Terra,  fought  witii  Hercules  for  Dejanira,  the  daoghter 
of  (£iieus.  and,  finding  hitnsclf  too  weak,  transformed  himself  into  a  bull.  Vide  Qvid 
and  btrabo. 

f  Amulacutia  sig'.tiGe:^  hardne>s  in  Greek. 


Gkap^  II.  IHODORU6  SICU  LUS*  S6 1 

I  .If.  ,  II  .gBaMMa——— BM— IB 

river,  w<:nt  to  Ceyx,  king  of  Trachiiiia,  and  dwelt  with  him  as  a 
stranger,evcraccoinpani<fd  with  the  Arcadians  as  his  f^llow-soldiers 
and  assov'iates. 

After  these  thirnrs,  Philas,  king  of  the  Dryopi,  being  accused  for 
some  act  of  impiety  aprainst  the  temple  of  Dclphos,  HerculeS|  with 
tite  assistance  of  the  Meiienses,  took  up  arms  agaiust  him,  and  both 
kilied  him,  and  cast  the  Dryopi  out  of  their  antient  habitations,  and 
gave  their  country  to  the  Melieuses.  On  his  captive,  the  daughter 
of  Fhilas,  he  bej^rat  Antiochus.  Besides  (lyllus  he  had  afterwards 
other  children  by  Dt  janira,  Gryueus  or  Gleneus,  and  Hodites.  Some 
of  the  Dryopi  that  were  driven  out  of  their  country  passed  over  to 
Euhoea,  and  there  built  the  city  Carystus:  others  of  them  sailed  into 
the  islaikd  Cyprus,  and  gained  new  seats,  and  became  one  people 
with  the  inhabitants;  the  rest  fled  to  Eurystheus,  wlio  (in  hatred  te 
Hercules)  received  them  into  his  protection,  and  they,  with  his. as* 
sisjtauce,  built  three  cities  in  Peloponnesus,  Asine,  Hermione,  aod 
£ioDe. 

After  the  expulsion  of  the  Dryopi,  a  war  broke  forth  between  the 
Dorians  (who  inhabited  Hestiates,  in  the  region  of  iEgimius)  and 
the  Lapithie,  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Olympus,  whose  king  was  Co* 
roiius,  the  son  of  Phoroneus* 

But  I  he  LapititiB  being  much  stronger  than  the  other,  the  Doriaoi 
craved  the  assistance  of  Hercules,  and  promised  hina  the  third  part  of 
the  kingdom;  u)>on  which  terms  they  prevailed  with  him  to  joio 
with  tiiem  as  their  confederate.  With  their  joint  forces,  therefore, 
they  set  upon  the  enemy,  and  Hercules,  by  the  valour  of  the  Area* 
dians,  (whom  he  ever  had  with  him  as  his  assistants)  routed  them, 
and  slew  tike  king  himself,  and,  cutting  off  multitudes  of  the  enemy, 
forced  the  Lapithffi  out  of  the  territory  which  they  contested  for. 

This  being  tlius  effected,  he  gave  up  the  third  part  of  the  country 
promised  him  to  y£gimius,  to  be  kept  by  him  in  trust,  in  order  to  be 
restored  to  Hcrcules's  posterity.  In  his  return  to  Trachinia,  he 
killed  Cygnus,  the  son  of  Mars,  who  cliallenged  him  to  a  %!ueL  And 
as  he  passed  through  the  country  of  the  Pelasgi,  from  Itonus,  he  met 
with  king  Honnenius,  and  demanded  his  daughter  Astydamia  in 
marriage;  but  because  Dcjanira  was  his  lawful  wife  before,  he  ne« 
fused  to  give  his  consent.  Upon  which  he  made  war  upon  him,  and 
both  took  the  city,  and  killed  the  king;  and  so,  possessing  him:|elf 
of  Astydamia  by  force  of  arms,  begat  of  her  Ctcsippus.  Afterwards 
he  made  a  second  expedition  against  the  sons  k^^  Eurytui,  for  de* 
nying  to  give  him  lole  in  marria^^e:  and,  by  tlie  help  of  the  Area* 
dians,  took  the  city,  and  slew  Toxios,  Molion,  and  Pytius,  the  eoos 
of  Eurytus;    aud^  carrying  away  lole,  made  to  tbe  promontory 


S52  DIODORUS  StCULUS.  Book  IFi 


Cenieus  iii  Eubcea,  where  he  appointed  a  solemn  sacrifice,  and  tent 
Lichas  his  servant  to  Traehina,  to  his  wife  Dejanira,  with  orden 
for  her  to  send  him  hisi  coat  and  shirt  he  used  to  wear  when  he 
sacrificed  to  the  gods.  Dejanira  (being  informed  by  Lichas  of  her 
]ius!)and*s  love  to  lole,  and  how  he  had  a  greater  love  and  kiodDeis 
for  her  than  herself)  anointed  the  coat  and  shirt  with  the  destnictife 
receipt  given  her  by  the  centaur,  which  Lichas  (ignorant  of  the  mat* 
ter)  carried  to  the  sacrifice.  But  as  soon  as  Hercules  put  on  the 
garment,  the  infection  and  venom  of  the  receipt  began  by  little  and 
little  to  work,  which  put  him  at  last  upon  the  rack  in  most  misera- 
ble torment.  For  the  poison  of  the  arrow  like  a  stinging  viper  over* 
spread  the  garment,  and  by  its  scorching  heat  even  eat  up  the  flesh 
of  his  whole  body.  Flercules  being  thus  intolerably  tormented  forth- 
with killed  his  servant  Lichas;  and  then  dismissed  his  army,  and 
returned  to  Trachinia.  But  his  torment  more  and  more  increasing, 
he  sent  Lioymnion  and  lolus  to  Delphos  to  inquire  of  Apollo  how  he 
might  be  cured.  Dejanira,  amazed  at  the  extremity  of  her  husband's 
misery,  and  conscious  of  what  she  had  done,  hanged  herself.     The 

answer  of  the  oracle  was ^That  with  a  warlike  train  they  should  cany 

Hercules  away  to  Q£ta,  and  there  raise  up  for  him  a  large  pile  of 
wood,  and  Jupiter  would  take  great  care  of  the  rest.  lolus  here- 
upon, and  tiiosc  with  him,  performed  what  was  commanded, suspect- 
ing what  the  issue  was  like  to  be.  Hereupon  Hercules  (despairing 
of  his  lecovcry)  mounted  the  pile,  and  earnestly  desired  those  pre- 
sent to  set  it  on  fire.  When  none  would  do  it,  at  length  Philoctetes 
observed  his  order,  and  put  fire  under  the  pile;  and  for  a  reward 
Hercules  gave  him  his  bow  and  arrows;  hereupon  the  pile  was  pre- 
sently on  a  flame,  not  only  by  the  fire  but  with  thunder  and  light-. 
ning  from  heaven,  and  all  was  in  an  instant  reduced  to  ashes.  lolus 
afterwards  seeking  for  his  bones,  could  find  none  at  all;  whence  a- 
rose  an  opinion  that  Hercules  (as  the  oracle  had  foretold)  was  trans- 
lated from  men  to  the  gods.  lolus  and  the  rest  having  therefore 
sacrificed  to  him  as  a  demi-god,  and  raised  up  a  great  monument  in 
remembrance  of  him,  returned  to  Trachinia.  Afterwards  MenoeCius, 
the  son  of  Actor,  Hercules's  special  friend,  instituted  that  in  Opun« 
tis  there  should  be  offered  up  to  him  every  year  as  to  a  demi-god,  a 
bull,  a  boar,  and  a  goat.  The  Thebans  did  the  same;  and  the  Athe* 
nians  were  the  first  that  offered  sacrifices  to  him  as  a  god,  and  their 
pious  example  first  induced  all  the  Grecians,  and  afterwards  all  other 
nations  as  such  to  worship  him. 

To  what  we  have  said,  we  must  further  add  this,  that  after  his 
translation  to  the  gods,  Jupiter  persuaded  Juno  to  adopt  Hercules 
for  her  son ;  and  ever  after  she  bore  towards  him  a  motherly  affection* 


Ck^ip.  TIL  DIODORUS  S1CULU9.  ttS 

And  they  report  that  thisadoption  was  brought  about  in  tbb  manner.^ 
Jono  being  gone  to  bed,  and  Hercules  laid  close  to  her  bodj^  she 
dropped  him  down  from  under  her  clothes,  to  the  ground;  whicfa 
rite  and  ceremony  the  barbarians  use  in  adopting  of  a  son^  to  this 
day.  They  feign  that  afterwards  Juno  married  him  to  Hebe*;  and 
in  the  story  of  the  dead,  the  poet  thus  introduces  his  ghost.-. 

Among  the  gods  he  feasts  with  hymns. 
And  in  fair  Hehe  joys  and  sings. 

But  they  report  that  when  Jupiter  would  have  him  to  be  one^of 
the  twelve  godsf,  Hercules  refused  that  honour;  for  that  it  was  im- 
possible  for  him  to  be  taken  into  the  number,  unless  one  of  the 
twelve  were  rejected,  and  it  was  an  unseemly  thing  to  accept  such  an 
honour  with  the  disgrace  of  another  god. 

Although  we  have  been  long  in  our  relation  concerning  Her* 
cules,  yet,  to  make  amends,  we  have  not  yet  omitted  any  thing 
material  that  is  reported  of  him.  And  now  it  is  time  that  we  treat 
of  the  Argonauts,  for  Hercules  went  with  them  in  that  expeditioou 


CHAR  m. 

Of  the  Argonauts  J  Medea,  and  the  daughters  ofPelias.  HowthM 
ArgaiuLuts  gained  the  Golden  Fleece.  The  pranks  of  Medea* 
The  acts  of  Jc^on.  The  cruelty  of  Pelias  towards  J'aBon*s 
kindred;  hotv  he  was  killed  by  his  own  daughters^  through 
Medea's  charms.  Medea  bums  the  king  of  Corinth* s  palace^ 
and  him  in  it.  The  miserable  end  of  Jason.  Of  the  HeracHdetf 
and  tfieir  return  to  Peloponnesus. 

JASON  (they  say)  was  son  of  iEson,  and  nephew  to  Pelias,  king  of 
Thessaly;  and  being  a  man  of  strong  body,  andbf  a  high  spirit,  far 
above  any  of  his  age,  was  ambitious  to  perform  some  memorable  and 

*  The  goddess  of  youth,  daughter  of  Jono,  and  c«p-bearer  to  Jupiter.  At  a  feaat 
her  foot  slipped,  and  she  shewed  all,  and  was  dUplaeed^  and  Ganymede  pat  in  her  roon. 
Scrvios.     She  restored  lolaus  to  bit  yontb. — See  Ovid,  9,  Met. 

t  Amongst  the  heathen  there  were  twelve  chief  gads.  Ovid  calls  them  De4ft  NobiUi: 
Tbey  enjoyed  heaven  by  natural  ri^ht;  Juno,  Vesta,  Minerva,  Ceres,  Diana,  Venui^ 
Mars,  Mercury,  Jove,  Neptune,  Vulcan,  ApoUo,  Coodw*  Antiq.  56,  lib.  2, 
sect.  1,  ^ 


S&4  DIODORUS  8ICULUfl»  JhoA  if^ 

remarkabk  action ;  for  knowiDg  that  Perseus  his  ancestor^  and  aoMi 
others^  (by  their  expeditious  aod  admirable  achievements  in  fore|gti 
cooatries),  had  purchased  eternal  lionour  and  renown^lic  resolved  19 
imitate  them  in  the  like  heroic  undertakings:  acquainting,  tb«refons^ 
the  king  hi^  uncle  with  his  purpose,  he  easily  obtained  hia  conaeat^ 
not  that  Pelias  thereby  aimed  at  the  honour  and  glory  of  tlie  young 
man,  but  that  he  hoped  (among  so  many  hazards  and  difficulties)  he 
would  be  cut  off;  fur  having  no  issue  male,  he  was  afraid  leal  hia 
brother,  with  the  assistance  of  his  son,  would  some  time  or  other 
invade  his  kingdom.  But  he  concealed  his  suspicion  in  the  mean 
time,  and  promised  to  furnish  him  with  provisions  for  hia  voyage^ 
encouraging  him  to  undertake  the  adventure,  in  sailing  to  Colchis  to 
bring  away  the  ram's  golden  fleece,  so  much  famed  and  spoken  of  all 
the  world  over. 

Pontusat  that  time  was  inhubited  by  a  fierce  and  barbaroos  people^ 
that  were  infamous  for  murdering  all  strangers  that  came  amongst 
them,  and  therefore  it  was  called  Axenus*:  however,  Jason  being  am* 
bitious  of  glory,  though  he  was  something  concerned  at  the  difficulty 
of  the  undertaking,  yet  when  he  considered  It  was  not  altogether 
impossible  to  be  accomplished,  and  that  the  more  hazardous  it  was 
the  greater  his  honour  and  glory  would  be,  he  furuished  himself  with 
all  things  necessary  for  his  expedition. 

And  in  the  first  place  he  built  a  ship  at  tlic  mountain  Pelion,  much 
larger  in  every  respect  than  was  usual  in  those  times;  for  tiien  they 
used  to  sail  only  in  boats  and  little  skiffs.  Every  one,  thcFefore,  at 
the  sight  of  the  vessel,  was  amazed,  and  the  intended  design  and  the 
building  of  this  ship,  was  noised  over  all  Greece,  so  that  many  ot  the 
noble  and  brisk  youths  were  eager  to  join  and  go  away  with  Jason  in 
order  to  partake  of  the  honour  in  this  expedition. 

JsBon  now  launching  forth  his  ship,  completely  furnished  with.all 
things  necessary,  miuie  choice  of  four-and-iifty  of  the  greatest 
persons  of  quality  out  of  the  number  of  those  who  were  desiixma  to 
go  along  with  him :  amongst  whom  the  most  remarkable  were  Castor 
and  Pollux,  Mercules  and  Telamon,  Orpheus  and  Atalania  the 
daughter  of  Schoeneus,  the  sons  of  Thcspius,  and  Jason  himself  the 
head  and  captain  of  the  expedition  to  Colchis ;  he  called  the  ship 
Argo,  before  he  took  her  from  the  builder,  whose  name  was  Argus, 
(as  some  fabulous  writers  report),  who  (they  say)  embarked  with 
them  to  repair  the  ship,  as  occasion  might  require:  but  others  say  it 
was  so  called  from  its  swift  sailing,  for  tluit  Argon  among  the  antienl 
Greeks  signified  swift.  Being  all  on  board,  they  unanimously  chose 
Hercules,  for  his  extraordinary  valour,  to  be  their  generaL    After 

*  Inhospitable. 


Cftop.  tiL  moDonu.H  siculus.  %bb 


s 


thejr  had  set  sail  from  lolchos,  and  passed  by  Athos  and  Samothraee^ 
they  were  by  a  tempest  cast  upon  Sigeum,  a  promontory  of  Troas: 
tvhere  landing,  they  found  a  young  virgin  tied  near  to  the  sea-shor^ 
fcrthis  reason  as  is  said... 

The  report  was,  that  Neptune  being  displeased  with  Laomedon 
the  king,  concerning  tlie  fabulously  famed  building  of  the  walls  of 
TVoy,  sent  a  vast  monster  out  of  the  sea  upon  the  land,  which  de- 
voored  all  that  came  upon  the  shore,  and  the  liusbandmen  that  tilled 
the  ground  upon  the  sea-coast;  and  that  this  sea-god  destroyed  the 
people  by  a  plague,  and  blasted  all  tlie  fruits  of  the  field.  The 
whole  country  being  in  this  miserable  condition,  the  people  met  in 
a  general  assembly,  and  consulted  together  what  course  was  to  be 
taken  for  the  redress  of  their  deplorable  condition.  Hereupon  it  is 
said  that  the  king  sent  to  inquire  of  the  oracle  of  Apollo  what  was 

to  be  done  in  this  matter:  who  received  this  answer ^Tluit Neptune 

was  angry,  and  would  be  then  appeased,  when  one  of  the  Trcjan's 
children  upon  whom  the  lot  should  fall,  should  be  offered  up  to  be 
devoured  by  the  sea* monster.  Hereupon,  they  say,  that  a  general 
lot  was  cast,  and  that  it  fell  upon  the  king's  daughter,  called  He-t 
sione;  whereupon  Laomedon  was  forced  to  deliver  up  his  daughter, 
and  left  her  bound  in  chains  upon  the  shore:  and  it  fortunately  hap- 
pened at  that  very  time,  that  Hercules  landed  with  the  rest  of  the 
Argonauts,  and  being  informed  by  the  lady  of  her  misfortune,  he 
broke  off  her  fetters,  and  brought  her  into  the  city,  promising  be 
would  kill  the  monster.  Laomedon  hereupon  rejoiced  exceedingly, 
and  promised  to  bestow  upon  him  as  a  reward,  some  horses  he  had, 
that  were  unconquerable.  They  say  this  monster  was  killed  accord- 
ingly by  Hercules,  and  that  free  liberty  was  given  the  lady  either  to 
go  along  with  her  deliverer,  or  stay  at  home  with  her  parents;  the 
lady,  it  is  said,  chose  to  go  along  with  the  stranger,  not  only  as  be- 
ing more  affected  with  the  deliverance,  than  the  society  of  her 
parents  and  kindred,  but' fearing  lest  (if  another  monster  should 
appear)  she  should  be  again  exposed  by  the  people  to  the  same  ca* 
lamity. 

Hercules,  therefore,  receiving  honourable  rewards  suitable  to  so 
welcome  a  guest,  left  Hesione  and  the  horses  in  trust  with  Laome- 
don, to  he  restored  to  him  after  his  return  from  Colchis.  Then  he 
proceeded  on  his  voyage  with  the  Argonauts :  and  presently  after 
they  were  overtaken  with  another  violent  storm,  insomuch  as  they 
despaired  of  their  lives;  Orpheus  only,  they  say,  of  all  his  companions 
in  the  expedition, (being  a  religious  man),  sacrificed  and  prayed  to  the 
gods  of  Samothracia  for  their  preservation:  whereupon  on  a  sudden 
there  was  a  calm>  and  two  stars  fell  down  uiK>n  the  heads  of  Castor 


M6  DIODORU9  8ICULU8.  Book  IF. 

and  Pollux>  to  the  great  amazement  of  the  beholden;  and  so  aB 
concluded,  that  by  the  providence  of  the  gods,  they  were  now  ont 
of  danger.  Hence  it  has  been  a  custom  ever  since,  that  when  aiqr 
are  in  a  storm  at  sea,  they  call  upon  the  gods  of  Samotbmciay  and 
when  any  stars  appear,  they  are  looked  upon  then  to  be  Castor  and 
Pollux,  that  appear  for  their  deliverance. 

When  the  storm  was  over,  the  noble  adventurers  landed  in  a  pro- 
vince of  Thrace,  of  which  Phineus  was  king;  where  met  them  tfV^ 
young  men,  who  for  the  punishment  of  their  offences^  wa%  drirc^ 
out  of  the  territories,  and  grievously  whipped  all  along  as  they  can»^ 
They  proved  to  be  the  sons  of  Phineus,  by  Cleopatra  the  daughc^^r 
of  Boreas,  and  Orithyia  the  daughter  of  Erechtheus.    But,  throu^b 
the  malice  of  their  stepmother,  (by  false  accusations),  their  father 
wrought  upon  to  deal  thus  severely  and  unjustly  with  them^ 
neus  having  married  (besides  his  former  .wife)  Idea  the  daughter  ^ 
Dardanus  king  of  Scythia,  was  so  enslaved  by  an  inordinate  afivctioii 
to  her,  that  he  humoured  her  in  every  thing  that  she  required;  ami 
therefore  at  that  time  he  gave  credit  to  her  accusation,  that  those  two 
young  men  (to  please  their  own  mother,  and  in  contempt  of  her) 
attempted  to  lay  violent  hands  on  her. 

Hercules,  with  the  rest,  fortunately  landing  at  that  very  time^  they 
say  the  young  men  called  out  to  those  .noble  heroes,  and  implored 
them  as  if  they  had  been  so  many  gods,  to  rescue  them  out  of  those 
miserable  circumstances,  declaring  the  cause  why  their  father  was  so 
enraged  against  them.  But  Phineus  meeting  the  strangers^  in  a 
rage  charged  them  not  to  meddle  in  other  people's  concerns;  for  tbej 
might  be  assured,  that  no  father  would  willingly  so  punish  his  owa 
sons,  unless  the  greatness  of  their  faults  had  overcome  all  nainral 
affection. 

But  it  happened,  that  at  that  time,  the  Boreades,  the  brothers  of 
Cleopatra,  were  companions  with  Hercules  in  this  expedition.  These 
therefore  were  the  first  that  (by  reason  of  their  near  relation)  by  force 
of  arms  relieved  the  young  men,  and  breaking  in  pieces  their  chains, 
killed  as  many  of  the  barbarians  as  opposed  them.  But  when  Phi* 
nevs  himself  with  a  multitude  of  Thracians  came  flocking  in^  march- 
ed up  to  decide  the  matter  by  a  battle,  it  is  said,  tliat  then  Hercu- 
les stoutly  laid  about  him,  and  slew  both  Phineus,  and  a  great  oom- 
ber  of  the  other  Thracians.  Then  seizing  upon  the  king's  city  and 
palace,  he  set  Cleo))atra  at  liberty,  and  restored  to  her  sons  their 
father's  kingdom;  who  resolving  to  be  revenged  upon  their  step* 
mother,  he  persuaded  them  to  forbear  doing  any  such  things  but 
rather  to  send  messengers  into  Scythia  to  her  father,  to  let  him  know 
that  they  left  her  wholly  to  his  discretion^  to  be  punished  for  her  of- 


fJkap.  TIL  mODORtJS  SICXTUT9.  S57 


•Ikrtn 


fences.  Which  being  done  accordingly,  the  Scythian  put  his  daugh- 
ter to  death;  and  the  sons  of  Cleopatra  were  highly  commended  Hjr 
the  Thracians  for  their  mildness  and  equity.  But  I  am  not  ignorant 
bow  some. of  the  fabulous  authors  relate,  that  Phineus  put  out  his 
two  tons  eyes,  and  that  in  retaliation, when  he  was  old,  Boreas  served 
bin)  the  same  sauce:  and  they  report  likewise,  that  Hercules  going 
out  of  the  ship  to  get  a  little  fresh  water,  was  left  behind  by  the  Ar- 
^oautf  in  Asia.  For  in  ancient  stories  no  historians  unanimously 
igree  one  with  another;  and  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  admired,  that 
in  giving  an  account  of  things  in  antient  times,  we  do  not  in  eviery 
thing  agree  with  the  poets  and  other  writers. 

But  ft  is  said,  that  the  two  sons  gave  up  the  kingdon  to  their  mo* 
kber  Cleopatra,  and  went  along  with  the  Argonauts  in  their  expedi- 
tion; who  sailing  away  from  Thrace,  and  arriving  at  Pontus,  landed 
in  Taurica  Chersonesus,  being  altogether  ignorant  of  the  cruelty  of 
the  inhabitants :  for  it  was  a  custom  amongst  those  Barbarians,  to 
lacrifice  all  strangers  that  arrived  there,  to  Diana  Taurica.  Amongst 
whom  it  is  said,  that  in  after-times,  Ephigenia,  the  priestess  of  the 
goddess,  practised  the  same  cruelty  upon  all  she  could  lay  hold  of. 

Aiid  here,  in  regard  that  the  course  of  the  history  requires  it,  it  is  re^ 
quisite  we  should  give  an  account  of  the  causes  of  this  horrid  cruelty 
executed  upon  strangers,  especially  this  digression  seeming  pertinent 
(o  the  acts  of  the  Argonauts. 

They  say,  that  Sol  begat  two  sons,  lEetcs  and  Perses,  and  that 
£etes  was  king  of  Colchis,  and  the  other  of  TauriCa,  and  that  l)oth 
were  exceeding  cruel.  That  Hecate  was  the  dauu^hter  of  Perses,  fai' 
more  fierce  and  cruel  tliau  her  father;  fur  being  given  to  hunting  (if 
she  could  find  no  game)  she  would  sport  herself  with  casting  her 
darts  at  men  instead  of  beiists:  she  made  it  her  business  likewise  to 
compound  deadly  poisons,  and  was  the  first  that  found  out  Aconi- 
Umd*;  and  made  trial  of  the  nature  and  efficacy  of  every  composi- 
tion, by  mixing  them  with  the  food  given  to  strangers.  Being  thus 
p-own  extraordinarily  skilful  in  this  devilish  art,  she  first  potsotied 
ber  own  father,  and  so  usurped  the  crown. 

Then  she  built  Diana's  temple,  and  ordered  all  strangers  that  nr* 
rived  there,  to  be  sacrificed  to  that  ^oddess ;  so  that  her  crueltv  was 
noised  abroad  in  every  place.  She  afterwards  marritd  ifietes,  and  by 
bim  had  two  daughters,  Circe  and  Medea,  and  one  son  called  iEgia* 
leus.  Circe  likewise  beiiitc  much  addicted  to  the  compounding  of 
aH  sorts  of  medicines,  found  out  the  wonderful  natures  and  efficacy 
>f  divers  sorts  of  roots  and  herbs,  many  she  learnt  of  her  mother 
Becate,  but  many  more  she  discovered  by  her  own  industry;  so  that 

•   Woif-b^n^,  a  most  poisonous  bcrb. 

Vol.  1.  No.  35,  ll 


£5 8  DIODORUS  8YCULUS.  '  SodJk  IF! 

she  left  nothing  new  (for  any  that  came  after  her)  which  might  aBf 
ways  advance  that  art.  This  Circe  was  married  to  the  king  of  the 
Sarmatians,  whom  some  call  Scythians;  but  she  lijcewise  poisoned 
her  husband,  and  so  usurping  the  kingdom,  executed  many  butche- 
ries and  cruelties  upon  the  subjects;  for  which  (as  some  writers  re« 
late)  she  was  driven  out  of  the  kingdom,  and  fled  to  the  ocean,  and 
possessing  herself  of  a  certain  desert  island,  settled  there,  togetbef 
with  the  women  her  companions.  But  as  other  historians  say,  leair* 
ing  Pontus,  she  settled  iu  the  promontory  of  Italy,  now  cmilcd  ftoA 
her  Circ9ium. 

They  report  likewise,  that  Medea  learned  the  same  art  ftom  b^r 
mother  and  sister;  but  she  plainly  made  use  of  it  for  contrary  endt 
and  purposes;  for  she  constantly  laid  out  herself  to  save  the  liv^ci 
of  strangers  that  were  driven  thither,  sometimes  begging  the  lives  €if 
such  as  were  condemned  by  her  father,  and  at  other  times  by  bcr 
subtle  contrivance  procuring  their  escape  out  of  prison. 

For  iEetcs,  prompted  thereto  both  by  the  cruelty  of  hb  own  na- 
ture, and  likewise  incited  by  the  counsels  and  persuasions  of  He- 
cate  his  wife,  observed  the  custom  of  murdering  strangers.  Bol 
Medea  every  day  more  and  more  opposed  her  parents  in  this  thing; 
.£etes  (upon  suspicion  of  treason)  committed  his  daughter  Medea 
to  prison,  whence,  notwithstanding,  she  escaped,  and  fled  to  a  teni* 
pie  of  Apollo,  seated  near  the  sea-shore;  about  which  same  time, 
the  Argonauts  sailed  by  Taurica,  and  arrived  in  the  night  at  Colchis, 
at  the  very  place  where  the  temple  stood;  where  meeting  with  Medea 
wandering  upon  the  shore,  were  informed  by  her  of  the  cruel  custom 
of  murdering  strangers  in  those  parts ;  whereupon  giving  the  virgin 
thanks  for  her  humanity  and  kindness,  they  told  her  of  their  de- 
signs, and  of  the  end  of  their  adventure;  and  she  on  the  other  hand 
informed  them  what  dangers  she  was  surrounded  with  from  her  fa* 
ther,  by  reason  of  her  kindness  and  compassion  to  strangers:  it  be- 
ing therefore  evident  to  both  parties  what  was  then  fit  to  be  done, 
Medea  on  her  part  promised  she  would  assist  them  to  the  utmost  of 
her  power,  till  they  had  accomplished  their  design ;  and  Jason  pro* 
mised,  and  confirmed  by  a  solemn  oath,  that  Medea  should  fiom 
that  time  forward  be  his  wife.  Hereupon  the  Argonauts  leaving  a 
party  to  guard  their  ships,  went  with  Medea  in  the  night  to  the  golden 
fleece :  of  which  we  must  here  write  more  largely,  that  nothing  may 
be  omited  that  is  pertinent  to  the  histor}% 

They  say  that  Fhr^-xus  the  son  of  Athamas,  to  avoid  the  malice 
of  his  stepmother,  fled  out  of  Greece,  together  with  Helles  his  sister, 
and  being  by  the  advice  and  direction  of  the  gods,  transported  oac 
of  Europe  into  Asia,  upon  the  back  of  a  goldeu-fleeced  ram,  it  hap* 


CKap.  III.  DTODORUS  SICULUS.  S59 


pened  that  the  young  maid  fell  off  into  Pontus^  which  was  thltrefore 
bom  thence  called  Hellespont:  biitPhryxas  landing  safe  in  Colchis, 
by  the  command  of  the  oracle  sacrificed  the  ram,  and  hung  up  its 
skin  in  the  temple  of.  Mars. 

Afterwards  the  king  was  told  by  the  oracle,  that  he  should  die 
when  some  sea-faring  men  came  thither,  and  carried  away  the  golden* 
£eece.  And  this  was  the  cause  (besides  the  cruelty  of  his  nature) 
that  moved  this  vile  man  to  sacrifice  strangers,  that  (this  horrid  cru* 
city  being  noised  abroad  in  all  parts)  no  stranger  might  dare  to  set 
looting  in  his  country.  He  built  a  wall  likewise  round  the  temple^ 
and  placed  a  strong  guard  of  Taurican  soldiers  to  keep  it,  which  has 
afibrded  matter  for  prodigious  stories  among  the  Grecians;  as  how 
that  bulls  which  breathed  out  fire  at  their  nostrils  guarded  the  temple^ 
and  that  a  dragon  kept  the  fleece.  For  by  reason  of  the  ambiguity 
of  the  word  Taurus*,  it  was  strained  to  signify  the  fierceness  and  vio* 
lence  of  bulls;  and  the  cruel  murdering  of  strangers,  gave  rise  to  the 
iiction  of  the  bulls  breathing  out  fire.  Upon  the  same  account 
the  poets  have  given  the  name  of  a  most  terrible  and  monstrous  beast^ 
|ili^ced  as  a  guard  for  security  of  the  temple. 

And  much  like  to  this  story,  is  what  they  say  concerning  Phryxus: 
far  they  say  that  he  sailed  in  a  ship,  upon  whose  fore-deck  was  carv- 
ed the  head  of  a  ram,  and  that  Helle  by  leaning  too  much  forward 
over  the  sides  of  the  ship  to  vomit,  fell  over-board  into  the  sea. 

Others  say,  that  about  the  time  that  Phryxus  with  his  school* 
master  was  taken  by  i£etes,  the  Scythian  king,  the  father-in-law  of 
.£etes,  came  to  Colchis,  and  fell  in  love  with  the  boy,  and  upon 
that  account  he  was  bestowed  by  i£etes  upon  the  Scythian,  who 
loved  him  as  his  own  child,  and  adopted  him  as  his  heir  and  succes-* 
sor  to  the  kingdom,  But  that  the  school-master  whose  name  was 
Cnus\j  was  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  his  skin,  according  to  the 
custom,  was  fastened  to  the  walls  of  the  temple. 

Afterwards  i£etes  being  foretold  by  the  oracle  that  he  should  die 
when  strangers  carried  away  the  ram's  skin,  it  is  said  that  he  gilt  it 
with  gold,  that  the  splendour  thereof  should  cause  the  soldiers  who 
were  set  to  guard  it,  to  be  more  careful  and  diligent  in  their  watch. 
But  we  leave  every  one  to  judge  of  these  things  as  he  thinks  fit. 

However  it  was,  Medea  conducted  tht;  Argonauts  to  the  temple  of 
Mars,  which  was  not  above  seventy  furlongs  distant  from  the  city 
Sybaris,  dignified  with  the  palace  royal  of  the  kings  of  Colchis. 
Medea  therefore  coming  in  the  night  to  the  temple  gates,  which 
►yere  fast  shut  up,  spoke  to  the  guards  in  the  language  of  Tauricai 

*  Which  signifies  iii  Latin  a  bull,  and  ii  like  in  sonnd  to  Taurica, 
t  i'r\ust  ligniAcs  a  rant  ii>  Qrcek. 


260  DIODORUS  gTCULUS.  B^oJk  IH 

^fassssssssssssBStsaeBsssssssss       v         'ssBBsssaaBssaBmammmmmamtBmmmm 

whereupon  knowing  lier  to  be  the  king's  daughter,  they  forthwitli 
opened  the  gates;  upon  which,  the  Argonauts  rushed  in  with  their 
drawn  swords,  and  killed  many  of  the  barbarians,  and  drove  the  wnt 
(terrified  with  the  sudden  surprise)  out  of  the  temple;  and  thm 
plucking  down  the  fleece,  they  hastened  back  to  their  ship  with  all. 
speed. 

While  these  things  were  performing,  Medea  was  as  diligent  oft  bcf 
part,  and  poisoned  the  ever- wakeful  dragon,  which  wound  himietf 
about  the  fleece  in  the  temple;  and  then  she  went  on  ahip-boanl 
with  Jason.     The  Tauricans  that  fled,  informed  the  king  of  what 
was  done,  who  forthwith  pursuing  the  Greeks  with  his  aoldien  whieh 
were  ready  at  hand,  overtook  them  at  the  sea-side,  and  falling  npon 
them  on  the  sudden,  slew  Iphitus,  one  of  the  Argonauts,  brother  of 
EurystheuSy  who  imposed  upon  Hercules  so  many  labours.   Biitwhett 
the  rest  of  the  Greeks  (who  were  before  dispersed)  fell  on  in  a  greib 
body  upon  them,  the  barbarians  were  most  of  them  killed  by  Me- 
leager,  amongst  whom  was  the  king  himself.    The  Grecians  here* 
upon  being  fired  with  this  success,  pressed  more  resolutely  upon  the 
Colchians,  atid  at  length  put  them  to  flight,  and  slew  the  greateil 
part  of  them  in  the  pursuit.     Of  the  Argonauts,  were  wounded  in 
this  encounter,  Jason,  Laertes,  Atalaiita,  and  the  Thespiadcs,  hut 
they  were  cured  within  a  few  days,  by  applications,  as  is  said,  nude 
up  of  herbs  and  roots  by  Medea.     Then  furnishing  themselves  with 
provision,  they  set  sail,  in  order  to  return.  But  being  got  into  the  midst 
of  the  Pontic  sea,  they  were  overtaken  with  a  sudden  tempest^  to  the 
great  hazard  of  their  lives.  But  Orpheus  addressing  himself  to  the  gods 
of  Sainothracia  as  before,  the  winds  presently  ceased,  and  Glaucus 
the  sea-gc)d  presently  appeared  near  to  the  ship,  and  swam  along 
by  the  ship's  side  for  two  days  and   nights  together,  and  foretold 
to  Hercules  his  labours  and  future  immortality.     He  told  likewise 
the  Tyndarides^^that  they  should  be  called  Dioscurif,  and  should  be 
adored  and  reverenced  by  all  men  as  gods.  Then  he  called  the  Ai|ponauts 
every  one  by  their  names,  and  told  them,  that  for  the  sake  of  Or- 
pheus's  prayers,  by  the  provident  care  of  the  gods,  he  now  appealed 
to  them,  and  had  foretold  them  of  things  to  come.    Therefore  he 
advised  them,  that  as  soon  as  they  landed,  they  should  pay  their  vows, 
and  give  thanks  to  the  gods,  by  whose  kindness  they  had  been  now 
twice  delivered.     Having  said  this,  Glaucus  dived  again  into  the 
sea. 

The  Argonauts  being  now  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  Pontns,  made 
to  land,  where  Byzas  then  reigned,  from  whom  the  city  is  nowcalkL 
Byzantiuo).    Here  they  erected  altars^  and  offered  up  tlieir  prayers 

*  Caator  aud  PoHvx*  t  The  looi  of  Jopitcr. 


t3iap.  IIL  DXODORU8  siculus.  261 

and  tkaDks  to  the  gods^  and  consecratad  the  place^  which  is  now  at 
this  day  accouQted  sacred,  and  reverenced  by  all  that  sail  that  way. 
Departing  thence,  they  passed  through  Propontis,  «nd  the  Helles* 
poQtj  and  made  to  the  coasts  of  Troy.  Wbea  they  arrived  there« 
Hercules  sent  his  brother  Iphiclus  and  Telamon  inta  the  city^  t9 
demand  Hesione  and  the  horses:  but  Laomedon  laid  the  messengers 
by  the  heels,  and  plotted  the  destruction  of  all  the  Argonauts.  To 
which  foul  act,  all  his  sons  (except  Priam)  contributed  their  helping 
hands.  For  Priam  alleged,  that  compacts  with  strangers  ought  to 
be  kept  inviolable,  and  pressed  that  bis  sister,  with  the  horses  that 
were  promised  should  be  restored  (whose  advice  being  disregarded9 
be  privately  conveyed  two  swords  into  the  goal  to  Iphiclus  and  Tela* 
mon,  declaring  to  them  his  fiather's  design,  and  by  this  means  pro* 
cured  their  deliverance.  For  forthwith  killing  the  keepers  that  re- 
ftsted  them,  they  escaped  to  the  sea,  and  discovered  all  the  particulars 
to  the  Argonauts.  The  heroes  hereupon  readily  prepared  themselves 
for  battle,  and  marclicd  on  to  meet  the  Trojans^  who  with  their  king 
had  issued  out  of  the  city  against  them. 

A  sharp  dispute  and  conflict  there  was,  but  at  length  the  valour  of 
the  heroes  prevailed,  where  they  say,  Hercules  exceeded  them  all; 
for  he  killed  Laomedon,  and  took  the  city  by  a  sudden  assault^  and 
punished  them  who  were  parties  and  contrivers  in  the  design  with 
the  king;  but  gave  the  kingdom  to  Priam  for  his  justice  and  equity; 
and  after  entering  into  a  league  of  friendship  with  him^  departed 
thence  with  the  Argonauts.  But  some  of  the  antient  poets  say, 
that  being  furnished  only  with  six  ships,  upon  the  accoimt  of  being 
.  denied  the  horses,  lie  took  Troy  himself,  withoutthe  helpof  the  Argo-» 
Qauts;  and  to  confirm  this,  they  allege  these  verses  of  Homer..^ 

But  Hercules  my  father,  as  is  said> 
,  The  liuiis  !»trong  iu  valour  did  exceed. 

That  only  with  six  ships  and  slender  force. 
Fur  Laomcdon'fl  horses  took  his  course; 
And  then  besieg'd  and  took  the  city  Troy, 
And  many  of  hot  people  did  destroy. 

From  Troy  tlie  Argonauts  arrived  at  Samothracia,  and  then  again 
gave  thanks  to  the  gods,  where  they  dedicated  their  drink-ofieriug 
bowls,  and  left  them  in  the  temple,  which  remain  there  at  this  day. 

The  return  of  the  heroes  was  not  yet  known;  but  the  common  re- 
port was  throughout  all  Thessaly,  that  Jason  and  all  his  companions 
were  destroyed  some  where  or  other  about  Pontus. 

Pelias  therefore  now  thinkkng  it  a  fit  opportunity  to  cut  off  all 
that  might  in  any  probability  seem  to  affect  the  kiqgdom,  compelled 
Jason's  father  to  drink  bull's  blood,  and  murdered  his  brotlier  Pro« 
machus,  who  was  tlien  but  a  mere  child. 


962  DionoRUS  sicuLTJS.  Boaklfl 


But  when  Amphiiiome  his  mother  was  sought  for  to  be  butchered, 
she  acted  the  part  of  a  manlike  and  noble  spirit,  worthy  of  remark; 
for  running  to  the  king's  palace,  she  poured  out  most  heavy  coisct 
uponhishead,  wishing  that  doe  vengeance  might  overtake  him  forhii 
impiety;  and  then  immediately  stabbed  herself^  and  so  like  a  hero 
ended  her  days. 

Pelias  having  thus  extinguished  Jason's  whole  family,  in  a  short 
time  after  paid  for  it,  and  received  the  due  reward  of  his  wickedness: 
for  Jason  in  the  night,  entering  a  port  of  Thessaly  not  far  from  the 
city  IoIchos,(yet  out  of  view  of  the  inhabitants),  was  by  one  informed 
of  the  sad  state  and  condition  of  his  family,  and  thereupon  all  the 
heroes  were  in  readiness  to  assist  Jason,  and  to  undergo  all  haards 
for  that  purpose;  but  there  arose  some  difference  of  opinion  amongst 
them;  for  some  were  for  surprising  the  king  with  a  sudden  assault, 
others  were  for  the  raising  of  forces  out  of  every  country,  and  so  to 
join  against  him  in  a  common  war:  for  it  was  impossible  for  three* 
and-forty  men,  to  think  to  overcome  so  potent  a  prince,  both  as  to 
his  riches  and  the  number  of  his  cities.  In  these  di£ferent  eooncils 
it  is  said,  that  Medea  promised  to  kill  the  king  by  a  stratagem,  and 
deliver  up  the  palace  into  their  hands,  without  any  hazard  to  any  of 
them.  The  heroes  wondering  at  what  she  said,  asked  how  she  would 
accomplish  it  ?  Who  answered,  that  she  had  great  variety  of  poisona 
of  admirable  strength  and  efficacy,  some  of  them  found  out  by  her 
mother  Hecate,  and  others  by  her  sister  Circe;  that  she  had  not  as. 
yet  made  use  of  them  for  the  killing  of  any  man,  but  now  by  the 
help  of  them,  she  would  execute  due  and  deserved  punishment  upon 
the  wicked  wretches ;  and  told  the  Argonauts  her  whole  desigu»  after 
what  manner  she  would  get  to  the  king;  and  promised  that  from 
some  turret  in  the  palace  that  looked  towards  the  sea,  she  would 
give  a  sign  to  their  watch  by  fire  in  the  night,  and  by  sn^oke  in  the 
day. 

Hereupon  she  provided  a  hollow  image  of  the  goddess  Diana,  in 
which  she  hid  several  sorts  of  poisons,  and  anointed  her  iiair  with  a 
sort  of  ointment,  which  turned  it  all  grey  and  hoary,  and  with  the 
bSLtne  ointment  wrinkled  up  her  face  and  her  whole  body,  so  that  she 
looked  like  an  old  withered  hag.  Then  taking  the  goddess  with  her, 
ordered  in  all  respects  so  as  to  excite  the  common  people  to  a  super- 
stitious adoration,  she  entered  the  city  when  it  was  light;  where- 
upon the  people  came  running  in  to  her  from  all  quarters^  as  if  she 
bad  been  an  inspired  priestess:  and  she  herself  commanded  every 
body  to  bear  a  reverend  regard  to  the  goddess,  wito  was  now  by  the 
special  providence  of  the  gods,  come  to  them  from  the  Hyperboreans, 
for  the  preservation  of  the  king  and  the  whole  city.    All  being  novr 


CKqi, ///•  BIODORUS  SICULUS»  fSs 

employed  every  where  id  adoring  (he  goddess,  and  preparing  sacri- 
fices in  honour  of  her,  the  whole  city  was  possessed  with  such  a 
fanatical  fury  of  superstition,  that  Medea  slily  procured  herself  to  be 
brought  into  the  palace;  where  with  her  delusions  she  infatuated 
both  Pelias  and  his  daughters  with  such  a  pang  of  superstition,  that 
they  all  believed  the  goddess  was  come  to  load  the  king's  house  with 
all  manner  of  blessings ;  for  she  declared  that  Diana  in  a  chariot, 
drawn  through  the  air  by  dragons,  had  passed  over  many  parts  of  the 
world,  and  had  now  at  length  made  choice  of  the  king  as  the  most 
pious  priace  to  settle  her  image,  and  establish  her  worship  there  for 
ever;  adding,  that  she  was  commanded  by  the  application  of  some 
medicines  to  give  a  check  to  his  old  age,  and  restore  him  to  his  former 
youth  and  strength,  and  bestow  many  other  blessings  upon  him  that 
night  make  his  life  comfortable  to  himself,  and  pleasing  to  the 
goddess« 

The  king  being  amazed  at  this  strange  and  unusual  discourse,  she 
promised  him,  forthwith,  to  give  an  assurance  of  the  truth  of  what 
she  said,  by  an  example  in  her  own  body.  To  this  end  therefore  she 
ordered  one  of  Pelias*s  daughters  to  bring  her  some  spring-water; 
which  being  done,  she  shut  lierself  up  in  a  little  room,  and  bathing 
her  body  all  over  in  the  water,  she  cleansed  herself  of  the  ointment, 
and  so  being  restored  to  her  former  vigour,  as  soon  as  she  came  into 
the  king's  presence,  all  the  beholders  were  amazed :  for  tliey  con- 
ceived that  an  old  woman  was  transformed  into  a  youthful  and  beau* 
tifui  virgin  by  the  power  and  providence  of  the  gods.  She  forthwith 
likewise,  by  her  witchcraft,  caused  the  appearance  of  the  shape  of  the 
dragons  to  appear,  by  which  the  goddess^  was  drawn  through  the  air 
from  tlie  Hyperboreans  to  continue  as  a  guest  with  Pelias. 

These  things  done  by  her,  being  looked  upon  to  be  above  the 
oourse  of  nature,  the  king  highly  honoured  her,  and  believed  sill  she 
said  to  be  true;  and  it  is  said  that  he  took  his  daughters  aside,  and 
ordered  them  to  assist  her,  and  do  whatever  she  commanded :  and 
that  it  was  fitter  his  own  children  should  apply  medicines  to  his  body 
than  servants,  in  order  to  reap  the  benefits  designed  him  by  the  fa- 
vour of  th^  gods.  Pelias  therefore  having  expressly  commanded  that 
his  daughters  should  observe  whatever  Medea  ordered  to  be  done,  in 
reference  to  the  care  of  their  father's  body,  were  ready  in  all  things 
to  obey  her.  About  midnight,  therefore,  when  Pelias  was  fast  asleep, 
she  said  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  his  body  should  be  boiled 
in  a  cauldron :  and  though  the  young  ladies  easily  and  readily  of  their 
own  accord,  prepared  themselves  to  obey  her,  yet  she  applied  her- 
self to  another  experiment  for  the  gaining  further  credit  to  what 
she  said:  there  was  an  old  ram  bred  up  in  the  stall,  which  she  told 


ft64  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  ^  Aok  1)^ 


the  young  ladies,  she  would  first  hoil,  and  then  it  should  eoine  fartfa 
a  lamb.  Whereupon  they  agreed,  and  then  it  is  said,  she  cut  the 
ram  into  small  pieces,  and  boiled  them,  till  to  their  seeming,  by  the 
use  of  the  enchanted  drugs,  she  brought  forth  a  young  tamb  oiit  of 
die  kettle,  to  the  admiration  and  astonishment  of  the  young  womeB^ 
who  now  thinkingthey  miglit  with  great  assurance  depend  upon  what 
she  promised,  resolved  to  observe  her  in  all  her  commands;  Aod  all 
of  them,  but  Alcestis  (who  out  of  a  pious  and  natural  afiectioo  to  her 
father,  would  not  lay  hands  upon  him)  cudgelled  him  to  death. 
Whereupon  Medea  pretended  that  vows  and  firayers  were  first  to  be 
made  to  the  moon,  before  his  body  was  dissected,  and  cast  into  the 
cauldron:  to  which  end,  she  carried  the  young  ladies  with  torchei 
and  fire-brands  to  the  top  of  the  higliest  part  of  the  palace;  where 
Medea  to  spin  out  time,  mumbled  out  a  long  prayer  in  the  language 
of  Colchis,  that  the  Argonauts  might  make  tlte  assault  in  tlie  mean 
time;  who  now  seeing  the  fire  from  the  turret,  concluded  the  king 
was  despatched;  and  therefore  in  a  body  they  made  hastily  to  the 
city;  where  presently  mounting  over  the  walls,  they  entered  the 
palace  with  their  drawn  swords,  and  killed  the  watch  that  opposed 
them.  As  soon  as  Pelias's  daughters  were  come  down  to  boil  their 
father,  unexpectedly  seeing  Jason  with  the  rest  of  the  noble  yotitht 
bis  companions,  entered  into  the  midst  of  the  palace,  they  grievoaily 
cried  out  with  exceeding  sorrow  and  lamentation :  having  now  -nci* 
tlier  power  to  revenge  themselves  upon  Medea,  nor  time  to  purge 
themselves  from  the  horrid  fact  that  by  her  delusions  they  had  com- 
mitted, they  had  forthwith  murdered  themselves,  if  Jason  (pitying 
their  miserable  condition)  had  not  prevented  them,  and  comforted 
them  with  this  consideration,  that  their  present  misery  was  not  oc- 
casioned by  their  own  malicious  contrivance,  but  that  they  were 
without  any  fault  of  theirs  led  aside  by  the  deceit  of  another:  he 
promised  them  likewise,  that  their  whole  family  should  be  civilly  and 
honourably  used.  Having  therefore  called  together  a  general  as- 
sembly, he  excused  what  was  done,  and  declared  that  he  had  dealt 
far  more  gently  with  the  authors  of  thoseinjuries  than  they  deserved; 
and  what  he  had  done,  was  far  short  of  what  he  and  his  had  suflered. 
Then  he  placed  Acastus  the  eldest  son  of  Pelias  upon  his  father's 
throne,  and  carried  himself  with  all  due  respect  to  the  king's  daugh- 
ters;  and  in  performance  of  what  he  had  promised,  it  is  said,  he  at 
length  married  them  to  the  greatest  persons  of  quality. 

Alcestis,  the  eldest,  he  married  to  Admetus  the  Thessalian,  the  son 
of  Pheretes;  Amphinome  to  Andrtemon,  the  brother  of  Leonteus; 
and  £r4dne  to  Canas  the  prince  of  Phocis,  the  son  of  Cephalos. 
And  these  were  the  things  afterwards  dune  by  Jason. 


Ci^lJ^.  9IODORU6  8ICULUS  S66 

Then  arriving  with  the  rest  of  theberoes  in  the  Isthmus  of  Pelopon* 
iiesiis^  he  there  sacrificed  to  Neptune^  and  dedicated  the  ship  Argo 
to  tiiat  god.  Hariog  gained  the  special  fevour  of  Crebn  kiug  of 
Corinthj  he  was  made  free  of  the  city^  and  ever  after  dwelt  ampng 
the  Corinthians. 

When  the  Argonauts  were  preparing  every  one  to  return  into  his 
own  country^  they  say  Hercules  made  this  proposal,  that  to  obviate 
tbe  unexpected  blasts  and  frowns  of  fortune,  they  should  enter  into. 
an  oath  mutually  to  assist  each  other,  whenever  any  of  them  stood  in, 
need  of  help;  and  that  they  should  pick  out  the  most  remarkable 
pliKe  in  Greece  for  the  celebrating  of  sports*,  and  a  general  and, 
■cdemn  meeting  of  all  the  Grecians!  and  that  the  games  should  be 
celebrated  in  honour  of  Jupiter  (Mympus,  the  greatest  oi  the  gods. 

Upon  which  the  heroes  entered  into  the  association  proposed,  and 
kft  it  to  Hercules  to  institute  tbe  games;  who  made  choice  of  the 
gioaild  in  the  territories  of  Elis,  near  to  the  river  Alpheus^  for  the 
Seoeral  and  solemn  meeting,  and  dedicated  the  place  to  the  chiefest. 
of  the  gods,  from  whom  it  was  called  Olympia.  Having  therefore 
appointed  horse*coursing,  wrestling,  and  other  Olympic  sports,  and 
cffdered  their  several  prizes  and  rewards,  he  sent  messengers  to  all 
the  cities,  to  acquaint  them  with  the  institution  of  these  games. 
He  was  in  no  small  honour  and  repute  before,  upon  the  account  of 
liis expedition  with  the  Argonauts :.  but  this  institution  of  the  Olympic 
^ames  much  more  advanced  hb  praise;  for  be  was  so  cried  up  a- 
xnongst  all  the  Grecians,  and  was  so  eminently  famous  in  the  esteem 
9f  most  of  the  cities,  that  many  desired  to  enter  into  a  league  of 
friendship  with  him,  and  to  stand  or  fall  with  him  in  all  dangers 
whatsoever. 

His  valour  and  military  art  was  so  admired  by  every  body,  that 
he  presently  got  together  a  vast  army,  with  which  he  went  through, 
the  whole  world,  desiring  to  benefit  all  mankind ;  upon  which  ac* 
count  all  unanimously  agree  that  he  has  attained  to  a  state  of  im-. 
mortality.  But  the  poets,  according  to  their  prodigious  way  of  relat- 
ing matters,  say,  that  Hercules  himself  alone,  and  without  any 
army,  performed  all  those  famous  actions  reported  of  htm.  But  we 
have  before  given  an  account  of  all  those  things  that  are  fabulously 
related  concerning  this  god:  and  now  it  remains  that  we  should  pro- 
ceed with  the  history  of  Jason. 

It  is  said  that  he  and  Medea,  as  man  and  wife,  lived  together  ten 
years  in  Corinth,  and  of  her  first  begat  twins, Thes«alus  and  Alcime- 
na,  and  then  a  third  called  Tisandrus,  much  younger  than  the  other 

*  Oly mpie  fiuact  iasticuted  bj  Hercutcs.  This  was  the  Srst  UMtitutkin :  bat  the  O* 
]jriiipkt  were  not  mi  tr%.  till  460  jesra  ftfttr.  An.  Maud,  3174^  ia  tbt  97llb  jetr  of 
Uniah  king  ul  Judab,  b«for«  Chriat»  774. 

Vou  I.   No.  35.  MM 


tG6  Dionoitus  S1CULU9.  'AMtlPt 

two.  During  all  this  timey  they  say  Medea  was  greatTy  befoted  of 
her  husband,  being  eminent  not  only  for  the  excelleney  iof  lefbeaqty^ 
but  for  her  prudence  and  other  virtuous  qualifications  V  but  hrissil^ 
that  when  she  grew  old/ and  her  beauty  began  to  decay,  Jitoon'  felT 
in  love  with  Glauce,  the  daughter  of  Creon,  and  courted  the  yoapg 
lady  to  marry  her.  The  father  agreed  to  the  match,  and  appcdnted 
a  day,  but  Jason  they  say,  first  applied  himself  to  Mediea,  ib  order 
to  persuade  her  to  a  voluntary  divorce;  telling  her,  that  he  did  not 
marry  this  other  lady  out  of  any  aversion  or  disgust  to  her^  bnC 
that  he  might  have  children  to  be  heirs  to  the  royal  fenrity.  Hiereat 
the  woman  stormed,  and  appealed  to  the  gods  for  revenge,  the  Wft-= 
nesses  of  his  oath  and  vows.  However,  it  is  said,  Jason  wlthoolf 
any  further  regard  to  her,  married  the  king's  daughter. 

Medea  therefore  being  commanded  to  leave  the  city,  having  only. 
one  day  allowed  her  by  Creon  to  prepare  for  her  departure,  by  the 
art  of  witchcraft  she  ciianged  the  form  of  her  countenance,  andf  en« 
tered  the  palace  in  the  night,  and  by  a  root  found  out  by  Ctrc^  he^' 
sister  (which  being  kindled,  was  of  such  a  nature,  as  it  eould  not  bo 
extinguished)  she  set  the  palace  on  fire.  And  now  all  being  in  t 
flame,  Jason  sprang  out  from  the  burning,  and  escaped,  but  Glraco 
and  her  fiither  Creon  hemmed  in  on  every  side  by  the  fire,  were  both 
consumed.  Some  historians  say,  that  Medea*s  sons  presented  the  new 
bride  with  poisoned  plasters,  whicli  she  appljdng  to  herself,  mima- 
biy  perished,  and  her  father  together  with  her,  by  only  touching  her 
body  in  endeavouring  to  help  her.  Medea  thus  succeeding  in'  her 
first  attempt,  proceeded  sill  to  be  further  revenged  upon  Jason;  for 
she  was  so  far  transported  with  rage  and  jealousy,  yea,  wiA  impfa- 
cable  cruelty,  that  notwithstanding  Jason's  narrow  escape,  and  the 
destruction  of  the  bride,  she  further  enlianeed  his  misery,  By  mur- 
dering his  sons  he  had  by  her;  for  she  cut  all  their  throats  (except 
one  who  made  his  escape  by  flight)-  and  buried  them  in  tlie  tempfe 
of  Juno;  and  when  she  had  done,  at  midnight  fled  with  some  of 
her  faithful  maid-servants  from  Corinth  to  Hercules  at  Thebes,  who 
undertaking  as  a  surety  for  Jason,  that  he  should  perform  hiii  vows 
made  to  her  in  Colchis,  promised  to  assist  her  in  taking  re^oge. 
Ita  the  mean  time,  every  one  judged  Jason  was  justly  punished  in 
this  loss,  both  of  his  wife  and  children :  hot  being  therefdrts  Mt 
to  bear  the  insupportable  weight  of  his  calamitiieS)  he  kiHied  liitoself. 
The  Corinthians  were  even  astonishedat  theextremity  of  lihT n^Isery, 
and  were  especially  perplexed  concerning  the  buryijDg  of  tbcchfl-' 
dren.  Tlicrefore  they  sent  to  Delphos  to  inquire  of  the  bfacte  how 
their  bodies  were  to  be  disposed  of:  and  it  is  suiJ^  the  onacio  ocdnned 
them  to  be  buried  in  Juno's  temple,  and  that  they  ahooM-  for 


tfklp^JS[l  WODOEX»'$VCVUU(l.  t6f 


after  kie[  wonhipiied  ap  demi'^go^  The  CorinthiaDt  accordiiigliK 
obMTVBd.  ^prbfit  was  coaiinaoded;  and  Tbcsaaloa  who  oacaped  cImi 
emd  baacU  of  bis  aiother,|vas  linMight  up  by  them. 
•  Afterwards  be  rauirqed  toJMohos,  bb  iatber's  couDUy,  and  found 
AiMtuli.  Cbe  aoo  of  Pelius^  tbeo  b^telj  d^;  and  tbereapoo  (as  oaiei 
heir  to  tbe  erowo)  took  upou  bin  the  sovereigDautborityi  and  called 
the  people  withiu  his  dominions  after  his  own  name  Thessalianii 
But  lafld  0(01  ^ooraot  that  there  ue  other  accounts  given  cooeefn- 
iag  the  oaroing  of  them  Thessalians,  of  which  we  shall  speak  io 
their  pro|)ef  place. 

In  tlie  mean  time  they  say,  Medea  finding  Hercules  at  Thebes 
distracted,  and  his  children  a  little  before  by  hion  murdered,  she 
cured  him  by  her  medicinal  applications.  But  because  there  was  no 
hbpe  of  assistance  for  her  from  Hercules  at  the  present,  by  reason 
of  the  labours  imposed  upon  him  by  Eurystheus,  she  fled  to  .£geai 
the  ton  of  Pbndioo  at  Athens,  who  married  her,  and  begat  of  h&i 
Medus,  afterwards  king  of  the  Medes.  Others  say,  she  was  brougfal 
to  her  trial  by  Hippotus  the  son  of  Creon,  and  fairly  acquitted. 

Some  sroaU  time  after,  when  Theseus  returned  from  TroeaeDe  to 
Athens,  she  was  expelled  the  city  for  witchcraft;  and  ^Egeus  sent 
her  away  by  messengers,  with  orders  to  conduct  her  to  what  plaoe 
soever  she  had  a  mind  to  go;  and  it  issiiid  she  went  into  Phoenicia, 
and  that  from  thence  she  past  into  the  upper  parts  of  Asia,  and  be* 
iflg  married  there  to  a  certain  famous  king,  she  had  a  son  by  him 
called  Medus,  wlio  after  the  death  of  his  father,  succeeded  in  tho 
kingdom,  and  became  renowped  for  his  valour,  and  after  his  own 
name,  called  the  people  Medes. 

Bat  by  rensOn  of  the  oionstrous  stones  feigned  by  the  tragediatis, 
thefe  is  great  vmiety  and  difference  in  the  history  concerning  MedeiU 
Others,  in  favour  to  the  Athenians, say,  that  she  returned  safe  to  Col^ 
ehis,  and  took  along  with  her  Medus  the  son  of  .£geus:  and  that 
about  that  time,  J^tes  wHs  by  force  of  arms  deprived  of  hia  king^ 
dom  by  Perses  his  brother^  and  was  restored  by  his  nephew  Mcdosi 
who  killed  Perses*  u 

Afterwards  Medus  having  raised  a^reat  army>  overran  many  parts 
of  Asia  above  Pontus,  and  Subdued  that  part  now  ealledi  ftom  liim^ 
Media:  but  it  would  be  here  unnecessary  and  too  tedious  to  relate  aU 
the  stories  that  they  have  written  concerning  Medea;  therefoiv  wedudl 
IKOw  proceed  with  what  remains  of  tbe  history  of  tbe  Argonauts. 

Many,  both  of  the  antient  and  modern  writers,  (amongst  whom  is 
Timseus),  report  that  the  Argonauts  (after  the  carrying  away  of  the 
gohicn  fleece)  coming  to  Understand  thtit.£etes  had  Uooktrd  up.  the 
aiouthof  Vojttm  wach  his  fleets  to  pTiveiit  their  iMiiri^|ieK£ar«icd 


86b  diodorus  siculus.  JkoAlK 

g===  BggBaasaaagaeggggaaasBageaa— Bi— e—il» 


tliat  which  was  wonderfully  remarkable:  for  it  it  aaid^  thcj 

to  the  head  of  the  riirer  Taoais,  aod  there  drew  tbe  ahip  ft 

able  way  over,  and  into  another  river  that  rao  into  tbe  oeeuiy 

fell  down  that  way  into  the  sea;  and  then  bending  thor  eoon 

the  north  to  the  west,  leaving  the  continent  on  their  left  hmad^  Aif 

at  length  entered  our  sea  near  Gades:  and  to  confirm  this^  thqf  «* 

these  arguments 

First,  that  the  Celts,  the  inhaUtants  near  the  ocean,  iomimmCmh 
tor  and  Pollux  above  all  the  rest  of  the  gods;  for  among  these  CellB 
there  is  an  ancient  tradition,  that  these  gods  appeared,  and  cum  Id 
them  out  of  the  ocean :  and  they  affirm,  that  there  are  several  pboes 
near  the  sea,  that  had  their  names  from  the  Argonauts  and  die 
curi,  which  remain  still  to  this  day;  and  that  within  the 
beyond  Gades,  there  are  apparent  marks  and  signs  of  the  retani  iff 
the  Argonauts:  for  sailing  by  Tyrrhenia,  and  arriving  at  a  certrin 
island  called  iEthalia,  there  is  a  spacious  haven,  called bf  then 
Argo,  from  the  name  of  their  ship,  which  name  the  port  retmas  to 
this  day:  and  that  there  is  another  harbour  in  Etruria,  efght  bs** 
dred  furlongs  from  Rome,  which  they  named  Telamon,  aAd  that  the 
port  at  the  city  Formim  into  Italy  they  called  .£etes,  wluch  m  mmt 
named  Caieta. 

They  further  say,  that  being  driven  upon  the  quick-sands  ni  Li* 
bya,  by  a  violent  teirpest,  they  were  informed  by  Triton  the  king, 
of  the  nature  c»f  the  sea  in  those  parts,  and  how  to  avoid  the 
ger;  fur  ^hich  kindness  they  presented  him  with  a  brass  tripod, 
which  were  inscribed  very  aucient  cliaracters,  which  not  loqg  aioee 
it  is  said  was  among  the  Hesperians.  -    . 

We  are  not  here  to  omit  refuting  those  historians,  that  affirai  the 
Argonauts  sailing  through  the  river  Ister  to  the  spring  heads  beioir, 
passedthrough  the  channel  there  straight  before  them  intodie  Adria* 
tic  gulf.  But  time  lias  now  clearly  manifested  the  mistalBea  of  those 
authors,'  who  thought  that  that  bter  wliich  disembogues  bmU  bf 
several  mouths  into  the  Pontic  sea,aod  that  other  which  fislbiulD  Ad* 
ria,  rise  fram  one  and  the  same  spring* head.  For,  ainoe  thocionqueat 
of  Istria  by  the  Romans,  it  is  known  by  experience,  that  the  faun* 
tain-heads  of  the  river,  are  not  above  forty  furlongs  iioai  theaca: 
but  the  identity  of  the  names  of  rivers  has  been  the  occaibii  off  mis- 
takes in  historians. 

Having  now  insisted  long  enough  upon  the  acts  of  Hereuics^  and 
the  Argonauts,  it  is  requisite,  according  to  my  promisej  to  rekte  the 
actions  of  his  sons. 

After  the  translation  of  Hercales  to  the  gods,  hb  childraa  dwelt 
ia  TracbiDia^  with  Ceyx  the  king.    Wheo  Hyllus  and  wmut  off.  the 


CK^Ki  HI.  noooEirs  siculus.  S^ 

rest  were  grown  up  to  men's  estate,  Eurystheus  began  to  fear,  lest 
when  they  were  all  grown  up,  he  should  be  ejected  out  of  the  king- 
dom of  MycensB:  therefore  he  molded  to  expel  the  HeracUike  out' 
of  all  parts  of  Greece.  To  thb  end  he  required  Ceyx,  to  bankh 
the  Heraciids  and  the  posterity  of  licymnius,  together  with  lolaus 
and  the  Arcadian  regiments,  (that  assbted  Hercules  in  his  expedi- 
tions), out  of  his  dominions,  and  threatened  him  tliat  if  he  did  not 
be  would  proclaim  war  against  him. 

Hereopon  the  Heraclidss  and  their  friends,  considering  they  were 
not  able  to  contend  with  him,  resolved  to  fly  fromTrachina  of  their 
own  accord :  making  therefore  away  toother  cities  more  wealthy  and 
eoDsiderable,  they  desired  residence  amongst  them:  but  none  durst 
receive  them  but  the  Athenians,  who  out  of  their  natural  generosity, 
enteruuned  them,  and  gave  them  and  their  friends  habitations  in  IVi- 
eoiy  thus,  which  is  one  of  the  four  cities  of  that  part  of  Attica  odled 
Tetrapoiis. 

After  some  time,  when  all  the  Heraclide  were  attained  to  men^s 
estate,  and  their  spirits  were  raised  on  account  of  the  glory  of  their 
fiither,  Eurystheus,  jealous  of  their  growing  interest,  led  a  strong 
army  against  them.  But  the  Heraclidss,  assisted  by  the  Athenians^ 
having  committed  themselves  to  the  care  of  lolaos,  (Hercul^'s  bro- 
ther's son),  who  together  with  Theseus  and  Hyilus,  commanded  the 
forces,  fought  Eurystheus,  and  routed  his  army,  and  cut  off  a  great 
pan  of  them ;  and  Eurystheus  himself,  (his  chariot  breaking  in  pieces 
in  his  flight),  was  killed  by  Hyilus  the  son  of  Hercules;  and  ail  the 
sons  of  Eurystheus  fell  in  this  battle. 

The  Heraclidffi  having  obtained  ^o  remarkable  a  victory  over 
Eurystheus,  and  their  prosperous  success  now  advancing  the  num- 
ber of  their  forces,  they  invaded  Peloponnesus  under  their  general 
Hyilus. 

One  Atreus*  at  that  time,  after  the  death  of  Eurystheus,  had  ob^ 
tained  the  kingdom  of  Mycens;  and  being  joined  with  the  Tegeans^ 
and  some  other  confederates,  marched  out  against  the  Heraclidae. 
Both  armies  met  in  the  isthmus,  and  there  Hylliis  challenged  any  one 
of  the  enemy  to  fight  him  singly,  upon  condition  that  if  he  over* 
came  the  other,  the  kingdom  of  Eurystheus  should  be  given  up  to 
the  Heraclids;  but  if  he  himself  were  killed,  that  then  the  Hera- 
clidfls  should  not  return  into  Peloponnesus,  within  the  space  of  flfty 
years.  Whereuix>n  Echemus,  king  of  the  Tegeans,  entered  the 
Ibt,  and  fought  with  Hyilus,  who  was  slain  in  the  combat.    The 

*  Thb  Arteot  wm  uncle  to  Eurjftbeus,  that  is,  brother  of  Aisidat&ia,  the  mother  olT 
SuxyttheiMi    He  wu  the  ton  of  FUopt,  and  father  of  Agamenmon.    ViiL  Thy.  lib.  1. 


SjrO  BIODORUS  ftlCULUS.  B^^JBf^ 

Heraclidie  tber<fupoD,  Id  perforsiaDce  of  the  agreementt  nuuie  saAiiw 
ther  attempt  to  enter  Petofwooesos^  but  returned  to  Tricorjrthoiv 
Afterwards  Licymoius  with  his  childreD,  aud  Tlepolemfta  theaoo  of 
Hercules^  by  the  consent  of  the  citiseasy  took  up  their  midenci^ 
and  dwelt  in  Argos;  the  rest  continued  in  Tricurythus,  till  thm  fifty 
years  were  expired^  and  then  they  reti^'ned  into  PelopoDnesus,  whcM 
acts  we  shall  set  fortli,  when  we  come  to  those  tioieSb  Akmena  in 
the  mean  time  came  to  Thebes^  and  a  little  time  after  fanishcd  a«ay« 
so  that  siie  was  worshipped  by  the  Tbebans  as  a  goddess.  The  near  of 
the  Heraclidse^  they  say,  applied  themselves  to  iEgimius  the  aoo  of 
Porusy  who  restored  them  to  their  father's  kii^gdomj  with  which  he 
was  intrusted  by  Hercules^  and  so  settled  themselTes  mmoog  Hm 
Dorians. 

Hal  they  say,  that  Tlepotemus  the  son  of  Hercules,  who  rcaidd| 
in  Argos,  was  forced  to  fly  thence  to  Rhodes,  for  the  killing  of  Ii« 
cymnius  the  son  of  Electryon,  upon  some  falling  out  that  was  he* 
tweeo  them.  The  island  was  then  inliabitcd  by  the  Helleaes^  aco» 
lony  brought  thither  by  Triopas  the  son  of  Phorbas. 

Tlepolemus  divided  Kliodes,  together  wiih  its  inhabitants,  inlft 
three  equal  parts,  and  built  there  three  cities,  Lyndus,  Jalysus,aBd 
Camirus;  becoming  king  of  the  Rhodians  upon  the  account  of  tlio 
renowned  actions  of  his  father,  he  afterwards  assistedAgamemooQ  9I 
the  siege  of  Troy. 


,CHAP.  IV. 

ITie  acU  of  Thesms.  The  dUnotaur  in  Crete,  j/mbragefu  tk^ 
son  of  Minos  murdered  by  Egeus.  Ariadne  daughter  of  Jfinof  9 
in  love  wiih  Theseus,  jlriadne^s  crown.  Egeus  Ung  qf  jt* 
thens  kills  himself.  ITieseus's  death.  Th€  war  of  Jkgte$  % 
the  seven  Captaitu.  The  Epigoni  renew  the  war. 
grees  of  the  heroes  at  Troy.  Of  the  Centaurs,  and 
The  pedigrees  of  Esculapius,  JEacus,  Jjax,  Pelops,  HmtelKa^ 
CEnomaus.    Dardanus*s  posterity,  to  JPriam  king  ef  TVqyw 


SINCE  we  have  spoken  of  Hercules  and  his  posterity,  it 
that  we  say  something  of  Theseus,  because  he  seemed  to  imitate 
Hercules  in  his  brave  and  noble  actions. 
He  was  the  son  of  JSthra,  the  daughter  of  Pittheoi,  by  Nfytnni> 


«    ■      '  .    7—^-—  .^  _        

a0dhtKightu|       rrdoene,     ifi     ttfte  r'^IWher.  Rar* 

tftenvaads  fba  il  (as  if  feportcO)'  the  i  hid  tinder  a  stone  by 

i!l^iis^  he  resbhvd  to  gb  to  Athens:  as  he  travelled  along  the  sea* 
coasts  in  the  istbinas,  his  ikrindwas'  ftill  of  thoughts  how  to  fanibtee 
iheTalour  of  Hercules,  and  to  perfonn  sdme  gtorioas  aild  honour- 
<Me  enterprises. 

First,  therefore,  he  killed  Corynetes,  who  used  t»  carrf  a  dbb 
erfkd  Coryne,  which  he  used  as  defensive  armf,  and  with  the  same 
weapon  Icnodced  all  passengers  and  travellers  on  the  hetd. 

t.  Then  next,  he  slew  Scinfs,  who  haonted  the  iirthnms,  and  M04 
tor  bend  down  two  pine  trees,  one  to  meet  another,  and  bind  doe 
arm  to  one  of  the  trees,  and  another  to  the  other;  of  sncft  ar  te 
fDok  pasising*  that  way;  and  when  he  had  dlahef  then  to  fet  theilt 
springy  up  on  s  sudden,  which  by  their  ftiirce  Md  ^<flence  so  rent  In 
^ccs  the  bodies  of  the  poor  adfserabte  creatdres,  that  they  dtled  id 
most  liorrid  pain  and  torment* 

9.  Tlie  tbh^  thing  remarkable  that  he  did,  was  the  Icilffpg  the 
Crommyonian  sow,  a  most  vast  and  fierce  creaturcj^  whtch  destroyed 
many* 

4.  The  fourth  was  the  killing  of  SclroU,  who  lay  lorfting  attotfgiT 
the  rocks,  called  from  him  the  Scironian  rocfcr:  his  insinAer  wni^ 
Aat  he  would  force  passengers  to  wash  bis  feel  opotf  (he  fbp  of  a 
steep  fock,  and  then  kick  them  dbwn  head*long  Into  the  sea,'  iear 
Chelone. 

5.  Next  he  slew  Cercyon  at  Bleusis,  who  killed  all  Aathe  <:hrer- 
etme  in  wrestling. 

6.  Afterwards  he  killed  one  Procrustes,  who  resided  in  Cbiydaltos 
in  Attica:  hts  custom  was  to  fbrce  all  that  passed  that  way,  t6  lie 
down  upot>  a  bed,  and  if  they  were  longer  than  it,  to  cut  o^  so 
much  of  their  legs,  aareached  beyond  ttie  bed;  if  they  Were  Shorter, 
thea  he  racked  and  stretched  out  their  limbs,  till  they  reached  thd 
fiill  length :  thence  he  was  named  Ph>crnstes. 

Having^  performed  these  notable  exploits,  he  came  to^Athensj  and 
by  the  tokens  which  he  brought  alonjg  with  him,  he  was  known  9|icf 
owned  by  /Egeus. 

7.  Afterwards  he  mastered  the  Marathonian  bull,'  (which  Hercu- 
les, in  performance  of  one  of  his  Ifkbours,  brought  from  Crete  into 
Peloponnesus),  and  led  the  monster  in  triumph  into  Athens,  whicK 
iKgeus  sacrificed  to  Apollo. 

And  now  it  remains  that  we  speak  of  the  Minotaur  which  was 
killed  by  Theseus:  but,  for  the  clearer  understanding  of  the  history,, 
il  is  necessary  that  we  first  ascend  to  things  done  some  time  before, 
that  have  a  reference  to  the  narration. 


872  DI0D0RU8  8ICUI.U8*  Book  tK 


Tectamiis  the  son  of  JDonis,  the  son  of  HelleD ,  the  iod  of  Deo* 
calion,  arriviDg  in  Crete,  with  the  .£olians  and  PeliiigianSy  reigiied 
there  as  Icing,  and  marrying  the  daughter  of  Cretheos^  had  by  her 
Asterius;  in  the  time  of  whose  reign,  they  say  Jupiter  having  car- 
ried away  Europa  out  of  Phcenicia,  transported  her  upon  %  boll's 
back  into  Crete,  and  upon  her  begat  three  sons,  Minos^  Rhadamao* 
thus,  and  Sarpedon. 

Asterius  king  of  Crete  afterwards  married  Europa,  but  hawig  no 
children  of  his  own,  he  adopted  the  sons  of  Jupiter,  and  left  the 
kingdom  to  them.  Rhadamanthus  prescribed  laws  for  the  Cretaoa. 
Minos  taking  the  kingdom  upon  him,  married  Itone,  the  daughter  of 
Lyctius^  and  of  her  b^t  Lycastes,  who  coming  to  reign^  mafried 
Ida  the  daughter  of  Corybantus,  and  of  her  begat  another  MiooSf 
whom  some  say  was  the  son  of  Jupiter.  He  was  the  first  of  the 
Grecians  that  rigged  out  a  gallant  navy,  and  gained  the  dominioa  of 
the  sea.  He  married  Pasiphae,  the  daughter  of  Sol  and  Perds^ 
and  by  her  had  Deucalion,  Astrea,  Androgens,  Ariadne,  ukiChmjaf 
other  children. 

Androgens  in  the  reign  of  £geus,  went  to  Athens,  to  the  Faoap 
thenean*  solemnities,  where  he  was  victor  in  all  the  sports  aod  eoo- 
tests;  upon  which  account  he  became  very  familiar  with  the  aoos 
of  Pallas ;  and  thereupon  iEgeus  grew  jealous,  lest  the  boose  of  Pallas^ 
with  the  assistance  of  Minos,  should  deprive  him  of  his  kingdoBSy 
and  therefore  contrived  to  cut  off  Androgens.  To  which  end,  Mhc$ 
was  travelling  to  Thebes  to  see  a  sacred  procession  by  order  of  iB- 
geus,  he  was  waylaid  by  some  of  the  country  people,  and  asaisainatcd 
near  CEnoo  in  Attica. 

Minos  afterwards  hearing  of  the  sad  misfortune  of  his  son,  went 
to  Athens,  and  required  justice  for  the  murder  committed:  hot  see* 
ing  he  could  not  prevail,  he  procUimed  war  against  the  Athenians^ 
and  prayed  Jupiter  to  send  a  drought  and  &mine  upon  the  city  of 
Athens ;  whose  prayer  was  speedily  heard,  for  forthwith  there  waS: 
a  great  drought  throughout  Attica,  and  even  through  all  Greece  it- 
self, together  with  a  miserable  scarcity  and  dreadful  famine. 

The  chief  men  therefore  of  the  several  cities,  assembling  them- 
selves together,  sent  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delphos,  w\mt  they 
must  do  in  order  to  avert  the  present  calamity;  who  answered,  t|yit 
they  were  to  go  to  iEacus  the  son  of  Jupiter,  and  .£gina  the  daugh- 
ter of  Asopus,  and  entreat  him  to  offer  sacrifices  for  them :  whicli 


*  The  Panatbeiiean  festiTaU  were  kept  io  honoor  of  Minerva^  wbrrrin  ttsra  eabi* 
^ited  wrestling,  horse  races,  dancing  m  armour,  6cc.  The^  wert  celebrate<|  'the  tVlh 
of  Jul  J,  yearly.  Rous.  Archnal.  Atiic.  lib.  t.  c  10.  p.  67.  Vid.  Sceph.  Diet.  Thej 
were  instituted  by  Theseus  ;  upon  wiiat  ground '— we  Pbomii*  in  Aicad.  e.  f. 


Ckap.  IPi  DlODOItVS  SfCULUS.  S7S 

they  did  accordingly,  and  JEacus  performed  what  they  desired :  upoa 
which  the  di^ght  and  famine  ceased  in  all  parts  of  Greece,  but 
only  in  Attica,  and  there  it  still  continued;  so  that  the*  Athenians 
were  forced  to  resort  again  to  the  oracle,  to  implbre  relief  from  tht 
pressing  calamity.  Upon  which  the  god  returned  answer,  that  to 
expiate  the  murder  of  Androgens,  they  should  give  to  Minos  such 
satisfaction  as  he  required.  The  Athenians  obeyed  the  oracle;  atad 
Minos  demanded,  that  for  seven  years  together  they  should  send  se« 
ven  boys,  and  as  many  girls,  to  be  devoured  by  the  Minotaur,  and 
that  this  they  should  do  as  long  as  the  monster  lived*  The  Athe* 
nians  sent  them  accordingly,  and  so  the  famine  ceased,  and  Mindt 
desisted  from  the  further  prosecution  of  the  war.  When  the  seven- 
years  were  expired,  Minos  came  again  with  a  great  navy  into  tht 
ooasts  of  Attica,  and  demanded  fourteen  boys,  which  were  delivered 
him. 

Theseus,  with  the  rest  of  the  children  his  fellows,  being  now  ready 
to  set  sail,  i£geus  sent  a  pilot  along  wjch  them,  with  orders^  that  it 
Theseus  overcame  the  Minotaur,  that  they  should  enter  the  port  of 
Athens  with  white  sails;  biijt  if  he  perished,  with  black,  as  they  used  ' 
formerly  to  do." 

When  the  Athenians  arrived  in  Crete,  Ariadne,  Minos's  daughter^ 
Cell  in  love  with  Theseus,  for  his  gallant  mean  and  deportment t 
having,  therefore,  opportunity  of  converse  with  her,  by  her  advict 
and  assistance  he  both  killed  the  Minotaur,  and  learned  the  passage 
out  of  the  labyrinth,  and  so  came  out  safe.  Then  privately  preparing 
tor  bis  return  into  his  own  country,  he  stole  away  Ariadne,  and  sailed 
out  of  the  port  in  the  night,  and  arrived  at  the  island  then  called  Dia, 
bat  now  Naxos^ 

They  report,  that  at  that  time  Bacchus  being  taken  with  the  beauty, 
of  the  young  lady,  took  her  by  force  from  Theseus,  and,  through  tht 
ardent  affection  he  had  for  her,  married  her;  and  that  his  love  for  he? 
was  such,  as  tiiat,  after  her  death,  he  dignified  her  with  immortality, 
and  transformed  her  crown  into  a  constellation  of  stars,  called  Ari« 
adne's  crown.  Theseus,  they  say,  was  so  grieved  to  be  thus  be» 
reaved  of  the  young  lady,  that,  through  sorrow  and  vexation,  he  for- 
got the  commands  of  i£geus,  and  made  into  the  port  of  Atheos  with 
black  sails.  At  which  sight  ^gcus,  concluding  that  his  son  was 
destroyed,  resolved  upon  a  heroic,  but  a  sad  and  lamentable  action; 
for  he  went  up  to  the  top  of  the  citadel,  and,  (through  the  excessive* 
ness  of  hisgrieif  counting  his  life  a  burthen  to  him),  threw  himself 
down  headlong.  After  his  death  Theseus  succeeded  him  in  the 
kingdom,  and  governed  according  to  the  laws,  and  ordered  and  per« 
formed  many  things  which  conduced  to  the  wel&se  wi  IHprrwe  f4 

yoL.l.  Np.  35,  W 


a!i4  DIODOEUS  6ICULUS.  .WooklWi 

the  city.    The  mmt  iaioous  aad  remarkable  among,  all  the  TCSt.'Wta 

this ^Tiiat  htr  gathered  all  the  people  together  that  were  scattereda- 

brpaH  in  Uie  cuunir^u  (who  were  more  considerable  for  ibeir  DOm* 
ber  (iirtij  th«  ir  powfr),  and  brought  them  into  Athens.  From  this  time 
the  largeness  of  the  city  did  so  puif  up  the  Athenians,  and  swell 
them  with  that  confidence,  that  they  questioned  not  but  to  be  kxdi 
of  all  Greece.  Bui  having  said  enough  of  these  things,  we  shall  go 
on  with  those  which  remain  concerning  TheseuSj  and  which  aftar« 
wards  happened  to  him. 

Deucalion,  the  eldest  of  Minos's  sons,  reigning  in  Crete,  entcrad 
into  a  league  with  the  Athenians,  and  qiarried  his  own  sister  Phmdn 
to  Theseus. 

After  his  marriage  he  sent  away  his  son  Hippolytus,  whom  he  had 
by  the  Amazon,  to  Troezene,  to  be  bred  and  brought  up  by  his  siater 
^thra:  of  Phaedra  he  begat  Acamantes  and  Demophon. 
.  JJippolytus  awhile  after  coming  to  Athens  to  the  eelebratioo  of  a 
great  festival,  Phedra  was  so  taken  with  bis  beauty,  that  she  fell 
passionately  in  love  with  him ;  but  he  going  hack  again  for  that.tune, 
she  built  near  to  the  citadel  the  temple  of  Venus,  whence  she  mijgfat 
have  a  prospect  of  Troezene. 

.'  Afterwards  going  with  Theseus  to  Troezene,  to  visit  Pitthevs^  she 
solicited  Hippolytus  to  lie  with  her,  who  reftising  the  motion,  her 
love  was  turned  into  hatred  and  rage,  and  therefore  she  accused  him 
to  her  husband,  that  he  attempted  to  ravish  her.  Tbeseos,  suspect* 
ing  the  truth  of  what  she  said,  summoned  Hippolytus  to  appear  and 
answer  the  accusation ;  but  Phaedra,  fearing  she  should  be  disc6veied 
upon  the  trial  of  the  cause,  hanged  herself. 

When  Mippolytus  first  heard  of  the  accusation,  he  waa  driving  a 
chariot;  upon  the  news  whereof,  he  was  in  such  a  consternation  and 
disturbance,  that  he  let  the  reins  fall,  which  so  startled  the  hones, 
that  they  hurried  him  away,  and  broke  the  chariot  in  pieces;  and  he 
liimself,  being  fastened  in  the  harness,  was  dragged  along  upon  the 
ground,  and  so  perished.  Hippolytus  thus  losing  his  life,  upon 
the  accouut  of  his  commendable  chastity,  was  adored  by  the  Trane* 
neans  as  a  god.  Theseus  afterwards,  by  a  sedition,  being  driven  out 
of  the  city,  died  in  hanishnient.  But  the  Atheniatis,  being  sorry  for 
what  they  had  done,  brought  back  his  bones,  and  hoinnired  him  as  a 
god,  and  the  place  where  they  buried  him  in  the  midst  of  Athens, 
they  made  a  sanctuary,  which  from  him  was  called  Thueimu 

Since  we  have  proceeded  so  far  in  the  story  of  .Thesetts,  we  shall 
give  ^  distinct  account  s\so  of  the  rape  of  Helen,  and  the  intentien  of 
Pcriihous  to  coMrt  Proserpina;  for  these  things  have  aiektiMi  to  Ika 


CKap.rt^  DitoORus  sTCtTitrd:      8^6 


Perithods,  the  son  of  Ixion,  after  the  de&th  of  his  wife  Hippo^ 
lit,  by  whom  he  had  a  sod  called  Folypcfeteir,  went  to  Athens  to 
TbeseniSy  whoiti  finding  a  widower,  (haring  then'  lately  buried  his' 
wife  Pbedra),  he  advised  to  steal  away  Helen^  the  daughter  of  Jupi-' 
ter  and  Leda,  who  Was  then  about  ten  years'  of  age,  atid  of  surpass- 
ing beauty.    To  this  end  they  went  (withsome  other  of  their  asso- 
dbites)  (o  Liacedsemon,  and,  catching  a  fit  opportunity  for  the  pur« 
pose,  seized  upon  Helen  as  their  common  prizcf,  and  carried  her  away 
to  Athens;   where  it  was  agreed  between  them  to  cast  lots  for  her, 
and  that  he  who  should  have  the  good  fortune  to  gain  her,  should 
faithfully  assist  the  other  (through  all  hazards  whatsoever)  in  j^roc^r- 
ing  him  another  wife.    This  compact  being  confirmed  by  a  sdlej^a 
o«th,  she  fell  by  lot  to  Theseus.    The  Athenikns  were  much  in* 
censed  at  what  was  done  in  this  business:  Theseus,  therefore,  fear- 
iog^  the  bad  effect  of  it,  privately  kept  Helen  at  Aphidna,  one  o^ 
the  cities  of  Attica,  and  committed  her  to  the  care  of  his  mothei^ 
iEthra,  and  some  other  persons  of  quality  that  were  his  faithful 
friends. 

Afterwards  Perithous  had  a  desire  to  conrt  Proserpina,  and  for  thif 
purpose  required  Theseus  to  go  along  with  him.  At  first  Theseus 
endeavoured  to  dissuade  him,  and  to  take  him  off  from  such  a  vrick- 
ed  and  impious  design.  But  Perithous  urging  him  the  more  vehe- 
mently, (and  by  virtue  of  his  oath  being  bound  thereunto),  be  at 
length  agreed  to  join  with  him  in  the  attempt.  To  this  end  both  of 
them  descended  into  the  shades  below*,  and  for  their  impudence 
and  impiety,  were  clapped  up,  and  bound  fast  in  chains;  but  The- 
seus was  afterwards  released  for  the  sake  of  Hercules.  But  Peri- 
thous sufiers  eternal  pains  with  the  infernal  spirits  for  his  wicked- 
ness; though  some  writers  report,  that  neither  of  them  ever  returned. 
About  the  same  time  they  say.  Castor  and  Pollux  (the  brothers  of 
Helen)  assaulted  Aphidna,  and  taking  it  by  storm,  razed  it  to  the 
ground,  and  carried  away  Helen  (still  a  virgin)  to  Lacedsemon,  and . 
with  her,  among  the  captives  £thra,  the  mother  of  Theseus. 

Having  spoke  suflBciently  of  these  things,  we  shall  now  proceed 
to  give  an  account  of  the  seven  captains  that  made  war  against 
Thebes,  and  shew  the  first  causes  of  that  warf.  Laius  the  king  of 
Thebes,  having  married  Jocasta  the  daughter  of  Creon,  and  for  a 

• 

*  HeU.  See  this  explaiaed  in  Plat.  Thes.  This  Piuto  was  tbe  kin.^  jf  the  Molof* 
gUos,  and  his  wives  and  daughters  aame  was  Proserpina,  who  clapped  botb  Theseut 
and  the  other  up  in  prison. 

t  This  is  the  first  war  related  by  any  heathen  hisitorian,  either  in  prose  or  Tcrft . 
An.  Mund.  1797,  the  lOcb  year  ot  Jair»  Judg.  10.  iii.  Bciotc  Christ,  1S91,  alraat  ^ 
yean  before  ih»Xn^aii  war. 


tf6  DIODORUS  SICULU8*  BpOJl  IFi, 

long  time  beiog  without  children,  at  length  consulted  the  omde 
whether  he  ever  should  have  any  issue.  Pithia  the  priesieas  gaie 
this  answer  from  the  oracle,  that  it  would  be  unfortunate  for  him 
to  have  any  issue;  for  tiiat  the  son  tliat  he  shoulcf  afterwards  beget^ 
should  kill  him,  and  involve  his  whole  family  in  roost  dreadful  cala* 
roities.  But  somewhat  forgetful  of  what  the  oracle  had  declaredly 
he  afterwards  begat  a  son,  but  bored  his  feet  through  with  an  iron, 
and  ordered  him  to  be  exposed  in  the  open  fields;  and  for  that  rea- 
son he  was  afterwards  called  (Edipus.  The  servants  that  took  him 
itito  their  custody  for  that  purpose,  were  unwilling  to  leave  him  so 
to  the  wide  world,  but  gave  him  to  Polybus's  wife,  who  was  barreiu 

Being  attained  at  length  to  man's  estate,  Laius  resolved  to  !»• 
quire  of  the  oracle,  to  know  what  was  become  of  the  exposed  in« 
fant;  and  OEdipus  at  the  same  time  being  by  some  one  informed  of 
the  design  against  him  when  he  was  so  very  young,  took  a  journey 
to  Delphos,  to  inquire  of  the  oracle  who  were  his  true  parents:  it  so 
fell  out,  that  both  of  them  meeting  one  another  upon  the  road  \m 
Phocis,  Laius  in  a  proud  and  haughty  manner  commanded  QEldipus  to 
get  out  of  the  ni-ay ;  who  thereupon  was  so  enraged,  that  he  fell  op* 
on  Laius  and  killed  him,  not  knowing  him  to  be  his  father. 

About  that  time  they  report  that  Sphinx,  a  double  shaped  monster, 
came  to  Thebes,  and  put  forth  a  riddle  to  be  resolved  by  any  that. 
could :  which  none  being  able  to  do,  (l)y  reason  of  the  difficulty  of 
the  thing),  she  destroyed  many:  at  length  she  became  more  mode- 
rate, and  oflered  a  reward  to  such  as  should  unfold  it^  that  he  should 
marry  Jocasta,  and  with  her  enjoy  the  kingdom  of  Thebes.    When 
none  else  could  expound  the  riddle,  QUipus  was  the  only  man  that 
did  it.     The  riddle  propounded  by  Sphinx  was  this :  fFhai  creature 
is  that,  tvhivh  is  two-footed^  three-footed,  and  four-footed?  Whea 
all  others  were  puzzled,  OEdipus  interpreted  it  to  be  a  man;  who 
when  he  is  an  infant,  creeps  upon  all-fours;  when  he  grows  older, 
goes  upright  upon  his  two  feet;  but  when  he  Isold,  he  is  three- 
footed,  Ubing  a  staff  to  support  him,  by  rea&on  of  his  weakness. 
Whereupon  Sphinx,  (as  it  is  reported),  threw  herself  down  hcadkmg. 
from  the  top  of  the  rock:  and  (Edipus  married  his  motlier  unknowB 
to  him,  and  begat  of  her  two  sons,  Eteocles  and  Polynices,  and  two 
daughters,  Antigone  and  Ismene.     The  sons  being  grown  up  to 
nian*s  estate,  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  wickedness  com- 
mitted in  their  family,  and  therefore,  for  the  foulness  of  the  ftet, 
confined  CEdipus,  so  as  tliat  he  should  not  stir  abroad;  and  his  sont 
took  upon  them  tlie  government,  first  agreeing  together  to  rule  yearly 
one  after  another  by  turns.     Eteocles,  the  elder  brother^  reigned 
first,  but  when  his  year  was  out,  he  refused  to  give  way  to  Ims  bio* 


Othp.  TPi  MOBOfiUS  sitULtrs.  277 

tber:  Polyniccs  demanded  llie  government  according  to  the  cnvt- 
Bant  between  them,  but  liis  brother  turned  to  him  the  deuf  ear; 
njton  wliicli  he  repiiirect  to  Aitraslus  king  of  Argos. 

At  which  time  Tydeus  the  son  of  (Eneu3  king  of  Cnlydonia,  liad 
fled  outof  iEiolia  to  Argos,  for  killing  his  ne[iliews  Alcntlious  and 
Lymbeus.  Adrastus  kindly  entertained  them  both,  and  by  com- 
mand of  the  oracle,  gave  his  daughter  Ai^ia  in  marriage  to  PiJynfcM, 
and  Deipyle  to  Tydeus,  The  young  men  being  Loth  in  great  ho- 
nour and  estectn,  and  highly  approved  of  by  the  king  for  their  vir- 
tuous qualifications,  Adrastus  promised  to  restore  them  both  totlieir 
owti  countries.  Resolving  therefore  first  to  bilng  back  Polynices, 
he  sent  Tydeus  on  an  embassy  to  Eteoclcs  to  debate  the  matter 
w!tb  him:  in  his  return,  it  is  said,  he  was  set  upon  by  fifty  men,  em- 
ployed by  Etcocles  to  way  lay  him;  all  whom,  notwithstanding,  he 
slew,  and  came  safe,  beyond  all  seeming  probability  to  Argos.  A- 
draslus  being  informed  of  this  piece  of  treachery,  prepared  all  things 
Decessary  for  the  war,  and  procured  Capaneus,  Hippomeilon,  and 
Part henopsus,  the  sonof  Ata[anta,thcdiiughtcrofSch(cneus,  to  join 
with  litm:  Polynices  also  endeavouied  to  persuade  Amphiaraus  the 
soothsayer,  to  go  along  with  them  to  the  war  against  Tliebes;  but 
he  foreknowing  he  should  fall  in  that  war  if  he  went,  refused  to  stJr. 
Polynices  therefore  presented  Amphiaraus's  wife  with  a  golden  chain, 
(which,  as  is  reported,  was  bestowed  upon  Harmonia  by  Venui), 
to  persuade  her  husband  to  join  with  them  as  one  of  their  confede- 
rates, There  being  some  controversy  about  that  time  between  A- 
drastiis  and  Amphiaraus  concerniug  the  kingdom,  they  agreed  to-, 
gnher  to  refer  the  whole  matter  in  difference,  both  as  to  the  king- 
dom and  the  war,  to  the  decisive  jtidgment  of  &iphyle  the  Biater  of 
Adnstus,  and  wife  to  Amphiaraus.  Hereupon  she  gave  judgsneot' 
for  Adraitus,  and  that  her  husband  should  joio  with  the  rest  ia  the 
war  against  Thebes.  Amphiaraus,  (tliough  he  looked  upon  himself  to 
be  betrayed  by  his  wife),  yet  prepared  to  go  along  with  the  atheP 
captains:  but  before  he  went,  commanded  his  son  Alcmnon,  that 
after  he  was  dead,  he  should  kill  £riphyle}  who  afterwards  executed 
his  fatha's  commands,  by  murdering  his  mother;  bat  was  some 
time  after  so  terrified  in  conscience  with  the  horridness  of  the  fact, 
that  he  went  stark  m&d. 

But  to  proceed;  Adrastus,  Polynices,  and  Tydeus,  together  with 
four  other  captains,  Amphiaraus,  Capaneus,  Hippomedon,  and  Par- 
tfaenopieus,  with  a  greatarmy,  marched  against  Thebes;  where  £teo- 
cles  and  Polynices  killed  each  other.  Capaneus,  in  attempting  tQ 
scale  the  walls,  was  likewise  slain.  The  earth  opened  and  swallowed' 
up  Amphiaraus  and  his  chariot  together,  and  so  he  was  never  more 


DIODORU8  SICULUa*^  Btoft  IfS 


seen.  All  the  rest  of  the  ^[eoerals  likewise  periahed  in  ihift  War 
cept  Adrastiis,  and  a  great  slaughter  there  was  amo^g  die  oaa 
soldiers^  whom  the  Thebaos  would  not  suffer  to  be  carriied  off  ihm 
grouDd;  so  that  Adrastus  was  forced  to  leave  them  unburriftd^ .  and 
return  to  Argos. 

The  bodies  of  the  slain  thus  lying  unhurried  at  Cadmc%  mhm 
daring  to  inter  them,  the  Athenians  (always  commeDdable  abovft 
others  for  their  humanity)  took  care  of  this  matter,  and  buried  theiB 
all.  And  these  were  the  misfortunes  that  befel  the  seven  oapttioft 
in  the  war  at  Thebes. 

But  the  children  ct  them  that  were  slain,  called  Epigoni*^  to  ra- 
venge  their  fathers*  deaths,  all  joined  together,  and  resolved  to  nako 
war  upon  that  city.  The  oracle  of  Apollo  (upon  inquiry)  answcnd 
them,  that  they  should  overcome  Thebes,  if  they  inade  AlcfUHO^ 
the  son  of  Amphiaraus  their  general*  Whereupon  Alcmaon  being 
accordingly  (with  unanimous  consent)  created  commander-in-cfaiefy 
consulted  the  oracle,  both  concerning  the  present  intended  tMfttHe* 
tion,  and  the  revenge  that  he  was  enjoined  by  his  father  to  czcn 
cute  upon  Eriphyle  Ids  mother.  The  oracle  commanded  hiin  to 
perform  both,  because  she  not  only  received  a  chain  of  gold  for  what 
she  did,  which  was  the  occasion  of  his  father's  death,  but  a  rich  vatef 
likewbe  as  a  bribe,  in  order  to  the  ruin  of  himself.  Venus  (tkejaaj) 
heretofore  bestowed  this  chain  and  garment  upon  Harmoniatthemfe 
of  Cadmus;  but  both  were  given  to  Eriphyle;  the  chain  by  Polyttioety 
and  the  vale  by  Thersandra,  Polynice's  sou,  that  she  might  persiiado 
Alcmseon  to  go  to  the  Theban  war. 

Alcmson  therefore  raised  soldiers  out  of  Argos,  but  great  anaabcfB 
out  of  the  neighbouring  towns,  and  with  these  he  marched  agaioat 
Thebes:  the  Thebans  issued  out  of  the  city  against  them^  upon 
which  there  was  a  sharp  engagement ;  but  the  AlcmsBons  at  length 
got  the  day.  The  Thebans  being  thus  overcome  with  a  great  akngh* 
ter  of  their  citizens,  seeing  themselves  too  weak  for  the  othery  utterly 
despaired  of  all  future  success,  and  therefore  consulted  Tireaias.  the 
soothsayer  what  they  should  do ;  wlio  advised  them  toabandon  the  cttj^ 
as  the  only  means  left  for  their  safety  and  preservation.  The  Cad- 
means  followed  his  advice,  and  in  the  night  forsook  the  city,  and  fled 
to  a  province  in  Bceotia,  called  Tilphussus.  The  Epigonians  after* 
wards  entered  and  razed  the  city,  and  being  now  lords  of  all,  (amoiig 
others),  possessed  themselves  of  Daphne,  the  daughter  of  Tireaiaiy 
whom  (according  to  their  vow)  they  devoted  (as  the  chief  of  their 
spoils)  to  the  oracle  at  Delphos.  The  daughter,  nothing  inferior  to 
her  father  in  the  art  of  divination,  mightily  improved  it  while  aha^ 

*  Bora  ■iter,  t  Or  garmeot  called  Feplos* 


ceottOQeitttDelphos;  for  she  ^ts^erichied  with  those  parts  and-qni^ 
MicitiMHthfttwere  to  he  admired/  She 'wrote  difiera  sorts  of  pito^ 
jphetieal  irerscs  in  a  most  artifieiardres8imd.eoiiipa8iire,baiof  whisb 
ftbay  ii]^  the  poet  flbmer  borroiired  many  ^rerses  'for  the  adonsisf 
of  his  poems.  Being  ofteii  in  an  enthosiastical  iDspiration  from  the 
god, ahe  uttered  things  that  were  prophetical,  and  iherefoR  (theyvay) 
she  was  called  a  Sihyl ;  for  to  be  so  inspired  is,  in  theChreek  langua^a; 
to  acfe  the  Sibyl.  ^ 

-  The  Epigoiiians  thus  prosperous j  succeeding  in  their  expedilioiiy' 
Ktnmed  at  length  (loaden  with  spoil)  into  their  own  covntiy.  Aim 
iBODg  those  Thri)ans  that  £ed  to  Tllphossss,  Tiresias  died,  and  wat 
buried  by  the  Cadmeans  with  great  funeral  pomp,  and  adored  after^ 
wards  as  a  god. 

In  piucess  of  time,  however,  aft^r  leaving  Tilphossus,  they  invadai 
the  Dorians,  and,  overcoming  them  in  a  battle^  expelled  them  boi  of 
their  country,  and  settled  themselves  for  awhile  in  their  stead;,  bift 
afterwards  part  of  them  returned  to  Thebes,  in  the  reign  of  Cieoo^ 
the  SOB  of  Menceceus,  and  the  rest  continued  in  Dorla:  but  the  ex^ 
poised  Di)r]ans  at  length  returned  into  their  country,  and  miiabiliA 
Erineus,  Citiuius,  and  part  of  Bceotia*.  About  this  time  Bceotui^ 
the  son  of  Neptune  and  Arne,  came  into  the  coimtry,  then  callrit 
.£olis,  {now  Thessaly),  and  named  those  that  accompanied  Urn 
BoBotians. 

Here  it  is  necessary  to  give  a  distinct  and  particular  accomit  of* 
those  things  which  we  have  gathered  out  of  the  rubbish  of  antiqutty, 
concerning  these  iEoiians. 

.  In  former  times,  some  of  the  children  of  iEolus  (the  nephew  of 
Deucalion  and  Helen)  inhabited  the  places  liefore  mentioned;  but 
Mimas,  another  son,  reigned  in  iEolis,  and  Hippotes,  the  son  of 
Mimas,  begat  iEulus  of  Menalippe;  and  Arne  the  daughter  of  tfalfT 
latter  Aolus,  had  a  son  by  Neptune  called  Bceotus,    iEoiua  not  be^ 
liering  she  was  got  with  child  by  Neptune,  judged  her  guilty  4>f 
whoredom,  and  therefore  delivered  her  to  a  Metapootiau^  stnu^pe^^ 
(that  was  there  by  chance  at  that  time)  to  be  traosjported  to  Afata- 
poDturof;  which  he  did  accordii^y,  and  there  she  was  delivered  of 
£olos  and  Bceotos,  whom  the  Metapontian,  (being chtlAea6),b]r 
direction  of  the  oracle,  adopted  for  his  own  sons.*    When  th^y  grew  • 
to  men's  estate,  a  sedition  being  raised  in  Merapont-am,  they  poii; 
sessed  themselves  of  the  kingdom  by  force  of  arms.    After wavdi 
Arne  and  Aotolyte,  the  wife  of  the  Metapontian,  felling  tOjgefll^. 
by  the  ears,  the  sons  of  Avne,  in  assisting  their  mother,  kitled  Autd^' 
lyte;  which  ^truel  feet  the  Metapontian  took  most  beinoiiaty,  abd 

•  In  the  Greek  EuImbi  for  BfieotiA.  f  A  town  in  lulj,  nesr  Tarenuun. 


tSO  DIODCmUS  %tCVhU9i 

tberefore  thejr  got  on  shipboard^  and  poi  to  sm^  trith  thtfar 
Arne,  and  many  other  of  their  friends,     .^jolot 
tha  islands  in  the  Tyrrhenian  seas,  called  the  JEolidea,  «ftet  Mv 
Maae>  and  buHt  a  city  there,  which  he  called  lApara.    But 
went  to  his  grandfather  .£oIiis,  who  receired  hioB  aa  his  aoo^ 
came  afkerwards  to  the  kingdom,  and  called  the  oowitiy  n/kkat 
pother  Ame,  but  named  the  people  Boeotians,  after  h»  o#ii 

Itonos,  the  son  of  Bceotus,  bc^t  four  sons,  Hippdcimos^r 
trymiy  Arehilicns,  and  Alegenor:  '  Hippalcimns  had  Penefiua, 
trjroo,  Leitus,  Alegenor,  Clonius,  Archilyoos,  Prothenor,  and  Aitov 
ailansy  who  were  all  commanders-in-diief  of  the  Boeatiaaa  ia  Ihr 
TVnyan  war. 

Having  now  set  forth  these  aflitirs,  we  shall  endeartow  lorglspf 
iA  aeecmnt  of  Salroonens  and  Tyro,  and  of  their  progenf  mMmI 
to  NestoTj  who  was  one  of  the  Grecian  commanders  at  the  8iegfcal^ 
Troy.  :• 

Salmoneos  was  the  son  of  Helen,  nephew  of  iEoIos,  tnd  iiephW^V 
soo  to  Deucalion  3  he  made  an  expedition  out  of  .£olia,  umI  ftm*^ 
iessed  himself  of  a  territory  in  Elis,  upon  the  hanks  of  the  riMr  tt^' 
phens,  and  there  he  buih  a  city,  which  be  called  after  his  ow»  vmuS 
Saboooet  he  married  Alcidice,  the  daughter  of  Aleos,  and  hfimi' 
had  a  daughter  named  Tyro,  who  was  an  extraordinary  beauty.  Hi! 
wife  Alcidice  dying,  hat^married  another  called  Sidero*,  who  I^Mi 
the  nanner  of  step- mothers)  hated  Tyro. 

Afterwards  Simoueus  (being  both  cruel  and  unrighteous  towJs 
men,  and  impious  towards  the  gods)  was  hated  by  his  sutgeets,  and  aft. 
length,  for  his  contempt  of  the  gods,  was  by  Jupiter  struck  4mA  wUk 
a  thunderbolt.  ■ 

About  this  time  Neptune  begat  two  sons  of  T^ro,  PeKas  and  Ne^ 
leus.     Tyro  being  afterwards  married  toCretheus,  she  had  hf  tah'. 
Amythaon,  Pheretes,  and  i£son.     After  the  death  of  GrathaaSy' 
,Pelias  and  Neleus  were  at  strife  one  with  another  for  the  kii^dmk- 
Pelias  reigned  as  king  of  loichos  and  the  neighbouring  countriatfaMl 
being  joined  withMelampus  and  Bias,  the  sons  of  Amythaott  ao8- 
Aglata,  together  with  some  Ach^sans,  Phthiots,  and  JEdliaoi^  osMia 
an  iqroad  with  his  army  itlto  Peloponnesus.    At  which  tims^  tab 
Argos,  MeUmpus,  (being  a  soothsayer),  restored  some  woaatn  M' 
soundness  of  mind,  that,  through  the  anger  of  Bacchus,  were  atnwk 
with  a  raging  madness.    And  for  this  good  aet  he  was  rewavded  by 
Anaxagoras,  king  of  the  Argives,  son  of  Megapentbes,  with  tmat. 
parts  of  the  kingdom*    Hereupon  Melampos  took  hia  hratbor  tSm  I 
at  Ms  as^odat^  with  him  in  the  gotemmeiitj  tnii  rcaidid  lit  Ai|«k! 

f  4denis» 


Chap., IF.  DIODORU8  SICULU8.  S81 

Then  marrying  Iphiaoira,  the  daughter  of  Megapanthes,  he  had  by 
her  AntiphateSy  Manto,  fiias^  and  Pronoe.  Antipbates  had  by 
Zeuxippe^  the  daughter  of  Hippocoon,  Oicleus  and  Amphales.  From 
Oicleus  and  Hypermnestra,  the  daughter  of  Tbespius,  descended 
Ipbianira^  Polybiea,  and  Amphiaraus:  and  thus  Melampus  and  fiiasv 
and  their  posterity,  enjoyed  the  kingdom  of  Argos. 

Neleus  likewise,  with  those  whom  he  conducted,  entered  Messena^ 
and  built  the  city  Pylos,  which  was.gtveu  to  him  by  the  bordering 
inhabitants ;  who,  reigning  here,  married  Chloris  the  daughter  of 
Amphionthe  Theban,  and  by  her  had  twelve  sons,  of  whom  Pericly« 
menus  was  the  eldest,  and  Nestor  the  youngest,  who  went  along 
with  the  rest  to  the  Trojan  war.  But  to  the  end  we  may  keep  with« 
in  bounds,  this  that  hath  been  said  shall  suffice  concerning  the  an- 
cestors of  Nestor. 

And  now  something  is  to  be  further  added  concerning  the  Lapiths 
and  the  Centaurs:  most  of  whom  were  the  sons  of  Oceanus  and 
Thetis  (as  the  my thologists  do  re|>ort},  remarkable  for  their  giving 
names  to  rivers;  amongst  whom  was  Peneus,  from  whom  the  riyec 
in  Thessaly  was  so  called.  He  was  familiar  with  the  nymph  Creusa^ 
and  of  her  begat  Hypseus  and  Stilbcs,  of  whom  Apollo  begat  Lapi- 
thus  and  Centaurus.  Lapithus  risided  near  the  river  Peueus,  and 
reigned  over  the  neighbouring  territories.  He  married  OrsiHome^ 
the  daughter  of  Eurynomus,  and  by  her  had  two  son8,.Phorbas  and 
Periphas,  who  afterwards  reigned  in  those  parts;  and  the  whole  na- 
tion of  the  Lapithae,  are  so  called  from  Lapithus.  Phorbas,  one  of 
the  sons  of  Lapithus,  resided  at  Olenus:  whence  Alector  the  king 
of  Elis  (fearing  the  power  of  Pelops)  sent  for  him  to  his  assistance, 
and  made  him  his  associate  in  the  kingdom.  Phorbas  had  two  sons^ 
£geus  and  Actor,  who  were  afterwards  kings  of  Elis. 

Periphas  the  other  son  of  Lapithus,  married  Astyage,  the  daugJiter 
of  Hypseus,  and  by  her  had  eight  children;  the  eldest  of  whom  An*r 
tion,  had  issue,  Lxion,  by  Perimela,  the  daughter  of  Amy ihaon.  Ix- 
ion  (they  say)  upon  promise  to  Hesioneus  of  a  great  dowry  and  rich 
gifts,  married  his  daughter  Dia,  of  whom  he  begat  Perithous:  but 
Luou  not  performing  his  promise  made  on  the  behaU  of  his  wife, 
Hesioneus  seized  his  horses  in  lieu  of  a  pawn.  lxion  under  colour 
of  giving  full  satisfaction,  desired  his  fatiier-in  law  to  come  to  him^ 
who  coming  accordingly,  lxion  threw  him  into  a  fiery  furnace. 

But  because  none  could  expiate  him  from  the  guilt  of  so  heinous 
a  parricide,  it  is  said  that  Jupiter  did  it.  But  growing  afterwards  in 
love  with  Juno  (they  say)  he  was  so  impudent,  as  to  court  her  to 
play  the  adulteress :  whreupon  Jupiter  turned  a  cloud  into  the  shape 
of  Juno,  wih  which  lxion  gratified^  his  lust,  and  begat  those  half 

Vol.  1.  No,  35.  oo 


iS^  OIODORUS  SICtTtOft 


men,  ctlled  CeaMon.  At  length,  for  hii  CBOttabtt  (MfAl^i  U 
#u  fotened  hj  Jupiter  to  t  «hefcl,  tad  sfter  hit  deitb  toAmtf  Mtt> 
M  ntrmentt. 

.  Othen  uf,  that  the  Centiun  were  Itr«d  up  bf  the  tj^jtlufal  Vft^ 
Hon,  uiddiat  when  theygrewup  to  men's  estace,the]ftii^tii>atirfi*i>> 
mares,  and  so  begat  a  dodbli;-ahaped  brood,  called  HippoMMSUtl'. 
Others  taj>,  (hat  the  Centaun  «ere  the  isiue  of  N«phetfe  lioA  tiUn, 
and  because  they  were  the  first  that  attempted  to  ride  npidii  BbrM, 
Aerefbre  they  were  called  HippoccDtaurs,  and  tdgotd  to  be  df  ■ 
double  nature,  both  man  and  horse.  ItiasAidf  that  ttieae  C^tttkiN 
being  of  the  same  atodt  and  origin,  demanded  of  Pcriilious  a  siiare 
itf  their  Other's  kingdom;  which  being  denied*  they  made  war  upon 
tlieLapithn;  and  that  when  the  war  was  ended,  Peritlious  married 
Hippodamia  tlie  daughter  of  Bystus,  and  inrit«d  Theseus  and  iIk 
CentRQTS  totlie  marriage;  and  (hat  the  Centaors  (being  drunk  Nod 
inflamed  with  wine)  attempted  to  ravish  the  wonieo  that  were  tlicD 
St  the  marriage-feast :  at  which  bold  and  wicked  prank,  Tlieseus  and 
the  Lapithn  were  so  iocenaed,  that  they  hilled  inany.of  tliem,  and 
drore  the  rest  as  fugitives  out  of  the  city.  And  for  llits  reason,  tlie 
whole  body  of  the  Centaurs  afterwards  made  wtr  upon  the  Lapithie, 
And  kilted  most  (A  them,  and  forced  the  rest  that  Iiud  escaped  tlie 
sword,  to  fly  into  Pholoe  in  Arcadia:  but  some  got  into  Malea,  and 
there  continued.  The  Centaurs  lified  np  with  this  success,  ofica 
issued  out  of  Pholoe,  and  robbed  all  the  Grecians  tliat  travelled  tliat 
Way,  and  killed  many  of  the  neighbouring  inhabitants. 

Having  now  done  with  these  occurrences,  we  shell  next  tptfk  of 
£scula|nu8  and  his  posterity:  they  say  be  was  the  sonof  ApMoim 
Coronis,  and  being  of  an  acute  and  sharp  wit,  earnestly  b«ut  hit 
mind  to  the  study  of  physic,  and  found  oui  many  preaerwtfaei  jtoi 
the  health  of  men's  bodies;  and  grew  at  length  so  famous,  't^'av- 
ing  many  in  a  wonderful  manner,  whoae  distempers-  4reK  lodged 
upon  to  be  desperate,  he  was  judged  to  raise  up  many  from  tWdbal: 
and  therefore  it  is  reported  by  the  mythologlsts,  that  Fltlto  ten- 
plained  to  Jupiter  of  j£scolapius,  that  throu^  his  cures  the  unhA# 
of  the  dead  decreased ;  aud  accused  iiim  of  weakening  bb  empfae  i^ 
the  shades  below :  at  which  Jupiter  was  to  incensed,  that  tie  kuU 
£sGulHpius  with  a  thunderbolt.  At  whose  death  Apollo 'wai  ear 
raged  to  that  degree,  that  he  killed  the  Cyclops  that  made  tlic  !4al^ 
derboit  for  Jupiter.  Whereat  Jupiter  was  again  la  wiatb,  anj  i|pt  • 
punkhmeot  of  his  offences,  forced  Apollo  to  terre  "lankinj  hi » 
piece  of  constant  druggery.    .£sculapius,  it  u  said,  had  twbaoa^ 


dflK  tW'  DIQDQI^IU  SIfUWS*  983 

li££!iaoa  u)3  I^iiTlnus,  who  were  sktlfiilln'tKeirfttfier's  iirtj~aii3 
went  Along  ^th  AgameroDon  to  the  Trcgan  war;  in  which  war  they 
werip  veiy  useM  and  serviceable  to  the  Grecians,  for  they  cured  them 
that  were  wounded  in  fights  with  singular  industry,  and  were  in  spch 
esteem  and  &vour  among  tlie  Grecians,  that  by  reason  of  their  ex« 
traordinary  usefulness  in  their  art,  they  were  exempted  from  hazard* 
ing  their  persons,  and  freed  from  ail  other  public  services. 

But  here  we  shall  conclude  the  history  of  Elsculapius  and  his  sons^ 
and  shall  now  proceed  to  give  an  account  of  the  daughters  of  AaopnSy 
and  the  sons  of  ^acus. 

Oceanus  and  Tethys  (as  some  stories  have  it)  had  many  other  sonij, 
which  gave  names  to  famous  rivers,  besides  Peneus  and  Asopus. 
The  residence  of  Peneus  was  that  country  which  is  now  called  TheS'- 
saly,  who  gave  name  to  that  famous  river  there  called  Peneus*  Aso* 
pus  dwelt  at  Plilias,  and  married  Medon,  the  daughter  of  Ladon,  by 
wliom  he  had  two  sons,  Pela^us  and  Ismenus,  and  twelve  daughters^ 
whose  names  were  Cercyra,  Salamis,  iEgina,  Pirene,  CleonejThebey 
Tanagra,  Thespira,  Asopis,  Sinope,  (Enia,  and  Clialcis.  Ismentia^ 
one  of  his  sons,  came  into  Boeotia,  and  seated  himself  near  the 
river  called  after  his  own  name.  Sinope,  one  of  the  daughters^ 
was  forced  away  by  Apollo  to  that  place  where  the  city  Sinope 
pow  stands,  so  called  from  her:  from  her  and  Apollo  sprang  Syrus^ 
who  reigned  over  those  people,  from  him  called  Syrians.  Nep* 
tune  transported  Cercyra  into  that  island,  now  called,  from  her^ 
Corey ra^.  He  had  by  her  a  son  called  Pheax,  from  whom  thePhe- 
ansf  are  so  named. 

This  Ph^Bax  was  the  father  of  Alcinous,  who  guided  Ulysses  into 
Ithaca :  Salamis  also  was  forced  by  Neptune,  and  carried  away  into 
the  island  called  after  her  own  name;   by  him  she  had  Cenchreus^ 
who  was  king  of  this  island,  and  a  brave  spirited  man;   he  killed  % 
serpent  of  a  vast  bigness,  which  had  destroyed  many  of  the  inhi^bi* 
tants.     iEglna  w^s  carried  away  by  Jupiter  from  Phlias,  into  the 
bland  iEgina,  so  called  frpm  her;  and  by  her  had  iGacus,  afterwards 
kii^  of  that  island,  whose  sons  were  Peleus  and  Telamon.     Peleus, 
by  the  throwing  of  a  hand  stone,  ynfortunately  killed   his   half- 
brother  Phocus,  being  both  of  the  same  father,  but  not  of  the  same 
mother ;   for  this  fact  he  was  banished  by  his  father,  and  fled  into 
Phthia,  a  province  of  that  country  nov  called  Thessaly,  where  he 
was  acquitted  and  purged  of  the  slaughter  by  king  Actor,  and  sue* 
ceedcd  him  in  the  kingdom,  Actor  dying  without  issue^    Achilles 
was  the  son  of  Peleus  and  Thet'^,  and  went  ^long  with  Agamemnou 
to  the  war  of  Troy.    Telamon,  likewise,  fled  out  of  ^gina,  and  ar^. 

•  Or  Cejc^N  t  pun,  or  Pbt^  •  wjy  ja  ElJfc 


984  moik>RUg  srctTLUS.'  jHaA^l^ 

SBSa9BHKeHHeBB9BeSHianBaQHBiaBSBaBB9BBBaH9HBBHVHnHnMH|M 

rived  io  SaUunis,  where  he  inarried  Glauce,  the  kiog't  daiijgnMfj 
and  by  that  means  afterwards  came  to  be  king  of  that  islaiid.  Amr 
the  death  of  Glauce  he  married  Eribna  of  Athena,  the  daqgfatcr 
of  Alcathous,  and  by  her  had  Ajax,  another  associate  in  tlie  Tib* 
jan  war. 

Having  given  account  of  these  things,  we  shall  now  speak  of  Fe* 
lops,  Tantalus,  and  (Enomaus.  And  here  it  will  be  necessary  to  fo 
higher,  and  treat  distinctly  of  some  things  in  time  long  belbre. 

In  Pisa,  a  city  of  Peloponnesus,  Mars  begat  OEnomaus  of  Harp&Mt 
the  daughter  Asopus ;  CEuomaus  had  one  only  daughter,  called  H^ 
podamia,  and,  consulting  the  oracle  how  long  he  should  live^  the  god 
answered,  that  he  should  die  when  his  daughter  was  married:  draadc 
ing,  therefore,  her  marriage,  he  resolved  she  should  ever,  remain  Inm 
virgin  state,  conceiving  by  this  means  only  he  should  avml  the  dan- 
ger ibretold. 

But  whereas  many  earnestly  sued  to  have  her  to  wife,  be  vnda  a 
proposal  of  a  horse-race  to  the  suitors,  with  this  condition,  that  he 
wiio  won  the  race  should  have  his  daughter,  and  that  he  that  lost 
should  be  put  to  death 

The  course  to  be  run  was  from  Pisa  to  the  altar  of  NeptttM  hi  die 
isthmus  of  Corinth,  and  the  manner  of  starting  was  thus  s  GBnoawns 
first  sacrificed  a  ram  to  Jupiter,  and  in  the  mean  time  the  aidtor 
ipakes  speedily  away  in  a  chariot  diawn  with  four  horses;  and  CElho* 
maus  having  at  length  finished  his  sacrifice,  mounts  his.  chariot^ 
driven  by  one  Myrtilus,  and  with  a  lance  in  his  hand,  porsuea  the 
suitor,  and,  overtaking  him,  runs  him  through.  And  in  this  muner, 
by  the  swiftness  of  his  horses,  always  coming  up  to  the  aukors, 
(though  they  set  out  so  long  before  him)  he  killed  very  many. 

But  Pelops,  the  son  of  Tantalus,  coming  to  Pisa,  and  desiring  to 
have  Hippodamia  for  his  wife,  as  soon  as  he  saw  her,  bribed  Myrtilus 
(Q£nomaus's  cliariot- driver)  to  sufl'er  him  to  be  victor;  by  which 
means  he  got  to  Neptune^s  altar  in  the  isthmus  before  (Enomans, 
who,  concluding  that  what  the  oracle  had  foretold  was  now  near  to  be 
fulfilled,  through  grief  of  heart  was  so  dejected,  that  he  mmdeied 
himself.  Pelops  thus  gaining  Hippodamia,  with  her  likewise  gained 
the  kingdom  of  Pisa;  and,  being  a  valiant  and  pmdent  man,  and 
growing  rich  besides,  subdued  most  of  the  countries  of  Peloponne- 
sus*, and  so  called  the  whole  peninsula  after  his  own  name*    ' 

Since  we  liave  made  mention  of  Pelops,  it  is  fit  to  say  aboietlii^g 
of  Tantaluses  father,  that  we  may  not  omit  any  thing  wcHthy  remaifc. 
Tjiutaltts  the  son  of  Jupiter  was  a  rich  and  renowned  prinee^  and, had 
bis  royal  seat  in  that  part  of  Asia,  which  is  now  called  Fbptittvttiiaj 

*  PeloptniMsiu  lignifiea  tbs  ulaad  of  Mopli.     -^ 


and  for  the  nobleness  of  his  birth,  being  the  cflspring  of  Jove  (thef  * 
gftjr)  he  was  the  very  darling  of  the  gods  themselves.  However,  bt 
used  not  his  prosperity  with  that  moderation  and  humility  as  became 
a  mortal ;  but  l)eing  admitted  to  hmiliarity  and  feasting  with  the  gods» 
discovered  their  secrets  to  men  ;  for  which  he  was  not  only  punished 
while  h^  was  living,  but  was  thrust  down  among  the  wicked  and  im* 
pious  (as  the  histories  relate)  to  suffer  eternal  torments  after  death. 
This  Tantalus  had  Pelops,  and  a  daughter  named  Niobe*,  who 
had  seven  sons,  and  as  many  daughters,  who  were  extraordinaiy 
beauties  :  being  proud  of  the  great  number  of  her  children,  she  ofte^ 
boasted,  that  for  her  fruitfulness,  she  excelled  Latona  herselff:  at 
which  the  goddess  they  say,  was  so  enraged,  that  she  commanded 
Apollo  with  his  arrows,  to  kill  the  sons,  and  Diana  witli  hers^  the 
daughters ;  who  executing  their  mother's  commands,  slew  all  the 
children  at  once.  So  that  Niobe,  who  abounded  with  children^  was 
childless  at  one  and  the  same  moment. 

•  But  because  Tantalus  being  hated  by  the  gods,  was  expelled  out 
of  Paphlagonia  by  llus  the  son  of  Tros^  something  is  fit  to  beaud 
concerning  llus  and  his  ancestors. 

Tlie  first  that  reigned  in  the  country  of  Troas,  was  Teucer  the  son 
of  the  river  Scamander,  and  the  nymph  Idaea ;  he  was  a  brave  man^ 
and  gave  the  name  of  Teucri  to  the  inhabitants*:  He  iiad  a  daiughtcr 
called  Batia,  whom  Dardanus  married,  and  succeeded  Teucer  Jo  th^ 
kingdom ;  and  ordered  the  people  to  be  called  from  him  Dardaniaoas 
and  built  a  city  near  the  sea  shore,  and  called  it  Dardanum*  He^ 
bad  a  son  named  Erichthonius,  a  prosperous  and  wealthy  prince;  4if 
whom  the  poet  Homer  writes  thus  t-. 

None  richer  was  of  all  men  under  th*  sun^    - 

\\  bote  brave  three  thousand  mares  in  tb*  meads  did  ran, 

Tros  was  the  son  of  Erichthonius,  and  of  him  the  peojde  wese 
named  Trojans ;  he  had  three  sons,  llus,  Assaracus,  and  Ganjrmedas^ 
llus  built  a  noble  city  in  the  champain  country  of  Troas,  which  ha 
called  Ilium ;  the  son  of  llus  was  Laomedoo^  whose  sons  were  11* 
tbonus  and  Priam :  Tithonus  led  an  army  into  the  eastern  parti, 
of  Asia,  and  pierced  as  fiir  as  to  Ethiopia,  whence  rose  the  story  of 
Memnon  being  the  son  of  Aurora;  which  MemnoD  brought  ai4 
to  the  Trojans,  and  was  killed  by  Achilles.      > 

Priam  married  Hecuba,  and  by  her  (besides  many  <^her  sons)  had^ 
Hector,  who  was  especially  remarkable  for  his  valour  in  the  Trojao. 
war.  Assaracus  king  of  the  Dardanians^  had  Capys  his  son»  the  it- 
ther  of  Anchises,  who  of  Venus  b^t  Matas,  a  faunotts  man  nmoug, 

*  By  Amphion,  king  of  Thebes.  t  Tlie  mother  of  Diaaa  and  Apollo. 


f86  pioooRvs  HcvhVh  MhoikJi^ 


«W"*P"^* 


ssnas 


die  Trojan?.  Ganymedifs  lastly  waa  extraordinarily  Imnitifiply  m4.M: 
If ypft#d  to  h^  caught  up  to  hwwejfi  by  the  fodf  to  be  JfipiMir'9  |BfBf 

Aad  9^  from  these^  «f  shall  proceed  to  Pipdalus  nod  Ibt  Mhn^ 
iwv,  wd  ^  npeditioQ  of  Mioos  ipto  $i€ily  ^g^t  Inqg  QoinliW^ 


BfBB 


CHAP.  V. 

CflktdabiSf  and  his  works  m  Creie^  Sidfy,  and  elsewhere.  JSf 
Jtighi  mio  Sicily :  Minos  invades  Sicily ;  the  mtamtt  of  kk 
death  there.  The  famous  temple  qf  the  Curetes  or  Corybofitt^ 
in  Sicily f  huilt  by  the  posterity  of  the  Cretans  that  came  /Aff^ 
foiih  Minos.  The  pedigree  of  Aristceus ;  his  acts  ;  hisso^jtct^ 
on.  Of  E/ryx.  Venus* s  temple  at  Xryxin  Sicily  j  the  f0s^ 
of  it.  Of  Daphnis  the  shepherd.  A  description  of  the  Ihrmm 
mountains.     Of  Orion.    Of  the  striats  of  Messana. 

DJEDAhVS  was  ao  Athenian,  of  the  family  of  the  Erecthidss|  tat 
lie  was  the  son  of  Hymetion,  the  son  of  £upalaiBtis,  the  .eqo  of 
Errchtheos.    He  was  extraordinarily  ingenious,  and  very  atudiose  m 
Ifae  art  of  architecture,  and  was  an  excellent  statuary  and  ^agnwm 
upon  stone,  and  ioiproved  those  arts  with  many  notable  inventioM* 
He  made  many  wonderful  pieces  of  work  in  several  parts  of  the  woiid, 
and  so  far  excelled  in  the  framingatid  cutting  of  statues,  that  thnimhal 
were  long  after  him,  report  that  the  statues  he  made,  did  resembh 
living  men  even  to  the  life.    For  their  symmetry  waa  so  exact  and 
perfect,  that  their  eyes,  and  frame  of  motion,  and  the  whole 
posure  of  the  body,  was  a  lively  representation  of  Uviag  creati 
For  he  was  the  first  thpt  in  statues  expressed  the  direct  and  Bveiy. 
peet  of  the  eyes,  and  the  progressive  motion  of  the  legs  mmi  ih^^ 
and  the  stretching  fcrth  of  the  bands  and  arms,  and  therefosv  van 
JQStly  admired  by  all :  for  those  artists  that  were  before  biai,,fnuBedl 
ibeir  images  whb  blinking  eyes,  heads  hanging  down,  .as  if  tbey  vera 
glued  to  their  sides.    But  though  Dsedalus  was  thus  admired  for  Us, 
exquisite  skill  in  this  art,  yet  he  was  forced  to  fly  his  countrjr  Sae  a 
murder  committed  upon  the  occasion  following.    Talus  %  Daidakula 
sister's  son,  being  but  a  young  boy,  was  at  that  time  bred  «p  widb 
bis  uncle,  to  learti  his  trade.    This  Talus  for  ingenuity  •caBedladlua 
master^  and  invented  the  potter's  wheel :  he  got  Ukewife  a  aeip^nt'a 

*  Called  Calof,  bj  Paosan.  lib.  1.  c.  f  1. 


|i#-bone,  and  with  it  M#ed  a  littte  piece  of  wood  afotider;  ttoi,  iH 
imitation  of  the  teeth  in  the  jaw,  he  made  the  like  in  irtm,  amiM  M 
feijikid  out  an  instrument  for  the  sawing  of  tiie  greatest  pieced  of  dm- 
\m^  eicMlingiy  useful,  and  tending  mueh  to  the  fUrtheraoce  Atid  eaa£ 
t>f  lill  iirchitects.  He  invented  likewise  tlie  turning  hthe,  and  mmtaj 
other  tools  for  the  use  of  architects ;  upon  which  account  ht  ins^  U 
gr^t  i^teem  and  reputation.  Dasdalus  hereat  burned  widi  rage  and 
entry  against  the  poor  boy,  and  fearing  lie  would  groW  flir  AOr^  fioll^ 
tm  than  hijnself,  secretly  murdered  him.  Being  seiaed  opoh  jott  Hi 
tie  Was  laying  the  darCass  in  the  ground,  he  was  asked  what  he  #M 
butying  ?  he  answered,  that  he  was  covering  a  serpent  with  eardu 
Here  it  \i  i^ery  worthy  of  remiirk,  that  the  same  cteature  that  w«^  dw 
iOiddasion  of  making  of  the  saw,  should  be  also  the  ibeans  trf  dii<to#»ft 
idf  the  murder.  Belhg  therefore  brought  td  hit  trild  at  thC  bbiitt  dF 
the  Areopagites,  and  there  condetfined,  to  dinf  for  the  ttirder,  lie 
im  fled  to  a  sort  of  {MfOple  In  Attlea  *,  who  fhoib  hiiki  Wm  telled 
fis^lians :  thence  he  gdt  intb  Crete,  where  h^  wtu  ttlttth  miXtaxA 
for  Hi  ait,  and  in  gif '^t  faVour  with  king  Minos. 

Afterwards  (as  it  Is  eomtnMfy  reported)  IMjAlie  the  qisMi, 
iiinos'6  wife,  burning  in  heir  knt^after  a  boll,  te  framed  an  ite* 
^ne  like  to  a  cow,  and  helped  b^t  by  that  ito^ns  to  slitisiy  tiler  hM. 
They  ^)r,  that  before  that  tiinii,  Mtnos  yelirty  aaerit^^d  fb^  beit  imd 
Ikrgeit  bull  in  the  herd  to  Neptune ;  and  once  diere  Mug  a  vsoit 
Idrely  beast  In  the  herd,  a  worse  was  fucked  out  to  be  ttlicftflced;  iK 
which  Neptune  was  so  incensed  at  Mmo$,  that  he  daused  his  wife 
f^siphae  to  go  mad  for  love  after  the  bull ;  and  by  the  art  of  De- 
AkTuS,  Shcf  prostituted  herself  to  the  beast,  and  btoigbt  forth  the 
ttinortaur  so  famous  in  ancient  stories. 

Ttiey  ascribe  a  double  nature  to  this  cfeattire,  that  from  the  hesd 
to  the  shoulders,  he  resembled  a  bull,  and  in  all  his  low^r  f^atta  was 
like  to  a  man.  It  is  said,  that  tot  the  keeping  and  feeding  of  lliia 
monster,  Dedalus  built  the  labyrinth  full  of  windings  and  tumlagfty 
this  way  and  that  way,  impossible  to  be  found  out  by  any  striihgef  M« 
fore  unacquainted.  Here  it  was  that  the  M incrtaur  derotitvd  the 
ieven  boys,  and  the  like  number  of  girls  yearly  sent  thither  fkom 
Athens,  as  we  have  before  declared, 

Daedalus  being  informed  of  Minos*s  threats  for  making  of  the 
^w,  fearing  the  rage  of  the  king,  by  the  help  of  the  queen  got  da 
shipboard,  and  secretly  escaped  out  of  the  island.  Icarus  his^on  fled 
away  with  him,  and  both  arrived  at  a  certain  island,  situated  in  the 
pCtUL  far  off  from  any  land,  where  the  young  man  being  too  rash^ 


*  01  tbc  ftiailj  or  tribe  of  C^r  >pa. 


MS  DionoRus  sicttLUs.  BookUf^ 

and  hasty  to  laod^  dropt  into  the  sea,  and  there  perished;  from  whom 
it  b  called  the  Icarian  sea,  and  the  island,  Icaria. 

From  hence  Dsdalus  sailed  into  Sicily,  and  landed  there  wbene 
Cocalus  reigned,  who  received  him  very  courteously ;  and  upoD  tht 
account  of  his  great  skill,  and  the  fame  that  went  of  him>  made  him 
his  bosom  friend. 

Some  report  this  story  concerning  him,  that  Dffidalus  continoio; 
still  in  Crete,  was  hid  by  Pasiphae;  Minos  in  the  meantime  making 
diligent  search  after  him,  in  order  to  punish  him,  but  not  able  to 
find  him  out,  he  promised  great  rewards  to  such  as  should  discover 
him* 

Dsdalus  utterly  despairing  to  get  away  by  shipping,  made  for  him* 
self  and  son,  artificial  wings,  jointed  and  compacted  in  a  wooderful 
manner  with  wax,  and  fastened  them  to  his  own  and  his  son's  body, 
and  with  them  Dsdalus  suddenly  flew  away,  and  got  over  the  Cre- 
tan  sea :  but  Icarus  soaring  too  high  (such  is  the  folly  of  young 
men)  fell  down  into  the  sea,  the  sun  melting  the  wax  wherewith  the 
feathers  of  the  wings  were  joined  together.  But  his  father  flying  low 
near  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  spcinkling  \m  wings  in  the  water^ 
passed  over  safe  into  Sicily.  Though  this  may  seem  an  absurd  fabk^ 
yet  we  judged  it  not  fit  to  be  passed  by, 

Daedalus  staid  with  Cocalus  and  the  Sicilians  a  long  timcjaod  wat 
highly  honoured  and  esteemed  by  all  for  his  excellent  art  and  skill  ia 
his  profession :  there  are  some  works  of  his  there  that  remain  to  thb 
day ;  for  in  the  territory  of  Megaris,  he  made  a  fish-pond  with  wod* 
derful  art,  through  which  the  great  river  Alabus  emptied  itself  into 
the  sea.  He  built  likewise  a  city  (now  called  Agrigentum  in  Caina* 
cus)  upon  a  rock  so  strong,  that  it  was  inexpugnable.  The  |MHS^y 
to  it  was  so  strait  and  winding,  that  the  place  might  be  easily  dc* 
fended  by  three  or  four  men.  Therefore  Cocalus  here  built  a  palace^ 
and  treasured  up  all  his  wealth,  as  a  place  (through  his  archhect^a 
ingenious  contrivance)  wonderfully  secure.  In  the  third  place^  he 
made  a  cave  in  the  territory  of  Selinuns,  in  which  by  fire  tliere  oa* 
der  ground,  a  warm  steam  was  so  artificially  raised,  that  by  its  no* 
derate  heat,  it  caused  a  gentle  sweat,  and  gradually  cured  many  that 
resorted  thither  of  their  distempers,  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasuse^ 
without  any  uneasiness  from  the  heat.  And  whereas  there  was  a 
high  and  craggy  rock  in  the  country  of  Eryx,  and  no  room  to  build 
but  upon  the  highest  and  craggiest  part  of  it,  by  leasun  of  the  strait 
and  narrow  passages  about  the  temple  of  Venus,  he  drew  a  wall 
round  the  very  top,  and  plained  and  enlarged  it  in  a  wonderful  man* 
ncr.  They  suy  he  likewise  made  a  golden  honey-comb  (dedicated  to 
Venus  Erycina)  with  such  exc^uisite  art,  and  so  like  to  a  true  uxkd  real 


one,  lb«t  none  could  ever  be  ooppipanibie  tp  iu  He  wroMgbt  maii|f 
other  exeelleot  pieces  iu  Sicilj,  wUcb  leu|ph  of  time  has  worn  puti 
and  consumed. 

But  Miaos  king  of  Crete,. ivho  bid  tbe  domiaioD  at  sen*  hcAring 
ibat  Dsedalos  was  fled  into  Sicily*  paodaioied  war  against  that  islapd* 
Harij^g  therefore  rigged  oat  a  nugbty  il«*et,  he  set  sail,  and  arrived 
upon  the  coasts  of  Agrigentum,  which  was  from  him  ealled  Mino|9 
where  he  landed  his  men,  and  sent  messengers  to  Cocalus,  to  de* 
mand  tlie  delivery  up  of  Dsedalus  to  justice.  Hereupon  Minos  and 
Cocaius  came  to  an  interview,  and  Cocalus  promjised  to  do  all  that 
Minos  required,  and  entertained  him  with  all  honoijirable  respect: 
but  when  he  was  in  a  bath,  Cocalus  kept  him  there  so  long,  that  he 
was  stifled  with  the  steam  and  heat.  Afterwaids  he  deliven^  bis 
j>ody  to  the  Cretans  that  came  along  with  him,  pretending  be  came 
to  his  dtrath,  hy  slipping  accidentally  into  the  hot  andscakUng  bathn^ 
His  soldiers  buried  bim  with  great  pomp,  and  built  him  a  double  sac 
puiehre,  in  the  lower  part  whereof,  in  a  vault,  they  deposited  hifi 
bones,  and  near  to  the  higher  part  that  was  open  to  the  view,  th^ 
erected  a  temple  to  Venus,  which  for  many  ages  after  was  so  adored 
Jby  the  inhabitants,  that  they  o£Eered  sacrifices  tbercj  as  in  a  templ^ 
peculiarly  consecrated  to  her. 

In  later  times,  when  Agrigentum  was  built,  it  being  then  disqi)^ 
vered  that  the  bones  were  there  buried,  the  sepulchre- was  wboUjf 
ruined,  and  the  bones  sent  to  the  Cretans,  at  the  time  when  Tkercn^ 
was  sovereign  lord  of  Agrigentum.  The  Cretans  that  were  thu^ 
broaglit  over  into  Sicily,  after  the  death  of  Minos,  having  then  &q 
kii^,  fell  at  odds  one  with  another,  and  raised  a  great  tumult.  But 
their  ships  being  all  burnt  by  the  Sicilians,  Cocalus's  subjects,  ib^ 
were  out  of  all  hope  ever  to  return  into  their  own  country ;  aod  ther^e*' 
fore  resolved  to  settle  themselves  in  Sicily.  To  that  end,  som^^ 
them  built  a  city,  which  from  the  name  of  their  king  tliey  oaUfi4 
Minoa.  Another  part  of  them  went  up  into  the  heart  of  tli^.C9uati:y9 
and  possessing  themselves  of  a  place  naturally  very  strpi|g,  tbcilf 
built  Eogyum,  a  city  so  called  from  a  fountain  there*  * 

After  the  destruction  of  Troy,  they  received  Meriooes,  wit)i  other 
Cretans  that  were  cast  upon  Sipily;  and  becduse  they  wecis  of/the 
same  nation,  they  made  tliem  members  of  tlieir  city*.  Aftiffwar^ 
making  frequent  inroads  into  tlie  neigbbouriag  coantr^  frofo^ 
strong  a  furt,  they  subdued  many  of  tbe  borderers,  aod  gqt^ wm|^ 
small  territory ;  afterwards  being  grown  wealthy,  they  built  a;9mpl^ 
to  the  Curetes  or  Corybantes^,  and  most  religiojCisly  adoi<|l  tboflf 
goddesses,  and  adorped  their  temple  with  mapy.  ijtfb  |;ifui»    1^^^ 

*  Called  the  0101  her  |^9dd«*»es  in  Crete. 

Vol,  1.   No.  35.  pp 


say,  these  godesses  came  into  Sicily  out  of  Crete,  where  they  were 
most  eiipecially  adored  and  honoured.  It  is  reported  that  they  prl* 
vately  bred  up  and  concealed  Jupiter  from  his  father  Satnrfi.  lo  ie» 
ward  of  which  kindness,  thev  were  taken  up  into  the  heavens  and 
placed  amon?  the  stars,  where  they  make  the  constellation  called 
Arctos*.  Of  whom  Aratus  (agreeable  hereunto)  in  his  poem  ofthf 
stars,  speaks  thus:.^ 

Vpon  iheir  ^hooHrn  him  thej  bore  awaj« 

It  |lia*  we  amy  relieve  what  Mortet  tsj  : 

From  Crete  great  Juve  advaoc'd  to  th*  heaveas  defer 

And  plac'd  the  Cure*eft  in  the  Northern  Bur. 

For  tliat  froo't  father  SAium  him  thej  bid. 

When  jouDg  ;  and  tii*  jrooth  out  of  all  danger  rid. 

It  is  not  fit  therefore  that  we  should  pass  by  in  silence  the  piety  of 
these  goddesses,  and  their  fame  and  reputation  amongst  all  men.  For 
they  are  not  only  adored  by  the  inhabitants  of  this  city,  bat  sefenl 
of  the  neighbouring  countries  worship  them  with  pompous  sacrifloe^ 
and  other  re1it;ious  services.  And  the  oracle  at  Delphoa  enjoined 
many  cities  to  give  divine  honour  to  these  goddesses ;  promlnng  that 
by  this  means  they  ^hould  be  blessed  both  in  their  privateand  paUie 
concerns.  And  at  length  these  goddesses  grew  so  famous^  that  rich 
gifts  both  of  gold  and  silver  were  dedicated  to  them  by  the  inhabi* 
tants,  and  such  offerings  arc  continued  to  the  very  time  of  writing 
this  history.  For  they  built  to  them  a  most  sumptuous  temple^  both 
for  greatness  of  structure,  and  costliness  of  ornament.  For  io  re- 
gard there  was  not  stone  in  that  part  of  the  country  fit  for  the  rddog 
such  a  structure,  they  took  care  to  have  it  brought  from  the  Agyri« 
neans,  which  was  a  hundred  furlongs  distance,  and  the  way  veiy 
rough  and  cragiry,  and  hard  to  pass  :  and  therefore  to  convey  the 
stones,  ibey  provided  waggons  and  a  hundred  yoke  of  oaen;  being 
the  better  enabled  to  bear  the  charge,  for  that  the  sacred  tieasurcs 
were  very  large.  For  a  little  before  our  time,  there  were  three 
thousand  oxen  dedicated  to  those  goddesses,  and  so  much  land  as 
raised  a  vast  revenue :  but  having  said  enough  of  this  wa  shaD  |ffD- 
ceed  to  the  history  of  Ari^tsus• 

Aristttus  was  the  son  of  A  polio  and  Cyrene,  the  daughter  of  Hyp* 
saaus,  who  was  the  son  of  Peneus,  Of  his  birth  some  tell  this  tmy. 
They  say  that  Cyrene  was  very  b  utiful,  and  brought  up  at  Mount 
Pelion,  and  that  Apollo  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  transported  her 
into  liibya,  where  in  later  time  was  built  a  city,  called  after  heir 
name  Cyrene.  There  Apollo  committed  his  son  Arist«os,  b^otten 
of  Cyrene  (then  a  young  infant)  to  the  care  of  the  nymphsj  to  ba 

«  UMbear. 


Gkfn  Fi  ,  DioiiORUs  rtcuLUB  991-* 

brought  up  by  them ;  who  gave  him  three  tevend  names,  Norricuff 
AristAii8>  and  Agreus.  These  nymphs  taught  him  how  to  curdle 
milk^j  to  order  and  make  bee-hives,  and  plapt  olive-yards  ;*  and  by 
this  means  he  became  the  first  that  directed  all  other  men  in  this  art : 
fimr  which  he  was  so  honoured^  that  all  adored  him  as  a  god^  at  much 
as  they  did  Bacchus. 

Afterwards  they  say,  he  went  to  Tliebes,  where  he  married  Au^ 
tonoe,  one  of  Cadmus's  daughters,  by  whom  he  had  Act»on,  torn 
in  pieces  (as  the  n^ythologists  say)  by  his  oWn  dogs.  Some  give  this 
reason  of  his  misfortune,  because  that  he  designed  nuptial  embraces 
with  Diana  in  her  temple  f,  dedicating  to  her  what  he  got  in  huQ.t^ 
ing,  for  that  solemnity.  Others  say,  because  he  boasted  that  la 
hunting,  he  excelled  Diana  herself ).  And  it  is  not  improbable^ 
but  that  the  goddess  might  be  incensed  at  either  of  these.  For  whe- 
ther for  the  gratifying  of  bis  lust  by  his  prey,  he  abused  the  goddess, 
who  was  ever  averse  from  marriage^  or  that  he  dared  to  prefer  him« 
self  in  the  art  of  hunting  before  her,  who  by  all  the  gods  themselves 
was  granted  to  excel  all  others  in  that  respect,  the  goddess  was  cer* 
tainly  most  justly  angry :  it  is  therefore  very  probable,  tliat  being 
tnwsformed  into  the  likeness  of  those  beasts  he  used  to  take,  the  dogt 
when  they  were  in  pursuit  of  other  game»  might  tear  himself  ia 
pieces.  .     « 

After  the  death  of  Actaeon,  Ariststua  went  to  his  fiithcr^  tb«  orack 
at  Delphos,  and  there  it  is  said,  he  was  commanded  by  the  oracle  to 
remove  into  the  island  Coos,  who  told  him  that  he  should  be  there 
highly  honoured,  and  in  great  esteem  with  the  Coons* 

Thither  therefore  he  sailed ;  it  plague  afterwards  raging  over  all 
Greece,  he  sacrificed  to  the  gods  for  the  deliverance  of  the  Grecians  s 
When  he  had  perfected  his  sacrifice  about  the  rising  of  the  dog  star||, 
at  which  time  the  Etesian  winds  began  to  rise,  the  plague  stopped* 
This  remarkable  change  (if  it  be  seriously  considered^  may  justly  b# 
wondered  at ;  for  he  who  had  his  son  torn  in  pieces  with  dogs,,  allayed 
the  evil  influences  of  the  dog  star  (which  commonly  are  peroiciom) 
and  at  that  time  restored  health  to  many  thousands. 

Afterwards  leaving  his  children  behind  ium,  he  went  to  Libya,  a^d 
from  thence  being  furnished  with  shipping  by  the  nymph  his  mother, 
he  sailed  into  Sardinia,  where  being  taken  with  the  pleasantness  of  tbf 
island,  he  seated  himself,  and  improved  the  ground  with  phmting 
and  tillage,  and  civilized  the  inhabitants,  who  were  before  rude  and 
barbarous.     Here  he  begat  two  sons,  Carmus  and  Cal«carpus.    Af« 

*  To  make  cheese.  t  Within  the  contecntcd  ground  belongini  to  the  tetepk; 

^  Others  a»y,  because  be  looked  at  her  wheu  the  was  bathJag.  Sse  Pans.  fio«liCi  c*  9* 
i  Apollo^  the  oracle  bciog  ciUicU  (bs  ora«U  of  ApoUo.  |  la  ▲■§■•!• 


29f  DIODORUS 'SICVLUS.  BdM  llf^ 

■-i  ■  ' ■iJM^i— ag> 

terwards  he  sailed  to  other  islands,  and  staid  for  some  time  in  Sicilf,' 
upon  the  account  of  its  firuitfulness  both  in  corn  and  cattlei  where  lie 
imparted  seyeral  things  to  the  inhabitants  that  were  of  great  beneft 
and  adyantage.  Therefore  it  is  said,  all  the  Sicilians,  and  eapecfallf 
those  that  had  olive-yards,  adored  Aristasus  as  a  god. 

At  last,  they  say,  he  went  into  Thrace  to  Bacehtis,  where  he 
learned  the  rites  of  the  orgia,  and  through  his  familiar  converse  irith 
that  God,  was  instructed  in  many  other  things  both  useful  and 
profitable. 

'  After  he  had  lived  some  time  near  mount  Hiemus*,  he  fauishcJ 
away,  and  was  never  seen  more  ;  and  was  afterwards  honoured  as  a 
god,  not  only  by  the  barbarians  in  those  parts,  but  by  all  the  GreciuM : 
but  concerning  Aristseus,  this  shall  suffice. 

Now,  to  say  something  concerning  Daphne  and  Eryx:  it  n  re- 
ported that  Eryx  was  the  son  of  Venus  a  native  of  Sicily,  and  Bates f, 
a  most  famous  prince.  This  Eryx  for  the  nobleness  of  his  birth  on  the 
mother's  side,  was  of  great  esteem  among  the  inhabitants,  andbecwne 
king  of  part  of  the  islnnd^y  and  built  a  city  called  after  hb  own 
name,  upon  a  high  and  lofty  hill,  upon  the  top  of  which,  whhm  the 
city,  he  built  a  temple  to  Venus,  adorned  with  rich  oblatkms,  and 
all  other  stately  furuiturc.  The  goddess  in  reward  of  the  piety  of  the 
inhabitants/  and  the  devotion  of  her  son  the  founder,  eiqprested  t 
S])ecinl  love  and  kindness  for  this  city,  and  upon  that  naUied  hcr- 
svlf  Venus  Erycina. 

When  any  seriously  considers  the  majesty  of  this  temple,  he  csn- 
not  but  greatly  admire  it ;  for  all  other  sacred  structurea^  afker 
they  have  been  famous  for  some  time,  have  often,  by  the  advene 
blasts  of  fortune,  been  at  length  ruined  and  destroyed ;  imt  thb  U 
been  so  far  (from  the  veiy  first  dedication  of  it)  from  decreasmg  ui 
its  glory,  that  it  has  grown  still  more  and  more  in  repntaticm  imd 
Mcenv  For  after  the  consecratiou  of  it  by  Eryx,  iEueas,  another 
son  of  Venus,  when  he  arrived  in  Sicily,  in  his  voyage  to  Itdy,  hom- 
tified  it  with  many  rich  oblations,  because  it  was  consec^iated  to  his 
mother;  and  after  him  the  Sicilians  for  many  ages  together  (at great 
eost  and  expence)  adored  this  goddess  with  magnificent  iA6tiBvts, 
and  further  adorned  her  temple  with  many  great  oblatiomL  The 
CarthagTuians  also,  in  later  times,  when  they  conquered  part  of  ihi 
islands  still  continued  the  splendid  worship  of  this  gtiddess.  And 
lastly,  the  Romans,  when  they  became  masters  of  the  whole  falandy 
suTpas^d  all  that  were  before  them  in  the  worship  uf  this  ddly;  and 
this  they  did  upon  good  grouud,  for  they  derived  thdr  mgok  fiani 

•  Beffw^n  Thrace  and  T!je»atv. 

^  Bntcs  king  of  Biihjnia,  cuTkd  foraer^y  Bcfitych  ia  Aaift  |  SicO||i 


facT)  imd  bf  her  tteane  Were  prosptrous  in  all  their  aflUra,  and  thtpe*: 
fore  in  gratitude  for  so  many  benefits,  they  returned  her  the  groalcr 
bMkHir  «fid  aateem.  For  the  cohmIs  md  piaton,  and  all  that  euie 
m  ^^Peroofs  into  this  ialaod,  m  soon  as  they  came  t#  Bryx>  etklteit 
most  toagnifloent  saeri6cea,  and  dedicated  rich  gift*  for  the  beaati^ 
i«g  e#  this  temple  %  and  by  little  and  little  hid  aside  thck'austerity^ 
and  pleasantly  conversed  both  with  the  women  and  children  hi  their 
jollity,  looking  upon  thia  tc^  be  the  only  way  to  ingratiate  theflnehres 
iBt<»  the  favour  c/t  the  f^oddess.  The  Roman  senate  likewise^  out  «# 
their  migular  respect  to  tbia  goddess,  deereed  that  seventeeo  of  dbe 
most  eoofiding  cities  they  had  in  Sieily,  should  make  an  dflhring 
in  gold  to  Venus,  and  that  the  iraiple  slioold  be  cootinnally  guarded 
by  two  hundred  soldiers. 

And  thus  thongb  we  have  treated  something  largely  of  Eryxy  yet 
the  account  is  not  impertinent  to  the  history  of  VeiuM« 

We  shall  now  endeafour  to  relate  what  Ae  mythologists  rsport 
oooGoroing  Daphnis:  in  Sieily^  they  say,  are  aiottniaiM  calloA 
Berei,  lo  pleasant  for  sitnatiooy  and  of  so  sweet  en  aii^  shait  no 
place  can  be  l)etter  pitched  npoB  than  tbey  for  pleasure  -and  di«ef« 
sion  in  tbesnmmer-tioiet  for  there  are  many  springs  of  admiiible 
sweet  water,  and  deeked  witH  trses  tt  all  sorts.  There  are  wiiole 
woods  of  Ull  and  stately  oaksy  which  bear  aeoirns  «f  a  vast'  bignesSy 
twice  as  many,  and  twice  as  big,  h»  in  any  other  pan  of  tlie  worid. 
-  There  likewise  grows  abaodaoce  ef  roots  and  beHbs,  iaiuml  sines^ 
and  ainspeakable  namber  of  melons^,  so  that  a  Cartbaginiai  arajr 
ooce  ready  to  starve  for  want  of  provision  was  there  reliered  and  pre* 
served;  and  tboogh  so  many  thousands  were  there  fod,  yet  plenty  re* 
mained  in  the  mountains  stiU.  In  this  region  there  is  a  pleasaot 
valley,  graced  with  rows  of  trees,  aflfiirding  a  most  ravUhiog  prospeet 
to  the  eye,  and  likewise  a  grove  dedicated  to  the  njrmphs :  here  tliey 
say  Daphnis  was  begotten  by  Mercury  upon  one  of  the  nymphs,  and 
gained  that  name  from  the  multitude  of  laurels**  that  grow  there. 
Being  bred  up  by  the  nymphs,  and  having  many  herds  of  cattle^,  he 
diligently  followed  the  shepherd's  life,  upon  which  account  he  was 
also  called  Bubulcust;  and  being  very  skilful  and  ingenious  in  com* 
posing  songs  and  tunes,  he  found  out  the  Bucolic  poems,  anci  har- 
monious notes,  which  are  much  used,  and  highly  esteemed  amongst 
the  Sicilians  at  this  day.  They  say,  likewise^  tliat  be  often  hunted 
with  Diana,  and  by  his  dutiful  observance  and  attendance  upon  the 
goddess,  mightily  gained  her  favour,  and  with  his  piping  apd  sitwing 
wonderfully  delighted  her.  It  is  likewise  said,  that  a  nymph  fiUiiiig 
in  love  with  him,  told  him,  that  if  he  lay  with  any  other  woman  but 
her,  he  should  be  struck  blind;  which  afterwards  proved  true,  for, 

*  Applet.  t  Daphne^  a  Uurcl,  in  Creek.  X  TUe  Cow-h«rd. 


394  DIODORtJS  8ICULtJfl#  JSook  IK 


««M 


lying  with  a  king's  daughter  who  had  made  him  druDk^  he  forthwith 
lost  his  sight. 

But  this  concerning  Daphnis  shall  suffice.  Now  we  proceed  io 
short  to  the  story  of  Orion.  It  is  said^  that  he  was  the  biggest  and 
strongest  man  of  all  the  heroes,  and  was  much  given  to  bunting;  and 
being  so  very  strongs  for  the  sake  of  vain  glory^  performed  many 
great  actions. 

Amongst  other  things,  by  casting  up  a  mound^  be  made  the  harbour 
called  Acte,  for  Zanclus,  the  Sicilian  king,  from  whom  the  city  was 
antieutly  called  Zancle,  but  afterwards  Messana,  and  now  Messina. 

But  since  we  make  mention  of  Messina,  we  conceive  it  no  digrei« 
sion  if  we  here  subjoin  what  is  related  concerning  the  narrow  aei^ 
thereon  it  is  seated. 

Some  antient  writers  say,  that  Sicily  was  once  a  peninsula^  and 
afterwards  became  an  island,  in  the  manner  following.^ 

The  sea  beating  violently  upon  each  side  of  the  narrowest  part  of 
the  isthmus,  at  length  cut  through  and  disjoined  one  part  frono  tha 
other,  and  the  place,  from  thence,  was  called  Rhegium,  where,  man/ 
years  after,  was  built  the  city  now  so  called.  Others  say,  that  that 
narrow  neck  of  the  continent  was  rent  asunder  by  an  earthquake»and 
by  that  means  the  sea  burst  into  that  part  where  the  convulsion  was 
made.  But  the  poet  Hesiod  affirms  the  contrary;  for  he  says,  that 
the  sea  being  formerly  broader,  Orion  raised  up  in  the  open  sea  the 
promontory  Pelorus,  and  built  upon  it  a  temple  to  Neptune,  Ircli* 
giously  adored  by  the  inhabitants.  After  the  performing  of  thesa 
things,  they  report  that  he  sailed  into  Euboea,  and  there  resided. 
Afterwards,  for  the  glory  of  his  actions,  being  fixed  as  a  constellatioa 
among  the  stars,  his  name  became  famous  to  eternity,  of  whom  the 
poet  Homer  makes  mention  in  his  ]K>cm  of  the  dead,  in  these  words  i 

Neit  YBst  Orion  bit  appearance  made. 
Hunting  wild  beasts  within  a  fruitful  mead« 
Which  on  th'  vast  mountains  he  had  killed  before^ 
When  once  a  brazen  knotted  club  he  bore. 

Where,  likewise,  he  takes  notice  of  his  great  bulk;  and  a  little  after, 
making  mention  of  Aloidcs,  he  adds,  that  at  nine  years  of  age  he  was 
four  yards  and  a  half*  in  thickness,  and  eighteen  yards  in  height 

Jiis  mother  earth  bis  body  did  so  rear. 

That  none  for  height  and  beauty  might  compar* 

Yfitk  him,  except  Orion  who  exccll'd 

In  botb«  and  so  him  more  than  paralleled. 

Having  now  treated  sufficiently  of  the  heroes  and  demi-gods,  ao* 
cording  as  we  at  first  designed,  we  sliall  here  put  an  end  to  this  book. 

*  Nmc  cubit!  make  four  yards  and  a  halt    Nine  Orgia  make  eighteen  yardi^ 


99S 

■■■■■■■■■■■aiaMMBBBHBaaHHaa 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


V 

I 


BOOK.  V. 


PREFACK 

rr  ought  to  be  the  special  care  of  all  hist<Mriani,  not  only  Id  tbdl 
writings  to  observe  whatever  maj  be  useful  and  profitable,  but  ala6 

to  keep  to  a  due  order  and  method  in  the  several  parts  of  tbdr  hit* 

■» 

tory.  This  not  only  conduces  much  to  direct  and  caution  private 
persons  how  to  get  and  keep  estates,  but  is  an  extraordinaiy  bdp  to 
writers,  in  composing  of  their  historical  treatises.  For  some  there 
are  that,  though  they  are  justly  in  high  esteem  fbr  their  eloquent 
stile,  and  variety  of  learning  discovered  in  their  writings,  yet  have 
been  too  careless  in  distributing  their  matter  under  proper  heads;  S9 
that*  though  the  readers  may  easily  discern  their  great  pains  and  inr 
dttstry,  yet  their  manner  of  writing  deserves  justly  to  be  censored. 
Tioissus,  indeed,  was  very  exact  in  his  clironok^,  and  extraordinarily 
industrious  to  abound  in  variety  of  relations;  but  (or  his  unseasonable 
and  immoderate  censures  of  others,  may  be  justly  taxed  and  repre- 
hended himself;  who,  fqr  his  unbounded  liberty  that  he  takes  in  this 
bitter  censuring,  is  called  by  some  the  Detractor*. 

But  Ephorus,  on  the  contrary,  in  his  Universal  Hist<Mry,  acts  the 
part  of  an  able  historian,  both  as  to  the  elegance  of  his  stile,  and  his 
accurate  method :  for  he  divides  his  books  according  to  their  several 
subjects,  keeping  close  in  every  book  to  things  of  one  and  the  same 
nature;  wliich  w^y  and  order  of  writing!  approve  above  all  others, 
and  therefore  shall  endeavour  to  imitate  him  as  well  as  I  can. 


DIODORUf  8ICUX.U9.  Book  Fi 


CHAP.  I. 

A  description  'of  Sidfy.  The  JEolideSy  or  Lipara  LHandM,  Of 
Maltaj  Gaulus,  Cercina,  Corsica,  Sardinia,  Piiyusa,  and  tie 
Bakares. 


HAVING  designed  this  book  for  a  description  of  the  islands, 
shall  first  begin  with  Sicily,  being  the  chiefest  and  most  remarkable 
for  antient  and  memorable  actions. 

It  was  antiently  called  JUnaeria^  from  its  shape.  Afterwards^ 
by  the  Sicanians,  the  first  inhabitants,  it  was  called  Sicania;  and  at 
Jast  it  ims  called  Sicily,  from  the  Sicilians,  who,  with  all  tbeir  pcsfile, 
entirely  transported  themseh'es  thither  out  of  Italy. 

In  circuit  it  is  four  thousand  three  hundred  and  sixty  furloQgsf ;  tog 
one  of  the  three  sides,  from  the  promontory  Pelorus  to  Lilyhaeaniy  is 
a  thousand  and  seven  hundred  furlongs;  the  other,  from  LilylMaiiD  tb 
FBchinum,  a  promontory  of  Syracuse,  runs  out  in  length  a  thonaant 
and  five  hundred  furlongs.  The  rest  contains  a  thousand  one  hdB^ 
dred  and  forty  furlongs. 

The  Sicilians,  the  inhabitants,  (from  old  tradition,  continued  down 
to  them  from  their  forefathers),  say,  that  this  island  is  dedicated  to 
Ceres  and  Proserpine.  Some  of  the  poets  feign,  that  at  the  nwuriage 
of  Pluto  and  Proserpine,  this  island  was  given  to  the  new  bride  by 
Jupiter,  for  a  present^.  The  most  approved  authors  say,  tbiit  the 
Sicaniaos,  who  were  the  antient  possessors,  were  the  first  natand  ib- 
babitants  of  this  isle,  aad  that  the  goddesses  which  we  have  bcfcie 
meotiooed  appeared  first  in  this  island;  and  that  the  fatiieaf.of  the 
soil  was  such,  that  corn  first  grew  here  of  itself,  which  the  most  emn 
nent  of  all  the  poets  confirms  in  these  words.. 

Within  this  island  all  things  grow. 
Without  the  help  of  sevd  or  plough, 
At  wbt«t  uid  haricj*  iritb  tfat  viaeb 
From  whence  proceeds  both  grape*  and  wiae^ 
Which  with  tweet  showers  from  above 
Are  brought  to  ripettess  {jy  great  'Jvft, ' 

'    For  in  the  territory  of  Leontium,  and  in  many  other  parts  of 
Sicily,  there  grows  up  wild  wheat  at  this  very  day.     If  it  be  adred  la 

*  Three-cornered,  like  a  wedge,  t  About  five  hundred  and  fortj-fir«  miles* 

t  For  an  Anacalypteriura.    These  were  gifts  bestowed  upon  the  bride  bj  the  bus* 

band  and  his  friends,  when  she  plucked  oflf  her  veil  at  ber  first  being  broogbt  to  htt 

husband.    See  Arch«oIog.  Att.  lib.  4,  c.  7. 


dhap.  t  mODORUS  SICULUd.  S9^ 

what  part  of  the  world  these  grains  were  first  known,  before  the  use 
of  corn  Was  found  out;   it  is  most  probable  that  they  were  firat 
brought  to  this  best  and  richest  country,  and  therefore  upon  that  ac- 
count we  see  that  the  Sicilians  most  especially  worship  those  god- 
desses who  were  the  first  discoverers  of  these  fruits.     That  the  rape 
of  Proserpine  was  In  this  country  (they  say)  is  most  clear  and  evi- 
dent from  hence,  that  neither  of  these  goddesses^  ever  resided  in  any 
other  place  but  in  this  island,  wherein  they  delighted  above  all  others. 
The  rape,  they  say,  was  in  the  meadows  of  Enna,  not  far  from  the 
city,  a  place  decked  with  violets,  and  all  sorts  of  other  flowers,  af- 
fording a  most  beautiful  and  pleasant  prospect.     It  is  said,  that  the 
fragrancy  of  the  flowers  is  such,  that  the  dogs  sent  ^ut  to  hunt  the 
game  thereby  lose  the  benefit  of  their  sense,  and  are  made  incapable 
by  their  scent  to  find  out  the  prey.     This  meadow-ground,  in  the 
middle  and  highest  part  of  it,  is  champaign  and  well  watered,  but  all 
the  borders  round  are  craggy,  guarded  with  high  and  steep  preci- 
pice^, and  is  supposed  to  lie  in  the  very  heart  of  Sicily,  whence  it  is 
called  by  some  the  navel  of  Sicily :  near  at  hand  are  groves,  meadows, 
and  gardens,  surrounded  with  morasses,  and  a  deep  cave,  with  a  pas- 
sage under  ground  opening  towards  the  north,  through  which,  they 
say,  Pluto  passed  in  his  chariot  when  he  forced  away  Proserpine.    In 
this  place  the  violets  and  other  sweet  flowers  flourish  continually  all 
the  year  long,  and  present  a  pleasant  and  delightsome  prospect  to 
the  beholders  all  over  the  flourishing  plain. 

They  say,  that  Minerva  and  Diana,  who  had  both  vowed  virginity 
as  well  as  Proserpine,  were  bred  up  together  with  her,  and  all  three 
wrought  a  gown  for  Jupiter  their  father  of  the  flowers  they  had  ga- 
thered in  company  one  with  another;  and  that  they  were  exceedingly 
delighted  in  the  island  upon  the  account  of  the  familiar  converse 
they  enjoyed  one  with  another;  so  that  each  of  them  chose  out  a 
particular  place  for  their  several  residences.  Minerva  made  choice 
of  those  parts  near  Himera,  where  the  nymphs,  for  the  sake  of  Mi- 
nerva, opened  the  hot  baths  about  the  time  of  Hercuies's  coming 
thither.  '  The  inhabitants  likewise  dedicated  the  city  to  her,  (to  this 
day  called  Athenaeum)  with  the  country  round  about.  To  Diana  was 
allotted  by  the  goddesses  the  island  at  Syracuse,  which  from  her 
was  called  both  by  the  oracles  of  the  gods  and  by  men  Ortygia. 
The  nymphs  likewise,  to  ingratiate  themselves  the  more  with  Dlana^ 
made  a  mighty  great  fountain  in  this  island,  called  Arethusa,  wherein 
were  bred  many  great  fishes,  not  only  in  antient  times,  but  there 
they  remain  to  this  very  day,  as  sacred  and  never  touched  by  any* 

*  Ceres  and  Proserpiue.    This  rape^  the  ground  of  thU  fable,  wai  Aon.  Mand.  S67.% 
Veforc  Christ  1275. 

Vol.  1.  No.  35.  OQ 


298  DiobORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  K 

|_  1— — ^B— ^M^gB     II  I       II  III  —— ^11— ^— — ^— ^— > 

But  when  some  in  time  of  war  have  made  bold  to  feed  upoo  tbem, 
they  have  suddenly,  by  the  apparent  anger  of  the  goddess,  been  af- 
flicted with  some  remarkable  calamity,  of  which  we  shall  write  mor^ 
fully  in  its  proper  time  and  place. 

Proserpine  enjoyed  the  pleasant  meadows  about  Enna  in  comoioa 
with  the  other  two  goddesses,  and  had  a  great  fountain  called  Cyan^ 
in  the  territories  of  Syracuse,  consecrated  to  her:  for  they  say  that 
Pluto,  after  the  rape,  carried  away  Proserpine  iii  a  chariot  to  Syni« 
cuse,  and  there,  the  earth  opening,  both  of  them  descended  into  hdl 
together,  from  which  time  in  that  place  arose  the  spring  and  lake 
called  Cyan'e,  where  the  Syracu^ns  every  year  celebrate  a  soIemR 
festival,  at  which  they  privately  sacrificed  the  lesser  victims,  but  pub- 
licly and  openly  they  threw  bulls  into  the  lake;  which  manner  of  sa- 
crifice Hercules  introduced  when  he  went  over  all  Sicily  with  tlie 
herds  of  Geryon,  After  the  rape  of  Proserpine,  they  say,  Ceres  {pot 
being  able  to  find  out  her  daughter)  lighted  firebrands  at  the  irrup- 
tions of  i£tna,  and  wandered  through  divers  parts  of  the  world  to 
seek  her,  and  did  much  good  where  she  came,  especially  where  the 
was  courteously  received,  bestowing  wheat  u]K)n  the  inhabitants  in  a 
grateful  return  of  their  civility.  And  because  the  Athenians  enter- 
tained this  goddess  with  the  greatest  civility,  therefore,  next  to 
Sicily,  they  were  the  first  upon  whom  she  bestowed  this  grain;  for 
which  the  people  of  Athens  honoured  this  goddess  above  all  others^ 
with  splendid  sacrifices  and  sacred  mysteries  at  Elcusis,  which  for 
their  antiquity  and  sanctity  are  greatly  esteemed  every  where. 

The  Athenians  generously  communicated  this  blessing  of  corn  to 
many  others,  and  they  imparted  the  seed  to  their  neighbours,  so  that 
by  degrees  the  whole  world  was  full  of  it. 

The  Sicilians^  therefore,  being  the  first  that  had  the  use  of  corn, 
by  reason  of  their  familiar  converse  with  Ceres  and  Proserpine,  who 
dwelt  amongst  them,  instituted  sacrifices  and  solemn  festivals  to  both 
these  goddesses,  whose  names  gave  reputation  to  the  things;  which 
festivals  were  solemnized  at  such  a  time  as  was  most  proper  to  point 
at  the  great  benefit  they  had  received :  for  they  celebrated  the  rape 
of  Proserpine  in  the  time  of  wheat  harvest,  and  performed  these  sa- 
crifices and  solemnities  with  that  sanctity  and  application  of  mind  as 
became  them,  who  were  obliged  to  he  thankful  for  being  preferred 
before  all  other  people  in  the  world  with  the  first  reception  of  so  great 
a  blessing. 

Tliey  had  another  festival  which  they  celebrated  to  Ceres  at  the 
time  of  wheat  seedings;  it  continued  for  the  space  of  ten  days,  and 
was  remarkable  for  the  name  of  the  goddess;  and  during  this  time 
every  thing  was  celebrated  with  great  pomp  and  splendour,  but  the 


€%!•  /•  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  ^^9 

rest  of  the  worship  was  after  the  old  way  and  fashion.  But  it  is  a 
custom  among  them  during  all  these  ten  days  to  use  obscene  and 
filthy  language  in  their  converse  one  with  another,  because  the  g<^- 
dess,  being  put  into  dumps  of  melancholy  for  the  loss  of  her  daugh- 
ter, is  put  to 'the  smile,  they  say,  by  smutty  discourse.  That  the  rape 
of  Proserpine  was  in  this  manner  as  we  have  before  declared,  many  of 
the  antients,  both  poets  and  historians,  do  generally  affirm.  For 
Carcinus  the  Tragedian,  who  came  often  to  Syracuse,  observing  how 
zealous  the  citizens  were  in  celebrating  the  sacred  mysteries  of  Ceres, 
has  these  verses  in  his  poems : 

Ceres*  most  lorelj  daughter,  as  tliejr  My* 
B^  Pluto's  crafty  snares  was  snatch'd  away, 
Wtio  under  ground  through  darksome  caves  conreyM 
To  ih'  gloomy  shades  below,  the  harmless  maid. 
Her  mournful  mother  wept  and  wrung  her  hands. 
Seeking  her  ravished  daughter  in  all  lands. 
Then  JEu\H*%  flames  through  all  the  laqd  did  roar» 
And  flHkes  of  fire  spread  all  the  island  o'erj 
Aiid  while  the  noh}c  niuid  was  thus  bemoan'd. 
For  want  of  corn  the  fainting  country  groau'd  : 
And  hence  it  is,  that  to  this  very  day. 
Devoutly  to  thtse  goddesses  they  pray. 

It  is  not  fit  we  should  here  omit  giving  an  account  of  the  kindness 
and  bounty  of  this  goddess  to  mankind  ;  for  besides  that  she  found 
out  corn,  she  taught  the  art  of  husbandry,  and  instituted  laws^  where- 
by  men  governed  their  actions  according  to  the  rules  of  justice  and 
honesty ;  for  which  reason,  they  say,  she  was  called  the  law-maker. 
And  certainly  none  can  bestow  greater  benefits  than  these  imparted 
by  her,  wiiich  include  both  being  and  well-being*  But  this  con« 
cerniijg  the  antiquities  of  Sicily  shall  suffice. 

But  it  is  necessary  to  say  in  brief  something  of  the  Sicanians^  the 
first  inhabitants  of  Sicily,  because  several  historians  diffi?rin  their  re- 
lations concerning  them.  For  Philistus  says  they  were  a  colony 
transplanted  from  Iberia  into  this  island,  and  came  thither  from  the 
river  Sicanus,  from  whence  they  were  called  Sicani.  But  Timsus 
(condemning  the  ignorance  of  this  writer)  proves  clearly  and  evi- 
dently that  they  were  the  original  inhabitants;  whose  reasons  to 
prove  their  antiquity  being  many,  we  conceive  it  needless  to  recite. 
The  Sicanians  antiently  dwelt  in  villages,  and  built  little  towns  upon 
hills  that  were  naturally  strong,  for  their  better  security  jagainst 
thieves  and  robbers.  For  they  were  not  under  one  general  monarchy 
but  every  town  had  each  a  several  prince.  And  at  first  they  enjoyed 
the  whole  island,  and  lived  by  tillage  and  improvement  of  the  ground; 
but  after  that  ^tna  burst  out  into  flames  in  many  parts  of  it^  and 


DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  K 


Streams  of  fire  even  overflowed  the  neighbouriog  territory,  the 
try  lay  waste  aud  ruined  for  a  great  space  and  tract  of  groi^iid  MH 
gether.     And  in  regard  the  fire  thus  continued  to  spoil  the  ooimii^ 
for  many  years  together^  the  inhabitants  in  a  coosteraation  fonook 
the  eastern  parts  of  Sicily,  and  went  down  into  the  west.    At  leogtll 
after  many  ages,  the  Sicilians  with  all  their  families  transported  thenir 
selves  out  of  Italy,  and  settled  in  that  part  of  the  island  befim  fiwH 
$aken  by  the  Sicanians.     Where  out  of  a  covetous  desire  to  gaia 
jiiorCy  they  encroached  still  farther,  and  made  incursions  into  the 
neighbouring  countries,  so  that  there  were  frequent  wars  between 
them  and  the  Sicanians,  till  by  a  mutual  compact  and  agreement,  they 
settled  the  boundaries  of  each  others  territories;  of  which  we  shall 
give  a  particular  account  in  their  proper  place  and  time.     The  last 
that  sent  colonics  into  Sicily  were  the  Grecians,  and  those  very  oon* 
siderable,  who  built  cities  upon  the  sea  coasts.    By  the  multitude  of 
Grecians  that  resorted  thither,  and  the  frequent  and  ordinary  com* 
merce  with  them,  they  learned  both  the  language  of  the  Grecians,  and 
their  way  of  living,  and  lost  (together  with  their  own  barbarous  dialeet) 
their  very  name  likewise,  and  were  called  Sicilians.     Having  sud 
enough  of  these,  we  shall  now  pass  to  the  islands  called  the  ^Bolides, 
which  are  seven  in  number,  called  Strongyle,  Euonymos,  Didyme, 
Phoenicusa,  Hiera,  Ericusa,  and  Lipara;  in  which  btst  there  is  a 
city  of  the  same  name :  these  lie  between  Sicily  and  Italy  in  a  direct 
line  from  east  to  west,  and  are  distant  from  Sicily  about  a  hundred 
and  fifty  furlongs :  they  are  much  of  an  equal  bigness ;  the  greatest 
of  them  is  in  circuit  a  hundred  and  fifty  furlongs :  they  have  been. 
a^ll  subject  to  great  eruptions  of  fire,  the  passages  of  which^  by  the 
openings  of  the  earth,  are  apparent  and  visible  at  this  day.    But 
in  Strongyle  and  Hiera,  to  this  very  time,  violent  vapours  burst  out  o( 
the  earth,  with  a  roaring  dreadful  noise;  abundance  likewise  of  sand 
and  fiery  stones  are  vomited  out  of  the  ground  ;  the  like  to  which 
may  be  seen  about  mount  iEtna ;  for  some  affirm,  that  from  these, 
islands  there  are  caverns  within  the  earth  that  run  out  as  br  as  ^^*n^ 
and  so  there  is  a  communication  one  with  another,  and  tbeiefoie  botti 
these,  and  those  breaches  and  chasms  of  the  earth  at  ^tna^  cast  fitftb 
their  flames  at  certain  seasons  by  turns.    They  say  that  these  isbuids^ 
antiently  were  desert  and  uninhabited;  and  that  afterwards  Lipvn^ 
son  of  king  Auson,  upon  a  sedition  raised  against  Iiim  by  his  hnn 
thers  with  a  fleet  well  manned,  fled  out  of  Italy  into  the  islandy  ficfi 
him  called  Lipara,  where  he  built  a  city  of  tlie  same  mmej  end  tilled 
and  cultivated  the  rest  of  the  islands.     When  he  was  old^  ^\m 
the  son  of  Hippotas,  with  some  other  of  his  associates,  arrived  in  the 
i^Iahd,  and  married  Cyane  the  daughter  of  Upanis  j  aad  iungti^g 


Gkyu  K  I     DORUS  s    ULUt.  4|0t*. 

\hi$  RSt  that  he  brcx  it  ah  f  with  him  with*  the  same  right!  ittid 
privileges  that  the  natural  iDliabitaDta  enjojred,  he  became  anprfii^ 
lord  of  the  ishnd.  liparus  afterwards  having  a  desire  to  retom  iati 
Ualyt  £olus  assisted  liim  in  possessing  the  country  about  SyrrealMtai^ 
ifbere  (after  he  had  reigned  with  general  appUuse)  he  died,  and 
was  buried  in  great  state  and  funeral  pomp,  and  hoooored  by  tkoiiK 
b^tants  as  a  demi-god.  This  is  that  \£olus  (which  they  say) 
tertained  Ulysses  in  his  wanderings;  and  was  reported  to  be 
towards  the  godsj  righteous  towards  men,  and  kind  and  eoutteoms  to 
itnuigers. 

It  is  likewise  reported  that  he  taught  marinera  the  use  of  aaila }  and 
by  the  diligent  ol>servance  of  fire,  foretold  the  rising  of  winds} 
whence  he  was  feigned  to  have  a  sovereign  power  over  the  winds  | 
md  for  his  piety  was  called  the  friend  of  the  gods*  He  had  six  soos, 
&styochus,  Xuthus,  Androcles,  Pheroemon,  Jocastes,  and  Agathyr<» 
Qus,  who  were  all  in  great  reputation  and- esteem  upon  tho  account 
!lf  the  fame  of  their  father*s  virtues. 

Amongst  these  sons,  Jocastes  reigned  as  king  over  those  p>rt% 
lying  upon  the  sea  coasts  of  Italy,  as  for  as  Rhegiom.  Pheroemoo  and 
Androcles  enjoyed  that  part  of  Sicily  from  the  narrow  cut  of  the  soi 
to  Lilybsum.  That  part  of  the  country  that  lies  eastward  was  in* 
habited  by  the  Sicilians ;  the  other  towards  the  west  by  the  SioaniaaSy 
which  several  people  were  continually  quarrelling  one  with  another  s 
bat  they  freely  submitted  to  the  sons  of  i£olus,  for  the  sake  of  their 
father's  eminent  piety,  and  their  own  gentle  and  sweet  dispositions* 
.^Xuthus  reigned  in  the  territory  of  Leontinm,  called  from  him 
Xuthia  to  this  day.  Agathyrnus  possessed  the  region  now  oaHed 
Agathyrnites,  and  built  the  city  called  Agathyraum,  after  Us  owtt 
name. 

Astyochus  was  sovereign  lord  of  lipara ;  and  all  of  them  imitating 
their  father's  justice  and  piety,  were  in  great  honour  and  esteem. 
After  the  posterity  of  iEolus  had  reigned  successively  for  many  aget 
together,  at  last  the  royal  line  in  Sicily  was  extinct.  After  whichs 
the  Sicilians  were  under  an  aristocratical  government ;  but  the  Sicn* 
nians  fell  to  odds  one  with  another  about  the  sovereignty,  and  for  « 
long  time  together  were  embroiled  in  a  civil  war. 

Many  years  afterwards,  when  the  other  islands  (throcigh  the  seve« 
rity  of  the  kings  of  Asia)  were  more  and  more  emptied  of  iheir  inha* 
bitants,  some  of  Cnidus  P'ld  Rhodes  determined  to  transplant  them* 
selves ;  to  which  end  they  created  Pentathlus,  a  Cnidian>  their  eap« 
tain,  (who  derived  his  pedigriee  from  Hippotes.the  spa  of  Htrculjes)' 
and  under  his  conduct  they  transported  themselves  into  Sicily,  and 
arrived  at  JUlybeum* 


ii09  wojyonvs  fncvhV9.  BookPt 


This  fell  oQt  io  the  fiftieth  olympiad*  io  which  EpidlidD  tke 
lifoniin  was  victor.     At  which  time  likewise  it  happened,  .thit 
iEgesta  and  Selinuotrs  were  at  war  one  with  another;  in  whick  war 
(joiniag  with  the  Selinuntines)  in  one  battle  thej  lost  many  of  their 
■len,  and  among  the  rest  their  general  Pentathhs.    The  Seliniiii* 
tines  being  tbns  routed,  those  of  these  strangers  that  survived,  de* 
tcrmioed  to  return  home;  to  which  purpose  they  chose  Gorgus,  Tbes- 
toves,  and  Epttherides,  of  the  household  of  P^ntathhis,  to  be  tbrir 
captains,  who  sailed  through  the  Tyrrhenian  sea,  to  Lipara,  wboe 
they  were  kindly  received,  and  easily  persuaded  to  enter  into  a  hagjm 
with  the  inhabitants,  and  dwell  among  them,  who  were  then  scarcclj 
five  hundred  that  remained  of  those  that  came  over  with  £olns^ 

Afterwards  when  the  Tyrrhenians  infested  the  seas  with  their 
piracies,  (being  vexed  with  their  incursions)  they  prepared  a  fleet 
for  their  defence ;  and  divided  themselves  into  several  parts,  some  n> 
till  the  ground,  and  others  to  guard  the  seas  against  the  piratea. 

Then  enjoying  their  estates  in  common,  and  feeding  together  in 
societies,  they  continued  for  some  time  in  this  communhy  of  file. 
Afterwards  they  divided  Li|jara  (wherein  whs  situated  the  MetropoB- 
tan  city)  anrang  themselves ;  the  rest  of  the  islands  they  tilled  and 
improved  for  the  use  of  them  all  in  common. 

At  last  they  divided  all  the  islands  for  the  space  of  twenty  years  ;  and 
when  that  time  was  expired,  they  again  made  a  division  by  lot.  After- 
wards they  overcame  the  Tyrrhenians  in  many  sea-fights,  and  devoted 
the  tenths  of  the  best  of  their  spoils  to  the  oracle  at  Delphos. 

It  remains  we  should  shew  by  what  means  the  city  of  Lipara  in 
succeeding  ages  grew  to  that  height  of  wealth,  that  they  were  not 
only  happy  in  themselves,  but  renowned  and  glorious  abroad. 

This  city  is  beautified  by  nature  with  very  large  and  fair  harboma, 
and  furnished  with  famous  baths ;  for  they  are  not  only  medicinal, 
but  by  reason  of  their  singular  properties  and  qualities,  aflbrd  much 
pleasure  and  delight ;  and  therefore  many  in  Sicily  that  are  taken 
with  strange  and  unusual  diseases,  pass  over  into  this  island,  and 
by  washing  themselves  in  the  hot  baths,  are  rcst(N:ed  presently  tn 
perfect  health,  even  to  admiration. 

And  the  island  itself  to  this  day,  abounds  in  that  famous  mineral 
called  allum,  which  brings  in  a  great  revenue  botU  to  the  Lipnrians 
and  the  Romans ;  for  being  in  no  other  part  of  the  world,  and  s^ 
very  useful,  the  inhabitants  (upon  good  reason)  have  the  sole  vend- 
ing of  thb  commodity,  and  by  setting  what  rate  they  please  on  it, 
they  grow  prodigiously  rich.     Only  indeed  in  the  isle  of  Meloa,  there' 

*  About  leTen  years  %(ktr  the  liking  aod  (|cstruGtioa  of  Jvrasalea  by  KcbuchadBcy 
jtr.     Aul.  Chr.  685  years.  - 


Chap.  L  DIODORUS  SICULU8. 


grows  a  sort  of  small  aUiuD,.  but  not  sufficient  to  supply  any  const* 
denible  number  of  cities.  This  island  of  JLipara  is  not  large,  boc 
reasonably  well  stored  with  fruit,  and  abounds  with  every  tbin^  n6* 
cessary  for  the  sustenance  of  man's  Ufe ;  for  it  plentifully  supplies 
the  inhabitants  with  all  sorts  of  fish^  and  bears  fruit  most  delicious 
to  the  taste.  But  this  may  suffice  to  be  said  of  Lipara,  and  the  nst 
of  the  iEolic  islands. 

Next  to  Lipara  westward,  lies  a  small  jsland  uninhabited,  called 
(fK>n  a  remarkable  accident)  Osteodes«  For  at  the  time  whea  tbe 
Carthaginians  were  engaged  in  great  wars  with  the  Symcusana*  t)ief 
were  furnished  with  considerable  forces  both  at  sea  and  land  |  ampagst 
whom  were  many  mercenaries  out  of  several  countries,  wliich  wero 
always  a  turbulent  sort  of  men,  and  commonly  accustomed  to  raise 
many  horrid  mutinies  in  the  army,  especially  when  they  received  act 
their,  pay  at  the  day  when  it  was  due.  Some  tlierefore  there  were 
at  that  time  (about  the  number  of  six  thousand)  according  to  their 
usual  insolence  and  rude  behaviour  (not  receiving  their  pay)  finst  go( 
into  a  body  together,  and  then  with  rude  shouts  and  clamours,  as- 
saulted their  commanders.  And  when  for  want  of  money,  they  still 
delayed  to  pay  them,  they  threatened  they  would  prosecute  their  rigbl; 
i^gainst  the  Carthaginians  with  force  of  arms,  and  thereupon  laid 
hold  upon  tlieir  officers  ;  and  though  they  received  a  check  from  tlie 
senate  for  their  unruliness,  yet  they  were  the  move  furious  and  out* 
rageous.  Whereupon  the  senate  privately  ordered  the  colonels  AA 
officers  to  put  all  the  mutineers  to  deatii ;  upon  which  orders,  thej 
forthwith  got  them  all  on  shipboard,  (and  under  colour  of  some 
military  service  to  be  performed)  transported  them  to  the  island  be« 
fore- mentioned,  and  there  landed  them  and  left  them:  and  though 
they  stormed  and  raged  at  this  misfortune,  yet  they  were  in  no  ca« 
pacity  to  revenge  themselves  upon  the  Carthaginians,  but  at  leugtk 
were  all  famished  to  death  :  and  being  that  so  great  a  number  (as  if 
they  bad  been  captives  of  war)  perished  in  so  small  an  island,  tiiis 
strait  place  was  filled  with  the  multitude  of  dead  mens'  bones;  and 
for  th'is  reason  tlie  island  was  called  as  aforesaid. 

And  in  this  manner  these  mercenaries  (by  the  fraud  of  their  own 
officers)  were  brought  into  these  extremities,  and  miserably  perished 
for  want  of  food. 

Having  now  gone  through  the  i^olides,  we  shall  next  view  those 
islands  that  lie  on  both  sides  of  tifem. 

Southward  over  against  Sicily,  lie  three  islands,  which  have  all 
safe  and  commodious  harbours,  and  each  of  them  a  city. 

The  first  is  Malta,  about  eight  hundred  furlongs  from  Syracuse, 
furnished  with  very  good  harbours ;  and  the  inhabitants  are  very  rich; 


i04     .  DIODORUS  SrCULUS. 


a 


for  it  is  full  of  all  sorts  of  artificers,  amongst  whom  there  are  esiSel-^ 
leut  weavers  of  fine  linen.  Their  houses  are  very  stately  and  beantl* 
ful,  adorned  with  graceful  eaves,  and  pargeted  with  white  plaflt«f» 
The  inhabitants  are  a  colony  of  Phoeniciansy  who,  tradidg  as  mer- 
chants as  far  as  the  western  ocean,  resorted  to  this  island  iipM  At 
account  of  its  commodious  ports,  and  convenient  situation  fbral^ 
trade ;  and  by  the  advantage  of  this  place,  the  inhabitants  preselid^ 
became  famous  both  for  their  wealth  and  merchandise. 

The  next  is  Gaulus,  furnished  with  several  safe  harbours^  andflvt 
inhabited  by  the  Fhcenicians. 

Tlien  follows  Cercina,  lying  to  the  coasts  of  Africa,  in  wbidh  il  a 
bandsome  city,  and  most  commodious  ports,  wherein  may  ride  not 
only  merchantmen,  but  men  of  war. 

Having  spoken  of  the  southern  islands,  we  shall  return  to  the  Mt 
Hear  to  the  Lipari,  which  He  in  the  Tyrrhenian  sea ;  for  near  to  F6- 
pulonium  (as  it  is  called)  a  city  of  Etruria,  lies  Athalia,  distant, 
from  Lipara  near  a  hundred  furlongs,  so  called  from  the  great  misH 
and  fogs  that  rise  there.  This  island  abounds  with  iron  stone^  which 
they  dig  and  cut  out  of  the  ground  to  melt,  in  order  for  the  maUng 
of-iron ;  much  of  which  metal  is  in  this  sort  of  stone.  The*  wofk* 
men  employed,  first  cut  the  stone  in  pieces,  and  then  melt  tliem  ia 
furnaces  built  and  prepared  for  the  purpose.  In  these  furnaces,  the 
stones,  by  the  violent  heat  of  the  fire,  are  melted  into  several  pieccff 
in  form  like  to  great  spunges,  which  the  merchants  buy  by  truck 
and  exchange  of  other  wares,  and  transport  them  to  Dicsearchifij  and 
other  mart  towns. 

Some  of  these  merchants  that  buy  of  these  wares,  cause  fheni  to 
be  wrought  by  the  coppersmiths,  who  beat  and  fashion  them  into  all 
sorts  of  tools,  instruments,  and  other  shapes  and  fiincies;  as  s<nM 
they  neatly  beat  iuto  the  shape  of  birds,  others  into  spades,  books^ 
and  other  sprts  of  utensils.  All  which  arc  transported  and  carried 
about  into  several  parts  of  the  world  by  the  merchants. 

There  is  another  island,  by  the  Greeks  called  Cyrnus,  and  by  tbtf 
Romans  and  natural  inhabitants,  Corsica,  three  hundred  furlongs  dis- 
tant from  i£thalia.  It  is  an  island  of  an  easy  access,  and  has  a  beaa- 
tiful  large  harbour,  called  Syracusium.  There  are  in  it  two  cidei| 
Calaris  and  Nicaea. 

The  Phocians  built  Calaris,  at  the  time  they  were  possessM  of 
the  islands,  but  were  afterwards  ejected  by  the  Tyrrhenians,  Nicsa 
was  built  by  the  Etrurians,  when  they  lorded  it  as  masters  at  sea^ 
and  subdued  all  the  islands  that  lie  near  adjoining  to  Etruria* 

During  the  time  the  cities  of  Corsica  were  subject  to  them^  thcj 
exacted  a  tribute  from  the  inhabitants  of  rosin,  wax^  and  booejj  of 


Chap.  L  PioooRus  siculds.  305 

■  ■   '    ■  I  '  '  '         =agrggaB»ggaeagg 

which  great  plenty  is  produced  in  this  island.  Corsican  bond-slaves 
are  naturally  of  such  a  temper  and  qualification,  tliat  for  usefulness 
they  are  to  be  preferred  before  all  others  whatsoever.  The  island  i' 
large,  a  great  part  of  it  mountainous  and  woody,  and  watered  with 
several  small  rivers. 

The  inhabitants  feed  upon  milk,  honey,  and  flesh,  which  this 
country  affords  plentifully,  and  exceed  all  other  barbarians  in  justice 
and  humanity  one  towards  another :  for  where  any  find  honey  in  hol- 
low trees  in  the  mountains,  it  is  certainly  his  that  finds  it  without 
any  further  dispute.  The  sheep  have  all  their  owner's  mark  set  upon 
them,  and  that  certainly  secures  the  property  of  their  masters,  though 
there  be  no  shepherd  to  look  after  them.  Au^  In  all  other  respects,  iu 
their  converse  and  way  of  living,  every  one  of  them  in  their  several 
stations  observe  the  rules  of  common  right  and  justice,  A  very 
strange  thing  there  is  among  them  concerning  the  birth  of  their  chil- 
dren; for  when  the  woman  is  in  labour,  there  is  no  care  taken  of  her 
in  the  time  of  her  travel ;  but  the  husband  goes  to  bed  as  if  he  were 
sick,  and  there  continues  for  certain  days,  as  if  he  were  under  the 
pains  of  a  woman  in  travail. 

There  grows  in  this  island  abundance  of  extraordinary  box-trees, 
which  is  the  reason  that  the  honey  produced  here  is  oftentimes  very 
bitter.  It  is  possessed  by  barbarians,  whose  language  is  very  strange 
and  difficult  to  be  understood;  they  are  above  the- number  of  thirty 
thousand. 

Next  to  this  lies  Sardinia,  an  island  as  big  as  Sicily ;  it  is  inha- 
bited by  barbarians,  whom  they  call  lolaeians,  sprung  (as  they  them* 
selves  suppose)  from  those  few  that  inhabited  tlie  country  with  lolaus 
and  Tiiespiadse.  For  at  that  time  that  Hercules  instituted  those  so 
much  celebrated  games,  having  many  children  by  tbe  daughters  of 
Thespius,  by  the  command  of  the  oracle,  he  sent  them  with  a  nu- 
merous train,  both  of  barbarians  and  Grecians  into  Sardinia,  to  set* 
tie  themselves  in  new  habitations. 

Their  captain  lolaus  ( Hercules 's  nephew,  on  his  brother's  side) 
possessed  himself  of  the  island,  and  built  in  it  several  famous  cities; 
and  dividing  the  country  by  lot,  called  the  people  from  himself,  lo- 
laeians. He  built  likewise  public  schools  and  temples,  and  left  other 
monuments  for  public  use  and  general  advantage,  which  remain  tp 

this  day. 

For  the  most  pleasant  fields  of  the  country  arc  called  after  him^ 
the  fields  of  lolaus,  or  the  lulaeian  fields;  and  the  people  are  still 
called  lolaeains  from  him.  It  was  foretold  likewise  by  the  oragle 
concerning  his  colony,  that  if  they  were  called  after  bis  mime,  iheir 
freedoms  and  liberties  should  be  secured  to  them  for  ever ;  aud  ac- 

Vol.  !•  No.  35.  fift 


306  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  V. 

cordingly  their  laws  and  government  have  been  preserved  firm  and 
unshaken  to  this  day.  For  though  the  Carthagioiaos,  when  tbejr 
were  in  the  height  of  their  power,  took  this  island,  yet  they  ooald  not 
enslave  the  people ;  for  the  lolaeians  fled  to  the  mountains,  and  made 
them  habitations  underground,  and  kept  and  maintained  many  herds 
and  flocks  of  cattle,  which  afforded  them  food  sufficient,  both  as  to 
milk,  cheese,  and  flesh.  And  thus  leaving  the  champaigu  parts  of  the 
country,  they  were  both  freed  from  the  toil  of  ploughing  and  tilling 
the  ground^  and  besides,  lived  at  ease  in  the  mountains^  contented 
with  a  mean  and  moderate  provision,  as  we  before  said. 

And  although  the  Carthaginians  often  assaulted  them  with  great 
armies,  yet  the  difficulties  of  the  places  were  such,  and  the  windings 
and  turnings  within  these  subterraneous  caves  were  so  inexplicable, 
that  they  were  ever  the  security  of  these  inhabitants  from  bondage 
and  slavery.     And  lastly,  the  Romans,  since  they  became  masten 
of  the  place,  have  often  attempted  to  reduce  them  by  force  of  arms, 
but  were  never  able  to  prevail,  for  the  reasons  before  alleged.    Bat 
to  return  to  the  antient  times ;  lolaus,  after  he  had  settled  all  the 
concerns  relating  to  the  colony,  returned  into  Greece.    The  Thcs* 
piadse,  after  they  had  been  lords  of  the  islands  for  many  agesy  were  at 
length  expelled,  and  driven  into  Italy,  and  seated  themselves  in  the 
parts  and  places  about  Cuma :  the  rest  of  the  people  returned  to  their 
former  barbarism,  and  making  choice  of  the  best  captains  from  among 
their  own  countrymen,  have  defended  their  liberties  to  this  day. 

Having  said  enough  of  Sardinia,  we  shall  now  go  on  with  the  other 
islands. 

Next  to  the  before-mentioned  island,  is  Pityusa,  so  called  from 
the  multitude  of  pine-trees  growing  there,  lying  in  the  midst  of  the 
sea,  three  days,  and  as  many  nights  sail  from  Hercules's  pillars,  one 
day  and  night's  sail  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  only  a  day's  sail 
from  Spain,  as  large  as  Corcyra,  and  reasonably  fruitful.  It  bears 
some  few  vines  and  wild  olive-trees.  Amongst  other  things  it  pro- 
duces, it  is  most  esteemed  for  fine  wool.  It  is  chequered  with  plea- 
sant champaign  fields,  and  lovely  hills.  There  is  a  city  in  it  called 
Eresum,  inhabited  by  a  colony  of  Carthaginians ;  and  vi  graced  with 
famous  ports,  and  high  walls,  and  a  great  number  of  stately  houses. 
Barbarians  of  several  nations  inhabit  there,  but  most  are  C«rtha« 
ginians,  a  colony  of  whom  settled  there  about  a  hundred  and  sixty 
years  after  the  building  of  Carthage, 

There  are  other  islands  over  against  Spain,  which  the  Grecians  call 
Gymnesiui,  because  in  summtr-timc  the  inhabitants  go  naked.  By 
the  natives  and  the  Romans  ;lu-y  arc  called  Baleares^  f/om  casting 


Gf^pl.  L  DIODOftUfr  SIGULUS.  30/ 

of  hoge  massy  stones  out  of  slings^  wherein  the  inhabitanu  excel  all 
other  people. 

The  greater  of  these  islands  is  larger  than  all  the  rest  of  the  is- 
lands^ except  these  seven^  Sicily,  Sardinia,  Cyprus,  Crete,  Eulnttj 
Corsica  and  Lesbos.    It  is  one  day's  sail  distant  from  Spain. 

The  lesser  lies  more  eastward,  and  breeds  and  feeds  all  sorts 
of  fine  and  large  cattle,  especially  mules,  which  for  the  bigness  of 
their  bodies,  and  the  exceeding  noise  they  make  in  their  braying,  art 
remarkable  above  all  others.  Both  these  islands  are  of  a  good  and 
fertile  soil,  and  are  peopled  with  above  thirty  thousand  inhabitants. 

As  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  they  are  altogether  destitute  of  wine; 
the  want  therefore  of  it  makes  them  the  more  eager  after  it.  Nel* 
ther  have  they  any  oil  amonst  tHein ;  to  supply  which,  they  press 
out  the  oily  part  uf  mastic,  and  mix  it  and  swine's  grease  together^ 
and  with  this  composition  anoint  their  bodies. 

They  luve  women  exceedingly,  whom  they  value  at  such  a  rate^ 
that  when  the  pirates  bring  any  women  they  have  taken  thither,  they 
will  give  as  a  ransom,  three  or  four  men  for  one  woman.  T*bey  live 
in  caves  hewn  in  the  rocks,  and  spend  all  their  days  in  these  holea^ 
dug  up  and  down  in  the  steepest  part  of  the  rocky  mountains^  by 
which  means  they  provide  for  themselves  both  shelter  and  security. 

They  make  no  use  either  of  silver  or  gold  coin,  but  prohibit  tht 
importation  of  it  into  the  island;  for  which  they  give  this  reasoo: 
that  Hercules,  in  former  times,  made  war  upon  Geryon  the  soa 
of  Chrysaor,  for  no  otiicr  reason  but  because  he  was,  rich  in  silver 
gold  and^  therefore,  that  they  may  live  more  securely,  and  quietly 
enjoy  what  they  have,  they  have  made  it  a  standing  law  to  have  oo« 
thing  to  do  with  that  wealth  which  consists  in  those  metals. 

According^  therefore,  to  this  decree,  when  once  heretofore  in  a 
war  they  assisted  the  Carthaginians,  they  brought  nothing  of  their 
pay  into  their  own  country,  but  laid  it  all  out  in  wine  and  women. 

They  have  a  filthy  custom  likewise  amongst  them  concerning  their 
marriages ;  for  in  their  marriage-feasts,  all  their  friends  and  house- 
hold  servants,  as  they  are  in  seniority  of  age,  one  after  another, 
carnally  know  the  bride,  till  at  length  it  comes  to  the  bridegroom's 
turn,  who  has  the  honour  to  be  last. 

They  have  another  strange  custom  likewise  about  burying  of  their 
dead;  they  cut  the  carcase  in  pieces  with  wooden  knives  or  axes, 
and  so  put  up  all  the  parts  into  an  urn,  and  then  raise  up  a  great 
heap  of  stones  over  it. 

Their  arms  are  three  slings,  one  they  wind  about  their  heads,  ano* 
ther  tliey  tie  about  their  loins,  and  the  third  they  carry  in  their  hands^ 
In  time  of  war  they  throw  much  larger  stoaes  than  any  other  pco- 


308  DTODORtrS  SICVLU9.  Book  V 


pie  and  with  that  violence,  as  if  they  were  shot  out  of  an  engine; 
and,  therefore,  in  the  time  of  assaults  made  upon  towns,  they  grier- 
ously  gall,  those  that  stand  upon  the  hulwarks  and  in  field-fights 
break  in  pieces  their  enemies'  shields,  helmets,  and  all  other  defensiva 
armour  whatsoever;  and  are  such  exact  marksmen,  (that  for  the 
mast  part)  they  never  mi^s  what  they  aim  at:  they  attain  to  this  skill 
by  continual  exercise  from  their  very  childhood;  for  while  they  arc 
very  young,  they  are  forced,  under  the  tutorage  of  their  mothers,  to 
cast  stones  out  of  slings.  For  they  fasten  a  piece  of  bread  for  a 
mark  to  a  pole,  and  till  the  child  hit  the  bread,  he  must  fastj  and  then 
at  length  the  mother  gives  him  the  bread  to  eat. 


CHAP.  II. 

Of  Madeira^  Britabiy  Gallia j  Celtiberia,  Iberia^  Ti/rrhema,  mni 
of  the  inhabitants^  and  their  laws  and  customs* 

SINCE  we   have  gone  through  the  islands  lying  eastward,  on  this 
side  within  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  wc  shall  now  launch  into  the 
main  ocean  to  those  that  lie  beyotid  them;  for  over  against  Africat 
lies  a  very  great  island  in  the  vast  ocean,  of  many  days  sail  from  Li* 
bya,  westward     The  soil  here  is  very  fruitful,  a  great  part  whereof  is 
mountainous,  but  much  likewise  champaign,  which  is  the  most  sweet 
and  pleasant  part  of  all  the  rest  \  for  it  is  watered  with  several  naviga- 
ble rivers,  beautified  with  many  gardens  of  pleasure,  planted  with 
divers  sorts  of  trees,  and  abundance  of  orchards,  interlaced  with  cor- 
rents  of  sweet  water.    The  towns  are  adorned  with  stately  buildings, 
and  banquetting-houses  up  and  down,  pleasantly  situated  in  their  gar- 
dens and  orchards.    And  here  they  recreate  themselves  in  siunnier* 
time,  as  in  places  accommodated  for  pleasure  and  delight. 

The  mountainous  part  of  the  country  is  cloathed  with  many  laige 
woods,  and  all  manner  of  fruit-trees;  and  for  the  greater  delight  and 
diversion  of  people  in  these  mountains,  they  ever  and  anon  open 
themselves  into  pleasant  vales,  watered  with  fountains  and  refresh- 
ing springs:  and  indeed  the  whole  island  abounds  with  springs  of 
sweet  water:  whence  the  inhabitants  not  only  reap  pleasure  anii^ile* 

light,  but  improve  in  health  and  strength  of  body. 
There  you  may  have  game  enough  in  hunting  all  sorts  of  wild 


beasts,  of  which  there  is  such  plenty,  that  in  their  feasts  there  is  no* 
thing  wanting  either  as  to  pomp  or  delight.  The  adjoining  aea  fur- 
nbhes  them  plentifully  with  fish,  for  the  ocean  there  naturally  aboundi 
with  all  sorts. 

The  air  and  climate  in  this  island  is  very  mild  an<)  healthful,  so 
that  the  trees  bear  fruit  (and  other  things  that  are  produced  thers 
are  fresh  and  beautiful)  most  part  of  the  year;  so  that  this  island 
(for  the  excellency  of  it  in  all  respects)  seems  rather  to  be  the  xtSA* 
dence  of  some  of  the  gods  than  of  men. 

Antiently,  by  reason  of  its  remote  situation,  it  was  altogether,  uo*^ 
known,  but  afterwards  discovered  upon  this  occasion.  .,«^ 

The  Phoenicians  in  antient  times  undertook  frequent  voyages  by 
sea,  in  way  of  traffic  as  merchants,  so  that  thay  planted  many  colo« 
nies  both  in  Africa  and  in  these  western  parts  of  Europe.    These 
merchants  succeeding  in  their  undertaking,  and  thereupon  growing 
very  rich,  passed  at  lengcK  beyond  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  into  the 
sea  called  the  ocean :  and  nrst  they  built  a  city  called  Gades,  near  to 
Hercules's  pillars,  at  the  sea-side,  in  an  isthmus  in  Europe,  in  which^ 
among  other  things  proper  for  the  place,  they  built  a  stately  temple 
to  Hercules,  and  instituted  splendid  sacrifices  to  be  offered  to  Iiinn 
after  the  rites  and  customs  of  the  Phoenicians.    This  temple  is  in 
great  veneration  at  this  day,  as  well  as  in  former  ages;  so  that  many 
of  the  Romans,  famous  and  renowned  both  for  their  births  and  glori* 
ous  actions,  have  made  their  vows  to  this  god,  and  after  succe&s  in 
their  affairs,  have  faithfully   performed  them.      The   Plioenicians 
therefore,  upon  the  account  before  related,  having  found  out  the 
coasts  beyond  the  pillars,  and  sailing  along  by  the  shore. of  Africa, 
were  on  a  sud<lcn  driven  by  a  furious  storm  afar  off  into  the  maia 
ocean ;  and  after  they  had  lain  under  this  violent  tempest  for  many 
days,  they  at  length  arrived  at  this  island;   and  so,  coming  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  nature  and  pleasantness  of  this  isle,  they  were  the 
first  that  discovered  it  to  others;  and  therefore  the  Etrurians  (when 
they  were  masters  at  sea,  designed  to  send  a  colony  thither;  but  the 
Carthaginians  opposed  them,  both  fearing  lest  most  of  their  own  citi-> 
zens  should  be  allured  (through  the  goodness  of  the  island)  to  settle 
there,  and  likewise  intending  to  keep  it  as  a  place  of  refuge  for  them- 
selves, in  case  of  any  sudden  and  unexpected  blasts  of  fortuhe,  which 
might  tend  to  the  utter  ruin  of  their  government:  for,  being  theo 
potent  at  sea,  they  doubted  not  but  they  could  easily  (unkoowo  to 
the  conquerors)  transport  themselves  and  their  families  into  that  is- 
land.    Having  now  spoken  sufficiently  of  the  African  qceacK  and  the 
islands  belonging  to  it,  we  shall  pass  over  to  Europe. 

For  over  against  the  French  shore^  opposite  to  the  Hercynian 


310  mODORUS  SICUMTS.  Sook  V. 

mountaiDs  (which  are  the  greatest  of  any  in  Europe)  there  lie  in  the 
ocean  many  islands,  the  greatest  of  which  is  that  which  they  call 
Britain,  which  antiently  remained  untouched,  free  from  all  fore^ 
force;  for  it  was  never  known  that  either  Bacchus,  Hercules,  or  any 
of  the  antient  heroes  or  princes,  ever  made  any  attempt  upon  it  by 
force  of  arms:  but  Julius  Ciesar  in  our  time  (who  by  his  great  a- 
ehievemcnts  gained  the  title  of  Divine)  was  the  first  (that  any  author 
makes  mention  of)  that  conquered  that  island,  and  compelled  the 
Britons  to  pay  tribute.  But  these  things  sliall  be  more  particuUriy 
treated  of  in  their  proper  time;  we  shall  now  only  say  something  con* 
cerning  the  island,  and  the  tin  that  is  found  there. 

In  form  it  is  trinn/^ular,  like  Sicily,  but  the  sides  are  unequal.  It 
lies  in  an  ol)lique  line,  over  against  the  continent  of  Europe;  so  that 
the  promontory  called  Cantium,  next  to  the  continent  (they  say)  it 
about  a  hundred  furlongs  from  the  land:  here  the  sea  ebbs  and 
flows:  but  the  other  point,  called  Belerium,  is  four  days  sail  from 
the  continent. 

The  last,  called  Horcas,  or  Orcades,  runs  out  far  into  the  sea.  Tie 
least  of  the  sides  facing  the  whole  continent  is  seven  thousand  and 
five  hundred  furlongs  in  length;  the  second,  stretching  out  itself  all 
along  from  the  sea  to  the  highest  point,  is  fifteen  thousand  furloi^; 
and  the  last  is  twenty  thousand :  so  that  the  whole  compass  of  the 
island  is  forty-two  thousand  five  hundred  furlongs.    Tlie  inhabitants 
are  the  original  people  thereof,  and  live  to  this  time  after  their  own 
antient  manner  and  custom;  for  in  fights  they  use  chariots,  as  it  is 
said  the  old  Grecian  heroes  did  in  the  Trojan  war.    They  dwell  in 
mean  cottages,  covered  for  the  most  part  with  reeds  or  sticks.    In 
reaping  of  their  corn,  they  cut  6fF  the  ears  from  the  stalk,  and  so 
house  them  up  in  repositories  under  ground;  thence  they  take  and 
pluck  out  the  grains  of  as  many  of  the  oldest  of  them  as  may  serve 
them  for  the  day,  and,  after  they  have  bruised  the  corn,  make  it  into 
bread.     They  are  of  much  sincerity  and  integrity,  far  from  the  craft 
and  knavery  of  men  among  us;   contented  with  plain  and  homely 
fare,  strangers  to  the  excess  and  luxury  of  rich  men.    The  island 
is  very  populous,  but  of  a  cold  climate,  subject  to  frosts,  being  un- 
der the  Arctic  pole.  They  are  governed  by  several  kings  and  princes^ 
who,  for  the  most  part,  are  at  peace  and  amity  one  with  another. 
But  of  their  laws,  and  other  things  peculiar  to  this  island,  we 
shall  treat  more  particularly  when  we  come  to  Cassar's  expedition 
into  Britain. 

Now  we  shall  speak  something  of  the  tin  that  is  dug  and  gotten 
there.    They  that  inhabit  the  British  promontory  of  Belerium,  by . 
reason  of  their  converse  with  merchants,  are  more  civilised  and  cour- 


(Skip.  //.  DIODORUS  SICULCS  811 

'   I— !■■■    — — —■^^M — —— — i    ■  III ■      I     II    II    i—y— — 1^— Wiiap^ 

teous  to  strangers  than  the  rest  are.  These  are  the  people  that  make 
the  tin,  which  with  a  great  deal  of  care  and  labour  they  dig  out  of 
the  ground;  and  that  being  rocky,  the  metal  is  mixed  with  some  veins 
t>f  earth,  out  of  which  they  melt  the  metal,  and  then  refine  it ;  then 
they  beat  it  into  four-square  pieces  like  to  a  dye,  and  carry  it 
to  a  British  isle  near  at  hand,  called  Ictis.  For  at  low  tide,  all  being 
dry  between  them  and  the  island,  they  convey  over  in  carts  aboo* 
dance  of  tin  in  the  mean  time.  But  there  is  one  thing  peculiar  to 
these  islands  which  lie  between  Britain  and  Europe :  for  at  full  sea» 
they  appear  to  be  islands,  but  at  low  water  for  a  long  way,  they  look 
like'so  many  peninsulas.  Hence  the  merchants  transport  the  tin  they 
buy  of  the  inhabitants  to  France ;  and  for  thirty  days  journey,  they 
carry  it  in  packs  upon  horses'  backs  through  France,  to  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Rhone.  But  thus  much  concerning  tin.  Now  something 
remains  to  be  said  of  amber.  - 

Over  against  Scythia  above  Gaul,  in  the  ocean,  lies  an  island  called 
Basilea,  upon  which  there  is  cast,  by  the  working  of  the  sea,  abun- 
dance of  amber,  not  to  be  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  world. 

Many  of  the  antient  historians  have  written  incredible  stories  of 
ttiis  amber,  which  since  have  been  experienced  to  be  false :  for  many 
poets  and  other  writers  report,  that  Phaeton  the  son  of  Sol,  while  be 
was  but  as  yet  a  young  boy,  prevailed  with  his  father  to  give  him 
liberty  to  drive  his  chariot  for  one  day :  which  request  obtained,  tha 
youth  not  being  able  to  manage  the  reins,  the  Ikmtscs  scorned  the 
charioteer,  and  forsook  their  antient  course,  and  ran  wildly  and  dis- 
orderly through  the  heavens,  and  first  set  them  on  fire,  and  by  that 
means  caused  that  track  called  the  milky  way;  then  burning  up  a  great 
part  of  the  earth,  many  countries  were  laid  waste;  at  which  Jupiter 
was  so  enraged,  that  he  threw  a  thunderboltat  Phaeton,  andcommand- 
ed  Sol  to  guide  his  steeds  into  their  wonted  course :  and  that  Phaeton 
himself  fell  down  into  the  river  Po,  antiently  called  Eridanus;  and 
that  his  sisters  greatly  bewailing  his  death,  (through  excessive  grief) 
changed  their  nature,  and  were  tranformed  into  poplar  trees,  which 
yearly  to  tiiis  day  distil  their  tears,  and  by  concretion  (they  say)  be- 
comes this  electrum  or  amber,  which  for  beauty  and  brightness,  ex* 
eels  all  others  of  its  kind,  and  is  distilled  most  in  that  country,  when 
the  deaths  of  young  men  are  solemnly  bewailed.  But  forasmuch  as 
they  that  have  invented  this  story,  have  turned  their  backs  upon  truth, 
and  that  later  ages  have  disproved  it  by  experience  of  the  contrary, 
regard  is  rather  to  be  had  to  true  and  faithful  historians.  For  amber 
is  gathered  in  this  island  before- mentioned,  and  transported  by  the 
inhabitants  into  the  opposite  continent,  from  whence  it  is  brought 
over  to  us  in  these  parts  as  is  before  declared. 


313  DioooRUS  sicuLUS.  JBMI  v. 


'  After  this  account  given  of  the  western  islands,  we  conceive  it  not 
impertinent,  if  we  briefly  relate  some  things  which  were  omitted  ia 
the  former  books  concerning  the  neighbouring  nations  in  Europe* 

In  Celtica  (they  say)  once  ruled  a  famous  man,  who  bad  a  daugk* 
tcr  of  a  more  tall  and  majestic  stature  than  ordinary,  and  for  bcanty 
far  beyond  all  others  of  her  sex*  This  lady  glorying  much  both  in  ha 
strength  and  beauty,  despised  all  that  courted  her,  as  judging  ngne 
worthy  of  her  bed*  It  happened  that  Hercules  at  the  time  lie  was 
engaged  in  the  war  against  Gallia,  marched  into  Celtica,  and  there 
built  Alesia.  When  this  young  virgin  saw  him,  admiring  both  Ik 
valour  and  stately  proportion,  she  readily  admitted  him  to  her  bed; 
yet  not  without  the  consent  of  her  parents.  Of  this  lady  he  b^it 
Galates  who,  for  virtues  of  mind,  and  strength  of  body,  far  ezcdled 
4he  rest  of  his  nation*  When  he  came  to  man's  estate,  and  waspoi* 
sessed  of  his  grandfather's  kingdom,  he  subdued  many  of  the  neigh- 
bouring countries,  and  performed  many  notable  achievements  by  his 
sword*  His  valour  being  every  where  noised  abroad,  he  called  his 
subjects  after  bis  own  name,  Galatians,  and  the  the  country  Gaktia, 
Gaul* 

Having  shewn  the  original  of  the  name,  something  is  to  he  aaid  of 
the  country  itself*  Gaul  b  inhabited  by  several  nations,  but  not  all 
alike  populous :  the  greatest  of  them  have  in  them  two  hundred 
thousand  men,  the  least  but  fifty  thousand*  Of  these  there  is  one 
that  has  been  an  ant  lent  ally  of  the  Romans,  and  continues  so  to 
this  day* 

In  regard  it  lies  for  the  greatest  part  under  the  Arctic  pole,  it  is  veiy 
cold,  and  subject  to  frosts ;  for  in  winter  in  cloudy  days,  instead  ct 
rain  the  earth  is  covered  with  snow ;  in  clear  weather,  every  place  is 
so  full  of  ice  and  frost,  tliat  the  rivers  are  frozen  up  to  that  degiee, 
that  they  are  naturally  covered  over  with  bridges  of  ice*  Fot  not 
only  a  small  company  of  travellers,  but  vast  armies,  with  their  cha- 
riots and  loaden  carriages,  may  pass  over  without  any  danger  or 
.  hazard. 

There  are  many  great  rivers  run  through  Gaul,  which  by  thdr 
various  windings  and  turnings  cut  through  and  parcel  the  champaign 
grounds,  some  of  which  have  their  spring-heads  from  deep  lakes, 
others  issue  out  from  the  mountains,  and  empty  themselves  either 
into  the  ocean,  or  into  our  seas* 

The  greatest  that  falls  into  our  sea,  is  the  Rhone,  which  rises  oat 
of  the  Alps,  and  at  five  moutlis  disgorges  itself  into  the  sea.  Of 
those  that  empty  themselves  into  the  ocean,  the  greatest  are  the 
Danube  and  the  Rhine  ;  over  the  last  of  which  C«sar^  called  I>iva$> 


Ckn^^H.  DI0D01IUS  sicutus.  '  515 


(ttkour  time)  to  admiritkNiy  twBk  a  bridge,  and  passed  oyer  his  forcts, 
bmI  aitbdiied  the  Gaitb  on  ibe  other  side. 

There  are  many  other  navigaMe  ftv«cs  in  Celtiea^  to  write  of  whick 
particulariy  would  be  tedious :  almost  all  of  them  are  frequently  frozen 
up^  as  if  bridges  were  east  ovei  their  ehanneta.  But  the  ice  being 
mitiirayy  smooch,  and  therefore  slippery  to  the  passengers^,  they  throw 
cbaff  upon  it  that  they  may  go  the  more  firmly. 

In  many  places  of  Gaul,  there  is  sonnething  strange  and  very  re* 
markable,  which  is  not  fit  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.  For  the  west 
and  north  winds  in  summer  are  sa fierce  and  violent,  that  they  fling  into 
the  air  great  stones  as  big  as  a  man  can  grasp  in  his  hands,  together 
with  a  doud  of  gravel  and  dust.  Nay,  the  violence  of  thil  whirlwind 
is  fuch,  that  it  forces  men's  arms  out  of  their  liaods,  rends  their 
dothes  o£f  their  backs,  and  dismounts  the  rider  from  his  horse. 

This  excessive  cold  and  immoderate  temper  of  the  air,  is  the  cause 
why  the  earth  in  these  parts  produces  neither  wine  nor  oil;  and 
therefore  the  Gauls,  to  supply  the  want  of  these  fruits,  make  a  drinkr 
of  barley,  which  they  call  Xythus  :  they  mix  likewise  their  honey* 
combs  with  water,  and  make  use  of  that  for  the  same  purpose.  They  { 
are  so  exceedingly  given  to  wine,  that  they  guzzle  it  down  as  soon  at  I 
it  is  imi)orted  by  the  merchant,  and  are  so  eager  and  inordinate,  that  I 
making  themselves  drunk,  they  either  fall  dead  asleep,  or  become  I 
stark  mad.     So  that  many  Italian  merchants  (to  gratify  their  owa 
covetousness)  make  use  of  the  drunkenness  of  the  Gauls  to  advance 
their  own  profit  and  gain.    For  they  convey  the  wiae  to  them  both 
by  navigable  rivers,  and  by  land  in  carts,  and  bring  back  an  incredi*   \ 
ble  price ;  for  in  lieu  of  a  hogshead  of  wine,  they  receive  a  boy,  giv*    \ 
ing  drink  in  truck  for  a  servant.  # 

In  Gaul  there  are  no  silver  mines,  but  much  ggMt  with  which  the 
nature  of  the  place  supplies  the  inhabitants,  without  the  labour  or 
toil  of  digging  in  the  mines.    Fur  the  winding  course  of  die  river 
washing  with  its  streams  tlie  feet  of  the  mountains,  carries  awaf 
great  pieces  of  golden  ore,  which  those  employed  in  tbb  business  ga» 
tber,  and  then  grind  and  bruise  these  clods  of  gdden  earth :  and 
iwben  they  have  so  done,  cleanse  them  from  the  gross  earthy  part,  by 
wasiiiug  them  in  water,  and  theu  melt  them  in  a  furnace;  and  thua   ' 
get  together  a  vast  heap  of  gold,  with  wluch  not  only  the  women,  but 
tlie  men  deck  and  adorn- themselves.     For  they  wear  bracelets  of  this 
metal  about  their  wrists  and  arms,  and  massy  cluuns  of  pure  and 
beaten  gold  about  their  necks,  and  weighty  ruigs  upon  their  fingers, 
and  croslets  of  gold  upon  their  breasts.    The  custom  observed  by 
the  higher  Gauls  in  the  temples  of  their  gods,  is  admirably  remarka- 
ble ;    for  in  the  oratories  and  sacied  temples  of  this  country,  in 
Vol.  1.   No.  35.  ss 


rt* 


314  DIODORU6  sieuLUs.  BooJ^  FT 

honour  of  their  gods  they  scatter  pieces  of  gold  up  and  down,  which 
none  of  the  inhabitants  (their  superstitious  devotion  is  such)  will  ia 
the  least  touch  or  meddle  with,  though  the  Gauls  are  of  themselfes 
most  exceeding  covetous. 
^i  For  stature  they  are  tall,  but  of  a  sweaty  and  pale  complezkMi, 
red-hairedy  not  only  naturally,  but  they  endeavour  all  they  can  to 
make  it  redder  by  art.  They  often  wash  their  hair  in  a  water  boiled 
with  lime,  and  turn  it  backward  from  .the  forehead  to  the  crown -of 
the  heady  and  thence  to  their  very  necks,  that  their  faces  may  be' 
more  fully  seen,  so  that  they  look  like  satyrs  and  hobgoblios*  By 
this  sort  of  management  of  themselves,  tlieir  hair  is  as  bard  at  a 
horse's  mane.  Some  of  them  shave  their  beards ;  others  let  them 
grow  a  little.  The  persons  of  quality  shave  their  china  clotej  but 
their  mustachios  they  let  fall  so  low,  that  they  even  cover  their 
mouths ;  so  that  when  they  eat,  their  meat  hangs  dangling  by  their 
hair;  and  when  they  drink,  the  liquor  runs  through  their  musta- 
chios as  through  a  sieve.  At  meal-time  they  all  sit,  not  upoo  aeatt, 
but  upon  the  ground,  and  instead  of  carpets,  spread  wolves  or  dogs 
skins  under  them.  Young  boys  and  girls  attend  them,  such  ti  are 
yet  hut  mere  children.  Near  at  hand  they  have  their  chimniea,  with 
their  fires  well  furnished  with  pots  and  spits  full  of  whole  joints  of 
flesh  meat ;  and  the  best  and  fairest  joints  (in  a  way  of  due  honour 
and  regard)  they  set  before  the  persons  of  best  quality  :  as  Homer 
introduces  the  Grecian  captains  entertaining  of  Ajax,  when  he  re*' 
turned  victor  from  his  single  combat  with  Hector,  in  this  venc 

But  Agamenmon  at  a  favooring  sign. 
Before  great  Ajax  set  tbe  losty  chine. 

They  invite  likewise  strangers  to  their  feasts,  and  after  all  is  overj 
they  ask  who  they  are,  and  what  is  their  business.  In  the  yery  midst 
of  feasting,  upon  any  small  occasion,  it  is  ordinary  for  them  io  a  beat 
to  rise,  and  without  any  regard  of  their  lives,  to  fall  to  it  with  their 
swords.  For  the  opinion  of  Pythagoras  prevails  much  amongst  them, 
that  men's  souls  are  immortal,  and  tliat  there  is  a  transntiigration  of 
them  into  other  bodies,  and  after  a  certain  time  they  live  again ;  and 
therefore  in  their  funerals  they  write  letters  to  their  friends^  and 
throw  them  into  the  funeral  pile,  as  if  they  were  to  be  read  by  the 
deceased.  In  their  journeys  and  fights  they  use  chariots  drawn  with 
two  horses,  which  carry  a  charioteer  and  a  soldier,  and  when  they 
meet  horsemen  in  the  battle,  they  fall  upon  their  enemies  with  their 
saunians* ;  then  quitting  their  chariots,  they  to  it  with  their  8w6ida» 
There  are  some  of  them  that  so  despise  death,  that  they  will  fight 
naked,  with  something  only  about  their  loins.  They  carry  ahmg  with 

*  A  kind  of  dart. 


Chap.  JL  DioDORUS  SICULUS.  '315 

them  to  the  wars  for  their  servants^  libertioes^  chosen  out  of  the  poorer 
sort  of  people,  whom  they  make  use  of  for  waggoners,  and  pedees. 
When  the  army  k  draWn  up  in  battalia,  it  is  usual  for  some  of  them 
to  step  out  before  the  army^  and  to  challenge  the  stoutest  of  their' 
enemy  to  a  single  combat^  toindishing  their  arms  to  terrify  their  ad- 
versary. If  any  comes  fbrtli  txi  fight  with  them,  then  they  sing  some 
song  in  commendation  of  the  valiant  acts  of  their  ancestors,  and 
blazon  out  their  own  praises :  on  the  contrary  they  vilify  their  ad- 
versary, and  give  forth  slighting  and  contemptuous  words,  as  if  he 
liad  not  the  least  courage.  When  at  any  time  they  cut  off  their  ene- 
mies' heads,  they  hang  them  about  their  horses'  necks. 

They  deliver  their  spoils  to  their  servants,  all  besmeared  with 
blood,  to  be  carried  before  them  in  triumph,  they  themselves  in  the 
meantime  singing  the  triumphant  pean.  And  as  the  chief  of  their 
spoils,  they  fasten  those  they  have  killed,  over  the  doors  of  their 
houses,  as  if  they  were  so  many  wild  beasts  taken  in  hunting.  The 
heads  of  their  enemies  that  werp  the  chiefest  persons  of  quality,  they 
carefully  deposit  in  chests,  embalming  them  with  the  oil  of  cedars, 
and  shewing  them  to  strangers,  glory  and  boast  how  that  some  of 
their  ancestors,  their  fathers,  or  themslves,  (though  great  sums  of  mo- 
ney have  been  offered  for  them),  yet  have  refused  to  accept  them. 

Some  glory  so  much  on  this  account,  that  they  refuse  to  take  for 
one  of  these  heads  its  weight  in  gold ;  in  this  manner  exposing  their 
barbarous  magnanimity.  For  it  is  brave  and  generous  indeed  not  to 
sell  the  ensigns  of  true  valour ;  but  to  fight  with  the  dead  bodies  of 
those  that  were  men  like  ourselves,  resembles  the  cruelty  of  wild 
beasts. 

.  Their  garments  are  very  strange ;  for  they  wear  party  coloured 
coa^s,  interwoven  here  and  there  with  divers  sorts  of  flowers ;  and 
hose  which  they  c^U  Bracse.  Yhey  make  likewise  their  cassocks  of 
basket-work  joined  together  with  laces  on  tlie  inside,  and  chequered 
With  many  pieces  of  work  like  flowers ;  those  they  wear  in  winter  are 
thicker,  those  in  summer  more  slender. 

Their  defensive  arms  are  a  shield,  proportionable  to  the  height  of 
a  man,  garnished  with  their  own  ensigns. 

Some  carry  the  shapes  of  beasts  in  brass,  artificially  wrought,  as 
well  for  defence^s  ornament.  Upon  their  heads  they  wear  helmets 
of  brass,  with  large  pieces  of  work  raised  upon  them  for  ostentation 
sake,  to  be  admired  by  the  beholders  ;  for  they  have  either  horns  of 
the  same  metal  joined  to  them,  or  the  shapes  of  birds  and  beasts 
carved  upon  them.  They  have  trumpets  after  the  barbarian  manner, 
which  in  sounding  make  a  horr/J  noise,  to  strike  a  tenor  fie  and  pro- 
per for  the  occasion.     Some  of  them  wear  iroa  breast-plates^  and 


3 1  (?  DIODOEUS  ftlCULOI.  iBbsft  t^ 

TaBsssssssssssssssaasaammmtaBssaasBassammmmmm^a^BSSSssBmam 

booked ;  but  ochen,  cooteot  wkh  wbat  van  —fa  afbffit  dMH^ 
figbt  naked.  For  swords,  tbey  use  m  long  aad  bnwl  wtmfOB  cdM 
S|Mitha,  whidi  they  hsog  across  their  right  thigh  by  wao  or  hnKn 
chaios*  Some  gird  themselTes  orer  their  coats  with  beks  gBt  with 
gold  or  silver.  For  darts  they  cast  those  they  call  LaoccSy 
iron  shafts  are  a  cubit  or  more  io  leogth^  and  almost  two 
breadth. 

For  their  swords  are  as  big  as  the  sauoiaiis  of  other  people^  btfl 
the  points  of  their  sauniaos  are  birger  thao  those  of  Acir  swwds; 
some  of  them  are  strait,  others  bowed  and  beodiog  backwaids^  so 
tliat  they  not  only  cut,  but  break  the  flesh;  and  when  die  daft  ii 
drawn  out,  it  tears  and  rents  the  wound  roost  miserably. 

These  people  are  of  a  most  terrible  aspect,  and  haie  a  moat  dnead 
ful  and  loud  voice.  In  their  converse  they  are  sparing  of  their 
and  speak  many  things  darkly  and  figuratively.    They  are  high 
hyperbolical  in  trumpeting  out  their  own  praisesj  bat  speak  sligM^ 
and  contemptibly  of  others.    They  are  apt  to  menace  others,  aetf» 
opiniated,  grievously  provoking,  of  sluirp  wits,  and  apt  %o  leanu 

Among  them  they  have  poets  that  sing  melodious  MOga,  wImmi 
they  call  bards,  who  to  their  musical  instruments  like  onto  hnrpi^ 
chant  forth  the  praises  of  some,  and  the  dispraises  of  others. 

There  are  likewise  among  them  philosophers  and  divines, 
they  call  Saronidit*^  and  are  held  in  great  veneration  and 
Prophets  likewise  they  have,  whom  they  highly  honour,  who  foretd 
future  events  by  viewing  the  entrails  of  the  sacrifices,  and  to  thcaa 
soothsayers  all  the  people  generally  are  very  observant. 

When  they  are  to  consult  on  some  great  and  weighty  matter,  thef 
observe  a  most  strange  and  incredible  custom;  for  they  sacrifice  a 
man,  striking  him  with  a  sword  near  the  diaphragm,  ciOBSOivorhb 
breast,  who  being  thus  slain,  and  foiling  down,  they  judge  of  Ae 
event  from  the  manner  of  his  fall,  the  convulsion  of  hb  oieabcfs^ 
and  the  flux  of  blood ;  and  this  has  gained  among  them  (by  loiig  and 
antient  usage)  a  firm  credit  and  belief. 

It  \s  not  lawful  to  ofl*er  any  sacrifice  without  a  philoaoplier;  fiir 
they  hold  that  by  these,  as  men  acquainted  with  tlie  natnre  of  Ibt 
deity,  and  familiar  in  their  converse  with  the  gods,  they  ought  %o  pre* 
sent  their  thank-oiferings,  and  by  these  ambassadoft  to  desire  anch 
things  as  are  good  for  them.  These  Druids  and  Bards  are  obaenrdi 
and  obeyed,  not  only  in  times  of  peace,  but  war  abo,  both  by  frienil 
and  enemies. 

Many  times  these  philosophers  and  poets,  stepping  in  between 


*  Droids;  for  SaroniHs,  or  Sscijoidsj  are  of  the  sane  sig«ificatioa  widi  Dwld^  ifct 
•na  of  an  oai«  tlie  other  of  an  hollow  oalc. 


armies  near  at  hmtid,  when  they  ore  j«6t  ready  to  engoge,  with  their 
swords  drawn,  and  spears  Tiresciitedonei^aiost  another,  have  pacified 
^dteoi^  as  if  some  wild  beasts  had  been  tamed  by  eiichqntmeQts.  Thai 
n^  is  mastered  by  wtedom,  even  amofigst  the  most  savage  barbariansy 
«md  Mars  himself  reverenees  the  Muses. 

And  DOW  it  will  be  worth  while  to  declare  that  whi<4i  maltitiiidea 
are  ahogether  jgooranc  of.  Those  who  inhabit  the  inland  parts  be- 
yond Massilia*^  and  about  the  Alps,  and  on  this  side  the  Pysreaeaa 
Bwantains^  are  called  Ceks;  but  those  that  inhabit  below  tMs  part 
•called  Cekiea^  southward  to  the  ocean  and  the  mountain  HyreuMtfy 
and  aH  as  Ceht  as  Scythia,  are  called  Gawla.  But  the  Romani  call  all 
these  people  generally  by  one  and  the  same  aame,  Gauls* 

The  women  here  are  both  as  tall  and  as  oounigooot  as  the  aaem 
The  children,  for  tiie  most  party  Awn  their  vdry  birth  are  gwy^ 
•headed*;  but  when  they  grow  up  to  men's  estate,  their  hair  changes 
in  oolour  ^e  to  their  pareats;  Those  Sawards  the  north,  and  bor-> 
dering  upon  Scythia,  ave  so  «xoeedhig  fierce  and  eru^  that,  (as  an* 
pert  foes)  they  eat  men^  like  the  Bntains  that  inhabit  irisf. 

They  are  so  noted  for  a  fierce  and  warlike  peoipie,  that  lame  bavi 
thought  them  to  be  those  that  antiently  overran  all  Asia,  and  wai« 
Hhen  ^led  Ctmerians,  and  who  me  now  (tiuough  length  of  tiaM) 
vridi  a  little  akeratioa,  called  Cimbiians. 

Antimtly  they  gave  themselves  to  rapine  and  spoil,  wasting  and 
destroying  other  countries,  and  slighted  and  despised  all  other  people* . 
These  are  they  that  took  Rome,  and  robbed  the  temple  at  Delphos* 
These  brought  a  great  part  of  Europe  and  Asia  under  tribute,  and  pos« 
sessed  themselves  of  some  of  the  countries  of  those  tliey  subdued. 
Because  of  their  mixture  with  the  Grecians,  they  were  at  last  called 
Galio-Grecians.  They  often  routed  and  destroyed  many  great  armies 
of  the  Romans. 

According  to  their  natural  cruelty,  they  are  us  impious  in  the  wer«» 
ship  of  their  gods;  for  malefactors,  after  that  they  have  been  kept 
close  prisoners  five  years  together,  they  impale  upon  stakes,  in  faonoaff 
to  the  gods,  and  then,  with  many  other  victims,  upon  a  vast  ]Nle  of 
wood,  they  offer  them  up  as  a  burnt  sacrifice  to  their  deities.  '  In 
like  manner  they  use  their  captives  also,  as  sacrifices  to  the  gods. 
Some  of  them  cut  the  throats,  burn,  or  otherwise  destroy  both  men 
and  beasts  that  they  have  taken  in  time  of  war;,  though  th^  have 
very  beautiful  women  among  them,  yet  they  little  value  their  prtvata 
society,  but  are  transported  with  raging  lust  to  the  filthy  act  of 
sodomy;  and,  lying  upon  the  ground  on  beast's  skins  spread  uudiv 
them,  they  tliere  tumble  together,  with  their  catamites  lying  on  both 

^  Marseillef.  t  Some  part  ofBntftin.tlitn  to  ciilM.     St«]>li,  ^ 


318  DIODORU8  SICULUS*  Bo&k  V. 

•ides  of  them :  and  that  which  if  the  most  abominable  is,  that  wjA^ 
out  any  sense  of  shame,  or  regard  to  their  reputation,  they  will  rfaJily 
prostitute  their  bodies  to  others  upon  every  occasion.  A  nd  tbey  am 
so  far  from  looking  upon  it  to  be  any  fault,  that  they  judge  it  a  mcas 
and  dishonourable  thing  for  any  thus  caressed  to  refuse  the  fiivoiir 
offered  them. 

Having  spoken  of  the  Celts,  we  shall  now  give  an  account  of  tbck 
neighbours  the  Celtiberians.    The  two  nations  Celts  and  IbcriaM^ 
heretofore  breaking  forth  into  a  war  about  the  boundaries  of  their 
countries,  at  length  agreed  to  inhabit  together  promiscuously,  anj  to 
marrying  one  with  another,  their  issue  and  posterity  (they  say)  aftef* 
wards  were  called  Celtiberians.    Two  potent  nations  being  thus 
united,  and  possessed  likewise  of  a  rich  and  fertile  country,  tbest 
Celtiberians  became  very  famous  and  renowned;  so  that  the  Romans 
had  much  ado  to  subdue  them  after  long  and  tedious  wars  with  them. 
Tliese  Celtiberians  bring  into  the  field  not  only  stout  and  valiant 
horsemen,  but  brave  foot,  both  for  strength  and  hardiness  able  to  no* 
dergo  all  manner  of  labour  and  toil.    They  wear  black  rough  cas* 
socks  made  of  wool,  like  to  goat's  hair.    Some  of  them  are  armed 
with  the  Gaulish  light  shields,  others  with  bucklers  as  big  as  shieM% 
and  wear  greaves  about  their  legs  made  of  rough  hair,  and  braien 
helmets  upon  their  heads,  adorned  with  red  plumes.    They  o^riy 
two-edged  swords  exactly  tempered  with  steel,  and  have  daggers  be* 
side,  of  a  span  long,  which  they  make  use  of  in  close  fights.    They 
make  weapons  and  darts  in  an  admirable  manner;   for  they  bury 
plates  of  iron  so  long  under  ground,  till  the  rust  hath  consumed  the 
weaker  part,  and  so  the  rest  becomes  more  strong  and  firm.    Of  this 
they  make  their  swords  and  other  warlike  weapons;  and  with  these 
arms,  thus  tempered,  they  so  cut  through  every  thing  in  their  way, 
that  neither  shield,  helmet,  nor  bone  can  withstand  them.    And  be- 
cause they  are  furnished  with  two  swords,  the  hone,  when  they 
have  routed  the  enemy,  alight  and  join  with  the  foot,  and  fight  to  adr 
miration. 

There  is  another  strange  and  wonderful  custom  they  have  amongst 
them ;  for,  though  they  are  very  nice  and  curious  in  their  diet,  yet 
they  have  a  very  sordid  and  filthy  practice,  to  wash  their  whole  bodies 
over  with  urine,  and  rub  their  very  teeth  with  it,  which  is  counted  a 
certain  means  of  health  to  their  bodies.  As  to  their  manners,  thcj 
are  very  cruel  towards  their  enemies  and  other  malefactorf,  but  very 
courteous  and  civil  to  strangers;  for  to  all  such,  from  what  place 
soever  they  come,  they  readily  and  freely  entertain  them,  and  strive 
who  shall  perform  the  greatest  office  of  kindness  and  respect.  Thoae 
who  are  attended  upon  by  strangers  they  commend  and  esteem  them 


Ckap.lL  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  319 


riuk 


as  friends  of  the  gods.  They  live  upon  «U 'sorts  of  flesh  in  great 
l^nty,  and  their  drink  is  made  of  honey,  their  country  abounding 
therewith:  but  they  buy  wine  jilso  of  the  merchants  that  traffic 
thitheV. 

Of  those  that  border  upon  them,  the  most  civilized  nations  are  tht 
VaccsQi*,  who  every  year  divide  the  lands  among  them,  and  then  till 
and  plough  it,  and  after  the  harvest,  distribute  the  fruits,  allotting  to 
every  one  their  share ;  and  therefore  it  is  death  to  steal,  or  under* 
handedly  to  convey  away  any  thing  from  the  husbandman.  Those  thef 
call  Lusitaniansf  are  the  most  valiant  of  all  the  Cimbri.  These,  ia 
times  of  war,  carry  little  targets  made  of  bowel  strings,  so  strong  and 
firm,  as  completely  to  guard  and  defend  their  bodies.  In  fights  they 
manage  these,  so  nimbly  whirling  them  about  here  and  there,  that 
with  a  great  deal  of  art  they  avoid  and  repel  every  dart  that  is  cast  al 
them. 

They  use  hooked  saunians  made  all  of  iron,  and  %ear  swords  and 
helmets  like  to  those  of  the  Celtiberians.  They  throw  their  darts  at 
a  great  distance,  and  yet  are  sure  tq  hit  their  mark,  and  wound  deep* 
ly :  being  of  active  and  nimble  bodies,  they  cah  easily  fly  from^  or 
pursue  their  enemy,  as  there  is  occasion :  but  when  they  are  aoder 
hardships,  they  cannot  endure  near  so  much  as  the  Celtiberians.  lo 
time  of  peace,  they  have  a  kind  of  a  light  and  airy  way  of  dancing,, 
which  requires  great  agility  and  nimbleness  of  the  legs  and  thigl^ 
In  time  of  war  tliey  march  observing  time  and  measure ;  and  sing, 
the  paeans  when  they  are  just  ready  to  charge  the  enemy. 

The  Iberians,  especially  the  Lusitanians,  are  singular  in  one  thing 
that  they  do ;  for  those  tliat  are  young  and  pressed  with  want,  but  yet 
are  strong  and  courageous,  get  together  upon  the  tops  of  the  moun* 
tains,  and  furnish  themselves  with  arms;  and  having  made  up  a 
considerable  body,  m/ike  incursions  into  Iberia,  and  heap  up  riches 
by  thieving  and  robbery;  and  this  is  their  constant  practiqe  in  de* 
spite  of  all  hazard  whatsoever;  for  being  lightly  armed,  and  nimble 
of  foot,  they  are  not  easily  surprised.  And  indeed  steep  and  craggy 
mountains  are  to  them  as  their  natural  country,  and  to  these  they  fly 
for  shelter,  because  there  is  no  way  in  those  places  for  great  armies 
to  pass.  And  therefore  though  the  Romans  often  set  upon  them, 
and  in  some  measure  have  curbed  them,  yet  they  were  never  able 
wholly  to  put  an  end  to  their  thieving  and  robbing. 

Having  related  what  concerns  the  Iberians,  we  conceive  it  not  im* 
pertinent  to  say  something  of  their  silver  mines.  For  almost  all  this 
country  is  full  of  such  mines,  whence  is  dug  very  good  and  purcf 
silver ;  from  whence  those  that  deal  in  that  metal,  gain  great  profit, 

*  People  of  the  higher  provi  ice  of  Spaia.  t  PurtogoeH, 


S90  DIODOaUS  sicvtusu 


y 


And  10  the  foniier  book  we  have  spoken  of  the  Pyrenetn 
in  Iberia,  when  we  treated  of  the  aets  and  achieremeots  of  Hcreater 
these  fxt  the  highest  and  greatest  of  all  others ;  for  ftoai  the 
sea,  almost  as  far  as  to  the  northern  ocean,  they  diTide  Gaol 
Iberia  and  Celtiberia,  inaning  out  for  the  space  of  three 
fttrkmgs.  These  places  being  fall  of  woods,  and  ihiek  of  trcea,  k  b 
reported,  that  in  antient  time  this  mountainous  tract  was  ael  on  fim 
by  some  shepherds,  which  continuing  burning  for  many  days  togetfaar, 
(whence  the  mountains  were  called  Pj^renean*),  the  parched  aupcilew 
of  the  earth  sweated,  abundance  of  siWer  and  the  ore  being  aiektd^ 
the  metal  ik>wed  down  in  streams  of  pure  silver,  like  a  river;  tbcnsi 
whereof  being  unknown  to  the  inhabitants,  the  Phoenician  merdinBCi 
bought  it  for  trifles  given  for  it  in  exchange,  and  by  tOHisportn^  it 
intoGieece,  Asia,  and  all  other  nations,  greatly  enriched  tbemselvca; 
and  such  was  their  covetousness,  that  wheni-tihey-  had  fully  kmded 
their  ships,  and  had  much  more  silver  to  bring  aboard,  tliey  cut  off 
the  lead  from  their  anchors,  and  made  use  of  silver  instead  of  tbe 
other. 

The  Phomicians  for  a  long  time  uring  this  trade,  and  so  growing 
more  and  more  wealthy,  sent  many  colonies  into  Sicily  and  the 
neighbouring  islands,  and  at  length  into  Africa  and  Sardinia  ^  but  n 
lodg  time  after,  the  Iberians  coming  to  understand  tlie  nature  of  the 
metal,  sunk  many  large  mines,  whence  they  dug  an  infinite  qonntity 
of  pure  silver,  (as  never  was  the  like  almost  in  any  other  phee  of  the 
world),  whereby  they  gained  exceeding  great  wealth  and  reveniies. 

The  manner  of  working  in  these  mines,  and  ordering  the  awtal 
among  the  Iberians  is  this :  there  being  extraordinary  rich  mines  in 
this  country,  of  gold  as  well  as  silver  and  brass,  the  laboorera  in  the 
brass  take  a  fourth  part  of  the  pure  brass  dug  up,  to  tbeir  own  ose^ 
and  the  commom  labourers  in  silver  have  an  Euboic  talent  for  their 
labour  in  three  days  time ;  for  the  whole  soil  is  full  of  solad  nod 
shining  ore,  so  that  both  the  nature  of  the  ground,  and  the  indiistrj 
of  the  workmen,  is  admirable.  At  the  first  every  common  peraon 
might  dig  for  this  metal;  and  in  regard  the  silver  ore  was  easily  got, 
ordinary  men  grew  very  rich :  but  after  that  Iberia  came  into  the 
hands  of  the  Romans,  the  mines  were  managed  by  a  throng  of  Ita- 
lians, whose  covetousness  loitded  them  with  abundance  of  richoa;  far 
they  bought  a  great  number  of  slaves,  and  delivered  them  to  the  iMk-^ 
masters  and  overseers  of  the  mines.  These  slaves  oiien  the  rooulhs 
of  the  mines  in  many  places,  where  digging  deep  into  the  groand^ 
are  found  massy  clods  of  earth,  full  of  gold  and  silver;  and  in  sinki^f 

*  Signif^mg  fSery  in  Greek. 


CS^.  //.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  SUV 

both  in  length  and  depth,  they  carry  on  their  works  tn  underminiag 
the  earth  many  furlongs  distance,  the  workmen  every  way  here  and 
there  making  galleries  under  ground.  And  bringing  up  all  the  massy 
piebes  of  ore  (whence  the  profit  and  gain  is  to  be  had)  even  out  of 
the  lowest  bowels  of  the  earth. 

There  is  a  great  difference  between  these  mines  and  those  in  Attica ; 
for  besides  the  labour,  they  that  search  there  are  at  great  cost  and 
charge;  and  besides  are  often  frustrated  of  their  hopes,  and  some*' 
times  lose  what  they  had  found,  so  that  they  seem  to  be  unfortunate 
to  a  proverb :  but  those  in  Iberia  that  deal  in  mines,  according  to 
their  expectations,  are  greatly  enriched  by  their  labours;  for  they 
succeed  at  their  very  first  sinking,  and  afterwards  by  the  extraor- 
dinary richness  of  the  soil,  they  find  more  and  more  resplendent  veins 
of  ore,  full  of  gold  and  silver;  for  the  whole  soil  round  abodt  is  in- 
terlaced on  every  hand  with  these  metals.  Sometimes  at  a  great 
depth  they  meet  with  rivers  under  ground,  but  by  art  give  a  check 
to  the  violence  of  their  current;  for  by  cutting  of  trenches  under 
ground,  they  divert  the  stream;  and  being  sure  to  gain  what  they 
aim  at,  when  they  have  begun,  they  never  leave  oiF  till  they  have 
finished  it;  and  to  admiration  they  pump  out  those  floods  of  water 
with  those  instruments  called  Egyptian  pumps,  invented  by  Ar- 
chimedes the  Syracusan,  when  he  was  in  Egypt.  By  these,  with 
constant  pumping  by  turns,  they  throw  up  the  water  to  the  mouth  of 
the  pit,  and  by  this  means  drain  the  mine  dry,  and  make  the  place 
fit  for  their  work.  For  this  engine  is  so  ingeniously  contrived,  that 
a  vast  quantity  of  water  is  strangely  with  little  labour  cast  out,  and 
the  whole  flux  is  thrown  up  from  the  very  bottom  to  the  surface  of 
the  earth. 

The  ingenuity  of  this  artist  is  justly  to  be  admired,  not  only  in 
these  pumps,  but  in  many  other  far  greater  things,  for  which  he  is 
famous  all  the  world  over,  of  which  we  shall  distinctly  give  an  exact 
narration,  when  we  come  to  the  time  wherein  he  lived. 

Now  though  these  slaves  that  continue  as  so  many  prisoners  in 
these  mines,  incredibly  enrich  their  masters  by  their  labours,  yet 
toiling  night  and  day  in  these  golden  prisons,  many  of  them  by  being 
overworked,  die  under  ground.  For  they  have  no  rest  nor  inter- 
mission from  their  labours;  but  the  task-masters  by  stripes  force 
them  to  intolerable  hardships,  so  that  at  length  they  die  most  mi- 
serably. Some  that  through  the  strength  of  their  bodies,  and  vigour 
of  their  spirits  are  able  to  endure  it,  continue  a  long  time  in  tliose 
miseries,  whose  calamities  are  such,  tlwt  death  to  tliem  is  far  mori; 
eligible  than  life. 

Since  these  mines  afigrdcd  such  wonderful  ri9hes,  it  may  be  great* 
Vol.  1.  No.  35.  it 


322  DfODORUS  SICULUS.  BookV. 


ly  admired  that  none  appear  to  have  been  sunk  of  later  times :  bat 
in  answer  hereunto,  the  covetousoess  of  the  Carthaginians,  when  they 
were  masters  of  Spain*,  opened  all :  and  hence  it  was  they  grew  so 
rich  and  potent,  and  hired  so  many  vah'ant  soldiers,  by  whose  assist- 
ance they  carrried  on  so  many  great  wars,  that  they  neither  trusted 
to  the  soldiers  raised  from  among  their  own  citizens,  nor  to  those  of 
their  confederates,  but  involved  the  Romans,  Sicilians,  and  Africansy 
in  extreme  hazards,  almost  to  their  utter  ruin,  by  conquering  all 
with  their  monies  dug  out  of  the  mines.  For  the  Carthaginians  were 
ever  of  old  excessively  thirsting  after  gain,  and  the  Italians  came  not 
one  jot  behind  any  of  them,  but  were  as  eager  to  engross  all. 

In  many  places  of  Spain  there  is  found  also  tin;  but  not  upon  tlie 
surface  of  the  ground,  as  some  historians  report,  but  they  dig  it  up^ 
and  melt  it  down  as  they  do  gold  and  silver.  Above  Lusitaoia  there  is 
much  of  this  tin  metal,  that  is,  in  the  islands  lying  in  the  ocean  over 
against  Iberia,  which  are  therefore  called  Cassiterides ;  and  much  of 
it  likewise  is  transported  out  of  Britain  into  Gaul,  the  opposite  con- 
tinent,  which  the  merchants  carry  on  horseback  through  the  heart  of 
Ccltica  to  Marseilles,  and  the  city  called  Narbo,  which  city  is  a 
Roman  colony,  and  the  greatest  mart  town  for  wealth  and  trade  in 
those  parts. 

But  now  having  done  with  the  Grauls  and  Celtiberans,  we  shall 
pass  to  the  Liguriansf.  They  inhabit  a'rough  and  barren  couo* 
try,  and  live  a  toilsome  and  troublesome  life  in  their  daily  labour 
for  their  common  sustenance ;  for  the  country  being  mountainous 
and  full  of  woods,  some  are  employed  all  day  long  in  cutting  down 
trees,  being  furnished  with  strong  and  great  hatchets  for  tliat  pur- 
pose. The  husbandman's  business  for  the  most  part  lies  iu  hewing 
and  breaking  rocks,  the  soil  is  so  very  rough  and  craggy;  for  there 
is  not  a  clod  of  earth  they  can  dig  up  without  a  stone ;  and  though 
they  continually  thus  conflict  so  many  hardships,  yet  custom  has 
turned  it  to  a  second  nature ;  and  after  all  their  labour  and  toilj  they 
reap  but  very  little  fruit,  scarce  sufficient  to  supply  their  neeesskies. 
Daily  toil  therefore,  and  scarcity  of  food,  is  the  reason,  they  are 
lean,  and  nothing  but  sinews,  ^ilie  women  share  in  these 
tasks  as  much  as  the  men  :  these  people  hunt  often,  and  take  many 
wild  beasts,  by  which  they  supply  the  want  of  bread.  Being  there* 
fore  accustomed  to  range  the  snowy  mountains,  and  climb  the  rough 
and  «*ra[rtry  hills,  their  bodies  are  very  strong  and  brawny.  Some 
of  thcui  for  want  of  com  and  other  fruits,  drink  watec;  and  feed  upon 
locusts  aud  wild  beasts,  and  cram  their  bellies  with  such  herhs  as  Una 

*  Iberift.  +  The  Gfooeif. 


Chilli.  OIODORUS^ICULUa.  3S3 

^aaasssa^atasaaesssBsssssssaesssssattsmsss^^ 

land  there  produces;  their  coaDtry  beiiq;  altogether  a  stranger  10 
those  desirable  deities,  Ceres  and  Bacchus. 

In  the  night  they  lie  in  the  fieldsi  and  very  seldom  so  much  as  io 
the  meanest  huts  or  cottages  i  but  most  commonly  in  hollow  rocksj 
and  natural  caves,  wheresoever  ihey  judge  there  may  be  a  conveni* 
ent  shelter  for  them ;  and  much  after  this  manner  they  do  in  all  other 
things,  living  after  the  old  sordid  and  barbarous  manner. 

In  short,  the  women  here  are  as  strong  as  men,  and  the  men  as 
beasts;  and  therefore  it  is  reported,  that  in  their  wars,  sometimes 
the  biggest  men  among  the  Gauls,  have  been  foiled  and  slain  in  n 
single  combat  upon  a  challenge,  by  a  little  slender  Ligutiao.  • 

They  are  lighter  armed  than  the  Romans,  for  they  defend  thtm« 
selves  with  a  long  shield,  made  after  the  fashion  of  the  Gauls,  and 
their  cassocs  are  girt  about  them  with  a  belt :  they  wear  wild  beasts' 
skios,  and  carry  a  sword  of  an  ordinary  length :  but  some  of  them 
conversing  much  with  the  Romans,  have  changed  their  antient  man* 
ner  of  arming  themselves,  and  have  imitated  their  lords  and  masters* 
They  are  bold  and  daring,  n#t  only  in  times  of  war,  but  upon  all  other 
occasions.  For  io  their  traffic  they  sail  through  the  Sardonian*  and 
African  seas,  exposing  themselves  to  great  hazards  in  little  sldfi^ 
less  tlian  the  ordinary  ships,  without  the  help  of  any  other  vessels;  ia 
which,  notwithstanding  they  will  boldly  (to  admiration)  ventora  to 
weather  out  the  greatest  storms  and  tempests. 

Now  it  remains  we  should  speak  of  the  Tyrrhenians f :  *  they  were 
antiently  very  valiant,  and  eii|jf^ed  a  large  country,  and  built  man/ 
famous  cities ;  and  having  a  great  navy,  were  long  masters  at  sea, 
and  called  the  sea  lying  under  Italy  the  Tyrrhenian  seat,  ^^r  their 
own  name.  Amongst  other  things  wherewith  they  funished  their 
land  army,  they  found  out  the  most  useful  instrument  for  war,  the 
trumpet,  which  from  them  is  called  Tyrrhcna.  To  the  generak  of 
their  army  they  gave  these  badges  of  honour;  they  allowed  them  an 
ivory  throqe,  aud  a  purple  robe.  They  were  the  first  that  invented 
portico's  or  galleries  to  their  houses,  to  avoid  the  trouble  and  noise 
of  a  croud  of  servants,  and  other  hangers  on;  most  of  which  being 
imitated  by  the  Romans,  and  brought  into  their  commonwealth, 
were  afterwards  improved  to  a  great  degree  of  curiosity.  They  gavf 
themselves  much  to  learning,  especialy  to  the  study  of  natural  philo* 
sophy ;  and  amongst  natural  events,  mightily  intent  (above  all  others) 

*  Adriatic,  from  Sardona,  a  citj  of  Libumia,  now  Croatia, 
t  Etrurians,  or  Tuscans,  in  Itaij,  now  under  tht  great  dukt  of  Tuscaoj. 
t  Between  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  formerly  tli«  lower  tea  on  Cbo  fooihowett  tido  of 
Italy  ;  tli»  iidrtstic,  or  Oiiif  of  Vcoko,  boia^  ool^d  tbs  IttgkM  at%  oo  tbo  nurch-MtC  of 

luly. 


i\  ' 


324  DiODORUS  stcuLus.  Sook  Pi 

to  find  out  the  nature  of  thunder  and  lightning :  and  therefore  to  this 
day 9  thpy  are  admired  by  the  princes  all  the  world  over^  who  make 
use  of  them  to  interpret  the  prodigious  efiTects  of  thunder. 

They  enjoy  a  very  rich  country,  and  well  tilled  and  improved ;  and 
90  reap  abundance  of  all  sorts  of  fruits^  not  only  for  their  neeaasarf 
foctr),  but  for  pleasure  and  delight. 

They  had  their  tables  spread  twice  a-day,  furnished  with  all  sorts 
of  varietiifs,  even  to  luxury  and  excess. 

Their  f^ot-carpets  are  interwoven  with  flower  works,  and  aban* 
dance  of  silver  cups,  and  great  variety  of  them  they  make  use  of.  Of 
liousehold  servants  they  have  great  numbers,  some  of  whom  are  veiy 
beautiful,  and  others  exceeding  rich  in  apparel,  above  the  cooditioa 
•f  servants. 

Both  servants  and  freemen  have  several  apartments  allowed  tiMBy 
completely  furnished  with  all  manner  of  adornments.  At  last  they 
threw  off  their  former  sobriety,  and  now  live  an  idle  and  debaudiod 
life,  in  riot  and  drunkenness;  so  that  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  hava 
lost  the  honour  and  reputation  their  fbrefothers  gained  by  warlika 
achievements.  The  goodness  of  the  soil  does  not  a  little  add  fuel  t9 
their  luxury,  for  they  enjoy  a  most  fertile  country,  rich  land,  wheooe 
they  reap  abundance  of  all  sorts  of  fruits:  for  Etruria  is  second  to 
none  for  fertility  of  soil,  being  a  large  champaign  country,  yet  dis« 
tinguished  with  rising  hills  here  and  there,  fit  and  commodious  like* 
wise  for  tillage :  it  is  watered  also  with  moderate  showers,  not  only 
in  the  winter,  but  in  the  summer  seaaan. 


CHAP.  III. 

Of  Gredosia,  Of  the  isles  of  the  AraUan  sea.  Of  the  holy  islands 
OfPanchiea.  Of  Samothracia.  Of  Naxus^  Syme,  Nauius^ 
Culydnay  Nisyrusy  Carpathus.     Ofjkhodes,  ofid  of  CherMonuus, 

HAVING  gone  through  the  western  and  northern  countries,  and  the 
islands  of  the  ocean,  we  shall  now  describe  the  southern  islands  lying 
In  the  Arabian  ocean,  on  the  east  part  of  Arabia  next  to  Gredosia*'. 
This  part  of  Arabia  is  a  country  full  of  villages,  and  considerable 
towns,  some  of  which  are  situated  upon  high  hills,  others  upon  ris* 
ing  grounds,  or  something  higher  than  champaign  fields.  Thdr 
greatest  cities  have  stately  royal  palaces,  and  are  very  wealthy  and 

*  A  country  of  Asia  now  called  Tarse,  a  province  of  PeffiM. 


€3^.111.  moDORUfl  sicuLUs;  •     838 

populous:  the  coudtry  abounds  with  all  sorts  of  cattle,  aod  is  of  a 
▼ery  fruitful  soil,  affording  plenty  of  rich  pasture  for  the  flocks  aod 
lierds :  many  rivers  run  through  it^  watering  the  fields^  to  the  great 
increase  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  And  therefore  this  part  of  Arabia 
which  excels  the  rest  in  richness  of  soil^  is  justly  called  Ambia  the 
Happy. 

Over  against  the  utmost  point  of  this  country,  near  the  ocean,  lie 
many  islands,  but  there  are  but  three  that  are  worth  resiark :  the 
first  is  called  the  Holy  Island,  wherein  it  is  unlawful  to  bory  tha 
dead :  but  not  far  from  this,  about  seven  furlongs  distant,  there  is 
another  wherein  they  bury :  the  sacred  isle  chiefly  produces  frankin* 
cense,  and  in  that  abundance,  as  suffices  for  the  service  and  worship 
of  the  gods  all  the  world  over;  it  has  likewise  plenty  of  myrrh,  with 
other  odoriferous  spices  of  several  sorts,  which  breathe  out  a  most  fra- 
grant smell.  The  nature  of  frankincense,  and  the  manner  of  getting 
it,  is  thus :  the  tree  is  very  small,  like  to  the  white  Egyptian  thom^ 
and  bears  a  leaf  like  to  the  willow :  it  puts  forth  a  flower  of  a  goldea 
colour ;  from  the  bark  of  this  tree  by  incision  made,  distils  theffanfe* 
incense  in  drops  like  tears. 

The  myrrh  tree  is  like  to  the  mastic  tree,  but  bears  a  more  aleiw 
der  leaf,  and  grows  thicker  on  the  branches.  The  myrrh  flows  forthf 
by  digging  up  the  earth  round  about  the  roots.  Those  that  growia 
a  rich  soil,  bear  twice  a-year,  that  is,  in  the  spring  and  summer:  that 
in  the  spring  time  is  of  a  deep  red  colour,  caused  by  the  dew;  thft 
otlier,  nearer  winter,  is  white. 

There  they  got  likewise  the  fruit  of  the  Paliurus  tree*,  very  whole* 
some  both  in  meat  and  drink,  and  good  against  a  dysentery.  The  land 
is  divided  amongst  the  inhabitants,  of  which  the  best  part  is  allotted 
to  the  king,  who  has  likewise  the  tenths  of  the  fruits. 

They  say,  the  breadth  of  this  island  is  about  two  hundred  fur* 
longs,  inhabited  by  them  they  call  Panchaeans,  who  transport  the 
myrrh  and  frankincense  into  foreign  parts,  ahd  sell  it  to  the  Arabian 
mercliants,  from  whom  others  buy  these  and  other  such  like  mer- 
chandise, and  convey  them  to  Phoenicia,  Caslosyria,  and  Egypt; 
and  from  those  places  they  are  carried  by  the  merchants  over  all  parts 
of  the  world. 

Besides  these,  there  is  another  large  island  about  thirty  furlongs 
distance  from  this  last-mentioned,  lying  to  the  east  many  furlongs, 
in  length.  For  they  say,  from  a  promontory  thereof  running  out  to- 
wards the  east,  may  be  seen  India,  like  a  cloud  in  the  ait,  the  dis* 
tance  is  so  great. 

There  are  many  things  observable  in  Panchsa,  that  deserve  to  be 

•  It  growf  in  Africt,  beaii  a  red  frtiit.    Vid.  Plin.  Nat.  Uktlib.  13.  c,  19. 


326  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8.  JBook  PI 

3==ggggsgggs=g=sg=  sssaaagggagB— aaaa—^—— 

taken  notice  of.  The  natural  inhabitants  are  those  they  call  Flu* 
cbei;  the  strangers  that  dwell  among  them  are  people  of  the  wet* 
tern  parts^  together  with  Indians,  Cretans,  and  Sc]rt6iaos.  la  thb 
island  there  is  a  famous  city,  called  Panara,  not  inferior  to  any  for 
wealth  and  grandeur.  Thie  citizens  are  called  the  suppliants  of  Jii* 
piter  Triphylius,  and  are  the  only  people  of  Panchsea,  that  are  go- 
irerned  by  a  democracy,  without  a  monarch.  They  choose  every 
jtwr  the  presidents  or  governors,  that  have  all  matters  under  their 
cognizance,  but  what  concerns  life  and  death ;  and  the  most  weighty 
natters  they  refer  to  the  college  of  their  priests.  The  temple  of 
Jupiter  Triphylius  is  about  sixty  furlongs  distant  from  the  city,  in  a 
champaign  plain.  It  is  in  great  veneration  because  of  its  antiquity 
and  the  stateliness  of  the  structure,  and  the  fertility  of  the  aoil. 

The  fields  round  about  the  temple  are  planted  with  all  sorts  of 
trees,  not  only  for  fruit,  but  for  pleasure  and  delight  ^  for  they  a* 
bound  with  tall  cypresses,  plane  trees,  laurels,  and  myrtles,  the  place 
abounding  with  fountains  of  running  water :  for  near  the  temple 
there  is  such  a  mighty  spring  of  sweet  water  rushes  out  of  the  earthy 
as  that  it  becomes  a  navigable  river :  thence  it  divides  itself  into  se* 
veral  currents  and  streams,  and  waters  all  the  fields  thereabouts,  and 
produces  thick  groves  of  tall  and  shady  trees;  amoligst  which,  in 
summer,  abundance  of  people  spend  their  time,  and  a  multitude  of 
birds  of  all  sorts  build  their  nests,  which  create  great  delight,  both 
by  affecting  the  eye  with  the  variety  of  their  colours,  and  taking  the 
ear  with  the  sweetness  of  their  notes.  Here  are  many  gardens,  sweet 
and  pleasant  meadows  decked  with  all  sorts  of  herbs  and  flowers,  and 
so  glorious  is  the  prospect,  tiiat  it  seems  to  be  a  paradise  worthy  of 
the  gods  themselves. 

There  are  here  likewise  large  and  fruitful  palms,  and  abundance 
of  walnut  trees,  which  plentifully  furnish  the  inhabitants  with  plea- 
sant nuts. 

Besides  all  these,  there  are  a  multitude  of  vines  of  all  sorts,  spir- 
ing up  on  high,  and  so  curiously  interwoven  one  amongst  another, 
that  they  are  exceeding  pleasant  to  the  view,  and  greatly  advance  the 
delights  of  the  place. 

The  temple  was  built  of  white  marble,  most  artificially  jointed  and 
cemented,  two  hundred  yards  in  length,  and  as  many  in  breadth, 
supported  with  great  and  thick  pillars,  curiously  adorned  with  ourvcd 
work.  In  this  temple  are  placed  huge  statues  of  the  gods,  of  ad* 
mirable  \torkmanship,  and  amazing  largeness.  Round  the  temple 
are  built  apartments  for  the  priests  that  attend  the  service  of  the  god% 
by  whom  every  thing  in  that  sacred  place  is  performed^  AU  9ifmg 
from  the  temple,  is  an  even  course  of  grouodi  four  furlpngs  in 


CA(^.  ///.  DI0D0RU8  SICULITS,  SSjT 

length,  and  a  hundred  yards  in  breadth ;  on  either  side  of  which  are 
erected  tast  brazen  statues,  with  four-square  pedestals ;  at  the  end 
of  the  course,  breaks  forth  the  river  from  the  fountains  before  men- 
tioned, from  whence  flows  most  clear  and  sweet  water,*  the  drinking 
of  which  conduces  much  to  the  health  of  the  body.  This  river  is 
called  the  water  of  the  sun. 

The  whole  fountain  is  lined  on  both  sides  and  flagged  at  the  bot* 
torn  with  stone  at  a  vast  expense,  and  runs  out  on  both  sides  for  tli€ 
space  of  four  furlongs.  It  is  not  lawful  for  any  but  the  priests  to  ap« 
proAch  to  the-brink  of  the  fountain.  All  the  land  about  for  two  hun- 
dred furlongs  round,  is  consecrated  to  the  gods,  and  the  revenuei 
bestowed  in  maintaining  the  public  sacrifices,  and  service  of  the  gods :' 
beyond  these  consecrated  lands,  is  a  high  mountain,  dedicated  like- 
wise to  the  gods,  which  they  call  the  throne  of  Ccelus  andTriphylius 
Olympus;  for  they  report  that  Uranus*,  when  he  governed  the 
whole  world,  pleasantly  diverted  himself  in  this  place;  and  from  the 
top  of  the  mount  observed  the  motion  of  the  heavens  and  stars,  and 
that  he  was  called  Triphylius  Olympus,  because  the  inhabitants  were 
composed  of  three  several  nations,  Pancheans,  Oceanites^  and 
Doians,  who  were  afterwards  expelled  by  Ammon;  for  it  is  said,  that 
he  not  only  rooted  out  this  nation,  but  utterly  destroyed  all  their 
cities^  and  laid  Doia  and  Asterusta  even  with  the  ground.  The 
priests  every  year  solemnize  a  sacred  festival  in  this  mountain^  with 
great  devotion. 

Behind  this  mount,  in  other  parts  of  Panchaea^  they  say  there  are 
abundance  of  wild  beasts  of  all  kinds,  as  elephants,  lions,  leopards^ 
deer,  and  many  other  wonderful  creatures  both  for  strength  and  pro- 
portion. In  this  island  there  are  three  chief  cities,  Hyracia,  Dalis, 
and  Oceanis.  The  whole  country  is  very  fertile,  and  especially  in 
the  production  of  all  sorts  of  wine  in  great  plenty. 

The  men  are  warlike,  and  use  chariots  in  battles,  after  the  antient 
manner.  The  whole  nation  is  divided  into  three  parts :  the  first  class 
is  of  the  priests,  with  whom  are  joined  the  artificers.  The  other 
tribe  consists  of  the  husbandmen ;  and  the  third  are  the  militia  and 
the  shepherds. 

The  priests  govern  all,  and  are  the  sole  arbitrators  in  every  mat- 
ter ;  for  they  give  judgment  in  all  controversies,  and  have  the  power 
and  authority  in  all  public  transactions  of  state.  The  husbandmen  * 
till  the  land,  hut  the  fruit  is  brought  into  the  common  treasury,  and 
who  is  judged  the  most  skilful  in  husbandry,  receives  the  largest 
share  of  the  fruits  for  a  reward  in' the  first  place  \  and  so  the  second, 
and  the  rest  in  order  to  the  tenth,  as  every  one  merits  less  or  more, 

*  Called  Coclani  in  JLnCin. 


328  DioDORus  sicULUS.  -  JBook  Fi 

3==ggggsgggs=g=sggsBa=  ssssssssxxsaeaBmmBmTBtm^mmmmj 

receives  his  reward  by  the  judgment  of  the  priests*  Id  the: same  num* 
ner  the  shepherds  and  herdsmen  carefully  bring  into  the  public  slockj 
the  victims  and  other  things  both  by  number  and  weighty  a&  the  hjh 
ture  of  the  things  are ;  for  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  to  appropriate  any 
tiling  to  themselves  particularly,  except  a  house  and  a  garden.  For 
all  the  young  breed  of  cattle,  and  other  things,  and  all  the  revemicSf 
are  received  by  the  priests,  and  they  justly  distribute  to  every  osc  as 
their  necessity  does  require }  only  the  priests  Iwve  a  doable  pro- 
portion. 

They  wear  soft  and  fine  garments ;  for  their  sheep's  wool  is  modi 
$ner  here  than  any  where  else ;  both  men  and  women  likewise  deck 
themselves  with  golden  ornaments;  for  they  wear  necklaces  of  go^d^ 
and  bracelets  about  their  arms,  and  like  the  Persians  have  riogshftng- 
ing  in  their  ears.  Their  shoes  are  such  as  others  wear,  but  richly 
beautified  with  divers  sorts  of  colours. 

Their  soldiers,  for  ordinary  pay,  defend  the  country,  fortifying 
themselves  within  camps  and  bulwarks ;  for  there  is  a  part  of  the 
island  infested  with  most  daring  thieves  and  robbers,  who  often  lordi 
and  surprise  the  husbandmen. 

To  conclude,  these  priests  for  delicacy,  state,  and  purity  of  life^ 
far  excel  all  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants :  their  robes  are  of  white  lineD^ 
and  sometimes  of  pure  soft  wool.  They  wear  likewise  mitres^  em- 
broidered with  gold.  Their  shoes  are  sandals  curiously  wrought  with 
exquisite  workmanship,  and  in  their  ears  hang  golden  ear-rioga  like* 
to  the  women's. 

They  attend  chiefly  upon  the  service  of  the  gods,  singing  mdodi* 
ous  songs  in  their  praises,  setting  forth  their  glorious  acts  and  bene- 
fits bestowed  upon  men.  The  priests  say  they  came  orginally  bom 
Crete,  and  were  brought  over  into  Panchsaa  by  Jupiter,  when  he  was 
upon  earth,  and  governed  all  the  world ;  and  allege  their  language 
for  a  confirmation  of  this  assertion,  inasmuch  as  they  retain  many 
words  of  the  Cretan  speech  among  them.  And  further  say,  that  they 
derived  from  their  ancestors  that  civility  and  kindness  wherewith  they 
entertain  the  Cretans,  the  fame  and  report  of  their  antient  consan- 
guinity descending  continually  in  a  perpetual  succession  to  their  pos- 
terity :  they  shew  likewise  a  record  written,  as  they  say,  by  Jupiter's 
own  hand,  at  the  time  when  he  was  on  earth,  and  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  temple. 

There  are  in  this  island  likewise  mines  of  gold,  silver,  brass,  and 
iron,  but  not  lawful  for  any  to  export  them.  Nay,  it  is  not  lawful 
for  any  of  the  priests  to  go  out  of  the  verge  of  the  consecrated  ground; 
and  if  any  do,  it  is  lawful  for  any  man  that  finds  them  to  kill  them. 
They  have  under  their  charge  innumerable  vast  vessels^  and  other 


C9k^  tIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  329 

consecrated  things,  both  of  gold  and  silver,  which  have  been  laidup 
there  in  honour  of  the  gods  for  many  ages.  The  gates  of  the  tem- 
ple are  of  admirable  workmanship^  beautified  with  gold,  silver,  ivory> 
and  thyine  wood. 

The  bed  of  the  god  is  six  cubits  long,  and  four  broad,  of  massy 
gold,  most  curiously  wrought  in  every  part;  near  adjoining,  stands 
the  table,  as  large,  and  of  the  like  materials  and  workmanship  with 
the  other  in  every  respect. 

In  the  middle  of  the  bed,  is  placed  a  great  golden  pillar,  whereon 
are  letters  inscribed,  called  by  the  Egyptians,  sacred  writing,  ex- 
pressing the  famous  actions  of  Uranus,  Jupiter,  Diana,  and  Apollo, 
written,  they  say,  by  Mercury  himself.  But  this  may  suffice  con- 
cerning the  islatids  lying  in  the  ocean  over  against  Arabia. 

We  shall  now  speak  of  those  in  the  iSgaean  sea,  near  to  Greece, 
btginning  with  ^amothracia.  It  is  said  this  island  was  antiently 
called  Samos,  and  afterwards  Samothracia,  to  distinguish  it  from  one 
near  to  it,  called  Samos,  built  by  Sam  us. 

The  inhabitants  are  those  that  have  ever  been  originally  there,  sc 
that  there  is  nothing  certain  handed  down  to  posterity,  concerning 
tlie  first  inhabitants  and  governors  of  this  place.  Some  there  arc 
notwithstanding,  that  report,  tliat  it  was  antiently  called  Samos,  and 
afterwards  Samothracia,  from  colonies  that  settled  there  out  of  Sa- 
mos and  Thrace. 

The  natural  inhabitants  had  antiently  a  peculiar  kind  of  speech; 
some  marks  whereof  remain  in  the  worship  of  their  gods  at  this  day 
The  Samothracians  themselves  report,  that  before  there  was  au] 
flood  in  any  other  nation,  there  was  a  great  one  amongst  them. 

The  first  irruption  was  at  the  mouth  of  the  Cyne/e*,  and  the  o- 
ther  made  through  the  Hellespont :  for  they  say,  that  the  Pontic 
sea  being  once  a  standing  pool*  was  so  swelled  by  the  falling  in  oj 
rivers,  that  being  overcharged  with  water,  it  emptied  itself  into  the 
Hellespont,  and  overflowed  a  great  part  of  the  coasts  of  Asia,  and 
laid  a  considerable  part  of  the  champaign  country  of  Samothracic 
under  water.  And  as  a  manifestation  of  this,  some  fishermen  oi 
^  later  times  have  brought  up  with  their  nets  the  heads  of  stone  pil- 

lars, certain  signs  of  the  cities  having  been  overflowed  and  ruined  h] 
\  the  waters.   The  inhabitants  thaf  escaped,  they  say,  fled  to  the  highe; 

parts  of  the  island,  but  the  sea  rising  still  higher,  they  made  thei; 
addresses  to  their  gods,  and  thereupon  being  delivered  from  the  im 
ininent  danger  they  were  in,  they  compassed  in  the  bounds  of  thos< 
places  wherein  they  were  preserved  throughout  the  whole  island,  aui 

*  Two  rocks  ia  tht  Tlirtcian  Botpho^ui. 

VoL.1.  No.  36,  vu 


330  '    UtODORUS  ^CULUS.  Book  Fi 


there  erected  altars,  where  they  sacrifice  to  their  gods  at  this  day; 
whence  it  is  apparent,  that  they  inhabited  Samothrieia  before  At 
last  deluge. 

Afterwards  one  Saon,  an  islander,  the  son,  (as  some  8ay},c»f  Ju- 
piter and  Nympha,  but  (as  ethers,  of  Mercury  and  Rhena),  gather* 
ed  the  inhabitants  (before  living  scattered  and  dispersed)  into  m  body; 
and  made  Jaws  for  their  better  government,  and  divided  tbem  into 
five  tribes,  calling  them  after  the  names  of  his  sons,  but  named  Mm* 
*self  Saon,  after  the  name  of  the  island.  The  government  being 
thus  settled,  it  is  said,  that  Dardanus,  Jasiou,  and  Harmonia,  the 
children  of  Jupiter  and  Electra,  one  of  the  daughters  of  Atlas^  were 
born  among  them*  Of  these,  Dardanus,  (being  a  bold  and  brave- 
spirited  man)  passed  over  in  a  pinnace  into  Asia,  and  first  boilt  the 
city  Dardanus,  and  erected  the  kingdom  of  Troy,  (so  called^  from 
Troy  built  afterwards),  and  called  the  people  Dardanians.  He 
reigned,  they  say,  over  many  other  nations  besides  in  Asia  and  that 
the  Dardanians  above  Tlirace,  were  a  colony  settled  there  by  him. 

It  is  further  said  that  Jupiter,  desiring  likewise  to  advance  his 
other  son  to  a  high  degree  of  honour  and  reputation,  discovered  to 
him  the  rites  of  the  sacred  mysteries  antiently  observed  in  thatiahmdy 
but  then  newly  revived,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  any  to  hear^  but 
those  th&t  are  initiated. 

But  he  seems  to  be  the  first  that  initiated  strangers ;  whenee  theei 
rites  and  ceremonies  became  more  noted  and  famous. 

About  this  time,  Cadmus  the  son  of  Agenor,  came  thither  to  seek 
Europa,andbeing  initiated  in  these  sacred  mysteries,  married  Harnio- 
nia  the  sister  of  Jasion,  not  the  daughter  of  Mars,  as  tlic  Greeks  re- 
port :  they  say,  that  this  was  the  first  marriage  that  was  celebrated 
in  the  presence  of  the  gods,  where  Ceres,  in  love  with  Jasion,  pre* 
sented  him  with  corn;  Mereury  with  a  harp;  Minerva  bestowed  that 
famous  necklace,  vail,  and  pipe.  Electra  taught  him  to  celebrate  thi 
sacred  mysteries  of  the  great  mother  of  the  gods  with  cymbals,  Aujtm 
brels,  and  dancing.  Apollo  pUyed  upon  his  harp,  and  the  muni 
upon  wind  instruments;  and  the  rest  of  the  gods  celebrated  the  nop^ 
tials  with  joyful  acclamations. 

Cadmus  afterwards  (as  he  was  commanded  by  the  oracle)  bailA 
Thebes  in  Boeotia;  and  Jasion  married  Cybele,  of  whom  they  say  hi 
begat  Corybas;  after  Jasion  was  received  into  the  number  of  tbegoda^ 
Dardanus,  Cybele,  and  Corybas,  travelling  into  Phrygia,  bronght 
over  the  sacred  mysteries  of  the  mother  of  the  gods  into  Asia;  thea 
Cybele  married  Olympus  the  first,  and  bore  Alces,  and  called  th||l 
goddess  Cybele,  after  her  own  name.  Corybas  called  those  that  cela* 
biated  the  sacred  mysteries  of  his  mother^  (in  a  furjous  nige  Jilpf 


Hkfff.  HI.  DIOBQAUfl  BI€llM;t«  431 


madaMo),  after  his  owu  name,  Coryt>ante8i  and  married  lliebe,  the 
daughter  of  Cilix ;  and  thus  pipes  were  brought  over  into  Phrygia, 
«nd  Mercury's  harp  into  Lyroessus  \  wbich^  when  the  city  was  taken, 
%nis  carried  away  hy  Achilles.  It  is  reported^  likewise,  that  Pluto 
was  the  sou  of  Jasioo  and  Ceres,  which  rose  from  this  real  truths 
that  Ceres,  at  the  marriage  of  Harmonia,  bestowed  upon  Jasioa 
upon  the  account  of  her  familiarity  with  him,  rich  presents  of 
corn :  but  what  are  particularly  acted  in  the  celebration  of  these 
•acred  mysteries,  it  is  granted  are  only  known  by  those  that  areini*^ 
tiated. 

It  is  commonly  said,  that  these  gods  are  always  presentj  and  af- 
ford their  help  and  assistance  to  those  tliat  are  initiated,  and  call 
upon  them  when  they  fall  into  any  sudden  and  unexpected  distress; 
and  tlmt  these  worshippers  grow  more  and  more  pious  and  righteous, 
and  still  exceed  themselves  in  goodness  $  and  therefore  the  most 
fiunotis  of  the  antient  heroes  and  demi«gods  greatly  coveted  to  bt 
initiated  into  these  sacred  rites  and  ceremonies:  for  it  is  believed, 
that  Jasion,  Dioscurus,  Hercules,  and  Orpheus,  (who  were  members 
of  this  society),  through  the  favour  of  these  goSs,  prospered  in  all 
their  wars. 

Having  now  finished  what  concerns  Samothracia,  the  course  of 
the  history  leads  us  to  Naxus* 

This  island  was  formerly  called  Strong/le.  The  Thracians  were 
the  first  that  settled  hejre,  upon  the  occasion  following.— It  is  said^ 
that  Boreas  had  two  sons,  Butes  and  Lycurgus,  of  several  motheis. 
Butes,  the  younger,  plotted  to  murder  his  iorother,  which  being 
plainly  discovered,  the  father  appointed  no  greater  a  punishment  to 
be  executed  upon  his  son,  but  only  commanded  him,  with  his  ac* 
complices,  to  take  shipping  and  be  gone,  ^nd  seek  out  for  themselves 
some  other  habitations:  upon  which,  Butes,  with  a  number  of 
Thracians,  his  fellow-criminals,  Went  aboard,  and  in  a  direct  course 
made  their  way  through  the  Cyclade  islands,  and  arrived  at  Strongylei 
and  til  us  possessed  of  the  island,  robbed  all  by  their  piracies  that 
passed  that  way.  But  being  in  want  of  women,  they  roved  about 
here  and  there,  and  forcibly  carried  them  away  wherever  theycould 
find  them.  Some  of  the  Cyclade  islands  at  that  time  were  wholly 
desolate,  and  others  of  them  but  very  thinly  inhabited*  Running 
out  therefore  a  long  way  off,  and  being  repulsed  at  Eubcea,  they  ar- 
rived at  Thessaly;  and  there  landing,  they  met  with  the  nurses  of 
Bacchus,  at  the  mountain  called  Diros,  celebrating  the  mysteries 
of  the  gods  in  Achaia  Pbthiotis;  being  then  ready  to  seize  upon  thft 
women,  some  of  them  cast  away  their  offerings  and  fled  to  the  sea, 
and  others  to  the  mountain  before  mentioned:  but. Butes  seized  iqi* 


332  DiODORiTs  stctaus.  Book  V. 


on  Coronides,  and  ravished  her,  which  dishonour  she  bore  so  hdiw 
ously,  that  she  called  upon  Bacchus  to  revenge  herdisgrace^  and 
thereupon  he  struck  Butes  with  madness^  who  in  his  mad  mood  casf 
himself  into  a  pit  and  so  perished.     The  rest  of  the  Tbraciansseiied 
upon  other  women,  amongst  whom  were  two  noble  ladies,  Iphime* 
dia,  the  wife  of  Aioeus,  and  his  daughter  Pancratis;  with  these  tbcj 
returned  to  Strongyle.    In  the  room  of  Butes  they  created  Agasn* 
menusf  king  of  the  island,  and  married  him  to  Pancratis,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Aloeus,  a  lady  of  an  admirable  beauty :  for  whom,  (before  be 
took  her  to  be  his  wife),  Sicuius  and  Hecaterus,  two  of  the  moit 
eminent  commanders,  fought  a  duel,  and  wounded  one  another* 
Agassamenus  bestowed  Iphimedia  upon  one  of  his  intimate  fiiends, 
whom  he  had  made  general  of  his  army.    In  the  mean  time  Atoeos 
sent  his  two   sons,   Otus  and  Ephialtes,  to  seek  after  his  wife 
and  daughter,  who  invading  Strongyle,  fought  with  the  ThreciaoSf 
routed  them,  and  took  the  city  by  storm.     Not  long  after  Pkncntis 
died,  Otus  and  Ephialtes  possessed  themselves  of  the  ishiod^  and 
ousted  the  Thracians,  and  called  it  Dia*    Shortly  after  they  fell  out 
and  fought  a  set  battle,  wherein  many  were  killed  on  both  sides,  and 
the  two  brothers  killed  one  another,  whom  the  inhabitants  afterwards 
adored  as  demi-gods.     After  the  Thracians  had  held  the  island  for 
above  two  hundred  years,at  length  a  drought  and  famine  forced  tbem 
to  leave  the  place.  After  them  theCarians  (being  expelled  from  Lamia) 
possessed  themselves  of  it,  whose  king  Naxus,  the  son  of  Polemon, 
afterwards  ordered  the  island  should  be  called  Naxus,  after  his  own 
name.    This  Naxus  was  a  very  famous  and  good  man,  and  left  be- 
hind him  a  son,   called  Leucippus,  whose  son  Smardius  afterwards 
reigned  in  the  island;  in  whose  reign  Theseus  coming  out  of  Crete 
with  Ariadne,  landed  here,  and  in  his  sleep  saw  Bacchus  threatening 
him  with  ruin,  if  he  did  not  forsake  Ariadne ;  with  which  vision  be* 
ing  terrified,  be  left  Her,  and  withdrew  himself  out  of  the  island. 
Then  Bacchus  in  the  night  led  away  Ariadne  to  the  mountain  Arius, 
and  then  immediately  dfsappeared,  and  not  long  after  Ariadne  was  no 
more  seen. 

The  Naxians  have  many  stories  amongst  them  concerning  this  god; 
for  they  say  he  was  bred  up  with  them^  and  therefore  that  this  island 
was  loved  by  Bacchus  more  than  any  other,  and  by  some  called  Dio* 
nysiades.  For  Jupiter,  as  the  story  goes,  (Semeie,  before  the  birth 
of  Bacchus,  being  struck  with  a  thunderbolt),  took  the  infant  Bac- 
chus out  of  his  mother's  womb,  and  clapped  him  within  his  thigh: 
but  when  the  full  time  of  his  birth  was  at  hand,  to  conceal  him 
from  Juno,  he  was  brought  forth  in  Naxus,  and  there  committed 
tp  the  care  of  the  nymphs,  Philias,  Coronidis^  and  Cleidisj  to  be 


Chi^  III.  DtODOftUS  SICULU8.  ^    83S 


educated  by  them ;  and  that  Semele  was  therefine  before  bis  birth 
killed  by  lightning,  to  the  end  that  Bacchas,  not  being  bora  of  n, 
mortal)  but  of  two  immortal  deities,  might  from  his  birth  be  of  an 
immortal  nature.  Upon  account  therefore  of  the  kindness  shewed 
him  in  his  education,  he  expressed  his  gratitude  to  the  inhabitants  so 
far,  as  that  he  advanced  them  to  a  high  ^egree  of  wealth  and  power^ 
and  furnished  them  with  a  large  fleet  of  ships;  and  that  they  being 
the  first  that  made  a  defection  from  Xerxes,  (they  say)  he  ilssisted 
tliem  to  vanquish  the  barbarians  in  a  sea-fight,  and  that  he  gave  a 
clear  evidence  and  token  of  his  concera  with  tliem  in  the  battle  at 
Platea;  and  that  the  excellency  of  their  wine,  was  an  apparent  de* 
monstratioo  of  the  kindness  of  this  god  to  their  island. 

The  first  that  inhabited  Syme  (which  before  lay  waste  and  deso- 
late) were  those  that  came  thither  with  Triops,  under  the  conduct  of 
Chthonius,  the  son  of  Neptune  and  Symes,  from  whom  the  island 
^as  so  called.  ** 

Nireus,  the  son  of  Charops  and  Aglaia,  was,  in  after  times^ 
king  of  this  island ;  he  was  a  very  comely  and  beautiful  man,  and 
went  along  with  Agamemnon  to  the  war  against  Troy;  and^  toge- 
ther with  this  island,  was  lord  of  Cnidus. 

After  the  end  of  the  Trojan  war,  the  Carians  possessed  them- 
selves of  this  place  at  such  a  time  as  they  were  masters  at  sea; 
afterwards,  forced  thence  by  an  excessive  drought,  they  settled 
themselves  in  Uranium.  From  that  time  it  lay  desohite,  till  the 
fleet  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Argives  arrived  there,  and  then  it 
was  planted  with  new  colonies  in  this  manner ... 

Nausus,  imc  of  the  companions  of  Hippotas,  taking  along  with 
him  those  that  came  too  late,  at  the  time  that  the  country  wasdi- 
vided  by  lot,  possessed  himself  of  Syme,  which  then  lay  desolate, 
and  afterwards  received  others  (that  came  there  under  the  conduct 
of  Xuthus)  to  share  with  him  both  in  the  privileges  of  the  city, 
and  commodities  of  the  country,  and  possessed  the  isUnd  equally 
among  them.  They  say,  that  both  Cnidians  and  Rhodians  made  up 
part  of  this  colony. 

The  Cares  antiently  possessed  Calydna  and  Nisynis;  and  after- 
wards Thessalus,  the  son  of  Hercules,  was  lord  of  both  the  islands ; 
and  therefore  Antiphus  and  Philippus  kings  of  Coos,  (when  thtf 
were  engaged  in  the  war  of  Troy),  were  generals  of  those  forces  that 
were  scot  out  of  these  islands.  In  their  return  from  the  Trojan  war» 
four  of  Agamemnon's  ships  were  by  a  storm  cast  upon  Calydna, 
and  the  men  that  were  on  board,  continued  there  intermixed  with 
the  other  inhabitants.  But  the  antient  inhabitants  of  Nisyrus,  were 
swallowed  up  by  an  earthquake.    After  which,  the  Coons  added  it 


534  DIODORUS  8ICULDS.  Btwk.fT. 


to  their  domioion,  as  they  bad  doue  Calydna  before.  After  theaiiy 
the  Rhodians  sent  a  colony  thither;  all  the  former  inliabitanta  bdag 
wholly  swept  away  with  a  plague. 

As  for  CarpathuS)  that  was  first  seized  upcMH  by  some  of  Mioos'a 
aoldierS)  at  such  time  as  he  was  master  at  sea^  and  lorded  it  oter 
the  Grecians*  Many  ages  after^  loclus,  the  son  of  Thymoleoa 
of  Argosy  by  tlie  command  of  the  oracle^  brought  over  a  oolony 
thither. 

The  island  of  Rhodes  was  antiently  inhabited  by  those  called  I'd- 
chines ;  who,  (as  an  old  story  goes),  were  the  ofispring  of  Thakasa^ 
and  with  Caphira,  the  daughter  of  Oceanusi  brought  up  Neptune^ 
who  was  committed  to  their  care  by  Rhea.  It  is  said  they  invent-' 
ed  several  arts,  and  found  out  many  other  things  useful  aad  oondii- 
cive  to  the  well-being  of  man's  life.  It  is  reported^  they  were  UMf 
first  that  made  statues  of  the  gods,  and  that  some  of  the  antient 
images  were  denominated  from  them;  for  amongst  the  Littdiaiis» 
Apollo  is  called  Apollo  Teichinius:  amongst  the  lalysians,  Juino  and 
the  nymphs  were  called  Telchioiee;  and  amongst  the  Camirsaans^ 
Juno  was  called  Juno  Tclcliinia.  But  these  Telchines  were  like- 
wise  reported  to  be  conjurers,  for  they  could  raise  stomas  and  teoi* 
pests,  with  rain,  hail,  and  snow,  whenever  they  pleased;  which  the 
magicians,  (as  is  related  in  history),  were  used  to  do.  They  couU 
likewise  transform  themselves  into  other  shapes,  and  were  envioua  at 
all  who  learned  their  art. 

Neptune,  they  say,  fell  in  love  with  Halia,  the  sister  of  the  Tel« 
chines,  and  of  her  begat  several  children,  six  sons,  and  one  di^ugb- 
iety  called  Rhode,  from  whom  the  island  was  called  Rliodes» 

In  those  days  there  were  giants  in  the  western  parts  of  the  bland. 
Then,  likewise,  Jupiter  having  conquered  the  Titans,  fell  in  love 
with  a  nymph  named  Hamalia,  and  of  her  begat  three  sons,  Spar- 
taeus,  Cronius,  and  Cytus.  About  the4ime  they  were  grown  up  to 
men's  estates,  Venus,  in  her  passage  from  Cythera  to  Cyprus,  ar- 
rived at  th'is  island;  but  being  hindered  from  landing  by  the  sons  of 
Neptune,  together  with  proud  and  impious  language, the  goddesswaa 
so  provoked,  that  she  struck  them  mad,,  and  caused  them  in  their 
raging  mood  to  ravish  their  own  mother,  and  commit  many  other 
outrages  upon  the  inhabitants.  Neptune  coming  to  the  knowledge 
ofthis  vile  fact,  sunk  his  sons  under  ground  for  their  wickedneaa. 
Whence  they  were  called  the  eastern  dflemons«  Halia  threw  her« 
self  into  the  sea,  and  afterwards  was  adored  by  the  inhabitants  as 
a  goddess  by  the  name  of  Leucothea.  Afterwards  the  Telchines 
foresceii^  an  inundation  coming  upon  Rhodes,  forsook  the  island^ 
and  were  dispersed  and  scattered  abroad.    Of  whom  Lyetia  weal 


Chap.  HI.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  39A 


into  Lycia^  and  built  the  temple  of  ApoHo  L^iu,  near  to  tbc  baaks 
of  the  river  Xantfaos. 

Wlien  the  flood  caine^  it  rose  so  high^  that  betides  dcstfoying  those 
that  remained  in  the  island,  all  the  flat  and  ehampaign  pan  of  the  coun- 
try, (with  showers  that  poured  down  contiDoally),  was  Itka  a  staad* 
ing  pool  of  water:  some  few  that  fled  to  the  higher  gronods  wete 
preserved,  amongst  whom  were  the  sons  of  Jupiter*  But  Sol,  (as 
the  story  is),  falling  in  love  with  Rhode,  called  the  island  afttr  her 
name  Rhodes,  and  cleared  the  island  of  the  inundation.    But  ths 

tmth  couched  in  the  fable  is  this In  the  first  generation  of  all 

things,  when  the  island  lay  in  mud  and  dirt,  the  sun  dried  «p  the 
moisture,  and  made  the  land  productive  of  living  creatures  |  whence 
sprang  the  seven  Heliades,  so  called  from  the  sun,  and  other  mee, 
the  original  inhabitants.  And  hence  it  is,  that  they  account  the  is* 
land  to  be  consecrated  to  the  sun,  and  the  Rhodians,  in  after-time^ 
constantly  worshipped  the  sun  above  all  other  gods,  as  the  paieot 
from  whence  they  first  sprang.  The  names  of  his  seven  sens  are 
Ochimus,Ccrcaphus,Macir,  Actis,  Tenages,  Trfopas,  and  Oaedalus; 
he  bad  only  one  daughter,  called  Blectryo,  who  oying  a  virgin,  be* 
came  ever  after  adored  by  the  Rhodians  as  a  demi-goddess.  Whea 
the  Heliades  attained  to  men's  estate,  Sol  told  them,  that  whidiso* 
^ver  of  them  first  sacrificed  to  Minerva,  should  ever  enjoy  the  pie* 
sence  of  the  goddess.  The  same  thin^,  it  is  said,  was  promised  and 
.  foretold  at  the  same  time  to  the  Athenians.  Hereupon,  it  fell  out^ 
that  the  Heliades,  through  too  muchhaste,forgot  to  put  fire  under  the 
altars,  before  they  laid  the  sacrifices  upon  them :  Cecrops,  they  say, 
then  reigned  in  Athens,  and  was  later  than  the  others  in  slaying  the 
burnt-oflferlng,  but  was  before  them  in  burning  the  victim;  for 
which  reason  there  is  a  peculiar  ceremony  used  in  Rhodes  in  their 
^cred  mysteries  to  thi^  day,  and  the  image  of  the  goddess  is  set  up 
there*. 

These  things  some  have  related  concerning  the  antiquities  of  the 
Rhodians,  among  whom  b  Zenon,  who  wrote  their  history. 

Tlie  Heliades,  as  they  were  in  station  above  other  men,  so  they 
excelled  others  in  learning,  and  especially  in  astrology.  They  were 
the  perons  that  first  found  out  the  art  of  navigation,  and  the  divid- 
ing of  the  dsy  into  hours.  Tenages  was  the  most  ingenious  of  any  of 
them,  and  therefore  through  envy  was  murdered  by  his  brotiiers; 
vpon  discovery  of  the  fact,  both  the  principal  authors  and  their  ac- 
complices fled  for  it. 

Macir  got  to  Lesbos,  and  Candalus  to  Coos.    Actis  fled  into  Egypt, 

^  Tlitt  U,  Ujwg  ibe  fiaim  upon  Ui#  alur  btfcirc  Ut  ficf. 


33(T    ^^  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.^ Book  PI 

and  there  built  Heliopolisi  calling  it  after  the  name  of  his  father;  and 
from  him  the  Egyptians  learned  the  science  of  astrology. 

Afterwards^  when  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  Greece  were  des- 
troyed by  the  flood,  and  all  records  and  antient  monuments  pe- 
rished with  them,  the  £g]r|)tians  took  this  occasion  to  appropriate 
the  study  of  astrology  solely  to  themselves;  and  whereas  the  Gre- 
cians (through  ignorance)  as  yet  valued  not  learning,  it  became  a 
general  opinion  that  the  Egyptians  were  the  first  that  found  out  the 
knowledge  of  the  stars. 

And  so  even  the  Athenians  themselves,  though  they  built  the  city 
Sais,  in  Egypt^  yet  by  reason  of  the  flood,  were  led  into  the  same 
error  of  forgetting  what  was  before.  And  therefore  it  b  believed^ 
that,  many  ages  after,  Cadmus  the  son  of  Agenor  brought  tlie 
knowledge  of  letters  out  of  Phoenicia  first  into  Greece ;  and  after 
him,  it  is  supposed  the  Grecians  themselves  added  some  letters  to 
those  they  learned  before}  but  a  general  ignorance,  ho  we  ver>  still  pre- 
vailed amongst  them. 

Triopas,  another  son,  passed  over  into  Caria,  and  possessed  him- 
self of  the  promontory  there,  called  from  him  Triopium.  The  rest 
of  Sol's  sons,  having  had  no  hand  in  the  murder,  staid  behind  in 
Bhodes;  and  afterwards  built  the -city  Achaia,  and  dwelt  in  lalysia. 
But  the  regal  power  was  in  Ochimus  the  eldest  son,  who  married 
Hegetoria,  one  of  the  nymphs,  and  of  her  begat  a  daughter  called 
Gydippe,  who  afterwards  went  by  the  name  of  Cyrbias,  by  marrying 
of  whom  Cercaphus  his  brother  came  to  the  kingdom;  after  whose 
death,  three  of  the  sons,  Lindus,  lalysus,  and  Camirus  reigned  to- 
gether; in  whose  time  a  great  inundation  laid  Cyrbe  waste  and  deso- 
late. These  three  brothers  divided  the  country  amongst  themselv^ 
and  each  built  a  city,  and  called  them  after  their  own  names. 

At  this  time  Danaus  fled  out  of  Egypt  with  his  great  number  of 
daughters, and  landed  at  Lindus  in  Rhodes;  where  being  received 
by  the  inhabitants,  he  built  a  temple  to  Minerva,  and  consecrated  to 
her  an  altar.  During  tliis  travel  of  Danaus,  three  of  hb  dauglitert 
died  in  Lindus,  and  the  rest  passed  over  with  their  father  to  Argos. 

Not  long  after,  Cadmus,  the  son  of  Agenor,  being  commanded  bj 
the  king  to  seek  after  Europa,  made  for  Rhodes;  and  in  the  voyage, 
being  overtaken  with  a  violent  storm,  made  a  vow  to  build  a  temple 
to  Neptune.  Having  therefore  escaped  the  danger,  according  to 
his  vow,  he  dedicated  a  temple  to  this  god  in  the  island,  and  left 
some  of  the  Phoenicians  to  be  overseers  of  the  sacred  mysteries,  who 
were  made  members  of  the  city  with  the  lalysians,  and  out  of  their 
families,  they  say,  from  time  to  time,  were  chosen  the  priests.  Cad- 
mus, at  that  time  devoted  many  rich  gifts  to  Minerva  Liodia,  amongn 


CA(^.  III.  DIODORUS  SIL'ULUS.  ^  33^ 

which  was  a  brass  caldron^  a  most  excellent  piece  of  curious  an- 
tieot  workmanship;  it  bad  an  inscription  upon  it  in  Phcenician 
letters,  which  were  therefore  called  Phoenician,  because,  they  say, 
they  were  first  brought  out  of  Phoenicia  into  Greece. 

In  after-times  vast  serpents  bred  in  Rhodes,  which  destroyed  many 
of  the  inhabitants;  those  therefore  that  remained,  sent  to  Delos,  to 
consult  the  oracle  what  was  to  be  done  for  the  removal  of  the  present 

calamity  they  suffered  under,  who  returned  answer ^That  they  should 

admit  Phorbas  and  his  followers  to  share  with  them  in  the  island. 
He  was  the  son  of  Lapithas,  and  was  then  with  many  of  his  friends 
in  Thessaly,  seeking  for  a  convenient  place  wherein  to  settle  them- 
selves. The  Rhodians,  hereupon  (according  to  the  direction  of  the 
oracle)  sent  for  Phorbas,  and  received  him  as  a  proprietor  with  them 
in  the  island,  who  destroyed  all  the  serpents,  and  freed  the  country 
from  their  former  fears,  and  from  thenceforth  continued  in  Rhodes; 
and  was  after  his  death  adored  as  a  demi-god,  having  approved  him- 
self a  good  man  in  several  other  respects. 

Afterwards  Althasmenes,  the  son  of  Catreus  king  of  Crete,  consult- 
ing the  oracle  concerning  some  aflairs,  was.answered,  that  it  would 
be  his  fate  to  kill  his  own  father;  to  avoid  which  misfortune  he 
voluntarily  forsook  Crete,  with  many  others,  who  of  their  own  accord 
went  along  with  him,  and  passed  over  to  Camirus,  the  metropolis  of 
Rhodes,  and  there  built  a  temple  upon  mount  Atamirus,  to  Jupiter 
Atamirus,  which  is  in  great  veneration  and  esteem  at  this  day.  It  is 
situated  upon  the  very  top  of  the  mountain,  whence  may  be  had  a 
clear  prospect  of  Crete.  Ahhaemenes,  with  his  followers,  thus  settled 
in  Camirus,  lived  in  great  honour  and  esteem  among  the  citizens. 
But  his  father  Catreus  having  no  issue  male,  and  exceedingly  loving 
his  son,  undertook  a  voyage  to  Rhodes,  longing  to  find  out  his  son, 
and  to  bring  him  back  to  Crete. 

And  now  his  unalterable  destiny  was  near  at  hand,  for  landing  at 
Rhodes  in  the  night,  with  some  others  of  his  attendants,  forthwith 
there  was  a  conflict  between  them  and  the  islanders;  whereupon 
Althfemenes  ran  in  hastily  to  their  assistance,  and  (unknown  to  him) 
killed  his  father  with  a  dart;  which  when  he  came  to  understand,  he 
was  so  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  that  he  ever  after  avoided  all  man- 
ner of  society,  and  wandered  up  and  down  in  the  deserts^  and  at  last 
died  of  grief:  but  by  the  command  of  the  oracle  he  was  afterwards 
honoured  by  the  Rhodians  as  a  demi-god. 

After  this,  a  little  before  the  Trojan  war,  Tlepolimus  the  son 
of  Hercules,  fled  voluntarily  from  Argos,  by  reason^  of  his  killing 
Licymnius,  whom  he  slew  unawares;  and  upon  inquiry  having 
received  an  answer  from  the  oracle  concerning  the'  plantfng  of  a 

Vol.  1.  No.  36.  '  xx 


338  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  Fl 

9Bssss=sssa^  ■  ■ '     ,  ■  ,  ■  ■  '  J  '■■     ■  IT* 

colony,  he  passed  over  with  a  few  people  into  Rhodes^  where  being 
received^  he  settled:  and  being  afterwards  created  king  of  the 
island,  he  divided  the  country  into  equal  shares  by  lot;  and  during 
his  reign,  ordered  all  other  matters  according  to  the  rules  of  jus- 
tice and  equity.  At  length  preparing  to  go  along  with  Agamem- 
non, in  the  expedition  against  Troy,  he  committed  the  government 
into  the  hands  of  Butas,  who  fled  with  him  from  Argos.  And  after 
he  had  gained  much  glory  and  renown  in  that  war,  he  died  in  the 
country  of  Troas. 

Now  because  some  things  of  Chersonesus  are  intermixed  with  the 
affairs  of  Rhodes,  over  against  which  it  lies^  we  conceive  it  not 
amiss  here  to  give  an  account  of  it.  Some  are  of  opinion  it  is  called 
Chersonesus,  from  the  nature  of  the  place,  being  like  to  an  bthmos; 
or,  as  others  write,  from  one  Chersonesus,  once  a  petty  prince  there. 
Not  long  after  whose  time,  it  is  said,  five  of  the  Curetes  came  there; 
which  Curetes  were  the  posterity  of  those  that  brought  up  Jupiter 
(born  of  the  mother  goddess  Rhea)  in  the  mountains  of  Ida  in  Crete. 
After  their  arrival  in  Crete  (with  a  considerable  navy)  they  expelled 
the  Cares,  the  antient  inhabitants,  and  divided  the  country  into  five 
parts,  and  each  of  them  built  a  city,  and  called  them  after  their  owa 
names.  • 

Not  long  after,  Inachus  king  of  Argos,  sent  Cyrnus,  one  of  hil 
noblemen  and  commanders^  with  a  considerable  fleet,  to  find  out 
his  daughter  lo,  and  not  to  return  till  he  found  her.  After  he  had 
roved  about  into  several  parts  of  the  world,  and  could  not  find  her, 
he  at  length  arrived  at  Curia  in  Chersonesus,  and  there  settled  him- 
self, despairing  ever  to  return  to  his  own  country;  and  afterwardsi 
partly  by  force,  and  partly  by  persuasions,  lie  reigned  as  king  over 
part  of  the  country,  and  built  a  city,  and  called  it  Cyrnus,  after 
his  own  name;  and  governed  so  well,  to  the  advancement  of  the 
public  good,  tliat  he  was  greatly  beloved  and  honoured  by  the  ci- 
tizens. 

Afterwards  Triopas,  one  of  the  sons  of  Sol  and  Rhode,  fled  into 
Chersonesus,  for  the  killing  of  his  brother:  but  being  cleared  and 
acquitted  by  king  Melisscus,  he  sailed  into  Thessaly,  to  the  assistance 
of  Deucalion's  sons,  and  assisted  in  expelling  the  Pelasgians  thence, 
and  they  divided  the  country  called  Dotion  among  them.  He 
there  cut  down  t!\c  grove  of  Ceres,  and  made  use  of  it  for  the  baild- 
ing  of  himself  a  palace;  for  which  he  was  hated  of  the  people,  and 
forced  to  fly  out  of  Thessaly,  and  sailed  away  with  some  of  his  fol- 
lowers to  Ciiidia,  where  he  built  a  city  called  after  his  own  name, 
Triopium.  Leaving  this  place,*  he  gained  Chersonesus,  and  a  great 
part  of  Caria  adjoining  to  it. 


Chap.  III.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  339 

Many  wiiters^  and  especially  the  poets^  differ  much  about  the 
descent  of  Triopas.  Some  derive  his  descent  from  Cauace  (the 
daughter  of  iEolus)  and  Neptune;  .others  say,  his  parents  were 
Lapitha^  the  son  of  Apollo^  and  Stibes,  the  daughter  of  Pineus.  In 
Castabus^  in  Chersonesus^  there  is  a  temple  dedicated  to  Hemithea; 
what  is  remarkable  concerning  her,  is  not  fit  to  be  omitted.  Although 
there  are  various  stories  rielated  of  her,  yet  we  shall  only  give  an  ac* 
count  of  what  is  generally  granted  and  agreed  upon  by  the  inhabitants 
to  be  true. 

Staphylus  and  Chrysothemides  had  three  daughters,  Molpadia, 
Rhceo,  and  Pafthenos.  Rhoeo  was  got  with  child  by  Apollo,  at  which 
her  father  was  so  incensed,  thinking  she  had  played  the  whore  with 
some  mortal  man,  that  he  locked  her  up  in  a  chest,  and  threw  her 
into  the  sea,  and  the  chest  was  afterwards  cast  up  upon  the  island 
Delos,  where  she  was  delivered  of  a  son,  whom  she  named  Arrius. 
Being  thus  wonderfully  preserved^  she  laid  the  child  upon  the  altar 
of  Apollo,  and  prayed  to  him,  that  if  he  was  the  child's  father,  he 
would  save  and  defend  the  infant :  upon  which  the  story  goes,  that 
Apollo  hid  the  child,  but  afterwards  took  care  to  have  him  carefully 
brought  up,  and  endued  him  with  a  prophetic  spirit,  and  advanced 
him  to  great  honour  and  reputation. 

Molpadia  and  Parthenos,  the  other  sisters,  having  the  charge  of 
their  father's  wine,  (the  use  of  which  was  then  but  newly  found  out), 
with  drinking  too  much,'  fell  fast  asleep;  in  the  mean  time,  a  sow 
which  they  fed,  coming  into  the  place,  threw  down  the  hogshead^ 
and  spilt  all  the  wine.  When  the  poor  ladies  perceived  what  was 
done,  they  so  dreaded  the  severity  of  their  father,  that  they  fled  to  the 
sea  shore,  and  threw  themselves  headlong  from  the  top  of  a  high  rock 
into  the  sea:  but  Apollo,  for  the  sake  of  their  sister,  took  them  up 
safe,  and  brought  them  to  some  cities  in  Chersonesus ;  where  Par* 
thenos,  at  Bubastus,  was  adored  as  a  goddess,  and  had  a  temple 
erected  in  honour  of  her. 

Molpadia  was  brought  to  Castabus,  and  for  the  special  revelations 
she  had  from  the  god,  she  was  called  Hemithea^,  and  was  in  great 
honour  and  esteem  among  all  the  Chersonesians.  In  the  celebration 
of  her  mysteries,  (in  remembrance  of  the  misfortune  concerning  the 
wine)  ihey  ofler  drink^oflFerings  of  water  and  honey  mixed  together; 
and  he  that  has  touched  a  swine,  or  eaten  of  swine's  flesh,  is  not 
permitted  to  enter  into  her  temple. 

This  temple  of  Hemithea  in  following  times  grew  so  famous,  that 
not  only  the  inhabitants  adored  it,  but  strangers  far  and  near  resorted 
to  it  with  great  devotion,  and  with  many  rich  presents  and  magnifi* 

*  lUlf  a  goddess. 


340  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  Fi 


cent  sacrifices;  and  that  which  is  most  observable  is^  that  the  Terj 
Persians  themselves,  when  tliey  destroyed  all  other  temples  through- 
out all  Greece,  spared  only  the  temple  of  Hemithea.  Thieves  and 
robbers  likewise,  who  spoil  and  waste  all  before  them,  have  still  from 
time  to  time  spared  this  temple^  though  it  stands  open  and  naked, 
without  the  defence  of  a  wall  to  secure  it.  They  say  that  the  cause 
of  the  flourishing  condition  of  this  place  is,  the  great  kindness  of  tUs 
goddess  to  all  men  whatsoever;  for  she  appears  to  those  that  are  sick, 
in  their  sleep,  and  directs  them  to  proper  remedies  for  the  recovery 
of  their  health;  such  as  are  in  desperate  distempers,  and  resort  thir 
ther,  she  perfectly  cures  and  restores.  Women  likewise  that  are  'ia 
hard  labour,  she  safely  delivers,  and  frees  from  the  pains  and  hazards 
of  child-bearing,  and  therefore  that  temple  is  full  of  antient  relicts 
and  donations  safely  kept  and  preserved  to  this  day,  not  by  guards 
or  walls,  but  only  by  the  religious  devotion  observed  in  this  place. 

But  let  this  suffice  concerning  Rhodes  and  Chersonesus;  it  re- 
mains we  should  now  treat  of  Cretd. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Of  Crete:  the  first  inhabi f  ants.  Of  the  Idaei  Dactyli :  of  Jupiter^ 
Satiirriy  Hyperion^  Projnethensy  Mnemosynej  ThemUy  Ceres, 
Neptuney  Pallas,  Jupiter's  race;  as  the  3fuses,  Fulcan,  Mars, 
f^'c.  Of  the  antient  Herculesy  Britoniartisj '  Pluto.  Rhada* 
7nanthas^s  justice.  Of  Lesbos.  Deucalion's  Jlood.  Of  the 
blessed  islands.     Of  Tenedos  and  the  Cyclades. 

THE  inhabitants  of  Crete  affirm,  that  the  most  antient  people  of 
Crete  are  the  Eteocretse,  whose  king,  whom  they  call  Greta,  found 
out  many  very  useful  things,  conducing  much  to  the  support  and 
comfort  of  man's  life.  They  say,  likewise,  that  many  of  the  gods 
were  born  amongst  tliem,  who,  for  the  benefits  they  conferred  upon 
mankind,  were  eternally  honoured  as  deities:  of  which  things  we 
shall  here  distinctly  treat,  as  they  are  delivered  to  us  by  the  most 
approved  authors  wlio  have  written  the  history  of  Crete. 

The  first  inhabitants  of  Crete  (of  whom  we  have  any  record)  were 
the  Id&ci  Dactyli,  in  mount  Ida:  some  say,  there  were  a  hundred 
others,  but  ten  in  number,  called  Dactyli,  from  the  ten  fingers  on 
men's  hands. 


^. 


Chtp.  IF.  DIODORtJS  8ICULUS.  341 

Some  affirm,  and  amongst  those  Ephorus^  that  the  Idsei  Dactyli 
had  their  origin  from  mount  Ida  in  Phrygia,  and  jpassed  over  with 
Minos  into  Europe;  and  that  they  were  conjurors^  and  gave  them- 
selves to  enchantments,  and  sacred  rites  and  mysteries;  and  abiding 
in  Samothracia,  greatly  amused  and  astonished  the  people  of  the 
island:  at  which  time  it  is  said,  Orpheus  (who  was  naturally  of  a 
prompt  wit  to  music  and  poetry)  was  their  scholar,  and  the  first  that 
brought  over  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  their  mysteries  into  Greece. 
The  Dactyli,  moreover,  as  is  said,  found  out  the  use  of  fire,  and  dis- 
covered the  nature  of  iron  and  brass  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Anti- 
sapterians,  near  to  the  mountain  Berecynthus,  and  taught  the  manner 
of  working  it:  and  because  they  were  the  first  discoverers  of  many 
things  of  great  use  and  advantage  to  mankind,  they  were  adored  and 
worshipped  as  gods:  one  of  them,  they  say,  was  called  Hercules^ 
who  was  a  person  of  great  renown,  and  who  instituted  the  Olympic 
games,  which  were  thought  by  posterity  to  have  been  appointed  by 
Hercules  the  son  of  Aicmena,  led  into  that  error  by  the  identity  of 
names. 

An  evidence  of  these  things,  they  say,  remains  to  this  day,  in  that 
the  women  chant  the  songs  formerly  sung  by  this  god,  and  wear  abovt 
them  certain  amulets,  in  imitation  of  him  who  was  a  magician^  and 
taught  sacred  rites  and  ceremonies :  all  which  were  different  from  the 
manners  of  Hercules  the  son  of  Aicmena. 

After  the  Id^i  Dactyli,  they  say,  there  were  nine  Curetes,  some  of 
which  are  feigned  to  be  the  ofl&pring  of  the  earth,  and  the  rest  to 
descend  from  the  Idsei  Dactyli.  They  dwelt  in  the  mountainSj^ 
under  the  shade  of  thick  trees,  and  in  caves  and  other  places  that 
naturally  afforded  them  a  shelter  and  covering,  the  building  of  houses 
not  being  then  found  out.  They  were  very  ingenious,  and  therefore 
invented  many  things  very  useful  and  profitable ;  for  they  were  the 
first  that  taught  how  to  manage  flocks  of  sheep,  and  to  tame  and 
bring  up  other  cattle,  and  how  to  gather  honey;  and  that  they  first 
explained  how  to  cast  darts,  and  to  hunt;  and  ordered  men  into  . 
societies  and  communities,  and  sociably  eating  one  with  another,  and 
brought  men  to  a  peaceable  and  orderly  course  of  life:  they  likewise 
invented  swords  and  helmets,  and  dancing  in  arms,  and  by  the  great 
noise  they  made,  deceived  Saturn.  For  it  is  said  that  by  them 
Jupiter  (whom  bis  mother  Rhea,  to  hide  him  from  his  father  Saturn^ 
committed  to  their  care)  was  secured  and  brought  up:  but  being 
willing  to  treat  of  this  more  particularly,  we  must  go  a  little  higher 
with  our  relation. 

The  Cretans  say,  that  the  Titans  were  contemporary  with  the 
Curetes :  they  dwelt  iu  the  country  tf  the  Gnossiansj,  where  now  may 


44  f  DIODOmUS  SICULUS. 


be  teeo  the  aotieot  foaDdatioDs  and  eouits  of  the 
inhabited,  and  ao  old  sacred  gnnre  of  cyprcn 
Domber  aix  men  and  five  woeico,  the  imie  of  Uianai  and  Teoa^  aa 
iocne  affino;  bot  as  others  saj,  the  ctbpmg  ci  tme  of  the  CoRiea 
and  Titsea,  and  called  Titans  after  the  name  of  their  awither,  Tke 
sons  were  called  Qirooos^,  Hjperion,  Cceus,  Japetos,  Crins^  ani 
Oceanos;  the  sisters  were  Rhea,  Themis,  Mncmoajnc,  FWrrfct^ 
and  Thetis;  ererj  one  of  whom  were  the  inrenton  of  wamtAimg 
iBefnl  and  profitable  to  man's  well-being;  and,  as  a  Mwafd  4if 
their  deserts,  are  bj  all  men.  honoured  with  an  ererlasting 
brance. 

Satom,  the  eldest,  obtained  the  kingdom,  and  reduced  his 
jects  from  a  wild  and  barbarous,  to  a  more  ciTil  course  of  lifi^  both 
as  to  food  and  maooers :  having  therefore  upon  that  account 
much  honour  aud  repuution,  be  went  into  many  parts  of  the 
and  persuaded  aii,  wherever  he  came,  to  justice  and  intftgnqf  off 
heart;  and  tlierefore  it  is  brought  down  as  a  certain  truth  to 
rity,  that  in  the  times  of  Saturn,  men  were  plain  and  honesty 
from  all  sorts  ot'  wicked  designs  or  practices;  yea,  that  thejr 
then  happy  aod  blessed.  Ke  chiefly  reigned  over  the  western 
of  the  world,  and  was  advanced  to  the  highest  pinnacle  of  honour; 
renowo;  and  therefore  of  later  times,  both  the  Romans  and  Cartha* 
ginians,  (while  their  city  stood),  and  other  neighbouring  »^*V*pt^ 
adored  this  god  with  magnificent  and  splendid  festivals  andsacrifioes; 
and  many  places  up  and  down  are  called  after  bb  name :  and  hecaqse 
at  that  time  tbe  laws  were  strictly  observed,  no  act  of  injustice  was 
committed,  but  all  submitting  to  his  authority,  lived  hq>pily,  and 
enjoyed  pleasure  and  content  without  any  molestation;  which  is  at- 
tested by  the  poet  Hesiod  in  these  verses — 

While  Satorn  reign'd,  tliote  then  his  tobjccts  m^rt. 

Who  liv'd  tbe  lires  of  gods  wiUMMit  all  care; 

Whom  sorrow,  Uboar»  nor  old  age  opprest. 

Bat  sooDdocia  bolh  in  bands  and  Ctet  them  blest; 

With  jojf'jl  vigour  to  tbeir  feasts  tbej  went; 

Free  from  all  ills,  tbeir  deaths  did  represent 

Sound  sleep ;  to  them  flow'd  dawn  whate'er  was  good» 

And  Without  toil  the  earth  did  jield  them  food. 

And  from  bcr  fruitful  womb  did  them  afford 

Her  fruiu  most  freel  j  of  her  own  accord. 

Kich  in  their  flocks,  and  to  the  gods  most  dear, 

Durifi^  this  rcigo,  these  happj  people  were. 

AuA  these  arc  the  things  they  reported  of  Saturn, 
A&  to  Hyperion;  they  say  that  he  was  the  fiist,  who  by  hia  own 

*  Satnrn. 


Chap.  IF.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  343 


s 


indostiy  found  out  the  motions  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  other  stars ^ 
and  the  seasons  and  distinctions  of  time  measured  out  by  them,  and 
afterwards  imparted  his  knowledge  to  others.  And  therefore  he  was 
called  the  father  of  those  planets,  as  he  that  first  taught  the  knowledge 
and  nature  of  them* 

Latona,  they  say,  was  the  daughter  of  Cokus  and  Phebe;  and  that 
Prometheus  was  the  son  of  Japetus,  who  (as  some  feign)  stole  fire 
from  the  gods,  and  bestowed  it  upon  men. 

But  the  truth  of  the  story  b,  he  found  out  the  way  to  strike  fire  out 
of  flint  or  stone.  Mnemosyne,  they  say,  found  out  the  art  of  logic^ 
and  gave  proper  names  to  every  thing,  by  which,  whatever  b  db« 
coursed  of,  might  be  dbtinctly  known  and  understood :  but  some 
attribute  thb  to  Mercury.  Theyaseribe  likewise  to  this  goddess 
every  thing  conducing  to  the  help  of  man's  memory,  from  whence 
she  has  her  name. 

Themis  taught  the  art  of  divination,  and  instructed  men  in  hdy 
rites,  and  prescribed  laws  for  the  service  and  worship  of  the  gods, 
and  for  preservation  of  peace  and  good  government  amongst  men; 
and  therefore  we  call  those  who  keep  and  preserve  the  sacred  laws 
both  of  gods  and  men,  Tbesmophyhce,  and  Thesmothetss.  And 
when  Apollo  himself  b  to  give  hb  answer  at  the  oracle,  we  sajr^ 
Themisteuein,  because  he  was  the  first  tliat  practised  dirinatioo* 
These  gods  therefore  liaving  thus  greatly  benefited  mankind,  were 
not  only  adored  with  divine  honours,  but  were  accounted  to  be  th« 
first  that  after  their  deaths  were  translated  to  heaven.  Vesta,  Ceres, 
Juno,  Jupiter,  Neptune,  and  Pluto,  are  said  to  be  the  children  of 
Saturn  and  Rhea« 

Vesta  invented  the  building  of  houses,  and  upon  this  account  al- 
HQOst  every  body  sets  up  her  statue  in  their  houses,  and  adore  her 
with  divine  honours. 

Ceres  was  the  first  that  discovered  the  use  of  bread  corn,  finding 
it  by  chance,  growing  of  itself  amongst  otlier  plants  and  Kerbs; 
and  taught  the  way  of  housing  and  baking  it,  and  how  to  sow  it. 
For  she  found  out  cornrbefore  Proserpina  was  born;  after  wliose 
birth,  and  rape  by  Pluto,^  she  was  so  incensed  at  Jupiter,  and  in 
such  grief  for  the  loss  of  her  daughter,  that  she  set  all  tlie  corn  on . 
fire.  But  when  she  had  found  out  Proserpina,  she  was  reconciled 
to  Jupiter,  and  gave  seed  com  to  Triptolemus,  with  orders  to  im- 
part it  to  all  people,  and  teach  them  how  to  order  it,  and  make 
use  of  it. 

Some  say  she  made  laws  to  direct  men  to  deal  justly  and  truly 
one  with  another,  and  from  hence  she  was  called  Thesmophora: 
for  these  great  advantages  to  mankind  she  was  likewise  highly 


344  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  JSook  K 


honoured;  and  not  only  Grecians,  but  the  barbarians  almost  evtry 
where,  that  partook  of  these  fruits,  adored  and  worshipped  her  With 
solemn  and  magnificent  festivals  and  sacrifices. 

There  are  many  controversies  and  difierences  concerning  the  first 
finding  out  of  this  fruit,  for  some  say,  this  goddess  first  saw  it^  and 
taught  the  nature  and  use  of  it  before  any  other.  For  the  Egyptians 
say,  tliat  Isis  and  Ceres  were  one  and  the  same  person,  who  first 
brought  seed-corn  into  Egypt,  the  river  Nile  watering  the  fielda^  and 
washing  the  country  at  proper  seasons^  much  advancing  thereby  the 
growth  and  increase  thereof. 

But  the  Athenians  say,  that  although  com  was  first  found  out 
amongst  them,  yet  it  was  transported  from  other  places  into  Attica* 
The  place  where  it  was  first  seen  they  call  Eleusina^  because  that 
seed  com  was  first  brought  thither. 

The  Sicilians  likewise,  who  inhabit  the  island*  especially  dedicated 
to  Ceres  and  Proserpina,  say,  it  is  most  reasonable  to  conclode^  that 
this  great  gift  was  first  bestowed  upon  those  who  tilled  and  improved 
that  country  which  was  most  beloved  by  this  goddess.  For  it  is  a 
most  unreasonable  thing  that  this  place  should  be  reported  thericheit 
island  of  the  world,  and  yet  to  judge  it  the  last  in  sharing  of  thb 
great  blessing,  as  if  it  had  been  no  part  of  their  fertility^  especially 
when  Ceres  resided  there  herself;  and  all  agree  that  Proserpina  was 
ravished  in  this  place ;  and  that  this  island  is  a  country  most  proper 
for  corn  of  any  other  in  the  world,  as  the  poet  testifies : 

Within  this  islind  til  things  grow, 

Witboot  the  help  of  seed  or  plough,  " 

As  wheat  and  birley 

01*  Ceres  therefore  ihus  they  saj 
In  stories  of  her • 

As  to  the  other  deities,  they  say  that  Neptune  was  the  first  that 
used  navigation,  and  rigged  out  a  navy,  and  was  appointed  admiral 
by  Saturn ;  and  therefore  it  was  a  common  tradition  afterwards^  that 
all  seaaflairs  were  under  his  rule  and  government,  and  upon  that 
account  mariners  worship  him  with  solemn  sacrifices.  They  say, 
moreover,  that  Neptune  was  the  first  that  managed  horses,  and  taught 
the  art  of  horsemanship,  whence  he  was  called  Hippius. 

Pluto,  they  say,  first  shewed  the  way  of  sepulchres  and  pompoot 
funerals,  whereas,  before,  no  regard  was  paid  to  any  of  these;  which 
was  the  reason  he  was  accounted  lord  of  the  dead,  and  prince  of  the 
infernal  shades. 

There  are  many  different  opinions  concerning  the  genealogy  and 
kingdom  of  Jupiter.    There  are  some  of  opinion^  that  after  the  death 

•  Sicily. 


^Cfiap.  ir.  '  DIODORUS  SICUUIS.  345 

of  Saturn,  lie  succeeded  iii  ihe  kin<rdum,  noi  adviincfd  to  timt  dig- 
nity by  a  forcible  expulsion  of  his  father,  but  by  a  just  and  lawful 
successioD.  Others  report,  that  Ssturn,  heiog  forewarned  by  the 
oracle  concerning  Juplier,  that  a  son  of  his  to  be  afterwurds  born, 
would  deprive  liim  of  lii>;  kingdom  liy  force,  liUlcd  his  ciiildren  one 
after  another,  as  soon  a$  titey  were  bortf  j  at  which  Rhea  was  so 
grieved,  (aot  being  able  to  work  upon  her  husband's  obstinate  hu- 
mour)^ tliat  she  forthwith,  upon  his  birth,  hid  Jupiter  in  Ida,  recom- 
mending his  education  to  the  care  of  the  Curetes,  who  inhabited  that 
mountain :  and  that  they  again  lodged  him  in  a  cave,  and  intrusted 
him  with  the  nymphs,  entreating  them  to  be  very  careful  of  him; 
who  fed  him  with  milk  and  honey  mixed  together,  and  for  his  better 
nourishment  suckled  him  at  the  paps  uf  a  goat,  called  Anialthjea: 
for  there  are  many  tokens  of  his  birth  aiid  education  in  this  island 
to  this  day. 

For  wlien  he  was  a  young  iofant,  and  carried  away  by  the  Curetes, 
they  say,  that  the  navel-string  fell  from  him  at  ihe  river  Triton, 
whence  tliat  part  of  the  country,  sacred  to  this  god,  is  called  Ompha- 
lium,and  the  region  adjoining,  Omphaleus.  In  Ida,  likewise,  where 
this  god  was  educated,  the  cave  wlierein  he  was  hid,  is  not  only  con- 
secrated to  him,  but  the  ports  near  to  that  promontory  are  under  his 
guard  and  protection. 

But  here  is  not  to  be  omitted  a  wonderful  story  that  is  related 
concerning  the  bees :  for  they  say,  the  god,  to  preserve  an  eternal  me- 
mory of  his  familiarity  with  the  bees,  changed  their  colour  into  that 
of  brass  or  copper,  washed  over  with  gold:  and,  whereas,  the  plage  is 
exceeding  liigli,aud  subject  to  stormy  winds, and  used  to  be  covered 
over  witli  depths  of  suow,  he  fortified  the  bees  with  an  impassibility, 
so  that  they  were  able  to  feed  atid  gather  honey  in  the  most  stormy 
and  coldest  places. 

Amongst  other  honours  attributed  to  the  go^t  that  gave  him  suck, 
he  bestowed  this,  that  he  himself  from  her,  assumed  the  name  of 
vi^giochus.  When  he  was  grown  up  to  man's  estate,  he  first  built  a 
city  at  Dictte,  where  he  was  born,  the  ruins  whereof  are  to  be  seen 
at  this  day. 

This  god  excelled  ail  the  others  in  valour,  prudence,  justice,  and 
all  other  virtues;  and,  therefore,  after  the  death  of  his  lather, when 
he  came  to  reign,  he  conferreil  many  and  great  benefits  upon  man-  ' 
kind.  For  he  was  the  first  that  instructed  men  how  to  puiilsh  in- 
juries, and  to  deal  justly  and  honestly  one  with  another,  to  forbear' 
force  and  violtitce,  and  liring  their  diftcrences  and  controversies  or- 
derly before  tribunals  and  courts  of  justice,  there  to  be  ended  and 
decided.     In  fine,  he  did  wiiatsoever  was  necessary  for  the  making 

Vol.  1.  No.  3G.  yy 


346  DioDORUS  sicuLUS.  Sook  V 


of  good  laws,  and  preservation  of  peace  among  men;  stirriog  up  the 
good  by  wholesome  advice  to  their  daty^  and  restraining  the  bid^, 
through  fear  of  severe  and  due  punishment  for  their  offences^ 

It  is  reported^  that  he  travelled  through  the  whole  world,  putting  to 
death  thieves^  robbers,  and  other  impious  persons;  establishing  com- 
monwealths and  democradies  in  every  place  wherever  he  came. 

About  ihat  time  he  slew  several  giants  with  their  adherents^  as  My- 
tinus  in  Crete,  and  Typhon  in  Phrygia. 

Before  the  battle  with  the  giants  in  Crete,  u^ion  Jujriter  sacrificing 
of  oxen  to  Sol,  Coelus,  and  Terra,  in  all  the  entrails  appeared  evi- 
dent signs  of  what  was  decreed  by  the  gods ;  their  victory  espe- 
cially was  portended,  and  a  defection  of  sdme  from  the  enemy,  as 
it  proved  in  the  issue  of  the  war;  for  Museeus  fted  and  revolted  fiom 
them,  for  which  he  was  highly  honoured. 

At  length,  all  that  fought  with  the  gods  were  every  one  cut  ofl>- 
and  destroyed :  but  he  was  afterwards  engaged  in  a  new  war  against 
the  giants  at  Pallene  in  Macedonia,  and  antiently  in  the  plains  of 
Italy,  called  Phlegra,  from  the  conflagration  the  country  once  suf- 
fered, but  now  called  Cum®. 

The  reason  why  Jupiter  destroyed  the  giants,  was  their  violence 
and  oppression,  making  use  of  their  strength  and  massy  bodies  to 
enslave  their  neighbours;  and  for  that  they  were  lawless,  and  not 
to  be  kept  within  any  bounds  of  justice,  made  war  upon  them;  who, 
for  their  doing  good,  and  being  beneficial  to  mankind,  were  reputed 
for  gods  by  all  people  whatsoever^    And  he  not  only  rooted  up  the 
wicktd  and  impious,  but  rewarded  the  best  of  the  gods,  heroes,  and 
men,  with  due  honours  according  to  their  several  deserts.     The 
great  authority,  therefore,  and  good  deeds  of  Jupiter  were  such,  that 
to  him  was  attributed  an  eternal  habitation  and  kingdom  in  Olympus* 
And  more  splendid  sacrifices,  by  his  command,  are  offered  to  hiro 
than  to  any  other  of  the  gods :  and  since  his  passing  from  earth  to 
heaven,  a  strong  persuasion  is  fixed  in  the  hearts  of  all  those  he  was 
kind  unto,  that  he  has  the  command  and  government  of  all  that  b 
done  in  heaven ;  and  is  supreme  lord  of  storms,  thunder  and  light- 
ning; and  therefore  they  call  him  Zona,  because  he  seemed  to  be 
the  preserver  of  men's  lives,  by  affording  fruitful  seasons  to  ripen  the 
fruits  of  the  earth.    They  call  him  likewise  Father,  not  only  opoa 
account  of  his  care  and  kindness  to  all  mankind,  but  likewise  for 
that  it  is  generally  believed  that  all  men  were  originally  his  oit> 
spring. 

He  Is  called  also  the  Supreme  King,  by  reason  of  the  maj^tyand 
excellency  of  his  kingdom;  and  moreover  Eubulus,  and  Metietcs^ 
by  reason  of  his  wisdom  and  prudence  in  counsel. 


\ 


Chap.  IK  DtODOitus  sicuLUS^    ,  \    347 


It  is  said  also,  that  Minerva  was  the  daughter  of  Jupiter,  born  in 
Crete,  at  the  springs  heads  of  the  river  Triton,  and  therefore  she  was  ^ 
called  Tritogenia;  and  now  at  this  day  there  stands  a  little  chapel 
dedicated  to  this  goddess  at  the  place  where  she  is  said  to  have  been 
born.  They  say,  likewise,  that  the  marriage  of  Juno  and  Jupiter 
was  solemnized  in  the  country  of  the  Gnossians,  near  the  river  The- 
rone,  where  there  is  now  a  temple,  in  which  the  priests  offer  an  an- 
niversary sacrifice  and  festival  with  great  deVotion,  imitating  the 
nuptial  rites  according  as  by  tradition  they  have  received  them. 

The  daughters  of  Jupiter,  it  is  said,  were  the  goddesses  Venus, 
the  Graces,  Lucina,  and  her  servant  Diana,  together  with  those 
called  Horse,  that  is  to  say,  Euoomia,  Dice,  and  Irene. 

,  The  gods  he  begot,  were  Vulcan,  Mars,  Apollo,  and  Mercury:  to 
every  one  of  these,  they  say,  Jupiter  imparted  the  knowledge  of 
things  invented  and  perfected  by  himself,  and  attributed  the  honour 
of  the  invention  to  them,  desirous  to  perpetuate  their  memories^ 
and  advance  their  reputation  and  eternal  praise  amongst  all  men. 

To  Venus  he  committed  the  care  of  the  mature  age  of  virgins ;  at 
which  time  they  ought  to  marry,  and  the  oversight  of  other  things 
used  at  nuptials,  together  with  sacrifices  and  drink^ofierings,  which 
are  solemnly  offered  to  this  goddess;  but  all  first  sacrifice  to  Jupiter 
the  Perfecter,  and  to  Juno  the  Perfectress,  because  they  are  the  au- 
thors and  inventors  of  all,  as  we  have  before  declared. 

To  the  Graces  was  given  power  to  beautify  the  fiice,^and  to  give  a 
comely  shape  and  proportion  to  all  the  members  of  the  body,  and  to 
do  good  wherever  they  pleased,  and  to  cause  the  persons  to  be  grate- 
ful and  thankful  for  what  they  received. 

To  Lucina  he  committed  the  oare  of  them  that  were  in  travail  and 
child-bearing,  and  easing  of  them  in  theic pains;  and  therefore  wo- 
men  in  these  hazards  chiefly  at  that  time  called  upon  her  for  help  and 
assistance. 

Diana  shewed  the  way  how  to  nurse  up  little  infants,  and  to  pro- 
vide food  for  them  suitable  to  their  tender  age;  upon  which  account 
she  was  called  the  children's  nurse. 

To  every  one  of  the  Horse,  is  allotted  an  office  agreeable  to  their 
several  names,  to  the  great  advantage  of  mankind,  for  the  govern- 
ment of  themselves  in  the  course  of  their  lives;  for  there  is  no  greater 
blessedness  in  this  life,  than  good  laws,  peace,  and  justice. 

To  Minerva  he  committed  the  care  of  olive-yards,  and  planting  of 
olive-trees,  and  extracting  the  oil :  for  before  the  birth  of  this  god- 
dess, this  tree  grew  wild,  disregarded  among  other  trees  of  the  wood^ 
the  use  and  culture  of  it,   (as   is  now  praotised),  not  then  being 
jcnown. 


348  DIOTX>RUS  SICULUS.  Book  PZ 


Ihc  iDsking  of  garments  likev^ise,  and  arclihecture,  and 
other  art>.  was  discovered  to  men  by  this  goddess:  she  invented  |MpcSy 
and  the  inaniicr  of  wind- music,  and  mativ  ingenious  toob  and  in* 
strument!»  for  handicrafts;  u hence  she  was  called  Ergane^ 

To  the  Muses  their  father  allotted  the  inireution  of  letters,  andtiie 
composing  of  verses,  called  poetr\'. 

But  there  are  some  who  attribute  the  invention  of  lettxn  to  the 
Syrians,  from  whom  the  Phoenicians  learned  them^  and  commnni* 
cated  them  to  the  Grecians  when  they  came  with  Cadmus  into  En- 
rope:  whence  the  Grecians  called  them  Phcenician  letters.  To 
these  that  hold  this  opinion,  it  is  answered,  that  the  Phceuiciansveie 
not  the  first  tliat  found  out  letters,  but  only  changed  the  fbnn  and 
shape  of  them  into  other  characters,  which  many  afterwards  using^ 
the  name  of  Phoenician  grew  to  be  common. 

Vulcan,  they  say,  found  out  the  working  of  iron,  brass,  silver, and 
gold,  and  all  other  metals  that  require  forging  by  fire ;  and  that  the 
general  use  of  fire  in  all  other  cases,  was  found  out  by  him,  and  dis- 
covered not  only  to  anificers,  but  to  all  other  men:  and  ilierefore  all 
the  masters  of  these  arts  pay  their  devotions,  and  oSer  their  sacri- 
fices chiefly  to  this  god;  and  both  they  and  all  others  call  fire  Vul- 
can, to  the  eitd  that  this  great  good  bestowed  upon  mankind  might 
be  for  ever  reniembfred,  to  his  eternal  honour  and  praise. 

Mars,  tliey  say,  first  taught  the  making  of  all  sorts  of  weapons, 
and  how  to  furnish  soldiers  both  with  offensive  and  defensive  arms, 
and  to  fight  with  courage  and  resolution,  destroying  all  them  that 
were  enemies  to  the  gods« 

To  Apollo  is  attributed  the  invention  of  the  harp,  and  that  sort  of 
music;  and  it  is  said,  he  discovered  the  art  of  physic,  which  is  prac- 
tised by  revelation  from  him,  by  which  the  sick  were  commonly  re- 
stored to  health:  he  found  out  likewise  the  use  of  the  bow,  and 
taui^ht  the  inhabitants  to  shoot;  and  therefore  the  Cretans  delight 
mucli  in  shooting,  and  call  the  bow  Scythicus. 

.'^Isculapius  was  the  son  of  Apollo  and  Coronis;  he  was  instruct- 
ed by  his  father  in  the  art  of  physic,  and  found  out  chirurgciy,  and 
the  making  up  of  medicines,  the  virtues  of  roots  and  plants,  and  im- 
proved to  that  degree  in  his  art,  that  he  was  reputed  the  first  founder 
and  author  of  it,  and  likewise  the  prince  of  physicians. 

To  Mercury  they  attribute  the  invention  of  messages  in  times  of 
war,  by  trumpets  and  heralds,  of  truces  and  leagues ;  and  as  a  sign 
they  were  sent  to  treat  with  the  enemy,  they  carried  a  rod  before 
them;  and  therefore  were  suffered  safely  to  come  and  go.  Hence 
tlu'y  were  called  the  common  Mercury,  because  both  sides  enjoyed 
tlic  equal  benefit  of  peace  after  a  war. 


Chap.  IV.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  349 

They  say,  lie  was  the  first  ttiat  invented  weigliis  and  measure?.,  and 
getting  of  wcjilth  by  incrcliandise,  and  t  lie  way  of  cheating  and  co- 
zening of  oihers.  He  was  nceountcd  the  herald  of  ihe  gods,  and 
the  best  messenger,  because  he  was  quick  and  ingenii>us  in  declaring 
particularly  every  thing  he  had  in  command.  Whence  lie  was  cal- 
led Hermes. 

He  was  not  the  inventor  of  namea  and  words,  as  some  say,  but  ez- 
celled  in  clear  and  eloquent  expression,  and  delivery  of  his  mesuge. 
He  was  likewise  the  author  of  the  games  of  wrestling,  and  inreoted 
the  harp  made  of  a  tortoise-shell,  after  the  contest  between  Apollo 
and  Marsyas;  \\\  which,  they  say,  Apollo  was  victor,  and  revenged 
himself  of  his  adversary  to  a  greater  degree  than  was  fitf  for  which 
he  was  afterwards  so  grieved,  that  ihey  say,  he  broke  the  strings  of 
his  harp,  and  fur  sume  time  forbore  to  play  upon  that  iostrument. 

The  Cretans  say,  that  Bacchus  found  out  tbe  use  of  the  vine,  and 
the  manner  of  planting  and  pruning  of  it,  and  tbe  making  of  wine, 
and  the  way  of  laying  up  the  summer  fruits;  by  which  means  tbev 
were  preserved  fur  men's  use  and. sustenance  for  a  long  tiine< 

It  is  further  reported,  that  this  god  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and 
Proserpina,  and  born  in  Crete)  and  Orpheus  in  his  sacred  ritea 
and  mysteries,  says,  he  was  torn  in  pieces  by  the  Tiuns ;  but  thera 
were  many  of  this  n.ime,  Bacchus,  of  which  we  have  more  largely  and 
particularly  given  an  account  already;  but  of  this  Oionysius  or  Bac- 
chus's  being  born  in  Crete,  they  endeavour  to  shew  evideut  signs,  as 
arguments  to  prov^  it ;  for  they  say,  there  are  two  islands  formed  by 
him,  near  Crete,  in  a  part  of  the  sea  called  the  Double  Gulfs:  to 
which  islands  he  gave  the  denomination  of  Dionysides,  which  be 
never  did  in  any  other  part  of  the  world. 

As  to  Hercules,  it  is  said,  that  there  was  one  of  that  name,  the 
son  of  Jupiter,  born  many  years  before  him,  that  was  begotten  of 
Alcmena  in  Argos;  but  who  was  the  mother  of  this  Hercules  is  un-  . 
certain:  only  this  is  certain,  that  there  was  no  man  comparable  to 
him  for  strength;  that  he  travelled  through  the  whole  worldf  in- 
flicting just  and  deserved  punishment  upon  the  wicked,  and  destroy- 
ing wild  beasts  that  infested  the  countries  and  made  them  desolate ; 
that  he  delivered  men  every  where  out  of  bondage  and  slavery,  and 
that  yet  he  himself,  (notwithstanding  so  many  hazards  and  difficul- 
ties) was  never  worsted,  remaining  still  unconquerable  and  invul-' 
oerable ;  for  which  renowned  aeiions,  he  is  by  all  men  adored  with 
eternal  honours.  But  that  Hercules,  who  was  the  son  of  Alcmena, 
was  much  later :  but  because  he  was  like  unto  this  antient  Hercules^ 

*  I'his  ilcrcuk'i  is  tield  to  bt  Jotliua.  Gale't  Couit  of  tbe  GcDtilei.  fart  1, 1.  i.  c.  S. 


S50  DiODORCS  sicuLus.  Mook  F. 


in  bis  noble  acts^  be  likewise  attained  immortal  glory,  and  in 
after  ages  (being  of  the  same  name)  was  acconnted  to  be  the  aame 
person^  and  (through  the  ignorance  of  the  vulgar)  the  deeds  of  the 
former  were  ascribed  to  the  latter.  They  say^  that  the  praise  and 
renown  of  this  elder  god^  for  his  famous  actions,  continues  in  £- 
gypt  to  this  day,  where  he  built  a  city. 

Britomartis,  otherwise  called  Dictynna,  they  say,  was  boro  in 
Csenon  in  Crete,  and  was  the  daughter  of  Jupiter,  begotten  on  Car-* 
me,  the  daughter  of  Eubulus,  the  son  of  Ceres.  It  is  said  she  in* 
vented  the  hunters'  toils  and  nets,  and  thence  was  called  Dictynna : 
she  was  very  familiar  with  Diana,  and  therefore  it  was  thought  by 
some,  that  Dictynna  and  Diana  were  one  and  the  same  person,  which 
goddess  is  adored  and  honoured  in  Crete  lioth  with  temples  and  sa* 
crifices.  Those  are  very  much  mistaken,  who  say  that  Dictynna  wis 
so  called  from  her  flying  and  hiding  herself  in  the  fisher's  net  to  avoid 
Minos,  who  would  have  forced  and  ravished  her :  for  it  is  not  reasonable 
to  imagine,  that  a  goddess,  the  daughter  of  the  most  Supreme  God, 
should  be  reduced  to  so  low  a  condition,  as  to  stand  in  need  of  hu- 
man help;  nor  is  it  just  to  imagine  that  Minos,  who,  by  the  general 
consent  of  all,  was  reputed  a  righteous  and  upright  man,  an'd  lived, 
a  good  life,  should  be  guilty  of  such  an  horrid  impiety  and  grand 
piece  of  wickedness. 

Pluto,  they  say,  was  the  son.  of  Jasion  and  Ceres,  and  born  in 
Tripolus  in  Crete;  and  of  his  descent  there  is  a  double  relation  in 
history. 

For  some  sny,  that  Jasion  so  improved  and  cultivated  the  land, 
that  it  brought  forth  fruit  in  that  abundance,  that  they  that  saw  it, 
imposed  upon  it  a  name  proper  to  the  abundance  of  tbe  fruits,  and 
called  it  Pluto;  and  therefore  posterity  afterwards  used  to  say.  Thai 
he  who  had  more  than  eriovghy  had  Pluto. 

Others  say,  that  Jasion  and  Ceres  had  a  son  named  Pluto,  who 
first  taught  men  a  more  orderly  and  careful  manner  of  living,  and 
how  to  gain  and  treasure  up  wealth.  Whereas  a  provident  care  of- 
getting  and  keeping  of  estates,  was  altogether  neglected.  And  these 
are  the  things  which  the  Cretans  say  of  those  gods  which  they  pre- 
tend were  born  among  them.  Moreover,  they  say,  the  manner  of 
worshipping  and  sacrificing  to  the  gods,  and  other  rites  and  sacred 
mysteries  came  from  them  to  other  nations,  and'they  bring  in  thb, 
as  a  most  certain  and  undeniable  argument,  as  they  suppose.  For 
they  say,  the  rites  and  initiations  practised  by  the  Athenians  inEleu- 
sis,  which  are  almost  the  most  famous  of  any  other,  and  those  in 
Samothracia,  and  in  Thracia  among  the  Sidonians,  (of  all  which 
Orpheus  was  the  institutor),  arc  celebrated  darkly  and  mystically | 


Chap.  IV.  mODORUS  6ICULUS*  351 

but  in  Crete^  at  Gnossos^  by  antient  law,  the  very  same  saovd  mys- 
teries are  celebrated  plainly  and  openly,  and  whatever  is  done  tn  se- 
cret by  others,  none  amongst  them  conceals  from  any  tliat  have  a 
desire  to  know  them;  for  many  of  the  gods,  they  say,  went  out  from 
Crete,  and  travelled  through  many  parts  of  the  world,  and  werebene?- 
factors  to  all  sorts  of  men,  and  communicatedto  them  the  benefit  and  ad- 
vantage of  such  things  as  they  themselves  had  found  out  and  invented. 
For  Ceres  sailed  into  Attica,  and  from  thence  into  Sicily,  and  at 
length  into  Egypt:  In  which  places,  after  she  had  delivered  them 
corn,  and  taught  them  how  to  sow  it,  she  was  highly  honoured  »-• 
mongst  them ;  so  Venus  dwelt  near  Eryx  in  Sicily,  in  the  island 
Cythera,  at  Paphos  in  Cyprus,  and  in  Syria  in  Asia;  and  because  she 
was  often  seen,  and  continued  long  amongsi  the  inhabitants  of  these 
places,  she  was  called  Venus  Erycina,  Cjrtheria,  Paphia,  and  Syria. 
Apollo  likewise  continued  long  in  Delos,  Lycia,  and  Delphos;  aqd 
Diana  in  Ephesus,  Pontus,  Persia,  and  Crete;  and  therefore,  jQrom  the 
places  and  things  done  there  bjr  them,  Apollo  was  called  Apollo  De?- 
.lius,  Lycius, and  Pythius;  and  she  was  stiled  Diana  £phesia»  of 
Cresia,  Tauropolia,  and  Persia;  although  both  of  them  were  bom  in 
Crete. 

This  goddess  Diana  is  highly  honoured  by  the  Persians,  and  the 
same  mysteries  and  sacrifices  that  are  celebrated  and  offered  to  her 
by  others,  the  barbarians  themselves,  at  this  very  day,  celebrate  in 
honour  of  Diana  Persia.  To  this  purpose  they  give  an  account  of 
the  rest  of  the  gods,  which  as  they  are  easy  for  the  reader  to  under- 
stand, so  they  are  too  tedious  for  us  to  recite. 

Moreover,  they  say,  that  milny  ages  after  the  birth  of  the  gods, 
there  yv^ere  many  heroes  among  them,  of  whom  the  most  eminent 
were  Minos  and  Rhadamanthus,  who  were  the  progeny  of  Jupiter 
and  Europa,  the  daughter  of  Agenor,  whom,  they  r'tport,  by  the 
providence  of  the  gods,  to  be  carried  over  into  Crete  upon  the  back 
of  a  bull.  Minos,  they  say,  who  was  the  elder,  obtained  the  king- 
dom, and  built  in  the  island  many  cities:  amongst  which,  three  were 
most  famous;  Gnossus,  situated  in  that  part  of  the  island  that  looked 
towards  Asia;  Phaeus,  lying  southward  upon  the  shore;  and  Sidonia, 
situated  in  the  western  part,  over-against  Peloponnesus.  Many  laws, 
they  say,  were  made  by  him  for  the  government  of  the  Cretans,  re- 
ceiving them  from  Jupiter  his  father,  who  used  to  converse  with  him 
privately  in  a  cave.  He  had  a  great  fleet,  and  conquered  many  of 
the  islands,  and  was  the  first  of  the  Greeks  that  gained  the  domi- 
nion of  the  seas;  and  after  he  had  arrived  to  a  high  pitch  of  glory 
and  honour,  by  reason  of  his  justice  and  valour,  he  died  in  Sicily, 


S52  DIODORUS  stcui.us.  Book  K 


in  undertaking  a  war  against  Cocalus,  of  which  we  have  beft^  give* 
a  particular  narrative,  when  we  treated  of  the  afikirs  of  DedalnSy 
who  was  the  occasion  of  this  war, 

Rhadamanthus,  they  say,  was  the  most  just  man  in  the  worl^ 
for,  in  executing  of  justice  upon  tliieves,  robbers,  and  other  impkwt 
and  wicked  persons,  he  was  inexorable. 

They  report,  likewise,  that  he  gained  several  islands;  and  many  of 
the  maritime  coasts  of  Asia,  voluntarily  submitted  to  him  upon 
the  account  of  his  eminent  justice.  He  gave  the  kingdom  toEiy- 
'  thro,  one  of  his  sons,  who  called  themselves  Erythri,  from  him.  To 
OBnopion,  the  son  of  Minos  and  Ariadne,  they  say  he  allotted  Chios: 
others  say,  he  was  the  son  of  Bacchus,  and  wa$  taught  how  to  male 
wine  by  his  father* 

He  rewarded  likewise  each  of  his  captains,  either  with  some  ishnd 
or  city:  upon  Thoas  he  bestowed  Lemnos ;  on  Engyeus,  Cyroos; 
to  Pamphilus  he  gave  Peparethos;  to  Euambeus,  Maronea;  to  Al- 
csus.  Faros:  to  Arrion,  Delos;  to  Andros,  the  island  Andros;  so 
called  after  his  name. 

And  becuuse  he  was  so  remarkably  just,  he  is  feigned  to  be  the 
judge  of  hell;  and  to  distinguish  between  the  pious  and  impious,  the 
good  and  the  bad.  They  say  likewise  that  Minos  is  co- partner  with 
him  in  that  dignity,  upon  the  account  of  his  uprightness,  and  his 
just  and  righjteous  reign.  ^ 

Sarpedon,  the  third  brother,  they  say,  passed  over  with  an  army 
into  Asia,  and  possessed  himself  of  Lycia  and  the  neighbouring  ter- 
ritories. His  son  Evander  succeeded  him  in  the  kingdom  of  I^cia, 
who  marrying  Deidamia,  the  daughter  of  Bellerophon,  of  her  begat 
Sarpedon,  who  went  to  the  Trojan  war  with  Agamemnon,  and  u 
called  by  some  the  son  of  Jupiter.  Deucalion  and  Molus,  they  say, 
were  the  sons  of  Minos:  Deucalion  had  a  son  called  Idomeneus, 
aiid  Molus  another  named  Meriones,  who,  as  is  said,  assisted  Aga- 
memnon against  Troy  with  a  fleet  of  fourscore  sail,  and  afterwards  re- 
turned and  died  in  their  own  country,  and  were  honourably  buried 
and  adored  as  gods :  they  show  their  sepulchre  in  Gnossus,  whereon 
is  this  inscription  — 

Idomeneus  in  this  tomb  doth  lie, 

Who  born  in  Gnossus  was;  and  him  hard  bjc« 

I,  son  of  Molus,  Meriones  caird. 

These  two  are  adored  as  demi-gods  by  the  Cretans,  for  they  ofler 
sacrifice  to  them;  and  in  their  wars  call  upon  them  for  aid  and  as- 
sistance. 

Having  given  an  account  of  these  things,  it  remains  we  should  now 


€!hap.  IK  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  353 

speak  of  the  oatioDS  that  are  intermixed  with  the  Cretans.  That  the 
^teocretans  were  the  first  inhabitants  of  this  island,  and  reputed  to 
have  been  there  from  the  beginning,  we  have  before  declared*  Many 
ages  after,  the  Pelasgi  planted  among  them  a  nation  inured  continu- 
ally to  arms,  an4  wandering  up  and  down  from  their  antient  habita- 
tions, seized  upon  that  part  of  the  island  where  they  landed. 

The  third  nation  that  catne  thither,  they  say,  were  the  Dorienses^ 
under  the  conduct  of  Teutamus,  one  of  the  posterity  of  Doms. 
It  is  said  the  greatest  part  of  his  colony  he  brought  from  the  neigh«> 
bouring  parts  of  Olympus,  and  some  part  from  the  Achaiaos  in  La- 
conia :  for  that  Dorus  gathered  hb  colony  out  of  the  parts  and  ter- 
ritories near  to  Malia. 

A  fourth  sort  of  people  that  poured  into  Crete,  were  a  pro- 
miscuous company  of  barbarians  from  several  parts  round  about, 
who,  notwithstan^iing,  in  process  of  time,  spoke  the  same  lan- 
guage with  the  antient  Cretans,  the  natural  inhabitants.  But 
after  the  power  of  Minos  and  Rhadamanthus  became  prevalent 
and  considerable,  all  these  nations  were  reduced  into  otie  body,  as 
one  people  throughout  the  whole  island.  And  at  length,  after 
the  return  of  the  Heraclidse,  the  Arglves  and  Spartans  sent  colo- 
nies, and  possessed  themselves  likewise  of  other  islands;  and  both 
in  this,  and  those  other,  built  several  cities,  of  which  we  sh411  speak 
more  fully  in  due  and  proper  time. 

But  since  that  almost  all  the  historians  of  the  Cretan  affairs  dif- 
fer among  themselves,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  we  do  not  a- 
gree  with  them  all  in  every  thing  we  relate;  for  we  follow  them  who 
give  the  most  probable  account,  and  are  esteemed  to  be  of  most  cre- 
dit. For  sometimes  we  follow  Epimenides,  the  theologist,and  some- 
times Dosiades,  Sosicrates,  and.Leosthenidas. 

Having  therefore  treated  thus  largely  of  Crete,  we  shall  now  apply 
ourselves  to  speak  of  Lesbos. 

This  island  was  antiently  inhabited  by  many  several  nations  one 
after  another,  by  which  reason  it  was  often  left  and  forsaken.  The  first 
that  seized  upon  it  were  the  Pelasgi,  when  it  lay  desert  and  unin- 
habited: for  Xanthus  the  son  of  Triopas,  prince  of  the  Pelasgians 
that  came  from  Argos,  seated  himself  in  a  part  of  Lycia,  which 
he  had  possessed  himself  of,  and  there  reigned  over  the  Pelasgians 
that  came  thither  with  him;  whence  he  sailed  over  to  Lesbos,  which 
at  that  time  lay  desolate,  and  divided  the  country  amongst  the  peo^ 
pie,  and  called  the  island  Pelasgia,  which  before  was  called  Issa. 

In  process  of  time,  after  the  seventh  generation,  many  people 
were  destroyed  by  Deucalion's  flood,  and  Lesbos  likewise  at  that 

Vol.  X.  No.36»  zz 


354  DfODORUS  SICULU9.  jBbo*  K 


ttiiie^  was  by  cataracts  of  showers  laid  waste  and  desolate*. 
afterwards  Macareus  happening  to  toach  there,  and  coBJidsffing  tb* 
pleasantucss  of  the  iriand,  there  seated  himselfi 

This  Macareus  was  the  son  of  Crinacus^  the  son  of  Jupiter,  ^as 
Hesiod  and  some  others  of  the  poets  say),  and  dwelt  in  the  city  Ola- 
nus,  then  called  Jados,  and  now  Achaia. 

He  got  together  a  great  company  of  lonians,  and  multitudes  ham 
several  other  nations  flocked  to  him;  in  the  first  place  he  possessed 
himself  of  Lesbos;  afterwards  growing  more  powerful,  thFoagh 
tlie  richness  of  the  island,  and  his  own  justice  and  humaaitf,  ht 
gained  many  neighbouring  islands,  and  divided  the  lands  amongst 
his  countrymen  and  followers. 

About  that  time  Lesbos,  tlie  son  of  Lapithas,  the  son  of  Eolna, 
the  son.  of  Hippotas,  by  the  direction  of  the  oracle  at  Delphos*  ar- 
rived in  this  island  with  new  colonies,  and  marrying  Methymna,  Ate 
daughter  of  Macareus,  seated  himself  and  his  followers  there,  and 
enjoyed  an  equal  interest  with  those  that  were  there  before  hnn; 
and  afterwards  becoming  a  man  of  great  renown,  he  called  the  is- 
land Lesbos,  after  his  own  name,  and  the  people  Lesbians:  for  Ma- 
careus had  two  daughters,  Mitylene  and  Methymna,  from  whom 
two  of  the  chiefest  cities  of  the  island  were  so  called. 

Macareus  having  a  design  to  possess  himself  of  some  of  the 
neighbouring  islands,  ordered  one  of  his  sons  to  carry  over  a  colcfOf 
first  into  Chios;  afterwards  he  sent  another  into  Samosi  named 
Cycbolaus,  who  seated  himself  there,  and  divided  the  lands  by  lot 
amongst  those  of  his  colony,  and  ruled  over  them  as  king.  The 
third  island  peopled  by  Macareus,  was  Coos,  over  which  heapixnnted 
Neander  king. 

After  this  he  sent  a  large  colony  with  Leucippus  into  Rhodes, 
whom  the  Rhodia.ns  (by  reason  of  the  small  number  of  inhabitants 
that  were  left  among  Lliem)  willingly  received,  and  suffered  them  to 
have  and  enjoy  the  lands  equally  with  them. 

But  about  that  time,  the  continent  over  against  these  islands  lay 
under  most  pressing  and  grievous  calamities,  by  reason  of  the  late 
flood;  for  in  regard  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth  by  the  inundation  and 
excess  of  rain  were  rotted  and  spoiled  for  a  long  time  togetlier, 
famine  cjiceedingly  prevailed;  and  through  the  corruption  of  the  air, 
a  great  plague  and  pestilence  dejwpulated  and  laid  waste  the  towns 
and  citic's.  But  in  the  mean  time  the  islands  lying  more  open  to  the 
winds,  and  so  partaking  of  their  heahhful  gales,  were  loaded  with 

•  J>ucalkn'>  fiood,  An.  jMiind.  ,:4:>6,  eighteen  ychn  bcfure  the  Iinielites  departed 
a;uI  oI  Egypt.     Origc's  fluod,  LMtJ  j'car*  before  thin,  nbile  Jacob  w»»  wjtb  Laban^  Au. 

Muud.  ilU9. 


theifruUs  of  the  eaUii,  and  the  inbahUmto  had  fiifMty  ^f  nil 
and  jo  a  short  time  were  its  a  happy  «Bd  proBpei^ip  .state  nod  oosdif 
4ioo^  and  Uy  vaasoa^  the  great  pleaty  that ^mas imoi^  iheoi,  diey 
were  called  the  Islands  of  <the  filesaed,  4U  ibe  Slewed  lalMEMk.  Bm 
peoieBay,  that  iihey  vercoaUed  the  Macasean  iidafids^  fsom  Maouleus 
mad  loQ^  two  ^ons  «f  ane  of  the  ,priaoeB  (bat  fornoerly  jrakd  liiene. 
Afid  indeed  these  islaoda  for  ^richneas^tf  joil,  mud  pleaty  of  all  thinga^ 
did  adt  only  excel  aU  the  neigbbeur^  ^QCMiOitries  m  mlient  tinae,  JmkI 
do  ao  evcfi  to  this  day.  For  the  fenliity  -of  fhe  soil,  tbe  {rieaaant  ocaa 
•f  the  situation,  aad  the  beakhf  ukieas  of  the  cUmate  ta  aaeh,  that 
tbey  are  not  without  oaase  oaUed,  bat  ajpe  really  nod  in  Vnnkh,  blessed 
and  hapfy  islands. 

Lastly,  Maioaffiiis  k4ng  of  Leabas*  ^made  the  fifst  Iww  4imai^  tlMsni^ 
whidi  was  so  beneficial  and  advantai^^ott^  ta  tJbe  pnblk,  iibat  he  gave 
it  the  naoBe  of  the  lAoa^  beeause  'of  the  ati^ngth  and  fcMiee  of  tiiait 

-flCQBt* 

A  considerable  tuaa  aAer  tUa  feolony  -was  planted  ja  LeBba^ 
aBOfther  was  brought  iato  the  ialaod  TcaoMsdos  k)  this  OEBanner* 

Tenes  was  tiie  aoa  ^  Cyenaay  Jcing  ofCoimm  in  Ti^oaif  and -was  m 
man  renowned  for  his  valour;  he  brought  over  a  colony  out  of  tha 
opposite  continent^randtpostessedUunaelf  of  the  iailaad  I^uoophrys, 
at  that  tune  desolate. 

After  he  bad  divided  the  country  by  laiaiDong  his  subjects^  anfl 
had  built  a  city,  he  cidkd  itTenedos^  after  his  owa  name,  fiy  jhis 
good  and  upright  govermnent  he  gained  upoo  the  hearts  of  his  peo- 
ple, and  twas  highly  honoured  wbiie  >be  li«ed«  and  i^er-his  death  ^was 
adored  as  a  demi-^god;  for  they  buik  a  temple  in  honoar  of  him^ 
and  offered  sacrifices  to  him  as  a  god,  which  ^eligiaas  ^eneraUon  was 
continued  to  times  not  long  since.  jBut  -we  'are  not  iiere  to  ^omit 
what  the  islanders  report  concerning  Tenes,  the  founder  of  the  city 
Tcnedos.  They  say  that  Cycnus,  the  father  of  Tenes,  giving  ear 
to  the  false  suggestions  aqd  calumnies  of  his  wife,  locked  his  son 
in  a  chest,  and  caused  him  vto  be  .throwA  iiito«the  sea,  and  that  the 
chest  was  cast  up  by  jhe  waves  upon  Tenedos;  and  being  thus 
strangely  preserved  by  the  special  providence  of  God,  became  king 
of  the  island,  and  afterwards  growing  renowned  for  his  justice,  and 
other  eminent  virtues,  lie  was  at  length  honoured  and  adored  as  a 
god.  And  because  his  step- mother  hired  a  piper  by  a  false  oath  to 
sui)j)ort  jier  own  calumny,  it  is  a  law  amongst  them  of  Tenedos,  that 
no  piper  sliall  come  into  ihc  temple. 

AFtcrvvards,  when  Tenes  was  killed  by  Achilles  in  the  time  of  the 
Trojan  war,  and  Tenedos  then  laid  waste  by  the  Grecians,  the  Tcne-^ 
cleans  made  anotlier  law,  that  it  should  not  be  lawful  so  mugh  ^^ 


3&6  BIODORUS  StCULUS.  Book  V. 


mm 


ODce   to  liame  Achilles  in  Tetes's  temple.    These  are  the  diingft 
related  of  Tenedos  and  its  aatient  inbabitints. 

HaviDg  oow  given  an  acconot  of  the  most  considerahle  hiands,  wc 
shall  proceed  in  the  next  place  to  the  lesser. 

The  islands  called  Cyclades  were  formerly  desolate  and  oniftliabital; 
but  Minos,  son  of  Jupiter  and  Europa,  king  of  Crete,  haTing  aj 
army  at  land,  and,  with  a  powerful  navy,  master  at  sea,  sent 
colonies  out  of  Crete,  and  peopled  many  of  the  islands  of  die  Cjdi- 
des,  and  divided  the  lands  to  the  people  by  lot,  and  sobdned  a  gicai 
part  of  the  sea-coasts  of  Asia ;  and  therefore  the  sea-ports  and  havena 
of  Asia,  and  of  the  islands,  have  the  same  names  with  those  in  Crete, 
and  are  called  Minoi.  Minos  being  now  grown  great  and  poweifol, 
began  to  envy  his  brother  Rhadamanthus,  hb  copartner  in  the  king- 
dom, for  the  honour  and  reputation  he  had  gained  by  his  jnstiee. 
Willing  therefore  to  remove  him  as  far  from  him  as  be  ^otaSSlAf 
could,  he  sent  him  into  the  farthest  part  of  his  dominions.  Where- 
upon Rhadamanthtis  abiding  in  the  islands  over  against  Ionia  and 
Caria,  caused  Erythrus  to  build  a  city  in  Asia  after  his  own  vmmt^ 
and  made  CEnopion,  the  son  of  Ariadne,  the  daughter  of  MiflK%Iord 
of  Chios. 

These  things  were  all  done  before  the  Tro)an  war;  but  afler  the 
destruction  of  Troy,  the  Cares,  grown  rich  and  wealthy,  gained  die 
dominion  at  sea,  and  subdued  the  Cyclades,  some  of  which  they  took 
into  their  own  hands,  and  rooted  out  the  Cretans ;  others  they  en* 
joyed  in  common  with  the  antient  Cretan  inhabitants.  Bat  in  pro* 
cess  of  time  the  Grecians  growing  strong  and  powerful,  the  barfaanMK 
Carians  were  ejected  out  of  most  of  the  Cyclades,  and  the  islands  fell 
into  the  hands  of  the  Greeks,  of  which  we  shall  give  a  more  parti<< 
cular  account  hereafter,  in  proper  time  and  place. 

D.G. 


The  following ^five  hooks  are  lost. 


■  I  ■  i|      ■  t.       II      "p^w 


TQfi 


LAST  TEN  BOOKS 


OF 


DIODORUS  SICULUS, 


35§ 


BIODORUS  SICULUS- 


BOOK  XI. 


PREFACE. 

rHE  book  next  before  tbis^  being  thie  tenth  in  the  whole  eomposne 
of  our  history,  ends  with  things  done  in  the  year  immediately  be- 
fore the  descent  of  Xerxes  into  Eqrope,  and  with  those  debates  m 
the  general  assemblies  of  the  Grecians  at  Corinth,  conoerati^  the 
admission  of  Gelo  into  the  Grecian  confederacy. 

In  this  to  proceed,  (as  things  were  done)^  in  a  eontinmed  aeries 
of  the  history,  we  shall  begin  witft  Xerxes's  expedition  into  Gffeece^ 
and  end  the  year  immediately  before  the  army  of  the  Athenjaos, 
under  Cymon  their  general,  invaded  Cyprus. 


CHAP.  I. 

Of  Xerxe^^s  expedition  into  Greece,  and  the  battle  of  T%emiOr 

py,UB,  and  the  sea-fight  at  Salamis. 

CALLIAS  being  archon  or  chief  magistrate  of  Athens,  Spuriuf 
Cassius  and  Proclus  Virginias  Tricostus,  consuls  at  Rome,  in  the 
seventy-fifth  olympiad,  celebrated  at  Elis,  (in  which  Asylius,  the  Sy- 
racusan  wa^  victor),  Xerxes,  (for  the  reason  after  mentioned),  raised 
an  army  against  the  Grecians.  Mardonius,the  Persian,  was  cousin- 
german,  and  by  marriage,  likewise,  nearly  related  to  Xerxes,  of  great 
esteem  among  the  Persians  for  his  valour  and  prudence.  This  man, 
prompted  forward  by  the  greatness  of  his  spirit,  and  the  heat  of  his 
youth,  burned  with  ambition  to  be  general  of  so  great  an  army  as 
that  expedition  required;  and  therefore  persuaded  Xerxes,  that  he 
would  bend  all  his  power  to  subdue  the  Grecians,  those  implacable 
enemies  of  the  Persians. 

Being  brought  over  to  close  with  this  advice,  he  determined  ut- 


o60  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Sook  XL 

terly  to  destroy  and  root  them  up:  and  to  that  end  sent  ambassa- 
dors to  Carthage,  to  treat  with  them  concerning  the  joining  of  tbdr 
forces  together;  whereupon  it  was  thus  agreed  between  tbem.^ 
That  Xerxes  should  land  his  forces  in  Greece^  and  that  the  Carthagi- 
nians at  the  same  time  should^  with  a  great  army,  invade  the  Greeks 
in  Italy  and  Sicily. 

According  to  which  compact  the  Carthaginians  raised  a  great  sum 
of  mouey,  and  hired  many  soldiers  out  of  the  provinces  of  Liguria 
in  Italy,  Gallia,  and  Iberia;  and  raised  men  of  their  own  throagboitt 
all  Libya,  and  out  of  Carthage  itself.  In  whicb  peparations  were 
spent  three  years,  and  an  army  of  three  hundred  thousand  men  were 
mustered,  and  two  hundred  ships  fitted  out. 

Ou  the  other  part  Xerxes,  stirred  up  by  the  industry  of  the  Cir« 
tbagiuians,  by  way  of  emulation,  as  far  exceeded  them  in  warlike 
preparations,  as  he  did  in  dominion  and  empire.  He  commaDdcd 
ships  to  be  built  every  where  upon  the  sea-coasts  within  bis  domi- 
nions, as  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  and  Cyprus,  and  likewise  throagb  Cili- 
cia,  Pamphylia,  Pisidia,  Lycia,  Caria,  Mysia,  Troas,the  cities  of  the 
Hellespont,  Pontus,  and  Bithynia,  and  in  three  years  time^  as  tbe 
Carthaginians  had  done^  set  forth  above  twelve  hundred  gallies. 
And  this  was  the  better  accomplished  by  means  of  the  prepaiatioos 
of  those  great  forces  raised  by  Darius's  father  in  his  life  time.  For 
Datis,  Darius's  general,  being  not  long  before  overcome  by  the  A- 
thenians  in  the  battle  of  Marathon,  Darius  ever  afterwards  bore  an 
implacable  hatred  against  them :  but  just  as  he  was  ready  to  pass  over 
into  Greece,  he  was  prevented  by  death. 

Xerxes,  tlicrefore,  encouraged  both  by  his  father's  assistance,  and 
the  advice  of  Mardonius  (as  is  before  related)  resolved  to  invade 
tbe  Grecians. 

When  all  things  were  prepared,  he  commanded  tbe  officers  of  his 
navy  to  rendezvous  his  fleet  at  Cyma  and  Phocaea.  And  he  himself 
with  the  whole  army,  both  of  horse  and  foot,  raised  out  of  every . 
province  of  his  dominions,  marched  from  Susa;  and  advancing  to 
Sardis,  forthwith  sent  heralds  into  Greece,  commanding  them  to  go 
to  all  the  cities,  and  demand  in  the  name  of  the  king,  earth  and 
water. 

There  dividing  his  army,  part  he  sent,  (sufficient  as  was  conceived) 
to  make  abridge  over  the  Hellespont,  and  another  part  to  cut  a  way 
though  the  mountain  Athos,  both  judging  it  safe  for  his  soldiers  to 
have  so  short  a  cut  for  their  march,  and  hoping  likewise  by  such  an 
extraordinary  work  upon  the  first  attempt,  to  strike  a  terror  into  the 
Grecians.  They  therefore  that  were  sent,  having  so  great  a  multi* 
tude  of  bands  at  work,  speedily  despatched  the  business. 


/ 


Chap.  t.  DtODOnus  stcULUS.  361 

But  the  Grecians  being  now  alarmed  with  the  vast  army  of  the 
Persians^  sent  ten  thousand  men  at  arms  into  Thessaly,  to  possess 
themselves  of  the  passages  or  posts  of  Tempe.  The^neral  of  the 
Lacedaemonians  was  Synetus^  and  of  the  Athenians,  Themistocles : 
these  sent  messengers  to  all  the  cities,  to  require  them  to  rabe  sol- 
diers for  the  defence  of  the  passages  at  the  common  charge;  for 
they  made  it  their  business,  with  all  expedition,  to  interest  all  the 
cities  of  Greece  in  the  war,  that  so  the  Persians  might  be  opposed 
by  the  combined  force  of  all  Greece  together. 

But  when  they  heard  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  Thessalians,  and 
those  that  inhabited  the  straits,  had  submitted  to  the  king's  dele- 
gates or  commissioners,  they  returned  home,  despairing  to  make  any 
effectual  defence  at  Tempe. 

'  And  here  it  will  not  be  from  the  purpose  to  declare  what  p&rt  of 
Greece  assisted  the  barbarians,  that,  (deservingly  branding  them  with 
disgrace),  traitors  to  the  common  liberties  of  their  country  may,  out 
of  a  sense  of  shame  and  dishonour,  be  deterred  from  the  like 
practice.  We  say,  therefore,  that  the  Dblopes,  iBnians,  Milesii, 
Perrhsebians,  and  Magnesians,  sided  with  the  barbarians ;  and  feven 
while  the  guards  were  in  Tempe,  the  Achsans,  Phthiotians,  Locri- 
ans,  and  Thessalians,  joined  with  them;  and  after  they  were  with- 
drawn, most  of  the  Boeotians  went  over  to  the  Persians.  Hereupon 
the  Grecians,  in  a  common  assembly  at  the  bthmus,  decreed,  that  if 
they  should  be  victorious,  those  Grecians  that  sided  with  the  Per- 
sians, should  be  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  eveiy  tenth  man.  And  they 
ordered  ambassadors  to  be  sent  to  such  as  at  present  stood  neuter, 
to  stir  them  up  forthwith  to  take  up  arms  for  the  common  liberty. 

Of  these,  some  without  delay  heartily  joined  themselves  to  the 
common  interest^  others  promised  to  do  it  in  due  time,  though  in 
truth,  by  delay,  they  were  willing  to  have  some  prospect  of  the 
hsue  of  the  war  before  they  hazarded  themselves.  Those  of  Argos, 
by  their  ambassadors  in  the  common  council,  declared*  that  they  were 
ready  to  join  in  arms  with  the  rest  of  Greece,  if  they  might  h^e 
some  share  in  the  supreme  command  of  the  army:  to  whom  answer 
was  given  by  the  council  ^That  if  they  thought  it  a  greater  grie- 
vance to  fight  under  a  Grecian  general  for  the  common  liberty,' than 
to  be  slaves  to  a  barbarian,  they  do  wisely  to  forbear  to  take  up  arihs : 
but  if  through  their  ambition,  they  aspire  to  the  command  of  Greece, 
it  were  just  that  they  should  first  signalize  themselves  by  such  noble 
actions,  as  might  justly  deserve  so  great  an  honour.  After  this  the 
Grecian  cities,  frcncrally  gave  answer  to  the  king's  ambassadors, 
(that  went  through  Greece),  in  such  a  manner  4ls  plainly  demou- 
VoL.  h    No.  36.  AAA 


562  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sook  XL 

strated  at  how  high  a  rate  they  prized  the  common  liberty  of  the 
country. 

When  Xerxes  understood  that  the  bridge  over  the  Hellespont  was 
finished^  and  a  passage  made  through  mount  Athos,  he  forthwith 
marched  from  Sardis^  determining  to  make  his  way  to  the  Helles* 
pont.  And  when  he  came  to  Abydos,  he  passed  his  army  over  the 
bridge  into  Europe ;  then  marching  through  Thrace,  he  increased 
his  army  by  the  Thracians  and  other  borderers.  When  be  came  to 
Doriscus,  he  commanded  Iiis  fleet  should  sail  thither,  that  his  foites 
both  by  sea  and  land  might  join. 

There  he  numbered  his  army,  in  which  it  is  reported  there  were 
enrolled  above  eight  hundred  thousand  foot,  and  more  than  twelve 
hundred  gal h'es,  three  hundred  and  twenty  of  which  were  Greek  ships. 
The  ships  themselves  were  provided  at  the  charge  of  the  king,  but 
furnished  with  soldiers  and  mariners  by  the  Grecians  within  his  do- 
minions. All  the  rest  were  ships  fitted  out  by  the  barbarians.  Of 
these,  two  hundred  were  built  and  manned  by  the  Egyptians;  tluree, 
hundred  by  the  Phoenicians;  the  Cilicians  fourscore;  the  Pampbylians 
forty;  and  the  Lycians  as  many:  besides,  the  Carians  fourscore;  and 
from  Cyprus  one  hundred  and  fifty.  As  to  those  from  the  Greriansi 
the  Dorians  inhabiting  about  Caria,  together  with  them  of  Rhodes 
and  Coos,  sent  forty;  the  lonians,  with  them  of  Samos  and  Chiosy 
one  hundred;  the  iEolians,  with  Licsbos  andTenedos,  forty;  they  of 
the  Hellespont,  with  them  tliat  inhabited  about  Pontus,  fourscore; 
and  the  blanders  fifty :  for  the  king  had  secured  to  himself  all  the  is- 
lands between  Cyaneus,  Triopium,  and  Sunium. 

Such  was  the  number  of  the  men  of  war  in  tlie  navy  besides  eight 
hundred  and  fifty  prepared  for  transporting  of  horses,  and  three 
thousand  ships  of  burthen,  of  thirty  oars  a-piece.  Thus  Xerxes  was 
employed  at  Doriscus  in  numbering  his  army :  but  the  general 
council  of  Greece  being  informed  that  the  forces  of  the  Persians 
approached,  it  was  ordered  that  the  Grecian  fleet  should  forthwith 
sail  to  Artemisium  in  Euboea,  judging  that  to  be  the  most  convenient 
place  to  oppose  the  euemy :  and  a  guard  of  men  at  arms  were  sent  to 
Thcrmopyl^,  sufficient,  as  was  conceived,  to  secure  the  straits  and 
passages,  and  repel  tiic  barbarians :  for  it  was  determined^  with  all 
haste  and  speed,  to  defend  oa  every  side  all  those  that  took  part  with 
the  Grecians,  and  with  their  forces  every  way  to  preserve  their  con- 
federates. Eur)  biades,  a  Lacedaemonian,  was  admiral  of  the  whole 
fleet;  Leonidas,  general  of  Sparta,  commanded  the  forces  sent  to 
Thermopylae,  a  brave  man  and  an  excellent  soldier, 

Leonidas,  taking  upon  him  the  command,  chose  only  a  thouaanii 
men  out  of  the  army  to  follow  him  in  this  expedition.    But  the  £- 


Cik^.  I.  DIOBORUS  SICULuk  ^BH 

"'     ■  ■       .  '^  ^       ... v    .r  ■  ■"    ■      !  ■  =s 

phori,  or  common  council,  advising  him  to  take  a  greater  number 

against  so  powerful  an  enemy,  yea,  commanding  bun  so  to  db^  be^ 
in  an  intricate  and  perplexed  speecb,  made  answer«^Tbat  in  truth, 
that  number  was  too  few  to  keep  the  pass  against  the  barbarians,  but 
that  he  needed  no  more  to  accomplish  that  design  which  they  were 
going  about  to  effect.  Receiving  this  dark  answer, they  asked  him.^^ 
Whether  he  led  out  the  army  ppon  any  slight  and  inconsiderable  at- 
tempt ?    He  returned  in  answer That  in  words  and  talk  he  was 

to  lead  them  to  defend  the  passages:  but  In  truth,  and  in  the  event,  to 
die  for  the  common  liberty.  Therefore,  if  these  thousand  which  he 
had  chosen  might  go  along  with  him,  the  feme  of  Sparta  would  be 
advanced  even  by  their  destruction:  but  if  all  the  LacedsBmonians 
should  go  thither,  the  very  Lacedeemonian  name  would  be  utterly  ex« 
tinct,  they  being  men  never  used  to  fly  to  save  themselves. 

Upon  this  there  were  allotted  to  him  a  thousand  Lacedaemonians^ 
three  hundred  Spartans,  and  three  thousand  out  of  the  rest  of  the  ar- 
my :  so  that  he  marched  with  four  thousand  soldiers  to  ThermopyUa. 
But  the  Locrians  who  inhabited  near  the  passages,  had  given  earth  and 
water  to  the  Persians,  and  had  promised  to  seizethe  passes. 

But  when  they  perceived  Leonidas  to  advance  to  ThermopyliBj, 
they  revolted  and  joined  themselves  to  the  Grecian  army;  and  so  a 
thousand  Locrians,  as  many  Milesians^  and  near  a  thousand  Pho- 
cians  marched  with  him  to  Thermopylse;  besides  four  hundred 
Thebans,  of  a  different  faction  sided  now  with  Greece:  for  the  Jhe- 
bans  that  were  in  a  confederacy  with  the  Persians  were  divided  a- 
mongst  themselves. 

This  then  is  the  utmost  number  of  the  army  which  under  Leoni- 
das theirgeneral  came  to  Thermopylse,  and  there  prepared  themselves 
to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  whole  strength  of  the  Persians.  ^ 

Xerxes  havinfir  now  numbered  his  forces,  marched  with  his  whole 
army  to  the  city  Acanthus,  his  fleet  sailing  near  at  hand  over  a* 
gainst  him;  thence  his  navy  passed  through  the  ditch  or  sluice  cut 
through  the  isthmus,  and  by  that  means  be  passed  his  fleet  into  the 
other  sea  by  a  short  and  safe  cut. 

When  he  came  to  the  bay  of  M alea,  he  was  informed  that  all  the 
passages  were  possessed  by  the  enemy :  upon  which  he  again  in-r 
creased  liis  forces,  and  joined  to  them  little  less  than  two  hundred 
thousand  men  more,  which  he  had  raised  as  his  confederates  out  of 
Europe.  So  that  besides  his  naval  forces,  his  land  army  consisted 
of  no  less  than  a  hundred  myriads*.  And  the  rest  that  were  in  his 
fleet,  (what  in  his  men  of  war,  and  what  in  his  transport  ships,  and 

shipping  for  other  necessaries),  were  judged  to  be  no  way  ioferior  in 


364  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  SmJk  XT* 


number  to  bis  land  forces.    Therefore,  wbat  we  find  reported  concem- 
iDg  the  number  be  brougbt  with  bim  is  not  to  be  wondered  at. 

For  It  b  said,  that  great  rivers  were  drank  up  by  that  roultitndej 
and  that  the  sea  itself  was  even  covered  over  by  the  spreading  forth 
of  the  sails  of  the  ships :  so  that  the  forces  of  Xerxes  have  been 
by  all  reputed  the  greatest  that  ever  any  history  made  mention  of. 

The  Persian  army  now  encamping  at  the  riv^r  Sperchius^  Xeixct 
sent  messengers  toThermopyte,  both  to  find  out  with  what  resolution 
he  was  likely  to  be  opposed,  and  likewise  to  declare  that  the  king 
commanded  them  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  return  in  safety  to 
their  own  countries,  and  become  friends  and  confederates  to  the 
Persians;  which  if  they  yielded  to,  then  he  faitlffully  promised  that 
he  would  bestow  upon  them  both  larger  and  richer  countries  than 
those  they  then  inhabited. 

This  message  being  heard,  those  with  Leooidas  returned  this  an* 
swer-^That  they  were  in  a  better  posture  to  be  the  king's  confede* 
rates  being  armed,  than  if  they  were  disarmed;  and  if  it  happened 
that  they  must  fight,  then  they  could  more  gallantly  and  courage* 
ously  venture  their  lives  for  their  liberties.  As  for  the  countries 
which  the  king  promised  them,  they  bid  them  tell  him,  that  it  was 
not  the  manner  of  the  Grecians,  by  any  base  or  dishonourable  neans 
to  plant  themselves  in  any  country,  or  to  gain  lands  and  estates  but 
by  virtue  and  valour;  and  being  so  gained,  by  the  same  valour  to  de- 
fend them. 

Xerxes  having  received  this  answer,  presently  sent  for  Demara- 
tus  the  Spartan,  who  was  banished  from- his  country,  and  fled  to  him, 
and  in  a  scoffing  manner  asked  the  Laconian .^Whether  the  Gre- 
cians could  run  faster  than  his  horses  ?  or  whether  they  durst  en- 
gage with  so  great  an  army?  Demaratus  is  reported  to  have  answer- 
ed the  king  thus — You  are  not,  O  king,  unacquainted  with  the  va- 
lour of  the  Grecians,  forasmuch  as  your  majesty  ever  made  use  of 
them  to  reduce  your  rebellious  subjects  upon  all  occasions:  and  do 
not  think  that  these,  who  have  done  more  than  the  Persians  in  d^ 
fence  of  your  majesty's  sovereignty,  will  prove  themselves  of  less  w 
lourfor  the  preservation  of  their  own  liberties  against  the  Persians. 

At  which  words,  Xerxes  laughing  him  to  scorn,  commanded  him 
to  follow  him,  that  he  might  presently  see  the  Lacedsmonians  tak- 
ing to  their  heels. 

And  now  Xerxes  dislodging  his  army,  marched  to  the  straits  of 
Thermopyte,  placing  the  Medes  in  the  front  of  the  battle,  either  be- 
cause they  were  esteemed  men  of  greatest  courage,  or  tliat  he  de- 
sired to  have  them  all  cut  off,  for  they  were  still  proud  and  haughty  in 
regard  that  the  sovereign  power  was  not  long  before  wrested 


GSkp.  I.  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8*  3^5 

ancestora;  and  many  there  were  likewise  in  the  army  whose  kindred 
perished  in  the  battle  of  Marathoo.  Xerxes  therefore  orders  the 
brothers  and  children  of  those  that  were  shun  fai  thatbattle,  to  be 
placed  in  a  body  in  view  of  the  Medes,  conceiving  this  would  be  a 
means  to  exasperate  them  to  a  fiercer  revenge  upon  the  Grecians. 

The  Medes  therefore  being  put  in  the  front  (as  before  said)  made 
a  fierce  charge  upon  theThermopyl«an  guards.  ButLeonidas,  be« 
ing  well  prepared,  had  placed  his  men  ia  a  close  body,  in  th^  strut* 
est  part  of  the  passages:  now  both  sides  are  hotly  engaged,  for  tbd 
barbarians  having  their  king  both  the  spectator  and  witness  of  their 
valour  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  thoughts  of  danger  of  losing  of  li» 
berty,  together  with  the  commands  of  the  general  firing  the  Gre* 
cians  on  the  other,  the  fight  was  amazing.  And  now  setting  foot  to 
foot,  fighting  close  at  hand,  and  being  locked  together,  wounds  were 
given  on  both  sides,  insomuch  as  the  battle  was  doubtful  a  long  tim^ 
till  at  length  the  Grecians,  through  their  resolution,  and  the  great* 
ness  of  their  shields,  getting  ground,  the  Medes  with  mncli  acb  fell 
ofi^,  and  began  to  flag,  a  great  part  of  them  bdng  killed^  and  many 
others  wounded.  The  Medes  thus  baffled,  the  Ccsii  and  Saeis, 
(counted  excellent  soldiers)  continued  the  fight;  and.althougfa  they 
were  fresh  men  and  untouched,  against  men  almost  tired  out,  yet 
they  were  hewed  down  and  quickly  put  to  flight,  and  many  killed  by 
Leonidas's  soldiers:  for  the  barbarians  being  guarded  with' short 
shields  and  bucklers,  were  fitter  for  fighting  in  the  open  field,  (where 
they  could,  by  reason  of  the  lightness  of  their  arms,  move  as  they^ 
pleased),  than  in  a  narrow  passage,  where  they  could  not  well  touch 
the  bodies  of  their  enemies  standing  so  close  together,  and  being 
likewise  defended  with  large  shields.  On  the  other  hand,  the  bar* 
harians  being  but  lightly  armed,  lay  the  more  open  to  all  the  darts 
and  blows  of  the  assailants. 

Xerxes  now  seeing  the  passages  strewed  with  the  carcases  of  his  sol* 
diers,  and  that  the  barbarians  were  not  able  to  withstand  the  Grecian 
valour,  sent  against  them  the  chiefest  of  the  Persians,  such  as  were 
called  immortal  and  invulnerable,  men  of  £iir  stronger  bodies  than 
any  of  the  rest  of  the  army.  Of  these  the  Grecians  made  a  quick 
despatch,  for  they  fled  presently,  and  night  now  coming  on,  gave  a 
present  cessation  of  arms,  with  a  grea.t  slaughter  of  the  barbariaos^ 
few  being  lost  on  the  side  of  the  Grecians. 

Xerxes  fretting  at  the  late  misfortune  of  his  arms,  so  cross  to  hia 
hopes  and  expectations,  the  next  day  chose  out  of  all  his  regimentSj^ 
such  as  were  most  approved  for  strength  and  valour;  and  after  many 
earnest  entreaties,  he  told  tliem  that  if  they  broke  in  upon  the  Gx^^ 
cians,  and  drove  them  out  of  the  passages,  he  would  remunerate 


S66  moDORus  sicuLuft.  JBMI  Jt/. 

^_  U        ■■!■       ■      III        !■■        Ill  ■!■  I  '  I     laai^lA^M  ^ 

them  with  large  rewards,  bat  that  death  should  be  the  wages  of  them 
that  fled.  Upon  which  thej  made  a  fierce  and  violent  chaige  iti  one 
body  upon  the  army  of  the  Grecians.  The  soldiers  of  Leonidas  on 
the  other  hand  closing  together  in  a  body  like  a  strong  wall,  with  great 
resolation  resisted  the  furious  shock  of  their  adrersariea^  and  wert  m^ 
earnest  in  fight,  that  they  would  not  saflfer  the  usnal  fresh  aids  to 
succeed  to  their  assistance;  but  overcoming  all  difficulties  by  resohn 
tion,  they  beat  down  and  destroyed  most  of  the  choicest  of  the  baiha- 
rians;  every  one  striving  wlio  should  spend  most  of  the  day  itfi  ^na- 
liziog  his  own  valonr :  for  the  courage  of  the  young  men  stimalated 
the  old  and  experienced  soldiers  to  a  higher  strain  of  valour  than 
ordinary;  and  the  glory  formerly  gained  by  the  old^  stirred  up  the 
young  men  to  emulation  of  honour. 

At  length  this  brave  and  choice  army  of  the  barbarians  was  rooted 
and  put  to  flight :  in  their  flight  they  were  stopped  by  a  strong  body 
of  men  appointed  for  that  purpose,  who  drove  them  back  upon  the 
enemy,  and  so  forced  them  to  renew  the  action.  But  the  king  being 
astonished,  and  in  great  fear,  conceiving  none  durst  make  any  fonber 
attempt  upon  the  Grecians,  one  Trachinius*,  an  inhabitant  of  the 
country,  (to  whom  all  the  secret  and  by-ways  in  the  mountains  were 
by  use  very  well  known),  came  to  Xerxes,  and  promised  him  to  lead 
the  Persians  through  a  certain  strait  and  difficult  pass,  that  the  troops 
sent  along  with  him  might  come  upon  the  back  of  Leonidas  and 
his  soldiers,  and  by  this  means  the  Grecians  being  engaged  both  in 
fropt  and  rear,  might  easily  be  cut  oif. 

At  the  hearing  of  this,  the  king  greatly  rejoiced,  and  amply  re- 
warded the  Trachinian,  and  forthwith  sent  along  with  him  in  the 
night,  twenty  thousand  men.  But  one  Tyrastiades  of  Cuma^  iq 
the  Persian  army,  an  upright  man  of  honest  principles,  privately 
conveyed  himself  in  the  night  from  the  watch  or  centinels  of  the 
Persians,  and  came  to  Leonidas,  and  discovered  what  the  IVachiniaii 
had  contrived;  which  being  known,  a  council  of  war  was  called  at 
midnight,  where  they  consulted  what  was  best  to  be  done  in  the 
present  imminently  dangerous  state  of  affairs.  There  were  some 
who  were  of  opinion,  that  it  would  be  best  forthwith  to  leave  the 
passages,  and  to  return  to  the  rest  of  their  associates,  while  it  wasi 
yet  well  with  them,  for  that  they  had  no  hopes  of  safety  if  they  con* 
tinned  there. 

But  Leonidas,  the  Lacedaemonian  general,  anxious  to  obtajii 
immortal  honour  for  himself  and  his  Spartans,  commanded  all  the 
rest  to  depart,  and  reserve  themselves  for  better  times^  and  further 
assistance  to  the  Greeks  hereafter,  enjoining  only  the  Lacedsemonians 

*  Or  rather  a  TrachiQian  called  Epiiialtes.    Paoian.  1.  i,  c.  4. 


Chap.  L  DiODOttus  sicuLUS.  .  367. 

"'     ■  ■  '  .      . f    .r  ■  ■"    ■      I  ■  =s 

to  stay^  and  not  to  desert  the  defence  of  the  straits^  for  that,  it  be«* 
came  the  generals  and  commanders  of  Greece  resolutely  to  be  victo-* 
rious,  or  valiantly  to  die  upon  the  spot. 

The  council  then  breaking  up^  all  the  rest  presently  marched, 
dway;  and  Leonidas  being  now  left  upon  the  place  with  only  hi* 
citizens,  was  resolved  with  them  to  pcrforqa  wonderful  and  heroiie 
actions:  for  the  Lacedemonians  b^ing  but  very  few,  (for  he  kept  the 
Thespians  only  with  him,  so  that  all  of  them  together  did  not  expeed 
£ve  hundred  men),  he  prepared  himself  bravely  to  die  for  the  Ubwrty 
and  glory  of  Greece. 

In  the  mean  time  those  who  were  sent  with  Tracbini|}9t  led  about 
through  the  steep  passes,  had  beset  those  with  lA^mAm  oo  ev^ry 
side :  but  the  Grecians,  who  had  before  ca3t  Qflf  ^  t)ioMg|)ta  of  deli- 
verance, and  had  preferred  honour  before  jife>  WJUlKopjS  voice  desired 
their  general  that  he  would  lead  them  out  <igaipst  tbeii;  ^n^a)^,^be<or^ 
it  were  known  to  the  Persians  that  they  were  sofrggoded^. 

Leonidas  hereupon  commending  the  courage  pf  bi^  soldiers^opai^ 
manded  them  to  go  with  all  speed:  to  their  dinners,  ,v|ri|li  ^hn^^chider^ 
fulness  as  those  that  must  be  with  the  gods.  ^t.  supper;,  apd  bfli 
himself  presently  commanded  meat  to  be  brought  to  him,  ftnd.bqpa. 
eating:  for  by  this  means  he.said  they  would  be  mpre  able  tp  cm? 
dure,  and  longer  to  continue  the  dangers  and  toils  of  such  an  eqjji^ger 
ment. 

After  they  had  all  refreshed  themselves,  and  were  ready  attending- 
upon  their  general,  he  commanded  them  to  fpllow  him,  aoLdbideaking 
into  the  enemy's  camp,  to  kill  all  that  they  met,  and  proceed  to  the- 
king's  pavilion :  at  which  word  of  command,  in  oq^  body,,iQ  the 
night,  under  their  general  Leonidas,  they  rushed  into  tlie  cwip  of 
the  Persians. 

The  barbarians  being  amazed  at  so  sudden  and  unexpec^ted  an 
alarm,  every  where  ran  out  of  their  tents  in  great  disorder  and  ooO'* 
fusion;  and  supposing  that  all  those  who  were  sent  with  the  Trachi-^ 
nian  were  cut  off,  and  that  all  the  Grecian  forces  were.  aiQongst 
them,  they  were  every  where  seized  wjth  fear  and  astonishpent:  a. 
great  slaughter  was  therefore  made  amongst  them  by  the  soldiers. of 
Leonidas^  but  mucli  more  by  the  Persians  ail!iong  themselves,  they, 
not  knowing  who  was  friend  or  foe:  the  mistake  likewise  being  in- 
creased by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  in  which  none  could  be  distin- 
guished, dread  and  horror  prevailed  throughout  the  camp,  therefore, 
it  was  no  wonder  that  a.  terrible  slaughter  was  made  amongst  them : 
for  they  killed  one  another,  since  there  was  now  neither  time  nor 
place  to  be  at  any  certainty,  for  none  |(new  whose  commands,  or. 
what  captain  to  follow,  or  what  colours  or  ensigns  to  haatea  to;  but 


36s  DtODORUs  siculUs.  Soak  XT. 

their  minds  were  in  a  continual  distraction :  and  if  the  king  bad  then 
been  in  his  pavilioni  he  had  been  easily  destroyed  amongst  the  rest 
by  the  Grecians,  and  in  that  moment  had  an  end  been  put  to  so 
great  a  war:  but  Xerxes  presently,  at  the  beginning  of  the  tumult^ 
hastened,  and  speedily  got  out  of  harm's  way.  The  Grecians  break* 
ing  into  his  pavilion,  cut  off  (he  heads  of  almost  all  they  found  xhiem, 
and  diligently  sought  for  Xerxes  (while  tlie  night  favoured  them)  ia 
all  parts  of  the  camp. 

But  when  the  day  broke,  and  light  began  to  make  a  discovery^  the 
Persians  then  perceiving  the  Grecians  to  be  very  few,  began  to  deqtise 
them^  but  durst  not  advance  straight  against  them,  being  terrified  by 
their  amazing  courage. 

Therefore  they  compassed  them  round,  and  galling  them  every 
way,  both  in  the  flank  and  rear,  they  were  all  destroyed  with  darts 
and  arrows;  and  thb  was  the  end  of  those  sent  with  Leonidas  to 
guard  the  passes  in  Thermopylae,  whose  valour  who  can  sufliciently 
admire!  who  were  also  unanimous  not  to  desert  their  post  assigned 
them,  but  undauntedly  sacrificed  their  lives  for  the  common  safety  of 
Greece,  and  chose  rather  to  die  valiantly  and  in  honour,  than  to  live 
as  slaves  and  in  disgrace. 

On  the  other  hand,  this  terror  and  amazement  of  the  Persians 
cannot  but  be  very  probable,  for  which  of  the  barbarians  could  ever 
suspect  so  incredible  an  attempt?  Who  could  have  imagmed  that 
five  hundred  should  have  that  confidence,  as  without  fear  to  set  upon 
a  bundled  myriads?  So  that  we  may  conclude,  that  posterity  cannot 
but  fix  upon  these  men  as  a  pattern  and  example  of  valour  for  ever; 
who  though  compassed  about  with  inextricable  dangers,  and  wearied 
out  in  their  bodies  with  overcoming,  yet  in  their  minds  were  uncon« 
querable.  These  therefore  are  the  only  men  we  read  of  that  became 
more  famous  by  their  being  overcome,  than  others  by  their  most 
glorious  victories;  for  we  ought  not  to  judge  of  men's  virtues  by  the 
event,  but  by  their  solid  and  well-grounded  resolutions;  for  fortune 
is  the  mistress  of  the  first,  but  every  man's  reason  is  the  advocate  for 
the  other. 

For  who  can  say  there  were  ever  braver  men  than  these  ?  who, 
though  they  were  not  the  thousandth  part  of  theur  enemies,  yet  wera 
actuated  with  such  brave  spirits,  as  to  dare  to  try  their  courage  with 
an  incredible  multitude;  not  that  they  had  the  least  hope  or  ezpec? 
tation  of  overcoming  upon  so  unequal  terms,  but  resolving  with 
undaunted  resolutions  and  noble  souls  to  surpass  all  that  was  ever- 
done  in  former  ages.  They  knew,  indeed,  they  were  then  to  fight 
with  barbarians;  but  yet  they  concluded,  that  thereby  they  should  be 
sharers  in  fame  and  glory  with  all  that  ever  were  befiKt  theoi*    For 


G%l«  /.  BIODORUS  SICULUS.  3^9 

they  were  the  only  men^  since  the  memory  of  man,  that  chose  ra* 
ther  to  defend  the  laws  of  their  country,  than  to  preserve  their  owtl 
lives,  even  with  a  contempt  of  dangers  that  were  insuperable; 
judging  it  more  desirable  for  men  of  valour  so  to  signalize  them- 
selves. 

To  these  the  common  liberty  of  Greece  owes  niore  than  to  those 
that  afterwards  overcame  Xerxes  in  following  battles;  for  the  barba* 
rians  being  astonished  with  such  an  extraordinary  and  unheard-of 
attempt,  were  afterwards  much  discouraged,  and  had  little  heart  to 
fight.  The  spirits  of  the  Grecians,  on  the  other  side,  were  inflamed 
with  the  desire  of  gaining  the  like  honour  with  their  countrymen. 
To  conclude,  these  alone  seemed  to  have  borne  away  with  them  the 
hnmortal  memory  of  an  unparalleled  valour,  above  all  before  them : 
and  therefore  their  praises  have  been  set  forth  not  only  by  historians, 
but  by  many  poets,  amongst  whom,  that  famous  Milesian  poet  Simo- 
nides  has  described  this  noble  action  with  high  strains  of  commenda- 
tion worthy  of  their  valour,  thus*^ 

At  fani*d  Thf rmopybe  tliese  brave  souli  fflt  * 
Aa  hoaoorabie  death*  and  aoble  lot| 
Their  tomb  aa  altar  bean*  which  doth  rteord 
Their  anceitort;  ai^d  death  doth  life  afford 
Unto  their  fane;  nor  mst*  nor  tiilie*i  teeth  iball 
Devour  the  trophies  of  dieir  funeral. 
The  praiie  of  Grecian  heroes,  to  ouuntain 
Their  couotrjr's  freedom  that  were  8lain> 
This  chapel  doth  contain.  •••••• 

Leonidas  above  the  resti 
The  Spartan  icing  will  this  attest; 
Who  gave  proof  to  posterity. 
That  real  valour  cannot  die. 

Having  now  said  enough  of  these  gallant  men,  we  shall  return 
where  we  broke  off.    Xerxes  thus  possessed  of  the  passes,  obtained 
(according  to  the  proverb)  only  in  a  Cadmean  victory,  lost  a  great 
number  of  his  soldiers,  with  the  destruction  of  a  very  few  of  bis 
enemies,  in  comparison.     And  having  now  gained  the  straits,  and 
made  his  way  open,  he  determined  to  tr}'  his  fortune  in  a  sea-fight. 
To  that  purpose  he  forthwith  sent  for  Megabates,  the  admiral  of  his 
navy,  and  commanded  him  to  make  up  to  the  Grecian  fleet,  and  with 
the  whole  strength  of  his  navy  to  give  them  battle;  who  without 
delay  obeyed  the  king's  command :  he  departed  from  Pydna  in  Mace- 
donia, with  the  whole  fleet,  and  sailed  to  the  utmost  coasts  or  proipon-^ 
tory  of  Magnesia,  called  Sepias,  where  meeting  with  a  violent  storm 
and  tempest,  he  lost  three  hundred  of  hi^  ships  of  war,  aiid  a  great 
number  of  his  transport  ships.    When  the  stonn  WM  over,  ha  made 
You  I.  No.  SC.  MMM 


370  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  6oak  XL 

■     '  ■     '  ■-     ■       I— JJ^ 

away,  aud  arrived  at  Aphetae,  a  city  of  Magnesia.    From  thence  he 
sent  forth  three  hundred  sail^  and  commanded  the  officers  that  th^ 
should  sail  about^  and  make  to  the  right  hand  of  the  island  Eubcea, 
and  so  surround  the  enemy.    The  Grecians  in  the  mean  time  lay  at 
anchor  at  Artcmisium^in  Euboea^whose  navy  was  at  the  most  not  above 
two  hundred  and  fourscore  sail,  whereof  an  hundred  and  forty  were 
fitted  out  by  the  Atiicnians,  and  the  rest  by  the  otlier  Grecians. 
Eurybiadcs,  a  Spartan,  was  admirkl  of  the  flect^  and  Tliemistocles 
the  Athenian  took  care  of  all  other  things  relating  to  it.     This  maoj 
by  reason  of  his  singular  prudence  and  military  experience,  was  not 
only  in  great  reputation  aud  authority  with  the  Grecians  in  the  fleet, 
but  even  with  Eury blades  himself;  and  all  were  ready  at  his  com- 
mand.    When  the  sea-officers  were  in  consultation  which  was  the 
most  commodious  place  to  give  battle;  whibt  all  the  rest  were  for 
abiding  where  they  were,  and  to  receive  the  enemy  as  they  then  lay, 
only  Themistocles  was  of  a  contrary  opinion,  and  declared,  that  that 
party  ever  had  the  advantage,  who  in  good  order  made  the  first  onset 
upon  the  enemy :  for  if  they  then  in  a  body  fell  upon  the  enemy, 
who  was  at  that  time  in  disorder  and  confusion,  by  coming  out  of 
several  ports,  and  at  a  great  distance  one  from  another,  the  attack 
would  probably  be  successful  and  prosperous. 

The  counsel  and  advice  of  Themistocles  prevailing,  the  whole 
Grecian  fleet  in  order  of  battle,  set  sail  against  the  Persians,  who 
coming  out  of  their  several  ports,  as  they  were  dispersed  and  out  of 
order,  were  met  by  the  navy  of  Themistocles^  who  sunk  many  of  them, 
and  forced  as  many  more  upon  the  shore. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  fleets  of  both  parties  now  came  together, 
and  battle  joined,  some  parts  of  the  fleets  prevailed  here  and  there  on 
both  sides,  without  absolute  victory  on  either,  till  night  put  an  end 
to  the  contest.  Presently  followed  a  most  dreadful  tempest,  whereby 
many  ships  of  the  Persian  fleet  were  forced  out  of  their  harbours  and 
lost.  So  as  god  himself  seemed  to  fight  for  the  Grecians,  by  reduc- 
ing the  barbarians  to  a  less  number,  that  the  Grecians  might  be  an 
equal  match  for  them,  and  better  able  to  bear  the  brunt  of  a  sea-fight. 
Hence  it  was  that  the  (irecians  grew  more  and  more  confident  and 
courageous :  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  barbarians  ever  more  fearful 
in  all  attempts. 

But  after  the  storm  was  over,  having  again  brought  together  their 
navy,  they  made  down  upon  the  enemy,  with  their  whole  fleet:  the 
Grecians,  reinforced  with  fifty  Athenian  ships,  made  ready^  aud  uiv- 
dauntedly  received  the  barbarians.  And  here  the  manner  of  the 
fight  was  almost  like  that  at  Thermopylae,  for  the  Persians  endea- 
voured to  charge  through  the  midst  of  the  Grecians,  and  so  to  pass 


dap*!.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  3^1 


dWfci 


into  Eiiripi^^:  but  the  Grecians^  with  the  helb  of  their  con£^deratef 
ia  Euboeai  defended  the  straits;  upoaWhicli^  xheiie  'w^  again  a  ^ 
fierce  engageipent^  and  both  sidies  lost  rpany  of  their  men  c^  war: 
but  night  drawing  on  again,  both  parties  were  forced  into  th^ir^ 
harbours.  It  is  reported  that  the  Athenians  on  the  Grecian  side^ 
and  the  Sidonians  on  the  other,  conducted  themsdvBS  bravely  in 
both  battles. 

.  The  Grecians  afterwards  hearing  of  the  defeat  aod  ghughter  made 
at  Thermopylae,  and  being  certainly  informed  that  the  Persians  wejre 
marching  towards  Athens,  were  in  great  consternation,  and  therefore 
sailing  back  to  Salamis,  they  there  lay*  And  now  the  Athenians 
seeing  the  extreme  hazard  all  were  in^  who  remained  in  Athens,  put 
on  board  their  wives  and  children,  and  all  necessaries,  and  whatever 
else  they  could,  and  transported  them  into  Salamis.  Then  the  ad- 
miral of  the  Persian  fleet,  understanding  that  the  enemy  was  with- 
drawn from  their  former  station,  presently,  with  his  whole  fleets 
made  for  Eubcea,  and  there  first  takes  the  city  of  IstisBa  by  storm, 
and  razed  it,  and  then  wastes  and  destroys  the  whole  country  Ix^for^ 
him.  • 

In  the  mean  time  Xerxes  marches  from  Thermopyl®^  through  the 
confines  of  Phocia,  razes  all  the  towns  far  and  near,  and  wastes  and^ 
spoils  all  before  him. 

That  part  of  the  Phocians  who  sided  with  the  Grecians,  not  being: 
able  to  contest  with  so  great  a  multitude,  forsook  their  towns^  andf 
with  all  their  inhabitants,  betook  themselves  to  the  difficult  passages* 
and  defences  of  the  mountain  Parnassus. 

Afterwards  the  king  entering  the  country  of  the  Dorians,  forbore 
from  pillage  and  spoil,  and  commanded  that  no  injury  should  be  done 
there,  because  they  were  his  friends  and  associates.  But  part  of  his 
forces  left  th^re,  he  commanded  to  invade  Delphos,  and  to  buin  the 
temple  of  Apollo,  and  to  rob  and  carry  away  all  that  they  found  there; 
and  he  himself  in  the  mean  time,  led  the  rest  of  his  army  into  Boeo* 
tia,  and  there  encamped. 

When  those  that  were  sent  to  spoil  the  Delpliian  god  were  pd^ 
vanced  as  far  as  the  temple  of  Pkllas,  there  arose  a  sudden  s^id  iq-f 
credible  tempest,  and  storm  of  h^il  and  wind,  with  dreadful  thunder 
and  lightning,  wherewith  great  rocks  were  rent  asunder^  and  felj 
upon  the  heads  of  the  Persians^  and  destroyed  them  by  heaps.  The 
rest  that  survived,  being  terrified  with  this  portent  of  the  immortal 
gods,  ran  away  with  all  haste  and  speed,  i^nd  thus  by  divine  provi** 
dence,  the  oracle  of  Delphps  was  preserved  froni  ruia  and  robbery, 

**  The  strait  betweei^  EuIkm  mui  BoDatia. 


S73  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBook  XI. 

■  ■        |i     ■  ■         — ■ — -. .,  ■■!  ==:^=g 

They  of  Deiphos^  that  they  might  continue  the  memory  of  this  won- 
derful appearance  of  the  gods  to  posterity  for  ever^  erected  a  great 
•trophy  or  q^YUument  near  the  temple  of  Pallas^  on  which  they  en* 
griived  this  elegy 

A  grateful  gift  tA  Joyrt,  the  Delpliiani  nitt 
Hftve  rais*d,  pruud  mooument  of  victory. 
By  PkoBbui'  help,  who  Medean  baadt  confoand« 
Pr«»crv'd  the  temple  that  with  br«M  waaprown'd. 

Xerxes  passing  through  Bceotia  wasted  the  country  of  the  Thes- 
pians^ and  burnt  Platea,  forsaken  before  of  its  inhabitants. 

For  the  people  of  these  parts,  with  their  families,  and  all  their 
concerns,  had  withdrawn  themselves  into  Peloponnesus:  from  thence 
he  passed  into  Attica,  continuing  still  his  devastation  and  ruin  of  all 
things:  and  Athens  itself  he  razes  to  the  ground,  and  burns  the 
temples. 

Whilst  Xerxes  was  thus  employed,  his  fleet  (having  first  spoiled 
Eubcea  and  the  coasts  of  Attica)  loosed  from  Euboea,  and  came  to 
Attica.  About  the  same  time  the  Corcyreans  lay  about  Peloponnesusj 
with  threescore  gallies,  because  they  could  not,  as  they  pretendedy 
recover  the  cape  or  promontory  of  Malea.  But  other  writers  say^ 
that  this  was  rather  done  out  of  policy,  that  they  might  observe  how 
the  issue  of  the  war  was  like  to  succeed,  and  submit  to  the  Persians 
if  they  were  victors;  and  that  the  Grecians,  if  they  were  conquerorSj 
might  believe  they  came  so  far  in  order  to  assist  them. 

But  when  news  was  brought  to  the  Athenians  who  were  at  Salamisj 
that  their  country  was  burnt  up,aiid  the  temple  of  Pallas  laid  in  rubbishy 
they  were  extremely  grieved  and  dejected.  An  exceeding  fear  like- 
wise seized  the  other  Grecians,  seeing  themselves  besieged,  as  it  were^ 
by  the  enemy  on  every  side,  cooped  up  together  within  PelopoDDesus. 
And  therefgre  it  was  determined  that  the  leaders  and  officers  should 
consult  and  give  their  opinion  what  place  was  fittest  and  most  con- 
venient wherein  to  try  their  fortune  in  a  sea-fight  Many  and  various 
opinions  were  proposed  and  bandied  to  and  fro  in  this  matter:  the 
Peloponnesians,  as  those  who  only  minded  their  own  security,  advised 
that  the  engagement  might  be  near  the  isthmus:  for  fortifying 
the  isthmus  with  a  strong  wall>  if  things  did  not  succeed^  they 
might  presently  withdraw  themselves  into  PeloponnesuSj  as  into  a 
place  of  greatest  safety  and  defence :  but  if  they  should  be  penned 
up  in  the  little  island  Salamis^  they  should  run  into  miscbieft  iogxr 
tricable. 

But  Themistocles  advised  to  fight  at  Salamis,  for  that  within  the 
straits  they  were  sure  to  have  the  advantage,  where  they  might  fight 
with  a  few  ships  against  many.    On  the  other  handj  he  made  it  outj 


ChlV.JU  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  3^ 

that  to  fight  near  the  isthmus,  would  be  a  great  disadvantage  to  thenut 
for  they  must  fight  in  the  open  sea,  where^'the  enemy  would  have 
room  to  make  use  of  their  whole  fleet,  by  which  so  few  vessels  as  they 
bad  would  soon  be  destroyed  by  such  a  multitnde« 

These  reasons,  and  many  others  to  the  same  purpose,  in  reference 
to  the  business  in  hand,  being  seasonably  and  wisely  ofiered  by  The-' 
xnistocle*;,  brought  over  all  the  rest  to  his  opinion. 

It  being  now  therefore  determined  in  thb  general  council,  to  fight 
within  the  straits  of  Salamis,  the  Grecian  captains  with  all  speed 
prepared  themselves  for  battle  against  the  Persians :  Eurybiades^ 
therefore,  together  with  Themistocles,  began  to  encourage  the  people 
against  the  danger  approaching;  but  they  were  struck  with  such 
terror  and  fear  of  the  great  power  of  the  Persians,  that  they  regarded 
not  the  advice  or  commands  of  their  leaders  and  officers;  but  every 
one  to  save  himself,  hastened  with  all  speed  to  pass  over  from  Safai- 
mb  to  Peloponnesus. 

Neither  were  the  Grecian  forces  by  land,  seized  with  less  fear  and 
terror,  by  reason  of  the  great  power  of  the  enemy,  being  likewise 
much  dejected  by  the  slaughter  of  those  valiant  men  at  ThermopvlaBt 
and  then  the  misery  of  the  Athenians  was  ever  before  their  eyes,  wnich 
amazed  them,  and  put  a  damp  upon  all  their  hopes. 

Upon  which  the  general  council  discerning  the  tumult  and  dis- 
tracting fears  among  the  people,  made  an  order  for  the  enclosing  of 
the  isthmus  with  a  wall;  and  thereupon  many  hearts  and  hands 
joining  togetlier,  the  work  was  completed :  and  so  the  Peloponnesians 
defended  themselves  by  a  wall  drawn  out  along  from  Lechaeum*  to 
C^nclireffi,  forty  furlongs. 

But  now  the  fleet  at  Salamis  was  in  a  mutiny,  and  in  that  degree 
of  fear,  that  none  would  obey  their  officers.  Thembt'bcles  therefore 
perceiving  that  Eurybiades,  the  admiral  of  the  fleet,  was  not  regarded^ 
^nd  that  the  violence  of  the  furious  populace  could  not  be  restrained; 
and  considering,  likewise,  that  the  straits  and  difficulties  of  the 
places  at  Salamb  were  of  great  advantage  in  order  to  obtain  the  vic« 
(ory,  resolved  iipoq  this  project:  he  commanded  one  chosen  out  for 
that  purpose,  to  go  privately  as  a  deserter  to  the  king,  to  let  him 
know  that  the  Grecian^  h^d  resolved  to  pass  over  with  all  their  fleet 
from  Salamis  into  the  isthmus.  Xerxes  gave  credit  to  what  was 
related,  as  a  thing  very  prpbahle^  and  therefore  resolved,  with  ail  haste 
and  diligence,  to  prevent  the  land  and  sea  forces  of  the  Grecians 
from  joining;  and  to  that  purpose  coipmanded  the  ships  he  had  from 
Egypt,  forthwith  to  possess  themselves  of  the  straits  and  narrow 
seas  between  Salamb  and  Megarb,  and  ordered  the  rest  of  his  navy 

*  A  port  of  Corinth, 


3fI4  DIODORUS  SICULU8*  BotA  XL 

to  make  for  Salamis,  and  there  without  delay  to  fight  the  eoemfi 
The  king's  gallies  were  drawn  up  distinctly^  according  to  their  serenl 
nationsv  that  being  all  of  one  and  the  same  language^  they  mightmore 
readily  aid  and  assist  one  another. 

The  fleet  setting  forth  in  this  order^  the  Phacniciaiis  were  in  tbe 
right  wiogj  aad  the  Grecians  joined  with  the  Persians  were  pTacetf  in 
the  left.  In  the  mean  time  the  officers  of  the  lonians  sent  witb 
great  secrecy  a  certain  Samian  unto  the  Grecians^  to  acquaiDt 
them  what  the  king  determined^  and  in  what  method  snd  order 
all  things  were  hastening  forward^  and  that  they  themselves  (at 
soon  as  the  battle  should  commence)  were  resolved  to  desert  tbe 
barbarians. 

All  whicb»  when  the  Samian  had  thus  privately  discovered  to 
Eurybiadcs^  Themistocles  (his  matters  succeeding  according  to  his 
heart's  desire,  and  as  he  had  contrived)  with  great  joy  encouraged 
the  navy  to  figlit.  The  Grecians  recovering  their  spirits  at  the  mes- 
sage, sent  by  the  lonians,  and  (stirred  up  with  fresh  hope  by  the 
present  circumstances  of  affairs  to  fight)  against  their  former  deter- 
miaaidons,  loosed  from  Salamis  with  great  resolution.  And  now  the 
fleet  being  disposed  in  order  of  battle  by  Eurybiades  and  Themistocles, 
tbe  left  wing  was  committed  to  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians 
against  tl^  Phoenicians,  the  enemy's  right  wing. 

The  Phoenicians  were  at  that  time  in  great  reputation  for  maritime 
af&irs,  as  well  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  their  shipping,  as  for 
their  singular  and  antient  skill  in  navigation.  The  ^giuians>  and 
those  of  Megara,  were  placed  in  the  left  wing,  for  these  were  coa- 
ceived  (next  to  the  Athenians)  to  be  the  best  seamen;  and  it  was 
concluded  that  they  would  fight  with  the  greatest  obstini^cy  and  re- 
solution, in  regard  they  had  no  where  to  fly  with  the  rest  of  the 
Grecians,  for  security,  if  they  were  conquered.  The  centre  was 
supplied  by  the  rest  of  the  Grecians. 

Things  being  thus  ordered  and  prepared,  they  forthwith  wt  saif, 
and  possessed  themselves  of  the  straits  and  passages  between  Salamis 
and  Heraclea. 

As  for  the  king,  he  commanded  the  adtoiiral  of  his  fleet  to  attack 
the  enemy  without  delay :  and  he  placed  himself  upon  an  eminehce 
over  against  ttie  island  of  Salamis,  from  whence  he  might  see  all  the 
incidents  of  the  battle. 

The  Persians  indeed  at  the  first,  while  they  were  in  the  open  sea, 
kept  good  ordex;  but  when  they  began  to  epter  the  straits,  many  of 
the  ships  were  forced  out  of  their  order,  which  occasioned  a  great 
tumult  and  confusion  amongst  the  rest.  Then  the  admiral  who  led 
the  van,  fell  in  first  with  great  valour  upon  the  enemy,  and  was 


sudk  at  Ae 'first  eliar^,  upon  wldcli  a  gre^if  ferrdr "sejpei^dlliiB  Wliible 
fleet;  for  upon  tte  dea^i  of  the  admiFal  many  todk  uipioa  fbiSm 
to  command^  and  gave  out  leveral  and  different  orde^;  i6  Atat 
they  durst  not  proceed  Tartheij  but  tacked  about^  ieujid'  hkiat  kiva  to 


The  Athenians  perceiving  the  terror  and  confusion  of  the'hai^- 
fians,  fiercely  pursued  them ;  some  of  ^heir  ships  they  struck  fhroii|^ 
with  the  beaks  of  their  vessels^  and  brushed  off  the  oars  of  othiers :  and 
many  of  the  barbarians*  gallies,  in  the  flighty  lying  open,  with  their 
broadsides  to  the  beaks  of  the  Grecian  ships,  by  multitude  of  strokes 
were  pierced  through  and  through;  so  that  now  not  having  tinae  to 
turn  the  heads  of  their  gallies^  tliey  fled  as  well  as  tliey  could  witk 
their  oars  reversed. 

The  Phceniciansy  and  Cyprian  ships  being  now  dispersed  by  the 
Atlienians^  and  forced  to  fly,  theCilicians,  Pamphylians,  and  I^ctaos, 
who  were  next  to  them,  fought  indeed  obstinately  at 'first,  biit  when 
they  saw  the  best  and  stoutest  of  the  ships  routed,  and  making  aways 
they  hastened  out  of  the  danger. 

In  the  other  wing  the  fight  was  for  some  short  time  dMb^ill,  'die 
contest  being  vigorous  on  both  sides;  but  the  Phceniciiins  atiil'Cy* 
prians  being  driven  on  shore,  and  the  Athenians  making  heaffiqpoa 
the  others,  the  barbarians,  not  able  to1>ear  (he  shock,  fled,  and' lost 
many  of  theur  ships  in  the  flight.  And  thus  the  odble  Ghrecians  got 
a  glorious  Wctory  at  sea  over  the  barbarians. 

In  this  battle  forty  ships  of  the  Grecian  fleet  were  Tost;  biit  ihoife 
two  hundred  gallies  of  the  other  were  sunk,  besides  those  that  were 
taken  with  their  ships  and  men. 

The  king  being  thus  unexpectedly  overcomCj  in  a  rage  slew  the 
Phceniciaos,  as  the  first  that  fled;  threatening  the  rest,  that  in  doe 
time  he  would  punish  them  as  they  merited;  who,  terrified  at  the 
king's  threats,  fortliwitli  made  for  Attica^  but  theniglit  following  they 
sailed  into  Asia. 

And  now  Themistocles,  justly  esteemed  the  author  of  this  vic- 
tory at  sea,  contrives  another  stratagem,  not  inferior  to  the  for  met; 
for  the  Grecians  being  terrified,  and  not  daringtofight  at  land  against 
so  many  thousands  of  men,  he  thus  diminishes  the  forces  of  the 
^nemy. 

He  sends  his  children's  schoolmaster  to  the  king,  with  instructioqs 
to  acquaint  him  that  the  Grecians  were  hastening  with  their 'fleet  to 
the  bridge^  in  order  to  pull  it  down. 

This  message  the  king  believed,  as  very  probable,  and  thereupQi^ 
was  in  a  terrible  fright,  lest  the  Grecians,  who  had  then  the  whold 
command  of  the  seas,  should  block  up  bis  passage  into  Asia,  so  (hat 


376  DiODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book  Xf« 

m 

he  could  not  return ;  be  resolved  therefore  to  depart  with  all  speed, 
and  to  leave  Mardonius  behind  him,  with  an  army  both  of  hone  and 
foot,  coDsisting  of  no  less  than  four  hundred  thousand  men.  These 
two  pieces  of  military  policy  contrived  by  Themistocles,  crowned  the 
Grecians  with  the  renown  of  two  glorious  victories:  and  thus  stood 
the  afiairs  of  Greece.  But  now  having  declared  sufficient  for  tfe 
present^  the  things  that  were  transacted  in  Europe^  we  shall  go  on 
to  those  done  elsewhere^  in  foreign  parts* 


CHAP.  U. 

JSTotir  the  Carthaginians  invaded  Sicily,  and  were  routed  Zy 

Gelan. 

THE  Carthaginians  (as  it  was  before  agreed  between  them  and  the 
Persians,  that  they  should  at  the  same  time  set  upon  the  Greeks  m 
Sicily)  had  made  great  preparation  for  war :  and  now  all  things  being 
in  readiness,  they  chose  Amilcar  general  of  their  army,  a  man  of  great 
authority  amongst  the  citizens;  who  being  furnished  both  with  sea 
and  land  forces,  departs  from  Carthage.  The  land  army  was  no  less 
than  three  hundred  thousand,  and  his  fleet  above  two  thousand  sail, 
besides  transport  ships  for  the  carrying  of  provision,  which  were  above 
three  thousand. 

But  sailing  through  the  Libyan  sea,  by  the  violence  of  a  st^wiUf 
he  lost  his  ships  wherein  the  horses  and  chariots  were  on  boards 
and  when  he  came  to  Panormus,  the  port  of  Sicily,  he  was  htfard 
to  say,  that  there  iivas  now  an  end  of  the  war;  for  he  was  much 
afraid,  that  the  Sicilians,  by  the  favour  of  the  sea,  had  escaped 
the  danger.  There  he  lay  for  the  space  of  three  days,  refreshing 
his  army,  and  repairing  his  ships;  and  then  marched  by  land  against 
Himera,  his  fleet  sailing  over  against  him  near  the  shore. 

When  be  came  to  the  city,  he  placed  his  army  in  two  camps,  in 
the  one  his  land,  and  in  the  other  his  naval  forces.  Under  all  his 
long  ships  or  gallies,  he  caused  deep  trenches  to  be  drawn,  and  to  bt 
barricaded  round  with  timber.  His  land  forces  he  encamped  in 
front,  over  against  the  city,  extending  the  fortifications  from  the 
barricado  of  his  other  camp  to  the  hills  that  ovenopped  the  city. 
When  he  had  thus  blocked  up  the  place  on  the  west  side,  he  na- 
loaded  all. the  ships  of  burthen,  of  the  meat  and  provisfon^  and  sent 


CkMp.  It.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  3^7 

away  what  ships  he  had  left,  for  corn,  and  what  other  provisioii 
and  victuals  they  could  buy,  to  be  brought  to  him  from  Africa  and 
Sardinia :  but  he  himself  marched  towards  the  city  with  a  choice  part 
of  the  army,  and  routed  the  Himerians  that  came  forth  to  oppose  him, 
by  which  he  struck  a  great  terror  into  the  besieged. 

Hereupon  Theron,  prince  of  the  Agrigentines,  though  he  had  aid 
sufficient  with  him  for  the  defence  of  Himera,  yet  being  now  in  a 
great  fright,  sent  with  all  speed  to  Syracuse,  to  Gelon,  for  succours, 
who  being  prepared  with  hb  forces  beforehand,  and  understanding 
the  fear  the  Himerians  were  in,  without  delay,  marched  out  of  Syra* 
cuse,  with  no  less  than  fifty  thousand  foot,  and  five  thousand  horse, 
and  with  a  swift  march  came  to  Himera:  upon  which  he  revived  the 
spirits  of  the  Himerians,  and  freed  them  from  all  fear  of  the  Cartha- 
ginian army;  for  he  encamped  near  the  city>  and  fortified  himself 
both  With  a  wall  and  deep  trench,  and  then  sent  forth  all  his  horse 
to  seek  out  the  enemy,  who  were  at  that  time  dispersed,  foraging  all 
over  the  country.  These  horse  setting  upon  the  Carthaginians, 
roving  and  disorderly  dispersed,  took  as  many  prisoners  as  each  of 
them  could  carry  back;  for  above  ten  thousand  were  brought  into  the 
city :  by  which  exploit  the  authority  and  glory  of  Gelon  was  much 
advanced;  and  now  the  Himerians  begau  to  treat  their  adversaries 
with  contempt. 

Afterwards,  with  no  less  courage,  he  performed  other  things;  far 
all  the  gates  that  Tlieron  before,  for  fear  of  the  enemy,  had  built,  he 
on  the  other  hand,  in  contempt  of  the  Carthaginians,  caused  to  be 
pulled  down,  and  furnished  the  place  with  others  that  were  of  abso- 
lute necessity.  To  sum  up  all,  Gelon  being  an  expert  soldier,  and 
prudent  in  management,  set  his  head  at  work  how  he  might,  by  some 
stratagem,  deceive  the  barbarians,  and  destroy  their  forces  without 
any  danger  to  himself  or  his  army:  which  device  of  his  was  much 
forwarded  by  an  accident  that  then  happened,  for  as  things  then  stood, 
resolving  upon  burning  the  enemy's  fleet,  it  happened  that  Amilcar 
being  then  in  the  camp  with  his  navy,  preparing  for  a  great  festival^ 
day  to  Neptune,  some  of  the  horsemen  brought  to  Gelon  a  courier 
taken  in  the  fields,  who  brought  letters  from  the  Selinuntians,  in 
which  was  written,  that  they  would  send  the  horsemen  to  him  at  the 
day  that  he  had  appointed;  which  was  the  day  whereon  he  had  de« 
fcrmined  the  sacrifice:  upon  the  same  day,  therefore,  Gelon  sends 
horsemen  of  his  own,  commanding  them,  jthat  conveying  themselves 
privately  in  the  night  to  places  nearest  and  most  convenient,  as  soon 
as  it  was  day,  they  should  go  to  the  enemy's  naval  camp,  as  if  thef 
were  the  Selinuntiau  confederates,  and  being  there  receiv(ftd,  should 
first  kill  Amilcar,  and  then  set  fire  to  the  ships. 

Vol.  1.  No.  S6.  ccc 


SJS  DIODOKUS  S1CULU8.  Book  JOL 


■5E 


He  gave  moreover  in  charge  to  those  set  as  spies,  upon 
hills,  that  as  soon  as  the  horsemen  were  admitted  into  the 
tion,  they  should  give  notice  of  it  by  lifting  up  the  sigiu  And  bs 
himself  at  break  of  day,  with  his  army  drawn  up,  waited  while  Am 
sign  should  be  given. 

The  horse  being  come  to  the  Carthaginian  camp  about  0QO-rMi|^ 
they  were  admitted  by  the  watch  for  the  confederates ;  being  euiewwl^ 
without  delay  they  made  up  with  a  fierce  charge  to  AmihaMr,  ivko 
was  then  sacrificing,  and  both  killed  him  and  fired  the  sfaipn.  Aarf' 
presently  the  sign  being  given  by  the  spies,  Gelon,  with  all  iuslDiDn 
in  battalia,  rushed  into  the  camp  of  the  Carthaginians.  Whefciyoii 
the  officers  presently  drew  all  their  forces  out  of  the  camp  to  en- 
counter the  Sicilians,  and  with  ensigns  advanced,  fought  witii  gftttt 
obstinacy.  And  now  the  trumpets  in  both  armies  sounded  a ^Mfge, 
and,  in  emulation,  each  endeavoured  to  exceed  the  other  in  aoiseimd 
clamour.  In  conclusion,  great  was  the  slaugliter  on  both  sides^wMi 
little  or  no  advantage  to  either;  when  presently  the  flame  momidflg 
up  from  the  ships,  and  news  brought  of  the  death  of  the  geaeral, 
the  Grecians,  now  encouraged,  doubled  their  shouts,  in  certain  hope 
and  coii£dence  of  victory ;  but  the  Carthaginians,  altogether  discon- 
raged  and  in  despair,  betook  themselves  to  flight.  And  becsofe 
Gelon  had  commanded  that  no  prisoners  should  be  taken,  tlieshmghter 
was  very  grievous;  at  last  no  less  than  an  hundred  and  fifty  thou- 
sand were  slain.  The  rest  gained  a  place  by  nature  fortified^  and 
this  gave  the  first  stop  to  the  fury  of  the  pursuers:  but  because  they 
wanted  water,  (thrpugh  extremity  of  thirst),  they  were  forced  tode* 
liver  up  themselves  to  the  conqueror's  mercy. 

Gelon *s  name  was  now  renowned  upon  the  account  of  so  great  a 
victory  obtained  merely  by  his  own  prudent  contrivance;  andhispnuae 
was  advanced  to  the  very  heavens,  not  only  by  the  Sicilians,  but  by 
all  others.  For  I  may  truly  say,  that  we  have  no  history  of  any 
general  that  ever  before  him  put  in  execution  so  prudent  and  re* 
roarkable  a  stratagem :  or  ever  slew  more  of  the  barbarians  in  one 
battle,  or  took  so  many  prisoners.  And  therefore  some  writers  ac» 
count  this  battle  nothing  inferior  to  the  figlit  by  the  Grecians  at 
Platiea,  and  equal  this  project  of  Gelon  to  the  contrivances  and  in* 
trigues  of  Themistocles.  But  the  highest  commendaliona, (because 
they  were  both  so  remarkable  and  eminent),  are  by  some  attributed' 
to  this,  and  by  others  to  that.  For  whereas  both  the  Grecke  and 
Sicilians  before  fighting,  were  terrified  with  the  multitoddW-ffe 
barbarians,  the  news  of  Gelon's  victory  (the  Sicilians  first  prevaHihf) 
ipspired  the  Grecians  with  greater  courage.  But  the  fortune  of  the 
generals  on  either  side  was.  much  different;  for  it  is  most  oertaiiip 


'GUtf^lt  iMrMMmu9Sfei7i.ua.  379 


that  tie  Penka  king  with  umaj  thottsaoda  more  escaped  f  but  not 
only  the  geaeiak  of  the  CankagiltiaIl^  b«t  even  aU  the  whole  aroiy! 
were  so  slaughtered  and  destroyed,  that  (ai  it  iSv  reported)  not  one 
escaped  to  Carthage  to  cany  the  news  of  the  defeat.    AM,  moreover, 
that  the  most  noble  of  the  Grecian  conamanders,  Pausamas  and 
TheniistocleSy  were  most  unworthily  dealt  with,  even  by  their  own 
countrymen ;  the  one  for  his  eovetousness  and  treason^  was  killed  by 
his  felk>w  citizens,  and  the  other  (banished  Greece)  was  fM'ced  to  fly 
to  his  greatest  enemy,  Xerxes,  and  there  live  in  exile.     Gelon,  on 
the  contrary,  (after  his  success,  advanced  to  more  honour  by  the  love 
and  favour  of, the  Syracusans),  reigned  till  he  was  <dd^  and  died  ho- 
noured and  admired  by  alL    And  such  was  the  esteem  and  grateful 
remembrance  the  citizens  had  of  him,  that  the  entire  governmcBt 
was  continued  in  his  family  for  three  descents.    Those  thefefore 
^who  have  thus  highly  merited,  challenge  from  us  likewise  their  due 
honour  and  praise.    But  to  return  where  we  left.    The  same  dajr 
that  GeloD  routed  the  Carthaginians^  Leonidas,  at  Thermopyl»,  with 
his  Grecians,  broke  into  the  camp  of  Xerxes  with  more  than  ordinary 
valour;  as  if  the  gods,  on  purpose,  had  contrived  and  eflected,  at  one 
and  the  same  moment  of  time,  a  glorious  victory  in  one  place,  and 
an  honourable  death  for  the  Grecians  in  another. 

After  the  fight  at  Himera,  twenty  long  ships,  which  Amilcar  had 
drawn  out,  occasionally  for  necessary  services,  made  their  escape, 
and  only  they  of  the  whole  army,  made  an  attempt  to  return  to  their 
own  country,  the  rest  being  either  killed  or  taken.  But  being 
overloaded  with  the  multitude  of  them  that  fled,  and  meeting  with 
cross  winds  and  tempests,  they  were  all  shipwrecked  and  lost,  save 
only  a  few  that  escaped  in  a  small  boat,  and  arrived  at  Carthage;  and 
there  with  a  doleful  cry  declared  how  all  the  army  that  was  carried 
over  into  Sicily,  was  destroyed? 

The  Carthaginians  were  so  terrified  with  the  unexpected  slaughter 
of  their  men,  that  they  all  watched  niglK  and  day,  for  the  guard  of 
the  city,  as  if  Gelon  had  been  just  then  ready  to  enter  into  Carthage 
with  his  whole  army.  The  number  of  those  that  were  slain  aflected 
the  whole  city  with  lamentations;  and  private  iiouses  and  families 
were  full  qf  tears  and  complaints,  while  some  inquired  after  their 
children,  others  after  their  brothers:  a  great  number  of  orphans  now 
bereft  of  their  parents,  with  miserable  cries  bewailed  botti  their  deaths, 
and  their  own  misery,  who  were  now  UH  naked  and  destitute  of  those 
that  should  take  cure  of  them. 

The  Carthaginians  therefore  fearing  kst  Gelon  should  hasten  into 
Africa,  sent  unto  him  plenipotentiaries,  men  both  of  ipreat  eloquence 
and  discretion. 


380  mODORUS  SICULU8. 

■  ''■'■■■  ■  ■   ' 

lo  the  mean  time  be  honourably  rewarded  the  honcoieo  tkat  d» 
stroyed  Amilcar;  and  upon  all  others  that  had  done  any  tmumAdk 
service^  he  bestowed  the  marks  of  his  favour.  Hie  ehiefctl  of  tki 
spoils  he  kept  himself,  with  an  intent  to  dedicate  them  as  anuuBCirii 
to  the  temples  at  Syracuse:  many  of  the  rest  he  gave  to  be  aet  opii 
the  temples  of  the  Himerians:  what  remained^  together  wiA  thi 
captives,  he  distributed  amongst  his  soldiers,  proportionably  to  efoy 
one's  merit.  And  those  captives  that  fell  to  the  share  of  the  ciik^ 
were  in  all  those  places  (with  their  legs  shackled)  employed  id  puUb 
works,  for  the  common  good.  They  of  Agrigentum  having  oblaiMl 
many  captives  for  their  share,  enriched  both  their  city  and  «MNiiiti| 
round  about  with  their  labours ;  for  they  had  so  many  prisooeEBf  that 
many  of  the  private  citizens  Iiad  five  hundred  a-piece. 

And  the  multitude  of  their  captives  and  slaves  was  advanoed,  BOt 
only  because  they  sent  great  assistance  to  the  war,  but  likewise  by 
reason  that  many  of  the  barbarians,  when  their  army  was  routed^  fled 
up  into  the  midland  and  borders  of  Agrigentum,  who  being  all  taken 
alive,  filled  the  city  with  prisoners.  The  greatest  portion  were  set  apart 
for  the  public  service,  and  appointed  to  cut  and  hew  stone^  of  whidi 
they  not  only  built  the  greatest  of  their  temples,  but  made  wates- 
courses  or  sinks  under  ground,  to  convey  water  from  the  city,  so  great 
and  wide,  that  though  the  work  itself  was  contemptible,  yet  when 
done  and  seen,  was  worthy  of  admiration.  The  oveiseer  and  master 
of  the  work  was  ode  Pheax,  an  excellent  artificer,  from  whom  these 
conduits  were  called  Pheaces.  The  Agrigentines  likewise  sunk  a 
fish^pond^  at  great  cost  and  expense,  seven  furlongs  in  compass,  and 
twenty  cubits  in  depth. 

Into  this,  water  was  brought  both  from  fountains  and  rivers,  and 
by  that  means  it  was  sufikicntly  supplied  with  fish  of  all  sorts, 
both  for  food  and  pleasure.  And  upon  this  pond  there  fell  and 
rested  a  great  multitude  of  swans,  which  gave  a  most  pleasant  and 
delightful  prospect  to  the  eye;  but  by  the  neglect  of  succeeding 
»ges,  it  grew  up  with  mud,  and  at  last,  through  length  of  time,  be- 
came entirely  dry  ground.  But  the  soil  there  being  very  fat  and  rich, 
they  have  planted  it  with  vines,  and  rcplenbbed  it  with  all  sorts  of  trees, 
which  yields  to  those  of  Agrigentum  a  very  great  revenue. 

When  Gelon  Iwd  dismissed  his  confederates,  he  marched  back 
with  his  army  to  Syracuse. 

And  for  his  notable  victory  he  was  not  only  held  in  great  honour 
and  esteem  by  his  own  citizens,  but  even  by  all  the  Sicilians^  for  he 
got  so  many  prisoners  and  slaves,  that  the  island  appeared  to  have  all 
Africa  under  her  dominion. 

Ambassadors  came  continually  from  all  the  cities  and  princes  of 


Cktfk  IL  nfODokus  siculus.  3tl 

the  adverse  party,  begging  pardon  for  their  error,  and  promising  ob« 
•emoice  to  all  his  commands  for  the  future.    But  as  for  Gelon,  be 
earned  himself  with  great  complacency  towards  all,  and  entered  into 
m  league  with  them;  and  in  the  time  of  his  prosperity,  behaved  him- 
•elf  with  great  modesty  and  humanity,  not  only  towards  the  Sictfians^ 
but  even  towards  his  most  implacable  enemies,  the  CarthaginiaQS.  . 
For  when  ambassadors  came  from  Carthage,  with  many  tears  bc^ 
giog  his  fiivour,  he  received  them  very  courteously,  and  made  peace 
with  them,  upon  condition  that  they  should  pay  two  thousand  talents 
of  silver,  for  the  expenses  of  the  war;  and  that  they  should  btiuld 
two  temples*,  where  the  articles  of  the  league  might  be  kept  as  sa* 
cred.    The  Carthaginians  being  thus  safe  beyond  their  hopes,  freely 
consented  to  the  demands,  and  promised  a  crown  of  gold  to  Demareta, 
the  wife  of  Gelou :  for  by  making  their  addresses  unto  her,  she  was 
chiefly  instrumental  for  the  procuring  of  the  peace.     And  after  she 
received  the  crown  from  the  Carthaginians,  which  was  of  the  value  of 
an  hundred  talents  of  gold,  Gelon  coined  it  into  money,  and  called 
it  from  her,  Demaretium,  every  piece  worth  ten  Attic  drachmas, 
called  likewise  by  the  Sicilians,  Pentecontralitrons,  from  their  being 
fifty  pounds  in  weight 

Gelon  carried  himself  thus  graciously  to  all,  chiefly  prompted 
thereunto  by  his  own  generous  disposition,  yet  not  without  some 
design  to  engage  all  by  kindness.    For  he  had  a  purpose  to  pass  with 
his  army  over  into  Greece,  and  to  join  with  them  against  the  Per- 
sians: but  when  he  was  ready  to  transport  his  fleet,  messengers  from 
Corinth  brought  him  the  news  of  the  victory  by  the  Grecians  at 
Salamis,  and  that  Xerxes  with  a  great  part  of  his  army  had  left  Eu* 
rope.    Upon  which  news  he  altered  his  resolution,  and  commending 
the  forwardness  of  hiis  soldiers,  called  a  general  assembly,  with  a 
command  that  all  should  meet  armed :  he  himself,  when  the  assembly 
was  met,  came  in  amongst  them,  not  only  without  any  arms,  but 
without  a  tunic,  covered  only  with  a  cloak  or  mantle,  and  in  a  speech 
set  forth  the  whole  course  of  his  life  and  actions  to  the  Syracusans; 
the  people  giving  evident  testimony  of  their  approbation  to  every 
word  that  he  said,  and  admiring  that  he  should  so  expose  himself 
amongst  armed  men,  to  the  will  of  every  person  that  might  have  a 
design  against  his  life;  every  one  was  so  fer  from  offering  him  any 
violence,  as  a  tyrant  who  had  oppressed  them,  that  all  with  one  voice 
proclaimed  him  their  benefactor,  their  king,  and  the  deliverer  of 
their  country. 

*  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  iaji»  twa  arntd  ihtpi,  u  plcdgM  of  tbt  peace;  wbtdi  I 
iBCline  unto. 


Sift  DioDOKus  sicuLVf •  JboA  EK 


After  these  things,  be  built  two  magDificeBt*  teapleiy  ont  I0 
aod  another  to  Proserpina,  out  of  the  spoib;  and  caused  a  tripoA  It 
be  made,  of  sixteen  talents  of  gold,  which  he  decficatedaa  A  tdum  af 
bis  gfatitttde  to  Apollo  at  Delphos.  He  afterwards  determuMd  ta 
build  a  tennple  to  Ceres  in  mount  Etna,  which  so  far  proceeded^ 
as  that  the  image  of  the  deity  was  placed  in  her  shrine)  but  hf 
death  he  was  interrupted  in  his  design,  and  the  work  naa  left 
imperfect.  About  this  time,  Pindar  the  lyric  poet  flourishedMMk 
And  these  are  all  the  things  that  were  done  this  yeai:  voftby  af 
$ny  remark. 


<mm*m 


CHAP.  HI. 

77tc  victory  of  the  Greeks  over  Mardmius  at  Plai€ett, 

XANTI FPUS  being  archon  of  Athens,  and  Quintus  Fabiaa  Vibv* 
lanus  and  Serrius  Cornelius  Cossus,  Roman  consuls,  the  Piersian 
fleet,  (all  but  the  Phcenicians),  after  the  battle  at  Salamis,  lay  about 
Cuma:  and  there  continuing  all  winter,  at  the  spring  passed  over  to 
Samos,  to  guard  the  coasts  of  Ionia:  the  fleet  consisted  of  four  ban* 
dred  sail ;  and  because  they  were  jealous  of  the  lonians,  they  kept  a 
strict  eye  upon  the  cities  there. 

In  Greece,  u|)on  the  great  success  at  Salamis,  which  was  chiefl|y 
owing  to  the  valour  and  conduct  of  the  Athenians,  all  were  of  opi« 
nion  that  the  Athenians  (being  lifted  up)  would  now  contend  widi 
the  Lacedemonians  for  the  dominion  of  the  seas;  and  this  theLaee* 
demonians  foresaw,  and  therefore  used  all  their  arts  and  endeavonra 
to  keep  them  under.  And  for  that  reason,  when  they  were  to  take 
notice  of  the  noble  actions  in  that  fight,  and  to  distribute  rewards 
accordingly,  the  LacedsBmonians  prevailed  by  their  interest,  that  the 
honour  of  the  day  should  be  given  to  them  of  iGgina,  and  among 
the  Athenians  to  Amynias,  the  brother  of  >£schyltts  the  poet ;  bceanae 
that  he  being  general  of  the  galUes,  first  charged  the  admiral  of  tho 
Persians,  and  sunk  both  him  and  his  ship  together. 

But  when  the  Athenians  shewed  their  resentment  that  they  were 
so  undeservedly  slighted,  the  Lacedaemonians  were  afraid,  lest  The* 
mistoclcs  (being  provoked  with  the  indignity)  should  contrive  some 
considerable  mischief  against  them  and  the  rest  of  the  Grecians  j 


thardfHre  to  stop  liis  mouth,  ttieyreviirded  faidi  drably^  above  all 
the  rest.  Bat  when  the  people  of  Atheos  oadersteod  tbet  he  had 
aeeepted  what  was  girea  him,  they  were  iiTueh  incensed,  and  removed 
kiai  horn  his  phuse  as  general,  aad  put  Xantippus,  of  the  family  of 
Aripbroa,  ia  his  stead« 

jlind  now  the  distaste  given  by  the  Grecians  to  the  Athenians  behig 
appead  abMad,  aaibessadors  «aroe  to  Atliens,  both  from  the  Persiane 
snd  the  Grecians,  The  Persian  ambaasadors  spoke  to  thVi  effects 
^^  That  if  the  Athenians  would  side  with  the  Persimis,  they  ahauM 
kave  what  part  of  Greece  they  should  choose;  that  Mardoaius,  the 
PersiaB  general,  would  rebuild  their  walls  and  their  temples;  and 
tAiMt  the  city  should  have  and  enjoy  ia  former  laws  and  liberties. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Lacedsemontaa  ambastedors  eamesfly^otre^ed 
them,  that  they  would  not  make  any  league  with  the  barbarians,  but 
preserve  their  ancient  amity  with  the  Grecians,  being  so  near  to  them, 
both  in  nation  and  language/' 

To  the  barbarians  the  Athenians  gave  this  return ^*  That  the 

Persians  had  no  country  so  rich,  nor  gold  so  lieavy,  whidi  eeuU 
tempt  them  to  forsake  tlieir  confederates  the  Grecians  in  their  neces^ 
sity."  And  to  the  Lacedfemonians  they  commanded  answer  to  be 
given  _^'  That  as  heretofore  their  care  had  been  to  preserve  Greece, 
so  for  the  future,  to  their  utmost  endeavour,  they  would  defend  it. 
And  in  the  mean  time,  desired  that  they  would  forthwith  with  all 
their  forces  pass  into  Attica,  in  regard  it  was  very  apparent,  Aat 
Mardonius,  wlien  he  came  to  understand  tlie  Athenians  to  be  so  re- 
solved against  him,  would  invade  Atliens  with  all  liis  force:"  and  so 
it  came  to  pass,  for  Mardonius  encamping  in  Boeotip,  first  endea- 
voured to  draw  the  cities  of  Peloponnesus  to  a  defection,  by  sending 
monies  here  and  there  to  the  governors  and  chief  men.  And  iiftier- 
wards,  when  he  received  tlie  answer  returned  him  by  the  Athenians, 
he  raged  like  a  madman,  and  forthwith  marched  with  all  his  armylnto 
Attica.  For  besides  those  which  Xerxes  left  with  him,  he  raised  many 
out  of  Thrace  and  Macedonia,  and  other  confederate  cities,  to  the 
number  of  two  hundred  thousand  men,  and  upwards. 

And  now  Attica  being  invaded  by  so  great  a  muhitude,  the  Athe« 
nians  sent  messengers  to  the  Spartans,  and  desired  their  aid,  who  were 
so  slow  that  the  enemy  violently  broke  in  upon  the  country,  so  tha<. 
the  Athenians  were  reduced  to  great  straits,  and  now  a  second  time/ 
with  their  wives  and  children,  and  all  other  things  that  they  could  in* 
tliat  distraction  and  hurry  carry  away,  left  their  country,  and  'fled  tia 
Salaniis.  ,        *. 

Mardonius^  greatly  enraged,  destroyed  and  wasted  all  the  country, 


384  MODORVS  8tCULUS« 

=agaae'    '    ■  ■;    '       "  gaggggaaMBgas 

levelling  the  city  with  the  ground^  and  utterly  dcmoiishing  all  tte 
temples  which  were  left  untoached  in  the  former  desoiation^ 

Upoahis  thus  returning  to  Athens  with  his  forces,  it  was  doltf* 
mined  in  the  general  assembly  of  the  Grecians*,  that  they  wovldiH 
join  with  the  Athenians,  and  march  to  Platsea,  and  there  give  litfsiit 
to  the  Persians  for  the  liberty  of  their  country.  And  made  solcaui 
¥ows  to  the  gods,  that  if  they  became  victorious,  they  would  celebrate 
and  set  apart  a  festival«day,  and  institute  sports  to  the  goddess  lir 
bertas,  at  Plataea* 

At  the  general  rendezvous  in  Peloponnesus,  they  took  ail  oath  to 
oblige  one  another  to  the  prosecution  of  the  war,  to  the  end  their 
league  might  be  inviolably  observed,  and  that  all  difficulties  might  br 
undergone  with  undaunted  courage.  The  form  of  the  oath  wsat 
tbus.*.^'  I  will  not  prefer  life  before  liberty :  I  will  not  desert  aqr 
officers,  whether  they  live  or  die;  but  that  I  will  bury  my  fellow- 
soldiers  that  shall  fall  in  the  war,  how  many  soever  they  may  be* 
If  I  be  victorious  in  this  war,  I  will  not  destroy  or  spoil  any  city  of 
my  confederates.  I  will  not  rebuild  any  of  the  temples  thai  ani 
burnt  or  ruined,  but  leave  them  as  monuments  to  posterity,  of  the 
impiety  of  the  barbarians/* 

When  they  had  thus  sworn,  they  marched  over  the  moontain 
Cithseron,  into  Boeotia,  and  encamped  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  near  the 
city  Erythrae.  Aristides  was  the  commander  of  the  Athenians,  and 
Pausanias,  the  tutor  of  Leonidas,  (who  was  under  age),  was  general 
of  the  whole  army. 

When  Mardonius  understood  that  the  enemy  was  entered  Boeotia, 
he  marched  from  Thebes,  and  pitched  his  tents  at  the  river  .£sopus, 
and  fortified  himself  with  a  deep  trench,  enclosing  his  camp  round 
with  a  wall  of  timber.  The  Grecians  were  an  hundred  thousand, 
but  the  Persians  were  five  hundred  thousand.  The  barbarians  bq;Bn 
the  fight,  who  all  the  night  long,  roving  up  and  down  with  all  their 
cavalry,  set  upon  the  Grecians  in  their  camp:  the  first  that  felt  the 
brunt  were  the  Athenians,  who  forthwith  in  good  order  valiantly  op- 
posed them ;  so  that  the  fight  was  very  hot.  At  length  the  rest  of  the 
Grecians  put  all  to  flight  that  made  the  onset  on  them;  only  the  Ma* 
garepsians,  who  had  to  deal  with  the  general  and  best  of  the  Persian 
horse,  were  over-pressed,  yet  gave  no  ground,  but  sent  with  all  speed 
to  the  Athenians  and  the  Lacedaemonians  for  succours.  Whei^ 
Aristides  was  informed  of  their  distress,  he  immediately  sent  the 
chief  of  such  Athenians  as  were  then  about  him,  to  their  aid;  who 
joining  with  the  others,  made  such  a  charge  upon  the  barbarians, 

*  At  tbe  ittbmuj. 


Cktp*  IB.  DiODomus  8ICU1U8.  585 

that  they  soon  freed  the  Megarensunw  from  tbeir  dangen,  killiDg  the 
general  of  the  Peiaian  horse,  with  many  others,  and  put  the  rest  to 
flight. 

This  happy  success  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  filled  the  Grecians 
^th  hope  of  absolute  victory  in  the  conclusion.  Afterwards  they 
removed  their  camp  out  of .  the  plain,  next  under  the  foot  of  the 
mountain^  into  another  place  more  convenient  fat  obtaining  a  perfect 
victory.  For  on  theur  right  iiand  was  a  high  hill,  and  on  their  left 
the  river  Asopus,  for  their  defence.  Between  these  two  they  en* 
camped,  thus  guarded  by  a  natural  fortification.  The  straitness  of  the 
place  thus  chosen  by  the  Grecians,  was  of  great  advantage,  and  did 
much  conduce  to  the  victory :  for  the  Persians  could  not  enlaige  their 
firont  as  otherwise  they  might,  by  reason  whereof  so  many  thousands 
of  the  barbarians  became  useless  and  unprofitable.  The  generals  Pku* 
sanias  and  Aristides  having  now  so  fiiir  an  opportunity,  drew  out  their 
forces,  and  advanced  in  battalia,  as  the  ground  would  permit. 

Mardooius,  on  the  other  hand,  being  forced  to  march  up  in  a  close 
body,  drew  up  his  men  to  the  best  advantage  he  could  devise,  and 
with  a  great  shout  meets  the  Grecians,  and  with  the  choicest  of  his 
men,  who  were  his  life-guard,  makes  the  first  charge  upon  the  Lace* 
dsemonians,  who  were  placed  in  front  to  receive  him.  He  fought 
with  a  high  resolution,  and  made  great  slaughter  amongst  the 
Greeks ;  but  the  Lacedamooians  stoutly  stood  their  ground,  con* 
temning  all  danger,  and  they  destroyed  likewise  multitudes  of  the 
barbarians,  who  (as  long  as  Mardonius  was  at  the  head  of  the  army) 
received  the  attack  with  great  courage;  but  as  soon  as  he  fell, 
(valiantly  behaving  himself),  and  that  they  discerned  the  choicest 
of  the  army  with  him  were  all  either  killed  or  wounded,  their  hearts 
failed,  and  they  betook  themselves  to  flight,  and  were  as  hotly  pur* 
sued  by  the  Grecians;  however,  the  most  of  them  got  within  the 
timber  wall.  The  rest  (being  Grecians  that  sided  with  Mardonius) 
fled  to,  and  sheltered  themselves  within  the  walls  of  Thebes.  The 
remainder  of  the  army,  to  the  number  of  forty  thousand  and  up- 
wards, fled  another  way,  with  Artabazus,  a  man  of  great  account 
amongst  the  Persians,  who  came  with  them  back  by  a  shorter  cut 
into  Phocis. 

The  dispersion  of  the  Persians  caused  the  forces  of  the  Grecians 
likewise  to  be  scattered,  and  divided  into  several  parties:  for  the 
Athenians,  Piateans,  and  Thespians,  fiercely  pursued  those  that  fled 
to  Thebes.  The  Corinthians,  Sicyonians  and  Phliasians,  and  some  few 
others,  followed  close  upon  the  back  of  those  that  fled  with  Artabazus. 
The  Lacedaemonians  with  the  rest  of  the  army,  besieged  and  assault- 
ed those  that  were  forced  within  the  wall.  The  Thebans  receiving  thosa 

Vol.  1.  No.SS.  VVm 


k  ■•  r"  "  .-  m 


3&8^  .  moeonvtt 


iiiU 


»    •  t 


**  * 


thalftedyissuedfovdi^  aadjtmod  with  them  ^jMtttlwA^^ 
pdnaers^  U|»oii  which  tfaeiv  w— .afitixgemAhliiiiily  l%h< *irfiw<iii 
city  walls,  the  Thebans  bravely  standing  to  it^  so  that  muxf 
Idlkd  tiki  'both  8idc8,  but  «t  leogtb  the  Atfacntan-oouagi^l* 
Tbebani  hwuM  iitto,tbe>«it]ri 

Then  the  iWihekiian»  martbed  bnck  to  the] 
aht}joiiled''Witfr  tbeinJn  aesauhing  the  Peniiaoa  witbin^batwUlli 
the  fight  was  tMimaioed^with  great  obstinacy  oai  bofthiidail  llit 
tenr iiins  on  the  one  liand>  Within  a- place  erf  alrangCh 
selves  with  great  courage,  and  the  Grectana'  on  the  echai^i 
their  itfight,  endeavouring  to  force  the  Walt,  the  ftghl 
withoutregard  or  fear  of  death ;  so  that  many  were 
great  numbers,  whh  ishowefs  of  darts  were  there  sbdOtf 
tKe  wallj  though  strongly  fortified,  nor  the  nuflober  oMiefaailMHai% 
could  withstand  the  fierce  assault  of  the  GreeiaiMii  bai 
was  in  their  way,  they  bore  down  all  before  theoh  The'i 
generals,  the  Lacedesmonians,  and  *  Athenians,  oufe  of 
desire  of  glory;  strove  to  exceed  each  other,  eocouniged  'ki4^l|| 
their  former  victories,  and  urged  forward  by  their  own 
lour.  At  length  the  Persian  camp  was  entered- and  takeavbyi- 
and  though  the  barbarians  cried  for  quarter,  yet  they  feond  ne 
For  Pausanias  considered  the  great  number  of  the  eaetliyy  inaoaiMh 
as  he  was  afraid*  lest  through  their  number,  (which  far  eseeeded  At 
Grecians)  some  unexpected  and  sudden  mischief  should*  hapyai^ 
and  therefore  commanded  that  they  should  take  no  {msonerai.  Where* 
upon  an  incredible  slaugliter  was  made  in  a  short  timoi  amd^wii 
scarce  endi^d,  when  more  than  an  hundred  thousand-  wnre  abeedy; 
put  to  the  sword. 

When  the  battle  was  ended,  the  Grecians  applied  themeelvce  le* 
the  burying  of  their  dead,  which  were  above  ten  tboofaod*  Tke» 
they  divided  the  spoil  amongst  the  soldiers^  and  appointed  jaJjgiieait 
to  be  given  concerning  every  thing  that  was  done  with  moTMiMMriib 
dinary  valour  and  cournge  in  that  wan  By  the  decreefof  Chatitid% 
aYnongst  the  cities,  the  greatest  honour  was  attribated  tO'S)perCe|ted 
amougst  the  men,  to  Pausanias.  '.•>.. 

In  the  mean  time  Artabazus  with  swift  marches  passed'  thiiiiMph 
Phocis  ihto  Macedonia,  with  those  forty  thousand'  P^lane  thsTwd 
with  him,  and  brought  them  all  over  safe  into  Asia.  TheOnieMe 
dedicated  a  tenth  of  the  spoils,  and  made  thereof  a  tripod  df  |{BMt 
and  placed  it  in  the  temple  of  Delphosy  and'  enj^nved  v/ffati  V 
this  elegy '  '.  •:  . 

The  stoat  defenderf  of  ff%9t  Greece  this  |«vt> 
From  bondage  when  iU  cities  thisj  did  tiYe. 


XSUyi.  tV.  DIODORU8  8ICU  LU«f 


And  another  was  cDgravea  by  the  commoo  confent  of  all,  to  the 
bonour  of  those  Laeetemooians  who  died  at  TherinopyhB>  aothefe 


Of  Pdopi  oottotrj  ooce  Umit  UioaMiid  bimv« 
Meo,  to  two  miJliooi  buc  repuife  once  gate. 

Aad  another  by  a  private  hand  thus.^ 

0«od  ilnuigar  tell  the  SfMitant  bera  ««  He, 
ScomJj  their  \%m%  while  we  Bainteimia  die. 

After  the  same  maDoer  did  the  people  .of  Athens  adorn  the  aepol- 
cbres  of  those  that  fell  in  the  Persian  war;  and  then  were  first  insti- 
tuted the  funeral  games,  and  a  law  was  then  made,  that  thevaloroos 
exploits  of  those  that  were  buried  at  the  pablic  charge  of  theeity^ 
alioold  be  thenceforth  set  out  by  the  best  of  their  ofators. 

Afterwards  Piaosaoiaa  the  general,  causing  all  his  army  to  return 
to  dieir  several  colotirs,  marched  against  the  Thebans,  and  requited 
the  first  authors  of  the  defection  to  the  Petsians,  to  be  delivered  up  to 
-jnstice.  The  Thebans  being  diseounged  both  with  the  moltitnde 
*aiid  valour  of  their  enemies,  the  chief  autliors  of  tbe  confiederacy 
with  the  Persians  yielded  themMlves  up-  to  .ncrcyy  and  were  all  pat 
to  the  sword  by  Pansaav 


CHAP.  IV. 

Of  the  fight  with  the  Pernam  by  the  Qreeiam  m  Jmtia  mi 

3fycmle. 

THE  same  day  that  the  battle  was  fought  at  Pbtsea^  there  was  another 
great  fight  with  the  Persians  in  Ionia,  which  I  shall  relate  from  the 
b^inning* 

Leotychides  the  Lacedsnnoniao,  and  Xantippus  the  Athenian^ 
ifdmirals  of  the  navy,  after  tlie  battle  at  Salamis,  came  with  their 
Aeet  to  JEpuAf  where  staying  some  few  days,  they  sailed  thenee 
to  Delos,  with  two  hundred  and  fifty  gallies.  While  they  staid 
-there,  nrohassadors  came  to  them  ftom  Samos,  entreating  that 
they  would  be  assistant  to  the  inhabitants  of  Asia,  to  regaio  their 
liberty. 

Leotychides  hereupon  calling  a  council  of  war,  it  was  there  deter- 
'■lined  to  assist  them )  and  to  that  end,  witb-all  epecdj  they  departid 


S88  DIODORUS  StCVLVI. 

II        I      ■     I      IIB^I^MMMPt— ^W—li^l—— ————*—*— r 

from  Delos.    The  officers  of  the  Persho  feet  Wag  AmM^ 

tnd  hearing  of  the  espeditbo  the  OiedMMr  IbH 

departed  from  Samoswith  their  whole  fleet,  and  came 

in  Ionia,  and  judging  tbemaelves  not  atroi^  enouilh  to 

the  Greeians,  they  hauled  all  their  ships  on  shore,  and 

them  both  with  a  wall  and  a^eep  trench.    And  in  fk0^ 

they  sent  with  all  speed  for  land  forcet  Irom  Smrikf  aad 

neighbooring  places,  to  diat  a  hundred  thousand  men  wevs 

mustered  together,  and  they  prooored  all  other  thipgs 

the  war,  as  far  as  was  possible,  being  jealoos  diattha 

leady  to  revolt.  .  n  •  tta. 

Leotyehides  with  his  whole  fleet  well  piwrided,  sailed  nirtmstKi^ 
course  against  the  barbarians  at  Mycale,  and  sent  lie&Nni>Uai:mal|i|^ 
with  an  herald  or  crier  in  it,  one  of  greater,  voioe  than  aay^f.llmrsnsl 
of  hb  army,  and  gave  him  in  chaige,  that  vriien  he 
enemy,  he  should  proclaim  with  a  loud  voicc^That  dm 
had  routed  the  Persians  at  Fbtsm  were  now  at  Innd^  ffBiils«A^ 
store  the  Greek  cities  in  Asia  to  their  liberty;  which  wa»j 
those  w|th  iieotychides,  because  they  conceived  that 
the  Grecians  in  the  army  of  the  Persians  would  jeuolc, 
mult  and  dis<Nrder  would  be  made  amongst  them;  which 
accordingly. 

As  soon  as  the  crier  came  up  to  the  Perrian  fleet,  and  liad 
bis  commands,  the  Persians  grew  jealous  of  the  Grecians,  and  AsT 
Grecians  began  to  consult  together  of  a  revolt.  The  officers  of  tiis 
Grecian  fleet  having  well  deluited  and  considered  all  ihiogs  rrlalini 
to  tlie  present  affiur,  landed  their  forces.  The  next  day,  when  all 
things  were  ready  for  the  onset,  a  rumour  was  on  a  suddeniqMad  to 
the  airmy,  tliat  the  Grecians  bad  overcome  the  Persians  at  Pktw, 
Upon  which,  Leotyehides  and  his  colleagues  drew  up  the  army  in  a 
body,  encouraging  them  to  fight,  making  use  ^several  argumoatits 
that  purpose,  and  withal  singing  among  them  so^gs  of  tliciidetDi|taC 
Plat^ea,  thereby  the  more  to  stir  up  and  inflame  their  spirits  .tsi'<lhe 
present  encounter.  But  the.circttmstances  of  affidrs  weTe^hsaa  vsij 
•  remarkable;  for  it  is  certain  that  both  armies  fought  on  iMMiMidit^ 
same  day;  the  one  at  Mycale,  and  the  other  at  Platauib  JThenkn 
since  Leotyehides  could  not  then  know  any  thing  of  the  .ligauy  at 
Platssa,  we  may  conclude  that  this  nrrnrt  urss  n  iitrati^m  iMsrntiitif 
him  on  purpose;  especially  when  we  consider,  that  from  the] 
distance  of  places,  the  news  could  not  possibly  arrive  in 
time.  But  the  Persians  now  no  longer  eonfiding  in  tfajsi 
took  away  their  arms,  and  delivered  them  to  their  eoiiMaiM%i4Ml 


Cbop.  IF.  moDORUs  sicuLUS.  399 

cneoariged  their  toMicn,  telling  them  thit  Xerset  wis  at  hud 
with  a  great  army  for  their  aasistance^  whereby  they  nised  up  their 
•liiritB. 

Both  armies  being  now  drawn  up  in  battalia^  and  advanciog  one 
towards  the  other,  when  the  Perrians  saw  the  inconsiderable  number 
cff  the  Greciansi  they  despised  them,  and  forthwith  chaiged  upon 
them  with  a  great  shout.    In  the  mean  time  the  Samiaos  and  Bfile- 
flinns  determined  to  assist  the  Grecians^  with  all  the  strength  they 
could  make,  and  to  that  end  with  a  swift  march  made  towards  th* 
enemy.    And  the  lonians  conceif  ed  that  when  they  came  in  s^t  of 
she  Grecians,  they  would  be  thereby  more  encouraged,  which  Cell 
out  otherwise;  for  those  with  Leotychides  being  seized  with  a  panic 
.lear,  upon  the  apprehension  and  suspicioo  that  Xerxes  was  at  hand 
vith  ail  his  forces  from  Sardis,  there  was  nothing  but  confusion  and 
distraction,  through  various  surmises  and  opinions  amongst  them. 
£ome  were  for  retiring  forthwith  to  their  ships,  others  were  for 
.standing  their  ground,  and  fighting  valiantly  to  the  last  man.    Whilst 
they  were  in  thb  terror,  disorder,  and  confusion,  the  Persian  army 
advanced  in  order  of  battle,  and  in  a  terrible  manner  with  great  shouts 
fell  in  upon  the  Grecians,  who  were  forced .  to  receive  the  ehaige, 
having  now  no  time  left  for  forther  consultations.    The  battle  betog 
aow  joined,  great  coumge  and  resolution  was  shewn  ou  all  sides,  and 
lor  a  long  time  the  fortune  of  the  day  was  doubtful,  and  auny  foil  on 
both  fides.    But  as  soon  as  the  Samian  and  Milesian  armies  appeared, 
the  courage  of  tlie  Grecians  was  revived,  and  the  Peraians  so  flagged 
and  failed  that  they  forthwith  fled,  and  were  pursued  with  a  very 
great  slaughter;  for  the  soldiers  of  Leotychides  and  Xantippus  fol* 
lowed  them  close  at  their  heels,  to  their  very  tents.    In  the  mean 
time  the  iEolians,  and  many  other  of  the  inhabitants  of  Asia,  came 
in  to  the  assistance  of  the  Grecians,  though  then  almost  conquerors: 
for  a  general  and  ardent  desire  of  liberty  possessed  all  the  Asian  eities^ 
and  therefore  many  neither  regarded  leagues  made,  or  hostages  gtvca^ 
but  together  with  the  other  Grecians,  with  the  same  rage  hewed  down 
and  slew  the  flying  Persians.    And  thus  the  Persians  were  routed  and 
dbpersed,  with  the  slaughter  of  forty  thousand  men ;  of  the  rest  somo 
of  them  escaped  \o  their  camp,  and  others  fled  to  Sardis. 

Xerxes  being  informed  both  of  the  slaughter  of  his  men  at  Pfaitsa, 
and  of  the  routing  of  his  army  at  Mycale,  leaving  part  of  his  forces 
to  carry  ou  the  war,  io  a  great  fright  fled  with  the  rest  to  Bcbatana. 

Wlicu  ail  WHS  over,  Leotychides  and  Xantippus  sailed  back  to 
Samos,  and  then  received  the  lonians  and  iEoliaiis  as  their  confede* 
rates  in  the  war:  and  some  time  after  used  many  persuasive  argu« 
ments  to  them,  to  leave  Asia,  and  come  over  into  Europe,  promising 


3^0  DIODORtTS  SICULU8.  ^OOk^tET. 

them  to  bestow  updh  them  the  estates  of  all  those  tbait  bad  confede- 
rated themselves  whh  the  Persians.  For  if  they  contimied  ia  Asia, 
they  would  be  in  continual  alarms  by  enemies  that  fiur  excelled  then 
in  strength,  and  that  were  near  to  them;  and  that  their  friendi,  by 
reason  of  the  distance  by  sea,  could  dot  be  assistant  to  them  ao«p- 
•portunely,  and  at  such  seasons  as  their  necessity  might  require.  Upon 
which  prombes  the  lonians  and  ^olians  were  persuaded,  and  in  ob- 
isertance  of  the  desires  of  the  Grecians,  prepared  thnnselves  to  take 
'shipping  for  Europe.  But  the  Athenians  afterwaMs  changing  their 
inlnds,  now  persuaded  them  to  remain  where  they  were,  mbd  hSMUBf 
fHToniised  that  though  none  of  the  rest  of  Greece  should  nriat  ^btm, 
yet  that  they  would  from  time  to  time  send  them  aid,  as  hmg  Ikif 
who  wereonly  obliged  so  to  do,  by  reason  of  their  kindred  andiekliali 
to  them.  For  the  Athenians  were  jealous  that  if  the  lonians  wtdni 
in  new  habitations,  by  the  common  concurrence  of  the  dfCtfianSj  Ikif 
would  not  for  the  future  own  Athens  as  their  Metropolitan  citf ,  nnd 
place  of  their  origin.  Whereupon  the  lonians  upon  aeeondtiioaBhii 
determined  not  to  femore  out  of  Asia. 

Things  thus  acoomplished,  the  Grecian  army  divided;  tbniiiaen- 
dssmonians  sailed  back  into  Laconia ;  the  Athenians,  wlth'tba  loniatfe 
and  islanders,  made  for  Sestos,  which  Xantippus  the  geneml'tHk 
•at  the  first  assault;  and  after  he  had  put  a  garrison  into  it,  and  'dis- 
charged his  confederates,  he  returned  with  his  citixens  to  AtlMns. 
And  this  was  the  event  and  issue  of  the  Medean  war,  asitwarealM, 
after  it  had  continued  for  the  space  of  two  years. 

Herodotus  the  historian  began  his  history  with  some  things  bdbie 
ihe  war  of  Troy,  and  relates  in  nine  books,  whatever  happennd  of 
moment  almost  in  all  parts  of  the  world;  and  concludes  bit  hisloqr 
with  the  fight  at  Mycale,  and  the  siege  and  taking  of  Sestds.  DnriBlf 
these  transactions,  the  Romans  had  great  wars,  and  shed  much  blood 
amongst  the  Volscians.  Spurius  Cassius,  the  year  before  oonanl, 
being  convicted  of  treason,  for  aspiring  to  the  supreme  govemaoMit^ 
was  put  to  death.    And  these  were  the  things  done  diisTcar. 


CKqpw  fZ\ :  T»W»VS  ^MHJliUI^  SlQfli 


I. 


CHARV. 

O0atkand:oammmdiUim  of:04(mkmff€^Sj^racu$9^  mHLtekdidklg 

qf  Athens  bjf  the  polity  qf  7Ji€mUiodk^ 


V  I 


's     * 


TIMO&THENES  being  arohon  or  chief  magistfste  m  Athiuift, 
Casio  Fabiu^,  and  Lucios  .Emilias  Mamercus  Raman  eo^pola^^heHit 
was  a  settled  peace  throughout  all  Sicily;  for  the  stmigth;Q()4ie« 
CarthagiDians  was  utterly  broken,  and  Geloa  governed  the  Sicffiaoar 
with  that  justice  and  equity,  that  the  laws  flourished  in  every  dty^and -. 
plenty  every  where  abounded.    The  Syracnsans  making  a  law  againat  - 
extravagant  pomp  o£  funerals,*  and  not  only  taking- away  those  usnal 
vast  expenses  upoa  the  dead,  but  forbidding  all  manner  of  cvriosi^.. 
upon  that  account;.  Gelon.  willing  in  all  things  to  confirm  what  tha 
people  agreed  upon,  coniBrmad  this  new  law  by  his  own  example|['. 
for  falling  sick,  and  Lying  upon  his  death  bed,  he  gave  up  the  kingdom 
to  Hiero,  his  eldest  brother,  and  commanded  that  the  law  sboidd  boi 
strictly  kept  in  reference  to  his  funeral*    After  his  death  his  sue-:, 
cessor,  in  burying  of  him,  observed  his  commands.    His  body  wati 
laid  in  his  wife's  inheritance,  within  the  nine  towers,  as  they  weoa. 
called^  places  of  great  and  sumptuous,  workmanship. 

The  whole  city  accompanied  the  body  to  the  place,  which  waai 
about  two  hundred  stages*  distant;  and  the  citizens  erected  a  stately 
monument  over  him,  and  commanded  he  should  for  ever  after  be 
honoured  with  the  honours  due  totheantient  heroes. 

This  monument  was  in  after  times  destroyed  by  the  Carthaginians; 
in  their  war  against  die  Syracusans:  and  the  places  called  the  nine 
towers,  through  envy,  were  demolished  by  Agathocles.     But  yet* 
neither  the  hatred  of  the  Carthaginians,  nor  the  envy  of  Agathooles, 
nor  the  force  nor  fraud  of  any  other  person,  was  able  to  eclipse  the: 
glory  of  Gelon:  for  history  has  justly  preserved  his  fame,  and  wilt 
for  ever  hand  it  down  to  posterity^    For  as  it  is  just,  and  tending 
much  to  correct  the  irregularities  o£  human  conversation,  to  fix  a-* 
brand  and  mark  of  disgrace  upon  those  that  have  used  their  power 
wickedly  and  mischievously,  so  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  as  just  to: 
perpetuate  the  memory  of  those  who  haveruled  justly  and  honourably, 
to  the  good  of  others.     For  this  will  be  an  inducement  to  men  to* 
behave  themselves  so  as  to  merit  commendation  from  those  that! 
come  after  them.     Gelon  reigned  only  six  years:  Hiero^  his  brother: 
and  heir,  eleven  years  and  eight  months* 

*  Twent^'»fi?e  milei. 


S9S  moDORUs  sicuLUi/  BedkXf. 

After  the  victory  at  Platsa^  the  AtheDians  brought  back  their 
wives  and  children  from  Troezene  and  Salamis  to  Athens,  and  forth- 
with set  upon  the  repairing  of  thdr  waUs,  and  spared  neither  coal  nor 
pains  in  that  nor  in  any  other. thing  necessary  for  their  defence. 

Bat  the  Lacedamonians  considering  that  the  Athenians  had  mach* 
advanced  their  reputation  by  their  strength  at  sea^  fearing  lestthof 
should  grow  too  strong,  determined  to  forbid  the  building  of  thefr 
walls*  and  therefore  sent  ambassadors  with  all  speed  to  Athens^  to  let 
them  knoW|  that  it  was  not  for  the  common  good  and  interest  of  ^ 
Greece  that  Athens  should  he  walled;  for  if  Xerxes  should  nsake  a 
second  invasion  upon  them,  with  fresh  and  greater  forces^  if  he 
should  gain  cities  out  of  Peloponnesus  ready  walled,  he  might  linoaa 
thence,  as  out  of  forts  and  castles,  make  sudden  incursiona  apeo , 
them,  and  thereby  with  ease  subdue  the  Grecians.  But  when  the 
ambassadors  were  not  much  regarded,  they  imperiously  ccnDmnodof ' 
the  carpenters  and  smiths  to  cease  from  the  work.  Whereupoii  the 
Athenians  not  knowing  what  to  resolve  upon,Themistocles  (who  was 
then  in  great  favour  and  authority)  advised  them,  that  they  ahoaUl 
not  at  present  make  any  noise  or  stir  about  the  matter  j  for  if  thef 
should  contend,  the  Lacedsmonians  would  easily  hinder  theni  in  the 
work,  by  making  an  inroad  upon  them  with  the  forces  of  Pelopoone* 
sus.  But  he  intimated  to  the  senate  privately,  that  he,  with  such 
others  as  they  should  appoint,  would  go  as  ambassadora  to  the 
Lacediemonians,  and  there  argue  the  case  with  them  concerning 
the  fortification  of  the  city.  And  he  gave  in  charge  to  the  ma- 
gistrates, that  if  any  ambassadors  came  from  Lacedemon,  thejr 
should  detain  them  till  his  return  from  thence;  and  in  the  mean 
time  they  should,  with  the  assbtance  of  the  whole  city,  go  od  with 
the  work;  and  that  was  the  very  way  (he  told  them)  to  effect  their 
design. 

The  Athenians  all  approved  of  his  advice,  and  Themistocles  with 
those  joined  in  embassy  with  him,  set  out  for  Sparta.    In  the  mean 
time  the  people  of  Athens  set  upon  the  work  with  might  and  roain^ 
sparing  neither  house  nor  sepulchre  for  materials:  women  and  chil- 
dren, strangers  and  servants,  were  all  employed,  and  none  permitted' 
to  be  idle.    The  work  went  on  beyond  expectation,  and  through  the' 
multitude  of  hands,  and  diligence  of  those  employed,  advanced  tO' 
admiration ;  which  being  noised  abroad,  the  Lacedsemonians  were  * 
very  hot  with  Themistocles  concerning  the  fortifying  of  the  city.    But 
he  denied  all,  and  wished  them  not  rashly  to  believe  every  little  story 
spread  abroad,  but  rather  to  send  some  faithful  messengers,  who  might 
bring  them  a  certain  account  of  the  truths  how  matter^  went;  omd  for 


fSktp.  Fl.  DIOlX>RU8  StCULUS.  S^S 

fiiitiier  assurance,  he  delirered  up  himself  and  his  associates  as  hos- 
tages to  the  Spartans. 

The  LacedflBmonians  at  present  pacified  and  persuaded  hf  what 
Themistocles  had  said,  took  him  and  his  associates  into  custody,  and 
forthwith  sent  some  of  the  chief  of  the  citiaens  to  Athens,  to  roalct 
strict  inquiry  and  observation  how  afiairs  were.  In  the  mean  time, 
the  Athenians  in  a  short  space  adranced  their  walls  to  their  just 
height.  Tlie  Spartan  ambassadors,  as  soon  as  they  entered  into 
Athens,  being  rery  turbnlent,^  and  sharply  threatening  the  Athenians 
for  what  they  had  done,  they  committed  them  all  to  prison,  declaring 
they  should  not  be  set  at  liberty,  till  Themistocles  and  the  rest  of 
their  ambassadors  were  sent  home.  By  this  trick  the  Laced«mo* 
nians  being  deluded,  were  forced  to  redeem  their  own  ambassadors 
by  the  discharge  of  the  Athenians.  And  this  policy  of  Tliemistocles 
in  procuring  the  walling  of  the  city,  both  with  effectual  speed  and 
safety,  purchased  the  great  love  and  honour  of  the  citizens. 

Whilst  these  things  were  acting  in  Greece,  the  Romans  made  war 
upon  the  Tuscans,  and  got  a  great  victory,  with  the  slaughter  of  many 
pf  their  enemies,  and  afterwards  took  Tuscolum  by  storm,  and  redaoed 
the  city  of  the  JSsculaneans. 


*f=r 


CHAP,  VI. 

7%€  enlarging  of  the  hav^  at  Athens  by  3%emistocles.   UketretMm 
qf  Pausanias,  and  the  justice  of.Aristidee. 

AT  the  end  of  the  year,  Adimantus  was  chosen  archon  of  Athens^ 
and  Pabius  Vibulanus  and  L.  Valerius  were  consuls  of  Rome.  At 
this  time  Themistocles,  for  his  excellent  government  and  ingenuity 
in  state  policy,  was  in  great  esteem,  not  only  at  Athens,  but  over  ail 
Greece.  Being  hereby  encouraged,  he  made  it  his  business,  by  fur* 
tlier  and  greater  services,  to  enlarge  the  bounds  and  sovereignty  of 
his  country :  for  considering  that  there  was  no  haven  at  the  Pirieus, 
and  the  Athenians  were  forced  to  make  use  of  Pbaleron  for  their  port, 
which  was  strait  and  incommodious,  he  contrived  to  turn  that  into  a 
harbour,  which  would  require  the  least  charge,  and  yet  would  be  the 
most  beautiful  and  spacious  haven  in  all  Greece,  which  being  accom* 
plished,  he  hoped  would  conduce  to  making  the  Athenians  masttfs 
Vol.  K  No.3«.  ns 


394  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Attft  XL 

of  the  seas;  wlio  then  had  a  great  fleet,  and  were  fiunooa  Ibr  thmt 
many  victories  at  sea. 

By  this  means  hd  hoped  the  lonians  (being  descended  itom  the 
same  ancestors)  would  be  brought  over  to  them,  and  ao  by  their  a» 
sistance  he  should  be  able  to  restore  all  the  Grecians  in  Asia  to  Ask 
liberty,  and  thereby  for  ever  oblige  them  to  be  friends  to  the  ik> 
thenians. 

Moreover,  he  concluded  that  the  islanders,  moved  with  the  atrengdi 
of  the  Athenians  at  sea,  would  presently  join  with  them,  who 
judged  persons  that  might  be  of  great  advantage  or  prejudice  to 
Ai\d  he  very  well  understood  that  the  Lacedsemonians  weie  veiyi 
aidenble  at  land,  but  understood  little  of  sea  afiairs;  but  yet  he  kipl 
all  private  to  himself,  being  assured  that  the  LacedsBmoniant  wmdd 
never  suffer  it  to  be  done. 

Therefore,  in  a  public  assembly,  he  told  the  citizens  that  he  hsd 
found  out  something  of  very  great  moment  and  advantage  to  As 
commonwealth;  but  that  it  was  not  at  present  expedient  to  make  k 
public,  being  of  that  nature  that  the  fewer  who  were  acquawted  At 
better;  and  therefore  wished  the  people  to  choose  two  who»  tkcf 
could  best  trust,  to  whom  he  might  discover  the  whole  desigo« 

The  people  hereupon  chose  two,  Aristides  and  Xantippua,  not  only 
because  they  were  men  of  integrity  and  honest  principles,  but  that 
they  emulated  Themistocles,  and  secretly  envied  him  for  theglotyand 
reputation  he  had  amongst  the  people.  When  they  had  privately 
heard  what  he  had  designed,  and  his  reasons,  they  made  report  unto 
the  assembly,  that  what  Themistocles  had  contrived  was  not  only  great, 
but  of  extraordinary  advantage  to  the  commonwealth,  and  with  ease 
"to  be  effected.  The  people  were  presently  taken  with  great  adminh 
tion  of  the  man,  and  yet  as  soon  struck  with  a  suspicion,  lest  by  these 
inventions  and  great  designs,  he  aimed  at  the  sovereignty:  therefoie 
they  commanded  he  should  forthwith  discover  his  purposed.  *  Botha 
told  them  again  and  again,  that  it  was  not  for  the  public  goodopeoly 
to  reveal  them. 

The  people  now  more  admiring  the  courage  and  constancy  of  tbt 
man,  commanded  him  to  reveal  the  business  to  the  senate  privately; 
and  if  the  senate  judged  that  it  was  a  feasible  matter,  and  of  eeitua 
advantage  to  the  public,  then  Whatever  was  necessary  for  the  ezecatiaa 
of  his  design  should  be  granted  to  him.  Upon  which,  wbeo  he  had 
informed  the  senate  of  the  particulars,  and  when  upon  the  rtlatioa 
all  was  judged  both  easy,  and  of  the  highest  concern  and  advantage  to 
the  commonwealth,  every  thing  was  at  length  gmnted  to  him  which 
he  desired,  (in  order  to  the  effecting  of  hb  design),  with  the  appiobae 
tion  and  consent  of  the  people. 


1" 


Chap.  VL  DIODORVB  sicuLCf.  39ft 

The  sffembljr  then  broke  up  with  great  tdmiratkiB  of  Thenitetudesy; 
every  one  expecting  what  would  be  the  istoe  of  their  coomela^  -  And' 
BOW  being  furnished  with  all  things  necessaryi  both  at  to  men  and- 
money^  he  contrived  how  to  delude  the  Lacedaftoionians  a  secodd 
tfooe;  for  he  was  attured^  that  as  they  bad  opposed  tbe  repairing  of- 
the  walls,  so  they  would  with  all  thw  power  and  might  obstruct  the ' 
making  of  the  port. 

He  sent  therefore  ambassadore  to  Spartaj  who  shoirid  let  them  - 
know  how  much  it  tended  to  the  advantage  of  Greece,  in  case  of  future 
invasions  by  tbe  Persians,  to  have  in  some  place  or  other  a  common 
dious  haven.    By  this  contrivance  giving  a  check  and  stop  to  any 
baaty  opposition  from  the  Lacedemonians,  he  forthwith  commences 
■pon  the  work.    And  all  hands  being  employed  in  the  business,  the- 
port  was  finished  in  a  short  time,  and  beyond  all  eapfictation.    Then 
he  advised  the  people  that  they  would  add  twenty  gallies  more  every 
year  to  the  fleet  they  had;  and  that  they  would  privilege  with  free- 
dom from  every  imposition  all  strangers  and  artificers,  that  by  thos^* 
means  both  the  city  might  become  populous,  and  a  store  of  workmen 
and  tradesmen  might  be  got  with  little  trouble;  for  he  conceived  both 
necessary,  not  only  for  the  increase,  but  the  support  of  their  power  at 
sea:  and  thus  the  Athenians  were  employed. 

The  Lacedflemooians  now  commanded  Pausanms  who  was  their 
general  at  Platsea,  to  free  tbe  Greek  cities  from  the  Persian  gairisdna 
which  still  remained  amongst  them;  whereupon  he  sailed  from  Pe- 
loponnesus (with  fifty  gallies,  and  from  Athens  with  thirty,  of  which' 
Aristides  was  admiral)  to  Cyprus,  and  there  delivered  the  cities  frOm 
the  garrisons  that  were  fixed  amongst  them.    Thence  sailing  back  to 
the  Hellespont,  he  took  Byzantium,  then  under  the  Persian  yoke^' 
and  freed  the  city ;  some  of  the  barbarians  being  put  to  the  sword, 
and  others  taken  prisoners ;  amongst  whom*  some  of  the  Persians  of 
great  quality  were  taken  and  delivered  to  the  isare  and  custody  of 
Gongylus  of  Erctria,  undei;  pretence  to  reserve  them  for  punishment, 
but  in  truth  to  return  them  safe  to  Xerxes:  for  he  h^d  contracted  i| 
private  confederacy  with  the  king,  and  was  to  marry  the  king's 
daughter  for  his  reward,  in  undertaking  to  betray  Greece,    AH  these^ 
matters  were  transacted  by  messengers  and  interpreters  between  him' 
and  Artabazus,  the  Persian  general,  who  secretly  suppKed  Pausanias 
with  money,  with  whic)i  h^  corrupted  such  Grecians  as  were  for  hir 
purpose^  '    • 

But  the  trefoil  was  discovered,  and  the  author  fell  under  just  pu<^ 
nishment  in  this  manner:  giving  hiipself  up  to  Persian  luxury  and 
excess,  and  carrying  it  with  gr^at  ipspl^nce  and  tyranny  towarda 
those  who  were  coimniu^4  to  hi^  charge,  ^  highly  repent^  his.pridf 


396  DlOXX>1LUS  8ICULU«.  Adfc  2Z 

tnd  haughtiDesS)  especially  those  that  had  borne  any  office  and  plaee 
of  magistracy  in  the  corooionweahh.  The  aoldien  thereftm  etcry 
where  murmuring,  and  in  all  their  meetings  complaJning  one  to 
another  of  these  things^  and  of  the  pride  and  tyranny  of  Pioanniaay  the 
Peloponnesians  at  length  deserted  him,  and  retamcd  into  tbdr  om 
country,  and  sent  messengers  to  Sparta  to  accuse  him. 

But  Aristides  the  Athenian  making  use  of  the  present  ocenaion  k 
all  poblic  meetings  add  assemblies,  stirred  up  the  citiety  and  by  bir 
and  smooth  words  so  far  wrought,  as  to  prevail  with  tbem  to  pot 
themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  Athenians.  And  that  wiiidi 
helped  forward  the  matter  to  the  advantage  of  the  Atheniana  waadiis 
that  follows.  Pausanias  had  agreed  with  Artabazus,  that  he  ahonU 
not  suffer  any  to  return  that  brought  him  letters  from  himaelfy  leil 
their  intrigues  should  be  discovered :  whereupon  all  such  mesaenpcfS 
were  killed  to  prevent  their  return;  which  being  taken  notice  of^and 
suspected  by  one  employed  in  that  afiair*,  he  opened  the  letters  deli- 
vered  to  him,  and  by  the  contents  being  now  confirmed  in  hie  ibmer 
opinion  of  the  destruction  of  the  other  letter-carriersy  he  ddiverad 
the  letters  to  ihe  Ephori ;  who  not  being  fully  satbfied  of  the  troth  by 
those  letters  which  were  very  dark;  but  insisting  open  further  and 
clearer  evidence,  the  messenger  told  tbem  he  would  find  out  a  way 
how  they  might  convict  him  of  his  treason^  by  testimony  out  off  hb 
own  mouth. 

Whereupon  the  messenger  forthwith  went  to  Tenarua»  to  pay  his 
devotion  in  the  temple  of  Neptune,  where  he  wrought  a  double  tcntf, 
one  within  another,  in  one  of  which  were  concealed  some  of  the 
£phori  and  other  SpartaDs.  Pftusanias  hastens  thither,  and  inqpiures 
of  him,  what  was  the  ground  and  cause  of  his  eamestoen  in  his  ad* 
dresses;  who  complained,  that  he  by  his  letters  had  determined  hb 
death,  notwithstanding  his  innocence.  Upon  which  Fbusanias  de- 
clared he  was  very  sorry  for  what  he  had  done,  and  begged  bis  pardon, 
and  entreated  him  to  conceal  the  matter,  and  promised  he  would 
bountifully  reward  him :  and  so  they  parted. 

But  the  Ephori  and  those  with  them  took  little  notice  at  that  time 
of  the  business;  but  a  while  after,  the  Lacedemonians,  with  the  au- 
thority of  the  Ephori,  consulted  together  to  seize  him,  and  bring  him 
to  his  trial;  which  he  foreseeing,  fled  to  the  temple  of  Minerva 
Chalcidica. 
'  The  Lacedemonians  being  doubtful,  whether  it  were  lawful  for 

*  One  Argilios,  his  Catamite.    Cornel*  Kcp. 
t  A  roAftt  with  a  partition  built  in  »omc  part  of  the  gronnd  bekmgiiig  to  the  tcnple; 
for  the  Greek  word  i»  HUrot  which  it  the  temple,  or  any  of  the  cooaecratH  groiOML    The 
word  JamMai  it  properlj  the  tevple  itaelf. 


CKop.  VI.  moDomus  ncuLus. 

them  to  force  him  out  of  the  temple,  it  is  said  his  mother  weot  thither, 
md  placed  a  tile  she  brought  with  her  before  the  gate  of  the  temple, 
and  without  dmng  or  saying  any  ofiher  thiog,  returned  to  her  own 
house;  which  when  the  Lacedmnonians  understood,  (according  to 
the  mother's  sentence),  they  built  up  the  gate  of  the  temple,  and  by 
thb  means  he  was  fiunished  to  death.  His  body  indeed  ^ras  delivered 
to  his  friends  to  be  buried;  but  the  deity  was-  highly  incensed  for 
the  violation  of  the  sanctuary ,  for  when  the  Spartans  went  to  inquire 
at  the  oracle  of  Delphos,  concerning  some  other  matters,  they  were 
commanded  to  restore  the  suppliant  to  the  goddess:  whicli  com* 
tnand  being  impossible  for  them  to  observe,  there  were  many  and 
great  consultations  among  them  what  was  best  to  be  done*  At 
length  they  came  to  this  resolution,  to  set  up  and  dedicate  two  bra- 
zen statues  of  Pausanias  in  the  temple  of  Minerva,  which  was  done 
accordingly. 

And  now,  according  to  our  usual  manner  throu^  the  whole 
course  of  our  history,  as  we  have  used  to  advance  the  just  praises  of 
them  that  were  virtuous  and  deserving,  and  on  the  other  band,  to 
perpetuate  the  dishonourable  actions  (after  their  deaths)  of  such  as 
acted  wickedly,  so  we  shall  not  allow  the  detestable  roaUee  and  trea* 
son  of  Pausanias  to  pass  without  censure.  For  who  could  not  but 
wonder  at  the  madness  of  this  man?  who,  after  his  victory  at  Platsa, 
and  by  other  noble  actions,  being  grown  so  deservedly  famous  and 
popular  among  tlie  Grecians,  did  not  only  neglect  to  preserve  what 
honour  and  authority  he  had  gained,  but  in  a  sordid  manner,  (thirsting 
after  the  riches  and  effeminate  delights  of  the  Persians),  wickedly 
stained  all  his  former  glory  by  treason.  Grown  proud  by  success, 
he  grew  weary  of  the  plain  Laconian  way  of  living,  and  gave  himself 
up  to  the  luxury,  voluptuousness,  and  softness  of  the  Persians,  whom 
it  less  became  of  all  other  men  to  imitate.  For  he  knew  (not  by  the 
relation  of  others,  but  by  his  own  experience)  how  much  the  severe 
discipline  of  his  own  country  exceeded  the  soft  manners  of  the  other, 
as  to  the  advancement  of  virtue  and  courage:  and  therefore  his 
treason  not  only  brought  upon  himself  just  punishment,  but  likewbe 
was  the  occasion  that  ail  his  fellow  citizens  were  deprived  of  the  ad« 
miralty  at  sea. 

For  the  great  care  and  integrity  of  Aristides  in  the  ouinagement  of 
martial  affairs  being  taken  notice  of,  as  likewise  his  courtesy  and 
moderation  towards  all  that  were  under  his  command,  (and  that  ma- 
naged with  an  apparent  demonstration  of  ail  manner  of  virtuous  qua« 
lities),  all  with  one  consent  chose  to  subject  themselves  to  the 
Athenians.  The  captains  and  officers  therefore,  sent  from  Sparta, 
no  longer  regarding  Pausanias,  but  all  admiring  Aristides,  subniiued 


399  DiODORus  ncuMTs.  JKnir  JQ! 

ID  erery  thing  to  hiuij  by  which  means  he  got  the  wovtmgatftt  Cher 
sea  without  blows. 

Aristides  thefcfore  forthwith  propoonds  to  his  coDfedeiales««.Thaf 
it  might  be  decreed  by  the  genetal  consent  of  the  people  in  iMr 
publk  assemblies^  that  from  thenceforth  a  common  Aind  or  tramny 
should  be  appointed  at  Delos^  where  all  the  money  c<dleeted  ioi^ 
pablic  senrice  should  be  kept.  In  pursuance  of  which  eoanael,  M 
the  better  managing  of  the  war  against  the  Persians,  (whcrewhb  they 
were  then  threatened),  all  the  cities  were  commanded  to  eontrilNrtw 
according  to  their  several  abilities;  which  was  so  liberally  done^  tiM 
the  sum  amounted  to  no  less  than  five  hundred  and  sixty  takntsi 
which  he  so  equally  and  justly  disposed  of,  (being  made  lord  trcMtt 
rer),  that  he  gained  the  entire  consent  and  approbatioa  of  all  dm 
cities  to  whatsoever  he  thought  fit  to  be  done. 

And  now  having  accomplished  that,  which  above  all  other  tbiiign 
seemed  to  be  most  difficulty  for  bis  justice  and  integrity  be  got  the 
name  of  Aristides  the  just*  And  so  the  very  same  time  that  Plaim^ 
nias  by  his  wickedness  deprived  his  citizens  of  the  chief  command  at 
sea,  Aristides  by  his  virtue  gained  for  the  Athenians  that  soveieigaty 
which  they  never  had  before.  And  these  were  the  actions  of  thia 
year. 


CHAP.  VII. 

Hiero  king  of  Sicify  prepares  to  beriege  Agrigentum  ;  di^wven  tka 
treason  of  them  of  Himera  to  Theron  their  prince,  Expeb  tk^ 
Cataneans  and  Naxians. 

WHEN  Phedon  was  archon  of  Athens,  the  seventy-sixth  olympiad 
was  performed,  in  which  Scamanderof  Mityleoe  was  victor;  the 
consuls  of  Rome  were  Ciesio  Fabius  and  Spur.  Furius  MedulUnus. 
About  this  time  died  Leotychides  king  of  Sparta,  in  the  twtuty-accond 
year  of  his  reign,  to  whom  succeeded  Archilaus,  who  reigned  fbrty- 
two  years.  At  the  ^me  time  died  Anaxilaus  king  of  Rhegiom  and 
Zancle,  after  he  had  governed  eighteen  yearSy  and  Micychus  (a 
faithful  trustee)  was  admitted  into  the  government,  upon  conditioq 
that  he  should  restore  ail  to  ^he  children  of  the  d^cease^  king  when 
they  came  of  age. 

Hiero  king  of  Syracuse,  after  the  death  of  Gelon,  had  a  jealoiia  eye 
towards  hb  brother  Polyzelus^  because  of  his  great  interest  and  esteeoa 


C3b^  nt.  l>lot>ORUS  sicULUf;  599 

among  the  people ;  and  therefinre  contriTed  how  to  take  him  out  of 
the  way;  to  which  end,  he  employs  all  mercenaries  and  strangers 
about  him  for  his  guard,  judging  that  to  be  the  surest  way  for  the 
keeping  possession  of  the  kingdom. 

And  when  the  Sybarites*  were  besieged  by  the  Crotonitesfy  and 
desired  assistance  from  him,  he  raised  a  great  army,  and  committed 
the  charge  of  the  war  to  Polyzelus,  with  the  purpose  that  he  might 
fall  in  the  battle.  But  Polyzelus  suspecting  the  design,  refused  the 
command;  at  which  the  king  fell  into  a  great  rage  against  his  bvotheff 
who  fled  to  Theron  king  of  Agrigentum ;  whereupoo  Hieoo  speedily 
made  all  preparations  to  besiege  them  both. 

Id  the  mean  time  Thiasideus  the  son  of  Theron  being  governor  of 
Himera,  by  his  harsh  and  severe  government  quite  lost  the  hearts 
of  the  people.  But  they  not  daring  to  complaio  to  his  fathcjr,  (not 
looking  upon  him  as  an  impartial  judge),  seat  ambassadors  to  Hieio^ 
with  great  accusations  agiunst  Thrasideus,  and  oflered  both  to  deliver 
up  their  city,  and  to  assist  him  against  Theron.  But  Hiero  (judgii^ 
it  better  for  his  purpose  to  deal  with  Theren  in  a  calm  and  peaceable 
manner)  secretly  betrays  the  Hiaieriaos  and  thdr  plots  against  him* 
All  things  being  made  apparent  and  plain,Theroo  b  not  only  reconciled 
to  Hiero,  but  likewise  restores  Polyzelus  to  his  brother's  former  love 
and  favour,  and  puts  to  death  many  of  the  traitors  of  Himera. 

About  the  same  time  Hiero  expelled  the  Cataneains.and  NalMUia 
from  their  own  country,  and  planted  the  cities  with  new  colonies  of 
five  thousand  men  out  of  Peloponnesus,  and  as  many  from  Syracuse, 
and  called  Catana,  iEtna;  and  distributed  not  only  the  country  of 
Catana,  but  many  large  tracts  adjoining,  by  lot  amongst  the  citizens, 
which  were  ten  thousand.  And  this  be  did  both  to  have  succours  at 
band  upon  any  pressing  occasion,  and  likewise  that  he  might  be  bo* 
noured  after  his  death  as  the  founder  of  so  great  a  city,  wherein  w^re 
contained  ten  thousand  inhabitants.  The  Cataneans  andNaxianshe 
transplanted  into  the  city  of  the  Leontines,  commanding  them  to 
abide  there  in  common  freedom  with  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants. 

Theron  in  like  manner  considering  bow  Himera  was  in  a  great 
measure  depopulated,  planted  the  Dorians  tbere^  and  ordered  that 
wiiosoever  would,  sliould  be  enrolled  citizens  of  tliat  place.  Thes^ 
governed  the  commonwealth  with  great  commendation  for  the  space 
of  fifty-eight  years :  not  long  after  which  time,  the  Carthaginians 
razed  the  city  to  the  ground,  which  hath  continued  ruined  and  in  its 
rubbish  to  this  day. 

*  A  people  uf  Sybari*  ia  Greece.  t  A  people  of  Crotona  in  Ictlj, 


400  MODOBVf  nevus*.  JhtflXL 


CHAP.  Tm. 

7%e  LtundtrmanaMi  fiuBrreL  with  tke  Athemitau  far  Ife 

oflkt 


-    -It. 


WHEN  DrofDOclidet  waf  arelioo  of  Athens  and  Marcas  Bdiiai 
Cneiac  Manliuv  eoutuk  of  Rome,  die  LaoedsBooians  were  l^Bhlf 
roficefiMKl  for  tbdr  low  of  the  fOfereigoty  of  the  sea,  and  theieiMie 
being  gftailj  exatpe rated  against  the  Grecians,  who  had 
them,  tbejr  breathed  ottt  revenge,  with  jvst  indignatioD  against 
A  general  council  therefore  being  called,  they  advised  together 
eeming  war  to  be  procliimed  against  the  Athenians,  in  oider  to  the 
recovery  of  their  dominion  at  sea :  and  in  several  other  assemblies  off 
the  people,  most  of  them  (especially  the  young  men)  were  vciy  hot 
and  eager  for  the  war,  vaunting  every  where  how  rich  they  shoold  he 
if  they  succeeded  in  their  design,  and  how  all  would  be  cncciuB^ed 
in  the  service  of  their  countryi  when  every  private  fiunily  hath  had 
such  advantages  and  occasions  to  enrich  and  advance  themselves. 

And  they  called  to  mind  an  old  prophecy  from  the  oracle,  which 
bid  them  beware  of  having  but  half  an  empire,  which  could  signify 
tiothiiig  else  (as  they  aliedged)  but  the  present  circumstances  thej 
wcfrc  in.  For  being  there  were  two  sovereignties,  the  one  at  landj 
und  the  other  at  sea,  if  they  lost  the  one,  they  must  needs  be  masters 
but  of  a  lame  government. 

The  whole  city  almost  being  of  the  opinion  for  a  war,  the  matter 
was  sgttia  referred  to  the  senate,  supposing  none  would  dare  to  con- 
tradict the  general  sense  of  the  citizens*  But  one  of  the  senators,  of 
the  family  of  Hercules,  called  Hetaemaridas,  (a  man  of  great  esteem 
among  the  citizens  for  his  virtue),  advised  quite  otherwise,  and  de- 
clared his  opinion  that  they  should  suflfer  the  Athenians  quietly  t» 
enjoy  the  dominion  of  the  sea,  for  that  it  was  not  the  custom  of  the 
commonwealth  of  Spaita,  to  contend  about  tliat  sovereignty.  And 
urging  many  rcanons  for  the  confirmation  of  his  opinion  (which  was 
not  Ht  first  very  grateful)  he  at  length  prevailed  both  with  the  senate 
and  people  to  wave  the  war.  And  so  it  was  concluded^  according  to 
his  advice,  as  most  advantageous  to  desist. 

The  Athenians  at  the  first  were  in  great  fear  of  a  bloody  war  with 
the  Spartans  about  this  command  at  sea,  and  therefore  they  built 
many  gnllios  for  that  purpose,  and  provided  a  great  masaof  treasure, 
and  sought  to  gain  all  their  neighbours  and  confederates  with  tha 
l^rcatcKt  ilcmonsirations  of  kindness  and  courtesy  imaginable.    But 


Chlap.X.  DIO0ORUS  SICULUS.  401 

heariiig  of  what  was  resolved  and  ddtermined  by  theLacedcemonians, 
all  fear  of  tirar  being  now  vatibhed>  tbey  wholly  bent  tbeir  minds  to 
advance  the  power  and  greatness  of  their  city« 


C&AiP.  IX- 

Hiero  breaks  the  power  of  the  Etruscans  by  sea. 

WHEN  Acestoridas.  was  archon  of  Athens^  and  Cssio  Fabios  and 
T.  Virginius  consuls  of  Rome,  at  that  time  Hiero  Icing  of  Syracuse 
(at  the  request  of  the  citizens  of  Cuma  in  Italy,  by  their  ambassadors^ 
who  were  greatly  annoyed  by  the-  Etrujscans)  sent  a  considerable 
fleet  to  their  assistance,  who  joining  battle  with  the  Etruscans  of 
Tyrrhenia,  in  a  sea-fight  sunk  several  of  their  ships^  and  obtained  a 
complete  victory,  and  so  the  power  of  the  Etruscans  being  broken, 
they  rcturiied  to  Syracuse, 


CHAR  X. 

77ie  war  between  the  Tarentines  and  the  Japt/gians. 

MENON  being  archon  of  Athens,  and  L.  iEmilius  M amercus  and 
C.  Cornelius  Lentulus  consuls  of  Rome,  a  war  broke  out  between  the 
Tarentines  and  the  Japyges,  concerning  the  limits  of  their  lands.  At 
the  first  there  were  but  little  skirmishes,  and  taking  booties  one  from 
another :  but  the  enmity  increasing  by  degrees,  and  in  the  mean  time 
slaughters  being  committed  far  and  near  on  both  sides,  at  length  it 
broke  out  into  open  war.  The  Japyges  (of  their  citizens  and  confer 
derates)  bring  into  the  field  abbve  twenty  thousand  men.  Tbe  Ta 
fcntines  understanding  the  great  preparation  made  agaibst  them, 
both  with  their  own  citizens  and  confederates  of  Rhegium,  likewise 
take  the  field.  A  bloody  battlie  was  fought,  and  after  many  killed  on 
both  sides,  at  length  the  Japyges  became  absolute  victors ;  and  in  the 
pursuit,  the  Tarentines  were  scattered,  and  broken  into  two  parties, 
whereof  one  fled  back  towards  ITarentum,  the  other  was  furiously 
Vol.  1.  No.  36.  fff 


402  DIODOKUS  SICULUS.  BookXL 


driven  towards  Rhegium.  The  Japyges  likewise  divided  themsdfcs 
into  two  parties,  one  of  which  pursued  close  upon  the  back  of  the 
Tarentines;  and  in  regard  the  distance  of  place  was  hut  very  amalli 
there  was  a  very  great  slaughter  made.  The  other  party  to  hotly  pur- 
sued them  of  Rhegium,  that  they  fell  in  pell-mell  with  them  intotbfc 
city,  and  so  took  and  possessed  it. 


CHAP.  XI. 

The  death  of  Theron  prince  of  j^grigentum,  and  the  lyranm/  of 
his  son  Thrasideicsy  who  abdicated  the  govemmenty  and  killed 
himself.  Three  hundred  of  the  family  of  the  Fabii  dam  ai 
one  time. 

m 

THE  next  year  Chares  was  archon  at  Athens,  and  at  Rome,  Titus 
Memius  and  Caius  Horatius  v^ere  consuls.  Then  were  celebrated 
the  Olympian  games  at£lis,  heing  the  seventy  seventh  olympiad)  in 
which  Duncles  of  Argos  was  victor.  About  this  time  Theron  king  of 
Agrigentum  died,  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  his  reign,  and  Thrasideiii 
his  son  succctcied. 

Theron  governed  with  great  moderation  and  justice,  and  therefere 
was  greatly  loved  and  honoured  by  his  subjects;  and  at  his  death  wis 
reverenced  as  a  divine  hero;  but  his  son,  even  in  his  father's  life-tune, 
appeared  to  be  of  a  violent  and  bloody  disposition. 

And  after  his  father's  death,  throwing  aside  all  restraint  of  thelaws^ 
he  ruled  arbitrarily  and  tyrannically;  for  which  reason  bis  salgectt 
combined  against  him,  as  one  not  fit  to  be  intrusted  with  the  govern- 
ment, and  perfectly  hated  by  alf.  And  therefore  within  a  little  time 
after  he  came  to  an  end  suitable  to  his  deserts. 

For  after  the  death  of  his  father,  he  raised  a  great  army  of  merce- 
naries, and  of  his  own  subjects  of  Agrigentum  and  Himeni,  to  the 
number  of  above  twenty  thousand  horse  and  foot,  and  with  these 
went  against  the  Syracusans.  But  Hiero,  furnished  with  a  consider* 
able  army,  wasted  the  borders  of  Agrigentum,  and  afterwards  joined 
battle  with  the  enemy,  in  which  most  of  the  Grecians  on  both  sides 
being  drawn  up  one  agaiust  another,  were  slain :  but  the  Syracusans 
got  the  day,  with  the  loss  of  two  thousand  men;  on  the  other  side 
wore  killed  above  four  thousand. 

Thrasideus  by  this  ill-success,  perplexed  in  his  mindj  abdicated 


Chap.XlL  DlODOftUfi  sicutus.  403 

his  government,  and  fled  to  the  Megarensians  called  Mbeans,  and 
being  there  condemned  to  die,  slew  himself.  The  Agrigentines, 
after  they  had  restored  and  settled  their  democratical  government, 
sent  an  ambassador  to  Hiero,  to  treat  for  peace.  At  the  same  time 
in  Italy,  the  Romans  had  war  with  the  Veientes,  and  in  a  great  battle 
at  Cremera  were  routed;  and  amongst  others,  three  hundred  of  the 
Fabii,  all  of  one  family,  were  every  man  slain :  and  these  were  the 
afliiirs  and  events  of  this  year. 


CHAR  XII. 

The  malice  of  the  Lacedaemonians  against  Themistocles,  and  his 

banishment.    His  praise. 

THE  next  year  Praxiergus  being  archon  of  Athens,  and  Aulus  Vir- 
gilitis  Tricostus  and  C.  ^ervilius  Roman  consuls,  the  Eleans,  who 
before  lived  dispersed  in  several  little  villages,  new  embodied  them* 
selves  into  one  city,  called  Etis.  The  Lacedaemonians  observing  how 
Sparta  was  contemned  and  evil  spoken  of  by  reason  of  the  treachery 
of  Pausanias,  and  how  the  name  of  Athens  grew  famous  for  tlieir 
loyalty  and  faithfulness  one  to  another,  endeavoured  all  they  could  to 
stain  the  Athenians  with  the  same  blot  of  ignominy.  And  tlierefore 
as  Themistocles  was  a  man  of  great  repute  and  esteem  amongst  the 
Athenians,  they  accused  him  of  treason,  and  said  he  consulted  with 
Pausanias  how  to  betray  Greece  to  Xerxes.  And  the  more  to  provoke 
the  enemies  of  Themistocles,  and  to  stir  them  up  to  accuse  him,  they 
made  use  both  of  bribes,  and  false  insinuations,  affirming  that  Pau- 
sanias discovered  his  treasonable  design  of  betraying  Greece  to 
Themistocles,  and  solicited  him  to  join  with  him  both  in  counsel  and 
aid  other  ways ;  but  though  Themistocles  would  not  tlien  agree  to  do 
that,  yet  he  did  not  consider  himself  obliged  to  discover  his  friend. 
However,  (notwithstanding  the  potency  of  his  adversaries),  Themis- 
tocles was  clearly  acquitted,  and  his  name  grew  more  famous  an)ongst 
the  Athenians,  for  he  was  greatly  beloved  by  the  citizens  for  the  for- 
mer eminent  services  he  had  done  the  commonwealth.  But  after* 
wards,  when  by  reason  of  his  popularity,  he  became  suspected  by 
some,  and  envied  bj  otliers^  unmindful  of  his  former  deserts,  they 
determined  both  to  weaken  his  authority,  and  to  bring  down  the 
height  of  his  spirit.     In  the  first  place,  therefore,  they  banisibed  hiiu 


404  DioDoaua  stcuLua..  Bfols^M/^ 


— i— I 


the  city,  by  the' judgment  of  ostracbm.  This, Uw  was,  ipfldtiitcd  it 
Athens,  after  the  tyrants  were  expelled  out  of  th^  city,  by  KwHi^tiHi: 
and  the  law  was  thus;  every  citizen  wrote  th^  nam^e  of  bqai.ii(a 
shell,  whom  they  most  suspected  to  be  in  a  capapity  (by  ramq  of 
his  power  and  interest)  to  overturn  the  popular  government^  aod^he 
whose  name  was  written  in  most  of  the  shells,  was  forthwith  banblid 
for  the  space  of  five  years:  and  this  law  was  used  at  Athens,  not  sq 
much  as  a  punishment  for  any  particular  offence,  as  to  humbk  the 
spirit  of  proud  and  aspiring  men,  and  by  their  banishment  to  redact 
them  to  more  moderation  aqd  submission. 

Themistocles  thus  banished  from  his  country,  went  to  Aijgos; 
which  when  known  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  (supposing  now  they  had 
a  fair  opportunity  to  ruin  him),  they  again  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens, 
to  accuse  him  as  being  in  conspiracy  with  Pausanias  in  his  treason; 
alledging  that  those  injuries  which  concerned  all  Greece  in  genenl, 
should  not  be  determined  by  the  Athenians  only,  but  by  acqamiOQ 
council  of  Greece,  which  was  usually,  upon  such  occasions,  assembled 
at  Sparta.    Themistocles,  considering  that  the  Lacedemonians  were 
resolved  to  expose  the  Athenians  to  shame  and  contempt,  and'tha| 
they  of  Athens  were  as  ready  to  oppose  them,  in  defending  thei( 
country  against  the  crime  objected,  he  concluded  that  the  mfttcX; 
concerning  him  would  be  agreed  to  be  heard  in  a.common  andg^ner 
ral  assembly  of  the  Grecians  at  Sparta ;  and  he;  had  had  <*xpeacnee 
that  the  Lacedemonians  wert  guided  more  by  interest  and; fiiLvour, 
tlian  by  the  rules  of  justice,  as  by  a  late  experiment  was  apparent  in 
a  judgment  they  lately  gave,  in  a  cause  between  them  of  Aigos  and 
Athens:  for  they  that  were  judges  in  that  assembly,  were  so  envious 
against  the  Athenians,  that  though  the  Athenians  provided  moiie  ships 
for  the  late  war  than  all  the  Grecians  besides,  yet  they  judged  them 
worthy  of  no  more  honour  than  any  of  the  rest  of  the  Gre^:  for 
these  reasons  he  judged  it  not  advisable  to  trust  to  that  assembly*  at 
Sparta;  for  from  his  late  defence  made  at  Atliens,  they  took  oecauon 
to  renew  their  accusation ;  for  in  his  justification  he  had  confessed 
he  had  received  letters  from  Pausanias,  to  persuade  liim  to  join  with 
him  in  his  treason,  conceiving  this  would  be  a  strong  argument  for 
tlie  support  of  his  innocence ;  inasmuch  as  it  might  be  concluded  that 
Pausanias  would  never  have  used  such  earnest  entreaty,  unless  be  had 
before  disallowed  of  Pausanias's  treasonable  design. 

For  these  reasons  Themistocles  fied  to  Admctus  king  of  the  Mo* 
lossians^,  and  at  his  court  humbly  prayed  for  protection.  The  king 
at  the  first  received  him  courteously,  and  promised  that  be  would 
take  care  of  his  safety:  but  when  the  Lacediemoniaiis  sent  some  of 

*  OfEpirui, 


dqi^XZ/*  BSDDOUTB  MCU1V8.  406 


tb4  mbUity.  to  iMm.  to  demftAdrTbrnniitoclaty  colUogUnktnutDcv 

tfae  foiii  of  Gneeee)  wd  dettooooiiig  wwagMiitt the  kiogt bji all  tht 

QmQii$o$$Muhm  be  did  ddiveo  htm*:.  tl»  king^t' leagth  move^mth 

tbck  tbrealSj  and  yet  pityiog  hiii  kte  sopplkiit  oa  the  on^hMidf  atid 

4e«iHiiK  to  avoid,  the  imputiiion  ofi  igoomioy,  of'barboaring  s-tnilor 

«i|i  the  other  band,  advised  Tbemistooies  with  all-apeed  tohe  goneea 

privately  as  be  could,  aod  facaished  him  with  a  great  sum  of  money 

foe  his  support,  in  his  fligbu    HaviDg- received  the 'moneys  and  all 

other  supplies  necessary,  provided  by  the  king  for  him,  he  fledin  the 

night  from,  the  Molossians,  and}  fiodiog.  two  young  merehante  pf 

Liguria,  who  were  well  acquaintednvith  the  voyage^  he  fled  with  them, 

and  by  the  advantage  of  the  night,  and  the  unwearied  care  and  i&«* 

duftrgr  of  the  two  young  men,  he  deceived  the  Laced«ttioniae^  and 

eame  safe  into  Asia,  where  he  badia  speeiid  frieodicalled  Lysithedas, 

a  OMUi  of  great  wealth  aod^  interest,  and  with^bim  ite  abodew    Tbie 

naao  was  in  great  £ivour  with  Xenee:the  Persian  king,  and'hadnobljf 

entertained  his  whole  army,  as  they  passed  that  ways  by  which  means 

he  became  vei^  familiar,  and  endeared  to  the  king«    l^e  man  {Mtjp- 

kigtbe  present  condition  of  Themistocles,  endeavoured  all  be-eottUt 

IP  prefer  him,  and  promised  to  do.  him  all  the  serviee  that  was  nt 

hif  pawer» 

But  when  Themistocles  desired  him  to  bring  him  totbe-Uieg,  beet- 
first  refused,  alledging  that  if  be  did,  the  king  would  tabeo#iihhead, 
because  he  had  done  so  much  mischief  to  the  Persiuns.  Yet  when 
be  found  that  Tliemistocles  was  id  earnest,  and  pressing,  he  yielded 
to  Inm,  and  in  a  short  time  procured  him  a -safe  conduct  into  Persia. 
It  was  a  custom  there,  that  when  any. of  the  kiagV  concubines  were- 
brought  to  him,  they  were  carried  in  a  chariot  close  covered,  and  it' 
was  not  lawful  for  any  either  to  spy  or  inquire  who  was  so  carried. 
Lysithedas  made  use  of  this  to  effect  what  he  designed,  for  he  pro- 
cured a  chariot  sumptuously  adorned  with  flags  and  streamers,  and 
put  Themistocles  into  it,  and  with  all  secrecy  brought  him  safe  to- 
the  king,  who  had  first  promised  Lysithedas  in  private,  that' none 
should  do  him  any  injury.  After  he  came  into  the  king's  presence,- 
and  in  an  elegant  and  fluent  discourse,  Iiad  satisfied  him  that  he  had 
not  been  any  ways  injurious  to  the  Persians,  he  Was  fiurly  dbcharged 
and  acquitted.     And  being  thus  safe  by  the  favour  of  an  enemy,  be  fell 

presently  into  a  new  and  far  greater  danger,  which  was  thus 

Mandona,  the  daughter  of  Darius,  that  destroyed  the  Magi,  and 
sister  of  Xerxes,  was  of  high  esteem  among  the  Persnins;  she  lost  all 
her  cliildren  in  the  sea  fight  where  the  Persians  were  routed;  which 
she  could  not  bear  without  great  trouble,  which  moved  all  to  pity  her : 


406  BtODORUS  SICULU8.  '  Aok  XL 


she  hearing  that  Tbemistocles  was  come  to  court,  in  a  nKMuniiig 
habit,  and  with  many  tears,  petitioned  the  king  her  brother,  diat  he 
would  kill  Themistocles;  but  not  being  able  to  prevail,  she  aolidtcdl 
the  nobility  to  the  same  purpose,  and  at  length  raised  a  tamakuoat 
multitude,  to  demand  justice  against  him;  who  rushed  with  great 
clamours  and  noise  into  the  palace,  crying  out  for  justice  agaiosl 
Themistocles.  The  king  told  the  nobility  that  he  would  call  a  senate^ 
and  whatever  they  ordered  should  be  effected.  Tbemistocles  had 
sufficient  time  given  him  to  prepare  for  his  trial ;  within  which  time 
he  perfectly  learnt  the  Persian  language,  and  so  managed  and  pleaded 
his  own  cause  before  the  senate,  that  he  was  acquitted  both  of  gaih 
and  punishment. 

The  king  rejoiced  at  his  discharge,  and  honoured  him  with  manj 
rich  gifts;  for  he  gave  to  him  in  marriage  a  virtuous  Persian  lady, of 
noble  birth,  and  excellent  beauty;  and  ordered  him  many  servants 
to  wait  upon  him,  and  gave  him  all  sorts  of  drinking  vessels,  and 
things  for  daily  use,  not  only  for  necessity,  but  for  delight  and  plet« 
sure.  He  bestowed  likewise  upon  him,  three  cities,  for  his  support 
and  maintenance :  Magnesia,  near  the  river  Meander,  (the  richest 
City  of  Asia  for  corn),  to  provide  him  bread:  Myus  for  meat  and 
victuals,  being  near  the  sea,  where  much  fish  was  caught;  and  Lamp* 
sacus,  full  of  vines,  for  his  drink. 

Themistocles,  now  free  from  all  fear  of  the  Grecians,  (by  wiioni 
he  was  undeservedly  banished  after  all  the  good  services  he  had  done 
for  them,  and  richly  provided  for  by  them,  whom  he  had  afflicted 
with  grievous  slaughters),  lived  in  these  cities  with  great  plenty  of 
all  things.  At  length  he  died  at  Magnesia,  where  he  was  buried, 
and  a  sumptuous  monument  there  set  up  for  him,  which  remains  to 
this  day. 

Some  authors  say,  that  Xerxes  longed  to  renew  the  war  against 
Greece,  and  required  Themistocles  to  be  general  of  the  army;  who 
assented,  upon  condition  that  Xerxes  would  swear  that  he  would 
not  undertake  the  war  without  him.  Upon  which  a  bull  was  sacri- 
ficed, and  at  the  solemnity  the  king  swore  accordingly.  Then  The'* 
mistoclcs  drank  off  u  cup  of  the  bull's  blood,  and  immediately  fell 
down  dead. 

Thus  was  Xerxes  diverted,  and  Themistocles  (by  the  manner  of  his 
death)  left  behind  him  a  remarkable  evidence  of  his  sincerity  in  the 
management  of  the  aflfairs  of  his  country. 

And  now  we  arc  come  to  the  death  of  the  bravest  man  among 
the  Grecians,  of  whom  it  may  be  justly  doubted  whether  he  fled  to  the 
Persians  with  the  stain  of  any  guilt  or  treachery  against  his  conntry. 


Chap.  XIL  DiODORUS  siculus.  407 


but  rather  believed  that  the  Athenians  and  the  rest  of  the  Grecians, 
ungrateful  for  all  the  good  services  he  had  done,  forced  him  most 
anjustly  into  extreme  hardships  and  dangers.  For  if  we  impartially 
and  without  envy,  examine  the  temper  and  actions  of  the  man,  we 
cannot  but  judge  him  in  every  respect,  to  be  the  bravest  and  most 
accomplished  person  of  any  we  have  before  mentioned.  Therefore 
it  may  be  justly  surprising,  that  the  Athenians  should  wilfully  deprive 
themselves  of  so  excellent  a  person:  for  when  Sparta  was  in  greatest 
power,  above  all  the  other  cities,  and  Eurybiades  the  Spartan  was 
high  admiral  of  the  fleet,  who  but  he,  by  his  counsels  and  manage* 
ment,  robbed  all  the  Spartans  of  their  glory?  Whom  have  we  ever 
heard  of  that,  by  one  action,  accomplished  that  which  advanced  his 
honour  above  all  generals,  and  his  city  above  all  Greece,  and  Greece 
itself  above  all  the  barbarians  ?  What  general  ever  had  less  advantages, 
and  yet  subject  to  greater  and  more  imminent  dangers?  Who  ever 
obtained  so  glorious  a  victory,  opposing  the  combined  strength  of  all 
Asia,  with  the  citizens  of  a  poor  ruined  city?  Who  ever  advanced  his 
country  to  such  a  height  and  extent  of  power  by  his  honourable  ac- 
tions in  time  of  peace?  Who  ever  so  preserved  his  country  in  the 
greatest  heat  of  a  devouring  war?  By  one  well  laid  stratagem  of 
pulling  down  a  bridge,  he  ruined  the  enemy's  land-forces,  causing 
them  to  divide  one  half  from  the  other,  and  by  that  means  making  it 
more  easy  for  tlie  Grecians  to  destroy  the  rest.  Therefore,  if  we  se- 
riously consider  the  things  done  by  him,  and  exactly  and  particularly 
examine  them,  it  will  evidently  appear,  that  he  was  most  unworthily 
dealt  with  by  a  city  which  he  had  by  his  virtue  and  valour  advanced 
to  the  highest  pitch  of  glory ;  and  that  that  city,  which  was  esteemed 
and  reputed  the  most  just  and  wise,  was  to  him  the  most  cruel  and 

anjust. 

Though  this  may  seem  a  long  digression  in  the  praise  of  Themis* 
tocles,  yet  we  conceived  it  an  inexcusable  neglect  slightly  to  pass  over 
his  excellent  and  incomparable  virtues. 

During  these  times,  Micythus,  prince  of  Rhegium  and  Zande,  buiU 
Teuxuntum  in  Italy. 


408  DIODOXUS  9ICULU9.  BbokXL 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Cif$honj  the  Atl^iian  general  J  gains  many  placet  for  (he  Aikeniams 
routs  the  Persians  by  a  stratagem  at  EurymeeUOim 


DEMOTION  or  Drotnodides  being  archon  at  Atheos,  the 
chose  P.  Valerius  Publicola  and  Naulius  Rtrfos  consuls. 

During  the  government  of  Deanotion^  the  Athenians  chose  CiiMa 
the  son  <tf  Miltiades  to  be  their  general,  and  with  a  great  almj  con* 
inanded  him  to  pass  over  into  Asia,  to  aid  the  confederate  cities,  ud 
10  free  them  that  were  as  yet  garrisoned  by  the  Persians.  He  Game 
with  a  fleet  to  Byzantium,  and  took  the  city  Eion  from  the  Persians; 
and  forced  Scyros,  where  the  Pelasgi  and  Dolopes  inhabited ;  and 
appointing  one  amongst  the  Athenians  to  see  the  repair  of  it,  he  di- 
vided the  country  by  lot. 

From  hence  (with  his  mind  and  thoughts  full  of  great  projects)  he 
sailed  back  to  the  Pirseus,  and  being  furnished  with  more  ships,  and 
sufiicient  provision,  he  put  to  sea  again  with  a  navy  of  two  hundred 
sail. 

At  length,  with  the  lonians  and  other  confederates,  he  got  together 
a  fleet  of  three  hundred  sail^  and  made  for  Caria.  And  when  he  came 
there,  all  the  Grecian  cities  upon  the  sea  coast  immediately  revolted 
from  the  Persians.  The  rest  (which  were  6Hed  with  the  natural  in- 
habitants, and  with  Persian  garrisons)  Cimon  took  by  storm.  All 
being  thus  hrought  under  his  power  in  Caria,  Lycia  wholly  submitted 
and  came  under  his  protection.  By  those  that  came  in  to  the  Athe- 
nians, the  fleet  was  greatly  increased.  Hereupon  the  Persians  prepaid 
land-forces  of  their  own  country,  but  their  seamen  were  of  Phosnieia 
and  Cilicia:  Tithraustes,  the  bastard  son  of  Xerxes,  was  general  of 
the  Persian  army. 

Cimon  having  intelligence  that  the  Persian  fleet  lay  at  Cypres, 
makes  straight  thither,  and  joins  battle  with  his  two  hundred  and  fiftj 
ships,  against  three  hundred  and  forty  of  the  Persians.  It  was  fought 
stoutly  and  bravely  on  both  sides ;  at  length  the  victory  fell  to  the 
Athenians,  who  (besides  many  that  were  sunk  and  destroyed)  took 
above  a  hundred  ships  with  their  men.  The  rest  flying  to  Cyprus,  the 
soldiers  left  their  ships  and  ran  ashore,  and  the  empty  vessels  after- 
wards came  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

Cimon  being  not  yet  satisfied  with  this  victory,  forthwith  sailed 
nway  with  his  whole  fleet,  with  a  design  to  fall  upon  the  land-army  of 
the  Persians,  w*ho  were  then  encamped  at  Eurymedon,  contriving  to 


Chmp.  XITL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  409 

delude  them  by  a  stratagem ;  he  filled  the  ships  he  had  taken  with 
the  stoutest  of  his  men,  with  turbans  and  other  ornaments,  attired 
like  the  Persians,  who,  deceived  by  the  make  and  furniture  of  the 
Pf  rsiciii  ships,  took  tliem  for  a  fresh  supply,  and  received  the  Athe* 
ni.ir.s  as  friends. 

Ciiiu)!),  when  night  came,  landed  his  men,  and  being  taken  as  a 
frirnd,  lu»  rushed  into  the  camp  of  the  barbarians,  now  filled  with 
confitNion  .ind  terror,  his  soldiers  killing  all  before  them,  and  amongst 
the  rest,  Piieredates,  in  his. tent,  theking*s  nephew  on  his  brother's 
•irie,  another  general  of  the  Persian  army.  At  length  the  whole 
anny,  jhrou;;h  the  sudden  and  unexpected  assault,  were  totally  routed 
anfl  ()ut  to  Hi^ht;  and  such  a  fear  and  consternation  surprised  the 
Persians,  that  many  of  them  knew  not  by  whom  they  were  broken; 
for  they  could  not  in  the  least  imagine,  that  they  were  assaulted  by 
the  Grecians,  who  had  no  land  army,  as  they  were  verily  persuaded; 
but  thouglit  that  the  Pisidians  their  neighbours,  who  had  been  a  little 
before  provoked,  had  risen  in  arms  against  them.  Supposing,  there- 
fort^,  this  impression  upon  them  to  be  made  from  the  land,  they  fled 
to  their  ships  as  to  their  friends;  and  because  the  night  was  very 
dark,  the  mistake  was  the  greater,  and  more  mischievous,  none  know- 
ing ror  certainty  what  to  do  When  the  Persians  in  this  confusion^ 
were  slaughtered  on  every  side,  Cimon  having  before  directed  his 
soldiers  that  as  soon  as  he  should  lift  up  a  burning  torch,  they  should 
all  repair  thither,  gave  the  sign  near  to  the  fleet,  fearing  some  disas- 
ter migiit  happen  by  his  men  being  scattered  and  dispersed  in  seeking 
after  the  pillage  of  the  field;  at  the  sight  of  the  torch  they  left  oft' 
pillaging,  and  all  returned  to  their  ships. 

The  next  day  they  set  up  a  trophy  near  the  place,  and  sailed  back 
to  Cy[)rus,  fraught  with  two  glorious  victories,  the  one  at  sea,  and 
the  other  at  land.  For  it  was  never  before  known,  that  such  great 
thmgs  both  by  sea  and  land  were  ever  done  by  one  and  the  same 
army.  From  this  time  Cimon,  for  the  great  achievements  he  had 
bravely  and  wisely  performed,  both  by  his  valour  and  policy,  was 
highly  advanced  in  reputation,  not  only  amongst  his  fellow-citizens, 
but  all  the  rest  of  the  Grecians;  for  he  took  three  hundred  and  forty 
ships,  twenty  thousand  prisoners,  and  a  vast  sum  of  money.  The 
Persians,  greatly  perplexed  with  this  dreadful  blow, began  building  a 
greater  number  of  ships  than  they  had  before;  for  the  great  suc- 
cesses of  the  Athenians  after  this  struck  them  with  fear  and  terror; 
and  from  this  time  the  city  increased  both  in  wealth  and  powe^, 
and  became  famous  abroad  for  the  glory  of  their  arras.    The  Ath^- 

VoL.  1.  No.  37.  acG 


4 1 0  DIODORl'S  8ICULUS.  Book  XI. 


uiaiis  dedfL-ated  t!\e  tenths  of  the  spoils  to  their  gods^  with  thb 
epigram.-. 

SiDCP  Mu  from  Earopr  A^iii  did  divide. 

And  Mam  firsi  ra^'d  with  bloodj  liand^ 
Among  loankiiid  (he  sun  hath  not  eipjr'd 

So  lad  N  fight  from  sea  or  land. 
Frum  the  Ph(eiiici«tn  fleet  when  itronglj  maa'd 

An  hand  red  bhip»  were  took,  these  slew 
Thoustinds  of  Medes,  nmde  As: a  sighing  stand 

Sad,  and  uppress*d  with  th'  armed  crew. 

These  were  the  things  done  this  year.  * 


CHAP.  XIV. 

A  great  earthquake  in  Sparta ;  the  war  upon  them  hy  the  Heleii 

and  Measenians. 

PFL'EDON  was  now  arclion  of  Athens,  and  Lucius  Furius  Medulli- 
nus  and  Marcus  Manlius  Vulso,  consuls  of  Rome,  when  a  most  sad 
and  ui:ox|H*ctcd  calamity  happened  to  the  Spartans;  for  by  an  earth* 
quake  tluM'o,  not  only  the  houses  were  wholly  overturned,  but  above 
twenty  tlM*UNand  souls  buried  in  the  rubbish.  7*he  city  shcwk  ibra 
long  time  together,  and  many  by  the  violent  fall  of  the  walls  of  the 
houses  miserably  perished;  and  the  household -goods  aud  riches  of 
all  sorts  were  t»y  this  dreadful  shock  swallowed  up. 

Thus  were  they  punished  as  by  some  angry  ueity  taking  vengeaoce 
upon  their  crimes;  and  were  afterwards  brought  under  many  other 
calamities,  by  the  hands  of  men,  u))on  the  accounts  following... 

The  Hcli'ts  and  Messenians,  (enraged  not  long  before  against  the 
I^icetUemonians),  bridled  their  anger  for  a  time,  whilst  they  feared 
the  power  and  grandeur  of  the  city  of  Sparta.  But  when  they  ob- 
st*rved  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  city  and  inhabitants  were  destroy* 
cd  by  the  late  caithquake,  (setting  light  by  them  that  were  left),  they 
entered  into  a  league,  and  with  joint  force  made  war  upon  the  Spar* 
tans.  But  Aichidamus,  kingof  Sparta,  by  his  prudence,  had  pre- 
served many  uf  the  citizens  from  the  late  ruin,  and  with  these  rrao- 
Ititely  ^oes  forth  against  the  enemy.  '  For  while  the  city  was  in  the 
height  of  this  terrible  convulsion,  Archidamus  suddenly  headed  his 
army,  and  hastened  into  the  open  field,  and  commanded  the  rest  to 


I  Chap^  Xr.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  ^11 


\i  follow  him;  by  which  means  this  remnant  was  preserxcd.     Flaving 
marshalled  his  men,  he  prepared  for  battle. 

The  Helots  with  the  Messeiiians  in  their  first  heat,  with  great  con* 
fidence  marched  against  Sparta,  supposing  there  was  none  to  make 
any  defence.  But  when  they  understood  that  Archidamus  was  ready 
with  the  citizens  that  were  left,  to  defend  the  city  and  country,  they 
desisted  from  their  design.  Afterwards,  from  a  fort  they  had  in  Mes« 
tenia,  they  made  daily  inroads  into  Lac^nia. 

The  Spartans  send  to  the  Athenians  for  aid,  who  furnished  them 
with  supplies:  and  at  length,  by  their  diligence  in  procuring  assist* 
aoce  fiom  the  rest  of  their  confederates,  they  ^ot  toirether  an  army 
equal  to  their  enemies:  nay,  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  they  were 
Ear  superior:  but  afterwards  they  dismissed  the  Athenians,  in  truth, 
suspecting  that  they  fevoured  the  Messenians,  but  pretending  Miat  the 
forces  of  the  other  confederates  were  sufficient  for  ^he  prtMH'  ser- 
vice. The  Athenians  lookhig  upon  it  as  a  slight  and  an  .tiiront,  :fe* 
parted  grumbling,  full  of  indignation,  with  their  hiMrts  b'tltiuL^  with 
revenge  against  the  Lacedsmonians ;  which  hatred  mcreased  cvtry 
day  more  and  more:  and  this  was  the  first  cause  of  the  t-nmity  be- 
tween the  Athenians  and  the  Lucedemonians,  which  after^rarf's  Ik oke 
out  into  open  hostility,  and  filled  tne  citlesi  with  cruelty  and  blood- 
abed,  and  all  Greece  with  misery  and  calamity:  but  we  shall  write 
of  these  things  distinctly  in  their  due  place. 

After  this,  the  Lacedemonians,  with  the  forces  of  their  confede- 
lates,  besieged  Ithome.  In  the  mean  time  all  the  Melo's  revolted 
from  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  joined  with  the  Messenians.  And 
now,  though  the  war  had  continued  ten  years  com|ili'tc,  wasting  one 
another  with  various  successes,  yet  they  could  not  decide  the  con* 
troversy. 


CHAP.  XV. 

l%c  war  between  the  Argives  and  the  Myctnctarts. 

WHEN  Theaginidas  was  archon  of  Athens,  and  Lucius  ^£mi!iu9 
Mamercus  and  Lucius  Vopiscus  Julius,  lonsuls  of  Rome,  brgan 
the  seventy-.'  ^hth  olympiad,  wherein  ParnuiiiiLi^i  Pussidiiniatcs  whs 
victor.  At  that  time  the  war  broke  out  between  the  Artrives  and  the 
Mycenieans  upon  the  following  occasion.  The  Mycchsans,  byrea- 
fou  of  tbc  antieui  renown  and  glory  of  their  country,  would  never 


4 1 2  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XL 

-  '  ■■       ■■■  -»^ 

sabmit  to  the  government  of  the  Argives^  as  all  the  rest  of  the  citiei 
in  the  territory  of  Argos  did,  but  were  still  governed  by  their  oirli 
laws  distinct  from  them  of  Argos.    They  contended  likewise  widi 
the  Argives,  concerning  the  holy  rites  of  the  temple  of  Juuc,  andl 
to  have  the  sole  management  of  the  Nemsan  games.     BesideSy 
when  the  Argives  made  a  law,  that  none  should  aid  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians at  Thermopylae,  unless  the  Spartans  would  relinquish  and  give 
up  part  of  their  country  to  them  of  Argos,  they  of  Mycene  only  of 
all  the  other  cities  in  the  territories  of  Argos  joined  with  the  I4H 
cedflemonians.    And  lastly,  they  of  Argos  were  jealous,  lest,  by  the 
growth  of  their  power,  their  antient  courage  should  so  revive  as  to 
contend  with  them  for  the  sovereignty.    For  these  reasons,  they  had 
an  evil  eye  to  the  Mycensans,  and  some  time  not  long  before,  had  a 
longing  desire  to  ruin  their  city.     And  now  they  thought  a  fit  ocea* 
sion  and  opportunity  was  offered  them,  to  accomplish  what  they  be- 
fore designed,  in  regard  the  Spartans  seemed  not  to  be  in  a  condition^ 
by  reason  of  their  late  calamity,  to  aid  and  assist  them.    To  this  end 
they  marched  against  them  with  a  great  army  both  frem  Aijgos  and 
their  confederates:  and  having  routed  them,  drove  them  within  the 
walls,  and  besieged  their  city.     The  Myceusans  made  a  stout  de- 
fence for  a  time,  but,  wearied  out  and  wasted  by  famine,  (the  Lace- 
daemonians, partly  through  wars  of  their  own,  and  partly  through  the 
late  ruins  by  the  earthquake,  unable  to  assist  them,  and  the  help  of 
the  other  confederates  failing),  they  became  a  prey  to  the  conqueroTS* 
The  Argives  made  all  the  citizens  captives,  and  consecrated  a  tench 
of  the  spoil  to  the  god,  and  laid  the  city  even  with  the  ground.     Such 
was  the  end  of  Mycenid,  a  city  in  former  times  flourishing  in  all 
prosperity,  that  liad  bred  and  brought  up  men  famous  in  their  gene- 
rations, that  had  been  glorious  in  the  world  by  brave  and  nbble  ac* 
tions,  and  now  lies  waste  and  forsaken  unto  this  day.    Tliese  were 
the  atfairs  of  this  year. 


CHAP.  XVI. 


The  death  of  Hiero. 


LYSIATUS  being  governor  or  archon  of  Athens,  the  Romans  ehose 
Lucius  Pinarius  Mamercinus  and  Lucius  Furius  Fusus,  their  con- 
suls.   At  this  time  Hicro,  king  of  Syracuse,  invited  to  hinij  with 


I  thap.  XFTL  DtODORUB  SICULUS.  413 

r  ftiany  rich  presents,  the  sons  of  Anaxilaus,  prince  of  Zancle,  now 

*.  tfcssana  in  Sicily,  and  put  them  in  mind  how  kind  Gelon  had  been 

I   to  their  father,  and  advised  them,  now  they  were  come  to  mea*a 

:   tetate,  to  call  Micythus  their  tutor  to  account,  and  to  take  the  sove* 

;    nlgn  power  and  government  into  their  own  hands.    Being  returned 

to  Rhegium,  they  forthwith  demanded  an  account  of  Micythus  of  hia 

administration;  who,  being  a  just  and  honest  man,  called  together 

•n  the  friends  of  the  two  young  men,  and  gave  so  full  and  clearan  ae« 

count  of  his  trust,  that  all  then  present  admired  his  justice  aodfidtk*- 

ftilness.   The  youths,  now  sorry  for  what  they  had  done,  desired  him 

to  take  upon  him  again  the  government,  and  as  their  lather,  to  order 

and  dispose  of  all  affairs  as  he  thought  fiL    But  Micythus  utterly  re« 

fused  to  beany  longer  concerned ;  but  giving  up  all,  shipped  his  goods, 

and  sailed  forth  from  Rhegium,  with  the  general  love  and  favour  of 

the  people,  and  made  for  Greece,  where  he  lived  the  rest  of  his  time 

in  great  repute  at  Tegea  in  Arcadia.    Hiero  died  at  Catana,  a  city 

repeopied  by  him,  and  was  there  buried  with  great  pomp  and  solem* 

ntty,  after  he  had  reigned  eleven  years.     He  left  bis  kingdom  to 

Tbrasybttlus  his  brother,  who  reigned  only  one  year. 


a 


CHAP.  XVII. 

nnuybMbts  tang  qf  Syracuse  deposed  by  force  of  arms /or  ki$ 

tyranny. 

NOW  was  Lysanias  archon  of  Athens',  and  Appius  Claudius  and 
Titus  Quintus  Capitolinus,  Roman  consuls,  during  whoae  govem- 
snents,Thrasybulus  lost  the  kingdom  of  Syracuse:  concerning  whom, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  our  purpose  particularly  and  distinctly  to  write,  it 
is  necessary  to  look  a  little  back,  that  so  things  may  be  more  clearly 
understood  from  the  beginning.  Gelon,  the  son  of  Dinomenes,  a 
Bian  for  valour  and  military  discipline  excelling  all  the  rest,  by  a  noble 
•tratagem,  (as  you  have  beard),  routed  the  Carthaginians.  And 
Qsing  his  victory  with  all  moderation  towards  tliem  he  had  subdued, 
and  dealing  kindly  and  courteously  with  all  his  neighbours,  wasgreat« 
ly  honoured  among  the  Sicilians;  and  for  the  sweetness  of  his  dispo- 
aitkm,  lived  beloved  of  all  in  peace  and  quietness  to  the  end  of  his 


414  *  mODORUS  StCULUS.  Smik  XL 


Hiero,  the  eldest  of  his  brothers,  succeeded  him  in  the  kiDgdoBi 
but  far  unlike  him  io  his  governmeot.     For  he  was  covetoas,  cnidt 
and  altogether  a  stranger  to  the  candour  and  sincerity  of  his  brothcTj 
by  reason  whereof  mariy  were  inclined  to  a  defection  and  revolt;  bat 
the  nr.emory  of  Gclou's  generosity  and  general  kindness  to  all  the 
Sicilians,  restrained  tliem  from  outward  force  and  violence.    But 
when  Hiero  was  dead^Thrasybulus,  lils  brother,  succeeding  to  the 
crown,  exceeded  his  predecessor  in  all  vice  and  wickedness:  for  be- 
ing more  cruel  and  bloody  in  his  nature,  he  slaughtered  the  citizens- 
against  all  law  and  justice;  and  by  false  accusations  banished  many 
others,  and  confiscated  their  estates.     At  last,  hating  his  peopki 
and  the  people  on  the  other  hand,  hating  him  for  the  injuries  they 
bad  suffered,  he  raised  a  standing  army,  to  defend  himself  against  the 
feared  revolt  of  his  subjects.     And  now  growing  efery  day  moit 
and  more  into  the  hatred  of  his  people,  abusing  some,  and  taking  away 
the  lives  of  many  others;  the  people,  not  able  longer  to  endure  his 
cruelties,  made  a  general  defection,  and  rose  up  in  arms,  to  procure 
their  liberty  by  the  sword,  and  shake  off  that  yoke  of  slavery  and 
tyranny  they  were  under.    Thrasybulus  seeing  the  whole  city  of  Sy» 
racuse  in  arms  against  him,  first  endeavoured  to  cool  them  by  fiur 
words;  but  when  he  saw  they  were  so  incensed,  that  there  was  no 
opposing  them,  he  raised  forces  from  Catana,  a  colony  not  long  be- 
fore placed  there  by  Hiero;  and,  by  other  confederates  and  mercena- 
ries, he  got  together  an  army  of  fifteen  thousand  men,  and  possessed 
himself  of  that  part  of  the  city  called  Acradina,  and  the  island  which 
was  strongly  fortified,  from  whence  he  made  many  sallies  and  incur- 
sions upon  the  enemy. 

The  Syracusans  at  first  kept  that  part  of  the  city  called  Ithica^ 
and  from  thence  annoyed  Thrasybulus :  and  sent  ambassadors  to  Gels, 
Agrigentum,  Selinus,  and  Himera,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  cities  in 
the  heart  of  Sicily,  desiring  aid  and  assistance  for  the  recovering  of 
their  liberty.  These  readily  answered  their  request,  and  sent  them 
seasonable  supplies,  some  regiments  of  foot,  others  troops  of  horse, 
others  ships  furnished  with  all  necessaries  for  war:  thus  in  a  short 
time,  having  a  considerable  force  both  of  a  fleet  at  sea,  and  an  army 
by  land,  the  Syracusans  offered  battle  to  the  enemy,  both  by  sea  and 
land.  But  Thrasybulus  being  forsaken  of  his  confederates,  and  hav« 
ing  now  none  to  trust  to  but  his  mercenaries,  betook  himself  to 
the  Acradina,  and  the  island,  and  left  the  rest  of  the  city  wholly  ia 
the  power  of  the  Syracusans.  Afterwards  he  fought  with  them  at 
sea,  and  was  beaten,  losing  many  of  his  ships,  and  fled  with  those 
that  escaped  into  the  island.  Presently  after  he  drew  out  his  men 
from  the  Acradina,  and  joined  battle  with  them  in  the  suburbs  of  the 


Cftdp.  XFIIL  DIODOEUS  SICULm.  41ft 

city,  vkhere  he  was  again  routed,  with  the  loss  of  matij  of  hb  mcD, 
and  retreated  a  second  time  withio  his  post  in  the  Acradina. 

At  len|;th  being  out  ot  all  ho|>e  of  regaining  iiis  so?ereignty,he  tent 

fo  the  Syracusans,  and  came  to  terms  of  agreement  with  them,  and 

00  'irparted  into  Locri..    The  Syrucusans,  thus  freed  from  slavery^ 

suffered  tlie  mercenaries  to  mar^h  away  peaceably.    They  freed  like* 

wbe  the  rest  of  the  ciries  from  such  garrisons  as  were  put  upbnthcm, 

and  restored  to  trver}  place  the  democracy.     From  thenceforth  the 

Syracusans  lived  iu  gieat  peace  and  prosperhy,  and  enjoyed  a  popular 

^veri'iiiriit  tor  the  space  uf  threescort  years,  till  th«r  reign  of  Dio- 

nysius.     Thin  Thrasybulus  received  a  well-ordered  and  constituted 

kitigdi/ij.,  but  basely  lost  it  by  his  wickedness;  and  spent  the  rest  of 

lus  days  a:  Locri  as  a  pri\'ate  man.     Whilst  these  things  were  done 

in  Sicily,  Rome  first   created  four  to  be  tribunes  of  the  people, 

Caius  Sicinius,  Lucius  Numitorius,  Marcus  Duillius^  and  SjAurioa 

Aquiliu), 


CHAP.  XVUI. 

The  murder  of  Xerxes  by  Artabanuim 

AT  the  end  of  this  year,  Lysitheus  was  made  chief  goveriKMr  of  A* 
thens,  and  Lucius  Valerius  Publicola  and  Titus  iEmilius  MamercuSp 
consuls  of  Rome.     In  their  times  Artabanus  of  Hyrcania,  io  great 
esteem  with  Xerxes,  and  captain  of  his  guard,  contrived  to  gain  the 
kingdom  by  the  murder  of  the  king.     Me  reveals  his  design  to  Mi- 
thridates  the  eunuch,  one  of  the  kiiig*s  chamberlains,  (whom  he  most 
confided  in,  as  beirg  his  near  kinsman,  and  whom  he  had  obliged  by 
many  instances  of  Lis  favour).     Mithridates  preseotly  complies  with 
him,  and  brings  Artabanus  privately  in  the  night  into  the  bedcham« 
ber,  and  being  entt  red,  without  dehy  murders  the  king:  and  in 
the  heat  of  the  fact  runs  to  the  king's  sons,  two  of  whom^  Darius  the 
eldest,  and  Artaxeixes,  were  then  at  court:  Hjrtaspes,  the  third,  at 
that  time  was  governor  of  Bactria.     Anabanus,  in  the  dead  of  the 
night,  hastens  to  Artaxerxes,  and  tells  him  that  Darius  had  murdered 
his  father  to  come  to  the  crown :  and  therefore  persuades  Artaserxct 
that  he  should  not  slothfully  suffer  his  brother  to  settle  himself  00 
the  throne,  but  revenge  his  father's  death,  and  take  upon  himscifthe 
sovereignty;  for  the  effecting  wliereof,  be  promised  to  bring  ia 
the  king's  guard  to  hb  assistance.    Artaiencs  was  easily  peiauaded^ 


4lS  DIODORUS  «ICULUS. 


aod,  with  the  as&utance  of  the  guards,  kilU  his  brother.  Aitabsi 
seeing  his  treachery  succeed  accordiog  to  his  hcan's  desire, 
boftsts  before  all  his  sons  that  the  time  was  come  for  his 
nent  to  the  kir^domi  and  forthwith  came  to  Anaierxcs  with  hit 
sword  drawn,  and  wounds  him.  Tfie  king  not  being  much  kort, 
bravely  defends  l;i(i:.sclf,  and  kills  Artabanus  upon  ific  place.  Hav- 
ing thus  not  only  preserved  himself,  but  revenged  the  irurder  of  Us 
father,  he  was  estabH.shed  i:\  il.c  throne  of  Persia.  This  was  the 
end  of  Xerxes,  after  be  had  reigned  twenty  yean.  But  his  saci 
continued  forty-four. 


CHAP.  XIX. 
The  war  between  the  Athenians  and  the  j3EgimatUm 

THE  following  year  wherein  Archimedes  was  archon  of  Athens, 
Aulus  Virginius  and  Titus  Xumicius,  Roman  consuls;  was  the  first 
year  of  the  seventy-ninth  olympiad,  at  which  Xenophon  the  Co- 
riiithiai)  won  the  prize:  at  this  time  the  Thracians  revolted  from  the 
Athenians^  through  the  differences  arising  concerning  the  mines,  but 
were  reduced  by  force  to  their  obedience.     The  ^giniana  likewise 
rebelled,  and  being  subdued,  the  Athenians  besieged  their  city,  which 
was  grown  proud,  not  only  through  their  great  successes  and  Ticti^ 
ries  at  sea,  but  their  riches  at  land ;  and  having  a  brave  and  well- 
furnished  navy,  were  ever  enemies  to  the  Athenians;  who  therefore 
entered  the  island  with  an  aimy,  laid  waste  the  country,  and  resolved 
to  raze  the  city  ofyEgina  to  the  ground:  hereupon,  now  grown  great 
in  power,  they  carried  not  themselves  with  that  humanity  and  cour- 
tesy towards  their  confederates  as  they  were  used  to  do,  but  domi* 
necrcd  every  where  with  a  proud  and  high  hand.    This  iuiperions 
way  of  tlicirs,  caused  many  of  their  confederates  to  enter  into  con- 
sultations for  a  general  defection,  and  some  particular  places  deter* 
mined  it  of  their  own  accord,  without  stopping  for,  or  expecting  the 
results  of  a  general  assembly.     While  these  things  were  actiiijg,  the 
Athenians,  (being  now  every  where  masters  at  sea),  sent  a  colony  of 
ten  thousand  men  to  A  mphipolis,  (chosen  partly  out  of  the  citizens^ 
and  partly  from  among  the  confederates),  and  divided  the  country  bj 
lot:  for  some  time  they  kept  down  the  Thracians  that  bordered  upon 
them;  but  when  they  attempted  to  proceed  farther  into  the  heart  of 
the  country,  those  that  entered  Thrace  were  wholly  cut  off  by  the 
I'ldones. 


Chap.  XX.  DIODORUS  sicuLUS.  417 


wmmmmmma 


«■  ■   » 


CHAP.  XX. 

The  Egyptians  revolt  from  the  Persians.    New  troubles  in 

Sicily. 

TLEPOLEMUS  being  governor  of  Atliens,  the  Roman  consuls 
were  Titus  Quintius  and  Quintus  Arbilius  Structus,  Artaxerxes 
uow  newly  come  to  the  throne  of  Persia,  first  put  to  death  all  those 
that  had  any  hand  in  the  murder  of  bis  father,  and  then  settled  aff<iirs 
so  as  he  thought  most  conducing  to  the  interest  of  the  government: 
for  he  removed  those  governors  of  the  provinces  whom  he  most  sus- 
pected, and  placed  others  in  whom  he  most  confided,  in  their  room. 
He  took  care  to  store  up  all  manner  of  provisions,  and  to  furnish  his 
army  with  all  things  necessary;  and  ruling  with  all  justice  and  equity, 
he  grew  into  high  esteem  among  the  Persians.  In  the  mean  time 
the  Egyptians  hearing  of  the  death  of  Xerxes,  and  the  troubles  in 
Persia  occasioned  thereby,  fell  a  plotting  how  to  recover  their  liberty; 
and  to  that  end  on  a  sudden  rose  against  the  Persians,  and  drove  the 
questors  or  Persian  treasurers  out  of  Egypt. 

Then  they  set  up  one  Inarus  to  be  their  king;  who  first  had  an 
army  of  the  natural  inhabitants,  and  afterwards  increased  his  forces 
by  mercenary  foreigners.  He  sent  likewise  ambassadors  to  Athens, 
desiring  their  aid,  with  promises,  that  if  they  regained  their  liberty, 
the  whole  kingdom  should  be  for  their  service  and  advantage  as  well 
as  his;  and  he  should  be  ever,  and  in  every  thing,  grateful  to  them. 
The  Athenians  conceiving  it  to  be  much  to  their  advantage,  if  by 
what  force  they  could  make,  they  might  drain  the  Persians  of  their 
money,  and  gain  likewise  the  Egyptians  to  their  interest,  to  be  ready 
to  serve  them  upon  all  occasions,  determined  to  send  to  their  assist- 
ance a  navy  of  three  hundred  sail;  and  to  that  end  all  hands  were 
at  work  to  make  ready  a  fleet.  Artaxerxes  receiving  the  news  of  the 
revolt  of  the  Egyptians,  resolved  to  exceed  them  both  in  number  of 
men,  and  provisions  of  war;  and  for  that  purpose  forthwith  raised 
soldiers  out  of  all  the  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  rigged  out  his  tieet, 
and  omitted  nothing  necessary  in  the  present  juncture.  And  thus 
stood  the  affairs  of  Asia  and  Egypt  at  this  time. 

In  Sicily,  after  they  had  thrown  off  the  kingly  government,  and 
restored  all  the  cities  to  liberty,  the  whole  island  greatly  flourished; 
for,  having  a  rich  and  fertile  soil,  and  peace  on  every  side,  they  grew 
very  rich  in  a  short  time,  the  land  abounding  in  labourers,  cattle, 
and  all  other  conveniencies,  for  the  comfort  and  happiness  of  man's 

Vol.  i.  No.  37-  hhh 


418  DioDORUS  sicuLtrs.  Book  XL 


liicy  much  being  now  laid  up,  and  nothing  expended  in  wart.  But 
they  continued  not  long  thus,  but  again  broke  forth  into  wars  and 
seditions  upon  the  account  following-.Thrasybalas  being  depoaed, 
they  called  a  general  assembly,  to  consult  upon  the  manner  of 
a  popular  government;  and  there  it  was  unanimously  decreed,  that  a 
statue  should  be  erected  to  Jove  the  Deliverer,  as  high  as  a  Coloasm^ 
and  that  there  should  be  yearly,  u|)on  the  day  that  they  were  deliver- 
ed from  the  tyrant,  and  regained  their  liberty,  sacrifices  oflfered,  and 
solemn  games  celebrated;  at  which  solemnities  they  likewise  vowed 
to  sacrifice  four  hundred  and  fifty  oxen,  and  therewith  to  feast  all  the 
people;  and  that  all  the  magistrates  (according  to  the  andent  coi* 
torn)  should  be  chosen  out  of  the  chiefest  citizens;  and  that  none 
of  the  strangers  who  were  made  denizens  by  Gelon,  shonld  be  ad* 
mitted  to  these  honours,  looking  upon  tliem  either  as  unworthy,  or 
fearing  lest  they,  (bcingalways  inured  to  monarchy) ,should  endeavour 
a  change  of  government,  which  was  no  vain  •  conception,  m  the 
event  after  made  evident :  for  Gelon  had  enfranchked  above  ten  thon- 
sand  mercenaries,  of  whom,  above  seven  thousand  remained  at  that 
time. 

Tliese  being  enraged  at  being  thus  excluded,  and  made  incapable 
or  being  chosen  magistrates,  began  to  plot,  and  at  length  joining  to- 
gether, seized  upon  the  Acradina,  a  part  of  the  city,  and  the  fore* 
mentioned  island^  both  of  which  places  were  strongly  walled  and 
fortified. 

On  the  other  side,  in  this  confusion,  the  Syracusans  possessed 
themselves  of  another  part  of  the  city,  especially  towards  the 
poise,  defending  themselves  with  a  wall  and  strong  guards.  The 
ditious  were  so  penned  up,  that  they  grew  scant  in  their  provisions: 
apd  though  they  were  far  less  in  number  than  the  citizens,  yet  they 
were  much  better  soldiers;  and  therefore,  whenever  they  made  any 
sallies,  in  every  skirmish  they  went  off  with  success.  But  being  so 
clase  shut  up,  they  were  nearly  famished.  And  this  was  the  state  <rf 
Sicilv  at  this  time. 

This  year  Conon  was  archon  of  Athens,  and  Quintns  Fabius  Vi- 
bulanus  and  Tiberius  iEmilius  Mamercus  were  Roman  consuls.  At 
this  time  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia,  made  Archemenes,  the  son  of 
])arius*s  great  uncle,  general  of  his  army  intended  against  Egypt, 
which  consisted  of  above  three  hundred  thousand  hone  and  foot: 
with  these  be  marched  into  Egypt,  and  encamped  near  the  river  Nile^ 
and  as  soon  as  he  had  refreshed  his  army,  prepared  for  battle.  The 
Egyptian  forces  were  made  up  of  Africans  and  Egyptians,  and  wait* 
ed  in  ex|>ectation  of  further  aid  from  the  Athenians;  who  at  length 
arrived  with  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  sail,  and  joining  witli  the  £* 


I  CSi«p.  XXL  DioDORUs  sieuLus.  419 

BTpti^ns,  the  battle  began  with  great  reaolatkm  on  both  sides.  The 
Plersians  indeed  were  far  more  in  number,  but  the  Athenians  with 
fpneat  valour  and  courage  breaking  in  upon  that  wing  of  the  Persians 
tliat  was  placed  against  them,  and  killing  and  destroying  many  of 
tiiem,  the  rest  of  the  barbarians  fled,  and  in  the  pursuit,  most  of  the 
aimy  was  cut  off,  and  the  rest  fled  to  a  place  called  the  White  WalL 
The  Athenians,  by  whose  valour  the  victory  was  obtained,  followed 
€slose  after  them  to  the  place  and  besieged  it.  But  Artaiuenies  hav* 
ing  intelligence  of  the  overthrow  of  his  army,  sent  some  he  could 
Siost  confide  in,  to  the  Lacedsemonians,  with  a  great  sum  of  money, 
to  induce  the  Spartans  to  make  war  upon  the  Athenians,  thinking 
by  that  means  to  force  them  back,  for  the  necessary  defence  of  their 
own  country.  But  the  Lacedemonians  would  neither  accept  of  the 
money,  nor  hearken  to  any  other  proposals  of  the  Persians.  Being 
tbtu  without  hopes  of  aid  from  the  Lacedspmonians,  Artaxerxes  pre* 
pered  a  new  army,  and  made  Artabazus  and  Megabysus,  both  very 
▼aliant  men,  generals,  and  sent  them  against  the  Egyptians. 


CHAP.  XXL 

T%e  Persian  expedition  into  Egypt.     fTars  in  Sicily. 

AT  Athens  Euippas  ws^  archon,  and  Quintus  Servilius  and  Spurios 
Posthumius  Albus,  consuls  at  Rome.  At  which  time  Artabazus  and 
Megabyzus,  appointed  generals  for  the  Egyptian  war,  marched  away 
for  Egypt  with  above  three  hundred  thousand  horse  and  foot.  When 
they  came  to  Cilicia  and  Phoenicia,  they  refreshed  the  army,  and 
commanded  the  Cyprians,  Phoenicians,  and  Cilicians,  to  set  forth  a 
fleet,  who  furnished  out  three  hundred  sail  fitted  both  with  men,  pro- 
visions and  all  other  things  convenient  and  necessary  for  a  sea-fight. 
In  preparations  for  the  war,  training  of  the  soldiers,  and  employing 
themselves  in  other  acts  of  military  discipline,  they  spent  almost  a 
wliule  year.  Tlic  Athenians  in  the  mean  time  closely  besieged  the 
Persians  at  the  White  Wall,  which  was  valuntly  defended,  and  not 
likely  to  be  taken  after  a  year's  siege.  In  Sicily  the  Syracusans,  at 
war  with  the  l>efore-named  revolters,  daily  assaulted  the  Acradioa  with 
*  the  adjoining  island;  and  though  they  overcame  the  reliels  at  sea,  yet 
ihey  could  not  drive  them  out  of  the  city,  they  were  so  fonified.  But 
afterwards,  when  both  armies  were  drawn  oat  into  the  open  fieKl^  the 


420  DioDORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XL 

■■     ■    '      ■     — — — ^ 

m 

fight  being  obstinate^  many  were  killed  on  both  sides,  but  the  vie- 
tory  was  at  length  gained  by  the  Syracusans.  After  the  battle,  the 
Syracusans  crowned  six  hundred  men  who  were  most  active  in  the 
fight,  and  gave  to  every  one  a  mina*  in  money,  as  a  reward  for  his 
valour.  During  these  combustions,  Dcucetiiis,  general  of  the  Sici- 
lians, began  a  war  against  the  inhabitants  of  Catana,  for  withholding 
the  lands  of  the  Si^iiilians,  in  which  the  Syracusans  likewise  engaged 
against  Catana. 

The  Cataneans  had  these  lands  divided  to  them  by  lot^  when  they 

were  first  placed  a  colony  there  by  Hiero  the  late  king.    And  therefore 

defended  their  rights  with  all  the  force  and  power  they  could.     But 

being  overcome  in  several  battles,  they  were  forced  at  length  to  leave 

Catana,  and  possessed  themselves  of  the  city  of  Etna,  formerly  called 

Eunetia;  and  the  antient  inhabitants  of  Catana,  after  a  long  time  of 

banishment,  returned  to  their  own  country  and  former  habitatioDs* 

After  this,  all  otiiers  that  were  driven  out  of  their  own  proper  cities 

in  the  times  of  Hiero,  with  the  assistance  of  iheir  neighbours,  were 

forthwith  restored,  and  the  usurpers  were  every  where  ejected,  as  the 

Gelotics,Agrigentines,  and  Himerians.  The  RhegiansandZancIeans 

likewise  threw  off  the  regal  power  of  the  sons  of  Anazilas,  aud 

asserted  the  liberty  of  their  country.     After  this  the  Gelones  seating 

themselves  at  Camerinum,  again  divided  the  land  by  lots.     At  length 

almost  all  the  cities  determining  to  root  up  all  those  they  took  for 

their  enemies,  confederated  together,  (by  virtue  of  a  public  edict), 

agaiust  all  the  foreigners,  and  restored  those  that  had  been  banished, 

to  their  antient  cities;  transplanting  all  the  Strangers  (tliat  had  before 

usurped)  to  Messana.     In  this  manner  all  the  seditions  and  tpmuits 

throughout  the  cities  of  Sicily  were  appeased,  and  almost  all  were 

freed  from  the  power  of  foreigners,  and  reduced  to  the  antient  form 

of  a  commonwealth,  and  all  the  public  lands  divided  by  lot  to  the 

citizens. 

Now  Phasiclides  was  governor  of  Athens,  and  the  eighteenth  o- 
lympiad  was  celebrated,  in  which  Tharillus  the  Thessalian  was  vic- 
tor. And  at  Rome  were  chosen  Quintus  Fabius  and  Titus  Quintios 
Capiiolinus  consuls.  In  Asia,  the  Persian  commanders  now  in  €!• 
licia  had  got  together  a  fleet  of  three  hundred  sail,  well  manned,  and 
furnished  in  every  respect  for  the  war,  and  marched  with  the  hind- 
army  through  Syria  and  Phoenicia,  and  came  at  length  to  Memphis, 
(the  fleet  sailing  all  along  by  the  sides  of  them,  nearthe  shore),where 
they  forthwith  raised  the  siege  at  the  White  Wall;  both  the  E- 
gyptians  and  Athenians  being  amazed  at  the  approach  of  such  an 
enemy.  Hereupon  the  Persians  presently  called  a  council  of  war,  and 

•  About  •£^3:2:6. 


Chap.  XXIL  DIODORU8  8ICULU8.  4S1 

prudently  re&olvcd  to  decline  fighting,  bat  rather  to  endeafoar  to 
make  an  end  ot  the  war  by  some  politic  stratagem.  And  to  that  end 
knowing  that  the  Athenian  fleet  lay  at  anchor  at  an  ishnd  called  Pro- 
sopitis,  thtrv  diverted  the  course  of  the  riTer,  which  encompassed  tht 
iaiaiid,  liy  deep  trenches  made  in  the  adjoining  continent,  and  by  that 
mckus  joined  th^  island  to  the  main-land.  The  Egyptians,  as  soon  ai 
they  discerned  all  the  ships  stood  tlpon  dry  land,  struck  with  amaze- 
0)cnt,  fur!»o()k  (he  Athenians,  and  submitted  themselves  to  the  Per* 
aians.  The  Athenians  thus  forsaken,  and  seeing  the  fleet  made  use* 
less,  set  fire  to  all  the  ships,  tluit  they  might  not  come  into  thepower 
of  tlie  enemy.  And  nothing  terrified  with  their  present  cireum* 
stances,  they  encouraged  and  advised  one  another,  that  they  should 
not  do  any  thing  tliat  should  be  a  blemish  or  disgrace  to  the  courage 
and  valour  they  had  before  shewn  in  former  encounters. 

Soaring,  thei^ore,  above  the  valour  of  those  that  lost  their  lives  at 
Thermopvlie  for  the  safety  of  Greece,  they  resolved  to  fight.    But 
the  coninwindcrs  of  the  Persians,  Artabazusand  Megabysus,  seeing 
the  courage  of  the  Athenians,  and  considering  their  former  lossea ' 
of  so  many  thousand  men,  they  made  peace  with  them  upon  this 

condition ^That  they  should   depart  out  of  E^ypt  without  hurt 

or  prejudice.  The  Athenians  thus  preserved,  (through  their  own 
valour) ,  leave  Egypt;  and,  marching  through  Africa  to  Cyrene,  from 
thence  they  all  came  safe  (beyond  their  hopes)  to  their  own  country. 
During  th.  sc  things,  Ephialtes,  son  of  Simonidas,  tribune  of  the 
people  at  Athens,  !»tirred  up  the  rabble  against  the  Areopagitcs,  to 
take  away  the  power  fiomthe  senate  in  Mars  Hill,  and  to  overturn 
the  antient  and  laudable  laws  of  the  countrv.  But  such  wicked  de* 
signs  went  not  unpunished,  for  he  was  killed  in  the  night,  not  known 
by  whom,  and  so  ended  his  days  in  dia»honour. 


CHAP.  XXII. 

T/te  war  britrcni  the  Epidanriofis  and  the  Athenians* 

THE  formtr  year  ended,  Philocles  governed  Athens  the  next;  andat 
Rome,  AuIuN  FosthuniiusnndSp.  Furius  were  consuls.  lu  their  times 
wasliegunthe  warbytheCorinthiansand  Epidauriansagainst  the  Aihe« 
ntans,who,  in  a  sharp  battle,  overcame  the  other,  and  withagreat  fleet 
made  out  against  the  Halienscsi  and  iuvadcd  Peloponnesus^  where 


in  DiODORUs  sicuLUfl.  JBookXMi 


they  slaughtered  and  destroyed  many  of  their  eaeinies..  The  VtUn 
poDnesians  make  head  again,  and  with  a  great  army  fight  then  at 
Cenryplialia,  where  the  Athenians  again  rout  them.  Grown  now 
confident  with  these  successes,  and  observing  the  iBginetns^  (poflied 
np  with  the  victories  i|iey  had  obtained),  to  carry  it  as  enemies  to* 
wards  them,  they  determined  to  make  war  upon  them;  and  in  exe* 
cution  thereof,  sent  forth  against  them  a  great  fleet:  they  of  .£^oa 
on  the  other  hand,  trusting  to  their  skill  and  former  successes  at  sea^ 
despised  the  great  forces  of  the  Athenians,  and  with  a  small  navy^ 
and  some  few  other  ships  lately  built,  venture  a  sea-fight,  but  were 
beaten,  with  the  loss  of  seventy  of  their  ressels;  so^that  now  they 
were  wliolly  discouraged  and  dejected,  and  therefore  were  forced  to 
sul^mit  themselves  to  the  Athenians*  These  things  were  done  bj 
Leocrates,  the  Athenian  admiral,  in  the  space  of  nine  months  war 
with  the  iEgineans.  In  the  mean  time,  Deucetius^  king  of  Sicily^ 
(very  rich,  and  of  a  noble  family),  built  Menenum,  and  divided  by 
lot  the  adjacent  lands  amongst  the  colony  brought  thither.  Then 
he  besieged  the  famous  city  Morgantium,  and  was  highly  honoured 
by  all  his  countrymen. 


CHAP.  XXUI. 

« 

The  war  hetiveen  the  Corinthians  and  Megarewum 

THE  next  year  Bion  was  archon  at  Athens,  and  Publius  Servilioa 
Structus  and  Lucius  iEbutius  Eliuas,  Roman  consuls.  During 
their  government,  broke  out  the  war  between  the  Corinthians  and 
the  Megareans  about  the  limits  of  their  country.  At  the  first  they 
made  inroads  into  one  another's  country,  and  then  proceeded  whh 
little  skirmishes.  At  length  the  difference  growing  higher  and  hotter^ 
theMegareans,  (suspecting  their  own  weakness),  made  a  league  with 
the  Athenians,  by  which  means  they  balanced  their  enemies  in 
strength  and  power.  And  when  tlie  Corinthians  sent  a  considerable 
army  from  Peloponnesus  against  Megara,  the  Athenians  sent  aids  to 
the  Megareans  under  Myronides  their  general,  a  very  valiant  mao. 
The  armies  presently  engaged,  and  great  valour  and  obstinacy  was 
shewed  on  lx)th  sides,  insomuch  as  the  success  was  very  doubtful  a 
long  time ;  till  at  length  the  Athenians  got  the  day,  with  the  slaughter 
of  multitudes  of  the  enemy.    And  a  few  days  after^  the  Atheniana 


Oqi.  XXIIL  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  49$ 

were  victors  in  another  battle  fought  at  Cimolia,  where  they  likewise,^ 
Iciiled  many.   Within  a  few  days  after^  a  third  battle  was  fmighf 
Here  something  seems  to  be  wanting  in  the  Greek  copy. 

The  Phocians  made  war  against  the  DorianS|  who  were  originally 
Lacedemonians,'  and  inhabited  three  cities  lying  under  mount  Far- 
nassusy  Cytiiieum,  Boium,  and  Erineus.  At  tlie  first,  the  Dorians 
(being  overcome)  lost  their  cities  to  the  other.  But  the  Lecedemo- 
Dians  being  of  the  same  blood,  afterwards  sent  them  aid  under  Ni* 
comedes,  formerly  general  of  Cleomencs,  who  led  forth  an  army  of 
fifteen  hundred  Lacedemonians,  and  raised  as  many  more  out 
of  Peloponnesus  as  made  up  ten  thousand;  with  these  he  marched  to 
the  defence  of  the  Dorians,  he  being  tutor  and  governor  of  Pleis** 
tonactis  their  king,  who  was  then  a  child.  Having  conquered  the 
Phocians,  and  recovered  the  cities,  he  put  an  end  to  the  war,  upoa 
articles  of  peace  between  the  two  nations. 

When  the  Athenians  understood  that  the  LacedcmoniaiM  bad 
made  an  end  of  the  Phocian  war,  and  were  ready  to  return  home, 
chey  consulted  how  to  cut  them  off  in  their  passage  by  the  way.  To 
this  end,  having  resolved  upon  the  attempt,  they  took  to  their  aidaad 
assistance  tlie  Argives  and  Thessalians,  and  so  making  out  against 
them  with  a  fleet  of  fifty  sail,  manned  with  above  fourteen  tlMNnand 
aoldieiis,  they  stopped  the  passages  through  Gerania.  The  Laeede- 
monians  hearing  of  the  contrivances  of  the  Athenians,  turned  out  of 
the  way  towards  Taoagra  in  Boeotia:  but  the  Athenians  marched 
swiftly  after  them,  and  at  length  the  two  armies  joined  battle;  and 
although  the  Thessalians  (in  the  very  heat  of  the  fight)  deserted  the 
Athenians  and  joined  with  the  Spartans;  yet  they  and  the  Argives 
stood  manfully  to  it,  and  after  many  were  killed  on  both  sides,  the 
night  put  an  end  to  the  dispute.  Alter  this,  there  being  sent  nueli 
provision  out  of  Attica  tu  the  Athenians,  which  was  understood  bj 
the  Thessalians,  they  conceiving  this  to  be  a  fit  opportunity  to  do 
some  notable  service,  (having  refreshed  themselves),  in  the  night 
marched  out  to  meet  the  carriages :  and  being  tliat  the  guard  that 
attended  them  never  sus|)ected  any  design,  hut  admitted  the  'Hies- 
salians  a.H  friend^,  the  contest  grew  hot  which  should  get  or  lose  all. 
For  the  Thessalians  (being  at  first  thus  admitted)  killed  all  they  met, 
and,  being  well  prepared,  and  the  others  taken  unawares,  made  a 
great  slaughter.  The  Athenians  that  were  encamped,  hearing  of 
wluitniiscliief  theTlicssalians  had  done,  hastened  to  the  relief  of  their 
eountrymen,  and  fell  with  great  rage  u|ion  the  llies»alians,  and 
routed  them  at  the  first  char|re  with  a  great  slaughter.  In  the  mean 
time,  the  Laceda.'monians  came  in  to  the  aid  of  the  Thessaliaos,and 
both  armies  being  now  drawn  up  in  battalia,  it  came  to  a  geutral  bat. 


424  DIODORU8  8ICULU8«  Book  XK 


tle^  which  was  fought  with  great  resolution,  aod  many  killed  oo  botb 
sides.  The  issue  and  event  being  doubtful,  both  the  one  side  and 
the  other  suspected  the  loss  of  the  day;  but  night  coming  on,  and 
the  victory  still  remaining  doubtful,  messengers  were  despatched  one 
to  another^  and  a  truce  at  length  agreed  upon  for  four  months* 


CHAP.  XXIV. 

l%e  war  between  i/ie  Atlienians  and  the  Beeoiians. 

THIS  year  ended,  Mnesitheides  was  chosen  arclion  af  Athens,  and 
Lucius  Lucretius  and  Titus  Viturius  Cicurinus  were  Roman  cousals. 
In  the  time  of  their  governments,  the  Thebans  being  brought  low 
by  reason  of  their  league  with  Xerxes,  endeavoured  by  all  the  arti* 
fices  they  could,  to  regain  their  former  power  and  sovereignty;  for 
being  greatly  despised  by  all  the  Boeotians  who  had  shaken  off  their 
authority,  they  applied  themselves  to  the  Lacedsemonians,  to  assist 
them  in  recovering  the  government  of  Boeotia:  and  for  this  kindness 
they  promised  that  they  would  be  at  all  the  charge  of  the  war  tiiea 
begun  against  them  by  the  Athenians,  and  that  the  Spartans  should 
not  need  to  bring  any  land  forces  out  of  Peloponnesus. 

The  LacedflBmonians  judging  it  to  be  much  to  their  advantage  to 
gratify  the  Thebans  in  their  request,  conceiving  that  if  they  were 
thus  strengthened  and  supported,  they  would  become  a  bulwark  a- 
gainst  the  Athenians,  especially  the  Thebans  having  at  that  time  a 
great  and  well  disciplined  army  atTanagra,they  enlarged  the  bounds 
and  circuit  of  the  city  of  Thebes,  and  compdled  all  the  Boeotians  to 
the  subjection  of  the  Thebans. 

The  Athenians,  to  obviate  the  designs  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  rais* 
ed  a  considerable  army,  and  made  Myronides  the  son  of  Callias,  ge- 
neral. Having  chosen  a  competent  number  of  the  citizens,  he  told 
them  the  day  wherein  he  intended  to  march  out  of  the  city.  When 
tlie  day  came,  many  of  the  soldiers  (notwithstanding  the  command 
given)  did  nut  appear;  yet  with  those  he  had,  he  made  forBcEotia. 
Some  of  his  friends  and  officers  of  the  army,  persuaded  him  to  stay 
till  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  came  up  to  them.  But  Myronides  being 
both  a  prudent  and  valiant  commander,  answered.— That  it  did  not 
become  a  general  to  loiter,  for  it  was  a  shrewd  sign,  that  they  who  were 
slow  and  dilatory  in  their  march  towards  their  enemy,  would  be  cowards 


t    Chap.  XXIV.  DIODORU8  ncvLUi.  495 

io  the  fight,  and  would  prefer  their  own  safety  before  the  good  of 
their  couiiiry.  For  they  (said  he)  that  readily  appeared  at  the  day 
appointed,  gave  an  evident  testimony  of  their  valour,  that  they  were 
resolved  not  to  shrink  in  the  day  of  battle.  Which  by  the  sequel  did 
appear;  for  he  marched  against  the  Thelians  wi'h  an  army  far  less 
in  number  of  men,  but  mp'.-h  excelling  in  prowess  and  valour,  ind 
by  the  brave  resolutiun  uf  his  soldiers,  utterly  routed  the  enemy; 
which  victory  was  not  inferior  to  any  that  were  ever  obtained  by  the 
Athenians  in  former  times.  For  neither  that  at  Marathon,  nor  that 
at  PlRt<ea  against  the  Persians,  nor  any  other  exploit  of  the  Atheni- 
ans, did  exceed  this  of  Myron  ides  against  the  The,bans:  for  of  the  for- 
mer, some  of  them  were  obtained  at^ainst  barbarians,  and  others  by  the 
help  of  their  confederates;  but  this  was  gained  by  the  Athenians 
tliemselves  alone,  against  the  most  valiant  of  the  Greeks.  For  the 
Bcrotians  were  ever  accounted  fur  stoutness  and  hardiuess,  not  infe- 
rior to  any  in  Greece:  which  in  after-times  was  confirmed;  for  at 
Lcuctra  and  Maotinea,  the  Thebans  alone  fought  both  with  the  Ia« 
cedaemoniaiis  and  their  confederates,  and  purchased  to  themselves 
great  renown,  and  became  reputed  (and  tlmt  not  unworthily)  the  best 
commanders  of  all  Greece. 

Although  this  battle  was  one  of  the  most  famous,  yet  no  author 
has  written  any  thing  of  the  manner  or  order  of  it.  However,  by  this 
glorious  victory  over  the  Bueotians,  Myrcnides  has  equalized  his  me- 
oiory  with  those  illustrious  generals,  Themistocles,  Miltiades,  and 
Ciiiion,  Immediately  after  the  fight,  be  tookTanagra  by  storm,  and 
demolished  it.  And  overrunning  Bofotia,  laid  waste  all  before  him^ 
and  divided  the  spoil  and  riclies  of  the  country  among  his  soldiers. 

The  Bwotiaos,  enraged  with  the  wasting  and  destroying  of  their 
country,  came  together  from  all  parts,  and  with  a  great  army  march* 
cd  against  their  enemies.  Th.*  figiit  began  amongst  the  vineyards  of 
Ikeotij,  and  botli  sides  being  full)  rcMilved,  the  heat  of  theliattle  eon* 
tinutfd  a  whole  day,  but  at  length  with  great  diificulty  the  valour  of 
the  Athenians  prevailed. 

Myronides  >{M'eiiily  won  all  the  cities  of  Bopotia,  except  lliebes. 
Then  he  raided  his  camp,  and  marclied  with  his  army  against  the  Lo- 
rrians,  (called  Opuntians),  routed  them  at  the  first  onset,  and,  upon 
their  submi&!»ion,  t(N*k  hostages,  and  then  broke  into  Fharsalia,  and 
with  as  much  c.'ise  overcame  the  Fhocians  as  he  did  the  l.x>crianst 
aud  r/i  eiving  hostages,  marclied  for  Thessaly,  and  charging  theui 
with  treason,  lonimanded  them  to  reeal  those  they  liad  banished. 

But  the  I'harsaliatis  refusing  to  obey,  be  besieged  the  city,  which 
(after  a  long  and  >tout  defence)  he  was  not  able  to  uke  by  force^and 
therefore  raised  his  siegCj  aud  returued  to  Atheus;  where  he  wasre* 

Vol.  1.  No.  J7.  Ill 


426  DIODORUS  SICULtfS.  Bdok  JEC 


ceived  witli  great  acclamations  of  praise,  for  the  noble  acts  lie 
in  so  short  a  time  accomplished.    These  were  the  remarks  of  fUM 

year. 


CHAP.  XXV. 

The  Athenians  invade  the  Spartans  by  Thlnddes. 

THE  eighty-first  olympiad  was  celebrated  at  Elis,  wherein  Polyin* 
na<;tus  Cyreneus  was  victor,  at  the  time  when  Callias  was  arcliDa  cf 
Atl)en«i^  and  Servius  Sulpitius  and  Publius  Volumnius  Amintinai 
were  Roman  Consuls.     Then  Tolmides,  the  admiral  of  the  Athe* 
niau  fleet,  out  of  emulation  to  the  glory  of  Myronides,  made  it  Ui 
business  to  do  something  more  than  ordinary  remarkable.    And  there- 
fore, for  as  much  as  none  before  had  ever  attempted  to  invadeLaco* 
nia,   he  advised  the  people  of  Athens  to  make  an  inroad  into  die 
country  of  the  Spartans,  undertaking,  that  if  he  might  liave  bat 
a  thousand  armed  men  aboard  his  ships,  he  would  waste  Laconia,  and 
bring  an  eclipse  upon  the  Spartan  glory.     Having  got  the  consent 
of  the  people,  and  designing  privately  to  get  more  men  than  he  at 
first  required,  he  conceived  this  pr6ject...Jlll  were  of  opinion  that  a 
choice  should  be  made  of  the  strongest,  young,  and  most  spirited 
men  In  the  army.    But  Tolmides,  designing  far  more  than  tjie  thon- 
sand  yielded  to  him  for  his  intended  enterprise,  he  goes  to  every  one 
of  the  ablest  men,  and  tells  them  each  singly,  that  he  intended  to 
chuse  l)im  for  the  war,  and  that  it  was  far  more  to  their  ci«dit  and 
reputation  to  ofier  themselves  of  their  own  accord,  than  being  chosen 
to  be  compelled  to  the  service.     When  by  this  means  he  had  per- 
suaded above  three  thousand  to  give  in  their  names  of  their  own  ac- 
cord, and  discerning  the  rest  to  be  backward,  he  then  proceeded  to 
the  choice  of  the  thousand  granted  him  by  the  consent  of  the  peo- 
ple.    And  when  all  things  were  ready  for  the  expedition,  he  set  sail 
with  fifty  ships  and  four  thousand  soldiers,  and  arriving  at  Methone 
in  Laconia,  took  it;  but  by  reason  of  the  speedy  succoor  sent  bj 
the  Spartans,  he  was  forced  to  quit  the  place,  and  made  for  Gythenm, 
a  port  town  of  the  Lacedemonians,  which  he  likewise  took^  and  there 
burnt  and  destroyed  all  the  shipping  and  naval  provisions,  wastinf 
the  country  round  about.    Thence  he  bent  his  coarse  for  Zacjntbns 
in  Cephalenia,  and  possessed  himself  of  that  city;  and  after  he  had 
brought  all  the  towns  iu  Cephalenia  to  a  submissioDj  he  sailed  with  the 


C/mp.  XXFT.  DiooOEus  siculus.  42^ 


whole  fleet  to  Naapaetus,  on  the  opposite  shore,  which  he  gained  at 
the  first  assault,  and  there  placed  a  colony  of  the  noblest  iauiilies  of 
the  Messenians,  who  liad  been  before  (upon  agreement)  dismissed 
by  the  Lacedsmoniaiis.  For  about  this  time,  in  a  war  against  the 
Messenians  and  the  Helots,  the  Lacedflemoniaiia  had  reduced  most 
of  them  to  their  former  subjection.  And  thorn  of  Itliome  they  dis- 
charged upon  articles  of  submission,  as  is  before  said :  and  as  for 
the  Helots,  those  of  them  that  were  the  authors  and  ringleaders  of  the 
defection  they  had  put  to  death,  and  made  the  rest  slaves. 

Sosistratus,  now  pretor  of  Athens,  the  Romans  cliose  for  their 
consuls  Publius  Valerius  Publicola  and  Caius  Claudius  Rhe;;illanus. 
During  their  government,  Tolmides  continued  in  Boeotia.  But  the 
Athenians  made  Pericles  the  son  of  Xanthes  general  of  a  select 
Dumber  of  men,  and  committed  to  him  fifty  ships,  and  a  thousand 
soldiers,  with  a  command  to  invade  Peloponnesus.  Hereupon  he 
wasted  a  great  part  of  it,  and  passed  into  Acarnania,  near  the  island 
CEuiadae,  and  there  brought  all  the  cities  to  a  submission.  So  that 
during  this  year,  the  Athenians  gained  many  cities,  and  became  fa- 
mous for  their  military  discipline,  and  many  glorious  successes  in 
their  wars. 


CHAP.  XXVI. 

Tke  war  in  Sicily  between  the  ^getteans  and  the  Lifybaans.  Ttte 
custom  of  writing  upon  an  olive-leaf  the  names  qf  stick  as  were 
to  be  bafmhed  in  Sicily,  called  Petalism. 

IN  this  year  Ariston  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  and  Quintus 
Fabius  Vibulanus  and  Lucius  Cornelius  Curetinus  consuls  of  Rome. 
In  the  time  of  their  goTcrnment,  a  peace  was  made  between  the  A- 
thenians  and  the  Peloponnesians  for  five  years,  by  the  mediation  of 
Ciroou  the  Athenian. 

In  Sicily  a  war  broke  out  between  the  iEgesteans  and  the  LilyluMins 
concerning  some  lands  near  to  the  river  Mazarus:  after  a  sharp  bat- 
tle fought,  and  many  killed  on  both  sides,  they  began  to  cool  tor  some 
time;  but  after  an  account  of  the  citizens  was  taken  in  every  i-itv, 
and  a  new  division  of  the  lands  was  marie  by  lot,  and  that  every  one 
was  to  take  his  share  as  it  fell,  the  shares  fell  so  confused,  that  the 
cities  broke  out  again  into  civil  discords  and  dfs<entions;  by  which 
mischiefs  the  Syracusans  greatly  suffered.  For  one  calledLTyndari- 
dcs,  a  rash  conceited  fellow,  who,  protecting  and  feeding  many  poor 


428  DfODORUS  8ICULV8.  B^ok  XL 

people^  by  that  means  sought  to  make  a  party  to  further  his  deaiga 
in  obtaiding  of  the  principality:  but  when  it  was  evideot  that  hef 
aimed  at  the  sovereign  power,  he  was  brought  to  his  trial  and  coo- 
dcmned  to  die.     And  when  they  were  bringing  him  back  to  the 
goal,  he  was  by  the  party  he  had  before  prepared,  as  afdHVsaid,  by 
force  rescued  out  of  the  hands  of  the  officers.    This  raised  a  tomult 
through  the  whole  city,  and  caused  the  chief  and  soberest  part  of  the 
citizens  to  join  together  against  them,  who  presently  apprehended 
the  innovators,  and  put  them,  together  with  Tyndarides  to  death. 
When  several  attempts  were  made  of  this  kind,  and  many  were  io" 
fected  with  this  itch  of  dominion,  the  Syracusans  were  at  length 
forced,  after  the  example  of  the  Athenians,  to  make  a  law  not  much 
differing  from  that  of  ostracism  at  Athens :  for  there  erery  citizca 
was  to  write  in  a  shell  the  name  of  him  whom  they  GonceiTed  to  be 
most  powerful  to  possess  himself  of  sovereignty.    So  the  Syracu- 
sans were  to  write  the  name  of  him  who  was  thought  to  be  most  po- 
tent, upon  an  olive-leaf;  and  when  the  leaves  were  counted,  he 
whose  name  was  upon  most  of  the  leaves,  was  banished  for  fiva 
years. 

By  this  means  they  conceived  they  should  bring  down  the  aspir- 
ing minds  of  the  great  ones  to  some  moderation ;  for  they  did  nol 
hereby  intend  the  punishment  of  any  crime  that  was  committedybot 
the  prevention  of  mischief,  by  impairing  the  estates,  and  weaken- 
ing the  interest  of  them  that  might  be  ambitious.  Tliat,  therefore, 
which  the  Athenians  called  ostracism,  from  the  nature  of  the  things 
the  Syracusans  called  Petalism. 

This  law  continued  long  among  the  Athenians,  but  was  abolished 
within  a  short  time  after  by  the  Syracusans,  for  these  reasons—For 
when  several  of  the  chief  and  best-deserving  men  were  by  this  law 
banished  the  city,  the  rest  who  were  beloved  by  the  citizens^  and 
were  men  of  great  use  in  the  service  of  their  country,  withdrew 
themselves  from  all  public  business,  and  out  of  fear  of  the  law,  be- 
took themselves  to  private  lives:  but  minding  thus  their  own  private 
concerns,  at  length  they  fell  into  all  manner  of  profuseness  and 
luxur}\  In  the  mean  time,  the  basest  of  the  citizens  taking  upou 
them  the  government,  stirred  up  the  common  people  to  ionovationa 
and  disturbances  in  the  commonwealth ;  and.so  all  things  ran  a  second 
time  into  sedition  and  confusion,  and  a  continual  and  mighty  atorio 
of  trouble  and  disorder  shook  the  city.  For  there  arose  many  ring*. 
leaders  and  seducers  of  the  people,  especially  young  conceited  men^ 
who  thought  none  spoke  like  themselves,  nor  no  wisdom  like  theira*. 
In  fine,  many,  instead  of  the  principles  of  the  antient  justice  and  ho- 
nesty, instilled  nothirg  into  the  people  but  wicked  notionSj  both  i 


Ckap.  XXFTT.  DfODomus  siculus.  489 


iimert  and  pntctice.  lo  time  of  petce,  it  was  their  only  busincfli 
to  heap  together  riclies,  but  had  oo  regard  at  all  to  amity  and  juslioe 
jUDongst  men.  The  decree  therefore  of  petalism,  upon  more  ana- 
tore  consideration,  was  repealed  within  a  short  time  after  it  was  put 
m  execution.    And  thus  stood  the  affiurs  of  Sicily  at  this  time. 


CHAP-  XXVII. 

/VrirfM  makes  an  inroad  into  Peloponnesus.    Besieges  Sieyom^ 
Phayliu  in  Sicily  made  admiral  against  the  Tyrrhenian piraies; 
is  corrupted  and  banished.     77ie  origin  of  the  Valid :  and  the 
stories  of  the  temple,  andwonders  of  the  Craters  in  Sicily. 

WHEN  Lysicrates  was  governor  of  Athens,  Cains  Nansius  Rutilltoa 
ftnd  Lucius  Minucius  Augurintis  were  celebrated  consuls  at  Rone. 
Daring  their  times,  Pericles,  the  Athenian  general,  made  an  inroad 
into  Peloponnesus,  and  wasted  the  country  of  the  Sicyonians.    The 
Sicyonians  marched  with  a  great  army  against  him,  and  battle  be- 
ing joined,  Pericles  routed  tbem,  and  killed  many  in  the  pursuit;  and 
having  drireu  the  rest  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  laid  siege  to  the 
place.     But  after  he  had  made  a  valiant  assault,  and  saw  he  could 
not  win  the  place,  in  regard  tlie  Lacedemonians  had  sent  aid  to  the 
besieged,  he  withdrew  his  army  from  Sicyon,  and  marciied  into  A- 
camania,  there  wasting  the  country  of  the  (Eniadae;  and  having  load- 
ed himself  with  l)ooty  and  plunder,  left  Acamania.     After  this,  he 
marched  into  Cliersonesus,  and  divided  the  country  by  lot  amongst 
a  thousand  citbens.    And  in  the  mean  time  Tolmides,  the  other  ge« 
neral,  made  a  descent  into  Eubcra,  and  divided  the  country  of  the 
Naxians  amongst  another  thousand  inhabitants. 

As  for  Sicily,  the  Tyrrhenians  infesting  the  sea  with  piracies,  the 
Syracusans  chose  one  Phaylus  to  lie  admiral  of  the  fleet,  and  com* 
manded  him  to  make  a  descent  upon  Tyrrhenia.  Being  furnished 
with  a  fleet  well  provided,  upon  the  first  attempt,  he  wastes  the 
island  of  iEthalia;  hut  being  corrupted  by  the  Etruscans  with  mo- 
ney, he  returned  into  Sicily,  without  doing  any  thing  memorable. 
But  the  Syracusans  banished  him  for  his  treason,  and  chose  another 
called  Apellcs,  and  sent  him  with  threescore  ships  against  the  Tyrr- 
henians. Upon  which  he  wastes  the  sea-coasts  of  Tynhcnia,  and 
aaila  to  Corsica,  then  subject  to  the  Etruscans,  and  harassed  and 


430  DiODORUS  8ICULUS.  MootJU 

destroyed  a  great  part  of  the  island ;  and  having  wholly  subdacd  JK- 
thalia^  retarned  to  Syracuse^  with  a  multitude  of  prisoners  and  imich 
spoil. 

After  this,  Deucetius  prince  of  the  Siculi,  reduced  all  the  cities  of 
the  same  nation  (except  Hybia)  into  one  society  and  commuiiity. 
This  man  being  both  wbe  and  valiant^  bent  his  mind  for  the  acoom- 
plishing  of  something  great  and  unusual;  for  having  a  rich  treasniyy 
he  removed  the  city  of  Neas,  the  place  of  his  birth, into  a  plain  cham- 
paign ground,  and  built  a  famous  city  near  the  temple  of  the  Falici, 
(as  they  are  called),  from  whom  he  called  the  city  Palicon.     And 
because  those  deities  now  fall  in  our  way,  it  is  not  fit  we  should  alto* 
together  pass  by  the  strange  and  indeed  incredible  stories  that  are 
related  concerning  this  temple,  and  especially  that  great  wonder  csl- 
led  the  Craters.    For  they  say,  that  this  temple  is  to  be  preferred  be* 
fore  all  others,  both  for  antiquity  and  religious  worship^  espe<saUy 
for  the  strange  and  wonderful  things  done  there. 

And  first,  in  this  temple,  there  are  hollows  in  the  earth,  cal- 
led Craters,  not  very  large  in  compass,  but  of  incredible  depth, 
from  whence  break  out  great  sparks  of  fire  and  water,  like  as  from 
boiling  pots  or  caldrons.    The  water  cast  forth  resembles  so  many 
streams  of  fire;  but  there  is  no  certainty  what  it  is,  for  none  hitfaerlD 
durst  approach  it:  for  the  violent  irruption  of  the  fiery  matter  is  so 
wonderful,  tliat  it  seems  to  be  the  immediate  efiect  of  some  divine 
power.    It  smells  like  brimstone,  as  most  predominent,  and  the  hot* 
tomlcss  gulf  roars  and  makes  a  most  dreadful  and  horrible  iioiae» 
And  that  which  is  far  more  to  be  admired  is  this  .^That  this  river  of 
fire  neither  flows  nor  makes  any  stay  upon  the  land,  but  in  a  conti* 
nual  motion,  with  an  amazing  force,  hurls  itself  up  into  the  air.  Thb 
place,  therefore,  by  these  wonderful  instances  of  some  divine  pretence, 
being  accounted  sacred,  the  most  solemn  and  sacred  oaths  were  used 
here  to  be  taken,  and  due  punishments  were  without  delay  executed 
by  the  deity  upon  the  perjured  person;  for  it  hath  been  observed, 
that  many  such  have  been  struck  blind  as  they  have  gone  out  of  the 
temple.    And  the  great  veneration  that  persons  have  bad  for  the 
place,  has  often  been  the  occasion  that  matters  of  great  controveny 
(where  might  was  likely  to  overcome  right)  have  been  decided  by  an 
oath  in  this  place.    This  temple  likewise,  at  some  times,  is  a  place 
of  refuge,  and  a  special  help  for  injured  servants  to  protect  them 
against  the  cruelty  of  their  severe  masters.     For  they  who  fly  thither, 
cannot  be  drawn  thence,  but  continue  safe  there,  till  by  the  media- 
tion of  friends  they  are  reconciled  to'  their  masters,  and  mutual  oaths 
taken  for  the  faithful  performance  of  what  is  promised  on  both  sides. 
Aud  it  was  never  known  tliat  ever  any  broke  bis  faith  with  his 


Ckap.  XXFTTI.  DlODORtm  ffct^tus.  43f 


irant  in  such  a  case,  such  an  awe,  through  the  fear  of  the  goda, 
upon  them.  This  temple  is  situated  in  a  most  pleasant  plain^adora* 
cd  with  beautiful  porches,  galleries,  and  other  stately  buildings,  be* 
coming  the  cl'irinty  of  the  gcxls.  But  of  this  sufficient  is  said  And 
BOW  we  return  to  what  we  were  before  relating. 

Deucetius,  after  he  had  walled  in  his  new  city  Palicon,  divided 
the  adjacent  c^ountry  among  the  inhabitants.  Tliey  grew  wonder« 
fully  rich  in  a  short  time,  Imth  by  reason  of  the  fruitfulnes^  of  tlio 
soil,  and  ihe  multitude  of  the  |)eoi>le.  But  this  sun-shine  lasted  not 
long,  for  the  city  whs  destroyed,  and  lies  H-aste  and  desolate  to  this 
dsy.     The  reason  of  which  shall  be  declared  in  its  proper  place. 

In  Italy,  after  the  sacking  of  Syb«iris  by  the  Crotonians,  one  Thes« 
talus,  about  eight -and-fifty  years  after  getting  together  the  remnant 
of  the  Sybarites,  rebuilt  Sybaris,  situated  between  two  rivers,  Syba« 
ris  and  Crathis.  But  the  Sybarites  growing  rich  suddenly,  by  reason 
of  the  fruitfulncss  of  the  soil,  possessed  the  city  only  sis  years,  and 
were  again  ejected ;  which  we  intend  to  relate  more  fully  in  the  Ibl* 
lowing  book. 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 


37le  contexts  betiveeti  Deucetins  and  the  /fgrigenthies.  Hig  shrmg^ 
sftbmission  to  the  SyrartisanSf  who  sent  him  to  Corinth,  with 
promise  to  supply  him  with  necessaries. 

WHEN  Antidotus  was  governor  of  Athens,  the  Romans  chose  Lu- 
cius Puhlius  Pusthuuiius  and  Marcus  Huratius  consuls.  In  their 
time,  Deucctius  the  general  of  the  Siculi  took  i£tna,  whose  prince 
was  killed  by  treachery.  Afterwards  he  leil  hh  army  into  the  coun- 
try of  the  Agri^ntiues,  and  l>csieged  Mot\*a,  a  garrison  of  the 
Agrigcntines.  Tlicy  of  Agrigentum  sent  aid  to  them  of  Motya^ 
bih  his  army  fought  and  routed  them,  and  took  the  place.  The 
winter  apjirouching,  all  returned  to  their  several  cities.  The  Syra« 
cusans  put  t  >  death  Bilco,  the  general  of  the  army,  the  author  (at 
was  suppi>scd)  of  that  ruin  that  was  brought  upon  them  in  this  bat* 
tie,  and  who  was  judircd  to  have  liad  secret  correspondence  withDeo- 
Cetius.  At  the  return  of  the  year,  they  made  another  general,  com* 
mitting  to  him  an  army  well  appointed  in  all  respects,  with  strict 
orders  to  ruin  and  destroy  Deucetius.  To  which  end  he  led  forth 
the  army^  and  found  Deucetius  encamped  near  Nornc^  where  a  battle 


45%  moDORUs  sicuLus.  BtHfk  XL 


was  foaght;  and  after  many  killed  on  both  sides^  the  Siculij  after  a 
Taliant  resistance^  at  last  fled,  but  a  great  slaughter  was  made  of  tbea 
in  the  pursuit.  Many  of  those  that  escaped,  fled  to  the  forts  and 
strong  holds,  for  few  had  hearts  and  courage  enough  to  run  the  same 
fortune  with  Deucetius. 

Whilst  these  things  were  thus  acting,  the  Agrigentines  re- took  the 
castle  of  Motya  by  force,  wherein  at  that  time  was  a  garrison  of 
Deucetius's ;  then  tiiey  marched  to  the  victorious  Syracusans^  and 
both  encamped  together:  hut  Deucetius  having  lost  all  bis  treasure 
in  the  last  battle,  was  brought  near  to  the  la.st  extremity,  partly  through 
the  treachery  of  some,  and  partly  through  the  cowardice  of  others  of 
bis  soldiers  who  deserted  him. 

At  length,  seeing  matters  brought  to  so  desperate  a  condition^  that 
his  friends  who  were  yet  about  him  were  ready  to  lay  violent  hands 
upon  him,  to  prevent  the  execution  of  their  treacheries  he  fled  with 
all  speed  in  the  night  to  Syracuse,  and  whilst  it  was  yet  darlr, 
came  into  the  market-place,  and  fell  down  before  the  altars,  and  as 
a  humble  suppliant,  gave  up  both  himself  and  his  country  into  the 
bands  of  the  Syracusans.  The  strangeness  of  the  thing  brought  a 
great  concourse  of  people  together  into  the  market-place.  Upua 
which,  a  general  assembly  of  the  magistrates  was  called,  and  there 
it  was  debated  whut  was  to  be  done  in  this  matter.  Some  who  were 
used,  and  loved  to  speak  much  to  the  people,  persuaded  them  to  take 
him  as  an  enemy,  and,  for  his  many  acts  of  hostility  against  thcm^ 
to  punish  him  accordingly.  But  the  wiser  sort  of  the  senators  who 
were  then  present,  declared  that  the  suppliant  was  to  be  preserved, 
and  that  a  reverend  regard  was  to  be  had  to  the  providence  of  the 
gods;  and  that  they  should  not  have  respect  so  much  to  what  Deu- 
cetius deserved,  as  seriously  to  consider  what  was  fit  and  just  for  them 
to  do  In  such  a  case.  To  kill  oac  whom  providence  had  hid  as  a 
suppliant  at  their  feet  was  unjust;  but  to  preserve  and  keep  to  the 
rules  of  piety  towards  the  gods,  and  humanity  towards  men  tliat  sub-* 
mit  to  mercy,  greatly  became  the  generosity  of  the  Syracusans.  Here- 
i^pon  the  people  unanimously  cried  out — Let  the  suppliant  be  safe. 
Deucetius  thus  delivered,  the  Syracusans  sent  him  back  to  Corinth, 
and  commanded  him  there  to  continue  the  rest  of  his  days,  with  ^ 
promise  to  supply  him  with  all  things  necessary  for  his  comfortable 
support.  And  now  having  performed  our  promise  in  setting  fortl\ 
those  things  that  happened  the  year  next  before  the  Athenian  ez« 
pedition  into  Cyprus  under  Cimon  their  general,  we  conclude  thi^ 
book. 


43S 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  XIL 


PREFACE. 

HE  who  seriously  considers  the  uncertainty  and  insti'ibility  of  human 
affairs,  must  needs  be  struck  with  great  admiration;  for^  he  will  find 
that  nothing  which  amongst  men  is  accounted  guod,  is  purely  such; 
nor  any  thing  that  is  esteemed  had,  is  perfectly  or  absulutcly  erily 
with«>ut  sonic  ingredient  of  profit  and  advantage:  which  lesson  we 
may  learn  from  what  is  before  related,  if  we  pondei  and  digest  thing* 
well.     Fi)r  the  expedition  of  Xerxes  the  king  of  Persia  into  Greece^ 
by  reason  of  hii  vast  army,  terrified  the  Grecians  to  the  highest  de- 
gree, who  were  by  that  war  in  great  danger  of  being  brought  into 
absolute  slavery,  and  might  justly  fear  that  Greece  was  likely  to  fall 
into  the  same  condition  with  the  Greek  cities  in  Asia,  who  were  not 
long  before  brouglit  under  the  |)ower  of  the  Persians.     But  beyond 
all  expectnti«m,  the  event  oftliis  war  was  wonderful;  for  the  Grc« 
cians  were  not  only  delivered  from  this  threatening  5torm»  but  by 
\\\BX  occasion  gained  an  cverlaMing  ret. own,  and  every  city  in  Greece 
thereby  abi>unded  with  so  much  wealth,  that  their  sudden  turn  of 
fortune  into  sueli  a  height  of  prosperity  was  admired  by  all:  for 
fifty  years  together  from  that  time,  Greece  flourished  io  all  felicity; 
in  which  tinte,  by  the  wealth  that  abounded  amongst  them,  all  good 
arts  wt'ie  highly  improved,  and  excellent  artists  are  recorded  to  ha%'e 
flourished  in  this  age;  ani«Mt^^t  whom  was  Phidias  that  famous  sta- 
tuary; and  sevtr.il  other  arts  and  sciences  then  advanced  to  au  ex- 
Uaordinary  degree.     But  the  great  honour  of  Greece  was  philosophy 
and  oratory,  and  chiefly  among  the  Athenians.   Those  that  were  emi- 
Dent  for  philosophy,  were  Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristotle:  fororatory^ 
Pericles,  Isocrates,  and  his  scholars.    There  were  othen  no  leia 
Vol.  1  •   No.  37t  %xjl 


434  DI0D0RU5  SICULUS.  Book 


XlL 


famous  for  military  discipline  and  excellent  commanders^  as  Milda* 
des,Themistocles,  Aristides,  Cimon,  Myronides,  and  mauy  othenjOf 
whom  it  would  be  too  tedious  to  give  a  particular  account.  For  the 
Athenian  name  was  highly  honoured  almost  through  all  parts  of  the 
world;  for  they  so  enlarged  their  dominion,  that  by  their  own  strength, 
without  the  help  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  those  of  Peloponnesus, 
they  routed  the  migiity  armies  of  the  Persians^  both  by  sea  and  land; 
and  did  sj  weaken  that  great  empire,  that  they  compelled  it  upon 
treaties  to  set  free  all  the  Grecian  cities  in  Asia:  the  particulars 
whereof  are  distinctly  and  at  large  related  in  the  former  book,  and  in 
this  we  have  at  present  in  hand.  And  now  we  are  come  to  the  mat- 
ters  designed  to  be  treated  of,  endeavouring  (as  near  as  we  can)  to 
fix  the  time  when  things  were  done.  We  began  the  book  next  he- 
fore  this  with  the  passage  of  Xerxes  into  Greece,  and  contiqued  it 
with  an  account  of  affairs  every  where  happening  from  that  time  to 
the  year  next  before  the  expedition  of  the  Athenians  against  Cyprus 
under  Cimon  tlieir  general.  In  this  we  shall  begin  with  that  expe- 
dition^  and  proceed  to  the  war  decreed  by  the  Athenians  against  the 
Svracusans. 


CHAP.  I. 

Cioion  tfie  Athenicni  admiral.  His  expedition  into  Cyprus.  Peace 
concluded  between  ike  Persians  and  Athetiians.  Cimon  dies  in 
Cyprus, 

EUTH  YDEM US  being  chief  governor  of  Athens,  Liucius  Quintus 
Cinnatins  and  Marcus  Fabius  Vibulanus  Roman  consuls,  fonuoe 
frowned  upon  the  Athenians;  for^  in  assisting  the  Egyptians  against 
the  Persians,  they  lost  all  their  ships  in  the  island  Prosopitis;  but  not 
long  after  a  new  war  was  determined  against  the  Persians,  for  the  li- 
berties of  the  Grecian  cities  in  Asia. 

For  this  purpose  the  Athenians  rigged  out  a  navy  of  two  hundred 
gallies,  and  made  Cimon  the  son  of  Miltiades  admiral,  and  ordered 
liim  to  make  straight  for  Cyprus,and  there  invade  the  Persians.,  Ac- 
cordingly he  forthwith  sailed  thither  with  a  noble  fleet,  well  manned 


tk4tp.L  MODORUS  SICULU8  435 

and  victualled,  and  ill  all  other  things  In  every  respect  sufficiently 
provided,  Artabazus  was  then  admiral  of  tiie  Fer;>ian  Rcet|  and  lay 
with  three  hundnd  ships  at  Cyprus:  and  Mtguhyzus  u'a<;  general  of 
the  Persian  hind  forces,  and  encamped  with  an  army  of  three  hun- 
dred thousand  men  in  Cilicia. 

Cimon  being  master  at  sea,  landed  his  men  at  Cyprus,  ai:d  forced 
Citium  and  Malus,  but  used  his  victory  with  great  nioclerutiun  and 
humanity;  having  received  intelligence  that  tleeisweie  come  fiOni 
Phcft* nicia  and  Cilicia  to  the  assistance  of  tlie  i&landers,  ho  luilsted  up 
sail,  fought  wiih  them,  sunk  many  ui'  their  vessels,  and  took  nn 
hundred, together  wiih  their  men,  and  pursued  the  rest  even  to  Phii!- 
nicia.  The  Persians,  with  therenmant  of  t'ne  fleet  ihat  was*  left,  ik-d 
to  Megahy/.us,  where  he  lay  encamped.  But  the  Aliienians  without 
delay  pursued  them,  landed  their  men,  and  set  upon  the  enemy,  l>nc 
lost  in  this  fight  Anaxicrates,  vice  admiral  of  the  lU-et,  w!io  foiit^ht 
with  much  gallantry,  and  there  fell  whh  honour.  However,  the  A- 
theniansgot  the  day,  and  after  they  had  made  a  great  slaughter  of 
their  enemies,  returned  to  their  ships,  and  sailed  hack  to  Cyprus. 
These  were  the  things  done  in  the  first  year  of  the  Cyprian  war. 

After  this,  when  Pedieus  was  arehon  of  Athens,  the  Ho  mans  be* 
stowed  the  consular  dignity  U|)on  Marcus  Valerius  Laciuca  and  Spu- 
rius  Virginius  Tricostus.  In  the  time  of  their  governinenr,  Cimon 
continuing  master  at  sea,  brought  most  of  the  eiiies  tif  Cyprus  under 
the  power  of  the  Athenians;  but  Saiamis,  the  metn»p<ilis,  wns  a  very 
strong  Persian  garrison,  well  stored  with  arms,  ammunitiim,  ami  pro-* 
visions  of  all  sorts;  therefore  he  judged  it  of  mighiy  eonsrijuenceand 
Advantage  if  he  could  gain  this  place;  for  he  conctrived,  if  this  were 
done,  that  the  whole  island  would  easily  fall  into  his  iiands,  and  the 
Persians  would  he  altogether  discouraged;  and  not  being  able  to  re- 
lieve Salaniis,  (tlie  Athenians  l>eingmastcis  at  sea),woiiIl  l>e  deserted 
and  despised  by  all  their  confederates.  Lastly,  he  concluded,  that 
if  the  whole  island  of  Cyprus  were  by  force  of  arms  subdued,  the 
chief  ends  of  the  war  were  obtained;  and  so  it  hnppened:  for  the 
Athenians  laying  close  siege  to  the  city,  assaulted  and  battered  it 
every  day.  But  the  garrison  being  well  furnl>hrd  with  arms  and 
all  other  necessaries,  easily  defL-nded  themselves  from  the  walls  a- 
gainst  all  the  strength  of  their  enemies. 

In  the  mean  time  Artaxirrxes  the  king  of  Persia,  hearing  of  the 
defeating  of  his  aimies  in  Cvpru^,  ealled  to/et!ier  a  Ci*uncil  of  w.^r, 
where  it  was  determined  that  it  ivus  ixut^x  iur  the  |.iif>irrgo'id  to  make 
peace  with  the  Grecians:  whtreu|>«iii  expresses  were  sent  u*  the 
generals  ai:d  olTicers  of  the  IVrHi.ins  to  mnke  peace  with  them 
ttpoo  any  teruis.     Artabsu.is  a:  d  Me^-abyztis  forthwith  uespatclied 


436  DIODORUS  sicuLirs* 


ambassadors  to  Athens  to  treat  of  Peace,  whose  conditions  beii|f 
cepted  by  the  Athenians,  they  sent  likewise  plenipotcntitfi0i»  At 
chief  of  whom  was  Cailias  the  son  of  Hipponicus. 
And  these  were  the  articles  of  peace  between  the  Persiaoiandtli^ 

Athenians,  and  their  confederates,  to  wit ^That  all  the  Greek  cicien 

in  Asia  should  be  free  and  governed  by  their  own  laws.    That  ncioe 
of  the  Persian  commanders  with  any  force  should  come  within  thiee 
days  journey  of  the  sea.    That  they  should  not  sail  in  any  man  of 
war  between  Phaselis  and  Cyanese.    Wiien  these  were  confirmed  by 
the  king  and  tlic  officers  of  his  army,  the  Athenians,  on  the  othas 
side,  agreed  and  engaged  not  to  iuvade  any  of  the  provinces  of  Ar* 
taxerxes.     Peace  thus  concluded^  the  Athenians  withdrew  their  foroca 
from  Cyprus,  triumphing  in  the  glory  of  their  victories,  and  in  the 
advantages  of  the  peace.     But  wliilst  the  army  remained  in  Cyprus^ 
Cimon  fell  sick  and  there  died.     Afterwards,  Philiscus  being  chief 
ruler  at  Atliens,  the  Romans  chusing  Titus  Romilius  Vaticanus  and 
Caius  Veturius  Cicurinus  consuls,  was  celebrated  the  eighty-third 
olympiad,  in  which  Crison  of  Himcra  carried  the  victory.     At  this 
time  the  Megareans  revolted  from  the  Athenians,  and  by  their  am- 
bassadors sent  to  Sparta,  ma()e  a  league  with  them;  with  which 
treachery  the  Athenians,  enraged,  sent  their  forces  into  their  country^ 
wiio  robbed  and  spoiled  every  where,  and  so,  loadcn  with  plunder,. 
returned  home.     The  citizens  indeed  issued  out  of  the  town,  for  the 
defence  of  the  country,  and  engaged,  but  were  beaten  and  driven 
within  their  walls. 


CHAP.  II. 

7*he  Megnreans  revolt  from  the  Athenians^  and  are  beaten^  TA& 
j^t'ivniuns  routed  at  Ckccronea  by  the  Bwoiians,  Many  dues' 
revolt,    ji  peace  is  cotUluded. 

AFTER  these  things,  when  Tymarchides  was  chief  govenior  of  A- 
thcns,  Spurius  Tarpcius  and  Aulus  Aterius  Fontiuus  being  created 
Roman  consuls,  the  Ijaccdiemouians  made  an  irruption  into  Attica,  and 
wasted  and  destroyed  the  country  far  and  near;  and,  after  they  had 
taken  several  forts  and  castles,  returned  into  Peloponnesus.  How- 
ever, Tolmides  the  Athenian  general  took  Chffironea;  but  theBoeo-^ 
tians  joining  together  surprised  him;  upon  which  a  bloody  battle  waa. 
fought  at  Cbaeronea,  iu  which  Tolmides  was  killed^  though  fighting  with 


in.  DiODORus  sicutirs.  437 


great  reiiolution,  and  the  rest  of  the  Atheai2ins  were  all  killed  or  taken. 
By  this  remarkable  slaughter  the  Athenians  were  compelled,  for  the 
redeeming  of  the  captives,  to  restore  all  the  cities  of  Boeotia  under 
their  dominion  unto  their  antient  liberties.  Afterwards,  when  Cal- 
limachus  was  archon  of  Athens,  and  Sextus  Quintilius  and  P.Curia- 
tius  were  Roman  consuls,  in  Greece  many  cities  revolted  from  the 
Athenians,  wlio  were  grown  very  low  by  reason  of  the  late  defeat  at 
Charonca,  and  especially  the  inhabitants  of  Euhcsa  wore  plottin^and 
contriving  some  dangerous  designs.  Therefore  Pericles,  beingmada 
general,  made  for  Eubcea  with  a  great  army,  and  assaulted  and  took 
the  city  of  Hestiaea,  made  all  the  citizens  captives,  and  transplanted 
them,  and  by  this  so  terrified  the  rest,  that  they  all  submitted  to  the 
Atheuian  government.  And  a  |>eacc  was  concluded  for  thirty  years^ 
Aod  the  articles  were  signed  and  sealed  by  Callias  and  Chares. 


CHAP.  III. 

ne  H*ar  between  the  AgngetUines  and  Sgracu»ans  in  Sicily.  Uie 
fcar  between  the  Crotanians  and  the  Sybarites,  SyhariM  razed* 
The  building  of  Thnrium.  Chamndas*s  good  lawM  in  Thu- 
rinm.  His  remarkable  death.  T7ie  laivs  of  Zaleucus  of  Lo» 
eris. 

IX  Sicily  wan  arose  between  them  of  Syracuse  and  Agrigentum,  for 
these  reasons — After  the  Syracusans  had  broken  the  power  of  Dcu- 
cetius  prince  of  the  Siculi,  upon  liis  submission  to  the  prople  for 
mercy,  they  pardoned  him,  but  conimaiuled  him  to  lead  a  private  life 
at  Curinth:  but  he  continued  not  lung  there  liefore  he  broke  all  hk 
engagements  and  ai(rcement5,  and  pretending  that  he  was  command- 
ed by  the  oracle  to  people  tiie  pleasant  sea-coast  in  Sicily,  he  arrived 
in  the  island  with  a  great  number  of  men,  as  colonies  to  plant  there. 
Sooie  of  the  Siculi  joined  li!m,  and  amongst  them  one  ArchonideSy 
prince  of  Erbita:  while  he  was  intent  u|M>n  his  ctilony,  the  Agri- 
gent  ines,  |)artly  out  <i\  ciivy  lu  tlie  SyraeiiSHiiSy  aii'l  likewise  because 
tliey  hud  spared  Driicettus,  their  common  enemy,  without  their  con- 
sent, make  war  u|>oii  the  Syracuaians.  Upon  this  the  cities  of  the 
Siculi  divided;  some  jt*iiiefl  with  the  Agrigentines,  othem  with 
the  Syracusans,  and  great  armies  were  raised  on  binh  sides,  and 
the  cities  pressed  ro  the  war  with  great  iin|H>rtuiiity.  At  length,  1*11* 
canping  at  the  river  Himcray  one  ovrs  against  the  otlirr,  iliry  came- 


438  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  JUkkfOi 

to  a  battle,  and  the  Syracusans  got  the  day,  and  killed  a  thoaaaad  of 
the  Agrigentines  upon  the  field.  But  presently  after  thefightjtht 
Agrigentines  sent  ambassadors  to  Syracuse  to  makepeace,  which wat 
agreed  on  upon  certain  conditions.  Whilst  things  were  thus  acting 
in  Sicily,  the  city  of  Thurium  was  built  in  Italy:  and  this  was  the 
occasion... 

The  Grecians  having  some  time  before  built  Syharis^  in  a  short 
time  the  city  grew  very  rich  by  reason  of  the  fruitfulness  of  the  soil. 
For  being  situated  between  two  rivers,  Crathis  and  Sybaris,  (from 
whence  it  took  its  name),  and  the  inhabitants  having  a  large  and  rich 
country  to  till,  they  grew  rich  on  a  sudden;  and  taking  many  into  the 
freedom  of  the  city,  flourished  in  such  a  degree,  that  they  seemed  to 
exceed  all  the  inhabitants  of  Italy.  For  they  were  so  populous,  that 
this  one  city  had  in  it  three  hundred  thousand  inhabitants.  Thert 
was  at  that  time  in  the  city  one  called  Telys,  who  had  great  influence 
over  the  people.  This  man,  by  raising  scandals  amongst  the  citizens 
against  those  who  were  the  richest,  so  far  at  length  prevailed  with 
the  Sybarites,  that  they  banished  five  hundred  of  the  most  wealthy 
citizens,  and  confiscated  their  estates  to  the  public  use. 

These  banished  men  went  to  Crotona,  and  there  (after  the  manner 
of  suppliants)  fled  to  the  altars  erected  in  the  forum.  Hereupon  Teljt 
sent  ambassadors  to  the  Crutonians,  cither  to  deliver  up  the  banished 
men,  or  expect  war.  A  council  was  called,  and  the  question  pat.. 
Whether  they  should  deliver  up  the  suppliants  to  the  Sybarites,  or 
engage  in  a  war  with  an  enemy  more  powerful  than  themselves.  Tha 
senate  and  people  made  some  doubt,  and  the  people  at  first  inclined 
to  deliver  them  up  rather  than  endure  the  war.  But  afterwards  Py- 
thagoras advising  them  to  protect  the  suppliants,  they  changed  their 
opinion,  and  determined  to  fight  in  their  defence. 

Hereupon  the  Sybarites  took  the  field  with  an  army  of  three  hun- 
dred thousand  men.  The  Crotonians  liad  but  an  hundred  thousand, 
which  were  commanded  by  Milo  the  wrestler,  who  at  the  first  onset 
put  to  flight  that  wing  of  the  army  which  was  opposite  to  him:  for  he 
wasofinvincible  strength,  and  had  courage  answerable  tohisstrengthy 
and  had  been  six  times  victor  at  the  Olympic  games;  when  he  be- 
gan his  fight,  he  was  crowned  with  Olympic  wreaths,  wearing  (like 
Hercules)  a  lion*s  skin  and  a  club;  at  last  he  gained  an  absolute 
victory,  and  thereupon  was  much  admired  by  his  countrymen.  Up- 
on  the  rout  the  Crotonians  gav^  no  quarter,  but  killed  all  tliey  toojr, 
so  that  most  of  the  army  was  destroyed,  and  the  city  sacked  and  mb- 
erably  laid  waste  and  desolate.  But  within  fifty-eight  years  afterj 
the  Thessalians  arrived  in  order  to  plant  there,  and  withia  less  thaD 
five  years  after  they  liad  rebuik  the  city,  they  were  likcwiw  cjeelcd 


€%tp.  ITL  DIODORU8  STCUtUS.  43^ 


bv  the  Crotonians.  For  when  Callimachus  was  archon  of  Athens^ 
this  city  hepin  to  be  inhabited:  but  shortly  after  it  chani^ed  both  its 
name  and  place,  being  built  elsewhere  by  Laropo  and  Xenoci:ates, 

Wtiich  was  u|>on  this  occasion The  Sybarites,  driven  out  of  their 

country  a  bccond  time,  sent  ambassadurs  into  Greece,  mod  desired 
aid  from  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  to  assist  them  io  restor- 
ing them  to  thf'ir  country,  and  likewise  desiring  that  they  would  send 
a  colony  to  p^iriakc  wicti  them.  Tlie  Lacediemonians  rejected  tlieir 
fiddress;  but  tlie  Athenians  resolved  to  assist  them, and  sent  ten  ships 
with  soldiers  to  the  Syluirites,  of  which  Lampoand  Xenocrates  wera 
fent-rals:  and  proclamation  was  made  through  all  the  cities  of  Pelo* 
ponnesus  by  the  Athenian  heralds,  that  it  should  be  lawful  for  any* 
that  would,  IO  pl.irt  wi:h  them  in  their  intended  new  colony.  Many 
complied,  especially  being  moved  thereunto  by  the  oracle  of  Apollo^ 
who  advised  them  to  build  a  city  where  there  was  little  water,  and  yet 
bread  wiiliout  measure. 

Setting  Hail,  therefore,  for  Italy,  they  at  length  arrived  at  SyhariSy 
and  there  made  diligent  search  for  the  place  recommended  to  them 
by  the  deity.  And  finding  a  fountain  or  spring,  not  far  from  Sybaris^ 
which  was  called  Thuria,  is>uing  its  waters  through  a  brazen  pipe, 
called  Medimnum,  Mhieh  signifies  a  bushel,  (judging  this  to  be  the 
place  foretold  by  theoriele),  ih^y  encomi>assed  itwi(hawall,aDdtheie 
built  the  ciry,  calling  it,  from  the  name  of  the  spring,  Thurium. 

Tlie  city  in  length  contained  four  streets:  the  first  they  called 
lleruclea,  the  second  A|>llrol!i^iade,  the  third  Olympiad,  the  fourth 
DionysiHd.  The  breaiith  was  divided  into  three  streets;  the  first 
called  Ileroa,  the  other  Thuria,  and  the  last  Thurina.  Wlieii 
all  these  streets  were  filled  with  houses,  the  city  appeared  very  com* 
pact  and  beautiful.  But  the  Hiurians  continued  not  long  at  peace 
among  themselves,  for  a  grievous  sedition  (and  not  witliout  some 
cause)  began  to  dlsiuib  the  commonwealth.  For  the  Sybarites,  the 
antient  inhabitants,  sliared  all  the  chief  places  of  the  magistnicy 
amongbt  themselves,  and  left  only  the  inferior  offices  to  the  new  co« 
Ionics.  And  the  wives  of  the  antient  citisens  were  first  admitted  to 
sacrifice  before  those  that  were  lately  brought  into  the  freedom  of  ^ 
the  city.  And  besides,  iliey  engrossed  all  the  land  next  to  the  city 
and  divided  it  among  iheniselves»,  and  left  that  wiiich  was  far  off  to 
the  new  comers.  Till^  lire  of  dissent iini  broke  out  into  a  devouring 
flame,  insomuch  that  ilie  new  colony,  (then  more  |M)werful  than  the 
otherj,  destroyed  almost  all  the  antient  inhabitants,  and  brought  the 
whole  city  into  thi  ir  own  |>ower.  Uut  the  country  being  very  rich| 
and  more  tliau  was  .sufl&ciiiii  inr  them  tluit  remained,  tliey  sent  for 
paay  out  of  Greece  to  till  and  improve  the  laudj  amongst  whomihcy 


440  DIODORUB  8ICULU8.  S&ok  JUE 


divided  both  the  liouses  in  the  city  that  were  destitute  of  inbaMtuItt^ 
and  the  land  in  the  country.  The  inhabiunts  grew  verj  rich  ia  ft 
short  time,  and  entering  into  league  with  the  Crotoniaus,  gOVCTMl 
their  commoDwealth  from  henceforth  with  great  comineDdatiooj  anl 
Imving  settled  m  democracy^  they  divided  the  citizens  into  ten  tribctj 
and  gave  them  names  according  to  their  several  countries  t  three  thsA 
came  out  of  Peloponnesus  they  called  the  Arcadian,  Acfaafauij  and 
Elcan.  The  same  number  of  them  that  came  from  other  morie  reiMte 
|i«rts  of  Greece,  they  named  the  Bceotian,  Amphictyoniibe,  andl>»^ 
iMm,  according  to  their  several  tribes.  Tlie  four  risidue  fronsothef 
countries  of  Greece  they  called  tlie  Jadans,  AtheniadaSy  EuNeadK^ 
and  Islanders.  Charondas,  one  of  their  most  learned  and  best  ae^ 
eomplislicd  citizens,  they  chose  for  their  legislator,  who  examined  the 
laws  of  every  country,  and  picked  out  of  every  one  what  he  )odgcd 
to  be  the  best,  and  digested  them  all  into  one  body  or  system:  but 
he  added  many  himself  of  his  own  contrivance:  to  rehearse  some  of 
which  it  will  not  be  unprofitable  to  the  reader.  And  first  lie  insti- 
tuted  ^That  whoever  married  a  second  wife^  and  brought  a  stepmo* 

thcr  amongst  his  children,  should  bt  removed  from  the  senate  anl 
common  assemblies,  for  he  judged  that  man  could  never  advise  his 
country  well,  who  was  so  imprudent  in  his  own  family:  for  they  that 
were  once  well  married,  ought  to  rest  satisfied  with  such  a  happi- 
ness; and  such  as  arc  unfortunate  in  their  first  match,  arul  yet  against 
their  own  experience  commit  a  scc(»nd  fault  of  the  same  kind^  justly 
desen'c  to  be  noted  for  fools.    To  false  accusers  he  appointed  this 

punishment That  they  should  l^e  led  through  the  city  crowned  with 

tlic  shrub  tamarisk,  that  it  might  appear  to  all,  tiiat  the  offender  was 
iruilty  of  the  highest  wickedness.  And  it  is  reported  that  some  con- 
Ticted  of  this  oftbncc,  to  avoid  the  disgrace,  have  killed  themselves. 
By  the  severity  of  this  law,  false  informers  (the  plague  of  the  com- 
monwealth) were  driven  out  of  the  city,  and  the  citizens  lived  in 
great  prosperity.  Charondas  made  likewise  a  new  law  (never  be- 
fore instituted  by  any  former  legislator)  concerning  keeping  bad  com« 
pany.  For  he  found  by  experience,  that  both  the  manners  and  jndg^ 
mcntsofgood  and  honest  men,  were  often  depraved  by  the  society  and 
familiarity  of  wicked  men,  and  drawn  aside  from  the  paths  of  virtue 
to  the  filthincss  of  vice;  and  that  such  company,  like  an  infectious 
disease,  seized  the  minds  of  the  very  best  with  its  contagion  and  cor- 
ruption ;  for  the  way  to  vice  is  down  the  hill  with  a  very  easy  de- 
scent;  by  reason  whereof  many  of  more  than  ordinary  integrity^(en- 
snarcd  with  the  enticing  charms  of  pleasure),  have  fallen  into  the 
highest  degree  of  wickedness;  desiiing,  therefore,  to  pi^vent  thii 
mischief,  he  severely  forbade  keeping  com|>any  and  familiarity  with 


Chap.  ITT.  DIODORUS  STCULU8.  441 


lewd  men:  and  framed  a  process  against  ill  society^  and  imposed  a 
severe  fine  upon  such  as  should  be  found  guilty.  And  he  oiade 
moreover  another  taw  more  excellent  tlian  this,  overlooked  by  all  tha 

antient  law-makers:  that  is ^That  all  the  children  of  the  citizens 

should  learn  to  write,  and  the  city  should  pay  the  master's  wages. 
For  he  knew  that  they  who  were  poor  were  not  able  to  be  at  the 
charge,  and  of  consequence  must  lose  the  advantage  of  instruction 
for  their  children:  for  he  preferred,  and  not  without  cause,  tha 
knowledge  of  writing  to  be  learnt  in  the  first  place  before  all  other 
arts ;  for  by  the  help  of  this  many  things  conducing  to  the  public  good 
are  preserved  to  posterity;  as  suffVages,  decrees,  epistles,  wills,  laws^ 
and  other  things  necessary  for  instruction.  Who  can  sufficiently  set 
forth  the  praises  of  this  art?  By  this  the  memor>'  of  the  dead  is  pre* 
served  among  the  living;  by  these  mc-Sj»engers,  they  tliat  are  at  the 
greatest  distance,  far  absent,  may  be  conversed  with  as  present* 
These  preserve  the  opinions  of  the  wisest  men,  the  answers  of  the 
gods,  the  learning  of  philosophers,  all  the  sciences  of  the  world,  and 
hand  them  down  to  posterity  for  ever.  Life  is  due  to  nature,  but 
how  to  live  well  we  owe  to  the  books  of  the  learned,  so  that  by  this 
good  law  (at  the  public  care  and  cnarge)  those  who  were  illiterate 
before  (wholly  deprived  of  those  great  blessings)  were  now  improved 
by  more  liappy  education;  so  that  we  may  say  he  far  exceeded  those 
former  law-makers  who  appointed  physicians  for  the  curing  of  private 
men's  distcm|iers,  at  the  charge  of  the  public;  for  they  provided 
cures  for  men's  bodies,  but  he  for  ignorance  and  disease  of  men's 
souls :  aud  we  never  desire  to  have  need  of  a  physician,  but  are  always 
unwilling  to  part  with  a  learned  man :  many  poets  have  celebrated 
these  laws  concerning  evil  company;  among  others  are  these. 

If  one  hrrd  willi  bad  company, 
I  Bftk  nnl  what  lie  i%,  bul  ice; 
Such  at  hu  fricads  arr,  «uch  ii  he. 

Of  his  law  concerning  step-mothers  mention  is  made  thus — ^Tlie 
law-giver  (bay  they)  Charondas,  amongst  others  made  this  law: 

I^t  hini  hnwt  no  rrpule  but  of  a  foul, 
'VUut  •ell  a  fttrp-damr  o'er  ^l»  houic  to  rule : 
N'lr  let  him  for  a  civil  office  lue. 
Who  to  ai>  old  plaipir  darci  lo  add  a  news 
U  good  imk  in  a  wife  tboa  haft  bad,  then  •  .    .  . 

btick  at  a  f;ood  hand ;  if  bad,  ai  wMl  men*  ^ 

1 W  art  mad  it  thoa  seek 'it  lo  be  cun*d  again. 

In  truth  he  who  miscarries  twice  in  one  and  the  same  thing,  may 
jiMtly  be  accounted  a  fool*    Fur  what  Philemon  the  comic  poet 
Vol.  1.  Nq.  37.  ^^^ 


449  DioDORUS  stcuLUS.  BonA  XB^  * 

%  ■  —    i  ■■ 

says  of  them  that  have  ofteo  escaped  shipwreck,  some  have  applied 
to  this  case; 

I  wonder  not  that  one  the  torn  should  enter 
And  •ail«  bat  that  he  made  a  second  venture. 

It  is  no  wonder  to  see  a  man  marry ;  but  to  see  him  twice  manj. 
For  it  is  saler  and  more  advisable  for  a  man  to  espose  himself  twiea 
to  the  dan^rs  of  tlie  sea,  than  to  the  hazards  of  a  second  wife.  For 
most  sad  and  cruel  discords  often  arise  in  families  between  parentt 
and  children  by  the  tricks  and  devices  of  stepmothers.  Hence  we 
have  the  frequent  and  horrid  pieces  of  villany  of  this  kind  rqireaeBted 
upon  the  stage  by  the  tragedians. 

Charondas  framed  another  very  good  law  concerning  the  guardian- 
ship of  orphans.     Upon  the  first  view  there  seems  to  be  little  in  it 
worthy  taking  notice  of;  but  examining  it  more  closely,  we  may  tUa- 
cern  in  it  much  wisdom  and  excellent  contrivance.    Their  estates  he 
committed  to  the  care  and  guardianship  of  the  next  of  kin  on  tlieif 
father's  side,  but  their  education,  and  the  custody  of  tfieir  penoiia«  to 
them  of  the  mothers.    At  first  here  seems  nothing  of  any  great  weight 
in  this  law,  but  upon  more  serious  consideration,  it  will  evidently 
appear  to  be  a  most  excellent  constitution :  for  if  the  cause  be  aerioodj 
pried  into,  why  he  ordered  the  care  of  the  estate  to  one,  and  the 
education  of  the  person  to  another,  the  wisdom  and  prudence  of  the 
law-maker  will  be  very  evident:  for  they  on  the  mother'a  side  would 
never  contrive  any  thing  of  prejudice  to  the  person  wliose  eataile 
could  never  come  and  descend  to  them;  and  the  mischief  was  pie* 
vented  as  to  the  kindred  on  the  father's  side,  because  the  peiaon  was 
not  committed  to  their  custody.    On  the  other  hand,  in  r^ard  the 
estate  of  the  orphan  was  to  fall  to  the  father's  kindred  in  ease  of  hia 
death,  it  was  to  be  presumed  they  would  take  care  to  preaenre  and 
improve  it,  upon  the  prospect  of  the  possibility  of  its  coming  unto 
themselves 

Another  law  he  made  against  those  that  ran  away  from  their  ooloais, 
or  refused  to  take  up  arms  for  the  defence  of  their  country:  for 
whereas  former  lawgivers  made  it  death,  his  edict  was..JThat  auch 
men  should  sit  three  days  in  the  forum,  clothed  in  women's  apparel; 
which  constitution,  as  it  was  more  moderate  than  those  in  other 
places,  so  the  greatness  ol  the  disgrace  did  work  more  upon  ingenuous 
spirits  to  deter  them  from  softness  and  effeminacy;  judging  it  far 
better  to  die  than  to  undergo  so  much  disgrace  in  their  own  country. 
By  this  way  he  destroyed  not  those  that  were  guilty,  but- reserved 
them  for  the  future  service  of  the  city,  as  oceask>n  should  he;  who, 
in  all  likelihood,  after  such  disgrace,  would  carry  themselvca  betterj 


GKop.  Itt.  DIODORUS  SICU  LUS.  443 

and  endeavour  to  wipe  off  the  stJiin  of  tiieir  former  reproach,  by  doing 
something  more  than  ordinary  for  the  time  to  come.  The  severity 
and  strictness  likewise  of  his  laws  gave  a  perpetual  vigour  to  them; 
for  it  was  absolutely  forbidden  to  depart  in  the  least  from  the  letter 
of  the  law,  though  it  were  never  so  severe  or  inconvenient.  But  if 
any  were  fit  to  be  repealed  or  amended,  he  gave  power  for  that  pur- 
pose. For  he  judged  it  fit  and  just  for  every  man  to  stoop  to  tiie 
authority  of  the  lawgiver,  but  to  suffer  the  cavils  and  exceptions  of 
every  private  man  to  prevail  (nay  though  they  seemed  to  tend  to  the 
public  good)  was  most  absurd.  And  by  this  means  he  restrained 
those  that  would  in  giving  of  judgment  for  criminal  matters  bring  in 
their  own  glosses  and  expositions  against  the  express  words  of  the 
law,  lest  by  their  cavils  the  authority  of  the  laws  should  come  to 
nothing.  And  hereupon  it  is  reported  that  some  prosecutors  against 
criminals  said  to  the  judges,  that  either  the  law  or  the  malefactor 
must  of  necessity  be  preserved;  Charondas  therefore  appointed 
something  more  than  usual  concerning  the  amendment  of  the  laws. 
For  whereas  he  saw  that  there  were  many  in  divers  cities  who  rashly, 
and  hand  over  head,  (going  about  to  correct  and  amend  the  laws),  did 
nothing  else  but  (by  corrupting  them)  involve  the  common  people  in« 
seditions;  he  published  this  most  excellent  law,  differing  from  all 
that  were  before-^That  any  person  who  would  have  any  law  to  be 
altered  or  amended,  a  council  should  be  called,  and  he  who  would 
have  an  alteration,  should  have  a  rope  put  about  his  neck,  and  so 
continue  while  the  votes  of  the  people  concerning  the  change  of  the 
law  were  in  taking;  and  if  the  assembly  approved  of  the  new  law,  then 
tlie  author  should  be  discharged;  but  if  it  were  rejected,  then  he 
should  be  forthwith  hanged.  By  this  so  severe  a  caution  to  prevent 
innovation,  new  law-makers  disappeared,  and  none  durst  so  much 
as  even  whisper  any  thing  concerning  the  amendment  or  alteration  of 

the  laws. 

From  that  time  forward,  there  were  at  Thurium  only  three  (forced 
by  urgent  provocations)  that  appeared  and  stood  up  to  persuade  the 
people  to  abrogation  of  some  laws.  For  there  was  a  law,  that  he  who 
struck  out  the  eye  of  another,  should  have  his  own  eye  plucked  out. 
It  happened  that  one  who  had  only  one  eye  (by  the  injury  of  another) 
lost  that  also,  so  that  he  was  altogether  blind.  In  this  case,  although 
the  offender  was  to  lose  his  eye  for  the  injury  done  to  the  other,  yet 
the  punishment  was  not  thought  equivalent  to  the  nature  of  the 
offence;  for  he  who  made  his  fellow  citizen  wholly  blind,  although 
by  losing  one  of  his  eyes  he  satisfied  the  letter  of  the  law,  yet  the  loss 
and  prejudice  was  not  equal;  and  therefore  it  was  conceived  to  be 
most  equitable  and  just^  that  he  who  deprived  another  of  his  sight 


444  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Jboft  XIL 

^^^— ^——i — ^—— — — i— ^ii^— ^^— — ^— 1— ^1^— — I— —i^— i^i^— ^i*^i^"^i^i^W — ^^Wi^ 

wholly,  should  lose  both  his  eyes,  if  the  punishment  wert  fMnopor- 
tioned  to  the' offence.    This  blind  man  therefore  (moved  and  hcsldl 
with  the  pain  and  indignity  of  the  thing)  complained  to  the  people  of 
his  sad  condition,  and  made  his  address  to  them  for  the  mmendaiCDt 
of  the  law.    At  length,  having  the  rope  about  his  neek,  he  pKvailed^ 
and  the  law  was  abolished,  and  anotlicr  made  more  effiectul  io  its 
place,  and  so  he  escaped  hanging.    Another  law  likewise  was  nMide- 
rated,  whereby  power  was  given  to  the  wife  in  some  eases,  to  leave 
her  husband,  and  marry  whom  else  she  thought  fit.     For  one  growa 
old,  being  forsaken  by  his  young  wife,  proposed  to  the  pcofde  fat  aa 
amendment  of  the  law  to  have  this  further  addition  .^That  it  mighl 
be  lawful  for  any  wife  that  had  a  desire  to  leave  her  husband,  to  many 
any  other  man,  provided  he  were  no  younger  than  her  former  fana- 
band;  and  that  he  who  cast  off  bis  wife,  should  marry  none  younger 
than  the  wife  he  rejected.    And  he  succeeded  so  well  in  bis  proponl^ 
that  by  having  tlie  law  amended,  he  not  only  escaped  tlie  rope,  but 
by  this  means  his  wife,  who  had  a  mind  to  a  young  fellow,  was  fosced 
to  return  to  him  again. 
The  third  law  (which  Solon  likewise  had  made)  which  was  amended^ 
•  was  that  concerning  virgins  aud  orphans.    The  law  was,  that  when 
there  was  an  heiress  left,  the  next  of  kin  might  demand  her  in  mar- 
riage; and  so  on  the  other  hand,  a  young  woman,  an  orphan,  niglrt 
demand  him  that  was  of  her  next  kindred  in  marriage,  and  he  skoold 
be  forced  to  ^arry  her ;  or  if  she  were  poor,  give  her  five  bundled 
draclimas  for  her  portion.    There  was  an  orphan  of  this  kind  left,  of 
a  good  family,  but  yet  extremely  poor;  she,  by  reason  of  herpo¥erty 
in  no  likelihood  to  get  a  husband,  made  her  appircation  to  the  people^ 
and  with  many  tears  bemoaned  her  desolate  ifonditipn,  anddespicabla 
state  of  life,  and  desired  an  amendment  of  lAie  law  to  this  purpoae... 
That  in  lieu  of  the  five  hundred  drachmas,  the  next  of  kin,  whom  by 
the  hiw  the  orphan  might  demand  in  marriage,  should  be  forced  to 
marry  her.     The  people  commiserating  her  condition,  changed  tha 
law,  and  so  she  was  delivered  from  the  rope,  and  tlie  rich  kinsman 
was  forced  to  marry  the  poor  maid  without  any  dowry. 

Now  it  remains  we  should  speak  of  the  death  of  Cliarondas,  con* 
cerniDg  which  there  happened  something  remarkable  and  wonderful; 
for  when  he  was  gone  forth  against  some  robbers  that  made  inraada 
into  the  country,  before  he  returned,  there  happened  a  tumult  to  be 
raised  by  the  people  in  one  of  their  common  assemblies.  Determining 
therefore  to  make  diligent  inquiry  into  the  cause  aud  authoFB  of  tbt 
sedition,  he  came  hastily  in  amongst  them,  with  his  sword  girt  at  lua 
side,  against  a  law  he  had  made  that  none  should  come  armc^l  into  tbf 
senate-house;  but  had  forgotten  his  sword  then  at  lua  aide,  and  ap 


CAap.  III.  DIODORUS  SICULltS.  4Ai 

rushed  into  the  assembly,  and  thereby  gave  an  occasion  to  them  Aat 
maligned  liim,  to  accuse  him :  upon  which  one  cries  out—You  break 
the  law  which  you  yourself  made.  No,  says  he,  but  I  will  confirm 
it ;  and  forthwith  ran  himself  through.  Some  writers  ascribe  this 
fact  to  Diocles,  the  law-maker  of  Syracuse.  ^ 

But  having  spoken  enough  of  Charondas,  we  shall  now  relate 
something  in  short  of  Zaleucbus  the  law-maker,  because  they  weie 
much  alike  in  their  consultations,  and  bent  their  minds  and  thoughts 
to  the  same  things,  and  flourished  in  cities  near  adjoining  one  to 
another.  Zaleuchus  was  an  Italian  born  at  Locris  of  a  noble  family, 
of  great  learning,  and  scholar  to  Pythagoras.  He  was  of  great  esteem 
and  account  in  his  country,  and  chosen  by  the  people  to  be  their  law- 
maker. He  began  hb  laws  first  with  the  worship  of  the  gods.  In 
the  preface  he  requires  the  inhabitants — That  in  the  first  place,  and 
above  all,  they  should  be  fully  persuaded,  and  undoulHedly  believe 
that  there  were  gods;  and  that  devoutly  looking  up  to  heaven,  and 
viewing  the  beauty  and  admirable  harmony  and  order  thereof,  they 
should  judge,  and  certainly  conclude,  that  that  great  work  was  not  of 
men,  or  came  there  by  chance:  and  therefore  he  ordained,  they 
should  adore  and  worship  the  gods,  from  whom  all  that  is  good  des* 
cends  upon  men.  And  to  that  end,  that  they  ought  to  have  their 
minds  pure  and  unspotted,  inasmuch  as  the  gods  are  better  pleased 
with  the  just  and  honest  actions  of  righteous  men,  than  with  all  their 
costly  sacrifices.  Having  made  this  preface  or  introduction,  he  then 
subjoins  his  precepts.  First,  That  none  should  be  implacable  one 
against  another,  but  that  all  should  so  manage  their  animosities,  as 
to  keep  a  reserve  in  a  short  time  to  be  reconciled,  and  in  full  friend* 
ship  with  their  adversaries;  and  if  any  did  otherwise,  such  a  man 
should  be  reputed  of  a  fierce  and  inhuman  disposition.  Secondly, 
He  commanded  the  magistrates  that  they  should  not  be  proud  and 
domineering;  that  they  should  not  give  judgment  in  any  matter 
either  for  love  or  iiatred.  And  in  other  particulars  he  devised  many 
things  with  great  wisdom,  prudence,  and  ingenuity.  Thirdly^ 
Whereas,  in  all  other  countries,  by  the  excess  and  extravagance  of 
women  much  silver  \vas  spent  and  wasted;  by  a  witty  and  ingenious 

kind  of  punishment,  he  restrained  their  excess,  for  he  ordered ^That 

no  woman  who  was  free  of  the  city  should  be  attended  abroad  with 
any  more  than  one  servant,  unless  she  were  drunk.  That  none 
should  walk  abroad  in  the  night,  except  it  were  wiih  an  intent  to  play 
the  whore,  nor  wear  golden  ornaments,  or  garments  embroidered 
with  gold,  unless  with  the  same  intent:  nor  that  any  man  should 
wear  a  gold  ring,  or  a  Milesian  garment,  unless  he  were  guilty  of 
fornication  or  adultery.     By  tlicse  dishonourable  exceptions  and  con- 


448  DTOnORVS  SICULU9.  BookJUZ^ 

great  and  high  birth,  and  the  glory  of  their  families,  with  inaaflierabk 
pride  engrossed  to  tbemselres  all  the  power  and  authority  of  the  city. 

Amongst  the  conditions  it  was  further  added Tiut  the  tribanet  of 

the  people,  at  the  end  of  every  year,  should  appoint  as  many  new 
ones  in  their  room  to  succeed,  and  if  they  neglected  it,  they  shosU 
be  burnt  alive.  And  though  the  tribunes  could  not  agree  in  thev 
choice,  yet  they  should  continue  still  in  their  offices  in  the  mean 
time.    And  this  was  the  end  of  the  great  commotion  at  Rome. 

Diphilus  being  archon  of  Athens,  the  Ronmns  created  Ifarcnt 
Horatius  and  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus  consuls,  who  perfected  the 
laws  which  suffered  an  eruption  by  the  sedition.  For  there  wem 
then  ten  out  of  the  twelve  tables  (as  they  were  called)  only  finished^ 
the  other  two  were  added  by  these  consuls.  The  Roman  laws  thus 
perfected,  the  consuls  ordered  them  tu  be  engraven  on  twelve  tabki 
of  brass,  and  fixed  them  to  the  pleader's  desk  in  the  face  of  the  court; 
And  these  laws  thus  written  briefly  and  plainly,  without  any  flomisk 
of  words,  remain  unto  this  day* 

About  the  time  these  things  were  done,  most  nations  through  the 
world  were  at  i>eace;  for  the  Persians  made  a  double  league  with  the 
Grecians,  and  with  the  Athenians  and  their  confederates,  whoeby 
liberty  was  restored  to  all  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia.  The  othtf 
afterwards  was  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  by  which  it  was  agreed  quite 
contrary,  that  the  Greek  cities  in  Asia  should  remain  under  the  power 
of  the  Persians.  In  like  manner,  the  Grecians  were  at  peace  among 
themselves,  the  Athenians  and  Spartans  having  entered  into  a  leaguo 
for  thirty  years*  And  all  was  likewise  quiet  in  Sicily,  the  Carthiqp- 
nians  having  made  peace  with  Gelon,  and  all  the  Grecian  cities 
submitted  to  them  of  Syracuse.  And  the  Agrigentines  after  tho 
slaughter  at  Himera,  accepted  of  terms  of  peace.  And  all  the  peopla 
of  Italy,  France,  Spain,  and  most  parts  of  the  world,  were  at  perfect 
concord  one  with  another.  Therefore  we  have  no  account  in  history 
of  any  thing  memorable  done  in  war  during  this  time;  but  all  were 
every  where  at  rest,  solacing  themselves  with  sports  and  sacred  fetti« 
vals,  and  other  jollities,  the  common  attendants  of  ^  piosperom 
State  and  cpndition» 


Ckgp-  TIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  44/ 


b: 


meu  for  making  of  lavrs.    A  ppius  Claudius,  Marcus  Cornelius,  Lucius 
Minutius,  Caius  Sergius,  Quintus  Pitilius,  Marcus  Rabuleius,  '^« 
AntoDius  Meranda,  Q.  Fabius  Vibulanus,  C.  Duilius,  and  Sp.  Oppius. 
But  these  could  not  perfect  the  business  wherein  they  were  em- 
ployed; for  one  of  them*  fell  in  love  with  a  beautiful  virgin,  but  of 
small  fortuue,  whom  be  endeavoured  to  debauch  by  money.    But 
when  he  saw  he  could  not  gain  hb  design  by  those  meaus,  he  suborned 
m  fellowf  fit  for  his  purpose,  to  claim  her  for  his  bondslave,  and  to 
bring  her  before  the  Decemviri,  and  demand  judgment  a^inst  ber  as 
hb  slave;  which  was  easily  obtained  trom  a  corrupt  judge,  the  author 
of  the  villany.     She  being  delivered  to  him,  the  sycophant  knave 
carried  her  away  as  hb  bond-maid.     In  the  mean  time,  the  father  of 
the  young  woman,  moved  with  grief  and  rage  at  the  indignity  offered, 
hastened  to  the  court,  where  seeing  no  hopes  of  redress,  he  followed 
his  daughter  close  behind  her>  and  spying  a  knife  in  a  butcher's  shop, 
as  he  passed  by,  he  snatched  it  up,  and  forthwith  stabbed  his  daughter 
to  death,  to  avoid  the  indignity  and  disgrace  of  such  a  condition,  and 
forthwith  without  delay,  hastening  out  of  the  city,  made  to  the  army 
that  was  tiien  encamped  at  Algidum,  and  with  many  tears  declared 
bis  miserable  c(  ndition,  and  implored  their  assistance;  which  on  the 
sudden   aflectcd  them  all  with  commiseration,  and  great  sorrow  at 
his  calamity;  upon  which  (being  all  stirred  up  with  a  resolution  to 
relieve  the  distressed  father)  in  the  night  they  rushed  into  Rome,  and 
possessed  themselves  of  the  Aventine  mount.     As  soon  as  the  day 
brake,  the  Decemviri,  being  informed  of  the  rage  of  the  soldiers 
against  the  wickedness  of  the  fact,  (by  force  of  arms  resolving  to 
defend  their  colleague),  got  together  a  multitude  of  young  men 
to  dispute  the  matter  with  their  adversaries  by  the  sword.    And  now 
a  great  and  bloody  fight  seemed  to  be  at  hand,  when  some  of  the 
citizens  of  the  best  quality,  foreseeing  the  danger,  interposed  by 
messengers  to  both  parties,  in  order  to  compose  the  difference;  en<* 
treating  and  earnestly  lieseeching  them,  that  they  would  forbear,  and 
not  involve  their  country  in  blood  and  destruction.    At  length  th^ 

matter  was  agreed  upon  these  conditions ^That  there  should  be  ten 

called  tribunes  of  the  people  chosen,  who  should  have  sovereign 
power  and  authority  over  all  the  rest  of  the  magistrates  of  the  city, 
and  who  might  protect  the  common  liberty  of  the  people:  and  that 
one  of  the  consuls  every  year  should  be  chosen  out  of  the  senators, 
and  the  other  out  of  the  common  people.  Yea,  further,  that  ti>ey 
should  have  power  to  chuse  both  consuls  out  from  among  themselves 
if  they  thought  fit.  And  this  law  was  then  made  to  be  a  check  to 
the  exorbitant  power  of  the  patricians ;  for  they,  under  colour  of  their 

*  Appios.        t  One  Marcus  Claudius. 


448  DTOnORVS  SICULU9.  BookJUZ^ 

great  and  high  birth,  and  the  glory  of  their  families^  with  inaaflisnble 
pride  engrossed  to  tbemselres  all  the  power  and  authority  of  the  city. 

Amongst  the  conditions  it  was  further  added That  the  tribanea  of 

the  people,  at  the  end  of  every  year,  should  appoint  as  many  new 
ones  in  their  room  to  succeed,  and  if  they  neglected  it,  tbey  shoaU 
be  burnt  alive.  And  though  the  tribunes  could  not  agree  in  their 
choice,  yet  they  should  continue  still  in  their  offices  in  the  mean 
time.    And  this  was  the  end  of  the  great  commotion  at  Rome. 

Diphilus  being  archon  of  Athens,  the  Ronmns  created  Marcna 
Horatius  and  Lucius  Valerius  Potitus  consuls,  who  perfected  tba 
laws  which  suffered  an  eruption  by  the  sedition.  For  there  wem 
then  ten  out  of  the  twelve  tables  (as  they  were  called)  only  finiahcd^ 
the  other  two  were  added  by  these  consuls.  The  Roman  laws  thos 
perfected,  the  consuls  ordered  them  to  be  engraven  on  twelve  tabki 
of  brass,  and  fixed  them  to  the  pleader's  desk  in  the  face  of  the  court; 
And  these  laws  thus  written  briefly  and  plainly,  without  any  flonrisb 
of  words,  remain  unto  this  day. 

About  the  time  these  things  were  done,  most  nations  through  the 
world  were  at  jieace;  for  the  Persians  made  a  double  league  with  the 
Grecians,  and  with  the  Athenians  and  their  confederates,  whnebf 
liberty  was  restored  to  all  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia.  The  other 
afterwards  was  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  by  which  it  was  agreed  quko 
contrary,  that  the  Greek  cities  in  Asia  should  remain  under  the  power 
of  the  Persians.  In  like  manner,  the  Grecians  were  at  peace  among 
tbems^lve$,  the  Athenians  and  Spartans  having  entered  into  a  league 
for  thirty  years.  And  all  was  likewise  quiet  in  Sicily,  the  Carthiqp* 
nians  having  made  peace  with  Gelon,  and  all  the  Grecian  cities 
submitted  to  them  of  Syracuse.  And  the  Agrigentines  after  the 
slaughter  at  Himera,  accepted  of  terms  of  peace.  And  all  the  people 
of  Italy,  France,  Spain,  and  most  parts  of  the  world,  were  at  perfeet 
concord  one  with  another.  Therefore  we  have  no  account  in  histmy 
of  any  thing  memorable  done  in  war  during  this  time;  but  all  were 
every  where  at  rest,  solacing  themselves  with  sports  and  sacred  festi* 
vals,  and  other  jollities^  the  common  attendants  of  ^  piosperom 
State  and  condition* 


•     Oop.  r.  nioDORus  S1CULU9.  449 


CHAP.  V. 

The  war  between  the  Samiuns  and  the  Milesians.    A  sedition  in 
''    SamoHy  which  revolts  from  the  Athenians.     The  tuur  in  Sicily* 
by  the  Syractisans  against  the  Trinacrians. 

TIMOCLKS  wasnow  cliii'Tirovcniorof  Athens,  and  fortius  ITorini- 
Dius  and  Titus  Virginius  Tricustus  Koinan  consuN.  In  their  time 
the  Sninians  hmke  forth  into  war  HL^inst  tlie  Milesians  concerning 
Pricne;  and  discerning  the  Athenians  more  to  favour  the  Milesians> 
they  revolted  from  them.  Hereupon  the  Athenians  sent  Fericlcs 
(made  admiral  soinr  time  before)  wiiii  forty  sail  ai^ainst  theSamianS| 
who  approached  their  city,  easily  reduced  ir,  and  there  estahlished  a 
democnicy.  And  havint;  imposed  a  nmlct  of  eighty  talents  u|Kin 
them,  and  received  as  many  youtlis  for  hostages,  lie  committed  them 
to  llic  care  and  custody  of  the  I^*mnians;  and  so  having  in  a  short 
time  fini.shed  with  good  success  all  for  which  he  was  sentj  lie  returned 
to  Athens. 

After  this,  a  grievous  sedition  happened  in  ^amos,  some  heing  for 
the  democracy,  others  endeavouring  to  set  upanaristocrarv,  whereby 
the  city  was  in  a  mighty  popular  tumult.    They  who  were  against  the 
delnocracy  went  over  to  bardis  in  Asia,  to  Fisuthnes  tTie   Persian 
governor,  to  desire  airl,  who  Icut  tlicm  seven -hundred  soldiers,  hopin*^ 
by  this  means  to  bring  Samos  under  his  i>ower.     The  Sann'ans  with 
this  aid,  marching  from  Asia  in  tiie  night,  stole  secretly  upon  the  city, 
and  by  the  help  uf  tlieir  acL*ompliiH:s,  entered  and  surprised  it;  and 
lieing  thus  easily  possessed,  forthwith  eject  all  cf  the  coutrary  faction. 
Then  having  btolen  and  carried  away  the  iiostages  out  of  Lemnos, 
and  strengthened  Samos  with  gsirrisons,  they  declare  tiiemselves  open 
enemies  against  the  Athenians;  who  again  send  against  them  Pericles 
with  sixty  sail;  who  overcame  them  in  a  sea  fight,  though  they  had 
seventy  sail.     U|)on  this  (with  the  help  of  twenty- live  sh»|)s  which 
joined  him  from  Chios  and  Mitylene)  he  besieged  Samos;  and  s^ome 
few  days  alter,  leaving  part  ol  his  forces  lu  maiiitiiin  the  ^iege,  uitli 
the  rest  he  made  against  the  Phu'nician  Hect,  «%hiih  the  Persians 
sent  to  the  aid  of  the  Saniians.     The  Simians  taking  advantage  of 
the  opportunity  of  his  departure,  suddenly  set  n|>0'i  the  rest  of  \\\% 
fleet  and  routed  them;  iviih  whith  su^eebs  they  iriew  very  proud  and 
haughty.     Bui  Periele^  hearing  ot  tlie  ruin  of  hl!i  fleet  left  heijind, 
returned  \^i(hout  delay,  and  got  tO:;etlier  a  strong  and  numerous 
navy,  full)  resolving  utterly  to  ruin  the  enemy's  fleet;  and  being 

Vol.  i.  No.  57.  mmm 


450  DiODORUs  sicuLUs.  JBodk  Xtl 

speedily  supplied  by  the  Athenians  with  threescore  ships,  and  witb 
thirty  from  Chios  and  Mitylene,  he  renewed  the  siege  both  by  sea 
and  land^  wearying  the  city  with  continual  assaults.     He  was  the 
first  that  made  use  of  those  warlike  engines  called  battering  rams 
and  scorpions,  by  the  assistance  and  ingenuity  of  Artemon  the  Lace- 
deemonian.    And  by  his  fierce  and  violent  assaults,  battering  down 
the  walls  with  his  engines,  the  city  fell  into  his  hands.     And  after  he 
had  put  to  death  the  autiiors  of  the  defection,  he  caused  the  Samians 
to  pay  two  hundred  talents  in  compensation  for  the  charge  of  the 
war.     He  carried  away,  likewise,  all  their  ships,  and  demolished 
the  walls ;  and  when  lie  had  restored  the  democracy,  returned  into 
his  own  country.     To  this  time  the  thirty  years  truce  between  the 
Athenians  and  the  Lacedemonians  continued  unviolated.     And  witb 
these  things  was  this  year  remarkable. 

When  Myrichidcs  governed  the  state  of  Athens,  Lucius  Julius  and 
Marcus  Geganius  were  Roman  consuls.  The  Eleans  then  celebrated 
the  eighty-fifth  olympiad,  in  which  Crison  of  Himera  was  the  second 
time  victor.  In  these  times  in  Sicily,  Deucetius  formerly  prince  of 
the  Siculi,  planted  the  country  of  the  Callatines,  and  having  settled 
tliere  many  colonies,  began  at  length  to  take  upon  him  the  sovereign 
power  over  the  Siculi :  but  falling  sick,  both  his  life  and  his  designs 
vanished  together. 

The  Syracusnns  now  being  lords  of  all  the  cities  cf  Sicily,  except 
Trinacria,  resolved  to  gain  that  likewise  by  force  of  arms;  for  they 
were  exceedingly  jealous  of  the  Trinacrians,  because  they  were  very 
rich,  lest  they  should  at  any  time  after  gain  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Siculi,  to  whom  they  were  related  as  kindred.    This  city,  both  then 
and  ever,  had  many  valiant  men  amongst  them,  and  u|)on  that  ac- 
count was  ever  esteemed  the  principal  city  of  the  Siculi,  for  it  was 
full  of  good  commanders,  men  of  brave  and  daring  spirits.     The 
Syracusans  therefore  gathered  together  all  their  forces,  both  from 
Syracuse,  and  from  among  their  confederates,  and  marched  against 
the  Trinacrians;  who  being  destitute  of  all  assistance,  by  reason  the 
rest  of  the  cities  being  subject  to  Syracuse,  were,  in  a  bloody  battle, 
hard  put  to  it;  and  after  a  resolute  and  valiant  opposition,  all  gallantly 
died  upon  the  ^pot.     For  those  that  were  wounded,  rather  than  un* 
dcrgo  the  disgrace  of  being  captives,  despatched  themselves.     They 
of  Syracuse  having  obtained  this  victory  over  a  people  never  before 
subdued,  made  all  the  inhabitants  captives,  and  razed  tlie  city  to  the 
ground.     The  richest  of  tiie  spoils  they  sent  to  Delphosy  as  a  grateful 
oflerlng  to  the  gods. 


Ckap.  VL  DfonoRus  sicuLUs.  451 


CHAP.  VI. 

The  Corinthian  war  againU  Corryra,  Potidea  revolis  from  the 
Athenians,  Quarreh  i;i  TImrium.  Mctuns  year.  Hwraclea 
in  Italy  built.     Potidea  besieged  by  Phonnio. 

GL.\rc.'lDC5  the  chief  magistatc  of  Athens;  Titus  Quintius  and 
Agiippa  Furius  consuls  of  Rome:  the  Syracusans  (hi*ing  victorious 
AS  is  he  fore  related)  hegan  huildinj^  ships  of  three  <«ais  upon  a  hank, 
and,  doubling  the  nuinl>cr  of  their  horse,  buNied  ihemselves  in  raising 
a  lacid  army.  And  that  they  might  raise  and  get  together  a  great 
treasure  and  fund  i)f  money,  they  exacted  larger  contributions  from 
their  bubjcctii;  and  this  they  did  with  u  design  to  subject  all  Sicily 
by  degrees  to  their  dominion. 

Whilst  these  things  were  in  doing,  the  Corinthian  war,  as  it  is 

called,  broke  fi>nli  u[)<m  the  following  occasion ^The  Epidamnians, 

the  iulialfilants  of  the  cottsi.s  of  the  Adriatic  &ea,  being  colonies 
brought  Irom  Corey i a  and  C'orinthi  were  greatly  distressed  with  tu- 
mulls  and  Ncdiiions  among  themselves,  ulicrc  the  stronger  piirty  cast 
niaiiy  of  tiie  coniiary  fa('U<Mi  out  of  liie  city;  whereupon  the  exiles 
joined  together,  aiid  calling  tlie  Illyrlans  to  their  assistance  and  con- 
fcdeiaey,  they  made  agaiii^i  Epidanmum  witii  a  great  fleet:  and 
lirihg  the  iMrbaiians  were  very  strong,  they  easily  |M)ssessed  them- 
selves  ol  the  country,  aiid  beMeL:ed  the  eity.  They  of  Epidaronum, 
not  able  to  resisi  so  great  a  force,  sent  to  Corey ra  for  aid,  who  wer« 
ot  the  same  sloek  and  kinuied;  but  Ixrir.g  (liare^arded  by  them,  they 
made  theii  appliciition  to  the  CorinthiaiiS,  owi.ing  that  city  to  lie 
their  only  meiio|>oiis,  aiitl  dirsin-rl  a  supply  of  iiiure  citizens  in  the 
rouin  ot  tbo»e  I  bat  weie  ej'-ctcil.  The  Corinthians,  paitly  out  of  pity 
to  them  of  Epidamnnin,  and  jiartly  out  of  an  old  gruds^o  they  bore 
llicmof  (  uu-yia,  (lor  that  they  only  of  all  the  colonies,  brought  from 
them  thitiier,  neglected  to  send  tutiiem  as  their  metiopolis  the  usual 
otlerings)  decreed  aid  to  be  sent  to  them  of  Epidarnnum.  And  ac- 
c<ir>.iiijiy  i!;ey  si.ut  both  a  new  supply  of  citizens,  and  a  guaid  of 
siiliiieis  siufheiLiit  for  the  liefenee  of  the  city.  The  CorcyreansmucJi 
eniii::! .!  .it  il.i^,  !i:ted  out  a  iiett  of  liliy  sail  against  them;  the  admiral 
of  i\ti  ih  (Uei,  utti'i  \\\s  aiiiviil,  commanded  them  Kji  Epidarnnum  to 
receive  the  i  \i;.  n  :  and  then  by  ambassailors  prupc  sed  to  the  Coiiu- 

ihian  gairlNuii Tltat  tliC  matter  relatiiij^  to  ihe  colony  might  rather 

be  endid  iri  .in  ortUrly  eonise  of  justice,  than  by  torce  of  arms.     But 
the  CorintbiiUiS  lefusing,  it  came  at  leugth  tu  a  war;  mud  fleets  wero 


453  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Boot  JEXP. 


prepared,  and  associations  and  confederacies  made  on  both  sides :  and 
these  were  the  causes  of  that  C  »rintliian  war.  In  the  meantime,  the 
Romans  made  war  against  the  Volsci.  At  first  they  began  with 
light  and  small  skirmishes;  but  at  length  in  a  formal  battle  the 
Romans  became  victorious,  and  slew  most  of  their  enemies  upon 
the  field. 

When  Theodorus  governed  Athens,  and  the  Romans  constitated 
Marcus  Genucuis  ai.d  Ajrrippa  Curtius  Ciielou  consuls,  in  Italy  the 
nation  of  the  Campanians  began  to  flourish,-  so  called  from  the  fruit- 
fulness  of  the  countrv  rouiul  about  them.  In  Asia  the  Archaeanactidtt 
had  now  held  the  kingdom  ot  the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus  for  thespaos 
of  two-and-forty  years;  to  whom  then  succeeded  Spartacus,  wlio 
reigned  seven  years.  In  Greece  the  Corinthians  and  Corcyreans 
were  preparing  on  both  sides  na\ies  for  figlits  at  sea:  and  presently 
the  Corinthians  made  towards  the  enemy  with  seventy  gallics  bravely 
fitted  out :  and  the  Corcyreans  met  them  with  fourscore,  routed  thciDy 
and  took  Epidamnuni  by  storm,  and  made  all  the  Corinthians  their 
prisoners,  but  put  all  the  rest  to  the  sword.  The  Corinthians,  by  ifiis 
overthrow  wholly  discouraged,  retamtd  into  Peloponnesus.  Tlie 
Corcyreans  now  become  masters  of  this  part  of  the  sea,  invaded  the 
confederates  of  the  Corinthians,  and  wasted  their  country. 

This  year  ended,  Euihymenis  entered  upon  the  governoienc  of 
Athens,  and  at  Rome  three  military  tribunes  were  appointed  nnagis- 
trates,  with  consular  dignity,  Aulus  Sempronius,  Lucius  Atilius,  and 
Titus  Clcelius.  At  that  time  the  Corinthians,  not  long  before  over- 
come at  sea,  determined  to  put  forth  another  navy  more  glorioiis 
than  the  former.  And  to  that  end  getting  together  materials  from  all 
parts,  and  hiring  ship -carpenters  out  of  the  cities,  they  built  ships 
with  all  care  and  earnestness,  and  prepared  all  manner  of  arms  and 
weapons,  and  everything  necessary  for  war;  some  ships  they  built  new, 
others  they  repaired,  and  some  they  borrowed  of  their  confederates. 
Nor  were  they  of  Corcyra  idle,  for  they  were  nothing  inferior  to  their 
enemies  in  care  and  diligence;  whence  it  was  apparent  how  dreadful 
a  war  was  like  to  ensue.  In  the  mean  time  the  Athenians  sent  a  co- 
lony to  Amphipolis,  chosen  partly  oDt  of  their  own  city,  and  partly 
out  of  the  neighbouring  forts  and  castles. 

Nausimuchus  being  chief  ruler  of  Athens,  Titus  Quintius  and 
Marcus  Geganius  Macerinus  were  chosen  Roman  consuls.  At  that 
time  the  Eleans  celebrated  the  eighty-sixth  olympiad,  in  which 
Theopompus  of  Thessaly  carried  away  the  prize.  The  Corcyreans 
hearing  of  the  great  preparations  that  were  making  against  them^ 
sent  ambassadors  to  Athens,  to  desire  their  assistance^  which  was 
done  likewise  by  the  Corinthians.    The  assemblies  being  calledj  and 


Chap.  IV.  DIODORUS  9TCrLU9.  459 


audience  given  to  the  amliassadprs  on  lioth  sides,  it  vi'as  determined 
to  join  with  them  ot'  Corcyra.  And  without  delay*  they  seut  them 
ten  ships  of  three  oars  in  a  seat,  well  manned  and  provided,  promising 
to  send  tlinn  more  as  there  should  be  occasion. 

The  Ct>:iiiihians  (now  aliaildoned  by  the  Athenians)  having  ninety 
ships  of  ilii'ir  own,  borrowed  sixty  more  of  their  confedemtea,  and 
so  made  up  a  fleet  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  sail,  and  furnished  it  with 
choice  c<iniinunders,  and  forthwith  made  out  against  the  Corey reans^ 
to  figtit  thc'iii  upon  the  first  opportunity.  As  soon  as  the  Corcyreaos 
heard  that  liieir  enemy's  fleet  was  near  at  hand,  they  made  forth 
against  them  with  a  navy  uf  a  hundred  and  twenty  sail,  accounting 
those  of  Alliens. 

The  fleets  en.irairi-d,  and  foui^ht  witli  ereat  resolution;  the  Corin* 
thians  at  the  first  hud  the  advantage,  but  a  fleet  of  twenty  sail  from 
Athens  just  then  appearing,  (sent  in  pursiuance  of  a  second  address 
made  to  them),  the  C'itreyreaiis  got  the  day.  I1ie  next  day  the  Cor* 
cyreans  appeared  uith  their  whole  strength  in  a  line  of  battle,  dariug 
the  Coriniliiuns  to  fi^ht.  but  they  kept  within  their  harbours,  and  so 
avoided  further  fighting. 

Antilochides  now  archon  of  Athens,  at  Rome  Marcus  Fabius  and 
Posthumius  /Ebutius*  Aulicus  were  made  consuls:  in  their  times 
tlic  Corinthians  greatly  resented  the  confederacy  of  the  Athenians 
with  them  of  Corcyra,  e«>|  •■cially  because  the  victory  obtained  was 
chiefly  by  iheir  means.  And  therefore  brinj;  enraged,  and  seeking 
by  all  the  mi  ans  they  could  to  he  reveiigeil,  they  stirred  up  their 
colony  at  I'otidea  to  revolt.  In  like  maimer  Perdiecas  the  king  of 
Macedonia,  not  long  before  incensed  apiinst  the  Athenians,  preiTiiled 
with  them  of  Clialcidica  to  revolt,  and  leave  the  cities  U(H>n  the  sea- 
coast,  and  withtlraw  only  into  one  called  Olyntlms.  * 

The  Athenians  hearing  of  the  defection  of  Fotidea*  sent  forth  a 
fleet  of  thirty  sail,  with  conmiand  both  to  desiro)  the  country  of  iho 
rebels,  and  storm  the  city.  They,  accordinj^  to  order,  bent  their 
course  for  Macedonia,  and  likewise  l>csie^cd  the  city.  The  Corin* 
thians  sent  two  thousand  men  to  assist  the  besieged,  and  the  Athe- 
nians sent  as  many  to  strengthen  it.  Hereupon  a  great  battle  was 
fouf^ht  in  the  isthmus  near  Fallene,  where  the  Athenians  wi?re  victors, 
and  killed  above  three  hundred  of  the  enemy.  And  then  rh)Nersicge 
WHS  laid  to  Potidia.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Athenians  Luilt  a  new 
city  in  Fro|)oniis,  which  they  called  Letanuin. 

In  Italy  the  KtMiianssiUt  new  colonies  into  Ardea,  and  divided  th^ 
country  amongst  them  by  lot. 

Now  Charetes  executed  the  ofTiee  of  archon  at  Athens,  and  the 
Romans  made  Quinius  Furius  Fusus  and  Manius  Papiriua  Crassus 

«    KlblS. 


454  DioDORUS  sicuLUS.  Bodk  XHL 

coMulsw  In  Italy  the  inhabitants  of  Thurium  (being  composedi  ef 
peoflie  gathered  from  several  places)  began  to  quarrel  and  diaagrea 
concerning  what  city  in  particular  Thurium  ahoald  be  reputed  a  co- 
lony of^  and  who  should  be  acknowledged  the  founder.  For  first  they 
of  Athens  challenged  it,  affirming  that  most  of  the  inhabitants  came 
from  Ihence.  Next  they  of  PeIo|)onnesu8  (because  many  cities  sent 
colonies  from  theoce)  claimed  die  right  of  being  accounted  foundeis 
aS  the  city.  In  this  manner  (there  being  many  persons  of  quality 
anembers  of  the  colony^  who  had  done  much  towards  its  advancement) 
there  arose  great  disseutions,  every  one  challenging  the  dignity  and 
honour  as  due  to  himself.  At  length  they  of  Thuriuin  sent  to 
Delphos  to  consult  there  who  should  be  esteemed  and  taken  to  bo 
tbeir  founder.  The  oracle  answered,  that  he  himself  should  be  so 
taken:  and  thus  the  great  doubt  being  resolved,  the  Thurians  de- 
clared Apollo  tiieir  founder:  find  so  this  difference  being  remoYcdj 
the  people  lived  in  peace  as  formerly.  In  Greece,  Archidamus  king 
of  Lacedsemon  died^  having  reigned  forty- two  years;  and  Agis  sue* 
ceeded,  who  reigned  seveu-and-forty  years. 

At  the  time  when  A]).scudes  was  chief  governor  of  Athens^  and 
Titus  Minenius  and  Proculus  Geganius  Macerinus  Roman  eonsnlsji 
Spartacus  king  of  Bosphorus  died,  after  he  had  reigned  seventeen 
years;  whom  Seleucus  succeeding  reigned  only  four  years.  At 
Athens  ik)urishcd  that  famous  astrologer  Meton  the  son  of  Pausaniasy 
who  then  published  his  table  of  the  cycle  of  the  moon  called  Ennea* 
deceterides,  beginning  from  the  thirteenth  of  the  Attic  month  Scirro- 
phorion*:  for  in  the  space  of  nineteen  years  the  stars  return  to  the 
same  state  and  place,  and  complete,  as  it  were,  a  great  year:  and  there- 
fore by  some  it  is  called  Meton's  year.  This  man  in  this  discovery 
seems  to  be  exactly  true  to  a  wonder,  for  the  motions  and  aspects  of 
the  stars  fully  agree  with  this  description:  and  therefore  most  of  the 
Grecians  following  the  rule  of  this  table,  have  never  erred  to  this 
day.  In  Italy,  the  Tarentines  drove  out  the  inhabitants  of  Siris,  and 
bringing  a  new  colony  thither,  built  a  city  called  Heraclea. 

When  Pythodorus  governed  Athens,  and  Titus  Quintius  and  Titus 
Menenius  Agrippa  were  Roman  consuls,  the  Eleans  celebrated  the 
eighty-seventh  olympiad,  in  which  was  victor  Sophron  of  Amphra* 
cion.  At  this  time  Spurius  Maniusf  aftecting  sovereignty  at  Rome, 
WHS  killed.  In  the  mean  time  the  Athenians  in  a  signal  battle  at 
Potidea  (wherein  they  were  conquerors)  lost  their  general  Callias, 
Phormio  was  advanced  to  his  place,  who  as  soon  as  he  came  io  the 

*  Answering  to.  the   Roman  months  June  and  July.     See  ^isn.  Var.  Hist  fi4» 
JO,  c.  7. 

t  Milius,  killed  by  Serviliui  Hala,  master  of  the  korse. 


Chap.  fit.  DiODORtJS  StCOtUS.  4SS 

''  '  ■        '"''  -Jt    ..sassBBacsBBessasi^ssissaBsaaasssBm 

army,  renewed  the  siege,  and  pressed  bard  upon  it  with  coBlhiual 
assaults :  but  by  reason  of  the  valour  and  obstinacy  of  the  deCeadants 
the  siege  continued  long. 

Here  Thucydides  the  Athenian  begins  his  history,  and  then  proceeds 
to  relate  the  war  between  the  Athenians  and  the  Laced^Bffioniant^ 
called  thePeloponnesian  war.  It  continued  seveo-and-twed^l^^ra^ 
but  Thucydides  writes  only  of  the  first  two-a nd- twenty  yf^ars^iaeiglut 
books,  others  say  nine. 


CHAP.  Vlf.  / 

l%e  Pelapennesian  war.  Potidea  revolts;  besieged  by  the  jdtke^ 
niansy  and  is  surrendered  tipcn  articles.  Niciaa  made  ih» 
yJthenian  admiral.  OorgiaSy  an  excellent  ora/or,  Seni  firam 
Leontine  in  Sicily  to  Athens.  A  peace  condkded  'after  the  svar 
had  continued  ten  years* 

WHEN  Euthydemus  governed  at  Athens,  tite  Romans  creata4direa 
military  tribunes,  invested  with  consular  power,  Manios  Emilias 
Mamercus,  Caius  Julius,  and  Lucius  Quintius.  At  this  time  broke 
foith  that  war  between  the  Athenians  and  the  Lacedaemoniaps^ 
called  the  Peloponnesian  war,  of  longest  continuance  of  auy  we  read 
of  in  history. 

According  to  the  design  of  our  history,  it  is  convenient  in  tlie  first 
place  to  declare  the  causes  of  this  war.  The  Athenians  now  endea- 
vouring to  have  the  dominion  of  the  sea,  brought  over  to  Athens  all 
the  money  they  had  laid  up  at  Delos,  whicli  they  had  gathered  toge- 
ther from  the  cities  of  Greece,  almost  to  the  value  of  eight  thousanjl 
talents^  and  made  Pericles  treasurer.  He  was  of  a  very  noble  family, 
and  in  eloquence  far  exceeded  others  of  his  fellow-citizens:  but  not 
long  after,  having  spent  a  great  part  of  the  money  intrusted  with  him 
upon  his  private  occasions,  and  being  called  by  the  people  to  give  aa 
account,  through  grief  of  his  incapacity  to  discharge  himself,  he  fell 
sick :  and  heing  thus  disturbed  in  his  mind,  in  regard  he  was  not  able 
to  make  satisfaction,  Alcibiudes,  his  nephew,  (who  was  then  under 
age,  and  under  iiis  care  and  guardianship),  directed  him  into  ^  way 
how  to  extricate  himself  out  of  the  present  trouble.     For  seeing  his 

uncle  so  disturbed,  he  asked  the  reason,  who  answered ^I  am  studying 

how  I  shall  give  an  account  to  the  people  of  the  money. oonmiit ted 


4i6  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBook  XIL 


to  my  care  and  custody.    He  replied ^Tliat  it  were  better  for  him  to 

consider  and  advise  how  he  might  give  no  account  at  all.     Pericles 
hereupon  following  the  advice  of  the  young  man,  contrived  by  all  the 
ways  imaginable  how  he  might  involve  tiic  Athenians  in  some  great 
war.     For  by  this  means  he  foresaw  he  should  avoid  the  accoant, 
inasmuch  as  the  city  would  be  so  distracted  with  cares  and  fears  in 
fiuch  a  conjuncture.    To  forward  this  design^  an  accident  fell  out 
very  opportunely  upon  the  following  occasion.     Phidias  had  made 
the  statue  of  Minerva^  and  Pericles  the  son  of  Xantippe  was  employed 
to  see  the  work  done:  but  some  of  Phidias's  workmen  and  servants 
fell  out,  and  stirred  up  by  the  enemies  of  Pericles,  they  fled  to  the 
altars  of  the  gods :  and  being  commanded  to  declare  the  reason  of  a 
thing  so  unusual,  they  said,  that  they  could  make  it  out,  that  Phidiar, 
with  the  connivance  and  help  of  Pericles,  had  embezzled  a  great  som 
of  money  belonging  to  the  goddess.    Whereupon  an  assembly  was 
called,  at  which  the  enemies  of  Pericles  moved  the  people  to  llppre* 
hend  Phidias,  and  charge  Pericles  with  the  sacrilege.    They  accused 
likewise  Anaxagoras*  the  sophist,  the  master  of  Pericles^  for  his  im- 
pious opinions  concerning  the  gods;  with  the  same  calumnies  they 
loaded  likewise  Pericles,  chiefly  designing  to  stain  the  glory^  and 
weaken  the  interest  of  so  brave  a  man.    But  Pericles  being  well 
acquainted  with  the  disposition  of  the  people,  as  knowing  that  they 
highly  valued  men  of  worth,  in  times  when  they  were  threatened 
with  war,  (the  present  circumstances  of  afikirs  making  it  at  snch 
times  of  absolute  necessity);  and  on  the  contrary,  that  in  times  of 
peace,  (when  they  had  nothing  to  do  but  giving  the  reins  to  envy 
and  malice),  blackened  the  same  men  with  all  manner  of  calumny; 
therefore  judged  it  advantageous  for  his  allairs,  if  he  could  engage 
the  city  in  some  considerable  war,  that  thereby  having  occasion  to 
make  use  of  them,  they  would  be  deaf  to  all  accusations  against  him, 
and  should  have  no  time  or  leisure  to  call  him  to  an  account.    To 
promote  this  his  design,  it  was  lately  decreed  at  Athens,  that  they  of 
Megara  should  have  no  traffic  with  the  Athenians  either  by  sea  or 
land:  the  Megareans  therefore  made  their  address  for  relief  to  the 
Spartans,  who  agreed  to  their  requests,  and  by  the  unanimous  assent 
of  all  the  assembly,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Athenians,  with 
orders  to  require  them  to  rescind  the  decree  against  them  of  Meganu 
And  that  it  they  refused,  then  that  their  ambassadors  should  denounce 
war  against  them  in  the  name  both  of  them  and  their  confederates. 
U|)on  hearing  of  the  ambassadors,  an  assembly  was  called  to  debate 

*  A  fmuoua  philosopher  who  held  that  the  bun  was  a  burning  plate  or  sione.  He 
was  tried  at  Aiheus  for  this  aud  other  impieties:  he  held  that  Gud  wu  an  infinite  Briog 
Koving  of  himself.    Sec  Laerliu*.  Lact.  lib.  1,  c.  5« 


^kap.  PIT.  D10D0RU8  8ICUI.Ui.  45/ 

this  matter;  where  Pericles  (who  far  surpassed  all  the  rest  in  elo- 

queoce  and  strength  of  reason)  gave  his  reasons  against  the  abrogating 

of  the  decree.     He  allodged,  it  was  a  step  to  bondage  and  slavery, 

and  against  the  common  good  to  yield  to  the  demands  of  the  Lace- 

daamonians;  hut  advised  them  rather  that  they  should  draw  all  their 

goods  and  concerns  out  of  the  country  into  the  city;  and  being  now 

masters  at  sea,  to  enter  into  a  war  with  the  Lacedemonians.    And 

bcreuix>n   making  an  accurate  discourse  of  the  war,  he  told  them 

what  a  multitude  of  confederates  ihey  had,  what  a  brave  and  well- 

luanned  fleet  they  were  masters  of,  what  a  vast  treasure  they  were 

possessed  of,  brought  from  Dclos,  gathered  from  the  common  con* 

tsibution  of  the  citiesi  amounting  to  ten  thousand  talents ;  and  though 

four  thousand  of  it  were  spent  in  the  building  of  the  Propyle*,  or 

citadel,  and  in  the  siege  at  Potideni  yet  every  year  four  hundred  and 

•ixty  talents  were  raised  by  tribute  from  their  confederates:  and 

besides  all  this,  that  the  adornments  belonging  to  the  shows,  and  the 

Persian  spoils  amounted  to  five  hundred  talents  more:  and  that  in 

the  temples  and  other  public  works  of  the  city,  there  were  great 

riclu's,  so  that  the  very  ima^e  of  Minerva  itself  alone  was  worth  fifty 

talents  of  >r«ld;  whose  ornaments  were  so  placed  that  they  might 

be  taki'n  ctf';  and  all  of  them,  when  necessity  required,  might  be 

borrowed  from  the  gotldess,  so  that  they  be  faithfully  restored  in  time 

of  peace:  and  an  to  the  state  of  the  citizens,  he  told  them,  through 

the  enjoyment  of  a  long  peace,  the  city  was  grown  exceeding  rich; 

be  added,  moreover,  that  they  had  twelve  thousand  armed  men, 

besides  their  confederates,  and  what  were  in  their  garrisons:  and 

those  in  their  garrisons,  together  with  their  colonies,  were  more  tiuio 

se%'enteen  thousand;  and  that  ti.ey  had  ready  a  fleet  of  three  hundred 

Mil.     On  the  contrary  the  Sprtans  were  poor,  and  far  inferior  to  the 

Athenians  in  naval  forces.     Having  fired  the  citizens  with  these 

discourses,  he  veliemeiitly  pressed  the  people  not  to  give  ear  to  the 

imperioub  demands  ot  the  Lacedxemonians :  and  by  the  earnestness 

of  his  s|>eech  he  easily  prevailed;  for  which  reason  he  was  called 

Olympius.    Aristophanes,  the  comic  poet,  v.ho  flourished  in  the  titDe 

of  Pencles»  mentionii  these  things  in  the  verses  following: 

V«*  \\fft  an<l  country  grains,  coovrlcr  well 

The  wortift  I  iprtk ;  it  j^oa  would  kuow  tbcj'll  tell 

Y^ur  cotiitirv  how  dcuroj'd;  a  ipark  but  taiaU, 

liiuui;hi  IruiD  MrK«rm't  law,  blown  up  wiUial 

h\  liiu'*  huth  rai»'d  Micb  ttaoke  of  war,  btuod,  fcar^ 

A »  draws  from  e^et  of  Grccco  cootiouaJ  tcart. 

*  Tbe  Propfle  wa«  a  itatclj  pic  or  porcb  bcUngiog  to  t)»o 

Vol.  1.  No.  .^7  «<>'>» 


498  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Sook  Tit 


And  likewise  the  comic  poet  Eupolisj  in  other  versesj  Mys  of  Pe- 
ricles^ whom  they  call  Olympius— 

Thunder  and  lightning  he  rais'd  in  Greece* 
Of  eloquence  who  was  the  master-piece; 
Only  among  ttie  orators  his  darts 
Were  lefl  fast  fixed  in  tbr  hearer's  hearts. 

And  these  were  the  causes  of  the  Peloponnesian  war^  as  they  are 
related  hy  Ephorus. 

The  principal  Grecian  cities  thus  provoked  to  war,  the  Lacedamo- 
nians  (in  a  general  convention  with  them  of  Peloponnesus)  deebied 
war  against  the  Athenians,  and  forthwith  sent  their  ambassadors  to 
the  king  of  Persia,  to  enter  into  a  league  offensive  with  them.  Am- 
bassadors were  likewise  sent  to  desire  two  hundred  sbipi  of  their 
confederates  in  Sicily  and  Italy. 

And  now  being  joined  with  the  Peloi>onnesians,  and  havioKiatsed 
a  land-army  from  several  parts,  and  prepared  with  all  things  oeoessaij 
for  war,  they  first  begin.  At  tifet  time  in  Boeotia  the  city  Platea  wis 
a  free  city,  in  league  with  the  Athenians;  but  some  of  the  otbens 
designing  to  enslave  the  plnce^  in  contrivance  with  the  Boradans 
promised  to  bring  the  city  under  their  piVwer  if  they  would  hot  send 
them  a  guard  of  soldiers.  The  Boeotians  therefore  sent  three  ban* 
dred  soldiers  in  the  night  to  Platea^  who  being  let  into  the  g«teS|  Ae 
traitors  delivered  up  the  city  into  their  bands.  But  the  Platami 
willing  to  approve  their  faithfulness  to  the  Athenians^  (at  first  think- 
ing that  the  whole  army  of  the  Thebans  were  entered)  sent  anbai* 
sadors  to  them  to  treat  and  make  terms :  but  when  day  a^peared^  and 
they  of  Platea  understood  how  small  a  number  the  enemy  was,  they 
all  as  one  man  came  upon  them,  and  fought  with  great  reaolutioo  for 
their  common  liberty.  But  because  the  fight  was  in  the  streets^  the 
Thebans,  being  Letter  soldiers,  at  the  first  destroyed  many  of  the  Pbh 
teans;  but  afterwards  they  in  the  houses,  even  the  veiy  boys  and 
children,  by  throwing  down  tiles  from  the  roofs,  so  severely  galled 
the  Thebans  that  they  were  forced  to  fly;  that  part  of  them  who  got 
out  of  the  city  escaped  clear,  but  another  part  that  fled  for  shelter 
to  a  little  house,  at  length  were  compelled  to  give  up  themselves  to 
the  will  of  the  enemy. 

The  Thebans  being  informed,  by  them  that  had  escaped,  of  this 
misfortune,  with  all  their  force  hastened  to  the  city;  by  reason  of 
which  sudden  incursion  many  of  them  who  lived  in  the  countijj  and 
those  abroad,  being  taken  unawares,  were  killed,  and  many  pri- 
soners made;  the  whole  country  being  filled  with  fears,  devastations, 
and  robberies.     In  the  mean  time  the  Plateans  sent  to  the  Thebans 


Chap.  FIL  DiODORus  siculu^.  459 

to  entreat  them  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts,  promising  they  would 
release  the  prisoners ;  upon  which  conditions  the  matter  was  com- 
posed,  and  the  Thebans  received  the  captives,  and  restored  the 
plunder  to  them  of  Platea,  and  so  returned  home.  The  Plateans 
had  some  time  before  sent  to  Athens  for  aid,  and  had  brought  much 
of  their  goods  out  of  the  country  into  the  city :  the  Athenians  hear- 
ing of  their  distress  despatched  to  them  a  competent  number  of  sol- 
diers, who  though  they  marched  with  all  expedition,  yet  they  could 
not  prevent  the  Thebans:  but  what  was  left  in  the  country  they 
brought  into  the  town :  the  women  and  children,  and  those  that  werp 
Infirm,  they  got  together  in  a  body,  and  conveyed  them  to  Athens. 

Hereupon  the  Lacedaemonians  judging  the  Athenians  had  broke 
the  league,  gathered  forces  together  from  all  parts,  both  from  Sparta 
and  from  the  rest  of  the  Peloponnesians.  The  confederates  of  the 
Lacedaemonians  were  the  Peloponnesians  wholly,  except  the  Argives^ 
for  they  then  stood  neuter.  Those  out  of  Peloponnesus  were  the 
Megareans,  Ambracians,  Leucadians^  Phocians,  Boeotians,  many  of 
the  Locrians  over  against  Euboea,  and  the  rest  those  of  Amphissa. 
Those  that  sided  with  the  Athenians  were  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea 
coasts  of  Asia,  the  Carians,  Dorians,  lonians,  them  of  the  Hellespont^ 
and  all  the  islanders,  except  the  inhabitants  of  Melus  and  Thera. 
The  Thracians  likewise  were  their  confederates,  except  those  of 
Chalcidica  and  Potidea.  Besides  these  there  joined  with  the  Atne- 
nians  the  Messenians  in  Naupactus,  and  the  Corcyreans.  All  the 
rest  sent  land-forces*.     They  all  stood  firm  on  both  sides. 

The  Lacedaemonians  having  at  length  raised  a  great  army,  made 
Archidamus  their  king,  general,  who  made  an  irruption  into  Attica, 
besieged  their  castles,  and  wasted  a  great  part  of  the  country.  Thei 
Athenians,  inflamed  with  desire  of  revenge  for  this  destruction  of  their 
country,  were  eager  to  be  out  to  fight  their  enemies;  but  Pericles 
the  general  advised  the  hot  youths  to  forbear  awhile,  telling  them 
that  he  would  drive  the  Spartans  out  without  fighting.  To  this  end 
he  fitted  out  a  hundred  gallies  well  manned,  and  gave  the  command 
of  the  fleet  to  Carcinus  and  some  other  officers,  with  orders  to  make 
a  descent  into  Peloponnesus.  Accordingly  they  laid  waste  a  great 
part  of  the  sea  coasts,  took  several  castles,  and  struck  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians with  great  consternation :  so  that  without  delay  they  withdrew 
their  forces  out  of  Attica,  and  made  it  their  chief  care  now  to  defend 
Peloponnesus.  The  Athenians  now  freed,  by  this  ingenious  con- 
trivance, from  their  en^imies,  highly  honoured  Pericles  as  a  wise 

^  Here  seems  to  be  something  wauting  and  lost ;  that  is,  who  they  were  that  seat 
the  shipping.  ^ 


46o  DioDORus  sicuLUS.  Sook  XIL 


commander,  and  one  able  to  carry  on  the  war  against  the  Lacede- 
monians. 

Apollodorus  now  archon  at  Athens,  the  Romans  chose  Marcus 
Genarius*  and  Lucius  Sergius  consuls.  In  the  mean  time  the 
Athenian  general  ceased  not  to  waste  and  plunder  the  sea-coast  of 
Peloponnesus,  and  destroy  their  castles:  and  being  joined  with  fifty 
gallies  of  three  tier  of  oars  from  Corsyra,  he  made  a  more  dreadful 
incursion  into  Peloponnesus,  and  especially  on  the  sea-coastf,  and 
up  farther  into  the  land,  burning  all  the  towns  before  him.  Then 
he  made  for  Methone,  a  city  of  Laconia,  wasting  and  pIundenDg  the 
country  in  his  way,  and  attempted  the  taking  of  the  city  itself.  There 
Brasidas  a  Spartan  (a  young  man,  but  of  great  strength  and  valour) 
seeing  Methone  likely  to  be  lost,  with  some  other  Spartans  joining 
with  him,  made  his  way  through  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  who  were 
dispersed  here  and  there  in  their  several  posts,  and  with  the  slaughter 
of  many  of  them  got  safe  into  the  castle.  After  the  Atheoians  had 
made  several  assaults,  (in  which  Brasidas  behaved  himself  with  great 
hravery  in  the  midst  of  dangers),  and  saw  no  hopes  of  gaining  the 
place,  they  returned  to  their  ships.  But  Brasidas,  who  had  preserved 
Methone  by  his  valour  and  resolute  defence,  was  highly  hoooured 
amongst  the  Spartans:  and  being  encouraged  by  this  success,  in  se* 
veral  encounters  afterwards,  iie  behaved  himself  with  such  valour  that 
he  gained  a  great  name  and  reputation. 

The  Athenians  roved  about  to  Elis,  wasted  the  country,  and  be- 
sieged Phcrae,  a  castle  of  the  Eleans,  to  wiiich  they  sent  relief^  but 
were  beaten  by  the  Athenians,  who  took  Pherae  by  storm.  Yet  within 
a  while  after,  the  Eleans  coming  upon  them  with  all  their  strength, 
they  were  forc<^d  to  their  ships,  and  sailed  back  to  Cephaleniai 
where  ihey  made  a  league  with  the  inhabitants,  and  then  returned 
to  Atiicns. 

Afterwards  Clcopompus,  made  by  the  Athenians  admiral  of  a  fleet 
of  thirty  sail,  was  commanded  into  Euba»a,  both  to  defend  the  island, 
and  to  make  war  uixm  the  I^)crians.  He  invaded  and  spoiled  all 
the  sea-tract  of  IxjctIs,  and  took  the  city  Throniuro,  and  afterwards 
routed  the  Locrians  in  a  laud  fiVht  at  Ellopia.  He  then  fortified  the 
island  Atalantc,  near  Fvocrrs,  that  it  might  be  both  a  defence  against 
the  Locrians,  and  that  from  thence  he  might  with  more  case  make 
incursions  upon  them. 

About  the  same  time  the  Athenians  cast  all  the  inhabitants  oat  of 

and 
eoontif 

•  Geganius.  f  Actc. 


*M^^^^  ....^  ^...,j^  «.ti.u  1,4^.  xsiiji:iji<ui9  LiiM  ail  me  innaoitants  CNI 
^gina  for  favouring  the  Lacedemonians,  (us  they  were  accused), 
brought  new  colonies  thither,  and  divided  the  city  and  eooi 


Chap.  Fit.  DiODORUSi  sicuLUs.  461 


amongst  them  by  lot.  The  Lacedemonians  appointed  Thyre*  to 
the  ejected  ^ginites  for  their  habitation,  and  on  the  other  side,  the 
Athenians  fortliwith  allotted  Naupactus  fur  a  recepiacic  for  the  Mes- 
senians,  formerly  ejected  by  the  Lacedaemonians.  At  the  same  time 
the  Athenians  sent  Pericles  with  an  army  against  them  of  Megara, 
who  after  he  had  harassed  the  country,  and  taken  much  sjxiil  and 
plunder,  returned  to  Athens. 

Shortly  after,  the  Ijacedsemonians  with  their  confederates  broke  a 
second  time  into  Attica,  and  cut  down  the  trees,  burnt  the  towns, 
and  most  miserably  destroyed  almost  the  whole  country,  except  Te- 
trapolis,  which  chey  spared  by  reason  of  their  former  kindness  in 
receiving  their  ancestors,  and  subduing  (by  arms  from  thence) 
Eurystiieus.  For  they  conceived  it  just  and  equal  to  shew  kindness 
to  them  who  had  deserved  so  w*ell  from  their  predecessors.  The 
Athenians  during  this  incursion  durst  not  come  into  the  field,  but 
kept  close  within  the  walls  of  their  city,  by  reason  whereof  a  great 
plague  raged  amongst  them ;  for  a  multitude  of  all  sorts  of  people 
being  thronged  together,  it  may  be  reasonably  concluded  thatthroa^ 
the  straitness  of  the  place  the  air  was  corrupted,  and  caused  the  in- 
fection. By  this  means  tliey  were  so  weakened,  that  they  were 
not  able  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  the  countrj',  but  sent  out  Pericles 
again,  with  a  fleet,  into  Pelo|>onnesus;  who  wasting  the  sea-coasts, 
and  taking  some  cities,  caused  the  Lacedemonians  at  length  to 
leave  Attica. 

The  Athenians,  by  reason  of  the  waste  and  <:puil  made  In  the 
country,  and  the  great  destruction  of  the  people  by  the  plague  10 
the  city,  fell  into  great  discontent  and  vcxutiuii,  and  were  enraged  at 
Pericles,  whom  they  looked  u|K>n  as  the  great  incendiary  and  oc'ca«» ion 
of  the  war,  and  therefore  deprived  him  i)i  the  niagi^trjcy,  and  up«»n 
slight  and  frivolous  ikumiiscs  laid  a  mulct  u|>on  him,  ot  thiity  talents. 
Then  they  sent  ambassadors  to  Spaita,  to  treat  of  peace,  but  being 
slighted  hy  the  LacedaMnonians,  wiio  would  admit  of  no  rcisotiable 
terms,  they  were  redueed  to  the  necessity  of  chusiu-r  Pericles  ^'elle^al 
again.     And  these  were  the  actions  of  this  year. 

Epaminondas  this  year  was  eliirf  ruler  of  Alliens,  and  Lucius 
Papirius  Crassnsand  MaieusCmiieiius  Maeerinusf  Konian  consuls: 
nt  which  time  IVrieies  the  [reiieial  died  at  Athens:  a  man  in  nobility 
of  birth,  greatness  of  estate,  in  elnquenee,  arts  and  stratagems  of 
war,  far  beyiMid  all  the  re>t  of  the  citizens:  about  the  same  time  the 
Athenians  were  very  hot  and  earnest  to  r<.eovci  Ptiiidea  by  force,  and 
to  that  end  sent  Ha^'no  1  hit  her  with  the  drniy  formerly  coiunjaudcd 


46f  moDORus  sicuLUS.  Book  XJK 


by  Pericles.     Uagoo  thereupon  sailed  thither  with  the  whole 
and  made  all  the  preparation  for  the  siege  imaginable^  viz.  enginet 
of  all  sorts  for  an  assault,  arms  and  darts,  and  suflicient  proviaioQ 
for  the  whole  army.    However,  though  he  continually  battered  the 
walls  of  the  city  in  many  places,  yet  he  spent  much  time  to  no  pur- 
pose ;  for  the  fear  of  being  taken  by  storm  added  courage  to  the 
defendants,  and  the  height  of  the  walls  commanding  the  port,  made 
them  very  resolute :  besides,  a  disease  happened  aniong  the  besicgcn, 
which  destroyed  many  of  them,  so  that  they  were  greatly  discoun^cdft 
Notwithstanding,  Hagno  knowing  that  the  Athenians  had  beeo  at 
the  charge  of  a  thousand  talents  to  carry  on  the  siege,  and  that  Aqp: 
were  highly  incensed  against  them  of  Potidea,  (because  thej  wen 
the  first  that  made  a  defection),  durst  not  leave  the  siege;  but  with 
all  his  might  persisted,  and  stirred  up  the  soldiers  even  above  tkeir 
strength  to  force  the  city.    But  at  length  considering  that  m^Qj  of 
the  citizens  were  lost  both  in  the  assaults,  and  by  the  infection  of  the 
disease,  leaving  a  part  of  the  army  to  maintain  the  siege,  he  returaedi 
with  the  rest  to  Athens,  having  lost  above  a  thousand  men.    After 
he  was  gone,  they  of  Potidea  (being  brought  to  the  utmost  estremicy. 
for  want  of  provisions)  sent  to  the  besiegers  to  treat  with  them  on 
terms  of  peace,  which  was  readily  accepted,  and  embraced  with  both 
arms  (as  they  say)  by  the  Athenians,  and  peace  was  made  upon  the 
terms  following,  to  wit— .That  all  the  inhabitants  should  draw  ont  of 
the  city,  and  take  nothing  away  with  them  but  every  man  one  snit 
of  apparel,  and  every  woman  two. 

Matters  being  thus  composed,  the  Potldeans,  with  their  wives  and 
children,  (according  to  the  articles),  left  the  city  and  settled  them* 
selves  among  the  Chalcidicans  in  Thrace,  after  wliich  the  Athenhma 
sent  a  colony  of  a  thousand  persons,  and  divided  both  the  citj  and 
country  adjacent  amongst  them  by  lot. 

Phormio  being  now  made  admiral  at  Athens,  with  twenty  sh^ 
sailed  round  Peloponnesus,  and  arrived  at  Naupactus,  where  pos- 
sessing himself  of  the  creek  Criseus,  he  stopped  the  passages  against 
the  Lacedsemonians,  so  as  that  their  ships  could  not  come  forth* 
But  their  king  Archidamus,  with  a  great  army  began  a  new  expedi* 
tion,  and  marched  into  Bceotia,  and  when  he  came  into  Platea  (ready 
and  prepared  to  waste  and  destroy  the  country)  he  first  solicited  that 
city  to  revolt:  but  not  being  able  to  prevail,  he  fell  a  robbing  and 
spoiling  the  country  all  along  as  he  went  Afterwards  he  besieged 
the  city,  in  hopes  to  weary  them  out  for  want  of  provisions :  he  in* 
ccssantly  likewise  battered  the  walls  with  his  engines,  and  made 
frequent  assaults.    But  with  all  his  attempts  not  being  able  to  gain 


Chap.  FTI.  DIODORU8  8ICULU9.  46S 


m 


the  piice^  he  left  a  part  of  the  army  to  carry  on  the  aiqpe^  and  with 
the  rest  inarched  back  into  Peloponnesus. 

About  this  time  the  Athenians  made  Xenophon  and  Phanomaehua 
generals,  and  commanded  them  with  a  thousand  men  to  go  into 
Thrace.  When  they  came  as  far  as  Pkctolus  in  Boeotia,  they  burnt, 
spoiled,  and  robbed  the  country  all  before  them,  and  destroyed  the 
very  standing  corn.  But  they  of  Olynthus  joined  with  the  Bceotians, 
fell  upon  the  Athenians,  and  slew  most  of  them,  together  with  their 
geneimls. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Lacedaemonbns,  hy  the  advice  of  the  Am- 
bracians,  with  a  thousand  men  and  a  few  ships  under  Cnemus  their 
captain,  made  for  Acarnanra,  and  being  enforced  by  a  considerable 
number  of  their  confederates,  Cnemus  arrived  there,  and  encamped 
near  the  city  Stratos.  But  the  Acarnanians  in  a  body  came  suddenly 
apon  him,  surprised  him  with  the  loss  of  many  of  hb  men,  and  drove 
him  into  the  country  of  (Euiads?.  About  the  same  time  Phormio^ 
the  Athenian  commander,  with  his  twenty  ships,  met  with  the  Lace* 
dssmonian  fleet  of  forty-seven  sail,  and  fought  them,  sunk  the  admi« 
ral,  and  disabled  many  others,  took  twelve  with  the  men  in  them, 
mnd  pursued  the  rest  to  the  continent.  The  Lacedemonians  thus 
unexpectedly  beaten,  with  the  remaining  part  of  their  fleet  got  into 
Pktrs  in  Achaia.  This  battle  was  at  a  place  called  Rhion.  Here- 
upon the  Athenians  erected  a  trophy,  and  dedicated  a  ship  in  th€ 
bihmus  to  Neptune,  and  so  returned  to  their  confederate  city  Nan* 
pactus.  But  the  Lacedsemonians  sent  other  ships  to  join  the  raroainder 
of  their  fleet  that  were  at  Patrs :  and  all  of  them  rendezvoused  at 
Khion*,  whither  likewise  the  Lacedemonian  land-army  marched, 
and  there  encamped  near  to  their  fleet. 

Pliormio,  encouraged  by  the  bite  victory,  set  up6n  the  enemy 
though  they  far  exceeded  him  in  numbers,  and  destroyed  many  of 
their  ships,  but  not  without  some  loss  of  his  own,  so  that  he  went  off 
but  half  conqueror;  but  being  enforced  with  twenty  more  ships  from 
Athens,  the  Lacedemonians  made  off  for  Corinth,  and  durst  never 
attempt  any  more  to  fight  at  sea.  And  these  are  the  things  reported 
to  be  done  this  year. 

Diotinus  executing  the  place  of  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  the 
Romans  created  Caius  Juniusf,  and  Proculus  Virginins  Trieostoa 
consuls :  and  they  of  Elis  celebrated  the  eighty-eighth  olympiad,  in 
which  Simmachus  of  Mesuina  in  Sicily  carried  away  the  prixe.  About 
this  time  Cnemus  the  Lacedsemonian  admiral,  while  he  lay  at  Corinth, 
contrived  how  to  surprise  tlie  Pyreum.     For  he  understood  by  has 

*  A  proiBuBiorj  dtm  Iha  i>lhiiu»  ofCvriutb.  f  JaliM. 


464  DIODORUS  SICULUB.  Btmk  XJB^ 


spies  that  no  shipping  lay  there,  nor  m^B  any  guard  appointed  to  i(^ 
fend  the  place;  and  that  the  Athenians  were  secure,  and  thcrefofm 
negligent,  conceiving  none  durst  be  so  bold  as  to  come  up  thitbv  to 
attempt  any  thing  of  that  nature. 

To  this  end  having  brought  forty  ships  a  little  before  ta  M^aiii^ 
with  tliese  well  manned,  he  set  sail  from  thence  in  the  nighty  and 
passed  over  to  Salamis,  where  he  surprised  and  took  the  caidt 
Budorum,  end  seized  their  ships  and  harassed  the  rest  of  the  couDtrj* 
They  of  Salamis  firing  their  beacons,  the  Athenians  suspected  thai 
the  Pyreum  was  taken,  and  ran  all  with  great  fear  and  conftukm  to 
their  arms,  for  the  defence  of  tlve  place:  but  being  belter  infonnedf 
made  away  for  Salamis*  The  Lacedaemonians  thus  frustrated  ii) 
their  design,  left  Salamis  and  returned  home :  after  their  depaittti^ 
the  Athenians  had  a  more  watchful  eye  upon  Salamis,  and  placed 
there  a  strong  garrison;  and  fortified  the  Pyreum  with  wallsy  and 
sufficient  guards  for  its  defence. 

About  this  time  Sitalces  king  of  Thrace,  though  he  had  but  t 
small  kingdom,  yet  by  his  valour  and  prudence  greatly  enlaiged  his 
dominions,  being  a  man  both  just  and  kind  to  his  subjects,  and  Yiliaat 
and  diligent  in  time  of  war:  he  made  it  his  chief  care  to  preserve  aad 
increase  his  stores,  by  which  means  he  grew  so  very  rich*  that  hf 
gained  larger  territories  than  ever  any  king  of  Thrace  had  done  before 
him.  For  that  part  which  lay  by  the  sea-coast  ran  along  from  the 
borders  of  the  Abderites  to  the  river  Ister;  and  that  from  the  BOt^uf 
into  the  main  laud,  was  of  as  great  extent  as  a  swift  footman  couU 
travel  over  in  thirteen  days* 

This  prince  was  possessed  of  so  large  a  country,  that  his  ycarif 
revenue  amounted  to  above  a  thousand  talents.  During  his  rejgo  a 
war  broke  forth,  upon  which  occasion  he  raised  out  of  Thrace  iDore 
than  a  hundred  a|id  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  fiity  thousand  horseb 
But  it  is  necessary  that  we  declare  the  causes  of  this  war,  that  so  the 
following  account  may  be  better  understood. 

Sitalces  had  entered  into  a  league  with  the  Athenians,  and  one  of 

the  articles  was ^That  be  should  faithfully  assist  them  in  the  war 

wherein  tiiey  were  engaged  in  Thrace.  To  tiiis  end  he  raised  a 
powerful  army,  with  a  design  to  join  the  Athenians  to  take  Chal- 
cidica  by  force :  and  likewise  fur  the  liatred  he  had  to  PerdiccaSj  kii^ 
of  Macedonia,  he  resolved  to  restore  Amyntas  the  son  of  Philip  u> 
his  father's  kingdom.  For  these  causes  he  was  necessitated  to  raise 
a  very  great  army.  When  all  things  were  in  readiness,  he  naarched 
all  his  forces  out  of  Thrace,  and  entered  Macedonia:  but  the  Maoe- 
donians,  struck  with  terror  at  the  multitude  of  tiieir  enemies,  dared 
not  to  oppose  them,  but,  getting  in  all  their  fruits  aod  goods  they 


€lktp.  FIJI.  MQDORUfi  8ICUIiUS.  465 


iioald  within  their  garrisoD«,  ibej  kept  close  within  their  forts  and 
wMb.  The  Thracians  brought  Amyotas  along  witli  them  as  kin^, 
«nd  first  treated  with  the  dties  by  messengers  and  &ir  speeches ; 
)#ut  when  none  would  hearken  to  them,  he  assaulted  the  first  castle 
•IB  liis  way,  and  took  it  by  storm.  Upon  which  many  of  the  cities  and 
garrisons,  through  fear,  surrendered  of  their  own  accord.  After  they 
had  run  through  all  Macedonia,  loaded  with  rich  booty,  they  made 
against  the  Greek  cities  of  the  Chalcidicans. 

Whilst  Sitalces  was  thus  employed,  the  Thessalians,  Achatans, 
MiS'^esians,  and  all  tlie  other  Grecians  inhabiting  within  Macedon 
and  Ttiermopyli^  confederated  and  raised  a  mighty  army;  for  they 
were  afraid  lest  tite  '^Fhracians,  who  were  so  powerful,  should  make 
an  inroad  into  their  country,  and  bring  them  under  the  Thracian 
yoke :  and  tlie  Chalcidicans  did  the  like.  Sitalces  hereupon  being  in- 
formed of  the  great  armies  raised  against  him  by  the  Grecians,  and 
.  Jciiowiog  liis  army  was  not  able  to  endure  the  sharpness  of  tfaeapproacli- 
ing  winter,  struck  up  a  peace  with  Perdiccas,  and,  in  confirmation 
thereof,  contracted  a  marriage  with  him,  and  so  marched  bb  army 
back  into  Thrace. 

In  the  mean  time,  whilst  these  things  were  on  foot,  the  Laceda- 
moniaos  with  their  confederates  made  another  irruption  out  of 
Peloponnesus  into  Attica,  under  their  king  Archidamus,  who  had  the 
sovereign  command  of  die  army;  and  after  they  had  destroyed  all 
the  standing  corn  when  it  was  nearly  ripe,  and  made'  havock  and 
spoil  all  over  the  country,  they  returned  to  their  respective  habita- 
tions. The  Atlieniaos  on  tlie  other  iiand  were  not  in  heart  to  oppose 
them,  but  were  under  sore  calamities  by  plague  and  famine,  and 
therefore  altogether  despaired  of  any  good  issue  and  event  of  the  war. 
And  these  were  tlie  things  observable  this  year. 

Euclides  was  ruler  of  Athens,  when  the  Romans  chose  three 
military  tribunes  in  the  room  of  consuls,  Marcus  Mannius*,  Quintus 
Sulpitius  l^retextatus,  and  Servitius  Cornelius  Cossus.    At  this  time 
in  bicily,  the  Syracusans  made  war  upon  tliem  of  Ijcontiqm,  a  colony 
brought  thither  from  the  Clialcidicans,  originally  Athenians,  who  bein^ 
overpressed  by  the  power  of  the  Syracusans,  and  in  great  danger  of 
losing  their  city,  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  for  speedy  and  season-? 
able  aid,  to  deliver  them  from  their  present  exigency.    The  chief 
among  them  that  were  sent,  was  Gorgias  the  orator,  the  most 
eloquent  man  of  his  time.     lie  was  the  first  that  taqght  the  rules  of  - 
rhetoric,  and  was  so  famous  for  his  wise^  and  learned  orations 
tliat  all  his  scholars,  as  a  gratuity,   gave  him  a  huadrfd  minai 
a-piece. 

*  Manlius. 

Vol.  1.   No.  37«  QQo 


•*  • 


466  DIODORUS  SICULtS.  JBook  XIL 

When  he  came  to  Athens^  and  had  audience,  he  made  an  oradon 
to  the  people  concerning  the  league  desired;  and  by  his  new  and 
ingenious  way  of  speaking,  the  Athenians  were  so  taken,  (who  woe 
otherwise  men  of  great  wisdom  and  eloquence),  that  they  were  strodk 
with  admiration.  For  he  adorned  his  speech  with  most  cxoellciit 
figures,  and  artificial  composures  of  words  and  sentences,  as  by 
opposites,  paranomacisms,  equal  periods  like  terminations,  and  tlie 
like  giiigling  strains  of  rhetorical  wit,  to  allure  and  entice  his  audhois; 
which  Ht  that  time  for  its  novelty  was  much  admired:  but  now  it  is 
looked  upon  to  savour  too  much  of  affectation,  and  to  be  ridieuloiiSy 
especially  when  by  frequent  repetition  it  becomes  fulsome  and  tedious. 
Coronas  having  persuaded  the  Athenians  to  enter  into  a  league  with 
the  Leontincs,  returned  to  Leontium  with  great  reputation  for  his 
eloquence. 

The  Athenians,  for  some  time  before,  had  a  hankering  mind  after 
Sicily,  by  reason  of  the  riehness  of  the  soil,  and  therefore  were  now 
more  willingly  persuaded  by  Gorgias,  and  decreed  to  send  aid  as  was 
desired.  The  pretence  was  to  assist  them  who  were  their  own  coon- 
trymen,  and  were  brought  into  great  straits,  hut  in  truth  their  chief 
design  was  to  gain  the  island;  for  not  many  years  before,  when  tbe 
war  broke  forth  between  the  Corinthians  and  them  of  Corcyn,  and 
both  addressed  themselves  to  the  Athenians  for  aid,  to  make  them 
their  confederates,  the  people  of  Athens  resolved  to  side  with  the 
Corcyreans,  because  Corcyra  was  so  situated,  that  it  was  a  veiy 
ready  and  convenient  pass  over  from  thence  into  Sicily.  In  short, 
the  Athenians  being  now  masters  at  sea,  and  every  where  successful, 
liad  many  confederates,  and  were  richly  furnished,  both  with  men 
and  money;  had  many  cities  under  their  power,  and  were  possessed 
of  a  mighty  treasure  in  ready  money,  brought  from  Delos,  gathered 
from  the  Inhabitants  of  Greece,  to  the  value  of  above  ten  thousand 
talents*. 

Moreover,  they  had  likewise  many  excellent  officers,  and  expert 
commanders;  by  these  advantages,  the  Athenians  were  grown  raj 
confident  that  they  should  both  overcome  the  Spartans,  and  (having 
subdued  all  Greece)  win  also  the  whole  island  of  Sicily.  These 
were  the  reasons  which  induced  them  to  assist  the  Leon  tines;  to  thit 
end  they  sent  them  a  hundred  .sail  of  ships,  under  the  command 
of  Lachetes  and  Chahrias.  With  these  they  arrived  at  Rliegium,and 
from  their  colonies  there  and  at  Chalcidica,  they  had  a  hundred  9hips 
more,  which  joined  with  the  former;  from  thence  they  departed, 
and  came  first  to  the  Lipari  islands,  where  they  ravaged  tlie  country, 

•  Tt  n  thonsand  talents  amounts  to  .f  1,875,000  8terIiDg»  the  lewer  talent :  tlue  greater 
f\lc.i»  i^  jt  2hO;  the  U>^tr  is  -i  187:  10*. 


Chap.  Fit.  bioDORUs  siculUS.  ABf 

because  they  were  coDfederates  of  the  Syracusans.  *  Theo  they  made 
for  Locris*,  and  took  five  ships  belonging  to  the  Locrians^  and  be- 
sieged one  of  their  castles.  The  Siculi  bordering  upon  the  Myleansf 
coming  to  their  aid,  the  armies  engaged^  and  the  Athenians  were 
conquerors,  and  killed  above  a  thousand  of  their  enemies^  and  took 
no  fewer  than  six  hundred  prisoners :  and  presently  after  they  took  the 
castle  by  storm*  In  the  mean  time  forty  ships  more  were  sent  to 
tfae  fleet  by  the  Athenians,  to  carry  on  the  war  with  more  vigour^ 
under  the  command  of  Eurymedon  and  Sophocles:  and  when  they 
were  all  joined,  they  made  up  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  Md  fifty  sail. 
But  while  the  war  was  carrying  on,  the  Leontines,  by  their  ambassa- 
dors, struck  up  a  peace  with  them  of  Syracuse;  upon  which  the 
Athenian  fleet  returned  home.  But  the  Syracusans  received  all 
the  Leontines  into  the  city,  and  made  them  all  free  of  Syracuse,  and 
frpm  that  time  appointed  the  city  of  Leontium  to  be  a  fort  or  gai  ri«> 
son  of  the  Syracusans.  And  this  was  the  condition  of  Sicily  at  this 
time. 

In  Greece,  they  of  the  island  of  Lesbos  revolted  from  the  Athenians  t 
and  the  reason  was,  because  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities  through- 
out Lesbos,  were  by  order  and  decree  of  tlie  Athenians^  removed 
and  brought  into  Mitylene|.  For  this  reason  also  they  entered  into 
a  league  with  the  Lacedemonians,  and  advised  them  how  they  might 
become  masters  at  sea:  to  accomplish  which  design  they  promised 
them  a  great  number  of  ships.  The  Spartans  gave  a  very  quick  ear 
to  this,  and  whilst  they  were  preparing  a  navy,  the  Athenians  were 
beforehand  with  them,  and  commanded  C{inippedes  with  forty  sail^ 
forthwith  to  waft  over  an  army  into  Lesbos; .  who  being  joined  with 
other  confederates,  made  for  Mitylene,  and  in  a  sea-fight  routed  the 
Mityleneans,  itnd  then  besieged  them. 

Hereupon  the  Lacedeemonians  resolved  to  assist  them  of  Mitylene, 
and  to  that  end  prepared  a  brave  navy ;  but  the  Athenians  reinforced 
their  army  with  a  thousand  men  more  sent  into  Lesbos,  before  the 
Lacedaemonians  arrived.  Paches,  the  son  of  Epiderus,  was  general 
of  this  expedition,  who,  when  he  arrived  at  Mitylene^.joining  with 
the  former  army,  laid  closer  siege  to  the  place,  and  continually  as- 
saulted the  city* both  hy  sea  and  land.  The  Lacedaemonians  in  the 
mean  time  sent  five-and-forty  ships,  under  the  command  of  Alcidas, 
to  assist  the  Mityleneans,  and  again  invaded  Attica,  with  the  assistance 
of  their  confederates;  who  fell  upon  those  places  that  were  before 
untouched,  and  after  they  had  most  shamefully  pillaged  and  wasted 
the  country,  they  returned  home.     But  the  Mityleneans,  oppressed 

*  In  Italy,  upontlic  sea- coast.  t  Mylc,  a  tiiy  ia  Sicily. 

X  Tbo  greateit  city  of  Lr»bof. 


468  DIODORDS  SICULUS.  BoA  Xth 


wi(l)  famine,  the  sword,  and  seditious  tumults,  upon  condttions  ; 
rendered  the  city :  after  which  a  council  was  held  at  AtbeiMi^  ai  lo' 
what  they  should  do  with  them  of  Mity lene.  There  wtti  one  Clsoa»  aft 
orator,  (a  cruel  and  violent  spirited  man),  stirred  up  the  people  tieiliUl 
all  the  Mityleneans  that  were  men  grown  up,  and  to  sell  all  the  wmmm. 
and  children  for  slaves.  The  Athenians  voted  it  to  be  so  aft  Clom 
had  persuuded  them,  and  sent  messengers  to  Mitylene  to  acqaaittt 
the  governor  with  the  decree.  When  Paches  had  read  it,  anQtherto> 
the  contrary  presently  came  to  his  hand;  upon  which  Paches  voder- 
standing  the  Athenians  had  changed  their  minds,  with  great  joj  eaUad 
the  Mityleneans  together,  and  l)Oth  remitted  their  faults,  andlikcfriie 
freed  them  from  their  fears.  But  the  Athenians  demoliahcdtkB« 
walls  of  Mitylene,  and  divided  the  whole  island  of  Lesbos  by  lot^  ca* 
cept  the  lands  belonging  to  Methymna.  And  this  waa  the  isauc  of 
the  Lesbcan  defection  from  Athens. 

About  the  same  time,  the  Lacedaemonians  (still  carrying  oatha 
siege  at  Platea)  drew  a  wall  round  the  city,  and  fortified  it  with  seveial 
forts  and  strong  guards  for  its  defence.  The  siege  contimiiag  hnp^, 
and  no  relief  coming  from  Athens,  the  besieged  were  greatly  pntaed 
both  with  want  of  provision,  and  the  loss  of  many  of  the  dtiaeia^ 
who  were  cut  off  in  the  frequent  assaults :  all  therefore  being  donbtfiil 
what  tlie  issue  might  be,  a  council  was  called  to  advise  w.bat  ma  fit 
to  be  done  in  order  to  their  preservation.  Many  tliought  ifc  BKMt 
advisable  to  capitulate,  but  there  were  others,  to  the  number  of  tao 
hundred,  that  were  for  breaking  through  theguardsin  the  higlil^and 
so  fly  to  Athens.  In  pursuance  whereof,  observing  the  darkacsa  of 
the  night,  those  that  were  for  capitulating,  were  prevailed  upon  to 
assault  a  remote  part  of  the  enemy's  wall ;  by  which  meaas  tbey  who 
intended  to  break  through  the  guards,  whilst  their  cneoiiea.  wen 
busied  in  assisting  their  fellows  that  were  assaulted^  scaled,  anoiiier 
part  of  the  wall,  (having  got  ladders  for  tliat  purpose) ,.aud.  killed  the 
guards,  and  so  escaped  to  Athens. 

The  next  day,  the  Lacedasmoiiians  were  in  great  vezarioD.at  the 
escape  of  them  out  of  the  city,  and  brought  their  forces  cloee  to  tiie 
walls,  and  bent  all  their  minds  and  strength  with  all  expedkion  to 
force  the  place;  upon  which,  the  Plateaus  being  terrified^  gave  op 
both  themselves  and  their  city  to  the  mercy  of  their  eoenriea. 

But  the  Lacedaemonian  commanders  put  this  questiou  to-< 
one  that  they  sent  for  from  among  the  Plateaus  ...What  goodi 
or  services  they  had  ever  done  to  the  Laccdaemoniaoai  an 
one  by  one  confessed  that  they  knew  of  none,  they  atkad  theai 
again — Whether  they  had  ever  done  the  Spartans  any  hacm  ?  and 
when  none  denied  t];at^  tlicy  ordeiel  them  ail  to  be  slain  j  so  that 


Chop.  VU.  nioDoRUfl  ticui«u&i  469 


^Mta 


dtt  wba  lenmincd  ki.  tbe  city  wtare  put  tp  the  sword^  tlie  t#«ni  itsdf 
railed  10  the  groivid^ and tW Umk bekiDgtBg  loit  let  tofimii.  Tbiui 
tke  Plaitaiwiy  for  tliek  hithfatiMss  to  the  K^kinauom^  beeaiBe  invoIfiQA 
iJi  gteat  MJsecyj  aid  wndesermedly  |»erjelied«  ... 

Wbibt  these  tUi^  were  in  doiBg)  ttgfeMaedltioiiaiuLet^  difteiA 
aMMk>0>rcyii^iipMthefeU<>wuigoeeaaon:  ift  the  battle  at  X^ 
dMHuim.  nany  dt  the  Careyrsana  vi^cie  tdten  prtaoacfs;  aad  wUIe 
tbejF  were  ia  ciiatady^  d^y  prenked  the  Corinthiani^  tfaat;  il  lfaa|^ 
aigbt  be  released,  ibeyiwould  imdettake  to  deliver  up  Coreyia  ioa^ 
tbur  faaods.  This  waa  ft  very  welcone  afid  graleM  oier  ta  tha 
QmsAmmu  A^oMiderahte  nmnber  af  taknts^lberefons*  bci^g 
lamablf  procured  fircuD  tbeir  friands  fiur  Ifaek  icdemptioii^  ihey 


Aa  soontaathsj^rcturaed  ima^iieii  aacailry»,Madiag.tke  peifiNraar 
aace ofi  dictf  ooatract,  tbay  first  seiaiBd  upon  tbechieC  af  Ibe  aitiaeiit^ . 
and  esficciaUy  thMe^nba  aaidd  inaal  tnfiatiiea  tbe  peaplfi,  aiatafttt* : 
watda^  ei»t  Ibek  tbaaat%  aod  aa  ^ta:  dasMlved  ihe  deiBAciaay.  flat 
tbe  Corcyreana  ware  pseaeaAly  aaaisied  by  4ba  AtfaeaiHW,  aad  mcmk  ; 
vwed  tbeia  Jibeftyj^.  and  weaeiviaUed  toeMaHe.  JMaca  upaak  lie. 
lingittadiMa.  of  ibe  defectiaft.  Bm  ihey^  tfafonf^feaff  af  pnadibnitnt^. 
ikd  foi  refaga  la*  tk»  aitara  ai  die  guik,  and  aa  aappUaota  bcggad. 
pardaai  h<Hh  •£  ti]«  goda  and  tli^  psoplf # 

£itth^eaMifi  waa  gaveraon  a£  Aftbeaa^  iibeiithra8<0iilteiry.ti3ndiaa< 
ia/veated  mxk  conaalar  power  iiicffa;a0ai»  aboaettat  Itoaacj  Marraa 
FaWMTf. PbaUuitiSy  and  LuciuaSieaeidiws.  In  tbaia  time  the phigaa* 
broke  aut  afiBCsb^  wlicft  tlicy  wane:  faoad  froaa  this.  ca«tqiaft  taii 
very  lately  before :  ir  raged  so  eKaeediogly^  tlMA.thay  lost  foar  tlaatt^*- 
sand  foot  suldiera^  aod  fane  baadtoed  hoi^;:  aiad  of  acbttff%  foseaea 
aAfd  ser vaals,  above  te  n  daansandL  And.  iumk  beeauaa  tfae  «o«aM!  aC 
the  bi&ajry  nay  Kegoisc  adeeknutiDOoi  the:  causes  of  tbiivbikQAdia^. 
teasper^  it  is  necessary' for  OS  ui  this  pkca  to  aet  tfaeci  fiarib. 

AbiuidaDiee  ol  raict  had  fatteai  in  tkr  wimary  by  Dttfinr  wheaaai 
the  eardi;  being  over  wet  hi  many  places,.  espexsiaUy  ioi  hsw  aodT, 
hoUowr graunda,  the  watac  hiy  Uke  standing  pools;  aad  those  baiaig 
aMCttpted  and  putiified  by  the  heat  ofi  that  aaooiaieiv.tbanee  peoFr 
ceeded  a  mist  o£  gross  and  stinbing  vapu«ns^  wbicb  euiiiaplad  the^ 
ak^  as  it  often  happens  ahawt  filtliy  massbes:  and  besidios,  tbac  waskt. 
of  good  food  nnidi  advaaeed  tbe  progreaa  o£  tlir  disease^  for  tbeyeaa* 
before^  tiie  frurtsy  by  too  much  rain^  were  crude  aod  imwfaoleaaniyr. 

There  was  likewise  a  thifd  cause  of  this  distemper,  which  was  thisj 
tlie  Etesian^  winds  this  suniiuer  blew  not,,  by  whose  gentle  brcezics 

*  That  is,  >viud!i  which  come  at  certuin  stated  times  every  Jf  ear.     Pliu.  Yk]^  ^c  47. 


470  DionoRus  sicuLUB.  BoakXlt 


the  violent  heat  of  the  air  was  constantly  allayed  at  other  tines;  ao 
that  the  heat  heing  now  excessive,  and  the  air  as  it  were  inflamed^ 
men's  bodies  now  wanting  the  usual  refreshment,  contracted  an  evil 
habit,  from  whence  arose  (through  the  vehement  and  immodente 
heat)  all  sorts  of  burning  distempers.  And  hence  it  was  that  many 
who  were  seized  with  this  disease,  to  free  themselves  from  the  buriH 
ing  heat  that  was  in  their  bodies,  cast  themselves  into  pits  and  weUs« 
But  the  Athenians  judged  so  grievous  a  distemper  was  from  the  godp; 
and  therefore,  according  to  the  charge  given  them  by  the  omcle^they 
purged  the  island  of  Dclos,  (which  was  formerly  dedicated  to  Apblhi), 
now  polluted,  as  they  conceived,  by  burying  many  dead  bodies  there, 
therefore  all  the  graves  of  the  dead  were  dug  up,  and  the  urns  were 
transported  into  the  next  island  to  DelOs,  called  Khene;  and  a  law 
was  made,  that  it  should  not  be  lawful  for  any,  for  the  time  to  come, 
either  to  bury  or  to  bear  any  child  in  Deios.  They  then  likewise 
revived  the  panegyric  festival  in  Delos,  now  for  a  longtime  dianstd. 
While  the  Athenians  were  thus  religiously  employed,  the  Lacedasmo*' 
nians,  with  their  confederates  in  Peloponnesus,  encamped  in  the 
isthmus,  and  there  consulted  together  concerning  the  invading  of 
Attica  again.  But  there  then  happened  such  terrible  earthquaka  in 
several  parts  of  Greece,  that  it  so  terrified  and  possessi?d  them  with 
fear  and  awe  of  the  gods,  that  they  all  returned  to  their  respective 
countries.  For  the  horrible  concussions  of  the  earth  were  so  great^ 
that  many  cities  near  the  sea  were  sunk  and  drowned.  And  whereas' 
that  tract  of  land  near  Locris  was  before  a  peninsula,  by  the  violence 
of  the  earthquake  a  channel  was  made  through  the  isthmus,  and  the 
place  turned  into  an  island  now  called  Atalante*. 

While  these  things  were  doing,  the  Lacedaemonians  sent  new  co« 
Ionics  into  Trachinia,  and  changed  its  name  into  Heracleaf.  The 
reason  was,  that  the  Trachinians,  having  had  wars  with  the  (Eteans 
for  many  years,  had  lost  most  of  their  citizens;  and  therefore  being 
almost  depopulated,  they  addressed  themselves  to  the  liacedsemonians 
(whose  colonies  tliey  were)  to  repcople  their  city.  The  Lacedsuno* 
nians,  in  regard  they  were  their  countrymen,  and  Hercules  their 
ancestor,  in  times  long  past  had  resided  at  Trachis,  resolved  to  make 
it  a  large  and  beautiful  city;  afld  to  this  end  they  sent  a  colony  tlii- 
ther,  out  of  their  own  city,  and  out  of  others  in  Peloponnesus,  to  the 
number  of  four  thousand ;  and  out  of  the  rest  of  Greece,  as  many  as 
pleased  were  received  as  members  of  the  colony:  the  whole  number 

*  Near  Euboea.  nuw  called  Negroponi. 
'  t  There  are  manjr  uf  this  uamei  but  this  i«  ucar  the  mogntain  (Eta^  and  tbe  strmilt  of 
Tli«nBop^'l«. 


Chi^.  PH.  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  4^1 

sesssssaas=sssssss?=s==ssBass9BS=saESSSSses==aB^ 

was  little  less  than  six  thousand.  To  concludeji  Tndiis  was  at  length 
6o  far  enlarged,  that  it  contained  ten  thousand  men;  and  when 
they  bad  divided  the  land  adjoining  by  lot,  they  called  the  dty 
Heraclea. 

Stratocies  being  archon  of  Athens,  the  consular  dignity  was  con- 
ferred upon  the  three  military  .tribunes  at  Home,  Lucius  Furius 
Metelltts*)  Luciusf  Pinarius,  and  S.  Posthumius  Albus.  In  the 
time  of  their  government,  Demosthenes,  madeadmiralof  the  fleet  by 
the  Athenians,  with  thirty  ships  well  manned,  joined  with  fifteen 
more  from  Corcyra,  and  other  aids  from  the  Cephalenians,  Acamani- 
jans,  and  Messenians  inhabiting  Naupactiis:|:,  and  so  setsail  for  Leucas, 
and  when  he  had  harassed  and  wasted  the  country  of  Leucadia,  be 
bent  his  course  for  iEtolia,  and  there  burnt  and  destroyed  many  of 
fheir  villages;  but  the  iEtolians  making  head  against  them,  routed 
the  Athenians,  who  fled  to  Naupactus.  The  ^tolians,  encouraged 
with  this  victory,  with  the  aid  of  three  thousand  Lacedaemonians^ 
marched  against  Naupactus,  (which  the  Messenians  then  inhabitedj, 
but  were  repulsed.  From  thence  they  made  an  expedition  against 
Molycrion§,  and  took  the  city. 

The  Athenian  general  Demosthenes,  fearing  lest  they  would  attack 
Naupactus,  sent  a  tlioQsand  men  out  of  Acarnania,  tostrengtiien  the 
garrison.  He  himself  continued  in  Acarnania,  and  fell  upon  a 
thousand  Ambraoiaos  in  their  march,  and  cut  them  almost  all  off. 
Upon  this  the  whole  strength  of  the  city||  came  out  against  him,  and 
he  destroyed  most  of  them  likewise,  so  tliat  the  city  waS  alniost  made 
desolate.  Hereupon  he  entered  into  a  consultation  of  assaulting 
Ambracia,  hoping  it  might  be  easily  won,  by  reason  there  were  few 
left  to  defend  it :  but  the  Acarnanians  fearing  that  if  the  Athenians 
were  master  of  the  town|  they  would  have  more  troublesome  neigh- 
bours than  the  Ambraci^ns  were,  refused  to  follow  Demosthenes: 
on  this  mutiny  the  Acarnanians  beckme  friends  with  the  Ambracians, 
and  entered  into  a  league  of  peace  and  amity  for  a  hundred  years; 
Demosthenes  thus  deserted  by  the  Acarnanians,  returns  with  twenty 
sail  to  Athens.  Presently  after,  the  Ambracians  (having  lately 
smarted  so  much,  and  in  great  fear  of  the  Athenians)  desired  agarrisoa 
from  the  Lacedaemonians. 

Demosthenes  afterwards  marching  with  an  army  to  Pylos^  ia 
Peloponnesus,  determined  to  draw  a  wall  round  the  place;  which 
was  naturally  fortified,  and  four  hundred  stadias  from  Messena:  an^^ 

*  Medullinus.  t  M'^™^'^*^** 

X  A  citj  of  Achaia,  uow  called  Lepanto  by  the  VeuetiMU. 
§  A  city  of  ifCtnlia.  |  Ambracia. 

51  A  town  in  the  western  part  of  Peloponnesui^ 


4^2  DioDORUs  ncvLVs.  Book  TIT. 

being  well  fomished  with  multitudes  of  meii^  in  twenty  days  spaee 
be  finished  the  work.    But  the  Licedfffnonians  hearing  of  the  fbfti- 
fjring  of  Pylos,  prepared  great  forces,  both  by  land  and  sea,  Mid  with 
a  fleet  of  forty- five  sail,  well  manned  and  provided,  and  with  twctte 
thousand  land  soldiers,  made  against  Pyios :  for  it  seemed  to  them  a 
thing  dishonourable,  to  suflfer  them  who  darst  not  eome  into  tb«  field 
to  defend  Attica  from  devastations,  now  to  nestle  themselves,  and  to 
make  fortifications  in  Peloponnesus.    Tliey  encamped  therefore  with 
their  army,  under  the  command  of  Tlirasymedes,  near  to  Pylos,  and 
were  resolved  to  undergo  all  hardships  and  hazards,  in  order  to  aab 
due  the  place.    To  tiiis  end  they  stood  with  their  fleet  in  the  veiy 
month  of  the  port,  to  block  up  all  the  passage  and  entrance  ffoni  the 
enemy :  and  by  their  forces  at  land,  they  assaulted  the  walls  withone 
body  after  another  hy  turns,  pressing  on  with  wooderfal  obatioacy 
and  resolution. 

They  likewise  put  some  of  the  choicest  of  their  soldiers,  both  of  the 
jLacediemonians  and  their  confederates,  into  the  Sphacteri»  iaUands 
which  was  near  at  hand,  and  ran  out  at  length  over  agamt  the  port, 
by  which  the  harbour  was  the  safer  and  securer  from  storms:  aad 
this  they  did  to  prevent  the  Athenians,  it  being  a  place  veiyiTommo- 
dtons,  and  useful  for  the  carrying  on  of  the  siege.  Tliey  lihcwise 
continued  the  assaults  every  day,  without  intermission,  and  received 
wounds  upon  wounds,  from  the  towers  and  bulwarks  upon  the  waUs, 
and  yet  remitted  nothing  of  their  iieat^and  resolution;  so  that  mul- 
titudes were-killcd,  and  many  wounded,  in  striving  to  storm  a  place 
most  strongly  fortified.  For  the  Athenians  being  possessed  of  a  town 
of  natural  strength,  and  abundantly  furnished  with  arms,  and  all  things 
necessary  for  a  defence,  most  vigorously  repelled  their  enemies.  For 
they  hoped,  that  if  they  frustrated  this  design,  Pcloponuesus  wouU 
be  the  seat  of  the  whole  war;  and  that  they  should  by  degrees  waste 
and  destroy  their  country. 

In  the  mean  time,  whilst  these  things  were  managed  at  the  siege 
witii  the  greatest  heat  imaginable  on  both  sides,  and  the  Spartans 
exercised  all  their  force  and  power,  amongst  many.others  that  pur- 
diased  honour  by  their  gallantry,  Brasidas  mounted  to  the  highest 
step  of  glory;  for  when  the  other  captains  and  commanders  in  the 
ffect  durst  vMt  make  up  to  the  shore  with  the  ships,  by  reason  of  sharp 
rocks,  and  the  difficulty  of  the  place,  he,  acting  the  part  of  an  admi- 
ral, with  a  loud  voice  commanded,  and  incessantly  urged  the  pilot  of 
his  own  vessel,  without  any  regard  to  the  ship,  to  force  it  ashore; 
for  he  said  it  was  a  base  thing  for  the  Spartans,  if  they  resolving,  as 
they  pretended,  to  be  victorious,  should  be  more  sparing  of  their  ships 
than  their  lives;  and  in  the  mean  time  suffer  the  A  thenians  to  lord  it 


Chap.  nl.  DIODOROS  SICULUS.  473 


-r 


in  Laconia.  Hereupon  the  pilot  was  forced  to  run  the  sliip  ashore, 
and  fortiiwith  Brasidas  (resolutely  fixing  himself  upon  the  batches) 
encountered  with  a  whole  troop  of  Athenians  that  made  up  in  a  body 
upon  him,  and  killed  many  of  them  that  first  assaulted  him;  but 
darts  flying  thick  about  him,  and  receiving  many  wounds,  at  length, 
through  the  loss  of  much  blood,  he  fell  down  as  dead;  and  his  arm 
slipping  off  board,  and  hanging  out  of  the  ship,  Ins  buckler,  caught 
by  the  waves,  dropped  out  of  his  left  hand  into  the  sea^  and  was  pre- 
sently seized  by  the  enemy;  and  he  himself  lying  half  dead  amongst 
the  heaps  of  those  he  had  killed,  was  taken  up  and  carried  out  of  the 
ship  by  his  own  me.n;  thus  far  excelling  all  others  in  valour,  (hat 
'when  others  have  been  put  to  death  because  they  basely  threw  away 
their  shields,  he  by  the  loss  of  his,  gained  the  highest  honour  and  re- 
putation. However,  the  Lacedcemonians  obstinately  persisted  in  the 
siege  at  Pylos,  with  great  loss  of  their  men. 

Here  any  one  may  justly  admire  the  wonderful  and  various  turn^ 
and  changes  of  fortune  at  Pylos :  for  the  Athenians  drove  the  Spartans 
out  of  Laconia;  and  they  who  were  usually  victors  at  land  (now 
forced  from  land)  overpower  the  Athenians  at  sea;  and  they  whd 
were  before  masters  at  sea,  now  repel  their  enemies  at  laud.  But 
the  siege  continuing  very  long,  they  who  were  in  the  island  were  in 
great  hazard  of  being  famished,  because  the  Athenian  fleet,  now  com- 
manding at  sea,  stopped  all  provision  that  way.  The  Lacedaemonians 
therefore  now  fearing  what  would  become  of  them  that  were  blocked 
up  in  the  island,  sent  to  Athens  to  treat  upon  terms  of  poace:  but 
when  nothing  of  peace  would  be  hearkened  unto,  they  desired  that 
they  would  accept  of  an  exchange,  and  receive  as  many  prisoners  of 
their  own  men,  as  they  were  that  were  in  the  island:  but  when  this 
was  refused,  tlie  Lacediemonian  ambassadors  very  freely  and  sharply, 
even  in  Athens  itself,  told  them,  that  by  their  refusing  to  exchange 
one  equal  number  for  another,  they  owned  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
were  of  more  worth  and  value  than  the  Athenians.  Being  reduced  to 
these  straits  and  necessities,  they  in  the  Sphacterise  islands  were  forced 
to  submit,  and  the  Athenians  took  them  all  prisoners.  The  number 
of  those  that  were  Spartans  (who  then  delivered  up  themselves)  were 
an  hundred  and  twenty;  of  those  that  were  their  confederates,  an 
hundred  and  fourscore.  Cieou,  the  admiral  of  the  fleet,  brought 
them  all  bound  to  Athens,  where  it  was  decreed  by  the  people,  that 
if  the  Lacedemonians  would  make  an  end  of  the  war,  thev  should  all 
he  preserved;  but  if  they  persisted,  they  should  all  be  put  to  death. 
After  this,  the  Athenians  sent  tor  the  best  soldiers  of  the  Messenians 
that  inhabited  Naupactus,  and  joined  some  of  their  confederates  with 

Vol.1.  No.  37.  ^^^ 


474  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Jfobft  XtL 

them  for  the  defence  of  Pylos,  judging  the  Messenians,  far  the  inve- 
terate hatred  they  had  towards  the  Spartans,  would  be  veiy  eager  to 
spoil  Laconia  by  sallies  from  so  strong  a  fortification:  and  in  ddi 
condition  were  things  at  Pylos. 

In  the  mean  time  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia  died,  haviiig  reigned 
forty  years:  Xerxes  succeeded  him,  and  reigned  only  one  year.  In 
Italy  the  i£qui  rebelled  against  the  Romans ;  to  suppress  whom,  the 
Romans  created  Aulus  Posthumius  dictator,  attd  Lucius  Julius  nmi* 
ter  of  the  horse,  who  made  an  inroad  with  a  brave  army  into  their 
country;  upon  which  the  iGqui  presently  fought  them,  and  were 
routed :  a  great  slaughter  was  made,  and  many  taken  prisonen^  and 
the  Romans  carried  away  great  spoil.  After  this  slaughter  the  JSqai 
submitted  to  the  mercy  of  the  Romans.  Postliumius  hanng  thns 
bravely  managed  the  war,  according  to  custom,  triumphed.  A  thing 
something  incredible  is  reported  to  be  done  by  this  Posthnmins;  to 
wit,  that  he  put  his  own  son  to  death,  for  that  in  the  battle,  ont  of  a 
sprightly  heat  of  youth,  pressing  on  upon  the  enemy,  he  left  liis  post 
assigned  him  by  his  father. 

This  year  ended,  Isarchus*  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athena,  and  at 
Rome,  Titus  Quintius  and  Caius  Julius  were  consuls;  at  whiehtlme 
the  eighty-ninth  olympiad  was  celebrated  at  Elis,  in  which  Slmma- 
chus  was  again  victor.  At  this  time  the  Athenians  made  Nleias 
admiral  of  their  fleet,  who  with  threescore  sail,  and  three  thonaand 
men  at  arms  under  his  command,  was  ordered  to  invade  the  Laeeds- 
monian  confederates;  whereupon  he  forthwith  made  up  to  the  islaad 
of  Melos,  spoiled  the  country,  and  besieged  the  city  many  days.  For 
this  only,  of  all  the  islands  of  the  Cyclades,  stood  firm  and  constant 
to  the  Lacedemonians,  because  they  were  a  colony  from  Sparta. 
Nicias,  knowing  he  was  not  in  a  condition  able  to  storm  the  place, 
(which  made  a  resolute  defence)  passed  to  Oropus  in  Boeotia,  and 
leaving  his  fleet  there,  marched  with  his  forces  into  Tanagra,  where 
he  was  joined  with  new  supplies  from  Athens,  under  the  command 
of  Hipponicus  the  son  of  Callias:  both  these  together  proceeded  in 
wasting  and  spoiling  the  country.  Hereupon  the  Thebans  came  ont 
accainst  them,  and  fought  them;  but  the  Athenians  routed  tl»em  with 
a  great  slaughter.  When  all  wits  over,  Hipponicus,  with  hb  forces, 
returned  to  Athens,  and  Nicias  to  the  fleet ;  who,  saiitag  along  the 
coasts  of  liocris,  wastes  and  destroys  many  places  upon  the  sea  siKNe. 
Here  forty  ships  came  up  to  him  from  the  confederates,  which, with 
those  he  had  before,  made  up  a  navy  of  a  hundred  sail;  lie  had  like- 
wise a  brave  army  of  land  soldiers,  with  which  he  made  for  Corinth; 

*  Or  rather  Iparchut. 


Ciap.  FH.  DioDORUS  sicutus.  4/5 


^f-nF^m^mtm^^n 


mid  laoding  his  men,  engaged  with  the  anny  of  the  Coriotbiaos,  beat 
cbetn  twice,  and  after  the  alaoghter  of  many  of  bb  enemies,  erected 
a  trophy*  In  this  fight  there  were  only  eight  of  the  Athenians  killed, 
bat  three  hundred  of  the  Corinthians.  Thence  he  saikd  towards 
Cremmyon*,  spoiled  the  country,  and  took  the  cssile  by  assault. 
Presently  after,  he  marches  back,  fortifying  the  castle  in  Methonef 
by  the  way;  and  having  put  in  a  8tix>iig  garrison,  wasted  the  country 
adjoining,  and  at  length  (spoiling  and  harassing  all  along  upon  the 
sea^coast)  returned  to  Athens.  Not  long  after,  the  Athenians  sent 
forth  threescore  sail,  and  two  thousand  men  at  arms  against  Cytherat, 
under  the  command  of  Nicias  and  some  others.  When  he  had  landed 
his  men  in  the  island,  the  city  after  a  short  siege  surrendered,  and 
leaving  there  a  good  garrison  for  the  defence  of  the  island,  he  passed 
over  to  Peloponnesus,  aod  spoiled  the  country  upon  the  sea  coast, 
and  took  Thyre§  {situated  between  the  confines  of  Laconia  and 
Argos)  by  assault,  and  demolished  the  walls,  and  made  all  the  inha- 
bitants captives.  But  the  ^ginites  who  inhabited  there,  and  TantaluSj^ 
the  governor  of  the  castle,  he  sent  prisoners  to  Athens,  where  they 
iv.ere  detained  with  other  prisoners. 

Whilst  these  things  were  acting,  the  Megareans,  now  tired  out  with 
the  war  they  had  both  with  the  Athenians  and  their  eidles,  after  many 
messages  backwards  and  forwards  between  the  two  cities,  some  of  the 
citizens  of  Megara,  incensed  against  the  exiles,  promised  the  Athe* 
nian  commanders  to  betray  the  city.  To  that^  end  Hippocrates  and 
Demosthenes,  the  Athenian  generals,  by  compact  with  them  of 
Megara,  sent  in  the  night  six  hundred  soldiers  into  the  city,  whom 
tlie  traitors  let  in  within  the  walls  j^  but  the  treachery  being  disco- 
vered, the  people  were  divided  into  two  factious,  oue  sided  with  the 
Athenians,  and  the  other  with  the  Lacedsemonians.  In  the  mean 
time,  one,  of  his  own  accord,  made  proclamation,  that  whosoever 
would,  might  join  with  the  Megareans  and  Athenians.  The  Lace- 
demonians thus  deserted  by  tliem  of  Megara,  the  watch  which  was 
all  along  upon  tlie  walls,  left  their  station,  and  fled  into  the  arsenal 
called  Nicea,  where  the  Megareans  kept  all  their  naval  stores  and 
provisions.  But  the  Athenians  intrenched  round  and  besieged  the 
castle;  and  a  little  time  after,  sending  for  workmen  from  Athens, 
encompassed  Nicea  with  a  wall.  Upon  this  the  Peloponnesians, 
feuriog  they  should  all  be  put  totiie  sword  if  the  place  were  taken  by 
storm^  delivered  up  Nicea  upon  conditions  to  the  Athenians.  Thus 
stood  the  aflfairs  of  Megara  at  this  time. 

*  A  town  near  Corinth.  f  In  Laconia. 

X  An  island  on  the  south-east  tide  of  Laconia. 

$  III  Pcloj>pi;iiH'su9,  now  cniied  Gtfigo,  belonging  to  the  Venetiaoa. 


476  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XII. 

But  Brasidas,  with  a  great  army  raised  in  Sparta  and  other  parts  of 
Fcloponnesus,  marched  to  Megara,and  drove  the  Athenians  (surprised 
with  this  sudden  and  unexpected  approach)  out  of  Nicea,  and  reduced 
the  city  to  its  former  ol)cdience  to  the  Laceds.roonians.  Tlten  he 
marched  through  Thcssaly,  and  came  to  Dion  in  Macedonia.  Thenoe 
going  on  to  Acanthus^  he  assisted  tlie  Chalcidicans,  and  paitlj  bj 
threats,  and  partly  hy  fair  and  plausible  arguments,  wrought  upon 
the  chief  citv  of  the  Acanthians  to  desert  the  Athenians:  afterwards 

m 

he  brought  over  many  other  of  the  Thracians  to  join^  as  confederate** 
with  the  Lacedaemonians;  and  henceforward  desiring  to  carry  on  the 
war  with  more  vigour,  sent  for  soldiers  out  of  LacedsMDOn  to 
strengthen  his  army. 

Tlie  Spartans  hereupon  sent  to  him  a  thousand  of  the  best  soldiers 
amongst  the  Helots,  whom  they  had  long  before  designed  to  root 
out,  hoping  most  of  them  would  he  cut  off  in  the  war:  and  there  was 
another  vile  act  of  cruelty  committed  by  them,  by  which  they  deter- 
mined utterly  to  destroy  all  the  Helots.  For  they  made  a  prodama- 
tion  that  whosoever  of  the  Helots  had  done  any  service  for  Sparfaj 
should  be  made  free,  and  to  that  end  they  should  send  in  their  names: 
when  two  thousand  had  written  their  names,  they  ordered  the  most 
powerful  and  chief  of  the  citizens  to  cut  all  the  Helots*  throats  in 
their  several  houses ;  for  they  were  in  great  dread  of  them,  lest,  when 
they  saw  an  opportunity,  they  should  join  with  their  enemies,  and  so 
be  instrumental  to  the  ruin  of  Sparta.  However,  when  these  Helots, 
with  some  other  supplies  from  their  confederates,  joined  with  Brssi* 
das,  his  army  was  very  strong:  and  thus  stretigtheaed,  he  marched 
his  forces  to  Amphipolis  Aristogoras  the  Milesian  was  the  first  that 
brought  colonies  into  the  city,  when  he  fled  from  Darius,  the  king 
of  Persia.  But  aft«T  Aristogoras *s  death,  the  inhabitants  were  ejected 
by  the  Thracians  called  Edones.  Two-and-thirty  years  after,  the 
Athenians  sent  thither  a  colony  of  ten  thousand  men :  'but  tliese  being 
destroyed  by  the  Thracians  at  Drabiscum  two  years  after,  the  Thra- 
cians recovered  the  city  under  Apion,  their  general.  Tliis  city, 
subject  to  so  frequent  changes  of  war,  Brasidas  made  it  his  busioess 
to  subdue.  To  this  end,  marching  thither  with  a  great  army,  he 
encamped  at  the  bridge  near  to  the  city,  and  presently  possessed 
himself  of  the  suburbs.  The  next  day  they  of  Amphipolis  being 
greatly  terrified,  surrendered  t!)e  place,  upon  condition  that  all  who 
would  might  leave  the  city,  and  take  their  effects  with  them:  and 
soon  after  he  took  in  manv  other  neighbouring  cities,  amongst  which 
the  chief  were  Syme  and  Galepsus,  both  colonies  of  the  Thracians, 
and  Myrcinus,  a  town  of  the  Edones. 

He  likewise  began  building  new  ships  at  the  river  Strymon,  and 
sent  for  fresh  supplies  from  Lacedacmonia  and  other  coqfcderates. 


Chap.  VIL  DiODORUS  sicuLUS.  477 

— — w  — — i— — — ^— i1^ 

He  also  caused  great  store  of  arms  to  be  made^  by  which  he  armed 
the  new  raised  men,  and  furnished  himself  with  darts^,  weapons,  and 
all  other  provisions :  and  being  thus  completely  provided,  he  marched 
from  Amphipolis,  and  encamped  at  a  place  called  Acte,  Here  were 
five  of  the  towns  partly  inhabited  by  Grecians  of  Andros,  and  partly 
by  a  mixed  multitude  of  barbarians,  descended  from  the  Bisalte^ 
people  of  a  double  tongue.  Having  brought  these  under  his  power^ 
he  fell  upon  Torone,  built  by  the  Chalcidicans,  but  then  in  the  power 
of  the  Athenians.  Here,  by  the  treachery  of  some  of  the  inhabitants, 
in  the  night  he  was  let  into  the  town,  and  so  won  Torone.  And  thus 
far  the  expedition  of  Brasidas  prospered  this  year. 

In  the  mean  time  there  was  a  battle  fought  by  the  Athenians  at 
Delium  in  Boeotia,  with  the  Bceotians,  upon  the  accounts  following.^ 
The  then  present  government  in  Boeotia  was  displeasing  to  some, 
who  desired  to  set  up  a  democracy  in  the  cities:  these  malcontents 
discovered  their  designs  to  the  Athenian  generals  Hippocrates  and 
Demosthenes,  and  engaged  to  deliver  up  the  cities  in  Bceotia.    Tlita 
was  a  very  welcome  overture  to  the  commanders:  and  that  th^ 
business  might  the  better  he  efiected,  they  divided  the  army,  and 
Demosthenes  with  the  greater  part  made  an  incursion  into  Bosoiia; 
but  the  Boeotians  being  well  prepared,  having  had  notice  of  the  . 
treachery,  he  marched  back  without  doing  any  thing.     Hippocrat^ 
in  the  mean  time  invaded  Delium,  possessed  himself  of  the  place; 
and  to  prevent  the  march  of  the  Boeotians  that  way,  fortified  Delium 
with  a  wall,  which  lies  near  to  Oropus,  and  the  borders  of  Boeotia 
lying  towards  the  mountains.     But  Pantoedas,  the  Boeotian  general, 
gathered  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Boeotia,  the  best  and  choicest  soldiers, 
and  with  a  great  army  and  a  swift  march  made  for  Delium;  for  he 
had  with  him  little  less  than  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  a  thousand 
horse.    The  Athenians  on  the  other  side  were  more  in  number,  but 
not  so  well  armed;  for  coming  hastily  and  suddenly  out  of  the  city, 
many  were  ill  furnished,  both  as  to  arms  and  other  necessaries.    This 
was  the  condition  of  both  armies,  yet  very  hot  and  eager,  on  both 
sides  to  fight.     In  the  army  of  the  Boeotians  the  Tliebans  were  in  the 
right  wing,  the  Orchomenians  in  the  left,  and  the  Boeotians  in  the 
main  body.     Those  that  were  called  Heniochi  and  Parfletacse,  that  is, 
the  charioteers,  or  those  that  fought  in  chariots,  were  placed  in  the 
front;  these  were  the  best  soldiers,  in  number  three  hundred.     The 
Athenians  were  forced  to  join  battle  before  they  were  perfectly  drawn 
up  in  battalia;  but  it  was  foqght  with  great  courage  and  resolution 
on  both  sides.    The  Athenian  horse  cliarged  with  that  bravery,  that 
in  the  beginning  they  put  the  enemy's  horse  to  flight.    Then  the  foot 
engaged,  and  that  part  of  tlie  Athenian  army  that  opposed  the  The- 


478  DiODoaus  sicutuf..  fitmk  XiJL 


bans,  by  the  violence  of  the  enemy's  ehai^,  were  quite  brak^  19 
pieces  and  routed :  but  the  rest  of  the  Athenians  chased  all  ikft  Otblf 
Bceotians^  and  pursued  them  a  bug  vay  with  a  great  slaugliccr.  O9 
the  other  side  the  Thebans  (bebg  strong-bodied  men)  1^  tht  qImw 
of  their  enemies,  and  fell  upon  the  other  pursuers,  hewed  tliap4lo«% 
dispersed,  and  utterly  rooted  jthem;  and  thus  the  TbebaM  )ilgU|f 
advanced  their  reputation  by  tlus  signal  victory.  As  for  thgAfhywiMW^ 
some  of  them  fled  to  Oropus,  others  to  Delium ;  some  made  to  tbeir 
ships,  and  the  rest  fled  any  way,  as  their  lot  and  fortune  ledtbeBy  till 
night  put  an  end  to  the  pursuit.  There  were  not  above  five  iuuiArii) 
of  the  Boeotians  killed,  but  many  more  of  the  Athenians,  and  if  iugk| 
had  not  come  on,  most  of  them  had  beeii  cut  off;  but  that  sved 
them,  and  gave  a  check  to  the  fury  q(  the  coiiqueron.  Yet  Ae 
number  of  the  slain  was  so  great,  that  wjtn  the  price  of  the  spofla 
the  Thebans  built  a  great  walk  or  gallery  in  the  forum,  and  adorned 
it  with  many  statues  of  brass;  and  even  covered  over  the  tro^iifa 
with  brass,  and  the  public  buildings  in  the  market  place,  with  the 
arms  and  shields  of  their  enemies.  And  with  the  riches  got  in  thi^ 
$ght  they  set  up  sports  and  shews  at  Delium. 

After  this  victory,  the  Boeotians  assaulted  Delium  with  that  fiujr^ 
that  the  greater  part  of  the  garrison  were  killed  in  de&nding  thf 
place.  Two  hundred  only  were  taken,  the  rest  escaped  to  their 
ships,  and  with  the  other  inhabitants  came  to  Athens.  Into  tliit 
disaster  fell  the  Athenians  by  tbeir  crafty  designs  against  the  Jto* 
otians. 

In  Asia,  Xerxes  the  Persian  king  died,  after  lie  had  reigned  one 
year,  some  say  only  two  months :  to  him  succeeded  Sogdianos  for  tiio 
space  only  of  seven  months,  who  being  killed,  Darius  enjoyed  the 
kingdom  for  nineteen*  years.  With  this  year  Antk>chua  of  Syracuse^ 
the  noble  writer  of  the  affairs  of  Sicily,  ends  his  history^,  begimxiog  a| 
king  Cocalus,  and  consisting  of  nine  books. 

When  Amyntas  was  chief  magistra,te  of  Athens,  Caius  Papirjosaod 
Lucius  Julius  were  Roman  consuls.  In  their  time  the  Sciooeaaa 
now  slighting  the  Athenians,  by  reason  of  the  late  defeat  given  tlien, 
made  a  defection  to  the  Lacedemonians,  and  gave  up  their  eity  tat» 
the  protection  of  Brasidas,  then  general  of  the  army  in  Thrace :  and 
those  who  escaped  out  of  Lesbos,  after  the  taking  of  Mltylene  by  the 
Athenians,  who  were  no  small  number,  some  time  befoice  contriving 
how  to  return  into  their  country,  joined  together,  and  possessed 
themselves  of  Antandros;  from  whence,  taking  their  opportunity^ 
they  issued  forth,  and  set  upon  the  garrison  at  Mitylene:  at  which 
the  Athenians  being  incensed,  command  was  given  to  Aristides  and 
Symmachus,  to  lead  the  army  agajpst  them ;  who  having  passed  over 


the  forces  into  Ltisbos,  after  some  fr  w  iMaults,  took  Ant«nd#09)  nnd 
put  ptn  of  the  etiles  to  the  8WonI>  aiKf  expelled  th^  rest  otit  of  the 
eify :  aod  after  they  had  strengthened  the  i^ee  with  a  garrhoii,  they 
departed  from  Lesbos.  After  tins,  Latnachos,  with  teti  ships  Hoder 
his  commaDd.  sailed  for  Pontus,  and  lay  with  his  fleet  at  Heraeleay 
Atid  near  the  river  Cacheta  lost  all  his  ships:  for  abandenee  of  nim 
folliog,  the  rain,  by  the  violence  of  the  stream,  dashed  in  pieces  all 
the  vessels  against  the  tocks  lying  opon  the  shore.  Herenpoo  the 
Athenhitn  made  a  truce  with  the  Laeedieraonians  for  tk  year,  upon 
these  conditions,  that  all  that  was  thett  under  the  power  and  goveni-« 
ttient  of  each  other,  should  so  remain  on  both  sides :  and  after  several 
debates  and  consultations,  it  was  judged  to  be  the  wisest  course  to  put 
an  end  to  the  war,  and  those  destructive  contentions  betweeb  theoH* 
selves  for  ever  after.  Tliat  which  chiefly  tnored  the  Laoedttnioniafis 
Was  the  earnest  desire  they  had  to  release  those  vrtio  were  tslken  in  the 
Spbacteriflfe  islands.  Thus  far  the  truce  went  oh ;  but  they  ooukl  not 
i^ree  concerning  Scione,  though  ril  oAier  things  were  eoostoted  so 
on  both  sides.  The  contention  was  so  h6t,  that  all  ftirther  overtuMS 
of  peace  were  at  an  end^  and  the  war  was  still  canned  on  upou  die 
account  of  Scione* 

About  this  time  the  city  of  Menda  fdl  off  to  the  LseedfMnonians^ 
which  caused  a  greater  heat  and  resolution  for  the  keeping  of  Scione. 
To  this  end  Brasidas  removed  all  the  women  and  children,  and  their 
best  goods,  out  of  Scione  and  Menda,  and  put  strong  garrisoAs  into 
them.  Tlie  Athenians  were  so  enraged  at  this,  that  they  made  a 
decree  to  pot  all  the  inhabitants  of  Scione  to  the  sword,  whenever 
they  took  the  city. 

To  that  end  they  sent  Nicias  and  Nicostratus  with  fifty  sail  against 
them :  they  first  set  upon  Menda,  which  they  took  by  the  treachery 
of  some  within :  then  they  besieged  Scione,  compassing  it  round 
With  a  wall,  and  pressed  upon  It  with  continual  assaults.  But  the 
garrison  in  Scione  being  very  strong,  and  well  provided  with  all 
things  necessary,  easily  defended  themselves,  and  from  the  top  of  the 
walls  greatly  galled  the  besiegers.  And  these  were  the  things  done 
this  vear. 

The  year  following,  Alceus  governing  at  Athens,  and  Opicter 
Lucretius  and  Lucius  Sergius  Pideniates*  Roman  consuls,  the  Athe- 
nians cast  the  Detians  out  of  the  island,  and  took  the  city  into  their 
own  hands,  because  they  kept  secret  correspondence  (as  they  alledged) 
with  the  Lacedaemonians.  Being  thus  expulsed,  Pharnaces,  the  Per- 
sian lord  lieutenant,  gave  them  the  city  of  Adramyttium  to  inhabit. 
The  Athenians  at  the  same  time  sent  forth  Cleon,  with  a  great  body  of 

*  Fidcnas. 


480  DiODORUS  sicuLUs.  Book  X£K 

foot  uDto  the  coasts  ofThrace,  who  arriviDg  at  Scione,  shipped  part 
of  them  that  lay  before  the  towu^  aud  sailed  with  them  to  Tcmme. 
For  he  had  intelligence  that  Brasidas  was  gone  from  those  parts^  and 
had  left  but  few  soldiers  at  Torone;  to  which  place,  he  approached 
as  close  as  he  could,  and  besieged  it  both  by  sea  and  land;  at  length 
he  took  it  by  storm,  and  made  the  women  and  children  captives;  the 
soldiers  he  bound  in  chains,  and  sent  them  to  Athens;  having  lefit  at 
Torone  a  small  garrison,  he  marched  with  the  rest  of  his  forces  to  the 
river  Strymon  in  Thrace,  and  thence  to  the  city  of  Scione,  (which  ii 
distant  thirty  stages  from  the  city  of  Amphipolis),  which  he  fiercelj 
assaulted*    But  here  having  intelligence  that  Brasidas  was  encamped 
with  his  army  at  Amphipolis,  he  made  against  him  with  a  swift  mareb, 
who  being  informed  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  set  forth  in  batr 
talia  to  meet  the  Athenians;  whereupon  they  presently  joined  battle^ 
and  the  victory  continued  very  doubtful  for  some  time,  both  udet 
behaving  themselves  bravely:  in  the  mean  time  tiie  generals  fought 
with  that  resolution,  as  if  each  would  gain  the  victory  with  his  own 
hands,  and  the  officers  themselves,  with  undaunted  courage  roshed 
into  the  heat  of  the  battle,  insomuch  as  many  brave  men  on  both  sides 
breathed  their  last :  at  length  Brasidas  fell  in  the  bed  of  honour^  a- 
mongst  heaps  of  his  enemies,  slain  by  his  own  hand.    Cleon  likewise 
was  slain  in  the  thickest  of  the  combatants ;  and  now  both  armies  were 
at  a  stand,  and  in  a  consternation  at  the  loss  of  their  generals;  bat  at 
length  the  Lacedemonians  got  the  day,  and  set  up  a  trophy:  and  the 
Athenians  upon  a  truce  made,  buried  their  dead,  and  sailed  back  to 
Athens.    When  some  who  returned  to  Lacedoemon  gave  an  accoont 
of  the  victory  and  death  of  Brasidas,  it  is  reported  tliat  his  mother 
asked  how  he  behaved  himself  in  the  battle;  to  whom  answer  was 

made ^Tliat  he  went  beyond  all  the  Lacedemonians.    Upon  wbidi 

she  replied Her  son  Brasidas  was  an  honest  and  good  man,  but  much 

inferior  to  many  other  Spartans  in  valour.  What  she  said  being  ncMScd 
through  the  city,  the  £phori  decreed  her  public  honours,  because  she 
preferred  the  glory  of  her  country,  before  the  particular  praise  of  her 
son.  After  this  battle,  the  Athenians  determined  to  make  peace  with 
the  Lacedaemonians  for  fifty  years,  and  did  so  upon  these  couditioos.. 
That  the  prisoners  on  both  sides  should  be  discharged,  and  that  the 
cities  taken  in  the  war  should  be  restored :  and  so  the  Peloponnestan 
war,  that  had  now  continued  ten  years,  was  thus  ended  at  this  time. 


Cftcp.  niL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  481 

'  '  -  .    -         ■  -g 


CHAR  VIIL 

'tJie  continuance  of  the  Peloponnesian  ti>ar.  The  war  by  the  Ro-^ 
.  mans  against  the  Ftdenates^  for  putting  t/ieir  ambassadors  to 
death.  The  quarrels  between  the  Egesteans  and  the  Selinuntines 
in  Sicily.  The  expedition  of  the  Athenians  against  Sicily, 
under  Nicias,  being  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  Peltynmnesian 
war. 

ARISTON  was  archoD  at  Athens,  when  the  Romans  committed  tlie 
consulship  to  Titus  Quintius  and  Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus.  The  Pe-» 
loponnesian  war  was  scarcely  ended,  when  new  commotions  and 

dissentions  broke  out  afresh,  occasioned  as  follows ^The  Athenians 

and  Spartans,  with  the  common  consent  of  all  their  confederates^  had 
entered  into  terms  of  truce  and  peace :  but  in  the  mean  time  they 
privately  confederated  in  a  league  offensive  and  defensive,  without 
taking  in  the  cities  that  had  sided  with  either  party;  which  raised  a 
suspicion  as  if  there  was  a  design  laid  by  this  secret  association^  to 
enslave  all  Greece;  and  therefore  the  chiefest  cities  in  Greece  sent 
one  to  another,  and  entered  into  mutual  leagues  to  join  together 
against  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians.    The  most  potent  Gre- 
cian cities  in  this  confederacy  were  four,  Argus,  Thebes,  Corinth, 
and  Elis.    And  indeed  there  was  some  reason  to  suspect  these  two 
cities  had  some  design  against  Greece;   for  in  the  articles  of  the 
league,  there  was  a  clause  subjoined,  that  it  should,  be  lawful  for 
the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians,  at  any  time  when  they  thought 
fit,  either  to  add  to,  or  take  any  thing  from  that  which  was  before 
solemnly  agreed  to.    Besides,  the  Athenians  had  created  ten  magis- 
trates, who  were  invested  with  full  power  to  manage  all  atifuirs 
relating  to  the  city:  and  whereas  the  Lacedaemonians  did  the  same 
thing,  it  was  very  evident  at  what  the  insatiable  ambition  of  the  two 
cities  pointed.     Many  of  the  cities,  therefore,  now  resolved  to  defend 
the  common  liberty,  and  to  that  end,  considering  the  power  of  Athens 
to  be  low,  by  their  late  overthrow  at  Delium,  and  the  honour  and 
glory  of  Sparta  much  diminished  upon  the  account  of  so  many  cap- 
tives of  the  noblest  of  their  citizens  taken  in  the  Sphacteriie  islands, 
they  conspired  against  them,  and  committed  the  sovereign  power  and 
management  of  the  war  to  the  city  of  Argos.     For  the  antient  noble 
actions  done  by  that  city,  challenged,  above  ail  others,  that  preemi- 
nence and  prerogative;  ior  long  before,  and  to  the  vory  time  of  the 
Vol.1.  No.  37.  QOa 


482  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  Sa6kXtt4 

migration  of  the  Heiaclidae  into  Peloponnesus,  the^preatest  kings  of 
Greece  came  out  of  Argos;  and  besides,  by  the  advantage  of  a  Icmg 
peace,  it  was  grown  very  rich  and  populous, 

Argos  now  concluding  that  the  chief  command  wils  lodged  in 
themselves,  picked  out  a  thousand  of  the  strongest  young  men^  and 
best  ability  for  estates,  whom  they  freed  from  all  public  affitirs,  and 
maintained  at  the  common  charge.  These  were  continually,  by  daily 
exercise,  to  inure  themselves  to  martial  discipline:  and  by  the  help 
of  a  plentiful  allowance,  and  constant  care  and  diligence,  in  a  shert 
time  they  became  most  expert  soldiers.  But  when  the  Lscedmno- 
nians  perceived  all  Peloponnesus  had  conspired  against  them,  tod 
foreseeing  the  greatness  and  danger  of  the  war,  they  made  preparatioii 
for  defence  of  the  government,  as  far  as  was  possible.  To  thateod^ 
in  the  first  place^  they  manumitted  a  thousand  of  the  Helots  that  were 
with  Brasidas :  and  afterwards  they  restored  the  citizens  to  their  foraier 
privileges,  who  had  been  taken  prisoners  in  the  SphacteriflBy  whom 
they  had  before  degraded  by  reason  of  the  disgrace  they  had  broaghf 
upon  their  country.  Moreover,  they  brought  In  many  who  had  far^ 
merly  done  great  service  in  the  wars,  by  crying  them  up,  aod  fiseding 
them  by  rewards,  to  encourage  them  to  shew  the  like  instances  of 
their  valour  in  the  hazards  of  the  approaching  war.  They  carried 
themselves  likewise  with  more  kindness  towards  their  confedeniteSy 
and  strove  to  gain  and  win,  by  courtesy  and  civility,  those  they  had 
disobliged  and  alienated  from  them.  But  the  Athenians  went  qiute 
a  contrary  way;  for  conceiving  that  those  whom  they  suspected  fobe 
false,  were  to  be  discouraged  by  fear  of  punishment,  they  pot  them 
in  mind  of  that  severe  revenge  taken  in  the  business  of  Sdonc*;  for 
there,  when  the  city  was  taken,  they  put  all  the  men  to  the  sword,  and 
carried  away  all  the  women  and  children  as  captives,  and  planted  the 
island  with  the  Plaieans  who  were  banished  their  country  for  their 
faithftilness  to  the  Athenians. 

Ahout  the  same  time  theCampaniansin  Italy  marched  against  Coma 
with  a  great  army,  and  routed  and  destroyed  most  of  the  Cnmeans. 
Then  th^y  besieged  the  city,  and  after  several  assaults  at  length  toolc 
it  by  fv»rcc,  atid  having  plundered  it,  and  carried  away  all  the  inha- 
hiiants  wlio  were  left  as  slaves,  they  repeopled  it  with  colonies  sent 
out  of  their  own  city. 

The  chit  I  of  tlic  senate  at  Athens  was  Aristophilus,  Locius  Qutn 
tius  and  Aulus  Sempronius  Roman  consuls,  when  they  of  £lis  eelc 
brated  the  niiietieth  olympiad,  in  which  [liperbius  theSyracusan  was 
crowned  with  victory.     And  at  tlmt  time  the  Athenians,  by  com- 
mand of  the  oracle,  restored  the  island  of  Delos  to  the  Delians;  and 

*  ScioDc  19  an  uilttud  in  the  ^gean  tea.    There  is  auother  Scione  im  Timce* 


Chap.  PlII.  mODORUS  8ICULU8.  483 

••        •  I  ■  ■    ■  -       '         '  II 

they  that  inhabited  Adramyttium  in  DeUum^  returned  to  their  own 
country.  And  now  because  Pylos  was  not  given  up,  and  restored  to 
the  Lacedaemonians,  the  war  began  to  break  out  afresh  between  the 
two  cities,  which  being  understood  by  them  of  Argos,  they  entered 
into  league  with  the  Athenians.  And  the  breach  growing  wider  and 
wider,  the  Lacedemonians  persuaded  the  Corinthians,  that  leaving 
their  association  with  the  confederate  cities,  they  would  join  with 
them.  In  this  condition  and  confusion  of  aflairs  stood  Pelopon- 
nesus. 

As  to  other  places  out  of  the  bounds  of  Peloponnesus,  the  ^neans, 
Dolopians,  and  M cleans,  confederated  together,  and  set  upon  He- 
raclea  in  Trachinia.  The  Heracleans  marched  against  them  with 
great  forces,  wherewith  they  bravely  fought  the  enemy,  but  were  to- 
tally routed,  with  the  loss  of  a  great  part  ^f  their  army  >  the  rest  by 
flight  got  within  their  walls.  Then  they  sent  to  the  Boeotians  for 
aid,  who  sent  them  a  thousand  heavy-armed  men  from  Thebes;  by 
which  assistance  they  repelled  their  enemies.  In  the  mean  time,  th^ 
Olynthians  made  an  expedition  against  the  city  Myciberna,  then  a 
garrison  of  the  Athenians,  and  having  forced  out  the  guards  there, 

possessed  themselves  of  the  place. 

Archias  was  archon  of  Athens,  and  Lucius  PajMrius  Mugillanus 

and  Caius  Servilius  Structus  were  consuls  ai  Rome,  when  the  Ar** 
g'.ves  proclaimed  war  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  because  they  ne** 
glected  to  offer  the  usual  frankincense  to  Apollo  Pythius.  At  the 
came  time  Alcibiades  the  Athenian  general  came  with  his  army  into 
the  country  of  Argos,  by  whom  the  Argives  being  forced,  invaded 
Troezene,  whicii  was  confederated  with  Sparta,  and  after  they  had 
wasted  and  spoiled  the  country,  and  burnt  many  of  their  towns,  at 
length  they  returned.  The  Lacedaemonians  being  greatly  enraged 
at  the  injuries  done  against  all  law  and  justice  to  them  of  Trcezene, 
denounce  war  against  Argos;  in  prosecution  whereof,  they  raised  an 
army,  and  thereof  made  Agis  their  king  general,  who  marched  witl\ 
all  speed  against  the  Argives,  and  after  he  had  made  spoil  and  havoc 
in  the  country,  made  up  close  to  the  city,  and  offered  them  battle. 
Hereupon  the  Argives  being  joined  by  three  thousand  of  the  Cleans, 
and  as  many  of  the  Mantineans,  inarched  out  of  the  city;^  and  just 
as  they  were  ready  to  join  battle,  the  generals  on  both  sides  by  their 
ambassadors,  made  a  truce  for  four  months;  so  both  armies  returned 
without  doing  any  thing:  but  both  thecities  were  incensed  at  the  au- 
thors of  the  truce,  insomuch  as  those  of  Argos  cast  stones  at  the  of- 
ficers of  the  army,  and  had  ordered  them  all  to  be  put  to  death,  which 
had  been  executed  it  by  great  intercession  their  lives  had  not  been 


484  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  HndfcXZf. 


spared ;  but  their  goods  were  confiscated^  and  their  houses  pulled 
down. 

The  I^cedaemonians  also  intended  to  have  put  Agis  to  death;  Imt 
upon  Ills  promise  to  wipe  off*  the  stain  of  the  late  miscarriage  by  hb 
future  services,  with  much  ado  lie  was  spared.  However^  for  the 
future,  they  joined  with  him  ten  persons,  approved  far  their  wisdom 
and  prudence,  without  whose  advice  he  was  strictly  charged  not  to 
do  any  thing  for  the  time  to  come. 

After  this,  when  the  Athenians  had  sent  forth  a  thousand  well* 
armed  men,  and  two  hundred  horse  by  sea  to  them  of  Argos,  under 
the  command  of  Nichctcs  and  Nichostratus,  to  whom  Alcibiades 
joined  himself,  though  then  in  no  command,  for  the  great  love  and 
kindness  he  bore  towards  the  Matineans  and  Eleans,  the  Argives  in 
a  common  assembly  decreed,  that  notwithstanding  the  former  agree- 
ment, they  should  make  it  their  business  to  carry  on  the  war  with  all 
their  power.  To  that  end  ail  the  officers  encouraged  every  one  their 
own  soldiers;  who  readily  and  heartily  followed  their  leaders,  and 
encamped  out  of  the  walls  of  the  city.  There  it  was  concluded  to 
be  most  advisable  to  begin  first  with  an  expedition  against  Orcho- 
menum  in  Arcadia.  To  that  purpose,  having  advanced  into  Arcadia, 
they  besieged  the  c  ity,  and  wearied  it  out  by  daily  assaults^  and  hav* 
ing  taken  the  town,  they  marched  to  Tegea,  determining  to  force 
that  likewise.  The  Tegeans  desiring  speedy  aid  from  the  Lacedae- 
monians,  they  with  the  strength  of  their  whole  city,  and  of  their 
confederates,  made  for  Mantinea,  conceiving  that  by  besieging  of 
that,  a  stop  would  be  easily  put  to  the  siege  of  Tegea.  But  the 
Mantincans  (being  enforced  by  the  assistance  of  their  confederates) 
marched  out  with  the  youth  of  their  city,  and  had  an  army  in  the 
field  ready  to  oppose  the  Lacedflcmonians.  Presently  hereupon  bat- 
tle was  joined,  and  a  select  band  of  the  Argives,  (consisting  of  a 
thousand  well-discijilined  and  expert  soldiers),  were  the  first  that 
put  the  enemy  to  flight,  and  made  a  great  slaughter  in  the  pursuit. 
]^ut  the  Lacedaemonians  returning  from  the  pursuit  and  slaughterof 
those  they  had  routed  in  another  part  of  the  army,  fell  upon  the  con- 
quering Argives,  and  surrounding  them,  made  no  question  but  to 
cut  them  oil*  every  man :  and  whereas  these  brave  men,  although  far 
inferior  in  number,  prevailed  in  a  great  measure  against  their  ene- 
mies, the  Laced.Tmonian  king,  being  earnest  to  perform  his  promise 
to  the  citizens,  and  to  wipe  off  the  stain  of  his  former  disgrace  by 
some  ^reat  and  remarkable  action,  at  the  head  of  his  army  ran  through 
all  sorts  of  difficulties  in  the  fight,  and  had  killed  them  all  upon  the 
»pot,  il  he  had  not  been  prevented;  for  Pharax,  (one  of  the  ten,  joined 


Chap.  Vlil.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  485 


with  the  king  as  his  council,  a  man  of  great  authority  in  Lacedfismon), 
commanded  the  soldiers  to  open  a  way  for  the  Arcadians,  lest  fight- 
ing with  men  in  a  desperate  condition,  they  came  to  experience  what 
Talour  can  do  when  it  is  driven  to  necessity.  The  king,  restrained 
by  his  command,  a  passage  was  made  for  the  enemy  to  break  through^ 
as  Pharax  had  ordered :  and  in  this  manner  these  thousand  men  got 
ofl^  and  the  Lacedemonians  having  gained  an  eminent  victory,  set 
up  a  trophy,  and  returned  home. 

The  former  year  ended,  Antopha  was  chief  governor  at  Athens,  and 
four  military  tribunes,Caius  Furius,  Quintilius*,  Marcus  Posthumius, 
and  Aulus  Cornelius,  bore  the  office  of  consuls  at  Rome.  At  that 
time  the  Argives  and  Lacedsmonians  had  several  meetings  and 
messages  to  and  fro,  about  entering  into  a  league  one  with  another, 
which  was  effected  accordingly.  Upon  this,  the  Mantineans  (now 
deserted  by  the  garrison  put  in  there  by  the  Argives)  were  forced  to 
eome  under  the  power  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  About  the  same  time 
the  thousand  choice  men  before  spoken  of^  in  the  city  of  Argo8,con* 
spired  to  overthrow  the  democracy,  and  set  up  an  aristocracy  from 
among  themselves:  and  having  R)any  associate  and  abettors  in  this 
affair,  of  the  wealthiest  and  most  courageous  men  of  the  city,  they 
forthwith  seized  upon  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  and  the  heads  and 
chief  of  those  that  were  for  popular  government,  and  cut  their  throats. 
Th/s  rest  being  terrified,  repealed  all  the  antient  laws,  and  began  to 
order  all  affairs  in  the  commonwealth  according  to  the  will  and  plea- 
sure of  these  men :  and  after  they  had  thus  governed  for  the  space  of 
eight  months,  they  were,  by  an  insurrection  of  the  people,  deposed, 
and  the  democracy  restored. 

Another  disturbance  likewise  arose  in  Greece;  for  upon  adifference 
happening  between  the  Phocians  and  the  Locrians,  the  matter  came 
to  a  decision  by  the  sword.  The  Phocians  were  conquerors,  and  killed 
above  a  thousand  of  the  Locrians.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Athenians, 
under  the  command  of  Nicias,  took  two  cities,  Citheraf  and  Nicaea^, 
and  in  Me1us§y  which  was  taken  by  storm,  they  put  all  but  the  women 
and  children  to  the  sword,  and  them  they  made  captives. 

In  Italy  the  Fidenates  put  the  Roman  ambassadors  to  death  upon  a 
light  occasion ;  at  which  base  act  of  injustice  the  people  of  Rome 
were  highly  incensed,  and  decreed  to  revenge  it  by  a  war*  To  this 
end  they  made  Manius  iEmilius  dictator,  and  according  to  the  custom, 
joined  with  him  Aulus  Cornelius,  the  master  of  the  horse.  When 
all  things  were  in  readiness,  he  marched  against  the  Fidenates  with  all 
expedition,  who  drew  out,  and  met  him ;  upon  which  there  was  a  sharp 

*  Titus  Quinctius.  t  Cithera,  in  Peloponnesns. 

t  Nicxa,  a  port  town  im  JVIegan^  §  Mcluf,  in  TbesMly. 


486  DIODORUS  8ICULU.S. 


CBgagementj  aud  so  continued  for  a  long  time;  and  after  many  wcie 
cut  off  on  both  sides,  they  parted  at  length  upon  equal  terms. 

At  this  time  Euphemus  was  chief  magistrate  at  Athens,  and  tii* 
military  tribuues  Lucius  Farius,  Lucius  Quidfctius,  and  Aulus  Sea* 
pronius,  again  executed  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome.  At  tUs  tioie 
the  Lacedflentonians,  enforced  by  the  aid  of  their  confedcrateSy  made 
an  incursion  into  Argia,  and  took  the  small  town  of  Argias,  kiHed  tha 
inhabitants^  and  razed  the  castle*  Then  hearing  that  they  of  Argos 
had  enlarged  their  walls  out  as  far  as  to  the  sea,  they  marched  thither^ 
and  pulled  them  down,  and  returned  home*  The  AiiieDians  made 
Alcibiades  general,  who,  with  twenty  ships  under  bis  command^  was 
ordered  to  do  the  utmost  he  could  to  restore  the  Argives  to  their  for« 
mer  government ;  for  there  was  such  confusion  and  disorder  ther^ 
that  great  multitudes  of  them  were  for  advancing  the  aristocracy. 
Alcibiades,  therefore,  as  soon  as  he  came  to  Argos,  called  an  assemUj 
of  those  who  were  for  tlic  popular  government,  and  caused  those  who 
seemed  to  side  with  the  Lacedsemonians  to  be  banished  out  of  the 
city,  and  having  settled  the  democracy,  returned  to  Athens.  At 
tlic  end  of  the  year,  the  LaccdsBmonians  invaded  Argia  with  agresi 
army,  and  making  waste  and  spoil  in  many  pUces  of  the  countij, 
placed  the  exiles  of  Argos  in  Ornca,  and  tortified  and  walled  the 
place  round,  in  regard  it  lay  in  Argia;  aud  having  put  in  there  a 
strong  garrison,  they  ordered  them  to  waste  the  country  of  Argos 
with  continual  excursions.  When  the  Lacedaemonians  were  marched 
back,  the  Athenians  sent  forty  ships,  and  twelve  hundred  soldiers,  to 
the  assistance  of  the  Argives.  With  tins  aid  they  marched  against 
Ornea,  and  took  it  by  storm,  and  putting  part  of  the  garrison,  and 
the  exiles,  to  the  sword,  they  expelled  the  rest  out  of  the  city.  And 
these  were  the  things  done  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  Pelopoonesian 
war. 

In  the  sixteenth  year,  when  Aristomnestes  was  archon  at  Athens^ 
and  Titus  Claudius  Spurius,  Nautius  Lucius  Sergius,  and  Sextus 
Julius,  military  tribunes,  executed  the  office  of  consuls  at  Rome,  the 
ninety-first  olympiad  was  celebrated  at  Elis,  wherein  Exaneus  of 
Agrigentum  was  victor.  At  that  time  the  Byzantines  and  Clialcidi- 
cans  joining  with  the  Thracians,  passed  over  with  a  great  army  into 
Bithynia,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country;  and  after  they  had  taken 
i>cvcral  small  towns  by  force,  they  executed  most  horrid  cruelties;  for, 
alter  they  had  gathered  together  a  great  multitude  of  prisoners,  of 
men,  women,  and  children,  they  cut  all  their  throats. 

About  the  same  time  the  Egesteans  aud  Selinuntines  in  Sicily  went 
to  blows,  upon  the  dlHerences  between  them  concerning  the  bounds 
of  their  country.    For  though  the  river  divided  the  territories  of  the 


iChap.  Fill.  DIODORUS  SlCULVS*  4? 7 

several  cities  that  were  at  variance,  yet  the  SeKttuntines  passed  over  ta 
rtie  other  side,  and  seized  upon  the  lands  lying  next  tottie  river;  and 
encroaching  still  by  little  and  little,  thejr  gained  the  ne^ct  to  them, 
and  laughed  and  jeered  at  those  they  thus  abused.  Provoked  witk 
these  indignities,  the  Egesteans  at  first  thouglit  to  win  them  by  (air 
words,  and  dissuaded  them  all  they  could  from  seizing  other  nien^s 
estates;  but  when  they  saw  they  turned  a  deaf  ear,  the  proprietors 
rose  «q>  in  arms,  and  drove  them  out  of  the  country,  and  so  reeontioued 
their  anciefit  possessions.  Upon  this,  a  great  fire  of  strife  and  cmi- 
tention  was  kindled,  and  armies  were  raised  on  both  sides,  to  decide 
tlie  eoBtroversy  by  the  sword.  Both  armies  being  drawn  into  the  fields 
a  sharp  battle  was  fought,  in  which  the  Selintllntines  got  the  day,  and 
killed  a  great  number  of  the  Egesteans. 

The  power  of  the  Egesteans  being  very  much  weakened  by  this 
8laughter,and  so  unable  of  themselves  to  oppose  their  enemy,  they  first 
sought  aid  and  assistance  from  them  of  Agrigentum  and  Syracuset 
but  these  failing  them,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  Carthage  for  reKef; 
and  they  likewise  refused.  Upon  which  they  sought  to  get  confede-- 
rates  beyond  the  seas ;  and  this  proved  successful;  for  whereas  the 
Leontiiies  had  been  driven  both  out  of  their  city  and  country  by  the 
Syracusans,  those  that  were  remaining  of  these  exiles  consulted  toge- 
ther, and  determiaed  to  enter  into  a  league  with  the  Athenians,  from 
whom  they  were  descended.  The  matter  was  debated  and  decreed 
in  a  common  assembly  of  all  tiieir  allies,  that  ambassadors  should  be 
sent  to  Athens,  to  desire  their  assistance  for  the  relief  of  the  oppressed 
cities,  and  withal  io  promise  that  they  would  do  their  utmost  endea- 
vour to  serve  the  Athenians  in  all  their  concerns  in  Sicily. 

When  the  ambassadors  came  to  Athens,  the  Leontines  pleaded 
their  kindred  and  antient  alliances;  but  the  Egesteans  promised  a 
great  sum  of  money  for  the  carrying  on  the  war,  and  with  all  their 
power  to  oppose  ihe  Syracusans.  Upon  this  the  Athenians  thought 
tit  first  to  send  some  prudent  citizens  to  Sicily,  better  to  understand 
the  state  and  condition  both  of  the  island  and  of  the  Egesteans. 
When  they  came  to  Egesla,  the  Egesteans,  with  great  ostentation 
and  vanity,  shewed  them  a  vast  mass  of  treasure,  in  part  their  own, 
and  part  borrowed.  When  tlie  ambassadors  were  returned,  and  the 
great  riches  of  the  Egesteans  was  noised  abroad,  an  assembly  of  the 
people  was  called,  where  the  war  to  be  made  in  Sicily  was  proposed, 
and  where  Nicias  the  son  of  Niccratus,  a  man  of  great  account 
amongst  the  people,  argued  with  great  prudence  against  the  war, 
alleging  it  impossible  hotli  to  contend  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  aitd 
likewise  to  send  so  great  a  force  as  they  must  needs  do,  into  parts 
beyond  the  seas;  and  alleircd;  that  wiicn  tiiey  were  not  able  hitherto 


488  DIODORUS  SICULU8.  Bodk  Xlt. 

to  subdue  Greece,  it  was  iu  vaia  to  think  to  bring  the  greatest  island 
of  the  world  under  their  power.   He  added,  moreover,  when  Carthagej 
that  was  of  so  large  an  empire,  and  had  often  attempted  Sicily,  was 
not  able  to  conquer  it,  could  they  suppose  that  the  Athenians,  who 
were  far  inferior  in  strength  and  power,  could  subdue  an  island  the 
most  potent  in  arms  of  all  others  in  the  world?  After  he  had  spoken 
this  and  much  more,  suitable  to  the  present  occasion,  Alcibiades,  one 
of  the  chief  of  the  nobility  of  Athens,  persuaded  the  people  to  prose- 
cute the  war.    This  man  was  the  most  eloquent  speaker  of  all  amongst 
the  citizens,  and  for  the  nobleness  of  his  birth,  and  greatness  of  hit 
estate,  and  skill  in  martial  aflairs,  far  exceeded  the  rest.    The  people, 
upon  his  persuasion,  without  delay  rigged  out  a  fleet  of  thirty  sail 
from  their  confederates,  and  an  hundred  of  their  own.     In  thcM, 
completely  furnished  with  all  provisions  and  necessaries,  they  put 
five  thousand  men  well  armed,  and  appointed  three  generals,  Alci- 
biades, Nicias,  and  Lamachus,  for  this  expedition;  and  thus  were  the 
Athenians  then  employed.    And  now  being  come  to  the  war  between 
the  Athenians  and  Syracusans,  according  to  our  designed  method  at 
first,  we  shall  pursue  the  things  that  followed,  in  the  next  book. . 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


BOOK  Xill. 


PREFACE. 


If  we  should  imitate  otliers  in  the  compiling  of  their  histnries,  we 
shtiuld  first  In  the  preface  of  every  book,  uliscrve  some  things  perti- 
nent to  the  occasion  and  subject  In  liam!,  unci  tbcn  descend  to  the 
continuation  of  our  discourse,  ujinn  the  uciions  and  alTairH  ibHl  follow 
Dentin  order:  for  by  some  small  interniissiun  From  writing,  we  gain 
a  breathing  fit;  the  fruit  and  adv»iniage  by  prefaces.  But  inasmuch 
as  we  have  promised  to  endeavour  in  a  few  books,  not  only  to  relKte 
things  that  have  been  done,  bat  likewise  to  comprehend  in  tliat  rela- 
tion, the  lime  of  above  eleven  hundred  years,  it  is  necessary  lo  avoid 
prefaces,  and  come  presently  lo  the  matters  in  hand.  Only  premising 
this  to  inform  the  reader,  that  in  the  six  formti;  books  are  contained 
the  things  done  in  all  parts  of  ilie  world,  from  the  Trojan  war  to  the 
time  the  Athenians  decreed  the  war  against  the  Syracusans,  to  which* 
from  the  destruction  of  Troy,  is  seven  hundred  and  threescore  years : 
and  that  we  shall  begin  this  book  with  that  expedition  against  the 
Syracusans,  and  end  it  at  tlie  beginning  of  the  aecond  Carthaginian 
war  against  Diooyiius  the  tyrant  of  Syracuse. 


490  DionoRus  sicuLus.  BookXnim 


CHAP.  I. 

The  Athenian  fleet  rigged  out  for  Sicily,    jtlcibiades  aecmnd^ 

flies;  is  condemned;  goes  out  qf  Italy  to  Sparta.     The  «S^r»* 

cusans  send  for  aid  to  Laced^gnum.     Gylippus  is  sent  to  them* 

The  battle  at  Syracuse, 


WHEN  Cabriasbore  the  office  of  arclion  at  Athens,  adcI  thcRotti 
invested  Lucius  Sergius,  Marcus  Servilius,  and  Marcus  P^irioii 
three  military  tribunes,  with  consular  dignity,  the  Athenians  having 
decreed  war  against  the  Syracusans,  rigged  out  a  fleet,  raised  vaoacff 
and  prepared  with  great  diligence  all  other  things  necessary  for  the 
expedition.  To  this  end  they  commissioned  three  generals,  Alci« 
biades.  Nicies,  andLamachus,  to  whom  they  committed  the  manage- 
ment  of  the  whole  war.  The  richer  sort,  to  ingratiate  themselves 
with  the  people,  some  of  them  supplied  the  fleet  with  Bxvas,  otlieis 
promised  to  advance  money  towards  victualling  the  navy,  and  pro- 
viding pay  for  the  soldiers.  Many,  likewise,  of  the  people,  hoik 
citizens  and  strangers,  freely  offered  themselves  to  the  generals,  tobe 
listed  and  enrolled :  and  all  were  so  confident,  that  they  were  ready 
to  divide  the  country  of  Sicily  amongst  themselves  by  lot. 

And  now  the  navy  was  ready  to  set  sail;  when  on  a  sudden  in  one 
night,  all  the  statues  of  the  goddess  Minerva  through  the  city,  (which 
were  very  many)  had  their  heads  struck  off.     The  populace  conceived 
this  not  to  be  done  by  any  of  the  meaner  sort,  but  by  some  inautho- 
rity,  with  a  design  to  destroy  the  democracy,  and  therefore  they  were 
highly  incensed  at  the  wickedness  of  the  fact,  and  promised  great 
rewards  to  find  out  the  authors.     In  the  mean  time,  one  of  the  citi- 
zens came  to  the  senate,  and  told  them,  that  in  the  new  moon  about 
midnight,  he  saw  several  persons  go  into  the  house  of  a  foreigoer, 
amongst  whom  Alcil)iadcs  was  one :  and  when  the  senate  asked  biin 
how  he  could  know  him  at  such  a  time  of  the  night  ?  he  answered, 
he  discerned  him  by  the  light  of  the  moon;  by  which  contradictioa 
he  detected  his  own  falscluwd :  and  never  after  could  the  least  diico* 
ver}'  be  made  of  that  fact  by  any  person  whatsoever. 

However,  notwithstanding  this  accident,  an  hundred  and  fbrtjf 
gallics  were  rigged  out,  besides  ships  of  burden  and  other  ships,  for 
transporting  of  horses,  provisions,  and  other  necessaries,  whereof 
there  was  a  very  great  number.  In  this  expedition  there  went  forth 
with  them  above  seven  thousand  men  at  arms,  and  sliugers,  and 


Chap.  I.  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  49I 

horsemen,  sent  from  their  confederates^  besides  those  belonging  to 
their  fleet. 

During  this  time  the  officers  had  a  private  consultation  with  the 
senate,  concerning  the  administration  of  affiiirs  in  Sicily,  in  case  they 
should  conquer  the  island,  where  at  length  it  was  determined,  that 
•they  of  Selinus  and  Syracuse  should  be  carried  away  as  captives 
and  slaves,  and  that  the  rest  should  have  only  a  yearly  tribute  imposed 
upon  them.  The  next  day  the  offipers,  with  the  army,  marched  dowa 
into  the  Plrseum'^,  and  were  followed  with  a  great  multitude,  both 
of  citizens  and  strangers,  throughout  the  whole  city,  every  one  mak* 
ing  it  his  business  to  take  leave  of  his  friend  or  relation.  The 
ships  lay  on  every  side  of  the  harbour,  with  their  fore-decks  adorned 
with  flags  and  streamers  erect,  and  shining  with  the  splendour  of  the 
arms.  The  shore  round  the  harbour  was  filled  with  altars  of  incense, 
and  silver  bowls,  out  of  which  were  poured  into  golden  cups,  drink- 
offerings  to  the  gods,  by  tnose  who  worshipped  the  deity,  and  earnestly 
prayed  for  ttie  happy  success  of  this  expedition. 

At  length  they  set  sail  from  the  Pyrieum,  and  sailing  round  the 
coasts  of  Peloponnesus,  arrived  at  Corcyraf:  for  here  they  were 
commanded  to  remain  till  they  were  joined  by  some  others  of  their 
neighbouring  confederates.  Being  all  come  up  to  them,  passing 
through  the  Ionian  sea,  they  came  to  the  promontory  of  Japygia^: 
hence  sailing  along  the  coasts  of  Italy,  they  were  refused  by  the 
Tarentiiies;  and  passing  by  them  likewise  of  Metapontum  and 
Heraclea,  they  came  to  the  Thurians,  by  whom  they  were  courteously 
received.  Sailing  from  thence,  they  made  for  Crotona,  and  there 
bought  some  provisions;  and  sailing  by  the  temple  of  Juno  Lacinia, 
passed  under  the  promontory  called  Dioscurias:  after  this,  leaving 
Tesasletius  (as  it  is  called)  and  Locris  behind  them,  they  anchored 
hear  Rhegiuni,  and  invited  the  Khegians  to  join  with  them;  who 
answered  that  they  must  first  advise  with  the  other  Italians. 

As  soon  as  the  Syracusans  heard  that  the  Athenians  were  within 
tlieir  seas,  they  made  tliree  generals,  invested  with  absolute  power, 
Hermociates,  Sicanus,  and  Heraclides,  who  raised  soldiers,>and  sent 
messengers  through  all  the  cities  of  Sicily,  to  press  theni  with  all 
earnestness  to  join  with  them  in  arms  for  the  common  safety  of  their 
country;  for  that  the  Athenians,  under  colour  of  a  war  against  the 
Syracusans,  had  no  other  design  but  to  subdue  the  whole  island.  To 
which  the  Agrigentines  and  Naxians  answered,  that  they  were  re« 
solved  to  abide  firm  in  their  league  with  the  Athenians.     The  Cama- 

*  The  port  of  Athens,  fire  iuil«s  from  Athens,  joined  to  it  with  a  long^wtU.     Plin.. 
Kat.  Hist.  lib.  t,  c.  85. 

t  Now  Corfu,  t  ^  pramoDtory  of  lUly, 


\ 


4Q2  DTODORUS  STCULUS.  JBook  XUL 

_       .  I 

riniaus  and  Messaiiiaiis  declared  they  were  for  peace,  and  refiMcdt0 
return  any  answer  to  what  was  proposed.  The  Himerians  and  Sdi* 
nuntincs,  with  them  ol  Gela  and  Catana,  promised  their  aaaistance. 
The  cities  ot  the  Siculi*^,  though  they  favoured  the  Syracusaiis,  yet 
desired  lo  he  at  ease;  and  not  knowing  what  tp  resolve^  judged  k 
most  advisable  to  consider  awhile  on  the  business,  that  they  might 
be  better  able  to  discern  what  was  likely  to  be  the  issue  of  so  great 
a  war. 

The  E^esteans  plainly  declaring  that  they  could  not  contribate  to 
the  Athenians  above  thirty  talents,  the  Athenian  generals  accused 
them  of  treachery;  and  setting  sail  from  Rhegium  with  their  whole 
fleet,  arrived  at  Naxos  in  Sicily,  where  they  were  friendly  and  cour- 
teously received  by  the  citizens ;  and  from  whence  they  made  for 
Catana.  But  they  of  Catana  refused  entrance  to  the  soldiers,  jet 
admitted  the  generals,  and  called  a  common  assembly;  where  die 
Athenian  generals  treated  with  them  concerning  the  entering  into  a 
mutual  league,  offensive  and  defensive;  but  whilst  Alcibiades  was 
making  a  harangue  to  court  the  people,  the  soldiers  broke  through 
a  little  gate  into  the  city,  by  which  means  the  Cataneans  were  forced 
to  join  with  the  Athenians  in  the  war  against  the  Syracusans* 

Whilst  tJKse  things  were  acting  abroad,  they  who  were  enemies  to 
Aleil/mdts  (through  private  peaks  and  grudges)  at  Athens^  took  oc- 
casion, from  the  maiming  and  spoiling  of  the  images,  to  accuse 
him  in  the  conimon  assemblies  of  a  conspiracy  against  the  demo- 
crncy ;  which  <iccusation  was  much  supported  and  furthered  by  what 
had  then  lately  happened  at  Argos:  "for  some  of  the  chief  of  the  ckj 
conspiring  with  others  of  their  dependants,  to  overturn  the  democracy 
in  Argos,  were  all  destroyed  by  the  citizens.  This  attempt  of  inno- 
vation there,  caused  the  accusation  at  Athens  to  be  more  readily 
believed,  and  therefoie  the  people  being  with  all  earnestness  stirred 
up  by  the  orators,  sent  a  ship  from  Salamis  to  Sicily,  to  recal  Alci- 
biades, in  order  to  abide  his  trial. 

As  soon  as  it  arrived  at  Catana,  Alcibiades  was  made  acquainted 
by  the  messengers  what  orders  they  had  from  the  people;  upon  which 
he  (with  those  who  were  accused  with  him)  went  on  ship-board  iato 
his  own  galley,  and,  together  with  that  from  Salamis,  set  sail  froy 
Catana.  As  soon  as  he  arrived  at  Thurtum,  either  througli  coo- 
sciousness  of  the  guilt  of  his  impiety,  or  through  the  fear  of  the 
greatness  of  the  danger,  he  and  all  those  accused  with  him  made 
their  escape.  Those  who  were  on  board  the  Salamian  vessel  made 
great  inquiry  after  Alcibiades;  but  when  he  could  not  be  foondf 

*  The  Siculi  are  those  who  came  out  of  Italy,  and  called  it  Sicily,  which 
Sicaoia,     Siciliaas  is  a  general  name  for  all  Uie  inhabitanCi* 


Chap.  I.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  493 

they  sailed  back  10  Athens,  and  there  gave  an  accouDt  of  what  had 
happened. 

Upon  which  the  Athenians  gave  judgment  of  death  upon  Alcibi- 
ades,  and  all  his  fellow  fugitives,  (their  luunea  being  only  put  np  to 
the  court),  without  heing  further  heard. 

But  Alcibudes  fied  out  of  Italy  to  Sparta,  and  there  persuaded  the 
Lacednniouians  to  iarade  the  Athenians :  but  the  generals  that  re- 
mained in  Sicily  sailed  with  tlieir  forces  to  Egesta,  and  took  Hyccara, 
a  Email  town  of  the  Siculi,  out  of  whose  spoils  they  raised  a  hundred 
talents;  and  having  received  thirty  talents  more  from  the  Egesteans, 
they  saHed  back  to  Catana,  where  having  consulted  how  to  poaaesa 
themselves  of  a  place  near  to  the  chief  port  of  Syracuse,  with  little 
or  no  hazard,  they  sent  thilhera  (rusty  fellow  of  CatBna,.not  suspected 
by  the  Syracusan  officers,  with  orders  to  acquaint  ihtrm  that  some  of 
the  Calaneans  hiyl  plotted  upon  a  sudden  lo  set  upon  ihe  Athenian 
aoldiers  ill  the  night,  when  they  had  laid  aside  their  arms,  and  to  bum 
all  their  shipping  in  their  harbour;  and  that  this  might  be  the  better 
effccted,  they  desired  the  commandcrstoappear  with  their  army,  that 
the  design  might  not  be  defeated.  As  soon  as  the  Catimean  came  lo 
fiynicuse,  he  delivered  his  message.  The  generals  believing  what  he 
s&id,  appointed  a  night  when  they  would  march  otit  with  their  forces, 
aiid  sent  back  the  man  to  Catana.  At  the  night  nppuinted,  the 
Syracusans  led  forth  their  men  towards  Catana;  and  the  Atlicnianx, 
with  great  silence,  made  out  with  their  fleet  to  the  great  port  of 
Syracuse;  and  seizing  upon  Olympius,  and  all  the  places  bordering 
round  about,  they  there  fortified  their  camp.  But  the  Syracusans 
understanding  the  treachery,  returned  with  a  swift  march,  and  set 
upon  their  eneniy'-s  camp.  They  on  the  other  side  issued  fonh,  and 
battle  was  joined,  in  which  the  Athenians  killed  four  hundred  of  their 
enemies,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight:  but  the  Athenian  generals  dis- 
cerning that  the  enemy  exceeded  them  in  the  number  of  their  horse, 
that  thty  might  be  the  better  provided  for  the  siege,  sailed  back  to. . 
Catana. 

Messengers  were  likewise  sent  to  Athens,  with  letters  to  the  de- 
mocracy, to  desire  more  horse  and  money,  because  the  siege  they  were 
about  to  begin,  would  be  long  and  tediouj.  Upon  which  it  was  decreed 
that  three  hundred  talents,  and  some  troops  of  horse,  should  be  sent 
into  Sicily. 

During  these  things  Diagoras,  surnamed  the  Atheist*,  accused  for 
his  impiety,  for  fear  of  the  people  fled  out  of  Attica;  and  a  talent  of 
silver  was  promised  as  a  reward  by  (he  voice  of  the  common  crier,  to 

*  Tliit  Diagocss  w«  *  Miliiiaiii  hr  quettJoaed.  in  hit  wciliDgii  wheiber  llicta  weia 
■nj  godi;  fer  sliith  tie  wh  proiccuted.     Vid.  Loel.  lib.  \,  pvT. 


4^4  DioDORus  Bicvhvs,  JBook  XZZE 


any  that  should  kill  him.  In  Italy  the  Romans  had  war  with  tkr 
Mqniy  and  took  Lavinium  by  assault:  and  these  were  the  actioM 
produced  this  year. 

Pbander  now  executed  the  office  of  archon  at  Athens,  ud  ih« 
Romans  created  four miKtary  tribunes  as  consuls,  Piiblius  Lucrctras^ 
Cafos  Servilfus,  Agrippa  Menenius,  and  Spurius  Vetorius.  At  thh 
time  the  Syracusans  sent  ambassadors  to  Corinth  and  LacedsunoDy  to 
desire  aid,  and  earnestly  entreated  that  they  would  not  tofier  thtm 
to  be  reduced  to  the  utmost  extremity.  The  Lacedannouians^  stinrot 
up  by  Alcibiadcs,  determined  to  assist  the  Syracusans,  and  UMidc 
Gytippus  generaL  The  Corinthians  sent  only  two  gallics  under  Py* 
thes  to  go  along  with  Gylippus  into  Sicily  for  the  present,  while  thcj 
were  preparing  a  gre«iter  fleet  to  be  sent  after  them.  Nicias  awl 
Lamacbus,  the  Athenian  generals  at  Catana,  having  received  three 
hundred  talents,  and  reinforced  with  two  hundred  and  fifty  horse  from 
Atliens,  set  sail  for  Syracuse,  and  arriving  there  in  the  night,  unsns* 
pected  by  them  of  Syracuse,  possess  themselves  of  the  Epipolfle*^ 
which  tliey  of  Syracuse  ])erceiving,  made  a  sally  with  all  speed  to  drive 
them  thence,  htit  were  forced  back  within  their  walls,  with  the  loss  oC 
three  liundrtd  men. 

After  this,  there  came  to  the  Atlienians  three  hundred  horse  firom 
Eginu,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty  frou)  the  Sicilians,  which  made  up 
a  body  of  abi)vr  eight  hundred  ))orse:   being  reinforced,  they  drew  a 
trench  round   Lahdalon,  and  hlocked  up  the  city  of  Syracuse  with 
a  wall ;  at  which  the  Syracusans  were  greatly  terrified;  and,  to  prevent 
.  thebuildingof  the  wall, they  sallied  out:  butafteraskirmish  with  horse 
on  both  sides,  the  Syracusans  were  beaten  back  with  great  loss*    Then 
the  Athenians,  with  a  part  of  their  amny,  possessed  themselves  of  a 
place  called  Poliehna,  eommauding  the  port,  and  drew  a  wall  about 
it,  wherein  they  included  the  temple  of  Jupiter;  so  that  now  Syracuse 
was  besieged  on  both  sides.     With  tiiese  many  misfortunes  the  Sym* 
cusans  were  greatly  discouraged;  but  when  they  heard  that  Gylippus 
was  arrived  at  Himera,  and  raising  men,  they  began  to  take  lieart* 
For  (lylippus,  as  soon  as  he  came  to  Himera,  with  four  gallies  only, 
after  he  had  secured  his  ships,  brought  in  them  of  Himera  to  join  with 
the  Syracusans;  and  from  them  and  tiic  Gelians,  Selinuntines,  sod 
Sicanians,  he  raised  and  listed  men,  who,  when  they  were  all  musteredj 
made  up  a  body  of  three  thousand  foot,  and  two  hundred  horsey  with 
which  he  marched  through  the  midst  of  the  country,  and  entered  into 
Syracuse;  and  after  a  few  days,  led  forth  his  forces,  with  those  of  ths 
Syracusans,  against  the  enemy.     Whereupon  a  sharp  battle  WM 

*  A  hi^  piece  of  land  near  the  city,  OTer tapping  it 


fouffhl,  wliereiD  Lamachus,  the  Alli^tiiaii  general,  was  klUt.-^.  Butat 
lengtii,  after  mauy  killed  on  both  sides,  the  Athtrniuos  got  ttie  day. 

After  tliis  fight  caiuc  in  tliirti'cn  galHes  from  Cuiintli,  whereupoa 
Gylippus  having  drawn  the  soldiers  out  of  these  ships,  with  ifaem  «iul 
the  Syracusuns  set  upon  the  enemy's  camp,  afld  assaulted  ihe  EiHpolw: 
snd  though  the  Athenians  made  a  sally,  yet  after  a  sluirp  dispute,  and 
many  of  ihem  killed,  they  wae  touted  by  the  Syracusans,  who  pre- 
sently demolished  ihe  walls  and  furtlDcations  through  all  tiie  £pi|)o)fB. 
The  Athenians  having  lost  thisplaee,  led  at^aytbeir  army  to  auother 
post. 

These  things  tltus  performed,  the  Syracusuns  sent  amhassadon  s 
lecontl  linit  lo  Corinlh  and  Lacedaemon  for  further  supplies;  to  wiioai 
were  sent  a  thousand  men  from  Corinth,  Bcpoila,  and  SIcyon;  and 
from  Sparta  six  hundred.  In  the  mean  lime  Gylippun,  traversing tjte 
country  aboutfrom  Own  to  town,  in  several  parts  of  Sicily,  brought 
in  many  to  join  witli  liim  in  the  war;  and  being  reinforced  with  three 
thousand  men  from  the  Himerians  and  Sicauians,  he  marched  iui 
army  through  the  heart  of  the  couotry:  but  the  Athenians  havii^ 
intelligence  of  their  coming,  cut  offoue  half  of  them  by  aq  amtuiEh; 
the  rest  came  safe  to  Syracuse. 

And  now  they  of  Syracuse  being  encouraged  with  fresh  supplies, 
determined  to  try  their  fortune  in  a  sea-fight:  what  shipping  they  (lal 
left,  they  set  forth,  and  buiU  others,  which  they  miulc  use  and  trial 
of  in  the  little  harbour. 

Nicias,  the  Athenian  general,  acquainted  the  people  of  Athras  bjr 
letters,  that  the  Syracusans  were  much  reinforced,  and  that  they  wen 
putting  forth  a  great  fleet,  with  an  intent  to  come  to  a  sea-fight,  atij 
therefore  desired  more  shipping  and  mooey  to  be  scot  him,  and  a 
colleague  to  bear  pnrt  of  the  burihen  and  care  of  the  war.  For  Alci- 
biades  being  fled,  and  Lamachus  killed,  he  only  remained,  and  thai 
very  infirm  and  unhealthy.  Upon  thi^tlie  Athenians  sent  into  Sicily, 
about  the  summer  solstice,  ten  gallies,  under  the  command  of  Eury- 
luedon,  with  a  hundred  and  forty  talents  of  silver;  but  withal  preparing 
and  designing  to  send  a  greater  Sect  in  the  spring:  and  to  that  end, 
they  raised  men  and  money  in  every  place,  from  among  their  ciHife- 
derates.  In  Peloponnesus,  the  Lacedsmoniiins,  by  the  instigation  of 
Alcibiades,  broke  the  league  they  had  made  with  llie  Athenians,  and 
the  beat  of  this  war  continued  for  the  space  of  twelve  years. 


4g6  DIODO&U8  SICULU8. 


CHAP.  II. 

The  LacedUtmonians  invade  Attica.  Thefighi  ai  sea  heimeem  lb 
Syracusans  and  Atltenians.  JEnrymedtm  and  Demoethemee  mr^ 
rive  in  Sicily.  A  plague  in  the  Athenian  camp.  Amoiher^fig^ 
between  the  Syracusans  and  Athenians.  The  latter  remied  ai 
sea.  The  Athenians  ruined  in  Sicily.  Nicholaus*s  long  oroCieM. 
CyUppus*s  answer. 

THIS  year  ended,  Cleocritus  governed  in  chief  at  Athensj  and  at 
Rome  four  military  tribunes  executed  the  authority  of  consuls;  thai 
is  to  say,  Aulus  Sempronius,  Marcus  Papirius,  Quintus  Pabius^  and 
Spurius  Nautius.  At  this  time  the  Lacedsemonians  invaded  Attica 
under  Agis  their  general,  and  Alcibiades  the  Athenian.  Theysebe 
upon  Decelea,  a  place  very  strong  and  fit  for  a  garrison,  and  there  thej 
built  a  fort ;  from  wlience  this  war  was  called  the  Decelean  war.  Oa 
the  other  side,  the  Athenians  sent  Chares  with  thirty  sail  into  La- 
conia,  and  decreed  fourscore  gallies  and  five  thousand  soldien  to  be' 
sent  into  Sicily. 

In  the  mean  time  tlie  Syracusans,  in  order  to  a  sea*fight  before 
determined,  made  out  with  a  fleet  of  fourscore  sail  well  mannedy 
against  the  enemy,  whom  the  Athenians  met  with  a  fleet  of  sixty  sail^ 
whereupon  began  a  fierce  fight;  and  now  the  Athenians  came  mn- 
ning  to  the  sea-side  from  every  quarter,  from  their  posts  and  forts, 
some  out  of  curiosity  to  ^  the  engagement,  others  to  beassistantto 
their  countrymen  in  their  flight,  in  case  they  should  be  worsted.     The 
Syracusan  ofiicers  foreseeing  the  Athenians  were  likely  to  do  as  now 
they  did,  had  before  given  secret  orders  to  those  who  were  left  as  a 
guard  for  the  city,  to  assault  the  forts  of  the  Athenians,  which  were 
full  of  money,  naval  preparations,  and  other  provisions.    The  Syra* 
cusans,  therefore,  easily  possessed  themselves  of  the  forts,  which  were 
slightly  guarded,  and  made  a  great  slaughter  of  them  that  came  from 
the  sea  shore  in  aid  of  their  fellows.     Hereupon  a  great  noise  and 
clamour  being  made  about  the  forts  and  in  the  camp,  the  Athenian 
soldiers  now  engaged  at  sea  were  struck  with  great  terror,  and  gate 
way,  and  at  length  betook  themselves  to  the  defence  of  the  furts  and 
fortresses  that  were  left*;  whom  the  Syracusans  pursued  without  ob* 
serving  any  order.     Whereupon,  the  Athenians  discerning  there  wai 
no  hope  nor  way  left  of  escaping  by  land,  (the  Syracusans  haviiy 
possessed  themselves  of  two  of  their  foits),  tacked  about^  and  were 


% 


I 

:    C/ia/i.  //.  DionoRus  sicu  Lus.  497 

forced  to  renew  the  fight :  upon  which,  with  their  whole  fleet  in  « 
line  of  (Kittle,  they  fell  upon  the  Syracusans,  (who  were  separated  one 
from  another,  and  had  their  line  broken  and  disordered  hy  the  pur« 
suit),  and  sunk  eleven  of  their  ships,  pursuin)^  the  rest  to  the  ibluiid. 
After  the  fight,  both  sides  siet  up  a  trophy,  tiic  Atlienians  fur  their 
victory  at  sea,  and  the  Syracu!>ans  for  their  succvss  at  land.  The 
fight  at  sea  having  this  issue,  and  the  victory  so  hardly  ithtained,  the 
Athenians  understanding  that  IVinostlienes  wiihin  a  few  day^  would 
be  with  them  with  a  fleei,  ucre  rcsulvi-d  not  to  attempt  any  thing 
furthtr  till  those  furces  ai  rived.  The  Syraiusans,  ou  the  contrary, 
resi^lvcd  to  lav  all  at  stake,  and  trv  the  utmost  bv  force  of  arms,  be- 
fore  the  army  of  Di-mosihenes  came  up.  And  to  that  end,  they 
faced  the  Athenian  fiter,  and  did  all  they  could  every  day  to  provoke 
them  to  a  battle. 

A^jout  tliat  time  Ariston  a  Corinthian  ct)mntander  of  a  vessel, ad« 
Tisc'l  the  Syracusans  to  make  the  forecastles  of  their  ships  shorter 
and  lower,  which  was  of  [Treat  advantage  to  them  in  fights  at  se^ 
afterwards :  for  the  forecastles  of  the  Atheni.in  gallics  were  both  very 
slende**  and  hiLrh  built,  by  reason  whereof  their  beaks  made  no  im- 
pression, but  where  tlu-y  met  uith  those  equal  in  lici^hi;  and  there- 
fore the  eiicmy  received  no  ^leat  piejudice  by  ihcui'.  Hut  the  ves- 
sels of  the  syracusans  (having  tiicir  lore-deckN  lo-.v  and  strong  built), 
often  at  the  tiist  stroke  sunk  the  Athenian  gallics. 

The  Syracusans  (as  is  before  related)  many  days  dared  the  Athe- 
nians to  tight  both  by  sea  and  land,  but  all  to  no  pui|)use,  for  ihe^f 
kepi  chise,  and  uouid  not  be  drawn  forth  by  atiy  means.  But  Hfrer- 
wardN,  ^some  of  the  odiccrs  ot  tiic  (li  ct  not  btini^  able  longer  to  endure 
the  iiiN.ilence  of  tlie  SyracUNans),  p.ui  of  the  navy  set  u|>on  them  in 
the  gicai  haven,  which  at  length  engaged  the  whole  fleet.  Tiie  A- 
thcnians  indeed  exi-ellcd  the  (»ihei  in  the  swiftness  of  their  gallics, 
and  in  the  expeitncss  and  diligence  ui  the  seamen:  but  because 
tlie  fight  was  in  a  strait  and  narrow  place,  this  adviintaire.was  of  no 
use  to  them. 

The  Svracusans  therefcue  beintr  confusedlv  mixe«l  uitli  their  cne- 
niies,  anil  giving  them  no  respiie  or  time  to  withdraw,  they  diove 
them  fiom  utf  their  decks  ami  their  forecastles  with  stonert  andb|K*ar9. 
And  when  they  had  with  the  Inaks  of  their  ships  pirrced  through 
nianv  of  I  lie  enemy '•«  ^a'.lies,  thvy  boarded  them,  and  the  fight  seem* 
ed  within  the  ships,  just  like  a  battle  on  land.  All  things  thus  go- 
ing to  wreck  t>n  the  Athenian  side,  they  fWd  outright  witli  great  pre- 
cipitation; whom  I hL' .Ml iicu^aiis  pursued  clo^e,  and  &unk  seveu  of 
their  eallics  and  disai)lcd  niauy  more. 

The  Svra'.  ubjus  bciog  now  grown  confident,  by  their  late  victories 
Vol.  I.    Sv.4^.  »** 


408  DIODORUS  8IQUI.U8»  Sodk  UBL 


iMta 


t)otb  by  sea  and  land,  presently  arrive  Gurymedovand  Demostlieiio, 
with  a  great  arnoy  from  Athens,  and  with  mapy  aqxilisriea  fnmi  Thi- 
lium  and  Messapia^j  which  joined  them  in  their  passage.  Tliae 
generals  brought  with  them  more  than  three  hundred  and  teo  gallicSi 
and  five  thousand  men,  besides  seamen :  but  armsj  money,  engiiMi 
for  a  siege,  and  other  provisions,  were  on  board  other  transport  shipi* 
Upon  this  tlK'  Syracusans  were  again  discouraged,  judging  theywoc 
never  able  for  the  future  to  cope  with  so  potent  an  enemy. 

Demosthenes  having  now  persuaded  iiis  colleagues  to  seize  upon 
the  Epipohe,  (for  otherwise  he  could  never  straiten  the  city  on  evety 
side),  set  i^pon  the  Syracusans  in  the  night  with  ten  thc^iisand  heavy- 
armed  men,  and  as  many  light-armed;  and  the  assault  being  unex- 
pected, they  took  some  forts;  and  entering  within  the  fortifications^ 
demolished  part  of  the  wall.  But  the  Syracusans  running  together 
from  all  parts  to  the  place  assaulted,  and  Ilermocrates  with  aclioice 
b^nd  of  lusty  young  men  iiasteningin  with  aid  and  assistance, the  A- 
titenians  were  driven  out,  and  through  the  darkness  of  the  night  and 
ignorance  of  the  passages,  were  dispersed  and  scattered  far  from  one 
another;  so  that  the  Syracusans  with  their  auxiliaries,  closely  pur- 
suing, killed  two  thousand  five  hundred  of  them,  and  wounded 
m^y  that  got  oS\\  and  possessed  themselves  of  a  gre^t  number  of 

Alter  this  encounter,  the  Syracusans  sent  Sicanus,  one  of  the  of- 
figenr^^  with  twelve  gallies  to  the  rest  of  the  cities,  both  to  inform  them 
^?  tfieivictory,  and  likewise  to  desire  further  aid. 

'  Tlie  Athenians  (their  affairs  now  declining  so  much  for  the  worsf, 
and  the  plague  breaking  forth  in  the  army  by  reason  of  a  stinking 
marshy  ground  near  adjoining)  consulted  what  was  fit  to  be  done  in 
the  present  exigency.  Demosthenes  was  of  oj)inion  without  delay  to 
return  to  Athens,  saying  it  was  far  more  commendable  to  venture 
their  lives  for  their  country  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  than  to  lie 
still  in  Sicily  doing  notliing.  But  Nicias  said  it  was  base  and 
dishonourable  to  leave  the  siege  when  they  were  so  plentifully  sup- 
plied both  with  shipping,  men,  and  money.  And  moreover,  that 
they  should  be  involved  in  great  danger  by  those  whose  common 
practice  it  was  to  asperse  the  generals,  if  they  should  make  peace 
with  the  Syracusans,  and  return  to  their  country  without  the  order 
and  command  of  the  people.  Among  those  that  were  then  present  at 
the  consultation,  some  approved  of  the  advice  of  Demosthenes  for 
returning;  others  agreed  with  Nicias.  But  nothing  being  deter- 
mined, they  lay  idle  without  any  action. 

^In  the  mean  time,  great  aids  and  supplies  came  to  them  of  Syra- 

*  Ale:ifapia,  an  island  neir  Sicilji  cmllcd  Calabria. 


j    Chap.IL  DiODORUS  sicur.us.  <99 

I  cuso  from  the  Siculi,  Sclinuntines^  Cicliatis,  Himcriaiis,  and  Cama- 
rioians,  which  encourai^od  them  as  mucli  as  it  di!»coura^a*d  the  A- 
iheuians.  And  hesides,  the  plague  so  raired  and  increased,  that  a 
great  part  of  the  army  peri««hed,  whicli  eaii^^cd  thetn  all  to  repent 
that  they  had  not  returned  before.  The  Athenian  army  therefore 
being  in  a  tumult,  and  cruwdini;  to  their  ships,  Xicias  himself  was 
forced  to  a  coiiiplianee.  And  now  huth  ircnerals  agreeing  in  opi- 
nion, the  soldiers  shipped  their  haggage  and  himher,  and  having  all 
on  lioard  their  ships,  imist  up  »ail.  And  the  generals  eauM-d  it  to  he 
procLiiiiicii,  that,  upon  a  \\\z\\  given,  all  should  he  ready;  and  if  any 
loitered,  thev  shoulii  he  left  hehind.  Unt  the  niirht  hcfore  tliev  in- 
tended  to  set  sail,  tht*  moon  was  eclipsed,  which  occa^^ioned  Nici;LS 
(who  was  naturally  su|RTStitious,  and  then  in  great  uneasincits  by 
reason  of  the  pi:ii:ue)  to  advise  with  the  soothsayers.  Ky  whom  an- 
swer was  given,  that  they  must  not  by  any  means  sail  for  three  days: 
into  which  opinitKi  iJemosilienes  and  those  of  his  party  likewise 
were  led  throuu'ii  their  su]>erstition.  The  Syracusatis  understandinji^ 
by  deserters  the  cause  of  the  stiiy,  manned  all  their  gallic^,  to  the 
number  of  seventy>four;  and  drawing  out  th.eir  land  ftirces,  fct  up- 
on the  .Athenians  both  hv  sea  and  land.  On  the  other  side,  the  A- 
thcoians  inannf*d  fourseore  and  six  i^allies,  and  irave  the  command 
of  the  rigiit  wint?  to  I-!uiynu-don,  ariin<<t  whom  was  opposed  Aga- 
tharcus  the  Syracusiin  treneral.  In  the  left  wing  they  placed  Euthy- 
demus,  in  o|)[Nisitj(»n  tf>  >ieanus,  who  commanded  for  the  Syracu- 
sans.  .Mrn:inder  commanded  the  middle  battle  cm  the  Atheniaa 
side,  a  (id  INthes  the  Corinthian  for  the  Syrncusans.  And  although 
tlie  Athenian  line  of  battle  stretc)\ed  out  farther  in  length  than  the  ' 
^vracusan,  because  thev  had  more  s^hips.  vet  that  whieh  seemed  to  be 
their  advantage,  proved  to  be  their  ruin  in  tlie  issue. 

For  Kuiymedon  stri\Iiigto  surround  t!ic  wing  opposite  to  him,  (by 
that  means  being  severed  from  tlie  rest  of  the  fleet),  was  driven  by 
the  Syracu'^ans  (who  Inire  down  upon  him)  into  the  creek  IX.vcones, 
before  ptjbses^ed  by  the  Syracusaiis;  where,  being  hemmed  in  witliin 
the  straits,  and  furced  upon  the  shor**,  n))on  a  mortal  wound  kfiveii, 
he  fell  down  dead,  and  there  seven  f>f  lii<  ships  were  destroyed.  In 
the  heat  of  the  tighty  the  rt  port  sprcai!  :ibio:!d  that  (he  Lciu'ral  nas 
killed,  and  many  of  his  ships  lost:  u{Kin  uliieli  the  eh:efe*»t  of  the 
gal  lies  which  weiC  next  in  place  aiul  oider  to  the  vessels  Io>t,  begun 
to  give  way,  and  thereupon  the  Syracu'^ans  pres>ed  fonvaid.  niril, 
heated  by  their  late  sucees.s,  fell  with  guut  fury  u|Kin  tt  c  Ati.r- 
uian»,  and  forced  them  to  an  absolute  flight:  and  drivnii;  i':<  n  iiiM 
the  shallows  uf  .he  haven,  many  of  tlic  ves.eli  were  sriariiji  r!  imiop^ 
the  shclvei  and  s.iiids.  I  |»on  which  .Sieanus,  the  >\nieti^.t.-.  .-.iniiral, 
filled  a  ship  with  fagots,  lire-briUids^  and  pitcii,  and  set  it  oa  ticu  «.- 


500  DI0D0RU8  8ICULU8.  HookXItTm 


mong  tlie  ships  floating  upon  the  sliallows.  On  the  other  band  the 
Athenians  with  all  expedition  cxtinguised  the  flames^  and  when  Acj 
saw  there,  was  no  other  way  left  to  escape,  they  TalhiDtly  grappled 
with  their  'enemies^  and  threw  them  overboard.  In  the  mean  time  tha 
land-forces  of  the  Athenians  were  ready  upon  the  sliore  to  ud  them 
that  fled  that  way,  and  bestirring  tlicmscliws  with  extraordinary  valour 
and  contempt  of  all  dangers,  routed  the  Syracusans  at  land.  But 
they  being  victors  at  sea  returned  into  the  city,  having  not  lost  many 
men  in  the  sea-fight.  But  tlie  Athenians  lost  no  less  than  two  thou- 
sand men  and  eighty  gallics. 

The  Syracusans  now  conceiving  timt  their  city  was  safe,  and  that 
their  business  remaining  was  to  break  into  the  enemy's  camp  and 
ruin  their  army,  blocked  up  the  mouth  of  their  haven  vith  sbipa 
joined  and  fastened  together,  to  hinder  the  flight  of  the  Athenians  by 
sea.     To  which  end  they  made  a  bridge  with  boats^  gallies,  and  other 
ships  fixed  with  anchors,  compacted  and  fastened  together  with  iron 
chains.    The  Athenians  perceiving  that  they  were  penn^  up  on 
every  side,  and  no  way  of  escape  remaining,  consulted  and  resolved 
to  fill  what  ships  they  had  remaining  with  the  best  of  their  soMieiSy 
that,  with  the  multitude  of  tlieir'shipping,  and  resoluteness  of  their 
soldiers,  (now  ready  to  fight  as  men  in  a  desperate  condition),  they 
might  strike  a  terror  into  the  Syracusans.     Hereupon  the  chiefestof 
the  officers,  and  best  and  most  expert  soldiers  embarked,  and  man- 
ned an  hundred  and  fifteen  gallies.    The  rest  of  the  army  they  placed 
in  order  upon  the  shore.     On,the  other  hand  the  Syracusans  (being 
furnished  with  land  soldiers  for  the  defence   of  .their  walls)  fitted 
out  seventy-four  gallies,  attended  by  many  of  the  young  lioys  of  tte 
city,  (not  yet  of  full  age),  in  ether  ships  as  auxiliaries  to  be  ready  to 
aid  and  assist  their  parents.     The  walls  of  the  harbour  and  every 
high  place  within  the  city  were  filled  with  multitudes  of  spectators. 
For  both  women  and  children,  and  all  others  unfit  to  bear  arms* 
(with  great  concern  and  trembling  of  heart),  stood  to  view  the  fight 
in  order  to  judge  how  things  were  likely  to  go  with  them.     At  the 
same  lime  Nicias,  the  Athenian  general,  viewing  the  fleet,  and  se« 
riously  considering  the  greatness  of  the  danger,  left  his  post  upon  the 
shore,  and  went  on  board  a  vessel,  and  sailed  round  the  Athenian  fleeC| 
and  called  to  the  conmianders  and  captainsof  every  galley,  earncstlyen* 
treating  them,  with  his  hands  lift  up  to  heaven,  that  every  one  woaU 
strive  to  outdo  another,  and  improve  to  the  utmost  the  present  op 
portunity,  being  the  last  ground  of  hope  they  were  ever  likely  to  en- 
joy; for  in  their  valour  in  the  sea-fight  now  approaching,  hy  th^ 
safety  and  preservation  both  of  them  and  of  their  country.    Thot0 
that  were  fathers  he  put  in  mind  of  their  children;  those  that  #efO 
nobly  born  he  earnestly  pressed  and  ejdiorted  that  tbej  would  be  oari(* 


Chap.  11.  niODORUS  SICULU9.  501 

ful  to  avoid  whatever  would  stain  the  honour  and  glory  of  their  £b- 
milics;  chose  that  had  been  advanced  by  the  people  for  their  former 
good  servtees,  he  advised  now  to  approve  themselves  worthy  of  those 
narks  of  honour  they  then  bore.  Lastly,  he  put  them  in  mind  of 
tlie  trophies  at  Saiamis,  earnestly  adjuring  them  that  they  would  not 
pixMtitute  the  f^lory  of  their  country,  and  become  slaves  to  the  Syra- 
cusans.  After  this  speech,  Nicias  returned  to  the  army  at  land. 
When  they  in  tlie  fleet  had  sung  the  P«an,  they  made  out  with  a 
design  to  break  the  blockade  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour.  But  the 
Syracusans  sailed  up  in  order  of  battle  against  them,  with  that  speed, 
that  they  drove  them  off  the  boom,  and  forced  them  to  fight.  In 
tliis  confusion,  some  sailed  towards  the  .shore,  others  made  into  the 
middle  of  clie  liarbour,  and  others  towards  the  fortifications;  and  thuf 
their  lines  being  broken,  the  fleet  was  presently  sc|)arated  and  dispers- 
ed, by  which  means  the  Athenians,  in  this  manner  disappointed, 
were  forced  to  fight  here  and  there,  up  and  down  in  the  harbour  in 
little  squadrons  and  small  parties:  however,  the  flight  wasobstlnate 
on  lioth  sides.  The  Athenians  exceeding  in  number  of  bhips,  seeing 
no  other  hof>cs  of  .safety,  undauntedly  despised  all  dangers,  and  r^ 
solved  to  die  valiantly.  On  the  other  hand  the  Syracusans,  knowing 
their  parents  and  children  were  observing  them, put  themselves  forth 
to  the  utmost,  every  one  striving  to  improve  his  valour,  to  gain  the 
victory  for  his  country.  Many  there  were,  that  when  their  shipa 
were  pierced  through  by  the  violent  assaults  of  the  enemy,  leaped 
into  the  siiips  that  pierced  them,  and  fougiit  bravely  upon  their  fore- 
castles ill  the  midst  of  their  enemies.  Otiiers  witli  grappling- 
irons,  so  joined  tlie  ships  together,  that  they  forced  their  enemy  to 
fight  on  lioard,  as  if  tliey  had  Im-cu  on  land.  And  tiieic  were  not  a 
few  that,  when  their  own  ships  were  disabled,  lM>arciiJ  tlieir  adver« 
saries,  and  killed  and  threw  tbeniovei  board,  and  so  |M>ssessed  them- 
selves of  their  vessels.  And  now  the  ci;i\hingof  shifw  one  against 
another,  and  the  cries  and  shouts  of  the  ccmibatants  and  dying  men, 
was  heard  in  every  place  throughout  the  whole  harlMjur:  for  some- 
times a  single  vessel  was  surrounded,  and  ^tiuek  through  wiili  the 
beaks  of  many,  and  so  the  water  forcing  in  at  the  breaches,  the  ship 
with  all  the  men  in  it  sunk  together.  And  many  (alter  thiir  ships 
were  sunk)  endeavoured  to  save  themselves  by  swimming,  but 
were  struck  through  with  dans,  and  wounded  with  spi  aiN,  and  so 
miserably  perished.  In  the  mean  time,  the  master:*  of  the  »hips 
were  amazed  to  see  tlic  confusion  and  dii^ordir  of  the  K^'ht,  see- 
ing nothing  but  tumult  and  honor  about  tlicni,  one  sliip  nftiii  set 
upon  by  many,  and  what  was  commanded  not  le^inlL-J,  .lu  1  th<'  a<!* 
vice  to  one  di^greeablc  to  the  circumstance^  of  anoihtr;  aiu!  after 


502  mODORUS  8ICULU8*'  " 


all,  DODe  attending  to  what' was  said.    For  n  nm  of  te% 

crashing  of  ships,  brushing  off  of  oars,  incra    *  of  urf  dnaov 

of  them  that  were  engaged,  and  loud  shoots  of  .the  innj  Jnpbn  die 
shore  encouraging  them  upon  the  sea,  none  heard  wjoit  ofden  wcw 
given :  for  the  shore  was  full  of  soldiers,  the  Sycacosans  in  one  part^ 
and  the  Athenians  in  another.  By  which  means,  they  that  were  dfivca 
in  the  fight  near  to  the  land,  were  sometimes  sacconred  by  dieoi 
upon  the  shore.  The  spectators  upon  the  walls  gave  great  shooli 
when  they  discerned  any  advantage  gained  by  their  friends;  but 
when  they  were  in  danger  of  being  overcome,  they  fiU^  the  air.wil 
doleful  groans  and  lamentations,  calling  upon  their  gods  for  deli! 
ance.  Sometimes  some  of  the  gallies  of  the  Syracusans  were 
troyed  under  the  very  walls,  and  their  kindred  and  relations  batchend- 
before  their  faces;  sp  that  parents  were  the  eye-witnesses  of  tbe 
death  of  their  children,  wives  of  the  miserable  end  of  their  bosbends, 
and  brothers  of  their  brothers. 

And  after  the  fight  liad  lasted  long,  (with  much  slaogfater  on  botb- 
sides),  yet  the  battle  was  still  carried  oi^  for  none  (though  ever  so 
greatly  pressed)  durst  fly  to  land.    For  the  Athenians  asked  them 

who madfe  towards  the  shore ^Whether  they  intended  to  sail  to  Athens 

by  land  ?  So  the  Syracusans  on  the  shore,  demandied  of  them  that  ied 
towards  them — ^Why  they  were  now  ready  to  betray  their  country^ 
who  would  not  suffer  them  that  staid  on  shore  to  embark  with  them? 
Did  they  shut  up  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  as  if  they  woatd  pie* 
vent  the  escape  of  the  enemy,  to  the  end  that  they  themselves  might 
have  the  better  excuse  to  fly  to  the  shore?  And  being  that  every  man 
roust  of  necessity  die,  wliat  more  honourable  death  could  they  de» 
sire,  than  that  for  their  country,  which  is  now  a  witness  of  the  en* 
gegement,  and  which  they  basely  and  sordidly  desert?  With  these' 
and  the  like  reproaches  did  they  who  fled  to  land,  meet  with  from  ike 
soldiers  placed  on  the  shore:  whereupon  they  returned  to  the  baldc^ 
though  greatly  disabled  in  their  shipping,  and  their  bodies  so  woooded^ 
that  they  were  scarce  able  to  defend  themselves.    At  length  tbe  A* 
thenians  nearest  to  the  city  were  forced  to  fly.     Presently  aflcev^  they- 
that  were  next  gave  way,  till  at  length  the  whole  fleet  asilde  off. 
Whereupon  the  Syracusans  pursued  with  a  great  shout.    Those  of 
the  Athenians  that  escaped,  being  driven  upon  the  shelves  and  eands)» 
leaped  out  of  their  broken  and  shattered  vessels,  apd  fled  to  the  hod 
army.    The  harbour  was  now  full  of  arms  and  wrecks  of  riiips  eveiy 
where.    Threescore  of  the  Athenian  ships  were  absolutely  dcitNi]fedf' 
of  the  Syracusans  eight  were  lost,  and  eleven  disabled.  ■'  «'  ■ 

The  Syracusans  towed  as  many  of  their  gallies  to  the  shore  m  tkaf' 
could,  and  took  out  the  dead  bodies  of  their  dtinns  Mi'tMktt^ 


Chap.  If.  DfODORUS  SICULU9.  6M 


imtes,  and  gave  them  an  honourable  burial.  The  Athenians  thronged 
together  to  the  tents  of  the  generals^  desiring  them  not  so  muehtore- 
gard  the  ships,  as  the  prrservntion  both  of  themselves  and  tlie  aoldiera. 
Thereupon  Demosthenos  declared  tliat  more  sliips  were  forthwith  to 
be  manned,  in  order  to  force  the  blockiide,  which  if  done  presently, 
they  might  all  easily  escape. 

Nicias  was  ofn  comrary  ojiinion;  and  advise  J  the  leaving  the  ships, 
and  to  march  up  into  the  ht-art  of  tlu*  country  tothe  cities  iif  their  con- 
federates, who:ic  o|)iriioii  all  embraced:  and  having  burnt  some  of 
their  ships,  they  loiihwirh  niftde  it  their  busiucbs  to  march  away. 
Tlieir  «ie.siLrn  of  (I'-carnj.inir  if  tlie  uhrUi  being  known  to  tlie  eiicniv, 
Hermocriitts  nrlvisccj  \h*^  Sy;jjusai.s  to  dniw  out  all  tiirir  forces  in 
thenip:lit,  ami  m  «|i  alt  tlie  ftasheson  the  liigli-ways.  Hut  the  officers 
not  ap|irovin^  of  tliin,  because  niat'iy  of  the  soldiers  were  wounded, 
anti  all  wearied  and  (ired  out  by  the  hite  engsigement,  sent  some  horse- 
men to  the  Atiieiiian  camp,  to  inform  thein  that  the  Syracusans 
had  laiihiil  the  ways  with  boldiers  to  entrap  them  in  their  march. 
Tlie  horse  roiniiig  in  late  in  the  niirht,  (the  Athenians  believing  they 
were  sent  out  of  kindnes.N  to  tluin  from  the  Ijcontines),  were  in  a 
great  perpiixity,  and  thereupon  continued  where  they  were;  though 
they  might  have  pas.sed  uiih  great  s;ifety,  if  they  had  not  been  thus 
deluded.  The  Syracusans  therefore,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  sent 
out  Soldiers,  and  secured  all  the  narrow  passes  on  the  road.  The  A- 
thenians  tlividcd  the  army  into  two  paits,  their  sick  men  and  carriages 
they  pla(e«i  in  the  middle;  those  that  were  strong  and  able  to  fight, 
were  in  tlie  front  and  rear:  l>emostlienes  led  these,  and  Nicias  tlie 
other,  and  so  they  marched  towards  C'atana.  In  the  mean  time^  the 
Symcusans  drew  fifty  gallics  left  behind,  with  ropes  into  the  city,  or- 
dered all  their  seamen  and  soldiers  out  of  the  gal  li'.-s,  and  armed  them, 
and  so  pursued  the  Athenians  with  all  their  forces,  and  continu- 
ally vexed,  galled,  and  even  tired  out  the  rear.  IVe&sing  thus  u|X)Q 
their  backs  for  three  days  together,  and  {lossessing  all  the  p<isses  be* 
furc  them,  the  way  to  Catana  wascpiite  blocked  up.  At  length,  be- 
ing chased  through  the  llelorinc  way,  to  the  river  Asinariis,  where 
there  was  no  going  A  r ward,  they  wcie  absolutely  cooped  up,  and 
there  the  Syracusans  killed  eighteen  thousand,  and  took  seven  thou- 
sand prisoners,  among  whom  were  Deaiosthenes  and  Nicias  the  ge- 
neraU.  Hie  rest  were  given  as  a  prey  to  the  soldiers;  for  the  Atlie- 
iiians  (noway  being  left  iocsca|Hj  were  ft»rced  to  deliver  up,  not  only 
their  arms  hut  themselves,  as  captives  to  their  enemy's  mercy. 

L'|Min  this  happy  success,  the  Syracussns  erected  two  trophies, 
and  fixed  to  them  the  arms  of  the  generals,  and  then  returned  lo  the 
city,     licreuiioa  the  whole  city  gave  public  thanks  to  the  gods. 


504  DIODORUS  SICULUS*  JBooft  Xltll 


The  next  day  an  assembly  was  called^  to  consider  what  was  to 
with  the  prisoners.  There  Diocles,  one  of  the  highest  m 
xnong  the  people,  delivered  his  opinion  ^JThat  the  Athenian  gene- 
lals  should  be  first  scourged  and  then  put  to  death;  and  that  the  rest 
of  the  prisoners  should  be  sent  to  the  quarries.  And  tliat  they  whs 
had  any  ways  assisted  the  Athenians,  should  be  sold  under  the  spear; 
and  that  no  more  than  two  cotyles  of  corn  a-day,sh6u)d  be  allowed 
to  every  prisoner.  When  the  decree  was  read,  Hermocrates,  thea 
in  the  assembly,  began  to  speai^  and  say ^That  it  was*  more  com- 
mendable to  use  a  victory  with  nKxferation  and  humanity^  than  ta 
overcome. 

The  people  murmuring  and  grumbling  at  this,  as  not  pleasing  la 
them, one  Nicholaus,  who  had  lost  two  sons  in  this  war,  ascended  the 
desk,  supported  by  his  servants,  t)y  reason  of  his  age*    At  which  the 
people  ceased  their  murmuring,  sup|>osing  he  would  be  sharp  against 
the  prisoners.     Silence  being  made,  the  old  man  began  thus-.Yt 
inhabitants  of  Syracuse,  I  myself  have  born  no  small  partof  th<  ca- 
lamities of  this  war;  for  being  the  father  of  two  sons,  I  readily  sent 
them  forth  to  venture  their  lives  for  the  defence  of  their  country;  and 
for  them  was  sent  a  messenger,  who  informed  me  of  the  deathof 
them  both;  and  though  lam  every  day  desiring  they  were  alive,  yet, 
considering  the  manner  of  their  deaths,  I  cannot  but  judge  them 
happy,  and  bewail  my  own  life,  and  count  myself  most  miseraUe; 
for  they,  by  losing  their  lives  (which  as  a  debt  to  nature,  they  most 
of  necessity  some  time  or  other  have  parted  with)  for  the  safe*ty  of 
their  country,  have  left  an  immortal  honour  behind  them.     Batl, 
now  in  the  end  of  my  days,  being  deprived  of  the  helps  of  my  old 
age,  am  doubly  afflicted,  whilst  I  have  both  lost  my  children,  and 
likewise  all  hopes  of  posterity.     For  the  more  glorious  their  ends 
were,  the  more  grateful  and  desirable  is  their  memory;  therefore,  the 
very  name  of  the  Athenians  is  most  deservedly  hateful  to  me,  whiMD 
you  see  led  and  supported  by  the  hands  of  my  servants^ahd  notof 
my  children.     Ye  Syracusans,  if  I  had  discerned  that  this  preseaf 
assembly  had  been  appointed  to  consult  and  advise  something  in  &- 
vour  of  the  Athenians,  I  should,  (as  justly  I  might),  for  the  many 
slaughters  and  calamities  brought  by  them  upon  the  country,  and  for 
my  own  particular  miseries,  most  bitterly  inveigh  against  them.  But 
seeing  we  are  here  debating  about  shewing  com[)assion  to  the  afflict- 
ed, and  how  to  spread  abroad  through  all  the  world,  the  honour  and 
glory  of  the  people  of  Syracuse,  I  now  desire  with  all  lenity  and  gen- 
tleness, to  propose  what  I  conceive  may  be  every  way  for  the  advan- 
tage of  the  commonwealth.   The  Athenians,  indeed,  have  justly  de« 
bcrvcd  to  undergo  all  manner  of  punishments  for  their  madness  and 


CSUlp.  !*£  '*  MOJMft»f)  •ICUftUf^*  S09 


foHy:  in  the  first  place^  for  Ibeir  impiety  towpirdb  the  gods }  Hodoext^ 
for  their  great  iDJury  done  to  iit •  CM  is  cerudoly  ;COod  i|i  this^  ia 
bringiog  those  into  misery  and  distress^  who^BOt  coutented  with  tbclii 
ewn  abaDdancey  fail,  by  atii  unjust  war,  upon  others,;  Who  would 
^ver  have  thought  that  the  AtheDi^oSf  who  had  brought  over  tea 
thousand  talents  from  Delos,  and  invaded  ^Sicily  w|th  a  fleet  of  tm 
hundred  sail,  and  with  an  army  of  forty  thousand  uien,  should  have 
been  brought  so  low,  into  such  calamities  as  now  they  ,are?  for  after 
so  great  a  preparation,  neither  ship  nor  man  returned  to  bring  the 
news  of  their  destruction.  And  now,  O  ye  Syracusans^  since  ye. 
see  by  experience,  that  the  proud  and  ambitious  are  hateful  "both  to 
god  and  man,  (adoring  the  deity),  take  hieed  off  doing  any  thing 
oruel  and  inhuman*  For  what  honour  is  it  to  destroy  .him  that  jLies, 
prostrate  at  our  feet  ?  What  glory  to  be  fierce  and  criie)  ip  taking  re«; 
venge  ?  for  he  that  is  implacable  towards  men  in  d^tr)ess,  19^  injufiouf^ 
to  the  common  frailty  and  weakness  of  mankind.  No  noan  ]s.  so  sub^ 
as  to  be  able  to  baffle  fate;  who,  as.  it  wer^,  sporting  he^fNdf  wit^ 
men's  miseries,  oftentimes,  on  a  sudden,  dr^ws  a  black  cloi^l  oves 
their  posperity.  And  here,  perhaps,  some  may  say^^Tbe  A^niaqt 
have  most  unjustly  committed  many  slaughters  amon^  us,  .and  now 
we  have  power  to  take  full  revenge.  Have  not  the  Athenians  suf* 
fered  already  above  the  degree  and  measure  of  their  ofience?  Have 
ye  not  sufficiently  punished  the  prisoners?  Consider,  when  thejde* 
livered  up  themselves  with  their  arms  into  your  hands,  they  did  it  re- 
lying on  the  mercy  of  the  conquerors.  Therefore,  it  would  be  a  base 
thing  to  deceive  tliem  in  the  good  opinion  and  hope  they  had  of  your 
humanity*  Certainly  they  that  are  implacable  and  obstinate  in  thei/ 
hatred,  will  fight  it  out  to  the  last;  but  these,  instead  of  enemies^ 
gave  up  themselves  to  you  as  suppliants.  For  they  that  render  their 
bodies  to  the  enemy  in  time  of  the  battle,  undoubtedly  do  it  in  hopes 
of  preservation ;  but  if  they  are  hurried  to  execution,  (though  they 
were  persuaded  to  the  contrary),  they  indeed  fall  into  an  UQexpect* 
ed  calamity ;  but  they  who  act  so  cruelly,  may  justly  be  termed  rag* 
iiig  fools:  but  it  becomes  tlipse  who  would  rule  others,  to  lecoa* 
mend  themselves  rather  by  mercy  and  clemency,  than  to  seek  to  es* 
tablish  their  grandeur  by  force  and  powen  For  they  who  are  drivea 
to  obedience  through  fear,  are  ready  to  execute  their  hatred  wh^a 
Uiey  see  their  opportunity  to  rebel.  But  they  love  those  that  rule 
them  with  gentleness  and  moderation,  and  do  all  they  can  to  ad\*aoce. 
and  strengthen  their  interest.  What  overthrew  the  empire  of  the 
Medes»  but  their  cruelty  to  their  subjects?  For,  as  soon  as  the  Per* 
sians  made  a  defection,  most  of  the  nations  together  with  them  re« 
belled.  How  did  Cyrus^  who  was  but  a  private  man«  gain  the  so- 
Vot.  I.  No.  38.  TIT 


■  4 


yftfO^tf  of  dlAvto/l^iirby  MsiMamqr ioK 
BM^MbdaM>  ^He*:aM  tM'otily  feriMnvito^oMkir  tttvekf  ipttli^ 
CVUf^nn/y  Tiut  KMTj^  laaiiy  fiiv«)un  i^IjIi^  »-»AMd  sttphmBii  UtopP 
1^^' t6w^i<dS/othJ&^  tfh^'aild  pik)frte;'tittr  his  I 
1fM-e?m'j^ufU»hetf  id  ii^ety  plale«>  M4lie  MlaMtkttte'Df  Aftift^lMh*! 
Agethief^-hW;'aiid:'trro^  Ifls^  conM^raiek.    BvC  Hhylrf 

^Mlk  of  times  MM  if^Iacea  so  Ifar'rt^mttte,  tw4ica'  in  this  Ifiwjf  ^y4j 
Jiiri/^  Oisloii;  frorti^kftbfdinirry  matiybedalne^nee  of  altSicilf} 
tlik  citl^Vii^ln^  up  -f henMeltes  ^HAj  td  bh  gbv«rbiiient>  Itei 
fiiy'^d'Hvftihi»|^bebaViQuf'of  tfce  ina6,  giiafed  t^  every  , 
£?t^ic4^ylht^'t(indclrues9  Wardflr  th^m  fhatii^Ke  in  distieas*  'T|M< 
ftMfj'g&rdea;«y<''tVis'<Maniple/  (at  tf  time  when  tliteH>ttrc^nU 
d^  Ml'Si<^);  let  119  iM>t^s%hrtb(vt'-i^hieh  wis  so  MmneDdabfeJi 
SfSk  ^ttt^dK;ii6r  l^iiiaff «:  Mrs^lves  IHke  bcitst*^  fieree  and  ii 
imm'idin-W  liitsety;  It  WiiriH  lifCoMt  fts^to  give 
tAfAliWiiitkhty^tikfto  say 'that  'i^e  esed  oUr'  sucwse  aod  praspoky 
i^^im^y-  Vow  d^sihible  a  tfiing^  is  it.wlH^tf we  ai^  io  dBictioe^ is 
tiWi  ibtt^  to'  sympathhEe  with  us,  and  wlieil  t^  are  in  |was[iqly 
fyV^^2^hc!h  to  rejoice  wr^^^  Victory  is  Vnany  times  guaed  If 
AWliibf'andV|Kft(rice;  bUthomatiity  and  m^rey  io  a  time  of  Miceesi^ 
a^i^clMf  Wi'ffiAees  bf'thc  Virtoe  of  the  conqueror.  * 

**' Wierifbre  envy  riot  your  cotihtry'  this  honout,  whereby  they  w9 
B^Ti^mib' fill  the  world  6 ver,  wlieii  it  shall  be  said  fliat  it  did  not 
otliy'oviitconie  (he  Athenians  by  arms,  but  by  mercy  and  humaoSljr. 
Aw  hen'ce  it  wTUtip|)earthat  they  Wlio*en^ross  to  themselves  all  the 
pAiie'ac(d'c6nimeridati6n'du(!  to  mercy  and  generosity^  are  for  oo^ 
dbne  by  ybor  lenity  and  compassion.     Aiid  that  they  who  first  de* 
d!cWed'8n  aKaif'to  mercyj-niay  find  the  very  same  in  the  city  of  Syrn 
^bSf^i  'Atnl  tt  will  be  a  iconvincing.argtfment  to  all  maDkind,  tliaC 
tRtiy'^re  rticfst  jtiMiybut  off,  and  we  most  deservedly  crowned  with 
^cce^^^'b^causcf  thev  sd  unjustly  fell  -upon  those  who  afterWurds 
sHe^edth^fcy  to  suvih  implacable  enemies;  and  that  we  overcaaie 
svXh  a  sort  6(  hieh  zis  most  unjustly  made  war  upon  them  who  ieani- 
^(f  irtPsheW  mercy  even  by  the  cruelty  and  injustiee  of  their  eneoiics. 
Ahd'hetlce  itwiP  follow  that  the  Athenians  shall  DOtonlyondergo  the 
-ffs^iikei^of  others/bnt  will  likewise  condemn  themselves,  that  they 
^blirfd -^deavour  by  an  unjust  war  to  destiny-  siieh  men.     It  is  cer- 
fl^ly  Vi  'md^  commendablie  thing  to  lay  the  first  foundation  of  frieod- 
ibi^^^nd'ejttinguish  dissentions,  hf  shewing  of  mercy.    A  food 
tfHildcViaAdikig  ^mobgsi  friends,  is  to  be  ^erlasting,  but  enmity  with 
tfdvCTsat^es 'ought  to  be  but  temporary.     By  this  ADcans  tlie  number 
Of 'fridtids'  would  increase,  .and  en<!mies 'would  be  tlie  fewer.    Bot  to 
etkftittoe  hiitred  tmd  'tliscdid  forevery  and  entui  thetai  to  paaterity^  it 


Chap.  U.  DTODORUS  sitiULUS.  507 

neither  just  nor  safe.  Forsiiiiictimes  ii  r»llsout  ihat  they  wlio  now 
seem  to  be  more  potent  ibaii  the  other,  in  a  monient  ari^  hrought 
lower  than  those  ihey  formerly  overcame:  which  is  clearly  evinced 
to  us  by  ihc  eveui  uf  tlie  present  war.  .  They  who  evea  now  bcfik-g- 
ed  our  city,  and  to  tliat  purpose  hemmed  us  iii  with  a  wall,  by  a  turn 
of  fortune  are  now  hecume  our  prisoners,  as  you  all  see:  iiis  tliero^ 
fore  our  great  prudence  in  llie  miseries  of  olhcrs,  to  sliew  compas- 
sion, ifwee\pectto  findthesame  ourselvea  in  their  condiiion.  Ti(is 
present  life  la  full  uf  puradoxes  mid  mutations ;  an  seditions,  TobLwi  iesi 
wars,  among  which  human  nuiure  can  scarce  avoid  loss  mi  p)<;ju-t 
dice:  therefore,  If  we  sliutupali  bowels  of  mercy  towartis  tliedisucss- 
edand  vanquishedftvccstahlisha  bloody  law  forever ngainstourfivlvfji. 
For  it  is  impmsible  that  they  who  are  cruel  towards  others,  NJiuuid 
find  mercy  al'terwards  themselves;  and  that  they  who  net  barltaiouily 
should  be  gently  used;  or  that  thoso  wlio  destroy  so  mitny  H|eu  Ur 
gainst  the  coininon  custom  of  the  (jrecks,  when  a  chaitge  of  furiuiju 
comes,  should  obtain  tlic  common  rights  and  privileges  of  all  odicf 
men.  For  which  of  the  Grceiaus  ever  put  to  death  those  tliat  &i\k* 
niittcd  and  delivered  up  themselves  upon  liopes  and  beUuf  uf  muiicy 
from  the  conquerors?  Orwhoeverpreferredcruolty  before  mefoy,  01 
precipitation  and  rashness  before pruditnce?  AUmatiMndindiifdagitiu 
in  lliis,  to  destroy  anenemy  iuBglit  byallwa^s  imagiuabW';  bvUyt'tU 
spare  those  who  submit  and  yield  op  tbemselv'es.  For  intke  uiiu  cas« 
■obstinacy  is  corrected,  and  in  the  ot iter  niercv  is  exercised.  For  «ur 
rage  is  naturally  cooled,  when  we  see  him  ihiit  was  un  enejuy,  uj)tm 
change  of  his  fortune,  now  lieat  our  foot,  subtUttiin|;1iim!ielfKf  tlicwjU 
nnd  pleasure  of  tiie  contjneror:  especially  men  of  mild  and  good  U'Wt 
ficrs  are  touched  with  a  sense  of  compassiun,  tlirotighraft'ectiutt  toUi^ 
same  common  nature  with  themselves.  Kven  the  Atheniaus<«il<  llts 
Peloponncsian  war,  when  they  took  many  of  the  IiaccdKinopiiu^  i^ 
the  Sphactcrix  islands,  yet  restored  them  to  the  Spartans  upuit  rail* 
som.  The  liacedxniontans,  likewise,  when  many  of  the  Allicn>ui>s 
and  their  confederates  fell  into  their  hands,  used  the  like  clemency; 
and  it  was  honourably  done  of  tliem  both:  for  Grecians  fliould  hiy 
aside  their  enmity  after  confjuest,  and  forbear  puniithmeni  after  the 
enemy  is  subdued.  He  that  revenges  himself'upuii  t4ie  coniguereii, 
after  he  hath  submitted  to  mercy,  punialm  not  an  enemy,  butnuhrf. 
wickedly  insults  over  the  weaktiess  of'  mankind.  Coaoerning  thii 
teverity  one  made  use  of  these  sayings  of  the  antient  philosophers— i 
O  man!  be  nut  over  wise;  know  ihyirlfi  consider  funane ^i)m-> 
mands  all  tilings,  Wliat,  \  beseech  yon,  wasMhe  rea*ini  that  all  tbt 
Grecians  in  former  ago,  after  tlieii"victoric9;(iMd.i»ot:0>akb.tlieir  tro- 
phies of  Btone-y-but  of  miiacmj  wood?-  waS'-it/OOtf  thu;U'tlit)i  Dotl-t 


908  DIODORUS  SICULV8;  Boi&  lOhfit 

tinued  b«it  a  short  iidm^  so  the'  memory  of  foroier  ttnJfJ  diffuiutss 
should  in  a  little  time  vanish?  If yoa  are  reaelved  tofespMNMeiMl 
hatred  and  animosities,  then  learn  first  to  slight  the  snoantistaB^ 
of  human  affiiirs.  Many  times  a  smalLoccasi»D,aiid  a  littla  (fmm  af 
fortune,  has  giren  a  check  to  the  iosoleacies  of  thepraadail  of  mtm 
And  if  you  purpose  at  any  time  to  put  an  end  to  the :  war,  {wineh  ii 
probable) ,  Iiow  can  you  have  a  better  opportunity  than  tlii8»ia  sthMi^ 
by  your  mercy  and  clemency  towards  the  cooqoeredy  yoa  lay  thi 
foundations  of  p^ace  and  amity?  Do  you  think  the  AtheniaaSyliytlNS 
loss  in  Sicily,  have  no  more  forces  left,  who  are  lords  almoUgfaH 
the  islands  of  Greece,  and  of  the  sea  coasts  of  Ekirope  and  Asie?*  Flsr 
not  long  ago,  though  they  lost  three  hundred  gallies  in  Egyptf  ytt 
they  compelled  the  king  (who  seemed  to  be  the  conqucfDr)  to 
peace  with  then}  upon  terms  on  bis  part  dishonottrablCi  Aod 
tofore,  though  Xerxes  had  destroyed  thdir  city,  yet  not  loog  after  Aey 
overcame  him,  and  became  masters  of  all  Greece.  This  noble  cky 
thrives  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  calami  ties,  and  nothingsmaH  or  mean 
is  the  subject  of  any  of  its  consultations.  And  therefore  it  is  both  ho^ 
nourable  and  profitable,  that  we  should  rather  (by  sparing  the  oapthts) 
enter  into  a  league  of  friendship  with  them,  than  to  widen  tbehrtech^ 
by  destroying  of  them.  For  if  we  put  them  to  death,  we  oarij g»* 
tify  our  rage  with  a  little  unprofitable  pleasure  for  the  preaeotf  bet 
if  we  preserve  them,  they  (whom  we  use  so  well)  will  he  ior  ever 
grateful;  and  from  all  mankind  we  shall  reap  eternal  praise  anil  ho- 
nour. Yea,  but  others  may  say,  some  of  the  Grecuins  have  kiBcd 
their  prisoners.  What  then  ?  if  they  have  been  praised  and  huiiiiMiol 
for  this  cruelty,  let  us  then  imitate  them  who  have  been  so  caiefolto 
preserve  their  honour;  but  if  the  best  and  cbiefest  among  as  jusdy 
condemn  them,  let  not  us  do  the  same  thing  witli  them,  wibo  aetsd 
apparently  so  wickedly. .  As  tongas  these  men  who  have  yetldad  ep 
themselves  to  our  mercy,  suffer  nothing  sad  and  doleful  Irani  «Sy  all 
the  nations  will  blame  the  Athenians:  but  when  they  hear  thatyoe 
have  destroyed  the  prisoners,  against  the  law  of  nations^  all  tbeahana 
and  disgrace  will  fall  upon  yourselves.  And  if  there  be  any  rqaid 
to  desert,  we  may  consider  that  the  glory  of  the  eity  of  Atlieaa  it 
such,  that  all  acknowledge  themselves  bound  to  be  gratefel  foftthe 
.benefits  and  advantages  reaped  from  tlience.  Tliese  are  they  wi» 
first  ennobled  Greece  with  civil  education;  for  when,  by  the  apacU 
bounty  of  the  gods,  it  was  only  among  them,  they  freely. inipeitadil 
to  all  others.  These  framed  laws,  by  means  whereof^  men  that  he* 
fore  lived  like  beasts,  were  brought  into  orderly  society  tb  live  tf^e* 
ther  according  to  the  rules  of  justice:  these  «were  ihay  Mho  fiiat  41 
all  protected  those  in  distress  that  fled  to  theni;  and 


the  receiving  and  defending  of  suppliants  in  such  cases  to  br  inviolably 
observed  amongst  all  otlier  nations ;  and  it  were  a  most  unwoithy 
Ihini;  now  to  deny  the  benefit  of  those  laws  to  them  who  were  the 
■athors  of  them.  And  this  much  in  general  tn  all.  Arvd  now  I  shiill 
hint  something  panicularly  to  some  of  yuu,  concerning  the  duties 
incUiabenC  upon  such  as  should  liave  regard  to  the  welfare  and  hap- 
piness of  mankind.  You  that  are  iheorators  and  men  of  learning  of 
tltis  city,  you,  I  say,  have  compassion  on  them,  whose  country  is  the 
nursery  of  all  leaniing  and  honourable  education.  All  you  who  are 
tnitiated  into  the  holy  mysteries,  spare  and  save  those  by  whom  you 
were  iasiructed.  You  who  have  reaped  any  advantage  by  ingenious 
education,  now  be  grateful  Cor  that  advantage.  You  who  heivafter 
liope  for  improvement  thence,  debar  not  yourselves  by  your  cruelty 
now.  For  whereshailstraii^rs  beinstructed  in  the  liberal  arts,  iF 
Athens  be  destroyed?  Some &hort  resentment  Indeed  liiey  du  deserve 
for  llieir  present  offence,  but  their  many  good  acts  may  justly  dial- 
lenge  fcturos  of  Itindness  and  good  will.  Besides  this  merit  of  tlic 
city,  if  any  do  but  considcrthe  private  circumstances  of  ibe  prisoners, 
there  will  be  just  cause  and  ground  found  to  shew  them  mercy.  For 
the  confederates,  being  under  tlic  command  of  their  tuperiors,  are 
forced  to  be  engaged  in  the  same  war  with  them.  Wherefore,  though 
it  may  be  thought  just  to  execute  revenge  upon  them  tbat  were  the 
chief  authors  of  the  injuries,  yet  eertsinly  it  is  very  fit  and  eommend- 
abie  to  pardon  such  as  are  offenders  airainst  their  wills.  What  shall 
I  say  of  Nieias?  who  from  the  beginning  (favouring  the  Syracusans) 
dissuaded  the  Athenians  from  this  expedition  against  Sicily;  aikdwat 
slwayskindand  courteous  l{i  all  the  Syracusans  that  ever  came  thither. 
How  base  aod  unworthy  then  would  it  he  to  put  Nieias  to  death,  wtiu 
was  our  advocate  in  the  senate  at  Athens,  and  that  he  (finding  no 
mercy  for  his  kindnesses)  should  undergo  a  rigorous  and  iinplacablc 
revenge  for  bis  obedience  to  his  governors?  So  that  thougti  Alci- 
biades  (who  was  the  great  promoter  of  this  war)  avoided,  by  hisfiiglit, 
revenge  both  from  us  and  the  Athenians,  yet  he  who  w;is  the  most 
courteous  of  all  the  Athenians,  cannot  be  thought  worthy  of  common 
favour.  Considering,  therefore,  the  catastrophe  ofihis  present  life,  I 
cannot  but  conipassioaate  so  unfortunate  a  eondiiion.  For, not  Ion" 
ago,  he  was  esteemed  one  of  the  bravest  men  of  iircece,  and  most 
•pplaudedfor  tke.iulegrityof  hi*  lifieandcotiversation;  wid  ihe  eyi>s 
and  good  wtthea  of  all  the  city  evpry  where  followbd  liim ;  blK  tiutfj 
with  his  ariDG  piBtooed  in  tbe  chains  of  captivity,  of  a  defArm^ 
couBtenaiice,  aufferiog  under  the  miseraMc  condition  of  a  aWrtf^  m 
if  fortune  i«  this aiaB's  lile  gtoricd  toskew tlie  greatnest  of  twr power^ 
■UMtu  wiMtt  buuotifiil  iDitulg^Bce  tuwirds  «i,  wc«i»^it  toieinyU 


^(MJieooijMtt  tbe.ttatc!  «adftonditi9a;of^inM}NrUil 
'  ^emiicMi^  and  jKot;  tO'  iwult  \mkh  ittaAmiomkh 

)ib  aliditdni  wUh|Nl3F  aod  compatioik  •*      Muv:Mt:ti  ^nriitvrctotiONi 

.  Bitt.GylinpuSftbe.LiQooiM^  bocnU^  Jmpiwi^ii  iiliiiMiiii 

-gupft  tbi^  AitbffoiBila^  ascends  :tfae  tsUMisdl,  Mmi  spMiii«lM»  JttlMil| 

gifat  admiration,  O  ye  Syraonsans^  to  see.yoa  (led>aBidaHhgr,«ii|ii||(| 

^rdsjeven  while  you  axe  .midct  tbajsaaiit  W^iipmsaifcMa 

yciu  X^fMyi  groan  under^    If  in  the  very  lieight 

coqU^i  in  your  revenge  Uiwaid^tkeni  whoivamei 

tpjjvio  ypuF.ooiuKry,  whjr  do  w»cDnteBdiff'W!ejUPeBdt\9tii4tYi 

Iifigreat  you  by  the  gods^O  ye  Sjpnoosana,  tojgiw  nwif  lirnitfUltl 

fre^y: declare  unto  yon  my  opinion;  iot^itbkg^Sputm^  iilmalito 

forced  to'speak  after  the. . manner  of  the^Spfeaiawvaad  'jmllMi^i* 

pUce,  some  may  inquicey.hoiKeomeiftittopasSytitetMMiMi^iaripiA 

fessea  himself  to  bealr  so  muoh'COfliipatlsionr.t«wmk'< 

who  haye  made  bis  old  age  the  morci  miseraUe  fay  Ahdl 

ao4  now  appears  in  the  .assembly  ki  a  moornfidtlMdiiliatidlirft^^ 

shedding  of  mady  tearsy>pleadafor  merqr  Cor  tlwdb,) 

dered  bis  own  children?  Certainly  httiiano< 

g^ts  the  denth  of  bis  nearest  relations^  as  tojadgeiife/fitflaiiA  jpMlil 

spare  them  who  were  their  moat  bitter  and  implaeaMelhiiaaMfia  HMi 

many  are  here  present  now  in  this  .great  assarobiy »• 

ingfor  thf  death.  4>f  their  children?  At  whiehmrds^i^ 

of  the  assembly  eent  forth  load  greJaus,  he  adUedlvil 

he)  that  thoae  sighs  are  the  witnesses  of  tfaeasbcsies  fcaiiimai  vMilK 

many  broth^rst  kindred,  and  frietMb^lost  inthiassar^dn  yai 

desire?-  At  which,  when  maujr 'nwre  .maDiftsscd>>tbcir{) 

Seest  tlioa  mot,  (saya  Gylipptts)^  O  Nieboiaasl^Kibiii 

nians  have  made  miserable?  All  thesie,  withoaihaiiy 

deprived  of  their  dearest  and.  neanst  relalions, 

the  more  to  hate  the  name  of  the 

the  greater  love  to  their  relations^  kindred,:dnA  lUkMalo'^ 

ifurd  and  unjust  a  thing  is  it,  O  ye  Syracuaans,  far  4aim^>\ 

to  sacrifice  their-  lives  for  yoo^and  yon  'not*t#ti 

upon  their  ioye terete  enemies^  <  nay^  behig  ao  •f^r  Arona> 

who  liave  lost  their  lives  in  defence  of  the  cwn'iiSstt  lih<HJF|idi|jH 

prefer  the  safety  of  the  enemits,  befcrethehondaftofslJMe  AMiikM  * 

deserved  so.  well.    You  have  made  a  law,  ahdttlMii 


countrymen  shall  be  adorned  and  beautified  r  wbai%itafWi 

cap  you  invent,  than  to  destroy  tfaielr  nnrrdeliiie  lifonlatt  li  tatfMUi 

gods  permit)  that  by  making  these  eni 


:•■  V 


feAjmuj 


tirriiiJne  lo  vet  them  up  as  living  trophies  for  tlie  rem  cm  b  ranee  of  your 
dead  friends.  But  riuw  ilic  denomination  of  enemies  is  changed  into 
that  of  suppliants.  Fintn  whence  arises  tills  tenderness?  For  tliey  who 
first  compiled  Iflws  concerning  these  matters,  decreed  mercy  to  the drs-' 
tressed,  byt  punisliintnl  trt  them  that  acted  wickedly.  And  now 
under  which  of  these  denominations  shall  we  account  the  prisoners j 
as  distressed  anj  afflicted?  But  what  evil  spirit  mus  it  that  compelled 
them  to  make  war  n'gainst  liie  Syracusans  without  any  provocation ; 
aadthrealiingHll  thebondsofpeace,(nhichissodesirRblc!tmon^tal1), 
to  plot  and  contrive  the  destruction  of  your  city  ?  Therefore,  as  they 
b^an  nn  niijust  war,  let  them  with  courage,  or  without,  suffer  and 
undergo  the  events  of  war:  for  if  they  had  been  coiKiuerors,  we 
should  have  felt  their  nrosl  inexoruble  cruelty;  but  now,  being  sub- 
dued, they  seek  to  avoid  the  punishment  in  the  most  low  and  humble' 
posture  of  distret^sed  suppliants.  What  if  they  should  be  answered, 
tiiat  their  coveiousness  and  wicked  ambition  lias  hurled  them  into' 
these  calamities?  Let  them  not  therefore  accuse  fortune,  nor  chal- 
lenge (o  themselves  the  name  of  suppliiiiits;  for  this  is  only  due  to* 
them  who  are  fallen  into  misfortunes,  and  yet  have  preserved  their 
innocency  and  integrity;  but  they  who  make  it  the  business  of  their 
lives  to  act  all  manner  of  injustice,  shut  up  all  the  doors  and  passages 
of  mercy  against  themselves.  What  is  it  that  is  most  base  will  they 
not  devise;  what  wickedness  will  they  not  commit?  It  is  the  spe- 
cial property  of  coveiousness  not  to  l)e  content  with  its  present  con- 
dition, butvioletiilytolust  after  things  remote,  and  what  is  not  our  own; 
which  is  most  notoriously  done  by  these  men :  for  though  they  were 
the  most  happy  and  prosperous  of  all  the  Grecians,  ^et  not  being  able 
to  bear  the  weight  of  their  own  greatness, -ihcy  thirsted  after  Sicily, 
{though  separated  from  them  by  so  large  a  sen),  to  dividcit  by  lot  a- 
mongst  themselves.  A  most  horrid  and  wicked  thing  it  is  to  make 
war  ujjon  them,  who  never  gave  any  occasion  or  provocation ;  and 
this  these  men  have  done.  These  are  they  who  not  long  ago  entered 
into  a  league  of  peace  and  friendship  with  us,  and  then  on  a  sudden, 
begirt  our  city  with  their  forces.  Certainly  it  is  a  great  piece  of  pride 
and  presumption  to  forejudge  the  events  of  a  war,  and  to  order  and 
determine  the  punislunentofan  enemy  before  the  conquest:  and  this 
they  did  not  omit ;  tbr  before  they  came  into  Sicily,   it  was  enacted 

ill  their  connnon  assemblies That  the  Syracusans  and  Seliountincs 

should  be  made  slaves,  and  all  the  rest  be  brought  under  tribute. 
And  now,  when  so  many  complicated  vices  center  in  these  men,  as 
insatiable  coveiousness,  fraud,  and  treachery,  instHTemble  pride  and 
insolency,  what  man  in  his  wits  can  shew  them  mercy?  especial]; 
when  >t  is  so  well  known  how  they  dealt  with  them  of  MityleiKt  For 


Jl|S-  moDonus  sicuLUfl* 


after  they  had  subdued  theuij  although  they  had  cooimitud 
fcDce,  but  only  desired  ta  pieseive  tlieir  libertji  yet  tliey  ci 
them  (dl  to  be  putto.thcswurd;  aaiost  cruel  and  bftrbanKu  kI;; 
this  against  Grecians,  against  confederates,  and  against  thaw  i^ 
Iiad  merited  better  things  at  their  haods.  A  ad  therefore  let  ihc&M 
ibluk  it  grievous  to  sji^r  that  tbemseiTes,  which  ihejr  liaw  mtmi 
vpaa  others:  fbr>it  is  butjuslibat  bewbo  makeaahiw  to  liioili 
a^ioald  be  subject  to  llic  same  himself.  But  why  do  I  spnkof  ikU 
Wbao  they  took  Meloa^  they  most  miserably  destroyed  all  iW  jt^ 
of  tbe  city.  And  the  Scioneans  of  the  culony  of  the  McleaDa  ii^». 
vreiit  tbc  same  fate.  So  tliat  lhes«  two  sorto  «f  people,  wini 
fell  into  the  crtteL  ba»dB  of  the  Atiieuiau,  were  so  totaJlj  im 
td,  titat  there  was  noiw  left  tu  bury  the  dead.  Tbejr  wlif  i 
these  thiDgs,  are  not  ScythiasS]  but  a  people  who  boeat  of  ham 
and  mercy  above  alloihers.  These  are  tbey,that,by  public  «& 
teity  destroyed  these  cities.  Now,  caft  you  imagine  how  they  tmik 
have  dealt  with  the  city  ofSyracuse,  if  theybad  ta&aiit>  Ctnatu 
tbey  whoare  so  cruel  towards  their owo  confederates,  would  ban  ii- 
vented  Mmethiag  more  vile  and  horrid  to  liare  executed  tipooto^ 
gera.  By  all  the  rulesof  law  and  justice,  therefore,  there  isii«M9, 
remains  for  these  men,  who  have  debarred  iheiawlves  of  all  p^  (A 
compassion  to  their  present  caUiuities.  For  whether  csu  tbejr^ 
To  the  gods;  whose  worship  according  to  the  laws  of  the  coW^ 
they  endeavoured  to  root  up?  To  men,  whom  with  all  their  ini{^ 
they  were  studying  and  contriving  to  malce  slaves  i  Will  th^  m^ 
their  addresses  to  Ceres  and  Proserpina,  when  they  came  hitbtfH 
spoil  and  lay  waste  the  island  dedicated  to  them  i  So  it  isi  B«tif 
some,  the  people  of  Athens  are  in  no  fault,  but  AlcihiaJes,  whe  4r 
vised  and  persuaded  them  to  this  war.  What  tlieD?  we  know  tktf 
they  who  advise,  for  the  most  part  frame  their  speeches  tbatwa^wki4( 
tbey  conceive  is  most  agreeable  to  the  humour  of  their  auditiMt 
and  he  that  is  to  give  his  vote,  often  suggests  to  tho  oiaioa  i^«kk 
wonld  have  to  be  ur^d.  For  tlie  orator  commaods  Dot  tbo  jmyl^; 
but  the  people  order  the  orator  to  propose  what  is  adrisabtcMl 
then  determine  what  they  think  fit.  Besides,  if  we  patdcxi  the  ■if*': 
factors  upon  ihcir  casting  the  fault  upon  their  advisers,  we  fiin^ 
every  wicked  feJlow  if/ith  a  ready  excuse  ibr  cleariitg  huuclf.  ft 
speak  plaiDly*  it  would  be  the  most  unjustthing  in  the  world,  togm 
thanks  to  the  people  for  all  the  good  and  advantage  we  at  any  daa 
reap,  and  execute  revenge  upon  the  orators  for  all  the  injuiJM  «* 
suffer.  It  is  admirable  to  see  some  so  fiir  besotted,  as  to  judgeitfitAl? 
abiadea,  now  out  of  our  reach,  should  be  punished,  and  yet  the  fA* 
soncTsnowjustly  brought  to  judgment  should  be  discharged}  th( 


Ch&p.  TL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  513 

thereby  it  might  be  evident  to  all,  tbat  tbe  Syracusans  are  so  sottish^ 
as  not  to  have  any  sense  of  what  is  ill :  but  admit  the  truth  to  be  so,  that 
the  advisers  were  tlie  cause  of  the  war,  then  let  the  people  accuse 
them  because  they  have  led  them  into  such  a  disaster.     In  the  mean 
time  do  you,  (as  in  justice  you  ought),  revenge  yourselves  upon  the 
multitude,  by  whom  you  have  most  injuriously  suffered.     The  sum 
of  all  is  this,  if  knowingly  and  advisedly  they  have  thus  wronged  you, 
they  deserve  to  suffer  upon  that  account;  if  they  came  upon  you 
rashly  and  inconsiderately,  they  are  not  to  be  spared  for  that  reason, 
lest  they  make  it  a  practice  to  injure  others,  under  pretence  of  un- 
advisedness  and  inconsideration.     For  it  is  not  just  the  Syracusans 
should  be  ruined  by  the  rashness  and  ignorance  of  the  Athenians, 
nor,  where  the  damage  is  irreparable,  to  admit  of  an  excuse  for  the 
offenders.     Yea,  by  Jupiter!    But  Nicias  (say  some)   pleaded  the 
cause  of  the  Syracusans,  and  was  the  only  person  who  dissuaded  the 
peo{)le  from  the  war.     What  he  said  there,  indeed  we  heard,  and 
what  he  has  acted  here,  we  have  now  seen.    For  he  who  there  argued 
against  the  expedition,  was  here  general  of  an  army  against  us;  and 
he  who  was  then  the  Syracusan  advocate,  but  even  now  besieged  and 
walled  in  their  city.     He  who  was  then  so  well  affected  towards  you, 
lately  commanded  the  continuance  both  of  the  war  and  the  siege, 
when  Demosthenes  and  all  the  rest  would  have  drawn  oif  and  return- 
ed.   I  judge,  therefore,  you  will  not  have  more  regard  to  words  than 
things,  to  promises  than  experiences,  to  things  dark  and  uncertain, 
than  to  those  tfiat  are  seen  and  apparent.     Yet  by  Jupiter,  I  con- 
fcss«  it  is  a  very  wicked  thing  to  perpetuate  enmities  and  differences: 
but  is  not  tlie  due  punishment  of  those  that  violate  the  peace,  the 
most  natural  way  to  put  an  end  to  hostilities?  It  is  certainly  most 
unjust,  wlien  it  is  apparent,  if  they  had  been  conquerors,  they  would 
liave  made  the  conquered  all  slaves,  to  spare  them  now  they  are  con- 
quered, as  if  tlicy  had  done  nothing  amiss:  for  thus  getting  their 
necks  out  of  the  halter,  they  will  speam  you  fair  for  a  time,  and  per- 
haps remember  the  kindness  so  long  as  it  is  for  their  advantage,  but 
no  longer.     One  thing  more  1  have  to  say,  if  you  follow  this  advice, 
besides  many  other  mischiefs,  you  disoblige  the  I^icedtemonians,  who 
readily  undertook  this  war  for  your  sakes,  and  sent  hither  aids  and 
su[)plies  as  your  confederates,  when  they  might  have  been  quiet,  and 
siiilered  Sicily  to  have  been  wasted  and  destroyed.     And  therefore, 
if  you  release  the  prisoners,  and  enter  into  a  new  league  with  the 
Athenians,  it  will  evidently  appear  that  you  betray  your  confederates; 
and  wherjas  it  is  now  in  your  power  to  ruin  and  destroy  the  common 
enemies,  by  discharging  of  those  who  are  the  best  of  their  soldiers 
you  put  them  in  a  better  condition  for  a  second  encouqter.     1  cua 
Vol.  I.  No.  3S,  \:v\; 


514  DiODoaus  sicuLus.  BoakXIUi 

I  I'll  11  ssasaaes  saaaae^— ^—HIB 

never  be  persuaded  that  the  AtlieoiaDS,  who  bear  such  an  iovetaite 
hatred^  will  ever  continue  long  to  be  your  friends.  Whilst  they  oan- 
not  hurt  you^  so  long  they  will  make  a  shew  of  kindness;  but  wheo 
they  think  tliey  have  power  enough^  then  they  will  execute  whtf 
before  they  long  designed.  To  conclude,  I  earnestly  bgscech 
thee^  O  Jiii)iter!  and  all  tliegods,  that  the  enemies  be  not  spuredy 
that  the  confederacy  be  not  deserted,  and  that  another  danger  of  nda 
be  not  brought  upon  the  country.  And  to  you,  O  ye  SyrMUsans,  I 
say  if  any  mischief  happen  to  you  by  releasing  the  enemy,  you  kftfe 
no  colour  of  excuse  for  yourselves. 

Thus  spoke  the  Laconian ;  upon  which  the  people  changed  thek 
minds,  and  confirmed  tiie  advice  of  Diocles,  and  withoat  delay  the 
generals  with  all  their  confederates  were  put  to  death.  But  the  a- 
tizens  of  Athens  were  adjudged,  and  thrust  down  into  the  quairks. 
But  some  of  them  that  had  been  well  bred  and  instructed  in  seveial 
useful  arts,  wbre  by  the  young  men  loosed  from  their  fetters  and 
discharged.  All  the  rest  almost  died  miserably  through  ill  usage  is 
their  imprisonment. 


CHAP.  111. 

Diocles  instituted  laws  for  Sicily:  siiffered  by  one  of  his  own  Ism, 
Three  hundred  appointed  to  govern  in  Athens.  ThejttAemmn 
beaten  at  sea  by  the  Lacedcemonians  at  Oropus.  j/hiiimin 
recalled  from  banishment. 

THE  war  now  ended,  Diocles  prescribed  laws  for  the  Syiacnsans. 
But  one  thing  very  remarkable  happened  concerning  this  man:  for 
being  of  an  inexorable  nature,  and  rigid  and  severe  against  the  offihadeiii 
amongst  other  laws  which  he  made,  one  was  this.^Thatif  any  SMO 
came  armed  into  the  court,  he  should  be  put  to  death,  withoatany  ex- 
ception of  ignorance,  or  of  any  other  circumstance  of  the  fact  whatso* 
ever,  it  happened  that  some  enemies  made  a  sudden  incursion  iota 
the  borders  of  the  Syracusans,  and  he  was  to  go  forth- against  thcuk 
In  the  mean  time,  a  seditious  tumult  arose  near  the  cqurt:  upon 
which  he  hastened  thither  with  his  sword  by  his  side;  which  bdiig 
taken  notice  of  by  a  private  man,  who  cried  out.— .That  he  violated 
the  laws  lie  himself  had  made.  No,  by  Jove,  (says  he),I  will  eonfirai 
them :  and  so  drawing  his  sword,  ran  himself  through.  These 
the  actions  of  this  year. 


I 


CIU9i.i7/v*  DI0D0RU9  nctTLOs;  515 

After  tbbi  when  Ctllias  govenKd  in  chief  at  Athen^i  the*  Romans 
cboie  fonr  ftitlitary  tribunes  to  execute  tlie  office  of  consuls^  Pub- 
lim  C!ortiettiiSy  Caius  Valerius,  Cneius  Fabilis  Vibnianus,  ao.d  Qnin- 
ths  Cineinnatus.  At  the  saque  time  the  nittety-seeond  olympiad  was 
cetebrated  at  Elis,  where  Exasnetns  of  Agrigentum  was  victor.  At 
Ais  time  the  Athenians  began  to  be  fn  conteftipt,  by  reason  of  their 
misfortunes  in  Sicily.  For  soon  after,  the  Chiahs,  Samians,  Byzan* 
tiaes^  and  a  great  part  of  their  confederates,  fell  off  to  the  Laced®- 
lAonians.  The  people  of  Athens  being  upon  this  account  in  great 
perplexity,  laid  aside  the  democmtical  government,  and  chuse  four 
hotidred  to  manage  the  affairs  of  th6  commonwealth.  The  sove- 
itigu'  power  being  now  devolved  upon  a  few,  they  built  more 
gallies,  and  rigged  out  a  fleet  of  forty  sail.  After  somef' disagree- 
ment among  the  officers,  they  sailed  to  Oropus,  whe;re  the  enemy ^s 
gallies  lay  at  anchor:  hereupon  a  battle  Was  fought,  and  the  Lac)^* 
dhsmonians  prevailed  and  took  two-and-twenty  sail. 

As  for  the  Syracusans,  when  the  war  was  ended  with  th^  Athe- 
nians, they  rewarded  the  Lacedemonians  their  Confederates,  of  whoni 
Gylippus  was  general,  with  the  spoils  taken  in  the  war,  and  senf  with 
them  five-and-thirty  gallies  to  assist  them  i^inst  the  Athenians,  oF 
which  Hermocrates,  a  great  man  among  the  dliaens^  was  admiral. 
Then  all  the  booty  and  prey  was  brought  together,  and  outnyf  the 
spoils  they  adorned  the  temples^  and  re^atdedev^  soldier  accord- 
ing te  his  merit.  ' 

After  these  things,  Diocles,  a  man  of  great  authority  amongst  the 
people,  prevailed  to  have  the  administration  of  the  govemrtient  shar- 
ed, by  choosing  ihe  magistrates  by  lot,  and  ordered  that  theiv^Iionld 
be  law-makers  appointed  both  to  settle  the  commofiwealth,  and  to  make 
new  laws  for  the  future  government.  The  Sjrracusans  therefore  chose 
such  from  among  the  citizens  as  they  judged  most  prudent,  of  whom 
the  chiefest  was  Diocles:  he  was  a  man  of  such  excellent  parts,  and 
of  so  great  reputation,  that  the  laws  (though  made  with  the  jotnt  help 
of  others)  were  called  from  him  the  Diodean  laws.  And  he  was  nut 
only  admired  by  the  Syracusans  whilst  he  lived,  but,  when  he  was 
dead,  they  honoured  him  as  r  hero,  and  built  a  temple  to  his  me-> 
mory,  which  Dionysius  afterwards  pulled  down  when  he  built  the 
new  wall.  All  the  rest,  likewise, of  the  Siculi,high1y  valued  this  man: 
and  upon  that  account*  many  of  the  cities  through  Sicily  used  the 
same  laws  that  he  had  instituted,  till  such  time  as  the  Romans 
brought  all  Sicily  under  tlie  power  of  Rome.  And  though  in  times 
long  after  Diocles,  Cephalus,  in  the  time  of  the  govemmenf  Of  Ti- 
moleon  and  Polydorus,  when  Hiero  reigned,  instituted  laws  for  the 


5 1 6  DioDokus  SICULU8.  Bodk  XIU. 


Syracusatis,  yet  neither  of  them  were  ever  called  hw-^makersy  but 
interpreters  of  the  law-maker;  because  the  former  laws  beiag  wfk* 
ten  in  old  and  obsolete  language^  were  scarce  to  be  underatDod*  Audi 
whereas  there  are  many  things  in  these  laws  very  resiarkabley  jef 
the  great  hatred  against  knavery  and  dishonesty  appears  chiefly  froBi 
this^fhat  the  bitterest  and  severest  punishments  are  levelled  against 
all  those  that  violate  justice.     His  great  dexterity  in  civil  afTairs  is  e^ 

dcnthcnce .Tiiat  he  appointed  a  certain  mulct  orfinealmostfiirevciy 

offence  or  cause,  private  or  public,  proportionate  to  the  nature  of 
the  tiling.  He  is  very  concise  in  his  expressions,  leaving  mucli  to 
the  disquisition  of  the  learned  reader.  The  sad  manner  of  his  death 
is  a  sufficient  testimony  of  the  virtuous  resolution  of  his  mind.  I 
am  the  rather  desirous  to  speak  more  tlian  ordinary  of  these  things 
in  regard  that  [most  authors  heretofore  have  mentioned  very  little 
concerning  him. 

But  to  return  to  the  Athenians,  when  they  heard  of  the  roin  of 
their  array  in  Sicily,  tliey  took  it  most  grievously,  yet  slaclced  no- 
thing in  their  contests  with  the  Lacedaemonians  about  the  sovereignty^ 
but  prepared  a  greater  fleet,  and  let  their  money  fly  abroad  amcn^M 
all  their  confederates  that  were  resolved  to  stick  by  them  to  the  nt* 
most  extremity,  to  gain  and  keep  the  sovereign  power.  And  to  Aat 
end  they  gave  full  authority  to  four  hundred  persons  chosen  oat  of 
the  citizens  to  rule  and  govern  the  commonwealth:  for,  in  their  pre- 
sent circumstances,  they  preferred  an  oligarchy  before  their  former 
democracy.  But  the  thing  did  not  in  the  least  answer  their  expecta^ 
tions;  for  they  were  much  more  unsuccessful  afterwards;  for  they 
sent  forth  two  generals  that  were  at  dissention  between  themselves^ 
with  a  fleet  of  forty  sail  against  the  enemy.  And  although  the  pre- 
sent distressed  condition  and  bad  state  of  affairs  with  the  Athenians 
called  aloud  for  peace  and  concord  amongst  themselves,  yet  the  ge- 
nerals did  all  they  could  to  widen  the  breach,  and  cherisii  the  enmn 
ties  and  ar.imosities  they  bore  one  against  another.  At  length  sailing 
to  Oropus,  unawares  and  unprepared, they  fought  with  the  Pelopoo- 
nesians,  where,  through  their  carelesisness  at  the  beginning,  and  their 
sloth  and  inadvertency  in  the  heat  of  the  fight,  tiicy  lost  two-and-^ 
twenty  ships,  and  brought  the  rest  with  great  difficulty  mto  Eretria. 

Upon  this  the  confederates  of  the  Athenians  (con^derinff  the  over* 
throw  in  Sicily,  and  the  late  ill  management  o£  the  two  commandeis) 
joined  with  the  Lacedaemonians.  Darius  likewise,  the  kin^^  of  IVr* 
sia,  sought  earnestly  to  enter  into  a  league  with  the  Lacedemoniaiis: 
and  to  that  end  Pharnabazus,  his  lieutenant  upon  the  sea-coasts, 
supplied  the  Lacedaemonians  with  money,  and  sent  for  three  hundnd 


C^.  III.  DIODOmUS  8TCULUS.  91/ 

ships  from  Phoenicia,  which  he  had  before  ordered  to  be  sent  to  them  at 

Boeotia.  And  now,  when  the  Athenians  were  involved  in  so  many  mis- 

chiefsat  one  time,alimen  thought  the  war  at  an  end:  for  none  had  the 

least  hopes  that  the  Athenians  could  make  any  further  opposition, 

not  for  the  least  moment  of  time.     But  the  thing  had  a  far  difierent 

issue  from  that  which  was  commonly  supposed ;  for  such  was  the 

lirave  spirit  of  the  Athenians,  that  the  event  was  quite  contrary^  wliich 

happened  upon  this  occasion _Alcibiades  being  banished  from  A- 

thens^  aided  the  Lacedsemonians  for  some  time  in  the  war,  and  was 

very  useful  to  them,  being  an  eloquent  orator,  daring  and  bold>  of 

the  roost  noble  family,  and  the  greatest  estate  of  any  of  the  citizeos^ 

and  therefore  esteemed  the  chief  man  of  Athens.    This  man  having 

a  great  desire  to  be  recalled  from  his  banishment,  did  all  he  could  to 

ingratiate  himself  with  the  people  of  Athens,  by  doing  them  some 

remarkable   service,  at  a  time  when    they  seemed  to  be  in  the 

lowest  ebb  of  fortune.    And  therefore  having  a  great  interest  ia 

Pharnabazus,  Darius 's  lieutenant,  and  understanding  that  hedesign- 

cd  to  send  three  hundred  ships  to  aid  the  Lacedaemonians,  prevailed 

with  bim  to  alter  hb  resolution.     For  he  suggested  to  him,  that  it 

was  not  safe  for  the  king  to  make  the  Lacedemonians  too  strong,  nor 

for  the  advantage  of  the  Persians :  and  that  it  was  much  more  their 

interest  to  keep  the  balance  equal,  that  so  the  two  commonwealclis 

■light  be  in  continual  war  one  with  another. 

Pbarnabazua  cooceiviog  Alcibiades  had  given  him  sound  and 
wholesome  advice,  sends  back  the  fleet  to  Phoenicia:  and  thus  the 
aid  intended  for  the  Locedflemonians  was  prevented  by  Alcibiades. 
A  little  time  after  he  was  recalled,  and  made  general  of  the  amy,  and 
overcame  the  Laced«nionians  in  several  battles,  and  raised  up  his 
eountry  from  their  low  estate,  to  their  former  height  of  glory.  But 
ot  these  matters  we  shall  speak  more  fully  hereafter,  lest  we  should 
transgress  the  due  order  of  our  history  by  too  much  anticipation. 


518  DTOpOHUS  STCULUS.  Book  XHT. 


CHAP.  IV. 

7%e  government  by  four  hundred  dhrogated  m  Athens^  The  vie* 
tory  by  the  Atliemam  over  the  Lacedaemonians  ai  sea^  beiwmm 
Sestos  and  Abydos.  The  Perxian  garrison  driven  out  qf  Ani^ 
iandros  by  the  help  of  the  LaceiUvmonians.  Twenty^tWQ  yean 
of  the  Peloponnesian  war  ended*  Here  Thucydides  e9ids  Mi 
history. 

AFTER  this  year  was  endedj  Theopompus  governed  Athensy  and  tht 
RomaDS  invested  foar  military  tribunes  with  consular  dignity,  Tibe* 
rius  Posthumius,  Caius  Cornelius,  Caius  Valerius^  and  Cfieio  Fahiiia. 
At  this  time  the  Atlienians  abrogated  the  authority  of  the  four  hon* 
dred,  and  restored  the  democracy.  Theramenes  was  the  author  of 
this  change,  (asober  and  prudent  man),who  was  the  only  peraoo  thai 
advised  the  recalling  of  Alcibiades,  (by  w|^om  they  recovered  their 
strength);  and  by  many  othe)r  good  offices  performed  hyThemnenctj 
to  the  advantage  of  the  public,  he  gained  great  authority  and  hvow 
with  the  people.    But  not  long  after,  the  following  things  happened. 

At  this  time,  in  order  to  carry  on  the  war,  two  generals  were  chosen 
by  the  Athenians,  Thrasyllus  and  Thrasybulus,  who  rendezvoused  a 
fleet  at  Samos,  and  there  trained  and  exercised  the  soldiers  every  day  to 
inure  them  to  fighting  at  sea.  Mindarus,  the  Lacedaemonian  admirali 
in  the  mean  while  lay  for  some  time  at  Miletus,  expecting  the  aidi 
from  Pharnabazus,  and  hearing  tliat  three  hundred  gallies  were  ar- 
rived from  Phoenicia,  was  confident  now  he  should  be  able,  with  so 
great  supplies,  utterly  to  ruin  the  Athenian  state.  But  presently  aftcfy 
having  intelligence  that  the  fleet  was  returned  to  Phoenicia,  through 
the  persuasions  of  Alcibiades,  (being  now  out  of  all  hopes  of  any  as- 
sistance  from  him),  he  furnished  some  ships  he  had  with  him^  from 
Peloponnesus,  and  from  otiier  foreign  confederates,  and  sent  Dorieus 
with  thirteen  sail,  (which  some  of  the  Grecians  had  lately  sent 
him  out  of  Italy),  to  Rhodes :  for  he  had  heard  that  some  inno- 
vations were  contriving  there;  with  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  (to  the 
number  of  eighty-three), he  made  to  the  Hellespont,  because  he  heard 
that  the  Athenian  navy  lay  at  Samos.  When  the  Athenian  com- 
manders saw  them  pass  by,  they  hastened  after  them  with  threescoK 
sail.  But  the  Laccdssmonians  arriving  at  Chtof,  the  Athenians  de- 
termined to  s<iil  to  Losbosyto  be  supplied  with  more  ships  from  their 
confederates,  lest  they  should  be  overpowered  by  numbers. 


Chap.  IFl  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  919 


While  the  Athenians  were  thus  busied,  Mindarus,  with  the  Lace* 
daemonian  fleet,  in  the  night,  with  all  speed  makes  for  the  Helles- 
pont, and  the  next  day  arrived  at  Sigeum*  The  Athenians  hearing 
that  they  had  departed  from  Chios,  having  received  from  their  con- 
frderates  at  the  present  only  three  gallies,  made  after  the  LaccdA- 
nonians;  hut  when  they  came  to  Sigeum,  they  found  the  Lacedu- 
nonians  had  left  that  place,  save  only  three  gallies,  which  fell 
fimhwitli  into  their  hands.  Proceeding  thence,  they  came  to 
Eleuntis*,  where  they  prepared  themselves  for  a  sea-fight.  On  the 
other  side  the  Lacedaemonians,  when  they  saw  their  enemies  were 
fitting  themselves  for  a  conflict,  they  likewise,  for  five  days  together^ 
employed  themselves  in  exercising  and  trying  their  rowers,  andtliea 
ordered  their  fleet,  which  consisted  of  eighty-eight  sail,  into  a  line 
of  battle,  and  stood  towards  the  Asiatic  shore.  The  Athenians  on  the 
other  hand,  drew  out  theirs  all  along  the  tract  lying  u|)on  the  borders 
of  Europe;  they  were  indeed  fewer  in  number,  but  far  more  skilful 
in  sea-affairs.  The  Lacedaemonians  placed  the  Syracusans  in  the 
right  wing,  commanded  by  Hermocrates;  the  Pelo|x>nDesiaiis  in  the 
left,  under  the  command  of  Mindarus.  On  the  part  of  the  Athenianty 
Thrasyllus  commanded  the  right,  and  ThrasyLulus  the  left  wing. 
At  the  first  the  great  contest  was  for  the  tide,  each  striving  to  gala 
that.  For  a  hmg  time  therefore  they  sailed  round  one  another;  at 
length,  being  in  a  narrow  sen,  they  fought  for  a  commodious  station. 
For  the  battle  being  between  Sestos  and  Abydos,  the  tide  in  those 
straits  was  a  great  disad%'antage  to  that  side  it  forced  upon.  But  the 
Athenian  pilots  far  excelling  the  others,  by  that  means  did  notable 
service  in  many  respects  for  the  obtaining  of  the  victory. 

For  although  the  Peloponnesians  exceeded  the  other  in  number  of 
their  ships,  and  valour  of  the  assailants,  yet  the  skill  and  diligence 
of  the  Athein'an  pilots  over-balanced  all  this,  and  made  it  of  no  ef- 
fect; fo^when  the  Peloponnesians  with  all  their  force  strove  to  pierce 
them,  the  Athenian  fleet  was  placed  in  such  excellent  order^  thai 
DO  part  of  their  ships  could  be  touclied,  save  only  the  very  end  of 
their  beaks.  Upon  which,  Mindarus  perceiving  they  assaulted  them 
in  viin,  commanded  that  a  few  shi|js  only,  singly  by  themselves, 
should  cope  with  the  enemy:  but  neither  in  this  case  was  the  dili- 
gence of  the  pilots  wanting;  for,  with  a  little  motion  they  easily  de- 
clined the  strokes  of  the  lK*aks  of  their  enemies'  ships^and  so  pierced 
tliem  in  their  broadNides,  that  they  disabled  many.  At  length  the 
dispute  waxing  very  hot,  they  not  only  pierced  one  another's  ships 
with  their  beaks,  but  the  *^oldiers  on  the  decks  fought  hand  to  hand: 
bat  oeitlier  side  could  as  yet  prevail.  And  now  in  the  very  heat  of 
the  battle,  there  appeared  beyond  a  promontory  five-aod-twenty  sail 

*  A  town  ia  Thrice. 


9  20  DIODORUS  SICU  LU8. 


sent  from  Athens.     Upon  which  the  Peloponnesiana  b^ng  in  a 
sternation  at  this  sadden  reinforcement,  tacked  about  for  Abydoi^ 
and  were  closely  and  eagerly  pursued  by  the  Athenians.    And  thm 
ended  the  battle,  in  which  all  the  ships  of  the  Syracusans^PallcneuiSi 
and  Leucadians,  fight  of  the  Chians,  five  of  the  CorinthianSy  and 
eleven  of  the  Ambracians  were  taken  by  the  Athenians,  who  on  the 
other  side  lost  five,  which  were  sunk.    After  this,  the  army  ondcr 
Thrasybulus  erected  a  trophy  on  the  promontory,  where  stands  the 
monument  of  Hecuba;  and  messengers  were  sent  to  Athens,  to  give 
intelligence  of  the  victory;  and  he  himself  sailed  with  the  whole  fleet 
to  Cyzicam:  for,  a  little  before  the  battle,  this  city  had  revolted  lo 
Pharnabazus,  governor  under  Darius,  and  to  Clearchus  the  Lacede- 
monian general.     This  place  not  being  fortified,  was  presently  sor^^ 
rendered;  and  after  the  tribute   agreed  upon  was   paid,  the  fleet 
returned  to  Sestos. 

In  the  mean  time,  Mindarusthe  Lacedsmonian  admiral,  who  fled 
io  Abydos,  refits  the  shipping,  and  orders  £picles  the  Spartan  to 
Eubcfa,  to  bring  to  him  gallies  from  thence;  who  hastens  thither, 
and  gets  to^^ethcr  fifty  sail,  and  forthwith  made  to  sea;  but  in  passing 
under  mount  Athos,  was  overtaken  with  such  a  violent  tempest,  that 
all  the  fleet  was  lost,  and  not  a  man  escaped,  save  only  twelve,  la 
memory  of  this,  there  is  an  inscription  on  a  monument  at  Coronea^aa 
Ephorus  observes  in  these  words 

Outiof  the  fifty  gallici  of  tliree  oari; 

But  poor  tMcivc  men  on  rocks  were  tlirown. 
Of  Atlios  mount  and  •av'd.  With  wind  »es  roars, 

Re»t  of  the  men  or  ships  spares  none. 

About  the  same  time  Alcibiades,  with  thirteen  gallies,  sailed  to 
them  that  lay  at  anchor  at  Samos.    The  Athenians  had  before  been 
informed,  that  (through  the  persuasions  of  Alcibiades)  Pliarnabazus 
would  not  send  the  three  hundred  ships  (as  he  intended)  in  aid  of  the 
Lacedsenionians.     Being  therefore  courteously  received  by  them  that 
lay  nt  Samos,  he  made  seme  proposals  for  his  return,  and  made  many 
promises  to  serve  his  country  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  absolutely 
denying  the  crimes  laid  to  his  charge;  and  complained  of  his  hard 
fortune,  that  he  was  compelled  (through  the  crafty  designs  of  his  eoe* 
mics)  to  make  use  of  his  arms  against  his  country.     His  speech  was 
highly  a))plaudcd  by  the  common  soldiers,  and  by  messengeis  report- 
ed at  Athens;  upon  which  he  was  absolved,  and  created  one  of  their 
generals;  for,  considering  his  valour  and  great  interest  every  where  a- 
mongst  tlic  Grecians,  they  hoped  it  would  be  much  for  their  advan- 
1ai;c  if  tlifv  nf^ain  received  him  into  favour.     And  l>esidesj  Then* 
inenes,  one  of  the  greatest  authority  in  the  commonwealth^  a  roan 


Chap,  n  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  SSI 

eminent  for  wisdom  and  prudence  as  ever  any  before  him,  advised 
the  recalling  of  Alcibiades.  When  the  messengers  returned  to  Samoa 
with  this  account,  Alcibiades  joining  nine  ships  more  to  those  thir- 
teen he  brought  with  him,  sailed  to  HalicarnassuSi  and  there  forced 
the  city  to  pay  him  a  large  sum  of  motley.  And  then  making  great 
devastations  in  Meropides*,  he  returns  with  much  plunder  to  Samos; 
and  there  divides  the  spoil  as  a  common  booty,  not  only  amongst  his 
own  soldiers,  but  amongst  them  in  Samos,  and  by  that  means  gains 
them  all  over  to  his  interest. 

About  this  time,  Antandros>  with  the  assistance  of  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians, drove  the  garrison  out  of  their  city,  and  so  restored  their  coun- 
try to  their  liberty:  for  the  Spartans  being  angry  at  Pharnabazus,  for 
sending  the  three  hundred  ships  into  Phoenicia^  entered  into  league 
with  the  Antandrians. 

Here  Thucydides  breaks  off  his  history,  containing  in  eight  books 
(which  some  divide  into  nine)  the  affairs  of  two-and*twenty 
years.  Xenophon  and  Theopompus  begin  theirs  where  Tfabcydides 
ends.  Xenophon  continues  his  history  for  the  term  of  forty-eight 
years ;  but  Theopompus  goes  on  with  tlie  affairs  of  Greece  for  the 
term  of  seventeen  years,  and  ends  his  history  at  the  sea-fight  at  Cni* 
dus,  comprised  in  twelve  books.  Thus  stood  the  state  of  afikirs  ta 
Greece  and  Asia  at  this  time.  ^  In  the  mean  time  the  Romans  were  at 
war  with  the  i^qui,  and  entered  their  country  with  a  great  army,  and 
besieged  their  city  called  Bokisus,  and  took  it. 


CHAP.  V. 

Commotions  in  Sicily.  The  Carthaginians  invited  thiih&r  hy  the 
Egesteans.  A  tea-fight  at  Dardaniumbetiae^  the  jitheniane 
and  Lacedemonians.  A  sedition  in  Corcyra.  TTie  sea^^Jighi  at 
Cyzicum;  and  at  Claros  by  land,  wherein  the  Athenians  were 
victors* 

THE  former  year  ended,  Glaucippus  was  created  archon  at  Athens^ 
and  at  Rome,  Marcus  Cornelius  and  Lucius  Furius  were  again  chosen 
consub.    About  thi3  time  the  Egesteans,(who  had  confederated  wUb 

*  Ao  island  ia  tli«  Ar«hiptl«g9,  otlierwitt  called  Coi. 

Vol.  L  No.  SS.  xzx 


522  DiODORUS  sicuLUS.  Book^IlL 

the  Athenians) y  after  the  war  was  ended  in  Sieily  against  the  Syra- 
cusans,  were  in  great  fear  (as  they  had  just  cause)  lest  the  SiciiS 
should  revenge  themselves  upon  them  for  the.  many  acts  of  hostility 
they  committed  against  them.     And  therefore,  when  the  Selinun- 
tines  made  war  upon  them  concerning  some  boundaries  that  were  in 
dispute,  they  submitted,  lest  the  Syracusans  should  take  that  occa- 
sion to  join  with  the  Sclinuntines,  and  so  hazard  the  loss  of  their 
country.     But  when  they  encroached  farther  upon  their  territories  than 
was  agreed  upon,  the  Kgesteans  desired  aid  of  the  Carthaginians^  and 
freely  offered  their  city  to  their  protection.     When  the  ambassadoia 
came  to  Carthage,  and  had  delivered  their  message  to  the  senate,  the 
Carthaginians  were  much  perplexed  what  to  resolve:  the  desire  of  so 
convenient  a  city  strongly  inclined  them  upon  one  hand,  and  the  fear 
of  the  Syracusans,  who  had  lately  destroyed  so  powerful  an  army  of 
the  Athenians,  discouraged  them  on  the  other.     But  at  length  their 
ambition  to  gain  the  city  prevailed.     The  answer  therefore  to  the 
ambassadors  was, that  they  would  send  them  aid«    For  the  manage- 
ment of  this  affair,  (in  case  it  should  break  out  into  a  war),  they  made 
Hannibal  general,  who  was  then,  according  to  their  law,  chief  magis- 
trate of  Carthage.     He  was  the  grandchild  of  Amilcar,  (who  was 
killed  at  Ilimeraat  the  battle  fought  with  Gelon),andsonof  GescoOy 
who  for  killing  his  father  was  banished,  and  lived  at  Selinus.      Hao« 
nibal  therefore,  in  regard  he  bore  a  natural  hatred  against  theGre* 
cians,  and  desired  by  his  own  valour  to  wipe  off  the  stain  of  his  fa- 
mily, was  very  earnest  to  make  himself  remarkable  by  some  eminent 
service  for  the  advantage  of  his  country.    Therefore,  when  he  under- 
stood that  the  Selinuntines  were  not  satisfied  with  that  part  of  land 
which  was  yielded  to  them,  he,  together  with  the  Egesteans^  sends 
ambassadors  to  the  Syracusans,  referring  the  controversy  to  their  de- 
termination; in  words  seeming  to  propase  all  things  fair  and  just; 
but  in  truth  with  hopes  that  if  the  Selinuntines  should  decline  the 
arbitration,  the  Syracusans  would  cast  ofl'their  confederacy  and  Icagoc 
with  them.     But  when  tlu  Selinuntines  (who  sent  likewise  their 
ambassadors)  refused  to  stand  to  their  decision,  and  strongly  op- 
posed both  the  Carthaginian  and  Kgestean  ambassadors,  the  Srim- 
cusans  were  at  length  resolved  both  to  be  at  peace  with  the  Cartha- 
ginians, and  likewise  to  stand  to  their  Icjiguo  with  the  Selinuntines. 
\]\iO\\  which,  when  the  ambassadors  were  returned,  the  Cartha^ni- 
ans  sent  to  the  Egosteans  five  thousand  men  from  Africa,  and  eight 
hundred  from  Campania.     These  were  formerlv  hired  by  the  Chalce- 
donians  for  the  assistance  of  the  Atheniaiis  against  the  SyracusanSp 
but  after  their  overthrow,  sailiui;  back,  they  knew  not  under  VfhiHa 


C!U/I.  V.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  8  S3 


mm 


%)  serve.  The  Carthaginians  therefore  bought  them  all  horses,  and 
giving  tliem  large  pay,  placed  them  in  a  garrison  at  Egesta.  But 
the  Seiinuntines,  who  were  then  both  rich  and  poinilous,  valued  not 
the  E^steans  one  jot. 

At  the  first,  with  a  well-formed  army,  they  spoiled  the  counti/ 
next  adjoining  to  them;  at  length,  in  regard  they  far  exceeded  the 
Bgestcans  in  number,  they  despised  tliem,  and  dispersed  themscivi-s^ 
nvaging  all  over  the  country.  The  Egestean  commanders  watch- 
ing their  op|>urtunity,with  the  help  of  the  Carthaginians  and  Campa- 
nians,  set  uiM)n  tliem  unawares :  and  the  assault  being  sudden  and 
anexpecied,  they  easily  routed  and  put  them  to  flight.  Thty  killed 
m  thousand,  and  took  all  their  baggage.  After  this  fight,  both  &^dei 
tent  forth  ambassadors,  the  Selinuntines  to  the  Syracusans,  and  tlie 
Egestcan.s  to  theCartbuginians  for  aid;  which  l>eing  readily  promised 
on  b<ith  sides,  tills  was  the  beginning  of  the  Carthaginian  war.  The 
Carthaginians  foreseeing  the  greatness  of  the  war,  committed  the 
whole  management  thereof  to  Hannibal,  giving  him  power  to  raise 
what  forces  he  thought  fit,  they  themselves  iu  the  mean  time  pro- 
viding all  things  necessary.  Hannibal  all  that  summer,  and  the  next 
winter,  raises  many  mercenary  soldiers  in  Spain,  and  lists  a  gremt 
number  of  his  own  citizens;  and  besides  these,  raises  men  in  every 
city  throughout  all  Africa,  and  equips  a  fleet,  intending  the  next 
spring  to  pas^  over  all  the  forces  into  Sicily.  In  this  condition  were 
the  aflairs  uf  Sicily  at  that  time. 

In  the  mean  time  IX>rieusthe  Khodian,  admiral  of  the  Italian  gal* 
lies,  as  soon  as  he  had  quieted  the  tumult  in  Rhodes,  passed  over  to 
tlie  Ilellespunt,  w'.th  a  puri)ose  to  join  Mindarus,  who  then  lay  at  A- 
bydos,  getting  together  from  all  parts  what  vessels  he  could  from 
the  Peloponnesian  confederates.  When  Dorieus  was  come  as  far 
as  Sigeum  of  Troas,  the  Athenians  (who  then  lay  at  anchor  at  Sestos) 
haTing  intelligence  of  hi^  course,  proceeded  against  him  with  their 
whole  fleet  of  seventy-four  sail.  Dorieus  altogether  ignorant  of  the 
preparations  against  him,  sails  on  securely :  but  when  he  understood 
what  a  |M)werful  navy  wa^  making  towards  him,  he  was  in  great  con- 
sternation, and  seeing  no  other  means  left  to  pscnpe,  fl«d  to  Darda* 
nium,  where  he  landed  his  men:  and  placing  a  garrison  in  the  city, 
he  forthwith  furnished  the  place  with  abundance  of  arms,  and  placed 
his  suhiiers,  Mnnr  upiHi  the  foredecks  of  his  vessels,  and  others  all 
along  u|H>n  the  shore.  But  tiR*  Athenians  making  up  suddenly  upon 
them,  endeavoured  to  haul  ofl^  the  ships  from  the  shore;  and  by  prefl« 
siug  upon  the  enemy  in  so  many  places  at  once,  they  almost  wearied 
them  out.  Mindarus  the  Peh»|Ninnesiau  admiral,  hearing  of  the  dis« 
treas  Dorieus  was  in,  foitliwitb  set  »aii  froDi  Abydoi  with  his  wliulc 


5  24  Di  ODOR tr s  8IC  u  L  u  s.  JBooA  XOt 

ilect^aiid  made  for  the  promontory  of  Dardanium,  with  founcoreaiid 
four  sail  to  assist  him.  The  land  forces  likewise  of  PharnalMsai 
were  near  at  hand,  to  support  the  LacedAmonian  fleet.  When  the 
navies  came  near  one  anotiier,  both  sides  prepared  for  fight.  Blm- 
darus  commanding  a  fleet  of  ninety-sevensail^  placed  the  SyrBCUStM 
in  the  left  wing^  and  he  himself  commanded  the  right.  On  the  A« 
thenians^  Thrasybulus  led  the  right,  and  Thrasyllus  the  left  wing. 
Tlie  lines  of  battle  being  thus  disposed  on  both  sides,  and  the  mga 
given  by  the  admirals^  the  trumpets  all  at  once  sounded  a  chaige. 
And  now  the  rowers  neglecting  nothing  on  their  part,  and  the  pilots 
every  where  minding  with  all  diligence  their  several  helms,  a  bloody 
fight  began.  For,  as  often  as  the  sliips  rowed  forwards  to  pierce  cuh 
other,  so  often  did  the  pilots  at  the  same  instant  of  time  carefully 
move  and  turn  the  ship,  that  the  strokes  only  fell  u|)on  the  beaks  of 
th(*  vessels  The  soldiers  upon  the  decks, when  at  first  they  sawtheir 
broadsides  lie  open  to  the  assaults  of  the  enemy,  began  to  be  dis- 
couraged, tiu:  ihen again presently,when  they  discerned  tliat  the cfaaige 
made  upon  them  by  the  enemy  was  eluded  by  the  art  of  the  pilot, 
their  spirits  and  courage  revived.  Neither  were  they  less  active, who 
fought  upon  the  decks,  for  they  who  were  at  a  distance,  plied  the 
enemy  continually  with  darts,  so  that  the  place  where  they  fell  seem* 
ed  to  be  covered  over.  They  who  fought  at  hand,  threw  their  lancet 
one  at  another,  sometimes  piercing  through  the  bodies  of  their  op^ 
posers,  and  sometimes  the  bodies  of  the  pilots  themselves.  If  the 
ships  fell  foul  upon  one  another,  then  they  disputed  it  with  theirspean: 
and  many  times  when  they  came  close,  they  would  board  ooeanother, 
and  light  it  out  with  their  swords.  What  with  the  doleful  complaints 
of  them  that  were  hastening  in  to  the  succour  of  those  that  were 
worsted,  and  the  triumphant  shouts  of  them  that  were  conquerorSj  every 
place  was  full  of  noise  and  confusion.  The  fight  continued  a  long 
time  with  great  obstinacy  on  both  sides,  till  on  a  sudden  Alcibiades 
(who  was  merely  by  chance  sailing  from  Samos  to  the  Hellespont 
with  twenty  ships)  came  in  view.  Before  he  came  near,  both  sides 
hoped  to  have  succour  from  them.  And  both  being  confident,  they 
fought  with  more  resolution  on  both  sides.  When  he  drew  near  (the 
Lacediemonians  being  still  in  the  dark)  he  presently  set  ap  a  purple 
flag  from  his  own  ship  as  a  sign  to  the  Athenians,  as  it  was  before 
ordered  and  agreed:  upon  which  the  Lacedaemonians,  in  a  gfcat 
fright,  forthwith  fled.  But  the  Athenians, encouraged  with  this  happy 
success,  pursued  them  with  all  their  might,  and  presently  took  ten 
of  their  ships ;  but  afterwards  a  great  storm  arose^  which  much  ob- 
structed them  in  the  pursuit:  for  the  sea  was  so  raging,  that  the  pi- 
lots were  not  able  to  manage  the  helm^  nor  could  they  make  anj  im- 


CSIbqEl.  V.  DTOOORUS  SICULDS.  5f5 


pression  with  the  beaks  of  their  ships  upon  the  enemy^  because  the 
•hips  aimed  at  were  born  back  by  the  violence  of  the  waves, ' 

At  length  the  Lacedasmonians  came  safe  to  shorje^  and  marched  to 
the  land  army  of  Pharnabazus:  the  Athenians  in  the  mean  time  en* 
deavoured  to  gain  the  empty  ships,  and  pressed  on  with  great  valour 
and  confidence  through  many  hazards  and  difficulties;  but  being  kept 
off  by  tlie  Persian  artny,  they  were  forced  to  return  to  Sestos.  Phar* 
nabazus  was  the  more  earnest  in  opposing  the  Athenians,  to  the  end 
be  might  convince  the  Lacedsemonians  that  he  had  no  ill  design  a- 
gainst  them  when  he  sent  back  the  three  hundred  gallies  to  Phod* 
nicia:  for  he  told  them  he  did  it,  because  at*  that  time  the  king  of 
Egypt  and  Arabia  had  some  design  upon  Phoenicia.  After  this  issue 
of  the  fight  at  sea,  the  Athenian  fleet  arrived  at  Sestos  in  the  night: 
and,  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  and  all  their  fleet  was  got  together,  they 
set  up  another  trophy  near  to  the  former.  Mindarus  arrived  at  Aby* 
dos  about  the  first  watch  of  the  night,  and  began  repairing  hn  shat- 
tered and  disabled  ships.  He  sends  to  the  LiRcedemonians  for  sap- 
plies  both  of  land  and  sea  forces.  For,  whilst  his  fleet  was  repairing, 
he  determined,  to  join  Pharnabazus  with  his  land  soldiers,  and 
to  besiege  the  confederate  cities  of  the  Athenians  in  Asia;  the  Chal- 
cedonians,  and  almost  all  the  Euboeanshad  deserted  the  Athenians,  and 
therefore  were  now  in  great  fear  (in  regard  they  inhabited  an  island) 
lest  the  Athenians,  being  masters  at  sea,  would  invade  them;  they 
therefore  solicited  the  Boeotians  to  assist  them  to  stop  up  Eu- 
ripus*,  by  which  Eubcea  might  be  annexed  to  the  continent  of 
Boeotia.  To  which  the  Boeotians  agreed;  because  by  this  means 
Euboea  would  be  but  as  the  continent  to  them,  and  an  island  to  others. 
Hereupon  all  the  cities  set  upon  the  work,  and  every  one  strove  with 
all  diligence  to  perfect  it.  And  orders  were  sent  forth  not  only  to 
the  citizens,  but  all  foreigners  and  strangers,  to  attend  upon  the 
business;  and  all  hands  were  to  be  at  work,  that  it  might  be  with  all 
speed  effected.  The  mole  began  at  Chalcis  in  Eubcea  on  the  one  side, 
and  at  Aulis  in  Boeotia  on  the  other:  for  here  it  was  the  narrowest. 
Jn  these  straits  the  sea  was  very  boisterous  and  rough,  but  after  this 
work  much  more  unquiet  and  raging,  the  passage  being  made  so 
very  close  and  narrow :  for  there  was  left  only  room  for  one  ship  to  pass. 
There  were  forts  built  on  both  sides  upon  the  extremities  of  themolc^ 
and  wooden  bridges  made  over  the  current  for  communication. 

Theramenes  indeed  at  the  first,  being  sent  thither  with  thirty  sail, 
endeavoured  to  hinder  the  project ;  but  being  overpowered  with  the 
number  of  those  that  defended  the  people  employed,  he  gave  up  his 
design,  and  made  off  towards  the  islands.    And  purposing  to  re- 

*  Euripus,  a  itrait  of  tbc  Ma  between  Boeotia  aad  Euboea. 


5  £6  DiODORus  sicULUfli. .  Book  XW^ 

lieve  the  confederate  cities  who  were  under  the  burden  off  coDtrik»> 
tions,  he  wasted  and  spoiled  the  enemy's  country^  and  retnrocdUii 
with  much  spoil  and  plunder.  He  went  likewise  to  some  ef  At 
confederate  cities,  and  imposed  upon  them  great  mulcts  and  ioo^ 
because  he  understood  that  they  were  secretly  contriving  some  rhuipt 
and  innovations*  Thence  he  sailed  to  Paros,  and,  freeing  the  peofli 
from  the  oligarchy,  he  restored  the  democracy,  and  exacted  agMC 
sum  of  money  from  them  who  set  up  the  oligarchy. 

About  the  same  time  a  cruel  and  bloody  sedition  arose  inCoFC]r^^ 
which  is  said  to  have  been  occasioned  through  private  grudges  and  ani- 
mosities,  as  much  as  any  other  cause.  In  no  city  of  that  time,  wtie 
ever  such  horrid  murders  of  the  citizens  committed,  nor  ever  m 
more  rage  to  the  destruction  of  mankind  heard  of;  fur  once  before 
this,  in  their  quarrelling  with  one  another,  there  were  fifteen  hna- 
dred  slaughtered,  and  all  of  them  the  chicfest  of  the  citizens.  But 
these  murders  following  were  much  more  miserable,  the  sparks  if 
old  discords  being  blown  up  into  a  devouring  flame :  for  they  it 
authority  at  Corcyra,  aspiring  to  an  oligarchy,  sided  with  the  Lmc* 
dsmonians,  but  the  people  favoured  the  Athenians. 

These  two  people  contending  for  the  sovereignty,  took  diflemt 
measures :  the  Laccdsemonians  set  up  an  oligarchy  in  the  cities  of 
their  confederates;  but  the  Athenians  established  a  democracy  evtry 
where  in  theirs. 

The  Corcyrians  therefore  discerning  that  the  great  men  of  thdr 
city  intended  to  betray  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Lacedaemonians, 
sent  to  Athens  for  a  garrison  for  the  defence  of  their  city :  upon 
which  Conon,  the  Athenian  admiral,  sails  to  Corcyra,  and  leavcstkre 
six  hundre'd  Messenians  drawn  out  from  Naupactus;  and  passing  from 
thence  with  the  fleet,  anchored  at  Juno's  temple. 

In  the  mean  time,  six  hundred  of  them  that  were  for  the  demo- 
cracy rushed  into  the  forum,  and  forthwith  set  upon  them  that  sided 
with  the  Lacedaemonians,  casting  somr  into  prisons,  killing  others, 
and  driving  above  a  thousand  out  of  the  city.  And  because  they 
feared  the  number  and  strength  of  the  exiles,  they  manumitted  all 
the  slaves,  and  enfranchised  all  the  strangers.  The  exiles  presently 
fled  into  the  continent  to  Epirus,  lying  over  against  them.  A  fc» 
days  after,  some  of  the  people  who  favoured  them  that  were  ejected, 
entered  the  forum  in  arms,  and  sendin^^  for  the  exiles  into  the  city, 
laid  all  at  stake,  and  fought  it  out.  When  night  parted  them,  pro- 
posals were  made  for  a  pacification,  which  taking  eflect,  they  all 
continued  in  their  country  with  equal  piivileges.  And  this  was  the 
issue  of  the  flight  of  the  exiles  from  Corcyra. 

At  the  same  time  Archelaus  king  of  Macedonia  marched  against 


Ch^.F.  DIODORUS  STCULUS.  SSf 

the  Pydneansy  who  had  revolted^  and  besieged  their  city  with  a  great 
mrmy;  to  whose  assistance  Theramenes  carae  with  some  ships;  but 
the  siege  continuing  longer  than  he  expected,  lie  returned  to  Thrace 
to  Thrasybulus,  the  admiral  of  the  whole  fleet,  fiut  Archelaus  at 
length  takes  Pydna  after  a  strict  siege,  and  removes  the  inhabitants 
twenty  furlongs  farther  from  the  sea. 

The  winter  now  near  an  end,  Mindarus  rendezvouses  his  shipping 
from  all  quarters ;  for  many  came  both  from  Peloponnesus  and  ether 
confederates.  The  Athenian  generals  who  lay  at  Sestos,  hearing  of 
the  great  preparations  of  their  enemies,  were  in  no  small  fear  lest,  if 
they  should  be  set  upon  by  their  whole  fleet  at  once,  they  should 
lose  alt  their  navy;  and  therefore  hauling  down  those  ships  they  had 
laid  up  at  Sestos,  they  sailed  round  Chersonesus,  and  anchored  af 
Cardia,  and  thence  sent  to  Thrace  to  Thrasybulus  and  Theramenes, 
to  come  to  them  with  the  whole  fleet  with  all  speed:  Alcibiades, 
likewise,  they  recalled  from  Lesbos :  so  that  now  the  fleet  was  brought 
together  with  that  expedition,  that  the  admirals  longed  to  fight  and 
put  all  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle. 

In  the  mean  time  Mindarus,  the  Lacedaemonian  admiral,  sails  in  m 
direct  course  for  Cyzicum,  and  there  lands  all  his  forces,  and  besieges 
the  city.     Pharnahazus  joins  him  with  a  great  army,  and  by  hta 
assistance  takes  the  place  by  storm.     Upon  which  the  Atheniaa 
admirals  were  resolved  to  make  for  Cyzicum;  and  to  that  end  they 
advanced  with  their  whole  fleet,  and  sailing  round  Chersonesus,  ar* 
rived  at  Eleuntis.     Then  they  contrived  all  they  could  to  pass  by 
Abydos  in  the  night,  lest  the  enemy  should  have  intelligence  of  the 
number  of  their  ships.   Sailing  thence  to  Preconnesus,  they  there  lay 
at  anchor  all  night.    The  next  day  they  landed  their  men  in  the  ter- 
ritories at  Cyzicum,  with  a  command  to  Chares,  who  led  the  army, 
to  march  straight  to  Cyzicum.    The  fleet  was  divided  into  three  squa- 
drons, one  under  the  command  of  Alcibiades,  another  under  Thera-' 
menes,  and  the  third  commanded  by  Thrasybulus.     Alcibiades  made 
out  with  his  squadron  far  from  the  rest,  and  dared  the  Lacedaemonians 
to  fight.     Theramenes  and  Thrasybulus  used  their  utmost  endeavour 
to  close  in  the  enemy,  so  as  to  prevent  their  sailing  hack  to  the  city. 
When  Mindarus  saw  only  that  part  of  the  fleet  which  was  with  Alci- 
biades, (having  no  intelligence  of  the  rest),  he  despised  them,  and 
with  fourscore  sail,  in  great  confidence,  attacks  them.     When  he 
came  near  to  Alcibiades,  the  Athenians,  as  they  were  commanded, 
counterfeited  a  flight:  whereupon  the  Peloponnesians  with  great  joy 
hotly  pursued  them  as  conquerors :  but  when  Alcil)iades  saw  that  he 
had  decoyed  and  drawn  tiiem  far  off  from  the  city,  he  lifts  up  his  sign 
from  his  ship.     At  which,  all   his  squadron  at  one  instant  tacked 


ASS  DiODORUS  8icuLUA»  Sook  XIIL 


about,  full  in  front  upon  the  enemy:  Theramenes  and  Thrasybiilai 
in  the  mean  time  making  to  the  city,  left  them  no  way  to  return. 
Upon  this,  they  that  were  with  Mindarus,  coosidering  the  strengdi 
of  their  enemies,  and  perceiving  how  they  were  outwittcdj  were  in  a 
great  consternation.    At  length  the  Athenians  appearing  on  eveij 
side,  and  the  return  of  the  Peloponnesians  to  the  city  intercepted^ 
Mindarns  was  forced  to  fly  to  a  place  upon  that  coast,  called  Claioi^ 
where  Pharnabazus  was  encamped  with  his  army;  but  Alcibiadci 
making  a  hot  pursuit  after  them,  sunk  and  took  many  of  their  ship% 
and  forcing  the  rest  upon  the  shore,  endeavoured  to  haul  them  thence 
with  grapling  irons.    Upon  'this  there  was  a  great  slaughter  amoiig 
the  Athenians,  in  regard  the  army  upon  the  shore  assisted  the  Pelo- 
ponnesians: and  indeed  the  Athenians  (lifted  up  with  their  Tietoiy) 
evinced  more  valour  than  prudence;  for  the  Peloponneaians  §u 
exceeded  them  in  number;  and  the  army  of  Phamabazua  assisted  the 
Lacednmonians  with  great  resolution,  and  fighting  from  land^  had 
the  advantage  of  a  certain  and  fixed  station.    But  wheu  Thrasybnlos 
saw  the  aid  that  was  given  to  the  enemy  from  the  land,  he  landed  the 
rest  of  his  men  with  all  speed,  in  order  to  succour  Alcibiades;  and 
commanded  Theramenes,  that  with  all  expedition  he  should  join  the 
foot  under  the  command  of  Chares,  and  fight  the  enemy  at  land. 
Whilst  these  orders  were  in  execution,  Mindarns,  theLacedflemonian 
general,  bore  all  the  brunt  in  preserving  of  the  ships  Alcibiades  had 
laid  hold  of.  '  Clearchus  the  Spartan,  with  the  Peloponnesians  and 
mercenary  Persians,  fought  with  Thrasybulus,  who  for  some  consider^ 
able  time,  with  his  seamen  and  archers,  bore  up  with  great  Talour 
against  the  enemy,  killing  many  of  them,  but  not  without  great  loss 
of  his  own:  and  just  when  the  Athenians  were  enclosed  round  with 
the  soldiers  of  Pharnabazus,  on  a  sudden  foils  in  TherameneSj  with 
his  own  and  Chares 's  foot.    Upon  this,  those  withThrasybuIuSj  who 
were  before  almost  spent,  and  quite  out  of  heart,  gathered  courage; 
so  the  fight  was  renewed,  and  continued  very  hot  and  sharp  a  long 
time  after;  till  the  first  that  gave  ground  were  the  Persians,  and  by 
little  and  little  their  whole  body  began  to  break  in  pieces.     At  length 
the  Peloponnesians,  with  Clearchus,  being  forsaken  by  their  fellows, 
(after  many  wounds  given  and  received,  and  slaughters  on  both  sides)^ 
were  forced  likewise  to  give  ground.     These  being  thus  biokeik  and 
dispersed,  Theramenes  hastened  to  assist  Alcibiades,  who  was  sorely 
pressed  in  another  part.    And  though  now  all  the  Athenian  Ibrocs 
were  joined  together,  yet  Mindarns  was  not  at  all  startled  nt  the 
approach  of  Theramenes,  but  divides  the  Peloponnesians  into  two 
bodies,  and  commands  the  one  to  engage  the  fresh  supply^  and 
keeping  the  other  with  himself,  earnestly  adjures  them  that  they 


Chap.  FF.  nioDORUs  siciaus.  539 


would  not  stain  the  honour  of  the  Spartan  name;  especially  when 
the  business  was  now  to  be  disputed  with  Alcibiades  by  a  fight  at 
land.  And  now  the  battle  for  the  safety  of  the  ships  was  renewed 
with  great  gallantry ;  and  Miudarus,  at  the  head  of  his  men,  exposing 
himself  to  all  manner  of  dangers^  beats  down  many  of  his  enemies; 
but  at  length  was  killed  by  the  soldiers  of  Alcibiades,  though  he 
fought  with  that  valour  as  was  agreeable  to  the  fame  and  glory  of  his 
country.  Upon  his  death  the  Peloponnesians  and  their  confederates 
all  as  one  man  fled  with  great  consternation.  The  Athenians  pur- 
sued them  for  awhile,  but  understanding  that  Pharaabazus  was 
hastening  after  tliem  with  a  great  party  of  horse,  they  returned  to 
tlicir  ships;  and  having  regained  the  city,  they  set  up  two  trophies, 
one  for  their  victory  at  sea,  near  the  island  Polydorus,  as  it  is  culled^ 
the  other  for  that  at  land,  where  the  enemy  first  began  to  fly.  The 
Peloponnesians  who  were  left  to  guard  the  city,  with  those  that 
escaped  out  of  the  battle,  marched  off*  to  Phamabazus's  camp.  The 
Athenians  being  now  possessed  of  all  the  ships,  and  of  a  great  num- 
ber of  prisoners,  were  laden  with  abundance  of  spoil,  the  fruits  of  the 
conquest  of  two  potent  armies. 

When  the  news  of  this  victory  was  brought  to  Atliens,  the  success 
was  so  unexpected,  after  all  their  former  losses,  that  the  people  were 
aarpriied  with  joy  at  such  a  happy  turn  of  fortune,  and  offered  sacrifices 
to  the  gods,  and  instituted  festivals:  and  upon  this  was  raised  a 
thousand  foot,  and  a  hundred  horse,  of  the  most  valiant  of  the  ciii- 
xens,  fur  the  carrying  on  of  the  war.  The  city  likewise  sent  to  AIci* 
biades  a  supply  of  thirty  sail,  to  encourage  him  with  greater  confidence 
(especially  now  when  thi^y  were  masters  at  sea)  to  attack  the  cities 
who  aided  with  the  Lacedaemonians. 


CHAP.  VI. 

77ie  Spartans  sue  for  peace.     The  speech  qf  Endius.     The 

jJthenians  refuse. 

THE  Lacedsmonians  receiving  certain  intelligence  of  their  rout  at 
Cyzieum,  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  to  treat  for  peace,  the  clilef  4>f 
whom  was  Endius.  When  he  was  admitted  to  an  audience,  he  vnme 
io,  and  spoke  in  the  Laconic  manner,  in  a  short  and  pithy  stile ;  wl.ose 
oration  1  judge  not  fitting  to  omit. 

Vot.  1.   No.  38.  YYV 


&30  DfODORUs  8icuLU9«  Boolr.XIZC 

The  wration  of  EndmSm 

WE  have  determined  to  imdce  proposals  of  peace  to  yoo,  O  je  Atli»- 
Diana,  apon  these  conditions -^JThat  the  cities  gained  on  dther  aide 
be  retained ;  that  the  garrisons  every  where  be  dismissed ;  that  all 
prisoners  be  released,  one  Athenian  for  one  Lacooian:  for  we  ue  Ml 
ignorant  that  the  war  is  very  mischievous  to  us  both,  but  much  moie 
to  you,  which  I  shall  make  apparent  from  the  things  themselves^  if 
you  hearken  awhile  to  what  I  say.  For  our  use  all  PelopOBDcans  ia 
improved  and  sowed,  but  of  Attica,  which  is  not.  so  lBfge,-yoa  have 
but  a  part  in  tillage:  this  war  has  brought  over  many  confedentes  tt^ 
the  Laconians ;  on  the  contrary,  the  Athenians  have  lost  as  many  sia 
we  have  gained.  Tlie  richest  king  of  the  world  maintains  our  armies^ 
but  you  force  the  charge  of  the  war  from  the  poorest  of  the  aatioiis. 
Our  soldiers  therefore  beltig  so  well  paid,  fight  cheerfully,  but  yoom 
(being  forced  every  one  to  bear  their  own  charges)  seek  to  avoid  both 
the  toil  and  the  expence*  Moreover,  when  our  fleet  is  out  at  sea,  we 
are  more  in  want  of  ships  than  men ;  but  the  greatest  part  of  your 
men  are  in  your  ships.  And  that  which  is  most  conHderable,althougb 
we  are  inferior  ta  you  at  sea,  yet  by  the  agreement  of  all  we  ave  your 
superiors  at  land>  for  the  Spartan  knows  iiot  how  to  fly  in  a  battle  al 
land.  On  the  other  hand  you  fight  at  sea,  not  with^any  hopes  to 
gain  the  sovereignty  at  land,  but  to  preserve  yourselves  from  utter 
destruction.  Now  it  remains  that  I  give  you  satisfaction,  why,  when 
we  thus  far  excel  you  in  feats  of  arms,  we  should  sue  to  you  for  peace* 
In  truth,  though  I  cannot  say  that  Sparta  has  gained  any  thing  by  thia 
war^  yet  I  dare  affirm  their  damage  has  not  been  so  great  as  Aat  of 
the  Athenians.  But  it  is  the  heiglit  of  folly  to  take  pleasure  in  eom- 
men  calamities,  because  our  enemies  are  fellow  suflerers;  wheresa 
it  had  been  much  better  neither  of  us  had  had  the  experience.  Net* 
thcr  does  the  content  an4  satisfaction  by  the  destmction  of  thine 
enemy,  balance  the  sorrow  that  is  conceived  at  the  loss  of  thy  firiend* 
But  it  is  not  for  these  reasons  only  that  we  desire  to  put  an  end  ti> 
the  war,  but  we  are  prompted  hereunto  by  the  custom  of  ourcountiy; 
for  when  we  saw  by  these  wars  so  many  horrid  murders,  and  so  much 
blood  lamentably  shed,  we  conceived  it  onr  duty  to^make  it  manifest 
both  to  the  gods  and  men,  that  we  are  the  least  concerned  in  the 
causing  of  it. 

■ 

When  the  Laconian  had  spoken  this  and  some  other  things  to  thr 
like  efiect,  the  more  moderate  of  the  Athem'ans  were  incUned  l» 
peace;  but  those  who  were  accustomed  to  sow  the  seeds  of  disscn- 
tion,  and  to  make  a  private  gain  of  the  public  diserdersy  were  fSar 


'  Cke^.  Fir.  moDomut  siculus.  &9 1 

.  Of  this  opiiiioo  was  Cleophon,  a  man  of  great  ioterett  among  the 
people,  who,  coming  into  the  assembly,  after  he  had  sud  many  things 
«i  pertinent  to  the  business  in  hand,  he  ehiefly  encomraged  the  people, 
K  bj  magnifying  the  greatness  of  their  late  successes,  and  urging  all  In 
■  jBch  a  manner,  as  if  fortune  (contrary  to  her  usual  custom)  had  now 
•  Jbrgot  to  dispose  and  order  the  successes  of  war,  by  turns  and  mutuiA 
changes  to  each  side.  But  the  Athenians  at  length  regreted  this  mis* 
chievous  adfice,  which  was  so  little  to  their  advantage;  for,  being 
thus  deceived  by  flattering  discourses,  framed  only  to  please,  they 
were  brought  so  low  that  they  could  never  after  recover  their  former 
•treogtii  and  grandeur;  but  these  things  shall  be  hereafter  related  in 
their  due  place.  The  Athenians  therefore  (being  thus  pufied  up  with 
their  victories,  and  being  very  confdent  because  Alcibiades  was  their 
.general)  concluded  they  should  recover  their  former  esteem  tnd 
nepatation  in  a  short  time. 


esae 


CHAP.  VII. 

Hammhal  the  Carikagmian  mvadti  Sicily,  The  miserable  deitruc* 
Horn  of  SeUnus.  The  rarm,  IHewise,  of  Himera.  The  aeU  tf 
UermocraieM  in  Sicily. 

THE  aAan  of  this  year  thus  ended.  Diodes  was  chosen  magistrate 
of  Athens,  and  at  Rome,  Quintus  Fabius  and  Caius  Furius  were  con* 
Mils.  At  that  time  Hannibal  the  Carthaginian  general  mostera  an 
army  out  of  Spain  and  Africa,  and  puts  them  on  board  threescore 
long  gallics,  and  provides  fifreen  hundred  transport  ships,  to  convey 
iwovisiou,  engines,  weapons,  and  all  other  things  necessary  for  a  siege. 
Passing  over  the  African  sea  with  his  navy,  he  arrived  at  Lilybcum, 
a  promontory  in  Sicily,  over  against  Africa.  About  the  same  time, 
some  Selinuntine  horaemen  being  in  those  parts,  when  they  saw  so 
great  a  fleet  make  towards  them,  speedily  rode  off  in  all  haste,  to  give 
intelligence  to  their  countrymen  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy;  upon 
which  the  Seltnuntines  despatched  messeiigere  to  Syracuse,  to  desire 
aid.  In  the  mean  time  Hannibal  landed  his  army^  and  marked  out 
his  camp,  beginning  at  a  pond  called  at  that  time  Lilyb«um ;  but  many 
yean  after,  it  gave  name  to  a  town  built  in  that  place. 

Hannibal's  whole  army  (as  Ephorus  relates)  consisted  of  two  huo« 
diad  thousand  fooi^  wd  f«9ur  tbousami  bone.    Tiawus  aaya  tksro 


532  DIODORUII  8ICULU8*  JBltfok  JEQT. 

were  not  much  above  no  hundred  thouaand.  He  diew  ap  di  Ui 
ships  into  the  creek  near  Motya,  intending  the  SjrracnsaBa 
hereby  be  assured  that  he  invaded  not  Sicily  with  a  design  to 
war  upon  them  either  by  sea  or  land*  Then  being  joiaed  bjllit 
Egesteans  aud  other  confederates,  he  raised  his  camp  from 
and  marched  towards  Selinus.  When  he  came  to  the  river 
he  takes  tlie  Emporium  at  the  first  assault.  Approaching  afterwaids 
nearer  to  the  city,  he  divides  his  army  into  two  parts,  aadencnaiping 
round  the  city,  raises  his  engines  and  batteries,  and  begins  to  asiaiilt 
the  town  witli  great  vigour :  for  he  built  six  high  towers,  and  bRMght 
as  many  battering  rams  to  the  walls,  and  with  the  maltitude  of 
his  darters  and  stingers  forced  the  citizens  from  the  forts  and  bml« 
warks.  The  Selinuntioes  had  been  now  a  long  time  anused  to 
sieges;  and  in  regard  tliey  were  the  only  people  of  Sicily  that  aided 
with  the  Carthaginians  against  Gelon,  they  little  expected  they  thoald 
have  been  brought  into  such  dangers  by  them  whom  they  had  io  tu 
engaged ;  and  therefore  were  in  great  consternation  and  amazement, 
seeing  the  abundance  of  engines,  the  greatness  of  the  army,  and  im- 
minent danger  wherewith  tliey  were  environed.  Yet  they  were  not 
.  altogether  without  hope;  but  expecting  speedy  aid  from  SyrBCtne, 
and  other  confederate  cities,  all  the  people  as  one  man  joined  together 
and  drove  the  enemy  from  the  walls.  The  young  meig^  courageously 
sh'giited  all  liazards;  the  old  men  ran  from  place  to  place  upoo  the 
walls,  to  furnish  the  others  from  time  to  time  with  all  things  iieois- 
sary  for  the  defence,  beseeching  them  not  to  suffier  the  enemy  to 
enter.  The  women  and  children  brought  meat  and  weapons  to  then 
who  were  fighting  for  their  country,  not  regarding  that  nM>de8ty  mad 
sobriety  which  in  times  of  peace  they  were  commendable  for ; '  the  fear 
was  so  great,  that  even  women  were  regardless  of  the  dangers. 

Hannibal  promised  the  plunder  of  the  town  to  his  soldiera,  applied 
his  engines  to  the  walls,  and  with  the  best  of  his  men  (whom  he 
relieved  from  time  to  time  with  fresh  supplies)  began  the  asaaalt. 
At  the  first  word  of  command,  at  one  instant  the  trumpets  aooaded 
to  battle,  and  the  whole  army  with  a  great  shout  ran  up  to  their  feverel 
posts ;  the  walls  were  battered  by  the  rams,  and  the  soldien  fivm  the 
high  towers  galled  the  Selinuntines  with  their  darts:  for  the  Seli« 
nuntines  enjoying  a  long  peace,  their  bands  were  not  iunred  to  aetion, 
and  therefore  were  easily  driven  from  thence,  the  wooden  towers 
being  far  higher  than  tliey.  In  the  mean' time,  part  of  tlie  waHbeiBg 
battered  down,  the  Campanians,  willing  to  make  themselves  jenmrfc* 
able,  on  a  sudden  rushed  into  the  city,  and  at  the  first  greatly  ten ifcd 
those  that  were  in  that  part  of  it;  but  presently  many  eoaaing  in  to 
assist  them,  the  enemy  was  repulsed  with  great  loss;  for  the  mbbish 


Clop.  VIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  533 

Ijing  in  tKe  way  where  they  entered,  when  they  were  driten  back  to 
^tut  breach,  they  were  so  encumbered,  that  many  were  cat  off.  Night 
approaching,  the  Carthaginians  drew  off. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Selinuntines  sent  forth  some  horsemen  in 
the  night  to  Agrigentum,  Gela,  and  Syracuse,  to  desire  aid  with  all 
^lecd,  for  that  they  were  not  able  any  longer  to  stand  ont  against  * 
go  great  an  army.    The  Gelians  and  Agrigcntines  thought  it  best  to 
wait  for  the  aids  from  Syracuse,  that  with  conjoint  forces  they  might 
■el  upon  the  Carthaginians.    But  the  Syracosans  having  certain  in* 
telligence  that  Selinus  was  besieged,  without   delay  made  peace 
with  the  Chalccddnians,  (with  whcHn  tliey  were  then  at  war),  and  ga«> 
tliered  all  their  forces  together  from  every  place.     But  because  thef 
•opposed  that  the  city  was  only  besieged,  and  not  in  any  danger  to  be 
auddenly  taken,  tliey  prorrecied  the  time,  to  make  the  greater  prepa* 
lation.     In  the  mean  time,  Hannibal,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  renewed 
the  assault  on  every  side  of  the  town,  and  presently  possessed  him- 
self  of  that  part  of  the  wall  where  the  breach  was  made,  and  of 
another  breach  made  in  another  part  adjoining;  and  when  he  had 
removed  the  rubbish,  with  the  choicest  of  his  fresh  men  he  sets  upon 
the  Selinuntines,  and  forces  them  by  degrees  to  give  ground,  but  was 
Bot  able  quite  to  break  them,  who  now  had  all  at  stake.     Many  fell 
on  both  sides. .  The  Carthaginians  were  still  supplied  with  fresh  men, 
ImC  tlie  Selinuntines  had  none  to  reinforce  them:   and  thus  the 
aasault  was  renewed  every  day,  for  the  space  of  nine  days,  with  great 
yciolotion  and  courage,  and  much  loss  on  both  sides.     At  length, 
when  the  Iberians  began  to  enter  at  the  breaches,  the  women  from 
the  tops  of  the  houses  filled  all  places  with  cries  and  lamentations: 
and  the  Selinuntines  now  judging  the  town  to  be  lost,  endeavoured 
to  block  up  all  the  narrow  passages  and  streets,  and  by  that  meant 
the  contest  continued  a  long  time.    But  while  the  Carthaginians 
were  making  their  way  by  force,  the  women  and  children  from  the 
tops  of  the  houses  mauled  them  with  tiles  and  stones;  so  that  the 
Carthaginians  for  a  long  time  were  sorely  galled,  not  being  able  to 
come  up  togetlier  in  those  narrow  passages,  the  walls  on  lx>th  sides 
heing  strongly  manned;  and  besides,  being  so  vexed  with  those  that 
east  down  stones  from  the  tops  of  the  houses     This  throwing  down 
of  darts  and  other  things  from  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  continued  till 
evening:  but  the  Canhaginians  still  renewing  the  fight,  by  pouring 
fresh  men  into  the  city,  the  others  were  tired  out,  their  number  de- 
creasing, and  their  enemies  still  increasing,  so  that  the  Selinuntines 
were  at  last  forced  to  desert  the  streets. 

The  city  thus  taken,  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  weeping  and 
wailing  among  the  Grecians}  and  on  the  other  sidCf  among  the 


534  DIOIHIRUS  SICULU§. 


bariMurians^  exultation  and  shouts  of  victory:  those  wen  ten  MM 
with  the  greatness  of  their  misery  every  where  be&Nre  their  cfes;  dicae 
now  victorious  commanded  to  kill  and  destn^  where  and  whoB  Aef 
pleased.    At  length  the  Selinuntines  got  in  m  body  tifpether  in  die 
market-placcy  and  there  fought  it  out  to  the  last  maiu    The 
lians  raging  in  all  parts  of  the  city,  rifled  all  the  houses:  tbe 
they  found  there,  they  either  burnt  them  and  their  houses  togelhsri 
or  dragging  them  into  the  streets,  without  any  respect  to  age  or  8C% 
whether  they  were  women  or  children,  young  or  old,  without  the 
least  pity  or  commiseration,  they  put  them  all  to  the  sword^and  after 
the  barbarous  manner  of  their  country,  they  mangled  their  careascsi 
•OBie  carried  about  multitudes  of  hands  tied  round  their  hodicsf 
others,  in  ostentation,  bore  about  the  heads  of  the  slam  npon  the 
points  of  their  swords  and  spears.    They  only  spared  wives  who  fled 
with  their  children  to  the  temples;  and  to  these  only  was  fawwr 
shewn,  not  out  of  any  compassion  to  the  miserable,  but  out  of  afiear 
tiiey  had  lest  the  women  being  desparate,  without  any  hopes  of  OMTcyf 
should  burn  the  temples,  and  by  that  means  they  should  lose  the 
riches  and  treasures  that  were  laid  up  in  those  places.    For  these 
barbarians  so  far  exceed  all  other  men  in  impiety,  that  whereas  olhcn 
(lest  they  should  offend  the  deity)  always  spare  them  who  fly  to  their 
temples,  the  Carthaginians  on  the  contrary  moderate  their  emeltf 
towards  their  enemies,  for  that  very  end  and  purpose  that  they  may 
have  a  better  opportunity  sacrilegiously  to  rob  the  temples.    The 
razing  and  ruining  of  the  city  continued  till  late  in  the  nigbt;  all  the 
bouses  were  burnt  or  pulled  down,  every  place  was  full  of  bluod  and 
dead  bodies,  sixteen  thousand  being  there  put  to  the  sword,  and  nsora 
than  five  thousand  carried  away  captives.    The  Grecians  who  sided 
with  the  Carthaginians,  seeing  the  inconstancy  of  the  things  «if  this 
life,  greatly  commiserated  the  condition  of  these  miserable  peopte; 
for  the  matrons  in  want  of  food  and  sustenance,  anuingst  the  floats 
and  jeers  of  an  insulting  enemy,  pas$ied  all  that  night  in  sorrow  and 
sadness.    Some  of  them  were  forced  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  the  suf- 
ferings of  their  daughters  in  such  a  kind  as  is  shameful  to  relate}  fyf 
the  cruel  lust  of  the  barbarians  sparing  neither  girls  nor  virgins  grown 
up,  afflicted  these  poor  people  with  unspeakable  miseiy.    The  dmh 
thers,  while  they  considered  the  slavery  they  were  to  undergo  in 
Libya,  and  how  they  and  tlieir  children  were  subjected  in  great  con* 
tempt  and  disgrace  to  the  brutish  lusts  of  domineering  masteiSy 
(whose  language  they  understood  not,  and  whose  actions  were  alto* 
gether  beastly),  were  in  grief  and  sorrow  even  to  see  their  childreu 
alive;  for  every  injury  and  disgrace  offered  to  them,  afiiM^ted  theas  as 
if  a  dagger  had  pierced  their  own  hearts,  when  they  were  not  aUe  la 


Chap.  FIT.  DfoDORUs  slcuLUS.  93S 


^m 


]rield  them  way  otber  relief  but  groans  and  lamentations}  insomuch 
aa  they  accounted  their  parents  and  kindred  that  had  lost  their  lites 
io  the  defence  of  their  country,  to  be  happy,  whose  eyes  saw  not  those 
brutish  and  beastly  acts  of  barbarous  cruelty.  There  were  notwith- 
standing,  two  thousand  sm  hundred  that  escaped  and  fle^  to  Agrigeii« 
turn,  where  they  were  received  with  all  manner  of  humanity  and 
tenderness;  for  the  Agrigentines  distributed  to  every  family  com  oaa 
of  the  public  stores,  and  desired  every  private  person  (who  yet  wciw 
Tcry  rauly  on  their  own  accord)  liberally  to  supply  them  with  all 
necessaries  for  their  sustenance. 

While  these  things  were  doing,  three  thousand  of  the  best  soldias 
aent  from  Syracuse  to  assist  the  Selinuntines,  came  to  Agrigentnav 
But  when  they  heard  that  the  city  was  taken,  they  sent  ambassadoia 
to  Hannibal,  to  demand  the  redemption  of  the  prisoners,  and  that  be 
would  forbear  robbing  the  temples  of  the  gods.  They  returned 
with  tliis  answer  from  Hannibal,  that  in  regard  tlie  Selinuntines  wen 
not  able  to  preserve  their  own  liberty,  they  were  now  justly  brought 
into  the  condition  of  slaves*  That  the  gods  were  angry  at  the  inha- 
bitants, and  therefore  had  forsaken  Selinus*  But  when  they  aent 
Empediones  ambassador  a  second  time,  Hannibal  restored  to  hini  all 
his  estate,  because  he  always  favoured  the  Carthaginians,  and  some 
time  before  the  city  was  taken,  had  advised  the  citiaens  not  to  with- 
stand:  he  pardoned  likewise  all  those  prisoners  that  were  of  his  kin- 
dred, and  permitted  those  that  fled  to  Agrigentum  to  repeople  the 
city,  and  till  the  lands,  upon  paying  tribute  to  the  Carthaginiaas. 
Thus  was  this  city  taken,  two  hundred  and  fifty-two  years  after  the 
building  of  it. 

After  Hannibal  had  demolished  it,  he  marched  off  with  all  hit 
army  towards  Himera,  with  a  longing  desire  to  ruin  this  city.  For 
this  town  occasioned  the  banishment  of  his  fatlier;  and  here  it  was 
that  his  grandfather  Amilcar  was  routed  by  Gelon,  who  killed  a  hun- 
dred and  fifty  thousand  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  took  almost  as  many 
prisoners.  In  revenge  whereof,  Hannibal  speeds  away  with  forty 
thousand  men,  and  encamps  upon  a  hill  at  some  distance  from  the 
city,  and  with  the  rest  of  his  army  (to  whom  joined  the  Sicilians  and 
Sicanians,  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand  men)  he  besieges  the 
place,  and  batters  the  walls  with  his  engines  in  several  places  at  once  $ 
and  with  fresh  succours  even  wearies  out  the  besieged;  to  the  efiect- 
ing  of  which,  the  forwardness  of  his  men  (through  the  late  successes) 
was  of  no  small  advantage.  Whilst  he  was  undermining  the  walls^ 
he  supported  them  witli  great  pieces  of  timber,  and  then  setting  them 
on  fire,  a  great  part  of  the  walls  on  a  sudden  tumbled  down;  upoQ 
which  there  was  a  sharp  conflict ;  these  striving  to  enter  by  fuice^ 


836  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  S&UkXOTi 


the  others  in  dread  of  undergoing  the  same  fate  and  deatnicCioQ  «Hb 
them  of  Selinus ;  so  that  the  besieged,  endeavoaring  whh  all  thdr 
might  to  defend  their  parents,  children,  and  countryy  beat  Ae  kai^ 
barians  off,  and  with  all  speed  repaired  the  walL  For  then  lad 
before  come  to  their  assistance  four  thousand  Stracuaana,  uid  aoaa 
other  confederates  from  Agrigentum,  under  the  command  of  Diodei 
the  Syracusan.  Then  night  coming  on,  it  gave  a  cheek  to-the  §mf 
of  the  besiegers,  and  so  there  was  an  intermission  of  the  assault. 

But  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  besieged,  resolving  not  to  bepanacd 
up  as  the  Selinuntines  were,  through  slothfuiness,  placed  tlie  goarib 
upon  the  walls,  and  with  the  rest  of  their  own,  and  the  forces  of  their 
confederates,  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand,  made  a  sally^  aiid  fsl 
suddenly  upon  the  enemy.  Whereupon  the  barbarians  were  struck 
with  great  terror  and  amazement,  conceiving  that  all  the  cooKade^ 
rates  of  the  besieged  were  come  to  their  relief.  The  saUianC^ 
therefore,  being  far  more  daring  and  skilful  in  their  weapons^  and 
especially  the  last  hope  of  their  safety  lying  in  the  good  success  of  the 
present  engagement,  they  cut  off  all  those  that  first  opposed  then. 
And  though  the  whole  force  of  the  barbarians  in  great  &ofder  and 
confusion  fell  upon  them,  (for  they  never  suspected  that  the 
durst  ever  have  attempted  any  such  thing),  yet  they 
DO  small  disadvantages;  for  fourscore  thousand  men  running  in 
fusion  together,  beat  dowO  one  another,  and  more  incommodsd 
themselves  tlian  their  enemies.  The  Himerians  in  the  mean  tfaK 
being  in  sight  of  their  parents,"  children, .  and  all  their  friends  and 
relations  upon  the  walls,  exposed  themselves,  without  fear,  fo  aB 
dangers  for  the  common  safety.  The  barbarians,  therefor^  astiH 
nished  with  the  valour  of  the  enemy,  and  unexpectedness  of  Ae 
onset,  turned  their  backs,  and  fled  in  great  precipitation  (o  their 
fellows  encamped  upon  the  hill,  whom  the  Himerians  ponucdf 
calling  one  to  another  not  to  give  any  quarter.  In  this 
there  were  killed  of  the  Carthaginians  above  six  thousand,  as 
relates,  but  Ephorus  says  twenty  thousand.  Hannibal,  when  hessnr 
his  soldiers  so  distressed,  drew  out  those  that  were  encamped,  and 
came  to  the  relief  of  his  shattered  troops,  setting  upon  the  Himeriaai^ 
now  in  disorder  by  the  pursuit;  upon  which  there  began  another 
sharp  dispute,  in  which  at  length  the  Himerians  were  put  to  ffight| 
but  three  thousand  of  them  stood  their  ground,  and  bore  the  bmnt  sf 
the  whole  Carthaginian  army;  and  after  they  had  signalised 
lour,  all  died  upon  the  spot. 

After  this  fight,  five-and- twenty  gallies,  which  were 
befoi^  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  Lfacedfiemonians,  from  the  Sicrii. 
leturoing  home,  arrived  at  Himeia;  but  a  rumouriqpicad  thiuughdM 


i    Chap.  VIL  nioDORUS  siculus.  537 

t    GJtyi  thai  the  Syracusaiis,  with  all  thi:ir  forces  and  cuafedcrutcsi  were 

(•  GQme  tu  the  relief  uf  the  Hlmeriaiis.     Uauuihal  in  the  mean  time 

I    embarks  many  uf  iiis  best  soldiers  in  his  gallics  which  lay  at  Motya, 

'»    io  order  to  sail  fur  Syracuse,  to  surprise  the  city,  now  that  it  wanted 

>    luiEeient  strength  to  defend  it,  as  he  supposed.     And  therefore  Dio- 

,     des,  eonimandi  r  in  chief  of  them  who  were  sent  in  aid  of  the 

Himerians,  advised  the  captains  of  the  vessels  to  sail  with  all  speed 

,    jlo  Syracuse,  lest,  when  they  had  lo^t  the  best  of  their  soldiers,  in  the 

next  tight,  tiieir  own  city  should  be  taken  hy  force.     To  which  end 

it  was  thought  advisaide  to  leave  the  city  for  awhile,  and  to  enihaik 

ooe  half  of  Uioi:Ies's  forces,  to  go  along  with  the  fleet  till  ihcy  were 

past  the  coasts  of  llimera,  and  to  leave  the  cither  half  for  the  defence. 

of  the  city  till  the  liaJlies  returned.     The  llinieiians    took   this 

pievously,  but  being  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  do  otherwise,  gallies 

were  filled  in  the  night,  with  women  and  children,  and  other  things 

to  be  transported  to  Messana. 

Then  Diodes,  with  those  under  his  counnand,  preiiarcd  for  his 
journey  back  into  his  own  country,  leaving  the  bodies  of  them  that 
were  skin  unburied.  And  so  many  of  the  IJimerians,  with  their 
wives  and  children,  went  along  with  him,  as  could  not  be  otherwise 
transported  for  want  of  shipping.  Uut  they  that  were  left  for  the 
ilefcDce  of  the  city,  watched  every  night  in  arms  upon  the  bulwarks. 
And  although  the  Carthaginians  constantly  upon  the  a|  proach  of  day 
made  frequent  tissiiulis  in  every  place  round  the  city,  yet  they  upon 
the  walls  indefatigably  bore  the  hiunt,  believing  the  ships  would 
return  speedily;  to  which  veiy  day  they  held  it  out  courageously:  but 
the  next  day  after  the  fleet  was  in  sight  afar  ofl',  at  ihut  iiisi»nt  the 
wall  was  battered  down  by  tlie  engiiit-s,  and  the  Spanish  regiment  in 
a  full  body  rushed  into  the  city,  part  of  the  barbarians  forcing  the 
guard  from  the  walls,  and  another  (uirt  ptjssessing  the  breaches, 
made  way  for  the  rest  of  the  army  to  enter.  At  leiigiii  tiie  city  was 
entered,  and  the  haibarians,  with  all  savage  ciuelty,  killed  all  in  their 
way,  till,  by  the  command  ol  Haunilml,  they  forbore  ihcir  butclK-iiiH : 
ID  the  mean  time,  the  soldiers  plundered  the  houses  of  cvny  thing 
raluabU*.  Mere  Hannibal  ribbed  and  spoiled  all  ilie  teiiiples,  and 
after  iu:  had  taken  out  those  that  fled  ihither  for  rcluge,  he  set  them 
ou  fire,  and  razed  the  city  to  the  ground,  tivo  hundrttl  and  fuiiy  years 
after  the  settling  of  the  inhabitants  there.  Among  the  pii^oner^,  ihe 
womcQ  and  children  he  commanded  to  be  ke|>t  sale;  but  ilie  ihi-ii,  to 
the  number  of  three  thousand,  lie  caused  to  be  broii.^i.i  .  i  a  :i>'m*'' 
fround  there  near  at  hand,  wheie  Amilcar,  hi>  giandLiini^i.  peii^!.«.il 
^y  the  army  of  Gelon,  and  thercj  \%iih  all  &oii*  ul  launu  anUniuk>4it 
VoL.i.  No.  38.  zzz 


538  D10D0RU8  8YCULUS.  Bmk  XttT. 

disgrace,  put  them  all  to  the  sword.  Afterwards  he  disbanded  many 
of  his  forces;  among  the  rest  he  sent  the  Sicilians  who  rided  with 
him  to  their  several  countries,  and  with  them  the  CampanUDSy  wbo  , 
made  great  complaint  of  the  injustice  of  the  Carthaginians^  for  that 
they,  contributing  so  much  to  their  successes,  had  not  rewarded  them 
proportionably  to  tlie  services  they  had  done  them  in  the  war. 

However  Hannibal  shipped  bis  army,  leaving  a  small  guard  irith 
his  confederates,  and  with  his  transport  ships  and  gallies  set  sail  from 
Sicily,  and  arrived  at  Carthage,  laden  with  abundance  of  bootj.  The 
whole  city  came  out  to  meet  him,  and  received  him  wi^i  lond  and 
joyful  acclamations,  as  a  general  that  had  performed  greater  things 
by  far  in  so  short  a  time  than  ever  any  before  him. 

At  this  timie  Hermocrates  the  Syracusan  returned  intoSicilji    He 

was  in  great  esteem  among  the  Syracusans,  because  in  the  war  against 

the  Athenians  he  was  remarkably  ser\'iceablc  to  his  country.     He  was 

afterwards  sent  as  admiral  with  thirty-five  sail,  to  the  aid  of  the  La- 

cedsemonians;  but  by  a  contrary  faction  at  home  being  condemned 

to  banishment,  he  delivered  up  the  command  of  the  fleet  in  Pelo* 

ponnesus,  to  those  who  were  deputed  by  the  government.   Afterwardp, 

having  received  a  considerable  sum  of  money  from  PhamabanSy 

whose  favourite  he  was,  he  sailed  to  Messana,  and  there  buHt  Ufa 

gallics,  and  hired  a  thousand  soldiers  with  his  own  money;  and  taking 

likewise  with  him  a  thousand  of  those  that  were  forced  frdm  Himera^ 

he  attempted  with  the  help  of  his  friends  to  return  to  Symciise:  but 

being  prevented  in  this  design,  he  marched  up  into  the  country  t0 

Selinus^  and  enclosed  part  of  the  city  with  a  wall,  and  got  togetfier 

as  many  of  the  Selinuntines  as  survived  the  late  destruction,  and  with 

them  and  many  others  which  he  received  into  the  place,  he  made  ap 

a  body  of  six  thousand  choice  men.    From  thence  he  made  an  exem^ 

idon,  and  spoiled  tlie  country  of  the  Motyeans,  overcame  them  that 

issued  out  of  the  city  against  him,  and  killed  many  of  them,  driving 

the  rest  within  their  walls.     Presently  after,  he  broke  into  the  borders 

of  the  Panormians,  and  carried  away  abundance  of  plunder:  he  killed 

likewise  five  hundred  of  the  citizens  that  stood  in  battalia  before  their 

city  to  oppose  him,  and  shut  up  the  rest  within  their  walls,  and  wasted 

and  spoiled  likewise  all  the  other  countries  that  were  subject  to  the 

Carthaginians,  for  which  he  was  in  high  esteem  among  the  SieilhmSL 

Hereupon  the  Syracusans  likewise  presently  began  to  repent,  when 

they  saw  that  they  had  banished  one  whose  valour  merited  so  nodk 

to  the  contrary :  so  that  when  he  was  often  named  and  dbcoorscd  of 

in  public  assemblies,  the  people  gave  many  hints  and  signs  of  tiieir 

desire  to  have  him  recalled.    Hermocrates  therefore  vndfiBtaodiBg 


Ckmp.  Fill.  DIODORU8  8ICULU8.  639 


that  his  name  was  up  among  the  Syracusans,  used  his  utmost  eodea- 
TOUT  to  return,  knowing  that  his  enemies  and  rivab  would  oppose  it 
with  all  their  miglit :  and  thus  stood  things  in  Sicily  at  this  time. 


CHAP.  VIU. 

2%raiybuluM  assauliM  Ephetu*.  The  LaceiUtmaniana  besiege  P^^ 
las;  tur rentier  Chalcedan^  besieged  by  Tiieramenes;  ami  after'' 
Ufards  Bjfxaniium,  which  was  betrayed  to  Mcibiades. 

IN  Greece,  Tbrasybulus,  sent  from  Athens  with  a  fleet  of  thirty  sail 
well  manned,  and  with  a  great  army  of  foot,  and  a  hundred  horse, 
sailed  to  Eplicsus ;  where,  lauding  his  men  in  two  places,  he  assaulted 
the  city ;  but  the  townsmen  making  a  brisk  sally,  there  began  a  sharp 
cngageuieni;  in  which  four  hundred  ot  the  Athenians  were  killed, 
(for  die  whole  strength  of  the  city  fell  upon  them),  the  rest  getting 
to  their  ships.  Thrasybulus  departed  thence  fur  Lesbos.  But  tha 
iktlicniau  generals,  who  lay  at  (lyzicum,  passed  over  to  Chalcedouj 
and  built  a  fort  called  Chrysopolis,  putting  into  it  a  sufficient  garri« 
sod;  and  commanded  the  governors  to  exact  the  tenth  part  of  all 
shipping  tlut  |Missed  that  way  from  Pontus.  Afterwards  the  forces 
were  divided,  and  Theramenes  was  left  with  fifty  sati  to  besiege 
Cbalcrdon  and  Byzantium.  But  Thrasybulus  was  sent  into  Thnce, 
and  brought  the  cities  of  that  country  under  the  power  of  the  Atlie-  ' 
niaos.  Alcibiades  having  sent  away  Thrasybulus  with  thirty  sail, 
with  the  rest  of  the  fleet  arrived  at  the  province  of  Pharuabazus. 
There  they  wasted  and  spoiled  all  that  large  tract,  and  filled  the 
soldiers  with  plunder;  and  the  generals  themselves  got  together  a 
great  sum  of  money,  by  the  sale  uf  the  spoils,  with  a  design  to  ease 
the  people  of  the  burthen  of  their  contributions. 

The  Laccdiemonians  understanding  that  the  Athenian  forces  wei« 
•till  about  the  Helles|)ont,  sent  forces  against  Pylos,  where  the 
Mcssenians  were  in  garrison.  At  sea,  indeed,  they  had  eleven  ships 
of  which  five  were  ot  Sicily,  manned  with  Spartans;  but  iheir  land- 
army  was  but  small.  With  these  they  besieged  the  fort  both  by  land 
aod  sea.  But  when  intelligence  was  brought  of  this,  the  Atlieuiaus 
aent  out  thiny  sail,  under  the  command  of  Any  tus,  the  sou  of  Anthc* 
piioD,  to  the  relief  of  the  besieged.  In  his  passing  thither,  a  great 
ptorm  arose,  so  that  not  being  able  to  recover  Malea,  ha  rcturued  to 


540  DIODORTTS  SieiTLOS*  Sebk  JUtii 


Athens  y  upon  which  the  people  of  Athens  were  so  fncensed,  tlMt 
they  condemned  him  to  die  as  a  traitor:  yNnytos  brought  tntoAii 
imminent  danger,  redeemed  liis  life  with  a  sum  of  money;  who  ft 
reported  to  be  the  first  Athenian  that  ever  reversed  a  sentence  for 
money.  In  the  moan  time,  the  besieged  Messenians  in  Pylos  stood 
out  sigainst  all  assaults  for  a  time,  in  hopes  of  relief  from  Athens: 
hut  being  pressed  by  fresh  and  renewed  succours  from  the  assailantSi 
by  the  loss  of  men  on  the  one  hand,  and  through  iis'ant  of  provisiont 
on  the  otlier,  they  were  forced  to  surrender  upon  terms.  Thus  Pjlos 
was  reduced,  and  brought  into  the  hands  of  the  Lacedsmonians;  the 
Athenians  having  had  possession  of  it  fifteen  years^  from  the  time  ft 
was  fortified  by  Domosthenes. 

During  these  affairs,  the  Megarcans  took  Niciea,  then  belonging  to 
the  Athenians.  Upon  which  the  Athenians  sent  against  them  Leo- 
trophides  and  Timnrchus,  witli  a  thousand  foot,  and  four  handred 
horse.  A  gainst  whom  ail  the  Megarcans,  with  the  assistance  of  some 
from  Sicily,  marched  out,  and  drew  np  in  battalia  upon  the  hiill 
ealled  the  Florns.  'There  the  Athenians  fought  with  that  valottr,  thai 
they  put  the  enemy  to  flight,  though  far  more  in  number  than  them- 
selves. In  this  battle  great  slaugiiter  was  made  amongst  the  Megapi 
reans;  but  there  were  only  twenty  killed  of  the  Ijaccdiemonians:  for 
the  Athenians  taking  the  loss  of  Nic(ea  very  grievously,  waved  the 
LacodiPmonians,  and  bent  all  the  heat  of  their  pursuit  agahiat  the 
Mrg^reans,  and  in  a  great  rnge  cut  down  multitudes  of  them.  About 
this  time,  the  Lacedaemonians  made  Cratesipidas  admiral,  and  nan- 
ned  fivc-and-twenty  sail  with  supplies  sent  from  their  confedentei, 
and  commanded  him  to  succour  their  allies;  who  spent  a  long  time 
about  Ionia,  doing  notliing  considerable.  Afterwards,  being  furnished 
with  money  by  the  exiles  of  Chios,  he  both  restored  them^  and  to6k 
the  citadel  of  the  Ciiians, 

Wlicn  the  exiles  were  returned,  they  expelled  those  that  banished 
them,  to  tlie  number  of  six  hundred,  who  possessed  themselves  of  a 
place  called  Atarnca,  opposite  upon  the  continent,  naturally  fortified; 
from  whence  afterwards,  growing  strong,  they  wearied  the  Chianft 
with  frequent  in\'asions.  During  these  things  Alcibiades  and  Thra- 
sybulus  having  fortified  Lampsacus,  left  there  a  sufficient  garrisonj 
and  then  sailed  wjth  the  whole  army  to  Theramenes,  who  was  then 
besieging  Chalcedon,  having  a  fleet  of  seventy  sail^  and  five  thousand 
men  under  his  command.  The  generals  drawing  up  the  whole  army 
together  in  a  body,  blocked  up  the  city  by  a  wall  of  timber,  drawft 
from  sea  to  sea.  Upon  which  Hippocrates,  made  governor  there  by 
the  Lacedaemonians,  (whom  the  Laconians  call  liarmostis),  made  a 
sally  both  with  the  Lacedaemonians  and  all  the  Chalecdoniatas :  and 


Ckiip.  VTtl.  DI01>0RUS  SICULUS.  54 1 

joining  battle  with  Alcibiades,  '(whose  soldiera  fought  with  great 
resolution),  Hippocrates  was  slain,  and  many  more  killed  and  wound* 
ed,  and  the  rest  fled  back  into  the  city.  Afterwards  Alcibiades  passed 
over  into  the  Hellespont  and  Chersonesus,  with  a  design  to  raise 
money.  But  Tl^eramenes  came  to  terms  with  the  Chalcedonians,  and 
agreed  that  they  should  pay  the  same  tribute  that  they  did  before; 
and  so  drew  off  his  forces,  and  came  before  Byzantium,  designing  to 
block  up  that  place. 

In  the  mean  time,  Alcibiades  having  got  together  a  vast  sum  erf 
money,  procured  many  of  the  Thracians  to  join  with  hior;  and  thea 
making  a  league  and  association  with  all  them  of  Chersonesos,  he 
went  from  thence  with  his  whole  army,  and  gained  Selymbria  bysar* 
render,  from  whence  he  exacted  a  great  sum  of  money;  and  placing 
there  a  garrison,  hastened  away  to  Theramenes  at  Byzantium,  where 
they  jointly  assailed  the  town  with  their  whole  strength;  for  they 
were  to  subdue  a  city  that  was  very  large,  and  full  of  resolute  men; 
for  besides  the  Byzantines,  who  were  very  numerous,  Clearchus 
Harmostis  the  Laccdssmonian,  had  with  him  in  the  city  a  strong 
garrison,  both  of  Peloponnesians  and  of  mercenaries,  insomuch  that^ 
though  they  violently  assaulted  it,  for  a  long  time  they  were  not  able 
to  make  any  considerable  impression  u{K)n  the  besieged.  But  the 
governor  of  the  city,  being  gone  to  Phamabazusfor  money^  tome  of 
tiie  Byzantines,  who  had  taken  a  distaste  at  bis  government)  (for 
Clearchus  was  sharp  and  rigid),  betrayed  the  city  into  the  hands  of 
Alcibiades,  in  this  manner — The  besiegers  pretended  they  would  raise 
the  siege,  and  ship  off  their  army  into  Ionia;  and  to  that  purpose,  in 
the  evening,  they  sailed  with  their  whole  fleet,  and  drew  off  their 
land  forces  to  some  distance  from  the  town ;  but  at  midnight  the  army 
marched  back  close  to  the  city;  and  having  before  sent  back  their 
gallics  with  orders,  that  they  should  haul  the  ships  of  the  i^zantinet 
out  of  the  harbour,  and  set  up  a  great  shout,  as  if  all  the  army  were 
there  present,  they  themselves  with  the  land-forces  kept  ready  dmwii 
up  in  a  body,  close  to  the  walls,  in  expectation  of  tlie  sign.  In  the 
execution  of  these  commands,  whilst  some  of  the  ships  were  broken 
in  pieces  by  the  beaks  of  the  ships  of  the  Athenians,  and  others  by 
grappling*  irons  were  hauled  forth,  and  a  great  and  terrible  shout  was 
made,  the  Peloponnesians  in  the  city,  ignorant  of  the  treachery,  sallied 
out  to  the  hariDonr,  for  the  defence  of  the  city.  In  the  mean  time 
the  traitors  gave  the  sign  from  the  walls,  and  by  ladders  took  in  die 
soldiers  of  Alcibiades,  while  they  of  the  garrison  were  oat  at  the  port. 
But  the  Peloponnesians  being  informed  of  the  treachery,  left  half 
the  forces  in  the  port,  and  with  the  rest,  ran  with  all  speed  to  guard 
the  walls,  of  which  the  enemy  was  newly  possessed.     And  although 


54f  monoRUs  sicutut*  ,BaokJItL 


the  whole  Athenhin  army  had  broke  in,  yet  the  besieged  were  not  ia 
the  least  discouraged  for  a  long  time;  but  with  the  help  of  die  Bf* 
ataotines  so  courageously  opposed  the  AtheuiaiiS)  that  the  cdty  had 
DCTcr  come  into  their  hands,  if  Alcihiades  had  not  made  proclunadon 
that  none  of  the  Byzantines  should  be  injured;  which  was  a  tluag 
▼ery  seasonably  advised :  upon  which  the  townsmen  turned  their 
arms  upon  the  Lacedsemonians,  so  that  many  of  them  (figbdag 
with  gteat  gallantry)  were  killed.  The  rest,  to  the  Dumber  of  five 
bttDdred»  Bed,  as  suppliants,  to  the  altars  of  the  gods.  The  Atheniam 
restored  the  city  to  the  Byzantines,  and  renewed  the  league  and  con- 
federacy. The  suppliants,  likewise,  were  received  upon  tenai^ 
that  they  should  deliver  up  their  arms,  and  that  their  peraoM 
should  be  transported  to  Athens^  there  to  be  disposed  of  as  die  peiH 
pie  should  think  fit. 


CHAP.  IX. 

TkeraifMneB  and  AkibiadeM  return  to  jtiheM;  are  admired  ig  ike 
people.  Ljf  Sander  made  general  by  the  LacedeemonioHM^  jtn 
HochuSf  one  of  the  Athenian  generaU,  beaten  at  EpAenu,  m  m 
wee^Jight.  Agis  surprises  part  of  the  walls  qf  Athens;  but  wm 
beaten  qffl  Alcihiades  accused  for  assaultbig  Cuma^  a  eossfede* 
rate  city.     Conan  made  admiral  in  his  place. 

AFTER  the  end  of  the  year,  Euctemones  was  mad^  archon  of  Athene 
and  the  Romans  constituted  Marcus  Papirius  and  Spurius  Naudos 
consuls.  Then  was  celebrated  the  ninety-third  olympiad,  in  which 
Eubaias  of  Cyrene  got  the  victory.  At  this  time  the  Athenian  gene* 
rals  (now  possessed  of  Byzantium)  gained  all  the  cities  of  the  Heir 
lespont,  except  Abydos.  Then  they  left  Diodorus  and  Bfantithtos^ 
with  sufficient  forces,  governors  in  the  Hellespont;  and  they  them* 
selves,  after  they  had  performed  many  famous  exploits  for  the  honoar 
and  safety  of  their  country,  returned  with  the  fleet,  laden  with  mpmh^ 
to  Athens.  When  they  drew  near,  all  the  people  thronged  oat  with 
great  joy  to  meet  them,  and  a  great  number  of  strangers,  both  women 
and  children,  ran  together  into  the  Piraeus;  the  arrival  of  the  gene* 
rals  filling  all  persons  with  admiration.  For  they  brought  aloof 
with  them  no  less  than  two  hundred  ships,  which  they  had  takei^ 
and  a  multitude  of  prisoners,  with  much  spoil ;  and  their  owii  ships 


Chip.  IX.  DIODORUS  8tClTLtJ9.  549  , 

tes^=:as9BS=sssBSBSBSSsasss=saaasssBs=sEBs=sssgiBSS9B^aaB^ 

were  gloriously  adorned  with  arms,  rich  spoils^  and  golden  crownt, 
and  such  like.  Every  body  thronged  one  updn  another  to  see  Aid- 
blades,  so  as  the  city  was  even  left  without  an  inhabitant,  whilst  both 
bond  and  free  longed  to  have  a  view  of  him.  For  he  was  ao  highly 
admired  at  that  time,  that  none  of  the  former  Athenians  were  judged 
comparable  to  this  man,'  who  so  openly  and  confidently  had  stood  it 
out  against  tlie  people.  They  who  were  poor,  and  under  mulcts  and 
fines,  now  hoped  they  had  an  excellent  advocate,  who  by  raising 
tumults  and  di^^turbances  in  the  city,  could  free  them  from  their 
penuries  and  pressing  necessities.  He  was  a  man  daring  above  all 
others,  and  an  excellent  speaker:  in  times  of  war  a  brave  soldier,  and 
as  skilful  a  commander;  ready  in  undertaking  any  desparate  enter- 
prise, of  a  very  comely  and  beautiful  countenance,  of  a  noble  spirit^ 
and  aspiring  mind.  All  were  so  filled  with  expectation  from  him, 
that  they  concluded  his  return,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  city,  were 
coupled  together.  For  as  the  Lacedsemonians  were  successful  a|id 
victorious  whilst  he  assisted  them,  so  they  hoped  that  by  his  return, 
their  affairs  would  change  to  the  better. 

As  soon  as  the  fleet  entered  into  the  harbour,  all  eyes  were  fixed 
upon  Alcibiades's  ship;  and  upon  his  landing,  they  received  him  with 
great  acclamations,  and  congratulated  his  return  and  victories.  After 
he  had  with  all  courteous  behaviour  saluted  the  people,  he  called  an 
assembly,  where,  liaving  made  a  long  defence  for  establishing  bit 
innocency,  he  so  insinuated  himself  into  the  good-will  of  the  people, 
that  all  cast  the  blame  of  the  dooms  and  judgments  against  him  upon 
the  city  itself:  and  therefore  they  restored  all  his  estate,  not  long 
before  confiscated,  and  threw  the  records  of  his  condemnation  into 
the  sea;  and  reversed  all  other  things  that  were  decreed  against  him: 
and  a  decree  was  made,  that  the  £umo1pidse  should  take  away,  and 
absolve  him  from  that  curse  they  had  pronounced  against  him,  when 
he  was  supposed  to  have  been  guilty  of  proplianing  the  sacred  myste- 
ries. At  last  they  made  him  general,  and  gave  him  full  power,  both 
by  sea  and  land,  and  committed  all  their  forces  to  his  command; 
upon  which  he  constituted  other  generals,  as  he  thought  fit:  that  is 
to  say,  Adimantus  and  Thrasybulus;  and  he  himself,  with  a  hundred 
sail,  passed  over  to  Andros,  and  there  possessed  himself  of  the  fort 
Gaurium,  and  enclosed  it  with  a  wall.  But  the  Andrians,  with  the 
whole  strength  of  the  city,  and  the  succours  sent  them  from  Pelo- 
ponnesus, sallied  out  against  them,  whereupon  a  sharp  engagement 
followed,  in  which  the  Athenians  were  conquerors;  a  great  part  of 
them  that  came  out  of  the  town  being  cut  off.  Of  those  that  escaped, 
some  were  scattered  abroad  in  the  fields,  others  got  within  the  wails. 
After  he  had  several  times  attempted  to  take  the  city  by  assault,  and 


S44  DIODORU9  9ICULU9.  Book  XIJH 

saw  he  could  not  prevail,  be  left  a  aufficieot  garriaoo  in  the  ibrt,  (bf 
him  before  fortified),  under  the  command  of  Thraaybuliis^  and  he 
himself  sailed  off  with  the  rest  of  the  army,  and  wasted  and  apqjM 
Cos  and  Rhodes,  and  there  got  a  great  deal  of  proYisioa  for  his  sol- 
diers.    As  for  the  Lacedemonians,  although  they  had  lost  ntoit  of 
their  fleet,  and  the  command  of  the  sea,  together  with  their  gencnd- 
Mindarus,  yet  they  were  not  discouraged,  but  created  Lysander  ad* 
miral  of  their  navy,  a  most  expert  soldier,  bold  and  daring,  and  ready 
to  undertake  any  thing,  through  all  hazards  whatsoever.     As  aooQ  as 
he  entered  upon  his  command,  he  raised  no  small  number  of  aoIdiciSi 
throughout  all  Peloponnesus,  and  furnished  the  fleet  with  seamcB, 
as  well  as  in  the  present  circumstances  he  was  able;  and  presently 
arriving  at  Rhodes,  he  got  together  as  niany  ships  from  thence,  and 
the  rest  of  the  towns,  as  he  could,  and  then  departed  with  whtt 
ships  he  had,  to  Ephesus  and  Miletus;  where,  bang  further  aupplied 
from  these  cities,  and  with  others  from  Chios,  he  set  forth  fnw 
Ephesns  with  a  fleet  of  seventy  sail.    But  when  he  nnderstood  thai 
Cyrus,  the  son  of  Darius,  was  sent  from  his  father,  with  orden  to 
assist  the  Lacedfiemonians  in  the  war,  he  made  a  journey  to  him  at 
Sardis;  and  after  several  arguments  adduced  to  encourage  the  young 
man  to  prosecute  the  war  against  the  Athenians,  he  forthwith 
received  from  him  ten  thousand  Daricans,  for  the  pay  of  his  aoldien, 
with  command  from  Cyrus  to  proceed,  without  doubting  hia  assist* 
ance;  for  that  he  was  commanded  by  his  father  to  spare  no  costs 
for  the  supply  of  the  Lacedsnionians,  in  whatsoever  they  should 
undertake. 

From  thence  he  returned  to  Ephesus,  and  sent  for  the  principal 
men  of  every  neighbouring  town ;  and  having  entered  into  a  lei^ne 
and  confederacy  with  them,  promised,  if  the  war  succeeded,  he 
would  make  every  one  of  them  a  prince  in  his  own  city.  Upon  this 
each  strove  to  exceed  another,  and  supplied  him  with  more  tlian  was 
required;  insomuch  as  they  abundantly  furnished  Lysander  with 
all  things  necessary  for  the  war,  sooner  than  could  in  reason  ba 
imagined. 

When  Alcibiadcs  understood  that  Lysander  was  preparing  a  fleet 
at  Ephesus,  he  made  thither  with  his  whole  navy$  where  he  ca- 
tered the  port  without  opposition,  and  anchored  with  many  of  his 
vessels  near  Notium,  and  gave  the  command  to  Aotioclms,  the  oip- 
tain  of  his  own  vessel,  with  strict  charge  not  to  fight  till  he  returned. 
In  the  mean  time  he  himself  sailed  with  several  men  of  wartoClaso^ 
mens,  which  city  (yet  standing  firm  to  the  Athenians)  waa  graillj 
oppressed  by  the  devastations  made  by  some  eailes.  But  Antiocluiii 
naturally  rash  and  hasty,  earnestly  desirous  to  perform  ■ametWt 


Chip.  IX.  DIODORU8  8ICULU8.  545 


saK 


vemarkabie  by  liis  own  contrivance,  witliout  any  n*gard  xo  the  coin- 
aund  of  Alciliiades,  mans  ten  of  tiie  best  <;allieSy  and  commands  the 
captains  and  oflicers  of  the  fleet,  to  be  ready  and  prepared,  with  the 
rest  of  the  ships,  to  fall  in  where  there  should  he  occasion:  upon  this 
lie  makes  up  to  the  enemy,  and  dares  them  to  hiiitlc.  Lysunder,  be- 
ing inf«»rmed  by  some  deserters,  that  Alcibiades,  with  the  best  of  the 
Ben  of  war,  wciegone  olT,  now  conceived  he  hud  a  fit  opportunity 
put  into  liis  hands,  to  do  siuneihiiif^  worthy  of  the  Spartan  name:  in 
order  thereunto,  he  makes  fortii  the  whole  licet  airaiiist  Antiochus; 
aud  one  of  the  ten  (which  sailed  before  the  rest,  and  in  wliich  An« 
tiochus  was)  he  presently  sinks,  and  puts  all  the  re.%i  tu  flight,  and 
pursues  them  till  the  Athenian  olFieers  In  the  other  vessels,  in  great 
confusion,  came  up  to  their  assistance.  And  now  the  fleets  on  both 
sides  were  wholly  engaged  not  far  ofl*  from  the  land:  in  short,  the 
Jktlieiii.ms  (hy  reasou  of  the  disurder  they  were  in)  were  beaten,  with 
tLe  loss  lit  tuo-and-lwenty  of  their  ships.  Some  few  of  the  men 
were  luki  n,  hut  the  rest  swam  on  sliure.  As  soon  as  Alcibiades 
brard  of  the  deieatt,  he  returned  with  all  speed  to  Nutium;  and 
having  sufliciently  niannetl  and  refitted  his  gallies,  he  sailed  into  the 
enemy*s  purt;  hut  Ly>anr!er  nut  daring  toeni^aj^^e,  it  was  determiHed 
to  go  fill  5anio5. 

\\  liile  these  things  were  done,  Thrasyhiilus  the  Atlienian  general, 
with  fiiieen  ^ullio,  ciuue  up  to  Thasns,  where  he  routed  the  citizens. 
Olid  killed  uhuut  !uo  hundietl  of  them ;  and  so  closely  besieged  them, 
that  at  U-iii^tli  ilu\  wne  loieed  to  receive  :ig.kin  those  that  favoured 
the  Aihi.-iii.iii^  iiitii  the  ciiy,  and  to  luke  in  a  piriison,  and  renew 
theii  contederaey  with  the  Athenians.  1 1.ence  he  sailed  to  Abdera, 
the  ntost  potent  lity  nl  Tliraee,  and  hrouL'iit  i  lie  in  over  lo  the  Athe- 
nians. Thc!»e  ui-ie  the  things  done  by  the  Aiiienian  generals  from 
the  time  chey  letl  Athens. 

Abi»ui  thisiinie  Agis,  the  Ijaeedtfiuioniun  king,  lay  encamped  with 
bis  army  ai  iXeclea;  wheie,  having  iitieiiigenee  chat  the  flower  and 
Strengili  of  tiie  Athrnians  wt-re  gone  otf  with  Alcibiades,  he  march- 
ed up  tu  Allien^  siUntly  in  a  daik  night,  having  with  him  eight-and- 
twenty  thousand  foot,  litiit'of  \%hich  were  old  soldi^r^,  very  well  arm- 
ed:  the  other  halt  uere  but  raw,  and  lightly  armed.  He>ides  these, 
there  iollowtd  liiiii  twelve  hnndreil  horse,  nine  of  which  were  Uoeu* 
tiaiiS,  and  the  lol  liont  l*elupi)niu'sus.  He  was  not  discerned  by  the 
wateh,  till  he  was  elose  at  hand;  and  so  fell  upon  ihem  unawares, 
and  slew  some,  and  forced  the  lot  within  the  wdlls.  Hereupon  the 
Atlicni.tns,  both  young  and  old,  were  eomnnnided  generally  tu  betake 
themM-lves  to  urins,  to  ojipobc  the  enemy;  upon  which,  the  walls 
ruuud  the  city  were  presenily  tilled  with  them  ihat  nil  thither  from 
Vol.  I.  No.  Jd.  aaaa 


5^16  DiODORUA  SICULU9.  3ook  XIIL 

all  quarters.  As  soon  as  it  was  ligbt|  and  the  Athenian  comnunden 
saw  the  army  of  tlie  enemy  drawn  up  into  a  body,  four  in  depth,  and 
eight  furlongs  or  stages  in  fronts  they  were  at  first  not  a  little  ter- 
rified, especially  two  parts  of  the  walls  being  now  possessed  by  the 
enemv. 

But  after  some  time,  they  sent  out  a  body  of  horse,  equal  in  nuBK 
ber  to  the  ILacedsmonians:  upon  which  the  horse  on  both  sides  en- 
gagedy  in  the  face  of  them  upon  the  walls :  and  the  contest  was  sharp 
for  a  coiisiderable  time :  for  the  foot  drawn  up,  as  is  said  before,  were 
as  yet  five  stages  from  the  walls ;  and  the  horse  fought  close  under 
them.     On  the  one  side  the  Boeotians,  who  had  formerly  routed  the 
Athenians  at  Delium,  looked  upon  it  as  a  dishonourable  thing  to  be 
worsted  by  them,  whom  they  had  before  conquered.     On  the  other, 
the  Athenians,  in  regard  they  were  known  by  alt  them  upon  the  walb, 
who  were  then  eye-witnesses  cither  of  their  valour  or  cowardice,  re- 
solved,  through  all  difficulties  whatsoever,  to  be  conquerors:  accord- 
ingly at  lengtl)  tiiey  routed  the  Laccdsemonians,  and  made  a  great 
slaughter,  and  pursued  those  that  fled,  even  close  up  to  the  body  of 
their  foot;  who  making  up  to  them,  the  horse  returned  into  the  city. 
Hereupon  Agis  (not  conceiving  it  now  a  tit  time  to  besiege  the  city) 
encamped  in  Acadcmia.     The  next  day,  when  the  Athenians  erected 
a  trophy,  he  drew  out  his  army  in  battalia,  and  challenged  them  to 
battle.     Upon  which  tlio  Athenians  marched  out,  and  drew  up  in  a 
body  under  tiie  walls.    The  Lacedsemonians  gave  the  onset;  but  by 
reason  of  the  showers  of  darts  wherewith  they  were  galled  from  the 
walls,  they  were  forced  to  draw  off  from  the  city.    And  after  great 
devastations  made  in  the  rest  of  Attica,  they  returned  to'Pelopon* 
uesus. 

As  for  Alcibiades,  he  went  with  his  whole  fleet  from  Samoa  to 
Cuma,  where,  under  colour  and  pretence  of  feigned  crimes  laid  to 
the  charge  of  the  inhabitants,  he  wastes  and  spoils  the  country.  And 
at  the  first  takes  a  great  multitude  of  prisoners,  and  forces  them  away 
to  his  ships;  but  the  Cumeans,  with  the  whole  power  of  the  city, 
made  out  against  him,  for  the  defence  and  rescue  of  their  country- 
men: Alcibiades  for  a  while  bore  the  brunt,  but  being  overcoipeby 
fresh  supplies  both  out  of  the  city,  and  from  the  country,  the  army 
was  forced  to  fly  to  their  ships,  and  leave  their  captives  behind  them. 

Alcibiades  being  much  troubled  to  be  thus  baffled,  sent  for  the 
regiments  from  Mitylene,  and  drew  up  his  army  against  the  city, 
challenging  the  Cumeans  to  a  bitttle.  But  none  coming  forth,  after 
many  devastations,  he  returned  to  Mitylene:  but  the  Cnmeans  sent 
to  Athens,  and  put  in  their  bill  against  Alcibiades  in  form  of  law, 
for  that  he  had  waited  and  spoiled  a  confederate  city  and  country. 


CAtgi>.  X   *  2>IODORU8  8ICULUS. 

=g'il,i  II    laaaara 


which  had  not  in  the  Jeast  done  them  any  injury:  and  many  other  ac- 
cusations they  brought  against  him ;  for  some  of  the  garrison  in  Sa- 
mos  (bearing  him  a  grudge)  passed  over  to  Athens,  and  accused  him 
in  the  public  assembly,  that  he  was'  a  secret  friend  to  the  Lacedse- 
nionians,  and  kept  a  close  and  intimate  correspondence  with  Pbarna* 
bazus^forthb  very  purpose  ...That  when  the  war  was  ended,  he  miglit 
gain  the  sovereignty  of  Athens.  These  calumnies  being  easily  cre- 
dited by  the  common  people,  the  glory  of  Alcibiades  began  to  de« 
cline :  and  the  rather  by  reason  of  bis  late  ill  success  at  sea,  and  hi^ 
miscarriages  at  Cuma. 

Henceforward  the  people  of  Athens  began  to  be  jealous  of  Alci- 
biades, and  created  ten  other  commanders,  Conon,Lysias,Diomedon, 
Pericles,  Erasmides,  Aristocrates,  Archestratus,  Protomachus,Tlirasy- 
bulus,  and  Aristogencs.  From  among  these  they  chose  Conon  to  be 
admiral;  and  forthwith  sent  him  to  Alcibiades,  to  demand  the  fleet 
from  him,  who  gave  up  bis  charge  accordingly;  but  not  daring  to 
return  to  Athens,  sailed  only  with  one  ship  to  Padyen  in  Thrace,; 
For,  besides  the  rage  of  the  common  people,  he  was  afraid  many 
crimes  would  be  laid  to  his  charge;  many  (now  he  lay  under  the 
batches)  contriving  how  to  load  him  with  accusations,  and  to  upbraid 
him  with  his  former  faults:  the  greatest  of  which  wasthat  concerning 
the  horses,  for  which  there  was  set  upon  him  a  mulct  of  fifty  talents. 
For  when  Diomedes,  his  f>iend,  lent  him  a  chariot  with  four  horses, 
to  go  along  with  him  to  Olympia,  when  he  subscribed  his  name  (as 
the  custom  was)  he  affirmed  the  horses  to  be  his  own;  and  when  he 
was  victor  by  that  chariot  and  horses,  he  not  only  carried  away  the 
glory,  but  detained  the  horses  from  him  that  so  friendly  and  kindly 
reposed  a  trust  in  him.  Revolving  therefore  all  these  things  in  his 
mind,  he  was^  afraid  the  Athenians,  now  they  had  an  advantage 
against  him,  would  rip  up  all  his  former  miscarriages,  and  lay  the 
greater  load  upon  him.    Therefore  he  banished  himself. 


CHAP.  X. 


H^rmocrates  killed  at  Syracusey  attenuating  to  surprise  ii. 

IN  this  olympiad,  the  Synouris*  was  added  to  the  olympian  games. 
And  Piistonax,  king  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  died,  when  he  had  reign- 
ed fifty  years.     To  whom  succeeded  Pausanias,  who  governed  four- 

*  A  Dew  rase  bjr  %  brace  of  mules  in  a  cbariot  so  caU94, 


54S  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  Book  XliL 


teen  years.  The  inliabitants  of  Rhodes^  out  of  Jalysiis,  Lindus^  ud 
Camirus,  incorporated  themselves  into  one  city,  now  ctiled  Rhodes* 
Hermocrates  the  Syracusan  inarched  outof  SeliiAuwitli  hisfbrctt 
to  Himera,  and  encamped  in  the  suburbs  of  that  lately  nuoed  city; 
where,  after  he  had  by  diligent  inquiry  found  out  in  what  ptscc  the 
Syracusans  had  their  post,  he  gathered  up  the  dead  bodies  of  the  Sf- 
racusans,  and  put  them  in  chariots  richly  adorned,  and  sent  them  te 
Syracuse;  and  he  himself  accompanied  them  as  fiir  as  it  was  lawful 
■for  a  banisiicd  man  to  go,  who  was  not  to  set  a  foot  within  the  con- 
fines of  the  country;  and  there  he  committed  the  care  of  convejinf 
them  to  Syracuse  to  otiiers.  He  did  this  to  bring  an  odinm  npon 
Diodes  (who  opposed  his  return)  for  his  neglect  in  not  burying  the 
dead ;  and  to  regain  tiie  good-will  of  the  people  to  hinoself  tot  \m 
humanity. 

When  the  bodies  were  brought  to  the  city,  there  arose  a  disicn^ 
tion  amongst  tlic  people.  Diodes  opposed  the  burial  of  then,  but 
the  people  were  unanimously  against  him.  At  length  it  was  re- 
solved  T\mt  they  should  be  buried,  and  the  whole  city  giaced  the 

solemnity  with  their  pre;sence,  and  Diodes  was  banished.    Howeier^ 
Hermocrates  was  never  the  nearer  being  restored;  for  they  were  very 
jealous  of  him,  that  if  ever  he  came  into  autliority,  he  would  dsvp 
the  sovereignty.    When  he  understood,  therefore, that  for  the  present 
it  was  to  no  purpose  to  strive  against  the  stream, ^^  e  retamed  to  Se« 
linus:  but  not  long  after,  being  sent  to  by  some  of  his  faetioUj  he 
hastens  away  with  three  thousand  armed  men,  and  marching  through 
Gcla  in  the  night,  comes  to  the  place  appointed,  where  all  his  sol* 
diers  could  not  readily  follow  him;  so  that  with  a  few  he  comes  up 
to  the  gate  in  Acradina;  whent  he  finds  some  of  his  friendsywho  had 
])ossessed  themselves  of  the  places;  there  he  waited  for  thfe  rest  of  hb 
men,  who  came  slowly  on,  and  at  length  joined  him.     But  the  de* 
sii;n  bcinjjr  discovered,  the  Syracusans  ran  armed  into  the  fcwumi 
where  (a  great  multitude  of  people  being  got  together)  they  killed 
Honnocratcs,  and  ilic  most  of  his  accomplices.     The  rest  that  es» 
ca|;(;(i  (after  thoy  had  cited  them  to  appear,  in  order  for  their  several 
trials)  they  condemned  to  banishment.     Some,  therefore,  that  were 
badly  wounded, were  by  their  friends  reported  to  be  dead « to  avoid  the 
present  fury  of  the  people.     Amongst  whom  was  Dionysius,  wha 
afterwards  usurped  the  tyranny. 


Cftffp.  XL  DIODORUS  SICl'LUS.  449 


CHAP.  XI. 

IThe  acts  of  Callicratidfs^  the  Lacedfcmonian  gaitraL  The  fight 
at  seOy  in  the  harbour  at  Mltylvne^  between  Conon  and  CalK- 
cratidesn 

THUS  things  passed  for  this  yt'ar,  at  the  close  of  which  Antigraes 
Was  chosen  magistrate  of  Athens;  and  Manius  iEmilias  and  Cains 
Valerius  Rom.in  consuls.  About  this  time  Conon,  the  Athenian  ad- 
nim!,  made  up  a  fleet  uf  those  ships  that  lay  at  Samos,  and  sent  for 
others  from  the  confederates;  and  having  now  got  together  a  const* 
dcrable  navy,  he  hastened  away  to  fight  the  enemy. 

l*hc  Lacedipmonians  appointed  Callicratides  admiral,  L^isander  hav- 
ing l>eeu  discharged  of  that  command  for  some  time.  Tliis  Callicratides 
was  a  vtTV  young  man,  of  a  plain  and  honest  mind,  and  an  innocent 
conversation,  not  as  yet  tainted  with  the  vices  and  ill  manners  of 
other  nations,  and  was  highly  esteemed  among  the  Spartans,  for  bis 
Jtistice  and  integrity;  and  every  man  owned,  that  he  never  swerved 
from  the  rules  of  justice,  cither  in  public  or  private  affairs ;  but  on  the 
contrary,  if  at  any  time  any  oflVred  to  corrupt  him  with  bribes,  he 
highly  resented  it,  and  punished  tliem  accordingly.  Having  now 
received  his  commission,  he  siiils  to  Kphcsus,  and  there  had  the  fleet 
delivered  up  to  him  by  Lysander;  wliicti  with  tlie  rest  that  he  got 
together  from  other  p:irts,  made  up  a  navy  of  a  hundred  and  fitny 
Sail.  The  Athenians  then  lay  at  anchor  at  Delphinium  in  Chios, 
against  whom  he  made  with  his  whole  fleet,  and  in  his  way  besieged 
a  fort  of  the  Athenians;  the  garrison  theie  hiiii^  alN)ut  five  hundred, 
were  terrified  at  the  greatness  of  the  nuvy,  and  surrendered  the  place 
Upon  avtieles  of  safe  coiuluct.  Tlien  Callicratides  demolished  the 
fort,  andaailedapainst  Teios;  and,  surpiisin.;  the  place  in  the  ni^ht, 
got  within  the  walls,  and  sacked  tlie  city.  Fa •>'iiri>:  thence  to  LeslK>s, 
he  lay  with  his  army  before  Metttyiiwii,  uiuiein  was  an  Athefii.in 
garrison.  At  first  he  prevaiKd  little,  tl:iiu>rh  he  prr^^rd  liard  ii|Mr»it 
with  daily  assaults:  hut  not  lunj;  after,  hein;:  let  in  iiv  the  treaclury 
of  some  within,  he  s:.eked  \hv  ciiy,  hut  |jut  mme  t'<  the  swurd,  aiij 
restored  the  place  to  the  M(.-thyninirins.  Things  tlnis  pro^iTrouvIy 
succeeding,  he  hastenerl  toMiiylenc,an(Ici}niiiMi;!'ic«!.v  lieavy- armed 
men  to  Thorax  the  LaeechiMtoniH!!,  e(inwnai!(!ed  him  to  march  with 
all  speed  with  the  land-army,  whiUt  he  hirnveif  ni:ir!i-  with  t!ie  fleet 
to  the  shore.     In  the  mean  time  Conun,  the  Atiienian  admiral,  no 


550  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Boqk  XIIL 

'  ■  ■        ■    ■ 

preparer]  his  fleet  (which  consisted  of  seventy  sail)  for  a  lea-fight, 
that  he  excelled  all  the  admirals  that  were  ever  before  him.  Witb 
these  he  came  to  the  aid  of  Methymna,  but  when  he  found  it  wis 
taken,  he  lay  with  his  fleet  at  an  island^  one  of  those  called  the  hnn- 
dred  islands.  About  break  of  day  next  morning,  when  he  discerned 
the  enemy's  fleet  making  up  to  him,  conceiving  it  not  advisable  !• 
fight  with  a  fleet  that  was  more  than  double  his  number,  he  resolved 
to  sail  off;  and  having  snapped  up  some  of  the  enemy's  gallies  by  the 
^ay,  determined  rather  to  fight  at  Mitylene,  concluding,  that  if  he 
were  conqueror,  he  could  there  pursue  them  with  greater  advanti^ 
and  if  he  were  conquered,  he  had  the  port  near  at  hand,  wheFcin  to 
shelter  himself.  Upon  this  he  embarks  all  his  soldiers,  and  com- 
mands the  rowers  to  row  but  gently  and  slowly,  tliat  the  enemy  migiit 
come  up  nearer  to  him.  The  Lacedcemonians,  the  nearer  they  came, 
were  more  eager  to  press  on,  in  confidence  that  they  should  orcrtakc 
and  destroy  those  that  were  behind  in  the  rear.  But  Conon,  by 
degrees  falling  down  behind  the  rest,  the  commanders  of  the  best  c^ 
the  Peloponnesian  ships  pursued  with  all  eagerness.  By  this  means 
the  rowers  now  waxed  faint^  and  were  drawn  away  far  from  the  rest 
of  the  fleet;  which  advantage  being  observed  by  Conon,  aodthat  they 
DOW  approached  near  to  Mitylene,  he  set  up  the  purple  flag  from  his 
own  ship,  which  was  a  sign  to  the  officers  to  join  battle.  Upon  which 
the  Athenians  all  at  one  time  tacked  suddenly  about,  and  made  upon 
the  enemy;  and  the  whole  fleet  reiterated  the  Pean,  and  the  trumpets 
sounded  a  charge. 

Upon  this  sudden  change,  the  Peloponnesians  were  amazedj  and 
made  what  haste  they  could  in  this  extremity,  to  put  themselves  into 
a  line  of  battle;  but  having  so  little  time  to  tack  about,  they  were  ia 
great  confusion;  especially  in  regard  the  ships,  where  their  proper 
place  was,  which  they  had  deserted,  were  so  far  behind.  Comm, 
therefore,  improving  the  opportunity  put  into  his  hands,  makes  strait 
upon  them,  and  before  they  could  put  themselves  in  order  of  battle, 
pierces  some  of  their  ships  through,  and  brushes  off  the  oars  of  others. 
But  not  one  of  those  ships  that  engaged  on  that  wing  against  Conoa 
stirred;  but  with  their  oars  reversed,  bravely  kept  still  in  one  place, 
till  their  whole  fleet  came  up.  But  the  left  wing  of  the  Athenian 
fleet  put  them  with  whom  they  were  engaged  to  flight,  and  hotly 
pursued  them  a  long  time.  But  when  all  the  Peloponnesian  fleet 
came  up  together,  Conon,  considering  the  multitude  of  his  enemies, 
drew  off,  and  with  forty  ships  returned  to  Mitylene.  In  the  mean 
time  the  whole  Pelopounesian  fleet,  which  had  spread  themselves 
every  way,  greatly  amazed  thcAihcnluns,  (who  had  before  pursued 
them  that  fled),  and  lying  in  their  way  to  prevent  their  return  to  the 


Ck&p.  XL  DI0IX>RV8  8ICULUS/  S51 


chj,  forced  them  on  shore;  whither  being  closely  paisned  by  the 
'  Feloponnesians,  the  Athenians  (seeing  no  other  remedy)  fonpok  their 
>rfrfpi>  and  got  to  land,  and  so  iled  to  Mitylene. 

Callicntides  haWng  thus  possessed  himself  of  thirty  ships,  and 
Meing  tiiat  the  enemy's  fleet  was  now  broken,  concluded  that  for  the 
fittare  he  was  to  fight  upon  land;  and  therefore  sailed  straight  to  the 
cbj.  Upon  which  Conou  expecting  the  city  would  be  besieged, 
■Mde  what  preparation  he  could  to  block  up  the  mouth  of  the  haven* 
.  For  in  that  part  where  it  was  shallow,  he  sunk  small  vessels^  lade^^ 
with  stones;  where  it  was  deep,  he  filled  great  ships  of  harden  widPP 
•tones,  and  fixed  them  with  anchors.  The  Atlienians,  and  a  great 
munber  of  Mityleneans  out  of  the  country,  flocked  into  the  city  tliroogh 
iMr  of  the  war,  and  forthwith  prepared  all  things  neccssaiy  for  their 
wfience  in  the  siege.    * 

And  now  Callicratides  comnuinded  his  men  to  land,  and  encamped 
the  city,  and  there  erects  a  trophy  for  his  naval  victoiy.  The 
Lt  day,  with  some  of  his  best  ships,  he  made  towards  the  city, 
with  a  design  both  lo  enter  the  port,  and  to  break  the  enemy's  boom; 
g}viog  strict  orders  that  none  of  them  should  be  iar  from  his  own 
ship.  Conon  on  tlie  other  hand  mans  the  smaller  gallics  with  some 
of  hb  soldiers,  and  places  them  in  the  mouth  of  the  haven  in  front, 
ilglinst  the  enemy,  and  puts  on  board  the  longer  vessels  the  other 
part  of  his  army.  Some  likewise  were  ordered  to  i^uard  the  shallows, 
that  so  the  port  might  be  defended  on  every  side,  both  by  sea  and 
hud:  and  he  himself  with  his  own  squadron  fought  in  that  part  which 
wu  open  into  the  harbour.  They  that  were  in  the  great  ships  pelted 
the  enemies  with  stones  from  the  main-yard :  those  that  were  placed 
nctf  the  shore  opposed  them  that  endeavoured  to  land.  The  Pelo* 
ponoesians  all  this  while  were  nothing  inferior  to  their  enemies  in 
courage  and  resolution ;  for  charging  with  their  sliipi  in  a  full  body, 
and  with  the  best  of  their  men  upon  the  decks,  it  resembled  both  a 
fight  at  sea  and  land  together:  and  they  fell  on  with  such  fury,  tliat 
they  even  dared  to  hurl  themselves  upon  the  fore-castlcs  of  the 
Athenian  ships,  judging  that  they  whom  tiiry  luid  so  lately  l>eaten, 
were  not  able  to  stand  the  shock.  On  the  other  hand  the  Atlienians 
and  Mityleneans  concluding  there  was  no  other  hojies  for  saf«iy  left 
but  in  victory,  resolved  to  die  rather  than  to  desert  their  posts.  Tliis 
obstinacy  on  both  sides  continued  the  fight  a  long  time;  whibt 
every  one,  without  the  smallest  fear,  exposed  himself  to  all  manner 
of  dangers:  many  upon  the  decks  were  sorely  galled  by  showers  of 
darts  on  every  hand;  some  mortally  wounded,  fell  from  the  decks 
ioto  the  sea;  those  that  were  yet  untouched,  or  at  least  insensible  of 


55S  DIODORUS  HCULU8.  Boo/k  XHL 

their  wounds,  were  rt solved,  Doiwiihsuodiug,  to  stand  it  out  to  tlw 
last.  Maujr  were  killed  by  stones  cast  down  opon  them  fnm  the 
main-yards,  which  being  both  very  big,  and  thrown  from  a  lii|^ 
place,  fell  with  the  greater  force  and  violence.  At  length,  after  the 
fight  had  continued  a  long  time,  and  many  fell  on  both  sidca,  Calli* 
cratides  commanded  a  retreat  to  be  sounded,  in  order  to  refresh  his 
men:  but  not  long  after,  he  puts  them  on  board  again,  and  renews 
the  fight.  And  after  a  long  conflict,  by  the  multitude  of  his  ships 
(which  overpowered  the  Athenians),  and  valour  of  those  upon  the 
fecks,  he  so  far  prevailed,  that  he  drove  the  Athenians  from  their 
post;  upon  which  they  fled  into  the  inner  part  of  the  harboor;  ud 
now  the  passage  being  open,  Callicratides  casts  anchor  close,  to 
Mitylene:  for,  gaining  the  pla.e  about  which  the  contest  was^  he 
was  possessed  of  the  whule  harbour  which  yet  was  out  of  the  walls 
of  the  city*  For  the  old  city  is  a  little  island,  but  that  which  is 
added  of  latter  times  lies  straight  beyond  into  the  land :  between  those 
two  runs  a  certain  Euripus,  or  current  of  the  sea,  by  which  the  city 
IS  more  strong  and  defensible.  Callicratides  therefore^  having  lauded 
his  men,  besieged  the  city,  and  begirt  it  on  every  side.  And  this 
the  condition  of  Mitylene  at  this  time. 


CHAP.  XII. 

Therma  built  in  Sicily  by  the  Carthaginians  They  raxtt  fortes  Is 
invade  Sicily.  The  noble  tem/,le  at  Agrigentum.  The  aniieHi 
grandeur  of  that  ( ity.  The  riches  of  GelliaSy  a  citizen  there, 
and  some  others,  yjgrigentum  besieged.  The  Syraaaau  under 
Dophnwus  route  the  Carthaginians  near  Agrigentum.  Amilcar 
seizes  the  Syracusan  fleet y  and  takes  all  the  provisions  going  io 
Agrigentuniy  tvhich  ivas  aftertvards  quitted  by  the  inhabitants. 
Their  miserable  condition.     The  Phalarian  bull. 

IN  Sicily  the  Syracusans  sent  ambassadors  to  Carthage  to  complain 
of  the  late  war  made  upon  them,  and  to  persuade  them  to  peace  for. 
the  time  to  come;  to  which  the  Carthaginians  returned  a  doubtiul 
answer.  In  the  mean  time  they  raise  again  a  numerous  army,  and 
were  resolved  to  do  their  utmost  to  subdue  all  the  cities  of  Sicily: 
but  before  they  transported  their  armies,  having  got  together  put  of 


Cimp.  XIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  553 

Carthage,  and  other  cities  in  Africa,  many  that  were  willing  to  trans- 
plant themselves^  they  built  a  new  city  called  Thermaj  near  the  hot 
(paths  in  Sicily. 

The  afiairs  of  this  year  concluded,  at  Athens  Callias  was  made  chief 
magistrate,  and  at  Rome,  Lucius  Furius  and  Cncius  Pompeius  were 
created  consuls.     At  this  time  the  Carthaginians,  puKcd  up  with  their 
saccesses  in  Sicily,  and  coveting  the  gaining  of  tlie  whole  island, 
determined  to  that  end  to  rai^e  a  great  army;    and  thereof  made 
Hannibal  general,   (the  same  that  had  razed  Seltnus  and  Hiincra)^^ 
and  invested  him  with  full  |>ower  for  the  management  of  the  wai;^ 
But  because  he  endeavoured  to  excuse  himself  by  reason  of  his  age, 
they  joined  Amitcar  in  commission  with  him,  the  son  of  Ilanno,  one  of 
the  same  family.    These  generals  consulted  together,  and  sent  some 
eminent  Carthaginians  with  great  sums  of  money,  to  raise  soldiers 
both  out  of  Spain  and  the  Baleary^  islands.     They  raised  likewise 
throughout  Libya,  Carthaginians  and  Africans,  and  out  of  every  city 
auch  as  were  most  able  for  war.     There  came  likewise  to  tliem  frojq 
the  nations  and  princes  of  their  confederates  abroad,  both  Maui  itanians 
and  Numidians,  and  some  from  the  parts  near  to  Cyrene.     Besides 
these,  there  were  trans|)nrted  into  Africa,  Campanians  hired  out  of 
Italy.     These  Campanians  they  had  experienced  to  be  very  useful  to 
them,  when  those  whom  they  had  left  in  Sicily,  by  reason  of  some 
old  grudge  they  bore  the  Carthaginians,  were  suspected  to  Ik'  ready 
to  side  with  the  Sicilians.     At  length,  when  all  the  forces  together 
were  mustered  at  Carthage,  Timasus  reports  they  were  not  much  above 
a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men;  but  Ephorus  aflirins  that  they 
were  three  hundred  thousand. 

Tlie  Carthaginians  now  prepare  all  things  necessary  for  the  trans* 
porting  of  the  army ;  they  equipped  out  all  their  men  of  war,  arid 
brought  together  no  less  than  a  thousand  transport  ships.  Forty  of 
their  gallies  were  sent  before  into  Sicily,  whieh  were  presently 
encountered  with  as  many  by  the  Syracusans  at  Eryx,  where,  after  a 
long  and  sharp  dispute,  fifteen  of  the  Carthaginian  ships  were  sunk; 
the  rest,  by  the  advantage  of  night,  fled  clear  away.  When  the  news 
of  this  defeat  was  brought  to  Carthage,  Hannibal  the  gential  sailed 
away  with  fifty  gallies,  contriving  lioth  to  make  tiic  enemy's  vietoty 
fruitless,  and  the  better  likewi^e  to  secure  the  tiansporting  ot  his 
Jinny.  When  the  coming  of  Hannilial  ua>  noised  through  the  island, 
all  were  of  opinion  that  he  intended  forthwith  to  triins)M»rt  uil  his 
forces  thither:  upon  which  all  the  cities  (liciriug  of  the  greaiucdS  cf 
his  preparations,  and  that  they  were  now  like  to  lay  ail  ai  suke)  \s<\^ 

*  Now  cjilcd  Maiorcift  mvA  Mu;orc«.  i.c«r  >.yCxk. 
VOUL  No.  SS.  BBBB 


551  DiODORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  Xllt 


struck  witli  fear  and  amazement.    The  Syracusans  therefore  sent 
ambassadors  both  to  the  Grecians  in  Italy,  and  to  the  Lacedamonians, 
to  desire  aid  and  assistance.    They  sent  letters  likewise  to  all  the 
magistrates  of  the  cities  up  and  down,  to  entreat  them  that  they 
would  stir  up  the  people  to  join  every  where  in  arms  for  the  common 
defence  of  the  liberty  of  their  country.    The  Agrigentines  coosider- 
ingthe  greatness  of  the  Carthaginian  army^  concluded  (as  the  thing 
was  in  truth)  that  they  were  likeliest  first  to  feel  and  undergo  the 
pressure  and  weight  of  the  war;  and  therefore  determined  that  all 
the  corn  and  other  fruits  of  the  field,  and  every  thing  else  that  was 
valuAble,  should  be  brought  out  of  the  country  into  the  city;  for  at 
that  time  both  the  city  and  country  of  the  Agrigentines  were  very 
rich ;  of  which  it  will  not  be  inconvenient  to  say  something  here 
more  largely.     Their  vineyards  were  large,  and  very  pleasant,  and 
most  part  of  the  country  abounded  with  olives,  so  much  as  that  they 
were  transported  and  sold  at  Carthage.     For  inasmuch  as  Africa  at 
that  time  was  not  planted  with  this  sort  of  fruit,  the  Agrigentines 
grew  very  rich  by  their  trading  with  the  Libyans.     Many  marks  of 
their  great  wealth  remain  to  this  very  day;  to  speak  a  little  of  which 
I  conceive  will  not  be  a  digression  from  the  present  subject. 

And  first,  the  stately  buildings  and  ornaments  of  their  temples^ 
especially  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  do  sufliciently  witness  the  grandear 
and  riches  of  the  men  of  that  age.  The  rest  of  the  sacred  buildings 
are  cither  burnt  or  destroyed  by  the  frequent  storming  of  that  city. 
When  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympus  was  near  to  the  laying  on  the 
roof,  a  stop  was  put  to  the  building  by  the  war;  and  the  city  being 
afterwards  sacked,  the  Agrigentines  were  never  able  (from  that  time 
to  this  day)  to  finisli  it.  This  temple  at  Agrigentum  was  three  hun- 
dred and  forty  feet  in  length,  threescore  in  breadth,  and  in  height 
(besides  the  foundation)  i\  hundred  and  twenty.  Ii  is  the  greatest  in 
the  island,  and  for  the  largeness  of  its  foundation  may  compare  with 
any  other  elsewhere :  for  though  the  design  was  never  finished,  yet 
the  antient  platform  is  still  visible;  for  whereas  some  build  qp  their 
temples  only  with  walls,  or  compass  them  round  with  pillars,  this  is 
built  both  with  the  one  and  the  other;  for,  together  with  the  walls, 
there  rise  lofty  pillars  round  on  the  outside  of  the  wall,  and  four- 
square within.  The  compass  of  every  one  of  these  pillars  on  the 
outside  are  twenty  feet,  and  so  far  distant  one  from  another,  as  that 
a  man  may  well  stand  between  each;  within,  they  are  of  the  compiss 
of  twelve  feet.  The  largeness  and  height  of  the  porticoes  are  won- 
derful, on  the  east  side  of  which  is  carved  the  giant's  war,  of  exquisite 
and  incomparable  workmanship:  on  the  west  side  is  carved  the 
destruction  of  Troy,  where  may  be  seen  all  the  brave  heroes  and 


Ohap.'XIL  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  555 

commanders  in  their  proper  habits,  most  admirably  represented.  In 
those  former  times,  likewise,  there  was  a  pond  out  of  the  walls  of  the 
City,  cut  by  art,  seven  furlongs  in  compass,  and  twenty  cubits  in 
depth:  into  this,  with  wonderful  art,  were  drawn  currents  of  water, 
by  which  they  were  abundantly  supplied  with  all  sorts  of  fish  ready 
for  their  use,  at  all  public  entertainments.  Upon  this  pond  likewise 
fell  multitudes  of  swans  and  other  fowl,  which  entertained  the  .spec* 
i&toYs  with  great  delight. 

The  grandeur  of  the  city  was  likewise  apparent,  by  the  stateliness 
of  the  sepulchres,  some  of  which  were  adorned  with  the  charging 
horses  of  the  heroes  there  interred;  others  with  those  little  birds 
that  tiie  children,  both  girls  and  boys,  fed  and  bred  up  in  their  pa- 
rent's houses.     All  which,  TimaBus  affirms  he  saw  in  his  time.     In 
tlie  ninety-second  olympiad  there  were  no  less  than  three  hundred 
chariots  of  Agrigentum,  alL  with  white  horses,  that  attended  upoa 
£xenetus,  the  victor  at  the  Olympic  games,  and  brought  him  mounted 
in  a  stately  chariot  with  great  pomp  into  the  city.     Their  nice  and 
delicate  way  of  living,  (till  it  came  to  their  very  children),  both  as  to 
their  food  and  raiment,  was  to  tliat  degree,  that  they  wore  garments 
of  cloth  of  gold,  and  had  their  water  pots,  and  boxes  of  ointment,  of 
gold  and  silver.     There  was  one  Gellias,  the  richest  man  of  all  tha 
Agtigentines  at  that  time,  who  built  several  rooms  for  public  enter* 
tainment,  in  his  own  house,  and  placed  porters  at  his  gates,  charging 
them  to  invite  all  strangers  that  passed  by,  to  come  in  to  be  his 
guests.     Many  others  of  the  Agrigentines  imitated  his  example,  who 
made  it  tlieir  business  (after  the  antient  manner)  to  converse  freely 
and  courteously  with  them  they  thus  invited.     And  therefore  £mpe* 
docles  says  thus  of  them  — 

Hospitibus  sancti  portu%  sine  labe  roaioruro. 

It  happened  once  that  five  hundred  Gelonian  horsemen  came  to 
his  Irouse  in  winter-time,  whom  he  liberally  entertained,  and  furnished 
every  one  of  them  out  of  his  wardrobe  with  cloaks  and  coats.  Poly* 
clitus  in  his  history  declares,  that  when  he  was  a  soldier  in  Agrigen* 
turn,  he  saw  a  wine-cellar  in  his  house,  in  which  were  contained 
three  hundred  great  vessels,  cut  out  of  one  and  the  same  rock,  each 
of  wliich  received  an  hundred  hogsheads:  and  that  near  to  these  was 
placed  a  cistern  of  pure  white  tempered  mortar,  containing  a  thousand 
hogsheads,  out  of  which  the  liquor  ran  into  the  vessels.  It  is  said 
that  this  Gellias  was  of  a  very  mean  presence,  but  of  ftdmirable  parts 
and  ingenuity.  Being  once  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  Centuripes*, 
when  he  entered  into  the  assembly,  all  the  people  fell  a-laughing, 

*  Ccuturipes— a  people  in  Sicily:    their  citjr  called  CcDturipiuom.      Pl/u.  ^;nu 
Jlist.  lib.  o,  Q.  9, 


dbd  DiotoORlTS  srcULU.^.  BimkXnt. 

seeing  the  mean  aspect  of  the  man^  so  disagreeable  to  bis  gre^t  fiiBie 
and  Imputation  in  the  world.     Upon  which,  he  made  this  sharp  ns* 

tort T\\m  what  they  saw  in  him  was  not  to  be  wondered  at,  because 

the  Agrigentines  always  send  the  comliest  and  handsomest  men  to 
the  noblest  cities  hut  to  tliose  that  were  mean  and  of  little  notej  suck 
as  himself. 

And  not  only  Gclias,  hut  many  other  Agrigetitines  were  very  net 
Antisthcnes^  surnamed  Rhodes,  at  the  marriage  of  his  daaghter,  feast- 
ed all  the  citizens  throughout  every  street,  and  procured  above  eight 
hundred  chariots  to  attend  upon  the  bride:  and  not  only  horsemen 
out  of  the  city,  but  many  who  were  invited  out  of  the  country,  went 
before  the  new-married  lady  in  great  pomp  and  splendor.  To  add 
to  the  solemnity  of  the  day,  there  were  great  preparations  rorilluodi* 
nations  in  the  city;  for,  he  ordered  that  as  soon  as  they  saw  a  flame 
of  fire  upon  the  top  of  the  castle,  the  altars  in  all  the  temples,  and 
the  piles  of  wood  in  all  the  streets,  and  the  fuel  he  had  prepared  and 
provided  in  the  taverns,  should  be  kindled  together  all  at  the  same 
moment:  whose  command  being  observed  at  the  very  same  instant, 
when  tliebiide  was  led  forth  by  a  multitude  that  bore  torches  be- 
fore her,  the  wliole  city  was  as  it  were  in  a  flame,  and  the  common 
streets  and  ways  of  the  city  were  not  able  to  contain  those  that  at- 
tended at  this  solemnity;  all  were  so  zealous 'to  furtherand  enconrage 
the  gallantry  and  m:ignificence  of  the  man.  At  that  time  there  were 
more  than  twenty  thousand  citizens  of  Agrigentum;  but  taking  in 
strangers  with  them,  they  were  no  less  than  two  hundred  thousand. 

It  is  reported  of  Antisthenes,  when  he  saw  his  son  pressing  npon 
a  poor  man  his  neighbour,  and  would  force  him  to  sell  a  little  spot 
of  land  to  him,  he  chid  his  son,  and  advised  him  to  forbear  awhile; 
but  his  covetous  desire  increasing  the  more,  he  told  him  he  should 
not  strive  to  make  his  neighbour  ])oor,  but  rather  desire  he  should 
become  rich;  for  being  rich,  he  would  covet  a  greater  piece  of  land, 
which  when  he  was  not  able  to  pay  for  lack  of  ready  money,  hb 
would  be  content  to  raise  money  by  the  sale  of  that  which  he  theb 
Iiad. 

In  short,  the  excess  and  luxury  of  the  Agrigentiucs,  by  reason  of 
their  riches,was  such,  that  not  long  after,  in  the  very  heightof  the  siege, 
which  ended  in  the  sacking  of  the  city,  a  decree  was  made,  that 
none  of  them  that  were  upon  the  guard  in  the  night,  should  have 
above  a  bed,  a  tent,  a  woollen  mantle,  and  two  pillows.  Wlien  this 
seemed  a  hard  law,  and  disturbance  to  their  ease  and  repose,  we 
may  ea>ily  judge  how  soft  and  luxurious  they  were  in  all  other  things. 
As  wc  were  not  willing  to  let  these  things  pass  altogether,  so  we  shall 
now  break  ott)  lest  we  omit  things  more  useful  and  necessary. 


(^ap.JClL  BIODORUS  SICULUS.  .  55/ 

The  Carthagiinans  having  landed  their  forces  in  Sicily,  marched 
straight  against  the  Agrigen tines,  and  divided  theirarmy  into  two  parts^ 
and  encamped  in  two  several  places;  one  camp  was  upon  certain 
hills,  where  were  placed  forty  thousand  Spaniards  and  Africans;  the 
other  TV  as  near  the  city,  fortified  with  a  deep  trench  and  a  wall.  At 
the  first  they  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Agrigentines,  to  invite  them  to 
join  with  them  as  confederates,  and  if  they  did  not  approve  of  thaty 
then  that  they  would  be  neuter,  and  ente^  into  league  of  peace  and 
amity  with  the  Carthaginians.  When  both  oflers  were  rejected,  they 
forthwith  pressed  on  tlie  siege  with  all  vigour.  Upon  this,  the  A» 
grigentines  listed  all  that  were  able  to  bear  arms,  and  marshalled 
them,  some  of  which  they  placed  upon  the  walls,  and  others  were 
appointed  as  reserves  to  relieve  their  fellows  as  occasion  offered* 
Dexippus,  the  Lacidfenu  ni»n,  was  the  man  that  directed  them  in  all 
things,  who  wus  lately  come  to  their  assistance  with  five  hundred  so)«> 
diers  from  Gela :  for  he  lived  about  that  time  (as  Timseus  relates) 
at  Gela,  in  great  estetm  for  the  sake  of  his  country:  and  therefore 
application  was  made  to  him  by  the  Agrigentincs,  that  he  would 
hire  as  many  soldiers  as  possibly  he  could,  and  come  to  their  relief: 
besides  these,  they  hired  eight  hundred  Campanians  who  had  for- 
merly ser\'ed  under  Amilcar.  These  kept  the  hill  Athenea,  which 
lay  over,  and  commanded  the  city,  a  very  commodious  post. 

Amilair  and  Hannibal,  the  Carthaginian  generals,  having  viewed  the 
walls,  and  found,outa  place  where  it  was  most  easy  to  enter,  brought 
two  towers  of  incredible  bigness  against  the  city:  the  first  day  out 
of  these  they  made  an  assault,  and  after  they  had  killed  and  cut  off 
many  of  the  citizens,  sounded  a  retreat.  The  next  night  the  besieg- 
ed made  a  sally  and  burnt  the  engines:  but  Hannibal  intending  to 
assault  the  town  in  several  places  at  once,  commanded  his  soldiers 
to  pull  down  all  the  monuments  and  tombs,  and  with  the  rubbish  to 
raise  mounds  as  high  as  the  walls,  which  was  presently  done,  for- 
warded by  so  great  a  multitude.  But  then  a  sudden  pang  of  religion 
seized  upon  the  army;  for  Theron's  monument  (a  large  and  stately 
structure)  wasbeaten  down  by  a  thunderbolt,  which,  by  the  advice  of 
the  soothsayers  then  present,  put  a  stop  to  the  perfecting  the  design; 
and  forthwith  the  plague  broke  out  in  the  army,  by  which  many  were 
destroyed  in  a  short  time,  and  not  a  few  seized  with  tormenting  and 
niiserable  pains,  among  whom  Hannibal  himself  perished.  Some 
that  were  upon  the  watch,  reported  they  saw  in  the  night,  the  apari- 
tions  of  them  that  were  dead.  Upon  this,  Amilcar  seeing  the  soldiers 
were  possessed  with  the  fear  and  awe  of  the  gods,  first  forbore  to  de- 
molish the  sepulchres :  afterwards  he  made  (according  to  the  custom 
of  his  country)  supplications  to  the  deities^  and  sacrificed  a  boy  to 


d58  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Bdok  XIIL 


Saturn,  and  threw  a  company  of  priests  into  the  sea^  as  a  aacrifice  to 
Neptune.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  Amilcar  forsook  not  tlie  siege, 
but  choaking  up  the  river  with  rubbish  close  to  the  waUs,  bnmgbt  up 
bis  engines^  and  renewed  his  assaults  every  day. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Syracusans  weighing  the  condition  of  tbe 
Agrigen tines,  and  fearing  they  should  undergo  the  same  fate  with 
them  of  Hiinera  and  Scliuus,  were  desirous  to  send  tbena  aid;  and 
to  that  end  having  increased  their  army  hy  tiie  forces  of  their  con-> 
federates  from  Iialy  and  Messana,  they  made  Daphnieus  general^and 
baviog  mustered  the  army,  they  set  forwards,  and  in  their  march 
were  joined  by  the  Camarinians,  Gelians,  and  some  others  out  of 
the  heart  of  tbe  cuuntry,  and  all  marched  straight  for  Agrigentum, 
having  a  fleet  of  thirtygallies,  which  sailed  all  along  over  against  them 
near  the  shore.  Daphnteus  had  with  him  above  thirty  thousand  foot, 
and  no  less  than  five  thousand  horse.  Amilcar,  upon  intelligence  of 
the  approach  of  the  enemy^  sent  forth  against  them  the  Iberians  and 
Campanian:>,  and  no  less  than  forty  thousand  out  of  the  rest  of  the 
army.  When  the  Syracusans  hiid  passed  the  river  Himera,they  were 
met  by  the  barbarians :  upon  which  battle  was  joined,  fad  after  the 
dispute  had  continued  a  long  time,  at  length  the  Syracusans  got 
the  day,  who  routed  the  whole  army,  with  the  slaughter  of  above  six 
thousand  men,  and  pursued  the  rest  to  the  very  city.  But  the  Syiu- 
cusan  general  perceiving  his  men  to  be  in  disorder  and  confusion  by 
their  pursuit,  began  to  fear  lest  Amilcar,  breaking  in  upon  them  with 
the  rest  of  his  army, should  recover  the  day;  for  he  remembered  how 
Himereus  had  formerly  lost  all  by  such  an  oversight.  The  barba- 
rians flying  into  that  part  of  the  camp  which  lay  nearest  to  Agri- 
gentum,  the  besieged  concluded  they  were  beaten  and  fled, and  there- 
fore earnestly  desired  their  commanders  that  they  would  lead  them 

forth,  crying  out Now  was  the  time  come  for  the  utter  ruin  and 

destruction  of  their  enemies.  But  the  officers,  whether  corrupted  by 
money,  (as  it  was  reported),  or  possessed  with  fear  lest  Amilcar  should 
slip  into  the  town  when  the  soidicis  were  gone  forth,  would  not  stir, 
but  commanded  the  soldiers  to  abide  within  the  town;  by  which 
means  they  that  fled  came  safe  into  the  camp.  But  Daphnsus 
marched  forward,  and  encamptd  in  the  place  where  the  enemy  be- 
fore lay;  to  whom  flocked  presently  the  soldiers  out  of  the  town  with 
Dexippus,  and  forthwith  a  council  of  war  was  held,  where  all  shewed 
themselves  very  uneasy  and  discontented,  that  the  opportunity  was 
neglected  in  taking  full  revenge  of  the  conquered  barbarians,  and 
that  their  officers,  when  they  might  have  so  easily  destroyed  them  by  , 
a  sally  out  of  the  town,  had  suffered  so  many  tens  of  thousands  clearly 
to  ebca|>e.     1-Iereupon  a  tumult  arising  in  the  assemby  with  a  great 


Chap.  XIL  DIODORUS  SICUXUS*  559 

■  .11 

noise  and  clamour,  one  Menes  a  Camarinian,  one  of  the  officers, 
stood  up,  and  accused  the  commanders  of  Agrigentum  to  such  a 
degree,  that  he  so  exasperated  the  whol^  assembly,  that  those  who 
were  accused  could  not  be  heard  to  speak  for  themselves;  but  four 
of  them  were  instantly  stoned  by  the  enraged  multitude.  The  fifth, 
called  Argeus,  in  favour  of  his  youth  was  discharged.  Deximnis, 
likewise,  the  Lacedsemonian,  was  ill  spoken  of,  that  he  who  was 
general  of  so  considerable  a  body  of  men,  and  ever  esteemed  a  maa 
more  expert  in  martial  affairs  than  most  others,  should  carry  it  jSO 
basely  and  treacherously.  After  the  council  had  broken  up,  Dajrii- 
nsus  endeavoured  to  force  the  Carthaginian  camp;  but  discerning 
it  to  be  excellently  fortified,  drew  off.  Then  he  blocked  up  ail 
the  passages  with  his  horse,  intercepted  the  foragers,  and  prevented 
all  provision  being  brought  in  to  the  enemy,  whereby  they  were  redtieed 
to  great  straits  and  necessities ;  for  not  daring  to  engage,  and  y^  in 
the  mean  time  starving  for  want  of  bread,  their  misery  was  the  greater, 
and  many  were  famished  to  death. 

Upon  this  the  Campanians,  and  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  tncrcc- 
naries,  in  a  body,  came  to  Amilcar's  tent,  to  demand  their  allowftnce 
of  bread,  and  threatened  to  fall  ofi^to  the  enemy  if  they  l«ad  it  not. 
But  Amilcar  being  informed  that  the  Syracusans  had  loaded  their 
ships  with  abundance  of  corn  for  Agrigentum,  (upon  which  he  relied 
as  his  last  shift),  persuaded  the  soldiers  to  be  patient  a  few  days, and 
in  the  mean  time  pawned  to  them  the  drinking  vessels  of  the  Cartha- 
ginian soldiers.  Hereupon  he  sent  for  forty  gallies  from  Panormut 
and  Motya,  and  lay  in  wait  for  the  ships  that  brought  the  provision. 
For  the  Syracusans  never  suspected  the  Carthaginians  durst  appear 
at  sea,  being  now  winter,  and  who  had  some  time  before  lost  their 
power  and  dominion  there.  Therefore,  sailing  on  with  great  assurance, 
they  were  on  a  sudden  attacked  by  Amilcar,  with  forty  sail;  who 
presently  sunk  eight  of  their  sliips,  and  drove  the  rest  upon  the 
shore ;  all  which  being  liius  taken,  the^cene  of  aifairs  was  so  dianged 
on  both  sides,  that  the  Campanians  that  were  with  the  Agrigentincs, 
perceiving  the  desperate  condition  of  the  Grecians,  corrupted  with 
fifteen  talents,  fell  away  to  the  Carthaginians.  Besides,  the  Agri- 
gentines,  at  the  beginning  of  the  siogc,  when  things  went  ill  with 
the  Carthaginians,  were  very  profuse  and  prodigal,  both  in  their  corn 
and  other  things,  and  therefore,  when  the  affairs  of  the  barliarians 
were  much  altered  to  their  advantage,  the  besieged  (being  so  many 
thousands  penned  up  together)  were  insensihly,  and  by  degrees, 
brought  into  great  wiint.  It  is  reported  tliat  Dexippus  the  Lacedie^ 
monian  also  was  bribed  with  Hfieen  talents;  for  he  on  a  sudden  told 
the  Italian  commanders,  that  it  was  better  \o  withdraw,  and  carry  oa 


s6o  DiODOHUs  SICULU8.  Moak  XJIL 


HiM 


the  war  in  some  other  place^  for  here  they  were  likely  to  be  starved. 
The  oiBcers  therefore  considering  of  what  he  had  said,  inarched  away 
with  the  army  to  the  sea,  as  if  now  the  time  limited  by  their  com- 
missions had  been  determined. 

After  their  departure,  the  generals  with  the  other  officers  met  in  a 
council  of  war,  and  ordered  that  an  account  should  be  taken  what 
•  provision  was  left  in  the  city;  and  when  a  return  was  made  of  tlie 
scarcity,  they  saw  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  quit  the  place; 
whereupon  they  commanded  all  to  be  ready  to  begone  the  next  night. 
Upon  this  there  was  a  lamentable  outcry  in  every  house  throughout 
the  whole  city,  of  men,  women,  and  children,  being  in  a  distraction 
through  fear  and  dread  of  the  enemy  on  the  one  hand,  and  care  of  their 
goods  and  estates  on  the  other,  which  now  they  must  be  forced  in  a 
great  measure  to  leave  to  the  rapine  of  the  barbarians ;  and,  as  an 
aggravation,  being  those  very  things  wherein  a  little  before  they  placed 
their  happiness.     However,  at  length  seeing  that  fortune  liad  stripped 
them  of  all  their  riches,  they  judged  it  was  wisdom  to  do  what  thej 
could  to  save  their  lives.    Then  might  be  seen  not  only  the  mighty 
wealth  of  a  flourishing  city  forsaken,  but  also  a  multitude  of  miserable 
people  left  behind;  for  those  that  were  sick  and  infirm  weredis* 
regarded  by  them  of  their  own  family,  whilst  every  one  sought  to 
preserve  himself;  and  those  that  through  old  age  could  not  remove, 
were  in  the  like  condition.    Many  that  preferred  death  before  the 
leaving  of  their  country,  killed  tlicmselves,  choosing  rather  to  die  in 
their  own  houses.     But  that  multitude  of  people  that  did  go  forth, 
were  guarded  by  the  soldiers  to  Gela,  so  that  all  the  ways  and  country 
towards  Gela  swarmed  with  a  promiscuous  multitude  of  women  and 
children;  amongst  whom  were  young  ladies,  who  though  they  hsd 
now  changed  their  former  soft  and  delicate  way  of  living,  into  th^ 
fatigues  and  sorrows  of  tedious  journies,  yet  being  quickened  and 
stirred  up  by  fear,  bore  all  difficulties  with  eminent  patience.     They 
all  came  at  length  safe  to  Gela;  and  afterwards  Leontium  was  giveo 
to  them  by  the  Syracusans  to  inhabit. 

Amilcar  entering  the  city  with  his  army,  not  without  some  fear  aod 
jealousy,  killed  almost  all  he  found  in  it,  not  sparing  those  tliat  fled 
into  the  temples  for  refuge,  but,  hauling  them  from  the  altars,  slew 
them  with  great  cruelty.  There  it  is  said  Gellias,  who  was  so  emi- 
nent above  the  rest  of  his  countrymen  in  the  greatness  of  his  wealth, 
and  integrity  of  his  conversatioi),  ended  his  life  with  the  loss  of  his 
country:  for  he  with  some  others  fled  to  the  temple  of  Minerva, 
hoping  the  Carthaginians  would  not  commit  any  outrages  against  the 
godb:  but  when  he  perceived  the  cursed  impiety  of  the  men,  he  set 
lire  to  the  temple,  and  together  with  the  wealth  that  was  there,  (con-r 


diup.  XTL  DIODOHUS  BTCULtTs.  t&l 

•sBsmBSBSTBBBBiBBsssssssssssssssaaB^sssL  I.  graggggaeggaMg— g—OiMK. 

secrated  to  the  gods),  burnt  himself;  by  one  act  preventing  three 
evils,  as  he  conceived;  the  impiety  of  the  enemy  against  the  gods^ 
the  rapine  and  plunder  of  the  vast  treasure  that  was  there^  and  (that 
which  was  the  greatest)  the  abuse  o^  his  own  body. 

Amilca^r  having  spoiled  and  plundered  all  places  both  religious  and 
firbfane,  got  together  from  the  spoil  so  much  riches  as  a  city  that 
had  beeh  inhabited  by  two  hundred  thousand  men^  and  never  takeh 
before  sintre  it  was  built,  and  which  was  the  richest  of  all  the  Greclaa 
cities,  might,  by  an  easy  computation,  in  that  time  heap  together; 
especially  since  the  citizens  made  it  their  business  to  be  stalely  and 
magnificent  in  a  wonderful  manner  in  every  thing  they  undertook: 
for  many  curious  pictures,  drawn  with  admirable  art,  and  an  infinite 
number  of  statues  of  ail  sorts^  cut  and  wrought  with  singular  inge« 
nuity,  were  found  here  by  the  conqueror.     The  best  and  choicest 
.things  (among  which  was  the  Phalarian  bull)  he  sent  to  darthage; 
the  rest  of  the  spoil  he  caused  to  be  sold  under  the  spear.    Timieu9| 
in  his  history,  with  great  earnestness  denies  that  there  ever  was  any 
such  bull;  but  fortune  has  since  disproved  him  in  this:    for  Scipio 
AfricanuS)  two  hundred  and  threescore  years  after  this  destruction^ 
when  Carthage  was  razed,  amongst  other  things  which  were  then  ki 
Carthage,  restored  that  famous  bull  to  the  Agrigentines,  which  remain^ 
at  Agrigentum  now  at  the  time  of  the  writing  of  this  history;'  of 
which  I  have  been  the  more  desirous  to  speak,  because  Timseus  wifK 
much  bitterness  inveighs  against  the  historians  that  were  before  htiA 
as  altogether  unpardonable;   and  yet  he  himself^  in  those  things 
wherein  he  most  pretends  an  earnest  and  diligent  search  after  truth> 
does  I  othing  but  merely  trifle;  for  in  my  opinion  we  ought  to  have» 
favourable  regard  and  respect  to  those  authors  we  differ  from,  because 
they  are  but  men,  and  the  truth  of  tilings  that  are  long  before  pasf 
are  not  easy  to  be  discovered.     On  the  other  hand,  those  writer*  thaft 
are  careless  and  negligent  in  their  inquiries,  are  justly  to  be  censurW; 
and  those  especially  may  be  well  judged  regardless  of  truth,  wbd 
make  it  tlieir  business  to  flatter  some,  and  out  of  envy  to  cast  dlirt 
upon  others. 


;)     . 


Vol.  !•   No,  38.  cccc 


56 1  DionoRus  sicuLus.  BookXni, 


CHAP.  3(111. 

2%e  SyracuBon  offktrt  accused.  DianyHuB  mode  gcmmtd  qf  At 
Syracusans.  He  moves  to  have  the  exiles  recalML  His  is  in* 
vested  with  the  sole  command.  At  lengthy  by  several asiifitti^ke 
gains  the  sovereignty. 

AMILCAR  having  gained  the  city  after  eight  montlis  aiegCf  a  litde 
before  the  winter  solstice,  did  not  presently  sack  it,  to  the  end  tht 
soldiers  might  quarter  there  all  the  winter.  When  the  ruin  of 
Agrigentum  was  noised  abroad,  the  wliole  island  was  struck  with  such 
tenor  that  some  of  the  Sicilians  fled  to  Syracuse,  and  othen  tram- 
ported  themselves,  their  wives,  children,  and  moveables^  into  Italy. 
When  the  Agrigentines  that  had  escaped  came  to  Syiaeusc,  they 
accused  the  commanders,  affirming  that  they  had  betrayed  their 
country  into  the  enemy's  hand;  hut  the  Syracusans  cast  the  Uane 
upon  the  other  Sicilians,  because  they  chose  such  a  sort  of  officersas 
endangered  the  loss  of  all  Sicily  by  their  treachery. 

But  when  a  senate  was  called  at  Syracuse,  they  were  in  rack  a 
consternation  as  none  durst  move  or  advise  any  thing  conceming  the 
war.    And  bciiig  all  thus  at  a  stand,  Dionysius,  the  son  of  Hcnno- 
,crates,  renewed  the  accusation  against  the  officers..Tliat  thej  hsi 
betrayed  Agrigentum  to  the  Carthaginians;  and  stirred  up  the  peopla 
forthwith  to  take  revenge,  and  not  to  wait  for  formaliti<ra  of  law  in 
execution  of  justice,    fiut  Dionysius  being  fined  according  to  law  bj 
tlie   magistrates,  as  a  disturber  of  the  public  peace,  Philistui  (who 
afterwards  wrote  a  history,  a  very  rich  man)  paid  the  fine  for  hin, 
and  bid  him  speak  his  mind  freely,  and  promised  him  he  would  pay 
whatever  was  imposed  upon  him,  if  they  fined  him  all  the  day  long. 
■  Dionysius  being  thus  encouraged,  he  stirred  up  the  people^  and 
filled  the  assembly  with  tumult  by  his  criminations,  charging  the 
commanders  that,  for  bribes,  they  had  drawn  off  and  forsaken  the  A- 
grigeniiiies.     He  likewise  accused  many  others  of  the  best  of  the 
citizens,  traducing  them  that  they  aimed  to  introduce  an  oligaitky; 
and  told  the  senate — ^That  commanders  were  not  to  be  chosen  accord* 
ing  to  their  greatness  in  power,  but  according  to  the  good-will  and 
regard  they  hore  towards  the  people :  for  the  great  onea  lording  it 
over  them,  had  them  in  contempt,  and  enriched  themaelTct  by  the 
losses  of  their  country;  but  men  of  low  fortunes  never  attempt  anj 
thing  of  such  a  nature,  knowing  their  own  disability. 


CAtip.  XJII.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  flfiS 

SSSS=S9e9BBBSemSSSSSaBSBBaBBBaaDHiBSBSBlHBBBBHaVHaHn^ 

When  he  bad  spoken  what  he  had  designed,  aqd  so  agreeanle  to  ' 
the  humour  of  the  people,  he  set  all  the  assembly  on  a  flame ;  for  the 
people  before  bore  a  secret  hatred  to  the  commanders,  because  they 
were  suspected  to  have  dealt  falsely  in  the  management  of  the  war; 
and  now  being  the  more  exasperated  by  the  speech  of  Dionysius,  they 
forthwith  deprived  them  of  their  commands,  and  chose  others  in  their 
room,  amongst  whom  was  Dionysius,  a  man  of  great  esteem  and 
reputation  with  the  Syracusans,  for  his  approved  valour  in  several 
battles  against  the  Carthaginians. 

Having  gained  this  step  of  preferment,  he  contrived  all  ways  ima- 
l^able  how  to  advance  to  the  sovereign  power  over  his  country;  for 
after  he  was  invested  with  the  command,  he  never  associated  with 
the  other  commanders,  nor  joined  with  them  in  any  council  of  war* 
In  the  mean  time  he  caused  rumours  to  be  spread  abroad,  that  they 
kept  secret  correspondence  with  the  enemy^  hoping  thereby  to  gti 
them  laid  aside,  and  so  to  have  the  sole  command  of  the  army  lodged 
in  himself.  While  he  was  executing  these  projects,  the  most  pru* 
dent  citizens  suspected  himi  and  every  assefpbly  gave  very  hard  and 
ill  words*  On  the  other  hand  the  common  people,  ignorant  of  his 
deceit  and  fraud,  praised  every  thing  he  did,  and  published  every 
where,  that  now  at  length  they  had  got  a  faithful  and  constant  guar- 
dian and  jdefender  of  the  city. 

The  consultations  concerning  preparations  for  war  being  very  fre^ 
quent,  and  Dionysius  discerning  that  the  Syracusans  were  in  sf  great 
fright,  he  advised  to  recal  the  exiles :  for  he  said  it  was  a  very  absurd 
thing  to  receive  aids  of  strangers  from  Italy  and  Peloponnesus,  and 
yet  to  be  backward  in  making  use  of  their  own  countrymen  to  with- 
stand the  common  danger,  who  are  solicited  by  the  enemy  with  great 
promises  of  reward  to  join  with  them,  and  yet  are  content  to  wander 
up  and  down  amongst  strangers,  and  die  rather  than  do  any  thing 
prejudicial  to  their  country.  For  though  they  were  banished  for 
stirring  up  sedition  in  the  city,  yet  such  kindness  shewn  them,  wduld 
in  gratitude  oblige  them  to  fight  cheerfully  for  their  country.  When 
he  had  spoken  many  things  to  this  purpose,  he  at  length  procured 
the  suffrages  of  the  people ;  for  none  of  his  colleagues  durst  contra- 
dict him,  for  that  they  both  feared  the  rage  of  the  ])eople,  and  likewise 
plainly  saw,  that  nothing  would  redound  thence  but  hatred  to  them^ 
selves,  and  more  love  and  favour  to  him. 

Dionysius  did  this  because  he  looked  upon  the  exiles  to  be  men  fit 
for  his  purpose,  such  as  were  given  to  change,  aitd  therefore  ready 
tools  to  make  use  of  to  serve  his  ambition;  who  would  delight  to  see 
their  enemies  throats  cut,  their  goods  and  estates  confi$catcd,  and 


564  DlODORUS  SICULV9.  Uimk  XIIL 


themselves  restored.    The  decree,  therefore,  for  the  recaHtng  of  the 
banished  being  published,  they  presently  returned* 

And  now  letters  coming  from  Gela  to  desire  asaistftoce  to  be 
speedily  sent  them,  Dionysius  made  use  of  this  fair  opportunity  ibr 
the  carrying  on  iiis  design;  for  he  forthwith  marched  to  Gela  with 
two  thousand  foot,  and  four  hundred  horse,  where  Dexippos  the 
Laccdsmonian  was  governor,  with  a  strong  garrison :  when  he  fomid 
the  city  in  a  seditious  uproar  raised  by  some  against  the  people,  be 
condemns  them  that  were  accused  in  a  public  assembly,  pnts  them 
to  deatli,  and  confiscates  their  estates;  and  with  part  of  the  money 
paid  the  soldiers  that  were  in  garrison  under  Dexippus,  all  their  oU 
arrears,  and  the  rest  he  distributed  amongst  the  soldiers  that  came 
with  him  from  Syracuse,  declaring  their  pay  ordered  bytheeityshoold 
be  double.  By  this  means  he  won  both  the  hearts  of  the  soMiers  if 
Gela,  and  of  those  that  went  with  him  thither.  The  Gelians  likewise 
cried  him  up  to  the  skies,  as  one  that  had  freed  them  from  shvery: 
so  that  out  of  envy  to  the  great  men  of  the  city,  they  decreed  the 
supreme  power  to  Dionysius:  upon  which  they  sent  ambesaadors  to 
Syracuse,  to  publish  there  his  praises,  and  likewise  to  shew  the  decrees 
of  the  city,  by  which  they  had  honoured  him  with  many  marics  of 
respect. 

In  the  mean  time  Dionysius  endeavoured  to  bring  over  Desuppos 
into  his  councils,  but  not  being  able  to  prevail,  he  determined  to 
return  to  Syracuse  with  ail  his  forces:  but  the  Gelians  hearing  that 
the  Carthaginians  had  determined  to  set  upon  their  city  with  their 
whole  power,  before  any  other,  earnestly  entreated  Dionysius  that  he 
would  not  leave  them,  nor  suffer  their  city  to  undergo  the  same  cala- 
mity with  that  of  Agrlgcntum.  To  whom  he  promised  to  return^  in 
a  short  time  with  greater  forces;  and  so  left  Gela. 

Afterwards,  when  the  people  came  from  the  theatre,  from  the  plays, 
Dionysius  at  t'hat  very  hour  returned  into  Syracuse;  whereupon  the 
citizens  came  thronging  about  him,  and  inquired  what  news  he 
brought  concerning  the  Carthaginians :  to  whom  he  answered  ...That 
he  had  nothing  to  say  of  them,  iu  regard  their  own  officers  and  go- 
vernors were  more  mischievous  to  the  commonwealth  than  the  ene- 
mics  themselves;  for  whilst  the  citizens,  led  away  by  their  flatteries, 
were  diverted  with  sports  and  pLiys,  they  themselves  cmpoTerished 
the  commonwealth,  and  defrauded  the  soldiers  of  their  pay.  And 
now  that  the  enemy  at  this  very  time  is  making  incredible  prepamtion 
for  war^  and  arc  even  upon  tlie  borders  of  Syracuse,  with  a  mighty 
army,  yet  it  is  not  at  all  by  tliem  regarded.  To  what  end  they  acted 
thus  he  suspected  long  since,  but  now  he  saw  dearly  their  drift:  fcr 


€*«/>.  Xin.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Sffj 

Amilcar,  he  said,  had  sent  by  an  herald  to  him,  pretending  to  redeem 
some  captives,  hot  in  truth  secretly  to  persuade  him  not  to  use  that 
authority  he  had,  to  pry  too  narrowly  into  things  that  were  in  doing, 
or  at  least  not  to  obstruct  them,  if  he  was  not  willing  to  joto  in  the 
execution*  Therefore  he  declared  he  was  not  willing  any  longer  to 
be  general,  but  was  ready  to  lay  down  hrs  commission.  For  it  was 
attogetber  intolerable  that  he  only  should  hazard  theioss  of  all  he 
had  with  the  rest  of  the  citizens,  whilst  others  made  merchandise  of 
their  country:  yea,  by  this  means  he  should  become  partaker  with 
them  in  their  treachery.  The  people  being  enraged  by  what  he  had 
said,  and  his  words  divulged  through  the  wliole  army,  everyone  went 
to  his  own  house  in  great  fear  and  perplexity. 

The  next  day  an  assembly  was  called,  where  he  loaded  his  fellow 
commanders  with  many  accusations;  and  by  stirring  up  the  people 
'against  them,  greatly  advanced  his  own  reputation.  At  length  sozn^ 
in  the  assembly  cried  out  to  make  him  generalissimo,  and  not  to  have 
the  thing  to  be  done  when  the  enemy  was  even  battering  the  waits; 
alledging  that  the  greatness  of  the  war  required  a  general  that  was 
able  to  do  eminent  service  for  the  commonwealth :  and  for  the  traitors; 
it  was  better  to  inquire  of  them  in  another  assembly  hereafter;  seeinjf 
DOW  it  was  not  so  agreeable  to  the  present  posture  of  afiairs.  '  It  was 
also  remembered  that  heretofore,  when  Gelon  had  the  sole  commiind, 
they  had  overcome  three  hundred  thousand  Carthaginiairs. 

Upon  this  the  people  (who  arc  always  apt  to  close  with  the  worst 
advice)  suddenly  made  Dionysius  general,  with  sole  and  absolute 
power. 

After  things  thus  succeeded  according  to  his  heart's  desire^  he  signed 
an  order,  that  the  soldiers  should  receive  double  pay;  alleging  tliat 
thereby  they  would  be  encouraged  to  fight  more  readily  and  cheerful- 
ly; and  bade  theSyracusans  not  trouble  or  disturb  themselves  about 
money,  for  there  would  be  ways  readily  found  out  to  bring  in  sufficient 
supplies.  But  when  the  assembly  was  broken  up,  there  were  many 
of  the  Syracusans  that  condemned  what  was  done,  as  if  they  had  had 
no  hand  in  confirming  it :  for  after  they  had  more  seriously  considered 
the  thing,  they  foresaw  tyranny  would  follow.  Th»»s,  while  they 
sought  after  freedom,  they  most  imprudently  placed  a  tyrant  over 
their  country. 

Dionysius,  therefore,  to  prevent  the  change  of  the  people's  minds, 
began  to  contrive  how  he  might  procure  a  guard  for  his  person :  if  he 
could  gain  this  point,  he  concluded  he  could  easily  fix  himself  in  the 
sovereignty.  Upon  this  he  commanded  all  that  were  able  to  bear 
arms,  not  above  forty  years  of  age,  with  thirty  days  provision  and 


566  DioDORUs  S1CCLU9.  Baok  Xllf. 


their  arms^  to  march  to  the  city  of  Leontium ;  for  this  city  was  agar* 
risoD  belonging  to  the  Syracasans,  full  of  strangers  and  exiles,  whom 
he  hoped  would  be  assistant  to  him,  being  men  given  to  innoTations; 
and  to  this  he  was  the  more  encouraged,  because  he  knew  but  few  of 
the  Syracusans  would  be  there.  For  the  better  effecting  of  this  de- 
sign, he  encamped  all  night  in  the  field ;  and  as  he  lay  there,  he  feigned 
a  plot  against  his  own  person,  and  caused  a  great  noise  and  clamour 
to  be  made  by  his  servants  and  attendants;  upon  which  he  fled  to  the 
castle;  where,  after  he  had  kindled  several  fires,  he  sent  for  aatroog 
guard,  and  so  passed  that  night. 

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  and  the  multitude  were  got  together  into 
the  city,  he  used  many  probable  arguments  suited  to  the  matter  in 
hand,  and  brought  over  the  people  to  give  him  liberty  to  choose  six 
hundred  men,  such  as  he  thought  best,  for  his  guard.  And  herein 
Dionysius  is  said  to  imitate  Pisistratus  the  Athenian,  for  he,  wilfully 
wounding  himself,  (as  if  he  had  been  assaulted  by  treachery),  came 
forthwith  into  the  assembly,  and  by  that  means,  as  it  b  reported,  got 
a  guard  from  the  citizens,  by  whose  help  he  gained  the  supreme 
authority. 

By  the  same  fraud  Dionysius,  cheating  the  people,  became  absolute 
lord  and  master  over  his  country ;  for  he  presently  chose  above  a 
thousand  men,  such  as  were  strong  in  body  and  low  in  purse,  and  pat 
them  in  arms,  and  encouraged  them  with  many  large  and  glorious 
promises.  Then  he  brought  all  the  mercenary  soldiers  to  an  entire 
observance  and  obedience  to  him,  by  his  winning  and  courteous 
speeches.  He  made  an  alteration  likewise  in  the  regiments,  giving 
commissions  to  them  that  he  could  most  trust.  Then  he  sent  away 
Dexippus  the  Lacedaemonian  into  Greece,  for  he  suspected  him,  lest 
he  should  become  a  head  to  the  Syracusans,  in  case  they  should  take 
an  occasion  to  seek  to  recover  their  liberty.  And  now  he  sends  for 
the  mercenaries  from  Gela,  and  gets  together  from  every  place  all  the 
exiles  and  lewd  fellows,  not  doubting  but  by  the  help  of  these  to  es- 
tablish himself  in  the  kingdom. 

After  his  return  to  Syracuse,  when  he  had  lodged  his  forces  in  the 
arsenal,  he  openly  declared  himself  king:  the  Syracusans  took  this 
grievously,  but  were  necessitated  to  be  silent,  because  it  was  not  in 
tiieir  power  to  do  any  thing  else;  for  the  whole  city  was  full  of  stran- 
gers that  were  in  arms,  and  all  were  in  fear  of  the  Carthaginians,  who 
had  a  vast  army  near  at  hand. 

Dionysius  now  presently  marries  the  daughter  of  Hermocrates,  (ba 
who  had  routed  the  Athenians  in  Sicily),  and  gave  his  own  sister  in 
marriage  to  Polyxenus,  Hermocratcs's  brother  in  law,    lliis  be  did 


t!ke^.XIP:  DIODORUII 8ICULUS.  iff 

mmm^SSSTSSSgOBSBSSSSSSBBSBSTSSSSSaBSBB^^ 

to  ati'eDgtheo  himself,  by  matching  intain  hoooarabte  fiunily.  After 
tfiis,  he  summoned  a  general  council,  and  lynitrived  all  ways  imagin* 
able,  how  to  get  rid  of  Daphnsus  and  Demarchus,  the  most  power-^ 
ful  of  all  his  adversaries. 

Thus  Dionysius,  from  a  scrivener,  and  a  man  of  poor  and  mean 
abstract,  got  the  sovereignty  of  the  greatest  city  among  the  Grecians, 
and  maintained  his  dominion  all  the  days  of  his  life,  for  the  space  of 
thirty-eight  years.  What  things  he  afterwards  did,  and  how  he  en« 
larged  his  dominion,  we  shall  relate  in  its  proper  place:  for  very 
probably  he  gained  the  largest  dominion,  and  of  the  longest  contthu* 
ance  of  any  that  have  ever  been  compassed  by  usurpation. 

After  the  taking  of  the  city  of  Agrigentum,  the  Carthaginians  trans* 
ported  to  Carthage  all  the  dedicated  things  laid  up  in  the  temples; 
the  statues  and  things  of  greatest  value;  and  having  burnt  all  the 
temples  to  ashes,  and  plundered  the  city,  they  quartered  there  all 
winter;  and  in  the  mean  time  furnished  themselves  with  engines^ 
and  all  sorts  of  weapons,  with  a  design  to  besiege  Gela  the  first  thing 
they  did  the  next  spring. 


CHAP.  XIV. 

27ie  famous  battle  of  ArginuscB  at  sea^  wherein  the  Ath^ians  were 
victors.  The  officers  accused  for  not  burying  the  dead.  The 
speech  of  Diomedon.     The  death  of  Sophocles. 

TH£  Athenians,  weakened  with  continual  losses,  itiade  all  strangers 
and  foreigners  free  of  their  city  that  would  engage  with  them  in  the 
war.  When  a  great  multitude  were  incorporated  into  the  city,  the 
commanders  listed  all  that  were  fit  for  war,  equipped  a  fleet  of 
sixty  sail,  with  which  (every  way  well  provided)  they  sailed  toSamos, 
where  they  found  other  commanders,  who  had  brought  together 
fourscore  more  gallies  from  other  islands;  and  having  procured  ten 
more  from  the  Samians,  they  weighed  anchor,  and  made  with  their 
whole  fleet  (consisting  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  sail)  to  the  islands 
Ar_,inusaB*,  with  a  design  to  raise  the  siege  at  Mitylene.  But  Calli- 
cratides,  the  Lacedsemonian  general,  having  intelligence  of  the 
approach  of  the  enemy,  left  Etonicus  with  a  great  force  to  maintain 
the  siege,  and  sailed  himself  with  ail  speed,  with  a  fleet  of  one  hun« 

*  Tbrce  UUud*  Ijing  between  Lesbwf  and  £oUs,  near  to  Cans. 


b6&  DTODORUS  StCULU9.  BmH  XUL 


dred  and  fortj  sail,  well  manned,  to  Arginusie.  These  islands  were 
then  inhabited,  and  had  a  little  town  in  them  peopled  by  the  Eoliams. 
They  lie  between  Mityiene  and  Cuma,  near  to  the  continent^  and 

l)ie  promontory  Catanidcs*.  The  Athenians,  in  regard  their  navy  I^ 
not  far  from  thence,  heard  time  enough  of  the  adrance  of  the  enemy's 
fteet;  yet,  because  the  wind  was  very  high,  they  waved  fighting  thai 
day,  and  prepared  to  engage  the  next.  The  like  did  the  LacedaMBO* 
niuns;  for  the  augurs  on  both  sides  dissuaded  each  from  fighting. 
For  the  head  of  the  Lncedaemonian  sacrifice  being  laid  upon  the 
shore,  was  suddenly  waslicd  away  by  the  violence  of  the  waves ;  upoD 
which  the  priest  foretold  the  death  of  the  admiral:  to  which  it  is 

icportcd  CuHicrutidcs  made  answer ^^Phat  the  glory  of  Sparta  would 

not  he  obscured  by  his  death.  Thrasybulus  likewise,  the  Atheoian 
admiral,  who  had  the  chief  command  that  day,  had  this  dream;  the 
niglit  before,  be  dreamt  that  he  and  six  other  commanders^  in  a  full 
theatre  at  Athens,  acted  the  tragedy  of  Euripides  called  Phenissa^ 
andtliut  the  enemies  acted  that  called  the  Suppliants;  and  that  at 
length  he  obtained  a  Cadmean  victor}',  and  all  of  them  were  killed^ 
like  those  at  the  siege  ofTbehes;  which,  when  the  sootlisayer  heard^ 

he  thus  interpreted That  seven  of  the  chief  commanders  should  fall 

ID  the  fi;;bt:  but  in  regard  that  the  entrails  portended  victory^tbey 
eoihmanded  that  nothing  should  bo  said  of  their  deaths^  but  orily  ta 
their  friends;  but  tliat  thty  should  publish  abroad  to  the  whole 
army,  tbut  victory  was  certainly  promised  by  the  view  of  the  sa* 
crifices. 
Then  Callicratidcs  calling  the  soldiers  together,  made  a  speech  te 

them  suited  to  the  occasion;  and  further  added I  am  so  cheerful 

and  ready  to  undergo  all  hazards  for  the  sake  of  my  country,  that 
although  the  augur  has  foretold  my  death  by  the  portents  of  the 
sacrifice,  yet  inasmuch  as  he  has  also  pronounced  assured  victory  to 
you,  I  am  impatient  of  delay,  and  ready  and  willing  presently  to  die: 
and  that  the  army  may  not  be  disturbed,  and  in  confusion  by  tht 
death  of  their  admiral,  I  now  appoint  another,  who  may  succeed  me 
in  case  1  fall;  and  that  is  Clearchus,  a  man  known  to  be  an  ezpe« 
rienced  good  soldier.  Callicratides  stirred  up  many  with  these  words, 
to  imitate  bis  valour,  and  to  hasten  the  battle.  The  Lacedsemonians 
now  eneouraging  one  another,  embarked ;  so  likewise  the  AtheniaD% 
heartened  by  their  officers,  went  abo;ird,  and  everyone  placed  them- 
selves according  to  their  squadrons.  Thrasybulus  and  Pericles 
commanded  the  right  wing,  (this  was  Pericles  the  son  of  that  Pericles 
the  famous  orator,  whose  surname  was  Olympus);  but  the  command 
of  part  of  this  wing  he  delivered  to  Theramenes^  who  was  at  first  but 

•  OrCanas. 


Chap.  Xir.  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  6(59 


a  common  soldier,  but  afterwards  at  several  times  commanded  con- 
siderable forces:  the  rest  of  the  officer;  he  placed  in  their  order 
throughout  the  wiiole  fleet ;  and  compassing  the  islands  called  Argi* 
nusse,  he  drew  out  his  fleet  in  a  line,  as  long  as  he  possibly  could. 
On  the  other  side,  Callicratides  advancing  into  the  open  sea,  com«» 
manded  the  right  wing:  the  Boeotians  were  in  the  left,  commanded 
by  Thrasonidas  the  Theban.  But  when  they  saw  that  they  could  not 
reach  to  equal  the  line  of  the  enemy,  because  the  islands  stretched 
out  so  far,  he  divided  his  navy  into  two  parts,  and  fought  in  two 
places.  This  amazed  the  beliolders  from  all  parts,  as  if  four  fleets, 
with  no  less  than  three  hundred  sail,  close  together,  were  hotly  en- 
gaged. For  this  was  the  greatest  sea-fight  that  ever  was  fought,  by 
Grecians  against  Grecians,  that  any  history  commemorates*  And 
now  at  one  instant  all  the  trumpets  were  commanded  by  the  admirals 
to  sound  a  charge,  and  the  armies  on  both  sides  set  up  great  shouts 
in  their  turns,  one  against  another,  and  plying  their  oars  with  great 
}ieat  and  earricstness,  every  one  strove  who  should  be  the  first  in 
making  the  onset.  For  there  were  many  that  by  reason  of  the  long 
continuance  of  the  war,  were  well  instructed  for  fights  at  sea;  and 
the  battle  was  very  hot  and  obstinate  on  both  sides,  in  regard  ihe  best 
and  stoutest  men  were  got  together  to  fight,  in  order  to  get  or  lose 
all  at  once :  for  none  doubted  but  this  battle  would  put  an  end  to  the 
war,  which  side  soever  got  the  victory.  But  Callicratides  knowing 
by  the  predictions  of  the  augurs,  that  he  was  to  die,  endeavoured  to 
make  his  fleath  honourable  and  glorious.'  Therefore  he  made  up 
fiercely  upon  the  gallies  of  Nausias,  the  vice-admiral,  whom  he  sunk 
with  xhose  next  to  him,  at  the  first  charge;  others  he  disabled,  striking 
them  through  wiih  the  beaks  of* his  ships,  and  others  he  made  useless 
for  fight,  by  brushing  off  their  oars.  At  length  he  struck  the  ship  of 
Pericles  with  such  violence  that  he  tore  oft^one  great  part  from  ano- 
ther. But  the  fore-part  of  his  own  ship  was  so  fixed  by  the  fierceness 
of  the  stroke  in  the  prow  ot  his  enemy's  ship,  that  he  could  not  clear 
himself  off;  upon  which  Pericles  cast  grappling-irons  into  Calli- 
cratides's  vessel,  and  so  forced  him  up  close  side  to  side;  and  there- 
upon the  Athenians  in  a  great  body  boarded  him,  and  put  all  in  the 
ship  to  the  swoid.  Here  it  is  reported  that  Callicratides,  after  he 
had  behaved  himself  with  great  gallantry  a  long  time,  and  received 
many  wounds  in  all  parts  of  his  body,  at  length  wearied  out,  fell 
down  dead:  the  report  of  his  death  running  through  the  fleet,  the 
Peloponnesians,  struck  with  a  panic  fear,  began  presently  to  fly:  but 
though  the  right  wing  fled,  yet  the  Boeotians  m  the  left  stuck  to  it, 
and  fought  stoutly  for  some  time;  for  they  of  Eubosa,  being  in  the 
same  common  danger^  v^ere  very  faithful  to  them,  and  all  tbosa  that 
Vol.1.. No.  39.  PDOd 


670  DIODORU5  SICULUS.  MBOk  XUL 


walH 


had  revolted  from  the  Athenians,  wfcre  afraid  lest  they  (if  they 
vered  tlieir  former  power)  would  revenge  themselves  apoti  those  thil 
had  deserted  them.  But  when  the  Bceotiatis  saW  that  the  greatelt 
part  of  the  fleet  was  routed  and  broken  in  pieces^  and  that  they  wot 
more  and  more  pressed  upon  by  multitudes  that  made  up  upon  theHi 
they  fled  outright.  Some  of  the  Peloponnesians  fled  to  Chios,  otheis 
to  Cuma.  But  the  Athenians  pursued  them  very  far,  and  filled  all 
the  sea-coasts  with  carcases  of  the  dead  and  wrecks  of  ships.  After 
this  some  of  the  commanders  advi&ed  that  the  bodies  of  those  that 
were  shiin  should  be  taken  up,  because  the  Athenians  ilsed  severely 
to  punish  those  who  neglected  that  last  oflice.  Others  were  rather 
for  sailing  back  forthwith  to  Mitylene,  and  in  the  first  place  to  raise 
the  siege:  but  presently  arose  a  most  violent  teitopest,  by  which  thi 
ships  were  greatly  shattered  and  broken;  so  that  by  this,  and  the  foil 
of  the  late  engagement,  the  spirits  of  the  soldiers  were  very  low,  and 
''  the  taking  up  the  bodies  of  the  dead  was  deferred.  At  length  tht 
storm  raged  and  increased  to  that  degree,  that  they  could  neither  gaia 
Mitylene,  nor  perform  what  they  ought  for  the  dead;  so  that  being 
driven  back  by  the  storm,  they  arrived  with  the  fleet  at  Argtnusa.  la 
this  fight  the  Athenians  lost  five-aiid-twenty  of  their shi{js,  and  most 
of  their  men  in  them ;  but  the  Peloponnesians  se\'enty*seven.  There 
were  so  many  ships  and  men  destroyed,  that  all  the  sea-coasts  of 
Cuma  and  Phocaea  seemed  to  be  filled  with  carcases  and  wrecks. 

Eleonicus,  who  was  besieging  Mitylene,  having  certain  intelligente 
of  the  defeat  of  the  Peloponnesians,  sent  away  all  the  shipping  to 
Chios ;  he  himself  marched  away  with  the  land-army  to  a  cona'cderate 
city  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  being  afraid  lest  by  a  sally  out  of  the  town, 
when  the  Athenian  fleet  came  up,  his  whole  army  should  be  cutoff. 
When  the  Athenians  arrived  at  Mitylene,  they  took  thence  Conon 
along  with  them,  with  forty  sail,  and  passed  over  to  Samos,  and  there 
wasted  and  spoiled  all  their  enemy's  country. 

After  these  things,  the  Lacedaemonians  in  Eolis  and  Ionia,  and 
the  dispersed  islands,  met  in  a  common  council  at  £phesus;  and  after 
many  bandings  and  discourses,  jjro  and  con,  they  at  length  resolved 
to  send  an  ambassador  to  Sparta,  to  desire  that  Lysander  might  be 
constituted  admiral  of  the  navy:  for  that  he  approved  himself  whh 
great  commendation  when  he  was  in  command,  and  was  judged  to  be 
the  most  skilful  general. 

But  because  the  Liacedflemonjans  would  not  alter  the  antient  cus- 
tom of  their  country,  they  made  Aratus  admiral,  and  sent  Lysander 
with  him,  as  a  private  man,  to  be  his  assistant;  with  this  strict 
command,  that  the  general  should  always  follow  his  advice  and 
counsel.    Thus  being  sent  fcvth  to  manage  the  command  of  the 


Cktfp.  XIF.  DIODORU8  SlCU|«Uf.  Bfl 


Tf 


fleetj  they  got  together  from  Peloponnesus  and  their  conredemtes,  as 
Buny  gallies  as  they  possibly  eould. 

The  Athenians,  when  they  received  the  happy  tidings  of  their  sue* 
cess  at  Arginusae, highly  applauded  the  commanders  for  the  victory; 
but  were  very  angry  that  they  neglected  to  bury  those  who  liad  lost 
their  lives  iu  the  defence  of  the  government. 

Theramenes  and  Thrasybulus,  coming  before  the  rest  to  Athenir^ 
the  other  officers  suspecting  they  would  accuse  them  to  the  people 
for  their  neglect  in  not  burying  the  dead,  sent  letters  against  them^ 
whereby  they  signified,  that  the  care  of  interring  them  that  were 
fbuo  was  committed  to  them,  which  was  the  chief  cause  of  ail  tlit 
mischief  that  afterwards  fell  upon  the  other  officers.  For,  whereas 
they  might  before  have  easily  made  Theramenes,  and  the  rest  of  his 
party,  their  patrons  and  advocates  in  the  accusations  laid  against 
ibem,  being  men  that  were  excellent  speakers,*  and  of  great  interest, 
and  tluit  which  was  most  considerable,  were  best  acquainted  with 
everything  that  was  done  in  the  battle:  now  on  the  contrar)*,  they 
had  so  far  disobliged  them,  that  they  became  their  most  bitter  ene- 
mies and  prosecutors.  For,  when  the  letters  were  read  to  the  peo- 
pk,  they  were  presently  all  on  fire  against  Theramenes:  but  he 
having  cleared  liimself,  their  rage  was  all  turned  again  upon  the 
other  officere.  The  people  therefore  assigned  them  a  day  to  be  heard, 
end  ordered  the  forces  to  be  delivered  over  to  Cooon,  whom  they 
exempted  from  this  bill;  all  the  rest  they  commanded  l»y  an  absolute 
decree  forthwith  to  return :  among  whom  Aristegenes,  and  Proto* 
mechus,  fearing  the  rage  of  the  |)eopIe,  fled :  but  Thrasyllus,  Callia- 
dca,  Lysias,  Pericles,  and  Aristocrates,  returned  to  Atlieus,  nith  a 
great  number  of  ships,  upon  this  confidence,  that  by  the  mediatiou 
<tf  those  they  had  biought  along  with  them,  who  were  very  many, 
they  ahould  be  acquitted.  But  after  the  assembly  came  together,  the 
people  yielded  a  4uick  ear  to  the  accusations,  and  whatever  the  de- 
■saguguea  said,  it  was  well  taken;  but  when  the  accused  began  to 
apeak,  e  tumult  arose,  and  they  could  nut  be  heard  in  their  own  de* 
fcQCC.  And  besides,  tlie  relations  of  them  that  were  killed,  did  note 
little  further  tlieir  ruin;  who  came  weeping  and  wailing  into  die  se^ 
Slate,  earnestly  desiring  that  the  commanders  mi^ht  sufl'er  tur  their 
neglect,  io  not  burying  them,  who  had  valiantly  lust  their  iivc«  fur 
their  country.  At  length,  the  friends  of  the  drad,  aii<i  tiiuse  tint 
prosecuted  with  Theramenes,  (uf  whom  many  were  then  present), pre* 
irailed.  And  thereupun  the  cuaunanders  were  condemnLil  lo  die, 
amd  their  estates  to  be  cootL^cated.  Sentence  bring  thus  given,  just 
M  they  were  being  led  to  execution  by  the  lictors,  Diomedun,  one  of 
$h/tm,  AO  cxceUeat  soUlier,  aud  reputed  a  just  oiau^  and  emioeni  in 


57^  DioDORUs  SICULU9.  Book  XHt 

all  other  virtuous  qualifications,  stood  up,  and  silence  being  made 

through  the  whole  assembly,  thus  began ^Ye  men  of  AtbenSj  we 

heartily  wish  that  the  sentence  now  pronounced  against  us,  may  issue 
in  the  prosperity  and  happiness  of  this  city:  hut  since  fortune  hiS 
prevented  us  from  paying  our  vows,  niid  giving  thanks  to  the  gods 
for  the  victory,  it  is  most  just  and  fit  you  should  perform  it;  see 
therefore  that  you  do  it  to  Jove,  to  Apolln,  and  the  glorious  goddesses; 
for  by  prayers  to  them  we  have  overcome  the  enemy.  When  he  hid 
said  this,  he  was  hurried  away  with  the  rest  to  execution ;  many  of 
the  best  of  the  citizens  bemoaning  his  fate  with  tears.  For  he  wto 
now  went  to  suffer,  never  in  tlie  least  complained  of  the  hardness  ef 
his  case,  but  only  advised  his  countrymen  (who  then  acted  so  wie- 
kedly)  to  make  their  addresses  to  the  gods;  which  was  a  clear  indi- 
cation of  a  man  of  a  pious  and  generous  spirit,  little  deserving  such 
base  and  unworthy  usage.  In  short  the  eleven  commanders  were  all 
put  to  dentil  by  the  officers  appointed  by  law,  though  they  had  never 
done  the  city  the  least  injury,  but  on  the  contrary  benefited  their 
country  by  a  victory  gained  in  a  sea-fight,  the  greatest  that  was  ever 
fought  by  Grecians  against  Grecians;  and  besides  were  men  whose 
valour  had  been  remarkable  in  several  battles,  and  who  bad  had 
statues  before  erected  in  memory  of  their  victories.  The  people  were 
then  so  desperately  mad  and  enraged  by  the  orators,  beyond  all 
bounds  of  justice,  that  they  gratified  their  anger  and  revenge  opon 
men  that  were  not  only  innocent,  but  deserved  rather  honour  and 
rewards. 

But  not  long  after,  both  the  accusers  that  stirred  up  the  pcoplci 
and  the  people  themselves  who  gave  credit  to  their  criminaiionSi 
sorely  repented  of  what  was  done,  as  if  God  himself  had  taken  revenge 
of  them  for  the  fact:  for  they  that  were  so  willing  to  be  deluded  by 
these  malicious  instigations,  not  long  after  received  the  reward  of 
their  folly;  when  not  one,  but  thirty  domineering  masters  were  by 
force  set  over  them.  Then  was  Callixenus,  (he  that  gave  sentence  of 
doatli  against  the  accused),  upon  this  change  of  the  people,  charged 
as  one  that  had  deceived  them,  and  without  being  admitted  to  any 
defence,  was  committed,  and  carried  to  the  common-goal;  but  by 
the  help  of  some  friends,  breaking  through  the  walls,  he  fled  to  the 
enemy  at  Decclea;  so  that  by  the  avoiding  of  death  at  thb  time,  he 
was  pointed  at,  as  it  were,  by  the  finger,  for  his  notorious  wicfcedncsSf 
not.  only  at  Athens,  but  amongst  all  the  other  Grecians  abroad^alltbt 
days  of  his  life  after. 

These  are  almost  all  the  things  that  are  reported  to  be  done  thb 
year.  Ainonest  the  writers,  Philistus  concludes  the  first  part  of  tht 
arlairs  oi  Sicily  with  this  year,  and  with  the  taking  of  Agr^geatamj 


DIODORUS  SICULU9.  573 

ling,  ia  teteo  Yoluines,  the  hiscory  of  above  eight  buodicd 
He  begins  the  other  part  where  the  former  ended,  and  pro- 
io  his  relaiioos  cobtaioed  in  four  books.  About  this  time  died 
Sophocles  die  tragedian,  the  son  of  Theophihu,  ninety  years  of  age. 
Be  gained  eighteen  Tictories  upon  the  stage.  It  is  reported  of  him, 
when  he  acted  his  last  tragedy,  and  came  off  conqueror,  be  Cell 
•o  violent  a  laughter,  that  he  fell  down  dead.  Apoliodonis,  a 
witer  of  chronicles,  reports  that  Euripides  likewise  died  this  year. 
BoC  others  rehite,  that  being  enteruined  with  Archelans,  king  of 
Ifaeedonia,  once  walking  abroad  into  the  fields,  some  dogs  met  him, 
hf  whom  he  was  torn  in  pieces,  and  so  miserably  perished^  a  litdt 
btfiare  this  year. 


CHAP.  XV. 

fmaJe  sole  ndmiral  of  the  LaceAamottiam  JUeL  JXr 
teAet  Canummm.  The  ruin  of  the  Aihauan  fleei  ai  JEgm 
Poiamos.  Aihau  taken  by  Lysander.  77^  end  of  the  Pelo^ 
war. 


THE  year  next  before  being  ended,  Alexias  was  made  archon  of 
Athens  this  year,  and  at  Rome  three  military  tribunes  again  executed 
the  pboes  of  consuls,  Caius  Julius,  Publius  Cornelius,  and  Caius 
Serrilius.  During  their  ma^^tracy,  after  the  commanders  were  put 
to  death,  the  Atlienians  made  Philocles  general  of  the  army;  and 
Mifering  the  fleet  to  him,  sent  him  away  to  Conon,  commissioning 
with  a  joint  power,  in  the  management  of  the  war.  When  ht 
to  Cotioo  at  Samos,  he  manned  all  the  ships,  to  the  number  of  a 
jMsndied  and  serenty-three.  Twe:iiy  of  these  be  left  there,  and  with 
the  rest  he  and  Conon  set  sail  for  the  Hellespont. 

Lyaander,  in  the  mean  time,  high  admiral  of  the  Lacethamooiaa 
fleet,  with  thirty-five  sail,  which  he  had  got  together  from  Pelopon- 
■esiM,  and  their  confederates  next  adjoining,  passed  over  to  Ephesus, 
and  fitted  out  a  fleet,  which  he  sent  for  from  Chios.  Then  he  goes- 
to  Cyrus,  the  son  of  Darius,  and  receiveri  from  him  a  great  sum  of 
money,  for  payment  of  the  army.  Cyrus  betiig  sent  for  by  his  father 
into  Persia,  intrusts  the  management  of  the  aflhirs  of  his  provinces 
to  Lysander,  and  commao  s  all  the  tri^iute  to  be  paid  to  him:  who 
Lciog  now  fully  sjpplied  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  war^  returns 


574  DiODORUs  sicuLUs.  Sook  XtlL 

toEpliesus.  At  this  time  some  in  Miletus,  that  favoured  an  olir 
garchy,  by  the  help  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  abolished  the  deoiocricj. 
And  to  that  end,  in  the  beginning  of  the  sedition,  when  theDiooyiiaB 
festivals  were  celebrated,  forty  that  were  the  greatest  enemies  agaiiiit 
their  faction,  were  surprised  in  their  houses,  and  mnrdered.  Afker« 
wards,  observing  their  opportunity,  when  the  forum  was  full  of  people 
they  cut  off  the  heads  of  three  hundred  of  the  richest  of  the  citiieBB. 
In  the  mean  time  above  one  thousand  of  the  moat  consideruble  per* 
sons  of  quality,  who  were  for  the  democracy,  afraid  of  the  present 
imminent  danger,  fled  to  Pharnabuzus,  the  Persian  lord-lieutenMity 
who  received  them  very  courteously,  and  bestowed  upon  every  one 
a  stater  of  gold,  and  ordered  Clauda,  a  castle  of  Claudia^  for  their 
residence. 

Lysandcr,  with  a  great  navy,  making  for  Thasos*,  a  city  of  Caria, 
in  league  with  the  Athenians,  takes  it  by  storm,  and  puts  all  the  men^ 
to  the  number  of  eight  hundred,  to  the  sword,  and  sold  all  the  women 
and  children  for  slaves,  and  razed  the  city  to  the  ground.  After  this 
he  sailed  to  Attica,  and  many  other  places,  but  did  nothing  memo- 
rable; therefore  we  have  nothing  to  write  further  concerning  these 
matters.  The  sum  of  all  is,  having  taken  Lampsacus,  he  dismisMd 
the  Athenian  garrison  there,  and  sent  them  home;  and  after  he  had 
plundered  the  city,  restored  it  to  the  inhabitants. 

The  Athenian  admirals  having  intelligence  that  the  LacedaBmooians 
had  besieged  Lampsacus  with  all  their  forces,  got  together  all  their 
fleet  from  every  place,  and  with  all  speed  made  for  lAmpsacus^  with 
a  hundred  and  fourscore  sail ;  but  hearing  that  it  was  taken,  thcf 
anchored  at  iEgos  Potamos,  and  there  lay.    Not  long  after,  thcj 
weighed  anchor,  and  made  out  against  the  enemy,  and  dared  them 
every  day  to  a  battle ;  but  when  the  Peloponnesians  would  not  atir, 
the  Athenians  began  to  consider  what  was  best  to  be  done,  tar  that 
they  could  not  stay  long  there  with  the  fleet.     Hereupon  Alcibiades 
came  to  them,  and  assured  them  that  Medocus  and  Seuthes,  kings  of 
the  Thracians,  who  were  his  special  friends,  had  offered  him  a  great 
army  if  he  would  fight  against  the  Lacedssmonians ;  and  therefore  if 
he  might  have  some  share  in  the  command,  he  engaged  eidier  to  fiirce 
the  L^cedsemonians  to  fight  at  sea,  or  to  fight  them  at  land,  by  aa 
army  out  of  Thrace.    This  Alcibiades  did  to  evince  how  great  lias 
desire  was  to  procure  some  eminent  advantage  to  his  country,  and  hy 
fresh  service  to  regain  their  former  good  opinion  of  him.     But  the 
Athenian  commanders  concluded,  that  if  matters  fell  out  ill,  all  the 


*  Thi»  it  said  to  be  mifCaken  for  Cararoium,  a  baj  in  Caria ;  for  ibat  Thaaoc  it  an  ii 
and  lies  far  off,  and  was  taken  some  time  after.     Usb.  Ana.  160.    J£auL  Ffokat  in  ths 
Life  of  Lyiandct. 


XWi  DIODORUS  8TCULUS.  575 

Usme  frould  be  laid  upon  them ;  and  if  well,  Alcibiades  vould  reap 
all  the  honour  of  the  victory.  Tliercfore  they  ordered  him  to  with« 
dmWf  and  not  to  come  near  the  army  for  the  future. 

The  enemy  still  avoiding  a  fight,  and  provision  growing  tcarcc  io 
tk  army,  Philocles,  who  commanded  that  day,  ordered  the  rest  of 
the  oficers  of  the  fleet  to  ship  their  men,  and  follow  him,  wlio  having 
thirty  ail  in  readiness,  forthwith  loosed  out  of  the  hurbour.  Lysan« 
der  having  intelligence  of  this  by  some  deserters,  makes  out  to  sea 
with  his  whole  navy,  puts  Philocles  to  flight,  and  sails  up  to  the  rest 
af  the  Athenian  fleet.  Hereupon  the  Athenians  which  lay  there  (in 
Rgard  they  had  but  few  of  their  men  on  board)  were  all  io  a  great 
consternation,  through  the  unexpected  approach  of  the  enemy* 
Ly«inder,  therefore,  understanding  the  confusion  and  disorder  of  bit 
caeiny*s  fleet,  commanded  Eteonicus  on  shore  with  the  land-army^ 
who  forthwith  being  now  landed,  judged  it  highly  necessary  to  im« 
ptDve  the  present  opportunity,  and  therefore  suddenly  forces  into 
pan  of  the  enemy's  camp;  and  Lysander  himself  coming  up  with  all 
Ilia  fleet,  well  manned  and  provided,  hauled  as  many  of  the  Atheniaa 
rls  as  there  were  in  the  liarl>our,  uiih  grappling-irons,  to  tha 
Upon  this  the  Athenians  were  so  amazed,  and  struck  with 

:h  a  sudden  astonishment,  (not  having  time  either  to  make  out  to 
with  their  ships,  or  to  form  tbem^lves  into  a  body  at  laiMl),  ao 
that  after  a  short  resistance  they  turned  their  backs:  hereupon  some 
fonook  their  ships,  others  fled  out  of  the  camp;  every  one  seeking 
where  he  could  l>est  preserve  himself.  Scarce  ten  of  all  the  com* 
vaaders  and  officers  of  the  fleet  escaped ;  amongst  whom  was  Conon, 
who  not  daring  to  return  to  Athens,  out  of  fear  of  the  people,  fled  to 
Evagoras,  prince  of  Cyprus,  his  special  good  friend.  Many  of  the 
aoidiers  fled  by  land  to  Sestos.  Lysander  possessed  himself  of  all 
tfche  rest  of  the  fleet,  and  took  Philocles,  one  of  the  generals,  priaoner^ 
aad  carried  him  to  Lampsacus,  where  he  put  him  to  death.  Then 
he  commanded  messengers  to  Lacediennon,  to  carry  the  news  of  the 
victory ;  and  ordered  one  of  tlie  best  of  the  gallies  to  transport  theoiy 
magnificently  adorning  it  with  the  arms  and  spoils  taken  from  the 
enemy. 

Next  he  marched  with  his  whole  army  to  Sestos,  in  pursuit  of  those 
that  fled  thither,  took  the  city,  and  dismissed  the  Athenians  upon 
terms.  From  thence  he  sailed  with  all  speed  to  Samos,  and  forthwith 
prepares  to  besiege  the  city ;  but  sent  away  Gyltppus  (he  who  so 
eminently  assisted  the  Syracusans  at  sea)  to  Sparta,  with  fifteen 
hundred  talents  of  silver,  besides  the  spoils.  The  money  was  made 
np  io  little  bags,  and  to  every  bag  was  fixed  a  sc}'tale,  upon  which 
was  written  the  sum  of  money  therein  conuined.    Gylippua  beinf 


67^  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  BotA  XIZK 

ignorant  of  what  was  done,  unties  the  bagSj  and  takes  out  three  him« 
dred  talents;  but  his  theft  being  discovered  to  the  ephori,  by  the 
scytales,  he  fled^  and  thereupon  was  condemned  to  die.  ClearcbnSy 
the  father  of  Gylippus^  in  former  timcSj  for  his  having  received  money 
of  Pericles  not  to  invade  Attica,  likewise  fled,  and  was  adjudged  to 
die,  and  lived  all  his  days  a  banished  man,  among  the  Thuriaos  in 
Italy.  These  two  men,  who  were  otherwise  virtuous,  yet  by  these 
sordid  acts  stained  and  blemished  all  the  worthy  actions  of  the  rest 
of  tiieir  lives. 

When  the  Athenians  were  fully  satisfied  that  they  were  totally 
ruined,  they  determined  to  strive  no  longer  to  be  masters  at  sea,  bat 
now  employed  all  their  care  to  repair  their  walls,  and  Allocked  up  the 
haven,  expecting  nothing  more  certain  than  a  siege,  which  happeaed 
accordingly;  for  presently  both  Agis  and  Pausanias,  the  Lacedsmo- 
sian  generals,  broke  into  Attica  with  great  forces,  and  eocamped 
under  the  very  walls  of  Athens:  and  Lysander entered  the  Phsus 
with  above  two  hundred  sail.    The  Athenians,  though  they  were 
pressed  on  every  side  with  so  many  mischiefs,  yet  stood  out,  and 
easily  defended  the  city  for  some  time.    But  the  Peloponuesiaus  re- 
solved in  council,  in  regard  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  force  the 
place,  to  withdraw  their  forces  out  of  Attica,  and  by  their  navy  to 
hinder  all  provision  from  being  brought  into  the  city;  which  beiqg 
put  in  execution,  the  Athenians  were  reduced  to  extreme  want  of 
all  things,  csj^ecially  of  food,  which  was  used  to  be  imported  to  them 
by  sea. 

Want  pressing  upon  them  every  day  more  find  more,  the  city 
filled  with  the  dead;  upon  which  those  that  survived  sent  forth 
bassadors,  and  procured  the  terms  and  conditions  following;  viz.*. 
That  the  long  fortifications  of  the  Piraeus,  and  their  walls,  sImmiM  be 
demolished;  that  they  should  never  have  above  ten  long  ships;  that 
lliey  should  leave  all  the  cities,  and  be  subject  to  the  Laced«aioniaiiSi 
And  thus  ended  the  Peloponnesian  war,  after  it  had  continued  aeven^ 
and-twenty  years;  a  war  of  the  longest  duration  of  any  ooiue  tq  oar 
knowledge. 


Cahp.  XFI.  DIODORUS  SICULU9.  577 


CHAP.  XVI. 

J^figatum  Mcked  by  jimilcar  the  Carthaginian.  The  Cariha* 
gmkau  bmegt  Oela.  Dianf^sius  goes  to  the  aid  of  Gela.  The 
ekinmshee  before  Gela.  Camarina  deserted  by  the  order  of 
2Kony$ius»  The  soldiers  enraged  at  Dionysius;  he  hastens  to 
Syracuse,  jtmilcar  makes  peace  with  Dionysius^  and  returns 
to  Carthage.  The  end  of  the  first  Carthaginian  war  against 
Diastymus. 

A  LITTLE  while  after  Darius*  king  of  Asia  died,  having  reigned 
Bineteeo  yean;  Artaxerxesf  his  eldest  son  succeeded  him  in  the 
Ungdom,  and  reigned  forty-three  yeare.  About  this  time  Apollt« 
donis  the  Athenian  reports  that  Antimachus  the  poet  fl«>arishcd. 
Amilcar  the  Carthaginian  general,  at  the  return  of  the  spring  sacked 
the  city  of  Agrigentum  in  Sicily,  and  carried  away  the  carved  work, 
mad  richest  furniture,  out  of  all  tliose  temples  that  were  not  utterly 
comomed  by  the  fire.  From  hence  he  made  an  inroad  with  his  whole 
army  into  the  country  of  Geia;  from  whence,  and  from  the  Camari« 
(having  made  great  devastations),  he  filled  his  camp  with  all 
of  plunder.  Then  marching  for  Gcia,  he  encamped  at  a  ri%'cr 
of  the  sanne  name.  Tiiere  was  a  brazen  statue  of  Apollo  of  a  woo« 
derfiil  bigness  at  Gela,  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city,  which  the  Cartiia* 
giaiana  Cook  and  sent  away  to  Tyre.  The  Gelians  had  dedicated  it 
by  the  command  of  the  oracle  of  Apollo.  But  the  Tyrians  some  tmie 
afker^  when  they  were  besieged  by  Alexander  the  Macedonian,  re- 
the  image,  as  if  it  sided  with  the  enemy.  But  aft<>r  tliat 
had  taken  the  city,  the  very  same  day  of  the  week,  and  the 
wry  boor  (as  Timaeus  reports)  that  the  Carihaginians  ct>mmitted 
the  Mcrilege  against  Apollo  at  Gehi,  the  Grecians  honoured  the  i^ud 
with  BMiBy  magnificent  gifts  and  costly  sacrifices,  as  he  by  whu^ 
belp  they  had  won  the  city.  Though  these  things  happened  in  i  n ncs 
Cir  distant  one  from  another,  yet  btfcause  the  thing  was  very  it  mark* 
able,  I  thoagbt  it  no  digression  to  compare  one  event  wim  liie  utner 
ia  this  place. 

The  Carthaginians,  when  they  Iwd  cut  down  all  the  trees  about 
Gela,  fortified  themselves  by  a  wall  and  deep  trench  drawn  ro.nd 
their  eamp;  for  they  eajiccted  that  Dionysius  would  come  to  the  aid 

*  Dariua  Nulh««,  who  ordtrrd  i)-c  rrbbildmg  oi  ibc  \tn»p-r, 
*  Aftucn«i  Ma«ttoa»  la  wb«t«  iwcoMia  j««r  NebcMwa  cmm  w  J<miit« 

Vou  1.  No.  39. 


578  DldDoftus  sicULUS.  JBMfc  JOBL 

of  the  besieged  with  a  great  army.  They  of  Gela  had  «t  the  begia«e 
niug  of  the  siege,  to  avoid  danger,  determined  to  send  away  their 
wives  and  children  to  Syracuse;  but  when  the  women  all  ran  toge- 
ther to  the  altars  in  the  forum,  earnestly  praying  that  they  aiight  un« 
dergo  the  same  fate  with  their  husbands,  they  were  suflcred  to  stay* 
After  this  the  soldiers  in  the  town,  dividing  themselves  into  sevoal 
squadrons,  sent  out  part  abroad,  who,  being  well  acquainted  with  all 
the  ways  and  passages,  fell  upon  the  enemy  that  were  straggliog  liere 
and  there,  and  not  only  brought  in  prisoners  every  day,  but  kiUed 
many:  and  when  the  Carthaginians  had  battered  down  part  of  the 
walls  with  their  rams,  the  besieged  stoutly  defended  them,  and  what 
was  beaten  down  in  the  day,  both  women  and  children  joined  with 
the  rest  and  repaired  in  the  night :  for  they  that  were  young  and  ahle 
were  continually  in  arms,  and  engaged  with  the  enemy;  the  rest 
were  diligently  employed  in  working,  and  other  necessary  serriceSi 
To  conclude,  they  bore  the  brunt  with  that  valour  and  resolntioa 
that,  though  their  city  was  unfortified,  and  they  receiyed  no  aid  finm 
their  confederates,  and  their  walls  were  broken  down  in  manyplaceSf 
yet  fear  did  not  at  all  abate  their  courage* 

In  the  mean  time  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  sent  for  the  Gre-' 
cian  succours  in  Italy,  and  aids  from  his  confederates,  and  employed 
every  one  almost  that  was  able  to  bear  arms  in  Syracuse,  and  j<Mncd 
the  army  of  the  mercenaries  with  the  rest.  The  wliole  amounted  net 
to  above  fifty  (us  some  report)  but  (as  Timeeus  relates)  not  above 
thirty  thousand  foot,  and  a  thousand  horse,  with  fifty  sail  of  ships. 
With  these  forces  he  hastens  to  the  aid  of  Gela.  When  he  arrived 
at  the  city,  he  encamped  near  the  sea:  this  he  did  that  his  fercet 
might  not  be  divided,  btit  might  fall  upon  the  enemy  both  by  sea  and 
land  at  once;  for,  by  skirmishing  with  his  light-armed  men,  he  pre« 
vented  their  foraging;  and  by  his  horse,  and  the  help  of  his  shippiagi 
he  endeavoured  to  intercept  all  provisions  that  should  be  brot^ht  to 
the  Carthaginians  from  any  part  of  their  dominions.  However,  he 
effected  nothing,  after  he  had  continued  there  twenty  days.  'After 
this,  he  divided  his  foot  into  three  bodies:  one  he  delivered  iniD  the 
hands  of  the  Sicilians,  with  a  command  that,  liaving  the  ehy  on  die 
left,  they  should  fall  upon  the  trenches  and  fortifications  of  the  etie* 
my;  another  body,  made  up  of  succours  from  the  confiedieratdiy  ho 
ordered  should  leave  the  city  on  the  right,  and  march  to  the  shore. 
I  le  liimself,  with  the  mercenaries,  designed  to  pass  throdgh  the  eity, 
10  the  place  where  the  Carthaginian  engines  were  placed,  and  oen^ 
inanded  the  horse,  that  as  soon  as  a  sign  was  given  by  the  foot,  tlMy 
^hou1(l  pass  the  river,-  and  disperse  themselves  over  the  fields;  and  if 
they  discerned  that  their  own  party  prevailed,  they  should  join  thdu. 


Chap.  Xf%  DIODOIIU8  MCVLm.  ^79 

stmimaammBmmmmmmaBa^aiaamBaKs^BstssmmmBSMtmBaaaasaBesamsssaBmamm 

«Md  if  .w<icited»  jiiioald  snccuur  them.  He  ^ounaDded^likewisC)  the 
officers  uCthe  fleet,  that  as  soon  as  the  Italian  bands  came  up,  thej 
should  sail  near  to  the  enemy's  camp.  While  every  one  was  cxe- 
cutihg  the  orders  given  him  in  charge,  the  Carthaginians  opposed  the 
enemy's  landing,  and  made  it  their  business  to  defend  that  part  of 
their  camp  towards  the  shore,  where  it  was  not  fortified.  At  the  very 
same  instant  the  Italians,  coming  in  near  the  shore,  set  upon  the 
Carthaginian  camp,  and  there  intercepted  many  that  had  issued  out 
to  prevent  the  landing:  and  when  they  had  put  them  to  flight  that 
were  left  to  guard  that  part,  they  assaulted  the  whole  camp;  upon 
which  the  Carthaginians  with  the  greatest  part  of  their  army  (now 
returned)  hotly  engaged  them,  and  with  much  ado  drove  them  back 
beyond  the  trenches,  which  they  had  gained,  and  passed.  The  Ita- 
lians, being  overpowered  with  the  multitude  of  the  barbarians,  were 
forced  to  retreat,  and  fell  into  a  strait  and  narrow  pass  within  the 
lines,  none  of  their  fellows  advancing  to  support  them;  for  the  Si* 
cull,  who  were  far  ofi^,  came  not  up  in  convenient  time,  and  Diony- 
sius's  mercenaries,  because  they  could  not  march  swift  euough 
through  the  streets  of  the  city,  could  not  succour  them.  Indeed  the 
Gelians  for  a  little  way  made  a  sally  to  relieve  the  Italians,  but,  fear- 
ing the  wall^  would  be  left  naked,  they  halted  and  returned:  sathat 
the  Iberians  and  Campanians,  with  the  Carthaginian  auxiliaries,  fell 
yery  sharply  upon  the  Greeks  of  Italy,  and  killed  above  a  thousand 
of  them ;  but  the  pursuers  being  driven  back  by  darts  and  other  shot 
from  the  ships,  the  rest  came  safe  into  the  town.  In  the  mean  time 
the  Sicuii,  being  engaged  with  the  Carthaginians  in  another  part, 
killed  many  of  them,  and  pursued  the  rest  up  to  their  very  camp. 
But  both  the  Iberians,  Campanians,  and  Carthaginians  coming  to 
the  aid  of  the  Africans,  the  Sicuii,  having  lost  six  hundred  men,  re- 
turned into  the  city.  The  horse,  likewise,  when  they  saw  all  was 
lost,  made  to  the  city,  especially  for  that  the  enemy  was  pressing 
upon  them  on  every  side.  Dionysius,  having  passed  through  the 
city  with  his  mercenaries  with  great  difficulty,  when  he  understood 
that  his  army  was  broken,  marched  back,  and  sheltered  himself  within 
the  wails  of  the  town:  then  calling  a  senate  of  thuse  that  were 
friends,  they  consulted  concerning  the  present  state  of  the  war; 
where  it  was  concluded  by  aH,  that  (because  the  enemy  was  go 
strong)  it  was  not  now  the  time  to  put  all  to  hazard.  Dionysius 
therefore  sent  forth  a  trumpet  in  the  evening,  to  gain  a  cessation  of 
arms  for  the  burying  of  the  dead  till  the  next  day.  Tiien,  about  the 
first  watch  of  the  night,  he  sent  a  multitude  of  people  out  of  the 
town,  and  he  himself  about  midnight  marched  forth  with  the  army, 
leaving  behind  him  two  thousand  light-armed  men,  commaoding 


580  DTODORUS  8YCULUS.  Bmk  XtH. 

them  to  make  fires  all  the  night  )ong»  and  set  up  contioml  ahoulSy 
tliat  the  enemy  miglit  believe  that  the  whole  army  was  stiH  ia  the 
town;  but  as  soon  as  it  began  to  be  light)  those  left  behind  widia 
swift  inarch  followed  Dionysius's  army.  When  the  Carthaginians 
undc*rst(M)d  the  cheat,  they  led  the  army  into  the  city^  and  made  a 
prey  uf  whatever  was  left  in  the  houses. 

When  Dionysius  came  to  Camarinaj  he  caused  all  the  cttiienSf 
with  their  wives  and  children^  to  remove  to  Syracuse;  and  because 
fear  would  not  admit  of  any  delay,  some  carried  what  gold  and  silver 
they  were  able,  others,  with  their  parents  and  little  children^  hastened 
away,  without  the  least  regard  to  their  estates.  Some  who  were  old 
and  sick,  were  left  behind  by  their  friends  and  relations,  every  one 
thinking  that  tlie  Carthaginians  were  at  his  heels:  for  the  late  ruin 
and  destruction  of  Selinus,  Himera,  and  Agrigentum,  struck  all  with 
sucli  ti  terror,  and  filled  every  one  with  such  an  apprehensiiin  of  the 
beastly  cruelty  of  the  barlmrians,  as  if  it  had  been  then  present  befbre 
their  eyes;  for  they  put  all  the  captives  to  the  sword,  shewing  no 
compassion  to  any:  .some  they  crucified,  and  others  they  tormented 
with  intoleral)le  scoffs  and  reproaches.  The  soldiers  of  Diooysias 
seeing:  men,  women,  and  children  driven  in  droves  from  two  several 
cities  in  one  and  the  same  country,  were  much  incensed,^ pitying  the 
sad  condition  of  the  miserable  people:  for^  when  they  saw  young 
gentlemen  and  ladieii  in  marriageable  estate,  unbecoming  their  rank 
and  aj|;e,  tumultuously  and  regardlessly  to  be  driven,  led^and  dragged 
in  droves  through  the  high- ways,  the  time  not  allowing  any  regard  or 
respect  either  iu  old  and  grave  men,  or  young  and  tender  women^ 
they  were  not  a  little  affected:  and  especially  it  greatly  grieved  them 
to  see  decrepid  old  people  forced,  beyond  the  strength  of  nature,  to 
go  as  fast  as  those  that  were  young.  These  were  the  things  that  in- 
flamed the  soldiers  with  rage  against  Dionysius;  for  they  suspected 
that  he  did  this  on  purpose  that  he  might  gain  the  sovereignty  over 
the  rest  of  the  cities,  through  their  fear  of  the  Carthaginians:  fcr 
they  muttered  among  themselves,  how  small  a  time  he  gave  his  as« 
sistance;  that  none  of  his  mercenary  soldiers  were  killed;  that  he 
fled  so  hastily  when  he  had  suflered  so  little  loss,  and  especially  when 
no  enemy  pursued.  Therefore,  all  those  who  had  long  wished  fiw  an 
opportunity  to  revolt,  now  did  their  utmost  to  shake  off  the  joke  of 
his  tyranny,  prompted  thereunto,  as  it  were,  by  the  instinct  of  adi* 
vine  providence.  So  that  all  the  Italians  forthwith  left  his  camp^ 
and  marched  homewards  through  the  heart  of  the  country.  The 
Syracusan  horsemen  likewise  watched  for  an  opportunity  how  thcv 
might  readily  kill  the  tyrant  on  the  road:  but^ observing  the  meiee* 
oaries  constantly  to  attt^nd  close  to  his  person  (uoaniiuottsly  with 


Chap.  XFT.  DioDORUS  acvhvs.  58 1 


s 


consent)  they  set  spars  to  their  horses,  mi  rode  away  to  Syracuse, 
where  they  entered' into  the  arsenal  without  any  opposition,  the 
guard  heing  altogether  ignorant  of  what  was  done  at  Gela.  Upon  ^ 
their  coming  there,  they  fortliwith  rifled  Dionysius's  palace,  and  car- 
ried away  all  his  gold,  silver,  and  rich  furniture  out  of  his  house,  and 
most  cruelly  and  filthily  abused  his  wife,  to  vex  and  molest  the  tyrant 
the  more,  and  that  this  sort  of  revenge  might  be  a  clear  evidence  to 
b!m  of  the  conspiracy  against  him;  * 

Dionysius  suspecting  upon  his  march  what  was  done,  hastens  to 
the  city  with  all  the  horse  and  foot  he  could  confide  in,  with  all  po8« 
tible  speed;  for  h^  concluded  he  had  no  better  course  to  take  to  dis* 
appoint  the  horsemen  that  were  gone,  than  to  prevent  all  intelli* 
gence,  judging  his  design  would  be  more  easily  accomplished  if  he 
were  sooner  at  Syracuse  than  they  could  believe;  which  happened  ' 
mccordingly:  for  the  horsemen  thought  that  Dionysius  durst  neither 
stay  with,  nor  be  far  from,  his  army.    And  therefore  now,  as  confi- 
dent that  they  had  gained  their  purpose,  they  noised  abroad  that 
Dionysius  pretended  to  fly  from  Gela  for  fear  of  the  Carthaginians, 
but  in  truth  he  fled  from  the  Syracusans.     In  the  mean  time  Diony« 
sius  having  marched  witliout  stopping  almost  four  hundred  furlongs^ 
came  aboutk  midnight  to  the  gates  of  Acradina,  with  one  hundred 
horse,  and  five  hundred  foot,  and  finding  them  shut  against  him^ 
caused  reeds  there  ready  gathered  out  of  the  fens  (with  which  the 
Syracusans  used  to  burn  lime)  to  he  put  to  the  gates:  while  the  gates 
were  on  fire,  those  that  marched  slower  came  up  to  him;  and  whea 
they  were  burnt  down,  he  forthwith  entered  through  Acradina  with 
all  the  forces  with  him.     Upon  which  those  horeemen  (who  were 
very  few)  tliat  were  of  the  noblest  birth  and  greatest  wealth  (without 
staying  for  the  people's  iiel)))  got  together  iu  the  market-place  to 
oppose  the  enemy;  but  were  presently  surrounded  with  the  merce- 
naries, and  every  man  killed  with  darts  and  pikes*     Th^n  Dionysius, 
scouring  the  streets  of  the  city,  put  all  to  the  sword  he  met  that  were 
running  here  and  there  to  aid  their  fellows;  and  not  only  so,  but  en- 
tered likewise  into  the  houses  of  those  he  took  to  be  his  enemies,  of 
whom  he  cut  the  throats  of  some,  and  banished  others.    The  rest 
of  the  horsemen  escaped  out  of  the  walls  to  that  part  of  the  city  called 
Acradina.     About  break  of  day  the  next  morning,  all  the  rest  of  the 
mercenaries,  and  the  whole  Sicilian  army,  came  to  Syracuse;  but 
the  Gelians  and  Camarinians,  incensed  against  Dionysius,  turned  off 
to  Leontium. 

Amilcar  at  length,  forced  by  the  circumstances  of  his  affairs, 
sends  a  herald  to  Syracuse,  to  offer  terms  of  peace  to  the  conquered: 
thb  was  very  acceptable  news  to  Dtonysius,''and  thereupon  peace 


589  DIODORUS  81CULU8.  JBookXIIL 


nm 


was  made  upou  these  conditioD8.«.That9  besides  the  antieDt  coloiiicsy 
the  SicaDiaiis^SelinuntineSyAgrigentines,  and  the -HiineriaiiSy  should 
be  under  the  power  of  the  CartbaginiaDS :  that  they  of  Gda  mad  Ca« 
marina  should  be  suffered  to  inhabit  in  their  own  citiesi  yet  without 
walls,  and  be  tributary  for  the  future  to  the  Carthaginians;  that  the 
Lieoutines,  Messanians^  and  all  the  Sicilians,  should  be  free^  and  en- 
joy all  their  own  laws  and  liberties,  save  that  the  Syracoaans  should 
be  subject  to  Dionysius.  When  all  these  articles  were  ratified^  the 
drtliaginians  passed  over  to  Libya,  after  they  had  lost  above  one 
balf  of  their  army  by  the  plague,  which  afterwards  raging  through 
Libya,  multitudes  perished  both  of  the  Carthaginians  and  their  con- 
federates. 

And  now  we  are  come  to  the  end  of  the  wars;  of  the  Pelopoone- 
sian  war  in  Greece,  and  of  the  first  Carthaginian  war  with  Dionyaiua 
in  Sicily :  and  so,  having  finished  what  we  hitherto  designed,  we  shall 
treat  in  the  next  book  of  those  afiKiirs  that  fell  out  afterwards^ 


58S 


DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


91 


BOOK  XIV. 

ssssBSmssssssmssssasstseassss 


PREFACE. 

IT  is  common  and  natural  for  every  man  to  be  touched  to  tTie  quick, 
to  hear  himself  evil  spoken  of.  For  even  they  that  are  so  notmri- 
ously  wicked  that  they  cannot  escape  reproaches,  yet,  if  they  be  tol J 
of  their  faults,  are  presently  in  a  rage,  and  do  all  they  can  to  pal* 
liate  and  cover  their  crimes  with  fine-spun  excuses.  Every  one 
therefore  ought  to  be  very  careful  to  avoid  the  doing  of  that  which 
is  of  bad  report,  especially  those  that  are  in  high'^ace  and  power, 
and  advanced  above  others  in  dignity*  For  their  actions^  by  reason 
of  their  eminency  in  the  world,  being  more  conspicuous  than  others, 
their  faults  and  miscarriages  likewise  are  more  obvious.  Therefore, 
let  none  in  such  places  of  power  and  authority,  think  to  avoid  cen- 
sures and  reproaches,  if  they  are  corrupt  and  unjust  in  their  admi- 
nistration. For  should  they  escape  infamy  and  disgrace  during  their 
lives,  yet  let  them  be  assured,  that  after  tiin.e9  will  publish  that  truth 
(to  the  stain  of  their  memory)  which  was  stifled  and  smothered  some 
time  before.  Let  this  therefore  startle  wicked  men  to  consider,  that 
they  leave  behind  them  an  ugly  representation  of  themselves,  to  the 
view  of  posterity  for  ever. 

For  though  those  things  that  follow  after  death  do  nothing  at  alt 
concern  us,  (as  some  philosophers  have  spread  abroad  among  the 
common  people) ,  yet  a  wicked  course  of  life  is  far  the  worse,  inas- 
much as  the  remembrance  of  it  is  hateful  to  all  posterity.  Of  which 
truths  he  who  seriously  considers  things  related  in  this  book,  may  find 
ready  at  hand  most  clear  and  evident  examples.  For  the  thirty  ty- 
rants of  Athens,  who  by  their  covetousness  and  ambition  involved 
their  country  in  dreadful  calamities,  thereby,  in  a  short  time,  not  only 


584  DIODORCrS  SICULUS.  SookXtF*^ 


lost  their  authority,  hut  left  behind  them  an  immortal  stain  and  &• 

• 

honour  to  their  names.  And  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  bad  nn- 
doubtedly  gained  the  sovereignty  of  all  Ghreece,  lost  what  ttbey  had 
gainedjwhen  they  began  to  oppress  their  associates  and  confedenta.. 
For  the  thrones  of  princes  are  supported  by  justice  and  mercy,  faoi 
are  overturned  by  cruelty  and  oppression  of  their  subjects.  As  ws 
may  see  in  the  example  of  Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Syractue,  who, 
though  he  had  the  smiles  of  fortune  above  all  the  other  princes  before 
him^  yet  plots  were  formed  to  entrap  him  all  his  life  long;  so  that  for 
fear  of  being  assassinated,  he  was  necessitated  to  wear  an  iron  breast* 
plate  upon  his  coftt,  and  after  his  death,  became  an  instance  and  es- 
ample  of  the  people's  hatred  to  all  succeeding  generations.  Bat  «t 
shall  speak  of  these  things  in  their  proper  places. 

And  now  we  come  to  those  afiiiirs  that  have  a  coherence  with  fhem 
before  related,  only  distinguished  by  diflerence  of  times.  For  ift 
the  foregoing  books  we  have  treated  of  things  that  were  done  from 
the  sacking  of  Troy,  to  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  and  the 
Athenian  dynasty;  which  comprehends  the  space  of  seven  hundjed 
and  seventy-nine  years.  In  this  we  shall  add  what  next  follows  ii 
order,  and  begin  with  the  thirty  tyrants  of  Athens,  and  from  thcnee 
down  to  the  taking  of  Rome  by  the  Gauls,  wherein  is  contained  the 
history  of  eighteen  years. 


CHAP.  1. 

A  peace  between  the  Athenians  and  Laced^emonkau.  Tkt  AAe^ 
nians  disagree  about  the  manner  of  their  government.  Tke  g^^ 
vernment  by  thirty.  The  cruelty  of  the  thirty  tyranUj  emdeaf§» 
daily  towards  Theramenes. 

BY  the  dissolution  of  the  government  at  Athens,  (which  happened 
the  seven  hundred  and  eightieth  year  current  from  the  destruction  of 
Troy),  the  city  was  involved  in  an  anarchy;  at  that  time  wcrefpor 
military  tribunes  appointed  at  Rome  to  execute  the  consular  diguity« 
Caius  Furius,  Coins  Servilius,  Caius  Valerius,  and  Nomodus  FabiHik 


And  the  ninety-fourth  olympiad  .WMoelelHBted  this,  year^  in  which 
Cocy  nas  of  Larissa  was  victor*  A  bout  thip  limCy  the  A  iheoiaQS  (tlieir 
power  being  broken)  obtained  a  peace  with  the.UKsediraipniaos,  and 
liberty  to  govern  according  to  their  own  law^i  upon  condition  they 
demolished  their  walls^  which  they  pplled  down  accordingly,  but  could 
hot  agree  among  themselves  about  the  form  of  their  government* 
For  they  that  were  for  an  oligarchy,  gave  their  votes  for  the  restoring 
that  antient  government.  But  the  greatest  part  who  stood  up  for 
the  democracy,  preferred  the  government  by  the  senators,  declaring 
that  to  be  the  truest  democracy. 

When  this  banding  one  against  another  had  continued  some  days, 
they  for  the  oligarchy  sent  to  Lysander  the  Spartan,  hoping  therebjf 
to  gain  the  point,  in  regard  he  was  ordered  (now  the  war  was  at  an 
end)  to  settle  the  government  of  the  cities;  and  in  every  place  he  set 
up  an  oligarchy.  To  this  end  they  sailed  to  him  at  Samos,  whera 
he  then  was,  having  lately  taken  the  city*  When  they  arrived,  and 
had  craved  his  assistance^  he  promised  them  his  aidi  and  thercupoa 
(after  he  had  made  Thorax  governor  of  Samos)  passed  over  to  Hm 
Pirseus  with  an  hundred  sail.  Then  calling  a  general  assembly,  hi 
advised  them  to  choose  thirty  men,  who  should  govern  the  com-* 
monwealth,  and  manage  all  the  aflkirs  of  the  city.  Theramenes  op« 
posed  this  proposal,  repeating  the  articles  of  the  peace,  whereby  h 
was  agreed^^That  they  should  be  governed  according  to  the  laws  of 
their  own  country;  and  declared  it  would  be  a  most  intolerable  piece 
of  injustice^  if,  (against  the  sacred  ties  of  an  oath),  their  libertief 
must  be  thus  ravished  from  them.  Lysander  answered  ^Fhat  the 
Athenians  had  first  broken  the  league  themselves,  because  they  did 
not  pull  down  their  walls  within  the  time  agreed,  and  grievously 
threatened  Theramenes,  and  told  him — ^That  unless  he  desisted  from 
his  oppositions  against  the  Lacediemonians,  he  would  put  him  to 
death. 

Upon  this,  both  Theramenes  and  the  people,  being  in  a  great 
fright,  were  forced  by  a  general  suffrage  to  abolish  the  democracy^ 
and  thirty  men  were  forthwith  phosen  to  be  governors  of  the  commoo* 
wealth,  in  name  called  fit  magistrates,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth  no« 
thing  but  tyrants.  But  because  the  justice  and  moderation  of  Tlie4 
r^menes  was  e vident)y*discerned  by  the  people,  they  judged  he  would 
be  a  bridle  to  the  covetousness  of  tlie  rest  of  those  placed  over  them^ 
and  thefeFore  chose  him  to  be  one  of  the  thirty. 

The  duty  and  office  of  these  men  was  to  choose  the  members  of 
the  senate,  to  create  magistrates,  and  to  make  laws  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  city.  But  they  forbore  to  make  any  laws  upon  many 
specious  pretences.     Yet  they  filled  the  senate^  aud  all  the  pUces  in[ 

Nou  I.  No.  39,  FFyF 


5^6  mrMMKTTff  ncvs.vif.  Ab^JtX^ 

,^  ,        ^„    _  ..        _^  .    ■  ■_  ■  . --T—  _■■■!■■■  ^ggg*?^'     ■yr*~-Tt 

the  magiKtmcV,  with  tlnrir'mrnr'ctfanires;  wto  wer^callMi^iNfelDfBi 
but  in  truth,  were'th^lriiretboh  of  the  tyrants; 

At  first  theyexecuied  justice  upon  fiialf  farctors  with  great  severity^ 
to  the  putting  them  to  rteaih:  so  that  us  yet  they  were  well  spokca 
of|  aiul  commended  by  every  honest  citizen.  But  ot>(  tongaficr, 
when  they  resolved  to  be  lawless,  and  set  up  an  arbitrary  power,  thcj 
sent  for  a  garrison  from  the  Lacedsemonians,  upon  preiehc^  that'thq^ 
would  mould  all  things  in  the  government  to  the  advantage  of  their 
interest.  For  they  knew  very  well,  that,  without  a  foreign  forc^,  ihey 
could  not  execute  those  slaughters  und  butcheries  they  designed,  hi 
that  all  would  as  one  man  rise  up  against  them  in  tbdr  cmn  ^ 
fence. 

When  the  garrison  from  Laced»mon  was  cbm^,  they'  presentlr 
gained  the  governor  Cnllibius,  with  bribes  and  other  fkiwDingand 
flattering  addresses.  Then  they  singled  out '  soitie  of  the  richest  ci 
the  oitiseens}  such  Us  they  thought  fit,  and  chiCrging  them  as  inno^ 
vators,  and  plotters  against  the  governmenr,  put  thefti  to  deiatb,  and 
confiscated  their  estates.  But  when  Theramenes  opposed  his  ool« 
leagues, aftd  ethers  (who  were^tfenlous  for  the  convmonwealth)  stooj 
up  for  the  defence  of  their  liberties,  the  thirty  called  a  aenate,  la 
which  Criiias,  the  president,  loads  lliefamenes  with  manygrievoiis 
crimes,and  chiefly  that  he  betrayed  that  government,  in  theadmiDis- 
tration  of  which  hehimscif  voluntarily  accepted  a  share  with  the  icit 
Theramenes,  in  answer  to  what  he  said,  so  cleared  himself  <if  cveij 
particular  laid  to  his  charge,  that  he  gained  the  good  opinion  of  the 
whole  senate.  Upon  which  Critias,  with  the  rest  of  bis  faction, 
(being  afraid  lest  this  man  should  overturn  the  oligarchy),  surround- 
ed him  by  the  soldiers  with  their  swords  drawn,  with  an  intent  fortlw 
with  to  seize  him. 

But  Theramenes  foreseeing  their  purpase,  rushes  tKroogh,  and 
flies  to  the  altar  in  the  senate«house,  crying  out«^That  he  fled  totlie 
gods,  not  that  he  honed  thereby  to  save  his  life,  hut  that  the  impieti 
of  his  murderers  might  be  the  more  aggravated,  by  the  violation  of 
the  sacred  rites  of  their  religion :  but  though  he  was  thence  violcmlj 
hauled  by  the  lictors,  yet  he  l)ore  all  with  an  undaunted  spirit,  bong 
well  principled  in  the  precepts  of  philosophy  by  his  late  master  So* 
crates.  The  ]>eople  generally  lamented  his  sad  misfortune,  and'  on- 
worthy  usage;  but  none  durst  rescue  him  by  reason  of  the  soldien 
that  closed  him  round.  But  Socrates  the  philosopher,  and  two  of 
his  servanu  ran  in,  and  endeavoured  to  hinder  the  lictora.  But  TV- 
ramenes  entreated  them  they  would  forbear,  declaring  he  could  noc 
but  houour  their  love  and  courage  shewed  on  his  behalf,  but  that  it 
would  be  his  greatest  misery  if  he  should  be  the  cause  of  t]^  dcsA 


Ckmjh  L  DIODOKUS  sicvvm.  .  987^ 

of  those  who  so  grettiy  loved  hifii«(  Socntet^tlMrefore,  «nd  tlid 
wst,  (when  they  saw  none  come  in  tor. their  anistaiioe,:'aod'that  the 
stronger  faction  moee  *and  more  iocreasdd),  let^  fall  their  design* 
Theramenes^thus  forced  from  thcaltarSyWas  led  throtigh  the  markec- 
place  to  execution  by  the  officers  who  had  him  in  charge.  But  the 
common  people,  (affrighted  with  the  armed  men),whiie  they  bewailed 
thecondition  of  this  miserable  man,  (as  one  most  unjustly  condemned)^ 
at  the  same  time  likewise  deplored  their  own  bondage  and  slavery* 
For  every  poor  man  seeing  the  virtue  of  Theramenes  so  despised  and 
trampled  under  foot,  foresaw  that  they,  by  reason  of  their  mean  and 
low  condition,  would  be  valued  no  more  than  things  set  behind  the 
door. 

After  they  had  executed  hinij  the  thirty,  upon  false  aeeusattonSi 
put  to  deatli  several  others  of  the  rich  men  whom  they  had  written 
down  in  a  list,  and  when  they  were  dead,  seized  upon  all  they  had. 
Among  whom  was  Niceratus,  the  son  of  Nicias  the  general,  who  was 
formerly  sent  against  the  Syracusans.  He  was  a  man  civil  and  cour« 
teous  to  all,  and  almost  the  richest  and  of  greatest  interest  of  any  man 
in  Athens;  there  was  not  therefore  a  family  but  lamented  his  death, 
the  memory  of  his  kind  and  sweet  disposition  forcing  tears  from  every 
one.  Yet  the  tyrants  did  not  in  the  least  remit  any  thing  of  their 
acts  of  injustice  and  violence,  but  growing  still  worse  and  worse  in 
all  manner  of  villauies,  they  cut  the  throats  of  threescore  of  the  richest 
men  in  the  city,  that  they  might  revel  in  their  estates*  The  miser« 
able  citizens  being  thus  slaughtered  and  butchered,  cveiy  day^  al« 
most  all  that  had  any  thing  to  lose  fled  out  of  the  city. 

Then  they  put  to  death  Autolycus,  a  most  excellent  and  fluent 
orator.  And  at  length,  every  man  that  was  in  any  respect  eminent 
or  remarkable,  they  sacrificed  to  their  raging  lusts*  By  these  cruel* 
ties  they  so  wasted  and  destroyed  the  city,  that  above  one  half  of  its 
inhabitants  ran  away  and  left  it. 

And  although  the  Lacedfiemonians  saw  the  city  thus  spoiled  and 
ruined,  yet  they  laughed  in  their  sleeves,  having  no  desire  it  should 
recover  its  strength  any  more,  as  was  very  evident  by  many  convincing 
arguments.  For  they  made  a  decree.«^That  all  the  fugitives  from 
Athens,  in  every  part  of  Greece,  should  be  carried  back  bound  to  the 
tyrants;  and  whosoever  opposed  the  execution  of  this  decree, 
should  be  fined  five  talents. 

This  was  in  truth  looked  upon  as  a  very  cruel  and  inhuman  edict, 
but  the  other  cities  stood  so  much  in  awe  of  the  power  of  the  Spar- 
tans, that  it  was  every  whefe  obeyed.  But  the  Argives  were  the  first 
that  shewed  their  abhorrence  of  the  Lacedemonian  cruelty,  and  pity* 
ing  the  miserable  condition  of  the  exiles,  received  theai  with  all 


ASS  DioDORtrs  sicuLUS.  Book  X0i 


tenderness  and  compassioQ.  ThcTheiMOS  likewiae  deaMd  m  mtlfl 
to  be  imposed  upon  him  that  did  not  to  his  utmost  poircraiaiitffiy 
fugitive  whom  he  saw  to  be  earried  away  by  force.  To  ihia 
were  brought  the  afiairs  of  Athens. 


CHAR  11. 


Dionyms^s  projects  to  strengthen  himself  in  the  sovereignijf^  M^ 
oily.    The  Syracusans  revolt.    They  are  dispereedm 


IN  the  meantime  Dionysius,  the  tyrant  of  Sicilyi  having  made 
with  the  Carthaginiansi  bent  all  his  care  to  strengthen  himself  in  te 
sovereignty.  For  he  judged  that  the  Syracusans,  now  brou^t  Mder 
by  the  war,  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  seek  after  the  reeorcry  of  Acir 
liberty.  Perceiving  therefore  the  island  belonging  to  the  city  (which 
was  naturally  fortified)  would  be  easily  defended  iiy  a  small  garriaOBf 
be  divided  it  from  the  city  by  a  strong  wall^  in  which  he*baih  many 
high  towers, nearoneanother,nndunder  themgoard^liousea  andlodg* 
ings,  which  would  contain  great  numbers  of  men :  he  built  liltewiae 
there  at  great  expense^  a  castle  which  commanded  the  city,  that  it 
might  be  a  shelter  ready  to  fly  to  upon  any  sudden  commotioD;  witii 
the  same  wall  he  took  in  the  arsenal  near  to  the  little  port  called  Lac« 
cius,  capable  to  recei\'e  threescore  sail,  and  had  a  gate  through  which 
only  one  ship  at  a  time  could  enter.  Then  he  marked  out  tha  best 
pieces  of  land,  and  gave  them  to  his  friends  and  officers:  the  rest 
he  equally  distributed  amongst  the  citizens,  and  in  the  numbte  off 
citizens  he  accounted  manumitted  slaves,  and  called  them  Ncopo- 
lites,  New  Citizens.  He  bestowed  likewise  houses  every  where  apoo 
the  common  people,  (except  those  houses  that  were  in  the  iahnd), 
and  those  he  gave  as  a  reward  to  his  friends  and  mercenaries. 

Having  now  firmly  fixed  himself  in  the  throne,  (as  he  conceived), 
he  marched  out  with  an  army  against  the  Sicilians,  with  a  design  t0 
bring  them  into  slavery,  who  as  yet  were  free,  especially  those  who 
had  lately  assisted  the  Carthaginians.  To  this  end  he  hy  before tbt 
city  of  (lerbessus,  and  furnished  himself  with  every  thing  neeeasuy 
for  the  siege.  They  of  Syracuse  that  were  listed  upon  tUa  espedi* 
tion,  having  got  arms  into  their  hands,  met  together  in  private eehalBi 
and  blamed  one  another  because  they  did  not  assist  the'iloneiiiM  U 
deposing  the  tyrant.    It  happened  at  that  time,  that  eue  of^  jTiiwy 


€kep.  n.  DIODORU8  8ICULU9.  589 


Bias*t  captains  threatening  a  soldier  for  liis  saucjr  language,  and  {ire- 
iently  dfcring  to  beat  him  upon  his  sliarp  retorts,  the  soldiers  nvre 
to  enraged,  that  they  killed  the  officer,  whose  name  was  Doricus; 
uid  calling  out  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  citizens  to  stand  up  for  tlieir 
Cherty,  they  sent  for  the  horse  from  Enna;  for  they  at  the  beginning 
of  the  tyranny  left  the  tyrant  and  possessed  tliemselves  of  that  castle. 
Dionysias  being  now  terrified  with  the  defection  of  the  Syracusans, 
broke  «p  the  siege,  and  instened  ai^-ay  with  all  speed  to  Syracuse, 
to  possess  himself  ot  the  city  before  any  of  his  enemies.  Upon  hb 
lli^t  thither,  the  fomenters  of  the  rebellion  created  them  tlieir  csp- 
tains  and  leatleri  who  had  killed  the  officer,  and  being  joined  by  the 
borse  from  Enna,  they  encamped  in  tlie  EpipoUe  (as  they  are  called) 
lying  ^ver  against  the  tyrant,  blocking  u|i  his  |iassage  into  the  open 
field.  These  revolters  likewise  continually  sent  messengers  to  Mes  - 
nana  and  Rliegiuni  to  solicit  their  aid  at  sea,  for  the  recoveiy  <if  tlieir 
liberty.  For  these  cities  at  that  time  commonly  set  forth  lie  less 
than  fourscore  gallics  well  manned,  which  they  then  sent  toilie  Sy- 
raeusans  to  assist  tliem.  Besides  all  this,  they  in  tlie  Epipolse  pro- 
mised by  the  common  crier  a  great  reward  to  him  that  should  lull 
the  tyrant;  and  that  they  would  enfranchise  all  foreigners  that  would 
cone  orer  to  them.  And  now  having  provided  engines  for  batter^* 
ing  down  the  wall,  they  assaulted  the  bland  every  day,  and  kindly 
teeeived  all  strangers  that  came  to  them.  Upon  thin,  Dionysius  see- 
ing himself  forsaken  by  the  mercenaries,  and  tliat  lie  was  sostraidy 
penned  up,  called  his  friends  together  to  consult  what  was  best 
to  be  done  in  the  present  eiigency.  For  he  so  far  despaired  of 
keeping  the  sovereignty,  that  he  did  ncK  so  much  as  seek  how  he 
anight  subdue  the  Syracusnns,  but  by  what  kind  of  death  he  might 
pit  an  end  to  his  life;  lest  he  slioald  be  forced  to  a  shameful  abdi* 
cation  of  the  government.  Hcloris,  one  of  his  friends,  (but  others 
any  the  pcii*t  his  father),  told  liim — ^Tliat  the  memory  of  his  being  a 
king,  would  be  the  glorious  ornament  of  his  sepulchre;  and  Polyxe- 
Hus,  his  father-in-law,  advised  him  to  break  through  U|)on  the  swift- 
est horse  he  had,  and  get  away  to  those  parts  under  the  power  of  the 
Carthaginians,  and  crave  help  of  the  Campanians  whom  Amilcar 
kad  left  to  defend  liis  conquests  in  Sicily.  But  Fhilistus  (who  after- 
wards wrote  the  history)   opposed  Polyxenus,  and  said Dionysius, 

it  duth  not  bccuiiic  thee,  by  the  swi finest  uf  tliy  horse,  to  fly  away 
from  thy  principality,  but  rather  with  thy  whole  strength  to  hold  it 
fast  within  thy  very  thighs.  Dionysius  adopted  this  advice,  and 
resolved  to  sutTer  any  thin^  rmher  tlian  voluntarily  lay  down  the  power 
he  had  gained.  VVhereujHin  tie  sent  commissioners  to  them  in  rc« 
keUion,  to  desire  liberty  fur  liimself  and  tliose  with  him  to  depart  uul 


69^  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Bo9k  XKFl 


of  the  city :  aod  in  the  mean  time  a  messenger  waa  secretly  sent  lo 
the  Campanians,  to  promise  them  as  much  money  as  they  shoold  de- 
mand, if  they  would  come  and  raise  the  siege.    Mattera  being  a- 
greed  upon,  the  Syracusans  consented  that  the  tyrant  should  haie 
liberty  to  be  gone  with  tive  ships  only.    After  this,  things  began  to 
cooh  and  a  part  of  tliem  that  lay  at  the  siege  were  discliaif;ed  and 
drawn  off  as  useless ;  and  many  of  the  foot  roved  about  in  the  fields,  as 
if  the  tyranny  had  now  been  altogether  at  an  end.   In  the  mean  time 
the  Campanians,  encouraged  by  such  generous  promises,  first  march- 
cd  to  Agyrium,  and  there  leaving  their  baggage  with  Agyrus  the 
prince  of  the  place,  with  twelve  hundred  light  horse  hastened  toSy* 
racuse;  where,  suddenly  arriving,  they  surprised  the  SyracuaanSy 
and  killing  many  of  them,  they  broke  through  into  the  fort  to  Sio- 
nysius.    About  the  same  time  three  hundred  mercenaries  arrivcdy 
and  came  in  to  the  assistance  of  the  tyrant ;  so  that  now  he  began  to 
pluck  up  his  spirits.    But  the  Syracusans,  when  they  perceived  that 
the  tyrant  began  to  gather  strength  again^  were  divided  into  parties; 
some  were  for  continuing  the  siege,  others  were  for  disbanding  the 
army  and  leaving  the  city.    As  soon  as  Dionysius  came  to  under- 
stand this,  he  sallies  out  with  what  he  had,  and  coming  upon  them 
when  they  were  in  a  distraction,  easily  put  them  to  flight,  and  pur- 
sued them  to  the  place  called  the  New  City:  yet  he  killed  not  many 
there:  for,  riding  amongst  his  men,  he  commanded  them  not  to  kill 
those  that  fled.    The  Syracusans  were  now  suddenly  scattered  all 
over  the  fields ;  and  awhile  after  above  seven  thousand  in  a  body 
came  up  to  the  horsemen  and  surrendered  themselves.    Afker  the 
burial  of  the  Syracusans  that  were  killed,  Dionysius  sent  messengen 
to  Enna  to  invite  the  exiles  there  to  lay  aside  their  animosities  and 
return  to  their  comitry,  faithfully  promising  them  that   he  would 
pardon  and  forget  all  that  was  past.    Upon  this,  some  who  bad  left 
wives  and  children  behind  them,  (through  the  irresistible  force  ojf 
natural  affection),  complied  with  the  invitation.    The  rest,  (when 
the  messengers  cried  up  his  humanity  in  burying  the  dead),  answer- 
ed—That Dionysius  himself  deserved  no  other  courtesy,  and  praved 
to  the  gods  that  he  might  presently  meet  with  it.    So  that  these  at 
Enna  could  not  by  any  means  be  wrought  upon  to  trust  the  tyrant's 
word,  but  continued  at  Enna,  waiting  for  a  fit  opportunity  to  pull 
him  down. 

Dionysius  carried  liimself  with  all  the  respect  and  tenderness  ima- 
ginable towards  those  that  returned,  to  encourage  the  rest  to  comt 
hack  to  their  country.  Then  he  discharged  the  Campaniaos  with 
great  rewards,  for  he  durst  not  trust  their  fickle  and  inconstant  bu« 
mour.  When  they  came  toEntclISj  they  prevailed  with  the  dtiicosio 


<Skap.  TTT.  D^npoKVS  stculus.  591 

ttetfivc  them  into  the  town,  and  to  enrranchize  them  as  natural  in* 
^ibitants:  but  :n  ilie  night  they  treacherously  fell  upoa  the  towns* 
■len  and  cut  all  their  throats^  and  marrying  their  wives,  possessed 
ttemsclves  of  the  city. 


CHAP.  III. 

Sfltf  Lacedismcnians  establish  an  oligarchy  in  every  city;  Diang* 
mui  disarms  the  Syracnsant.  Akibiudes  killed;  the  maimer  of 
his  death      Clean huA^s tyranny  in  Byzantium.     The  battle  iff 

.  Poms  against  his  country n^n  the  LacedtCfnonians,  JLysander 
projects  to  uejirire  the  Htraclidie  of  the  sovereign  power. 

In  Greece,  aHer  the  end  of  the  Pcloponnesian  war,  the  Lacedcroo* 
liiars,  hy  the  general  consent  of  ail,  hud  tliesu%'crcign  command  both 
fi  SCH  and  IhiicI.  \Vhcri>u|X)n  they  created  Lysander  again  high  ad- 
V^ira!,  with  ix>wcr  ui  cstabliaih  the  Hcrmoste,*  (as  they  called  them)^ 
in  evi*ry  ciiy  whcu-vcr  he  came.  For,  because  the  Dcmocraiists 
were  enemies  tu  ihc  Lucedtemuniaiis,  ihcy  ordered  an  oligarchy  to 
be  settled  in  every  ciiy,  11111!  imposed  a  tribute  u|)on  all  they  subdued. 
And  alt^iougli  they  made  nu  u^e  uf  niouey  at  any  lime  before,  yet 
imw  they  treasured  up  fruiii  the  tribulc:s  paidiu  by  the  citics,a  thutt« 
Mod  talents  every  year. 

When  they  had  .settled  the  aifdirs  of  Greece,  as  they  thoui^lit  best 
fcr  the  sup|x)rt  of  their  authority,  they  sent  Aribius,  a  noble  |>er3on,to 
Syracuse,  under  cohtur  of  abrogating  the  tyranny,  but  in  truth,  and 
uoderhand,  to  cmifiim  it.  For  they  runcluded,  tluit  if  they  were  in* 
Ctrumental  to  fix  him  in  his  ncf-got  empire,  they  should  ever  oblige 
him  to  be  a  friend  to  them.  Aristus,  after  he  cauie  to  Syracuse,  had 
aprira:e  conference  with  Diony&i us  concerning  these  matters:  aud 
yet  in  the  mean  time  encouraged  (he  people  with  fair  promises  to 
restore  them  to  their  former  liberties :  but,  instead  of  (hat,,he  betrayed 
Nicoleles,  the  general  of  the  Syracusans,  and  others  who  trusted  ia 
his  fidelity,  and  eaused  them  all  to  lie  put  to  death,  by  which  he 
Strengthened  the  tyrant,  and  by  so  ba&e  an  act,  stained  his  own  repu- 
tation, and  dishonoured  his  country. 

After  thi»,  when  the  people  of  Syracuse  had  left  the  city  In  the 
time  of  harvest,  to  gather  tl.e  fruits,  Dionysius  enters  every  one  of 

*  TtMM  iu9  aa  oligarchy. 


tiieir  houses,  nnd  lakes  an-ay  all  tho  oTma  be  could  fiod:  anil  pre* 
KOily  after  draws  another  w:ill  about  tbe  castle,  buildi  Abifipini;, au4 
ukeM  into  pny  a  number  qF  stiaogcrs,  and  prepares  wltatevrr  «u  tie- 
ensttfy  for  the  stJ[)^Ttiu^  of  hts dominion;  liaviDgezperipnced  that 
the  Syrarusans  would  endure  any  tiling  rather  Iban  ilavrry. 

While  these  tilings  were  acting  here  am)  ihcrv,  PhartMliuas,  Di* 
riiuNtord-lieiiienanl,  to  giatify  the  Leccdwinoniatit,  surpriMd  AU 
ribiarfe*  and  killed  liJm.  But  in  regard  Ephoms  give*  an  aceautii  of 
other  ihiogs  to  be  tlie  causes  of  his  dcaili,  I  conceive  it  may  not  he 
aliAgeiher  unpro6tabli-,  if  we  relale  what  this  author  hath  recorded 
concerning  the  manner  of  Alcihiadcs  losing  his  life. 

In  bis  ficvcntecnih  bimk  he  Bays,  (lia<  Cyrui  serrvtly  comparted 
with  the  Lacedemonmns  to  make  war  against  Anaxcrxca,  Khi^ 
eomifig  to  the  tats  of  Alcihindes,  he  forthwith  hasteiied  away  tu  Pbir* 
naliazas,  and  informs  him  of  the  inrrigue,and  deslrei  from  him  a  pass- 
port to  go  to  Artnxcrxes,  judging  it  titlest  for  him  to  give  the  irst 
inrormaiion  of  iheconiipiracy  to  the  king.  But  ihat  when  Fbnrna* 
haaus  beard  this,  he  was  resolved  to  he  the  first  di&iutcrer  bimselfy 
and  therefore  forthwiih  sent  a  messenger  in  whom  he  could  mMl 
coiifidv,  and  by  him  laid  all  open  before  the  king.  That  whro  AU 
cibiadrs  mw  that  I'harnahazus  would  Dot  furnish  bim  wiib  l(>lleat« 
nake  way  for  him  to  the  king*.t  pnlnee,  he  miidtf  n  juurttey  to  lh» 
ticatenitnl  and  govirnor  of  Fnphlagonia,  anil  desired  bra  astistutn 
to  gel  to  the  king :  and  that  I'harnabuzus  rearing  lest  the  king  sh«vld 
come  lo  undeistand  the  truth,  sent  some  to  lie  in  wait  for  Alctbladts 
in  the  wtiy,  and  lo  murder  him :  and  (bat  these  fltiding  him  in  his  ina 
at  Plirygin,  iM*ti\  up  a  pile  of  wood  round  liis  lodging  in  ibc  uight^ 
and  set  tl  on  lire ;  and  that  AlcibiadiS,  endeavouring  to  Hive  himself 
in  the  midst  of  the  flumes,  partly  by  the  fue,  and  panly  by  datta 
cast  at  him  by  his  enemies,  there  perished. 

About  the  same  time  Democraies  the  philosopher  dirrf,  bring 
ninety  years  of  age.  And  Lasthenes^iheTliehaii,  who  wunthepriae 
this  olympiad,  is  5flid  to  run  a  race  on  fuui  with  a  mnnlng-binKet 
from  Coronea*  to  ihc  walla  of  Thebes,  and  won  ibe  match.  Im 
Italy  the  Volsci  Eiei  upon  the  Hnman  garrison  at  Veruginrl,  took  ihv 
city  itself,  and  killed  many  of  the  garrison -soldiers. 

After  the  aflhirs  of  this  year,  Eucltdcs  became  chief  magut rate 
of  Athens.  And  four  military  tribunes  bore  ibe  cnnsular  dignity  at 
Rome,  Puhltus  Cornelius,  Numerius  Fahius,  Loeius  Vatetitu.  and 
Tcrentlus  Maximtls.  Doring  the  time  of  their  government,  the 
affairs  of  Byzstntium  ware  but  in  an  ill  postUre,  by  reason  oF  tbcif 
'  Pinm  Coronrt  t*  Tlirbs),  no  milri,  liolh  (iiuuttd  in  B«uiii  Fn  Gtn«c. 


<Xkp.  III.  DI0D0RU8  SICULUS.  fi^S 

iatcstiae  seditions,  and  their  wars  with  the  Thmciani  their  neigh-* 
kours.  Not  being  able  to  put  an  end  to  their  civil  discords^  they 
desired  a  governor  from  the  Lacedaemonians;  to  which  end  Clearchas 
was  sent  to  them,  who,  after  the  whole  power  was  put  into  his  hands^ 
got  together  a  great  number  of  mercenaries,  and  acted  more  like  a 
tyrant  than  a  governor.  For  first,  having  invited  the  magistrates  to 
a  feast,  after  a  public  sacrifice,  he  caused  them  all  to  be  put  to  death. 
Presently  after,  when  there  was  none  left  to  govern  the  city,  he 
strangled  tliirty  of  tlie  chief  men  of  Byzantium,  and  seized  upon  all 
their  goods  to  his  own  use.  He  likewise  put  to  death  some  of  the 
richest  of  the  citizens  under  colour  of  pretended  crimes,  and  others 
he  banished.  Having  thus  enriched  himself,  he  inlisted  vast  num- 
bers of  foreign  troops,  and  confirmed  and  strengthened  himself  in 
the  sovereignty.  Wiien  the  cruelty  and  power  of  the  tyrant  was 
spread  abroad;  the  Lacedaemonians  at  the  first  sent  messengers  to 
Iiim  to  advise  him  to  lay  down  his  government:  but  when  he  flatly 
refused,  they  sent  an  army  against  him  under  the  command  of  Pan* 
U^edas ;  but  when  Clearchus  heard  of  his  coming,  he  marched  away 
With  his  forces  to  Selymbria,  of  which  he  had  before  possessed  him- 
self. For  by  reason  of  his  cruelty  in  Byzantium  he  foresaw,  that 
not  only  the  LAceda3motiian6,  but  the  citizens,  would  be  his  enemies; 
and  therefore  concluding  that  he  could  with  more  safety  march  out 
i^inst  his  enenaies  from  Selymbria,  he  brought  all  his  money, to* 
gether  with  his  army,  thither.  When  he  came  there,  and  heard  of 
the  approach  of  the  Lacedeemonians,  he  drew  out  to  meet  them,  and 
at  a  place  called  Porus  they  engaged.  The  battle  was  doubtful  a 
long  time,  but  at  length  the  valiant  Spartans  prevailed,  and  the  ty- 
rant's army  was  miserably  destroyed.  Clearchus  with  a  few  escaped 
to  Selymbria,  and  was  there  awhile  besieged,  but  afterwards  in  a 
great  fright  he  fled  out  of  the  town  in  the  night,  and  sailed  over  to 
Ionia,  where,  becoming  familiar  with  Cyrus  the  king  of  Persia's  bro- 
ther, 1ie  was  made  general  of  his  army.  For  Cyrus,  being  made 
chief  of  all  the  princes  and  governors  of  the  sea»coasts,  and  being\ 
of  a  high  and  aspiring  spirit,  determined  to  nudce  war  against  his  \ 
bjroth^r  Artaxerxes;  looking  therefore  upon  Clearchus  to  be  a  fel- 
low of  a  bold  and  daring  spirit,  ready  for  any  adventure,  he  furnish^- 
ed  hiin  with  money,  and  ordered  him  to  raise  an  army  of  as  many 
foreigners  as  he  could,  hoping  he  liad  now  got  a  fit  companion  to 
assist  him  in  the  execution  of  those  bpid  attempts  he  had  taken  in 
hand.  As  for  Lysander  the  Spartan,  after  he  had  settled  all  tlie  cities 
subject  to  the  Laccdaemanjans,  according  tq  the  orders  and  direc- 
tions of  the  Ephori,  some  to  be  governed  by  a  decemvirate,  others 
by  an  oligarchy,  became  of  great  note  and  reputation  at  Sparta:  fgt 
Vp4^.1.  No.  39.  wca 


594  DIQDORUS  8ICULUS. 


by  his  conduct  he  had  put  an  end  to  the  Prloponnrmii  Wj 
thereby  had  gained  for  bis  eouutry  the  sovereign  comntendt  both  If 
sea  and  land,  without  rontrouL    Bdng  pafied  up  with  th»  sorcMy 
hi  desii^ned  to  put  an  end  to  the  reign  of  the  Hemclids,  and  to  thit 
end  endeavoured  so  to  contrive  the  matter,  as  to  procaie  a 
That  any  Spartan  whatnoever,  should  be  capable  of  bong 
king     Thereby  he  lioped  that  the  regal  power  woold  pwwptly  ba 
conferred  upon  himself,  for  the  great  and  noble  services  that  he  had 
donr.    Bat  considering  that  the  Laocdgmoniana  were  led  wtmA  bf 
tht  answers  given  by  the  oracle,  be  resolved  to  bribe  the  prapbeUSi 
of  Delphus  wiih  a  large  sum  of  money;  SoTj  he  concludedy  dMt  if 
he  were  favoured  uy  the  oracle,  his  business  was  done  9cemimg  la 
his  bean's  desire.    But  when  he  saw  that  by  his  repeated 
tinual  promises  uf  reward,  day  by  day,  he  could  aot^prevaily  he 
dressed  himself  upon  the  same  account  to  the  priest  of  tlie  oiadb  at 
Dodona,  by  one  Plierecnites,of  ihe  family  of  ApoUooiatiiSy  who  was 
familiarly  acquainted  with  the  officers  of  that  temple. 

But  being  di!>app*nnted  here  likewise,  hetaokajoumcy  ta  Gcaea^ 
under  colour  to  pay  a  vow  to  Jupiter  Ammon^  bat  ia  truth  tanoolhsr 
pui-|K>se  than  to  bribe  that  oracle.  To  that  end  he  carried  with  bin  a 
great  sum  of  money  to  bring  over  the  priests  of  that  temple  la  bis 
interesit;  for  Lybis,  the  king  of  that  coantiy,  had  been  Us 
guest,  and  fi>r  the  great  love  and  triendship  there 
them,  the  brother  of  Lysander,  was  called  Lybis.  Bat 
ing  ail  his  hopes  to  prevail,  by  his  interest  in  the  biiy  aod  tha  lal* 
ness  of  his  purse,  lie  was  not  only  frustrated  of  his  hope  dicas^ 
the  priests  of  the  oracle  sent  ambassadors  to  Sparta, 
Lysander  for  his  ofiering  of  bribes  to  corrupt  the  oracle. 
when  he  returned  to  ittcedcmoa,  he  was  called  to  answer  ta  the 
charge :  but  lie  so  sabtllely  managed  his  cause,  that  be  caase  off  ckars 
and  nothing  was  dbcerned  concerning  his  prospect  toaboliih  tha 
vemment  of  the  Heiaclidse.  But  a  little  after  his  death, 
notes  of  accounts  were  sought  for  in  his  house,  there  a 
speech  eloquently  peimed,  which  he  had  framed  to 
pie — That  the  kii^  oiight  be  chosen  oot  of  anj  of  the  fcaiilhi  af 
Sparta. 


€lkap.IPi  MODORUs  sicVLirs.  595 

wmKaammsstaam 


CHAP.  IV. 

Dkmjfdus'sacikmsinSicify.    7^  Oropian$  ittbdned  iy  the  l^e- 
bam.     2%e  LaeeddsmanianB  quarrel  €riih  the  JSIeL    JHam^nu^ 
the  EfipoUt. 


AS  soon  as  Dionysiaf  9  the  tyrant  of  Syracose^  after  his  peace  made 
with  the  Carthaginians^  had  quieted  all  at  home,  he  prefwred  to  bring 
all  the  towns  and  cities  of  the  Chalcidonians  into  his  power;  that  is 
to  say,  Naxos,  Catana,  and  Leontium.  And  he  was  the  more  earnest 
to  gain  these,  because  they  hiy  near  to  Syraettse,  and  would  much 
fiurilitate  the  enlargement  of  his  dominions.  To  this  end  he  marches 
with  his  forces  to  Enna,  and  takes  die  castl^^  the  eiiles  there  not  being 
able  to  resist  ^so  great  an  army. 

Thence  he  goes  against  the  Leontines,  add  encamps  at  the  Hver 
Tyria,  not  far  from  the  city,  where  he  presently  draws  out  his  army, 
and  sends  a  trumpet  to  the  town>  commanding  them  to  surrender  the 
place,  supposing  that  out  of  fear  they  would  submit.  But  when  he 
perceived  the  Leontines  slighted  his  commands,  and  prigpared  to  fur- 
nish themselves  with  all  things  necessary  for  asiegc^*having  not  then 
with  him  his  engines  of  battery,  he  drew  off  for  the  present^  and 
wasted  and  spoiled  the  country  round  about. 

Thence  he  marched  against  the  Siculi^  pretending  these  were  the 
people  he  chiefly  aimed  at  in  the  war,  thereby  to  make  the  Naxians 
and  Catanians  the  more  secure.  When  he  lay  near  to  Enna,  he 
persuaded  Acimnestus  of  Enna  to  take  upon  him  the  sorereignty^ 
promising  to  assist  him :  this  Acimnestus  accomplished.  But  when 
he  would  not  receive  Dionysius  into  the  city,  he  began  to  storm,  and 
change  his  measures,  and  stirred  up  the  Ennians  to  throw  off  his 
authority.  Upon  this,  to  regain  their  liberty,  they  suddenly  ran 
together  armed  into  the  market-place;  and  now  the  city  was  full  of 
tumult  and  confusion;  at  which  instant  Dionyslua  hearing  of  the 
sedition,  and  getting  together  his  trustiest  friends,  he  advanced  to  a 
place  where  there  was  no  guard,  and  on  a  sudden  running  into  the 
city,  takes  Acimnestus,  and  delivers  him  up  to  the  will  of  the  En- 
nians, and  returned  without  doing  any  hurt  to  the  place.  Not  that 
he  did  this  either  out  of  love  to  justice,  or  to  them,  but  that  he  might 
be  trusted  for  the  future  by  the  rest  of  the  cities. 

Moving  from  thenc«t^  he  besieged  the  city  of  Erbita^;  but  not 

*  Jijow  St.  AficbolM. 


h9$  DIODORCS  SICULCS. 


socceediog  there^  be  made  pence  mdi  them,  aid  led 

against  Catana:  for  Arcesilaiis  tbe  gwciuot  lad 

it:  aod  in  accomplishmeiit  of  his  ticacbes;,  aiioat 

in  withio  tlie  walk,  and  ao  he  gained  tbe  cilj. 

all  the  citiKDS,  and  placed  dicrc  a  soficicnt 

Proclei,  tbe  general  of  the  Naxians,  (woo  over  hy 

rewards),  beorayed  the  city  to  Diooysios.     Whes  he 

the  traitor,  aod  set  all  his  kindred  at  liberty,  he 

gave  the  spoil  thereof  to  his  aoUierSy  and  Garried  awRf  all  Aa 

of  the  citizens  as  slaves.    He  dealt  not  better  wkh  the  inUfaitoHtiaff 

Calana,  whom  he  sold  for  slaves  to  the  Sjraconaa.    1¥e  caanftj 

of  the  Na&ians  he  gave  to  the  oeighbooring  Sieiiiaaa^  hot  &a  dy  aff 

Catana  he  bestowed  upon  the  Campanians  for  a  faahiiatiaB. 

From  thence  he  again  moved  to  Leonunm,  and  beaicgedk' 
his  forces^  aod  by  his  messengers  required  them  to 
government,  and  join  themselves  as  one  body  to  the  cil 
Tlie  Leontines  seeing  no  hope  of  relief,  and  consideriajg;  ike  lito  of 
tlie  Naxians  and  Catanians,  were  seized  with  great  tenor,  kit  tlay 
themselves  should  be  swallowed  up  in  the  like  destructKNi, 
they  conclnded  it  most  advisable  to  yield  to  the  praseat 
amd  submitted  to  the  conditions  offined,  left  their  comtry,  aad 
to  Syracuse. 

Archonide,  prince  of  the  Erbitans,  (after  the  people  of 
made  peace  with  Dionysius),  determined  to  build  a  new  citj,  ior  hs 
had  many  mercenaries,  and  a  mixed  multitude  of  stranfen  who  fled 
tbitber  for  fear  of  the  war  by  Dionysius;  and  numy  likewise  of  Eihka 
freely  gave  up  their  names  to  follow  him  to  this  new-intended  eoloay. 
With  these  he  possessed  himself  of  a  little  hill,  eight  stipes  or  i 
from  the  sea,  and  there  laid  the  foundation  of  the  city  Akaes 
because  there  were  other  cities  in  Sicily  that  bore  that  naaa,  hi 
added  to  it,  as  it  were,  a  surname,  and  called  it  from  himaelf^  Aksc 
Archonidion.  In  process  of  time,  when  tbe  city  abounded  ia  waahha 
partly  by  reason  of  its  traffic  by  sea,  and  privileges  granted  to  it  bjtht 
Romans,  they  of  Alese  would  not  own  their  original  fniai 
because  they  thought  it  a  dishonourable  thing  to  adinowkdga 
selves  colonies  from  a  place  so  inferior  to  their  city.  But  at  ihkdaf 
there  remains  tbe  mutual  kinduesses  and  respects^  both  of  kindred 
•and  countrymen,  betwixt  these  two  cities;  and  in  the  temple  af 
Apollo  they  use  the  same  rites  and  ceremonies  in  their 
Some  there  are  who  say,  this  Alese  was  first  built  bj  the 
Dian.v,  when  the  peace  was  concluded  between  Amikar  and  Dioaj* 

51  us. 


t!kap.  IF4  DIODOKUS  8ICULUS.  6Qff 

^        ■'        igeiga— ^— flf—    11  ■   ■ !■■■     ■■■— — — — >— ^^^ 

Id  Italy  the  Romans  m^  war  opoQ  the  Veieotes  for  the  causes  fol- 
lovring*.  At  this  timie  it  was  first  decreed  by  the  RomaQ  seDi^te^  that 
the  soldiers  should  he  paid  every  year  out  of  the  publie  treasury. 
Also  «  eity  of  the  Volscii  thea  Aozur,  now  Tarracioa^  was  taken  by 
the  Uomans. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  Micio  was  made  chief  magistrate,  or  lord^ 
chancellor  of  Athens,  and  at  Rome  six  military  tribunes  were  created 
consuls,  that  is  to  say,  Titus  Quintius,  Caius  Julius,  AulusManiliua^ 
Quintus  Quintius,  Lucius  Furius  Medullinus,  and  Marcus  iEmilius 
Alamercusf.  During  the  time  these  governed,  the  Oropians,  upon  a 
sedition  raised  in  the  city,  expelled  several  of  their  inhabitants,  who 
for  some  time  did  all  they  could  to  procure  their  return;  but  whea 
all  was  to  no  purpose,  they  addressed  tliemselves  to  the  Tbebans  for 
ihe  assistance  of  their  aitas  to  restore  them.  The  Thebans  undertook 
the  expedition,  and  possessed  themselves  of  the  city,  and  remove4 
the  inhabitants  seven  furlongs  farther  ^frorn  the  sea,  and  for  a  time 
auffered  them  to  enjoy  their  own  laws;  but  afterwards,  bringing  them 
under  the  same  government  with  themselves,  they  joined  aU  their 
lands  to  Bceotia* 

While  these  things  were  going  on,  the  Lacediwnonians  picked 
a  quarrel  with  the  £Iei,  laying  several  things  to  their  charge;  as 
that  they  would  not  suffer  Pausanias  their  king  to  sacrifice  to  the 
gods;  and  that  they  denied  the  Spartans  liberty  to  run  at  the  Olympic 
games.  Upon  these  pretences  they  declared  war  against  them :  but 
first,  for  greater  colour,  demanded  of  them  by  ten  ambasadors.«.Tliat 
^hey  would  suffer  the  neighbouring  cities  to  govern  by  their  own  laws; 
and  that  they  would  allow  something  towards  the  charge  of  the  late 
war  agaiast  tlie  Athenians*  This  was  done  that  they  might  have  a 
apecious  pretence  for  the  war« 

The  Elei  not  only  refused  to  hearken  to  them,  but  charged 
tbem  with  a  design  to  enslave  all  Greece;  upon  which  they  sent 
forth  Pausanias,  one  of  their  kings,  against  them,  with  four  thousand 
men;  after  whom  followed  a  great  army,  almost  from  all  their  con- 
federates, except  the  Boeotians  and  Corinthians;  for  these  being 
angry  at  some  things  the  Lacedsmonians  had  done,  forbore  the 
expedition  against  the  Elei.  Pausanias  with  all  speed  invades 
the  country  of  Elis  in  Arcadia,  and  presently  upon  the  first  assault 
takes  the  castle  Lasion.  From  thence  he  passes  over  the  mountains 
with  a  swift  march,  and  takes  in  four  towns ;  that  is  to  say,  Threstus^, 
Aulis,  Eupagium^  and  .Opus,  Thence  he  marches  to  Pylos,  and 
speedily  takes  it,  which  is  distant  from  Elis  about  seventy  furlongs; 

*  Here  the  ca«s«s  are  wanting.  t  These  three  last  aie  not  in  the  Greek  copy. 

t  Hither  Tbr>'«tj  in  Arcadia. 


598  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Jfaoifc  XIK 

then  without  delay  he  makes  for  Elis  itself,  aod  maikt  out  m  place 
for  his  camp  upon  the  bills  between  the  town  and  the  river.  There 
came  to  the  Elei  a  little  before  a  thousand  braye  aoldiera  fnmi  the 
Etolians,  who  were  appointed  to  guard  the  places  about  the  Gymaa* 
sium.  Pausanias  resolved  to  attack  these  places  chielij,  gF^"^ 
contemning  the  enemy,  as  if  they  had  no  courage  to  nrnich  out 
against  him.  But  presently  on  the  sudden  a  vast  nomber  of  the 
Etolians  and  citizens  sally  out  and  kill  about  thirty  of  his  men^  wliUk 
greatly  terrified  the  rest :  upon  which  Pausanias  intennita  the  i» 
sault.  Afterwards  perceiving  that  it  would  be  a  difficult  task  taaban 
the  city,  he  wasted  and  destroyed  the  country,  though  Goosecnted  te 
the  deity,  and  carried  away  much  spoiL  But  winter  now  drawiqg 
on,  having  fortified  all  the  castles  through  the  countiy  of  JQfy^  and 
put  into  them  sufficient  garrisons,  with  the  rest  of  the  army  he  win* 
tered  in  Dym». 

At  the  same  time  Dionysius,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  when  all  things  an-> 
swered  his  heart's  desire,  determined  to  make  war  upon  the  Gartlia* 
ginians.  But  because  he  was  not  as  yet  sufficiently  prepared,  he 
kept  it  to  himself,  and  made  provision  for  what  was  necessary  for  the 
war  in  the  mean  time;  but  recollecting  himself,  and  considering  that 
the  city  was  hemmed  in  by  a  wall,  (drawn  from  one  sea  to  another  in 
the  time  of  the  war  with  Athens),  he  was  afraid  lest  he  should  firil 
into  the  like  misfortune  again,  to  be  penned  up,  so  as  he  could  not 
issue  forth  abroad,  if  occasion  served:  for  he  saw  that  the  situation 
of  the  Epipolie  was  such  that  it  would  easily  command  Syift^^mtp^ 
Having  therefore  sent  for  architects,  and  advised  with  them,  he 
resolved  to  fortify  the  Epipolse  at  the  phce  where  now  the  wall  with 
six  gates  stands.  For  this  place  towards  the  north  is  so  rough, 
craggy,  and  steep,  that  it  is  altogether  inaccessible  on  the  outsidew 
Having  therefore  a  great  desire  to  finish  this  fortification,  with  all 
speed  he  gets  together  a  great  multitude  from  all  parts  of  the  countiy, 
out  of  which  he  chose  threescore  thousand  that  were  freemen,  end  fit 
for  liis  purpose,  and  proportioned  the  several  parts  of  the  work  amongat 
them.  To  every  furlong  he  ordered  an  overseer  or  master-worhman^ 
and  to  every  Plethrum^  a  mason,  and  two  hundred  kboureik,  ■  Be* 
sides  these  a  great  number  were  employed  in  cutting  out  of  the 
quarries  rough  and  unwrought  stone. 

He  had  likewise  six  thousand  yoke  of  oxen  appointed  in  aevend 
places  for  carrying  on  of  the  work.  The  multitude  of  the  worfcoicB 
produced  great  admiration  in  the  spectators,  whilst  every  one  wis 
diligent  tu  perfect  that  which  was  allotted  to  his  share.  For  Diony- 
sius^ to  encourage  them,  here  promised  great  rewards  to  the  vchileetL| 

*  AbuuC  twcutj  j^ardf. 


ChtfK  V.  NODOtrs  8icuLUf .  699 

there  to  the  carpenters,  and  here  again  to  the  labourers;  and  he 
MmBelf  with .  his  fnends  would  often  oversee  the  work,  whole  dajt 
together,  going  every  where  from  one  place  to  another,  taldng  care 
to  ease  and  relieve  them  that  were  tired  oat.  At  length,  hying  aside 
all  state  and  majesty,  he  wrought  like  a  {urivate  person,  and  would  be 
the  first  that  should  set  upon  works  of  the  greatest  difficulty,  and 
endure  as  much  hardship  as  the  meanest  labourer;  by  which  mean« 
every  one  strove  who  should  do  most,  insomuch,  as  besides  their 
daily  labours^  they  wrought  some  part  of  the  night,  so  great  was  the 
ambition  of  the  very  common  people  to  finish  the  work;  so  diat 
(beyond  what  could  have  been  believed  or  imagined)  the  wall  was 
finished  in  the  space  of  twenty  days,  thirty  furlongs  in  length,  and 
proportionable  in  height ;  and  as  for  its  strength,  It  seemed  to  baflte 
the  force  of  any  assailant.  For  it  had  many  high  towers  that  stood 
at  convenient  distances  one  from  another;  and  it  was  built  of  hewn 
atone,  most  artificially  jointed  and  compacted,  every  stone  four  feet 
square* 


CHAP.  V- 

Tht  war  between  Cyrus  and  his  brother  Artaxersts  king  of  Persia* 
Cyrus  routed.  The  Grecian  forces  in  dijkuliies;  their  brave 
behaviour;  and  long  and  troublesome  march  out  qf  Perstm 
into  Oreeee.  ^ h^^h A^f t> 

AT  the  end  of  the  year  Exenetus  was  made  archon  or  lord  chancellor 
of  Athens,  and  six  military  tribunes,  Publius  Cornelius,  Cassio  Fabios, 
Spurius  Nausius,  Caius  Valerius,  Marcus  Sergius,  and  Junius  Lu* 
cuUus,  executed  the  consuhr  dignity  at  Rome.  At  this  time  Cjtum^ 
chief  of  all  the  lord-lieutenants  of  the  maritime  provinces,  now 
determined  to  prosecute  that  war  against  Artaxerxes,  his  brother, 
which  he  had  long  before  been  ruminating  in  his  mind :  for  this 
young  man  was  of  a  very  high  spirit,  and  much  addicted  to  martial 
affairs.  To  this  end  he  musters  a  great  army  of  strangers,  and  fur- 
nishes himself  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  expedition;  but  did 
not  as  yet  discover  to  hi$  army  what  he  intended,  but  gave  out  that 
he  raised  an  army  to  go  against  some  tyrants  in  Cilicia  who  had  re* 
belled  against  the  king.    He  sent  moreover  an  ambassador  to  the 


600  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Boitrik  XIK 

LacedacmoDiaDs,  to  put  them  in  mifid  of  the  sendees  he  had  done 
them  in  the  war  against  Athens,  and  to  desire,  their  aid  in  the  dcsiga 
he  had  now  on  foot.  Upon  this  theLacedseafioniaiiBj  conceiTiiigthis 
war  would  be  to  tlieir  advantage,  forthwith  decreed  aid  to  be  sent  ti^ 
Cyrus,  and  presently  sent  orders  to  Samus,  the  admiral  of  their  fleeiy 
to  observe  whatever  was  commanded  him  by  Cyrus.  Hercppott 
Samus  having  then  five-snd-twentygallies  of  three  tier  of  oars  andcf 
his  command,  with  these  passed  over  to  Ephesus,  to  Cyrus's  adou- 
ra),  offering  his  assistance  in  every  thing  he  should  -be  commanded* 
The  L#aced8emonians  sent  over,  likewise,  under  the  command  off 
Chirosophus,  eiglit  hundred  corsetecrs.  One  Tamos  was  admiial 
of  the  barbarian  fleet,  and  had  under  his  command  fifty  galliea  well 
equipped.  As  soon  ns  the  Spartan  fleet  arrived,  both  fleets  set  sail^ 
as  if  tlu'y  intended  for  Cilicia. 

When  Cyrus  had  got  together  at  Sardis  the  choicest  soldiers  off 
Asii),  and  thirteen  thousand  mercenaries,  he  made  those  Persians  that 
were  of  Ills  kindred,  governors  of  Lydia  and  Phrygia,  but  the  chieff 
connnand  of  Ionia  and  Eolja  he  bestowed  upon  hb  trusty  friend 
Tanios  of  Memphis.     Having  settled  these  matters,  be  then  pre- 
sently marched  with  his  army  towards  Cilicia  and  Pisidia,  a  rumonr 
being  spread  abroad  that  some  of  those  nations  had  made  a  defection. 
He  had  out  of  Asia  seventy  thousand  men,  of  which  three  thousand 
were  horse :  out  of  Peloponnesus  and  other  parts  of  Greece  thirteen 
thousand  mercenaries.     Clearehus  the  Lacedsemonian  was  genend 
of  all  the  Peloponnesians,  except  the  Achaians;  Prosenos  «^  tho 
Boeotians;  Socrates  of  the  Achaians;   and  Menon  commanded  die 
Tbessalians«    Tlie  Persians  led  the  barbarians,  every  Qpe  in  their 
proper  companies  and  regiments,  and  Cyrus  was  geoeralissimo;  who 
luid  now  discovered  the  design  of  this  expedition  to  bis  oflScers,  bat 
wisely  concealed  it  from  the  common  soldiers,  lest  by  the  greatness 
of  the  attempt  they  should  be  discouraged,  and  so  desert  him*     And 
further,  considering  the  great  journey  they  were  to  march^  he  took 
speciiil  care  of  the  soldiers,  was  very  familiar  with  every  one,  and 
made  plentiful  provision  for  them  in  every  place. 

At  length  having  passed  through  Libya  aud  Phrygia^  and  tlio 
countries  bordering  on  Cilicia,  they  came  to  the  borders  and  gates 
leading  into  Cilicia.  The  passage  there  is  very  strait  and  rugged  to€ 
the  s[)ace  of  twenty  furlongs,  hemmed  in  on  either  side  with  vast  and 
very  high  and  inaccessible  mountains ;  from  these  mountains  on  both 
sides  a  wall  was  drawn  across  the  passage  to  Jcfcud  |t,  in  which  were 
those  gates  before  mentioned.  When  his  forces  had  passed  thm^^ 
tiiis  way,  he  entered  into  a  champaign  country,  inC^or  to  nope  ia 


.'V.  DiODORus  sicrr.us.  6oi 


ua  for  sweetness  and  pleasantness:  through  thes»e  pleasant  fields 
ke  marched  to  Tarsus^  the  largest  city  of  Cilicia^  which  lie  easily  forced 
lo  submit. 

WhcD  Syeonesis,  king  of  Cilicia,  heard  of  this  great  armVy  he  waj 
greatly  perplexed  what  to  do^  because  he  saw  he  was  in  no  condition 
to' cope  with  so  great  a  force.  But  being  sent  fur  by  Cyrus,  with 
proaiises  of  safe  conduct,  he  came  to  hini,  and  being  acquainted 
with  the  design,  promised  his  assistance  against  Artaxerxfs,  and 
•Craitway  joined  Cyrus  with  a  small  party,  under  the  command  of 
•DC  of  his  sons :  but  being  a  crafty  man ^  and  preparing  for  the  worst, 
1m  sent  the  other  secretly  to  the  king,  to  inform  him  of  the  great 
iorces  that  were  coming  against  him;  and  that  though  he  himself, 
nuch  against  his  will,  was  forced  to  join  with  Cyrus,  yet  he  uas  still 
loyal  and  faithful  to  the  king,  and  would  fall  off  and  return  to  the 
kiag*s  standard  when  he  had  an  opportunity. 

In  the  mean  time  Cyrus  spent  twenty  days  in  refreshing  his  army, 
and  inlisting  more  soldiers. '  Then  breaking  up  his  camp,  he  acquaint- 
ed all  the  common  soldiers,  that  this  expedition  was  intended  against 
Artaxerxes.  Upon  this  every  one  weighing  the  thing  seriously  with 
himself,  and  considering  tiic  vast  length  of  the  way  they  were  to 
laarch,  and  how  many  enemy's  nations  they  were  to  |>ass  through, 
took  the  matter  very  grievously :  for  a  rumour  was  spread  abroad  that 
h  was  four  months  march  to  Bactria,  and  that  the  king  had  an  army 
of  fidur  hundred  thousand  men:  upon  uhich  the  soldiers  were  so 
transported  with  fear  and  rage,  tliat  they  resolved  to  kill  all  their 
•IBcers  as  traitors.  But  when  Cyrus  (not  without  many  entreaties) 
ioterposed  his  antliniity,  and  assured  them  that  he  did  not  intend  to. 
lead  them  against  the  king,  but  against  a  certain  governor  in  Syria, 
the  mutiny  ceased  :  and  upon  the  increase  of  their  pay  they  all  re- 
turned to  their  former  love  and  esteem  for  their  general. 

Having  now  marched  almost  through  all  Cillcia,  he  took  Nhipping, 
and  arrived  at  last  by  sea  at  Issus,  the  utmost  city  of  that  country 
sear  the  sea  side.  At  the  same  time  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet  arrived 
there,  and  landcnl  their  men,  assuring  him  of  the  friendship  of  the 
Spartans,  where  they  delivered  to  Cyrus  eight  bundled  fcM>t,  under 
the  command  of  Chirosophus:  they  pretended  tiiai  these  were  sent 
privately  to  Cyras,  by  his  friends,  wlien  in  truth,  all  was  done  by  the 
decree  and  order  of  the  Ephori.  For  the  Lacedicmunians  had  not 
aa  yet  proclaimed  open  war  against  the  king,  but  kept  their  coun- 
aeb  secret  till  they  spied  a  fit  oppi^rtULiity,  aiul  how  tilings  were 
likely  to  go. 

Decamping  from  thence,  Cyrus  moves  towards  Syria,  and  ordered 
the  admiralb  to  sail  along  near  to  the  shore,  and  attend  upon  him 

Voul.   No.  39.  UUMH 


602  DIODORUS  9ICULUS.  3&olk  XIK 


as  he  marched  by  land.  When  he  came  to  the  Pylaa*  (••  Ibey  «m 
called)  and  found  the  entrance  without  any  guards  he  was  wnA 
pleased ;  for  he  was  full  of  fear  lest  the  passes  should  be  seued  betae 
him;  for  the  place  is  naturally  very  narrow,  and  defended  by  craggy 
rocks  on  every  side,  so  that  it  may  be  kept  by  a  very  few  meD.  For 
there  are  two  mountains  that  rise  up  on  either  side  near  one  to  ano- 
ther, the  one  mounting  up  with  sharp  rocks  of  a  prodigioos  beigb^ 
and  the  other  called  Libanus,  beginning  at  the  very  entrance  iutotke 
only  passage  that  leads  througli  those  places,  and  runs  out  as  far  as  to 
Phcenicia.  The  space  lying  between  these  two  mountaina  is  aboot 
three  furlongs  wide,  strongly  fortified,  shut  up  with  strait  and  narrow 
gates.  When  Cyrus  had  passed  through  this  place,  he  discharged  the 
fleet,  and  sent  it  back  to  Ephosus ;  for  he  had  no  occasion  to  use  il^ 
being  now  to  marcli  through  the  heart  of  the  country. 

After  twenty  days  march,  he  came  to  Thapsacus,  near  to  the  river 
Euphrates.  After  he  had  continued  here  five  days,  and  liad  gained 
the  hearts  of  tlie  soldiers  by  plenty  of  provision,  and  rich  spoils  and 
booties,  he  called  a  council,  and  discovered  to  them  his  whole  design. 
But  perceiving  that  the  army  was  very  uneasy  upon  what  be  said^  be 
earnestly  entreated  all  of  them  that  they  would  not  now  desert  hinif 
and  endeavoured  to  pacify  tiicm,  by  promising,  besides  other  rewards, 
a  mina  a-piocc  to  every  man,  as  soon  as  lie  came  to  Babylon  i  upon 
which,  being  thus  encouraged,  and  having  their  exiiectations  raised 
high,  they  at  length  consented.  Hereupon  Cyrus  passed  his  army 
over  the  Euphrates,  and  went  forward  without  midcing any  halt;  and 
as  soon  as  he  came  to  the  borders  of  Babylon  he  gave  leave  to  his 
army  to  refresh  themselves. 

•  Artaxerxes,  the  king,  had  some  time  before  notice  given  him  by 
^harnabazus,  of  the  secret  preparations  of  Cyrus  against  him,  buff 
now  having  certain  intelligence  of  his  march,  he  called  all  his  forces 
toj^ethcr  from  every  place  to  Ecbataiui  in  Media;  and  with  what  force 
he  then  Imd,  marched  against  Cyrus,  not  being  willing  to  stay  for  the 
aids  from  Injlia  and  othiT  naiions,  who  he  jn.»rceivod  would  be  too 
long  in  coming  np  to  him  by  reason  of  the  great  distances  of  the 
sevcnil  places  from  wheuci?  they  came.  His  army  (as  Ephorus 
relates)  amounted  to  no  les.>  than  four  hundred  thousand  horse  and 
foot. 

When  he  came  witliin  tlie  borders  of  Babylon,  he  encamped  at 
the  Euphrates,  purposing  there  to  leave  his  heavy  baggage:  for  be 
knew  tlie  enemy  was  nut  far  of\\  and  therefore  had  just  cause  to  fear 
their  desparate  and  daring  attempt:  he  therefore  drew  a  trencb 
threescore  feet  in  breadth,  and  ten  in  depths  and  barricaded  it  witb 

*  Gati«. 


Ckt^.  V.  DIODORU8  SICULUS.  60S 


X 


carts  and  carriages  as  with  a  wall ;  here  he  left  his  baggage,  and 
those  that  were  sick  and  weak,  with  but  a  slender  guard,  but  he  him- 
celf  with  a  swift  march  made  towards  the  enemy,  who  were  then  near 
at  hand. 

When  Cyrus  saw  the  king's  army  advancing,  he  forthwith  com* 
manded  all  his  army  to  their  arms.  The  Lacedaemonians  and  some 
mercenaries  were  in  the  right  wing,  stretched  out  to  the  river  Eu- 
phrates, under  the  command  of  Clearchus  the  Macedonian,  with 
whom  were  joined  above  a  thoi^sand  Paphlagonian  horse.  The  left 
win  :  was  commanded  by  Arid«eus,  consisting  of  Phr}'gians  and  Ly- 
<lians,  and  in  this  were  about  a  thousand  horse  more.  In  the  middle 
division  was  Cyrus  himself,  with  a  guard  for  his  person,  consisting  of 
the  best  Persian  soldiers  and  other  barbarians,  to  the  number  of  tea 
thousand  men,  before  whom  marched  as  a  van -guard  a  thousand 
horse  gallantly  accoutred,  with  Grecian  swords  and  coats  of  mail. 
On  the  other  side,  Artaxerxes  placed  a  great  number  of  hooked  cha' 
riots  in  front  of  his  whole  army,  and,  committing  the  two  wings  to 
the  commafid  of  Persian  officers,  he  himself  remained  with  the  mala 
body,  guarded  with  no  less  than  fifty  thpusand  choice  men. 

When  the  armies  came  within  three  furlongs  one  of  another,  the 
Grecians  sang  the  Paean,  and  then  silently  led  the  van ;  and  as  soon 
as  they  came  within  the  cast  of  a  dart,  they  ran  in  upon  the  enemy 
with  great  fury;  for  so  Clearchus  had  ordered  them,  conceiving  that 
if  they  fought  at  a  great  distance,  their  whole  bodies  would  be  marks 
for  their  enemies  during  all  the  time  of  the  fight;  whereas,  if  they 
engaged  close  at  hand,  they  would  be  less  subject  to  the  darts  and 
arrows  of  the  Persians.  As  soon  as  the  main  body  with  Cyrus  came 
up  to  the  king's,  a  shower  of  darts  and  arrows  like  a  tempest  fell  up- 
on them,  as  great  as  can  be  imagined  might  be  discharged  by  a  body 
of  fifty  thousand  men.  But,  after  they  had  fought  awhile  with  their 
darts  ut  a  distance,  at  length  they  fell  to  it  hand  to  hand.  The  La- 
cedaemonians and  mercenaries  at  the  first  charge  routed  that  part  of 
the  army  that  opposed  them,  far  exceeding  the  barbarians  both  in 
dexterity  of  fight  and  the  resplendent  brightness  of  their  arms;  for 
ail  the  barbarians  were  but  lightly  armed,  and  many  of  the  regiments 
were  of  the  meanest  soldiers,  and  the  greatest  part  but  raw  and  iu* 
expert  in  war.  The  Grecians,  on  the  contrary,  by  so  long  and  con-^ 
tinual  exercise  of  their  arms  in  the  late  Peioponnesian  war,  were 
grown  very  skilful  atid  excellent  soldiers;  so  that  they  put  their  ad^ 
versarics  presciitly  to  fiight,  and  made  a  great  slaughter  of  the  barba** 
rians.  It  so  happened,  that  both  the  generals,  (who  were  contending 
for  the  kingdom),  being  in  the  main  battle  on  i^ither  side,  and  weigh* 
ipg  how  fatal  the  issue  would  bc^  (xtadc  one  agaiost  the  other,  pur* 


004  DioDoRus  sicuLus.  Book  XIF. 

posiiig  to  decide  the  controversy  by  their  own  hands;  and  destiny 
seemed  now  to  engage  tiiese  two  brothers  in  a  duel,  as  if  it  had  been 
in  imitation  of  tliat  antient  and  stout  combat  between  Eteocles  and 
Polyiiices,  so  memorized  hy  poets  in  tlieir  tragedies.  Here  Cyras 
made  the  onset,  and  at  a  distance  threw  his  javelin  with  all  his  force 
at  the  king,  and  brought  him  down  to  the  ground,  who  was  presently 
taken  up  as  dead,  and  carried  out  of  the  fight  by  them  that  were  a- 
bout  him.  Upon  this  Tissapiierncs,  a  noble  Persian,  steps  into 
the  king's  place,  encourages  the  soldiers,  and  fights  valiantly  him* 
self;  and,  endeavouring  to  revenge  the  supposed  death  of  the  king^ 
flew  about  into  every  place  with  the  choicest  of  the  troops,  and 
made  a  dreaHful  slaughter  wherever  he  came,  insomuch  as  his  heat 
and  extraor'linary  courage  wtis  taken  notice  of  by  them  that  were  at  a 
great  distance. 

Cyrus,  likewise,  lifted  up  with  the  success  of  his  arms,  fiercely 
rushes  into  the  midst  of  the  battle,  and  signalized  his  courage  with 
the  slaughter  of  many  of  his  enemies;  but  rashly  running  himself 
into  eminent  dangers,  he  at  length  received  a  mortal  wound  from  a 
common  soldier  of  the  Persians,  and  there  fell  down  dead;  upon 
whose  fall  the  spirits  of  the  royalists  revived,  who  renewed  the  fight, 
and  at  last,  by  the  number  of  their  forces,  and  confidence  of  succesSj 
wearied  out  their  opposcrs. 

Aridffius,  Cyrus's  general  and  commander  in  the  other  part  of  the 
army,  at  the  first  valiantly  received  the  charge  of  the  barbarians;  but 
afterwards  (the  wing  of  the  enemy  stretching  in  length  far  beyond 
liim,  and  the  rumour  of  the  death  of  Cyrus  coming  to  him,  as  a  far- 
ther discouragemetit)  he  retreated  with  those  under  his  command  to 
a  post  very  comtnodious  for  that  purpose.  Clearchus,  perceiving  the 
main  body  of  their  army  to  be  routed,  and  the  rest  ready  to  fly, 
stop]ied  his  own  men  in  their  pursuit;  for  he  feared  that  if  the 
whole  army  of  the  barbarians  should  fall  upon  the  Grecians,  they 
would  he  all  utterly  cut  off.  In  the  mean  time,  the  body  where  the 
Persian  king  immediately  commanded,  having  routed  the  party  that 
engaged  them,  rifled  Cyrus's  camp.  Afterwards,  (it  now  growing  to- 
wards night),  in  one  body  they  made  against  the  Greeks,who  valiantly 
(like  men  of  brave  and  generous  spirits)  received  the  charge;  the 
barbarians  did  not  long  stand  their  ground,  but,  being  worsted 
by  the  valour  and  dexterity  of  the  Grecians,  were  presently  pat 
to  fliirht. 

I 

Clearchus,  after  he  had  made  a  great  slaughter  among  them,  (it 
being  now  dark)  erected  a  trophy,  and  then  retired  to  his  caoip,  a* 
bout  the  time  of  the  second  watch.  The  battle  thus  ended,  an  ac« 
count  was  taken  of  those  that  were  slain  on  the  king's  side,  which 


Chap.  V.  '  DioboRUS  8ICULU8.  665 

amoQDted  to  above  fifteen  thousand,  the  greatest  part  of  whom  were 
killed  by  the  Lacedaemonians  and  mercenaries,  tinder  the  command 
of  Clearchus.  On  the  other  hand,  three  thousand  were  slain  of  Cy- 
rus's army.  Nb  account  is  given  of  any  of  the  Grecians  that  were 
slain,  but  only  a  few  wounded. 

The  next  day  Aridceus.  who  retired  to  his  former  post  (as  we  have 
before  related)  sent  to  Clearchus,  to  desire  him  to  join  their  forces, 
that  so  they  might  better  secure  themselves  by  the  advantage  of 
places  near  to  the  sea-side:  for  Cyrus  being  dead,  and  the  king's 
forces  now  victors,  a  terror  seized  the  whole  army,  and  every  one 
repented  himself  of  his  bold  and  rash  attempt  to  depose  Ar- 
taxerxes. 

Hereupon  Clearchus  called  a  council  of  war  of  all  the  captain$ 
and  officers  of  the  army,  to  advise  what  was  to'  be  done  in  th^  pre- 
sent  exigency  of  afiairs.  While  they  were  in  consultation,  there 
came  to  them  messengers  from  the  king,  the  chief  of  whom  was  one 
Philcnus,  a  Grecian,  of  the  island  Zacynthus.  When  they  were  in- 
troduced, they  declared  their  message  in  this  manner^Phus  saitb 
king  Artaxerxes:  Inasmuch  as  Cyrus  is  killed,  and  I  am  now  con- 
queror, lay  down  your  arms,  make  haste  to  my  gatts,  and  consider 
how  to  appease  me,  that  ye  may  find  some  favour.  Upon  these 
words  all  the  officers  answered,  as  Leonidas  had  done  in  time  past 
when  Xerxes  sent  to  the  guard  at  Thermopylae  to  give  up  their  arms^ 

which  was  to  this  purpose ^That  if  at  any  time  after  they  should  l)c- 

come  Xerxes's  friends,  they  should  be  more  able  to  do  him  service 
with  their  arms  than  without  them;  and,  if  they  were. forced  to  be 
his  enemies,  they  could  better  defend  themselves  in  fighting  against 
him.     After  Cleaichus  had  returned  this  answer  to  the  same  effect, 

Proxcnus  the  Theban  said  tiius We  liave  now  lost  almost  all  we 

have,  only  our  hearts  ahd  our  arms  are  still  our  own,  and  as  long  as 
we  keep  these,  we  doubt  not  but  by  our  courage  we  may  be  able  to 
better  our  condition;  but  when  we  part  with  our  arms,  our  valour  is 
useless  and  unprofitable;  and  therefore  bid  them  tell  the  king,  that 
if  he  designed  any  attack  upon  thecn,  they  were  ready  with  their  arms 
to  oppose  him.  Sophilus,  likewise,  one  of  the  commanders,  is  re- 
ported to  have  said ^That  he  wondered  at  the  king's  demands:  for, 

says  he,  if  the  king  thinks  himself  stronger  than  the  Grecians,  let  him 
draw  uown  his  ar^ny  upon  us,  aud  take  our  arm"*  by  force;  but,  if  he 
means  only  to  persuade  us,  and  intends  to  give  us  thanks  for  the  fa« 
vour,  let  him  first  say  so.  To  this  Socrates  the  Achaian  added-^The 
king,  said  he,  deals  with  us  without  sense  or  reason;  for,  that  which 
be  would  have  to  be  taken  from  us,  he*demands  forthwith  to  be  deli- 
vered to  him,  and  that  which  w#  are  to  expect  in  return^  we  most 


606  DIODORUS  8YCULU8.  Book  Xlf^ 


■■ 


seek  for  after  as  suppliants,  by  petition  and  entreaty.  To  conclude, 
if  be  be  so  ignorant  how  things  stand,  as  that  he  thinks  fit  to  coib« 
mand  the  conquerors,  as  if  they  were  conquered,  that  he  may  lean 
the  better  to  judge  which  side  carries  away  the  victory,  kt  him  set 
upon  us  with  his  innumerable  army ;  but  if  he  very  well  kaows  Aat 
we  are  conquerors,  and  yet  seeks  deceitfully  with  a  lie  to  cLneamvcDt 
us,  how  can  we  rely  upon  his  promises  for  things  to  ooine?..jrhc 
messeugers  were  dismissed  with  these  answers,  and  so  departed. 

Ciearchus  afterwards  marclied  with  his  squadron  to  the  phot 
where  the  rest  of  the  army  that  escaped  out  of  the  battle  were  posted] 
and  wlien  all  the  forces  were  got  together,  they  entered  into  a  coon- 
cil  of  war  concerning  their  marching  back  to  the  sea-side,  and  so 
from  thence  how  to  go  on.     In  this  consultation  it  was  judged  most 
advjseable  not  to  return  the  same  way  they  came;   for  that  a  gical 
part  of  it  was  desert  and  barren,  and  the  more  hazardous,  because  the 
enemy  would  be  pressing  continually  upon  their  heels.    At  length  it 
was  resolved,  with  u  swift  march  to  lead  the  army  towards  PlaphbH 
gonia,  yet  not  so  fast  but  that  they  might  furnish  themselvea  widi 
provision  in  the  way.   But  the  king,  as  soon  as  he  began  to  be  healed 
of  his  wounds,  and  heard  of  the  enemy's  being  retired,  supposiiig 
that  they  fled,  hastened  after  them  with  all  speed;  and,  becanae  they 
moved  but  slowly,  at  last  he  overtook  them,  and,  night  drawing  oa^ 
encamped  near  at  hand.    About  break  of  day  next  morning  the  Gie- 
cians  drew  up  in  battalia;  upon  whidi  he  sent  messengers  to  thea^ 
and  for  that  time  granted  to  them  a  truce  for  three  days;  within  whisb 
it  was  agreed  that  the  king  should  suffer  them  to  pass  quietly  Amigb 
his  country,  and  that  he  should  allow  them  guides  to  the  sea-aide^ 
and  furnish  them  with  provision  in  their  march  for  their  money. 
And  that  all  the  mercenaries  under  the  command  of  Clearchna  and 
Aridaeus  should  pass  peaceably  through  all  places,  provided  they  com** 
xnitted  no  outrages.  Upon  which  they  commenced  their  jonrney,  and 
the  king  marched  back  with  his  army  to  Babylon,  and  tliere  lewanbd 
them  that  had  behaved  themselves  courageously  in  the   battlt; 
amongst  whom  Tissaphernes  was  judged  the  hnivest  man,  and  theie* 
fore  he  honoured  him  with  many  rich  and  princely  gifts,  and  bcsiowei 
his  daughter  upon  him  in  marriage,  using  him  ever  after  aa  hia  &st 
and  faithful  friend.    He  made  him  likewise  governor  aod  kvi* 
lieutenant  of  all  the  provinces  that  had  been  under  the  command  of 
Cyrus  upon  the  sea-coasts.    But  Tissaphernes  perceiving  that  the 
king  was  irreconcilably  incensed  against  the  Grecians,  promised  ta 
destroy  them  all  if  he  would  furnish  him  with  an  army,  and  be  leeoft^ 
cilcd  to  Aridieus ;  for  through  him,  he  said,  he  should  be  abb  to  oivfe 
Lumvcni  all  the  Grecians  in  their  j^urney^ .     .. 


CaUy.  V.  DIODOKUfl  ilCULUS. 

This  advice  was  rery  acceptable  to  the  icing,  and  therefiore  lie  mC* 
fered  faim  to  choose  the  best  of  the  soldiers,  and  as  many  as  lie  thougfan 
fit  out.  of  the  whole  army.  With  these  in  all  haste  he  pursued  the 
Grecians,  and  at  length  encamped  not  far  from  them,  and  sent 
messengers  to  them  to  desire  that  Clearchtts,  and  the  rest  of  the 
commanders  would  come  to  him  and^bear  wliat  he  bad  to  ssf  t# 
ckem*  Upon  which,  almost  all  the  colonels  and  captains  fas  becaan^ 
them)  went  along  with  Clearchus  to  Tissaphernes;  and  about  tm^ 
hundred  soldiers  followed  afteif  to  buy  provisions.  Tissapheroes 
called  all  the  colonels  and  chief  officers  into  his  tent,  but  the  eaptaiM 
and  other  inferior  officers  stood  without*.  In  a  short  time  after,  upon 
the  putting  forth  a  purple  flag  from  the  top  of  bis  pavilion,  the  com* 
manders  within  were  all  seized,  and  others  (appointed  im  that  pur-* 
porse)  killed  all  the  rest  that  stood  without;  and  the  other  soldiciv 
that  came  to  buy  victuals,  werekiHed  in  every  place  here  and  thero 
as  they  were  found ;  only  one  made  bb  escape  to  the  eamp,  and  IbcM 
related  the  slaughter.  Upon  the  lusaring  of  this  bloody  fact,  the  sol* 
diers  in  great  consternation  ran  in  confusion  to  their  arms,  haviac 
neither  general,  colonel,  nor  almost  any  other  offitcer» 

When  none  was  willing  to  undeitake  the  charge,  they  chose  sevenl 
officers  from  amongst  themselves,  and  fixed  upon  one  of  those  to  bo 
the  general,  which  was  Chirosophus  tlie  Lacedsemooiaa.  The  army 
hereupon  being  marshalled  by  these  officers  into  that  order  which  waa 
judged  best,  set  forward  towards  Paphlagonia.  Tissaphemes  in  the 
mean  time,  sends  the  general  and  the  other  officers  bound  in  chains 
to  Artaxerxes,  who  put  them  all  to  death,  but  only  Menon,  whom  be 
released:  for  he  was  supposed  to  have  been  willing  to  have  delivered 
up  the  Grecians,  because  he  was  angry  with  them  for  not  surrender* 
tng  themselves.  After  this  horrid  act,  Tissaphemes  with  his  forces 
pursued  the  Greeks,  aod  picked  up  stragglers  here  and  thei«,  but 
durst  never  face  their  whole  army,  because  he  was  afraid  of  the  rage 
and  valour  of  men  in  a  desperate  condition.  And  therefore  set- 
ting upon  them  now  and  then,  only  in  such  places  as  he  judged  most 
lor  his  advantage,  he  made  no  great  slaughter  of  them,  but  with  small 
aud  inconsiderable  loss  on  the  part  of  the  Grecians,  pursued  iheni  as 
far  as  the  country  of  the  Garduehi.  But  then  perceiving  he  was  not 
likely  to  gain  any  advantage  by  attacking  the  enemy  thus  in  the  rear, 
he  marches  his  army  to  Ionia. 

But  the  Grecians  spent  seven  days  in  passing  over  the  mountains 
of  the  Carduchi,  and  in  that  time  suffered  very  much  from  the  in- 
habitants, being  a  warlike  people,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  passes 
in  those  parts.  They  were  a  free  people,  and  enemies  to  the  king, 
and  very  good  soldiers,  especially  skilful  and  experinced  in  hurling 


608  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  BookXlFi 

■  ■        ■<     I   I    II     II      II  ■  !■■! 


great  stones  out  of  slings,  and  shooting  with  bows  of  a  vait  bigncMy 
and  more  than  ordinary  strength.  These  people  galled  the  Greciant 
from  the  rising  grounds,  killing,  and  miseiahly  wounding  many  of 
them;  for  their  arrows,  being  above  two  cubits  loog^  pierced  bodi 
their  shields  and  breast-plates,  so  that  no  armour  could  repel  thdr 
force.  And  it  is  said  that  thesasort  of  weapons  were  so  extraordinarily 
big,  that  the  Grecians  used  to  cast  these  as  Saunians^  instead  of 
their  thong  darts. 

When  they  had  passed  this  country  with  great  difBcultyy  they  eame 
to  the  river  Centrites,  and  passed  over  into  Armenia^  which  was 
then  under  the  government  of  Teribazus,  lord-lieuteuant  to  the  ki^g 
of  Persia,  with  whom  they  made  a  league,  and  so  passed  quietly  as 
friends  through  his  province.    But  as  they  marched  over -the  moiui- 
tains  of  Armenia,  the  snow  was  so  very  deep,  they  were  in  dai^pr 
every  man  of  being  lost.    Fur  at  the  first,  when  the  wind  begins  to  rise, 
the  snow  falls  but  leisurely  and  by  degrees,  so  that  it  occasions  no 
great  molestation  or  trouble  to  the  travellers :  but  then  present^  the 
wind  increasing,  the  snow  foils  so  tempestuously,  and  on  a  anddea 
covers  the  ground  so  thick  and  deep,  that  none  can  possibly  ace  be* 
fore  them,  nor  know  where  they  are.     Hence  fear  and  tenw  aciaed 
upon  the  whole  army,  seeing  nothing  but  certain  destmction  m 
behind  them  if  they  returned,  and  no  possibility  to  advance  ibrwaid 
by  reason  of  the  depth  of  the  snow;  besides,  winter  was  then  very 
sharp,  and  coming  on  apace,  and  such  a  tempest  of  windj  with  a 
storm  of  hail  arose,  and  blew  like  a  whirlwind  in  their  very  bea^ 
that  the  whole  army  was  forced  to  stand  stilL    For  none  being  able  to 
endure  so  sad  and  lamentable  a  march,  every  man  was  necessitated 
to  abide  in  the  place  where  the  storm  found  him:  and  though  all 
were  in  extreme  want,  yet  they  patiently  endured  that  whole  nigbt 
and  day  the  sharpness  of  the  winter's  cold,  attended  with  all  manner 
of  uncomfortable  circumstances.     For  all  their  arms  were  covered 
with  snow,  which  fell  continually  in  great  abundance.    Their  bodies 
were  stiff  and  benumbed  with  ice,  (which  became  more  sharp  and 
biting  after  the  air  was  calm  and  still),  and  so  grievous  were  the 
hardships  they  lay  under,  that  they  took  no  rest  all  the   night  long. 
Some  indeed  cherished  themselves  with  a  little  fire  they  had  kindled; 
others  bad  their  bodies  so  benumbed  with  cold,  tliat  little  hopea  of  life 
rcniaincd,  having  all  their  fingers  and  toes  perished.     When  tbs 
ni^ht  was  over,  they  found  most  of  their  carriage-hones  and  cattle 
lame  and  useless;  many  men  dead;  and  not  a  few  there  were^  who^ 
tiiough  they  iiad  some  life  remaining,  yet,  through  the  aharpocsiiaf 
tiie  cold,  their  bodies  were  immoveable;  and  some  were  as  if  tbsf 
were  struck  blind  by  the  whiteness  of  the  snow:  and  cveiy  asaabdl 


CKcip.  V.  DiODOKus  sicuLirs.  609 

certainly  perished  if  they  bad  not,  by  going  a  little  farther,  found 
ioiiie  small  TiHageSi  where  there  was  plenty  of  supplies  for  their  ne-» 
eessities ;  here  the  people  went  down  under  ground  by  steps*  and  the 
cattle  by  other  passages  made  thiougli  the  earth;,  and  in  these  little 
cells  were  stored  both  hay  for  the  cattle^  and  great  plenty  of  all 
tilings  necessary  for  the  support  and  sustenance  of  man's  life.  After 
lliey  had  staid  here  eight  days,  they  came  at  length  to  the  river 


There  they  abode  fnur  days,  and  then  passed  througii  the  country 
of  the  Chaoniti  and  Phasians,  where  being  fallen  upon  by  the  inha* 
bitants  in  their  march,  they  made  a  great  slaughter  among  them,  and 
possessed  themselves  of  their  towns,  which  were  full  of  provisions^ 
and  other  rich  booty,  and  there  they  rested  fifteen  days.  Thence 
marching  through  the  country  of  the  Chalcidoniaos,  in  the  space  of 
seven  days  they  arrived  at  the  river  called  Harpasus,  four  plethra 
broad.  From  thence  they  marched  through  the  plains  of  the  Tascu- 
tians,  where  they  had  plenty  of  all  things,  and  spent  three  days  in 
refreshing  themselves.  In  four  days  after  they  came  to  the  great  city 
called  Gymnasia ;  here  the  prince  of  the  country  entered  into  a  league 
with  them,  and  allowed  them  guides  as  far  as  to  the  sea;  after fifteeik 
days  journey  they  came  to  the  mountain  Chenius,  where  they  that  ' 
were  in  the  van,  as  soon  as  they  discerned  the  sea  afar  ofi^  were 
transported  with  exceeding  joy,  and  gave  up  so  great  a  shout,  as  they 
that  were  in  the  rear  suddenly  put  themselves  in  a  posture  of  defence^ 
supposing  some  enemy  had  broke  in  upon  them;  but  as  soon  as  they 
all  came  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  from  whence  they  might  have  a  pros- 
pect of  the  sea,  they  lifted  up  their  hands,  and  gave  thanks  to  the' 
gods,  as  if  now  they  were  past  all  danger  for  the  future.  There  they 
got  together  great  heaps  of  stones,  and  of  them  raised  up  high  altars, 
upon  which  they  fixed  the  spoils  taken  from  the  barbarians,  as  eternal 
monuments  of  their  expedition.  They  bestowed  a  silver  cup  and  a 
Persian  garment  upon  the  guide;  who,  pointing  to  them  the  way  to 
the  Macrones,  took  his  leave. 

After  the  Grecians  entered  the  country  of  the  Macrones,  they  made 
a  league  with  them ;  in  confirmation  of  which  the  Grecians  received  a 
spear  from  the  barbarians^  and  gave  another  to  them ;  for  this  was  • 
a  certain  pledge  of  the  faithfxil  observance  of  their  leagues,  received 
from  their  forefathers,  as  the  barbarians  alleged.  When  they  had 
passed  the  mountains  in  these  parts,  they  came  down  into  the  country 
%A  the  Colchians,  where  a  great  body  of  the  inhabitants  came  forth 
against  them,  whom  the  Grecians  routed,  and  killed  vast  numbers  of 
them :  then  possessing  themselves  of  a  hill,  naturally  defensible, 
thence  they  wasted  the  country,  and  bringing  all  the  spoil  tlnther, 
they  plentifully  refreshed  themselves.    In  these  places  were  n)ulti- 

^QU  1.  No.  39.  iin 


6 1 0  DioDORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  XIFi 

I 
tudes  of  bee-hives,  from  whence  might  be  had  large  hobey-cooihss 
but  an  astonishing  mischief  happened  to  them  that  tasted  of  tfacmi 
for  as  many  as  eat  ever  so  little  went  presently  mad^  and  lay  npoB 
the  ground  as  if  they  were  dead.    And  because  many  fed  dienadici 
with  these  combs,  a  great  multitude  lay  up  and  down,  here  and  there^ 
as  if  they  had  been  slain  in  a  field  of  little.    This  was  a  very  sid 
day  to  the  whole  army,  being  amazed  with  the  strangeness  of  the 
thing,  and  the  number  of  those  that  lay  grovelling  upon  the  ground. 
But  the  next  day,  about  the  same  hour^all  cametothemselTes  agaiiiy 
and  rose  up  of  sound  and  perfect  mind,  and  found  themselv^es  in  U9 
other  condition  than  as  if  health  and  strength  had  been  restofed  to 
them  by  drinking  of  a  medicinal  potion.     Being  thus  recovered 
three  days  after,  they  came  to  Trapezus^  a  Greek  city.    This  isai 
lony  of  Sinopians^  and  belonging  to  the  Colchians:   here  they 
tinued  thirty  days,  being  bountifully  entertained  by  the  citiacenSy  end 
there  sacrificed  to  Hercules  and  toJupiter  Soter,  and  celebrated  the 
Gymnic  games.     It  is  the  common  fame,  that  the  ship  Ai^gos,  with 
Jason  and  his  companions,  arrived  here.     Hence  ChirosophaSy  die 
general,  was  sent  to  Byzantium  to  procure  shipping  to  convey  then 
thither;  for  he  and  Anaxibius,  the  Byzantine  admiral,  were  account* 
ed  intimate  and  special  friends;  thither,  therefore,  he  speedily  sails. 
The  Grecians  in  the  mean  time  being  furnished  with  two  small  ves* 
sols  at  Trapezus,  made  incursions  both  by  sea  and  land  upoD-tfo 
neighbouring  barbarians.    Thirty  days  they  had  waited  for  the  return 
of  Chirosophus;  but  he  staying  longer  than  they  expected,  and  their 
provisions  now  growing  scanty,  they  departed  from  thence,  and  after 
three  days  arrived  at  Cerasus,  which  is  likewise  a  Grecian  city^ 
built  by  the  Sinopians.     After  they  had  staid  here  a  few  days,  they 
marched  into  the  country  of  the  Mosynseci,  but  here  they  were 
assailed  by  the  inhabitants  in  great  bodies,  and  in  an  engagement 
killed  a  great  number;  those  that  escaped  fled  to  a  town  they  inha* 
bited^  defended  by  wooden  towers,  with  seven  stories  of  chambeis  one 
above  another.     This  town  the  Grecians  assaulted,  and  at  length 
took  it  by  storm.    This  place  was  the  metropolis,  and  chiefest  fort 
of  the  country,  and  in  the  highest  part  stood  the  king's  palace.    It 
is  the  law  of  the  country  here,  that  the  king  must  continue  in  this 
palace  during  his  life,  and  thence  issue  all  his  edicts  to  the  people. 
The  Grecians  related  tliat  they  passed  through  no  nation  more  bar* 
barous  than  this ;  for  the  men  scruple  not  to  have  carnal  knowledge 
of  the  women  in  open  view;  and  the  better  and  richer  sort  fetten 
their  children  with  boiled  walnuts;  and  are  stigmatized  with' divcfS 
markb  burnt  into  their  flesh,  both  upon  their  backs  and  breasts.    The 
Grecians  marched  through  tiiis  country  in  eightKdays^  and  thnm^ 


Chap.  VI.  MODOKUS  sicuLUfl.  611 


SBK 


the  oext  called  Tibaris  in  three.  Thence  they  passed  to  Cotyorsj  a 
Greek  city  and  colony  of  the  Sinopians^  where  they  abode  fifty  daySj 
wasting  and  spoiling  the  barbarous  nations  bordering  upon  Paphla- 
gonia.  Here  the  Heracleans  and  Sinopians  furnished  them  with 
shipping,  in  which  both  they  and  their  cargo  were  conveyed  into  their 
own  country* 

iSinope  was  built  by  the  MilesianSi  situated  within  the  confines  of 
Paphlagonia;  of  the  greatest  account  and  authority  of  any  in  those 
parts.  Here  Mithridates  (so  fomous  in  our  age  by  his  wars  against 
the  Romans)  kept  his  court.  Chirosophus,  who  was  sent  away  for 
shipping,  but  all  in  vain,  returned  to  the  army.  But  the  other  Sino- 
pians having  entertained  them  with  all  the  demonstrations  of  Jcindness 
and  humaqity,  took  care  to  convey  them  to  Heraclea,  a  city  of  the 
Megarensians.  From  thence  the  whole  fleet  arrived  at  a  peninsula 
called  Acberusias,  where  Hercules  (as  the  fable  is)  drew  Cerberus  out 
of  hell.  Thence  they  marched  by  land  through  Bit&ynia»  where 
they  fell  into  great  hazards  and  hardships  by  the  attacks  of  the  inha* 
bitants,  who  assaulted  them  in  every  place  as  they  passed*  At  last, 
however,  with  great  difficulty,  they  came  to  Chrysopolis,  a  city  of 
Chalcedonia,  three  thousand  eight  hundred  being  only  left  of  ten 
thousand*".  From  hence  some  of  them  with  ease  and  safety  returned 
every  man  into  his  own  country;  the  rest  joined  in  a  body  at  Cher- 
sonesus,  and  besieged  a  city  bordering  upon  Thrace.  And  this  was 
Hx^  issue  of  Cyrus's  expedition  against  his  brother  Artazerzcs. 


CHAP.  VI. 

Thrasyhulns  opposes  the  thirty  tyrants.  The  cruelty  of  Psani'- 
metichusy  kmg  of  Egypt  y  towards  his  old  friend  T^amoSy  thai  fled 
to  him  for  succour  from  the  Persians.  Dercyllidas  sent  general 
against  the  Persians  hito  Asia*  Canon  made  admral  of  the 
Persianfleet. 

IN  the  mean  time  the  usurping  tyrants  at  Athens  every  day  were 
banishing  or  putting  to  death  some  one  or  other.  At  which  cruelty^ 
while  the  Thebans  were  much  incensed,  and  courteously  entertained 
the  exiles,  Thrasybulus,  surnamed  Tyrius,  (but  a  citizen  of  Athens^ 

*  This  is  a  mistakej  as  appears  afterwards  hy  the  number  «f  tbose  that  w«nt  with  X«^ 
aopbon  iato  i'hrace.     Vide  postciw    Olymp.  95. 


and  forced  to  fly  to  avoid  the  rage  of  the  thirty  nsarpen),  by  the  tU 
of  the  Thebans,  underhandedly  possessed  himself  of «  place  in  Atlie^ 
called  Phila.  It  was  a  very  strong  castle^  a  hundred  stages  dKatnl 
from  Athens;  by  which  means  an  easy  passage  might  be  bad  at  el 
times  to  invade  Attica. 

As  soon  as  the  tyrants  had  intelligence  of  what  was  dooe^  thej  M 
forth  their  forces  in  order  to  besiege  the  place;  but  as  bood  m  tlicj 
were  set  down  before  it,  there  fell  a  great  snow;  whereapoOy  wbik 
some  were  very  busy  in  removing  their  tents^  the  commoD  eoUien 
concluded  ihat  some  of  their  army  was  put  to  flight  by  an  eoeaiy  at 
bund,  that  had  broke  in  suddenly  upon  them;  upon  wliich  being 
struck  witli  a  panic  fear,  they  drew  oif  and  encamped  in  another 
place.  The  thirty,  when  they  saw  the  citizens  of  Athens  (tlioee  that 
had  no  share  in  the  administration  of  the  commonwealth  with  tlie 
tliree  thousand)  to  be  hot  and  earnest  to  dissolve  the  government^ 
encamped  in  the  Pirseus,  and  over*awed  the  city  with  foreign  soldiers; 
and  intlie  mean  time  put  to  death  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Ekasb 
and  Salamis,  for  joining  in  a  conspiracy  with  the  exiles. 

Whilst  titese  things  were  going  on,  great  numbers  of  the  fugitives 
flocked  to  the  camp  of  Thrasybulus,  and  at  the  same  time  there  cane 
to  him  ambassadors  from  the  tliirty*,  under  colour  of  treating  con* 
cerniiig  some  prisoners,  hut  in  truth  privately  to  advise  him  todismiv 
the  fugitives,  and  to  share  with  them  in  the  govemnaent  of  the  citjr 
in  tiie  room  of  Theramenes,  and  that  he  should  have  liberty  to  restore 
any  ten  of  the  exiles  to  their  country,  such  as  he  thought  fit  to 
choose.  To  which  Thrasybulus  answered .^That  he  loolced  aponliis 
banishment  to  be  far  more  honourable  than  the  whole  power  and 
dominion  of  the  thirty,  and  that  he  would  never  put  up  his  swoid 
till  all  the  citizens  from  every  place  were  received,  and  the  people 
restored  to  their  former  liberties,  descended  to  them  firom  tlieir 
ancestors. 

When  the  tyrants  perceived  the  defection  increased,  throogh  ha- 
tred of  their  tyranny,  and  that  the  number  of  the  exiles  increaeed, 
they  sent  their  ambassadors  to  Sparta  to  desire  aid;  and  thitf  them- 
selves in  tiie  mean  time  got  together  what  forces  they  coald,  aad 
encamped  at  a  place  called  Acarnas.  Thrasybulus  lc»Wng  but  a 
small  guard  in  the  castle,  marches  out  against  them  with  twdve 
hundred  of  the  exiles,  and  setting  upon  them  in  the  night  onawarcSi 
kills  many  of  them,  and  the.rest  (being  terrified  with  tlie  tnanikaad 
confusion  occasioned  by  the  surprise)  he  forces  in  great  precipitation 
to  fly  into  the  city.  And  presently  after  the  success  of  this  attadry 
he  marches  against  the  Pireeus,  and  possesses  himself  of  ManyehMi 

*  Sq{  in  liie  Greek,  but  m  the  Latin,  jet  neccMtij  for  the  mbm. 


Chap.  VI.  DIODOKU8  fflCULUS«  6l3 


■M 


m  iNumn  hUl,  but  strong  aod  well  fimified.  Upon  tfais  the  tjruiti 
brought  all  their  foreet  into  the  Ptneiiii  and  anaoited  Munycfaia  bj 
Oritias  their  general ;  whereupon  was  a  sharp  encounter  a  long  timef 
for  the  tyrants  had  the  adwintage  of  number,  and  the  exiles  of  the 
strength  of  the  piaee.  At  length  the  forces  of  the  thirty  (being  db* 
couraged  and  Critias  slain)  retired^  but  the  exiles  judged  it  not  ad- 
visable to  pursue  them. 

Frequent  assaults  were  afterwards  made  upon  the  esules;  at  length 
the  army  of  Thrasybulus  broke  in  on  a  sudden  with  great  violence 
upon  the  enemy,  and  not  only  routed  them,  but  gained  possession  of 
the  Pirsus. 

A  great  multitude  who  hated  the  tyranny,  continually  flocked  out  of 
the  city  into  the  Piraeus,  and  all  the  exiles  from  every  place,  hearing 
of  th^  success  of  Thrasybulus,  hastened  thither  to  him,so  thatat  length 
the  number  of  the  exiles  exceeded  the  other;  upon  which  encourage- 
ment they  began  to  tiesiege'the  city.  But  they  within,  to  the  end  a 
peace  might  be  concluded  upon  fair  terms,  cast  off  the  thirty,  and 
sent  them  out  of  the  city,  and  established  a  decemvirate  with  sove- 
reign power.  But  as  soon  as  these  ten  were  settled  in  the  ma^tracy, 
instead  of  minding  any  thing  relating  to  the  peace,  they  turned  ab- 
solute t}Tants,  and  sent  toLacedsemon  for  forty  ships'and  a  thousand 
soldiers^  under  the  command  of  Lysander.  Pausanias,  then  king  of 
Lacedaemon,  both  out  of  envy  to  Lysander,  and  because  he  understood 
the  rest  of  the  Greeks  had  an  evil  eye  against  Sparta,  marched  with 
a  great  army  to  Athens,  and  reconciled  the  exiles  and  the  citizens. 
Thus  at  length  the  Athenians  were  restored  to  their  country,  and 
now  began  to  govern  according  to  their  own  at^tient  laws.  Those 
that  were  afraid  lest  they  should  suffer  due  punishment  for  their 
former  wickedness,  had  liberty  to  remove  themselves  to  Eleusis. 

About  this  time  they  of  Elis,  fearing  the  power  of  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians, made  peace  with  them  upon  these  terms^Fhat  they  should 
deliver  their  ships  to  the  Lacedaeiponians,  and  suffer  the  neighbouring 
cities  to  govern  according  to  their  own  laws.  And  now  Lacedasmoa 
being  at  leisure  and  at  peace  with  all  her  neighbours,  prepares  for 
war  against  them  of  Messena.  Some  of  them  then  held  a  castle  in 
Cephaienia,  others  inhabited  in  Naupactus,  within  the  country  of  the 
Locrians,  (called  Hesperians),  formerly  given  to  them  by  the  Athe- 
nians. But  they  cast  them  out  of  both,  and  restored  the  castle  to 
the  Cephalenians,  and  the  other  to  the  Locrians.  The  miserable 
Messenians  (through  the  antient  hatred  of  the  Lacedaemonians)  were 
expelled  every  where,  and  were  forced  to  leave  Greece,  marching 
off  with  their  arms;  some  of  them  went  to  Sicily,  and  inlisted  them- 
selves under  Dionysius^  others,  to  the  number  of  three  thousand. 


614  DiODORua  sicuLUS.  Book  XIK 


made  to  Cyrcne,  and  joined  other  exiles  there:  for  at  that  time 
a  grei^t  sedition  arose  among  the  Cyrenians  after  Aristooj  with  aone 
othersj  bad  possessed  themselves  of  the  city,  by  whom  five  huodicd 
of  the  principal  men  of  the  city  on  a  sudden  were  slain;  upoQ  whid 
all  the  persons  of  quality  fled  out  of  the  town.  Hereupon  the  exiles 
of  Cyrcnc  joined  with  the  Messenians,  and  inarched  inabody  agaioil 
tlicjD  who  kept  the  city :  the  parties  engaged,  and  in  the  fight  agreat 
slaughter  was  made  of  the  Cyrenians,  and  almost  all  the  Messeniaiis 
were  cut  off.  After  the  fight,  messengers  were  sent  to  and  firo^  ani 
the  matter  at  length  was  composed  by  the  Cyrenians,  among  then* 
selves,  who  engaged,  by  solemn  oath  one  to  another .^»That  all 
injuries  should  be  afterwards  for  ever  forgotten;  so  that  they  lived 
together  from  that  time  peaceably  in  the  government  of  their  com* 
monwcalth.  About  this  time  the  Romans  sent  colonies  to  them 
called  Vcntras*. 

The  vcur  ended.  Laches  was  made  lord  chancellor  of  Athens.    At 
Rome  the  consular  dignity  was  given  again  to  military  tribunes^ 
Manlius  Claudius,  Marcus  Quintius-t,  Lucius  Julius,  Marcus  FuriiiSy 
and  Lucius  Valerius.    Then  was  celebrated  the  ninety-fifth  olympiad 
in  which  JMIhos  the  Atlienian  was  victor.    At  the  same  time  Artax* 
erxcs  king  of  Asia,  after  the  defeat  of  Cyrus,  sent  Tissaphemes}  to 
take  into  his  care  and  charge  all  the  governments  on  the  sea-coasts; 
upon  whicii  the  provinces  and  cities  which  bad  sided  with  Cyrus  were 
greatly  terrified,  lest  they  should  be  punished  for  what  they  had  done 
against  the  king;  aud  therefore  sought  to  qualify  Tissaphernes  by 
their  messengers:  and  every  one  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  endea* 
vourcd  to  procure  his  favour.    But  Tamos,  the  cliiefest  of  themj 
lord-Iieutcnant  of  Ionia,  put  his  wealth  and  all  his  children  on  ship- 
board, (except  one  culled   Gaus,  who  was  afterwards  the  king  of 
Persia's  general),  out  of  fear  of  Tissaphernes,  and  went  to  Egypt 
for  protection,  to  Psammetichus  the  king,  (descended  from  the  antient 
Psammctichus) ,  whom  he  had  formerly  obliged  by  several  good  offices, 
and  therefore  hoped  he  sliould  there  find  shelter  and  safe  harboar^ 
to  secure  him  from  the  impending  storm  of  the  king^s  wrath«    Bnt 
Psammetichus  neither  valuing  former  benefits,  nor  regarding  the  lav 
of  nations  to  them  in  distress,  (out  of  covetousness  togain  the  money 
and  the  ships),  cut  the  throat  of  bis  friend  and  suppliant^  and  of  aU 
his  children. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Grecian  cities  throughout  Asia^  hearing  of 

*  Vclitras. 
t  Livj  sa}s,  Marrus  Emilius,  AppiuH  Claudius,  Marcus  Quintillw,  Lndai  Jdiii% 
Marmi  r»'«thiimiiis,  and  Lucius  Valtrius. 

t  riiuruabu^us  Ik  here  put  for  Tissaplieracs.    Usb.  An.  169. 


Chap.  FT.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS«  $15 


M, 


the  descent  of  Tlssapheroes^  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Lacedemo- 
Aians,  and  earnestly  entreated  tbem  that  they  would  not  sufier  them 
to  be  utterly  destroyed  by  the  barbarians.  Upon  this  they  promised 
forthwith  to  send  them  aid,  and  by  their  ambassadors  solicited  Tissa- 
phernes  that  he  would  not  invade  the  Grecian  cities  with  his  army. 
However,  regardless  of  their  ambassadors,  he  set  upon  theCumeans  in 
'the  first  place,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  the  country  round  about,  and 
took  a  vast  number  of  prisoners,  and  afterwards  besieged  the  city ;  but 
by  reason  of  winter  coming  on,  he  could  not  talce  it,  ^nd  therefore 
(after  he  had  received  a  great  sum  of  money  for  the  redemption  of  the 
captives)  he  raised  his  siege. 

The  Lacedsmonians,  in  defence  of  the  Greek  cities,  made 
Thimbron  general  in  the  war  against  the  king,  and  gave  him  the 
command  of  a  thousand  Spartans,  with  orders  to  raise  as  many  more 
men  from  among  their  confederates,  as  he  thought  fit  for  the  present 
service. 

Upon  which  Thimbron  goes  to  Corinth,  and  mustering  the  aid  he 
had  got  together  from  several  places,  he  passes  over  to  Ephesus^ 
with  no  more  than  five  thousand  men:  after  he  had  raised  two  thou* 
sand  more  from  the  confederate  cities  and  other  places,  having  with 
him  not  above  seven  thousand  men,  he  marched  a  hundred  and  twenty 
stages,  and  took  Magnesia  at  the  first  assault,  a  city  within  the  fgb^ 
▼ernment  of  Tissapheriies.  Then  he  came  to  Tralles,  a  town  in  loaia^ 
imd  determined  to  besiege  it;  but  not  being  able  to  efiect  any  thing 
to  the  purpose  there,  by  reason  of  the  strength  of  the  place,  he  re- 
turned to  Magnesia.  Tliis  place  being  then  unwallcd,  and  therefore 
fearing  lestTissaphernes  siiould  retake  it  after  he  was  gooe,he  removed 
higher  to  the  next  hill,  called  Thorax;  from  whence  he  made  seve- 
ral incursions  upon  the  enemy,  and  loaded  his  soldiers  with  a  variety 
of  plunder. 

But  hearing  that  Tissaphemes  was  near  at  hand  with  a  great  body 
of  horse,  he  forthwith  retired  to  Ephesus. 

About  this  time  part  of  those  soldiers  that  went  along  with  Cyruf 
against  his  brother,  returned  into  Greece,  every  one  to  their  own 
country.  Others,  (the  greater  part  of  them  tlmt  were  always  accus- 
tomed to  military  employment),  to  the  number  almost  of  five  tliou- 
aand,  chose  Xenophon  for  their  general,  who  with  those  forces  made 
an  expedition  against  the  Thracians,  who  inhabited  Salmydessus^. 
This  is  a  long  creek  lying  shooting  out  along  the  left  side  of  Pontus, 
well  known  for  the  many  shipwrecks  that  have  been  there;  by  reasou 
whereof  the  Thracians  near  tliose  parts  used  to  seize  upon  the  nier* 
chants  that  escaped  on  shore,  and  carried  them  away  as  captives. 

^  A  pTumoDtory  and  bay  ia  Footus. 


6l6  uiODORUS  8ICULUS.  Book  XIF. 

-^•^  I"  '  '      ■'       II I  ii     '  ■  ■■  I.I  ,„,^^,,^x,^j,,^j^,^_^^^j^a^^^^^ 

XenophoD  therefore  with  his  forces  breaks  into  their  eoaotij, 
comes  them  ia  battle,  and  barns  many  of  dieir  tomia  and  villngcs. 
From  hence  they  are  sent  for  by  Thimbron,  with  proouse  of  boagwril 
paid^  upon  which  they  marched  to  him^  being  very  ci^ger  to  ■mini  At 
Liacedsemonians  against  the  Persians. 

During  these  actions,  Dionysius  in  Sicily,  builds  a  town  at  tk 
foot  of  iEtna,  and  from  a  certain  famous  temple,  calls  it  Adnmimi.  It 
Macedonia,  king  Archilaus,  when  he  was  hunting,  was  killed  ky 
Craterns,  whom  he  dearly  loved,  after  he  had  reigned  seven  jcus; 
and  his  son  Orestes  (yet  a  child)  succeeded  him.  After  the  dorthtf 
Archilaus  ^tropus,  the  tutor  and  guardian  of  Orestet  governed  ^ 
kingdom  for  the  space  of  six  years.  At  the  same  time  in  Athens^ 
Socrates  the  philosopher  accused  by  Anytus  and  Melitua  of  atheis■^ 
and  corrupting  the  youth,  was  condemned  to  die,  and  afterwvds 
executed  by  drinking  a  cup  of  poison;  of  which  wicked  action  the 
people  in  a  short  time  after  repented,  when  in  vain  they  could  hife 
wished  that  excellent  and  worthy  man  alive  again :  therefore  tbcy 
turned  all  their  fury  upon  his  accusers,  and  killed  them  witboat  wait- 
ing for  any  formalities  of  law. 

When  the  year  was  ended,  Aristocrates  bore  the  oiBce  of  archon  at 
Athens  for  the  year  ensuing:  and  at  Rome,  six  military  tribaaei 
were  invested  with  consuhu*  Bignity,  Caius  Servilius^  Ludus  Viigi- 
nius,  Quintus  Sulpitius,  Aulus  Matilius*,  Capitusf,  Ciodius|,  and 
Marcus  Ancus§.  During  their  magistracy,  the  Lacedsemonians  under- 
standing that  the  affairs  of  tiie  war  were  badly  managed  by  Thimbroa, 
sent  Dercyllidas  general  into  Asia.  Upon  his  arrival,  he  forthwith 
marched  with  the  forces  against  the  cities  of  Troas,  and  quickly  took 
Arisbajl,  Hamaxia,  and  Colonae,  afterwards  Ilium,  Cebrenia,  and  all 
the  rest  of  the  cities  in  the  territory  of  Troas,  some  by  tricks  and  sur- 
prise, and  others  by  storm. 

After  this,  he  and  Pharnabazus^  agreed  upon  a  truce  for  eight 
months;  and  in  the  mean  time  he  fell  upon  the  Thracians  in  Bi- 
thynia,  and  wasted  their  country,  and  then  drew  his  army  into  winter 
quarters. 

At  that  time  a  great  sedition  broke  out  in  Heraclea,  in  Thrachinia, 
and  thereupon  the  Lacedasmonians  sent  Eriphldas  to  compose  the 
differences,  who,  when  he  came  there,  procured  a  council  to  be  called, 
and  having  beset  the  senate  round  with  armed  men,  seized  the  au- 
thors, and  put  all  to  death,  to  the  number  of  five  hundred  noen.  He 
likewise  marched  with  an  army  against  the  inhabitants  of  (Eta^ who  had 
made  a  defection;  and  after  he  had  reduced  them  to  many  hardships, 

^KanJiut.  f  Capitolinus.  |  Quintns  Serrilius.  §  Marcus  Scrjtti. 

n  For  LarUia.  5]  TiMapbernea. 


CA&p.  VI.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  6l7 

he  forced  them  out  of  those  places^  and  the  greatest  part  of  th«n^ 
with  their  wives  and  children^  fled  into  Thessaly,  and  five  years  after 
were  transplanted  into  Boeotia. 

During  these  afiairs  the  Thracians  in  great  bodies  made  an  irrup- 
tion into  the  Chersonesus  of  Thrace^  wasting  and  ravaging  the  coun- 
try every  wliere,  and  there  they  possessed  themselves  of  all  the  fenced  . 
cities.  Upon  tbis^  they  of  the  Chersonesus  sent  for  Dercyllidas  the 
Lacedsemonian  out  of  Asia,  who  transported  his  army  thither,  and 
drove  the  Thracians  out  of  the  country;  and,  drawing  a  wall  aqross 
from  one  sea  to  the  other,  fortified  the  Chersonesus  so  as  that,  by  this 
means,  he  prevented  the  incursions  of  the  Thracians  for  the  time  to 
come,  and  so  he  returned  with  his  forces  into  Asia,  after  he  had  been 
bountifully  rewarded  for  his  services.  During  the  time  of  the  truce, 
Pharnabazus^  went  up  to  the  king,  and  he  and  dihers  persuaded  him 
to  equip  a  navy,  and  make  Conon,  the  Athenian, admiral,  for  he  was 
a  very  skilful  and  expert  soldier,  the  best  that  was  then  in  Cyprus 
with  king  Evagoras*  Pharnabazus,  having  wrought  upon  the  king, 
and  received  five  hundred  talents  for  that  purpose,  forthwith  made  it 
his  business  to  fit  out  a  fleet,  and,  after  he  had  sounded  Conoa 
concerning  his  acceptance  of  chief  command  at  sea,  he  created  him 
admiral,  making  him  many  great  and  fair  promises  in  the  king's  name. 
Hereupon  Conon  accepts  the  place,  iu  hopes  not  only  to  recover  the 
sovereignty  of  the  seas  for  his  country,  by  subduing  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians, but  to  advance  his  own  reputation  by  the  success  of  his  arms. 
But  in  regard  the  whole  fleet  was  not  as  yet  ready,  he  sailed  away 
only  with  forty  sail  into  Cilicia,  and  there  prepared  himself  for 
the  war. 

Pharnabazus,  likewise,  and  Tissaphernes,  having  raised  men  out  of 
their  several  provinces,  marched  forth,  and  made  their  way  towards 
Ephesus,  because  the  enemy's  forces  lay  there.  There  were  with 
them,  under  their  command,  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  ten  thousand 
horse.  Dercyllidas  the  Lacedsemonian,  hearing  of  the  enemy's 
march,  drew  forth  his  army,  having  no  more  than  seven  thousand 
men  3  but  when  the  armies  drew  near  one  to  another,  a  truce  was  a- 
greed  upon,  and  a  certain  time  prefixed,  within  which  Phatnabazus 
might  send  the  articles  to  the  king  to  know  his  pleasure,  whether  he 
would  have  peace  or  war,  and  that  Dercyllidas  might  inform  the  Spar- 
tans how  aflkirs  stood  in  the  mean  time.  And  upon  these  terms  th^ 
armies  drew  off  into  their  several  quarters. 

*  Tissaphernes. 


Vui.I.Nq.M.  kkkx 


6*1 8  DIODORU8  SICULU9.  Sook  JUPl 


CHAP.  VII. 

TJie  war  bpiween  the  Rhegians  and  Dionysius:  he  preparei  I9 
make  war  upon  the  Carthaginians.  Most  of  the  cities  submit  ia 
Dionysius.  He  returns  to  the  siege  of  Motya.  J2  it  takm. 
Forces  sent  from  Carthage  against  Dionysius.  A  sea-fight  &e- 
txveen  the  Carthaginians  and  tlie  Sicilians.  Syracuse  besiegedm 
The  speech  of  Theodoras  against  Dionysius.  A  grievous  plague 
in  tlie  Carthaginian  army.  A  great  destruction  of  the  Carika^ 
ginian  fleet  in  the  harbour  of  Syracuse.  The  miserable  cofitfi- 
tion  of  Amilcar  in  his  own  country.  The  troubles  of  iks  Car- 
ihagviians. 

THE  Rhegians,  formerly  a  colony  of  the  ChalcidoniaDS,  were  now  un- 
easy under  the  growing  power  of  Dionysius;  fcH*  he  had  enslaved  the 
Naxians  and  Catancans,  who  were  of  their  own  blood  and  natioo; 
and  the  Rhegians,  seeing  that  they  themselves  were  in  the  same 
common  danger  with  those  already  expressed,  were  in  a  great  con- 
sternation lest  they  should  all  be  brought  under  the  same  calamity: 
therefore  they  judged  it  most  advisable,  and  highly  to  concern  them, 
to  make  war  upon  him  while  they  had  an  opportunity,  before  the  ty- 
rant grew  too  strong.  Those  that  were  banished  from  Syracuse  by 
Dionysius  joined  in  this  war^  being  furnished  with  all  things  neces- 
sary for  that  purpose  by  the  Rhegians :  for  there  wa»  a  great  multi- 
tude of  them  at  that  time  at  Rhegium^  who  (being  pressed  by  the 
Rhegians  with  the  necessity  and  advantage  they  were  likely  to  revp 
by  the  war)  resolved  to  make  use  of  the  first  opportunity.  To  that 
end  officers  were  at  length  chosen,  and  with  them  they  sent  six  thou- 
sand foot,  and  six  hundred  horse,  with  fifty  crabycs:  when  they  were 
landed,  they  solicited  the  Messanian  commanders  to  join  with  them, 
telling  them  it  would  be  a  most  dishonourable  thing  if  they  should 
suflfcr  a  Grecian  city,  and  next  to  them,  to  be  utterly  destroyed  by  a 
tyrant.  TIic  officers,  being  thus  persuaded,  led  forth  the  aoldieia 
without  the  order  of  the  state.  The  number  was  four  thousand  foot, 
and  four  hundred  horse,  and  with  them  thirty  gallies.  Before  they 
had  marched  to  the  utmost  borders  of  Messana,  there  was  raised  a 
great  mutiny  among  the  soldiers,  by  a  speech  made  to  them  by  Lao- 
medon  a  Messanian;  for  he  advised  them  not  to  be  the  aggressors 
upi>n  Dionysius,  who  had  not  hitherto  oflTered  them  any  injury.  Up- 
on which  the  soldiers  of  Messana  (because  the  people  had  not  by  their 
suffrage  ordered  this  war)  presently  followed  his  advice,  and,  foisak- 


€kap.  Fit  DIODORU8  SICULXJS.  $19 


in^  tlieir  captains^  returned  hpaie«  Whereapop  the  Rh^;taii8y  coq- 
sideriog  themselves  not  able  to  carry  on  the  war  alone,  now  the  forces 
of  Messana  were  fellen  off,  retamed  likewise  to  their  own  city.  As 
for  Dionysius,  he  had  (upon  the  first  notice  of  the  design  upon  him) 
drawn  out  his  forces  to  the  utmost  confines  of  Syracuse,  expecting 
the  enemy;  but,  hearing  by  his  spies  that  they  were  marched  back, 
he  likewise  returned  with  his  to  Syracuse. 

After  this,  when  they  of  Rhegium  and  Messana  sent  ambassadors 
to  him  to  treat  upon  terms  of  peace  (he,  conceiving  it  much  to  the 
advantage  of  his  affiurs  to  prevent  all  oth^r  hostilities  and  disturbances 
from  these  cities)  made  peace  with  them*  He  likewise  observed, 
that  many  of  the  Grecians  ran  into  the  Carthaginian  garrisons,  not 
only  bringing  along  with  them  their  goods  and  estates,  but  the  laws 
and  customs  of  their  several  cities;  and  therefore  concluded,  that  as 
long  as  the  peace  continued  with  the  Carthaginians,  those  that  were 
yet  bis  subjects  would  from  time  to  time  be  sheltering  themselves 
under  their  protection;  to  remedy  which,  he  conceived  that  if  he  re- 
newed the  war  against  Carthage,  all  those  that  were  fled  to  them,  be* 
ing  oppressed  by  the  Carthaginians,  would  return  to  him.  And  he 
was  the  more  encouraged,  for  that  he  heard  that  in  Africa  a  plague 
then  raged,  and  swept  away  many  of  the  Carthaginians.  Having 
oow,  therefore,  a  fit  opportunity  to  declare  war  against  them,  as  he 
conceived,  he  determined  to  make  it  his  chief  care  to  prepare  neces- 
saries for  so  great  an  expedition,  being  to  engage  with  the  most  po- 
tent nation  that  then  had  any  footing  in  Europe;  and  judging  (as  he 
very  well  might)  that  it  was  likely  to  be  a  great  war,  and  of  long 
continuance.  To  this  end  he  forthwith  gets  together  all  sorts  of  ar- 
tificers^ some  out  of  the  towns  and  cities  of  his  own  dominions,  and 
others  hired  with  more  than  ordinary  wages  out  of  Italy  and  Greece. 
For  he  resolved  to  make  a  vast  number  of  all  sorts  of  arms  and  wea- 
pons; likewise  gallies,  both  of  three  oars  on  a  bank,  and  of  five, 
which  last  were  never  used  before.  For  this  purpose  a  great  multi- 
tude of  all  sorts  of  workmen  were  brought  together,  to  every  one  of 
whom  he  ordered  their  proper  work,  according  to  their  several  trades, 
and  appointed  some  of  the  best  and  most  substantial  of  the  citizens 
to  be  overseers,  promising  great  rewards  for  the  encouragement  of 
the  diligent.  He  himself  directed  the  form  and  fashion  of  every 
sort  of  weapon,  because  mercenary  soldiers  came  flocking  in  to  him 
out  of  many  different  countries :  for  he  purposed  that  every  one 
should  use  such  anus  (both  offensive  and  defensive)  as  they  were 
accustomed  to  in  their  own  nations;  for  he  concluded,  that  as 
it  would  strike  a  greater  terror  into  his  enemies,  so  his  soldiers 


^20  DIODORU8  81CULUS,  Book  XIV. 


would  fight  much  the  better  with  those  arms  they  had  most  cob- 
monly  used. 

The  Syracusans  did  all  they  could  to  forward  him  in  his  design; 
so  that  every  one  strove  who  could  most  advance  the  work;  for,  not 
ouly  the  porches  and  back  parts  of  the  temples,  bat  the  public  schools 
and  walks,  and  galleries  about  the  forum,  and  every  place  op  and 
down,  were  full  of  workmen;  and  besides  these  in  public  plscesyanns 
were  made  in  great  quantities  in  every  large  hou^e  belonging  to  the 
citizens.  The  art  of  making  engines  to  hurl  great  stones  was  now 
first  known  at  Syracuse,  for  at  this  time  the  most  excellent  arti- 
ficers were  met  together  from  all  parts:  for  the  great  wi^ges  and  laige 
promises  of  rewards  to  the  perfecting  of  the  work,  made  the  trades- 
men and  artificers  very  intent  and  industrious.  And  besides  all  this, 
Dionysius  himself  came  every  day  to  oversee  the  workmen,  speaking 
kindly  and  courteously  to  them;  and  when  he  saw  any  one  more  than 
ordinarily  diligent,  and  quick  in  despatch,  that  man  wonld  be  sure  to 
receive  some  reward  or  honour  as  a  mark  of  his  fiivonr,  and  some- 
times, for  further  encouragement,  he  would  invite  such  to  dine  or 
sup  with  him.  The  artificers,  thus  encouraged,  wrought  with  all 
diligence,  (striving  to  outvie  one  another),  so  that  there  were  made  a 
vast  number  of  strange  weapons  and  warlike  engines  for  batteiy. 
He  built  likewise  gallics  with  their  boats,  both  of  three  and  five  oan 
on  a  bank,  of  which  last  he  was  the  first  inventor.  For,  when  he  un- 
derstood the  first  galley  of  three  oars  was  made  at  Corinth^  be  was 
desirous  a  colony  from  thence  (as  the  Syracusans  were)  should  be  the 
first  that  should  enlarge  the  number.  Having,  therefore,  provided 
plenty  of  materials  to  be  brought  over  from  Italy,  he  sent  one  half 
of  the  workmen  to  Mount  iGtna,  (where  in  those  days  were  abundance 
of  fir  and  pitch  trees);  the  rest  he  commanded  to  sail  toltaly,  and  or- 
dered them  carts  to  convey  the  timber  to  the  sea-side,  and  ships  and 
seamen  there  to  receive  them,  and  thence  without  delay  to  transport 
them  to  Syracuse. 

When  Dionysius  had  got  together  materials  sufficient  for  his  pur- 
pose, he  forthwith  set  about  building  above  two  hundred  gallies,  and 
to  refit  a  hundred  and  ten.  Besides,  he  built  several  holds  round 
the  harhour,  for  the  receiving  of  the  ships,  to  the  number  of  a  hun- 
dred and  sixty,  of  which  many  would  receive  two  ships  a-piece:  lie 
likewise  repaired  and  covered  over  with  new  planks  a  hundred  and 
fifty  old  and  useless  vessels.  This  great  preparation  struck  the  be- 
holders with  admiration,  to  see  so  vast  a  numlier  of  ships,  and  all  be- 
longing to  them,  built  together  in  one  place.  For  indeed  the  pre- 
paration wat>  such,  that  if  a  man  did  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  ships,  and 


Chap.  P7I.  '  DIODORU8  sicirt-us.  _         6si 

consider  the  great  cost  and  expense  in  fitting  them  out,  he  would 
presently  conclude  that  all  the  power  and  riches  of  Sicily  were  there 
employed;  and  then^  to  turn  and  look  upon  the  army  and  engines, 
he  would  judge  that  there  was  no  art  or  trade  but  what  there  had 
ahewed  the  height  of  their  skill,  to  the  utmqst  of  what  could  possibly 
be  done  in  that  kind.     And  though  he  had  performed  all  these  with 
ao  much  cost  and  care,  that  nothing  seemed  to  be  wanting,  or  could 
be  added,  to  make  them  magnificent  and  glorious,  yet,  for  further 
state  and  grace  to  the  preparation,  be  made  a  hundred  and  forty 
thousand  bucklers  or  targets,  as  many  swords  and  helmets,  and 
caused  to  be  forged  fourteen  thousand  corslets,  of  all  sorts  of  excel* 
lent  workmanship :  these  he  appointed  and  ordered  to  the  horse,  and 
to  the  colonels  and  captains  of  the  foot,  and  to  the  mercenaries  who 
were  of  his  life-guard.     He  prepared,  likewise,  engines  of  battery  of 
all  fashions,  and  a  vast  number  of  darts.    The  city  of  Syracuse  pro- 
vided one  half  of  the  long  ships  with  masters,  pilots,  and  rowers  of 
their  own  citizens;  for  the  rest  Dionysius  hired  foreigners.    After  all 
the  ships  and  arms  were  ready  and  complete,  he  then  began  to  call 
his  army  together:  for  he  thought  it  not  advisable  to  do  it  before^  to 
the  end  to  avoid  charge  and  expense.    About  this  time  Astydamus 
the  writer  of  tragedies  began  to  open  his  school;    he  lived  sixty 
years :   and  this  year  the  Romans,  as  they  were  besieging  the  Veii, 
by  a  sally  out  of  the  city  were  totally  routed,  and  shamefully  put  to 
flight. 

After  the  former  year  expired,  Ithycles  was  made  lord  chancelor 
of  Athens,  and  at  Rome  six  military  tribunes  bore  the  consular  dig- 
nity ;  Lucius  Julius,  Marcus  Furius,  iC^milius  Marcus^,  Caius  Corne- 
liust>  Ctesio  Fabius,  and  Paulus  Sextus^,  This  year  Dionysius  the  ty- 
rant of  Syracuse,  when  he  had  finished  his  preparation  of  ships  and 
arms,  (as  is  before  related),  began  to  muster  his  forces.   To  this  end 
he  chose  out  of  the  city  companies  such  as  he  thought  fittest  for  his 
purpose^  and  sent  for  such  as  he  thought  most  serviceable  from  those 
towns  that  favoured  his  interest:  he  hired,  likewise,  soldiers  out  of 
Greece,  and  especially  from  the  Lacedaemonians;  for  from  them  (to 
whom  he  owed  the  growth  and  increase  of  his  power)  he  received  as 
many  soldiers  as  he  chose  for  the  completing  of  his  army:   for,  de« 
signing  to  raise  a  numerous  army  of  strangers,  and  to  this  end  offer- 
ing large  pay,  he  had  multitudes  come  in  to  him;  and  because  he  had 
determined  upon  a  war  which  would  be  very  great,  he  carried  himself 
with  all  the  complacency  imaginable  to  the  cities  throughout  the 
island,  with  a  purpose  thereby  to  gain  their  good-will  and  approba- 
tion.    Knowing,  likewise,  that  they  of  Rhegium  and  Messana,  who 
bordered  upon  the  sea,  were  able  to  bring  great  forces  into  the  fields 

*  Marcot  ^milius  Mamercos.  i  Cntriut  Cornelius.  |  Luciiaa  Valerioi.' 


622  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  JBookXlFt 

he  began  to  fear  lest  they  should  join  with  the  Carthaginians  when 
they  returned  into  the  island ;  for  he  concluded  that  no  small  advan* 
tage  would  accrue  to  that  side  to  which  those  two  cities  inclined. 
Being  in  this  perplexity^  he  gave  to  the  Messanians  a  hkrge  part  of 
the  country  next  adjoining  to  them,  thereby  the  more  to  oblige  them 
to  his  interest.  He  despatched^  likewise^  ambassadors  to  Rhegium^ 
to  desire  that  they  would  contract  affinity  with  bim>  and. to  that  end 
bestow  upon  him  a  virgin  of  their  own  city  to  be  his  wife;  in  grate* 
ful  remembrance  of  which  he  would  give  them  a  large  portion  of  land 
next  adjoining  to  their  territories^  and  that  he  would  endeavour  to 
advance  and  increase  the  wealth  and  prosperity  of  the  city  to  the  ut- 
most of  his  power.  For,  after  he  had  lost  his  former  wife^  the  daugh- 
ter of  Hcrmociates,  who  was  killed  in  the  late  defection  of  the  horse- 
men^  he  desired  issue  by  another,  supposing  he  should  firmly  settle 
himself  in  his  sovereignty  by  the  kindness  and  obliging  demeanor  of 
his  children  towards  the  people.  But  a  council  being  called  at  Rhe- 
gium  to  consider  of  the  proposal,  after  great  banding  on  both  sidrs^ 
it  was  resolved  not  to  enter  into  any  such  affinity. 

Dionysius  being  disappointed  in  this  project,  sends  ambassadors  to 
Locris  upon  the  same  embassy;  they  embraced  the  motion:  upon 
which  he  marries  Doris,  the  daughter  of  Xenetus^  at  that  time  the 
most  eminent  citizen  of  that  place.  A  few  days  before  the  marriage^ 
he  sends  to  Locris  a  galley  of  five  oars  on  a  bank  (a  piece  of  new  and 
rare  workmanship),  adorned  with  gold  and  silver  flags  and  streamers, 
to  convey  her  over,  and  receives  the  lady  upon  her  landing  at  Syra- 
cuse into  the  castle.  He  married,  likewise^  a  noble  lady  of  Syracuse^ 
called  Aristomache,  whom  he  brought  to  his  palace  in  a  chariot  drawn 
by  four  white  horses.  Upon  his  celebrating  this  double  marriage 
at  one  and  the  same  time,  he  often  feasted  both  the  soldiers  and  most 
of  the  citizens.  For  now  he  laid  aside  his  cruelty  as  a  tyrant,  and, 
minding  the  distribution  of  justice,  carried  himself  more  coorteonsly 
and  favourably  towards  his  subjects,  forbearing  his  former  bloody 
slaughters  and  proscriptions. 

Some  few  days  after  his  marriage  he  called  a  senate,  and  there 
stirred  up  the  people  of  Syracuse  to  a  war  against  the  Carthaginians, 
urging,  that  they  were  the  most  implacable  enemies  of  the  Grecians 
in  the  world,  and  especially,  were  continually  plotting  and  contriving 
how  to  ruin  the  Sicilians.  The  reason,  saith  he,  tlwt  they  are  now 
at  present  quiet  is,  because  the  plague  rages  so  violently  amongst 
them,  and  hath  swept  away  great  numbers  of  the  Africans;  but  yon 
will  presently  see  that,  as  soon  as  they  are  free,  and  have  recovered 
their  strength,  they  will  invade  Sicily  with  all  their  power,  which  is- 
land  they  have  for  a  long  time  most  greedily  gaped  after.    There* 


,CAap.  FIL  DIODORUS  sicui«U8.  689 

forej  said  he^  it  is  mach  safer  and  better  to  fisdl  apoD  them  now  they 
are  weak,  than  to  stay  till  they  have  recovered  themselves.  He 
added,  moreover,  that  it  would  be  a  most  unjust  and  dbfaouourable 
thing  to  suffiBT  barbarians  to  enslave  the  cities,  who,  the  more  they 
coveted  their  freedom, and  the  fonder. they  were  of  their  liberties^ 
would  be  certainly  more  ready  to  engage  in  the  common  cause  with 
their  countrymen. 

Having  debated  this  matter  in  a  long  discourse,  he  easily  gained 
upon  the  Syracusans  for  their  consent,  for  they  were  as  desirous  of 
the  war  as  Dionysius  himself;  and  especially,  they  hated  the  Cartha- 
ginians, because  by  their  means  they  had  been  brought  under  the 
power  of  the  tyrant :  and  then  they  hoped,  that  out  of  fear  of  the  cue* 
my  abroad,  and  plots  by  them  that  had  been  oppressed  at  home,  Dio* 
nysius  would  be  more  moderate  than  he  had  been  in  former  timet* 
And  tliat  which  weighed  more  than  all  was,  that  they  hoped,  if  they 
were  conquerors  in  this  war,  (and  fortune  favoured  them),  they  should 
recover  tlieir  antient  liberties* 

When  the  assembly  was  dissolved,'  he  granted  licence  to  the  peo^ 
pie  of  Syracuse  to  seuse  upon  all  the  goods  and  estates  of  the  Cartlu- 
ginians;  for  there  were  many  of  them  in  Syracuse  that  were  very 
rich,  and  many  merchants  had  ships  laden  with  rich  goods  and  mer- 
chandize then  lyin^  in  the  harbour*  The  Syracusans,  therefore,  on  a 
sudden  flew  upon  the  prey.  Other  cities,  likeirise,  in  Sicily,  drove 
out  the  Carthaginians  that  inhabited  amongst  them,  and  took  and 
carried  away  all  their  estates:  for,  though  they  all  hated  the  tyranny 
of  Dionysius,  yet  it  was  a  delight  to  them  to  join  in  the  war  against 
the  Carthaginians,  by  reason  of  the  barbarous  and  beastly  cruelty  of 
the  men.  And  therefore  those  Grecians  that  inhabited  the  cities 
within  the  power  and  jurisdiction  of  the  Carthaginians,  when  they 
aaw  that  now  open  war  was  declared  against  them  by  Dionysius,  gave 
instances,  likewise,  of  their  hatred  against  the  Africans;  for  th^  not 
only  seized  upon  all  their  estates,  but  likewise  their  persons;  and  exe* 
cuted  all  manner  of  cruelty  and  disgraces  upon  the  bodies  of  these 
miserable  wretches,  in  memory  and  retribution  of  those  they  had 
themselves  before  suffered  when  their  cities  were  destroyed  by  them. 
And  they  went  on  and  continued  this  sharp  revenge  upon  them,  to 
the  end  they  might  learn  for  the  future,  by  this  example  of  retaliation, 
not  to  execute  such  barbarous  cruelties  upon  them  they  should  after- 
wards subdue :  for  hereby  they  would  be  taught,  (having  learned  by 
experience),  that  in  the  events  of  war, and  common  turns  of  fortune, 
the  party  subdued  must  expect  to  suffer  that  which  they  themselves 
before  executed  upon  those  they  had  conquered. 

Dionysius  having  now  prepared  all  things  necessary  for  the  war. 


ft 

024  DioDORUs  srcuLua*  Book  XtK 


^m 


determined  to  send  messengers  to  Carthage  to  denounce  war  against 
them,  in  the  name  of  the  people  of  Syracuse,  unless  they  restored  all 
the  Greek  cities  they  had  suhdued  to  their  autient  laws  and  liberties. 
TIius  were  the  thoughts  of  Dionysius  at  this  time  employed.  With 
this  year  Ctesias  ends  his  history  of  the  Persians^  brought  down  from 
Ninus  and  Semiramis.  At  this  time  flourished  the  fiunoos  poetf 
for  Dithyramhic  verse,  Phlloxenus,  Cythcreus^  Timotheus,  Phi- 
lesius,  Telestes  of  Selinus^  and  Bolycidusj  an  excellent  limoer  and 
musician. 

Upon  the  expiration  of  the  former  year  Lysiades  entered  upon  the 
chief  magistracy  at  Athens,  and  six  military  tribunes  were  invested 
with  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome^  viz*  Publius  Mellius^  Marina 
Spurius,  Furius  Lucius,  and  three  others.  At  that  time  the  Syracn^ 
san  tyrant  (being  furnished  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  war,  ac* 
cording  to  his  heart's  desire)  sends  a  herald  with  a  letter  to  the  se- 
nate at  Carthage,  in  which  was  written — ^That  the  people  of  Syracuse 
had  decreed  to  make  war  upon  the  Carthaginians,  unless  they  quitted 
all  the  Grecian  cities  in  Sicily.  The  herald,  according  to  order^  sails 
over  into  Africa,  and  delivers  the  letter  to  the  senate,  which  beiog 
read  first  in  the  house,  and  then  to  the  people,  it  occasioned  no  small 
disturbance  and  perplexity  to  the  Carthaginians,  through  fear  of  the 
war  coming  so  suddenly  uppn  them,  for  the  plague  liad  destroyed  an 
infinite  number  of  people,  and  they  were  altogether  unprovided  of 
every  thing  necessary.  Therefore  they  had  now  nothing  to  do  but 
to  observe  how  far  the  designs  of  the  Syracusaus  would  proceed^ 
and  whither  they  would  tend;  and  in  the  mean  time  to  send  some  of 
the  senate,  with  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  to  raise  soldiers  out 
of  Europe. 

Dionysius  now  marches  out  of  Syracuse  towards  Eryx,  with  Syra* 
cusans,  mercenaries,  and  confederate  auxiliaries.  Not  far  from  this 
hill  stood  the  city  Motya,  a  colony  of  Carthage,  which  was  a  strong 
castle  and  inlet  into  Sicily:  by  reducing  of  this  they  hoped  they 
should  gain  no  small  advantage,  and  prevent  the  enemy.  To  this 
end  he  stirred  up  the  people  every  where  to  arms,  and  auxiliaries 
from  all  the  Greek  cities  came  in  to  him  all  along  io  his  march:  for 
they  were  eager  and  hot  for  the  war,  both  because  they  hated  the 
slavery  they  suffered  under  the  Carthaginians,  and  were  likewise 
urged  forward  with  the  ardent  desire  and  hopes  they  had  at  length  to 
recover  their  liberties.  First,  the  Camarinians  joined  him,  then  the 
Gelians  and  Agrigentincs;  then  he  sent  to  them  of  Himera^  who  in* 
habited  farther  off  in  another  part  of  Sicily.  With  these  and  the 
Selinuntines,  who  joined  with  him  in  his  march,  he  came  to  Motya: 
bis  army  consisted  of  fourscore  thousand  foot^  and  above'duree  thou* 


ekm^  m^  DIOOOEUfl  SICULyS.  ^^, 

wtssgseagssssssesaas3ssMmsssswt.\ 


««-«•     MHW^^     ^.       . 


m^A  borsi;;  19  lu»  4M  he  h«4  little  le«  tliiQt«PDlii|pdce4IoDggiAr 
li^,  Of  mw  of  wvi  in^ta  attend  tlnoif^thfr?  ww  at  lcf«  fiv^r 
hUpdieA  ^bq;i9  of  lwd«%  full  of  iwrUlse  eDfineih,  tq4  «V  miffln^  of 

When  thejr  of  frjrx  8«w  thei  WQmderfql  pre(M|Tition  thftt  w||ft  m^iit^ 
9xA  beiog  terrified  wiih  tiie  greatness  of  the  anP7j  iM  witW  btiq^ 
the  Carthaginians^  they  sided  with  Dionysiiis.  Bat  thej  of  Mqtya| 
in  czpecmtion  of  aid  and  reli^  fiom  Cardiagej  were  not  aiBr$ght)ed  at 
the  greatness  of  Pionysius*s  arq^y^bnt  were  resohed  to  abide  Mi^; 
for  they  knew  very  weU  that  the  Syracu^tis  would  ha«i^.  then  iit 
the  first  place,  becaase  they  weve  so  whpUy  devot^  to  the  in^ireat  of' 
Carthage,  This  city  is  situated  in  an  isbmd  aboi|t  half  i|  leMpp  froni 
the  shore  of  3icUy,  large  and  heaatifMlly  boiUi  a|i4  the  |h£l|bit«^n^ 
very  rich.  A  strait  and  narrow  way  had  been  ipada  l^y  9it  fropi  the 
i^lfl^d  to  the  shore,  whieh  th<7  of  Motya  at  duit  tioif  vi|iiiied|tO  fire- 
Tent  so  ready  an  access  for  the  enemy,  Pionysio%  lifter  h^  had  tK^tl 
li  Tiew  of  the  situation  of  the  city  with  his  iirchitetts,  began  \o  fill  v^ 
the  place  between  the  island  and  the  shore  with  nib^|sh|  i|nd  brought 
gallies  into  the  mouth  of  the  harhoivr,  and  My  At  iwfih<7  with  hi| 
of  burthen  near  to  the  shore.  Thia  dof|C!|  he  l^yes  ](ieptii|uf!| 
the  admiral  of  his  fleets  to  cprry  on  i^  |iegP|  and  be  himself,  with 
the  laiid-army,  sets  upon  the  cities,  thnt  wm  f:onMtmt<^  with  thf 
Cardiairinians* 

AU  the  cities  of  Sicily,  terrified  with  the  greatness  of,  his  <UlQJf 
presently  submit  to  him,  except  only  fite,  vi^u  Ancynp^  SpkBis,%e8tai 
Panormus,  and  Eotella:  upon  which  he  spoils  and  wsstes  the  ttnit 
tpries  of  the  Selinuntines,  Panormians,  and  AucyreanS|  and  citfs  down 
aU  their  trees,  but  besieges  the  city  of  the  Egestioe^  and  ]BintelUnS| 
and  by  fierce  and  continual  assaults  uses  his  utmost  endeavour  to  tak^ 
them  by  stomu    And  thus  npv  stood  the  affiurs  of  Dionysivs* 

In  the  mean  time,  HUnilco,  the  Carthaginian  general,  was  bu^ 
in  raising  men  from  all  parts,  and  making  other  preparation^,  but 
^bwith  sends  away  the  admiral,  with  ten  gallies,  with  a  oomman^ 
secretly  to  weigh  anchor,  and  make  straight  for  Syracuse,  and  in  the 
night  to  destroy  the  ships  that  be  should  then  find  in  tbe  h^rhnnr. 
His  project  was,  by  this  means  to  divide  the  enemy^s  forces,  ^on- 
ptrsining  Dionysius  to  send  away  part  of  hb  fleet  to  defeqd  l^yriicusi;. 
The  admiral  without  delay  observes  his  order? ,  and,  entering  the  iiar^ 
bour  of  Syracuse  in  the  night,  privately  (not  discerned  of  ai\y}  breaks 
in  pieces,  sinks,  and  destroys  almost  all  the  ship?  tliat  Wfre  thfp  in 
the  port,  and  sails  back  towards  Cartilage. 

Dionysius  having  wasted  and  ^ip^il^  the  fiel^t  find  tmiierm  9f 
Vol.1.  No.  39,  JULU 


626  DloDORus  sicuLUS.  Book  XlVl 

all  them  that  were  under  (he  protection  of  the  Carthaginians^  and 
driven  the  enemy  every  where  within  their  walls,  returns  with  \Sm 
whole  army  to  Motya^  supposing  that  when  he  liad  reduced  tlus,  the 
rest  would  all  presently  surrender :  and  now,  setting  more  hands  at 
work,  he  speedily  fills  up  the  channel  with  heaps  of  stone  and  rub- 
bish, and  by  tliat  means  makes  his  approaches  ^ith  his  batterii»  nearer 
to  the  town. 

About  this  very  time,  Himiico,  the  Carthaginian  general^  hearing 
that  Dionysius  bad  brought  his  ships  into  the  harbour,  forthwith 
Inanned  a  hundred  of  his  best  gallies,  supposing  that  by  a  sudden 
and  unexpected  attack  he  should  easily  possess  himself  of  the  fleet 
as  they  lay  in  the  harbour,  (none  being  out  at  sea  to  obstruct  his  de* 
sign)  which,  if  it  succeeded,  he  should  raise  the  siege  at  Motya,  and 
carry  the  war  to  Syracuse. 

To  this  end,  he  departs  from  Carthage  with  a  hundred  sail,  and 
arrived  in  the  night  upon  the  coasts  of  Selinus,  and  so,  sailing  round 
the  promontory  of  Lilybaum,  about  break  of  day  reaches  Motya, 
where,  surprising  the  enemy,  he  breaks  some  of  their  ships  to  pieces^ 
and  burns  others,  Dionysius  not  b.eing  able  then  to  afford  any  assist- 
ance. Then  he  enters  into  the  port,  and  so  orders  and  places  his 
ships  as  if  he  designed  to  set  upon  the  fleet  as  they  lay.  Upon  this, 
Dionysius  commands  his  army  to  march  down  to  the  mouth  of  the 
harbour :  but  seeing  that  the  enemy  had  possessed  themselves  of  the 
passage,  he  dur5!t  not  bring  his  ships'  out  of  the  port;  for  he  knew 
that  the  mouth  being  very  narrow  and  strait,  a  few  ships  were  able 
to  fight  with  many  above  their  number,  and  to  advantage.  And 
therefore,  having  many  soldiers,  he  easily  drew  the  ships  over  the 
land  into  the  sea,  at  a  farther  distance  from  the  harbour,  and  so  pre-* 
sen'cd  them. 

In  the  mean  time  Himiico  pressing  upon  those  gallies  that  lay 
foremost,  aud  next  to  him,  was  by  a  multitude  of  darts  repulsed;  for 
many  darters  and  slingcrs  were  placed  upon  the  decks.  The  Syra* 
cusaus,  likewise,  from  land  killed  great  numbers  of  the  enemy,  by 
their  sharp  arrows,  shot  out  of  their  engines  of  battery.  And  ia 
truth  these  sort  of  darts  struck  great  teiTor  into  the  enemy,  being  the 
first  time  that  they  were  used  and  found  out.  When  the  Carthagi* 
nian  saw  he  could  not  accomplish  his  design,  he  drew  off,  and  sailed 
back  for  Africa,  judging  it  in  no  wise  prudent  to  engage  inaseftoflghc 
with  an  enemy  double  his  number. 

When  Dionysius,  by  the  help  of  many  workmen,  had  perfected  th< 
bank  or  rampart,  he  applied  all  sorts  of  engines  of  battery  to  the  walb^ 
battering  the  towers  with  the  rams,  and  driving  the  dcfenduits  fnm 


dap.  riL  DIODOEUS  SICULUS*  .  Stf 

— — ^^^ii^W^*^— — — — ^— ^fc^— — — — — ^— —    I   ■     .laiii^— ii^— ^M        I  — ^ijili— —  fc  III       fc 

the  bulwarks  with  the  shot  from  the  engines.  He  approached  like*? 
wise  to  the  walls  with  six-floored  towers^  which  moved  upon  wheels^ 
and  were  as  high  as  any  house. 

However,  the  citizens  of  Motya^  although  they  were  now  in  im* 
piinent  danger,  and  destitute  of  all  md  from  their  confederates,  yet 
feared  not  all  the  force  and  power  of  Dionysius;  but,  bravely  opposing 
the  assailants,  they  first  placed  soldiers  clothed  in  coats  of  mail  upoQ 
the  masts  of  their  ships,  who  hobting  up  their  main-yards,  threw 
burning  firebrands,  and  sticks  dipped  in  pitch,  down  upon  the  euv 
gines,  which  set  them  presently  on  fire;  upon  which  the  Sicilians 
ran  in,  and  having  quenched  the  flame,  so  plied  their  work,  that  with 
the  frequent  and  repeated  batterings  by  the  rams,  a  great  part  of  the 
wall  fell  down.     Upon  which  both  sides  rushing  into  the  breach 
with  great  fury,  there  was  a  sharp  engagement:  for  the  Sicilians 
thinking  the  town  now  had  been  their  own,  endured  any  thing,  from 
tlae  insatiable  desire  they  had  to  revenge  themselves  upon  the  Gar-r 
thaginians^  for  the  many  injuries  they  had  suffered  by  them.    On  the 
other  hand  the  l)esieged,  to  avoid  the  misery  of  bondage  and  slavery, 
and  seeing  no  hopes  to  escape,  either  by  sea  or  land,  resolved  vaK« 
antly  to  die.    At  length,  doubtful  of  defending  the  walls  any  longer^ 
4h^y  stopped  up  all  the  sally  ports,  and  betook  themselves  to  the  holds 
and  buildings  at  the  foot  of  the  walls,  which  were  perfectly  built  as 
another  strong  wall.    From  hence  t)ie  soldiers  of  Pionysius  were  put 
harder  to  it  th^n  they  were  before;  for  wh^n  the^  had  got  Witlijn  the 
vm]\s,  (thronging  in  one  upon  another),  an4  thoug|it  they  had  noir 
gained  the  town,  they  were  presently  roost  miserably  galled  by  them 
that  were  on  the  tops  and  rqpfs  of  ^he^e  buildings,     fiowever,  with 
all  the  speed  they  could,  by  the  help  of  the  wooden  fon^ers,  they  ad- 
vanced tlieir  scaling-ladders  to  the  hoiii^es  th^^t  were  n^^(  to  them; 
and  now  they  fought  hand  to  hand  from  the  towers  find  t^e  tops  of 
the  houseS|  which  equalled  one  another  in  height :  a^id  \}e{e  tbf 
jMotyans  stood  to  it,  and  fought  with  undaunted  resolutionj^^  h^viog 
their  wives  and  children  in  their  eyes,  and  possessed  with  the  sense 
pf  the  imminent  danger  of  the  ruin  and  destruction  both  of  them,  an4 
theirs :  for  spnne|  moyed  vyritli  the  earnest  prayers  of  their  poor  parents 
then  present,  entreating  them  n9t  tp  suffer  them  to  be  made  a  sco^ 
and  scorn  to  their  epemics^  renc\^ed  tl\eir  courage,  and  without  anv 
fegard  to  their  Ijves  rushed  into  the  midst  of  the  assailants:  others 
hearing  the  cries  and  complaints  of  their  ^ive$  and  children,  madf^ 
the  more  haste  rather  to  die  valiantly,  than  to  see  the  captivity  an^ 
slavery  of  their  dearest  relations.    There  was  no  way  left  to  escape 
or  fly  out  of  the  city,  for  they  were  hemmed  in  by  the  sea,  which  wai^ 
poqimanded  by  their  enemies.    Tlic  cruelty  of  tl^e  Grecians,  wt^^^ 


{hey  hnd  Already  executed  upon  ttifcir  prisoners,  ahd  in  all  likelihobd 
would  execute  upon  thein^  was  that  wbiCh  chieffy  terrified  the  6ff- 
thaginians,  and  made  them  desparate*  And  t'heret<Are  Qodung  le* 
malned  hut  either  to  conquer  or  die. 

Ttiis  ohsftinacy  of  tlie  besieged  bccasioned  grtaX  toil  mfl  liaidsl^ 
to  the  Sicilians ;  for  they  were  lamentably  hurled  off  (he  acalibUs 
Which  they  had  made;  and  besides  the  narrowness  of  die  place,  (bj 
which  fhey  were  greatly  prejudiced)  they  fought  with  men  diat  were 
desperate  aad  prodigal  of  their  li? es. 

Thus  thereFore  being  engaged,  some  giving  and  receiving  wonndi 
fell  on  the  one  hand^  others  repulsed  by  the  Motyans,  were  dirown 
down  headlong  from  the  scaflblds  and  house  tops,  and  so  miserably 
perished  on  the  other.  At  length  the  assault  having  continued  in 
this  manner  several  whole  days  together,  and  every  evening  Dionysios 
by  r.  trumpet  sounding  a  retreat  to  his  men,  the  Motyana  were  inured 
bow  to  this  way  of  fighting:  after,  tlierefore,  both  sides  were  drawn 
ofi^  Oiooysius  sent  forth  Archylus  the  Thurian,  with  some  of  tbebest 
raiments,  who  on  a  sudden,  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  by  scaling- 
ladders,  got  over  the  shattered  houses,  and  having  possessed  himself 
of  a  co!ivenient  pass,  presently  the  rest  (which  were  sent  to  hit 
Assistance  by  Dionysius)  came  in  to  him.  But  when  the  Motyans 
])erceivrd  it,  with  great  courage  and  resolution  they  set  upon  them  to 
beat  them  bacic,  and  though  they  had  not  timed  it  right,  yet  their 
▼alour  was  not  in  the  least  impaired :  so  that  there  was  now  begun  a 
fierce  encounter  upon  which  (many  more  likewise  mounting  over) 
the  Sicilians  witli  much  ado,  overpowering  them  by  their  multitude, 
at  length  drove  them  from  the  post;  and  presently,  by  the  mould  aud 
bank  that  was  raised,  Dionysius's  whole  army  broke  into  the  city; 
and  now  every  place  was  strewed  with  dead  bodies.  For  the  Sici* 
lianS)  resolving  to  revenge  themselves  upon  the  Carthaginians  for 
their  former  cruelties,  without  any  regard  either  to  age  or  sex,  slew 
all  before  thera,  putting  man,  woman,  and  child  to  the  sword.  Bat 
Dionysius  having  a  mind  to  sell  all  the  citizens  for  slaveSj  thereby  to 
raise  money,  commanded  the  soldiers  to  forbear  killing  the  prisonen; 
but  when  he  saw  that  none  regarded  him^^  but  that  the  Sicilians  raged 
like  wild  beasts,  he  ordered  a  crier  by  public  proclamation  to  declare 
•.That  he  would  have  the  Motyans  to  fly  for  refuge  to  the  Greciin 
temples.  Upon  which  the  common  soldiers  stopped  their  hands,  bat 
fortliwith  began  plundering  and  spoiling  all  through  the  city,  aod 
carried  away  abundance  of  silver  and  gold,  rich  garments^  and  all 
sorts  of  other  wealth  and  treasure.  For  Dionysius,  for  the  encou- 
Tagement  of  his  soldiers  for  the  time  to  come^  bad  given  them  the 
plunder  of  the  city. 


After  dl  Waii^fver^  Ii6  m»ttfAd  AstAfliKi»  wliofim  mountidlke 
"wiSHf  with  t  hundred  uihUB,  tnd  tM  the  test  every  aae  tceMding  Id 
hfft  mttiU  As  hoBhy  of  the  Motymn  as  were  hHFt  alive  he  aof  d  for 
slaves:  hot  DioiiiiieoeSi  and  some t>ther  Greeks  who  joined  yvkh  the 
Cattha^iaift^  attd  were  taken*  prisoners^  he  conrntanded  to  be  em^ 
eHied.  After  this  lie  put  a  garrison  inlo  Motya^  and  made  Bito  th6 
Syracosan  guvernor^  the  greater  part  of  the  garrison  were  Sicilhns. 
Ulien  he  ordered  Leptinos  the  admiral^  with  a  hnndned  and  twenty 
sail,  to  watch  the  Carthagfniaiis  at  sea;  and  likewise  to  makeincor^ 
s!otis  (as  he  had  iiefore  des^;tted)  upon  £gesta  and  Entelk.  He 
Idmself  returned  with  the  army  to  Syratose,  summer  now  drawing 
near  to  an  end.  At  thn  time  Sophoeles,  the  son  of  Sophocles,  be* 
gan  to  write  tra^dies  at  A^ens,  and  came  off  twelve  times  a 
tonqueror. 

\Vheo  this  year  was  ended,  Phormio  entered  on  the  cUef  noagistracy 
at  Athens ;  and  at  Rome  six  military  tribunes  executed  the  consular 
authority;  Cneins  Genusins,  Lucius  Atilius,  Marcus  PomponiuS, 
Caius  Dttilius,  Marcus  Veturius,  and  Valerius  Publios.  At  thb  time 
was  celebrated  the  ninety-sixth  olympiad,  in  which  Eupolis  of  £Ua 
was  victor. 

In  the  time  of  their  governments,  IMonyrfus,  lord  of  Syracuse, 
marched  from  thence  with  his  army,  and  invaded  the  territories  of 
the  Carthaginians.  When  he  was  Wasting  and  spoifing  the  coontry, 
the  Halicyans,  out  of  fear  of  liim,  sent  ambassadors  to  his  camp,  and 
became  confederates.  But  they  of  Egesta  made  a  sudden  and  nn-« 
expected  sally  upon  the  guards  of  the  besiegers,  and  burnt  their  tents, 
which  caused  a  great  consternation  and  tumult  through  the  camp. 
Por  the  flames  catching  and  running  along  at  a  great  distance,  were 
not  easily  quenched,  so  that  some  of  the  soldiers,  in  quenching  the 
fire,  were  destroyed,  and  many  horses  were  burnt  and  the  tents  toge- 
ther :  bat  Dionysius  went  on  spoiling  and  wasting  the  country  without 
any  opposition. 

In  the  mean  time  Leptinus  the  admiral,  who  lay  then  with  the  fleet 
nt  Motya,  was  very  intent  in  observing  the  enemy  at  sea.  And  the 
Carthaginians  having  certain  intelligence  of  the  strength  of  Diony- 
sius, resolved  to  exceed  him  in  all  warlike  provision  and  preparation 
whatsoever.  To  which  end  (according  to  their  laws)  they  made 
Himilco  their  king,  and  raised  forces  out  of  all  parts  of  Africa  and 
Spain,  of  which  some  were  their  Own  confederates,  and  others  mer- 
cenaries; at  length  they  got  together  an  army  of  above  three  hundred 
thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  horse,  besides  chariots  to  the  uum- 
t)er  of  four  hundred.  They  bad  likewise  a  fleet  to  the  number  of 
three  hundred  long  gallies,  for  men  of  war,  and  six  hundred  iships 


630  D10D0RU8  61CUL0S#  Soofk  XIK 

of  burden,  (as  Ephorus  relates),  to  transport  all  manner  of  pnmaionsy 
engines  of  battery,  and  all  other  necessaries  for  the  war.  Bnt  Timssos 
affirms,  that  not  above  a  hundred  thousand  were  transported  from 
Africa  into  Sicily,  with  which  three  thousand  of  the  Sicilians  joinod 
when  they  came  over.  Himilco  delirered  commissions  sealed  up  to 
every  one  of  the  oiBcers,  with  a  command  they  should  not  open 
them  till  they  were  out  at  sea,  and  then  to  execute  their  orders. 
He  did  this  that  the  spies  which  might  be  amongst  them^  nu|ght  not 
be  able  to  inform  Dionysius  of  the  design  of  the  fleet.    The  Ofden 

were ^That  they  should  make  straight  to  Panormus.     Upon  tUs 

they  all  set  sail  with  a  fair  wind :  the  transport^^hips  made  directly 
into  the  open  sea,  but  the  gallics  sailed  along  the  coast  of  Africa. 

When  the  transport-ships  and  ships  of  burden  with  a  fresh  gale 
Came  witliin  sight  of  Sicily,  Dionysius  sent  out  Leptinus  with  thirty 
sail  against  them,  with  orders  to  sink  and  destroy  as  many  as  he 
could,  who  fortliwitli  made  up  to  them,  and  fought  those  he  first  mi^ 
with,  and  sunk  several  with  all  the  men  in  them.  The  Yest>  (tbougb 
they  were  heavily  laden),  by  the  help  of  the  wind  fortunately  veeiiof 
about,  easily  escaped^  but  about  fifty  were  sunk  downright^  in  which 
were  lost  five  thousand  soldiers,  and  two  hundred  chariots. 

In  the  mean  time  Himilco  arrived  at  Panormus,  and  landing  hv 
men  marched  directly  against  the  enemy,  commanding  the  fleet  to 
sail  along  u|)pn  the  coast  near  to  him.  In  his  iparch  be  entered 
Kryx  by  treachery,  and  thence  hastened  with  all  speed  to  Motya:  and 
because  Dionysius  was  then  busy  in  besieging  Egesta,  Himilco  had 
the  opportunity  to  take  Motya  by  storm. 

Although  the  Sicilians  were  very  earnest  and  desirous  to  fight  the 
enemy,  yet  Dionysius  judged  it  more  advisable  for  him  to  draw  off  to 
5omc  other  place,  because  he  was  both  far  off  from  his  confedenles^ 
and  his  provisions  too  began  to  grow  very  low.  Determining  there^ 
fore  to  be  gone,  he  advised  the  Sicilians  for  the  present  to  quit  their 
cities,  and  join  themselves  to  the  army,  promising  to  plant  them  in  9 
richer,  and  in  no  less  a  country  than  their  own;  and  telling  then 
that  when  the  war  was  ended,  as  many  as  would  might  return  to  they* 
former  habitations:  upon  this,  some  few  of  them  embraced  the  oflex, 
lest,  if  they  refused,  they  should  have  been  plundered  by  the  soldiera: 
the  rest  deserted,  together  with  the  Halicyans,  who  sent  ambassadon 
to  the  Carthaginians,  and  renewed  their  league  with  them.  Diony* 
ftius  therefore  made  with  all  speed  to  Syracuse,  spoiling  and  wasting 
the  country  all  along  as  he  marched.  But  Himilco  seeing  all  things 
succeed  according  to  his  heart's  desire,  marched  with  hu  army  agunat 
Messana,  earnest  to  possess  himself  of  that  city,  by  reason  of  iti  ^ 
and  convenient  situation}  for  the  hf^vcn  tliere  was  very  coroipodioii|» 


tiU^  Fit  btoDditirs  stcMtjii.  ^i 

"■  '       I  "im'         ■  V    I  — — a— I  ■    ■ ■■> 

Mpable  to  rtetSm  hb  whol6  fleets'  iHilch  ^cmtisted  bf  aboot  fix  him- 
fted  ml;  and  by  that  means  ba^dg  th«  cominaQd  of  the  sea  iiitbos^ 
fttrti,  be  judged  he  should  be  able  to  fiitercept  all  tb*  shippinj^ 'that 
aboold  be.  aent  both  from  Italy  and  Peloponnesasj  -to  'aid  them  of 
Syracose.  While  he  was  musing  and  considering  of  these  thin^,  he 
wale  ilpeace  with  them  of  Himera^  and  the  inhabitants  of  Cephale*^ 
dion.  And  talcing  in  the  city  of  lipacra^  he  imposed  a  mulct  of  thirty 
talents  fipon  the  islanders.  Thenr  he  marched  straight  away  with 
bis  fofces  for  Messana,  (bis  fleet  sailing  near  at  hand  over  against 
him),  and  in  a  short  time  encamped  at  Pelorus^  not  abote  a  hundred 
stages  from  thence.  When  tSiey  of  the  city  heard*of  the  approach  of 
the  enemy,  they  began  to  disagree  about  the  concerns  ^  the  wari 
For  some  of  them  onderstttoditig  the  great  sttength  of-  the  Carthagi- 
nian army,  and  seeing^  how  they  were  deserted  by  their  eoD(ed«*atai^ 
and  that  they  wanted  their  horse.  Which  were  ttieo  at  Syracuse,  were 
of  opinion  that  the  city  could  not  be  defended.  Besides,  to  tbrfr 
finrther  discoumgement,  their  walls  were  down  in  many  places,  and 
th^  had  now  no  time  to  make  tfie  necessaiy  preparatmis  for  their 
defeneck  iTharefore  they  sent  away  tbehr  wivei  and  cfaildreD,  and  all 
their  choicest  goods,  and  the  richest  of  their  treasures  to  the  neigh* 
bouring  cities.  Others^here  were  who  remembered  the  oM  piopheey^ 
whereby  it  was  foretold  by  the  ondCi^Tliat  the  Carthaginians  sbouM 
be  carriers  of  water  in  that  city:  which  was  cDaundnly  interpr^ed 
in  that  sense  as  might  portend  most  advantage  to  themselves,  as  if 
She  Carthaginians  should  be  slaves  in  Messana.  From  hence  they 
were  very  confident,  and  by  tbia  means  greatly  encouraged  others,  $o 
Aat  they  resolved  to  undergo  the  utmost  extremity  in  defence  of  their 
common  liberty.       .  - 

lliey  presently  sent  out,  therefore,  a  select  number  of  their  brisic* 
est  young  men  t6  Pelorus,  to  prevent  the  enemy's  jnroads  into  the 
country)  who  did  according  to  order:  upon  which  Himilco,  seeing 
the  Messanians  dispersed  and  scattered  in  order  to  oppose  his  de» 
aeent,  tie  commanded  two  hundred  ships  to  malce  towards  the  city; 
for  he  hoped  (as  he  might  easily  conjecture)  that  the  whole  garrison 
of  Messana  would  be  so  earnest  in  opposing  bb  breaking  into  their 
borders,  that  the  city  would  be  left  unguarded,  so  that  it  would  be 
easy  for  his  fleet  to  enter;  and  at  that  time  the  north  wind  blew  fresh| 
by  which  means  the  ships  were  carried  with  a  full  gale  strait  inti^ 
the  harbour;  and,  tbougli  tlie  guard  sent  to  Pelorus  hastened ^baci^ 
frith  all  speed,  yet  the  enemy'^  fleet  was  in  before  they  retumedt 
And  now  the  Carthaginian  army>  coming  in  on  every  side,  speedily 
battered  down  the  walls,  entered,  and  todt  the  city  Messana.  Af 
nftpy  of  the  Messanians  at  engaged  with  th9  enemy  died  valiantljt 


63 1  DIODORUS  SIGULUf.  JMr  XIFm 


upon  the  spot;  the  rest  fled  to  the  next  cities :  mny  pi  the  cobmdo^ 
people  fled  to  the  mountains  near  at  hand,  and  were  dispcfted  tnd 
scattered  into  several  garrisons  in  the  country :  sonc  wfff  takea  kf 
the  enemy,  others  that  were  got  into  narrow  creeks  about  the  li«iliaQi| 
flung  themselves  into  the  sea*  thinking  they  should  be  ibie  to  nrisa 
over  to  land  on  the  other  side :  but  of  two  hundred  scarcely  fifty  VfOD* 
vered  the  shore  of  Italy.  Afterwards  Himilco  entered  Mes^nna  witk 
bis  whole  army;  and  the  first  thing  he  set  upon,  wm  the  beaeging 
the  castles  and  forts  near  to  the  cityj  but  being  very  ttto^gn  v4 
bravely  defended  by  thero  t^iat  had  fled  thither^  when  he  lew  hr  oould 
not  gain  them  by  fiorce^  be  returned  to  the  city ;  and  having  lefreshed 
end  recruited  his  army,  resolved  to  march  i^gainst  Syracoae. 

The  Sicilians  bearing  an  inveterate  hatred  to  Dionyaios^  having 
now  a  fair  opportunity,  all  of  them  (except  the  Asserini)  deserted  to 
(he  Carthaginians.  Dionysins,  theiafore,  to  the  end  he  might  be 
eupplied  with  men,  sets  free  all  the  slaves  and  servants  of  the  Syn* 
cusans^  and  with  them  sufficiently  manned  threescore  gallies:  he 
was  furnished  likewise  with  a  thousand  neroenariea  firom  the  Lace* 
dsmonians:  passing  likewise  from  place  to  ptece  diroo^  the 
country,  he  fortified  all  the  castles  and  atrong  holds,  aod  fumidied 
them  with  provisions.  But  his  greatest  care  was  to  fpitify  the  caetlci 
of  the  Leontines,  and  to  that  end  laid  up  stoics  and  magasioea  thei^ 
brought  in  from  all  parts.  He  likewise  persuaded  the  Campenians, 
who  at  that  time  inhabited  Catana,  to  remove  to  the  city  df  Snna, 
because  it  was  a  place  of  great  strength. 

After  things  were  thus  settled,  Dionysius  led  forth  his  anpy  a  bun* 
dred  and  sixty  stages  from  Syracuse,  and  encamped  near  to  a  plaof 
called  Taurus.  He  then  had  with  him  thirty  thousand  fbot^  an4 
aomething  above  three  thousand  horse :  his  navy  copaisted  of  a  hun- 
dred and  fourscore  ships,  of  which  there  were  but  few  that  bad  three 
oars  on  a  bank.  In  the  mean  time  Himilco  demolished  Messana,  and 
commanded  his  soldiers  to  pull  down  the  houses  to  the  grouod,  so  ai 
not  one  stick  should  be  left  standing,  or  one  stone  upon  another; 
which  was  efiectually  executed,  by  burning  some,  and  puUing  down 
others;  for  by  so  many  hands  the  business  was  done  in  a  trice;  pod 
such  was  the  ruin  and  desolation  of  the  city,  that  that  place  which 
was  so  lately  full  of  inhabitants,  could  now  scarce  be  known  where  it 
stood.  For  Himilco,  considering  how  remote  it  was  from  the  con- 
federate cities,  and  yet  the  best  port  and  situation  in  all  Sicily,  judged 
it  absolutely  necessary  either  to  ruin  it  as  he  had  done,  or  at  least  sp 
ftr  to  destroy  it^  as  that  it  could  not  be  repaired  for  a  long  time.  And 
thus  Himilco,  having  sufficiently  discovered  his  implacable  hatred  to 
the  Grecians^  commanded  Mago  the  admiral  to  sail  with  tkc  mM9 


Chap.   FIT.  DI0DORUS  SICULUS.  6S3 

S=5SSS==aaS=ESSSSSSSSSSSS=SSSSSBaaBBSSBaBBSSS5^^ 

fleet  to  the  promontory  of  Taurus.  Here  tlie  Sicilians  inhabited  io 
great  numbers^  bat  without  any  head  or  certain  commander.  Dio- 
nysius  had  heretofore  given  the  country  of  the  Naxians  to  these 
Sicilians;  but  they,  induced  by  the  promises  of  Himiico,  then 
dwelt  upon  the  hill,  (which  was  naturally  fortified),  and  there  at 
that  time  they  were,  and  so  continued  after  the  war,  in  a  city  strongly 
trailed,  called  Taurominium,  from  its  situation  upon  Taurus. 

Himilco  himself  by  swift  marches  came  with  his  army  to  the  befiure 
mentioned  place  of  Naiia,  Mago  sailing  all  along  near  to  the  coast: 
but  because  mount  iEtna  had  a  little  before  vomited  out  fire  as  far 
as  to  the  shore,  the  army  at  land  could  not  march  so  as  to  have  the 
fleet  near  at  hand  to  attend  them.  For  the  passages  by  the  sea-shore 
were  so  spoiled  and  choaked  up  by  rivers  and  streams  of  fire  froDi| 
JEtna,  that  the  army  was  forced  to  take  a  compass,  and  march  round 
the  mountain.  Therefore  Himilco  commanded  Mago  to  sail  towards 
Catana,  and  be  himself  with  the  array  hastened  through  the  heart  of 
the  country,  to  join  again  with  the  fleet  at  that  city. 

For  he  was  afraid  lest,  when  the  forces  were  divided  and  hx  asunder^ 
the  Sicilians  should  set  upon  Mago  by  sea,  which  happened  accor* 
dingly.  For  Dionysius  having  intelligence  that  Mago  sailed  very 
slowly,  and  that  the  land  army  was  engaged  in  a  long  and  difficult 
march,  hastened  with  all  speed  to  Catana,  that  he  might  fight  Mago 
by  sea  before  Himilco*s  army  came  up.  For  he  hoped  that  being 
upon  the  shore  near  at  hand  with  his  laud  forces,  it  would  much 
encourage  his  own,  and  discourage  the  enemy:  and  that  which  was 
the  most  considerable  was-^-Tliat  if  his  fleet  were  worsted,  both 
ships  and  men  had  a  place  ready  to  retreat  to  for  their  safety. 

Things  thus  ordered,  he  sent  forth  Leptinus  with  the  whole  fleet 
against  the  enemy,  commanding  him  to  engage  in  close  order,  and 
not  to  break  his  line  upon  any  account,  unless  he  were  over-pressed 
with  multitudes.  There  were  in  Mago*s  fleet  ships  of  burden  and 
gallies  with  brazen  beaks,  to  the  number  of  five  hundred.  The 
Carthaginians,  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  coasts*  full  of  ships,  and  the 
Grecian  pavy  making  out  strait  upon  them,  were  greatly  amazed,  and 
began  to  tack  about  and  make  into  the  shore:  but  presently  recol- 
lecting themselves,  they  considered  the  insuperable  hazard  they 
should  run  themsslves  into,  if  they  should  fight  both  with  the  soldiers 
at  land,  and  them  in  the  ships  at  one  time,  therefore  they  resolved  to 
try  it  out  at  sea;  and  so  putting  themselves  into  a  line  of  battle, 
waited  to  receive  the  enemy.  Leptinus  eagerly  forcing  on  with  thirty 
of  the  best  gallies  iu  the  van,  with  more  valour  than  prudence,  began 
the  fight;  aud  presently  falling  in  upon  the  first  squadron,  sunk  se« 
veral  of  their  ships :  but  when  Mago  with  his  fleet  all  joined  together. 

VpI^1*No*39.  JtfMMM 


634  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIF, 

*■  ■        '  ■■     ■  ■  , 

they  surrounded  the  thirty  sail^  the  first  exceeding  in  number^  and 
the  other  in  valour. 

And  now  was  begun  a  sharp  engagement^  which  looked  like  a  fight 
upon  land,  the  ships  grappling  close  one  to  another,  for  there  was  do 
distance  left  for  them  to  strike  with  their  beaks,  but  they  fought  hand 
to  hand  with  their  forecastles  close  in  front  together :  some,  while 
they  were  attempting  to  board  their  adversary,  were  hurled  over- 
board; others  effecting  what  they  designed,  fought  valiuitly  aboard 
in  the  midst  of  their  enemy's  ships.  At  length  Leptiaus,  over- 
powered by  numbers,  was  forced  to  hoist  up  sail  and  fly;  the  rest 
of  the  fleet  coming  on  upon  the  enemy,  who  were  in  disorder,  were 
easily  routed  by  the  Carthaginians;  for  the  flight  of  the  admin! 
encouraged  them,  and  greatly  discouraged  and  distracted  the  Si« 
cilians. 

The  fight  thus  ended,  the  Carthaginians  made  a  very  hot  pursuit, 
and  sunk  and  destroyed  above  a  hundred  vessels;  and  they  that  were 
in  the  transport  ships  that  lay  along  the  shore,  killed  the  seamen  as 
they  saw  them  swimming  to  get  to  the  forces  that  were  upon  the 
land;  so  that  many  being  killed  near  the  land,  the  shore  was  full  of 
carcases  and  wrecks :  the  Dionysians  being  not  able  in  the  least  to  help 
them.  Many  were  killed  on  the  side  of  the  Carthaginians;  but  there 
were  above  a  hundred  gzillies  of  the  Sicilians  sunk  and  taken^  and 
more  than  twenty  thousand  men  killed. 

After  the  fight,  tl\e  Carthn^nian  navy  anchored  at  Catana,  whi- 
ther they  brought  along  with  them  the  ships  they  had  taken,  and 
drawing  them  up  to  the  shore,  refitted  ihem,  that  the  eyes  as  well  as 
the  ears  of  tlie  Carthaginians  might  be  entertained  with  the  greatness 
of  their  victor}'. 

Upon  this  misfortune  the  Sicilians,  judging  that  by  returning  to 
Syracuse  they  should  suflcr  much,  and  be  brought  into  great  straits 
by  being  suddenly  besieged,  persuaded  Dionysius  rather  to  figlit 
Himilco,  alleging — ^That  by  an  unexpected  onset,  the  barbarians 
would  be  terrified,  and  by  that  means  they  might  in  great  probability 
repair  their  late  overthrow.     Dionysius  inclining  to  this  advice,  andf 
preparing  to  march  against  the  enemy,  some  of  his  friends  told  him 
he  ran  a  great  hazard,  and  had  reason  to  fear  lest  Himilco  would 
invade  Syracuse  with  iiis  whole  fleet,  and  so  he  should  lose  the  eitv. 
Upon  this  he  altered  his  resolution,  knowing  that  Messana  was  lately 
lost  by  such  an  oversight ;  thereupon  he  hastened  to  Syracuse,  not 
thinking  it  safe  for  that  place  to  be  without  a  strong  gsirrison.     Many 
of  the  Sicilians  upon  this  were  much  displeased,  and  therefore  sonir 
returiied  to  their  own  habitations,  and  others  dispersed  themselves 
into  bcverul  castles  and  forts  noar  at  hand. 


Chap.  ni.  moDORUs  sicuLUs. .  634 

■^   ■  '  *     '  '  '  *  * 

Himiico  in  two  days  march  came  to  Catana,  and  caused  the  ships 
that  were  there  to  be  drawn  up  into  the  harbour,  by  reason  of  the 
present  wind  and  storm :  here  he  staid  some  days,  and  refreshed  his 
army,  and  from  thence  sent  ambassadors  to  the  Campanians  at  Enna, 
to  court  them  to  a  defection  from  Dionysius,  promising  to  bestow  on 
them  large  possessions,  and  that  they  should  be  equal  sharers  in  the 
spoils  of  the  war.  He  likewise  acquainted  them,  that  the  Campa- 
nians of  Entella  had  sided  with  the  Carthaginians,  and  had  supplied 
them  with  aids  against  the  Sicilians.  In  sum  he  told  them  that  the 
Grecians  bore  an  inveterate  hatred  to  all  other  nations  whatsoever. 
But  the  Campanians  having  given  hostages  to  Diouysius,  and  sent 
the  best  of  their  soldiers  to  Syracuse,  were  forced  to  stand  to  the  league 
they  had  made  with  him,  though  they  had  a  desire  rather  to  fall  to 
the  other  side. 

After  these  misfortunes,  Dionysius  being  now  afraid  of  the  power 
of  the  Carthaginians,  sends  Polyxen us,  his  father-in-law,  ambassador 
to  the  Grecians  in  Italy,  Lacedaemon,  and  Corinth,  to  desire  their 
assistance,  and  that  they  would  not  stand  by,  and  seethe  Greek  cities 
in  Sicily  utterly  destroyed :  he  sent  likewise  several  paymasters  into 
Peloponnesus  with  great  sums  of  money,  to  raise  what  men  they  could^ 
not  sparing  any  cost. 

But  Himiico  now  enters  with  his  navy,  richly  adorned  with  the 
spoils  of  his  enemies,  into  the  great  haven  of  Syracuse.  Tliis  filled  the 
citizens  with  terror  and  amazement ;  for  a  navy  of  two  hundred  and 
eighty  sail  of  men  of  war,  in  excellent  order,  entered  the  port:  and 
after  them  came  in  above  a  thousand  transport  ships,  wherein  were 
above  five  hundred  soldiers :  so  that  the  ships  were  near  two  thousand 
sail;  insomuch  as  the  whole  haven  (though  it  were  large)  was  so 
filled  with  shipping,  that  it  was  almost  covered  over.  When  the 
na\'y  had  cast  anchor  in  the  harbour,  presently  appeared  the  land- 
army  on  tiic  other  side,  consisting  (as  some  report)  of  three  hundred 
thousand  foot,  and  three  thousand  horse,  besides  two  hundred  long 
ships.  Himiico  the  general  pitched  his  tent  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter ; 
the  rest  of  the  army  encamped  round  him,  about  twelve  stages  distant 
from  the  city. 

A  wliile  after,  Himiico  draws  out  his  whole  army  in  battalia  under 
the  walls  of  Syracuse,  daring  the  Syracusans  to  battle;  and  at  the 
same  time  ordered  a  hundred  of  his  best  ships  to  enter  into  all  the 
rest  of  the  harbours,  the  more  to  terrify  the  Syracusans,  and  to 
convince  them  that  the  Carthaginians  were  masters  at  sea;  but 
when  he  saw  none  durst  come  out  against  him,  he  marched  buck  to 
the  camp. 


^36  1)I0D0RUS  8ICULU9.  Sook  XtK 

After  this,  he  most  shamefally,  for  the  space  of  thirty  daya^  wasted 
and  spoiled  all  the  country  round  about,  to  the  end  to  gratify  lu» 
soldiers  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  discourage  bis  enemies  on  the  other. 
He  won  also  the  suburbs  of  the  Acradhia^,  and  plundered  the  temples 
of  Ceres  and  Proserpina.  But  he  paid  for  his  sacrilege  mthin  a 
short  time  after;  for  his  fortune  began  to  change,  and  things  to  go 
worse  and  worse  with  hhn  every  day.  And  Whenever  Dionysios 
took  coorage  and  skiraiished  with  the  enemy,  the  Syracusana  came 
off  conquerors.  Such  terror  sometimes  seized  the  Cartha^nians  in 
their  camp,  that  in  the  night  they  would  ran  with  great  terror  and 
confusion  to  their  arms,  as  if  an  enemy  had  broken  in  upon  them. 
Besides,  a  disease  at  length  seized  upon  them,  which  was  the  caosr 
of  all  the  mischiefs  which  afterwards  overtook  them,  of  which  we 
shall  speak  hereafter^  that  we  may  observe  due  coarse  and  order  of 
time  in  the  relation. 

Himilco,  now  eager  to  block  up  tbt  city,  demolishes  almost  alt 
the  sepulchres,  amongst  which  were  the  monuments  of  Gelon  and 
his  wife  Dtmareta,  of  rich  and  ezcellent  workmanship.  He  raised 
likewise  three  forts  near  the  sea,  one  at  Plemmyriam,  another  about 
the  middle  of  the  port,  and  the  third  near  the  temple  of  Jupiten 

Id  these  he  laid  up  stores  of  meat  and  drink,  and  all  other  neces« 
saries,  believing  the  siege  would  continue  long.  He  sent  away  like<- 
wise  the  transport  ships  to  Sardinia  and  Africa,  to  bring  from  thence 
corn  and  all  other  provisions. 

About  this  time  Polyxenus,  Dionysius's  father-in-law,  (being  re- 
turned from  Italy  and  Peloponnesus),  brought  with  him  thirty  gallics 
(men  of  war)  from  tlie  confederates,  under  the  command  of  Phaia- 
cides  the  Lacedflenionian.  After  this,  Dionysius  and  Lcptioua  made 
out  to  sea  with  a  few  galliea,  to  endeavour  to  procure  some  provisions 
for  the  town ;  and  while  they  were  craising  about,  the  Sjrracusans  from 
the  city  espied  a  ship  laden  with  povisionty  coming  up  to  Himilco's- 
army ;  upon  which  they  made  out  witb  five  sail  apon  it,  and  took  it, 
and  brought  it  into  the  town.  As  they  were  sailing  away  with  their 
prize,  forty  sail  of  the  Carthaginians  pursued  them;  upon  which  the 
whole  Syracusan  fleet  presently  hoisted  up  siul,  aBd  engaged;  took 
the  admiral,  and  sunk  and  destroyed  twenty  ships  more:  the  rest 
they  put  to  flight,  and  pursued  the  Carthaginians  to  their  main 
fleet,  and  dared  them  to  battle  y  but  they,  amazed  with  this  sudden 
disaster,  stirred  not.  Then  the  Syracusans  fastened  the  gallies  they 
had  taken,  to  the  jK)ops  of  their  own  ships,  and  brought  them  ioio 
the  city. 

*  Purt  of  Sjracii5o. 


Chap.  P^L  DIODORUS  HtCVtVB.  GSf 


Being  now  puffed  up  with  this  good  success^  they  proudly  vaunt« 
ti — ^That  Dionysius  was  often  overcome  by  die  Carthagiuiads;  bat 
that  now,  when  they  had  not  him  with  them,  they  triumphed,  tfid 
were  returned  conquerors.  And  in  their  cabals  here  abd  there  they 
would  frequently  discourse,  and  ask  each  other  why  they  should  suffer 
themselves  to  be  made  slaves  by  Dionysius,  especially  when  they  had 
now  so  bar  an  opportunity  to  depose  him  ?  For  till  of  late,  they  said, 
tfaey  were  disarmed,  hut  now,  by  occasion  of  the  present  war,  they 
had  again  got  arms  into  their  hands. 

While  these  things  were  thus  whispered  up  and  down,  Diotiysiui 
buds  at  the  port,  and  presently  after  calls  an  assembly,  and  in  A 
harangue  highly  praises  the  Syracusans,  wishing  them,  that  as  fhef 
had  done,  so  they  would  still  continue  to  shew  their  valour  and  cou- 
rage for  the  time  to  come,  promising  them,  that  in  a  short  time  lie 
would  put  an  end  to  the  war.  When  the  assembly  was  ready  Id 
break  up,  Theodorus  a  Syracusan,  a  man  of  great  authority  among 
the  nobility,  and  one  that  had  done  remarkable  setvice  for  hk 
country,  stood  up,  and  boldly  made  this  speech  concerning  their 
liberties—. 

7%e  J^ech  of  Theodxjmn. 

ALTHOUGH  Dionysius  has  interlaced  his  discourse  with  Mmy 

lies,  yet,  what  he  said  in  the  close  of  hb  harangue That  he  would 

make  a  speedy  despatch  of  the  war,  he  may  truly  perform,  if  he  him- 
self (who  has  always  been  beaten)  be  not  the  general,  but  forthwith 
restore  us  to  our  own  laws  and  liberties :  for  there  are  none  of  us  that 
can  freely  and  cheerfully  venture  our  lives  in  the  field,  when  there  is 
not  a  pin  to  choose  whether  we  be  conquered  by  tlni  Carthi^inians, 
or,  being  conquerors,  become  slaves  at  home  to  Dipnysius:  for, 
whilst  conquerors  or  conquered,  we  are  sure  either  to  serve  the  Car- 
thaginians on  the  one  hand,  or  a  more  severe  and  tyrannical  matter 
on  the  other.  If  the  Carthaginians  prevail,  by  paying  of  tribute  We 
shall  enjoy  our  laws;  but  this  tyrant  robs  our  temples,  seizes  our  es- 
tatesy  takes  away  our  lives,  and  deprives  masters  of  their  servants  to 
fill  up  the  number  of  his  mercenaries.  And  he  that  has  acted  as  great 
cruelties  in  a  time  of  peace,  as  any  that  have  been  executed  upon 
the  storming  of  cities  in  a  time  of  war,  now  promises  to  put  an  end 
to  the  Carthaginian  war.  But  it  as  highly  concerns  us.  Oh  fellow 
citizens,  to  be  rid  of  the  tyrant  within  our  walls,  as  to  put  an  end  to  \ 
the  war  without:  for  the  castle,  which  is  now  garrisoned  by  our  own 
slaves,  is  built  as  a  fort  against  the  city  itself,  and  the  mercenary 
soldiers  are  kept  in  pay  to  keep  the  Syracusans  in  slavery,  and  he 
himself  lords  it  over  the  city^  not  as  a  good  magistrate,  for  the  ex;ecu- 


\ 


638  ntODORUS  sicuLUs.  Book  XtV- 


tion  of  justice,  but  as  sole  and  absolute  lord,  to  rule  according  to  the 
dictates  of  his  own  insatiable  desires.     Tlie  enemy  now  enjoys  but  a 
small  part  of  the  country,  but  Dionysius  has  bestowed  all  that  he  has 
conquered  upon  them  that  have  given  assistance  to  the  advancement 
of  his  tyranny.    Why  are  we  content  so  XoTtg  tamely  to  sufier  these 
base  abuses?    such  as  a  generous  spirit  would  rather  choose  to  die 
than  to  be  brouglit  into  a  hazard  and  danger  to  suffer  and  undergo. 
Wc,  to  say  the  truth,  courageously  endure  the  extrcmest  hardships 
in  fighting  against  the  Carthaginians;    but  we  are  so  poor-spirited^ 
that  we  dare  not  speak  a  word  for  the  laws  and  liberties  of  our  coun- 
try against  a  most  cruel  tyrant.     We  that  dare  bravely  charge  so 
many  thousands  of  our  enemies,  are  dastardly  afraid  of  one  tyrant^ 
that  has  not  the  courage  of  a  generous  slave.    No  man  ever  presumed 
to  compare  or  equal  Dionysius  with  Gelon,  for  he,  (through  the  innate 
goodness  of  his  disposition),  with  the  assistance  of  the  Synicusans  and 
other  Sicilians,  restored  all  Sicily  to  their  liberty;  but  this  vile  man, 
when  he  found  the  cities  free,  either  exposed  them  to  the  will  of  the 
enemy,  or  he  himself  made  them  perfect  slaves.    The  other,  after  he 
liad  fought  many  battles  in  the  cause  of  Sicily,  was  so  successful 
that  an  enemy  was  not  to  be  seen;   but  this  tyrant,  running  away 
from  Motya  through  the  whole  island,  at  length  penned  himself  up, 
not  daring  to  look  his  enemy  in  the  face,  yet  fierce  and  cruel  enough 
towards  the  citizens.    The  other,  for  his  valour  and  remarkable  ser« 
vices  done  for  his  country,  had  the  sovereignty  freely  and  willingly 
bestowed  on  him,  not  only  by  the  Syracusans,  but  by  all  the  Sicilians: 
but  this  man,  who  has  usurped  the  sovereign  power,  to  the  ruin  of 
the  confederates  and  shivery  of  the  citizens,  why  should  he  not  be 
liated  by  all,  who  is  not  only  unworthy  of  the  supreme  power,  but 
deserves  a  thousand  deaths  besides?    Through  him  Gela  and  Cama- 
lina  are  spoiled,  Mcssana  razed  and  laid  in  rubbish,  and  twenty  thou- 
sand of  our  confederates  destroyed;   and  things  are  now  brought  to 
that  pass,  that  all  the  Greek  cities  througliout  Sicily  are  ruined,  and 
we  are  all  cooped  up  into  one.    Among  other  mischiefs  and  miseries, 
Naxos  and  Catana  are  by  him  sold  for  nought,  and  many  of  the  best 
situated  and  confederate  cities  razed  to  the  ground.    He  fought  twice 
with  the  Carthaginian<»,  and  was  beaten  in  both.     As  soon  as  ever  the 
sovereign   power  was  given  into  his  hand,  he  forthwith  deprived 
the  citizens  of  their  liberties,  putting  to  death  all  those  that  stood  up 
for  the  laws  of  their  country,  and  banishing  those  that  were  rich,  to 
gain  their  estates,  giving  their  wives  in  maniage  to  their  servants,  and 
to  the  lowest  of  the  people,  and  putting  arms  into  the  hands  of 
strangers  and  barbarians.     All  these  wickednesses.  Oh  Jupiter,  and 
all  the  gods !   has  this  hangman  and  base  mean  fellow  comuiitted* 


Chap.  VII.  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  63$ 

Where  is  now  the  love  of  the  laws  and  liberties  among  the  Syraca« 
sans?  Where  are  the* noble  actions  of  our  ancestors?  by  whom  were 
destroyed  at  Himera  three  hundred  thousand  Carthaginians;  not  to 
say  any  thing  of  the  tyrants  deposed  by  Gelon.  But  that  which  is 
to  be  most  admired  is,  that  though  your  fathers,  even  but  yesterday, 
routed  so  great  an  army  of  the  Athenians  that  came  against  Syra- 
cuse^  and  that  in  such  a  manner  as  that  they  left  not  one  to  be  a  mes- 
senger of  their  destruction ;  though,  I  say,  you  have  so  fresh  an  ex« 
ample  of  your  fathers'  valour,  yet  that  you  should  bow  your  necks 
to  the  yoke  of  Dionysius,  and  at  this  instant  of  time,  when  you  have 
arms  in  your  hands,  is  most  strange.  Certainly  some  good  provi- 
dence of  the  gods  has  brought  ^you  now  hither  together  in  arms,  tliat 
you  may  have  an  opportunity  to  regain  your  liberty.  Now  is  the  day 
come  wherein  you  may  shew  yourselves  men  of  courage,  and  unani- 
mously rescue  yourselves  from  so  base  and  shameful  a  slavery.  It 
was  an  easy  matter  wlien  we  had  no.assistance,  and  the  city  was  full 
of  mercenary  soldiers,  to  keep  us  under;  but  now  that  we  are  armed, 
now  that  we  have  confederates  to  assist  us,  and  stand  by  us  as  spec- 
tators of  our  valour,  let  us  not  yield  an  inch,  but  make  it  manifest  to 
all,  that  it  was  not  cowardice,  but  want  of  opportunity,  that  made  us 
seem  to  be  willing  and  content  to  be  slaves.  May  we  not  be  ashamed 
to  have  an  enemy  to  be  our  general,  one  who  has  sacrilegiously  robbed 
all  the  temples  in  the  city !  to  intrust  one  in  matters  of  the  greatest 
public  concern,  that  none  (in  his  wits)  would  trust  with  his  own  pri- 
vate estate!  And  when  we  see  that  all  men  generally  are  more  than 
ordinarily  religious  in  times  of  war  and  imminent  dangers,  can  we 
hope  that  such  a  notorious  atheist  as  this  should  be  instrumental  to 
put  a  happy  issue  to  this  war?  And  if  any  man  will  but  seriously 
consider,  he  may  easily  conclude  that  Dionysius  is  more  afraid  of 
peace  than  war.  For  he  knows  that  the  Syracusans  (through  fear 
of  the  bad  consequences  of  commotions  at  this  present  time)  dare  not 
attempt  any  thing  against  him :  but  he  foresees,  that  if  the  Cartha- 
ginians be  conquered,  the  Syracusans,  being  then  in  arms  and  encou- 
raged with  the  success,  will  seek  to  redeem  themselves,  and  regain 
t4ieir  liberty.  And  this  was  the  cause  (as  I  conceive)  that  in  the  for- 
mer war  he  most  treacherously  depopulated  Gela  and  Camarina^  and 
stripped  them  of  all  their  inhabitants;  and  likewise  agreed,  as  part  of 

the  articles  of  the  league ^That  many  of  the  Greek  cities  should  never 

after  be  inhabited  by  the  Grecians.  This  was  likewise  th«  cause  that 
afterwards,  in  a  time  of  peace,  and  against  the  conditions  agreed  on, 
he  enslaved  Naxos  and  Catana,  razed  the  one  down  to  the  ground, 
and  gave  away  the  other  to  the  Campanians,  a  colony  out  of  Italy. 
And  when  he  perceived  that,  after  the  cities  were  thus  ruined,  the 


640  DIODORUS  BlCVLVBf  Book  XIF. 

rest  were  Gontinually  plotting  how  to  rescue  tbeiiiselfCf  fiom  his  tj* 
ranny,  he  then,  for  a  diversion^  began  this  second  wv  againat  Ac 
Carthaginians :  for  the  sacred  bonds  of  an  oath  did  not  ao  modi  awe 
bim  to  the  keeping  of  his  league,  as  the  fear  of  those  Siciliana  that  re- 
mained tormented  him,  whose  destruction  he  continually  watched 
all  opportunities  to  effect.     When  the  enemy  lately,  weak  and 
weather- beaten  J  landed  at  Panormus,  though  he  might  caaily  then 
hare  fallen  upon  them  with  his  whole  army,  yet  was  very  fiir  fnw 
doing  any  such  service  for  his  country.     Afterwards  he  auftred 
Messana,  (that  large  city  and  commodious  port)^  for  want  of  leliefy  to 
be  laid  waste,  not  only  because  there  were  many  Sicilians  by  thai 
means  cut  off,  but  likewise  that  all  aids  by  shipping  from  Italy  and 
Peloponnesus  might  be  intercepted  by  the  Carthaginians.    Then  at 
last  he  fought  upon  the  coasts  near  to  Catana,  eren  close  to  the  dty, 
that  the  enemy,  if  they  were  beaten,  might  have  ready  shelter  in  the 
port  of  their  own  allies.    After  this,  and  the  fight  was  over,  a  stoim 
arose,-  by  reason  whereof  the  Carthaginians  were  forced  to  draw  np 
their  ships  into  the  harbour,  at  which  time  we  had  a  fair  opportunity 
of  ruining  them,  their  land  army  being  not  then  come  up,  and  their 
ships,  many  of  them  thrown  upon  the  shore  by  the  violence  of  the 
storm.    If  we  then  had  set  upon  them  with  our  land^rmy,  they  most 
all  necessarily  have  either  fallen  into  our  hands,  if  they  had  eome  to 
land,  or  by  the  violence  and  rage  of  the  sea  the  shore  had  been  filled 
with  wrecks.    But  I  know  I  need  not  spend  many  words  in  accuuag 
Dionysius  among  the  Syracusans ;  for  if  the  incurable  injuries  and 
wrongs  themselves  will  not  raise  the  spirits  of  the  sufierers,  how  can 
words  prevail  to  take  revenge  of  this  miscreant?  When  besides  all 
that  they  have  suffered,  they  may  clearly  see  that  he  n  the  most  ifli« 
pious  wretch  of  the  citizens,  the  crudest  tyrant,  and  most  slothful 
and  careless  general :  for  as  often  as  we  fight  the  enemy  under  hb 
conduct,  so  often  are  we  beaten :  but  now  when  we  lately  engaged 
ourselves  without  him,  we  routed  the  enemy's  whole  fleet  with  a  few 
gallics.    We  ought,  therefore,  to  provide  a  new  general,  lest,  while 
we  make  use  of  one  who  has  sacrilegiously  robbed  the  temples,  we 
fight  against  God  himself:  for  the  deity  apparently  opposes  them  wW> 
make  such  an  atheist  their  head  and  governor.    For,  to  see  all  onr 
forces,  in  the  height  of  their  strength,  dispersed  and  scattered  whea 
he  is  with  them,  and  yet  a  small  part  of  our  army  conqueran  whea 
he  is  absent,  what  does  it  but  evidence  to  all  the  special  and  remarka^ 
bic  presence  of  the  gods?    Therefore,  Oh  ye  Syracusans,  if  he  will 
freely  abdicate  his  government,  let  us  as  freely  consent  that^he  nay 
depart  out  of  the  city  with  all  tliat  belongs  to  him;  bat  if  he  refuses 
so  to  do,  uow  we  have  an  opportunity  to  regain  our  liberty.    We  arc 


Chap.f7t  ptoDORUs  sicuLUs.  ^41 

— — —     ■■    '  I    ■    I    ■         '■     ■  ■   ■»  ■ i»>.        -     ■  I    iif        .mimmmt^^^^^^^^m^^^Saim^ 

DOW  here  altogether^  we  have  arms  io  our  hands,  and  thos0  that  will 
assist  us  both  out  of  Italy  and  Pelopoooessus  are  near  at  band*  And 
by  the  law,  the  chief  command  in  the  army  ought  either  to  be  given 
to  some  of  the  citizens,  or  to  some  of  the  Corinthians,  who  are  the 
natural  inhabitants,  or  to  the  Spartans,  who  now  eommand  all 
Greece. 

WhenTheodorus  had  thus  spoken,  the  Syracusans  (much  perplex* 
ed  in  their  minds,  and  doubtful  what  to  do)  looked  back  upon  their 
confederates.     Upon  which,  Pbaracides  the  Lacedemonian  admiral 
of  the  fleet,  (latqly  sent  to  their  assistance),  ascended  the  tribunal; 
and  every  man  now  hoped  he  would  be  very  earnest  in  persuading 
them  to  stand  up  for  tlieir  liberties.    But  he  being  Dionysius'sl guest, 
and  then  one  of  lib  family,  told  them — That  he  was  sent  by  the  La* 
cediBmonians  to  assist  the  Syracusans  and  Dionystus  ^gunst  the  Car* 
thaginians,  and  not  to  deprive  him  of  bis  kingdom.    And  while  he 
was,  (contrary  to  all  men's  expectations) ,  opposing  what  had  been 
said,  the  mercenary  soldiers  all  flocked  about  Dionysius,  Ijut  the  Sy* 
xacusans,nota  little  amazed,  sat  still,but  raged  in  tlieir  minds  against 
the  Spartans:  for  not  long  before,  Aretas  tlie  Lacedflsmonian  had 
betrayed  them  under  the  covert  and  pretence  of  being  sent  to  free 
them  from  their  slavery;  and  now  Pharacides  obstructed  the  Syraeu* 
sans  in  their  endeavours  to  free  themselves.    However,  Dionysius 
was  now  in  a  great  fright,  and  forthwith  dissolved  the  assembly:  and 
afterwards  courted  the  people  with  very  fair  and  smooth  words,  pre- 
senting some  with  large  gifts,  and  inviting  others  to  his  feasts  and 
banquets.    But  as  to  the  Carthaginians,  after  they  had  ruined  the 
suburbs,  aud  rifled  and  plundered  the  temples  of  Ceres  and  Proser* 
pina,  a  plague  seized  upon  tlieir  army,  and  the  more  to  increase  and. 
sharpen  the  vengeance  of  the  gods  upon  them,  both  the  time  of  the 
year,  and  tlie  multitudes  of  men  thronging  together,  greatly  con- 
tributed to  the  enhancement  and  aggravatioo  of  tiieir  misery:  for 
the  summer  was  hotter  than  ordinary,  and  the  place  itself  was  the 
great  occasion  that  the  distemper  raged  above  all  bounds.    For  the 
Athenians  in  the  very  same  place,  not  long*  before,  were  in  multi- 
tudes swept  away  by  the  plague,  for  it  was  a  marshy  and  spungy 
ground.    In  the  beginning  of  the  distemper,  before  tlie  sun  arose, 
through  the  coldness -of  the  air  that  came  off  from  the  water,  their 
bodies  would  fall  a-shaking  and  trembling;^  but  about  noon,  being 
to  close  pent  up  together,  they  were  choaked  with  the  heat.    The 
infection  was  brought  in  among  them  by  the  south  wind,  which  swept 
them  away  in  heaps,  and  for  awhile  they  buried  them :  bat  the  num- 
ber of  the  dead  increasing  to  that  degree,  that  those  who  attended  the 
sick  were  likewise  cut  off,  none  durst  approach  the  intected^  and 
Vox..  1.  No.  39.  NNNdc 


642  DtODORUS  sicutus.       M$ok  XfP! 

(besides  the  want  of  attendance)  the  distemper  seemed  to  be  iiH 
curable.    For  firsts  catarrhs  and  swellings  of  the  throat  were  caoMd 
by  the  stench  of  the  bodies  that  lay  unburied,  and  the  patrifiwtioD  of 
the  soil.    Then  followed  fevers,  puns  in  the  back,  heaTineas  of  die 
Ioins,dysenteries,  and  botches  and  boiles  over  the  whole  body.    Hms 
were  many  tormented  by  this  plague;  others  were  stnick  mad,  and 
ran  about  the  camp  like  wild  beasts,  and  beat  every  one  tbey  met 
All  the  help  of  physicians  was  in  vain,  both  by  reason  of  the  violeiice 
of  the  distemper,  and  the  sudden  despatch  it  made  of  many:  for 
in  the  midst  of  great  pains  and  horrible  torments,  they  died  coO" 
monly  the  fifth,  or  at  most,  tlie  sixth  day ;  so  that  they  who  died  by  the 
war,  were  accounted  happy  by  all.     And  it  was  further  obaervaUe, 
that  all  that  attended  upon  the  sick,  died  of  the  same  distemper:  and 
tliat  which  aggravated  the  misery  was,  that  none  were  willing  to  oome 
near  to  the  distressed  and  languishing  persons  in  order  to  administer 
to  them  any  sort  of  help.    For  not  only  strangers,  but  even  bro- 
thers, and  dear  and  familiar  friends  and  acquaintances,  were  forced, 
out  of  fear  of  the  infection,  to  avoid  and  forsake  one  another.    Dio- 
nysius,  therefore,  hearing  of  the  miserable  condition  of  the  Cartha- 
ginians, manned  fourscore  sail,  and  ordered  Pharacides  and  Leptioos 
the  admirals,  at  spring  of  day,  to  fall  upon  the  enemy^a  fleet.    And 
he  himself  before  the  moon  was  up  in  the  night,  got  bis  army  to- 
gether, and  marching  to  the  temple  of  Cyane,  came  np  without  be- 
ing discovered,  to  the  enemy's  camp  about  break  of  day :  he  had  sent 
the  horse,  and  a  thousand  foot  of  the  mercenaries  before  him,  to 
fall  upon  that  part  of  the  enemy's  camp  that  lay  op  farther  iato 
the  land.    These  mercenaries  hated  Dionysius  more  than  any  other 
that  were  about  him,  and  were  often  making  disturbaacesi  and  mu- 
tinying upon  all  occasions;  therefore  Dionysius  ordered  the  h0tie,as 
soon  as  they  were  engaged  with  the  enemy,  to  fly  and  leave  the  mer- 
cenaries to  be  cut  off,  which  was  accordingly  observed,  and  they 
were  all  killed  upon  the  spot.     Dionysius  himself  determined  to 
assault  the  camp  and  the  castles  both  at  once.    The  barbarians^opon 
this  sudden  and  unexpected  incursion  of  the  enemy,  running  in  great 
confusion  and  disorder  to  their  arms,  gave  him  an  opportunity  to  fake 
the  castle  called  Polictma  by  storm.     On  the  other  side,  in  the 
meantime,  the  horse,  with  some  gallics,  made  to  the  fort  near  Diucon, 
and  took  it;  and  forthwith  came  up  the  whole  fleet,  and  the  army 
assaulted  the  rest  of  the  forts  with  a  mighty  shout,  which  strode  the 
barbarians  with  great  terror  and  amazement;  for  at  the  first,  tbeyidl 
ran  to  defend  their  camp,  but  now  seeing  the  enemy's  whole  fleet 
come  up,  they  bestirred  themselves  to  preserve*  thefar  havy  thattdm 
by  at  anchor:  but  all  ihcir  care  wiis  to  little  purpose,  4bs  ibey ' 


C^p.  VIL  DioDORUs  ncuLUs.  643 

prevented  by  the  suddenness  of  the  surprise.  For  while  they  were  as* 
ceflding  the  decks^  and  hastening  on  boards  the  enemy's  ships  came 
up  with  that  fierceness  upon  them,  and  so  pierced  their  broadsides^ 
that  some  were  sunk  downright  at  the  first  shock:  others  by  repeated 
and  frequent  assaults  were  broken  in  pieces,  so  tliat  the  Carthagini- 
ans were  filled  with  dread  and  horror.   And  while  the  best  and  greatest 
of  their  ships  were  up  and  down  pierced  through  and  through,  the 
air  resounded  with  a  terrible  noise  by  the  crashing  of  the  vessels^ 
broken  by  the  beaks  of  the  gallies,  and  the  shore  over  against  them 
was  presently  filled  with  dead  bodies.  The  Syracosans  still  more  and 
more  encouraged  by  their  success,  while  each  strove  who  should  first 
leap  into  their  enemy's  ships,  in  every  place  killed  and  dispersed  and 
scattered  the  barbarians,  astonished  and  amazed  with  the  fear  of  the 
present  destruction.  Neither  was  the  land-army  wanting  in  their  as- 
sistance, in  wliich  Dionysius  thea  was  (by  chance)  having  rode  to 
Dascon  some  time  before;  for  finding  there  forty  ships  of  fifty  oars# 
apiece,  besides  ships  of  burthen  that  lay  near  them,  and  some  gal- 
lies, they  threw  fire  amongst  them;  upon  which,  the  flame  mount* 
log  up,  and  spreading  itself  far  and  wide,  set  all  the  ships  on  fire, 
and  neither  merchants  nor  mariners  were  able  to  stop  the  violence 
of  the  flame,  which  (the  wind  being  then  high)  ran  along  from  the 
ships  at  anchor,  and  caught  upon  the  transport  ships  which  lay  near 
to  them;  aiad  the  men,  to  avoid  the  fire,  leaping  out  of  the  ships  into 
tlie  sea,  and  the  cables  snapping  asunder,  the  ships  fell  foul  one  upon 
another,  by  reason  whereof  some  broke  in  pieces,  many  were  burntj 
and  others  by  the  violence  of  the  winds  scattered  and  dispersed  here 
and  there,  so  that  all,  one  way  or  other,  were  destroyed.    And  here 
a  show,  as  upon  a  theatre,  was  represented  to  the  citizens,  while  the 
fire  ran  through  the  transport  ships  from  one  to  another,  and  the  flame 
mounted  the  masts,  and  cbnsumed  the  main  yards,  and  the  ruin  of  the 
barbarians  seemed  like  the  overthrow  of  such  as  were  destroyed  for 
some  notorious  impiety  by  thunder  And  lightning  from  heaven.   Upon 
these  successes,  both  young  apd  old  that  were  able,  took  boats  and 
passed  over  to  tli^  harbour,  to  rifle  those  ships  that  were  almost  con- 
sumed by  the  fire,  and  to  save  such  as  might  be  refitted ;.and  those 
that  wjere  yet  sound  and  untouched,  to  tow  them  by  their  boats 
to  the  cijty.     Yea,  such  was  the  exceeding  joy  and  emulation  of  all  to 
siiare  in  the  honour  of  the  victory,  that  those  whom  age  might  well 
have  excused  from  int^rmcdliog  with  matters  of  war,  yet  now  be-* 
yond  their  age  and  natural  strength  made  themselves  remarkable. 
And  now  the  victory  spread  swiftly  through  the  city ;  upon  which  the 
women  and  children  and  whole  families  left  their   houses  and  ran  to 
^he  walls  and  filled  them  with  spectators, of  whojp  some  Ufted  up  their 


644  MODOAU8  tieVLUi.  Jbeift  XIK 


hands  to  heaven^  and  gave  thanks  to  the  gods;  others  cried  out  thM 
the  barbarians  were  justly  punished  for  their  profiiiMaeoi -in  tiS^g 
and  plundering  of  the  temples.  For^  indeed,  it  seemed  as  if  tlK  foii 
themselves  were  engaged  in  the  fight,  where  so  many  ships  were  ea 
fire,  with  the  fiame  mounting  into  the  air,  above  the  masts,  and  the 
Grecians  only  standing  by  (with  joyful  acdamatiuns)  as  eye-^ 
of  the  happy  event :  and  on  the  contrary,  the  barbariads, 
and  astonished  with  the  dreadful  misfortune,  (in  great  coofnaioii,  aad 
with  mournful  cries),  bewailing  themselves.  But  D^ht  pot  an  cod 
to  the  battle,^  and  Dionysius  encamped  near  to  the  harbariaasj  at  the 
temple  of  Jupiter. 

The  Carthaginians  being  thus  routed  both  by  sea  and  knd,  seat 
ambassadors  privately  to  Dionysius,  to  ofier  him  three  hundred  talents, 
which  they  had  then  ready  in  their  camp,  if  he  would  permit  the  re* 
mainder  of  their  army  to  transport  themselves  into  Africa.    To  this 
Dionysius  answered,  that  he  could  not  suffer  all  to  be  gone,  but  he 
was  content  that  those  who  Were  citusens  of  Carthage  might  depart 
privately  in  the  night,  but  no  other:  for  he  knew  well  enough  tiiat 
neither  the  Syracusans  nor  his  confederates  would  ever  suflfer  liim  to 
grant  to  them  any  such  liberty.    But  he  did  this  because  he  was  an* 
willing  utterly  to  destroy  the  Carthaginians,  that  the  Syiacosans 
(through  fear  of  them)  might  find  no  opportunity  or  leisure,  by  dis* 
turbiug  of  him,  to  seek  after  the  regaining  of  their  liberty.     Havii^ 
therefore  agreed  with  the   Carthaginians  that  they  should  go  the 
fourth  night  next  after,  he  draws  his  whole  army  into  the  city:  up- 
on which  Himilco  delivered  the  three  hundred  talents  to  persons  ap* 
pointed  for  that  purpose,  who  conveyed  them  secretly  in  the  night 
into  the  castle.     When  the  time  appointed  was  come,  Himilco  filled 
forty  gallies  with  citizens  of  Carthage,  with  an  intent  to  be  gone, 
leaving  the  rest  of  the  army  behind  him.    And  he  was  no  sooner  en- 
tered into  the  port,  but  some  Corinthians,  discerning  that  Dionysius 
trifled  away  the  time  in  getting  the  soldiers  and  officers  together, 
were  impatient,  and  forthwith  made  after  them ;  and,  by  rowing  hard, 
at  length  got  up  to  the  Carthaginian  ships  that  were  in  the  rear,  which 
they  sunk,  by  piercing  them  through  with  the  beaks  of  their  ships. 
Afterwards  Dionysius  drew  out  his  army';    but  the  Sicilians  v^o 
sided  with  the  Carthaginians  were  almost  all  fled  through  the  heart 
of  the  country,  and  escaped  to  their  several  cities,  before  the  Syn- 
cusans  could  reach  them.     In  the  mean  time,  when  Dionysius 
had  placed  guards  at  several  passes  to*  intercept  those  that  fled,  he 
marched  with  his  army  in  the  night  to  the  enemy's  camp:   upoa 
which  all  the  barbarians,  now  betrayed  both  by  their  general  and  the 
Carthaginhins,  and  likewise  by  the  Sicilians,  fled  away  in  great  fear 


•nd^aoMXcnienti  of  whom  part  were  tiken  fidlifig  in  tmoDg  their  ene^ 
tBifu  guards  that  wajlaid  them  \  others^  and  the  greatest  part^  threw 
away  their  arma,  and  cried  for  qaarterj  but  the  Spaniards,  vMi  their 
arms,  got  into  a  body  and  sent  a  trumpet  toDionjrsiuSj  to  offer  thea^ 
selves  to  him  as  confederates :  upon  wliich  he  made  a  league  with 
them,  and  joined  them  to  the  regiments  of  his  mercenaries.  The 
rest  of  the  common  soldiers  be  took,  and  whatever  was  left  of  the 
bag  and  baggage  he  gave  fur  pinnder  to  the  soldiers*  And  thus  wsi 
the  sudden  change  and  turn  of  the  Carthagloian  aflkirs }  from  whence 
all  men  may  learn,  that  whoever  they  be  that  above  measure  exalt 
themselves,  may  come  in  a  short  time  to  be  convinced  how  Weak  and 
inconsidemble  creatures  they  are«  They  who  a  little  before  were 
possessed  of  all  the  cities  of  Sicily  but  Syracuse,  (which  they  ae^ 
counted  themselves  likewise  sure  of),  were  presently  brought  into  such 
a  dilemma,  as  to  be  afmid  lest  they  should  lose  thdr  own  countryt 
and  they  who  lately  destroyed  the  sepulchres  of  the  Syracnsans,  were 
now  eye-witnessed  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  carcases  of  thdr 
own  men,  that  perished  by  the  plague,  lying  rotting  upon  the  ground 
without  the  honour  of  burial.  They  who  had  before  burnt  up  all 
before  them  belonging  to  the  Syracusans,  by  a  sudden  change  of  for* 
tune,  now  saw  their  whole  fleet  wrapped  up  and  consumed  in  flames; 
They  who  not  long  ago^  in  great  pride  and  ostent&tion,  enter^  into 
the  port  of  Syracuse,  boasting  of  their  successes,  little  thought  that 
in  a  short  time  after  they  should  be  forced  to  fly  away  in  the  night, 
and  treacherously  leave  their  confederates  to  the  mercy  of ^their  ene* 
mies.  The  general  himself,  who  had  pitched  his  tent  in  the  temple 
of  Jupiter,  and  had  robbed  the  temples  of  the  riches  laid  up  in  them, 
shamefully  fled  away  with  a  few  to  Carthage,  and,  though  he  escaped 
with  life,  yet  he  could  not  fly  from  the  vengeance  of  the  gods  for  his 
impiety,  but  lived  all  his  days  in  disgrace  in  his  own  country,  re- 
proached and  scorned  by  all :  nay,  he  was  reduced  to  that  estremity 
of  misery,  that  he  wandered  about  all  the  temples  of  the  city  ill 
rags,  convinced  of  hb  own  impiety,  and  doing  penance  for  his  no* 
torious  wickedness;  and  at  length  murdered  himself, and  died  in  ex* 
treme  want  and  poverty,  by  his  example  leaving  behind  him  an  awful 
reverence  for  the  gods  among  the  citneens.  Presently  aft€r,  many 
otlier  calamities  of  war  overtook  them :  for,  this  overthrow  being 
spread  all  over  Africa,  titeir  confederates,  who  hated  them  before,  now, 
for  their  treacherous  desertion  of  the  soldeirs  at  Syracuse,  abhorred 
the  Carthaginians  much  more  than  formerly:  and  therefore,  stirred 
up  by  rage  on  the  one  hand,  and  encouraged  to  contemn  the  Cartha- 
ginians, by  reason  of  their  late  misfortune,  on  the  other,  they  resolved 
to  stand  up  for  their  liberty;  and,  having  sent  ambassadors  into  all 


646  DIODORU8  SICULU9.  Book  XIFL 


2ES-: 


parts^  they  raised  an  army,  and  at  length  encamped  themaelfcs  in  the 
field :  upon  which  there  presently  came  in  to  them  not  only  free  amb^ 
but  slaves,  so  that  in  a  little  time  they  made  up  a  body  of  two  hun- 
dred thousand  men. 

In  the  first  place  they  took  Tunis,  not  far  from  Carthage;,  firon 
thence  they  marched  in  a  body,  fought,  and  beat  the  Carthi^niaiWj 
and  drove  them  within  their  walls.  At  length  the  CarthaginiaDf^  (a- 
gainst  whom  the  gods  thus  apparently  fought)  with  faint  end  tieaa- 
bling  hearts,  assembled  themselves  together,  to  supplicate  the  deitf 
to  be  appeased,  and  to  put  an  end  to  his  wroth  and  indignation  a- 
gainst  them ;  and  presently  a  spirit  of  devotion  (joined  with  teafy 
pofisossed  the  whole  city,  whilst  every  one  expected  to  become  mise- 
Table  slaves.  1'hcrefore,  all  were  of  opinion  that  the  gods,  who  were 
offended,  should  l;y  all  means  in  the  first  place  be  pacified:  end  al- 
ttiough  they  never  before  sacrjficed  to  Proserpina  or  Ceres,  yet  now 
the  chicfcst  of  the  citizens  were  consecrated  to  be  priests  Cm*  this 
service.  And  having  set  forth  the  statues  of  the  gods  with  all  pomp 
and  solemnity,  they  ordered  the  sacrifices  for  the  future  to  be  made 
according  to  the  Grecian  rites  and  ceremonies;  and  they  cerefiiiUj 
made  use  of  those  Grecians  tliat  were  with  them,  and  wlio  were  best 
acquainted  with  the  rites  of  their  religion,  to  officiate  in  the  sacrifices. 
But  after  this  they  prepared  another  navy,  and  all  other  thinga  ne- 
cessary for  the  carryii>g  on  of  the  war. 

In  the  mean  time  the  rebels,  though  they  were  a  vast  number  of 
men,  yet  they  wanted  good  and  expert  officers;  and  that  which  was 
worst  of  all,  they  wanted  sufficient  provbion  for  such  a  multitude^ 
which  the  Carthaginians  were  supplied  with,  having  enough  brought 
to  them  by  sea  from  Sardinia.  And,  besides  all  this,  the  revolters 
fell  a-quarrelling  among  themselves  about  the  supreme  command  of 
the  army;  and  some,  bribed  with  money  by  the  Cartbagioiansj  fell 
off  and  deserted  the  common  cause:  and  hence  it  came  to  pass^  that 
(through  want  of  provision,  and  treachery  of  some  of  their  asso- 
dates)  this  great  rabble  broke  in  pieces,  and  were  dispeised  here  end 
there,  every  one  to  their  own  country  and  places  of  babitationj  end  so 
freed  (Jartliage  from  the  great  fright  they  were  lately  in.  And  this 
was  the  state  of  affairs  in  Africa  at  this  time. 

As  for  Dionysius,  he,  discerning  that  the  mercenaries  bore  him  no 
good  will,  and  therefore,  lest  they  should  depose  him^  seised  upon 
Aristotle,  their  general ;  upon  which  the  common  sotdicia  n^  to  their 
arms,  and  in  great  rage  demanded  their  pay«  But  he^  to  appoM 
thcui,  told  them,  that  he  would  send  Aristotle  to  Lacedmnonj  to  be  - 
tried  there  by  the  democracy,  and  gave  them  (who  were  about  ten 
thousand)  the  city  and  country  of  Leontium  for  their  pey^  whidithflf 


fSkap.  Fill.  DioDcmua  ncuLUS.  ^64flf 

'    "  '  ■  ■       ■-   '  »         ■  ■-        .  III'!  ■  H.    ■ 


readily  accepted,  for  the  sweetoeM  and  pleaaaotDesaof  the  place; 
divided  the  land  amongst  themselves  by  lot«  Then  he  riiiacd  otb^r 
mercenaries^  to  whom,  and  to  diose  that  wete  freemen  of  hs  own 
fiunily>  he  coinmitted  the  care  and  protection  of  his  government. 

After  the  overthrow  of  the  Carthaginians,  all  those  that  remained 
of  them  that  belonged  to  the  cities  that  were  taken  by  the  Carthagi- 
nuns  throQghont  Sicily,  got  together,  and,  being  restored  to  their 
•everal  countries,  began  to  get  strength  again:  and  Dionystos  le- 
peopled  Messana  with  a  thousand  Locrians,  four  thousand  Medbn- 
nians,  and  six  hundred  Milesians  of  Peloponnesus,  who  were  exiles 
from  Zacynthus  and  Naupactus.  But  when  he  discerned  that  be  had 
ofiended  the  Laoedssmoniansy  by  planting  the  Messaniana  (wlwm 
they  had  driven  out)  in  so  eminent  and  considerable  a  city,  he  re- 
moved them  into  wiother  place  in  the  province  of  Abaeeiie,  near  the 
sea,  limiting  them  within  certain  bounds^  The  Messaniana  called 
thb  city  Tyndaris,  and,  living  peaceably  aAiong  themselves,  and 
receiving  -many  into  the  teedom  of  their  city,  they  increased  ia  m 
short  time  to  above  thet  number  of  five  thoutend.  After  many  exf- 
peditions  and  ineunions  into  the  territories  of  the  Sicili^as^  they 
took  Simethus  and  Morgantiuin,  and  ^nt^red  into  a  leagne  mbh 
Agyros,  king  of  the  Agyrioenaes,  ind  Damoo^  the  petty  priooB  of  the 
Centuripians,  as  likewise  with  the  Erbessians  and*  Astorioes.  C^ 
pfaaledion,  Selinus,  and  Enna,  were  also  brought  under  their  power 
and  government  by  treacheiy,  and  they  made  peace  with  them  qt 
^bessa.    And  so  stood  the  afiiurs  of  Sicily  at  that  time* 


CHAP.  vm. 

jtgesitaus  fnade  general  against  the  Perrian$  hf  the  Lacedmmf^ 
nians;  goes  to  Ephesus.  Tketf  send  to  the  khtg  of  Egypt  *fifr 
assistance.  The  Persians  routed  at  Syi^his  by  jfgesUdks,  JU" 
saphemes*s  head  cut  off  in  a  bath  at  Larissa,     The  war  beiwe^i 

•     the  Phocians  and  Boeotians. 

* 

IN  Greece,  when  the  Lacedtemonians  foresaw  the  great  war  they  went 
likely  to  have  with  the  Persians,  they  made  Agesilaus,.  one  of  theh 
two  kings,  their  general ;  who,  rabing  six  thousand  men,  and  choosing 
thhty  of  the  most  eminent  citizens  to  be  members  of  the  seiMtf, 
passed  over  out  of  Europe  to  Ephesus.^    Therehe  raised  four  thousand 


648  DionoRus  sicuLus.  BookXlK 

■    ■  ■  ■—  ■*         ssssssssssssass^Bamsmmmmmmmmmmmmmm 

more,  and  so  inarched  into  the  field  with  an  army  of  tea  thouauid  fooft, 
and  four  hundred  horse. 

After  the  camp  followed  a  rabble,  (for  the  sake  of  pillage  and 
plunder),  not  inferior  in  number  to  the  army  itself.  He  ran  throiigh 
the  plains  of  the  Caystrians,  and  wasted  and  spoiled  all  that  bekmgcd 
to  the  Persians  as  far  as  to  Cuma.  Moving  from  thence,  he  apent 
the  greatest  part  of  the  summer  in  spoiling  and  wasting  niiygia^  the 
country  next  adjoining;  and  having  loaded  his  anny  with  pilli^ 
and  spoil,  about  the  latter  end  of  autumn  returned  with  his  army  to 
Ephesus. 

While  these  things  were  going  on,  the  Lacedsunonians  aeni  ambaa* 
aadors  to  Nepbreus^,  king  of  ^ypt,  in  order  fo'procure  hisaaautance 
in  the  war;  who  sent  to  the  Spartans  tackle  and  furniture  for  a 
hundred  gallies,  and  five  hundred  thousand  bushels  of  wheat  ioateid 
of  soldiers.  Pharax,  therefore,  the  Lacedemonian  admiral,  depart- 
ing from  Rhodes  with  a  hundred  and  twenty  sail,  arrived  at  Cas- 
sandra, a  castle  of  Caria,  distant  a  hundred  and  fifty  atagea  fnm 
Caunus.  Setting  sail  from  thence,  he  besieged  Caunos,  and  Conon 
the  Persian  admiral,  who  then  lay  there  with  a  fleet  of  forty  aalL 
But  Artaphemes  and  Phamabasus  approaching  to  the  rdief  of  CanniB 
with  a  great  army,  Pharax  raised  the  siege,  and  returned  with  his  fleet 
to  Rhodes. 

After  this,  Conon  got  together  fourscore  gallies,  and  irith  dieae 
sailed  over  to  Chersonesns.  In  the  mean  time  the  inhabitanta  of 
Rhodes  refuse  to  suffer  the  Peloponnesian  fleet  to  enter  thdr  har- 
bour, revolt  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  receive  Conon  vrith 
his  navy  into  their  port  and  city.  And  presently  after,  they  who 
brought  corn  out  of  Egypt,  (designed  for  the  Lacedssmonians),  not 
knowing  any  thing  of  the  defection  of  the  Rhodians,  sailed  boldly  to 
the  island :  upon  which  Conon,  the  Persian  admiral,  with  the  help 
of  the  Rhodians,  brought  them  and  their  lading  into  the  port,  and 
stored  the  city  with  corn.  And  there  came  likewise  other  ships  to 
Conon,  ten  from  Silicia,  and  fourscore  from  Phcenida,  under  the 
command  of  tbe  lord-lieutenant  of  the  province  of  Sidon. 

But  afterwards  Agesilaus,  drawing  out  his  army  into  the  plain  of 
Caystrus,  and  tlie  places  near  to  Sipylus,  plundered  and  apuikd  the 
inhabitants.  Upon  which  Tissaphernes,  with  an  army  of  ttn  thou- 
sand horse,  and  fifty  thousand  foot,  came  upon  the  backs  of  the  La- 
cedaemonians, and  killed  all  the  stragglers  as  they  were  (an^guigmoA 
ranging  about  the  country.  But  Agesilaus,  \rith  a  phafamx  (dram 
up  in  a  square)  possessed  himself  of  the  rising  grounds  at  Slpjlui^ 
watching  his  opportunity  to  set  upon  the  enemy:  and  ftoa  that f 

*  Otbenrisf  called  Ncphiffitet. 


Ch&p.  Fin.  DIODORUS  SIC'ULUSU  64Q 


ovemo  all  the  country  as  far  as.to  Sardbj  and  amongst  othere  wast* 
ed  and  destroyed  a  garden  belonging  to  Tlssapberaes^  set  with  all 
sorts  of  trees,  and  other  things  for  delight  and  .divertisement  in  time 
of  peace,  beautified  with  very  great  art  and  cost.  Marching  thence^ 
when  he  came  half  way  between  Sardis  and  Thybarne,  be  sent  Xeho- 
des  the  Spartan  in  the  night,  with  fourteen  hundred  men  into  a  wood 
to  lie  in  ambush,  in  order  to  intercept  the  enemy^  be  himself  (about 
spring  of  day)  marching  forward  with  the  army :  as  soon  as  he  had 
passed  the  ambuscade,  the  barbarif^ns  in  great  fury,  on  the  sudden  set 
upon  his  rear;  upon  which  he  forthwith  wheeled  about,  and  wliea 
they  were  hotly  engaged,  he  lifted  up  a  sign  to  them  in  ambush, who 
forthwith  with  a  great  shout  came  in  and  fell  upon  the  enemy,  who 
seeing  themselves  surrounded,  (in  great  fear  and  terror),  betook  them- 
selves to  their  heels,  of  whom  six  thousand  were  killed  in  the  pusuit, 
and  a  great  number  of  prisoners  taken^  and  the  Lacedwsonians  seized 
the  enemy's  camp,  which  was  very  rich.  Tissaphernes  liiimselfj aoias* 
ed  at  the  valour  of  the  Spartans,  in  a  great  fright  fled  out  af  the  bat- 
tle to  Sardis.  Agesllaus  was  moved  to  march  up  higher  int6  fko 
other  provinces,  but  because  the  sacrifices  did  not  point  out  to  him 
any  great  success,  he  returned  with  his  army  to  the  sea--side. 

Artaxerxes,  king  of  Asia,  hearing  of  the  routing  of  his  army,  was 
both  afraid  and  angry;  afraid  of  the  Lacedsmonians,  and  angry  at 
Tissaphernes,  who  was  the  occasion  of  the  war.  And  Parysatis  the 
queen-mother  had  not  long  before  prayed  Artaxerxes^  even  upon  her 
knees,  to  take  revenge  upon  Tissaphernes;  for  she  bore  him  a  mortal 
hatted,  because  he  was  instrumental  in  frustrating  the  expedition  of 
her  son  against  his  brother.  Artaxerxes  therefore  makes  Tithraustes 
general,  and  commanded  him  to  seize  Tissaphernes,  giving  him  Iike« 
wise  letters  directed  to  all  the  cities  and  governors  of  the  provinces^ 
ordering  them  to  observe  his  commauds.  As  soon  as  Tithraustes 
came  to  Colosse  in  Plirygia,  by  the  help  off  the  governor  of  larissa^ 
he  seized  Tissaphernes  in  a  bath,  and  cut  off  his  head  and  sent  it  to 
the  king.  After  which,  he  made  a  truce  with  Agesilaus  for  six 
months. 

While  affairs  went  thus  in  Asia,  the  Phocians  made  war  upon 
the  Boeotians,  and  prayed  aid  and  assistance  from  the  Lacedamo- 
nians.  Upon  which,  Lysa^nder  was  sent  thither  with  a  few  soldiers^ 
who  raised  more  after  he  came  to  Phocis;  but  not  long  after,  Pau« 
sanias,  king  ot  Sparta,  was  sent  to  Phocis  with  six  thousand,  where- 
upon the  Bqeotians  drew  out  their  forces,  and  being  joined  by  the 
Athenians  their  confederates,  found  Haliartus  besieged  by  Lysander 
and  the  Phocians.  Whereupon  a  battle  was  fought,  in  which  Ly^ 
Sander,  and  many  of  the  Lacedaemonians^  with  th^ir  confederates^ 
Vol.  U  No.  40.  pooo 


6*50  niODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  X/Fi 

■-  ■  ■  ■ 

were  killed.  The  Bceotians  pursued  not  far,  but  two  hundred  The- 
bans  lost  tiieir  lives,  by  falling  down  some  steep  precipices  through 
their  own  carelessness.  This  was  afterwards  called  the  Bceotian  war. 
But  Pausanias  hearing  of  the  defeat  of  the  Lacedsemoniaas,  entered 
into  a  truce  with  the  Boeotians,  and  returned  with  his  araiy  into 
Peloponnesus. 

In  the  mean  time,  Conon  the  Persian  admiral  committed  the  care 
of  the  fleet  to  Hieronymus  and  Nicodemus,  two  Athenians^  and  he 
himself  hastened  away  to  the  king,  sailing  to  Cilicia,  and  From  thence 
passing  to  Thapsacus  in  Syria,  he  put  himself  in  a  barge^  and  sailed 
down  the  river  Euphrates  to  Babylon.     Here  being  admitted  to  the 

king,  he  promised ^That  if  the  king  would  but  furnish  him  with 

money  and  other  necessaries  as  he  should  think  fit,  he  would  under- 
take to  ruin  the  Lacedseinonian  fleet.  The  king  was  much  pleased^ 
and  hiu'hly  commended  and  rewarded  him,  and  ordered  a  paymaster 
to  attend  him,  and  pay  him  as  much  money  as  he  should  from  time 
to  time  require.  He  ^ave  him  liberty  to  chuse  what  Persian  he 
would  to  be  his  coitcague  and  assistant  in  the  command;  he  there-^ 
upon  chose  Piiamabazus,  and  after  he  had  taken  order  for  all  thingSj^ 
(according  to  the  utmost  of  his  power),  he  went  down  to  sea. 


CHAP.  IX, 

T/ie  confederate  war  by  the  Argives  and  others  against  the  Lace^ 
dcemfmians.  The  battle  at  Aricas.  Thejight  at  Netnuea,  Pi- 
sander  the  Lacedrrmonian  admiral  routed  in  a  sea^Jight  at 
Cnidus  hi/  the  Persian  fleets  commanded  by  Conaii  the  Athenian. 
The  Corinthian  tvar  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  great 
sedition  there. 

AT  the  end  of  the  year  Diophantus  was  made  lord  chancellor  at  A- 
thens,  and  at  Rome  six  military  tribunes  were  invested  with  the  con- 
sular authority;  that  is  to  say,  Lucius  Valerius,  Marcus  Fnriusy 
Quintus  Servilius,  Quintus  Sulpitius,  Claudius  Ogron*^  and  Ma- 
rius  Appiusf.  In  the  time  of  their  governments,  the  Boeotians  and 
Athenians,  the  Corinthians  and  the  Argives,  confederated:  for  they 
conceived,  that  if  they  (being  the  most  considerable  and  largest  cities 
of  Greece)  did  but  stick  close  one  to  another,  tbey  might  easily  ovcf^ 
*  Marcus  Vulcriiu  l^Iaximus.  t  Lucius  Furins. 


Chap.IXk  BioQoRUS  sicutusj  651 

<  .     I     ■  .  'I 

come  the  lordly  power  of  the  LacedAmoDians^and  the  ratheri  because 
they  were  hated  of  their  confederates  for  their  tyrannical  govern  meat, 
^o  this  end  they  first  ordered  a  general  assembly  of  members  from 
the  several  cities  to  meet  at  Corinth)  where  being  met)  they  ordered 
all  things  necessary  concerning  the  war.  Afterwards  they  sent  mes- 
sengers from  city  to  city,  and  by  that  means  took  off  many  from  sid« 
ing  with  the  Lacedcemonians*  And  presently  there  joined  with  them 
all  Euboea  generally,  the  Leucadians,  Acarnanians,  Ambracians,  and 
Chalcidonians  of  Thrace.  They  then  endeavoured  to  bring  into  the 
confederacy  the  inhabitants  of  Peloponnesus,  but  none  of  them  would 
hearken  to  them :  for  Sparta  lying  close  to  the  sides  of  Peloponnesus, 
was  as  a  castle  or  bulwark  for  the  defence  of  the  country.  Medicu8> 
the  prince  of  Larissa  in  Thessaly,  was  about  that  time  engaged  in  a 
Ivar  with  Lycophron,  tyrant  of  the  Pherseans*,  to  whom,  upon  his 
request,  this  general  assembly  sent  in  aid  two  tliousand  men,  who 
being  furnished  with  these  aids,  takes  Pharsalus,  (a  Lacedsemonian 
garrison),  and  sells  all  the  inhabitants  for  slaves.  After  this,  the 
Boeotians,  with  them  of  Argos,  separating  themselves  from  Medic|i^ 
took  Heraclea  in  Trachinia,  being  let  within  the  walla  in  tbei%ht; 
and  there  they  put  all  the  Lacedemonians  to  the  sword,  bill  suffer- 
ed the  Peloponnesians  to  depart  with  all  that  belonged  to  them.  Then 
they  recalled  the  Trachinians  to  inhabit  the  city,  whom  theLaceds- 
monians  had  forced  to  till  the  land,  though  they  were  the  antientin-* 
habitants  of  the  country. 

And  not  long  after,  tsmenias  the  general  of  the  Bceotians  leav-* 
ing  the  Argives  to  guard  the  city,  caused  the  iEneans  and  Achame« 
nians  to  desert  the  Lacedemonians,  and  having  raised  among  them 
and  otiier  confederates  many  soldiers,  he  marched  with  an  army  of 
no  less  than  six  thousand  men  against  the  Phocians.  Not  long 
after  he  encamped  near  Aricas,  a  city  of  Locris,  (the  birth-place  of 
Ajax^  as  it  is  said),  where  the  Phocians,  under  the  conduct  of  La  . 
clsthencs  a  Laconian,  came  out  against  him  and  fought  him:  the 
dispute  was  very  sharp  for  a  long  time,  but  at  length  the  Boeotians 
got  the  day,  and  pursued  the  enemy  till  it  grew  dark,  of  whom  tlicy 
killed  above  a  thousand,  and  lost  five  hundred  of  their  own.  After 
this  battle,  both  sides  disbanded  their  armies,  and  the  Phocians  re* 
turned  to  their  own  country,  and  the  other  to  Corinth;  where, having 
called  a  senate,  and  encouraged  by  this  good  success, '(as  they  con- 
ceived it),  they  mustered  an  army  at  Corinth,  (raised  out  of  all  the 
cities  far  and  near),  to  the  number  of  about  fifteen  thousand  foot,  and 
five  hundred  horse. 
.   The  Lacedaemonians  seeing  that  the  greatest  cities  of  Greece  had 

*  Pberse,  »  oitj  \u  MaccdoauL 


.^ 


652  DIODORUS  SICUM7S.  MdOk  Xlf^ 


mm 


confederated  agaiosttheni^  determined  tosend  for  Agesilansy  and  tbe 
army  he  had  with  him,  out  of  Asia.  Yet  in  the  mean  time  thej 
marched  out  against  the  enemy  with  three-and-twenty  tboasand  Ibotf 
and  five  hundred  horse,  whicli  they  had  raised  out  of  their  own  eity^ 
and  from  among  their  confederates.  And  not  long  after  a  battle  wat 
fought  at  the  river  Nemaea,  which  continued  till  night  parted  them^ 
wherein  part  of  the  army  on  both  sides  prevailed  one  against  the  otiier. 
There  fell  of  the  Lacedsmonians  and  their  confederates,  eleven  hun- 
dred; but  of  the  Boeotians  and  their  confederates,  were  slain  two 
thousand  eight  hundred. 

As  soon  as  Agesilaus  had  landed  his  army  in  Europe,  he  was  en- 
countered by  a  great  body  of  Thracians,  whom  he  h»uted,  and  killed 
the  greatest  part  of  them.  Thence  he  marched  thfongh  Macedonia^ 
on  purpose  to  pass  that  way  Xerxes  had  formerly  done,  wheD  be  came 
with  a  powerful  army  into  Greece.  Having  therefore  passed  throagh 
Macedon  and  Thessaly,  he  went  on  forward  to  the  straits  of  Ther- 
mopylfie,  and  passed  through  that  way. 

In  the  mean  time  Conon  and  Pharnabazus,  the  Persian  adnonby 
lay  at  Doryma  in  the  Chersonesus  with  a  fleet  of  more  than  ninety 
men  of  war;  and  being  informed  that  the  enemy's  navy  lay  at  Cnidos^ 
they  prepared  for  a  sea-fight  Periarchus*  the  admiral  of  the  Lace« 
dasmonian  fleet  weighing  anchor  from  Cnidus,  arrived  at  Physens  ia 
Chersonesus  with  eighty-five  gallics;  and  departing  from  thenee^fcU 
upon  the  king's  fleet,  and  h«id  the  advantage  against  those  ships  he 
first  attacked :  but  upon  the  Persian  gallies  coming  up  in  a  full  body 
to  rescue  their  fellows,  his  confederates  fled,  and  made  to  the  shore; 
but  he  judging  it  abase  and  dishonourable  thing  for  a  Spartan  to 
turn  his  back,  tacked  about  to  front  the  enemy,  and  fighting  with 
gallantry,  (after  he  had  destroyed  many  of  the  Persians  in  tbe  heat  of 
the  fight),  was  at  length  killed,  and  so  fell  with  honour  worthy  of  his 
country.  Then  they  with  Conon  pursuing  the  Lacedaemonians  to 
the  shore,  took  fifty  of  their  gallies,  but  the  most  part  of  the  men 
swam  to  land  and  escaped,  only  five  hundred  were  taken  prisoners, 
and  the  rest  of  the  gallics  came  to  Cnidus. 

But  Agesilaus  being  strengthened  with  forces  from  Peloponnesus, 
entered  with  an  army  into  Bceotia,  where  the  Boeotians  and  their 
confederates  fortliwith  met  him  at  Coronea,  and  engaged,  in  which 
battle  the  Bu\)tian$  put  that  wing  of  the  Lacediemunians  to  flight 
that  opposed  tlieni,  and  pursued  them  to  their  camp;  but  the  rest, 
after  a  small  resistance,  were  routed  by  Agesilaus  and  bis  parfyv 
Whereupon  the  Lacrd^emonians  looking  upon  themselves  as  eon* 
'[ueroiS;  in  token  of  victory  erected  a  trophy,  and  gave  leave  to  the 

*  Tcriarcljus  is  here  miatakcu  for  Fi»andcr.     Usb.  An.  179. 


f*(g».  IX.  mODORTTS  8ICULU3.  653 

enemy  to  bury  their  dead.  For  there  were  killed  of  ihe  Boeotians 
and  their  eonfederates  above  six  liundrcd;  and  of  the  Lacedtetno- 
Dians  and  their  oGSocialcs  above  three  hundred  and  fifty;  Agesjlaua 
himself  being  sorely  wounded,  and  carried  to  Delphos  to  lie  cured. 

After  the  late  sea-fight,  Pharnabazus  aiid  Conoii  invaded  the  con- 
federates of  the  Liacedsinonians  with  their  whole  fleet;  and  first 
forced  them  of  Cons  to  a  defection  from  the  Laeedstmonians,  then 
those  of  N'isiea,and  Teos  orTeium.  Afterwards  the  Chians  (forcing 
out  the  garrison  there)  revolted  to  Cono«, 

The  MItylencans,  Ephesians.and  Erytlireeans  likewise  followed  the 
examples  of  the  former.  And  thus  all  the  cities  un  a  sudden  revolted, 
some  of  which  (casting  out  tlie  Lacedaemonian  garrisons)  took  the 
op[>ortunity  absolutely  to  free  themselves :  others  from  that  time  gave 
themselves  up  into  Conon's  liands,  and  from  that  time  forward  the 
Liaccdiemonians  lost  the  sovereignty  of  the  sea, 

Conon  determining  to  sail  for  Altica  with  his  whole  fleet,  weighed 
anchor,  and  by  theway  bringingovcr  the  islands  of  the  Cyclades  to 
his  side,  he  makes  strait  for  Cythera,  which  he  gained  upon  tlie  first 
approach;  and,  taking  hostages  of  the  CytherJnns  for  their  fidelity,  he 
sent  them  away  to  Laeonia ;  and  when  he  had  put  a  strong  garrison 
into  the  city,  he  sailed  for  Corinth,  where  he  had  audience  of  the 
senate;  and  then  entering  into  a  league,  and  leaving  money  with 
them  for  the  carrying  on  of  the  war,  he  returned  into  Asia.  About 
this  time  Eropus  king  of  Macedonia  died,  after  he  had  reigned  sir 
years;  his  son  Fausanias  succeeded  him,  and  relied  only  one  year. 
Theopompns  of  Chios  ends  his  history  with  this  year,  and  with  the 
sea-fight  at  Cnidus,  containing  the  relation  of  the  Grecian  affiiirs  iii 
twelve  books,  beginning  at  the  sea-fight  at  CynossciiiB>  where  Thac;* 
dides  ends,  comprehending  seventeen  years. 

After  the  end  of  the  last  year,  Eohulides  was  made  lord  chancellor 
of  Athens,  and  six  military  tribunes  executed  the  consular  dignity  at 
Rome,  Lucius  Sergius,  Aulus  Posthumius,  Publius  Cornelius,  Sextus 
Centlus,  Quintus  Manlius,  and  Anitius  Camillus*.  At  that  time 
Conon  the  Persian  admiral  arrived  in  the  Piraeus  at  Athens  with  four- 
score sail,  and  promised  the  citizens  to  rebuild  the  walls  of  the  city : 
for  tlie  walls  and  long  thighs  of  the  Pirsus  were  demolished  by  the 
Lacedaemonians,  according  to  the  articles  of  the  peace  when  the  A- 
thenlans  were  brought  veryIow,and  their  power  broken  by  the  Pelo- 
ponnesian  war.  To  this  end  Conon  hired  many  workmen, and  ordered 
several  out  of  the  fleet  to  be  assisting  to  the  carrying  oh  the  work^  so 
that  the  greatest  part  of  the  wall  was  finished  in  a  sliort  lime.  For 
llic  Thebnns  sent  in  five  hundred  carpenters  and  masons,  and  several 
*  Lucius JuniuiBod  Luciui  Fdriui. 


6&4  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  Book  XIFi 

Other  cities  gave  their  assistance.  But  Teribazusy  general  of  the 
land  forces  in  Asia^  envying  Conon's  successes,  contrived  fidsely  to 
charge  him>  as  if  he  only  made  use  of  the  king's  soldiers  to  get 
towns  and  cities  for  the  Athenians ;  therefore  sending  for  him  to 
Sardis,  upon  his  appearance  be  seized  him  and  threw  him  into 
prison. 

But  now  at  Corinthi  some  that  had  thirsted  after  the  chief  role  and 
command  in  the  government,  entered  into  a  conspiracy^  and  at  the 
time  of  the  public  plays  killed  many  in^the  pkyhousCj  and  filled  the  city 
with  tumult  and  sedition.    And  being  assisted  by  tlie  Aigivei^  they 
cut  the  throats  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  citizensi  and  haniahed  five 
hundred  more.    The  Lacedsemonians  raised  forces  in  order  to  ledoce 
these  murderers  by  force  of  arms:  but  the  Athenians  and  Boeotians 
came  with  an  army  to  their  assistance,  but  with  an  eye  to  bring  the 
city  into  their  subjection.    But  the  exiles  with  the  LAcedsBmonians 
and  other  confederates,  in  the  night  came  ap  to  the  Lechmm  and 
Arsenal,  and  took  it  by  storm.    The  next  day  the  townamea  drew  out 
their  forces  under  the  command  of  Iphicrates,but  were  routed  l^.the 
Lacedaemonians,  who  stew  a  great  humber  of  them.    After  this^  the 
Boeotians  and  Athenians,  together  with  the  Arpves  and  Corinthiana^ 
marched  down  with  their  forces  to  the  Ijech8sum,and  at  first  (after  a 
short  resistance)  forced  their  way  into  the  castle.    But  the  Laccde* 
roonians  and  exiles  (valiantly  renewing  the  fight)  drove  out  theBoBO* 
tians,  and  all  with  them,  who  were  forced  to  return  into  the  dty^ 
with  the  loss  of  about  a  thousand  men. 

And  now  the  time  of  celebrating  the  Isthmuin  games  approached, 
and  a  contest  fell  out  amongst  them  concerning  tlie  ordering  and 
management  of  the  sports :  and  after  much  wrangling,  the  Lacede- 
monians prevailed,  and  gave  to  the  exiles  the  authority  of  orderin|p 
that  affair.  And  because  almost  all  the  skianishes  and  encounteia 
in  this  war  happened  near  Corinth,  it  was  called  the  Coriathiaa 
war,  and  lasted  eight  years. 


Chap.  X.  NODORUS  SICULUS.  659 


■f  ij]' . , 


CHAP.  X. 

The  quarrel  between  the  JRh^fiana  and  IHanyrius.  MagOj  the 
Carthaginian^  settles  affairs  in  Sicily.  Routed  at  Abacene  by 
Dionynus.  Rhegium  nearly  surprizedby  Dionysius,  The  acts 
of  Jphicrates  at  Corinth,  Pklius,  andSicyon.  Amyntas  lost  his 
kingdom  of  Macedonia^  hut  was  restored*  J%e  Romans  take 
Feii;  dedicate  a  golden  cup  to  ApoUo.  '  Their  ambassadors  are 
taken  by  the  pirates  of  the  Lq^ari  islands,  but  discharged  by ' 
Timasitheus^ 

MOREOVER,  about  this  time  they  of  Rhegiam  quarrelled  with  Dio- 
nysius  iii  Sicily,  because  he  had  fortified  Messana^  as  if  he  intended 
thereby  some  mischief  against  them.  Upon  which  they  received  into 
their  protection  all  that  were  driven  out  by  Dionysius^  and  all  others 
that  hated  his  government.  Then  they  gave  Mylas  to  the  late  in- 
habitants of  Naxos  and  Catana  to  b#  inhabited  by  them ;  and  sent 
Heloris  with  an  army  to  besiege  Messana;  and  while  he  in  the  first 
place  besieged  the  castle,  the  townsmen  with  the  mercenaries  of  Dio- 
nysius  drew  out  and  fell  upon  him^  routed  him^  and  tilled  above  five 
liundred  of  his  followers.  Then  they  presently  set  upon  Mylas  and 
took  It,  and  discharged  all  the  Naxians  that  were  there  upon  terms 
of  mutual  friendship,  who  went  to  the  Sicilian  and  Grecian  cities, 
some  to  one  place  and  some  to  another. 

Dionysius  having  now  made  a  league  with  the  cities  that  lay  on  the 
sea-coasts,  determined  to  pass  over  with  an  army  against  Rhegium : 
but  for  the  present  his  design  was  retarded  by  the  Sicilians  at  Tauro- 
minium,  whom  therefore  he  resolved  in  the  firstplace  to  reduce;  to 
which  end  he  marched  thither  with  all  his  forces,  and  encamped  on 
that  side  towards  Naxos,  and  continued  the  siege  all  winter,  in  hopes 
that  the  Sicilians  would  leave  the  hill,  because  they  had  not  been 
long  there.  But  they  having  heard  their  fathers  declare  that  the  an- 
tient  Sicilians  (the  former  inhabitants  of  that  place,  were  expelled 
thence  by  the  Grecians  when  they  arrived  there,  and  built  Naxos, 
they  therefore  concluded  they  had  just  cause  both  to  defend  their  own 
country,  and  to  revenge  the  injury  done  to  their  ancestors  by  the 
Greeks,  and  so  they  defended  the  place  with  great  resolution. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  the  dispute  was  hot  on  both  sides,  the 
winter  solstice  drew  near  at  hand,  and  winter  coming  on  apace,  all 
the  places  near  the  castle  were  full  of  snow;  and  Dionysius  con- 
(reiving  that  the  Sicilians,  by  r^asou  of  the  strength  of  the  pkcc 


056'  DIODORUS  SICULUi. 


ass- 


and  height  of  the  walls,  kept  but  a  slender  guard  in  the  castle^ 
he  ascends  those  high  and  steep  places  in  a  dark  tempettuovs  nigfatj^ 
and  with  much  difficulty  (by  reason  of  the  steepness  of  the  rock  and 
depth  of  the  snow)  at  length,  with  a  scarred  face,  and  half  bliod  with 
cold  and  snow,  possessed  himself  of  one  part  of  the  castle*  TImb 
presently  forcing  into  another,  he  laid  open  a  passage  for  hie  mtmy 
into  the  city :  upon  which  the  whole  power  and  strength  of  the  Sici- 
lians ran  together,  and  drove  the  Dionysians  out  of  tbe  city  and  cn^ 
tie:  and  he  himself  (by  a  blow  upon  bis  brigandioe)  in  the  paiaoit 
was  knocked  down,  and  was  very  near  falling  alive  into  the  hands  of 
his  enemies.  And  in  regard  the  Sicilians  had  the  advantage  of  high 
ground,  (from  whence  they  galled  the  other),  above  six  httodied  of 
Dionysius's  men  were  killed,  and  many  lost  their  arms;  Dionysios 
himself  saved  only  his  corslet.  After  this  misfortune,  they  of  Agri* 
gentum  and  Messana,  (those  that  sided  with  Dionysius  being  at  e 
great  distance),  were  altogether  intent  upon  regaining  their  liherty^ 
and  therefore  sent  back  Dionysius's  ambassador,  who  was  ordeied  to 
them  to  renew  and  continue  the  confederacy  and  league  that  then 
was  between  them  and  the  tyii|nt. 

About  this  time  Pausanias,  )^ing  of  Sparta,  fled  out  of  his  coontfy^ 
by  reason  of  some  heinous  crimes  laid  to  his  cliarge  by  the  citiaensy 
when  he  had  reigned  fourteen  years;  A  gisipolis  his  son  succeeded  him^ 
and  continued  as  many  years  more.  Then  likewise  died  Pkusanias^ 
king  of  Macedon,  whom  AmyntuiS  treacherously  murdered  after  he 
luid  reigned  only  one  year.  Aniyntas,  who  thus  got  the  kiagdonij 
held  it  four-and-twenty  years. 

Ai  the  end  of  the  year,  Demostratus  was  chosen  archon  of  A« 
thens ;  and  six  military  tribunes,  Lucius  Titinius,  Publius  Lidnius^ 
Publius  Melius,  Quintus  Mallius*^,  Cneius  Genutius^  and  Lacios 
Attilius,  governed  as  consuls  at  Rome.  In  their  time  Mago,  the 
Carthaginian  general,  was  busy  in  Sicily,  endeavouring  tQ  settle  the 
adairs  of  Carthage  there,  which  were  then  but  in  a  bad  condition^ 
since  the  last  slaughter  and  ruin  of  their  army.  To  this  end  lie  car- 
ried himself  with  all  mildness  and  humanity  towards  all  the  cities 
within  his  government,  and  received  all  otliers  into  his  protectioa 
that  were  enemies  to  Dionysius,  and  entered  into  leagues  with  many 
of  the  Sicilians.  At  length  he  raised  an  army,  and  marched  against 
Messana;  and  when  he  had  wasted  the  country, he  returned  with  rich 
booty,  and  encamped  near  Abacene,  a  city  of  his  confederates^'^  But 
Dionysius  with  his  army  marched  up  to  him,  and,  upon  his  approach^ 
both  armies  were  drawn  out  in  order  of  battle;  upon  which  there  waa 
a  sharp  and  hot  cngngemcnt,in  which  the  Carthaginians  were  rottfcd 

*  lUsuiiius. 


Chap.  X  DiODomus  siculus.  dj 

and  fled  to  the  city,  with  tBe  loss  of  above  eight  hundred  men; 
and  Dionysius  returned  to  Syracuse.  But  within  a  few  days  after,  he 
made  an  expeditioo  against  Kheginm  with  a  hundred  sail  well  man- 
ed;  and  coming  upon  tiiem  on  a  sudden  in  the  night,  he  set  the 
gales  on  fire;  and  reared  scaling  ladders  to  the  wails.  A  few  only 
of  the  Rhegians  at  first  ran  to  repube  the  enemy,  and  busied  them- 
selves in  extinguishing  the.  fire;  but  by  the  advice  of  Hcloris  the 
governor,  they  left  the  fire,  and  fell  with  ail  their  force  upon  the 
enemy,  and  by  that  means  saved  their  city.  For  if  they  had  con* 
tinued  still  in  quenching  die  flames,  so  sauill  a  number  could  not  Iceep 
out  theDionysiaus  till  the  rest  of  the  citizens  had  come  in  to  their 
assistance.  For  by  throwing  of  timber  and  other  combustible  mat- 
ter from  the  tops  of  the  houses  nest  adjoining,  they  rather  increased 
the  fire.  Dionysius  being  thus  disappointed  in  his  design,  wastes 
and  destroys  all  the  country  round  ab<mt  with  fire  anjl  sword ;  but 
afterwards  made  a  truce  with  them  for  one  year^  and  so  returned  to 
Syracuse. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Gredans  in  Italy,  perceiving  that  Diony^ 
aius*s  covetonsness  and  ambition  exteiided  as  far  as  to  their  countries, 
entered  into  a  general  league,  and  appointed  a  public  place  for  their 
common  assemblies.  By  thb  means  tliey  hoped  that  they  should 
both  be  able  to  oppose  Dionysius,  and  likewise  liave  an  army  always 
ready  to  fight  the  Lucanians,  who  were  ever  and  anion  making  in- 
roads upon  them. 

While  tliese  things  were  doing,  the  exiles  that  were  in  the  Lechaeum 
at  Corinth,  being  let  into  the  city  in  the  night,  endeavoured  to  pos- 
sess themselves  of  tlie  walls,  but  were  driven  out  again  by  Iphicrates, 
and  forced  to  fly  to  the  arsenal,  with  the  loss  of  three  hundred  men. 
Within  a  few  days  after,  part  of  the  Spartan  army  marched  through 
the  territories  of  Corinth,  and  were  suddenly  fallen  upon  by  Iphi- 
crates and  some  other  confederates,  who  cut  off*  the  greater  part  of 
them.  And,  marching  from  thence  with  his  light-armed  men  a^inst 
Phlius,  he  engaged  with  them  that  came  out  ol  the  town,  and  killed 
above  three  hundredof  them.  Hence  he  made  against  Sicyun,wherethe 
inhabitants  drew  out  under  the  walls  and  fought  him,  but  were  beaten 
and  forced  into  the  city,  with  the  loss  of  five  hundred  citizens. 

After  these  things,  the  Argi%'es,  with  all  their  forces,  came  against 
Corinth,  and  took  both  the  castle  and  city,  and  joined  that  territory 
to  their  own.  Iphicrates  the  Athenian  liad  had  a  design  to  be  mas- 
ter of  that  territory,  as  a  place  conducing  much  to  the  gaining 
and  keeping  the  principality  of  Greece:  but  the  i>eople  opposing  it, 
he  abdicated  the  goverumentj  and  the  Athenians  ordered  Cabrias  to 
Corinth  in  his  room. 
s  Vol.  U  No*  40.  pfpp 


Chap.  XL  DIODORUS  8ICULU8.  699 


CHAP.  XL 

7^  acts  of  ThrasyhuluB,  the  Athenian  general.  The  Carthagi^ 
niansj  under  Mago^  begin  a  new  war  in  Sicily  against  Dicny- 
sius,  A  peac£  crnicludetL  Rhodes  falls  of  from  the  AthadanM. 
JBvagoras  becomes  lAig  ofSalamis,  in  Cyprus.  Makes  war  a- 
gainst  the  Persians.  The  acts  of  I%imbron,  the  Lacedannonian 
general,  in  Asia. 

WHEN  the  year  was  ended,  Pliilocles  was  made  lord -chancellor  of 
Athens,  and  six  military  tribunes,  Publius  Sextus^,  Publius  Corne- 
lius Cra!«sust,  Ciesio  Fabios,  Lucius  Fnrius,  Quintus  Servilius,  and 
Marcus  Valerius,  executed  the  oflScc  of  consuls  at  Rome.  At  this 
time  was  celebrated  the  ninety-seventh  Olympiad,  in  which  Terites 
was  victor.  And  then  the  Athenians  ordered  forth  their  general, 
Thrasyhulus,  with  forty  sail  of  men  of  war,  who  hastened  to  lonia^ 
and  th(.*re  being  furnished  with  money  from  the  confederates,  be 
weighed  anchor  from  thence,  and  arrived  at  Chersonesus,  where  he 
Maid  awhile,  and  procured  Mcdicus  and  Seuthes,  princes  of  Thrace^ 
to  bcc(MTic  conieJerates.  Presently  after,  he  passed  over  to  I^^esbos, 
and  Hnchorcd,  with  his  fleet,  near  to  Eresus:  but,  by  a  violent  storm^ 
three-aud-twcnty  of  his  ships  were  then  lost.  However,  with  those 
that  were  left,  he  endeavoured  to  reduce  the  cities  of  Lesbos  to  their 
obedience,  (br  all  had  made  a  defection,  except  Mitylene;  and  first 
he  sets  upon  Methymna,  and  fought  with  the  citicens  led  by  Tlieri- 
macus,  a  Spartan,  whom  he  killed,  with  many  of  the  Methymnians,* 
his  followers,  and  drove  the  rest  within  their  walls;  and,  after  he  had 
made  grHit  spoil  and  liavoc  in  the  country,  Eresus  and  Antissa  were 
surrendered  to  him:  then  (being  furnished  with  shipping  from  Chioi 
and  Mitylene)  he  sail«*d  to  Khodes, 

And  now  the  Carthaginians  having  (after  the  slaughter  at  Syracuse) 
at  length  recovered  their  strength,  resolved  to  renew  their  attempts 
for  the  bettering  their  affairs  in  Sicily;  and,l>ecause  they  determihed 
to  try  their  fortune  by  a  battle  on  land,  they  {wssed  over  with  but  a 
few  long  ships,  but  raised  soldiers  out  of  Africa,  Sardinia,  and  from 
among  the  barbarians  in  Italy,  and  armed  them  all  completely  at  their 
own  charge;  and  with  tliese  they  landed  in  Sicily,  to  the  nunber  of 
fourscore  thousand,  under  their  general  Mago,  who,  marching  through 
the  tenitories  of  the  Siciliaust  caused  many  cities  to  desert  and  fall 

*  PabUtts  ConisliM  Scipio.  t  Cottu. 


660  DIODORUS  SICUIiUS,  Book  XIF. 


off  from  Dionysius^  and  at  length  encamped  at  the  river  Chryta,  in 
the  country  of  the  Agyrinenses^  near  the  road  leading  to  Morgao- 
tium :  but,  when  he  could  not  bring  over  the  Agyrinenses  to  join 
with  him,  either  by  fair  means  or  foul,  he  made  a  halt,  and  especially 
because  he  heard  an  army  was  upon  their  march  against  him  from 
Syracuse.  For  Dionysius,  having  intelligence  of  the  motion  of  the 
Carthaginians  through  the  heart  of  the  country,  without  delay  got  to- 
gether what  forces  he  could,  both  Syracusans  and  mercenaries,  and 
marched  against  the  enemy  with  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand  men. 
And,  when  he  came  near  to  the  enemy's  camp,  he  sent  ambassadors 
to  Agyrus,  prince  of  the  Agyrinenses,  who  at  that  time  was  the  greatest 
and  most  powerful  prince  of  Sicily,  next  to  Dionysius :  for  he  had  al- 
most all  the  castles  and  strong-holds  lying  round  about  under  his 
power  and  government,  and  the  city  of  the  Agyrinenses,which  he  com* 
manded,  was  at  that  time  very  populous,  having  in  it  no  less  than 
twenty  thousand  citizens;  besides,  it  was  sufficiently  provided  with 
all  sorts  of  victuals,  and  a  vast  treasure  was  laid  up  in  the  castle, 
,  which  Agyrus  had  hoarded  up  from  the  confiscations  of  the  richest  of 
the  citizens  whom  he  had  put  to  death.  Dionysius,  therefore,  eo^ 
tering  with  a  few  into  the  city,  gained  Agyrus  to  join  with  him,  pro- 
mising to  bestow  on  him  a  large  territory  next  adjoining  to  him  if  he 
succeeded  in  the  war. 

Agyrus  then  freely  and  liberally  furnished  Dionysius's  army  wuli 
bread,  and  all  other  provision,  and  afterwards  drew  out  his  whole  forces^ 
and  joined  him  in  the  war  against  the  Carthaginians. 

But  Mago,  being  in  an  enemy's  country,  (and  every  dHy  more  and 
more  pinched  by  the  want  of  every  thing  that  was  necessary) ,  was  very 
uneasy :  for  the  Agyrinenses,  being  well  acquainted  with  all  the  ways 
and  passes,  often  surprised  his  men,  and  intercepted  his  provisions. 
The  Syracusans  were  for  fighting  with  all  speed,  but  Dionysius  would 
not  yield  to  that,  aiBrming,  that  time  and  want  would  ruin  the  Car- 
thaginians without  fighting.  Upon  this  delay  the  Syracusans  were 
so  enraged,  that  they  deserted  his  camp;  whereupon  he  was  in  a  great 
fright,  and  forthwith  made  free  all  the  slaves.  Yet  afterwards,  the 
Carthaginians  sending  ambassadors  to  treat  upon  terms  of  peace,  lie 
made  peace  with  them,  and  forthwith  restored  the  servants  and  slaves 
to  their  masters. 

The  conditions  were  like  the  former,  but  something  fuller  in  tin's, 
that  the  Sicilians  should  be  subject  to  Dionysius,  and  tliat  he  should 
have  Taurominium. 

Wlicn  the  articles  were  signed  and  confirmed,  Mago  left  Sicily, 
and  Dionysius,  after  his  taking  possession  of  Taurominium,  banishcr! 
tiicncc  most  of  the  Sicilians,  and  placed  in  their  room  the  choicc>; 


CAap.  XL  DIODORUS  SICULUS. 


of  his  mercenarict.     Thus  stood  the  afimirs  of  Sicily  at  this  time; 
and  ID  Italy,  the  Romaps  took  Falerium*^  a  city  of  the  Falisci,  bj 

StOfUl* 

After  the  end  of  the  former,  this  yearNicoteles  executed  the  office 
of  chief  magi^mte  at  Athens,  and  three  military  tribunes,  Marcus 
Furius,  Caius  iEmilius,  and  Catulus  Bems^  were  Tested  with  the  con- 
sular dignity  at  Rome.  At  this  time  they  of  Rhodes  that  sided  with 
the  Lacedssmonians  expelled  all  the  citizens  that  favoured  the  Athe- 
nians; and,  when  they  got  together  in  arms  to  defend  their  interest^ 
the  Laced^moniun  confederates  routed  them  with  the  slaughter  of 
many,  aud  pn>scrioed  all  the  rest  that  made  their  escape;  and  because 
they  were  afraid  lest  the  citizens  should  be  contriving  some  innova- 
tions, they  sent  for  aid  from  Lacedsemon.  Upon  this,  the  Lacede- 
monians setting  out  seven  gallies,sent  away  Eudocimus,  PhilodicuSy 
and  Diphilas,  to  manage  afiiiirs  there,  who,  arriving  at  Samoa,  caused 
the  city  to  fall  off  from  the  Athenians;  then,  coming  to  RhodeSy 
they  busied  themselves  in  settling  and  composing  matters  there. 
And  now  the  Lacedemonians,  seeing  their  aflhirs  to  succeed  and 
prosper,  they  resolved  again  to  recover  the  dominion  of  the  sca^ 
and  to  that  end  prepared  a  fleet,  and  by  degrees  brought  in  more  and 
more  confederates  to  join  with  them ;  and,  for  the  same  purpose^ 
they  sailed  to  Samoa,  Rhodes,  and  Cuidus,  and,  getting  together 
shipping  from  all  parts,  they  listed  from  thence  the  best  seamen 
they  could  get,  and  at  length  bravely  equipped  a  fleet  of  twenty- 
seven  gallics. 

At  that  time  Agesilaus,  king  of  Lacedsemon,  hearing  that  the  Ar« . 
gives  lay  encamped  at  the  siege  of  Corinth,  made  an  incursion  into 
the  territories  of  Argos  with  all  the  forces  of  Sparta  except  one  regi- 
ment, and,  having  plundered  and  spoiled  the  people  of  their  goods 
and  cattle,  and  cutting  down  the  trees  all  along  through  the  country, 
he  returned  to  Sparta. 

In  Cyprus,  Evagoras  of  Salamis,  a  man  of  a  noble  family,  (for  he 
was  descended  from  the  founders  of  that  city),  who  was  then  some 
time  before  expelled  the  city  by  a  sedition,  (but  returned  not  long 
after),  with  a  small  number  of  men,  his  confederates,  drove  Abdcmon 
the  Tyrian,  petit-prince  of  Sabunis,  (a  friend  and  ally  of  the  king  of 
Persia),  out  of  the  city,  and  so  at  first  became  king  only  of  Salamis, 
the  greatest  and  richest  city  of  Cyprus,  but  in  a  short  time  after, 
growing  rich,  he  raised  an  army,  and  purposed  to  bring  the  whole 
island  under  his  dominion.  To  which  end  he  gained  some  cities  by 
force,  and  others  he  won  by  fair  promises.     But  the  Amathusians, 

•  RatlMf  ralariam. 


662  DiODORUs  sicuLUS.  Book  Xin 


Solians^  and  Cittans,  (resohnng  to  stand  it  out)^  sent  ambastadois  to 
Artaxcrxes  for  aid^  and  charged  Evagoras  with  the  killing  of  Agynu^ 
the  Persian  confederate^  and  promised  to  be  assistant  to  the  king 
in  getting  the  island  into  his  hands.  The  king  therefore,  both  to 
clip  the  wings  of  Evagoras,  that  he  might  not  grow  too  strongi  and 
because  he  considered  the  commodious  situation  of  the  place  for  the 
supply  and  provisioning  of  shipping,  whereby  he  might  defend  A8i% 
gave  orders  to  send  aid  to  the  islanders. 

Therefore,  dismissing  the  ambassadors,  he  sent  letters  to  all  the 
sea- port  towns  and  their  governors,  to  build  with  all  speed  what 
ships  tliey  could,  and  to  furnish  them  with  tackle,  and  all  things  ne- 
cessary for  the  use  of  the  navy.  He  commanded,  likewise,  Heca- 
tomnus*,  lord-lieutenant  of  Caria,  to  make  war  upon  Evagoras:' 
and  he  himself  (going  through  the  cities  of  the  Upper  Asia)  sailed 
thence  with  a  great  army  to  Cyprus.  And  such  were  the  afibirs  of 
Asia  at  this  time. 

In  Italy,  ilie  Romans,  after  they  had  made  peace  with  the  Falisei, 
began  the  fourth  war  against  the  Equi;  and  took  Sutrium  by  stonn^ 
but  lost  the  town  of  Vcrrugo. 

VVlien  this  year  was  ended,  Demostratus  was  chosen  archoBj  or 
lord*chancellor  of  Athens,  and  Lucius  Lucretius,  and  Servilius  Cos* 
susf,  were  Roman  consuls.  At  this  time  Artaxcrxes  declared Struthiu 
his  i^eneral,  and  sent  him  down  with  an  army  to  the  sea-coasts  agunst 
the  Lacedciemonians ;  and  they,  hearing  of  his  march,  sentThimbron 
their  general  into  Asia  against  him,  who  possessed  himself  of  the 
castle  Jonda,  and  of  the  high  and  steep  mountain  Corossus,  about 
forty  stages*  distant  from  Ephesus.  From  thence  he  wasted  and 
spoiled  the  king's  provinces  with  eight  thousand  men  that  he  had 
raised  iii  Asia.  But  Struthus  (who  with  a  great  body  of  borse^  and 
five  thousand  heavy-armed  men,  and  with, above  twenty  thousand 
light-armed,  encamped  near  to  the  Lacedaemonians)  at  length,  when 
Thiinhron  was  out  with  a  party,  and  had  loaded  himself  with  plunder, 
on  a  sudden,  and  by  surprise,  fell  upon  him,  and  killed  him,  and  took 
and  killed  many  of  his  soldici*s,  and  the  rest  (being  but  few)  escaped 
to  the  castle  Cnidinium. 

At  the  same  time,  Thmsybulus  the  Athenian  general,  departing  from 
Leshos,  arrived  with  his  fleet  at  Aspendus,  and  anchored  at  the  river 
I^uryniedon,  and,  though  he  received  contributions  from  tbem  of 
Aspendus,  yet  some  of  his  soldiers  ravaged  and  plundered  the  coun* 
try,  which  highly  provoked  the  Aspendians,  insomuch  that  in  the 
night  they  set  upon  the  Athenians,  and  killed  many  of  them,  toge^ 

*  Ilr  rc^itomnus.  i  Serviliu^  Sulpiiius.  %  Abool  five  milfS. 


Chap.  Xn.  DIODORU8  8ICULU8.  663 


MMK 


ther  with  Thnsybuliis  himseir;  which  struck  such  «  terrorioto  the 
captains  and  officers  of  the  fleet,  that  they  forthwith  returned  to 
their  ships,  and  sailed  to  Rhodes,  where,  finding  tliat  the  city  had 
deserted  them,  they  joined  with  the  exiles,  who  possessed  themselves 
of  a  certain  castle,  and  put  themselves  in  array  against  the  city.  But 
as  soon  as  the  Athenians  heard  of  the  death  of  Thrasybulus,  they  des- 
patched Agyrius  to  be  general  in  his  room.  Thus  stood  the  aflaurs 
of  Asia  at  that  time. 


CHAP.  XU. 

Didhjf9iu8*s  expediium  against  Megium.  The  war  between  the 
Lucanians  and  I%urian$,  in  Italy.  The  Thurians  cut  eff  bjf 
their  own  rashneu.  Leptines  generously  saved  those  thai  swam 
to  his  ships f  though  he  was  a  frie^ut  to  their  enetnies.  Diony^ 
sius^s  second  expedition  into  Italy:  besieges  Caulonia^  and  routs 
Mdoris.  Makes  peace  with  the  Hhegians.  Razes  Cauloma 
to  the  groundf  and  transplmUs  the  inhabitants  to  Syracuse. 
Watches  an  occasion  to  be  revenged  on  them  ofEhegiunu  Be^ 
sieges  it.  He  sends  rich  chariots  to  the  Olympic  games.  His 
poetry  ridiculed. 

IN  Sicily,  Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  tliough  he  had  a  design^ 
and  did  what  he  could,  to  bring  all  Sicily  and  the  neighbouring 
Greeks  in  Italy  under  his  power,  yet  deferred  the  expedition  against 
them  to  some  other  time,  as  we  said  before.  Having,  therefore,  in 
the  mean  time  considered  how  greatly  it  would  ndvauce  his  aflOurs,  if 
he  could  gain  Rhegium,  (the  key  of  Italy),  he  now  drew  out  his  army 
into  the  field*  He  had  then  under  his  command  twenty  thousand 
foot,  and  a  thousand  horse,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  gallies.  With 
these  he  passed  over  to  the  borders  of  Lucris,  and,  thence  marching 
through  the  heart  of  the  country,  he  wasted  and  spoiled  all  the  terri* 
lories  of  Rhegium  with  fire  and  sword;  his  fleet  atteiuiing  over  a- 
gainst  him,  he  at  length  encamped,  with  all  his  forces,  near  the  sea. 
But  the  Italians,  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  Dionysius,  and  his  design 
upon  Rhegium,  with  all  speed  put  forth  sixty  sail  from  Croiuiia,  for 
the  aid  of  the  Rhegiaus.  Whereupon  Dionysius  made  fortb  against 
them  with  fifty  gallies,  and,  though  tliey  made  to  the  shore  to  avoid 
hiiDf  yet  be  pursued  them  so  close,  that  he  threw  grappling  irons  into 


664  DioDORUs  sicuLus.  Mook  Xin 

them^  to  draw  them  off  from  the  land;  and  all  the  aicty  tail  Idnl  cer- 
tainly fallen  into  his  hands,  if  the  whole  bodyof  the  Uegiana  had  not 
with  showers  of  darts^  forced  him  from  the  shore,  and,  by  the  advan- 
tage of  a  storm  (that  then  arose)  hauled  up  the  ships  to  land.  And, 
though  Dionysius  fought  very  valiantly,  yet  he  lost  seven  galliea,  and 
no  less  than  fifteen  hundred  men  on  the  Rh^ian  shore;  and,  boA 
ships  and  men  beiog  thrown  upon  the  shore  by  the  storm,  many  of 
the  seamen  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  citizens.  The  tyrant  him- 
self, flying  in  a  vessel  of  five  oars,  very  narrowly  escaped  drowning, 
and  landed  at  length,  with  much  difficulty,  about  midnight,  at  the 
port  of  Messana :  and  because  winter  now  drew  on,  having  made  a 
league  with  the  Lucanians^  he  returned  with  his  army  to  Syracuse. 

After  this,  the  Lucanians  made  an  incursion  into  the  territories  of 
theThurians;  upon  which  they  sent  forthwith  to  their  confederates 
for  assistance :  for  the  Greek  cities  throughout  all  Italy  had  agreed 
together,  that  if  the  Lucanians  fell  upon  any  one  of  them,  all  the  rest 
sliould  come  in  to  the  help  of  them  that  were  so  oppressed;  and  if 
any  city  should  not  have  their  forces  ready  to  defend  them,  the  chief 
commanders  should  be  put  to  death. 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  cities  had  notice  by  the  potts  of  the 
march  of  the  enemy,  the  Thurians  all  unanimously  prepared  for  the 
encounter,  and  hastily  and  unadvisedly,  in  an  imprudent  heat,  (not 
waiting  for  their  confederates), with  above  fourteen  thousand  foot  and 
a  thousand  horse,  marched  against  the  enemy. 

The  Lucanians,  lif  aring  of  their  approach,  suffered  them  to  enter 
into  their  country:  upon  which  they  pierced  intoLucania  with  great 
violence,  and  at  the  first  were  so  successful  as  that  they  took  a  cas- 
tle, and  carried  away  thence  much  plunder,  which  was  in  truth  but 
as  a  bait  laid  in  their  way  for  their  destruction.   For,  while  they  were 
puiTed  up  and  grown  high-crested  with  this  success,  they  contemned 
the  enemy,  so  far  as  that  they  daringly  ventured  through  strait  and 
craggy  passages,  (through  the  heat  of  ambition  and  covetousness), 
eager  to  possess  themselves  of  a  city  and  country  so  blessed  with  the 
fullness  of  all  things  as  that  was;  but,  as  soon  as  they  came  into  the 
plain,  surrounded  with  high  and  steep  hills  on  every  side,  the  Luca- 
nians, coming  in  with  their  forces  from  all  parts,  intercepted  all  the 
passages,  leaving  them  no  hopes  of  return  any  way;   and,  shewing 
themselves  on  every  side  from  the  tops  of  the  hills,  the  Grecians  ^ftn 
struck  with  great  fear  and  terror,  both  with  the  greatness  of  their 
army,  and  the  difficulty  of  the  places;   for  the  Lucanians  were  no 
fewer  than  thirty  thousand  foot,  and  four  thousand  horse.     While 
the  Grecians  were  in  this  perplexity,  unexpectedly  surrounded  with 
it^superable  dunger^  the  barbarians  marched  down  into  the  plain. 


•  Xn.  DIODORUS  SICUL09.  6S5 


and  battle  being  joined,  the  Italians  were  overpowered  by  multitude, 
and  above  ten  thousand  of  them  killed  upon  the  spot,  (for  the  Lu- 
canians  gave  no  quarter,  as  they  were  before  ordered);  the  rest  fled  to 
a  hill  near  the  sea-side,  from  whence,  espying  some  long  ships  sail- 
ing towards  them,  hoping  that  they  came  from  Rhegium,  (out  of 
eagerness  to  save  themselves)  they  leaped  into  the  sen,  and  some 
of  them,  by  swimming,  got  to  the  ships.  But  this  fleet  proved  to  be 
ships  sent  by  Dionysius  to  the  assistance  of  the  Laicanians,  under  the 
command  of  Leptines,  his  brother,  who  very  generously  received  them 
that  swam,  into  his  ships,  and  set  them  all  on  shore,  (being  about  a 
thousand,  and  prevailed  with  the  Lucanians  to  accept  a  mina  for  every 
man,  for  their  ransom,  and  lie  himself  engaged  for  the  payment,  and 
so  ordered  matters  among  them,  that  the  Lucanians  and  lulians  made 
peace  one  with  another. 

From  this  time  Leptines  was  in  great  favour  and  much  esteem 
with  the  Italians,  having  made  an  end  of  the  war,  more  to  his  own, 
than  to  the  advantage  of  Dionysius,  who  was  in  hopes  that,  by  means 
of  the  diflorences  lietween  the  Lucanians  and  the  Greeks  of  Italy,  he 
should  be  able  with  much  case  to  accomplish  his  designs  tliere;  but, 
if  he  should  make  peace,  he  judged  his  conquest  would  be  difiicuU. 
Therefore  he  discarded  Leptines,  and  created  Thearidas,  his  other 
brother,  admiral  of  the  fleet.  Daring  these  transactions,  the  Romans 
divided  the  country  of  the  Veians,  distributing  to  every  one  four 
plethra  of  land,  but,  as  others  say,  eight-and-twcnty.  At  the  same 
time  they  made  war  upon  the  E^ui,  and  took  Liflus  by  storm.  They 
sent  forces,  likewise,  again&t  the  Veliterni*,  who  had  revolted.  Sa- 
tricum,  likewise,  made  a  defection,  and  a  colony  was  sent  forth  into 
Ccrtium. 

At  the  close  of  the  year,  Antipater  was  chosen  chief  governor  of 
Athens,  and  Lucius  Valerius,  and  Aulus  Manlius,  were  Roman  con- 
suls. Now  Dionysius,  king  of  Syracuse,  declared  openly  his  design 
of  a  desc«:nt  upon  Italy,  and  to  tliat  end  marched  from  Syracuse  with 
a  numerous  army;  for  he  Imd  with  him  above  twebty  thousand  foot 
and  three  thousand  horse,  a  navy  of  forty  long  ships,  or  men  of  war, 
besides  three  hundred  transport-shi|M,  for  carrying  of  corn  and  pro- 
visions. I  f e  arrived  at  Messana  the  firth  dav,  and  there  refreshed  his 
army;  from  thence  he  sent  away  Thearidas,  his  brother,  with  forty 
^ail  to  the  Lipari  islands,  for  it  was  reported  that  ten  ships  of  Rhe- 
gium lay  there;  Thearidas,  therefore,  hastening  thither,  found  out 
Che  ships  in  a  place  fit  for  his  puq)ose,  and,  possessing  himself  of 

*  Tlic  VvIkij  whotc  chief  ciiy  vai  Vcliira*. 

Vol*  1.  No.  40.  wQaa 


666  BiODoRus  slcuLuSi  BmA  XlK 


them^  with  all  their  men  on  tH)ard|  he  forthwith  returned  to  Mt 
to  DioDysiuSf  who  delivered  the  prisoners  bound  in  chaioft  to  tht 
custody  of  the  Messanians.  Then  he  transported  his  forces  to  Oui* 
lonia^^  and  laid  close  siege  to  the  city  on  erery  side,  and  battered  il 
with  his  engines. 

But  the  Greeks  in  Italy^  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  the  landiDg  of 
Dionysius's  forces,  raised  men  and  got  together  an  army  from  all 
parts.  Crotona  at  that  time  was  very  populous,  and  many  that  fled 
and  timt  were  forced  out  of  Syracuse  inhabited  there.  The  chief 
comoMind  and  management,  therefore,  of  the  war  Was  committed  to 
them,  and  Heloris  the  Syracusan  was  made  general  of  all  the  forces. 
He  was  a  valiant  man,  and  they  concluded'he  would  be  faithful^  be* 
cause  he  hated  the  tyrant,  who  had  banished  him  out  of  hb  cottQtry* 
When  he  had  mustered  all  the  confederate  army  at  Crotona,  and  or« 
dered  all  things  as  he  thought  fit,  he  hastened  away  with  a  swift  march 
towards  Caulonia,  hoping,  by  coming  upon  them  suddenly  and  docx  • 
pectedly,  he  should  not  only  raise  the  siege,  but  likewise  rout  them 
with  efise,  being  harassed  and  tired  out  with  their  continual  toil  and 
labour  in  assaulting  the  town.  His  army  consisted  of  twenty  thou- 
sand foot,  and  two  thousand  horse.  Having  marched  the  greatest 
part  of  tlie  way,  he  encamped  at  the  river  Helorus :  thereapoD  Diony- 
sius  drew  off  from  the  city  to  meet  the  Italians;  upon  which  Hcloris, 
at  the  head  of  five  hundred  of  the  choicest  men  in  the  army,  marched 
before  the  rest.  Dionysilis,  encamping  about  forty  sti^ges  from  t^ 
enemy,  understood  by  his  spies  that  the  Italians  drew  near;  upon 
which  he  forthwith,  very  early  in  the  morning,  rouzed  his  soldiers 
from  sleep,  and  commanded  them  to  march  forward,  and,  about  break 
of  day,  fell  upon  tiie  Helorians,  with  his  army  in  good  order  of  bat-* 
tie,  giving  the  enemy  no  time  to  get  into  a  body :  so  that  Heloris 
was  in  a  great  strait,  and,  with  those  he  had  with  him,  bore  the  hruDt 
of  the  enemy's  whole  force;  but,  in  the  mean  time,  he  sent  away 
some  friends  to  the  camp  to  bring  up  the  rest  of  the  army  with  all 
spot'd,  who  diligently  executed  their  orders;  upon  which  the  Italians^ 
hearing  in  what  hazard  their  general  was,  ran  in  a  greht  huriy  to  his 
assistance.  But  Dionysius,  with  a  well-ordered  body  of  meUf  ddinf 
execution  in  every  place,  cut  off  Heloris  and  almost  all  his  party, 
tliough  they  fought  with  great  resolution  and  gallantry.  For,  the 
Italians  coming  in  to  their  help  but  scattering,  and  by  parties,  and 
the  Sicilians  (keeping  orderly  together)  easily  overcame  them*  How* 
ever,  the  Griicians  for  sonic  time  despised  danger,  andauffered  nacl^ 

*  Or  Cuu1hid>  \ik  -J.ociiM 


Chap.  Xn.  DIODORUS  8ICULUS.  &S^ 

Uiougb  I  hey  s^^w  grent  numbers  of  their  fellows  tie  dead  upon  the 
spor.  Buty  when  tliej  heard  of  the  death  of  their  genenl,  (in  great 
confusion),  they  trod  down  and  killed  one  another,  and  at  last,  being 
tothily  diNCoumged  and  out  of  heart,  they  fled  outright :  upon  which 
many  were  killed  up  and  down  in  the  fields,  and  the  rest  betook 
themselves  tu  a  mount  sufficiently  fortified  and  very  defensible,  save 
that  it  wanted  water.  Dionysius  blocked  up  the  place  with  his  army, 
and  closely  guarded  it  all  tliat  day  and  the  following  night;  the  next 
(lay  they  that  were  on  the  hill  (being  much  inconunoded  by  the  beat 
and  the  want  of  water)  sent  a  trumpet  to  Dionysius,  tlmt  they  might 
have  lil»t?rty  to  ransom  themselves;  who  at  length  (growing  moderate 
in  the  height  of  his  good  fortune)  sent  them  word,  that  they  should 
lay  down  then-  arms,  and  surrender  themselves  upon  discretion. 
On  return  of  these  harsh  and  hard  terms,  they  held  out  for  some 
short  time  lougei ;  but,  being  grievously  pressed  by  the  necessity  of 
nature,  ai«d  almost  starved,  they  surrendered  themselves  about  the 
eighth  hour.  Dionysius  heieupon  numbered  them  as  they  came 
down,  ^y  striking  the  grodnd  with  a  staff,  and  they  amounted  to  above 
ten  thousand.  They  were  all  afraid  he  would  have  been  as  cruel  ae. 
a  wild  beast;  hut  he  then  approved  himself  the  mildest  of  all  men 
livii.^;  fur  he  di>clmrged  all  t*ie  prisoners  without  ransom,  and  made 
peace  with  them,  and  suircrcd  the  cities  to  govern  according  to  their 
own  laws :  for  which  great  grace  and  favour  he  was  highly  lionooredi 
and  his  name  was  so  great,  that  they  presented  him  with  golden 
crowns.  And  this  was  the  most  noble  action  that  ever  he  did  almost 
throughout  his  whole  -life. 

From  hence  he  marched  with  his  forces  against  Rhegium,  with  a 
design  to  besiege  it,  to  be  revenged  for  their  slight  of  him,  in  deny- 
ing him  a  wife  Irom  some  of  their  own  city.  The  Ithegians  were 
greatly  terrified  at  his  approach,  for  they  had  neither  confederates  nor 
forces  of  their  own  sufficient  to  cope  with  him;  besides,  they  fore- 
saw that  there  was  no  mercy  to  be  expected,  if  the  city  were  taken  i 
therefore  they  sent  an  ambassador  to  him,  to  entreat  him  to  shew 
them  favour,  and  to  use  them  like  men.  I'pon  which  he  demanded 
a  tribute  of  three  hundred  talents,  and  that  they  should  deliver 
into  his  hands  all  their  fleet,  (which  were  seventy  in  nuniber)^ 
ami  send  out  to  him  a  hundred  hostages,  all  which  terms  were  a* 
greed  to. 

Whereupon  he  moved  towards  Caulonia,  and  transported  all  the 
itihabitant^  of  that  place  to  Syracuse,  and  incorporated  them  into  the 
city,  and  granted  to  them  freedom  from  the  public  taxes  for  the  siwce 
of  five  years.    As  for  Caulonia  itself,  he  raxed  it  t^  the  ^ound,  bm 


■•r 


^^8  DIODORUS  SICULU5.  Mdtlk  X^4 


mmmmt 


gave  the  territory  to  the  Locriaos.  About  the  same  timcL  the  Komaiifl 
(after  the  taking  of  the  city  Liflus  from  the  Equi)  celebnted  the 
stately  plays  which  the  consuls  had  vpwed  to  Jupiter. 

After  the  end  of  the  year,  Pyrrhio  executed  the  office  of  lord-  . 
chancellor  of  Atliens  the  next;  and  four  military  tribunes,  Ladlos 
Lucretius,  Servius  Sulpitius,  Caius  i£milius,  and  Caius  Rafus,  were 
invested  with  the  consular  dignity  at  Rome.  Then  was  acted  the 
ninety-eighth  Olympiad,  wherein  Sosippus  the  Athenian  cariried  awty 
the  prize.  About  thie  same  time  Dionysius,  the  prince  of  Syracuse, 
entered  Hipponium*  with  his  army,  and  transported  all  the  citizens 
to  Syracuse,  and,  when  he  had  razed  the  town,  he  gave  the  binds  to 
theLocrians;  for  he  was  always  very  desirous  to  oblige  them,  be- 
cause they  so  readily  complied  with  him  in  the  business  of  his  mar- 
riage. On  the  other  hand,  he  studied  revenge  upon  the  Rhegians 
for  their  denial:  for,  when  he  sent  an  ambassador  to  them^  to  treat 
with  them  to  send  him  a  virgin  of  some  of  their  citizens  to  be  hb 
wife,  it  is  said  the  Rhegians  answered  his  ambassador8.-jrhat  he 
should  have  none  from  them,  except  it  were  the  hangman's  daughter. 
Being  highly  incepsed  at  this  gross  abuse,  (as  he  took  it^to  be), 
he  continually  studied  how  to  be  revenged.  For  he  ^made  not 
peace  with  them  the  year  before  out  of  any  design  of  kindness  oi; 
irlendsiiip  with  them,  but  only  out  of  a  desire  he  had  to  possess 
himself  of  their  fleet  of  seventy  sail.  For  he  knew  he  could  easily 
take  the  city,  when  they  could  have  no  aid  or  assistance  by  sea.  To 
tin's  end  he  made  several  halts,  and  delayed  as  much  as  he  ccmhl 
his  drawing  his  forces  out  of  Italy,  waiting  forsome  colourable  pre- 
tence or  occasion  to  break  his  league  with  the  Rhegians,  without  any 
reflection  upon  his  honour.  Drawing,  therefore,  his  forces  down  to 
the  sea-side,  he  prepares  all  things  necessary  for  bis  passage;  and 
then  desires  that  the  Rhegians  would  furnish  him  with  provisions  lor 
his  army,  and  he  would  send  them  as  much  back  again  from  Syra- 
cuse. His  design  in  this  was,  that,  if  they  refused  to  supply  him, 
he  thought  he  might  have  a  just  ground  to  raze  their  city;  and,  if 
they  readily  answered  his  request,  then,  after  their  coro  and  pfovision 
was  spent,  (upon  laying  siege  to  the  town),  he  might  with  more  ease 
(through  their  scarcity  of  food)  possess  himself  of  the  place.  The 
Riiegluns,  not  suspecting  any  thing,  for  some  few  days  furnished  him 
liberally.  But,  when  he  delayed  and  trilled  away  the  time,  sometimes 
pretending  himself  sick,  and  other  times  framing  other  excuses,  they  ' 
at  length  suspected  his  design,  and  therefore  forbore  sending  any 

,      *  A  city  of  the  Brutii^  in  Italjr. 


CAap.  XTI.  DIODORUS  SICULTT3.  6^9 

furlhci  (M'ovUiiin  to  hi^  citnip.  Upon  whlcli  Dionyiiius,  seeming  to 
be  much  enraged  at  tiiis  affront,  returned  to  them  all  the  hostages, 
and,  t-ticompassing  the  town  round  with  his  forct^s,  assaulted  it  everjr 
day;  and,  with  a  great  numher  of  engines  (nf  an  incredible  bigness) 
so  battered  the  walls,  as  if  they  had  been  shaken  by  a  storm  and 
tempest,  so  earnest  was  he  to  gain  the  ciiy.  Tlic  Rhegians,  on  the 
other  liiind,  (having  made  I'hilo  their  gcn>-ral),  ordefii  all  thai  were 
of  age  and  strength  to  taKe  up  arms,  and  to  keep  strict  guard;  i and, 
spying  a  (it  oppurtuoily,'they  made  a  vigorous  sally,  and  burnt  the 
enemy's  engines;  and  often  skirmished  out  of  the  walls  with  that 
valour  and  resolution  (to  the  exasperating  of  the  enemy)  that  they 
both  lost  many  of  (heir  own,  and  killed  no  few  of  the  Sicilians:  nay, 
Dionysius  himself  was  so  wounded  with  a  lance  about  tlie  scro- 
tum, that  be  was  very  near  losing  his  life,  it  being  a  long  time  be- 
fore he  recovered.  Notwithstanding,  though  the  siege  was  tedious, 
and  t)ie  Rhegians  resolved  to  defend  their  liberty,  yet  be  emjiloyed  his 
soldiers  in  continual  assaults,  not  In  the  least  receding  from  his  for- 
mer design  and  purpose.  The  Olympic  games  in  ibe  mean  time 
drawing  on,  he  sent  to  that  solemnity  many  chinioi.\  diuwQ  with 
four  horses  a- piece,  and  execeding  swift;  and  likewise  tents  glister- 
ing with  gold,  and  adorned  with  rich  and  various  embroideries  of 
edniirable  worknianship;  and  with  these  he  sent,  likewise,  the  most 
skilful  singers,  to  advance  hjs  own  praise  by  the  reciting  of  poc.'u» 
composed  by  himself;  for  he  wes  {even  to  mad-iess)  given  to  poetry: 
and  lie  committed  the  care  and  oversight  of  all  ibese  things  to  his 
brother  Thearidas,  (who,  when  he  came  to  the  ground,  by  the  mul* 
titude  o(  the  chariots,  and  richness  and  splendour  of  the  tents  and 
paviliohs)  atiructcd  the  eyes  of  all  the  beholders.  And,  when  tlM 
singers  began  to  recite  the  poems  of  Dionysius,  the  people  ut  firA 
ran  logetber,  and  greatly  admired  the  sweet  and  pleasant  airs  of  the 
stage -players.  But,  as  soon  as  they  perceived  bow  bad  and  ballad-  - 
like  ibe  verses  were,  they  ridiculed  Dionysim,  and  despised  hini  to 
that  diigre^',  ihat  tbey  rifled  tire  tents.  Lysias,  likewise,  the  orator, 
then  at  Olympia,  advised  the  people  that  they  should  not  admit  any 
of  those  procurators,  sent  by  so  wicked  a  tyrant,  to  have  any  thing 
to  Ao  with  those  sacred  sports.  At  which  time  lie  made  the  speech 
siilcd  by  him  the  Olympic  Oration.  And  now  the  race  began,  and 
it  so  happened,  that  the  chariots  of  Dionysius  were  some  of  them 
diii'cn  out  of  the  line,  others  were  broken  in  pieces  by  dashing  one 
upon  another.  Neither  did  the  ship  prosper  better  which  conveyed 
the  proLuriiiors :  for,  in  their  return  from  the  games  lo  Sicily,  they 
were  fuiced  by  tlic  violence  of  a  tempest  toTarentum,  acity  in  Italy, 


670  DIODORUS  SICULUS.  Book  XIK 

And  it  is  reported,  that  when  they  came  to  Synieiwe  they  siirQKd  it 
abroad — ^That  the  badness  of  Diouysius's  verses  had  not  only  dis* 
graced  the  singers,  but  prejudiced  both  the  chariots  and  the  ahipw 
However,  though  he  knew  that  his  verses  were  hissed  at,  yet  atill  he 
addicted  himself  to  poetry,  being  told  by  his  flatterers,  that  those  that 
envied  every  thing  that  was  noble  and  brave,  would  at  length  admire 
what  they  then  despised.  At  tiiat  time  the  Romans  slew  a 
number  of  tlie  Volsci  in  the  battle  at  Gurasunu 


CHAP.  XIII. 

■ 

The  peace  of  Antnlridas.  The  war  by  the  PersUms  agabM  Mvtt^ 
goras  in  Cyprus.  The  miserable  condition  of  Shegmm.  lU 
surrender.  The  cruel  usage  of  Philo,  the  governor  of  Me^ 
giumy  and  of  his  son.  The  expedition  of  the  Gauls  agoing  Itsify^ 
The  Romans  routed  by  the  Gauls  at  the  river  AUia.  Rome 
taketi  by  the  Gauls.  The  Romans  besieged  in  the  CajntoL  7%6 
Vohci  revolt  from  tfte  Romans.  The  Gauls  routed  by  Marciu 
Fitrius  in  their  return.  AH  cut  off*  afterwards  in  the  plains  qf 
Trausium, 

WITH  these  actions  the  year  ended,  and  now  Theoddtus  was  made 
chief  magistrate  of  Athens;  and  six  military  tribunes  executed  the 
consular  authority  at  Rome,  Quintus  Caesus,  Sulpitius  .£nos,  Cflssos 
Fahius,  Quintus  Cervilius^,  Publius  Cornelius^  and  Marcus  Ciaa* 
diusf.  At  this  time  the  Lacedaemonians,  tired  out  with  the  war 
both  against  the  Greeks  and  Persians,  ordered  their  admiial  Antal- 
cidas  to  go  to  Artaxerxes,  to  strike  up  a  peace.  When  he  bad  ddl« 
vcred  his  embassy  to  the  king,  he  answered,  that  he  would  make 
peace  with  the  Grecians,  upon  condition  that  all  the  Gredc  citiea 
in  Asia  should  return  to  their  obedience,  and  that  the  rest  of  die 
Grecians  should  all  govern  their  cities  according  to  their  own  laws;  • 
and  that,  if  any  should  stand  out,  and  not  submit  to  these  coiidjtioiu^ 
it  should  be  lawful  for  him  to  make  war  upon  them,  by  those  thai 
did  agree.  These  terms  were  allowed,  and  so  the  LacedeoioniaDa 
rested  from  war.    But  the  Athenians  9od  Thebans^  with  some  othera. 

*  Qdiutus  Sulpjtiu^  i  Sfi^fluM  CprncUosk 


CSlop.  Xni.  moDORtTs  sicuLUS.  671 

y/ere  much  vexed,  and  highly  concerned  to  see  llie  cities  of  Asia 
thus  betrayed;  but,  not  beiag  able  to  contend  with  I'crsia  by 
l^eir  own  strength,  they  were  forced  to  embrace  peace  upon  the 
same  terms. 

And  tww  the  king,  being  free  from  the  long  and  tedious  vmr  with 
the  Grecians,  he  prcpred  and  nmde  ready  an  army  for  the  Cyprinn 
war.  For  Euagoras  had  raised  a  vast  army  almost  throughout  all 
Cyprus,  takiag  advantage  of  Artaxcrxes's  being  engaged  in  a  war  willi 
the  Greeks. 

In  the  mean  tone  Dionysiusj  having  continued  the  siege  of  Rhe- 
gium  now  for  the  space  of  eleven  months,  and  obstructed  all  waya 
and  means  of  reliefi  he  brought  the  besieged  to  the  utmost  eictce- 
mity,  through  wanl  of  aU  things  necessary:  for  it  is  reported  that  at 
tliat  time  a  bushel  of  wlieat  was  sold  for  tive  niinas ;  and  tlie  famine 
was  so  great,  that  they  first  eat  up  their  horses,  and  then  all  other 
beasts  of  burtlten,  and  at  length  fed  upon  boiled  skins  and  Icatlicr. 
And  at  the  last  (hey  cauie  out  of  the  town,  and,  like  cattle,  began  to 
cat  tlie  grass  timl  grew  under  the  walls;  so  that,  to  supply  nature^ 
they  were  forced  to  feed  upon  those  things  proper  to  the  beasts  of  the 
field,  for  want  of  man's  otdinary  food.  When  Dionysius  heard  what 
the  Rhegians  did,  lie  was  so  far  from  commiserating  them,  who 
were  sunk  in  misery  heiow  the  common  condition  of  mankind^  that 
lie  added  to  titeir  iiflliction,  and  put  in  his  carriage  horses,  and  other 
dratight  cattle,  to  gr^ze  there,  where  they  used  to  feed,  and  so  ate 
Up  ail  that  poor  provision  which  was  only  left  for  them.  The  citi- 
zens, being  thus  overcome  by  extreme  famine,  (no  longer  to  be 
borne),  were  forced  to  deliver  up  themselves  and  their  city  to  the 
tyrant's  mercy.  When  he  entered,  he  found  licapH  of  carcases  lying 
in  the  streets,  who  had  perished  for  want  of  brend;  and,  those  that 
were  alive  were  Jilie  ivafking  ghosts,  leau,  and  almost  piued  away  hf. 
femiiie:  however,  he  got  together  above  six  thousand  prisonerf,  and 
sent  them  to  Syracuse,  with  orders,  that  whoever  paid  a  mina  ni^C 
be  redeemed ;  and,  as  for  those  that  were  not  able,  he  sold  Ifaetn  all 
for  slaves.  Fhilo,  the  governor,  he  bound  in  chains,  and  caused  his 
son  to  be  hurled  into  the  sea,  and  fastened  Philo  himself  to  the  top 
of  one  of  his  highest  engines,  tliat  the  severity  of  his  punishment 
might  be  taken  notice  of  by  all,  and  sent  one  of  his  guard  to  tell  hlm» 
that  Ihs  son  was  drowned  the  day  before;  to  whom  Philo  answered, 
that  his  son  was  by  one  day  more  happy  than  his  father.  After  this, 
be  ordered  him  to  be  whipped  through  tiie  city,  and  to  be  scoffed  and 
scorned,  and  undergo  all  sons  of  cruelly,  a  cryer  in  the  mean  time 
rijaldn^^  proclamation ^Tliat  the  rascal  was  so  severely  dealt  withjbe- 


^9  DIO;  IB  BICVU 

f  e  he  stirred  up  the  city  to  the  war,  hrii  nfUJjkmg 

through  the  siege  approved  himself  a  Talit  i^'fmMiiuIng 

his  whole  life  was  esteemed  and  hooburedi  was  boft'thpi  Ae 
discouraged  at  death,  but,  with  an  ud  aunted  couragef  flfidl 
That  he  thus  suffered  because  he  wonld  not  betiaj  the  tiff  tolNal^' 
sius;  however, God  would  revenge  him  nf  tin  ijmu  in  ■  lillnjIllBifi 
This  admirable  courage  and  brave  spirit  of  the  mm  b^wi  to  worir 
compassion  in  some  of  Dionysius's  soldien,  ao  that,  tli^  bqgm  to 
murmur:  upon  whicli  Dionysfus  (being  afraid  lest  Philo  ahovU  to 
rescued)  left  off  tormenting  him^  and  ordered  the  miaeiiUa  aaBt 
with  all  his  kindred,  to  be  drowned  in  the  sea.  Tbna  a«SmdtU|' 
worthy  man,  who  deserved  much  better  than  to  ondeigo  solMHf  and 
dreadful  a  punishment:  and  many  Greniana  there  wore  who  gricwd 
at  his  sad  misfortune;  and  several  pa  in  afitev  timet  aiade  eiq|kii 
upon  his  mournful  and  lamentable  end* 

i\t  the  same  time  when  Dionysius  lay  at  the  siege  of  TThrgiiini) . 
the  Gauls  who  lay  beyond  the  Alps  passed  over  those  atndts  vilb  4 
numerous  army,  and  possessed  themselves  of  all  the  opuatiy  betirosa 
the  Apenine  hills  and  the  Alps,  driving  thenlBe  the  TpAnimm,  the 
natural  inhabitants.    Some  say  they  were  colonies  tent  tUthcf  iNMH 
twelve  cities  in  Tyrrhenian ;  others  say  they  were  Peki^g|||BS^arha^ 
before  the  Trojan  war,  fled  out  of  Thessaly  at  the  time  of  Oeaealioa'i 
flood,  aqd  settled  themselves  in  these  parts.    Aa  for.  the  Gool^  Akf 
were  a  people  that  were  divided  into  several  tribe^^  sifid  da/^  ih 
several  countries.   Those  called  the  Sinonea  inhabited  the  lomitaia 
farthest  from  the  sea  of  all  the  other  ipountaina,  and  beeaiiao  iha 
heat  was  excessive  and  troublesome  to  them,  they  resolved  to^aeeh 
for  themselves  some  more  commodious  habitations.    To  thw  end 
they  sent  forth  the  ablest  of  their  young  men^  well  amcd^  to  .find 
out  some  other  seats,  who,  making  an  irruption  iato.TynlMahit 
with  thirty  thousand  men,  wasted  and  spoiled  the  territories  of  the 
Caulonians. 

About  this  time  the  Romans  sent  ambassadors  into  l^rnheoia,  to 
gain  intelligence  what  thb  expedition  of  the  Ganla  meant|  who^ 
when  they  came  to  Clusium,  and  saw  the  armies  on  both  aides  deawii 
up  in  battalia  ready  to  engage,  with  more  valour  than  prodejHie^.the]^ 
joined  with  them  of  Clusium,  and  fought  with  the  enemy;  Mid  oio 
of  the  ambassadors  by  good  fortune  killed  one  of  the 
manders  of  tlie  Gauls ;  who,  when  they  heard  of  it,  aeiit.i 
to  Rome,  to  require  the  ambassador  who  had  killed  thptSafll  to  ho 

•  A  province  io  It«ljr,  t  Hetruiiti  9t|MO 


■l-■^ 


Ckl^.'XIl.  DIODORUS  SICULUS. 

delivered  Up  to  1I1CI11, as  one  that  lind  begun  an  unjust  war:  upon 
which,  the  senate  would  huve  persuaded  the  ambassadors  in  have  ac- 
cepted money  in  satisfaction  of  the  injury;  but,  wlien  they  refused  it, 
it  was  decreed  that  the  person  should  be  delivered.  Upon  this,  the 
father  of  him  who  was  to  be  given  up  iolo  the  enemy's  haiid.s  (being 
then  of  cODSulaj  dignity,  and  one  of  the  military  tribunes,  and  be- 
ing likewise  very  rich,  and  of  gre;it  interest  and  account  with  the 
commonalty)  referred  the  decision  of  the  matter  to  the  people,  and 
BO  easily  procured  t\\e  judgment  and  decree  of  the  senate  to  bo  re- 
pealed. From  this  time  the  people  began  to  rescind  the  decrees  of 
»he  senate,  though  ever  before  tbey  always  submitted  10  them. 

But  the  ambassadors  of  the  Gauls  returned  to  their  camp,  and  de- 
clared (vhat  answer  was  given  them  by  the  Romans:  upon  which  they 
were  in  a  great  rage,  and  increased  ihcir  army  with  new-raised  forces 
out  of  their  own  cuifntry,  and  forthwith  marched  towards  Rome  with 
above  seventy  thousand  inen. 

When  the  news  came  to  Rome,  the  military  tribunes  commanded 
all  that  were  able  to  bear  arms  to  list  themselves,  who,  marching  out 
of  the  city,  passed  over  the  Tiber,  and  ciime  with  all  their  forces  untn  a 
jiver*  fourscore  furlongs  from  Rome;  where,  when  they  understood 
tliaUhe  enemy  wasnearat  hand,  they  drew  up  their  army  in  this  man- 
ner: their  best  soldiers,  10  the  number  of  four-and-tweoty  thousand, 
they  posted  all  blong  from  the  river  to  the  hills  adjoining,  the  rest  were 
placed  u|>on  the  rising  grounds.  On  the  other  hand,  the  encm)' 
out-wiiigii)g  the  Romans,  tlieir  strongest  and  ablest  soldiers  (whether 
on  purpose  or  by  chance  is  uncertain)  fronted  those  weaker  and  in- 
experienced soldiers  on  the  hills.  And  now  the  trumpets  on  both 
sides  siiundcd  a  charge.  Whereupon  the  armies  ran  one  upon  ano- 
ther with  a  great  shout;  and  those  Cauls  that  set  upon  them  that 
were  upon  the  liilU  presently  cleared  the  place  of  ihem,  who  fled  in 
great  confusion  to  their  own  men  into  the  plain;  so  that  by  tlieir 
fligiit,  and  the  hot  pursuit  of  the  Gauls,  they  broke  and  disordered 
their  own  army,  and  put  them  likewise  to  the  run.  And,  while  the 
greatest  part  of  them  made  to  the  river,  and  in  great  precipitation 
and  confusion  trod  down  one  another,  the  enemy  without  inlermis' 
bion  killed  all  still  that  were  in  the  rear,  so  that  the  whole  field  was 
covered  with  dead  bodies.  Some  of  the  stoutest  of  those  that  fled  to 
the  river  swam  over  with  their  arms,  prizing  them  as  much  as  their 
lives;  but  many  of  theio  (jthroii^  ihe  violence  of  l^e  stream,  and 
the  weight  of  tlieir  arms)  were  drowned. '  Some  with  great  difficulty, 

'  Altii,  t*n  oiitei  from  Raiiw. 
Vol.  1.   No.  40.  iiaBB 


674  DioDORUs  sicuLus.  Book  XIF. 


wmtmmt 


(after  they  had  fled  a  long  way,  and  in  by-paths^  with  much  ado)5  cs* 
caped.  However,  many  (still  pursued  close  by  the  enemyi  who  made 
a  great  slaughter  among  them  upon  the  bank  of  the  river)  threw  away 
their  arms,  and  swam  over  the  Tiber.  And,  though  the  Gaub  had 
cut  off  so  many  upon  the  shore,  yet  such  was  their  continued  rage, 
that  they  cast  their  darts  and  javelins  after  them  that  took  the  water; 
and,  many  darts  being  hurled  amongst  shoak  of  them  that  were 
swimming,  no  small  execution  was  done,  so  that  some  were  killed 
forthwith,  and  others  so  wounded,  that  through  loss  of  blood,  and 
strength  of  the  current,  they  were  spent  and  carried  away  by  the 
stream. 

The  greatest  number  of  those  that  escaped  from  this  sad  overthrow 
of  the  Romans,  fled  into  Veii,  lately  ruined  by  them,  and^  fortifyiog 
the  place  as  well  as  they  could,  received  the  rest  that  fled  thither. 
Those  few  who  swam  the  river,  and  returned  unarmed  into  Rome, 
related  how  the  whole  army  was  destroyed,  which  sad  news  greatly 
amazed  all  those  that  were  left  in  the  city :  for,  the  strength  and 
flower  of  the  citizens  being  now  cut  off,  they  looked  upon  themselves 
unable  in  the  least  to  resist;  and  besides,  to  aggravate  their  misery, 
it  seemed  to  them  impossible  to  fly,  with  their  wives  and  children, 
without  the  greatest  hazard  imaginable,  the  enemy  being  sa  near. 
Therefore,  many  of  the  ordinary  sort  removed,  with  their  whole  fami- 
lies,  to  the  neiglibouring  towns  and  villages;  but  the  city  magistrates, 
encouraging  the  people,  ordered  that  victuals  and  all  other  necessa- 
ries should  be  brought  into  the  capitol;  by  which  means  both  th^ 
castle  and  capitol  were  filled  not  only  with  meat  and  provisions,  but 
with  silver  and  gold,  and  all  sorts  of  rich  garments  and  attire,  goods 
of  all  kinds  throughout  the  whole  city  beiog  heaped  together  in  this 
one  place;  for  they  had  but  three  days  time  to  remo\'e  what  was 
moveable,  and  to  fortify  the  place:  for  the  Gauls  spent  the  first  day 
(according  to  the  custom  of  their  country)  in  cutting  off  the  beads  of 
those  that  were  slain;  the  other  two  days  they  lay  quiet  in  their 
xjamp,  now  close  to  the  city:  for,  when  they  discerned  that  the  walls 
were  left  bare  and  undefended,  and  yet  heard  a  confused  noise  (oc- 
casioned by  the  bringing  in  of  household  goods,  and  other  things 
useful  into  the  capitol)  they  suspected  some  stratagem  was  designing 
against  them.  But  the  fourth  day,  when  they  came  to  understand 
the  truth,  tliey  broke  down  the  gates,  and  laid  all  the  city  in  rubbish, 
except  a  few  houses  upon  Mount  Pallatine :  and  though  afterwards 
they  pressed  upon  them  in  the  capitol  with  continual  assaults,  yet 
they  within  sutfcred  little  by  it,  but  many  of  the  Gauls  perished. 
Ilowcrer,  they  stuck  olose  to  the  siege,  hoping,  (hough  they  could 


chap.-xn.  DIODORU8  SICUH19.  675 

not  g-din  the  place  by  farei;,  yet  at  least  ii)  time,  when  all  ilic 
provisions  and  victuals  were  spent,  they  niij^Lt  pu::>ess  themselves  oS 
the  fort. 

While  the  Roman  affairs  were  thus  periilesed,  llie  Tuscans,  ihclr 
neighbours,  made  an  incursion  with  a  great  army  into  their  teriito- 
ries,  and  wasted  and  destroyed  all  before  tliem.  But,  when  they 
tiad  Kot  many  prisuncr.<,  and  much  spoil  and  plunder  into  their  liand^, 
the  Romans  iU:it  iiad  fled  to  Veil  set  upon  tlicm  on  tlie  sudden,  and 
put  tliLui  to  di^litj  auil  utit  only  j-ecovL-ri^d  all  the  spoil,  but  ILkewi&e 
possessed  themselves  of  all  theii  tents;  and  by  this  means,  being 
furnished  with  a  great  number  of  arms,  they  armed  their  fellow- 
soldiers,  who  hitherto  were  unarmed  since  the  ItHe  detent,  and  got 
together  a  company  of  country-fellows  from  several  parts, and  armed 
them  likewise :  for  they  had  n  design  to  raise  the  siege  of  the  ca- 
pitol,  but  were  most  perplexed  and  concerned  how  to  give  notice  of 
their  purpose  to  the  besieged,  in  regard  the  Gauls  so  strnitly  blocked 
it  up.  Upon  this,  one  Poutius  Camiuius  undertook  to  get  into  the 
capitol;  to  which  end  he  passed  on  himself  alone,  and  privately  in 
the  night  swam  over  the  river,  and,  ascending  a  steep  rock  of  the 
capiiol  with  great  diHicuIty,  drew  himself  up,  qnd  so  came  to  the  be- 
sieged, and  acquainted  them  that  ibcy  of  V*:ii  were  in  a  l>ody,  and 
that  they  intended  to  fall  upon  the  Gaub  upon  the  fint  opportunity; 
and,  having  delivered  his  mesjage,  he  returned  to  Veil  the  sain«  way 
he  came.  But  when  the  Gauls  perceived,  by  the  impressions  of  (i 
man's  feet,  that  some  person  had  lately  |»ssed  that  way  into  the  cas- 
tle, they  determined  to  attempt  to  make  an  entry  by  cltmhing  the 
rock  in  that  part:  and  to  that  end,  about  midnight  (the  guards  be- 
ing careless,  trusting  to  the  strength  of  the  place)  some  of  the 
Gauls  got  up  to  the  top,  and  were  not  taken  notice  of  by  the  wateh; 
but  the  gcesc  dedicated  to  Juno,  that  fed  there,  (seeing  them  ap' 
pear  above  the  walls)  presently  made  a  great  gaggling  and  noise, 
which  so  alarmed  the  watch,  that  they  all  ran  to  the  place:  upoQ 
which  ihe  Gauls,  now  betrayed  and  affrighted,  duntoot  proceed  anjr  . 
J'iirtlier. 

In  liie  mean  time  that  famous  man  Marcus  Manlius,  hasteuii^  to 
thi'  d<^fence  of  the  place,  cut  off  the  hand  of  a  Gaul  as  he  was  raising 
himself  to  recover  the  wall,  and,  by  a  thrust  in  his  breast  with  the 
buss  of  his  buckler,  oast  him  down  headlong  from  the  top  of  the 
roc!<;  and  another  being  destroyed  after  the  satne  manner,  the  rest 
in  all  baste  retired;  and,  because  the  rock  was  very  steep,  (being  in 
;l  great  terror  and  amaz'ment),  they  all  miserably  perished.  The 
Romans  hereupon  sending  ambassadors  to  them  to  treat  u^n  terms 


GjG  DIODORUS  SICULITS.  Book 


M^MtMk 


of  peace,  cl)taiiie(l  it  in  or*  these  conditions ^Tfiat  upon  receiving  a 

thousand  pound  weicJiv  tit"  »old,  they  should  leave  the  city, and  depart 
out  oi  til"  Roniari  ti'ir'aories. 

After  tin's,  because  the  houses  were  destroyed,  and  many  of  the 
citizens  killed,  the  Romans  gave  leave  to  every  one  tliat  would,  to 
build,  and  roofed  and  covered  all  the  houses  at  the  public  charge, 
which  were  therefore  ever  after  to  tliis  day  called  tlie  public  houses. 
And  because  ever}*  man  built  according  to  his  own  humour,  where 
he  pleased,  tlie  streets  ^-ere  made  very  narrow  and  crooked,  which 
(rot^vithstanding  the  riches  of  the  city)  in  succeeding  times  could 
never  be  reformed.  Some  have  reported,  that  the  Roman  matrons 
gave  all  their  golden  ornaments  for  the  redeeming  of  their  country; 
for  which  they  have  this  honour  allowed  them,  that  they  may  at  any 
time  he  eariierl  in  chariots  thifough  the  city. 

The  Ro?iuiiis  bring  thus  impoverished  and  brought  low  by  the  late 
calamity,  the  V4)lsci  U)o\i  ihe  advantage,  and  raised  arms  against 
them,  t'pon  which,  the  consular  tribunes  gi»t  their  forces  together, 
and  inarched  out  into  the  Campus  Martins  (as  it  is  called)  and  en- 
camped about  two  hundred  s rages  from  the  city.  The  Volsci  far 
exceeded  th'*  Romans  in  number,  and  set  upon  their  camp:  upon 
v/hicli  the  sj  »iatc,  much  concerned  for  them  in  the  field,  madcMar-t 
cus  Fi;rius  i-ietaior,  who  ordered  the  young  men  in  the  city  to  take 
np  arms,  witii  whom  he  marched  out  in  the  night,  and  came  upon 
the  I.  icks  of  tlie  Volsci,  (when  they  were  very  busy  and  intent  in 
assaulting  the  Romans),  and  easily  put  them  to  flight:  upon  which, 
they  within  the  canij)  sallying  out,  th«  Volsci  by  this  moans  were 
hemmed  in  or.  every  side,  aiid  almost  all  cut  off*.  And  thus  th;s 
nati.ui,  whr>  were  betore  a  strong  and  potent  people,  by  this  over- 
throw were  brought  extremely  low,  and  weaker  than  ai:\y  of  the  na- 
tions round  about  them. 

The  dictaior  afiei  wards,  hearing  that  Bola  was  besieged  by  the 
j^qui,  marched  thither,  and  killed  most  of  the  besiegers.  Thence 
he  moved  to  Sutrinum*,  a  colony  of  the  Romans,  but  then  pos- 
sessed by  the  /Equi,  and,  falling  upon  them  on  the  sudden,  he 
made  a  great  slaughter  among  them,  and  restored  the  city  to  them 
of  SutriuL  m. 

About  this  time  the  Gauls,  in  their  march  from  Rome,  besieged 
Veascus,  a  confederate  city  of  the  Romans;  upon  which  the  dicta- 
tor marcljcd  against  them,  fought,  and  routed  them,  and  seized 
tlieir  bag  and  baggage,  amongst  which  was  the  gold  weighed  at  Rome, 

•  Sutrium. 


Chap.  Xir.  DIODORUS  SICULU<1.  6*7 

and  rec'overtd  almost  nil  the  prey  and  plunder  they  had  guined  ia 
talthig  of  ihe  city.  And,  though  he  had  performed  all  this  good  ser- 
vice, yel  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  through  euvy,  denied  him  a 
triumph.  Yet  some  relate  that  he  did  triumph  in  a  chariot  drawn 
liy  four  white  horses  for  the  victory  over  the  Tuscans,  and  within 
two  days  after  was  lined  by  the  people  in  a  great  sum  of  inoney^ 
which  we  shall  mection  hereafter  in  its  proper  place. 

Those  Gauls  that  went  to  Japygium,  designed  to  return  through 
the  Roman  territories;  btit  the  Cerii  laid  an  ambush  for  them  in  the 
night,  and  cut  them  all  olF  in  the  plains  of  Trausium. 

Callistbenes  the  historian  began  hia  Grecian  memoirs  from  thu 
year,  wherein  the  peace  was  made  between  the  Greciatis  and  Ar- 
taxerxes,  and  ended  them  with  the  year  the  temple  of  Delphos  was 
taken  and  rillud  by  Philomelus  the  Fbocieti,  compreliending  an  ac- 
count of  affairs  for  the  space  of  thirty  years  in  teti  books.  And  now, 
bein^^  come  tu  the  peace  between  Artazerxes  and  the  Greeks,  and 
the  danger  threatened  to  Rome  by  the  Gauls,  according  to  our  pur* 
pose  at  the  beginning,  we  shall  put  an  end  to  this  book. 


BSD  Op  VOL.  I. 


7, 


a* 


