C. H. Brewitt- 
Taylor. 


Translated by 


E (= = ae A ag A 
> = 2 £ J E ; È 2 z 
= = eee 


VO Ne ve 
See Se as 
je 


EE LZ 
WN REA ONV 


“e.o. 


eee eoo o9 


e -e SAVANTAN. AC e 
ALAE KEARN 
g f: E 


d 
s] 
fy 

A 

“cd 

wy 
cc) 

a 

4D 
E 
is) 

H 

by 


fy 
Q 
E 
“4 
4 
{63} 
[aen 
> 
wy 
YD 
g 
ia] 
La) 
H 
A 


Accession No. 


Date 2 oes 


y 


Pa 


ait 
Sy 


ah 
crt, 


z 


ahh 


Adee lat 
aus, Tee 


es 


ican 
Kone: 


x 


- SAN KUO, 
fo tah OR a 
ROMANCE OF THE THRÈE KINGDOMS 


| i By C. H. BREWITT-TAYLOR oy. 
late of the Maritime Customs Service ‘of China a ae 
AN ENGLISH VERSION OF : 


i } a 
. VOLUME 1 
POPULAR EDITION 
KELLY & WALSH, LIMITED 
SHANGHAI : HONGKONG : SINGAPORE 
1929 
i AEE NS ean BN ay sd ae 


COPYRIGHT, 1925, BY Co H. BREWITT-TAYLOR. 


ý First Printing, December, 1925. . 
Especially prepared for the use and education of the Chinese People. 


HEE ERAEN a Fa ee ae: o R 


Provisionally Registered in the Shanghai Bureau for the Registration of Trade Marka. 
Popular Edition, November, 1929. 


he 


PRINTED. IN SHANGHAI, CHINA, AT THE PRESS OF KELLY & WALSH, L/t'v, 


PUBLISHERS’ NOTE... 


. The Standard edition of this translation of China’s most 
famous historical Novel was published in 1925 and. is fast 
becoming out-of-print. 


The price of this Standard edition, it was realised, was 
above the purchasing capacity of the average Chinese reader, 
- and, therefore, in view of the ever-increasing desire on the 
part of the latter to embrace Western learning, it was thought : 
that'a cheaper edition might meet with the support of Chinese 
friends who would be interested in reading in English what 
most of them have already read in their mother tongue. 


In the hope that this may be realised, the Publishers 
now. have pleasure in placing this Popular Edition on the 
market and they trust that it will meet with cordial approval. 


KELLY & WALSH, LTD. 


November 1929. 


s ey BeOS it, a f Em ye i ' Kt aS ee ak ey 
è ope FEAST I IN THE GARDEN OF PEACHES: 
ee a e OF REBELS 


t 
sah 
Mg 


A Bei TUNG CHO SILENCES TING YUA 


ee aL EN-LIU Ky 
a AGAINST ` TUNG. CHO: “A 
ni SWORD ey NA i roa 
at SENDING OUT THE CALL: “MANY RESPOND: ‘DES 
- TROYING AN ARMY: THE THREE pen 
FIGHTAGAINGT LU BU.) te nee aie 


i ie if 
VI. BURNING THE CAPITAL, TUNG ‘CHO. COMMITS ANS 
E ES i: ATROCITY: | HIDING THE SEAD; SUN CHIEN 
Cap _ BREAKS FAITH . A VRR 


a VIL. YUAN SHAO FIGHTS WITH KUNGSUN TSAN ar 
eS? PAN HO? SUN CHIEN ATTACKS LIU PIAO 


ee GOVERNOR. WANG PREPARES THE “CHAIN” 
_ SCHEME: TUNG CHO’S RAGES AT THE FENGI 
PAVILION 


sf ce PU HELPS TO SUPPRESS DISORDER: CHIA HSU fess 
| COUNSELS AN ATTACK ON THE CAPITAL. <o 


MA TENG SERVES HIS COUNTRY WELL: TS ‘AO. TS‘ AO 
 AVENGES HIS FATHER’ S MURDER 3 


T. LIU, ‘THE EMPEROR’S UNCLE, RESCUES K‘UNG 
JUNG: LU, MAERUIR OF WEN, DEFEATS TS‘AO — 
Wie TSAO Wo cae anda 
XIL THE PREFECT T‘AO THRICE OFFERS HIS CHARGE: 
| o TSAO TS‘AO FIGHTS A GREAT BATTLE... Ate 


= XIII. GREAT BATTLE BETWEEN LI TS‘UI AND KUO SSU: UR 
SeSi THE EMPEROR RESCUED y o 3 ; EER 
= XIV. TS‘AO MENG-TE MOVES THE COURT: AU PENG?) N 
ia HSIEN ‘RAIDS, HSUCHUN ; E ty 


SG A ae TABLE: OF CONTENTS fg" gk od 
TEAN f E AS iy Ea Sy i en irene : rage. 


XV. T‘AISHIH TZU FIGHTS FOR FRIENDSHIP’S SAKE: ~ 
SUN PO-FU DOES BATTLE WITH YEN, THE WHITE ise 


eas DIGER hon cel ae oy aa eka 
2 ; i XVI. A FEAT OF ARCHERY: A BATTLE LOST AT YUSHUI .__ L 
_ RIVER : : à 4 gos ET E ON 
XVII. AN ARMY OF SEVEN DIVISIONS MARCHES OUT: So tah ag 
THREE GENERALS ARE BROUGHT TOGETHER - . 175 
XVIII. CHIA HSU ENGINEERS A GREAT VICTORY: HSIAHOU = Ae 
TUN LOSES AN EYE. . i LBA Tes 
XIX. TS‘AO TS‘AO FIGHTS AT HSIAP‘EI: LU PU PERISHES A 
AT THE WHITE GATE TOWER. ; i ani 195 


XX. TS‘ AO A-MAN ORGANISES A HUNTING EXPEDITION : 
> STUNG, “STATE UNCER,” RECEIVES A COMMAND ` 


IN THE PALACE. =. ; : : ELON 
XXI. TS‘AO TS‘AO DISCUSSES HEROES: KUAN YU SLAYS et 

CHE CHOU = : ; i rA 
XXII. YUAN AND TS‘AO BOTH TAKE THE FIELD: THE — 


TWO BROTHERS CAPTURE TWO CAPTAINS —..- 228. 


XXIII. MI HENG SLIPS HIS GARMENT AND RAILS AT TRAIT- - 
Se aan ORS: CRUEL PUNISHMENT OF THE PHYSICIAN. = 
S CHI A 3 ; : Sa Ogee 


XXIV. MURDER OF A KUEI-FEI: LIU PEI DEFEATED; bas 
FLIGHT TO YUAN SHAO : ines ee 
XXV. FROM T'USHAN CAMP KUAN YU MAKES THREE | as 
CONDITIONS: THE RESCUE AT PAIMA RELEASES 
‘TS‘AO TS‘AO eel : . _ 259 
XXVI. YUAN SHAO IS DEFEATED AND LOSES A LEADER’ Ah ae 
Rie KUAN YU ABANDONS RANK AND WEALTH =. 270 
XXVII. “BEAUTIFUL BEARD ” RIDES ON A SOLITARY JOUR- = 
NEY: AND SLAYS SIX MEN AT FIVE PASSES. 279 


XXVIII. TS‘AI YANG PUT TO DEATH, THE BROTHERS’ DOUBTS 
DISAPPEAR: MEETING AT KUCH‘ENG, LORD AND E ag ba NA 
LIEGE FORTIFY EACH OTHER à 29 Ores 


XXIX. THE “LITTLE CHIEF OF THE FEUDAL LORDS” SLAYS 
YU CHI: THE “BLUE-EYED BOY” LAYS HERT ON 


i } CHIANGTUNG .- j i -802 
XXX. YUAN SHAO DEFEATED AT THE FERRY: TS‘AO TS “ab ; 
BURNS THE WUCH‘AO GRANARIES . : S E 


XXXI. TS‘AO TS‘AO OVERCOMES YUAN SHAO: LIU PEI 
SEEKS SHELTER WITH LIU PIAO . S EAT 


‘40 P Pr FINDS A WIFE: A PLAN FOR a 
_ LIAOTUNG ee eae 


FU MEETS A NOBLE LORD AT HSINYEH 


aoe oF FANCH ENG: CHUKO LIANG “RECOM. 
MENDED SA Lewin : 


IT. ANOTHER SCHOLAR: INTRODUCED: | THE THREE i 
_VISITS TO THE RECLUSE 7 


VIII. PLAN FOR THREE ‘KINGDOMS: THE SUNS AVENGE i 
‘THEMSELVES 


AT CHINGCHOU. THE SON o aut PIAO THRICE BEGS 
_ ADVICE: AT POWANG SLO} PETHE MASTER DIRECTS 
| HIS: FIRST BATTIE ouh % PE : 


THE LADY TS‘AI DISCUSSES THE RENUNCIATION OF Ko z 
CHINGCHOU : CHUKO LIANG BURNS HSINYEH . 


i LIU PEI LEADS HIS PEOPLE OVER THE RIVER: CHAO a x 
. YUN RESCUES HIS LORD ; 


_ CHANG FEI’S GREAT FIGHT AT CH “ANGPAN. SLOPE: ea 
LIU PHI, DEFEATED, GOES TO HANCHINGK‘ OU i ae 


. CHUKO LIANG DISPUTES WITH THE SCHOLARS: LU 
_ SU DENOUNCES THE MAJORITY OPINION . 7 


. K‘UNG-MING STIRS CHOU YU TO ACTION: SUN 
CH‘UAN DECIDES TO ATTACK TS‘AO TSAO 


TS‘AO TS‘AO. LOSES SOLDIERS: : CHIANG KAN (EPH a 
OF A RUSE- È A 


K‘UNG-MING Fe ee SOME ARROWS: HUANG 
_ KAI ACCEPTS A PUNISHMENT ~ Com 1 


KAN TSE PRESENTS THE "TREACHEROUS LETTERS” oc ae 
P‘AN TUNG SUGGESTS | CHAINING THE CENS 
TOGETHER i 


y ai, BANQUET ON THE YANGTSE: TS ‘AO TS‘AO’S SONG: we lg 
WHOA A THE OR MEN see ON THE Oa se ke 
SHIPS (iit, aoe: : £ 


| XLIX. ON THE SEVEN STARS ALTAR CHUKO. J SACRIFICES a 
TO THE WINDS: AT THE THREE RIVERS CHOU YU 
LIBERATES FIRE aie ee : ; 


sj ae 


. Uy KUAN YU, FROM ss 
misc E Sas HUANG CHUNG: SUN CH‘UAN. 
3 TH C 


nee SLEEPING DRAGON’ e ae AT CH EE 
fe A PHOENIX FLEDGELING ’ x INTERVENE AT te A 

SYA NGET AOA a sd ; T E AR 

"nn. AN ‘EXPEDITION FOR REVENGE: EXPEDIENTS To Ral 

CONCEAL IDENTITY LAU 2 ; i MAA 

LK, HSU CH‘U STRIPS FOR A FIGHT WITH MA CH‘ AO: iy 
TS‘AO TSAO WRITES A LETTER TO SOW DISSEN- i 
Pies SHON SG e site AEA i E 

Hie LX. CHANG SUNG TURNS THE TABLES ON- YANG HSIU js Ri 
OCCUPATION OF SHU DISCUSSED y is ' 


E, 


1 


PREFACE. 


À. WYLIÉ, in his invaluable Notes on Chinese Litra, 


- gays, “Works of fiction par excellence are not admitted by oe 


the Chinese to form a part of their national literature. ‘Those 
who have imbibed European ideas on the subject, however, 
-will feel that the novels and romances are too important as a 
~ class to be overlooked. The insight they give in the national 
manners and customs of various ages, the specimens which they 


furnish of an ever-changing language, the fact of this being — 


_ the only channel through which a large portion of the people 
~ gain their knowledge of history, and the influence which they 


must consequently exercise in the formation of character, are’ — 


- reasons too weighty to be left out of account, notwithstanding 
the prejudices of scholars on the subject. ‘Foremost among 
these in popular estimation is the San Kuo Chih Yen-i. 
(= 8 ŠA S). This is a historical novel, in 120 chapters, 
= written by Lo Kuan-chung (# H #) of the Yiian dynasty > 
(1260-1341). The plot, which is founded on the historical 
- events immediately succeeding the decadence of the house of 
- Han, is wrought out with a most elaborate complication of 
details, embracing the period from 168 to 265. Following the 
course of events from the imbecile reign of Ling Ti of the 
= Han, the tale opens with an account of the insurrection of the 
3 ‘Yellow Caps,’ during which Lui Pei (21 ffi), a descendant 
~ of the imperial family, enters into a solemn compact with 
Kuan Yü (6) 7), now the deified Kuan Ti, God of War, and 
Chang Fei (# I) to aid each other till death, in their efforts 
_ to uphold the falling house. The fortunes of Liu Pei are 
_ traced through a series of reverses, till he assumes the royal 
= power, (known afterwards as Chao-Lieh Ti), and the empire 
became divided into three states Wei, Shu and Wu. Tyranny - 
and bloodshed mark the narrative for nearly a century, till 
_ the usurper Ts‘ao Mao of the Wei is deposed by his minister 
_ Sst-ma Chao, whose son became the consolidator of the empire, 
‘and founder of the'Tsin dynasty, being the Wu Ti of history.” 
As a general description of the book, Wylie’s brief note 
leaves little to be desired ; to amplify it would mean an analysis 
- with which I would not weary the reader. I will add, however, 
` that the San Kuo is widely read and very generally known, 
perhaps, however, better through stage performances than by 
er aal reading. 


ond he San Kuo is dis 
story-teller, one can 
and genealogies, which seem I ar to 
listener. Happily, English admits 

many strangely-spelt names. which 
- have been Hee, and as ROR “bes 


in. the case ‘of very NIANA, wees Ae 
_... Manchu, Japanese, ‘Siamese, and Pihl oiher f 
of the San Kuo-have been made, and now to these 
attempted to add one in English, with what measure of ; 
_ I leave to curious readers qualified to Sompare, i y re di 
aa aA Pheoriginak en Naas, y i 

ey _, The Wade. system of rom nisation, in whi 


a 


“Th conclusion, Ẹ wish Ko. put on: ‘record my gratitude 
Chen Ti Tsen who ea the text, and Mr. E. M ni 


ae) ye A 


z 
EEA 


S 


CHAPTER L. 


Frast IN THE : GARDEN OF PEACHES: BROTHERHOOD Sworn: : 
ka SLAUGHTER OF REBELS: THE BROTHERS HEROES. 


ene ee wax and wane; states cleave asunder and coalesce. _ me 
s When the rule of Chou weakened seven contending principa- — 
i lities sprang up, warring one with another till they settled NAN 
_ down.as Ts‘in and when its destiny had been fulfilled arose 
WON u yee Han to contend for the magtery, And Han was the ; 
victor.. h cal 
- The rise of the EOUN of: Hon ben with the slaughter 
-of the White Serpent. In a short time the whole Empire was 
-theirs and their magnificent heritage was handed down in. 
successive generations till the days of Kuang-Wu, whose name. 
~ stands i in the middle of the long line of Han. This was in the © 
. first century of the western era and the dynasty had then 
AN already passed its zenith. A century later came to the Throne. 
He _ the Emperor Hsien, doomed to see the beginning of the division 
a into three parts, known to history as The Three Kingdoms. i 
© The descent into misrule hastened in the reigns of the two TE 
_ Emperors Huan and Ling, who sat in the dragon seat about the. 
4 middle of the second century. The former of these two paid | 
no heed to the good men.of his court, but gave his confidence | 
to the palace eunuchs. He lived and ‘died, leaving the sceptre 
rte Ling, whose trusted advisers were the General Tou Wu and 
ig the Grand Tutor Ch‘én Fan. These two, disgusted with the 
Ee} ` abuses resulting from the meddling of the eunuchs in affairs 
A of State, plotted their destruction. But the chief eunuch - 
mT S'ao Chieh was not to be disposed of easily. The plot leaked | 
out and the two honest men fell, leaving the eunuchs stronger. 
oes before. 
he ms It fell upon the day of full moon of the fourth Taha second — 
year of the period Chien-Ning, that the Emperor went in state — 
to the Wén-té Hall. As he drew near the Throne a rushing 
-< whirlwind arose in the corner of the hall and, lo! from the — 
roof beams floated down a monstrous black serpent that coiled — 
itself up on the very seat of majesty. The Emperor fell in a 
swoon. Those nearest him hastily raised and bore him to his 
palace while the courtiers scattered and fled. The serpent 
_ disappeared. Bi R 
` But there followed a terrific tempest, thunder, hail. andi ioe 
torrents of rain, lasting till midnight and working havoc on 
| os sides. hae years later the earth quaked i in Loyang, while 


1" 


Be aS x San Buo, or 


=v \ 


X a recorded ten years later, when the reign- -title was changed: 
ks certain hens suddenly developed male characteristics, a miracle 


T affairs of State. At the new moon of the sixth month a long g 
wreath of black vapour wound its way into ‘the audience 


leaving a mighty rift in its flank. 


moved by these signs of the displeasure of Heaven, issued an 
edict asking his. ministers for an explanation of the calamities 


«about by feminine interference in State affairs. 
The Emperor read this memorial with deep sighs, and the 


anxiously noted these signs of grief. An opportunity offering, 


driven from court and forced to retire to his country house. 
With this victory the eunuchs grew bolder. Ten of them, rivals 
in wickedness and associates in evil deeds, formed a powerful 
party known as The Ten. One of them, Chang Jang, won such 
influence that he became the Emperor’ s most honoured and 
trusted adviser. The Emperor even called him Daddie. So the 
Government went quickly from bad to worse, till the country 
was ripe for rebellion and buzzed with brigandage. 

At this time in Chiilu was a certain Chang family, of whom 
three brothers bore the name of Chio, Pao:and Liang respec- 
tively. The eldest was an unclassed graduate, who devoted 
himself to medicine. One day, while culling simples in the 
woods, he met a venerable old gentleman with very bright 
eyes and fresh complexion, who walked leaning on a stafi. 
The old man beckoned Chio into a cave and there gave him 
three volumes of the “Book of Heaven.” “This book” said he, 
“is the Way of Peace. With the aid of these volumes you can 
convert the world and rescue mankind. But you must be 
single-minded, or, rest assured, you will greatly suffer.” 


name of his benefactor. 

T ~ “I am the Hsien of the Southern Land of Glory,” was the 
TER Tay as the old gentleman disappeared in thin air. A 

A ~ The new possessor of the wonderful book studied it eagerly 
and strove day and night to reduce its precepts to practice. 


Before long he could summon the winds and command the rain,- 


along the coast a huge tidal wave rushed in which, in its recoil, i 
swept away all the dwellers by the sea. Another evil omen was. _ 


which could only refer to the effeminate eunuchsmeddling in — 
chamber, while-in the following month a rainbow was seen in — 
the Jade Chamber. Away from the capital a mountain fell in, 


Such were some of various omens. The Emperor, greatly 


and marvels. A` certain Ts‘ai Yung replied bluntly that k 
showers of insects and changes of fowls’ sexes were brought 


chief eunuch Ts‘ao Chieh, from his place behind the Throne, 


he read the document and told his fellows its purport. Before ; 
long a charge was trumped up against the author, who was ` 


With a humble obeisance Chang took the book and asked the 


and became known as The Mystic of the Way of Peace. Soon 


he could test his other powers. With a change of reign-title 


“flomance of the Tiet Bingpoms | 


y Eere. a terrible Lt Sate which ran Fhrous how he land, : A 


whereupon Chang Chio distributed charmed’ remedies of 
which the success gained him the title of the Wise and Good 
Master.. He began to have a following of disciples whom he © 
initiated into the mysteries and sent abroad throughout all the 

land. They, like their master, could write charms and recite: 

formulae and their fame increased his following. He began — 
_ to organise his disciples. He established thirty six circuits,. 
the larger with a myriad or more members, the smaller with 
about half that number. Each circuit had its chief who took | 


_the military title of General. They talked wildly of the death he 


p _ of the blue heavens and the setting up of the yellow; they said | 


si a new cycle was beginning and would bring universal good 


~ fortune, and they persuaded people to chalk the symbols for 
the first year of a cycle on the main door of their dwellings. 


‘a With the growth of the number of his supporters grew also a 
the ambition of the “Wise and Good.” He dreamed of empire. 


One of his partizans, Ma Yiian-i, was sent bearing gifts to gain 
the support of the eunuchs whereby to have allies within the 
palace. To his brothers Chang Chio said, “For schemes like | 
ours always the most difficult part is to gain the popular 
favour. But that is already ours. Such an opportunity must 
` not pass.” And they began to prepare. Many yellow flags. 
were made and a day was chosen to strike the first blow. — 
fi Then they wrote letters to the chief eunuch, Fêng Hsü, and 
- sent them by a follower, who alas! betrayed their trust and 
discovered the plot. The Emperor summoned his trusty 


-General Ho Chin and bade him look to it. Ma Yüan-i was at 


once taken and put to death. Féng Hsü and many others were: 
cast into prison. 


The plot having thus become known the Changs were forced _ 


at once to take the field. They assumed grandiose titles, 
T‘ien Kung, or Celestial Duke, Ti Kung, or Terrestrial Duke, 
_Jén Kung, or Duke of- Humanity, and in these names they put 


forth this manifesto:—“‘The good fortune of the Hans is ex- — 


hausted and the Wise Man has appeared. Discern the will of 
Heaven, O ye people, and walk in the way of righteousness, 
whereby alone ye may attain to peace.’ 

Support was not lacking. On every side people bound their 
heads with a yellow turban and joined the army of the rebel 
' Chang Chio, so that soon his strength was exceeding great and 
the official troops melted away at a whisper of his coming. 

Ho Chin, Guardian of the Throne, memorialised for general 
preparations against the rebels and an edict called upon every 
one to fight against them. In the meantime Lu Chih, Huangfu 
Sung and Chu Chien marched against them in three directions 
with veteran soldiers. 

It is now time to turn to Chang Chio. He led his army into 
Yuchow, the northern of the eight divisions of the country. 


geese 7 i Zan tuo, or a 


The Prefect was one. Liu Yen, a scion of the Tibecine House s 


through a certain Lu, Prince Kung ‘of Chingling. Learning of | 
the approach of the rebels, the Prefect called in the Hsiao-yi — 
Tsou Ching to consult over the position. Said Tsou, “They are i 


many and we few ; you must enlist more men to: oppose them.” 


The Prefect saw this was so and he put out notices calling i 


for volunteers to serve against the rebels.. One of these notices _ 


` was posted up in the Cho district, where lived one of whom 
much will be heard later. 


This man was no mere bookish scholar nor eond he: any 
pleasure in study. But he was liberal and amiable, albeit a 


man of few words, hiding all feeling under a calm exterior. 


He had always cherished a yearning for high emprise ‘and had- 


cultivated the friendship of men of mark. He was tall of 


_ His complexion was clear as jade and he had rich red lips. He. 


was a descendant of a Prince whose father was the grandson 


for filial piety. 


At this time the family had sunk deep in Nene ea and the 3 
` son gained his living by the sale of straw sandals and weaving . 
grass mats. The family home was in a village near the district t 
city. Near the house stood, a huge mulberry tree, and seen 


from afar its'curved profile resembled the tilt of a waggon. 


Noting the luxuriance of its foliage a soothsayer had predicted _ 


that one day a man of distinction would come forth from the 


family. . As a child Yiian-té and the other village boys played . 
beneath this tree and he would climb up into it, saying he — 
was emperor'and:' was mounting his chariot. The lad’s uncle. 


recognised that he was no ordinary boy and saw to it that the 


family did not come to actual want: 


When Yiian-té was fifteen his mother senit, him travelling for _ 
his education. For atime he served Chéng. Yiian and Lu Chih 


as masters and he became great friends with Kungssun Tsan. 


Ytian-té was twenty eight when the outbreak of the rebellion - 


called for soldiers. The sight of the notice saddened him and 


he sighed as he read it. Suddenly a rasping voice behind him 
cried, “Noble Sir, why sigh if you do nothing to help your © 


country ? ae Turning quickly he saw te a a aman about , 


ae - 


.. stature. His ears were long, the lobes touching his shoulders, 
` and his hands hung down below ‘his knées.. His eyes ‘were. A 
=: very prominent, so that he could see backward past his ears. — 


.. of the Emperor Ching, (the occupant of the dragon throne a ~ 
century and a half B.c.) His name was Liu Pei; or more ` 
commonly Liu Yiian-té. Many years before one of his forbears — 
had been Marquis of that very district, but had lost his rank 
_ for remissness in ceremonial offerings. However, that branch f 
of the family had remained on in the place, gradually becoming — 
poorer and poorer as the years rolled on: His father Liu Hung ~ 
‘had been a scholar and an official but died young. The widow — 
and orphan were left alone and Pei as a. lad won a ‘reputation i 


ne own ee with a bullet Jead ike a Konia n large e eyes, 
ma pointed chin anda bristling moustache. He spoke ina bud. 


_ bass voice and looked as irresistible as a runaway horse. At Me 


7 once Yüan-tê saw hè was no ordinary | man and- asked who he 
‘was. 
“Chang Fei is my name; i am usually. called Ete” tepli: 
. the stranger. “T live near here where I have a farm; and I am 
EGY wine- seller and a butcher. as well. And I like to become 


+ 


acquainted with worthy men. Your sighs as you neag the 


; notice drew me toward you.” 


XYüan-tê replied, “I am of a petal Family, Liu by; name, et 1 eas 


F 


SÀ these rebels and restore peace, to the Jana, but oe I am 


` helpless.” 
we Taminot without means, cai, Row. Se you and E 
pa raised some men and tried what we could do.” ` 


37 


-This was happy news for Yüan-tê and the two betook then : 


i aes to the village inn to talk over the proj ject. As they ` were 
drinking, a huge, tall fellow appeared pushing a hand-cart 
along the road. At the threshold he halted and entered the . 


inn to rest awhile and he called for wine. “And be quick,” © 


‘added he “for I am in haste to get into the town and offei 
i myself for the army.” : 

- Yitian-té looked over the new-comer om by ia and noted — 
| ‘his huge frame, his long beard, his dark brown face and deep 
red lips. He had eyes like a pheenix and fine bushy eyebrows ~ 

7A like silkworms. His whole appearance was dignified and awe- . 
inspiring. Presently Ytian-té crossed over, sat down beside 
-him and asked his name. 

“Tam Kuan Yü,” said he; “T used to be known as Shots ch‘ ang 

(Long as eternity), but now. am usually called Yün- chang | 


. (Long as a cloud). “Iama native of the east side of the river, | 
but I have been a fugitive on the waters for some five years, . 
_ because I slew a ruffian who, since he was powerful, was a _ 


bully, I have come to join the army here.” 

_ ‘Then Yiian-té told him his own intentions and all three went 
away to Chang Fei’s farm where they could talk over the grand 

roject. 

ey J rid F Fei, “The peach Uds in the orchard behind the eu 
are just in full flower. Tomorrow we will institute a sacrifice 
“there and solemnly declare our intention before Heaven and 
Earth. And we three will swear brotherhood and unity of 
aims and sentiments; thus will we enter upon our great task.” 


Ali three being of one mind, next day they prepared the 


. Se a black ox, a white horse and wine for libation. 


. Beneath the smoke of the incense burning on the altar they 


‘bowed their heads and recited this oath :—“We three, Liu Pei, 
‘Kuan Yü and Chang Fei, though of different families, swear 


brotherhood, and promise mutual help to one end. We will 


and my distinguishing name is Pei. An I could: I would destroy Vo 


ria 


$ 


aes ain Tad l » o- Sipe tO 


—— 


CRT O San huo, or 


rescue each other in difficulty, we will aid each other in danger. 
We swear to serve the state and save the people. We ask not 
the same day of birth but we seek to die together. May Heaven, 


the all-ruling, and Earth, the all-producing, read our hearts, 


and if we turn aside from righteousness or forget kindliness 
may Heaven and man smite us!” 

They rose from their knees. The two Se bowed before 
Ytian-té as their elder brother and Chang Fei was to be the 
youngest of the trio. This solemn ceremony performed, they 
slew other oxen and made a feast to which they invited the 


villagers. Three hundred joined them and all feasted and ~ 


drank deep in the Peach Garden. 
The next day weapons were mustered. But there were no 


. horses to ride. This was a real grief, but soon they were 


cheered by the arrival of two horse dealers with a drove of 


- horses. 


“Thus does Heaven help us,” said Yiian-té and the three | 
brothers went forth to welcome the merchants. They were 


from Changshan and went northwards every year to buy 


horses. They were now on their way home because of the 
rising. They also came to the farm, where wine was set before 


them, and presently Ytian-té told them of the plan to strive | 


for tranquility. The two dealers were glad and at once 
gave them fifty good steeds, and beside, gold and silver and 
a thousand catties of steel fit for the forging of weapons. 
After the merchants had taken their leave, armourers were 
summoned to forge weapons. For Yiian-té they made a double 
sword. Yitin-ch‘ang fashioned a long-handled, curved blade 
called “Black Dragon” or “Cold Beauty,” which weighed a full 


-hundredweight, and Chang Fei made himself an eighteen-foot 


spear. Each too had a helmet and full armour. 


When these were ready the troop, now five hundred strong, 
marched to Tsou Ching, who presented them to Liu Yen. 


When the ceremony of introduction was over, Yiian-té declared - 
his ancestry and Yen at once accorded him the favour due to 


a relation. 

Before many days it was announced that the rebellion had 
actually broken out and the leader, Chéng Yiian-chih, had 
invaded the district with a huge army. Tsou Ching and the 
three heroes went out to oppose them with the five hundred 
men. Yiian-té joyfully undertook to lead the van and marched 
to the foot of the Tahsing Hills where they saw the rebels. 
The rebels wore their hair flying about their shoulders and 
their foreheads were bound with yellow turbans. 

When the two armies had been drawn up opposite each other 
Yiian-té with his two brothers, one on each side, rode to the 


front and, flourishing his whip, began to hurl reproaches at: 


the rebels and called upon them to surrender. Their leader, 


Mie Eee Oy) 
j i 
TERAN 


full ea rage, ory Ours one Teng Mou to hase tie. battle. a 
once rode forward Chang Fei, his long spear poised to strike. 
One thrust and Téng rolled off his horse pierced through the 
heart. At this the leader himself whipped up his steed and 
4: rode forth with sword raised ready to slay Chang. But Kuan 

Yü swung up his ponderous weapon and rode at him. At the 

He eht fear seized upon Chéng, and ere he could recover himself 
the great sword fell, cutting him in halves. i tetas 


1 


Two heroes new to war’s alarms, 
Ride boldly forth to try their arms. 
Their doughty deeds three kingdoms tell 
And poets sing how these befell. 
Their leader fallen, the rebels threw away their weapons 
Se fled. The official soldiers dashed in among them. Many 
thousands surrendered and the victory was complete. Thus 
this part of the rebellion was broken up. 


_ On their return the Prefect met them and distributed re- 
ea wards. But before long letters came from the prefecture of | 
_. Chingchou saying that the rebels were laying siege to the chief 
= city and it was near falling. Help was needed quickly. 

“I will go,” said Yiian-té as soon as he heard the news and 
he set out at once with his own men, reinforced by a large 
= body under Tsou Ching. The rebels seeing help coming at 

- once attacked most fiercely. The relieving force being com- 
_ paratively small could not prevail and retired some thirty li, ee 
_ where they made a camp. ` Cet 
-~ “They are many and we but few,” said Yüan-tê to his 

brothers. “We can only beat them by superior strategy.” 

-So they prepared an ambush. The two younger brothers, 
each with a goodly party, went behind the hills right and left eo 
- and there hid. When the gongs beat they were to move out to 
- support the main army. 

These preparations made, the drums rolled for the advance. 
- The rebels also came forward. Then Ytian-té suddenly retired. 
=. Thinking this was their chance, the rebels pressed forward and 
-~ ‘were led over the hills. Then suddenly the gongs sounded for 
- the ambush to discover itself and the rebels were attacked on 

three sides. They lost heavily and fled to the provincial city. 

` But the Prefect led out the men he had to assist in the battle 
` and the rebels were entirely defeated and many slain. Ching- 

Hon was no longer in danger. 
Tho’ fierce as tigers soldiers be, i 
Battles are won by strategy. 
A hero comes; he gains renown, 

j Already destined for a crown. : 

After the celebrations in honour of victory were over Tsou 

Ching proposed to return home, but Yüan-tê preferred to go. 

to the aid of his old master Lu Chih, then struggling with a 


° 


a 


ie : ra “Ban bu, or 


horde of rebels led by Chang Chio. So they Skoka ‘and the “a 


three brothers with their troop made their way of Kuangtsung. 


They found the Prefect in camp, were admitted to his pres- _ 


ence and declared the reason of their coming. The Prefect 
received them with. great joy and they Temati with him. 
while he made his plans. 5 

At that time the rebels there were three to one and’ the twee 


` armies were facing each other. Neither had had any: success. ‘ 


The Prefect said to Liu Pei, “I am surrounding these rebels 
here but the other two brothers Chang Liang’ and Chang Pao ~~ 
are strongly intrenched opposite Huangfu Sung and. Chu Chien © 


=< 


at Yingch‘uan.. I will give you a thousand more men and with’ - 


these you can go to find out wh ati is happening and we can then ae 


settle the moment to attack.” 


So Yiian-té set off and marched as quickly as ‘possible. At is X 
that time the imperial troops were attacking with success and 
the rebels had retired upon Changshé. They had encamped ~ 


among the thick grass, and, seeing this, Huangfu decided to ~ 
attack them by fire. So he bade: every man cut a bundle of 
dry grass and laid an ambush. That night the. wind blew a. 
gale and at the second watch they started a blaze. At the Am 
same time the rebels were attacked. Their camp was set on’ 
fire and the flames rose to the very heavens. The rebels were 
thrown into great confusion. There was no time to saddle a 


horses or don armour; they fled in all directions. ` 


The battle continued till dawn. Chang Liang and Chang Pao, ney 


with a few flying soldiers, found, as they thought, a way of. i: 
_ escape.. But suddenly a troop of soldiers with crimson banners 


appeared to oppose them. Their leader was a man of medium 


stature with small eyes and a long beard. He was one T's‘ao a 
- Ts‘ao, also known as Ts‘ao Mêng- tê, a P‘eikuo man, holding ~ 


been born to the Hsiahou family, but he had been brought up- 
by the eunuch Ts‘ao T‘éng and had taken his family name. 


` the rank of Chi-tu- -yii. His father was Ts‘ao Sung, ‘who had i 


This Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was Sung’ s son and, as a lad, bore the name nf 


of A-man. 


As a young man Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had been fond of hunting aan | 
delighted in songs and dancing. He was resourceful and ful = 
of guile. An uncle, seeing the young fellow so unsteady, used 


to get angry with him and told his father Ts‘ao Sung of his 
misdeeds. His father remonstrated with him. 


But the youth was equal to the occasion. One day, seeing ni 


his uncle coming, he fell to the ground in a pretended fit.. 
The uncle alarmed ran to tell his father, who came, and there 
was the youth in most perfect health. 

“But your uncle said you were in a fit; are you better?” 

“T have never suffered from fits or any such illness,” said 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. < But I have lost my uncle’s shot and he has 


deceived you.’ 


. 


fiiatever the: uncle might say rat his fete: ie Vee a 
ne heed. So the young man Lei up licentious a AAEN 
nd uncontrolled. A 
A certain man of the hie said w Ts ao Ts ao, SepRehaiion peak 
et at hand and only a man of the greatest ability can succeed nee 
in restoring tranquillity. That man is yourself.” EA Mt an ea Y 
And Ho Yung of Nanyang said of him, “The dynasty of Han’ SRAN 
is about to fall. He who can restore peace is this man and ye ag 
only he.”’ A 
' Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao. went to “enquire his future of a wise man of hares 
Paitin: ts "i ee 
$ “What manner of man am I?” clog Ts‘ao. oe, 
_ The seer made no reply and again he put the beta: Phen a! 
he replied, “You are able enough to. rule T world, but wicked en 
“enough to disturb ct AME ‘ 


% ciate ten 


a  Ts‘ao. greatly rej joiced to heat EA N 
mM 
i 


He graduated at twenty and buon nis career. ina yaa. i 
near Loyang. In the four gates of the city he ruled he hung | 
up clubs:of various sorts and any breach of the law met with © 
Re ‘its punishment whatever the rank of the offender. i oat 
_.. Now an uncle of a eunuch was found one night in the streets 
` witha ‘sword and was arrested. In due course he was beaten. 
Thereafter no one dared to offend and Ts‘ao’s name became 
sti Soon he became a magistrate. ; 
_ At the outbreak of rebellion he held the rank of Chima iik 
ana: was given command of. five thousand horse and foot to ` j 
nelo fight at Yingch‘uan. He just happened to fall in with the ` Si 
feat defeated rebels whom he cut to pieces. Thousands were . 
slain and endless banners and drums and horses were captured 
and not a little money. However the two leaders got away: 
and, after an interview with Huangfu Sung, Ts‘ao: went. in N 
ee pursuit of them. h 
W We return now to aa: tê. He and his brothers. were 
2 “hastening toward the point of danger when ' they heard the. — 


-Huanfu and Chu to whom they told the intentions of Lu Chih. 
“The rebel power is quite broken. here,” said the chiefs, “but 
they will surely make for Kuangtsung to join Chang Chio. | 
~ You can do nothing better than hasten back.” 
_ «The three brothers retraced their steps. Half way along the 
‘road they met a party of soldiers escorting a prisoner in 
a cage-cart. When they drew near the prisoner was no other 
than the man they were going to help. Hastily dismounting | 
Liu Pei asked what had. happened. Liu Chih explained, “I ` 
` had surrounded the rebels and was on the point of smashing 
i them, when Chang Chio employed some of his supernatural 
powers and prevented my victory. The Court sent down a 
_ eunuch to enquire into my failure and that, official demanded 


G7 


10 d Gan Wiig oy eee 


a bribe. I told him how hard pressed we were and asked him — 
where, in the circumstances, I could find a gift for him. He 


went away in wrath and reported that I was hiding behind a 


my ramparts and would not give battle and I disheartened 
my men. So I was superseded by one Tung Cho and I have 
to go to the capital to answer the charge.” Bera 

This story put Chang Fei into a rage. He was for slaying 
the escort and setting free the prisoner. th Ytian-te checked 
him. 

“The Government will take the proper course,” said he. 
“You must not act hastily.” And they went their ways. 

It was useless to continue on that road so Kuan Yü proposed - 
to go back and they retook the road. Two days later they heard 
the thunder of battle behind some hills. Hastening to the top 
they beheld the government soldiers suffering great loss and 
they saw the countryside was full of Yellow Turbans. On 
their banners were the words, “Celestial Duke,” writ large. 


“We will attack this Chang Chio,” said Yüan-tê and they 


galloped out to join in the battle. 

Chang Chio had worsted Tung Cho and was following up 
his advantage. He was in hot pursuit when the three brothers 
dashed into his army, threw his ranks into confusion and drove 


him back. Then they returned with the rescued general to his cal ` 


camp. 
“What officers have you?” asked Tung Cho, when he had - 

leisure to speak to the brothers. 
“None,” 

respect. Yüan-tê retired calmly, but Chang Fei was furious. 
“We have just rescued this menial in a bloody fight,” cried 


was the reply. And Tung treated them with dis- | 3 


che, “and now he is rude to us! Nothing but his death ‘can iar) 


slake my anger.” | 
He would have dashed into the tent and slain the insulter 
‘had not his elder brothers held him back. 


As it was in olden time so it is to-day, 

The simple wight may merit well, 
officialdom holds sway; 

Chang Fei, the blunt and hasty, 
where can you find his peer? + 

But slaying the ungrateful would * 
mean many deaths a year. 


Yung Cho’s fate will be unrolled in later chapters. 


13 
oh 
AN 
3) 


ym 


Re 
= 


CHAPTER II. 
AN OFFICIAL IS THRASHED; 
UNCLE Ho PLOTS To KILL THE EUNUCHS. 


code must here be told who this Tung Cho was. Cho, or 
Chung-ying, was born in the wést at Lint‘ao in modern Shénsi. 
His father was a prefect. He himself was arrogant and over- 


_ bearing. But the day he had treated the three brothers with 


contumely had been his last had not the two elders restrained 
their wrathful brother. : 
‘Remember he has the government commission;” said- 
Yüan-tê, “who are we to judge and slay?” 
“Tt is bitter to take orders from such a wretch; I would 


= rather slay him. You may stay here an you wish to, but I 


will seek some other place.” 

“We three are one in life and in death; there is no hartie 
for us. We will all go hence.” 
_So spake Ytian-té and his brother was satisfied. Wherefore 
all three set out and lost no time in travelling till they came to 


- Chu Chien, who received them weli and accepted their aid in 


‘attacking Chang Pao. 


At this time Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had joined himself to Huangfu Sung 
and they were trying to destroy Chang Liang and there was a 
great battle at Chuyang. At the same time Chang Pao was 
attacked. The rebel had led his men to a strong position in the 
rear of the hills. An attack being decided upon Ytian-té was < 
hsien-féng, or leader of the van. On the rebel side a subordi-. 


` nate leader, Kao Hsing, came out to offer battle. Chang Fei. 


was sent to smite him. Out rode Fei at full speed, his spear 
ready set. After a few bouts he wounded Kao, who was un- 
horsed. At this the main army had the signal to advance. 


_ Then Chang Pao, while still mounted, loosened his hair, grasped 


his sword and uttered his incantations. Thereupon began the 
wind to howl and the thunder to roll, while a dense black cloud 


from the heavens settled upon the field. And therein seemed 


_ to be horse and footmen innumerable, who swept to attack the | 


imperial troops. Fear came upon them and Ytian-té led off his 
men, but they were in disorder and returned defeated. 

E Chu Chien and Yüan-tê considered the matter. “He uses 
magic, ’ said Chien. “Tomorrow, then, will I prepare counter 
magic in the shape of the blood of slaughtered swine and goats 
and dogs. This blood shall be sprinkled upon their hosts 
from the precipices above by men whom they see not. Thus 


shall we be able to break the power of their black art.” es 


WUE es sale Cy gg “Ban fiuo, 1 or NNE ae 


RY So it. was done.. “The two younger Sections teenie) each a a: 
~ company of men Bat hid them on the high cliffs behind the ie 
hills, and they hada plentiful supply of the blood of swine and 

AIR goats and dogs and all manner of filthy things. And so next 


day, when the rebels with fluttering banners and rolling ANRE 


¡came out to challenge, Yiian-té rode forth to meet them. -At — 


the same moment that the armies met, again Chang Pao began ` 


his magic’ and again the elements began to strugele together. . 
Sand flew in clouds, pebbles were swept along the ground, 


black masses of vapour filled the sky and rolling: masses aie 


‘foot and horse descended from on'high. Ytian-té turned, as 


before, to flee and the rebels rushed on.. But as they presde © 


i through the hills the trumpets blared and the hidden soldiers 
' .. exploded bombs, threw down filth and spattered blood. The. 
masses of men and horses in the air fluttered to the ear th as 


fragments of torn paper, the wind ceased to blow, the thunder | 
subsided, the sand, pads and rhe pebbles lay still upon: ‘the | 
ground. 

»Chang Pao quickly saw his Magie had been countered ‘ana 


. turned to retire. Then he was attacked on the flanks by the | 
pi two younger brothers, and. in rear by, Yüan-tê and Chu Chien. 
. The rebels were routed. Yiian-té; seeing from afar the banner — 
'. of the “Duke of Earth,” galloped toward it but only succeeded 
¿in wounding the: “Duke” with an arrow in the left arm. 
‘Wounded though he was, he got away into Yangch‘éne, where 
he fortified himself and was besieged by te Chien. 


Scouts, sent out to get news of Huangfu, reported that he. 


>- had been very successful and Tung Cho had suffered many 
- reverses. Therefore the Court had put Huangfu in the latter’s 
place. Chang Chio had died before his arrival. Chang Liang 
had added his brother’s army to his own but no headway 
“could be made against Huangfu, whose army gained seven ` 
~ . successive victories. And Chang Liang had been slam abn 
_«  Chitiyang. Beside this Chang Chio’s coffin had been exhumed, 
_ the corpse beheaded and the head, after exposure, had been | 


sent to the capital. The common crowd had surrendered. . 
For these services Huangfu had been promoted and now ruled 


“ah j in Ichou. 


He had not forgotten his friends. His first act after he had 


attained to power was to memorialise concerning the case of . 
. «+ Lu Chih, who was then restored to his former rank. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao also had received advancement for his services. 


and was preparing to go south to his new post. 


Hearing these things Huangfu Sung pressed harder yet upon ` 


i j c 


N 


| 


. Yangch‘éng and the approaching break-up of the rebelion  — 


became evident. Then one of Chang Pao’s officers killed his- 
leader and brought his head in token of submission. Thus 


rebellion in that part of the country was stamped out and- 


Chu Chien made his report to the government. 


tv AN 


Ml 


i ` rob'and burn, calling themselves the- avengers of Chang ae 
je _ The successful Chu Chien was commanded to lead his veteran 
+ iy and successful troops to destroy them. He at once marched | 
toward Wanch‘éng, which the rebels were attacking. When 
K Chu arrived Han Chung was sent to oppose him. Chu Chien | 
~ sent the three brothers, our heroes, to attack the south west — 
angle of the city. Han Chung at once led the best of his men 
3 He he: beat them off. Meanwhile Chu Chien himself led two com- 
ARE _paniés. of armoured horsemen to attack the opposite corner. 
a The rebels, thinking the city lost, abandoned the south west 
and turned back. ‘The three brothers pressed hotly. in their 
rear and they were utterly routed. They took refuge in the - 
city which was then invested. When famine pressed upon the | 
besieged they sent a messenger to offer to surrender but the 
offer was refused, _ en 
Said Yiian-té, “Seeing that the bate he of the Han Draai 
could. welcome the submissive and receive the favourable why 
reject these?” : 
a “The conditions are diferent. at replied Chu Chien. “In eee 
_ days disorder was universal and the people had no fixed lord. 


a oly eee a he and Sun ace aie th eat heh i 


he 
te 


_ Wherefore submission was welcomed and support. rewarded to — 


encourage people to come over. Now the Empire is united and 
the Yellow Turbans are the’ only malcontents. To receive their 
= surrender is not to encourage the good. To allow brigands, | 
‘when successful, to give way to every licence, and to let them — 


‘surrender when. they fail is to encourage brigandage. Your ; i 


plan is not a good one.’ 
.Yüan-tê replied, “Not to let brigands surrender i is well.. But 
. the city is surrounded as by an iron barrel. If the. rebels 
an Sane be refused they will be desperate and fight to the. death | 


are many times that number, all doomed to death. Let us 
_ withdraw from one corner and only attack the opposite. They. 
will all assuredly flee and have no desire to fight. We shall 
take them.” 
Chu Chien saw. that the advice was good and followed it. 
As predicted the rebels ran out, led by Han Chung. The 
-besiegers fell upon them as they fled and their leader was 
‘slain. They scattered in all directions. But the other two | 
rebels came with large reinforcements, and as they appeared — 


very strong, the government soldiers retired and the new body a 


_of rebels entered’ Wanch‘éng. 
- Chu Chien encamped ten li from the city and prepared to 
attack. Just then there arrived a body of horse and al from 
the east. ` They were led by one Sun Chien. 

‘ Sun Chien had a broad open face, was lithe and vo power- 
fully built. He was a native of Wu, a descendant of Sun Wu. 


; and a myriad such men cannot be withstood. In the city there © n 


R * 


14 San hun, or 


_ His minor name was Wén-tai. When he was seventeen he was 
with his father on the Ch‘ientang River and saw a party of 
pirates, who had been plundering a merchant, dividing their 
booty on the river bank. 

“We can capture these,” said he to his father. 

So, gripping his sword, he ran boldly up the bank and cried 
out to this side and that as if he was calling his men to come 
on. This made the pirates believe the soldiers were on them 
and they fled, leaving their booty behind them. He actually 

killed one of the pirates. ER 
i In this way be became known and was recommended for — 
official rank. Then, in collaboration with the local officials, he 
raised a band and helped to quell the rebellion of one Hsü 
Ch‘ang, who called himseif the Yangming Emperor. The 
rebel’s son was also slain. For this he was commended in a 
memorial to the throne and received further promotion. 

When the Yellow Turban rebellion began he gathered to- 
gether the young men of his village, some of the merchant 


class, got a company and a-half of veteran soldiers and took the ah 


field. Now he had reached the fighting area. 

Chu Chien welcomed him gladly and ordered him to setae 
the south gate. Other gates were simultaneousiy attacked, but 
the east gate was left free to give the rebels a chance of exit. 
Sun Chien was the first to mount the wall and cut down a score 
of men with his own hand. The rebels ran, but Chao Hung 
their leader, rode directly at Sun Chien with his spear ready to 
thrust. Sun Chien leaped down from the wall, snatched away 
the spear and with it knocked the rebel from his horse. Then 
mounting the horse he rode hither and thither, slaying as he 
went. 

The rebels fled north. Meeting Yüan-tê they declined to 
fight and scattered. But Yüan-tê drew his bow, fitted an arrow 
and wounded their leader Sun Chung, who fel 1 to the ground. 
The main army came up, and after tremendous slaughter, the 
others surrendered. Thus was peace brought to the country 
about Nanyang. 

Chu Chien led his army to the capital, was promoted to a 
General of Cavalry and received the governorship of Honan. 
He did not forget those who had helped him to win victory. 

Sun Chien, having influential friends to support him, quickly 
got an appointment and went to it. But Ytian-té, in spite of 
Chu Chien’s memorial, waited in vain for preferment and the 
three brothers became very sad. . 

Walking along one day Ytian-té met a Court official, Chang 
Chiin by name, to whom he related his services and told his 
sorrows. Chang was much surprised at this neglect and one 
day at Court spoke to the Emperor about it. 

Said he, “The Yellow Turbans rebelled because ne eunuchs — 
sold offices and bartered ranks. There was employment only 


J 


it 

_ for their friends, punishment only for their enemies. This led 

-~ to rebellion. Wherefore it would be well to slay the eunuchs 

‘and expose their heads and proclaim what had been done 

` throughout the whole empire. Then reward the worthy. 

_ Thereby the land would be wholly tranquil.” 

But the eunuchs fiercely opposed this and said the memo- 
rialist ‘was insulting the Emperor and they bade the guard 
thrust him without. 

However, the eunuchs took counsel together and one said, 

“Surely some one who rendered some service against rebels 
resents being passed over.” 

< So they caused a list of unimportant people to be prepared 

_ for preferment by and by. Among them was Yiian-té, who 

received the post of magistrate of the Anhsi district, to which 

= he proceeded without delay after disbanding his men and 

_ sending them home to their villages. He retained a score or 

so as escort. 

- The three brothers reached Anhsi, and soon the administra- 
tion of the district was so reformed and the rule so wise that 
in a month there was no law-breaking. The three brothers 

lived in perfect harmony, eating at the same table and sleeping ~ 

=~ onthe same couch. But when Yiian-té was in the company of- 
others, the two younger brothers would stand in attendance, 
were it even a whole day. |. 
Four months after their arrival there came out a general 
order for the reduction of the number of military officers 
holding civil posts, and Yiian-té began to fear that he would 
be among those thrown out. In due course the inspecting 
official arrived and was met at the boundary, but to the polite 
obeisance of Yiian-té he made no return, save a wave of his 
whip as he sat on his horse. - This made the younger brothers 
furious; but worse was to follow. 
When the inspector had arrived at his lodging, he took his 
- seat on the dais leaving Yiian-té standing below. After a long 
time he addressed him. 
“Magistrate Liu, what was your origin?” 

- Liu Pei replied, “I am descended from Prince Ching. Since 
my first fight with the Yellow Turban rebels at Chochün I have 
been in some score of battles, wherein I gained some trifling 
merit. My reward was this office.” 

- “You lie about your descent and your statement of services — 
is false,” roared the inspector. “Now the Court has ordered 
the reduction of your sort of low class officials.” 

Yiian-té muttered to himself and withdrew. On his return ` 

to the magistracy he took council with his secretaries. 

“This pompous attitude only means he wants a bribe,” said 
the 

oF have never wronged the people to the value of a single 
stalk of stubble; then where is a bribe to come from?” 


op 


Aomance of the Chreeingyoms 1B 


T 4 - Ban tiuo, 0 or 


Forced them to bear witness that their master had oppressed ee 


CREA EA tat PA 7 
| Next day the eestor had the minor officials before him and 
the people. Yiian-té time after time went to rebut this charge, 


but the doorkeepers drove him away and he could not enter. — 
Now Chang Fei had been ali day drowning his sorrow in- 


. wine and had drunk far too much. Calling for his horse he S 


rode out past the lodging of the inspector, and at the gate saw 


a small crowd of white-haired men weeping bitterly. He asked | is 


why. They said, “The inspector has compelled the underlings ~ 


_to bear false witness: against our magistrate, with the desire ae 


` to injure the noble Liu. We came to beg mercy for him, but 


- are not permitted to enter. Moree yet we have been beaten by 4 A 


the doorkeepers.” 


This provoked the irascible and half intoxicated man to fury. 


. ' His eyes opened till they became circles; he ground his teeth; 


in a moment he was off his steed, had forced his way past the vis 


scared doorkeepers into the building and was in the rear i 


‘ apartments. There he saw the inspector sitting on high with He. 


the official underlings in bonds at his feet. us 
“Oppressor of the people, robber!” cried Fei, “do you know |» 

me? 99? f x 
But before he could reply Fei had him by the hair and had i 

dragged him down. Another moment he was outside and © 


-. firmly lashed to the hitching post in front of the building. 
-. Then breaking off a switch from a willow tree Fei gave his- 


victim a severe thrashing, only staying his hand when the oy 
switch was too short to strike with. 


Ytian-té was sitting alone, communing with his sorrow, Hey ti 


he heard a shouting before ‘his door. He asked what was the 


matter. They told him General Chang had bound somebody - 


to a post and was thrashing him. Hastily going, outside he 


saw who the unhappy victim was and asked the reason. 


“Tf we do not beat this sort of wretch to death what aa we 
expect?” said Fei. 


“Noble Sir, save me,” cried the victim. ; 
Now Yüan-tê had always been kindly and gracious, where- 


. fore he bade his brother release the officer and go his way. 


Then Kuan Yii came up saying, “Brother, after your magni- t 


. ficent services you only got this petty post and even here you 


-have been insulted by this fellow. A thorn bush is no place — 
for a phoenix. Let us slay this fellow, leave here and go. home 


till we can evolve a bigger scheme.” 
Ytian-té contented himself with hanging the official] seal 


‘about the inspector’s neck saying, “If I hear that you injure 
‘the people I will assuredly kill you. I now spare your life and cal 
-© I return to you the seal. We are going.” 


The inspector went to the Prefect and complained, and 
orders were issued for the arrest of the brothers, but they 


= 


le Mii dalton Mh 
ie will Be here cele a this. ae this ime the’ 
Ten Eunuchs had everything in their hands and they put to. 
eath all who did not stand in with them. From every officer > 
-who had helped to put down the rebeis they demanded presents, ` 
ndi se were not forthcoming he was removed from office. 
uangfu, and Chu both fell victims to these intrigues, while 
ther hand the eunuchs received the highest honours. 5 
og ‘teen of them were ennobled. The government grew worse 
i (a and worse and every one was irritated. 
a Rebellion broke out in ‘Changsha led by one Ou Hsing, and 
in other places. Memorials were sent up in number as snow 
flakes in winter, but the eunuchs suppressed them all. One 
) day the Emperor was at a feast in one of the gardens with the 
i eunuchs when a certain high minister Liu Tao suddenly 
_ appeared showing very great vice The ‘Emperor asked | 
R What was the matter. th 
v “Sire, how can you be Feantine ith. these when i Empire K 
‘is at the last gasp usaid Liu Taos) i ey 
io “Alli is well,” said the Emperor, “Where i is anything wrong? y 
= Said T‘ao, “Robbers swarm on all sides and plunder the | 
A cities. And all is the fault of the Ten Eunuchs who sell offices- 
„and injure the people, oppress the prince and deceive their a 
“superiors. All virtuous men have left the services and MISA, 


; fortune i is beforé our very eyes.” Ga 
= At this the eunuchs pulled off their hats and threw them- eh 
ig selves at their master’s feet. 


Ky 


-= “His Excellency disapproves of us,” they said, “and we are 
ain, danger, We pray that our lives be spared and we may go 
- to our homes. Lo! we yield our: property te help defray 
i military expenses.” 
And they wept bitterly. The Emperor bane angrily to 
the minister, saying, “You also have PeT vaatas why can you 
-not bear with mine?” | a 
And thereupon he called to the- PN to eject T‘ao and 
put him to death.” Liu Tao cried aloud, “My death matters | 
nothing. The pity is that the Hans, after four centuries of 
reign, are falling fast.” . 
The guardsihustled him away and were just about io carry 
| “out their orders when another minister stopped them, saying, 
“Strike not! Wait till I have spoken with His Majesty.” 
It was the Ssi-tu, Chén Tan. He went in to the Emperor, 
to whom he said, “For what fault is Liu the Censor to be put 
< to death?” “He has vilified my servants; and has insulted 
me,” said the Emperor. 
= “All the Empire would eat the flesh of the dns if they rege 
- could, and yet, Sire, you respect them as if they were your SBE eo. 


= 


“parents. They have no merit, but they are created nobles. 


18. | 12) Ban kus ot ee a 


Moreover, Féng Hsii was in league with the late rebels. Unless 
-Your Majesty looks to it the State will fall. 

“There was no proof against Féng,” replied the Emperor. 
“Are there none faithful among the eunuchs?” 

The minister beat his forehead on the steps of the throne 
and did not desist from remonstrance. Then the Emperor 
grew angry and commanded his removal and imprisonment 
with Liu T‘ao. That night he was murdered. ; 


Then a forged edict went forth making Sun Chien Prefect Of) 


Changsha, with orders to suppress the rebellion, and in less ~ 


than two months he reported the district all tranquil. For — 


this he was created Marquis of Wuch‘éng. Further Liu Yü 
was made magistrate of Yuchow to move against Yiiyang and > 

suppress Chang Chü and Chang Shun. The Prefect of Taichow 
- recommended Ytian-té to Liu Yü, who welcomed him and gave `. 
him rank and sent him against the rebels. He fought with 
and worsted them, and entirely broke their spirit. Chang Shun | 
was cruel and his men turned against him. One of his officers — 
then slew him and brought in his head, after which the others. 
submitted. The other leader Chang Chii saw that all was lost ; 
and committed suicide. 


Yüyang being now tranquil Liu Pei’s services were reported aii 


to the throne and he received full pardon for the insult to 
the inspector. He also became an official in Mich‘eéng. Then 
Sun Chien stated his previous good services and he was made 
Pieh-pu Ssti-ma and sent to Pingyiian. eee 

This place was very prosperous and Yiian-té recovered some- 
thing of his old manner before the days of adversity. Liu Yu 
also received preferment. ` 

In the summer of the year A.D. 189 the Emperor became 
seriously ill and summoned Ho Chin into the palace to arrange — 
for the future. This man Ho had sprung from a humble. 
family of butchers, but a sister had become a concubine of | 
rank and borne a son to the Emperor, named Pien. After this 
she became Huang-hou or Empress and Ho Chin became 
powerful. The Emperor had also greatly loved a beautiful 
girl named Wang who had borne him a son named Hsieh. 
The Empress Ho had poisoned the girl from jealousy, and the 
babe had been given into the care of the Empress Dowager 
Tung, who was the mother of the Emperor Ling; She was the 
wife of Liu Chang, the Marquis of Tu-ting. As time went on 
- and the Emperor Huan had no son of his own he adopted the 
son of the marquis, who succeeded as the Emperor Ling. 
After his accession he had taken his own mother into the. 


palace to live and had conferred upon her the title of T“ai-hou, 


or Empress Dowager. 

The Dowager Empress had always tried to persuade her son 
to name Hsieh as the Heir Apparent, and in fact the Emperor 
greatly loved the boy and was disposed to do as his mother | 


| gesiea Whee: he fell ill one of ie eiaachs aad, “Tf Bech 
- is to succeed, Ho Chin must be killed.” The Emperor saw this 
-too and commanded Ho Chin to come to him. But at the very 
> ss of the palace Ho had been warned of his danger and had 
' secreted himself. Ho had then called many of the ministers 
È os side and they met to consider how to put the eunuchs to 
ea 
At this assembly Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had spoken saying, “The in- 
- fluence of the eunuchs dates back half a century and has spread 7 
like a noxious weed in all directions. How can we hope to 
destroy it? Above all keep this plot secret or you will be 
_ exterminated. Si 
= Ho Chin was very angry at this speech and cried, “What do 
inferiors like you know of the ways of government? p 
_. And in the midst of the confusion a messenger came to say 
the Emperor was no more. He also told them the eunuchs had 
- decided to keep the death a secret and forge a command to 
_ Ho, the ‘State Uncle,’ to come into the palace to settle the 
- succession. Meanwhile to prevent trouble they had inscribed 
_ the name of Hsieh on the roll. And as he finished speaking 
the edict arrived. 
: “The matter for the moment is to set up the rightful heir,” 
_ said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. “The other affair can wait.” 
- “Who dares to join me?” asked Ho Chin. 


At once one stood forward saying, “Give me five companies 
of veterans and we will break into the palace, set up the true 
heir, slay the eunuchs and. sweep clean the government. Then 
3 will follow peace.” 
The energetic speaker was Ytian Shao, who then held the 
~ rank of Hsiao-yii. 
) Ho Chin mustered five companies of the guards. Shao put 
-on complete armour and took command. Ho Chin, supported 
_by a large number of ministers, went into the palace and in 
i | the hall where lay the coffin of the late Emperor they placed 
Pien on the throne. After the ceremony was over and all had 
Towed before the-new Ruler, Yüan Shao went in to arrest the 
eunuch Chien Shih. Shih in terror fled into the palace garden 
and hid among the shrubs, where he was discovered and 
murdered by another eunuch. The guards under his command 
oil went over to the other side. Shao thought the moment most 
opportune to slay all the eunuchs and it had been well if his 
advice had been taken. But the eunuchs scented the danger 
- and went to the Empress Dowager Ho. 

They said, “The originator of the plan to injure your brother 
= was Chien Shih; only he was concerned and no other. Now 
` General Ho, on his lieutenant’s advice, wishes to slay every 
one of us. We implore thy pity, O Grandmother.” | 
“Fear not,” said she, “I will protect you.” 


ph 


\ 


20. = an Ruo, or 


She sent for her brother, and said, “I and you are of lowly — 
origin'and we owe our good fortune to the eunuchs. The — 


misguided Chien Shih is now dead and need you really put all ce 


the others to death as Ytian Shao advises?” 


And Ho Chin obeyed her wish. He explained to his party — 


that the real offender having met his fate they heed not ex- — 


terminate the whole party nor injure his colleagues. ha 
“Slay them, root and branch,” cried Shao, “or they will ruin a i 


you.’ 
“T have decided;” said Ho, coldly, “say no more.’ 


Within a few days Ho became a President of a Bad and 7 


his friends received offices. 


Tung T‘ai-how summoned the eunuch Chang Jang and his . 


party to a council. Said she, “It was I who first brought 
forward the sister of Ho Chin. To- day her son is on the 


throne and all the officials are her friends and her influence 


is enormous. What can we do?” 


Jang replied, “Madam should administer the state ag 


x behind the veil’; create the Emperor’s son Hsieh a prince; 


give ‘Uncle’ Tung high rank and place him over the arai ‘i 


and use us. That will do it.” 


Tung T‘ai-hou approved. Next day she held a court and aie 


In the middle of the feast, when all were well warmed with 


wine, she rose and offered a cup to her guest saying, “It is — 


issued an edict in the sense proposed. When Ho Tai- hou saw 
this she prepared a banquet to which she invited her rival. 


not fitting that we two women should meddle in state affairs. _ 
Of old when Lü T‘ai-how laid hands upon the government — 
all her clan were put to death. We ought to remain content, 
immured in our palaces, and leave state affairs to the states- 
men. That would be well for the country and I trust you will 


act thus.” 


But the Empress Tung only got angry. ‘‘You poisoned the mh i 


lady Wang out of jealousy. Now, relying upon the fact that © 
your son sits on the throne and that your brother is powerful, — 


you speak these wild words. I will command that your brother — 


be beheaded and that can be done as easily as I turn my hand.” 


Then Empress Ho in. her turn waxed wroth and said, “I — 


tried to persuade you with fair words; why get so angry?” 


“You low born daughter of a butcher, what do you know of 1 


offices ?” cried her rival. 
And the quarrel waxed hot. 


The eunuchs persuaded the ladies to retire. But in the We 


Ho T‘ai-howu summoned her brother into the palace and told — 
him what had occurred. He went out and took counsel with ~ 


the principal officers of state. Next morn a court was held 


- and a memorial was presented Saying that Tung T‘ai-hou, 


being the consort of a “frontier” prince—only a collateral— ‘ 


could not properly occupy any part of the palace. She was 


be cee) Do Hchien and. was ve dari onsets 
nd while they sent an escort to remove the lady a strong 
guard’ was placed | about her brother’s dwelling. They took 
away his seal of office and he, knowing this was the end, 
‘ ommitted suicide in his private apartments. His dependents, 
who wailed his death, were driven off by the guards. 
Two of the eunuchs having lost their patroness, sent large 
| gifts to Ho Chin’s younger brother Miao and his mother, and 
_ thus got them to put in a good word to the Empress Dowager. 
_ Ho so as to gain her protection. | And so they gained favour 
i once more at court. 
aed A few months later the secret emissaries of Ho Chin mur- — 
dered Tung T‘ai-hou in her residence in the country. Her 
j remains were brought to the capital and buried. Ho Chin 
4 feigned illness and did not attend the funeral. 
_ Yüan Shao went one day to see Ho Chin to teil him that two _ 
CH e rN Chang Jang and Tuan Kuei, were spreading the: _ 
' report outside that Ho Chin had caused the death of the late 
i b empress dowager and was aiming at the throne. He urged 
= Ho to make this an excuse to put them finally out of the way. 
P: Shao pointed out how Tou Wu o missed his chance because 
the secret had not been kept and urged upon him the ease with © 
| which they . could be destroyed under the then favourable 
ay conditions. It was a heaven-sent opportunity. 
<p) But Ho Chin replied, “Let me think it over.” 
His servants secretly told the intended victims, who adit 
. further gifts to the younger brother. Corrupted by these he 
= went in to speak with his sister and said, “The General is the 
_ chief support of the new Emperor, yet he is not gracious and 
j merciful but thinks wholly of slaughter. If he slay tne eunuchs 
without cause, it may bring about revolution.” 
pe Soon after her brother entered and told her of his derien 
zi to put the eunuchs to death. She argued with him. She said 
that they looked after palace affairs and were old servants. 
w To kill the old servants just after the death of their master 
i} would appear disrespectful to the Dynasty. And as Ho was 
of a vacillating mind he murmured assent and left her. 
“What about it?” said Shao on meeting him. 
_ “She will not consent; what’can be done?” mn 
ii Gall up an army and slay them; it is imperative. Never: | 
mind her consent.” uy 
“That is an excellent plan,” said Ho. 
_ And he sent orders all round to march soldiers to the capital. 
But the Recorder, Ch‘én Lin, said, “Nay ; do not act blindly. © 
- The proverb says ; To cover the eyes and snatch at swallows 
‘is to fool one’s self.’ If in so small a matter you cannot attain 
` your wish, what of great affairs? Now by virtue of the 
- imperial prestige and with the army under your hand you may 
do as you please. To use such enormous powers against the 


pri 


22 So he Dan Mo 


XAR 


eunuchs would resemble lignting up a furnace to burn a hair. 


ı But act promptly; use your powers and smite at once and all _ 
the Empire will be with you. But to summon forces `to thè 
capital, to gather many bold men into one spot, each with his 


own schemes, is to turn one’s weapons against one’s own — 
person, to place one’s self in the power of another. NotimE l 


but failure can come of it, nothing but confusion.” 
“The view of a mere book- -worm,’ ’ said Ho with a smile. 


Then one of those about him suddenly clapped his hands, 3 


crying 


“It is as easy as turning over one’s hand! why so much talk?” 


The speaker was Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


Wouldst thou- withdraw wicked men from thy Sine side 
Then seek counsel of the wise men of the State. 


What Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said will be disclosed in later chapters. Vs 


4 


CHAPTER IIL. 


TUNG CHO SILENCES TING YUAN: 
Li Su BRIBES Lu Pu. 


Wat Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said was this: “The eunuch evil is of very 


old standing, but the real cause of the present trouble is in the 
improper influence allowed them by the ruler, and the mis- 


: _ placed favouritism they have enjoyed. But a gaoler would be 


ample force to employ against the evil. Why increase confu- 


E. sion by summoning troops from the provinces? Any desire to | 
- slay them will speedily become known and the plan will fail.” 


“Then Méng-té, you have some scheme of your own to fur- 
+ ther,” said Ho with a sneer. . 
“Ho Chin is the man to throw the empire into Lonin 
retorted Ts‘ao. 
Then Ho Chin sent swift, secret letters fae and wide. 
It must be recalled here that the now powerful Tung Cho 
had failed in his attempt to destroy the Yellow Turban re- 
bellion and would have been punished but for the protection 
of the Ten Eunuchs, whom he had bribed heavily. Later he ~ 
obtained an important military command in the west. But he 
-was treacherous and disloyal at heart. So when he received 
the summons to the capital he rejoiced greatly and lost no time 
in obeying it. He left a son-in-law Niu Fu to hold Shénsi and 
set out for Loyang. 
Li Ju, his adviser and son-in-law said, “Though a formal 


~ summons has come there are many obscurities in it. It would 


be well to send up a memorial stating plainly our aims and 


intentions. Then we can proceed.” So he composed one 


~ something like this: “Thy servant knows that the continual 
rebellions owe their origin to the eunuchs who act counter to 
all recognised precept. Now to stop the ebullition of a pot 
the best way is to withdraw the fire; to cut out an abscess, 
though painful, is better than to nourish the evil. I have dared 
to undertake a military advance on the capital, and now pray 
that Chang Jang and the other eunuchs be removed for ee 
happiness of the Dynasty and of the whole land.” 
- Ho Chin read this memorial and showed it to his partisans 
Then said Cheng, T ‘ai, “A fierce wild beast; if he come his- 
prey will be men.’ 
- Ho Chin replied, “You are too timorous; you are unequal to 
great schemes.” 


Bat Lu Chih also siid. “Long have I Goal this man; iW 


appearance innocent, he is a very wolf at heart. Let him rhs 
and calamity enters with him. Stop him; do not let him come 


- and thus will you avoid confusion.” 


Ho Chin was obstinate and both these men gave up their 
posts and retired, as did more than half the ministers of State, 
while Ho Chin sent a warm welcome to Tung Cho, who soon 
camped at Ying Pool. 

‘The eunuchs knew this move was directed against them and — 
recognised that their only chance for safety was to strike the 


first blow. So they first hid a band of armed rufhans in the | 


paiace at the Gate of Abundant Virtue and then went in to . a 
see the Empress. 
They said, “The General, feigning to act under Conia: 


has called up armies to the capital to „destroy us. We pray a 


you, Grandmother, to pity and save us.’ 
“Go to the General and confess your faults,” said she. Ne 
“If we did then should we be cut to mincemeat. Rather 


summon the General into your presence and command him to hey 


cease. If he will not, then we pray but to die in your presence.” 

She issued the requisite command and Ho was just going to 
her when Ch‘én Lin advised him not to enter, saying the — 
eunuchs were certainly behind the order and meant him harm. — 


‘But Ho could only see the command of the Empress ‘and was 


blind to all else. 

“The plot is no longer a secret”; and Yuan Shan, ‘ “still you ` 
may go if you are ready to fight your way in.’ 

“Get the eunuchs out first,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

_ “Silly children!” said Ho, “What can they do against the 
waa opa holds the forces of the Empire in the palm of his 
an 9 

Shao said, “If you will go, then, we will come as a guard, 
just as a precaution.” re 

Whereupon both he and Ts‘ao chose a half company of the 
best men under their command, at whose head they placed a 
brother of Ytian Shao, named Shu, 

Yiian Shu, clad in mail, drew up his men outside the Chingso 
Gate while ‘the other two went as escort. When Ho Chin 
neared the palace the eunuchs said, “The orders are to admit — 
the General and none other.” So the escort was détained 


outside. 


Ho Chin went in proudly. At the Gate of Abundant Virtue 


uae he was met by the two chief eunuchs and their followers quickly 


closed in around him. Ho began to feel alarmed. Then Chang 
Jang in a harsh voice began to revile him. 
“What crime had Tung T‘ai-hou committed that she should 
have been put to death? And when the Mother of the Country | 
was buried, who feigned sickness and did not attend? We _ 
raised you and your paltry, huckstering family to all the 


SA Wa wealth you have, and this i is your r gratitude! AG 
= would slay us. You call us” sordid and dirty; who) is the 
cleaner?” E ) enet 
< Ho Chin was panic arcen and looked about for a way to i 
escape, but the eunuchs closed him in and then the assassins fali 
_ appeared and did their bloody work. ate Ea "4 


i Closings the days of the Hans, and te meats of thei È ‘rule were aD 
he (osc Sees near spent; neh 

Stupid and tactless was Ho Chin, yet Sond he Honest in ofice; 
' Many were they who advised him, but he was deaf as he heard not; oy 
_ Wherefore feil he a victim under the swords of the eunuchs. _ 


h., ate Ho Chin died. Yiian Shao waited long. By and. by, im- 
- patient at the delay, he called through the Gate, “Thy carriage i 
_ waits, O General.” For reply the head of the murdered officer i 
_ was fiung over the wall. : 
a A decree was proclaimed that Ho Chin had Cantem ; 
treachery and therefore had been slain. It pardoned his. 
1 adherents. Yüan Shao shouted, “The eunuchs have slain the _ 
F minister. Let those who will slay this wicked party come and sees 
help me.’ Fat 
| Then one of Ho Chin’s officers set fire K the gate. vian o 
a the head of his men burst in and fell to slaying the eunuchs 
without regard to age or rank. Yüan Shao. and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
- broke into the inner part of the palace. Four of the eunuchs ig 
~ fled to the Blue Flower Lodge where they were hacked to pieces. 
Fire raged, destroying the buildings. Four of the eunuchs led 
by Chang. J ang carried off the Empress, the heir apparent and ae 
i the Prince of Ch‘én-liu toward the north palace. fi 
Lu Chih, since he had resigned office, was at home, pad Koh 
Earnie of the revolution in the palace he donned his armour, — 
took his spear and prepared to fight. He saw the eunuch Tuan 
-Kuei hurrying the Empress along and called out “You rebels, _ 
_ how dare you abduct the Empress?” The eunuch fled. The ieee 
_ Empress leaped out of a window and was taken to a place of 
i rey. è 
~ Wu K‘uang burst into one of the inner halls oe he found iy 
Ho Miao, sword in hand. 
You also were in the plot to slay your brother,’ 
“You shall die with the others.” 
“Let us kill the plotter against his e brother,” cried 
_ many. 
Miao looked around; his enemies Paa him in on every i 
i side. He was hacked to pieces. 

_ Shao bade his soldiers scatter and seek out all the Ea E 
Bae eunuchs, sparing none. In that slaughter many beardless =- 
men were killed in error. i 

feet SAO Ts‘ao set himself to extinguish eae ree He then 
begged Ho T‘ai-how to undertake the direction of affairs and 


G 

` 
F 
A 


29 


ented he. 


nagar 


26 , ; San Guo, or 


Soldiers were sent to pursue Chang Jang and rescue the young 


Emperor. 

The two chief eunuchs, Chang Jang and Tuan Kuei, had 
hustled away the Emperor and the Prince of Ch‘én-liu. "They 
burst through the smoke and fire and travelled ,without stop- 
ping till they reached the Peimang Hills. It was then the third 


watch. They heard a great shouting behind them and saw ` 


soldiers in pursuit. Their leader was shouting ‘Stop, stop!” 
Chang Jang, seeing that he was lost, jumped into the river, 
where he was drowned. 

The two boys ignorant of the meaning of all this conus 
and terrified out of their senses, dared not utter a cry; they 
crept in among the rank grass on the river bank and hid. 
` The soldiers scattered in all directions but failed to find them. 


So they remained till the fourth watch, shivering with cold | 


from the drenching dew and very hungry. They lay down in 
the thick grass and wept in each other’s arms, silently, lest 
any one should discover them. 


. “This is no a place to stay in,’’.said the Prince, “we must find 
- some way out.” 


So the two children knotted their clothes together and 
managed to crawl up the bank. They were in a thicket of 


thorn “bushes and it was quite dark. They could not see any 


path. They were in despair when, all at once, millions of 
fireflies sprang up all about them and circled i in the air in front 
of the Emperor. 

“God is helping us,” said the Prince. 


They followed whither the fireflies led and gradually got — 
into a road. They walked till their feet were too sore to go 
further, when, seeing a heap of straw near the road, they — 


crept to it and lay down. 
This heap of straw was close to a farm house.. In the night, 


as the farmer was sleeping, he saw in a vision two bright red 


suns drop behind his dwelling. Alarmed by the portent he 
hastily dressed and went forth to look about him. Then he 
saw a bright light shooting up from a heap of straw. He 


ne hastened thither and then saw two youths lying behind it. 


“To what household do you belong, young genem? Ie asked 
he. 

The Emperor was too frightened to reply, but his Soap alod 
said, “He is the Emperor. There has been a revolution in the 
palace and we ran away. I am his brother Prince of Ch‘én 
iu 

The tatir bowed again and again and said, “I am the 
brother of a former official and my name is Ts‘ui I. My 
brother was disgusted with the behaviour of the eunuchs and 
so resigned and hid away here.” 

The two lads were taken into the farm and their host on his. 
knees served them with refreshment. 


omane af the Cie Bingos. 


5 t has Bae said that Min Kung had gone in Jamae Of the o ea 
eunuch Tuan Kuei. By and by Kung overtook him ang éried, Ui ies 
- “Where is the Emperor?” iho 
“He disappeared. I do not know where he is.’ 
- Kung slew him and hung the bleeding head on he horse’s 
= neck. Then he sent his men searching in all directions and he 
rode off by himself on the same quest. Presently he came to the etna 
farm. Ts‘ui I, seeing what hung on his horse’s neck, question-, °° 
ed him and, satisfied with his story, led him to the Emperor. 
- The meeting was affecting; all were moved to tears. 
a “The State cannot be without its ruler,” said Min Kung. 
Tan pray Your Majesty to return to the city.” 
= At the farm they had but one sorry nag and this they saddled 
for the Emperor. The young prince was taken on Min Kung’s 
charger. And thus they left the farm. Soon they fell in with — 
_ other officials and the several guards and soldiers made up an 
- imposing cavalcade. Tears were shed freely as the ministers 
~ met their Emperor. 
z A man was sent on in front to the capital there to expose 
the head of the eunuch Tuan Kuei. 
_ As soon as they could they placed the Emperor on a better 
-~ steed and the young prince had a horse to himself. 
- Thus the Emperor returned to Loyang and so it happened 
after all as the street boys’ ditty ran :— 


m Though the Emperor doesn’t rule, though the prince no office fills, 
i Yet a brilliant cavalcade comes along from Peimang Hills. 


M The cavalcade had not proceeded far when they saw coming 
towards them a large body of soldiers with fluttering banners 
: hiding the sun and raising a huge cloud of dust. The officials 
turned pale and the Emperor was greatly alarmed. Ytian Shao 
-~ -rode out in advance and demanded who they were. From 
- under the shade of an embroidered banner rode out an officer 
. demanding if they had seen the Emperor. His Majesty was 
too panic-stricken to respond but the Prince of Ch‘én-liu rode 
to the front and cried, “Who are you?” 
- Tung Cho replied giving his name and rank. 
“Have you come to protect the chariot or to steal it?” said 
the prince. 
“I have come to protect,” said Tung Cho. 
“Tf that is so the Emperor is here; why do you not ae Ms 
mount ?”’ C 
Cho hastily dismounted and made obeisance on the left of 
the road. Then the prince spoke graciously to him. 
- From first to last the prince had earried himself most per- 
fectly so that Cho in his heart admired his behaviour, and then 
= arose the first desire to set aside the Emperor in favour of the 
= prince. 


oe 0 a mad 5 ‘San Bua, or 


A 


‘They reached the palace the same day and thire was an oa 


affecting interview with Ho T<ai-hou. 


i 


But when they had restored order in the palace the Tere i à 


ditary Seal, the special seal of the Emperor, was missing. 

Tung Cho camped without the walls but every, day he was 
to be seen in the streets with an escort of mailed soldiers so 
that the common people were in a state of constant trepidation. 
He also went in and out of the palace careless of all the rules 
of propriety. 

‘Pao Hsin spoke of his behaviour to Yiian Shao, saying, 
“This man harbours some evil design and should be removed.” 


“Nothing can be done till the government is more settled, ai 


said Shao.” 
Then he saw Wang Yiin and asked what he thought. 
“Let us talk it over,’* was the reply. 


Pao Hsin said no more but he left the capital and ONEA Lei to W ; 


Taishan. Tung Cho induced the soldiers of the two brothers 


Ho to join his command and privately spoke to his adviser he 
- about deposing the Emperor in favour of the Prince of Ch‘én- aM 


liu. 


she 


fy 


vF 


“The government is really without a head; there can be no E 


better time than this to carry out your plan. Delay will spoil — 


all. Tomorrow assemble the officials in the Wênming Garden 
and address them on the subject. Put all on ponran to death 
and your prestige is settled.” ; 
So spoke his adviser and the. words plend Tung Cho 
mightily. 
So the next day he spread a feast and invited many “guests. 
As all the officers went in terror of him no one dared be absent. 


He himself rode up to the garden last of all and took his place y i 
with his sword girded on. When the wine had gone round 


several times Tung Cho stopped the service and the music and 
began to speak. ya 
_ “I have something to say; listen quietly all of you.” 
- All turned towards him. ; 
“The Emperor is lord of all and if he lacks dignity and 


_ behaves in an unseemly manner he is no fitting inheritor of — 


the ancestral prerogatives. He who is now on the throne is 
a weakling, inferior to the Prince of Ch‘én-liu in intelligence 
and love of learning. The Prince is in every way fitted for 
the throne. I desire to depose the Emperor and set up the 
Prince in his place. What think you?” 

The assembly listened in perfect silence, none daring at first 
to utter a word of dissent. But one dared; for suddenly a 
guest stood up in his place, smote the table and cried. 

“No! No! who are you, that you dare utter such bold words? 


The Emperor is the son of the lawful consort and has done no © | 


wrong. Why then should he be deposed? Are-you a rebel?” 
The speaker was Ting Yuan, governor of Chinchow. 


“There i is ike for those wh are with so 
e, death for those against,” roared he. we A 
He drew his sword and made for ‘the Bredt but the i 
watchful Li Ju had noticed standing behind Ting Yüan a — 
particularly dangerous looking henchman of his, who was now — 
handling his spear threateningly, and whose eyes were blazing 
with anger. So he hastily interposed, saying, “But this is the 
_ banquet chamber and state affairs should be left outside. The 
i matters can be fully discussed tomorrow.” 
His fellow guests persuaded Ting Yiian to leva: and after.’ ya 
his departure Tung Cho said, “Is what I said just and rea- : 
ir sonable ? T 
AA “You are mistaken, Illustrious Sir,” said Lu Chih. “Of aaen 
; Tai Chia was unenlightened.. Wherefore I Yin immured him 
in the T‘ung Palace till he reformed. Later} Prince Ch‘ang 
I ascended the throne, and in less than a month he committed | 
-more than three thousand categorical faults. Wherefore Ho 
Kuang, the regent, declared in the ancestral temple that he | i 
was deposed. Our present Emperor is young, but he is 
intelligent, benevolent and wise. He has not committed a ie 
single fault. You, Sir, are. not a metropolitan official and 
ee -have had no experience in state administration. Neither have 
you the pure intentions of I Yin which qualified his actions. 
pee tthout that justification such an act is presumption.” 
Tung Cho angrily drew his sword to slay the bold speaker, 
A but another official remonstrated. 

“President Lu is the cynosure of the whole country and his’ 
violent death would stir the hearts of all men,” said P‘éng Po. 
_ Then Tung Cho stayed his hand. 
` Then said Wang Yün, “A great question like the depostiiiay 
and substitution of Emperors is not one to be decided ater a 
wine party. Let it be put off till another time.” 

- So the guests dispersed. Cho stood at the gare with drawn 
sword watching them depart. n 
= Standing thus he noticed a spearman caltopine to and fro . 
ona. fiery steed and asked Li Ju if he knew him. 
“That is Lü Pu, the adopted son of Ting Yiian. His ordinary 
name is Fénhsien. You must keep out of his way, my lord.” 
Tung Cho went inside the gate so that he could not be seen. 
Bat next day a man reported to him that Ting Yiian had come 
out of the city with a small army and was challenging to a 
~ pattle. Tung Cho went forth to accept the challenge. And 
_ the armies were drawn up in proper array. 
Lü Pu was a conspicuous figure in the forefront. His hair 
was arranged under a handsome headdress of gold and he had 
donned a. beautiful embroidered fighting robe, a t‘ang-ni helmet 
and breast plate, and round his waist was a mang belt with a 
LT DOUB.G. ae B.C. 


PO AOE Si Ban aus, or 


ion’ s head clasp. With spear a Heh "pode close behind: his 4 
master. 5 
Ting Yüan, pointing his finger at Tung Cho, began to revile 
him. ae 
“Unhappy indeed was this State when the eunuchs became 


so powerful that the people were as if trodden into the mire ` 


under their feet. Now you, devoid of the least merit, dare to 
talk of deposing the rightful Emperor and setting up another. 
This is to desire rebellion and no less.” 

Tung Cho could not reply for Lü Pu, eager for the fight, 
rode straight at him. Tung Cho fled and Ting’s army came on. 
The battle went in their favour and the beaten men retired 
and made another camp. Here Tung Cho called his officers 
to a council. ; 

“This Lü Pu is a marvel,” said Tung Cho. “If he was only 
on my side I would defy the whole world.” 

At this a man advanced saying, “Be content O my lord! 
I am a fellow villager of his and know him well, his bravery, 

his stupidity, his cupidity and unscrupulousness. With this 
` little, blarneying tongue of mine I -can persuade him to put ` 
up his hands and come over to your side.” ‘ 

Tung Cho was delighted and gazed admiringly at the 7 
speaker, on Li Su a minor officer of his army. i 

“What arguments will you use with him?” ; 

“You have a fine horse, the Hare, one of the best ever bred, 
I must have this steed, and gold and pearls to win his heart. 
‘Then will I go and persuade him. He will certainly abandon 
Ting Yüan’s service for yours.” í 

“What think you?’ said Tung Cho to his adviser Li. : 

“One cannot grudge a horse to win an empire,” was the 
reply. 

So they gave the corrupter of morals what he demanded—a 
thousand taels of gold, ten strings of beautiful pearls and a ~ 
jewelled belt, and these accompanied Li Su on his visit to his — 


fellow villager. He reached the camp and said to the guard, — 


“Please tell General Lü that a very old friend has come to. 
visit him.” cc . 

He was admitted forthwith. 

“Worthy brother, have you been well since we last met?” 

“How Jong it is since we last saw each other !? replied Pas 
bowing in return. “And where are you now?” 
. “Taman officer in the Tiger Company. When I learned you 

were a strong supporter of the throne I could not say how I 
rejoiced. J have come now to present to you a really fine horse, 
a thousand li a day horse, one that crosses rivers and goes up 
mountains as if they were the level plain. He is called The 
Hare. He will be a fitting aid to your valour.” 

Lü Pu bade them lead out the horse. He was of a uniform 
colour like glowing charcoal; not a hair of another colour. He 


~ Bomance of the Three Bingdoms OE, 
3 a eured ten feet Kom head te tail and. from hoof to neck 
eight feet. When he neighed the sound filled the empyrean, 


and shook the ocean. 


Mark ye the steed swift and tireless, see the dust, shee he his. 
hoofs, rising in clouds; 
Now he swims the river, anon climbs. the hill, rending the purple 


- mist asunder; 
Scornful he breaks the rein, shakes from’ his head the jewelled 


„bridle; 
He is as a fiery dragon descending from the highest heaven. 


Pu was delighted with the horse and said, “What return 
can I hope to make for such a creature?” 


“What return can I hope for? I came to you out of a sense ie 


~ of what is right.” 
- Wine was brought in and they drank. 
“We have seen very little of each other, but I am a constantly 
~ meeting your honourable father,” said Li Su. 
“You are drunk,” said Pu. “My father has been dead for - 
- years”? 
“Not so; I alee of Ting Yiian, the man of the day.” 
Lü Pu started. “Yes, I am with him but only because I can | 
do no better.” 
| “Sir, your talent is higher than the heavens, deeper than the 
seas. Who in all the world does not bow before your name? 
_ Fame and riches and honours are yours for the taking. And 
you say you can do no better than remain a subordinate!” 
“Tf I could only find a master to serve!” said Lü Pu. 
“The clever bird chooses the branch whereon to perch; the 
wise servant selects the master to serve. Seize the chance 
when it comes, for repentance ever comes too late.” 
“Now you are in the government. Who think you is ‘really 
_ the bravest of all?”, asked Lü Pu. 
“I despise the whole lot except Tung Cho. He is one who 
respects wisdom and reveres scholarship; he is discriminating 
in his rewards and punishments, Surely he is destined to be 
-a really great man.’ 

“I would that I could serve him, but there is no way, I fear.” 

Then Su produced his pearls and gold and. the jewelled belt 
and laid them out before his: host. oe 

“What is this? What does it mean?” said Lü Pu. 

“Send away the attendants,” said Li Su. And he went on, 
“Pune Cho has long ‘respected your valour and sent these by 
‘my hand. The Hare was also from him.” 

“But, if he loves me like this, what can I do in return?’ 

“Tf a stupid fellow like me can be an officer in The Tigers, 
it is impossible to say what honours await you.” 

“I am sorry I can offer him no service worth mentioning.” 


ae aa Ban Rue. hae 


“There is one service you can do, anda an extremely easy one 


to perform; but you would not render. that.” 


Lü Pu ponder ed long in silence. Then he said, “I might slay 


Ting Yüan and bring over his soldiers to Tung. Cho’ s sides; 4 


what think you of that?” 

“If you would do that, there could be no greater service. 
But such a thing must be done quickly.” 

And Lii Pu promised his friend that he would do the deed 
and come over on the morrow. 

So Li Su took his leave. That very night, at the second 
watch, Lü. Pu entered, sword in hand, into his master’s tent. 
He found Ting Yüan reading by the light of a solitary candle. 
Seeing who came in he said, “My son, what is afoot?” — 

“T am a bold hero,” said Pu, “do you think I am willing to- 
be a son of yours?” 

“Why this change, Féng- isien? a 

As a reply Lü Pu made one cut at his protector and his head 
fell to the earth. Then he called the attendants and said, “He 
was an unjust man and I have slain him. Let those who back 
me stay; the others may depart.” 

Most ran away. Next day, with the head of the murdered 
man as his gift, Lii Pu betook himself to Li Su, who led him 
to Tung Cho. Cho received him with a warm welcome and | 
had wine set before him. 

“Your coming is welcome as the gentle dew to the parched ' 
grass,” said Tung Cho. 

Lii Pu made Cho seat himself and then made his obeisance, 
saying, “Pray let me bow to you as my adopted father.” 


- Tung Cho gave his newly won ally gold and armour and — 
silken robes and spread the feast of welcome. They then 
_ separated. 


Thence Tung Cho’ s power and influence increased rapidly. 
He gave ranks of nobility to his brother and Lü Pu, who were 
leaders of the two wings, he himself being leader of the centre. 
The adviser Li Ju never ceased from urging him to carry out — 
the design of deposing the young Emperor. 

The now all-powerful general prepared a banquet in the - 
capital at which all the officers of State were guests. He also 
bade Lü Pu post a company of armed ‘men right and left ready 
for action. The feast began and several courses were served 
with nothing to distinguish that banquet from any other. 
Then suddenly the host arose and drew his sword, saying, 
“He who is above us being weak and irresolute is unfit for 
the duties of his high place. Wherefore I, as of old did I Yin ~ 
and Ho Kuang, will set aside. this Emperor giving him the 
title of Prince Hung-nung and I will place on the throne the 
present Prince of Ch‘én-liu. And those who do not support 
me will suffer death.” 


eg is in my Handski ” le Cho, « ) a 
ng mo will dare say T Think you my w d i: 


ni 


C flashed, Sut of the a A 4 
Dri stood face to face amid the oe ee 


When Ting by treacherous murder died, { 4 3 
“The loss was aati to Yiian’ s s side. 


CHAPTER IV. — : 


THE DEPOSITION OF THE EMPEROR: PRINCE OF 
CH‘EN-LIU BECOMES EMPEROR: 


. SCHEMES AGAINST TUNG CHO: MENG-TE PRESENTS 
` A SWORD. 


It is recorded that Tung Cho was on the point of slaying 


Ytian Shao, but his adviser checked him, saying, “You must $ 


¿not kill rashly while the business hangs in the balance.” A 
Yüan Shao, his sword still unsheathed, left the assembly. — 
He hung up the eyo of his office at the east gate and went 
_ to Ichow. i 

Tung Cho ead to the. T‘ai-fu Yüan Wei, wy our nephew. 
behaved improperly but I pardon him for your sake; what 
think you of my scheme?” 

“What you think is right,” was the seni 5 

“If any one opposes the great scheme he will bè dealt with i 
by military law,” said Tung Cho. S 

The ministers, thoroughly cowed, promised obedience and 
the feast came to an end. Tung asked Chou Pi and Wu Chiung 
what they thought of the flight of Yüan Shao. 

“He left in a'state of great anger. In such a state of ex- 
citement much harm may ensue to the present state of affairs, 
especially as the Yiian family have been noted for their 
kindness to the people for four generations, and their protégés 
and dependents are everywhere.’ If they assemble bold spirits 
‘and call up their clients, all the valiant warriors will be in | 
arms and Shantung will be lost. You had better pardon him 
and give him a post. He will be glad at being forgiven and © 
will do no harm.” 

Wu said, “Shao is fond of scheming, but he fails in decision 
and so is not.to be feared. ` But it would be well to give him ~ 
rank and thus win popular favour.” 

Tung Cho followed this advice and thereupon sent a mes- 
senger to offer Yüan Shao the command ef Pohai. 

In the ninth month the Emperor was invited to proceed to 
the Hall of ‘Abounding Virtue where was a great assembly of 
officials. There Tung Cho, sword in hand, faced the gathering 
and said, “The Emperor is a weakling unequal to the burden 

of ruling this land. Now listen ye to the document I have 
prepared, ? . 


NENE 


8B 


And] Li J u Teed: as ows: _“The dutiful mies Ling too 
-soon left his people. The Emperor is the cynosure of all the 
-~ people of this land. Upon the present Emperor Heaven has — 
- conferred but: smali gifts: in dignity and deportment he is 
deficient and in mourning he is remiss. Only the most 
~ complete virtue can grace the imperial dignity. The Empress. 
Mother has trained him improperly and the whole State ad- 
ministration has falien into confusion. The Empress Dowager, 
Jung-lé, died suddenly and no-one knew why. The doctrine of 
~ the three bonds and the continuity of celestial and terrestrial 
S _ interdependence haye both been injured. But Hsieh, Prince — 
of Ch‘én-liu, is sage and virtuous beside being of handsome 
_ exterior. He conforms to all the rules of propriety, his 
=- mourning is sincere; his speech is always correct. Eulogies 
of him fill the Empire. He is well fitted for the great duty of 
consolidating the rule of Han. ) 
3 “Now therefore the Emperor is deposed and created Prince 
-- Hung-nung and the Empress Dowager retires from the ad- 
ministration. i 
“IJ pray the Prince to accept the throne in conformity with 
the decrees of Heaven, the desires of men and the fulfilment 
of the hopes of mankind. v 
= This having been read Tung Cho bade the attendants lead 
the Emperor down from the throne, remove his seal and 
=~ cause him to kneel facing the north, styling himself minister 
and requesting commands. Moreover he bade the Empress- 
- Dowager strip off her dress of ceremony and await the - 
imperial command. Both victims of this oppression wept and 
every minister present was deeply affected. One put his 
- discontent into words, crying, “The false Tung Cho is the 
author of this insult, which I will risk my life to wipe away.” _ 
~ And with this he rushed at Tung Cho threatening him with | 
his ivory baton of office. 
~ It was the President Ting Kuan and he was removed and 
- summarily put to death. While he lived he ceased not to rail 
at the oppressor, nor was he frightened at death. 
Ry The rebel Tung conceived the foul design 
To thrust the King aside and wrong his line. 
With folded arms the courtiers stood, save one 
Ting Kuan, who dared to cry that wrong was done. 
Then the Emperor designate went to the upper part of the 
hall to receive congratulations. After this the late Emperor, 
_ his mother and the Lady in waiting Tang were removed to 
` the Palace of Perpetual Calm. The entrance „gates were locked 
against all comers. 
ie It was pitiful! There was the young Empir. after reign- 
-ing less than half a year, deposed and another put in his place. 
. The new Emperor was Hsieh, the second son of the late 
- Emperor and the name under which he reigned is Hsien. He 


Ţ~ 


BELO oe aan u 


was nine years of age and the reign-style was changed to hy 


Ch‘u-P‘ing or The Inauguration of Tranquillity. 

As chief minister Tung Cho was arrogant beyond all reason. 
When he bowed before the throne he did not declare his name; 
in going to court he did not hasten. Booted and armed he | 
_ entered the reception halls. Never had such a thing been seen 
before. Li Ju impressed upon him constantly to employ men — 
of reputation so that he should gain public esteem. So when 
they told him Ch‘ai Yung was a man of talent he was sum- 


moned. But he would not go. Cho sent a message to him 


that if he did not come he and his whole clan should be 
exterminated. Then Ch‘ ai gave in and appeared. Cho was 
very gracious to him and promoted him thrice in a month. 
He became a Shih-chung and seemed to be on most friendly 
terms with the tyrant. 

Meanwhile the deposed ruler, his mother and the Lady T‘ang 
were immured in the palace and found their daily supplies 
gradually diminishing. The deposed Emperor wept inces-  _ 
santly. One day a pair of swallows gliding to and fro moved 
him to verse. Bes: 

Spring! and the green of the tender grass, 
Flushes with joy as the swallows pass; 

The wayfarers pause by the rippling stream, 
And their eyes with new born gladness gleam; 
With lingering gaze the roofs I see 

Of the palace that one time sheltered me. 


The messenger, sent by Tung Cho from time to time to the y ; i 


palace for news of the prisoners, got hold of this poem and 
showed it to his master. š 


“So he shows his resentment by writing poems, eh! A fair A 


excuse to put them all out of the way,” said Tung. : 

Li Ju was sent with ten men into the palace to consummate | 
the foul deed. The three were in one of the upper rooms when 
he arrived. The Emperor shuddered when the maid announced 
the visitor’s name. 

Presently Li entered and offered a cup of poisoned wine to 
the Emperor. The Emperor asked what this meant. a 

“Spring is the season of blending and harmonious inter- — 
change and the Minister sends a cup of the wine of longevity,” 
said he. 

EE it be the wine of longevity you may share it too; pledge 
me first,” said the Empress. 

Thén Li became brutally frank. 

“You will not drink!” cried he. 

He called the men with daggers and cords and bade her look 
at them. 

“The cup, or these?” said he. 

Then said the Lady T‘ang, “Let the handmaiden drink in 
place of her lord. Spare the mother and her son, I pray.” 


“And i ay you be to die for a prince? oe said Li. US bre 
_ Then he presented the cup to the Empress once more and 
bade her drink. i 
~ She railed against her brother, the feckless Ho Chin, the Pki 
ap author of all this trouble. She would not drink. pat 
of Next Li approached the Emperor. 
ae “Let me say farewell to my mother” Heowad he, and he did 
30 in these lines :— | ae 
‘The heaven and earth are changed alas! the sun and the moon 
leave their courses, 3 
I, once the centre of all eyes, am driven to the farthest confines. 
; Oppressed -by an arrogant minister my life nears its end, 
Everything fails me and vain are my falling tears. 
5 The Lady T‘ang sang :— 
Heaven is to be rent asunder, Mother Earth to'fall away; KEUS 
‘I, handmaid of an Emperor, would grieve if I followed him not. 
Wei have come to the parting of ways, the quick and the dead walk 
not together; ; 
Alas! I am left alone with the grief in my heart. 
‘When they had sung these lines they fell weeping into ae 3 
others’ arms. ine 
= “The minister is awaiting my report,” said, Li, “and you 
delay too long. Think you that there is any hope of succour ? T 
- The Empress broke into another fit of railing. ie 
“The rebel forces us to death, mother and son, and Heaven 
has abandoned us. But you, the tool of his ling will as- 
-suredly perish.” 27s) ij 
_ Thereupon Li grew more Ae kid hands on ihe Empress -7 
i and threw her out of the window. Then he bade the soldiers © 
strangle Lady T‘ang and forced the lad to swallow the wine 
p death. 
at He reported the achievement of the cruel deed to his master 
i Hahto bade them bury the victims without the city. After this- 
-Tung’s behaviour was more atrocious than before. He spent — 
his nights in the palace, defiled the virgins there and even | 
‘slept on the imperial couch. : 
`. Once he led his soldiers out of the city to Yangch‘éng when — 
the villagers, men and women, were assembled from all sides — 
- for the annual festival. His men surrounded the place and | 
one plundered it. They took away booty by the cart load, and ~— 
- women prisoners and a large number of heads. The procession 
returned to the city and published a story that they had ob- 
=~ tained a great victory over some rebels. They burned the © 
heads beneath the walls and the women and jewellery were | 
shared out among the soldiers. 
_ An officer named Wu Fou was disgusted at this ferocity and. 
sought a chance to slay the tyrant. He constantly wore a 
M breastplate underneath his court dress and carried concealed 
a sharp dagger. One day when Tung came to court Fou met 


y 


4 


Se 3 an tuo, or 


n 
à 


him on the steps and tried to stab him. But Cho was a very 


powerful man and held him off till uy Pu came to his help. 
_ He struck down the assailant. 

“Who told you to rebel?” said Tung. 

Fou glared at him and cried, “You are not my prince, I am 


not your minister: where is the rebellion? Your crimes fill — ‘ 
the heavens and every man would slay you. I am sorry I ~ 


cannot tear you asunder with chariots to appease the wrath 
of the world.” : 
Tung Cho bade them take him out and hack him to PIE Cat 
He only ceased railing as he ceased to live. eel 
Men praise Wu Fou, that loyai seryant of the latter days of Han. 
His valour was hign as the Heavens, in all ages unequalled; 
In the court itself would he slay the rebel, great is his fame! 
Throughout all time will men call him a hero. 
Thereafter Tung Cho always went well guarded. a ee 
-At Pohai Yiian Shao heard of Tung Cho’ s misuse of power oy 
and sent a secret letter to Wang Yü. ee 


“That rebel Cho outrages Heaven and has deposed his ruler, Cae 


Men cannot bear to speak of him. Yet you suffer his aggres- 


sions as if you knew naught of them. How then are you a “i 
dutiful and loyal minister? I have assembled an army and 


desire to sweep clean the royal habitation, but I dare not 


lightly begin the task. If you are willing, then find an oppor- i 
tunity to plot against this man. If you would use force I am  — 


at your command.” 


The letter arrived but Wang Yün could see no chance. One a 


day while among the throng in attendance, mostly men of long 

service, he said to his colleagues, “This is my birthday, I pray 

you come to a little party in my humble cot this evening.” 
“We certainly will,” they cried, “and wish you long life.” 
That night the tables were spread in an inner room and his 


friends gathered there. When the wine had made a few rounds ae 


the host suddenly covered his face and began to weep. 

The guests were aghast. 

“Sir, on your birthday too, why do you weep?” said’ they: x 

“It is not my birthday,” replied he. “But I wished to call — 
you together and I feared lest Tung Cho should suspect, so 
I made that the excuse. This man insults the Emperor and 


does as he wishes so that the imperial prerogatives are in’ - 


imminent peril. I think of the days when our illustrious 
founder destroyed Ts‘in, annihilated Ch‘u and obtained the 
Empire. Who could have foreseen this day when that Tung ~ 
Cho has subjugated all to his will? That is why I weep.” 

Then they all wept with him. 

Seated among the guests, however, was Ts‘ao Ts‘a0, who 
did not join in the weeping but clapped his hands and laughed 
aloud. ; 


“-Homance of the Three tingooms 


from dawn weep till dark, will that slay Tung Cho?” said he. 
His host turned on him angrily. 


no gratitude? You can laugh?” 
2 “I laughed at the absurdity of an assembly like this being 
-unable to compass the death of one man. Foolish and incapable 
as I am I will cut off his head and hang it at the gate as an 
£  offeri ing to the people.” i 
. The host left his seat and went over to Ts‘ao Ts! ao. 


him. Now he begins to trust me and so I can approach him 
~ sometimes. You have a ‘seven precious ’ sword which I would’ 
= borrow and I will go into his palace and kill him. I care not 
mi, Edie for it.” 
Di 4 “What good fortune for the world that this is so!” said the 
ost. 
With this he himself poured out a NS, for his guest who 


“If all the officers of the government weep till dawn, and 


- “Your forbears ate of the bounty of the Hans; do you feel > 3 


“These later days,” Ts‘ao continued, “I have bowed my head » Ne 
_ to Tung Cho with the sole desire of finding a chance to destroy. 


- drained it and swore an oath. After this the sword was. — s 
_ brought out and given to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who hid it under his 


dress. He finished his wine, took leave of the guests and left 
-the hall.. Before long the others dispersed. 


Soon after Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, with this short sword girded on, = 


came to the palace of the minister. 
“Where is the minister?” asked‘ he. 
“In the small guest room,” replied the attendants. 
So Ts‘ao Ts‘ao went in and found his host seated on a ; couch, 
Lit. Pu was at his side. ` 
“Why. so late, Meng-té?” said Tung Cho, 
“My horse is out of condition and slow,” replied Ts‘ao. 
` Cho turned to his henchman. 
- “Some good horses have come in from the west You go and 
pick out a good one as a present for him.” And Lü Pu left. 
“He is doomed,” thought Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He ought to have 
struck then, but Ts‘ao knew Cho was very powerful and he 
was afraid; he wanted to make sure of his blow. 
Now Tung Cho’s corpulence was such that he could not 
remain long sitting, so he rolled over and lay face inwards. 
“Now is the time,” thought the assassin, and he gripped the 
good sword firmly. But just as he was going to strike, his 
victim happened to look up and in a mirror he saw the reflec- 
fion of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao behind him with a sword in his hand. 
“What are you doing, Meng-té?” said he turning suddenly. 
_ And at that moment Lü Pu came along leading a horse. 
= Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in a flurry dropped on his knees and said, “I 
have a choice sword here which I wish to present to Your 
- Benevolence.” 


40 San fuo, or 


Tung Cho took it. It was a fine blade, over a foot in length, 


inlaid with the seven precious signs and very keen; a fine 
sword in very truth. He handed the weapon to Lü Pu while 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao took off the sheath which he also gave to Lü Pu. 

Then they went out to look at the horse. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was 
- profuse in his thanks and said he would like to try him. So 
Cho bade them bring saddle and bridle. Ts‘ao led the creature 
outside, lept into the saddle, laid on his whip vigorously and | 
galloped away eastward. 

Lii Pu said, “Just as I was coming up it seemed to me as if 
that fellow was going to stab you, only a sudden panic seized 
him and he presented the weapon instead.” 
~ “I suspected him too,” said Cho. Just then Li Ju came in 

and they told him. 

“He has no family here but lodges quite alone and not far 
away,” said he. “Send for him. If he comes forthwith the 
sword was meant as a gift, but if he makes any excuses he 
had bad intentions. And you can arrest him.” 

They sent four prison warders to call Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. They 
were absent a long time and then came back saying Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


_. had not returned to his lodging but had ridden in hot haste 


- out of the eastern gate. To the gate-warden’s questions he 


had replied that he was on a special message for the minister. A 


~. He had gone off at full speed. 

. His conscience pricked him and so he fled; there is no 
doubt that he meant assassination,” said Li Ju. 
“And I trusted him so well!” said Tung Cho in a rage. 
“There must be a conspiracy afoot: when we catch him we 

shall know all about it,” said Li Ju. ` 


Letters and pictures of the fugitive were sent everywhere ~ 
` with orders to catch him. A large reward in money was — 


offered and a patent of nobility, while those who sheltered 
him would be held to share his guilt. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao travelled in hot haste toward Ch‘iaochiin. On 
the road at Chungmou he was recognised by the guards at the 
gate and made prisoner. They took him to the magistrate. 
Ts‘ao declared he was a merchant, named Huangfu. The 
magistrate scanned his face most closely and remained in deep 
thought. 

Presently he said, “When I was at the capital seeking a post 
I knew you as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, why do you try to conceal your 
identity ?” 

He ordered him to the prison till the morrow when he. could 
be sent to the capital and the reward claimed. He gave the 
‘soldiers wine and food as a reward. 


About midnight he sent a trusty servant to bring the prisoner 3 


into his private rooms for interrogation. 
“They say the Minister treated you well; Ta did you try 
to harm him?” said he. 


) 


` 


| omance of the Three Bingooms 
hy rl 

eave can swallows and sparrows understand the flight of | 
_ the crane and the wild goose? I am your prisoner and am to 
_ be sent to the capital for a reward. Why so many questions?” 

The official sent away the attendants and turning to the 
-~ prisoner said, “Do not despise me. I am no mere hireling, 
~ only I have not yet found the lord to serve.” . 

= Said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “My ancestors enjoyed the bounty of the 
Hans and should I differ from a bird or a beast if I did not 
desire to repay them with gratitude? I have bowed the knee 


to Tung Cho that thereby I might find an opportunity against.. ie 


$ him, and so remove this evil from the State. I have failed for 
_ this time. Such is the will of heaven.” — 
“And where are you going?” 


tyrant. This is my desire.” 


rg Thereupon the magistrate himself bed the bonds of the See 


_ prisoner, led him to the upper seat and bowed saying, “I am 
= called Ch‘én Kung. My aged mother and family are in the 
east. I am deeply affected by your loyalty and uprightness 

and I will abandon my office and follow you.” | 
j Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was delighted with this turn of affairs. The 
= magistrate at once collected some money for the expenses of 


their journey and gave his prisoner a different dress. Then 


each took a sword and rode away toward the home of T's‘ao. 
: Three days later at eventide they reached Ch‘éngkao. T's‘ao 


2 Ts‘ao pointed with his whip to a hamlet deep in the woods 
„and said, “There lives my uncle, Lü Po-shé, a sworn-brother ° 


ot my father. Suppose we go and ask news of my family and 
= seek shelter for the night?” 

= “Excellent!” said his companion and they rode over, dis- 
mounted at the farm gate and entered. 

i Their host said, “I hear the government has sent stringent — 
orders on all sides to arrest you. Your father has gone into 
hiding to Ch‘én Lu. How has this all come about?” 

~ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao told him and said, “Had it not been for this man 
~ here with me I should have been already hacked to pieces.” 


salvation of the T's‘ao family. But be at ease and rest, I will 
find you a bed in my humble cottage.” 
He then rose and went into the inner chamber where he 


| stayed a long time, When he came out, he said, “There is no 


-= good wine in the house, I am going over to the village to get 
some for you.” _ 
And he hastily mounted his ‘donkey and rodé away. -The 
two travellers sat a long time. Suddenly they heard at the 
back of the house the sound of sharpening a knife. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “He is not my real uncle; I am beginning 
to doubt the meaning of his going off. Let us listen.” 


_ “Home to my village. Thence I shall issue a summons 
- calling all the bold spirits to come with forces to kill the 


on Po-shé bowed low to Ch‘én Kung saying, “You are the 


42 `O an Ruo 


So they silently stepped out into a Saw hut at the back 
Presently some one said, “Bind before killing, eh?” 

“As I thought; said Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao, “now unless we strike 
first we shall be taken.” ‘ 

Suddenly they dashed in, sword in hand: and slew the whole = 
household male and female; in all eight persons. py 

After this they searched the house. In the kitchen they 
found a pig bound ready to kill. à TERRA 


“You have made a huge mistake,” said Ch‘én Kung, “and we _ 


have slain honest folk.” 


They at once mounted and rode away. Soon they met their “a 


host coming home and over the saddle in front of him they — 
saw two vessels of wine. In his hands he carried fruit and ~ 
vegetables. 
“Why are you going, Sirs?” he called to them. 
“Accused people dare not linger,” said Ts‘ao. bs 
“But I have bidden them kill a pig! Why do you refuse my 
poor hospitality? I pray you ride back with me.’ tee 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao paid no heed. Urging his horse forward he 2 
suddenly drew his sword and rode after Lu. ` ; 
“Who is that coming along?” es 
Lu turned and looked back and Ts‘ao at the same instant ae: 
cut him down. 
His companion was frightened. 


“You were wrong enough before,” cried he. ‘What now is. 


this? 99? 183 
“When he got home and saw his family killed, think youhe 
would bear it patiently? If he had raised an alarm and 
followed us we should have been killed.” We 
“To kill deliberately is very wrong,” said Ch‘én Kung. = 
T would rather betray the world then let the world betray : 
me,” was the reply. oy 
Ch‘én Kung only thought. They rode on some distance by ~ 
moonlight and presently knocked up an inn for shelter. 
Having first fed their horses, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was soon asleep, 
but his companion lay thinking. : 
“I took him for a true man and left all to follow hirs but 
he is cruel as a wolf. If I spare him he will do more harm,” 
thought Ch‘én. 
And he rose intending to kill his companion. 


In his heart lie cruelty and venom, he is no true man; 
In nought doth he differ from his enemy Tung Cho. 


The further fortunes of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will be told in later 
chapters. ‘ 


oe | CHAPTER 
SENDING OUT THE CALL: MANY RESPOND: 


om _ DESTROYING AN ARMY: THE THREE BROTHERS FIGHT 
FY ar Re ~. AGAINST Lu Pu. i 


fod Mt the ‘close: of the last chapter Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s companion was 
_ about to slay him. But the memory of why he had decided to 
‘join his fortunes with his companion’s stayed his hand. Rising 
from his bed before dawn he mounted his horse and rode away 
_ toward his home in the east. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao awoke with the day 
and missed his companion. Thought he, “He thinks me brutal 
oe. -because of a couple of egoistic phrases I used and so he has 
i gone. I ought to push on too and not linger here.” 
So he travelled as quickly as possible toward home. When 
e saw his father he related what had happened and said he 
wanted to dispose of all the property and enlist soldiers with 
he money. 
“Our possessions are but small’; said his father, and not 
i nough to do anything with. However, there is a graduate 
- here, one Wei Hung, careless of wealth but careful of virtue, 
“whose family is very rich. With his help we might hope for 
success.’ 
A feast was prepared and the men man invited. Ts‘ao made 
“him a speech: —“The Hans have lost their lordship and Tung 
Cho is really a tyrant. He flouts his prince and is cruel to the 
‘people, who gnash their teeth with rage. I would restore the 
Hans but my means are insufficient. "Đir, I appeal to your 
oyalty and public-spirit.” 


found a man fit to undertake the task. Since you, Meng-té, 
have so. noble a desire I willingly devote all my property to 
_ the cause.’ 

~ . This was joyful news and ‘the call to arms was forthwith 
Bs neared and sent far and near. So they established a corps 
of volunteers and set up a large white ‘recruiting banner 
“with the words “Loyalty and Right” inscribed thereon. The 
response was rapid and volunteers came in like rain drops in 
number. ; 
` -One day came a. arein Yo Chin, whose minor name was 
Wèên-chʻien, and another Li Tien, also known as Man-ch‘éng., 
These two were appointed to Ts‘ao’s personal staff, . Another 
was: one Hsiahou Tun. He was descended from Hsiahou Ying 


- He replied, “I have long desired this aa So far, have not- 


‘and had been trained from his early boyhood to use the spear 


re aa ‘San Buo, or 


and the club. When only fourteen he had been attached to a 
certain master-in-arms. One day some one spoke disrespect- : 
fully of his master and Tun killed him. For this deed, however, — 
he had to flee and had been an exile for some time. Now he 
came to offer his services, accompanied by his brother. Each 
brought a company of trained men. 

Really these two were brothers of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao by birth since 
his father was originally of the Hsiahou family, and had’ only, 
been adopted into the Ts‘ao family. t 

A few days later came two other brothers, Ts‘ao Jén and 
Ts‘ao Hung, each with a company. These two were accom- 
plished horsemen and trained in the use of arms, Then drill 
began and Wei Hung spent his treasure freely in buying 
clothing, armour, flags and banners. From all sides poured © 
in gifts of grain. 

When Yiian Shao received Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s call to arms he 
collected all those under his command to the number of three 
legions. He came to take the oath to Ts‘ao. Next a manifestigi : 
was issued :— 

“Ts‘ao and his associates, moved by a sense of duty, now 
make this proclamation. Tung Cho defies heaven and earth. 
He is destroying theState and injuring his prince. He polluted! 
the palace and oppresses the people. He is vicious and cruel. 
His crimes are heaped up. Now we have received a secret 
command to call up soldiers and we are pledged to cleanse the | 
Empire and destroy the evil-doers. We will raise a volunteer 
army and exert all our efforts to maintain the dynasty and. 
succour the people. Respond to this, O Nobles, by muste 
your soldiers.” 

Many from every side answered the summons as the follow: 
ing list shows :— j ? ; 


The Prefect of Nanyang, Yüan Shu. 

The Governor of Ichow, Han Fu. 

The Governor of Yüchow, K‘ung Yu. 

The Governor of Yenchow, Liu Tai. 

The Prefect of Honei, Wang K‘uang. 

The Prefect of Ch‘én-liu, Chang Mo. Pee! ny 
The Prefect of Tungchun, Chiao Mao. 2 aise 
The Prefect of Shanyang, Yiian I. 

The Hsiang of Chipei, Pao Hsin. ~ 
The Prefect of Peihai, K‘ung Yung. 

The Prefect of Kuangling, Chang Ch‘ao. 
The Governor of Hsiichow, T‘ao Ch‘ien. 
The Prefect of Hsiliang, Ma T‘éng. 

The Prefect of Peip‘ing, Kungsun Tsan. 
The Prefect of Shangtang, Chang Yang. 
-The Prefect of Ch‘angsha, Sun Chien. 5 
The Prefect of Pohai, Yüan Shao. sap i 


‘These contingents varied in size, but oh was Besse in 
elf. with its officers, civil and military, and battle- leaders, 
nd they assembled at Loyang. : 
_ The Prefect of Peip‘ing, Kungsun Tsan, while on his way 
ith his force of a legion and a half, passed through P‘ingyiian. 
here he saw among the mulberry trees a yellow flag under 
which marched a small company. When they drew nearer he 
k saw the leader was Liu Yiian-té. 

-= “Good brother, what do you here?” | 
“You were kind to me once and on your recommendation 
ma was made magistrate of this district. I heard you were 
passing through and came to salute you. May I pray my elder 
brother to enter into the city and rest his steed?” 
‘Who are these two? RN said Tsan pointing to the other two 
rothers. | 
“These are Kuan Yü a Chang Fei, my sworn: Prothera." 
j “Were they fighting with you against the rebels?” 
“All my success was due to their efforts,” said Yiian-té. 
“And what offices do they fill?” 
“Kuan Yü is a mounted archer: Fei is a foot archer” 
“Thus are able men buried!” said Tsan, sighing. Then he 
ontinued. “All the highest in the land are now going to 
estroy the rebellious Tung Cho. My brother would do better 
to abandon this petty place and join us in restoring the House 
f Han. Why not?’ 
“I should like to go,” said Yiian-té. 
“Tf you had let me kill him that other fire you would not 
have this, trouble to-day,” said Chang Fei. 
“Since ‘things are so let us pack and go,” said Kuan Yii. 


12% 


men, joined Kungsun Tsan and marched with | him to join the 
great army. 
-One after another the feudal lords came up and encamped. 
Their camps extended over three hundred li and more. When, 
all had arrived Ts‘ao, as the head, prepared sacrificial bullocks 
and horses and called all the lords. to a great assembly to decide 
“upon their plan of attack. 

Then spake the Prefect Wang saying “We have been moved 
_ by a noble sense of right to assemble here. Now must we first 
choose a chief and bind ourselves to obedience.” 
- Then said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “For four generations the highest 
offices of state have been filled by members of the Yiian family 
and his clients and supporters are everywhere. As a descen- 
dant of ancient ministers of Han, Yiian Shao is a suitable man 
to be our chief lord.” 
‘Yiian Shao again and again declined this honour, But they 
all said, “Tt must be he; there is no other.” And then he 
agreed. . 


So without more ado the three brothers, with a few horse- 


l 


46 | Ban Hu, i or 


So a three-storeyed altar was built ‘and they on bout i 
it the five banners of the divisions of space. And they set up — 
white yaks’ tails and golden axes and emblems of military as 
authority and the seals of leadership round about. a 

All being ready the chief lord was invited to ascend the altar. 5 
- Clad in ceremonial robes and girt with a sword, Yüan Shao- 
reverently ascended. There he burned incense, made obeisance | 
and recited the oath :— mh 

“The House of Han has fallen upon evil days, the bands of 5 
imperial authority are loosened. The rebel minister, Tung Cho, ~ 
takes advantage of the discord to work evil, and calamity falls ‘ 
upon honourable families. Cruelty overwhelms simple folk. 
We, Shao and his confederates, fearing for the safety of the 
imperial prerogatives, have assembled military forces to res- ~ 
cue the State. We now pledge ourselves to exert our whole — 
strength and act in concord to the utmost limit of our powers. — 
There must be no disconcerted or selfish action. Should any — 
depart from this pledge may he lose his life-and leave no ie 
posterity. Almighty Heaven and Universal Mother Earth and 
the enlightened spirits of our forefathers, be ye our witnesses.” — 
The reading finished, he smeared the blood of the sacrifice — 
upon his lips and upon the lips of those who shared the pledge. ~ 
All were deeply affected by the ceremony and many shed tears. | 

This done the oath-chief was supported down from the high ~ 
place and led to his tent, where he took the highest place and — 
- the others arranged themselves according to rank and age. si 

Here wine was served. x 

Presently Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “It behoves us all to obey the 
chief we have this day set up, and support the State. There. 
must be no feeling of rivalry or superiority based upon — 
numbers.” isi 

Shao replied, CUu oy as I am, yet as elected chief I must 5) 
impartially reward merit and punish offences. Let each see 
to it that he obeys the national laws and the army pee 
These must not be broken.” 

“Only thy commands are to be obeyed” cried Bil: i 

“My brother, Yiian Shu, is appointed Chief of the Commis- 
sariat. ‘He must see to it that the whole camp is well supplied. ` 
But the need of the moment is a van-leader who shall go to- 
Sstshui Pass and provoke a battle. The other forces must 
take up positions in-support.’ 

Then the Prefect of Ch‘angsha offered himself for ‘this’ 
service. 

“You are valiant and fierce, and equal to this service,’ ’ said 
Yiian Shao. 

The force under Sun Chien set out and presently came to 
the Pass. The guard there sent a swift rider to the capital 
to announce to the tyrant the urgency of the situation. ` ; 


“Bomance “a the Three tingooms Ca , ae 


Ever since Tung Cho had seouted: his position he Wed given 
himself up to luxury without stint. When the urgent news. 
reached the adviser Li Ju, he at once went to his master, who 


- much alarmed called a great council. 


a Pass. 


~. Lü Pu stood forth and said, “Do not fear, my father, I look 
= upon all the lords without the Pass as so ‘much stubble and 
= with the men of our fierce army I will put every one of them 
to death and hang their heads at the gates of the capital.” 

_ “With your aid I can sleep secure,” said Tung Cho. 

But some one behind Lii Pu broke in upon his speech saying 

__ “A butcher’s knife to kill.a chicken! There is no need for the ` 
K ‘Marquis to go: I will cut off their heads every one as easily 
; as I would take a thing out of my pocket.” 

= Cho looked up and his eyes rested on a stalwart man of fierce 
mien, lithe and supple. He had a small round head like a leo- 
- pard and shoulders like an ape’s. His name was Hua Hsiung. 
_. Cho rejoiced at his bold words and at once gave him high rank 
-~ and command over five legions of horse and foot. He, with 
- Li Su, Hu Chén and Chao Ts‘én hastily moved toward the 


Among the feudal lords Pao Hsin was jealous lest the chosen 


E van-leader should win too great honours. Wherefore he en- 
~ dẹęavoured to meet the foe first and so he secretly despatched 


his brother Chung with three companies by a bye road. As. 


x soon as this small force reached the Pass they offered battle. 
~~ Hua Hsiung at the head of half a company of mail-clad horse- 


men swept down from the Pass crying “Flee not, rebel.” 
But Pao Chung was afraid and turned back. Hsiung came 


~ on, his arm rose, the sword fell, and Chung was cut down from 


his horse. Most of his company were captured. His head was 
sent to the minister’s palace. Hua Hsiung was promoted to 


AS Tu-tu, or Commander in Chief. 


aa Sun Chien presently approached the Pass. He had four 


. captains: Ch‘éng P‘u, whose weapon was an iron-spined snaky ; 


lance; Huang Kai, who wielded an iron whip; Han Tang, a 

swordsman, and Tsu Mou, who fought with a pair of wre. 
The Commander Sun wore a helmet of fine silver wrapped _ 

‘round with a purple turban. He carried across his body his 


sword of ancient ingot iron and rode a dappled horse. with 


flowing mane. 

` He advanced to the Pass and hailed the defenders, calling 

them helpers of a fool, and summoned them to surrender. 

A half legion under Hu Chén went out against him whom 
_Ch‘éng P‘u with the snaky lance rode out and engaged. After 
avery few bouts Hu Chén was killed.on the spot by a thrust 


= through the throat. Then the signal was given for the main 


army to advance. But from the Pass they rained down showers 
of stones, which proved too much for the assailants and they 


48 - San Kuo, or 


retired into camp at Liangtung to await further help from 
Yüan Shao. 

An urgent message for supplies was sent to the commissary. 
But one said to him, the Controller : “This Sun Chien is a very 
tiger. Should he take the capital and destroy Tung Cho we | 
should have a tiger in place of a wolf. Do not send him grain. 
Starve his men and that will decide the fate of that army? 

And Yüan Shu gave ear to the detractors and sent no grain 
or forage. Soon the hungry soldiers showed their disaffection 
by indiscipline and the spies bore the news to the defenders 
of the Pass, who decided upon a speedy attack in front and 
rear. They hoped to capture the Sun Chien. 

So the soldiers of the attacking face were told off and given 
a full meal. At dark they left the Pass and crept by secret 
paths to the rear of Sun Chien’s camp. The moon was bright 
and the wind cool. They arrived about midnight and the 
drums beat an immediate attack. Sun Chien hastily donned 
his fighting gear and rode out. He ran straight into Hua 
Hsiung and the two warriors engaged. But before they had 
exchanged many passes Li Su’s men came up-and set fire to 
whatever would burn. 

Sun’s army were thrown into PERENA and fled like rats. 
A general mêlée ensued and soon only Tsu Mou was left at his 


-chief’s side. These two broke through the pass and fled. 


Hua Hsiung coming in hot pursuit, Sun Chien took his bow 
and let fiy two arrows in quick succession, but both missed. 
He fitted a third arrow to the string, but drew the bow so 
fiercely that it snapped. He cast the magpie painted bow to 
the earth and set off at full gallop. 

Then spake Tsu Mou saying, “My lord’s purple turban is a 
mark that the rebels will too easily recognise. Give it to me 
and I will wear it.” 

So Sun Chien exchanged his silver helmet with the turban 


for his faithful friend’s headpiece, and the two men parted, 


riding different ways. The pursuers looking only for the 
purple turban went after its wearer and Sun escaped along . 
a bye-road. 
Tsu Mou, hotly pursued, then tore off the headdress which. 
he hung on the post of a half-burned house as he passed and 
dashed into the thick woods. Hua Hsiung’s men seeing the 
purple turban standing motionless dared not approach, but 
they surrounded it on every side and shot at it with arrows. 
Presently they discovered the trick, went up and seized it. 
This was the moment that the hidden man awaited. At once 
he rushed forth, his two swords whirling about, and dashed 
at the leader. But Hua Hsiung was too quick. With a loud 
yell he slashed at Tsu Mou and cut him down. Day had now 


broken and the victor led his men back to the Pass. 


Romance of the Three Hingvoms _ aoe 


The three other leaders in time met their chief and the 
soldiers halted. Sun Chien was much grieved at the loss of . 


_ his generous subordinate. 


When news of the disaster reached Yiian Shao he was greatly 


_chagrined and called all the lords to a council. They assembled 


and Kungsun Tsan was the last to arrive. When all were 


seated in the tent Yiian Shao said, “The brother of General _ . 


Pao, disobeying the rules we made for our guidance, rashly 


= went to attack the enemy; he was slain and with. him many 


of our soldiers. Now Sun Wén-t‘ai has been defeated. Thus © 
our fighting spirit has suffered and what is to be done?” 


Every one was silent. Lifting his eyes the chief looked § ‘ 
~ round from one to another till he came to Kungsun Tsan and © 
then he remarked three men who stood behind his seat. They - ree) 
= were of striking appearance as they stood there, all three 


smiling cynically. 
“Who are those men behind you?” said the chief. 

Kungsun told Yüan-tê to come forward, and said, “This is 
Liu Pei, magistrate of P“ ingyüan and a brother of mine who 
shared my humble cottage.” ~ 
“Tt must be the Liu Ytian-té who broke ‘up the Yellow 


Turban rebellion,” said Ts‘ao. 


“It is he,” said his patron and he ordered Liu Pei to make 
-his obeisance to the assembly, to whom he then related his 
‘services and his origin, all in full detail. 

“Since he is of the Han line he should be seated,” said the 


- chief and he bade Liu Pei sit. 


' Liu Pei modestly thanked him. 
Said Shao, “This consideration is not for your fame and 
office; I respect you as a scion of the imperial family.” 
So Liu Pei took his seat in the lowest place of the long line! 


of lords. And his two brothers with folded arms took their 


stations behind him. 
Even as they were at this meeting came in a scout to say > 
that Hua Hsiung with a company of mail-clad horsemen was 


coming down from the Pass. They were flaunting Sun Chien’s 


captured purple turban on the end of a bamboo pole. The. 
enemy was soon hurling insults at those within the stockade ` 
and challenging them to fight. 

“Who dares go out to give battle?” said the chief. 

“I will go,” said Yü Shé, a leader who belonged to the fou 
of Yiian Shu. 

So he went and almost immediately one came back to say 


hat he had fallen in the third bout. 


Fear began to lay its cold hand on the assembly. Then said 
another, “I have a brave warrior among my men. Pan Féng 
_ is his name and he could slay this Hua Hsiung.” 


œ So P‘an was ordered out to meet.the foe. With his great 


battle-axe in his hand he mounted and rode forth. But soon 


A 


aa ee ee ye Huo, or 


came the direful panies that he w had fallen. "The faces. oE Í 
. the gathering paled at this. if 
“What a pity my two able leaders, Yen Liang and Wén Ch‘ou, 
are not here! Then should we have some one who wont not 

fear this man,” said the chief. 

He had not finished when from the lower end a voice cried, 
“T will go, take his head and lay it before you here.” 
- All turned to look at the speaker. He was tall and had a 
long beard. His eyes were those of a phcenix and his eyebrows 
` thick and bushy like caterpillars. His face was a swarthy- 
`- red and his voice deep as the sound of a great bell. 
“Who is he?” asked the chief. 
Kungsun Tsan told them it was Kuan Yu, brother of Liu 
- Yüan-tê. 

“And what is he?” 

_He is in the train of Liu Yüan-tê as a modak. archer.” 

“An insult to us all!” roared the chief’s, brother from his 

Rises “Have we no leader? How dare an archer speak thus 3 


4) before us? Let us beat him forth!” 


But Ts‘ao Ts‘ao intervened. “Peace, O Kung-lu! Since he 
` speaks great words, he is certainly valiant. Let him try. If 
he fail, then you may reproach him.” 

“Hua Hsiung will laugh at us if we send a mere archer to’ 
fight him, said the chief.” 

“He looks no common person. And how can the enemy know | 
he is but a bowman?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“If I fail then can you. take my head,” cried Kuan. | 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade them heat some wine and offered a stir pop 
cup to Kuan Yü as he went out. 

“Pour it out,” said Kuan. “I shall return in a little space.” 
He went with his sword in his hand and vaulted into the 
saddle. Those in the tent heard the fierce roll of the drums 
and then a mighty sound as if skies were falling and earth 
' rising, hills trembling and mountains tearing asunder. And 
they were sore afraid. And while they were listening with. 
ears intent, lo! the gentle tinkle of horse bells, and Kuan Yii 
threw at their feet the head of the slain leader, their enemy 

Hua Hsiung. 
The wine was still warm! 
This doughty deed has been celebrated in verse. 


The power of the man stands first in all the world; 

At the gate of the camp was heard the rolling of the battle drums; 

Then Yimn-ch‘ang set aside the wine cup till he should have 
displayed his valour, 

And the wine was still warm when the enemy had been slain. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was pleased at this success. But Chang Fei’s 
voice was heard, shouting, “Brother, you slew the leader; 
why did you not break through the Pass and seize Tung Cho? 
Could there have been a better time?” 


3 Ae arose enol voice of the Las Maan Shur “We nigh 
Umien are too meek and yielding. Here is the petty follower © 
- of a small magistrate daring to flaunt his prowess before us! i 
. Expel him from the tent, I say.” cf 
= — But again Ts‘ao Ts‘ao interposed, “Shall we. consider the 
` station of him who has done a great service?” 
“Tf you hold a mere magistrate in such honour then I simply ran 
t - withdraw, ” said Yüan Shu. i a 
Be T is a word enough to defeat a grand A ?? said. Ts‘ ao 
s‘ao. i K 
SE He told Kungsun Tsan to lead, his three companions back toi 
pa uei own camp and the other chiefs then dispersed, "Thati 
night he secretly sent presents of flesh and wine to soothe the 
three after this adventure. f 
:- — When Hua Hsiung’s men seni back and told the story — 
: of defeat and death Li Su was greatly distressed. He wrote 
urgent letters to his master who called in his trusted advisers 
¿ to a council. Li Ju summed up the situation. ‘We have lost — 
our best leader and the rebel power has thereby become very 
“| | great. Yiian Shao is at the head of this confederacy and Yüan 
= ' Wei of the same family is holder of high office in the govern- X 
i ment. If those i in the capital combine with those in the country , 
= we may suffer. Therefore we must remove them. So I request 
4 + you, Sir Minister, to place yourself at the head. of your army 


and break this confederation,” 

_ Tung Cho agreed and at once ordered Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Ssù 

to take half a company and surround the residence of Yiian. 

. Wei, the T‘ai-fu, slay every soul, and hang the head of the high 
‘ officer outside the gate as a trophy. And Cho commanded — 
` twenty legions to advance in two armies. The first five legions — 
were under Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Sst. and they were to hold 
Sstshui Pass. They should not necessarily fight. The other 
fifteen. legions , under Tung Cho himself went to Tigertrap 
- Pass, i 

This Pass i is fifty li from Loyang and as soon as they arrived 
‘Tung Cho bade Lü Pu take three legions and make a strong 
stockade on the outside of the Pass. The main body with Cho 
would occupy the Pass. 

News of this movement reaching the confederate lords the 
BN Thiet summoned a council. Said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “The occupation 
of the Pass would cut our armies in two, therefore must we 
oppose Tung Cho’s army on the way.’ 

So eight of the confederate lords went in the dihection of 

the Pass to oppose their enemy. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and his men: 
were a reserve to render help where needed. 

` Of the eight, the Prefect of Honei was the first to arrive 
‘and Li Pu went to give battle with three companies of mailed 
` horsemen. 


5 


"52 ae ‘San Huo, or 


When Wang K‘uang, Prefect of Honei, had ordered his army, 
~ horse and foot, in battle array he took his station under the 
great banner and looked over at his foe. There he saw Lü Pu, 
a conspicuous figure in front of the line. On his head was a 
triple curved headdress of ruddy gold. He wore a robe of 
Sstich‘uan silk embroidered with flowers and over that breast 
and back mail adorned with a gaping animal’s head, joined 
by rings at the sides and girt to his waist with a belt fastened 
by a beautiful lion-head clasp. His bow and arrows were slung 
on his shoulders and he carried a trident-halberd (hua-cht). 
He was seated-on his snorting steed “The Hare”. Indeed he 
was the man among men, as his steed was the horse among 
horses. 

“Who dares go out to fight him?” asked Wang Kuang turn- 
ing to those behind him. In response a tried warrior named 
Fang spurred to the front, his spear set ready for battle. 
The two met: before the fifth bout Fang fell under a thrust | 
of the halberd and Lü Pu dashed forward. Wang K‘uang’s 
men could not stand and scattered in all directions. Lü Pu 
went to and fro slaying all he met. He was quite irresistible. 

Happily two other troops came up and rescued the wounded. 
leader and his opponent retreated. The three having lost many — 
men withdrew thirty li and made a stockade. And before long 
the remaining five lords came up and joined them. They held ` 


»-a council. 


“This Lii Pu is irresistible,” said they. 

And while they sat there anxious and uncertain, it was 
announced that Lü Pu had returned to challenge them. Each 
mounted his horse and placed himself at the head of his force, 
each body in its station on lofty cliffs. Around them was the 
opposing army, innumerable horse and foot, their embroidered 
banners waving in the breeze. 

They attacked. Mu Shun, a leader from Shangtang, rode 
out, but fell at the first encounter with Lü Pu. This frightened 
the others. Then galloped forth Wu An-kuo of the iron mace. 
Lii Pu whirling his halberd and urging on his steed came to 
meet him. The two fought, well matched for half a score 
bouts, when a blow from the halberd broke Wu An-kuo’s wrist. | 
Letting his mace fall to the ground he fled. Then all eight of 
the lords led forth their men to his rescue and Lii Pu retired. 

The fighting then ceased and after their return to camp 
another council met. í 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “No one can stand against the prowess of 

‘Lt Pu. Let us call up all the lords and evolve some good plan. 
If only Lü Pu were taken, his master could easily be killed.” 

While the council was in progress again came Lü Pu to 
challenge them and again they moved out against him. This 
time Kungsun T'san, flourishing his spear, went to meet the 


fiomance of the Three iingdome 
following at the topmost speed of “The Hare.” 


“The Hare” was a thousand-li-a-day horse, swift as the wind. 
As. they watched “The Hare” gained rapidly upon the flying 


` horseman and his rider’s spear was poised ready to strike _ 
Tsan just behind the heart. Just then dashed in a third rider 


with round glaring eyes and a bristling moustache, and armed 
with a long snake-iike spear. 


“Stay, O thrice named slave!” roared he, ‘T; Crane Fei, 
await you.’ 


Seeing this opponent Lü Pu left the pursuit of Tsan and- 


~ engaged the new adversary. Fei fought with all his energies. 
_ They two were worthily matched and they exchanged half a uid: 


` hundred bouts with no advantage to either side. Then Kuan 
Yü rode out with his huge and Weighty moon-curved sword 
and attacked Lii Pu on the other fiank. The three steeds stood 
like the letter T and their ricers battered away at each other 


enemy. After a very few bouts Tsan turned and fled, Ii Pu i 


for nearly two score bouts, yet stiil. Lü Pu stood firm. Then © 


Liu Yüan-tê rode out to his brothers’ aid, his double sword 
raised ready to strike. .The steed with ithe flowing mane was 
- urged in at an angle and now Lü Pu had to contend with three ~ 
warriors at whom he struck one after another, and they at 
him, the flashing of the warriors’ weapons looking like’ the 
revolving lamps suspended at the new year. And the spec- 
tators gazed rapt with amazement at such a battle. 


But Lü Pu’s guard began to weaken and fatigue seized him. : 


` Looking hard in the face of Yitian-té he feigned a fierce thrust iis 


thus making him suddenly draw back. Then, lowering his 
halberd, Lü dashed through the angle thus opened and got 
away. 


But was it likely they would allow him to. escape? They 
whipped their steeds and followed hard. The men of the eight 
„armies cracked their throats with thunderous cheers and all 
dashed forward, pressing after Lü Pu as he made for the 
shelter of the Pass. And first among his pureuers were the 
three heroic brothers. 


An ancient poet has told of this famous fight in:these lines: 


The fateful day of Han came in the reigns of Huan and Ling, 
Their glory declined as the sun sinks ai tne close of day. 
Tung Cho, infamous minister of state, pulled down the youthful 
sovereign from his throne»: 
It is true Liu Hsieh was a weakling,-too timid for his times. 
Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao proclaimed abroad these wicked deeds, 
And the great lords, moved with anger, assembied their forces. 
In council met they ana chose as their oath-chief Yiian Shao, 
Pledged themselves to maintain the ruling house and tranquillity. 
Of the warriors of that time peerless Lü Pu was the boldest. 
“His valour and prowess are sung by all within the four seas. 
He clothed his body in silver armour like the scales of a dragon, 
pate On his head was a golden headdress, fastened with a massive pin, . 


Be co ee Sa ate ee 


About his waist a shaggy belt, the ele two wild benata heads 
with gripping jaws, i 
His flowing, broidered robe fluttered about his form, 

_ His swift courser bounded over the plain, a mighty wind following, 
His terrible halberd flashed in the sunlight, bright as a placid lake. 
Who dared face him as he rode forth to challenge? 

The bowels of the confederate lords were torn with fear and their 
hearts trembled within them. 

Then leaped forth Chang Fei, the valiant warrior of the north, 

Gripped in his mighty hand the long snakelike spear, 

His moustache bristled with anger, standing stiff like wire. 

His round eyes glared, lightning flashes darted from them. 

Neither quailed in the fight, but the issue was undecided. 

Kuan Yiin-ch‘ang stood out in front, his soul vexed within him, 

Black Dragon his sword shone white as hoar frost in the sunlight, 

His bright coloured fighting robe fluttered like butterfly wings, 

Demons and angels shrieked at the thunder of his horse hoofs, | 

In his eyes was fierce anger, a fire to be quenched only in blood. 

Next Yuian-té joined the battle, gripping his twin sword blades, 

The heavens themselves trembled at the majesty of his wrath. 

These three closely beset Lü Pu and long drawn out was the battle, 

Always he warded their blows, never faltering a moment. 


The noise of their shouting rose to the sky, and the earth y 


re-echoed it, i 
The heat of battle ranged to the frozen pole star. 
Worn out, feeling his strength fast ebbing, Lii Pu thought to. fee.. 
He glanced at the hills around and thither would fly for shelter, 
Then, reversing his halberd and lowering its lofty point, 
Hastily he fied, loosing himself from the battle; 

With head low. bent, he gave the rein to his courser, 
Turned his face away and fled to. Hulaokuan\. 


The three brothers maintained the pursuit to the Pass. le 


Looking up they saw an immense umbrella of black gauze 
fluttering in the west wind. 

“Certainly there is Tung Cho,’ cried Chang Fei. ‘What is 
the use of pursuing Lü Pu? Better far seize the chief rebel 
and so pluck up the evil by the roots.” 

And he whipped up his steed toward the Pass. = > 


To quel! rebellion seize the leader if you can; 
If you need a wondrous service then first find a wondrous man. 


The following chapters will unfold the result of the battle. 


CHAPTER VI. 


BURNING THE CAPITAL, TUNG CHO COMMITS AN ATROCITY: | 


HIDING THE SEAL, SUN CHIEN BREAKS FAITH. 


AUA Fei rode. hard up to the Pass but the detener.. sent 
down stones and arrows like rain so that he could not enter and 


_ he returned. ‘The eight lords all joined in felicitations to el ; 
em three heroes for their services and the story of victory was sent) \ 
=  to'Yüan Shao, who ordered Sun Chien to advance. 


Thereupon Sun with two trusty friends. went over to. the i 


camp of Yüan Shu. Tracing figures on the, ground with his 


staff Sun Chien said, “ Tung Cho and I had no personal quarrel. 


Yet now I have thrown myself into the battle regardless of | i 


consequences, exposed my person to the risk of wounds and 


fought bloody battles to their bitter end. And why? Thatī 


might be the means of ridding my country of a rebel and—for ` me 


- the private advantage of your family. Yet you, heeding the _ 


slanderous tongues of certain enemies, formerly withheld the — 


_ supplies absolutely necessary to me, and sol suffered defeat. 
How can you explain, General?” 


Yiian Shu, confused and frightened, had no word to keo wha 


He ordered the death of the slanderers to placate Sun. 


Then suddenly they told Sun, “Some officer has come riding mH 


down from the Pass to see you, General; he is in the camp.” 
Sun Chien therefore took his leave and returned to his own 


‘camp where he found the visitor was an officer, much beloved i 


of Tung Cho, named Li Ts‘ui. 
“Wherefore come you?” said Chien. 


He replied, “You are the one person for whom my master hae ai 
respect and admiration, and he sends me to arrange a matri- — 
monial alliance between the two families. He wishes that his 


daughter may become the wife of your son.’ 


“What! Tung Cho, that rebel and renegade, that subverter _ 


of the throne! Would that I could destroy his nine generations — k 


- as a thank-offering to the Empire! Think you I would be 
willing to have an alliance with such a family? I will not slay 
you as I ought, but go, and go quickly! . Yield the Pass and I 
may spare your lives. If you delay I will grind your bones to 
powder and make mincemeat of your flesh.” 

~ Li Ts‘ui threw his.arms over his head and ran out. He 
_ returned to his master and told him what a rude reception he 
had met with. Cho asked his adviser Li Ju how to reply to 
this and he said that as Lii Pu’s late defeat had somewhat 
blunted the edge of his desire for battle it would be well to’ 


Sen 


Pan trai 


56 — San Kwo, or 


return to the cage and remove the Emperor to Chale as 


the street boys had been lately singing :— 


“A Han on the west, a Han on the east. 
The deer will be safe in Ch‘ angan, poor beast.” 


Li continued “If you think out this couplet it applies to the 
present juncture. Half the first line refers to the founder of 
the dynasty, who became ruler in the western city, which was 
the capital during twelve reigns. The other half corresponds 
to Kuang-Wu who ruled from Loyang, the capital during 
twelve later reigns. The revolution of the heavens brings us 
to this moment and if the minister remove to Ch‘angan there 
will be no need for anxiety.” 

Tung Cho was exceedingly pleased and said, “Had you not 
spoken thus I should not have understood.” 


Then taking Lü Pu with him he started at once for the ~ 


capital. Here he called all the officials to a great council in 
the palace and addressed them thus :— 


“After two centuries of rule here the royal fortune has heen 


exhausted and I perceive that the aura of rule has migrated to 
Ch‘angan, whither I now desire to move une court. All you 
had better pack up for the journey.” ; 


The minister Yang Piao said, “I pray you reflect. Within ~ 
that city all is destruction. There i is no reason to renounce the 
ancestral temples and abandon the imperial tombs here. I. 


fear the people will be alarmed. It is easy to alarm them but 
difficult to pacify them.” Geena 
“Do you oppose the State plans?” said Cho angrily. 
Another official, Huang Yüan, supported his colleague, “In 
the rebellion of Wang Mang, in the days of Kéng Shih and Fan 
Ch‘ung of the Red Eyebrows, the city was burned and became 
a place of broken tiles. The inhabitants scattered all but a 
. few. It is wrong to abandon these palaces for a desert.” 
Tung Cho replied, “East of the Pass is full of sedition and all 
the Empire is in rebellion. The city of Ch‘angan is protected 
by Yaohan and very near Shénsi, whence can be easily brought 
building material. In a month or so palaces can be erected. 
So an end to your wild words!” 
Yet another raised a protest against disturbing the people 
but the tyrant overbore him also. 
“How can I stop to consider a few common people when my 
scheme affects the Empire?” - 
That day the three objectors were degraded to the rank of 
ordinary people. 


s Cho went out to get into his coach he met two other 
picor who made obeisance. They were the President, Chou `- 
- Pi, and the Captain of the City Gate, Wu Ch‘ing. Cho stopped . 


and asked them what they wanted. Said the former, “We 
venture to try to dissuade you from moving the capital to 
_Ch‘angan.” 


nA 


 Aiomante of the eres fingdoms | 57 | 


7 Cho replied, “They used to say you two were supporters of 
- Yiian Shao; now he has already turned traitor and you are of 


4 the same party.” 


And without more ado he bade his guards take both outside 


_ the city and put them to death. 


an Í 

The command to remove to the new capital immediately was 
issued. On the advice of Li Ju, who pointed out that money 
was short and the rich people of Loyang could be easily plun- 
dered and that it was a good occasion to remove the supporters 


of their opponents, Cho sent five companies out to plunder and 


slay. They captured very many wealthy folk and, having stuck 


-~ flags on their heads saying they were traitors and rebels, drove 


them out of the city and put them to death. Their property 


was all seized. 


The task of driving forth the inhabitants, some millions, was. 


_ given to two of Tung Cho’s creatures. They were sent off in 


bands of a hundred, each band between two parties of soldiers, 


- who urged them forward. Enormous numbers fell by the road 


side and died in the ditches, and the escort plundered the 


fugitives and defiled the women. A wail of sorrow arose to the 


very sky. The tyrant’s final orders as he left were to burn the 


-< whole city, houses, palaces and temples, and everything was 


devoured by the flames. ` The capital became but a patch of » 


$ scorched earth. 


Tung Cho sent Lil Pu to desecrate the tombs of the Emperors 


-` and their consorts for the jewels therein, and the common 


soldiers took the occasion to dig up the graves of officers and 
plunder the cemeteries of the wealthy. The spoil of the city, 
gold and silver, pearls and silks, and beautiful ornaments,. 
filled many carts and with these and the persons of the’ 
Emperor and his household Tung Cho moved off to the new 
capital. 

The city being thus abandoned the commander at Sstshui 
Pass evacuated that post of vantage, which Sun Chien at once 
occupied. The three brothers took Tigertrap Pass and the - 


confederate lords advanced. 


Sun Chien hastened to the late capital which was still in 
flames. When he arrived dense smoke hung all over it and 


‘spread for miles around. No living thing, not a fowl, or a dog, 


or a human being, remained.: Sun told off his men to extin- 
guish the fires and set out camping places for the confederate 
lords, 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao went to see the chief and said, “Tung has gone 
peace we ought to follow and attack without loss of time; why 
do you remain inactive?” . 

“All our colleagues are worn out and there is nothing to be 
gained bv attack,” said Yiian Shao. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao urged him to strike a blow for the moment was 


most propitious in the utter confusion that reigned, palaces 


G 
F 


y raria | 


58 à ey Sante, or 


burned, the ives: abducted, the whole. oi upset and no ` 


BAKI SUN PUN ye nee n 


A 


ee 


— one knowing whither to turn. But all the confederate lords — 
seemed of one mind and that mind was to postpone action. So 
they did nothing. However, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and his subordinates, 


with a full legion of soldiers, started in pursuit. 


The road to the new capital led through Jungyahg, and when | 


the cavalcade reached it the Prefect went to welcome Tung 


Cho. Li Ju said, “As. there is some danger of pursuit it would 


be well to order the Prefect of this place to lay an ambush 


ready to cut off the retreat of our pursuers when our army — t 


beats them off. That will teach any others. not to follow.” 


Then Lü Pu was ordered to command the rear guard. Very _ i 
soon they saw Ts‘ao Ts‘ao coming up and Lü Pu laughed at his ~ 


colleague’s foresight. He set out his men in fighting order. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rode forward crying, | “Rebels, abductors, drovers . 


of the people, where are you going?” 


Lü Pu replied, “Treacherous simpleton, what mad words. 


are these?” 


Then from Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army rode against him Hsiahou Tun af 
with his spear set and they two engaged. The combat had 


hardly begun when Li Ts’ui with a cohort came in from the 


left. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade Hsiahou Yiian meet this onslaught. — 
_However, on the other side appeared Kuo Ssi, against whom _ 


was sent Ts‘ao Jên. The onrush on three sides was too much ` 
to withstand and Lii Pu showed no signs of being vanquished, — 
so Hsiahou Tun had to retire to the main line. Thereupon Li — 
Pu’s mail-clad men attacked and completed the defeat. The 


beaten men turned toward Jungyang. 


They got as far as the foot of a bare hill in the second. watch, — 
-about nine in the evening, and the moon made it as light as day. — 
Here they halted to reform. Just as they were burying the — 


boilers to prepare a meal there arose a great noise of shouting 


on all sides and out came the men from the ambush fresh to — 


attack. 


Ts‘ao Ts ‘a0, Ae into a flurry, mounted and fled. Heran 


right in the way of the waiting Prefect.. Then he dashed off _ 


in another direction, but the Prefect shot an arrow after him 


which struck him in the shoulder. The arrow still in the — 


wound, he fled for his life. As he went over the hill two 
soldiers lying in wait among the grass suddenly dashed out and 


wounded his horse, which fell and rolled over, ‘and as its rider- i 


slipped from the saddle he was seized and made prisoner. 

Just then a horseman riding at full speed and whirling his 
sword came, up, cut down both the captors and rescued Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao. Tt was his brother Ts‘ao Hung. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “I am doomed, ae brother, go and save 


yourself.” 


“My lord, mount my horse quickly; I will go afoot,” said . 


Hung. 
“If those wretches come up, what then?” 


"romance of the pree Ringooms 


“The world can do without me, but abt without you, my 


ae brother, Fon 


“Tf I live I shall owe you my life,” said Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao. 


=- So he mounted. His brother tore off his own Renee a 
- gripped his sword and went on foot after the horse. Thus 


_ they proceeded till the fourth watch when they saw before 


- them a broad stream, and behind they still heard the shouts of ~ 


_ pursuers drawing nearer and nearer. 


“This is my fate;” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. “I am really doomed.” 


His brother helped him down from his horse. Then taking 


_ off his fighting robe he took the wounded man on his back and 


ahh) 
TS 


= sat down to rest under a precipice. Suddenly loud shouting was 


bi 


_ waded into the stream. When they reached the further side 
_ the pursuers had already gained the bank whence they shot 
arrows. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao all wet pushed on. 

Dawn was near. They went on another thirty li and then 


heard and a party of horse appeared. It was the Prefect of 


N who had forded the river higher up. Just at this 


~ moment Hsiahou Tun and his brother, with a half score men, 


came along. 


i “Hurt not my lord!” cried Raunon to the Prefect, who aay, 
- once rushed at him. But the combat was short. The Prefect 


_ speedily fell under a spear thrust and his men were driven off. 


Before long Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s other captains arrived. Sadness and 


3 joy mingled in the greetings. They gathered together the few 
-hundreds of men left and then returned to Honei. 


. £ the ‘Chienchang Hall of the palace. His men cleared away the © 


The story broke off leaving the confederate lords in their 
' various camps at Loyang. Sun Chien, after extinguishing the 
fires, camped within the walls, his own tent being set up near 


débris and closed the rifted tombs. The gates were barred. 
On the site of the Dynastic Temple he put up a mat shed 


containing three apartments, and here he begged the lords to. 


' meet and replace the sacred tablets, with solemn sacrifices and 


rayers. 

rÀ This ceremony over, the others left and Sun Chien returned 
to his camp. That night the stars and moon vied with each 
other in brightness. As Sun sat in the open air looking up at 
the heavens he noticed a mist spreading over the stars of the 
Constellation Draco. 


“The Emperor’s stars : are dulled,” said he with a sigh, “No 
-= wonder a rebellious minister disturbs the State, the people sit 
a ‘in dust and ashes, and the capital is a waste.” 


And his tears began to fall. Then a soldier pointing to the 


- south said, “There is a beam of coloured light rising from a ` 


well.” . 
He bade his men light torches and descend into the’ well. 


~ Soon they brought up the corpse of a woman, not in the least 


‘decayed although it had been there many days. She was 


dressed in palace clothing and from her neck hung an em- 


60 San kuo, or 


broidered bag. - Opening this a red box was found, with a 
golden lock, and when the box was opened they saw a jade 
seal, square in shape, an inch each way. On it were delicately 
engraved five dragons intertwined. One corner had been 
broken off and repaired with gold. There were eight charac- 
ters in the seal style of engraving which interpreted read, “I - 
have received the command from Heaven: may my time be 
always prosperous.’ 

Sun Chien showed this to Ch’éng P’u who at once recognised 
it as the hereditary seal of the Emperor. 


He said, “This seal has a history. In olden days one P‘ien ` 


Ho saw a phenix sitting on a certain stone at the foot of Ching 
Hill. He offered the stone at court. King Wên of Ch‘u split 
open the stone and found a piece of jade. Early in the Ts‘in 
dynasty a jade cutter made a seal from it and Li Sst: engraved 
the characters. Two years later it was thrown overboard in 
a terrific storm on the Tungt‘ing Lake as a propitiatory offer- 
ing, and the storm immediately ceased. Ten years later again, 
when the Emperor was making a progress and had reached 
Huaying, an old man by the road side handed a seal to one of 
the attendants saying, “This is now restored to the ancestral 
dragon,” and had then disappeared. Thus the jewel returned 
to Ts‘in. The next year Emperor Shé died. 

“Later Tzu-ying presented the seal to the founder of the 
Han dynasty. In Wang Mang’s rebellion the Emperor struck 
two of the rebels with the seal and broke off a corner, which 
was repaired with gold. Kuang-Wu got possession of it at 
Iyang and it has been regularly bequeathed thereafter. I 
heard it had been lost during the trouble in the palace when 
‘The Ten’ hurried off the Emperor. It was missed on His 
Majesty’s return. Now my lord has it and certainly will come 
to the imperial dignity. But you must not remain here. 
Quickly go east where you can lay plans for the accomplish- 
ment of the great design.” 

“Your words exactly accord with my thoughts,” said Sun 


Chien., “Tomorrow I will make an excuse that I am unwell | 


and get away.’ 

The soldiers were told to keep the discovery a secret. But 
who could guess that one among them was a compatriot of the 
elected chief of the confederacy? He thought this might be 
` of great advantage to him so he stole away out of the camp and 
betrayed his master. He received a liberal reward and Yiian 
Shao kept him in his own camp. So when Sun Chien came to 
take leave saying “I am rather unwell and wish to return to 
Changsha.” Shao laughed saying “I know what you are suffer- 
ing from; it is called the Hereditary Seal!” 

This was a shock to Sun Chien and he paled but he said, 
“Whence ae words?” 

Shao said, “The armies were raised for the good of the State 
and to relieve it from oppression. The seal is State property 


Romante of the Three Kingdoms 61 


and since you have got hold of it you should publicly hand it 
_ over to me as chief. When Tung Cho has been slain it must 


go back to the government. What do you mean by concealing 


it and going away?” 


“How could the seal get into my hands?” 

“Where is the article out of the well?” 

“I have it not: why harass me thus?” 

“Quickly produce it, or it will be the worse for you.” 

Sun Chien pointing toward the heavens as an oath said, “If 
I have this jewel and am hiding it myself may my end be 
unhappy and my death violent !”? 
< The lords all said, “After an oath like this we think he 


-= cannot have it.” 


Then Shao called out his informant. “When you pulled that 
thing out of the well, was this man there?” asked he of Sun. 
Sun Chien’s anger burst forth and he sprang forward to kill 


‘the man. The chief also drew his sword saying “You touch 
_ that soldier and it is an insult to me.” 


In a moment on all sides swords flew from their scabbards. 
But the confusion was stayed by the efforts of the others and 
Sun Chien left the assembly. Soon he broke up his camp and 


- marched to his own place. 


The chief was not satisfied. He wrote to Chingchou and 
sent the letter by a trusty hand to tell the governor to stop `` 
Sun Chien and take away the seal. 

Just after this came the news of the defeat and misfortune 
of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and when he was coming home Shao sent out to 
welcome him and conduct him into camp. ‘They also prepared 
a feast to console him. During the feast Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said 


sadly, “My object was for the public good and all you gentle- 


men nobly supported me. My plan was to get Yiian Shu with 
his Honei men to approach Méngching and Suantsao while the 
others of you held Ch‘éng-kao and took possession of the 


- granaries and guarded Taku, and so controlled the points of 
- vantage. Yiian Shao was to occupy Tanshi and go into 


- Wukuan to help the three supports, all were to fortify their 


. positions and not fight. Advantage lay in an uncertain mili- 


tary force showing the Empire’s possibilities of dealing with 
the rebellion. Victory would have been ours at once. But 


| then came delays and doubts and inaction and the confidence 


of the people was lost and I am ashamed.” 
No reply was possible and the guests dispersed. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


- saw that the others mistrusted him and in his heart knew that 


nothing could be accomplished, so he led off his force to 


> Yangchou. 


Then Kungsun Tsan said to the three brothers, “This Yiian 
Shao is an incapable and things will go agley. We had better 


„go too.” 


er SUN ZUN an Ruo 


` So he broke camp and went north. At P‘ingyiian he left 


_ Liu Pei in command and went to strengthen his own Pose 


and refresh his men. 

The Prefect of Yenchou wished to borrow grain of the 
Prefect of Tungchun. Being denied he attacked the camp,- 
killed the leader and took over all his men. Yüan Shao seeing | 
the confederacy breaking up also marched away and went east. 

Now the Governor of Chingchou, Liu Piao, was a scion of 
the imperial house. As a young man he had made friends 
with many famous persons and he and his companions were — 
called the Eight Dilettanti. The other seven were Ch‘én 


Hsiang, Fan P‘ang, K‘ung Yu, Fan K‘ang, T‘an Fu, Chang 


Chien and Ts‘én Ching. He was friends with ali these. He 
had three famous men who helped him in the government of 
his district. They were K‘uai Liang, K‘uai Yueh and Ts‘ai 
Mao. 
When the letter detailing the fault of Sun Chien arrived the 
two K‘uai and Ts‘ai were sent with a legion of soldiers to bar - 
the way. When Sun Chien drew near the force was arranged 
in fighting order and the leaders were in the front. 

“Why are you thus barring the road with armed men?” 
asked Sun. ; 

“Why do you, a minister of Han, secrete the Emperor’s 
special seal? Leave it with me at once and you go free,” said- 
K‘uai Yüeh. | Ase 

Sun Chien angrily. ordered out a leader Huang Kai, who 
exchanged a few bouts with Ts‘ao Mao and presently dealt him ` 
a blow with the iron whip just over the heart. Mao turned his | 
steed and fled and Sun Chien got through with a sudden rush. © 

However, there arose the sound of gongs and drums on the 
hills behind and there was Prefect Liu in person with a large 
army. Sun Chien rode straight up to him and bowing low — 
spoke thus. “Why did you, on the faith of a letter from Ytian 
Shao, try to coerce the chief of a neighbouring district?” `. 

“You have concealed the State jewel and I want you to 
restore it,” was Liu’s reply. 

“If I have this thing may I die a violent death!” 

“If you want me to believe you let me search your baggage.” 

“What force have you that you dare come to flout me thus?” 

And only the Prefect’s prompt retirement prevented a battle. 

Sun Chien proceeded on his way. But from the rear of the 
second hill an ambush suddenly discovered itself and K‘uai 
and Ts‘ai were still following. Sun Chien seemed entirely © 
hemmed in. 

What doth it advantage a man to hold the imperial seal if 
its possession lead to strife? 

How Sun Chien got clear of the difficulty will ie a be 

told. 


| CHAPTER VII. 
| -YUAN SHAO FIGHTS WITH KUNGSUN TSAN AT P‘ANHO: 
SUN CHIEN ATTACKS Liu Piao. 
Py the close of the last, chapter Sun Chien was surrounded. 


_ However he eventually fought his way through, though with — ek ree 


the loss of three of his best leaders and more than half his men- 


_ and he returned to Chiangtung. As te he and Liu 
- Piao were open enemies. 
_ Ytian Shao was in Honei. Being ort of supplies He sent 
’ to borrow from Ichou, whence he obtained the wherewithal to 
=- support his army. Then his adviser, Féng Chi, said to him, 
- “You are really the strongest power here about, why then 


depend upon another for food? Ichou is rich and wide; why : i ve 


not seize it?” 

“I have no good plan,” tepiied Vian: 

“You could secretly send a letter to Kungsun Tsan to atack, 
~ promising him your support. The Prefect Han Fu being in- 


. capable must ask you. to take over a country and yoy will. 


$ - get it without lifting a finger.” 
‘ So the letter was sent, and when Kimbei Tsan saw thedain 


`- the proposal to make a joint attack and divide the territory, ` 


he agreed to give his help. In the meantime Yiian Shao had 
sent to warn Han Fu of his danger. Han sought advice from 
_ Hsiin Shén and Hsin P‘ing. The former said that if Kungsun 
came to attack them they could not stand against him, 
= especially. if he had the help of Liu and Chang. So he coun- 

_ selled getting aid from their powerful neighbour. “Yiian 


= Pén-ch‘u is bolder than most and he has many able and famous 


leaders under him. You cannot. do better than ask him to 


-assist in administering this district. He will certainly treat . 


MG you with generosity and you need have no fear from Kungsun 
Tsan.” 
The Prefect agreed and sent a message to Yiian Shao. But 


the commandant of the palace, Keng Wu, remonstrated with 


his master saying, “‘Ytian Shao is a needy. man with a hungry 
army and as dependent on us for existence as an infant in arms 
on its mother. Stop the flow of milk and the infant dies. 
= Why should you hand the district over to him? It is nothing 
Jess than letting a tiger into the sheepfold.” 

_ Han Fu replied, “I am one of the clients of the Yüan family 
~ and I know the abilities of Pén-ch‘u. Why are you all so 
jealous? The ancients counselled yielding to the sage.” 


64 San Kuo, or 


Kéng Wu sighed, “Ichou is lost!” said he. 


When the news got abroad two score of officers of Ichou left 


their employment and the city. However Kêng and Kuan hid 
in the suburbs to await the arrival of Yüan Shao. 

They had not long to wait. Soon Yüan Shao with his 
soldiers came and the two men tried to assassinate him. © This 
attempt failed. Yen Liang killed one of them and Wên Ch‘ou'! 
the other. Thus both died and the object of their hatred 
entered the prefecture. 

His first act was to confer on Han Fu a high sounding title, 
but the administration was entrusted to four of his own con- 
fidants who speedily deprived the Prefect of all power. Full 
of chagrin Han soon abandoned all, even his family, and took 
refuge with the Prefect of Ch‘nliu. 

Hearing of Shao’s invasion Kungsun Tsan sent his brother, 
Yüeh, to see the usurper and demand his share of the district. 
The brother was sent back to request Kungsun himself to come, 
but on the homeward road he was killed by assassins .who 
loudly proclaimed they belonged to the Minister, Tung Cho. 
Those of his followers who escaped carried the news to their 
late master’s brother. 

Kungsun Tsan was very angry and said, “He prevailed on 
me to attack and now he has taken possession. Also he 


pretends the murderers of my brother were not his men. Shall. 


I not avenge my brother’s injury?” 

Then he brought up all his force to the attack.. Yiian sent 
out his army and they met at P‘anho. They halted on opposite 
sides of a stream, over which was a bridge. Kungsun Tsan 
took his station on the bridge and cried to his enemy, 
“Renegade, how dared you mislead me?” 

Yiian rode to his end of the bridge and, pointing at Kungsun 
san, replied, “Han Fu yielded place to me because he was 
unequal to the rule. What concern is it of yours?” 


Kungsun replied, “Formerly you were regarded as loyal | 


and public spirited and we chose you chief of the confederacy. 
‘Now your deeds prove you cruel and base, wolf-hearted and 
currish in behaviour. How can you look the world in the 
face?” 

“Who will capture him?” cried Yüan in a rage. : 

At once Wên Ch‘ou rode out with his spear set. Kungsun 
Tsan rode down the bridge to the enemy’s side, where the two 
engaged. Half a score bouts showed Tsan he had met his 
master so he drew off. The enemy came on. Tsan took refuge 


within his formation, but Wên Ch‘ou cut his way in and rode © 


this way and that, slaying right and left. The four best of 
Tsan’s captains offered joint battle, but one fell under the first 


stroke of the doughty warrior and the other three fled, Wén — 


Ch‘ou following clear through to the rear of the army. Kung- 


+. a 
ak 


fomance of the Three Kingdoms 65 


F sun made for the mountains. Wên Ch‘ou forced his horse to 


its utmost pace crying hoarsely, “Down! Dismount and 
surrender.” 
= Kungsun fled for life. His bow and quiver dropped from 
his shoulders, his helmet fell off and his hair streamed straight 
behind him as he rode in and out between the sloping hills. 
Then his steed stumbled and he was thrown, rolling over and 
_ over to the foot of the slope. 
Wên Ch‘ou was now very near and poising his spear for the 
thrust. Then suddenly came out from.the shelter of a grassy 
mound on the left a leader of youthful mien, but sitting his 
steed bravely and holding a sturdy spear. He rode directly at 
Wen Ch‘ou and Kungsun crawled up the slope to look on. 

The new warrior was of middle height with bushy eyebrows 
and large eyes, a broad face and a heavy jowl, a youth of com- 
manding presence. The two exchanged some fifty bouts and 

yet neither had the advantage. Then Kungsun’s rescue force 
came along and Wén Ch‘ou turned and rode away. The youth 
did not pursue. 
-= Kungsun Tsan hurried down the hill and asked the young 
fellow who he was. 

He bowed low and replied that his name was Chao Yiin, or 
Tzu-lung, and he was of Chéngting. 

“I first served Ytian Shao, but when I saw that he was dis- 
loyal to his prince and careless of the welfare of the people I 
left him and I was on my way to offer service to you. This 
meeting in this place is most unexpected.” 

Kungsun was very pleased and the two went together to the 
camp, where they at once busied themselves with preparations 
for a new battle. ; 

Next day Kungsun prepared for fight by dividing his army 

. into two portions, like the wings of a bird. He had five thou- 
sand cavalry, nearly all mounted on white horses and because 
he had formerly seen service against the frontier tribes, the 
Ch'iang (Ouigours) where he always placed his white horses 
in the van of his army, he had won the sobriquet of General of 


Ge the White Horse. The tribes held him so much in fear that 


- they always fled as soon as the white horses appeared. 

On Yiian Shao’s side Yen Liang and Wên Ch‘ou were leaders 
of the van. Each had a company of archers and crossbowmen. 
They were set out half on either side, those on the left to shoot 

at Kungsun Tsan’s right and those on the right to shoot at his 
left. In the centre was Ch‘ii I with a small company of bow- 

- men and a legion and a half of foot. The chief took command 
of the reserve force in the rear. 
` In this fight Kungsun Tsan employed his new adherent Chao 
Yiin for the first time and, as he did not feel assured of his 
good faith, put him in command of a company at the rear. 
The van-leader was Yen Kang and Kungsun himself commanded 


e 


CAN ian es 
ya 


66. an kuo, or 


the centre. He took his place on Ce on the Paes 


word “General” in gold embroidery. 


_ beside an enormous red standard on which was displayed the 


From shén (T a.m.—9 a.m.) till ssă (9 a.m.—11 a.m.) the 


drums rolled for the attack, but Ytian’s army made no move. 


Ch‘ti I made his bowmen hide under their shields. They heard — 
the roar of explosions, the whistling of arrows and the rattle _ 
of the drums, as Yen Kang approached from the other side, 


but Ch‘ti I and his men lay closer than ever and never stirred. 


They waited till Yen Kang had got close on them and then, as. 
the sound of a bomb rent the air, the whole company, eight — 


hundred men, let fly their arrows in a cloud. Yen Kang was 


quite taken aback and would have retired, but Ch‘ti I rode i 
furiously toward him, whirled up his sword and cut him down. | 


‘So Kungsun’s men lost that battle. The two wings that should 


have come to the rescue were kept back by the bowmen under p 
Yen Liang and Wên Ch‘ou and Yiian’s men advanced right up — 


to the bridge. Then Ch‘ti I rode forward, slew the standard . 
bearer and hacked through the staff of the embroidered banner. © 
Seeing this Kungsun Tsan turned his steed and galloped away. — 

Ch‘ii I followed. But just as he caught up the fugitive there — 
came prancing forth Chao Yiin, who rode directly at him with © 


‘spear ready to strike. After a few passes the pursuer was. 


i s laid in the dust. Then Chao Yün attacked the soldiers and 


turned the tide. Plunging forward on this side, dashing in ` 
on that, he went through as if there were no antagonists and, 
seeing this, Kungsun Tsan turned and came again into the ; 


fight. The final victory was on his side. 


From the men sent to find out how the battle went Tian 


Shao heard the good news of Ch‘ii I’s success in slaying the 


standard bearer, capturing the flag and his’ pursuit. So he © 


_ took no further care but rode out with his captains and a few | 
- guards to look on at the defeated enemy and enjoy his victory. 


“Ha ha!” he laughed. “The poor fool! He is an incapable.” 
But even as he spoke he saw in front the redoubtable Chao 


Yim. His guards hastened to prepare their bows, but before — 
they could shoot Chao with a few followers was in their midst i 


and men were falling before him wherever he went. The — 
others fled. Kungsun Tsan’s army then pareren round and: - 


| i hemmed. in Yüan Shao. 


Ten Fêng then said to his master, “Sir, take refuge i in this. 


empty building here.” 


But. Yiian dashed his helmet to the ground, erying “The ; 


brave man rather faces death in the batie than seeks safety 
behind a wall!” w 7 


This bold speech gave new courage to his men who now 


fought desperately and with such success that Chao Yün could — 
nowhere force his way in. Shao was soon reinforced by the © 


arrival of his main body and Yen Liang, so that Chao Yiin 


aie 


" Hiomance of the Three Kingdoms i i. : ore 67 


Soula only just get his master safe out of the press. When 
clear they both returned to the bridge. » But Yiian’s men still 


came on and fought their way across the. bridge, forcing a 
multitudes of their adversaries into the Pear where many, Pe 
` were. drowned. 


Yitan was leading in person and his men still Mavaneed: \But 


not very far, for soon a great shouting was heard behind some 


hills, whence suddenly burst out a body of men led by the ren 


brothers: ; 
At P‘ingyiian they had heard ae the struggle Delmee a 


protector and his enemy, Yiian Shao, and had at once set out. 
_ to help. Now the three riders, each with his peculiar weapon, | x 
_ flew straight at Yitan, who was so frightened that his soul — 
seemed to leave his body and fly beyond the confines of heaven. 

His sword fell from his hand and he fled for his life. He was 


_ chased across the bridge when Kungsun Tsan called i in his men 


come to our help, we should have been in very bad case. 


~- made known their errand. Kungsun sent letters to his adver- 


and they returned to camp. 


= 


After the usual greetings Kungsun said, “Tf you had. not t ue 


90k 


Yiian-té and Chao Yiin were made acquainted with each 
other and a warm affection sprang up from the very first so` 


; ee they were always together. 


paan n had lost that battle and Kungsun Woah: would not risk | 
anot He strengthened his defences and the armies lay — 
inactive for over a month. In the meantime news of the 


fighting had reached the capital and Tung Cho was told. 


His adviser, Li Ju, went to see his master and said, “The — 
two active warriors of to-day are Yiian Shao and Kungsun 


‘Tsan, who are at grips at P‘anho. Pretend you have a com- 


mand to make peace between them and both will support you 


-out of gratitude for your intervention.” 


“Good!” said Tung Cho. So he sent a Grand Preceptor and 
a Court Chamberlain on the mission. When these men were 
arriving Yiian sent. out to welcome them a hundred li from his 
headquarters and received the command with the greatest — 
respect. Then the two officers went to Kungsun Tsan and 


` sary proposing friendship. The two emissaries returned to 


report their task accomplished. Kungsun drew off his army. 
He also sent up a memorial eulogising Liu Ytian-té, une was 
raised in rank. 

The farewell between Liu Pei and Chao Yün was. aifentine.: 
They held each other’s hands a long time, their eyes streaming 


with tears, and could not tear themselves apart. 


Chao Yün said with a sob, “T used to think Kungsun noble, - ea 
‘put I see now that he is no different from ‘Yiian. ‘They are 


both alike.” 
“But you are in his service, and we Saat surely meet again.” 


said Yiian-té.. 


68 - an kuo, or 
5 Both men wept freely as they separated. mae 
Now Ytian Shu, hearing that his brother had come into 
- Ichou, sent to beg a thousand horses. The request was refused 
_.and enmity sprang up between the brothers. He also sent to 
Chingchow to borrow grain, which Liu Piao would not send. 
In his resentment he wrote to Sun Chien trying to get him to 
attack Liu Piao. The letter ran like this :— . 

“When Liu Piao stopped you on your way home it was at the 
instigation of my brother. Now the same two have planned 
to fall upon your district, wherefore you should at once strike 
at Liu Piao. I will capture my brother for you and both 
resentments will be appeased. You will get Chingchow and I 
‘shall have Ichou.” 

“I cannot bear Liu Piao,” said Sun Chien as he finished read- - 
ing this letter. “He certainly did bar my way home and I may 
wait many years for my revenge if I let slip this chance.” 

- He called a council. 

“You may not trust Yüan Shu; he is very deceitful,” said 
Ch‘eng P‘u. 

-~ “T want revenge on my own part; what care I for his help? ” 
said Chien. 

He despatched Huang Kai to prepare a river fleet, arm and 
provision them. Some craft were to take horses on board. 
The force soon set out. 

News of these preparations came to Liu Piao and he hastily 
summoned his advisers and warriors. K‘uai Liang told him 
to be free from anxiety, and said, “Put Huang Tsu at the head 
of the Chianghsia army to make the first attack and you, Sir, 
support him. Let Sun Chien come ‘riding the rivers and strad- 
dling the lakes;’ what can he do?” 

So Huang Tsu was bidden to prepare to march and a great 
army was assembled. 

Here it may be said that Sun Chien had four sons, all the 
issue of his wife who was of the Wu family. Their names 
were Ts‘é (Po-fu), Ch‘tian (Chung-mou), I (Shu-pi) and 
K‘uang (Chi-tso). His wife’s sister was his second wife, and 
she bore him a son and daughter, the former called Lang 
(Tsao-an), the latter Jén. He had also adopted a son from 
the Yü family named Shao (Kung-li). And he had a younger 
brother named Ching (Yu-t‘ai). en 

As Sun Chien was leaving on this expedition his brother with. 
all his sons stood near his steed and dissuaded him, saying, 
“Tung Cho is the real ruler of the State for the Emperor is a 
weakling. The whole country is in rebellion, every one is 
scrambling for territory. Our district is comparatively peace- 
ful and it is wrong to begin a war merely for the sake of a 
little resentment. I pray you, brother, to think before you 
start.” Wohi ER i 


4 Romance o ae tthe bree Hingdoms 


Chien replied, “Brother, say no more. I desire to make my. ap 
atran othe felt everywhere and shall I not avenge my inj uries? PREET 
“Then father, if you must go, let me accompany you, ’ said 
the eldest son. i 
His request was granted, and father and son embarked Bs 
go to ravage Fanch‘éng. — 
Now Huang Tsu had placed archers and procdbownen along 
the river bank. When the ships approached a flight of arrows 
met them. Sun ordered his men to remain under cover in the 
_ ships, which then sailed to and fro drawing the fire for three 
days. Several times a landing was tried, but showers of. 
arrows repulsed each attempt. At last the arrows of the i 
defenders were all shot away and Sun, who collected them, 
found he had many myriads. Then with a fair wind Sun’ Sih 
men shot them back at the enemy. Those on the bank were. 
thrown into great disorder and retired. The army then landed © 
and two divisions set out for Huang Tsu’s camp along di vent 
roads. Between them marched Han Tang and under this 
triple attack Huang Tsu was worsted. “He left Fanch‘éng and | 
hastened to Téngch‘éng. 
Leaving the ships under the command of Huang Kai, Sun 
- led the pursuing force. Huang Tsu came out of his city and — 
drew up for battle in the open country. When Sun had dis- : 
posed his army he rode out to the standard. ‘His son, clad in } 
armour, placed himself beside his father. | ee, 
Huang Tsu rode out with two captains Chang Hu i Chen D 
$Shéng. Flourishing his whip, the chief abused his enemy, 
“You swarm of rebels from Chiangtung, why do you invade : ia 
_ the land of a scion of the ruling house?” 
Chang Hu challenged to combat and Han Tang went out to _ 
accept. The two champions fought two score bouts and then 
Ch‘én Shéng, seeing his fellow captain becoming: exhausted, © 
rode to his aid. Sun Chien saw him coming, laid aside his. 
spear, reached for his bow and shot an arrow wounding Chén ‘ 
Shéng in the face. He fell from his horse. Panic seized upon’ | 
Chang at the fall of his comrade and he could no longer defend. 
himself. Then Han Tang with a slash of his sword clove his 
skull in twain. ‘Se 
_ Both having fallen, Ch‘éng Pu galloped. up to make prisoner 
of Huang Tsu, who threw off his helmet, slipped from his steed — 
and mingled for safety among his men. Sun Chien led on the — 
attack and drove the enemy to the Han water, where he ordered $ 
Huang Kai to make an immediate attack on Hanchiang. AAO 
Huang Tsu led his defeated men back and told Liu Piao they 
were no match for Sun Chien. K‘uai Liang was called in to 
advise and he said, “Our newly defeated men have no heart 
for fighting now. Therefore we must fortify our position, 
while we seek help from Yüan REA: Then we can extricate 
ourselves.” 


i) 


MIDE ae Bait aaa OF 


Aone Bind move,” said Ts‘ai Mao. “The enemy is at the 
Save gates; shall we fold our hands and wait to be slain? Give 
‘me men and I will go out and fight to the finish.” 
So he was placed in command of a legion and went out to 
“ ic Hsien hills where he drew up his battle line. ‘Sun Ts‘é 
led the invaders, now flushed with success. When Ts‘ai ap- 
X proached, Sun Chien looked at him and said, “He is brother- 
in-law to Liu Piao; who will capture him?” 
Ch‘eng P‘u set his supple: spear and rode out. After a few 
_ bouts Ts‘ai Mao turned and fled. The Suns smote him till corp- . 
ses filled the country-side and he took refuge in Hsiangyang. 
K‘uai Yen said, “Ts‘ai ought to be put to death by military” 
law. This defeat was due to his obstinacy.” But Liu Piao 
"was unwilling to punish the brother of his newly wedded wife. . 
Sun Chien surrounded Hsiangyang and assailed the walls 
daily. One day a fierce gale sprang up and the pole bearing. 
- his standard was broken. 
f “Very inauspicious!’ said Han Tang. “We agh to go 
; back. e Se 
$ His lord said, “I have won every battle and the city i is on the - 
-` point of falling. Shall I return because’ the wind breaks a 
flagstaff?” ENA 
i He flouted the advice and attacked the walls still more: My 
vigorously. 
Within the gee they had seen an omen. It was told Liu 


` the city, and they had calculated that it inferred the fall of 
_ their enemy. Piao was advised to seek help from Yiian Shao. 
= So he wrote. But who would undertake to fight his way | 
- through with the letter? One Lü Kung, a warrior of great — 
_ strength, offered himself for this service. K‘uai Liang said, 

. “Jf you undertake this service listen to my advice. You will 
have five hundred men; choose good bowmen. Dash through 
~ the enemy’s formation and make for Hsien Hill.. You will be 
-= pursued, but send a hundred men up the hill to prepare large 
=- stones and place a hundred archers in ambush in the woods. 

_ These are not to flee from the pursuers but to beguile them 
-along devious ways round to the place where the boulders have. 
been prepared. There stones will be rolled down and arrows 
shot. If you succeed, fire off a series of bombs as a signal 
` and the men in the city will come out to help. If you are not 
~ pursued get away as fast as possible. To-night will be suit- 
= able as there is very little moon. Start at dusk.” 7 
Lü Kung, having received these directions, prepared his 
= force to carry them out. As soon as day began to close in he 
- went quietly out at the east gate. Sun Chien was in his tent 
_ when he heard shouting and at once mounted and rode out with 
_ thirty men to discover the cause. Lü Kung’s men had already 
hidden themselves in the thick woods. Chien rode ahead of 


Piao that a great star had fallen into the wild country without — 


pas fiomance af the Three Lingdoms 


“his escort and soon he found? himself nine shed close to ‘he 

enemy. He called out to them to halt. Lü at once turned.. 
| back and came as if to fight. But they had only exchanged a. 
| _ single pass when he again fled, taking the road among the hills. 


Sun followed but soon lost sight Of his fne. np i 


Sun turned up the hill. Then the gongs clanged and dowa 


‘the hills fell showers of stones, while from among the trees 
the arrows flew in clouds. Sun was hit by several arrows and 


a huge stone crushed in his head. Both he and his steed were 


killed.. And so his life ended at the age of thirty seven. 


‘His escort was overpowered and every man: of them slain.. 


“Then Lü let off a series of bombs, the sign of success, as agreed. 


_ At this signal three armies came out of the city and fell upon’ 


the Chiangtung men, throwing them into the utmost confusion. 
“When Huang Kai heard the sound, of battle he led up the 


“men from the ships.. He met Huang Tsu and took him — 


prisoner after a brief fight. 


Ch‘éng P‘u set out to bear the ead news to Sun Tsé ê. While 


he was seeking. a way out he came across Lü Kung. » He at 
once put his horse at full speed and engaged him. After a few 
bouts Lü went down under a spear thrust. The battle became 


general and continued till daylight broke, when each drew off 
his army. Liu Piao withdrew into the city and when Sun Ts‘ 


- returned to the river he heard that his father had perished i in 


the fight, and his body had been carried within the enemy’s 
<- walls.. He uttered a great cry and the army joined him with 


wailing and tears. 
“How can I return home leaving my father’s Cornge with 
_ them?” cried Sun Ts‘é. 


- Huang, Kai said, “We have Huang Tsu as our prisoner.. Let 


one enter the city. and discuss peace, giving up our prisoner 
- for our lord’s body.” . 


He had barely finished speaking, a ee Huang K‘ai offered 


himself as messenger saying he was an old friend of Liu Piao. 
So he went and peace was discussed. Liu Piao told him the 
body was already laid in a coffin and ready to be delivered as 


soon as Huang Tsu returned. “Let us both cease fighting and 


pever again invade each other’s district,’’ said he. j 
Huan Kʻai thanked him and took his leave. But as ie went 


-down the steps K‘uai Liang suddenly broke in, saying, “No, 


‘No! Let me speak and I will see to it that not a single breast- 


plate returns. I pray you. first put es man to death and then ci 


employ my means.” 


Pursuing his enemy, Sun Chien as l i B 
Even on a peaceful mission Huang Kai is threatened. 


The fate of a, ambassador will be disclosed | in a later 
chapter 


rh 
s 


CHAPTER VI.  ' ee 


GOVERNOR WANG PREPARES THE “‘CHAIN” SCHEME: ° 
TUNG CHO’S RAGES AT THE FENGI PAVILION. 


Eiig is what K‘uai Liang said, “Sun Chien is now. gone and 
his sons are but youths. Seize this moment of weakness to 
break into Chiangtung and it is yours in one beat of the drum. 
If you return the corpse and make peace, you give them time 
to grow powerful and evil will ensue to this district.” 

“How can I leave Huang Tsu in their hands?” said the — 
Prefect. 

“Why not sacrifice this blundering warrior for a district??? 

“But he is my dear friend and to abandon him is wrong.” 

So Huan K‘ai was allowed to.return to his own side with 
the understanding that Sun Chien’s dead body should be given 
in exchange. Sun Ts‘é freed his prisoner, brought away his. 
father’s coffin and the fighting ceased. Sun Chien was inter- 
red in the border of Chüa and when the ceremonies were over 
Sun Ts‘é led his army home again. 

In his district Sun Ts‘é set himself to the task of ruling well. 
He invited to his side men of wisdom and valour and so bore 
himself that all the best and bravest of the country gathered 
about him. 

But this part of his story will not be told here. Tung Cho 
at the capital, when he heard of the death of the turbulent 
prefect, said, “An evil that pressed hard upon my heart has. 
been removed.” He asked what sons he had left and when 
they told him the eldest was but seventeen he dismissed all 
anxiety from his thoughts. 

From this time forward his arrogance and domineering 
spirit waxed worse and worse. He styled himself Shang Fu 
or “Imperial Rector,” a name full of honour, and in all his 
behaviour aped imperial state. He created his younger brother 
a marquis and made him Generalissimo of the Left. A nephew 
was placed- in command of the Palace guards and everyone of 
his clan, young or old, was ennobled. At some distance from 
the capital he laid out a city, an exact replica of Ch‘angan, with 
its palaces, granaries, treasuries and magazines, and employed 
a quarter of a million people to build it. Here he accumulated ~ 
supplies sufficient for twenty years. He selected eight hundred 
of the most beautiful maidens and sent them to dweil in his’ 
new city® The stores of wealth in every form were incalculable. 


Romance of the Three Yiingdoms ~ 3 


All his family and retainers found quarters in this new city 
named Meiwu. 
= Tung Cho visited his city at intervals of a month or so and 
=- every visit was like an imperial progress, with booths by the 
_ roadside to refresh the officials and courtiers who AURREA 
him to the. Héngmén and saw him start. 

On one occasion he spread a great feast for all those. as- 
sembled to witness his departure and while it was in progress 


` there arrived a large number of malcontents from the north 


who had voluntarily surrendered. The tyrant had them 
brought before him as he sat at table and meted out to them 
wanton cruelties. The hands of this one were lopped off, the 
feet of that; one had his eyes gouged out; another lost his 
tongue. Some were boiled to death. Shrieks of agony arose 
to the very heavens and the courtiers were faint with terror, 
_ but the author of the misery ate and drank, chatted and smiled 
as if nothing was going on. 

Another day Tung Cho was presiding at a great gathering 
of officers who were seated:in two long rows. After the wine 
had gone up and down several times Lii Pu entered and 


a whispered a few words in his master’s ear. Cho smiled and 


`. said, “He was always so. Take Chang Wên outside.” The 
others all turned pale. In a little time a serving man brought 
the head of their fellow guest on a red dish and showed it to 
their host. They nearly died with fright. 

- “Do not fear,” said Cho smiling. “He was in league with 
Yiian Shu to assassinate me. A letter he wrote fell by mistake 
-into the hands of my son so I have had him put to death. You 
gentlemen, who have no reason, need have no fear.” 

‘The officials hastened to disperse. One of them, Governor 
Wang Yiin, who had witnessed all this, returned to his palace 
very pensive and much distressed. The same evening, a bright 
moonlight night, he took his staff and went strolling in his 
private garden. Standing near one of the creeper trellises 
he gazed up at the sky and the tears rolled down his cheeks. 
Suddenly he heard a rustle in the peony pavilion and.some 
one sighing deeply. Stealthily creeping near he saw there. 
one of the household singing girls named POEN or Sable 

Cicada. 

This maiden had been brought up in his R where she 
had been taught to sing and dance. She was then just 
bursting into womanhood, a pretty and clever girl whom Wang | 
Yiin regarded more as a daughter than a dependant. 

After listening for some time he suddenly called out, “What 
mischief are you up to there, you naughty girl?” 

The maiden dropped on her knees in terror, “Would thy 
unworthy handmaid dare to do anything wrong?” said she. 
~ “Then what are you sighing about out here in the darkness?” 

“May thy handmaid speak from the bottom of her heart?” 


A P ; 


ps EA Ny ot ae 
we iy ESN 
SEN K 


74 San Huo, or et oa 


“Tell me the whole truth; do not conceal anything.” 

_. And the girl said, “Thy handmaid has been the recipient of i 
bountiful kindness. She has been taught to sing and dance A 
and been treated so kindly. that were she torn in pieces for 
her lord’s sake, it would not repay a thousandth part. She 
has noticed lately that her lord’s brows have been knit. in — 
distress and knows it is on account of the State troubles. But 
she has not dared to ask. This evening he seemed more sad 
than ever and she was miserable on her lord’s account. But 
she did not know she would be seen. Could she be of any use 
she would not shrink from a myriad deaths.” — , 

A sudden idea. came to Wang and he stuck the ground aie 

his staff. “Who would think that the fate of the Hans lay on 
DIRI, your palm? Come with me!” . 
~*~» The girl followed him into the’ house. Then he ange 
PAM all the waiting women and girls, placed Sable. Cicada on a 
AGA chair and bowed before her. She was frightened and threw : 
ae herself on the ground, asking in'terror what. it all meant, 
My Said he, “You can sympathise with the people of. Han,” and 
the fount of his tears opened afresh. | 
_ “As Isaid just now, use me in any way: I will never hiak, rote 
said the girl. A 
Wang Yün knelt saying, “The Kotoi are on the brink of ~ 
destruction, the prince and his officers are in jeopardy, and. 
you, you are the only saviour. That wretch Tung Cho wants to 
depose the Emperor and not a man among us can find means _ 
to stop him. Now he has.a son, a bold warrior it is true, but , 
both father and son have a weakness for beauty and I am 
going to use what I may call the “chain” plan. I shall first 
propose you in marriage to Lü Pu and then, after you are 
betrothed, I shall present you to Tung Cho and you will take 
every opportunity to force them asunder and turn away their 
countenances from each other, cause the son to kill his adopted 
father and so put an end to the great evil. Thus you may 
restore the altars of the land that it may live again. All this 
lies within your power; will you do it?” l i 

“Thy handmaid has promised not to recoil from death itself. ` 
You may use my poor self in any way and I must do my best, ch a 

“But if this gets abroad then we are all lost!” . 

“Fear not,” said she, “if thy handmaid does not show gra- 
titude, may she perish beneath a myriad swords!” . 

“Thank you; thank you!” said Wang Yün. 

Then they took from the family treasury many eee and 
bade a cunning jeweler make therewith a fine golden head- 
dress which was sent as a present to Lii Pu. He was delighted 

i -~ and came to thank the donor. When he arrived he was met- 
at the gate by the host himself and within found a table full ` 
A MAIRAN of dainties for his delectation. He was conducted into the | 
Best R private apartments and placed in the seat of honour. ` 


=, 


you are an exalted officer of State, why am I treated thus?” 
- “Because in the whole land there is no warrior your. equal. 


‘This gratified Lü Pu mightily and his host continued to 
"praise and flatter and ply him with wine and to talk of. the 
‘virtues of the minister and his henchman. 

Lü Pu laughed and drank huge. goblets. 

Presently most of the attendants were sent away, only a 


mellow Wang Yün suddenly said, “Let the child come in!” 


: _ between them the exquisite and fascinating Sable Cicada. . 

“Who is this?” said Lü Pu startled into sobriety. 

i “This is my little girl, Cicada. You will not be annoyed at 
my familiarity, will you? But you have been so very friendly, 

E thought you would like to see her.” 


those of the warrior. 


all our house.” 
‘Lü Pu begged the oe te sit diet She pretended to ell 
an retire. Her master pressed her to remain, saying that she 


% might do so since the guest was a dear friend. So she took a. 


ce modestly near her master. . 
Lü Pu kept his gaze fixed upon the maid while he Laenen 
a IR after cup of wine. 
“I should like to present her to you as a handmaid ; would 
-you accept?” ` 


The guest P up. “Tt that i is So you may rely upon my 7 


- abject gratitude,” said he. 


“We will choose a propitious day ere long and send her TOAN 


` the palace.” 


Lü Pu was over- joyed. He could not keep his eyes off the 


i girl and loving glances flashed from her liquid orbs. 


-= However the time came for the guest to leave and Wang said, 
“I would ask you to remain the night but the Minister might 


; _ Suspect something.” 
The guest thanked him again and again and departed. Some 

oe days later when Wang Yiin was gt court and Lü Pu was 

i _ absent he bowed low before Tung Cho and said, “I would that 
you would deign to come to dine at my lowly cottage, could 
your noble thought bend that way!” 

k “Should you invite me I would certainly hasten, 

reply. 

- Wang Yün thanked him. He went home and. prepared in 
the reception hall a feast in which figured every delicacy from 
land and sea. Beautiful embroideries surrounded the chief 


29 


was the 


Bete if  Bomance of the Cher Kingdoms ; i i 75. 


| i iG an asia? ‘J am but’ a simple omeehi in the palace of a alster: A 


por Yün bows not to an officer’s rank; he bows to his ability.” 


few kept to press the guest to drink. When the guest was very — 


-Soon appeared two att endants, dressed in black, leading — 


He bade the girl present a goblet of wine an her eyes met. 


The host feigning intoxication said, “The little one. Dege you, 
Commandant, to take a cup or PRO We all depend upon you, 


76 | San Buo, or - 


seat in the centre and elegant curtains were hung within and. 
without. At noon next day, when the Minister arrived, his 
host met him at the gate in full court costume. He stood by 

while Tung Cho stepped out of his chariot and he and a host 

of armed guards crowded into the hall. Tung Cho took his. 

seat at the top, his suite fell into two lines'right and left, 
while the host stood humbly at the lower end. Tung Cho bade 

his people conduct Wang to a place beside himself. 

Said Wang, “The great minister’s abundant virtue is as 
the high mountains; neither I Yin nor Duke Chou could attain 
thereto.” 

Tung Cho smiled. They bore in the dishes and the wine and 
the music began. Wang Yün plied his guest with assiduous 
flattery and studied deference. When it grew late and the 
wine had done its work the guest was invited to the inner 
chamber. So he sent away his guards and went. - Here the 
host raised a goblet and drank to his guest saying “From my 
youth up I have understood something of astrology and have 
been studying the aspect of the heavens. I read that the days 
of Han are numbered and that the great Minister’s merits 
command the regard of all the world as when Shun succeeded — 
Yao and Yii continued the work of Shun, conforming to the 
mind of heaven and the desire of man.’ 3 

“How dare I expect this?” said Cho. 

“From the days of old those who walk in the way have 
replaced those who deviate therefrom; those who lack virtue: 
have fallen before those who possess it. Can one escape fate?’ 
_ “If indeed the decree of heaven devolve on me; you shall þe- 
held the first in merit,” said Tung Cho. | 

Wang Yün bowed. "Then lights were brought in and all the: 
attendants were dismissed save the serving maids to hand. 
‘the wine. So the evening went on. 

Presently the host said, “The music of these everyday musi- 
cians is too commonplace for your ear, but there happens to 
be in the house a little maid that might please you.” 

-< “Excellent !”’ said the guest. 

Then a curtain was lowered. The shrill tones of Heed ins- 
truments rang through the room and presently some attendants 
led forward Cicada, who then danced on the outside of the 
curtain. 

A poem says :— ' 

For a paiace this maiden was born, 
So timid, so graceful, so slender, Í 
Like a tiny bird flitting at morn ; 
© O’er the dew-laden lily-buds tender. 
Were this exquisite maid only mine, 
For never a mansion I’d pine. 
Another poem runs thus :— 


“The music calls; the dancer comes, a swallow gkang in, 
A dainty little damsel, n as air; 


i Bomance of the Three ‘ingdoms : 


Her peant? captivates the guest yet saidi him within, 
For he must soon depart and leave her there. 
_ She smiles; no gold could buy that smile, no other smileth so, 
3 No need to deck her form with jewels rare, 
But when the dance is over and coy glances come and.go, - 
Then who shall be the chosen of the fair? 
_ The dance ended, Tung Cho bade them lead the maiden in, 
and she came, bowing low as she approached him. He was 
much taken with her beauty and modest grace. 
“Who is she?” said he. 


“A singing girl; we call her Sable Cicada.” 
“Then can she sing?” 


The master bade. her sing and she did so to she accompani- 
ment of castanets. There is a measure describing her youthful 
beauty :— í , ; 
y ; You stand, a dainty maiden, 

Your cherry lips so bright, 

Your teeth so pearly white, 

Your fragrant breath love-laden; 

Yet is your tongue a sword; 

Cold death is the reward 
Of loving thee, O maiden. 

Tung Cho was delighted and praised her Pa She was 
told to present a goblet of wine to the guest which he took from 
her hands and then asked her age, 

She replied, “Thy unworthy handmaid is just sixteen.” 

“A perfect little fairy!” said Tung Cho. 


Then Wang Yün rose and said, “If the Minister would not 


mind I should like to offer him this little maid.” 

“How could I be grateful enough for such a kindness?” 
. “She would be most fortunate if she could be your servant,” 
said Wang. — 

Cho thanked his host warmly. y 
_ Then the orders were given to prepare a closed carriage and 
- convey Sable Cicada to the palace. | 

Soon after Tung Cho took his leave and Wang Yiin accom- 
panied him the whole way. 

After he had taken leave he mounted to ride homeward: 
Half way he met two lines of men with red lamps who were 
escorting Lü Pu on horseback and armed with his halberd. 


Seeing Wang Yün he at once reined in, stopped, seized him by 


the sleeve and said angrily, “You promised Cicada to me and 
now you have given her to the Minister: what foolery is this?” 
Wang Yiin checked him, “This is no place to talk; I pray 
you come to my house.” j 
So they went together and he led Lü Pu into a peice room. 
After the usual exchange of polite greetings Wang said, “Why 
-do you find fault with me, Commander?” 
“Somebody told me that you had sent Cicada to the Minister’s 
palace in a covered carriage: what does it mean?” 


Cae E Ban tuo, or 

` “Of course you do not understand. Ied when I was: À 
; at court the Minister told me he had something to talk to me — 
about in my own house. So naturally I prepared for his. 
coming and while we were at dinner he said, “I have heard: 


something of a girl named Sable Cicada whom you have pro- 
mised to my son Féng-hsien. I thought it was mere rumour 


so I wanted to ask if it was true. Beside I should like to see a 
her.” I could not say no, so she came in and made her bow to — 


‘the lord of lords. Then he said that it was a lucky day and. | 


he would take her away with him and betroth her to you. ~ 


Just think, Sir; when the Minister had come himself, could _ 
I stop him? yp ‘a 
“You were not so very wrong,” said Pui “but for a time Lage 
had misunderstood you. I’ owe you an apology.” ae 
“The girl has a small trousseau, which I will send as soon | 
as she has gone over to your dwelling.” | 
Pu thanked him and went away. Next day he went en 
the palace to find out the truth, but could hear nothing. Then — 
he made his way into the private quarters and questioned the ~ 
maids. Presently one told him that the Minister had brought 
home a new bedfellow the night before and was not up yet. ` 
Pu was very angry. Next he crept round behind his master’ Si 
lee apartment. 
By this time Cicada had risen and was dressing Rae hair at 


= the window. Looking out she saw a long shadow fall across: | 


the little lake. She recognised the headdress and peeping 
‘around she saw it was indeed no other than Lü Pu. Thereupon ` 
she contracted her eyebrows, simulating the deepest grief, and 
‘with her dainty handkerchief she wiped her eyes again and 
again. Lü Pu stood watching her a long time. | . 4 

Soon after he went in to give morning greeting. His master 
was sitting in the reception room. Seeing his henchman. he 
asked if there was anything new. 

“Nothing,” was the reply and he waited while Tue Cho 
took his morning meal. As he stood beside his master he 
glanced .over at the curtain and saw a woman there behind 
the screen showing a half face from time to time and throwing: 
amorous glances at him. He felt it was his beloved and his 
thoughts flew to her. Presently Cho noticed his expression 
and began to feel suspicious. — 

“Tf there is nothing you may go,” said he. 

Lu Pu sulkily withdrew. 

Tung Cho now thought of nothing but his new mistress and 
for more than a month neglected all affairs, devoting himself . 
entirely to pleasure. He was a little indisposed and Cicada | 
was constantly at his side, never even undressing to show her 
solicitude. She gratified his every whim. Cho grew. more and 
more fond of her. i 


One day Lü Pu went to enquire hetet his father s health. 


ae pine Cho was asleep and Cicada was sitting at the head of 


ae 


E C aO 


` as he held her close. 


his couch. Leaning forward she gazed at the visitor, with one 
hand pointed to her heart, the other at Tung Cho asleep, and 


her tears fell. Lü Pu felt heartbroken. Cho drowsily opened: 
his eyes, and seeing his son’s gaze fixed on something behind — 
him, turned over and saw who it was. He angrily rebuked — 
Pu saying, “Dare you make love to my beauty?” He told the 


servants to turn him out and not allow him to come in again. 


Lü Pu went off home very wrath. Meeting Li Ju he told — 


him the cause of his anger. The adviser hastened tc see his 


master and said, “Sir, you aspire to be ruler of the State, why — a 
then for a small fault do you blame the Marquis? If he turn 


against you, it is all over.’ ; 
“Then what can I do?’ said Cho. 


“Recall him to-morrow; treat him well; anal him with 
gifts and fair words and ‘all will be well.” ed 
So Tung Cho did so. He sent for Lü Pu and was Very: 

- gracious. and said, “I was irritable and hasty yesterday owing . 
_ to my illness and x wronged you, I know. Forget it.” i 


= He gave him ten catties of gold and twenty rolls of brocade. 
And so the quarrel was made up. But though Lii’s body was 


mt with Tung his heart was with his promised bride. 


Tung Cho having quite recovered went tc court again dan 


<- Lü Pu followed him as usual. Seeing Tung Cho deep in con- 
versation with the Emperor, Lü Pu, armed as he was, went out > 


‘of the palace and rode off to his chief’s residence. He tied up 


his steed at the entrance and, halberd in hand, went to the . : 
private apartments to seek his love. He found her and ‘she 
told him to go out into the garden where she would join him - 


soon. He went, taking his halberd with him, and he leaned 


. against the rail of the Phoenix Pavilion to wait for Cicada. 
ie: After a long time she appeared, swaying gracefully as she © 
' made her way under the drooping willows and parting the 

_ flowers as she passed. She was exquisite, a perfect little — 
-. fairy from the Palace of the Moon. Tears were in her eyes 
=- as she came up and said, “Though I am not the Governor’s 
real daughter yet he treated me as his own child. The desire | 
of my life was fulfilled when he plighted me to you.: But Oh! , 

_ to think of the wickedness of the. Minister, stealing my poor 


self as he did. I suffered so much. I longed to die, only that 
I had not told you the real truth. So I lived on, bearing my 
shame as best as I could but feeling it mean still to live. Now 


a that I have seen you I can end it all. My poor sullied. body 
is no longer fit to serve a hero. I can die before your eyes and 
_ so prove how true I am!” 


Thus speaking she seized the curving rail as if to jump into 
the lily pond. Lü Pu caught her in his strong arms and wept 


6 


‘romance of the ahe mauia, tw ii 79 t 


80 San Kuo, or 


“I knew it; I always knew your heart, ” he sobbed. “Only — 
we never had a chance to speak.” 

She threw her arms about Lü Pu. TE, I cannot be your 
wife in this life I will in the ages to come,” she whispered. 

“If I do not marry you in this life, I am no hero,” said he. 

“Every day is a year long. O pity me! Rescue me!”. 

“T have only stolen away for a brief moment and I am afraid 
that old rebel will suspect something, so I must not stay too 
long,” said Pu. 

The girl clung to his robe. 

LE you fear the old thief so much I shall never see another 
sunrise.’ 

Lü Pu stopped. ‘Give me a little time to think,” said he. 
And he picked up his halberd to go. 

“In the deep seclusion of the harem, I head the stories of 
- your prowess; you were the one man who excelled all others, 


Little did I think that you of all men would rest content under _ 


the dominion of another.” 

And tears rained again! 

A wave of shame flooded his face. Leaning his halberd 
against the railing he turned and clasped the girl to his breast, 
soothing her with fond words. The lovers held each other 
close swaying to and fro with emotion. How could they bring 
‘themselves to say farewell? is 

In the meantime Tung Cho missed his IER and doubt 
filled his heart. Hastily taking leave of the Emperor, he 
mounted his chariot and. returned to his palace. There at the 
gate stood Lu Pu’s well known steed, riderless. He questioned 
the doorkeepers and they told him the Marquis was within. 
He sent away his attendants and went alone to the private 
apartments. Lü Pu was not there. He called Cicada, but she 
did not reply. He asked where she was and the waiting maids 
told him she was in the garden among the flowers. 


So he went into the garden and there he saw the lovers in í 


the pavilion in most tender talk. Lü Pu’s halberd was leaning 
on the railing beside him. 

A howl of rage escaped Tung Cho and startled the lovers. 
Lü Pu turned, saw who it was and ran away. Cho caught up 
the halberd and ran in pursuit. But Lü Pu was fleet of foot — 


while his master was very stout. Seeing no hope of catching — 


the runaway Cho hurled the halberd. Lü Pu fended it off and 
it fell to the ground. Cho picked it up and ran on. But by 
this time Lü Pu was far ahead. Just as Cho was running out 
at the. garden gate he dashed full tilt against eas man 
running in, and down he went. 


Surged up his wrath within him as the billows heavenwied leap, 
Crashed his unwieldy body to earth in a shapeless heap. 


We shall presently see who the other runner was. 


t 


h y 


CHAPTER IZ. 


LÜ Pu HELPS TO SUPPRESS DISORDER: 
CHIA Hsü COUNSELS AN ATTACK ON THE CAPITAL. 


i 4 i 
The person who collided with the irate Tung. Cho was his. 
most trusty adviser Li Ju. Li had not fallen in spite of the 
shock and at once helped his master to regain his feet and led 
him inside to the library, where they sat down. 

“What were you coming about?” 

“Happening to be passing your gates I heard that you had 
gone into your private garden: -to look for your adopted son. 
Then came Lii Pu running and crying out that you wanted to 
_ kill him, and I was coming in as fast as I could to intercede for 
him when I accidentally collided with you. I am very Sorry 

F deserve death.” 

She wretch! How could I hoax to see him tòying with my 
fair one? Iwill be the death of him yet.” : 
“Your Graciousness is making a mistake. It is the ‘plucked 
-~ tassel’ story over again. But if you remember Prince Chuang 
‘of Ch‘u made. no fuss about the liberties taken with his lady 
` love, although the hat-tassel in her hand betrayed the culprit. 
-= His restraint stood him in good stead, for the same man saved 
his life when he was hemmed in by the hosts of Ts‘in. After 
all Cicada is only a woman, ‘but Lü Pu is your trustiest friend 


- and most dreaded commander. If you took this chance of 


- making the girl over to him, your kindness would win his 
- undying gratitude. I beg you, Sir, to think over it well.” 

Tung Cho hesitated a long time; he sat murmuring to him- 
self. Presently he said, “What ‘you say is right. I must 


<- think over it.” 


- Li Ju felt satisfied. - He took leave of his master and went. $ 
away. Cho went to his private rooms and called Cicada. A 
-~ “What were you doing there with Lü Pu?” said he. 

-She began to weep. “Thy handmaid was in the garden 
among the flowers, when he rushed in on me. I was frightened 
and ran away. He asked why I ran away from a son of the 
family and pursued me right to the pavilion, where you saw us. 

_ He had that halberd in his hand all the time. I felt he was 
a vicious man and would force me to his will so I tried to 
_ throw myself into the lily pond, but he caught me in his arms 
and held me so that I was helpless. Luckily just at that mo- 
- ment you came and saved my life.” 
_ “Suppose I send you to him.” 


6 


82 . San Kuo, or 


She shrieked with terror. 

“After having been yours to be given to a mere slave! 
Never! I would rather die.” | 

And with this she snatched down a dagger hanging on the 
wall to kill herself. Tung Cho plucked it from her hand and, 
throwing his arms about her, cried, “I was only joking.” 

She lay back on his breast hiding her face and sobbing bit- 
terly. “This is the doing of that Li Ju,” said she. “He is 
much too thick with Li Pu. He suggested that, I know. Little — 
he cares for your reputation or my life. Oh! I would like to | 
eat him alive.” UP eu 

“Do you think I could bear to lose you? ae 

“Though you love me yet I must not stay here. That Lii Pu 
will do me some harm if I do. I fear him.” 

“We will go to Meiwu to-morrow, you and I, and we will be 
happy together and have no cares.’ 

She dried her tears and thanked him Next day Li Ju came 
again to persuade Tung Cho to send the damsel to Lü Pu. 
“This is a propitious day,” said he. 

“He and I standing in the relation of father and son I cannot 
very well do that,” said Tung Cho. “But I will say no more © 
about his fault. You may tell him so and soothe him as well 
as you can.” 
etait are not being beguiled by the woman, are you?” said 

Tung Cho coloured. ‘Would you like to give your wife to 
some body else? Do not talk about this any further. It would — 
be better not to.” i 

Li left the chamber. When he'got outside he cast his eyes 
up to heaven, saying, “We are dead men, slain by the hand of 


this girl.” 


When a certain student of history reached this eoo he 
wrote a verse or two :— 

Just introduce : a woman, 
Conspiracies succeed; 

Of soldiers, or their weapons, 
There really is no need. 

They fought their bloody battles, 
And doughty deeds were done; 

But in a garden summer house 
The victory was won. 

The order was given to journey to Meiwu and the whole 
body of officers assembled to add lustre to the start. Cicada, — 
from her carriage, saw Lü Pu among the crowd. She at once ~ 
dropped her eyes and assumed an appearance of deepest | 
melancholy. After the cavalcade started and when her car- 


riage had almost disappeared in the distance, the disappointed 


lover reined in his steed on a mount whence he could watch | 
the dust that rose around it. Unutterable sadness filled his 
heart. 


— 


: Suddenly a voice said, “Why do you not accompany the 


_ Minister, Marquis, instead of standing here and sighing?” 


It was Wan Yün. “I have been confined to the house by 


a illness these few days,” continued he, “so I have not seen you. 
But í had to struggle out to-day to see the Minister set off. 


This meeting is most fortunate. But why were you sighing?” 
“Just on account of that damsel of yours,” said Lü Pu. 
Feigning great astonishment he said, “So long a time and 
yet not given to you!” 
“The old ruffian has fallen in love with her himself.” . 
“Surely this cannot be true.” 
Lii Pu related the whole story while Wang Yiin listened, 


‘silent, but stamping on the ground as with irritation and per- 
plexity. After a long time he said, “I did not think he was 
such a beast.” i 


. Taking Lü Pu by the hand he said, “Come to my house and 


- we will talk it over.” ; 

So they went away togther to the house and retired to a 

- secret room. After some refreshments, Lü Pu told the whole 
story of the episode in the garden just as it happened. 


“He seems to have corrupted my little girl and has stolen 


= your wife. He will be an object of shame and ridicule to the 
-whole world. And those who do not laugh at him will laugh at 


you and me. Alas! Iam old and powerless and can do nothing. 
More’s the pity! But you, Commander, you are a warrior, the 


greatest hero in the world. Yet you have been put to this 


-~ shame and exposed to this contempt.” 


A wave of fierce wrath rolled up in Lü Pu. Banging the 
table he shouted and roared. His host ostentatiously tried to 


calm him saying, “I forgot myself. I should not have spoken 
like that. Do not be so angry, I pray.” 
“T will kill the wretch, I swear it. In no other way can I 


= wash away my shame.” ` ; 


< - “No, no! Do not say such a thing,” said Wang, putting his 
` hand over the other’s mouth. ‘You will bring trouble on poor 


me.” 
= “When a man is born great he cannot be patient for long 
under another man’s domination,” said Lü Pu. 

“Tt needs some one greater than the Minister to limit the 
scope of such talents as yours.” 

Lü Pu said, “I would not mind killing the old wretch were it 
not for the relation in which we stand. I fear to provoke the 


. hostile criticism of posterity.” 


His host smiled. ‘Your name is Lü; his is. Tung. Where 
was the paternal feeling when he threw the halberd at you?” 


= “I had been misled if you had not said that,” said Lü hotly. 


Wang Yiin saw the effect of his words and continued, “It 
would be a loyal deed to restore the House of Han, and history 


- would hand down your name to posterity perpetually fragrant. 


fiomance of the Three tiingdoms | 83 P 


84 : Han Kwo, or 


If you lend your aid to Tung Cho‘ you will bea iratos awd your 
name will stink through all the ages.” 


Lü Pu rose from his place and bowed. to Wang Yün. ape ie 


have decided,” said he. ‘You need not fear, Sir.” 
. “But yet you may fail and bring upon yourself misfortune,” 
said Wang. 


Lü Pu drew his dagger and pricking his arm swore by the : 


blood that flowed. 
Wang fell on his Keen and thanked hun | “Then the Han 


sacrifices will not be cut off and you will be their saviour. But- 4 
this must remain a secret and I will tell you how the plot shall 


be worked out.” 
Lü Pu took leave with great emotion. 


Wang Yiin took into his confidence two colleagues, Sun Jur. 


and Huang Yüan. The former said, “The moment is favour- 
able. The Emperor has just recovered from his illness and 


we can despatch an able talker to Meiwu to persuade Tung Cho | : 
to come here to discuss affairs. Meanwhile we will obtain a — 


secret decree as authority for Lü Pu. Lay an ambush just 


inside the palace gates to kill ono as he enters. This is the : 4 


best plan to adopt.” 
“But who would dare to go?” 


“Li Su would go. He belongs to the same district as Lü pas 
and is very angry with the Minister for not advancing him. $ 


His going' would excite no suspicions.” 


of it.” 


When Pu was consulted he told them that this man’s persua- 


sion had led him to kill Ting, his former benefactor. “If he 
refuse this mission I will kill him,” said he. 


So they sent for Li Su. When he arrived Lü Pu said, 


“Formerly you talked me into killing Ting and going over to 


Tung Cho. Now we find Tung Cho means evil for the Emperor | 


and is an oppressor of the people. His iniquities are many 
and he is hated of gods and men. You go to Meiwu, say you 
have a command from the Emperor to summon Tung Cho to 


the palace. He will come and he will be put to death. You | 


will have the credit of being loyal and restoring the Hans. 
Will you undertake this?’ 


“I also wish to slay him,” was the reply. “But I could not a 
find any to assist me. How can I hesitate? Your interven- - 


tion is directly from heaven.” 
And he snapped an arrow in twain as register of his oath. 


Si «TE this succeed, what glorious rank will be yours!” said 


Wang Yün. 


Next day Li Su, with a small escort, set out for Meiwu and 
announced himself as bearer of a decree. He was conducted — 
-into Tung Cho’s presence. After he had made his obeisance 


Tung asked what the decree was. 


“Good, ” said Wang Yün. “Let us see what Lii Pu thinks 


eee of the Three eae 85 


“His Majesty has recovered and wishes his ministers to meet 


ay him i in the palace to consider the question of his ae in 


W Sts 


your favour. That is what this summons means.” 
“What does Wang Yiin think of the scheme?” 
“Wang Yiin has already begun the construction of the Ter- 


race of Abdication and only awaits my lord’s arrival.” 


“Last night I dreamed a dragon coiled round my body,” 
said Tung Cho greatly pleased, “and now I get this happy 


` tidings! I must not neglect the opportunity.” 


2 


So he gave instructions for the safekeeping of his city and 


announced his intention of starting on the morrow. 


_ “When I am Emperor you shall be my Precursor,” said he. 
“Your minister thanks you,” said Li. fe 
Cho went to bid farewell to his aged mother. “Whither are 


& you going, my son?” 


“T go to receive the abdication o Han; and soon you will be 


_ Empress Dowager.” 


“T have been feeling nervous and creepy these few days. . It 


_ is a bad sign.’ 


“Any one about to become the mother of the State must have 


-~ premonitions,” said her son. 

= ` He left her with these words. Just before starting he said 
_ to Cicada, “When I am Emperor, you shall be Kuei-fei, the first 
_ of my ladies.” She bowed low thanking him, but she knew 


rz 


and inwardly rejoiced. 


He went out and mounted his carriage, and began his journey. 


_ to the Capital with an imposing escort. Less than half way 


the wheel of his carriage broke. He left it and mounted a 


i horse. Soon after the horse snorted and neighed, threw up his 


head and snapped the reins. 
Tung Cho turned to Li Su and asked what these things 


~ portended. io 


~ “Tt means that you are going to receive the abdication of the 


fs Hans, which is to renew all things, to mount the aerated 
wa ‘chariot and sit in the golden saddle.” 


And Cho believed him. During. the second day’s Sones: a 


- violent gale sprang up and the sky became covered with a thick 
- mist. The wily Li Su had an interpretation for this also. 


“You are ascending to the place of the dragon; there must be 


- bright light and lurid vapour to dignify your majestic 


- approach.” 


Cho had no more doubts. ` He presently arrived and found 
many officials waiting without the city gate to receive him, all 
but Li Ju who was ill and unable to leave his chamber. He 


- entered and proceeded to his own palace, where Lii Pu came 
_ to congratulate him. 


“When I sit on the throne, you shall command the whole 


- armies of the Empire, horse and foot,” said he. 


86 San Buo, or 


That night Cho slept in a tent in the midst of his escort. In 
the suburbs that evening some children at play were singing 
a little ditty and the words drifted in on the wind. 

“The grass in the meadow looks fresh now and green, 
Yet wait but ten days, not a blade will be seen.” * 

The song sounded ominous but Li Su was again prepared — 
with a happy interpretation. “It only means that the Lius 
are about to disappear and the Tungs to be exalted.” 

Next morning at the first streak of dawn Tung Cho prepared 
for his appearance at court. On the way he saw a Taoist, 
dressed in a black robe and wearing a white turban, who 
carried in his hand a tall staff with a long strip of white cloth 
attached. At each end of the cloth was drawn a mouth. 

“What is the meaning of this?” said Tung Cho. 

“He is a madman,” said Li ‘Su, and he told the guards to 
drive the fellow away. 


Tung Cho went in and found all the officials in court dress pE 


lining the road. Li Su walked beside his carriage, a sword in ` 
his hand. When he reached the side room on the north he 


found soldiers drawn up outside and only the pushers of the — 


palace carriage, a score or so, were allowed to proceed further. 

When he arrived near the Reception Hall he saw that Wang. 

Yün and all the other officials standing at the door were armed. 
“Why are they all armed?” said he to Li Su. Li Su was © 


silent. The pushers urged the carriage forward swiftly to the 
_ entrance. 


Suddenly Wang Yün shouted, “The rebel is here! where are 
the executioners ?” 

At this call sprang from both sides men armed with halberds 
and spears who attacked Tung Cho. He had not put on the 
breastplate he usually wore and a spear pierced his breast. 
He sank down in the carriage calling loudly for his son, “Where _ 
is Féng-hsien?” 


“Here, and with a decree to deal with a rebel,” said Lü Pu 


savagely, as he appeared in front of his “father. » 

Thereupon he thrust his halberd through his victim’s throat.. 
Then Li Su hacked off the head and held it up. Lü Pu, his 
left hand holding his halberd, thrust his right hand into his 
bosom whence he drew the decree, crying, “The decree was to 
slay the rebel Tung Cho; no other.” 

The whole assembly shouted, “Live for ever! O Emperor.” 

A sympathetic poet has written a few lines in pity :— 

Await the time, O noble, and be king, - i 
Or failing, reap the solace riches bring; 


Heaven n’er is partial, but severely just, 
Meiwu stood strong yet now it lies in dust. 


“The grass in the meadow is an ingenious quip on Tung Cho’s surname; 
as is the “ten days” on his distinguishing name. 


itis: lust: all biod veh Gued, ‘Lec ba Ureed the dalshe of) 


Li Ju, who had been the confidant of the murdered Minister 
a Li Su volunteered to go in search of him. But just then 

a shouting was heard at the gates and it was told them that a 
pacers slave had brought their intended victim in bonds. 


Wang Yiin ordered his immediate beset ie in the market ae 


' place. ° 
‘Tung Cho’s head was exposed in a phaeled thoroughies: 


He was very fat and the guards made torches by sticking fh 
splints into the body. The passers-by pelted the poor head and ied 


spurned the body with their feet. : 
Tie A: large force under Lü Pu was sent to destroy Meiwu. +e 
i first captive was Cicada. _ Then they slew every member of the 
í Tung family, sparing none, not even his aged mother. Some 
- of his particular adherents, with the “Flying.Bear’’ force, fled 
_ to Chingchou. In Meiwu were hidden many young ladies of 
. good family. These were set free. The spoil was enormous; 
stores of wealth in all its forms had been collected there. ` 
` When they returned to report: success Wang Yün rewarded 


~ and feasted the soldiers.. Banquets were held in the halls to 
which all the officials were invited. They drank and congra- 


- tulated each other. While the feasting was in progress it was 
-~ announced that some one had come and was wailing over the 
corpse exposed in the market place. 
| “Tung Cho has been put to death,” said Wang Yiin, angrily. 


4 “Every body is glad to be rid of him and yet one is found to 


lament over him. Who is this?” - 
So he gave orders to arrest the mourner and bring him in. 


Soon he was brought in and when they saw him all were start- = : 


led. For he was no other than Ts‘ai Yung the Shih-chung. 


Wang Yiin spoke to him angrily, “Tung Cho has been put to 


_ death as a rebel and all the land rejoices. You, a Han Mini- 
= ster, instead of rejoicing, weep for him. Why ? 
Yung confessed his fault. “I am without int yet know 

I what is right. Am I the man to turn my back on my country 
and toward Tung Cho? Yet once I experienced his kindness 
-and I could not help mourning for him. I know my fault is 

grave but I pray you to regard the reasons. If you will leave 
my head and only cut off my feet, you may use me to continue 

the History of Han, whereby I may have the good fortune to 
_be allowed to expiate my fault.” | 
All were sorry for him, for he was a man of great talents 
and they begged that he might be spared. The Preceptor Ma 
„secretly interceded for him, pointing out that he was famous 
as a scholar, that he could write glorious history, and that it 
was inadvisable to put to death a man renowned for rectitude. 
But in vain. The Great Councillor was now strong and 
obdurate. | 


ence of the ayree Kingdoms | ate | 87 oe 


4 


38 San Kuo, or 


“Sst-ma Ch‘ien was spared and employed on the annals, 


with the result that many slanderous stories have been handed 
down to us. This is a trying period of great perplexity and 
we dare not let a specious fellow like this wield his pencil in 


criticism of those about the court of a youthful prince and i 


abuse us as he will.” 


Remonstrance and appeal being vain Ma retired. But he 


said to his colleagues, “Is Wang Yiin then careless of the 
future? Worthy men are the mainstay of the State: laws are 


the canons of action. ‘To destroy the mainstay and nullify : 


the laws is to hasten destruction.” 
As was just said Wang Yiin was obdurate. The man whose 


offence was an expression of gratitude was thrown into prison 


and there strangled. The people of that day wept for him, for 
they refused to see any offence in what he had done and death 
was a harsh punishment. ` 
Tung, the harsh dictator, 
Tyrannised the State, . av 
Fell and his sole mourner 
Shared his direful fate. 
Chuko in seclusion 
Was content to dream, 
Felt his worth and never 
Helped a traitor’s scheme. 


Those of his adherents whom Tung Cho had left to guard 7: 


his city fled when their master was slain and went into Shénsi. 
Thence they sent in a memorial entreating amnesty. But. 


Wang Yün wouid not hear of it. Four of them were the chief 


instruments of Cho’s aggressions. Now though a general — 
amnesty were proclaimed these men should be excluded from 


its benefit. 


The messenger returned and told the four there was no hope. 


of pardon and they could only flee. 


Adviser Chia Hsü said, “If we throw away our arms and flee. 


singly then we shall fall easy victims to any village beadle who 
may seize us. Rather let us cajole the Shénsi people to throw 
in their lot with us and make a sudden onslaught on the capital 


and so avenge our master. If we succeed, we control the court. 


and the country. It will be time enough to run away if we 
fail.” 


The plan was adopted and they spread abroad the story that. 


Wang Yiin intended to harry the district.. Having thus thrown 


the people into a state of terror they went a step farther and 
said, “There is no advantage in dying for nothing. Revolt 


and join us.” So they cajoled the people into joining them and 


gathered a host equal to ten legions. This horde was divided | 
into four parts and they all set out to raid the capital.. On the 
way they fell in with a son-in-law of their late chief, with a 
number of soldiers. He had set out to avenge his father-in~ 


law and he became the van-leader of the horde. 


Romance of the Three Gin gboms iP Wg 


As they advanced the news came to Wang Yün and he 

~ consulted Lü Pu. 

-~ 7 “They are a lot of rats,” said he. “Never mind how many 
there are of them. Be not in the least anxious.” 

So Lü Pu and Li Su went to oppose them. ‘The latter was 

in advance and met Niu Fu. They fought; Niu Fu was out- 

~ matched and retired. But unexpectedly Niu Fu returned in 


= a night attack, found Li Su quite unprepared and drove his 


force some thirty li, slaying many. 

Li went to tell his chief who raged at him saying, ““You have 
sullied my reputation as a warrior and destroyed my prestige.” 

oe he put Li Su to death, exposing his head at the camp 
gate 
= — Next day Lü Pu advanced his own force and engaged Niu 
- Fu. Could the result be the least dubious? Niu Fu was 

driven off. That night he called in his friend Hu Ch‘ih-érh tò 
advise him. 

Lü Pu is too doughty a fighter for us to hope to overcome 
him. Our case is hopeless. Our best course is to desert these 
four men, secrete our valuables and leave the army with just 
- a few of our followers.” 

-The plan of Niu Fu was adopted and the two traitors that 
very night packed up and made their way out of camp. They 
were only half a dozen. They came to a river and, while cross- 


~ ing, Hu Ch‘ih-érh, tempted by the lust of wealth, slew his 


companion. Then he went to offer the head to Lü Pu. Lü Pu 
= enquired into the matter and when a follower told him the 
truth, he put the double traitor to death. 

Then he advanced against the rebels and fell in with Li 
~“Ts‘ui’s force. Without giving them time to form in battle 
array, he attacked. Horses curvetting and spears set, the 
men dashed in irresistibly and Li Ts‘ui, making no stand, fell 
back a long way. He took up a position under a hill and 
thence sent to call his fellows to council. 


Li Ts‘ui said, “Lü Pu though brave in battle is no strategist ` : 
and so not really formidable. I will lead my men to hold the © 


mouth of the gorge and every day I will incite him to attack 
and, when he comes toward me, Commander Kuo can smite 
his rear, after the manner of Pé êng Yüeh when he fought 
against Ch'u. While thus I am alternating attack and retreat 
you other two will march off in different directions toward 
Ch‘angan. Such an attack at two points must end in his. 
defeat.” 

They set themselves to. carry out this schenie. As soon as 
-Lü Pu reached the hills a force came out to attack him. Pu 
made an angry dash toward the enemy, who retired up the hill, 
whence they shot arrows and hurled stones like rain. Lü Pu’s 
. men halted. At this moment the report came that the rear 
5 was being attacked and there appeared Kuo Sst. At once Lü 


90 ar San Kuo, or 


Pu wheeled toward the new enemy, but immediately the rolling 
drums gave the signal to retire and Lü Pu could not come to 
blows with them. As he called in his men the. gongs clanged 
on the other side and his former opponent came as if to smite 
him. But before he could join battle ‘his rear was again threat- 
ened by Kuo, who in his turn drew off without striking a blow. | 

Thus Lü Pu was baited till his bosom was near bursting with © 
rage. The'same tactics continued for several days. He could 
neither strike his enemies nor escape them; his men had no 
rest. 


In the midst of these distracting manceuvres a messenger — 


rode up in hot haste to say that the capital was in imminent 
danger from a double attack. He at once ordered a march to 
save the capital, which became a rout when both his opponents 
came in pursuit. His loss was heavy. 

He soon reached Ch‘angan and found the rebels there in 
enormous numbers and the city quite surrounded. Lü Pu’s 
attack had but little effect and as his temper became more 
savage under defeat many of his men went over to the rebels. 

He fell into deep melancholy. Then a remnant of Tung 


Cho’s adherents still in the city, led by Li Méng and Wang | y 
Fang, began to lend aid to the attackers and by and by ‘they eap 


secretly opened the city gate and the beseigers poured in. Lü 
Pu exerted himself to the utmost but could not stem the tide. — 
At the head of a few horse he dashed over to the Chingso Gate, 
or “Gate of the Black Lock,” and called out to Wang Yün, who 
was on the other side, that the case was desperate and bade 
him mount and ride to a place of safety. 

Wang Yiin replied, “If I am gifted with the holy oe OR AK 
the State I shall succeed in restoring the tranquillity which 
I desire, but if I have it not, then I offer my body a sacrifice. 
I will not quail before dangers. Thank the noble supporters 
east of the pass for their efforts and bid them remember their 
country.” l 

Lü Pu urged Kim. again and again, but he would not leave. 
Soon flames started up all over the city and Lü Pu had to leave, 
EA his family to their fate. He fled and joined Yüan 

u 

Li Ts‘ui and his fellow leaders gave full licence to their 
ruffians, who robbed and murdered their fill. Many high 
officers perished. In time they penetrated to the inner palace 
and the eunuchs begged the Emperor to proceed to the 
Hstianp‘ing Mén (the Gate of Pervading Peace) to try to quell 
the rioting. At sight of the yellow umbrella Li Ts‘ui and Kuo 
Ssti checked their men and they all shouted “Long life O 
Emperor!” (Wan- suil). The Emperor stood by the tower 
and addressed them, “Nobles, what means it that you enter 
the capital in this unruly manner and without my summons?” 


Romance of the Three tiingdoms Seca DIA 


The two leaders looked up and said, “Tung Cho, Your 
Majesty’s Minister, has been slain by Wang Yün and we are 
here to avenge him. Weare no rebels, Sire. Let us only have 
. Wang Yün and we draw off our men.” | 


Wang Yiin was actually among the courtiers and at the 
_Emperor’s side. Hearing this demand he said, “The plan was 


made for the benefit of the Throne, but as this evil has grown 
therefrom Your Majesty will not grudge losing me. I have 
brought about evil and I will go down to these rebels.” 
The Emperor was torn with sorrow and wavered. . But the 
ruadh Minister leaped from the wall crying, “Wang Yün is 
ere.” 
The two leaders drew their swords, crying, “For what crime 
- was our master slain? 
_ “His crimes filled the heavens and covered the earth; no 
tongue can tell them. The day he died was a day of rejoicing 
in the whole city as you well know,” said Wang. 


“And if he was guilty of some crime what had we done not 


to be forgiven?” 
“Seditious rebels, why bandy words? Iam macy. to die.” 
And he was slain at the foot of the tower. 
Moved by the people’ s sufferings, 
Vexed at his prince’s grief, 
Wang Yün compassed the traitor’ s death, 
That they might find relief. i 
Every one knows him a hero, 
Leal to the State alway: 
Living he guarded the princely towers, 
His soul keeps guard to-day. 
-= Having done the loyal Minister to death at his master’s feet 
they proceeded to exterminate also his whole family. Every 
- one mourned. i 
Then said the ruffians to each other, “Having gone so far 
` what could be better than to make away with the Emperor and 
salah our scheme?” — 
The traitor condoned his crime, 
Rebellion ought to cease; 
` But his licentious followers 
Disturb’ the Empire’s peace. 


The fate of the ice wd will be disclosed i in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER X. $ 
MA TENG SERVES HIS COUNTRY WELL: 
Ts‘ao Ts‘Ao AVENGES HIS FATHER’S MURDER. 
k the last chapter the two arch rebels. proposed to murder 


this. 


“No; the people will not approve of his death now. Restore ; 
him to power and get the leaguers inside the gates. Remove 


the Emperor Hsien, but their followers Chang and Fan opposed 7 


his supporters and then we can compass his death. And we a 


shall be able to do what we wish.” 

So they ceased the attack. The Emperor again spoke from 
the tower, saying, “Why do you still remain? You have slain 
Wang Yiin now withdraw these soldiers.” 


Then Li and Kuo replied, “Your servants desire rank us a 


reward for their good service to your dynasty.” 
“And what rank, Sirs?” 


All four wrote their wishes and handed them up to the 


Emperor who had no choice but to accede to the request and 


they were created “Generals” (Chiang-chtin) and received — 


ranks of nobility and thereupon they went away and camped 
at Ssinung. The inferior leaders also were gratified with 
ranks. And once more the capital was free of troops. 

Tung Cho’s followers having so far succeeded did not forget 


their late leader. They sought his corpse for burial, but only se 


a few fragments were discoverable. Then they graved an 


image of fragrant wood in his likeness, laid that out in proper — 


form and instituted a noble’s sacrifices and prayers. The 


remains were dressed in the robes of a prince laid in a princely - 


coffin for burial. They seleeted Meiwu for his tomb and having 
found an auspicious day conveyed the coffin thither. 
- But a terrific thunder storm came on at the time of inhuma- 


tion and the ground was flooded. The coffin was riven asunder — 


and the poor remains thrown out. A second time they buried 
the coffin, but a similar thing happened in the night. And yet 
a third time i in another place but the earth rejected the remains. 
Meanwhile the thunder-fire had entirely consumed them. So 


it may be said justly that Heaven was exceeding angry . with — 


Tung Cho. 
So now Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Ssii wielded the real power of the 


` sceptre and they were hard upon the people. They also re- 


moved the attendants from the palace and replaced them by 
their own creatures, who maintained a most perfect watch 


Romance of the Three kingdoms g 


S 


ever every movement of the Emperor so that he was greatly 


hampered and embarrassed. All appointments were made by 


the late rebels. For the sake of popularity they especially 
‘summoned Chu Chien to court, made him a High Chamberlain 


and associated him with the government. 
_ One day came a report that Ma T‘éng, the Prefect of Hsi- 
liang, and Han Sui, with ten legions, were rapidly approaching. 
the capital with the intention of attacking the rebels. 

`. Now these men from the west had laid careful plans. They 


had sent trusty friends to the capital to find out who would 


support them. They had conspired with three officials to be 


` their inside allies and plot against the rebels. These three 


obtained from the throne two secret edicts conferring the ranks 


of Commander, “Conqueror of the West,” on Ma T‘éng and 


Commander, “Warden of the West,” on Han Sui. With these 


powers the two officials joined forces and began their march. 
The four leaders of the party in power held a consultation 


as to how to meet the attack. The adviser, Chia Hsii, said, 
_ “Since the attackers are coming from a distance our plan is 


to fortify and wait till shortage of food shall work for us. 
In a hundred days their supplies will be consumed and they | 


2 must retire. Wecan pursue and we shall capture them.” 


Li Méng and Wang Fang rose and said, “This plan is bad. 


Give us a legion and we will put an end to both of them and 


offer their heads before your ensign.’ 


fb “To fight forthwith means defeat,” said the adviser. 


The other two cried with one voice, “If we fail we are willing 


i to lose our heads, but if we win then your head is forfeit.” 


Chia Hsii then said, “Two hundred li west of the capital 
stand the Chouchih Hills. The passes are narrow and difficult. 
Send Generals Chang and Fan to occupy this point of vantage 


and fortify themselves so that they may support Li and Wang. 


‘Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Sst accepted this advice. They told off a 


legion and a half of horse and foot and Li and Wang left. 
They made a camp two hundred and eighty li from Ch‘angan. 


The force from the west arrived and the two officers led out 


- their men to the attack. They found their opponents in battle 


array. The two leaders, Ma Téng and Han Sui, rode to the 
front side by side. Pointing to the rebel leaders they abused 


them, calling them traitors and asking who would capture 


them. 
Hardly were the words spoken wien there came out a youth 


with a clear, white complexion, eyes like shooting stars, lithe 
< of body and ‘strong of limb. He was armed with a long spear 


and bestrode an excellent steed. This young leader was Ma 
- Ch‘ao, son of Ma T‘éng, then seventeen years of age. 


Though young he was valiant and skilful. Wang Fang, 


: despising him on account of his youth, galloped forth to fight 


him. Before ner had eana many passes Wang Fang was 


/ 


94 : Aan Kuo, or 


disabled and fell to a thrust of the young man’s spear. The 


victor turned to retire into the formation, but Li Méng rode ~ 


after him to avenge his fallen colleague. Ma Ch‘ao did not 
see him, but his father called out “You are followed!” Hardly 
had he spoken when he saw that the pursuer was a prisoner 
seated on his son’s steed. 

Now Ma Ch‘ao had known he was followed, but pretended 
not to see, waiting till his enemy should have come close and 
lifted his spear to strike. Then he suddenly wheeled about. 
The spear thrust met only empty air, and as the horses passed 
Ma Ch‘ao’s powerful arm shot out and pulled Wang Fang from 
the saddle. Thus the soldiers were left leaderless and fled in 
all directions. The army dashed in pursuit and a complete 
victory was scored. They pressed into the pass and made a 
camp. They decapitated Li Méng and exposed his head. 

When Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Sst: heard that both the boastful 
captains had fallen under the hand of one young man they 
knew that Chia Hsü had given good advice and was gifted 
with clear prescience. So they valued his plans the more 
highly and decided to act on the defensive. They refused all 
challenges to combat. 

Surely enough after a couple of months the supplies of the 
Hsiliang men were all exhausted and the leaders began to 
consider retreat. 

Just at this juncture a household servant of Ma Yii’s family | 
betrayed his master and told of the conspiracy of the three 
men to assist the attackers. The two chief rebels in revenge 
seized the three conspirators, with every member of their 
households, and beheaded them in the market place. The 
heads of the three were exposed at the gate. 

Being short of food and hearing of the destruction of their 
three adherents in the city, the only course for Ma and Han 
was to retreat. At once Chang Chi went in pursuit of Ma 
T‘éng and Fan Ch‘ou followed Han Sui. The retreating army 
under Ma was beaten and only by Ma Ch‘ao’s desperate efforts 
were the pursuers driven off. 

Fan Ch‘ou pursued the other army and when he had come 
close Han Sui rode boldly up and addressed him, saying 
“You and I, Sir, are fellow villagers. Why then behave so 
unfriendly ?” 

Ch‘ou replied, “I must obey the commands of my chief.” 

“I am here for the service of the State; why do you press 
me so hard?” said Han. ~— 

At this Fan Ch‘ou turned his horse, called in his men and 
left him in peace. Unwittingly a nephew of Li Ts‘ui had been. 
a witness of this scene and when he saw the enemy allowed to 
go free he returned and told his uncle. Angry that his enemy 
had escaped, Li would have wreaked vengeance on his lieuten- 
ant, but his adviser again came in saying it was dangerous 


‘Homance of the Three Kingvomgs B 


a tO crop another war. He proposed inviting the defaulting 
= Officer to a banquet and, while the feast was in progress, 


executing him for dereliction of duty. This seemed good to 


Li so the banquet. was prepared. The two officers accepted 
their invitations and went cheerfully. Toward the latter part 
of the entertainment a sudden change came over their host and 
he suddenly asked Fan Ch‘ou, “Why have you been intriguing 
with Han Sui? You are turning traitor, eh?” 
The unhappy guest was taken aback and before he could 
` frame his words to reply he saw the assassins rush out with 
= swords and axes. In a moment all was over and his head lay 
beneath. the table. 13 
= Seared beyond measure his fellow-guest grovelled on the 
floor. “He was a traitor,” said the host, raising him by the 
aaa “and he has his deserts; you are my friend and need not ` 
ear. 

He gave Chang Chi command of the murdered man’s troop 
with which he returned to Hungnung. No one of the nobles 
among the leaguers dared attempt an attack on the party newly 
risen from Tung Cho’s disaffection, while on the other hand 
Chia Hsü never ceased to urge his masters to exert themselves 
_ for the welfare of the people and thus to tempt wise men to join 
meathem. — And by these means the government began to prosper. 

However, a new trouble arose in the shape of a resurgence — 
of Yellow Turbans. They came, without apparent head or 
leader, in large numbers and plundered any place they reached. 
-Chu Chien said he knew of one who could destroy this sedition, 
and when asked who was the man he proposed he said, “You 
want to destroy this horde of rebels; you will fail unless you 
~ get the services of Ts‘ao Méng-té.” 

“And where is he?” asked Li Ts‘ui. 

“He is Prefect of Tung Chiin. He has a large army and you 
have only to order him to act; the rising will be broken.” 

A messenger went post haste with a command for Ts‘ao 


~ Ts‘ao and Pao Hsin to act together in quelling the rebellion. 


As soon as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao received the court command he 
arranged with his colleague first to attack the rebels at 
_Shouyang.€ Pao Hsin made a dash right into their midst, 


` inflicting damage wherever he could, and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao pursued 


them as they fled. So many surrendered. Then he put his 
quondam enemies in the van and when his army reached any 


: place many more surrendered and joined him. After three 


months of these tactics they had won over many thousands, 
both of soldiers and ordinary folk. 

Of these new adherents the strongest and boldest were made 
soldiers and the others were sent home to their fields. In 
consequence of these successes Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s prestige and fame 
became very great and increased daily. He reported his 


96 í an Buv, or 


success to the capital and was rewarded with the re ot 
-Commander, “Warden of the East.” 

At his headquarters in Yenchow Ts‘ao Ts‘ao welcomed wise 
counsellors and bold warriors, and many gathered around him. 
Two clever men, uncle and nephew, came at the same time, 
both Yingchow men, named Hsiin Yü and Hsiin Yu. The 
uncle had once been in the service of Ytian Shao. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
rejoiced when he had won the elder Hsiin to his side saying 
he was his teacher. The nephew was famed for his ability 
and had been in the court service but had abandoned that 
career and retired to his village. 

The uncle said to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “There is a certain wise man 
a Yenchow somewhere, but I ‘do nos know in whose service 

e is.’ 

“Who is he?” 

“Ch‘éng Yii; he belongs to the eastern district.” 

“Yes; I have heard of him,” said Ts‘ao. So a mesSenger 
was sent to his native place to enquire. He was away in the © 
hills engaged in study, but he came at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s invitation. 

“I shall prove unworthy of your recommendation,” said he 
to his friend Hsiin, “for I am rough and ignorant. But have — 
you forgotten a fellow villager of yours, Kuo Chia? He is | 
really able. Why not spread the net to catch him?” 0 

“I had nearly forgotten,” said Hsiin Yü suddenly. So he 
told his master of this man, who was at once invited. Kuo, 
discussing the world at large with his master, spoke in high 
terms of one Liu Yeh; and when he had arrived he was the 
means of inviting two more, Man Ch‘ung and Lii Ch‘ien, who 
were already known to Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao by reputation. These 
two brought to their new master’s notice the name of Mao: 
Chieh, who also came and was given office. Then a famous 
leader, with his troop of some hundreds, arrived to offer 
service. This was Yü Chin of T‘aishan, an expert horseman 
and archer, and skilled beyond his fellows in every form of ` 
military exercise. He was made an army inspector. 

Then another day Hsiahou Tun brought a really fng hand- 
some fellow to present to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“Who is he,” asked Ts‘ao. 

“He is from Ch‘én-liu and is named Tien Wei. He is the © 
boldest of the bold, the strongest of the strong. He was one 
of Chang Mo’s men, but quarrelled with his.tent companions 
and killed a lot of them with his fists. Then he fled to the 
mountains where I found him. I was out shooting and saw 
him follow a tiger across a stream. I persuaded him to join 
my troop and I recommend him.” 

“I see he is no ordinary man,” said Ts‘ao. “He is handsome. 
and straight and looks very powerful and bold.” 

“He is. He killed a man once to avenge a friend and carried 
his head through the whole market place. Hundreds saw him, 


Romance of the Three Bingdoms 97 


_but dared not come near. The weapon he uses now is a two- 
_ branched spear over a hundred pounds in weight, and he vaults 
= into the saddle with this under his arm.” 

Ts‘ao 'Ts‘ao bade the man give proof of his skill so he gal- 
loped to and fro carrying the spear. Then he saw away 
among the tents a huge banner swaying dangerously with the 
force of the wind and on the point of falling. A crowd of 
soldiers were vainly struggling to keep it steady. Down he 
leaped, shouted to the men to clear out and held the staff quite 
steady with one hand, keeping it perfectly upright in spite 
of the strong wind. 

“This is old Wu Lai again,” said Ts‘ao.Ts‘ao. He gave the 
‘strong man a post in the army and besides made him presents 
of an embroidered robe and a swift steed with a handsome 

saddle. — i 

Thus Ts‘ao Ts‘ao encouraged able men to assist him and 
he had advisers on the civil side and valiant captains in the 

army. He became famous through all Shantung. 

Ts‘ao’s father, Sung, was living at Langya, whither he had 
gone as a place free from the turmoil of the partizan struggles 
and, as a dutiful son, Ts‘ao sent the Prefect of T‘aishan to 
escort his father to Yenchow. The old man read the letter 

_ with joy and the family prepared to move. They were some 

_ forty in all, with a train of a hundred servants and many 
carts. 

Their road led through Hsiichou where the Prefect, T'ao 

_ Ch‘ien, was a sincere and upright man who had long wished 
-to get on good terms with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao but, hitherto, had found 
no means of effecting a bond of union. Hearing that the family ~ 
of the great man was passing through his district he went to 

- welcome them, treated them with great cordiality, feasting and 
entertaining them for two days, and when they left he escorted 
them to his boundary. Further he sent with them one Chang 

~ K‘ai with a special escort. 

The whole party reached Huafei. It was the end of summer, 

-~ just turning into autumn, and at this place they were stopped — 
by a tremendous storm of rain. The only shelter was an old 
temple and thither they went. The family occupied the main 
‘rooms and the escort the two side wings. The men of the escort 

- were drenched, angry and discontented. The leader called some 
of his petty officers to a secret spot and said, “We are old Yellow 
-Turbans and only submitted to T‘ao because there was no help 
for it. We have never got much out of it. Now here is the 

- Ts‘ao family with no end of gear and we can be rich’ very 
easily. We will make a sudden onslaught to-night at the third 
watch and slay the whole lot. Then we shall have plenty of 

- treasure and we will get away to the mountains.” - 

They all agreed. ‘The storm continued into the night and as 
-Ts‘ao Sung sat waiting anxiously for signs of clearing he 


e 
í 


98 an Kuo, or 


suddenly heard a hubbub at the west end of the temple. Hisia i 


brother Ts‘ao Tê, drawing his sword, went out to see what it 


was about and was at once cut down. Ts‘ao Sung seized one. : 
of the concubines by the hand, rushed with her through the 


passage toward the back of the temple so that they might 
escape. But the lady was stout and could not get through the 


narrow doors so the two hid in one of the small outhouses at 


the side. However, they were seen and slain. 


The unhappy Prefect fled for his life to Yüan Shao. The 


murderers fled into Huainan with their plunder after having ~ 


set fire to the old temple. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, whom the ages praise, 
Slew the Lis in former days; 
Nemesis ne’er turns aside. 
Murdered too his family died. 


Some of the escort escaped and took the evil sidings to Tsao 4 


Ts‘ao. When he heard it he fell to the earth with a great ery. 
They raised him. With set teeth he muttered, “His men have — 
slain my father: no longer can the same sky cover us. I will 


sweep Hsiichou off the face of the earth. Only thus can I 
satisfy my vengeance.’ 


Leaving one small army to guard the east he set forth with 
all the remainder to destroy Hsiichou and avenge his father. - 


Now the Prefect of Kiukiang was a close friend of T‘ao 


Ch‘ien. Hearing Hsiichou was threatened he set out with half 
a legion to his friend’s aid. Ts‘ao sent Hsiahou Tun to cut: — 


_ him off while still on the march. At this time Ch‘én Kung was 


in office in the east and he was also on friendly terms with | 


T‘ao. Hearing of Ts‘ao’s design to destroy the whole popula- 


tion he came in haste to see his former companion. Ts‘ao _ 


knowing his errand put him off at first and would not see him. 
But he could not forget the kindness he had formerly recess 
and presently the visitor was called to his tent. 

Ch‘én Kung said, “They say you go to avenge your father’s 
death on Hsiichou, to destroy its people. I have come to say a 


word. The Prefect is humane and a good man. He is not. 


looking out for his own advantage, careless of the means and 
of others. Your worthy father met his unhappy death at the 
hands of Chang K‘ai. T‘ao Ch‘ien is guiltless. Still more 
innocent are the people and to slay them would be an evil. 
I pray you to think over it.” 


\ 


Ts‘ao retorted angrily, “You once abandoned me and. now ; 
you have the impudence to come to see me! T‘ao Chien slew — 


my whole family and I will tear his heart out in revenge. _ 


I swear it. You may speak for your friend and say what you 
will. I shall be as if I heard not.” 


Intercession had failed. He sighed and took his leave. tg 
“Alas! I cannot go to T‘ao and look upon his face.” So he 


rode off to the Ch‘én-liu district. 


Í 


1 


Romance of the Three Hingdom Ti 


Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao’s army of revenge laid waste Whatever place it A : 
passed through, slaying the people and desecrating their ceme- 


_teries. oe fk 
When T‘ao Chien heard the terrible tidings he looked. up ton o a 
heaven saying, “I must be guilty of some fault before Heaven ~~ 


to have brought this evil upon my people.” He called together | 
_ his officials to consult. One of them, Ts‘ao Pao, said, “Now the A 


enemy is upon us, we cannot sit and await death with. folded Me 


- hands. I for one will help you to make a fight.” 

The army went out. From a distance the enemy spread 
abroad like hoar frost and rushed far and wide like snow. 
In their midst was a large white flag and on both sides was: 2 


- written “Vengeance.” — eas 
When he had ranged his men Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rode out dresued” ae 
in mourning white and abused T‘ao Ch‘ien, But T‘ao advanced a 


and from beneath his ensign bowed low and said, “I wished l 
_to make friends with you, Illustrious Sir, and so I ‘sent Chang e 
= K‘ai to escort your family. I knew not. that his rebel heart EN, 
was still unchanged. The fault does not lie at my door as 
you must see.” 


“You old fool, you killed my father and now you dare to- i 
mumble this nonsense, ’ said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, And he asked AO oe 
would go out and seize him. a ae 


Hesiahou Tun undertook this service and rode out. The co 


Prefect fled to the inner portion of his array and as Hsiahou 


two horses met a hurricane burst over the spot and the flying 

dust and pebbles threw both sides into the utmost confusion. N 

Both drew off. ` Bic 
The Prefect retired into the city and called his officers ‘toy: auno 

council. “The force against us is too strong,” saidhe. “Iwill 

-give myself up as a prisoner and let him wreak his vengeance Nh 

on me. I may save the people.” yy 
-But a voice was heard saying, “You have long ruled here. 


Tun came on Ts‘ao Pao went to meet him. But just as the - 


a Vand the people love you. Strong as the enemy are they are 


not necessarily able to break down our walls, especially when 

` defended by you and your people. I have a scheme to suggest. 

that I think will make Ts‘ao Ts‘ao die i ina place where he will 

net find burial.” Pasi) 
‘These bold words ‘startled the assembly and they eagerly ay 


asked what the scheme was. 


Making overtures for friendship he encountered deadly hate, 
` But, where danger seemed most threatening, he discovered 
' safety’s gate. 


re next chapter will disclose who the speaker was. 


3 bey i 


à 5 ? : 


CHAPTER XI. 


LIU, THE EMPEROR’S UNCLE, RESCUES K‘UNG JUNG: 
Lu, MARQUIS OF WEN, DEFEATS Ts‘Ao TS‘AO. 


I was one Mi Chu who said he knew how to defeat Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao utterly. He came of a wealthy family of merchants 


trading in Loyang. One day travelling homeward from that 


city in a carriage he met an exquisitely beautiful lady trudg- 
ing along the road, who asked him to let her ride. He stopped 
and yielded his place to her. She invited him to share the seat 
with her. He mounted, but sat rigidly upright never even 
glancing in her direction. They travelled thus for some miles 
when she thanked him and alighted. Just as she left she said, 
.“I am the embodied spirit of the Southern Heat. I am on my 
way to execute a decree of the Supreme to burn your dwelling, 


but your extreme courtesy has so deeply touched me that I `. 


now warn you. Hasten homeward, remove your valuables for 
I must arrive to-night.” 


Thereupon she disappeared. Mi Chu -hastily finished nie. 
. Journey and as soon as he arrived moved everything out of 


his house. Sure enough that night a fire started in the kit- 
chen and involved the whole house. After this he devoted 
his wealth to relieving the poor and comforting the afflicted. 
T‘ao Ch‘ien gave him the office he then held. 

The plan he proposed was this. “Iwill go to Pohai and beg 
K‘ung Jung to help; another should go to Ch‘ingchow on a 
similar mission, and if the armies of these two places march 
on our enemy he will certainly retire.” 


The Prefect accepted the plan and wrote letters. He asked 


for a volunteer to go to Ch‘ingchow and a certain Ch‘én Téng 
offered himself and, after he had left, Mi Chu was formally 
- entrusted with the mission to the north. Meanwhile they 
would hold the city as they could. 

This K‘ung was a native of Ch‘tifou in the old state of Lü, 
one of the twentieth generation in descent from the great 
Teacher Confucius. He had been noted as a very intelligent 
lad, somewhat precocious. When ten years old he had gone 
to see Li Ying, the Governor, but the doorkeeper demurred to 
letting him in. But when he ‘said, “T am Minister Li’s intimate 
friend,” he was admitted. Li asked him what relations had 
existed between their families that might justify the term 


intimate. The boy replied, “Of old my ancestor (K‘ung). 


\ 


‘fiomance of the Three tingvomgs Ei n 


l 


questioned yours (Lao Tai, whose name was Li TRR concern- ; 
ing ceremonies. So our families have known each other for > 


many generations.” His host was astonished at the boy’s 
- ready wit. 
Presently another visitor of high rank came in, to whom 


Li Ying told the story of his youthful guest. “He i is a wonder, . 


this boy,” said Li. 
The visitor replied, “It does not follow that a clever boy 
grows up into a clever man.’ 


The lad took him up at once saying “By what you say, Sir, T 


- you were certainly one of the clever boys.” 
- They all laughed. ‘‘The boy is going to be a noble Jea 
said they. 


Thus from boyhood he was famous. As a man he rose to 


be a Chung-lang Chiang, and was sent as Governor to Pohai, 


where he was renowned for hospitality. He used to quote the ee 


lines: — 
; “Let the rooms be full of friends, 
And the cups be full of wine.’ 


“That is s what I like,” said he. 


After six years at Pohai the people were devoted to him. — 


The day that Mi Chu arrived he was, as usual, seated among 
his guests and the messenger was ushered in without delay. 


-In reply to a question about the reason of the visit he presented ` 


- his letter which said that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was pressing on the city 
and the Prefect prayed for help. 


Then said K‘ung Jung, “Your master and I are good friends — : 


and your presence here constrains me to go to his aid. How- 
-ever I have no quarrel with Ts‘ao Méng-te either, so I will first 


write to him to try to make peace. If he refuses my offer, then — 


I must set the army in motion.” 


“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will not listen to proposals of peace; he is too 4 


certain of his strength,” said the messenger. 


K‘ung Jung wrote his letter and also gave orders to muster _ ot 


his men. Just at this moment happened another rising of the 
Yellow Turbans, and the ruffians began to rob and murder at 


._ Pohai. It was necessary to deal with them first and Kung led 


his army outside the city. 


The rebel leader rode out to the front saying, “I know this 


district is fruitful and can well spare ten thousand ‘stone’ of 


grain. Give me that and we retire: refuse, and we will batter. 


down the city walls and destroy every soul.” 
The Prefect shouted back, “I am a servant of the great Hans, 
-entrusted with the safety of their land. Think you I will feed 
rebels ?” 


The leader Kuan Hai whipped his steed, whirled his sword © 


‘around his head and rode forward. Tsung Pao, one of K‘ung’s 


captains, set his spear and rode out to give him battle, but | 


after a very few bouts was cut down. Soon the soldiers fell 


102. mes T San uo, ow ` 


into Konon and rushed pell-mell into the city for protection. 
The rebels then laid seige to the city on all sides. K‘ung Jung 
was very down-hearted and Mi Chu, who now saw no hope for ` 
the success of his mission, was grieved beyond words. 

The sight from the city wall was exceeding sad, for the rehels 
were there in enormous numbers.. One day as the Prefect 
stood on the wall, he saw a man armed with a spear riding hard 
in among his enemies and scattering them before him like chaff 
‘` before the wind. Before long he had reached the foot of the 
wall and called out, “Open the gate!” But the defenders would 
not open to an unknown man and in the delay a crowd of rebels 
gathered round the rider along the edge of the moat. Sud- 
denly wheeling about, the warrior dashed in among them and 
bowled over half a score at which the others fell back. At- 


_. this the Prefect ordered the wardens to open the gates and let 
the stranger enter. As soon as he was inside he dismounted, 
laid aside his spear, ascended the wall and made humble 


obeisance to K‘ung Jung. ie i 
He said his name was T‘aishih Tz‘t and he came from — 

_ Laihuang. His aged mother had sent him out of gratitude. 
for the kindness shown her by K‘ung. “I only returned home 
_ yesterday from the north and then I heard that your city was 
in danger from a rebel attack. My mothef said you had been 


boat very kind to her and told me I Shod try to help. So I set out 


all alone and here I am.’ 

This was cheering. The Prefect already knew T‘aishih by ` 
reputation as a valiant fighting man although they two had . 
never met. The son being far away from his home the Prefect 
had taken his mother, who dwelt a few miles from the city, 
. under his especial protection and saw that she did not suffer 
from want. This had won the old lady’s heart and she had 
sent her son to show her gratitude. 

-= K‘ung showed his appreciation by treating his guest with 
the greatest respect, making him presents of clothing and 
armour, saddles and horses. 

Presently said T“aishih, “Give me a company end I will go 
out and drive off these fellows.” 
“You are a bold warrior, but these are very numerous. It 

is a serious matter to go out among them,” said K‘ung. 

“My mother sent me because of your goodness to her, How 


-shall I be able to look her in the face if I do not raise the siege? 


I would prefer to conquer or perish.” 

“I have heard Liu Yiian-té is one of the Anast warriors in 
the world and if we could get his help there would be no doubt 
of the result. But there is no one to send.” 

“I will go as soon as I have received your letter.” 
So K‘ung wrote letters and: gave them to his new helper: 
T‘aishih put on his armour, mounted his steed, attached his 


bow and quiver to his girdle, ‘took his spear in his hand, tied 


HER. TISAI TENSE TAR 


ae 


 Homance of the Three Kingdoms 0B 


ue his packed haversack firmly to his saddle bow and rode out at 
the city gate. He went quite alone. 
Along the moat a large party of the besiegers were gathered 


_. and they came to intercept the solitary: rider. But he dashed 
in among them and cut down several and so finally fought his 


` way through. 


; The rebel leader, hearing that a vider had left the city, 
. guessed what his errand would be and followed T‘aishih witk 


a party of horsemen. He spread them out so that the messen. 
ger rider was entirely surrounded. ‘Then T‘aishih laid aside 


his spear, took his bow, adjusted his arrows one by one and ` 
-shot all round him. And as a rider fell from his steed with | 
every twang of his bowstring, the pursuers dared not close in. ` 


Thus he got clear away and rode in hot haste to Liu Yiian-te. 
He reached P‘ingyiian and after greeting his host in proper 
- form he told how K‘ung Pohai was surrounded and had sent 


him for help. Then he presented the letter which Liu Pei read. | 


“Who are you?” asked he. 


“I am T‘aishih Tz‘t, a stupid fellow from Tunghai. I aul 


not related by ties of kin to K‘ung Jung, nor even by ties of 


` neighbourhood, but I am by the bonds of sentiment and I share 
_ his sorrows and misfortunes. The rebel Kuan has invested . 


` his city and he is distressed with none to turn to and destruc- 
_ tion is very near. You are known as humane and righteous 
and you are able to rescue him. ‘Therefore at his command I 


have braved all dangers and fought my way through his ` 


enemies to pray you to save him.” 

Liu Yiian-té smiled, saying, “And does he know of my 
uremistence rii, 
So the three brothers | told off three companies and set out 


to help raise the siege. When the rebel leader saw these new © 


. forces arriving he led out his army to fight them, thinking he 


_ could easily dispose of so small a force. 


The brothers and T‘aishih Tz‘t with them sat on their horses 


- jn the forefront of their array. Kuan Hai, the rebel leader, 


© hastened forward. ‘T‘aishih held back to allow Kuan Yü to 
- open the combat. He rode forth and the two steeds met. The 


‘soldiers set up a great shout, for how could there be any doubt ~ 


of the result? After a few ‘bouts Black Dragon rose and fell, 
and with the stroke fell the rebel leader. 
_ This was the signal for the two other warriors to take a 
share and they advanced side by side. With their spears ready 
they dashed.in and Yiian-té urged forward his men. The 
besieged Prefect saw his doughty rescuers laying low the rebels 
- as tigers among a flock of sheep. None could withstand them 
and he then sent out his own men to join in the battle so that 
the rebels were between two armies. The rebels’ force was 
- completely broken and many men surrendered, while the 
remainder scattered in all directions. 


104 San kus, or 


The victors were welcomed into the city and as soon as 
possible a banquet was prepared in their honour. Mi Chu was 
presented to Liu Yiian-té and he related the story of the 
- murder of Ts‘ao Sung by Chang K‘ai and Ts‘ao’s vengeful - 
attack on Hsiichou and his coming to beg for assistance. 

Yiian-té said, “T'ao Kung-tsu is a kindly man of high charac- 
ter, and it is a pity that he should suffer this wrong for no 
fault of his own.’ 

“You are a scion of the imperial family.” said the Prefect, 

“and this Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is injuring the people, a strong man 
abusing his strength. Why not go with me to rescue the 
sufferers ?”. 

“I dare not refuse, but my force is weak and I must act 
cautiously,” said Liu Pei. 

“Though my desire to help arises from an old friendship, 
yet it is a righteous act as well. Is it that your A is net 
inclined toward the right?” said K‘ung. 

Liu Pei said, “This being so, you go first and give me time © 
to see Kungsun Tsan from whom I may borrow more men and | 
horses. I will come anon.’ 

“You surely will not break your promise?” said the Prefect. 

“What manner of man think you that I am?” said Yüan-tê. - 
“The wise one said, ‘Death is common to all: the man without 
truth cannot maintain himself.’ Whether I get the men or 
not, certainly I shall myself come.” _ 

So the plan was agreed to. Mi Chu set out to return forth- 
with while K‘ung Jung prepared for his expedition. 

T‘aishih Tz‘ŭ took his leave saying, “My mother bade me 
come to your aid and now happily you are safe. Letters have - 
come from my fellow townsman, Liu Yu, Governor of Yang- 
chou, calling me thither and I must go. I will see you again.” 

K‘ung pressed rewards upon him but he would accept no- 
thing and went away. When his mother saw him she was 
pleased at his success saying she rejoiced that he had been able 
to prove his gratitude, and after this he departed for Yang- 
chou. 

Here nothing will be said of the departure of the relieving 
force. But Yiian-té went away to his friend Kungsun Tsan 
and laid before him his design to help Hstichou. 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and you are not enemies; why do you spend 
yourself for the sake of another?” said Tsan. 

“I have promised,” he replied, “and dare not break faith.” 

“I will lend you two companies, horse and foot,” said Tsan. 

“Also I wish to have the services of Chao Tzii-lung,” said 
Yüan-tê. , 

-Tsan agreed to this also. 

They marched away, their own men being in the front and. 
Chao Tzŭ-lung, with the borrowed men, being in rear. 


Romance of the Three Lingdoms 


In due course Mi Chu returned saying that K‘ung Jung had 
also obtained the services of the three warrior brothers. The 


other messenger, Ch‘én Yiian-lung, came back and reported . 


that T‘ien K‘ai would also bring help. Then was the Prefect’s 
heart set at ease.. 


But both the leaders, though they had promised aid, greatly 


_ dreaded their antagonist and camped among the hills at a great 
distance, fearful of coming to close quarters. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao knew 
of their coming and divided his army into parts to meet them, 
so postponing the attack on the city itself. Presently Liu Pei 

came up and went to see K‘ung Jung, who said, “The enemy is 
very powerful and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao handles his army skilfully. ‘We 


must be cautious. Let us make most careful observations be- ` 


fore we strike a blow.” S 
_ “What I fear is famine in the city,” said Liu Pei. “They 
cannot hold out very long. I will put my men with yours 
under your command while I with Chang Fei make a dash 
_ through to see T‘ao Ch‘ien and consult with him.” 

K‘ung Jung approved of this, so he and Tien K‘ai took up 
‘positions on the “ox horn formation,” with Kuan Yü and Chao 

Yün on either side to support them. 

_ The day that Liu Pei and his company made their dash to 
get through Ts‘ao’s army they got as far as. the flank of his 


: camp when there arose a great beating of drums, and horse 


and foot rolled out like billows on the ocean. The leader was 
Yü Chin. He checked his steed and called out, “You mad men 
from somewhere, where are you going?” 

Chang Fei heard him but deigned no reply. He only rode 
straight to attack the speaker. After they had fought a few 
bouts Yiian-té waved his double sword as signal for his men 
to come on and they drove Yii Chin before them. Chang Fei 
led the pursuit and in this way they reached the city wall. 

From the city wall the besieged saw a huge banner embroid- 
ered in white with the name of Liu Pei and the Prefect bade 
them open the gate for the rescuers to enter. The leader was 
made very welcome, conducted to the residency and a banquet 
prepared in his honour. The men also were feasted. 

T‘ao Ch‘ien was delighted with Liu Pei, admiring his noble 
appearance and clear speech. He bade Mi Chu offer him the 
seal and insignia of office. But the visitor shrank back startled. 

“What does this mean?” said he. 

T‘ao said, “There is trouble on every side and the kingly rule 
is no longer maintained. You, Sir, are a member of the family 
and eminently fitted to support them and their prerogatives. 
I am verging on senility and I wish to retire in your favour. 

I pray you not to decline and I will report my action to the 
Court.” 

Liu Pei started up from his seat and bowed before his host 
- saying, “Scion of the family I may be, but my merit is small 


105 ak 


PEE L an huo, or 


and my virtue meagre. I doubt my fitness even for my present 
post and only a feeling of doing right sent me to your assist- 
- ance. To hear such speech makes me doubt. Surely you 
think I came with greed in my heart. May God help me no 
more if I cherished such a thought.” 

“Itis a poor old man’s real sentiment,” said T‘ao Ch‘ien. 

Time after time T‘ao Ch‘ien renewed his offer to retire, but — 
how could Liu Pei accept it? 

In the midst of this came Mi Chu to say the enemies had 
reached the wail and something must be done to drive them off. — 


The matter of one officer retiring in favour of the other could | 


await a more tranquil time. 

Said Liu Pei, “I ought to write to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to press him 
to raise the siege. If he refuse, we will attack forthwith.” = 
l Orders were sent to the three camps to remain quiescent till - 
the letters could reach Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. E 

It happened that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was holding a council wher? a ¥ 
messenger with a war letter was announced. The letter was 
brought in and handed to him and, when he had opened and ` 
looked at it, he found it was from Liu Pei. 

This is the letter, very nearly :—‘“‘Since meeting you. outside 
the pass, fate has assigned us to different quarters of the 
world and I have not been able to pay my respects to you. 


Touching the death of your noble father, the Marquis, it was — 


owing to the vicious nature of Chang K‘ai and due to no fault 


of T‘ao Kung-tsu.. Now while the remnant of the Yellow | 


Turbans is disturbing the provinces and Tung Cho’s partizans 
have the upper hand in the capital, I would that you, illustrious 
Sir, would regard the critical position of the Court rather than 
your personal grievances and so divert your forces from the | 
attack on Hsitichou to the rescue of the State. Such would be 
for the happiness of that city and the whole world.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao gave vent to a torrent of abuse. ‘Who is this, — 
Liu Pei that he dares write and exhort me? Beside, he means | 
to be satirical.” 

He issued orders to put the bearer of the letter to death and 
to press on the siege. But Kuo Chia remonstrated, “Liu Pei — 
has come from afar to help T‘ao and he is trying the effect of © 
politeness before resorting to arms. : I pray you, my master, 
reply with fair words that his heart may be lulled with a 
rae of safety. Then attack with vigour and the city will 
fall.” 

Ts‘ao found this advice good, so he spared the messenger - 
telling him to wait to carry back his reply.. While this was 
going on a horseman came with news of misfortune. Lii Pu 
had made a raid on Yenchou, 

When Li and Kuo, the two partizans of Tung Cho, sokeeaded i 
in their attack on the capital Lü Pu had fled to Yüan Shu, who 
however looked askance at him for his instability, and refused 


3 ~- Romane of the Three Hingooms 107 


Chang Yang, who accepted his services. 


About this time P‘ang Hsü, who had been protecting Lü’s 


family since his disappearance, restored them to him, which 
deed angered Li and Kuo so that they put P‘ang to death and 
wrote to Lii Pu’s protector to serve him the same. To escape 


this Lü Pu once again had to flee and this time joined himself — 


to Chang Mo. 

He arrived just as Chang Mo’s brother was POENE E 
Ch‘én Kung. Kung said to Mo, “The disrupture of the Empire 
has begun and warriors are seizing what. they can. It is 
strange that you, with all the advantages you enjoy, do not 
strike for independence. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has gone on an expedi- 
tion’ against the east leaving his own district defenceless. Lü 
Pu is one of the fighting men of the day. If you and he 
together attacked and got. K AGRO. you could then proceed to 


-the dominion.” 


„Chang Mo was pleased and resolved to try, Soon Lü Pu 
‘was in possession of Yenchou and its neighbourhood, all but 
three small departments, which were desperately defended. 


Ts‘ao Jên had fought many battles but was always defeated 


-and the messenger with the evil tidings had come from him 


asking help. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was greatly disturbed by this and said,e“If my 
own city be lost I have no home to return. to. I must do 


something at once.” | 


“The best thing would he i become Ponde with Liu Pei at 


any ‘cost and return to Yenchou,” said Kuo Chia. 


Then he wrote to Liu Pei, gave the letter to the waiting 
messenger and broke camp. The news that the enemy had 
left was very gratifying to the. Prefect, who then invited his 


various defenders into the city and prepared panne and. 


feasts i in token of his gratitude. 


At one of these, when the feasting was over, he proceeded 


with his scheme of retirement in favour of Liu Pei. Placing 
him in the seat of highest honour he bowed before him and 


: then- addressed the assembly. 


} 


“Tam old and feeble and my two sons lack the D to hold 


“go important an office as this. The noble Liu is a descendant 


cof the imperial house. He is of lofty virtue and great talent. 
Let him then take over the rule of this district and only too 
willingly I shall retire to have leisure to nurse my health.” 

Liu Pei replied, “I came at the request of K‘ung Wén-chii 
because it was the right thing to do. Hsiichou is saved, but 
if T take it surely the world will say I am a wicked man.’ 


Big receive him. Then he had tried Yüan Shao, who had made 

use of him in an attack upon Chang Yen in Ch‘angshan. But 
his success filled him with pride and his arrogant demeanour 
SO annoyed the other commandants that Shao was on the point | 
of putting him to death. To escape this he had gone away to 


108 San Kuo, or 


Mi Chu said, “You may not refuse: The House of Han is | 


failing, their realm is crumbling and now is the time for 


iP 


doughty deeds and signal services. This is a fertile district, © 


well populated, and you are the man to rule over it.” 
“But I dare not accept.” ` 


“The Prefect is a great sufferer,” said Ch‘én Téng, “and — 


cannot see to matters. You may not decline, Sir.” 


Said Yiian-té, “Yiian Shu belongs to a family of rulers and 


the highest offices of state were held four times in three 


generations. The whole empire respects him, why not invite © 


him to this task ?” 


“Because he is a rotting bone in a dark tomb; not worth — 
talking about. This oportunity is a gift from Heaven and you : 


will never cease to regret its loss,” said K‘ung. 
So spake K‘ung Jung, but still Liu Pei obstinately refused. 


T‘ao Ch‘ien besought him with tears. “I shall die if you leave | 


me and there will be none to close my eyes.’ 


“Brother, you should accept the offer thus made,” said Kuan. 


Yii. 


“Why so much fuss?” said Chang Fei. “We have not taken i 


the place; it is he who wishes to give it you.’ 
“You all persuade me to do what is wrong,” said Liu Pei.. 


Thrice did T‘ao entreat Liu Pei and thrice was he refused. > 


Then he said, “As he is set in his determination perhaps he will © 


consent to encamp at Hsiaop‘ei. It is only a little town, but a 


thence he can keep watch and ward over this city.” 


They all with one voice prayed Liu Pei to consent so he gave | 
in. The feast of victory being now ended the time came to © 
say farewell. When Chao Yün took his leave Liu Pei held his © 


hands alternately while dashing away the falling tears. K‘ung — 


Jung and his leader went home to their own place. 


‘When Liu Pei and his brothers took up their abode in 


Hsiaop‘ei, they first repaired the defences and then they put 


out proclamations i in order to calm the inhabitants. 


In the meantime Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had marched toward his own © 
district. His cousin, Ts‘ao Jên, met him and told him Lü Pu © 
was very strong and he had Ch‘én Kung as adviser. Yenchou — 
was as good as lost, with the exception of three small districts — 


which had been desperately defended. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “I own that Lü Pu is a bold fighter but 
nothing more; he ‘has no craft. So we need not fear him — 


seriously.” 


Then he gave orders to make a strong camp till they. could — 
think out some victorious plan. Lü Pu, knowing of Ts‘ao — 
Ts‘ao’s return, called two of his subordinate captains, Hstieh © 
Lan and Li Féng, to him and assigned to them the task of — 
holding Yenchou, saying “I have long waited for opportunity © 
to employ your skill: now I give you a legion and you are: to 


hold the eny while I go forth to attack Ts‘ao Ts ao.” 


A 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms — 109 


~ They made no objection. But Ch‘én Kung, the strategist, 
| came in hastily saying, “You are going away; whither?” 

_ “Tam going to camp my men at Puyang, that vantage point.” 

“You are making a mistake,” said Ch‘én Kung. “The two 

you have chosen to defend this are unequal to the task. For 
Š this expedition remember that about one hundred and eighty 

li due south, on the road to T‘aishan, is a very advantageous 
position where you should place your best men in ambush, 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will hasten homeward by double marches when he 
hears what has happened and if you strike when half his men 
have gone past this point you may seize him.” 

_ Said Lü Pu, “I am going to occupy Puyang and see what 
develops. How can you guess?” | Pe 
So he left the two captains in command at Yenchou and went 
away. i ; ; : 

Now when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao approached the’ dangerous part of 
the road near T‘aishan, Kuo Chia warned him to take care as 
there was doubtless an ambush. But his master laughed, “We 
know all his dispositions. Do you think he has laid an 
ambush? I shall tell Ts‘ao Jên to besiege Yenchou and I shall 
go to Puyang.” 4 i 
When Ch‘én Kung heard of the enemy’s approach. he spoke, 

_ saying “The enemy will be fatigued with long marches so 
_attack quickly before they have time to recover.” 
_. Lü Pu replied, “I, a single horseman, am afraid of none. I 
go and come as I will. Think you I fear this Ts‘ao Ts‘ao? 
- Let him settle his camp; I will take him after that.” 

- Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao neared Puyang and he made a camp. And. 
‘soon after he led out his commanders and they arrayed their 
men in open and desert country. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao took up his 
station on horseback between the two standards, watching 
while his opponents arrived and formed up in a circular area. 
Li Pu was in front, followed by eight of his captains, all strong 
men. Two were called Chang Liao and Tsang Pa; and there 
were six others. They had five legions. -~ . 
The drums began their thunderous roll and Ts‘ao, pointing 
to his opponent, said, “You and I had no quarrel, why then 
did you invade my land?” 

“The Empire of Han is the possession of all; what is your 

special claim?” said Lü. i 

" So saying he ordered Tsang Pa to ride forth and chailenge: 
From Ts‘ao’s side the challenge was accepted by Yo Chin. The 
_ two steeds approached each other, two spears were lifted both 
together and they exchanged near two score blows with no 
advantage to either. Then Hsiahou Tun rode out to help his 
colleague and, in reply, out went Chang Liao from Lü Pu’s 
side, And they four fought. ; ee | 
Then fierce anger seized upon Lü Pu. Setting his spear’he 
“urged his steed forward to where the fight was waging. See- 


110. 7 San tiuo, or 
ing him approach Hsiahou and Yo. both fled, but. Lü. Pu 
pressed on after them and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army. "lost the day. 
Retiring a long way they made a new camp. Lü Pu called 
in and mustered his men. j 

The day having gone against him Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao called a council 
and Yü Chin said, “From the hill tops to-day I saw a camp of; 
our enemies on the west of Puyang. They were but few men, — 
therein, and to-night after to-day’s victory, it will not be de- | 
fended. Let us attack and if we can take the camp we shall 
strike fear into the heart of Lü Pu. This is our best plan.” — 

Ts‘ao thought so too. He and six of his lieutenants and 
two legions left that night by a secret road for the camp. 

In Lü Pu’s camp was rejoicing for that day’s victory when. — 
Ch‘én Kung reminded him of the west camp and its importance, | 
and said that it might be attacked, Lü Pu replied that the 
enemy would not dare approach after that day’ s defeat. 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is a very able commander,” replied Kung. 
“You must keep a good lookout for him lest he attack our weak 
spot.” 

So abennoemenis were made for dofence;. At dusk Ts‘ao. 
Ts‘ao reached the camp and began an immediate attack on all 
four sides. The defenders could not hold him off. They ran . 
in all directions and the camp was captured. Near the fourth 
watch, when the party told off to help defend the camp reached, _ 
it, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sallied forth to meet them and met Kao Shun. 
` Another battle then began and waged till dawn. About that. 


time a rolling of drums was heard in the west and they told — 


_Ts‘ao that Lü Pu’himself was at hand. Thereupon. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao — 
abandoned the attack and fled. 
They pursued him, Lii Pu taking the lead. Two of Ts‘ aos 
lieutenants attacked the pursuers but could not check them. 
Ts‘ao went away north. But from behind some hills came out 
more of Lü Pu’s army and as they could not be beaten off | 
Ts‘ao sought safety in the west. Here again his retreat was 
barred. 
~The fight became desperate. Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao dashed oF the 
enemy’s array. The din was terrible. Arrows fell like 
pelting rain upon them and they could make no headway. He 
was desperate and cried out in fear, “Who can save me??? >= 
Then from the crush dashed out Tien Wei with his double 
lance, crying “Fear not, my master.” He-leapt from his steed, 
leaned his double lance against a wall and laid hold of a hand- 
ful of darts. Turning to his followers he said, “When. the ; 
ruffians are at ten paces, call out to me.” 
Then he set off with mighty strides, plunging (opaecd 
eareless'of the flying arrows. Lü Pu’s horsemen followed and 
when they got near the followers shouted, “Ten paces!” 
“Five, then call !”. shouted back Tien Wei, and went « on. 
Presently, “Five paces!” 


oat) ‘hen Tien Wei spun end and flung the dartan With every. 
Hi fling. a man fell from the saddle and never a dart missed. 
- Having thus slain half a score the remainder fled and Tien 
- quickly remounted his steed, set his twin lance and rushed — 
` again into the fight with a vigour. that none could withstand. | 
One by € one his opponents yielded and he was able to lead Ts‘ao_ 
Ts‘ ‘ao safely out of the press of battle, Ts: ao and his captains 
i Bs went to their camp. 
But as evening fell the noise of pursuit fell on their ears 
and soon appeared Lü Pu himself. “Ts‘ ao, you rebel, do not’ i 
a flee!” shouted he as he apiroachar, with his halberd ready o i 
a thrust. rai 
$ All Stopped and looked in each others’ faces: the men were 
weary, their steeds spent. Fear smote them and they looked | 
round for some place of refuge. i AEA j 
S -You may lead your lord safely out of the wane: ! ue 
But what if the enemy follow? sit 
ie We cannot say here what Ts‘ao Ts’ ao’s fate was, but the a 
AREXE, preter: will relate. | ee 


CHAPTER XII. 


THE PREFECT T‘AO THRICE OFFERS HIS Gece’ 
Ts‘Ao Ts‘AO FIGHTS A GREAT BATTLE. 


Fie last chapter closed with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in great danger. 
However, help came. MHsiahou Tun with a small body of 
soldiers found his chief, checked the pursuit, and fought with 
Lu Pu till dusk. Rain fell in torrents swamping everything 
and as the daylight waned they drew off and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
reached camp. He rewarded Tien Wei richly and advanced 
him in rank. 

When Lii Pu reached his camp he called in his Dae Chié én 
Kung. The latter proposed a new stratagem. He said, “In 
Puyang there is a rich family, T‘ien by name, who number 
thousands, enough to populate a whole district in themselves. 
Make one of these people go to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp with a pre- | 
tended secret letter about Lü Pu’s ferocity, and the hatred of the 
people, and their desire to be rid of him. End by saying that 
only Kao Shun is left to guard the city and they would help 
any one who would come to save them. Thus our enemy will 
be inveigled into the city and we will destroy him either by 
fire or ambush. His skill may | be equal to encompassing the 
universe but he will not escape.” 

Lii Pu thought this trick might be tried and they arranged 
for the T‘ien family letter to be sent. Coming soon after the 
defeat, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao felt uncertain what step to take next, 
the secret letter was read with joy. It promised help and said 
the sign should be a white flag with the word “Rectitude” — 
written thereon. 

“Heaven is going to give me Puyang,” said Ts‘ao joyfully. 
So he rewarded the messenger very liberally and began to 
prepare for the expedition. 

Then came Liu Hua saying, “Lü Pu is no strategist but , 
Ch‘én Kung is full of guile; I fear treachery in this letter and 
you must be careful. If you will go, then enter with only one 
third your army leaving the others ‘outside the city as a 
reserve.’ 


Ts‘ao agreed to take this prevaitione He went to Puyang, ` 


which he found gay with fluttering flags. Looking carefully | 
he saw among them, at the west gate, the white flag with the 
looked-for inscription. His heart rejoiced. 

That day, just about noon, the city gates opened and two 
bodies of soldiers appeared as if to fight. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao told off 


— Komance of the Three Ringvoms 113 


two of his captains to oppose them. Neither body, however, 


= came on to engage but fell back into the city. By this move 


the assailants had been drawn close up to the drawbridge. 


= From within the city several soldiers were seen taking any 


chance of confusion to escape and come outside. To Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
they said they were clients of the T‘ien family and they gave 
him secret letters stating the signal would be given about 
watch setting by beating a gong. That would be the time to 
attack. The gates would be opened. 

So the rescuers were stationed and four trusty captains told 
_ off to accompany Ts‘ao Ts‘ao into the city. One of these Li 
` Tien, pressed upon his master the precaution of letting him go 
first. But Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade him be silent. “If.I do not go, 
= who will advance?” And so at the time appointed he led the 
way. The moon had not yet arisen. 

As he drew near the west gate th ey heard a crackling sound, 
then a loud shouting, and then torches moved hither and thither. 
= Next the gates were thrown wide open and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, 
whipping up his steed, galloped in. 

But when he reached the residence he noticed the streets 
- were quite deserted and then he knew he had been tricked. 
_ Wheeling round his horse he shouted to his followers to retire. 
This was the signal for another move. An.explosion of a 
- signal-bomb was heard close at hand and it was echoed from 
every side in a deafening roar. Gongs and.drums beat all 
around with a roar like rivers rushing backward to their source. 
and the ocean boiling up from its depths. From two sides 
came bodies of soldiers eager to attack. 

Ts‘ao dashed off toward the north only to find his way 
barred; he tried for the south gate, but met enemies led by 
Kao Shun and Hou Ch‘éng. His trusty henchman Tien Wei, | 
with fierce eyes and gritting teeth, at last burst through and 
got out, with the enemy close after him. 

But when he reached the drawbridge he glanced behind him 
and missed his master. Immediately he turned back and cut 
his way inside. Just within he met Li Tien. 

“Where is our lord?” cried he. 

“T am looking for him.” 

. “Quick! get help from outside,” shouted Tien Wei. “I will 
seek him.” 

So one hastened for aid and the other slashed his way in, 
_ looking on every side for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He was not to be found. 
Dashing out of the city Tien Wei ran up against Yo Chin, who 
asked where their lord was. 

_ “J have entered the city twice in search of him, but cannot 
. find him,” said Tien. 
“Let us go in together,” said Yo Chin. | 
They rode up to the gate. But the noise of bombs from the 
gate tower frightened Yo Chin’s horse, so that it refused to 


8 


114 | Ban Kuo, or 


' pass. Wherefore Tien Wei alone went in, butting through the 
smoke and dashing through the flames. But he got in and 
searched on every side. 

When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saw his sturdy protector cut his way out 
and disappear leaving him ‘surrounded, he again made an 
attempt to reach the north gate. On the way, sharply outlined 
against the glow, he saw the figure of Lii Pu coming toward 
him with his halberd ready to kill. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao covered his 
face with his hand, whipped up his steed and galloped past. 
But Lü Pu came galloping up behind him and tapping him on 
the helmet with the halberd cried, “Where is Ts‘ao Tsʻao?” 

Ts‘ao turned and, pointing to a ‘dun horse well ahead, cried, 
“There; on that dun! that’s he.” 

Hearing this Lii Pu left pursuing Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to gallop after 
the rider of the dun. 

Thus relieved Ts‘ao Ts‘ao set off for the east gate. Then he 
fell in with Tien Wei, who took him under his protection and _ 
fought through the press leaving a trail of death behind till 


they reached the gate. Here the fire was raging fiercely and — 


burning beams were falling on all sides. The earth element © 


seemed to have interchanged with the fire element. Tien Wei 


warded off the burning pieces of wood with his lance and rode 
into the smoke making a way for his lord. Just as they were 
passing through the gate a flaming beam fell from the gate 
tower. Ts‘ao just warded it off with his arm but it struck his 
steed on the quarters and knocked him down. T's‘ao’s hand 
and arm were badly burned and his hair and beard singed. 

Tien Wei turned back to his rescue. Luckily Hsiahou Yüan 
came along just then and the two raised Ts‘ao and set him on - 
Yiian’s horse. And thus they got him out of the burning city. 
But the fighting went on till daybreak. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ac returned to his camp. His officers crowded about - 
his tent, anxious for news of his health. He soon recovered 
and laughed when he thought of his escape. . 

“I blundered into that fool’s trap, but I will have my re-` 
venge,” said he. 

“Let us have a new plan soon,” said ean Chia. ; 

“T will turn his trick to my own use. I will spread the false 
report that I was burned in the fire and that I died at the fifth 
watch. He will come to attack as soon as the news gets abroad 
and I will have an ambush ready for him in’ Maling Hills. 
I will get him this time.” 

“Really a fine stratagem!” said Kuo. : 

So the soldiers were put into mourning and the report went 7 
everywhere that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was dead. And soon Lü Pu heard 
it and he assembled his men at once to make a surprise attack, 
taking the road by the Maling Hills to his enemy’s camp. 

As he was passing the hills he heard the drums beating for - 
an advance and the ambushed soldiers leapt out all round him. — 


fiamance of the Three Kingdoms —— 115 


_ Only by desperate fighting did he get out of the mêlée and with 

a sadly diminished force returned to his camp at Puyang. 
. There he strengthened the fortifications and could not be 
-~ _ tempted forth to battle. 
`. This year locusts suddenly appeared and they consumed 
every green blade. There was a famine and in the east grain 
rose to fifty “strings”? a hu (bushel). - People even took to 
cannibalism. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army suffered from want and he 
marched them to Chuangch‘éng. © Lü Pu took his men to Shan- 
- yang. Perforce therefore the fighting ceased. 


It is time to return to Hsiichou. T‘ao Ch‘ien, over sixty 


years of age, suddenly fell seriously ill and he summoned his 
confident, Mi Chu, to his chamber to make arrangements for 
_ the future. As to the situation the adviser said, “Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
abandoned his attack on this place because of his enemy’s seizure 
of Yenchou and now they are both keeping the peace solely 
because of the famine. But Ts‘ao will surely renew the attack 
in the ‘spring. . When Liu Yüan-tê refused to allow you: to 
vacate office in his favour you were in full vigour. Now you 
are ill and weak and you can make this a reason for retirement. 
He will not refuse again.” — 
_ So a message was sent to the little garrison iowa calling 
Liu Pei to a counsel on military affairs. This brought him 
with his brothers and a slender escort. He was at once called in 
_to the sick man’s chamber. Quickly disposing of the enquiries 
about his health T‘ao soon came to the real object of his call 
for Liu Pei. 

“Sir, I asked you to come for the sole reason that I am 
dangerously ill and like to: die at any time. I look to you, 


illustrious Sir, to consider the Hans and their Empire as 


. more important than anything else, .and so to take over the 

_ symbols of office of this district, the commission and the seal, 
that I may close my eyes in peace.’ 

“You have two sons, why not depute them to relieve you?” 
said Liu Pei. 

“Both lack the requisite talents. I trust you will instruct 
them after I have gone, but do not let them have the guidance 
of affairs.” -= 

“But I am unequal to so great a charge.” 

“I will recommend to you one who could assist you. He is 
‘Sun Ch‘ien who could be appointed to some post.” © : 

Turning to Mi-Chu he said, “The noble Liu here is the most 
prominent man of the time and you should serve him well.” 

_ Still would Liu Pei have put from him such a post, but just 
; then the Prefect, pointing to his heart to indicate his sincerity, 
passed away. 

When the ceremonial wailings of the officials were over, the 
insignia of office were brought to Liu Pei. But he would have 
-none of them.. The following days the inhabitants of the town 


116 » San Kus, or 


and country around crowded into the residence bowing and with 
tears calling upon Liu to receive the charge. “If you do not we 
cannot live in peace,” said they. To these requests his brothers 
added their persuasion, till at length he consented to assume 
the administrative duties. He forthwith appointed Sun and . 
Mi as his official advisers and Ch‘én Téng his secretary. His. 
guard came up from Hsiaop‘ei and he put forth proclamations. 
to reassure the people. 

He also attended to the burial ceremonies, he and all his 
army dressing in mourning. After the fullest sacrifices and 
ceremonies a burial place for the late Prefect was found close 
to the source of the Yellow River. The dead man’s testament: 
was forwarded to Court. 

The news of the events in Hstichou duly reached the ears. 
of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, then in Chiianch‘éng. Said he, angrily, “I have 
missed my revenge. This Liu has simply stepped into com- 
mand of the district without expending half an arrow; he sat — 
still and attained his desire. But I will put him to death and 
ae dig up T‘ao’s corpse in revenge for Mie death of my noble 
father.” 

Orders were issued for the army to Srepare for a new 
campaign against Hsiichou. But an adviser, Hsiin Yü, re- 
monstrated with Ts‘ao saying, “When the founder of the Han 
dynasty secured Kuanchung and his illustrious successor on 
the throne, Kuang-wu, took Honei, they both first consolidated. 
their position whereby they could command the whole Empire. 
Their whole progress was from success to success. Hence 
they accomplished their great designs in spite of difficulties. 
Illustrious Sir, your Kuanchung and your Honei are Yenchow, 
which you had first, and Hochi which is of the utmost strategic . 
value. If you: undertake: this expedition against Hstichou leav- 
ing many men here, you will not accomplish your design; if 
you leave too few, Lü Pu will fall upon us. And finally if you 
lose this and fail to gain Hsiichou whither will you retire? 
That prefecture is not vacant. Although T‘ao has gone, Liu 
Pei holds it, and since the people support him they will fight 
. to the death for him. To abandon this place for that is to 
exchange the great for the small, to barter the trunk for the 
branches, to leave safety and run into danger. I would implore 
you to reflect well.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao replied, “It is not a good plan to keep soldiers 


- idle here during such scarcity.” 


“If that is so it would be more advantageous to attack the 
east and feed your army on their supplies. Some remnant of 
the Yellow Turbans are there with stores and treasures of all 
kinds that they have amassed by plundering wherever they 
could. Rebels of their stamp are easily broken. Break them, 
and you can feed your army with their grain. Moreover, both 
the Court and the common people will join in blessing you.” 


iomance of the Three Rinovon ai ur 


This new e a aoai strongly to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and he 
quickly began his preparations to carry it out. He left Hsia- 
hou Tun and Ts‘ao Jén to guard Chiianch‘éng while his main 
body, under his own command, marched to seize Ch‘énch‘éng. 
This done they went to Juying. 

Now when the Yellow Turbans knew that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was 
approaching they came out in a great body to oppose him. 


They met at Goat Hill. Though the rebels were numerous, 


they were a poor lot, a mere pack of foxes and dogs without 
organisation and lacking discipline. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao ordered his 

a archers and vigorous crossbowmen to keep them in 
chec 

. Tien Wei was sent out to challenge. The rebel leader chose 
a second-rate champion for his side, who rode out and was 
vanquished in the third bout. Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army pushed 
forward and they made a camp at Goat Hill. ; 

The following day the rebel Huang Shao himself led forth 
his army and made his battle array along a circle. A leader 
advanced on foot to offer combat. He wore a yellow turban 
on his head and a green robe. His weapon was an iron mace. 
- He shouted, “I am Ho Man the Yakcha who shoots across the 
sky; who dare fight with me?” 

Ts‘ao Hung uttered a great shout and jumped from the saddle 
to accept the challenge. Sword in hand he advanced on foot 
and the two engaged in fierce combat in the face of both 
armies. They exchanged some scores of blows, neither gaining 
the advantage. Then Ts‘ao Hung feigned defeat and ran 
away. Ho Man went after him. Just as he closed Hung tried 
a feint and then suddenly wheeling about, wounded his adver- 
sary. Another slash, and Ho Man lay dead. N 

At once Li Tien dashed forward into the midst of the enemy. 
and laid hands on the rebel chief whom he carried off captive. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s men then set on and’ scattered the rebels. The 
spoil of treasure and food was immense. 

The other leader, Ho I, fled with a few horsemen toward 
Kopei. 

While on their road thither there suddenly appeared a 
force led by a certain swashbuckler, who shall be nameless 


for the moment. This bravo was a shortish man, thickset ` 


and stout, with a waist ten ‘span in girth. He used a long 
sword. 

He barred the way of ues The rebel leader set his 
spear and rode toward him. But at the first encounter the 
bravo caught him under his arm and bore him off a prisoner. 
All his men were terror-stricken, dropped from their horses 
and allowed themselves to be bound. Then the victor drove 
them. like cattle into an enclosure with high banks. 

Presently Tien Wei, still pursuing the rebels, reached Kopei. 
The swashbuckler went out to meet him. 


118 an Ruo, or 
“Are you also a Yellow Turban?” said Tien Wei. 
“I shave some hundreds of them prisoners in an enclosure 


re 

“Why not bring them out?” said Tien. — 

“I will if you win this: sword from my hand.” va 

This annoyed Tien Wei who attacked him. They engaged 
and the combat lasted for two long hours and then was still 


. undecided. Both rested a while. The swashbuckler was the 


= 


first to recover and renewed the challenge. They fought till 


dusk and then, as their horses were quite spent, the combat _ 


was once more suspended. 
In the meantime some of Tien Wei’s men had run off to tell 


the story of this wondrous fight to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who hastened — 5 


in amazement, followed by. many officers to watch it and see 
the result. - 

Next day the unknown warrior rode out again and Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao saw him. In his heart he rejoiced to see such a doughty. 
hero and desired to gain his services for his own side. So he 
bade his champion feign defeat. 

Tien Wei rode out in answer to the aheiicnee and some score 
of bouts were fought. Then Tien Wei turned and fled toward 
his own side. The bravo followed and came quite close.. But 
a flight of arrows drove him away.. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao hastily drew off his men for some distance’ and 
then secretly sent a certain number to. dig a pitfall and sent 
hookmen to lie in ambush. 

The following day Tien Wei was a out with a small com- 
pany of horse. His'adversary nothing loth came to meet him. 

` “Why does the defeated leader venture forth again?” cried 


- he laughing. 


The swashbuckler spurred forward to join battle but Tien 
Wei, after a faint show of fighting, turned his horse and rode 
away. His adversary intent upon capture, took no care and 
he and his followers all blundered into the pitfall. The hook- 
men took them all captive, bound them and carried them before 
their chief. 

As soon as he saw the prisoners, Ts‘ao advanced from his 
tent, sent away the soldiers and with his own hands loosened 
the leader’s bonds. Then he brought out clothing and dressed 
him, bade him be seated and asked who he was and whence he 
came. 

“I am named Hsii Ch‘u, and by my near friends called 
Chungk‘ang. I am from Chao.* When the rebellion broke 
out I and my relations built a stronghold within a rampart 
for protection. One day the robbers came but I had stones 
ready for them. I told my relatives to keep on bringing them 


up to me and I threw them, hitting somebody .every’ time 


I meow This drove off the robbers. i 
* Modern Anhui. 


“Another day they came and we were short of grain. Sol 
_ agreed witn them to an exchange of plough oxen against grain. 
- They delivered the grain and were driving away the oxen when 
_ the beasts took fright and tore off to their pens. I seized two 


= of them by the tail, one with each hand, and hauled them back- 


wards a hundred or so paces. The robbers were so amazed 
_ that they thought no more about oxen but went their way. 
So they never troubled us again.” 
“I have heard of your mighty exploits,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
“Will you join my army?’ . 
“That is my strongest desire,” said Hsii. 
‘So he called up his clan, some hundreds in all, and they 
formally submitted to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. The strong man received 
the rank of Tu-yü and received ample rewards. The two rebel 
leaders were executed. 
 Juying being now perfectly quiet Ts‘ao Ts‘ao withdrew his 
army. His lieutenants came out to welcome him and they told 
_ him that spies had reported Yenchou to be left defenceless, | 
all its garrison having given themselves up to plundering the 
surrounding country, and they wanted him to go against it 
; without loss of time. “With these soldiers fresh from victory 
_ the city will fall at.a tap of the drum,” said they. 
So the army was marched to the city. An attack was quite 


? 


unexpected but the two leaders, Hstieh and Li, hurried out 


their few soldiers to fight. Hsü Ch‘u, the latest recruit, said 
- he wished to capture these two and he would make of them 
an introductory gift. 

The task was given him and he rode forth. Li Féng with 
his halberd advanced to meet Hsü Ch‘u. The combat was 
brief as Li fell in the second bout. His colleague retired with 
his men. He found the drawbridge had been seized so that he 
could not get shelter within the city. He led his men toward 
Chiiyeh. He was followed and slain. His soldiers scattered 
to the four winds. And thus Yenchou was recaptured. 

Next an expedition was prepared to take Puyang. The 
army moved out in perfect order with van leaders, commanders: 
of the flanks and rear guard. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao led the centre; 


_ Tien Wei and Hsü Ch‘u were van leaders. When they approach- 


ed Puyang, Lii Pu wished to go out in person and alone to 
attack but his adviser protested, begging him to await the 
arrival of his officers. ? 

“Whom do I fear?’ said Lü. 

So he threw caution to the winds and went. He met his 
-foes and he began to revile them. The redoubtable Hsü Ch‘u 
went to fight with him, but after a score of bouts neither 
combatant was any the worse. 

“He is not the sort that one man can overcome,” said Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao, and he sent Tien Wei to assist. Lü Pu stood the double 
onslaught. Soon after the flank commanders joined in and 


Es 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms f a 


120 | San Kuo, or 


Lü Pu had six opponents. These proved really too many for ` 
him so he turned his horse and rode back to the city. 

But when the members of the T‘ien family saw him coming 
back beaten they raised the drawbridge. Pu shouted to open 
the gates, but the T‘iens said, “We have gone over to Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao.” This was hard to hear and the beaten man abused 
them roundly before he left. The faithful Ch‘én Kung got 
away through the east gate taking with him the general’s 
family. 

Thus Puyang came into Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s hands and for their 
present services the T‘ien family were pardoned their previous 
fault. However, Liu Hua said that savage Lii Pu left alive 
was a great danger and he should be hunted down. Wherefore 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao determined to follow Lü Pu to Tingt‘ao whither 
he had gone for refuge. 

Lü Pu and many of his captains were assembled in the city, 
but certain of them were out foraging. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army 
arrived but did not attack for many days and presently he with- 
drew along way and made a stockade. It was the time of harvest 
and he set his men to cut the wheat for food. The spies having 
reported this to Lii Pu he came over to see, but when he saw 
that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s stockade lay near a thick wood he feared 
an ambush and retired. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao heard that he had come ~ 
and gone and guessed the reason. 

“He fears an ambush in the wood,” said he. “We will set 
up flags there and deceive him. There is a long embankment: 
near the camp but behind it there is no water. There we will 
lay a ambush to fall upon Lü Pu when he comes to burn the 
wood.” 

So he hid all his soldiers behind the embankment except half 
a hundred drummers, and' he got together many peasants to 
loiter within the stockade as though it was empty. 

Lü Pu rode back and told his adviser what he had seen. © 
“This Ts" ao Ts‘ao is very crafty. and full of wiles,” said the 
adviser; “great care in necessary.” 

“I will use fire this time and burn out his ambush,” said 
Lü Pu. i i 

Next morning he rode out and there he saw flags flying i 
everywhere in the wood. He ordered his men forward to set 
fire on all sides. But to his surprise no one rushed out to make 
for the stockade. Still he heard the beating of drums and 
doubt filled his mind. Suddenly he saw a party of soldiers 
move out from the shelter of the stockade. He galloped over ` 
to see what it meant. 

Then the signal-bombs exploded; out ied the men and 
all their leaders dashed forward. Lü Pu was at a loss and 
fled into the open country. One of his captains was killed by 
an arrow. Two thirds of his men were lost and the beaten — 
remainder went to tell Ch‘én Kung what had come to pass. 


-Romance of the ahree Wingdoms: A 


Aard 


“ye 
i if 


rene 


i held. RR 


city they met with no resistance, one leader burned himself to 
death, the other fled to Yüan Shu. . 


“We had (better leave” said he. “An empty city cannot be. 
So ie and Kao Shun, taking their. chief’s family with them, 
abdndoned Tingt‘ao. When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s soldiers got into the 


ts Thus the whole of Shantung fell under the power of Ts‘ ao 
s‘ao. ; 

How he A aoise. the people and rebuilt the cities dail 
not be told here. But Lii Pu in his retreat fell in with his 
oe reets and Ch‘én Kung also rejoined him so that he was pe 
no means broken. © 

“I have but few men,” said he, “but still enough to break 
Ts ao Ts‘ao.” And so he retook the backward road. 


‘Thus does fortune alternate, victory, defeat, 
The happy conqueror to-day, to-morrew, must retreat. 


Vs What was the fate of Lü Pu will appear later. 


29 


CHAPTER XIII. 


GREAT BATTLE BETWEEN LI Ts‘UI AND KUO SSU: 
THE EMPEROR RESCUED. 


The last chapter told of the defeat of a Pu, and his gathering 
the remnant of his army at Haipin. When all his lieutenants 
had joined him he began to feel strong enough to try conclu- 
sions with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao once again. 

Said Ch‘én Kung, who was opposed to this course, “He is 
too strong; seek some place where you can rest a time before 
trying.” 

“Suppose I went to Yüan Shao,” said Lü Pu. 

“Send first to make enquiries.” 

Lü Pu agreed. The news of the fighting between Ts‘ao and 


Lü Pu had reached Ichou and one of Ytian’s advisers, Shén. | 


P‘ei, warned him saying, “If this savage Lii Pu gets possession 
of Yenchou he will certainly attempt to add this district to it. 
For your own safety you should help to crush him.”’ 


Wherefore Yen Liang, with five legions, was sent. ‘The 
spies heard this and at once told Lü Pu, who was greatly — 


disturbed and called in the faithful Ch‘én Kung. 
“Go over to Liu Pei, who has lately succeeded to Hstichou.” 


Hence Lü Pu went ‘thither. Some one urged Liu Pei to go - 


out to meet such a warrior and receive him with honour. Mi 
Chu was strongly against receiving him at all saying he was 
a cruel, bloodthirsty beast. 


But Pei replied, “How would misfortune have been averted ` 


from this place if he had not attacked Yenchou? He cannot 

be our enemy now that he comes seeking an asylum.” 
“Brother, your heart is really too good. Although it may 

be as you say yet it would be well to prepare,” said Chang Fei. 


The new Prefect with a great following met Lii a long way 
outside the city gates and the two chiefs rode in side by side. 


They proceeded to the residence and there, after the elaborate 
ceremonies of reception were over, they sat down to converse. 


“After Wang Yiin’s plot to slay Tung Cho and my misfortune: 


r 


in the Li-Kuo sedition, I drifted about from one place to. 4 


another and none of the nobles seemed willing to receive me. 
When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao wickedly invaded this district and you, Sir, 
came to its rescue, I aided you by attacking Yenchou and thus 
diverting a portion of his force. I did not think then that I 
should be the victim of a vile plot and lose my leaders and my 


ES ee ot S E 


Romance of the Three Yingooms — oo B3 


soldiers. But now if you will I offer myself to you that we 
„may together accomplish great designs,” 

Liu Pei replied, “When the late Prefect died there was no 
One to administer Hsüchou and so I assumed that task for a 
time. Now since you are here, General, it is most suitable 
- that I retire in your favour.” | 1 
_ Whereupon he handed the insignia and the seal to Lü Pu. 
_ Lü was on the point of accepting them when he saw Kuan and 

Chang, who stood behind the Prefect, glaring at him with 
angry eyes, so he put on a smile one said, “Lü may be some- 
thing of a fighting man but he could not rule a place like this.” 
-~ Yiian-té repeated his offer. Ch‘én Kung said, “The strong 
late does not oppress his host. You need not fear, O Prince 
ect.” 
Then Yiian-té desisted: Banquets were held and dwelling 
_ places prepared for the guest and ‘his retinue. As soon as con- 
venient Lü Pu returned the feast. Liu Pei went with his two 
brothers. Half through the banquet Lü Pu requested his guest 
to retire to one of the inner private rooms, whither the 
brothers followed him. There Lü Pu bade ‘his wife and 
daughters bow as to their benefactor. Here also Ytian-té 
showed excessive modesty and Pu said, “Good younger brother, 
you need not be so very modest.” 
$ Chang Fei heard what he said and his eyes glared. “What 


ag sort of a man are you that dares call our brother, ‘younger 


_. brother’? cried he. “He is one of the ruling family (a golden 
branch, a jade leaf). Come out; and I will fight you three 


hundred bouts for the insult.” 


Yiian-té hastily checked the impulsive one and Kuan Yü 
persuaded him to go away. Then the host apologised saying, 
~ “My poor brother talks wildly after he has been drinking. I 
_ hope you will not blame him.” . 
= Lü Pu nodded, but said nothing. Soon after the guests 

departed. But as the host escorted Liu Pei to his carriage he 
saw Chang Fei galloping up armed as for a fray. 

“Lü Pu, you and I will fight that duel of three hundred!” 
shouted he. 
~ -Liu Pei bade Kuan Yü check him. Next day Li Pu came 
to take leave of his host. “You, O Prince, kindly received me 
but I fear your brothers and I cannot agree. ‘So I will seek 
some other asylum.” 

“General, if you go, my brother’s fault becomes grave. My 
» rude brother has offended and must eventually apologise. In 
`. the meantime what think you of a temporary sojourn at the 


~ town where I was encamped for some time, Hsiao-p‘ei? The 
_ place is small and mean, but it is near and i will see to it that 


-~ you are supplied with all you need.” 
- Lü Pu thanked him and accepted this offer. He led his men 
there and took up residence. After he had gone Liu Pei 


124 San Buo, or 


buried his annoyance and Chang Fei did not again refer to 
the matter. i 

That Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had subdued Shantung has been stated 
before. He memorialised the throne and was rewarded with 
‘the title of General with the epithet “Firm Virtue’ and a mar- 
quisate. At this time the rebellious Li Ts‘ui had made himself 
Ta-ssti-ma, or Minister of War, and his colleague styled him- 
self Grand Commander. Their conduct was abominable but 
no one dared to criticise them. The Tai-yii Yang Piao and the 
Minister of Agriculture, Chu Chien, privately talked with the 
Emperor Hsien and said, ‘““Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has twenty legions of 
` soldiers and many capable advisers and leaders; it would be 
well for the Empire if he would lend his support to the imperial 
family and help to rid the government of this evil party.” 

His Majesty wept, “I am weary of the insults and contempt 
of these wretches and should be very glad to have them 
removed,” said he. 

S have thought of a plan to Eae Li and Kuo and so 
make them destroy each other. Then Ts‘ao could come and 
cleanse the Court,” said Piao. 

“How will you manage it?” asked the Emperor. 

“Kuo’s wife is very jealous and we can take advantage of 
her weakness to bring about a quarrel.” 

So Yang Piao received instruction to act, with a secret edict 
to support him. 

Piao’s wife made an excuse to visit Madam Kuo at her ‘palace 
and, in the course of conversation, said “There is talk of secret 
liaison between the General, your ‘husband, and the wife of the 
Minister Li. It is a great secret, but if the Minister knew it 


he might try to harm your husband. I think you ought to | 


have very little to do with that family.” | 

Madam Kuo was surprised but said, “I have wondered why 
he has been sleeping away from home lately, but I did not think 
there was anything shameful connected with it. I should 
never have known if you had not spoken. I must put a stop 
to it.” 

By and by, when Madam Yang took her leave, her hostess 
thanked her warmly for the information she had given. 

Some days passed and Kuo Ssii was going over to the dwell- 
ing of his colleague to a dinner. His wife did not wish him 
to go and she said, “This Ts‘ui is very deep and one cannot 
fathom his designs. You two are not: of equal rank and if he 
` made away with you, what would become of your poor hand- 
maid?” 

Kuo Sst. paid no attention and his wife could not prevail 
on him to stay at home: Late in the afternoon some presents 
arrived from the Li palace and Kuo’s wife secretly put poison 
into the delicacies before she set them before her lord. He 
was going to taste at once but she said, “It is unwise to! 


oo things that come from outside. Let us try on a dog 
1 NR ai 


They did and the dog died. This incident made Kuo doubt 
_ the kindly intentions of his colleague. a 

One day, at the close of business at Court, Li invited Kuo to 
his palace. After Kuo arrived home in the evening, rather 
the worse for too much wine, he was seized with a colic. His 
wife said she suspected poison and hastily administered an 


emetic, which relieved the pain. Kuo Sst began to feel angry. 


“We did everything together and helped each other always. 


_ Now he wants to injure me. If I do not get in the first blow, 

I shall suffer some injury.” 

So Kuo began to prepare his guard for any sudden emer- 
gency. This was told to Li and he in turn grew angry, saying, 
“So Kuo is doing so and so.” 

Then he got his guard under way and ‘came to attack Kuo. 
Both houses had several legions and the quarrel. became so 
serious that they fought a pitched battle under the city walls. 
When that was over both sides turned to plunder the people. 


Then a nephew of Li’s suddenly surrounded the palace, put 


the Emperor and Empress Dowager Fu in two carriages and 
carried them off. The palace attendants were made to follow 
on foot. As they went out of the rear gate they met Kuo’s 
army who began to shoot at the cavalcade with arrows. They 
killed many attendants before Li’s army came up and forced 
them to retire. 

It is unnecessary to say how the carriages were got out of 
the palace but they eventually reached Li’s camp, while Kuo’s 
men plundered the palace and carried off all the women left 
there to their camp. Then the palace was set on fire. 

As soon as Kuo Sst. heard of the whereabouts of the 
Emperor he came over to attack the camp. The Emperor 
between these two opposing factions was greatly alarmed: 


Slowly the Hans had declined but renewed their vigour with 
ty f Kuang-Wu, 

Tweive were the rulers before him, followed him also twelve others. 
Foolish were two of the latest, dangers surrounded the altars, 
These were degenerate days, with authority given to eunuchs. 

Then did Ho Chin the simple, the inept, who commanded the army, 
Warriors call to the capital, wishing to drive out the vermin; 
Though they drove out the leopard, tigers and wolves quickly entered, 
All kinds of evil were wrought by a low ciass creature from Hsichou. 
Wang Yiin, honest-of heart, beguiled this wretch with a woman, 
Much desired of his henchman, thus sowing seeds of dissension. 
Strife resulted, and peace no longer dwelt in the Empire. 

No one suspected that Li and Kuo would continue the evil, i 
Much to the sorrow of China; yet they strove for a trifle. 

Famine stalked in the palace, grief for the clashing of weapons; 
Why did the warriors strive? Why was the land thus partitioned? 
We had turned aside from the way appointed of Heaven. 

Kings must ponder these things; heavy the burden lies on them, 
Chiefest in all the realm theirs is no common appointment, 


Romance of the Three Liingdoms 125 


126 San Teun, or 


Should the King falter or fail, salami fall on the people, : 
The Empire is drenched with their blood, grisly ruin surrounds them. 
Steeped in sorrow and sad, read I the ancient records, 

Long is the tale of years; the tale of sorrow is longer. 

Wherefore he who would rule, chiefly must exercise forethought. 
This and his keen-edged blade, these must suffice to maintain him. 


Kuo Sst’s army arrived and Li Ts‘ ui went out to give battle. 
Kuo’s men had no success and retired. Then Li Ts‘ui removed 
the imperial captives to Meiwu with his nephew. as gaoler. 
Supplies were reduced and famine showed itself on the faces 


of the eunuchs. The Emperor sent to Li to request five mea- ‘ 


sures of rice and five sets of bullock bones for his attendants. 
Li angrily replied, “The Court gets food morning and evening; 
why do they ask for more?” 

He sent putrid meat and rotten grain and the Emperor was 
very vexed at the new insult. 

Yang Piao counselled patience. “He is a base creature but, 
under the present circumstances, Your Majesty must put up — 
with it. You may not provoke him.” 

The Emperor bowed and was silent, but the ieee fell on his 
garments. Suddenly some one came in with the tidings that 
a force of cavalry, their sabres glittering in the sun, was 
approaching to rescue them. Then they heard the gongs beat — 
and the roll of the drums. : 


The Emperor sent to find out who it was. But it was Kuo 7 


Sst, and the sadness fell again. Presently arose a great din.. — 
For Li had gone out to do battle with Kuo, whom he abused by 
name. ; 

“I treated you well and why did you try to kill me? ?” said Li. 

“You are a rebel, why should I not slay you?” cried Kuo. 

“You call me rebel when I am guarding the Emperor ?” 

“You have abducted him; do you call that guarding?” 

“Why so many words? Let us forgo a battle and settle the 
matter in single combat, the winner to take the Emperor and 
go.’ 

They two fought in front of their armies but neither could 
prevail over the other. Then they saw Yang Piao come riding 
up to them, crying, “Rest a while, O Commanders! for I have 
invited a party of officers to arrange a peace.” 


Wherefore the two leaders retired to their camps. Soon | 


Yang Piao, Sun Ch‘ien and three score other officials came up 
and went to Kuo’s camp. They were all thrown into confine- 
ment. ., 
~ “We came with good intentions,” they moaned, “and we are 
treated like this.” ; 
“Li Ts‘ui has run off with the Emperor but I have got his 
ofñcers,” said Kuo. 
“What does it mean? One has the Emperor, the other his 
officers. What do you want?” said the peace-maker, Yang 
Piao. f 


anae of the Three kingooma 127 


eho lost patience and drew his sword, but a certain Yang Mi 
_ persuaded him not to slay the speaker. Then he released Yang 
Piao and Sun Ch‘ien; but kept the others in the camp. ‘Here 


are we two officers of the throne and we cannot help our lord. 


_ We have been born in vain,” said Yang Piao. 
Throwing their arms about each other they wept and fell | 
swooning to the earth. Sun Ch‘ien went home, fell seriously 
ill and died. 
Thereafter the two adversaries fought every day for nearly 
three months each losing many men. 
Now Li Ts‘ui was irreligious and practised magic. He often 
~- called witches to beat drums and summon spirits, even when 
in camp. Chia Hsti used to remonstrate with him, but quite 
 uselessly. 
A certain Yang Chi said to the Emperor, “That Chia Hsii, 


_ although a friend of Li’s, never seems to have lost the sense 


of loyalty to Your Maj esty. Ke 

Soon after Chia Hsii himself arrived. The Rimperor sent 
away his attendants and said to him weeping the while, “Can 
you not pity the Hans and help me?” 

Chia prostrated himself, saying, “That is my dearest wish. 
But, Sire, say no more, let they servant work out a plan.” 

The Emperor dried his tears and soon Li Ts‘ui came in. He 
- wore a sword by his side and strode straight up to the Emperor, 
whose face became the colour of clay. Then he spoke. : 

“Kuo Sst has failed in his duty and imprisoned the court 
officers. He wished to slay Your Majesty and you would have 
been captured but for me.’ 

The Emperor joined his hands together in salute and thank- 
ed him. He went away. Before long Huangfu Li entered 
_ and the Emperor, knowing him as a man of persuasive tongue 
` and that he came from the same district as Li, bade him go to 
both factions to try to arrange peace. He accepted the mission 


and first went to Kuo, who said he was willing to release the 


officers if Li Ts‘ui would restore the Emperor to full liberty. 
He then went to the other side. 

; To Li he said, “Since I am a Hsiliang man the Emperor and 
the officers have selected me to make peace between you and 
your adversary. He has consented to cease the.quarrel; will 
‘you agree to peace?” 

“I overthrew Lü Pu; I have upheld the government for four 
years and have many great services to my credit as all the 
world knows: -That other fellow, that horse-thief, has dared 
to seize the officers of state and to set himself up against me. 
I have sworn to slay him. Look around you. Do you not 
think my army large enough to break him?” Gig 
- “It does not follow,” said Huangfu Li. “In ancient days 

-in Yuch‘ing, Hou I, proud of and confident in: his archer’s 

skill, gave no thought to gathering difficulties and so perished. 


128 San uo, or 


Lately you yourself have seen the powerful Tung Cho betrayed 
‘by Lü Pu, who had received many benefits at his hands. In 


no time his head was hanging over the gate.. So you see mere 
force is not enough to ensure safety. Now you are a General, 


with the axes and whips and all the symbols of rank and high a 


office, your descendants and all your clan occupy distinguished 
positions. You must confess that the State has rewarded you 
liberally. True, Kuo has seized the officers of State, but you 
have done the same to “The Most Revered.” Who is worse 
than the other?” 


Li angrily drew his sword and shouted, “Did the Son of _ 


Heaven send you to mock and shame me?” 

But Yang Féng checked him. “Kuo Ssğ is still alive,” said 
he, “and to slay the imperial messenger would be giving him 
a popular excuse to raise an army against you. And all the 
nobles would join him.” 

Others also persuaded Li and gradually his wrath cooled 
down. The messenger of peace was urged to go away. But. 
he would not. be satisfied with failure. He remained there 
and cried loudly, “Li Ts‘ui will not obey the Emperor’ s 
command. He will kill his Prince to set up himself.” 

Hu Miao tried to shut his mouth saying, “Do not utter such | 
words. You will only bring hurt upon yourself.” : ras 

But Huangfu Li shrieked at him also. ‘You also are an 


- officer of state and yet you even back up the rebel. When the 


prince is put to shame the minister dies. If it be my lot to 
suffer death at the hands of Li Ts‘ui, so be it!” 

And he maintained a torrent of abuse. The Emperor heard 
of the incident, called in Huangfu Li and sent him away to his 
own country.. 

Now more than half Li Ts‘ui’s men were from Hsiliang and 
he had also the assistance of the Ch“iang, or tribes beyond the 
border. The stories spread by Huangfu Li, that Li Ts‘ui was a 
rebel and so were those who helped him, and that there would 
be a day of heavy reckoning, were readily believed and the 
soldiers were much disturbed. Li Ts‘ui sent one of his officers 
to arrest Huangfu Li, but the officer had a sense of right and 
instead of carrying out his orders returned to say he could 
not be found. 

Chia Hsii tried. to work on the feelings of the barbarian 
tribes. He said to them. ‘The Emperor knows you are loyal 


-to him and have bravely fought and suffered. He has issued 
Ta secret command for you to go home and then he will reward 


you.’ 

The tribesmen had a grievance against Li Ts‘ui i for not 
paying them, so they listened readily to tke insidious persua- 
sions of Chia Hsii and deserted. Then Chia represented to 
the Emperor the covetous nature of Li and asked that honours 
be heaped upon him now that he was deserted and enfeebled. 


So he was raised to the rank of Presdent of a Board of State. 
This delighted him greatly and he ascribed his promotion to 
the potency of his wise women’s prayers and incantations. He 


_ rewarded those people most liberally. 


‘But his army was forgotten. Wherefore Yang Pane was 
‘angry and he said to one Sung Kuo, “We have taken all the 


risks and exposed ourselves to stones and arrows in his 
service, yet instead of giving us any reward he ascribes all. 


the credit to those witches of his.” 
“Let us put him out of the way and rescue the Emperor,” 
said Sung. 


“You explode a bomb within as signal'and I will attack from 


outside.” 

So the two agreed to act together that very night in the 
second watch. But they had been overheard and the eaves- 
dropper told Li Ts‘ui. The traitorous Sung was seized and 


‘put to death. That night Yang waited outside for the signal 


and while waiting, out came Li himself and found him. Then 
a fight began, which lasted till the fourth watch. But Yang 
Feng got away and fled to Hsian (Sian) in the west. 


But from this time Li Ts‘ui’s army began to fall away and | 


he felt more than ever the losses caused by Kuo’s frequent 
attacks. Then came news that Chang Chi, at the head of a 
large army, was coming down from the west to make peace 
between the two factions. Chang said he would attack the 
one who was recalcitrant. Li Ts‘ui tried to gain favour by 
hastening to send to tell Chang Chi he was ready to make 
peace; So did Kuo Ssi. 

“So the strife of the rival factions: ended at last and Chang 


: Chi memorialised asking the Emperor to go to Hungnung near 


Loyang. He was delighted saying he had longed to go back - 


~ to the east. Chang Chi was rewarded with the title of General 


-of Cavalry and was highly honoured. He saw to it that the | 


Emperor andthe Court had good supplies of necessaries. Kuo 
Sst. set free all his captive officers and Li Ts‘ui prepared 
transport for the Court to move to the east. He told off com- 
panies of his veterans to escort the cavalcade. 


The progress had been without incident as far as Hsinfung. 


Near Paling the west wind of autumn came on to blow with 
great violence, but soon above the howling of the gale was 


_ heard the trampling of a large body of horse.” They poles 
‘at a bridge and barred the way. A 


. “Who comes?” cried a voice. Sey 
“The Imperial Chariot is passing and who dares iia it” 


said Yang Chi, riding forward. 


Two leaders ‘advanced, “General Kuo Has orderi us to aari 
the: bridge:and stop all spies. . You say the Emperor is here; 


we must see him and then we will let you pass.” So the ‘beaded 
curtain was raised and the Emperor said, “T the Emperor am 


9. 


Komar, of the Three Bingooms 129%)! 


me San uo, or 


here. Why do you not retire to let me pass, Gentlemen?” — 
They al! shouted, “Long Life! Long Life!’ and fell away to 
allow the cortege through. 

But when they reported what they had done Kuo was very — 
angry. “I meant to outwit Chang Chi, seize the Emperor and © 
hold him in Meiwu. Why have you let him get away?” 

He put the two officers to death and set out to pursue the 
cavalcade, and overtook it just at Huayin. The noise of a. 
great shouting arose behind the travellers and a loud voice — 
commanded the chariot to stop. The Emperor burst into tears. 

“Out of the wolf’s den into the tiger’s mouth!” said he. 

No. one knew what to do, they were all too frightened. But — 
when the rebel army was just upon them they heard the beat- 
ing of drums and from behind some hills came into the open — 
a cohort of soldiers preceded by a great flag bearing the well 
known name of that trusted leader, Yang Féng. | 

* Now after Yang Féng’s defeat he had camped under Chung- — 
nanshan and had come up to guard the Emperor as soon as | 
he knew of his journey. Seeing it was necessary to fight now, 


he drew up his line of battle and Ts‘ui Jung, one of Kuo’s | 
leaders, rode out and began a volley of abuse. eure Heng. 


turned ‘and said, “Where is Kung-ming ?”? i 

In response out came a valiant warrior gripping a heavy 
battleaxe. He galioped up on his fleet bay, making directly 
for Ts‘ui Jung, whom he felled at the first blow. At this the . 
whole force dashed forward. and routed Kuo. The defeated — 


`- army went back some twenty li, while Yang Féng rode forward 


to see the Emperor who graciously said, “Tti is a great service. 
you have rendered ; you have saved my life.” 
Yang bowed and thanked him and the eine asked to 


. see the actual slayer of the rebel leader. So he was led to the 


chariot where he bowed and was presented as “Hsü Huang, 
also known as Hsü Kung-ming, of Yangchitin.” | 
Then the cavalcade went forward, Yang Féng actiie as 


escort as far as Huayin the halting place for the night. “The 


General there supplied them with clothing and food and the. 
Emperor passed the night in Yang Féng’s camp. 
Next day Kuo Sst, having mustered his men, appeared in ` 


front of the camp and Hsii Huang rode out to engage. But 


Kuo threw his men out so that they entirely surrounded the 


. camp and the Emperor was in the middle. The position was 


very critical, when help appeared in the person of a galloping 
horseman from the south-east and the rebels fell away. Then 
Hsti Huang smote them and so scored a victory. 

When they had time to see their helper they found him to 


7 be Tung Ch‘éng, the “State Uncle.” The Emperor wept as 
he related his sorrows and dangers. 


Said Tung, “Be of good courage. Sire. We welds ourselves 
to kill both the rebels and so purify the world.” 


Romance of the Three Yingdomg | 13L 


‘The Emperor bade them travel east as soon as possible and so 
bec. went on night and day till they reached their destination. 

Kuo led his defeated army back and meeting Li Ts‘ui’told 
him of the rescue of the Emperor and whither he was going. 
“Tf they reach Shantung and get settled there, they will send 
out proclamations to the whole country, calling up the nobles: 
to attack us and we and our families will be in danger.” 

“Chang Chi holds Ch‘angan and we must be careful. There 
is nothing to prevent a joint attack on Hungnung when we 
can kill the Emperor and divide the conntry between us,” said 

Be i 
Kuo found this a suitable scheme, so their armies came to- 
gether in one place and united in plundering the countryside.. 
Wherever they went they left destruction behind them. Yang 
and Tung heard of their approach when they were yet a long 
way off so they turned back to meet them and fought the rebels. 
at Tungchien. | 

The two rebels had previously made their plan. Since the 
loyal troops were few as compared with their own horde they | 
would overwhelm them like a flood. So when the day of battle 

came they poured out covering the hills and filling the plains. 
The two leaders devoted themselves solely to the protection of 
the Emperor and the Empress. The officials, the attendants, 
the archives and-records and all the paraphernalia of the Court 
were left to care for themselves. The rebels ravaged Hungnung, 
but the two faithful soldiers got the Emperor safely away into 
the north of Shénsi. 

When the rebels showed signs of pursuit Yang and Tung 
sent to offer to discuss terms of peace, at the same time sending 
a secret edict to Hotung calling upon the old “‘White Wave 
General”. Han and Li Yiieh and Hu Ts‘ai for help. Li Ytieh 
was actually a brigand but the need for help was desperate. 
~ These three being promised pardon for their faults and 
crimes and a grant of official rank, naturally responded to the 
call and thus the loyal side was strengthened so that Hungnung 
“was recaptured. But meanwhile the rebels laid waste what- 
ever place they reached, slaying the aged and weakly, forcing 
the strong to join their ranks. When going into a fight they | 
forced these people-soldiers to the front and they called them 
the “Dare-to-die” soldiers. 

The rebel force was very rons. When Li Ytieh, the late 
brivand, approached, Kuo Sst bade his men scatter clothing 
and valuables along the road. The late robbers could not 
resist the temptation so a scramble began. The rebels fell 
upon the disordered ranks and did much damage. Yang and 
Tung could not save them so they took the Emperor away to 
the north. 

-© But the rebels pursued. Li Yüeh said, “The danger is grave. 
I pray Your Majesty to mount a horse and go in advance.” 


132 San Kuo, or 


The Emperor replied, “I cannot bear to abandon my officers.” 


They wept and struggled on as best they could. Hu Ts‘ ai 
was killed in one attack. The enemy came very near and the — 


Emperor left his carriage and went on foot to the river where — 
they sought a boat to ferry him to the other side. The weather — 


was very cold and the Emperor and Empress cuddled up close 
to each other shivering. They reached the river but the banks — 
were too high and they could not get down into the boat. So 
Yang Féng proposed to fasten together the horses’ bridles and | 
lower down the Emperor slung by the waist. However, some | 


rolls of white silk were found and they rolled up the two 
imperial personages in the silk and thus they lowered them 


down near the boat. Then Li Yiieh took up his position in the ~ 
prow leaning on his sword. The brother of the Empress 


carried her on his back into the boat. 


The boat was too small to carry everybody and those unable ' 
to get on board clung to the cable, but Li Yüeh cut them down ~ 
and they fell into the water. They ferried over the Emperor - 


and then sent back the boat for the others. There was a great 


scramble to get on board and they had to chop off the fingers Al 


and hands of those who persisted in clinging to the boat. 


The lamentation rose to the heavens. When they mustered ; 
on the farther bank many weye missing, not a score of the 


Emperor’s suite were left. A bullock cart was found in which 


the Emperor travelled to Tayang. They had no food. and at 
night sought shelter in a poor, tile-roofed house. The cottagers 
gave them some boiled millet but it was too coarse to be 


swallowed. 


Next day the Emperor conferred titles on those who had À 
protected him so far and they pushed on. Soon two officers © 
of rank came up with the cortège and they bowed before His | 


Majesty with many tears. They were Yang Piao and Han 


Jung. The Emperor and Empress lifted up their voices and | 


wept with them. 


Said Han Jung to his colleague, “The rebels have confidence ý 
in my words. You stay as guard of the Emperor and I will — 


take my life in my hands and try to bring about peace.” 


After he had gone the Emperor rested for a time in Yang’s | 


camp and then was requested to make Anihsien the capital. 


But the town contained not.a single lofty building and the 
court lived in grass huts devoid even of doors. They sur- 


rounded these with a fence of thorns as a protection, and 


within this the Emperor held counsel with his ministers. The 


soldiers camped round the fence. 
Li Ytieh and his fellow ruffians showed their true lona 


They wielded the powers of the Emperor as they wished and 
officials who offended them were beaten or abused even in the 
presence of the Emperor. They purposely provided thick wine — 
and coarse food for the Emperor’s consumption. He struggled © 


| Romance of the Three Ringoomg 133 


_ to swallow what they sent. Li Yüeh and Han Hsien joined in 
_ recommending to the throne the names of convicts, common 
soldiers, sorcerers, leeches and such people who thus obtained 
official ranks. There were more than two hundred of such 
people. As seals could not be engraved pieces of metal were - 
eera into some sort of a shape.. 

ow Han Jung went to see the two rebels who listened to 
him and set free the officials and palace people. 

A famine occurred that same year and people were reduced 
to eating grass from the roadside. Starving they wandered 
hither and thither but food and clothing were sent to the 
Emperor from the surrounding districts and the Court began 
to enjoy a little repose. 
` Tung Ch‘éng and Yang Fêng sent workmen to restore the 
palaces in Loyang with the intention of moving the Court 
thither. Li Ytieh was opposed to this and when argued with, 
that Loyang was really the capital as opposed to the paltry 
town of Ani, and removal would be but reasonable, he wound 
up by saying, “You may get the Court to remove but I shall 
remain here.” 

But when the consent of the Emperor had been given and 
a start made Li Yiieh secretly sent to arrange with Li Ts‘ui 
and Kuo Sst to capture him. However, this plot leaked out 
and the escort so arranged as to prevent such a thing and they 
_ pressed on to Chikuan as rapidly as possible. Li heard this 
and without waiting for his colleagues to join him set out to 
act alone. 

About the fourth watch, just as the cavaleade was passing 
Chikuan, a voice was heard shouting, “Stop those carriages! 
Li and Kuo are here.” 

This frightened the Emperor greatly and his terror in- 

creased when he saw the whole mountain side suddenly light 
up. 
A The rebel party, erstwhile split i in twain, 

To work their wicked will now join again. 


How the Son of Heaven escaped a peril will be told i in the 
next chapter. 


i CHAPTER XIV. 


Ts‘ao MENG-TE MOVES THE COURT: 
Lu FENG-HSIEN RAIDS HSUCHUN. 


“Tre last chapter closed with the arrival of Li Yüeh who 
shouted out falsely that the army was that of the two arch 
rebels Li and Kuo come to capture the imperial cavalcade. 
But Yang Fêng recognised the voice of Li Yüeh and bade 
Hsü Huang go out to fight him. He went and in the first bout 
the traitor fell. His men scattered and the travellers got 
safely through Chikuan. Here the Prefect, Chang Yang, sup- 
plied them plentifully with food and other necessaries and 
escorted the Emperor to Chihtao, For his timely help the 
Emperor conferred upon Chang Yang the rank of a Ta-ssti-ma, 
or President, and he went and camped at Yehwang. 

Loyang was presently entered. Within the walls all was 
destruction. The palaces and halls had been burned, the streets 
were overgrown with grass and brambles and obstructed by 
heaps of ruins. The palaces and courts were represented by 
broken roofs and toppling walls. A small “palace” however 


ô 


was soon built and therein the officers of court presented their — 


congratulations, standing in the open air among thorn bushes 
and brambles. The reign style was changed from Hsing-P‘ing 
to Chien-An (firm tranquillity). 

The year was a year of grievous famine. The Loyang people, 
even reduced in numbers as they were to a few hundreds, had 
not enough to eat and they prowled about stripping the bark 
off trees and grubbing up the roots of plants to satisfy their 
starving hunger. Officers of the Government of all but the 
highest ranks went out into the country to gather fuel. Many 
people lay down and died quietly behind the ruined walls of 
their houses. At no time during the decadence of Han did 
misery press harder than at this period. 

A poem written in pity for the sufferings of that time 
says :— 

Mortally wounded, the serpent poured forth his life blood at 

Mantang; ; 

Blood-red pennons of war waved then in every quarter, nes 

Chieftain with chieftain strove and raided each other’s borders, 

’Midst the turmoil and strife the Kingship even was threatened. 
` Wickedness stalks in a country when the King is a weakling, 

Brigandage always is rife, when a dynasty’s failing, 

Had one a heart of iron, wholly devoid of feeling, 

Yet would one surely grieve at the sight of such desolation. 

The Tai-yü Yang Piao memorialised the Throne saying, “The 
decree issued to me some time ago has never been acted upon. 


z i Tsi ao Ts‘ao is very strong in T and it would be 
- well to associate him in the SNE ek that he might support 
the ruling house.” ~ 


The Emperor replied, “There was no head to refet to the 


= matter again. Send a messenger when you will.” 


So the decree went forth and a ‘messenger bore ‘it inte 
Shantung. Now when Ts‘ao had heard that the Court had 
returned to Loyang he called together his advisers to consult. 


-Hstin Yü laid the matter before him and the council thus:— te ii 
“Of old Duke Wen supported Prince Hsiang of the Chou 


dynasty and all the feudal lords backed him. The founder of- 


_ the Hans won the popular favour by wearing mourning for the 


Emperor I (who never really sat on the throne). Now the 


_ Emperor has been a fugitive on the dusty roads. To take the 


lead in offering an army to restore him to honour is to have 


ie unrivalled opportunity to win universal regard. But you 


ust act quickly or some one will get in before you.” 


eR ao Ts‘ao understood and at once prepared his army toe 
~ move. Just at this moment an imperial messenger was an- 


nounced with the very command he wanted and he pence 


set out: 


EAE Loyang everything was desolate. ‘The walls had fallen 


s As and there were no means of rebuilding them, while rumours. 
~ and reports of the coming of Li and Kuo kept up a state of | 


© constant anxiety. 


- The frightened Emperor spoke with Yang Rane saying, 


“What can be done? There is no answer from Shantung and 


j our- enemies are near. 


= 


Then Yang Féng and Han Hsien said, ihe your ministers, 
will fight to the death for you.” 
Tung Ch‘éng said, “The fardnennbue are weak and our 


Ne military resources small, so that we cannot hope for victory 
` and what does defeat. mean? I see nothing: better to propone 


than a move into Shantung.” 

The Emperor agreed to this and the ead ‘began woUe 
further preparation. There being few horses, the officers of 
the Court had to march afoot. Hardly a bowshot outside the 
gate they saw a thick cloud of dust out of which came all the | 
clash and clamour of an advancing army. The Emperor and 
his Consort were dumb with fear. Then appeared a horseman; 
he was the messenger returning from Shantung. He rode up 
to the chariot, made an obeisance and said, “General Tsʻ‘ao,. 


as commanded, is coming with all the military force of Shan- 
tung, but hearing that Li and Kuo had again approached the 
capital he has sent Hsiahou Tun in advance. With him are 
-many capable leaders and five legions of proved soldiers. They 
will guard Your Majesty.” 


All fear was swept away. Soon after Hsiahou Tan. and his 
staff arrived and they were presented to the Emperor who 
graciously addressed them. | 


- fiomance af he Three Kingdoms ae roo 


ents 


136 : San Ruo, or 


Then one came to say a large army was approaching Toni 
the east and at the Emperor’s command Hsiahou Tun went to 
ascertain who these were. He soon returned saying they were 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s infantry. 

In a short time Ts‘ao Hung and his officers came to the 
chariot and their names having been duly. communieated the 
chief said, “When my brother heard of the approach of the 
rebels he feared that the advance guard he had sent might be 
too weak so he sent me to march quickly and reinforce him.” | 

“General Ts‘ao is indeed a trusty servant,” said the Emperor. 

Orders were given to advance, the escort leading. By and 
by scouts came to say that the rebels were coming up very 
quickly. The Emperor bade Hsiahou Tun divide his force into 
two parts to oppose them, whereupon the armies threw out two 
wings with cavalry in front and foot behind. They attacked 
‘with vigour and beat off the rebels with great loss. Then they 
begged the Emperor to return to Loyang and Hsiahou Tun 
guarded the city. 

Soon Ts‘ao Ts‘ao came with his great army and having got 
_ them duly camped he went into the city to audience. He knelt 
at the foot of the steps, but was called up hither to stand 
beside the Emperor and be thanked. 

Ts‘ao replied, “Having been the recipient of greai bounty — 
thy servant owes the State much gratitude. The. measure of 
evil of the two rebels is full, I have a score of legions of good 
soldiers to oppose them and they are fully equal to securing 
the safety of Your Majesty and the Throne. The preservation 
of the state sacrifice is the matter of real moment.” 

High honours were conferred on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. ~ 

The two rebels wished to attack Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army while 
fatigued from its long march, but their adviser Chia Hsii - 
opposed this, saying there was no hope of victory. In fact he 
advised submission. Li Ts‘ui was angry at the suggestion, 
saying that the adviser wished to dishearten the army and 
drew his sword on Chia. But the other officers interceded and 
saved him. That same night Chia stole out of the camp and, 
quite alone, took his way home to his native village. 

Soon the rebels decided to offer battle. Ts‘ao sent out in 
reply a small company of horse with three warriors as leaders. 
These dashed into the rebels army but quickly retired. This 
manoeuvre was repeated, and again repeated before the real 
battle array was formed. Then Li Hsien and Li Pieh, nephews 
of Li Ts‘ui, rode out. At once from Ts‘ao’s side dashed out Hsii 
Ch‘u and cut down the former. Li Pieh was so startled that 
he fell out of the saddle. He too was slain. The victor rode | 
back to his own side with the two heads. When he offered — 
them to the chief, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao patted him on the back crying, 
“You are really my Fan K‘uai! (Preserver).” 


“Romance of the Three Hinguoms 137 


N ext a general move forward was made, Hsiahou Tun and ` 


Ts‘ao Jên leading the two wings and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in the centre. 
They advanced to the roll of the drum. The rebels fell back 
before them and presently fled. They were pursued, Ts‘ao 
himself leading, sword in hand. Many were killed and many 
more surrendered. The two leaders went west, flying in panic 


like dogs from a falling house. Having no place of refuge they 7 


took to the hills and hid among the brushwood. 

The army returned and camped again near the city. Then 
Yang Féng and Han Hsien said one to another, “This Ts‘ao 
has done a great service and he will be the man in power. 
There will be- no place for us.” So they represented to the 
Emperor that they wished to pursue the rebels and under this 
excuse withdrew and camped at Taliang. 

One day the Emperor sent to summon Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to au- 
in: dience. The messenger was called in. Ts‘ao noticed that he 
looked remarkably well and could not understand it seeing that 
everyone else looked hungry and famine stricken. So he said, 
“You look plump and well, Sir, how do you manage ip?” 

. “Only this; I have lived maigre for thirty years.’ 

‘Ts‘ao nodded. “What office do you hold?” 

“I ama graduate. I had an office under Yiian Shao, Hut 
came here when the Emperor returned. Now I am one of the 
secretaries. I am a native of Tingt‘ao called Tung Chao.” 

- Ms‘ao got up from his place and crossed over saying, “I have- 
heard of you. How happy I am to meet you!” 

‘Then wine was brought into the tent and Hsiin Yü was | 
` called in and introduced. While they were talking a man 
came in to report that a party was moving eastward. Orders. 
were given to find out whose men these were but the visitor. 


oe knew at once. “They are old leaders under the rebels, ‘Yang Ges 
_ Féng and the “White Wave General” Han. They are Pes a 


— off because you have come, Illustrious Sir!” 
“Do they mistrust me? 2?” said Ts‘ao. 
“They are not worthy of your attention. They are a poor 
“What of this departure of Li and Kuo?” 
pia e Tigers without claws, birds without wings will not escape 
you very long. They are not worth thinking about.” 
_ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saw that he and his guest had much in common 
so he began to talk of affairs of State. 
Said Tung Chao, “You, Illustrious Sir, with your noble army 
: have swept away rebellion and have become the mainstay of 


| is _ the throne, an achievement worthy of the five chieftains. But 
the officials will look at it in very different ways and not all 


favourably to you. I think you would not be wise to remain 
here and I advise a change of capital to Hsütu in Honan. 


aiden it must be remembered that the restoration of the 


< capital, has been ee far and wide and the attention of 


all the people is concentrated on Torang. hoping for a pene 


138 | ean fina, o or 


of rest and tranquillity. Another move will displease many. 


x 


However, the performance of extraordinary service may mean 


the acquisition of extraordinary merit. It is for you to 
decide.” 

“Exactly my own inclination!” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, seizing his 
guests hand. ‘But are there not dangers? Yang Féng at 
Taliang and the Court officials?” 

“That is easily managed. Write to Yang and set his mind 
at rest. Say plainly that there is no food in the capital here 
and so you are going to another place where there is, and where 
there is no danger of peony: When the higher officials hear 
it they will approve.’ 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had now decided and as his guest hati leave he 


seized his hands once more saying, “All my success I shall 
only owe to you.” 


Tung Chao thanked and: left. Thereafter. Ts ao and his. 


advisers secretly discussed the change of capital. 


Now as to that a certain official named Wang Li, who was 


a student of astrology, said to one Liu Ai, “I have been studying 


the stars. Since last spring Venus has been nearing the 
‘Guard’ star in the neighbourhood of the ‘Measure,’ and the © 


‘Cowherd’* crossing the River of Heaven.+ Mars has been 
retrograding and came into conj unction with Venus in the Gate 


-of Heaven, so that ‘Metal’ and ‘Fire’ are mingled. Thence | 


must emerge a new ruler. The aura of the Hans is exhausted 


- and Chin and Wei must increase.’ 
A secret memorial was presented to the Emperor Hsien j 


saying, “The Mandate of Heaven has its course and the five 
elements are out of proportion. ‘Earth’ is attacking ‘Fires. 
and the successor to the Empire of Han is in Wei.” 


Ts‘ao heard of these sayings and memorials and sent a‘man | 


to the astrologer to say, “Your loyalty is well known, but the 


ways of Heaven are past finding out. The less said the 


better.” 

Hsiin, the adviser, expounded the meaning thus: “The virtue 
of Han was fire; your element is earth. Hsütu is under the 
influence of earth and so your fortune depends on getting 
there. Fire can overcome earth, as earth can multiply’ wood. 


Tung Chao and the astrologer agree and you have only to bide 


your time.” 
So Ts‘ao made up his mind. Next day at Court he said, 


“The capital is deserted and cannot be restored ner can it be. 


supplied easily with food. Hsütu is a noble city, standing 


close to a fruitful district. It is everything that a capital . 


should be. I venture to request that the Court move thither.” 


. * The Great Bear and Vega. 
+ The Milky Way. 
£A star in Taurus. 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 139 


The Emperor dared not oppose and the officials were too ri i 


overawed to have any independent opinion so they chose a day 
to set out. Ts‘ao commanded the escort and the officials all 
followed. When they had travelled a few stages they saw 
before them a high mound and from behind this there arose 


the beating of drums. Then Yang and Han came out and 


barred the way. ‘In front of all stood Hsü Huang, who shouted, 
“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is stealing away the Emperor!” 


Ts‘ao rode out and took a good look at this man. He sederded 
_ a fine fellow and in his secret soul Ts‘ao greatly admired him, 


although he was an enemy. Then he ordered Hsii Ch‘u to go 


and fight him. The combat was axe against broadsword and © 
. the two men fought more than half a hundred bouts without 
advantage to either side. Tsi ao then beat the gongs and drew 


off his men. 
In the camp a otal was called. Ts‘ao said, “The two 


, tabele themselves need not be discussed; but Hsü Huang is a 
fine captain and I was unwilling to use any great force against _ 


him. I want to win him over to our side.” 
An officer, Man Ch‘ung, replied, “Do not let that trouble you; 
I will have a word with him. I shall disguise myself as a 


soldier this evening and steal over to the enemy's camp to 
talk to him. I shall incline his heart toward you.’ a 
That night Man Ch‘ung, duly disguised, got over to the other _ 
. sideʻand made his way to the tent of Hsü Huang, who sat 
there by the light of a candle. He was still wearing his coat- 
of mail. Suddenly Ch‘ung ran out in front and saluted saying, 
PS OM. have been well since we parted, old friend?” 

Hsii jumped up in surprise, gazed into the face of the speaker 
a long time and presently said, “What! you are Man Po-ning 


of Shanyang? What are you doing here? st) 
.“I am an officer in General Ts‘ao’s army. Seeing my old 


_ friend out in front of the army to-day I wanted to say a word bo 


to him. So I took the risk of stealing in this evening and here 


Eram? : 
Hsü Huang invited him in and they sat down. Then said ie 
Man Ch‘ung, “There are very few as bold as you on the earth; 


why then do you serve such as your present chiefs? My master 
is the most prominent man in the world, a man who delights 


in wise men and appreciates soldiers as every one knows. 
-Your valour to-day won his entire admiration and so he took 


care that the attack was not vigorous enough to sacrifice you. 
Now he has sent me to invite you to join him. Will you not 
leave darkness for light and help him in his magnificent 
task?’ 

Hsti Huang sat a lone time pondering over the offer. Then 
he said, with a sigh, “I know my masters are doomed to failure, 
but I have followed their fortunes a long time and do not like 


; to leave them.” 


140.8 | Ban Kuo, or 


“But you know the prudent bird selects its tree and the 
wise servant chooses his master. When one meets a worthy 
master and lets him go one is a fool.’ 2 

“T am willing to do what you say,” said Hsii, rising. 

“Why not put these two to death as an introductory SS 
said Man. 

“It.is very wrong for a servant to slay his master. a will 
not do that.” 

“True; you are really a good man.’ e 

Then Hsü, taking only a few Bon. of his own men with 
him, left that night and deserted to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Soon some 
one ‘took the news to Yang Féng, who at the head of a strong 
company of horsemen, set out to capture the deserter. He 
called out to him to come back. -~ 

But when Yang was getting near he fell into an ambush. 
Suddenly the whole mountain side was lit up with torches and 
out sprang Ts‘ao’s men, he himself being in command. “I 
i been waiting here a long time; do not run away,” cried 

e. 

Yang Fêng was completely surprised and tried to draw off, 
but was quickly surrounded. His colleague came to his rescue 
and a confused battle began. Yang Fêng succeeded in escap- 
ing, while Ts‘ao Ts‘ao kept up the attack on the disordered 
army. -A great number of the rebels gave in and the leaders 
found they had too few men left to maintain their independence | 
-so they betook themselves to Ytian Shu. 

When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao returned to camp the newly surrendered 
man was presented and well received. Then again the caval- 
cade set out for the new capital. In due time they reached it- 
and they built palaces and halls and an ancestral temple and 
an altar, terraces and public offices. The walls were repaired, 
storehouses built and all put in order. 

Then came the rewards for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s adherents. © Thir- 
teen were raised to rank of hou, or marquis. All good service 
was rewarded; certain others again, who deserved it, were 
punished, all according to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s sole decision. He 
himself was made a Generalissimo and Marquis of Wup‘ing. 
The advisers became Presidents of Boards and filled such 
offices. Mao Chieh and Jén Hsiin were put over the military 
stores. Tung Chao was made magistrate of Loyang and Man > 
Ch‘ung of Hsiitu. All good service received full recognition. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was then the one man of the Court. All 
memorials went first to him and were then submitted to the 
Throne. ; 

When State matters were in order a great banquet was 
given in his private quarters to all Ts‘ao’s advisers, and affairs 
outside the capital were the subject of discussion. Then Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao said, “Liu Pei has his army at Hsüchou and he carries 
on the administration of the prefecture. Lii Pu fled to him 


Romance of the Three ingdoms TAr 


_ when defeated and Pei gave him Hsiaop‘ei to live in. If Hen ; 
- two agreed to join forces and attack, my position would be 
most serious. What precautions can be taken?” 

Then rose Hsii Ch‘u, saying, “Give me five legions and I will 
give the Minister both their heads.” 

Hsiin Yü said, “O Leader, you are brave, but you are no 
strategist. You cannot start sudden war just as the capital 
‘has been changed. However, there is a certain ruse known as 
The Rival Tigers. Liu Pei has no decree authorising him to 
govern the district. You, Illustrious Sir, can procure one for — 
him, and when sending it, and so conferring upon him right 
in addition to his might, you can enclose a private note telling 
him to get rid of Lü Pu. If he does, then he will have lost a 


_ vigorous warrior from his side and he could be dealt with as 


occasions serve. Should he fail, then Lii Pu will slay him. 


: As This is The Rival Tiger ruse; they wrangle and bite each ae 


other.” 

` Ts‘ao agreed that this was a good plan so he memorialised 
for the formal appointment, which he sent to Liu Pei. Pei 
was created General “Conqueror of the East” and a Marquis as 
well. At the same time a private note was enclosed. 

When Liu Pei heard of the change of capital he began to 
prepare a congratulatory address. In the midst of this an 
imperial messenger was announced and was met which all cere- 
- mony outside the gate. When the epistle had been reverently 
received a banquet was prepared for the messenger. 

The messenger said, “This decree was obtained for you by 
the Minister Ts‘ao.”’ 

Yiian-té thanked him. Then the messenger drew forth his 
Seret. letter. When he had read this Liu Pei said, “This 
matter can be easily arranged.” 

The banquet over and the messenger conducted to his lene 
to seek repose, Ytian-té, before going to rest, called in his 
councillors to consider the letter. 

“There need be no compunction about putting him to death, a 
said Chang Fei; “he is a bad man.’ 


“But he came "to me for protection in his weakness, how can 


I put him to death? That would be immoral,” said Liu Pei. 
“Tf he was a good man; it would be difficult,” replied Fei. 
Liu Pei would not consent. Next day, when Lü Pu came 

to offer congratulations, he was received as usual. . He said, 

“T have come to felicitate you on the receipt of the e imperial 

bounty.” 

Liu Pei thanked him in due form. But then he saw Chang 
Fei draw his sword and come up the hall as if to slay Lü Pu. 
He hastily interfered and stopped him. Lü Pu was surprised 
and said, “Why do you wish to slay me, I-té?” 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao says you are immoral and tells my brother to 
kill sou) shouted Chang Fei. OBES 


142 Ban Ruo, or 


Liu Pei shouted again and again to him to go away, and he 
led Lü Pu into the private apartments out of the way. 
Then he told him the whole eee showed him the secret 

letter. He wept as he finished reading.. 

“This is that miscreant’s scheme for sowing discord between 
us. 39 

“Be not anxious, elder brother,” said Liu Pei. via pledge 
myself not to be guilty of such an infamous crime.’ 

Lü Pu again and again expressed his gratitude hia Liu Pei 
kept him for a time. They remained talking and drinking 
wine till late. 

Said ths other two brothers, “Why not kill himt 

. Liu Pei said, “Because Ts‘ao Méng-té fears that Lü aha 
I may attack him, he is trying to separate us and get us to 
‘swallow’ each other, while he steps in and takes the advant- 
age. Is there any other reason?” : 

Kuan nodded assent, but Chang Fei said, “I want to get him 
out of the way lest he trouble us later.” ` 

“That is not what a noble man should do,” said his elder 
brother. f 

Soon the messenger was demised and returned to the 
capital with the reply from Liu Pei. The letter only said the 
plan would be made later. But the messenger, when he’ saw 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, told him the story of Liu Pei’s pledge to Lü Pu. 
Then said Ts‘ ao Ts‘ ao, “The plan has failed; what next?” 

Hsiin Yü replied, “I have another trick called ‘The Tiger 
acy Wolf’ in which the tiger is see to gobble Up. the 
wolf.” 

“Let us hear it,” said Ts‘ ao. ( 

“Send to Yüan Shu to say that Liu Pei has sent up a Pre 
memorial that he wishes to subdue the southern districts. Shu 
will be angry and attack him. Then you will order Pei to 
dispose of Shu and so set them destroying each other. Lü Pu 
will certainly think that is his chance and turn traitor. This 
is The Tiger-Wolf trick.” 

-'Ts‘ao thought this good and Satie the messenger and also. 
sent a false edict to Liu Pei. When this came the messenger 
was received with all the ceremonies and the edict ordered the 
capture of Yiian Shu. After the departure of the bearer Liu: 
called Mi Chu who pronounced it a ruse, 

“It may be,” said his master, “but the royal command i is not 
to be disobeyed. 8 

So the army was prepared and the day fixed. Sun Ch‘ien 
said that a trusty man must be left on guard and Pei asked 
- which of his brothers would undertake this task. 

- “I will guard the city,” said Kuan Yü. 

ona constantly in need of your advice so how can we 

art?” 

“I will guard the city,” said Chang Fei. 


iS Romance of the Three Kingdoms Y Lig oe 


_ “You will fail,” said Pei. “After one of your E bouts 


= you will get savage and flog the soldiers. Beside you are rash 


and will not listen to any one’s advice. I shall be uneasy all 
the time.” ! 


“Henceforth I drink no more wine. a will not best the ` 


soldiers and I will always listen to advice,” said Fei. 
a cee the mouth does not correspond to the heart,” said 
i Chu 


“I have followed my elder brother these many years and 
never broken faith; why should you be contemptuous?” said Fei: _ i 
~- Yüan-tê said, “Though you say this I do not feel quite» — 
satisfied. I will order friend Yiian-lung to help you and keep > 
eh: you sober. Then you will not make any mistake.” 

Ch‘en Téng was willing to undertake this duty and the final 
orders were given. The army of three legions, horse and foot, 


left Hsiichou and marched toward Nanyang. — 
When Yiian Shu heard that a memorial had been presented 
proposing to take possession of this district he broke out into 


abuse of Liu Pei. “You weaver of mats! You plaiter of straw ` 


pal ‘shoes! You have been smart enough to get possession of a 
- large district and elbow your way into the ranks of the nobles. 


‘I was just going to attack you and now you dare to scheme 
S against me! How I detest you! | 
; So he at once gaye orders to prepare an army of ten legions, HA 
: nder Chi Ling, to attack Hsiichou. The armies met at Hsüi, K 
where Liu Pei was encamped in a plain with hills behind and eae 


1” 


a stream on his flank, for his army was small. i 
Chi Ling, his opponent, was a native of Shenae He used 


a very heavy three-edged sword. After he had made his camp | 


he rode out and began abusing his opponents “Liu. Pei, you 


‘rustic bumpkin, how dare you invade this land?” 


“T have a decree ordering me to destroy the minister a 


‘behaves improperly. If you prose you will be assuredly 


r punished” replied. Pei. 


‘Chi angrily rode out E his weapon. But Kuan Yü 


cried, “Fool, do not attempt to fight!’ and rode out to meet 


‘him. Then they two fought and after thirty bouts neither had 
-an advantage. Then Chi cried out for a rest. So Kuan turned 


his horse away, rode back to his own array and waited for him. 

When the moment came to renew the combat Chi sent out 
one of his officers to take his place. But Kuan said, “Telf 
Chi Ling to. come: I must settle with him who shall be cock 
and who shall be hen.” 


“You a reputationless leader and unworthy to fight with our 


general,” replied the officer, Hsiin Chéng. 
This reply angered Kuan, ‘who made just one attack on Hsiin 


- and brought him to the ground. At this success Liu Pei urged 
-on the army and Chi Ling’s men were defeated. They retired 
to the mouth of the Huaiyin River and declined all challenges. 


REIA 


~ 


144 ~- an uo, or 


However, many of their men came privately into Liu. Pei’s 
camp to try to do what mischief they could and many, so found, f 
were slain. 

But the armies will be left facing each other while we relate 
what happened in Hsiichou. 

After Liu Pei had started on. his expedition eae Fei placed iS 
his colleague and helper in charge of the administration of 
Hstichou, keeping military affairs under his own supervision. 
After thinking over the matter for some time he gave a ban- 
quet to all the military officers and when they were all seated 
he made a speech. -‘‘Before my brother left he bade me keep 
clear of the wine cup for fear of accidents. Now, gentlemen, 
you may drink deep to-day but from tomorrow wine is for- 
bidden for we must keep the city safe. So take your fill.” 
And with this he and all his guests rose to drink together. 

The wine bearer came to one Ts‘ao Pao who declined it, 
saying he never drank as he was forbidden of heaven. eke 

“What! a fighting man not drink wine!” at the host. “I 
want you to take just one cup.” ` 

Ts‘ao Pao was afraid to offend so he drank. . 

Now the host drank huge goblets with all his guests on 
every hand and so swallowed a huge quantity of liquor. 
He became quite intoxicated. Yet he would drink more and 
insisted on a cup with every guest. It came to the turn of 
Ts‘ao Pao who declined. . 

“Really, I cannot drink,” said Pao. 

“You drank just now: why refuse this time? Neh 

‘Chang Fei pressed him, but still Ts‘ao Pao resisted. Then ~ 


Fei in his drunken madness lost control of his temper and | 


said, “Tf you disobey the orders of your general you shall be 
beaten.” And he called in his, guards. 

Here Ch‘én Yuan-lung interfered reminding hita of the strict 
injunctions of his brother. ; i 

“You civilians attend to your civil business and leave us 
alone,” said Fei. 

The only way of escape for the guest was to beg remission 
and he did so, but added, “Sir, if you saw my son-in-law’s 
face you would pardon me.’ . 

“Who is your son-in-law?” 

x Brit Pu. 39 

“I did not mean to have you really beaten,. but if you think 
to frighten me with Lü Pu I will.. I will beat you as if I was 
beating him,” said Fei. Ce 

The guests interposed to beg-him off, but their drunken host 
was obdurate and the unhappy guest received fifty blows. 
Then at the earnest prayers of the. others the remainder of 
the punishment was remitted. | 

The banquet came to an end and the beaten man went away 
burning with resentment. .That night he sent a letter to 


‘Romance of the Three Kingdoms 145 
Paap ei relating the insults he had received from Chang Fei. 
` The letter told Lü Pu of the prefect’s absence and proposed 
_ that a sudden raid should be made that very night before 
Chang Fei had recovered from his drunken fit. Lü Pu at 
once summoned Ch‘én Kung and told him. 

“This is only a place to occupy temporarily,” said Kung. 
“Tf you can seize Hsiichou, do so. It is a good chance.” 

Lü Pu got ready at once and soon on the way with half a 


company, ordering Ch‘én Kung to follow him with the main 


body. Kao Shun was to follow him. 

Hsiaop‘ei being only about forty li away, one gets there 
almost as soon as one is mounted and Lü Pu was under 
the walls at the fourth watch. It was clear moonlight. 
No one on the ramparts saw him. Pu came up close to 


the wall and called out, “Liu Pei’s secret messenger has 


_ arrived. cee 

The guards on the wail: -were Ts‘ao Pao’s men and they. called 
him. He came and when he saw who was there he ordered the 
< gates to be opened. Lü Pu gave the secret signal and the 
‘soldiers entered shouting. 

Chang Fei was in his apartment sleeping off the fumes of 


wine. His servants hastened to arouse him and told him an 


enemy had got the gates open and was in the city. Chang 


_ savagely got into his armour and laid hold of his mighty spear, 


_ but as he was mounting his horse at the gate the soldiers came 
` up. He rushed at them but being still half intoxicated made 
but a poor fight. Lü Pu knowing his prowess did not press 


F him hard and Chang Fei made his way, with a small escort, 


to the east gate, and there went out, leaving his brother’s 
family to their fate. — 

Ts‘ao Pao, seeing Chang had but a very small force and was 
-still half drunk as well, came in pursuit. Fei saw who it was 
‘and was mad with rage. He galloped toward him and drove 
_ him off after a few passes. He followed Pao to the moat and 


- wounded him in the back. His frightened steed carried him 
- into the moat and he was drowned. s 


Once well outside the city Chang Fei sallected his men and 
they rode off toward the south. 

-Lii Pu having surprised the city set himself to restore order. 
He put a guard over the residence of Liu Pei so that no one 


should disturb the family. 


Chang Fei with his few followers went to his brother s camp 
and told his story of treachery and surprise. All were greatly 
‘distressed. 

‘Success is not worth rejoicing over; failure is not worth 
grieving over,” said Liu Pei with a sigh. 

“Where are our sisters?” asked Kuan. 

“They shared the fate of the city.” 

‘Liu Pei podaci his head and was silent. 


~ 


10. TS <0 


| 


t 


CHAPTER XV. 


T‘AISHIH TZU FIGHTS FOR FRIENDSHIP’ S SAKE: 
SUN Po-FU DOES BATTLE WITH YEN, THE WHITE TIGER. | 


Be the last chapter it was recorded that Chang Fei was about I P 


_to end his life with his own weapon. But his brother rushed 
forward and caught him in his arms, snatched away the sword 
and threw it on the earth saying, “Brothers are hands and 


_ feet; wives and children are as clothing. You may mend your 
torn. dress, but who can re-attach a lost limb? We three, by © 
the Oath of the Peach Garden, swore to seek the same death- © 


day. The city is lost, it is true, and my wife and little ones, 
but I could. not bear that we should die ere our course be run. 
Beside, the city was not really mine and Lü Pu will not harm 
my family but will rather seek to preserve them. You made 
a mistake, worthy brother, but is it one deserving of death?” 

And he wept. His brothers were much affected and their 
tears fell in sympathy. 

As soon as the news of Lü Pu’s successful seizure of his 


~. protector’s district reached Yiian Shu, he sent promises of 


i 


valuable presents to Lü to induce him to join in a further 
attack on Liu Pei. The presents are said to have been fifty 
- thousand measures of grain, five hundred horses, ten thousand 
taels of gold and silver and a thousand pieces of coloured silk. 
Lü Pu swallowed the bait and ordered Kao Shun to lead forth 
five legions. But Liu Pei heard of the threatened attack, 
so he made inclement weather an excuse to disband his few 
soldiers and left Hsüi, before the attacking force came up. 
However, Kao Shun demanded the promised reward through 
Chi- Ling, who put him off saying, “My lord has gone away, I 
will settle this as soon as I can see him and get his decision.”’ 
With this answer KaoShun returned to Lü Pu, who could not 
decide what to do. Then came a letter from Yüan Shu saying 
that although Kao Shun had gone to attack Liu Pei, yet Pei 


had not been destroyed and no reward could be given till he 


was actually taken. Lü Pu railed at what he called the breach 
of faith and was inclined to attack Yiian Shu himself. How- 
ever, his adviser opposed this course, saying, “You should not; 

he is in possession of Shouch‘un and has a large army, well 
supplied. $ You are no match for him. Rather ask Liu Pei 
to take up his quarters at Hsiaop‘ei as one of your wings and, 
‘when the time comes, let him lead the attack. -Then both the 
Yiians will fall before tah and you will be very powerful.” 


148 = an Huo, or 


Finding this advice good he sent letters to Yiian-té asking ee 


him to return. 

The story of Liu Pei’s attack on Kuangling, the attack on 
his camp and his losses, has been told. On his way back he 
met the messenger from Lü Pu, who presented the letter. 
Yüan-tê was quite content with the offer but his brothers were 
not inclined to trust Lii. 

“Since he treats me kindly, I cannot but trust him,” replied 
Yiian-té. 

So he went back to Hsiichou. Lü Pu, fearing that Liu Pei © 
might doubt his sincerity, restored his family and when the 
ladies; Kan and Mi, saw their lord they told him that they had 
been kindly treated and guarded by soldiers against any in- 
trusion, and provisions had never been wanting. | 

SI knew he would not harm my. family,” said Yiian-té to 
Kuan and Chang. 
_ However, they were not pleased and would not accompany 
their brother into the city when he went to express his thanks. : 
They went to escort the two ladies to Hsiaop‘ei. 

At the interview Lii Pu said, “I did not wish to take the city, . 
but your brother behaved very badly, drinking and flogging 
thesoldiers, and I came to guard it lest some evil should befall.” 

(oS But. I had long wished to yield it to you,” said Ytian-té. 


Thereupon Lii Pu pretended to wish to retire in favour of | ue 
Yiian-té who, however, would not hear of it. He returned -— 


and took up ‘his, quarters in Hsiaop‘ei, but his two brothers © 
would not take the situation kindly and were very discontented. 
Said Ytian-té, “One must bow to one’s lot. it is the will of 
Heaven and one cannot struggle against fate.” ` 
Lü Pu sent presents of food and stuffs and peace reigned 
between the two houses. 


But there is no need to write of this. As the story runs, we 


Yiian Shu prepared a great banquet for his soldiers on the 
occasion of a, victory gained by Sun Ts‘é over Lu K‘ang, the 
Prefect of Luchiang. Yüan Shu summoned the victor, who 
made obeisance at the foot of the hall of audience. Shu, — 
sitting in State, asked for details of the campaign and then — 
invited Sun Ts‘é to the banquet. 

After the unhappy death of his father Sun Ts‘é had returned 
to Chiangnan, where he had devoted himself to peaceful ends, 
inviting to his side good men and able scholars. Afterwards 
when a quarrel broke out between his mother’s uncle, the 
Prefect of Tanyang, and T‘ao Ch‘ien, he removed his mother 
with all the family to Ch‘tia, he’ himself taking service under 
Yiian Shu, who admired and loved him greatly. 

“If I had a-son like him, z said Shu, sT should die without ; 
regret, ee 
- He employed Sun Ts‘é as a soldier and sent him on various 
expeditions, -all of which were: successful. - After this. banquet 


Romance of the Three ingvoms 149 


to celebrate the victory over Lu K‘ang, Sun Ts‘é returned to 
his camp very bitter over the arrogant and patronising airs 
-= of his patron. Instead of retiring to his tent he walked up 
and down by the light of the moon. 
` “Here am I, a mere nobody and yet” my father was such a 
hero!” And he cried out and wept in spite of himself. : 
Then suddenly appeared one who said, laughing loudly, 
‘What i is this, O Po-fu? While your noble father enjoyed the 
light of the sun he made free use of me and if his son has any 
difficulty to resolve why does he not refer it to me also instead 
of weeping here alone?” 
Looking at the speaker Sun Ts‘é saw it was one Chu Chih, 
- whose less formal name was Chiin-li, a native of that district, 
_ who had been in his father’s service. Sun Ts‘é then ceased 
weeping and they two sat down. 
“I was weeping from regret at being unable to continue my 


: 7 father’s work,” said he. 


“Why stay here bound to the service oF a master? Why not 
get command of an army under the pretence of an expedition to 
relieve Chiangtung? Then you can accomplish great things.” 

While these two were talking another man suddenly entered 
saying, “I know what you two are planning, noble Sirs. Under 


ie my hand is a band of bold fellows ready to help Po-fu in what- 


ever he wishes to do.” 
- The speaker was one of Yiian Shu’s advisers named Lü Fan. 


_ They three then sat and discussed schemes. 


“The one fear is that the soldiers will be refused,” said the 
newcomer. 

“I still have the Imperial Seal,that my father left me; that 
- should be good security.” 
= “Yiian Shu earnestly desires that jewel,” said Chu Chih. 

“He will certainly lend you men on that pledge.” 

The three talked over their plans, gradually settling the 
details, and not many days after Sun Ts‘é obtained an inter- 
view with his patron. Assuming the appearance of deep grief 
he said, “I have been unable to avenge my father. Now the 
Prefect of Yangchow is opposing my mother’s brother and 
~ my mother.and her family are in danger. Wherefore I would 
_ borrow a few companies of fighting men to rescue them. As 
perhaps, Illustrious Sir, you may lack confidence in me I am 
willing to deposit the Imperial Seal, left me by my late father, 

as a pledge.” 
= “Let me see it, if you have it,” said Shu. “I do not. want 
the jewel really, but you may as well leave it with me. I will 
lend you three companies and five hundred horses. Return 
‘as soon as peace can be made. As your rank is hardly 


sufficient for such powers I will memorialise to obtain for 


- you higher rank with the title of General, ‘Exterminator of 
. Brigands,’ and: you can soon start.” ; 


"150 San Buo, or 


Ts‘é thanked his patron most humbly and soon put the army 
in motion, taking with him his two new friends as well as his. 
former captains. -When he reached Liyang he saw a body of 
troops in front of him, at their head a dashing leader of hand- 
some and refined mien. As soon as this man saw.Sun Ts‘ 
he dismounted and made obeisance. It was Chou Yu. 

When Sun Chien was opposing the tyrant Minister Tung 
Cho, the Chou family had removed to Shu, in modern Anhui, 
and as Chou Yü and Sun Ts‘é were of the same age all but 
two months, they became exceedingly good friends and sworn 
brothers, Ts‘é being the “elder” in virtue of his two months’ 
seniority. Chou Yü was on his way to visit Sun Ts‘é’s uncle, 
Prefect of Tanyang, when the happy meeting took place. 

Naturally Sun Ts‘é confided his projects and inmost ideas 
to his friend, who at once promised fidelity and service. They 
would work out the grand design together. 

“Now that you have come the design is as good as accom- 
plished,” said Sun. . 

Chou Yü was introduced to Chu Chih and Lü Fan. 

Chou Yü said, “Do you know of the two Changs of Chiang- — 
tung’? They would be most useful men in working out your 
schemes.” 

` “Who are they, the two Changs?” said Sun. 

“They are men of transcendent genius who are living near 
here for the sake of tranquillity in these troublous times. 
Their names are Chang Chao and Chang Hung. Why not 
invite them to help you, brother?” i 

Sun Ts‘é lost no time in sending letters and gifts, but they 
both declined. Then he visited them in person, was greatly 
pleased with their speech and by dint of large gifts and much 
persuasion, got them to promise to join him. They were given 
substantial offices. Baan 

The plan of the attack upon Yangchou was the next matter 
for discussion. The Prefect, Liu Yu, was of Tunglai, a scion of 
the Imperial family and brother of the governor of Yenchow. 
He had long ruled in Yangchou, but Yüan Shu had forced him 
to leave his usual abiding city and retire to Ch‘tia. 

Hearing of the meditated attack on him he summoned his 
captains to take counsel. Said Chang Ying, “I will take an 
army and entrench at Niuchu. No army can get past that, 
whatever its strength.” - 

He was interrupted by another who shouted, “And let me 
lead the van!” 

All eyes turned to this man; is was T‘aishih Tzi who, after 
raising the siege of Pohai, had come on a visit to the Prefect 
and stayed on. 

Hearing him offer to undertake the hazardous post of van- 
leader Liu Yu said, “But you are still young and not yet equal 
to sucha charge. Rather stay by my side and obey my orders.” 


| Romance of ti the bree ghee! 151 


Taishih Tait withdrew in high dudgeon. Soon Chang Ying 
ed his army to Niuchu, leaving his stores of grain at Tiko. 
‘When Sun Tss‘é approached, Chang Ying went to meet him and 
the two armies faced each other above Niuchut‘an, (Bullock 
Island Rapid). Chang Ying roundly abused his opponent and. 
‘Huang Kai rode out to attack, bui before the combat had 
- proceeded far there arose an alarm of fire in Chang Ying’s 
camp. Chang Ying turned back and then Sun Ts‘é advanced in 
-full force, compelling the enemy to abandon their possession. 
E The defeated general fled to the hills. 
Now the incendiaries who had brought about this result 

` were two, named Chiang Ch‘in and Chou T‘ai, both from the 
s - Kiakiane district, who in these troublous times had got to-- 
gether a band of kindred spirits and lived by plundering the 
country along the Yangtse River. They knew Sun Ts‘é by 
eputation as a man who treated able men very liberally and 
wished to join him. So they came with their band, three 
- hundred strong, and helped him in this way as an introduction: 
Sun Ts‘é welcomed them and gave the leaders rank. After 
_ taking possession of the stores of all kinds abandoned by the 
‘runaways, and | enlisting a large number of those who sur- 
‘rendered into his own ranks, he moved forward to attack 
Shéntiing. — 

_ After his defeat Chang Ying returned to his master and told 
his misfortune. Liu Yu was going to punish his failure by 
death, but listened to his advisers, who asked for mercy for the 
K unfortunate man, and sent him ‘to command the garrison in 
‘Lingling. He himself set out to meet the invaders. He 
camped under the hills at Lingnan. Sun Ts‘é camped on the 
5 opposite side of the hills. 

Sun Ts‘é enquired if there was a temple to Kuang-Wu, of 
j the Hans, in the vicinity, and was told there was a temple on 
the summit of the hills. 
AOST dreamed last night that he called me so I will go and 
"pray there,” said Ts‘é 
He was advised hot to go as the enemy was on the other 
- side and he might fall into an ambush. 
“The spirit will help me; what need I fear?” 
So he put on his armour, took his spear and mounted, taking 
with him twelve of his officers as anescort. They rode up the 
hills, dismounted, burned incense and they all bowed in the 
n shrine. Then Ts‘é knelt and made a vow saying, “If I, Sun 
_ Ts‘é, succeed in. my task and restore the authority of my late 
father then will I restore this temple and order sacrifices at 
_ the four seasons.’ 
When they had remounted he said, “I am going to ride along 
the ridge and reconnoitre the enemy’s position.” 
His followers begged him to refrain but he was obstinate 
and they rode away eerie noting the villages below, A 


$ 


152 Dan Buo, or 


soldier going along a bye road quickly reported the nte i 
of horsemen on the ridge and Liu Yu said, “It is certainly Sun 
Ts‘ trying to inveigle us to battle. But do not go out.” 

T‘aishih Tzu, the bold, jumped up saying, “What better | 
chance to capture him?” 

So, without orders he armed himself and rode through the. 
camp crying, “If there be any valiant men among you follow 
me!” 

No one moved save a subaltern who said, “He is a valiant 
man and I will go with him.” So he also went. The others 
only laughed at the pair. 

Now having seen all he wished Sun Ts‘ê thought it time to 
‘return and wheeled round his horse. But when he es going 
over the summit some one shouted, “Stay, Sun Ts‘é! 

He turned; two horsemen were coming at full speed down 
the next hill. He halted and drew up his little escort right 
and left, he himself with his spear ready. 

“Which i is Sun Ts‘é?” shouted T‘aishih. 

“Who are you?” was the reply. ee 

“I am T‘aishih Tzu, of Tunglai, come to take him prisoner.” 

“Then I am he,” said Sun Ts‘é laughing. “Come both of __ 
you together; I am not afraid of you. If I was, I should not 
be Po-fu.” ` iv. 

“You and all your crowd come on and I will not blench,” 
cried T‘aishih putting his horse at a gallop and setting his 
spear. 
Sun braced himself for the shock and the battle began. 
Fifty bouts were fought and still neither combatant had the 
advantage. Sun Ts‘é’s followers whispered to each other 
their admiration and amazement. ‘T‘aishih saw that the — 
spearmanship of his opponent showed no weak point whereby 
he could gain the advantage so he decided to resort to guile. 
Feigning defeat he would lead Sun to pursue. ‘T‘aishih how- 
ever did not retire along the road by which he had come, but 
took a path leading around the hill instead of over it. His 
antagonist followed, shouting, “He who retreats is no worthy 
son of Han!” 

But T‘aishih thought within himself, “He has twelve others 
at his back and I only one. If I capture him, the others will — 
retake him. I will inveigle him into some secret spot and 
then try.” So flying and fighting by turns he led Sun Ts‘ ê, 
an eager pursuer, down to the plain. y 

Here T‘aishih suddenly wheeled about and attacked. Again 
they exchanged half a hundred, bouts, without result. ‘Then 
Sun made a fierce thrust which his opponent evaded by grip- 
ping the spear under his oxter, while T‘aishih did the same 
with his opponent’s spear. Neither was wounded but each 
exerting his utmost strength to pull the other out of the saddle 
they both came to the ground.. 


’ 


Romance of the Three tiingdoms 153 


Their steeds galloped off they knew not whither while the 
ra awe men, each dropping his spear, began a hand to hand 
struggle. Soon their fighting robes were in tatters. Sun 


gripped the short lance that T‘aishih carried at his back, while 


T‘aishih tore off the other’s helmet. Sun tried to stab with 
the Se but T‘aishih fended off the blow with the helmet 
-as a shie 


Then arose a great shouting. Liu Yu had come up with a f 


company of soldiers. Sun seemed now in sore straits. His 
twelve followers came up and each combatant let go his hold. 
T‘aishih quickly found another steed, seized a spear and 
mounted. Sun Ts‘é, whose charger had been caught by Ch‘éng 
P‘u, also mounted, and a confused battle began between the 


‘handful of men on one side and a whole company on the other. 


It swayed and drifted down the hill side. However, soon Chou 
Yii came to the rescue, and as evening drew on a tempest put 
an end to the fight.. Both sides drew off and returned to camp. 
` Next day Sun Ts‘é led his army to the front of Liu Yu’s 
camp and the challenge was accepted. The armies were drawn 
up. Sun hung the short lance he had seized from T‘aishih 


a8 Tzu at the end of his spear and waved it in front of the line 
of battle and ordered his soldiers to shout, “If the ownér of — 


this had not fied he would have been stabbed to death.” 
On the other side they hung out Sun’s helmet and the soldiers 
shouted back “Sun Ts‘é’s head is here already.” 
5 Both sides thus yelled defiance at each other, one side boast- 
ing, the other bragging. Then T‘aishih rode out challenging 
Sun to a duel to the death and Sun would have accepted, but 


~ Ch‘éng P‘u said, “My lord should not trouble himself, I will 


take him,” and he rode forth. 
“You are no antagonist for me,’ ’ said T‘aishih. “Tell your 


- master to come out.” 


This incensed Ch‘éng, who rode at his opponent, and they 
- two fought many fy The duel was stopped by the gongs 
of Liu Yu. 

“Why did you sound the retreat?” said T‘aishih. “I was 
just going to capture the wretch.” 

“Because I have just heard that Ch‘tia is threatened. Chou 
Yü is leading a force thither and a certain Ch‘én Wu is in 
league with him to betray the city. The loss would be irre- 
mediable. I will hasten to Moling to get the help of Hstieh 
Li and Chai Jung.” 

The army retired, T‘aishih Tză with it, without being 


pursued. On the other side Chang Chao said to Sun Ts‘é ê, : 


“Chou Yii’s threatened attack is the cause of this move; they 


are in no mood to fight. A night raid on their camp would 


finish them.” 
The army was- divided: into five divisions for the night 


es surprise and ca tile toward the camp where they were 


154 San Fun, or 


victorious. Their opponents scattered in all directions. T'ai- 
shih alone made a determined stand and as he could not with- 
stand a whole army he fled with a few followers to Chinghsien, _ 

Now Sun Ts‘é acquired a new adherent in the person of 
Ch‘én Wu. He was a soldier of middle height, sallow of 
complexion and dark eye, an odd looking man. But ‘Sun held 
him in high esteem, gave him rank and put him in the van for 
the attack on Hsiieh Li. As van- leader he and half a score — 
horsemen made a dash into the enemy’s formation, where they _ 
slew half a hundred men. So Hsiieh Li would not fight but 
remained within his defences. As Sun was attacking the city 
a spy came in with the news that Liu Yu and Chai J ung had 
gone to attack Niuchu, which made Sun move thither in haste. 
His two opponents were ready for battle. 

“I am here,” said Sun Ts‘ê, “you had better give in.’ 

A horseman came out from behind the two leaders a accept 
the challenge. It was Yü Mi. Butin the third bout Sun Ts‘ è 
made him prisoner and carried him off to the other side. da 

Seeing his colleague thus captured Fan Néng rode out a 


the rescue and got quite close. But just as he was going to 


thrust, all the soldiers shouted “There is a man behind you 


going to strike secretly!” At this Sun Ts‘é turned and shouted __ 


so thunderously loud that Fan Néng fell out of his saddle from 
mere fright. He split his skull and died. When Sun Ts‘é 
reached his standard he threw his prisoner to the ground. 
And he was also dead, crushed to death between the arm and 
the body of his captor. So in a few moments Sun Ts‘é had 
disposed of two enemies, one crushed to death and one fright- 


ened to death. Thereafter Sun Ts‘é was called the Little F 


Prince. 

After Liu Yu’s defeat the greater portion of his force Sur- 
rendered and the number of those put to death exceeded ten — 
thousand. Liu Yu himself sought safety with Liu Piao. 

An attack on Moling was the next move. As soon as Sun 
Ts‘é arrived at the moat he summoned the commander, Hsiieh 
Li, to surrender. Some one let fly a furtive arrow from the 
wall which wounded Sun in the left thigh so severely that 
he fell from his steed. Hastily his officers picked up their 
wounded chief and returned to the camp where the arrow 
was pulled out and the wound dressed with the medicines 
suitable for-injuries by metals. . 

By Sun Ts‘é’s command the story was spread abroad that 
the hurt had been fatal and all the soldiers set up cries of 
lamentation. The camp was broken up. The defender of the 
city made a night sortie, but fell into a carefully prepared 
ambush and presently Sun himself appeared on horseback 
shouting “Sun Ts‘é is here still.” 

His sudden appearance created such a panic that the soldiers 
dropped their weapons and fell on their faces. Sun gave 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 155 


orders not to kill them but their leaders fell, one from a spear 


_ thrust as he turned to run away, another wounded by an arrow, 


_ and the commander in chief was slain in the first rush. Thus 
Sun Ts‘é got possession of Moling. Having calmed the people 
he sent his soldiers away to Chinghsien, where T‘aishih Tzit 
was in command, 


_ T‘aishih Tzt had assembled two companies of veterans in 


addition to his own troop for the purpose of avenging his 
master. Sun Ts‘é and Chou Yü on the other hand consulted 
how to capture him alive. The latter’s plan was to attack the 
city on three sides, leaving the east gate free for flight. Some 
distance off an ambush would be prepared, when their victim, 
his men fatigued and horses spent, would fall an easy victim. 
_ The latest recruits under T‘aishih Tzii’s banner were mostly 
hillmen and unaccustomed to discipline. Beside the walls of 
the city were pitiably low: One night Sun ordered one Ch‘én 
Wu to strip off his long dress, leave his arms save a dagger, 
clamber up the ramparts and set fire to the city. Seeing the 
flames spreading the commander made for the east gate and, 


‘as soon as he got outside, Sun Ts‘é followed in pursuit. The _ 


pursuit was maintained for some thirty li when the pursuers 
stopped. T‘aishih Tzt went on as long as possible, finally 
halting to rest in a spot surrounded by reeds. Suddenly a 


tremendous shouting arose. T‘aishih was just starting when | 


tripping ropes arose all round, his horse was thrown and he 
found himself a prisoner. 
_ He was taken to camp. As soon as Sun Ts‘é heard the news 


the himself rode out to meet the successful man and ordered the . 


‘guards to leave the prisoner, whose bonds he loosened with 


his own hands. Then he took off his own embroidered robe 


and put it on the captive. They entered the camp together. 

“I knew you were a real hero,” said Sun. “That worm of 
‘a Liu Yu had no use for such as you and so he got beaten.” 

The prisoner, overcome by this kindness and good treatment, 
then formally surrendered. : 

Sun Ts‘ê seized his hand and said, laughing, “If you had 
taken me at that fight we had near the shrine, would you have 
killed me?” As a 

“Who can say?” said T‘aishih smiling. 

` Sun Ts‘é iaughed also and they entered his tent, where the 
captive leader was placed in the seat of honour at a banquet. 

T*aishih said, “Can you trust me so far as to let me go to 
muster as many as I can of the soldiers of my late master? 
Under the smart of this defeat they will turn against him and 
they would be a great help to you.” 

_ “Exactly what I most desire. I will make an agreement 
with you that at midday to-morrow you will return.” 

‘T‘aishih agreed and went off. All the captains said he would 
never return. 


\ 


156 Ban Kuo, or 


“He is trustworthy and will not break his word,” said the 
chief. 

None of the officers believed he would come back. But the 
next day they set up a bamboo rod in the gate of the camp and ~ 
just as the shadow marked noon T‘aishih Tzu returned, bring- 
ing with him about a thousand men.. Sun Ts‘é was pleased 
and his officers had to confess that he had rightly judged his. 
man. y 

Sun Ts‘é had now several legions and Chiangtung was his. 
He improved the conditions of the people and maintained 
order so that his adherents and supporters daily increased. He 
was called Sun Lang (the Bright One). When his army 
approached the people used to flee in terror, but when it had- 
arrived and they saw that no one was permitted to loot and 
not the least attempt was made on their houses, they rejoiced 
and pr esented the soldiers with oxen’ and wine, for which they 
were in turn duly rewarded. Gladness filled the country side. | 
The soldiers who had followed Liu Yu were kindly treated. — 
Those who wished to join Sun’s army did g0; those who pre- 
ferred not to be soldiers were sent home with presents. And 7 
thus Sun Ts‘é won the respect. and praise of every one in 
Kiangnan and became very powerful. 

Sun Ts‘é then settled his mother and the remainder of the 
family in Chiiia, setting his brother Ch‘tian and Chou T'ai 
over the city. 

Then he headed an expedition to the south to reduce the Wu: 
districts. At that time there was a certain Yen Pai-hu, or | 
. the White Tiger, who styled himself Prince Tê of Eastern: Gs 
Wu and ruled over the Wu districts. Hearing of Sun Ts‘é’s. 
approach, the “Prince” sent his brother Yen Yü with an army 
against him and they met at Féngch‘iao. 

Yen Yü, sword in hand, took his stand on a bridge and this 
was reported to Sun Ts‘é, who prepared to accept the challenge: | 
Chang Hung tried to dissuade him saying, ““Forasmuch as my 


lord’s fate is bound up with that of the army, he should not- 


risk a conflict with a mere robber. I would that you should 
remember your own value.” 

“Your words, O Elder One, are as gold and precious stones; 
but I fear that my soldiers will not carry out my commands 
unless I myself share their dangers.” . 

Then he sent forth Han Tang to take up the challenge. 
Just as he reached the bridge, Chiang Ch‘in and Ch‘én Wu, 
who had dropped down the river in a small boat, passed under 
the bridge. Though the arrows fell in clouds on the bank, 
the two men rushed up and fiercely attacked Yen Yii as he 
stood on the bridge. He fled and Han Tang went in pursuit. 
smiting up to the gate of the city into which he entered. 

Sun Ts‘é laid seige to Soochow both by land and water. For 
three days no one came out to offer battle. Then at the head 


“Romance of the Three fingooms e T 


TAN we his army he came to the Chiang Gate and ed the 
warden. An officer of inconsiderable rank came out and stood 
with one hand resting on a beam while with the other he gave 
point to his abuse of those below. Quickly T‘aishih Tzu’s 


hands sought his bow and an arrow was on the string. | 

“See me hit that fellow’s hand,” said he, turning to his 
companions. ) 

Even as the sound of his voice died away, the bowstring 


-~ twanged, the arrow sped and lodged in the beam, firmly pin- 


ning thereto the officer’s hand. Both sides, those on the wall 
and those below it, marvelled at such marksmanship. 
‘The wounded man was taken away and when the White 


Jo ; Tiger heard of the exploit he said, “How can we REDE: to with- 
_ stand an army with such men as ‘this in it?” a, 
DA And his thoughts turned toward a peace. He sent his 


brother Yu out to see Sun Ts‘é, who received: him civilly, 


_ invited him into the tent and set wine before him. 


“And what does your brother propose?” said Sun. 
“Heis willing to share this district with you,” was the reply. 
“The rat! how dare he put himself on a level with me?” cried | 


Sun. 


He commanded to put the messenger to death. Yü started 


up and drew his sword, but out flew Sun Ts‘é’s blade and the 


unhappy messenger fell to the ground. His head was hacked 


| ; : off and sent into the city to his brother. 


This had its effect. The White Tiger saw etane was 


- hopeless, so he abandoned the city and fled. Sun Ts‘é pressed -` 


the attack. Huang Kai captured Chiahsing (Kashing) and 


= Tfaishih Tzu took Wuch‘éng. The district was quickly sub- 


1 


5 
eos 


dued. The White Tiger rushed off toward Hangchow in the 


east, plundering on all sides, till a band of villagers undér the 


leadership of one Ling Ts‘ao checked his career of robbery 
there. He then went toward Kueichi. 
The Lings, father and son, then went to meet Sun Ts‘é, who 


took. them into his service as a reward for their service and 
- the joint forces crossed the river. 


The White Tiger gathered his scattered forces oa took up 


.a position at the western ford, but Ch‘éng P‘u attacked him 


there and scattered. the defenders, chasing them as far as 
Huichi. The Prefect of the place, Wang Lang, was on their 
side and inclined to support them actively. But, when he 
proposed this, one of his men stood forth saying, “No! No! 


_ Sun Ts‘ as a leader is humane and upright, while the White 


Tiger is a savage ruffian. Rather capture him and offer his 
person as a peace offering to Sun Ts‘é.” 
The Prefect turned angrily toward the speaker, who was 


- an official named Yü Fan, and bade him be silent. He with- 


drew sighing deeply. And the Prefect went to the help of 


| the White Tiger with whom he joined forces at Shanyin. 


158 San kuo, or 


Sun Ts‘é came up. When both. aiden were arrayed Sun 
Ts‘é rode out and addressed Wang Lang, saying, “Mine is an 
army of good men and my aim is to restore peace to Chekiang, 
but you give your support to a rebel!” . i ; 

Wang Lang replied, “Your greed is insatiable. Having got 
possession of Wu you want also my district, and so as an 
excuse you have vengeance to wreak on the Yens.” 

This response greatly angered Sun Ts‘é. Just as battle 
was to be joined T‘aishih Tzu advanced and Wang Lang came 
toward him waving his sword. . Before they had exchanged — 
many passes Chou Hsin dashed out to help Wang. ‘Thereupon ~ 
Huang Kai rode out to make the sides more equal. These 


latter two were just engaging when the drums rolled on both 


sides and a general battle began. 

Suddenly confusion was caused in the rear of Wang’s army 
by the sudden onslaught of a small troop. Wang Lang galloped 
off to see to it. Then an attack was made on his flank, so that: 
he was in a hopeless position, and he and the White Tiger, 
fighting desperately, only just managed to reach the shelter 


of the city. The drawbridges were raised, the gates closed 


and preparations made to sustain a siege. 

Sun Ts‘é followed right up to the walls and then divided his 
men so as to attack all four gates. Seeing that the city was being ~ 
fiercely attacked Wang Lang was for making a sortie, but the | 
White Tiger opposed this as hopeless against so strong a force 


outside. They could only strengthen their position and remain | y 
- behind the shelter of the ramparts until hunger forced the 


besiegers to retire. Wang Lang agreed and the siege went on. 
For several days a vigorous attack was maintained, but with 


little success. Taking counsel with his officers Sun Ching, who | 


was the uncle of Sun Ts‘, said, “Since they are holding the 
city with such resolution it. will be difficult to dislodge them. 
But the bulk of their supplies i is stored at Ch‘atu, distant only 
some score li. Our best plan is to seize this place, thus attack- 
ing where the enemy is unprepared, and doing what they do ` 
not expect.” 

Sun Ts‘é approved saying, “My uncle’s plan is admirable 
and will crush the rebels.” So he issued orders to kindle watch 
fires at all the gates, and leave the flags standing to maintain 


‘the appearance of soldiers in position while the a kaa: 


went south. 

Chou Yü came to utter a warning, “When you, my lord, go 
away the besieged will surely come out arid follow you. We 
might prepare a surprise for them.” 

Sun Ts‘é replied, “My preparations are complete and the 
city will be captured to-night.” 

So the army set out. 

Wang Lang heard that the besieten had gone and he went 
up to the tower to reconnoitre. He saw the fires blazing, the 


t 


A > 


 gaaure of the Tree ttingvoms 16007" 


Pok rising) and the pennons fluttering i in the breeze as usual 
and hesitated. 

Chou Hsin said, “He has gone and this is only a stratagem. 
Let us go out and ‘smite. them.” 

The White Tiger said, “If he has gone, it is to attack Ch'atu. 
Let us pursue.” | 

“The place is our base of supply, ? daid Wang Lang, “and 
must be defended. You lead the way and I will follow with 


- reserves.’ 


So the White Tiger and Chou Hsin went forth with five 
companies and drew near their enemy about the first watch, 


at twenty li from the city. The road led through dense forest. 


Then suddenly the drums beat and lighted torches sprang up 
‘on all sides. The White Tiger was frightened, turned his 
horse and started to retreat. At once a leader appeared in 
front in whom, by the glare of the torches, he recognised Bes 
Ts‘é. Chou Hsin made a rush at’ him but fell under Sun Ts‘é 


- spear. The men surrendered. However, the White Tiger 
-~ Managed to cut his way out. 


Wang Lang soon heard of the loss and not daring to return 


a to the city retreated in all haste to Haiyii. ere so Sun Ts‘é — 


got. possession of the city. 

Having restored order, a few dava later a man came bring- 
-ing the head of the White Tiger as an offering to Sun Ts‘é 
< This man was a native of the district. He was of medium 
height, with a square face and wide mouth. He was named 
- Tung Hsi, and was given an office. After this peace reigned 
in all the east and, having placed his uncle in command of the 
city and made Chu Chih Prefect, Sun Ts‘é returned to his own 

lace. ; 
i ‘While Sun Ts‘é was absent a band of brigands suddenly 
eteoked Hsiianch‘éng, left in the care of his brother Ch‘iian 
`- and the leader Chou T‘ai. As the onslaught was made on all 
sides at once, and in the night, the brigands got the upper 
hand. Chou T‘ai took the youth in his arms and mounted a 
‘horse, but as the robbers came on with swords to attack him 
he dismounted, and though without mail, met the robbers on 
- foot and slew them as they came up. Then came a horseman 
armed with a spear, but Chou Tai laid hold'of his spear 
and pulled him to the earth. Then he mounted the robber’s 
horse and thrusting this way and that with the spear fought 
his way out. So Sun Ch‘iian was preserved, but his saviour 
had received more than a dozen wounds. 

These wounds being due to metal would not heal but swel- 


~ led enormously, and the brave soldier’s life hung in the balance. 


‘Sun Ts‘é was deeply grieved. Then Tung Hsi said, “Once in 
an engagement with some pirates I received many spear 


= wounds, but a certain wise man named Yü. Fan recommended 


a surgeon who cured me in half a month.” 


160 San uo 


“Surely this must be Yü Chung-hsiang,” replied Sun Ts‘ê ê. 

“That is he; he is so called.” 

“Yes, truly a wise man; I will employ him.” 

So Sun Ts‘é sent two officers to invite him and he came at 
once. He was treated in most friendly fashion and appointed 
an official forthwith. Then the question | of treating the 
wounded man was brought up. 

“The surgeon is one Hua T‘o, who has perfectly marvellous 
skill in the leech’s art. I will get him to come,” said Yü Fan. 

Shortly the famous leech arrived, a man with the complexion 
of a youth and a snowy beard. He looked more like a saint 
who had passed the gates of this life. He was treated very 
handsomely and taken to see the sick soldier’s wounds. 

“The case is not difficult,” said the surgeon and he prepared 
certain drugs that healed the wounds within a month. Sun 
Ts‘é suitably acknowledged Ais care and skill and he was 
allowed to leave. 


Next Sun Ts‘é attacked the brigands and destroyed them, 


so restoring complete tranquillity to Chiangnan. After this 


he set garrisons at all the strategical points, and this done, | 


memorialised what he had achieved. He came to an under- 
standing with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and sent letters to Yüan Shu de- 
manding the return of the Seal he had left in pledge. 

But Yiian Shu, secretly cherishing the most ambitious 


designs, wrote excuses and did not return the State jewel. 


In his own place he hastily summoned his officers to a council 
and said, “Sun Ts‘é borrowed an army from me and set out 
on an expedition which has made him master of: Chiangtung. 
Now he says nothing of repayment but demands the token of 
his pledge. Truly he is a boor and what steps can I take to 
destroy him?” 

The Recorder, Yang Ta-chiang, replied, “You connet do any 
thing against him for he is too strongly placed. You must 


first remove Liu Pei in revenge for having attacked you with- 
out cause, and then you may think about Sun Ts‘é. I have a 
scheme to put the former into your hands in a very short time.” 


He went not to destroy the tiger, but instead 
Against a dragon forth his army led. 


The means he employed will be made plain in the nekt 
chapter. 


Si oy 


CHAPTER XVI. 


A FEAT OF ARCHERY: 
; A BATTLE LOST AT YUSHUI RIVER: 
What i is your plan of attack on Liu Pei?” said Shu. 


Yang Ta-chiang replied, “Though Liu Pei, now camped at 
_ Hsiaop‘ei, could easily be taken, yet Lü Pu is strongly posted 


; 3 at the chief city near, and I think he would help Pei if it was 
ou for the grudge he bears against you for not having given 


_ him the gold and stuffs, grain and horses you promised. First 
of all you should send Lii Pu a present whereby to engage his 


a) affections and keep him quiet while you deal with Liu Pei. 


You can see to Lü Pu after this is done.” 

Thereupon a large quantity of millet was sent, with letters, 
_ by the hand of Han Yin. The gift pleased Lü Pu greatly; and 
he treated the messenger with great cordiality. Feeling sure 


-of no trouble from that quarter Yüan Shu told off the leaders 


of the expedition against Hsiaop‘ei. 


When Liu Pei heard these things he called his officers to take 
counsel. Chang Fei was for open war forthwith. Sun Ch‘ien 


said their resources were too small: they must lay the position 


N before Lü Pu and ask help. 


“Do you think that fellow will do anything?” said Chang Fei 


: cynically. 


Liu Pei. decided in favour a Sun’s proposal and wrote as- 
- follows :— 


“Humbly I venture to remind you that I am here by your 


~ orders and enjoy repose as the result of your kindness, exten- 
Ey _ sive as the heavens. Now Yüan Shu, moved by a desire for 


_ revenge, is sending a force against this place and its destruc- 
tion is imminent unless you intervene to save it. I trust you 


<- will send an army quickly to protect the town, and our happi- 


ness will be inexpressible.” 
Receiving this Lü Pu called in Ch‘én Kung to whom he said, 


“I have just received gifts from Yüan Shu and a letter, with 


the intent of restraining me from helping Liu Pei. Now comes 


a letter from him asking help. It seems- to me that Ytian-té 


where he is can do me no harm, but if Yuan Shu overcomes 
- Liu Pei then the power of the north is so much nearer and 


| - I should be unable to resist the attacks of so many leaders and 


-should never sleep secure. I will aid Liu Pei; that i is the better 


_- course for me.” 


11 


162 an Kuo, or EIT iii ar ae 
X | oF 

Now the force sent against Hsiaop‘ei went thither as quickly 
as possible and soon the country to the southeast fluttered 
with pennons by day and blazed with watch fires by night, t 
while the rolling of the drums reverberated from heaven TON MARIN 
earth. i — 

The few men at Liu Pei’s disposal were led out of the city — 
and arranged to make a brave show, but it was good news. 
to him to hear that Lii Pu had arrived and was quite near. 
He camped only a li away to the south-west. When Yüan 
Shu’s general, Chi Ling, heard of his arrival he wrote letters = 
reproaching Lü Pu for his treachery. Lü Pu smiled as he- 
read them. 

“I know how to make both of them love me,” said hel So a 
he sent invitations to both leaders to come to a banquet. 
Liu Pei was for accepting the invitation and going, but his- ai 
brothers dissuaded him saying, “There is some > treachery in oe 
his heart.” ean 

“I have treated him too well for him to do me any harm,” 
said Ytian-té. Patina oe 

So he mounted and rode away, the two brothers following. é i 
They came to the camp. rah 

The host said, “Now by a special effort I have got. you out. 
of danger ; I hope you will not forget that when you come into, 
your own.’ Fe 

Yüan-tê thanked him heartily and was invited to take a seat. 5 ict 
“The two brothers took up their usual place as guards. ns his cor a, 

But when Chi Ling was announced Yiian-té felt a spasm. of 
fear and got up to go away. 

“Vou two are invited for the particular purpose of a discus- 
sion,” said the host. “Do not take it amiss.” 

Yiian- tê, being quite ignorant of his intentions, was very © 
uneasy. Presently his fellow guest entered. Seeing iania 
in the tent, and in the seat of honour, he was puzzled, hesitated — 
and- tried to withdraw. But the attendants prevented this and 
Lü Pu, advancing, laid hold of him and drew him into the tent 
as. he had been a child. | 

“Do you wish to slay me?” asked he: : 

_ “Not at all,” replied Lu Pu. VA 
“Then you are going to slay Long-ears?” (tee i RE 
“No; not that.” AENDA 

s “Then, what does it mean? a? 

“Yiian-té and I are brothers. Now, Ganenen you are be 
sieging him and so I have come to the rescue.” : 

“Then slay me,” said Chi Ling. EA IAEI: 

“There would be no sense in that. -All my life T have disliked i 
fighting and quarrels, but have loved making peace. And now 
I .want to settle the quarrel between you two.” 

. May Lask how you think of doing so? 

“T have a means and one approved of heaven itself.” 


AES onc 


Mahe of the pree tingvoms af | 163 


Then he drew. Ling within the tent and led him up to Pei. 


The two men faced each other, full of mutual suspicion, but r 
their host placed himself between them and they took their 


‘seats, Liu Pei on the right hand of the host. 


The banquet began. After a number of courses almost. in 


‘silence, Lü Pu spoke, saying, “I wish you two gentlemen to 


listen to me and put an end to your strife.” 


Liu Pei made no reply but Chi Ling said, “I have come with ‘ 
an army of ten legions at the express bidding of my master to. _ 


take Liu Pei. How can I cease the strife? I must fight.” 

=. “What!” exclaimed Chang Fei drawing his sword. ‘Few as 
we are we regard you no more than a lot of children. What are 

you compared with a million Yellow Torbans? You dare to 
hurt our brother!” 

Kuan Yü urged him to be silent. Let us see what General 
Lü has to say first; after that there will be time to go to our 
tents and fight.” 


“I beg you both to come to an understanding. I cannot et. “ 


you fight,” said Lü Pu. 


Now on one side Chi Ling was diskontehled snd angry; on x 
the other Chang Fei was dying for a fight and neither of the — 


two chiefly concerned would signify assent. Then suddenly 


k the host turned to his attendants saying, “Bring my halberd!” _ 


They did so and he sat there gripping the graceful but effective 


weapon in his right hand. Both guests felt very ill at ease ae 
and turned pale. Lü Pu went on “I have tried to persuade you: 
to make peace for that is the command of the Most High. Tt . 


shall be put to the test.” 


. He then bade his servants take the halberd outside Hoven h 


the gate and set it up. Then speaking to his two guests he 
said, “That gate is one hundred and fifty paces distant. If I 


ean hit that centre branch of the halberd-head with an arrow, — 
you will both withdraw your armies. If I miss, you can go 


away and prepare for immediate battle. I shall compel you 


to abide by what I say.” 


Chi Ling thought to himself, “That small mark at that dis- if 
tance! How could any one hit it?’ So he assented, thinking —. 


he would have plenty of fighting after his host had missed the 
mark, Of course Liu Pei was willing. 

They all sat down again and wine was served. When this 
had been drunk the host called for his bow and arrows. 
Yüan-tê silently prayed that he would hit the mark. 


Lü Pu turned back his sleeves, carefully fitted an arrow to Ai 


the string and pulled the bow to its utmost stretch. A slight 
exclamation escaped him as the bow curved like the harvest 
moon sailing through the sky. “Twang! went the bowstring 
and the arrow sped like a falling star. And it struck the 
slender tongue of the halberd head full and square. A roar of 


acclamation from all sides greeted the exploit. Biot 


164 Han Kuo, or 


O Lü was a wonderful archer, 
And the arrow he shot sped straight; 
By hitting the mark he saved his friend i 
That day at his yamên gate. vÉ : 
Hou I, the archer of ancient days, Wh 
Brought down each mocking sun, 
And the apes that gibbered to fright Yuchi 
Were slain by him, one by one. 
But we sing of Lii Pu that drew the bow, 
And his feathered shaft that flew; 
For a myriad men could doff their mail 
When he hit the mark so true. 

Lii Pu laughed loud at the success of his shot. Dropping his 
bow he seized his guests by the hands saying, “The command 
-of Heaven indeed! And now you cease from fighting!’ 
: He ordered the soldier attendants to pour out great goblets 

of wine and each drank. Liu Pei in his inmost heart felt rather 
ashamed; his fellow guest sat silent, nodding his head. Pre- 
sently he said, “I cannot disobey your command, General, but lef 
me depart. What will my master say and will he believe me?” 

“I will write a letter and confirm it,” said Lü Pu. 

After a few more rounds of the wine Chi Ling asked that he 
might have the letter and after that departed. When the 
brothers took their leave Lü Pu again reminded Liu Pei that — 
he owed him his deliverance. 

In a short time the soldiers had gone. Here nothing will be 
said of the entry of two of the actors in the drama into their 
own towns. When Chi Ling had got back to Huainan-and 
told the story of the feat of archery and the peace-making that 
followed, and had presented the letter, his lord was very wroth. 

“He repays me for all my grain with this bit of play-acting!”’ 
cried he. “He has saved Liu Pei, but I will lead a large army 
myself and settle him, and take Lü Pu too.” 

“Be careful, my lord, ” said Chi Ling. “He is braver and 
stronger than most men and has wide territory. He and Liu 
Pei together make a powerful combination, not easy to break. 
But there is another course. I have found out that his wife, 
the lady Yen, has a daughter just of marriageable age and as 
you have a son, you could arrange a marriage alliance with 
Lü Pu. If his daughter wedded your son he would certainly 
slay your enemy for you. This is the nothing-can-separate- 
relations plan.” 

This scheme appealed to Yiian Shu, who soon set about its 
accomplishment. He sent presents by the hand of Han Yin, 
who was to discuss the question. When Han saw Lii he spoke 
of the immense respect his master had for him and his desire 
to ensure’ perpetual alliance between the two families by a 
marriage, an alliance such as existed between the states Ts‘in 
and Chin. 

Lü Pu was well disposed toward the scheme, but went in to 
consult his wife.. Now Lii Pu had two wives and one concubine. 


Romance of the bree fringooms | 165 


He first married a lady of the Yen family and she was the | 
legal wife. Then he took Little Cicada as a concubine, and ` 
while he was living at Hsiaop‘ei he had married a secondary 
wife, a daughter of Ts‘ao Pao. She had died quite young 
leaving no issue. Neither had his concubine borne any child- 
ren. So that he had but one child, this daughter, of whom he 
was dotingly fond. 

When he broached the subject his wife said, “The Yiian’s 
have dominated their part of the country these many years. 
They have a large army and are very prosperous. One day a ° 
Yüan will become Emperor and our daughter may hope to be 
an Empress. But how many sons has he?” 

“Only this one.’ 

“Then we should accept the offer. Even if our daughter 
a not become an Empress, Hsiichou is nothing to be sad 
about.” 

Lü Pu decided to accept and so treated the messenger with 
extreme generosity. Han Yin went back with a favourable | 
answer. The wedding gifts were then prepared ready for © 


Han Yin to take to the bride’s family. They were received a 


and banquets and merry-making filled all the time. 

One day Ch‘én Kung went to see the messenger in his lodg- 
ing, and when the usual ceremonies and greetings had been. 
exchanged, the two men sat down to talk. When the servants 
had been sent out of earshot Ch‘én Kung said, “Who originated 
_ this scheme by which Yüan Shu and Lü Pu are to’ become 
connections by this marriage so that Liu Pei’s head may fall?” 

Han Yin was terrified. “I pray you not to let it get abroad,” 
said he. 

“I certainly shall keep it secret. But if there be any delay 
some other person will find it out and that spells failure.” 

“What had best be done?” a 

“I will see Lü Pu and get him to send the girl immediately 
so that the marriage may be concluded quickly.” 

“If it happened thus my master would indeed hold you in 
high respect.” 

With this Ch‘én Kung took his leave and sought an interview 
with Lü Pu. 

“I hear your daughter is to be married to Yiian Shu’s son. 
That is capital, but no one knows when.” 

“That has yet to be considered.” 
= “There were certain fixed rules as to the period between 

sending presents and consummation of the marriage; Em- 
perors, a year; nobles, half a year; high officers, three months; ; 
and common people, one month.” 

Lü Pu replied, “As to Yüan Kung-lu, Heaven has already 
put into his hands one Imperial jewel and he will surely arrive 
> at the dignity one day. So, I should think the eral rule 
- would apply.” 


166 -o San Buo, or 


a “No; it will’not.”? 

“The nobles rule, then?” 

“No; nor that.” 

“The high officers’ ?” 

“Not even that.” l i ; 

Lü Pu laughed. ‘Then you mean me to go by thetrule for 
common people.” 

“Nor that either.” 
“Then what do you mean?” . 
“In the midst of the present troubles, when there is great 
rivalry between the nobles, do you not see that the others will 
be exceedingly jealous of your marriage alliance with such a | 
_ family as the Yüans? Suppose you postpone the choice of the 
- day, most likely when your fine morning arrives the wedding 
party will fall into an ambush on the road and the bride be 
-~ carried off. Then what could be done? My opinion is that 
you would have done better to refuse. But since you have 
consented, then carry out the plan at once before the lords | 
hear of it and so send the girl over without delay to Shouch‘un. 
You can hire a lodging there till you have selected the wedding | 
day and the odds are greatly against any failure.” 

“What you say is quite to the point,” replied Lü. 

He went into the private apartments to see his wife and told 
- ber the bride elect would set out immediately and the trousseau 

= was to be prepared as far as it could be. On his side he chose 
some good horses and had a wedding carriage got ready. The 
escort consisted of Han Yin and two military officers. The 
procession went out of the city to the sound of music. 

Now at this time Ch‘én Kuei, father of Ch‘én Téng (Yüan- 
lung) was placidly waiting till the evening of his life passed 
into night. Hearing this burst of music he enquired the occa- 

= sion and the servants told him. 

t “They are working on the ‘Relatives-are-inseparable’ device, 
_ then,” said he. “Ytian-té is in danger.” 
ki n Thereupon in spite of his many infirmities he went to see 

u Pu 

“Noble Sir, what brings you here?” asked Lü. 

“I heard you were dead and I came to mourn,” quavered the 
old man. 

“Who said that?” exclaimed his Tost: 

“Once upon a time you received grand presents from the 
Yiian’s that you might slay Liu Pei, but you got out by that 
clever ‘shot at’ your halberd. Now they suddenly seek a 
marriage alliance thinking to get hold of your daughter as a 
pledge. The next move will be an attack on Hsiaop‘ei and, 
_. that gone, where are you?’ Whatever they ask in future, grain 
or men or anything else, and you yield, will bring your own 

end nearer, and make you hated all round. If you refuse, then 
you are false to the duties of a relative and that will be an 


iss ae to Ak you openly. Beside this Yüan Shu intends to 
~ ¢all himself Emperor, which would be rebellion, and you would | 
be of the rebel’s family; something abominable, which the 

-~ Empire would not suffer.” 

y Lü Pu was much disturbed to hear this. “I ‘have been 
RA misled!” cried he. 

JS -So he hurriedly sent Chang Liao to bring the wedding party 
ire back to the city. When.they had come he threw Han Yin into > 
prison and sent a reply to Yiian Shu saying curtly that the 

- girl’s trousseau was not ready and she could not be married 

till it was. 

=. Han Yin was sent back to the capital. Lü Pu was hesitating 

= whatcourse to adopt, when he heard that Liu Pei was enlisting. 

soldiers and buying horses for no apparent reason. 
“He is simply doing his duty ; there is nothing to be surprised 
at, ”? said Lü Pu- 

‘Then came two ofice saying, “As you ordered us we went 
~ into Shantung to purchase horses. We had got three hundred 
RH when, on our way back, on the borders of Peihsien some robbers 
aN stole half of them. Wel hear that the real robbers were Chang 

i Fei and his men, who took on the guise of brigands.” 

Lt Pu was very angry at this and began to prepare an 
f expedition against Hsiaop‘ei. When Liu Pei. heard that an 
-attack threatened he led out his army to oppose it and the two 
armies were arrayed. Liu Pei rode to the front and said, 
“Elder brother, why have you brought an army against me?” 
iP eds PU began. abusing him saying, “That shot of mine at the 
~ yamên gate saved you from grave danger; why then did you . 
steal my horses?” 
< “I wanted horses and I sent out to buy them. Should I dare 
nian to take yours?” said Liu. 
` “You stole a hundred and fifty in the person oF your brother 
ie Chang Fei. You only used another man’s hand.” 

TR Thereupon Chang Fei, with his spear in rest, rode out saying, 
z “Yes; I stole your good horses, and what more do you expect?” ~ 
oe Lü Pu peptied, “You goggled-eyed thief! You are always 
SENI Tre me with contempt.” 

“Yes; I took your horses and you get angry. You did not 
ry Say any thing when you stole my brother’s city.” 

‚Lü Pu rode forward to give battle and Chang Fei advanced. 
On reckless fight began and the two warriors kept. it up for 
a hundred bouts without a decisive stroke. Then Liu Pei, 
= fearing some accident to his brother, hastily beat the gongs 
as a signal to retire and led his army mro the city. Lü Pu 
then invested it. 

y Liu Pei called his brother and chid him as the cause of all 
ens ETS misfortune. 

_ “Where are the horses?” Skid He: 

-. “In some of the temples and courts,” replied Fei. 


- fiomance of the bres Hingdoms NBC oe 


168 San tuo, or 


`. A messenger was sènt out to speak softly and offer to restore 
the stolen horses if hostilities were to cease. Lü Pu was 
disposed to agree but Ch‘én Kung opposed. “You will suffer 
by and by if you do not remove this Liu Pei.” 

Under his influence the request for peace was rejected and 
the attack on the city pressed harder. 

Liu Pei called Mi Chu and Sun Ch‘ien to him to ook advice. 

Said the latter, “The one person that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao detests is 
Lü Pu. Let us then abandon the city and take refuge with 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, from whom we may borrow men to destroy him.” 

“If we try to get away, who will lead the van?” 

“I will do my best,” said Chang Fei. 

So he led the way. Kuan Yü was rearguard and in the 
centre was Liu Pei with the non-fighting portion. The caval- 
cade started and went out at the north gate. They met some 
opposition but the soldiers were driven off and the besieging - 
force was passed without difficulty. Chang Liao pursued, but — 

was held off-by the rearguard. It seemed Lü Pu was not 
dissatisfied at the flight for he took no personal trouble to 
prevent it. He made formal entry into the city, settled local 
affairs and appointed a governor. 


Liu Pei approached Hstitu and encamped outside the city, se 


whence he sent Sun Ch‘ien to see Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and relate the 
events that brought him there. Ts ao was very friendly and 
said, “Liu Pei is as my brother.” He invited him to enter 
the city. SA 

Leaving his brothers at the camp Liu Pei, with Sun Chien ae 
and Mi Chu, went to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who received him with the 
greatest respect. The story of Lü Pu’s perfidy was again 
related. ; 

“He has no-sense of right,” said Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao. “You and I, | 
my brother, will attack him together.” | 

Yüan-tê was very grateful. A banquet was then prepared 
and it was late evening before the visitor left for his own 
camp. D 

Hsün Yü then had an interview with his master and said, 
“If you are not on your guard Liu Pei will be your undoing. 
You ought to destroy him, He is too much of the hero.” 

Ts‘ao made no reply and his adviser retired. Presently Kuo ° 
Chia came and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “I have been advised to kill 
Liu Pei; what of such a scheme?” 

“A bad scheme,” said Kuo.’ “You are the popular champion, 


pledged to relieve the people from oppression and only by truth — 


and rectitude can you secure the support of the noble-minded. 
Your only fear is lest they stay away. Now Liu Pei is famous. 
He has come to you for help and protection and to put him to 
death would be to alienate all good men and put fear into the 
hearts of all the able advisers. Hampered by these difficulties 
where will you find those whose help you need? To remove 


y 


Romante of the shi Gingvomg Bae. 188 


h om 


the dangers represented by one man and thereby injure your- 

self in the eyes of all mankind is a sure means of destruction. 

These conditions need careful consideration.” 

“What you say exactly fits in with what I think,” said m ao, 
greatly pleased with these remarks. | 

His next step was to memorialise the Emperor to give on 
Pei the governorship of Yiichou. 

Again Ch‘éng Yii said, “Liu Pei is certain to rise to the top; 
he will never remain in a subordinate position. You had better 
remove him.” 

“Now is just the time to make use of good men. I will not 
forfeit the regard of the world for the sake of removing one in- 
_, dividual. Kuo Féng-hsiao and I both see this in the same light.” 
_ Wherefore he rejected all persuasion to work against Liu Pei. 


but sent him soldiers and a large supply of grain, and set him 


‘on his way to Yü (Honan). He was to march to Hsiaop‘ei, 
occupy it, call together his former soldiers and attack Lü Pu. 
When Liu Pei reached Ytichou he sent to inform Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, 


- who prepared to march an army to subjugate Lü Pu. But just 


then hasty news came that Chang Chi, who had gone to the 
attack of Nanyang, had been wounded by a stray arrow and 
had died. His nephew Hsiu had succeeded to the command of 
his army and with Chia Hsü as strategist, had joined Liu Piao 
and camped at Wanch‘éng. They intended to attack the capital 
and get possession of the Emperor’s person. 

‘Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was placed in a quandary. He would go to attack 
this combination but he feared lest Lü Pu would attack the 
capital if he left it. So he sought the advice of Hstin Yü. 
“Yi Pu has no notion of a policy. He is led astray by any 
- jittle advantage that presents itself to his eyes: All you need 
_ do is to obtain promotion for him, giving him some additional 

title, and tell him to make peace with Yiian-té and he will do it.” 
“Good,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and he acted upon the hint and 
sent an officer with the official announcement and a letter 
urging peace, while he went on with preparations to meet the 
- other danger. When ready he marched out in three divisions. 
- Hsiahou Tun was the van-leader and they went to Yiishui 
River and camped there. 

Chia Hsii succeeded in persuading Chang Hsiu of the 
_ hopelessness of resistance. 
i “You would do well to surrender since his army is too large 


for you to oppose,” said he. 


Seeing the’ truth of this Hsiu sent his adviser to propose sub- 

` mission. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was greatly pieased with the messenger, 

- admiring his ready and fluent repartee, and tried to win him 
-to his service. 4 

“T was formerly with Li Ts‘ui and was held guilty with him. 
` Now I am with Chang who accepts my advice and I should not 

like to abandon him,” said Chia Hsii. 


RE AS EL Ces SER 


PIAN San Kuo, or 


He left and next day conducted his aes into Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s © 
presence. Ts‘ao was generous. Then he entered Wanch‘éng, _ 
the greater part of the army being put in camp outside where — 
the lines extended some ten li. Great banquets were given 
every day and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was always being entertained. 

Pi i One day, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao returned to his quarters in a 
a more than usual merry mood, he asked the attendants if there 
i were any singing girls in the city. The son of his elder brother — 
heard the question and said, “Peeping through one of the 
partititions last evening I saw a perfectly beautiful woman in 
one of the courts.. They told me She was the wife of Chang 
Hsiu’s uncle. She is very lovely.” i 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, inflamed by the description given nee of the | 
beauty, told his nephew to go and bring her to visit him. He | 
did so supported by an armed escort and very soon the woman ie 
stood before him. let 

She was a beauty indeed and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asked Do name, 
She replied, “Thy handmaid was wife to’ ae ae I was 
born of the Tsou family.” $ 

“Do you know who I am?” i ai 

“I have known the Minister by reputation a long time. Iam ~~ 
happy to see him and be permitted to bow before him,” said _ 
she vin 

“It was for your sake that I allowed Chang Hsiu to submit; ; 
otherwise I would have slain him and cut him off root and ii 
branch,” said Ts‘ao. i 4 

“Indeed, then, I owe my very life to you;I am very grateful, ee 
said she. j 

“To see you is a Celi a! of paradise, but there is one ine 
I should like better. Stay here and go with me to the capital _ 
where I will see that you are properly cared for. What do | 
you say to that?” 

She could but thank him. | : ne 

“But Chang Hsiu will greatly wonder at my. prolonged ie 
absence and gossips will begin to talk,” said she. 

“Tf you like yeu can leave the city tomorrow.” 

She did so, but instead of going at once to the capital she 
stayed with him among the tents, where Tien Wei was 
appointed as a special guard over her apartments. Ts‘ao | 
Bis: was the only person whom she saw and he passed the days | 
ete in idle dalliance with the lady, quite content to let time, ue 
Tee But Chang’ S people told him what had gone amiss and Ke a 
was angry at the shame brought upon the family. He confided 
his trouble to Chia Hsti who said, “Keep this secret, wait till 
he appears again to carry on büsiness and then 

A plan was arranged quite secretly. aca 

Not long after this Chang Hsiu went into Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s tent ; 
to say that, as many of his men were deserting, it would be | 


ee ee ee 


“Romance of the Three fingom A EE 


“sn swell to camp them in the centre and when permission was 
S given the men of his òld command were moved in and paced 
an four camps. 
- But Tien Wei, the especial giard of Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao’s tent, was 
a man to be feared, being both brave and powerful. It was 
hard to know how to attack him. So counsel was taken with 
- an officer, Hu Ch‘érh, a man of enormous strength and activity. 
He could carry a burden of six hundred pounds and travel 
seven hundred li in a day. He proposed a plan. He said, 
“The fearsome thing about Tien Wei is his double halberd. 
But get him to come to a party and make him quite drunk 
. before you send him back. I will mingle among his escort 
and so get into his tent and steal away his weapon. One need 
- not fear him then.” - 
So the necessary arms were prepared and orders given in 
the various camps. This done the intended victim was invited 
and plied vigorously with wine so that he was quite intoxicated 
T when he left. And, as arranged, the officer mingled with his 
escort and made away. with his weapons. 
That night, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was at supper with the lady, 


rs 


inc he heard the voices of men and neighing of horses and sent. 


out to ask what it meant. They told him it was the night patrol 
_ going the rounds and he was satisfied. 

Near the second watch of the night again was heard some 
noise in the rear of his tent and one of the fodder carts was 
reported to be burning. 


“One of the men has dropped a spark; there is nothing to 


be alarmed at,” said he. 

But very soon the fire spread on all sides and became 
alarming. He called Tien Wei. But he, usually so alert, 
-was lying down quite intoxicated. 

However, the beating of gongs and rolling of drums mingling 


arith his dreams awoke him and he jumped up. His trusty - 


halberd had disappeared. The enemy was near. He hastily 


snatched up an infantryman’s sword and rushed out. At. 


the gate he saw a crowd of spearmen just bursting in. Tien 
~ Wei rushed at them slashing all around him and a score or 


more fell beneath his blows. The others drew back. But the 
spears stood around him like reeds on the river bank, Being — 


_ totally without mail he was soon wounded in several places. 
He fought desperately till his sword snapped and was no 
_ longer of any use. Throwing it aside he seized a couple of 
_ soldiers and with their bodies as weapons felled half a score 
of his opponents. The others dared not approach, but they 


shot arrows at him. These fell thick as rain but he still 


maintained the gate against the assailants. 

However, the mutineers got in by the rear of the camp and 
one of them wounded him in the back with a spear thrust. 
Uttering a loud cry he fell. The blood gushed from the wound 


172 Han Kuo, or 


in torrents and he died. Even after he was dead not a man | 
dared to come in by the main gate. i 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, relying on Tien Wei to hold the main gate, had | 
fled in haste by the rear gate. His nephew accompanied him 
on foot: Then Ts‘ao was wounded by an arrow in the arm — 
and three arrows struck his horse. However} fortunately, 
the horse was a fine beast from Tawan full of spirit and, in - 


spite of his wounds, he bore his master swiftly and well as ii 


far as the Yiishui River. 

Here some of the pursuers came up and his nephew was 
hacked to pieces. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao dashed into the river and reached — 
the further side, but there an arrow struck his steed in the 
eye and he fell. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s eldest son dismounted and yielded 
his horse to his father, who galloped on. His son was killed 
but he himself got away. ‘Soon after he met several of his 
officers who had rallied a few soldiers. 

The soldiers under Hsiahou Tun seized the occasion to plun- 
der the people. Yü Chin took his men fell upon them and | 
slew many. Thus he protected and- appeased the people. 
The plunderers, meeting Ts‘ao Ts‘ao on the road, knelt down ` 
howling and said Yü Chin had mutinied and attacked them. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was surprised and when he met eee Tun, 
gave orders to attack Yü Chin. RAs 

Now when Yü Chin saw his master and a great conan 
approaching he at once stopped the attack and set his men to 
make a camp. Hsün Yü asked him why. 

“The Chingchou soldiers say you have turned traitor; hy 
do you not explain now that the Minister has arrived? Why ag 
first make a camp?” said he. 

He replied, “Our enemies are coming up in our rear and are 
very close.. It is necessary to prepare for defence or we 
shall not withstand them. ‘Explanation is a small matter, but 
‘ defence is very important.” ; 

Soon after the camp was finished Chang Hsiu fell upon them 
in two divisions.. Yü Chin himself rode out to face them. 
Chang drew back. The other leader, seeing Yü Chin advance 
thus boldly, also attacked and Chang Hsiu was overcome. 
They pursued him a great distance until his force was almost 
annihilated With the miserable remnant he finally fled to 
Liu Piao. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army reformed and the cantani mustered. 
Then Yü Chin went to see his master and-told him of the 
conduct of the Chingchou soldiers and their looting and why 
he had attacked them. - 

“Why did you not tell me before you made the camp?” 

Yu Chin related what had occurred. 

Said Ts‘ao, “When the first thought of a leader in the time 
of greatest stress is to maintain order and strengthen his 
defences, giving no thought to slander but shouldering his 


Somane of the ann dinguang ARE 


i rens. manfully, and when he thereby turns a defeat into a 


victory, who, even of the ancient leaders, can excel him?” 
He rewarded Yü Chin with a service of plate and a mar- 
= quisate. But he reprimanded Hsiahou Tun for his lack of 
_ discipline. 

Sacrifices in honour of the dead warrior Tien Wei were 
instituted. -Ts‘ao himself led the wailing and paid due honours. 
‘Turning to his offices he said, “I have lost my first born son, 
but I grieve not so heavily for him as for Tien Wei. I weep 
for him.” 

All were sad at the loss of this captain. Then orders were 

issued to return but nothing will be said here of the march 
_ to the capital. 
When Wang Tsé, bearing the imperial decree, reached 
-= Hstichou, he was met by Lü Pu, who conducted him into the 
residence where the decree was read. It conferred the title 
General, “Pacificator of the East,” and a special seal accom- 
panied the mandate. The private letter was also handed over 
and the messenger detailed the high appreciation in which Lu 
- was held by the chief Minister of State. 

Next came news that a messenger from Yüan Shu had 
arrived. When he had been introduced he said that Shu’s 


project of declaring himself Emperor was advancing. He had 


already, built a palace and would speedily choose an Empress 
and concubines and would come to Huainan. 

“Has the rebel gone so far?” cried Lü Pu in a rage. 

He put the messenger to death and Han Yin into the cangue. 
He drafted a memorial of thanks and sent it to the capital, at 
the same time sending, too, Han Yin, the unfortunate agent 
who had arranged the marriage alliance. ‘He also replied to 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s private letter asking to be confirmed in his 
“governorship. 

Ts‘ao was pleased to hear of the rupture of the marriage 
arrangement, and forthwith put Han Yin to death in the 
market place. 
=- However, Ch‘én .Téng sent a secret remonstrance to Ts‘ao 
-Ts‘ao, vilifying Lü Pu as cruel, stupid and facile and advising 


his destruction. 


“IT know Lü Pu quite well,” said Ts‘ao. “He is a wolf with 
aa savage heart, and it will be hard to feed him for long. ` 
if it had not been for you and your father I should not have 
known all the circumstances and you must help me to get rid 
-of him.” ® 

“Anything the Minister wishes to do shall have my assis- 
tance,” was the reply. 

Ag a reward Ts‘ao Ts‘ao obtained a grant of grain for the 
father and a prefecture for the son, who then took his leave. 
As he was saying farewell Ts‘ao took him by the hand saying, 
“<I shall depend upon you in the eastern affair.” 


174 San Kuo 


Ch‘én Téng nodded acquiescence. Then he returned to Lit ~ 
Pu, who asked him how he had fared. Ch‘én told him of the ~ 
gifts to his father, which annoyed Pu. E 

“You did not ask Hstichou for me, but you got something i 
for yourself. Your father advised me to help Ts‘ao Ts‘ao by | 
breaking off the marriage, and now I get nothing at all of ` 
what I asked while you and your father get nate 2 
I have been victimised by your father.” z i 

He threatened Ch‘én with his sword. 

Ch‘én Téng only laughed saying, “O how stupid you are, 
General!” 

“I! How stupid?” 

“When I saw Ts‘ao, I said that to keep you going was like a 
feeding a tiger. The tiger must be kept fully fed or he would — 
eat men. But Ts‘ao laughed and replied, ‘No; not that. One | 
must treat the marquis like a falcon. Not feed it till the foxes 

-and hares are done: Hungry, the bird is of use; full fed it flies _ 
away.’ I asked who were the quarry. He replied ‘Yiian Shy, — 
Sun Ts‘é, Yiian Shao, Liu Piao, Liu Chang and Chang Lu; 
- these are the foxes and hares.’ ” ia 
He Lü Pu threw aside his sword and laughed, saying, “Yes; he 
understands me.’ 

But just about that time came news of the advance of Yuan. 
Shu on Hsiichou and that frightened Lü Pu. È 

When discord rose ’twixt Ts‘in and Chin, 
They were attacked by Ytieh and Wu, 


And when a promised bride ne’er came, 
An army marched to enforce the claim. 


How all this fell out will be shown in the next chapter. | 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Aw ARMY OF SEVEN DIVISIONS MARCHES OUT: 
THREE GENERALS ARE BROUGHT TOGETHER. 


Huainan was very fruitful, and Yüan Shu, as governor of 

sucha large district, was very influential.. He was not a little 
puffed up. The possession of the Imperial seal, pledged by 
Sun Ts‘, ‘added to his pride. And he seriously thought of 
assuming the full style. Asa preliminary he Sone a his 
_ officers and addressed them thus:— > 
` “Of old Kao-Tsu, Founder of the Dynasty of Hon was Toly 
-a very minor official and yet he became ruler of the Empire. 
‘The Dynasty has endured four centuries and its measure of 
-fortune has run out. It no longer possesses authority; the 
cauldron is on the point of boiling over. My family has held 
the highest offices of State for four generations and is univer- 
sally respected. Wherefore I wish, in response to the will of 
Heaven and the desire of the people, to assume the Imperial 
ay What think ye of the proposal, my officers?” 
= The Recorder, Yen Hsiang, rose in opposition at once. “You 

‘may not do this. Hou Chi, the Minister of the Chou Dynasty, 

was of distinguished virtue and held many offices, till in the 
` time of Wên Wang he had two thirds of the Empire. Still he 
served and was loyal to the Yim Dynasty. Your house is 
honourable, but it is not so glorious as that of Chou. The Hans 
may be reduced, but they are not so abominably cruel as Tsou 
-~ of the Yins. Indeed this should not be done.” 

- Yiian Shu did not hear this with pleasure. “We Yiians came 
from Ch‘én and he was a descendant of Shun (the Emperor). 
p BY the rule of interpreting the signs of fate the day has come 
when earth receives fire. Beside there is an oracle saying, 
-~ ‘He who replaces the Hans must wade through deep mire.’ My 
name means ‘the high road.’ It fits exactly. Further than . 
_ this, I possess the hereditary seal of State and must become 
lord of all or I turn from Heaven’s own way. Finally I have 
-made up my mind, so if any one says too much he will simply. 
T suffer death.” 
- He arrogated himeelf the insignia of royalty. He set up 
officials with titles only given by an Emperor, and rode in a 
carriage decorated with the dragon and phoenix and offered 
“sacrifices after the manner of an Emperor in the north and 
south suburbs. Also he appointed an “Empress” and an “Heir 
_ Apparent” (in the Eastern Eee and pressed for the ‘early 


176 an tiuo, or 


wedding of Lii Pu’s daughter with hia son that the palace 
entourage might be complete. 

But when he heard of the fate of his marriage E ae 
he was very angry and began at once to plan for revenge. 
Chang Hsün was made Generalissimo having unger his com- 
mand more than twenty legions, in seven divisions under so. 
many commanders, and each of these was instructed to make 
a certain town his obj ective. The Governor of Yenchou, Chin 
Shang, was ordered to superintend the commissariat, but he | 
declined the office and so was put to death. Chi Ling was in 
command of the reserves to help wherever he was required. 


Yiian Shu led three legions and he appointed three tried 


officers to go up and down and see that the various armies did 
not lag behind. 

Lii Pu found out from his scouts that his own city was Chang 
Hstin’s objective ; the other towns to be first attacked being 
Hsiaop‘ei, Itu, Langya, Chiehshih, Hsiap‘ei and Chiinshan. 
The armies were marching fifty lia day, and plundering the 
countryside as they advanced. 

He summoned his advisers to a council to which came Ch‘én 
Kung, Ch‘én Téng and his father. When all had assembled 
Ch‘én Kung said, “This misfortune that has comesto us is due 
to the two Ch‘éns, who fawned upon the central government 
in order to obtain rank and appointments. Now remove the 
evil by putting these two to death and sending their heads to 
our enemy. Then he will retire and leave us in peace.” . 

Lii Pu acquiesced and had the two arrested. But the son, 
Ch‘én Téng, only laughed. “What is this anxiety about?” said 
he. “These seven armies are no more to me than so many © 
heaps of rotting straw. They are not worth thinking about.” 

“Tf you can show us how to overcome them I will spare your 
life,” said Lü. 

“General, if you will listen to a poor stupid fool the city will 3 
be perfectly safe.” 

“Let us hear what you have to say.” 

“Yüan Shu’s men are numerous but they are only a flock of 
crows; they are not an army under a leader. There is no 
mutual confidence. I can keep them at bay with the ordinary 
guards of the place and could overcome them by some unsus- 
pected stratagem. If I should fail I have another plan by 
which I can not only protect the city but capture our enemy. $e 

“Let us have it.” 

“Han Hsien and Yang Féng, two of the leaders of our 
enemies, are old servants of the Han dynasty who fled from 
fear of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and, being homeless, sought refuge with 
Yiian Shu. He despises them and they are dissatisfied with his 
service. A little letter will secure their help as our allies, and- 
with Liu Pei to help us on the outside we can certainly over- 
come Yiian.”’ 


Romance of the Three fingdoms: 177 


“You shall take the letters yourself,” said Lü. 
He agreed and a memorial detailing his intentions was sent 


to the capital, letters to Yiichou to Liu Pei, and finally Ch‘én 


Téng was sent, with a small escort, to wait for Han Hsien on 


the road to Hsiap‘ei. When Han Hsien’s army had halted and 


pitched camp Ch‘én Téng went to see Han Hsien who said, 
“What are you here for? You belong to Lü Pu.” 


“I am a noble of the Court of the great Hans. Why do you — 


call me a Lü Pu’s man? If you, General, hitherto a Minister 
of State, now serve a traitor you nullify the grand services you 
rendered in protecting the Emperor and I despise you. Beside 
the suspicious Yüan Shu will assuredly do you some harm and 
you will regret not having taken this opportunity to work 
against him.” 

Han Hsien sighed. “I would return to my allegiance if 
-~ there should be any opportunity.” 

~ Thereupon Ch‘én Téng gave him the letter. Han read it 
and said, “Yes; I know. You may return to your master and 
say General Yang and I will turn our weapons and smite him. 
ag out for a signal-flare and let your master come to our 
woh MAAE 

As soon as Ch‘én Téng had got back and reported his success, 

Lü Pu divided his men into five divisions and sent them to five 
points to meet his enemies. He himself led against the main 
body under Chang Hsün, leaving a guard in the city. 
`. Lü Pu camped thirty li from the walls. When the enemy 

came up their leader thought Lü Pu too strong to attack with 
the force he had, so he retired twenty li to await reinforce- 
~ ments. be 

That night, in the second watch, Han Hsien and Yang Féng 

arrived and soon the flare was lighted as arranged. Lü Pu’s 
men were admitted to the camp and caused great confusion. 
Then Lü Pu himself attacked and Chang Hstin was routed’ and 
= fled. Lü Pu pursued till daylight when he fell in with one of 
the other bodies led by Chi Ling. Both sides faced each other, 
but at the very beginning of the engagement the two traitors 

also attacked and Chi Ling was forced to fly. 
= Lü Pu went in pursuit but soon another force came out from 
‘the rear of some hills. These looked very imposing. As the 
| ranks opened he saw a leader’s guard with flags: bearing 
dragons and phcenixes and representations of the sun and 
moon, the four “measures,” * the five directions, + golden 

gourds, silver axes, yellow halberds, white yaks’ tails, all 
Imperial emblems. . And beneath a yellow silken parasol sat 


Yiian Shu on horseback, clad in silver mail with a sword 


handle showing at each wrist. 


* Groups of stars similar to the Great Bear Constellation. 
+ Points of the compass, including the centre. 


12 


; 


178 fan Ruo, or 


Standing out in front of the array he railed at his opponent 
calling him traitor and slave. Lü Pu said nothing but rode 
forward ready for battle and Li Féng, one of Yiian’s leaders, 
advanced to take the challenge. They met, but at the third 
bout, Li was wounded in the hand, whereupon his spear fell to 
the ground and he fled. Lü Pu waved on the advance and his — 
men prevailed. The other side fled, leaving much spoil, cloth- 
ing, mail and horses. 

Yiian Shu’s defeated men had not gone far when a stron 
troop, led by Kuan Yü, appeared barring his way. 

“Traitor! why have they not slain you?” cried Kuan Yü. 

Whereat Yiian Shu fled in great trepidation and his army 
melted into fugitives in all directions. The new army fell 
upon them with great slaughter. Ytian Shu and the remnant 
of his army retreated into Huainan. ' 

Victory being now secure, Lü Pu, in company with Kuan Yü, 
Yang Feng and Han Hsien returned to Hsiichou, where there. 
were banquets and feastings and rewards for the soldiers. - 
These over, Kuan took his leave and returned to his brother, - 


while Han Hsien was appointed magistrate of Itu and his s 


friend magistrate of Langya. 

There had been a question of keeping these two in Hsüchou 
but Ch‘ên Kuei opposed it. “Let them hold those places in` 
Shantung, which will be all yours within a year.” So they | 
were sent to these two cities in the meantime to await orders. | 

“Why not retain them here?” asked Ch‘én Teng secretly. of . 
his esi “They would be a basis for our conspiracy against - 
Lü Pu 

“But if they helped him, on the other hand, we should 
lengthen the tiger’s claws and teeth,” said his, father. 

So Téng could only approve of his father’s precautions. 

Yuan Shu returned home burning to avenge his defeat, so 
he sent to Chiangtung to ask a loan of men from Sun Ts‘. 
Ts‘é said, “On the strength of holding the State Seal he secretly 
calls himself Emperor and rebels against the Hans. I would 
rather punish such a renegade than help him.” 

So he refused. The letter refusing help added to Yiian’s — 
anger. ‘What next from this callow youth ?” cred hes.) Sis 
will smite him before I deal with the other.” 

But Y-ang Ta-chiang dissuaded him from this course. 

Having refused help to his powerful rival Sun Ts‘é thought 
it wise to take measures for his own safety. So he stationed 
an army at Chiangk‘ou. Soon after came a messenger from 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bearing his appointment as Prefect of Kueichi with 
-orders to raise an army and reduce Yüan Shu. 

Sun Ts‘é was inclined to carry out these orders but he called 
a council at which Chang Chao opposed this course. Said he, 
“Although recently defeated Yiian Shu has many. men and 
ample supplies. He-is not: to be attacked lightly. You had 


Re 
r 


(Romance of the Three Hingdoms 179 


ee better write to Ts ao T's‘ao persuading him to attack the south 
_ and we will be auxiliaries. Between the two armies Shu must 
~ certainly be defeated.. If by the remotest chance we lose, we 
have Ts‘ao Ts‘ao- to come to our rescue.” 


This plan was adopted and a messenger was sent to lay it 
before Ts‘ao. -In the meantime Ts‘ao had reached Hsiitu where 
his first thought was to institute sacrifices to his beloved lost 
leader Tien Wei. He conferred rank upon his son Tien Man 
and took him into his own palace to be cared for. 

Presently arrived Sun Ts‘é’s messenger with letters and 
next came a report that Yiian Shu, being short of food, had . 


: made a raid on Ch‘énliu. Ts‘ao thought the moment opportune, 


_ so he issued orders for the expedition south, leaving Ts‘ao Jên 
to hold the city. The army marched, horse and foot, seven- 


teen legions, with commissariat waggons of food to the number 
of over a thousand. Messages were sent to summon Sun Ts‘, 
“Liu Pei and Lü Pu to assemble on the Yiichang borders. 


Liu Pei was the first to arrive and he was called in to the | 
Minister’s tent. After the usual salutations two human heads 


were produced. 


“Whose are these?” asked Ts‘ao in surprise.. S 


“The heads of Han Hsien and Yang Fêng.” 


of 


X “Why did this happen?” 


“They were sent to control Itu and Langya i allowed their 


soldiers to plunder the people. Bitter complaints arose so I 


invited them to a banquet and my brothers despatched. them 


when I gave the Signal by dropping a cup. Their men gave 


in at once and now I have to apologise for my fault.” 
“You have removed an evil, which is a grand service: why 
talk of a fault?” ; a 
And he praised Yüan-tê’s action. 
When the joint army reached Lü Pu’s borders he came to 


meet it. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao spoke graciously to him and: conferred 


upon him the title of Generalissimo of the Left, promising him 


a suitable seal as soon as he returned to the capital. Lü- Pu 


was very pleased. 


Then the three armies were ie ee one force, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


being in the centre and the other two on the wings. Hsiahou 
“Tun and Yü Chin were leaders of the van. 


On Yiian Shu’s side Ch‘iao Sui with five legions was appoint- _ 
ed van leader. The armies met on the confines of Shouch‘un. 


_ The two van leaders rode out and opened battle. Ch‘iao Sui 
felli in the third bout and his men fled into the city.. 


Then came news that Sun Ts‘é’s fleet was near and woul 


- attack on the west. The other three land corps took each one 


face and the city was in a parlous state. 


At this juncture Yiian Shu summoned his officers. Yang 


= Ta-chiang explained the case, ‘“Shouch‘un has suffered from 
- drought for several years and the people are on the verge of 


180 San Huo, or ` > 


famine. Sending an army would add to the distress and anger 


the people, and victory would be uncertain. I advise not to 
send any more soldiers there, but to hold on till the besiegers 
are conquered by lack of supplies. Our noble chief, with his 
regiment of guards, will move over to the other, side of the 
river, which is quite ready, and we shall also escape the 
enemy’s ferocity.” 

So due arrangements being made to guard Shouch‘un a 
general move was made to the other side of the Huai River. 
Not only the army went over but all the accumulated wealth of 
the Yiian family, gold and silver, jewels and precious stones, 
were moved. . 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army of seventeen legions needed daily no 


inconsiderable quantity of food, and as the country around had — 


been famine-stricken for several years nothing. could be got 
there. So he tried to hasten the military opérations and cap- 


ture the city. On the other hand, the defenders knew the 


value of delay and simply held on. After a month’s vigorous 


siege the fall of the city seemed as far off as it was at first 


and supplies were very short. Letters were sent to Sun Ts‘ê 


who sent a hundred thousand measures of grain. When the | 
usual distribution became impossible the Chief of the Com- 
missariat, Jén Hstin, and the Controller of the Granaries, © 
Wang Hou, presented a statement asking what was to be done. - 


“Serve out with a smaller measure,” said Ts‘ao. “That 
will save us for a time.” . ; 
“But if the soldiers murmur, what then?” 
“I shall have another device.” 


As ordered the controllers issued grain in a short measure. — 


Ts‘ao sent secretly to find out how the men took this and when 
he found that complaints were general and they were saying that 


he was fooling them, he sent a secret summons to the controller. 


When he came Ts‘ao said, “I want to ask you to lend me some- 
thing to pacify the soldiers with. You must not refuse.” 
“What does the Minister wish?” 
“T want the loan of your head to expose to the soldiery.” 
“But I have done nothing wrong!” exclaimed the unhappy 
man. Sais 


be my care. So you need not grieve on their account.” 


Wang Hou was about to remonstrate further but Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


gave a signal, the executioners hustled him out and he was 
beheaded. His head was exposed on a tall pole and a notice 
said that in accordance with military law Wang Hou had been 


put to death for peculation and the use of a short measure in > 


issuing grain. 


This appeased the discontent. Next followed a general ; | 
order threatening death to the various commanders if the city 


“I know that, but if I do not put you to death there will he 
a mutiny. After you are gone your wife and children shall 


eS oe 


- Homance of ike hee Hingvoms 


o was not taken within three days. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in person went 


up to the very walls to superintend the work of filling up the 


_ moat. The defenders kept up constant showers of stones and 


arrows. Two inferior officers, who left their stations in 


3 _ fear, were slain by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao "himself, Thereafter he went 


on foot to see that work went on continuously and no one dared 


be a laggard. Thus encouraged the army became invincible 


181 


and no defence could withstand their onslaught. In a very | 


short time the walls were scaled, the gates battered i in and the 


besiegers were in possession. The officers of the garrison were 
captured alive and were executed in the market place. All 


the paraphernalia of impetta state. were burned and the | 


-= whole city wrecked. 


When the question of crossing the river in pursuit of Yiian 


_ Shu came up Hsün Yü opposed it saying, “The country has 
suffered from short crops for years and we should be unable. 
_ to get grain. An advance would weary the army, harm the 
- people and possibly” end in disaster. I advise a return to the 
capital to wait there till the spring wheat ‘Shall have been 
_ harvested and we have plenty of food.” 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao hesitated and before he had kde up his mind 


there came an urgent message saying Chang Hsiu, with the 
_ support of Liu Piao, was ravaging the country all round, that ` 


Sy -there was rebellion in Nanyang and Ts‘ao Hung could not 


cope with it. He had been worsted already in several engage- 


ments and was in sore straits. 


_Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at once wrote to Sun Ts‘é to command the river 
‘so as to prevent any move on the part of Liu Piao, while he 
prepared his army to go to deal with Chang Hsiu. Before 


to Yiian-té, “I am leaving you at Hsiaop‘ei as a pitfall for the 


tiger. You will only take advice from the two Ch‘éns and 
` there can be no mishap. You will find so-and-so your ally 
‘when needed.” 


So Ts‘ao Ts‘ao marched to Hsiitu where he heard that Tuan 
Wei had slain Li Ts‘ui and Wu Hsi had killed Kuo Sst and they 


Li Ts‘ui had been arrested and brought to the capital. They 


were all put to death at various gates and their heads exposed. 


People thought this very harsh dealing. 
In the Emperor’s palace a large number of officials were 


assembled at a peace banquet. The two successful leaders 


Tuan and Wu were rewarded with titles and sent to guard 
Ch‘angan. They came to audience to express their gratitude 


_ and marched away. 


Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sent in a moor that Chang Hsiu was ` 


in rebellion and an army must be sent against him. The 


marching he directed Liu Pei to ae at Hsiaop‘ei, as he and 
_ Lii Pu, being as brothers, might help each other. 
When Lii Pu had left ‘for Hstichou Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said secretly 


- presented the heads of these two. Beside the whole clan of 


182 ‘San Kuo, or 


Empercr in person arranged the chariot and escorted his 
Minister out of the city when he went to take command of the 
expedition. ‘It was the summer, the fourth month of the third 
vear of the period Chien-An (199 A. D.). Hsün Yü was in 
chief military command in Hsiitu. ; 
The army marched away. In the course of the 'march they 
passed through a wheat district and the grain was ready for 
harvesting but the peasants had fled for fear and the corn was 
uncut. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao caused it to be made known all about that 
he was sent on the expedition. by command of the Emperor to 
capture a rebel and save the people. He could not avoid 
moving in the harvest season but if any one trampled down the 
corn he should be put to death. “Military law was so severe 
that the people need fear no damage. The people were very 


` pleased and lined the road, wishing success to the expedition. 
‘When the soldiers passed wheatfields they dismounted and 


pushed aside the stalks so that none were trampled down. 

One day, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was riding through the fields, a . 
dove suddenly got up, startling the horse so that he swerved 
into the standing grain and a large patch was trampled down. 
Ts‘ao at once called the Provost Marshal and bade him decree © 


. the sentence for the crime of trampling down corn. 


“How can I deal with your crime?” asked the Provost | et 
Marshal. i 
“I made the rule and I have broken it. Can I otherwise 
satisfy public opinion?” 
He laid hold of the sword by his side and made to take his 
own life. All hastened to prevent him and Kuo Chia said, 


“In ancient days, the days of the Spring and Autumn history. 
the laws were not applied to the persons of the most honour- ~ 
able. You are the supreme leader of a mighty army and must 


not wound yourself.” 

_Ts‘ao Ts‘ao pondered for along time. At last he said, “Since 
there exists the reason just quoted I may perhaps escape the 
death penalty.” 

Then with his sword he cut off his hair and threw it on the 
ground saying, “I cut off the hair as touching the head.” 

Then he sent a man to exhibit the hair throughout the whole 
army saying, “The Minister, having trodden down some corn, 
ought to have lost his head by the terms of the order; now here 
is his hair cut off as an attack on the head.” 

This deed was a stimulus to discipline all through the army 


so that not a man dared be disobedient. A poet wrote :— 


A myriad soldiers march along and all are brave and bold,’ 
And their myriad inclinations by one leader are controlled. 
That crafty leader shore his locks when forfeit was his head, 
O full of guile wert thou, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, as every one has said. 


On the first news of the approach of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao with an 
army oe Hsiu wrote to Liu Piao for help. Then he sent 


183 


Homanre of the Chree Gingdome 


out his men under command of Lei Hsii and Chang Hsien. 
When the array was complete Chang Hsiu took his station in 
front and pointing at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao railed at him saying, “O false 


= and pretended supporter of benevolence and justice! O shame- 


less one! You are just a beast of the forest, and absolutely 


devoid of humanity.” 


This annoyed Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who sent out Hsii Ch‘u against the 
insulter. Chang Hsien came to meet him and fell in the third . 
bout. Thence Chang Hsiu’s men fled and were pursued to the 
very walls of Nanyang, only managing to get within just be- 
fore the pursuit came up. ‘The city was then closely besieged. 
Seeing the moat was so wide and deep that approach to the 


f wall would be difficult they began to fill up the ditch with earth. 


Then with sand bags, brushwood and bundles of grass they 


i _ built a great mound near the wall and on this erected steps so 
__ that they could look over into the city. 


Ts‘ao rode round the city closely inspecting the defences. 


-- Three days later he issued an order to make a mound of earth 


and brushwood at the north west angle, as he would mount the 
walis at that point. He was observed from within the city 
by Chia Hsti, who went to his chief and said, “I know what he 


gs intends and I can defeat him by a counter-move.”’ 


E’en amongst the very foremost 
There is one who leads the way; 

Some one sees through your devices, 
Be as crafty as ye may. 


-What the counter-move was will be told in the next chapter. 


. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


CHIA HSU ENGINEERS A GREAT VICTORY: 
HsIAHOU TUN LOSES AN EYE. 


(irs Hsii, as he had guessed the enemy’s intention, had also 
devised a counter-move. So he went to his chief and said, “I 
saw Ts‘ao Ts‘ao very carefully reconnoitring round about the 
city and he certainly noticed that the south-east angle of the 
wall had been lately restored with mud bricks of a different 
kind and that the abatis is badly out of repair. He will try to 
effect an entrance there. Wherefore he is making a feint. ~ 
attack at the opposite point. He is piling up straw and making 
ostentatious preparations whereby to cajole us into withdraw- 
ing from the real point of attack to defend the north-west. His 
men will scale the walls in the darkness and try to enter at the 
south-east.” Ara, 

“Supposing your surmise correct, what do you advise?” 
asked Chang Hsiu. ‘ 

“The counter-move is plain. You issue an order for our best- 
and bravest soldiers to fill their bellies, to take only the lightest 
outfit and conceal themselves in the houses near the south-east 
corner. Then disguise the townspeople as soldiers and send 
them to pretend to defend the north-west. To-night we will 
let the enemy climb up the walls and enter the city and, once — 
they are fairly within, give the signal and the concealed 
soldiers will rush out upon them. We may even capture 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao himself.” 

The stratagem was decided upon. Soon the scouts told Ts‘ao 
that the defenders of the city had moved to the north-west. 
where noisy preparations for defence were going on. The 
opposite corner was left undefended. 

“They have fallen into my trap,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao gleefully. 

They prepared shovels and hooks and all the gear needed 
for sealing walls, and all day they kept up the attack on the 
north-west angle. 

But at the second watch they despatched the veterans to the 
opposite corner, where they climbed the wall, broke up the 
abatis and got into the city apparently without disturbing any 


‘of the guards. There was no sign of life anywhere as they 


entered. But just as they were leaving the wall suddenly a 
bomb exploded and they found themselves in an ambush. They 
turned to retire, but Chang Hsiu immediately fell on thé rear. 


“Romance of the Three tingdomg 185 07 


Ts‘ ao’s men were totally defeated and fled out of the ie into 


_ the country. Chang Hsiu kept up the pursuit till daybreak, ies 
| ‘when he retired into the city again. asta 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao then rallied his army and mustered his men. 
He had lost five legions and much baggage, while two of his 
captains, Lu Ch‘ien and Yu Chin were wounded. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao being thus worsted, Chang Hsiu wrote off to Liu 
Piao to cut off his retreat that he might be utterly destroyed. _ 

An army was preparing for this purpose when a scout came 
to say that Sun Ts‘é had encamped at Huk‘ou. K‘uai Liang 
urged the immediate departure of the expedition as he said 
this move of Sun Ts‘é was part of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s strategy and 
there would be never-ending regret if he were allowed to 
escape. Wherefore Liu Piao moved out with his army to 
Anchung, leaving Huang Tsu to hold the point of vantage. 

Chang Hsiu, having been informed of the movement to attack — 
his enemy in the rear, went with Chia Hsii to smite him once 
more. 

In the meantime Ts“ ao Ts‘ao’s army, marching very leisurely, 
had arrived at Hsianch‘éng. Walking one day beside the 
Yushui River he suddenly uttered a great ery, and when his 

_ Officers asked the reason thereof he replied, “I remembered 
that here, only a year ago, I lost my great cantain Tien Wei. 


Is that not a reason to grieve?” 


Thereupon he gave orders to halt while he should make a 
great sacrifice and mourn for his lost leader. At the ceremony 

- he himself burned incense and wailed and prostrated himself. 
The army was much affected by his devotion. After the sacri- | 
fices to the lost hero, he sacrificed to the names of his nephew - 
Ts‘ao An-ming and his eldest son Ts‘ao An, both of whom had - 
died at the same time. He also sacrificed to his lost soldiers 
and even to his steed which had been killed by an arrow. 

_ Soon Hsiin Yü wrote to tell him that Liu Piao had gone to: 
help Chang Hsiu and was camped at Anchung, sae cutting 
his road of retreat. Ts‘ao replied to the letter saying, “I have 
been marching only a short distance each day and of course 
knew of the pursuit. But my plans are laid and, as I near . 
Anchung, my enemy will be broken. You need not have any 
fears.” 

Then he hastened ae march till he came near where Liu Piao 
had taken position. Chang Hsiu still followed. Ts‘ao ordered 
his men during the night to open a secret way through a pass, 
where he laid an ambush. 

With the first light of dawn Liu and Chang met. As Ts ao 
Ts‘ao’s force looked small, they thought he had retired so they 
boldly advanced into the pass to smite him. Then the ambush 
was opened and both the attackers’ forces were cut up. The 

- fighting ended, ‘Ts‘ao’s soldiers went outside the Daps and 

encamped. < es p ©) 


186 an Kuo, or 


The two leaders on the other side restored order among their 
beaten men- and then held a conference. 

“How could we have foreseen such a wicked ruse?” said Liu 
Piao. 

“Let us try again,” said his colleagye. 

Wherefore they joined forces at Anchung. 

But Hsiin Yü discovered through his spies that Yiian Shao 
was preparing an attack on Hsiitu, the then capital, so he at 
once wrote to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who, much disturbed by this news, 
set out homeward at once. When Chang Hsiu heard this- 
through his scouts he wished to follow the retreating army. — 
Chia Hsti opposed it and said it would lead to a defeat. How- 
ever Liu Piao was also of opinion that it was wrong to lose 
such a chance and so finally pursuit was decided upon. 


They had not marched very far before they came upon | ji 


Ts‘ao’s rear-guard, who fought with great vigour and bravery, 
so that the pursuers were beaten off and went home 
discomfited. 

Chang Hsiu said to Chia, “This defeat comes Hoe my Aot 
following your advice.” 

“Now set your army in order and pursue,” aaia. Chia. 


“But we have just suffered defeat!” cried both leaders. “Do : ; 


you now counsel pursuit?” 

“Yes, and the result will be a great victory if you go now. 
I will venture my head on that,” said Chia. 

Chang Hsiu had confidence, but his colleague was afraid and ~ 
would not accompa, him. So one army only started in | 
pursuit. 

However, this ‘was eeoieh, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s rear-guard was 
thoroughly routed. and abandoned their waggons and their 
baggage in their hasty flight. Chang Hsiu pursued, but sud- 


denly a troop came out from the shelter of some hills and 


checked him, Fearful to try further he hastened back to 
Anchung. 

The other general, Liu Piao, asked the adviser to explain his 
apparent inconsistency. “When our veteran and brave sold- — 
iers were going to pursue those who retreated you said our men 
would lose the day ; and: when defeated men pursued the victors 
you foretold victory. You were right in both cases, but we 
wish' you would enlighten us.” 

“It is easy to explain. You, Generals, although skilled 
leaders, are not a match for our enemy. Though the enemy 
had lost a battle he had able captains to keep the rear and 
guard against pursuit. Our men are good, but not a match 
for them. That is how I knew. Forasmuch as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s 
hurried retreat was due to trouble in the capital and he had 
beaten off our men, I knew he would retire at his utmost speed 


and not take his usual precautions. I ventured to take | 
advantage of his laxity.” on 


Pa 


— Ñomanee of the Chreeingooms 187 


Liu wd Chang could not but afirm his complete o eland. 
ing of the conditions. | 

On the advice of Chia Hsü then Liu Piao returned to Ching- 
chou, while Chang Hsiu took up his position at Hsiangch‘éng 
so that each strengthened the other as the lips protect the teeth 
from cold. 

When Ts‘ao, during his retreat, heard that his army was 
being pursued he hastily turned back to support the rear- 


guard. Then he saw the pursuing army draw off.. The 


soldiers of the beaten rear-guard said, “Had it not been for the 

troop that came out of the hills we should all have been lost.” 
“What troop?” asked Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in surprise. 

The leader of the troop then advanced, slung his spear and, 


~ dismounting, made a low obeisance. He was Li T‘ung, a 


-eaptain of some rank and reputation from Chianghsia. 

Ts‘ao asked him why he had come. 

Li T‘ung replied, “I was in command at Junan when I heard 
of a struggle going on, so I came to lend you any help I 
could.” 

To show his gratitude Ts‘ao conferred upon Li the title 
Marquis of Established Merit, and confirmed him in his 


command as a defence against Liu Piao. Then Li T‘ung took 
_ his leave. | 


On his return to the capital Ts‘ao Ts‘ao presented a memorial 


on the good services rendered by Sun Ts‘é and he.was created 
Marquis of Wu with the title General “Captor of Rebels.” The 
messenger bearing the decree bore also the order to repress 
Liu Piao. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao went to his palace and there received the cere- 
oaa calls of congratulation. These finished, Hsün Yü 


: asked, saying, “You; Sir, marched very leisurely to Anchung; 


-how came it that you felt certain of victory ?”? 
Ts‘ao replied, “He who retires and finds his retreat cut off 
fights desperately. I retired slowly to entice them into follow- 


ing whereby I could do as I wished with them. Basing my 


movements on these considerations I felt .secure.’ 
Hsiin bowed his head in admiration. 
' When Kuo Chia entered Ts‘20 said, “Why so late, Sir?” 
The visitor drew a letter from his sleeve saying to his 
of ASiEr, “Yiian Shao sends this saying he desires to send an 


army to attack Kungsun Tsan and wishes you to lend 


‘provisions and men. 

- “I heard he was going to attack Hsiitu; I suppose my return 
has made him change his intention,” said Ts‘ao. 

Then he opened the letter and read it. It was couched in 

-very arrogant terms. 
“He is so exceedingly rude that I will attack him,” said Ts‘ao, 
“Only I think I am not quite strong enough. What should be 
- done?” 


X 


188 jan uo, or 


“My lord, you know well who lost, and why, in the conflict 


between Liu Pang and Hsiang Yü; the former won only by 
superior wisdom. Hsiang Yü was the stronger, but in the 
end he was overcome. Your rival has ten weak points where- 
as you have ten strong ones, and, though his army is large, it 
is not terrible. : : 


“Shao is over-much devoted to ceremony and deportment ;_ 
while you are sympathetic and natural; this is an excellence in | 


conduct. He is antagonistic and drives; you are conciliatory 
and lead; so you have the advantage of popular approval. For 
many years the government has been lax and he makes it more 
so: you strive vigorously after efficiency ; this is the excellence 
of able administration. He is outwardly liberal but grudging 
at heart, and too given to nepotism: you appear exacting, but 


you understand and use men after their ability; this is the 
advantage of correct appreciation. He is a visionary and ~ 


lacking in decision: you are a man of prompt decision and 


direct action; this is an advantage in policy. He loves to 


gather about him men of renown: you treat a man as you find 


him regardless of his reputation; this'is where you excel in | 
moral virtue. He is compassionate to those at hand, but care- — 


less about those out of sight: your care is all-embracing; this 


is where you excel in humanity. He lends a ready ear to ` 


calumny and is misled: you may be flooded with evil counsel, 
but you preserve independence; this is where you excel in 
perspicacity. His sense of right and wrong is confused: your 
appreciation is accurate and clear; this is where you excel in 
administrative capacity. He loves the make-believe force, but 


is ignorant of military essentials: you would overcome with $ 


ar inferior numbers as you possess military genius; this is 


where you excel in war. With your ten superiorities you will _ 


have no difficulty in overcoming Shao.” 


“How can I be worth as much as you say?” said Ts‘ao, 


. 


smiling. j 

“What he has said about the ten points in your favour 
agrees exactly with what I think,” said Hsün Yü. “Shao’s 
army is not formidable in spite of its size.” 


“The real and dangerous enemy is Lü Pu,” said Kuo. Chia. 
“When Yüan Shao has gone north to destroy Kunsun Tsan, we- 


ought to sweep away Lii Pu and so clear away our danger from 


that side, for if this is not done our attack on Shao will be the ‘ 
signal for an attempt on the capital. That would be most 


serious.” s 


Ts‘ao T's‘ao saw things in the same light as his advisers and | 


began to discuss plans for an attack on Lü Pu. Sün Yü was 
of opinion that they should first secure the fidelity and aid of 


Liu Pei. So letters were written and they waited his assur- 


ance before moving a soldier. Then, in order to reassure Yiian 


Shao, his emissary was treated with great kindness and a- 


Romante of tire Three Lingdoms a 189 


oF memorial presented asking extra honours for him. With all 


_ this a private letter was written urging upon him to attack 
‘Kungsun and promising assistance. ee Yiian Shao’s army 


started. 
in the meantime the two Ch‘éns were playing their game. 
t every feast and gathering in Hsiichou they uttered the most | 
fulsome praises of Lü Pu. Ch‘én Kung was greatly displeased 
and took an opportunity to talk about them to his master. 
“They flatter you to your face, but what is in their hearts? 
You ought to be most carefully on your guard. k 
“Hold your tongue!” was the angry reply.. “You are simply 


-slandering them without the slightest excuse. You want to 
_ harm good men. Ši í 


“No ears for loyal words”; said Ch’en Kung, as he went 
away sad at heart, “and we shall suffer.” 
He thought seriously of abandoning Lü Pu, but that would 


be too painful a wrench. Beside he feared people would laugh 


at him. 
So the days passed sorrowfully for him. One day, with a 
few horsemen, he rode out to the country near Hsiaop‘ei to 


hunt. On the high road he saw a messenger galloping along 
in hot haste and began to wonder what it might mean. He 
left the hunt, rode across country and intercepted the rider. 


“Where are you from? Who sent you?” asked Ch‘én Kung. 

The messenger made no reply for he knew to what party 
his captors belonged. But they searched him and found a 
letter, the secret reply to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s letter to Liu Pei. The 
messenger and the letter were both taken straight to Lü Pu. 
He questioned the man, who said he had been sent to Liu Pei 
with a letter and was now taking back the reply. He knew 
nothing more. He was ignorant of the contents of the letter. 


z So Lü Pu tore it open and read :—“I have received your com- 


mands concerning the destruction of Lü Pu and dare I for a 


-moment venture to disregard them? But my force is weak 
and I must act with extreme circumspection. If you move 
_ your main body, then I will hasten forward and in the mean- 


time my men shall be got ready and weapons prepared. I. 


await your command.” 


Lii Pu was really alarmed. “The wretch!” said he, “To dare 
to act thus!” | 
- The unhappy messenger was put to death and counter-moves 


` planned. Ch‘én Kung and Tsang Pa went to enlist the help 


of the T‘aishan bandits and take Yenchou in Shantung. Kao 
Shun and Chang Liao went to attack Liu Pei in P‘eich‘éng. 


‘Sung Hsieu and Wei Hsii went west to attack Juying and Lü 


Pu took command of a large body of men ready to afford help 


-~ wherever needed. 


The departure of the army under Kao Shun against Hsiao- 


= p‘ei was told Liu Pei who assembled his officers at a council. 


a 


9 


fn 


N EA AEN E EEA AON A 
Sheil, ANETO Hipias TADAN 
EAN ENN RWA S 


E ART are hin 


190 San Guo, or 


Sun Ch‘ien advised sending a message to the capital to inform 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao of their danger and, in response to the chief’s call, 
Chien Yung, a fellow-townsman of Liu Pei’s, offered to take the- 
message. Up to that moment he had served as a secretary. 
So a letter was written and the late secretary set out at once 
on his journey. © E 
Then preparations were made for defence, Yüan-tê com- 
manding at the south gate and the two brothers and Sun Chʻien 
taking each a gate. -Mi Chu and his brother Fang commanded 
the family guard. . 


The two Mi’s were put in command of the house guard tea | 


because they were Liu Pei’s brothers-in-law, he having taken 
a sister of Mi Chu as a second wife. Hence they were suitable — 
men to guard the family. chi 

In due course Kao Shun came to the south gate. Liu Pei 
ascended the tower and said, “I have no quarrel with your 
master, why do you come here with an army?” — 

“You have plotted with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to injure my master as 
we know now; why should I not ‘ bind’ you?” 


So saying he gave the signal to attack. But Yiian-té did | 


not go out to repulse him; he only kept the gate fast closed. — 


Soon after Chang Liao led an attack on the west gate, then _ 4 


kept by Yiin-ch‘ang, who addressed him from the wall. 
“You are too good a man to waste yourself on rebels,” said 


Chang hung his head and made no reply. Bas sy the 
Kuan Yii knew that he had a sound heart and high principles 
and said no more as he was unwilling to wound him. Nor did 

he go out to attack. 


Chang Liao then drew off and proceeded to the east gate, i ; 


and Chang Fei went out to give battle. Soon it was told Kuan 


Yü, who came over quickly. He saw Chang Fei going out, 
but Chang Liao was already withdrawing. Fei wished to sp 


pursue, but his brother held him back. a i 
“He is afraid- and so has gone.away; it would be best to. 
pursue,” said Fei. 


“No,” said his brother. “As a warrior he is not inferior 


to either of us, but I have spoken a few straight words and 


they have sunk deep. He is repentant and that is why he. 

will not.meet us.” 
„So Chang Fei understood and the gates were shut and orders © 

given for careful defence. 


When Liu Pei’s messenger reached the capital he saw Tsʻao 


Ts‘ao who told him what had happened. The advisers were 
called to discuss a plan. Ts‘ao said, “I wish to attack Lü Pu. 
I fear not Ytian Shao, but Liu Piao and Chang Hsiu may attack 
me in the rear.” 

Hsün Yu replied, “Both these latter have been too recently 
defeated to do anything so rash. But Lü Pu isa bold fighting — 


ra 


aera of the Three Kingoomg 191 


man, aa if he joined forces with Yiian Shu and they set 
themselves to conquer Huai and Ssi* the problem would be 
difficult.” 

Then spoke Kuo Chia, “Let us take advantage of the moment 
before they have fully made up their mind. Smite before they 
are fully prepared.” And Ts‘ ‘ao Ts‘ao did so. Five legions. 
with four captains were sent in advance. ‘Ts‘ao commanded 
the rear army, which marched by divisions, and Chien Yung 
brought up the rear. 

Soon the scouts informed Kao Shun. He sent flying mes- 
sengers to Lii Pu, who detached two hundred horse to assist 
him. Kao Shun posted this reinforcement about thirty li 
from the city to meet Ts‘ao’s army. He followed close. 

When Liu Pei saw the enemy retiring from the city he knew 


= Ts‘ao’s army was close at hand. So, making arrangements 


for guarding the city within, he and his two brothers marched 
their men out of the city and made a camp, that they might be 
ready to assist. 

Now the division of Ts‘ao’s army under Hsiahou Tun, having 
marched out in advance, first came into touch with Kao Shun. 
The former ¢aptain at once rode out with spear set and offered 


a challenge.- It was accepted and the two leaders fought half 


a hundred bouts. Then Kao Shun began to weaken and had 
_ to own he had lost the day. His adversary pressed him hard 
- and he rode round to the rear of his array. Tun was not the 
¿man to quail so he followed right into the:enemy’s country. 
Then Ts‘ao Hsing, one of the captains, secretly strung his 
bow, fitted an arrow and, when Tun had come quite near, shot 
at him. The arrow hit Hsiahou Tun full in the left eye. He 
shrieked, and putting up his head, pulled out the arrow and 


with it the eye. 


“Essence of my taor blood of my mother, I annot throw 
-this away,” cried, he, and he put the eye into his mouth and 


-swallowed it. 


Then resuming his firm grip of his spear he went after this 
new enemy. 

There was no escape for Ts‘ao Hsing. He was overtaken 
and fell with a spear wound full in the face. Both sides were 
stricken dumb with amazement. 

- Having thus slain the man who had wounded him Tun rode 
‘back toward his own side. Kao Shun went in pursuit and, 
waving,on his men, attacked so vigorously that he won the 
day. Hsiahou Tun saved his elder brother, with whom he 
fled. The various divisions rallied at Chipei and made a camp 
there. 
+ Kao Shun having scored this victory, returned to attack 
Liu Pei, and as Lii Pu opportunely arrived with Chang Liao, 


* The country about modern Kiangsu and south Shantung. 


192 fan uo 


these three arranged their forces so that each attacked one of 
the brothers. 


Dauntless was Tun, that warrior bold, 
His courage had been proved of old; 

But smitten sore one hapless day, n 
He might not in the battle stay. 


The fate of Yüan-tê will be told in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


: , Ts‘ao Ts‘AO FIGHTS AT HSIAP‘EI: 
_ LU Pu PERISHES AT THE WHITE GATE TOWER. 
s was stated before, Kao Shun and Chang Liao together 


went to smite Kuan Yii, while Lü Pu attacked the younger 
brother’s camp. Both brothers went out to give battle, while 


Liu Pei’s force was held in reserve. Lü Pu attacked from the 
` rear and the brothers were forced to flee. Liu Pei with a few 


_ score horsemen rushed back to P‘eich‘éng. As he approached 

the gate with Lü Pu pressing him close, he shouted to the 
~ soldiers on the wall to lower the drawbridge. Lü Pu was so 
-~ close behind that the archers on the wall feared to shoot lest 
they should wound their lord and so Lii Pu got into the gate. 
The gate guards could not force him back so they scattered in 


= all directions. Lü Pu led his force into the city. 


Liu Ytian-té saw the position was too desperate for him to 


a reach his residence and he must abandon all his family. So he 


hastened through the city and left by the west gate out at 
which he and his scanty following fied for very life. 

When Lü Pu reached the residence he was met by Mi Chu 
who said, “The hero does not destroy a man’s wife. Your rival 
- for the Empire i is Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and my master, always mindful 
= of the good turn you did him at your gate, would not be un- 
grateful. But he could not help going to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and I 


think you will pity him.” 


Lü Pu replied, “We two Bee old friends; how could I bear 


: : to harm his wife and children?” 


~ Whereupon he sent the family to Hsiichou with Mi Chu to 
take care of them. Next Lii led his army into Shantung to 
Yenchou, leaving Kao Shun and Chang Liao to guard Hsiao- 
- p‘el. 

n During these troubles Sun Ch‘ien had also fled out of the 
city and the two brothers, each with a handful of men, had 
got away to the hills. As Liu Pei with his few horsemen was 
making the best of their way from the scene of his defeat he 
heard some one coming up behind him. When he got closer 
. the person proved to be Sun Ch‘ien. ` 

“Alas! I know not the fate of my brothers, whether they 


be alive or dead, and my wife and children are lost to me! 


What can I do? ? said Liu Pei. 
_ Sun replied, “I see nothing better than getting away to Ts‘ ao 
Ts‘ao, whence we may be able to plan our future moves.’ 


ats 


194 San fio, or 


Liu Pei had no better plan to propose and the two men 
directed their way to Hsiitu, choosing bye-roads rather than 
highways. When their small supplies ran out they entered a 
village to beg. But when the people of any place heard that 
Liu of Yüchou was the man who needed help they vied with 
each other in offering all that was required. ; si 

One day they sought shelter at a house whence a yout 
came out and made a low obeisance. They asked his name 
and he gave it as Liu An, of a well known family of hunters. 
Hearing who the visitor was the hunter wished to lay before 
him a dish of game, but though he sought for a long time 
nothing could be found for the table. So he came home, killed © 
his wife and prepared a portion for his guest. While eating 
Liu Pei asked what fiesh it was and the hunter told him “wolf.” 
Yiian-té knew no better and ate his fill. Next day at daylight, © 
just as he was leaving, he went to the stables in the rear to 
get his horse and passing through the kitchen he saw the dead 
body of a woman lying on the table. The flesh of one arm had 
been cut away. Quite startled he asked what this meant, and 
then he knew what he had eaten the night before. He was 
deeply affected at this proof of his host’s regard and the tears 
rained down as he mounted his steed at the gate. è 

“I wish I could go with you,” said Liu An, “but as my ~ 
mother still lives I cannot go so far from home.” 

Liu Pei thanked him and went his way. The party took 
the road by Liangch‘éng and as they were going out they saw 
not far off a thick cloud of dust. When the troop came nearer 
they found they were men of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army, and with 
them they travelled to the main camp where they found Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao himself. He wept at the sad story of Liu’s distress, the ~ 
loss of the city, his brothers and wife and children. When he — 
told him of the hunter who had sacrificed his wife to feed 
them Ts‘ao sent the hunter a present of a hundred ounces of 
silver as a reward.* KEAN 

The march then was continued to Chipei, where Hsiahou 
Yüan welcomed them. They heard that his brother was still 
ill from the wound he had received in the eye. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
went to the sick man’s bedside to see him and had him removed 
to Hstitu for skilled treatment: ni va 

Presently scouts, sent out particularly for tidings of Lü Pu, —__ 
returned saying that he had allied himself with the bandits — 
in the east and they were attacking Yenchou. At this Ts‘ae 
Ts‘ao despatched Ts‘ao Jén with three companies to take 
Peich‘€ng, while he, in conjunction with Liu Pei, moved 
against Lü Pu. f 

_* An editor here remarks in a note, “With a hundred ounces of silver 
Liu An could get himself another wife, but I am afraid no one would 


marry him. And what then? No woman could help reflecting that she 
might have to serve as the ‘game’ course in a chance visitor’s dinner.” 


iny went east. As they neared “Artemisia Pass (Hsiac 
Euan} they met the T‘aishan brigands with three legions 
barring their road. However, they were easily beaten back 
and were chased right up to the pass. 


“Bomance of the Three Hinghems ae 195 


The scouts told Lü Pu, who was then in Hstichou, whither he. 
had gone to start an expedition to save Hsiaop‘ei. He left the 


protection of his city to Ch‘én Kuei and set out with Ch‘én Téng. 
As this latter was starting Ch‘én Kuei said to him, “Re- 
member the words of Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao, that the business of the 
east is in our hands. Now is our moment for Lü Pu is about 
. to suffer defeat.” -74x 
-= “Father, your son can look after the outside. But when he 


returns beaten you must arrange with Mi Chu to keep him 


a out of the city. I shall find a means of escape,’ said Téng. 
ae family is here and he has many friends. How about 
them?” ; 


“I also have a scheme to settle them.”’ 


Then he went to see Lü Pu, to whom he said, ‘‘Hsiichou is - z 


` surrounded and this city will be fiercely attacked. We ought 
_.to provide for possible retreat and I advise storing grain and 
money in Hsiaop‘ei. We could retreat there if the day went 
adversely. Why not see about this in good time?” . 


_ “Your words are indeed wise. I will also send my wife and 


` tittle ones thither,” said Lü. 


The family left under escort and with them was sent muh. 


grain and silver. And then the. soldiers marched to the relief 


of the pass. About half way there Ch‘én Têng said, “Let 


me go first to reconnoitre so that xom, my lord, may advance 
with confidence.” 


R Thus Ch‘én Têng parted company ill his chief and pre- i 
Be ceded him to the pass where he was received by Ch‘eén Kung. 


He said, “The Marquis greatly wonders why -you do not — 


‘advance. He is going to enquire into it.” 

“The enemy is in great force and we cannot be too Caretal. iif 
ed Kung. ‘We are holding the pass and you should persuade 
our master to take steps to guard P‘eich‘éng.”’ 


Ch‘én Téng muttered to himself and said no more. That 


evening he went up to the heights from which he could see 
-Ts‘ao’s army, which was quite close to the pass. Then he 


wrote three notes, tied them to arrows and shot them into 


Ts‘ao’s camp. 

Next day he left and AS back to Lü Pu. “Those 
bandits are about to give up the pass to the enemy, but I have 
left Ch‘én Kung to hold it. You had better make an attack 
- to-night and hold him.” 

(“Had it not been for you the pass ‘would have been lost, i 
said Lü. 

Then he sent Ch‘én Téng baek ia arrange a iene: with 
.Ch‘én Kung for simultaneous action. So Téng returned to 


196 : Dan Rus., or 


Kung to whom he said, ““Ts‘ao’s men have found a secret way 
through the pass and I fear Hsiichou is already lost. You 
ought to go back at once.’ 

At this the pass was abandoned and Kung began to retreat. 
Then the prearranged signal was given. 

Lü Pu advanced in the darkness to the relief of the pass. 
Presently he met Ch‘én Kun’s men, and as neither recognised 
the other in the darkness a fierce battle ensued. Nor was the 
trick discovered till daylight came. ii ; 

While these things were going on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had noted the - 
signal and advanced as fast as possible. The bandits, who - 
alone remained to hold the pass, were easily driven out and — 
‘scattered in all directions. 

When daylight came and the trick was discovered Lü Pu 
and Ch‘én Kung set off together for Hstichou.. But when they 
arrived and summoned the gate, instead of opening the doors 
the men on the wall saluted them with a thick flight of arrows. 
At the same time Mi Chu appeared on the defence tower and 
shouted, “You stole our master’s city and now we are going to ` 
give it back to him. You will not enter here again.” a 

“Where is Ch‘én Kuei? ?” cried Lü Pu, angrily. 

“We have slain him,” was the reply. ‘ 

“Where is that son of his?” said Pu turning to Ch‘én King 

“Do you still hold to your delusion, General, that you ask 
where this specious rogue is?” 

-Lü Pu bade them search through all the ranks, but he was 
not to be found. Then they decided to go to Hsiaop‘ ei. But 
ere they had got half way there suddenly appeared the troops 
under the command of Kao Shun and Chang Liao. They said 
Ch‘én Téng had come to them saying their lord was surrounded 
and wanted help so they had come at once. 3 

“Another trick of that false rogue!” said Lü Pu. “Surely. 
he shall die for this.” 

They went with all speed to the city, only to see as they 
drew near the ensigns of the enemy displayed all along the 
walls, for the city had been taken by Ts‘ao Jén. 

While Lü Pu stood at the foot of the rampart reviling the 
traitor, Ch‘én Téng, Téng himself appeared on the wall and 
pointing to Lü Pu cried, “Did you think that I,’a Minister of 
the. Dynasty, would serve a rebel like you?” | : 

Lü Pu in his wrath was about to make a desperate attack 
but suddenly a great noise was heard and an army came up 
behind him. It was led by no other than Chang Fei. ; 

Kao Shun went to engage him, but he had no chance of 
success. Lü Pu then joined in the fray. Then another army 
appeared, and the leader this time was Ts‘ao Ts‘ao himself, 
and his army rushed to the attack. Seeing that he had no 
hope of victory Lü Pu went away toward the east, with Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao in pursuit. His army marched till they were worn out. 


Homan of the Three tingvoms o 


Then a a. new force under Kian Yü: Holding his 
= Mih ready to strike he called out, “Do not flee, O Lü Pu, 

Juan Yü is waiting for you.” 

Lü Pu joined battie; he was flurried and scarce knew what 
was happening. And soon Chang Fei came up once more. By 
-~ desperate efforts Lü Pu and his men cut their way through 
_ the press and got free. After this they started for Hsiaop‘ei 


as fast as they could travel and Hou Ch‘éng helped to keep- 


the pursuers at bay. 

So the two brothers Kuan Yü and Chang Fei were together 

-~ again after their separation. Both shed tears of joy as they 

-~ told each other what they had seen and suffered. 

“I was on the Haichow road when I heard of you,” said 
Yiin-ch‘ang. “T lost no time in starting.” 

: “And I had been camped in the Mangtang Hills for a long 

~ time. It is happiness to be together again.” — 

So they talked. Then they marched off together to find 
their elder brother, and made their salutations with tears. 
In Yiian-té’s heart sadness and joy intermingled. Next they 
were presented to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and with him they went into 
the captured city. ° 
- Mi Chu soon came with- the welcome news of the safety of 
the family. And the two Ch‘én’s, betrayers of Lü Pu, came to 


- present their salutations. A grand banquet was prepared for 


the officers at which Ts‘ao Ts‘ao presided as host and Ch‘én 
-Kuei and Ytian-té occupied the seats of honour. At the close 

of the banquet Ts‘ao Ts‘ao paid the two Ch‘éns the highest 
‘compliments on their success and rewarded them with the 


p 


revenues of ten departments beside giving the. son the title 


of Fu-po Chang-chiin or General, “‘Queller of Waves.” — 
- Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was very pleased with his success and at once 
< began to scheme for the taking of Hsiaop‘ei, the sole place now 


— Jeft to Lü Pu, where he had taken refuge. Ch‘éng Yü said the | 


—eourse was inadvisable.. 
“Tf Lii Pu be pressed too hard he may get clear by a des- 


| -.perate effort and throw himself into the arms of our especial 


enemy Ytian Shu. These two as allies would be difficult to 
overcome. Rather send a capable man to guard Huainan, one 
able to secure you against Lü Pu on one hand and to hold 
Yiian Shu on the other.. Moreover the bandits are in Shantung 
and still our enemies. ` They must be watched.” 

Ts‘ao replied, “I can keep the whole of Shantung ‘and I will 
request Yiian-té to take the south.” 
“Could I dare withstand your command?” said Viian-té. 

So forthwith Liu Pei, leaving Mi Chu and Chien Yung at 
‘Hsiichou, went south, taking in his train his brothers and 
Sun Ch‘ien. And Ts‘ao led his army to Hsiaop‘ei. 

Lii Pu felt very secure in his refuge. He had good store 
a oe grain and he had the protection of the river, so he sat quiet, 


ï 


198 Dan Kuo, or ' 


satisfied that he could maintain his defence. So he allowed 
Ts‘ao’s army to approach without molestation. 
“You ought to attack Ts‘ao’s army as they come up before 


they have time to make camps and defences. They will only - 


have fatigued men to oppose to your fresh troops and you will 
certainly defeat them.” 
So said Ch‘én Kung but Lü Pu replied, “I have suffered too 


-many defeats lately to take any risk. Wait till they actually 


e 


attack and you will see them floating away on the waters.” 


So he neglected the confidant’s advice and waited till the kai 


enemy had settled into their camp. This done, the attackers 


advanced against the city. From the foot of the wall Ts‘a0 


Ts‘ao called to Lü Pu to listen while he spoke. Lü Pu ascended 


~ to the wall where he stood. 


Ts‘ao addressed him, saying, “When I heard that your family 
and that of Yiian Shu were likely to be united by marriage 


I sent an army against you, for Yiian was guilty of treason 


while you had to your credit the destruction of Tung Cho. 


ae 


For what reason have you sacrificed all your merits to throw 


in your lot with a rebel? It will be over late to. regret when 


this city shall have fallen. But if you surrender and help me 


to support the ruling house you shall not lose your rank of : cy 


Marquis.” 


Lü Pu replied, “If the Minister will retire we may be able . 
‘to discuss the matter.” 


But Ch‘én Kung, standing near his master, began to rail at 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao for a rebel and shot an arrow that struck Te, i i 


plumed helmet. 


“My oath, but I will slay you at least!” cried Ts‘ao, pointing ae 


his finger at Ch‘én Kung. 
Then the attack on the walls began. 


“They have come from far and cannot’ maintain this fob 
- long,” said Ch‘én Kung. “General, go out with your horse. 


and foot and take up a position outside, leaving me to maintain 
the defence with the remainder of our men. If he engages you, 


I will come out and strike at his rear ranks; if he attacks the 


city, you can come to our aid. In a few days their stores will 
fail and we can beat them off. This will place them between 
the horns.” 

“The advice seems good,” said Lü Pu. 

He went back to his palace and prepared his weapons. As 
it was the depth of winter he made his men take plenty of 


-wadded clothing to keep them warm. His wife heard of it 
_ and came to ask whither he was Roine He told her of Ch‘én 


Kung’s plan. 
She said, “My lord, you are kavine an undamaged city, 
abandoning your wife and little ones and going with a paltry 


force. Should any untoward event happen will your handmaid _ ; 


and her lord ever meet again?” 


fiomance of the Three Bingdoms 199 


Lü Pu hesitated, and for three days made no move. ‘Then 


 Ch‘én Kung came to see him again and said, “The enemy are 


all round the city and unless you go out soon you will be quite 
hemmed in.” 


“I am thinking it would be better to maintain a stubborn 
defence,” said Lu. 

“Qur enemies are Mont of food and have sent for supplies 
to Hsütu. These will soon arrive and you should ge out with 
some veterans and intercept the convoy. That loss would be 
a heavy blow.” 
SLU PU agreed ‘and went in to tell his wife the new plan. 
She wept saying, “If you go do you think those others 
equal to the defence of the city? Should anything go wrong 
you would be very sorry. You abandoned me at Ch‘angan 
and it was only through the fortunate kindness of P‘ang 
Hsü that I was hidden from our enemies and rejoined you. 


= Who would have thought you would leave me again? But. 


go, go your way as far as you wish, and do not mind your 


Ba wite r? 


- And she wept bitterly. Lü Pu very sadly went to take leave 
of Little Cicada who said, “You are my lord, you must not be 
careless and ride out alone.” 

“You need not fear; with my mighty halberd and the Hare, 
my swift steed, who dare come near me?” 

He went out. He met Ch‘én Kung and said, “That story 
about supplies for Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao is all false, one of his many 
ruses. I am not going to stir.” 

- Ch‘én Kung sighed; he felt all was lost. 

“We shall die and no man shall know our burying place,” 
said he. 

- Thereupon Lü Pu remained in his own quarters with his 
~ women folk, drinking freely to dissipate his sorrows. Two of 


font Ris advisers went in and proposed that he should write to the 
- powerful Yiian Shu for help. Yiian would hardly refuse to 


rescue the affianced bride of his son. So he wrote and bade 


_ these two take the letter. : 


Hsü Sst said, “You ought to send a strong escort with us to 
force a way through. X 
So Lü told off a company and two captains to conduct his 


-. messenger beyond the pass. They started that same night at 


the second watch, Chang Liao leading and Ho Ming bringing 
up the rear. They got out of the city, crept past Ytian-té’s 
camp and got beyond the danger zone. Then half the escort 
. went on and Chang Liao led the remainder back toward the 
city. At the pass he found Ytin-ch‘ang waiting. However, at 
that moment Kao Shun came to his help and they all returned 
and re-entered the gates. 

_ < The two messengers presently reached Shouch‘un, saw Yuan 

Shu and presented the letter. 


200 . . Ban Kwo, or 


“How is this?” said Shu. “Formerly he slew my messenger 
and repudiated the marriage; now he sends to ask for it.” 

“Tt is all due to the vile plans of that monster Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
I pray you, Illustrious ony to consider it carefully,” replied 
Ssù. 

“But if your master was not hemmed in by his enemy and 
in imminent danger he would never have thought of renewing 
this proposal of marriage.’ 

The messengers said, “You may decide not to help him, nee 
the teeth are cold when the lips are gone. It will not make 
for your happiness and comfort.” 

Said Shu, “Féng-hsien is unreliable; tell him that I will 
send soldiers after the girl has arrived here.” 

This was final and the two messengers took leave. When 
the party reached Ytian-té’s camp they decided to try to get 
through in the darkness, the escort remaining behind to protect 

their rear. They tried that very night and the two messengers 
crept across without discovery. But the escort found them- 


selves faced by Chang Fei. Ho Ming tried to fight but was — 
captured in the very first bout and the men of his half company ~ 


were either killed or they fled. 


The prisoner was taken to Ytian-té, who forwarded him to- ` 


the main camp. There he told the story of the marriage and 
the scheme to save the city. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was angry and ordered 
the execution of the prisoner at the main gate. 

Then he sent orders to each camp to exercise the greatest 
diligence with threats of rigorous punishment of the officers 
of any corps that permitted any communication between the 
besieged and the outer world. 

Every soldier felt mightily afraid.  Yüan-tê returned to 
camp and cautioned his brothers saying, “We are in the most 
important place with regard to Huainan and you must be very 
careful not to allow any breach of this command.” 

Chang Fei was inclined to grumble, “We have just captured | 
one of the enemy’s leaders,” said he, “and there is no word of 
praise or reward for us; nothing but new orders: and threats. 
What do you make of that? age 

“You are wrong to complain,” said Yiian-té. ‘These are 
orders of the Commander-in-Chief and what would happen. 
were there no orders? Do not disobey them, brother. icy 

They promised obedience and withdrew. 

In the meantime the messengers had got back to bü Pu and 

told him what Yüan Shu had said, that if the ae came the 
soldiers should go. 

“But how can she be sent?” said Pu. 

“That is the difficulty. Ho Ming’s capture means that Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao knows the whole plan of getting help from the south. 
I do not see how any one but you yourself could hope to get — 
through the close siege.” 


- fiomance of the bree kingvoms O 2 


“Suppose we tried, to-day?” said Lü Pa. 

“This is an ill- omened day; you must not try to-day. To- 
morrow is a very lucky day, especially in the evening, for any 
military action.” 


Then Lü Pu ordered Chang Liao and Kao Shun to get a 


ready three companies for the venture and to prepare a light 
carriage. He would lead till they had got a couple of hundred ` 
li away. Thence they could escort the bride-elect the remainder 
`of the way to her new home. 

Next evening toward the second watch Lii Pu wrapped up 
` his daughter in soft wadded garments, bound her about with 
a mailed coat and took her on his back. Then with his mighty 
halberd in hand, he mounted his steed and rode at the head of 
- the cavalcade out of the city gate. The two captains followed. 


In this order they approached Yiian-té’s camp. The drums. i 
_ at once beat the alarm and the two younger brothers barred 


the way. 
- “Stop!” they shouted. 
Lü Pu had no desire to fight; all he wished was to get 


through so he made for a side road. Yüan-tê came in pursuit 
` and the two parties engaged. Brave as he might be, Lü Pu 


was almost helpless now that he was hampered by a girl on 


his shoulders, whom he was desperately anxious to preserve 
-< from hurt. Beside other parties came up all shouting and 
attacking and he had no alternative but to give up his project 


and return into the city. He reached his palace very sad at 


- heart. The besiegers returned to camp well pleased that no 
. one had got beyond their lines. 


Lü Pu found consolation in the wine cup. The siege had 
gone on for two months and still the city stood, when they 


ee heard that Chang Yang, Prefect of Honei, had been inclined 
to come to the help of Lü Pu. But one of his subordinates had. 
assassinated him and was bringing his head as an offering to 


-Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, when he also had been slain by one of the Prefect’s 
- friends. “He had then gone to Tach‘éng. 


In the camp of the besiegers there now arose much mur- — 
muring. The officers grumbled saying, “Though Chang Yang, 
- who meant to hurt us, is happily no more, yet we are threatened 


on the north by Yiian Shao and on the east Piao Hsiu is a 
menace. Here we meet with no success against the city. We 
are for leaving Lü Pu to his fate and returning home. We 
need a rest.” 

- Among them Hstin Yü fought against this discontent. “You 
‘must not act like this,” said he. “Lü Pu has lost much and his 
spirit is broken. The spirit of the leader expresses that of 
his men, and when the leader fails his men do not fight. Ch‘én 
Kung is clever but nothing is done. Lü Pu broken, Ch‘én Kung 
without decision, it only needs a sharp attack and we shall 
succeed. his 


AGA Bese eats Ue ee KELIP I 
Cee UIRE 


202 . Ban Buo, or 


“I have a plan to propose,” said Kuo Chia, “a plan to over- 
come the city at once; it beats twenty legions.” 

“T suppose you mean drowning the city,’ said Hsün Yü. 

“That is it,” said the proposer, smiling. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao accepted the suggestion with joy and set his 
men to cut the banks of the I and Sst Rivers, and moved his 
men to the high ground whence they watched the drowning 
out of Hsiaop‘ei. Only the east gate remained clear of water. 

The besieged soldiers hastened to their leader. He said, 
“Why should I fear? My good horse can go as well through the - 
water as over the land.” And he again returned to the wine cup 
for consolation, drinking deeply with his wife and concubine. 

The continual drinking bouts told at last and Lü Pu began 
to look dissipated. Seeing himself in a mirror one day he was 
startled at the change and said to himself, “I am injuring 
myself with wine; no more from this day forward. uy 

He then issued an order that no one should drink wine under 
penalty of death. 

Now one of his captains, Hou Ch‘éng, lost fifteen horses, 
stolen by one Hou. T'ss‘ao, who intended them for Ytian-té. The 
owner found out where they were, went out after them and ~ 
recovered them. And his colleagues congratulated him on his 
success. To celebrate the occasion he brewed a few catties of 
wine to be drunk at the feast, but thinking his chief might find | 
him in fault he sent the bottles of wine to his palace with a 
petition explaining that by virtue of his lord’s warlike renown 
he had recovered his horses and asking that he and his com- 
rades might be allowed a little wine at their feast. 
= Lü Pu took it very angrily saying, “When I have. forbidden 
all wine you brew some and begin to give feasts; you are 
simply defying me.” Whereupon ke ordered the ‘officer to 
instant execution. However, a number of his colleagues came © 
_in and interceded and after a time Lü Pu softened. 

“You ought to lose your head for this disobedience, but for 
the sake of your colleagues the punishment shall be reduced 
to a hundred strokes.” 

They tried to beg him off this, but only succeeded i in reducing 
the number of blows to one half. 

When the sentence had been carried out and the offender was 
permitted to return home his colleagues came sadly to console 
him. 

“Had it not. been for you I ona have been put to death,” 
said Hou Ch‘éng. 

Sung Hsien replied, “All he cares for is his family, there is 
no pity for any one else. We are no more than the weeds by 
the roadside.” 

Wei Hsii said, “The city is besieged, the water is drowning 
us out. There will not be much more of this for we may die 
any day.” 


Romance of the Three Séingdoms Pa 203 


“He is a beast, with neither a sense of humani nor of right. 


Let us leave him, ” said Hsien. 


“Hei is not worth fighting for. The best we could. do would 


- be to seize him and hand him over to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.” 
“I was punished because I got my horses back again, yet all 


he trusts in is his own steed. If you two will betray the gate 
and seize Lü Pu I will steal the horse and go out to Ts‘ ao’s 
camp.” 

They settled how to carry out the plot and that very night 


Hou Ch‘éng sneaked into the stables and got the Hare away. 


He hastened to the east gate which was opened to let him 


through. The guard made a maena of pursuing him but Lease 
_ only a pretence. f 

Hou Ch‘éng reached the besiegers’ camp, E TA the horse 

_ and told Ts‘ao what had been arranged. They would show a 


white flag and open the gates to his army. Hearing this Ts‘ao 
had a few notifications written out, which were attached to 
arrows and shot over the walls. This is one of them :—“The 
General Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has received a command to destroy Lü Pu. 
Those who interfere with the operations of his grand army, 
whatever their rank, shall be put to death in the gate on the 
day that the city shall be captured. Should any one capture 
Lu. Pu or bring his head he shall be well rewarded. Let all 


as take note of this.” 


Next day at daylight a tremendous kabbub was heard with: 
out the city and Lü Pu, halberd in hand, hasted to the wall to 


see what it meant. As he went from gate to gate inspecting 

the defences and guards he censured Wei Hsii for letting Hou 

Ch‘éng escape and get away with his horse. He threatened to 

punish him. But just then the besiegers began a fierce attack —_ 
_. as the white flag had just appeared and Lü Pu had to turn all 
- his energies to defence. The assault lasted till noon, when the | 


attacking force drew off for a time. 
Lü Pu was taking a rest in the tower and fell Haleg in his 


- chair. Sun Hsien sent away his attendants, and when they 


had gone he stole his master’s weapon, the halberd in which 


he trusted. Then he and Wei Hsii fell upon Lü together and A pe 


before he was well awake had bound him with cords, trussing 
him so that he could not move. Lü Pu shouted for his men, 


` but they were driven off by the two traitors and could not 


come near. Then a white flag was shown and the besiegers 
again approached the city. The traitors shouted out that Lü 
Pu was a prisoner. But Hsiahou Yüan could hardly believe it 
till they threw down the famous halberd. 

The gates were flung open and the enemy entered the city. 
Kao Shun and Chang Liao, who were at the opposite gate, were 


surrounded and cut off by the water and helpless. They were 
= captured. Ch‘én Kung made a dash to the south gate but was 
-~ also taken. Presently Ts‘ao Ts‘ao > entered and at once gave 


204 -an Buo, or 
4 


orders to turn the streams back into their usual courses. He 
put out proclamations soothing the people. 

He and Liu Pei seated themselves side by side in the White 
Gate Tower, with Kuan Yü and Chang Fei in attendance. The ~ 
captives, to the number of a thousand, were brought before 
them. Lü Pu looked a pitiable object. Although a very tall 
man he was tied up in a veritable ball. 

“The bonds are very tight,” cried he, “I beseech you to loosen - 
them.” 

“A bound Geer frets of course, replied Ts‘ao. 

Seeing the three traitors standing there looking pleased at 
their success Pu said, “I treated you all well enough; how could 
you turn against me?” 

Said Sung Hsien, “You listened to the words of your women, 
but rejected the advice of your captains. Was not that mean? p? 
Lü Pu was silent. Then Kao Shun was'brought forward. 

“What have you to say?” asked Ts‘ao. 

Shun sulkily held his tongue and was ordered out to | 
execution. 

Next Ch‘én Kung was led in. 

‘“T hope you have been well since we. last saw each other, 
Kungt‘ai?” said Ts‘ao. . i 

“Your ways were crooked and so I left you,” said Ch‘én. 

“You say I was crooked; and what of your serving. Lü Pu?” 

“Though: he was a fool, he did not resemble you in deceit and 
wickedness.” 

“You say you are able enough and clever, but what about 
your position to-day?” 

Turning toward Lii Pu, Ch‘én Kung said, “This man would 

-not follow my advice. Had he done so he would not now be a 
captive.” i 

“What think you ought to be done about this day’ s work?” » 
said Ts‘ao. 

“There is death for me to-day and that is the end,” shouted 
Ch‘êr Kung. Š 

oe well for you; but what of your mother and your 
wife?” 

“It is said that he who rules with due regard to filial piety 
does not harm a man’s family; he who would show benevolence — 
does not cut off the sacrifices at a man’s tomb. My mother and 
my wife are in your hands. But since I am your prisoner I 
pray you to slay me quickly and not to try to harrow my 
feelings.” 

Ts‘ao’s heart still leaned toward mercy, but Ch‘én Kung 
turned and walked away, repulsing the attendants who would — 
stop him. Ts‘ao rose from his place and walked with him, the 
tears falling from his eyes. Ch‘én Kung never looked at him. 
Turning to his men Ts‘ao said, “Let his mother and family be 
taken to Hsütu and looked after. This insolent fellow must die.” 


ane Romance of the Three Kingdoms 205 


The condemned man heard him but uttered no word. He 
stretched out his neck for the blow. Tears sprang to the eyes 


_ of all present. His remains were eh tated coffined and 
` buried in Hsiitu. 


A peer pitying his fate says :— 


Neither hope of life nor fear of death moved' him. 
How brave was he, a hero indeed! 

But his lord heeded not his words, 

Wherefore in vain possessed he great talents. 
Nevertheless, in that hé stood by his master, 

To parting with wife and mother, 

He merits our pity and profound respect. 

Who would not resemble Kung-t‘ai 

That day he died at the White Gate? 


While Ts‘ao sadly escorted Ch‘én Kung on the way to den 
Lu Pu appealed to Yiian-té, “Noble Sir, you sit there an 
honoured guest while poor I lie bound at your feet. Will you 
not utter one word to alleviate my lot?” 


= _Ytian-té nodded. As Ts‘ao Ts‘ao returned to his place his - : 
- prisoner called out, “Your only trouble, Illustrious Sir, is my- ` 
- self and Iam on your side now. You take the lead, I will help ; 


. you and together the world is at our feet.” 
“What do you think?” said Ts‘ao turning to Liu Pei. 

“You are willing to forget the episodes of Ting Ytian and 
Tung Cho?” . 

“Truly the lout is not to be trusted,” said Lü Pu, looking at 
Yiian-té. 

“Strangle and expose,” said Ts‘ao. 

As he was led away the prisoner turned once more to Ytian- 
tê, “You long-eared lout, you forget now the service I rendered 
you that day at my yamén gate, when my arrow hit the mark.” 

Just then some one shouted; “Lii Pu, O fool! death is but 


<- death, and why are you scared at it?” 


Every one turned to look; the lictors were hustling Chang 
i dee to the place of judgement. 
A poet has written upon the death of Lü Pu:— 


The flood spreads wide, the city drowns, | 
Its lord is captive. Nought avails 

His courser’s speed or halberd’s thrust. 
The tiger erstwhile fierce, now whines 
‘For mercy. Ts‘ao had meted him 

Full well, a faleon flown at will 

And hungry kept. Poor fool! He let 
Ch‘én Kung’s advice be overborne 

By harem tattle; vainly now 

He rails against the Long-eared Childe. 


- And another poem says :— 


Bound is the hungry tiger, eater of men, for whom is no pity, 
Since the blood of his victims is fresh and not yet dry. 
Yiian-té spoke no word in favour of Lü Pu, ` 

To whom even a father’s life was not sacred. 

How could he save him to be a menace to Ts‘ao Man. 


209 non ge maaan TATE Ys Neg ies k 


‘It was recorded earlier that the executioners were hustling 
Chang Liao forward. Pointing to him as he stood there Ts‘ ao 
said, “He has a fine face.” 

“You. ‘were not likely to forget me; you saw me before in 
P‘uyang,” said Liao. ' 

“OQ, so you remember me, eh?” 

“Yes; more’s the pity.” 

“Pity for what?” 

“That the fire that day was “not fierce enough to burn you 
up, rebel that you are.’ 

Ts‘ao began to get angry. “How dare'you insult me?” cried 
he and lifted his sword to kill the bold speaker. 

The undaunted Chang Liao never changed colour, but 
stretched out his neck for the blow. Then a man behind 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao caught his arm and in front of him another 
dropped on his knees, saying, “O Minister, I pran, thee stay 
thy hand.” 

Lü Pu whining was not spared, 
Railing Chang far better fared. 

how.. was it that saved ae Liao? The heri chapter ‘wink, 

show 


Í 


Se 


Sedan Rese 
eR eas en NTS 


Be Lin. ~ oie 
Kuan said, “I know. him well as loyal and righteous. Iwil = 


CHAPTER XX. 


Ts‘Ao A-MAN ORGANISES A HUNTING EXPEDITION: 
TUNG, “STATE UNCLE, rA RECEIVES A COMMAND IN THE PALACE.. 


es Tie last chapter baid that Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao was checked in his 
angry attack upon Chang Liao. It was Liu Pei who held his 


arm and Kuan. Yiin-ch‘ang who knelt before him. 
“A man as eee -hearted as he is should be saved,” said 


vouch for him with my own life.” 
Ts‘ao threw aside his sword. “I also ae Wéen-yiian to be 


loyal and good; I was just testing him,” said he. 


He loosed the prisoner’s bonds with his own hands, had a 


change of dress brought in and clothed him therewith. Then 
- he was led to a seat of honour. This kindly treatment sank 
= deep into Chang’s heart and he hastened to declare formally | 
that he yielded. And then he was given a rank and the title 
of marquis. He was sent on a mission to win over Tsang Pa, 


who hearing what had happened, came forthwith and gave in 


; - his submission. He was graciously received and his former | 
- colleagues also yielded, with the exception of Chang Hsi, who 
remained obdurate. All these former enemies who came over - 


were kindly treated and given posts of responsibility wherein 


F they might prove the reality of their conversion. Lü Pu’ s 
i family were sent to the capital. 


After the soldiers had been rewarded a feastings the ` 
eamp was broken up and the army moved away to Hsiitu. 


Passing through Hstichou the people lined the roads and 
. burned incense in honour of the victors. They algo petitioned © 


that Liu Pei should be their governor. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao replied, “Liu Shih-chiin has rendered great 
services. You must wait till he has been received in audience 
and obtained his reward. After that he shall be sent here.” 

Ch‘é Chou, a General of Cavalry, was given command of 


, i Hsiichou for the moment. After the army had arrived at the 


capital rewards were granted to all the officers who had been 
in the expedition. Liu Ytian-té was retained in the capital, 


~ lodging in an annexe to the Minister’s palace. Soon after a 
. Court was held and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao represented the services of 
-Yiian-té who was presented to the Emperor Hsien. Dressed in 


Court robes he bowed at the lower end of the audience arena. 


The Emperor called him to the Hall and asked his ancestry. _ 


208 San Ruo, or 


Liu Pei replied, “Thy servant is the son of Liu Hung, rand- 
son of Liu Hsiung, who was a direct descendant of Prince 
Ching of Chungshan, who was the great-great- grandson of His 
Majesty the Emperor Ching (about 150 B.c.)” 7 

The Emperor bade them bring forth the Books of the 
Genealogies and therefrom a secretary read: “The filial 
Emperor Ching begat fourteen sons of whom the seventh was 
Liu Shêng, Prince Ching of Chungshan. Shêng begat Chên, 


\ 


Marquis (T‘ing-hou) of Luch‘éng; Chén begat Ang, Marquis — HA 


‘Pʻei; Ang begat Lu, Marquis Chang; Lu begat Lien, Marquis — 


of Ishui; Lien begat Ying, Marquis of Ch‘inyang; Ying begat ~~ 


Chien, Marquis Ankuo; Chien begat Ai, Marquis Kuanglu; 
Ai begat Hsien, Marquis of Chiaoshui; Hsien begat Hsu, 
Marquis of Tsuyi; ; Hsü begat I, Marquis of Ch‘iyang; I begat 
Pi, Marquis of Yuiantsé; Pi begat Ta, Marquis of Yingch‘uan; © 
Ta begat Pu-i, Marquis of Fêngling; Pu-i begat Hui, Marquis 
of Chich‘uan; Hui begat Hsiung, Governor of the Eastern 
Districts ; Hsiung begat Hung, who held no office or rank and ; 
Liu Pei is his son.’ 
The Emperor compared this with the registers of the 
Imperial House and found by them that Liu Pei was his uncle 
by descent. He seemed greatly pleased and requested Liu Pei . 
to go into one of the side chambers where he might perform 
the ceremonial obeisance prescribed for a nephew to his uncle. 


In his heart he rejoiced to have this heroic warrior-uncle asa- 


powerful supporter against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who really held all the 


power in his own hands. The Emperor knew himself to be a - ‘ 


mere puppet. He conferred upon his uncle, the rank of General ~ 
. and the title of Marquis of Ich‘éng. aa 

When the banquet was concluded Ytian-té thanked the 
Emperor and went out of the palace. And from this time he 
was very generally styled Liu, “Uncle of the Emperor.” 

When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao returned to his palace Hsün Yü and his - 
fellow advisers went in to see him. Hsün Yü said, “It is no 
advantage to you, Illustrious Sir, that the Emperor recognises 
Liu as an uncle.” 

“He may be recognised as uncle, but he is under my 
orders since I control the decrees of the throne. ‘He will be 
all the more ready to obey. Beside I will keep him here 
under the pretence of having- him near his sovereign and 
he will be entirely in my hands. I have nothing to fear. 
The man I fear is Yang Piao, who is a relative of the two 
Ytians. Should Yang conspire with them he is an enemy 
within and might do mueh harm. He will have to be 
removed.” 


Hence Ts‘ao sent a secret emissary to say that Yang Piao ~~ 


was intriguing with Yiian Shu and on this charge Piao was 
arrested and imprisoned. And his death would have been — 
compassed had his enemy dared. 


H country. 


=a bold stroke which terrified i bulk of officers and reduced 
-them to silence. 


= He said, “Illustrious Sir, your prestige grows daily; why not 
va Feudatory Princes?” i 


a reply. “I must be careful. I am going to propose a royal hunt. 
' to try to find out the best line to follow.” 


horses, famous falcons and pedigree hounds, and prepared 


| ~ Emperor said he feared it was an improper thing to do. 


i hunt joined the expedition. He rode a saddle horse, carried an _ 


while their escort followed them. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rode a dun horse 


‘of guards outside the city. 


yearly at each of the four seasons in order to show their 


order of the seasons. Now that ‘the whole country is in confu- — 
sion it would be wise to inaugurate a hunt in order to train 


A Aon of the ares ingvoms Si 209. ‘i f 


‘But just then ihe Prefect of Pohai, K‘ung Jung, was at thes 
capital and he remonstrated with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saying, “Yang i Tun 


` comes from a family famed for virtue for at least four | ae 


generations; you cannot trump up so foolish a charge as that 
against him.” . ‘ee 
“Tt is the Court,” retorted Ts‘ao. Be, 
“If Prince Ch‘éng had put Duke Chao to death, oa Duke. 
Chou have pretended ignorance ?”’ a 
So Ts‘ao had to relinquish the attempt, but he took away 
Yang’s offices and banished him to his family estate in the . 


A certain Chao Yen, a minor official but an opponent of the 
Minister, sent up a memorial impeaching Ts‘ao for having 
removed a Minister of State from office without a decree. 
Ts‘ao’s reply to this was the arrest of Chao and his execution, 

Ch‘éng Yii advised Ts‘ao to assume a more definite position: 
seize the opportunity to take the position of Chief of the 


“There are still too many supporters of the Court, ” was the 


This expedition being decided upon they got together fleet 
bows and arrows in readiness. They mustered a strong force 

When the Minister proposed the hunting ' expedition the 

‘Ts‘ao replied, “In ancient times rulers made four expeditions 
strength. They were called Sou, Miao, Hsien and Shou, in the 
the army. I am sure Your Majesty will approve.” | 

So the Emperor with the full paraphernalia for an Imperial 


inlaid bow, and his quiver was filled with gold-tipped arrows. 
His chariot followed behind. The three brothers were in the 


Imperial train, each with his bow and quiver. Each wore a 


breastplate under the outer robe and held his especial weapon, 


called “Flying Lightning” and the army was ten legions strong. 
The hunt took place in Hstit‘ien and the legions spread out 
as guards round the hunting arena which extended over some 


- two hundred square li. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rode even with the Em- 
` peror, the horses’ heads alternating in the lead. The imperial 
= suite immediately following were ages in Ts‘ao’s confidence. 


14 


210. Dan Kuo, or 


x: 
The other officers, civil and military, lagged behind, for who 
dared press forward into the midst of Ts‘ao’s partizans? 

One day the Emperor was riding near Hsiit‘ien and noticed 
his newly found uncle repectfully standing by the roadside. 

“I should like to see my uncle display his hunting skill,” 
said the Emperor. 

Liu Pei mounted his steed at once. Just then a hare started 
from its form; Yiian-té shot and hit it with the first arrow. 

The Emperor, much struck by this display, rode away over 
a slope. Suddenly a deer broke out of the thicket. He shot. 
three arrows at it but all missed. 

“You try,” said the Emperor turning to Ts‘ao. 

“Lend me Your Majesty’s bow,” he replied, and taking the 


inlaid bow and the golden-barbed arrows he pulled the bow 
and hit the deer in the shoulder at the first shot. It fell in the ~ 


grass and could not run. 

Now the crowd of officers seeing the golden-barbed arrow 
sticking in the wound concluded at once that the shot was the 
Emperor’s, so they rushed up and shouted ““Wansui! O King, 
live for ever!” Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rode out pushing past the Emperor 
and acknowledged the congratulations. , 

They alliturned pale. What did this mean? Liu Pei’s © 
brother Kuan who was behind him was especially angry. The- 
sleeping caterpillar eyebrows stood up fiercely and the red 
phoenix eyes glared as, sword in hand, he rode hastily forth 
to cut down the audacious Minister for his impertinence. 
However, his elder brother hastily waved him back and shot _ 
at him a meaning glance so that he stopped and made no 
further move. 

Yiian-te bowing toward Ts‘ ao said, “Most sincere feket 
tions! A truly supernatural shot, such as few have achieved!” 
~ “It is only the enormous good fortune of the Son of Heaven! ae 
said Ts‘ao with a smile. 

Then he turned his steed and felicitated the Emperor. But 
he did not return the bow; he hung it over his own shoulder 
instead. 

The hunt finished with banqueting and when the entertain- 
ments were over they returned to the capital, all glad of some 
repose after the expedition. Kuan Yü was still full of the — 
Minister’s breach of decorum. 

One day he said, “Brother, why did you prevent me from 
killing that rebel and so ridding the world of a scoundrel? : 
He insults the Emperor and ignores everybody else.” 

“When you throw stones at a rat, beware of the vase,’ 
quoted Yüan-tê. ‘“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was only a horse’s head away 
from Our Lord and in the midst of a crowd of his partizans. 
In that momentary burst of anger, if you had struck and 


failed, and harm had come to the Emperor, what an awful ; 


crime would. have been laid to us!” 


Biv 


Romance of the Three fingdoms 211 


“If we do not rid the world of him to-day, a worse evil will 
come of it,” said Kuan. 
“But be discreet, my brother. Such matters cannot be 


lightly discussed.” 


The Emperor sadly returned to his palace. With tears in 
his eyes he related what had occurred in the hunt to his consort 
the Empress Fu. 

“Alas for me!” said he. From the first days of my accession 
one vicious minister has succeeded another. I was the victim 
of Tung -Cho’s evil machinations; then followed the rebellion 
of Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Ssü. You and I had to bear sorrows such 
as no others have borne. Then came this Ts‘ao Ts‘ao as one 
who would maintain the imperial dignity, but he has seized 
upon all real authority and does as he wishes. He works 
continually for his own glorification and I never see him but 
my back pricks. These last few days in the hunting field he 
went in front of me and acknowledged the cheers of the crowd. 
He is so extremely rude that I feel sure he has sinister designs 
against me. Alas, my wife, we know not when our end may 
come!” 

“In a whole Court full of nobles who have eaten the bread of 


_ Han, is there not one who will save his country?” said she. 


Thus spake the Empress, and at the same moment there 


stepped in a man who said, “Grieve not, O Imperial Pair! 


I can find a saviour for the country.” 

_ And who was this? It was none other than the father of 
the Empress, Fu Wan. — 

= “Have you heard of Ts‘ao -Ts‘ao’s wanton and perverse 
behaviour?” said the Emperor, drying his eyes. 

“You mean the deer shooting? Who did not see that indeed? 
But the whole Court is full of his clan or his creatures. With 
the exception of the relatives of your Consort there is not one 
loyal enough to deal with a rebel. I have no authority and 


ve = can do nothing, but there is General Tung Ch‘éng, the State 


Uncle, who could do it.” 

“Could Uncle Tung come in to consult about this? I know 
he has had much experience of State troubles.” 

Wan replied, “Every one of your attendants is a partizan of 


-Ts‘ao’s and this sort of thing must be kept most profoundly 
~~ secret or the consequence will .be most serious.’ 


“Then what can be done?” said the Emperor. 
“The only plan I can think of is to send gifts of a robe and 


a jade girdle to Tung, and in the lining of the girdle hide a 


secret edict authorising him to take certain steps. When he 
gets home and has read the edict he can elaborate plans as 
quickly as possible and neither the spirits above nor the 


- demons below will know anything about them.” 


The Emperor approved and Fu Wan went out. The Em- 


4 peror then with his own hand drew up a decree, writing it 


212; an uo, or 


ivy 


| with blood drawn by biting his finger. He gave the document 


to his consort to sew into the purple lining of the girdle. 
When all was done he put on the robe and girded it with the 
girdle. . Next he bade one of the attendants summon Uncle } 
Tung to the palace. 

Tung Ch‘éng came and after the ceremonies were finished 
the Emperor said, “A few nights ago I was talking with the 
Empress of the terrible days of the rebellion and we thought. 
of your good services then, therefore we have called you in to: 
reward you.” 

The minister bowed his head in thanks. Then the Emperor . 
led Tung out of the Reception Hall to the T‘az Miao or Temple — 
of Ancestors, and they went to the gallery of Worthy Ministers, 
where the Emperor burned incense and performed the usual cere- 
monies. After this they went to see the portraits and among: 
them was one of the Founder of the Dynasty, Han Kao-Tsu. _ 

“Whence sprang our great ancestor and how did he begin. 
his great achievement?” said the Emperor. K 
= “Your Majesty is pleased to joke with thy geet ” said 
Tung Ch‘éng, rather startled at the question. “Who does not. 


know the deeds of the Sacred Ancestor? He began life as a ~ 


minor official in Sstshang. There gripping his sword he slew | 


the White Serpent, the beginning of his struggle for the right. 
_ Speedily he mastered the Empire; in three years had destroyed. 


Ts‘in and, in five, also Ch‘u. Thus he set up a Dynasty that. 
shall endure for ever.’ 
“Such heroic forefathers! such weakling descendants! How . 


' gad it is!’ said the Emperor. 


Pointing to the portraits right and left he continued, “Are 
not these two Chang Liang, Marquis Liu, and Hsiao Ho, 
Marquis 'Ts‘uan?” 

“Certainly. Your great ancestor was greatly assisted by 
these two.” 

The Emperor glanced right bud left. His attendants were 
rather far away. Then he whispered to Tung, Ch'êng, ‘Vous! 
like these two, must stand by me.’ 

“My poor services are of no worth; I do not compare with 
those men,” said the Uncle. ( 

“I remember ‘that you saved me at the western capital. I 
have never forgotten and I could never reward you.” Then 
pointing to his own robe the Emperor continued, “You must 
wear this robe of mine, girded with my own girdle, and it will 
be as though you are always near your Emperor.” 

Tung Ch‘éng bowed his gratitude while the Emperor, taking 
off the robe, presented it to his faithful Minister. At the same 
time he whispered, “Examine it closely when you get home, 
and help your Emperor carry out his intention.” 

Tung Ch‘éng understood. He put on the robe and the girdle, 
took leave and.left the chamber. 


“flomance of the Three kingdoms ela 


The news of the audience for Tung Ch‘éng had heen taken 


to the Minister, who at once went to the Palace and arrived 


as Tung Ch‘éng was passing out at the gate. They met face 


to face and Tung Ch‘éng could in nowise avoid him. He 
went to the side of the road and made his obeisance. 
“Where are you from, State Uncle?” asked Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


“His Majesty summoned me into the Palace and has given 


. me this robe and beautiful girdle.” 

“Why did he give you these?” 

“He had not forgotten that I saved his life in the old days.” 

“Take it off and let me see it.” 

Tung Ch‘éng who knew that a secret decree was hidden 
“away somewhere in the garments was afraid Ts‘ao Ts‘ao would 
notice a breach somewhere in the material, so he hesitated 


$ and did not obey. But the tyrant called his servants. So he 
took off the girdle. Then Ts‘ao looked it over carefully. “It | 
certainly is a very handsome girdle,” said he. “Now take off | 


the robe and let me look at that.” 
Tung Ch‘éng’s heart was melting with fear but he ened not 


disobey. So he handed over the robe. Ts‘ao took it and held 
it up against the sun with his own hand and minutely examined 


every part of it. When he had done this he put it on, girded 


2 i ‘it with the girdle and turning to his suite said, “How is it for. 


length?” ) 
-= “Beautiful!” they ouod. 

Turning to Tung Ch‘éng he said, “will - you give these to 
me? ee i 

“My King’s presents to me I dare not give to- another. Let 
me give you another robe in its stead,” said Tung. 

“Ts there not some intrigue connected with these presents? 
‘I am sure there is,” said Ts‘ao. 

“How could I dare?’ said Tung, trembling. “If you are so 
“set upon it then I must give it up.’ 
a “How could I take away what your King has given you? 
It was all a joke,” said the Minister. 


He returned both robe and girdle and their owner made the 


pest of his way home. When night came and he was alone in 
his library, he took out the robe and looked over ake inch of 
it most carefully. He found nothing. 
“He gave me a robe and a girdle and bade me look at them 
carefully. That means there is something to be looked for 
“but I can find no trace of it. What does it _mean?” he 
soliloquised. 
Then he lifted the girdle and examined that. The jade plates 
were carved into the semblance of small dragons interlaced 
among flowers. The lining was of purple silk. All was sewn 


4 _ together most carefully and neatly and he could find nothing 


out of the common. He was puzzled. He laid the belt on the 
table. Presently he picked it up and looked at it again. He 


214 Dan Kuo, or ‘ 


spent long hours over it but in vain. He leaned over on the - 
small table, his head resting on his hands and was almost- 
asleep, when a candle snuff fell down upon the girdle and 
burned a hole in the lining. He hastily shook it off, but the 
mischief was done: a small hole had been burned in the silken 
lining, and through this there appeared something white 
with blood red marks. He hastily ripped it open and drew 
out the decree written by the hand of the Emperor himself 
in characters of blood. 

It read, “Of human relationships, that between father tue 
son stands first; of the various social. ties that between Prince 
and Minister stands highest. To-day Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, the wicked, 
is a real tyrant, treating even his Prince with indignity. With 
the support of his faction and his army he has destroyed the 
principles of government. By conferring rewards and inflict- 
ing punishments he has reduced the Emperor to a nonentity. 
I have grieved over this day and night. I have feared the 
Empire would be ruined. $ 

“You are a high Minister of State and my own relative. You 
must recall the difficulties of the great Founder’s early days. 
and draw together the loyal and right-minded to destroy this 
evil faction and restore the prerogatives of the Throne. Such 
a deed would be indeed an extreme joy to the pee = of my 
ancestors. 

“This decree, written in plead dii from my own veins, 
is confided to a noble who is to be most careful not to fail in 
executing his Emperor’s design. 

“Given in the era Established Tranquillity, fourth year and 
the third month of Spring.” 

So ran the decree and Tung Ch‘éng read it with streaming ~ 
eyes. There was no sleep for him that night. Early in the 
morning he returned to his library and re-read it. No plan 


suggested’ itself. He laid the decree down on the table and ~ } 


sought in the depths of his mind for some scheme to destroy 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, but could not decide upon any. And he fell asleep 
leaning over his table. 

It happened that a certain official, Wang Tzu-fu, with whom 
he was on terms of great intimacy, came to visit him and, 
as usual, walked into the house unannounced and went 
straight to` the library. His host did not wake and Wang 
noticed, hardly hidden by his sleeve, the Emperor’s writing. 
Wondering what this might be he drew it out, read it and ` 
put it in his own sleeve. Then he called out loud, “Uncle 
Ch‘éng, are you not well? Why are you asleep at this time 
of day?” 

Tung Ch‘éng started up and at once missed the decree. He 
was aghast; he almost fell to the ground.” 

“So you want to make away with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao? I shall have 
to tell him,” said Wang. 


“fomance ot the Three kiigan. a 215 : 4 


` “Then, brother, that is the end of the Hans,” said his host, | 


with tears. 


“I was joking,” said Wang. “My forefathers also served 
the Hans and ate of their bounty. Am I devoid of loyalty? 
I would help you, brother, as far as lies in my power. nt 

“Tt is well for the country that you think like this,” said Tung. 


“But we ought to have a more private place than this to talk ae 


over such plans and pledge ourselves to sacrifice all in the 
cause of Han.” ~ 
Tung Ch‘éng began to feel very Sotishieds He oa a 


- roll of white silk and wrote his own name at the top and signed 


it, and Wang followed suit. Then the visitor said, “General 


to come in.’ 


' Ch‘éng replied, “Of all the Aficiais of the Court Ch‘ung Chi 


and Wu Shih are my best erede. Certainly they would back 
me up.’ 

So the discussion proceeded. Presently a servant announced 
no other than these very two men. 


“This is providential,” said. Tung Ch‘éng and he told his 


friend to hide behind a screen. 
The two guests were led into the library and after the ex- 
change of the ordinary civilities and a cup of tea, Ch‘ung Chi 


referred to the incident at the hunt and the shooting of the 


stag. ‘Were you not angry at that?” said he. 


Tung Ch'êng answered, “Though we be angry, what can 1 we 


do?” 


“Though one should perish for one’s country one should not 


mind,” said Ch‘ung Chi. 


At this moment Wang Tzu- fu appeared from behind the- 
screen, saying, “You two want to kill Ts‘ao! I shall have to 


let him know this. And Uncle Tung is my witness.” 

“A loyal Minister does not mind death.. If we are killed we 
will be Han ghosts, which i is better than being sycophants of a 
traitor.” 


-Tung Ch‘eng said, “We were just saying we wanted to see 
-you two on this matter. Wang is only joking.” 
Then he drew forth the decree and showed it to ihe tay 


ie ; -new-comers, who also wept as they read it. They were asked 
_ to add their names. 


Tzů-fu said, “Wait here a few moments till I get Wu T2u- lan 


7 to come.” 


He left the room and very soon “returned with his friend, 
who also wrote his name in the presence of all the others. 

After this they went into one of the inner chambers to drink 
success to the new plot. While there a new visitor, Ma T‘eng 


< Prefect of nee was announced. 


Falk 


Wa Tzu-lan is one of my best ee he ought to be allowed ee 


~ 


Wu Shih struck in, “I ee slay this fellow, I swear, but | 
I cannot get any one ‘to back me up,’ 


216 San Hus, or 


“Say I am indisposed, ” said the host, “and cannot receive 
visitors.” 

The doorkeeper took the message, whereat Ma angrily said, 
“Last night at the Tunghua Gate I saw him come out in robe 
and girdle. How can he pretend illness to-day?’ I am not — 
come from mere idleness, why does he refuse to see me?” 

The doorkeeper went in again and told his master what the 
visitor had said and that he was very angry. Then Ch‘éng 
rose, excused himself saying he would soon return, and went 
_ to receive Ma T‘éng. After the visitor had saluted and they 
= were both seated, he said, “I have just come from a farewell 
audience and wished to bid you adieu. Why did you want to- 

put me off?” 

“My poor body was taken suddenly ill; that is why I was | 
not waiting to welcome you,” said Ch‘éng. 

“You do not look as if you were ill; your face wears the very 
bloom of health,” said T‘éng bluntly. 
_. His host could say no more and was silent. The wath shook 
out his sleeves and rose to depart. He sighed deeply as he — 
walked down the steps, saying to himself, “Not one of them i is 
any good: there is no one to save the country.” 


This speech sank deeply into Tung Ch‘éng’s heart. He ` 


stopped his guest, saying, “Who is no good to save the country? 
Whom do you mean?” 

“That incident at the hunt the other day, the shooting of 
the stag, filled my breast with anger. But if you, a near 
relative of the Emperor, can pass your time in wine and idle 
-< dalliance without a thought of doing away with- rebellion, 
where can any one be found who will save the dynasty ?” 


However, Tung Ch‘éng’s s doubts were not set at rest. Pre- — 


tending | great surprise he replied, “The Minister is of high -> 
_ rank and has the confidence of the Court: why then does he | 
utter such things?” 

“So you find that wretch Ts‘ao a good man, eh?” 

“Pray speak lower: there are eyes and ears very near us.” — 

“The sort of people who covet life: and fear death are not 
those to discuss any great undertaking.” 

So saying he rose to go away. By this time his host's doubts 
were set at rest: he felt that Ma T‘éng was loyal and patriotic. 
a he said, “Do not be angry any more. I will show you some- 
thing.’ 

Whereupon he invited Ma T‘éng to go into the room where 
the others were seated and then showed him the decree. As 
Ma read it his hair stood on end, he ground his teeth and bit. 
his lips till the blood came. 

“When you move, remember the whole force of my army is 
ready to help,” said he. 

Tung Ch‘éng introduced him to the other conspirators and 
then the pledge was produced and Ma T‘éng was told to sign 


his name. “He did So, et uray same Maye: smearing dhe! blood i 
asa sign of the oath and saying, soe swear to die rather eon i 
etray this pledge.” N 


nad Pointing to the five he said, “We require t ten for this business Sire 


and we can accomplish our design.” yest 
“We cannot get many true and loyal men. “One of the wrong 
-sort will spoil all,” said Tung Ch‘éng. er i 
K Ma Têng told them to bring in the list of bees ‘He read: ; 
on till he came to the name ‘Liu, of the Imperial. oe when 
lapping his hands he cried, “Why not. consult him? Pe 
Whom?” cried they. altogether. _ ee ch 
Ma T‘éng very slowly and deliberately spoke his’ name. 
Tova very trusty servant comes an’ Emperor’ s decree, AAR 
And a scion of the ruling house can proye his loyalty. E aes 
i a the reader turns to the next chapter he wee see who was (z: 
A Ma Te êng’s hero. mbes Sue skip be i 


i 


nla MIAS 


Ey Y i Ei 


CHAPTER XXI. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘Ao DISCUSSES HEROES: 
KUAN YU SLAYS CHE CHOU. 


66 ; ' 

Who i is it? ??” was the question on the lips of the conspirators. — 

Ma Téng’s reply was, “The Governor of Yuchow, Liu Pei. 
He is here and we will ask him to help.” 

“Though he is an uncle of the Empreor, he is at present 4 
partizan of our enemy, and he will not join.’ 

“But I saw something at the hunt,” said Ma T'êng.. “When 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao advanced to acknowledge the congratulations due 


to the Emperor, Yiian-té’s sworn brother Kuan Yü was behind 
him, and grasped his sword as if to cut down Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. — 


However, Yiian-té signed to him to hold his hand and he did. 


He would willingly destroy Ts‘ao, only he thinks his teeth and z 
claws are too many. . You must ask him and he will surely ` 


consent.” 
Here Wu Shih urged caution. “Do not go too fast, ” said he. 
“Let us consider the thing most carefully.” 


They dispersed. Next day after dark Tung Ch‘éng went . 


to Liu Pei’s lodging taking with him the decree. As soon as 


he was announced Ytian-té came to greet him and led him : 
into a private room where they could talk freely. The two 


younger brothers were there as well. 

“It must be something unusually important that has brought 
you here to-night,” said Pei. 

“If I had ridden forth by daylight, Ts‘ao might have 
suspected something so I came by night.” ` 


Wine was brought in and while they were drinking Tung © 


Ch‘éng said, “Why did you check your brother the other day 
at the hunt when he was going to attack Ts‘ao Ts‘ao?” 
Yiian-té was startled and said, “How did you know?” 
“Nobody noticed but I saw.” | 
Yiian-té could not prevaricate and said, “Tt was the presump- 
Hon of the man that made my brother so angry; he could not 
elp it.” 
The visitor covered his face and wept. “Ah,” said he, “if 
all the Court Ministers were like him, there would be no sighs 
for lack of tranquillity.” 


Now Yiian-té felt that possibly Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had sent his 


. visitor to try him, so he cautiously replied, “Where are the 


sighs for lack of tranquillity while Ts‘ao T's‘ao is at the head _ 


of affairs?” 


Romance of the Three Hingvoms fiat, ALI 


Tung Ch‘éng changed colour and rose from his seat. “You, 

‘Sir, are a relative of His Majesty and so I-showed you my 
inmost feelings. Why did you mislead me?” 

“Because I feared you might be misleading me, and I wanted 


_ to find out.” 


At this Tung Ch‘éng drew jit the decree he had received 
and showed it. His host was deeply moved. Then he produced 
the pledge. There were only six names to it and these were 


Tung Ch‘éng, Wang Tzu-fu, Ch‘ung Chi, Wu Shih, Wu Tzi- 


lan and Ma T‘éng. 


“Since you have a decree like this, I cannot but do my 


” 


share,” said Liu Pei and at Tung Ch‘éng’s request he added 


cs _ his name and signature to the others and handed it back. 


“Now let us but get three more, which will make ten, and 
we shall be ready to act.” 
“But you must move with erent caution and not let this get 
abroad, ” said Ytian-té. 


The two remained talking till an early hour in the morning — 


when the visitor left: 

Now in order to put Ts‘ac Ts‘ao quite off Ane. scent that any 
plot against him was in progress, Liu Pei began to devote 
himself to gardening, planting vegetables and watering them 
with his own hands. His brothers ventured to remonstrate 
with him for taking to such an occupation when great matters 
needed attention. 

-~ “The reason for this you may not know, 
they said no more. 

One day when the two brothers were absent and Ytian-té 
was busy in his garden, two messengers with an escort came 


99 


replied he. And 


_ from Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, saying, “The command of the Minister is. 


i that you come at once.” 
= “What important affair is afoot?” asked he nervously. 
“We know ne we were ordered to come and request 


` your presence.’ 


All he could do was to follow. When he arrived Ts‘ao met 


~ - him and laughingly said, “That is a big business you have in 
hand at home.” | 


~ This remark made Liu Pei turn the colour of clay. But 
Ts‘ao took him by the hand and led him straight to the private 
garden, saying, “The growth of vegetables that you are trying 
to learn is very difficult.” 


Yiian-té breathed again. He said, “That is hardly a busi- 


ness it is only a solace.” 

Ts‘ao said, “I happened i0 notice the green plums on the 
trees to-day ‘and suddenly my thoughts went back to a year 
ago when we were thrashing Chang Hsiu. We were marching 
` through a parched district and every one was suffering from 

thirst. Suddenly I lifted my whip and pointing at something 
` in the distance I said, “Look at those plum trees.” The soldiers 


220 San Kuo, or 

heard it and it made their mouths water. Now I owe some- 
thing to the plums and we will pay it to-day. I ordered the 
servants to heat some wine very hot and sent to invite you to 
share it.” 

Yiian-té was quite composed by this time and no longer 
suspected any sinister design. He went with his host to a 
small summer house, where the wine cups were already laid 
out and green plums filled the dishes. After a goblet of wine 
had been swallowed they sat down to a confidential talk and 
enjoyment of their wine. 

As they drank the weather gradually changed, clouds 
gathering and threatening rain. The servants pointed out - 
a mass of cloud that looked like a dragon hung in the sky. 
Both host and guest went to the window and leaned over the 
rail looking at it. 

“Do you understand the awalutonis of dragons?” asked Ts‘ ao 
of the guest. 

“Not in detail.” ; 

“A dragon can assume any size, can rise in glory or hide 


from sight. Bulky, it generates clouds and evolves mist; eg 
attenuated, it can scarcely hide a mustard stalk or conceal ai l 


shadow. Mounting, it can soar to the empyrean; subsiding, 
it lurks in the uttermost depths of the ocean, This is the mid- 
spring season and the dragon chooses this moment for his 
transformations, like a man realising his desires and over- 
running the world. The dragon among animals compares with 


the hero among men. You, O Yitian-té, with your experience .. 


must know who are the heroes of the present day and I wish 
` you would say who they are.’ 
“How can a dullard like me know such things?” 
“Do not be so modest.” 
“Thanks to your kindly protection I have a post at Courts 
But as to heroes I really do not know who they are.” 
“You may not have looked upon their faces, but you have 
heard their names.’ 
“Yiian Shu, with his resources; is he one?” 


His host laughed, “A rotting bone in a graveyard. I shall ` 


put him out of the way shortly.” l 

“Well, Yüan Shao then. The highest offices of State have- 
been held in his family for four generations and his clients 
are many. He is firmly posted in Ichou and he commands the 
services of many able men. Surely he is one.’ 

“A bully, but a coward; he is fond .of grandiose schemes, 
but is devoid of decision ; he makes for great things but 
grudges the necessary toil. He loses sight of everything else — 
in view of a little present advantage. He is not one.” 

“There is Liu Ching-shéng. He is renowned as a man of 
sy ea a whose fame has spread on all sides. Surely he is 
a hero.” j 


en (ea 


fomance of the Three Kingdoms ho) 2 


“He is a mere semblance, a man of vain reputation. No; 
= not he.” 
“Sun Ts‘ is a sturdy sort, the chief of all in the east.. Is he 
a hero?” 
-~ “He has profited by his father’s reputation; he is no hero.” ii 
“What of Liu Chang?’ 
“Fhough he is of the reigning family, he is nothing more 
than a watch dog. How could you make a hero of him?” 
“What about Chang Hsiu, Chang Lu, Han Sui and all those?” 
Ts‘ao clapped his hands and laughed very loudly. “Paltry 
people like them are not worth mentioning.” __ 
“With these exceptions I really know none.’ 
“Now heroes are men who cherish lofty pai in their 
bosoms and have plans to achieve them; they have all-em- 


a bracing schemes and the whole world is at their mercy.” 


“Who is such a man?” said Yüan-tê. 

Ts‘ao pointed his finger first at his guest and then at himself, 
saying, “The only heroes in the world are you and I.” 
_ Ytian-té gasped and the spoon and chopsticks rattled to the 
flooor. Now just at that moment the storm burst with a 
‘tremendous peal of thunder and rush of rain. Ytian-té stooped 
down to recover the fallen articles, saying, “What a shock! 
and it was quite close.” ~ . 

- “What! are you afraid of thunder? ” said Ts‘ao. 


-Yiian-té replied, “The wise man paled at a sudden peal of © é 


thunder or fierce gust of wind. Why should one not fear?” 
. Thus he glossed over the real fact, that it was the words he 


j had heard that had so startled him. 


i Constrained to lodge in a tiger’s. lair, 
He played a waiting part, 
But when Ts‘ao talked of breaking men, 
Then terror gripped his heart. 
But he cleverly used the thunder peal 
_ As excuse for turning pale; ; 
© quick to seize occasions thus! 
He surely must prevail. 


i 


The shower had passed and there appeared two men rushing 
through the garden, both armed. In spite of the attendants 
they forced their way to the pavilion where sat the two friends. 
They were Kuan Yü and Chang Fei. 

The two brothers had been outside the city at archery prac- 
tice when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s invitation had come so peremptorily. 
On their return they heard that two officers had arrived and 
led away Yiian-té to the Minister. They hastened to his palace 
and were told their brother was with his host in the grounds 
and they feared something had happened. So they rushed in. 
= Now when they saw their brother quietly talking with Ts‘ao 

and enjoying a cup of wine, they took up their usual places 
and meekly stood waiting. 


222 a Dan uo, or 


7 Ñ 

“Why did you come?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“We heard that you, Sir, had invited our brother to a wine 
party and we came to amuse you with a little sword play,” 
said they. 

“This is not a Hungmén banquet,” replied Ts‘ ao. “What 
use have we for two Hsiangs?” 

Yiian-té smiled. The host ordered wine to be served to the 
two “Fan K‘uai” to allay their excitement and, soon after, the 
three took their leave and returned homeward. z 

“We were nearly frightened to death,” said Kuan Yü. 

The story of the dropped chopsticks was told. The two 
asked what their brother intended by his actions and he told 
them that his learning gardening was to convince Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
of his perfect simplicity and the absence of any ambition. | 
“But,” said he, “when he suddenly pointed to me as one of the 
heroes I was startled, for I thought he had some. suspicions. 
Happily the thunder at that moment supplied the excuse I 
wanted.” 

“Really you are very clever,” said they. 

Next day Ts‘ao again invited Ytian-té and while the two 
were drinking, Man Ch‘ung, who had been despatched to find 
out what Yiian Shao was doing, came to present his report. 


He said, ‘“Kungsun Tsan has been completely defeated by 


Yuan. 

“Do you know the details? I should like to know how,” 
interrupted Liu Pei. 

“They were at war and Tsan got the worst of it, so he acted 
on the defensive, building a high wall about his army and on 
that erecting a high tower, which he called the I-ching Tower. 
Therein he placed all his grain and took up his own quarters. 
His fighting men passed in and out without ceasing, some 
going out to give battle, others returning to rest. One of 
them was surrounded and sent to ask Kungsun to rescue him. 
Kungsun said, “If I rescue him, hereafter every one will want 
to be helped and will not exert himself.” So he did not go. - 
This disgusted his men and many deserted to the enemy so 
that his army diminished. He sent letters to the capital to 
crave help, but the messenger was captured. He sent to Chang 
Yen to arrange with him for a joint attack and those letters 
with the plans also fell inte Shao’s hands and the plans were 
adopted by his enemy, who gave the signals agreed upon. 
Thus Tsan fell into an ambush, lost heavily and retreated into. 
the city. “There he was besieged and a subterranean passage 
was pierced into the tower where he lodged. The tower-was 
set on fire and Kungsun could not escape. So he slew his wife 
and little ones and committed suicide. The flames destroyed 
the bodies of the whole family. 

“Yiian Shao has added the remnants of the wenauished army 
to his own and so become yet stronger. His brother Yiian Shu 


in Seat however, has become so arrogant and cruel that the 
people have turned against him. Then he had sent to say he 
. would yield the title of Emperor, which he had assumed, in 
favour of his brother. His brother Shao demanded the seal 
_ also and Yüan Shu promised to bring it in person. Now he 
has abandoned Huainan and is about to occupy Hopei. If he 
succeeded, the two brothers will control Bas oining districts and 
be dangerous.” 

It was a sad story and Yiian- té Ceman Te with sorrow 
that, in the days of success and prosperity, the dead chieftain 
had pushed his interest and shown him much kindness. More- 
over he was anxious to know the fate of Chao Tzit-lung. . 

. In his heart he thought, ‘What better chance am I likely to 
get of setting myself free?’ 


So he rose and said to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “If Viian Shu goes over — 


toj join his brother he will surely pass through Hsüchou. I beg 


` youto give me an army with which to smite him on the way. 


That will finish Yiian Shu.” 


< “Memorialise the Emperor to-morrow and I will give you an“ ) 


army,” said Ts‘ao. 
So next day Yiian-té went to an audience and Ts‘ao gave 


him command of five legions, horse and foot, and sent Chu Ling 


and Lu Chao with him. 

At parting with Liu Pei the Emperor shed tears. As soon 
as he reached his lodging he set about preparations for im- 
mediate departure, returning his seal as General and preparing 


his weapons. Tung Ch‘éng went out some distance on. the- 
ae road to bid him farewell. 


~ “You must not mind my going; this journey will assuredly 
help on the scheme,”’ said Liu Pei. 

“Keep your mind fixed on that,” said Tung, “and never 
forget what His Majesty requires of us.’ 

They parted. Presently his brothers asked him whe he was 
in such a hurry to get away. 

He replied, “I have been a bird in a cage, a fish in a net. 
This is like the fish regaining the open sea and the bird soaring 
into the blue sky. I suffered much from the confinement.” 

Now Kuo Chia and Ch‘éng Yii had been absent inspecting 
stores and supplies when Liu Pei left. As soon as they heard 
of his expedition they went in to see their master, asking him 

why he had let Liu Pei go in command of an army. 

“He is going to cut off Yiian Shu.” 

“Formerly, when he was governor of Yiichou, we recom- 
mended that he should be put to death but you would not hear 


of it. Now you have given him an army.’ You have allowed — 


the dragon to reach the sea, the tiger to return to the moun- 
tains. What control will you have in future?” 


So spoke Ch‘éng Yii and a Chia followed in the same 


strain. 


Romance of the Three Yingdoms 223 


Pie a 2 a 


Bek San Bua, or RN aba 


“Even if you would not put han to death you need not have 


let him go. As the proverb says, ‘Relax opposition for one 
day and age-long harm ensues.’ You must admit the truth 
of this.” 


Ts‘ao recognised that these were orient counsels so he 


sent Hsü Ch‘u with a half company and imperative orders to 
bring Ytian-té back again. 


Liu Pei was marching as rapidly as possible when he noticed 
a cloud of dust in the rear and remarked to his brothers,- 


“Surely they are pursuing. us.’ 


He halted and made a stockade and ordered his brothers: tox vce 


be in readiness, one on each flank. Presently the messenger 
arrived and found himself in the midst of an army ready for 


battle. He dismounted and entered the camp to speak with 


Yiian-té. 

“Sir, on what business have you come?” asked Pei. 

“The Minister has sent me to request you to return as he has 
further matters to discuss with you.’ 


“When a general has once taken the field even the royal 


‘command is of no effect. I bade farewell to the Emperor, I 


received the Minister’s commands and there can be nothing — 


. further to talk about. You may return forthwith and take 
that as my reply.” i ; 


The messenger was undecided what action to take. He 


knew of the friendship that existed between the Minister and 
his late guest and he had no orders to kill. He could only 
return with this reply and ask further instructions. So he 
left. When he related what had occurred Ts‘ao still hesitated 
to take any action. His advisers urged upon- Eke that this 
refusal to return meant enmity. 

- “Still, two of my men are with him,” said Ts‘ao. “He will 


not dare do anything unfriendly, I think. Beside, I sent him un 


and I cannot go back on my own orders.” 
So Yuan-té was not pursued. 


He took his arms, he fed his steed, 
And fared forth willingly, 

Intent to accomplish his King’s behest _ 
Deep graved on his memory. 

At least he had broken out of his cage, 
He heard not the tiger’s rear, 

He had shaken the shackles frdm his feet, 
As a dragon on high could soar. 


As soon as Ma T‘éng heard that Liu Pei had set forth he 
reported that pressing business called him and marched back 
to his own district. 

When Yiian-té reached Hsiichou the governor, Ch‘é Chou, 
came to meet him, and when the official banquet was over, Sun 
Ch‘iien and Mi Chu came to visit him. Then he proceeded to 
his residence to greet his family. 


Romance of the Three Lingdoms 225 


Scouts were sent out to see what Yüan Shu was doing. They 
came back with the intelligence that his arrogance had driven 
away his banditti allies, who had returned to their mountain 
fastnesses. His forces thus reduced he had written resigning 


~ the Imperial style he had assumed in favour of his brother 


Shao, who had at once commanded his presence. Thereupon 
he packed up the palace fittings he had had made, got the 
: remnants of his army in order and marched west. 

When he neared Hsüchou, Yüan-tê led out his captains with 
the five legions, to meet him. Yüan sent out Chi Ling to force 
a way through. But Chang Fei opposed him and attacked 
without a parley. In the tenth bout he cut down Chi Ling. 
‘The defeated soldiers fled in all directions. 

~. Then Yüan Shu came up with his own army. Yiian-té placed 
his captains right and left, he himself being in the centre, and 
‘so met Yüan Shu. As soon as the enemy came near Yiian-té 
began to abuse him. “O rebellious one, and wicked, I have a 
command to destroy you. Yield, then, with good grace and so 
escape your punishment.” 

“Base weaver of mats and mean maker. of straw sandals, 
how dare you make light of me?” replied Shu and he gave the 
signal for an attack. 

-. Yitian-té retired and his captains from the flanks closed in. 
They smote the army of Shu till corpses littered the plain 
~ and blood flowed in streams. At the same time the bandits 
attacked the baggage train and completed the destruction. Shu 
tried to retreat to Shouch‘un but the bandits barred the road. 
He sought refuge in Chiangt‘ing, with the small company 
left of all his army. And these were the weakly ones able 
neither to fight nor flee. It was then the height of summer 
and their food was nearly exhausted. The whole provision 
consisted of thirty measures of wheat. This was made over 
_ to the soldiers and the members of his household went hungry. 
. Many died of actual starvation. Ytian Shu could not swallow 
the coarse food that the soldiers lived on. One day he bade 
his cook bring him some honey-water to quench his thirst. 

“There is no water, save that tainted with blood,” replied 
the cook. “Where can I get honey-water?” ; 

` This was the last straw. Shu sat up on his couch and rolled 

out on the floor with a loud cry. Blood gushed from his mouth 

and thus he died. It was the sixth month of the fourth year 
_ of “Established Tranquillity.” ` 


‘The last days of Han approached and weapons clashed in every quarter, 
` The misguided Ytian Shu, lost to all sense of honour, 

Forgetful of his forefathers, who had filled the State’s highest Offices, 

Madly aspired to become himself Emperor, 

_ Resting his outrageous claim on the possession of The Seal, 
And arrogantly boasting that thus he fulfilled the design of Heaven. 
Alas! Sick unto death he vainly begged for a little honey-water; 

He died, alone. 


Jb 


226 Ban Yun, or 


Yiian Shu being dead, his nephew taking his coffin and his 
wife and children, sought shelter in Luchiang. There the 
magistrate, Hsii Ch‘iu, slew all the survivors. Among the 
possessions he found the Imperial Seal, which he at once took 
to the capital and presented to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, for which service 
he was made Prefect of Kaoling. 

When Yiian-té heard that Yiian Shu was dead he prepared 
a report to the throne, and sent it to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He sent the 
two officers deputed by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao back to the capital, keeping 
the army to defend Hsiichou. He also personally went through’ 
the country-side commanding the people to resume their 
ordinary. avocations. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was angry when his two officers returned with- 
out their man and was going to put them to death. Hsiin Yü 
reasoned with him. 

“The power was in Liu Pei’s hands and so these two had no. 
alternative,” said he. 

So they were pardoned. 

“You should instruct Ch‘é Chou to try to destroy him,” said 
Yü. i 
Accordingly he sent secret orders to Ch‘é Chou, who took 
Ch‘én Téng into his confidence and asked his advice. Téng _ 
advised an ambush in the city gate to attack Liu Pei on 
his return from the country; he himself would attack the, 
we with arrows from the city walls. Ch‘é agreed to try: 
this 

Then Téng went to his father to tell him. His faina 
Ch‘ên Kuei bade him go and warn the intended victim. He 
at once rode away to do so. Before long he met the a 
younger brothers, to whom he told his story. 

Now Yiian-té was following some distance behind. As soons 
_ as Chang Fei heard of the plot he wanted to attack the ambush, 
but Yiin-ch‘ang said he had a better plan. 

Said he, “The ambush will be a failure. And I think we can, 
compass the death of Ch‘é Chou. In the night we will pretend 
to be some of Ts’ ao’s men and entice him out to meet us. We 
will slay him.” 

Chang Fei approved of the plan. Now the soldiers still had 
some of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army banners and wore similar armour.: 
About the third watch they came to the city wall and hailed 
the gate. Those on guard asked who they were. The men 
replied that they were Chang Wén-yiian’s troop sent from the 
capital. This was told Ch‘é Chou who sent hastily for Ch‘én: 
Téng to ask his advice. 

“If I do not receive them they will suspect my loyalty,” said’ 
he.« “Yet if I go out I may be victim of a ruse.’ 

So he went up on the wall and said it was too dark to dis- 
stinguish friends from foes and they must wait till daylight. 
The men skouted back that Liu Pei must be kept in ignorance 


- Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 227 
and they begged him to let them in, Still Ch‘é Chou hesitated. 


They shouted louder than ever to open the gate. 


Presently Ch‘é girded on his armour, placed himself at the 


head of a company and went out. He galloped over the bridge, 


- shouting, “Where is Wényiian?” 


Then lights blazed around and he recognised Kuan Yü with 


his sword drawn. 


“Wretch!” cried Kuan Yü. “You would plot to slay my 
brother, would you?” 

Ch‘é Chou was too frightened to make good defence and he 
turned to re-enter the gate. But as he reached the drawbridge. 
flights of arrows met him, wherefore he turned aside and 


-. galloped along under the wall. But Kuan Yü came quickly in 
pursuit. His sword was raised aloft and as it came down the 


fugitive fell to the earth. Kuan Yü cut off his head and 


. returned, shouting, “I have slain the traitor. You others need 
-~ not fear if you only surrender.” 


They threw aside their spears and gave in. As soon as 


: the excitement had calmed Kuan Yü took the head to show 


Yiian-té and told him the story of the plot. 
“But what will Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao think of this?” said Yüan-tê. 
“And he may come.’ 
“Tf he does we can meet him,” said Kuan Yü. 
But Yiian-té was grieved beyond measure. When he entered 
the city the elders of the people knelt in the road to welcome 
him. When he reached his residence he found that Chang Fei 


_ had already exterminated the family of Ch‘é Chou. 


- Yüan-tê said, “We have slain one of his best friends and how 
will he stand that? T? 
“Never mind!” cried Ch‘én Têng. “I have a plan.” 


Just from grave danger extricated, 
An injured friend must be placated. 


The plan proposed by Ch‘én Têng will be disclosed next. 


a 


CHAPTER XXII. AN 


YUAN AND Ts‘Ao BOTH TAKE THE FIELD: 
“THE Two BROTHERS CAPTURE Two CAPTAINS.» 


Pass 


aie was the plan proposed to Yiian-té: “Yüan Shao is Ts‘ao — 
Ts‘ao’s terror. He is strongly posted in an extensive district — 


with a hundred legions of fighting men and many able officers. 
Write letters and pray him to rescue you.’ 


Liu Pei replied, “But we have never had any dealings oa ; 
each other and he is unlikely to do such a thing for one who 


has just destroyed his brother.” 


“There is some one here whose family have been on intimate 


terms with the Yüans for a hundred years. Shao would suray 
come if he wrote.” ; 
“And who is this?” 


“A man you know well and repe greatly; can yon not 


guess?” 

“You surely mean Chéng Kang. ch‘éng,” said Liu Pei 
suddenly. 

“That is he,” said Ch‘én Téng smiling. 


` Now Chéng K‘ang-ch‘éng’s ming was Yiian. He was a ey 


student and a’man of.great talent, who had long studied under 
Ma Jung. Ma Jung was peculiar as a teacher. Whenever he 
lectured he let fall a curtain behind which were a circle of 


singing girls. The students were assembled in front of this. 


curtain. Chéng Yiian attended these lectures for three years 
and never once let his eyes wander to the curtain. 


Naturally the master admired his pupil. After Chéng Yiian - 
had finished his studies and gone home Ma Jung praised him © 


to the others, saying, “Only one man has penetrated the inner 
meaning of my instructions and that one is Chéng Yiian.”. 


In the Chéng household the waiting maids were familiar 


with Mao’s edition of the Odes. Once one of the maids 
opposed Yüan’s wishes, so as punishment she was made to 


kneel in front of the steps. Another girl made fun of her, 


quoting from an ode;— 
“What are you doing ikers in the mire?” 
The kneeling gir] capped the verse from another ode; quoth 
she :— 


“Twas but a simple word I said, 
Yet brought it wrath upon my head. ing 


Such was the family in which he had been born. In the ce. s 


of the Emperor Huan he rose to the rank of President of a 


omane of the Three Kingdome 229 


| Boara, but when the Ten Eunuchs began to control the govern- 


E ment he gave up Office and retired into the country to ‘Hsiichou. 
Liu Pei had known him before, had consulted him on many- 
occasions and greatly respected him. 


Liu Pei was glad that ne had r rember this man and 


` without loss of time, in company with Ch‘én Têng, he went to 
his house to ask him to draft this letter, which he generously 
`- consented to do. 


Sun Ch‘ien was entrusted with the task of delivery and set 


out at once. Shao read it and considered the matter long 
before speaking. “Liu Pei destroyed my brother and I ought 


not to help him, but out of consideration for the writer of this 


_ letter I must.” 
Whereupon he Joen his officers io Mider an attack 
_upon Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


T‘ien Féng said, “Do het raise an army. The people are 


-worn out and the granaries are empty with these constant 
_ wars.. Let us rather report the recent victory of Kungsun 


Tsan to the Throne. If that does not reach the Emperor, then 
memorialise that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is hindering the government. 


- Then raise an army: occupy Liyang, assemble : a fleet in Honan, 


prepare weapons, send out your various divisions and within 


n bhree years you will win all round.” | 


: The adviser Shén P‘ei replied, “I do not agree. The military 


genius of our illustrious lord having overcome the hordes of 
the north, to dispose of Ts‘ao is as simple as acne one’s 
hand; it is hot a matter of months.” 


Chii Shou said, “Victory is not always to the many. Ts‘ao 


Ts‘ao’s discipline is excellent; his soldiers are brave and well 
drilled. He will not sit down quietly waiting to be surrounded 


as Kungsun Tsan did. Now you abandon the intention to 
inform the Throne of our success, which I find a good plan, 


z but you intend to send out an army without any valid excuse. 


-= Our lord should not do that.” 


Then followed adviser Kuo T‘u, “You are wrong. No ex- 


_ pedition against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao can lack excuse. But if our 


master would take the chance now ‘offering itself of coming 


‘into his own, he will accede to the request in the letter and ally 


himself with Liu Pei for the destruction of Ts‘ao. This would 
-= win the approval of heaven and the affections of the people, 


a doubie blessing.” 

- Thus the four advisers differed and wrangled and Yiian 
Shao could not decide which to follow. Then there came two 
others, Hsii Yu and Hsiin Shén, and, seeing them, Shao said, 


= “You two have wide experience, how would ‘you decide?” 


The two made their obeisance and Ytian Shao said, “A letter 


| from Chéng the President has arrived, counselling me to 
support Liu Pei in an attack on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Now am I to 
= sendan army or not sng an army?” 


230 | | San Kuo, or 


They both cried with one voice, “Send! Your armies are 
numerous enough and strong enough; you will destroy a traitor — 
and help the dynasty.” ¢ 


“Your words just express my desire,” said Shao and thence-. — 


forward the discussion turned on the expedition. à 

First Sun Ch‘ien was sent back with Yüan Shao’s consént 
and instructions for Liu Pei to make ready to co-operate. 
Officers were assigned divisions and advisers were told off. 
The army was to be composed of'‘thirty legions, horse and foot 
in equal numbers. They were to march on Liyang. 

When the arrangements were complete Kuo T‘u went to hia’ 
chief saying, “In order to manifest the righteousness of your 
attack on Ts‘ao it would be well to issue a manifesto with a 
summary of his various crimes.’ 

Yiian Shao approved of this and a certain Ch‘én Lin, well- 
known as a scholar, who had been a Recorder in the late 
Emperor’s reign, was entrusted to compose such a. document. 
This is the manifesto :— 

“A perspicacious ruler wisely provides against political 
vicissitudes; a loyal minister carefully foresees the difficulties 
in the assertion of authority. Wherefore a man of unusual 
parts precedes an extraordinary situation, and of such a man . 
the achievements will be extraordinary. For indeed the 
ordinary man is quite unequal to an extraordinary situation: 

“In former. days, after having gained ascendancy over a 
weakling King of the powerful Ts‘in Dynasty, Chao: Kao wielded 
the whole authority of the Throne, overruling the government. 
All dignity and fortune came through him and his contem- 
poraries were restrained so that none dared to speak openly. 
Slowly but surely evolved the tragedy of the Wangi Temple, 
when the Emperor was slain and the Imperial tablets perished 
in the flames. He, the author of these crimes, has ever since 
been held up to obloquy as the arch example of an evil doer. 

“In the later days of the Empress Lü of the Hans the world — 
saw Lü Chan and Lü Lu, brothers of the Empress and fellows 
in wickedness, monopolising the powers of government. — 
Within the capital they commanded two armies and without 
they ruled the feudal states of Liang and Chao. They arbi- 
trarily controlled all State affairs and decided all questions in 
the council chamber and the Court. This dominance of the 
base and declension of the noble continued till the hearts of 
the people grew cold within them. 

“Thereupon Chou P‘o, Marquis of Chiang, and Liu Chang, 
Marquis of .Chuhsti, asserted their- dignity and let loose 
their wrath. They destroyed the contumacious ministers 
and restored their Ruler to his royal state. Thus they 
enabled the kingly way to be re-established and the glory 
to be manifested. Here are two instances where miaren 
asserted their «authority. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 231 


“This T's‘ao, now a minister, forsooth, had for ancestor a 
certain eunuch named T‘éng, fitting companion of Tso Kuan 
and Hsü Huang. All three were prodigies of wickedness and 
insatiably avaricious and, let loose on the world, they hindered 
ethical progress and preyed upon the populace. This T‘éng 
begged for and adopted Ts‘ao’s father who, by wholesale 
bribery, wagons of gold and cartloads of jewels presented at 
the gates of the influential, contrived to sneak his way into 
considerable office where he could subvert anthority. Thus 
Ts‘ao is the depraved bantling of a monstrous excrescence, 
devoid of all virtue in himself, ferocious and cunning, delight- 
ing in disorder and revelling in public calamity. : 

“Now I, Mu-fu, a man of war, have mustered my armies 
and displayed my might that I may sweep away and destroy 
the evil opponents of government. I have already had to deal 
with Tung Cho, the ruffian who invaded the official circle and 
wrested the government, At that time I grasped my sword 
and beat the drums to restore order inthe east. I assembled 
warriors, selected the best and took them into my service. In 
this matter I came into relations with this Ts‘ao and conferred 
with him to further my scheme. I gave him command of a 
subordinate force and looked to him to render such petty 
service as he was equal to. I suffered his stupidities and con- 
doned his shortcomings, his rash attacks and facile retreats, 
his losses and shameful defeats, his repeated destruction of 
whole armies. Again and again I sent him more troops and 
filled the gaps in his depleted ranks. I even addressed a 
~ memorial to the Throne for him to be appointed Governor of 
Yenchou. I made him feared as he were a tiger. I added to 
his honours and increased his authority, hoping that event- 
ually he would justify himself by a victory such as fell to 
Méng Ming of Ts‘in. 

“But Ts‘ao availed himself of the opportunity to overstep © 
all bounds, to give free rein to violence and evil. He stripped 
the common people, outraged the good and injured the 
virtuous. Pien Jang, Prefect of Kiukiang, was a man of 
conspicuous talent and of world-wide reputation. He was 
honest in speech and correct in demeanour. He spoke without 
flattery. He was put to death and his head exposed, and his 
family utterly destroyed. From that day to this scholars have 
-deeply mourned and popular resentment has steadily grown. 
One man raised his arm in anger and the whole countryside 
followed him. Whereupon Ts‘ao was smitten at Hsiichou and 
_ his district was snatched by Lü Pu. He fled eastward without 
` shelter or refuge. — j 
= “My policy is a strong trunk and weak branches, a com- 
` manding central government and obedient feudal lords. Also 
I am no partizan. Therefore I again raised my banners, 
donned my armour and moved forward to attack. My drums 


X 


232 ) Han Kuo, or , 


rolled for an assault on Lü Pu and his multitudes incontinently 
fled. I saved Ts‘ao from destruction and restored him to a 
position of authority. Wherein I must confess to showing no 
kindness to the people of Yenchou although it was a great 
matter for Ts‘ao. 

“Later it happened that the imperial cortege aa west. 
and a horde of rebels rose and attacked. The course of 
government was hindered. At that moment my territory was 
threatened from the north and I could not leave it. Wherefore 
I sent one of my officers to Ts‘ao to see to the repair of the 
temples and the protection of the youthful sovereign. There- 
upon Ts‘ao gave the rein to his inclinations. He arbitrarily 
ordered the removal of the Court. He brought shame upon 
the ruling House and subverted the laws. He engrossed the 
presidency of the three highest offices and monopolised the 
control of the administration. Offices and rewards were con- 
ferred according to his will; punishment was at his word. 


He glorified whole families of those he loved; he exterminated © 


whole clans of those he hated. Open critics were executed; 
secret opponents were assassinated. Officials locked their lips; 


wayfarers only exchanged glances. Presidents of Boards. 


recorded levies and every government official held a sinecure. ` 


“The late Yang Piao, a man who had filled two of the highest 
offices of State as President of two Boards, because of some 
petty grudge was, though guiltless, charged with a crime. He 
was beaten and suffered every form of cruelty. This arbitrary 
gad impulsive act was a flagrant disregard of constitutional 
rules. 

“Another victim was the Councillor Chao Yan. He was 
faithful in remonstrance, honest in speech, endowed with the 
highest principles of rectitude. He was listened to at Court. 
His words carried enough weight with the Emperor to cause 
him to modify his intention and confer reward for outspoken- 
ness. Desirous of diverting all power into his own hands and 
stifle all criticism, Ts‘ao presumed to arrest and put to death 
this censor, in defiance of all legal procedure. 

“Another evil deed was the destruction of the tomb of Prince 
Liang Hsiao, the brother of the late Emperor. His tomb should 
certainly have been respected, even its mulberries and lindera 


trees, its cypresses and its pines. Ts‘ao led soldiers to the — 


cemetery and stood by while it was desecrated, the coffin 


destroyed and the poor corpse exposed. They stole the gold © 


and jewels of the dead. This deed brought tears to the eyes 


of the Emperor and rent the hearts of all men: Ts‘ao also. 


appointed ‘Openers-of-Grave-Mounds’ and ‘Seekers-for-Gold,’ 
-whose tracks were marked by desecrated graves and exhumed 
bodies. Indeed, while assuming the position of the highest 
officer of State, he indulged the inclination of a bandit, polluting 
the State, oppressing the people, a bane to gods and men. 


4 


_ “He added to this by setting up minute and vexatious pro- 


hibitions so that there were nets and snares spread in every 
. pathway, traps and pitfalls laid in every road. A hand raised 
was caught in a net, a foot advanced was taken in an entangle- 


Romance of the Three Viingvoms 233 


ment. Wherefore the men of Yen and Yü waxed desperate © 


and the inhabitants of the metropolis groaned and murmured 
in anger. 

Read down the names through all the years 

Of ministers that all men curse 

For greed and cruelty and lust; 

Than Ts‘ao you will not find a worse. 

“I have investigated the cases of evil deeds in the provinces, 

but I have been unable to reform him. I have given him 
_ repeated opportunities hoping that he would repent. But he 


has the heart of a wolf, the nature of a wild beast. He © 
nourishes evil in his bosom and desires to pull down the pillars 
of the State, to weaken the House of Han, to destroy the loyal 
and true and to stand himself conspicuous as the chiefest of — 


criminals. 


“Formerly, when I attacked the north, Kungsun Tsan, that- 


obstinate bandit and perverse bravo, resisted my might for a 
year. Before he could be destroyed this Ts‘ao wrote to him 
that, under the pretence of assisting the Imperial armies, he 
would covertly lead them to destruction. The plot was dis- 


_ covered through his messengers and Tsan also perished. This 


blunted Ts‘ao’s ardour and his plans failed. 


`- “Now he is camped at the Ao Granaries with the river to 
-strenghten his position. Like the mantis in the story, who 


threatened the chariot with its forelegs, he thinks himself | 


terrible. But with the dignity and prestige of Han to support 
me I confront the whole world. I have spearmen by millions, 
horsemen by thousands of squadrons, fierce and vigorous 
warriors strong as Chung Huang, Hsia Yu and Wu Huo, those 
heroes of antiquity. I have enlisted expert archers and strong 
bowmen. In Pingchou my armies have crossed the T‘aihang 
Range and in Chingchou they have forded the Chi and T'a 
Rivers. They have coasted down the Yellow River to attack 


his van, and from Chingchou they have descended to Wanyeh 


to smite his rearguard. Thunder-like in the weight of their 


march, tiger-like in the alertness of their advance, they 


\ 


mer 


converge on Lot‘ing. They are as flames let loose among 


light grass, as the blue ocean poured on glowing embers. 
Is there any hope that he escape destruction? 
“Of the hordes of Ts‘ao, those who can fight are from the 


north or from other camps and they all desire to return home. 


_ They weep whenever they look to the north. The others belong 
to Yen or Yü, being remnants of the armies of Lü Pu and 
Chang Yang. Beaten, stern necessity forced them to accept 

service, but they take it only as a temporary expedient. Every 


234 | San Huo, or, 


man who has been wounded is an enemy.’ If I give the signal 
to return and send my drums and shawms to the mountain tops, 
and wave the white flag to show them they may surrender, 
they will melt away like dew before the sun and io blood will 
be shed. The victory will be mine. 

“Now the Hans are failing and the bonds of emit are 
relaxed. The sacred Dynasty has no supporter, the Ministers 
are not strong enough to cope with the difficulties. Within the 
capital the responsible Ministers are crestfallen and helpless. 
There is no one to rely upon. Such loyal and high principled | 
men as are left are browbeaten by a tyrannical Minister. How 
can they manifest their virtue? 

“T's‘ao has surrounded the Palace with seven hundred veter- 
ans, the ostensible object being to guard the Emperor, but the 
covert design being to hold him prisoner. I fear this is but 
the first step in usurpation and so I take my part. Now is the 
time for loyal Ministers to sacrifice their lives, the opportunity - 
for officers to perform meritorious deeds. Can I fail to urge ` 
you? 

“Ts‘ao has forged commands to himself to Padena the 
control of government affairs and, in the name of the State, 
sends out calls for military assistance. I fear lest distant ~ 
districts may obey his behest and send troops to help him, to 
the detriment of the multitude and their everlasting shame. 
No wise man will do so. 

“The forces of four oerein are moving out simul- 
taneously. When this call reaches Chingchou you will see 
their forces co-operate with those of Chang Hsiu. All districts 
and departments ought to organise volunteers and set them 
along their borders to demonstrate their force and prove their 
-loyal support of the Dynasty. Will not this be rendering 
extraordinary service? 

“The rank of Marquis, with feudal rights over five thousand 
households and a money reward of fifty millions, will be the 
reward of him who brings the head of Ts‘ao. No questions 
will be asked of those who surrender. I publish abroad. this 
notice of my bounty and the rewards offered that you may. 
realise that the Dynasty is in real danger.” 

Shao read this effusion with great joy. He at once dered 
copies to be posted everywhere, in towns and cities, at gates 
(tax stations) and ferries and passes. Copies found their way 
to the capital and one got into Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s palace. That day 
he happened to bein bed with a bad headache.. The servants 
took the paper to the sick man’s room. He read it and was 
frightened from the tips of his hair to the marrow of his very 
bones. He broke out into a cold perspiration and his headache 
vanished. He bounded out of: bed and said to Ts‘ao Hung, 
“Who wrote this?” 

“They'say it is Ch‘én Lin’s pencil,” replied he. 


\ 


; omance of the Three Vingooms 285. 


_ Ts‘ao laughed “They have the literary gift; they had better 
- have the military too to back it up. This fellow may be a very 
aN writer, but what if Yiian Shao’s fighting capacity falls 
short?” . i 
- He called his advisers together tc consider the next move. 
-K‘ung Jung heard of the summons and went to his master 
saying, “You should not fight with Yiian Shao; he is too strong. 
Make peace.” 
Hsiin Yü said, “He is despicable: do not make peace.” 
Jung replied, “His land is wide and his people strong. He 
- hás many skilful strategists and he has loyal and able captains. 
You cannot say he is despicable.” 
Yu laughed saying, “His army is a rabble. One captain, 
_ Tien Féng, is bold but treacherous; another, Hsü Yu, is greedy 


and ignorant; Shen P‘ei is devoted but stupid; Féng Chi is 


steady but useless. And these four of such different tempera- 
ments, mutually incompatible, will make for confusion rather 


-~ than efficiency. Yen Liang and Wen Ch‘ou are worthless and 


can be disposed of in the first battle and the others are poor, 
-rough stuff. What is the use even of their legions?” 

— K‘ung Jung was silent and Ts‘ao smiled. “They are even as 
Hsün Wen-jo describes,” said he. 

-~ - Then Ts‘ao issued orders. Generals Liu Tai and Wang 
-- Chung were to lead an army of five legions, displaying the 


_ minister’s banners, and march against Hsüchou to- attack 


Liu Pei. 


This Liu Tai had been governor of Yenchou but had sur- 


rendered and entered Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s service after the fall of 
the city. Ts‘ao had given him a rank as supernumerary leader 
and now was disposed to make use of him. 
-. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao himself took command of a large army of twenty 
~ legions for a simultaneous attack on Yiian Shao at Liyang. 
=- A certain adviser said he thought the two captains sent 
against Liu Pei were unequal to their task. 

“I know,” said Ts‘ao. “They are not meant to fight Liu Pei; 
“it is merely a feint. They have orders not to make any real 
attack till I have overcome Yiian Shao. Then Liu Pei will be 


next.” 


Liu Tai and Wang Chung went their way and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
marched out his grand army, which came into touch with the 
enemy, then eighty li distant, at Liyang. Both sides made 
fortified camps and waited watching each other.. This went 
on for two months. i ; 

There was dissension in Yiian Shao’s camp. Hsü Yu was 
at enmity with his colleague, Shen Pʻei, and the strategist 
Chu Shou resented the rejection of his plan. So they would 
not attack. Yüan Shao also could not make up his mind. 


Tired of this state of inaction Ts‘ao Ts‘ao then. gave certain 


commanders definite points to hold and marched back to Hsiitu. 


236 San Buo, or 
} į 


The five legions sent against Liù Pei went into. camp a 
hundred li from Hsüchou. The camp made an imposing 


display of the banners of the Prime Minister but no attacks - | 
followed. Their spies were very busy north of the river. On 


the defensive side, Liu Pei, as he was uncertain of the streagth 
of the force against him, dared not move. 


Suddenly orders came for the Ts‘ao army to attack and then 


discord showed itself. 
Liu Tai said, “The Minister orders an attack; you advance.” 
Wang Chung replied, “You were named first.” 


“T am the Commander in Chief; it is not my place to go. 


first.” 

“I will go with you in joint command,” said Chung. 

“Let us cast lots and he upon whom the lot falls must go 
said Tai. 

They drew lots and it fell to Wang ‘Chung, who advanced 
toward Hsiichou with half the force. 


When Yiian-té heard of the threatened attack he called Ch'ên aM 


Téng to consult. 


Ytian-té said, “There is dissension in Yiian Shao’ s camp at 
Liyang so they ‘do not advance. We do not know where Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao is but his own banner is not atte in his Liyang. 


camp. Why then is it shown here?” 
Ch‘én Téng replied, “His tricks take a hundred forms. 


It must be that he regards the north as most important and. 
has gone there to look after its defence. He dares not show ` 


his flag there and I feel sure it is only meant to mislead us. 
He is not here.” 


Yiian-té then asked whether one of his brothers would find 4h 


out the truth and Chang Fei volunteered to go. 


“I fear you are unsuited for this,” said Ytian-té. “You are 


too impetuous.” 
“Tf Ts‘ao is there I will haul him over here,” said Fei. 
“Let me go first and find out,” said Kuan Yii. 
“If you go I shall feel more at ease,” said Yiian-té. 


So Kuan Yü set out with three companies to reconnoitre. 
It was then early winter and snow was falling from a gloomy 


sky. They marched regardless of the snow and came near 


Sg Praesent 


Wang Chung’s camp with arms all ready to attack. Kuan Yü oii 


summoned Wang Chung to a parley. 


“The Minister is here: why do you not surrender?” said > 


Wang Chung. 

“Beg him to come to the front for I would Speak with him,” 
replied Kuan Yü. . 

“Is he likely to come out to see such as you?” 


Kuan Yü angrily dashed forward and Wang Chung set his 


spear to meet him. Yü rode till he came close to his antagonist, © 


then suddenly wheeled away. Wang Chung went after him 
and followed-up a slope. Just as they passed the crest, Yü 


Romance of the Three kingdoms ~ i 287 


_ suddenly wheeled again, shouted and came on flourishing the 
_ mighty sword. Wang Chung could not withstand that and fled. 
But Kuan Yü, changing the huge sword to his left hand, with 
his right laid hold of his victim by the straps of his breastplate, 
- lifted him out of the saddle and rode away to his own lines” 
-= with the captive laid across the pommel! of his saddle. Wang 
= Chung’s men scattered. 
E The captive was sent to Hsüchou, where he was summoned 
~ into the presence of Liu Pei. ida 
= “Who are you? What office do you hold? How dare you 
_ falsely display the ensigns of the Minister Ts‘ao Ts‘ao?” said 
=v - Tatu Pei. 
i “What do you mean by falsely when I simply obeyed my 
orders?” said Wang. “My master wanted to produce the im- | 
~ pression that he was present. Really he was not there.” 
Liu Pei treated him kindly, giving him food and clothing; 
but put him in prison till his colleague could be captured. 
_-Kuan Yü said that, knowing his brother had peaceful intentions 
in his mind, he captured the man instead of slaying him. ' 
“I was afraid of Chang Fei’s hasty and impulsive temper,” 
~ said Liu Pei. “He would have slain this man. So I could not 
-= sendhim. There is no advantage in killing persons of this sort 
and while alive they are often useful in amicable settlements.” | 
= Here Chang Fei said, “You have got this Wang; now I will 
- go and get the other man.” Ra aut ca 
“Be careful,” said his brother. “Liu Tai was once governor 
of Yenchou and he was one of the nobles who met at Tigertrap 
- Pass to destroy Tung Cho. He is not to be despised.” 
= “I do not think him worth talking about so much. I will 
= bring him in alive just as my brother did this other.” 
“J fear that if his life be lost it may upset our designs,” said 
meee Wig Pet. 
“Tf I kill him I will forfeit my own life,” said Fei. 
So he was given three companies and went off quickly. 
~ The capture of his colleague made Liu Tai careful. He | 
= strengthened his defences and kept behind them. He took no 
notice of the daily challenges and continual insults which 
began with Chang Fei’s arrival. 
© After some days Fei evolved a ruse. He issued orders to 
prepare to rush the enemy’s camp at night, but he himself 
spent the day drinking. Pretending to be very intoxicated he 
held a court martial and one soldier was severely flogged for 
a breach of discipline. The man. was left bound in the midst 
of the camp, Fei saying, “Wait till I am ready to start to- 
night; you shall be sacrificed to the flag.” At the same time 
he gave secret orders to the custodians to let the man escape. 
ve The man found his opportunity, crept out of camp and went 
= over to the enemy, to whom he betrayed the plan of a night 
attack. As the man bore signs of savage punishment Liu Tai 


eS 


238 J San Kuo, or 


was the more disposed to credit his desertion and tale and — 
made his arrangements, putting the greater part of his men 
in ambush outside his camp so that it was empty. 3 

That night, having divided his men into three parties, Ghiane 
Fei went to attack the camp. A few men were,ordered to 
advance directly, dash in and set fire going. Two larger bodies 
of men were to go round to the rear of the camp and attack 
when they saw the fire’ well started. At the third watch 
(midnight) Chang Fei, with his veterans, went to cut off 
Liu Tai’s road to the rear. . 

The thirty men told off to start a conflagration made their 
way into the camp and were successful. When the flames 
arose the ambushed men rushed out but only to find themselves 
attacked on both sides. This confused them and as they knew 
nothing of the number of their assailants they were panic- 
stricken and scattered. 

Liu Tai, with a company of footmen got clear of the fight 


and fled, but he went straight toward Chang Fei. Escape was -~ H 


impossible and the two men rode up each to attack the other. 
Chang Fei captured his opponent and the men surrendered. 
Chang Fei sent news of this success to his brothers. 


Yiian-té said, “Hitherto I-té has been rather violent, but n t 


time he has acted wisely and I am very pleased.” 
They rode out to welcome their brother. 
“You said I was too rough; how now?” said Fei to iis 

brothers. i 
“If I had not put you on your mettle you would not have . 

evolved this stratagem,” said Liu ‘Pei. Re 


Fei laughed. Then appeared the captive Liu Tai, in bonds. 


Yüan-tê at once dismounted and loosed the cords, saying, “My 
young brother was rather hasty, but you must pardon him.” a 

So he was freed. He was taken into the city, his colleague 
was released and both were cared for. 

Yiian-té said to them, “I could not help putting Ch‘é Chou 
to death when he tried to kill me, but Ts‘ao Ts‘ao took it as 
disaffection and sent you two generals to punish me. I have 
received much kindness from him and certainly would not show ` 
ingratitude by killing you. I wish you to speak for me and 
explain when you get back.” 

“We are deeply grateful that you spare our lives and we will 
certainly do so in gratitude for what our wives and children 
owe you.” ; 

Next day the two leaders and their army were allowed to 
depart unscathed. But before they had got ten li from the 
boundary they heard a mighty shouting and there appeared 
Chang Fei barring the road. 

“My brother made a mistake in letting you go: he did not 
understand. How could he give fr a to two rebels?’ 


Romance of the Three fiingdoms 239 


This made the two men quake with fear, but as the fierce- 


eyed warrior with uplifted sword was bearing down upon them 


they heard another man galloping up and shouting, “Do not 
behave so disgracefully !” 


7 The newcomer was Kuan Yü and his appearance relieved the ; 
- unhappy men of all fear. 


“Why do you stop them since our brother set them free?” 
cried he. 


“Tf they are let go today they will surely come:back,” cried 


Fei.. 
“Wait till they do, then you may kill them,” replied Kuan Yü. 
The two leaders with one voice cried, “Even if the Minister 


-slay our whole clan we will never come again. We pray you 


-pardon us.’ 


Said Fei, “If Ts‘ao Ts‘ao himself had come I would have 


slain him. Not a breastplate should have gone back. But for : 


this time I leave you your heads.” 

Clapping their hands to their heads the two men scuttled 
off while the two brothers returned to the city. 

. “Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will certainly come,” they said. 

Sun Ch‘ien said, “This is not a city that can hold out fon 
long. We should send part of our forces to Hsiaop‘ei and 
guard P‘eich‘éng as a corner stone of our position.” 

Yiian-té agreed and told off his brothers to guard P‘eich‘éng 


whither he also sent his two wives, the Ladies Kan and Mi. 


The former was a native of the place; the latter was Mi Chu’s 


- sister. 


Four captains were left to defend Hsüchou and saa tê with 
Chang Fei went to Hsiaop‘ei. 

The two released leaders hastened home to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and 
explained to him that Liu Pei was not disaffected. But their 


~ master was exceeding angry with them, crying “You shameful 


traitors, what use are you?” — 
He roared to the lictors to take them away to instant execu- 
tion. 
How can a dog or a pig expect 
-To conquer in tiger strife? | 
Minnows and shrimps that with dragons contend 
Already have done with life. 


The fate of the two leaders will be told in the next chapter. 


Re Madcon ee Ys Ue i a Tee A ee 


vhs 
Mute 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


M1 HENG SLIPS HIS GARMENT AND RAILS AT TRAITORS: 
CRUEL PUNISHMENT OF THE PHYSICIAN CHI. 


At the close of the last chapter the two unsuccessful leaders 
` Liu and Wang were in danger of death. However, one of the 
advisers, K‘ung Jung, remonstrated with Ts‘ao saying, “You 
knew these two were no match for Liu Pei and if you put 
_ them to death because they failed you will lose the hearts of 
your men.” 
Wherefore the death sentence was not executed but they 
were deprived of rank and status. Ts‘ao next proposed to 
lead an army himself to attack Liu Pei, but the weather was 
too inclement. So it was settled to await the return of spring. 


In the interval there would be time to arrange peace with . 


Chang Hsiu and Liu Piao. 

Wherefore Liu Yeh was sent to the former of these and in 
due time reached Hsiangch‘éng. He first had an interview 
with Chia Hsii, whereat he dwelt upon Ts‘ao’s virtues so that 


Hsii was impressed, kept him as a guest and undertook to- 


smooth his way. 

Soon after he saw Chang Hsiu and spoke of the advantages 
of coming to terms with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. While the discussion 
was in progress a messenger from Ytian Shao was announced 
and he was called in. He presented letters and, when they 
also proposed terms of peace, Chia Hsti asked what their 
success had been lately against ‘T's‘ao. 

“The war had ceased for the moment on account of the 
winter,” replied the messenger. “As you, General, and Liu 
Piao are both well reputed officers of the State, I have been 
sent to request your help.” ; 

Chia Hsü laughed, “You can return to your master and say 


that as he could not brook rivalry of his brother he certainly - 
would be sorely put to it with that of all the officers of the 


State.” | 

The letter was torn into fragments before the messenger’s 
face and he was angrily bidden begone. 

“But his master, Yüan Shao, is stronger than Ts‘ao Ts‘ao,” 
protested Chang Hsiu. ‘You have torn up his letter and are 
dismissing his man. What shall we say about such an insult 
should Yüan Shao come?” 

“Better join hands with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao,” said Chia Hsii. 


a ny 
eS 
` 

` 


with Ts‘ao. First, he has a command from the Emperor to 


Biomance of the Three iingdoms Cea 


“But there is still between us an unavenged enmity, we could 


not suffer each other.” 


Chia Hsii said, “There are three advantages in joining hands 


restore ‘peace. Secondly, as Ytian Shao is so strong our little 
help to him will be despised, while we shall loom large and be 
well treated by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Thirdly, Ts‘ao is going to be 
Chief of the Feudal Lords and he will ignore all private feuds. 
in order to show his magnanimity to all the world. I hope, 
oe you will see these things clearly and hesitate no 
onger 


= Chang Hsiu, now convinced, became more reasonable and © 


: recalled the messenger, who, ‘at the interview, extolled the 


many virtues of his master. “If the Minister had any thought 


a of the old quarrel he would hardly have sent me to make 


friendly enkagements : would he?” said he at the last. : 

So Chang and his adviser proceeded to the capital where 

formal submission was made. At the interview the visitor 

- bowed low at the steps, but Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao, hastening forward, 

-= took him by the hand and raised him saying “Forget that little 
` fault of mine, I pray you. 


99 


Chang Hsiu received. the title of Yang-wu General 


Beara wren. in-War” General) and Chia Hsü that of Chih . 
` Chin-wu (Controller of the Ways). 


Ts‘ao then directed his secretaries to draft letters inviting 


_ the support of Liu Piao. 


Chia Hsii said, “Liu Ching-shéng loves to have to do with 


BS famous people. if some famous scholar should be sent to him 


he would submit forthwith.” 
‘So Ts‘ao enquired of Hsiin Yu who. was the best man 
to go as a messenger and he recommended K‘ung Jung. 


i Ts‘ao agreed and sent him to speak with this officer. So he 


went to K‘ung, saying, “A scholar of reputation is required 


‘to act as a messenger of State; can you undertake this — 


task ?” 
K‘ung Jung te “I havea erin friend, Mi Héng, whose 


talents are ten times mine. He ought to be constantly at 
the Court of the Emperor and not merely be sent as a State 


messenger. I will recommend him to the Emperor.” 


So he wrote the following memorial :— 
“Tn ancient days, when the great waters were abroas the 
Emperor pondered over their regulation and he sought out mer 


of talent from all directions. In old time, when the Emperor 


4 


Wu of the Hans desired to enlarge his borders, crowds of 
scholars responded to his call. 

“Tntelligent and holy, Your Majesty. RNT the throne. 
You have fallen upon evil days, but have been diligent, modest 
and untiring in your efforts. Now the great mountains have 
-sent forth es and men of genius appear. 


( 


vie 


242 San kuo, ov , 


“I, your humble servant, know of a certain simple shots 
Mi Héng by name, of P‘ingyiian, a young man of twenty-four. 
His moral character is excellent, his talents eminent. As a` 
youth he took a high place in study and penetrated the most: 
secret arcana of learning. What he glanced at he could repeat, 
what he heard once he never forgot. He is naturally high 
principled and his thoughts are divine. Hung-yang’s mental 
-calculations and An-shih’s mnemonical feats compared with ~ 
Mi Héng’s powers are no longer wonderful. Loyal, sincere, 


correct and straight-forward, his ambition is unsullied. He , 


regards the good with trembling respect, he detests the evil 
with uncompromising hatred. Jên Tso in unflinching candour, 
Shih Yü in severe. rectitude, never surpassed him. 


“Hundreds of hawks are not worth one osprey. If Mi Héng = 


be given a Court appointment notable results. must follow. 
Ready in debate, rapid in utterance, his overwhelming intel- 
ligence wells up in profusion; in the solution of doubts and the 
unravelling of difficulties he has no peer. 


“In former days Chia I begged to be sent on trial to a poner ied 


State to be responsible for the arrest of Shan Yü; Chung Chiin — 
offered to bring the Prince of Nanytieh as with a pair of long 
- reins. The generous conduct of these youths has been much’. 


admired. In our day Lu Tsui and Yen Hsiang, remarkable E 


for their talents, have been appointed among the secretaries. 
And Mi Héng is no less capable. Should he be got, then all 
possibilities may be realised; the dragon may curvet through 


the celestial streets and soar along the Milky Way; fame will- 


extend to the poles of the universe and hang in the firmament 
with rainbow glory. He would be the glory of all the present 
Ministers and enhance the majesty of the Palace itself. The 


air Chun-t‘ien will acquire new beauties and the Palace will’ 3 


contain an excellent treasure. #Men like Mi Heng are but few. 

As in the recitation of Chi-ch‘u and the singing of Yang-o the 
most skilful performers are sought, and such fleet horses as 
Fei-t‘u and Yao-miao were looked for by the famous judges 
of horses, Wang Liang and Pai Lo, so I, the humble one, dare 
not conceal this man. Your Maj esty is careful i in the selection” 


of servants and should try him. Let him be summoned as he | $ 


is, simply clad in his serge dress, and should he not appear 
worthy then may I be punished for the fault of deception.” — 

The Emperor read the memorial and passed it to his 
Minister, who duly summoned Mi Héng. He came, but after 
his formal salutations were over he was left standing and not. 
invited to sit down. Looking up to heaven he sighed deeply, 


saying, “Wide as is the universe it cannot produce the man.” _ 


“Under my orders are scores of men whom the world call 
heroes. What do you mean by saying there is not. the man?” 
said Ts‘ao. 


“I should be glad to hear who eee are,” said Mi. 


-Romance of the Three Liingdoms er C 


“Hsün Yü and Hsün Yu, Kuo Chia and Ch‘éng Yü are all 
- men of profound skill and long views, superior to Hsiao Ho and 
By Ch‘én P‘ing; Chang Liao and Hsii Chu, Li Tien and Yo Chin 
are bravest of the brave, better than Tsén P‘éng and Ma Wu. 
Lü Chien and Man Ch‘ung are my secretaries, Yü Chin and 


Hsti Huang are my van-leaders; Hsiahou Tun is one of the 


world’s marvels and Ts‘ao Tzu- hsiao is the most successful 
leader of the age. Now say you there are not the men?” 
“Sir, you are quite mistaken,” said Mi Héng with a smile. 


“I know all these things you call men. Hsün Yü is qualified to ` 


pose at a funeral or ask after a sick man. .Hsün Yu is fit to 
` þe a tomb guardian. Ch‘éng Yü might be sent to shut doors 
and bolt windows, and Kuo Chia is a reciter of poems; Chang 
Liao might beat drums and clang gongs; Hsü Chu might lead 
cattle to pasture; Yo Chin would make a fair confidential clerk 
- of the Court; Li Tien could carry despatches and notices; Lü 
' Ch‘ien would be a fair armourer; Man Ch‘ung- could be sent 
to drink wine and eat brewers’ grains; Yti Chin might be of 


use to carry planks and build walls; Hsii Huang might be 


employed to kill pigs and slay dogs; Hsiahou Tun should be 


styled ‘Whole Body’ General and Ts‘ao Tzut-hsiao should be. 


called ‘Money-grubbing Prefect.’ As for the remainder, they 
are mere clothes-horses, rice-sacks, wine butts, flesh bags.” 

“And what special gifts have you?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao angrily. 
“I know everything in heaven above and the earth beneath. 
. IT am conversant with the Three Religions and the NineSystems 


of Philosophy. I could make my prince the rival of Yao and. 


Shun and I myself could compare in virtue with K‘ung and 

Yen. Can I discuss on even terms with common people?” 
Now Chang -Liao was present and he raised his sword to 

strike down the impudent visitor who spoke thus to his master, 


but Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “I want another drummer boy to play on ~ 
-occasions of congratulation in the Court. I will confer this 


_ office upon him.” 


‘Instead of ieoaiiy declining enis Mi Hêng accepted the 


position and went out. 


“He spoke very impertinently,” said Liao; “Why did you 


not put him to death?” 
“He has something of a reputation; empty, but people have 
heard of him and so, if I put him to death, they weuld say I was 
intolerant. As he thinks he has ability I have made him a 
drummer to mortify him.” 

Soon after Ts‘ao instituted a banquet in the capital at which 
the guests were many. The drums were to be played and the 
old drummers were ordered to wear new clothes. But the new 
drummer took his place with the other musicians clad in old 


and worn garments. The piece chosen was Yü-yang (or . 


= “Fishing”) and from the earliest taps on the drum the effect 
= was exquisite, profound as the notes from metal and stone. 


} 


244 -~ San Kuo, or 


The performance stirred deeply the emotions of every guest, 
some even shed tears. Seeing all eyes turned on the shabby 
performer the attendants said, “Why did you not put on your 
-new uniform?” 


Mi Hêng turned to them, slipped off his frayed and torn | 


robe and stood there in full view, naked as he was born. 
The assembled guests covered their faces. Then the drummer 
composedly drew on his nether garments. 


“Why do you, behave so rudely at’ Court? 2” said Ts‘ao Ts! ao. 


“To flout one’s prince and insult one’s superiors is the real 
rudeness,” 
emblem of my purity.” 

“So you are pure! And who is foul?” 

“You do not distinguish between the wise and the foolish; 
which is to have foul vision ; you have never read the Odes or the 


Histories, which is to have foul speech; you are deaf to honest - ʻi 


words, which is to have foul ears; you are unable to reconcile 


antiquity with to-day, which is to ‘be foul without; you cannot — a 


tolerate the nobles, which is to be foul within; you harbour 
thoughts of rebellion, which is to have a foul heart. I am the 
` most famous scholar in the world and you make me a drummer 


boy, that is as Yang Huo belittling Chung-ni (Confucius) or. 


Tsang Ts‘ang vilifying Méng, the Philosopher(Mencius). You 


desire to be chief and arbitrator of the great nobles, yet. you 


treat me thus!” 


Now K‘ung Jung who had recommended Mi Héng for em- 


ployment was among the guests and he feared for the life of 
his friend. \Wherefore he tried to calm the storm. l 

“Mi Hêng is only guilty of a misdemeanour like’ Hsü Mi’ oe 
cried he. “He is not a man likely to. disturb your dreams, 
illustrious Prince.” 


Pointing to Mi. Héng the Minister said, oy will send you WORN 


Chingchou as my messenger and if Liu Piao surrender to me 
I will give you a post at Court.” B 
~ But Héng was unwilling to go. So Ts‘ao Ts‘ao ) bade two of 
his men prepare three horses and they set Héng on the middle 
one and dragged him along the road between them. 
It is also related that a great number of officers of all ranks 


assembled at the east gate to see the messenger start. Hsün. 


Yü said, “When Mi Hêng comes we will not rise to salute him.” 


So when Hêng came, dismounted and entered the waiting 
room, they all sat stiff and silent. Mi Heng uttered a loud cry. 


“What i is that for?” said Hsün Yü. 

“Should not one cry out when one enters a coffin? igs mid Mi 
Héng. 

“We may be corpses,” cried they altogether, “but you are a 
wandering ghost.” 


“I am a Minister of Han and not a partiga of Ts‘ ao rs? cried 


he. “You cannot say I have no head.” 


cried Mi Heng. “I bare my natural body as an | 


Skandi of the Three Singdoms 245 


f 


They were angry enough to kill him, but Hsiin Yü checked 
them. “He is a paltry fellow, it: is not worth (SMe your 


` blades with his blood.” 


“Iam paltry, am I? Yet I have the soul of a man and you 
are mere worms,” said Mi Héng. | ; 
They went their ways all very angry. Mi Heng went on 


-~ his journey and presently reached Chingchou, where he saw 


Liu Piao. After that, under pretence of extolli ing his virtue, 
he lampooned Piao, who was annoyed and sent him to Chiang- — 


 hsia to see Huang Tsu. 


“Why did you not put the fellow to nee for lampooning 


you?” said one to Liu Piao. 


“You see he shamed Ts‘ao Ts ao, but 'Ts‘ao did not kill him 
as he feared to lose popular favour. So he sent him to me, 


thinking to borrow my hand to slay him and so suffer the- loss i 
of my good name. Ihave sent him on to uang Tsu to let Ts‘ao | 


see that I understood.” 
His clever caution met with peneril praise. At that time 


a messenger from Yüan Shao was also there with certain 
proposals for an alliance and it was necessary to decide which 


side to espouse. All the advisers came together to consider 


the question. Then the secretary, Han Sung, said, “As you 
have now two offers you can please yourself and choose your 


own way to destroy your enemies, for if one refuse you can 


follow the other. Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is an able general and has 
many capable men in his train. It looks as though he may. 
destroy Ytian Shao and then move his armies across the river. 
I fear, General, you would be unable then to withstand him. 
‘That being so it would be wise to support Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who 


will treat you with respect.” 


Liu Piao replied, “You go to the capital and see how things 


Pea. What will help me to wecide.: 


Han Sung said, “The positions of master and servant are 


clearly defined. Now I am your man prepared to go all lengths ni 
-for you and obey you to the last, whether in serving the 
Emperor or in following Ts‘ao Ts‘ac. But lest there should 


be any doubt you must remember that if the Emperor gives 


‘me any office then I shall become his servant and shall not be 


ready to face death for you.” 
“You go and find out what you can. I have ideas in my 
mind.” 
So Han Sung took his leave and went to the anial, where 
he saw Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao gave him rank and made him Prefect of 
Lingling. The adviser Hsiin Yü remonstrated, saying, “This 


man came to spy out how things were moving. He has done 


nothing to deserve reward and yet you give him an office like 
this. There were no such suspicious rumours connected with 


poor Mi Hêng and yet you sent him off and would never test 


his powers.’ 


246 = San Kno, or. ` 


“Mi Hêng shamed me too deeply before all the P I am 
going to borrow: Liu Piao’s hand to remove him. And you 
need say no more,” said T's‘ao. 

Then Ts‘ao sent Han Sung back to his former master to tell 
him what had happened. He came and was full of praise for 
the virtues of the Court and was keen on persuading Piao to 


espouse that side. Then Liu Piao suddenly turned angry, 


_ charged him with treachery and threatened him with death. | 

“You turn your back on me;” cried Han Sung. “I did not | 
betray you.” 

K‘uai Liang remarked that Han Sung had foretold this 
possibility before he left, it was only what he expected. Liu 
Piao, who was just and reasonable, went no further. 

Presently came the news that- Mi Héng had been put to 
death by Huang Tsu on account of a quarrel begun over the 
wine cups. Both being worse for liquor they had begun to — 
discuss the worth of people. 

“You were in Hstitu,” said Huang. “Who was there of — 
worth?” 


“The big boy was K‘ung Jung and the ewe one Yang Tê- TA Wi 


There was no one else to count.” 

“What am I like?” said Huang. 

“You are like a god in a temple; you sit still and receive 
sacrifice, but the lack of intelligence is pitiful.” 

“Do you regard me as a mere image?” cried Huang Tsu; 
angry. 

So he put the impudent speaker to death. Even at the very 
point of death Mi never ceased his railing and abuse. . 

“Alas!” sighed Liu Piao, when he heard of his fate. He had 
the victim honourably interred near Yingwuchou. And a later 
poet wrote of him :— 


~ Huang Tsu could brook no rival; at his word 
Mi Héng met death beneath the cruel sword. 
His grave on Parrot Isle may yet be seen, 
ə The river flowing past it, coldly green. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao heard of the young man’s death with benike 
“The putrid bookworm has just cut ee up with his own 
sharp tongue,” said he. | 

As there was no sign of Liu Piao coming 6 join him, Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao began to think of coercion. The adviser, Hstin Yü, 
dissuaded him from this course. 

- Said he, “Yiian Shao is not subjugated, Liu Pei is not des- 
troyed. To attack Liu Piao would be to neglect the vital to 
-= care for the immaterial. Destroy the two chief enemies first. 
and Chiang-han is yours at one blow.” 

And Ts‘ao Ts‘ao took the advice. 

After the departure of Yiian-té, Tung Ch‘éng and is fellow 
conspirators did nothing else day or night but-try to evolve 


Romance of the Three tiingooms 247 


_ plans for the destruction of their enemy. But they could see 
no chance to attack. At the new year audience Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
: was odiously arrogant and overweening and the chief cons- 
pirator’s disgust was so intense that he fell ill. Hearing of 
his indisposition the Emperor sent the Court physician to see 
his “State Uncle.” i 

The Court physician at this time was a native of Loyang, 
named Chi T‘ai, more commonly known as Chi P‘ing. He was 
very famous. He devoted himself wholly to the treatment of 
his Court patient. Living in his Palace and seeing him at all 
times he soon found that some secret grief was sorely troubling 
Tung Ch‘éng. But he dared not ask questions. 


One evening, when the physician was just taking his leave, 


-~ Tung Ch‘éng kept him and the two men had supper together. 

= They sat talking for some time and Tung by and by dropped 

_ off to sleep dressed as he was. 

Presently Wang Tzu-fu and the others were announced. As 
they were coming in Wang cried, “Our business is settled!” 
—. “I should be glad to hear how,” said Tung. 

a “Liu Piao has joined Yiian Shao and fifty legions are on- 
their way here by different routes. More than this, Ma T‘éng 
and Han Sui are coming from the north with seventy-two 

~ legions. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has moved every soldier outside Hsiitu 

to meet the combined armies. There is a great banquet in the 
Palace to night and if we get together our young men and 
slaves, we can muster more than a thousand, and we can 

- surround the palace, while Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is at the banquet, and_ 

. finish him off. We must not miss this.” 

Tung Ch‘éng was more than delighted. He called his slaves - 

and armed them, put on his own armour and mounted his 

` horse. The conspirators met, as they had arranged, just at 
the inner gate. It was the first watch. The small army 

- marched straight in, Tung Ch‘éng leading with his sword 

- drawn. His intended victim was at table in one of the private 

rooms. Tung rushed in crying, “Ts‘ao you rebel, stay!” and 
‘dashed_at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who fell at the first blow. 

And just then he woke up and found it was all a dream, a 

` dream as unreal as that of life in the kingdom of the ants. — 

But his mouth was still full of ‘curses. 

“Do you really wish to destroy Ts‘ao Ts‘ao?” said Chi P‘ing, 
going forward to his half awakened patient. : 
This brought him to his senses. Tung stopped, terror 
~- stricken, and made no reply. ; 
“Do not be frightened, O Uncle,” said the doctor, “Although 

I am a physician I am also a man, and I never forget my 

Emperor. You have seemed sad for many days but I have 

never ventured to ask the reason.- Now you have shown it in 

your dream and I know your real feelings. If I can be of any 
use I will help. Nothing can daunt me.” 


248 p San Kuo, or . 


' Tung Ch‘éng covered his face and wept. “I fear you may 
not be true to me,” cried he. 

Chi P‘ing at once bit off a finger as a pledge ot his faith. 
And then his host and patient brought forth the decree he had 
received in the girdle. “I am afraid our schemes ‘will come to 
nought,” said he. “Liu Yiian-te and Ma T‘éng are gone and 


there is nothing we can do. That was the real reason I fell — 


Te? 


“It is not worth troubling you gentlemen with; for Ts‘ao’s | 


life lies in these hands of mine,” said Chi Pring. 

“How can that be?” 

“Because he is often ill with deep-seated pain in his head. 
When this comes on he sends for me. When next he calls 
me I only have to give him one dose and he will certainly die. 
We do not want any weapons.’ 


“If only you.could do it! You would be the saviour of the 


Dynasty ; it depends upon you.’ 


Then Chi P‘ing went away leaving his late patient a happy 


man. Tung strolled into the garden and there he saw one 


- of his slaves, Ts‘in Ch‘ing-t‘ung, whispering with one of the 
waiting maids in a dark corner. This annoyed him and he 
called his attendants to seize them. He would have put them ` 


to death but for the intervention of his wife. At her request 


he spared their lives but both were beaten, and the lad was. 
thrown into a dungeon. Sulky at his treatment the slave broke | 


out of the cell in the night, climbed over the wall and went 
straight to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s palace, where he betrayed the cons- 
piracy. i 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at once had him taken into a secret chamber and 
questioned him. He gave the names of the conspirators and 
told as much as he knew of-their doings. He said his master 
had a piece of white silk, with writing on it, but he did not 


know what it meant. Lately Chi P‘ing had bitten off one of 


his fingers as a pledge of fidelity. He had seen that. 

The runaway slave was kept in a secret part of the Palace 
while his late master, only knowing that he had run away, 
took no special means to find him. 

Soon after this Ts‘ao feigned a headache and sent for Chi 
P‘ing as usual. 

“The rebel-is done for,” thought Chi P‘ing, and he made a 
secret package of poison which he took with him to the palace 
of the Minister. He found Ts‘ao in bed. The patient bade 
the doctor prepare a potion for him. 


“One draught will cure this disease,” said P‘ing. He bade 


them bring him a pipkin and he prepared the potion in the 
room. When it had simmered for some time and was half 
finished the poison was added, and soon after the physician 
presented the draught. T's‘ao Ts‘ao, knowing it was poisoned, 
made excuses and would not swallow it. 


=A 52 


Romance of the Three ingdoms ae ae 


“You should take it hot,” said the doctor. “Then there will 


be a gentle perspiration and you will be better.” 
“You are a scholar,” said Ts‘ao, sitting up, “and know what. i 
is the correct thing to do. When the. master is ill and takes 
_ drugs, the attendant first tastes them; when a man is ill, his 
son first tastes the medicine. You are my confidant and should 
-drink first. Then I will swallow the remainder.” zh 
“Medicine is to treat disease; what is the use of any ane ’s 


tasting it?” said Ping. But he guessed now the conspiracy 
had been discovered so he dashed forward, seized Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


_by the ear and tried to pour the potion down his throat. Ts‘ao 


pushed it.away and it spilt. The bricks upon which it fell 


pied oa split asunder. Before Ts‘ao Ts‘ao could speak his ser- 
= vants had already seized his assailant. 
Said Ts‘ao, “I am not ill: I only wanted to test you. “So 


you really thought to poison me.’ 
He sent for a score of sturdy gaolers who carried off the 


bound, was thrown to the ground before him. The prisoner 


_ maintained a bold front. 


Ts‘ao said “I thought you were a physician; ee dared you 


-try to poison me? Some one incited you to this crime and if 
i you tell me I will pardon you.’ 


“You are a rebel; you flout your Prince and injure your 


ia betters. The whole ‘world wishes to kill you. Do you think 


I am the only one?” 
Ts‘ao again and again pressed the prisoner to tell what he 


ew but he only replied that no one had sent him; it was his 


-own desire. 


“And I have failed and I can but die,” added he. 
Ts‘ao angrily bade the gaolers give him a severe beating 


and they flogged him for two watches. His skin hung in 
tatters, the flesh was battered and the blood from his wounds 
ran down the steps. Then fearing he might die and his 


evidence be lost, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade them cease and remove him. 


-They took him off to a quiet place where he might recover 
; somewhat. 


Having issued orders to prepare a banquet for next day 


-Ts‘ao invited all the conspirators thereto. Tung Ch‘éng was 


the only one who excused himself, saying he was “unwell. The 
others dared not stay away as they felt they would be sus- 


pected. 3 


Tables were laid in the private apartments and after several 
courses the host said, “There is not much to. amuse us to-day 
but I have a man to show you that will sober you.” 


“Bring him in,” he said, turning to the gaolers, and the 


hapless Chi Ping appeared, securely fastened in a moots 
collar. He was placed where i could see him. 


a prisoner to the inner apartments to be interrogated. -Ts‘ao. 
took his seat in a pavilion and the hapless physician, tightly 


250 San ito, or 4 
“You officials do not know. that this man is connected with 

7 a gang of evil doers who desire to overturn the government — 

and even injure me. However Heaven has defeated their 

plans, but I desire that.you should hear his evidence.” 

Then Ts‘ao ordered the lictors to beat their prisoner. They 
did so till he lay unconscious, when they revived him by . 
spraying water over his face. As soon as he came to he 
glared at his oppressor and ground his teeth. K 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao you rebel! what are you vang for? Why 
not kill me?” cried Chi. - 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao replied, “The conspirators were only six at first; 

thea you made the seventh.” 

Here the prisoner broke in with more abuse, while Wang 
Fzu-fu and the others exchanged glances looking. as though 
they were sitting on a rug full of needles. Ts‘ao continued: 
his torture of the prisoner, beating him into unconsciousness | 
Oe and reviving him with cold water, the victim disdaining to 
ask mercy. Finally Ts‘ao realised he would incriminate none —_— 
ca of his accomplices and so he told the gaolers to remove him. Ba 

At the close.of the banquet, when the guests were dispersing, 
four of them, the Hous conspirators, were invited to remain 
behind to supper.» They were-terrified so that their souls . 
seemed no longer is inhabit their bodies, but there was no 
saying nay to the invitation. Presently Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, 
“Still there is something I want to speak about so I have asked = 
you to stay for a time longer. I do not know what you four. 
have been arranging with Tung Ch‘éng.” 

“Nothing at all,” said Wang. 

“And what is written on the white silk?” asked Ts‘ao. 

They all said they knew nothing about it. 

Then Ts‘ao ordered the runaway slave to be bouki in. 
As soon as he came Wang said, “Well, what have you seen’ 
and where?” 

The slave Ch‘ing-t‘ung replied, “You six very carefully 
chose retired places to talk in and you secretly Mee a white 
roll. You cannot deny that.” 5 

Wang replied, “This miserable creature was panned for 
misbehaviour with one of Uncle Tung’s maids and now 
pee of that he slanders his master, You must not‘listen 
to him 

“Chi P‘ing tried to. pour poison down my throat. Who told 
him to do that if it was not Tung?” 

They all said they knew nothing about who it was. 

“So far,” said Ts‘ao, “matters are only beginning and there 
is a chance of forgiveness. But if the thing grows, it will be 
difficult not to take notice of it.” 

The whole four vigorously denied that any plot ated 
However Ts‘ao called up his henchmen and the four men were 
put into confinement. 


uae at the Three fingooms es 251 


Next das Ts‘ao Ts‘ao litte a large following went to the 


State Uncle’s Palace to ask after his health. Ch‘éng came out 


to receive his visitor, who at once said, “Why did you. not 
come last night?” 
“I am not quite well yet and have to be very careful about 


= going out,” replied Ch‘éng. 


“One might say you were sufterine from national sorrow, 
eh?” said Ts‘ao. 

Ch‘é éng started. Ts‘ ao continued, “Have you heard of the 
Ch Rine affair | ea 

“No: what isit? | 

~'Ts‘ao smiled coldly. “How can it be you do not know?’ 

Ts‘ao turned to his attendants and told them to bring in 


the prisoner while he went on talking to his host about. his 


illness. 
“Tung Ch‘éng was much put about and knew not what to do. 


= Soon the gaolers led in the physician to the steps of the hall. 
= At once the bound man began to rail at Ts‘ao as rebel and 
‘traitor. i 


33 


“This man,” said Ts‘ao, pointing to Chi P‘ing, “has impli- 


cated Wang Tzt-fu and three others, all of whom are now 


under arrest. _ There is one more whom I have not caught 
et. 39 
“Who sent you to poison me? a ' continued he, turning toward 


the physician. “Quick, tell me.’ 


“Heaven sent me to slay a traitor.” 

Ts‘ao angrily ordered them to beat him again, but there 
was no part of his body that could be beaten. Tung Ch‘éng 
sat looking at him, his heart’ feeling as if transfixed with a | 


- dagger. 


“You were born with ten fingers; how is it-you have now. 
only nine?” 
Chi Ping replied, “I bit off one as a pledge when I swore to 


slay a traitor.” 


Ts‘ao told them to Brine a knife and they lopped off his other 


` nine. fingers. 


“Now they are all off; that will teach you to make pledges.” 
“Still I have a mouth that can swallow a traitor and a tongue — 
that can curse him,” said Chi P‘ing. 
Ts‘ao told them to cut out his tongue. 
` Chi P‘ing said, “Do not. I cannot endure any more punish- 


ment I shall have to speak out. Loosen my bonds.” 


“Loose them. There is no reason why not,” said Ts‘ao. 

They loosed him. As soon as he was free Chi P‘ing stood 
up, turned his face toward the Emperor’s Palace and bowed, 
saying, “It is Heaven’s will that thy servant has been. unable 


to remove the evil,” then he turned and fell dead or the 


steps. 
His body was quartered and exposed, 


This happened in the fest ey of the fifth year of 
“Established Tranquillity” and a certain historian wrote a ~ 


“poem :— i He 


There lived in Han a simple leech. 
No warrior, yet brave | 
Enough to risk his very life 
His Emperor to save. 
Alas! he failed; but lasting fame 
Is his; he feared not death; 
He cursed "the traitorous Minister 
Unto his latest breath. |i 


Seeing his victim. had passed beyond the realm of punish- 
ment Ts‘ao had the slave led in. ty j 

“Do you know this man, Uncle?” | 

“Ves,” cried Tung Ch‘éng. “So the runaway slave is here; 
he ought to be put to death.” 


“He just told me of your treachery; he is my witness,” said 


Ts‘ao, “Who would dare kill him?” 


“How can you, the first Minister of State, heed the i 


unsupported tale of an absconding slave?” 


“But I have Wang and the others in prison,’ i gaid Ts‘ ao A 


Ts‘ao. “And how can you rebut their evidence?” 


He then called in the remainder of his followers and ordered W 
them to search Tung Ch'‘êng’s bedroom. They did so and found’ 


the decree that had been given hum) in the girdle and the Mecze 
signed by the conspirators. 

, “You mean rat!” cried Ts‘ao, “you dared do this 7 is 

He gave orders to arrest ‘the whole household without ex- 
ception. Then he returned to his Palace with the incriminating 
documents and called all his advisers together to discuss the 
dethronement of the Emperor and the setting up of a successor. 
: Many decrees, blood written, have issued, accomplishing nothing 

One inscribed pledge was fraught with mountains of sorrow. 


The reader who wishes to know the fate of the Emperor — 


must read the next chapter. 


= 
è 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


Bes hath © MURDER or A KUEI-FEI: 
i rics Lau PEI DEFEATED ; FLIGHT TO YUAN SHAO. 


The last chapter closed with the discovery of the ‘ ‘girdle? 
_ decree and the assembly of Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao’s advisers to consider 


the ‘deposition of the Emperor Hsien. Ch‘éng Yü spoke 

-~ strongly against this” Saying | ‘“Tllustrious Sir, the means by 

p which you impress the world and direct the government is the 
command of the House of Han. 


- deprecated.” 


Tung Ch‘éng’s plot was not to go unpunished. All five of the 


of the gates of the city. The people wept at such merciless 
and wholesale slaughter. 


A secret decree ina girdle sewn, 

In red blood written, the Emperor's. own, 
To the staunch and faithful Tung addressed, 

< Who had saved him once when enemies pressed, 

And who, sore grieved at his Sovereign’s fate, — é 
Expressed in dreams his ceaseless hate, 
Carried misfortune and death i in its train 
But glory to him who died in vain. 


= ; i Another poet wrote of the sad fate of Wang Tzù- 4 and hiss 


Bs -friends :— = 
SIA Greatheartedly these eted the silken roll, 

And pledged themselves to save their King, from shame. 

Alas! black death of them took heavy toli, 

‘To write their names upon the roll of fame. 


But the slaughter of the conspirators and their whole house- 


holds did not appease the wrath of the cruel Minister. The 


_Emperor’s Kuei-fei was a sister of Tung Ch‘éng and, sword 


\in hand, Ts‘ ao T's‘ao went into the palace determined to slay 


peo her. also. The Emperor cherished her tenderly, the more so 


as she was then in the fifth month of pregnancy. That day, thes 


> as they often did, the Emperor, his Consort and the Kuei-fei 
-~ were sitting in their private apartments secretly talking of 
= the decree entrusted to Tung Ch‘éng and asking each other 
hee | why nothing seemed to have been done. The sudden appear- 

-ance of the angry Minister, armed as he was, frightened them 
y 


EIN yw y 
KEE IETF T: 


In these times of turmoil and — 
- rivalry among the nobles such a step as the deposition of the | 
ruler will certainly bring about civil war and is meh. to be | 


After reflection. Ts‘ao Ts‘ i ERT N the project But. 


4 conspirators with every member of their households, seven e 
= hundred at least, were taken and put to death at one or another 


254 : an Ruo, or 


“Does Your Majesty know that eke Ch‘éng conspired 
against me?” said he. a 

“Tung Cho died long ago,’ ’ replied the Emperor. 

“Not Tung Cho; Tung Ch’éng,’’ roared T's‘ao. 

The Emperor’s ‘heart trembled but he gasped, out, oneal 
I did not: know.” 

“So the cut finger and the Ďlobd written decree are lal for- 
gotten, eh?” t 

The Emperor was silent. Ts‘ao bade his lictors seize the 


Kuei-fet. The Emperor interposed asking pity for her condi- 


tion. 

“If Heaven had not interposed and defeated the plot ï should 
be a dead man. How could I leave this woman to work evil 
to me by and by?” ; 

Said the Emperor, “Immurè. hee in one of the palaces till 
her confinement. Do not harm her now.’ 

“Do you wish me to spare, ‘her offspring to avenge the 
mother?” said Ts‘ao. 

“I pray that my body may Ihe spared mutilation and not- 
put to shame,” said Tung Kuei-fev. ÈN, 
Ts‘ao bade his men show her the white silk Sond The | 
Emperor wept bitterly. weetee 
“Do not hate me in the realms below the Nine Springs,” said 

the Emperor to her. 

His tears fell like rain. The Empress Fu also joined in the 
lament, but Ts‘ao said, “You are behaving like a lot of child- 
ren,” and told the lictors to take her away and strangle her: 
in the courtyard. si 

In vain had the fair girl found favour in the sight of her lord, 
She died, and the fruit of her womb perished. ; 
Stern and calm her lord sat, powerless to save, 

Hiding his face while tears gushed forth. 

When leaving the palace Ts‘ao gave strict orders to the 
keepers saying “Any one of the Imperial relatives by marriage 
who enter the Palace will be put to death; and the guards will i 
share the same punishment for lack of zeal.” 

To make more sure he appointed three companies of Imperial _ 
Guards from -his own men and appointed Ts‘ao Hung to the 
command. 

Then said Ts‘ao to his counsellor, Ch‘eng Yu, “The con- 
spirators in the capital have been removed, it is true, but there 
ay he two others, Ma T’éng and Liu Pei. These must not 

e left.” Meee 

Ch‘éng Yü replied, “Ma T‘éng is strong in the west and 
would not be easily captured. He might be enticed to the 
capital by suave words and kindly praises, when he would be 


at your mercy. The other is at Hstichou, strongly posted, and > ` 


not to be lightly attacked. More than this, Yiian Shao is at' 
Kuantu and_his one desire is to attack you. Any attempt on 


Romance of the Three Lingdoms 255 


the east will send Liu Pei to him for help and he will come here 

at once. Then what wili you do?” 

“You are at fault,” replied Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. “Liu Pei is a bold 
warrior and if we wait till he is fully fledged and winged, he 
will be more difficult to deal with. Shao may be strong but 

he is not to be feared. He is too undecided to act.” 

As they were discussing these things Kuo Chia came in and 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao suddenly referred the matter to him. 

“If I attack Liu Pei, then Ytian Shao is to be feared: what 
‘do you think of it?” 

“Shao by nature is dilatory and hesitating and. his various 
advisers are jealous of each other. He is not to be feared. 
Liu Pei is getting together a new army and has not yet won 
their hearts. You could settle the east in one battle. X : 

This advice being in harmony with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s own opinion 
was pleasing to him and he prepared an army of twenty 
legions, to move in five divisions against Hstichou. 

Scouts took the news of these preparations to Hsiichou. Sun 
_ Ch‘ien first went to Hsiap‘i to tell Kuan Yü and then went to 
Hsiaop‘ei to tell Yüan-tê. The two discussed the position and 
decided that help must be sought. So letters were written to 
~ Yuan Shao and given to Sun Ch‘ien, who went north, sought 
Tien Féng and asked him to take him into the presence of 
Yuan Shao. He was introduced and presented his letters. 
= But Yüan Shao was of melancholy countenance and his 
dress was all awry. Tien ‘Feng said, “Why this disarray, 
-my lord?” 

_“T am about to die” replied Shao. 

. “But why do you utter such words?” 
“I have five sons, but only the youngest is clever enough to 
understand my ideas. Now he is suffering from a disease 


TA which places his life in jeopardy. Think you that I have any 
heart to talk over any other affairs?” 


Spat,” said T‘ien Féng, “the present A NA of cir- 


n cumstances is unparalleled. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is going to attack . 
the east and Hsiich‘ang will be empty. You can enter it with ` 


‘a few volunteers and so perform good service to the Emperor 
and save the people from sorrow. You have only to make up 
your mind to act.” 

“T know the chance is excellent but I am worried and dis- 
tressed and fear failure.” 

“What are you distressed about: ?? said Fêng. 

“Among my sons only this special one is remarkable and if ` 


ae anything happens T am done.” 


Thus it became evident that no army would be despatched. 
In confirmation of this Yiian said to Sun Ch‘ien, “Go home and 
tell Yiian-té the real reason and say that if anything untoward 
happen he can come over to me and I will find some means of 


helping him.” 


256 Aan kuo, or 


Tien Féng struck the ground with his staff. “It is such a 
pity!” cried he. “Just as.an unique opportunity presents itself 
everything is spoiled by the illness of a child.” 

He went out. Sun Ch‘ien saw that no help could be hoped 
for and set out to return. When he had arrived and related — 
what he had seen Yiian-té was quite alarmed and asked what 
could be done. 

“Do not be troubled, brother,” said Chang Fei. “We can — 
destroy Ts‘ao Ts‘ao merely by a sudden attack before his army 
shall have time to camp.” ~ 

“That would be according to the rules of war,” said Venice 
“You have always been a bold warrior and that move against 
Liu Tai shows that you are becoming a strategist too.” 

So he gave his younger brother command of enough men to , 
carry out his plan. | 

Now while Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was in the midst of his march toward 
Hsiaop‘ei a tornado sprang up and the howling gale tore down 
one of the banners and broke the staff. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao called 
together his advisers and leaders to ask them what this, 
portended. Hsiin Yü said, “From what direction was the 
-wind at the time and what was the colour of the flag?” - © 


“The wind was from the south-east and the flag was blue A 


and red.” 

“There is only one interpretation; there will be a pt on 
the camp to-night.” 
Ts‘ao nodded. At that moment Mao Chih entered and re- 

ported a similar incident. Ts‘ao asked him the portent. 
i “My foolishness tells me that it means a night raid, cs ephe 
e. 


Alas for the weakness of this descendant of kings! 
He placed his faith on a night raid, 

But the broken staff of a banner warned } his enemy. 
Why should the ancient of days favour the wicked? 


“This is evidently providence,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and he : 


began to make preparations. He told off nine bodies of men 
to take stations, leaving only one of them as if camped while 
he placed the others in ambush at eight points. 

There was but little moonlight as Ytian-té and Chang Fei © 
marched their respective armies toward Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp. 
They had left Sun Ch‘ien to guard Hsiaop‘ei. Chang Fei, 
since he was the originator of the stratagem, led the way with 
some light horse. As they drew near everything seemed very | 
quiet and no one seemed moving. Then suddenly lights flashed — 
out all about them and Chang Fei saw he had fallen into a traps 
At once from all the eight directions came out the ambushed 
troops. 

Chang Fei, dashing this way and rushing that, PNE EN his. 


van and protecting his rear, vainly tried to clear himself. The 


soldiers he had, being originally Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s men, soon gave 


N 
y 
x 


p 
! 


ere oe “Romance of the awe Mingort 257 


ia in 'and returned k their old leader. The position became very 
_ desperate. 

Chang Fei met Hsü Huang and engaged him but his rear 
was also attacked by Yo Chin. At length he cut his own way 
~ out and with a half score of his men started to return to 
; _ Hsiaop‘ ei. The retreat was cut off. He thought to make for | 
- Hsiichou but felt certain that way was also barred. No other 
way seemed open and so he made for the Mangyang Hills. 

- As Yiian-té drew near the camp he intended to attack he 
~ heard the din of battle. Then he was attacked in the rear 
~- and very soon had lost half his force. Next Hsiahou Tun 
~~ came to attack. Thereupon Yiian-té bolted.. He was pursued 
` by Hsiahou. Ytian. Presently he looked about him and found 
- he had less than half a hundred men following him. He set 
his face in the direction of Hsiaop‘ei. 
7 But before long he saw that place was in flames. So he 
_ changed his plan and went toward Hsiap‘i. However he found 
the whole countryside full of the enemy and he could not get 
- through. So he bethought himself of the promise of Yiian 
Shao, that he would find refuge if things went agley, and 
-~ determined to go to him till he could form some other plan. 

Wherefore he took the Ch‘ingchou road. But it also was 
blocked and he went into the open country and made his way 
north, not without being pursued and losing the remainder 
of his few followers. 
~ He hastened toward Ch‘ingchou, travelling three hundred li 
i Ura day. When he reached the city and summoned the gate the 
= guards asked who he was and they told the governor, who 

was Yiian Shao’s eldest son, T‘an. Yiian T'an was greatly 
mS - surprised, but he opened the "gates and went to meet Yiian-té, 
a whom he treated with due consideration. 

Liu Pei told the story of his defeat and said he wished 
. for harbour. He was given suitable quarters and hospitably 
- entertained, while the young man wrote to inform his father. 
Then he provided an escort and sent Yiian-té on his journey as 
- far as the boundary of P‘ingyiian. 

K At Yehchün he was met by Yüan Shao in person, with a 
great escort. Yüan-tê made a humble obeisance which Yiian 
_ Shao hastened to return and said, “I have been very distressed 
- that, on account of my son’s illness, I did not come to your 
aid. It is great joy to see you; the one desire of my life is 
E satisfied: ; 
= — Yüan-tê replied, “The poor Liu Pei you see here has long 
-~ desired to take refuge with you, but fate has hitherto denied 
- him that privilege. Now, attacked by Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao, my family 
# lost, I remembered that you, General, would receive gentlemen 
from all sides. Wherefore I put my pride in my pocket. I 
trust that I may be found worthy and one day I will prove 
$ MY gratitude.” 


a 


258 : : San uo 


Yüan Shao received him with much pleasure and treated — 


him exceedingly well. And they both lived in Ch‘ichou. 
After the capture of Hsiaop‘ei, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao pressed on toward — 
Hsiichou, which, after a short "defence and the flight of the. 


defenders, was surrendered by Ch‘én Téng. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao led — : 


his army into the city, restored order and pacified the people. 


Next he wanted to press on to Hsiap‘i, where Kuan Yü was 


holding out and keeping guard of Liu Pei’s family. 

Hsiin Yü said, “Kuan Yü is there, in charge of his brother’s 
family, and he will defend the city ‘to the last. If you do not 
take it quickly Yiian Shao will get it.” 

“I have always loved Kuan Yü, both for his warlike Ecos 
and his intelligence. I would engage him to enter my service. 
I would rather send some one to talk him into surrender.” 

“He will not do that,” said Kuo Chia; “his sense of right. 
is too solid. I fear any one who went to hae’ with him would 
suffer.” 

Then suddenly a man | stepped out, saying, “I know him 
slightly and I will go.’ 


The speaker was Chang Liao. Hsün Yü looked A him and 
said, “Though you are an old acquaintance I do not think you - 


are equal to talking over Kuan Yü. But I have a scheme that * 
will so entangle him that he will have no alternative; he will- 
have to enter the service of the Minister.” 


They set the fatal spring beside the lordly tiger’s trail, 
They hide the hook with fragrant bait to catch the mighty whale! 


How Kuan Yü was to be Potra DpEg will be told in the next 


chapter. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


FROM T‘ USHAN CAMP KUAN YU MAKES THREE CONDITIONS, 
THE RESCUE AT PAIMA RELEASES Ts‘ao TS‘AO. 


Fhe plan to seduce Kuan Yü from allegiance to his brothers 
was now announced by its proposer. Since Kuan was far 
braver than ordinary men he could only be overreached by 


superior cunning. So it was proposed to send some of his 


soldiers who had lately been of Liu Pei’s army into Hsiap‘i, 
where they would say they had come back. They would thus 


be allies on the inside. Then an attack and a feigned defeat 


would entice Kuan to a distance from the city. And his return 
road would be cut. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao accepted the scheme and a few score of the men 
who had lately been in Hstichou were sent to the city. The 
commander believed the story they told and trusted them. So 
_ they were suffered to remain. 

After this part of the game had been played, Hsiahou Tun 
- Jed forward five companies against the city. At first Kuan Yü 
=- would not accept the challenge, but provoked by men sent to 
hurl insults at him from the foot of the wall, his wrath got 
the better of him and he moved out with three companies. 
: After the leaders had exchanged a half score bouts Tun made 
to run away. Kuan Yü pursued. Tun stopped and made a 


= stand; then he fled again. Thus alternately fighting and 


see retiring, he enticed Kuan Yü twenty li from the city. Then 
- Kuan suddenly remembering the risk to the city drew off his 
~ men to return homeward. 
~ Soon, at the sound of a signal bomb, out moved two bodies 
‘of men who barred his way. Kuan Yü hastened along a road 
that seemed to offer retreat, but from both sides his ambushed 
enemies shot their crossbows and the arrows flew like locusts 
on the wing. No way past was found and he turned back. 
Then both bodies joined in attacking him. He drove them off 
= and got into the road to his own city, but soon Hsiahou Tun 
came up again and attacked fiercely as before. Evening came 
and still Kuan was hemmed in, so he went up on a low hill 
upon which he encamped for a rest. 
. He was surrounded on all sides by enemies. By and by, 
looking toward his city, he saw the glow of fire. It meant 
~ that the traitors, who had come in to surrender, had opened 
_ the gate and the enemy had gone in in force. They had made 


260 ee) Dan Kuo, or \ 


the fires in order to perplex and distress Kuan Yü and indeed 
the sight saddened him. 

In the night he made efforts to escape Nom the hill, but every 
attempt was checked by flights of arrows. At daybreak he 
prepared for one more effort, but before moving he saw a 
horseman riding up at full speed and presently discerned 
Chang Liao. When within speaking distance, Kuan Yü said, 
“Are you come to fight me, Wên-yüan ?” 

“No,” replied Chang Liao. “I am come to see you because » 
of our old friendship.” ! / 


Wherefore he threw aside his sword, dismounted and came x 


forward saluting. And the two sat down. 

“Then naturally you have come to talk me over,” said Kuan 
Yi. 

“Not so;” said Chang Liao. “Sometime ago you saved me; 
can I help saving you?” 

“Then you desire to help me.” 

“Not exactly that,’ replied Chang. 

(Then what are you doing here if you have not come to help 
me? 9 

“Nothing is known of the fate of your elder brother, nor 
whether your younger brother is alive or dead. Last night 
your city fell into the hands of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, but neither soldiers 
nor people were harmed and a special guard was set over the 
family of Yüan-tê lest they should be alarmed. I came to tell 
you how well they had been treated.” 

“This is certainly talking me over,” said Kuan testily. 
“Though escape is impossible yet I am not perturbed. I look 
upon death as going home. You had better depart quickly 
and let me go down and begin the struggle again.” 

“Surely you must know everybody will ridicule you when 
they hear of this,” said Chang, laughing loud. 
“I shall die for loyalty and righteousness. Who will laugh?” 

said Kuan. 

“You would be guilty of three faults if you died.” 

“Tell me them,” said Kuan. 

“First of all you and your elder brother pledged yourselves 
in the Peach Garden to die or to live together. Now your 
brother has been defeated and you want to fight to the death. 
Therefore, if your brother appear again by and by and wants 
your help, he will seek it in vain. Is this anything else than 
betraying the Peach Garden oath? Secondly you are in charge 
of your brother’s family and, if you fought and died, the two 
women would be left forlorn and without a protector. ‘That 
would be a betrayal of trust. Thirdly your military skill 
stands out conspicuous and will go down in history. If you 
do not aid your brother in his noble attempt to maintain the 
Dynasty then all your labours and sufferings will have been | 
spent to win a worthless reputation as a valiant fool. Where 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 261.0 


VIS the sense in that? I feel it my duty to point out these three 
faults to you.’ 

Kuan Yii remained silent and thought for some time. Then 
he said, “You have spoken of my three faults. What do you 
desire? 2 

“You are surrounded with the certainty of death if you do 
not yield. There is no advantage in a useless death. Where- 
fore your best course is to yield to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao till you hear 
news of Liu Pei and can rejoin him. Thus you will ensure 
the safety of the two ladies and also keep inviolate the Peach 
Garden compact. You will preserve a useful life. Brother, 

you must reflect on these things.” 

“Brother, you have spoken of three advantages; now I have 
three conditions. "a the Minister concede these then will I 
~- doff my armour. he refuse, then I prefer to be guilty of 
the three faults and die.” 
he “Why should the Minister not concede them? He is most 
. liberal and large minded. I pray you to let me hear your 
- conditions.” 

; “The first is that as I and the Imperial Üde have sworn 
to support the Hans I now submit to the Emperor and not 
to his minister Ts‘ao. The second condition is that suitable 
provision be made for the two ladies under my care and that 
_ no one shall be allowed to approach them. The third is that 
= I shall be allowed to set off to rejoin Uncle Liu so soon as 

I shall hear where he is, whether it be far or near. I require 

all these to be satisfied ; failing a single one, I will not submit. 

Wherefore, Wên-yüan, I pray you hasten back and announce 

them.” 

Chang Liao lost no time but rode back to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. When 

= he spoke of Kuan Yii’s intention to submit to the Hans but 
not to Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao, the latter smiled, saying, “As I am the 
= Minister of Han, so am I Han. I grant Pee esaii 
-. Chang then spoke of provision due to their rank and security 
from molestation for the ladies, to which Ts‘ao replied, 
_ “I will give them twice the regular amount for an Uncle of 
the Emperor; as for securing them from molestation, that is 
simple. The ordinary domestic law is enough. Why should us 
there be any doubt. ?” i 

Then said Chang, “Whenever he shall get news of the where- By 
abouts of Yüan-tê, he must go to him.” 

At this Ts‘ao shook his head, saying, “Then I am merely ae 
to feed Yiin-ch‘ang. What is the use of this? I cannot ert 
consent.” : 

Chang replied, “You must know of the difference in Yü 

= Jangs behaviour brought about by difference of treatment? 
-  Yiian-té treats Yiin-ch‘ang just kindly and liberally; you can 

surely engage his heart and support by being kinder and more 
liberal.” 


Pe ie = ee 


à 


+ 
- z hs z= 


262 San uo, or 


“What you say is much to the point. I will grant the three- 


conditions,” said Ts‘ao. 

Whereupon Chang Liao left to carry the news to Kuan Yü, 
still on the summit of the hill. 

“Now I expect the army to withdraw so that I may enter 
the city to tell the two ladies what has been arranged. After 
that I submit at once.’ 


Chang Liao rode back once more wits this request and the , 


order was given for the army to retire ten li. 

“Do not do this,” said Hsiin Yü. “I fear treachery.” 

“He will certainly not break faith,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. “He 
is too high principled. 2 

The army retired and Kuan Yü with his force re-entered 
the city, where he saw that the people were following their 


ordinary avocations in tranquillity. He came to the palace © 
and went in to see the two ladies, who hastened to meet him.. 
He bowed to them below the steps and said, “I apologise for 


having caused you to feel alarmed.” 

“Where is the Uncle?” asked they. 

“T know not whither he has gone.’ ; 

“What do you intend to do, brother-in-law?” 

“I went out of the city to try a last battle. I was surrounded -~ 
ona hill top and Chang Liao has urged me to yield. I proposed 
three conditions, all of which were conceded, and the enemy | 
drew off to allow me to return to the city. Unless I have 
your decision, sisters-in-law, I scarcely dare to take any final 
step.” 

They asked what were the conditions and were told. Then 
Kan Fu-jén said, “When Ts‘ao’s army came in we took it to 


mean certain death. But it is scarcely credible that not a hair -` 


of our heads has been disturbed, not a soldier has dared enter 
our doors. You have accepted the conditions, brother-in- law, 
and there is no need to ask our consent. Our only fear is that — 
he will not let you go by and by to search for the Uncle.’ 


‘‘Sisters-in-law, you need not be anxious. I will see to that.” A 


“You must decide everything and need not ask us women- 
kinds sc" 


Kuan Yü withdrew and then, with a small escort, went to 7 


his interview with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao came to the outermost 
gate to welcome him and Kuan Yü dismounted and made obei- 
sance. Ts‘ao returned his salute with the greatest cordiality. 


“The leader of a defeated army is grateful for the gracious- 


ness that has preserved his life,” said Kuan Yü. 
“T have so long admired your loyalty and high principles 


that this happy meeting gratifies the desire of my whole life,’ Ae 


replied Ts‘ao. ` 

“As the Minister has granted the three requests which my 
friend petitioned for on my behalf there is now but little to 
discuss,” said Kuan. 


¥ 


"Romance of the Three tingvoms | 263 


“As I have ken so be it; I could not break faith,” replied 
Ts‘ao. 

ate e Whenever I hear where Uncle Liu is I must: containly go to 
him, even if through fire and water. It may be that there 
$ there will be no opportunity of taking leave. I trust you will 
understand the reason.” 

“If Liu Pei should prove to be alive you auat certainly be 
allowed to go to him. But I fear that in the confusion he may 
have lost his life. You may set your mind at rest and let me 
make enquiries.” 
` Kuan Yü thanked him. Then a banquet was prepared in his 
honour. Next day the army started on its homeward march. 

For the journey to the capital a carriage was prepared for 
i the two ladies and Kuan Yü was its guard. On the road they 
= rested at a certain post station and Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao, anxious to 
_ compromise Kuan by beguiling him into forgetfulness of his 

' duty, assigned him to the same apartment as his sisters-in-law. 


2 candle. in his hand. Not once did he yield to fatigue. Ts‘ao 
~ Ts‘ao’s respect for him could not but increase. 

= . At the capital the Minister assigned a dignified residence to 
- Kuan Yü, which he immediately divided into two enclosures, 


the inner one for the two ladies and the other for himself. He 


placed a guard of eighteen of his veterans over the women’ s 
~ quarters. : 
i : Kuan Yü was presented to the Emperor Hsien who conferred 
_ upon him the rank of General. Soon after Ts‘ao made a great 
` banquet, inviting all his advisers and fighting men, solely in 
honour of Kuan Yii, who sat in the seat of honour. Beside this 
_ “he received presents of silks and gold and silver vessels, all of 
~ which were sent into the ladies’ quarters for their use and 
keeping. In fact from the day of arrival in the capital Kuan 
_ Yti was treated with marked respect and distinction, banquets 
and feasts following each other in quick succession. ` 
ees Ts‘ao Ts‘ao also presented him with ten most lovely serving 
__. girls; these also were sent within to wait upon his two sisters- 
- in-law. 
Every third day Kuan Yü went to the door of the women’s 
quarters to enquire after their welfare, and then they asked 
if any news of the wanderer had-come. This ceremony closed 
= with the words “Brother-in-law, you may retire when you 
- wish.” & 
; -Ts‘ao heard of this extremely correct behaviour and thought 
`- all the more of the man for it~ 
_, One day Ts‘ao noticed that the robe Kuan Yii was wearing 
~ was old and frayed. Taking his measurements Ts‘ao had a 
` new one made of fine brocade and presented it to him He 
- took it and put it on under the old robe, so that the oe 


_ covered it. 


Kuan stood the whole night before the door with a lighted | 


San tiuo, or , 
\ 


264 


“Why so very thrifty ? 2” laughed Ts‘ao. “a 

“It is not thrift,” was his reply. “The old cone was a pitt Be 
from my brother and I wear it because it reminds me of him. 
I could not allow the new gift to eclipse his old one.” . 

“How very high principled!” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sighing. oe 

But he was not pleased with the man for all that he praised 
his conduct. One day when Kuan Yti was at home there came 
a messenger to say that the two women had thrown themselves 
on the ground and were weeping. They would not say why. | 
Kuan Yü set his dress in order, went over and knelt by the door 
saying, “Why this grief, sisters-in-law?” 

Kan Fu-jén replied, “In the night I dreamed that the Uncle 
had fallen into a pit. I woke up and | told Mi Fu-jén and we 
think he must be dead. So we weep.” es 

“Dreams are not to be credited,” he replied. “You dreamed: 
of him because you were thinking ‘of him. Pray do not grieve.” 

Just then Kuan Yü was invited to ancther banquet so he took = 
leave of the ladies and went. Seeing Kuan looked sad ana 4 
tearful his host asked the reason. KEN 

“My sisters-in-law have been weeping for my brother and Ri 
I cannot help being sad in sympathy.” KRA 

Ts‘ao smiled and tried to cheer up his guest. He plied him. ~ 
-with wine so that he became quite intoxicated and sat stroking 
his beard and saying, “What a useless thing am I! I could do 
no service for my country and I have parted from my elder 
brother.” 4 

“How many hairs in your beard?” suddenly asked his host. 

“Some hundreds, perhaps. : In the autumn a few fall out, | 
but in the winter it is fullest: Then I use a black silk bag to Be 
keep the hairs from being broken,” replied Kuan. Fe 

Ts‘ao had a bag made for him to protect his beard. Soon 
after when they were at Court the Emperor asked what was 
the bag he saw on Kuan Yii’s breast. SMe os 

“My beard is rather long, Your Majesty,” said Kuan. “So 
the Minister gave me a bag to protect it.” 

The Emperor bade him take off the bag.and show his beard _ 
in all its fullness and it fell in rippling waves below his breast. 

“Really a most beautiful beard!” said the Emperor. 

T is why people call him “The Duke with the Beautiful 
Beard.” 

Another time, after a banquet, Ts‘ao was seeing his guest — 
start from the ‘gate of his palace when he noticed that his — 
charger was very thin. 

“Why is he so thin?” said Ts‘ao. i 

“My worthless body is rather heavy and really too mich for a 
him. He is always out of condition.” ee 

Ts‘ao at once told his men to bring out a certain steed and 
before long he appeared. He was red, like glowing ee 
and a handsome creature in every way. 


i aninae of the Three Ringvoms 


“Do you recognise him?” asked Ts‘ao, . 
_ “Why, it is no other than ‘Red Hare!’ ” cried Karn Yü. 
“Yes; it is he,” said Ts‘ao, and he presented the horse, all 
fully caparisoned, to his guest. Kuan Yti bowed many times 
and thanked him again and again, till Ts‘ao began to feel 
displeased and said, “I have given you many things, lovely 
handmaids and gold and silks and never won a bow of gratitude 
from you before. This horse seems to please you better than 
all the rest. Why do you think so poorly of the damsels and 
~ so much of the steed?” a 
:- . “J know the horse, and his speed, and I am very lucky to. 1 
N get him. Now as soon as I find out where my brother is I can 
` get to him in a single day,” said Kuan. 
=  Ts‘ao grumbled to himself and began to repent of his gift, 
but Kuan Yü took his leave and went away. 
A y Fortune dealt a stunning blow, still he played ee 
Partitioning his dwelling proved his purity of heart. 
The crafty Minister desired to win him to his side, 
But felt that failure was foredoomed however much he tried. 
Said Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao to Chang Liao, “I have treated him pretty 
- liberally, but he still cherishes the desire to leave me. Do you 
know if it is really so?” 
= “I will try to find out,” was the reply. 
-So he took an early opportunity of seeing Kuan Yü and when 
the politenesses of the visit were over, Liao said, “I recom- 
- mended you to the Minister and you have not lost much by 
that. if 
< “I am deeply afected by his kindness and bounty,” said 
-` Kuan Yü, “but, though my. body is here, yet I am always 
thinking of my brother.” . : 
“Your words do not express ate E quite cor- 
_ rectly. One who lives in the world without discrimination and 
consideration of his relations with others is not the most 
admirable type of man. Even Yiian-té never treated you 
better than does the Minister. Why then do you maintain 
` this desire to get away?” - 
= “I know only too well that he has been most kind, but I have 
also received great kindness from Uncle Liu. Beside we have 
sworn to die together and I cannot remain here, but before 
me Lod must try to pender him some signal service to prove my 
gratitude.” 
“Supposing Yiian-té should have left the world, whither will 
you go?” said Chang. 
“T will follow him to the realms below.” 
There could no longer be the least doubt as. to iva yv s 
intentions and Chang Liao told Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao just how matters 
= stood. Ts‘ao sighed. “To serve one’s chief with unswerving 
Se fidelity is a proof of the highest principle of all,? said he. i 
r < Said Hsün Yü, “He spoke of performing some ‘act of service ant: 


Z t 


266 ` Han Kuo, or 


$ 


before leaving. If he gets no chance of such a thing, he will © 3 


not be able to go.’ 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao agreed that this was so. 


The story of Yiian-té broke off at the point when he went — 


to Yiian Shao for refuge. Here he was always sorrowful and, 
when asked the reason, said he did not know where his brothers 
were nor what had happened to his family since they fell into 
the hands of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“Why should I not be sad when I have failed towards my 
country and my family?” said he. 

“I have long wished to attack Hsiitu,” said Yüan Shao. 
“Now it is autumn and just the time for an expedition, so 
let us discuss plans for the destruction of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.”’ 

T‘ien Féng at once opposed this. “When Ts‘aoTs‘ao attacked 
Hstichou and Hsiitu was undefended you let the chance slip by. 
Now that Hsiichou has been captured and the soldiers are 
flushed with victory it would be madness to attempt it. It is 
necessary to await another chance.” 

“Let me think about it,” said Ytian Shao. » i 
He asked advice from Yüan-tê, whether to attack or te hold 
on. zy 

Yiian-té replied, “Tsʻao is a rebel. I think you are failing © 
in your duty if you do not attack him.” z 
“Your words are good,” said Shao. 

He made up his mind to move. But again the advie T‘ien 


intervened. Then Shao grew angry, saying, “You fellows who | 5 


cultivate literature and despise war have made me miss a lot.” 
Tien Féng bowed his head and said, “Neglect your servant’s’” 
wise words and yeu will fail in the field.” 


Yiian Shao was so angry that he wanted to put him to death. a 


However Yiian-té begged him off and he was only imprisoned 


Seeing the fate of his colleague another adviser, Chu Shou . : 


by name, assembled his clan and distributed among them. all 
his possessions, saying, “I go with the army. If we succeed, 
then nothing can exceed our glory, but if we are defeated, the 
risk I run is great.” 
His friends wept as they said farewell ' 
Yen Liang was appointed to the command of the advance 
guard, to go to attack Paima. Then Chu Shou first protested, 


“His mind is too narrow for such a post. He is brave but se 


unequal to such a trust.” 


“You are not the sort of man to measure my best generals,” : 


replied Shao. 3 

The army marched to Liyang and the Prefect sent an urgent 
call to Hsiich‘ang for aid. Ts‘ao moved his armies hastily. 
As soon as the news of battle got about Kuan Yü went to see 
the Minister and asked that he might go with the first body. 


“F scarcely dare put you tọ such i inconvenience, but presently, T 


if need arises, I will call upon. you.’ 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 267 


So Kuan Yü vetired and fifteen legions marched out in three 


=- directions. On the road the letters from Liu Yen arrived 


_ praying for help and the first five legions went to Paima and 
_ took up a position supported by the hills. In the wide plains 
in front of them Yen Liang was encamped with ten legions of 
veterans. 
-~ Ts‘ao'Ts‘ao was frightened at the force opposed to him and, 
returning to camp, spoke to Sung Hsien, who had once served 
under Lii Pu, saying, “You are one of Lü Pu’s famous veteran 
generals; can you give battle to this Yen?” 
Sung Hsien agreed to try. He armed himself, mounted and ; 
rode to the front. Yen Liang was there on horseback his sword 
lying crossways. Seeing an opponent approaching he uttered 
-a loud shout and galloped toward him. The two met, but 
after only three bouts, Sung Hsien fell under a mighty slash 


— from the other’s sword. 


“What a terrible leader!” said Ts‘ao. 
-= “He has slain my comrade, I want to gọ and avenge him,” 
then cried Wei Hsii. 
Ts‘ao bade him go and he rode out, spear in rest, and in 
front of the army railed at Yen Liang. 
Yen Liang replied not a word, but their two steeds came 


y together and at the first blow from Yen’s sword this second 
- champion fell. 


- “Now, who again dares face him?” cried Ts‘ao. 
Hsü Huang took up the challenge and he went out. The 


l - combat endured a score of bouts and then Hsü fled back to 
-~ his own side. The other captains were now greatly depressed 
~ at their failure. Yen Liang however had marched off his 


-men leaving Ts‘ao very sad at the loss of two captains in quick 


jä succession. 
Then Ch‘éng Yü went to see him saying, “I can produce a8 


man the equal of Yen Liang.” 
~ “Who?” cried Ts‘ao. : 
“No other than Kuan Yü.” 
“I am afraid that if he is given an opportunity to perform 
that return service he spoke of he will leave me.’ 
“Tf Liu Pei is still alive he is with Ytian Shao. If you get 
Kuan Yü to defeat Yüan Shao’s army Shao will look askance 


at Liu Pei and put him to death. Liu Pei gone, where can 


Kuan Yü go?” 

This argument appealed to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at orice and he sent 
` to request Kuan Yü to come. | 
Previous te obeying the call Kuan went to say farewell to 


his sisters-in-law. 


2“ You may get news of the Uncle. on the journey,” said a 
“Yes,” said Kuan and left them. 
Armed with his famous Black Dragon, riding on the swift 
_ steed “Red Hare,” and having but a slender following, Kuan Yü 


268 Lots Senna oe og 


was not long in arriving at Paima. He saw Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who 
told him what had happened. Yen Liang was too valiant for 
any to face. 
' “Tet me look at him,” said Kuan. 

Then wine was served for his refreshment and while they 
were drinking, it was reported that Yen Liang once again 
offered a challenge. So Ts‘ao and his guest and staff went to , 
the summit of a hill whence the enemy could be seen. These two 
sat on the hill top and the captains stood about them. Ts‘ao 
pointed out Yen Liang’s men arrayed on the plains below. The 
ensigns and banners waving fresh and bright amid the forest 
of spears and swords made a grand and imposing spectacle. 

“See what fine fellows these northmen are,” said Ts‘ao. 

“T regard them as so many clay fowls and ‘mud dogs,” said 
Kuan. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao pointed out Yen Liang, saying, “There he is 
under that umbrella.” 

He was wearing an embroidered robe and a silver breast- 
plate and rode on horseback. His hand gripped his sword. 

“His head looks as though it was stuck on a pee for sale,” 
said Kuan, just glancing over the army at his feet. 

“You must not despise him,” said T's‘ao. 

Kuan rose, saying, “I ama poor thing but I will go over and 
bring you his head if you like.” t 

“Joking is not allowed i in this army,” interposed Chang Liao. 
“Be careful what you say.” 

Kuan Yü quickly mounted, turned down his mighty weapon 
and galloped down the hill, his phoenix eyes rounded and his 
heavy eyebrows fiercely bristling. He dashed straight into the 
enemy’s array and the northmen opened like water before him, 
a wave spreading right and left. He made directly for the 
- general. 

Now Yen Liang sitting there in Kaie saw a horsemañ RT 
ing toward him and just as he began to ask who the rider of 
the red horse was, lo! the horseman was there. Taken utterly 
by surprise the leader could make no defence. Kuan’s arm rose 
and the mighty weapon fell. And with it fell Yen Liang. © 

Leaping from the saddle Kuan Yü cut off his victim’s head 
and hung it to his horse’s neck. Then he mounted and rode 
out, just as if there was no army there. ` 

The northern men, panic stricken, made no fight. Ts‘ao’s 
army attacked with vigour and slew great numbers of them. 
They captured many horses and weapons and much military 
gear. Kuan Yü rode quickly back up the hill and laid the proof 
of his prowess at the feet of the Minister. 

“You are more than human, General!” cried Ts‘ao. 

- “What have I done to talk about’ ? said Kuan. “My:brother, 
Chang I-té, did the same thing in an army of a hundred legions, 
and did it easily.” 


Bee) Ts ao o Ts“ ao eli at the statement and Sune to os 
about him said, “If you meet this brother be careful.” And 
K he bade them make a note on the overlap of their robes so iat 
they should remember. 
- The beaten army returning northward. thet: Yüan Shao. on 
_ the road and told their story. “A red-faced warrior with a- 
3 - long beard, wielding a huge sword, broke into the army, cag 
off the ‘general’ s head and bore it off, A said they. Si 
4 “Who was this?” asked Shao. ie 
‘Chu Shou said, “It must have been Liu Yiian-té’ 8 brother; 
4 i could be nobody else.” 
~ Ytian Shao was very angry and, panine to Liu Pei, he said, 
-AON “Your brother has slain my beloved leader. You are in the 
plot too. Why should I save you alive?” ites Seas 
i He bade the lictors take him away and beead ge te ae Ace 
l EERS Morning saw Hi ‘guest on high, | ties 
Evening, prisoner, doomed to die,- 


His actual fate will ue nae in the next ee 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


YUAN SHAO IS DEFEATED AND LOSES A LEADER: 
KUAN YU ABANDONS RANK AND WEALTH. 


As the last chapter closed Yiian-té had been condemned to - 
die. He spoke up, however, and said, “Pray hear one word, 
Illustrious Sir, before you decide. I have lost sight of my 
brother since my misfortune at Hsiichou and know not whether 
Yiin-ch‘ang be dead or alive. There are many men in the 
world who resemble him. Is every red-faced man with a*beard 
named Kuan? Should you not rather seek some evidence?” 

‘Now Yiian Shao was impulsive and facile by nature and 
when Yiian-té spoke thus, he suddenly turned upon Chu Shou, - 
saying, “By wrongly regarding what you said I nearly killed 
an innocent man.’ ; 

Then he requested Ytian-té once more to resume his seat in 
. the tent and advise him how to avenge Yen Liang. 

Soon from the lower end a voice was heard, saying, “Yen ` 
Liang and I were as brothers and can I allow any other to 
avenge his death?” 

The speaker was a man of middie height with a face like Bios 
unicorn, a famous leader from Hopei, named Wên Ch‘ou. ~~ 

Yiian Shao was pleased and said, “You are the only man 
who can do it. I will give you ten legions and you can cross 
the Yellow River, and quickly smite that rebel Ts‘ao. 

“You cannot do it; he will fail,” said Chu Shou. “The proper 
course is to hold Yenching and detach a force to Kuantu. If 
you rashly cross the river and anything goes wrong not a soul 
will return.” 


Yüan Shao said, “That is always the way with you fellows, 7 5 


always delaying and taking the dash out of the soldiers. You 
put off to-day and postpone tomorrow till success has become 
impossible. Do you forget that promptitude is what the soldier 
honours?” 

The adviser withdrew sadly, saying. “Superiors do not 
curb their ambitions: inferiors must strive to render service. 
Eternal is the Yellow River, shall I cross it?” 

Thereafter he feigned illness and went no more to the 
Couneil. 

- Yüan-tê said, “I have received much kindness at your hands 
and have been ‘unable to show my gratitude. I would accom- 
pany General Wén that I may repay your bounty and also 
that I may hear news of my brother.” 


siomance of the are amea ann 


 Yüan Shao da consented and ordered Wên Ch‘ou to share 
his command with Yiian-té. But the former objected saying 
that Yüan-tê had been so often defeated that it would augur 


i ill for success this time. He proposed to give Yüan-tê command 


of the rear guard, and this being approved, three legions were 


told off under Liu Pei’s special command to follow the main 


body. 


The prowess displayed by. Kuan Yü in the bold attack on 
Yen Liang redoubled Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s respect for him and he 
memorialised the throne that Kuan Yü receive the title of 
Marquis of Hanshout‘ing and a seal was cast for him. 


Just then came the unexpected news that Yiian Shao’s army 


had moved toward the Yellow River and was in position above 
Yenching. Ts‘ao first sent to.transfer the inhabitants to Hsiho 
and then led out an army to oppose Yiian Shao. He issued 


an order to face about, thus placing the rear. companies in front. 
‘The commissariat wagons were also placed in the van. 


“What is this reversal for?’ asked Lu Ch‘ien. 

Ts‘ao replied, “When the supplies are in rear they are liable 
to be plundered. So I have put them first.” 
“But if you meet the enemy and they steal them?” ı 
: “Wait till the enemy appears; I shall know what to de 


. < Lü Ch‘ien was much exercised at this new move of the — 

~ Minister’s. In the meantime the supply train moved along 
= the river toward Yenching. Presently the foremost troops 
raised a great shout and Ts‘ao sent to see what it meant. 


The messenger came back to say Wên Ch‘ou’s army was 


as approaching, and the supply train had been abandoned and 
was at the mercy of the enemy. Thereupon Ts‘ao pointed to 
_ two mounds saying, “We will take refuge here for the present.” 


‘All those near him’ hastened to the mounds. There Ts‘ao 
ordered them all to loosen their dress, lay aside their breast- 


-plates and rest a time. -The horsemen turned their steeds 
- loose. és 


Wen Ch‘ ‘owe s men approached under cover. As they drew 


~ near one after another the officers told Ts‘ao saying, “The | 
rebels are near: we ought to catch the horses and go back to 


Paima.” 
-But the adviser, Hstin Yu, checked them saying, “These are 


“a bait for the enemy: why retire?” 


Ts‘ao glanced across at him and said, “He understands; do 


not say anything.” 


Now having got possession of the supply carts the enemy 
next came to seize the horses. By this time they had all 


- broken ranks and were scattered, each man going his own way. 


Then suddenly Ts‘ao gave the order to go down rrom the 


-< mounds and smite them. 


The surprise was complete. Wên Ch‘ou’s army was in 


confusion and Ts‘ao’s men Smito maed them. Wên Ch‘ou 


272 Ban tiuo, o 


made a stand, but those about him teandoled each other down $ 5 


and he could ‘do nothing but flee. And he fled. 

Then standing on the top of a mound Ts‘ao pointed to the 
flying leader calling out, “There is one of the most famous 
captains of the north; who can capture him?” + 


Chang Liao and Hsii Huang both mounted and dashed after 


him, crying, “Wên Ch‘ou, do not run away!” 

Looking round, the fugitive saw two pursuers and then he 
set aside his spear, took his bow and adjusted an arrow, which 
he shot at Chang Liao. 


“Cease shooting, you rebel!’ shouted Hsü Huang. Chang gic 


` Liao ducked his head and the shaft went harmlessly by, save 
that it carried away the tassel of his cap. He only pressed 
harder in pursuit. The next arrow however struck his horse 
in the head and the animal stumbled aus fell, throwing his 
rider to the earth. 
Then Wén Ch‘ou turned to come back. Hsti Huang, whirl- 


ing his battle axe, stood in his way to stop him. But he saw — 


behind Wên several more horsemen coming to help him and 


as they would have been too many for him he fled. Wen oy 
pursued along the river bank. Suddenly he saw coming © 
toward him with banners fluttering in the breeze, a smalt. Saf 


party of horse, and the leader carried a great sword. 


“Stop!” cried Yiin-ch‘ ang, for it was he, and he attacked ae a 


once. At the third bout Wên Ch‘ou’s heart failed him and he 
wheeled and fled, following the windings of the river. But ue 
Kuan Yü’s steed was fast and soon caught up. One blow, ard — 


the hapless Wên Ch‘ou fell. i 
When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saw from the mound that tue leader of ther. 
enemy had fallen, he gave the signal for a general onset and ~ 


many of the northmen were driven into the river. And the ~ 
carts with supplies and all the horses were quickly recovered. — 
Now Kuan Yü, at the head of a few horsemen, was thrusting ~— 


here and striking there at the moment when Ytian-té, with the ~— 


three reserve legions, appeared on the battle field. At once. 
they told him that the red- faced, long-bearded warrior was. 
there and had slain Wên Ch‘ou. He hastily pressed forward 
to try to get a look at the warrior. He saw across the river | 


a large body of horse and the banners bore the words “Kuan i i 


Yün-ch‘ ang, Marquis of Hanshout‘ing.” 

“Then it is my brother and he is really with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, g 
said Yüan-tê, secretly thanking God that he was safe. . 

He made an attempt to wait about till, he could call to Kuan 


Yü, but a great mass of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s soldiers came rushing ie: 


down and he was forced to retire. 

Yüan Shao, bringing reinforcements, reached Kuantu and ` 
built a stockade. Two advisers went in to. see him and said, 
“Again that fellow Kuan has been in the battle; he killed 
Wên Ch‘ou. * Liu Pei pretends ignorance of him.” 


aie omane of sg abee tiingoomg 273, 


d Their master was angry and railed at Pei. “The long-eared. 


__ rebel! How dare he do such a thing? TE 


Soon Yüan-tê appeared; again Shao ordered him out to 


Be instant execution. 


“What crime have I committed?” asked Ytian-té. 

“You sent your brother to slay one of my generals. Is that 
no crime?” 3 ; 
= “Pray let me explain before I die. Ts‘ao hated me and has 
always done so. Now he has found out where I am and, 
fearing that I may help you, has got my brother to destroy 
your two generals, feeling sure that when you heard of it 


- you would be angry and put me to death. You cannot fail to 


‘see this.” 


“What he says is sense,” shid Shao, ‘ ‘and you two nearly 


j x brought on me the reproach of injuring the good.” 


He ordered his attendants to retire and asked Ytian-té to 
come and sit by him. Yüan-tê came saying, “I am deeply 


thankful, Illustrious Sir, for your great kindness, for which 


I can never be sufficiently grateful. Now I desire to send 
some confidential messenger with a secret letter to my brother 


; to tell him where I am, and I am sure he will come without 
-amoment’s delay. He will help you to destroy Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to 


make up for having destroyed your two officers. Do you 
approve of this?” 

“Tf I got Ytin-ch‘ang he would be ten fice better than the 
two men I have lost,” replied Shao. 

So Yiian-té prepared a letter. But there was no one to take 
it. Ytian Shao ordered the army to withdraw to Wu-yang, 
where they made a large camp. For some time nothing was’ 
done. 

Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao Beni Hsiahou Tun to defend the strategical 


point at Kuantu while he led the bulk of the army back to 


the capital. There he gave many banquets in honour of the 


_ services of Kuan Yü and then he told Lü Ch‘ien that putting 
- the supplies in the front of the army had been meant as a 


bait to draw the enemy to destruction. “Only Hstin Yu 


understood that,” said he in conclusion. 


Every one present praised his ingenuity. Even while the 
banquet was proceeding there arrived news of a rising of ` 
Yellow Turban rebels at Junan. They were very strong and 
Ts‘ao Hung had been defeated in several engagements. Now 
he begged for help. 

Kuan Yü, hearing this said, “I should’ like. to have the 
opportunity of performing some service by destroying these 
rebels.” 

“You have already rendered noble services for which you 
have not been properly requited. I could hardly trouble you 


again,” said Ts‘ao. 


“I have been idle too long; I shall get ill,” said Kuan Yii. 


18 


274 San Huo, or - 


Ts‘ao encouraged him to go and gave him five legions with 
Yü Chin and Yo Chin as captains under him. They were to 
leave soon. 

Then Hstin Yü said privily to his- master, “He always 
cherishes the idea of returning to Liu Pei. He will leave 
you if he hears any news. Do not let him go on this ex- 
pedition.” 

“Tf he does well this time I will not let ai go into battle: 
again,” said Ts‘ao. 

In due time the force led by Kuan Yü drew near the rebels 
and made their camp. One night, just outside his camp, two 
spies were caught and taken in to Kuan who in one of them 
recognised Sun Ch‘ien. The attendants being dismissed Kuan 
Yü questioned him. 

“After we lost sight of each other I have heard not a word 
of you; what are you doing here?” 


“After I escaped I drifted hither and thither till I Had thei va 


good fortune to reach Junan and Liu P‘i took me in. But why 
are you with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, General? And where are your 
sisters-in-law? Are they well?” 

Kuan Yü told him all that had happened. i 
“I have heard lately that Liu Pei is with Yüan Shao. i 
would have liked to go and join him, but I have not found a 
convenient opportunity. Now the two men I am with have 
taken the side of Yiian Shao against Ts‘ao. By good luck you 
were coming here so I got command of a small party of scouts 
to be able to see you and tell you. Presently our two leaders 
will pretend to be defeated and you, and the two ladies, can 

go over to Yiian Shao. And you will see your brother.” 

“Since he is there I certainly must go at once to see him. 
But it is a misfortune that I have slain two of Yüan Shao’s 
generals. I fear things are not in my favour,” said Kuan- 

“Let me go first and see how the land lies; I will come back 
and tell you.’ 

“I would risk-a myriad deaths to see my bron? said. 
Kuan Yü. “But I must go to say farewell to Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao.” 

Sun Ch‘ien was sent away that night and next day Kuan 
Yü led out his men to offer battle. Kung Tu, in armour, went 
out to the front of tke line of battle and Kuan Yü said, “You 
people, why have you risen against the government?” 

“Why do you blame us when you have turned your back on - 
your own lord?” replied Kung Tu. 

“How have I turned my back on my lord?” 

“Liu Ytian-té is with Yüan Pén-ch‘u and you are with Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao; what is that?” 

Kuan Yü could not reply, but he whirled round his sword 
and rode forward. Tu fied and Kuan Yü followed. Tu turned 

` and said to Kuan Yü, “I cannot forget my old chief’s kindness. 


Now attack as soon as you-can and I will give up the defences.” — 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 275 


_ Kuan Yü understood and urged on his men. The leaders 
of the rebels pretended they were worsted and they all 
scattered. So the city was taken. Having pacified the 
people Kuan Yü quickly led his army back to the capital, 
where he was met by Ts‘ao, congratulated on his success and 
feasted. 

__ When this was all over Kuan Yü went to the dwelling of 
his sisters-in-law to pay his respects at their gate. 

“Have you been able to get any news of Uncle Liu in your 
two expeditions?” asked the Lady Kan. 

“None,” replied Kuan Yii. 

_ As he retired from the door he heard sounds of bitter weep- 
ing within. 

“Alas he is dead,” said they. “Our brother-in-law thinks we 
shall be greatly distressed and hides the truth from us.” 

One of the old soldiers, who acted as guard, hearing the 
sounds of perpetual grief, took pity on them and said, “De . 
not weep, ladies; your lord is with Yiian Shao in Hopei.” 

“How do you know that?” said they. 

“T went out with General Kuan and one of the soldiers told 
me.” 

The two ladies summoned Kuan Yii and reproached him 
saying, “Uncle Liu never betrayed you and yet you remain 
here enjoying the bounty of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and forgetting the 
old times. And you tell us falsehoods.” 

Kuan Yü bowed his head. “My brother really is in Hopei, 
but I dared not tell you, lest it should become known. Some- 
thing must be done but done carefully and it needs time.” 

“Brother-in-law, you should hasten,” said the Lady Kan. 

Kuan Yü withdrew feeling that he must evolve some scheme 
of departure without further loss of time. It caused him much 

uneasiness. 
~ Yt Chin, having found out that Liu Pei was in the north, 
told Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who at once sent Chang Liao to find out Kuan 
Yii’s intentions. Chang Liao entered jauntily and congratu- 
lated Kuan, saying, “They tell me you obtained news of your 
_ brother in the battlefield; I felicitate you.” 
“My lord was there indeed but I met him not. I see nothing . 
-to be glad about.” «° 
“Ts there any difference between the relationship of you two 
and that of any other two brothers?” 
Kuan replied, “You and I stand in the relationship of 
friends: Yiian-té and I are friends and brothers beside, and 
prince and minister in addition to both. Our relationship 
cannot be discussed in usual terms.” 

“Well, now that you know where your brother is, are you 
going to him?” 

“How can I go back on what I said before? I am sure you 
will explain fully to the Minister.” 


` 276. San Tuo, or, 


Chang Liao went back and told his master who said, “I must i 


find a way to keep him here.” 


While Kuan Yü was pondering over his difficulties they told 


him that a friend had come to enquire for him. The visitor 


was introduced but Kuan did not recognise him. ` 
“Who are you?” asked Kuan. 
“IT am Ch‘én Chén of Nanyang, in the service of Yüan Shao.” 


In great perturbation Kuan Yü sent away the attendants ; 


and, they being gone, said, “There is some peel reason for 
your visit.” 
For reply the newcomer drew out a letter and handed it to 


his host, who recognised that it was from his brother Yüan-tê. 


“I, the writer, and you, Sir, pledged ourselves in the 


Peach Garden to die together. Why then are we apart 


and yet alive, our kindly feelings destroyed, our sense of 
right outraged? Surely you desire to obtain fame and 


acquire riches and honour by offering my head as a crown- 


ing act of merit. More might be said but I await your 
commands with great anxiety.” 


Kuan Yü finished the letter with a bitter cry. “I always tr- 


wanted to find my brother, but I did not know where he was. 
How can he think such evil of me?” said he. 

“Yüan-tê looks for you very eagerly, and if you are still 
bound by the old pledge you should go quickly,” said the 
messenger. 

“Any one born into the world without the one essential 
virtue of sincerity is no true man. I came here openly and 


can go in no other way. Now will I write a letter which 


I will ask you to bear to my brother, that as soon as I can. 
take leave of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao I will bring the ladies and come to 


him.” 


Chén. 
“Then would I rather die; I will not remain here.” 


“But what if Ts‘ao Ts‘ao refuse to let you. goi 2?” said Ch'ên 


“Then, Sir, quickly write your letter and relieve your brother — 


from’ his anxiety.” l 
So Kuan Yü wrote like this: “I, the humble one, know full 
well that a man of principle does not betray and a man of 
loyalty despises death. I have been a student in my youth and 
know somewhat of the proprieties. I sigh and weep at the 
memory of the fraternal affection that made Yang. Chio-ai 


and Tso. Po-t‘ao die rather than separate. I was in charge of | 


Hsiap‘i but the place lacked provision and there was no help. 
I would have fought to the death but there was on my shoulders 
the responsibility for my sisters-in-law. Wherefore I had to 
take care of my body lest I betrayed my trust. And so I made 
a prisoner of myself, hoping to find a way of release. I heard 
of you lately in Junan. .I must, however, bid farewell to Ts‘ao 


Ts‘ao and bring the ladies with me when I come. May I 


“Fomance ie the Shree Kingono E VAWT o A 


! hae victim to the superhuman powers, if I nave harboured CE 
~ any traitorous thought. Pencil and paper are poor substitutes 
pe for what I would say, but I look to see you soon.” ee 


A The visitor left with this missive and Kuan Yü went to tell : 
_ the women. Then he proceeded to the Minister’s palace to say, ==. 
~ farewell. But Ts‘ao knew what he was coming for and he = — 
found at the gate the board intimating that no one could be’. 
received. So he had to return. However, he bade his own | 

few soldiers prepare to start at any moment. He also gave | YE 
orders that everything received from Ts‘ao was to be left in tee 


_ the quarters: nothing was to be taken. 


Next day he again proceeded to the palace to say farewell 
_ to his patron, but again found the board hanging there to show . 
there was no admission. So it was several times; he could 


< never enter. Then he went to see Chang Liao, but he was 


indisposed. AAE T t)) 
“This means he will not let me go,” thought Kuan Yü. ie 
- . “But I am going and I shall hesitate no longer,” 

So he wrote this letter :—“As a young man I entered the. 
service of the Imperial Uncle, and pledged myself to share his 
-. fortunes. Heaven and Earth witnessed this oath. When I lost = = 
the city I made three requests which you granted. Now I hear ee 
my brother is with Ytian Shao and I, remembering our pledge, 


not the bond of the past, wherefore I write this letter of fare- 


- well trusting that when you have read it you will be content for 
me to postpone to another season the proof of my gratitude.” = — 

He sealed and sent it to the Palace. Then he depositedinthe = =~ 
treasury of his dwelling all the gold and silver he had received, | 
suspended his seal of marquis in the reception hall and left, t 
taking his sisters-in-law with him in a carriage. He rode : 
“Red Hare” and carried Black Dragon in his hand. Witha 
small escort of men, those formerly under his command, he 
left the city by the north gate. 

The wardens would have stopped him but he frightened > 4 

them with a fierce shout. Having got out he told the escort ~ ; 
to go in front with the carriage while he would remain behind | 


cannot but go to him. Though your bounty is great I forget Mah j i 


= to guard against pursuit. So they pushed the carriage toward 


4 any one of the waiting maids. Everything was left in the 


the high road. 

In the city Kuan Yii’s letter reached the Minister while he 
was consulting about what to do. He read it and exclaimed, 
“So he has left!” 
| - Then the warden of the gate came to report that Kuan Yu 
had forced his way out, and was gone with a carriage, a horse 
=- and a score of guards. Next came the servants from his house 
to report that he had left, taking nothing of the treasure, nor 


_ house. Even his seal was there. His only escort were the ne ae 
few men of his original force. a i 


PS uddetily from the basen of. men rose Pest eh e 
with three companies of mailed horse I will bring him t 
alive.” ; ; ; 

Their eyes turned to the Sp aker, who was General i 
Yang. i a ip 


On the pE s cave he N his baki 
But numberless wolves infest his track. 


What came of this offer to pursue will be seen in the 1 i 
chapter. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


“BEAUTIFUL BEARD” RIDES ON A SOLITARY JOURNEY: 
‘3 H AND SLAYS Six Min AT FIVE PASSES. 


Nos of all the captains in Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army, the only one 


_ friendly toward Kuan Yü, with the exception of Chang Liao, 


was Hsii Huang. The others treated him with respect, except 
Ts‘ai Yang who was decidedly inimical. So this Ts‘ai was 
ready to pursue and capture him as soon as he heard of his 
departure. But Ts‘ao accepted his going as natural. “He 
does not forget his old leader and he was perfectly open in 


all his actions. He is a gentleman and you would do well to 


follow his example.” 

So he bade the would-be pursuer begone and say no more 
about pursuit. — 

“You were exceedingly good to Kuan Yü,” said Ch‘éng Yü, 
“but he went off very rudely. He certainly left a screed behind 


with his reasons, but he affronted you and that is no light 


matter. Now to let him join Yüan Shao is to add wings to a 
tiger. You had better catch him and put him to death so as 
to guard against future evil.” 

- Ts‘ao replied, “But he had my promise and can I break my 
word? Each has his master. Do not pursue.” But he said 
to Chang Liao, “He has rejected all I gave him, so bribes were 
powerless with him in whatever shape. I have the greatest 


; respect for such as he. He has not yet gone far and I will 


try to strengthen his attachment to me and make one appeal 
to sentiment. Ride after him and beg him to stop till I can 
come up and bid farewell and offer him a sum of money for 


his expenses and a fighting robe, that he may remember me 


kindly in after days.” 

So Chang rode out quite alone; Ts‘ ao followed him leisurely 
with an escort of a score or so. 

Now the steed that Kuan Yü rode was “Red Hare” and he 


was very fast. No one could have come up with him but ` 


that there was the ladies’ carriage to escort and so “Red Hare” 
had to be held in and go slow. Suddenly Kuan Yü heard a 


- shout behind him, a voice crying, “Go slowly, Yiin-ch‘ang.” 


He turned and made out the person to be Chang Liao. 


| Ordering the-pushers of the carriage to press on along the 


high road, he reined in his steed, held Black Dragon ready 


for a stroke and waited for Chang Liao to come up. 


280 . . San tuo, or 


“Of course you have come to take me back, Wen-yiian?” 
TNE said he. 
Bai “No; the Minister, seeing that you are going a fae journey, 
fie wishes "to see you on your way and told me to hasten forward 


and beg you to wait till he can come up. That is the only i i 


n ; thing. 
ae “Seeing that he is coming along with mailed men I Wa 
fight to the very last,” said Kuan Yü and he took up his 
position on a bridge where he waited the approach of the 


followed close. Seeing Kuan Yü was ready to fight, Ts‘ao | 
tee ordered his escort to open out in two lines and then it was 
neha seen they carried-no arms. This relieved his mind; for it 
proved to Kuan Yü they meant no attack. 

“Why do you go in such haste, Ytin-ch‘ang?” asked Ts‘ ao. 

Kuan Yii inclined his head but did not dismount. | Bi 

“I informed you in writing that since my lord was in Hopei - 
I had to leave at once. I went to your palace again and again 
but was refused admittance. So I wrote a letter of farewell, . 


everything for you. I hope you recall the promise you once ~ 
made me.” Be | age va 
Ts‘ao replied, “My desire is to keep my troth with all men; 
I cannot go back on my word. However, you may find the 
journey expensive and therefore I have here prepared a sum 
of money to help you.’ 
Then from horseback he held out a packet of gold. 

“T have sufficient left from your former bounty ; keep tha: 
for presents to your soldiers.” i 
“Why should you refuse this? It is but an insignificant - - 

return for great services.” ; 
“My services have been all trifling, not worth mentioning.” 


men. I am very sorry my luck is too poor to retain yoù at 
my side. Pray accept just this robe to show you I am not 
quite ungrateful,” said Ts‘ao, and one of his captains, dis- 
mounting, held up a silken coat in both hands. Kuan Yü 
even still fearful of what might happen, would not dismount, 
but he reached down his sword and took the robe on its point. ' 
Then he threw it over his shoulders and turned to thank the - 
giver saying, “I thank you, Sir Minister, for the robe and 
SEN, _ trust we shall meet again.’ 
Pg So saying he went down from the bridge and bore away to 
RL the north. 
A “He is a very rude man,” said Hsii Ch‘u, who was of the 
K escort. “Why do you not take him prisoner?” 
Ts‘ao replied, “He was absolutely alone facing scores of us; 
he was justified in being suspicious. But my word has gone 
forth and he is not to be pursued.” y 


9 


party, who advanced quickly. Four of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s captains 


sealed up the treasure, resigned my marquis seal and left 


“Really, Ytin-ch‘ang, you are the most high-principled of 


: oo if Ai ba inane at es : : i REN Mal ee í a { i i oe 
BE eh 8 _ Homance of the Three ingdoms An 


he thought of the man who had gone. 


But here we need say nothing more of Ts‘ao’s return. Kuan _ 


yü went down from the bridge and started in the wake of the 


-carriage carrying the two ladies, which should have gone 


i about thirty li while this interview Thad been going on. He 
» could see no signs of it and rode hither and thither poking 
on all sides. 


Presently he heard some | one shouting from a hill, cating 


him by name to halt. He saw a youth wearing a yellow turban a) 
‘and dressed in a silk robe. He held a spear in his hand and 


was mounted on a horse from the neck of which dangled a 
l biooiy head. Behind him were a hundred or so men on foot 
om they advanced quickly. 

“Who are you?” asked Kuan Yü. 


" i low bow. Kuan feared this was some ruse so he only checked 
his horse and gripped his sword the more firmly, saying, “Sir 
_ Swashbuckler, I desire you to tell me your name.” 


i Liao Yiian-chien.. I belong to a Hsiangyang family. Since 
these troubled times began I have been an outlaw among the 
rivers and lakes and I and my comrades have lived by plunder. 

` We are about five hundred in all. By chance my friend Tu 


_ Yiian came across two ladies in a carriage just now and, quite. 
is wrongly, he took them prisoners and brought them to the hold 


in the hills. I questioned the servants and so found out who 
they were and who was escorting them. So I wished them to 
be set free to pursue their journey. My friend opposed this 


ie and spoke so ill-mannerly that*I killed him, And here is: pi DM 


head. I pray you to pardon me.’ 
_ “Where are the two ladies?” 
“They are among the hills,” replied ee 
“Bring them down here, at once,” said Kuan. 
; - In a short time a party of the brigands pushed the carriage 
_ down the hill and the ladies sat there before him. 


' - Then Kuan Yü dismounted, laid aside his sword and stood, 


iy, before them with his arms crossed. 
“Sisters, have you been alarmed?” asked he. 
~ They replied, “We should have suffered at the hands of 
Tu Yiian had it not been for Liao Hua.” 
' “How did Liao Hua come to save the ladies rae asked Kuan 
of those who stood by. 
They said, “Tu carried off the ladies and Bonadi that he 
` ańñd Liao Hua should have one each as wife. But Liao Hua had 
found out they were of gentle birth and worthy, and was for 
treating them with respect. When Tu disagreed Liao slew him.” 
Hearing this Kuan Yü bowed to Liao Hua and thanked him. 
TERN then wanted to join himself and his troop to Kuan Yü, 


re -Ts‘ao and his escort ence: the Minister very sad when: 


` The young man dropped his spear, dismounted and mede ay 


. “My family name is Liao and I am known as Liao Hua S 


UT Ameer Sete A E te Se DYN SR UTR A IT AE 
SEAN RR AR t 4 IA | KORTA 
t f Fi x i P 4 


282 fan Kuo, or, 


but the latter, seeing he was a Yellow Turban, would have 
nothing to do with him. So he simply thanked him for his 
kindness to the ladies. Liao offered some presents but these 
were also declined. 

So Liao Hua took his leave and presently disappeared in a 
valley among the hills. Kuan Yü told his sisters the story of 
his interview with Ts‘ao and the gift of a robe and then he 
urged the carriage on its way. Towards dark they came to a 
farm where they would rest. The farmer, an old greybeard, 
came out to welcome the party and asked who they were. 
Kuan Yii described himself as the brother of Liu Pei, and 
said his name was Kuan. 

“Surely you are no other than the slayer of Yen Liang and 
Wên Ch‘ou,” said the venerable host. 

“That is so,” > replied Kuan Yü. 

“Come in,” said the old man, joyfully. 

“My two sisters- in-law are in the carriage”? said Kuan Yü, 

“will you let your women-folk go out to receive them?” | } 

As Kuan Yü remained standing there the host asked him 
to be seated, but he would not sit while the women were present 
and remained standing in a respectful attitude till the old © 
man’s wife had returned and ushered the ladies into the inner» 
apartments. Then the old man set to the entertainment of his 
guest in the guest hall. Kuan Yü asked his name. 

He replied, “I am called Hu Hua. In the days of the 
Emperor Huan I was an officer of the Court but I resigned 
and retired into prjvate life. I have a son with the Prefect of 
Yungyang (in Szechuan) and if you should be going that way, 
General, I should like to send him a letter by you.’ 

Kuan Yü said he would take the letter. Next day, after an 
early meal, the ladies got into their carriage, the host handed 
his letter to Kuan Yü, and the little party once more took the 
road. They went toward Loyang. ` 

Presently they approached a pass known as the Tungling 
Pass, guarded by one K‘ung Hsiu and half a company. 
When the soldiers saw a carriage being pushed toward the 
pass they ran to tell their commander, who came out to 
accost the travellers. Kuan Yü- dismounted and returned 
the officer’s salute and the latter said, “Whither are you 
going?” 

“I have left the Minister to go into Hopei to find oy, 
brother.” 

“But Yüan Shao is my master’s rival. You have authority 
from him to go thither?” 

“T left hurriedly and could not get it.” 

“If you have no authority you must wait while I send to 
request orders.” 

“To remain while you send and receive an answer will delay 
me greatly,” said Kuan. 


Romance of the Three Ringdooms 283 


“I must stand by my instructions; that is the only thing to 
do,” said K‘ung. 

“Then you refuse to let me pass?” 

“If you want to go through leave the family as a gage.” 

At this Kuan Yü got very angry and made to cut at the 
_ Officer on the spot, but he withdrew into the gate and beat the 
drums for an attack. Thereupon the soldiers armed them- 
selves, mounted and came down to oppose the passage, crying, 
“Dare you go through, eh?” 
The carriage was sent off to a safe distance and then Kuan 
Yii rode at full speed directly at the commander of the guard, 
who set his spear and came to meet him. The two steeds met 
and the men engaged, but at the first stroke of Black Dragon 
Re commander of the gate fell to thè earth dead. His men 

ed. ; ; 
_ “Soldiers, do not flee!” cried Kuan Yü. “I killed him because 
I could do no otherwise. I have nothing against you, but I 
would ask you to tell the Minister how this thing came to pass, 
that he wished to kill me and so I slew him in self-defence.” 

The men bowed before him and Kuan Yü, with the carriage, | 
passed through the gates and they continued their way to 
Loyang. But one of the guards of the pass went quickly in 
advance. and informed the Prefect of Loyang, Han Fu, of the 
slaughter of K‘ung Hsiu. Wherefore Han Fu assembled his 
officers to take counsel. Méng Tan, one of his captains, said, 
“This Kuan Yü must be a fugitive or he would have a safe- 
conduct. Our only course is to stop him or we shall incur 
blame.” 

“The man is fierce and brave. Remember the fate of Yen 
and Wên. It seems vain to oppose him by force and so we 
must think out some trap for him,” said Han Fu. : 

“I have a ruse ready,” said Mêng T‘an. “I will close the 
gate with “deerhorns” (chevaux de frise) and I will go to 
fight with him. I will engage and then flee, and you can shoot 
him from an ambush along the road. If we can get him and 
his party and send them prisoners to the capital we ought to 
be well rewarded.” 

This course was determined upon and soon they heard that 
Kuan Yii was approaching. Han Fu strung his bow and filled 
his quiver with arrows and with one company took up position 
along the pass. Then as the party approached Han Fu said, 
“Who is the traveller who comes?” i 

Kuan Yü bowed low and said, “He is a certain Kuan, Mar- 
quis of Hanshout‘ing, and he wishes to go through the pass.” 

“Have you a letter from the Minister?” 

“In the hurry of departure I did not get any.” 

“My special orders from him are to hold this pass and make 
‘examination of all spies that may go to and fro. Any person 
- without an authority must be a fugitive.” 


284 | 2an tuo, or 


Then Kuan Yü began to be angry, and he told them what 


had happened to K‘ung Hsiu. “Do you also seek death?” asked - 


Kuan. 
“Who will capture him for me?” cried Han Fu, and Méng 
T‘an offered himself. He rode out, whirling his double swords 


and made straight for Kuan Yü. 


Kuan Yü sent back the carriage out of danger and then rode 
toward Méng. They engaged, but very soon Méng turned his 
steed and fled. Kuan Yü pursued. Méng, intent only on © 
leading his enemy toward the ambush, took no account of the- 
speed of “Red Hare.” Very soon he was caught up and a stroke 
of the mighty sword cut him in two pieces. Then Kuan Yii 
stopped and turned back. The archers in the gate shot their 
hardest and though it was a long way off one of them lodged 
an arrow in his left arm. He pulled it out with his teeth but. 
the blood streamed down as he rode toward the Prefect, Han 


Fu. The men scattered. Kuan Yü rode straight at his next | 
_ victim. He raised his sword and made an oblique cut which | 


sliced off the head and shoulder of his opponent.. 
Then he drove off the soldiers and returned to escort the - 


4: carriage. He bound up his wound, and, fearing lest any one | i. 
might take advantage of his weakness, he made no long halts. — 


on the road but hurried toward Ishui Pass. 

The warden of this pass was Pien Hsi of Pingchou, a warrior 
whose weapon was a comet-hammer. He had been a Yellow © 
Turban and had gone over to Ts‘ao, who had given him this 
post. As soon as he heard of the coming of the redoubtable 


warrior he cudgelled his brains for a ruse to use against him... 


He decided upon an ambush. In a temple at the pass he placed 
two hundred “axe and sword” men. He reckoned on enticing 
Kuan to the temple for refreshment and when he let fall a 
cup as signal the hidden men would rush out. 

All being thus arranged and ready, he went out to welcome 
Kuan Yü in friendly guise and he dismounted at his coming. 
Pien Hsi began very amiably. 

“Your name, General, makes the very earth tremble and 
every one looks up to you. This return to the Imperial Uncle 
proves you to be noble and true.” 

Kuan Yü in reply told him the story of the men he had 
slain. Hsi replied, “You slew them; that is well. When I see 
aN Minister I will explain to him the inner reasons for these 
acts.’ 

Kuan Yü thought hie had found a friend and so mounted and 
rode through the pass. When he came to the temple a number 
of priests came out to meet him with clanging bells. . 

This temple, that of a Guardian of the State, had a court- 
yard in which the Emperor Ming had burned incense. In the 
temple were thirty priests and among these there happened 
to be one who came from the same village as Kuan Yü. His 


Pelisicus name was P‘u-ching. Hearing who the visitor was, | 


he came forward to speak with him. 


“General, ? aid he, “it is many a long year since you left 


Putung.” 
“Yes,” said Kuan Yü,. “nearly twenty years.” 
“Do you recognise this poor priest?” 
“T left the village many years ago; I do not recognise you.” 


“My house and yours were only separated by a rivulet,” 


said the priest. 


_ Now Pien Hsi, seeing the priest holding forth about village i 

matters, thought he would blab about the ambush, so he bade. 

` him be silent. LAREN 
“T want to invite the General to a feast. You priest fellows 


— seem to have a lot to say,” said Pien. 


-` “Not too much,” said Kuan Yü. “Naturally when fellow i; 


villagers meet they talk of old times.” 
P‘u-ching invited the visitor into the guest room to take| 


Romance of the Three kingdoms LE a ON 


x 


tea, but Kuan Yü said, “The two ladies are out there in the | ae 


_ carriage; they ought to have some first.” 
So the priest bade them take some tea to the ladies ahd then 


he led Kuan Yü within, at the same time lifting the priest a 
knife which he wore at his side and looking meaningly at _ 
Kuan Yii. The latter understood and told his people to bring BAY 


along his weapon and keep close at his side. 


When Pien Hsi invited Kuan Yü to go into the Hall of the D ie 


i Law for some refreshment, Kuan Yü turned to him, saying, 
“Ts this invitation with good intention or evil?” 
His host was so taken aback that he could make no reply, 


` and then Kuan Yü saw that many armed men were concealed 


behind the arras. ‘Then he shouted loudly at Pien Hsi, saying, 
“What means this? I thought you an honourable man. How 
dare you?” 


The traitor saw that his Ae had failed and called to the — 
assassins to come out and fall to, but Kuan Yü had a short 


sword in his hand and slashed at any one who came near. So 


they scattered. Their commander ran down the hall and tried 


to escape among the side buildings, but Kuan Yü threw aside 
the short sword, took up Black Dragon and went after Pien 


_Hsi. The latter was trying to get into position to throw his 


: comet-hammer, but Kuan Yü cut the cord and the weapon was 


useless. He followed. Pien in and out and soon caught up with 


“him. Then with one blow he cut him in halves. 
The fight over he sought the two ladies, who were sur- 
rounded by soldiers. These fled at sight of the terrible 


= warrior. Seeking out the priest, his fellow countryman, he 


thanked him for the timely warning which had aed him 


2% from death. 


- “I cannot remain here after this,” said Bapehines “I shall 
pack up my few garments and my alms bowl and take to the 


286 San Kuo, or 


[S 


road, vague in my wanderings as the clouds in the sky. But 
we shall meet again and till then take care of yourself.” 

Then Kuan Yü took leave and retook the road to Yungyang. 
The Prefect of this city was named Wang Chih, and he was 
related to Han Fu by marriage. Hearing of the death of his 
relative he set about a scheme to kill Kuan Yü secretly. He 
sent men to guard the city gates and, when he heard that Kuan 
Yü approached, he went himself and received him with a 
smiling countenance and badé him welcome. Kuan Yü told 
him the object of his journey. j 

“You, General, have been able to get some exercise on the 
road, but the ladies in their carriage must be cramped and 
fatigued. I pray you to come into the city and all of you 
remain the night in the official travellers’ quarters. © To- 
morrow you can set forth again.” 

The offer was tempting and his host seemed in earnest so 
the two ladies went into the city, where they found everything 
very comfortably prepared for them. And, though Kuan Yt 
declined the Prefect’s invitations to a banquet, refreshments 
for the travellers were sent to their lodgings. Kuan Yü was 
fatigued from the trials of the journey and as soon as the 


evening meal was over he bade the ladies retire to rest while > 


he sat down in the main room, quite alone, for he bade all to 
get repose while they could. His horse was given a good feed 
for once. He sat with his armour loosened in order to be more 
at ease. 

Now the Prefect had a secretary named Hu Pan to whom 
he had entrusted the arrangements for the destruction of his 
guest. Said he, “This Kuan is a traitor to the Minister and a 
fugitive. On the road he has murdered several Commanders 
of Passes and is guilty of serious crimes. But he is too strong 
and valiant for any ordinary soldier to overcome. So this 
evening a whole company of men will surround his lodging, 
each one armed with a torch, and we will burn him. They 
will start the fire about midnight. Every one of the party 
will perish. a will come with a force to stand by and assist 
if necessary.” 

These orders received, Hu Pan passed them on to the men, 
who began secretly to prepare dry wood and other combustibles 
which they piled up at the gate of the rest-house. Hu Pan 
thought within him that he would like to know what manner 
of man was this Kuan Yti, whose fame had spread so far, so 
he determined to get a peep at him. He went to the rest-house 
and enquired where Kuan Yü was. 

the General is the man in the main hall reading,” was the 
reply 

Hu Pan noiselessly made his way to the outside of the room 
and peeped in. He saw the famous warrior stroking his beard 
with his left hand while he read by the light of a lamp placed 


fiamance of the Three Kingdoms 287 


ona low table. An involuntary exclamation of wonder escaped 
at the majesty of the figure. 
“Really a god!” he sighed. 
“Who is there?” suddenly asked the reader at the oon 
- Hu Pan entered and said he was the Prefect’s secretary. 
“Surely you are the son of Hu Hua, who lives outside Hsii- 
tu,” said Kuan. 
“T am he,” replied Hu Pan. 
Then Kuan Yii called up his followers and bade them look 


_ among the baggage for the letter, which they brought. Kuan — 


Yü handed it to the secretary, who read it and then breathed 
long, saying, “I very nearly caused the death of a good man.” 

Then he betrayed the whole plot . “This Wang is a wicked 
man, who wanted to kill you. At this moment you are sur- 
rounded and at the third watch they will set fire to this place. 


Now I will go and open the:city gates while you hastily prepare ~ 


for flight.” 

Kuan Yü was greatly surprised, but he quickly buckled up 
his armour, got his steed ready, roused the two ladies and put 
them into their carriage. Then they left the rest-house and 
as they passed out they saw the soldiers all about them, each 
with a torch. The party hastened to the outskirts of the city 


-and found the gate already open and they lost no time in- 


getting clear of the city. Hu Pan returned to give orders 
to fire the rest house. 

The fugitives pressed on but before long they saw ; lights 
- coming up behind them and Wang Chih called out to them to 
stop. Kuan Yü reined in his horse and began to abuse him. 

“Worthless fellow! What had you against me that you 
wished to burn me to death?” 

Wang Chih whipped up his steed and set his spear, but 
Kuan Yü cut him through with the short sword he wore at 
his side and scattered his followers. 

Then the carriage pushed on. Kuan Yii’s heart was filled 
with gratitude to Hu Pan. When they drew near Huachou 


some one told Liu Yen, who rode out to welcome him. Kuan © 


` Yü did not dismount but bowed from horseback, saying, “Have 
you been quite well since we parted ?” 

“Whither are you going, Sir?” replied Liu Yen. 

“T have left the Minister and am on my way to find my 
brother.” 


“Vijan-té is with Ytian Shao, who is at enmity with the | 


Minister. How can you be allowed to go to him?” asked Liu 
Yen. 

“That matter was settled long ago.” 

“The Yellow River ferry is an important point and is guar d- 
ed by a lieutenant of Hsiahou Tun; he will not let you cross.’ 

“But suppose then you provide boats for me?” 

“Though there are boats I dare not give them to you.’ 


‘ 


c(h EUAN Sr Re ite Oeera 


288 San Kuo, or , 


` “Well, formerly I slew Yen Liang and Wên Ch‘ou and deeds 
you from a grave danger. Now you refuse me a ferry boat!” 

“I am afraid Hsiahou will know of it and make it a fault 
against me.’ 

Kuan Yü perceived that no help was to be expected from tis 
man so he pushed on and presently reached the ferry. There 
the commander of the guard, Ch‘in Ch‘i, came out to question 
him. 

“T am one Kuan, Marquis of Hanshout‘ing.” 

“Whither are you. bound?” 

“I go to Hopei to seek my brother, Liu Yiian-té, and I res- 
pectfully ask you to grant me a passage over the river.” 

“Where is the authority of the Minister?” 

“T am not, on a mission from the Minister so why should 
I have such an authority ?”’ 

“I have orders from my’ chief to’ guard the ferry and you 
will not cross; even if you grew wings you should not fly over.’ 


Kuan Yii’s choler arose. “Do you know that I have been. 


the death of all those who have hitherto tried to stop me?” 
said he. 

“You have only slain a few officers of no rank or reputation; ; 
but you dare not kill me.’ 


“Where would you stand beside Yen Liang and Wên Ch‘ou? on 


asked Kuan. 


The Ch‘in Ch‘i grew angry and he loosed his rein. Sword 


in hand he came at a gallop. The two met, but in the first 
encounter Ch‘in Ch‘i’s head was swept off by the terrible Black 
Dragon. 


“He who opposed me is dead; you others need not be afraid, pe 


cried Kuan Yü. ‘‘Be quick and prepare me a boat.” 

The boat was soon at the landing and the two women stepped 
on board, followed by Kuan Yü. They crossed, and were then 
in.the country of Yüan Shao. In the course of his journey 
to this point Kuan Yü had forced five passes and slain six 
captains. 


His seal hung, up, the treasury locked, his 
courtly mansion left, 

He journeyed toward his ‘brother dear, too long 
from his side reft. 

The horse he rode was famed for speed as for 
endurance great, 

His good sword made a way for him and 
opened every gate. 

- His loyalty and truth forth stand, a pattern 

unto all, 

His valour would frighten rushihg streams and 
make high mountains fall. 

Alone he travelled lustily, ’twas death to meet 
his blade, 

He has been themed by myriads, his a ne’er 
will fade. 


- bounty.” 


: Homance of the Three Hingdoms 


“T did not willingly slay a single one of them,” maed Kuan 


 Yii as he rode along. “There was no help for it. Nevertheless 


when Ts“ ao hears of it he will regard me as ungrateful for his 


Before long he saw a rider on the road who soon hailed him 
and proved to be Sun Ch‘ien. 
“T have never heard a word from you since we lost sight of 


each other at Junan; how have you fared?” said Kuan Yü. 


“After your departure the city fell. I was sent to Yüan Shao 


to try to make peace with him and succeeded, so that he invited 
your brother to go to him and share in the deliberations for an 
attack on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. But to my disgust the leaders of Yiian 
~Shao’s army showed great jealousy of each other so that one 
= got into gaol, another was degraded and others quarrelled. 


Then Ytian Shao vacillated and hesitated, so that your brother 


and I consulted how we might get away from them all. Now 
the Uncle is at Junan-with Liu P‘i and, thinking you could not 
know that and might suffer some harm if you unwillingly went 


to Yiian Shao, I have come to warn you. It is good fortune to 


find you like this. Now we can hasten to Junan and you will 
meet your brother.” 
‘Kuan Yü took Sun Ch‘ien to make his bow to the ladies, who 


- asked after his adventures and he told them of the risks Liu 
Pei had run from Ytian Shao’s sudden bursts of anger. Now, 


however, he was out of his way and sere at Junan where they 


“would meet him. 


They covered their faces and Eor at the recital of his 


“dangers. Then the party no longer travelled north but took | 


the road toward Junan. Not long after a great cloud of dust 
was noticed behind them and they presently made out a 


i squadron of horsemen: These were led by Hsiahou Tun, who 
3 shouted out to Kuan Yü to stop. . 


One by one the pass commanders stopped his 
progress and were. slain, 

The river crossed, another army comes and he 
must fight again. ; 


Tow finally Kuan Yü escaped death will appear in the suc- 


; ceeding chapter. 


CHAPTER XXVII.  ' 


TS‘Al YANG PUT TO DEATH, THE BROTHERS’ DOUBTS DISAPPEAR: 
MEETING AT KUCH‘ENG, LORD AND LIEGE FORTIFY EACH OTHER. | 


So Ch‘ien had joined Kuan Yü in escorting the two ladies and ` 
they were on the road to Junan when Hsiahou Tun suddenly 
determined to pursue. So with a couple of hundred horse he 
set out. When he was seen approaching, Kuan Yü bade Sun 
Ch‘ien go ahead with the carriage while he remained to deal | 
with the pursuers. When they were near enough Kuan Yü 
said, “In coming after me thus you do not reinforce thea 
magnianimity of your master.” ae 

Replied Hsiahou Tun, “The Minister has sent no dennie, 
instructions. You have caused the death of several people, 
among them one of my lieutenants, and so I have come Ne 
capture you., You have behaved most grossly. He will decide.” 

Thereupon he dashed forward with his spear ready to thrust. 
But at that moment a rider came up behind him at full gallop 
crying, “You must not fight with Ytin-ch‘ang.” 

Kuan Yii stayed his steed at once and waited. The messen- 


| ger came up, drew from his bosom an official letter and said | 


to Hsiahou Tun, “The Minister loves General Kuan for his. 
loyalty and honour, and fearing lest he might be stopped at the: 
various passes, he sent me with this letter to show when neces- 
sary at. any. point on the road.” sae 
.“But this Kuan has slain several commanders of the passes ; 
does the Minister know that?” said Tun. - : een 
The messenger said these things were unknown. 
“Then,” said Tun, “I will arrest him and take him to the 
Minister, who may set him free or not as he wills.” 
“Do you think I fear anything you can do? 2”) said Kuan Ya 
getting wrathful. - full 
And he rode forward. Tun, noia loth, aut his spear ane 
prepared for battle. They met and had reached the tenth 
encounter when a second horseman, came up at full Speco 
crying, “Generals, wait.a little” 
Hsiahou Tun stayed his hand and asked the messenger, a 
saying, “Am I to arrest him?” EY. 
“No,” replied the messenger. “Fearing lest he should have a 


ee E eS eg EO ed 


CORY. 
Me 


difficulties at the passes the Minister has sent me with a 


despatch to say he is to be released.” 
“Nid ne Minister nails that he had slain several men on. 
the way?” 


J 
ve 


Ete of the ahree Lona 


ri “He did not know.” 
“Since he was ignorant of ai I may not let him go, ’ and he 
i - gave the signal to his men to close in round Kuan. Yü. 
_ ‘But Kuan Yü flourished his sword and made to attack them. 
a and a fight was again imminent, when a third rider appeared, © 
- who cried, “Yiin-ch‘ang, give way and do not fight!” 
fas Lhe speaker was Chang Liao. Both combatants made no 
_ further move but awaited his arrival. 
_. He said, “I bring the Minister’s order that since he has 
heard that. ‘Yiin-ch‘ang has slain certain men on the way he 
_ fears that some will hinder his passage. Wherefore he has 
sent me to deliver his command at each gate that Kuan Yii is.. 
_ to be suffered to pass freely. ue 
= Hsiahou Tun said, “Ch‘in Ch‘i was the son of Ts‘ai Yang’s 
- sister, and he was confided to my especial care. Now this- 
_ Kuan has killed him and how can I refrain?” D 
_ “When I see his uncle I will explain. But now the main 
point is that you have the Minister’s orders to let Kuan Yü 
pass and you may not despise his wish.” ` 
A So the only ihing for Hsiahou Tun to do was to retire; and 
e did. } 
“Whither are you going? ?” then said Chang Bae to Kuan Yb, 
i fs fear my brother is no longer with Yiian Shao and now I. 
Ee am going to find him wherever he is.’ 
“As you do not know where to go, why not ree to the 
- Minister?’ 
_ “Where is the sense of that?” said Kuan Yti with a smile. 
“But, Wén- -yiian, you return, and try to arrange pardon for my 
faults. KRE i 
With this he saluted Chang Liao and took his leave. Chang 
3 Liao retired and joined Hsiahou Tun. 
-== Kuan Yü quickly regained. the carriage, and as they. went 
res alone side by side he told Sun Ch‘ien what had happened. 
- Several days later a heavy rain storm came on which soaked | 
everything. Looking about for protection they noticed a farm 
-~ under the shelter of a precipice and took their way thither. An 
old man came out to them, to whom they told their story. When ` 
_ they had finished; the old ‘fellow said, “My name is Kuo Ch‘ang © 
and I have lived here many years. Tam very pleased to greet 
oe the man whom I have known so long by reputation.” 
He quickly killed a sheep for their refreshment and brought 
out wine for the two men. The two ladies were entertained 
inthe inner apartments. And while they refreshed themselves 
_ their baggage was put out to dry and their steeds were fed. 
=- As the day closed in they saw several youths come along and 
- their host said, “My son is come to pay his respects.” 
“This is my stupid son,” said he, presenting alad to Kuan 


Yi. 
“What has he been doing? ?” asked Kuan, 


292. Han UG, or , 


“He has just come in from hunting.” 


The young fellow went out. The old man continued, “All — | 
my family have been farmers or scholars. He is my only son. 


and instead of following in the footsteps of his ancestors he 
cares for nothing but gadding about and hunting; unhappily.” 

“Why unhappily?” said Kuan Yü. “In these days of äis- 
order a good soldier can make a name for himself.” 

“If he would only learn the military arts that would be | 
something of a career, but he is nothing but a vagabond and 
does everything he should not. He is a grief to me.” 

Kuan Yü sighed in sympathy. The old gentleman stayed 
till a late hour and when he took his leave his two guests began ; 
to prepare for rest. 

Suddenly outside there arose a great hubbub, men shouting 
and horses neighing. Kuan Yü called to his people, but as no 
one answered he and his companion drew their swords and- 
went into the stable yard. There they found their host’s ‘son 
on the ground shouting to his followers to fight. Kuan Yü 
asked what it was all about and his men told him that the 
young fellow had tried to steal Red Hare, but had been badly — 
kicked. They had heard shouting and had gone to see whee 
it meant when the farm people had set on them. i 

Kuan Yü was very wrathful “You mean thieves! Would 
you steal my horse?” cried he. 

But before he could do anything his host came running out 
saying, “It was not with my consent that my son did this evil 


thing. I know he is very guilty and,deserves death. But his _ 


mother loves him tenderly and I pray you to be generous and. 
pardon him.” i 
“Really he is unworthy of his father,” said Kuan Yü. “What 
m told me shows he is a degenerate, For your sake I pardon 
tim.” in wea 
. Then he told his own people to keep a better lookout, sent 
the farm people about their business and, in company with 
Sun Ch‘ien, went away to rest. 
Next morning both host and hostess were up betimes waiting 
to thank him for forgiving their son’s mad freak. ‘‘My currish 
son has insulted your tiger dignity, I know, ‘and I am deeply 
affected by your kindness in not punishing him, ” said the ae 
man. 
- “Bring him here and I will talk to him,” said Kuan Yü. 
“He went out before daylight with a lot of his fellow-rogues 


` and I know not where he is.’ 4 
So Kuan Yü bade them farewell, got the ladies into their — 


carriage and they moved out of the farmyard, the two warriors 
riding abreast as escort. They took the road toward the hills, - 
Before they had gone far they saw a large party of men, led 
by a couple of riders, pouring down one of the gullies. One of 
the riders wore a yellow turban and a battle robe. The other ` 


“Romance of the Chrec Vingooms 293 


was Kuo Ch‘ang’s son. The wearer of the turban called out 
-~ Saying, “I am one of the captains of the Celestial Duke, Chang 

Chio. _Whoever you may be, leave that horse you are riding 
for me. You may then go fr ee.” 

Kuan Yü greeted the speech with a hearty laugh. 

“O you mad ignoramus! If you had ever been with Chang — 
Chio as a bandit you would have learned to know Liu, Kuan 
and Chang, the three brothers.” Biss 

“I have heard of the ruddy long beard called Kuan but I. 
have never seen him. Who may you be?” | 


Kuan Yü then laid aside his sword, stopped his horse and 


= drew off the bag that covered. his beard thus showing its 
- magnificence. 
The turban wearer immediately slipped out of the saddle, 
-laid an angry hand on his companion and they both bowed low 
in front of Kuan Yü’s steed. 
“Who are you?” asked Kuan Yü: ‘ 
“Tam P‘ei Yiian-shao. After the death of Chang Chio I was 


oe left forlorn and I got together a few others like myself and we | — 


- took refuge in the forests. This morning early this fellow 
- came to tell us that a guest at his father’s farm had a valuable 
_ horse and proposed to me to steal it. I did not think I should . 


meet you, General.” 


The wretched youth Kuo implored that his life might be 


E spared and Kuan Yü pardoned him for his Bote ssake. He 
~ covered his face and crept away. 


; “You did not recognise me; how then did you know my 
name?” asked Kuan Yü. 


Pei replied, “Not far from here is a mountain called. the cae as 


= Sleeping Bull, where lives a certain Chou Ts‘ang, a very power- 
- ful man who came from the west. He has a stiff curly beard 
and looks very handsome. He also was a captain in the rebel 
army, who took to the forest when his leader perished, He 
has told me a lot about you but I have never had the happiness 
of seeing you.” | : 
Said Kuan Yu, “Under the greenwood tree is no place for a 


os, hero’s foot. You had better abandon this depraved life and 
>. _ return to the path of virtue. Do not work out your own 


destruction.” 
As they were talking a troop of horsemen appeared in the 


ae distance. They were the men of Chou Ts‘ang, as P“ei said, and 


Kuan Yii waited for them to-approach. The leader was very 
dark complexioned, tall and armed with a spear. As soon as 
he drew near enough to see he exclaimed joyfully, TA his is 
General Kuan.” 

- In a moment he had slipped out of the saddle and was on his 
knees by the roadside. 

“Chou Ts‘ang renders obeisance,” . said he. 

~ Said Kuan Yü, “O warrior, where have you known me?” 


pi 


Se ee 
gerne ee 
a 


mit 3 oS 


m 


294 San Ruo, or ' 


“I was one of the Yellow Turbans and I saw you then. My 
one regret. was that I could not join you. Now that my good 
fortune has brought me here I hope you will not reject me. 
Let me be one of your foot soldiers to be always, near you to 


` carry your „whip and run by your stirrup. I will cheerfully 
die for you.’ 


As he seemed thoroughly in earnest Kuan Yü said, “But if 
you follow me, what of your corapanions?” 

“They may do as they. please; follow me or go their ways.” 

Thereupon they all shouted, “We will follow.” i 

Kuan Yü dismounted and went to ask the ladies what they 
thought of this. The Lady Kan replied, “Brother-in-law, you 
have travelled thus far alone and without fighting men; you 
have safely passed many dangers and never wanted their 


assistance. You refused the service of Liao Hua, why then — | 


suffer this crowd? But this is only a woman’s view and you 
must decide.” 

“What you say, sister-in-law, is to the point.” et 
Therefore returning to Chou Ts‘ang he said, “It is. not 
that I am lacking in gratitude but my sisters-in-law do not - 
care for a large following. Wherefore return to the mountains. | 


~ till I shall have found my brother when I will surely call you.” 


Chou Ts‘ang replied, “I am only a rough uncouth fellow, 
wasting his life as a brigand. Meeting you, General, is like 
seeing the full sun in the skies and I feel that I can never bear 
to miss you again. As it might be inconvenient for all my men 
to follow you I will bid my companion lead them. away, but | 
I will come and follow you on foot wherever you go.’ Y 

Kuan Yü again asked his sisters-in-law what they thought 
of this. Lady Kan said one or two made no difference and 


so Kuan Yü consented. But P‘ei Yüan-shao was not satisfied — ii 


with this arrangement and said he wished also to follow. 
Chou said, “If you do not stay with the band they will 


-disperse and be lost. You must take command for the moment — i 
and let me accompany General Kuan. As soon as he hasa 


fixed abode I will come to fetch you.” w 
Somewhat discontentedly P‘ei Yüan-shao accepted the situa- y 


‘tion and marched off, while his one-time colleague joined- 


the train of Kuan Vii and they went toward Junan. They 
travelled quickly for some days and then they saw a city on 


a hill. From the natives they heard that the city was called | ' 


Kuch‘éng and that a few months before a warrior had suddenly 


appeared, driven out the magistrates and taken possession. tet, 


Then he had begun to recruit men, buy up horses and lay in 


stores. The warrior’s name was Chang Fei. Now he had a 


large force and no one in the neighbourhood dared face him. 

“To think that I should find my brother like this!” said 
Kuan Yü, delighted. “I have had never a word of him, nor . 
knew I where he was since Hsii-chou fell.” 


Petite of the Three tiingdoms 


So he Meshatened Sun Ch‘ien into the ee to tell its new 
- commander to come out to meet him and provide for their 


sisters-in-law. 


Now, after being separated from his brothers, Chang Fei had 


gone to the Mangyang Hills, where he had remained a month or 


so while he sent far and near for tidings of Yiian-té: Then as 
he happened to pass Kuch‘éng he had sent in to borrow some 
grain, but had been refused. In revenge, he had driven away 
the magistrate and taken possession of the city. He found 


_ the place well suited to his needs at the moment. 


__As directed by Kuan Yü, Sun Ch‘ien entered the city and, 


after the usual ceremonies, told Chang Fei the news of both his 


brothers ; that Yiian-té had left Yuan Shao and gone to Junan 


and that ‘Kuan Yü, with their sisters-in-law, was at his gates. 


-Chang Fei listened without a word till he came to the request 
to go out to meet him. At that point he called for his armour 
- and, when he had put it on, laid hold of his long spear, mounted 
and rode out with a large company at his back. Sun Ch‘ien 
was too astonished to ask what this meant and simply followed. 
` Kuan Yü was very glad when he saw his brother coming, 


aa ‘put up his weapons and, with Chou Ts‘ang at his back, rode 


~ toward him at full speed. But as he approached he saw all 
_ the signs of fierce anger on his brother’s face and he roared as 
= he shook his spear, threatening his brother. : 
` Kuan Yü was entirely taken aback and called out anxiously, 
“Brother, what does this mean? Is the Peach Garden Pledge 
quite forgotton? p? 
“What impudence is this that you come to see me since your 


aa ‘disgraceful behaviour?” shouted Chang. 


J RAN: 


“What disgraceful behaviour has been mine?” said Kuan 


“You have Ratraves your brother, you have surrendered 
To Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and you have received title and office at his 
- hands. And now o are come to exploit me. One of us 
shall die. a 

Kuan said, “Really you do not understand aad it is hard ta 


Ay me to explain. But ask the two ladies here, worthy brother, | | 


and they will tell you.’ 
_ At this the ladies lifted the curtain of the carriage and called 
out, “Brother, why is this?” 

Fei said, “Wait a while, sisters, and see me slay’ this traitor. 
After that I will conduct you into the city.” 

Said the Lady Kan, “Since he knew not where you were our 
brother took shelter with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. And since he knew 
that his elder brother was at Junan he has braved every danger 

to escort us thus far on the road. Pray take a correct view of 
his conduct.” l 

The Lady Mi also chimed in, “When your brother went to 
Hsütu no other course was open to him.” 


296 . San kuo, or, 


“Sisters, do not let him blind you to the truth. Real loyalty 


prefers death to dishonour. No good man can serve two ae 


masters.” 

Kuan Yü said, “Brother, cease to wrong me I pray you.” 

Sun Ch‘ien said, “Yiin-ch‘ ang came expressly to seek you.” 

“How much more nonsense will you talk?” roared Chane 
Fei. “How can he be true-hearted? He came to capture me, 
I say.” 


“Had I come to capture you, I should have come with men | i 


and horses,” said Kuan Yü. ) 

“And are there not men and horses?” said Chang Fei point- 
ing to a point behind Kuan Yü. 

Kuan Yii turned and there he saw a Houa of dust rising as 
though a squadron of horse was coming. And soon they were 
near enough and from their trumpets and banners they showed 
themselves to be of Ts‘ao T's‘ao’s army. ` z 


“Now will you try to cajole me aeea cried Chang Fei Oi: 


in a rage. 


He set his long spear and was just Cones on when Kuan Yü iA 


said, “Brother, wait a while; see me slay the leader of these . 
that I may prove myself no traitor.” 


“Well, if you are really true, prove it by slaying that. leader, i 


whoever he may be, before I have finished three rolls of the z 
rum 

Chang Fei’s condition was accepted. Soon the attacking 
_ force was near enough to make out the leader to be Ts‘ai Yang. 
Sword in hand he rode at full speed, crying, “So I have found 
you, slayer of my nephew! I have a command to capture you : 
and will execute it.” 

Kuan Yü made no reply. Raising his sword ready to strike 
he moved out and the drums began to beat. Before a roll | 
could be completed the fight was over and Ts‘ai Yang’s head — 
had rolled on the ground. His men scattered and fied. Kuan 
Yü, however, captured the young ensign-bearer and questioned 
him. The youth said that in very truth the Minister had not 
given an order. Incensed at the loss of his nephew, Ts‘ai 
wished to pursue and attack Kuan Yü although the Minister ` 
refused permission. To satisfy him he had sent Ts‘ai to attack 
Junan and the meeting at this place was entirely an accident. 


Kuan Yü bade him repeat this story to his brother. Chang, ae 


Fei also questioned him concerning all that had*happened in 


the capital and the recital of the whole story satisfied him of = 


the fidelity of Kuan Yü. 

Just then messengers came from the city to Chang Fei to 
say that some scores of horsemen had arrived at the south gate. 
They seemed in a great hurry but no one knew them. Chang 


Fei, with still a lingering doubt in his mind, went to look at. ~ 


the newcomers and there saw a score or ‘two of mounted 
archers with-light bows and short arrows. Hastily dismount- 


Romance of the Three tingdoms 297 


- ing to see them better he found they were Mi Chu and Mi 
- Fang. Quickly slipping out of the saddle they came up and 
Mi Chu said, “After the dispersal at Hsü-chou when we lost 
sight of you we returned to our village whence we sent all 
around for news of you. We heard that Kuan Yü had sur- 
rendered to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and our lord was.in Hopei. The one 
of whom we could hear nothing was yourself. But yesterday, 
` while on our way, we fell in with some travellers who told us a 
certain General Chang, of such and such an appearance, had 
suddenly occupied Kuch*‘eng and we felt it must be you. So we 
came to enquire and we happily fell in with you here.” 

Fei replied, “Kuan Yü and Sun Ch‘ien are here and my 
two sisters are with them. They had heard where my elder 
brother was.’ 

‘This news added to the joy of the two newcomers who went 
- to see Kuan Yü and the women and then they all entered the 
city. When the ladies had settled down a little they related the 
whole story of the adventures on the road at which Chang Fei 
was overcome with remorse and bowed before his brother 
_ bitterly weeping. The brothers Mi were greatly affected. 
Then Chang. Fei related what had happened to him. 
` A day was spent in banquets and next, day Chang Fei 


__ wished his newly found brother to go with him to Junan to see 


‘their elder brother Yiian-té. But Kuan Yü said, “No; you take 
care of the ladies here while Sun Ch‘ien and I go to get news.” 
= So Kuan Yü and Sun Ch‘ien with a small escort set out. 
_ When they reached Junan they were received by Liu P‘i who 
told them their brother was no longer in the city. After 
-waiting some days he had come to the conclusion that the 
“soldiers were too few and had gone back to Yuan Shao to 
consult with him. 

-Kuan Yü was greatly disappointed and his companion did 
his best to console him. “Do not be sorrowful; it only means 
the trouble of another journey into Hopei to tell Uncle Liu 
and then we can all meet at Kuch‘éng.” 

So spoke Sun Chen and Kuan Yü accepted it. They took 
leave of Liu. P“ and returned to Kuch‘éng where they related 
_ what had happened. Chang Fei wanted to go with them into 


Hopei, but Kuan Yü opposed this, saying, “Seeing you have — 


this city it makes a rallying point for us and a resting place. 
We must not abandon it lightly. We two will go and while 
away we look to you to keep the city safe.” 

“How can you go after Killing, the two generals, Yen Liang 


~ and Wên Chou ?”. 


“That will not stop me. And after I am there I can act 
accor ding to circumstances.” 

Then he summoned Chou Ts‘ang and asked him, saying, 
“How many men are there with. P‘ei at Sleeping Bull Moun- 


tain?” 


298 . San Kuo, or 


“T should think four or five hundred.” z 
“Now,” said Kuan Yü, “I am going to take the shortest 


road to ‘find my brother.’ Can you go to summon your men — 


and lead them along the high road to assist me?” 

With instructions to bring up these men Chou Ts‘ang left, 
while Kuan Yii and Sun Ch‘ien and their small escort went off 
to the north. When they drew near the boundary Sun Ch‘ien 
said, “You must be careful how you go over; you ought to 
stop here while I go in, see Uncle Liu and take the necessary 
steps.” 

Seeing the wisdom of this Kuan Yü stopped there and sent 
his companion in advance, he and his followers going up to a 
nearby farm as an abiding place. 

When they got to the farm out came a Tene ite man leaning 


`. on a staff. After exchanging salutes Kuan Yü told the old man, 


all about himself. 

“My name is also Kuan; my personal name being Ting,” 
said the old man. ge! know your reputation and I am very 
happy to meet you.” 


He sent for his two sons to come and make their bow. He ye 


put up Kuan in his house and provided for his escort in the 
farm buildings. 
In the meantime Sun Ch‘ien had made his way to Ch‘ichow 


and seen Yiian-té, who said, “Chien Yung also is here. We: 


will send for him secretly to ‘talk over this matter.” 
They did so, and when the usual salutes had been dogahinigoeet 
they three began to consider the means of getting away. 
“You see Ytian Shao personally,” said Yung, “and say you 


wish to go to Chingchou to see Liu Piao about a scheme for.. 


the destruction of our enemy. That will give an excuse.” 


“That seems best,” said Liu Pei, “but will you go with me?” ee 


“I have another plan to extricate myself,” said. Yung. 


Having settled their plans, Ytian-té soon went in to see his 


protector and suggested that, as Liu Piao was strong and well 
posted, his help should be sought against their enemy. 


“I have sent messengers repeatedly to ask his help,” said ' 


Shao, “put he is unwilling.” 


“As he and I are of the same. family he will Hat refuse me - 


if I go and ask him,” said Liu Pei. 

“Certainly he is worth much more than Liu P‘i; you shall 
go. 9 

“T have just heard,” Shao continea. “that Kuan Yünch ene 
has left Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and wants to come here. If he does I will 
put him to death out of revenge for my two officers.” 

“Tllustrious Sir, you wished to employ him and so I sent for 
him. Now you threaten to put him to death. The two men he 


slew were but deer compared with such a tiger as he is. When — | 


you exchange a couple of deer for a tiger you need not ‘complain 
of the bargain.” ` 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 299 


“Really I like him,” said Shao. “I was only joking. . You 
can send another messenger for him and tell him to come 


- soon. 


“May I send Sun Ch‘ien for him?” 

“Certainly.” ys 

After Yiian-té had gone Chien Yung came in and said to 
Shao, “If Ytian-té goes he will not come back. I had better go 
to speak to Liu Piao. And I can keep a watch on Liu Pei.” 

Yutian Shao agreed and issued orders for both to go.’ 


On the subject of the mission Kuo T‘u came in to his chief ` 


to dissuade him. Said he, “He went to speak to Liu P‘i, but 
he accomplished nothing. Now you are sending Chien Yung 
- with him and I am sure neither will ever return.” 

“Do not be too suspicious,” said Shao. “Chien Yung is 
clever enough.” 

That was the end of the interview. Forthwith Yiian-té sent 


Sun Ch‘ien back to Kuan Yü and then, with Chien Yung, took | 


leave of Yüan Shao and rode out of the city.. As soon as they 
reached the border line they met Sun Ch‘ien and all three rode 
off to Kuan Ting’s farm to meet Kuan Yti. He came out to 


“welcome them, bowed and then seized his brother’ s hands while i 


! tears streamed down his face. 

Presently the two sows of their host came to Mav to the 
visitors. Liu Pei asked their names. 
“These are of the same name as myself,” said Kuan Yü. 
“The sons are Kuan Ning, who is a student, and Kuan P‘ing, 
who is to be a soldier.” 

“T have been thinking of sending the younger in your train, 
General,” said old Kuan, “would you take him?” 

“What is his age?” said Liu Pei. 

“He is eighteen.” 


Liu Pei said, “Since, O Senior, you are so kind I venture f 


to suggest that your son should be adopted by my brother, who 


has no son of his own. What think you of that?” 


Kuan Ting was perfectly willing, so he called his younger 


‘son and bade him make a son’s obeisance to Kuan Yü and to., 


style Yüan-tê, “Uncle.” 


Then it was time to get on their way lest they ona. be | 


pursued and with them went Kuan P‘ing in the train of his 
“father.” The lad’s real father escorted them a short distance 
and then left. They took the road to Sleeping Bull Hill. 
Before they had gone very far they met Chou Ts‘ang with a 
small party. He was wounded. He was introduced to Yiian- 
tê who asked him how it was. He replied, “Before Í reached 
- the Hill a certain warrior, all alone, had fought with my friend 
- Pei and killed him. Then many of our men surrendered to 
him and he occupied our old camp. When I reached it I tried 
_ to allure the soldiers back to my side but only succeeded with 
afew. The others were too afraid. I got angry and engaged 


moi 


300 ~ San kuo, or Res] 
4 
the interloper, who however worsted me time after time and 
wounded me thrice.” 
“Who is the warrior? what does he look like?” asked Yiian-té. 
“All I know he is a doughty fighter, I do not know his name.’ 
Thereafter they advanced toward the hill with Kuan Yu in 
front and Yiian-té in rear. When they drew near Chou Ts‘ang 


began to abuse his enemy, who soon appeared, mailed and 


armed, coming down the hills. 


Suddenly Yiian-té rode out waving his whip and shouting, 


“You, O Comer, are surely Tzu-lung?”’ 

The rider, for it was Chao Tzu-lung, (Chao Yün), instantly 
slipped out of the saddle and bowed by the roadside. 

The brothers dismounted .to talk with him and ask how he 
came to be there. 


“When I left you I had no idea that Kungsun Tsan was a 
man who would listen to no reason. The result was disaster - 


and he perished in the flames. Yiian Shao invited me to him 


several times, but I thought too little of him to go. Then I 
wanted to go to Hsüchou to you, but you had lost that place 


and Yiin-ch‘ang had gone over to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and you had 
joined Ytian Shao. Several times I thought of coming to you 


but I feared Ytian Shao. So I drifted from one place to- : 


another with nowhere to rest till I happened to come this way 
and P‘ei Yiian-shao tried to steal my horse. SoI slew him and 


took possession of his camp. I heard I-tê was in Kuch‘éng 


but thought it might be only a rumour. And so the days have 
passed till this happy meeting.” 


Yüan-tê told him all that had happened to him since they 


parted and so did Kuan Yü. 


Said Liu P‘ei, “The first time I saw you I felt drawn to you 


and did not want to part from you. I am very happy to meet 
you again.’ 

“In all my wanderings, trying to find a lord worth serving, 
I have seen no one like you. Now I have reached your side 


that is enough for all my life. I care not what may happen - $ 


to me.’ 


Next they burned the camp, after which they all took the. ` 


road back to Kuch‘êng where they were welcomed. They 
exchanged the stories of their several adventures and the two 
ladies related the valiant deeds of Kuan Yti whereat Yüan-tê 
was too affected to speak. 

Then they performed a great sacrifice to Heaven and Earth 
with the slaughter of a bull and a horse. 


The soldiers also were recompensed for their toils. Yiian-té 


surveyed the conditions around him and found therein much 


to rejoice at. His two brothers were restored to his side and - 
none of his helpers were missing. Moreover he had gained ` 


Chao Yiin, and his brother Kuan Yu had acquired an adopted 
son P‘ing. Another captain had joined his ranks in the person 


Romance of the Three iingdoms _ 301 


of Chou Ts‘ ang. There was every occasion for feasting and 


$, gratification. 


Scattered wide ‘were the has none knew another’s retreat, 
Joyfuliy now they foregather, dragon and tiger meet. 
At this time the forces under the command of the three 
brothers and their adherents numbered four or five thousand 
men. Ytian-té was in favour of leaving Kuch‘éng and occupy- 


-ing Junan and just then Liu P‘ei and Kung Tu, commanders - 


of that city, sent to invite him to go there. So they went. 
There they devoted all their efforts to strengthen their army, 
both horse and foot, but nothing will be said of the recruiting, 


Sa parehase of horses and such matters. 


However it must be noted that Yiian Shao was much annoyed 
ae ose Yiian-té did not return and at first was for sending a 

` force after him. However Kuo T‘u dissuaded him. 

-~ “Liu P*ei need cause you no anxiety; Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is your one 

- enemy and must be destroyed. Even Liu Piao, though strong- 
ly posted on the river, is none too terrible. There is Sun 

Po-fu on the east of the river, strong, feared, with wide 


territory, a large army and able counsellors and leaders ; you . 
$ should make an alliance there against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.’ 


-He won his chief to his view oe wrote to Sun, sending the 
letter by Ch*én Chén. 


Just as one warrior leaves the north, 
Another from the east comes forth. 


, Future chapters will reveal the outcome of these dispositions. 


AOS to 


CHAPTER XXIX. ' 


THE “LITTLE. CHIEF OF THE FEUDAL LORDS”? SLAYS YU CHI: 
THE “BLUE-EYED Boy” Lays HOLD ON CHIANGTUNG. 


We may tell here how Sun Ts‘é gradually became supreme 
on the east of the river. In the fourth year of the period 


“Established Peace,” * he took Luchiang by the defeat of the - 
Prefect Liu Hsiin. He despatched Yu Fan with. a despatch 


to the Prefect of Yuchang,; Hua Hsin, and he surrendered. 


Thence his renown increased and he boldly sent a memorial — 
on his military successes to the Emperor by the hand of 


Chang Hung. 


Ts‘ao'Ts‘ao saw in him a powerful rival antl said he was 
a lion difficult to contend with. So he betrothed his niece, ~ 
- daughter of Ts‘ao Jên, to Sun K‘uang, the youngest brother 
of Sun Ts‘é, thus connecting the two families by marriage. . 


He also retained Chang Hung near him in the capital. 
Then Sun Ts‘é sought the title of Ta Ssu-ma, or Minister 
of War, one of the highest offices of State, but Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


prevented the attainment of this ambition, and Sun Ts‘é keenly 


resented it. Henceforward his thoughts turned toward an 
attack on’ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


About this time the Prefect of Wuchtin sent a secret letter — 
to the capital to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, saying that Sun Ts‘é was a tur-. 
bulent fellow of the Hsiang Chi type and the government ought, 


under the appearance of showing favour to him, to recall him 
to the capital for he was a danger in the provinces. But the 


bearer of this letter was captured on the Yangtse River and 


sent to Sun Ts‘é, who immediately: put him to death. Then 


he treacherously sent to ask the author of the letter, Hsü Kung | 


by name, to come and consult over some affair. The unsuspect- 
ing man came. Sun Ts‘é produced the letter, saying. ‘So you 
wish to send me to the land of the dead, eh?” and thereupon 
the executioners came in and strangled him. The family of 
the victim scattered, but three of his clients determined to 


avenge him if only they could find some means of attacking — 


Sun. 

Their chance came in the hunting field. One day Sun went 
hunting in the hills to the west of Tant‘u. A stag was started 
and Sun pressed after it at topmost speed and followed it 
deep into the forest. Presently he came upon three armed men 


es LOO AnD 5 + Modern Kiangsi. 


E a a 8 Sa 
eee a ee E LNE 2 ae NG 


—-Fomance of the Three Hingdoms: 


k E dne. among the trees. Rather surprised to see them there 
he reined in and asked who they were. 


“We belong to Han Tang’s army and are shooting deer,’ 


was the reply. 


- So Sun Ts‘é shook his bridle to proceed. But just as he did 


so one of the men thrust at him with a spear and wounded his 


thigh, Sun drew the sword at his side, dashed forward and 
cut down the aggressor, The blade of his sword suddenly fell 
to the ground, only the hilt remaining in his hand. Then one 
of the assassins drew his bow and an arrow wounded Sun in 
the cheek. He plucked out the arrow and shot at the offender, 
who fell, but the other two attacked him furiously with their 
spears, shouting, “We are Hsii Kung’s men and his avengers!” 

Sun Ts‘é then understood. But he had no weapons save his 


~ bow against them.: He tried to draw off, keeping them at bay 
by striking with his bow, but the fight was getting too much 
for him and both he and his steed were wounded in several 


places. However, just at the critical moment, some of his own 
_ men came up and ‘they made short work of the remaining two 


avengers. 
_ But their lord was in a sorry plight. His face was stream- 
ing with blood and some of the wounds were very severe. 


_ They tore up his robe and therewith bound up his wounds and 


they carried him home. 
MA poem in praise of the three avengers says :— 

O Sun Ts‘é was a warrior and a stranger he to fear, 

But he was basely murdered while hunting of the deer. 

Yet were they leal who slew ! him, to avenge a murdered lord, 

_ Self immolated like Yii-jang, they dreaded not the sword. 

_ Badly wounded, Sun Ts‘é was borne to his home. They 
sent to call the famous physician, Hua T‘o, but he was far 


`. away and could not be found. However, a disciple of his came 


and the wounded man was committed to his care. 
“The arrowheads were poisoned,” said the physician, “and 


a. the poison has penetrated deep. It will take a hundred days 
of perfect repose before danger will be past. But if you give 


way to passion or anger the wounds will not heal.” 

‘Sun’s temperament was hasty and impatient and the pros- 
pect of such a slow recovery was very distasteful. However, he 
remairfed quiet for some twenty of the hundred days. Then 


came a messenger from the capital and he insisted on seeing 


| and questioning him. 


“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao fears you, my lord, very greatly,” Laid the 


messenger, “and his advisers have exceeding respect for you: 


all except Kuo Chia.” 


“What did he say?” asked the sick chieftain, 
The messenger remained silent, which only irritated his. 


$ _ master and caused him to demand to be told. So the messenger 
i oe to poak the truth.- He said, “The fact is Kuo Chia told 


304. = an Ruo, or 


‘ 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao that he need not fear you, that you were frivolous — 


‘and unready, impulsive and shallow, just a stupid swaggerer 


who would one day come to his death at the hands of Some... i; 


mean person.’ 
This provoked the sick man beyond endurance. 


“How dare he say this of me, the fool!” cried ‘Sun Ts‘é.. 


“I will take the capital from Ts‘ao, I swear.’ 


It was no more a question of repose. Ill as he was he wanted: 


to begin preparations for an expedition at once. They remons- 
trated with him, reminded him of the U r, s Ash eas) and 
urged him to rest. 

“You are risking your priceless self in a OENE anger,” 
said Chang Chao. 

Then arrived Ch‘én Chén, the messenger from Yüan Shao, 
and Sun would have him brought in. He said, “My master 
wishes to ally himself with Wu in an attack on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.” 


Such a proposal was just after Sun’s heart. At once he | 


called a great meeting of his officers in the wall tower and 


prepared a banquet in honour of the messenger. While this . 
was in progress he noticed many of his captains whispering | 


to each other and they all began to go down from the banquet 


chamber. He could not understand this and enquired ofthe | 


attendants near him what it meant. They told him that Saint 
Yii had just gone by and the officers had gone down to pay 
their respects to him. Sun Ts‘é rose from his place and went 
and leaned over the railing to look at the man. He saw a 


Taoist priest in snowy garb leaning on his staff in the middle : 
of the road, while the crowd about him burnt incense and 


made obeisance. 

“What wizard fellow is this? Bring him here!” said Sun. 

“This is Yü Chi,” said the attendants. ‘He lives in the east 
and goes to and fro distributing charms and draughts. He 
has cured many people as everybody will tell you, and they 
say he is a saint. He must not be profaned. TNR 

This only angered Sun the more'and he told them to araea 
the man at once or disobey at their peril.. So there being no 
help for it they went down into the road and hustled the saint 
up the steps. 


“You madman! How dare you incite men to evil?” said Sun 


Ts‘. 

“I am but a poor priest of the Lanyeh Palace. More than 
half a century ago, when gathering simples in the woods, I 
found near the Chtiyang Spring a book called “The Way of 
Peace.” It contains a hundred and more chapters and taught 


me how to cure the diseases of men. With this in my posses- 


sion I had only one thing to do, to devote myself to spreading 
its teachings and saving mankind. I have never taken any 


thing from the people. Can you say I incite men to evil - 


deeds ?”’ 


aE 


mane e of the Three Bingboms _ RAB | 


A g “You say you fake nothing; whence came your clothes and 
. your food? The fact is you are one of the Yellow Turban 
kidney and you will work mischief if you are left alive.” 
“Take him away and put him to death,” continued he to his 
attendants. 
: Chang Chao interceded, “The Taoist has been here in the 
east these many years. He has never done any harm and does 
not deserve death or punishment.’” 
Fan tell you, I will kill these wizard fellows just as I would 
cattle.’ 
The officials in a body interceded, even the guest of honour 


-Ch‘én Chén, but in vain; Sun Ts‘é refused to be placated. He 


~ ~ ordered the Taoist to be imprisoned. 
$ :The banquet came to an end and the messenger retired to 
his lodging. Sun Ts‘ also returned to his palace. 
; His treatment of the Taoist Holy Man was the theme of 
-~ general conversation and soon reached the ears of his mother. 
- She sent for her son to the ladies’ apartments and said to him, 
“They tell me you have put the Taoist in bonds. He has cured | 
many sick people and the common folk hold him in great 
reverence. Do not. harm him.” 
-. “He is simply a wizard who upsets the multitude with his 
~ spells and craft. He must be put to death,” replied Ts‘é. 
_ She entreated him to stay his hand, but he was obstinate. 
“Do not heed the gossip of the street, mother,” said he. “I 
must be judge of these matters.” 
However, he sent to the prison for the Taoist in order to ~ 
interrogate him. Now the gaolers having a great respect for 
é Yü Chi and faith in his powers were very:indulgent to him 
_ and did not keep him in the collar. However when Ts‘é sent 
-. for him he went with collar and fetters all complete. 
: Ts‘é had heard of their indulgence and punished the gaolers 
so that the prisoner thereafter lay in constant torture. Chang 
-Chao and some others, moved by pity, made a petition which they 
humbly presented and they offered to become surety for him. 
- Sun Ts‘ said to them, “Gentlemen, you are all great scholars, 
- but why do you not understand reason? Formerly in Chiao- 
- chou was a certain Governor Chang Ching, who was deluded 
by these vicious doctrines into beating drums, twanging lyres, 
burning incense and such things. He wore a red turban and 
represented himself as able to ensure victory to an army. But 
he was slain by the enemy. There is nothing in all this, only 
none of you will see it. I am going to put this fellow to death 
in order to stop the spread of this pernicious doctrine.” 
pee Ti Wan interposed, “I know very well this Yü Chi can control | 
a the. weather. It is very dry just now, why not make him pray 
for rain as an amercement?’ 
“We will see what sort of witchcraft he is equal to,” said 
Sun Tsen ht A 


GAI] 


306 San Kuo, or 


Whereupon he had the prisoner brought i in loosed his fetters elated 


and sent him up to an altar to intercede for rain. 
The docile Taoist prepared to do as he was bidden. ‘He first. 


bathed himself, then dressed himself in clean garments. After 3 
that he bound his limbs with a cord and lay down in the fierce 


heat of the sun. The people came in crowds to look*on. 


Said he, “I will pray for three feet of refreshing rain for- 
the benefit of the people, nevertheless I shall not escape death - 


thereby.” 


The people said, “But if your prayer pa efficacious our lord _ A 


must believe in your powers.’ 
“The day of fate has come for me and there is no escape.” 


Presently Sun Ts‘é came near the altar and announced that as 


if rain had not fallen by noon he would burn the priest. And 
to confirm this he bade them prepare the pyre. 


As it neared noon a strong wind sprang up and the dlolids act uo 


gathered from all quarters. But there was no rain. 


“Tt is near noon,” said Sun Ts‘é “Clouds are of no account re 


without rain. He is only an impostor.” 


He bade his attendants lay the priest on the pyre and pile N 


wood around him and apply the torch. Fanned by the gale 


the flames rose rapidly. Then appeared in the sky above a .: i 
wreath of black vapour followed by roaring thunder and vivid ~ 


lightning, peal on peal and flash on flash. And the rain fell in 
a perfect deluge. In a short time the streets became rivers 
and torrents. It was indeed a three feet fall. 

Yü Chi, who. was stili lying upon the pile of firewood, dried 


in a loud voice, “O clọuds, cease thy rain, and let the glorious Ena 


sun appear!” 


Thereupon officials and people helped the elec down, : $ 
loosened the cord that bound him and bowed before him in - 


gratitude for the rain. 


But Sun Ts‘é boiled with rage at seeing his officers and the. al SA 
people gathered in groups and kneeling in the water regardless oe 


of the damage to their clothing. 


“Rain or shine are as nature appoints them and the wizard 4 ! AN 
has happened to hit upon a moment of change; what are you 


making all this fuss about?” cried he. 


Then he drew his sword and told the attendants to smite ng 


the Taoist therewith. They all besought him to hold his hand. 


“You want to follow Yü Chi in rebellion, I Suppose, ” eried 


Sun Ts‘ê. 
The officers, now thoroughly cowed a the rage of their lord, 


were silent and showed no opposition when the executioners ; 


seized the unhappy Taoist and beheaded him. 
They saw just a wreath of black smoke drift away to the 
north-east where lay the Langyeh Mountains. — 


The corpse was exposed in the market place as a warning fs č 
to enchanters and wizards and such people. .That night there 


a 4 fiomance af the Giver Ringooms. | 807 


came a very violent Bien and when it calmed down at daylight 


there was no trace of the body. The guards reported this and 


Sun Ts‘é in his wrath sentenced them to death: But as he 


did so he saw Yü Chi calmly walking toward him as if he were — 


still alive. He drew his sword and darted forward to strike 
at the wraith, but he fainted and fell to the ground. 


They carried him te his chamber and in a short time he, fa 
recovered consciousness. His mother, the Lady Wu, came to 
visit him and said, “My son, you have done wrong to slay the _ 


holy one and this is your retribution. ss 


“Mother, when I was a boy I went with my father to the of 
‘wars, where men are cut down as one cuts hempen stalks. | 
There is not much retribution about such doings. I have put — 
this fellow to death and so checked a great evil. Where does 
retribution come in?” Meas eva see 
“This comes of want of faith,” she replied. “Now you must ~ 
-~ avert the evil by meritorious deeds.” 


“My fate depends on Heaven: wizards can do me no harm, 


‘so why avert anything?” aes 
His mother saw that it was useless to try persuasion, ‘but RANN 


abel told his attendants to do some good deeds secretly whereby 


H the evil should be turned aside. 


That night about the third watch, as Sun Ts‘é lay in his ee 


` chamber, he suddenly felt a chill breeze, which seemed to 


extinguish the lamps for a moment, although they soon 


` brightened again, and he saw in the lamp light the Tora 
of Yü Chi standing near. his bed. AR 
Sun said, “I am the sworn foe of witchcraft and I will purge ees 
- the world of all such as deal in magic. You are a spirit and 
hid dare you approach me?” È 
Reaching down a sword that hung at the hod of his bed 
he hurled it at the phantom, which then disappeared. When 
“his mother heard this story her grief redoubled. Sun Ts‘é 


ill as he was, did his utmost to reassure his mother. 


She said, “The Holy One says, ‘ How abundantly do se t 


beings display the powers that belong to them!’ and ‘ Prayer 
has been made to the spirits of the upper and lower worlds.’ 


- You must have faith. You sinned in putting Master Yü to H 


death and retribution is sure. I have already sent to have 


"sacrifices performed | at the Jade-pure Monastery and you 
` should go in person to pray. May all come right!” 


Sun Ts‘é could not withstand such a mandate from his 


- mother so, mustering all his strength, he managed to get into - 
<a sedan chair and went to the monastery, where the Taoists 
received him respectfully and begged him to light the incense. 

» He did so, but he returned no thanks. To the surprise of all, 


the smoke from the brazier, instead of floating upwards and 
dissipating, collected in a mass that gradually shaped itself 


a into an umbrela and there on the top sat Yu Chi. 


308 ae San uo, or , 

Sun Ts‘ simply spat abuse and went out of the temple. 
As he passed the gates, lo! Yü Chi stood there gazing at him 
with angry eyes. 


“Do you see that wizard fellow?” said he to those about nie 


They said they saw nothing. More angry than ever he flung 
his sword at the figure by the gate. The sword struck one of 
his escort who fell. When they turned him over they saw it 
was the executioner who had actually slain the Taoist. The 
sword had penetrated his brain and his life drained out through 
- the seven channels of perception. Sun Ts‘é told them to bury 


the man. But as he went out of the- courtyard he saw Yu Chi 


- walking in. 
“This temple is nothing more than a larkin place-for sor- 
cerers and wizards and such people,” said he. — 

Whereupon he took a seat in front of the building and sent 
' for half a company of soldiers to pull the place down. When 
they went up on the roof to strip off the tiles he saw Yü Chi 
standing on the main beam flicking tiles to the ground. More 


angry than ever he told them to drive out the priests belonging 


‘to the place and burn it. They did so and when the flames 


rose their highest he saw the dead Taoist Yü Chi standing in 


the midst of the fire. 

Sun Ts‘é returned home still in a bad humour, which in- 
creased when he saw the form of Yü Chi standing at his gate. 
- He would not enter but mustered his army and went into camp 
outside the city walls. And there he summoned his officers to 
meet him and talk ovér joining Yüan in an attack on Ts‘ao. 

They assembled, but they remonstrated with him and begged 
him to consider his precious health. That night he slept in 
the camp and again saw Yü Chi, this time with his hair 
hanging loose. He raged at the vision without cessation. 

Next day his mother called him into the city and he went. 


She was shocked at the change in his appearance; he looked- 


so utterly miserable. Her tears fell. 
“My son,” said she, “how wasted you are!” 


He had a mirror brought and looked at himself: he was. 


indeed so gaunt and thin “that he was almost frightened and 
exclaimed, “How do I come to look so haggard? ae 

While he spoke, Yü Chi appeared in the mirror. He struck 
it and shrieked. Then the half healed wounds re- -opened and 
he fainted. 


He was raised and borne within. When he recovered cons- 
_ciousness he said, “This is the end; I shall die.” 


He sent for Chang Chao and his other chief officers and his 
- brother, Sun Ch‘tian, and they gathered in his chamber. He 
gave them his dying charge, saying, “In the disordered state 
of the Empire Wu and Yiieh, with their strong defence of the 
Three Chiang, have a brilliant future. You, Chang Chao, must 
assist my brother.” 


ae 


‘Homance of the Three kingdoms | 309 


So saying he handed his seal to Sun Ch‘iian saying, “For 


= manipulating the might of Chiangtung so as to make it the © . 


deciding force between two factions and then obtaining the 
whole Empire, you are not so suited as I; but in encouraging 
the wise and confiding in the able and getting the best out of 
every one for the preservation of this district, I should not 


‘ succeed as you will. Remember with what toil and labour 
your father and I have won what we possess and take good 


care thereof.” . 

Sun Ch‘tian wept as he knelt to receive the seal and the 
dying chief turned to his mother, “Mother, the days allotted | 
of Heaven have run out and I can no longer serve my tender 


mother. I have given over the seal to my brother and trust 


that you will advise him. early and late, and see that he lives 
worthy of his predecessors.” 

“Alas! your brother is full young for such a task, ” said his 
mother weeping. “I know not what may happen.” 
“Heis far abler than I and fully equal to the task of ruling. | 
Should he have doubts upon internal affairs, he must turn to 
Chang Chao; for outer matters he must. consult Chou Yü. It 
is a pity Chou Yui is ‘absent so ee I cannot give him my 
charge face to face.” 

To his brothers hé said, “When i: am gone you must help 


your brother. Should any discord arise in the family let the ~- 
-others punish the wrong-doer and let not his ashes mingle j 


with those of his ancestors in the family vaults.” . 
The young men wept at these words. Then ie called. for 


his wife, the famous beauty of the Ch‘iao family, and said, é 
“Unhappily we have to part while still in the full vigour of life. 


You must care for my mother. Your sister will come to see 


you presently and you can ask her to tell Chou Yt to help my i i A i 


brother in all things and make him keep to the way I have 
taught him to walk in.’ 

Then he closed his eyes and soon after passed away.. He was © 
only twenty-six. 


Men called him first of the chieftains, 
The east had felt his might, 

He watched like a tiger crouching, 
Struck as a hawk in flight. 

There was peace in the lands he ruled, 
His fame ran with the wind, 

But he died and left to another,. 

` The great scheme in his mind. 


As his brother breathed his last Sun Ch‘tian sank | by his 


_bed and wept. 


“This is not the time to mourn,” said Chang Chao. “First 
see to the funeral ceremonies and that the government is safe.” 
So the new ruler dried his tears.. The superintendence of 


the funeral was bene to Sun Ching and then Chang Chao - 


310 i an Kuo, or 


led his young master to the hall to receive the felicitations of 
his ofñcers. , 

Sun Ch‘üan was endowed with a square jaw and a large 
mouth; he had blue eyes and a dark brown beard. Formerly, 
when Liu Yiian had gone to Wu to visit the Sun family, he 


said of the family of brothers, “I have looked well at them all _ 


and they are all clever and perspicacious, but none of them 


have the very ultimate degree of good fortune. Only the 


second has the look of a deep thinker. His face is remarkable, 
and his build unusual, and he has the look of one who will 
come to great honour. „But none of them will attain to the 
blessing of a great age.” 

History says that when Sun Ch‘iian succeeded to his brother 
and his brother’s might, there was still some reorganization 
to be done. Soon Chou Yü had arrived. The young ruler 
received him very graciously and said, “I need have no anxiety 
now that you have come.” 

It will be remembered that Chou Yii had been sent to hold 
Pachiu. When he heard that his chief had been wounded by 
an arrow he thought it well to return to see how he was. But 
Sun Ts‘é had died before Chou Yü could arrive. He hurried 
to be present at the funeral. 

When he went to wail at the coffin of his late chief, Wu 
Fu-jén, the dead man’s mother, came out to deliver her son’s 
last injunctions. When she had told him the last charge he 
bowed to the earth, saying, “I shall exert the puny powers 
I have in your service as long as I live.” 

Shortly after Sun Ch‘iian came in, and, after receiving Chou 


LS obeisance, said, “I trust you will not forget my brother’s - 


charge ‘to you.’ 

Chou bowed saying, “I would ae suffer any form of 
death for you.’ 

“How best can I maintain this grave charge which I have 
inherited from my father and brother?” 

“He who wins men, prospers; he who loses them, fails. 
Your present plan should be to seek men of high aims and 
farseeing views and you can establish yourself firmly.” 

“My brother bade me consult Chang Chao for internal ad- 
ministration, and yourself on external matters,” said Ch‘iian. 

“Chang Chao is wise and understanding and equal to such 


a task. I am devoid of talent and fear to take such responsi- | 


bility, but I venture to recommend to you as a helper one Lu 
Su, named Tzu-ching, a man of Tungch‘uan. This man’s bosom 


hides strategy and his breast conceals tactics. He lost his 
father in early life and has been a perfectly filial son to his © 
mother. His family is rich and renowned for charity to the - 


needy. When I was stationed at Ch‘ao-ch‘ang I led some 


hundreds of men across the Linhuai. We were short of grain. _ ! 


Hearing that the Lu family had two granaries there, each 


ee 


Romaner of the Three Kingdoms 559 


would dispute with, and even fight him. Beside, at the battle 
at Ch‘ihpi (Red Wall)’ my lord did good service and acquired ` 
great merit while his captains risked their lives. Was it solely 
the strength of your men of Wu that won that fight? Had 
-I not brought that south-east wind that meant so much for 
Chou Yü, could he have done anything? Had Chiangnan been — 
conquered, it is needless to say that two beauties you wot 

of would now be gracing the Bronze Bird Palace, and as for 
yourself, fant 
-þeen sure to survive? Just now my lord did not reply because 
he was willing to believe rather that a scholar of your abilities 
would understand without a detailed explanation, and I trust 
“now that you wil.” . 
This speech absolutely shut the guest’s mouth for a time ~ 
_ and he said no word in reply.. But after an interval he said, 
“What you say, K‘ung-ming, I think is devoid of reason, and 
means much unpleasantness for me.’ 

“What unpleasantness?” asked K‘ung- -ming. 

The guest replied, “When Liu Pei was in serious Straits at 
Tangyang I conducted you across the river and introduced 
you to my lord. I opposed Chou Yü when he was going to 
_ Capture Chingchou, and then it came about that the place was 
` to be ours when the young man died. -And I pledged myself . 


cant though your family be, could you have $ 


to that. Now how can I go back and say you break your 


promise? Both my lord and Chou Yü will hold me guilty. 
I would not mind death so much, but I fear that my master 
will be very wrathful and make war on the Imperial Uncle, 

who will have no place of refuge and he will look ridiculous 
in the eyes of the world for no reason.’ ; 

Replied K‘ung-ming, “I care not for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao with his 
hundred legions and the Emperor in name at his back, and 
do you-think I fear such a youngster as your. Chou Yü? 
However, as it may cause you some loss of consideration I will 
try to persuade my master to put the matter in writing and 
give you a paper to the effect that he is temporarily occupying 
Chingchou as a base and when he can obtain possession of 
some other city this shall be returned to you. What think 
you Wu would say to this?” 

“Wait till what other place was obtained?” said Lu Su. 

“My master can scarcely think of attacking the capital yet, 
but Liu Chang in Sstch‘uan is ignorant and weak and my 
master will attack him. If he get the western province then 
this place will be given up to you.’ 

Lu Su had no alternative and accepted the offer. Ytian-té 
with his own hand wrote the pledge and sealed it. Chuko 
K‘ung-ming being named as guarantor also signed the docu- 
ment. 

“Since I belong to this side of the compact and one can 
hardly have a guarantor of the same party I wodid trouble 


/ 


560 ne Aan Kuo, or 


you, Tztching, also to sign. It will look better when you 


reach Wu again,” said K‘ung-ming. ° 
Lu Su said, “I know that your master is perfectly honourable 
and will adhere to the bargain.” 


And so he signed. Then he received the document in formal _ 


style and took his departure. He was sent off with every 


mark of great respect, both Yiian-té and K‘ung-ming attending 


him to his boat. There the adviser delivered him a last 
exhortation, “When you see your master, speak discreetly and 
explain fully so as not to create a bad impression. If he reject 


our document we may get angry and we will take his whole 


country. The one thing now is for our two houses to live in 


harmony and not give our common enemy an opportunity 


against us.’ 
Lu Su went ‘down into his ship. He reached Ch‘aisang and 


there saw Chou Yü, who said, “Well, how did you speed with 


= your demand for Chingchou?” 


~ 


“Here is the document,” said Lu Su, giving it to Chou Yü 
to read. i 

“You have been- EERE A T, by Chuko,” said Chou, stamping 
his foot with irritation. “In name it may be temporary 
occupation but in fact it is humbug. They say the place is 
to be returned when they get the west. Who knows when 


Hes that will be? Suppose ten years; then it will be ten years 


before they give us Chingchou. What is the use of such a 
document as this? And you are a guarantor of its due 
performance! If they do not give us the city, you get into 
trouble. Suppose our lord finds you in the wrong, what then ?’’ 

Lu Su was dumbfounded. When he had somewhat recovered 


his self-possession, he said, re think Yiian-té will be true to- 


“You, my friend, are simple and sincere; Liu Pei is a: 


scoundrelly ` adventurer ; and Chuko Liang is a slippery 
customer. They and you are utterly different.” 
“What then is to be done?” cried Lu Su distressfully. . 
“You are my dear friend and your kindness in freely offering 
your store of grain to relieve my necessity is still fresh in my 


3 memory. Of course I will save you. Do not be anxious, but 


wait a few days till we get news of what is doing, on the north 


`of the river and then we can decide upon a plan.” 


Lu Su passed some very uneasy days. Then the scouts came 
back saying that in Chingchou everything seemed in excellent 
order and the flags were flying everywhere, while outside the 
city they were building a magnificent mausoleum for the Lady 


© Kan, wife of Liu Pei. All the soldiers were in mourning. 


When Chou Yii knew who was dead, he said to his friend, 


“My scheme is made. You will see Liu Pei just stand still to 
be bound and we shall get Chingchou like turning a hand.” 
“What is the main-spring of your plan?” said Lu Su. 


`~ 


j 
4 
F. 
* 
a 
Pe 
] 
3 


“Romance of i Three ¢ Hingdoms PRE, 


“Liu Pei will want to re-marry and our lord hae a sister. 
She is a veritable amazon, whose women guards number many 


hundreds, all armed with weapons of war. Her apartments 


also are full of such things. I will write to our lord to send 


an intermediary to arrange that the lady shall wed Liu Pei 4 


at her family home and thus we shail entice him to Nanhsi. 
But instead of marrying a wife, he will find himself a prisoner, 
and then we will demand Chingchou as ransom. When they 
have handed over the city I shall find something else to say 
and nothing will fall on your head.” 

Lu Su was very grateful. Then Chou Yü wrote. letters to 
his master and a swift boat was chosen to take Lu Su to see 
the Marquis of Wu. 

After the lending of Chingchou had been discussed, Lu Su 
presented the document given him by Liu Pei. “What is the 
anty such nonsense as this?” said Sun Ch‘uan, when he had’ 
read it. 

“There is another letter from General Chou and he says 
that if you will employ his scheme you can recover Chingchou,” 
replied Lu. 

Having read that letter the Marquis was ‘more pleased | 


a and began to consider who was the best man: to send. 


Suddenly he cried, “I have it; Lü Fan is the man to 
send.” 

He called Lii Fan and said to him, “I have just Board that, 
Liu Yüan-tê has lost his wife. I have a sister whom I should 
like to marry to him and so make a bond of union between 
our two houses. Thus we should be united against Ts‘ao and 
in support of the House of Han. You are the one man to be 
intermediary and I hope you will go to Chingchou and see to 
this.” j 

Under these orders Lü Fan at once began to prepare his 
ships for the voyage and soon started. 

Yiian-té was greatly distressed at the death of the Lady Kan, 


- fretting for her day and night. One day when he was talking 


with his adviser they announced the arrival of Lii Fan. He 
had come on a mission from Wu. Me 
“One of Chou Yii’s devices,” said the adviser amikino ‘and 
it is all on account of this city. I will just retire behind the 
screen and listen. But you, my lord, agree to whatever the 
messenger proposes. Then let the messenger be taken to the 
guest-house while we arrange what is to be done.” 
So the envoy was introduced. Bows having been exchanged, 
host and guest being seated in due order and the tea drunk, 


Yiian-té opened the interview. 


“You must have some commands for me, Sir, since you 
come thus.” 
“News has just ane received that you, O Imperial Uncle, 


have just been bereaved of your consort. I venture to hope 


36 


562 San Kuo, or 


you would not object to an advantageous match and I have 
come to propose one. Are you disposed to listen?” 

“To lose one’s wife in middle age is truly a great misfortune,” 
said Liu Pei. “While her body is still warm I cannot listen to 
proposals for another marriage.”’ 

Lü Fan said, “A man without a wife is like a house without 
a ridge pole. "At your age one should not live an incomplete 
life. I am come on the part of the Marquis of Wu, who has 
a sister, beautiful as she is accomplished and well fitted to be 
a mate for you. Should the two families become allied as 
formerly were Ts‘in and Chin, then that ruffian Ts‘ao would — 
never dare so much as look this way. Such an alliance 
would be to the benefit of both our houses and of the State. 


‘I hope, O Imperial Uncle, that you will fairly consider 


the proposal. However, since the young girl’s mother is 
dotingly fond of her she does not wish her to go far away, 
and so I must ask you to come into our country for the 
wedding.” 

“Does the Marquis know of your coming ? i 

“How dare I come without his knowledge?” 

“I am no longer young,” said Liu Pei, “I am fifty and 
grizzled. This fair damsel, the sister of the Marquis, is now 
in the flower of her youth and no mate for me.’ i 

“Although the damsel is a woman yet in mind she surpasses 
many a man, and she has said she will never wed any one who 
is unknown to fame. Now, Sir, you are renowned throughout 
the four seas. Marriage with you would be the chaste maiden 
mating with the born gentleman. Of what consequence is the 
difference in age?” 

“Sir, stay here awhile and I will give you a reply to-morrow,” 
said Liu Pei. 

So that day the envoy was entertained at a banquet and then 
conducted to the guest house to repose, while, late as it was, 
Yiian-té and K‘ung-ming discussed their plans. i 

“I knew what he had come about,” said the adviser. “While 
he was talking I consulted the oracle and obtained an excellent 
sortilege. Wherefore you may accept the proposal and send 
Sun Ch‘ien back with this envoy to arrange the details. When 
the promise has been ratified we will choose a day and you 
shall go to complete the ceremony.” 

“How can I thus go into enemy territory? Chou Yü has 
wanted to slay me for a long time.” 

“Let Chou Yü employ all his ruses; think you he can get 
beyond me? Let me act for you and his calculations will 
always fail halfway. Once Sun Chi‘iian’s sister is in your 
power there will be no fear for Chingchou.”’ 

Still Yiian-té doubted in his mind. However, the messenger 
was sent to Wu, with definite instructions, and travelled thither 
with Lü Fan. At the interview Sun Ch‘iian said, “I wish my © 


io 


tee could induce Yüan- tê to live here Sih us. He would 
come to no harm.” 

Sun Ch‘ien took his leave, and ‘returning to Ghinechou he 
told the bridegroom elect that Sun Chi‘tian’s sole desire was 
for him to go over and complete the marriage. 

However, Ytian-té feared and would not go. Runes -ming 


said he had prepared three plans but they needed Chao Tzu- 


lung to carry them out. Wherefore he must go as guard. 
So he called in Chao Yiin, gave him three silken bags and 
whispered in his ear saying, “Here are three schemes enclosed 


in three bags. When you escort our lord to Wu you will take i 


these with you and act as they direct:” 


Chao Yün hid the three silken bags in his breast so that they, SANN 


should be at hand when required. 

K‘ung-ming next sent the wedding gifts, and when these had 
been received the preliminaries were settled. 

It was then the early winter of the fourteenth year of 
“Established Tranquillity” (209 A.D.) and the bridegroom 
elect, his escort and the intermediary, left Chingchou with 


-a fleet of ten fast ships to sail down the river to Nanhsii. 


K‘ung-ming remained to guard and rule the city. 
But Liu Pei was far from feeling comfortable. They arrived 


and the ships were made fast. This done the time had come 


for the first of the silken bags to be opened: And so it was; 
and thereupon Chao Yiin gave each of the soldiers of his half 
company his instructions and they went their several ways. 


Next he told Liu Pei what he was to do; that he was to pay - 


his visit first to Ch‘iao “Kuo-lao,” who was the father-in-law 


of Sun Ts‘é and of Chou Yü. He resided in Nanhsti and to- 


his house, “leading sheep and bearing wine jars,’ went the 
bridegroom elect. Having made his obeisance he explained 
that as Lü Fan had arranged he had come to marry a wife. 


In the meantime the half company of the escort, all in gala. 
‘dress, had scattered over the town buying all sorts of things, 
as they said, for the wedding of Liu Pei with the daughter — 


of the House of Wu. They spread the news far and wide and 
the whole town talked about it. 


‘When Sun Ch‘iian heard of Ytian-té’s ar rival he bade Lu Fan — | 


wait upon him and take him to the guest-house. Meanwhile 
Ch‘iao Kuo-lao-went to the Dowager of Wu, mother of Sun 
Ch‘tian, to congratulate her on the happy event. 
“What happy event?” ejaculated the old lady. ra 
“The betrothal of your beloved daughter to Ytian-té. And 
he has arrived too, as surely you know.” 
| “My poor old self does not know,” said the Dowager, “I have 


heard nothing of all this.” 


She at once summoned her son and also sent her nt 


‘out into the town to see what was going about. They quickly 


returned to say that the whole town knew of the coming 


Viomance of the Three fimgooms : 563. 


San uo, or 


wedding, and the bridegroom was then at the guest-house. 
Moreover, he had come with a large escort and the men were 
spending freely, buying pork and mutton and fruits, all in 
readiness for the wedding feasting. They also told her the 
names of the intermediaries on each side, and said they were 
in the guest-house too. 
_ The Dowager was terribly taken aback and upset so that, 

when Sun Ch‘üan arrived, he found his mother beating her 
breast and weeping bitterly. 

“What has disturbed you, mother” asked he. 

“What you have just done,” said she. “You have treated 


“me as a nonentity. When my elder sister lay dying, what — i 


did she tell you?” wh 
Sun Ch‘itian began- i be frightened, but he said boldly, 
“Please speak out plainly, mother; what is this great sorrow?” - 

“When a son is grown he takes a wife, and when a girl is 
old enough she goes to her husband. And that is right and 
` proper. But I am the mother and you ought to have told me 
that your sister was to become the wife of Liu Pei. Why did 
you keep me in the dark? It was my place to: promise her in- 
marriage.’ 

“Whence comes this story?” said the Marquis, really much 
frightened. 

“Do you pretend ignorance? There is not a soul in the ee 


who does not know! But you have succeeded in keeping me j 


in the dark.” 

“I heard it several days ago,’ said Chiao. “And I came 
just now to offer my felicitations.” | 

“There is no such.thing,” said Sun. “It is just one of the 
ruses of Chou Yü to get hold of Chingchou. He has used 
this means to inveigle-Liu Pei here and hold him captive till 
-` Chingchou is restored to us. And if they will not give it back, 

then Liu Pei will be put to death. That is the plot. There is 
= no real marriage.’ 

_But the Dowager was in a rage and ventel her wrath in 
abusing Chou Yü. “He is a pretty sort of a governor over the 
_ eighty-one districts if he cannot find any means of recovering 
one city except making use of my child as a decoy. Truly this 


is a fine deed, to spoil the whole of my child’s life and condemn ~ 


her to perpetual widowhood because he wants to use the fair 
damsel ruse to slay a man! . Who will ever come to talk of 
marriage with her after this?” 
Said Ch‘iao Kuo-lao, “By this means you may indeed recover 
Chingchou but you will be a shameful laughing stock to all 
the world. What can be done?” 

Sun Ch‘tian had nothing to say; he could only hang his head, 
while the Dowager abused his general. 

Ch‘iao tried to soothe her. “After all Liu, the Imperial 
Uncle, is a scion of the reigning family. You ean do nothing 


Romance of the Three Fingon, | 565 — 


better now ee to a him as a son-in-law and not Jet 


this ugly story get abroad.” 

“T am afraid their ages do not fateh y interposed ‘Sun 
Ch‘iian. 

“Liu is a very famous man, said Ch‘iao. “There can he 
no shame in having such a son-in-law.” 

“I have never seen him,” said the Dowager. “Arrange that I- 
may get a look at him to-morrow at the Gentle Dew Temple. If 
he displeases me, you may work your will on him. But if I am 


-satisfied with him then I shall simply let the girl marry him.” 


Now Sun Ch‘iian was above all things filial and at once 


agreed to what his mother said. He went out, called in Lii 


Fan and told him to arrange a banquet for the morrow at the 
temple so that the Dowager might see the bridegroom. 
“Why not order Chia Hua to station some men in the wings 


roe the temple? Then if the Dowager be not pleased we can 


call them out and fall upon him,” said Lü Fan. 
Accordingly the ambush was prepared and ruffians posteg A 


` to act as the Dowager’s attitude might determine. 


When Ch‘iao took his leave and had reached his house, ihe 
sent to tell Yüan-tê that on the morrow the Dowager wished © 
to see him and she was well disposed. 

Yuian-té and his faithful henchman discussed their plans. 


Chao: Yiin said, “The morrow bodes rather ill than well, 


However, the escort shall be there.”’ 

Next day the Dowager and Ch‘iao went to the Temple of 
Gentle Dew as had been arranged. Sun Ch‘tian came with a 
number of his strategists, and when all were assembled Lü Fan 


_ was sent to the guest house to request Yuan-té to come. He. 
- obeyed the summons, but as a precaution he put on a light coat 
of mail under his brocaded robe. His followers too took their ue 
swords upon their backs and followed close. He mounted his 
steed and the cavalcade set out for the temple. At the door — 


of the temple he met Sun Ch‘tian on whom the visitor’s brave 


demeanour was not lost. After they had exchanged salutations, 
Sun led Liu Pei into the presence of his mother. 


' 


“Just the son-in-law for me!” said the Dowager delighted 
with the appearance of Liu Pei. 

“He has the air of an emperor and a look like the sun,’ 
remarked Ch‘iao. “When one remembers also that his ri 


fame has spread over the whole earth, you may well be con- 


_gratulated on getting such a noble son-in-law.” 


Liu Pei bowed, in acknowledgment of his reception. Soon 
after they were all seated at the banquet in the temple, Chao 
Yün entered and took his place beside Yiian-te. 

“Who is this?” asked the Dowager. 

“This is Chao Yün of Ch‘angshan.”” 

“Then he must be the hero of Tangyang Slope, rao saved — 


; the little O-tou. 7 


566 San Kuo, or 


“Yes; this is he,” replied Yüan-tê. 

“A fine captain!” said the Dowager, and she gave him wine. 

Presently Chao Yiin said to his master, “I have seen a lot 
of armed ruffians hidden away in the purlieus of the temple. 
They can be there for no good and you should ask the ‘Dowager 
to get them sent away.” 

Thereupon Liu Pei knelt at the feet of the Dowager and, 
weeping, said, “If you would slay me, let it be here.” 

“Why do you say this?” asked she. 

“Because there are assassins in hiding in the wings of the 
temple; what are they there for if not to kill me?” 

The Dowager wrathfully turned on Sun Chitian. “What 
are armed men doing there to-day when Yüan-tê is to become 
my son-in-law and the pair are my son and daughter?” 

Sun Ch‘iian said he did not know and sent Lü Fan to 
enquire. Lii Fan put the blame on Chia Hua. The Dowager 
summoned him and upbraided him severely. He had nothing 
' to say and she told them to put him to death. But Ytian-té 
-interceded saying that it would do him harm and make it hard 
- for him to stay at her side. 

Ch‘iao Kuo-lao also interceded and she only ordered the 
captain out of her presence. His men also scattered and ran 
like frightened rats. 


By and bye, strolling out of the banquet room into the temple © 


. grounds, Yiian-té came to a boulder. Drawing his sword he 
looked. up to heaven and prayed saying, “If I am to return to 
Chingchou and achieve my intent to become a chief ruler, then 
may I cleave this boulder asunder with my sword, but if I am 
to meet my doom in this place then may the sword fail to cut 
this stone.” . 

Raising his sword he smote the boulder. Sparks flew in all 
directions; and the boulder lay creft in twain. 

It happened that Sun Ch‘tian had seen the blow and he said, 
“Why do you thus hate that stone?’ 

Yiian-té replied, “I am near my fifth decade and have 
so far failed to rid the State of evil; I greatly regret my 
failure. Now I have been accepted by the Dowager as her 
son-in-law, and this is a critical moment in my life. So I 
implored of Heaven a portent that I might destroy Ts‘ao as 
I would that boulder and restore the dynasty. You saw what 
happened.” 

“That is only to blind me,” thought Sun. Drawing his own 
sword he said, “And I also ask of Heaven an omen, that if 
Iam to destroy Ts‘ao I may also cut this rock.” 

So he spoke. But in his secret heart he prayed “If I am 
to recover Chingchou and extend my borders, may the stone 
be cut in twain.” 

He smote the stone and it split in twain. And to this day 
there are cross cuts in the stone, which is still preserved. 


he ee Fi 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms | nT sll 


f aldine three thousand measures, I went to ask for help. Lu 
_ Su pointed to one granary and said, ‘Take that as a gift.’ 
i Such was his generosity!” 
oe “He has always been fond of fencing and horse archery. 
-= He was living in Chuo. His grandmother died while he was 
there and he went to bury her in Tungch‘éng and then his 
friend, Liu Tzu-yang, wished to engage him to go to Ch‘aohu | 
and join Chéng Pao. However, he hesitated about that and 
eat not gone yet. You should ‘invite him without loss of 
- time.’ 
Sun Chiiian at once sent Chou Yü to engage the services of 
this man and he set out. When the obeisances were over he 
laid before his friend the inducements that his own master 
A held out.. He replied that as he had been engaged by Liu Tzi- 
- yang to go to Ch‘aohu he was just starting thither. 
_. Said Chou Yi, “Of old Ma Yüan said to Kuang-Wu, ‘This 
is an age when not only do princes select their ministers, but 
ministers choose their princes.’ Now our General Sun calls 
_ to him the wise and treats his officers well. Thus he engages 
_ the help of the wonderful and gets the services of the extra- 
ordinary in a way that few others do. But if you are not 
engaged elsewhere come with me to Wu as the best thing to 
“200; 99 
Lu Su vikirmed with him and saw Sun Ch‘ tian, who treated 
him with the greatest deference and with him discussed affairs 
very fully. The conference proved so interesting that it went 
on all day and neither felt fatigue. 
oe One day at the close of the usual reception, the chief kept 
_ Lu Su to dine with him. They sat up late and by and by slept 
on the same couch as.would the closest of friends. In the . 
dead of night Sun Ch‘tian said to his bedfellow, “The Dynasty 
is failing and everything is at sixes and sevens. I have 
` received a great charge from my father and brother and I am 
_ thinking of imitating the actions of Huan and Wén and be- 
~ coming the leader of the feudal lords and I pray you instruct 
me. VAI 
o Lu Su replied, “Of old Han Kao-Tsu wished to honour and 
-serve the Emperor I, but could not on account of Hsiang Yii’s 
evil doings. Now. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao can be compared with Hsiang 
Yü; how can you be Huan and Wên? My humble opinion is 
that the Hans have fallen beyond hope of recovery and Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao cannot be destroyed and that the only key to your 
< schemes is to secure your present position in order to keep the 
a master hand and control the combinations among the others. 
Now take advantage of the turmoil in the north to smite Huang 
Tsu and attack Liu Piao. Thereby you will command the 
- whole length of the Great River (Yangtse). Then you may 
style yourself Emperor or. King and thereafter as may be. 
aia This was how Kao- Tsu acted.” 


312 Dan Kuo 


Hearing this Sun Ch‘tian was very greatly pleased. He : 


threw on some clothing, got up and thanked his new-found 
adviser. Next day Sun Chitian gave him costly gifts and a 
robes and hangings to his mother. 


Lu Su then recommended a friend of his to the young man’s 


notice, a man of wide reading and great ability. He was also 
a filial son. His double name was Chuko Chin and he came 
from Nanyang. Sun Ch‘tian treated him as a superior guest. 
This man dissuaded Sun Ch‘iian from making common cause 
with Yiian Shao, but advised him rather to favour Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, 
against whom he could plan when occasion served. Suv Ch‘tian 
therefore sent back the messenger Ch‘én Chén with despatches 
that broke off all negotiations. 

Hearing of Sun Ts‘é’s death, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was for sending 


an expedition against Chiangnan. But a certain historian, — . 


Chang Hung, dissuaded him, saying that it would be mean to 
take advantage of the period of mourning. 


“And if you should not overcome him you will aake him > 
an enemy instead of being a friend. It would be UGA de Mere 


to treat him generously.” 
So Ts‘ao memorialised the throne and obtained for Sun 


Ch‘tian the title of Generalissimo and Prefect of Kueichi, while - 


Chang Hung was appointed under him as Tu-yu. 
And a seal of office was sent him. The new appointment 

pleased Sun Ch‘tian and he was also glad to get Chang Hung 

back again. He was sent to act jointly with Chang Chao. 
Chang Hung was the means of getting another into Sun 


Ch‘tian’s service. His friend was Ku Yung, known also as 


Yiian-t‘an, a disciple of the historian Ts‘ai Yung. He was a 


man of few words and an abstainer frem wine. He was very - 


correct in all things. Sun Ch‘tian eo him in the ad- 
ministration. 


Henceforward Sun Ch‘iian’s rule was very prosperous and 
he waxed mightily in influence and won the love of all- the 


people. 


Wu, and told of the honours that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had obtained for 
the young man in return for his support, Yiian Shao was very 


wroth and he set about preparing for an attack on Nee apia ; 


with a force of seventy legions of northern men. 


Although in the south they rest Feo war, 
They rattle the spears ’neath the northern star. 


Later it will be seen which side conquered, 


When Ch‘én Chén had returned and related the events Aone r q 


CHAPTER XXX. 


YUAN SHAO DEFEATED AT THE FERRY: 
-Ts‘ao Ts‘Ao BURNS THE WUCH‘AO GRANARIES. 


ee that Yiian Shao was hastening to attack at Kuantu, 
Hsiahou Tun wrote to the capital urgently asking for rein- 
_forcements, and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao told off seventy legions with which 
he marched. Hsün Yü was left to guard the capital. 

Just as Yüan’s army was starting T‘ien Féng sent out a 
remonstrance from his prison cell denouncing the policy of 
attack and counselling Shao to wait upon such times as Heaven 
should appoint. 

An enemy said to Yiian, “Why does this T‘ien Féng utter 
ill-omened words? My lord is „ruaig forth an army in the 
cause of humanity and justice.” 

Easily moved to anger Yiian Shao was going to execute Tʻen, 
but this time he forebore at the entreaties of many of his 
officers. However, he was not appeased, for he said, “I will 
punish him when I return from conquering Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.”’ 

Meanwhile he hastened to start. The banners of his host 
filled the horizon, their swords were as trees in the forest. 


- They marched to Yangwu and there made a strong camp. 


Then Chü Shou once more opposed any hasty movement, 
saying, “Though our soldiers are many they are not so bold as 
the enemy; however, veterans as are the enemy they have not 
ample supplies. Therefore they will wish to force on a speedy 
- battle, while our policy is to hoid them off and delay. If we 


a can keep from a decisive battle long enough the victory will 
= be ours without fighting.” 


This advice did not appeal to the General. Said he, threaten- 
ingly, ““T‘ien Féng spake discouraging words to my armies and 
Iwill assuredly put him to death on my return. How dare you 

follow in the same way?” 

He summoned the lictors and sent away the adviser in chains, 
saying, “When I have overcome Ts‘ao then will I deal with you 
and Tien Féng together.” 

. The huge army was camped in four divisions, one toward 
- each point of the compass. The camps were ninety li in circuit. 
Scouts and spies were sent out to discover the strong and the 
weak points of the enemy. 

 Ts‘ao’s army arrived and were smitten with fear when they 
- heard of the strength of their enemy. The leader called 


314 : San Huo, or 


together his council. Then said the adviser Hstin Yu, “The 
enemy are many but not terrible. Ours is an army of veterans, 
every man worth ten, but our advantage lies in a speedy battle 
for unhappily our stores are insufficient for a long campaign.” 
“You speak to the point,” said Ts‘ao. “I think the same.” ` 
Therefore he issued orders to press forward and force on a 


_ battle. Yiian Shao’s men took up the challenge and the two - 


sides were arrayed. On Yiian’s side a legion of crossbow men 
were placed in ambush on the two wings, while half a legion 
of archers held the centre. The signal for general attack was 
a bomb and the onset was to continue through three rolls of 
the drum. > 

Yüan Shao wore a silver helmet and breastplate and an 
embroidered robe held in by a jewelled belt. He took up his 
post in the centre with his numerous captains ranged right 
and left. His banners and ensigns made a brave show. 

When the Ts‘ao army centre opened and the banners moved 
aside the great captain appeared on horseback with his staff 
of doughty leaders all fully armed. Pointing with his whip 
at Yiian Shao he cried, “In the presence of the Emperor I 
pressed your claims to consideration and obtained for you the 
title of Generalissimo; why do you now plan rebellion?” 

Yiian replied, “You take the title of a minister of Han, but 
you are really a rebel against the House. Your crimes and evil 


deeds reach to the heavens, and you are worse than -the 


usurper Mang and the rebel Cho. What are these slanderous 
= words about rebellion that dare you address to me?” 
“I have a command to make you prisoner.” . 
-~ “I have the Girdle Decree to arrest rebels,” replied Yiian. 
Then Ts‘ao became wrathful and bade Chang Liao ride forth 


as his champion. From the other side-rode Chang Ho on a > 


curvetting steed. The two champions fought four or five bouts 
with no advantage to either.. In his heart Ts‘ao thought the 


contest amazing. Then Hsü Ch‘u whirled up his sword and 


went to help. To match him rode out Kao Lan with his spear 


in rest, and the contestants were now four, battling two and — 


two. Then Ts‘ao ordered three companies under Hsiahou Tun 
and Ts‘ao Hung to attack the opponents’ array. Thereupon 
on Yiian’s side the signal for attack was also given and the 


legion of crossbow men on the wings shot and the centre. 


archers let fly all together, The arrows flew all over the field 


in front and Ts‘ao’s men could not advance. They hastened 


away toward the south. Ytian threw his soldiers on their 
rear and they were broken. They went away toward Kuantu 
and Yiian advanced another stage. He camped near them. 
‘Then Shén P‘ei said, “Now send ten legions to guard Kuantu 
and get near Ts‘ao’s camp, then throw up observation mounds 


to get a clear view of the enemy and choose vantage points . 


whence to shoot arrows into the midst of their host. If we can 


fiomance of the Chree fingdoms re 315 


force him to evacuate this place we shall have gained a orate 


gical point whence Hsiich‘ang can be attacked.” 
Ytian adopted this suggestion. From each of the camps 
they sought out the strongest. veterans who dug with iron 


- spades and carried earth to raise mounds near Ts‘ao’s camp. 


Ts‘ao’s men saw what their enemies were doing and were 


anxious to make a sortie and drive them off. But the archers 
and crossbow men came out commanding the narrow throat 


through which it was necessary to attack and stayed them. 


- At the end of ten days they had thrown up more than half a 
hundred mounds and on the summit of each was a lofty tower, | 


whence the archers could command their opponents’ camp. 
Ts‘ao’s men were greatly frightened and held up their bucklers 
to keep off the itty missiles. From the mounds the arrows 


flew down, pang! pang! like a fierce rain. The men of the 


Yiian army laughed and jeered when they saw their enemies 
crouching under their shields and crawling on the ground to 


avoid their missiles. 


Ts‘ao saw that his soldiers were getting out of hand under 


p this attack so he called a council. Liu Yeh Spoke up saying, 


“Let us make ballistæ and so destroy them.” 
_ Ts‘ao at once had models brought and set cunning workmen 


to make these machines. They soon constructed some hundreds © 
` and placed them along the walls of the camp inside, just 
` opposite the high ladders on the enemy’s mounds. 


Then they watched for the archers to ascend the towers. 


_As soon as they began to shoot all the balliste began to heave 


their stone balls into the skies and they wrought great havoc. 
There was no shelter from them and enormous numbers of 


- the archers were killed. Yiian’s men called these machines 


“Rumblers” and after their appearance the archers dared not 


ascend the mounds to shoot. 


Then Shén P‘ei, the strategist, thought out another plan. 
He set men to tunnel under the walls into the midst of Ts‘ao’s 
‘camp and called this corps “The Sappers.” Ts‘ao’s men saw 


the enemy digging out pits behind the mounds and told the 
` chief, who at once sought a counter plan from Liu Yeh. 


“As Yüan Shao can no longer attack openly he is attacking 
secretly and is tunnelling a zgadi under ground into the midst 
of our camp,” said he. 

“But how to meet it?” 


Y “We can surround the camp with a wg moat which renders 
-=~ their tunnel useless.” 


Soa deep moat was dug as quickly as possible and whew the 


enemy \sappers arrived thereat, lo! their labour had been in 


vain and the sap was useless. 
It is recorded that Ts‘ao held Kuantu throughout the eighth 
and ninth months when, the men being worn out and provisions 


failing, he began to think of giving up and returning to the 


316 ots San Kuo, or sf 


& 


capital. As he could not make up his mind he referred his. 


difficulties by letter to Hsiin Yü, whom he had left to guard 


Hsiich‘ang. The reply he got was to this effect:—“I have 
received your command to decide whether to continue the 
campaign or retire. It appears to me that Yüan Shao as- 
sembled such large forces at Kuantu with the expectation of 
winning a decision. You, Sir, are very weak while he is very 
strong and if you cannot "get the better of him he will be able 
to work his will on you for this is a crisis of empire. Your 
opponents are indeed numerous, but their leader knows not 
how to use them. With your military genius and discernment 
where are you not sure to succeed? Now though your numbers 
are small it is not as when Ch‘u and Han were between Jung- 
yang and Ch‘éngkao. You are securely intrenched with your 
hands on his throat, and even if you cannot advance, that state 
of things cannot endure for ever but must change. This is the 
time to play some unexpected move and you must not miss it. 
The device I leave to your illustrious ingenuity.” 

This letter greatly pleased Ts‘ao and he urged upon his men 
to use every effort to maintain the position. 

Yiian having retired some thirty li, Ts‘ao sent ott scouts to 


ascertain his new dispositions. One of Hsii Huang’s officers ~ 


` captured an enemy spy and sent him to his chief, who inter- 


rogated him and found out that a convoy of supplies was © 


expected and that this spy and others had been sent to find. 
out what were the risks of the route. Hsü Huang went at 
once to tell Ts‘ao. When the adviser Hsiin Yu heard that the 

commander of the convoy was Han Méng he said, “That fellow 

is a valiant fool. A few companies of light horse sent to inter- 

cept him can capture the whole train and cause much trouble 

in the enemy’s camp.” 

“Whom should I send?” asked Ts ao. 

“You might send Hsü Huang; he is capable of such a task.” 

So Hsü was deputed and he took with him Shih Huan, who 
had captured the spy, and his company. And this party was 
supported by Chang Liao and Hsü Ch‘u. 

It was night when the commissariat train of many thousands 
of carts drew near Ytian Shao’s camp. As they passed through 
a defile Ts‘ao’s men came out and stopped the train. Han Méng 
galloped up to give battle but was soon overcome. The guard. 
was scattered and soon the whole train was in flames. The 
escort and their leader got away. č 

The glow of the flames seen from Shao’s camp daed great \ 


consternation, which became fear when the escaped soldiers | 


rode in and told. their tale. 

Yiian sent out Chang Ho and Kao Lan to try to intercept 
_ the raiders and they came upon Hsti Huang and his company. 
Just as they were attacking reinforcements came up and the. 
Yiian men were between two fires. They were cut to pieces 


“Romance of the Three Kugoma 317 


i aed the successful captains rode back to Kuantu, where they 

were richly rewarded. 

As an additional safeguard Ts‘ao made a supporting outpost 
in front of the main camp to be the apex of a triangle of 
defence. 

j When Han Mêng returned with his woeful tidings Yiian | 
_ Shao was angry and threatened to put him to death. His 
`- colleagues begged him off. i 

Then said Shên P‘ei, “Food is very important for an army 
in the field and must be defended with the greatest diligence. | 
Wuch‘ao is our main depot and must be carefully guarded.” 

“My plans being complete,” said Shao, “you may as well 
return to Yehtu and undertake the control of the supplies. 
Let there be no shortage.” So Shén P‘ei left the army. 

Then a force of two legions under six captains was told off 
; to defend the depot. One of these captains, Shunyu Ch‘iung, 
-~ was a hard man and a heavy drinker, who in his cups was a- 
terror to the men. Under the idle life of guarding the supply 
- depot the leaders gave themselves up to see Cuse and drank 


| - heavily. 


In Ts‘ao’s army also food was getting scarce and a message 
was sent to the capital to send grain quickly. The messenger 
with the letter, however, had not gone far when he fell into the 
hands of Shao’s men, who took him to the adviser Hsü Yu. 
Seeing from the letter that Ts‘ao was short of supplies the 
-adviser went to his master and told him saying, “Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
and we have been at grips here for a long time and the capital 
must be undefended. A small army sent quickly could take it 
and at the same moment an attack here would deliver Ts‘ao 
into our hands. Now is the moment to strike, for his supplies 
are short.” 

Shao replied, ““T's‘ao is full of ruses ond this letter is artfully 
designed to bring about a battle to suit himself.” 

“If you do not take this chance he will do you some injury 
by and by.” 

Just at this juncture in came a despatch from Yehchiin in | 
- which, after some details regarding the forwarding of grain, 
Shén P‘ei said he had discovered that Hsü Yu had been in the 
habit of receiving bribes while in Ch‘ichou and had winked at 
his relatives collecting excess taxes. One son and nephew were 
then in prison. 

At this Yiian Shao tarned on Hsii Yu angrily and said, “How 
can you have the face to stand before me and propose plans, 
you extortionate fellow? You and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao have old likings 
for each other and he has bribed you to do his dirty work for 
him and help his base schemes. Now you want to betray my 
army. I ought to take off your head, but temporarily I will 
let your neck carry it away. Get out and never let me see you 


again.’ 


318 | i San Kuo, or 


\ 
The discredited adviser sighed and went out, saying, “Faith- 
ful words offend his ear. He is a pest and unworthy of advice 
from me. And now that Shen P‘ei has injured my son and 


nephew how can I look my fellow men in the face again?” 

And he drew his sword to end his life. But his people 
prevented that. They said, “If Yiian Shao rejects ‘your honest 
words then assuredly he will be taken by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. You are 
an old friend of Ts‘ao’s; why not abandon the shade for the 
sunlight ?” 


Just these few words awakened him to consciousness of his — vi 
position and he decided to leave Yüan Shao and go over: to k 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao for he was an old friend. 


Vainly now for chances lost 
Yiian sighs; once he was great. 
Had he taken Hsii’s advice, 
Ts‘ao had not set up a State. 


‘Hsii Yu stealthily left the camp and set out for Ts‘ao’s lines. 


3 


- He was captured on the way. He told his captors he was an 
old friend of the Minister’s and asked them to tell him that 
_ Hsü Yu of Nanyang wished to see him. . 
They did so. Ts‘ao was resting in his tent, his clothing loose | 


and comfortable after the toils of the day. When he heard 


‘who wished to see him he arose quite joyfully and BE ee ; 


himself hastily to receive Hsü. He went forth to greet him. 
They saw each other in the distance and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao clapped 


his hands with gladness bowing to the ground when near. 


enough to his visitor. Hsü Yu hastened to help him -rise, 


saying, “Sir, you, a great Minister, should not. thus „salute a 


simple civilian like me.’ 


“But you are my old friend and no name or office makes any 4 


difference to us,” replied Ts‘ao. 


“Having been unable to choose the lord I ae serve I had ' 


to bow my head before Yüan Shao. ` But he was deaf to my 


words and disregarded my plans.’ Wherefore I have left him } 


and come now to see my old friend from whom I hope 
employment.” 


“If Tzu-yuan is willing to come then have I indeed a helper,” 


said Ts‘ao. “I desire you to give me a scheme for the destruc- 


tion of Yiian Shao.” 


“I counselled him to send a light force to take the capital 


so that head and tail be both attacked.” _ 
Ts‘ao was alarmed. “If hé does so, I am lost,” 
“How much grain have you in store? ee ” said the new adviser. 
“Enough for a year.” 
“T think not quite,” said Yu smiling, 
“Well, half a year.’ 


The visitor shook out his eaves, rose and hurried baw and ; 
the door of the tent, saying, “I offer him good counsel and he 


repays me with deceit. Could I hane expected it?” 


"Romance of oe ahree Kangoo ‘S19 


ti Ts: ao held him back. “Do not be angry,’ said he. “I will 
tell you the truth. Really I have here only enough for three 


2 months.” 


“Everybody says you are a marvel of wickedness and indeed 


: iti is true,” said Yu. . 
“But who does not know that in war there.is no objection 


_ to deceit?” replied Ts‘ao. Then whispering in the other’s ear 

» che said, “Actually here I have only supplies for this month’s 

ape he) 
“O do not throw dust in my eyes any more. Your grain is. 


` exhausted and I know it.” 


sa Ts‘ao was startled, for he thought no one Hes of the kirana ES 
he was in. 

- “How did you find that out?” said he. 

` Hsü Yu produced the letter, saying, “Who vind that?” 

“Where did you get it?” 

Whereupon he told Ts‘ao the story of the captured messen- 


oe ger. Ts‘ao seized him by the hand saying, “Since our old 


ee friendship has brought or to me I hope you have some plan 
to suggest to me.’ 
` Hsti Yu said, “To oppose a great army with a small one is 


i -to walk in the way of destruction unless you inflict quick defeat. 
_. I can propose a plan which will defeat the innumerable hordes 


| j of Yüan Shao without fighting a battle. But will you follow ; 


-my advice?” 


~ “T desire to know your plan,” said Ts‘ao. 
= “Your enemy’s stores of all kinds are at Wuch‘ao, where } 


the commander of the guard is that drunkard Shunyu Chi PONS a as 
= You can send some of your trusty veterans to pretend they | 
ert belong to Chiang Chi, one of Yüan’s generals, sent to help 


guard the depot. These men can find an opportunity to fire 
the grain and stores of all kinds, which will upset all Yiian 


a Shao’ s calculations.” 


í Ts‘ ao approved. He treated Hsü Yu very liberally and kept 
À him in his camp. Forthwith he chose five companies of horse 
and foot ready for the expedition, Chang Liao protested the - 


enterprise would be futile as the grain depôt would certainly 


be well guarded and he suggested treachery on the part of the 


| : newly arrived strategist.” bras 
“Hsü Yu is no traitor,” said Ts‘ao. “He has come sent by 


a even to defeat Yiian Shao. If we do not get grain it will 


_ for a long time. . 
succeed.” 


be hard to hold out and I have either to follow his advice or sit 
still and be hemmed in. If he was a traitor he would hardly 
remain in my camp. Moreover this raid has been my desire 
. Have no doubts; the raid will certainly 


m 


“Well, then, you must look out for an attack here while the | 


x ee? is ‘undefended. a 


ot is already well provided for,” said Ts‘ao gleefully. 


320 San Ruo, or 


The defenders of the camp were then told off.- Among them 
was Hsii Yü. 

The arrangements for the raid on the grain depot were made 
with extreme care to ensure success. When all was ready they 
set out, Ts‘ao himself in the centre. The army showed the — 
ensigns of their opponents. The men carried bundles of grass 
and faggots to make a blaze. The men were gagged and the 
horses tied round the muzzles so as to prevent any noise. 

They set out at dusk. The night was fine and the stars shone 
brightly. .Chii Shou, still a prisoner in.Ytian Shao’s camp, 
saw the stars were very brilliant and told his gaolers to conduct 
him out to the central pavilion whence he could study them. 
While watching he saw the planet Venus invade the quarter of 
the Bear and Lyra, which startled him very greatly.- 

“Some misfortune is near,” said he. 

So although it was still night he went to see his master. 
But Yiian Shao was sleeping after indulgence in too much 
wine and was in bad humour. However, when they had roused — 
him saying that the prisoner had a secret message to deliver, 
he got up. 
` “While I happened to be studying the aspect of the heavens,” 
said the night visitor, “I saw Venus, then between Hydra and 
Cancer, suddenly shoot into the neighbourhood of the Bear ~- . 
and Lyra. There is danger of a robber raid and special — 
\ precautions must be taken at the grain depot. Lose no time- 
in sending good soldiers and vigorous leaders thither and keep . 
a lookout on the byeways among the hills that you may escape 
the wiles of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.’ 

“You are a criminal,” said Shao. “How dare you come with 
such wild nonsense to upset my armies.’ 

And turning to the gaolers he continued, “I bade you oun 
him; why did you let him come?” 

Then he issued orders to put the paolers to death and 
appointed others to keep the prisoner in close custody. ' 

Chü Shou went away, wiping his falling tears and sighing - 
deeply. “Our soldiers’ destruction is at hand and I know not - 
where my poor corpse may find a resting place.” 


Blunt truth offended Ytian Shao, 
Too stupid any plan to make, 

His stores destroyed tis, evident 
That Ch‘ichou also i is at stake. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s raiding party went along through ie night. 
Passing one of Yiian Shao’s outpost camps they were chal- 
lenged. Ts‘ao sent forward a man to say, “Chiang Chi has 
orders to go to Wuch‘ao to guard the grain stores.” 

Seeing that the raiders marched under the ensigns of Yiian 
Shao the guard-had no suspicions and let them pass. At every 
post this ruse was effective and they got safely through. 


Momance of the Three Lingdoms or Ba 


- They reached their objective at the end of the fourth watch, 
the straw and wood were placed in position without loss of 
time and the blaze started. Then the captains beat to attack. 

At the time of the attack Shunyu Ch‘iung and his companions 
were all asleep after a heavy drinking bout. However, when 
the alarm was given, they sprang up and asked what was the 
matter. The hubbub was indescribable. Very soon the fuddled 
officers were caught with hooks and hauled out of their camp. 

Mu Yiian-chin and Chao Jui were just returning from taking 
grain to the camp and seeing the flames arise, they hastened to 
assist. Some of Ts‘ao’s soldiers ran to tell him that some of 
the enemy were coming up in the rear and ask him to send 
reinforcements, but he only replied by ordering the generals to 
press on to the front till the enemy was actually close at hand 
and then face about. So the attack was eaen and they all 
hastened forward. 

Very soon the fire gained strength imd thick areak hung all 


l around filling the sky. When Mu and Chao drew near, T's‘ao 


- turned about and attacked them. They could not stand this 


-> 


for a moment and both captains were killed. Finally the stores 


of grain ahd forage were utterly destroyed. 


The commander, Shunyu Ch‘iung, was made prisoner and 
taken to Ts‘ao who ordered him to be deprived of ears, nose 
and hands. He was bound on a horse and sent, thus horri 
mutilated, to his master. 

From Yiian’ s camp the flames of the burning depôt were 
seen away in the north and they knew what they meant. Yüan 
hastily summoned his officers to a council to send a rescue 
party. Chang Ho offered to go with Kao Lan but Kuo T‘u said, 
“You may not go; it is certain that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is there in 
person, wherefore his camp is undefended. Let loose our 
soldiers on the camp and that will speedily bring Ts‘ao back 
again. This is how Sun Pin besieged Wei and thereby rescued 
Han.” 

But Chang Ho said, “Not so; Ts‘ao is too wily not to have 
fully prepared against a chance ‘attack. If we attack his camp 
and fail and Shunyu Ch‘iung should be caught we shall all be 
captured too.” 

Kuo T‘u said, “Ts‘ao will be too intent on the destruction of 
the grain to think of leaving a guard. I entreat you to attack 
his camp.” 

So five companies under Chang Ho and Kao Lan were sent 


to attack Ts‘ ao’s camp and Chiang Chi was sent to try to 


recover the grain store. 
Now after overcoming Shunyu, Ts‘ao’s men dressed them- 


- selves in the armour and clothing of the defeated soldiers and 


put out their emblems, thus posing as defeated men running 
back to their own headquarters. And when they happened 


‘upon Chiang Chi’s rescue legion they said they had been beaten 


21 


322 l San Kuo, or 


at Wuch‘ao and were retreating. So they were suffered to 
pass without molestation while Chiang Chi hastened on. But 
soon he came to Chang Liao and Hsii Chu who cried out to him 
to stop. And before he could make any opposition Chang Liao 
had cut him down. Soon his men were killed or dispersed and 
the victors sent false messengers to Shao’s camp to say that 
Chiang Chi had attacked and driven away the defenders of the 
granaries. *So no more reliefs were sent that way. However, 
reinforcements were sent to Kuantu. 

In due course the Yiian men came down upon Ts‘ao’s camp 
at Kuantu and the defenders at once came out and fought them 
on three sides so that they were worsted. .By the time rein- 
forcements arrived Ts‘ao’s army, returning from the raid, had 
also come and Yiian’s men were attacked in the rear. So they 
were quite surrounded. However, Chang Ho and Kao Lan 
managed to force their way out and got away. 

When the remains of the defenders of the grain stores 
reached their master’s camp they were mustered. Seeing the 
mutilated state of their one time leader, Shao asked how he. 
had come to betray his trust and to suffer thus and the soldiers 
told their lord that their commander had been intoxicated at 
the time of the attack. So Shun-yu was forthwith executed. -~ 

Kuo T‘u, fearing lest Chang Ho and Kao Lan would return 
and testify the whole truth, began to intrigue against them. 
First he went to his lord saying, “Those two, Chang and Kao, | 
were certainly very glad when your armies were defeated.” 

“Why do you say this?’’ asked Yiian. 

“O they have long cherished a desire to go over to Ts‘ac 
Ts‘ao, so when you sent them on the duty of destroying his 
camp they did not do their best and so brought about this 
disaster.” 

Shao-accordingly sent to recall these two to be interrogated 
as to their faults. But Kuo T‘u, their enemy, sent a messenger 
in advance to warn them, as though in friendly guise, of the 
adverse fate that awaited them. So when the orders reached 
them to return to answer for their faults they asked why they 
were recalled. When the messenger disclaimed all knowledge 
of the reasons, Kao Lan drew his sword and killed him. Chang 
Ho was stupefied at this demonstration but Lan said, “Our 
lord has allowed some one to malign us and say we have been 
bought by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. What is the sense in our sitting still 
and awaiting destruction? Rather let us surrender to Ts‘ae 
Ts‘ao in reality and save our lives.” 

“T have been wanting to do this for some time,” replied 
Chang Ho. 

Wherefore both, with their companies, made their way to 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp to surrender. 

When they arrived, Hsiahou Tun said to his master, “These © 
two have come to surrender but I have doubts about them.” . 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms B28 


` Ts‘ao replied, “I will meet them generously and win them 
over even if they have treachery in their hearts.” 

The camp gates were opened to the two officers and they 
were invited to enter. They laid down their weapons, removed 
their armour and bowed to the ground before Ts‘ao who said, 
“If Yüan Shao had listened to you he would not have suffered 
defeat. Now you two coming to surrender are like Wei Tzu 
going to Yin and Han Hsin going over to: Han.” 

He gave both men the rank of general and the title of mar- 
quis, which pleased them much. 

_ And so as Ytian Shao had formerly driven away his adviser, 
Hsü Yu, so now he had alienated two captains and had lost 
his stores at Wuch‘ao and the army was depressed and down- 


hearted. 


_ When Hsti Yu advised Ts‘ao to attack as promptly as he _ 
~ could the two newly surrendered men volunteered to lead the — 

` way. So these two were sent to make a first attack on the 
camp, and left in the night with three divisions. The fighting 
went on confusedly all night but stayed at dawn. Shao had 
lost heavily. ` a a ! ; 

-1 Then Hsün Yu suggested a plan saying, “Now is the moment 
` to spread a report that a party of men will go to take Suantsao 
and attack Yehchiin, and another to take Liyang and intercept 
` the enemy’s retreat. Yiian Shao, when he hears of this, will — 

be alarmed and tell off his men to meet this new turn of affairs, 
` and while he is making these new dispositions we can have 
him at great disadvantage.” 
The suggestion was adopted and care was taken that the 
report spread far around. It came to the ears of Ytian’s 
soldiers and they repeated it in camp, Ytian Shao believed it 
and ordered Yiian Shang with five legions to rescue Yehchiin, 
and Hsin Ming with another five to go to Liyang and they 
= marched away at once. Ts‘ao heard that these armies had 
started and at once despatched. eight divisions to make 
a simultaneous attack on the nearly empty camp. Ytian 
Shao’s men were too dispirited to fight and gave way on — 
all sides. © 3 
Yiian Shao without waiting to don his armour went forth 
in simple dress with an ordinary cap upon his head and 
mounted his steed. His son Shang followed him. Four of the 
enemy captains with their men pressed in his rear and Shao 

- hastened across the river, abandoning all his documents and 
papers, baggage, treasure and stores. Only eight hundred 
men followed him over the stream. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s men followed 

hard but could not come up with him; however, they captured 
all his impedimenta and they slew many thousands of his men 
so that the watercourses ran blood and the drowned corpses — 
could not be counted. It was a most complete victory for Ts‘ao 

` and he made over all the spoil to the army. 


Among the papers of Yiian Shao was found a bundle of ! 


letters showing: secret correspondence between him and many — 


persons in the capital and army. Ts‘ao’s personal staff sug- 


gested that the names of those concerned should be abstracted 
and the persons arrested, but their lord said, “SHao was so 
strong that even I could not be sure of. safety: how much less 
other men?” 

So he ordered the papers to be pened and nothing more 
was said. 

Now when Yiian Shao’s men ran away Chii Shou, being a 
prisoner, could not get away and was captured. | Taken parore: 
Ts‘ao, who knew him, he cried aloud, “‘I will not surrender.” 

Said Ts‘ao, “Yüan Shao was foolish and neglected. your 
advice; why still cling to the path of delusion? Had I ae 
you to help me I should have been sure of the Empire.” 

The prisoner was well treated in the camp but he- stole a 
horse and tried to get away to Ytian Shao. This angered Tsa ao. 
who put him to death, which he met with. brave composure. 

“I have slain a faithful and righteous man,’ then said Teta ao 
sadly. And the victim was honourably buried at Kuantu. 
His tomb bore the ARSE TDL rom “This is the tomb of Chit the 
loyal and virtuous.” a AE SN 


Chü honest was and virtuous, 
The best in Yuan’s train, Ret 

From him the stars no secrets held, s iiai ea akg 
In tactics all was plain. eae fg 
For him no terrors had grim death, 

Too lofty was his spirit, 

His captor slew him, but his tomb 

Bears witness to his merit, 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao now gave orders to attack Ch‘ichou. ; 


In feeling over confident, that’s where one’ s. weakness lay; 
The other bettered him by plans which never went agley. 


The roles chapter will tell To won the next campaign. 


ff 


x 


i CHAPTER XXXI. 
_ Ts‘Ao Ts‘ao OVERCOMES YUAN SHAO: 
Liu PEI SEEKS SHELTER WITH LIU PIAo. 
ec ‘ao ee no time in taking advantage of Ytian Shao’s flight, 


_. but smote hard at the retreating men. Yüan Shao without 


helmet or proper dress, and with few followers, crossed hastily 
to the north bank at Liyang. He was met by his General, 
Chiang I-chu, who took him in and comforted him and listened 


ee to the tale of misfortunes. Next Chiang called in the scattered 


remnants of the army; and when the soldiers heard that their 


-~ old lord was alive they swarmed to him like ants so that he 


quickly became strong enough to attempt the march to Ch‘i- 
fis Soon the army set out and at night halted at Huang 
ills. E 
“That evening, sitting in his tent, Shao kee mad to.hear a far 
Of sound of lamentation. He crept out quietly to listen and 
. found it was his own soldiers telling each other tales of woe. 
‘This one lamented an elder brother lost, that one grieved for 


his younger brother abandoned; a third mourned a companion 


- for joy and said, ‘Indeed, just as I foretold! 


_ missing, a fourth, a relative cut off. And each beat his breast 
and wept. And all said, “Had he but listened to Tien Feng 
we had not met this disaster.” 

And Yiian Shao, very remorseful, said, “I did not hearken 
unto T‘ien Feng and now my men have been beaten and I was 
nearly lost. How can I return and look him in the face?” 

Next day the march was resumed and he met Féng Chi with 
reinforcements, to whom he said, “I disregarded T‘ien Féng’s 
advice and have brought myself to defeat. Now shall I be 
greatly ashamed to look him in the face.” 

This tribute to T‘ien Féng’s prescience roused the jealousy 
of Fêng Chi, who replied, “Yes; when he heard the news of 
és your defeat, though he was a prisoner, he clapped his hands 


Y >? 


“How dare he laugh at me, the blockhead? eee ay he 


ie shall die,” said Yiian. 


Whereupon he wrote a letter and sent therewith a awoud to 
„slay the prisoner. 
Meanwhile Tiers gaoler. came to him one day saying, 
“Above all men I felicitate you.” 
“What is the joyful occasion and why felicitate?” said T‘ien 
% Fêng. ; 

“The gaoler replied, “General Yiian has been defeated and is 
on his way back; he will treat you with redoubled scam F 

i `~ 


326 San kuo, or : 
Krn 

“Now am I a dead man,’ ’ said Tien. 

“Why say you that, Sir, when all men give you joy?” 

“The General appears liberal but he is jealous and forgetful 
of honest advice. Had he been victorious he might have 
pardoned me; now that he has been defeated and put to shame 
I may not hope to live.” 

But the gaoler did not believe him. Before long came the 
letter and the sword with the fatal order. The gaoler was. 


dismayed, but the victim said, “TI knew all too well that E 


should have to die.” 


The gaoler wept. Tʻien Fêng said, “An able man born into 


this world who does not recognise and serve his true lord is. 
ignorant. To-day I die, but I am not deserving of paiya 
Whereupon he committed suicide in the prison. 


Chü Shou but yesterday was killed, 
T‘ien ends his life his fate fulfilled: 
Hopei’s main beams break one by one, 
Mourn ye that House! its day is done. 


Thus died Tien Reng: pitied of all who heard of his fate: 
When Yüan Shao came home it was with troubled mind and 
distorted thoughts. He could not attend to the business of 
government and became so ill that his wife, who came of the 


Liu family, besought him to make his last dispositions. 


Now three sons had been born to him, T‘an the eldest, who. 


“was commander at Ch‘ingchou; Hsi, who ruled over Yuchou;. 


and Shang, borne to him by his second wife, who still lived... 


. This youngest son was very handsome and noble looking, and 
his father’s favourite. So he was kept at home. After the 
defeat at Kuantu the lad’s mother was constantly urging that: 


her son should be named as successor and Shao called together | f 


four of his counsellors to consider this matter. These four 
happened to be divided in their sympathies, Shén P‘ei and 


Féng Chi being in favour of the youngest son, and Hsin Png 


and Kuo Tu supporters of the eldest. 

When they met to consult, Yiian Shao said, “‘As therë is 
nought but war and trouble outside our borders it is necessary 
that tranquillity within be early provided for and I wish to 
appoint my successor. My eldest son is hard and cruel, my 
second is mild and unfit. The third has the outward form 
of a hero, appreciates the wise and is courteous to his sub- 


ordinates.. I wish him to succeed, but I would that you tell — 


me your opinions.” 


Kuo T‘u said, “T‘an is your first born and he is in a position E 
of authority beyond your control. If you pass over the eldest 


in favour of the youngest you sow the seeds of turbulence. 


The prestige of the army has been somewhat lowered and — 


enemies are on our border. Should you add to our weakness: 


by making strife between father and son, elder and younger. 


eo 


ee 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 327 


brothers? Rather consider how the enemy may be repulsed 


` and turn to the question of the heirship later.” 


-Then the natural hesitation of Yiian Shao asserted itself 
and he could not make up his mind. Soon came news that his 
sons, Tan and Hsi, and his nephew, Kao Kan, were coming with 


large armies to help him and he turned his attention to pre- . 


parations for fighting Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao drew up his victorious army on the banks 
of the Yellow River a certain aged native brought an offering 
of food and sauce to bid him welcome. His venerable and 
hoary appearance led Ts‘ao to treat him with the highest 


respect and he invited him to be seated and said to him, 


“Venerable Sir, what may be your age?” 

“I am nearly a hundred,” replied the ancient. 

ST should be very sorry if my men had disturbed your 
village,” said Ts‘ao. 

“In the days of the Emperor Huan a soll star was seen 
over by way of Ch‘u and Sung in the southwest. A certain 
man of Liaotung, Yin K‘uei, who was learned in astrology, 
happened to be passing ‘the night here and he told us that 
the star foretold the arrival in these parts, fifty years hence, 
of a true and honest man from Lian and P‘ei. Lo! that is 
exactly fifty years ago. Now Yiian Pén-ch‘u is very hard on 
-the people and they hate him. You, Sir, having raised this 
army in the cause of humanity and righteousness, out of pity 
for the people and to punish crimes, and having destroyed the 
hordes of Yiian Shao at Kuantu, just fulfil the prophecy of 
Yin K‘uei and the millions of the land may look now ye 
_ tranquillity.” 

“How dare I presume that -I am he?” said Ts‘ao with a 
smile. 

‘Wine was served and refreshments Dooh, in and the old 
gentleman was sent away with presents of silk stuffs. And 
an order was issued to the army that if any one killed so 
much as a fowl or a dog belonging to the villagers he should 
be punished as for murder. And the soldiers obeyed with fear 
and trembling while Ts‘ao rejoiced in his heart. 

‘It was told Ts‘ao that the total army from the four 
prefectures under the Yiian family amounted to twenty-three 
legions and they were camped at Ts‘ang-t‘ing. Ts‘ao then 
advanced nearer them and made a strong camp. 

Soon after the two armies were arrayed over against each 
other. On one side Ts‘ao rode to the front surrounded by his 


captains, and on the other appeared Yiian Shao supported by 


his three sons, his nephew and his officers. 

Ts‘ao spoke first, ““Pén-ch‘u, your schemes are poor, your 
strength is exhausted, why still refuse to think of surrender? 
Are you waiting till the sword shall be upon your neck? Then 
- it will be too late.” 


PNR H SUA A A ae 
ayers 


328 San Kuo, or 


Yiian Shao turned to those about him « saying, “Who dares 
‘go out?” 

His son Shang was anxious to exhibit his prowess in the 
presence of his father so he flourished his pair of swords and 


rode forth. Ts‘ao pointed him out to his officers and asked if 


any one knew him and they replied that he was the youngest 
son. Before they had finished speaking from their own side 
rode out one Shih Huan, armed with a spear. The two 
champions fought a little while and suddenly Shang whipped 
up his horse, made a feint and fled. His opponent followed. 
Yiian Shang took his bow, fitted an arrow, turned in his saddle 
and shot at Shih Huan, wounding him in the left eye. He fell 
from the saddle and died on the spot. 

Yiian Shao seeing his son thus get the better of his opponent, 
gave the signal for attack and the whole army thundered for- 
ward. The onslaught was heavy, but presently the gongs on 
both sides sounded the retire and the battle ceased. 

When he had returned to camp Ts‘ao took counsel to find a 
plan to overcome Yiian Shao. Then Ch‘éng Yü proposed the 
plan of the Ten Ambushes and persuaded Ts‘ao to retire upon 
the river, placing men in ambush as he went. Thus would 
Shao be inveigled into pursuit as far as the river, when T's‘ao’s 


men would be forced to make a desperate stand or be driven ; 


into the water. 

Ts‘ao accepted this suggestion and told off five companies 
to lie in ambush on one side of the road of retreat and five on 
the other, while Hsü Chu commanded the advanced front. — 


Next day the ten companies started first and placed them- 


` 


selves right and left as ordered. In the night Tsʻao ordered 


the advanced front to feign an attack on the camp, which 


roused all the enemy in all their camps. This done Hsti Chu > 


retreated and the Shao army came in pursuit. The roar c’ 
battle went on without cessation and at dawn Ts‘ao’s army 
rested on the river and could retreat no farther. Then Ts‘ao 
shouted, “There is no road in front, so all must fight to the 
death.” ` 

The retreating army turned about and advanced etn 
Hsti Chu simply flew to the front, smote and killed a half 
score captains and threw Yüan Shao’s army into confusion. 
They tried to turn and march back, but Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was close 
behind. Then the drums of the enemy were heard and right 
and left there appeared a company, one pair of the ambushed 


parties. Yüan Shao collected about him his three sons and — 


his nephew and they were enabled to cut their way out 
and flee. Ten li further on they fell into another ambush and 


here many men were lost so that their corpses lay over the 


country-side and the blood filled the water courses. Another 


ten li and they met the third pair of companies barring their 


road. 


fiomance of the Three Hingdoms: : 329 


mare they los heart and bolted for an old camp “of their 

own that was near, and bade their men prepare a meal. But 

just as the food was ready to eat down came Chang Liao and 

Chang Ho and burst into the camp. 

Yiian Shao mounted and fled as far as Ts‘ angt‘ing, when. 
he was tired and his steed spent. But there was no rest, 
for Ts‘ao came in close pursuit. It seemed now a race for life.. 
But presently Shao found his onward course again blocked and 
he groaned aloud. i 

“If we do not make most desperate efforts we are all 
captives,” said he, and they plunged forward. His second 
son and his nephew were wounded by arrows and most of his’ 
men were dead or had disappeared. He gathered his sons 
into his arms and wept bitterly. Then he fell into a swoon. 
He was picked up, but his mouth was full of blood which ran 
forth in a bright scarlet stream. He sighed saying, “Many 
battles have I fought and little did I think to be driven to this. 
Heaven is afflicting me. You had better return each to his 
own and swear to fight this Ts‘ao to the end.” 

- Then he bade Hsin P‘ing and Kuo T‘u as quickly as possible 
follow Yiian T‘an to his district and prepare to give battle to 
the enemy lest he should invade. .Yiian Hsi was told to go to 
Yuchou and Kao Kan to Pingchou. » 

So each started to prepare men and horses for repulsing 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, Yiian Shao with his youngest son and the 
remnant of his officers went away to Ch‘ichou and military 
operations were suspended for a time. 

Meanwhile Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was distributing rewards to his army 
for the late victory and his men were scouting all about Chí- 

‘chou. He soon learned that Yiian Shao was ill and that his - 
youngest .son and Shén P‘ei were in command of the city, 
while his brothers and cousin had returned each to his own. 
Ts‘ao’s advisers were in favour of a speedy attack. But he 
objected, saying “Ch‘ichou is large and well supplied; Shén 

P‘ei is an able strategist and it behoves me to be careful. -I 

`- would rather wait till the autumn when the crops have been 
gathered in so that the people will not suffer.” 

While the attack was being talked over there came letters 
from Hsiin Yu saying that Liu Pei was strengthening himself 
at Junan and, when he had heard that Ts‘ao was going to 
attack Ch‘ichou; he had said he would take the opportunity to 
march on the capital. Wherefore the Minister would do well 
to hasten homeward to defend it. This news disconcerted 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He left Ts‘ao Hung in command on the river 

bank, with orders to maintain the appearance of strength 

` there, while he led the main part of his army .to meet the 

threatened attack from. Junan. S 

It has to be said now that Liu Pei, his brothers and sup- 
porters, having gone forth with the intention of attacking the 


330 bert: San Ruo, or 


capital, had reached a point near Jang Hills when Ts‘ao came 
upon them. So Liu Pei camped by the hills and divided his 
army into three, sending his brothers with one division each. 
to. entrench themselves south-east and south-west respectively 
of the main body which he and Chao Yün commanded. 

When Ts‘ao came near, Yiian-té beat his drums‘and went 
out to where Ts‘ao had already arrayed his men. Ts‘ao called 
Liu Pei to a parley, and when the latter appeared under his. 
great standard, Ts‘ao pointed his whip at him and railed 
saying, “I treated you as a guest of the highest consideration; 
why then do you turn your back on righteousness and os 
kindness?” 

Yüan-tê replied; “Under the name of Minister you are 
really a rebel. I am a direct descendant of the family and I 
have a secret decree from the throne to take such offenders 
as you.’ 

As he said these words he produced and recited the decree 
which is known as the “Girdle Mandate.” 

Ts‘ao grew very angry and ordered Hsii Ch‘u to go out to 
battle, and, as Liu Pei’s champion, out rode Chao Yiin with 
spear ready to thrust. The two warriors exchanged thirty 
bouts without advantage to either. Then there arose an earth- | 


rending shout and up came the two brothers, Yiin-ch‘ang from He 


`~ the south-east and Fei from the south-west. The three armies 
then began a great attack, which proved too much for Ts‘ao’s 
men, fatigued by a long march, and they were worsted and 
fled. Yüan-tê having scored this victory returned to camp. 

Next day he sent out Chao Yiin again to challenge the enemy, 
but it was not accepted and Ts‘ao’s army remained ten days 
` without movement. Then Chang Fei offered a challenge which ` 
also was not accepted., And Ytian-té began to feel anxious. _ 

Then unexpectedly came news that the enemy had stopped 
a train of supplies and at once Chang Fei went to the rescue. 
Worse still was the news that followed, that an army had got 
in behind to attack Junan. 

Quite dismayed, Ytian-té said, “If this be true I have enemies. 
in front and rear and have no place to go.” 

He then sent Yiin-ch‘ang to try to recover the city and thus 
both his brothers were absent from his side. One day later 
a horseman rode up to say Junan had fallen, its defender 
Liu P‘i was a fugitive and Yiin-ch‘ang surrounded. To make 
matters worse the news came that Chang Fei, who had gone 
to rescue Kung Tu, was in like case. 

Yiian-té tried, to withdraw his men, fearing all the time an 
attack from Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Suddenly the sentinels came in © 
saying Hsü Ch‘u was at the camp gate offering a challenge,. 
but no one dared accept it or go out. They waited till dawn, 
and then Ytian-té bade the soldiers get a good meal and be: 
ready to start. When ready the foot went out first, the 


fiomance of the Chree Hingdoms ce ae 


Sealine next, leaving a few men in the camp to beat the 
watches and maintain an appearance of occupation. 

__ After travelling a short distance they passed some mounds. 
Suddenly torches blazed out and on the summit. stood one who 
shouted, “Do not let Liu Pei run away; I, the Minister, am 
here awaiting him.” : 

Liu Pei dashed along the first clear road he saw. 

Chao Yün said, “Fear not, my lord, only follow me,” and 
setting his. spear he galloped in front opening a lane as he 
- went. Yüan-tê gripped his double sword and followed close. 
_ As they were winning through, Hsü Ch‘u came in pursuit and 
engaged Chao Yün, and two other companies bore down as 
= well. Seeing the situation so desperate Yiian-té plunged into 
_ the wilds and fled. Gradually the sounds of battle became 
fainter and died away while he went deeper and deeper into 
the hills, a single horseman fleeing for his life. He kept on 
his way till daybreak, when a company suddenly appeared 
_ beside the road. Yiian-té saw these men with terror at first, 
_ but was presently relieved to find they were led by the friendly 
- Liu P“. They were a company of his defeated men escorting 
the family of their chief. With them also were Sun Ch‘ien, 

Chien Yung and Mi Fang. » 

- They told him that the attack on their city had been Laas 

strong to be resisted and so they had been compelled to abandon 

the defence, that the enemy had followed them and only Kuan’s 

- ‘timely arrival had saved them. 

- “I do not know where my brother is,” said Liu Pei. 

“All will come right if you will push on,” said Liu P‘ei. 

They pushed on. Before they had gone far the beating of 
‘drums was heard and suddenly appeared Chang Ho with a 
company of soldiers. He cried, “Liu Pei, quickly dismount 
and surrender.” 

Yiian-té was about to retire when he saw a red flag waving 
from a rampart on the hills and down came rushing another 
- body of men under Kao Lan. Thus checked in front and his 
retreat cut off, Yiian-té looked up to Heaven and cried, “O 

_ Heaven, why am I brought to this state of misery? Nothing 
is left me now but death.” And he drew his sword to slay 
himself. 

But Liu Pí stayed his hand saying, “Let me try to fight a 
way out and save you.’ 

As he spoke Kao Lan’s force was on the point of engaging 
his. The two leaders mét and in the third bout Liu P‘i was 
cut down. Liu Pei at once rushed up to fight, but just then 
there was sudden confusion in the rear ranks of the opponents 

-and a warrior dashed up and thrust at Kao Lan with his spear. 
Kao Lan fell from his steed. The newcomer was Chao Yiin. 
His arrival was most opportune. He urged forward his. 

` steed thrusting right and left, and the enemy’s ranks broke and 


332 San Huo, or 


$ x 

scattered. Then the first force under Chang Ho came into the 
fight and the leader and Chao Yün fought thirty or more bouts. 
However, this proved enough, for Ho turned his horse away 
recognising that he was worsted. Yün vigorously attacked, 
but. was forced into a narrow space in the hills where he 
was hemmed in. While seeking for some outlet’ they saw: 
Ytin-ch‘ang, Kuan P‘ing and Chou Ts‘ang, with three hundred 
men, coming along. Soon Chang Ho was driven off and then 
they came out-of the narrow defile and occupied a strong 
position among the hills where they made a camp. 

Yiian-té sent Yiin-ch‘ang for news of the missing brother 
Chang Fei. He had been attacked by Hsiahou Yüan, but 
had vigorously resisted, beaten him off and followed him up. 
Then Yo Chin had come along and surrounded Chang Fei. 
In this pass he was found by Yiin-ch‘ang, who had heard of his 
plight from some of his scattered men met on the way. Now 
they drove off. the enemy. The two brothers returned. Soon 
they heard of the approach of a large body of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s 
army. Yiian-té then bade Sun Ch‘ien guard his family and 
sent him on ahead, while he and the others kept off the enemy, 


sometimes giving battle and anon marching. Seeing that — 


Yiian-té was retiring, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao let him go and left the 
pursuit. 

When Yiian-té collected his men he found they numbered. 
only a thousand, and this halting and broken force marched 


as fast as possible to the west. Coming to a river they asked « 


the natives its name and were told it was the Han, and near 
it Yiian-té made a temporary camp. When the local people 


found out who was in. the camp they presented flesh and wine. 
A feast was given upon a sandy bank of the Han. After 


they had drunk awhile, Yiian-té addressed: his faithful follow- 
ers, saying, “All you, fair Sirs, have talents fitting you to be 


advisers to a monarch, but your destiny has led you to follow — 


poor me. My fate is. distressful and full of misery. To-day 
I have not a spot to call my own and I am indeed leading you 
astray. Therefore I say you should abandon me and go to 


some illustrious lord where you may be able to become famous.” - 


At these words „they all covered their faces and wept. Yiin- 
ch‘ang said, “Brother, you are wrong to speak thus. When 
the great Founder of Han contended with Hsiang Yii he was 


defeated many times, but he won at Chiuli Hill and that | 


achievement was the foundation of a Dynasty that endured 
for four centuries. Victory and defeat are but ordinary events: 
in a soldier’s career and why should you give up?” 

“Success and failure both have their seasons,’ . said Sun 


Ch‘ien, “and we are not to grieve. Chingchou, which your 
illustrious relative, Liu Piao, commands, is a rich and prosper- 


ous country. Liu Piao is of your house, why not go to him?” 
“Only that I fear he may not receive me,” said Liu Pei. 


Romance of the Chree Gingdoms : 833 | 


= “Then let me go and prepare the way. I will make Liu 
Ching-hsing come out to his borders to welcome you.” 

_So with his lord’s approval Sun Ch‘ien set off immediately 
and hastened: to Chingchou. When the genuflexions and cere- 
“monies. of greeting were over Liu Piao asked the reason of 
the visit. 

o Said. Sun, “The Princely Liu is one of the ioes of the day 

although just at the moment he may lack soldiers and leaders. 

His mind is set upon restoring the Dynasty to its pristine glory, 

and at Junan the two commanders, Liu and Kung, though 

bound to him by no ties, were ‘content to die for the sake of 
his ideals. You, illustrious Sir, like Liu Pei, are a scion of 
the Imperial stock. Now the Princely One has recently suffered 
_ defeat and thinks of seeking a home in the east with Sun 
Chung-mou (Sun Ch‘tian). I have ventured to dissuade him, 
saying that he should not turn from a relative and go to a 
mere acquaintance; telling him that you, Sir, are well known 
as courteous to the wise and condescending to scholars, so that 
they flock to you as the waters flow to the east, and that 
certainly you would show kindness to one of the same ancestry. 
_ Wherefore he has sent me to explain matters and request your 
i cómmands.” 

“He is my-brother,” said Piao, ‘ ‘and I have long desired to 
see him, but no opportunity has occurred, I should be very 


Ss happy if he would come.’ 


Ts‘ai Mao, who was sitting by, here kroke in with “No, no! 
4 Liu Pei first followed Lü Pu, then he served Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and 
- next he joined himself to Ytian Shao. And he stayed with 
none of these, so that you can see what manner of man he is. 
If he come here Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will assuredly come against us 
and fight. Better cut off this messenger’s head and send it 


: as an offering to Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao, who would reward you well for 


the service.’ 

Sun Ch‘ien sat unmoved while this harangue was pronoun- 
ced, saying at the end, “I am not afraid of death. Liu, the 
Princely One, is true and loyal to the State and so out of 
sympathy with Lü Pu, or Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, or Yüan Shao. It is 
true he followed these three, but there was no help for it. 
Now he knows your chief is a member of the family, so that | 
both are of the same ancestry, and that is why he has come 
far to join him. How can you slander a good man like that?” 

Liu Piao bade Ts‘ao Mao be silent and said, “I have decided 
-and you need say no more.’ 

Whereat Ts‘ai Mao sulkily left the audience chamber. 

Then Sun Ch‘ien was told to return with the news that 
- Yiian-té would be’ welcome and Prefect Liu Piao went thirty 
` li beyond his boundaries to meet -his guest. When Yiian-té 
arrived he behaved to his host with the utmost politeness and 
-was warmly welcomed in return. Then Liu Pei introduced his 


> Bea Aan Kuo 


two sworn-brothers and friends and they entered Chingchou, 
where Liu Pei finally was lodged in the Prefect’s own residence. 

As soon as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao knew whither his enemy had gone 
he wished to attack Liu Piao, but Ch‘éng Yü advised against 
any attempt so long as Yiian Shao, the dangerous enemy, was 
left with power to inflict damage. He advised return to the 
capital to refresh the men so that they might be ready for a 
campaign in the mild spring weather. 

Ts‘ao accepted his advice and set out for the capital. In 


S 


the first month of the eighth year of the period “Established | 


Tranquillity,’ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao once again began to think of war, 
and sent to garrison Junan as a precaution against Liu Piao. 
Then, after arranging for the safety of the capital, he marched 
a large army to Kuantu, the camp of the year before. 


As to Ytian Shao, who had been suffering from blood-spit- 
ting but was now in better health, he began to think of measures 


against Hsiitu, but Shén P*ei dissuaded him saying, “You are 


not yet recovered from the fatigues of last year. It would be 


better to make your position impregnable and set to improving 
the army.” 


When the news of Ts‘ao’s approach arrived, Yiian said, ; 
“If we allow the foe to get close to the city before we march ` 


to the river we shall have missed our opportunity. I must 
go out to repel this army.” Be 


Here his son interposed, “Father, you are not sufficiently — 
recovered for a campaign and should not go so far. Let me. 


lead the army against this enemy.’ 


Yiian consented, and he sent to Ch‘ingchou and Yuchou and: D 
Pingchou to call upon his other two sons and his nephew to 4 


attack Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at the same time as his own army. 


Against Junan they beat the drum, 
And from Ch‘ichou the armies come. 


To whom the victory will be seen in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


CHICHOU TAKEN: YUAN SHANG STRIVES: 
THE CHANG RIVER CUT: Hsu Yu’s SCHEME. 


tian Shang was puffed up with pride after his victory over 
Shih Huan and, without deigning to wait the arrival of his 
brothers, he marched out to Liyang to meet the army of Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao. Chang Liao came out to challenge him, and Yüan 
Shang, accepting the challenge rode out with spear set. But 
he only lasted to the third bout when he had to give way. 
Chang Liao smote with full force and Shang, quite broken, 
fled pell mell to Ch‘ichou. His defeat was a heavy shock to 
his father, who had a severe fit of hemorrhage at the news 
and swooned. 

The Lady Liu, his wife, got him to bed as quickly as possible, 
but he did not rally and she soon saw it was necessary to 
prepare for the end. So she sent for Shén P‘ei and Féng Chi 
that the succession might be settled. They came and stood by 
the sick man’s bed, but by this time he could no longer speak; 
he only made motions with his hands. When his wife put the 
formal question, whether Shang was to succeed, he nodded his 
head. .Shén P‘ei at the bedside wrote out the dying man’s 
testament. Presently he uttered a loud moan, a fresh fit gl 
bleeding followed and he passed away. 


Born of a line of nobles famous for generations, 

He himself in his youth was wayward always and headstrong, 
Vainly he called to his side captains skilled and courageous, 
Gathered beneath his banner countless legions of soldiers, 

' For he was timid at heart, a lambkin dressed as a tiger, — 
Merely a cowardly chicken, phoenix-feathered but spurless. 
Pitiful was the fate of his house; for when he departed 
Brother with brother strove and quarrels arose in the household. 


Shén P‘ei and some others set about the mourning ceremonies 
for the dead man. His wife, the Lady Liu, put to death five 
of his favourite concubines, and such was the bitterness of 
her jealousy that, not content with this, she shaved off the hair 
and slashed the faces of their poor corpses lest their spirits 
should meet and rejoin her late husband in the land of shades 
beneath the Nine Springs. Her son followed up this piece of 
cruelty by slaying all the relatives of the unhappy concubines 
lest they should avenge their death. ; 

Shén P‘ei and Fêng Chi declared Yiian Shang successor with 
the titles of Minister of War and General Governor of the four 


336 i Dan Kuo, or 


- prefectures of Ch‘i, Ch‘ing, Yu and Ping and sent in a report 
of the death of the late governor. 

At this time Yüan Tan, the eldest son, had already manchet 
out his army to oppose Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao, but hearing of his father’s 
death he called in Kuo T‘u and Hsin P‘ing to consult as to his 
course of action. 

“In your absence, my lord,” said Kuo T‘u, “the two advisers 
of your younger brother will certainly set him up as lord, 
wherefore you must act quickly.” 

“Those two, Shên and Fêng, have already laid their plans,” 
said Hsin P‘ing. “If you go you will meet with some mis- 
fortune.” N 

“Then what should I do?” asked T'an. 

Kuo T‘u replied, “Go and camp near the city and watch what 
is taking place while I enter and enquire.’ 

Accordingly Kuo T‘u entered the city and sought an inter- . 
view with the young governor. é 

“Why did not my brother come?” asked Shang after the 
usual salutes. 

Kuo T“u said, “He cannot come as he is in the camp unwell.” 

“By the command of my late father I take the lordship. 
Now I confer upon my brother the rank of General of Cavalry . 
and I wish him to go at once to attack Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who is 
pressing on the borders. I will follow as soon as my army is 
in order.” 

“There is no one in our camp to give advice,” said Kuo. Tu. 
“I wish to have the services of Shén P‘ei and Féng Chi.” 

“I also need the help of these two,” said Shang, “And as I 
am always working | at schemes I do not. see how I can do 
without them.” 

“Then let one of these two go,” replied T‘u. 

Shang could do no other than accede to this: request so he 
bade the two men cast lots who should go.. Féng Chi drew the 
lot and was appointed, receiving a seal of office. Then he 
accompanied Kuo T‘u to the camp. But when he arrived and 
found T‘an in perfect health he grew suspicious and resigned. 
T‘an angrily refused to accept his resignation and was disposed © 
to‘ put him to death, but Kuo T‘u privately dissuaded him 
saying, ‘““Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is on the borders and he must be kept 
here to allay your brother’s suspicions. . After we have beaten 
Ts‘ao we can at once make an attempt on Ch‘ichou.” 

Ytian T'an agreed and forthwith broke up his camp to 
march against the enemy. He reached Liyang and lost no 
time in offering battle. He chose for his champion Wang Chao | 
and, when he rode out, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sent Hsü Huang to meet 
him.. These two had fought but a few bouts when Wang Chao 
was slain. At once Ts‘ao’s army pressed forward and T‘an 
suffered a severe defeat. He drew off his army and retired — 
into Liyang, whence he sent to his brother for reinforcements. 


° 


Romance of the Three kingdoms | 337 


Shang and his adviser Shén P‘ei discussed the matter and 
half a legion only was sent. Ts‘ao hearing of the despatch of 
this meagre force sent two generals to waylay them and the 


half legion was destroyed. When T“an heard of the inadequate 


force sent and their destruction he was very wrath and roundly 


_ abused Féng Chi. Féng replied, “Let me write to my lord and 


pray him to come himself.” 

So Feng Chi wrote and the letter was sent. When it arrived 
Shang again consulted Shén P‘ei who said, “Kuo T‘u, your 
elder brother’s adviser, is very guileful. Formerly he left 
without discussion because Ts‘ao was on the border. If Ts‘ao | 
be defeated there will certainly be an attempt on you. The 
better plan is to withhold vis i eae and use Ts‘ao’s hand to 
destroy your rival.” 

Shang took his advice and no help was sent. When the 
‘messenger returned without success T‘an was very angry and 
showed it by putting Feng Chi to death. He also began to 

talk of surrendering to Ts‘ao. Soon spies brought news of 
this to Shang and again Shén P‘ei was called in. Said he, “If. 
he goes over to Ts‘ao they will both attack Ch‘ichou and we 


_ shall be in great danger.” Finally Shén P‘ei and Su Yu were 


left to take care of the defence of the city and Yiian Shang 


~ marched his army to the rescue of his brother. 


“Who dares lead the van?” said Yüan Shang. 
‘Two brothers named Lü volunteered and three sA were 


given them. They were the first to reach Liyang. 


T‘an was pleased that his brother had made up his mind to ` 
play a brotherly part and come to his aid, so he at once aban- 
doned all thought of going over to the enemy. He being in the 


city, Yuan Shang camped outside, making that an angle of 


their strategic position. Before long Yüan Hsi, the second 
- brother, and their cousin, Kao Kan, arrived with their legions 
and also camped outside the city. 
Engagements took place daily and Shang daered many 
defeats. On the other hand Ts‘ao was victorious and elated. 


= In the second month of the eighth year, Ts‘ao made separate 
` attacks on all four armies and won the day against each. Then 


they abandoned Liyang and Ts‘ao pursued them to Ch‘ichou, 
where T‘an and Shang went into the city to defend it, 
while their brother and cousin camped about thirty li away 
making a show of great force. When Ts‘ao had made many 
attacks without success Kuo Chia proffered the following 
lan. 
7 He said, “There is dissension among the Yüans because the 
elder has been superseded in the succession. The brothers are 
about equally strong and each has his party. If we oppose 
them they unite to assist each other, but if we have patience 
they will be weakened by family strife. Wherefore send first 
a force to reduce Liu Piao in Chingchou and let the fraternal 


22 


338 San kuo, or 


quarrels develop. When they have fully developed we canr 
smite them and settle the matter.” 

Ts‘ao approved of the plan. So leaving Chia Hsü as 
Prefect of Liyang and Ts‘ao Hung as guard at Kuantu the 
army went away toward Chingchou. 

The two brothers T‘an and Shang congratulated each other 
on the withdrawal of their enemy, and their brother Hsi and 
cousin marched their armies back to their own districts. 

Then the quarrels began. T‘an said to his confidants, “I, 


the eldest, have been prevented from succeeding my father, - 


while the youngest son, born of a second wife, received the 
main heritage. My heart is bitter.” 

Said Kuo T‘u, “Camp your men outside, invite your brother 
and Shén P‘ei to a banquet and assassinate them. The whole 
matter is easily settled.” 

And T‘an agreed. It happened that a certain Wang Hsiu> 
came just then from Ch‘ingchou whom Tan took into his 
confidence. Wang opposed the murder plan saying, “Brothers 
are as one’s limbs. How can you possibly succeed if at a 
moment of conflict with an enemy you cut off one of your 
hands? If you abandon your brother and sever relationship, 
whom will you take in all the world as a relation? That fellow . 
Kuo is a dangerous mischief-maker, who would sow dissension 
between brothers for a momentary advantage, and I beg you 
to shut your ears and not listen to his persuasions.’ 

This was displeasing to T‘an and he angrily dismissed Wang, 
while he sent the treacherous invitation to his brother. ; 

His brother and Shén P‘ei talked over the matter. Shén © 
P‘ei said, “I recognise one of Kuo T‘u’s stratagems and if you - 
go, my lord, you will be the victim of their plot. Rather strike 
at them at once.” 

Whereupon Shang rode out to battle. His brother T‘an,. 
seeing him come with five legions, knew that his treachery 
had been discovered, so he also took the field, and when the 


forces were near enough T'an opened on Shang with a MCHC, E 


of abuse. 

“You poisoned my father and usurped the succession; now 
you come out to slay your elder brother?” 

The battle went against T‘an. Shang himself took part in 
the fight, risking the arrows and the stones. He urged on his 
men and drove his brother off the field. He took refuge in 
P‘ingytian. Ytian Shang drew off his men to his own city. 

Yüan T‘an and Kuo T‘u decided upon a new attack and this 
time they chose Ts‘€n Pi as leader. Yiian Shang went to meet 
him. When both sides had been arrayed and the banners were 
flying and the drums beating, Ts‘én Pi rode out to challenge 
and railed at his opponent. At first Shang was going to answer 
the challenge himself but Lü K‘uang actually went out. Lü 
and Ts‘én met but had fought only a few bouts when the latter 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 339 


fell. Tʻan’s men were once more defeated and ran away to 
P“ingyüan. Shén P‘ei urged his master to press home the 
advantage and T‘an was driven into the city, where he forti- 
fied himself and would not go out. So the city was besieged 
on three sides. i 

T‘an asked his strategist what should be done next and he 
said, “The city is short of food, the enemy is flushed with 
victory and we cannot stand against them. My idea is to send 
some one to offer surrender to 'Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and thus get him 
to attack Ch‘ichou. Your brother will be forced to return 
thither, which will leave you free to join in the attack. We 
may capture Shang. Should Ts‘ao begin to get the better of 
your brother’s army we will lend our force to help him against 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and as Ts‘ao’s base of supply is distant we shall 
drive him off. And we can seize on Ch‘ichou and begin our 

-real career.” 
~ “Supposing this scheme be attempted, who is the man for 
a messenger ?” , 

“I have one, Hsin P‘i, Hsin P‘ing’s younger brother; he is 
magistrate here in this very place. He is a fluent speaker and 
good scholar and suited to your purpose.” ; 

So Hsin P‘i was summoned and came readily enough. 
Letters were given him and an escort of three companies took 
him beyond the border. He travelled as quickly as possible. 

At that time Ts‘ao’s camp was at Hsip‘ing and he was 
attacking Liu Piao, who had sent Yiian-té out to offer the first 
resistance. No battle had yet taken place. 

_. Soon after his arrival Hsin P‘i was admitted to the Minister’s 
presence, and after the ceremonies of greeting Ts‘ao asked the 
object of the visit. Hsin P‘i explained that Yiian T‘an wanted 
assistance and presented his despatches. Ts‘ao read them and 
told the messenger to wait in his camp while he called his 
officers to a council. 

The council met. Ch‘éng Yu said, “Yüan T'an has been 
forced into making this offer because of the pressure of his 
-brother’s attack. Put no trust in him.” 

Lü Ch‘ien and Man Ch‘ung said, “You have led your armies 

here for a special purpose; how can you abandon that and go 
to assist Yiian T'an ?” 

“Gentlemen, not one of you is giving good advice,” inter- 
posed Hstin Yu. “This is how I regard it. Since there is 
universal trouble, in the midst of which Liu Piao remains 
quietly content with his position between Chiang and Han, it 
is evident that he has no ambition to enlarge his borders. The 
Yüans hold four Chou and have many legions of soldiers. 
Harmony between the two brothers means success for the 
family and none can foresee what will happen in the Empire. 
‘Now take advantage of this fraternal conflict and let them 
fight till they are weakened and have to yield to our Minister. 


? 


= $ r 
Bl er N 


$ GA Fs EN SSAA es ait is ita h bie 
PS acne icv Be ye 
r yi. x 


340 Han Buo, or 


\ 


Then Yiian Shang can be removed, and when the times are 
suitable, Yiian T‘an can be destroyed in his turn. Thus peace 
will ensue. This present combination of circumstances is to 
be taken advantage of to full measure.’ 

Ts‘ao realised the truth of this and treated the messenger 
well. At a banquet he said, “But is this surrender of Yiian 
T‘an real or false? Do you really think that Aae s army is 
sure to overcome him?” 

Hsin P“ replied, “Illustrious one, do not enquire into the 
degree of sincerity; rather regard the situation. The Ytians 
‘have been suffering military losses for years and are powerless 
without, while their strategists are put to death within. The 
brothers seize every chance to speak evil of each other and 
their country is divided. Add to this famine, supplemented 
by calamities and general exhaustion, and everybody, wise as 
well as simple, can see that the catastrophe is near, the time 
ordained of Heaven for the destruction of the Yiians is at hand. 
Now you have a force attacking Yeh, and if Yüan Shang will 
not return to give aid the place of refuge is lost. If he help, 
then T‘an will follow up and smite him, making use of your. 
power to destroy the remnant of his brother’ s almy, just as 
the autumn gale sweeps away the fallen leaves. IY he do not, 
then he will attack Chingchou. Now Chingchou is rich, the j; 
government peaceful, the people submissive and it cannot be 
shaken. Moreover, there is no greater threat to it than Hopei. 
If that be reduced then the task is complete. I pray you, Sir, . 
think of it.” X 

“I am sorry that I did not meet you earlier,” said Ts‘ao, 
much gratified with this speech. _ 

Forthwith orders were given to return and attack Ch‘ichou. 
Yiian-té, fearing this retirement was only a ruse, allowed it 
to proceed without interference and himself returned to Ching- 
chou. 

When Yiian Shang heard that Ts‘ao had crossed the river 
he hastily led his army back to Yeh, ordering the two Liis to 
guard the rear. His brother T‘an started from P‘i ingylian with 
a force in pursuit. He had not proceeded far when he heard. 
a bomb and two bodies of men came out in front of him and 
checked his progress. Their leaders were Lü K‘uang and Lü 
Hsiang. T‘an reined in and addressed them, saying, “While | 
my father lived I never treated you badly; why do you support 
my brother and try to injure me?” 

The two men had no reply to make, but they dismounted 
and bowed before him yielding submission. 

T‘an said, “Do not surrender to me but to the Minister,” 
and he led them back to camp, where he waited the arrival of 
Ts‘ao and then presented the pair. Ts‘ao received them well. 
He promised his daughter to T‘an to wife and he appointed 
the two brothers as advisers. 


fiomance of hte Three Hingdoms 341 


gi 


Me 


When T'an asked Ts‘ao to attack Ch‘ichou the reply was 


“Supplies are short and difficult to transport. I must turn 


the waters of the Chishui into the Paiho from Chiho whereby 


to convey my grain and afterwards I can advance.” 


Ordering T‘an to remain in P‘ingyiian, Ts‘ao retired into 


camp at Liyang. The two Brother: Lü, who were renegades 


from Yüan Shang, were now raised to noble rank and followed 
the army as supernumeraries. 

Kuo Tu noted this advancement and said to T'an, “He has 
promised you a daughter to wife. I fear that bodes no good. 
Now he-has given titles of nobility to the two Lüs and taken 
them with him. This is a trap for the northern people but he 


intends evil toward us. You, my lord, should have two 


generals’ seals engraved and send them secretly to the brothers 
so that you may have friends at court ready for the day when 


Ts‘ao shall have broken your brother’s power and we can begin . 


to work against him.” 

The seals were engraved and sent. As soon as the brothers 
received them they informed Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who smiled saying, 
“He wants your support so he sends you seals as officers. I 
will consider it as soon as Ytian Shang has been dealt with. 


In the meantime you may accept the seals till I shall decide 


< what to do.” 


‘Thenceforward T‘an was doomed. Shén P‘ei and his master 
also discussed the situation. 

“Ts‘ao is getting grain into Paikou, which means an attack 
on Ch‘ichou; what is to be done?” asked Shang. 

Shén P‘ei “replied, “Send letters to Yin Kai, Chief of Wuan, 
bidding him camp at Maoch‘éng to secure the road to Shang- 
tang and direct Chu Ku to maintain Hantan as a distant 
auxiliary. Then you may advance on P‘ingyiian and attack 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.’ 

The plan seemed good. Yiian Shang left Shén P‘ei and 
Ch‘én Lin in charge of Ch‘ichou, appointed two captains Ma 
Yen and Chang K‘ai as van leaders, and set out hastily for 


- Pingyiian. | 


; oy 


When T‘an heard of the approach of his brother’s army he : 
sent urgent messages to Ts‘ ao, who said to himself, “Iam going - 


to get Ch‘ichou this time.” 
Just at this time it happened that Hsü Yu came down from 


the capital. When he heard that Yuan Shang was attacking 


his brother T‘an he sought Ts‘ao and said, “You, Sir Minister, 
sit here on guard; are you waiting till Heaven’ s thunder shall 
strike the two Yiians?” 

“I have thought it all out,”’ said Ts‘ao. 

Then he ordered Ts‘ao Hung to go and fight against Yeh, 


ai. while he led another army against Yin Kai. Kai could make 


no adequate defence and was killed by Hsü Ch‘u. His men 
ran away and presently joined Ts‘ao’s army. Next he led the 


ele as i 


342 . San Kuo, or 


army to Hantan and Chu Ku came out to fight him. Chang 
Liao advanced to fight with Chu and after the third encounter 
the latter was defeated and fled. Liao went after him and 
when their two horses were not far apart, Liao took his bow 
and shot. The fleeing soldier fell as the bowstring twanged. 
Ts‘ao sent Ma Yen to complete the rout and Chu Ku’s force 
was broken up. - ; 

Now Ts‘ao led his armies to an attack on Ch‘ichou. Ts‘ao 
Hung went close to the city and a regular siege began. The 
army encompassed the city and began by throwing up great 
mounds. They also tunnelled subterranean ways. 

Within the city Shén P‘ei turned his whole care to the 


defence and issued the severest commands. The captain of ~ 


the east gate, one Féng Li, got intoxicated and failed to keep 
his watch for which he was severely punished. He resented 
this, sneaked out of the city, went over to the besiegers and 
told them how the place could be attacked. 

“The earth within the T‘umén is solid enough to be tunnelled 
and entrance can be effected there,” said the traitor. 

So Féng Li was sent with three hundred men to carry out 
his plan under cover of darkness. 

After Keng Li had deserted to the enemy Shén P‘ei went . 
every night to the wall to inspect the men on duty. The night 
of the sapping he went there as usual and saw that there were 
no lights outside the city and all was perfectly quiet. So he 
said to himself, “Féng is certain to try to come into the city 
by an underground road.” Whereupon he ordered his men to 
bring up stones and pile them on the cover of the tunnel open- 
ing. The opening was stopped up and the attacking party 
perished in the tunnel they had excavated. Ts‘ao having failed 
in this attempt abandoned the scheme of underground attack. 
He drew off the army to a place above the Héngshui to await 
till Yüan Shang should return to relieve the city. 

Yiian Shang heard of the defeat of Yin Kai and Chu Ku, 
and the siege of his own city, and bethought himself of reliev- 
ing it. One of his captains, Ma Yen, said, “The high road will 
surely be ambushed; we must find some other way. We can 
take a bye-road from the Western Hills and get through at 
Fushuik‘ou, whence we can fall upon Ts‘ao’s camp.’ 

The plan was acceptable and Shang started off with the 
main body, Ma Yen and Chang K‘ai being rear guard. 

Ts‘ao’s spies soon found out this move and when they re- 
ported it he said, “If he comes by the high road I shall have 
to keep out of the way; if by the Western Hills bye-road I can 
settle him in one battle. And I think he will show a blaze as 
a signal to the besieged that they may make a sortie. I shall 
prepare to attack both.” So he made his preparations. 

Now Yüan Shang went out by the Fushui Pass east toward 
Yangp‘ing and near this he camped. Thence to his own city 


Yiomance of the Three Kingdoms 343 


was seventeen li. The Fushui stream ran beside the camp. 
He ordered his men to collect firewood and grass ready for 
-the blaze he intended to make at night as his signal. He also 
sent Li Fu, a civil officer, disguised as an officer of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s 


` army, to inform Shén P‘ei of his intentions. 


Fu reached the city wall safely and called out to the guards 
to open. Shén P‘ei recognised his voice and let him in. Thus 
Shén P‘ei knew of the arrangements for his relief and it was 
agreed that a blaze should be raised within the city so that the 
sortie could be simultaneous with Shang’s attack. Orders were 
given to collect inflammables. 

Then said Fu, “As your food supply is short it would be well 
for the old men; 'the feeble soldiers and the women to surrender. 
This will come upon them as a surprise and we will send the 
soldiers out behind them.” 

Shén P‘ei promised to do all this and next day they hoisted 
on the wall a white flag with the words “The populace of 
Ch‘ichou surrender” on it. 

“Ho ho! This means no food,” said Ts‘ao. “They are send- 
ing away the non-combatants to escape feeding them. And the 
soldiers will follow behind them.” 

So on two sides he laid an ambush of three companies while 
he went near the wall in full state. Presently the gates were 
opened and out came the people supporting their aged folk and 
leading their little ones by the hand. Each carried a white 
flag. As soon as the people had passed the gate the soldiers 
followed with a rush. 

“Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao showed a red flag and the ambushed 
soldiers fell upon the sortie. The men tried to return and 
Ts‘ao’s men made a direct attack. The chase continued to the 
drawbridge, but there they met with a tremendous shower of 
arrows and crossbow bolts which checked the advance: Ts‘ao’s 
helmet was struck and the crest carried away. 

So the men retired. As soon as Ts‘ao had changed his dress ~ 
and mounted a fresh horse he set out at the head of the army 
to attack Yiian Shang’s camp. 

Yiian Shang led the defence. The attack came simultan- 
eously from many directions, the defenders were quite disor- 
ganised and presently defeated. Shang led his men back by 
the hills and made a camp under their shelter. Thence he sent 
messengers to urge Ma Yen and Chang K‘ai to bring up the 
supports. He did not know that Ts‘ao had sent the two Liis 
to persuade these two into surrender and that they had already 
passed under T's‘ao’s banner, and he had made them marquises. 

Just before going to attack the Western Hills he sent the 
two Lüs with Ma Yen and Chang K‘ai to seize the source of 
- Yüan Shang’s supplies. Shang had realised he could not hold 
the hills so he went by night to Ik‘ou. Before he could get 
camped he saw flaring lights springing up all around him and 


344 | San Buo, or 


soon an attack began. He was taken aback and had to oppose 
the enemy with his men half armed, his steeds unsaddled. His. 
army suffered and he had to retreat another fifty li. By that. 
time his force was too enfeebled to show any resistance and. 
as no other course was possible he sent to ask that he might 
surrender. Ts‘ao feigned to consent, but that night he sent a 
force to raid Shang’s camp. Then it became flight, abandoning 
everything, seals, emblems of office and even personal clothing. 
He made for the hills. 

Then came an attack on Ch‘ichou and to help out this Hsü 
Yu suggested drowning the city by turning the course of the 
River Chang. Ts‘ao adopted the suggestion and at once sent 
a small number of men to dig a channel to lead the water to: 
the city. All told, it was forty li. 

Shén P‘ei saw the diggers from the city wall and noticed 
that they made only a shallow channel. He chuckled, saying 
to himself, “What is the use of such a channel to drown out. 
the city from a deep river?” 

So he made no preparations to keep aie the water. 


But as soon as night came on Ts‘ao increased his, army of — 


diggers tenfold and by daylight the channel was deepened to 
twenty feet and the water was flowing in a great stream into 
the city where it already stood some feet deep. So this mis- 
fortune was added to the lack of food. 

Hsin P‘i now displayed the captured seal and garments of 
Yüan Shang hung out on spears, to the great shame of their 
late owner, and called upon the people of the city to surrender. 
This angered Shén P‘ei, who avenged the insult by putting to 


death on the city wall the whole of the Hsin family who were | 


within the city. There were nearly a hundred of them and 
their severed heads were cast down from the walls. Hsin Pi 
wept exceedingly. 

Shén P‘ei’s nephew Shén Yung, one of the gate wardens, 
was a dear friend of Hsin Pi and the murder of Ps family 
greatly distressed him. He wrote a secret letter offering to 
betray the city and tied it to an arrow, which he shot out among 
the besiegers. The soldiers found it, Have it to Hsin P“ and 
he took it to his chief. 

Ts‘ao issued an order that the family of the Yiians should 
be spared when the city should be taken and that no one who 
surrendered should be put to death. The next day the soldiers 
entered by the west gate, opened for them by Shén’s nephew. 
Hsin P‘i was the first to prance in on horseback and the men 
followed. 

When Shén, who was on the southeast of the city, saw the 
enemy within the gates he placed himself at the head of some 
horsemen and dashed toward them. He was met and captured 
by Hsü Huang who bound him and led him outside the city. 
On the road they met Hsin P‘i, who ground his teeth with rage 


at the murderer of his relatives and then struck the prisoner 
over the head with his whip and abused him as a murderer. 
Shén retorted by calling him traitor and saying how sorry he 
was not to have slain him before. 

When the captive was taken into Ts‘ao’s presence Ts‘ao said, 
“Do you know who opened the gate to let me in?” 

“No; I know not.” ij . 

“It was your nephew Shén Yung who gave up the gate,” 
said Ts‘ao. 

“He was, always unprincipled; and it has come to this!” 
said Shén. vl 

“The other day when I approached the city why did you 
shoot so hard at me?” 

“I am sorry we shot too little.” 

“As a faithful adherent of the Yiians you could do no other- 
wise. Now will you come over to me?” ; 

“Never; I will never surrender.” 

Hsin P‘i threw himself on the ground with lamentations, 
saying, “Eighty of my people murdered by this ruffian; I pray 
you slay him, O Minister!” 

“Alive, I have served the Ytians,” said Shén, “dead, I will 
be their ghost. I am no flattering time-server as you are. 
Kill me!’ 

Ts‘ao gave the order ; they led him away to put him to death. 
On the execution ground he said to the executioners, “My lord 
is in the north, I pray you not to make me face. the south.” 

= So he knelt facing the north and extended his neck for the 
fatal stroke. 


Who of all th’ official throng © 
In Hopei was true like Shén? 
Sad his fate! he served a fool, 

“ But faithful, as the ancient men. 
Straight and true was every word, 
Never from the road he swerved. 
Faithful unto death, he died 
Gazing toward the lord he’d served. 


Thus died Shén P‘ei and from respect for his character 
Ts‘ao ordered that he be buried honourably on the north of 
the city. 

Ts‘a0 Ts‘ao then entered the city. As he was starting he 
saw the executioners hurrying forward a prisoner who proved 
to be Ch‘én Lin. eter 

“You wrote that manifesto for Yiian Shao. If you had only 
directed your diatribe against me, it would not have mattered. 
But why did you shame my forefathers?” said Ts‘ao. _ 

“When the arrow is on the string, it must fly,” replied Lin. 

Those about Ts‘ao urged him to put Ch‘én Lin to death, but 
` he was spared on account of his genius and given a small civil 


post. 


Romance of the Three Lingdoms B45 


346 Dan Ruo 


$ 


Now Ts‘ao’s eldest son was named P‘ei, otherwise Tzù-hêng. 
At the taking of the city he was eighteen years of age. When 
he was born a dark purplish halo hung over the house for a 
whole day. One who understood the meaning of such mani- 
festations had secretly told Ts‘ao that the halo belonged to the 
Imperial class and portended honours which could ‘not be put 
into words. 

At eight the lad could compose very skilfully and he was 
well read in ancient history. Now he was an adept at all 
military arts and very fond of fencing. He'had gone with his 
father on the expedition to Ch‘ichou. He led his escort in the 
direction of the Yiian family dwelling, and when he reached 
it he strode in sword in hand. When some one would have 
stayed him, saying that by order of the Minister no one was 
to enter the house, he bade them begone. The guards fell back 
and he made his way into the private rooms, where he saw two 
women weeping in each other’s arms. He went forward to 
slay them. 


Four generations of honours, gone like a dream, 
Fate follows on ever surely, though slow she seem. 


The fate of the two women will be told in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


Ts‘AO P‘EI FINDS A WIFE: 
A PLAN FOR SETTLING LIAOTUNG. 


As was said, Ts‘ao P‘ei, having made his way into the Yiian 
Palace, saw two women there whom he was about to kill. 
a Suddenly a red light shone in his eyes, and he paused. Loret 
=- _ ing his sword he said, “Who are you?” 

3 “Thy handmaid is the widow of the late Yiian Shao, née 
Liu,” said the elder of the two, “and this is the wife of Hsi, 
his second son. She was of the Chén family. When Hsi was 
sent to command in Yu her family objected to her going so 
far from home and she stayed behind.” 

Ts‘ao P‘ei drew her toward him and looked at her eloaely! 
Her hair hung disordered, her face was dusty and tear-stained, 
but when, with the sleeve of his inner garment, he had wiped 
away these disfigurements he saw a woman of exquisite loveli- 
ness, with a complexion clear as jade touched with the tender 


`- - bloom of a flower petal, a woman indeed beautiful enough to 


ruin a kingdom. 

- “I am the son of the Minister Ts‘ao,” said he turning to the 
elder woman. “I will guarantee your safety so you need fear 
nothing.” 

He then put by his sword and sat down at the upper end 
of the room. 


As the great Minister Ts‘ao was entering the gate of the 


- conquered city Hsü Yu rode up very quickly, passed him and 
- pointed with his whip at the gate saying, ‘““A-man, you would 
not have been here but for my plans.” 

' Ts‘ao laughed, but his captains were very annoyed. When 
he reached the Yiian residence he stopped at the gate, and 
asked if any one had gone in. The guard at the gate said, 
“Your son is within.” Ts‘ao called him out and chid him, 


| but the wife of the\ late Prefect interposed, saying, “But for ` 


your son we had not been saved. I desire to present to you 
a lady, of the Chén family, as a handmaid to your son.” 

Ts‘ao bade them bring out the girl and she bowed before 
him. After looking at her intently he said, “Just the wife for 
- him!” and he told Ts‘ao P‘ei to take her to wife. 

After the conquest of Ch‘ichou had been made quite sure, 
'Ts‘ao made a ceremonial visit to the Yiian family cemetery, 
where he sacrificed at the tomb of his late rival, bowed his 
head and lamented bitterly. 


ow i, 


348 San Kuo, or 


$ 


Turning to his captains he said, “Not long ago when Pên- 
ch‘u and I worked together in military matters he asked me, 
saying, ‘If this disturbance continue what districts should be 
held?’ and I replied asking him what he thought. He said, 
‘To the south I would hold the river, on the north, guard 


against Yen and Tai and the hordes from the Shamo. Thence ` 


southward I would try for the Empire and do you not think 
I might succeed?’ I replied saying, I depended upon the 
wisdom and force of the world directed by Tao; then every 
thing would be possible. These words seem as if spoken only 
yesterday, and now he is gone. Thinking over it I cannot 
refrain from tears.” 

His officers were deeply affected. Ts‘ao treated the widow 
generously, giving her gold and silks and food to her 


_ content. 


He also issued a further order that the taxes in Hopei would 
be remitted in consideration of the sufferings of the people 
during the warlike operations. He sent up a memorial and 
formally became Governor of Ch‘ichou. 

One day Hsü Ch‘u, riding in at the east gate, met Hsü Yu, 
who called out to him “Would you fellows be riding through 
here if it had not been for me?” 

Hsü Ch‘u replied, “We fellows, those who survive and those 
who perished, risked our lives i in bloody battle to get this. city, 
so do not brag of your deeds.” 


“You are a lot of blockheads, not worth fall ied ie abouti e s 


said Yu. 


Ch‘u in his anger drew his sword and ran him throughs s 


Then he took his head and went to tell Ts‘ao the reason. 

Said Ts‘ao, “He and I were old friends and we could joke 
together. Why did you kill him?” 

He blamed Hsii Ch‘u very severely and gave orders that the 
corpse should be buried honourably. 

He enquired for any wise and reputable men who were 
known to be living in the district and was told of a certain 
cavalry officer named Ts‘ui Yen, of Tungwu City, who had 
on many occasions given valuable advice to Yiian Shao. As 
the advice was not followed Yen had pleaded indisposition and 
remained at home. 

Ts‘ao sent for this man, gave him‘an office and said’ to him, 
“According to the former registers there are three hundred 


thousand households in the district so that one may well call 


it a major district.” 

Yen replied, “The Empire is rent and the country is torn; 
the brothers Yüan are at war and the people have been strip- 
ped naked. Yet, Sir, you do not hasten to enquire after local 
conditions and how to rescue the people from misery, but first 
compute the possibilities of taxation. Can you expect to gain 
the support of our people by such means?” 


ee ee 


fiomance of the Three Hingdoms 349 


Ts‘ao accepted the rebuke, changed his Boley: thanked him 
and treated him all the better for it. 

As soon as Ch‘ichou was settled, Ts‘ao sent to find out the 
movements of Yüan T‘an. He heard he was ravaging Kanling 


_ and the places near it in the south and west. Moreover, the 


- to hold out for long. Nothing is to be gained by helping this: 


scouts brought the news that Yiian Shang had fled to the hills. 

An expedition had been sent against him but Shang would not 

ey a battle. He had gone away to Yuchou to his brother 
si. 

T‘an, having surrendered with all his army, yet prepared 
for another attempt on Ch‘ichou. Whereupon Ts‘ao summoned 
him. Tʻan refused to come and Ts‘ao sent letters breaking 
off the marriage with his daughter. Soon after Ts‘ao led an 


expedition against T‘an and marched to P‘ingytian, whereupon | 


T‘an sent to Liu Piao to beg assistance. Piao sent for Liu Pei 
to consult about this and he said, “Ts‘ao is very strong now 
that he has overcome Ch‘ichou and the Yiians will be unable 


man and it may give Ts‘ao the loophole he is always looking 
for to attack this place. My advice is to keep the army in 
condition and devote all our energies to defence.” 

“Agreed; but what shall we say?’ said Piao. 

“Write to both the brothers as peacemaker in gracious 
terms.” 


Accordingly Liu Piao wrote thus to Yüan T‘an:—“When 


the superior man would escape danger he does not go to an 


. enemy State. I heard recently that you had crooked the knee 


to Ts‘ao, which was ignoring the enmity between him and 
your father, rejecting the duties of brotherhood and leaving 


_ behind you the shame of an alliance with the enemy. If your 


brother, the successor to Ch‘ichou, has acted unfraternally, 
your duty was to bend your inclination to follow him and 


wait till the state of affairs had settled. Would it not have | 


j A been very noble to bring about the redress of wrongs?” 


And to Yüan Shang he wrote:—“Your brother, the ruler 
of Ch‘ingchou, is of an impulsive temperament and confuses 
right with wrong. You ought first to have destroyed Ts‘ao 
in order to put an end to the hatred which your father bore 
him and, when the situation had become settled, to have en- 
deavoured to redress the wrongs. Would not that have been 
well? If you persist in following this mistaken course, re- 


member the hound and the hare, both so wearied that the 


peasant got the hare.” 
From this letter Yiian T‘an saw that Liu Piao had no inten- 


tion of helping him, and feeling he alone could not withstand 


Ts‘ao, he abandoned P‘ingytian and fled to Nanp‘i, whither 
Ts‘ao pursued him. The weather was very cold and the river 
was frozen, so that his grain boats could not move. Wherefore 


' Ts‘ao ordered the inhabitants to break the ice and tow the 


350 San Guo, or 


boats. When the peasants heard the order they ran away. 
Ts‘ao angrily wished to arrest and behead them. When they 
heard this they went to his camp in a body and offered their 
heads to the sword. 


“Tf I do not kill you, my order will not be obeyed,” ‘said 


Ts‘ao. “Yet supposing I cut off your heads—but I cannot bear 
to do that. Quickly flee to the hills and hide so that my soldiers. 
do not capture you.’ 

The peasants left weeping.. Í 

Then Yiian T‘an led out his army against Ts‘ao. When beth 


sides were arrayed Ts‘ao rode to the front, pointed with his 


whip at his opponent and railed at him saying, “I treated you 
well; why then have you turned against me?” 

T‘an replied, “You have invaded my land, captured my cities 
and broken off my marriage; yet you accuse me of turning 
against you.’ 

Ts‘ao ordered Hsü Huang to go out and give battle: T‘an 
‘bade P‘€ng An accept the challenge. After a few bouts P*éng 


An was slain and T‘an, having lost, fled and went into Nanp‘i, 


where he was besieged. T‘an, panic-stricken, sent Hsin Ping 
to see Ts‘ao and arrange surrender. 

“He is nothing but a fickle-minded child,” sate Ts‘ao. “He 
is never of the same mind two days running and I cannot 


depend upon what he says. Now your brother is in my 
employ and has a post of importance, you had better remain 


here also.” 

“Sir Minister, you are in error, 
said that the lord’s honour is the servant’s glory, the lord’s 
sadness is the servant’s shame. How can I turn my back on 
the family I have so long served?” 

Ts‘ao felt he could not be persuaded and sent him back. 
P‘ing returned and told T‘an the surrender could not be ar- 
ranged and T‘an turned on him angrily calling him a traitor. 
At this unmerited reproach such a huge wave of anger welled 
up in the man’s breast that he was overcome and fell in a 
swoon. They carried him out, but the shock had been too 
severe and soon after he died. T‘an regretted his conduct 
when it was too late. 

Then Kuo T‘u said, “To-morrow when we go out to battle 
we will drive the people out in front as a screen for the soldiers 
and we must fight a winning battle.” 

That night they assembled all the common people of the 
place and forced into their hands swords and spears, At 
daylight they opened the four gates and a huge party with 
much shouting came out at each, peasantry carrying arms in 
front, and soldiers behind them. They pushed on toward 
Ts‘ao’s camps and a mélée began which lasted till near 
midday. But this was quite indecisive, although heaps of 
dead lay everywhere. 


29 


said Hsin P‘ing. “It is - 


sy 
s 


fiomance of the Three Lingooms 351 


Seeing that success was at best only partial Ts‘ao rode out 
to the hills near and thence had the drums beaten for a new 
‘attack under his own eye. Officers and men, seeing that he 
could observe them in person, exerted themselves to the utmost 
and T‘an’s army was severely defeated. Of the peasantry 
driven into the battle-field multitudes were slain. 

Ts‘ao Hung, who displayed very great valour, burst into the 
press of battle and met Yiian T‘an face to face. The two 
` Slashed and hammered at each other and T‘an was killed. 

Kuo T‘u saw that his side was wholly disorganised and tried 
to withdraw into the shelter of the city. Yo Chin saw this and 
opened a tremendous discharge of arrows so that the moat 
was soon filled with dead. 

The city fell to Ts‘ao; he entered and set about restoring 
peace and order. Then suddenly appeared a new army under 
one of Yüan Hsi’s captains. Ts‘ao led out his-men to meet 
them, but the two commanders laid down their arms and 
yielded. They were rewarded with the rank of marquis. 

Then Chang Yen, the leader of the Black Hills Brigands, 
came with ten legions and gave in his submission. He was 
made a General, Chiang-chiin. 

By an order of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s the head of Yüan T'an was 
exposed and death was threatened to any one who should 
lament for him. Nevertheless a man dressed in mourning 
attire was arrested for weeping below the exposed head 
at the north gate. Taken into Ts‘ao’s presence he said he 

i was Wang Hsiu and had been an officer in Ch‘ingchou. He 
had been expelled because he had remonstrated with T‘an, 
‘but when the news of T‘an’s death came he had come to weep 
for him. 

“Did you know of my command?” 

“I knew it.” 

“Yet you were not afraid?” 

“When one has received favours from a man in life it would 
be wrong not to mourn at his death. How can one stand in the 
world if one forgets duty through fear? If I could bury his 
body I would not mind death.” 

Ts‘ao said, “And there were many such as this in this 
district. What a pity that the Yüan family could not make 
the best of them! But if they had done so I should never 
have dared to turn my eyes toward this place.” 

The intrepid mourner was not put to death. The remains 
of Yiian T‘an were properly interred and Wang Hsiu was 
well treated and even given an appointment. 

In his new position he was asked for advice about the best 
way to proceed against Yiian Shang, who had fled to his 
brother, but he held his peace, thereby winning from T's‘ao 
renewed admiration for his constancy. “He is indeed loyal”? 
said Ts‘ao. 


352 San Kuo, or 


4 


Then he questioned Kuo Chia, who named certain officers 
who should be sent to bring about the surrender of the Ytians. 
Then five captains, to attack Yuchou along three routes, and 
other armies, were sent against Pingchou. 

The two brothers Shang and Hsi heard of Ts‘ao’s advance 
with dismay for they had no hope of successful resistance. 
Therefore they abandoned the city and hastily marched into 
Liaohsi to the Governor Wuhuan Ch‘u. But the governor was 
not disposed to incur the enmity of the powerful Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
so he called his subordinates together to swear them to support 
him and said, “I understand that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is the most: 
powerful man of the day and I am going to support him and 
those who do not go with me I shall put to death.” 

Each in turn smeared his lips with the blood of sacrifice 
and took the oath till it came to the turn of Han Héng. Instead 
he dashed his sword to the ground crying, “I have received 
great benefits from the Yiians. Now my lord has been van- 
quished; my knowledge was powerless to save him, my bravery 
insufficient to cause me to die for him; I have failed in my 
duty. But I refuse to commit the crowning act of treachery ~ 
and ally myself with Ts‘ao.” 

This speech made the others turn pale. The chief said, 
“For a great undertaking there must be lofty principles. 
However, success does not necessarily depend upon universal 
support and since Han Hêng is actuated by such sentiments 
then let him follow his conscience.”’ So he turned Han Héng . 
out of the assembly. 

Wuhuan Ch‘u then went out of the city to meet and welcome 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army and rendered his submission. He was well 
received and the title given him of Guardian of the North. 

Then the scouts came to say that the three captains had 
marched to Pingchou but that Kao Kan had occupied Hukuan 
Pass and could not be dislodged. So Ts‘ao marched thither 
himself. The defender still maintaining his position Ts‘ao 
asked for plans. Hstin Yu proposed that a band should go 
over pretending to be deserters. Ts‘ao assented and then 
called the two brothers Lu, to whom he gave whispered orders. 
They left with their companies. 

Soon they came near the pass and called out, saying, “We 
are old officers in Yiian’s armies forced into surrender to Ts‘ao. 
We find him so false and he treats us so meanly that we want 
to return to help our old master. Wherefore quickly open 
your gates to us.” 

Kao Kan was suspicious, but he let the two officers come up 
_to the pass, and when they had stripped off their armour and 

left their horses they were permitted to enter. And they said 
to Kao Kan, “Ts‘ao’s men are new to the country and not 
settled; you ought to fall upon their camp this very evening. 
If you approve. we will lead the attack.” 


\ 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 353 


Kao Kan decided to trust them and prepared to attack, 
giving the two brothers the leadership. But as they drew 
near Ts‘ao’s camp a great noise arose behind them and they 
found themselves in an ambush attacked on all sides. Real- 
ising too late that he had been the victim of a ruse, Kao 
retreated to the pass, but found it occupied by the enemy. 


-~ Kao Kan then made the best of his way to the barbarian 


chieftain Shanyu. Ts‘ao gave orders to hold the passes and 
sent companies in pursuit. 

When Kao Kan reached the boundary of Shanyu’s territory 
he met Tso-hsien, Prince of the northern tribesmen. Kao Kan 
dismounted and made a low obeisance saying, ““Ts‘ao is con- 

. quering and absorbing all the borders and your turn, O Prince, 
will come quickly. I pray you help me and let us smite together 
for the safety of the northern regions.’ 

The Prince replied, “í have no quarrel with Ts‘ac, why then 

Should he invade my land? Do you desire to embroil me with 
him?” 

He would Kave nothing to do with Kao Kan and sent him 


away. At his wits’ end Kan decided to try to join Liu Piao 


and got so far on his journey as Shanglu when he was taken 
prisoner and put to death by Wang Yen. His head was sent 
to Ts‘ao Ts'ao and Wang was created a marquis for this 


service. 
‘Thus Pingchou was conquered. Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao began to- 


‘discuss the overthrow of Wuhuan on the west. Ts‘ao Hung, 


speaking in the name of his brother officials, said, “The two 


brothers Yüan are nearly done for and too weak to be feared. 


_ They have fied far into the Sea of Sand and if we pursue them > 


thither it may bring down Liu Piao and Liu Pei upon the 
capital. Should we be unable to rescue it the misfortune would 
be immense. Wherefore we beg you to return to Hsiitu.” 
But Kuo Chia was of different advice. “You are wrong,” 
said he. “Though the prestige of our lord fills the Empire, 


_ yet the men of the desert, relying upon their inaccessibility, 


- will not be prepared against us. Wherefore I say attack, and 
we shall conquer them. Beside Yiian Shao was kind to the 
nomads and the two brothers have been more so. They must 


be destroyed. As for Liu Piao he is a mere gossip, who need. 


-not cause the least anxiety. And Liu Pei is unfit for any 
` heavy responsibility and will take no trouble over a light one. 


- You may leave the State with perfect safety and make: as long 


an expedition as you choose. Nothing will happen.” 

“You speak well, O Féng-hsiao,” said Ts‘ao. He led his 
legions, heavy and light, to the edge of the desert, with many 
waggons. 

i The expedition marched into the desert. The rolling ocean 
of yellow sand spread its waves before them and they saw far 
pod near the eddying sand pillars, and felt the fierce winds 


° 


23 


354 poke N San fuo, or 


that drove them forward. The road became precipitous. and ; 
progress difficult. Ts‘ao began to think of returning and spoke — 
thereof to Kuo Chia, who had advised the journey. Kuo had 


speedily fallen victim to the effects of the climate, and at this 
time he lay in his cart very ill. } 

Ts‘ao’s tears fell as he said, “My friend, you are suffering 
for my ambition to subdue the Shamo. I cannot bear to Eao 
you should be ill.” 


“You have always been very good to me, ’ said the sick man, 


“and I can never repay what I owe you.’ a 
“The country is exceedingly precipitous and I am thinking 


of going back; what think you?” 


Chia replied, “The success of an expedition of this kira ; 
depends upon celerity. To strike a sudden blow on a distant ~ 


spot with a heavy baggage train is difficult. To ensure success 


the need is light troops and a good road to strike quickly before 
an enemy has time to prepare. N ow you must aoe guides who ate 


know the road well.” 


Then the sick adviser was left at Ichou for treatment and k 
' they sought among the natives for some persons to serve as 
guides. One of Yiian Shao’s old captains knew those parts 


well and Ts‘ao called him and questioned him. He said, 


“Between autumn and summer this route is under water, the ~ 


shallow places too heavy for wheeled traffic, the deep parts 


insufficient for boats. It is always difficult. Therefore you ~ | 


Ne art eee 
See eee, 


would do better to return and at Lulungk‘ou cross the Pait‘an ‘ing 


Pass into the desert. Then advance to Liuch‘éng (Willow 
_.City) and smite before there is time to prepare. One sudden 


rush will settle Mao Tun.” 


For this valuable information and plan Tien Chiou was made — 


a “‘Pacificator of the North” General, and went in advance as 


iehdex and guide. Next after him came Chang Liao and Ts‘ao > 
brought up the rear. They advanced by double marches. __ 
' Tien Ch‘ou led Chang Liao to White Wolf Hill, where they z 
came upon the two Yüans with Mao Tun and a large force of 
cavalry. Chang Liao galloped to inform his chief and Tsao. 
rode up to the top of an eminence to survey the foe. He saw — 
a large mass of cavalry without any military formation ad- 


vancing in a disorderly ‘crowd. 


Said he, “They have no formation, we can easily rout them. 7 y) SM 


x 32 


Then he handed over his ensign of command to Chang Liao. a 


who, with Hsti Ch‘u, Yu Chin and Hst Huang, made a vigorous 
attack from four different points, with the result that the — 


enemy was thrown into confusion. Chang Liao rode forward 


and slew Mao Tun and the other captains gave in. The brothers — 
Yüan with a few companies of horse got away into Liaotung. 


_Ts‘ao Ts‘ao then led his army into Liuch‘éng.; For his 


services he conferred upon Tien Ch‘ou the rank of marquis ~ 
of Liut‘ing and put him over the city. But Tien Ch‘ou declined — 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms hy BDN 


the rank, saying with tears, “I am a renegade and a fugitive. 

It is my good fortune that you spared my life and how can 
I accept a price for Lulung camp? I would rather die than 
-= accept the marquisate.”’ ; 
Ts‘ao recognised that reason was on his side and conferred 


upon him another office. Ts‘ao then pacified the Shanyu chief- 


tains; collected a large number of horses and at once set out 
on the homeward march. 
The season was winter, cold and dry. For two Humare li 


there was no water, and grain also was scanty. The troops 
fed on horse flesh. "They had to dig very deep, thirty to forty | 


chang,* to find water. 
When Ts‘ao reached Ichou he rewarded those who had re- 
_monstrated with him against the expedition. 


He said, “I took some risk in going so far but by good. | 


fortune I have succeeded; with the aid of Heaven I have 
secured victory. I could not be guided by your advice but 
_ still they were counsels of safety and therefore I reward you 
to prove my appreciation of advice and that hereafter you 
may not fear to speak your minds.” 


The adviser, Kuo Chia, did not live to see the ohare of his 


lord. His coffin was placed on the bier in a hall of the govern- 


- ment offices and Ts‘ao went thither to sacrifice to his manes.. 
Ts‘ao mourned for him, saying, n Alas! Heaven has smitten oe 


“me; Féng-hsiao is dead. >» 


Then. turning to his officers he said, “You, geatlonion: are 


of the same age as myself, but he was very young to die. 


I needed him for the future and unhappily he has been > 


torn from me in the flower of his age. My heart and my 
bowels are torn with grief.” 

The servants of the late adviser presented his last testaman, 
which they said his dying hand had written, and he had told 


them to say, “If the Minister shall follow the advice given i 


herein then Liaotung will be secure.’ 
Ts‘ao opened the cover and read, a his head in agree- 
ment and uttering deep sighs. But no other man knew what 
= was written therein. 
Shortly after, Hsiahou Tun at the head. Of a. delegation 


presented a petition saying, “For a long time Kungsun K ‘ang, - 


the Prefect- of Liaotung, has been contumacious and it bodes 
ill for peace that the brothers Yiian have fled to him. Would 
‘it not be well to attack before they move against you?” 

“T need not trouble your tiger courage, gentlemen,” said 
Ts‘ao smiling. “Wait a few days and you yan see- the heads 
of our two enemies sent to me.’ 

They could not believe it. 

` As has been related the two brothers Vien alana] to the 
east with a few squadrons of horse. The Prefect of Liaotung 


* A chang is ten feet. 


356 CAL gan Buo, or 


was a son of General Kungsun Tu, “the Warlike,” as his title 
ran, He was a native of Hsiangp‘ing. When he heard that 


the Yiians were on their way to his territory he called a council | 


Š 
à 
E 

-N 
X 
i 
K 

a 
p, 
f 

k: 
a 


to decide upon his plan. At the council Kungsun Kung rose 


saying, “When Yiian Shao was alive he nourished the pian 
- of adding this district to his own. Now his sons, homeless, 
with a broken army and no officers, are coming here; it 
seems to me like the dove stealing the magpie’s nest. If 
we offer them shelter they will assuredly intrigue against us. 
I advise that they be inveigled into the city, put to death 
and their heads sent to Ts‘ ao, who will be most grateful. 
to us.’ 

eed the Prefect, “I have one fear; Ts‘ao will come against 

If so, it would be better to have the help of the Ytians 

kinsi him.” 

“Then you can send spies to ascertain whether the army is 
preparing to attack us. If it is then save them alive; if not, 
then follow my advice.” 


It was decided to wait till the. spies came back. In the | 


meantime the two Yiians had taken counsel together as they 
approached Liaotung, saying, “Liaotung has a large army 
strong enough to oppose Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. We will go thither and 


submit till we can slay the Prefect and take possession. Then > 


when we are strong enough we will attack and recover our 
own land.” 


With these intentions they went into the city. They were 


received and lodged in the guests’ quarters, but when they 
wished to see Kungsun K‘ang he put them off with the excuse 
of indisposition. However, before many days the spies return- 
ed with the news that Ts‘ao Tss‘ao’s army was quiescent and 
there was no hint of any attack. 


Then Kungsun K‘ang called the Ytians into his presence. — 


But before they came he hid swordmen and axemen behind 
the arras in the hall. When the visitors came and had made 
their salutations, K‘ang bade them be seated. 

Now it was bitter ly cold and on the couch where Shang was 
sitting were no coverings. So he asked for a cushion. The 
host surlily said, “When your heads take that long, long 
journey, will there be any cushions?” 

Before Shang could recover from his fright K‘ang shouted, 

“Why do you not begin?” 

At this out rushed the assassins and the heads of the two 
brothers were cut off as they sat. Packed in a small wooden 
box they were sent to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at Ichou. 

All this time Ts‘ao had been calmly waiting, and when his 
impatient officers had petitioned in a body that he would 
march to the capital if he intended no attack on the east, he 
told them what he was waiting for. He would go as soon as 
the heads arrived. 


Romante of the Three ¥ingdoms Vy 357 


_ In their secret hearts they laughed. But then, surely enough, 
-a messenger soon came from Liaotung bringing the heads. 
_ Then they were greatly surprised and when the messenger 
presented his letters Ts‘ao cried, “Just as Féng-hsiao said!” 

He amply rewarded the messenger and. the Governor of 
- Liaotung was made a marquis and General of the Left Wing; 
and when the officers asked what had happened, Ts‘ao told 
them what the late adviser had predicted. He read to them 
the dead officer’s testament, which ran something like this :— 
“Yiian Shang and his brother are going to Liaotung. Illus- 
trious Sir, you are on no account to attack for Kungsun K‘ang 
has long lived in fear lest the Yiians should absorb his country. 
When they arrive K‘ang will hesitate. If you attack, he will 
` save the Yiians to help him; if you wait, they will work against 
each other. This is evident.” 

The officers simply jumped with surprise to see how per- 
fectly events had been foreseen. 
= Then Ts‘ao at the head of all his officers performed a grand 
sacrifice before the coffin of the wise Kuo Chia. He had died 
_ at the age of thirty-eight, after eleven years of meritorious. 

and wonderful service in the wars. 


When Heaven permitted Kuo Chia’s birth, 
It made him ablest man on earth, 

He knew by rote ail histories, 

From him war kept no mysteries. 

Like Fan’s, his plans were quite decisive, 
As Ch‘én’s, his strokes were most incisive. 
Too soon he ran his earthly race, 

Too soon the great beam fell from place. 


` When Ts‘ao returned to Ch‘ichou he sent off the coffin of 
his late adviser to the capital where it was interred. 

Then certain of his officers said that as the north had been 
overcome it was time to settle Chiangnan. Ts‘ao was pleased 
and said that had long occupied his thoughts. 

: The last night he spent in Ch‘ichou he went to one of the 
_ corner towers and stood there regarding the sky. His only 
companion was Hsiin Yu. Presently Ts‘ao said, “That is a 
very brilliant glow there in the south. It seems too strong 
for me to do anything there.” 

“What is there that can oppose your heaven-high prestige?” 
said Yu. 

Suddenly a beam of golden light shot up out of the earth. 
“Surely a treasure is buried there,” remarked Yu. 

They went down from the city wall, called some men and 
led them to the point whence the light proceeded. There the 
men were ordered to dig. 


The southern skies with portents glow, 
The northern lands their treasures show. 


What the diggers found will appear in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


A WOMAN OVERHEARS A SECRET: 
A WARRIOR LEAPS A STREAM. 


ihe story says that the diggers at the spot whence the golden 


light proceeded presently unearthed a bronze bird. Looking 
at it, Ts‘ao turned to his companion, saying, “What is ther 


portent?” 

“You will remember that Shun’ s mother dreamed of a jade 
bird before his birth, so certainly it is a felicitous omen,” said 
Hsiin Yü. 

Ts‘ao was very pleased and he ordered forthwith the building 
of a lofty tower to celebrate the find, and they began to dig 


. foundations and cut timber, to burn tiles and to smooth bricks | 


for the Bronze Bird Tower on the banks of the Chang River. 
Ts‘ao set a year for the building. 


His younger son, Chih, said, “If you build a terraced. tower 


you should add two others, one on each side. The centre tower 


and the tallest should be ‘called The Bronze Bird Tower; the ` | 


side towers named Jade Dragon Tower and Golden Phcenix 


Tower. Then ee these by flying bridges and the effect 


will be noble.” 

“My son, your oy are very good and by and bye when the 
building is ‘complete I can solace my old age therein.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had five sons, but this one Chih was the most 
clever and his essays were particularly elegant. His father 


was very fond of him and, seeing that the young man took an | 4 


interest in the building, Ts‘ao left him with his brother P‘ei at 


Yehchün to superintend the work, while he led the army that 
had recently conquered the Yiians back to the capital. When 


he arrived he distributed rewards liberally and memorialised ` 


_ the throne obtaining the title of “The Pure Marquis” for the 
late Kuo Chia. And he took Kuo’s son to be brought up in his 
own family. 


Next he began to consider the reduction of Liu Piao’s power. 


Hsün Yü said, “The Grand Army has only just returned from 
the north and needs rest. Wait half a year that the men may 
recover from the fatigue of the campaign and both Liu Piao 
and Sun Ch‘ian will fall at the first roll of the drums.” 

Presently Ts‘ao approved of this plan and to rest: his men 
he assigned certain lands to them to till while they rested. 

Liu Piao had been very. generous to Liu Pei ever since he 
had come, a fugitive seeking shelter. One day at a banquet 


oy Seite 


= Hamance of the Three Hingdoms 359 
- there came news that two captains, who had tendered their 

_ submission, had suddenly begun plundering the people in 
_  Chianghsia. They evidently meant rebellion. ‘If they really 


rebel it will cause a lot of trouble,” said Piao, rather dismayed. 


“Do not let that trouble you, I will go and settle it,” said P‘ei. 

Pleased with this proposal, Piao told off three legions and | 
placed them under his friend, and the army marched as soon 
_as the orders were issued. In a short time it reached the scene © 


N and the two malcontents came out to fight. Yüan-tê and his 


two brothers took their stand beneath the great banner and 
_ looked over at the enemy. The two leaders were riding hand- 
-some prancing horses and Yüan-tê said, “They certainly have 
fine steeds.” 
As he spoke Chao Yün galloped out with his spear set and — 
dashed toward the enemy. Chang Wu, one of the leaders, came 
out to meet him, but the combat was very brief for Chang was 
-soon killed. Thereupon Chao Yün laid a hand upon the bridle 
_ of the fallen man’s horse to lead him back to his own side. The 


slain rebel’s:companion Ch‘én Sun at once rode after him, 


_ whereupon Chang Fei uttered a loud shout and -rode out to 
meet him. With one thrust he slew the rebel. Their followers 
now scattered and Yiian-té speedily restored order and 
returned. 

Liu Piao, grateful for this service, rode out to the boundary ` 
to welcome the victors. They re- entered the city and grand | 


banquets were instituted, at which they emptied great goblets 


-in congratulations over the victory. At one of these banquets 
` the Prefect said, “With such heroism as my brother has shown 
Chingchou has one upon whom to rely. But a source of sorrow 
is the south country Yueh, from which a raid may come at any 
time. Chang Lu and Sun Ch‘tian are to be feared.” 

“But I have three bold captains,” said Yiian-té, “quite equal 
to any task you can set them. Send Chang Fei to keep ward 
on the southern marches, Kuan Yü to guard the city against 


ae Chang Lu and Chao Yün will protect you from Sun Ch‘tian.. - 


Why need you grieve?” 
The scheme appealed strongly to the Prefect, but Ts‘ai Mao 
did not approve. So he spoke to his sister, Liu Piao’s wife, 
and insisted on the danger of putting these men in such com- 


i  manding positions all round the prefecture. The lady Ts‘ai, 
_ thus influenced by her brother, undertook to remonstrate and 


that night began by saying, “The Chingchou men seem to have ` 
a great liking for Liu Pei; they are always coming and going. 
You ought to take precautions. I do not think you should let 
them stay in the city. Why not send them on some mission?” 
_“Yiian-té is a good- man,” replied the Prefect. 
“I think others differ from you,” said the lady. í 
The Prefect said nothing but muttered to himself. Soon 
after he went out of the city to see Yüan-tê and noticed he was 


360 | Aan Kuo, or 


riding a very handsome horse. They told him it was a prize 
taken from the recently’ conquered rebels, and as he praised 
it very warmly, the horse was presented to him. Liu Piao was 
delighted and rode it back to the city. K‘uai Ytieh saw it and 
asked where it had come from. The Prefect told him it was 
a gift from Liu P‘ei and Yiieh said, “My brother Knew horses 
very well and I am not a bad judge. This horse has tear-tracks 


running down from his eyes and a white blaze on his forehead. 
He is called a tilu and he is a danger to his master. That is 


why Chang Wu was killed. I advise you not to ride him.” 


The Prefect began to think. Soon after he asked Yüan-tê — 


to a banquet and in the course of it said, “You kind'v presented 
me with a horse lately and I am most grateful, >t you may 
need him on some of your expeditions and, if you do not mind, 
I would like to return him.” - 

Yiian-té rose and thanked him. The Prefect ona 


“You have been here a long time and I fear I am spoiling 
your career as a warrior. Now Hsinyeh in Hsiangjang is _ 


no poverty-stricken town; how would you like to garrison it 
with your own men?’ 

Yiian-té naturally took the offer as a command and set out 
as soon as he could, taking leave of the Prefect the next day. 
And so he took up his quarters in Hsinyeh. When he left the 


EL ae 


_ city he noticed in the gate a person making him emphatic .— 


salutations and the man presently said, “You should not ride 
that horse.” 


Yiian-té looked at the man and recognised in the speaker 
one of the secretaries named I Chi, a native of Shanyang. So- 


he hastily dismounted and asked why. I Chi replied, “Yester- 


/ 


day I heard that K‘uai Ytieh told the Prefect that that horse 


was a tilu and brought disaster to its owner. That is why it 
was returned to you. How can you mount it again?” 

“T am deeply touched by your affection,” replied Yiian-té, 
“but a man’s life is governed by fate and what horse can 
interfere with that?” 

I Chi admitted his superior view, but thereafter he followed 
Yiian-té wherever he went. 

The arrival of Liu P‘ei in Hsinyeh was a matter of rejoicing 
to all the inhabitants and the whole administration was 
reformed. ` 

In the spring of the twelfth year the Lady Kan gave birth 


- to a son who was named Ch‘an. The night of his birth a crane - 
settled on the roof of the house, screeched some forty times — 


and then flew away westward. 
Just. at the time of birth a miraculous incense filled the 
chamber. Lady Kan one night had dreamed that she was 


looking up at the sky and the constellation of the Great Bear, ; 


Peitou, had fallen down her throat. As she conceived soon 
after she gave her son the milk-name of O-tou. 


ie each other farewell and Liu Pʻei went back to his own — 
_ place. 


While Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was absent from the capital on his 
northern expedition, Liu P‘ei went to Liu Piao and said to 


_ him, “Why do you not take this opportunity to march against 
s the capital? An empire might follow from that.” 


= “I am well placed here, ” was the reply, “Why should I 
attempt other things?” 

Yüan-tê said no more. Then the Prefect invited him into 
the private apartments to drink and while they were so 
engaged he suddenly began to sigh despondently. 

“O brother, why do you sigh thus?” asked Ytian-té. 

a have a secret sorrow that is difficult to speak about,” said 
iao. 


:- Yüan-tê was on the point of asking what it was when the 


Lady Ts‘ai came and stood behind the screen, whereat Piao 
hung his head and became silent. Before long host and guest 


That winter they heard that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had returned from 


Liuch‘éng and Liu P‘ei sighed when he reflected that his friend 
- nad paid no heed to his advice. 


Unexpectedly a messenger came from the principal city with 
a request that Liu P‘ei would go thither to consult with the 


- Prefect. So he started at once with the messenger. He was 
_ received very kindly, and when the salutations were over, the 
_ two men went into the private quarters at the rear to dine. 


- Presently the host said, “Ts‘ao has returned and he is stronger 


s 


day.’ 


than ever. Iam afraid he means to absorb this district. I am 


sorry I did not follow your advice for I have missed an 
- opportunity.” 


“In this period of disruption, with strife on every side, one 


cannot pretend that there will be no more opportunities. If 
_ you only take that what offers there will be nothing to regret.” 


- “What you say, brother, is quite to the point,” replied Liu 
Piao. 

They drank on for a time till presently Liu P‘ei noticed that 
his host was weeping, and when he asked the cause of these 
tears, Piao replied, “It is that secret sorrow I spoke of to you 
before ; I wished to tell you, but there was no opportunity that 


“O brother, what difficulty have you, and can I assist you? 
I am entirely ‘at your service.’ 

“My wife, of the Ch‘én family, bore me a son Ch‘i, my eldest. 
He grew up virtuous but weakly and unfitted to succeed me 
in my office. Later i took a wife of the Ts‘ai family, who bore 


“me a son named Ts‘ung, fairly intelligent. If I pass over the 


elder in favour of the younger there is the breach of the rule 


of primogeniture, and if I follow law and custom there are the 


intrigues of the mother’s family and clan to be reckoned with. 


= Further, the army is in the hollow of their hands. There will 
_ be trouble and I cannot decide what to do.” 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 361 


362 j = an Kuo, or 


\ 


Liu P‘ei said, “All experience proves that to set aside the 


elder for the younger is to take the way of confusion. If you oe 


fear the power of the Ts‘ai faction, then gradually reduce its . 
power and influence, but do not let doting affection lead you. | 
into making the younger your heir.” 

Piao agreed. But the Lady Ts‘ai had had a suspicion why 


her lord had summoned Liu P‘ei and what was the subject of — 3 


discussion, so she had determined to listen secretly. She was 
behind the screen when the matter was talked over and she 


conceived deep resentment against Liu P‘ei for what he had 4 
said. On his side he felt that his advice had fallen upon deaf i 
ears and he arose and walked across the room. As he did so © 


he noticed that he was getting heavy and stiff and a furtive 
tear stole down his cheek as he thought of the past. When he 


returned and sat down his host noticed the traces of weeping | Pe 


and asked the cause of his sorrow. 


“In the past I was always in the saddle and I was slender i lg 
and lithe. Now it is so long since I rode that I am getting’ — 


stout and the days and months are slipping by, wasted; I shall © i 


have old age on me in no time and I have accomplished’ nothing. ee 


So I am sad.” 
“I have heard a story that when you were at Hsucheng ato 


the season of green plums you and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao were discussing —_— 
heroes. You mentioned this name and that to him as men of 
parts and he rejected every one of them. Finally he said that 
you and he were the only two men of real worth in the whole 
country. If he with all his power and authority did not dare 
to place himself in front of you, I do not think you need grieve > 


about having accomplished nothing.” 


At this flattering speech Liu P‘ei pretended that. the He 


was getting the better of him and in a half maudlin manner | 
he replied, “If I only had a starting point then I would not É; 
trouble about any one in a worldful of fools.” > oN 
His host said no more and the guest, feeling that he had 
slipped up in speech, rose as if drunk, took leave and staggered 
out saying he must return to his lodging to recover. 
The eee has been celebrated in a poem:— 


When with crooking Enes counting, 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao reckoned up the forceful 
Men of real determination, 

Only two he found; and one was 
Yiian-té. But by inaction 

He had grown both fat and slothful; 
Yet the months and years in passing 
Fretted him with nought accomplished. 


Though Liu Piao kept silence when he heard the words of i 
Yiian-té, yet he felt the more uneasy. After the departure of 


his guest he retired into the inner quarters where he met his | E 


wife. The Lady Ts‘ai said, “I happened to be behind the 


ee Homance of the Three Ringoomg 363 


screen just now and so heard the words of Liu P‘ei. They 
betray scant regard for other people and mean that he would 
take your country if he could. If you do not remove him it 
will go ill with you.” 

Her husband made no reply, but only shook his head. Then 
the Lady Ts‘ai took counsel with her kinsman Ts‘ai Mao, who 
said, “Let me go to the guest-house and slay him forthwith, 
and we can report what we have done.” 

His sister consented and he went out, and that night told off 
a party of soldiers to do the foul deed. 
~ Now Yitian-té sat in his ladeni by the light of a single candle 
till about the third watch, when he prepared to retire to bed. 
He was startled by a knock at his door and in came I Chi, who 
had heard of the plot against his new master and had come in 


` the darkness to warn him. He related the details of the pipt 


and urged speedy departure. 
“T have not said farewell to my host; how can I go away? Ha 
said Liu P‘ei. 


“Tf you go to bid him farewell you will fall a victim to the | 


Ts‘ai faction,” said I Chi. 


So Yitian-té said a hasty good- bye to his friend, galled up his © 


escort and they all mounted and rode away by the light of the 


stars toward Hsinyeh. Soon after they had left the soldiers © j 


arrived at the guest-house, but their intended victim was 
already well on his way. 
N aturally the failure of the plot chagrined the treacherous 


Ts‘ai Mao, but he took the occasion to scribble some calumnious ` 
‘verses on one of the partitions. Then he went to see Liu Piao ~ 
to whom he said, “Liu P‘ei has treacherous intentions, as can. 
be seen from some lines written on the wall. And his hurried 


departure is suspicious.” 


Liu Piao felt doubtful, but he went to bie guest-house and ey 
- there on the wall he read this poem: ag 


. Too long, far too long I have dreamed life amway, 
Gazing at scenery day after day. 

_ A dragon can never be kept in a pond, 
He should ride on the thunder to heaven and ic 


Greatly angered by what he read, Liu Piao drew his sword 


= and swore to slay the writer. But before he had gone many 


paces his anger had already died down and he said to himself, 
“I have seen much of the man, but have never known him write 
verses. This is the handiwork of some one who wishes to sow 
discord between us.’ 

So saying he turned back and with the point of his sword 


scraped away the poem. Then, putting up his sword, he- 
. mounted and rode home. By and bye Ts‘ai Mao reminded him 


that the soldiers were awaiting orders and asked whether they 
could go to Hsinyeh and arrest Liu Pei. 
“There is no hurry,” he replied. 


364 5 Aan Kuo, or 


t 


Ts‘ai Mao saw his brother-in-law’s hesitation and again 
sought his sister. She said, “Soon there is to be the great 
gathering at Hsiangyang and we can arratge something for 
that day.” 

Next day Ts‘ai Mao petitioned ihe Prefect, saying, “I pray 
you, Sir, to attend the Full Harvest Festival at Hsiangyang ; 
it would be an encouragement to the people.” 

a have been feeling my old trouble lately ; I certainly cannot 

” replied he, “but my two sons can go to represent me and 
PE the guests.” 

“They are full young,” replied Mao, “They may make some 
mistakes.” 

“Then go to Hsinyeh and request Liu P‘ei to receive the 
guests,” said Piao. 

Nothing could have pleased Ts‘ai Mao more, for this would 
bring Liu P‘ei within reach of his plot. Without loss of time 
he sent to Ytian-té requesting him to go to preside at. the 
Festival. 

It has been said that Ytian-té ade the best of his way home 
to Hsinyeh. He felt that he had offended by that slip in speech, 
but determined to keep silence about it and attempt no explana- 
tion. So he discussed it with nobody. Then came the 
message asking him to preside at the Festival, and he needed 
counsel. 

Sun Ch‘ien said, “You have seemed worried and preoccupied 
lately and I think something untoward happened at Chingchou. 
You should consider well before you accept this invitation.” 

Thereupon Yiian-té told his confidants the whole story. 

Kuan Yü said, “You yourself think your speech offended 
the Prefect, but he said nothing to show displeasure. You 
need pay no attention to the babble of outsiders. Hsiangyang 
is quite near and, if you do not go, Liu Chinchou will begin to 
suspect something really is wrong.” 

“You speak well,” said Yüan-tê. 

Said Chang Fei, “Banquets are no good; gaPhenbes are no 
better ; it is best not to go.’ 

“Tet me take three hundred horse and foot as soe there 
will be no trouble then,” said Chao Yiin. 

“That is the best course,” said Yüan-tê. 

They soon set out for the gathering place and Ts‘ai Mee met 
them at the boundary and'was most affable and courteous, 
Soon arrived the Prefect’s sons at the head of a great company 


of officers, civil and military. Their appearance put Yüan-tê . 


more at ease. He was conducted to the guest-house and Chao 
Yün posted his men so as to guard it completely, while he 
himself, armed, remained close to his chief. 

Liu Chi said to Yiian-té, “My father is feeling unwell and 
could not come, wherefore he begs you, Uncle Liu, to preside 
‘at the various ceremonies and conduct the inspections. Nt 


TEORIN, 


“Romane of the Three Kingdoms 365 


“Really I am unfit for such responsibilities,” said Ytian-té, 
“But my brother’s command must be obeyed.” 

‘Next day it was reported that the officials from the forty- 
one departments of the nine districts had all arrived. 

Then Ts‘ai Mao said to K‘uai Yiieh, “This Liu P‘ei. is the 
villain of the age and if left alive will certainly work harm 
to us. He must be got rid of now.” 


“I fear you would forfeit everybody’s favour if you harmed > 


him,” replied K‘uai. 

“T have already secretly spoken in these terms to Prefect 
Liu,” said Ts‘ai, “and I have his word here.” 

“So it may be regarded as settled; then we can Prepare. A 
-~ Ts‘ai Mao said, “One of my brothers is posted on the road 

to the Hsien Hills from the east gate and the others are on the 
north and south roads. No guard is needed on the west as the 
T‘an Torrent is quite safeguard: enough. Even with legions 
he could not get over that.” 

K‘uai replied, “I notice that Chao Yiin never leaves him. I 
feel sure he expects some attack.” 

“T have placed five hundred men in ambush in the city.” 

“We will tell Wén P‘ing and Wang Wei to invite all the 
military officers to a banquet at one of the pavilions outside 
the city, and Chao Yün will be among them. Then will be our 
opportunity.” 

Ts‘ai Mao thought this a good device for Seire Chao Yün 
- out of the way. 

= Now oxen and horses had been slaughtered and a grand 
banquet prepared. Yüan-tê rode to the residence on the horse 
of ill omen and when he arrived the steed was led into the back 
part of the enclosure and tethered there. Soon the guests 
arrived and Yitian-té took his place as master of the feast, with 
the two sons of the Prefect, one on each side. The guests were 
all arranged in order of rank. Chao Yün stood near his lord 
` sword in hand as a faithful henchman should do. 


Then Wên and Wang came to invite Chao Yün to the ae 


-they had prepared for the military officers. But he declined. 
However, Yiian-té told him to go, and, after some demur, he 
went. Then Ts‘ai Mao perfected his final arrangements, 
placing his men surrounding the place like a ring of iron. The 
three hundred guards that formed the escort of Yiian-té were 
sent away to the guest-house. 

All were ready and awaiting the signal. At the third 
course, I Chi took a goblet of wine in his hands and 
approached Yiian-té, at the same time giving him a meaning 
look. „Then in a low voice he said, “Make an excuse to get 
away.” 

Yüan-tê understood and presen rose as if stiff with long 
sitting and went outside. There he found I Chi, who had gone 


366 Aan Kuo, or 


thither after presenting the cup of wine. I Chi then told him 
more of the plot and that all the roads were guarded except 
that to the west. And he advised him to lose no time. 

Yiian-té was quite taken aback. However, he got hold of 
the horse of ill omen, opened the door of the garden and led 
him out. Then he took a flying leap into the saddle and gal- 
loped off without waiting for the escort. He made for the 
west gate. At the gate the wardens wanted to question him, 
but he only whipped up his steed and rode through. ‘The 
guards at the gate ran off to report to Ts‘ai Mao, who quickly 
went in pursuit with a half company of soldiers. 

As has been said Yüan-tê burst out at the west gate. 
Before he had gone far there rolled before him a great river 
barring the way. It was the T‘an, many score feet in width, 
which pours its waters into the Hsiang. Its current was very 
swift. 

Yüan-tê reached the bank and saw the river was unfordable. 
So he turned his horse and rode back. Then, not far off, he 
saw a cloud of dust and knew that his pursuers were therein. 
He thought that it was all over. However, he turned again 
toward the swift river, and seeing the soldiers now quite near, 
plunged into the stream. A few paces, and he felt the horse’s 
fore legs floundering in front while the water rose over the 
skirt of his robe. Then he plied the whip “nae as crying, 
“Tilu, Tilu, I trust to you.’ 

Whereupon the good steed suddenly reared up out OE the 
water and, with one tremendous leap, was on the western bank. 
Yüan-tê felt as if he had come out of the clouds. | 

In after years the famous court official, Su T‘ung-p‘o, wrote 
a poem on this leap over the T‘an Torrent :— 


I’m growing old, the leaves are sere, 
My sun slopes westward, soon will sink, . 
And I recall that yester year ` ` 

: I wandered by T‘an River brink. 


Irresolute, anon I paused, 

Anon advanced, and gazed around, 

I marked the autumn’s reddened leaves,, 
And watched them eddying to the ground. 


I thought of all the mighty deeds 

Of him who set the House of Han 
On high, and all the struggles since, 
The battlefields, the blood that ran. 


I saw the nobles gathered round 
The board, set in the Banquet Hall; 
Amid them, one, above whose head. 
There hung a sword about to fall. 


I saw him quit that festive throng 
And westward ride, a lonely way; 
I saw a squadron follow swift, 
Intent the fugitive to slay. 


ee e O 


_I saw him reach the River T'an, 

Rint = Whose swirling current rushes by; 

ei Nia -Adown the bank he galloped fast, 

tN _ “Now leap, my steed!” I heard him cry. 

His steed’s hoofs churn the swollen stream; 
What recks he that the waves run high? 
He hears the sound of clashing steel, 

Of thundering squadrons coming nigh. 


And upward from the foaming waves 

Hse I saw two peerless beings soar: 
One was a destined western king, 

; “And him another dragon bore. 


Rot ee ty tT be Tan still rolls from east to west, 
Its roaring torrent ne’er dry. 
- Those dragons twain, Ah! where are they? , 
= Yes, where? But’there is no reply. 
= The setting sun, in dark relief — 
Wha) _ Against the glowing western sky, 
. Throws out the everlasting. hilis 
| While, saddened, here I stand and sigh. 


Men died to found the kingdoms three, 
` Which now as misty dreams remain. 
Of greatest deeds the traces oft 

É Are faint that fleeting years retain. 


£ 


y Thus Liu Pei crossed the rolling river. Then he farncd and 
looked back at the, other bank which his pursuers had just 
gained. 


“Mao. 


injury?” replied Yüan-tê. 
_ “I have never thought of auch a thing: do not listen to what 
oe people say to you.’ 


E bowstring, SO ee woipped up his steed and rode away south- 
[WEB (oe) 

T “What spirits. aiid: him? tee said Ts‘ai “Mao to his followers. 

Then he turned to go back to the city, but in the gate he saw 

Chao Yün coming out at the head of his company of guards. 


5 “By wondrous leap the dragon steed his rider’s life could save, 
i Now follows him, on Urenen see bent, his master’ s sebum brave. 


“Why did you run away from the feast?” called out Ts“ atai 


“Why did you. ans to harm one who has done you no | , 


But Ytian-té saw that ie enemy was fitting an arrow y to His Wis 


CHAPTER XX RV. or 


YUAN-TE MEETS A RECLUSE AT NANCHANG: 
TAN FU MEETS A NOBLE LORD AT HSINYEH. 


J ust as Ts‘ai Mao was going into the city he met Chao Yiin 
and his three hundred coming out. It had happened that, 
while at the banquet, Chao Yiin had noticed some movement 
of men and horses and had at once gone to the banquet-hall 
to see if all was well with his lord. Missing him from his 
place he had become anxious and gone to the guest-house. 
There he heard that Ts‘ai Mao had gone off to the west gate 
with troops. So he quickly took his spear, mounted and went, 


he and the escort, in hot haste along the same road. Meeting 


Ts‘ai Mao near the gate he said, “Where is my lord?” | 


“He left the banquet- hall quite suddenly and I Po not = 


whither he has gone,” was the reply. 


Now Chao Yün was cautious and careful and had": no desire i 
to act hastily, so he urged his horse forward till he came to - 


the river. There he was checked by a torrent without ford 


or bridge. At once he turned back and shouted after Ts‘ai » 
Mao, “You invited my lord to a feast; what means this going 


after him with a squadron of horse? pr 

Mao replied, “It is my duty to guard the officials Soho: An 
assembled here as I am the chief captain.” 

“Whither have you driven my lord?’ asked Chao. 


“They tell me he rode quite alone out through the west gate, : 


but I have not seen him.” 

Chao Yiin was anxious and doubtful. Again he rode to the 
river and looked around. This time he noticed a wet track 
on the farther side. He thought to himself that it was almost 
` an impossible crossing for a man and a horse, so he ordered 


his men to scatter and search. But they also could find no 


trace of Liu Pei. 


Chao Yün turned again to the city. By the time he had 
reached the wall Ts‘ai Mao had gone within. He then ques- - 


tioned the gate wardens, and they all agreed in saying that 


Liu Pei had ridden out at full gallop. That was all they 


knew. Fearing to re-enter the city lest he should fall into an 
‘ambush, Chao started for Hsienyeh. 

After that marvellous life-saving leap over the torrent, 
Yiian-té felt elated but rather dazed. He could not help 


feeling that his safety was due to an especial interposition 2 


of Providence. Following a tortuous path, he urged his steed 


Romance of the Three eingdoms 369 


toward Neng ‘But the sun sank to the west and his 
- destination seemed yet a long way off. Then he saw a young 
cowherd seated on the back of a buffalo and ‘playing on a 
short pipe. 

“If I were only as hapiy !” sighed Yüan-tê. 

He checked his horse and looked at the lad, who stopped his 
beast, ceased playing on the pipe and stared fixedly at the 
stranger. 

“You must be Yitian-té, the General who fought the Yellow 
Turbans,” said the boy presently. 

Yiian-té was taken aback. 

“How can you know my name, a young rustic like you living 
in such a secluded place?” said he. 

“Of course I do not know you, but my master often has 
visitors and they all talk about Yiian-té, the tall man whose 


_-hands hang down below his knees and whose eyes are very 


‘ 


prominent. They say he is the most famous man of the day, 
Now you, General, are just such a man as they talk about, and 
surely you are he.” 

= “Well, who is your master?” 

me “My master’ s name is Ssuma, a compound surname, and his 
ming is Hui; his other name is "Té-ts‘ ao. He belongs to Ying- 
cn and his Taoist appellation is Shui-ching, ‘The Water- 
` mirror? ” 

“Who are your master’s friends that you mentioned?” 
“They are P‘ang Tê-kung and P‘ang T‘ung of Hsiangyang.” 
“And who are they?” 

“Relatives. Pang Tée-kung is ten years older than my 
master; the other is five years younger. One day my master 
was up in a tree picking mulberries when P‘ang T‘ung arrived. 
They began to talk and kept it up all day, my master did not 
come down till the e ening. My master is very fond of P‘ang 


- T‘ung and calls him brother.” 


“And where does your master live?” 

“In that wood there, in front,” said the cowherd pointing 
to it. “There he has a farmstead.” 

“T really am Liu Ytian-té and you might lead me to your 
master that I may salute him.” — 
_ The cowherd led the way for about two li, when Liu Pei 
found himself in front of a farm house. He dismounted and 
went to the centre door. Suddenly came to his ear the sound 


- of a lute most skilfully played and the air was extremely 
-` beautiful. He stopped his guide and would not allow him to 


announce a visitor, but stood there rapt by the melody. 
Suddenly the music ceased. He heard a deep laugh and a 


“man appeared, saying, “Amidst the clear and subtle sounds of 


the lute there suddenly rang out a high note as though some 
noble man was near.’ 
“That is my master,” said the lad pointing. 


24 


370° Ban Huo, or , 


. Liu Pei saw before him a tall figure, slender and straight 
as a pine tree, a very “chosen vessel.” Hastening forward he 
saluted. The skirt of his robe was still wet from the river. 

“You have escaped from a grave danger to-day, Sir,” said 
“Water-mirror.” ` 

Yüan-tê was startled into silence, and the cowherd said te 
his master, “This is Liu Ytian-té.” 

“Water-mirror” asked him to enter and when they were 
seated in their relative positions as host and guest, Yüan-tê 
glanced round the room. Upon the bookshelves were piled 
books and manuscripts. The window opened upon an exquisite 


picture of pines and bamboos and a lute lay upon a stone | 


couch. The room showed refinement in its last degree. 

“Whence come you, illustrious Sir?” asked the host. 

“By chance I was passing this way and the lad pointed you 
out to me. So I came to bow in your honoured presence. 
I cannot tell what pleasure it gives me.” 

““Water-mirror” laughed. “Why this mystery? Why must 
you conceal the truth? You have certainly just escaped from 
a grave danger.” 

Then the story of the banquet and the flight was told. 


“I knew it all from your appearance,” said his host. “Your >. | 
name has long been familiar,’ continued he, “but whence. 


Hee it that, up to the present, you are only a homeless 
devil?” 


“T have suffered many a check during my life,” said Liu Pei,, 


“and through one of them, am I here now.’ 


“It should not be S05 but the reason is that you still lack the 


one man to aid you.’ 
‘I am simple enough in myself, I know; but I have ie 


Ch‘ien, Mi Chu and Chien Yung on the civil side, and for: 


= warriors I have Kuan Yü, Chang Fei and Chao Yün. These 
are all most loyal helpers and I depend upon them not a little.” 

“Your fighting men are good: fit to oppose a legion. The 
pity is you have no really able adviser. Your civilians are but 
pallid students of books, not men fitted to weave and control 
destiny.” 

“T have always yearned to find one of those marvellous re- 
cluses who live among, the hills till their day arrive. So far 
I have sought in vain.” 

“You know what the Master said, ‘In a hamlet of ten house- 
P there must be one true man.’ Can you say there is no 
man?” 

“T am simple and uninstructed; I pray you enlighten me.” 

“You have heard what the street boys sing :— 


In eight and nine begins decay, 
Four years, then comes the fateful day, 
When destiny will show the way, 
And the dragon flies out of the mire O! 


gael of the Tree faiignome 371 


l : This song was first heard whe an new reign-style was 
adopted. The first line was fulfilled when Liu Piao lost his 
first wife, and when his family troubles began. The next line © 


relates to the approaching death of Liu Piao and there is not 


a single man among all his crowd of officers who has ‘the least. 
ability. The last two lines will be fulfilled in you, General.” 
Ytian-té started up in surprise, crying, “How could such a ~ 
‘thing be?” 
“Water-mirror” continued, “At this moment the marvel- 
lously clever ones of all the earth are all here and you, Sir, 
_ ought to seek them.” 
~. “Where are they? Who are they?” said Yiian-té quickly. 
~- “Tf you could find either Fu- lung (Hidden Dragon) or 
- Fêng-ch‘u (Phoenix Fledgeling), you could restore order in 
1 the Empire.” = 
- “But who are these men?’ | 
ne host clapped his hands, smiled and said, “Good; very 
goo 29 l 
When Yüan-tê persisted and pressed home his questions 
“Water-mirror” said, “It is getting late. You might stay the 
x night here, General, and we will talk over these things to- 
morrow.’ 
He called to a lad to bring wine and food for his guest and 
_ his horse was taken to the stable and fed. After Ytian-té had 
- eaten he was shown to a chamber opening off the main room 
‘and went to bed. But the words of his host would not be 
banished and he lay there only dozing till far into the night. 
_ Suddenly he became fully awake at the sound of a knock at 
the door and a person entering. And he heard his host say 
“Where are you from, Yiian-chih?” 
Liu Pei rose from his couch and listened secretly. He heard 
the man reply, “It has long been said that Liu Piao treated 


; _ good men as good men should be treated and bad men as they 
should be treated. So I went to see for myself. But that 


- reputation is undeserved. He does treat good men correctly 
- but he cannot use them, and he treats wicked men in the right 


-~ way, all but dismissing them. So I left a letter for him and 


came away; and here I am.’ 

“Water-mirror” replied, ‘You, ‘capable enous to be the 
adviser of a king, ought to be able to find some one fit to serve. 
Why did you. cheapen yourself so far as to go to Liu Piao? 
_ Beside there is a real hero right under your eyes and you do 

not know him.” 

-~ “Tt is just as you say,” replied the stranger. 

Liu Pei listened with great joy for he thought this visitor 
` was certainly one of the two he was advised to look for. He 
would have shown himself then and there, but he thought that 
- would look strange. So he waited till daylight, when he sought 
. out his host and said, “Who was it came last night?” ` 


hh} 


372 jan Kuo, or 


ea 


“A friend of mine,” was the reply. £ ; ; 
Yiian-té begged for an introduction. “Water-mirror” said, 


ie 
É be: 
2 
4 
3 


“He wants to find an enlightened master and so he has gone 


elsewhere.” 
-When the guest asked his name his host only replied, ‘ ‘Good, 
good.” And when he asked who they were who went by. the 


names of Fu-lung and Féng-ch‘u he only elicited the same 


reply. 
Yiian-té then, bowing low before his host, begged him to 
leave the hills and help him to bring about the restoration of 


the ruling house to its prerogatives. But he replied, “Men . 


of the hills and deserts are unequal to such a task. However, 


there must be many far abier than I who will help you if you — 


seek them.” 


While they were talking they heard outside the farm the 
shouts of men and neighing of horses, and a servant came in to ` 
say that a captain with a large company of men had arrived. — 


-~ Ytian-té went out hastily to see who these were and found 
Chao Yün. He was much relieved and Chao dismounted and 
entered the house. 


“Last night, on my return to our city,” said Chao, “I could 


not find my lord, so I followed at once and traced you here. 


I pray you return quickly as I fear an attack on the city.” 


So Yiian-té took leave of his host and the whole company 


returned to Hsinyeh. Before they had gone far another troop : a 


appeared, and, when they had come nearer, they saw the two- 


brothers. They met with great joy and Yiian-té told them 
of the wonderful leap his horse had made over the torrent. 
All expressed surprise and pleasure. 


As soon as they reached the city a council was called and. 
Chao Yün said, “You ought first of all to indite a letter to | 


Liu Piao telling him all these things.” . 
The letter was prepared and Sun Ch‘ien bore it to the seat 


of government. He was received, and Liu Piao at once asked ~ 


A 


the reason of Yiian-té’s hasty flight from the festival. Where- 


upon the letter was presented and the bearer related the ~ 
machinations of Ts‘ai Mao and told of the escape and the © 


amazing leap over the torrent. Liu Piao was very angry, 
sent for Ts‘ai Mao and berated him soundly, saying, “How 
dare you try to hurt my brother?” and he ordered him out 
to execution. 


Liu Piao’s wife, Ts‘ao Mao’s sister, Dad for a remission | 


of the death penalty, but Liu Piao refused to be. appeased. 


Then spoke Sun Ch‘ien, saying, “If you put Ts“ ai to death, 


I fear Uncle Liu will þe unable to remain here.” 


Then he was reprieved, but dismissed with a severe repri- — A 


mand. * 


Liu Piao sent his elder son back with Sun Ch‘ien to apologise, 


When Ch‘i reached Hsinyeh, Yiian-té welcomed him and gave 


$ 


Romance of the Three Liingooms 373 


a banquet in. his honour. After some little drinking, the chief 
guest suddenly began to weep and presently said, “My step- 
mother always cherishes a wish to put me out of the way, 
and I do not know how to avoid her anger. Could you advise 
me, Uncle?” 

Yiian-té exhorted him to be careful and perfectly filial and 


nothing could happen. Soon after the young man took his 


leave, and wept at parting. Yiian-té escorted him well on his 
way and, pointing to his steed, said, “I owe my life to this 
horse: had it not been for him I had been already below the 
Springs.” 

“It was not the streneth of the horse, but your noble fortune, 


~~ Uncle.” 


_.. They parted, the young man weeping bitterly. On re-enter- 
- ing the city Ytian-té met a person in the street wearing a 
hempen turban, a cotton robe confined by a black girdle, and 
black shoes. He came along singing a song. 
ie The universe is riven, alack! now nears the end of all, 
er The noble mansion quakes, alack! what beam can stay the fall? 
A wise one waits his lord, alack! but hidden in the glen, 
The seeker knows not him, alack! nor me, of common men. 
Yuan- tê listened. “Surely this is one of the men ‘Water- 
- mirror’ spoke of,” thought he. 
He dismounted, spoke to the singer end invited him into his 


a residence. Then when they were seated he asked the stranger’s 


name. | 

“I am from Yingshang and my name is Tan Fu. I have 
known you by repute for a long time and they said you appre- 
ciated men of ability. I wanted to come to you but every way 


of getting an introduction seemed closed. So I bethought me — 


of attracting your notice by singing that song in the market 


_ płace.” 


Yiian-té thought he had found a treasure and treated the 


newcomer with the greatest kindness. Then Tan Fu spoke 


of the horse that he had seen Ytian-té riding and asked to look 
- at him. So the animal was brought round. 
“Ts not this a tilu?” said Tan Fu. “But though he i isa pod 
- steed he risks his master. You must not ride him.” 


“He has already fulfilled the omens,” said Ytian-té, and he 


related the story of the leap over the "torrent, 

“But this was saving his master, not risking him; he will 
surely harm some one in the end. But I can tell you how to 
avert the omen.’ 

“I should be glad to hear it,” said Ytian-té. 

“If you have an enemy against whom you bear a grudge, 
- give him this horse and wait till he has fulfilled the evil omens 
on this man: then you can ride him in safety.” 
= Yüan-tê changed colour. ‘What, Sir! You are but a new 

. acquaintance and you. would advise me to take an evil course 


4 


374 Dan uo, or 


\ 


and to harm another for my own advantage? No,. Sir! I cannot 


listen.” 

_ His guest smiled. “People said you were virtuous. I could 

not ask you directly, so I put it that way to test you.” 
Yüan-tê’s expression changed.: He rose and returned the 


compliment, saying, “But how can I be AS while I lack 


your teaching?” 
“When I came here, I heard the people saying: 


Since Liu came here, O blessed day! 
Weve had good luck: long may he stay! 


So you see the effects of your virtue extend to the ordinary 
people.” 

Thereupon Tan Fu was made Organiser in Chief of the army. 

The one idea that held Ts‘ao Ts‘ao after his return from 
Ch‘ichou was the capture of Chingchou. He sent Ts‘ao Jên 
and Li Tien, with the two brothers Lii who had surrendered, 


to camp at Fanch‘éng with three legions and so threaten te 
Chingchou and Hsiangyang. Thence he sent spies to find out — 


the weak points. 
Then the two Lüs petitioned Ts‘ao Jên saying, “Liu Pei is 
strengthening his position at Hsinyeh and laying. in large 


supplies. Some great scheme is afoot and he should be ` 
checked. Since our surrender we have performed no note- — 
worthy service and, if you will give us half a legion; we promise 


to bring you the head of Liu Pei.” 

Ts‘ao Jén was only too glad, and the expedition: set out. 
The scouts reported this to Yüan-tê who turned to Tan Fu 
for advice. 


Tan Fu said, “They must not be permitted to cross the ee 
boundary. Send your two brothers right and left, one to 


attack the enemy on the march, the other to cut off the retreat. 
You and Chao Yiin will make a front attack.” 


The two brothers started and then Yiian-té went out at the 


gate with three companies to oppose the enemy. Before they 
had gone far they saw a great cloud of dust behind the hills. 
This marked the approach of the brothers Lii. Presently, 
both sides being arrayed, Yiian-té rode out and stood by his 


standard. He called out, “Who are you who thus would a i 


encroach on my territory ? 2 


a: 


“T am the great general Lu K‘ uang, and I have the orders of 


the minister to make you prisoner,” said the leader. — 

Ytian-té ordered Chao Yün to go out, and the two captains 
engaged. Very soon Chao had disposed of his opponent and 
Yiian-té gave the signal to attack. Lü Hsiang could not 
maintain his position and led his men off. Soon his men 


found themselves attacked by an army rushing in from the oe 


side led by Kuan Yü. The loss was more than a half and the: 


remainder fled for safety. 


_ About ten li farther on they found their retreat barred by 
an army under Chang Fei, who stood in the way with a long 
spear ready to thrust. Crying out who he was, he bore down 
upon Lü Hsiang, who was slain without a chance of striking 


a blow. The men again fled in disorder. They were pursued 


by Yüan-tê and the greater part killed or captured. 
_ Then Yiian-té returned into his own city where he rewarded 


Tan Fu and feasted his victorious soldiers. Some of the: 


defeated men took the news of the deaths of the leaders and 
the capture of their comrades to Ts‘ao Jén. 

Ts‘ao Jê, much distressed, consulted his colleague who 
advised staying where they were and holding on till reinforce- 
~ ments could arrive. 

“Not so,” said Ts‘ao Jên. “We cannot support calmly the 
` death of two leaders and the loss of so many men. We must 
avenge them quickly. Hsinyeh is but a crossbow-slug of a 
_ place and not worth disturbing the Minister for.” 

“Liu Pei is a man of metal,” said Li Tien. “Do not esteem 

him lightly.” 

=- “What are you afraid of?” said Jên. 

__. “The Rule of War says ‘To know your enemy and yourself 
is the secret of victory,’ ” replied Tien. “I am not afraid of 
the battle, but I do not think we can conquer.’ 

“You are a traitor!” cried Jên angrily. “Then I will capture 
- Liu Pei myself.” Re 
“Do so; and I will guard this city,” said Tien. é 
“JF you do not go with me, it is a proof that you are a 
 traitor,”’ retorted Ts‘ao Jên. __ 

At this reproach, Li Tien felt constrained to join the expedi- 


tion. So they told off two and a half legions with which they 


erossed the river for Hsinyeh. 


The officers all keenly felt the shame of many slain, 
The Chief determines on revenge and marches out again. 


What measure of success the expedition met with will be 
related i in ti next chapter. 


4 


‘Gea Romance of the Three ingooms 375 


CHAPTER XXXVI.» 


CAPTURE OF FANCH‘ENG: 
CHUKO LIANG RECOMMENDED. 


Li hot anger, Ts‘ao Jén lost no time in marching out to avenge 
the loss of so many of his army. He hastily crossed the river 
to attack Hsingyeh and trample it in the dust. 

When Tan Fu got back into the city he said to his master, 
“When Ts‘ao Jên, now at Fanch‘éng, hears of his losses, he 
will try to retrieve them and will come to attack us.” 

“What is the counter move?” asked Ytian-té. 

“As he will come with all his force his own city will be left 
undefended: we will surprise it.” 

“By what ruse?” 

The adviser leaned over and whispered to his chief. What- 
ever the plan was it pleased Yiian-té, who made arrangements. 
Soon the scouts reported Ts‘ao Jén crossing the river. with a` 
mighty host. 

“Just.as I guessed,” said Tan Fu, hearing of it. 

Then he suggested that Yüan-tê should lead out one army. 
against the invaders. He did so, and, when the formation 
was coiiplete, Chao Yün rode to the front as champion and 
challenged the other side. 

Li Tien rode out and engaged. At about the tenth bout 
Li Tien found he was losing and retired toward his own side. 


Chao Yün pressed after him, but was checked by a heavy - 
discharge of arrows from the wings. Then both sides stopped _ 


the battle and retired to their camps. 

Li Tien reported to his chief that their opponents were 
brave, very full of spirit, and that they would be hard to 
overcome and advised a retreat on Fanchéng. 

Ts‘ao Jén angrily replied, “You damped the men’s spirits 
before we started, and now you betray us. You have been 
bought and you deserve death.” 

He called in the executioners and they led away their victim. 
But the other officers came to intercede and Tien was spared. 
However, he was transferred to the command of the rear, while 
Ts‘ao Jén himself led the attack. 

Next day the drums beat an advance and T's‘ao Jê én, having 
drawn up his men, sent a messenger over to ask if his opponent 
recognised his plan of-array. So Tan Fu went on a hill and 
looked over it. Then he said to Liu Pei “The arrangement is | 
called ‘The Eight Docked Gates,’ and each ‘gate’ has a name. 


x 


Romance of the Three tingdoms 377 


Ify you enter by one of the three named ‘ Birth, ’ ‘Bellevue’ and 


‘ Expanse’ you succeed: if by one of the ‘gates’ ‘Wounds,’ 


“Fear, or ‘ Annihilation,’ you sustain injuries. The other 


two ‘ gates ’ are named ‘ Obstacles ’ and ‘ Death,’ and to enter 
them means the end. Now, though the eight ‘ gates’ are all 
there quite correct, the central ‘ key-post’ is lacking and the 


formation can be thrown into confusion by entry from the 


south-east and exit due west.” 

Wherefore certain orders were issued and Chao Yin, leading 
half a company, rode out on his prancing steed to break the 
array. He burst in, as directed, at the south-east and, with 
great clamour and ‘fighting, reached the centre. Ts‘no Jén 
made for the north, but Chao Yün, instead of following. him; 
made a dash westward and got through. Thence he turned 


_ round to the south-east again and smote till Ts‘ao Jén’s army 


was in disarray. A general advance was signalled and the 


_defeat was severe. The beaten enemy retired. 


army since my formation Was So quickly broken, 


Tan Fu forbade pursuit and they returned. 

The loss of the battle convinced Ts‘ao Jén of the wisdom of 
his colleague and he sent for him to consult. 

“They certainly have some very able person in Liu Pei’s 
? said Ts‘ao 
Jên. 
“My chief anxiety is about Fanch‘éng,” said li Tien. 

“I will raid their camp this night,” said Jên. “If I succeed 
we will decide upon what should be done next. If I fail, we 
will return to Fanch‘éng.”’ 

“The camp will be well prepared against such a thing and 


you will fail,” said Li. 


“How can you expect to fight successfully: when you are so 
full of doubts?” said Jén, angrily. 

He held no more converse with his cautious colleague, but 
himself took command of the van and set out. Tien was 
relegated to the rear. The attack on the enemy’s camp was 


fixed for the second watch. 


` Now as Tan Fu was discussing plans with his chief a whirl- 


` wind went by, which Fu said foretold a raid on the camp. 


“How shall we meet it?” said Yiian-té. 
“The plans are quite ready,” was the reply. 

He whispered them to the chief. So at the second watch, 
when the enemy arrived, they saw fires on all sides; the 
stockades and huts burning. Ts‘ao Jén understood at once 
that all hope of a surprise was vain and he turned to get away 
as quickly as possible. This was the signal for Chao Yiin to 
fall on and that cut his return road. He hastened north toward 
the river, and reached the bank, but, while waiting for boats 


3 to cross the stream, up came Chang Fei and attacked. 


By dint of great efforts and with the support of his colleague 
he got into a boat, but most of the men were drowned in the 


378 San uo, or 


stream. As soon as he got to the farther shore he bolted for 4 


Fanch‘éng. He reached the wall and hailed the gate, but, 


instead of a friendly welcome, he heard the rolling of drums, . 


which was soon followed by the appearance of a body of men. 
Kuan Yü led them. 

“T took the city a long time ago,” shouted Kuan Yü. 

This was a severe shock to Jén, who turned to flee. As soon 
as he faced about Kuan Yu attacked and killed many of his 
men. The remnant hastened to Hsiich‘ang. On the road the 
beaten general wondered who had advised ne opponents with 
such success. 

While the defeated general had to find his way back to the 
capital, Yiian-té had scored a great success. Afterwards he 
marched to Fanch‘éng, where he was welcomed by the magis- 
trate Liu Pi, himself a scion of the ruling family, who had 


been born in Changsha. He received Yiian-té as a guest in 


his own house and gave banquets and treated him exceedingly 
well. 
In the train of the magistrate, Yiian-té saw a very handsome 
and distinguished- looking young man, and asked who he was. 
Liu Pi replied, “He is my nephew, K‘6u Féng, an orphan, 
whom I am taking care of.” 


Ytian-té had taken a great liking for the lad and proposed ` 


to adopt him. His guardian was willing, and so the adoption 
was arranged. The young man’s name was changed to Liu 


Fêng. When Yiian-té left, he took his adopted son with him. - 


He was then made to bow before Kuan Yü and Chang Fei as 
uncles. 
Kuan Yü was doubtful of the wisdom of adopting another 


son, saying, “You have a son; why do you think it neccessary | 


to adopt another? It may cause confusion.” ; 

“How? I shall treat him as a father should and he will 
serve me as befits a son.’ 

Kuan Yü was displeased. Then Yiian-té and Tan Fu began 
further discussions of strategy and they decided to leave a 
guard in Fanch‘éng and to return to Hsinyeh. — 

In the meantime Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s defeated generals had gone 
back. When they saw the Minister, Ts‘ao Jén threw himself 


on the ground weeping and acknowledging his faults. He > 


told the tale of his losses. 

“The fortune of war,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. “But I should like 
to know who laid Liu Pei’s plans.” i 

“That was Tan Fu,” said Jên. 

“Who is he?” asked Ts‘ao. 


Ch‘éng Yü said, “The man is not Tan Fu. When young ~ 


this man was fond of fencing and used to take up the quarrels 
of other men and avenge their wrongs. Once, after killing 
his man, he let down his hair, muddied his face and was trying 
to escape when a lictor caught him and questioned him. He 


a e ENS 


iomance of the Three kingdoms l B19) 


would not reply. So they carted him through the streets beat- 
- ing a drum and asking if any one recognised him. Nobody 
dared own to knowing him, if they did so. However, his ae 
- companions managed to release him secretly and he ran away’ i A 
under some other name. Then he turned to study and wan- i 
dered hither and thither wherever scholars were to be found. 
He was a regular disputant with Sstma Hui. His real name ae 
is Hsti Shu (Yiian-chih) and he comes from Yingchou., Tan SIA 
Fu is merely an assumed name.” Y 
“How does he compare with ounaelt 2” asked Ts‘ao. 
“Ten times cleverer.” 
“It is a pity. . If able men gather to Liu Pei his wings will 
goon grow. What is to be done?” 
_ “Hsti Shu is there now; but if you wanted him it would not. 
be difficult to call him,” replied Hsiin Yu. canes 
_ “How could I make him come?” said Ts‘ao. Re: 
“He is noted for his affection for his mother. His father Ho 
` died young, leaving his mother a widow with one other son. A 
- Now that son is dead and his mother has no one to care for ; 
her. If you sent and got his mother here and told her to write } 
and summon her son he would surely come.” | Reape fi 
Ts‘ao sent without loss of time and had the old lady brought 
_ to the capital, where he treated her exceedingly well. Presently 
_he said, “I hear you have a very talented son, who is now at 
- Hsinyeh helping on that rebel Liu Pei against the government. BE 
_ There he is like a jewel in a muck-heap; it is a pity. Supposing pee 
you were to call him, I could speak of him before the Emperor 
-and he might get an important office.” A 
' Ts‘ao bade his secretaries bring along the “four precious 
things of the SaN with which the dame could write to her ` 


- son. 


“What sort of a man is Liu Pei?” asked she. 

Ts‘ao replied, “A common sort of person from P‘eichiin, 
irresponsible enough to style himself Imperial Uncle, and so 
claiming some sort of connection with the Hans. He is neither 
trustworthy nor virtuous. People say he is a superior man as 
far as externals go, but a mean man by nature.” 
= The dame answered in a hard voice, “Why do you malign 

him so bitterly? Every one knows he is a descendant of one 
of the Han Princes and so related to the House. He has 
eondescended to take a lowly office and is respectful to all 
men. He has a reputation for benevolence. Every one, young 
and old, cowherds and firewood cutters, all know him by name 
and know that he is the finest and noblest man in the world. 
If my son is in his service, then has he found a fitting master. 
_ You, under the name of a Han minister, are really nothing but 
a Han rebel. Contrary to all truth you tell me Ytian-té is a Ba 
_ rebel, whereby you try to induce me to make my son leave the ma 
light for darkness. Are you devoid of all sense of shame?” 


380 San Kuo, or 


As she finished speaking she picked up "the MESON to Sia 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. This so enraged him that he forgot himself and 


the need for caution and bade the executioners lead off the old 3 


‘woman and put her to death. The adviser Ch‘éng Yü, however, 
stopped this act of folly by pointing out the effect it would 
have on his reputation and how it would enhance ‘hers, beside 
adding a keen desire for revenge to the motives which led 
Hsü Shu to labour inthe interest of Liu Pei. He closed his 
remarks saying, “You had better keep her here so that Hsü 
Shu’s body and his thoughts may be in different places. ‘He 
can not devote all his energies to helping our enemy while his 


mother is here. If you keep her I think I can persuade the 


son to come and help you.’ : 

So the outspoken old lady was saved. She was given 
quarters and cared for. Daily Ch‘éng Yü went to ask after 
her health, falsely claiming to being a sworn brother of her 


son’s, and so entitled to serve her and treat her as a filial son — 
would have done. He often sent her:gifts and wrote letters 
to her so that she had to write in reply. And thereby he | 


learned her handwriting so that he could forge a “home” 
letter. When he could do this without fear’ of detection he 


wrote one and sent it by the hand of a trusty en to 


Hsinyeh. 


One day a man arrived enquiring for one Tan Fu, a secre- ` 


tary; he had a letter from home for him. The soldiers. led 
him to Tan Fu. The man said he was an official carrier of- 
letters and had been told to bring this one. Tan Fu aney 
tore it open and read :— k 


(ers “On your brother’s death recently I was left alone. no Plase 
was near and I was lonely and sad. To my regret, the Minister 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao inveigled me into coming to the capital, and now he ~ 


says you are a rebel and he has thrown me into bonds. However, 
thanks to Ch‘éng Yii, my life has been spared so far, and, if you 
would only come and submit too, I should be quite safe. When this 
reaches you, remember how I have toiled for you and come at once, 
that you may prove yourself a filial son. We may together find 
some way of escape to our own place and avoid the dangers that 


threaten me. My life hangs by a thread and I look to you to save ~ 


me. You will not require a second summons.’ 


Tears gushed from Hsii Shu’s eyes as he read, and with 3 


the letter in his hand he went to seek his chief, to whom he 
told the true story of his life and how he had joined Yüan-tê. 
“I heard that Liu Piao treated men well and went to him. 
I happened to arrive at a time of confusion. I saw he was 
of no use, so I left him very soon. I arrived at the retreat 
of Ssima Shui-ching (‘Water-mirror’) late one night and told 
him, and he blamed me for not knowing a master when I saw 
one. Then he told me of you and I sang that wild song in the 


streets to attract your attention. You took me: you used me. — 
But now my. aged mother is the victim of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s wiles. 


MT PO Te LORE Ne, 


ey ELEL ee a es eee E 


hie n 


Se a a ne a T ee 


ee ee ee oe 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 381 


- She is in prison and he threatens to do worse. She has written 
_to call me and I must go. I hoped to be able to render you 
_ faithful service, but, with my dear mother a captive, I should 
_ be useless. Therefore I must leave you and hope in the future © 
to meet you again.’ 
Yüan-tê broke into loud moans when he orare that his 
- adviser was to leave. 
“The bond between mother and son is divine,” said he, “and 
I do not need to be reminded where your duty lies. When you 
have seen your venerable mother perhaps I may have again 
the happiness of receiving your instruction.” 
Having said farewell, Hsü Shu prepared to leave at once. 
However, at Yüan-tê’s wish he consented to stay over the night. 
Then Sun Ch‘ien said privately to his master, “Hsü Shu is 
‘indeed a genius, but he has been here long enough to know 
all our secrets. If you let him go over to Ts‘ao, he will be 
- in his confidence and that will be to our detriment. You ought 
to keep him at all costs and not let him go. When Ts‘ao sees 
he does not come he will put the mother to death, and that 
_ will make Hsii Shu the more zealous in your service, for he © 
will burn to avenge his mother’s death.” 
“TY ecannot do that. It would be very cruel and vile to procure 
the death of his mother that I might retain the son’s services. 
If I kept him it would lead to a rupture of the parental lien, 
and.that would be a sin I would rather die than commit.” 
= Both were grieved and sighed. Yitian-té asked the parting 
guest to a banquet, but he declined saying, “With my mother 
-a prisoner I can swallow nothing, nay, though it were brewed 
from gold or distilled from jewels.” 
“Alas! your departure is as if I lost both my hands,” " paid 
Yiian-té. “Even the liver of a dragon or the marrow of a 
phoenix would be bitter in my mouth.” 
- They looked into each other’s eyes’ and wept, They sat 
silent till dawn. When all was ready for the journey the two 
rode out of the city side by side. At Long Pavilion they dis- 
mounted to drink the stirrup cup. Yuiian-té lifted the goblet 
and said, “It is my mean fortune that separates me from you, 
` but I hope that you may serve well your new lord and become 
famous.” 
Hsü Shu wept as he replied, “I am but a poor ignorant 
person whom you have kindly employed. Unhappily I have 
to break our intercourse in the middle, but my venerable 
mother is the real cause. Though Ts‘ao Ts‘ao use all manner 
of means to coerce me, yet will I never plan for him.” 
“After you are gone I shall only bury myself in the hills and 
hide in. the forests,” said Yuan- tê. 
"Tan Fu said, “I had in my heart for you the position of 
leader of the chieftains, but my plans have been altogether 
upset by my mother. I have been of no advantage to you nor 


382 | San Huo, or, 
ae should I do any good by remaining. But you ought to seek . ` 
eh some man of lofty wisdom to help you in your great. emprise. Agee 
; It is unseemly to be downcast.” ' è 

“I shall find none to help better than you, my master.” 4 
“How can I permit such extravagant praise?” said Tan Fu. 
“T am only a useless blockhead.” i 
As he moved off he said to the followers, “Officers, I hope © i 
you will render the Princely One good service, whereby to í 
write his name large in the country’s annals and cause his fame 
to glow in the pages of history. Do not be like me, a man who : 
has left his work half done.” g 
They were all deeply affected. Ytian-té could not bring . 
himself to part from his friend. He escorted him a littl  — 
further, and yet a little further, till Shu said, “I will not K 
trouble you, O Princely One, to come further. Let us say our. 
farewell here.” . 
i 

; 


Yüan-tê dismounted, took Hsü Shu by the hands and said, 
“Alas! we part. Each goes his way and who knows if we 
shall meet again?” 

His tears fell like rain and Shu wept also. But the last = 
goodbyes were said and when the traveller had gone Yüan-tê 
stood gazing after the little party and watched it slowly dis-. 
appear. At the last glimpse he broke into lamentation. eee 

veo >. “Ae is gone!’ What shall I do?” : 
bP LS! One of the trees shut out the travellers from his sight end he 
an he testily pointed at it, saying, “Would that I could cut down 

every tree in the countryside!” HOREN 

“Why?” said his men. ; 

“Because they hinder my sight of Hsü Yüan-chih. if 

Suddenly they saw Hst Shu galloping back. : 

Said Yüan-tê, “He is returning; can it ‘be that he is going 

Go stay ete 

So he hastened forward to meet him and when they got ae 
near enough he cried, “This return is surely for no slight — 
reason.’ oe 

Checking his horde Hsti Shu said, “In the turmoil of my — A 
feelings I forgot to say one word. There i isa man of wonderful . — 
skill living about twenty li from the city of Hsiangyang, why i 
not seek him?” A 

“Can I trouble you to ask him to visit me?” 

| “He will not condescend to visit you; you must go to him. 
‘5 But if he consent you will be as fortunate as the Chous when 
f ae got, the aid of Lü Wang, or Han when Chang Liang came i 
o help { 
“How does the unknown compare with yourself?” ; 
“With me? Compared with him I am as a worn-out cart- 
horse to a kilin, an old crow to a phoenix. This man is of | 
the same kidney as Kuan Chung and Yo I but, in my opinion, 
he is far their superior. He has the talent ‘to measure the: 4 


“Romance of the See EEEE ; 383 


heavens and mete the earth; hè is a man who Guaeutanous 
every other in the world.” | 
“I would know his name.’ 


“He belongs to Yangtu 3 Langya; and his name, a double 
name, is Chuko Liang. His minor name is K‘ung-ming. He 


is of good family. His father was an official but died young 
and the young fellow went with his uncle to Chingchou, the 
_ Prefect of which was an oid friend of his uncle’s, and he 
became settled there. Then his uncle died and he, with a 
younger brother, Chiin, were farmers. They used to amuse 
themselves with the composition of songs in the ‘Old Father 
Liang’ style. 

“On their land was a ridge of hills called the Sleeping 
Dragon and the elder of the two took it as a name and called 
- himself ‘Master Sleeping Dragon.’ This is your man; he is 
. a veritable genius. You ought really to visit him and if he 
will help you, you need feel no more anxiety about peace in 
the Empire.” 

“*Water-mirror’ spoke that time of two men, Fu-lung and 
Féng-ch‘u, and said if only one of them could be got to help 

me all would be well. Surely he, whom you speak of, is one 
of them.” ) 
? “Féng-ch‘ u, or ‘Phoenix Fledging,’ is ‘Prong Tung’: and 
-Fu-lung, or “Hidden Dragon,’ is ‘ Chuko K‘ung-ming.’ ” 
Ytian-té jumped with delight, “Now at last I know who the 
mysterious ones are. How I wish they were here! But for 
- you I should have still been like a blind man,” said he. 

Some one has celebrated in verse this interview where Hsii 
j Shu from horseback recommended K'ung-ming : ii 


Yiian-té heard that his able friend 
Must leave him, with saddened heart, 

For each to the other had grown very dear, 
Both wept when it came to part. 

But the parting guest then mentioned a name 
That echoed both loud ane deep, 

Like a thunder clap in, a spring-time sky, 
And there wakened a dragon from sleep. 


Thus was the famous K‘ung-ming recommended to the lord ; 


he was to serve, and Hsü Shu rode away. 

Now Yiian-té understood the speech of the hermit Ssŭma 
Hui, and he woke as one from:a drunken sleep. At the head of 
his officers, he retook the road to the city and having prepared 
rich gifts set out, with his brothers, for Nanyang. 

Under the influence of his emotions at parting Hsü Shu 
had mentioned the name and betrayed the retreat of his 
friend. Now he thought of the possibility that K‘ung-ming 
would be unwilling to play the part of helper in Yiian-té’s 
scheme, so he determined to go to visit him. He therefore 
took his way to Reposing Dragon yk and dismounted at 


zs Oy 


384 ie San Ruo 


the Cottage. Asked why he had come, he replied, “JI wished 
to serve Liu Pei of Hsiangchou but my mother has been 
imprisoned by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and has sent to call me. There- 
fore I have had to leave him. At the moment of parting I — 
commended you to him. You may expect him speedily and 
I hope, Sir, you will not refuse your aid but will consent to 
use your great talents to help him.” 

K‘ung-ming showed annoyance and said, “And so you have 
made me the victim of your sacrifice.” 

So saying he shook out his sleeves and left the room. The. 
guest shamefacedly retired, mounted his horse and hastened 
on his way to the capital to see his mother. 


To help the lord he loved right well, 


He summoned the aid of another, ; ae 


When he took the distant homeward way, 
At the call of a loving mother. 


What was the sequel will appear in the following chapters.. 


s 


raf 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


ANOTHER SCHOLAR INTRODUCED: 
THE THREE VISITS TO THE RECLUSE. 


Pe fas been said Hsü Shu hastened to the capital. When- 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao knew he had arrived he sent two of his confidants 
to receive him and so he was led first to the minister’s palace. 
“Why did such an illustrious scholar as you bow the knee to 
_ Liu Pei?” said Ts‘ao. 

“I am young and I fied to avoid the results of certain 
escapades. I spent some time as a wanderer and so came to 
Hsinyeh where I became good friends with him. But my- 
mother is here and when I thought of all her affection I could 
no longer remain absent.” 

“Now you will be able to take care of your mother at all 
times. And I may have the SAn of receiving your 
instruction.” 

“Hsü Shu then took his leave and hastened to his mother’s 
dwelling. Weeping with emotion he made his obeisance to 
her at the door of her room. 

But she was greatly surprised to see nent and said, “What 
-have you come here for?” 

“I was at Hsinyeh, in the service of Liu of Yuchou hen 
I received your letter. I came immediately.” 

His mother suddenly grew very angry. Striking the table 
she cried, “You shameful and degenerate son! For years 
you have been a vagabond in spite of all my teaching. You 
are a student and know the books. You must then know that 
loyalty and filial piety are often opposed. Did you not recog- ` 
nise in Ts‘ao a traitor, a man who flouts his king and insults - 
the mighty ones? Did you not see that Liu Pei was virtuous 
and upright as all the world knows? Moreover, he is of the — 
House of Han and when you were with him you were serving 
a fitting master. Now on the strength of a scrap of forged 
writing, with no attempt at any enquiry, you have left the 
light and plunged into darkness and earned a disgraceful 
reputation. Truly you are stupid! How can I bear to look 
upon you? You have besmirched the fair fame of your fore- 
fathers and are of no use in the world.” 

The son remained bowed to the earth, not daring to lift his 
eyes while’ his mother delivered this vilifying tirade. As she 
said the last word she rose suddenly and left the room. Soon 


25 


386 FER Han Buo, or, 


after one of the servants came out to say she had hanged - 
herself. Her son rushed in to try to save her, but was too late. | 


A eulogy of her conduct has been written thus :— 


Wise Mother Hsü, fair is your fame, -7 » 
The storied page glows with your name, 
From duty’s path you never strayed, 
The family’s renown you made. 
To train your son no pains you ater 
For your own body nothing cared. 

` You stand sublime, from us apart, 
Through simple purity of heart. 
Brave Liu Pei’s virtues you extolled, 
You blamed Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, the basely ‘bold. 

- Of blazing fire you felt no fear, 
You blenched not when the sword came near, 
But dreaded lest a wilful son 
Should dim the fame his fathers won. 
Yes, Mother Hsü was of one mould 
With famous heroines of old, ' 
Who never shrank from injury, 
And even were content to diè. - 
Fair meed of praise, while still alive, 
Was yours, and ever will survive. — 
Hail! Mother Hsti, your memory, 
While time rolls on, shall never die. 


At sight of his mother dead Hsii Shu fell in a swoon and © | 


only recovered consciousness after a long time. By and bye 


Ts‘ao heard of it and sent mourning gifts, and in due course > 


went in person to condole and sacrifice. The body was interred 
on the south of the capital and the dead woman’s unhappy 


son kept vigil at her tomb. He steadily rejected all gifts from | 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

At that time Ts‘ao was contemplating an attack on the 
south. His advisers dissuaded him, saying he should await 
milder weather ; and he yielded. But he began to prepare, and 


led the river waters aside to form a lake, which he called the 


Training Lake, where he could accustom his men to fight on 
the water. 

As has been said Ytian-té prepared gifts to offer to Chuko 
Liang on his visit. One day his servants announced a stranger. 
of extraordinary appearance, wearing a lofty head-dress and a 
wide belt. 

“Surely this is he” said Yüan-tê, and, hastily arranging his - 
dress, he went to welcome the visitor. But the first glance 
showed him that it was the recluse of the mountains, Sstima 
Hui. However, Ytian-té was glad to see him and led him into 
the inner apartment as he would an old friend. There Pei 


conducted him to the seat of honour and made his obeisance, 


saying, ‘Since leaving you that day in the mountains I have 


been overwhelmed, with military preparations and so have > 


failed to visit you as courtesy demanded. . Now that the 


~ 


iy 


Eag ie 
- EAA 


Cerati has cendaa upon me I hope this dereliction of 
_ duty may be pardoned.” 
aera § hear Hsü Yiian-chih is here. I have come expressly to 
_ see him,” replied the visitor bluntly. 

“He has lately left for Hsiich‘ang. A messenger came with — 
a letter telling of the imprisonment of his mother. A 
“Then he has just fallen into Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s trap, for that 


letter was a forgery. I have always known his mother to be — i 


a very noble woman, and even if she were imprisoned by Ts‘ao 
she would not summon her son like that. Certainly the letter 
was a forgery. If the son did not go, the mother would be 
safe; if he went, she would be a dead woman.” 

“But how ?” asked Yüan-tê, dismayed. 

“She is a woman of the highest principles, who oud be 


a ‘greatly mortified at the sight of her son under such condi- - 


_ tions.” 


Liu Pei said, “Just as your friend was leaving he mentioned | 
the name of a certain Chuko Liang. What think you of. 


ay hain 272 


x 


re 


3 
t. 
1 


Hui laughed, saying, “If Yiian-chih wanted to go, he was : 
free to go. But why did he want to provoke him into coming 


- out and showing compassion for some one else?” 


_ “Why do you speak like that?” asked Yüan-tê. 
_ He replied, “Five men, K‘ung-ming, Ts‘ui Chou-p‘ing, Shih 


e Mêng Kung-wei and Hsii Yüan-chih were the 


closest of friends. They formed a little coterie devoted to 
‘meditation on essential refinement. Only K‘ung-ming arrived 
at a perception of its meaning. He used to sit among them 


_. with his arms about his knees muttering and then, pointing to 
` his companions, he would say, ‘ You, gentlemen, would become 


governors and prefects if you were in official life.’ 

“When they asked him what was his ambition he would only 
smile and always compared himself with the great scholars 
: Kuan Chung and Yo I. No one could gauge his talents.” 

“How comes it that Yingchou produces so many able men?” 
said Yüan-tê. 

“That old astrologer, Yin K‘uei, used to say that the stars 
clustered thick over the district and so there were many wise 


y men.’ 


Now Kuan Yü was there and when he heard K‘ung-ming 
so highly praised he said, “Kuan Chung and Yo I are the two. 
pane famous men mentioned in the ‘Spring and Autumn.’ 
They well overtopped the rest of mankind. Is it not a little 
too much to say that K‘ung-ming compares with these two?” 
“In my opinion he should not be compared with these two, 


| _ but rather with two others,” said Hui. 


“Who are these two?” asked Kuan Yü. 
“One of them is Chiang T'zt-ya, who laid the foundations of 
the Chou dynasty so firmly that it lasted eight hundred years, 


AES 


388 San Guo, ot 


and the other’ Chang Tzň- fang, who-made Han glorious for 
` four centuries.” 


Before the surprise called forth by this startling statement — 
had subsided, the visitor walked down the steps and took his — 


leave. Liu Pei would have kept him if he could, but he was 
obdurate. As he stalked proudly away he threw up his head 
„and said, “Though the ‘Sleeping Dragon’ has found his lord, ` 
he has not been born at the right time. It is a pity.” 
“What a wise hermit!” was Liu Pei’s comment. 


Soon after the three brothers set out to find the abode of : 


the wise man. When they drew near the spot they saw a 
number of peasants in a field hoeing up the weeds, and as 
they worked they sang :— 


“The earth is a chequered board, 
And the sky hangs over all, ` 
Under it men are contending, 
Some rise, but a many fall. 

For those who succeed ’tis well, 

But for those who go under rough. 
There’s a dozing dragon hard. by, 
But his sleep is n’t deep enough.” 


They stopped to listen to the song and, calling up one of the — 
peasants, asked who made it. 

“It was made by Master. ‘Sleeping Dragon,’”’ said the 
labourer. ; 

“Then he lives hereabout. Where?” mers 
= “South of this hill there is a ridge called The Sanne ; 

Dragon and close by is a sparse wood. In it stands a modest 

cottage. That is where Master Chuko takes his repose.” 

Yüan-tê thanked him and the party rode on. Soon they 
came to the ridge, most aptly named, for indeed it lay wrapped 
in an atmosphere of calm beauty. 

A poet wrote of it thus :— 


Not far from Hsiangyang’s massive walls 
There stands, clear cut against the sky, 
A lofty ridge, and at its foot 

A gentle stream goes gliding by. 


The contour, curving up and down, 
Although by resting cloud it’s marred, 
Arrests the eye; and here and there 
The flank by waterfalls is scarred. 


There, like a sleeping dragon coiled, 
Or phoenix hid among thick pines, ` 
You see, secure from prying eyes, 
A cot, reed-built on rustic lines. 


The rough-joined doors, pushed by the wind, 
Swing idly open and disclose 

The greatest genius of the world 

Enjoying still his calm repose. 


< Romance of the Three Ringoomg == 389 


The air is full of woodland scents, 
Around are hedgerows trim and green, 
Close-growing intercrossed bamboos 
Replace the painted doorway screen. 
But look within and books you see 
By every couch, near every chair; 
\And you may guess that common men 
Are very seldom welcomed there. 
The hut seems far from human ken, 
So far, one might expect to find 

_ Wild forest denizens there, trained 
To serve in place:of human kind. 


Without a hoary crane might stand 
As warden of the outer gate; 
Within a long-armed gibbon come 
To offer fruit upon a plate. 
But enter; there refinement reigns; 
Brocaded silk the lutes protect, 
And burnished weapons on the walls 
The green of pines outside reflect. 
For he who dwells within that hut 
Ts talented beyond compare, ~> 
se Although he lives the simple life 
And harvest seems his only care. 
He waits until the thund’rous call 
Shall bid him wake, nor sleep again; 
Then will he forth and at his word 
Peace over all the land shall reign. 


Wants soon arrived at the door of the retreat, Hannak 
and knocked at the rough door of the cottage. A youth. 
appeared and asked what he wanted. i 
-Yiian-té replied, “I am Liu Pei, General of the Han Dynasty, 
Marquis of Ichéngt‘ing, Magistrate of Yuchou and Uncle of 
the Emperor. I am come to salute the Master.” 
“T cannot remember so many titles,” said the lad. 
aK “Then simply say that Liu Pei has come to enquire after 
NIM.. 
“The master left this morning early.” 
` “Whither has he gone?” 
“His movements are very uncertain. I do not know whither 
he has gone.” 
“When will he return?” = ; 
“That also is uncertain. Perhaps in three days, perhaps - 
in ten.” / 
The disappointment was keen. : 
“Let us go back since we cannot see him,” said Chang Fei. 
“Wait a little time,” said Yiian-té. 
“It would be better to return,” said Kuan Yü, “then we 
‘might send to find out when this man had come back.” 
= So Yiian-té agreed, first saying to the hoy, “When the master 
returns, tell him that Liu Pei has been.” 
= They rode away. Presently Liu Pei stopped ‘and looked 
back at the surroundings of the little cottage in the wood. 


390 San huo, or EY 


The mountains were picturesque rathen than grand, the water 
clear rather than profound, the plain was level rather than 


extensive, the woods luxuriant rather than extensive.. Gibbons ~ x 
ranged through the trees and cranes waded in the shallow 


water. The pines and the bamboos vied with each other in 
verdure. It was a scene to linger upon. 

While Liu Pei stood regarding it, he saw a figure coming 
down a mountain path. “The man’s bearing was lofty; he 
was handsome and dignified. He wore a comfortable- looking 
bonnet on his head and a black robe hung about his figure in 
easy folds. He used a staff to help him down the steep path. 

' “Surely that is he!” said Yiian-té. 

He dismounted and walked over to greet the e whom 
he saluted deferentially, saying, “Are you not Master Sleeping 
Dragon, Sir?” 

“Who are you, General?” said the stranger. 

“T am Liu Pei.” 

“Iam not K‘ ung- ming, but I am a friend of his. My name 
is Ts‘ui Chou-p‘ing.’ í 
“Long have I known of you! I am very glad to see you,” 
replied Yüan-tê. “And now I pray you to be seated just where ‘ 
we are and let me receive your instruction.” 

The two men sat down in the wood on a stone and the two - 
brothers ranged themselves by Liu Pei’s side. ; 

Chou-p‘ing began, saying, “General, for what reason do you. 
wish to see K‘ung-ming ?” 

Liu Pei replied, “The Empire is in confusion ana troubles 
gather everywhere. I want your friend to tell me how ve 
restore order.” 

“You, Sir, wish to arrest the present disorder evaded you are 
a kindly man and, from the oldest antiquity, the correction of ~ 
disorder has demanded stern measures. On the day that the 


founder of the Han dynasty first put his hand to the work and | i 


slew the wicked ruler of Ts‘in, order began to replace disorder. 


Good government began with The Founder, (206 B.c.), and- 


endured two hundred years; two centuries of tranquillity. — 
Then came Wang Mang’s rebellion and disorder took the place — 
of order. Anon, arose Kuang-Wu, who restored the Dynasty, © 


and order once more prevailed. We have had two centuries 
of order and tranquillity, and the time of trouble and battles 
is due. The restoration of peace will take time; it cannot be 
quickly accomplished. _ You, Sir, wish to get K‘ung-ming to 
regulate times and seasons, to repair the cosmos; but I fear 
the task is indeed difficult and to attempt it would be a vain 
expenditure of mental energy. You know well that he who 
goes with the favour of Heaven travels an easy road, he who 
goes contrary meets difficulties. One cannot escape one’s lot; 
one cannot evade fate.” i i 


-Aomance of the Three Yiingooms 391 


“Master »’ replied Pei, ee insight is indeed deen and your 


< words of wide meaning, but I am a scion of the House of Han 


pe must help it. Dare I talk of the inevitable and trust to 
a e? ”? 

Chou-p‘ing replied, “A simple denizen of the mountain wilds 
is unfitted to discuss the affairs of Empire. But you bade me 
speak and I have spoken; perhaps somewhat madly.” 

“Master, I am grateful for your instruction. But know you 
whither K“ ung-ming has gone?” 

“T also came to see him and : know not where he is,’ ’ said 
Chou-p‘ing. 

“Tf I asked you, Master, to AnS me to my poor bit of 
territory, would you come?” 

“Tam too dilatory, too fond of leisure and ease, and no longer 
have any ambitions. But I will see you another time.” 

And with these words he saluted and left, 

The three brothers also mounted and started homeward. 
Presently Chang Fei said, “We have not found K‘ung-ming 
and we have had to listen to the wild ravings of this so-called 
scholar. There is the whole result of this journey.” 


“His words were those of a deep thinker,” replied Yiian-té. 


Some days after the return to Hsinyeh, Ytian-té sent to find 
out whether K‘ung-ming had returned and the messenger came 
back saying that he had. Wherefore Liu Pei prepared for 
another visit. Again Chang Fei showed his irritation by 
remarking, “Why must you go hunting after this villager? 
Send and tell him to come.’ 

_ “Silence!” said Yüan-tê, “The Teacher Méng, (Mencius) 
said, ‘To try to see the sage without going his way is like 
_ barring a door you wish to enter.’ K‘ung-ming is the SKER ESDI 
sage of the day; how can I summon him?” 


So Yitian-té rode away to make his visit, his two brothera. 


with him as before. It was winter and exceedingly cold; 
angry clouds covered the whole sky. Before they had gone far 


a bitter wind began to blow in their faces and the snow began 


‘ to fall. Soon the mountains were of Jade and the trees of 
silver. 
“It is ; very cold and the earth is frozen hard, no fghting is 


possible now.”’ Said Chang Fei. “Yet we are going all this 


way to get advice which will be useless to us. Where is the 
sense of it? Let us rather get back to Hsinyeh out of the 
cold.” 
Yiian-té replied, “I am set upon proving my zeal to K‘ung- 
- ming, but if you, my brother, do not like the cold, you can 
return.” 
“I do not fear death; do you think I care for the cold? 
But I do care about wasting my brother’s energies,” said 
- Chang Fei. 
— ‘Say no uaa said Ytian-té, and they travelled on. 


SO 


ai 


392° San Ruo, or 
When they drew near the little wood they heard singing in 
a roadside inn and stopped to listen. This was the song :— 


Although possessed. of talent rare, 
This man has made no name; 

Alas! the day is breaking late a 
That is to show his fame. n 
O friends you know the tale: 

Th’ aged man constrained to leave 
His cottage by the sea, 

To follow in a prince’s train 
His counsellor to be. 

Eight hundred feudal chieftains met 
Who came with one accord; 

The happy omen, that white fish, 
That leapt the boat aboard; 

The gory field in distant wilds, 
Whence flowed a crimson tide, 

And him acknowledged chief in war 
Whose virtues none denied; 

That Kaoyang rustic, fond of wine, 
Who lefi his native place k 

And went to serve so faithfully 
The man of handsome face; 

And one who spoke of ruling chiefs 
In tones so bold and free, 

But sitting at the festive board. 
Was full of courtesy; 

And one, ’twas he who laid in dust 
Walled cities near four score— 

But men of doughty deeds like these 
On earth are seen no more. 

Now had these men not found their lord 
Would they be known to fame? 

Yet having found, they served him mer 
‘And so achieved a name. 


The song ended, the singer’s companion tapping the table 
sanm 

We had a famous emperor, 
Who drew his shining sword, 

Cleansed all the land within the seas 
And made himself its lord. 

In time his son succeeded him, 
And so from son to son 

The lordship passed, held firm until 
Four hundred years had run. 

Then dawned a day of weaklier sons, 
The fiery virtue failed, 

Then ministers betrayed their trust, 
Court intrigues vile prevailed. 

The omens came; a serpent black 
Coiled on the dragon throne, 

Whiie in the hali of audience 
Unholy haloes shone. 

Now bandits swarm in all the land 
And noble strives-with chief, 

Thé common people, sore perplexed, 

“ir Can nowhere find relief. 


 Komance of the Three Hingyoms = 3938 


Let’s drown our sorrows in the cup, 
i Be happy while we may, 
Let those who wish run after fame 
‘That is to last for aye. 


The two men laughed loud and clapped their Pande as the 
second singer ceased. Yiian-té thought full surely the longed- 
for sage was there, so he dismounted and entered the inn. 
He saw the two merry-makers sitting opposite each other at 
a table. One was pale with a long beard; the other had a 
strikingly refined face. Yiian-té saluted them and said, 
“Which of you is Master Sleeping Dragon?” 
“Who are you, Sir?” asked the long-bearded one. “What 
business have you with Sleeping Dragon? a 
“I am Liu Pei. I want to enquire of him how to restore 
tranquillity to the world.” 
“Well, neither of us is your man, but we are friends of his. 
My name is Shih Kuang-yiian and my friend here is Méng 
Kung-wei.’ 
“T know you both by reputation,” said Yiian-té smiling. 
“I am indeed fortunate to meet you in this haphazard way. 
Will you not come to the Sleeping Dragon’ s retreat and talk 
for a time? I have horses here for you.’ 
“We idle folk of the wilds know nothing of tranquillising 
States. Do not trouble to ask, please. Pray mount pga and 
go your way in search of Sleeping Dragon.” 
So he remounted and went his way. He reached the little 
cottage, dismounted and tapped at the door. The same lad 
answered his knock and he asked whether the Master had 
returned. 

“He is in his room reading,” said the boy. 

‘Joyful indeed was Liu Pei as he followed the lad in. In 
front of the middle door he saw written this pair of scrolls :— 


By purity manifest the inclination: 
By repose affect the distant. 


As he was looking at this couplet he heard some one singing 
in a subdued voice and stopped by the door to peep in. He 
saw a young man close to a charcoal brazier, hugging his | 
knees oe he sang :—- 

The phoenix flies bieh, ah me! 

And only will perch on a wutung tree. 
The scholar is hid, ah me! 

Till his lord appear he can patient be. 
He tills his fields, ah me! 

He is well-content and I love my home, 
He awaits his day, ah me! 

His books and his lute to leave and roam. 


As the song ended Yüan-tê advanced and saluted saying, 
“Master, long have I yearned for you, :but have found it 
impossible to salute you. Lately one Hsu spoke of you and 


R Bale Gusyior arre i ai 


I hastened to your dwelling, only to come away disappointed. 
This time I have braved the elements and come again and my 
reward is here; I see your face, and I am indeed fortunate.” 

“The young man hastily returned the salute and said, 
“General, you must be that Liu Pei of Yuchou who wishes to 
see my brother.” 

“Then, Master, you are not the Sleeping Dragon!” saai 
Yüan-tê, starting back. 


“I am his younger brother, Chün. He has an elder prothen 


Chin, now with Sun in Chiangtung as a secretary. K‘ung-ming 
is the second of our family.” 

“Is your brother at home?” 

“Only yesterday he arranged to go a eee with, Ts‘ui Chou- 
p‘ing.’ 

“Whither have they gone?” 

“Who can say? They may take a boat and sail away among 
the lakes, or go to gossip with the priests in some remote 
mountain temple, or wander off to visit a friend in some 
far away village, or be sitting in some cave with a lute or a 
chessboard. Their goings and comings are uncertain and 
nobody can guess at them.” 


“What very poor luck have I! Twice have I ae ‘to meet | 


the great sage.’ 

“Pray sit a few moments and let me offer you some tea.” 

“Brother, since the master is not here I pray you remount 
and go,’ said Chang Fei. 

“Since I am here, why not a little talk before we go home 
again?” said Yiian-té. 

Then turning to his host he continued, “Can you tell me if 
your worthy brother is skilled in strategy and studies works 
on war?” 

“T do not know.” 

“This is worse than the other,” grumbled Chang Fei, “And 
the wind and snow are getting worse; we ought to go back.” 

Yiian-té turned on him angrily and told him to stop. 

Chiin said, “Since my brother is absent I will not presume 
to detain you longer. I will return your call soon.’ 

“Please do not take that trouble. In a few days I will come 
again. But if I could borrow paper and pencil I would leave 
a ee show your worthy brother that I am zealous and — 
earnest.” 


Chun produced the “four treasures” of the scholar and 
Ytian-té, thawing out the frozen brush between his lips, spread . 


the sheet of delicate note-paper and wrote :— 

“Pei has long admired your fame. He has visited your 
dwelling twice, but to his great disappointment he has gone 
empty away. He humbly remembers that he is a distant 
relative of the Emperor, that he has undeservedly enjoyed 
fame and rank. When he sees the proper government wrested 


A 


| Romance of the Three Kingdoms 


aaide and replaced by pretence; the foundation of the State 

crumbling away, hordes of bravos creating confusion in the 
_ country and an evil cabal behaving unseemly toward the right- 
- ful Prince, then his heart and gall are torn to shreds. Though 
he has a real desire to assist, yet is he deficient in the needful 


_ skill. Wherefore he turns to the Master, trusting in his 


kindness, graciousness, loyalty and righteousness. Would the 
Master but use his talent, equal to that of Lii Wang, and 


perform great deeds like ‘Chang Tzu-fang, then would the pe 


Empire be happy and the throne would be secure.” 
“This is written to tell you that, after purification of mind 
with fasting and of body with fragrant baths, Pei will come 
again to prostrate himself in your honoured presence and 
- receive enlightenment.” 
The letter written and given to Chitin, Ytian-té took his leave, 


exceedingly disappointed at this second failure. As he was 


-~ mounting he saw the serving lad waving his hand outside the 
hedge and heard him call out, “The old Master is coming” 

Ytian-té looked and then saw a figure seated on a donkey 
leisurely jogging along over a bridge. 

The rider of the donkey wore a cap with long flaps down to 
~- his shoulders and his body was wrapped in a fox fur robe. 
~ A youth followed him bearing a jar of wine. As he came 
res: through the snow he hummed a song :— 

Tis eve, the sky is overcast, 

The north wind comes with icy blast, 
hy Light snowflakes whirl adown until 
i A white pall covers dale and hill. 
ti Perhaps above the topmost sky 
Fi White dragons'strive for mastery, 


i The armour, scales from their forms riven 
ary Are scattered o’er the world wind-driv en. 
if Amid the storm there jogs along 
i A simple wight who croons a song. 
“O poor plum trees, the gale doth tear 
Your blossoms off and leave you bare.” j 


>. “Here at last is the Sleeping Dragon,” thought Yin tê, 

hastily slipping out of the saddle. He saluted the donkey 
rider as he neared and said, “Master, it is hard to make 
way against this cold wind. I and my companions have been 
waiting long.” 

The rider got off his donkey and returned the bow, while 
Chuko Chiin from behind said, “This is not my brother; it is 
his father-in-law, Huang Ch‘éng-yen.’ 

-Yiian- tê said, “I chanced to hear the song you were singing; 
it is very beautiful. a 

Ch‘éng-yen replied, “It is a little poem I read in my son- 

in-law’s house and I recalled it as I crossed the bridge and 
_ saw the plum trees in the hedge. And so it happened to catch 
your ear, noble Dine: 


396 San Kuo 


$ 


“Have you seen your son-in-law lately T asked Yüan-tê. 
“That is just what I have come to do now.’ 
At this Yiian-té bade him farewell and went on his way. 


The storm was very grievous to bear, but worse than the storm - 


was the grief in his heart as he looked back at Sleeping Dragon 
Ridge. 
One winter’s day through snow and wind 
A prince rede forth the sage to find; 
Alas! his journey was in vain, 
And sadly turned he home again. 
The stream stood stil! beneath the bridge 
A sheet of ice draped rock and ridge, 
His steed benumbed with biting cold 
But crawled as he were stiff and old. 
The snow-fiakes on the rider’s head 
Were like pear-blossoms newly shed, 
Or like the willow-catkins light 
They brushed his cheek in headlong flight. 
He stayed his steed, he looked around, 
The snow lay thick on tree and mound, 
The Sleeping Dragon Ridge lay white. 
ay A hill of silver, glistening bright. 


After the return to Hsinyeh the time slipped away till sine 
was near. Then Yüan-tê cast lots to find the propitious day | 
for another journey in search of the sage. The day being 
selected he fasted for three days and then changed his dress 
ready for the visit. His two brothers viewed the preparations 
with disapproval and presently made up their minds to re- 
monstrate. 


The sage and the fighting man never agree, \, 
A warrior despises humility. 2. 


The next chapter will tell what they said. 


= o CHAPTER. XXXVIIL 


PLAN FOR THREE KINGDOMS: 
THE SUNS AVENGE THEMSELVES. 


Nothing discouraged by two unsuccessful visits to the retreat 
_of the sage whose advice he sought to secure, Liu Pei made 
preparations for a third visit. His brothers disapproved, and 
Kuan Yü said, “Brother, you have sought him twice, surely 
this is showing even too ‘much deference. I do not believe in 
this fame of his for learning; he is avoiding you and dare not 
submit to the test. Why so obstinately hold this idea?” 


= “You are wrong, my brother. Duke Huan of Ch‘i paid five 
<- visits to the ‘Hermit of the Eastern Suburb’ before he got 
`- to see his face. And my desire to see the sage is even greater 


-than his.” 
“J think you are mistaken,’ 
this villager be such a marvel of wisdom? You should not go 


’ 


again and, if he will not come, Į will bring him with a hempen 


rope.’ 

“Have you forgotten the great Prince Wén’s visit to Chiang 
Tzu-ya, the old man of the Eastern Sea? If he could show 
-such deference to a wise man, where am I too deferential? 
If you will not go, your brother and I will go without you,” 
said Yüan-tê. 

“If you two go, how can I hang back? 2?” said Chang Fei. 

“If you go, then you must be polite.” 

Fei said he would not forget himself, and the three set out. 
-When they were half a li from the little cottage, Yiian-té 


= dismounted, deciding to show his respect by approaching the 


house on foot. Very soon he met Chuko Chiin, whom he saluted 


with great deference, enquiring whether his brother was at 


home. 

“He returned last evening; you can see him to- day, General.” 

As he said this he went off with some swagger. 

“Fortune favours me this time,” said Yüan-tê, “I am going 
to see the master.” 

“That. was a rude fellow” , said Fei, “it would not have 
hurt' him to have conducted us to the house. Why did he go 
off like that?” 

“Each one has his own affairs,” said his brother. “What 
- power have we over him?” 

- Soon the three stood at the door and they naked. The 
‘serving lad came out and asked their business and Yüan-tê 


~ 


said Chang Fei. “How can — 


8398 a al De tiuo, or 


$ 


said very deferentially, “I ola trouble the servant of the 
genius, gentle page, to inform the Master that Liu Pei wishes . 


to pay his respects to him.” 

“My Master is at home, but he is asleep.” 

“In that case do not announce me.’ 

He bade his two- brothers wait at the door dieti and he 
himself entered with careful steps. There was the man he 
sought, lying asleep on the’ couch, stretched on a simple 


mat. Yiian-té saluted him with joined hands at a respectful 


distance. 


The time passed and still the sleeper did not wake. The , 
two brothers left without, beginning to feel impatient, also — 


came in and Chang Fei was annoyed at seeing his revered 
elder brother respectfully standing by while another slept. 
“What an arrogant fellow is this Master?’ said he. “There 


is our brother waiting, while he sleeps on perfectly carelessly. 
I will go to the back of the place and let off a bomb and see if | 


that will rouse him.” 
“No, no; you must do Harkins of the kind,” | whispered Kuan 
Yü, and then Yiian-té told them to go out again, 


Just then he noticed that the Master moved. He es 


f 

y 
iy iy 
se 


over as though about to rise, but, instead, he faced the walland. 


again fell asleep. The serving lad made as if he would rouse 


his master, but Yiian-té forbade him to be disturbed -and he — 
waited yet another weary hour. Then K‘ung-ming woke up 


repeating to himself the lines :— . 
“Can any know what fate is his? i 

Yet have I felt throughout my life, 

The day would come at last to quit 

The calm retreat for toil and strife.” 


As he finished he turned to the lad saying, “Have any of the | 


usual people come?” 


“Liu, the Uncle of the Emperor is here,” said the boy. : “He. 


has been waiting some time.” 
“Why did you not tell me?’ said he, rising from the couch. 
“I must dress.” 


He rose and turned into a room behind to dress. In a short . 
time he re-appeared, his clothing properly arranged, to receive ` 


his visitor. 


Then Yitian-té saw coming toward him a man rather below 


medium height with a refined face. He wore a head-wrap and 


a long crane-white gown. He moved with much dignity as ee: 


though he was rather more than mortal. ' 
Yiian-té bowed saying, “I am one of the offshoots of the 
Han family, a simple person from Cho. I have long known 


the Master’s gee which has indeed thundered in my ear, 


Twice I have come to visit: you, without success. Once I left 
my name on*your writing table; you may have my note.” 


i? $ ae “ Fomance of the wines kinaran s 399 W 


N 


anamua aa “This hermit is but a dilatory person 


by temperament. I know I have to thank you for more than | a i 


one vain visit and I am ashamed to think of them.” 
‘These courteous remarks and the proper bows exchanged, 


the two men sat in their relative positions as host and. guest } 


and the serving -lad brought tea. Then K‘ung-ming' said, 


“From your letter I know that you grieve for both people and 


government. If I were not so young and if I possessed any- 


talent, I would venture to question you.” 


Yüan-tê replied, “Sstima Hui and Hsü Shu have both spoken 
of you; can it be that their words were vain? I trust, O 
Master, that you will not despise my worthlessness but will 


condescend to instruct me.’ 


“The two men you speak of are very profound scholars. 


. Iam but a peasant, a mere farmer, and who am I that I should 


talk of Empire politics? Those. ‘two misled you when they 


_ spoke of me. Why do you reject the beautiful jewel for a 


worthless pebble?’ 


“But your abilities are world koa a i and marvellous. 
How can you be content to allow time to pass while you idle 
away life in these secluded haunts? I conjure you, O Master, 
to remember the inhabitants of the world and remove my crass 
ignorance by bestowing instruction upon me.’ 
~ “But what is your ambition, General?” ; 

Yitian-té moved his seat nearer to his host and said, “The 


` Hans are sinking; designing ministers steal away their author- 


ity. I am weak, yet I desire to restore the State to its right 
mind. But my ignorance is too vast, my means are too slender 
and I know not where to turn. Only you, Master, can lighten 


my darkness and preserve me from falling. How happy should - 
Ibe if you would do so!” 


K‘ung-ming replied, “One bold man after another has arisen 
in various parts of the Empire ever since the days of the great 


ip rebel Tung Cho. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was not so powerful as Yüan 


Shao, but he overcame him by seizing the favourable moment 


and using his men properly. Now he is all-powerful; he rules | 


an immense army and, through his control of the Court, the 
various feudal lords as well. You cannot think of opposing 
him. Then the Suns have held their territory in Chiangtung 
for three generations. Their position may not appear too 


secure, but they have popularity to appeal to. You can gain 
‘support but win no success there. Chingchou on the north 
‘rests on the two rivers Han and Mien; their interests lie in 
_all to the south of them; on the east they touch Wu and on 


the west they extend to the ancient states Pa and Shu. This 
is the area in which decisive battles have to be won and one 
must hold it in order to be secure and Heaven has virtually 
made it yours. Yichou is an important place, fertile and 
extensive, a country favoured of Heaven and that through 


1 


400 ; San Kuo, or, 


which the Founder of Han obtained the Empire. Its ruler 


Liu Chang is ignorant and weak. The people are noble and 
the country prosperous, but he does not know how to hold it 
all, and all the able men of the district are yearning for an 
enlightened prince. As you are a scion of the Family, well 
known throughout the land as trusty and righteous, a whole- 
hearted hero, who greatly desires to win the support of the 
wise, if you get possession of Yi and Ching, if on the west 
you are in harmony with the Jung tribes, on the south win 
over I and Yiieh, make an alliance with Sun Ch‘tian, and 
maintain good government, you.can await confidently the day 
wher. heaven shall offer you the desired opportunity. Then 
you may depute a worthy leader to go to the north-east while 
you take command of an expedition to the north-west, and 
will you not find the warmest welcome prepared for you by the 
people? This done the completion of the task will be easy. 
The Hans will be restored. And I will be your adviser in all © 
these operations if you will only undertake them.” 

He paused while he bade the lad bring out a map. As this 
was unrolled K‘ung-ming went on, “There you see the fifty 
four divisions of Sstch‘uan. Should you wish to take the 


overlordship you will yield to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao'in the north till the ~- 


-time of Heaven be come, to Sun Ch‘tian in the south till the 
position may become favourable. You, General, will be the 
Man and complete the trinity. Chingchow is to be taken first . 
as a home, the west next for the foundation of domination. 
When you are firmly established you can lay your plans for 
the attainment of the whole Empire.” 

As K‘ung-ming ceased his harangue, Yüan-tê left his place 
‘and saluted him, saying, “Your words, O Master, render every-. 
thing so clear that meseems the clouds are swept aside and 
I see the clear sky. But Chingchou belongs to Liu Piao, my 
kinsman, and Yichou to another kinsman; I could hardly take 
the land from them.” 

“T have studied the stars and I know Liu Piao is not long 
for this world; the other is not the sort of man to endure. 
Both places will certainly fall to you.” v 

Yüan-tê bowed his acknowledgments. And so, in one con- 
versation, K‘ung-ming proved that he, who had lived in complete 
retirement all his life, knew and foresaw the three fragments 
into which the Empire was to break. True, indeed, is it that 
throughout all the ages no one has ever equalled his intelligence 7 
and mastery of the situation. 

Behold, when Liu Pei frets that he is weak, 
Then “Sleeping Dragon” is not far to seek; 
When he desires to know how things will hap, 
The Master, smiling, shows him on the map. 

“Though I be of small repute and scanty virtue,” said 

Yiian-té, “I hope, O Master, you will not despise me for my 


Pee oe fiomance of the Chree fingdoms Pi AGT 


Deb ithicnsness: but will leave this retreat to help me. I will 
assuredly listen most reverently to your words.” 
‘K‘ung-ming replied, “I have long been happy on my farm 


and am fond of my leisure. -I fear I cannot obey your com- 


mand.” 

Yiian-té wept. “f you will hers O Master, what will become 
oft the people?” 

The tears rolled down unchecked upon the bel and sleeves 
of his robe. This proved to K‘ung-ming the sincerity of his 
desire and he said, “General, if you will accept me, I will 
render what trifling service I can.” 

Then Yiian-té was delighted. He called in Kuan and Chang 
to make their bow and brought out the gifts he had prepared. 
K‘ung-ming refused them all. 


_ “These are not gifts to engage your services, but mere proof. 


of my regard,” said Ytian-té. 

Then the presents were accepted. They all remained that 
night at the farm. Next day Chuko Chiin returned and his 
brother said to him, ‘‘Uncle Liu has come thrice to see me and 
“now I must go with him. Keep up the farm in my absence 


and do not let the place go to ruin for, as soon as my work is - 


accomplished, I will certainly return.” 


Then, turning from his humble home: 
- )  He'thought of peaceful days to come, 
When he should take the homeward way 
And ne’er beyond. the valley stray. 
But duty kept him in the west, 
(And there he found his place of rest. 


An old poem may be quoted here: = 


ia _ The Founder of Han See his oleae blade 
ao And at Mangtang the blood of the white snake flowed. 
He conquered Ts‘in, destroyed Ch‘u and entered Hsienyang. 
After two centuries of rule the line was near broken, 
But Kuang-Wu, the great, restored the glory at Loyang. 
And his children occupied the ‘throne 
‘Till decay began in the days of Huan and Ling. 
The Emperor Ling removed the capital to Hsitich‘ang, 
And, within the four seas, all was confusion. 
Bold spirits started up in fierce contention. 
; Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, seized the favourable moment 
`- And the Imperial authority passed into his hands, 
While the Suns made to themselves 
A glorious heritage east of the river, 
Solitary and poor, Liu Pei wandered from place to place, 
Till he found a haven in Hsinyeh. ‘ 
Soreiy distressed he was at the sorrows of the people, 
But. tne Sleeping Dragon conceived a noble ambition, 
Within his breast were thoughts 
Of great things to be accomplished by force of arms. 
Then, because of the parting words of Hsti Shu, 
And by the thrice repeated visits to his retreat, 
“The great hero found and knew his mentor. 


He gaat) eu 
© aes 


402 - San Huo, or ` 


When the age of K‘ung-ming was but thrice nine years, 
He turned from his books, put aside his lute 

And left the peaceful fields he had loved, 

Under his guidance Chingchou was taken 

And the Land of the Four Streams conquered. , 

He unrolled great schemes, as one all knowing, 

In speech, he went to and fro in the world, 

The sound of war drums rolled from his tongue, 

The words from his heart stirred one to the utmost depths, 
The dragon pranced, the tiger glared, 

And peace was brought to the world. 

Through all the ages his fame shall never decay. 


After taking leave of the younger brother, Yüan-tê and his 
followers left for Hsinyeh, with K‘ung-ming as companion. 


When they took up their abode there, K‘ung-ming was treated 
as a master, eating at the same table, sleeping on the same 


couch as Liu Pei. They spent whole. days conve Tang over 


the affairs of the Empire. 


K‘ung-ming said, “Tsʻao Ts‘ao is training his men for naval — 


service and hence certainly intends to invade the country south 


of the river. W e ought to send our spies to ascertain what he f; 
„is really doing.” ; 


So spies were despatched. 


Now after Sun Ch‘tian had succeeded to the heritage of his ` z 


father and brother he sent far and wide to invite men of 
ability to aid. him. He established lodging places for them 
in Wu, and directed- Ku Yung and Chang Hung to welcome 
and entertain all those who came. And year by year they 


flocked in, one recommending another. Among them were | 
K‘an Tsé, of Kueichi; Yen Chiin, of P‘engch‘éng ; Hstieh Tsung, © 


of P‘eihsien; Ch‘éng Ping, of Junan; Chu Huan, of Wuchiin: 
Lu. Chi; ;of the same place; Chang Wen, of Wu; Ling Tung, of 


Kueichi: and Wu Ts‘an of Wuch‘eng; and all these scholars 


were:treated with great deference. . 
Some able leaders came also, Lu Méng, of Junan; i Hsün, 


of Wuchiin; Hsü Shéng, of Langya; P‘an Chang, of Tungchiin ~ 


and Ting Féng of Luchiang. Thus Sun Ch‘tian obtained the 
assistance of many men of ability both in peace and war and 
all went well with him. 

. In the seventh year of “Established Tranquillity’ Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao had broken the power of Ytian Shao. Then he sent a 


messenger to Chiangtung ordering Sun Ch‘iian to send his a 


son to court to serve in the retinue of the Emperor. Sun, 


however, hesitated to comply with this request and the matter 


was the subj ect'of much discussion. His mother, the lady Wu, 
sent for Chou Yü and Chang Chao and asked their advice. 
The latter said, “He wishes a son to be present at court as 
a hostage whereby he has a hold upon us, as formerly was 
the case with all the feudal chiefs. If we do not comply with 


this request he will doubtless attack the territory. ee is 
some peril.” 


Pat Toh Fee 


N> SAFF 


Romance of the Three Lingdoms 403 


Chou Yii said, “Our lord has succeeded to the heritage 
and has a large army of veterans and ample supplies. 
He has able men ready to do his bidding, and why 


should he be compelled to send a hestage to any man? To 


send a hostage is to be forced into joining Ts‘ao, and to — 
carry out his behests, whatever they be. Then we shall 
be in his power. It would be better not to send, but rather 
to wait patiently the course of events and prepare plans 
to attack.” 

“That is also my opinion,” said the Dowager. 

So Sun Ch‘tian dismissed the messenger but did not send 
his son. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao resented this and had since nourished 
schemes for the destruction of the Suns. But their realisation 


had been delayed by the dangers on the north and, so far, no 


; 


attack had been made. 

_ Late in the eighth year, Sun Ch‘tian led his armies against 
Huang Tsu and fought on the Great River, where he was 
successful in several battles. One of Sun’s leaders, Ling Ts‘ao, 
ted a fleet of light vessels up the river and broke into Hsiak‘ou 
but was killed by an arrow. He left a son, Ling Tung, fifteen 
years of age, who led another expedition to recover his father’s 
corpse and was so far successful. After that, as the war was 


inclined to go against him, Sun Ch‘iian turned again to his. 


own country. 

Now Sun Chi‘tian’s brother, Sun I, was Prefect of Tanyang. 
He was a hard man and given to drink and, in his cups, very © 
harsh to his men, ordering the infliction of severe floggings. 
Two of his officers, Kuei Lan and Tai Yuan, bore their chief 


-a grudge and sought to assassinate him. They took into their 


confidence one Pien Hung, of the escort, and the three plotted 


to kill their master at a great assembly of officials at Tanyang 


amid the banquets and junketings. 
Sun’s wife was skilled in divination and on the day of the 
great banquet she cast a most inauspicious lot. Wherefore 


` she besought her husband to stay away from the assembly. 


But he was obstinate and went. The faithless guardsman 
followed his master in the dusk when the gathering dispersed, 
and stabbed him with a dagger. The two prime movers at 
once seized their accomplice and beheaded him in the market 
place. Then they went to Sun’s residence, which they plun- 
dered. Kuei Lan was taken with. the beauty of the dead 


- Prefect’s wife and told her that as he had avenged the death 
of her husband she must go with him, or he would slay her. 


The wife pleaded that it was too soon after her husband’s 
death to think of re-marriage but promised to be his after 
the mourning sacrifices. 

= She thus obtained a respite, which she utilised to send for 


two old Generals of her husband’s, Sun Kao and Fu Ying. 
They came and she tearfully told her tale. 


404 San Kus, or x 


“My husband had great faith in you. Now Kuei and Tai 


have compassed his death, and have laid the crime on Pien 
Hung. They have plundered my house and carried off my 
servants and slaves. Worse than this, Kuei Lan insists that 
I shall be his wife. To gain time I have pretended to favour 
this proposal and I pray you now to send the news to my 
husband’s brother and beg him to slay these two miscreants 
and avenge this wrong. I will never forget your kindness in 
this life or the next.” 

And she bowed before them. They wept also and said, “We 
were much attached to our master and now that he has come 
to an untimely end we must avenge him. Dare we not carry 
out your behests?” 


So they sent a trusty messenger. On the day of the sacri- — 


fices the lady called in her two friends and hid them in a secret 
chamber. Then the ceremonies were performed in the great 
hall. These over, she put off her mourning garb, bathed and 
perfumed herself, and assumed an expression of joy. She 
laughed and talked as usual, so that Kuei Lan rejoiced in his 
heart, thinking of the pleasure that was to be his. 

When night came she sent a slave girl to call her suitor to 


the Palace, where she entertained him at supper. When he. 


had well drunk, she suggested that they should retire and led 


him to the chamber where her friends were waiting. He 
followed without the least hesitation. As soon as she entered. 


the room she called out, ‘““Where are you, Generals?” Out rushed 


the two men, and the drunken man, incapable of any resistance, 


was despatched with daggers. 


Next she invited Tai Ytian to a supper and he was slain in > 


similar fashion. After that, she sent to the houses of her 


enemies and slew all therein. This done, she resumed her — 


mourning garb and the heads of the two men were hung as 
a sacrifice before the coffin of her husband. 

Very soon her brother-in-law came with an army, and 
hearing the story of the deeds of the two generals from the 
widow, gave them office and put them over Tanyang. When 
he left he took the widow to his own home to pass the re- 
mainder of her days. All those who heard of her brave conduct 
were loud in praise of her virtue :— 


Full of resource and virtuous, few in the world are like her, 
Guilefully wrought she and compassed the death of the lusty 
assassins, 
i Faithful servants are always ready to deal with rebellion, 
t None can ever excel that heroine famous in East Wu. 


The brigandage that had troubled Wu had all been suppres- 


sed and a large fleet (of seven thousand) keels were in the ~ 


Yangtse River ready for service. Sun Ch‘tian appointed Chou 
Yü to be the Admira!-in-Chief. 


ae 


EES ATIA BEE 6 Kaeo 
Vette vac yite ls ae 


4 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 405 


In the twelfth year (207A4.D.) the Dowager Lady Wu, feeling 
her end approaching, called to her the two advisers Chou Yü 
and Chang Chao and spoke thus :—“I came of a family of Wu, 


-but losing my parents in early life, my brother and I went — 


into Yiieh, and then I married into this family. I bore my 
husband four sons, not without premonitions of the greatness 
to be theirs. With my first, I dreamed of the moon and with 
my second, Ch‘tian, of the sun, which omens were interpreted 
by the soothsayer as signs of their great honour. Unhappy 
Ts‘é died young, but Ch‘iian inherited and it is he whom I 
pray you both to assist with one accord. Then may I die in 
peace.” 

And to her son she said, “These two you are to serve as they 
were your masters and treat them with all respect. My sister 


-and I both were wives to your father, and so she is also a 
mother to you and you are to serve her after I am gone as 


you now serve me: And you must treat your sister with 
affection and find a handsome husband for her.” 
Then sne died and her son mourned for her, but of that and 


her burial nothing will be said. 


The following year they began to discuss an attack upon 
Huang Tsu.. Chang Chao said the armies should not move 
during the period of mourning; however, Chou Yü, more to 
the point, said that vengeance should not be postponed on 


that account; it could not wait upon times and seasons. Still 


Sun Ch‘iian halted between two opinions and would not decide. 
Then came Lii Méng, the Commander of the North, who. 


said to his master, “While I was at Lungchiushuik‘ou one of 


Huang Tsu’s captains, Kan Ning by name, offered to surrender. 
I found out all about him. He is something of a scholar, is 
forceful, fond of wandering about as a knight-errant. He 
assembled a band of outlaws with whom he roamed over the 


rivers and lakes where he would terrorise everybody. He 
= wore a bell at his waist and at the sound of this bell every, 


one fled and hid. He fitted his boats with sails of Sstch‘uan 
brocade and people called him the ‘Pirate with Sails of Silk.’ 
“Then he reformed. He and his band went to Liu Piao, 


but they left him when they saw he would never accomplish 


anything and now they would serve under your banner, only 
that Huang Tsu detains them at Hsiak‘ou. Formerly when 
you were attacking Huang Tsu, he owed the recovery of Hsia- 
k‘ou to this same Kan Ning, whom he treated with liberality, 
but when Su Fei, the Commander-in-Chief, recommended him 
for promotion, Huang Tsu said he was unsuited for any high 


position as, after all, he was no more than a pirate. 


“So Kan Ning became a disappointed and resentful man. 
Su Fei tried to win him over to good humour and invited him _ 
to wine parties and said, ‘I have put your name forward many 


times but our chief says he has no place suitable for you. 


” 


406 Aan Kuo, or, 


However, time slips away and man’s life is not very long. 
One must make the most of it. I will put you forward for the 
magistracy of Ohsien, whence you may be able to advance.’ 
So Kan Ning got away from Hsiak‘ou and would have come. 
to you then, but he feared that he would not be welcomed, since 
he had assisted Huang Tsu and killed Ling Ts‘ao. I told him 
you were always ready to welcome able men and would nourish 
no resentment for former deeds. After all, every man was 
bound to do his best for his master. He would come with 
alacrity if he only felt sure of a welcome. I pray you to . 
express your pleasure.” 

This was good news for Sun Ch‘ tan and he said, “With his 
help I could destroy Huang Tsu.” Then he bade Lu Méng 
bring Kan to see him. 

When the salutations were over, the chief said, “My heart 
is entirely captivated by your coming; I feel no resentment 
against you. I hope you will have no doubts on that score | 
and I may as well tell you that I desire some plan for the 
destruction of Huang Tsu.” 

He replied, “The dynasty is decadent and without influence. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will finally absorb the country down to the river 
unless he is opposed. Liu Piao provides nothing against the 
future and his sons are quite unfitted to succeed him. You 
should lay your plans to oust him at once before Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
anticipates you. The first attack should be made on Huang 
Tsu, who is getting old and avaricious, so that every one hates 

-him. He is totally unprepared for a fight and his army is 
undisciplined. He would fall at the first blow. If he were 
gone, you would control the western passes and could conquer 
eben Shu (Szech‘uan). And you would be securely estab- 
ished.” 

“The advice is most valuable,’ said Sun Ch‘tian, and he 
made his preparations. Chou Yti was appointed Commander- 
in-Chief; Lü Méng was van-leader; Tung Hsi and Kan Ning 
were sub-leaders. Sun Ch‘tian himself would command the 
main army of ten legions. 

The spies reported that Huang Tsu, at the news of an ex- 
pedition against him, called his officers together to consult. 
He placed Su Fei in chief command. He also appointed van- 
leaders, and other officers, and prepared for defence. He had- 
two squadrons of ships under the command of Ch‘én Chiu and | 
Téng Lung. On these he placed strong bows and stiff cross- 
bows to the number of more than a thousand and secured the 
boats to heavy hawsers so that they formed a barrier in the 
river. 

At the approach of the men of Wu the drums beat for the 
ships to attack. Soon arrows and bolts flew thick, forcing 
back the invaders, who withdrew till several li of water lay 
between them’and the defenders. 


- “We must go forward,” said Kan Ning to his colleague. 
__ So they chose a hundred light craft and put picked men on 
them, fifty to a boat. Twenty were to row the boats and thirty 
to fight. These latter were armoured swordsmen. Careless of 

_ the enemy’s missiles these boats advanced, got to the defenders’ 
fleet and cut the hawsers of their ships so that they drifted 
- hither and thither in confusion. Kan Ning leaped upon one 
- boat and killed Téng Lung. Ch‘én Chiu left the fleet and set out 
for the shore. Lü Méng dropped into a small boat and went 
- among the larger ships setting them on fire. When Ch‘én 


we fe fe him, got ahead and struck him full in the breast so that 
he fell. 

Before long Su Fei came along the bank with reinforcements, 
- but it was too late; the armies of Wu had already landed and 


_ Ch‘iian who ordered that he be put into a cage-cart and kept 
_ till Huang Tsu should be captured. Then he. would execute 

the pair. And the attack was pressed; day and nigh they 
i wrought to capture Hsiak‘ou. 


Bae i He sees his ships cut loose and ines 
Sete! ; By the “Silk-sailed Pirate” he once spurned. 


For Huang Tan s fate, see next chapter. 


n 


< Chiu had nearly reached the bank, Lü reckless of death went 


there was no hope of repelling them. Su Fei fled into the open - 
= country, but he was made prisoner. He was taken to Sun 


` CHAPTER OO 


AT CHINGCHOU THE SON OF Liv Piso THRICE BEGS A 
AT POWANG SLOPE THE MASTER DIRECTS HIS FIRST BATTLE, 


Now Sun Ch‘tian fought against Hsiak‘ou. When Huang Tsu. Bee 


“recognised that he was beaten and could not maintain 


his position, he abandoned Chianghsia and took the road to | i 
Chingchou. Kan Ning, foreseeing this, had laid an ambush 
outside the east gate. ‘Soon after the fugitive, with a small  _ 


following; had burst out of the gate he found his road blocked. 
From horseback, Huang Tsu said, “I treated you well in the 
past, why do you now press me so hard?” ; 
Kan Ning angrily shouted, “I did good service for you and 
yet you treated me as a pirate. Now what have you to say?” 


There was nothing to be said, and Huang turned his horse | x 


to escape. But Kan Ning thrust aside his men and himself i 
rode in pursuit. Then he heard a shouting in his rear and 


saw Ch‘êng P‘u coming up. Fearing lest this other pursuer w 


should overpass him and score the success he desired for 
himself, Kan fitted an arrow to his bow and shot at the 


fugitive. Huang was hit and fell from his steed. Then Kan — i 
Ning cut off his head. After this, joining himself to Ch‘éng - 


P‘u, the two returned bearing the ghastly trophy to their lord. 


Sun Ch‘iian ordered them to place it in a box to be taken back 


home and offered as a sacrifice to the manes of his father. 


Having rewarded the soldiers for the victory and promoted : ; 
Kan Ning, Sun Ch‘üan next discussed the advisability of — 
sending a force to hold Chianghsia. But his adviser, Chang | 


Chao, said it was useless to try to hold one city alone. It would 


be better to return home and prepare for the expedition that : i 
‘Liu Piao would surely send in-revenge. They would defeat 


him, push home the attack and capture his district. 


Sun Ch‘tian saw the advice was wise so he left Chianghsia i : 


and led his army home to tHe east. 


Now Su Fei was still confined, but he got some one to go to. — E 
Kan Ning to beg him to plead for mercy. Kan Ning had ` 


expected this although the prisoner had said no word and he ~ 


was averse from leaving his friend and one-time protector 
to perish. T should not have forgotten him even if he had E 


said nothing,” said Kan. Ea 
When the army had reached Wuhui the victor gave orders 
for Su Fei’s execution that his head might be offered with 


“Saray of the Three nee | Sond, 


-that of Huang Tsu. Then Kan Ning went in to his lord and 
said, weeping, “Long ago, if it had not been for Su Fei, my 
“bones would have been rotting in some ditch and how then 
-~ could I have rendered service under your banner? Now he 
deserves death, but I cannot forget his kindness to me and 
I pray you take away the honours you have bestowed on me 


as a set-off to his crime.” 


Sun Ch‘iian replied, “Since he once showed kindness to you, 
I will pardon him for your sake. But what can be done if he 
run away?” 

- “Tf he be pardoned ‘and escape death he will be immeasure- — 
ably grateful and will not go away. If he should, then will 
I offer my life in exchange.” 

So the condemned man escaped death and only one head 
_.was offered in sacrifice. After the sacrificial ceremonies a 
-great banquet was spread in honour of the victories. As it 


-~ was proceeding suddenly one of the guests burst into loud 


- lamentations, drew his sword and rushed upon Kan Ning. 

- Kan hastily rose and defended himself with the chair on which | 
he had been sitting. The host looked at the assailant and saw 
it was Ts‘ao T‘ung, whose father had fallen under an arrow 

-shot by Kan Ning. The son was now burning to avenge his 
father’s death. l 

_ Hastily leaving his place, Sun Ch‘tian checked the angry 

officer, saying, “If he slew your noble father, then remember 


~ each was fighting for his lord for whom he was bound to exert 


- himself to the utmost. But now that you are under one flag 
and are of one house you may not recall an ancient injury. 
5 You must regard my interests continually.” 

-Ts‘ao Ling beat his head upon the floor and cried, saying, 
a “But how can I not avenge this? It is a blood feud and we 
may not both live under the same sky.” 

The guests interfered, beseeching the man to forgo his 
revenge, and at last he ceased from his murderous intention. 
E But he sat glaring wrathfully at his enemy. 

-So soon after Kan Ning was despatched with half a legion 


E and a squadron of ships to guard Hsiak‘ou, where he was 


beyond the reach of his enemy’s wrath. Then Sun Ch‘iian 
promoted Ts‘ao Ling and so he was somewhat appeased. 
From about this time Wu enlarged her fleets, and men were 
sent to various points to guard the river banks. The brother 
of the chieftain was placed in command at Wuhui and Sun 
Ch‘iian himself, with a- large army, camped at Ch‘aisang. 
Chou Yü, the Commander-in-Chief of the forces, was on the 
< Pfoyang Lake training the naval forces, and general prepara- 


~ tions were made for defence and attack. 


Here our story digresses to follow the adventures of Liu Pei. 
By his spies he had tidings of the doings in the lower portion: 
of the great river, and knew of the death of Huang Tsu. So 


410 San Huo, or 


he consulted K‘ung-ming as to his action. While they were | 
discussing matters, there arrived a messenger from Liu Piao, — 
begging Liu Pei to go to see him. K‘ung-ming advised him to ~ 
go and said, “This call is to consult you about avenging Huang 
Tsu. You must take me with you and let me act as the cir- | 
cumstances direct. There are advantages to be got.” 

Leaving his second brother in command at Hsinyeh, Liu Pei 
set forth, taking Chang Fei with half a company as his escort. 

On the way he discussed the course of action with his adviser, | 
who said, “First you must thank him for having saved you 
from the evil that was planned against you at Hsiangyang. 
But you must not undertake any expedition against Wu; say 

you must return to Hsinyeh to put your army in good order.” 

With this admonition Liu Pei came to Chingchou and was . 
lodged in the guest-house. Chang Fei and the escort camped a 
without the walls. In due course Liu Pei and K‘ung-ming 
were received, and after the customary salutations, the guest 

apologised for his conduct. 

The host said, “Worthy brother, I know you were the victim — 
of a vile plot and I should have put the prime mover to death 
for it had there not been so universal a prayer for mercy. 
However, I remitted that penalty. I hope you do nob consider... ; 
that I was wrong.’ ie 

“Mao had little to do with it; I think it was due to his 
subordinates,” replied Pei. 

Piao said, “Chianghsia is lost, as you a Huang is dead 
So I have asked you to come that we might take measures Ofu Se 
vengeance.” ve 

“Huang was harsh and cruel and never used his men in the- 
proper way ; that was the real cause of his fall. But have you 
reflected what Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao may do on the north if we attack 
the south?” E 

“I am getting old and weak and I am unable to manage - 
affairs properly; will you aid me, brother? After I am gone 
you will have this district. ae 

“Why do you say this, my brother? Think you. that I am 
equal to such a task?” j 

Here K‘ung-ming glanced at Liu Pei who continued, “But 
give me a little time to think it over.’ : 

And at this point he took his leave. When they had reached 
their lodging, K‘ung-ming said, “Why did you decline his offer 
of the district.” 

“He has always been most kind and courteous. I could not 
take advantage of his weakness.” 

“A perfectly kindly and gracious lord,” sighed Kung. -ming, 

Soon after the son of Liu Piao was announced and Liu Pei 
received him and led him in. The young man began to weep 
saying, “My mother cannot bear the sight of me. My very 


R: 
life is in danger. Can you not save me, Uncle?” 


“My worthy nephew, this is a pie affair. You should 


not come to me.’ 
= K‘ung-ming, who was present, smiled. Liu Pei turned to 
him to know what he should do. 
“This is a family affair; I cannot touch it!” replied K‘ung- 
ming. 


call and you can talk with him: He will advise you.” 

Liu Chi thanked him and left. Next day when the call was 
to be returned Ytian-té pretended to be suffering from colic 
and made that an excuse to send K‘ung-ming to return the 
call. The adviser went, and when he had reached the Palace, 
dismounted and was led in, Liu Chi conducted him into one 
-of the inner rooms and when the tea had been brought, said, 


“T am an object of my stepmother’s dislike ; can you advise me | 


= what to do?” 

“As a mere stranger guest I can hardly have anything to do 
with your own ‘bone and flesh’ matters. If I did, and the story 
got abroad, much harm might ensue.” 

With this he rose to take leave. But Chi was unwilling to 
say farewell. He said, “Your glory has turned i in my direction, 
- you cannot mean to go away so pointlessly.” 

He led his visitor into a private chamber and had refresh- 
ments brought. While they ate and drank Chi repeated his 
ee what was he to do since his stepmother disliked 

im? 

“Tt is not the sort of thine. I can advise in,” replied kuan 
ming, as he rose for the second time to take leave. 

“Master, if you will not reply; that is well. But why in- 
-continently leave me?” 


So the adviser once more seated himself and Liu Chi ie) 


“There is an ancient writing I should like to show you.’ And 
he led his visitor to a small upper room. 

“Where is the writing?” said K‘ ung-ming. 

Instead of answering Liu Chi wept, saying, “My stepmother 
cannot bear me; my life is in danger. O Master, will you not 
say a word to save me?” 

K‘ung-ming flushed and rose to go away. But he found 
the ladder by which they had mounted had been removed. 
Again Chi besought some advice, “Master, you fear lest it may 
get abroad! Isthat why you are silent? Here we are between 
-earth and sky and what you say will come out of your mouth 
directly into my ear. No other soul can hear. Now can you 
tell me what to do?” i 

“Sow not dissension among relatives,” said Kane -ming. 
“Ts it possible for me to make any plan for you?” 

“Then is my life indeed in danger,” said the young man. 
“JT will die at your feet.” \ 


Gade of the vree tingvoms oo al 


The young man soon left and when Yüan- tê was ‘saying i 
PRYE A he whispered, “I will get K‘ung-ming to return your 


412 a San Buo, or | 


So saying, he pulled out a dagger and threatened to make: 
an end of himself. 

K‘ung-ming checked him. “There is a way,” said he. 

“T pray you tell me.’ 

“You have heard of Shén Shéng and Chane Erh, have you: 
not? Shén Shéng stayed at home and died; his brother went 
away and lived in peace. Now that Huang Tsu is gone and. 
Chianghsia is weakly defended, why do you not ask to be sent 
there to guard it? Then you would be out of the way of harm.” 

Chi thanked him. Then he called to his people to restore the 
ladder and he escorted K‘ung-ming down to the level ground. 

K‘ung-ming returned to Yüan-tê and related the whole 
interview. The young man soon acted.on the advice given 
him, but his father would not at first consent to let him go. — 
To settle his doubts he sent for Yiian-té, who said, “Chiang- — 
hsia is important and your son is the most suitable man to 
defend it. You must let him go. The south-east will be 
defended by your son; the north-west I will look after.” 

“T hear that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has been training a naval force 
and I am afraid he has intentions against us. We must be 
on our guard.” 

“I know all about it; you need feel no anxiety,” said Ytian-té.-. 

He took leave of his relative and went home while Liu Chi 
received command of three companies and went to guard 
Chianghsia. 

At this time Ts‘ao Ts‘ao suppressed the three high officers — 
of State and exercised their functions himself. He appointed. 
as his general secretaries or T's‘ao-ch‘uan, Mao Chieh and Ts‘ui 


Yen, and as literary secretary, Ssima i grandson of Ssuma 
Sui and son of Sstma Fang. Thus he was strong in literary ‘ 


talent. 

He then called his military officers to a council to discuss an` 
expedition against the south. Hsiahou Tun opened the debate 
saying, “Liu Fei is drilling his army at Hsinyeh, and is a 
source of danger. He should be destroyed.” 

Accordingly he was appointed Commander-in-Chief and four - 
assistants were given him. With these he led ten legions to: 
Powangch‘éng, whence he could observe Hsinyeh. 

“Hstin Yü was opposed to this and said, “Liu Pei is a famous 
warrior and he has lately taken to himself as his director of 
training Chuko Liang. Caution is needed.” 

Tun replied, “Liu Pei is a mean rat. I will certainly take 
him prisoner.” 

“Do not despise him,” said Hsü Shu. “Remember he has 
Chuko Liang to help him and so he is like a tiger who has 
grown wings.’ 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “Who is this Chuko Ling?” 


“He is also called K‘ung-ming, and has taken a Taoist 


cognomen of ‘Sleeping Dragon.’ He is a perfect genius, god. 


Bie Romance of the Three Wingooms 413 


Lie devil combined, the greatest marvel of the age. Do not 
despise him.” 

“How does he stand as compared with you?” asked T's ao. 

“There is no comparison. I am a mere glow-worm spark; 
he is the glory of the full moon,” replied Hsü Shu. 

“You are mistaken,” replied Tun. “This Chuko Liang of 
yours is of no account. Who would fear him? If I do not 
take him and his master prisoners in the first battle, then here 
is my head, a free gift to our lord, the minister.” 


“'Ts‘ao. 
Hsiahou Tun hastened to depart. 
The advent of K‘ung-ming and the extravagant deference 


shown him did not please Liu Pei’s sworn brothers. who 


grumbled, saying, “He is very young although he is clever 
and learned. Our brother really treats him too well. We 
have not seen any evidence of his wonderful skill.” 

-Liu Pei replied, “You do not know his worth. To me it 
seems as if the fish had got into the water again. Pray do 
-not discuss this matter further, my brothers.” 

They withdrew, silent but dissatisfied. One day a man 
presented Liu Pei with a yak’s tail and he at once put it in 
his cap as an ornament. K‘ung-ming came in and noticed it 
at once. “Then you have renounced all ambition, my lord; 
you are just going to attend to this sort of thing,” he quietly 

remarked. 

_ Ytian-té snatched off his cap and flung it away. “I was 
only amusing myself with the thing,” replied he. 

“How do you think you stand compared with Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao?” 
asked K‘ung-ming. | 

“Inferior.” . 

“Yes; your army is less than one legion and the ae 
are ten. thousand to one that he will attack. How can we 
- meet him?” 

“T am greatly distressed about it; but I see no way.” 

“You might recruit and I will train them. Then we might 
be able to oppose him.” 

So recruiting began and three companies were enlisted. 
K‘ung-ming set about drilling them diligently. 

Soon they heard that Hsiahou Tun was leading an army of 
ten legions against them. When he heard it Chang Fei said 
` to his brother, Kuan Yü, “We will get this K‘ung-ming to go 
and fight them.” 

Just at that moment they were summoned to their brother, 
who asked their advice. 

“Why not send the ‘Water’ brother?” said Chang Fei. 

“For method I rely on K‘ung-ming; but for action I put 


~ my faith in you, my brothers. Are you going to fail 


me?” 


“Hasten ‘to comfort me with news of victory,” said Ts‘ao 


414 San Huo, ot , 


They went out and K‘ung-ming was called. “I fear your 


brothers wiil not obey me,” said K‘ung-ming. “Wherefore, if — 


I am to direct the campaign, you must give me a seal of office 
and a sword of authority.” 


So Yiian-té gave him both. Armed with these’ ensigns of 


power he assembled the officers to receive their orders. 
“We will go just to see what he will do,” 
to the other. 


In the assembly K‘ung-ming spoke saying, “On the left of i 


Powang are hills called Yüshan. On the right is a forest, 


said one brother, 


Anlin. There we will prepare an ambush. Kuan Yü will go 


to the former place with one company. He will remain there 
quiescent till the enemy has passed, but when he sees a flame 
in the south, that will be the signal to attack. He will first 
burn their baggage train. Chang Fei will go toa valley behind 
the forest. When he sees the signal he is to go to the old 
stores depot at Powang and burn that. Kuan P‘ing and Liu 
Féng will take half a company each, prepare combustibles 
and be ready with them beyond Powang Slope. The enemy 
will arrive about dusk and then they can start the blaze.” 
“Chao Yiin, now recalled from Fanch‘éng, is to lead the 


attack, but he is to lose and not win. And Liu Pei is to ` 


command the reserve. See that each one obeys these orders, 
and let there be no mistakes.” 


Then said Kuan Yü, “All of us are to go out to meet . 


the enemy, but I have not yet heard what you are going to 
do.” 
` “I am going to guard the city.” 
Chang Fei burst into a laugh, “We are to go out to bloody 
battle and you are to stay quietly at home quite comfortable.” 


“Here is the sword and here the seal,” replied the strategist, . 


displaying the emblems of authority. “Disobedience of orders. 
will be death.” 
Liu Pei said, “Do you not understand that the plans elabo- 


rated in a little chamber decide success over thousands of li? 


Do not disobey the command, my brothers.” 
Chang Fei went out smiling cynically. 


Kuan Yü remarked, “Let us await the result. If he fail 


then we can look to it.” | ; 

The brothers left. None of the officers understood anything 
of the general line of strategy and, though they obeyed orders, 
they were not without doubts and misgivings. 

K‘ung-ming said to Liu Pei, “You may now lead your men 
to the hills and camp till the enemy shall arrive to-morrow 
evening. Then you are to abandon the camp and move away 
retreating till the signal is seen. Then you will advance and 
attack with all force. The two Mi and I will guard the city.” 

In the city he prepared banquets to celebrate the victory 
and also prepared the books to record exceptional services. 


; Liu Pei no noted all these Ainea with not a little trouble in his 
hear : 
= Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army in due course reached Powang. Then 
half of them, the veterans, were told off for the first attack 
‘and the remainder were to guard the baggage train and 
i supplies.. Thus they marched in two divisions. The season 
- was autumn and a chilly wind began to blow. 
They pressed forward. Presently they saw a cloud of dust 


ahead of them and the general ordered the ranks to be re- 


formed. He questioned the guides as to the name of the place. 
They told him the place in front was Powang Slope and behind 
them was the Lok‘ou Stream. Then Hsiahou Tun rode to the 
- front. to reconnoitre, leaving Yü Chin and Li Tien to finish 
setting out the battle array. 
_ Presently he began to laugh and, when they asked the cause 
of this merriment, he replied, “Hei Shu praised Chuko Liang 
to the very skies as something more than human. But now 
that I see how he has placed his men and the stuff he has put 
into his vanguard, it seems to me that he is sending dogs or 
sheep against tigers and leopards. I bragged a littie when I 
- said I would take him prisoner, but I am going to moke good 
- my boast.” 
Then he rode forward at full speed. Chao Yün rode té meet 


_ him and Tun opened a volley of abuse. “You lot, followers of- 


- Liu Pei, are only like wraiths following devils.” 
= This angered Chao Yün and a combat began. In a little 
time Chao Ytin turned and retreated as if he was worsted. 
Tun pressed after him and kept up the chase for some ten li.. 
‘Then Chao suddenly turned again and offered fight; but only 
to retreat after a few passes. 
_ Seeing these tactics Han Hao, one of Tun’s s captains, rode. 
up to his chief and urged him to use caution saying he feared 
he was being inveigled into an ambush. 
“With such antagonists as these I should not fear a score of 
-ambushes,” replied Tun, pressing forward eagerly. } 
Just as he reached the slope he heard the roar of a bomb. 
and out came Liu Pei to attack. “Here is your ambush,” 


said Hsiahou Tun, laughing. “T will ‘get to Hsinyeh this 


evening before I have done.” 
He urged his men forward and his opponents retired in 
measure as he advanced. 
As evening came on, thick clouds overcast the whole sky. 
The wind increased but the leader still urged his men after 
the retreating foe. The two captains came to a narrow part 
of the road with reeds and rushes thick all round them. 


“Those who despise the enemy are beaten,” said Li Tien 


to Yü Chin. ‘Away south there the roads are narrow, and 
_ streams and mountains make the country difficult. The forests 
‘are dense and if the enemy used fire we should be lost.” 


A 


N O EMRAT, 

ie s 

S a AA 
pY ews Ure 


416 San Kuo, or 


‘ 


“You are right,” replied Chin. “I will get on and warn — 
the Commander. Perhaps he will stop. You can halt chose 


who come up.’ 

Yu Chin rode forward shouting at the top of his voice. 
Hsiahou Tun saw him coming up and asked what was the 
matter. Chin told him of the state of the country and re- 
minded him of the danger of fire. His ferocity had then 


somewhat abated and he turned his. steed toward his main 


body. 
Then there arose a shout behind him. A rushing noise came 
from in the reeds and great tongues of flame shot up here 


and there. These spread and soon the fire was in “the four 


quarters and the eight sides,” and fanned by a strong wind. 

The Ts‘ao troops were thrown into confusion and trampled 
each other down. Many perished. Chao Yiin turned on them 
again. The Commander-in-Chief dashed through the fire and 
smoke to escape. 


Now Li Tien saw that things were going very badly so he — 


turned to get back to Powangch‘éng but fell upon a body of 
‘men in the way, led by Kuan Yü. He dashed into their midst 
and managed to get clear. Yü Chin saw the supplies were 


being destroyed and there was nothing left to guard, so he ss 
escaped along a bye-path. Two other captains, who came to — 
try to save the baggage train, met Chang Fei and one of them 


was slain forthwith, but the other escaped. Next morning 


the countryside was strewn with corpas and drenched we 


blood. 


The armies met on Powang Slope 
And K‘ung-ming fought with fire; 
A perfect strategist, he bent 
All men to his desire. 
But poor Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, his enemy, 
He trembled in his shoes 
Before the man, who’d never fought 
But yet could armies use. 


Hsiahou Tung -drew up the battered remains of his army 
and led them back to the capital. 

K‘ung-ming ordered his armies to collect, and as Kuan and 
Chang rode homeward they confessed to each other that the 
new strategist was a fine fellow. Before long they met him 
seated in a light carriage and they dismounted and bowed 


before him. The remaining bodies came in. The spoil was 


distributed among the soldiers and all returned to Hsinyeh, 
where the populace lined the roads to bid them welcome. 
“We owe our lives to the Prince,” they cried to Liu Pei. 
Said K‘ung-ming, ‘‘Hsiahou Tun has been driven off, but 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will come with a stronger force.” 
“And what shall we do?” replied Liu Pei. 
“My plan is quite ready,” said K‘ung-ming. 


or horse or man 
here one can. 


CHAPTER XL. 


THE LADY Ts‘Al DISCUSSES THE RENUNCIATION OF CHINGCHOU = 
CHUKO LIANG BURNS HSINYEH. 


Wren Yiian-té asked how his adviser hoped i repel Ts‘ao > a 
Ts‘ao, K‘ung-ming replied, “This is a small city and unfitted — 


for our lengthy occupation. Liu Piao is ill and failing fast, 
so this is the time to take his district as a base where we may 
be. safe against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.’ 
“You speak well, Master, but Liu Piao has shown me great 
kindness and I could not bear to serve him an ill turn.” 


“Tf you do not take this opportunity you will reer it ever a 


after,” said K‘ung-ming. 
“I would rather perish than do what is wrong.” 
“We will discuss it again,” replied K‘ung-ming. 


When Hsiahou Tun reached the capital he presented himself T 


to his master in bonds and craved death. But his master 
- loosed him and let him tell his tale. And he said, “I was the 
victim of Chuko Liang’s evil machinations ; he attacked with- 
fire.” À 
“As a soldier from your youth you should have remembered 
that fire was a likely weapon in narrow roads.” a 
“Li Tien and Yü Chin reminded me; I am sorry enough Pin 
now.’ 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rewarded his two captains who had warned their 
leader. paged 
“Liu Pei as strong as he is now certainly is a menace to our 
existence and he must be quickly destroyed,” said Hsiahou Tun. 
“He is one of my anxieties,” replied Ts‘ao.. “Sun Ch‘tian 
is the other. The rest do not count. We must take this. 
chance to sweep the south clean.” -~ ee 


Then orders were issued to prepare an army of fifty legions, 


in five divisions of ten legions each. Each had two leaders, 
except the fifth, which Ts‘ao Ts‘ao himself led. The van was 
commanded by Hsii Ch‘u. The seventh moon of the thirteenth 
year was fixed for the march. 

The high officer, K‘ung Jung, offered a remonstrance. He 


said, “Liu Pei and Liu Piao are both of the Imperial, House: — g 


and should not be attacked without grave reasons. Sun Ch‘iian 
in the six districts is terrible as a crouching tiger and, with the 
Great River as his defence, he is very secure. If, Sir Minister, 
you undertake this unj justifiable expedition, you will forfeit the: k 
respect of the world, I fear.” CR 


f 


| Romance of the Three Kingdoms 


: i “AN three of them are disobedient ministers and rebels and 


how can I fail to punish them?” replied Ts‘ao. 
He was angry, and bade the adviser go from his presence. | 


Presently he gave formal orders that he would put to death 
- any one who remonstrated on the subject of his expedition. 


K‘ung Jung went forth from the palace sadly. Casting his 
eyes up to heaven, he cried, “Where is the chance of success 


~ when the perfectly inhumane attacks the perfectly humane? — 


He must be defeated.” 

One of the clients of the historian Chi Lü, whom K‘ung 
Jung had always treated contemptuously and disdainfully, 
happened to hear this apostrophe and told his patron who 


carried the tale to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He also added to it that K‘ung 


habitually spoke disrespectfully of the Chief Minister and 
had been very friendly with Mi Héng. In fact the insults 
that Mi Héng had hurled at Ts‘ao Tss‘ao had been deliberately 


- arranged and intrigued by K‘ung. K‘ung Jung and Mi Héng 


seemed to admire each other hugely and Mi used to say, 
“Confucius is not dead” and the other used to reply “Yen Hui 


has risen again.’ 


Chí Lii’s tale angered Ts‘ao, who ordered the arrest of the 


historian and sent T‘ing Wei to carry it out. 


Now K‘ung Jung had two sons, both young, who were sitting 


at home playing wei-ch‘i, when one of their servants ran in 


and said, “Your father has just been carried off for execution ; 
why do you not run away?” 
The youths replied, “When the nest is pulled down are the 


eggs left unbroken?” 


Even at that moment the same officer came and car ried off 


-the whole household. The two youths were beheaded. The 
father’s corpse was exposed in the streets. 


The ‘Prefect of the Metropolis, Chih Hsi, wept over the 


corpse. This public exhibition of sympathy re-kindled Ts‘ao’s 


anger and he was going to punish it with death. However, 


this additional cruelty was prevented by the adviser Hsün Yü, 


who said, “You should not slay a righteous man who came to 
mourn over his friend’s corpse. He had often warned his 
friend, K‘ung Jung, against the danger his severe rectitude 
might lead him into.” 

Chih Hsi took up the remains of father and sons and buried > 
the 


K‘ung Jung, who dwelt on the north sea shore, 
A noble reputation bore; 

With him all guests warm welcome TA 
And ceaselessly the wine went round. 

For skill in letters he was famed, 

In speech, he dukes and princes shamed, 
Historians his merits tell, 

Recorders say that he did well. 


420 San kuo, or ` 


After wreaking his wrath on K‘ung Jung, Ts‘ao issued the 


order to march. Hsün Yü was left in command of the capital. 


About this time the Prefect of Chingchou became seriously 
ill and he summoned Liu Pei to his chamber. He went ac- 
companied by his two brothers and the adviser. Liu Piao 
said, ““The disease has attacked my very vitals and my time 
is short. I confide my orphans to your guardianship. My 
son is unfit to succeed to my place, and I pray you, my brother, 
to administer the district after my death.” 

Liu Pei wept, saying, “I will do my utmost to help my 
nephew; what else could I do, indeed?” 

Even at this moment came the news of the march of Ts‘ao 


Ts‘ao’s armies and Liu Pei, taking hasty leave of his kinsman, 


was forced to hurry to his station. The evil tidings aggrava- 
ted the sick man’s condition and: he began to make his last 


arrangements. In his testament he appointed Ytian-té the 


guardian of his son Liu Chi, who was to succeed in the lord- 
ship. 

This arrangement greatly angered his Waite the Lady Ts‘ ai. 
She closed the inner doors against all and confided to her own 
partizans, of whom her brother and Chang Yiin were her 
confidants, the keeping of the outer gates. g 

The heir was at Chianghsia and he came to make filial 
enquiries as soon as his father’s condition became serious. 
But Ts‘ai Mao refused him admittance and said, “Your father 
sent you to guard Chianghsia. Such a very responsible post 
should by no means have been quitted without orders. Sup- 
pose it was attacked, what might not happen? If your father 
sees you he will be very angry and it will make him worse. 
That would be most undutiful and you. should return to your 
command at once.” 

Liu Chi stood out for some time, but admittance was denied 
him in spite of his tears. So he returned to his post. Mean- 
while his father rapidly grew worse. He anxiously looked 
for his son, but he came not. Suddenly he uttered piercing 
shrieks and then passed away. ; 

When the Yiians were lords of the north, 

And Piao held the bank of the river, 

It seemed, so strong were they both, 

That they would endure for ever. 

But the women folk troubled their states, 

And, meddling, confusion made; i 
It was mournful indeed to see 

How quickly the house decayed. 

So the Prefect died. Then the widow and her partizans took 
counsel together and forged a testament conferring the lord- 
ship of Chingchou on the second son Liu Ts‘ung before they 
published the news of the death. 

The wrongful heir was then fourteen years of age. He was 
no fool, so he assembled the officials and said, “My father has 


_ passed away and my elder brother is at Chianghsia. More 
_ than that, our uncle is at Hsinyeh. You have made me lord, 
_ but if my brother and uncle come here with an army to punish 
me for usurping the lordship, what explanation can I offer?” 
At first no one replied. Then a secretary Li Kuei, rose and 


said, “You speak well.. Now hasten to send letters of mourning. 
to your brother and ask him to come and take his inheritance. 


Also call upon Yiian-té to come and assist in the administration. 
Then shall we be safe against our enemies on both north and 


= south. I consider this the most excellent plan.” 


_ But Ts‘ai Mao replied harshly, “Who are you to speak thus 
wildly and oppose the’testament of our late lord?” 


Li began to abuse him, “You and your party have fabricated 


this testament, setting aside the rightful heir. Now the whole 


- district is in the hands of the Ts‘ai family and if our dead lord i 


. knew your doings he would slay you.” / 
_Ts‘ai Mao ordered the lictors to take him away to execution. 
» He was hurried out, but his tongue ceased not. | 
i So the younger son was placed in his father’s seat and the 
- Ts‘ai clan shared among them the whole military authority of 


the district. The defence of Chingchou was confided to Téng. 
I and Liu Hsien, while Lady Ts‘ai and her son took up their. 


= residence in Hsiangyang so as to be out of the reach of the 
= rightful heir and his uncle. They interred the remains of the 


late Prefect on the east of Hsiangyang. No notice of the death 


was sent to Liu Chi, the son, or to his uncle. 


Romance of the Three Hingooms 421 


Liu Ts‘ung arrived at Hsiangyang, but, before he had had | 


time to recover from the fatigue of the journey, the startling 
news of the approach of a great army came in. He summoned 
K‘uai Yiieh and Ts‘ai Mao and others to ask counsel. One of 


the secretaries, Fu Sun, offered his advice, saying, “Not only i 


are we threatened by a great army, but the elder son, who is 


- the real heir, at Chianghsia, and his uncle at Hsinyeh, are to be 


reckoned with. These two have not been notified of the death, 


and they will resent that. We shall be in sad case if they also . 


march against us. But if you will adopt my suggestion then 

our people will be as steady as Mount T“ai and our young lord’s 
position and rank will be assured.” 

= “What is your plan?” asked the young lord. 


“To offer the whole district to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, whe will treat 


our young master most liberally.” 

“What advice!” said Liu Ts‘ung angrily. “Am I to yield 
my heritage to another before I have even fairly succeeded 
to it?” Ne . 
= “The advice is good,” said K‘uai Yiieh. “Opportunism is a 
policy and possibilities need consideration. In the name of 
_ government, Ts‘ao is fighting against his neighbours. If our 
lord oppose him he will be termed contumacious. Beside, any 
misfortune on our borders before our young lord is well 


422 Han us, or 1 


established will react upon the internal administration and 
our people will be panic-stricken at the mere news of the | 
approach of a hostile army. How could we then offer any- 
resistance?” 

Liu Ts‘ung replied, “It is not that I disagree with you, but 
I should be a laughing-stock to the whole world were I to 
abandon my heritage without an effort.” 

He was interrupted by a speaker who said, “If their advice 
is good, why not follow it?” 

They turned toward the speaker who was a certain Wang 


Ts‘an of Shangyang, a lean, cadaverous individual much below 


the middle height of a man. : 

However, his talents did not conform to his physical appear- 
ance. When he was yet a youth he went to visit’ Ts‘ai Yung, 
then a vice-president, and although many guests of exalted 
rank were present, the host hastened to welcome the newcomer 
-with the greatest deference. The others were astonished and 
asked why he was so respectful to a mere youth. 

“He is a young man with the highest gifts; were I only like 
him ,” said Ts‘ai. 

Wang was widely read and had a most retentive memory, 
better than any of his contemporaries. If he glanced at a` 
roadside monument as he passed, he remembered every word 
of the inscription. If he saw people playing wei-ch'i and the 


board was suddenly overthrown, he could replace every pip - $ 


in its proper place. He was a good mathematician and his 
poems were exquisite. At seventeen he was appointed a court - 
official but did not take up the appointment.: When the dis- 
turbance in the empire grew serious he sought refuge in | 
Chingchou, where he was received with great honour as guest 
of the Prefect. 

What he said was this, “General, how do you compare with 
‘Ts‘ao Ts‘ao?” ee 
- “Inferior,” replied Liu Ts‘ung. ; 

Wang continued, “Ts‘ao has many soldiers and bold kadan.. ; 
he is able and resourceful. He took Lü Pu and broke the 
power of Yüan Shao. He pursued Liu Pei into Lung and © 
destroyed Wu Huan. The destruction of such firmly estab- 
lished men shows his invincible character. Now he is on 
the way here and it will be very difficult to withstand him. 
The plan proposed is the best you can expect and you 
should not delay and hesitate till it is too late for aught but 
regret.” 

“Worthy Sir, you indeed speak to the point; I must inform 
my mother,” said the young ruler. 

But just then they saw his mother appear from behind a 
screen; she had been listening to all that was said. 

“Why refer to me when three such gentlemen coincide in 
their opinions?” said she. 


Romance of the Three fiingdoms 423 


An So he decided, and the letter of surrender was composed and . 
entrusted to one Sung Chung to convey secretly to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


- Sung went straight to Wanch‘é éng and presented the letter. 


_ It was received with joy and the bearer well rewarded. The 

_ submission was accepted and Sung was told to tell his master 

to go out to meet Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in the open country and he was- 

to: be confirmed in perpetual tenure of his land. 
Sung Chung left the city and took the homeward way. He 
_ had nearly reached the ferry when he fell in with a party of 
horse. On a closer look he saw the leader was Kuan Yü. The 
|. messenger tried to escape observation, but was presently 
captured and taken to the leader to be ‘questioned. At first — 
he prevaricated but on being closely questioned told the whole 
= story. Then he was carried off to Hsinyeh and made to retell. 
his story to Liu Pei who heard it with lamentations. 

Chang Fei said, “This being so, I propose that we put this 

fellow to death, then cross the river, attack Hsiangyang and 

. make an end of the Ts‘ai tribe and Liu Ts‘ ung as well. Then 

"we can attack Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.’ 

-~ But Yüan-tê replied, “Just shut your mouth. I have some- 
thing more to say.” Then turning to the prisoner he shouted, 
When they did all this why did you not come to tell me? As 

_ things are now there is nothing to: be gained by miling you. 

— You may go.’ j 

Sung Chung stammered his thanks, threw his arms over his 

-head and ran away. Yüan-tê was very sad. 

= Presently a certain I Chi, a messenger from his nephew, was 

announced. Yüan-tê was very fond of this man and went 
~- down the steps to welcome him. 

- Then said I Chi, “The heir has heard that his father is dead, 

-but his stepmother and her family are keeping back the news 

so that they may set up Liu Ts‘ung. He knows the news is 
true, as he sent a special messenger to find out. He thinks you, 

eo ON Prince, may not know and has sent me to inform you and- 
his letter begs you to lead all the men you can to Hsiangyang 

to help him assert his claims.” — 

Poy Muan-te opened and read the letter. Then he said, “Yes; 

= you know that the younger son has usurped the lordship, 

but you have not heard that he has already sent to offer the 
district to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.’ 
This news shocked I Chi. “How know you this?” he | 
asked. 
Liu Pei told of the capture of Sung Chung. Chi said, “You 
can go to Hsiangyang as if to attend the mourning ceremonies 
and so draw Liu Ts‘ung into coming out of the city to welcome 

_ you. Then you can seize him, slay his party and fake the 

district.” 

= “Your advice is good,” said K‘ung-ming, ‘ ‘and my lord: 
} ought to take He ; 


sy 
ee 
fh x 


APA RO Han Kus, or > 


Liu Pei wept, saying, “In his last interview my brother 
confided his son and heir to my care. If I lay hands upon 
another son and seize upon the inheritance, how shall I be 
able to look my brother in the face when I meet him by and 
bye beyond the grave?’ 

“If you do not act in this way now how will you repel Ts‘ao. 
Ts‘ao, who has already reached Wanch‘éng? ?? said Kung-ming. 

“Our best plan is to take refuge in Fanch’eéng,” replied 
Yüan-tê. EN i 

Just about tnis tine the spies came to say that Ts‘ ao’s army 
had reached Powang. So I Chi'was sent off with instructions. 
to take measures for the defence of Chianghsia, while Liu Pei 
and K‘ung-ming discussed plans for meeting the enemy. 

K‘ung-ming bade his master take heart. As he had seen 
the last army destroyed by fire, so would he see this one also 
the victim of a ruse. He said, “This is no place to live in; 
we will move over to Fanch‘éng.’ 

Then notices were posted at all the gates that all the people, 
without any exception, were to follow their rulers at once to 
the new city to escape danger. Boats were prepared and the 
people sent away under the direction of Sun Ch‘ien. Mi Chu 
saw to the safe conveyance of the families of the officials. ? 

Then the officers assembled for orders. Kuan Yü was to 
go to the White River. His men were to carry bags to fill 
with sand and earth to dam the river till the enemy should | 
be heard, about the third watch next day. Then the waters 
were to be freed to drown one of the armies. He was then 
to march down river. Chang Fei was to go to Poling Ferry, 
where the current was slow. After the waters of the White 
River had been let loose on T's‘ao’s men they would try to get 
over the river at the ferry. They were to be attacked. Chao ` 


Yün was to divide three companies into four parties and take 


one to the east gate. The other three were for the other gates. 
The roofs of the houses within the city walls were piled with — 
sulphur nitre and other combustibles. 

The intention was to set fire to the city when the army of 
the enemy had entered it for shelter. There would be a strong 
breeze next day in the evening which would fan the flames. 
When this wind began to blow, fire arrows were to be shot 
into the city from all sides. When the flames were high there 
was to be a great shouting outside to add to the general terror. 
The east gate was to be left free for escape, but the flying 
men were to be smitten after passing the gate. Fanch‘éng 
was the rallying centre after the battle. 

Other orders were given to Mi Fang and Liu Féng to take 
command of two companies, one half with red flags and the 
other half with black. They were to go to Magpie Tail Slope 
(Hsiwei P‘o)., about thirty li from the city and camp. When 
they saw the Ts‘ ao army coming along they were to move right 


ary 


a 


- Ch‘u pressed forward. As he neared the flags moved from . My 
side to side and he hesitated. He began to think it unwise to 
advance and called a halt. Finally it was decided to go no 


— 


y ii: lett tovcontuse themésc that they should. be afraid togi 


advance further. 
All the orders given, ie various. leaders went their way to 
take up their positions and await the burning of the city. 


K‘ung-ming and Liu Pei went away to an eminence whence 
pose could watch what happened and where they would await 


_ the reports of victory. 
Ts‘ao Hung and T's‘ ao Jên, with their ten legions, preceded 


by Hsü Ch‘u leading three companies of mailed men, marched | 
toward Hsinyeh. They formed a mighty host. They reached 


Magpie Tail Slope about noon. Looking ahead, they saw what 
seemed a goodly army with many black and red flags. Hsti 


farther then, and the leader rode back to the main body to see: 


When he reached the wood where he had seen the flags he . 
= saw no one at all. It was then late in the afternoon but he > 
_ decided to move on. Then he heard from the hills the sound. 


Ts‘ao Jen. 


“Those men are only make-believe,” said Ts‘ao Jên. “Ad. 


vance, there is no ambush. I will hasten up the supports.” 
So Hsti Ch‘u rode to his own command again and advanced. 


of musical instruments and, looking up, saw on the hill top- 


W two umbrellas surrounded by many banners. There sat Liu 
= Pei and K‘ung-ming quietly drinking. 


Angry at their coolness, he sought for a “way up, but logs. 
of wood and great stones were thrown down and he was driven. 


back. Further, from the rear of the hills came a confused roar. 


_ He could find no way to attack and it was getting late. 


Then Ts‘ao Jén arrived and ordered an attack on Hsinyeh 


that he might have a place to rest in. They marched to the- 
walls and found the gates wide open. They entered and found. — 
a deserted city. No one was visible. 


“This shows they are done,” said Ts‘ao Hung, “They have 


all run away, people and all. -We may as well occupy the city 


and rest our men ready for the morrow.’ 


: The soldiers were fatigued with marching and hungry as 
well, so they lost no time in scattering among the houses and 
setting about preparing food in the deserted kitchens. The 


_jJeaders took up their quarters in the yamén. 


After the first watch the wind began to blow. Soon after 
the gate guards reported that a fire had started. 
“The careless men have let sparks fly about,” said the 
General. 

< He thought no more about it just then, but along came: 
Eher reports of like nature and soon he realised that fires 


- breaking out in all quarters were not due to accident. So he 
. gave orders to evacuate the city.. Soon the Whole city seemed: 


“Deonanee oF the amet hingoone ni 425 | 


426 Pe, Dan uo ‘ 
i) 


on fire and a red glow hung in the sky. The army was beset . 
with fire fiercer than it had been at Powang. a 


Thrice wicked was T's‘ao, but he was bold; 

Though all in the capital he controlled, ; 

Yet with this he was not content, 

So southward his ravaging army went. 

But, the autumn wind aiding, the Spirit of Fire 
>» Wrought to his army destruction dire. 


Officers and men dashing through the smoke and fire in 
utter confusion sought some way of escape, and hearing that 
the east gate was free they made for that quarter. Out they - 
rushed pell-mell, many being trodden down and trampled to 
death. Those who got through took the road to the east. ie 

But presently there was a ‘shouting behind them and Chao - 
Yiin’s company came up and attacked. Then Ts‘ao’s men 
scattered, each fleeing for his life. No stand was made. A 
little later Mi Chu came. The fleeing general then had very 
few followers and those left him were scorched and burned 
and very wearied. 

They directed their way to the Paiho, joyfully remembering ~ 
that the river was shallow and fordable. And they went down 
into the stream and drank their fill, men shouting and horses 
neighing. 

Meantime Kuan Yü, higher up its course, had dammed the 
river with sandbags so that its waters were collected in a lake. 
Toward evening he had seen the red glow of the burning city 
and began to look out for his signal. About the fourth watch — 
he heard down stream the sounds of men and horse and at 
once ordered the breaking of the dam. The water rushed 
down in a torrent and overwhelmed the men just then in the 
bed of the river. Many were swept away and drowned. 
Those who escaped made their way to where the stream ran 
gently and got away. ; 

Presently they reached the ferry at Powang. Here, where 
they thought there would be safety, they found the road barred. 


“You Ts‘ao brigands!” shouted Chang Fei. “Come and 


m? 


receive your fate! 


Within the city the red flame leaps out: 
On the river. bank black anger is met. 


What happened will appear in later chapters. 


f 


CHAPTER XLI. 


LIU PEI LEADS HIS PEOPLE OVER THE RIVER: 
CHAO YUN RESCUES HIS LORD. 


Ehe last chapter closed with the attack made by Chang Fei 
-as soon as his brother had let loose the waters on the doomed. 
army. He met with Hsü Ch‘u and a combat began, but a 
fight with such a warrior was not to Hsii’s taste and he ran 
away. Chang Fei followed till he came upon Liu Pei and 
_ K‘ung-ming and the three went up stream till they came to 
the boats that had been prepar ed, when they all crossed over 
and marched toward Fanch‘éng. As soon as they disembarked 
~K‘ung-ming ordered the boats and rafts to be burned. 

Ts‘ao Jên gathered in the remnants of his army and camped 
- at Hsinyeh, while his pele fee went to tell their lord the evil 
- tidings of defeat. 

“How dare he, this rustic fool!” Seamed Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
angrily. 

He then hails sent an overwhelming army to camp near 
the place and gave orders for enormous works against the city, . 
levelling hills and turning rivers to launch a violent assault 
on Fanch‘éng from every side at once. 


Then Liu Yeh came in to see his lord and said, “Sir, you i 


are new to this district and you should win over the people’s 
hearts. Liu Pei has moved all the people from Hsinyeh to 
Fanch’e éng. If we march through the country, the people will 
be ground to powder. It would be well to call upon Liu Pei 
first to surrender, which will prove to the people that you 
have a care for them. If he yield then we get Chingchou 
- without fighting. ` 

~ Ts‘ao agreed and asked who would be a suitable messenger. 
The reply was Hsü Shu. 

“He is a close friend and he is here with the army,” said 
_ Liu Yeh. 

“But he will not come back,” objected Ts‘ao. 

“Tf he does not return he will be a laughing stock to the 
whole world; he will come back.” 

Hsii Shu was sent for, and Ts‘ao Said, “My first intention 
was to level Fanch‘éng with the ground, but out of pity for 
- its people you may carry an offer to Liu Pei, that if he will 
surrender he will not only not be punished but he shall be 
given rank. But if he hold on his present misguided course 
the whole of his followers shall be destroyed. Now you are 


ATAN 


j Ñ 
A A | 
ust 


428, San kuo, or, 


$ 


an honest man and so I confide this mission to you, and I trust _ 


you will not disappoint me.’ 
Hsü Shu said nothing but accepted his orders and went to the 
city, where he was received by both Liu Pei and K‘ung-ming. 


They enjoyed a talk over old times before Shu mentioned the 
object of his mission. Then he said, “Ts‘ao has sent me to- 


invite you to surrender, thereby making a bid for popularity. 
But you ought also to know that he intends to attack the city 


from every point, that he is damming up the Paiho waters to’ 


be sent against you, and I fear you will not be able to hold 
the city. You ought to prepare.’ 

Liu Pei asked Shu to remain with them, but he said that 
that was impossible, for all the world would ridicule him if 
he stayed. 

“My old mother is dead and I never forget my resentment. 


My body may be over there, but I swear never to form a plan 


for him. You have the ‘Sleeping Dragon’ to help you and 


‘need have no anxiety about the ultimate achievement of your ' 


undertaking. But I must go.’ 
And he took his leave. Liu Pei felt he could not press his 
friend to stay. He returned to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp and reported 


that Liu Pei had no intention of surrender. This angered ` 


Ts‘ao who gave orders to begin the siege. When Liu Pei 


asked what K‘ung-ming meant to do he replied that they would . 


abandon Fanch‘éng and take Hsiangyang. 


“But what of the people who have followed us? They | 


cannot be abandoned.” 


“You can tell them to do as they wish. They may come if- 
they like, or remain here.” 


They sent Kuan Yü to prepare boats and told Sun Ch‘ien 
to proclaim to the people that Ts‘ao was coming, that the city 
could not be defended, and those who wished to do so might 
cross the river with the army. All the people cried, “We will 
follow the prince even if it be to death.” 

They started at once, some lamenting, some weeping, the 
young helping the aged and parents leading their children, the 
strong soldiers carrying the women. As the crowds crossed 
the river from both banks arose the sound of lamentation. 

Yiian-té was much affected as he saw all this from the boat. 


“Why was I ever born,” said he, “to be the cause of all this. 


misery to the people?” 

He made to leap overboard, but they heid him back. All 
were deeply sympathetic. When the boat reached the southern 
shore he looked back at the weeping crowds waiting still on 
the other bank and was again moved to tears. He bade Kuan 
Yü hasten the boats before he mounted and rode on. 


When Hsiangyang came in sight they saw many flags flying 


on the walls and that the moat was protected by chevaux de 


frise. Ytian-té checked his horse and called out, “Liu Ts‘ung, . 


es ae Romance of the Three Ringroms R ae 


good nephew, I only wish to save the people and nothing more. 
I pray you quickly to open the gates.” 

But Liu Ts‘ung was too frightened to appear. Ts‘ ai Mao 
and Chang Yün went up to one of the fighting towers and 
ordered the soldiers to shoot arrows down on those without 
_ the walls. The people gazed up at the towers and wept aloud. 


Suddenly there appeared a captain, with a small following, | 


who cried out, “You are two traitors. The princely Liu is a 
most upright man and has come here to preserve his people. 
Why do you repulse him?” 

All looked at this man. He was of middle height, with a 
face dark brown as a ripe date. He was from Iyang and 
named Wei Yen. At that moment he looked very terrible, 
whirling his sword as if about to slice up the gate guards. 


They lost no time in throwing open the gate and dropping 


-the bridge. “Come in, Uncle Liu,” cried Yen, ” ‘and bring your 
men to slay these traitors! Ve 
Chang Fei plunged forward to take him at hie word, but 


-was checked by his brother, pen said, “Do not frighten the > 


people!” 
Thus Wei Yen let in Liu Pei. As soon as he entered he saw 
a captain galloping up with a few men. The newcomer yelled, 


“Wei Yen, you nobody! how dare you create trouble? Do you 


not know me, the Generalissimo Wên P‘ing?” — 

Wei Yen turned angrily, set his spear and galloped forward 
-to attack the generalissimo. The soldiers joined in the fray 
and the noise of battle rose to the skies. 

“I wanted to preserve the people and I am only causing 
them injury,” cried Yiian-té distressed. “I do not wish to 
„enter the city.” 

“Chiangling is an important point; we will first take that 
as a place to dwell in,” said K‘ung-ming. 

“That pleases me greatly,” said Yüan-tê. 


So they led the people thither and away from Hsiangyang. 
Many of the inhabitants of that city took advantage of the | 


~ confusion to escape and they also joined themselves to Ytian-té. 
Meanwhile, within the inhospitable city, Wei Yen and Wen 
- Ping fought. The battle continued for four or five hours, all 
through the middle of the day, and nearly all the combatanis 


fell. Then Wei Yen got away. As he could not find Yiian-té — 


he rode off to Ch‘angsha and sought an asylum with the 
Prefect, Han Ytian. « 

Yiian-té wandered away from the city that had refused 
shelter. Soldiers and people, his following numbered more 


than a hundred thousand. The carts numbered scores of 


thousands, and the burden bearers were innumerable. Their 
road led them past the tomb of Liu Piao and Yüan-tê turned 
aside to bow at the grave. He lamented, saying, “Shameful 
is thy brother, lacking both in virtue and in talents. I refused 


We ES a 


430 San Huo, or 


to bear the burden you wished to lay upon me, wherein I was 


wrong. But the people committed no sin. I pray your glorious i 


spirit to descend and rescue these people.” 


His prayer was fraught with sorrow and all those about him ; 


wept. 

Just then a scout rode up with the news that Fanch‘éng was 
already occupied and that men were preparing boats and rafts 
to cross the river. The captains knew that Chiangling was a 
defensible place, but they said, “With this crowd we can only 


advance very slowly and when can we reach the city? If Ts‘ao 4 


Ts‘ao pursue, we shall be in a parlous state. Our counsel is 
to leave the people to their fate for a time and press on to the 
city.” 


But Yiian-té wept. saying, “The success of every great enter: 


prise depends upon humanity ; how can I abandon these people 
who have joined me?” 

Those who heard him repeat this noble sentiment were 
greatly affected. 


In time of stress his heart was tender toward the people, 
And he wept as he went down into the ship, 

Moving the hearts of soldiers to sympathy. 

Even to-day, in the countryside, 

Fathers and elders. recall the Princely One’s kindness. 


The progress of Yüan-tê, with the crowd of people in his 


train, was very slow. 

“The pursuers will be upon us “quickly,” said K‘ung-ming. 
“Let us send Kuan Yü to Chiangk‘ou for succour. Liu Chi 
should be told to bring soldiers and prepare boats for us at 
Chiangling.”’ 

Ytian-té agreed to this and wrote a letter which he sent by 
the hands of Kuan Yü and Sun Ch‘ien. Chang Fei was put 
in command of the rear guard. Chao. Yün was told to guard 
the aged and the children, while the others ordered the march 


of the people. They only travelled a short distance daily and os 


the halts were frequent. 

Meanwhile Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was at Fanch‘éng, whence he sent 
soldiers over the river toward Hsiangyang. He summoned 
Liu Ts‘ung, but he was too afraid to answer the call. No 
persuasion could get him to go. One, Wang Wei, said to him 
privately, “Now you can overcome Ts‘ao Ts‘ao if you are wise. 
Since you have announced surrender and Liu Pei has gone 


away, he will relax his precautions and you can catch him 


unawares. Send a well-prepared but unexpected force to 
waylay him in some commanding position and the thing is 
done. If you were to take Ts‘ao prisoner your fame would 


run throughout the empire and the land would be | yours for ` 
the taking. This is a sort of opportunity that does not recur — 


and you should not miss it.” 


eee fiomance of the whee. thingvoms | 431 


‘The young man consulted Ts‘ai Mao, who called Wang an 


) evil counsellor and spoke to him harshly. “You are mad; 


you know nothing and understand nothing of destiny,” said 


fs Mao. 


Wang Wei angrily retorted, calling his critic the betrayer 
of his country, and saying he wished he could eat him alive. 
The quarrel waxed deadly but eventually peace was restored. 

Then Ts‘ai Mao and Chang Yiin went to Fanch‘éng to see 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Mao was by instinct specious and flattering, and 
when his host asked concerning the resources of the district, 
he replied, “There are five legions of horse, fifteen of foot 
and eight of marines. Most of the money and grain are at 
Chiangling; the rest is stored at various places. There are 
ample supplies for a year.’ i 

“How many war vessels are there? Who is in Command! i 
said Ts‘ao. 

“The ships, of all sizes, ATURE seven thousand and we two 
are the commanders.” x 

Upon this Ts‘ao conferred upon Ts‘ao Mao the title of 
Marquis, Guardian of the South and Admiral-in-Chief of the 
Naval Force and Chang Yün was his Vice-Admiral with the 
title of Marquis Tsŭ-shun. 

When they went to thank Ts‘ao for these honours he told 
them he was about to propose to the throne that Liu Piao’s 


‘son should be perpetual prefect of Chingchou in succession to 


his late father. With this promise for their young master 


. and the honours for themselves they retired. 
=- Then Hsiin Yu asked Ts‘ao why these two evident self- 


seekers and flatterers had been treated so generously. Ts‘ao 
replied, “Do I not know all about them? Only in the north 


- country, where I have been, they know nothing of war by 


water and these two men do. I want their help for the 
present. When my end is achieved I can do as I like with 
them.” 

Liu Ts‘ung was highly delighted when his two chief sup- 
porters returned with the promise Ts‘ao had given them. 


Soon after he gave up his seal and military commission and 


proceeded to welcome Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who received him very 


- graciously. 


Ts‘ao next proceeded to camp near Hsiangyang. The popu- 


- lace, led by Ts‘ai Mao, welcomed him with, burning incense, 


and he on his part put forth proclamations couched in com- 
forting terms. ` 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao presently entered the city and took his seat in 
the residence in state. Then he summoned K‘uai Ytieh and 
said to him graciously, “I do not rejoice so much at gaining 


‘Chingchou as at meeting you, I-tu.” 


He made K‘uai Prefect of Chiangling and Marquis of Fan- 


-ch‘éng; his other adherents were all ennobled. Liu Ts‘ung 


BENDE, 


432 | Ban Hus, or 


\ 


became Governor of Ch‘ingchou in the north and was ordered 


to proceed to his district forthwith. He was greatly frightened i 
and said he had no wish to become an actual official; he wished — 


to remain in the place where his father and mother lived. 


Said Ts‘ao, “Your governorship is quite near the capital. 


and I have sent you there as a full official to remove you 
from the intrigues of this place.” 

In vain Liu Ts‘ung declined the honours thus thrust upon 
him; he was compelled to go and he departed, taking his 
mother with him. Of his friends, only Wang Wei accompanied 
him. Some of his late officers escorted him as far as the river 
and then took their leave. Then Ts‘ao called his trusty officer 
Yü Chin and bade him follow up Liu Ts‘ung and put him and 
his mother to death. 


Yü Chin followed the avian party. When he drew near he 


shouted, “I have an order from the great Minister to put 
you both to death, mother and son; you may as well submit 
quietly.” 

The Lady Ts‘ai threw her arms about her. son, lifted up 
her voice and wept. Yü Chin bade the soldiers get on with 
their bloody work. Only Wang Wei made any attempt to 


save his mistress and he was soon killed. The two, mother. 


and son, were soon finished and the murderer returned to 
report his success. He was richly rewarded. 


Next Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sent to discover and seize the family of 


K‘ung-ming, but they had already disappeared. It was much 
to Ts‘ao’s disgust that the search was fruitless. 

So Hsiangyang was settled. Then Hsün Yu proposed a 
further advance. He said, “Chiangling is an important place, 
oe very rich; if Liu Pei gets it, it will be difficult to dislodge 

im.” 

“How could I have overlooked that?” said Ts‘ao. 

Then he called upon the officers of Hsiangyang for one who 
could lead the way.. They all came except Wên P‘ing. 

Ts‘ao sent for him and soon he came also. “Why are you 
late?” asked Ts‘ao. 

“To be.a minister and see one’s master lose his own bound- 
aries is most shameful. Such an one has, no face to show to 
any man and I was too ashamed to come.’ 

His tears fell fast as he finished this speech. Ts‘ao admired 


his loyal conduct and rewarded him with office and a title, and - 


also bade him open the way. 

The spies returned and told how Liu Pei was hampered by 
the crowds of people who had followed him. And he was then 
only three hundred li away. Ts‘ao decided to take advantage 
of his plight so chose out five companies of tried horsemen and 
sent them after the cavalcade, giving them a limit of a day 
ae a night to come up therewith. The main army would 

ollow. 


As has een said Liu Pei was beaveling with. a huge , 


multitude of followers, to guard whom he had taken what 


egy precautions were possible. Kuan Yü had been sent to 


x Chianghsia. One day K‘ung-ming came in and said, “There — 


is as yet no news from Chianghsia; what are we to do? Ps 
“T wish that you yourself would go there,” said Liu Pei. 


“Liu Chi would remember your former kindness to him and Aap 


consent to anything you proposed.” 


K‘ung-ming said he would go and set out with Liu Féng, i 
the adopted son of Liu Pei, taking an escort of half a company. 


A few days after, while on the march in company with three 
of his intimate captains, a sudden whirlwind rose just in front 


of Yüan-tê, and a huge column of dust shot up into the air — ii p 


_ hiding the face of the sun. Yiian-té was frightened and asked 
~ what that might portend. Chien Yung, who knew something 

of the mysteries of nature, took the auspices by counting 
- secretly on his fingers. Pale and trembling he announced 
that a calamity was threatening that very night. He advised 
- his lord to lead the people to their fate + iba flee quickly. But 
he refused to think of it. 


“If you allow your pity to overcome vole judgment, then __ 


_ misfortune is very near,” said Chien. 

~- Thus spake Chien Yung to his lord, who then asked what 
` place was near. - His people replied that Tangyang was quite 
-close and there was a very famous hill near it called Chingshan 


or Prospect Hill. Then Yiian-té bade them lead the way | 


: thither. 


The season was late autumn, just changing to winter, and — 


the icy wind penetrated to the very bones. As evening fell, 


— jong-drawn howls of misery were heard on every side. At 


- the middle of the fourth watch, two hours after midnight, 
they heard a rumbling sound in the north-west. Yiian-té 
halted and placed himself at the head of his own guard of two 
companies to meet whatever might come. Presently Ts‘ao’s 


‘men appeared and made a fierce onslaught. Defence was 


impossible, though Yiian-té fought desperately. By good for- 

. tune just at the crisis Chang Fei came up, cut his way through, 

-~ rescued his brother and got him away to the east. Presently 
_ they were stopped by Wên P‘ing. 


~“Tyrncoat! Can you still look men in. the face?” cried / 


Yiian-té. 

. Wên Ping was overwhelmed with shame and led his men 
away. Chang Fei, now fighting, now flying, protected his 
j brother till dawn. — 

- ` By that time Liu Pei had got beyond the sound of battle 
i and there was time to rest. Only a few of his men had been 
able to keep near him. He knew nothing of the fate of his 
captains or the people. He lifted up his voice in lamentation 
saying, “Myriads of living souls are suffering from love of me, 


- omance of ibe Three hingooms Be aga X | 


434 an uo, or ` 


, and my captains and my loved ones are lost. One would bea _ 


graven image not to weep at such loss.” 


Still plunged in sadness presently he saw hurrying toward ` 


him Mi Fang, with an enemy’s arrow still sticking in his face. 
He exclaimed, “Chao Yün has gone over to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao!” 

Yüan-tê angrily bade him be silent. ‘Do you think I can 
believe that of my old friend?” cried he. 

“Perhaps he has gone over,” said Chang Fei. “He must see 
that we are nearly lost and there are riches and honours on 
the other side.” 

“He has followed me faithfully through all my misfortunes. 
< heärt is firm as a rock. No riches or honours would move 

im: 

“I saw him go away north-west,” said Mi Fang. 

“Wait till I meet him,” said Chang Fei. “If I run against 
him I will kill him.” ; : ; 

“Beware how you döubt him,” said Yüan-tê. “Have you 
forgotten the circumstances under which your brother had to 


slay two men to ease your doubts of him? Chao Yün’s absence 


is due to good reason wherever he has gone, and he would 
never abandon me.” ` 


But do you think Chang Fei was convinced? Then Chang ; 


Fei, with a score of his men, rode to Ch‘angpan Bridge. 
Seeing a wood near the bridge, an idea suddenly struck him. 


He bade his followers cut branches from the trees, tie them to » 


the tails of the horses and ride to and fro so as to raise a 


great dust as though an army were concealed in the wood. : 


He himself took up his station on the bridge facing the west 
with spear set ready for action. So he kept watch. 
Now Chao Yiin, after fighting with the enemy from the 


fourth watch till daylight, could see no sign of his lord and,” 
moreover, had lost his lord’s family. He thought bitterly — 


within himself, “My master confided to’ me his family and 
the young lord; and I have lost them. How can I look him 
in the face? I can only go now and fight to the death. 
Whatever happen I must go to seek the women and my 
lord’s son.” 

Turning about he found he had but two score followers left. 
. He rode quickly to and fro among the scattered soldiers seeking 
the lost women. The lamentations of the people about him 
were enough to make heaven and earth weep. Some had been 
wounded by arrows, others by spears ; they had thrown away 


their children, abandoned their wives, and were flying they | 


knew not whither in crowds. 


Presently he saw a man lying in the Geass and. recognised 


him as Chien Yung. 
., ‘Have you seen the two mothers?” cried he. 


” Chien replied, “They left their carriage and ran away taking 


Q-tou in their arms. I followed but on the slope of the hill 


eT Oy PSS Sy ee ere y) 


Romance of the abe dtingvoms 


aS I was wounded and fell from my horse. The horse was stolen. 
- I could fight no longer and I lay down here.” — 

: Chao Yün put his colleague on the horse of one. of his 
followers, told off two soldiers to support him and bade him 
ride to their lord and tell him of the loss. “Say,” said he, 
“that I will seek the lost ones in heaven or hell, through good 
or evil, and if I find them not I will die in the desert. a 

Then he rode off toward Ch‘angpan Slope. As he went a 
voice called out, “General Chao, where are you going?’ 

“Who are you?” said Chao Yün, pulling up. grit 

“One of the Princely One’s carriage guards. Iam wounded.” 

“Do you know anything of the two ladies?” 

_. “Not very long ago I saw the Lady Kan go south with a` 
party of other women. Her hair was down and she was 
` barefooted.” 

; Hearing this, without even aroe lance: at the speaker, 
Chao Yün put his horse at full gallop toward the south. Soon 
he saw a small crowd of persons, male and female, walking 
hand in hand. 

“Ts the Lady Kan among you?” he called out. | 
= A woman in the rear of the party looked up at him and 
uttered a loud cry. He slipped off his steed, stuck his spear 
‘in the sand and wept, “It was my fault that you were lost. 
` But where are the Lady Mi and our young lord?” 

She replied, “I and she were forced to abandon our eaaa 
and mingle with the crowd on foot. Then a band of soldiers: 
came up and we were separated. I do not know where they 
are. I ran for my life.” . 

As she spoke a howl of distress rose how the crowd of 
fugitives, for a company of soldiers appeared. Chao Yün re- 
covered his spear and mounted ready for action. _ Presently 
he saw among the soldiers a prisoner bound upon a horse; 
and the prisoner was Mi Chu. Behind him followed a captain 
gripping a huge sword. The men belonged to the army of 
T's‘ao Jên and the Captain was Shunyu Tao. Having captured 
=- Mi Chu he was just taking him to his chief as a proof of his 

prowess. | 

Chao Yün shouted and rode at the captor who was speedily 
unhorsed and his captive was set free. Then taking two of 
the horses Chao Yiin set the lady on one and Mi Chu took the 
other. They rede away toward Ch‘angpan Slope. 

But there, standing grim on the bridge, was Chang Fei. 
As soon as he saw Chao Yün he called out, “Tzt-lung, why 
- have you betrayed my brother?” 

“I fell behind because I was seeking the ladies and our young 
lord,” said Chao Yin. “What do you mean by talking of 
. betrayal? tA 
“Tf it had not been that Chien Yung arrived before you I 

should hare haye spared you.” 


435 


} 


Ban kuo, or 


“Where is the master?’ said Chao Yün. 

“Not far away, in front there.” \ 

“Conduct the Lady Kan to him; I am going to look for the 
Lady Mi,” said Chao, Yün to his companion, and „he turned 
back along the road by which he had come. 

Before long he met a captain armed with an iron spear aan) 
carrying a sword slung across his back, riding a curvetting 
steed and leading a half score of other horsemen. Without 
uttering a word Chao Yün rode straight toward him and- 
engaged. At the first pass he disarmed his opponent and- 
brought him to earth. His followers galloped away. ii 

This fallen officer was no other that Hsiahou En. Ts‘ao 
= Ts‘ao’s sword-bearer, and the sword on his back’ was his 
master’s. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had two swords, one called J-t‘ien | 
(Trust in God) and the other Ch‘ing- kung. - I-t‘ien was the — 
weapon he usually wore at his side, the other being carried © 


i by his sword-bearer, Ch‘ing-kung would cut clean through | 


iron as though it were mud and no sword had so keen an 
- edge. 

12 When .Chao Yün thus fell in with Ts‘ ao’s sword-bearer the 
later was simply plundering, depending upon the authority — 


rh 


implied by his office. Least of all thought he of such sudden, me 


death as met him at Chao Yiin’s hands. 

So Chao Yiin got possession of a famous sword. The name 
Ch‘ing-kung was chased in gold characters so that he recog- 
‘nised its value at once. He stuck it in his belt and again 


E 


iy 


plunged into the press. Just as he did so he turned his head Ret 


and saw he had not a single follower left; he was quite alone. 
Nevertheless not for a single instant thought. he of turning | 


~ back; he was too intent upon his quest. To and fro, back and © 


forth, he rode questioning this person and that. At length a | 
man said, “A woman with a child in her arms, and wounded 


in the thigh so that she cannot walk, is lying over there Ny x 


~ through that hole in the wall.” 

Chao Yiin rode to look and there, beside an old well benina. 
the broken wall of a burned house, sat the mother clasping — 
the child to her breast and weeping. l 

~ Chao was on his knees before her in a moment. 

“My child will live then since you are here,” cried the Lady 
Mi. “Pity him; O General; protect him, for he is the only son 
of his father’s flesh and blood. Take him to his father and 
I can die content.” - 

“It is my fault that you have suffered.” replied Chao Yiin. 
“But it is useless to say more. I pray you take my horse while | 
I will walk beside and protect you till we get clear.” | 

She replied, “I may not do that. What would you do with- 
out a steed? But the boy here I confide to your care. I am 
badly wounded and cannot hope to ‘live. Pray take him and ` 
go your way. Do not trouble more about me.’ © 


{ 


Romance of the Three Ringdoms 


eS 4 hear shouting,” said Chao. “The soldiers: wil be upon a ; 

-~ us again in a moment. Pray mount quickly.” ee 
“But really I cannot move,” she said. “Do. not let ihare í 
be a double loss!” And she held out the child toward him — 


as she spoke. (3 Me 
“Take the child,” cried she. TP life Jna. safety arein o 

your hands.” R im 
Again and again Ehan Yün Nee her to get on his horse, A 

but she would not. The shouting drew nearer and nearer, Chao 


Yün spoke harshly saying. “If you will not do what I say, — 
what will happen when the soldiers come up?” s 
She said no more. Throwing the child on the ground she a 
turned over and threw ne Paea the old well. And there BEN 
‘she perished.. 08 eo y 3, iie sea 
-The warrior relies upon the ntveneth of his charger, í Le ee 
€ Afoot, how could he bear to safety his young prince? ] 
i Brave mother! who died to preserve the son of her husband’s line; Nee 
_ Heroine was she, bold and decisive! E: ) ; ie 


Seeing that the lady had seoed the’ seating, by jane as 
_ there was nothing more to be done. Chao Yün filled in the JEN, 
= well with the rubbish that lay about lest the dead body should — 

- suffer shame. Then he loosened his armour, let down the | 
heart-protecting: mirror and placed the child in his breast. 
: This done he slung his spear and re-mounted. i m 
= He had gone but a short distance when he saw Yen Mine 

one of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s minor. captains. This warrior used a ; 

double edged, three pointed weapon and he offered battle. 

However, Chao Yün disposed of him after a very few bouts. i 

and dispersed his men. i ie 
As the road cleared before him he saw anether deaa a A 
barring his way. At the head of this was a captain of rank | : 
` exalted enough to display a banner with his name Chang Ho. if 

- Chao Yün never waited to parley but attacked. However, this- 

was a more formidable antagonist and half a score bouts found | 

-~ neither any nearer defeat.: But Chao, with the child in his- E 
~ bosom, could only fight with the greatest caution and so he > 

decided to flee. Chang Ho pursued and as Chao thought only. 

of thrashing his steed to get away, and ‘little of the road, 

- suddenly he went crashing into a pit. On came his pursuer, 

‘spear at poise. Suddenly a brilliant flash of light seemed to 


shoot out of the pit and the fallen horse ph with it into the — Ay 

air and was again on firm earth. Wp ce 

_ A bright glory surrounds the child of the imperial line, A i 

now in danger, i 
e NEAN B pone l charger forces his way through the press ; E S 
- of battle, . eal 


Bearing to safety him who was destined to sit on the 
throne two score years and two; 
And the general thus manifested his. godlike courage. 


438 . antnu a 


This apparition frightened Chang Ho, who abandoned the 
pursuit forthwith and Chao Yün rode off. Presently he heard 
shouts behind, “Chao Yün, Chao Yün, stop!” and at the same 
time he saw ahead of him two captains who seemed disposed 
to dispute his way. Two in front and two following; his state 
seemed desperate, but he quailed not. 

As the men of Ts‘ao came pressing on he drew Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s 
own sword to beat them off. Nothing could resist it. Armour, 
clothing, it went through without effort and blood gushed forth 
in fountains wherever it struck. So the four captains were 
-soon beaten off and Chao Yün was once again free. 

Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao from a hill top saw these deeds of derring- 
do and a captain showing such valour that none could with- 
stand him, so he asked of his followers whether any knew the 
man. No one recognised him, so Ts‘ao Hung galloped down 
into the plain and shouted to the hero asking him his name. 

“I am Chao Tzit-lung of Ch‘angshan,” replied Chao Yün. 

Ts‘ao Hung returned and told his lord, who said, “A very 
tiger of a leader! I must get him alive.” Whereupon he sent 
gallopers to all detachments with orders that no arrows were 


to be fired from an ambush at any point. ee Yün should i 


pass; he was to be taken alive. 
And so Chao Yün escaped most imminent danger, and 
O-tou’s safety, bound up with his saviour’s, was also secured. 
On this career of slaughter which ended in ‘safety, Chao Yiin, 
bearing in his bosom him who was to. be known as The Later 
' Lord, cut down two banners, took three spears and slew o 
Ts‘ao’s captains half a hundred, all men of renown. 


Blood dyed the fighting robe and crimsoned 'his buff coat; 
None dared engage the terrible warrior at TANEYSPR; 
In the days of old lived the brave Chao Yün, 

Who fought in the battlefield for his lord in danger. 


Having thus fought his” way out of the press Chao Yün lost 
no time in getting away from the battle field. His battle robe 
was soaked in blood. 

On his way, near the rise of the hills, he met Sah two other 
bodies of men under two brothers, Chung Chin and Chung 
Shén. One of these was armed with a massive axe, the other 
a halberd. As soon as they saw Chao Yiin they knew him and 
shouted, “Quickly dismount and be bound!” 


He has only escaped from the tiger’ s cave, 
To risk the deep pool’s sounding wave. 


How Chao Yiin escaped will be next related. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


CHANG FEI’S GREAT FIGHT AT CH‘ ANGPAN SLOPE: 
Liv PEI, DEFEATED, GOES TO HANCHINGK‘OU. 


‘Aa related in the last chapter two brothers appeared in font 
. of our warrior, who rode at them with his spear ready for a 
thrust. Chung Chin was leading, flourishing his battle-axe. 
Chao Yün engaged and very soon unhorsed him. Then he 
galloped away. Chung Shén rode up behind ready with his 
halberd and his horse’s nose got so close to the other’s tail 


that in Chao Yiin’s back heart-protecting mirror he could see 


the play of the reflection of his weapon. Then suddenly, and 
without warning, Chao Yün wheeled round his horse so that 
he faced his pursuer and their two steeds struck breast to 
breast. With his spear in his left hand he warded off the 


halberd strokes and in his right he swung the sword Ch‘ing- 


_ kung. One slash and he had cut through both helmet and 

head; Chung Shén fell to the ground, a corpse with only half 

-a head on his body. His followers fled and Chao Yün retook 
- the road toward Long Slope Bridge. - 

But in his rear arose another tumultuous shouting, seeming 
‘to rend the very sky, and Wên Pʻing came up behind. However, 
although the man was weary and his steed highspent, Chao 
= Yün got close to the bridge where he saw standing, all ready for 
any fray, his brother in arms. 

“Help me, I-té!” he cried and crossed the bridge. 

“Hasten!” cried Chang Fei, “I will keep back the pursuers.” 

About twenty li from the bridge he saw Ytian-té with his 
followers reposing in the shade of some trees. He dismounted . 
and drew near, weeping. The tears also started to Ytian-té’s 
eyes when he saw his faithful follower. 

Still panting from his exertions, Chao Ytin gasped out, “My 
fault - death is too light a punishment. The Lady Mi was 
severely wounded; she refused my horse and threw herself into 
aweil. Sheis dead and all I could do was to fill in the well with 
the rubbish that lay around. But I placed the babe in the 
breast of my fighting robe and have won my way out of the 
‘press of battle. Thanks to the little lord’s grand luck I have 

escaped. At first he cried a good deal, but for some time now 
he has not stirred or made a sound. I fear I may not have 

saved his life after all.” 
_ Then he opened his robe and looked the child was fast 


asleep- 


ca al San kuo, or, 


“Happily, Sir, your son is unhurt,” said Chao as he drew 
him forth and presented him in both hands. Yüan-tê took the | 
child but threw it aside angrily, saying, “To preserve that 
suckling I very nearly lost a great captain.” 

Chao Yiin picked up the child again and, weeping, said, 
“Were I ground to powder I could not prove my gratitude.” 

From out Ts‘ao’s host a tiger rushed, i 
His wish but to destroy; 
Though Liu Pei’s consort lost her: life, 
Chao Yün preserved her boy. 
“Too great the risk you ran to save 
This child,” the father cried. 
To show he rated Chao Yiin high, 
He threw his son aside. 

Wên Ping and his company pursued Chao Yün till they 
saw Chang Fei’s bristling moustache and fiercely glaring eyes 
before them. There he was seated on his battle steed, his 
hand grasping his terrible serpent-like spear, guarding the . 
bridge. They also saw great clouds of dust rising above the 
trees and concluded they would fall into an ambush if they 
ventured across the bridge. So they stopped the pursuit, not 
daring to advance further. 

In a little time several other captains came up, but none 
dared advance, frightened not only by Chang Fei's fierce look, 
but lest they should become victims of a ruse of the terrible. 
Chuko Liang. As they came up they formed a line on the 
west side, halting till they could inform their lord of the 
position. 

As soon as the messengers arrived and Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao heard 
about it he mounted and rode to the bridge to see for himself.. 
Chang Fei’s fierce eye scanning the hinder position of the 
army opposite him saw the silken umbrella, the axes- and 
banners coming along and concluded that Ts" ao Ts‘ao came 
to see for himself how matters stood. So in a mighty voice ~ 
he shouted, “I am Chang I-té of Yen; who dares fight with 


. me? 9? 


At the sound of this thundrous voice a terrible quaking fear 
seized upon Ts‘ao and he bade them take the umbrella away. 
Turning to his followers he said, “Kuan Yü said that his 
brother Chang Fei was the sort of man to go through an 
army of a hundred legions and take the head of its commander- 
in-chief; and do it easily. Now here is this terror in front 
of us and we must be careful.” 

As he finished speaking again that terrible voice was heard, 
“I am Chang I-té of Yen; who dares fight with me?” 

Ts‘ao, seeing his enemy so fierce and resolute, was too 
frightened to think of anything but retreat and Chang Fei, — 
seeing a movement going on in the rear, once again shook — 
his spear and roared, “What mean you, cowards? You will 
not fight nor do you run away.” 


reeled and fell from his horse terror-stricken, paralysed with 
Rs fear. The panic touched Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and spread to his whole 
j surroundings and he and his staff galloped for their lives. 
They were as frightened as a suckling babe at a clap of 
thunder or a weak woodcutter at the roar of a tiger. Many 
threw away their spears, dropped their casques and fled, a 


wave of panic-stricken humanity, a tumbling mass of terrified W 
horses. None thought of aught but flight, and those who ran — 


trampled the bodies of fallen comrades under foot. 


Chang Fei was wrathful; and who dared 
To accept his challenge? Fierce he glared; 
His thundrous voice rolled out, and then 

In terror fled Ts‘ao’s armed men. 


Panic stricken Ts‘ao Ts‘ao galloped westward with the rest, 


thinking of nothing but getting away. He lost his headdress 


and his loosened hair streamed behind him. Presently Chang 
Liao and Hsü Ch‘u came up with him and seized his bridle; 
fear had deprived him of all self-control. 
“Do not be frightened,” said Chang Liao. “After ali Chang 
Fei is but one man and not worthy of extravagant fear. If 
you will only return and attack you will ‘capture your enemy.’ 


By that time Ts‘ao had somewhat overcome his panic ‘and 


‘become reasonable. Two captains were Bernas back to the 
bridge to reconnoitre. 

Chang Fei saw the disorderly rout of the! enemy but he 
dared not pursue. However, he bade his score or so of dust- 
raising followers to cut loose the branches from their horses’ 
tails and come to help destroy the bridge. This done he went 
to report to his ee and told him of the destruction Of the 
bridge. | 


“Brave as om are, brother, and no one is hese: oe are 


no strategist,” said Liu Pei. 
“What mean you, brother?” 


“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is very deep. You are no match for him; The 


destruction of the bridge will bring him in pursuit.” 
“Tf he ran away ata yell of mine, think you he will dare 
return?” 


“Tf you had left the bridge he would have thought there was . Mine i 


an ambush and would not have dared to pass it. Now the 
destruction of the bridge tells him we are weak and fearful, and 
he will pursue. He does not mind a broken bridge. His legions 
could fill up the biggest rivers that we could get across.” 

_ So orders were given to march and they went by a bye-road 
which led diagonally to Hanching and then took oe road to 
Minyang. 

_ The two captains sent’ by Ts‘ao to becontoitre near Ch‘ang- 
pan. Bridge returned, saying, “The bridge has been destroyed, 
oie Fei has left. ” 


This roar had Erea begun when one of Ts‘ aos staff 


Bie RTOS SE TRIM Cetin, oo Soria < A Ne La E 
5 KOY EFRR { 


Hai gns San Kuo, or 


M 


“Then he is afraid,” said Ts‘ao. 


He at once gave orders to set a legion at work. on three ~ 


floating bridges to be finished that night. 


Li Tien said, “I fear this i is one of the wiles of Chuko Liang; i 


so be ċareful. ” 

“Chang Fei is just. a bold warrior, but there’ is no ‘guile 
about him,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

He gave orders for immediate advance. 

Liu Pei was making all speed to Hanching.° Suddenly there | 
appeared in his track a great cloud of dust whence came loud 


rolls of drums and shoutings. Yuian-té was dismayed and | 


said, “Before. us rolls the great river; behind is the pursuer. 
What hope is there for us?” 

But he bade Chao Yiin organise a defence. 

Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in an order to his army had said, “Liu oe 
is a fish in the fish kettle; a tiger in the pit. Catch him this 
time, or the fish will get back to the sea and the tiger escape - 
to the hills. , Therefore every captain must use his best efforts 
to press on.’ 

In consequence every leader bade those under him hasten 


forward. And they were pressing on at great speed when — 


suddenly soldiers appeared from the hills and a voice cried, 
“T have waited here a long time.” 

The leader who had shouted this bore in his hand the Black 
Dragon sword and rode “Red Hare,” for indeed it was no other 
than Kuan Yü. He had gone to Chianghsia for help and had 
returned with a whole legion. Having heard of the battle he 
had taken this very road to intercept pursuit. 

As soon as Kuan Yü appeared Ts‘ao stopped and said to his 
officers, “Here we are, tricked again by that Chuko Liang.” 

Without more ado he ordered a retreat. Kuan Yü followed 
him some ten li and then drew off to act as guard to his elder 
brother on his way to the river. There boats were ready and 
Yiian-té and family went on board. When all were settled 
comfortably in the boat: Kuan Yü asked where was his sister, 


the second wife of his brother. Then Yüan-tê told him the 


story of Tangyang. ; ; 

“Alas!” said Kuan Yü. “Had you taken my advice that day — 
of the hunting in Hsütien 1 we should have cscs the misery 
of this day.” 

“But,” said Yiian-té, ‘fon that das it was ‘Ware damage 
when pelting rats.’”’ 

Just as he spoke he heard war- drums on the south bank. 
A fleet of boats, thick as a flight of ants, came running up 
with swelling sails before the fair wind. He was alarmed. 

The boats came nearer. There he saw the white clad figure 
of a man wearing a silver helmet who stood in the prow of 
the foremost ship. He cried, “Are you all right, my uncle? 
I am very guilty.” 


fy 


Bu 


an ee 


Ran mee ae 


ae T 


“fiomance of af the bree Hinge Ps ; : 443 


pea: ‘It was iad Chi. ‘Ge bowed low as the ship passed, saying, 
i “I heard you were in danger from Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao and I have 
| come to aid you.” > 

i Yüan-tê welcomed ha with joy and his soldiers joined in 


% ith the main body and the whole fleet sailed on, while they | 


told each other their adventures. 
Unexpectedly in the south-west there appeared a line of 


fighting ships swishing up before a fair wind. Liu Chi said, 


“All my: men are here and now there is an enemy barring 


the way. If they are not Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s ships they must be. 


_ from Chiangtung. We have a poor chance. What now?” 

. Ytian-té went to the prow and gazed at them. Presently 
he made out a figure in a turban and Taoist robe sitting in 
the bows of one of the boats and knew it to be K‘ung-ming. 
Behind him stood Sun Ch‘ien. — 

When they were quite near Ytian-té asked K‘ung-ming how 
he came to be there. And he reported what he had done, 
_ saying, “When I reached Chianghsia I sent Kuan Yü to land 
- at Hanching with reinforcements, for I feared pursuit from 
_ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and knew the road you would take. So I prayed 
_ your nephew to go to meet you while I went to Hsiak‘ou to 
"muster as many men as possible.” 

-The new-comers added to their arene ana they began 
once more to consider how their powerful enemy might þe 
overcome. 

Said K‘ung-ming, “rakod is strong and a good strategical 
point; it is also rich and suited for a lengthy stay. I would 
_ ask you, my lord, to make it a permanent camp. Your nephew 
can go to Chianghsia to get the fleet in order and prepare 
weapons. Thus there will be two threatening angles to our 
position. If we all return to Chianghsia the position will be 
weakened. a 

- Liu Chi replied, “The Adviser-General’s words are excellent, 
put I would rather my uncle stayed awhile in Chianghsia till 


the army was in thorough order. Then he could go to Hsia- 


k‘ou. 

SOU speak to the point, nephew,” replied Yiian-té. Then 
leaving Kuan Yü with half a legion at Hsiak‘ou he, with 
K‘ung-ming and his nephew, went to Chianghsia. 

When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saw Kuan Yü with a force ready to attack 


he feared lest a greater number were hidden away behind, so . 


he stopped the pursuit. He also feared lest Ytian-té should 
take Chiangling, so he marched thither with all haste. 
The two officers in command at Chingchou had heard of 


what happened at Hsiangyang and, knowing that there was - 


no chance of successful defence against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s armies, 
‘they led out the people of Chingchou to the outskirts and 
offered submission. Ts‘ao entered the city and, after restoring 
order and confidence, he released Han Sung and gave him the 


444 © an Kuo, or 


N 


dignified office of Director of Ambassadorial Receptions. He. 


rewarded the others. 


Then said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “Liu Pei has gone to Chianghsia and. i 
may ally himself with Wu and the Gencetier to me will be | 


greater. Can he be destroyed?” 


Hsiin Yu said, “The splendour of your achievements has 
spread wide. Therefore you might send a messenger to invite — 


Sun Ch‘iian to a grand hunting party at Chianghsia and you 
two could seize Liu Pei, share Chingchou with Sun and make 


to you and your end will be gained.” 


Ts‘ao agreed. He sent the letters by a messenger and he 


prepared his men, horse and foot and marines. He had in all 
eighty-three legions, but he called them a hundred. The 
attack was to be by land and water at the same time. 


The fleet advanced up the river in two lines. On the west- 
it extended to Chinghsia, on the east to Ch‘ihuang in Hupeh: 


The stockades stretched three hundred li. 


.a solemn treaty. Sun will be too frightened not to come over 


At this point the narrative must digress. The story of 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s movements and successes reached Sun Ch‘tan, - 
then in camp at Ch‘aisang. He assembled his- strategists to 


decide on a scheme of defence. 


Lu Su said, “Chingchou is contiguous to our bordera w 
is strong and ‘defensive, its people are rich. It is the sort of — 


country that an emperor or a king should have. Liu Piao’s. Na 
recent death gives -an excuse for me to be sent to convey 


condolence and, once there, I shall be able to talk over Liu Pei 


and the officers of the late prefect to combine with you against — 


Ts‘ao. If Liu Pei does as I wish, then success is yours.” 


Sun Ch‘iian thought this a good plan, so he had the necessary a 


letters prepared, and the gifts, and sent Lu Su with them. 
All this time Liu Pei was at Chianghsia where, with K‘ung- 
ming and Liu Chí, he was endeavouring to evolve a good plan 
of campaign. 
K‘ung-ming said, ““T's‘ao Ts‘ao’ S power is too great for us 


to cope with. Let us go over to Wu and ask help from Sun 
Ch‘tian. If we can set north and:south at grips we ought to 
be able to get some advantage from our mediary position © 


between them.” 


“But will they be willing to hane anything to do with us?” ce 


said Yiian-té. “It is a large and populous country and Sun. | 


Ch‘iian has ambitions of his own.’ 


K‘ung-ming replied, “Ts‘ao with his army of a hundred > 
legions holds the Han and the Yangtse. Chiangtung will cer- _ 
_ tainly send: to find out all possible about the position. Should 


any messenger come I shall borrow a little boat and make a 


little trip over the river and trust to my little lithe tongue to 
set north and south at each other’s throats. If the southern 
men win, we will assist in destroying Ts‘ao in order to get 


Pines if aha ae win, we ahali profit ie the bey 
o get Chiangnan. So we shall get some AS, either 


i “That i is a very fine view to take,” said Yiian-té. 


to?” i 


_ K‘ung-ming laughed, saying, “It is done!” 

Turning to Liu Ch‘i he asked, 
your country send any condolences? ae 
- “Is it likely there would be any mourning courtesies between 


“Then it is certain that this envoy does not come to present 
condolences but to spy out the land.” 

- So he said to Yiian-té, “When Lu Su asks about the move- 
` ments of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, you will know nothing. if he press the 
matter, say he can ask me.” _ 


4, the envoy, who. entered the city in mourning garb. The gifts 


_ having been accepted, Liu Ch‘i asked Lu Su to meet Yüan-tê. 


s i 


= went to one of the inner chambers to drink a cup of wine. 


you a long time, Uncle Liu, but till to-day I have not met you. 
am very gratified at seeing you. You have been fighting 


- him. Has he really so great an army? How many, do you 


think, he has?” 


of his approach; so I do not know how many he had.” 


fire. on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao twice. You burned him almost to death 
so that you can hardly say you know nothing about his mèn,” 
aid Lu. 

“Without asking my adviser I really do not know the 


_ “Where is K‘ ung- -ming? I Should: like to see him,” said Lu. 
So they sent for him and he was introduced. When the 
` ceremonies were over Lu Su said, “I have long admired your 


Now that I have met. you: I hope I may ppeaity of present 
politics. : 


-Replied K‘ung- -ming, “We ow all Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s infimi 


and wickednesses, but to our regret we were not strong enough 
to withstand him, That is why we avoided him ” 
~ “Is the Imperial Uncle going to stay here?’ 
` “The Princely One is an old friend of Wu Ch‘én, Prefect 
“of Ts‘angwu and intends to go to fn 


“But how . 
are you going to get cet of any one from the south to talk 


Liu Pei’s EAERI RE was answered by the arrival of Lu Su, 
‘and as the ship touched the bank and the envoy came ashore, 


av ben Sun Ts‘é died did 


Having thus prepared their Shoma they nt to welcome ` 


When the introductory ceremonies were over the three men 


Presently Lu Su said to Yüan-tê, “By reputation I have known 
Ts ao Ts‘ao, though, lately, so I suppose you know all about | 


: “My army was so small that we fled whenever we heard _ 


“You had the advice of Chuko K‘ung-ming and you used 


genius but have never been fortunate enough to meet you. 


them and us while there was the death of a father to avenge?” q | 


$ 


446 l an kuo 


“He has few men and insufficient supplies, he cannot ensure Be 


safety. How can he receive the Uncle?” said Lu. 


“His place is not one to remain in long, but it is good enough 


for the present. We can make other plans for the future.” 

Lu said, “Sun Ch‘tian is strongly posted and is exceedingly 
well supplied. He treats able men and scholars with the 
greatest courtesy and so they gather round him. Now if you 
are seeking a plan for your Prince you cannot do better than 
send some friend to confer with him.” 

“There have never been any relations between my master 
and yours,” said K‘ung-ming. “I fear there would be nothing 
but a waste of words. Besides, we have no one to send.” 


“Your elder brother is there as adviser and is longing to` 


see you. I am but a simple wight but I should be pleased to 
discuss affairs with my master and you.’ 


“But he is my Director-in-Chief,” said Ytian-té, “and I x 


cannot do without him. He cannot go.” 


Lu Su pressed him. Yiian-té pretended to refuse permission. | 
“It is important; I pray you give me leave to go, said 


K‘ung-ming. 


Then Ytian-té consented. dnd they soon took leave and the 7 


two set out by boat for Sun Ch‘itian’s headquarters. 


A little boat sailed down the stream 
With Chuko well content; 

For he could see his enemies 
To black perdition sent. 


The result of this journey will appear in the following — 


chapter. 


CHAPTER XLIII. 
_CHUKO LIANG DISPUTES WITH THE SCHOLARS: 


Lu Su DENOUNCES THE MAJORITY OPINION. 


n the boat on the way to Ch‘aisang the two travellers beguiled 
the time by discussing affairs. Lu Su impressed upon his 
companion the necessity of concealing from Sun Ch‘itian the 


- truth about the magnitude of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army. 


“I do not promise to do what you ask, ” replied Chuko Liang, 


“but I shall know how to reply.” 


When the boat arrived K‘ung-ming was lodged in the guests’ 
quarters and Lu Su went alone to see his master. He found 
him actually at a council, assembled to consider the situation. 


Lu Su was summoned thereto and questioned at once upon ` 
_ what he had discovered. 


“T know the general outline, but I want a little time to 
prepare my report, > replied he. 
- Then Sun Ch‘iian produced Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s: letter and gave 


it to Su. “That came yesterday. I have sent the bearer 


of it back and this gathering is to consider the reply,” said 


he. 


Lu Su read the letter, which said, “When L the solitary one, 


received the imperial command to punish a fault my banners 


went south and Liu Ts‘ung became my prisoner, while his 


. people flocked to my side at the first rumour of my coming. 
_ Under my hand are a hundred legions and I have many able 


captains. My desire is, General, that we go on a great hunting 


expedition into Chianghsia and together attack Liu Pei. We 

will share his land between us and we will swear perpetual 

amity. If happily you would not be a mere looker-on 1 pray 
you reply quickly.” 


“What have you decided upon, my lord?” asked Lu. as he 


| finished the letter. 
‘ e “T have not yet decided.” 


Then Chang Chao said, “It would be imprudent to. withstand 
Ts‘ao’s many legions backed by the imperial authority. More- 


over your most important defence against him is the Long 


River (Yangtse) and since Ts‘ao has gained possession of 
_Chingchou the river is his ally against us. We cannot with- 


stand him, and the only way to tranquillity, in my opinion, 
is submission.” 
_ “The words of the speaker accord with the manifest decree 


| of providence,” echoed all the apgemply. 


448 * an Kuo, or i 


Sun Ch‘iian remaining silent and thoughtful, Chang Chao 
again took up the argument. “Do not hesitate, my lord. 
Submission to Ts‘ao means tranquillity for the peaks of Wu — 
and safety for the inhabitants of Chiangnan.”’ $ 

Sun Ch‘iian still remained silent, his head bent in deep 
thought. Presently he arose and paced slowly out at the door ' 
and Lu Su followed him. Outside he took Lu by the hand, 
saying, “What do you desire?” 

“What they have all been saying is very derogatory to you. 
A common man might submit; you cannot.” ` 

“Why? How do you explain that ?”’. 

“Tf people like us submitted we could just return to our 
village, and everything would go on as before. If you submit, : 
whither will you go? You will be created a Marquis, perhaps. 
You will have one carriage, no more, one saddle horse, that is 
all. Your retinue will be half a score. Will you be able to 


sit facing the south and call yourself by the kingly title of - 


‘the solitary’? Each one in your crowd of hangers-on is 
thinking for himself, is purely selfish, and you should not | 
listen to them, but take a line of your own and that quickly. — 
Determine to play a bold game.” 

Sun Ch‘tian sighed, “‘Théy all talk and talk, they miss my 
point of view. Now you have just spoken of a bold game and 
your view is the same as mine. Surely God has expressly sent 
you to me. Still Ts‘ao is now the stronger by all Ytian Shao’s 
army and he has possession of Chingchou. I fear he i is almost 
too powerful to contend with.” 


` “I have brought back with me Chuko Liang, the Heater of 


our Chuko Chin. If you questioned him he would explain 
clearly.” 

“Is ‘Master Sleeping Dragon’ really here?” 

‘ “Really here; in the guest-house.” 

“Tt is too late to see him to-day. But to-morrow I will 
assemble my officials and you will introduce him to all my 
best. After that we will debate the matter.” 

With these instructions Lu Su retired. Next day he went — 
to the guesthouse and conveyed Sun’s commands to the guest, 
particularly saying, “When you see my master to-morrow, 
say nothing of the magnitude of Ts‘ao’s army.” 

K‘ung-ming smiled, saying, “I shall act as circumstances 
dictate; you may be sure I shall make no mistakes.” 

K‘ung-ming was then conducted to where the high officers, 
civil and military to the number of two score and more, were 
assembled. They formed a dignified conclave as they sat in 
stately ranks with their tall headdresses and broad girdles. - 

Chang Chao sat at the head and K‘ung-ming first saluted 

him. Then, one by one, he exchanged the formal courtesies 
with them all. This done he took his seat in the guest’s chair. 
They, on their part, noted with interest his refined and elegant 


Romance of the Three diingooms == 449 


= manner and his commanding figure, thinking within mom 
_ selves, “Here is a man fitted for discourse.” 

; ‘Chang Chao led the way in trying to bait the Ae He 
said, “You will pardon the most insignificant of our official 
H circle, myself, if I mention that people say you compare your- 
self with those two famous men of talent, Kuan Chung and 
Yo I. Is there any truth in this?” ., 

“To a trifling extent I have compared myself with ‘them,” 
replied K‘ung-ming. 

“T have heard that Liu Pei made three journeys to visit you 
when you lived in retirement in your simple dwelling, and that 
when you consented to serve him he said he was as lucky as 
` a fish in getting home to the ocean. Then he desired to possess 
the district about Chingchou and Hsiangyang. Yet to-day all 
that country belongs to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. I should like to hear your 
account of all that.” — 

K‘ung-ming thought, “This Chang is Sun Ch‘tian’s first 
adviser and unless I can nonplus him I shall never have a 
chance with his master.” So he replied, “In my opinion the 
-~ taking of the district around the Han River was as simple 

as turning over one’s hand. But my master Liu is both 
righteous and humane and would not stoop to filching the 
possession of a member of his own house. So he refused the 


= offer of succession. But Liu Ts‘ung, a stupid lad, misled by 


specious words, submitted to Ts‘ao and fell yictim to his 
ferocity. My master is in camp at Chianghsia, but what his 
future plans may be cannot be divulged at present.” 
= “Be it so; but your words and your deeds are something 
discordant. You say you are the equal of the two famous 
ones. Well, Kuan Chung, as Minister of Duke Kuan, put his 
master at the very head of the feudal nobles, making his 
master’s will supreme in all the land. Under the able states- 
manship of Yo I the feeble country of Yen conquered Ch‘i, 
reducing nearly four score of its cities. These two were men 
-of most commanding and conspicuous talent. When you lived 
in retirement you smiled scornfully at ordinary people, passed | 
your days in idleness, nursing your knees and posing in a super- 
ior manner, implying that if you had control of affairs Liu Pei 
would be more than human; he should bring good to everybody 
and remove all evil; rebellion and robbery would be no more. 
Poor Liu, before he obtained your help, was an outcast and. 
a vagabond, stealing a city here and there where he could. 
With you to help him he was to become the cynosure of every 
eye and every lisping school boy was to say that he was a 
tiger who had grown wings. The Hans were to be restored 
and Ts‘ao and his faction exterminated. The good old days 
=- would be restored and all the men who had been driven into 
retirement by the corruption of political life would wake up, 
rub the sleep out of their eyes and be in readiness to lift, the 


29 


450 a San Buo, or | j 


cloud of darkness that covered the sky and gaze up at the 
glorious brilliancy of the sun and moon, to pull the people out 
of fire and water and put all the world to rest on a couch of 
comfort. That was all to happen forthwith. Why then, when © 
you went to Ytichou, did not Ts‘ao’s army: throw aside their ` 
arms and armour and flee like rats? Why could you not have 
told Liu Piao how to give tranquillity to his people? Why | 
could you not aid his orphan son to protect his frontiers? 
Instead you abandoned Hsinyeh and fled to Fanch‘éng; you 
were defeated at Tangyang; you fled to Hsiak‘ou with no 
place to rest in. Thus, after you had joined Liu Pei, he was 
worse off than before. Was it thus with Kuan Chung and . 
Yo I? I trust you do not mind my blunt speech.” 
K‘ung-ming waited till he had closed his oration, then 
laughed and said, “How can the common birds understand 
the long flight of the roc? Let me use an illustration. A 
man has fallen into a terrible malady. First the physician 
must administer hashish, then soothing drugs until his viscera 
shall be calmed into harmonious action. When the sick man’s 
body shall have been reduced to quietude, then may he bé given 


strong meats to strengthen him and powerful drugs to correct. He 


the disorder. Thus the disease will be quite expelled and the -` 
man restored to health. If the physician does not wait till 
the humours and pulse are in harmony, but throws in his 
strong drugs too early, it will be difficult to restore the patient.. , 
My master suffered defeat at Junan and went to Liu Piao. 

He had then less than one company of soldiers and only three 
captains. That was indeed a time of extreme weakness. 

Hsinyeh was a secluded, rustic town with few inhabitants 
and scanty supplies, and my master only retired there as a 
temporary refuge. How could he even think of occupying 
and holding it? Yet, with insufficient force, in a weak city, 
with untrained men ‘and inadequate supplies, a camp was 
burned, two leaders and the_r army were nearly drowned and 


were frightened into running away. I doubt whether your ` 


two ancient heroes would have done any better. As to the. 
surrender of Liu Ts‘ung, Liu Pei knew nothing of it. And 


he was too noble_and to righteous to take advantage of a 


kinsman’s straits to seize his inheritance. As for the defeat 
at Tangyang it must be remembered that Liu Pei was ham- 
pered with a huge voluntary following of common people, 
with their aged relatives and their children, whom he was too. 
humane to abandon. He never thought of taking Chiangling, 
but willingly suffered with his people.. This is a striking 
instance of his magnanimity. Small forces are no match for 
large armies. Victory and defeat are common episodes in 
every campaign. The great Founder of the Hans suffered 
many defeats at the hands of Hsiang Yü, but he finally con- 
quered at Haihsia and that battle was decisive. Was not this 


Romance of the Three Rmgvoms 451 


| due ne the strategy of Han Hsin who, though he had long 
served his master, had never won a victory. Indeed real 
_ statesmanship, the restoration of stable government is a 
= master plan far removed from the vapid discourses and. 
= debates of a lot of bragging babblers and specious and deceit- | 

ful talkers, who, as they themselves say, are immeasureably 


superior to the rest of mankind but who, when it comes to- ~ 


deeds and decisions to meet the infinite and constant vicissi- 
tudes of affairs, fail to throw up a single capable man. Truly 
such people are the laughing stock of all the world.” 

Chang Chao found no reply to this diatribe but another in 
< the assembly lifted up his voice, saying, “But. what of Ts‘ao 
 ‘Ts‘ao’s present position? There he is, encamped with many 
legions and numberless leaders. Whither he goes he is 

< invincible and whither he looks he is fearsome. He has taken 
- Chianghsia already, as we see.’ 

The speaker was Yü Fan and K‘ung-ming replied, “Ts’ao 
has acquired the swarms of Ytian Shao and stolen the crowds 
of Liu Piao. Yet I care not for all his legions.” 

i Yü Fan smiled icily, “When you got thrashed at Tangyang 
-= and in desperation sent this way and that to ask help, even 
then did you not care? But do you, think big talk really takes 
„people in 
“Liu had a few companies of Berupulols soldiers to oppose 
to a hundred legions of fierce brutes. He retired to Hsiak‘ou 
-for breathing space. The soldiers of Chiangtung are good 
Ee “and there are ample supplies and the Long River is a defence. 
= is now a time for him to bend the knee before a renegade, to 
` be careless of his honour and reputation? As a fact Liu is 
not the sort of man to fear such a rebel as Ts‘ao.’ 
' Yü Fan had nothing to reply. Next, one Pu Chih, who was 
among those seated, said, “Will you talk of our land of Wu 
witha ‘tongue like the tongues of Chang I and Su Ch‘in of old?’” 
. K‘ung-ming replied, “You regard those two as mere specu- 
Vigtive talkers: you do not recognise them also as heroes. Sw 
' Ch‘in bore the prime minister’s seals of six federated states: 
ee I was twice prime Minister of Ch‘in. Both were 
‘men of conspicuous ability who brought about the reformation 
- of their governments. They are not to be compared with those 
~ who quail before the strong and overbear the weak, who fear : 
. the dagger and run away from the sword. You, Sir, have 
listened to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s crafty and empty rhodomontade and 
it has frightened you into advising surrender. Dare you 
ridicule Su Ch‘in and Chang [?” 
< Pu Chih was silenced.. Then suddenly another interjected 
the question, “What do you think of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao?”’ 
2 It was Hsüeh Tsung who had spoken and K‘ung-mine 
replied, “Ts‘ao is one of the rebels against the dynasty ; why 
o ask about him?” 


N) 


452 ; Han kuo, or 
“You are mistaken,” 
outlasted their allotted time and the end is near. Ts‘ao already — 
has two-thirds of the empire and people are turning to him. 
Your master has not recognised the fateful moment and to. 
contend with a man so strong is to try to smash stones with — 
eggs. Failure is certain.” 
K‘ung-ming angrily replied, “Why do you speak: so andake : 
fully, as if you knew neither father nor prince? Loyalty and. 
filial duty are the essentials of a man’s being. For a minister 
of Han correct conduct demands that one is pledged to the — 
destruction of any one who does not follow the canon of a — 


said Hsüeh Tsung. “The Hans have i 


minister’s duty. Ts‘ao’s forbears enjoyed the bounty of Han, — 


but instead of showing gratitude, he nourishes in his bosom 
thoughts of rebellion. The whole world is incensed against 
him and yet you would claim for him the indication of destiny. 


Truly you are a man who knows neither father nor prince, 


aman unworthy of any words, and I decline to argue with you 

farther.” i 
The blush of shame overspread Hsüeh’s face and he said, ay 

no more. But another, one Lu Chi, took up the dispute and! 


said, “Although Ts‘ao Ts! ao overawes the Emperor and in his eee 
name coerces the nobles, yet he is the descendant of a minister, ~ 
while your master, though he says he is descended from`a. 
prince, has no proof thereof. In the eyes of the world he is i 
just a weaver of mats, a seller of straw shoes. Whois he to. — 


strive with Ts‘ao?” 


K‘ung-ming laughed and replied, “Are you not».that Liu roi 
who pocketed the orange when you were sitting among — 
Yiian Shao’s guests? Listen to me; I have a word to say to ` — 
you. Inasmuch as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is a descendant of a minister 
of state he is by heredity a servant of the Hans. But now ~ 


he has. monopolised all state authority and knows only his 


own arbitrary will, heaping every indignity upon his lord. | 


Not only does he forget his prince, but he ignores his 
ancestors; not only is he a rebellious servant of Han, but 
the renegade of his family. Liu Pei of Yuchou is a noble ‘ 
scion of the imperial family upon whom the Emperor has 
conferred rank, as is recorded in the annals. How then 


can you say there is no evidence of his imperial origin? 
Beside, the very founder of the dynasty was himself of lowly ` 
origin, and yet he became emperor. Where is the shame 


in weaving mats and selling shoes? Your mean, immature. 


views are unfit to be mentioned in the presence of scholars — 


of standing.” 


This put a stop to Lu Chi’s flow of eloquence, but another. oa 


of those present said, “K‘ung-ming’s words are overbearing 


and he distorts reason. It is not proper argument and he had. i. 


better say no more. But I would ask him what classical canon 
he studied.” . $ 


Í Romance of the ‘ahree ingoma | 


ie tee po at his interlocutor, who was named Yen 


Chin, and said, “The dryasdusts of every age select passages 
and choose phrases; what else are they good for? Do they 
= ever initiate a policy or manage an affair? I Yin, who was 
a farmer in Hsin and Tzu-ya, the fisherman of the Wei River, 


Chang Liang and Ch‘én P‘ing, Téng Yü and Kéng Yen all 
were men of transcendent ability, but I have never enquired 
what classical canon they followed or on whose essays they 


formed their style. Would you liken them to your rusty 
-~ students of books, whose journeyings are comprised between _ 

their brush and their inkstone, who spend their days in literary 
~- futilities, wasting both time and ink?” 

eNO reply was forthcoming; the speaker hung his head with 

= shame. But another disputant, Ch‘éng Té-shu by name, sud- 
denly shouted, “You are mightily fond of big words, Sir, but 


they do not give any proof of your scholarship after all. 


=- J am inclined to think that a real scholar would just laugh ` 
> at you.: 


K‘ung-ming replied, “There are scholars and scholars. 


There is the noble scholar, loyal and patriotic, of perfect 


rectitude and a hater of any crookedness. The concern of 


such a scholar is to act in full sympathy with his day and 
-` leave to future ages a fine reputation. There is the scholar 


of the mean type, a pedant and nothing more. He labours 


S constantly with his pen, in his callow youth composing odes 


as and in hoary age still striving to understand the classical 
books completely. Thousands of words flow from his pen 


‘but there is not a solid idea in his breast. He may, as did 


| _ Yang Hsiung, glorify the age with his writings and yet stoop 


to serve a tyrant such as Mang: No wonder Yang threw 


himself out of a window; he had to. That is the way of the 


scholar of mean type. Though he composes odes by the 


_ hundred, what is the use of him?” 


Ch‘éng could make no reply. The other officers now Boban 


to hold this man of torrential speech in wholesome fear. Only 


I two of them had failed to challenge him, but when they would — 
- have tried to pose K‘ung-ming, suddenly some one appeared 


from without and angrily shouted, “This is not paying fit 
respect to a guest. You have among you the most wonderful 
man of the day and you all sit there trying to entangle him 
in speech while our arch enemy Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is nearing our 


borders. Instead of discussing how to oppose him you are all 
ane and disputing.” 


All eyes turned toward him; it was Huang Kai, of Lingling, 


E ho was master of the commissariat of Wu. He turned to 
_ address K‘ung-ming, saying, “There is a saying that though 


3 something may be gained by talk there is more to be got by 


silence. Why not give my lord the advantage of your valuable 


advice instead of wasting time in discussion with this crowd?” 


453 


454 San Kuo, or 


“They did not understand,” replied K‘ung-ming, “and it was _ 


necessary to enlighten them, I had to speak.” 

As Huang Kai and Lu Su led the guest toward their master’s 
apartments, they met his brother Chuko Chin. K‘ung-ming 
saluted him with the deference due to an elder brother and 
Chin said, “Why have you not been to see me, brother?” 

“I am now in the service of Liu of Yü chou and it is right 
that public affairs precede private obligations. I cannot attend 
to any private matters till my work is done. You must pardon 
me, brother.” 

“After. you have seen the Marquis you will come and ae 
me your news,” said he as he left. 


As they went along to the audience chamber Lu Su again 


cautioned K‘ung-ming against. any rash speech. The latter 
nodded but made no other reply. When they reached the hall 
Sun Ch‘itian came down the steps to welcome his guests and 
was extraordinarily gracious. After the mutual salutations 


the guest was given a chair while the Marquis’s officials were ~ 


drawn up in two lines, on one side the civil, on the other the 


military. Lu Su stood beside K‘ung-ming and listened to his 
introductory speech. 

As K‘ung-ming spoke of Yüan-tê’s intentions, he glanced up 
at his host. He noted the grey eyes and brown beard and the 
dignified commanding air of the man ‘and thought within 


himself, “Certainly in appearance this is no common man. - 


He is one to be incited perhaps, but not to be persuaded. It 


will be better to see what he has to say first, then I will try 


to stir him to action.” 

The serving of tea being now finished, Sun Ch‘iian began 
with the usual gracious ceremonial expressions. 

“Lu Su has often spoken of your genius” said the host; 
“it is a great pleasure to meet you. I trust you will confer 
upon me the advantage of your instruction.” 

“I am neither clever nor learned” was the reply, “it hu- 
miliates me to hear such words.” 

“You have been at Hsinyeh lately and you helped your 
master to fight that decisive battle with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, so you 
must know exactly the measure of his military strength.” 

“My master’s army was small and his generals were few; 
the city was paltry and lacked supplies. Hence no stand 
could be made against such a force as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had.” 

“How many men has he in all?” 

“Horse and foot, land and marine, he has a hundred legions.” 

“Is there not some doubt about that?” said Sun Chiiian. . 


“None whatever; when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao went to Yenchou he had ag 


the twenty legions of Chingchou. He gained fifty or sixty 


legions when Yiian Shao fell. He has thirty or forty legions 


newly recruited in the capital. Lately he has acquired twenty — 
or thirty legions in Chingchou. And if these be reckoned up - 


- Komanee of the Three Hingooms 455 


< the total is not less than a fundredend fifty. Hence I said a 


_ hundred for I was afraid of frightening your officers.” 


Lu Su was much disturbed and turned pale. He looked 
ne meaningly at the bold speaker, but K‘ung-ming would not: see. 
-Sun Ch‘iian went'on to ask if his arch enemy had a corres- 
ponding number of leaders. 
“He has enough administrators and strategists to control 
such a host and his capable and veteran leaders are more than 
a thousand; perhaps more than two thousand.” 
“What will be Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s next move now that he has 


` overcome Chingchou and Ch‘u?” 


“He is camped along the river and he has collected a fieet. 
Tf he does not intend to:-invade your territory, what can be his 
intentions?” 

_ “Since that is his intention, it is a case of fight or not fight. 

I wish you would decide that "for me.’ 

“I have something I could say, but I fear, Sir, you would 
not care to hear it.” 

“I am desirous of hearing your most valuable opinion.” 

“Strife has prevailed for a long time and so you should raise 

your army and Liu Pei should collect his forces south of the 
Han River, to act with you in contest for the empire against 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Now Ts‘ao has overcome most of his difficulties 
and his recent conquest of Chingchou has won him great and 
wide renown. Though there might be one bold enough ‘to 
-tackle him, yet there is no foothold for such. That is how 
Liu Pei has been forced to come here. But, General, I wish 
you to measure your forces and decide whether you can venture 
to meet him and that without loss of time. If you cannot, 
then follow the advice of your councillors; cease your military 
preparations and yield; turn your face to the north and 


wr Serve: 


‘Sun Ch‘iian did not reply. But-his guest went on, “You 
have the reputation of being reasonable a I know also. you 
are inclined to hesitate. Still this matter is most important 
and evil will be quickly upon you if you do not decide.” 

Then replied Sun, “If what you say represents the actual 
-~ conditions, why does not Liu Pei yield?” 

“Well, you know Ts‘ien Héng, that hero of the state of Ch‘i; 
his character was too noble for him to submit to any shame. 
It is necessary to remember that Liu Pei also is an off-shoot 
from the dynastic family, beside being a man of great renown. 
Every one looks up to him. His lack uf success is simply the 
will of. Heaven but manifestly he could not bow the knee to 
any one.’ 

These last words touched Sun Ch‘iian to the quick and he 
could not control his anger. He shook out his sleeves, rose 
and left the audience chamber. Those present smiled at each 
_ other as they dispersed. 


456 + an uo, or. 


But Lu Su was annoyed and reproached K‘ung-ming for his — 


maladroit way of talking to Sun. “Luckily for you my lord 
is too large-minded to rebuke you to your face for you spoke 
to him most contemptuously.” 

K‘ung-ming threw back his head and laughed. oe Whata 
sensitive fellow it is!” cried he. “I know how Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao 
could be destroyed, but he never asked me; so I said nothing.” 

“If you really do know how that could be done I will certainly 
beg my. lord to ask you.’ 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s hosts in my eyes are'but as swarms of ants. 
I have but to lift my hand and they will be crushed.” 

Lu Su at once went into his master’s private room, where 
he found him still very irritable and angry. “K‘ung-ming 
insulted me too deeply,” said Sun. 

“I have already reproached him,” said Lu Su, “and he laughed 
and said you were too sensitive. He would not give you any 
advice without being asked for it. Why did you not seek 
advice from him, my lord?” 

At once Sun’s anger changed to joy. He said, “So he had 
a plan ready and his words were meant to provoke me. I did 
despise him-for a moment and it has very nearly lost me.” 

So he returned to the audience chamber where the guest 
was still seated and begged K‘ung-ming to continue his speech. 
He spoke courteously saying, “I offended you just now, I hope 
you are not implacable.” 


“And I also was rude,” replied K‘ung-ming. “I entreat 


pardon.” 

Host and guest retired to the inner room where wine was 
served. After it had gone round several times, Sun Ch‘tian 
said, “The enemies of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao were Lü Pu, Liu Piao, 
Yiian Shao, Yüan Shu, his brother, Liu Pei and my poor self. 
Now most of these are gone and only Liu. Pei and I remain. 


I will never allow the land of Wu to be dictated to by another. . 


The only one who could have withstood Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was Liu 

Pei, but he has been defeated lately and what can he do now 

against such force?” 

i K‘ung-ming replied, “Although defeated, Li Pei still has 
Kuan Yü with a legion of veterans. And Liu Ch‘i still leads 

the men of Chianghsia, another legion. 'Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army 

is far from home and the men are worn out. They made a 


frantic effort to come up with my master, and the light horse 


marched three hundred li in a day and a night. This was the 
final kick of the crossbow spring and the bolt was not swift 
enough to penetrate even the thin silken vesture of Lu. The 


army can do no more. They are northern men, unskilled in. 


water warfare, and the men of Chingchou are unwilling sup- 
porters. They have no desire to help Ts‘ao. Now if you, 
General, will assist Liu Pei, Ts‘ao will certainly be broken 
and he must” retire northwards. Then your country and 


AENT 


- flomance of ie epee inguens 


Methischon will Be estrone and fisy atanh Bak the.” 
es oe must be carried out without delay and only you can 
ecide 
‘Sun Ch‘iian joyfully replied, ““Your words, master, open up» 
the road clearly. I have decided and shall have no further — 
doubts.” i 
So the orders were issued forthwith to prepare for a joint i 
attack on Ts‘ao Tsʻ‘ao. And he bade Lu Su bear the news of his 
decision to all his officers. He himself escorted K‘ung-ming 
to the guest quarters and saw to his comfort. 
~ When Chang Chao heard of the decision he met his col- Hi 
leagues and said to them, “He has fallen into the trap set by ` 
this K‘ung- ming.’ ; 
They went in a body to their lord and said, “We hear you 
are going to attack Ts‘ao Ts‘ao; but how do you stand when 
- compared with Ytian Shao?’ In those days Ts‘ao was compara- 
tively weak and yet he overcame.. What is he like to-day. 
with his countless legions? He is not to be lightly attacked — 
and to listen to Chuko Liang’ s advice to engage in a conflict 
is like carrying fuel to a fire.” 
Sun Ch‘iian made no reply and Ku Yung took up the argu- 
ment. “Liu Pei has been defeated and he wants to borrow — 
our help to beat his enemy. Why must our lord lend himself 
to his schemes? Pray listen to our leader’s words.” 
Doubts again surged up in the mind of Sun Ch‘iian. When 
the troop of advisers had retired, Lu Su came in saying, “They 
-came to exhort you not to fight, but to compel you to surrender — 
simply because they wish to secure the safety of their families. Hi 
They distort their sense of duty to serve their own ends and = 
I hope you will not take their advice.” i 
) Sun Ch'tian being sunk in thought and saying nothing, Lu. 
' Su went on, “if you hesitate you will certainly be led astray by i 
the majority and senha 
= “Retire for a time,” said his master. “I must think it over: 
carefully.” ind 
So Lu Su left the chamber. Among the soldiers some wished | 
for war, but of the civil officers, all were in favour of surrender 
and so there were many discussions and much conflict of 
opinion. Sun Ch‘itian went to his private apartments greatly 
perplexed. There his worry was easily discernible and he 
neither ate nor slept. He was quite. unable to decide finally 
upon a course of action. 
Then the Lady Wu asked him what so troubled him, and 
he told her of the threatened danger and the different opinions 
his advisers held one.and another and all his doubts and fears. 
If he fought, he might fail; and if he offered to surrender, 
perhaps Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, would reject his proposal. — 
Then she replied, “Have you POT eH TE the last words of my 
sister?” y 


458 © Dan Kuo 


As to one recovering from a fit of drunkenness, or waking 


out of a dream, so came to him the dying words of the mother 
who bore him. E 


His mother’s advice he called to mind, £ 
“In Chou Yii’s counsels you safety find.” 


What happened will be told in the next chapter. 


a h 


a | CHAPTER Eae 


K‘UNG-MING STIRS CHOU YU To ACTION: 
' Sun CH‘ UAN DECIDES TO ATTACK Ts‘Ao TS‘AO. 


Pie dying message which the Lady Wu recalled to Sun 
_ Ch‘tian’s memory was, “For internal matters consult Chang 
- Chao; for external policy Chou Yü.” 


Wherefore Chou Yti was summoned. 

But he was already on the way. He had been training his 
naval forces on Lake P‘oyang when he heard of the approach 
of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s hosts and had started for Ch‘aisengchiin 
without loss of time. So, before the messenger ordered to 
call him could start, he had already arrived. As he and Lu 
Su were close friends the latter went to welcome him and told 


_ him of all that had happened. 
_ “Have no anxiety,” said Chou Yü, “I shall be able to decide 
this. But go quickly and beg K‘ung-ming to come to see me.’ 


So Lu Su went to seek out K‘ung-ming. Chou Yü had many 


- other visitors. First came Chang Chao and his faction to find | 
- out what might be afoot. They were received, and after the 


; exchange of the usual commonplaces, Chang Chao said, “Have 


you heard of our terrible danger?” 


“I have heard nothing,” said Chou Yü. 


a “Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and his hordes are encamped up the river. He 
has just sent letters asking our lord to hunt with him in 


Chianghsia. He may have a desire to absorb this country but, 


-= if so, the details of his designs are still secret. We prayed our 
= master to give in his submission and so avoid the horrors of 


war, but now Lu Su has returned bringing with him the 
Commander-in-Chief. of Liu Pei’s army, Chuko Liang. He, 
desiring to avenge himself for the recent defeat, has talked 


= our lord into a mind for war and Lu Su persists in supporting 
_ him. They only await your final decision?” 


“Are you and yours unanimous in your opinions?” 

“We are perfectly unanimous,” said Chang. 

Chou said, “The fact is I have also desired to submit for a 
long time. I beg you to leave me now and to-morrow we will 
see our master and I shall make up his mind for him.” 

So they took their leave. Very soon came the military party 
led by Ch‘éng P‘u. They were admitted and duly enquired 
after their host’s health. Then the leader said, “Have you 


heard that our country is about to pass under another’s 
iS government?” 


- 460 San Huo, or | 


“No; I have heard nothing,” replied the host. 


“We helped General Sun to establish his authority here ad, f 
carve out this kingdom, and to gain that end we fought many — 
- a battle before we conquered the country. Now our lord lends 
his ear to his civil officers and desires to submit ‘himself to- 
` Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. This is a most shameful and pitiful course and we | 
would rather die than follow it, so we hope you will decide to 


hd, fight and you may depend upon our struggling to the last man.’ 
“Andare you unanimous, Generals?’’ asked Chou Yü. 
Huang Kai suddenly started up and smote his forehead 


render.” 
“Not one of us is willing to surrender,” cried all the others. ; 


you retire, Generals, and when I see our lord I will settle his 
doubts.” 

So the war party left. They were quickly succeeded by 
Chuko Ching and his faction. They were brought in and, 
after the usual courtesies, Ching said, “My brother has come 


hold different opinions as to the course to be pursued, but as 
my brother is so deeply concerned I am unwilling to say much 
on either side. We are awaiting your decision.” 

7 “And what do you think about it?” asked Chou Yü. 


of war is hard to foretell.” 


The. trimmers took their leave. But soon after came Lü 


disputed with the other. ; 

“I must not. say, much now,” replied Chou Yü, “but you 
will see to-morrow in the palace, when the matter will be fully 
debated.” 

They went away leaving Chou Yü smiling cynically. 

About eventide Lu Su and K‘ung-ming came and Chou Yü 


has come against the south with a huge army. Our master 


your decision. What is your opinion?” 


acts at the command of the Emperor. Moreover, he is very 
strong and to attack him is to take serious risks. In my 


opinion, opposition would mean defeat and, since submission — 


saying, “They may take my head but I swear never to sur- 


“My desire also is to decide matters with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao on the i! 
battlefield. How could we think of submission? Now I pray 


down the river saying that Liu Pei desires to ally himself - 
-with our lord against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. The civil and military ~» 


“Submission is an easy road to tranquillity, while aie result . 


Chou Yü smiled, “I shall have my mind wines up. Come 
to-morrow to the palace and the decision shall be announced.” ` 


Méng with his supporters, also desirous of discussing the same ~ 
thing, and they told him that opinions differed greatly, some | 
being for peace and others for war. One party constantly 


er PETENS aaco ST rni f us 
EP N Ay E TATE NE ERIR E TEOR a A EO IN, 


is 


went out to the main gate to receive them. When they had 
taken their proper seats, Lu Su spoke first, saying, “T's‘ao Ts‘ao° 


i A ER 


cannot decide whether to submit or give battle and waits for — 


Chou Yü replied, “We may not oppose Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao when he 


ee NTS 


D aean peace, I have decided to advise our, lord to write and 
= offer surrender. N KUAS 
“But you'are wrong,’ * stammered rh Su. “This eee Wee has: ee 
- been under the same rule for three generations and cannot be 
> suddenly abandoned to some other. San Ts‘é said that you  — 
<- were to be consulted on matters beyond the border and we = 
_ depended upon you to keep the country as secure and solid as. = 
Mount T‘ai. Now you adopt the view of the weaklings and EN 
_ propose to yield! I cannot believe you mean it.” AREAS ; 
- Replied Chou Yü, “The six districts contain countless people. 
_ If I am the means of bringing upon them the misery of war = = = 
they will hate me. So I have decided to advise submission.” i ; 
-= “But do you not realise our lord’s might and the strength i 
of our country? If Ts‘ao does attack it is very uncertain that = 
he will realise his desire.” PER 
The two wrangled for a long time, while K‘ ung-ming sat Hk 
Painike with folded arms. Presently Chou Yu asked why he 
= smiled thus and he replied, “I am smiling at no other than:  ~ 
your opponent Lu Su, who knows nothing of the affairs of 
_ the day.” i 
a “Master,” said Lu a “What do you mean???) aI 
Sho er WIRY, this intention to submit is perfectly Terona ble, TERAN 
-is the one proper thing.” : Vaden a 
Mie “There!” exclaimed > Chou uy KE ung- ming knows the ‘ot eee 
times perfectly well and he agrees with me.’ BRERA ASS 
` — “But, both of you, why do you say this?” said Lu. < 
i. Said K ung-ming, “‘Ts‘ao is an excellent commander, so good 
that no one dares oppose him. Only very few have ever. 
attempted it and they have been exterminated; the world 


knows them no more. The only exception is Liu Pei, who ie a 
did not understand the conditions: and vigorously contended © Pea 
-against him, with the result that he is now at Chianghsia ina > Prey i 


=- very parlous state. To submit is to secure the safety of wives py 
~- and children, to be rich and honoured. But the dignity of = = © 
= the country would be left to chance and fate However a un 
that is not worth consideration.” D 
Lu Su interrupted angrily, “Would you Mate our lord crook . 
the knee to such a rebel as he?” | 
“Well,” replied K‘ung- -ming, “there is another way, and a 
cheaper ; there would be no need to ‘lead the sheep and shoulder 
wine pots’ for presents, nor any need to yield territory and = 
surrender seals of office. It would not even be necessary to Bees 
cross the river yourselves. All you would require is a simple - 
“messenger and a little boat to ferry a couple of people across 
the river. If Ts‘ao only got these two persons under his hand,’ ae 
his hordes and legions would just drop their weapons, furl pe a): 
their banners and silently vanish away.’ abe 
“What two persons could cause Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to go away as 
you say?” asked Chou Yü. i 


) 


W7) 
i 


JE San Ruo, or , 


, 


“Two persons who could be easily spared from this populous 


country. They would not be missed any more than a leaf 


from a tree or a grain of millet from a granary. But if Ts‘ a0 3 


p? 


could only get them, would he not go away rejoicing! 
“But who are the two?” asked Chou Yü JoAN LSY 


“When I was living in the country they told me that Ts ‘a0. Nae 
was building a pavilion on the Chang River; it was to be | 
named the Bronze Bird Pavilion. It is an exceedingly hand- — 


some building and he has sought throughout all the world for 


ci 
ie 
rent 
% ‘4 
fa 
7 ae 
ay 
Ena 
eS 
STi 


x 
k 
a 


the most beautiful women to live in it. For Ts‘ao really is @ ni 


sensualist.” 


“Now theré are two very famous beauties in Chiantung, — 


born of the Ch‘iao family. So beautiful are they that birds 
alight and fishes drown, the moon hides her face and the 


flowers blush for shame at sight of them. Ts‘ao has declared | 
with an oath that he only wants two things in this world, the — 
imperial throne in peace and the sight of those two women on - 


the Bronze Bird Terraces. Given these two he would go down 
to his grave without regret. This expedition of his, his huge 
army that threatens this country, has for its real aim these 


two women. Why do you not buy these two from their father 
for any sum however large and send them over the river? = 
The object of the army being attained, it will simply be marched 
away. This is the use that Fan Li made of the famous beauty — 


Hsi Shih.’7 


“How ad you know he so greatly desires these two?” said- x 
.Chou Yü. i 
“Because his son, who is an able writer, at the command of | 
his father wrote a poem ‘An Ode to the Bronze Bird Terrace,’ — 
the theme only allowing allusions to the family fitness for the — 


throne. He has sworn to possess these two women. I think 


I can remember the poem, if you wish to hear it. I admire it- 


greatly.” - 
“Try,” said Chou Yü. 
‘So he recited the poem :— 


Let me follow in the footsteps of the enlightened ruler that I may 
rejoice, 

And ascend the storied terrace that I may gladden my hort 

That I may see the wide extent of the palace, 

That I may gaze upon the plans of the virtuous one. 

He has established the exalted gates high as the hills, © 

He has builded the lofty towers piercing the blue vault, 

He has set up the beautiful building in the midst of the heavens, 

Whence the eye can range over the cities of the west. 

On the banks of the rolling River Chang he planned it, 

Whence abundance of fruits could be looked for in his gardens. 

The two towers rise, one on either flank, 

This named Golden Phoenix, that J ade Dragon. 

He would seize the two Ch‘iao; these beautiful ladies of the 
south-east, 

That he might rejoice with them morning and evening. . 

Look down; there is the grand beauty of an imperial city, 

And the rolling vapours Tie floating beneath. 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 463 


He will rejoice in the multitude of scholars that assemble, 
D i ae to the felicitous dream of King Wén 
Look up; and there is the gorgeous harmony of | spring- -time, 
_ And the singing of many birds delighting the ear; 
The lofty sky stands over all. 
The house desires success in its double undertaking, í 
That the humane influence may be poured out over all the wodd. 
That the perfection of reverence may.be offered to the Ruler. 
Only the richly prosperous rule of Huan and Wên 
Could compare with that of the sacred understanding 
What fortune! what beauty! 
The gracious kindness spreads afar, 
The imperial family is supported, 
Peace reigns over all the world, 
Bounded only by the universe. 
‘Bright as the glory of the sun and moon, 
Ever honourable and ever enduring, 
The Ruler shall live to the age of the eastern emperor, 
The dragon banner shall wave to the farthest limit. 
His glorious-chariot shall be guided with perfect wisdom, 
a. thoughts shall reform all the world, , 
elicitous produce shall be abundant, 
And the people shall rest firm. 
My desire is that these towers shall endure Ae ever, 
And that joy shall never cease through all the ages. 


Choa Yii listened to the end but then suddenly Eon up 


in a tremendous rage. Turning to the north and pointing with > 
his finger he cried, “You old rebel; this insult is too deep!” 


~ K‘ung-ming hastily rose too and, as if to soothe him, said, 


_ “But remember Shan Yü. The emperor gave him a princess. 
-of the family to wife although he had made many incursions 


into our territory. That was the price of peace. You surely 
would not grudge two more women from among the people.” 
“You do not know, Sir,” replied Chou Yu. “Of those two 


women you mentioned, the elder is the widow of Sun Ts’e, 


our late ruler, and the younger is my wife.” 


K‘ung-ming feigned the greatest astonishment and said, 
“No indeed; I did not know. I blundered; a deadly ‘fault; a 


deadly fault! is 


“One of us two has to go, either the old rebel or I; we shall 5 
not both live. I swear that, ” eried Chou Yü. 
“However, such a matter needs a good deal of thought, i 


-replied K‘ung- -ming. “We must not make any mistake.” 


Chou Yü replied, “I hold a sacred trust from my late lord, 
Sun Ts‘é; I would not bow the knee to any such as Ts‘ao. 


What I said just now was to see how you stood. I left the 


lake with the intention of attacking the north, and nothing 


can change that intention, not even the sword at my breast or 


the axe on my neck. But I trust you will lend an arm and we 


will smite Ts‘ao Ts‘ao together.” 


“Should I be happy enough not to be rej jected I would render 


such humble service as I could. Perhaps Per I might 
be able to offer a plan to oppose him.” 


= 
£ 
a 
> 


464 San Buo, or 


Y 


“I am going to see my lord to-morrow to discuss this matter,” ` 


said Chou Yü. 
K‘ung-ming and Lu Su then left. Next day at dawn Sun 


Ch‘iian went to the council chamber, where his officials, civil — 
and military, were already assembled. They numbered about 
three score in all. The civil, with Chang Chao at their head,’ 


were on the right; the military, with Ch‘éng P‘u as their 
` leader, were ranged on the left. All were in full ceremonial 


dress and the swords of the soldiers clanked on the pavement. — 


Soon Chou Yü entered and, when Sun Ch‘iian had finished 
the usual gracious remarks, he said, “‘I hear that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


is encamped on the river and has sent a despatch to you, my 


lord; I would ask what your opinion is.’ 


Ther eupon the despatch was produced and handed to Chou . ) 


Yü. After reading it through he said, smiling, “The old thief 
thinks there are no men in this land that he writes in this 
contemptuous strain.” & 

“What do you think, Sir?” asked Sun Ch‘tian. 

“Have you discussed this with the officials?” asked Chou Yü. 

“We have been discussing this for days. Some counsel 
‘surrender and some advise fight. I am undecided and there- 
fore I have asked you to come and decide the point.” 

“Who advise surrender?” asked Chou Yü. 

“Chang Chao and his party are firmly set in this opinion.” 


` Chou Yü then turned to Chang Chao and said, “I should be | 


pleased to hear why you are for surrender, Master.” 

Then Chang Chao replied, ‘“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has been attacking 
all opponents in the name of the Emperor, who is entirely in 
his hands. He does everything in the name of the government. 
Lately he has taken Chingchou and thereby increased his 


prestige. Our defence against him was the river, but now he 


also has a large fleet and can attack by water. How can we 
withstand him? Wherefore I counsel submission till some 
chance shall offer.’ 

“This is but the opinion of an ill-advised student,” said Chon 
Yu. “How can you think of abandoning this country that we 

have held for three generations?” 

“That being so,”’ said Sun Chitian, ‘ Aaneren is a plan to come 
from?” 

“Though Ts‘ao Ts‘ao assumes the name of a Minister of the 


empire, he is at heart a rebel. You, O General, are able in ~ 


war and brave. You are the heir to your father and brother. 
You command brave and tried soldiers, and you have plentiful 
supplies. You are able to overrun the whole country and rid 
it of every evil. There is no reason why you should surrender 
to a rebel. Moreover, Ts‘ao has undertaken this expedition in 
defiance of all the rules of war. The north is unsubdued and 
Ma T‘éng and Han Sui threaten his rear and yet he persists 
in his southern march. This is the first point against Ts‘ao. 


PENR ea 


ee i Ce r T ee eee ee EEEN A ee es 


a $ oo “Bomance of the Three Kingdoms 


E The nonce men are unused to fighting on the water; Ts‘ao 

ris relinquishing his well-tried cavalry and trusting to ships. 

_ That is the second point against him. Again, we are now 

_ in full winter and the weather is at its coldest so there is no 
_ food for the horses. That is the third point against. Soldiers 
~ from the central state marching in a wet country among lakes 

~ and rivers will find themselves in an unaccustomed climate 
and suffer from malaria. That is the fourth point against. 
Now when Ts‘ao’s armies have all these points against them, 
defeat is certain, however numerous they may be, and you can 
take Ts‘ao captive just as soon as you wish. Give me a few 
companies of veterans and I will go and destroy him.” 

Sun Ch‘tian started up from his place saying, “The rebellious 
eold rascal has been wanting to overthrow the Hans and set 
up himself for years. He has rid himself of all those he feared, 
save only myself, and I swear that one of us two shall go now. 

Both of us cannot live. What you say, noble friend, is just 
what I think, and Heaven has certainly sent you to my 

- assistance.” 

“Thy servant will fight a Teinie battle,” said Chou Yü, 

“and shrink not from any sacrifice. Only, General, do not 
hesitate.” 

a Sun Ch‘tian drew the sword that hung at his side and slashed 
the table in front of him, exclaiming, “Let any other man 
mention surrender and he shall be served as I have served 
this table.” 

_ Then he handed the sword ‘to Chou Yü, at the same time 
-giving him a commission as Commander-in-Chief, Ch‘éng P‘u 
being second in command. Lu Su was also nominated as 
| assistant. 

In conclusion Sun said, “With this sword you will slay any 
officer who may disobey your commands.” 

Chou Yü took the sword and turning to the assembly said, 
“You have heard our lord’s charge to me, to lead you to destroy 

_Ts‘ao; you will all assemble to-morrow at the river-side camp 

` to receive my orders. Should any be late or fail, then the 
full rigour of military law, the seven prohibitions and the 
fifty-four penalties there provided, will be enforced. 

He took leave of Sun Ch‘tian and left the chamber; the 
various officers also went their several ways. When Chou Yü 
reached his own place he sent for K‘ung-ming to consult over 
the business in hand. He told him of the decision that had been 
taken and asked for a plan of campaign. 

“But your master has not yet made up his mind,” said 

»K‘ung-ming. “Till he has, no plan can be decided upon.” 

“What do you mean ?” 

+ “Jn his heart he is still fearful of Ts‘ao’s numbers and frets 
over the inequality of the two armies. You will have to explain 

away those numbers and bring him to a final decision before 
anything can be effected. 2 


>30 


~ 


466 3 San Rug, or OPIS eens 


\ 


“What you say is excellent,” said Chou Yü and he went to “i 
the palace that night to see his master. Sun Ch‘tian said, “You 
must have something of real importance to say if you come like 


this at night.” 
Chou Yü said, “I am making my disvartion: to-morrow; 
you have quite made up. your mind?” 
“The fact is,” said Sun Ch‘tian, “I still feel nervous about 


the disparity of numbers. Surely we are too few. That Bu 


really all I feel doubtful about.” 

“It is precisely because you have this one remaining doubt 
that I am come. And I will explain. Ts‘ao’s letter speaks 
of a hundred legions of marines, and so you feel doubts and, 


fears and do not wait to consider the real truth. Let us — 
examine the case thoroughly.: We find that he has of Centrale — 
State soldiers, say, fifteen or sixteen legions, and many of them 


are sick. He only got seven or eight legions from the Ytians_ 
and many of those are of doubtful loyalty. . Now these sick 
men and these men of doubtful loyalty seem a great many but 


they are not at all fearsome. ` I could smash them pe five “i 


legions. So, my lord, have no further anxiety.” 
Sun Ch‘tian “patted his general on the back saying, “You 


have explained my difficulty and relieved my ‘doubts. Chang >. 
Chao is an old fool who constantly baulks my expeditions. | 


Only you and Lu Su have any real understanding of my heart. 
To-morrow you and he and Ch‘éng P‘u will start and I shall 
have a strong reserve ready with plentiful supplies to support 
you. If anything goes agley you can at once send for me and | 
I will engage with my own men.’ 

Chou Yii left; but in his innermost heart he said to himself, 
“Tf that K‘ung-ming can gauge my master’s thoughts so very 


„accurately he is too clever for me and will be a danger. He 


will have to be put out of the way. 

He sent a messenger over to Lu Su to talk over this last 
scheme. When he had laid it bare, Lu Su did not favour it. 
“No, no,” said he, “‘it is self-destruction to make away with 
your ablest officer before Ts‘ao shall have been destroyed.” 

DUG Kʻung- -ming will certainly help Liu Pei to our disn 
advantage.” 

“Try what his brother Chuko Chin can do to persuade kim 
It would be an excellent thing to have these two in our service.’ mM 

“Yes, indeed,” replied Chou Yü. 

Next morning at dawn Chou Yü went to his camp and took 
his seat in the council tent. The lictors took up their stations’ 


right and left and the officers ranged themselves in lines to 5 


listen to.the orders. 

Now Ch‘éng P‘u, who was older than Chou Yü, was very 
angry at being passed over, so he made a pretence of indis- 
position and stayed away from this assembly. But he sent 
his son to répresent him. Chou Yü addressed the gathering, 


x SiS 


A 
Ca 


TA 
d 
a 
q 


pe 


E. 


i 


% „attend to your several duties. a 
_ than ever was Tung Cho, and the Emperor is really a prisoner 
in Hsiich‘ang, guarded by the most cruel soldiers. rae 
_ a command to destroy Ts‘ao and with your willing help we __ 
~ shall advance. The army must cause no hardship to the people 
Rewards for good service and punishments for. 


ee 


= anywhere. 


yig “The law P no calas and you wi all ave A 


Ts‘ao is? now more absolute 


We have 


faults shall be given impartially.” | 


Having delivered this charge he told off Han Tang and © 
Huang Kai as leaders of the van, and ordered:the ships under. 
his own command to get under way and go to Sanchiangk‘ou. 
They would get orders by and bye. 


Then he appointed five 


a armies with two officers over each while Lii Fan and Chu Chih 


‘were appointed inspectors, to move from place to place and 
k keep the various units up to their work and acting with due > 
regard to the general plan. 


Land and marine forces were to 


_ move simultaneously. The expedition would soon start. 


Having received their orders each returned to his command 
and busied himself in preparation. Ch‘éng P‘u’s son returned 


and told his father what arrangements had been made and 


- general, but this shows that he has a leader’s talent. 

support him.” 

-~ mander-in-Chief and confessed his fault. 
_ kindly and all was over. 


Ch‘éng P‘u was amazed at their skill. 
despised Chou Yü as a mere student who would never be a 
I must 
So he went over to the quarters of the Com- 


Next’ Chou Yü sent for Chuko Chin and said, to him, 


_ “Byidently your brother is a genius, a man born to be a king’ s 


counsellor. 
is here I wish you to use every effort to persuade him to stay | 


Why then does he serve Liu Pei? Now that he 


with us. Thus our lord would gain able support and you two 


brothers would be together, which would be ae ane for you. . 
both. 


I wish you success. 
Chin replied, 


~ rendered since I came here and I can do no other than obey 
-your command to the best of my ability.” 


his sorrow at their separation. 


_ Thereupon he went away to his brother, whom he found in. 
- the guest-house. 


The younger brother received him and. when 
he had reached the inner rooms K‘ung-ming bowed respect- 
fully and, weeping, told his experiences since they parted and 
Then Chin, weeping also, 


_ said, “Brother, do you remember the story of Po I and Shu Chi, 
the brothers who would not be separated?” 


X K‘ung-ming. So he replied, 


“Ah, Chou Yü has sent him to talk me over,” thought 
“They were two of the noble 


_ people of old days; yes, I know.” 


“Those. two, although they perished of hunger near the 


_ Shouyang Hills, yet never separated. You and I, born of the 


same mother and suckled at the same breast, yet serve different 


Said he, “I have always — 7 


He was received ; 


‘Tam ease of the little service I- have 


AEROS: PR San kuo AR 


AN ate 
masters And never meet. Are you not ashamed aka you thinke GERA 


of such examples as Po I and Shu Ch‘i?” - 


K‘ung-ming replied, “You are talking now of love, but what ae 


I stand for is duty. We are both men of Han and Liu Pei is 
of the family. If you, brother, could leave Wu and join me 
in serving the rightful branch, then on the one side we should 


‘be honoured as Ministers of Han and on the other we should — 


be together as people of the same flesh and blood should be. 
Thus love and duty would both receive their proper meed. 
-What do you think of it, my brother?” 

“I came to persuade him and lo! it is I who am Deine talked 
over,” thought Chuko Chin. He had no fitting reply to make 


so he rose and took his leave. Returning to Chou ae he — 


related the story of the interview. 
“What do you think?” asked Chou Yü. 


“General Sun has treated me with great kindness and [E 


2) 


could not turn my back on him,” replied Chin. 
“Since you decide to remain loyal, there is no need to say 
much; I think I have a plan to win over your brother.” 


The wisest men see eye to eye, 
For each but sees the right; 
But-should their several interests clash, 
They all the fiercer fight. 


The means by which Chou Yii tried to bap the support of 
K‘ung-ming will be described in the next chapter. 


SS a Si 
AE ET ae en Te E ee ans ae SA 


ESA OEE T eet AE E ee 
Pe ee Pee, aS I) ES ee TR a al Peete ee ee 


— 


CHAPTER XLV. 


‘Ts‘Ao Ts‘Ao LOSES SOLDIERS: | 
- CHIANG KAN VICTIM OF A RUSE. 


hoe: Yü was very nored. by the words of Chuko Chin 3 

and a fierce hatred for K‘ung-ming took root in his heart. 
- He nourished a secret resolve to make away with him. He 
continued his preparations for war and when the men were 


all mustered and ready he went in for a farewell interview _ 


with his lord. ~ 
“You go on first, noble sir,” said Sun Ch‘tian. “I will then 
march to support you.’ 
Chou Yii took his leave and ‘then, with Ch'ê êng Pu and Lu 
Su, marched out with the army. He invited K‘ung-ming to 
` accompany. the expedition, and when he cheerfully accepted, 
_ the four embarked in the same ship. They set sail and the | 
flotilla made for Hsiak‘ou.. | 
About sixty lè from “Three River Mouths” the fleet anchored 
“near the shore and Chou Yü built a stockade’on the bank 
near the middle of their line with the West Hills as a support. 
Siler camps were made near his. K‘ung-ming, however, took 
up his quarters in a small ship. 
_ When the camp dispositions were complete Chou Yü sent 
to request K‘ung-ming to come and give him advice. He 
came, and after the salutations were ended Chou Yü said, 
_“Tsʻao Ts‘ao thought he had fewer troops than Yiian Shao, 
- nevertheless overcame him because he followed the advice 
` given by Hsii Yu to destroy his supplies. Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
has over eighty legions while I have but five or six. In order 
~ to defeat him his supplies must be destroyed first. I have 
_ found out that the main depôt is at Chiit‘ieh Hill. As you 
have lived hereabout you know the topography quite well and 


I wish to entrust the task of cutting off supplies to you and ` 


your colleagues Kuan Yii, Chang Fei and Chao Yiin. I will 
-assist you with a company. I wish you to start without 
‘delay. In this way we can best serve our masters.” 
=- K‘ung-ming saw through this at once. He thought to 
himself, “This is a ruse in revenge for my not having heen 
persuaded to enter the service of Wu. If I refuse I shall be 
-laughed at. So I will do as he asks and trust to find some 
3 means of deliverance from the evil he intends.” 
` Therefore he accepted the task with alacrity, much to the 
joy of Chou Yü. After the leader of the operon had taken 


` 


470 San uo, or 4 


his leave, ie Su went to Chou Yu secretly and said, Why. 
have you set him this task?” SA 
“Because I wish to compass his death. without appearing : 
ridiculous. I hope to get him killed by the hand of Ts‘ ao 
-Ts‘ao and prevent his doing further mischief.” ° i 
Lu Su left and went to see K‘ung-ming to find out if He ; 


suspected anything. He found him looking quite unconcerned _ : 


and getting the soldiers ready to march. Unable to hold his _ 
tongue, however, he put a tentative question, “Do you think — 
this expedition will succeed ?”’ » ne 


K‘ung-ming laughingly replied, “I am an adept at all sorts of E 


fighting, with foot, horse and chariots on land and on the water. 


There is no doubt. of my success. I am not like you and your © 


friend, only capable in one direction.” 

“What do you mean by our being capable only in one 
direction?” said Lu Su. 

“T have heard the street boys in your country singing: — 


To lay an Sabath, hold a pass, 
Lu Su is the man to choose; 
But when you on the water fight, 
Chou Yü is the man to use. 


You are only fit for ambushes and guarding passes on land: i 
just as he only understands fighting on the water.’ 


Lu Su carried this story to Chou Yu, which only incensed i Ì 


him the more against K‘ung-ming. | i 
“How dare he flout: me, saying I cannot fight a land battle? 


I will not let him go. I will go myself with a legion and cut- a 


off Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s supplies.” ‘ 
Lu Su went back and told this to K‘ung-ming, who smiled | 


and said, “He only wanted me to go on this expedition because — A 


he wanted Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to kill me. And so I teased him a | 
little. But he cannot bear that. Now is the critical moment 
` and the Marquis Wu and my master must act in harmony 


if we are to succeed. If each one tries to harm the other ~ 
the whole scheme will fail. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is no fool and it is — 


a usual thing with him to attack an enemy through his- 


supplies. Do you not think he has already taken double 4 


` precautions against any surprise of his own depot? If Chou ~ 


Yü tries he will be taken prisoner. What he ought to do is 
to bring about a decisive naval battle, whereby to dishearten 


the northern men, and then find some other means to defeat 


them utterly. If you could persuade him what was his best 
course it would be well.” 

Without loss of time, Lu Su went tc Chou Yü to- relate 
what K‘ung-ming had told him. Chou shook his head when 


he heard it and beat the ground with his foot, saying, “This — ; | 


man is far too clever; he beats me fifty to one. He will have 
to be done away with or my country will suffer.” 


s 


Remane of the Three tingooms 


a Said Lu Sa “This is the OE t to use men; you must ana 
_ think of the country’s good first of all. When once Ts‘ao 
.Ts‘ao is defeated you may do as you please.” . w 
Chou had to confess the reasonableness of this. r A A 
-~ Itis now time to speak of Liu Pei. He had ordered his í 
= nephew Liu Ch‘i to hold Chianghsia while he and the bulk — by 
- of the army returned to Hsiak‘ou. Thence he saw the opposite == 
bank thick with banners and flags and glittering with every == 
kind of arms and armour. He knew then that the expedition = 
_ from Wu had started. So he moved all his force from 
=- Chianghsia to Fank‘ou. ees 
_ Then he assembled his officers and said to them, “Kungs i n 
Ni: ming went to Wu some time ago and no word has come 
from him, so I know not how the business stands. Will = © 
“any one volunteer to go to find out?” Re ; 
“I will go,” said Mi Chu. ee. 
=- So presents were prepared and gifts of flesh and wine, ee 
- and Mi Chu prepared to journey to Wu on the pretext of A 
$ offering a congratulatory feast to the army. Mi Chu set out 
_in a small ship and went down river. He stopped opposite the 
- camp and the soldiers reported his arrival to Chou Yü, who 
- ordered him to be brought in. Mi Chu bowed low and 
expressed the respect which Liu Pei had for Chou Yü and 
offered the various gifts. The ceremony of reception was hy 
followed by a banquet in honour of Mi Chu. Mi said, an 
 “Kung-ming has been here a long time and I desire that he o/s ea 
may return with me.’ b AE N: 
“K‘ung-ming is making plans with me and I could not let? | 
` him return,” said Chou Yü. “I also wish to see Liu Pei that = 
we may make joint plans, but when one is at the head of a ; 
-great army one cannot get away even for a moment. If | 
your master would only come hare it would be very gracious hel 
-on his part.” A ea A 
~- Mi Chu agreed that Liu Pej might come and presently  ~— 
took his leave. Then Lu Su asked Chou Yü the reason for 
his desiring Liu Pei to come. ENA 
=- “Liu Yüan-tê is the one bold and dangerous man and if 
must be removed. I am taking this opportunity to persuade = 
him to come, and when he shall be slain a great danger will 
cease to threaten our country.” mi. 
Lu Su tried to dissuade him from this scheme but Chou aa a 
- Yü was deaf to all he said. He even issued orders for half ney, 
a hundred executioners to be ready to hide within the lining E VERRA 
of his tent if Liu Pei decided to come and arranged to drop a 
cup as a signal for them to fall on and slay him. 
= Mi Chu returned and told Liu Pei that his presence was 
desired by Chou Yü. Suspecting nothing Liu Pei at once 
<- ordered them to prepare a fast vessel to take him without 
loss of time. Kuan Yü was opposed to his going saying 


472 ey aa . San Ruo, or a 


that Chou Yü was artful and treacherous and there was no 3 a 


news from K‘ung-ming. 


Yiian-té replied, “I have joined my forces to theirs in this oe 
attack on our common enemy. If Chou Yü wishes to see me 


and I refuse to go, it is a betrayal. Nothing will succeed. if 
both sides nourish suspicions.’ 

“Tf you have finally decided to go, then will I go eth you,” 
said Kuan Yü. sS 

“And I also,” cried Chang Fei. — - 

But Yitian-té said, “Let Kuan Yü come with me while you 


and Chao Yün keep guard. Chien Yung will hold Ohsien. | 


I shall not be away long.” 


So leaving these orders, Liu Pei embarked with his brother j 


on a small boat. The escort did not exceed a score. The light 

craft travelled very quickly down the river. Liu Pei rejoiced 

greatly at the sight of the war vessels in tiers by the bank, 

the soldiers in their breastplates and all the pomp and 

panoply of war. All was in excellent order. l 
As soon as he arrived the guards ran to tell Chou Yü. 
“How many ships has he?” asked Chou. 


They replied, “Only one; and the escort is only about a | 


score.” 
-“His fate is sealed,” said Chou Yü. 
He sent for the executioners and placed them in hiding 


between the outer and inner tents, and when all was arranged à 
for the assassination he contemplated, he went out to receive - 
his visitor. Liu Pei came with his brother and escort into 
the midst of the army to the Commander’s tent. After the — 


salutations Chou Yü wished Liu Pei to take the upper seat, 


but he declined saying, “General, you are famous through — 
all the country, while I am a nobody. Do not overwhelm | 


me with too great deference.” 


«So they took the positions of simple friends and refresh- | 


ments were brought in. 
Now by chance K‘ung-ming came on shore and heard that 


his master had arrived and was with the Commander-in- — 


Chief. The news gave him a great shock and he said to 
himself, “What is to be done now?” He made his way- to 


the reception tent and stole a look therein. He saw murder | 


written on Chou Yii’s countenance and noted the assassins 
hidden within the walls of the tent. Then he got a look at 
Liu Pei, who was laughing and talking quite unconcernedly. 
But when he noticed the redoubtable figure of Kuan Yü near 
his master’s side he became quite calm and contented. 

“No danger,” said he, and he went away to the river bank 
to await the end of the interview. 


Meanwhile the banquet of welcome proceeded. After the! 


wine had gone around several times Chou Yü picked up a cup 


to give the signal agreed upon. But at that moment he saw so - 


aoa of te Tore Gnoom 


Ta a look upon the fads of the trusty henchman who stood, ` 
sword in hand, behind his guest, that he hesitated and Haguiy ; 
asked who he was. a 
“That is my brother, Kuan Yiin- ch‘ang,”’ replied Vase 
~ Chou Yü, quite startled, said, “Is he the slayer of Yen Liang 
‘and Wên Ch‘ou?” | 

“Exactly; he it is,’ EB epiied Liu Pel 

The sweat of fear broke out all over Chou Yü’s body and 
trickled down his back. Then he poured out a cup of wine 
and presented it to Kuan Yü. Just then Lu Su came in and 


Yiian-té said to him, “Where is K‘ung-ming? I would trouble 


you to ask him to come.” 
“Wait till we have defeated Ts‘ao Ts‘ao,” said Chou Yü, 
“then you shail see him.” 
Ytian-té dared not repeat his request, but Kuan Yü gave him ~ 
a meaning look which Yüan-tê understood and rose, saying, 
“I would take leave now; I will come again to congratulate 
you when the enemy has been defeated and your success shall 
be complete.” 

Chou Yü did not press him to remain, but escorted him to 
the great gates of the camp, and Yüan-tê left. When he 
reached the river bank they found K‘ung-ming awaiting them 
_in their boat. 

- Yiian-té was exceedingly pleased but K‘ung- -ming said, “Sir, 

do you know in how great danger you were to-day ?”’ 
Suddenly sobered, Ytian-té said, “No; I did not think of 
danger.” 

“Tf Yiin-ch‘ang had not been there you would have been 

killed,” said K‘ung-ming. 

 “Yüan-tê, after a moment’s reflection, saw that it was true. 

He begged K‘ung-ming to return with him to Fanch‘éng, but 
he refused. “I am quite safe,” said he. ‘Although I am living 
“in the tiger’s mouth, I am as steady as Mount T‘ai. Now, 
-my lord, return and prepare your ships and men. On the 
twentieth day of the eleventh month send Chao Yün with a 


small ship to. the south bank to wait for me. Be sure there . 


is no miscarriage.’ 
~ “What are your intentions?” said Yüan- tê. 
“When | the south-east wind begins I shall have to 
return.” 
- Yiian-té would have questioned him further, but K‘ung-ming 
pressed him to go. So the boat started up river again while 
-K‘ung-ming returned to his temporary lodging. ` 
The boat had not proceeded far when appeared a small fleet 
: dweeping down with the current, and in the prow of the 
leading vessel stood a tall figure armed with a spear. It was 
Chang Fei, who had come down fearing lest his brother might 
be in some difficulty from which the strong arm of Kuan Yü 
might even be insufficient to rescue him. 
f 


X 


ATA : San ius, ov, 


Of the return of the three brothers nothing will be said. 


After Chou Yü, having escorted Yiian-té to the gate of his. 
. camp, had returned to his quarters Lu Su soon came to see ` 


him. 

“When you had cajoled Yüan-tê into coming, why did you 
not carry out your plan?” asked Lu. 

“Because of that Kuan Yü; he is a very tiger and he never 


left his brother for a moment. If anything had been attempted y 


he would certainly have had my life.” 


Lu Su knew that he spoke the truth. Then suddenly they 
announced a messenger with a letter from Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


Chou Yü ordered them to bring him in and took the letter. 


But when he saw the superscription | “The First Minister of 
Han to Commander-in-Chief Chou,” he fell into a frenzy 


of rage, tore the letter to fragments and threw them on be 
ground. 
“To death with this fellow!” cried he. 


“When two countries are at war their emissaries are not- 


slain,” said Lu. 


“Messengers are slain to show one’s dignity and indepen- 


dence,” replied Chou. 


The unhappy bearer of the letter was decapitated and his — 


head sent back to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao by the hands of his escort. 
Chou Yii then decided to move. The van under Kan Ning 


was to advance, supported by two wings. -Chou Yü would. 


lead the remainder in support. The next morning the early 
meal was eaten in the fourth watch and the ships got under 
weigh in the fifth with a great beating of drums. 


. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was greatly angered when he heard that his- 
letter had been ‘torn to fragments and he resolved to attack — 


forthwith. His advance was led by Ts‘ai Mao and others of 
the Chingchou officers who had joined his side. He went as 


hastily as possible to the meeting of the three rivers and saw i 
the ships of Wu sailing up. In the bow of the foremost ship — 


stood a fine figure of a warrior who cried, “I am Kan Ning; 
I challenge any one to combat.” 
Ts‘ai Mao sent his young brother to accept the challenge, 


but as his ship approached Nan King shot an arrow and ~ 
Ts‘ai Hsiin fell. Kan Ning pressed forward, his crossbowmen ~ 


keeping up a heavy discharge which Ts‘ ao’s men could not 
stand. The wings also joined in. 
Ts‘ao’s men, being mostly from the dry plains of the north, 


did not know how to fight effectually on water and the southern — 
ships had the battle all their own way. The slaughter was 


very great. However, after a contest lasting till afternoon 
Chou Yü thought it more prudent, in view of the superior 
numbers of his enemy, not to risk further the advantage he 


had gained. So he beat the gongs as the signal to cease battle 


and recall thé ships. 


es Ts ao was „worsted, but his eae tume to the; en 
-where a camp was made and order was restored. Ts‘ao sent 
-for his defeated leaders and reproached them saying, “You 


| did not do your best. You let an inferior force overcome you.” on 


Ts‘ai Mao defended himself saying, “The Chingchou marines 


have not been exercised for a long time and the others have roe 


never been trained for naval warfare at all. A naval camp 
must be instituted, the northern men trained and the Ching- 


chou men drilled. When they have been made efficient they 


will win victories.” : 
“If you know what should be done, why have you not done. 
it?” said Ts‘ ‘ao Ts‘ao. “What is the use of telling me ibe ple 
Get to wor 
So Ts‘ai Mao and Chang Yiin organised a naval camp ¢ on the 
river bank. They established twenty-four “Water Gates,” 
with the large ships outside as a sort of rampart, and under 
their protection the smaller ships went to and fro freely. At 
_ night when the lanterns and torches were lit the very sky was 
illuminated and the water shone red with the glare. On land 
the smoke of the camp fires could be traced for thr ee hundred 
li without a break. 
Chou Yü returned to camp and teated his victorious fight- _ 
ing men. A messenger bore the joyful tidings of victory to 
his master in Wu. When night fell Chou Yü went up to the 
- summit of one of the hills and looked out over the long line of 
bright lights Stretching toward the west, showing the extent 
- of the enemy’s camp. He said nothing, but a great fear came 
in upon him. | 
‘Next day Chou Yü decided that he would go in person to find | 
out the strength of the enemy. So he bade them prepare a 
small squadron which he manned with strong, hardy men 
armed with powerful bows and stiff crossbows. He also placed 
i; musicians on each ship. They set sail and started up the 
stream. When they got opposite Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp the heavy 
-stones that served as anchors were dr opped and the drums and 
_ trumpets began while Chou Yü scanned the enemy’s naval camp. 
= What he saw gave him no satisfaction for everything was most © 
admirable. He enquired whether any one knew the names of 
_the admirals and they told him Ts‘ai Mao and Chang Yün. 
~ “They have lived in our country a long time,” said he, “and 
are thoroughly experienced in naval warfare. I must find 
some means of removing them before I can effect anything.” 
Meanwhile on shore the sentinels had told Ts‘ao that the 
enemy craft were spying upon them and he ordered out some 
ships to capture the spies. Chou Yti saw the commotion on 
‘shore and hastily gave the order to unmoor and sail down 
stream. The squadron at once got under way and scattered; 
to and fro went the oars and each ship seemed to fly. Before 
. Ts‘ao’s ships could get out after them they were all far away. 


476 A Ban ino, or ` 


Ts‘ao’s ships took up the ese but soon saw pursuit was i ji: 


useless. They returned and reported their failure. 


Again Ts‘ao found fault with his officers and said, “The ; 


other day you lost a battle and the soldiers were greatly 


dispirited. Now the enemy have spied out our camp. What 


` can be done?” 
In eager response to his question one stepped out, saying, 
“When I was a youth Chou Yii and I were fellow students and 


pledged friends. My three-inch tongue is still good and I will ` 


go over and persuade him to surrender.” 


Ts‘ao, rejoiced to find so speedy. a solution, looked at the 3 
speaker. It was Chiang Kan of Kiukiang, one of the secretary 


staff in the camp. 

“Are you a good friend of Chou Yii’s?” said Ts‘ao:. 

“Rest contented, O Minister,” replied Kan. “If I only geton 
the other side of the river I shall succeed.” 

“What preparations are necessary?” asked Ts‘ao. | 

el ust a youth as my servant and a couple of rowers; nothing 
else.” 

Ts‘ao offered him wine, wished him success and sent him on 
- his way. 


Clad in a simple white robe and seated in his little craft, the ` 


messenger reached Chou Yii’s camp and bade the men say that 


an old friend Chiang Kan wished to see him. The commander — 
was in his tent at a council when the message came, and he » 


laughed as he said to those about him, “A guest is coming.” 


. Then he whispered certain instructions in the ear of each one | 


of them and they went out to await his arrival. 


Chou Yü received his friend in full ceremonial garb. A. 


crowd of officers in rich silken robes were about him. The 


guest appeared, his sole attendant a lad dressed in a simple - 
blue gown. He bore himself proudly as he advanced and 


: Chou Yü made a low obeisance. 


“You have been well I hope since last we met,” said Chiang — 


Kan. 


“You have wandered far and suffered much in this task of 3 


emissary in the Ts‘ao cause,” said Chou. 
“T have not seen you for a very long time,” said the envoy 


much taken aback, “and I came to visit you for the sake of old 


times. Why do you call me an emissary for the Ts‘ao cause?” 
“Though I am not so clever a musician as Shih Kuang, 


“yet I can comprehend the thought behind the music,” replied 


Chou. 


will take my leave,” said Chiang. 


EA E ee ne ES pS ee E meg 


Pa RAEE OON RIEN AN TOEL N A 


na he ik ria 


“ As you choose to treat your old friend like this I think I 3 


Chou Yü laughed again and taking Kan by the arm, said, E 


“Wel, I feared you might be coming on his behalf to ‘try to 


persuade me. But if this is not your intention, you need not. 


go away so hastily.” 


ORF aoe 


oe of the Three notons ee ATG 


~ So they two entered the tent; and when they had echauwed 


Slates and were seated as friends, Chou Yü bade them call’ 


- his officers that he might introduce them. ‘They soon appeared 
civil and military officials, all dressed in their best. The 
military officers were clad in glittering silver armour and the 
staff looked very imposing a sthey stood ranged in two lines. 
The visitor was introduced to them all, Presently a banquet 
was spread, and while they feasted the musicians played songs 
of victory and the wine circulated merrily. Under its mellow- 
ing influence Chou Yii’s reserve seemed to thaw and he said, 
“He is an old fellow student of mine and we are pledged 


friends. Though he has arrived here from the north he is 


no artful pleader so you need not be afraid of him.” | 


Then he took off the sword which he wore as Commander- 


_in-Chief and handed it to T‘aishih Tzu, saying, “ You take this 
- and wear it for the day as master of the feast. This day we 
meet only as friends and if any one shall begin a discussion of 
the questions at issue between Ts‘ao Tis‘ao and our country just 
slay him.” 
_ T‘aishih Tzu took the sword and dented himself in his place. 
The guest was not a little overcome, but he said no word. 
Chou Yü said, ‘Since I assumed command I have tasted no 


drop of wine, but to-day as an old friend is present and there 


is no reason to-fear him, I am going to drink freely.” 

So saying he quaffed a huge goblet and laughed loudly. 

The rhinoceros cups went swiftly round from guest to guest 
till all were half drunk. Then Chou Yü, laying hold: of the 

-guest’s hand, led him outside the tent. The guards who stood 
= around all braced themselves up and seized their weapons. 
“Do you not think my soldiers a fine lot of mowa 8? Said 
- Chou. 
“Strong as ioe and bold as tigers,” roped Ghians an 

Then Chou Yii led him to the rear of the tent whence he saw 
-= the grain and forage piled up in mountainous heaps. 


~ “Do you not think I have a fairly good store of grain and 


forage?” 

“Tt is quite true as I have heard that your men are brave 
and your supplies ample.” 

Chou Yü pretended to be quite intoxicated and went on, 
“When you and I were students together, we never looked 
_ forward to a day like this did we?” 

“For a genius like you it is nothing extraordinary,” said 
the guest. 


Chou Yii again seized his hand and they sat down. “ When 


a really great man has found his proper lord then, in his 
service, he relies upon the right feeling between prince and 
minister outside, and at home he is firm in the kindly feeling 
of relatives. His words must be obeyed, his plans must be 
followed out. He is independent of good or evil fortune. He 


478 i San Kuo, or i 


? 


“and Li Shéng so that they seem to live again. His words pour | 
forth like a rushing river, his tongue is as a sharp sward. ` 
Is it possible to move such as I am?” 

He burst into a loud laugh as he finished and Ghiang Kan’s 

: face had become clay-coloured. Chou Yü then led his guest 

back into the tent and again they fell to drinking. Presently 


he pointed to the others at table and said, “These are all the i 


best and bravest of the land of Wu; one might call this “Ther 
Meeting of Heroes ’.” 

They drank on till daylight failed and continued after laa 
had been lit. Chou Yü even gave an exhibition of sword play | 
and sang this song :— 


When a man is in the world, 0, 
He ought to do his best. 
And when he’s done his best, O, 
He ought to have his rest. 
And when I have my rest, O, 
. PI quaff my wine with zest. | 
And when I’m drunk as drunk can be, 
TIl sing the madman’s litany. — 


takes as his models such men as Su Ch‘ in, Chang I, Lu Chia : 


A burst of applause greeted the song. By this time it was — 


getting late and the guest begged to be excused. “The wine. 


is too much for me,” said he. His host bade them clear the =- 


table and as all the others left Chou Yü said, “It is many ` 


a day since J shared a couch with my friend, but we will do. 
so to-night.” 

Putting on the appearance of irresponsible intoxication he 
led Chiang Kan into the tent and they went to bed. Chou Yii 
simply fell, all dressed as he was, and lay there emitting 
uncouth grunts and groans, so that to the guest sleep was 
impossible. He lay and listened to the various camp noises 
without and his host’s thund‘rous snores within. About the- 
second watch he rose and looked at his friend by the dim — 
light of the small lamp. He also saw on the table a heap of 
papers and looking at them furtively, saw they were letters. 


4 


J 


Among them he saw one marked as coming from Chang Yün « 
and Ts‘ai Mao. He read it and this is what it said:—‘““We — 


surrendered to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, not for the sake of pay but under — 


stress of circumstances. Now we have fooled these northern 
soldiers into admitting us to their camp but, as soon as occasion 
offers, we mean to have the rebel’s head to offer as a sacrifice 


to your banner. From time to time there will be reports as. 
occasions serve but you may trust us. This is our humble 


reply to your letter.” 

“Those two were connected with Wu in the beginning,” 
thought Chiang Kan, so he secreted the letter in his dress 
and began to examine the others. But at that moment Chou 
Yu turned over and so Kan hastily blew out the light and 
went to his couch. 


a 


3 


Chou Yii was muttering as: he lay bare aad un guest, ' 
carefully listening, made out, “Friend, Iam going to let you 


see Ts‘ao’s head in a day or two.” 


; i Chiang Kan hastily made some reply to lead on his host 
to say more. Then came, “Wait a tew days; you will see 


| ai  Ts‘ao’s head. The old wretch!” 


Chiang tried to question him as to what he meant, but sue ch 
Chou Yü was fast asleep and seemed to hear nothing. Chiang weet 
Jay there on his couch wide awake till the fourth watch was | 

beating. Then some one came in, saying, “General, are you’ 


awake?” At that moment as if suddenly awakened from the 


deepest slumber, ope Yu started up and said, “Who is this 


on the couch?” 


_ The voice replied, “Do you not remember, General? You 
asked your old friend to stay the night with you; it is he, 


of course.’ 

ee | drank too much last night,” said Chou Yü in a regretful 
. tone, “and I forgot. I seldom indulge to excess and am not 
used to it. Perhaps I said many things I ought not.” 

The voice went on, “A man has arrived from the north.” 

“Speak lower,” said Chou Yii, and turning toward the 


4 eper he called him by name. But Chiang Kan affected 


4 
- commanders, have come.” 


` to be sound asleep and made no sign. 
~ Chou Yü crept out of the tent, while Kan listened with all 
his ears. He heard the man say, “Chang and Ts‘ai, the two 


But listening as he did with straining ears he could not 


_ make out what followed. Soon after Chou Yü re-entered and 


_ again called out his companion’s name. But no reply came, 
` for Chiang Kan was pretending to be in the deepest slumber 
and to hear nothing. Then Chou Yü undressed and went to bed. 

As Chiang Kan lay awake he remembered that Chou Yu 
was known to be meticulously careful in affairs and if in the 


. morning he found that a letter had disappeared he would. 
certainly slay the offender. So he lay there till near daylight 


and then called out to his host. Getting no reply he rose, 
dressed and stole out of the tent. Then he called his servant 


and made for the camp gate. 


Ye 


“Whither are you going, Sir?” said the watchmen at the- 


gate. 
“T fear I am in the way here,” replied Kan, “and so I have 
taken leave of the General for a time. So do not. stop me.’ 
He found his way to the river bank and re-embarked. 
Then, with flying oars, he hastened back to Ts‘ao’s camp. 


é When he arrived Ts‘ao asked at once how he had sped and 


` he had to. acknowledge failure. 

“Chou Yü is very clever and perfectly high- minded, ” said 
he, “nothing that I could say moved him in the least. y 

TY ouri failure makes me look ridiculous,” said Ts‘ao. 


mee 


480 fee ean tuo 


\ 


“Well, if I did not win over Chou Yü, I found nat some- aa 


thing for you. Send away these people and I will tell you,” 
said Chiang. 


The servants were dismissed and then Chiang Kan pro- : 


duced the letter he had stolen from Chou Yii’s tent. He gave 
it to Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao was very angry and sent for the two at 
once. As soon as they appeared he said, “I want you two 
to attack.” 

Ts‘ai Mao replied, “But the men are not yet sufficiently 
trained.” 


“The men will be well enough trained when you have sent 


my head to Chou Yü, eh?” 

Both officers were dumb-founded, having Hot the least idea 
what this meant. They remained silent for they had nothing 
to say. 'Ts‘ao bade the executioners lead them away to instant 
death. In a short time their heads were produced. 

By this time Ts‘ad had thought over the matter and it 
dawned upon him that he had been tricked.: A poem says:— 


No one could stand against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, : 
Of sin he had full share, a 
But Chou Yü was more treacherous, 
And caught him in a snare. 
Two officers to save their lives, 
Betrayed a former lord, 
Soon after, as was very meet. 
Both fell beneath the swora. 


The death of these two naval commanders caused much 
consternation in the camp and all their colleagues asked the. 


reason for their sudden execution. Though Ts‘ao knew he 


had been victimised he would not acknowledge it. So he | 
said the two men had been remiss and so had been put to 
death. The others were aghast, but nothing could be done. 


Two other officers, Mao and Yü by name, were put in command ~ A 


of the naval camp. 


Spies took the news to Chou YU, who was delighted at the 


success of his ruse. 


“Those two were my only source of anxiety,” said he. 


“Now they are gone, I am quite happy.” 

Lu Su said, “General, if you can continue like this you need 
not fear Ts‘ao.’ 

“I do not think any of them saw my game,” said Chou Yü, 


except Chuko Liang. He beats me, and I do not think this 
ruse was hidden from him. You go and sound him. See if- 


he knew.” 


Chou’s treacherous plot succeeded well, 
Dissension sown, his rivals fell. 

Drunk with success was he, but sought 
To know what cynic K‘ung-ming thought. 


What passed between Lu Su and K‘ung-ming will next be . 


related. 


oe CHAPTER: SUVI 


-K‘uNG-MING “BORROWS” SOME ARROWS: Lona 
_ HUANG KAI ACCEPTS A PUNISHMENT. A 


Er gossip Lu Su departed on his mission and found ange a 


ming seated in his little craft. 
_ “There has been so much to do that I have not been able to 
come to listen to your instruction,” said Lu Su. 
“That is truly so,” said K‘ung-ming, “and I have not yet 
congratulated the Commander-in-Chief.”’ 
“What have you wished to congratulate him upon?” 


oh “Why Sir, the matter upon which he sent you to find out 
-= whether I knew about it or not. Indeed I can congratulate 


him on that.” 


_ Master?” 
_“The ruse succeeded well thus played off on Chiang Kan. 
TaN ao has been taken in this once, but he will soon rise to it. 
- Only he will not confess his mistake. However, the two men 
oe gone and your country is freed from a grave anxiety. 
Do you not think that a matter for congratulation? I 
hear Mao Chieh and Yü Chin are the new admirals, and 


in their hands lie both good and evil for the fate of the : 


fleet.” 


=r 


passing the time in making empty remarks, and then took his 
against letting Chou Yü know that his new rival had guessed 


to do me harm.” 
‘Lu Su promised; nevertheless he went straight to his chief 
l Pana related the whole thing just as it happened. 
-~ “Really he must be got rid of,” said Chou Yt, “I have quite 
_ decided to put the man out of the way.” 
“Tf you slay him, will not Ts‘ao Ts‘ao laugh at you? p 
“Oh, no; I will find a legitimate way of getting rid of him 
“S0 that he ’ shall go to his death without resentment.” 
= “But how can you find a legitimate way of assassinating 
NIM??? 
=- “Do not, A too much; you will see presently.” 
Soon after all the officers were summoned to the main tent 
and K‘ung-ming’s presence was desired. He went contentedly 
_ enough. When all were seated Chou Yü suddenly addressed 


31 


— Lu Su turned pale and gasped. But how did you know, 


Lu Su was quite dumbfounded; he stayed a little time longer — 
eave. As he was going away K‘ung-ming cautioned him | 


his ruse. “I know he is jealous and he only seeks some chance 


482 i yah e an dogo Oe ee 


K‘ung-ming, saying, “I am going to fight a battle with the ae 


enemy soon on the water: what weapons are the best?” 

“On the great river arrows are the best,’ said K'ung- 
ming. 

“Your opinion and mine agree. But at the moment we are 
short of them. I wish you would undertake to supply about a 
-hundred thousand for the naval fight. As it is for the public 
“service you will not decline, I hope!” ` 3 
“Whatever task the Commander-in-Chief lays upon me I 
-must certainly try to perform,” replied K‘ung-ming. “May . 
I enquire by what date you require the hundred thousand 
arrows?”, 
“Could you have them ready in ten days?” 

“The enemy will be here very soon; ten days will be too 
late,” said K‘ung-ming. 


“Tn how many. days do you estimate the arrows can be 


ready ?” 

“Let me have three days: then you may send for’: your 
hundred thousand.” 

“No joking, remember,” said the General. “There is no 
joking in war time.” 6 

“Dare I joke with the Commander-in-Chief? Give me a — 
-~ forma! military order and if I have not completed the task in 
three days I will take my punishment.” 


Chou Yü, secretly delighted, sent for the secretaries and) 


prepared the commission then and there. Then he drank to 


the success of the undertaking and said, “I shall have to — ’ 


congratulate you most heartily when this is accomplished.” 


“This day is not to count,” said K‘ung-ming. “On the third a 
from to-morrow morning send five hundred small boats to the is 


river side to convey the arrows.” 


They drank a few more cups together and then K‘ung-ming — J 


took his leave. After he had gone, Lu Su said, “Do you not | ; 
think there is some deceit about this?” © 
“I think he has signed his own death warrant,” said Chou. | 


“Without being pressed in the least he asked for a formal 


order in the face of the whole assembly. If he grew a pair 
of wings he could not escape. Only I will just orde: the 
workmen to delay him as much as they can, and not supply 


him with materials, so that he is sure to fail. And then, when — d 
the certain penalty is incurred, who: can criticise: You can 2 4 


go and enquire about it all and keep me informed.” 


So off went Lu Su to seek K‘ung-ming, who at once re- y 
proached him with having blabbed about the former business, . — 


“He wants to hurt me, as you know, and I did not think you 


could not keep my secret. And now there is what you saw ~ 


to-day and how do you think I can get a hundred thousand: 


arrows made in three days? You will simply have to rescue ~ 4 


me.’ 


j “You Moe the misfortune on yourself and how can I 

rescue you?” said Lu. 

— “T look to you for the loan of a score of vessels, manned 

_ each by thirty men. I want blue cotton screens and bundles 

of straw lashed to the sides of the boats. I have good use for 

- them. On the third day I have undertaken to deliver the fixed 
number of arrows. But on no account must you let Chou Yu 
_ know, or my scheme will be wrecked.” 

Lu Su consented and this time he kept his word. He went 
to report to his chief as usual, but he said nothing about the 
boats. He only said K‘ung-ming was not using bamboo or 
_ feathers c or glue or varnish, but had some other way of getting 
< arrows. 

=~ “Let us await the three days’ limit,” said Chou Yü, puzzled 
~ though confident. 
= On his side Lu Su quietly prepared a score of light swift 
boats, each with its crew and the blue screens and bundles of 
` grass complete and, when these were ready, he placed them 
-at K‘ung-ming’s disposal. His friend did nothing on the first 
2 a nor on the second. On the third day at the middle, of the 
_ fourth watch, K‘ung-ming sent a private message asking Lu 
-Su to come to his boat. 
“Why have you sent for me, Sir?” asked Lu Su. 
- “I want you to go with me to get those arrows. 
“Whither are you going?” 
_*Do-not ask: you will see.’ 
: Then the twenty boats were fastened together by long ropes 
and moved over to the north bank. The night provea very 
-< foggy and the mist was very dense along the river, so that one 
_ man could scarcely see another. In spite of the fog K‘ung- 
ming urged the boats forward. 
_ There is a poem on these river fogs:— 
Mighty indeed is the Yangtse River! 
Rising far in the west, in the mountains of Omei and Min, 


Ploughing its way through Wu, east flowing, resistless, 
k Perea by its nine tributary streams, rolling down from the far 


= Aided. and helped by a hundred rivulets swirling and foaming, 

aN Wi 5 Ocean receives it at last welcoming, joyful, its waters. 
Pies Therein abide sea-nymphs and water gods, 
Enormous whales a thousand fathoms long, 
Nine-headed monstrous beasts yclept t“ien-wu, 
Demons and uncouth creatures wondrous strange. | 
, - In faith it is the home and. safe retreat 
ec Of devils black, and sprites, and wondrous growths, 
ie And eke the battle ground of valiant men. 

Tass At times occur strange strife of elements, 
“When darkness strives on light’s domain t’encroach, 
. Whereat arises in the vaulted dome of blue 
White wreaths of fog that toward the centre roll. 
Then darkness falls, too dense for any torch 
T’illumine; only clanging sounds can pass. 
The fog at first appears, a vaprous wreath 


+x 


484 Dan Ruo, or ` ; i 
Scarce visible. But thickening fast, it veils — ` 

The southern hills, the painted leopard’ s home. 

And spreads afar, until the northern sea TRN oa Na 
Leviathans are mazed and lose their course. R a WAM 
And denser yet it touches on the sky, aa 

And spreads a „heavy mantle o’er the earth. 

Then, wide as is the high pitched arch of heaven, J 
Therein appears no single rift of blue. ; 

Now mighty whales lead up their wives to sport 

Upon the waves, the sinuous dragons dive 

Deep down and, breathing, swell the heaving sea, 

The earth is moist as with the early rains, i 

And spring’s creative energy is chilled. ; 

Both far and wide and high the damp fog Dona 

Great cities on the eastern bank are hid, 7 

Wide ports and mountains in the south are lost, 

Whole fleets of battle ships, a thousand keels, 

Hide in the misty depths; frail fishing boats 

High riding on a wave are seen—and lost. 

The gloom increases and the domed sky 

Grows dark and darker as the sun’s light fails. 

The daylight dies, dim twilight’s reign begins, 

The ruddy hills dissolve and lose their hue. i oe 
The skill of matchless Yü would fail to sound ; 
The depth and height; and Li Lou’s eye, though’ ae 
Could never pierce this gloom. Now is the time, 

O sea and river gods, to use your powers. 

The gliding fish and creeping water folk 

Are lost; there is no track for bird or beast. 

Fair P‘énglai Isles are hidden from our sight, 

The lofty gates of heaven have disappeared. te 
Nature is blurred and indistinct, as when AE Fas 
A driving rain storm hurries o’er the earth. Ng 
And then, perhaps, within the heavy haze k ca 
A noisome serpent vents his venom foul : 

And plagues descend, or impish demons work 

Their wicked wills. 

Ills fall on men but do not stay, , 

Heaven’s cleansing breath sweeps them away, © 

But while they last the mean ones cry, 

The nobler suffer silently. 

The greatest turmoil is a sign 

Of quick return to state benign. 


The little fleet reached Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s naval camp Bonk the 
fifth watch and orders were given to form line lying prows 
west, and then to beat the drums and shout. 

“But what shall we do if they attack us?” exclaimed Lu Su. 

K‘ung-ming replied with a smile, “I think the fleet will not 
venture out in this fog; go on with your wine and let us be 
happy. We will go back when the fog lifts.” 

As soon as the shouting from the river was heard by those ; 
in the camp the two commanders ran off to report to their © pe 
chief, who said, “Coming up in a fog like this means that they — 
have prepared an ambush for us. Do not go out, but get all 
the force together and shoot at them.” 

He also sent orders to the soldier camps to despatch six KT, 
companies of archers and crossbowmen to aid the marines. 


The naval Hanes were then line ı up on the baik to avent 
a landing. » ‘Presently the soldiers arrived and a legion and 
more men were shooting down into the river, where the arrows > 
‘fell like rain. By and bye K‘ung-ming ordered the boats to turn 
round so ‘that their prows pointed east and to go closer in so 
that many arrows might hit them. 

‘es The drums were kept beating till the sun was high and ihe 
fog began to disperse, when the boats got under way "and sailed 
- down stream. The whole twenty boats were bristling with 

arrows on both sides. As they left, all the crews derisively 

shouted, “We thank you, Sir Mini ster, for the arrows.’ 

They told Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, but by the time he came the light boats | 
helped by the swift current were a long way down river and 
pursuit was impossible. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saw that he had been 
duped and was very sorry, but there was no help for it. 

__ On the way down K‘ung-ming said to his companion, “Every 

-= boat must have five or six thousand arrows and so, without 

Sathe expenditure of an ounce of energy, we must have more 
than ten myriad arrows, which to-morrow can be shot back 
again at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army to his great inconvenience.’ 

~~ “You are really superhuman,” said Lu Su. “But how did 
- you know there would be a thick fog to-day?” | 

-~ “One cannot be a leader without knowing the workings of 
heaven and the ways of earth. One must understand the secret 
“3 gates and the inter-dependence of the elements, the mysteries 
3 of tactics and the value of forces. It is but an ordinary talent. 

_I calculated three days ago that there would be a fog to-day 
and so I set, the limit at three days. Chou Yü would give me 
| ten days, but neither artificers nor material, so that he might » 
find occasion to put me to death as I knew, but my fate lies 
Pt with the Supreme and how could Chou Yü harm me?” 
~ Lu Su could not but agree. When the boats arrived half a 
- company were in readiness on the bank to carry away the 
arrows. ‘K‘ung-ming bade them go on board the boats, collect 
them and bear them to the tent of the Commander-in-Chief. 
Lu Su went to report that the arrows had been obtained and 
told Chou Yü by what means. 


Chou Yü was amazed and sighed sadly, saying, “He is better | ! 


_ than I; his methods are more than human.” 


Thick lies the fog on the river, 
Nature is shrouded in white, 
Distant and near are confounded, 
Banks are no longer in sight. 
Fast fly the pattering arrows, A 
Stick in the boats of the fleet. p 
Now can full tale be delivered, 
K‘ung-ming is victor complete. 


When, shortly after his return, K‘ung-ming went to the tent 
_ of the Commander-in-Chief he was welcomed by Chou Yü, who 


486 Han Buo, or a a e N 


predictions compel one’s esteem.” 
“There is nothing remarkable in that nimime trick, j "replied 
he. i 


Chou Yü led him within and wine was brought. — 

Chou Yü said, “My lord sent yesterday to urge me to advance, 
but I have no master plan ready; I wish you would assist me, 
Master.” 

“But where should I, a man of poor, everyday ability, find 
such a plan as you desire?” 

“I saw the enemy’s naval camp just lately and it looked 
very complete and well organised. It is not an ordinary | 
place to attack. I have thought of a plan, but I am not sure 


me.’ 
“General,” replied K‘ung-ming, “do not say what your plan — 


it will answer. I should be happy if you would decide for Sk 


a 
y 


came forward to greet him, saying, out maemo ee 


‘Ss 
SA 


“A 
na 


is but each of us will write in the palm of his hand'and see 


whether our opinions agree.’ 


So pen and ink were sent for and Chou Yü first wrote on his 


wrote. Then getting close together on the same bench each 
showed his hand to the other, and both burst out laughing, ~. 
for both had written the same word, “Fire.” i 


own palm, and then passed the pen to K‘ung-ming who also ~ 


I 


“Since we are of the same opinion,” said Chou Yü, “there - : 
is no longer any doubt. But our intentions must be kept ~ 


secret.” 
; “Both of us are public servants and what woul þe me 
sense of telling our plans? I do not think Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will be 
on his guard against this although he has had two experiences. 
You may put your scheme into force.” 


They finished their wine and separated. Not an 1 officer knew 4 a 


a word of the general’s plans. 

Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had expended a myriad arrows in vain. 
and was much irritated in consequence. He deeply desired 
revenge. Then Hsiin Yu proposed a ruse, saying, “The two © 


strategists on,the side of the enemy are Chou Yu and Chute - 


Liang, two men most difficult to get the better of. Let us send- 


some one who shall pretend to surrender-to them but really ~ 
be a spy on our behalf and a helper in our schemes. When ` 


we know what is doing we can plan to meet it.” 


“I had thought of that myself,” replied Ts‘ao. “Whom do 


you think the best man to send?” 

“Ts‘ai Mao has been put to death, but all the clan and family. 
are in the army and the two younger brothers are junior 
generals. You have them most securely in your power and 
may send them to surrender. The ruler of Wu will never 
suspect deceit there.” i 


* 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao decided to act on this plan and in the evening = : 


summoned the two men to’ his tent, where he told them oe 


fiomance ol the brer fringdoms 


yi he Ta mem io do. And he promised them ‘eich: veWards ee i 
if they succeeded. ‘But do not betray me,” added he. 
` “Our families are in Chingchdu and that place is yours,” 


Py, replied they. “Should we dare betray? You need have no) 


doubts, Sir. You will soon see the heads of both Chou Yü 
and Chuko Liang at your feet.” BRESA 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao gave them generous gifts and soon after the 
: two men, each with his half company, set sail with a fair wind 
for the opposite bank. i 
Now as Chou Yü was preparing for the attack the arrival 
of some ships was announced. They bore the two younger 
brothers of Ts‘ai Mao, who had come as deserters. They were 
led in and, bowing before the general, said, weeping, “Our 


innocent brother has been put to death and we desire venge- 


ance. So we have come to offer allegiance to you. We pray 
you to appoint us to the vanguard.” 
Chou Yü appeared very pleased and made them presents. 
- Then he ordered them to join Kan Ning in leading the van. 
They thanked him and regarded their scheme as already a 
success. 

But he gave Kan Ning secret orders. saying, “They have 

‘come without their families and so I know their desertion is 
only pretence. They have been sent as spies and I am going 
to meet their ruse with one of my own. They shall have some 
information to send. You will treat them well, but keep a . 
careful guard over them. On the day our soldiers start they. 

shall be sacrificed to the flag. But be very careful that nothing 
goes wrong.” o 

Kan Ning went away, and Lu Su came in to tell Chou Yü 
that every one agreed in thinking the surrender of the two 
feigned and said they should be rejected. 

“But they wish to revenge the death of their brother,’ said- 
the General. “Where is the pretence? If you are so suspicious 
you will receive nobody at all.” 

Lu Su left much piqued and went to see K‘ung-ming to whom 
he told the story. K‘ung-ming only smiled. . 

“Why do you smile?” said Lu Su. 

“T smile at your simplicity. The General is playing a game. 
Spies cannot easily come and go so these two have been sent 

` to feign desertion that they may act as spies. The General 

is meeting one ruse with another. He wants them to give 
information. Deceit is not to be despised in war and his 
scheme is the correct one to. employ.” 

“Then Lu Su understood. That night as Chou Yü was sitting 
in his tent, Huang Kai came to see him privately. “You have 
surely some wise plan to propose that you come at night ne 
this.” 

; Huang Kai replied, “The enemy are more numerous than we 
and it is wrong to delay. Why not burn them out?” 


? 


' his leave. 


488 . Aan Kuo, ov 
s \ 
“Who suggested that to you?” 
“T thought of it myself, nobody suggested it, 2 sE Huang. 
“I just wanted something like this and that is why I kept id 
those two pretended deserters. I want them to give some 
news. The pity is that I have no one to feign desertion to the 
other side and work my plan.” ; 
“But I will carry out your plan,” said Huang Kai. vont 
“But if you cannot show some injury you will not be be 
believed,” said Chou. ; 
“The Sun family have been very generous to me and I would 
not resent being crushed to death to repay them,” said Huang. 
The General thanked him saying, “If you would not object 
ae some bodily suffering then our country would indeed be 
ap i. 
“R me; I do not mind,” repeated Huang Kai as he took a 


Next day the drums called all the officers together to the - 
General’s tent and K‘ung-ming came with the others. Chou 
Yü said, “The enemy’s camps extend about three hundred li so A 
that the campaign will bea Jong one. Each leader i isto prepare 
supplies for three months.” 

Scarcely had he spoken when Huang Kai started up, crying, 
“Say not three months; be ready for thirty months, and even ~ 
then it will not be ended. If you can destroy them this month 
then all is well. If you cannot, then it were better to take 
Chang Chao’s advice, throw down your weapons, turn to the . 
north and surrender.” SN 

Chou Yü’s anger flared up and he flushed, crying, “Our 
lord’s orders were to destroy Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and whoever men- 
tioned the word surrender should be put to death. Now, the ~~ 
very moment when the two armies are to engage, you dare 
talk of surrender and damp the ardour of my men! If I do 
not slay you, how can I support the others?” j 

He ordered the lietors to remove Huang Kai and execute 
him without delay. 

Kai then flamed up in turn, saying, “This is the third 
generation since I went with General P‘o-lo (Sun Chien) and 
we overran the south-east; whence have you sprung up?” 
`. This made Chou Yü perfectly furious and Huang Kai was 
ordered to intant death. But Kan Ning interfered. Said he, 
“He is a veteran officer of Wu; pray pardon him.” i 

> “What are you prating about?” cried Chou Yü. “Dare you. a 
come between me and my duty?’ Turning to the lictors he 
ordered them to drive him forth with blows. ee 

The other officials fell on their knees entreating pity for 
Huang Kai. “He is indeed most worthy of death, but it would 4 
be a loss to the army; we pray you forgive him. Record his 
fault for the moment and after the enemy shall have been E 
defeated then put him to death.” 4 


eg But Chou. Yü > was iaplacable. The piers, iied with 
ars. At length he seemed moved, saying, “Had you not 
terceded he should certainly have suffered death. ‘But now 
r will mitigate the Sen to a beating. He shall not 
; : Qle. i 


7 


h © He turned to the lictors and bade them deal the culprit a € Us 
hundred blows. Again his colleagues prayed for remission 


_but Chou Yü angrily pushed over the table in front of him 


_and roared to the officers to get out of the way and let the 


sentence be executed. 


So Huang Kai was stripped, thrown to the ground and fifty | 
_ blows were given. At this point the officers again prayed that 


he be let off. Chou Yü sprang from his chair and pointing 
his finger at Huang Kai said, “If you dare flout me again you 
shall have the other fifty. If you are guilty of any disrespect, 
ee shall be punished for both faults!” 


‘With this he turned into the inner part of the tent, growling - í 


i -as he went, while the officers helped their beaten colleague to 


-his feet. He was in a pitiable state. His back was cut in 
many places and the blood was flowing in streams. They led- 
hin to his own quarters and on the way he swooned several | 


. times. His case seemed most pitiable. 


Lu Su went to see the suffering officer and then called on 


RKS ung-ming in his boat. He related the story of the beating 


and said that though the other officers had been cowed into i 3 


_ silence he thought K‘ung-ming might have interceded. “You 
are a guest and not under his orders. Why did you stand by 
-with your hands up your sleeves and say never a word?” 
“You insult me,” said K‘ung-ming smiling. 


“Why do you say that? I have never insulted you; never. 


-since the day we came here together.” 


“Do you not know that that terrible beating was but a ruse? 


i How could I try to dissuade him?” 


Then Lu Su began to perceive and K‘ung-ming contac: D En 


— “Ts‘a9 Ts‘ao would not be taken in unless there was some real 
bodily suffering. Now he is going to send Huang Kai, over as 
a deserter and he will see to it that the two Ts‘ao spies duly 


tell the tale. But when you see the General you must not tell | 


him that I saw through the ruse. You say that I am very 
angry like the others.” 


Lu Su went to see Chou Yii and asked him why he had so © 


cruelly beaten a proved and trusty officer. 

“Do the officers resent it?” asked Chou. 
“They are all upset about it.” 

“And what does your friend think?” 

“He also resents it in his heart, and thinks you have made 
a mistake.” 
- _ “Then I have deceived him for once,” said Chou gleefully. 
«What mean you?” cried Lu. 


190 te Dinghies Jan Bua RAS oo Se 
IÑ ; igs 
“That beating that Huang Kai got is part of my ruse. I am : 
sending him to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao as a deserter and so I have supplied 
a reason for desertion. Then I am going to use fire against a 
the enemy.’ ag 
Lu Su kept silence but he recognised that K‘ung-ming was A 
again right. 4 
Meanwhile Huang Kai lay in his tent, whither all his brother : 
officers went to condole with him and enquire after his health. — 
But Kai would say never a word; he only lay sighing deeply 
from time to time. 
But when the strategist K‘an Tsé came, Kai told them to ae 
bring him to the room where he lay. Then he bade the © 
servants go away and Tsé said, Surely you must have some = 
EN serious quarrel with the General. RR ; 
% _. “I have none,” said Kai. 3 


“Then this beating is just part of a ruse?” 4 
“How did you guess?” said Kai. TON 
“Because I watched the. General and I guessed about nine 


tenths of the truth.” a 
Huang said, “You see I have been very generously treated _ 
by the Sun family, all three of them, and have no means of — 
showing my gratitude except by offering to help in this ruse. _ 
AAND True I suffer, but I do not regret that. Among all those I- 
Wey know in the army there is not one I am intimate with except ~- 
aha yourself. You are true and I can talk with you as a friend.” 
eee Mas suppose you wish me to present your letter proposing to: 
wee come over; is that it?” ; 
<a “Just that; will you do it?” said Huang. 
“sea K‘an Tsé consented joyfully. 


Even the warrior’s body is but a stake in the game, 
The prionn so ready to help him proves that their hearts are 
the same. 


K‘an’s reply will be read in the next chapter. 


{ 


è Hae on T s went) r > = 4 i: s 
OE T ee STE Nee Ee E E SETE NAA ET RE 


¥ 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


K‘ AN Tsk PRESENTS THE TREACHEROUS LETTER: 
P AN T‘UNG SUGGESTS CHAINING THE SHIPS TOGETHER. 
Ts. K‘an Tsé was from Shanyin, a son of a humble family. 


He loved. books, but as he was too poor to buy he used to 
‘borrow. -He had a wonderfully tenacious memory, was very 


eloquent and no coward. Sun Ch‘tian had employed him 


among his advisers and he and Huang Kai were excellent 
friends. The latter had thought of him to present the treach- 
erous letter as his gifts made him most suitable. K‘an Tsé 


accepted with enthusiasm, saying, “When you, my friend, 
- have suffered so much for our lord, could I spare myself? ? 
- No; while a man lives he must go on fulfilling his mission or 


-he is no better than the herbs that rot in the field.” 
- Huang Kai slipped off the couch and came over to salute 


. him. 


; : ‘there is no time to lose.” 


isis 2s 


< “However, this matter must speed,” continued K‘an ‘LSGey: 


o> 


i “The letter is already written, nee Huang Kai. 
' K‘an Tsé received it and left. That night he disguised 


“himeolt as an old fisherman and started in a small punt for 
the north shore under the cold, glittering light of the stars. 
Soon he drew near the enemy’s camp and was captured by 
‘the patrol. Without waiting for day they informed their 
a General, who said at once, “Is he not just a spy?” 


“No,” said they, “he is alone, just an old fisherman; and 


y he says he is an adviser in the service of Wu named K‘an Tsê, 


= and he has come on secret business.” 


“Bring him,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and he was led in. Ts‘ao was 


$ seated i in a brilliantly lighted tent. He was leaning on-a small 


table and as soon as he saw the prisoner, he said, “You are an 


adviser of Wu; what then are you doing here?” 


“People say ‘that you greedily welcome men of ability; I do 


“not think your question a very proper one. Friend 2 Muang 


you made a mistake,” said K‘an. 


“You know I am fighting against Wu and you come here 


privately. Why should I not question you?” 


“Huang Kai is an old servant of Wu, one who has served 


three successive rulers. Now he has been cruelly beaten, for 
no fault, before the face of all the officers in Chow Yii’s camp. 


He is grievously angry about this and wishes to desert to 


_ your side that he may be revenged. He discussed it with me, 


. and for no reason have been shamed in the ee of men. i 


‘and the supply ships will also come over to you. In perfect 


-this letter over and over and read it again and again. 


` injury trick on me, is he? And you are in it as the inter- 


- simplicity.” 


492. San fiuo, or Pes 
arid’ as we are inseparable, Al have come i give you his lette 
asking whether you would receive him.” 

“Where is the letter? said Ts‘ao. tae ae: 

The missive was produced and presented. Ts‘ao Ts ao 
opened it and read:—“I, Huang Kai, have been generously 
treated by the Sun family and have served them single-heart- 
edly. Lately they have been discussing an attack with our 
forces on the enormous army’of the central government. 
As every one knows our few are no match for such a multitude _ 
and every officer of Wu, wise or foolish, recognises that quite 
well. However, Chou Yü who, after all, is but a youth and a 
shallow minded simpleton, maintains that success is possible 
and rashly desires to smash stones with an egg. Beside this. 
he is arbitrary and tyrannical, punishing for no crime, ands 
leaving meritorious service unrewarded. I am an old servant 


Wherefore I hate him in my heart. ie: 

“You, O Minister, treat men with sincerity and are ready me 
to welcome ability and so I, and those under my leadership, 
desire to enter your service whereby to acquire reputation 
and remove the shameful stigma. The commissariat, weapons i 


sincerity I state these matters; I pray you not to doubt me.” 
Leaning there on the low table by his side, Ts‘ao turned 


Then he smacked the table, opened his eyes wide with | 
anger saying, “Huang Kai is trying to play the. personal 


mediary to present the letter. How dare you come to sport A 
with me?” 4 

He ordered the lictors to thrust forth the messenger and 
take off his head. K‘an Tsé was hustled out, his face $ 
untroubled. On the contrary, he laughed aloud. At this Ts‘ao 
told them to bring him back and harshly said to him, “What 
do you find to laugh at now that I have foiled you and youe 
ruse has failed?” 

“T was not laughing at you; I was laaghing at my friend’s | 


“What do you mean by his simplicity ?” 

“If you want to slay, slay; do not trouble me with a 
multitude of questions.” 

“I have read all the books on the art of war and I am wei 
versed in all ways of misleading the enemy. This ruse of — 
yours might have succeeded with many, but it will not do for Bi 
me.’ S 
a “And so yan say that the letter is a vicious trick?” said ig 

an. s 

“What I say is that your little slip has ‘sent. you to the: 
death your risked. If the thing was real and you were sincere, a 


‘ 


ren 
i DSA 


or ance 0 f the Three H 


Ai 


PRES not the letter name a timet What Haa you to say 
DEP cies 

‘an. Tsê waited’ to the end and then laughed louder than i 
er, saying, “I am so glad you are not frightened, but can 
ll boast of your knowledge of the books of war. Now you 
ill not lead away your soldiers. If you fight, Chou Yü will | 
ertainly capture you. But how sad to think I die at the. hand ae 
of such an ignorant fellow!” — esi 
“What mean you? I, ignorant?” 

“You are ignorant of any strategy and a victim of unreason: su 
is not that sufficient?” 
_ “Well then, tell me where is any fault in my navy.” j] 

= “You treat wise men too badly for me to talk to you, You ; 
an finish me and let there be an end of it.” ; 
“If you can speak with any show of reason, I will treat youi 
differently.” | 

a “Do you not know that when. one is going to desert one’s 
master and become a renegade one cannot say exactly when. 
the chance will occur? If one binds one’s self to a fixed moment 
and the thing cannot be done just then, the secret will be 
discovered. One must watch for an opportunity and take it | 
when it comes. Think; is it possible to know exactly when? 
But you know nothing of common sense; all you know is how 

o put good men to death. So you really are an ignorant 
fellow.” 

ne At this Ts‘ao uichaneed his manner, got up and came over ` 
to the prisoner bowing, “I did not see clearly; that-is quite | 
true. I offended you and I hope you will forget it.” 

“The fact is that Huang Kai and I are both inclined to 
esert to you; we even yearn for it as a child desires its 
arents. Is it possible that we should play you false?” 

“Tf you two could render me so prea a ade We you shall 
certainly be richly rewarded.” 

= “We do not desire rank or riches; we come because it is ih 
he will of heaven and the naan way of duty.” fies 
Then wine was set out and K‘an Tsé was treated as an 
honoured guest. While they were drinking some one came in 
and whispered in Ts‘ao’s ear. He replied, “Let me see the 
letter.” Whereupon the man pulled out and gave him a letter, 
yhich evidently pleased him. 

“That is from the two Ts‘ais,” thought Kan Tsé. ‘They 
are reporting the punishment of my friend and that will be a 
proof of the sincerity of his letter.” 

` Turning toward K‘an Tsé, Ts‘ao said, “I must ask you to 
return to settle the date with your friend: as soon as I know 
I will have a force waiting.” 

“I cannot return; pray, Sir, send some other man you can 
ust.” ; 
Tef s some one eles should go oe secret would out.” ee 


ak 


E 3 


494 oa Baw Reunion ve he 


K‘an Tsé refused again and again but ba ashe gave way, yo 
saying, “If I am to go I must not wait here; I must be- off at. 


once.’ 


| Ts‘ao offered him gold and aes which were refused. Tae 


_ started, left the camp and re-embarked for the’ south bank, — 


where he related all that had happened to Huang Kai 


“If it had not been for your persuasive tongue fhe, had i 7 


undergone this suffering in vain,” said Huang. 
“I will now go to get news of the two Ts‘ ais,’ > said Kan Tse. 
“Excellent,” said Huang. 


He went to the camp commanded by Kan Name. and when Bu 
they were seated he said to his host, “I was much distressed 
when I saw how disgracefully you were treated for your ` 


intercession on behalf of Huang Kai.” 


Kan Ning smiled. Just then the two Ts‘ais came, and o 
host and guest exchanged glances. The former said, “The — 
truth is the General is over confident and he reckons us as 
nobody. We count for nothing. Every one is talking of the — 
way I was insulted. Aiya!” and he shouted and gritted his i 


teeth and smacked the table in his wrath. 


K‘an Tsé leaned over toward his host and said something a : 


a very low voice, at which Kan Ning bent his head and sighed. 


The two visitors and spies gathered from this that both Kan ea 


ae K‘an were ripe for desertion and determined to probe i 
them. 

“Why, Sir, do you anger him?. Why not be silent about 
his injuries?” said they. 

“What know you of our bitterness?” said K‘an Tsé. s 

“We think you seem much inclined to go over to Ts‘ao T0, PN 
said they. 

K‘an Tsé at this lost colour: Kan Ning started up ani drew - 
his sword, crying, “They have found out; they must die to 
keep their mouths shut.” 


“No, no,” cried the two in a flurry. “Let us tell you some- 


thing quite secret.” 
“Quick, then,” cried Kan Ning. 
So Ts‘ai Ho said, “The truth is that we are only pretended 


deserters, and if you two gentlemen are of our way of thinking 3 


we can manage things for you.’ 

“But are you speaking the truth?” said Kin 

“Is it likely we should say such a thing if it were ana po 
cried both at the same moment. 


Kan Ning put on a pleased look and said, “Then this is the ie 


very heaven-given chance.” 

“You know we have already told Ts‘ao of the Huang Kai 
affair and how you were insulted.” 

“The fact is I have given the Minister . a letter on bonnie’ 
of Huang Kai and he sent me back again a settle the date of 
his desertion,” said K‘an. 


i 


x 


a 
2 


3 “When an honest man- Faon upon an enlightened 
master his heart will always be drawn toward himi, said 
Kan Ning. 
= The four then drank together and opened their hearts ia 
if each other.® The two brothers Ts‘ai wrote a private letter to 

_ their master saying that Kan Ning had agreed to join in their 
_ plot and play the traitor, and K‘an Tsé also wrote and they 
_ sent the letters secretly to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Kan’s letter said that 

Huang had found no opportunity so far. However, when he 
came his boat could be recognised by a black, indented flag. 
That would mean he was on board. 
- However, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao got these two letters he was | 
still doubtful and called together his advisers to talk over the 
matter. Said he, “On the other side Kan Ning has been put 
oe shame by the Commander-in-Chief whom he is prepared to 
- betray for the sake of revenge. Huang Kai has been punished 
: and sent K‘an Tsé to propose that he should come over to our 
side. Only I still distrust the whole thing. Who will go over 

__ to the camp to find out the real truth?” 

- Then Chiang Kan spoke up, saying, “I failed in my mission 

_ the other day and am greatly mortified. I will risk my life 

- again and, this time, I shall surely bring good news.” 
=~ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao approved of him aš messenger and bade him 

= start. He set out in a small craft and speedily arrived in 
- Chiangnan landing near the naval camp. Then he sent to 

inform Chou Yü, who hearing who it was chuckled, saying, 
sh “Success depends upon this man.’ 

= Then he called Lu Su and told him to call P‘ang Tung to 

. come and do certain things for him. 
This P‘ang T‘ung was from Hsiangyang. His other name 
z was Shih-yiian and he had gone to the east of the river to get 

_.away from the strife. Lu Su had recommended him to Chou 

_ Yü, but he had not yet presented himself. When Chou Yü sent 

to ask what scheme of attack he would recommend against 

Ts ao’ Ts‘ao, Pang T‘ung had said to the messenger, ‘‘You 
~ must use fire against him. But the river is wide and if one 
~ ship is set on fire the others will scatter unless they are 
~ fastened together so that they must remain in one place. 

That is the one road to success.” 
Lu Su took this message to the General, who pondered over 

: it and then said, “The only person who can manage this is 

'P‘ang Tung himself. ee 

“T's‘a0 Ts‘ao is very wily,” said Lu Su, “how can Prang Tung 

go? Wiha i 

< So Chou Yü was sad and undecided: He could think of no 

~ method till suddenly the means presented itself in the arrival 

of Chiang Kan. He at once sent instructions to P‘ang T‘ung 

“how to act and then sat himself i in his tent to await his visitor 

“Chiang Kan. 


Í 


496 San fuo, or ` 


But the visitor became ill at ease and suspicious when he 


saw that his old student friend did not come to welcome him 
and he took the precaution of sending his boat into a retired 


spot to be made fast before he went to the General's tent. - 


When Chou Yü saw him he put on an angry face and said, pity 


“My friend, why did you treat me so badly.” 


Chiang Kan laughed and said, “I remembered the old days | 


when we were as brothers and T came expressly to pour out > y 


my heart to you. Why do you say I treated you badly?” 


“You came to persuade me to betray my master, which I ! e 
would never do unless the sea dried up and the rocks perished. _ 


Remembering the old times I filled you with wine and kept you 


to sleep with me. And you; you plundered my private letters 


and stole away with never a word of farewell. You betrayed 
me to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and caused the death of my. two friends on 
the other side and so caused all my plans to miscarry. Now 
what have you come for? Certainly it is not out of kindness to 


me and I care no more for our old friendship; it is cut in two, — 
destroyed. I would send you back again, but within a day or _ 
two I shall attack that rebel and, if I let you stay in my camp, 
my plans will leak out. So I am going to tell my attendants to ~ 
conduct you to a certain retired hut in the western hills and 


` keep you there till I shall Have won the victory. Then I will 
send you back again.’ 


Chiang Kan tried to say something but Chou Yü would not — 
listen. He turned his back and went into the recesses of his © 
tent. The attendants led the visitor off, set him on a horse - 


and took him away over the hills to the small hut, leaving 
‘two soldiers to look after him. 


When Chiang Kan found himself in the lonely hut he was a 


‘very depressed and had no desire to eat or sleep. But one 


night, when the stars were very brilliant, he strolled out to — 


enjoy them. Presently he came to the rear of his lonely 
habitation and heard, near by, some one crooning over a book. 


Approaching with stealthy steps he saw a tiny cabin half | 
hidden in a cliff whence a slender beam or two of light stole © 


out between the rafters. He went nearer and peeping in, saw 


a man reading by the light of a lamp near which hung a — 


sword. And the book was Sun Wu’s “Art of War.” 


“This is no common person,” thought he and so he knocked 
at the door. The door was opened by the reader, who bade. 
him welcome with cultivated and refined ceremony. Chiang 
Kan enquired his name and the host replied that he was P‘ang 


T‘ung, sometimes known as Shih-ytian. 

“Then you are surely The Master known as ‘Phoenix 
Fledgeling,’ are you not?” 

“Yes; I am he.” 


“How often-have I heard you talked about! You are famous. . 


But why are you hidden away in’ this spot?” 


ae “That fellow Chou Yii is too ate] to allow that any one 
else has any talent and so I live here quietly. But who are 
ag Sira ree) 
“Tam Chiang Kan.” ; 
= Then Pang T‘ung made him very welcome and led him in 
. and the two sat down to talk. 


se Nees | = Romance í of nie abere kingooms. eg AE 


“With your gifts you would succeed ra said Chiang ~ 


Kan. “If you would enter Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s service J would re- 
commend you to him.” 
_ “T have long desired to get away from here and if you, Sir, 
-will present me there is no time like the present. If Chou Yu 
heard of my wish he would kill me, I am sure.’ 

-So without more ado they made their way down the hill to 
the water’s edge to seek the boat in which Chiang had come. 
They embarked and, rowing swiftly, they soon reached the 
‘northern shore. ` At the central camp Chiang landed and 
went to seek Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to whom he related the story of the 
discovery of his new acquaintance. 

_When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao heard that the newcomer was Féng-ch‘u, j 
or the “Phoenix Chick” Master, he went to meet him, made him 
very welcome and soon they sat down to talk on friendly terms. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said questioningly, “And so Chou Yü in his 
youth is conceited and annoys his officers and rejects all their 

advice; I know that. But your fame has been long known 
to me ‘and now that you have been gracious enough to turn 
. my way I pray you not to be niggardly of your advice.” 
“J, too, know well that you are a model of military strategy,” 
said ps ang Ls ung, “but I should like to have one look at your 
disposition.” 

So horses were brought and the two rode out to the lines, 
host and visitor on equal terms, side by side. They ascended — 
a hill whence they had a wide view. After looking all round 
_P‘ang T‘ung remarked, “Sun Wu, come to life again, could 
not do better, nor Jang Chu if he reappeared. All accords 
- with the precepts. The camp is beside the hill and is flanked — 
by a forest. The front and rear are within sight of each other. 
-Gates of egress and ingress are provided and the roads of 
neante and retirement are bent and broken.” { 

» “Master, I entreat you not to overpraise me, but, to advise 
me where T can make further improvements,” said T's‘ao. 

Then the two men rode down to the naval camp, where 
twenty four openings were arranged facing the south. The 
cruisers and the battleships were all lined up so as to protect 
the lighter craft which lay inside. There were channels to- 
‘pass to and fro and fixed anchorages and stations. 

P‘ang T’ung surveying all this smiled, saying, “Sir Minister, 
if this is your method of warfare, you enjoy no empty reputa- 
tion.” Then pointing to Chiangnan he went on, “Chou, my 
friend, Master Chou, you are finisned; you will have to die.” 


32 


nie 


- 498 a adi iuo, or \ 


tig 


They rode back to the chief fine and wine was ahi 


-~ They discussed military matters and P‘ang T‘ung held forth | 


at length. Remarks and comments flowed freely between the ` 


two, and Ts‘ao formed an exalted opinion of his new adherent’s 
abilities and treated him with the greatest honour. 


By and bye the guest seemed to have succumbed to the in- ; 


fluence of many cups and said, “Have you any opine medie 
men in your army?” 

“What for?” said Ts‘ao. 

“There is a lot of illness among the marines and you ought 
to find some remedy.” 

The fact was that at this time Ts‘ao’s men were suffering 
from the climate; many were vomiting and not a few had died. 


It was a source of great anxiety to him and when the new- - 


comer suddenly mentioned it, of course he had to ask advice. 


P‘ang T‘ung said, “Your marine force is excellent, but there © 


is just one defect; it is not quite perfect.” 

Ts‘ao pressed him to say where the imperfection lay. 

“T have a plan to overcome the ailment of the men so that 
no one shall be sick and all fit for service.’ 

“What is this excellent scheme?” said Ts‘ao. 


“The river is wide and the tides ebb and flow. The winds- 


and waves are never at rest. Your men from the north are 


from one to the next, even horses could move about on them. 


If this were done, then there would be no fear of the wind and 


the waves and the rising and falling tides.” 
Coming down from his seat Ts‘ao Ts‘ao thanked his guest. 


saying, “I could never defeat the land of Wu without this E. 


scheme of yours.’ 


9 
À 
4 
q 
3 


t 
unused to ships and the motion makes them ill. If your ships, — | 
large and small, were classed and divided into thirties, or — 

fifties, and joined up stem to stem by iron chains and boards j 


spread across them, to say nothing of men being able to pass — 


Ri 


. “That is my idea,” said P‘ang T‘ung, “it is for you to decide | | 


about it.” 

Orders were then issued to call up all the blacksmiths and 
set them to work, night and day, forging iron chains and great 
bolts to lock together the ships. And the men rejoiced when 
they heard of the plan. bi 


In Red Wall’s fight they used the flame, 
The weapon here will be the same. 

By P‘ang’s advice the ships were chained, 
Else Chou had not that battle gained. 


P-ang Tung further told Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saying, “I know many — 


bold men on the other side who hate Chou Yü. If I may use | 


my little tongue in your service I can induce them to come 
over to you and if Chou Yii be left alone you can certainly — 
take him captive. And Liu Pei is of no account.” 


a 


G 
A 


€ o suetan De the ole of Scalia or Bois 
re et re Bites alas ay you cross the 


00. ee Pr N to be ea Having sien it T 
ave o P4 ‘ang T‘ung who said, “You should attack as 
i have gone but do not let Chou Yü know anything.” i 
T hee Ts'2 ‘ao aema secrecy Bes the wily traitor took his 


id injury ruse’ and I ian "Tse hak one: the teeta 
sertion. You have proffered the fatal scheme — 
the ships together lest the flames may not com- 

y destroy them. This sort of mischievous work may 
been Coens to blind TS ao Ts‘ao te I saw it all.” 


By bale means one may succeed, 
The victims too find friends in need. 


xt : chapter will tell who the stranger was. 


BANQUET ON THE YANGTSE; Ts‘Ao TS‘a0’S SONG: 


THE NORTHERN MEN FIGHT ON THE CHAINED SHIPS. 


li the last chapter P‘ang T‘ung was brought up with a sudden À 
shock when some one seized him and said he understood. 


Upon turning to look at the man he saw it was Hsü Shu, an 
old friend, and his heart revived. Looking around and seeing | 


no one near he said, “It would be a pity if you upset my plan; 


the fate of the people of all the eighty-one districts is in “your | a 


hands.” 


Hsü Shu smiled.. “And what of the fate of these eighty, $ 


three legions of men and horse?” said he. 
“Do you intend to wreck my scheme?” 3 
“I have never forgotten the kindness of Uncle Liu, nor my 


. oath to avenge the death of my mother at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s-hands. 


I have said I would never think out a plan for him. So amí- 


likely to wreck yours now, brother? But I have followed the 4 
army thus far and after they shall have been defeated, good — E: 
and bad will suffer alike and how can I escape? Tell me howo - 


I can secure safety and I sew up my lips and go away.” 


P‘ang T‘ung smiled, “If you are as bigu m imdad as ree there ae 


is no great difficulty.” 
“Still I wish you would instruct me.’ 


So P‘ang Tung whispered ne in his ear, =- 
seemed to please Hsü Shu greatly, for he thanked him most | 
cordially and took his leave. Then P‘ang T‘ung betook himself ee 


to his boat and left for the southern shore. 


His friend gone, Hsü Shu mischievously spread carnin sas 
rumours in the camp, and next day were to be seen everywhere § ~ 
men in small groups, some talking, others listening, heads 
together and ears stretched out, till the camps seemed to buzz. * 
Some of the men went to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and told him that a 
rumour was running around that Han Sui and Ma T‘éng had 
attacked the capital. This troubled Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who called 
together his advisers to council. Said he, “The only anxiety o i 
I have felt in this expedition was about the possible doings of 3 
Han Sui and Ma T‘éng. Now there is a rumour running 


ae 


among the men, and though I know not whether it be true or. $ 4 


false, it is necessary to be on one’s guard.” 


At this point Hsü Shu said, “You have been kind enough ton 
give me an office, Sir, and I have really done nothing in return, . 


If I may have three companies I will march at once to San Pass ~ | 


Bp. wen guard a ‘Tf hen be any “pressing malian I will ‘report 
at once.’ 

“If you would do this I should be quite at my ease. “There 
re already men beyond the Pass, who will be under your 


and foot and Tsang Pa shall lead tiie van and march quickly.” 
Hsü Shu took leave of the Minister and left in company 


-of Hsti Shu. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao marched south, but at his back 
There rode the fear of rear attack.“ , 
` Pang T‘ung’s good counsel Hsü Shu took, 
_ And thus the fish escaped the hook. 


bows and crossbows. 


. rose over the eastern hills in its immaculate beauty and 
_ beneath it lay the broad belt of the river like a band of pure 

white silk. It was a great assembly and all the guests were 
clad in gorgeous silks and embroidered robes and the arms of 


H and military, were seated in their proper order of precedence. 
-The setting, too, was exquisite. The Nanping hilis were 
outlined as-in a picture; the boundaries of Ch‘aisang lay in 


Forest. The view stretched wide on every side. 


has been the removal of evil from the State and I have sworn 
-to cleanse the country and restore tranquillity. Now there is 
only teft this land of Chiangnan to withstand me. I am at 
- the head of a hundred legions. I depend upon you, gentlemen, 
_ and have no doubt of my final success. After I have subdued 


we shall enjoy wealth and honour and revel in peace.’ 

They rose in a body and expressed their appreciation saying, 
- “We trust that you may soon report complete victory and we 
~ shall all repose in the shade of your good fortune.” 


~ command, and now I will give you three companies of horse 


=- with Tsang Pa. _ This was P‘ang’s scheme to secure the safety 


_ A poem says:— | Sst ae 


' Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s anxiety diminished after he had thus sent 
away Hsti Shu. Then he rode round all the camps, first the — 
land forces and then the naval. He boarded one of the large. ~ 
ships and thereon set up his standard. The naval camps were _ 
arranged along two lines and every ship carried a thousand — 


ae While he remained with the fleet occurred the full moon of — 
cuthe. eleventh month of the twelfth year of “Established Tran- 
quillity.” The sky was clear; there was no wind and the river =- 
day ‘unruffied. He prepared a great banquet, with music, and 
thereto invited all his captains. As evening drew on the moon _ 


the fighting men glittered in the moonlight. The officers, civil 


'Ts‘ao’s heart was jubilant and he harangued the assembly, 
“My one aim since I enlisted my first small band of volunteers 


-Chiangnan there will be no trouble in all the country. Then | 


Romance of ‘the Three fiingdoms i BOL 


the east; the river showed west as far as Hsiak‘ ou; on the | 
south lay. ‘the Hills of Fan, on the north was the “Black” 


i) N 


i 


502 San uo, or 
: > : i 


In his elation Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade the servants bring more wine 
and they drank till late at night. Warmed and mellowed, the — 
host pointed to the south bank saying, “Chou Yü and Lu Su 
know not the appointed time. Heaven is aiding me bringing 
upon them the misfortune of the desertion of their fie trusted _ 
friends.” 

“O Minister, say nothing of these things lest tee become _ 
known to the enemy,” said Hsiin Yu.’ oe 

But the Minister only laughed. “You are all. my trusty © 
friends,” said he, “both officers and humble attendants. Why 
should I refrain? g» a ; 

Pointing to Hsiak‘ou he hued: “You do not Tek for | 
much with your puny force, Liu Pei and Chuko Liang. How — 
foolish of you to attempt to shake T‘aishan! I am now 
fifty-four and if I get Chiangnan I shall have the wherewithal 
to rejoice. In the days of long ago the late noble Ch‘iao and | 
I were great friends and we came to an agreement on certain — 
matters, for I knew his two daughters were lovely beyond 
words. Then by some means they became wives to Sun Ts‘é . 
and Chou Yü. But now my palace of rest is built on the 
Chang River and victory over the south will mean that I marry | 
these two fair women. I will put them in my palace and they — 
shall rejoice my declining years. My desires will then be 
completely attained.” 

He smiled at the anticipation. 

Tu Mu, a poet of the T‘ang Dynasty, in one poem says :— | 


A broken halberd buried in the sand, 
With deep rust eaten, 
Loud tells of ancient battles on the strand, 
When Ts‘ao was beaten. 
Had eastern winds Chou’s plan refused to aid 
And fan the flame, 
Two captives fair, locked in the Bronze Bird’s shade, 
Had gone to shame. 


But suddenly amid the merriment was heard the hoarse ery: 
of a raven flying toward the south. b N 
“Why does the raven thus cry in the night?” said Ts‘ao to 
those about him. gia 
“The moon is so bright that he thinks it is day,” said they, YE 
“and so he leaves his tree.” 

Ts‘ao laughed; by this time he was quite intoxicated. He 
set up his spear in the prow of the ship and poured a libation 
into the river and then drank three brimming goblets. As he 
lowered the spear he said, “This is the spear that broke up the 
Yellow Turbans, captured Lü Pu, destroyed Ytian Shao and ` 
subdued his brother, whose armies. are now mine. In the E 
north it reached to ‘Liaotung and it stretched out over the th 
whole south. It has never failed in its task. The present 


s me to the depths and I will sing a 
é Kompany TE Sri its ite els | 
d so he E E per ra K ie BIC NA 


x A i AAA 


ý y ‘ Le Aba Se 
: ENARA Sia P 2 y yew ix A) } SA CAA i Tae ANR 
CANE Nh, When goblets are brimming then song is near birth, _ 
_ But life is full short and has few days of mirth, . 
_ Life goes as the dew drops fly swiftly away, 
= *=Neath the glance of the glowing hot ruler of day. 
= Man’s life may be spent in the noblest emprise, 
- But sorrowful thoughts in his heart oft arise. i 
. Let us wash clean away the sad thoughts that intrude, 
With bumpers of wine such as Tu K‘ang once brewed. 
Gone is my day of youthful fire Z ag 
And still ungained is my ‘desire. 
The deer feed on the level plain 
And joyful call, then feed again. — 
My noble guests are gathered round, at 
The air is trilled with joyful sound. 
~- Bright my future lies before me, 
As the moonlight on this plain; 
But I strive in vain to reach it. sano 
When shall I my wish attain? KEAK ie 
None can answer; and so sadness 
_ Grips my inmost heart again. 
Ss aed Far north and south, ea 
Mean. 4 Wide east and west, EENID ATA, ; giya 
; We safety seek; i ! fa Nee 
Vain is the quest. 
= Man’s heart oft yearns an 
For converse sweet, A | 
And my heart burns ; } ° 
When old. friends greet. P 
The stars are paled by the full moon’s light, 
The raven wings his southward flight, 
~ ——— And thrice he circles round a tree, 
No place thereon to rest finds he. s ENE, 
y They weary not the mountains of great height, Teh 
== The waters deep of depth do not complain, TUA A. 
A Duke Chou no leisure found by day or night ree es 
< Stern toil is his who would the Empire gain. leh 


y 


i 


The song made they sang it with him and were all exceed- 
gly merry; save one guest who suddenly said, “When -the 
great army is on the point of battle and lives are about to be 
sked, why do you, O Minister, speak such ill words?” Bene cad: 
-Ts‘ao turned quickly toward the speaker, who was Liu Fu, — 
the Governor of Yangchou. This Liu sprang from Hofei. 
When first appointed to his post he had gathered in the > 
-~ terrified and frightened people and restored order. He had 
founded schools and encouraged the people to till the land. ` 
. He had long served under Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and rendered valuable , a 
service. _ h PRA aes Muh ku 
= When he spoke Ts‘ao dropped his spear to the level and — 

-= gaid, “What ill-omened words did I use?” i ; 
= “You spoke of the moon paling the stars and the raven flying 


southward without finding a resting plaee. These are ill- 
omened words.” ae. 


504 | San kuo, or 


3 bd : ee 
_ “How dare you try to belittle my endeavour?” cried Ts‘ao,) 
very wrathful; and with that he smote Liu Fu with his spear: 
-and slew him. ~ 


The assembly broke up and the guests dispersed in fear 
and confusion. Next day, when he had recovered from his | 


drunken bout, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was very grieved at what he had 
done and when the murdered man’s son came to crave the 


body of his father for burial, Ts‘ao wept and expressed his © ‘i 


sorrow. 

“T am guilty of your father’s death; I was drunk yesterday, 
I regret the deed exceedingly. Your father shall be interred “ 
with the honours of a minister of the highest rank.” 

He sent an escort of soldiers to take the body home for — 
burial. 

A few days after this the two leaders of the naval force 
came to say the ships were all connected together by chains 
‘as had been ordered, and all was now ready. They asked for 

the command to start. 


Thereupon the leaders of both land and naval forces were i ie 
assembled on board a large ship in the centre of the squadron 


to receive orders. The various armies and squadrons were 


- distinguished by different flags, the central naval ‘squadron, — e 


yellow; the leading squadron, red; the rear squadron, black; 
the left, blue, and the right, white. On shore the horsemen 
had a red flag; for the vanguard, black; blue and white for 


the rearguard and the wings respectively.. Hsiahou Tun and 


Ts‘ao Hung were in reserve and the general staff was under > 


the leadership of Hsti Ch‘u and Chang liao. The other leaders _ i 


were ordered to remain in camp, but ready for action. 
All being ready, the squadron drums beat the roll thrice and 
the ships sailed out under a strong north-west wind on a trial 


cruise and when they got among the waves they were found ce 
-to be as steady and immoveable as the dry land itself. The ~~ 
northern men showed their delight at the absence of motion - 


by eapering and flourishing their weapons. The ships moved 
on, the squadrons keeping quite distinct. Fifty light cruisers 
sailed to and fro keeping order and urging progress. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao watched his navy from the General’s terrace ee 


and was delighted with their evolutions and manceuvres. 


Surely this meant complete victory. He ordered the recall oe 


and the squadrons returned in perfect order to their base. 
_ Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao went to his tent and summoned his advisers. 
_He said, “If Heaven had not been on my side, should I have 
got this excellent plan from the Phoenix Chick? Now that 
the ships are attached firmly to each other, one may traverse 
the river as easily as walking on firm earth.” fe 
“The ships are firmly attached to each other,” said Ch‘éng 
Yii, “but you should be prepared for an attack by fire so that 
they can scatter to avoid it.” 


Romance s of the Three Gingooms 


A The Genera Tanad, 'EYod. Jook a long way ahead, ” said 
e, “but you see what cannot happen.” ; 

es whe speaks much to the point” said Hsiin Yi, “why do you 
laugh at him?” 

; “Any one using fire depends upen the wind. This is now 

_ Winter and only west winds blow. You will ger neither east ` 

nor south winds. I am on the north-west and the enemy is. 


selves. I have nothing to fear. If it was the tenth moon, or 
early spring, I would provide against fire.” 
“The Minister is indeed wise,” said the others in chorus. 
N one can equal him.” i 
_ “With northern men unused to shipboard I could never r have 
-= crossed the river but for this plan,” said Ts‘ao. 
Then he saw two of the secondary leaders stand up and 
_ they said, “We are from the north, but we are also sailors. © 
Pray give us a small squadron and we will seize some of the © 
_ enemy’s flags and drums for you that we may prove ourselves 
a -adepts on the water.” 


Shao, named Chiao Ch‘u and Chang Nan. 
= “I do not think naval work would suit you two, born and | 
- brought up in the north,” said Ts‘ao. “The Chiangnan men 


your lives as a child’s plaything.” 

They cried, “Tf we fail, treat us according to army laws.” 
“The fighting ships are all chained together, there are only 
small, twenty-men boats free. They are posuyable for 
fighting.” x 
“Tf we took large ships where would be the Be i in 


we will take half each and go straight to the enemy’s naval 
port. We will just seize a flag, slay a leader and come home.” . — 
“J will let you have the twenty ships and half a company 
of good, vigorous men with long spears and stiff crossbows. ` 
Early to-morrow the main fleet shall make a demonstration 
on the river and I will also tell Wen P‘ing to support you with 
fe thirty ships.” í 

= — The two men retired greatly elated. Next morning, very 
_ early, food was prepared and at the fifth watch all was ready 
_ for a start. Then from the naval camp rolled out the drums 
and the gongs clanged, as the ships moved out and took up 
- their positions, the various flags fluttering in the morning 
breeze. And the two intrepid leaders with their squadron of. 
small scouting boats went down the lines and out into the 
- => stream. 

= Now a few days before the sound of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s drums 
ad been heard on the southern bank and the watchers had 
seen their enemy ’s fleet maneuvring : in the open river. Chou — 


on the south bank. If they use fire they will destroy them- ~ x 


The speakers were two men who had served under Yüan eo 


are thoroughly accustomed to ships. You should not regard ~ 


what we will do? No; give us a score of the small ships and o bie? 


AA L AN 


4 yi > 
eee CE Ne pat 


ae an kuo, or GEN 


i . . 
Yii had watched the manceuvres from the top of a hill till the 


fleet had gone in again. So when the sound of drums was _ 


again heard all the army went up the hills to watch the fleet. 


EE Ni ip era ‘Sa 


ay 


n 


1 heed 


All they saw was a squadron of small ships bounding over the 


waves. But as they came nearer the news was taken to the 
leader who called for volunteers to go out against them. Han 
Tang and Chou T“ai offered themselves. They were accepted 


and orders. were issued to the camps to remain ready, for a 


action but not to move till told. 


Han and Chou sailed out each with a small squadron of five a 


ships in line. ` 


The two braggarts from the north really only trusted to gl 


their boldness and luck. Their ships came down under the 


powerful strokes of the oars and as they neared the two 


leaders put on their heart-protectors, gripped their spears and 
each took his station in the prow of the leading ship of his 


division. Chiao’s ship led and as soon as he came near 
enough his men began to shoot at Han Tang, who fended off — 
the arrows with his buckler. Chiao twirled his long spear as- 


he engaged his opponent. But, at the first thrust, he was 3 


killed. ) ; 
His comrade with the other ships was coming up with great 


shouts when Chou T“ai sailed up at an angle and these two ` 


squadrons began shooting arrows at each other in clouds. 
Chou T‘ai fended off the arrows with his shield and stood 


gripping his sword firmly till his ships came within a few feet - 


of the enemy’s ships when he leaped across and cut down 


Chang Nan. Chang’s dead body fell into the water. Then the 


battle became confused and the attacking ships rowed hard to 


get away. The southerners pursued but soon came in sight 


of Wen P‘ing’s supporting fleet. Once more the ships engaged 


and the men fought with each other. 


Chou Yü with his officers stood on the summit of a mountain | 
and watched his own and the enemy ships out on the river. 
The flags and the ensigns were all in perfect order. Then he > 


saw Wen P‘ing and his own fleets engaged in battle and soon 


it was evident that the former was not a match for his own 
sailors. Wên P‘ing turned about to retire, Chou and Han - 


pursued. Chou Yü fearing lest his sailors should go too far, 
then hoisted the white flag of recall. 
To his officers Chou Yü said, “The masts of their ships stand 


thick as reeds; Ts‘ao himself is full of wiles; how can we Si 


destroy him?” 
No one replied, for just then the great yellow flag that 


_ flapped in the breeze in the middle of Ts‘ao’s fleet suddenly _ 


fell over into the river. 
Chou Yü laughed. “That is a bad omen,” said he. 


Then an extra violent blast of wind came by and the waves Be) 


rose high and beat upon the bank. A corner of his own flag 


Romance of the Three Gingdoms = 507 


_ flicked Chou Yü on the cheek and suddenly a thought flashed 

through his mind. He uttered a loud cry, staggered and fell 
backward. They picked him up; there was blood upon his 
lips and he was unconscious. Presently, however, he revived. 


And once he laughed, then gave a cry, 
T’is hard to ensure a victory. 


Chou Yii’s fate will appear as the story unfolds. 


CHAPTER XLIX a = 9 


ON THE SEVEN STARS ALTAR CHUKO SACRIFICES TO THE WINDS: _ 
AT THE THREE RIVERS CHOU YU LIBERATES FIRE. 


i the last chapter Chou Yü was seized with sudden illness. 
as he watched the fleets of his enemy. He was borne to his 
tent and his officers came in multitudes to enquire after him. — 
They looked at each other saying, “What a pity our general 
should be taken ill when Ts‘ao’s legions threaten so terribly! j 
What would happen if he attacked?” Ki 

Messengers with the evil tidings were sent to Wu while inen 
physicians did their best for the invalid. Lu Su was pan i 
cularly sad at the illness of his patron and went to see- 
K‘ung-ming to talk it over. ; 

“What do you make of it?” said K‘ung-ming. 

“Good luck for Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao; bad for us,” said Lu. 

“T could cure him,” said K‘ung-ming laughing. 

“Tf you could the State yong be very fortunate,” said Lis 

He prayed K‘ung-ming to go to see the sick man. They ~ 
went, and Lu Su entered first. Chou Yü lay in bed, his heip 
covered by a quilt. 

“How are you, General? ” said Lu. i i 
4 “My heart pains me; every now and again I feel faint and 
izzy.’ ee 

“Have you taken any remedies?” ` 

“My gorge rises at the thought; I could not.’ ie 

“I saw K‘ung-ming just now and he says he could heal you, 
He is just outside and I will call him if you like.” À 

“Ask him to come in.’ 

Chou bade his servants help him to a sven position and 
K‘ung-ming entered. 

“I have not seen you for days,” said he. ON could I guess - 
that you were unwell?” 

“How can any one feel secure? We are ‘constantly the 
playthings of luck; good or bad. 

“Yes; Heaven’s winds and clouds are not to be measured. — 
No one can reckon their comings and goings, can they?” AEE 

Chou Yü turned pale and a low groan escaped him, while his — 
visitor went on, “You feel depressed, do you not? As thonen 43 
_troubles were piling up in your heart?” ey, 

“That is exactly how I feel.” : ag 

“You need cooling medicine to dissipate this sense of ODE res, a 
sion.’ Bi 


Moos Seon 


ave wees a oe cit but it has done no ‘good. i 


‘You must get the RUST he good order before we drugs 
have any effect.” 


aM $ 
to produce a favourable temper?” . 


eplied K‘ ung-ming. 
“I wish you would tell me.’ 
j K‘ung-ming got out ett ataia, sent. away the 
servants and then wrote a few words :—“One should burn out 
Tsʻao; all is ready, but there is no east wind,” this he gave to 
sick general, saying “That is the origin of your illness.” 
Chou Yü read the words with great surprise and it confirmed 
secret opinion that K‘ung-ming really was rather. more 
n human. He decided that the only course was to be open 
: nd tell him all. So he said, “Since you know the cause of the 
disease, what do you recommend as treatment? The need of 
remedy is very urgent.” 


raid awical books. I can call the winds and summon the 
ains.. Since you need a south-east breeze, General, you must 


S sven Stars. It must be nine feet high, with three steps, 
: urrounded by a guard of one hundred and twenty men 
bearing flags. On this altar I will work a spell to procure 


you approve? 937 , 
- “Never mind three whole days;” said . Chou Yü, “one day 


O: 
at once and without delay.” 

‘I will sacrifice for a wind for three days from the twentieth 
day of the moon; will that suit you?” 


told off the guard of one hundred and twenty to bear the flags 
and be at the orders of K‘ung-ming. 

P tu Su to the mountains where they measured out the ground. 
He bade the soldiers build the altar of red earth from the 


- circuit, square in shape, and of three tiers, each of three feet, 
all nine feet high. On the lowest tier he placed the flags 
of the twenty-eight “houses” of the heavens; on the east seven, 
h blue flags, on the north seven, with black flags, on the 
‘seven, with white flags, and on the south seven, with red 
; amoung the second tier he placed, sixty-four yellow 


hou Yü began to think K ane nung knew what was really _ oy 
the matter and resolved to test him. “What should be taken ey 


Id an altar on the Nanping Mountains, the Altar of the. 


a strong south-east gale for three days and three nights. Do 


strong wind will serve my purpose. But it must be done 


Chou Yü was delighted and hastily rose from his couch to. 
ive. the necessary orders. He commanded that five hundred — 
men should be sent to the mountains to build the altar and he - 


=  K‘ung-ming took his leave, went forth and .rode off ‘with | 


south-east quarter. It was two hundred and forty feet in 


path te 


ar know one means of producing a favourable temper, Ae 


Mie a lat 


510 MERE; San fino, or 


\ Cus Wig A 


flags; corresponding to the AE of ‘the’ diagrams of th 
Book of Divination, in eight groups of eight. Four men were 
stationed on the highest platform, each wearing a Taoist 
headdress and a black silk robe embroidered with the phoenix 
and confined with wide sashes. They wore scarlet boots and 
-square-cut skirts. On the left front stood a man supporting. 
a tall pole bearing at its top a plume of light feathers to show 
by their least movement the wind’s first breathing. On the 
right front was a man holding a tall pole whereon was a flag 
with the symbol of the seven stars to show the direction and 
force of the wind. On the left rear stood a man with a sword, 
and on the right rear a man with a censer. Below the altar 
were two score and four men holding flags, umbrellas, spears, 
lances, yellow banners, white axes, red bannerols and ‘black: 
ensigns. And these were spaced about the altar. 

On the appointed day K‘ung-ming, having chosen a. pro- 
pitious moment, bathed his body and purified himself. Then 
he robed himself as a Taoist, loosened his locks and’ pb hed 
the altar. ; 

He bade Lu Su retire saying, “Return to the camp and ER 
the General in setting out his forces. Should my pie 
avail not, do not wonder.” oe 

So Lu Su left him. Then he commanded the guards on no i 
account to absent themselves, to maintain strict silence and to — 
be reverent; death would be the penalty of disobedience. n fi, 

Next with solemn steps he ascended the altar, faced the sg 
proper quarter, lighted the incense and sprinkled the water in 
the basins. This done he gazed into the heavens and prayed 
silently. The prayer ended he descended and returned to his 
tent. After a brief rest he allowed the soldiers by turns to go 
away to eat. 

Thrice that day he ascended the altar and thrice descended 
but there was no sign of the wind. ek 

Here it may be related that Chou Yü with Ch‘éng P‘u ae itty 
Lu Su and a certain number of military officials on duty, sat 
waiting in the tent till the wished-for wind should blow and — a 
the attack could þe launched. Messengers were also sent to a 
Sun Ch‘iian to prepare to support the forward movement. ~ 

Huang Kai had his fire ships ready, a score of them. The ~ 
fore parts of the ships were thickly studded with large nails, 
and they were loaded with dry reeds, wood soaked in fish oil 
and covered with sulphur, saltpetre and other inflammables. 
The ships were covered in with black oiled cloth. In the prow AHS 
of each was a black dragon flag with indentations. A fighting 
ship was attached to the stern of each to propel it toro 
All were ready and awaited orders to move. 

Meanwhile Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s two spies, the brothers Ts‘ai, were 
being guarded carefully in an outer camp far from the river 
bank and daily entertained with feasting. They were- not, 


By ice bat esses 

‘iui of tie ieee The watch was so close iz 
a trickle of information reached the prisoners.. 
Present y, w ile Chou Yü was anxiously awaiting i 
for the desired. wind, a messenger came to say that 
Ch‘tian had anchored at a place eighty-five li from the 
mp, where he awaited news. Lu Su was sent to warn a 
e various commanders to be ready, the ships and their 

weapons, sails and oars, all for instant use, and to impress 
upon them the penalties of being caught unprepared. The | 
_ soldiers were indeed ready for the fight and yearning for the, 
Bea. i 
- But the sky remained obstinately clear and as night drew i 
nigh no breath of air stirred. 
“We have been cajoled,” said Chou Yü. “Indeed what 
ossibility is there of a south-east wind in mid-winter? 
“K‘ung-ming would not use vain and deceitful words,” 
replied Lu Su. 
__ Towards the third watch the sound of a movement arose in — 
the air. Soon the flags fluttered out. And when the general 
went out to make sure he saw they were flowing toward the _ 
orth-west. In a very short time the south-east wind was an 
ull force. 
Chou Yü was, however, frightened at the power of the man 
lose help he had invoked. “Really the man has power over 
e heavens and authority over the earth; his methods are 
Iculable, beyond the ken of god or devil. He cannot be © 
wed to live to be a danger to our land of Wu. We must 
him soon to fend off later evils.” i 
__ So he resolved to commit a crime to remove hin duhgerons i 
l. He called two of the captains of his guard, Ting Fêng — 
Hsii Shéng, and bade each take a party, one along the | 
r, the other along the road, to the altar on the mountains. a 
on as they got there, without asking questions or giving — 
asons, they were to seize and behead K‘ung-ming. They 
ght expect a solid reward if they brought his head. 
The two went off on their nefarious errand, one leading 
gger- and axe-men going as fast as oars could propel them — 
ng the river, the other at the head of archers and bowmen — 
on horseback. The south-east wind buffeted them as wa 
went on their way. i 


Psat High was raised the Seven Stars’ Altar, 
AD On it prayed the Sleeping Dragon 
i For an eastern wind, and straightway 
Blew the wind. Had not the wizard 
BRET Exercised his mighty magic 
net S Nought had Chou Yi’s skill availed. 


Ting Fêng first arrived. He saw the guards with their ui 
ags, dropped off his steed and marched to the altar, sword in Wie 
f ooi ` But he found no K‘ung-ming. He asked the guards; G 


512 San TG, UT, On eee ee 
: ry j G T ieee 
they told him he Wad just gone down. Ting Feng ran down | 
the hill to search. There he met his fellow and they joined. 
forces. Presently a simple soldier told them that the evening 
before a small, fast boat had anchored there near a sand spit 
and K‘ung-ming had been seen to go on board. Then the boat 
had gone up river. So they divided their party into two, one 
to go by water, the other by land. 
Hsti Shéng bade his boatmen put on all sail and take every 
advantage of the wind. Before very long he saw the fugitives 
boat ahead and when near enough, stood in the prow of his 
own and shouted, “Do not flee, O Instructor of the Army! 
The General requests your presence.’ fee 
K‘ung-ming, who was seated in the stent of his boat, just 
laughed aloud, “Return and tell the General to make good use — we 
of his men. Tell him I am going up river for a spell and will 
see him again another day. San 
- “Pray wait a little while, cried Hsti. “I have something 
most important to tell you.” et 
“I knew all about it, that he would not let me go and that he T 
_ wanted to kill me. That is why Chao Yün was paitiug for tegi 
me. You had better not approach nearer. ea 
Seeing the other ship had no sail, Hsü Shéng thought hesti 
would assuredly come up with it and so maintained the pursuit. 
Then when he got too close Chao Yün fitted an arrow to the 
bowstring and, standing up in the stern of his boat, cried, 
“You know who I am and I came expressly to escort the 
Instructor. Why are you pursuing him? One arrow would 
kill you, only that would cause a breach of the peace between 
two houses. I will shoot and just give youa specimen of my 
skill.” “a 
With that he shot, and the arrow whizzed overhead cutting 4 
the rope that held up the sail. Down came the sail trailing in 
the water and the boat swung round. Then Chao Yiin’s boat — 
ee its sail and the fair wind speedily carried it out of — 
sight 
On the bank stood Ting Féng. He bade hig comrade come 
to the shore and said, “He is too clever for any man; and 
Chao Yiin is bravest of the brave. You remember what hes) 
did at Tangyang Slope. All we can do is to return and 
report.” 4 
So they returned to camp and told their master about the 
preparations that K‘ung-ming had made to ensure safety. 
Chou Yü was indeed puzzled at the depth of his rival’s insight. 
“T shall have no peace day or night while he lives,” said he. 
“At least wait till Ts‘ao is done with,” said Lu Su. 
And Chou Yü knew he spake wisely. Having summoned 
the leaders to receive orders, first he bade Kan Ning take with 
him the false deserter Ts‘ai Chung and his soldiers and go 
along the south bank, showing the flags of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, till me ne, 


9? 


iG Bomance of the Cee thingooms | ae : 


j _enemy’s main store of grain and forage. Then they were to 


~ -a torch as a signal. ` Ts‘ai Chung’s brother was to be kept in 
camp for another purpose. 


_enemy’s communications with Hofei. When near the enemy 


| A that Sun Ch‘tian was at hand with reinforcements. 
_.. These two had the farthest to go and started first. Then 


reached he “Black” Forest (Wu Lin) just Opna: the a 
penetrate as deeply as possible into the enemy’s lines and light eek 

“The next order was for Taishih Tzii; he was to lead two as 
companies as quickly as possible to Huangchou and cut the : 


_ he was to give a signal and if he saw a red flag he would know a 


sai Lü Méng was sent into Wu Lin (the “Black” Forest) with ; 


_ three companies as a support. Kan Ning was ordered to set 
_ fire to the camp. A fourth party was to go to the borders of 
Iling and attack as soon as the signal from the forest was 


seen. A fifth party of three companies went to Hanyang to 2 


white flag and a sixth division supported them. 
When these six parties had gone off, Huang Kai got ready 


_ that he was coming over that evening. Four fighting ships 
~~ were told off to support Huang Kai. 4 
z The four squadrons, each of: three hundred ships, were _ 
__ placed under four commanders, Han Tang, Chou T“ai, Chiang — 
= Ch‘in and Ch’en Wu. The score of fire ships preceded them. 
~ Chou Yü and Ch‘éng P‘u went on board one of the large ships 
- tọ direct the battle. Their guards were Ting Féng and Hsü 
Shéng. Lu Su, K‘an Tsé and the advisers were left to guard 
the camp. Ch‘éng P‘u was greatly impressed with Chou Yii’s 
ordering of the attack. 
Then came a messenger bearing a mandate from Sun Ch‘tian 
making Lu Hsiin leader of the van. He was ordered to go 
-to Ch‘ihuang. The Marquis himself would support. him: 
~ Chou Yü also sent a man to the western hills to make slenaly 
~ and to hoist flags on the Nanping Mountains. 
So all being prepared they waited for dusk. 
Here it is necessary to diverge from the direct narrative to 
say that Yiian-té was at Hsiak‘ou anxiously awaiting the 
. return of his adviser. Then appeared a fleet, led by Liu Chi, 
who had come to find out how matters were ‘progressing. 
 Yiian-té sent to call him to the battle tower and told him of 
the south-east wind that had begun to blow and that Chao Yün 
~ had gone to meet K‘ung-ming. Not long after a single sail - 
was seen coming up before the wind and he knew it was 
K‘ung-ming, the Instructor of the Army. So he and Liu Ch‘ 
= . went down to meet the boat. Soon the vessel reached the 
-ghore and K‘ung-ming and Chao Yün disembarked. 
-= Yitian-té was very glad and after they had enquired after 
each other’ s well-being K‘ung-ming said, “There is no time to 


oo 


- fall upon the enemy along the river. Their signal was a pe 


his fire ships and sent a soldier with a note to tell Ts‘ao Tsao : 


i Ri southern districts and the other to Chingchou. I do not know 


i tell of any other things now. 
ready? > ; l 
© “They have iie been yeady,” epia Yüante. | “they only 
await you to direct how they are to be used.” 

3 The three then went to the tent and took their’. ‘seats. 
iM K ung-ming at once began to issue orders. “Chao Yün, with 
three companies is to cross the river and go to the Wu Lin by 
the minor road. He will choose a dense jungle and prepare 
~ an ambush. To-night, after the fourth watch, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
will hurry. along that way. When half. his men have passed, 

_ the jungle is to be fired. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will not. be. wholly 
» destroyed but many will perish.” 

“There are two roads,” said Chao Yiin. “One leads to the 5 


by which he will come.” 

.. “The south road is too dangerous; Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will certainly 

pass along the Chingchou road, so that he may get away to 
< Hstich‘ang.”’ 

Then Chao Yün went away. Next K‘ung-ming said toj 


to cut the road to Iling. You will ambush in the Hulu 
-< Valley. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, not daring to go to South Iling, will 
go: to North Iling. To- morrow, after the rain, he will halt 
_to refresh his men. As soon as the smoke is seen to rise 
from their cooking fires you will fire the hill side. You 
© will not capture Ts‘ao Ts‘ao but you will render excellent- 
service.” 


= Liu Fêng. They were to take command of three squadrons. 
vi and go along the river to collect the weapons that the beaten 
K soldiers would throw away. 
| ` The three left. Then K‘ung-ming said to Uhi Ch‘i, “The 
- country around Wuch‘ang is very important and I wish you 
~- to take command of your own troops and station them at 
strategic points. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, being defeated, will flee thither, 
and you will capture him. But yoy are not to leave ap city 
without the best of reasons.’ 
_ And Liu Ch‘ took leave. 
Then K‘ung-ming said to Yiian-té, “I wish you to remain > 


szreat scheme this night.” 
= All this time Kuan Yü has been silently waiting his fue 
but K‘ung-ming said no word to him. When he could bear 


ee, this no longer he cried, “Since I first followed my brother to e 
battle many years ago I have never been left behind. Now 
- that great things are afoot i is there no work for me? What; is ie 


meant by it?” 
~“You should not be surprised. I wanted you for service at | 
a most important point only that there was a something 


Chang Fei, “You will take three companies over the river — 


quietly and calmly in Fank‘ou while Chou Yü works out his a 


So Chang Fei left. Next was called Mi Chu, Mi Fang Juda A 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 515 


_ Standing in the way that prevented me from sending you,” 


said K‘ung-ming. | 

“What could stand in the way? I wish you would tell me.” 

“You see Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was once very kind to you and you 
cannot help feeling grateful. Now when his soldiers have 
been beaten he will have to fiee along the Huayung road and 
if I sent you to guard it you would have to let him pass. So 
I will not send you.” 

“You are most considerate, Instructor. But though it ‘is 
true that he treated me well, yet I slew two of his most 
redoubtable opponents by way of repayment, beside raising ` 
a siege. If I happened upon him on this occasion I should 
hardly let him go.” 

“But what if you did?” 

“You could deal with me by military rules.” 

“Then put that in writing.” 

So Kuan Yü wrote a formal undertaking and gave the docu- 
ment to K‘ung-ming. 

“What happens if Ts‘ao Ts‘ao does not pass that way?” 
said Kuan Yü. 

“I will give you a written engagement that he will pass.” 
Then he continued, “On the hills by the Huayung Valley you 
are to raise a heap of wood and grass to make a great column 
of smoke and mislead Ts‘ao:Ts‘ao into coming.” 

“If Ts‘ao Ts‘ao ‘sees a smoke he will suspect an ambush and 
will not come.” said Kuan Yii. 

“You are very simple,” said K‘ung-ming. “Do you not 
know more of war’s ruses than that? Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is an able 
leader but you can deceive him this time. When he sees the 
smoke he will take it as a subterfuge and risk going that way. 


- But do not let your kindness of heart rule your conduct.” 


Thus was his duty assigned Kuan Yü and he left, taking his 
adopted son, P‘ing, Chou Ts‘ang and a half company of 
swordsmen. Tet 
= Said Liu Pei, “His sense of rectitude is very profound; I 
fear if Ts‘ao Ts‘ao should come that way that my brother 
will let him pass.” 

“T have consulted the stars and Ts‘ao the rebel is not fated 
to come to his end yet. I have purposely designed this 


- manifestation of kindly feeling for Kuan Yü to accomplish 


and so act handsomely.” T 
“Indeed there are few such far-seeing men as you are, 


said Yüan-tê. 


The two then went to Fank‘ou whence they might watch 
Chou Yii’s evolutions. Sun Chüan and Chien Yung were left 
on guard. : 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was in his great camp in conference with his 
advisers and awaiting the arrival of Huang Kai. The south- 
east wind was very strong that day and Ch‘éng Yti was 


Blen i an Ruo, or — g pr seats 


insisting on the necessity for precaution. But Ts‘ ao langtied ETE 


saying, “The Winter Solstice depends upon the sun and nothing 
else; there is sure to be a south wind at some one or other of _ 
its recurrences. I see nothing to wonder at.” - ; 
Just then they announced the arrival of a small boat from 
the other shore with a letter from Huang Kai. The bearer 
of the letter was brought in and presented it. It stated that 
Chou Yü had kept such strict watch that there had been no 
chance of escape. But now some grain was coming down 
river and Huang Kai had been named as escort commander, 
which would give him the opportunity he desired. He would 
slay one of the known captains and bring his head as an 


offering when he came. That evening at the third watch, if . 


boats were seen with dragon toothed flags, they would be the 
grain boats. 

This letter delighted Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who, with his officers, went 
to the naval camp and boarded a great ship to watch for the 
arrival of Huang Kai. 

In Chiangtung, when evening fell, Chou Yii sent for Ts‘ao 
Ho and bade the soldiers bind him. The unhappy man 
protested that he had committed no crime but Chou Yü said, 
“What sort of a fellow are you, think you, to come and 
pretend to desert to my side? I need a small sacrifice for my 
flag and your head will serve my purpose. So I am going to 
us it.” 

Ts‘ai Ho being at the end of his tether unable to deny the 
charge suddenly cried, “Two of your own side, K‘an ue and 
Kan Ning, are also in the plot!” 

“Under my directions,” said Chou Yü. 


Ts‘ai Ho was exceedingly repentant and sad, but Chou Yi A 


' bade them take him to the river bank where the black standard 
‘had been set up and there, after the pouring of a libation and 


the burning of paper, he was beheaded, his blood being a — Re 


“sacrifice to the fiag. 

This ceremony over the ships started ‘and Huang Kai took 
his place on the third ship. He merely wore breast armour 
* and carried a keen blade. On his flag were written four large 
characters “Van Leader Huang Kai”. With a fair wind his - 
fleet sailed toward Ch‘ihp‘i, or Red Wall. 

The wind was strong and the waves ran high. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
in the midst of the central squadron eagerly scanned the 
river which rolled down under the bright moon like a silver 


serpent writhing in innumerable folds. Letting the wind — i 


blow full in his face Ts‘ao Ts‘ao laughed aloud for was he not — 
now to obtain his desire? 
Then.a soldier pointing to the river said, “The whole south- 
is one mass of sails and they are coming up on the wind.” 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao went to a higher point and gazed at the sails 
intently and his men told him that the flags were black and 


Fane Ch éng Yu Teed. “DE ee were cape with grain ‘chee 
Fo lie deep in the water. But these are light and float 
easily. The south-east wind is very strong and if they intend 
i treachery, how can we defend ourselves?” +i 
= Ts‘ao Ts‘ao began to understand: Then he asked who wonk fs 


used to the waters,” said he. 
Thereupon he sprang into a small light craft and sailed 


‘Standing i in the prow of his ship he called out to those advan- 
-cing toward them, “You southern ships are not to approach; 

‘such are the orders of the Minister. Stop there in mid stream. » 
‘The soldiers all yelled to them to lower their sails. The 


Wên Ping rolled down into the ship with an arrow in the 


; hurried back to their camp. 
_ When ‘the ships were about a couple of li distant, Huang 
; Kai waved his sword and the leading ships broke forth into ` 
_ fire, which, under the force of the strong wind, soon gained 
: strength and the ships became as fiery arrows. Soon the. whole 
twenty dashed into the naval camp. io 
All Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s ships were gathered there and as they 


others and flee. There was a roar of bombs and fireships fi 


- filled with flame. pia: 
—_ . .Ts‘ao Ts‘ao hastened toward the shore. Huang Kai, with 
a few men at his back, leaped into a small boat, dashed through 
the fire and sought Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao. He, seeing the imminence of © 
the danger, was making for the land, Chang Liao got hold of 
- a small boat into which he helped his master; none too soon, 
_. for the ship was burning. They got Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao out of the 
thick of the fire and dashed for the bank. 
= Huang Kai seeing a handsomely robed person get into a 
d mall boat guessed it must be Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and pursued. He 
_ drew very near and he held his keen blade ready to strike, 

_erying out, “You rébel! do not flee. I am Huang Kai.” 
=e Tsao Ts‘ ao howled in the bitterness of his distress. Chang 
Liao fitted an arrow to his bow and aimed at the pursuer, 


go out to stop them, and Wên P‘ing volunteered. “Iam well. 


- out, followed by a half score cruisers which came at his signal. i 


< shout had not died away when a bowstring twanged and fr: 


left arm. Confusion reigned on his ship and all the others — 4 


‘were firmly chained together not one could escape from the oe 


came on from all sides at once. The face of the three rivers © : 
‘was speedily covered with fire which flew before the wind ` 
- from one ship to another. It seemed as if the universe was 


518 Aan uo 


shooting at short range. The roaring of the gale and the 
flames kept Huang Kai from hearing the twang of the string 
and he was wounded in the shoulder. He fell and rolled over 
into the water. 

He fell in peril of water ’ 

When flames were high; 

Ere cudgel bruises had faded, 

An arrow struck. 


Huang Kai’s fate will be told in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER L. 


CHUKO LIANG FORESEES THE HUAYUNG EPISODE: 
KUAN YUN-CH‘ANG RELEASES T's‘AO T's‘AO. 
The last chapter closed with Huang Kai in the water wounded, 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rescued from immediate danger and confusion — 
rampant among the soldiers. Pressing forward to attack the 


naval camp Han Tang was told by his soldiers that some one’: ’ 


was clinging to the rudder of his boat and shouting to him by 
his familiar name. Han Tang listened carefully and in the 
voice at once he recognised that Huang Kai was calling to 
- him for help. & 

“That is my friend Huang Kai,” cried he and they quickly . 
pulled the wounded leader out of the water. .Then they saw 
Huang Kai was wounded for the arrow still stuck. Han bit 
out the shaft of the arrow but the point was deeply buried 
in the flesh. They hastily pulled off his wet garments and 
cut out the metal arrowhead with a dagger, tore up one of 
the flags and bound up the wound. Then Han Tang gave his 
friend his own fighting robe to put on and sent him off in a 
small boat back to camp. ` ae 

Huang Kai’s escape from drowning must be taken as proof 


of his natural affinity for, or sympathy with, water. Although © 


it was the period of great cold and he was heavy with armour 
when he fell into the river-yet he escaped with life. 

In this great battle at the junction of the rivers, when 
fire seemed to, spread wide over all the wide surface of the 
water, when the earth quaked with the roar of battle, when 
land forces closed in on both wings and four battle squadrons 
' advanced on the front, when the ferocity of fire answered the 
clash of weapons and weapons were aided by fire, under the 
thrusts of spears and the flights of arrows, burnt by fire and 
drowned by water, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao lost an incalculable number 
of men. And a poet wrote:— 


When Wei and Wu together strove 
For the mastery, è 
In Red Cliff fight the towering ships 
Vanished from the sea, Í ; 
For there the fierce flames, leaping high, 
Burned them utterly. ; 
So Chou Yü for his liege lord 
Got the victory. 


And another Poem runs :— 


wae _ no road in front; all seemed on fire. Presently Mao Chieh and : a 


pa 520 Un | San Buo, or T TEE ESE T TE 
' The hills are iien dhe: moon’ mee faint, OER nae We eee 
The waters stretch afar; AE a SARI ike ume ah 
I sigh to think how oft this land PEEN te creer twa A cues 
Has suffered stress of war; SN te Nees } SW (fe 
And I recall how southerners oN ph eee ana 
Shrank from the northmen’s might, — 7: A, anne 

And how a favouring eastern gale we si i 

. Helped them to win the fight. 


Leaving for a while the story of the slaughter on ire river 
it is time to follow Kan Ning. He made Ts‘ ao Chung guide * 
him into the innermost recesses of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp. .Then . 
he slew him with one slash of his sword. After this he set ` : 
_ fire to the jungle, and-at this signal Lu Méng put fire to the — 
=- grass in half a score places near to each other. Then other = 
- fires were started, and the noise of battle was on all sides. - 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and the faithful Chang Liao, with a small party ~. 
<- of horsemen, fled through the burning forest. They could see 


: Wên P‘ing, with a few more horsemen, joined them. Tsao ~ 
Ts‘ao bade the soldiers seek a way through. Chang Liao. 
pointed out that the only suitable road was through the “Black” ee 
‘Forest and they took it. oe 
They had gone but a short distance when they were over- ee 
‘taken by a small party of the enemy and a voice cried, “Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao, stop!” It was Lü Méng, whose ensign soon appeared Bee 
against the fiery background. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao urged his small 
party of fugitives forward bidding Chang Liao defend him 
from Lü Méng. Soon after he saw the-light of torches in ~ 
front and from a gorge there rushed out another force. And  — 
the leader cried “‘Ling T‘ung is here!” ee 
 Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was scared; his liver and gall both seemed torn ~~ 
-from within. But just then on his half right he saw another —__ 
company approach and heard a friendly ery “Fear not, Q ba 
Minister, I am here to rescue you.’ a 
The speaker was Hsti Huang and he attacked the pursuers. ea 
A move to the north seemed to promise escape, but soon ~ 
they saw a camp on a hill top. Hsti Huang went ahead to ` 
reconnoitre and found the officers in command were Ma Yen : 
and Chang I, who had once been in the service of Yiian Shao. — 
“They had three companies of northern men in camp. They ~~ 
had seen the sky redden with the flames, but knew not what oh 
was afoot so dared make no move. Peeks 
This turned out lucky for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao who now found himself 


with a fresh force. He sent these two, with a company, to 


‘clear the road ahead while the others remained as guard. 2 
-And he felt much more secure. (on 

The two went forward, but before they had gone very far 
they heard a shouting and a party of soldiers came out, the __ 
leader of them shouting, “I am Kan Hsing -pa of the land of oh 


TAAN eum’ the igo Taa would. engage, pat. 
do btable Kan Ning cut down Ma. Yen, and. when his 
brothe rior Chang I set his spear and dashed forwa dy: 
> fell beneath a stroke from the fearsome sword. -Both 
aders dead, the soldiers fled to give Ts‘ao Ts‘ao the bad news. 
At this time Ts‘ao Ts‘ao expected aid from Hofei for he 
new not that Sun Ch‘iian was barring the road. But when 
un saw the fires and so knew that his men had won the day he: 
ordered Lu Hsiin to give the answering signal. T‘aishih Tz 
eeing this came down and his force joined up with that of. Lu 
Hsun and they went against Ts‘ao. 
__ As for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao he could only get away. toward Tings 
On the road he fell in with Chang Ho and ordered him to - 
‘protect the retreat. He pressed on as quickly as possible. ` 
At the fifth watch he was a long way from the glare and he 
felt safer. He asked the name of the place where they were. 
They told him it was west of the “Black” Forest and north of 
itu. Seeing the thickly crowded trees all about him, and the 
steep hills and narrow passes, he threw up his head and. 
laughed. Those about him asked why he was merry and he 
said he was only laughing at the stupidity of Chou Yü and 
the ignorance of Chuko Liang. If they had only set an ambush : 
there, as he would have done, why, there was no escape. 
_He had scarcely finished his explanation when from both | 
des came a deafening roll of drums and flames sprang up to ate 
aven. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao nearly fell off his horse, he was so 
rtled. And from the side dashed in a troop, with Chao | 
ün Teung, who cried, “I am Chao Tzů- lung and long have 


onani and he himself rode off into the S and fre: : 
o Yün did not pursye; he only captured his banners and 


und, for the south-east wind had not ceased. Suddenly, . 
an a heavy down-pour of rain, wetting every one to the ` 
“skin, but still Ts‘ao Ts‘ao maintained his headlong flight till - 
he starved faces of the men made a halt imperative. He told 
the men to forage in the villages about for grain and the means . 
of making a fire. But when these had been found and they 
‘began to cook’ a meal another pursuing party came along and 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao again was terrified. However, these proved to be 
riends escorting some of his advisers whom he saw with joy. 
When giving the order to advance again he asked what 
places lay ahead, and they told him there were two roads; one — 
‘was the highway to South Iling and the other a mountain road ai 
o the north of Iling. 

“Which is the shorter way to Chiangling?” asked Tsʻao 


ob 
S 


yar 4 were unsaddled and turned out to graze. 


K suddenly looked up and began to laugh loud and long. His 


Tee at had an ambush here, just to meet us. when. a wel ‘ 


~ mouth of the valley. A force was arrayed before them and 


warrior. Hsti Ch‘u, mounted on a barebacked horse, rode up — 


than the bye road which goes to Huayungtao. Only the latter _ 


Ban yas, or 


“The best way is to take. the south road thy 
was the reply. i 

So he gave orders to ave that way. By ihe tim 
-was reached the men were almost starving and C 
no more; horses too were worn out. Many. had f 
roadside. A halt was then made, food was taken by fi 
from the villagers, and as there were still some boilers: le 
they found a dry spot beside the hills where they could res 
and cook. And there they began to prepare a meal, boilin 
< grain and roasting strips of horse-flesh. Then they ‘took. 
their wet clothes and spread them to dry. The beasts, too, bate 


Seated confortably in a somewhat open spot Ts‘ao Ts“ ac 


“Not long since, Sir, you laughed at Chou Yü and Chuko. 
Cheney that resulted in the arrival of Chao Yün and- a W 
-loss of men to us. Why do you now laugh?” i 

“Iam laughing again at the ignorance of the same av men. 
If I was in their place, and conducting. their campaign, I 


~ 


- fore I am laughing at them.” i 

. Even at that moment behind them rose a ao yell. that 
roughly startled, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao threw aside his breastplate and’ 
leaped upon his horse. Most of the soldiers failed to catch 
theirs and then fires sprang up on every side and filled the 


at the head was the man of Yen, Chang Fei, seated on his 

steed with his great spear levelled. $: 
“Whither wouldst thou flee, O rebel?” shouted he. : 
The soldiers grew cold within at the sight of the E 


„to engage him and two comrades galloped up to his aid. The 


aes aa and Chang Fei aia However, Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao "by 
dint of hard riding got away and gradually the pureuerp were 
out-distanced. 3 
But many had received wounds. As they were going the | 
soldiers said, “There are two roads before us; which- sha 
we take?” ' } AGHI Si: 
- “Which is the shorter? asked Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
“The high road is the more level, but it is fifty li longer 


road is narrow and dangerous, full of pits and difficult.” 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sent men up to the hill tops to look around. 
They returned saying there were several columns of smoke 


ey 


G 


‘Romante of the Three fiingdoms 523 


ai from the hills along the road. The high road seemed 
quiet. . aay : 

Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade them lead the way along the bye-road. 

Where smoke arises there are surely soldiers,” remarked 


-~ the officers. “Why go this way?” 


“Because the Book’ of War says that the hollow is to be. 


regarded as solid and the solid as hollow. That fellow Chuko ` 


Liang is very subtle and has sent men to make those fires so 
that we should not go that way. He has laid an ambush on 
the high road. I have made up my mind and I will not fall 
a victim to his wiles.” 

“Q Minister, your conclusions are most admirable. None 


~ other can equal you,” said the officers. 


And the soldiers were sent along the highway. They were — 
very hungry and many almost too weak to travel. The horses 
too were spent. Some had been scorched by the flames and 
they rode forward resting their heads on their whips; the 


wounded struggled on to the last of their strength. All were 


soaking wet and all were feeble. Their arms and accoutre- 
ments were in a deplorable state, and more than half had 


M been left upon the road they had traversed. Few of the 


horses had saddles or bridles, for in the confusion of pursuit 


~ they had been left behind. It was the time of greatest winter 


cold and the suffering was indescribable. 

Noticing that the leading party had stopped T's‘ao T's‘ao 
sent to ask the reason. The messenger returned, to report 
that by reason of the rain water collected in the pits and the 
“mire the horses could not move. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao raged. 

He said, “When soldiers come to hills they cut a road, when 
they happen upon streams they bridge them; such a thing as 
mud cannot stay an army.” 

So he ordered the weak and wounded to go to the rear and 
‘come on as they could, while the robust and able were to cut 
down trees, and gather herbage and reeds to fill up the holes. 
And it was to be done without delay, or death would be the 
punishment of the disobedient or remiss. 

So the men dismounted. and felled trees and cut bamboos, 


-and they levelled the road. And because of the imminence 


is 
SS 


and fear of pursuit a party was told off to hasten the workers- 


~and slay any that idled. 


The soldiers made their way along the shallower parts, but 
many fell, -and cries of misery were heard the whole length 
of the way. l 
= “What are you howling: for?’ cried Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. “The 
number of your days is fixed. Any one who howls shall be 
put to death.” 

The remnant of the army, now divided into three, one to 
march slowly, a second to fill up the waterways and hollows 
and a third to escort Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, gradually made its way over 


“the precipitous road. When the going aA a, little Gaan. 


< O Minister, have shown him kindness, and if you will remind 


‘in return, “ and I have been expecting you these many days.” 


Tame Fal Cage? i ee TV neo Ee 
va Ye i : x 


Bi thu, « or 


On 
bo 
l 


the path was moderately level, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao turned to look at | 
his following and saw he had barely three hundred men. And 
these lacked clothing: and armour and were Ea and 
disordered. a 
But he pressed on, and when the oficere told hi the horned ! 4 
were quite spent and must rest, he replied, “Press on to. 
Chingchou and there we shall find repose.’ AB 
- So they pressed on. But they had gone only a few li when 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao flourished his whip and broke once again into — ; 
loud laughter. 4 TE = 
“What is there to laugh at?” asked the officers. ~~ S 
“People say those two are able and crafty; I do not see > ite 
They are a couple of incapables. it an ambush had been placed - 7 i 
Lere we should all be prisoners.” & 
He had not finished this speech when the explosion of a bomb ; 
broke the silence and a half company of men with swords in ~ 
their hands appeared and barred the way. The leader was — 
Kuan Yü holding the famous Black Dragon sword, bestriding ~ 
the “Red Hare” steed. At this sight the spirits of the soldiers 4 
left them and they gazed into each others’ faces in panic. a a 
“Now we have but one course;” said Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao, “we must». 


.. fight to the death.” 


“How can we?” said the officers. “The men are scared, the si 
horses are spent.” ee 
Ch‘éng: Yü said, “I have always heard that Kuan Yü is” 

haughty to the proud but kindly to-the humble; he deso 4 
the strong, but is gentle with the weak. He discriminates A 
between love and hate and is always righteous and true. You, — 


him of that we shall escape this evil.” 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao agreed to try. He rode out to the front, bowed 
low and said, “General, I trust you have enjoyed good health. F 
“T had orders to await you, O Minister,” replied he, bowing — 


“You see before you Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, defeated and weak. I have 2 
reached a sad pass and I trust you, O General, will not forget — 


the kindness of former days.” 


“Though indeed you were kind to me in those days, yet es 
I slew your enemies for you and relieved the siege of Paima. — 
As to the business of to- day, I cannot allow private feelings — 
to outweigh public duty.” ie 44 

“Do you remember my generals, slain at the five passes? 
The noble man values righteousness. You are well versed in 
the histories and must recall the action of Yu- kung, the archer, 
when he found his master Tzut-cho in his power.” . 

Kuan Yü was indeed a very mountain of goodness and could 
not forget the great kindness he had received at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s 
hands, and the magnanimity he had shown over the deeds Gin | 


{ 
ne 
p 
E 


on 


Romance of the Three Kingoomg 525 


ct ve passes. He saw the desperate straits to which his 
benefactor was reduced and tears were very near to the eyes 
_both. He could not press him hard. He pulled at the 
idle of his steed and turned away saying to his followers, © 
Break up the formation.” = =. > ie ea és 
From this it was evident that his design was to release  _ 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who then went on with his officers, and when 
Kuan Yü turned to look back they had all passed. He uttered 
a great shout and the soldiers jumped off their horses and 
knelt on the ground crying for mercy. But he also had pity 
for them. Then Chang Liao, whom he knew well, came along 
and was allowed to go free also. — 3 í 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, his army lost, fled to the Huayung Valley; 
There in the throat of the gorge met he Kuan Yü. 
Grateful was Kuan, and mindful of former kindness, = 
A Wherefore slipped he the bolt and freed the imprisoned dragon. 
_. Having escaped this danger Ts‘ao Ts‘ao hastened to get out — 
_ of the valley. As the throat opened out he glanced behind him 
~ and saw only two score and seven horsemen. As evening fell 
_ they reached Nanchiin and they came upon what they took te 
-= be more enemies. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao thought the end had surely 
-~ come, but to his delight they were his own men and he regained 
= all his confidence. Ts‘ao Jên, who was the leader, said that 
= he had heard of the misfortunes of his master, but he was iA 
_ afraid to venture far from his charge else he would have met 
him before. : ; 
= “I nearly missed you as it was,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
_ The fugitives found repose in the city, where Chang Liao 
soon joined them. He also praised the magnanimity of Kuan 
W en Ts‘ao Ts‘ao mustered the miserable remnant of his 
host he found nearly all were wounded and he bade them rest. © 
's‘ao Jên poured the wine of consolation whereby his master 
might forget his sorrows. And as Ts‘ao drank among his 
familiars he became exceedingly sad. | 
Wherefore they said, “O Minister, when you were in the . 
cave of the tiger and trying to escape you showed no sign of » wit 
_ sorrow; now that you are safe in a city, where you have food Cera 
and the horses have forage, where all you have to do is to Nt Dien 
‘prepare for revenge, suddenly you lose heart and grieve; why me 
ERUS On: ARA 
= Replied Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “I am thinking of my friend Kuo Chia; 
had he been alive he would not have let me suffer this loss.” 
= He beat his breast and wept, saying “Alas for Féng-hsiao! 
- I grieve for Féng-hsiao! I sorrow for Féng-hsiao!” ; 
- The reproach shamed the advisers. Next day Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
~ called Ts‘ao Jên and said, “I am going to the capital to prepare 
a another army for revenge. You are to guard this district and, 
in case of necessity, I leave with you a sealed plan. You are 


i 2 


_ “Chingchou is particularly your 
- to hold Hsiangyang. As Hofei is most 
` Chang Liao thither with good aids. io 
. send at once to tell me.” 

' Having made these dispositione Te. a o Ts 


iz: 


come a few Pon clio He took with an 


X pat his way back to ncudduasters.y Be this he the ‘ether ; 
detachments had returned bringing spoil of- Heide and | 


nt 


cree e A IEG: him on his success. Wheat Kuan Y 
- was announced K‘ ung-ming got up and went to welcome 
A PR a cup of wine. / 
if pe O vor ” said he 


“You have done a deed t 


f «l hope it is not because we have omitted to welcome a 
the road that you seem sad.” = 
= Turning to those about him he said, “Why ga you not 
_ us he was coming?” i 
` —_ “I am here to ask for death,” said Kuan Yü. 
“Surely Ts‘ao Ts‘ao came through the valley? ——— — 
“Yes; he came that way, and I could not Hee its) let him 
“Then ee have you captured? ye 
“on one.’ 


‘ ane its conditions is here. You will have to 
_ penalty.’ f i} 
He called in the lictors and told them to take awani Ku 


K a and put him to death. Be: 


Kuan Yü risked life when he spared Ts‘ao te Mics Se 
In direst need, 

And age-long admiration gained 
For kindly deed. 


What actually befell will be seen in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER LI. 


A GREAT BATTLE BETWEEN NoRTH AND SOUTH: 
K‘UNG-MING ANGERS CHOU YU. 


s K an Yü had died there but for his elder brother, who said 
-tothe great strategist, “We three:pledged ourselves to live and 
die together. Although my brother Yiin-ch‘ang has offended 

. I cannot bear to break our oath. I hope you will only record 
this against him and let him atone later for the fault by some 
specially meritorious service.” 

So the sentence was remitted. In the meantime Chou Yü 
` mustered his officers and called over his men, noted the special 
services of each and sent full reports to his master. The 
soldiers who had surrendered were all transported across the 
river. All this done they spread the feast of victory. 
The next step was to attack and ¢apture Nanchtin. The van 
of the army camped on the river bank. There were five camps — 
and the general’s tent was in the centre. He summoned his 
officers to a council. At this moment Sun Ch‘ien arrived with 
congratulations from Liu Pei. Chou Yü received him and, 
having saluted in proper form, Ch‘ien said, “My lord sent me 
on this special mission to felicitate the General on his great 
virtue and offer some unworthy gifts.” 
“Where is Ytian-té?” asked Chou Yü. 
“He is now encamped at Yuchiangk‘ou.”’ 
“Ts K‘ung-ming there?” asked Chou Yü, taken aback. 
“Both are there,” said Ch‘ien. j 

— “Then return quickly, and I will come in person to than 

them.” 

_ The presents handed over, Sun Ch‘ien was sent back forth- | 
‘with to his own camp. Then Lu Su asked Chou Yti why he 

had started when he heard where Liu Pei was camped. i 
“Because,” replied Chou Yü, “camping there means that he 

has the intention of taking Nanchün. Having spent much 

military energy and spared no expenditure, we thought the 
district should fall to us easily. Those others are opposed to 
us and they wish to get the advantage of what we have already 
accomplished. However, they must remember that I am not 
dead yet.” ; 
“How can you prevent them?” asked Lu Su. t 
“I will go myself and speak with them. If all goes well, 
~ then, let it be so; in case it does not, then I shall immediately 
_ settle up Liu Pei without waiting for Nanchiin to be taken.” 


| 528 Canaan San Kuo, or 


Ra SS NN 
| ty 


«ey khoul like to Webs tees you, 36 said Lu Su. 


The General and his friend started, taking with k G ai A 


guard of one squadron of light horse. Having arrived at. 


Yuchiangk‘ou they sought out Sun Ch‘ien, who, in turn, went — 
in to see Yiian-té and told him Chou Yü had come to render - 


thanks. 


“Why has he come?” asked Yiian-té of his Eae adviser. RANMA 


“Is it likely he would come out of simple politeness? Of G A 


course he has come in connection with Nanchün.” 


“But if he brings an army, can we stand against it?” asked ee 


Ytian-té. 
“When he comes you may reply thus and thus.” 


Then they drew up the warships in the river and ranged. a 


the soldiers upon the bank and when the arrival of Chou Yü 
was formally announced, Chao Yiin, with some horsemen, 


= went to welcome him. When Chou Yü saw what bold men : Va 


_ they looked he began to feel uncomfortable, but he went on 


his way. Being met at the camp gates by Liu Pei and K‘ung-- x 
ming, he was taken in to the chief tent, where the ceremonies © 
were performed and preparations for a banquet had been on A 


made. 


-here with no other idea than to take Nanchün ?” 


“We heard you were going to take the place and came to, 


assist. Should you not take it then we will occupy it.” 


Chou Yü laughed. “We of the east have long wished for 
-~ this district. Now that it is within our grasp we naturally — 


“Shat takei it? 


Presently Liu Pei raised his cup in felicitation on the recent a ; 
victory gained by his guest. The banquet proceeded and after ~ — 
a few more courses Chou Yü said, “Of course you are camped 


Liu Pei said, “There is always some uncertainty. Tsʻao 


Ts‘ao left Ts‘ao Jên to guard the district and you may be ~ 
certain that there is good strategy behind him to say nothing 


of his boldness as a warrior. I fear you may not get it.” 


“Well, if we do not take it then, Sir, you may have it,” 


said Chou Yü. 


“Here are witnesses to your words,” said Liu Pei, naming | 


. those at table. “I hope you will never repent what you have A 


just said.” 


‘Lu Su stammered and seemed unwilling to be cited as one a 
of the witnesses but Chou Yu said, “When the word of a noble. 


man has gone forth it is ended; he never regrets.” 


“This speech of yours, Sir, is very generous,” interjected 7° 
K‘ung-ming. “Wu shall try ‘first, but if the place does not 


fall there is no reason why my lord should not capture it.” , . 
= The two visitors then took their leave and rode away. As “fe 
soon as they had left Liu Pei turned to K‘ung-ming and said, | 
“O Master, you bade me thus reply to Chou Yü, but though ve 
I did so I have turned it over and over in my mind mitoni ien 


~ teens. ut 


* 


 Homance of the Three fingdoms 529 


finding any reason in what I said. I am alone and weak, — 


without a single foot of land to call my own. I desired to 
get possession of Nanchiin that I might have, at least, a 
temporary shelter, yet I have said that Chou Yii may attack 


~- it first and if it fall to Wu, how can I get possession?” 


K‘ung-ming laughed and replied, “First I advised you 
to attack Chingchou, but you would not listen; do you re- 
member ?” F 

“But it belonged to Liu Piao and I could not bear to attack 
it then. Now it belongs to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao I might do so.” nin 
` “Do not be anxious,” replied the adviser. “Let Chou Yü 
go and attack it; some day, my lord, I shall make you sit in 
the high places. thereof.” 

“But what design have you?” 

“So and so,” replied K‘ung-ming. 

Yüan-tê was satisfied with the reply, and only strengthened 


his position at Chiangk‘ou. In the meantime Chou Yü and 


Lu Su returned to their own camp and the latter said, “Why 


‘did you tell Liu Pei that he might attack Nanchiin?” 


“IT can take it with a flick of my finger,” replied Chou Yü, 
“but I just manifested a little pretended kindliness.” 


Then he enquired among his officers for a volunteer to attack | 


the city. One Chiang Ch‘in offered himself, and was put in 
command of the vanguard, with Hsü Shéng and Ting Féng 
as helpers. He was given five companies of veterans and they 


- moved across the river. Chou Yü promised to follow with 


supports. 

On the other side Ts‘ao Jén ordered Ts‘ao Hung to guard 
Iling and so hold one corner of a triangular defence. When 
the news came that Wu had crossed the river Han, Ts‘ao said, ' 
“We wili defend and not offer battle.” ' 
` But Niu Chin said impetuously, “To let the enemy approach 
the walls. and not offer battle is timidity. Our men, lately 
worsted, need heartening and must show their mettle. Let 
me have half a company of veterans.and I will fight to a 
finish.” i 

Ts‘ao Jên could not withstand this offer and so the half 


: company went out of the city. At once Ting Féng came to 
challenge the leader and they fought a few bouts. Then Ting 


Féng pretended to be defeated, gave up the fight and retreated 
into his own lines. Niu Chin followed him hard. When he 


= had got within the Wu formation, at a signal from Ting Fêng, 


the army closed round and Niu Chin was surrounded. He 
pushed right and left, but could find no way out. Seeing him 
in the toils, Ts‘ao Jên, who had watched the fight from the 


= wall, donned his armour and came out of the city at the head 
- of his own bold company of horsemen and burst in among the 


men of Wu to try to rescue his colleague. Beating back Hsu 
Sheng he fought his way in and presently rescued Niu Chin. 


34 


530. toa San Buo, or 


ye: è 

However, having got out he saw sevenal score. oF korsare 
still in the ‘middle unable to make their way “out, whereupon — 
he turned again to the battle and dashed in to ‘their. rescue. 
This time he met Chiang Ch‘in on whom he and Niu Cun 
made a violent onslaught. Then the brother Ts‘ao Shun came 
up with supports and the great battle ended in a’ defeat for aie 
‘the men of Wu. aes 

So Ts‘ao Jên went back victor, wA ihe unhappy Chiang” 
Ch‘in returned to report his failure. Chou Yü was very angry 
and would have put to death his hapless subordinate. but for. 
the intervention of the other officers. Raed: 

-Then he prepared for another attack where he hielt wane oe int 
lead. But Kan Ning said, “General, do not be in too. orc 
hurry; let me go first and attack Hing, the supporting angle 
of the triangle. After that the conquest of Nanchiin will Pex a a 
easy.’ a 

Chou Yii accepted the plan and Kan, with three companies, 
went to attack Iling. 

When news of the approaching army reached him Ts! ao Jê ên. 
called to his side Ch‘én Chiao, who said, “If Iling be lost then 
Nanchiin is lost too. So help must be sent quickly.” 

Thereupon Ts‘ao Shun and Niu Chin were sent by secret. 
ways to the aid of Ts‘ao Hung. Ts‘ao Shun sent a messenger > 
to the city to ask that they should cause a diversion by a 
sortie at the time the reinforcements should arrive. 

So when Kan Ning drew near, Ts‘ao Hung went out to ieat 
and engage him. They fought a score'of rounds, but Ts‘ao — 
Hung was overcome at last and Kan Ning took the city. 
However, as evening fell the reinforcements came up and the A 
captor was surrounded in the city he had taken. The scouts | 

went off immediately to tell Chou Yü of this PUn change 
of affairs which greatly alarmed him. cae vet 

“Let us hasten to. his rescue,” said Ch‘éng P‘u. Se 

“This place is of the greatest importance,” said Chou Yü, Š; 

“and I am afraid to leave it undefended lest Ts‘ao Jên should ae “a 
attack.” ro: 

“But he is one of our first leaders and must be rescued,” ee a 
said Lü Mêng. AR 

“I should like to go myself to his ai but whom can I leave 
here in my place?” said Chou Yi. a 

“Leave Lin T‘ung here,” said Lü Méng; “I will push oni 
ahead and you can protect my advance. Tn less than ten pe a 

-we shall be singing the pæan of victory.” S 
“Are you willing?” said Chou Yü to the man who was- to 
-~ act for him. 
“Tf the ten day period is not exceeded I may be able tö carry 
on for that time; I am unequal to more than that.” ` 

Ling T‘ung’s consent pleased Chou Yü who started at. once, o 
leaving a legion for the defence of the camp. Lü Me said 


Va onae: and. the men set o. ` When the man Mee 
my drew near Iling, Chou Yü asked who would try to break 
through the ` besiegers and Chou T‘ai offered himself. He — 
girded on his sword, mounted his steed and burst straight aan 
to the Ts‘ao army. He got through to the city wall. . 
From the city wall Kan Ning saw the approach of his friend 
hou T‘ai and went out to welcome him. Chou T‘ai told him 
at the Commander-i in-Chief was on the way to his relief and ~ By 
-Ning at once bade the defenders prepare from within to ‘ 
vort the attack of the rescuers. ie 
hen the news of the approach of Chou Vii had reached | 
Hing the defenders had sent to tell Ts‘ao Jên, who was at — 
N nchiin ‘and they prepared to repel the assailants. SO 
when the army of Wu came near they were at once attacked. 
Simultaneously Kan Ning and Chou T'ai attacked on two ~ 


The men of Wu fell-on lustily and the three leaders all fled 
by a bye-road, but, finding the way barred with felled trees _ 
and other obstacles, they had to abandon their horses and go 
afoot. In this ed the men of Wu gained some five hundred > 
steeds. 
-. Chou Yü, “pressing on as Saadiy as possible toward Nanchün, 
i came upon Ts‘ao Jên and his army marching to save Iling. 
-~ The two armies engaged and fought a battle which lasted till- 
late in the evening. Then both drew off and Ts‘ao Jen with- 
drew into the city. f 
During the night he called his officers to a council. Then 
said Ts‘ao Hung, “The loss of Iling has brought us: to a IS, 
angerous pass; now it seems the time to open the letter of 
the Minister our Chief and see what plans he arranged for 
our salvation in this peril.” 
“You but say what I think,” replied Ts! ao Jên. Whereupon | 
tore open the letter and read it. His face lighted up with | 
oy and he at once issued orders to have the morning meal ~ 
prepared at the fifth watch. At daylight the whole army 
_ moved out of the city but they left a semblance of occupation 
in the shape of banners on the walls. 
Chou Yü went up to the tower of observation and looked pe 
er the city. He saw that the flags along the battlements | 
ad no men behind them and he ‘noticed that every man aS 
 earried a bundle at his waist behind so that he was prepared ee 
=~ for along march, Thought Chou Yü to himself, “Ts‘ao Jên pia 
ust be Prepared for a long march,” f cs 


ee advanced to attack the city. 


-Jên came out to help him and Chou T‘ai rode out at ft spee 


then Ts‘ao Jên fled. Ai 


Tak guards upon the walls, R the a of the ‘city, 


sah 


in: person and Ch‘éng Pu “commanded Ne thi r. 


The armies being ee facie. each other, 
rolled out across the plain. Ts‘ao Hung rode 
- challenged, and Chou Yü, from his place by th 
bade Han Tang respond. The two champions f 
- two score bouts and then Ts‘ao Hung fled. There 


< to meet him. These two Se edits a half score "passes an 


iy His army fell into confusion. Thereupon Chou Yü. gave | 
-~ signal for the advance of both his wings and the men of Ts 
- were sore smitten and defeated. Chou Yü pursued to the ci 
wall, but Ts‘ao’s men did not enter the city. pele pee went ay, 


score horsemen rode in first, Chou Yü followed and Sipe 
his steed. As he galloped into the enclosure around the gate, 
 Ch*én Chiao stood on the defence tower. When he saw Chou 
Yü enter, in his heart he applauded the god- like perspi cati wh 
of the Minister Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. oh 
Then was heard the clap-clap of a watchman’s rates Aaa 
. this signal the archers and crossbowmen let fly and the arrows 
A and bolts flew forth in a sudden terce shower, while those 


lives got him away safe. Then the men of Ts‘ao dashed out 
of the city and wrought confusion among the men of. Wu, 
_ who trampled each other down and many more fell into. 
trenches. Ch‘éng P‘u tried to draw off, but Ts‘ao Jê and T 
~. Hung came toward him from different directions and — 

- battle went hardly against the men ee the east, till hel 


the army a, called in. With iron rene he Sra 
the sharp bolt and dressed the wound with a lotion designe 
to counteract the poison of the metai. But the pain was intense 
and the patient rejected all nourishment. The physician said 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 538 


the missile had been poisoned and the wound would require 
a long time to heal. The patient must be kept quiet and 
especially free from any irritation, which would cause the 
` wound to re-open. 

Thereupon Ch‘éng P‘u gave orders that each division was 
to remain in camp. Three days later Niu Chin came within 
sight and challenged the men of Wu to battle, but they did 
not stir. The enemy hurled at them taunts and insults till 
the sun had fallen low in the sky, but it was of no avail and 
Niu withdrew. EN 

Next day Niu Chin returned and repeated his insulting 
abuse. Ch‘éng P‘u dared not tell the wounded general. The 
third day, waxing bolder, the enemy came to the very gates 
of the stockade, the leader shouting that he had come for the 
purpose of capturing Chou Yü. - 

Then Ch‘éng P‘u called together his officers and they dis- 
cussed the feasibility of retirement into Wu that he might 
seek the opinion of the Marquis. 

Ill as he was Chou Yii still retained control of the expedition. 
He knew that the enemy came daily to the gates of his camp 
and reviled him although none of his officers told him. One 
day Ts‘ao Jén came in person and there was much rolling of 
drums and shouting. Ch‘éng P‘u, however, steadily refused 
to accept the challenge and would not let any one go out. 
_ Then Chou Yü summoned the officers to his bedside and said, 

-“What mean the drums and the shouting?” 
. “The men are drilling,” was the reply. 

“Why do you deceive me?” said Chou Yü angrily. “Do 
I not know that our enemies come day by day to our gates 
and insult us? Yet Ch‘éng P‘u suffers this in silence and 
makes no use of his: powers and authority.” 

He sent for Ch‘éng P‘u. and. when he arrived, asked him 
why he acted thus. 

“Because you are ill and the physician said you were on 
` no account to be provoked to anger. Wherefore, although the 
enemy challenged us to battle, I kept it from you.” 

“And if you do not fight what think you should be done?” 
said Chou Yü. ; 
- And they all said they desired to return to the east till he 


had recovered from his wound, when they would make another 


expedition. 
Chou Yü lay and listened. Suddenly he sprang up, crying, 
“The noble man who has eaten of his lord’s bounty should die 
_ in his lord’s battles; to return to one’s home wrapped in a 
- horse’s hide is a happy fate. Am I the sort of man to bring 
to nought the grand designs of my country?’ 

‘So speaking he proceeded to gird on his armour and he 
mounted his horse. The wonder of the officers only redoubled 
when their General placed himself at the head of some hun- 


uttered a loud cry, and he fell to the ground — with Boge 


E a San tiuo, or 


‘dreds of horse en and wonk Bue of ie camp R to ard i 
enemy, then fully arrayed. Ts‘ ao Jên, their general, “stood” 
beneath the great standard. S an 

At sight of the opponents Ts‘ao Je ên fourished he whiny and- 
began to hurl abuse at them, “Chou Yü, you babe! E think 
your fate has met you. You dare not. face my men.’ 

The stream of insult never ceased.” “Presently. ‘Choa: X 
could stand it no longer. Riding out to the front he erep 
“Here I am, base churl; look at me!” 

The whole Ts‘ao army were taken aback. But Ts‘ao Jên. 
turned to those about him and said, “Let us all revile him! we 
And the whole army yelled insults. a 

Chou Yu grew angry and sent Pian “Chang out to fight, ie 
But before he had delivered his first blow Chou Yü suddenly © 


gushing from his mouth. 
_ At this the Ts‘ao army rushed to the battle and the men of 
Wu pressed forward to meet them. A fierce struggle waged 
around the General’s body, | but he was borne off safely and EN 
taken to his tent. A 
“Do you feel better?” asked Ch‘éng P‘u anxiously. _ 
“It was a ruse of mine,’ whispered Chou Yü in Topy 
“But what avails it?” Se 
“T am not suffering, but I did that to make our enemie 
think I was very ill and so oppose them by deceit. I will send | 
a few trusty men to pretend desertion and tell them I-am. 
dead. That will cause them to try a night raid on the camp — 
and we shall have an ambush ready for them. -We shall get 
Ts‘ao Jén easily.” it 
“The plan seems excellent,” said Ch‘éng P‘u. 
Soon from the tent there arose the sound of wailing as for i 
the dead. The soldiers around took up the cry and said onè 
to another, “The General is dead of his wound,” and Me all 
put on the symbols of mourning. 
Meanwhile Ts‘ao Jên was consulting with his opens: Said 
he, “Chou Yü lost his temper and that has caused his wound — 
to re-open and brought on that flow of blood. You saw him - 
fall to the ground and he will assuredly die soon.” ~“ Ni 
Just then there came in one who said that a few men had 
come over from the enemy asking to be allowed to join. the 
army of Ts‘ao; among them were two of Ts‘ao’s men who had 
been made prisoners. } 
Ts‘ao Jén sent for the deserters and questioned ea ’ ‘They 
told him a story of Chou Yii’s wound and death that day. — 
The leaders were all in mourning. They had deserted because © 
they had been put to shame by the second in command. 
Pleased at this news Ts‘ao Jén at once began to arrange to 
make a night attack on the camp and, if possible, get the head. ee 
of the dead general to send to the capital. 


n n ee 


ihe id Was $ 


rear was oad o Ts‘ “20 Hace anc 
1 Chiiao,, cand a few ‘men, were left to guard 


e rst wateh they: left rhe city ane took the way towar a 
camp. When they drew near not a man was visible, 
Eb: flags and banners and spears were all there, evidently to. E 
eep up an appearance of preparation. Feeling at once that - 
they had. been tricked they turned to retreat. But a bomb > 
e) ee and this was the signal for an attack on all four . 
sS. The result was a severe defeat for the raiders and. 
he - r my of Ts‘ao Jên was entirely broken and scattered — 
abroad so. that no one part of the beaten army could aid the. 


_ Ts‘ao. Jên, with a few horsemen got out of the press and 
sently: met Ts‘ao Hung. The two leaders ran away together — fa: 
id by the fifth watch they had got near Nanchiin. Then — 
ey heard a beating of drums and Lin T‘ung appeared barring 
he way. There was a small skirmish and Ts‘ao Jên went off — 
an angle. But he fell in with Kan Ning, who attacked him 
1 gorously. Ts‘ao Jên dared not go back to Nanchiin, but he oi 
made for Hsiangyang along the main road. The men of Wu ` sar 
pursued him for a time and then desisted. 2 
-= Chou Yü and Ch‘éng P‘u then made their way to Nanchan! A 
where they were startled to see flags on the walls and every 
ign of occupation. Before they had recovered from their 
prise there appeared one who cried, “Pardon, General; I- i 
orders from my chief to take this city.. Team Chao 
i-lung of Ch‘angshan.” : 
10u Yü was fiercely angry and gave orders to assault the 
4 sity, but the defenders sent down flights and flights of arrows 
nd . is. men could not stay near tne rampart. So he withdrew — 
nd ook oe In the meantime he decided to send a force 
;  Chingcheu . and another to take Hsiangyats i 
nchün- odd be taken later. i 
3ut even as these orders were being given the scouts came 
hurriedly to report that Chuko Liang, suddenly producing — 
a military commission, had induced the guards of Chingchou 
to leave it and go to the rescue of Chou Yu. Whereupon — 
Cl ang Fei had occupied the town. Soon after another — 
“messenger came to say that Hsiahou Tun, at Hsiangyang, = = 
vad received from Chuko Liang ‘despatches, supported by a ju 5 
sion in due form, saying that Ts‘ao Jén was in danger 
eded help, whereupon Hsiahou Tun had marched off and 


aad the two towns. that Chou Yü wanted had fallen, without 
east effort, into: the hands of his rival Liu Perion ee 


536 Ban Bua 


“How did Chuko: ‘Liang get this military commission with: 
which he has imposed on the captains?” asked Chou Yu. ts 
Ch‘eng P‘u replied; “He seized that of Ch‘én Chiao; and so 


has got all this district into his power.’ 
Chou Yü uttered a great cry for at that moment his wound 


had suddenly burst open. 


A city falls, but not to us the gain; 
The guerdon is another’s; ours the pain. 


The next chapter will say what befell Chou Yü.. 


CHAPTER UIE OO er a 
CHUKO LIANG TALKS CUNNINGLY TO LU SU: 


CHAO YUN, BY A RUSE, CAPTURES KUEIYANG. 


heii Yü’s anger- at seeing that his rival, K‘ung-ming, had 
: surprised Nanchün, and at hearing the same news of Ching- 
chou and Hsiangyane, was but natural. And this sudden fit 
of rage caused his wound to. re-open.. However, he soon 
recovered. All his officers besought him to accept the situation, | 
but he said, “What but the death of that. bumpkin, Chuko, will | 

assuage my anger? If. Ch‘éng P‘u can but aid me in an 
attack on Nanchiin I can certainly restore it to my country.” 

Soon Lu Su came in, to whom Chou Yii said, “I simply 
must fight Liu Pei and Chuko Liang till it is decided which . 
shall have the upper hand. I must also recapture the city. 
Perhaps you can assist me.” 

“Tt cannot be done,” replied Lu Su. “We are now at grips 
with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and victory or defeat is undecided.’ Our 
lord has not been successful.in overcoming Hopei. Do not. 
fight near home, or it will be like people of the same household 
destroying each other and should Ts‘ao Ts‘ao take advantage ~ 
of this position to make a sudden descent we should -be in a 

parlous condition. Further, you must remember that Liu 
Pei and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao are united by the bonds of old friendship 
and, if the pressure becomes too great, Liu Pei may relinquish 
` these cities, offer them to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and join forces with him 
to attack our country. That would be a real misfortune.” , 

“I cannot help being angry” said Chou Yu, “to think that. 
=- we should have used our resources for their benefit. They | 

get ali the advantage.” 

“Well, -let mego and see Ytian-te and talk reason to, him. 
If I can arrive at no understanding then attack at once.’ 

“Excellent proposal!” cried ail present. 

So-Lu Su, with his escort, went away to Nanchün to carry 
out his proposal and try to arrange matters. He reached the 
city wall and summoned the gate, whereat Chao Yün came 
out to speak with him. 

_ “T have something to say to Liu Yttan-té,” said he; “I wish 
to see him.” ; 

.“My lord and Chuko Liang are in Cmagehou i was the 
rep! à 

ae Su turned away and hasted to Chingchou. He found 
the walls bedecked with flags and everything in excellent 


588 


order. In his heart he admirar the sieht d; 
-an able man was the commander of that army. : 


them to throw wide the gate. | “He was Jed to The government 
house and, after the usual exchange of salutes, ‘Kfung-miag 
and his- visitor took- their respective seats. Having finished 
the tea, Lu Su said, “My master, the Marquis ‘Wu, and the 
Commander of his army, Chou Yü, have sent me to lay before 
_the Imperial Uncle their’ views. When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao led. his 
huge host southward he gave out that it was for the conquest 
of Chiangnan; really his intention was to destroy. Liu Pei 
“Happily our army was able to repulse that mighty host and - 
so saved him. Wherefore Chingchou with its nine’ districts’ 
ought to belong to us. But by a treacherous move your 
master has occupied Chingchou and Hsiangyang, so that we 
- have spent our treasure in vain and our armies have fought n 
to no purpose.. The Imperial Uncle has reaped the benefits a 
to the full. This is not as it should be.” ir 
K‘ung-ming replied, “Tzu-ching, you are a man of high | RU 
- intelligence; why do you hold such language? You know the- 
saying, that all things turn to their owner. These places have’ 
never belonged to Wu, but were of the patrimony of Liu Piao, ~- 
and though he is dead, his son remains. Should not the uncle ath 

assist the nephew to recover his own? Could my master have 
refrained ?” Base: 

“If the nephew Liu Chi, the rightful heir, ey occupied 6 
these cities there would have been something to say. But he ea. 
is at Chianghsia and not here.” ae 

“Would you like to see him?” said K‘ung-ming. 

At the same time he ordered the servants to request ‘bina 
‘Ch‘i to come. Thereupon he at once appeared, supported by pee: 
‘two attendants. Addressing Lu Su he said, “I am too weak — 
, to perform the correct ceremonies; I pray you pardon me 
Tzu-ching.” 

Lu Su said not a word; he was too much taken backe ; 
However, he recovered himself presently and said, “But E 
-the heir had not been here, what then?” 

_ “The heir is living but from day to day; should be go, then 
—— there will be something to talk about.” ~ 

“Should he die, then you ought to return these cities te us.” 

“You state the exact facts,” said K‘ung-ming. 

Then a banquet was prepared and, that over, Lu Su took -| 
his leave. He hastened back to his own camp and gave Chou oe 
_ Yü an account of his mission. Se 

“But what is there for us in the chance of Liu che oe 
death?’ said Chou Yü. ‘He is in his very first youth. When — ious 
will these places fall to us?” -> e Nis 

race” content, General; let me zadanie the re of these 
places 


vas i Sudden y came 

N a p aad, “Our. lord is layin: 

but i in several battles has had no victory. H 
you to withdraw from here and go-to Hotel: 


oon hou xa marched hack to Ch aisang. “Havin; 
om he began to give attention to the recovery of | 

Be, sent eee R u with the marine and land 
I el was exceédingly. well satisfied with the ‘possession 
f ae territory and his thoughts turned to more ambitious 
cheme: _ Then a certain man came to him to suggest a plan. 
was I Chi and, remembering the kindly. feeling 0 


5 seated, s nd ee aot had asked what he proposed, he Said. 
) a wish n a pion | to pou eh yet greater deeds ; Maes mat 


named Ma, five eet an of whom are known as men ae 
- The youngest ‘is called- Ma Su, or Ma Yu-ch‘ang. 

blest. is Ma Liang, or Chi-ch‘ang, who has white hairs 

is eyebrows, and the villagers have a little rhyming 
that means there are AVE sons in ae family Ma. Mita) 


was eid with oe EE He was pean: to` 

plan for the security. of the newly acquired district 

id, “Attacked ag it is on all sides this district is 

which one is permanently secure. You should let 

í remain here till he is recovered from his present 

s, the actual protection of the place being left in the hands 
friends. Obtain an Edict appointing him Governor 

ople will be content. Then conquer Wuling, Chang- 

yang and Linling and with the resources you will- 

uire you will have the means for further plans. That. ; 

j ild þe your policy.” Fuy 
er of e four districts should be first taken Ry asked re 


a Liu 


ph 


à nearest, ‘Linling, which ties in the west of Hsiang. 
a1) The next is Wuling and Canes these the other ey 


g. ae 
eh Prefect! oe Linling was pw Tu. When dan 
tened he called in hiss son tay Hsien and th 

ise 


eee were arrayed, Hsing rode to the front. 
i bee a peat: called Cleaver of Monn 


phi: al a. ‘turban. on his head. “in one aad he resso ' 
ather fan, with which he signed to the warrior to approach. 
me the same time he said, qa am Chuko K'ung- pt, O i 


A oe heh can you T to oppose me I now “oer you pea r 
and it will be well for you to surrender.” F 
_ Hsing laughed derisively. ‘Their defeat was owin 
; plan of Chou Yü; you had nothing to do with it. He 
oaety to deceive me?” ESMA 
~ So saying he swung up his battle-axe and came 
M ovard K‘ung-ming. But he turned his carriage and re 
= within the lines which closed up behind him. Hsing still a 
rushing on. As he reached the array the men fell away o a 
both sides and let him enter. Well within he looked T kais 
for his chief opponent. Seeing a yellow flag moving 
quietly he concluded that K‘ung-ming was with it | 
followed it. When the flag had gone over the shoulder of 
f “hill it esi Then PEN as if the earth had o Í 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — | i 541 


while in its place came a ferocious warrior, with a long spear 
in his hand and mounted on a curvetting steed. It was Chang 
Fei, who dashed at Hsing with a tremendous roar. 
_, Nothing daunted Hsing Tao-jung whirled up his battle-axe 
and went to meet Chang Fei. But after four or five bouts he 
‘saw that there was no chance of victory for him, 'so he turned 
his horse and ran. Chang Fei pursued, the air shaking with 
the thunder of his voice. iat 

Then the ambushed men appeared. Tao-jung, nothing 
daunted, rushed into their midst. But in front’ appeared 
another warrior barring the way, who. called out, “Do you 
know me? I am Chao Tzi-lung of Ch‘angshan.” 

Hsing Tao-jung knew that all was over; he could neither 
fight nor fly. So he dismounted and gave in. He was fettered 
' and taken to camp, where were Ytian-té and K‘ung-ming: 
The former ordered him out to execution, but K‘ung-ming 
hastily checked him. 

“We will accept your submission if you capture Liu Hsien 
for us,” said he: 

The captive accepted the offer without the least hesitation, 
‘and when K‘ung-ming asked how he intended to do it, he 
replied, “If you will set me free, I shall be cunning of speech. 
If you raid the camp this evening you will find me your helper — 
on the inside. I will make Liu Hsien a prisoner and will-hand 
him over to you. He being captured, his father will surrender 
-at once.” 

'‘Yüan-tê doubted the good faith of the man, but K‘ung-ming. 
` said he knew he could answer for him. Wherefore he was set 

free and went back to camp, where he related all that had 
occurred. . 

“What can we do?” asked Liu Hsien. 

-“We can meet trick with trick. Put soldiers in ambush 
to-night outside our camp while within everything will appear 
as usual. When K‘ung-ming comes we shall capture him.” : 

The ambush was prepared.. At the second watch a troop 
came out of the darkness and appeared in the gate. Each 
man carried a torch and they began to set fire to all about 
them. Out dashed Liu Hsien and Hsing Tao-jung and the 
incendiaries forthwith fled. The two warriors pursued them, 
but the fugitives ran and then suddenly disappeared at about 
ten lifrom the camp. Much surprised the two turned to wend 
‘their way back to their own camp. ne 

_Jt was still burning for no one had extinguished the flames. 
Soon from behind them came out Chang Fei. Liu Hsien called 
out to his companion not to enter the burning camp, but to go 
with him to attack K‘ung-ming’s stockade. _ 

. | Thereupon they turned again, but at a distance of ten li 

Chao Yiin and a troop. suddenly debouched upon their road. 
Chao Yiin attacked and Hsing Tao-jung fell. Liu Hsien turned 


i BEO flee, but Chang Fei” was ‘close’ upon him and ! 
= prisoner. He was thrown across a horse, bound and taken St 


ee this deed was not his own wish. K‘ung-ming ordered them 


wine to cheer him and help him forget his troubles. When — 


| bility so fully, and with the commission gavee him | three 


= yang. The Prefect Chao Fan soon heard of his approach and 


` Ying and Pao Lung, offered to meet the invaders and ues 
them back. 


one put to death,” said K‘ung-ming. as he left. 


“Ban huo, « or 
Ae $ 


to camp. When he saw K‘ung-ming he ‘laid blame. on his. | 
fallen comrade saying he had listened ‘to his evil counsel and. — 


to loose his ‘bonds, had him properly dressed and gave him — 


he was recovered he was told to go to his father and persuade 
him to yield. 
“And if he does not, the city shall be destroyed and every 


The son returned to. the city. and told his father! these — 


y things. Liu Tu at once decided to yield and forthwith hoisted _ 
the flag of surrender, opened the gates, and went out taking _ 


his seal of office with him. He was re-appointed to his ` 


` prefectship, but his son was sent to- Chingchou for service re 


with the army. i 
The people of Linling all rejoiced greatly at the: change of ea 


rulers. -Yiian-té entered the city, calmed and re- assured the | 
people and rewarded his army. be 


But he at once began to think of the next move and asked — 
for an officer to volunteer to take Kueiyang. Chao Yün offered, 


_ but Chang Fei vehemently proposed himself for the command > is 


of the expedition. So/they wrangled and contended. aie 
Then said K‘ung-ming, “Undoubtedly Chao Yün was first as 


lesa Ay volunteer, wherefore he is to go.’ 


Still Chang Fei opposed and insisted on going. They were ; 
told to decide the dispute by drawing lots and Chao Yün drew 


_ the winning lot. Chang Fei was still very angry and grumbled, © : 
-~ “IT would not have wanted any helpers: just three companies — 
-and I would have done it.” Meee 


“I also only want three companies,” said Chao Yün. “And si 
if I fail I am willing to suffer the penalties.” Ei 
K‘ung-ming was pleased that he recognised his responsi- 


companies of veterans. x 
Though the matter was thus settled Chang Fei was d a 
contented and pressed his claim till Yüan-tê bade him desist ia 
and retire. SA 
With his three companies Chao Yün took the road to Kuei- 


hastily called his officers to take counsel. Two of them, Ch‘én 


These two warriors belonged to Kueiyang and had made ah 


‘themselves famous as hunters. Ch‘én used a “Flying Fork” 


and Pao could draw a bow with such force that he had been . 


-known to send an arrow through two tigers. So strong weré — 


they, as well as bold. seer 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 543 


. They. stood before ‘Chao Fan and said, “We will lead the 
way against Liu Pei.” 
The Prefect replied, “I know that Liu Pei is of the Teper 


| family:  K‘ung-ming is exceedingly resourceful: Kuan Yü- 


and Chang Fei are very bold. But the commander of this 
force is Chao Tzit-lung who, on one occasion, faced a hundred 
~ legions and never blenched. Our small force here cannot 
stand against such people. We shall have to yield.” 

“Let me go out to fight,” said Ch‘én Ying. “If I cannot 
capture Chao Yün then you can yield.” 

The Prefect could not resist him and gave:his consent. 
Then Ch‘én Ying, with three companies, went forth and soon 
_the two armies came within sight of each other. When Ch‘én 
Ying’s army was drawn up he girded on his “Flying Fork” 
` and rode to the front. Chao Yün gripped his spear and rode 
‘to meet him. Chao Yün began to rail at Ch‘én Ying, saying, 
“My master is the brother of Liu Piao to whom belonged this 
land. Now he is supporting his nephew the heir and son of 
Liu Piao. Having taken Chingchou I am come to soothe and 
comfort the people here. Why then do you oppose me?” 

“We are supporters of the Minister Ts‘ao and are no 
followers of your master,” was the reply. 

Chao Yun, waxing angry, firmly grasped his spear and rode 
forward. His opponent twirled “Flying Fork” and advanced. 
The horses met, but after four or five encounters Ch‘én Ying, 
realising that there was no hope of victory, turned and fled. 
Chao Yiin followed. Suddenly turning, Ch‘én Ying got close 
to Chao Yiin and flung the fork. Chao Yiin deftly caught it 
-and threw it back. Ch‘én Ying dodged away, but Chao Yün 


soon caught him up, seized Ch‘én Ying, dragged him out of : 


the saddle and threw him to the ground. Then he called up 


-his soldiers and they bound the prisoner. He was tah to the |, 


camp, while his men scattered and fied. 

“I thought you would not dare a combat with me,” said 
Chao Yiin to the prisoner when they had returned to camp. 
“However, I am not going to put you to death. You are free. 
But persuade your master to yield.” 

- Ch‘én Ying asked pardon, put his hands over his head and 
fied like a frightened rat. When he reached his city he told 
the Prefect all these things. 

“My original desire was to yield, but you insisted on fighting 
and this is what it has brought you to.” 

So spoke the Prefect. He bade Ch‘én begone and then 
prepared his- letter of submission and put up his seal. With 
‘a small party he went out of the city and wended his way to 
Chao Yiin’s camp, Chao received him graciously, offered him 
wine and then accepted the seal of office. After the wine had 
gone round several times Chao Fan became talkative, “General, 
your surname is the same as mine, and five centuries ago we 


DAA in San ‘ius, or 


were one family. You are from Cheats and s so am I. Ae 
over we are from the same village. If you do not mind we 
might swear brotherhood. I should be. very happy.” 

Chao Yiin was pleased and they compared ages. They were 
of the same year. However, Chao Yün was the elder by four. 
months and so Chao Fan ‘made his bow as younger brother. 
The two men, having so many things in common, were very 
pleased with each other and seemed fitted to be close friends. 

At eventide the feast broke up and the late Prefect returned — 
to his. dwelling. ‘Next day he requested Chao Yün to enter 
the city, where, after he had assured the people of their safety, 
Chao Yün went to a banquet at the ya-mén. When they had — 
become mellow with wine the Prefect invited Chao Yün into 
the inner quarters, where wine was again served. When Chao ` 
Yün was a little intoxicated, his host'bade'a woman come 
forth and offer a cup of wine to the guest. 

The woman was dressed entirely in white silk ond her 
beauty was such. as:to overthrow cities and ruin states. 

“Who. is she?” asked Chao Yün. 

“My sister-in-law; her maiden name was Fan.” 

Chao Yiin at once changed his look and treated. her with 
deference. When she had offered the cup the host told her 
“to be seated and join the party but Chao Yün declined this 
addition to the evening and the lady withdrew. 

“Why did you trouble your sister-in-law to present wine to 
me, brother?’ asked Chao Yün. 

“There is a reason,” said. the host smiling. “I pray you let — 
me: tell you. My brother died three years ago and left her a 
widow. But this cannot be regarded as the end of the story. 
I have often advised her to marry again, but she said she 
would only do so if three conditions were satisfied in one man’s 

< person. The suitor must be famous for literary grace and 
warlike exploits, secondly, handsome and highly esteemed and, 
thirdly, of the same name as our own. Now where in all the 
world was. such a combination likely to be found? Yet here 
are you, brother, dignified, handsome and prepossessing, a 
man whose name is known all over the wide world and of the 
` desired name. You exactly fulfil my sister’s ambitions. If 
you do not find her too ugly, I should like her to marry you and 
I will-provide a dowry. What think you of such an alliance, 
such a bond of relationship? ae 

But Chao Yün rose in anger, shouting, “As I have just sworn 
brotherhood with you, is not your sister-in-law my sister-in- 
law? How could you think of bringing such confusion into 
the relationship.” : 

Shame suffused Chao Fan’s face and he said, “I only thought 
of being kind to you; why are you so very rude to me?” ? 

He looked right and left to his attendants with murder in 
his eye. Chao Yün raised his fist and. knocked him down. 


Romance of the Three ingdoms 545 


‘iy he strode out of the place, mounted and rode out of the 
city. 
_ Chao Fan at once called in his two fighting men. Ch‘én Ying 
said, “He has gone away in a rage, which means that we shall 
have to fight him.” i 
“I greatly fear you will lose,” said Chao Fan. 

_ “We will pretend to be deserters,” said Pao Lung, “and so 
_ get among his men. When you challenge him we will suddenly 
-~ catch him.’ 
Y “We shall have to take some others with us,” said Ch‘én. 
“Half a company will be ample,” said Pao. 
So in the night the two men and their followers ran over to 
' Chao Yiin’s camp to desert. 

| Chao Yün understood the trick they would play, but he called 
_ them in and they said, “When Chao Fan tempted you with that 
fair lady he wanted to make you drunk and get you into the 


_ private apartments so that he might murder you and send 


your head to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Yes; he was as. wicked as that. 
even. We saw you go away in anger and we thought that 
would mean grave trouble for us and so we have deserted.” 
~ Chao Yün listened with simulated joy, and he had wine 
_ served to the two men, and pressed them to drink so that , 
they were quite overcome. When this was done he had both 
bound with cords, called up their followers and asked them 
whether this was real or pretended desertion and they told © 
him the truth. Then he gave the soldiers wine and said, 
“Those who wanted to harm me are your leaders and not you. 
If you do as I tell you you shall be well rewarded.” 

The soldiers threw themselves to the ground and promised 
obedience. Thereupon the two leaders were beheaded. The 
half company were made to lead the way and act as screen 
for a whole company of horsemen and the party set out at 
full speed for Kueiyang. When they got there they summoned 
the gate and said that they had slain Chao Yün and had got 
back. And they wished to speak with the Prefect. 

Those on the wall lighted flares and inspected those at the 
gate. Surely enough they wore the uniforms of their own 
people and Chao Fan went out to them. He was immediately 
seized and made prisoner. Then Chao Yiin entered the city, 
restored order and sent off swift messengers to Ytian-té who 
at’once, with his adviser, came to Kueiyang. 

When they had taken their seats the late Prefect was 
brought in and placed at the foot of the steps. In response to 
K‘ung-ming’s questions he related the history of the proposed 
marriage. : 

Said K‘ung-ming to Chao Yün, “But this seems a fine project; 
why did you receive the proposal so roughly?” 

“Chao Fan and I had just sworn brotherhood and so 
Marriage with his sister-in-law would have called down on 


35 


ne eee 


St 


Pn ; Ban tiuo a 


my head universal blame; That is one reason. 


chastity. And thirdly I did not know whether T ene ti ae 
such a proposal from one who had just. yielded to force. My. 
lord, your position as a recent victor was one of danger and 
could I risk the failure of your plans for the sake of a woman?” 
“But now that the plan. has been carried out and we. are 
pole victors would you care to marry her 277s 
e le iy) “There are plenty of women in the world. Al my fear is 
Bei for my reputation. What is a family to me?” AEAT 
“You are indeed r`ght honourable,” said Yiian-té, Si 
Chao Fan was réleased and ` restored to the prefectorate, 
Chao Yiin was conspicuously rewarded. e3 
But Chang Fei was angry and disappointed. “So. Tzň-lung 
ye aay <6) all-the praise and I am worth nothing,” cried he. “Just 
give me three companies and I will take Wuling ana bring n 
e you the Prefect.” eed) 
Berea: This pleased. K‘ung- ‘ming, who said, “There is no. reason f 
ei oe you should not go, but I will only require one condition 
of you.’ 


, Wondrous, the plans of the general, so doth he conquer in battle; 
Re AT Soldiers keenly competing gain renown in the fighting. 


athe) The condition that K‘ung-ming made will appear in the next E 
eta chapter. ee 


CHAPTER LIII. 


KUAN YU, FROM A SENSE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, RELEASES 
HUANG CHUNG: 
SUN CH‘ UAN FIGHTS A GREAT BATTLE WITH CHANG LIAO, 


What K‘ung-ming required from Chang Fei was a formal 
recognition of: responsibility for success.. Said he, “When | 
Chao Yün went on his expedition he gave written guarantee 
-of being responsible for success and you ought to do the same 
now that you are starting for Wuling. In that case you may 
have men and start.” 

So Chang Fei gave the required document and received 
joyfully the three companies of soldiers he had demanded. 
‘He set out at once and travelled without rest till he reached . 

~ Wuling. - 

‘When the Prefect of Wuling, Chin Hsüan by name, heard 
that. an expedition against him was afoot he mustered his 
officers and recruited brave soldiers and put his weapons in 
order ready for the struggle. And his army moved out of 
the city. . 

A certain secretary, Kung Chih, remonstrated with his- 
chief for opposing a scion of the imperial house, saying, “Liu 
Yiian-té is of the Hans, and recognised as an uncle of the 
Emperor. All the world knows he is kindly and righteous. 
Added to that his brother Chang Fei is extraordinarily bold. 


-_ We cannot face them in battle with hope of success. Our. best 


course is to give in.” 

But his master angrily replied, “Do you want to play the 
traitor and take the side of the rebels and help them?” 

He called in the lictors and told them to put Kung to death. 
The other officers interceded for him, saying, “It augers ill to 
“start an expedition by slaying your own men.” 

So the Prefect merely sent Kung Chih away. He himself 
led the army out of the city. After marching twenty li he 
:ı Inet with Chang Fels army. 

Chang Fei at once rode to the front, spear ready to thrust, 
and opened with a shout. Chin Hsüan turned to his officers 
and asked who would go out-to fight him, but no one replied; 
they were too afraid. 

So the Prefect himself galloped out, flourishing his sword. 
Seeing him advance Chang Fei shouted in a voice of thunder. 
Poor Chin was seized with panic, turned pale and could not 
go on. He turned his steed’ and fled. Then Chang Fei and ` 


tives 


_ their own wait Gee ae 
“see what this ‘meant and 
$ opposed him, standing on the wall. # 

ee Yo brought defeat upon eae 
will of God,” cried the traitor. L and t! 
N “determined to yield to Liu Pei?” ea 

-Just as he finished speaking an arrow wounded 
in the face and he fell to ue ground. Thereupon is 


| a Kune Chih then went e and matte fornial submi sion 
-Chang Fei bade him take his letter and the seal to Kui 
to Liu Pei, who was pleased to hear of CEE, Fets 


ct came, in person and soothed the puple i 
= This done he wrote to his other brother telling h Lte anc 
Tzu-lung had gained a district each. Kuan at once wrote back, 

‘and said that Changsha was yet to be taken and if he was 
. not thought too feeble he would like to be sent to attack 
= Yutian-té agreed and sent Chang Fei to relie e his brother 

_ whom he ordered to return and prepare for an expedition t 

_ Changsha. Kuan Yü came and went in to see his elder brother 
n K‘ung-ming. 

At this interview Rane ninr said that the other two suc-. 

A Gesstul warriors had done their work with three companies. | 
< The Prefect of Changsha, Han Yüan, was not worth mentio 
_ ing, but there was a certain general with him, named Hu: i 
Chung, who had to be reckoned with. | 
x “Huang Chung,” said K‘ung-ming, “is a native of Nanana Be 
_ He used to be in the service of Liu Piao and was a colleague of — 

Liu R an, when he was in command of caret, í AR 


j a larger number of men.’ fox) 
Ki Kuan Yü replied, a what makes you a a 
ASAN man’s ardour to fight and do. away with your own digr 
I do not think the old leader need be discussed and I do ni 
think I require three companies of men. Give me my ow 
_ half company of swordsmen and I will have the heads of bot 
our enemies to. saCrinice to our standard.” ` 4 


PeR would not give way. He a took his half company ands 
IES) out. i 
ECL. he - is not careful how he attacks Huang Chung: t 

will be a mishap?’ said K‘ung-ming. “You must go to su 
A PEI ie him.” a + 


h Romante of the Three Viingdoms 549 


. Ytian-té accordingly, at the head of another and larger 
party, set out toward Changsha. 

The Prefect of Changsha was of hasty temperament with 
small compunction in matters of life and death and was 
universally hated. When he heard of the army coming against 
him he called his veteran leader, Huang, to ask advice. The 
latter said, “Do not be distressed; this sword of mine and my 
bow are equal to the slaughter of all who may come.” 

Huang Chung had been very strong and could bend the two 
hundred catty bow and was a most perfect archer. When he 
referred to his one-time prowess a certain man spoke up and 
said, “Let not the old General go out to battle. Trust to my 
might arm and you shall have this Kuan a prisoner in your 

ands.” ? 
' The speaker was named Yang Ling. The Prefect accepted 
~ his offer and told off a company to go with him and they — 
quickly rode out of the city. About fifty li from the city 
they observed a great cloud of dust approaching and soon 
» ‘distinguished the invaders. Yang Ling set his spear and rode 
~ to the front to abuse and fight. Kuan Yü made no reply to | 
~ the abuse, but rode forward flourishing his -sword. The 
‘warriors soon met and in the third encounter Yang Ling was 
~ cut down. Kuan Yii’s company dashed forward and pursued 
`~ the defeated force to the city wall. 

When the Prefect heard of this reverse he ordered the 
' veteran Huang Chung to go out while he went up on the city 
~ wall to watch the fight. 

Huang Chung took his sword-and crossed the drawbridge | 
at the head of his men. Kuan Yü, seeing an old leader riding- 
~~ out, knew it must be Huang Chung. He halted his men and 
placed them in-line with their swords at the point.. Then 
_ sitting there on horseback he said, “He who comes is surely 
~ Huang Chung, eh?”, 
“Since you know me, how dare you come within my bound- | 
aries?” replied the veteran. 
“TJ have come expressly to get your head.” . 
: Then the combat began. They fought a hundred and more 
~ pouts and neither seemed nearer victory. At this point the 
‘Prefect, fearing some mishap to his veteran general, beat the 
gong to retreat and the battle ceased, one side going into the 
city and the other camping ten li away to the rear. 
Kuan Yii thought in his heart that the fame of the veteran 
T opposed to him was well merited. He had fought a hundred 
bouts and discovered never a weak spot. He determined that 
~ in the next encounter he would use a feint (or “Parthian” 
stab) and so overcome him. . : 
Next day, the early meal eaten, Kuan Yü came to the city 
' wall and offered his challenge. The Prefect seated himself 
~. on the city wall and bade his veteran warrior go out to accept 


: ite a: at the head of a few homemen he dashed ac: C 


‘half a hundred bouts neither- had the advantage. 


TA raS ide Yü wheeled round his horse and fled. Of course Huang 


had stumbled and thrown him. Kuan Yü turned, raised his” 
sword in both hands, and cried in a fierce tene, “ “I spare 
_» your life, but quick! get another horse and come again to. 
= battle.” 


- its back and went into the city at full speed. -The prefect was 
astonished and asked for an account of the accident. n “The 
-horse is too old,” replied Huang. 


_ the Prefect. 


a and then shoot him.” 
“rode himself; Huang thanked him and retired. 
= > could he understand it. He could not make up his mind to- 


i ge shoot the man who had spared his life. Yet if he did not 
shoot, he betrayed his duty as a soldier. It was very per- 


’ 


-the wall and challenging them again. So Huang Chung gave 
- orders to go out. js 


‘ Beeercaine Huang Chung, was very ill at ease. So he called up 


3 K they had got to the thirtieth bout Huang Chung fled as if he 
“was overcome. Kuan Yü pursued. 


to-day. Putting up his sword he took his bow and twanged N: 
= the string only; no arrow flew. Kuan Yü dodged, but seeing - 
~ no arrow in the air, he re-took the pursuit. Again Huang — 
 twanged an arrowless bowstring and again Kuan dodged, but 
- no arrow came. Then he said to himself, “He cannot- shoot,” 

and pressed on in pursuit. 


-~ -drawbridge, fitted an arrow, pulled the bow and sent an arrow W 
flying that just hit the base of the pilame on Kuan’ S. helmet. E 


550. see ie | San tuo, r 


drawbridge. The two champions engaged- and at the end ie 
sides the soldiers cheered lustily. Bee 

> When the drums’ were Pama ‘most. furiously, sudden; 
Chung followed. Just as the moment for the feint arrived 


Kuan Yü heard behind him a tremendous crash and turned. 
to see his pursuer lying prone upon the ground. His steed _ 


‘Huang Chung pulled his horse to. fe feet hastily, cane upon : 


“Why did you not shoot since your arm is so perfect? ” asked 


“I will try again to-morrow,” said Huang. “Then T will 
run away as. if overcome and so tempt him to the drawbridge 


The Prefect gave the veteran a grey horse that he usually 


But he could not forget Kuan Yii’s generous conduct, nor 


plexing and the whole night spent in thinking it over found — 
him still undecided. ae 
At daybreak a man came in saying that Kuan yi was near — 


: Now Kuan Yü, having fought for two days and not having 


all his dignity when he went forth to fight that day. When 


As he rode away Huang Chung thought in his e “He 
spared me only yesterday and I cannot bear to shoot him 


As they neared the city wall, the veteran stopped on the 


Hd set off for camp with the arrow still 
heard that Huang Chung’ s: skill was said 
o piercing a willow leaf at a hundred paces. and he. 
t he owed this arning in the oor of an 


ae. “But nen the ean ery ae up a eh 
see the Prefect, he was at once seized. “What have - oe: 


ae y seen these last three days that you were fooling me; i 
` you were slack the day before yesterday, which proved you 
had some sinister intention. Yesterday, when your. horse 
nbled and he spared you, it showed that you were in league 
n him. And to-day you twice twanged a vain bowstring, 
hile at the third shot you only hit your opponent’s helmet. 
are you say there is no secret understanding in all this? 
If I do not put you. to death it will assuredly redound to my 
i own hurt.” 
_. The Prefect ordered him to be executed outside the city 
S gate. The intercession of the officers he met by saying that- 
iN one who pleaded for the condemned would be regarded — 
asin the plot: 
+ The executioners had hustled the old man out of the. city 
i and the sword was in the air and on the point of descending, © 
when a man. suddenly dashed- in, cut down the lictor and — 
Mvescned Huang Chung. 
“Huang Chung is our. bulwark;” shouted he, “to destroy 
him i is to destroy the Changsha people. This Han is too fierce ~ 
and cruel; too lightly values good men and is too arrogant 
toward his officers. We ought rather to kill him, and sees 
“who will, let them follow me.’ 
All eyes turned toward this bold speaker, who was bronzed _ 
~ and had eyes like the Cowherd’s star. Some of. them knew _ ; 
him as Wei Yen, a native of Iyang. He had followed Liu Pein 
- from Hsiangyang but, unable to come up with him, had gone — 
into the service of Han Yiian. -Han Yiian took exception AES E. 
his arrogant carriage and lack of polish and neglected him. . HS os 
And so he had come to this place. 
= After the rescue of Huang Chung he called upon the people: 
to make an end of the Prefect. He waved his arm and shouted — 
to the people. Soon he‘had a following of several hundreds. 
. Huang Chung could not stop them. In a very short time Wei. 
had dashed up on the wall and the Prefect lay dead. Taking = 
_ his head, Wei Yen rode off out of the city to lay the blood- ——— 
` stained trophy at the feet of Kuan Yü, who forthwith went: sae 
i into the city to restore confidence. 
When the people were all quiet, Kuan sent to request Huang 
i es to come to see him, but the old general pleaded illness. 


552 a Huo, or \ 


Next he sent the good news to his brother and to K‘ung-ming 
and asked them to come. 

Soon after Kuan Yii had left to capture Changsha, Liu Pei 
and K‘ung-ming had followed him up with supports in case of 
need. While on the march a black flag was furled backwards 
and a crow flew over from north to south croaking thrice as — 
it passed. ; 

“What good or evil things do these omens presage?” asked 
Yuian-té. 

With hands hidden within his long sleeves, K‘ung-ming 
performed a rapid calculation on his fingers of the auspices 
and replied, “Changsha is taken and a great leader mastered. 
We shall know soon after noon.’ 

Sure enough a simple soldier presently came ealon along 
with the welcome tidings of the capture of the city and saying 
that the two city warriors who had aided them were near 
waiting the arrival of Liu Pei. Soon after they arrived Liu | 
Pei entered the city, where he was escorted to the magistracy 
and heard the recital of Huang Chung’s deeds. 

Yüan-tê went in person to Huang’s house and enquired for 
him, whereupon he came forth and yielded formally. He 
requested to be permitted to bury the remains of the late 
Prefect on the east of the city. 


Lofty as is heaven above earth was the spirit 
of the captain, 

Who, even in his old age, suffered -sorrows in 
the south; 

Cheerfully had he approached death, with no 
thought of resentment, 

But, bowing before the conquerer, he hung his 
head and was ashamed. 

Praise the sword, gleaming snow-white, and 
the glory of super-human bravery, 

Consider the mail-clad steed snuffing the wind 
and rejoicing in the battle, 

That warrior’s name shall stand high and its 
brightness be undiminished, 

While the cold moon sheds her light on the 
waters of Hsiang and T'an. 


Yiian-té.was generous toward the veteran leader who had 
come under his banner. But when Wei Yen was introduced, 
K‘ung-ming suddenly ordered him to be thrust forth and put 
to death. 

“He has merit; he has committed no fault,” exclaimed 
Yiian-té. “Why slay him?” 

But K‘ung-ming replied, “Ingratitude; to eat a-man’s bread 
and slay him is most disloyal; to live on his land and offer his 
territory to another is most wrong. I see the bone of treachery 
at the back of his head and he will certainly turn against his 
master. Wherefore it is well to put him to death and prevent 
him from doing harm.” 


Romante of the Three tingvoms T R 


“If we slay this man Shera who may wish to surrender 
will be deterred by the danger. I pray you forgive him.” 

K‘ung-ming pointed his finger at Wei Yen and said, “You 
are pardoned. You would do weli to be perfectly faithful 
to your lord as weil as grateful. Do not let a single thought 
eee elsewhere or I will have your head by fair means or 

ou 

Wei Yen went away muttering to himself. 

Having given in with good grace, Huang Chung introduced 
a nephew of .Liu Piao, named P‘an, then living in Yuhsien 
near by. Ytian-té employed him in the administration of . 
Changsha. 

All being tranquil at Changsha, Ytian-té and his army 
returned to Chingchou. The name Yuchiangk‘ou was changed 
to Kungan and soon all was prosperous. Taxes were freely 
paid and able men from all sides came to assist in the .ad- 
ministration. Guards were placed at strategic points. 

It is time to return to Chou Yü. When he went to Ch‘aisang. 
to recover from his wound he left Kan Ning in command at 
Lingchün and Ling T‘ung at Hanyang. The fleet was shared 
- between these two places to be ready to move when required. | 
The remainder of the force was under Ch‘éng P‘u and he went 
to Hofei, where Sun Ch‘iian had been since the fight at Red 
Wall. He was still fighting the northern army and in half a’ 
score encounters, small and great, neither had gained a decided 
advantage. He could not approach the city but entrenched 
himself about fifty li away. 

When he heard of the coming of Peioren eni he was very 
pleased and went in person to meet and welcome the leaders. 
Lu Su was in advance of the main body and Sun Ch‘tian 
` dismounted and stood by the roadside to greet him. As soon 
as he saw this, Lu Su slid out of the saddle and made his 
obeisance. 

But the officers were amazed at the attitude of Sun Chitian, — 
and still more so when Sun Ch‘tian asked Lu Su to remount | 
and ride by his side. Presently he said secretly to Lu Su, © 
“I, the Lone ‘One, dismounted to greet you as you saw; Was 
that manifestation enough for you?” 

“No,” replied Lu Su. 

“Then what further can I do?” 

“T want to see your authority and virtue spread over the 
four seas and enfold the nine provinces and you yourself 
playing your part as Emperor. Then will my name be 
inscribed in the annals and I shall indeed be known.” 

Sun Ch‘iian clapped his hands and laughed gleefully. y 

When they reached the camp a banquet was prepared and 
the services of the new arrivals were praised and glorified. 

The destruction of Hofei was one day under discussion 
when one came in to say that Chang Liao had sent a written 


~ of Ts‘ao and prepared for battle. Sun Ch‘iian, with helmet 


Fee Ts‘ao array opened to allow the exit of three warriors, all 


aoe and Yo Chin. Chang Liao, the central figure, especially. de- 


scape OSes went the two ch'i guarding their lord’s head. The blow g 


<- the head, and in another moment they were hammering away - 


Ba arrow -to his bow and aimed at 'Sung’s heart from; behind. - 


p = Ee ae San up, or oe 


. Shalicnge to battle. Sun Chit tian tore open the cover . at 
‘he read therein made him very wrath. “This. Chang h aS a 
insulted me grossly,” said he, “he hears that Ch‘éng P‘u | has. 
-arrived and sends a challenge. To-morrow, O- newly-come > a 
warriors, you shall see me fight. with him. You. ar hane ashy 
no share in the battle.” aa 
Orders were given that next morning the army would: me ` "e 
out’ of camp and advance on Hofei. Early in the morning 
when they had advanced about. halfway, they met the army © 


and breastplate of silver, rode to the front with Sung Ch‘ien 
- and Chia Hua, each armed with a. ch‘ i halberd to suport him 
and guard him one on each side. 1 
~ When. the third roll of the drum ceased, the centre. of the. a 


fully armed. They were Chang Liao, supported by Li Tien 


` signated Sun Ch‘tian as the object of his challenge. Sun 
~Ch‘iian took his spear and was about to accept the challenge, ; 
when the ranks behind him were broken by. T‘aishih Tzů,; | 
who galloped forth with his spear ready to thrust. Chang 
Liao whirled up his sword to strike the newcomer and the- 
two fought near a hundred bouts without a decisive blow. — 
Then ‘said Li Tien to Yo Chin, “He there opposite us with — 
the silver helm is Sun Ch‘iian; could I but capture him the Ss ee 
loss of our four score legions would be amply avenged.” = .. 
So speaking he rode out, alone, just one man and one sword. 
and went sidelong toward the two combatants. Then S ee bi 
swift as a flash of lightning, he ran forward and slashed ato 
Sun. But Sun Chiiian’s two guards were too quick for him. 


fell, but on the crossed ch'i which were shorn through near 


on the head of Yo Chin’s steed with the shafts of ie broken 
weapons and forcing him back. 

2 Sung Ch‘ien snatched a spear from a soldier near ae ene” 
in pursuit of Yo Chin, but Li Tien, on the other side, fitted an 


And he fell as the bowstri ing twanged. a 


Then T‘ aishih Tzu, seeing a squadron of horse in. motion — 
toward him, left off the fight with Chang Liao and returned  — 
to his own line. At this Chang Liao fell on in a swift attack 
‘fed the army of Wu, thrown into confusion, scattered and 

e : 

 ChangLiac, having distinguished Sun Ch‘tian in the dita S 
: galloped in pursuit and had nearly come up with him; when — 
`~ Ch‘éng P‘u happily rushed in from one side of the line of firhtace: :.: 
‘stayed the pursuit and saved his master. Chang Liao withdrew ate 
to Hofei. Sun Ch‘tian was escorted back to his main camp, -~ 


he ‘recorder, venrbualed him -sayi 
uch upon your martial prowess: a d 
tle with a formidable enemy. Every 
y was chilled with fear and you lost a genera Í 
y banners. It is not for you to exhibit prowess: 
C battlefield and encroach upon the duties of 
; Rather curb and repress such physical feats a ; 
j g Pên and Hsia Yu and contemplate schemes- of ; 
princely virtues with the hegemony of all the. feudal. 
s because of your ill-regulated action in engaging 
in bati at Sung Ch‘ien perished at the hands of your 
enemies. Hereafter you should regard as most. importan 
F. personal. safety.” 
“Yes; it is indeed a fault,” said Sun Chitian. “Iwill retora a 
Soon after T‘aishih Tait entered the tent and said, “In my 
0 mand there is a certain Ko Ting, brother of a groom name 
Jou Ts‘ao in the army of Chang Liao. This Hou Ts‘ao is 
deeply resentful on account of a punishment inflicted upon him 
d is anxious to be revenged. He has sent over to say that 
e will show a signal to-night when he has assassinated Chang 4 
iao in revenge for the death of your late leader Sung Chtien 
wish to take some men over to await this signal to attack.” 
e is this Ko Ting?” asked Sun Ch‘iian. 
has mingled with the enemy and gone into the city 
‘me have five companies,” 
uko Ching. said, “Chang Liao is full of R I think yo 
; ill find him prepared for your coming. Be careful.” = 
a T‘aishih Tzu urged his chief to let him go, and Sun Ch'üan 
per o hurt by the ao of his captain, the permis 


ee. nih of the same Cues ae ede made his way ‘tnt 
the city without detection, found his brother and the two had 
ces arranged their plot. Ko also told him that T‘aishih Tză would. 
-~ come over that night to help them and asked what they. should — 
do. S 
fo His drother. the groom; said, “As the. men of Wu are far 
-away I fear they cannot be here to-night, so we will make a ` 
huge bonfire of straw and then you can rush out and cry: 
treachery. That will throw. all into confusion and will- give _ 
a chance to kill Chang Liao.” iy 
“This is an excellent plan,” said: Ko: Ting. Geek 
Now after the victory Chang Liao returned to tii city Gna: 
rewarded his men but he issued orders that no one was to 
off his armour or sleep. His attendants said, “You have 


' A Hse is no 
ME If th 


took up a e eor maena in the way. eae 
Those about him said, “The shouts are insistent K 
o go and see what it means.” i ’ 
“A whole city cannot be traitors” 
contented person has frightened the soldiers. 
ne doing so I will slay him.” 
< Soon after this Li Tien dragged up Ko Ting ana | 
aa After a few brief oe they were 


ahat means athe men of Wu are Gin to bale pe 
Liao. “But we will destroy them by a simple ruse.” 
- He bade them light torches and yell “Treachery ! ie) 

ieee throw open the city gates and let down the d a 


l Sun Chan was D sad when he leaned 1 
faithful captain had been grievously wounded and when hae 3 
tee prayed him to cease from war he was Re a 


ask apes he fared, he cried, “When a worthy man is 
a turbulent. world, he has to be a soldier and- gird, on 
feet sword. I have not rendered gron service. y i 


Single minded and peri loyal, 

AAE Such was T‘aishih, in Tunglai born, 
PN ; Far distant frontiers rang with his exploits, 
RI, Riding.or archery, all men he excelled, | 
One in Pohai who admired his valour 


° 


` 


Romance of the Three kingoomg «OT 


Cared for his mother while he was fighting, | 

How he joyed in the battle at Shént‘ing! 
Dying, he spake'as a hero; 

| All through the ages men sigh for his fate. | 


Sun Ch‘tian was exceedingly grieved when this second of 
his leaders died. He gave orders to bury his remains most — 
honourably outside the north wall on Ku Hill and took his son, 
T‘aishih Hsiang, into his own palace to be brought up. í 

When Yüan-tê heard of the series of misfortunes that had 
befallen Wu'and of their retirement to Nanhsü, he and K‘ung- 
ming discussed their plans. Said K‘ung-ming, “I was studying 
the sky and saw a falling star in the north-west. The Imperial 
family is to suffer a loss.” 

He had scarcely said this when they brought news of the 
death of Liu Ch‘i, son of Liu Piao. 

Yiian-té at once began to wail bitterly. But his adviser said : 
to him, “Life and death are beyond our control, wherefore 


weep not, my lord, for grief harms the body. Rather consider. ` 


what is necessary to be done. Send some one to assume 
control and make arrangements for the interment.” 

“Who can go?” asked Yiian-té. 

“No other than Kuan Yü.” 

So they sent him to guard the city of Hsiangyang. 

Liu Pei at. once began to feel troubled about his promise to 
surrender Chingchou on the death of Liu Chí, but K‘ung-ming 
did not consider this a matter of moment. He said he would 
have somewhat to say to any one who came to ask fulfilment 
of the promise. In half a month it was announced that Lu Su 
would come to mourn at the funeral. 


To claim the promise one will come, 
But they will send him empty home. 


What reply K‘ung-ming made may be read in the next 


chapter. 


CHAPTER LIV. 


THE DOW AtER MARCHIONESS SEES Her Son-tN-Law 
ATA TEMPLE: 
LIU, THE IMPERIAL UNCLE, TAKES A WORTHY Consorr. 


; üan-tê and K‘ung-ming went out of the city to welcome the 
envoy of Wu and led him to the guest-house. After the usual 
greetings, Lu Su said, “Hearing of the death of your nephew, 
‘my lord has prepared. some gifts and sent me to take his place 
_ at the funeral sacrifices. General Chou Yü also sends greetings 
to the Imperial Uncle and to’ you, Master Chuko.” i 
Both rose at once and thanked-him for the P, Then 
_ the gifts were handed over and a banquet prepared, and while 
_ it was in progress, the guest brought up the real object of his 
A visit. 
‘| “You said, Sir, that Chingchou should be returned to us 


after the death of Liu Ch‘i. Now that that event has happened | 


rendition becomes due and I should be glad to know when th: 
transfer can take place.” 

A “We will discuss that later; in the meantime let us go < 

6 with our wine,” said Yiian-té. 

~ So the feasting continued. Some time later Lu Su Ta a 


D K to the subject, but this time his host remained silent. Howeve , 


K‘ung-ming, changing colour, said, “Tzu-ching, you are u 
‘reasonable. You should have waited till some other spoke : 

_ this matter. From the very foundation of the empire by ov 

_ illustrious ancestor the grèat heritage has descended in du 
course till to-day when, unhappily, evil doers have risen amons 
the powerful and they have seized upon such portions as they 
could. But with God’s favour and help unity is nearly restored. 


My lord is a scion of the Imperial house, a great great grandson - 


of the “peror Hsiao-Ching. Now, as the Emperor’s Uncle, 
should h. not have a share of the Empire? Moreover, Liu 
Ching-hsing (Liu Piao) was my lord’s elder brother and there 
is ¢artainly nothing extraordinary in one brother’s succession 
> to xnother’s estate. Whatis your master? The son of a petty 

official on the banks of the Ch‘ient‘ang River,. absolutely 

wit out merit so far as the State is concerned. ~ Just because 
` he is powerful he holds actual possession of a certain amount 
of territory, which has whetted his insatiable appetite till he 
how desires to swallow the whole country. The land is the 
estate of the Liu family and my lord, who is of that name, 
has no share thereof, while your master, whose name is Sun, 


/ 


m 


LIBRARY RULES 


sal ln NU | 


age done to the’ 3 2400 00457 


neo i) o e ————————_ 


good all losses. 


(a) Reserve Books may be borrowed 
for a period of two hours. In case no 
call has been made in the interval, books 
may be renewed for a second two hours. 
(Where there is only one copy, book 
must be used in the library.) 


(b) Reserve books taken at 10 p. m. 
Mondays to Fridays are due at 9 a. m. 
the next morning. A reserve book taken 
from the library at 12 m, Saturday is due 
at 9 a. m. the following Monday. 


Books not on reserve may be drawn from 
the library for two weeks and may be 
renewed once for the same period, except 
one-day books. 


. A fine of two cents a day will be charged 


on each book which is not returned ac- 
cording to the above rule. 


MAGAZINES ARE NOT to be taken 
from the library without the special 
permission of. the librarian. 


GTU Library 
240 0 Page Road 
ley, CA a 4709 
SW ais call (510) 649-2500 


All items are subject to recall, 


