C. H. Brewitt- 


Translated by 
Taylor. 


N DV 
AES 4 Enn AR 


OE a RON 


NN id Ace O8 4) 8 8) 


À K) ) | ii 


D, 


D: 


or 
Aomance of the 


three Kingdoms @ y 


i 
Q 
Ps 
H 
inv} 

ne 

ard 

[a] 
(e$) 

<i 

42 
z 
O 

H 

HE4 


Latimer 


James V. 


DE: 
Accession No. 


Date colors us 


PELSAN 
iy 


es 


SAN KUO, — 


OR 


ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS | 


By C. H. BREWITT-TAYLOR 


late of the Maritime Customs Service of China 


AN ENGLISH VERSION OF 


VOLUME II 


POPULAR EDITION 


KELLY & WALSH, LIMITED 
SHANGHAI : HONGKONG : SINGAPORE 
1929. 


COPYRIGHT, 1925, BY C. H, BREWITT-TAYLOR, 


First Printing, December, 1925. 


Especially prepared for the use and education of the Chinese People. 


M Z RAAT REY 


' Provisionally Registered in the Shanghai Bureau for the Registration of Trade Marks 


Popular Edition, November, 1929. 


BSREELEY BAPTIST DIVINFY SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


~ 


PRINTED IN SHANGHAI, CHINA, AT THE PRESS OF KELLY & WALSH, LTD. 


CHAPTER. 


(LXE: 
LXII. 
EXT, 
LXIV. 
‘LXV. 
LXVI. 

| xvi. 


LXVIII. 


LXIX. 


LXXII. 


4 


LXXIII. 


LXXIV. 


LXXV. 


LXXVI. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 
VoLUME II. 


RESCUE OF 0-TOU BY CHAO YUN; TS‘AO TSAO 
: REPULSED BY A LETTER i 4 


TAKING OF FOU PASS; YANG AND KAO SLAIN; 


SIEGE OF LO CITY; HUANG AND WEI RIVALS 


CHUKO LIANG MOURNS FOR P‘ANG T‘UNG; CHANG 
FEI RELEASES YEN YEN. i : 


PLAN FOR THE CAPTURE OF CHANG JEN; BOR- 
ROWING SOLDIERS TO DESTROY MA CH ‘AO 


GREAT BATTLE AT CHIAMING PASS; LIU PEI 
TAKES THE GOVERNORSHIP OF ICHOU . — . 


KUAN YU GOES TO A FEAST ALONE, BUT ARMED; 
FU HUANG-HOU DIES FOR THE STATE ; 


TS‘AO TS‘AO CONQUERS HANCHUNG; CHANG LIAO 
SPREADS TERROR AT CHAOYAO FORD : 


KAN NING’S HUNDRED HORSEMEN 
ENEMY’S CAMP; TSO TZ’U’S FLUNG-DOWN CUP 
FOOLS TS‘AO TS‘ AÒ 


KUAN LU TAKES THE SORTES BY THE OOE OF 
CHANGES;” LOYAL SUBJECTS DIE FOR THEIR 
COUNTRY | 


. FIERCE CHANG FEI TAKES A POSITION BY GUILE; 


AGED HUANG CHUNG CAPTURES A HILL BY 
STRATAGEM 


. AT THE CAPTURE OF TUI HILL HUANG CHUNG 


SCORES A SUCCESS; ON THE HAN WATERS CHAO 
YUN CONQUERS A HOST 


CHUKO LIANG’S WIT TAKES HANCHUNG; TS‘AO 

A-MAN’S ARMY RETIRES UP HSIEHKU =. 4 

YUAN-TE BECOMES PRINCE OF HANCHUNG; YUN- 

CH‘ANG ATTACKS AND OCCUPIES HSIANGYANG 

P‘ANG TE TAKES HIS COFFIN ON A CAMPAIGN; 
_ KUAN YU DROWNS HIS ENEMIES 


SURGERY ON A WOUNDED ARM; LU MENG IN A 
WHITE ROBE CROSSES THE RIVER 


HSU FIGHTS ON THE MIEN ed te 
RETREATS TO MAICH‘ENG . 


KUAN 


` 


1960% 


RAID THE 


Pags — 


80 


92 


104 


115 


126 


136 


147 


157 


166 


LXXIX. 


IXC. 


VIIIC. 


CHAPTER. 


- LXXVII 


LXXVIII. . 


N a EXXX. 
LEXA. 
LXXXII. 
“LXXXIII. 
LXXXIV. 
LXXXV. 


LXXXVI. 
LXXXVII. 


LXXXVIII. 


LXXXIX. 


PABPE oy CONTENTS. is 
KUAN YU MANIFESTS HIS SACRED CHARACTER AT 


THE JADE FOUNT HILL; TS‘ AO TS‘AO ~IS 
POSSESSED AT LOYANG. ae 


X a 


HUA T‘O, TREATING, TS ‘AO. TS‘AO, HIMSELF DIES; yÈ 
TS‘AO TS’ AO'S LAST WORDS AND DEATH . =u 


A CRUEL BROTHER; AN POEM; ‘AN ‘UNDUTIFUL 


' NEPHEW: PUNISHMENT | Hie VE ° 


DEPOSITION OF THE EMPEROR; THE PRINCE oF 


HAN CHUNG CLAIMS TO BE THE TRUE 
SUCCESSOR 


GOES TO WAR 


SUN CH‘UAN SUBMITS TO WEI AND IS REWARDED ; 
THE FIRST RULER ATTACKS WU AND REWARDS 
HIS ARMY 


FIGHTING AT HSIAOT‘ING; THE FIRST RULER 
CAPTURES CERTAIN ENEMIES; 
CHIANGK‘OU; A STUDENT ACCEPTS SUPREME 
` COMMAND A ` ` x ° 


LU HSUN BURNS HIS ENEMY’S CAMPS; K‘UNG- 


MING PLANS THE EIGHT ARRAYS 


LIU, THE FIRST RULER, CONFIDES HIS SON TO 
K‘UNG- MING’S CARE; CHUKO LIANG PEACE- 
FULLY SETTLES THE FIVE ATTACKS 


A PHILOSOPHICAL ENCOUNTER, FIRE USED TO 
_ DESTROY TS‘AO PEI’S ARMY . 


K ‘UNG-MING’S SOUTHERN EXPEDITION ; 
KING OF THE MANS . ; ` r 


THE 


CROSSING THE RIVER LU; BINDING OF THE 


BARBARIAN KING; RECOGNISING A PRETENDED 
SURRENDER ; CAPTURE OF MENGHUO | 


K‘UNG-MING’S SUCCESSFUL FOURTH RUSE; THE 
KING OF THE MANS parT UREO FOR THE TETE 
TIME 


. WILD BEASTS AS WARRIORS; K‘ a MING’S:SIXTH 


VICTORY ; BURNING OF THE RATTAN ARMY; 
SEVENTH CAPTURE OF THE KING. i 


SACRIFICE AT LU SHUI; HOMEWARD ‘MARCH 
ATTACK ON THE CAPITAL; CHUKO’S MEMORIAL 


CHAO YUN SLAYS FIVE CAPTAINS; K‘UNG-MING 
CRAFTILY TAKES THREE CITIES ; 


29a k 


DEFENCE OF 


} 3 ! . «i 208 
CHANG FEI IS ASSASSINATED; THE FIRST RULER — 


213 + 


237 


297 


iG. CHIANG WEI GOES ‘OVER To K UNG-MING: KS UNG- 


TRN 


o > MING ee w. tG DANG, WHO DIES . ot 


; C.. MA SU’ s WRANGLING oam en ING; 'K ‘UNG f: 
an a,  MING’s LUTE REPULSES SSUMA_ oe Ne Be 5 


Sap Shey 


het “me. K‘ UNG- MING PROPOSES TO | RENEW THE o 
i: ON WEI: CHIANG WEI DEFEATS AN ARMY BY 
MEANS OF A FORGED LETTER a 


On “we. DEATH OF WANG. SHUANG; KUNG- MING’S | 


E Ar oe VICTORY AT CH'ENTS‘ANG | maha ite Lt 396. 
Rosie (| “IC.  CHUKO LIANG WINS A GREAT VICTORY ; ‘SSUMA I ne 


__INVADES Pe OA T 3 ee 


lig: THE HAN SOLDIERS RAID A CAMP. AND DEFEAT. 
`. TS‘AO CHEN ; CHUKO, IN. FRONT OF THE ARRAY, 
SHAMES SSUMA . í hee epal 


Be’ Ne CI. GOING OUT FROM SHENSI, CHUKO DRESSES ASA 
Baye es -© GOD; DASHING TOWARD CHIENKO, CHANG > l 
FALLS INTO A SNARE . ER AN 


CII. SSUMA OCCUPIES THE RIVER BANKS: “CHUKO 
he © CONSTRUCTS “BULLOCKS” AND “HORSES.” — 


Rois SSUMA SURROUNDED IN SHANGFANG VALLEY; AU 
; CHUKO INVOKES THE STARS IN, THE WUCHANG E ASEARA 
PLAIN: 2. : y ? 1 i . 450. 


CIV. A‘ STAR FALLS AS CHUKO LIANG ASCENDS TO. 
ay HEAVEN; A WOODEN IMAGE AFFRIGHTS SSUMA — PAP 


bee ear) 


S in ia A £ = a 


CV. THE PLAN OF THE SILKEN BAG; THE BRONZE or 
STATUE WITH THE DEW BOWL AE E C AN 


ECVT: DEFEAT AND DEATH OF, KUNGSUN YUAN: PRE- 
Sen i TENDED ILLNESS OF SSUMA LEC tics) co eA 


` ovi. SSUMA I RECOVERS POLITICAL POWER; CHIANG 
© — WEI IS DEFEATED AT NIUT‘OU HILLS  - 492 


ee vn: TING FENG’S SWORDSMEN WIN A VICTORY | IN 
"THE SNOW; SUN. HSUN EXECUTES A MUR- ; 
_DEROUS PLAN AT A PANRUEL EA a D 
O 


S 


à 
$ ‘ ia 


CHAPTER. 


CIX. 


CX. 


CXI. 


-CXII. 


‘CXIV. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


SSUMA SURROUNDED; A HAN LEADER EMPLOYS 
AN UNEXPECTED RUSE; THE KING DETHRONED ; 
RETRIBUTION FOR THE WEI FAMILY : ts 


WEN YANG REPULSES THE ENEMY; CHIANG WEI ; 


DEFEATS HIS OPPONENT 3 ; rs 


TENG AI OUTWITS CHIANG WEI; CHUKO TAN 
THINKS IT HIS DUTY TO DESTROY SSUMA CHAO 


YU CH‘UAN DIES NOBLY AT SHOUCH‘UN; CHIANG 
WEI FIGHTS FIERCELY AT CH‘ANG CH‘ENG 


. TING FENG’S PLAN TO SLAY SUN CH‘EN; CHIANG 


WEI DEFEATS TENG Al : : . 


KING MAO DRIVES TO HIS DEATH ; CHIANG WEI 
ABANDONS STORES AND CONQUERS 


. THE KING LISTENS TO SLANDER AND RECALLS 


HIS ARMY; CHIANG WEI TAKES COMMAND OF 
THE CANTONMENTS AND ESCAPES DEATH 


. CHUNG HUI DIVIDES HIS ARMY; APPARITION OF 


WU HOU . h : 2 


. TENG GETS THROUGH YINP‘ING PASS; CHUKO 


DIES AT MIENCHU | 


. A FILIAL PRINCE DIES; JEALOUSY BETWEEN 


LEADERS . 


FALSE DESERTION ; A SUBTLE SCHEME; A SECOND 
ABDICATION RESEMBLES THE FIRST 


A VETERAN OFFERS NEW PLANS; SUN HAO 
SURRENDERS AND THE THREE STATES RE-UNITE 


546 


555 


563 


571 


580 


590 


599 


610 


‘CHAPTER Ix 


RESIS Peat OF O-Tou BY Ua vin; 
es Ts AO TS‘AO REPULSED BY A LETTER. | 


i Spite Of the persuasion of P‘ang T‘ung and Fa Cheng, 1 Liu 
e steadily refused to sanction the assassination of his host, 


‘es The next day there was another banquet, this time in the: 
~ city, whereat host and guest unbosomed themselves freely to 3 
each other and became exceedingly friendly and affectionate. 
All were mellow with wine, and P‘ang T‘ung, talking with 
_ Fa Chéng said, “Since our master will have nothing to-do _ 
with our scheme we had better set Wei Yen’s sword-play to 
“work and take advantage of the confusion to kill Liu Chang.” 
=. Wei Yen came in shortly afterward, with his sword drawn, ` 
and said, “There being no other distraction at this banquet, 
“may I show you a little fencing to amuse you?” | 
Thereupon P‘ang T‘ung called up some of the armed men 
„and ranged them along the lower part of the hall till Wei 
‘should fall on. At these preparations the officers of Liu 
Chang stared with questioning eyes toward the chief seats at. 
the upper end, and one of them, Chang Jén, drew his sword, 
saying, “ An opponent is needed to make fencing a success, so 
he and I will display our skill at the same time.” | 
_ So they began. Presently, at a glance from Wei Yen, Lire 
_Féng came up and took position at his side. . At once three of | 
the officers of Shu followed suit, saying, “ And we three will — 
pees in too; it may add to your ‘amusement and help to raise 
_ a laugh.” 

ho) But to. Liu Pei matters began to take on a serious look. 
Seas the two swords he wore, one on the right side and the 
other on the left, he stood out in the banquet hall and cried, 


“Tittle k much wine; there is nothing to say against that, but 
aK this i is no Hung-mén Gathering, where murder was done.” Put 
up your swords or I will slay you!” 

<- “Why wear swords at all at a meeting of two brothers?’ 
W cried Liu Chang, at the same time telling his servants to sur- 
round his officers and take away their weapons. 

_ Disarmed, they sulkily withdrew, and then Liu Pei called 
me all the captains to the upper end of the banquet. hall, gave 
_ them wine and said, “You need have no doubts; we two 


2 Gan Huo, or 


brothers, of the same bone and blood, have talked over the” — 


great design and we are one in purpose.” 
The officers bowed and retired. Liu Chang teok his guest 


by the hand, saying, “Brother, I shall never forget your 


kindness.” 


They sat drinking till late, both feeling very happy. When 


at length Liu Pei reached his camp he blamed his strategist 


for having caused the confusion. 


“Why did you endeavour to force me into committing a 
great wrong?” said Liu. “There must be no repetition of 
this.” ; . 

P‘ang T‘ung retired, sighing. When Liu Chang reached 


- his own camp his captains waited on him and said, “ Sir, you 


saw the real meaning of that occurrence at the banquet, we 
suppose. We think it prudent for you to retire at once into 


i ithe city.” 


“ My brother is different from ordinary men,’ ’ replied Liu 
Chang. 


“ He may not incline toward murder himself, but those about — 
-. him have but one desire—that i is to exploit this land of ours to 
their own advantage.” 


“Do not try to sow dissension: between us and make us 


` quarrel,” said their chief. 
And he took no heed of their remonstrance. One day, when | 
he and Liu Pei were enjoying together relaxation from cares 


of state, the news came that Chang Lu was about to invade Shu 


at the Chiaming Pass. Thereupon the Prefect begged Liu 


Pei to go and defend it. He consented and left immediately 
with his own especial band. At once Liu Chang’s officers 
took advantage of the guest’s departure to urge the Prefect 
to place his own trusty men in command at various strategic 
points, so as to guard against any attempts of the visitors to 
seize the land.. At first Liu Chang was unwilling and refused, 


but as they prayed him most earnestly to do this he yielded 


and consented to take some steps to safeguard himself. He 
sent Yang Huai, the commander at Paishui, and Kao P‘ei to 
garrison Foushui PASSA ih 4 

So Liu Chang returned to Ch‘éngtu and his guest, Liu Pei, 
went away to the point where invasion threatened. Arrived 
there, he soon won the hearts of the people by the strict disci- 
pline he maintained over his men and by his gracious manner. 

News of these doings in Shu duly reached Wu, and the 


Marquis summoned his counsellors as to his countermove. a 
Then Ku Yung spoke, saying, “I have an infallible plan to 


propose. Liu Pei and his army are now far away and separ- 
ated from us by difficult country. Therefore he cannot return 
quickly, and my advice is to occupy the passes so that he cannot 


get through. Then send all your force against Chingchou and 


Hsiangyang and they will surely fall to you.’ 


Cee ee 
a = puree ingnoms i n 


voice was ton Foony bend he a screen 

just put to death the man who proposed Can 

ie for tio ying to compass the death of my daughter.” 
one started with surprise. It was the Dowager’s - 

f Further, she looked very angry as she entered, saying, 
} y is to Pome jot my Pog E who is the wie ne 


se No, no! p a Sun, ashamed. “I woulda never “think 
of ‘going contrary to my mother’ s wishes and orders.” 
He eet dismissed the assembly, and when they had gone : 


This chance missed! When will those provinces be mine”? 

; thought he. 

» While still deep in reverie, Chang came UP, saying, “What 

grieves my lord?” 

“No great matter; only this last failure to gain my ends.” 
“The difficulty ‘may be easily removed,” said Chang. 
‘Choose some trusty man and charge him with a secret ages” 

-the Princess saying that her mother is dangerously ill. 
zive him a half company as escort and tell him to make his — 
sae way privily into Chingchou and deliver the letter. Hearing 

- her mother wants her she will rush home at once, and she 

might bring with her the only son of Ytian-té. He will be © 

lad enough to exchange Chingchou for his son. Tf he will- 

not, you can still send the army.’ 

- _ “That sounds like a good plan,” said Sun. “Further, I haves 

the man to carry it out successfully. He is that Chou Shan, 

who was a burglar when he was younger and a bold one. He © 
ised to accompany my brother. He is the man to go.” 

ae ED it” a secret, then,” said Grane, “and let him start 


ł alf a company of soldiers disguised as east traders. 
He had five vessels and distributed his men among them, we 


Pict Shan set out lene the river route for Chingchou sande 
} not aed on the way. He anchored his ships under the 


and led into the presence of the Lady Sun and presently gave 
her the secret letter. When she read that her mother was 


in danger of death she began to weep bitterly and questioned — 


the messenger closely. Chou invented a long story. that the 
` Dowager was really fretting for a sight of her daughter and 
if she did not go quickly it would be too late. He added that 
she was to take little O-tou with her that her mother might 
see him once before she died. 


The Lady Sun replied, “You know that the timpérial Uncle ; 


is far away on military service and I ought to Oo the chief 
of the army before returning home.” 

“But what will you do if he says he must tora: your 
husband and await his consent?” said Chou. - 


L went without asking permission—but I fear that is 


impossible.” 


“My ships are all ready in the river and you have only to 


~ drive through the city,” said Chou. 


Naturally the news of her mother’s illness greatly disturbed 


the young wife. In a short time her carriage was ready and 
`- she mounted, taking O-tou with her. She took an escort of 


thirty men, all armed, and was soon at the river side and had , 


embarked before the palace people could report what she was ` 


doing. But just as the ships were starting, a voice was heard, 
shouting, “Do not start yet; let me bid my lady farewell.” 
The voice was Chao Yiin’s; he had just returned from an 


inspection trip and they had ‘at once told him of Lady Sun’s » 
sudden departure. As soon as he had recovered from his er 


surprise he dashed down to the river bank like a whirlwind, 


with only half a dozen followers. He arrived only just Whites 


time; the boat was starting and Chou Shan stood in the prow, - 


a long spear in his hand. 

“Who are you that you dare hinder the movements of your 
mistress?” cried Chou. 

Chou bade his men cast off and pee under way, and also to 
prepare their weapons to fight. The ship moved off with a 
fair wind and a strong current beneath her keel. 

But Chao Yün followed along the bank. “My lady may go 
or not as she pleases,” 
to her.” 

Chou Shan turned a deaf ear and only urged’ his men to get 
greater speed on the ship.. Chao Yün followed down the bank 


for some ten or more li. Then he saw a fishing boat made fast 
=~ tothe bank. He at once dismounted, cast off the rope, took 

_his spear and leaped into the boat. Then he made the two 
men row him toward the vessel in which sat Lady Sun. As he 


. approached, the men of Wu threatened him with their spéars. 


Thereupon he threw his spear into the bottom of the boat, ans 


cried he, “but I have one word to say 


drew the’ glittering steel blade he wore, dashed aside- the a 
opposing spears and leaped upon the larger vessel. The men - SP 


eae of the ae “There sat the rude NE with little O-tou 
her arms.. 

“Why this- rude ian Ta said she angrily. 

_ The warrior sheathed his sword and said humbly, “Whither 
may my mistress be going, and why goes she privily?” 


_ to inform any person of my departure,” said the Lady Sun. 
“But why take the young master if you are going merely to 
= see a sick person?” said Chao. 

< “Q-tou is my son and I would not eave him behind to be’ 
~ neglected.” 


-one son of his body and I rescued him from among many - 
ie legions in the great battle at Ch'angpan Slope. There is no 
-reason for you to take him away.” 


affairs alone, you common soldier,” cried she. 

— “My lady, if you will go, then go, but leave the young master 
behind: i 

_ “You are a rebel, jumping on board the ship like that! 
P shrieked the Lady Sun. 

“Tf you will not leave the young lord behind I refuse to let 
ae go, come what may,” said Chao. 

The Lady Sun called in her maids to seize him, but he just 
_ pushed them off. Then he took the boy from her arms and 
- ran out’ to the prow of the ship. He tried to get the vessel in 
to the bank, but no one would aid him, and he thought it would 
‘be wrong to begin to slay indiscriminately. He knew not 


screaming to her maids to take the boy away from Chao. But 
ae he kept too firm a grip on the child, and the good sword in his 
-other hand kept every one at bay. 
Chou Shan was at the helm, giving all his attention to 
getting the ship out into the current and away down the river. 
He steered for the middle of the stream, where the wind was 
strong. Chao :Yiin, one hand taken up with holding the boy, 
was quite unable to get the vessel in toward the shore. 
__ Just as things looked most desperate, Chao saw a string of 
‘ships: filing out from a creek lower down the stream, flags 
fluttering and drums beating. He thought that certainly all 


was over and he was about to fall a victim to'a stratagem of 


-Wu, when he noticed a mighty warrior standing in the prow 
of the leading craft. He was armed with a long spear, and it 
was Chang Fei. He also shouted to his sister-in-law to leave | 
the child. 

Chang Fei had been out scouting when he heard the news 


Hh ms sister-in- law’ S sudden departure, and he at once made — 


“My mother is ill and on the point of death; I had no time | 5 és 


BERGI Ý 


“Mistress, you have acted wrongly. My lord has but this ae 


- The Lady Sun took refuge in anger. “You leave my family 


ES 


~~ what to do in such a quandary. And the Lady Sun was 


Eiin e.a 


you will return quickly.” 


` Chingchou, whence an account of the whole adventi was 


He had arrived just in the ak of lime to cut of. the shine of ; 
Wau. Very soon, sword in hand, he had boarded the vessel. 
As he came on board Chou drew his sword and advanced 


has Peet the conduct of Chao Ytin:— 


jh Some 


a 
Leake 


uo, or i 


OR Smk 


toward him, but one sweep of Chang’s blade laid him on the’ aa 
deck dead. And the grim warrior flung his head at the feet Mean 
of the Lady Sun. Dae 

“Why this very unseemly behaviour ? ??” cried the Lady Sun, ai 
now quite frightened. 

“Sister,” said Chang, “you thought very little of my brother _ 
when you set out on this mad Journey. That was beh 
rudely.” WE 

“My mother is very ill; it is a matter of life and death,’ hi 
cried she. “If I had waited for your brother’s permission to A 
go'I should have been too late. If you do not let me go now 
I will throw myself into the river.’ 

The two soldiers took counsel together. It was hardly the 
correct thing for servants to force their lord’s wife into com- ` 
mitting suicide. Suppose they kept the child and let mg 
vessel go. 

Then they said, “O Lady, we cannot allow the wite of our - 
exalted brother to die a death of shame and so we will take _ 
our leave. We trust you will not forget our brother and that 


Taking the child with them they left the vessel, and the font a 
ships of Wu continued their voyage down stream. One poet A 


Some years before, Chao saved QO-tou, 
What time his mother died; 
Again like service he performs, 
Upon the Yangtse’s tide. 
The men of Wu all in the ship, 
Were stricken down with fear, 
Search all the world, you never find 
Of bold Chao Yiin the peer. ’ 


Another has eulogised Chang Fei :— 


At Long Slope Bridge, ; $ j 
_. With rage Fei boiled, ; ea 
Like wild beast roared, : ate 

And men recoiled. i ; 
From danger now 

His prince is saved. 
On history’s page 

His name is graved. 


Quite satisfied with their success the two warriors sailed oe 
homeward. Before they had gone far they met K‘ung-ming | 
with a squadron of ships. He was very pleased to find they — 
had recovered the child and they three joyfully returned to 


written to Liu Pei. 


bs When the T Sun beatae her home she related tbe steer 
of the death of Chou Shan and the carrying off of the child. | 
Naturally Sun Ch‘tian was very wrath at the miscarriage of 


bis scheme and he resolved to attack Chingchou in revenge : 


for his messenger’s murder. . 
“Now that my sister has returned home there is no longer — 


a any family tie to prevent.the attack, and I will take full 
‘measure of revenge for the death of my henchman,” said Sun.. 


So he called the council to consider the expedition. As 
_ But before they could decide upon any plan their delben. l 
tions were suddenly cut short by the news that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was | 


coming down upon the south with forty legions, burning to. : 


avenge his defeat at Ch‘ihpi (Red Wall). All thoughts now ot 

- turned toward repelling his attack. 

The Recorder Chang Hung, who had retired to his home 
ill, had just died and his testament was sent to his lord to rea 


3 Therein he advised Sun Ch‘iian to remove the seat of govern- gik 
~ ment to Moling, where the scenery seemed to bear the impress 


of kingly dignity, befitting a man who cherished the ambition 
of founding an enduring dynasty. Sun read this document. 


- out to his councillors at this meeting, not without some tears | Re. 


in memory of the writer. He told them he could not withstand | 
‘such advice, and he at once gave orders to surround with a wall. 
_ the city which he intended henceforth to make his capital. 


_ ` Asa protection against Ts‘ao the Admiral Lu Méng proposed 


building a rampart at Port Juhsti. Some other officers opposed 


ae this, saying, “When the enemy appears you will have to land 


in order to attack him, and after that you will return to your 

ships. What is the use of a rampart?” 
Lii Méng replied, “One must prepare against possibilities. 

Soldiers vary in keenness and sometimes lose battles. If an 


urgent occasion arises the men may be unable to reach the 


_water’s edge, and how then are they to embark? They will 
then need shelter.” ! 

Sun Ch‘iian said, “Provision against eventualities, such as — 
he proposes, is good. Against a distant risk provide, and 
- sorrow walks not by your side.” 

So they sent many legions of men to build ramparts at Juhsii, 
and as the work ceased not day or night the wall was soon 
completed. Na 


In the capital Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s influence and glory waxed daily pate 


greater. Tung Chao proposed that the title of Kung (Duke) 
should be conferred upon him. He said, “In all history no one 
has rendered such services as you have, O Minister, not even 
Duke Chou or Lii Wang. These thirty years you have exposed 
yourself to all risks, been ‘ combed by the wind and bathed by 
_ the rain’ and you have swept evil from the land, succoured the 
‘distressed and restored the Hans. Who of all statesmen can 
rank with you? It would be fitting for you to become the 


8. : San tuo, or 
a Duke of Wei anid receive the Ni ine Gifts, that your merit and 
virtue be known to all.” 

Now the Nine Gifts, or signs of honour, were :— 

Chariots and Horses (gilt chariots and war chariots 
drawn by eight horses) ; ‘ 

Court Dress; 

Music at Banquets, etc. ; 

Red Doors; 

Steps to the Dais; 

Guards (300 at the gates) ; 

Axes; 

Bow and Arrows (red- lacquered bow with 100 arrows); 

Libation Vessels. 

However, all the courtiers were not of one mind. Said 
Hsün Yü, “This should not be done, O Minister. You raised 
a force by an appeal to the innate sense of righteousness of the 
- people, and with that force you restored the Han authority. 
Now you should remain loyal and humble. The virtuous man 
loves men with a virtuous love and would not act in this way.’ 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao did not take this opposition kindly. Tung Chao 
said, “How can we disappoint the hopes of many because of 
the words of one?” 


So a memorial went to the Throne and Ts‘ao’s ambitions and 
desires were gratified with the title of Duke of Wei. -The Nine. 


Gifts were added. i 

“I did not think to see this day,” said Hstin, sighing. 

This remark was repeated to the newly created Duke and 
angered him. He took it to mean that Hsiin Yü would no 
longer aid him or favour his designs. 

In the winter of the seventeenth year, Ts‘ao deeided to send 
an army to conquer Wu, and he ordered Hsün Yü to go with it. 
Hstin Yü understood from this that Ts‘ao wished his death, 
so he declined the appointment on the plea of illness. While 
he was at home he received one day a box such as one sent 
with presents of dainties. It was addressed in Ts‘ao’s 
own handwriting. Opening it he found therein nothing. He 
understood; he took poison and died. He was fifty-two years 
of age. 

j Weên-jo’s talents were to all men known, 
"T'was sad that at the door of power he tripped. 
Posterity is wrong to class him with the noble Liu, i 
For, nearing death, he dared not face his lord of Han. 

News of his death came to Ts‘ao in the form of the ordinary 

letter of mourning. Then he was sorry and gave orders for 
an imposing funeral. He also obtained for the dead man the 

posthumous title of Marquis. 

~ The northern army reached Juhsti, whence he sent a recon- 

- naisance of three legions down to the river. On the river he 

saw displayed a fleet of ships all arranged in admirable order, 


Uiicions pain ana. by o distinctive lace j (The equip- 
ment glittered in. the sunlight. -Inethe centre was a large ship “ 
_ whereon was a huge umbrella, and beneath the shade sat, Sun 
-  Ch‘üan in the midst of his staff. ; 
“That is the sort of son to have;” said Ts‘ao in admiration, 
Mot such piglets and puppies as Liu Piao’s.” 
sa Suddenly, at the explosion of a bomb, the ships got. under 
- way and came flying toward him, while a force ‘moved out of - 
Juhsü. Ts‘ao’s men at once retired in great haste. A com- 
pany led by the grey-eyed, red-bearded Sun Ch‘iian made 
= straight for Ts‘ao, who hastily retreated. But he was sore. 
i peed by other captains and it had gone hard with him but ia 
_ that Hsü Chu came to his rescue and fought with the men of | 
~ Wu till his master could escape. Hsii Chu fought some score 
bouts before he could draw off and return to his own side. 
When Ts‘ao returned to camp he conferred rich rewards — 
-upon his henchman who had saved him and he reprimanded his- 
= other captains for their too hasty retirement. “You blunt the: 
x5 keen spirits of the men, and if you do such a thing again I will = a 
put you to death,” said he. 
_ About midnight that night there arosé great commotion ab 
- the gates of the camp, and when Ts‘ao went outside he found 
_ that the enemy had crept up secretly and started a conflagra- 
tion. They forced their way into the stockade and went hither 
and thither, slaying till morning broke. Then Ts‘ao and his 
army retired. ` 
: Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was greatly distressed by this misfortune. He 
- was sitting in his tent poring over the Book of War when 
` Cheng Yü came in to see him. 
A4 “O Minister,” said Cheng, “you who know so thoronghis, 
- the art of war, have you forgotten the maxim to strike quickly? - 
-~ You had your army ready, but you postponed action and = 
-~ allowed your enemies to build them ramparts at Juhstii Now | 
-~ you will find it hard to capture the place. It would be better — 
now to retreat on the capital and await a more propitious - 
moment.” 

Ts‘ao listened, but said nothing ; after a time Ch‘eng went 
away. Ts‘ao remained seated in his tent, leaning on a small 
table by his side. And he fell asleep. Suddenly. he heard a‘ 

sound as of a rushing stream or galloping squadrons of horse, 
and out of the river in front of him arose a huge red sun, so ` 
- bright that his eyes were dazzled by it. Looking up at thesky 
he saw two other suns as if reflections of this one. And as’ 
_ he wondered the first sun suddenly fiew up and then dropped 

among the hills in front of his camp with a roar like thunder. 
=- This woke him. He was in his tent and had been dreaming, CRB eae 
‘and the sentry at his tent door was just reporting noon. ` i A 
Soon he had his horse saddled and rode out, with a small 
escort, toward the spot he had seen in his dream. As he stood 


Le 7 Sahu o a 
gazing. around him a troop of horse came along with Sun 
~- Ch‘üan at their head. . He “wore a glittering helmet and was 


clad in silver armour. Seeing his chief enemy he showed no- 


sign of haste or dismay, but reined in his steed on a rise and, 
pointing with his whip at Ts‘ao, said, “Behold the all-powerful 
Minister who holds the capital in the hollow of his hand. He 
has reached the acme of wealth and good fortune and yet he 
is not content, but must needs come to encroach upon our 
southern country.” 


Ts‘ao replied, “You are disobedient, and the command of the © 
- Emperor is to exterminate you.” 


“What words!” cried Sun with a laugh. “Are you not 
ashamed? Every one knows that you control every act of the 
Emperor and you tyrannise over the nobles. I am no rebel 
against the dynasty, but I do desire to capture you and reform 
the government.” 

Ts‘ao grew angry at this speech and bade his captains go 


be . over and take Sun prisoner. But before they could obey, two 


` troops of soldiers marched out to the sound of beating drums, 
and arrows and crossbow bolts began to fall like raindrops 
` around Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He turned to retire, and the archers and 

-bowmen followed him. However, presently appeared Hsü Chu, 
with the Tiger Guard, who rescued Ts‘ao and took him back to 
his camp. The men of Wu had scored a victory and they 


-~ marched back to Juhsü. 


Alone in his camp, Ts‘ao thought, “This Sun Ch‘tan certainly 
is no ordinary man, and by the presage of the sun in my dream 
he will become an emperor.” 

He began to think it would be well to retire from the AAEN, 
tion, only that he feared the men of Wu would exult over him. 
So the two armies remained facing each other a whole month, 
fighting occasional skirmishes and battles in which victory fell 
sometimes to the one and sometimes to the other. 

And so it went on till the new year and the spring rains 
filled the watercourses to overflowing and the soldiers were 
wading in deep mud. Their sufferings were extreme and 
Ts‘ao became sad at heart. At the council board his officers 
were divided, some being for retirement and others anxious 

to hold on till the warm weather. Their chief could not make 
up his mind. 

Then there came a messenger from Wu bearing a letter, 
which read: “You and I, O Minister, are both servants of 
Han, but you are careless for the tranquillity of the people and 
think only of battle, thereby causing great suffering. Is this 

- conduct worthy of a kindly man? 
“But spring with its heavy rains is at hand and you would 
be wise to retire while you can. If not, you may expect a 


repetition of the misfortune: at Red Wall. It would be well 


to consider this.” 


e ‘you live.” sy w 
Femine-mon, you c mot 


the messenger and iss aa orders to eae 

f Luchiang was left to guard Huanch’éng; the 
r the capital. - : 
ht n returned to, Moling. At a eoe of 


nove a man; F: know how to eae Liu Pei from i rotúrning to 
Chingchou.” i | 


Mangio’: s army arau away, 
Chung-mov’ s thoughts then southward stray. 


The a aned by Chane will be unfolded in a the next 4 


apter. 


pide 


CHAPTER LXII. . 
TAKING OF Fou Pass; YANG AND Kao SLAIN; 
SIEGE OF Lo City; HUANG AND WEI RIVALS. 


(rene Chao proceeded to unfold his device. “If you under- 
take any expedition farther west Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will undoubtedly 
return to the attack. Rather write two letters, one to Liu — 
Chang saying that Liu Pei has leagued himself with you ~ 
„against the west, which will raise suspicions in the mind of 
Liu Chang and cause him to attack his guest, and another 
persuading Chang Lu to march upon Chingchou, which will 
embarrass Liu Pei. Between these two conflicting matters 
Chingchou will be neglected and we can march against it.” — 

Sun Ch‘tian approved, wrote the two letters and sent them ` 
by two messengers. $ 


-Inthe meantime, Liu Pei had been winning the hearts of the 
peoples about Chiaming Pass, where his-army lay. When he 


‘received the news of his wife’s flight and of Ts‘ao’s threatened ~ 


attack, he called in P‘ang T‘ung and laid the matter before him. 


“The victor, whichever it is, will assuredly possess himself of - 
- our city of Chingchou,” said Liu Pei at the close. K 
; “You need not trouble about that city,” said P‘ang. “Ido . 


| not think Wu will try to take it so long as K‘ung-ming is there. i 


But, my lord, write to Liu Chang telling him you wish to return 


on account of this threatening danger. It will be a plausible © i 


excuse. You may say that on account of Ts‘ao’s attack, Sun 


has sent te you for help and that as his country and yours ~ | 
are neighbours and dependent upon’ each other for safety you 
cannot refuse. Further, you will assure him that there is no ` 


danger of any invasion by Chang Lu. However, we have too 


few men for our purpose and insufficient grain, so you must | 
also urge your relative to send you three or four legions of — 


veterans and a plentiful supply of food. He will not refuse, 


‘and with more men and provisions we can do as we please.” 
Liu Pei agreed to this and sent a messenger to Ch‘éngtu. 


‘When his messenger reached the Pass, Yang Huai and Kao 


P*o, who commanded the garrison, already knew of the design, . i 
and the former of the two captains went with him to the city. — 
After reading the letter the Prefect asked Yang why he had ~ 


come. 
_.“Only because of that letter,” he replied. ‘This Liu Pei, | 
from the day he first entered the province, has been trying to 
_ win over the hearts of your people by a display of kindness and 3° 


He selene tice: no a and I think you ig 


ike adding fuel to a fire.” ča 
“We are affectionate brothers and I must help. him, z said AON 
E Brefet. a onn oi wee 

<i “Liu Pei is nothing but a vagabond Swashbuckler, ? some one 
cried, ‘ ‘and if you keep him here in Shu you are loosing a tiger 


i fuse both the men and the supplies he asks. ‘To help “ip ig 


~ in your household. If you give him the men and supplies he- r 


sks you are adding wings to your tiger.” 


peaker as one Liu Pa, a native of Ch‘éngyang. His words — 


shang ‘actually decided to send only four companies of worn- 
ut men and a paltry supply of grain. At the same time fresh — 
orders enjoining a diligent watchfulness were sent to the muar 
~ dians of the Pass. 

= When Yiian-té read thë letter that accompanied the Prefect’s 
miserable contribution to his strength he was furious and. 
‘cried, “I have been spending myself in your defence and this 
is my reward! You are mean and greedy enough to stint my 
3 supplies. How can you expect generous service?” 


eS . thereof. The bearer of the letter fled back to the capital. 
_ Then said P‘ang T‘ung, “You have hitherto laid too much 


_ that you have torn up that letter.” . ` 
= “Yes. And since that is so, what next?” asked. Yüante. 
~ “I have three schemes ready i in my mind. mou may choose 
- which pleases you.’ i 
“What are your three schemes? 
“The first, and. best, is to send an army forthwith and seize 
 Ch‘êngtu. The second is to capture and put to death the two 
“captains of the Pass. They are the two most famous fighting 
‘men in this land. If you give out that you are returning to 
‘Chingchou they will assuredly come to say farewell. Seize 
and put them to death, and the Pass and Fouch‘éng are both 
yours. Ch‘éngtu will follow soon. The third plan is to drop 
this rôle you have been playing, go back to Chingchou and 
make a regular invasion. But: if you ponder these schemes 
“too long you will get into such straits that nothing can save 
you? 
à 7 Yüan-tê replied, “Of your three schemes, O Commander, I 
find the first too summary and the last too slow. I choose the 
second scheme, which is neither.” 
So a letter was written to Liu Chang saying that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 
was sending an army against Chingchou, the captains there 
were. unequal to the Geen and Liu Pei had to go to help. 


ids 


Turning whence the voice proceeded they recognised the Di 


ee the Prefect into a state of doubt and hesitation. Huang — 
h‘tian aiso dissuaded him most earnestly, and finally Liu 


He tore the letter to fragments and exeerated the wA 4 


; stress on humanity and righteousness. However, that is ale 
-over now and all affection between you two is at an end, now — 


D 


As the matter was pressing there could T no Personal leave- H 


taking. 


“I knew that the real desire of Liu Pei. was to return to 


Chingchou,” said Chang Sung, when he heard of the letter. 
Chang Sung then also composed a letter to Liu Pei. While 


Su, who was the Prefect of a country district, came to see him. 


He hid the letter in his sleeve while he talked with his brother. fi 
Brother Su noticed his anxious inquietude, which he could not 


explain. Wine was brought in and, as the two brothers chat- 


ted over it, the letter dropped to the floor unnoticed by Chang 
Sung. One of brother Su’s men saw it, picked it up and gave 


it to his master, who opened and read. it. 


This is about how it ran:—“What I said to you lately was. “os 
‘not mere meaningless talk. Why, then, postpone action? The 
. anciénts valued the man who took by force and held by concilia- 

` tion. If you act at once the whole matter is in your hand. 

‘Why abandon all and return to Chingchou? Surely I do not 

hear aright! When you get this, attack without a moment’s T 
delay and remember that I am your ally on the inside. Above | 


all, no delay!” 


“This plot of my brother’s will end in the destruction of the aa 
whole family,” said Chang Su. “I must get in the first word.” ` 
So at once he went in and laid the whole matter before the i ie 


Prefect. 


“I have always treated your biother so well!” said Liu 


Chang, very angry. 


À ‘He issued orders to arrest Chang Sung and behead him and EAN 
all his household in the market place. i 


Chang was quick of comprehension, such as he have been but few, 


Little thought he that a letter would betray 
When he plotted for another. But success he never knew, 
For himself there opened out a gory way. 


Having thus learned of a real conspiracy to deprive him 
of his heritage, Liu Chang assembled his officers and asked’ 
their advice. Huang Ch‘tian spoke out saying, “Prompt action — 


is needed. Send to every strategic point telling them to in- 
crease the garrisons and keep careful guard and, above all, 
prevent the entrance of any person from Chingchou. K 


Such orders were sent to all points of vantage where were 


garrisons. 


In the meantime, carrying out P‘ang T’ung’s scheme, Liu 
Pei had marched down to Fouch‘éng, where he halted and sent aie 
in a messenger to invite the two captains to come forth and _ 
say farewell. But they did not respond at once to this invita- ; 


tion. 


“What is the real meaning of this retirement?” said oneto ne 


the other. 


1 


he was looking about for a trusty person to take it, his brother N 


SL 


daggers ander our ane and ma Lim aL the piace of farewell, 
hat will end all our lord’s troubles.” _ l 
“A most excellent plan,” said his colleague. == one 
So they two, taking only a small escort, went down out oe the 
ass to say good-bye. Most of their. men were left i P the camp. 
-On the way down to Fou River, P‘ang T‘ung had said to his 
master, “You have need to be on your guard neni those two 
if they come to bid you farewell. If they do not come, then 
the Pass must be attacked without delay.” 
_ Just as he said this a violent gust of wind oerte the 
leading flag of the army, and Liu Pei asked what this portended. 
“That means a surprise ; those two intend to assassinate you, i 
so be on your guard.” ! 
_ Accordingly, Liu Pei put on aanble armour and girded on His 
Beard in readiness. When the two captains arrived the army 
halted while the captains should pay the farewell visit. 
Then P‘ang T‘ung said to his two captains, Wei Yen and 
Huang Chang, “However many soldiers come down from the | 
Pass see to it that none return.” 
- The two captains of Shu, armed with hidden daggers, ¢ came, 
up, their escort bearing gifts of sheep and wine. They marked » z 4 
no precautions being taken against an attack and began to 
_ think their task of murder would be an easy one. They were 
_led in to where Liu Pei sat under a tent, his adviser with ka 
They said, “We hear, O Imperial Uncle, that you etic. | 
a long march and therefore we come to offer a few poor gifts — 
to speed you on your way.’ 
= The cups of farewell were duly filled. Then Yiian-té replied, 
“You have a heavy responsibility to defend the Pass, Captains. © 
_I pray you drink first.” 
š They drank. Then Liu Pei said, “I have a sore: matter to 
-talk over with you.” 
= So all but the two captains were sent away with the escort 
~ and were led to the midst of the camp. As soon as they had 
gone, Liu Pei shouted, “My people, lay hands upon these two. 
‘Tebels! gs 
i Thereupon Liu Féng and Kuan P‘ing rushed out from be- 
ct bna the tent. The two captains of the Pass were taken aback, 
but began to struggle. However, each of tthe two seized his. ; 
man and held him. pent OR 
“Your lord and I are of the same house,” said Liu Pei, “why 
_ then have you plotted ala me and conspired to sow enmity | ; 
A between us?” ae 
~  Pfang Tung bade his men search the captives, and the hid- 
o den daggers were found. So both were ordered to immediate 
execution. However, Liu Pei hesitated and was unwilling to 
confirm the sentence and put them to death. But his adviser 
Ya insisted that they were worthy of death for the assassination 


RAS cee 
vA we 


ie am bua or 


they had panned, and bade the executioners fall on. So the a 


two men were beheaded. Of their following not one had been S 


allowed to slip away. 


Liu Pei summoned the ‘soldiers of the escort to his tent, gave 


- them wine to comfort them and said, “Your leaders conspired tosa 


sow dissension between brothers and were found with daggers 
hidden beneath their clothing.. They were assassins in intent 


‘and have met the fate they merited. You have committed no 


crime and need feel no alarm.” 


The soldiers thanked him Por his clemency with low obei- 


sance. 
Then said P‘ang Tung, “Tf you will now show the way so 


= that our men may capture the Pass, you: shall even be 
rewarded.” 


celebrated with music; I suppose weapons were not well used — 


. then the servants told him that he had driven away his 2 


They consented. That same night the army set out, witht the 


men of the renegade escort leading the way. When they . 
` reached the Pass they hailed the gate, saying, “Open the gate 


quickly: the captains have returned earlier than they expected 
because of important business.” 


Hearing the voices of their comrades, the gate guards had no © 
-suspicion of treachery and threw open the gates. In rushed | 


the enemy soldiers and so gained possession of Foukuan with- 


out shedding a drop of blood. The defenders came over to the . 
side of Liu Pei and were liberally rewarded. This done, the ~— 
-army was posted so as to guard the approaches and maintain a 


what they had captured. 


The next few days were spent in banquets and feasts in 


celebration of success. At one of these feasts Liu Pei turned 
to his adviser, saying, “This is what one might call a joyful 


© oecasion.’ 


“To employ warlike weapons in making an attack upon the 


possession of another is not using them in the best way.’ 


replied P‘ang T‘ung. Nor is such attack the most proper 
occasion for rejoicing.” 
- Liu Pei replied, “The success of King Wu against Chou was 


on that occasion either. Why do you talk so wide. of reason? 
You had better retire.” / 

P‘ang T‘ung laughed and withdrew from the table, while the 
attendants supported Liu Pei to his own chamber, where he had 
a long sleep. About midnight he awoke from his wine and 


_ adviser from the feast. He was at once filled with remorse. 


Next day, having dressed early in full costume of ceremony, he _ 


took his seat in the great hall, summoned his adviser and 


apologised handsomely. for his rude behaviour the ne S 


before. 


; “I drank too much mer night ang spoke rudely; pray forga Me 
it: >? Whey bh 


Siete K 


: who had taken: the. a wer god E 
the first, laughed and talked as-‘uswal:' "But Whan-te went — 
Really I was the only one to blame yesterday: 


Mel poth p onpa, wea n was not Ae you, oe leeds d a 3 


gain as ever. e A ee 
When the ‘Prefect Tats ae heni of he Tonks of m TAk 
relative and. guest he said, “T did not think that suchi things aa 
ould come to pass”: Loe ODS ss sy 
The officers of Shu aa to consider how to. oppose the further ng 
dvance of Liu Pei, and Huang Ch‘tian said, “Eet ùs send with- 
t delay a force to hold Lohsien, which is. the very ‘throat of 
e road he must take: ` He may have veteran soldiers and pie 
fiery captains but he will not be able to:pass.?° J 922% 
So the four ablest captains were told’ off for' this: dats: añ: SE 
they led. five legions. As they marched, one of them, Liu‘Kuei 
by name, said, “In the Chinp* ing Hills there isa wonderful 
“Taoist who calls himself ‘The Superman of the: “Dark | Void sais 
He has the gift of second sight, so let us. visit ae: as we pass 
ay es what our fortunes are to be” : weak JS Aa 


ae O 


ees So let : us ‘enquire of this man, of. Pane ee es 
‘that we may know what to do and what to avoid.” ~ | 
A Whereupon they. went up into the hills and’ ‘sought ‘the her. Rag 
mit’s retreat. ‘They were a small party, on’ horseback; 2Meete i) 
‘ing a wood-cutter they enquired the whereabouts of the'dwell- 
ing of the wise man, and he pointed to one ‘of the. highest hills,, 
saying that the Sage lived on the very summit. “They r climbed 
up to the spot he had told them of and found a’small- hut. At 
heir summons a lad in Taoist garb came out. ‘to. speak: “with 
hem. He asked their names and led them into the presence 
f the Superman, who received them seated, on a rush: cushion.: 
hey made a low obeisance, told him the reason oft their coming $ 
and asked of the future. `. 
“How cean a poor Taoist recluse know aught of fortimes, 
rood or evil?” said he. eee 
‘However, | after a time, as Liu Kuei repeated his serene 
again and again and comported himself most humbly, the. 
hermit bade the lad bring paper and. ee ge he. erore pishi 


lines, pach he handed to his questioner. 


s “Supported ‘by drar and sheng. Ie 
So flies he westward. N ee 

» © But the Phenix Fledgling shall fall: to the Srii 

EN owAnd the Sleeping, Dragoni. shall: “soar to the sky- <0 i io 1a 


$ 


18 


- ‘Rhere shall be successes and d failures, ; 

ör such is the eternal law. = =€ 
èe that ye act when occasion oe 
Lest ye descend to the Nine Springs.” 


Having end the oracle they pressed the seer Fto ‘reveal them Bx 
their individual fortunes, but he replied, “Why ask these = 
things? None can escape his fate.” Liu Kuei ventured to — 
- question the Sage further, but his eyelids dropped as if he. | 

slumbered. . Nor would he vouchsafe a word more, and the _ 
four captains took leave and descended the hill. pic 

“One must have faith in such as he says,” said Liu. he 

“What is to be gained by listening to the sayings of a daft e. 
‘old mañ?” replied Chang. i 

So. they continued their road to Lohsien. When they arrived 
they settled that two of them should guard the ramparts while _ 
the other two should station themselves in front of the city, 


= where was a point of vantage sheltered by some hills. Here — 


they established two camps in two stockades, hoping to be able 
` to keep the foe away from the city. am 
The Pass being captured, Yiian-té took tounsel with his advi- ae 
ser as to the next point to be attempted. This was Lohsien. © 
Scouts had reported the arrival of the four captains sent by 
Liu Chang and said that a camp had been established sixty lè 
from the city. Then Yiian-té assembled his officers and asked 
who would go to attack the ir i The veteran Huang Chung 
offered himself. i 
“Veteran captain, Gi your own men and go,” said Liu Pei. 
“A goodly reward shall be yours if you capture the two camps.” __ 
Huang thanked his lord and was just leading away his men _ 
when suddenly up spake a youthful leader, saying, “Fhe 
General is old to go on such an expedition ; I am of poor ability, 
but I wish to take his place.” SY 
The speaker was Wei Yen. Huang replied, “I already have 
my commission ; why should you wish to supplant me?” { 
“Because the task is beyond an old man’s strength,” said. 
Wei. “The two men in those camps we know are the best and 
-boldest in the country. They are strong, and, veteran as you ~ 
are, I fear you will be unable to overcome them. If you fail, 
‘our lord’s great-design will be hindered. Therefore I ask that wis 
I may replace you, and my intent is kindly.” 7 hs 
This reminder of: his age angered the old man. “Old, am à 
| eas epi you i as with me in the use of warlike weapons?” _ 
said he ee 
“Yes: 1 fares And our jord shall be the judge. The winner r 
shall undertake this expedition. Do you agree?” ie 
Huang ran down the steps and called to his men to bring his À 
small sword. i) 
But Yiian-té would stop this contest and said, “I have need 
of both of you in the task that lies before me. When two 


Romance of the Three iingooms 


tigers fight one is sure to lose, and the loss of either of. you is 
more than I could bear. - Be reconciled and quarrel no more.” 
_ “You two must not quarrel,” said P‘ang T‘ung. “But as 


; there are two camps to be taken and two captains to fight, take i 4 i 
one each and let each lead his own men. The first to capture A URR 
lis camp shall be held to have rendered the greater service and iE aie ccs 


"io have acquired the greater merit.” __ 
This decision pacified them and it w 
the veteran should go against Léng Pao,’ nd Wei, the younger | 
leader, should attack Têng Hsien. But a.cer they had marched. 
away P‘ang recommended Liu Pei to follow them lest they = 
should quarrel on the way. So leaving the city in care of his — i 
adviser, Liu also marched, taking with him Féng, his adopted ue 
son, and P‘ing, his nephew by adoption. They took five a $ 
companies. 
_. After having received the command to take one of the camps, ; 
Huang went to his own camp and issued orders for the morn- — 
_ing meal to be ready very early, and for every one to be in 
“marching order by daybreak. When the time arrived, his 
little army set out, taking the road through a gully to the left 
of the hills. ees: 
- But early as he started, his rival had stolen a march on him. 2 
a Wei had sent over the night before to find out the hour fixed i nc 
for the start and had arranged his own departure a watch 
earlier, by which he would be able to reach his objective at k: 
awn. After his men had taken their early meal they removed = | 


settled that Huañig i 


Tihe bells from the horses and put gags in their own mouths to ' "4 
prevent talking, and all-silently the army stole out of the camp Ae $ 
just as the other party were eating their breakfast: The | } 
ensigns were furled and weapons covered lest the glint of steel aoe ; 


should betray their movement. RAE: 
Thus far successful in getting the start of his rival, Wei ie 
thought as he rode along what a fine score he would make if | | 
he anticipated him also in his attack and captured the camp es 
before he could get there. He at once deviated from his own era 
line and marched toward the camp defended by Leng Pao, of Sye 4 
which the capture had been assigned to Huang. eee 
= _ Just before arrival he halted his men and bade them prepare , 
the drums and ensigns and their weapons. E EEEE 
Early as it was, yet the camp commander was on the alert, SEYN aT 
: for the advancing force had been observed by his scouts. At (aaa 
the first sign of attack the defenders poured out in full force. aN 
Wei galloped up and made straight for Léng. These two EENT 
fought a. score or so of bouts and then the men of Shu came Lon eae 
up and joined in the battle. The men of Han, as the force . (hy 
_ under Wei may be caled, having marched a long distance, 
were fatigued and could not withstand this onslaught, so they 
fell back. Wei heard the confused sound of hoofs behind him 


° 


207 aban tino, OF pe ae 


turned his horse and fled. The men: of Shu kept up the pur- s 
suit and the attackers were defeated and retired. __ i 
-They had gone about five li when another body of. Ssüch'üan 
men appeared from behind some hills. They advanced with 
‘beating drums. Their leader, Téng Hsien, shouted to Wei to — 
surrender, but Wei heeded him not; whipping up his steed he | 
fled the faster. However, the tired horse tripped and fell on 
his knees, throwing his rider to the ground. 'Téng’s men came 
galloping up, and he himself set his spear to thrust and slay — 
Wei. Before the spear could get home, twang! went a B Ps 

string, and Téng lay prone upon the earth. 

. Léng, his colleague, rode up quickly to his rescue! but 
just then a body of horse came dashing down the hill, and — 
their leader shouted, “The veteran captain Huang Chung’ is 
here.” A 
-With uplifted sword Huang rode toward Léng, who fried 


` his steed and galloped off to the rear. Huang pursued, and the © 


men of Sstch‘uan were thrown into confusion. So Huang © 
was able to rescue his colleague Wei. He had thus slain Téng 
Hsien and forced his way up to the gate of the camp. Once © 
again Léng came on and engaged Huang. The two had fought’ | 
a half score bouts when appeared another body of soldiers.. 
Thereupon Léng fled again and this time he made for the other % 
camp, abandoning his own to the men of Han. 4 
But when he drew near he saw no longer the familiar flags 
of his own side. Instead, alien banners fluttered in the breeze. } 
He checked his steed and stared at the new force. The leader — 
was a general wearing a silver breastplate and clad in a silken © 
robe, no other than Liu Pei himself. On his left was his son. 
and on his right rode his nephew. 
“Whither would you?’ cried Liu Pei. “The camp is ours; 
¥ have captured it.” ; 
` Now Liu Pei had led his men in the track of the other two 
armies ready to help either in case of need. He had come 
across the empty and undefended camp and taken possession. 
~ Left with no place of refuge, Léng set off along a by-way to — 
try to get back to Lohsien. He had not gone far when he fell 
into an ambush and was taken prisoner. Bound with cords he > 
was taken to the camp of Yiian-té. 2 
Here it is necessary to record that the ambush had been. 
prepared by Wei Yen, who, knowing he had committed a fault. 
that could in no wise be explained away, had collected as many © 
of his men as he could find and made some of the captured men 
of Shu guide him to a spot suitable for laying an ambush. 
Ytian-té had hoisted the flag of pardon for his enemies, and 
whenever any man of Shu laid down his weapons and stripped 
off his armour he was spared. Also all the wounded were — 
granted life. Liu Pei told his enemies that they had liberty — 
of choice. “You men have parents and wives and little ones 


Ry foma ite of the Three tingvoms 


home, and hace who wish to Ceiri ko them are ies: a’ go. s 
any wish to join my army they also will be received.’ Ber 


land. 
ae ‘Having made his camp, ee came to Yiian-té and said; 
“Wei Yen should be put to death for disobedience.” 


risoner. Yiian-té decided that the merit. of capturing an 
enemy should be set against his fault and bade him thank his _ 
_ rescuer, enjoining upon them both to quarrel no more. Wei — 
Yen bowed his head and confessed his fault and Huang Chung ` 
was handsomely rewarded. 
The prisoner was then taken before Yiian-té to decide upon — 


of consolation. After he had drunk he was asked if he was 
illing to surrender. ; 
“Since you give me my ‘life I can do no other,” said he. 
‘Moreover, I and my two companions, Liu Kuei and Chang Jên, 
are sworn to live or die together. If you will release me I 
will return and bring them also to you and therewith you will 
et possession of Loch‘éng.” _ 
Yiian-té gladly accepted the offer. He gave Léng clothing 
nd a horse and bade him go to the city to carry out his plan. 
“Do not let him go,” said Wei. “If you do, you will never see ~ 
im again. 
Liu Pei replied, “If I treat men with kindness and justice 
ey will not betray my trust.” 
- So the prisoner was set free. When he reached the city and 
» saw his two friends he told them he had slain many of the 
“enemy and had escaped by mounting the steed of one of his 
victims. He said no word of having been captured. Messen- 
- gers were sent in haste to Ch‘éngtu for help. 

- The loss of his captain, Téng Hsien, disturbed the Prefect 
greatly. He called his advisers together to consult. Then his ‘ 
j eet son said, “Father, let me go to defend the city.” 
, “You may go, my son, but who is there to go with you?” 


Chang, who said, “It is well that you_go, my uncle, but who 
ill second you? p 

Wu I at once recommended two men, Wu Lan and Lei Tine 
_ who were appointed to assist in the command. Two legions 
N were given them and they set out for Loch‘éng. The two cap- 
5 tains came out to welcome them and told them what had 
3 happened. 

<- Wu I said, “If the enemy paw near to the walls it will be 
hard to drive them off again. war do you two think should 
be done? ~; 

-  Lêng Pao replied, “The city lies along the river and the 
current is strong. The enemy camp lies low at the foot of the 


At this proof of generosity the sound of rejoicing. filled the he 


i The culprit was summoned and came, bringing with him his as h 


is fate. His bonds were loosened and he was given the cup | Ne 


One Wu I at once offered himself. He was uncle to Liu ae 


22° Ee San Guo 


py 
hills and with half a legion I can cut the river banks, flood their 


camp and drown Liu Pei and his army with him.” 

The plan was approved, and Lêng went away to carry it out. 
Wu and Lan were told off to guard the workers. Lt Bey began 
to prepare the tools for cutting the bank. 


Leaving Huang and Wei in command of ee two camps, A 
Yiian-té went away to Fouch‘éng to consult with P‘ang, the . 


army chief. Intelligence had been received that Sun Ch‘tian 
had sent a messenger to seek to make a league with Chang Lu 
to make a joint attack upon the Chiaming Pass, and Yuian-te 


was alarmed lest it should come to pass. “If they do that I 
said he. “What do you 


29 


am taken in the rear and helpless, 
counsel ?” 


P‘ang turned to Wéng Ta, saying, “You are a native of Shu 


and well skilled in its topography; what can be done to make 
the Pass secure?” 


“Let me take a certain man with me and I will defend it . 


myself and answer for its safety.” 

“Who is he?” asked Yiian-té. 

“He was formerly an officer under Liu Piao. His name is 
- Ho Hsün and he is a native of Chihchiang in the south.” 
This offer was accepted, and the two men departed. 


After the council, when P‘ang returned to his lodging, the 


doorkeeper told him that a visitor had arrived. When P‘ang 


went out to receive him he saw a huge tall fellow eight cubits — : 
in stature and of noble countenance. His hair had been cut — 


short and hung upon his neck. He was poorly dressed. 
“Who may you be, master?” asked P‘ang. 


The visitor made no reply, but went at once straight up the - X 
i room and lay upon the couch. P‘ang felt very suspicious of | 


the man and repeated his question. Pressed again, the visitor 
said, “Do let me rest a little; then I will talk with you about 
everything i in the world.” 

This answer only added to the mystery and increased the 
host’s suspicion, but he had wine and food brought in, of which 
the guest partook ravenously. Having eaten, he lay down and 
fell asleep. 


P‘ang was greatly puzzled and thought the man must be a- 
spy. He sent for Fa Cheng, met him in the courtyard and told _ 


him about the strange visitor. 
“Surely it can be no other than P‘éng Jung-yen,” said Fa. 


He went inside and looked. Immediately the visitor jumped — 


up saying, “I hope you have been well since we parted last” 


Because two old friends meet again, « 
A river’s fatal flood is checked. 


The next-chapter will explain who the stranger was. 


ea 


- CHuKo LIANG MOURNS P FOR ne ANG T UNG; 
CHANG FEI RELEASES YEN YEN. a o 


A i 
a ‘Cheng aul the new comer met with every sign bi joy, E 
lapping their hands and laughing with pleasure. ; 
~ “This is P‘éng Yang of Kuanghan, one of our heroes. His 
blunt speech, however, offended Prefect Liu, who put him to- 
i hame by shaving his head, loading him with fetters and 
- forcing him into a “‘monast¢ry. That is why his hair is short.” — 
= The-introduction made, P‘ang treated the stranger. with all 
the courtesy due to a guest and asked why he had come. 
“To save a myriad of your men Ss lives. I will explain fully 
when I see General Liu.” NG 
A message was sent to Liu Pei, whe came aver to see _the ae 
sitor. “How many men have you, General ? e asked P'êng, 
hen he arrived. ‘ 
Yiian-té told him. ' 
“As a leader you cannot be ignorant of the lie of the land. ; 
our camps over there are on the Fou River; if the river be 
verted and armies hold your men in front ‘and rear, nota > 
man can escape.” ia 
Liu Pei realised that this was itoe. P'êng continued, “The. 
owl of the Dipper lies toward the west and Venus stands 
er against us. The aspect is ominous of evil, and Some — 
isfortune threatens. It must be warded off.” | 
In order to retain his services, Liu Pei gave P‘éng an apport: 
nent as a secretary. Then he sent messages to the captains — 
at the camps telling them to keep most vigilant look-out to = 
ruard against the cutting of the river bank. When this 
message came the two captains agreed together to ‘take duty 
ay and day about and maintain the strict watch necessary in 
the presence of an enemy near at hand. They arranged means | 
f communication i in case either met with a body of the enemy, 
One very stormy night Léng Pao ventured out with a strong 
econnoitring party and’ went along the river bank to seek a 
itable place for the breach. But a sudden shouting in his 
‘ear told him that the men of Han were on the alert, and he at — 
mce retired. Wei Yen came in pursuit and, as he pressed _ 
nearer, Léng’s men hurried forward, trampling each other | 
down in their haste: Suddenly Léng and Wei ran against each 
other, and they engaged. The fight was very short, for Wei 
oon took. his opponent prisoner Those who eame to his 


"SX 


eed. Be a San tiuo, or 


rescue were easily beaten off, and Lêng was aid away. s 
-When he reached the Pass, Yüan-tê saw him and greatly Manod ri 


him for his base ingratitude. 
“I treated you generously and set you tree; you repaid me 
with ingratitude. I cannot forgive: gain.” 


So the prisoner was beheaded and his captor wae seared: ee 


A banquet was given in honour of P’éng. 
Soon after’ this cine a letter from K‘ung-ming, by the hand 


of Ma Liang, who reported all calm in, ‘Chingchin and told : 


Yiian-té that he need feel no anxiety. Opening the letter, — 


Yiian-té read: “I thave:been making some astrological calcul- a 


ations. Thig“is the last year of the cycle, the bowl of the 
Dipper‘is in:the western quarter and the planet Venus approa- 
ches Lochêng: The configuration is inimical to leaders and- 
the. utmost ‘caution ‘is necessary.” ial 
Having read ‘this and sent Ma aways Vitian-té daid he would Le 
return“himself- to: Chingchou and discuss the matter. But 


P‘ang, who ‘thought in his heart: that K‘ ung-ming’s warning ae 


was due toa jealous desire to prevent him from winning the 
glory of conducting a victorious campaign, opposed this, saying, 


“I also: havesmade calculations, and I read the. ‘signs to mean 


that the time is'favourable for you to get‘ possession of this 


land, and no evil is foreshown., Therefore be not of doubtful a 


heart, my lord, but advance boldly. 3 
“ Vijansteowvas: won over and decided to follow Pang S adice. 


He ordered: the. two captains Huang. Chung and Wei Yen to ; k 


lead.” 


P‘ ang akel of Fa Chêng what aaa. e were to follow, cae 


and thedatter drew a map, which was found ‘to agree exactly ae 


with that.left by-Chang. Sung. 


i Fa said, “North of the Mountains i: is a ick oad leading to 
the west gate. pee these. roads are suitable for the advance ge 


of an army. : 
‘So Pang ond to Liu Pei, “With Wei to lead the way, I will go 


- along the southern road, while you, my lord, will advance along 


the high: -koad, -with Huang i in the van: ‘We will attack at Ahe ; 


same time.? 


: “Yilansté replied. Ty was Gained asa moneda age al am 


accustomed to: by-roàds, wherefore, O Commander, I think 
you should take thehigh road and let” me take the other. ee 
“There wih be: opposition on the high road and’ you are the fen 


best ta deal with-it. “Leb me take thé by-road.” 


“No 3 this. does “not: suit me,” replied‘ Yiian te “A ‘soil 


this expedition will turn out badly.” ~ 


‘:P‘ang replied, “When a soldier goes’ ‘into battle he may hee E 
killed, or hemay be: wounded; he accepts whichever i is his fate. BY 


But should. one hesitate because 9i a dream ?? S 


; bearing 2 massive iron club appeared to me in a dream and git 
struck my ‘right.arm, so that I suffered great pain. I feel sure’ 


a Romance o the Three hingooms 


e yea reason of. my heattation. is the letter from K‘ung- Bees 
Q aing. Wherefore I wish you to remain and guard the Pass. i) 
Do MOU aree to that ro I eae) a i BES el ANS as 
,P‘ang smiled, saying, “K‘ung-ming has indeed filled pour | 
mind with doubts. The real thing is that he is unwilling to let 
ne have the merit of accomplishing a great undertaking alone: — 
That is why he has written this. And your doubts and hesita- 
tions have produced the dream. But I see nothing ill-omened, — 
-andIam prepared for any sacrifice and mean just what I say. 
_ Pray, my lord, say no more, but prepare to set forth.” 4 
-So the order went forth that the morning meal was to be 
taken early and the army was to march at dawn. Huang and 
Wei were to take the lead, one along each road. These two 
` set out first, and in due time Liu Pei and P‘ang T‘ung mounted 
and. followed. Suddenly P‘ang’s horse shied and stumbled, 
_ throwing him off. Yitian-té jumped down and seized the er | 
aed the bridle, saying, “Why do you ride this wretched ie 
beast?” 
- “I have ridden him a long time and he. has never done this — 
before,” was the reply. ga 
_ “A shying steed risks a man’s life,” said Yiian-té. “Ride — 
_ my horse, which i is thoroughly trained and will never fail you. 
és Give me yours.” 
_ They exchanged horses. “I am deeply affected’ by your: 
Beanies, ” said Pang. 1 could never repay you if I suffered 
death a thousand times.” 
Soon their ways diverged. After his adviser had left, 
Yiian-té felt ill-at ease and rode gloomily. 
When the news of Léng Pao’s capture and death reached 
woch‘éng the two- commanders there took counsel together. 
Their. colleague, Chang Jén, said, “I know a by-road on the 
“east which is of great importance, and I pray you to let me 
guard it while you two hold the city.” 
~ So as soon as the news of the advancing armies came, Chang- 
led three companies to this road and placed them in ambush. 
They remained hidden while Wei Yen passed and made no 
attack. The main body: under P‘ang T‘ung soon followed. _ 
‘The soldiers in ambush saw a rider on a fine white horse and 
E _ pointed him out to one ‘another, saying, “That surely is Liu Pei : 
‘on the white horse.” Their leader rejoiced too, and he’ gave : 
certain orders, which need not be recorded here. ‘ 
< P‘ang hastened forward. By and by the mountain road nar- r A 
rowed to.a defile with dense thickets on either hand, and as cata 


was thick and impenetrable. His heart misgave him, and 
presently he reined in his steed and asked if any knew the 
ame: of that-place. One of the Shu soldiers ‘who had joined 
is. army = said, ote is: ee ne Slope of the: Fallen 


~< 


‘San fiuo, or 


P‘ang shuddered. “An evil omen for me, Paie Puen, 
Fledgeling ’ is my Taoist name.. There is no luck for me 
Rere.< i 
He E to retire. But as he gave the order the roar of ou 
a bomb. rent the air and arrows began to fly toward him thick i 
as swarming locusts. All the hidden men were shooting at — 
the rider of the white horse. And there, wounded by many 
arrows, poor P‘ang T ung died at the age of thirty-six. Gi: 
A poem says :— ; oe 


Deep in the blue recesses of the hills 

Lay hid the modest cot of Shih-yüan. 

But now each village urchin knows his story, - 
And any village rustic tells his exploits. ERAEN E 
He knew the empire must be triply rent, : 

And far he travelled lonely, to and fro. 

None knew that Heaven would cast down hig star, i 
Forbidding his return in glory clad. i ASNA 


A song was also written referring to P‘ang T‘ung :— 


They were two, the Phenix and the Dragon, 
And they, would travel far to Shu; sae 
But on the road thither STR 
The Phoenix died on the mountain slope. 
The wind drives off the rain, 
The rain sends off the wind. 
» It was the day of the Han restoration, i ae 
When Shu was attained, j ‘Nebel 
But in the attainment E AEN N, 
The Dragon was alone. 


-Not only was the leader of the expedition k but more 
than half the soldiers fell in the narrow road that fatal day. 
Some of the men in the van escaped and ran off to tell Wei of 
the mishap to the army, and he halted and turned back to help. 

. However, it was difficult to march back and he could not Haak 
a way through, for the road was held by Chang, and archers | 
- and crossbowmen occupied all the heights. 

Then one of the renegades proposed that they should ty. 
_ to return along the high road, and they started for Loch‘êng 
this way. But in front of them arose a great cloud of dust, — 

betraying the approach of an enemy. The defenders of the i 
city were moving toward them, and Wei Yen was between the a 
two armies closed in like the kernel of anut. Wei fought hard — 
to get through. When his case seemed most desperate and e 
hopeless, he observed signs of confusion in the army that. ae 
between him and the city. Soon that army turned and faced — e 
the other way, He pressed forward and presently saw men 
of his own side, led by the veteran Huang Chung. vi 
“I will rescue you, Wên-chang,” shouted he, as he came near. Uy 
Now the defenders of Loch‘éng found themselves between — i 
two enemies, and they were smitten heavily. They could no! 
check Wei and Huang, who got through to the very walls © @ 


yh 


me êng. Sealing. Phone near, hin Kuei, who ‘ia been left ig 
efend the city, came out against them. Thereupon Huang 
ind Wei, in spite of the nearness of the army of Liu Pei, 
¢ refused battle and turned away from the city. Yiian-té’s _ 
army made a dash for two stockades, but when Chang’ came 
_ along a by-road and the other three defenders of the city came 


“retire. Now fighting mes now maehine the army of Liu Pei 
strove hard to reach Fou Pass, but Chang pressed close. How- 
_ ever, Liu Pei’s adopted son and nephew came up, and not only 
drove back the pursuers but chased them some twenty li.. 
FEA Liu Pei and his men reached the Pass, weary and 
= dispirited. His son and nephew returned from the e, 
„with many horses they had captured from the flying enemy. 
_ However, nothing had been gained and the victory lay rather 
with the army of Shu. 

One of the fugitives from the army finally reached Fou Dasa. 
{ pen told Yüan-tê of the sad news of the death of his AS : 
man and horse wounded to death. He turned his face to the 

west. and mourned bitterly. 

Although the body of the slain leader lay | fag away ‘they _ 

a atitaten sacrifice to call the spirit, and all the captains keened _ 
_ for him. 
- ‘Then said Huang, “Now that our leader i is no more, certau 
the enemy will return to attack the Pass. What is to be done? 
= I think we had better send to Chingchou for Chuko Liang and 
a get him to lay plans for getting possession of the country.” | 

And even then came in one to say that the enemy under 
Chang Jên had come and were now offering a challenge at the . 
_ rampart. Huang and Wei wished to go forth to fight, but | 
_ Liu Pei disapproved, saying, “We have suffered a ‘severe check > 
and the men are low-spirited.. Let us rather remain on the ca 
_ defensive until the great adviser can arrive.” 
= Huang and Wei made no objection, but set thamaalvad ha 
guard the Pass most vigilantiy, while a letter was written to © 
_ K‘ung-ming and sent by the hand of Kuan P‘ing. He set forth 
at once and Yiian-té gave himself up to holding the Pass. 
- It was the seventh day of the seventh moon, and in the — 
evening K‘ung-ming invited his officers to a banquet. Ga 

- versation turned toward the enterprise in Ssiich‘uan. Sud- 
denly a large and brilliant meteor appeared in the west, > 
illuminating the whole sky. It so disturbed the host that. he. of 
_ dashed his wine cup to the ground, covered his face and burst _ 
‘ j into tears. . . 
ros Alas! Alas!” : ; EA 
+ #The guests eagerly asked him why he lone He replied, 
NT knew by my calculations that the bowl of the Dipper would 
` be in the west at this season and that the auspices would be — 
unfavourable to leaders of armies, and lo! the Heavens have 


ee et aen huo, « or 


í. x 


= 


gone against our men. When Venus was about to stand over 
Loch‘éng I wrote to our lord warning him to be very. cautious. 


- [never contemplated the falling of the star this evening: N ow 
. Pfang T‘ung is no more.’ 


Again he fell to weeping. “My lord has lost an arm!” 
moaned he. 
The guests were rather disturbed, but they only half believed. 
that such a misfortune had happened. 
“We shall hear the sad news in a very few days,’ 
K‘ ung-ming. l 
. The banquet ended sadly enough, and the guests went their 
ways. A few days later, while K‘ung-ming was sitting with 
Kuan Yü and a few others; they reported the arrival of Kuan 
P‘ing with letters from the west. When the letters were 
opened they knew that P‘ang T‘ung had fallen ine same 
evening that the meteor had appeared. ie 
K‘ung-ming wailed and the others wept with him. / 
Then K*‘ung-ming said, “I must go to help our lord; he. is 
eA in at the Pass and cannot move.’ 


» 


said 


“Tf you go away, who will guard this city?” asked Kuan Yü. ; 


“It is of very great importance.” 


“Our lord has not written plainly, but I know what was in > 


his mind.” Then he showed the letter to the others and said, 


“Provision for the defence of this city is laid upon meand Iam 


to find one equal to the task. I read the letter to mean that 
he desires Kuan Yu to undertake the defence, and I know that 
-he will do it for the sake of the pledge taken long ago in the 


Peach Garden: The task is no light one.’ é 
Kuan accepted without hesitation or thought of excuse. A 
special banquet was prepared at which the seal was to be 
handed over to him. 
~ “All the future rests with you, General, ” said K‘ung-ming as 


~- he raised the symbol of office to place it in the hands 9: the - 
` veteran warrior. 


“When a man of honour accepts Such a task he is only 


-released by death,” replied Kuan. 


But that ill- omened word “death” ‘displeased K‘ung-ming, 
and even then he would have retracted but that his word had 


~ “Repel him with all my strength.” | 
“But if Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and: Sun Ch‘ üan attack you together, 


what then? ae k í: 


“Fight both; half my force against each.” 


K‘ung-ming said, “In that case, Chingchou would be i in K 
danger. I will give you my advice i ina few words, and: if you ae 


remember them the city is safe.” 


“What are these few words?” asked Kuan.: s PAR y : 


“North, fight Ts‘ao; south, ally with Sun.” ire ay 4 


_ gone forth. He went on. “Now if ‘T's‘ao Ts‘ao pons what | 
is to be done?” EEES : 


t- 


‘a Thereupon: the seal was: placed in his hands. ‘K‘ung-ming 


also appointed tried and worthy men to assist. the new com- 2 7 ra 


mander. 


= Chang Fei, with a legion, was sent to fight his way into the 


country west of Pachou and Loch‘éng and he was to go with- 


all speed. . The earlier he got through the. greater merit would 
be his. Chao Yün was to lead a. force up the river and make 


Pie Ss 


3 RN, would follow. / 


3 Wan, a noted scholar from Linghsiang. -He went as Recorder: 


: K‘ung-ming and Chang Fei set out the same day. Just 
- before leaving, the great strategist said to Chang, “Do not. 


_. think lightly of the men of Ssich‘uan, for there are many 


mighty men among them. On the march restrain your men , 
_ from plunder and licence lest the’ ordinary people be against ~ 
us. Wherever you halt be compassionate and kindly and do © 


not give way to anger and flog your men. I shall expect.you 

yi to reach Loch‘éng very soon.’ ‘ RAD 

Sea Chang joyously mounted and left. He marched rapidly, and 

ae ‘on the way all places that surrendered suffered nothing what- 
TS per : 

; When they drew hear the Pachou district the scouts of Shu 

ts dent out by the Prefect of that place informed their master, 


and even then, although he was rather old, he had lost none 
of his boldness and could eat pull the stiffest bow and wield 
y the heaviest sword. 


ine ve fest approach of an enemy. So when Chang came near he 
~ ` cautiously encamped about ten li from the city. Thence he 
+ sent a messenger to summon the Prefect to surrender. ‘Tell 


`: the old fool to give in, or I will trample down his walls and S 


-leave no soul alive.” 


=- Yen had never favoured inviting Liu Pei into Shu. When : 
. he had first heard of the Prefect’s intention, he said, “This is 
ike calling a tiger to protect one when one is alone on a bare 
- hillside.” When he heard of the seizure of Fou Pass he was 


= yery angry and offered again and again to lead an army and 


Be drive out the aggressors. He had feared that his city would - 
be attacked along this very road, so he had prepared his men, — 


- and when Chang’s message came he mustered them, five com- 
panies or so, to oppose him. 


the many. legions of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at Tangyang Slope. Even 


“These pada o. Commander are Gaaran on my heath at 


. This done, K‘ung-ming began to pr epare for his departure 


a junction at Loch‘éng. K’ung-ming, with his own body of : 


‘Being -so famous, Yen was not the man to surrender me the i 


Then a certain man said to him, “You must be careful how 
-you oppose a man who by the mere sound of his voice scared 


$  Tsʻao himself was careful to keep out of his way. Your safety i 


Among those who followed Kuns mine was one Chiane i 


Yen Yen. This Yen was one of the famous captains of Shu, - ; 


coe ae Hon ure oo a 


is in defence, lying behind your ramparts and within your deep 


- moats till hunger shall have vanquished your enemies. This 


Chang has a very violent temper, and if he is provoked he vents. 
his anger in flogging his men. If you avoid battle he will be 
irritated and his cruelty to his men will cause them tu mutitiy- 
Then you can attack and will succeed.” 

Yen thought the advice good. He therefore resolved ont 
to defend, and he set all his men on the walls. When one of — 
Chang’s soldiers came up to the gate and shouted for them to 
open, Yen gave orders to open the gate and admit the man. 
When he had come within he gave the message as has been 


_ related before. But the Prefect was exceedingly angry and — 


said, “Fool that you are! How dare you speak thus to me? 
Think you that I, General Yen, will surrender to such as he? 
` By your mouth indeed will I send a message.’ 

Then he bade the executioner cut off the man’s ears and nose. 
And thus mutilated he returned to Chang. When Chang | 


‘heard of it his wrath boiled’ up and he cursed the defender of 


the city. Grinding his teeth and glaring with rage, he put om 
his armour, mounted his steed and went up close to the walls, 
with a few mounted men, and challenged those on the ramparts 
to fight him. But the men on the walls only replied with 
` shameful abuse and none accepted the challenge. Chang — 
galloped again and again to the drawbridge, only to be driven — 


off each time with flights of arrows. But not a man came 


outside the walls. As the day closed in, the warrior, still 
- fuming with wrath, returned to his own camp. 
Next day Chang again led his men to the foot of the wall 


and challenged; again the challenge was refused. But Yen 


shot an arrow from the tower that struck Chang’s helmet. 
This angered him still more, and pointing the finger of disdain 
at his enemy, Chang cried, “I will capture you yet, you i 
fool, and then I will devour your flesh.” 

So again at eventide the men of. Han returned to camp 
baulked of their desire. On the third day Chang and his men 
made the circuit of the city along the edge of the moat, hurling 
insults at their enemies. 

It so happened that the city was set on a hill with rugged 


heights all round, so that going around it the assailants were 


sometimes on hill tops and sometimes on the level. While 


standing on one of the hills, Chang noticed that he could see — 


4 


i 


-clear down into the city. There stood the defenders in their — 


ranks, all readly for battle although none of them came out. | 
And the common people went to and fro carrying bricks and 


bringing stones to strengthen the defences. Then he ordered 
his horsemen to dismount and his footmen to sit down so that 
they could not be seen from the city. He hoped thus to cheat — 
the defenders into thinking that there were none to attack and 
so induce them to come out. But this also was vain, for still 


declined battle ‘and another ay was lost. thee army c once i 
returned to camp. . i 

That night Chang sat in his tent me to think! out some 
means to overcome an enemy that steadily refused to come out 
om behind the walis. Presently, however, the brain behind | 
e knitted brow conceived a plan. So next day, instead of © 
ding all the men to offer a challenge from the foot of the 
wall, he kept most of them in camp and sent only a few to howl | 
insults and hurl abuse. He hoped by this means to erred! i 
Yen out to attack the small number of men. But this also 
failed, and he was left all day rubbing his hands with im- 
$ patience. Never a man appeared without the wall. nee 
_ Foiled again, another ruse grew up behind the knitted brows 
D above: his bushy eyebrows. He set his men to cut firewood 
and seek out and explore the tracks that lay about the city. 
Tik longer did they challenge the wall. After some days of 
this, Yen began to wonder what mischief was brewing, and he — 
nt out spies, dressed as were the firewood cutters, to mingle f 
with them and try to discover what. was afoot. hs 

That day, when the men returned to camp, Chang sat in his- 
nt stamping his foot with rage and execrating his enemy. _ 
“The old fool! Assuredly I pied die of disappointed wrath,” — 
-eried he. i 
Just then he noticed thiet or four men lurking about his 
ten t door as if they wished to speak with him. And one of 
ther said, “General, do not let your heart be hot within you. A 
These last few days we have discovered. a narrow road by es 

which we can sneak past this city.” ay 
“Why did you not come and tell me before?” Sika he. 
“Because we have only lately discovered it,” said they. 

__ “J will lose no time then,” said he. “ This very night let 
D food be ready at the second watch and we will break camp and 
steal away as silently as possible. — -I will lead the way and 
you shall go with me as guides.” 

The requisite orders were given. Having made sure tha. 
the preparations for the march were. really being made, the 
three spies, for such were they, returned into the city. she 
TAS guessed right, then,” said Yen Yen gleefully when the. Aa 
three spies reported their success. “I cannot bear the old 
fool. He will now try to sneak past with his commissariat 
following and I will cut off his rear. How can he get through? — 
He is very stupid to fall thus into my trap.” 
- Orders were given to prepare for battle, to have the food 
ready at the second watch and move out at the third. The 
force was to hide in the woods and thickets till the greater 
part of the army had passed and Chang Fei had arrived in the 

very throat of the road. Then the blow would be struck. . 

ey waited till ee had falan Th i time the late on 


32 a Ban tuo, or 


the city and hid as they. had been. told, The Prefect himself, ie 
with a few of his captains, went out also, dismounted and) hid 


in a wood. They waited till after the third. watch. ` Then — 
Chang came along, urging his men to the top of their speed. Ms 
His spear lay ready to thrust. He looked very handsome as 
he rode at the head of his men. The carts were three or four. He at 


in the rear. aes 
When the soldiers had got well -past, Yen gave the: signaly.. i 
The drums rolled out, up sprang the hidden men and fell- on. 


the baggage train. 


- They began to plunder. But suddenly : a: gong clanged ant 
along came a company. of soldiers Yen had not seen: . At the: 
same time a voice was heard shouting, “Old: rebel, do. not E, 
I have been waiting for this chance a long time.” » ee 

Yen turned his head. The leader of this band was a s bak A 
man with a. leopard-like bullet head, round eyes, a. sharp chin’ 
and bristling tiger moustache. He was armed with a long — 


spear and rode a jet-black steed. In a word, it was. Chang 


Fei. : 
¿ All around the gongs were clanging, and. -many captains 


were rushing toward Yen, already too frightened to be able 
to defend himself. However, the two leaders engaged. Very | 
soon Chang purposely gave his opponent an opening and Yen | 
rushed in to cut down his enemy with his sword. But Chang 3 


evaded the blow, made a sudden rush, seized Yen by the lace 


of his armour and flung him on the ground. He was a prisoner, ce 
and in a moment was fast bound with cords. © ae 

The handsome leader who had passed first: had not been es 
Chang Fei at all, but someone dressed and made up to resemble vat 
him. To add to the confusion, Chang had exchanged the Ki 


signals, making the gong the signal for his:men to fall | on i 
instead of the usual drum. -~ 

-As the gongs clanged, more and more of the men of Han 
came into the fray. The men of Shu could make no fight, and - 
most of them dropped their weapons’ and surrendered. To 


reach the walls of the city was now easy. After entering the 


gates the leader ordered his men not to hurt the people, and 


he put out proclamations to pacify the citizens. 


` By and by a party of executioners brought in the prisoner. 
Chang Fei took his seat in the great hall, and the late com- - 


`. mander of the city was brought before him by a party of. : 


executioners. Yen refused to kneel before his captor: aE 
“Why did you not surrender at first?” cried Chang angrily 
grinding his teeth. “How dared you try to oppose me? PAUSA 


“Because you are a lot of unrighteous and lawless invaders, R 


replied Yen without the least sign of fear. “You may behead i 
me an you will, but I will not surrender to you.” A 
Chang angrily gave the order for his execution, ~ eS eae 
“Strike, if you want to, fool; why be angry?” said Yen.) 


A 


e was not at upon Chang. ie from. 
the steps, put aside the lictors and began 
en the prisoner’s bonds. Then he dressed him in new 
ients, led him to the high place, and, when he was seated, 
a. low pow, saying, “I have always known you were a 


A aberi a. in menteri, Shu, 
Clear fame is his the whole world ‘through, 

As radiant sun his loyalty, 

_ Unmatched his soul’s nobility. 

: When captive taken rather he 

: Would suffer death than crook his knee. 

: Pachou he ruled for many a year, ; e 
; The world cannot proline his peer. 


sen Yen aie prisoner, then the matchless one 
_ Exchanged the sword for reason, and so won 
The place he holds among the sacred ones 

Of Shu, to whom they sacrifice to-day. 


Chany asked him to suggest the means of overcoming 
en replied, “I am but the defeated leader of a defeated 
indebted to the victor for my life. I have nothing but _ 


Ones yield: in quick succession 
Because of one old man’s secession. 


The proposal will be unfolded in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER LXIV.. o 


PLAN FOR THE CAPTURE OF CHANG JEN; 
BORROWING SOLDIERS TO DESTROY Ma CH‘AO. 


A: stated in the last chapter, Chang Fei asked Yen Yen to 
tell him how he might conquer the whole of Shu. This was the — 
reply: “All the fortified posts between this and Loch‘éng are _ 
under my control and the commanders of all the garrisons owe 
to me their commissions. The only way for me to prove my 
gratitude is to make them all yield, as I myself have done. Let 
me lead the advance and I will summon them one by one to i 
surrender.” ! 
Chang thanked him again and again, nud the mechs on ae 
plan began. Whenever the army arrived at a post, Yen sum- 
moned the commander and there it ended. Occasionally, one 
` would hesitate, when Yen would say, “You see I have submit- 
ted; how much more ought you to do so?” 
These bloodless victories followed each other day after. dees ` 
supporters rallying to the invaders without question. They. 
simply came. A 
In the meantime, Kune cuar was preparing. Having en z 
cided upon the date of departure, he wrote to inform Yüan-tê 
and he made Loch‘éng the rendezvous for the various armies. 
On receipt of this letter, Ytian-té assembled his officers and 
explained to them its purport. He bade them be ready to — 
march on the twenty-second day of the seventh month. Both ‘ 
river and land forces were to set out the same day. De 
But the fiery old man Huang Chung was dissatisfied that — 
there should be no local victory. He said, “Day after day the 
enemy has come to challenge us and day after day we have 
refused. They must have grown lax, and I propose a night 
raid on ‘their camp. We shall catch them unprepared- andi i 
shall score a victory.” ei, 
Yiian-té agreed to try.. He arranged fora night raid, Haane rt 
on the right, Wei on the left, of the centre force under his own 
command. They set out at the second watch and soon arrived. 
They found their opponents unprepared, rushed the camp and 
set it on fire. The flames were very fierce, and the men of Shu 
fled in confusion and sought shelter in Loch‘éng. They were 
admitted. After pursuing them for some distance Yüan-tè 
made a camp. \ 
Next day Ytian-té marched right up to the city to besiege it. 
Chang Jén Kept quiet within and made no eet to beat off. 


“the besiegers. On the fourth day Liu Pei ted: an Sirak oa a 


the west gate, sending his two lieutenants to attack the east. 


_ The south gate was left to give the besieged a chance to escape — 


{ if they would. 


ieee eat SS ces a} 
= tes had 


k _ toward the west the attacking force showed signs of weariness. 


Wherefore he sent his two captains, Wu Lan and Lei T‘ung, 
out of the city by the north gate with orders to make their way 


around and attack Liu Pei’s two lieutenants. He said he 
_ himself would go out by the south gate and steal round to 
attack Liu Pei. Lest the withdrawal of men from the ram- 
=. parts should discover his plans, he sent the populace up on the 


~ the rolling of the drums. 
a = Atsundown Yiian-té ordered the retirement of his army, and 


the rearmost company turned about to march back to camp. 


be At this moment arose still louder shouting from.the ramparts, 


va and out at the south gate burst Chang Jén and his force. 
ene made straight for Yiian-té, who was in the middle of 


“his army. His men were thrown into confusion. As his two: 


We ‘lieutenants on the east side were also attacked, they could 
_ render no help, and Yiian-té fled to the hills. Chang followed 


one solitary man, and as Ytian-té plied his whip he felt that the 
- odds. were much ‘against him. Just then he saw another com- 
_ pany of soldiers ahead, emerging from a hill path. 

` “An ambush in front; pursuers in rear! Surely Heaven 
wishes to destroy me!” cried he. 


wA 


a _ But all was not lost. As they drew nearer he recognised his 
own men, and the leader who dashed to meet him was his. 


brother Chang Fei. 


Chang Fei And ten Yen had happened to take that road and were 


Chang Fei had hastened forward when he saw the dust of 
a conflict. 


i fought a half score bouts. By this time Yen Yen with the 
~ main body had come up and Chang Jên turned and fled. Chang 
: ‘Fei followed and chased him as far as the city wall. The gate 


K drawbridge was raised. 

_ Then Chang Fei returned to his elder brother to report his 
_ arrival and the incidents of the way. Hearing that K‘ung- 
ming had not yet arrived, he rejoiced, saying, “So I have the 
=; credit of first arrival although he is travelling by river.’ 


domane of ibe Tiree ingooms a TERE a 


‘walls to make a show and bade them shout loudly to reinforce . 


~ and soon got very near. They were a whole company pursuing 


The two Changs soon came up with each other and they 


` was opened to allow Chang Jên to enter and at once shut. The | 


' Now, Siaa the south gate of Loch‘éng the COUNTY was 

- rough and hilly, while the swift Fou River ran past the north. — 
For this reason the city could not be surrounded. From the | 
city wall Chang Jên watched the progress of the attack and ` 
saw Yiian-té the whole day indefatigably going to and fro 
directing the assault. He also saw that as the sun dropped —s— 


36 | San Kuo, or 


Yiian-té said, “But how is it you ‘have come so wT seeing ee 
the precipitous road you had to travel? Did you meet no 


opposition ?” 


Chang replied, “The fact is I have taken the forty-five places 4 


on the way by making use of the veteran general Yen, whom 
I captured. It was not my own merit at all. I have come all 
the way without the least effort.” 


He told the story of Yen’s capture and services from begini eee 


ning to end, and then presented the man himself. 

Yiian-té said, “General, my brother’s speedy arrival is cer- 
tainly owing to your help.” Whereupon he took off the golden 
chain mantlet he was wearing and gave it to his new ally. 

Orders were given for a banquet. While it was being pre- 
pared a messenger came to say that Huang and Wei had been 
fighting with the two captains Wu and Lei and had held their 
own till enemy reinforcements had arrived. They had then 
gone away eastward. Chang Fei at once asked his brother to 


go with him to rescue them. Both went. When Wu and Lei *° 


saw the men of Han coming they retired into the city. The 
other two continued the pursuit. 
The coming of Yüan-tê and Chang Fei threatened their rear 


and the fugitives turned and recommenced the battle. Theva. 
two captains were thus between two fires and helpless. They | 


offered to surrender and were received. Yüan-tê returned 


to his own camp near the city. 


The loss of his two captains grieved Chang Jên sorely. He 
called his remaining two and asked advice. They proposed to 


risk all in one desperate battle while they sent to Ch‘éngtu to 


tell their master of their sorry plight. 

Chang Jên agreed. . Said he, “To-morrow I will go and chak 
lenge them. If they accept and come out to fight, I will feign 
retreat and inveigle them round to the north side of the city. 
As they follow me, a sortie must be made when they pass the 
gate so as to cut their army in two. We ought to overcome 


them in this way.” 
“Let me lead the sortie,” said Wu I. “General Liu can stay — 


to help our lord’s son guard the city.” ° 
This also was agreed to. Next morning Chang Jén went 
out to offer the challenge, his men waving flags and shouting 


lustily. At once Chang Fei took up the challenge and. rode : 


X 


out. He stayed not to parley, but galloped up to Chang Jên _ ; 


and engaged him. After half a score of bouts Chang Jên 


seemed to be getting worsted, so he turned and fled, taking the ~- s 


way around the north of the city. Chang Fei pursued. him a 
with all speed. Then as he passed the gate the sortie was - 


made so that Chang Fei was between two forces and unable 
to get clear. Chang Jén turned back to attack. 


Chang Fei seemed in a parlous state. But at this very mo- 


ment a body of soldiers came up from the river-side and a 


e o oe Romance of the e Tbe tingvomg ee 


fierce warrior rode Sieceht for Wu I, and in iha first bout 
made him prisoner. His men were then easily forced back 
_and Chang Fei was free. It was Chao Yiin who had so oppor- 

tunely appeared. __ 

_ “Where is the Commander-in-chief?” asked Chang Fei 
— “He has arrived; I think he has ey, seen our lord,” 

replied Chao. 

The prisoner was carried to the camp “where K‘ung-ming 

3 was. Fei dismounted and went in to greet him. K‘ung-ming 

was surprised, and said, “How comes it that you arrived 


Gruan e told the story of Fei’s prudence and sagacity in 
dealing with Yen. K‘ung-ming congratulated him and said, 
“When ` Chang Fei behaves with such skill my lord’s good. 
fortune is indeed ample.” 

= When the prisoner was taken in, we asked him if he 

would surrender. 

He replied, “Why not, seeing I am a prisoner?” te els 

-Thereupon Ytian-té himself loosed his bonds. K‘ung-ming 
began to question him upon the defence. Wu told him the 
names of the officers, adding, “Liu Kuei does not count for — 
_ much, but Chang Jên is a man to be avoided.” 

pe be hen before we can get the city we must capture Chane? 

k said K‘ung-ming. 

_ “There is a bridge on the east; what is it called?” 

. “Tt is known as the ‘ Bridge of the Golden Goose.’ ”’ 

_. K‘ung-ming rode over to the bridge and scrutinised the 

as - neighbourhood. 

- After his return to camp he summoned Huang and Wei for 
- orders. To them he said, “On the east of the city is a bridge 
called the ‘Bridge of the Golden Goose’ and about five li south 

ce of this I saw a dense growth of reed and sedge which would 

_ afford excellent shelter. Wei is to lead a company of men to 

the left and attack, but only attack horsemen. Huang will 

lead a company of ‘swordsmen who are to hough the horses. 

- When Chang Jên has lost most of his men and horses he will 

_ flee by the hill road, where he will fall into an ambush. ; 

= Next Chao Yün was called and sent to lie in ambush close 

; to the bridge, which he was to destroy as soon as the enemy 

i _ had crossed. That done, Chao was to take up a position beyond 
the bridge to prevent the enemy from getting away to the 
“north. Forced to the south, their destruction was inevitable. 

4 These - arrangements made, K‘ung-ming himself went to 
- challenge the enemy and try to bring them to battle. 

The Prefect had sent two captains to reinforce Chang Jên. 
He sent one of them to the help of Liu Kuei in the city, while | 
the other, Cho Ying by name, was to march second with Chang 
himself. K‘ung-ming guilefully led out a mob of disorderly 

-looking soldiers, all in disarray, whom he drew up as if ise 


peas Ry San Bue, or Ae 


were a fighting ones: He himself, dressed in a sini hee 


` and toying with a fan, took his seat in a small four-wheeled | 
carriage. A few horsemen caracolling gaily to and fro formed © | 


his escort. 


AM 


Having crossed the bridge, K‘ung-ming halted and pointed — | 
to Chang Jên, saying, “Dare you withstand me and inot ~ 


surrender when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s hundred legions fled at may ts 


name?’ 


But the enemy leader was rather occupied with inspecting E 
the disorderly lot of soldiers he saw in front, all standing. 


anyhow and not drawn up into “fives” at all. With a cynical 


smile, he said, “People talk of Chuko Liang’s superman 


military genius; I say his reputation is false.” 
With that he whirled his spear about his head and hé dashed 


forward with all his men. As he came, K‘ung-ming left his 
carriage, mounted a horse and retired to the far side of the- 


bridge. Chang impetuously pursued and rushed over the 


Bridge of the Golden Goose. It was only when he had reached 
the other side that he saw a body of soldiers on either hand. - 


Then he knew that he had been led into a trap., 


As soon as he had got across the bridge the two bodies of HIA 
soldiers came to the attack. Chang turned to re-cross to the i 
north, but Chao Yün had done his work and the bridge was in- 
ruins. He made to turn away north, but Chao’s men stopped 
the way. So he had to turn southward and followed the course — 
of the river. He presently reached the place where grew the — 
reeds and sedges. Out came Wei and his company of spear-. 
men, who attacked fiercely while Huang, with his swordsmen, 
houghed the horses. Men and horses were soon lying on the — 


iste 


ground. The few survivors were quickly made prisoners and 


bound with cords. 


No footman escaped. But a few lucky horsemen followed!) 3 


Chang and got away to the hills. There they met Chang Fei, 
- who fell upon them with a mighty roar, scattered the few men 


and captured the leader. Seeing Chang Jên a prisoner, his 


second in command turned toward Chao Yiin and surrendered. 


. ‘Victorious, they returned to camp. Yüan-tê rewarded Cho i 


“Ving: 


When the leader Chang Jên was led in by Chang Fei, K‘ung- 


ming was seated beside his lord. 


“Why have you held out so long after all the other captains a 


of Shu have yielded?” said Ytian-té. x 


“Can a loyal servant take a second master? ” cried Chang 
fiercely, his eyes glaring with hate. 

“You do not know the times; submission means life.” 

“I might submit to-day, but ‘it would not endure. I should 
repent it. You had better slay me.’ 


ki 
hy 
hi 
i 


*Yiian-té was inclined to mercy, but the prisoner was irre- 4 
concilable and kept up a stream of furious abuse. So at lastis ibe 


7 


poem says: :— 


No second lord the heroic servant knows, 

The way of death Chang Jên contented goes. 
SA ale aS Clear shines his fame as doth the heavenly moon 

yi f i 3A i That nightly lights the ramparts of Lo Town. 


Ta Yüants grieved for him although he had been an enemy, 
~ for he was a brave man. He was given honourable burial, 
` sepulture beside the Bridge of the Golden Goose, “where all the 
passers-by would be reminded of his loyalty. $ 
Rat: ANEXE day the army moved on to Loch‘éng, Yen Yen and the 
< other captains who had submitted leading the way. At the 
= gate they hailed the wardens and called upon them to sur- 
render, whereby the city should be saved from utter destruc- 
tion. From the wall, Liu Kuei abused the treacherous Yen and 
took his bow to shoot, but just as he was fitting the arrow to 
fe, the string another man cut him down. Soon the gates were 
=~ thrown open and the city had yielded. : 

~ . As Yiian-té entered the city by one gate, Liu Hsiin, who had 
shared the command of the city, escaped by another’ gate and 
as set off for Ch‘éngtu. 
~ Yüan-tê put forth proclamations to allay the fears of the 
_ inhabitants of the city. He enquired who had been on his side 
~ in cutting down Liu Kuei and was told it was one Chang I, of 
 Wuyang. He and all who had helped in the capture were 
amply rewarded, 
+ “Our next city is Ch‘éngtu.” said K*‘ung-ming. “However, 
‘in the meantime there may be some trouble in pacifying the 


- Chao Yün and Chang Fei, with a certain number of those who 
have joined us, into the country around to reassure the people 
oe and to repress any risings that may take place. There will 
-þe no need for any especial precautions in the neighbourhood 
- of Ch‘éngtu.” _ 
~ The two warriors went their ways, and then K‘ung-ming 
- began to make careful enquiries concerning the road to Ch‘éng- 
0 otu. &Certain of those who had given in their allegiance to the 
pe _ invaders said that the only place where they could expect any 
serious defence was Mienchu. Once they had passed this the 
capital lay at their mercy. 
- Then Fa Chéng was consulted. Said he, “With the fall of 
Loch‘éng the land of Shu passed to you. Let our lord only 
deal with the people kindly and justly and there will be no 
need of weapons. I can write such a letter to the Prefect Liu 
Chang as shall make him surrender at call.” 
- “That would be most excellent,” said Kune wing: 
; The, letter was written and sent by the hand of a AE 


outlying districts, and hence it will be well for you to send oa 


-40 Bat: uo, or 


_ Liu Hsiin, son of the Prefect, ne peclien: ‘Ch’ens’ aa 
and told his father of the loss of Loch‘éng. The Prefect at ay 
once called his counsellors together, and the Secretary Ch‘éng > 
Tu said, “Although Liu Pei has been successful and captured 
cities and towns, yet his army is but small, his hosts are not ` 
near him, he depends upon chance for his grain and has no aa 
proper supplies. Therefore our best plan is to remove the 
people of Pahsi and Tzichang to the farther side of the River 
Fou, burn all the granaries, fortify the city and let starvation ae 
defeat him. Let us reject all challenges to battle and ina i 
` hundred days his men will go off of their own accord. Then i 

we can do with him as we will.” =- Bo SHA 
“I like not the plan,” said Liu Chang. “Oppose invaders ae 
in order that tranquillity may prevail,” is a well-worn maxim, | — 
but till now I have never heard of disturbing the people in ~ 
order to oppose the march of an enemy. Your words are not 
` such as mean’ safety.” N 
Just at the moment the letter from Fa Chéng arrived. ‘It ee 
was opened and the Prefect read: “I was sent to Chingchou — 
to negotiate an alliance, but the opposition of those about you 
to its lord has resulted in the present situation, However, the ` 
ruler of Chingchou still remembers old friendship and is mind- 
ful of the ties of relationship. If you, my master, could reverse 
your policy and lend your support to your relative, I think you ` 
would be generously treated. me hope you will consider this 5 
carefully.” 
Liu Chang flew into a passion. He tore the. letter to re 
ments and began to abuse its writer as a traitor, an ingrate, ~ 
a renegade, and drove the bearer of the letter from his > 
presence. He then sent an army under the leadership of Fei — 
Kuan, his wife’s brother, to reinforce Mienchu. Ne 
Fei Kuan at once recommended as his assistant one Li Yen: aa 
and the two mustered their men, three legions, and set out for 
the city. At this juncture the Prefect of Ichou wrote advising — 
to borrow aid from Hanchung, but. Liu Chang rejected this 
plan, saying it would be useless to try to obtain help from a ~ 
district under the influence of his relentless enemy Chang Lu. — 
Tung Ho, of Ichou, replied, “He may be an enemy, but Liu Pei is 
is in possession of Loch‘éng and the situation is extremely 
dangerous. When the lips are gone the teeth are cold. Ifyou — 
clearly indicate the dangers to him he must come 7 our help,” - 
So a letter was written. oe 
Two years had elapsed since Ma Ch‘ao had hea defeated and 
gone over to the Ch‘iang tribes of Tangut. He had made 
friends with them and with their aid had conquered portions 
of Shênsi. His expeditions had been very successful, the — 
people opening their gates at the first summons. Only Chichou ate, 

had stood out, but ever this was on the point of yielding. The 3 

Governor of the district had sent many urgent appeals for help 


Pao NOn 


mance o the Three kingooms 
ti ou Yüan, aho. owaver: Soa do nothing without.” 
his s master’ s order. | Wei K‘ang, the Governor, was in despair, 
and at a council his officers advised him to yield. However, 
‘one of them, Yang Fou, earnestly opposed yielding, saying 
ney. could not surrender to alot of rebels such as were Ma and | Wee 


“What is there to hope for?” asked Wei k ang despairingly. ~ 
Although Yang Fou besought him with bitterness to hold- _- 
ut, it was useless; K‘ang rejected his advice, opened the city. eee 
ates and bowed his head in submission. ae poe 
“You only yield now as the last resource,” cried Ma, angry i 
at the delay he had suffered. “This is no real submission.” E: 
Whereupon he put to death. Wei K‘ang and all his to the S; 
number of two score. | z 
But when one told him that Yang had been really Peaponsible ie 
r the long delay, in that he had urged his master to hold out, 
Ma did not put him to death but praised him and said Yang 
had but done his duty. He further showed his approval by pes 
-employing Yang and two of his friends in his own army. — 
“These two friends were named Liang K‘uan and Chao Chiii. 
4 One day Yang went to his new chief and said, “My wife has 
: ped in: Lint‘ao; I. ise to take leave for two months to bury 
her? : 
‘Wherefore he was pea feaye and went away from the 
army. On the way, he went to his maternal cousin, one Chiang 
sü, the general in command at Tungeh‘éne. ‘The general’s 
mother, -then an old lady of eighty-two, was Yang’s aunt. — 
When Yang saw her he wept before her, saying, “Behold an 
unfortunate man! The city I had to defend i is lost; my master 
is dead; and I have survived him. I am ashamed ‘to look you 
‘in: the face. Now this Ma Ch‘ao ravages the country-side,. 
and every man hates him. Yet my cousin sits still and 
- does nothing against him. Is this fitting conduct for a state 
servant?” 
= He wept. bitely. The old lady was mone by his grief, 
called in her son and said to him reproachfully, “You are the 
cause of the evil that has come upon the noble Wei.” Then 
turning once more toward Yang she said, “But what can now _ 
be done? ‘You have surrendered and, more than that, you 
have accepted. service under your late enemy.’ : 
“Tt is true,” replied Yang. “I have surrendered and I have 
accepted service, but it-is with the. desire to preserve my 
miserable life till I can avenge my master.” 
“A bold man is Ma Ch‘ao, and difficult to destroy,” said 
Chiang. — 
; “Not very difficult,” replied Yang, “for though he is bold yet 
he ‘is unskilful. Already I have two friends by his side, and 
-they would heip against him if you, my brother, would only == = 
supply a a force.” pase ME 


San Huo, or X 


“What is to be gained by delay? ” then said the old aye 
there any who will not have to die? To perish in the way of 
“loyalty and righteousness is to die in the right path. Do not 
i think of me, for if you do, and heed not the call of your cousin, 
~ then will I die at once so that you may be free to make up yours 
mind.” 
There was now no excuse for delay, and Chiang had to act.” 
He summoned two of his officers, Ying Fêng and Chao Ang, 
and took counsel with them. : 
Now the latter of these had a son, Yueh, who was an oficer. 
in the army of Ma Chiao. When Ch‘ao had to consent to take | 
part against his son’s chief he became very unhappy and went — 
home to talk over it with his wife. He said, “I have to-day 
© been led into a scheme to destroy Ma Ch‘ao and avenge Wei- 
K‘ang. But there is our son there in Ma’s service, and Ma 
will certainly put him to death as soon as he hears that we are’ 
arming against him. What is to be done?” 
But his wife replied angrily, “Should any grudge even his- 
= life to avenge his liege lord or his father? How much lessa ~~ 
son? My lord, if you let the thought of your son stay your — 
hand then will I die forthwith.” 
This decided the matter, and without further parley Chao 
decided to share the expedition and set about preparations 


camped at Lich‘éng; the other two, Yin and Chao, camped at 
Ch‘ishan. The wife of Chao Ang sold her ornaments and went 
in person to her husband’s camp to feast his soldiers: i 

The fears of Chao Ang concerning the fate of his son were 
only too soon justified. At the first news of the march of an 
army against him, Ma beheaded the young man. A force was 

-sent to Lich‘éng, and the men under Chiang and Yang went out 
to oppose it. The two leaders on the avenging side went to 
battle dressed in mourning white. They railed at Ma, calling 
him traitor and wicked and rebellious. 

Ma Ch‘ao angrily dashed across toward them, and the- fight 
began. From the very first it was seen that the defenders of © 
the city could not hope to beat off the attack, and they turned 
to flee. Ma pursued them. But soon he heard the shouting. of 
soldiers behind him and found the other army was attacking 
his rear. Wherefore he was between two armies and had 3 
double battle to fight. As he turned toward that in his rear 
those he had been pursuing returned again to the attack. An 
while engaged with these two, there suddenly appeared a third 
force under Hsiahou Yiian, who had just received orders from : 
Ts‘ao to come against Ma. ee 

Three attacks at once were too much for Ma, and he fled, his 
force in utter confusion. He retreated all that night and at. = 

` dawn reached his own city of Chich‘éng. He hailed the gate, | i 
but a flight of arrows was the response. Soon after, Tna 


n Rd Chas: Chù. appeared and ried him To the H 
mparts above. More than this, they dragged his wife up _ 
the wall, murdered her before his face and threw the © 
dy body at his feet.. They followed up this by the murder 
like manner of his three sons and other members of his — 
mily to the number of half a score and more. And all their’ 
a bodies were flung from the wall. : 
Rage and despair filled Ma’s bosom; he almost fell from 
s steeds But little time was allowed to grieve, for Hsiahou 
Yüan was nearly upon him. Knowing that he could not oppose — 
1is force with any chance of victory, he made no battle line, 
but set off with two of his captains to cut his way through such 
arties of the enemy as they might meet. Their sole object 
was escape, so when they fell upon Yang and Chiang they only 
fought to get through, and in the same way they forced a road 
through the small army under Yin and Chao. However, they | 
lost most of their few followers, and at the end na only some | 
three score left. - 
- About the fourth watch they came to Lich‘é êng. Tn the dark- 
ness the gate guards, thinking- only of the return of their own 
men, opened the gates and unwittingly let in the enemy. Once 
ir the city the slaughter began, and every one, soldier or com- 
mon person, was slain, till the city was swept clear from the 
south gate to the very centre. ; 
` Presently they came to the residence of Chiang Hsu and 
dragged forth his aged mother. She showed no sign of fear, 
but reviled Ma Ch‘ao till in his anger he slew her with his own 
£ sword. Thence they went to the house of Yin and Chao and 
slew all they found therein. The only person who escaped the 
massacre was the wife of Chao Ang, who had accompanied her 
husband. ; 
= But the city proved no place of ‘safety. Hsiahou with his 
army appeared the following day, and Ma fled before him to 
the west, > But ere he had gone twenty li he came face to 
face with another army drawn up in battle array. Yang Fou 
was the leader. Grinding his teeth with rage, Ma set his spear 
and rode at Yang, while his two captains, Ma Tai and P‘ang _ 
re, attacked the rear. Yang was overcome, and his seven 
brothers who had gone with him into the battle were slain, — 
Yang himself was wounded in five places, but still fought on ` 
till he was made prisoner. . 
_ However, Hsiahou had not left pursuing Ma. He came up 
0 the city, and Ma fled before him to the west. His army was. 
10w reduced to the two captains and about half a score of ' 
norsemen, and these few were left to go their way. — EA A 
ETs ao Ts‘ao’s general, Hsiahou Yüan, set himself to restore ATE Niy 
order and tranquillity in the district, after which-he appor- WEI 
tioned its defence among Chiang Hsü and certain other trust- ee a 
worthy men. The rape leader Yang Fou was sent to the mae 


“44 


capital in a cart. When he arrived he saw T's‘ao, who offered: 

him the title of Marquis. But Yang declined the honour, 
saying, “I have neither the credit of a successful defence nor 
the merit of death in the attempt. Death should be my pornon si 
rather than honours. How could I accept the dffer?” — ; 

Ts‘ao praised him and did not insist. —. Speedie 

Having escaped from their pursuers, Ma Ch‘ao and his few 
followers decided to make for Hanchung and offer their ser- 
vices to Chang Lu. He received them gladly, for he thought | 
with such help he could certainly get possession of Ichou on 
the west as well as repel Ts‘ao on the east. More than this, he 
thought to cement the friendship by giving Ma a daughter to 
wife. But this displeased one of his captains, Yang Poo sie 

“The misfortune that befell Ma Ch‘ao’s wife and family was 
entirely- the fault of his own misconduct. Would you give 
your daughter to such as he to wife?” said Yang. 

_. Chang Lu again considered the matter and abandoned his. 
intention. But a certain busybody told Ma what had been 
proposed and that Yang had defeated the scheme. Where- 
upon Ma was very annoyed and sought to compass the death of 
Yang. Yang and his brother Sung on the other side conspired 
to destroy Ma. 

At this time a messenger EAO in Hanchung begging r 
„assistance against the invader Liu Pei. Chang Lu refused. 
help. But then Huang Ch‘iian came on the same efrand. He 
first saw Yang Sung and talked to him and brought him to 
favour the scheme, pointing out the inter-dependence of the 
eastern and western countries, which stood next each other as 
the lips are close to the teeth. So he won over Yang Sung, 
who led him to see his master. To him again Huang spoke 


-forcibly and laid the matter before him so cogently that Chang 


promised his help. : 

One of Chang’s officers tried i dissuade him by. pointing out i 
the old enmity between him and Liu Chang, but another sud- 
denly interjected, saying, “Useless I may be, but if you will 
give me troops I will capture this Liu Pei and you will retain. 
all your land.” 


The land’s ene lord goes west and then 
Hanchung sends forth its bravest men. . 


Who made this bold offer? The next chapter will tell. 


4 J Paes 


CHAPTER LXV. 


5 GREAT BATTLE AT CHIAMING PASS; 
ee: L PEI TAKES THE GOVERNORSHIP OF ICHOU. i 


ma 


l: was Yen Pu who thus opposed sending help to Liu Chang. 
Then Ma Ch‘ao rose and said, “I have been the recipient of 
much kindness from my lord, which I feel I can never repay 
adequately. Now let me lead an army to take Chiaming Pass 
and capture Liu Pei. Then, my lord, Liu Chang will surely 
lose his twenty districts, and they shall be yours.’ 

- This offer rejoiced Chang Lu, who sent away Huang Chiiian 
Pout an answer and told off two legions for Ma Ch‘ao to 
lead. As P‘ang Té was too ill to take part in the expedition, 
Yang Po was sent i in his place. The day to march was chosen. | 
Meanwhile, the messenger sent by Fa Chéng had returned © 
to Fouch‘éng to say Chéng Tu had advised his master to set 
fire to all the plains and valleys between the capital and the 
invaders, as well as the granaries, to move away the people 
and to stand solely on the defensive. This news caused Liu 
Pei and K‘ung-ming great anxiety, for it would be a grave 
danger to them. However, Fa Chéng was more sanguine. 

- “Do not be anxious,” said he, “the plan would be extremely 
harmful, but it will not be carried out. Liu Chang will not do 
at: 

Surely enough, very soon they heard that Liu Chang had not 
adopted the suggestion; he would not remove the people, It 
was a great relief to Yiian-té. 

‘Then said K‘ung-ming, “Now let us capture | Mienchu — 
quickly, for, that done, Ch‘éngtu is as good. as ours.’ 

He therefore told off Huang Chung and Wei Yen to advance 
first. When Fei Kuan heard of their advance he ordered 
Li Yen to go out to stop them, and Li led out his three com. 
panies. The two sides being arrayed, Huang Chung rode out 
and fought some half hundred bouts with Li Yen. Neither 
was able to claim a victory, and so K‘ung-ming from the midst 
of the host ordered them to beat the gongs to cease from battle. 
When Huang Chung had got back to his side again he said, 
“Q Commander, why did you sound the retirement just as i 
was getting the better of my opponent?” 

“Because I saw that he was not to be overcome by mere 
force. . ‘To-morrow you shall fight again, and then you shall 
lead him into the hills by the ruse of pretended defeat. There 
will be a surprise awaiting him.” 


Co 


Huang Chung agreed to try this ruse, and so on the morrow 
accepted Li Yen’s challenge when it was offered. After about 
the tenth bout he and his men pretended to be worsted and 
ran. Li pursued and was quickly lured into the mountains 
Suddenly his danger flashed into his mind, and he turned to ge 
back. But he found Wei Yen’s men drawn up across his path 
while K‘ung-ming from a hill top near by cried, “You hac 
better yield ; if not, there are bows and crossbows on both sides 
of you all ready to avenge the death of our P‘ang T‘ung.” | 

Li dropped off his horse, threw aside his armour and offered 
submission. Not a man of his had been hurt. The prisone} 
was conducted to Yüan-tê, who was very affable and so wor 
his heart that he offered to try to seduce Fei Kuan from hi: 
allegiance. 

“Though he is related to Liu Chang, yet Fei and I are very 
close friends. Let me go and persuade him.” 

Wherefore Li was sent back to the city to induce his chie! 
to come over to Liu Pei’s side. He talked to such effect of the 
kindness and virtues of Liu Pei that Fei was won over, opent 
the city gates and admitted the invaders. 

As soon as Yüan-tê had entered Mienchu he set out ne mer 
to take the capital. While thus engaged, a hasty messenge! 
came to tell of the doings at Chiaming Pass, whereat hac 
suddenly appeared an army from the east under Ma Ch'ai 
and his captains. They had attacked, and the Pass woul 
certainly be lost if help was not sent quickly. 

“We need both Chang Fei and Chao Yün for this,” remarkec 
K‘ung-ming. “Then we could oppose successfully.” 

“But Tzut-lung is away,’ ’ said Yiian-té. “However, I-té i i 
here. Let us send him quickly.” 

“Do not say anything, my lord,” said K"ung-ming. “Let n m 
stir him to fight his noblest.” 

But as soon as Chang Fei heard of the danger he cam 
rushing in, shouting, “I must a farewell, brother. I am of 
to fight Ma Ch‘ao.” _ 

However, K‘ung-ming made as if he heard not and said t 
Yiian-té, “That Ma Ch‘ao has invaded the Pass and we hav 
no one to drive him back. Nobody can stand up to him— 
avi we can get Kuan Yü from Chingchou. He coul 

o i 9? 

“Why do you despise me, O Commander?” cried Chang Fe 
“Did I not. once drive back a whole army? Think you that 
mind a stupid fool like Ma Ch‘ao.” 

K‘ung-ming said, “Yes, I-tê; but when. you forced back th 
waters and broke the bridge you succeeded because you 
enemies were doubtful. If they had known, General, yo 
would not have come off so easily. All the world knows thi 
Ma Ch‘ao and has heard about his six battles at the We 
Bridge; and how he made Ts‘ao Ts‘ao cut off his beaut an 


aut ARETE i: 


row away his Hobe! He - very nearly slew him too. This is ai? 
o lightsome task like that, and even your brother might fail.” 
“All I care for is to go, and if I do not overcome this fellow, 
I will take the consequences.” 
| “Well; if you will put that in PE you may lead the athe 
attack. And I will ask our lord to lead another army to back 
ou up this time. He can leave the defence of this town to ae 
me till Chao Yün os SRS 
“I also want to go,” said Wei Yen. | 
Wei Yen was allowed to go with a half company of light 
orse in advance of Chang Fei. Yüan-tê marched third. Wei — 
Yen and his scouts soon ‘arrived at the Pass and there fell in © 
with Yang Po. They engaged ; but after a few bouts Yang ~ 


A At this success Wei Yen was seized with ambition to rival 
it and try to snatch the credit that would fall to Chang Fei. 
So he pursued. But-he presently came across a line of battle _ 
all drawn up, the commander being Ma Tai. Wei Yen, think- | 
ing it was the redoubtable Ma Ch‘ao, rode toward him whirl- 
ing his sword. Soon Ma Tai turned and ran away, and Wei 
Yen followed him. However, Ma Tai presently turned back > 
_ and shot an arrow, which wounded his pursuer in the left arm, 
so that he left the pursuit and turned his face the other way. 
Then Ma Tai came after him and chased Wei Yen nearly up © 
to the. Pass. 
et Here Ma Tai was suddenly con fronied by a fierce thunder- 
roaring leader who dashed down from the Pass as on a flying 
steed. I j 
It was Chang Fei, who had just Ay died’ Heardi Abe noise 
a of battle below the ’Pass he had come to learn what it meant — 
a a saw the arrow wound Wei Yen. Soon he was in the saddle — 
a and off to the rescue, but before he engaged he would ascertain 
_if the foeman was worthy of his steel. 
; - “Who are you? Tell your name,” cried Chang Fei, “then 
-I may fight with you.” RCE Pass ie 
= “Iam Ma Tai of Hsiliang.” gi i A 
_ “As you are not Ma Ch‘ao go away iene: for you are no 
match for me. You may bid ‘Ma Ch‘ao himself come, and ft . 
him that Chang I-té of the north is here. à 
“How dare you treat me with contempt?” cried Ma Tai n ` 
‘hot. anger, and he came galloping up with his spear set ready ` 
to thrust. But after a half score bouts he fled. Chang Fei 
was about to pursue when a rider came up to. him hastily, 
crying, “Do not pursue, my brother.” 
The rider was Yüan-tê, and Chang Fei stopped. The two 
returned together to the Pass. 
=- “I knew your impulsive temper, and so I followed you. 
_ Since you have got the better of him you may well rest and 
recuperate for the nent to-morrow with Ma Ch‘ao.” 


48 ashes ‘San fu, « or. Oe 


The rolling of drums at dawn next day declared the arrivals E 
of Ma Ch‘ao. Yüan-tê looked at the array from a point of- E 
vantage and saw Ma Ch‘ao emerge from the shadow of his ~ 


great standard. He wore a lion helmet and his belt was 


clasped with the shaggy head of a wild beast. His breastplate 
was silver and his robe of white. As his dress and bearing _ 
were not as other men’s so were his abilities superior. And — 


Yiian-té looked at him admiringly. 


“He justifies what people say,” said Liu Pei. “Handsome 


Ma Ch‘ao.” 


_ Chang Fei was for going down at once, but his brother once in 
more checked him, saying, “No; not yet. Avoid the first ~ 


keenness of his fighting ardour.” 


Thus below was Ma Ch‘ao challenging Chang Fei, while, a 
above, Chang Fei was fretting at being unable to settle © 
Ma Ch‘ao. Time after time Fei was setting out, but each — 


time his brother checked him. And so ‘it continued till. past 


midday, when Ytian-té, noticing signs of fatigue and weariness — : 
among Ma Ch‘ao’s men, decided that it was time to let Chang. Pes 
Fei try his fortune. Whereupon he chose out a half company © — 


of horsemen to accompany his brother and let the party go. 


Ma Ch‘ao seeing Chang Fei coming with so small a force, — 
signalled with his spear to his array to retire a bowshot, and ` 
Chang Fei’s men halted. When all his men had taken their _ 


places, Fei set his spear and rode out. 


“Do you.know who I am?” shouted Fei, “Tam Chang Fei He 


of Yen.” 


Ma €h‘ao replied, “My family having base noble for many. 


generations I am not likely to know any rustic dolts.” 


This reply upset Chang Fei, and in a moment the two steeds 
were rushing toward each other, both men with poised spears. 
The fight began and continued for a hundred honts Neren ae 


had the advantage. 
‘A veritable tiger of- a leader,” sighed Yitian-té, 


But he felt that Chang Fei was running a risk, S keratan 5 
he sounded the gong as a signal to cease the fight. And each 
drew off to his own side. Chang Fei rested his steed for a © 


x 


time, then, leaving his helmet, he wound a turban about his > 


head, mounted and rode out to renew the fight. Ma Ch‘ao 
also came out, and the duel continued. 


"Presently Yiian-té thought his brother in danger. So he — 
- girded on his armour and went down into the plain. He 


watched till they had fought another hundred bouts, and then 


as both seemed to wax fiercer than ever he gave the signal. : 


again to cease the battle. 


Both drew off and returned each to his own side. It was ‘ | 
then getting late, and Ytian-té said to his brother, “You had — 
better retire for to- day; he is a terrible opponent. Try him © 


again to-morrow.’ > 


But Chahe Fei’ s ir was roused, and was it likely that 
ach advice would be palatable? 
“No,” shouted he, “I will die and not come back.” 
“But it is late; you cannot go on fighting,” said Yiian-té. 
“Let them bring torches, and we wiil have a night battle,” 
said Fei. ; 

Ma Chʻao having mounted a fresh steed, now rode out and 
shouted, “Dare you try a night battle, Chang Fei?” 
4 Chang Fei’s excitement rose higher. He hastily changed 
horses with his brother and rode forth. 


E “if I. do not capture you, I will not go back to the Pass,” N 


Baia Fei. 


_ “And if I do not overcome you I will not return to the camp,” 


aid Ma. 
= Both sides cheered. They lit many torches till it seemed as 
light as day, and the two great captains went to the front to 
E At the twentieth bout Ma Ch‘ao turned his steed and fled. 
= “Whither are you going?” called out Fei. 
` The fact was that Ma Ch‘ao had begun to see he could not 
win in direct and simple combat, so he thought to try a ruse. 
yi a false flight, as though he knew he had lost, he would. 
inveigle Chang Fei into pursuit. He picked up a copper 
hammer secretly and kept a careful watch on his opponent for 
the most favourable moment to strike. But his enemy’s flight 


oa put Chang Fei upon his guard, and when the moment came — 


or the blow with the hammer he dodged, so that the weapon 
flew harmlessly past his ear. Then Fei turned his horse. 
E epon Ma Ch‘ao began to pursue. Then Fei pulled up, 
kook his bow, fitted an arrow to the string and let fly at Ma. 
But Ma also dodged, and the arrow flew by. Then each 
E to nis own side. 

Then Yüan-tê came out to the front of his battle line and 
Patied out, “Note well, O Ma Ch‘ao, that I, who have never 
treated men other than with kindness and "justice and truth 
and sincerity, swear that I will not take advantage of your 
period of repose to pursue or attack. Wherefore you may rest 
while in peace.’ 

-` Ma Ch‘ao, hearing these words, withdrew to the rear, and 


his army toward the Pass. 

_ Early next day Chang Fei was once more going down out 
of the Pass to fight, when they told him that the Commander- 
in-chief, Chuko Liang, had arrived. Ywtian-té went to receive 
him, and K‘ung-ming at once began to speak of Ma Ch‘ao. 

E: “He is the most terrible leader of the age; if he fights a 
desperate battle with Chang Fei loss will ensue. So I have 
eome as quickly as I could. I left Mienchu in safe hands. I 
ag I have a little ruse left that will bring Ma over to our 

side.” 


the other captains one by one returned, while Yiian-té drew oft 


oN 


50 San Huo, or 
“Now I have seen the man. I greatly admire him, 
Yiian-te. “If we could only win him over!” t 
“Then listen” said K‘ung-ming. “Chang Lu greatly desires — 
the title of “Prince. of Hanning” and among his most intimate | 
subordinates I know one open to bribery. So we will send a 
person secretly to see him and give him gold and silver and 
so. win his support. This done, we will write to Chang and 
tell him that you are set upon taking Hsich‘tian from its 
present ruler, which will give an opportunity to wipe out the 
enmity he has so long nourished against Liu Chang, and that- 
the reward of his remaining firmly on our side to the end will ` 
be that vou will memorialise the Throne for the coveted — 
title for him. _ This: will make him order Ma to return, 
and, W hen that is done, I shall find a means of winning him 
over. ss 
Yüan-tê wrote a letter and sent it by the hand of Sun Ch‘ien | 
together with gold and pearls. Sun went by secret roads to 
give these to Yang Sung. And when he found Yang and 
explained his mission in private, he was quickly led into the — 
presence of Chang Lu. 
_ “How can Yiian-té memorialise the Throne to confer on me _ 
the rank of prince when he is but a simple General himself?” - 
asked Chang Lu, when he understood the offer and its con- 
ditions. Ey 
` “He is an Imperial Uncle; daid Yang Sung, ‘with such an 
rank he could present such a memorial.” S 
Chang Lu assented. He sent orders to Ma Ch‘ao to cease f 
fighting, and Sun Ch‘ien remained as the guest of Yang Sung 
till he should see whether Ma Ch‘ao would obey the command. — 
Before long the messenger returned with a word from Ma that . 
he could not cease fighting till he had been successful. A 
second messenger returned with a similar response. a 
“This Ma is untrustworthy,” said Yang Sung. “He will 
not withdraw his soldiers because he contemplates rebellion. 
That is the real reason.’ 
He set stories afloat that Ma Chiao desired to make himself 
the ruler of Shu and had said that he would no longer be 
content with subordinate rank. And he meant to avenge the ~ 
death of his father. The rumours came to the ear of Chang- 
Lu, and he asked Yang Sung what should be done. Yang 
proposed that he should give Ma Ch‘ao a limit of a month in —~ 
order to accomplish his task, provided he consented to three — 
conditions. And if he would not agree he would have to. be 
put to death. ris 
So a messenger was sent to declare the three conditions, : 
which were: the capture of Hsich‘iian, the head of Liu Chang — 
and the repulse of the Chingchou troops. S 
“Tf he fails in any one of these just bring ie head,” said 
Chang. g 


3) 


said 


> 


While ihe messenger went: to carry: ese order Chang Wei 
as sent as guard at one of the strategic points which would. ; 
ntrol Ma’s army in case of rebellion. ` s 
When Ma Ch‘ao heard the three demands made on him he eee 
as greatly troubled, saying, “What can such a charge mean?” 
- After taking counsel with his son it seemed best to suspend 
: ohting: and the army rested. But Yang had not yet attained 
his end, so he dropped another hint that Ma Ch‘ao’s return with 
an army would be a danger, and hence all the points of vantage 
on the homeward road were guarded so that he should. not . 
return. “Thus Ma Ch‘ao was helpless and could see no way 
out of the difficulty. Pe 
Then K‘ung-ming said to his lord, “Now is my chance. SOK 
use my little three inches of unworn tongue; Ma Ch‘ao is in 
a fix, Il am going to his camp to persuade: him to come over 
to your side.” 
| “But I do not like you to run such a Uk my 1 Master. ` You 
are my most necessary support, and if, anything happened to. 
you, what should I do?” p 
E K*‘ung-ming was set upon going Hee persisted | in his request. 
_ Yiian-té again and again. refused. At this juncture a mes- 
senger came with letters from Chao Yün. Yiian-té called him 
- in and questioned him. He was Li Hui of Chienning, the man 
who had formerly remonstrated so earnestly with Liu Chang. 
“You once pleaded with your master to keep me out; why 
are you here now?” 
- Because the prudent bird chooses its perch and the wise 
man his master. I did attempt to dissuade Liu of Ichou from. 
a -a course which I felt to be disastrous, and thereby fulfilled my: 
duty as his servant. He rejected my counsel and I knew he 
-would fail. Your liberality, O General, has won over all the 
- province, and success must be yours. I wish to serve under 
_ your banner.” 
“Your services will surely be. of great advantage to me, Sir,” 
said Ytian-té. w 
Then Li began to talk of Ma Ch‘ao. “I knew him when a 
we were in Shénsi together. He is now in great straits, and oa 
I may be able to talk him over. What say you?” iste 
“Just the man to go instead of me,” interjected K‘ ung-ming. eg 
» “But what arguments will you use? ” 
-* Li Hui leaned over and whispered in his ear thus—and thus 
` —What he said seemed to please K‘ung-ming mightily, and he 
was bidden to go forthwith. -. 
_ Arrived at the camp, he sent in his name, at which Ma Ch‘ao 
remarked, “Yes; I know him; a glib and specious talker. I 
know what he has come for too.” 
‘So he placed a score of armed ruffians in hiding about his 
tent and told them to cut the visitor to pieces if the signal 
was. ie 


i 


‘San uo, or 


_ Then the guest was led in aad came walking proudly. Hie 
host remained seated stiff and upright. He spoke roughly, 
saying, “What are you come for?” i 

“I am here as bearer of a message.” y) 

“This sword here in the scabbard is newly: ground. You | 
may try me by words, but if the words do not penetrate I shall 

ask you to try the sword. ot uy 

Li Hui smiled, saying, “O, General, evil is not far off. How- | 
ever, I am thinking the newly ground sword will not be tried 
on my head.. You will want to try it on your own.’ 

“What evil were you talking about?” A 

“The worst vilification could not hide the beauty of Hsi-tzii < 
nor could the most fulsome praise gloze over the ugliness of 
~ Wu-yen. The sun rises to the meridian and then declines; ` 
the moon waxes to the full and then wanes. All things obey — 
the one law. Now, Sir, you are at enmity with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao for — 
your father’s death, but Shénsi hates you with a stubborn, — 
grinding hate. You can neither rescue Liu Chang by repuls- 
ing the army from Chingchou, nor can you settle Yang Sung 
by getting an interview with Chang Lu. The whole world. 
now holds no place for a man without a lord, and if you | 
experience further defeats, like that one on the Wei River, or i 
the loss of Chich‘éng, will you not be too shamed to look any 
man in the face?” 

Ma Ch‘ao bowed his head. “You speak well, Sir. But I 
am helpless.” 

“Now that you listen to me I would ask why those fearsome — 
ruffians are in hiding by your tent?” continued Li Hui. Y 

Ma, suddenly stricken with shame, ordered them to retire. 
Li Hui continued his speech. ` 

“Liu, the Imperial Uncle, is considerate to his subordinates, 
and I am certain he will succeed, and so I have forsaken Liu. 
Chang to cleave to him. Your honoured father joined him in 3 
destroying rebels. Why do you not flee from darkness into 
_ the light? Therehy you would avenge your father and become — 
famous.”’ 

Ma, convinced of the wisdom of the course thus recom- 
mended, proved his conversion by sending for Yang Sung and — 
slaying him forthwith. Taking with him the head of his — 
victim, he accompanied Li Hui to the Pass and tendered his — 
submission. Yuian-té welcomed him warmly and treated him 4 
as a highly honoured guest. s 

Ma Ch‘ao bowed his head, saying, “Meeting you, O ilustrou g 
lord, is like seeing the clear sky when the clouds have been > 4 
swept aside.” S 

When Sun Chʻien returned, Yüan-tê detached certain forces — 
to go to’ the capture of Ch‘éngtu, left two captains to guard the ~ 
Pass and made a triumphant entry into Mienchu. Two of the — 
Shu captains came to oppose Ytian-té, but Chao Yiin went out. 


ARS 


i 
q 


IET TFE 


PER of thi Three Himgdoms 


; against thew while Swen was. entertaining Ma Chao. at a 
- banquet on the city wall. Ere it had concluded, Chao’ Yün | 
slew both the captains and brought their heads to the banquet — 
hamber. This exploit put Ma Ch‘ao on his mettle and doubled 
is respect for the conquerors. 


urrender of his own accord. Should he resist, my son and 
I will take the city and offer it to you with both hands. i i 
- Yiian-té was very pleased with the course of events; the day 


_ distressed at the news of his fresh misfortunes, which reached 
him with the return of his defeated soldiers. He barred the 

gates and stopped all exit. Before long came news of the 

approach of Ma Ch‘ao with an army of rescue. The Governor | 
_then ventured to mount the walls, and soon Ma Chao and — 

Ma Tai rode up and stood below the ramparts. And the former 

- called out, “I wish to speak with Liu Chi-yii.” 


“Let not my lord attack,” said he. “I will make Liu Chang PUIA 


was. indeed one of rejoicing. But Liu Chang was greatly 


Then Liu Chang showed himself, and Ma Ch‘ a0 plunged into ; 3 2 


_ the matter without more ado. 
a “I took the leadership of Chang Lu's s army to rescue ‘Tchou, 
_ little thinking that, under the calumnious advice of Yang ‘Sune. 
he would try to slay me. However, now I have gone over to 
-~ the side of Liu, the Imperial Uncle, ‘and advise you, Sir, to do 
li ‘the same, you and all your officers. Thereby you will all 
escape harm. If any one holds on a misguided course I shal! 
take the city.” s 
= Such words came as a shock, and Liu Chang paled. His — 
feelings overcame him and he swooned. When he came to his. 
_ senses he muttered, “I am stupid and I am sorry. Better open 
-the gates and end it, The city will be saved.” 
f “No, no,” cried Yung Ho. “There are three legions of pae 
-soldiers in the city and ample money and stores for a year to 
Come. Hold out.” 
But Liu was broken. “My father and be have ruled here for 
- twenty years and have done no particular good for the people. 
if we fight for three years the grass will be stained with the 
~ blood of my people and the fault will be mine. I could not 
pear it, and so I see no better way than to surrender, whereby 
p A may bring peace to the people.” 


i as Heaven guides you.’ 

Turning toward him they recognised’ a man of Pahsi TANEN 

 Chʻiao Chou, who had the reputation of being an astrologer. 

“I have studied the aspect of the heavens and a multitude 

fe of stars gathered over Shu, one of which shone as the full 
= moon; a right royal star. And T recall a popular couplet of 
ili last year :— 


Has 


“When comes the ruler Mom the eat!) 
Then may you on new rice feast.” / 


Those about him wept. One man spoke, saying, “You speak i fe 


54 hae Sam Ruo ors 


This is a sort of presdge. - None can withstand the decree of a 


` the Most High.” 


Huang and Liu, who heard these words, were very angry at > ; 
such a speech and rose up to smite the speaker. But Liu Chang — 


stayed them. 
Next came news that Hsti Ching, Prefect of the metropolitan 


. district, had gone over to the invaders. This was the last 


blow. Liu Chang went home weeping. 
Next day they reported that Liu Pei, the Imperial Uncles. 
had sent a secretary to visit Liu Chang and he was even then 


at the city gate. He was admitted, and Chien Yung entered, 


riding in a carriage and looking about him most haughtily. 


Suddenly he was hailed from the street by a man with a sword © 


in his hand, who cried, “You have got your wish, wretched 


creature, and you seem to think there is no one to compare - 


with you. But do not look so contemptuously at. us. of 
Shu.” 

Chien quickly got out of His carriage to speak to the ae 
who was a man of Mienchu named Ts‘in Mi. 


“Worthy brother,” said he, “I did not recognise you I pray 


you not tò be angry.” 


Both then went. to visit Liu Chang, and they DON of the — 


liberality and broad-mindedness of Liu Pei, said he had no 


intention to harm any one, and praised him to such effect that — 
Liu Chang then and there made up his mind finally that he — 
would give up the struggle. So he treated Chien very honour- 
ably that day. And the next day, taking his seal and insignia — 
of office and his archives, he accompanied Chien out of the — 
city and went to Ytian-té’s camp. Ytian-té came out in person — 


to receive him. Taking Liu Chang by the hand, he wept, 
saying, “It is not that I wish to act cruelly or wrongly ; Tam 
the victim of circumstances and cannot help it.” 

They entered the camp together, where the seal of office and 
the documents changed hands. ‘Afterwards they rode into 


the city. side by side. The people gave Ytian-té a cordial 
welcome, burning incense and illuminating the city. The 
victor went to the residence of the chief of the province, 


where he took his seat and was saluted by all the subordinate 
officials. 


However, Huang Ch‘iian and Liu Pa stayed away from the 


ceremony. This annoyed the more violent of Yiian-té’s sup- | 


porters, and they wished to kill the delinquents. But Yiian-té 
would not allow violence and threatened condign punishment 
to. any one who might interfere with these two. When the 


reception was over he went to visit the two recalcitrants, © 


whereupon both came out and made their obeisance. 


Said K‘ung-ming, “We have vanquished, and all opposition — 
is at an end. But there cannot be two rulers, so you must. 


remove Liu Chang to Chingchou.” 


Romance of the Three ingdoms 55 


-~ “But I do not wish to exile him,” said Yüan-tê. 
E = “He lost his prestige through weakness. If you are effemin- 
ately weak and undecided you also will not last long.” 
= Yiian-té saw his advice was good, and so he gave a great 
_ banquet whereat he begged Liu Chang to pack up his treasures 
and prepare to move. He gave the dispossessed Prefect the 
title Chén-wei Chiang-chiin (Captain of Wide-spread Prestige) . 
Liu Chang went away to Chingchou, taking with him his 
; family and all his possessions. 
_ Yüan-tê thus became Governor of Ichou. He conferred 
_ gifts on the inferior officers who joined him, confirming their 
ranks and titles. Yen Yen was given a high rank in the army. 
Fa Chéng became Prefect of the District of Shu. Others of 
_ the Shu officers whose aid had been conspicuous were given 
high ranks and finer titles under the new rule, while the | 
‘services of minor men to the number of three score or more 
were well rewarded.. 
= Naturally, honours’ were distributed freely to Yiian-té’s 
immediate helpers, to whose efforts he owed his position. 
~ Chuko Liang became Master of the Forces; Kuan Yu, Tang- 
- kou Chiang-chiin (General, Destroyer of Rebels) and a 
Marquis; Chang Fei, General, Assailant of the West, and a _ 
Marquis; Chao Yün, General, Guardian of the Distant; 
Huang Chung, General, Guardian of the West; Wei Yen, 
General, Wager of Successful War; Ma Ch‘ao, General, Paci- 
ficator of the West. All the others, many of whom had come 
to Ytian-té from Chingchou and Hsiangjang, received promo- 
tion and rewards. 
~ In addition, a special gift of five hundred “axes” (catties) 
of gold, a thousand “axes” of silver, much copper money and 
_a thousand rolls of Ssuch‘uan silk, was sent to Kuan Yü. And 
- allthe military men were given appointments. Huge numbers 
_ of oxen and horses were slaughtered for banquets to the army, 
and the contents of the granaries were given to the common 
people. So that there were great rejoicings. 
-. Ichou being settled, Yüan-tê next desired to confiscate the 
lands of the more famous of the inhabitants about the capital 
- and divide them among his officers. But here Chao Yün and 
others dissuaded him, saying that the sufferings of the people 
had been severe and losses great; it would be wise policy to 
Jet them settle down to their occupations as soon as possible. 
“Tt would be wrong to reward his own men at the expense of 
these persons.” Yitian-té listened and gave in with good grace. 
To Chuko Liang he assigned the revision of the laws, the 
- punishments to be made, on the whole, heavy. Then Fa Chéng 
‘spoke up, “The founder of the Hans drew up three chapters of 
law, and the people were all profoundly affected by his virtue. 
AL would rather that the laws be few and liberal that people 
may be comforted.” 


ANE A | 


56 Han tino, or, 


K‘ung-ming replied, “You only look at one side. The laws 
of Ts‘in were fiercely cruel and provoked resentment among 


the people; it was fitting that Kao Tsu should temper them. — 


with kindness. Under the weak administration of the late 
ruler there has never been an efficient government and there 
is a lack of respect for the law. The proper relationship 
between ruler and minister has been gradually obscured. 


Favour has been the means of rising, and the highest in rank ~ 


have been the basest: kindness has been extended into licence 
and the most benefited have been the most contemptuous. And 
thereby have crept in many evils. Now I mean to inculcate 
respect for the dignity of the law, and kindness shall follow its 


attainment: there shall be moderation in conferring rank, but — 


honour shall really follow on such promotion. In the mutual 
co-operation of kindness and honour and in proper distinction 
between superiors and inferiors lies the efficiency of a 
government.” 

Fa Chêng had no argument to oppose. In due time all 
became perfectly tranquil, and all the forty-and-one districts, 
with their respective garrisons, were peaceful and contented. 

As Prefect of the metropolitan district, Fa Chêng earned 
much hatred, caring for no one but himself, and one man told 
of the complaints to K‘ung-ming, urging his ‘dismissal. 

But K‘ung-ming referred to his meritorious services. — 
“When my lord was in Chingchou, fearful of his enemy on the — 
north and trembling lest he be attacked from the east, Fa 
Chéng was his sure support. In these prosperous days one — 
can hardly begin to discipline him.. Could we reasonably i 
forbid him following somewhat his own way?’ ; 

So no investigation was made, but Fa Cheng heard of the © 
complaints and corrected his faults. 

One day, when Yiian-té and K‘ung-ming were resting and at 
leisure, Kuan P‘ing arrived with a letter from his father, - 
thanking his elder brother for the handsome gifts. Handing > 
in his letter, the sen said his father was anxious to come into 
Ch‘iian to try conclusions with Ma Ch‘ao. 

Said Ytian-te, “If he | were to come and fight I fear they 
would not both survive.’ 

“There is nothing to be anxious about,” said a EE 
“I will write to Kuan Yü.” 

Yüan-tê feared that his brother’s impulsive temperament 
might lead to trouble, so he told K‘ung-ming to compose a 
letter and send back by Kuan P‘ing. 

When Kuan Ping came again to his father the first question 
was about the contest with Ma Ch‘ao. Then the letter. was 
produced, and this is what it said: “I hear you are anxious to 


decide whether of the twain, Ma Ch‘ao and yourself is the © 


better man. Now I can measure Ma Ch‘ao. He may be 
unusually brave and bold, but he is only of the class of Ching — 


Anat Peng eee He iat Be a worthy ‘Hel of your 
unger brother, but he is far from the standard set by you, O 
ke of the Beautiful Beard. You have a most important 
arge. If you'comeinto Sstich‘uan, and Chingchou should be | 
st, would you not be guilty of. a. terrible failure? f think 
ou will see this.” 
~ Kuan Yü stroked his long Pedra. and smiled as he rend the 
etter. “He knows me thoroughly,” said he to himself. 
He showed the letter to his clients and friends and thought | 
o more of going westward. J 
The successes of Liu Pei in the wees had been duly noted he 
un Ch‘iian, who thought he was surely now going to obtain’ 
-thè much-coveted Chingchou. So he called in Chang Chao and 
Ku Yung to ask advice. 
= Chang Chao was ready with a Selec that would need no 
ghting: Yiian-té would offer the place with both hands. j 


In Shu there shine new sun and moon, = Ste, y 
Wu dreams Chingchou will he his soon. 


ken district. ENR i 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


KUAN YU GOES TO A FEAST ALONE, BUT ARMED; 
Fu HUANG-HOU DIES FOR THE STATE. 


The scheme which Chang Chao had in mind he laid before his 
master thus: “The one man upon whom Liu Pei relies most is 


Chuko Liang. Now his brother is in your service and in your ~ 


power. All you have to do is to seize his family and send him 
west to see his brother and make him persuade Liu Pei to 
- return Chingchou. If he refuse, the family will suffer, and 
Liang will not be able to resist the claims of brotherhood.” 

“But Chuko Chin is a loyal and true gentleman. I could not 
lay hands upon his family,” said Sun Ch‘tian. =f 

“Explain the ruse to him; that will set his mind at rest,” ~ 
said Chang. : : ; siles 

Sun Ch‘tian consented and issued the command to confine the — 
family of his retainer in the palace but not really, imprison — 
them. Then he wrote a letter for Chuko Chin to take with — 
him on his mission. Before many days Chin reached Ch‘éngtu __ 
and sent to inform Ytian-té of his arrival. He at once sought © 

the advice of his able counseller. 

“Why think you your brother has come?” 

“He has come to force the return of Chingchou.” 

“How shall I answer him?” ; 

“You must do so and so,” said K‘ung-ming.’ ieee 

The plan of action being prepared, K‘ung-ming went out of the 
city to welcome his brother, but instead of taking him to his own 
residence he took him to the guest-house. When the greetings 
were over, the visitor suddenly lifted up his voice and wept. ; 

“Tf you have any trouble, my brother, tell; why do you weep — 
thus?” asked: K‘ung-ming. 

“Alas! my family are lost,” cried he. as 

“I suppose it is-in the matter of the return of Chingchou? > 
If your family have been seized on my account, how can I bear — 
it calmly? But do not be anxious, my brother. I shall cer- — 
tainly find some way out of the difficulty.” ; 

This reply pleased Chuko Chin, and the two brothers went 
to visit Yitian-té. .The letter was presented, but when Yiian-té 
had read it he said, angrily, “He is related to me by marriage — 
and he has profited by my absence from Chingchou to steal 
away his sister. That is a sort of kindliness I find it hard to — 
bear. When I am just going to lead my army to take vengeance — 
is it likely he will get Chingchou out of me?” sites 


ais 
Ly 


? í {a 
r, L ENE a ae 
r; 3 Re d A 


Xa 


At this point K‘ung-ming prostrated himself Peene at his 


3 rd’s feet and said, “The Marquis of Wu has seized my |. 


brother’s family, and he will put them all to death if the land 

be not given up. Can I remain alive if such a fate befall them? 

I pray my lord for my sake to give back the district and pre- 

vent any breach between my brother and me.” 

But Yiian-té refused. He seemed obdurate, but K‘ung-ming 
persisted in his entreaty. Finally Yiian-té reluctantly con- 
sented, Vae 5 i 

= “Since things are so, and the Commander-in-chief pleads for 
it, I will return half,” said he. “I will give up Changsha, 

i Lingling and Kueiyang.” j 

i “Then, as you have consented, prepare letters ordering Kuan 

- Yü to yield these three districts,” said Chin. 

-Yitian-té said, “When you see my brother you must use most 

=- gracious words to him, for his nature is as a fierce fire, and I 

‘fear what he may do. So be very careful.” 

: Chuko Chin, having got the letter, took his leave and went 

' straightway to Chingchou. . He asked for an interview, and 

was received in the grand reception hall. When both were 
seated in their respective places, the emissary produced his 

letter, saying, “The Imperial Uncle has promised to return 

- three districts to my master, and I hope, General, you will hand 

them over at once and let me return.” 

Kuan Yii’s countenance changed, and ha said, “The oath — 

sworn in the Peach Garden bound me and my brother to sup- 

‘port the Dynasty of Han. Chingchou | is a portion of their 


leader is in the field he receives no orders, not even those of 
his prince. Although you have brought letters from my 
brother, yet will I not yield the territory.” 

“But the Marquis of Wu has laid hands upon my family. and 


- 


-they will be slain if the land be not given up. I crave your . 


ae O General.” 
_ “This is but a ruse on his part, but it does not deceive me.’ 

“Why are you so pitiless?” 

Kuan Yü drew his sword, saying, “Let us have no more. 
This sword is pitiless.” 

X = “It will put the Commander-in-chief to shame, ” said Kuan 

= Ping. “I pray you not to be angry, my father.” 

i “Were it not for my respect for the Commander-in-chief, 
: you would never go back to Wu,” said Kuan Yu. 

Chuko Chin, overwhelmed with shame, took his leave, sought 
his ship and hastily returned to see his brother. “But K‘ung- 
“ming had gone away upon a journey. However, he saw Ytian- 
. a tê and related what had happened, and said that Kuan Yü was 
going to slay him. 

“My brother is hasty,” said Ytian-té. “It is difficult to argue 
Brith him. But return home for the present, and when I have 


_ domain, and how can any part be given to another? When a. 


tmou a the Eheee Bingooms - pi: 59 ; 


1 


60 | an Guo, or 


finished my conquest I will transfer Kuan Yü to another post, D 


and then I may be able to return Chingchou.” 


Chuko Chin had no choice but to accept this reply and carry - 


the unsatisfactory news to his master, who was greatly annoy- 
ed and said, “This running to and fro was nothing more than 
one of your brother’ s tricks.” 


The unhappy messenger denied this and told how his brother — 


had interceded with tears and obtained the promise to return 


three districts. It was the obstinacy of Kuan Yü that spoiled © 


all. y3 


“Since Yiian-té said he would return the ee districts, we may 


send officials to take over their adminiotrakio. -Think you 
that might be done?” said Sun. 
“What you say, my lord, seems most proper” 


The family of Chuko Chin were restored to liberty and | 


officers were sent to take charge of the three districts that had 
been named. But they quickly returned, saying that Kuan Yü 


would have none of them, but had chased them away at once | 


with threats to kill them if they did not hasten. 


him. 


said Sun. 


Sun Ch‘iian then summoned Lu Su and laid the blame onk 


“You are Ytian-te’s guarantor in brs matter; how can you 
sit quietly looking on while he fails to perform his contract?” — 


ik have thought out a plan and was just going to impart it a 


to you,” said Lu Su. 
“And what is your plan?” 


Lu Su said, “There is a camp at Luk‘ou; 5 Eo Kuan Yü t to i 
` a banquet there and try to persuade him. If he still remain 
obstinate, have some assassins ready to slay him. Should he © 


refuse the rem then we must try conclusions with an 


army.” $ a 


“This suits me,” said Sun, “and it shall be done.” 
“It should not be done,” interrupted K‘an Tsé. “The man 


is too bold and not at all like common men. The plan will fail - 


and result in more harm 
“Then when may: [| expect to get my Chingchou?” asked. 
Sun, angrily. 


He ordered Lu Su to carry out his plan, and Su went to i 


‘Luk‘ou forthwith and settled the preliminaries of the banquet. 
The place selected was by the river. Then he wrote a letter. 
and found a persuasive person to deliver it. The messene 
set out and sailed across the river to the post, where he was 
received by Kuan P‘ing, who conducted him to his father. 

“AS Lu Su invites me, I will come to-morrow: you may tee.) 
turn,” was Kuan Yii’s reply. 
After the messenger had gone, Kuan P‘ing said to his father; 


“Why did you promise to go? I think Lu Su means you no — 


good.” 


Homan of the Three Bingdems he : 


“Do you think I do not news This has all come out of my 
fusal to yield those three districts. They are going to try 
ercion at this banquet. If: I refuse they will think I fear. 
hem. I will go to-morrow in a small ship with just my per- 
onal guard of half a score, and. we shall see whether Lu Su 
-will dare to come near me.” 
:: “But, father, why risk your priceless self in the very den of 
tiger? I think you are not giving due importance to my 
uncle’s charge.” 
-“I have been in the midst of many and imminent dangers 
ll alone and have been careless of them ; think you that I shall 
egin to show fear of a few such rats as those?” | 
= Nor was the son alone in remonstrance. Ma Liang also 
warned his chief. 
_ “Although Lu Su has a great Pagut: yet now he is pushed > 
ard, He certainly is badly disposed toward you, and you 
must be careful, General.” 
~~ Kuan Yü replied, “IL have given my word, and shall I with- 
draw from it? In the days of the warring states Lin Hsiang- . 
ju of the State of Chao had not the force even to bind a chicken, 
yet in the assembly at Shéngch‘ih he regarded not the Prince 
-of Ts‘i in, but did his duty without fear of consequences., Have 
-T not learned to face any number of foes? I cannot break my 
promise.” ; 
“If you must go; ” said Ma Liang, “at least go prepared.” 
- “Tell my son to choose out half a score of fast ships and a 
half company of good marines and be in readiness to help me 
at need. And when nen sees a red flag waved he can come over 
fo my aid.” - A i 
"The order was given and ee little adon. was got 
ready. 2 
~ The messenger returned to his Masir and tolg him that 
Kuan Yü had boldly accepted the invitation, and Ly Su and Lü 
“Méng took counsel together. 
_ “What do you think of this?” asked Lu Su. 
= “Tf he comes with a force, Kan Ning and I will be in readi- 
“ness for him by the river-side. And you will hear our bomb 
asa signal that we are attacking. If he has no force with him 
‘the assassins can set on during the banquet.” 

Next day a look-out was kept on the bank, and early in the 
day a single ship came along. It was manned by very few. 
_men, and a simple red flag flew out on the breeze showing but | 
one character, the name of the great warrior. Presently they 
could see him, a handsome figure in a green robe and black 
turban. Beside him stood Chou Ts‘ang, his sword-bearer, and 
near him were eight or. nine fine-looking men each with a sword © 
at his side. 

He landed and was evaven by the embi Lu Su, who T 
conducted him to ne hall, bowed his greetings and led him to = —— 


ies cane San one or Re SS , ela 


the banquet chamber When he drank to his host ius Su dicen : 
not raise his eyes, but Kuan Yü was perfectly composed. E 

When, they had become mellow with wine, Lu Su said, “I 
have a word to say to you, Sir, if haply I may have your atten- 
_tion. You know that your illustrious brother, the Traperial 

Uncle, made me surety with my master that Chingchou would 
be returned after Ssiich‘uan had been taken. Well, now that 
country is in his possession, but Chingchou is still unreturned, 

Is not this a breach of good faith ?” X : 

“This is a government affair,” said Kuan Yü. “Such matters 

should not be introduced at a banquet: 
“My. master only has petty possessions in the east, and he 
allowed the: temporary loan of Chingchou out of consideration 
for the need in which you then were. But now you have Ichou, — 
and Chingchou should be given up. The Imperial Uncle has 
even yielded three districts, but you, Sir, seem unwilling to let 
them go. This seems hard to explain on reasonable grounds.” 

Kuan Yü replied, “I braved the arrows and the stones in. the. 
„battle at Wuling and with all my strength drove back the 
enemy: did I get a single foot of land for all my efforts? Now 
you come to force this place out of me.’ 

“No; I do not,” said Lu Su. “But at the time that you and 
your brother suffered defeat at Ch‘angpan, when you were 
helpless and in the greatest straits, fugitives you knew not 
whither, then my master was moved with pity and-did not 
grudge the land. So he gave your brother a foothold whence — 
he might be abie to accomplish other ends. But your brother 
has presumed upon long-suffering. He has attained his end, 
the country of his desire, and still he occupies Chingchou. Such 
greed and such treachery will make the whole world laugh 
him to shame, as you know. quite well.” 

“All that is no affair of mine; it is my brother’s I cannot 
yield the land.” é 

“I know that by the dath in the Peach Garden’ you three: 
were to live or die together. But your brother is now a ruler ; 
how are you going to get out of that?’’. 

Kuan Yü was at a loss to reply. However, Chou Ts‘ ang 
burst into the conversation, roaring out, “Only the virtuous get 
hold of territory, does that mean only you people of East Wu?” 

Kuan Yü’s anger now showed itself. His face changed; he 
_ rose in his place, took his sword from his sword-bearer and 
said fiercely, “How dare you talk like this at a discussion of 
-state matters? Go! And go quickly.” - 

Chou understood. He left the hall, made his way to the: 
river and waved the red eall-flag. The ‘ships darted across like 
arrows and were ready for action. : 

The mighty sword in his right hand, Kuan Yü laid hold of. 
his false host with his left and, simulating intoxication, said, 
“You have ‘kindly invited me to- day, Sir, but do not say apy- ; 


3 iie about Cl cena for I am so uk that I may forget our 
“old friendship. Some other day I hope to invite you to Ching- 
chou, and then we will taik about that matter.” 
~ Poor Lu Su’s soul almost left his body with fright as he was 
‘led down to the river bank in the grip of his guest. The two 
friends he had placed in ambush dared not face the terrible 
Kuan Yii and so made no move lest they should bring about the 
evil they feared. When they got tc the bank, Kuan Yü released — 
his host, got on board and then said farewell. Lu Su stood 
2 stupidly staring at the ship while a fair breeze as it ae 
out of sight. 
~ This episode has been commemorated in verse :— 


a = He showed his contempt for the men of the east 
= By going alone to their traitor feast; 
= He met contempt with disdain. 


To gain his end his pride he controlled, 
As Hsiang-ju of old he was also bold; 
"T'was the Mien Lake game played again. 


Kuan Yü took his homeward way, while Lu Su and his two 

‘confederates talked over what had occurred. l 

= “What can be done now?” said Lu Su. 

4 “The only thing is to tell our master and let him send an 
army, > replied Lü Mêng. 

_ Lu Su sent a messenger to Sun Ch‘üan, who, in his wrath, 
was for sending évery available soldier at once against Ching- : 
chou. But at this crisis there came news that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was 
_ raising a huge army with the intention of attacking the south. 
č: ‘So hasty orders were sent to Lu to make no move, but to send ~ 
È all the men he could toward the north to repel Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
However, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao did not march south. One of his 
- officers, Chuan Kan, sent in a memorial against the scheme. 
= “J, Chuan Kan, understand that inspiring fear is the chief 
consideration in war, as inculcating virtue is in government. 

-These two combined in one man fit him to be a prince. For- 
Ee, in the days of disturbance, you, illustrious Sir, attacked 
_ the rebels and restored tranquillity almost everywhere, the only 
districts unsubdued and not under your contro] being Wu and 
~ Shu. The former of these is protected by the great river, the 
3 latter secured by its mountains, and both difficult to conquer — 
_ by force of arms. My humble opinion is that it is more fitting 
_ to increase the authority of civil government, to lay aside arms 
and rest weapons, to cease. from war and train your soldiers 
until the times shall be favourable. If your mighty legions © 
be now sent to camp on the river bank and the rebels should 
take refuge behind their natural defences, your men will be 
unable to prove their prowess, and should unforeseen combina- 
tions appear their force will not be available. In such a case 
pour high prestige would be impaired. I trust, illustrious Sir, 
you will deign to examine this.” 


ee ENAN AN sa 


64 : = an Huo, ar 


After reading this, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao ceased to think of an ex- — 
pedition against the south. Instead, he established schools — 
and set himself to attract men of ability. 

About the same time fcur of his officers conceived the: idea 
of getting for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao the honour of “Prince of Wei.” But — 
another, Hsiin Yu, opposed this course, saying, “The minister’s 
rank is already that of “Duke,” and he has received the addi- 
tional honour of the Nine Gifts, so that his position is 
extremely high. If he advances to the rank of prince it will 
be inconsistent with reasonableness.” 

But Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was annoyed at this opposition and said, 
“Does the man wish to emulate Hsün Yü?” 

When Hsiin Yti heard of his anger he was grieved and fell 

- ill, so that in a few days he died. He was fifty-eight years of 
age. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had his remains interred honourably, and he 
stayed his ambition for princely rank. i 

But there came a day when he entered the palace wearing 
his sword and made his way to the apartment where the 
Emperor and Empress were seated. The Empress rose in a, 
fright and the Emperor gazed at his minister in terror. i 

“Sun Ch‘tian and Liu Pei have each seized a portion of the 
empire and no longer respect the court; what is to be done?” 

To this abrupt speech the Emperor replied, “The matter lies 
within your province.’ | 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao answered, angrily, “If such a remark be known se 
outside they will say I treat my prince without respect.” 3 

“Tf you will help me I shall be most’ happy; said His © 
ue “if not, then I trust to your kindness to let me | 
alone 

At this T's‘ao Ts“ ao glared at the Emperor and went out full 
of resentment. ; 

The courtiers said, “It is said that Duke Wei desires to 
become a prince and soon he will aspire to the Throne.” 

Both the Emperor and his consort wept. Presently Her 
Majesty said, “My father, Fu Wan, has long nourished a desire 
to slay this man. Now I will indite a secret letter to my father — 
to accomplish his end.” Sue 

“Remember the former attempt with Tung Ch‘eng. The ~ 
plot was discovered and great misery ensued. . I fear that this 
will leak out also and both of us will be undone.” 

Said the Empress, “We pass our days in constant discomfort, 
like sitting on a rug full of needles. If life is to be like this 
one were better dead. But I know one loyal man among the > 
attendants to whom I may entrust the letter. That one is Mu tt 
Shun, and he will deliver it.” 

: Thereupon she summoned Mu Shun a and having set 
away all others, they told their distress to the faithful one. so 
“That fellow 'T's‘ao desires the dignity of prince and soon he 

will aspire to the throne itself. I, the Emperor, wish to order 


‘iomance of the Three Bingoomgs 65 


_ the father of my consort to make away with the man, but the i 
_ difficulty is that all the courtiers are his creatures and there 
_is none whom I can trust save yourself. I desire you to convey PORE 
_ this secret letter to Fu Wan. I know your loyalty and am sure | 
_ you will prove no betrayer.” 
4 “I am the recipient of much graciousness for which not even 
-death would prove my gratitude. Thy servant prays that he 
_may be allowed to undertake this.” 
The letter was given to Mu Shun, who hid it in his hair, made ‘ 
= his way out of the precincts and handed it to its owner. Fu 
_ Wan recognised the handwriting of his daughter and read it. 
= Turning to the messenger he said, “You know the fellow’s 
- Creatures are many, and one must act with extreme caution 
_ against him. Unless we have the aid of Sun Ch‘iian and Liu 
= Pei’s armies, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will certainly attain his ends: In 
this matter we must gain the support of every loyal and faith- 
_ ful one in the court so that within and without there may be a 
_ simultaneous attack.” 
-~ “Then, O father of the Empress, write a letter in reply ask- 
ing for a secret edict, so that we may send to Wu and Shu to 
~ join in the attack.” 
So Fu Wan composed a reply, which he gave to Mu Shun to 
= take into the palace. This time also the letter was concealed 
in his hair and was safely taken in. 
= But there was a traitor, and Ts‘ao heard of the letters. So 
he waited at the palace gate for Mu Shun to come out. 
“Where are you going?” asked Ts‘ao Ts‘ a0, when Mu ap- 
peared. Riteg 
rr “The Empress is indisposed and has bidden me call a physi- U Nac 
- cian’ 

“Where is the summons for the physician ?” 

“There is no summons.’ . 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade his men search Mu Shun, but they did not | 
find the letter. 
< So he was allowed to go. But just then a gust of eid blew . Me 
off his hat, and it struck Ts‘ao that that had not been examined. AVRR 

So Mu Shun was called back. Nothing was found in the hat, ae 
. but when it was given back Mu Shun put it on with both hands. Beis 
- There was something suspicious about the movement and Ts‘ao aii 
_ bade the searchers examine his hair. Pies: 
herein the letter was found. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao read it; it said = = 
= that Sun and Liu were to be induced to help. The unhappy 
' Mu was taken away into a secret place and interrogated, but ot 
- he would confess nothing. a 
. That night three companies of soldiers surrounded the dwell- 
_ ing of Fu Wan, who was arrested with all his family. Search- 
ing the house they found the first letter in the handwriting of 
the Empress. Pr amn and his family were then consigned 
_ to a gaol. 


5 


BS ns ‘3 
aed te Fe 


66 San Kuo, or 


At dawn, a party of the Foresters, under Ch‘i Lü, bearing © 


ensigns of authority, entered the palace with orders to take 


away the seal of the Empress. On the way they met the Em- — 


peror, who asked the reason for a company of armed men being 
in the palace. 

“T have orders from Duke Wei to get the Empress’ s seal,” 
said Chí Lü. 


As soon as the Empress knew of this she recognised her. 


danger and hid herself in the hollow walls of. her private apart- 
. ments behind one of the ceremonial halls. She had not been 
long in hiding when one Hua Hsin, a president of a Board, with 
a company of men appeared and asked where she was. The 
palace people said they did not know. The red doors of the 
hall were burst open and Hua looked in, but: he saw no lady 
there. It occurred to him where she might be hidden, and he 
ordered his men to break open the wall. With his own hands 
he laid hold of the lady’s hair and dragged her forth. 

“Spare my life!” pleaded she. 

“You may say what you have to say to the Duke,” cried he 
surlily. 

She pulled down her hair and kicked off her shoes, but a 
couple of soldiers pushed her along in front of them outside. 


It may be said here that this Hua had some reputation for — 


learning. He and two others, Ping Ytian and Kuan Ning. all 
good friends, made a little coterie which was known as “The 
Dragon.” Hua Hsin was the “head”; his two friends the 


“belly”? and the “tail’’ respectively. One day Hua and Kuan 


were hoeing in their garden, when they turned up an ingot of 
silver. Kuan went on with his labours without giving a second 
glance at the find, but Hua picked it up. After regarding it a 
moment he threw it away again. 

Another day Kuan and Hua were reading together when 
there arose a great shouting outside the window of the study. 


A lady from the palace was passing. Kuan took no notice, but 


kept his eyes on his book; Hua rose and went to the window. 


For this, Kuan Ning despised his companion and the two parted 
‘for good. Sometime after, Kuan Ning fled into Liaotung, where 


he led the life of hermit. He wore a white cap and lived inthe . 


upper part of a house, never touching the ground with his feet. 
He wou!d have nothing to do with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and would not 
enter his service. 


But the unstable and inconstant Hua Hsin led a totally — 


different life. For a time he was with Sun Ch‘itian; then he. | 


went over to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and served him. And here he is 
found actually laying hands upon the Empress. 
His conduct in this particular is the subject of a poem :— 
"Twas a dastardly thing that Hua Hsin did, 


When he broke down the wall where the Empress hid 
And dragged her forth by the hair. . 


eet 


Romance ot the Three tngooms EE 


He lent his aid to a foul, foul crime’ 
And execrations throughout all time, 
Have been, and shall be, his share. 


a _ A poet also wr ote concerning Kuan Ning :— 
a 
y 


“ast of the Liao, so stories tell’t À ; 5 ree 
Is Kuan Ning’s tower, where long he. dwelt. ; 
Ignoble wealth was Hua Hsin’s quest, 

T } The hermit’s simple life was best. 


E SEN S 


As Hua Hsin hurried the unhappy woman out of the hall the e 
_ Emperor saw her. He went over and clasped her to his bosom, ` EK 
weeping. Hua Hsin tried to force her onward, saying he had 
orders from Duke Wei. 
“My doom is sealed,” wept the Empress. l 

= “And I know not when my turn will come,” sighed the 
j Emperor. 
~The. soldiers hustled the Empress onward, leaving His: 
- Majesty beating his breast in despair. 
= “Can it be that such things happen in the world?” cried the 

_ Emperor to Ch‘i Lü, who stood by. 
And he swooned. Ch‘i Lü made the courtiers pick him up, 
_ and they bore him into the palace. 
= Meanwhile, the unhappy Empress had heen taken before 
- Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
-= “I have dealt well with you and yours,” sate he ae. 
“and you requited me by plotting my murder. It isthe death 
_ of one of us, I see.’ 
_ He ordered the executioners to Heat her till she died.» After 
_ this, he went into the palace, seized her. two sons and had them 
poisoned. In the evening of the same day the whole household | com 
of Mu Shun were put to death publicly. Such terrible deeds cae 
-spread terror everywhere. They Happened in the late autumn iy nae 
_ of the year 211 A.D. r A 


As Ts‘ao stands first in crublty, j CERN 
So stands Fu Wan in loyalty. ; ae 
A married pair of low estate, a aa 
Had not been torn apart by fate. : <a 


` The Emperor grieved bitterly over the loss of his consort, - 
=f Bad in his despair refused all food. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao did not wish 
him to die of starvation and loneliness, so he proposed his awy Ea 
daughter as consort. tei 
- “Be not sad,” said he, “thy servant is no rebel. My neer 
is already in your palace as a secondary lady. She is wise and 
dutiful, fit to be your consort and occupy the first rank.” 
The Emperor Hsien dared not refuse, and therefore at the 
new year, in the time of the festivities, her name was inscribed 
on the dynastic rolls as Empress. And no one of the courtiers 
2 dared protest. ' 


[ss 


68 aci bari tuo 


Wherefore Ts‘ao Ts‘ao became even more powerful. But it 
pleased him not to have rivals in the land, so he again thought 
of subduing Liu Pei and Sun Ch‘tian. Chia Hsü proposed that | 
Hsiahou Tun and Ts‘ao Jên, who had served on the frontiers, © 
should be called to give their advice. They were sent for, and 
Ts‘ao Jên was the first to arrive. As a relative he felt he had 
the right to see the great minister without delay and went 
direct to the palace. 

But it happened that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had been drinking heavily, 
and his faithful henchman, Hsü Ch‘u, would not admit the new 
arrival. 

“Tam of the family,” said Ts‘ao Jé én, angry at the hindrance. 
“Dare you stop me?” 

“General, you:may be a relative, but here you are but an 
officer from the frontier. I am of little account, but a duty 
lies on me here in the palace. Our lord is overcome with wine 
and asleep, and I dare not allow you, to enter.” 

The refusal came to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s knowledge, and he com- 
mended the loyalty of his servant. 

Soon after, Hsiahou Tun came and was called to the council, 
and gave his opinion that the two rivals should be left until. 
Chang Lu of Hanchung had been subdued. The army that 
could overcome him would be in condition to attack Shu, and it 
would be conquered without difficulty. The advice coincided 
with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s own idea, and so he prepared an expedition 
for the west. 


By, a dastard crime he showed his power over a feeble king; 
This done, at once he hastened to destroy his neighbour. 


What happened will be told in later chapters. 


CHAPTER LXVIL 


k ‘Ts AO Ts“ AO CONQUERS HANCHUNG; 
$ CHANG LIAO SPREADS ‘TERROR AT CHAOYAO- FORD. 


To: expedition against Hanchung went out in three divisions, A 
with Hsiahou Yüan as leader of the van, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao in comi _ 
mand of the centre and Ts‘ao Jên bringing up the rear. Hsia- 


hou Tun was in charge of the commissariat. The spies soon 
carried the news into Hanchung, and Chang Lu called in his 
brother Wei to consult how to meet the attack. 

= Said Wei, “The strategical point to hold is Yangp‘ing Pass, 
and there should be half a score of stockades there with the 
forest to support them. You, my brother, should ee your 
dépôt of supplies at Hanning.” | 
= Thereupon two captains, Yang Ang Wadi Yang Jê ae were ee. 
with Chang Wei to the Pass, and they built the stockades. Soon 


the vanguard of the enemy arrived and camped at a point. 


fifteen li away. The soldiers were fatigued after the long 
march, and all lay down to rest without placing proper guards. 


Suddenly the camp was attacked in the rear by the two Yangs 


i from different points. Hsiahou Yüan and Chang Ho mounted 
i quickly and tried to beat off the attackers, but the enemy pour- 
ed in all round, and Ts‘ao’s men suffered great loss. They re- 
turned to the main body to tell of their defeat, and their chief 
abused them for their want of care. À 

= “Old soldiers like you should have known better and taken 
precautions against a raid of the camp when the enemy knew 
your men were exhausted by a long march.” 

He even desired to put them to death as a warning, but their 
fellow-officers interceded and he spared them. Soon Ts‘ao 
himself marched in the van. Then he saw the dangerous and 
-evil nature of the place, with its thick growth of trees, and as 
he knew nothing of the roads and was fearful of, an ‘ambush 
he returned to his camp. — 

Calling up his two henchmen, Hsti Ch‘u and Heit Huan he 
i penid., Had I known the dangerous nature of the place I would 
never have come.’ 
= Hsti Ch‘u replied, “The goldiers are here now, my lord, and 
TAN cannot recoil before the hardships.” 

Next day Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao with only his two ua Tode out to 
E aantre the enemy’s camp. As they rede over the hills 
-Ts‘ao Ts‘ao pointed out the position with his whip and said, 
“Tt will be very difficult to reduce a place as strong as this.” 


70 ` Dan tuo, or 


Just then there arose a shout in their rear and a shower of 
arrows fell about them. The two Yangs were attacking and — 
the danger became great. 

“Friend Hsii, you look after our lord; cried Hsü Ch‘ u, ey 
can hold the enemy.” 

He galloped out and the two leaders took to flight, while their 
men scattered. In the meantime Hsü Huang led his master 
over the hills. Soon he met a troop of soldiers led by Hsiahou 
Yiian and Chang Ho, who had heard the sound of fighting and 


had come to the rescue, and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao got back safely to- 


camp. The four captains were rewarded. 

For fifty days-the two armies held each other at bay with- 
out coming to a fight. At the end of this time, orders were 
given to retire. . 

“We have not tried the strength of the enemy,” said Chia 
Hsii. “You should not retire, my lord.” 

“I see that they are always on the alert,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
“I am only retiring to put them off their guard. By and by I 
will send some light horse to attack their rear. T shall defeat 
them then.” 

“Ah! your skill is unfathomable!” cried Chia Hst. | 

Two parties were then sent to get round behind the Pass by 


-unfrequented roads, while Ts‘ao Ts‘ao broke up his camp and — 


led his main body backward. | 

When Yang Ang heard of the Met reat he thought it would be > 
a good chance to attack, but Yang Jén, remembering the cun- 
ning of their opponent, opposed it. Yang Ang was wilful and : 
said, “I shall go; you may come or not, as you wish.” ; i 

In spite of the protestations. of his colleague, Yang Ang 
marched, taking with him the men of five camps and leaving 
only a few defenders. ‘The day he set out was very foggy, so 
that one could hardly see his neighbour’s face, and soon the > 
force got into difficulties and could not advance. They bivou- 
acked on the road. 

Now, Hsiahou Ytian was out with a reconnoitring force be- 
hind the hills when they heard the voices of men and the 
neighing of horses. In the dense fog they could see nothing, 
but fearing an ambush they hastened to retire. They lost 
their way and presently stumbled on the deserted camp. The 
few defenders thought their comrades had returned, so they 
threw open the gates to let themin. One camp was empty and 
there they raised a great blaze, which frightened those in the 
other camps so that they fled. As.soon as the fog cleared, Yang. 
Jén came to the rescue, but as more of Ts‘ao’s men came up, 
the force was too strong for him and he quickly fled toward 
Nanch‘éng. By and by, when Yang Ang returned, he found 
his camp in the possession of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s men. 

Soon Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s main army came up, and Yang was be: 
tween two forces. There seemed no other way but to a a 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms ps A 


= dash for it. Falling in with Ho, the two engaged and Yang — a 


Ang fell. Those who escaped carried the news of the disaster 
to Chang Wei, who abandoned the Pass and fled. 

So the invaders took possession of the Pass, and its late 
Wotenders: Chang Wei and Yang Jén, had to go back and report 
failure. Chang Wei laid the blame on his companion, saying 
the Pass could not be he'd after its supporting positions had 
been lost. Chang Lu threatened to behead Yang Jén for his 
failure. Yang said he had tried to prevent the rashness of his 
brother and begged to be allowed to make another attack. 
If he failed he would abide by the consequences without 
protest. 

Chang Lu took his formal pledge to succeed, gave him two 
legions and sent him away. He marched to Nanch‘éng and 
made a stockade. 

Before Ts‘ao Ts‘ao made any further advance he sent Hsia- 
hou Yiian, with half a legion, to reconnoitre the road and they 


fell in with the force led by Yang Jén. Both sides drew up 


their battle array. From Yang’s side went out Ch‘ang Ch‘i to 
engage Hsiahou Ytian, who disposed of him in the third bout. 
Then Yang Jén set his spear and rode to the front.. They two 
fought near two score bouts and neither could claim victory. 
Then Hsiahou Yüan pretended defeat and fled. The other 


rushed in pursuit. The fugitive suddenly employed the Par- — 


` thian stab and killed his pursuer. His men ran away. 

As soon as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao knew of the death of this leader of the 
other side he brought up his army, marched straightway to 
Nanch‘éng and camped. 

Chang Lu became alarmed and called a council. 

“I can propose a man able to stand against the best leader 
of the enemy,” said Yen Pu. 

“Who is he?” asked Chang Lu. 

“P‘ang Tê, of Nanan. He surrendered at the same time as 


As 
i ‘Gi 


Ma Ch‘ao, but could not go with him into Sstch‘uan as he was ENR 


ill. If you treated him generously he would save you.’ 

Pang Tẹ was summoned. He came, was loaded with nite 
and given a force of one legion, with which he marched and 
camped ten li from the city, near the besieging force. 

His camp made, P‘ang Té rode out and challenged. Now 
Tsao Ts‘ao, remembering his boldness at the battle of the 
bridge over the Wei, was desirous of winning his help for 
himself, so he told his captains to try to weary him by prolong- 
ing the fights, and so make him captive. 
. Wherefore first rode out Chang Ho to answer the challenge. 
He fought a few bouts and returned. Then Hsiahou Yiian did 
the same thing. So did Hsü Huang. Lastly went Hsii Ch‘u, 
who kept up the fight to half a hundred bouts before he retired. 
Still P‘ang Tê showed no signs of fatigue nor of fear, and all 
- those who had fought with him praised his prowess and skill. 


72 . San kuo, or. 


“Tf only I could win him over to my side!” said Ts‘ao Ts‘a0 


longingly. 
Said Chia Hsu, “I know one of his subordinates, Yang Sung. 
He is avaricious and open to a bribe. You might send him 


secret presents and get him to slander Pfang Tê to his master © 


so as to weaken his position.” 
“But how can one get at this man? He is in Nanch‘éng.” 


“In the next battle pretend defeat, flee and let P‘ang gh 
possession of this camp. Return in the night in force and. 
drive him out, and he must retreat into the city. Let one of | 


your own peop:e with a persuasive tongue mingle with his men, 
disguised as one of his soldiers, and so gain entrance into the 
city.” 

A subtle agent was found, and goodly gifts were his in 


- advance, and he was entrusted with a golden breastplate as a 
bribe. He put it on and over it put on the dress of an ordinary ie 


soldier of Hanchung. And he made his way quietly to a point 
-on the road along which the soldiers of Hanchung would re- 
treat into the city. There he waited. 


Next, two parties were sent to lie in ambush and Hsü Huang © 


was sent to challenge, but with orders to be defeated. The 
scheme went well, and as P‘ang Té came on to smite, Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao’s men retired before him till he found himself at their 


very camp. And therein he entered and was exceedingly — ji 


pleased to find fodder and forage in great quantities. 
Having sent off a messenger to his chief, he spread a feast 


-in celebration of the victory; and when night came on they 
slept. But about the second watch there was an alarm from. 


three directions, and the camp was threatened by three forces: 
It was the night-attack arranged by Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and P‘ang Tê 


could not make any defence. He got to horse, cut his way ` 


through and made for the city. With the attackers in close 
pursuit he reached the gate, got it opened and rushed in. 


And the traitor got in in the confusion. He mede his way © 


quickly to Yang Sung’s residence and saw him. He told him 


that the great minister, Duke Wei, knew him by reputation and 


held him in great esteem and as a token thereof had sent him 


his golden breastplate and a confidential letter as well. Yang 
took it all in, read the letter and said, “I will reply by and by, 


and the duke need feel no anxiety for I shall find a means of. | 


proving my gratitude. You may return.” 


_ Soon after, he went to see Chang Lu and told him that P‘ang 
`. Tê had been defeated because he had been bribed. Forthwith. 


Chang Lu summoned his general, abused him and threatened 
to put him to death. Yen Pu, however, protested and proposed 


to test P‘ang in another encounter. If he lost that, he might - 


be put to death. 


P‘ang Té retired full of resentment. The next day Ts‘ao ; 
Ts‘ao attacked, and P‘ang went out to repel him.. Ts‘ao sent — 


isa ee 


Romance of the Three tingdoms 73. 


out his favourite Hsü Ch‘u, but bade him pretend dotbat. 
When P‘ang pursued, Ts‘ao rode toward the hills, where he 
halted and presently got speech with P‘ang. He proposed 
surrender. 

But P‘ang thought within. himself that to capture Ts‘ ao 


would be a fine exploit, so he boldly faced his escort and rode 
up the hill. But there arose a great shouting as if heaven and 
earth were clashing together and he’and his followers went — 
headlong into ditches and pits that had been dug. Out flew 


= men with ropes and hooks, and P‘ang was a prisoner. 


When he was taken to T's‘ao he was received with the erent 


est kindness. Ts‘ao himself dismounted, loosed the captives — 


bonds and asked him if he would surrender. ‘Pfang thought 


of the ill-treatment he had just received at the hands of his 
master and of his injustice, and gave in. At once he was helped 
-to mount a horse by Ts‘ao himself and led to the great camp. 


Men placed for the purpose on the city wali saw what 


- happened and told Chang Lu that his leader had ridden off on 


friendly terms with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, whereby Chang Lu was per- 


_suaded that Yang Sung had spoken truly. 


_ Soon after, scaling ladders were set against the city walls and 
catapults threw in great stones. The danger being imminent, 


-~ Chang Wei counselled the destruction of all supplies and flight 


E - 


_ to Nanshan, where they might be able to defend Pachung. On 
_the other hand, Yang Sung said the best course was to throw 


open the gates and surrender. Chang Lu could not decide 


= which to do. His brother, Wei, maintained that burning every- 
_ thing and flight was the only course. 


Chang Lu said, “I have been always loyal at heart and 


- desired to return. to allegiance when circumstances would 


permit. I have been unable to attain my desire, but now 
fight seems the only course open to me. However, the gran- 


aries and treasures, the public offices and the government 
_ property of all kinds must be kept safe.” 


So the public buildings were all carefully barred and sealed. 


` The same night, in the late evening, Chang and his family went 


out through the south gate and found their way through. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao let them go unpursued. When Ts‘ao entered the 


_ city and saw the proofs of Chang Lu’s care of the government 


property he compassionated the. man’s misfortunes. He then 
- sent a messenger into Pachung to induce him to surrender. 
Chang Lu was disposed to do so, but his brother would not 
hear of it. Nor would Yang Sung, who wrote a secret letter 
3 ae Ts‘ao urging him to attack and promising treacherous 
aid. 


- Tsʻao presently attacked, and Chang Wei came out to meet 


. felis But his opponent was the mighty Hsti Ch‘u, who made 
short work of him. The beaten soldiers went back into the city, 
~ which chee Lu then decided to defend. As this would not 


74 Dan ius, or 


give Yang Sung the chance to carry out his treacherous scheme, — 
he persuaded his master to go out and fight, leaving him to — 
defend the city. Chang Lu took this advice, although it was 
opposed by Yen Pu, and went out. But before his van got near — 
the enemy, his rear ranks began to desert, and Chang retreated. 
Ts‘ao pursued him to the city walls, where Chang found the ~ 
gates shut against him. There being now no way open, Chang’ 
dismounted, prostrated himself and gave in. Because of this 
and his care of the public property, Ts‘ao treated him with 
great kindness and consoled him with the title of General, 
“Guardian of the South.” Yen Pu and many others also were ° 
enrolled among the nobles. To each district was appointed 
a military officer styled Tu-yii, in addition to the Prefect. All. 
the soldiers were feasted and rewarded. 

Then the traitor Yang Sung, who had sold his master, came . 
and sued for honours. He was condemned to public execution | 
and exposure. fis SEDERE. 


To harm fhe wise and compass the death ‘of one’s Toka may ` 
appear signal service, 

But the gains thereof are vanity; 

No glory clings to the house of him who dies a hamein denh) 

Wherefore Yang Sung is an object of contempt forever. 


When the eastern Ch‘iian was quite subdued the Readede en 
Ssiima I said, ‘““The-men of Shu are against Liu Pei because 
of his treatment of the late ruler, Liu Chang, and if on the | 
strength of your present success you press forward, Liu Pei 
will become as a shattered tile. The wise man takes the 
occasion when it serves and this should not be missed.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sighed. “There is no end; now that I have 

Shénsi I am forced into taking Shu.” 
-. Liu Hua supported Sstma I, saying he spoke well. “yg yok 
delay, Chuko Liang will have become minister, while Kuan Yü, 
Chang Fei and the other bold warriors will be at the head of 
the army. If the man of Shu once settle down, and the points 
of vantage are held, you will not be able to overcome them.” 

Ts‘ao replied, “My men have marched far and suffered much; 
beside we must show pity.” 

Wherefore he rested his army for a time. ~ Meanwhile the 
populace of West Shu, having heard of Ts‘ao’s success, conclud- ’ 
ed that they would suffer next, and fear spread among them. 
Whereupon Ytan-te called in the Commander-in-chief and 
asked his advice. He replied that he could make Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao ` 
retreat of his own accord. 

“A. part of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army is camped at Hota because of 
the fear of Sun Ch‘tian. If now we restore those three districts 
they desire so greatly, and send a specious person to talk, we. 
can make Sun Ch'tian attack Hofei, which will lead to Ts! ao 
going southward.’ ; 


Konar of the Three tiingooms 75 


ey “Who | is a fit person for the messenger ? 2” said Ytian-té. 


And I Chi replied, “T will go.” 

Yiian-té, well satisfied, wrote letters and prepared gifts, 
with which I Chi went, calling i in at Chingchou on the way to 
tell Kuan Yü. Then he went on to Moling and saw Sun Ch‘tian. 
After the greetings, Sun Ch‘tian asked on what business he had — 
come, ` 
I Chi replied, “On a former occasion Chuko Chin would 


` have had the three districts but for the absence of the Com- 


mander-in-chief, which prevented the actual transfer. Now © 
I am the bearer of letters giving them back to you. Chingchou, 


= Nanchiin and Moling were meant to be restored, and now that 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has got possession of Eastern Ch‘uan they are no | 


- place for General Kuan. Hofei is empty and we hope you will 
attack it so as to make Ts‘ao Ts‘ao withdraw to the south and - 


let my master take East Ch‘uan, when he will restore the whole 
of the Chingchou district.” 
“Go back to the guest-house and let me take counsel in this 


- matter,” said Sun Ch‘tian. 


As soon as I Chi had gone, the marquis turned to his officers 


_ and asked what should be done. 


Chang Chao said, “All this is because Liu Pei fears that 


 Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao will attack him. However, since Ts‘ao is absent 
in Hanchung it would be well to seize the opportunity and 


attack Hofei.” 

Sun Chiiian accepted the: advice. After he had sent the — 
messenger away he began to prepare for the expedition. He 
left Lu Su in command over the three districts of Changsha, 


; Chianghsia and Kueiyang. Then he-encamped at Luk‘ou, and 
withdrew Lü Méng and Kan Ning and sent tó Hangchou : 
(Yiihang) for Ling T‘ung. wx 


Very soon, Lü Méng and Kan Ning’ returned, and the former 
suggested a plan, saying, “Ts‘ao Ts‘ao has sent Chu Kuang, 
Prefect of Luchiang, to camp at Huanch‘éng and plant grain 
for the supply of Hofei. Let us first take Huanch‘eng and 
then attack Hofei.”’ 

“This scheme is just after my own heart,” said Sun Ghian, 

So he made dispositions accordingly, he himself with several 
generals, commanding the centre. But the famous warriors 
Ch‘êng P‘u, Huang Kai and Han Tang were not called to take 


part in this expedition as-they were guarding certain especial 
places. 


‘The army crossed the river and captured Hochou on the way. 
The Prefect of Huanchou sent an urgent message to Hofei for 


help and set himself to strengthen his fortifications for a siege. 


Sun Ch‘iian went very near the city to observe its defence, and 
a flight of arrows greeted him, some striking his great official 


parasol. He went back to camp and asked his officers to offer 


plans of attack. 


ts i, Ban fuo, or, ne he 


Then Tung Hsi said, “Pile up great hills of earth and attack 
from the summits.” 
Said Hsii Shéng, “Set up long ladders and construct plat- 


: forms whence you can look over the city walls and thus” 


attack.” 

But Lü Mêng said, “All such plans need a long time to : 
prepare, and in the meantime the soldiers will arrive from 
Hofei. Do not try such long-drawn-out schemes, but take ad- 


vantage of the fine, fresh spirit of our newly arrived men and » 


attack impetuously. Their élan will carry the wall. Tf you 
attack to-morrow at dawn the city will fall before noon.’ ' 

So the early meal was taken at the fifth watch and the army 
went to the attack: The defenders sent down showers of 


‘arrows and stones. Kan Ning took an iron chain in his hand 


and climbed up the wall. They shot at him with bows and 


5 crossbows, but he turned aside the arrows and bolts and he 


threw the chain round the Prefect Chu Kuang to pull him 


down. Lü Mêng beat the drum for the attack. The soldiers — 


made a rush forward to climb the wall, and they slew Chu 
Kuang. His officers and soldiers gave in, and so the city fell 


„to Sun Ch‘tian. It was still a long time to noon. 


In the meantime Chang Liao was marching to,the aid of the i 
city. Half-way he heard that the city had fallen, and so he | 
returned to Hofei. } 

Soon after the conqueror’s entry into Huanch‘éng, Ling 
T‘ung came there with his army. The next few days were 
devoted to feasting.the army. Especial rewards were given 


-to the two captains who had done such good work at the cap- _ 


R 


ture, and at the banquet to the officers Kan Ning was seated 
in the seat of honour, which his colleague, Lü Mêng, readily 
yielded to him for his ‘late prowess. 

But as the cup of felicitation was passing round, Ling Tung’ S 4 
thoughts turned to the enmity he bore Kan Ning for having 
slain his father, and the praises which Lü Méng now heaped 
upon him filled Ling’s heart with bitterness. . For some time 
he glared savagely at Kan Ning, and then he determined on | 
revenge. Drawing his sword, he suddenly rose to his feet and | 


ie ‘cried, “There is nothing to amuse the assembly. 1! will give 


them a display of swordsmanship.” 
Kan Ning quickly saw his real intention. He Sushed back 


his table and laid hold of a ch'i (halberd) in.each hand, crying,. 


“And you may also watch an adept in the use of this weapon. a 

Lü Méng saw the evil meaning of both, and assuming his 
sword and shield he hastily stepped between the two warriors; — 
saying, “Neither of you gentlemen is so dexterous as I.” Hider 

So he forced the two combatants asunder, while some ome 
ran to tell Sun Ch‘iian. He hastily jumped into the saddle and 
rode to the banquet hall. At sight of their lord they all three 
lowered their weapons. 


mi? 


k 


x 


Ni 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 


Ch'üan. “Why do you revive it to-day? R 


Ling T‘ung prostrated himself in tears. Sun Ch‘iian ex- 


“I have bidden you two to forget this old enmity,” said Sun 5 


horted him to forget his quarrel, and once again there was 


peace. 
The next day the army set out for Hofei. 


nilai seal and bearing outside the words, “If rebels come, open 
is 


_ So when he received the news of the coming of a powerful Bae 
army Chang Liao opened the casket and read the letter there- 
in, which said, “If Sun Ch‘iian comes to attack Hofei the two | 


captains Chang and Li are to go out to oppose him and Yiieh 
is to be left to guard the walls.” Chang Liao sent the letter 


to the two men named therein. 


“What do you think to do?” said Yiieh Chin. 
Chang Liao replied, “Our lord is away and Wu is coming to 


attack for certain. We must go out to repel them and exert 
ourselves to the utmost to inflict defeat upon their advanced — 


guard. Thus we shall appease the fears of the populace and 


. then we can hold as best we may.” 


But Li Tien was silent, for he was ever unfriendly to Chang 


\Liao. Then seeing his colleague inclined to hold off, Ytieh - 
Chin said, “I am for remaining on the defensive since the 


enemy is so much more numerous than we.’ 


“Gentlemen, it seems you are selfish and kot devoted to the 


_ common weal, » said Chang Liao. “You may have your pri- 
_vate reasons for what you do, but I intend to go out and try bf 


_to repel the enemy. I will fight them to the death.” 


Thereupon he bade his servants saddle his steed. At this, 
Li Tien’s better feelings were aroused, and he rose saying, 
“How can I be careless of the common weal and indulge my 
private feelings? I am ready to follow you and do as you 
command.” 

Chang Liao was elated at this moral victory, and said, “Since 
I can depend upon your help, my friend, then I would ask you 
‘to lie in ambush on the north of the Ch‘aoyao Ford in order 


to destroy the bridge there as soon as the army of Wu has 


“erossed. I, with my friend Yüeh Chin, will smite the enemy.” 


Li Tien went away to muster his men and prepare the 
ambush. 
= As has been recorded, the leaders of the advance guard of 
the Wu army were the veterans Lü Méng and Kan Ning. Sun 


-Ch‘iian and Ling T‘ung were in the centre; the other captains 


followed them. The leaders of the van met Ytieh Chin first, 
and Kan Ning rode out and challenged him. After a few 


bouts Yüeh pretended to be defeated and fled. Kan Ning 
called to his colleague to join in the pursuit. 


Because of the loss of Huanch‘éng, Chang Liao Blaa | 
greatly. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had sent a small casket sealed with his | 


18 Dan Kuo, or 


When Sun Chiiian heard that this advance guard had been 
successful he hastened his men to the Ford. But then there 
came a series of explosions, and up came Chang Liao and Li | 
Tien, one on each flank. Sun Ch‘iian was unprepared for this 
and sent messengers to call off the pursuit and ask for help. — 
Before it could arrived, Chang Liao had come up. 

Manifestly, Ling T‘ung, who had with him only a small troop 
of horse, could not long withstand the army of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, but 
he faced them and fought bravely while his lord galloped for 
the bridge. The southern end had been already broken down 
and there was a wide breach between the end of the bridge 
and the.shore. Nota single plank was there by which to cross. 
What could be done? Sun Ch‘tian was in a quandary, and 
helpless. 

“Go back and jump for it!” yelled one of the petty officers, 
Ku Li by name. 

He did so. Backing his horse some thirty feet or so, he then 
gave him his head and lashed him with his whip. 

The good beast leaped, cleared the charma and his master was 
safe on the southern shore. ; i 

Once Tilu leapt across T'an Torrent wide, 

And when defeat did Sun of Wu betide, j 
And death came threateningly at Ch‘aoyao Ford, 

His steed too leapt, and saved him from the sword. | 

Having reached the farther shore, Sun Ch‘tian embarked on 
a boat and was rowed to a place of safety, while Chang Liao’s 
army was held at bay. Kan Ning and Lti Méng, coming to his 
aid, were pursued by- Ytieh Chin, and Li Tien also stayed their 
progress. But the men of Wu fought bravely, and Ling T‘ung’s 
troop of horse perished to a man. While Ling himself was 
wounded, but found his way to the bridge. Finding it des- 
troyed, he fled along the stream. Presently he was seen by 
Sun Ch‘tian from the boat and taken on board. Kan Ning and 
Lü Méng fied into Honan. 

The terrible slaughter at this battle put sack fear into the 
minds of the men from Chiangnan that the name of Chang 
Liao kept the very children quiet at night. 

When Sun Ch‘tian reached his camp he richly rewarded 
Ling T‘ung and the petty officer Ku Li. Then he led his 
army back to Juhsii and began to put his ships in order so` 
that the army and navy might act in unison. He also sent 
home for reinforcements. 

Chang Liao reflected that he had insufficient force to meet 
another attack if it should be supported by the navy of Wu, 
so he sent an urgent message to his master in Hanchung. 
When the messenger arrived, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao saw that his western 
expedition would have to yield to the urgency of home defence. 
pee he called in his Counselors and put a direct question 
o them 


“Can we tet Waster Shu x now, or sate p abe 
“The country is too well prepared; we cannot, ae replied Liu 
“It is better to go to the succour of Hofei and then go 
own the river.” wa 
Wherefore, leaving Hsiahou Kaan to aged whet he had 
Pren of H anchung, and other reliable captains at other ee 6 
of vantage, , Ts‘ ao broke up his camp and went toward J uhsu.. 


The armoured horsemen would have conquered Shén, 
Th ensigns toward the south were turned again. 


i 


> The subsequerit course of the % war will be unfolded i in later 
chapters. 


CHAPTER LXVIII. 


KAN NING’S HUNDRED HORSEMEN RAID THE reat S CAMP; 
- Tso TZ‘U’S FLUNG-DOWN CUP FOOLS Ts‘ao TS‘AO. 


Si Ch‘iian was occupied in ordering his army at Juhsiik‘ou 
when he heard of the coming of Ts‘ao T’s‘ao with forty legions 
to the relief of Hofei. He told off a fleet of fifty large ships to 
lie in the port while Ch‘én Wu went up and down the river 
banks on the look-out.. 

“It would be well to inflict a dereat upon Ts‘ao’s men before 
they recover from the long march; it would dishearten. them,” 
said Chang Chao. 

Looking around at the officers in his tent, Sun Ch‘tian said, 
“Who is bold enough to go forth and fight this Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and 
so take the keen edge off the spirit of his army ?” 

And Ling T‘ung offered. “I will go,” said he. 

“How many men do you require ? VR 

“Three companies will suffice,” replied Ling. ~ 

But Kan Ning struck in, saying, “Only a hundred horse would 
be needed ; why send three companies ?” 

Ling T‘ ung was angry, and he and Kan Ning began to 
wrangle even in the presence of their chief. 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army is too strong to be. attacked recklessly,” 
said Sun Ch‘iian. 

Finally he gave the commission to Ling T‘ung with his three. 
companies, bidding him reconnoitre just outside Juhsiik‘ou, 
and fight the enemy if he met him. 

Marching out, they very soon saw a great cloud of dust, which 
marked the approach of anarmy. As soon as they came near 
enough, Chang Liao, who led the van, engaged with Ling T‘ung, 
and they fought half a hundred bouts without sign of victory 
for either. Then Sun Ch‘tian began to fear for his champion, 
so he sent Lii Méng to extricate him from the battle and escort 
him home. When Ling had come back, his rival went to Sun 
Ch‘iian and said, “Now let me have the hundred horsemen and 
I will raid the enemy’s camp this night. If I lose a man or a 
mount I will claim no merit.” 

Sun Ch‘iian commended his courage and chose a hundred of 
his best veterans, whom he placed under Kan Ning’s command > 
for the raid. He also gave him as a feast for the soldiers fifty 
flasks of wine and fifty catties of mutton. | 

Returning to the tents, Kan Ning drew up his little force and 
made them:sit down in rows, Then he filled two silver goblets 


Romance af the Three kingvoms 


an wine, solemnly drank to them and said, “osades. to- 


ight our orders are to raid the camp of the enemy. Where- 
ore fill your goblets and call up all your strength for the task.” 

_ But the men did not welcome his words; instead they looked 
ne at another uncertain. Seeing them in this mood, Kan Ning 
idopted a fierce tone, drew his sword and cried, “What are you 
ring for? If I, a leader of rank, can risk my life, cannot 
rou? 9? 

Moved by the angry face OF the leader, the men rose, bowed 
heir heads and said they would fight to the last. 

Then the wine and meat were distributed to them and each 
me ate his fill. The second watch was chosen as the hour to 


start, and each man stuck a white goose plume in his cap where- ia 


hy they could recognise each other in the darkness. 

At the time appointed they buckled on their armour, mounted 
and, galloping away, quickly came to Ts‘ao T's‘ao’s camp. 
Hastily throwing aside the “deer-horns,” they burst in with a 
yell that rose to the very heavens. They made straight for 
he centre, hoping to slay Ts‘ao himself. But the men of the 


eader’s brigade had made a rampart of their carts within | 


which they were sheltered as if in an iron tun, so that the 
raiders failed to find a way in. 

However, the leader and his small force dashed hither and 
hither, cutting and slashing, till Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s men were quite 
vewildered and frightened. 

They had no notion of the number of their assailants. All 
heir efforts only increased the confusion. Wherefore the 
wundred men had it all their own way and rushed from point to 
joint slaying whomever they met. But soon the drums beat 


n every camp and torches were lit, and shouts arose, and it was 


ime for the raiders to get away. 


Kan Ning led his little body of men out through the south 


ate with never a man trying to stop him, and rode for his own 
samp. He met Chou T‘ai, who had been sent to help him in 
case of need; but the need ae not arisen, and the hundred 
1eroes with their leader rode back in triumph. There was no 
oursuit. 

A poem was written praising this exploit: — 


The drums of war make earth to shake 

When Wu comes near e’en devils quake. 

Men long will tell of that night raid, 

That Kan Ning’s goose-plumed warriors made. 


On his return, Kan Ning took the tale of his men at the camp 
Ble. not a man nor a horse was missing. He entered to the 
ound of drum and fife and the shouting ‘of his men. 


“Wan Shui! Long Life!” shouted they, as Sun Ch‘iian came | 


o welcome them. Kan Ning dismounted and prostrated 
1imself. His lord raised him, and took him by the hand, 
PET ? 


82. Aan Guo, or 
saying, “This expedition of yours must ite given those rebels — 
a shaking. I had not yielded to your desire only I wished to 
give you the opportunity to manifest your valour. I did not 
wish to let you be sacrificed.” 

Kan Ning’s exploit was rewarded with gifts, a thousand rolls 
of silk and a hundred good swords, all of which he distributed 
among his soldiers. Sun’ Ch‘iian was very proud of his 
subordinate’s doughty deed, and said, “Méng-té may have 
his Chang Liao, out I can match him with my friend Kan 
Ning. ; 

ascii Chang: Liae came y proffer another challenge, and — 
Ling T‘ung, impatient at being excelled by his rival and enemy, 
begged that he might go out to fight. His request was granted, 
and he marched out a short distance from Juhsti with half a 
legion. Sun Ch‘iian, with Kan Ning in his train, went out to 
look on at the encounter. 

When both armies had come out on the plain and were 
arrayed, Chang Liao, with Li Tien and Ytieh Chin, one on 
either side, advanced to the front. Ling T‘ung, sword in hand, 
galloped out towards him and, at his chief’s command, Yiieh : 
Chin took the challenge and went to open the combat. They 
fought half a hundred bouts and neither seemed to have the 
better of the other. Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, hearing of the great — 
contest going on, rode up to the battlefield and took position — 
under the great standard, whence he could see the fighting. — 
Seeing both combatants were waxing desperate, he thought to — 
decide the struggle by an unfair blow. He bade Ts‘ao Hsiu : 
let fly a secret arrow, which he did by creeping up under cover | 
of Chang Liao. It struck Ling T’ung’s steed, which reared 
and threw its rider. Yiieh Chin dashed forward to thrust at 
the fallen warrior with his spear, but before the blow could be- 
given the twang of another bow was heard and an arrow speed- 
ing by hit. Ytieh Chin full in the face. He fell from his horse. — 

Then both sides rushed forward to rescue their champions; — 
the gongs clanged, and the combat ceased. Ling T‘ung 
returned to his camp and reported himself to his master. 

“The arrow that saved you was shot by Kan Nene said Sun 
Ch‘tian. 

Ling T‘ung turned to his rival and bowed low. 

“I could not have supposed you would have rendered me such 
a service, Sir,” said he to Kan Ning. | 

This episode ended the strife and enmity between the two - 
men, who thereafter swore perpetual friendship. 

On the other side Ts‘ao saw to it that his captain’s wound — 
was dressed, and next day he launched an attack against Juhsii 
along five different lines. He himself led one army; the other 
armies were led by Chang Liao, Li Tien, Hsü Huang and P‘ang 
Tè. Each army xwas one legion strong, and they marched to. 
give battle on the river bank. The crews ang fighting men 


Viomance of the Three Kingdoms . 83 


of fhe Wu naval squadron were greatly frightened by, the 
approach of these armies. 

“You have eaten of the bread of your prince and you must 
give loyal service; why fear?” said Hsii Huang. 

Thereupon he put some hundreds of his best men into small 
boats, went along the bank and broke into the legion under 
Li Tien. Meanwhile their comrades on the ships beat drums 
and cheered them on. But a great storm came on, lashing the 
river to fury, and the waves rolled mountains high. The larger 
ships rolled as if they would overturn, and the men were fright- 
ened. They started to get down into the bulkier cargo-boats 
to save their lives. But Tung Hsi threatened them with his 
sword, cutting down some half score of the mutineers. 

“My orders are to hold this point against the enemy ;” shout- 
ed he, “we dare not abandon the.ships.” 

- However, the wind increased, and presently the bold Tung 
Hsi was thrown into the river by the rolling of his ship and 
was drowned. 

Hsü Huang dashed hither and thither among Li Tien’s men, 
slaying right and left. Ch‘én Wu, hearing the noise of battle, 
set out for the river bank. On his way he met P‘ang Tê and 
the legion under him. A mélée ensued. Then Sun Chitian 
with Chou T‘ai and his men joined in. 

- The small force from the ships that had attacked Li Tien 
was now surrounded. So Sun Chiiian gave the signal for an 
onslaught that should rescue them. This failed, and Sun 
Ch‘tian was himself surrounded in turn and soon in desperate 
straits. From a height, Ts‘ao saw his difficulties and sent in 
Hsü Ch‘u to cut Sun Ch‘tian’s column in halves so that neither 
half could aid the other.’ 

< When Chou Tai had cut his way out of the press and reached 
the river-side he looked for his master. But he was nowhere 
visible, so he dashed once again into the battle. Coming to his 
own men, he asked where Sun Ch‘tian was. They pointed to 
where the press was most dense. Chou T‘ai stiffened and 
dashed in. Presently he reached his Jord’s side and cried out, 
“My lord, follow me and I will hack a way out.” 

Chou T‘ai fought his way out to the river bank. Then he 

turned to look, and Sun Ch‘tian was not behind him. So he 
turned back, forced his way in and once again found his way 
to his master’s side. 
ed cannot get out ; the arrows are too thick,” said Sun Ch‘tian. 
“Then go first, my lord, and I will follow.” 
-» Sun Ch‘iian then urged his steed as fast as he could go and 
Chou T‘ai kept off all pursuit. He sustained many wounds 
and the arrows rattled on his helmet, but he got clear at last 
and Sun Ch‘iian was safe. As they neared the river bank, 
Lii Méng came up with some of the naval force and escorted 
Sun Ch‘iian down to the ships. 


> 


84 : San fuo, or 


“I owe my safety to Chou T‘ai, who thrice came to my aid,” 
said Sun Chiiian. “But Hsii Shéng is still in the thick of the 
fight, and how can we save him?” 

“I will go to his rescue,” cried Chou. 

Whirling his spear, Chou again plunged into'the battle ae 
presently brought his colleague safely out of the press. Both 
were severely wounded. 

Lii Méng ordered his men to keep up a rapid flight of arrows 
so as to command the bank, and in this way the two leaders 
were enabled to get on board the ships. : 

Now Ch‘én Wu had engaged the legion under P‘ang Tê. 
Being inferior in force and no aid being forthcoming, Ch‘én 
Wu was forced into a valley where the trees and undergrowth 
were very dense. He tried to turn, but was caught by the 
branches and while so entangled he was killed. 

When Ts‘ao saw that Sun had escaped. from the battle to the 
river bank he urged his steed forward in pursuit. He sent. 
flights of arrows toward the fugitives. By this time Lü Méng’s. 
men had emptied their quivers, and he began to be very 
anxious. But just then a fleet of ships sailed up led by Lu 
Hstin, the son-in-law of Sun Ts‘é, who came with ten legions 
and drove back Ts‘ao’s men. Then he landed to pursue. He 
captured many thousands of horses and slew many men, so that 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was quite defeated and retired. 

Then they sought and found the body of Ch‘én Wu among 
the slain. Sun Ch‘iian was much grieved when he came to 
know that Ch‘én Wu had been slain and Tung Hsi drowned, 
and wept sore. Men were sent to seek for Tung Hsi’s body, 
which at last was found. Both Ee were buried with 


‘great honours. 


As a recompense for Chou Tai’s services in his rescue, 
Sun Ch‘tian prepared in his honour a great banquet, where 
he himself offered Chou a goblet of wine and complimented 
and embraced him while the tears coursed down his 
cheeks. 

“Twice you saved my life, careless of your own,” cried he, 
“and you have received many wounds. It is as if your skin 
had been engraved and painted. What sort of a man should 
I be if I did not treat you as one of my own flesh and blood? 
Can I regard you, noble Sir, merely as a unit in my army? 
You are my meritorious minister. I share the glory you have 
won and mine are your joys and sorrows.’ 

Then he bade Chou Tai open his dress and exhibit his. 
wounds for all the assembly to see. The skin was gashed all 
over as if his body had been scored with a knife. Sun Ch‘tian 
pointed to the wounds one after another and asked how each’ 
one had been received. And, as Chou told him, for every wound 
Sun Chiiian made him drink off a goblet of wine till he became 
thoroughly intoxicated. Sun Ch‘tian then presented him with 


a black silk parasol and bade him use it on all occasions as a 
sign of the glory that was his. 

‘But Sun Ch‘iian found his opponents too much for him; at 
the end of a month the two armies were both at Juhsii and 
neither had won a peony: 

Then said Chang Chao and Ku Yung, “Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is too i 
strong and we cannot overcome him by mere force. If the i 
struggle continue longer you will only lose more men. You h 
had better seek to make peace.” 

Sun Ch‘tian followed this advice and despatched Pu Chih, 
on a peace mission to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp. He was ordered to 
offer a yearly tribute. Ts‘ao also saw that Chiangnan was too 
strong to be overcome, and consented. He insisted that Sun. 
Ch‘tian should first send away his army and then he would © 
retire. The messenger returned with this message and Sun 
Ch‘tian sent away the greater part, leaving only Chou T‘ai and 
Chiang Ch‘in to hold Juhsü. The army returned to Moling. 
Ts‘ao left Ts‘ao Jén and Chang Liao in charge of Hofei and 
marched to Hsiich‘ang. 

_ On arrival, all Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s officers’ persuaded him to become 
Prince of Wei. Only the president of a Board, Ts‘ui Yen, 
spoke strongly against the scheme. 

= “You are, then, the only man who knows not the fate of Hsiin 
Wén-yo,” said his colleagues. i 

“Such times! Such deeds!” cried Ts‘ui Yen. “You are 48 
guilty of rebellion, but you may commit it yourselves. I will cf 
‘bear no part in it.” oe 
_ Certain enemies told Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and Ts‘ui Yen was thrown PARA 
into prison. At his trial he glared like a tiger and his very 
beard curled with contempt; he raged and cursed at Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao for a betrayer of his prince, andarebel. The interrogat- 
ing magistrate reported his conduct to Ts‘ao, who ordered Ts‘ui 
to be beaten to death in prison. 

+ + Ts‘ui Yen was born in Ch‘ingho. 
Firm and unyielding was he, 
With beard crisp curling and gleaming eyes, 
Which showed the man of stone and iron within. 
He drave the evil from his presence, 
And his glory is.fair and high. 
For loyalty to his lord of Han, 
His fame shall increase as the ages roll. 

in. the twenty- first year of the period “Established Tran- 
quillity,”’ in the fifth month of that year, a great memorial 
signed by many officers went up to the Emperor Hsien, praying 
that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao be granted the title of prince for his ‘manifest 

merits and signal services to the state, exceeding those render- 

ed by any minister before him. The memorial was approved, 
and a draft Edict was prepared by the famous Chung Yu. 
‘Thrice Ts‘ao Ts‘ao with seeming modesty pretended to decline 
the honour, but thrice was his refusal rejected. Finally he 


\ 


86 San Aun or 


made his obeisance and was enrolled as “Prince of Wei” with 
the usual insignia and privileges, a head-dress (or coronet) with 
twelve strings of beads and a chariot with gilt shafts, drawn — 
by six steeds. But he arrogantly used an imperial chariot with — 
bells and had the roads cleared when he passed along. He 
built himself a palace at Yehchiin. 

Then he began to discuss the appointment of an heir-appa- 
rent. His real wife, of the Ting family, was without issue, 
but a concubine had borne him a son, Ts‘ao Ang, who had been 
killed in battle at the siege of Wanch‘eng. A second concu- 
bine, of the P‘ien family, had borne him four sons, P‘ei, Chang, 
Chih and Hsiung. Wherefore he elevated her to the rank of 
~princess-consort in place of the Lady Ting. The third son, 
Chih, also known as Tzu-chien, was very clever and a ready 
master of composition. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao wished him to be named 
the heir. Then the eldest son sought from the high officer Chia - 
Hsii a plan to secure his rights of primogeniture, and Hsti told — 
him to do so-and-so. Thereafter, whenever the father went 
out on any military expedition, Ts‘ao Chih wrote fulsome pane- 
gyrics, but Ts‘ao Chih wept so copiously at bidding his father, 
farewell that the courtiers were deeply affected and remarked 
that though the one son was crafty and clever he was not so — 
sincerely filial as the other. Ts‘ao P‘ei also bought over his 
father’s immediate attendants, who then rang the praises of — 
his virtues so loud that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was strongly disposed to 
name him as the heir after all. 

After hesitating a long time, the matter was referred to 
Chia Hsü. i 

“I wish to name my heir; who shall it be?” 

Chia Hsti would not say; ‘and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asked why. 

“I was just recalling the past in my mind and could not 
reply at once,” said Chia. 

“What were you recalling?” 

“I was thinking of two fathers: Yiian Pén-cn‘u (Ytian Shao) 
and Liu Chinghsing (Liu Piao) and their sons.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao smiled. Soon after this he declared his eldest 
son his heir. 

In the tenth month the building of the palace of the new 
Prince of Wei was completed and the furnishing begun. From 
all parts were collected rare flowers and uncommon trees to 
beautify the gardens. One agent went into Wu and saw Sun 
Ch‘tian, to whom he presented a letter from Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asking — 
that he might be allowed to proceed to Wénchow to get some | 
oranges. At that period Sun Ch‘tian was ina most complaisant | 
mood toward Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, so from the orange trees in his own ~ 
city he picked forty very fine fruits and sent them immediately _ 
to Yehchiin. 

On the way, one of the bearers of the oranges fell ill and they 
had to stop at the foot of a certain hill. There came eth an F 


Taanon of tbe Three tingooms D; D a 


elderly man, blind of one eye and lame of one- leg, who: woren a 


a white rattan head-dress-and a black loose robe. He saluted . 
the bearers and stayed to talk. 
= Presently he said, “Your burdens are heavy, O porters; may 
this old Taoist lend you a shoulder? What do you say?” 

Naturally they were pleased enough, and the amiable way- 
farer bore each load for five li. When they resumed their 
burdens they noticed that they seemed lighter than before, and 
they felt rather suspicious.. When the Taoist was taking his 
leave of the officer in charge of the party, he said, “I am an- 
old friend from the same village as Prince Wei. My name is 

Tso Tz‘, my commoner name being Yuan-fang. Among 
Taoists I bear the appellation of ‘ Blackhorn.’ When you get 
to the end of your journey you may say that I was non ag ay 
after your lord.” æ 

He shook down his sleeves and dete: In due course the 
orange bearers reached the new palace and the oranges were. 
presented. But when Ts‘ao cut one open it was but an empty 
shell of a thing; there was no pulp beneath the rind. T's‘ao 

Ts‘ao was rather puzzled and called in the porters, who told 
him of their falling in with the mysterious Taoist on the way. 
But Ts‘ao scouted the idea of that being the reason. 

But just then the warden of the gate sent to say that a 
certain Taoist was at the gate and wished to see the prince. 

_ “Send him in,” said Ts‘ao Tsao, » se 
“He is the man we met on the way,” said the porters when 
Be appeared. — 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said curtly, “What sorcery have you been exer- 
cising on my beautiful fruit?” 

“How could such a thing happen?” said the Taoist. 

Thereupon he cut open an orange and showed it full of an 
most delicious to the taste. But when Ts‘ao cut open another 
that again was empty, nothing but rind. | 

_. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was more than ever perplexed. He bade his 
visitor be seated, and, as Tso Tz‘ŭ asked for refreshment, wine 
and food were brought in. The Taoist ate ravenously, consum- 
ing a whole sheep, and drank in proportion. Yet he showed 
‘no sign of intoxication or repletion. ` 

- “By what magic are you here?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“Tam but a poor Taoist. I went into Hsich‘uan (Ssuch‘uan) 
and on Mount Omi I studied the Way for thirty long years. | 
One day I heard my name called from out the rocky wall of 
my cell. I looked, but could see nothing: The same thing 
happened next day, and so on for many days. Then suddenly, — 
with a roar like thunder, the rock split asunder and I saw a 
sacred book in three volumes called “The Supreme Book of 
Magic.” From the first volume I learned to ascend to the 
clouds astride the wind, to sail up into the great void itself; 
“from. the second to pass through mountains and penetrate 


83 San Ying, or 


rocks; from the third, to float light as vapour, over the seas, 


to become invisible at will or change my shape, to fling swords s 


‘and project daggers so as to decapitate a man from a distance. 


You, O Prince, have reached the acme of glory; why not now oh 


withdraw and, like me, become a disciple of the,Taoists? Why 
not travel to Mount Omi and there mend your ways so that I 
may bequeath my three volumes to you ?” , 

“Oft have I reflected upon this course and struggled against 
my fate, but what can I do? There is no one to maintain the 
government,’ replied Ts‘ao. 

“There is Liu Ytian-té, a scion of ihk dynastic family ; could 
you not make way for him? If you do not, I may. have to send 
one of my flying swords after your head one day.” 

“You are one of his secret agents,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, suddenly 
enraged. “Seize him!” cried he to his lictors. 

They did so, while the Taoist laughed. And he continued 
to laugh as they dragged him down to the dungeons, where they 


beat him cruelly. And when they had finished, the Taoist lay - 


there gently respiring in a sound sleep, just as if he felt no- 
thing whatever. 

This enraged Ts‘ao Ts‘ao still more, and he bade them put 
the priest into the large wooden collar and nail it securely and 
then chain him in a cell. And he set guards over him, and the 
guards saw the collar and chains just fall off while the victim 
lay fast asleep not injured in the least. 


The Taoist lay in prison seven days without food or water, E 


and when they went to look at him he was stering upright on 


the ground, quite well and rosy looking. 

The gaolers reported these things to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who had the 
prisoner brought i in. 

“I do not mind going without food.for years,” said the vic- 
tim, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao questioned him, “yet I could eat a 
thousand sheep in a day.” 

Ts*ao Ts‘ao was at the end of his resources, he could prevail 
nothing against such a man. 

That day there was to be a great banquet at the new palace, 
and guests came in crowds. When the banquet was in pro- 
gress and the wine cup passing freely, suddenly the same 
Taoist appeared. He had wooden clogs on his feet. All faces 
turned in his direction and not a few were afraid; others 
wondered. Standing there in front of the great assembly, the 
Taoist said, “O powerful Prince, here to-day you have every 
delicacy on the table and a glorious company of guests. You 
have rare and beautiful objects from all parts of the world. 
- Is there anything lacking? If there be anything you would 
like, name it and I will get it for you.” 

Ts‘ao replied, “Then I want a dragon’s liver to make soup: 
can you get that?” 

“Where’s the difficulty ” replied Tso Tz‘t. 


+ ¥ 
- Ai 
$ D 
4 
4 y 
Cei a 7 


Fiomance of hae Tbree hingoomg P e RBA 


-With a pencil the Taoist immediately sketched a dragon on 
Bre whitewashed wall of the banquet hall. Then he flicked 


his sleeve over it, the dragon’s belly opened of itself and there- 


from Tso took the liver all fresh and bloody. 

“You had the liver hidden in your sleeve,” said Ts‘ae Ts‘ao, 
incredulous. - 

“Then there shall be another test,” said the Taoist. “It is 
winter and every plant outside is dead. What flower would 
you like, O Prince. Name any one you will.” 

“I want a peony,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“Easy,” said the Taoist. 

At this request they brought out a flower-pot, which was 
placed in full view of the guests. Then he spurted some water 
over it, and in a very short time up came a peony with two 
fully expanded flowers. 

The guests were astonished, and (oa asked the Taoist to be 


seated and gave him wine and food. The cook sent in some. 


minced fish. 
“The best mince is made from the perch of the Sung River,” 
said the Taoist. 
“How can you get fish a nedsand li away?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
“Not at all difficult. Tell someone to get a rod and hook, 


: and fish in the pond just below this banquet hall.” 


They did So, and very soon several beautiful perch lay on the 


| steps. 


“I have always kept some of these in my ponds, of course,’ 


_ said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


“O Prince, do you think to deceive me? All perch have two 


_ gills except the Sung perch, which has two pairs. That is the 
- distinguishing feature.” 


The guests crowded round to look, and, surely enough, the 


fish had four gills. 


“To cook this perch one needs purple sprout ginger though,” 
said the Taoist. 

“Can you also produce that?” asked Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

_ “Easily. 

He told them to bring in a silver bowl, which the magician 


filled with water. Very soon the ginger filled the bowl, and 


he presented it to the host. Ts‘ao put out his hand to pick 


“some, when suddenly a book appeared in the bowl and the title 


was “Méngté’s New Treatise (on the Art of War). He took 


it out and read it over. Nota word of his treatise was missing. 


hei ee a 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao became more and mystified. Tso Tz‘t took up 


a jade cup that stood on the table, filled it with fine wine and 


_ presented it to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 
= “Drink this, O Prince, and you will live a thousand years.” 

- “Drink of it first yourself, ” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

The Taoist took the jade pin from his head-dress and drew 
“it across the cup as if dividing the wine into two portions. 


90 | San Huo, or 


Then he drank one half and handed the cup with the other k 


half to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. But he angrily refused it. The Taoist ` 


then threw the cup into the air, where it was transformed into 
a white dove which circled round the banquet pe and then 
flew away. 

All faces were turned upward following the ‘flight of the 


dove, and so no one had noticed the going of the Taoist. But | 


he was gone; and soon the gate warden reported that he had 
left the palace. 

Said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “A magician like this ought to be put to 
death or he will do some mischief.” 

The redoubtable Hsii Ch‘u and a company of armed men 
were sent to arrest the Taoist. They saw the Taoist, still 
wearing his wooden clogs, not far ahead but striding along 


quickly. Hsii Ch‘u rode after him, but in spite of all his horse © 


could do, he could not come: up with him. He kept-up the 
chase right to the hills, when he met a shepherd lad with a 
‘flock of sheep. And there walked the Taoist among the sheep. 
The Taoist disappeared. The angry warrior slew the whole 
flock of sheep, while the shepherd lad looked on weeping. 
Suddenly the boy heard a voice from one of the severed 
heads, telling him to replace the heads on the bodies of his 


sheep. Instead of doing so, he fled in terror, covering his face. — 


Then he heard a voice calling to him, “Do not run away; you: 


shall have your SRED again.’ 
He turned, and lo! the sheep were all alive again and Tso 
Tz‘ was driving them along. The boy began to question him, 


but the Taoist made no reply. With a flick of his sleeves he a 


was gone. 

The shepherd lad went home and told all these marvels to 
his master. He could not conceal such a story, and it reached 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Then sketches of the Taoist were sent every- 
where with orders to arrest him. Within three days were 
arrested in the city and outside three or four hundred persons 
all blind of one eye, lame of one leg, and wearing, a rattan 
head-dress, a black loose robe and wooden clogs. They. were 


all alike and all answered to the description of the missing a 


Taoist. 
There was a great hubbub in the street. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao order- 
ed his officer to sprinkle the crowd of Taoists with the blood 


of pigs and dogs in order to exorcise the witchcraft and take 


them away to the drill ground on the south of the city. Thi- 


ther he followed them with his guards, who surrounded the — 
crowd of arrested persons and slew every one. But from the 


neck of each one, after the head was severed, there floated 


up into the air a wreath of black vapour, and all these wreaths | 
drifted toward a centre where they joined up into the image 
of another Tso Tz‘t, who presently beckoned to him a white 


crane out of the sky, mounted it and sat as on a horse. 


Sa 
ns a 


age 


Picante his hinds the Taoist cried merrily, “The rats of 
the earth follow the golden tiger, and one’ morning the doer 
of evil shall be no more.” 

_ The soldiers shot arrows at both bird and man. At this a 
tremendous storm burst over the city. Stones were driven 
along, sand was whirled about and all the corpses arose from. 

_ the ground, each holding his own head in his hands. They > 
rushed toward Ts‘ao Ts‘ao as if to strike him. The officials 
: _ covered their eyes, and none dared to look another in the face. pi; 


; S The power of a bold, bad man wil overturn a State, 
Te l _ The art of a necromancer produces wonders great. 


Ts! Read the next chapter and yon will know the fate of Ts‘ ao- 
Ts Bere 


CHAPTER LXIX. 


KUAN LU TAKES THE Sortes BY THE “BOOK OF CHANGES;” 
LOYAL SUBJECTS DIE FOR THEIR COUNTRY. 


‘Te sight of the corpses of his victims rising to their feet in 
the storm and running toward him was too much for Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao, and he swooned. However, the wind quickly fell and 
the corpses disappeared. His followers assisted Ts‘ao to his 
palace, but he was very ill. 
A poet celebrated the episode of the murdered Taoist:— 
_ He studied his magical books, 
He was learned in mystical lore, 
And with magical fleetness of foot 
He could travel the wide world o’er. 
The magical arts that he knew, 
He employed in an earnest essay 
To reform the bad heart of Ts‘ao Man, 
But in vain; Ts‘ao held on his way. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s illness seemed beyond the art of the leech and 
drugs seemed of no avail. It happened that T‘aishih Ch‘eng 
and Hsü Chih came from the capital to visit the prince, who 
bade the latter take the sortes from the “Book of Changes.” 
“Have you ever heard of Kuan Lu? He is more than human 


„in his skill at divination,” said Hsii. 


“I have heard a lot. about him, but I do not know how clever | 
he is; you tell me about him,” replied Ts‘ao. 

“He is from P‘ingyiian; his other name is Kung-ming. His 
face is ugly and coarse; he drinks to excess and is rather 
dissipated. His father was chief of the aborigines of the 
Langya districts. From a lad Kuan Lu loved to study the 
stars, staying’ up all night: to watch them, in spite of the 
prohibition of his father and mother. He used to say that if 


. domestic fowls and wild geese knew the seasons naturally how 


much more should a man. He often used to play with other 
boys at, drawing pictures of the sky on the ground, putting in 
the sun, moon and stars. When he grew older he studied the 
‘Book of Changes’ very deeply and observed: the winds. He 
was a marvellous calculator and excellent physiognomist. 
' “His fame reached the ears of the Prefect Tan Tzii-ch‘un, 
who called him to his residence for an interview. There were 
present some hundred or so other guests, every one of whom ~ 
could be called able of speech. 

“TIam young and not over-bold,’ said Kuan Lu to the Prefect. 
‘I pray you give me three stoups of wine to loosen my tongue.’ 


Romance of th 


of opponents you have got together for me to contend with? 


Are these gentlemen sitting around me disputants?’ 
“I myself am anxious for a match with you,’ said Tan. 
“Then they began upon the meaning of the ‘Book of Changes.’ 


Kuan Lu’s words poured forth like a torrent, and his ideas 


were most recondite. The Prefect replied, stating difficulties; 


Kuan swept them away in a stream of eloquence. So it went. 
on _the whole day without a pause even for refreshment. 
Neither Tan nor his other guests could help praising him and ` 


agreeing with him. 

“His fame spread wide after this encounter, and people spoke 
of him'as the ‘Supernatural Boy.’ 

“After this he became famous in another way. There was 
a certain Kuo En, a man of the people, who had two brothers. 
All three became lame and they called in Kuan Lu to cast lots 


and discover the reason. Kuan Lu said, ‘By the lots there is 


a female demon in your family tomb, an aunt, the wife of one 


_ of your father’s brothers. Some years ago, in a time of dearth, 
- for the sake of a few measures of grain, she was pushed into 


a well and a great stone was thrown in on her, crushing her 
head so that she suffered intensely. She complained to the 
Most High, and your lameness is the retribution for that crime. 
No prayers will avert the evil. ; 
“The three brothers wept and acknowledged their guilt. 
“The Prefect Wang Chi, of Anp‘ing, heard of the diviner’s 


_ fame and invited him to come on a visit, and he went. It 


happened that the wife of the magistrate of Hsintu suffered 


from headaches and his son from pains in the heart. Kuan 
Lu was asked to discover the reason. He cast lots and said 
that at the west corner of the main hall there were buried two 
corpses, one of a man who held a spear, the other of a man 
who had a bow and arrows., The wall was built across them. 
The spearman’s master had gashed his head dnd so his head 
pained. The archer’s master had stabbed him in the heart 
and so his heart suffered anguish. They dug where he in- 


dicated and, about eight feet down, found two coffins, one with 


a spear inside and the other with a strung bow and wooden 
arrows.\ All were much decayed. Kuan Lu bade them remove 
the bones and bury them ten li outside the walls. Thereafter 
the woman and her son suffered no more. ib 

“A certain Chuko Ytian, magistrate of Kuant‘ao, newly 
promoted to Prefect, was leaving for his new post, and Kuan 
Lu went to see him off. One of the guests mentioned that 
Kuan Lu could divine what was hidden from sight. The 


- Prefect doubted such powers and said he would put a test. 


He got a swallow’s egg, a wasp’s nest and a spider and con- 


e Three Hingvoms 93 i 


“The request was astonishing, but the wine was brought in, 
and when he had drunk it, Kuan Lu, looking contemptuously at 
_ the other guests, said, ‘Now I am ready; are these the sort 


94 | San kuo, or — 
cealed them in three separate boxes. He asked Kuan to guess | 
the contents. The divination made, he wrote three quatrains :— 


‘The latent life will declare itself; 
It will cling to your lordly hall, 
Or male or female, flung into space, * 
Wide wings will prevent its fall. 


l a 


‘This seems to indicate a swallow’s egg. 


“A many-chambered dwelling 
Is hanging to your eaves, 
Each room has a poisonous tenant; 
Who’ll be flying when he leaves. 


‘This answers to a wasp’s nest. 


‘Therein ’s a long-shanked, trembling thing, 
Who spins a thread from his inside 
And spreads a fine spun net for flies; 
He profits most at eventide. 


‘And this it a spider.’ 

“The guests were amazed. 

“An old woman in his village having lost a cow, came to 
consult him. After the divination he told her that seven men © 
had taken away the cow and were cooking and eating it on 
the bank of a certain mountain stream. She had better go 
there quickly and see who they were. If she went with all 
speed she would find the skin and the. flesh. She went and 
found the seven men hidden behind a small shanty, boiling beef. 
Most of the cow’s flesh was still there. She told the Prefect, 
who arrested the seven men and punished them. Then he 


asked the old lady how she got to know exactly who the 


offenders were, and she told him. 

“He was dubious, too. He sent for Kuan Lu and put his 
to the following test. He placed his seal and a pheasant 
feather in a box and asked what were the contents. The reply 
was :— 


‘Square within, without so round, 
Beauteous colours here abound; 
The jewel within is held secure 
And what it witnesses is sure. 


‘Is not this a seal in its bag?” 
“With regard to the other thing, Kuan Lu said:— 


‘There’s a bird on the precipice steep, - 
Its body with flame seems aglow,- 
Its wings are barred yellow and black, 
At sunrise it ne’er fails to crow. 


‘And I think this hints at a 2 pheasant feather.’ 


2 


-Romanie of the Three Kingooms 


“The Prefect Liu treated the marvellous diviner with great 


onour. 


“One day Kuan Lu saw a youth ploughing a field. After 
watching him for a long time, Kuan Lu suddenly asked his © 


name and age. 


s ‘My name is Chao Yen, and I am nineteen,’ said the young 
man. ‘Pray, who may you be, Sir?’ 

“JT am Kuan Lu; you may have heard of me. I see an air 
of early death about you, and you will be done with life in three 
days. It is a pity that one so handsome should die so young.’ 

“Chao Yen forsook his plough, hurried home and told his 
father. The father at once set out to find Kuan Lu, and, having 
found him, threw himself on the ground and besought him to 
save his son. 

““How can I avert the doom? It is fate,’ said Kuan Lu. 

“<Alas! I have but this one son, I pray you to save him.’ 

-“And the son added his tears and prayers to those of his 
father. Kuan Lu was deeply touched. Then he turned to the 
lad and said, ‘You get ready some good wine-and some venison. 
To-morrow go into the forest on the south there, and under- 
neath a lofty tree you will see two men seated on boulders 


-playing wet-ch‘t.. One of them will be dressed in white, and 


he will be facing the south. He is very evil looking. The 


other will be seated opposite, dressed in red. He is very hand- 


home. They will be deeply absorbed in their game and will 
not notice who offers them food and wine, which you will 
~humbly present on your knees. When they have eaten and- 
drunk, you will prostrate yourself and with tears pray them 


-to grant you length ofdays. You will gain an increased span 


of life, but, above all things, do not mention that I told you 
what to do.’ 


_ “The father kept Kuan Lu as a guest, and the jot day the 
son followed out his instructions. He entered the forest and 
soon came upon the two men seated beneath a pine, playing 


wei-ch. They seemed oblivious to all around them. Chao 


Yen presented the wine and the food, and the two men ate 
-absent-mindedly, for the game went on. 


“But when Chao Yen threw himself on the ground and im- 
plored the gift of long life, they seemed startled. 
“<This must be some of Kuan Lu’s doing,’ said Red Robe. 


‘Still, as we have accepted a gift at his hand we must have pity 
on him.’ 


“He who was dressed in white then lifted up a book that 


hung at his side and looked therein. 


“You are nineteen this year,’ said he to Chao Yen. ‘You 
ought to die. But we will insert a ‘nine’ over the ‘ten’ and 


‘so make it read ninety and nine, and that is the age you will 
attain. But when you go back, tell Kuan Lu he is not to betray 


the secrets of fate, or Heaven will surely punish him.’ 


96), San de or 


“Then Red Robe took out a pen y added. the figure. A 
gust of wind passed, and the two old men were transformed 
into two cranes that rose into the sky and flew away. 
= “Chao Yen came back home and told what he had seen. Kuan 

Lu told him the red-robed man was the Southern Dipper Con- 
stellation, and the white-robed, the Northern Dipper. 

Bug the Northern Dipper consists of nine stars. and there 
was only one man,’ objected the lad. i 

“Separately they are nine, but they a to form one. 
The Northern Dipper records deaths; the Southern Dipper, 
births. Now the extra figure has been added you need have 
no anxiety; you will live long.’ 

“Father and son both thanked him most sincerely, but there- 
after Kuan Lu was very careful how he divined for people lest 
he should betray celestial secrets. 

“Now, this man is at P‘ingytian, and you, O Prince, can seek 
your fate of him. Why not call him?” 

Kuan Lu was sent for and came. As soon as the salutations 
were over, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asked him to cast lots for him. 

Kuan Lu at once found that the illness was only due to 
magical machinations, and said so; at which Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was 
much relieved in his mind, and his health began to improve. 

Next Ts‘ao Ts‘ao wished to know about the conditions in the 
world’s affairs. After the necessary calculations the prophet 
said, ““Three-eight crosswise; the yellow boar meets the tiger: 
stop the southern expedition with the loss of one limb.” 

Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asked him to enquire whether his life 

should be long or not. ; 
; He replied, “Lion in the Palace to preserve the taedia of 
ancestors: the Prince’s way is securely renewed and his son 
and grandson shall come to high honour.” 

Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asked concerning himself. 

“Divinations concerning the fate of the universe may not be 
foreknown; wait a time and I will look into it.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was pleased and would like to keep such a man 
near him, so he offered him the post of historiographer (who 
wasialso soothsayer) at his court, but it was declined. 

“My destiny is mean, my luck despicable: I am not equal to 
such an office and dare not undertake it.” 

“Why, not?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“My forehead has no lofty fullness; my eyes no steady ex- 
pression; my nose no bridge; my feet no round, solid heels; 
my back lacks the triple armour (of shoulder blades and inter- 
vening muscles) ; and my breast the three marks (like the 
character jén, which indicates wealth). I can only control 
evil spirits securely; I cannot rule living men.” 

“What think you of my physiognomy ?” ° À 

“What can a minister of. extremely exalted rank like your- 
self desire further?” said Kuan Lu. 


i Ts ao o Ts‘ ao nori him to say: the soothsayer. only laughed. 
en Ts‘ao asked him to look at the many officers of all kinds 
standing around. 
“Every one of them is a servant eee to the administration 
of the world,” said Kuan Lu. v 
i But, when Ts‘ao Ts‘ao asked wHelher good or bad fortune 
was to be his, the soothsayer ek not give a clear and full 
Ne 
A poen says :— :— E 
A : Mg TAA Lu was a seer of old, 
BYE: cant Stars to him their secrets told. 
Bea ee hhh Mysteries, occult and dim, | 
Were as daylight unto him. =` 
His so subtle intellect 
- Could the shade of death detect. 
But the secrets of his skill 
Died with him,—are secrets still. 

Again Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao asked him to divine concerning his rivals 
Wu and Shu. He said the former had just lost a famous 
leader and the latter had encroached on his territory. Ts‘ao’s 
doubts as to the accuracy of one of these events were soon set 

at rest, for a messenger came from Hofei to say that Lu Su 
kad died. Then Ts‘ao sent hurriedly into Hanchung, and the 
scout returned to say that Chang Fei and Ma Ch‘ao had taken 
the Pass at Hsiapien. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was angry and inclined to 
march at once against the invaders; but he consulted the great 
ae who advised him not to move. 

A ee the coming spring there will bea conflagration i in Hsiitu,” 


it ~ Having been witness of the ver ification of Kuan Lu’s words, 
Ts‘ ‘ao Ts‘ao was in no mood to neglect the warning. He stayed 
on in his palace, but he sent Ts‘ao Hung with five legions to 
assist in the defence of East Ch‘uan, while Hsiahou Tun, with 
three legions, went to Hsiitu to keep careful watch and be 
ready against any surprises. He placed Chang Shih and Wang 
A Pi in command of the Imperial Guard. 

_ Sstma I warned him against this Wang Pi. Said he, “The 
$ man is given to wine, and alee Hei is not a fit man. for oe 
ee post. a 

PUES AO Ts‘ ao replied, “He is very fit. He has followed me- 
through all difficulties cand dangers. He is loyal and diligent; 
_ solid as stone or iron.’ 

_ Wang Pi was appointed and led the guard into camp at the 
Kapital, outside the Tung-hua Gate of the Imperial Palace. 

_ Now there was a certain Kêng Chi, a Loyang man, who had 
long been employed in the minister’s palace. in a subordinate 
_ capacity and afterward: had been promoted to a rather better 
post. He, Sstma Chih and Wei Huang were close friends. 

_ These three were greatly distressed at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s advance 
to princely rank, and more especially at his use of the imperial 


98 `o an Kuo, or 


chariots. In the early months of the (weyaki year Kêng 
and Wei came to a secret exchange of views on Ts‘ao’s conduct. — 

Kéng Chi said, “The man is a rebel and wicked, every day 
behaving worse. He intends to go farther, and how calr we, 
as servants of the dynasty, help him in his wickedness? I 
have a friend named Chin I, who also is a servant of Han and 
an enemy of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s. He is a descendant of Chin Jih-ti, 


- one-time minister. ‘Beside, he is friendly with Wang Pi. If 


we all tried our best we ought to succeed.” 

“But if he is friendly with Wang Pi he will not assist us!” 
said Keng. ; 

“Let us go and sound him,” said Wei Huang. 

.So the two went to see Chin E who received them in hike 
private rooms. There they. talked. ; 

Said Wei Huang, “O virtuous I, we know you are on most 
friendly terms with Commander Wang Pi, and so have come 
to beg a favour.’ 

“What is it you ask?” SOES ; 
“The Prince of Wei will soon receive the abdication ot the 
Emperor and himself ascend to the seat of the mighty. Then 
you and your friend Wang will advance to places of great — 
honour; and when that day comes, we pray you not to forget us, © 
but to recommend us for employment. We should feel ee i 

shallow gratitude for your kindness.” 

Chin I flicked down his sleeves and arose koe very angry. » 
At that instant arrived the tea for the visitors. He snatched 
it away from the serving-man and emptied it on the floor: 

Wei Huang started up in feigned alarm. 

“How have I offended you, my good old friend?” cried he. 

“I have been friends with you because you are descendants 
of men who have served Han faithfully. Now, if instead of 
trying to repay the debt:of gratitude you ought to feel, you 
turn aside to assist one who is their enemy, think you that I 
can regard you as friends? How could I look the world in the 

ace?” 

“But if it be destiny, one cannot help it,” said Kêng. “One 
must accept it.” 

Chin grew stil more angry, so that the two visitors were 
convinced that at heart he was still loyal to the dynasty. Then 
they began to tell him the true state of the case. 

“Our real desire is ‘to destroy this rebel, and we have come 
to ask your help in that. What we said at first was only a test 


to find out what you thought.” 


“Think you, with my ancestry, generation after generation 
in the confidence and service of the Hans, that I would willingly 
follow a rebel? Hf you, Sirs, really Bee of restoring the | 
dynasty, pray tell me your plans.” 

“Though we have the desire to pr ove our gratitude, yet we 
lack the means to destroy the enemy,” said Wei, 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 99 


Said Chin, “We desire helpers within and supporters with- 


out. If we could slay Wang Pi we could use his name and 
_ troops to help the Emperor. With the help of Liu, the Im- 
` perial Uncle, we should be able to destroy the rebel Ts‘ao.”?” _ 

Hearing Chin Ps plan, the others clapped their hands in 

approval. 

“And I have two friends who will go with us,” said Chin. 
“Both of them have the murder of a father to avenge. They 
are sons of the great physician Chi P‘ing and are called Chi 
Miao and Chi Mu. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao put their father to death for 


his connection with the plot organised by Tung Ch‘éng when . 


he received the secret edict conveyed in the robe and girdle that 


was conferred upon him by the Emperor. The two sons es- | 


caped that time by flight, but they have since secretly returned 
to the capital. With their help all will go well.” 

The two conspirators rejoiced at the prospect of further help, 
and a messenger was sent to call in the two Chi. Soon they 
arrived, and the plot was laid before them. They were deeply 


affected and shed copious tears. Their wrath rose to the sky 


and they swore to aid in the destruction of the rebel. 

“On the fifteenth day of the first month there will be grand 
illuminations in the city,” said Chin I, “and felicitations will 
` be going on on every side. Kéng Chi and Wei Huang will 
each lead out their retainers and make their way quickly to 


Wang Pi’s camp to wait till they see the firé begin. Then they 


_ will dash in, slay Wang Pi and follow me inside the palace. 
We will then request the Emperor to ascend the Tower of the 


Five Phoenixes, assemble his officers and issue orders to destroy.. 


the rebels. The two brothers Chi will make their way into the 
city and set fires going. Then all will raise their voices and 
‘summon the populace to their aid. They are to hold up any 
_ rescue force in the city till the Emperor has issued the edict 
and disturbance is allayed, when they will rush toward Yeh- 
chitin and seize Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Then a messenger will be des- 
patched with a summons for Liu, the Imperial Uncle. We will 
begin our work this night at the second watch and we will 
escape the ill success that attended Tung Ch‘éng’s attempt.” 
All five swore before Heaven to be true, and they smeared 
their lips with blood in earnest of their oath. After this, each 
returned to his own home to prepare arms and call up their 
men. 
-Both Kêng Chi and Wei Huang had a large namber of re- 
tainers, whom they armed. The brothers Chi also got together 
` some hundreds of men. They gave out a story of a hunting 
party to explain the gathering. 
_ When the preparations were complete, and before the time 
fixed for the rising, Chin I went to see Wang Pi and said, 
“Everything in the world seems now tranquil, and the power 
of the Prince of Wei extends over all the land. It is a season 


ee Da i 


i 


- 100 i Bar Kuo, ot. 


of joy and felicitation, and everyone is hanging out aat 
and putting up decorations for the occasion.’ 
The night of full moon was very clear, moon and stars most 


brilliant. The people of the capital took advantage of the 


night and thronged the “six streets and the three market 
places.” The lanterns were hung out in profusion, and all went 
merrily. No official interfered with the crowd, no one thought 
of the flight of time; all was simple gaiety. 
That night Wang Pi and his officers of the guar ds had a feast 
in their camp. Just after the second watch had begun they 
. heard a great shouting in the camp, and someone came 
in to say that a fire had started in the rear. Wang Pi hurriedly 
left the table and went outside. He saw flames leaping up and 
rolling by and heard shouts of “Kill!” rising on every side and 
echoing to the very sky. He thought the camp had certainly 
mutinied, and, jumping on his horse, went out at the south 
gate. Just outside he ran against Kéng Chi, who loosed an 
arrow which struck him in the shoulder. He nearly fell with 


the shock, but he got away toward the west gate. He found © 


he was pursued by armed men, so he got flurried, dismounted 
and went on foot. Presently he came to the house of Chin 
Wei and hammered at the door. 

Now the fire that had created such a scare had been raised 


by Chin’s own men sent for that purpose, and he had followed — 
them to fight when the time came. Hence there was no one © 


. but the women folk left in his house. When the women heard 


the clamour at the door they thought Chin I had come back, and 


his wife, from the door of the women's quarter, called out, 
“Have you killed Wang Pi?” 


This was a shock, but it told Wang Pi that his quondam - 
friend was now an enemy. Wherefore he fled further to the 


house of Ts‘ao Hsiu and told him that Kêng Chi and Chin I 
had raised a disturbance. Ts‘ao Hsiu immediately armed 
himself, got to horse and led a company into the city. He 
found fires on all sides, and the Tower of the Five Phcenixes 
was in flames. The Emperor had fied into the recesses of the 
palace, but Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s friends and partizans were defending 
the palace gate like grim death. : 


In the city the crowd was shouting one to another to slay 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and restore the Hans. 
When Hsiahou Tun had received the O and to keep watch 


and ward over the capital, he had gone into camp five li from 
the city. When he saw the conflagration start he set the army 
in motion and surrounded the city. He also sent reinforce- 


ments to Ts‘ao Hsiu within. 
Inside the city the fighting went on all night. No one joined 


the conspirators; the small band were left to their own efforts. _ 


Soon it was reported that Chin I and the brothers Chi were 


slain. Kêng and Wei found their way to one of the gates, but 


PRT hy 


/ there’ they met Heated Tun’s main force and were. she 


2 


we 


prisoners. The handful of men with them were cut to pieces. 
When the fighting subsided, Hsiahou Tun went into the city 


and set his men to put out the fires. He also laid hands on the 


t 


_ whole households of the five conspirators. Then he sent a 


_ report to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who sent back orders to execute the two 


_ conspirators and put to death in public all the members of the 


five families. He was. also to arrest every official and send the 


whole batch to Yehchiin. 


Hsiahou Tun sent his two chief prisoners to the place of a 


execution. They shouted against Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


“Living we have failed to slay you, Ts‘ao A- man; dead we comi 


will be malicious spirits smiting rebels in all places.” 


The executioner smote Kéng on the mouth with his sword, | 


so that the blood gushed out, but he continued to shout as long 


as he could. Wei Huang, his fellow-conspirator, dashed his 


pa 


_temples on the ground crying, “How I hate him!” and ground 
his teeth till he broke them to fragments. And he died. - 

Who can with outstretched hands uphold the sky 

Or thrones maintain by simple loyalty? 

Han’s day was done; two would avert the doom, 

But failed, and carried anger to the tomb. 

Hsiahou Tun carried out his chief’s orders and sent the 

- officials he had arrested to Yehchiin. There Ts‘ao Ts‘ao set 
- up two flags, one red and one white, in the drill ground and 
Beat all the officials thither. Then he addressed them. 
_ “In this late rebellion some of you: went out to extinguish 
-the fire, some of you stayed within ‘doors. Let those who went 


forth to put out the fire take their stand by the red flag and. 


_ those who remained in their houses go to the white flag.” 


_ The officials thought within themselves, “Certainly there can ~ 


ihe nothing wrong in trying to put out a fire,“ so they nearly all 
placed themselves under the red flag; only about a third went 
-to the white. 
Then the order was given to seize all those by the red flag. 
They protested. “We are guiltless!” cried they. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “At that time you intended not to put out — 


the flames but to aid the rebels.” 
He.sent them all down to the Chang River and had them put 


to death on the bank. There were more than three hundred 


_ victims. He rewarded those who were under the white flag 
and sent them to their homes in the capital. 


Wang Pi died from his wound and was buried with great 
_ honour. 

Ts‘ao Hsiu was placed over the Guana: Chung Yu was 
- dreated Prime Minister, Hua Hsin became a Chief Censor. 
The occasion was taken to create six grades of the title of 


_ “Marquis” with three divisions each, eighteen in all. There 


were seventeen grades of marquis under the name Kuan-hsi, or 


BARMELEY BAPTIST prvwiry SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms LONTE 


102 San Kun. or 


“West of the Pass.” And all these had golden seals of office 
with purple ribbons. There were also sixteen ranks of marquis 
called Kuan-nei, “Interior,” and Kuan-wai, “Exterior”. S They 
had silver seals with tortoise ornaments on the back and black 
ribbons. There were five classes of T’ai-fu with three grades 
in each class. These had brass seals, with chain ornaments 
and ribbons. And with all these various gradations of ranks- 
and nobility reorganised, the Court was entirely transformed. 
There were new ranks and new men in Office. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao then remembered the warning about a conflag- 
ration in the capital and wished to reward Kuan Lu for his 
prescience, but he would receive nothings ` 
.  Ts‘ao Hung with an army went into Hanchung. He placed 
Hsiahou Yiian and Chang Ho in command at points of 
importance, while he went on to the attack. At that time 
Chang Fei with Lei T‘ung were holding Pahsi. Ma Ch‘ao 
marched to Hsiapan and sent Wu Lan out as van leader to 
reconnoitre. He fell in with Ts‘ao Hung, and Wu Lan was 
going to retire. But .a petty. officer, Jên K‘uei, advised 
against this. ` see 

“They are newly arrived, why not fight and take the keen 
edge off their pride? If we do not fight, how can we look our 
chief in the face when we return?” 

So it was decided to offer battle, and Jên K‘uei rode out and ~ 
challenged Ts‘ao Hung. The challenge was accepted, and the — 
warriors advanced. Jén K‘uei fell in the third encounter. 
Ts‘ao Hung pressed the advantage, and Wu Lan was driven 
off. When he returned and told Ma Ch‘ao, he was blamed. 

“Why did you attack without orders and bring about this, 
defeat?” 

“It was the fault of Jên K‘uei, who disobeyed orders.” 

“Defend most carefully; do not engage,” said Ma Ch‘ao. 

Ma Ch‘ao sent a report to Ch‘éngtu and awaited orders 
for a further action. Ts‘ao Hung suspected some ruse when 
Ma Ch‘ao remained so long inactive, and retired to Nanchiin. 
Here he was visited by Chang Ho, who asked why he had 
retired after the successful attack and slaughter of one of 
the enemy leaders. 

“Seeing that Ma Ch‘ao declined to come out to fight I 
suspected some ruse,” replied he. “Beside, when I was at 
Yektu that wonderful soothsayer, Kuan Lu, foretold the loss 
of a leader here. I heeded what: he said and so was careful.” 

Chang Ho laughed, “You have been a leader of soldiers 
for half your life and yet you heed the sayings of a soothsayer! 
I may be of small wit, but I would take Pahsi with my own 
ee and the possession of Pahsi would be the key to the whole 
of Shu.” Re X 

“The defender of Pahsi is Chang Fei,” said Ts‘ao Hung.. 
“He is no ordinary man to meet. One must be careful.” 


exer ear keg: Pa EM PT SLR 


f peta} 


oe in writing, and 


CHAPTER LXX. 


FIERCE CHANG FEI TAKES A POSITION BY GUILE; 
AGED HUANG CHUNG CAPTURES A HILL BY STRATAGEM. 


hang Ho‘s army, with which he felt so sure of AOE 
consisted of three legions, and they were in three camps 
protected by some hills. They were named “Yench‘ii Camp,” — 
“Ménet‘ou Camp” and ““Tangshih Camp.” When he marched © 
he left half the men in each camp as defenders. 


The news soon reached 'Pahsi, and Chang Fei called in ae 


colleague Lei T‘ung to give his opinion. Lei said, “The © 


country is bad and the hills full of danger in Langchung ; g 

us lay an ambush. You, O General, go out to give battle and | 

I will help you by some sudden. and ek See A attack. We- 
ought to get-Chang Ho.” 

` Whereupon Chang Fei gave half a bhon to Lei Tung and © 

himself ied out a legion to a point thirty li from Langchung. - 


Having set them in order, he rode out and challenged Chane | f | 


Ho to single combat. Chang galloped out to meet him. l 
After the thirtieth or so bout Chang Ho’s men suddenly 
began to shout and soon showed signs of confusion. The 


reason was the appearance of the banners of Shu from the | 


cover of some hills. Chang Ho dared not continue to en 


k 
> 


“ after this, and he fled. Chang Fei pursued him. Lei Tung — 
also appeared in his road and attacked, and so, with enemies — 
on both. sides, Chang Ho lost the day. Both Chang Fei and — 
Lei T‘ung continued to smite him, even into the night, till he | 


got back to his camp at Yench‘ii Hill. 


Chang Ho reverted to his old plan of defending the 


three camps, rolling down logs and hurling stones. But 
he remained behind his defences. Chang Fei made a camp 
ten li off. 

Next day he went forth and offered battle, but Chang Ho 


-took no notice. He ascended to the summit of the hill and — 
drank wine to the accompaniment of trumpets and drums, but — 


he would not fight. Chang Fei bade his soldiers shout insults, 
but these had no effect. Lei T‘ung was sent up the hill, but — 


the rolling logs and hurtling stones forced him to retire. 


ris cS 


Then the men of the other two camps came out to the attack 


and Lei was discomfited. 


Next day Chang Fei again offered battle, but there was ho. 


response. Again the soldiers yelled every form of insult, but — 
Chang Ho from the hill top only replied by similar abuse. 


ang Fei was at his wits’ ends: and this game was played 
or more than fifty ae 
Then Chang Fei made a strong tokai just in front of 
the hill, and therein he sat day after day drinking till he 
became half drunk. And when he was so, he reviled his 
opponent. 
_ About this time Liu Pei sent biths to the army, and when the 
. messenger went back he told Liu that his brother was giving — 
-himself over to wine. This made Liu Pei anxious, so he lost 
“no time in asking advice from K*ung- -ming. 

K‘ung-ming was jocular, saying, “Since that is so let us send 
him fifty vessels of the best brew of Ch’engtu. He probably 
has but poor stuff in the camp.” 

“But he has always had a weakness for wine, and he has 
failed because of it. Yet you would encourage him to drink 
by sending him more wine?”. 

“My lord, is it that you do not andeid your brother even 
after all these years? He is brave and steady, yet when we 
first invaded Shu he released Yen Yen, which was not what a 
“mere bravo would have done. He is face to face with Chang 
Ho, and has been for nearly two months, and day after day he 
drinks and rages and insults his enemy openly. He treats 
him with most perfect contempt. But this is not only the 
> es it is a _ deep plan to get the better of Chang 

O EEN 

“This may Wek so,” replied Liu Pei, “but let us not rely upon 
t too much. Let Wei Yen go to help him.” 

 K‘ung-ming sent Wei Yen with the wine, and the carts set 
out, each flying a yellow flag with a writing in large characters 
that ab was fine wine for the general use of ae army in me 
; field. 

| when Wei Yen reached the army he handed over the wine, 
which he said was a gift from the lord of Shu. And Chang 
Fei received it with due respect. 

He told Wei Yen and Lei T‘ung each to take a company and 
move out on the two wings, ready to act when they saw a red 
Hag displayed. And then he had the wine laid out and called 
up some soldiers to drink with a great display of flags and a 
rolling of drums. hae 

The spies reported all these doings on the hill- top, and Chang 
Ho came out to look for himself. There he saw his opponent 
drinking, and two of the soldiers were boxing before him for 
his amusement. 

“He despises me too mach ” said Chang Ho, and he gave 
orders to prepare for a night attack on the enemy camp. His 
own men should do the raiding and the other two camps were 
to support them. 

-There was little moon that night, and Chang Ho took advan- 
eee Ly the Bley to steal down the side of the hill. He 


£06 Dan uo, or ae i ; c 4 


got guite close to the enemy camp and stood for a time looking a 


at Chang Fei sitting amid a blaze of lamps and drinking. 
Suddenly he dashed forward with a yell, and at the same ` 


moment his drums on the hill-top rolled out their. defiance. 
Chang Fei never stirred. Chang Ho rushed at him and de- 
livered a mighty thrust with his spear. Chang Fei toppled 
over—it was a Chang Fei of straw. Ho checked and turned 
his steed.. At that moment he heard a string of detonations 


` and a warrior appeared before him barring his way. It was — 


the real Chang Fei, as the round head and thundering voice | 


speedily made manifest. 
With spear set, he rode toward Chang Ho. The two war- 
riors fought many bouts under the gleaming lights.. .No help 


came to Chang Ho. In vain he yearned for the assistance. 


which the two camps were to bring him. How could he know 


that his reinforcements had been driven back by Wei Yen and — 


Lei T‘ung?. And that the two camps were now in possession 


of his enemies? As the help did not come he was powerless; 


and, to add to his discomfiture, the glare of fire out on the hill 


told him of the seizure of his third camp. Nothing could be- 


done, and he fled to Wak‘ou Pass. The victory was all to x 


Chang Fei. 


The news of the success delighted Liu Pei, and he knew then. 


that Chang Fei’s drinking had been part of a stratagem tox 


entice his, enemy into the open and defeat him. 


Chang Ho reached the Pass, but with the loss of more than a 


half his army. He stood on defence and sent urgent messages ie 


to his colleague to come to his rescue. 


Ts‘ao Hung angrily replied, “He disobeyed my orders and : 


marched; he has lost an important point and now he sends to 
me for help.” 
While refusing aid, he sent to urge his colleague to go out 


and fight. But Chang Ho too greatly feared. At length he > 


decided upon a plan of action. He sent out two parties into 


ambush and said to them, “I will pretend defeat and fly. They i 


will follow and you can cut off their retreat.” 
When he did march out he met Lei T‘ung. The two engaged 


in battle and Chang presently ran away. Lei pursued and fell — 


into the ambush. Then Chang Ho returned and slew Lei 


Tung. His men went back and told Chang Fei, who came up ` 


to provoke another fight. Chang Ho again tried his stratagem, 
but Chang Fei did not pursue. Again and again the ruse was 
tried, but Chang Fei knew it was only a ruse and simol i 
retired to his own camp. 

He said to Wei Yen, “Chang Ho has compassed the death f 


Lei T‘ung by leading him into an ambush, and he wants to — 


inveigle me into another. What say you to meeting ice with | 
trick?” 
“But how% said Wel en: 


“To-morrow I will lead the army forward, you following me 


with some reliable soldiers. When his men come out from 
their ambush you can smite them, sending half your men 
against each party. We will secretly fill the by-roads with 
loads of combustibles, entice the enemy among them and start 
a fire. In the confusion I shall try to capture Chang Ho. So 
will we avenge our comrade’s death.” 


So Chang Fei went out, and Chang Ho’s men came and : 


began to fight. After a half score bouts, Chang Ho ran away, 
and this time Chang Fei pursued. Ho, now fleeing, now 


stopping to exchange a blow or two, led Fei through the hils — 


to a valley: Here, suddenly changing front, he halted, made 
a camp and off ered battle. 

It was now the time when he expected his hidden; men to 
appear and surround Chang Fei. But none appeared. He 
knew not that his ambush had been broken up by Wei Yen’s 
brave men and driven into the valley where the road was filled 


with cart-loads of combustibles, and that the.valley even then 


was all aflame. 

Then Chang Fei came to the attack, and the rout was com- 
plete. Chang Ho, fighting desperately, got through to the 
Wak‘ou Pass and there mustered the remnant of his men. 
He strengthened the position and remained behind his ram- 
parts. 
= Chang Fei and Wei Yen then tried to take the Pass, but day 
after day they failed. Chang Fei, seeing no hope of success, 
retired twenty ii and bivouacked. From this point he sent 
out scouts under Wei Yen to explore the country. While going 
along they observed some burden-bearers, men and women, 
going up a very retired path, pulling down the creepers and 
pushing aside the grasses. 

“That is the way to take Wak‘ou Pass,” cried Chang Fei, 
pointing with his whip to the wayfarers. 

He ordered his soldiers not to scare the people, but to call 
a few gently and bring them to him. They soon had several 
standing before their leader, who spoke to them kindly and put 
them at ease. 

“Whence come you?” asked Fei. 

“We belong to Hanchung and are going home. We heard 
that you were out fighting and the high road to Langchung 
was blockaded, and so we have come across the Ts‘angchi 
Torrent and Tziichang Mountain and down Kueichin River. 
We are going to our homes in Hanchung.” 

“Can one reach Wak‘ou Pass by this road? And how far is 
it? 

The country RES replied, “A small, road leads past to the 
rear of the Pass from Tzuchang Mountain.” 

For this piece of information Chang Fei rewarded ‘them by 
taking them into his camp and giving them a good meal, and 


Romance of the Three Yiingtoms | 107 


108 San Ruo, or , 


he sent off Wei Yen to make a frontal attack on the Pass while | A 


he himself with some light horse attacked it from the rear 
by way of Tzuchang Mount. 

Chang Ho was grieved and disappointed that his colleague 
sent no help, and the news of Wei Yen’s attack only added to 
his sorrow. But-he girded on his armour and was about to 
ride out when they told him that fires had started at half a 
dozen places behind the Pass. They most likely indicated 
soldiers. However, he went out to meet them, and, to his horror, 
‘when the flags opened out, his eyes fell on the figure of Chang 
Fei. Away he ran along a by-road. 

But his steed was not fast, and as Chang Fei pressed him 
close, Chang Ho dismounted and ran up the mountain side. So 
he saved his life. He had, however, very few followers, and it 
was a small and dejected party that presently found its way 
into Nanch‘éng. He saw Ts’ ao Hung, and Ts‘ao was very 
angry at his plight. 

“T told you not to go, büt you were wilful. And you gave 


in your written pledge. You have lost all your men, yet you — 


do not commit suicide. What will you do next?” 

Ts‘ao Hung ordered the lictors to put him to death. But 
the Commissary General interceded. 

“An army is easily raised; a leader is hard to find. Though 


Chang Ho is guilt, he is a great favourite with our prince. 


I think you should spare him. Rather give him command of 
another army and send him to take Chiaming Pass and so hold 


up the soldiers at all the stations. Hanchung will be tranquil 


of its own accord. If he fail a second time you can punish 
‘him for both faults.” 


Ts‘ao Hung was satisfied to do this, and instead of dealing 


with his fault gave Chang Ho half a legion and told him to 
take the Pass. l Be 
The captains of the Pass he was to capture were Méng Ta 


and Ho Hstin. They were at variance—the former desiring to 


go out to meet Chang Ho, the letter being in favour of defence. 


Meng Ta being set on having his way went out, gave battle and — 


was defeated. Ho Hsiin reported this to the capital, where 


Yiian-té at once called in the Commander-in-chief to ask’ 


aa K‘ung-ming assembled all the chief captains into the 
a 


“Chiaming Pass is in danger; we must get Chang Fei from 


Langchung to drive off Chang Ho,” said he. 
Fa Chéng replied, “Chang Fei is encamped at Wak‘ ou, and 


Langchung is no less important than Chiaming. I do not 


think he should be recalled. Choose one among the captains 
to go and defeat Chang Ho.” 
K‘ung-ming laughed, “Chang Ho is renowned in Weis no 


ordinary leader will avail. Chang Fei is the only man te ~ 


send, the only one equal to the task.” 


oan of the Chree Kingdoms 109 
Then among the captains one started up crying angrily, l 
“O Commander, why do you thus despise us? Twill use what = Ar 
little skill I have i in slaying. our enemy and I will lay his head r: 
at the foot of our standard.” 

~The speaker was the veteran Huang Chung, and all eyes 
centred on him. 

“Friend Huang, you are bold enough, but what about your 

age? JI fear you are no match for Chang Ho.” EU 

Huang Chung’s white beard bristled, and he said, “I know f, 
Iam old. But these two arms can still ‘pull the three hundred 
catty bow, and the vigour of my body is not yet departed. Am 
I not strong enough to meet such a poor.thing as Chang Ho?” 

“General, you are nearly seventy ; can you still hold you are 
not. aged?” 

Huang tore down the hall. Seizing o; one of a great swords 
off the rack he whirled it as if it flew. And the stiffest bow 
that hung on the wall he pulled till it snapped. 

= “Well, if you will go, who will second you?” said K‘ung-ming. 

“I would prefer Yen Yen. And if there is the least anxiety, 

—well, here is this hoary head.” 
` Yüan-tê was pleased to let these two go to fight Chang Ho. 
However, Chao Yün put in a protest. 

“Chang Ho has already got through Chiaming Pass, so that 
the fighting will be no child’s play, “and the loss of that Pass 4 
endangers the whole of Ichou. It is no task to set to a couple E 
of old men.’ 

= Replied K‘ung-ming, “You regard tue two as too old and a 
stupid to succeed, but I think the attainment of Hanchung tele: 
depends upon these two.” a 

Chao Yün and many others sniggered as they went from the i 
hall; they did not agree with K‘ung-ming. pee 

In due course the veteran captain and his chosen colleague if 
arrived at the Pass. At sight of them the defenders laughed Cs 
‘in their hearts, thinking that in sending such a pair of dotards 
on such a mission K‘ung-ming had slipped up in his calculations. Vite 

Huang Chung said to his colleague, “You see the behaviour i vie 
of these people? They are laughing at us because we are old. ict 
Now we will do something that will win admiration from all ine 

. the world.” ae 

“I should be glad to hear your orders,” replied Yen Yen. 

‘The two captains came to a decision how to act. Huang 
Chung led his men down below to meet Chang Ho in the open 
' plain. Both drew up their array. When Chang Ho rode out 
and saw his venerable opponent he laughed in his face. 

“You must be very old, and yet you are unashamed to go 
into the battle, eh?’ said Chang Ho. 

“You menial r replied the veteran. “Do you’ despise me 
for my age? You will find my. good sword, however, young 
enough.” ; | 


110 San fuo, or 


So he urged forward his steed and rode at Chang Ho. The om 
two chargers met and a score of bouts were fought. Then _ 
suddenly a great shouting came from the rear. Yen had | 
come up and fallen upon the rear portion of Chang Ho’s army. 
Thus attacked on two sides, Chang Ho was defeated. The 
pursuit did not cease with nightfall, and Chang Ho was driven 
back near a hundred li. Contented with this success, Huang 
and his colleague went into their camp, where they rested their 
men for a time. 

When Ts‘ao Hung heard of Chang Ho’s s new defeat, he was 
going to exact the penalty. But Kuo Chun persuaded him to 
forbear. 

“Tf he is pressed too hard he may take refuge in Shu,” said 
he. “Rather send him help. You will thus keep a hold over 
him and prevent his desertion.” a 

Wherefore Hsiahou Shang was sent with e E 
This Shang was a nephew of Hsiahou Tun. The brother of 
Han Yüan, Han Hao by name, was also sent. They had half 
a legion. \ San 

The two Spine soon reached Chang Ho, and asked how 
now the war was going. 

“That old man Huang is really a hero,” said Chang; “and 
with Yen Yen’s help he is very formidable.” we 

“When I was at Changsha I heard the old man was very — 
fierce. He and Wei Yen yielded the city and killed my own ae 
brother. Now that 1 shall meet him I can have my revenge,” 
said Han Hao. 

So he and Hsiahou Shang led out ‘the new army. "i 

Now, by means of spies Huang had gota thorough EE 5 
of the country, and Yen said, “Hereabout there is a mountain — 
named “Tentang” wherein Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao has stored his supplies. _ 
If we can gain possession we shall reduce the enemy to want. 
and we shall get Hanchung.”’ 

Huang replied, “I think so, too, and so let us do so-and-so.” 

Yen agreed with him and marched off with a body of men 
to carry out his part in the stratagem. 

_ At news of the coming of new armies, Huang Chung marched 
out to meet them. He found Han Hao in front of his array, 
and Han began to abuse the veteran as a disgraceful old ruffian.. 
Then he whipped up his steed and set his spear at Huang. 
Hsiahou Shang also rode out and took part in the combat. The — 
veteran held them both at bay for some half score bouts and 
then fled. They pursued him for twenty li, when they reached’ 
and seized his camp. Huang, however, quickly made another. 
defence of brushwood. Next day they renewed the pursuit, — 
which ended with the capture of the temporary camp of the day — 
before. And they had advanced twenty li further. Then 
they called upon Chang Ho to protect the rear camp. When 
Chang Ho came up he dissuaded them trom continuing. ; 


, Homance of the Three Kingaoms TLE 


“Huang Chung ie retreated before you for two days; there 
is some deep stratagem behind this,” said Chang Ho. | 
Hsiahou Shang scoffed at him. “You are such a coward 
that you have been defeated many times. Now say no more, 
but let us accomplish something.” 
Chang Ho retired much mortified and shamed. Next day 
_ the twe captains again went out to battle, and again Huang 
fled from them for twenty li. The two captains pursued as © 
_ quickly as they could. The day after, Huang fled without any 
' pretence of showing fight, except at short intervals. He got 
to the Pass and, went on the defensive. The pursuers knocked 
-at the very gate of the Pass and made a camp close by. 
-. Then Méng Ta secretly wrote to Yiian-té that Huang Chung 
had been repeatedly defeated and now was in the Pass and 
unable to go out. Ytian-té became alarmed and consulted 
~K‘ung-ming, who said, “The old captain is making the enemy 
- over-confident,—to their ultimate destruction. But Chao 
` Yün did not share this opinion, nor did many others, and 
- Yiian-té decided to send Liu Féng to reinforce his aged captain. 
_ The young man came to the Pass and saw Huang, who asked 
~ him bluntly why he had come to help. 

“My father heard that you have sustained several ent 
a and he has sent me,” said Liu Feng. 
= = “But lam only employing the ruse of leading on the enemy,” 
said Huang Chung, smiling. “You will see to-night that in 
one battle I shall regain all the camps and capture their sup- 
plies and many horses. I have only lent the camps to them to 
store their supplies. To-night I shall leave Ho Hsiin to guard 
the Pass, while General Mêng will gather up the spoils for 
us. Now, young Sir, you shall see the destruction of the 
enemy.’ 
= <That same night, at the second watch, Huang left the Pass 
e with half a legion. But now Hsiahou Shang and Han Hao, 
- seeing no move from the Pass for many days, had become z 
_ careless and so their camps were unable to resist. Their men 
had no time to don their armour or to saddle their horses. All 
the leaders did was to flee for their lives, while their men 

trampled each other down and were killed in great numbers. 
All three camps were recovered by dawn, and in them were 
found all sorts of military equipment. Horses and. their 
_ caparisons also fell to the victors, and all the booty was carried 
-off by Méng Ta and stored in the Pass. 
Huang Chung pressed on his victory. Liu Féng ventured 
to say that the men needed repose. 
“Can you seize the tiger’s whelps without going into the 
tiger’ s den?” cried Huang. And he urged on his steed. 
~ The soldiers also were eager. Chang Ho’s own army was 
-. thrown into confusion by the flying men from the other armies, 
pad he could not maintain his station, but was forced to re- 


112 dan ‘ud. or 


treat. They abandoned all their stockades and rushed to ‘the a 
bank of the Han Waters. vee 
Then Chang Ho sought the two captains who had brought A 
about the misfortune and said to them, “This is Tentang. 
Mountain, where our stores are. Close by is Maits‘ang Moun- 
tain, where the grain is stored. They are the very source of i 
life of the Hanchung army. Lose them and Hanchung is gone 
too. We must see to their security.” | 
Hsiahou Shang said, “My uncle, Hsiahou Yiian, will look out — 
for the defence of the mountain where the granaries are: there 
need be no anxiety about that as it is hard by Tingchtin Mount 
and my brother, Hsiahou Tê, guards T‘ientang Mountain. Let - 
us go to him and help to protect that.” i 

Chang Ho and the two captains set out at once. Theyr eached 
the mountain and told Hsiahou Tê all that had happened. . 

“I have ten legions in camp here,” replied he. “You may, 
take some of them and recover your lost camps.” X 

“No,” replied Chang Ho. “The only proper course to | 
defend.” 

Almost as they spoke the rolling of drums and the clang of © 
gongs were heard, and the look-outs came to say that Huang ~ 
Chung was near. 

“The, old ruffian does not know much of the art of wary 
after all,” said Hsiahou Tê with a laugh; “he is only a brave.” — 

“Be not mistaken; he is crafty and not only bold,” said 
Chang Ho. | 

“This move is against the rules and not at all crafty. He } 
is fresh from a long march and his men are fatigued and they ; 
are deep in an enemy’s country.” 

“Nevertheless, be careful how you pie. K Sd Chang ii 
“You would still do well to depend upon defence only,” 

“Give me three companies of good men and I will cut him ' 
to pieces,” cried Han Hao. 5 

They told off the three companies for him, and down he weda 
into the plain. As he approached, Huang Chung arrayed his 
men. Liu Fêng put in a note of warning that it was late in- 
the day to fight and the men were weary, but Huang paid little ` 
attention. 

“I do not hold with your bite one This.is the one God: ~ 
OS ane to make good, and it would be a sin not to” 

ake it.” 

' So saying, the drums rolled for a great attack. Han Hao 
came forward with his men and the aged captain went toward — jz 
him whirling his sword. In the first encounter Han Hao fell. 
At this the men of Shu gave a yell and went away up the hill, — 

whereupon Chang Ho and Hsiahou Shang hastily moved out ; 
to withstand them. But a great red glare sprang into the sky 
from behind the hill, and a shouting arose. Hastily Hsiabou 
Te led off his men to meet the danger there and went straight 


fiomance of the Three ingdoms 113.3 | } Hi 


into the arms of Yen Yen. His arm rose, the sword fell and 
_Hsiahou Tê dropped from his steed to rise no more. 


This ambush, into which the dead captain had rushed, had 


been carefully prepared by Huang, who had sent Yen away 
before he marched himself and given him orders what to do. 


It was the brushwood that his men had spent the time in col- 


4 lecting that now sent forth the flames reaching up to the 
_ heavens and filling the valleys. 


Yen Yen, after slaying Hsiahou Tê, came round the hill to 


aid in the ‘attack, so that the defenders were taken both in 


front and rear. They could do nothing and presently left the 
battle-field and rushed toward Tingchun Mount to seek refuge , 


-= with Hsiahou Yiian. 


Meanwhile the victors took steps to hold the position they 


= had won and sent the good news of victory to Ch‘éngtu. And 


si at 


when the news arrived, Ytian-té called together all his ic 


to rejoice. 
Then said Fa Chéng, “Not long ago Chang Lu submitted 16 


 Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and thereby he got possession of Hanchung quite 


easily. Instead of following up this by an advance on the 
west he left two captains to guard it and went north. That 
was a mistake. Now, my lord, do not make a mistake your- 
self, but take advantage of the present favourable position, 


with Chang Ho newly defeated and T‘ientang captured, to 


attack Hanchung and you will have it at once. Once that is 


_ yours, you can train your army and amass supplies ready for 


= a stroke against the arch-rebel himself. This God-given ad- 
vantage will be confirmed to you and you should not miss it.” 


Both Ytian-té and K‘ung-ming saw the wisdom of this 


y scheme and prepared to act. Chao Yün and Chang Fei were 


to lead the van, while Yüan-tê with K‘ung-ming commanded 
the main army of ten legions. A day was chosen to set out, 
and orders were sent to everyone to keep careful guard. 

It was a certain auspicious day in the seventh month of the. 


_ twenty-third year that the army marched. Reaching Chia- 


ming Pass, Huang Chung and Yen Yen were summoned and 
well rewarded for their services. 

“People said you were old, General, but the army know you 
better than they, and you have rendered amazing service. Still, 
Tingchiin Mountain is yet to be captured and Paochang is a 
great central store of supplies. If we could get Tingchiin 
Mount we could be quite easy about the whole district of Yang- 


w p‘ing. Think you that you are equal to taking. Tingchün 


Mountain?” 
To this harangue of Liu Pei the venereal nobly answered that 
he was willing to try and was ready to start when they would. 
Said K‘ung-ming hastily, “Do not be hasty. You are brave 
enough, General, but Hsiahou Yuan is a man of different stamp 
from Chang Ho. Hsiahou is a real strategist and tactician; 


114 San uo 


so much so that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao relies upon him as his defence 
against Hsiliang. He it was who was set to defend the capital 
when threatened by Ma Ch‘ao. Now he is in Hanchung and 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao puts his whole confidence in him and his skill as 
aleader. You have overcome Chang Ho, but it is not certain 
you will conquer: this man. I think I must send down to 
Chingchou for Kuan Yü for this task.” 

Huang hotly replied, “Old Lien P‘o was four score and yet 
he ate a measure of rice and ten catties of flesh, so that his 
vigour frightened the nobles and not one dared encroach upon 
the borders of Chao. I am not yet seventy. You call me old, 
O Commander; then I will not take any: helper, but go out 
simply with my own three companies and we will lay Hsiahou 
Yiian’s head at your feet.” . 

K‘ung-ming refused to allow him to go; Huang Chung in- 
sisted. At last K‘ung-ming consented, but said he would send 
an overseer. 


They put upon his mettle the man who was to go, 
Youth’s vigour may be lesser worth than age’s powers, we know. 


The next chapter will tell who the overseer was. 


CHAPTER LXXI. 


AT THE CAPTURE OF TUI HILL HUANG CHUNG 
i SCORES A SUCCESS; 
ON THE HAN WATERS CHAO YUN CONQUERS A HOST. 


“Tf you are really determined to undertake this expedition, 


- I shall send Fa Chéng with you,” said. K‘ung-ming to the 
veteran leader. “You will have to discuss everything with Ea 


him. Ishall also despatch supports and reinforcements.” 


The expedition set out. Then K‘ung-ming explained to 


: Yiian-té that he had purposely tried to spur on the old captain 
that he should really exert himself, else he feared he would 


not do much.. After this, he ordered Chao Yün to march after 


‘the first army and help, if help was needed. So long as the 


old man was victorious, Chao Yün was to do nothing; if he 


was in difficulties then he was to be rescued. Three companies | 


also were sent out among the hills to take position at strate- 
gical points and set up many banners and make a brave show 


in order to spread the impression of huge forces, and so 


-frighten and perplex the enemy. In addition, he sent to 


Hsiapan to tell Ma Ch‘ao what part to play in the campaign; 


- Yen Yen was to hold Langchung in place of Chang Fei. 


` The refugees, Chang Ho and Hsiahou Shang, reached | 
Hsiahou Yiian’s camp and told their doleful tale of the loss 
of T‘ientang Mountain and the death of their colleague and 
the threatened attack. The news was sent to Ts‘ao Hung, 


who bore it quickly to the ¢apital. Bk 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao lost no time in calling a council. Then the =- , 


Historian Liu Hua said, “The loss of Hanchung would shake 


the whole country. You, O Prince, must not shrink from toil — 


and hardship, but must yourself go to lead the army.’’ - 
“This state of things comes of my not heeding your words 


before, gentle Sir,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, then repentant. 


However, he hastily prepared and issued an edict to raise 
an army of forty legions which he would lead. The army was 
ready in the seventh month, the early autumn, and marched 


- in three divisions. The leading division was under Hsiahou 


Tun, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao commanded the centre and Ts‘ao Hsiu was. 
the rear guard. sid i 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao rode a white horse, beautifully caparisoned. 


_ His guards were clad in embroidered silk. They carried the 
huge red parasol woven of silk and gold threads. Beside him | 
-in two lines were the symbols of princely dignity, the golden 


116 San Kuo, or . 
melons, silver axes, stirrups, clubs, spears and lances; ban- 
nerols embroidered with the sun and moon, dragon and 
phoenix, were borne aloft. His escort of twenty-five thousand 
stout warriors led by bold officers, marched in five columns 
_of five thousand each, under banners of the five colours, blue, 
yellow, red, white and ‘black. The five companies made a ‘brave 
show as they marched, each column under its own flag with 
men in armour and horses in caparisons all of one colour 
and all glittering in the sun. 

TEUAS they debouched through Chang Pass, Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao 
noticed in the distance a thick wood, very luxuriant, and asked 
those near him what it was called. 
“This place is Lant‘ien, the Indigo Fields, ” they replied. 
< “And in that wood is the estate of the late Ts! ai Yung. His’ 
en Ts‘ai Yen, and her present husband, Tung Chi, live 
there.” ihe 
Now Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and Ts‘ai Waren had been excellent 
friends at one time. His daughter had been first married to. 
Wei Taochieh, Then she was abducted and taken away to 
the north, where she had borne two sons.. She had composed y 
& ballad called, “Eighteen Stanzas for the Mongol Flageolet,” — 


which is well known. ‘Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had been moved by pity for | 


her sorrows and sent a messenger with a thousand tales to 
ransom her. The Prince of Tsohsien, overawed by Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao’s strength, had restored her to Ts‘ai Yung. i 
Ordering his escort to march on, Ts‘ao went up to the gate 
with only a few attendants, dismounted and enquired after 
the lady of the house. At this time Tung Chi was absent at © 
his post and the lady was alone. As soon as she heard who | 
-her visitor was she hastened to welcome him and led him into 


© the reception room. When he was seated and she had 


performed the proper salutations, she stood respectfully at his 
side. Glancing round the room, he saw a rubbing of a tablet 
hanging on the wall. So he got up to read it, and asked his 
- hostess about it. 

“It is a tablet of Ts‘ao É, or the fair lady Ts‘ao. In the 
time of the Emperor Ho (eire. 100 A.D.), in Shangyü there 
was a certain magician named T's‘ao sii, who could dance 
and sing like the very Spirit of Music. On the fifth of the 
fifth month he was out in a boat, and being intoxicated, fell 


overboard and was drowned. He had a daughter then 


fourteen years of age. She was greatly distressed ‘and sought 
the body of her father for seven days and nights, weeping all 
. the while. Then she threw herself into the waves, and five 
days later she floated to the surface with her father’s body in 
her arms. The villagers buried them on the bank, and the 
magistrate reported the occurrence to the Emperor as a 
worthy instance of daughterly affection and remarkable piety. 
A later magistrate had the story inscribed by Hantan aD 


eis omane of the Tore Kingdoms Es 


in memory of the event. At hat time Hatten Shun was sae 
thirteen, but the composition of the inscription was so perfect 
that neither jot nor tittle could be added, and yet he had written | 
it currente calamo. The stone was set up beside the grave, 


_ and both inscription and story were the admiration of all the 


men of that day. My father went to see it. It was evening, 


but in the obscurity he felt out the inscription with his fingers. 


He got hold of a pencil and wrote eight large characters on 
the reverse of the stone and, later, some person recutting the 
stone engraved these eight words as well. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao then read the eight words; they formed an i 
enigma. Literally they read, yellow silk, young wife, a 
_daughter’s child, pestle and mortar.” ae 


“Can you explain J ? asked Ts‘ao. Ts‘ ao of his kostes. 


“No; although it is a writing of my father’s, thy Handmaid | ee 
cannot interpret it,” she replied. Re 


Turning to the strategists of his star, MEN ao Tsʻao. said, 


“Can any one of you explain it?’ 


All but one made no reply. The man ‘who said he had 
fathomed the meaning was a Recorder named Yang Hsiu. 
“Do not tell me yet; let me think it out,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 


_ Soon after they took leave of the lady, went out of the © 
„tarm and rode on. About three li from the farm the meaning | 
= suddenly dawned upon Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao, and he laughingly turned — 
to Yang Hsiu saying, “Now, you may try.” oi 

“This is the solution of the enigma,” ‘said Yang. “Yellow 
-~ silk” is silk threads of natural colour, and the character for 


“silk”? placed beside that.for “colour” forms a word meaning 


. “finally, decidedly” ; the “young wife” is a “little female,” and 
"the character for “female” with “little,” or “few, ” placed | beside 
‘it forms a word meaning “admirable, fine,” : the “daughter’s | 


child” is “daughter” and “child,” which side by side make the 


word “good;” and a “pestle and mortar” suggest pounding a 


together: the five bitter herbs in a receptacle: the character 


for “receptacle” and “bitter? form a word meaning “‘to tell.” 


So the four words are “Decidedly fine and well told.” 


i 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was astonished at his cleverness, and said, 


“Just what I made it.” 
Those around greatly wondered at Tene ingenuity and 


knowledge. 
In less than a -day they reached Manchin: where T's‘ao. 


Hung welcomed them. He told the tale of Chang Ho’ S$ mis- 
fortunes. 


“To suffer defeat is no crime?’ ’ said Ts‘ao Ts‘ a0, «that and oa 


i victory are things that happen constantly in war.’ 


= “Liu Pei has sent Huang Chung to take Tingchtin Mount,” - 
said Ts‘ao Hung. “Hsiahou Ytian, hearing you were coming, 


O Prince, has een defending the position and not going out 


to. give battle.” 


118 | ; Aan Ruo, or 


“But standing always on the defensive is showing weak- 
ness,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

Thereupon he bade a man carry a chieh, simple authority to 
act, to the mountain commander and so order him to atiack 
the enemy. 

_ “Hsiahou Yuan is very stern and inflexible, and he may be 
ae too far and fall victim to some vile ruse,” said Liu 
ua 

Wherefore the prince wrote a letter to him to accompany the 
chieh. And when the messenger arrived and the letter was 
opened it read: “Every leader must exercise a combination 
of inflexibility and yielding. Boldness is not the only thing | 
that counts; if he make it'so, then is he a mere creature to 
fight. Now Iam camped at Nanchiin ready to watch the deeds 
of your admirable prowess and capacity, and all I have to say 
is, ‘Do not disgrace your previous reputation.’ ”’ 

| The letter pleased the commander mightily. Having sent 
away the bearer, he called in Chang Ho to consult. 

“The prince has a great army at Nanchün ready to destroy 


. Liu Pei. We have been on the defence here long enough, and 


it is time we rendered some solid service. To-morrow I am 
going out to battle, and hope to capture Huang Chung.” 


“Your opponent combines ready resource with boldness and 


prevision,” said Chang Ho. ‘‘Beside, he has Fa Chéng to aid 
him; and you must be cautious, for the country is very ‘difficult 
and dangerous. You had better keep on the defensive.” 

“How shall we be able to look our prince in the face when ` 
other men render good service? However, you just keep the 
hill; and I will go out to battle.” 

Then an order was issued asking who would go out to recon- 
noitre and provoke a battle. His brother Hsiahou Shang 
volunteered. He was told that he was not to make a real stand, 
but merely to begin the fight. He was to. lose and not win, 
for a grand ruse was ready for the enemy. He explained 
his plans, and Hsiahou Shang went away with a small 
column. 

Now Huane Chung and his helper, Fa Chéng, were camped 
quite close to the Tingchtin Mountain. They had endeavoured 
to entice Hsiahou Yuan out into the field to fight, but failed; to 
attack him as he stood in that country was very difficult. So 
thus far no advance had been made. But as soon as Ts‘ao’s 
men appeared and seemed to offer battle, Huang Chung was 


~ ready to march out to meet them at once. Buta certain minor 


captain named Ch‘én Shih offered his services. 
“Do not trouble yourself to move, O General,” said Ch‘én 
Shih, “for I will go out to fight them.” 
Huang Chung consented, and placed three companies under 
Ch‘én Shih, who went out of the valley and set his army in 
array. And when Hefahon. Shang came up and, as arranged, 


4 


Romance of the Three tingdoms 119 


_ merely fought a few bouts and ran away,-Ch‘én Shih followed 
_ to take advantage of his success. But he was soon brought to 


a standstill by the rolling of logs and hurling of stones on the 


- part of his opponents. As’he turned to retire, Hsiahou Yiian 


brought out his men and attacked. : Ch‘én Shih had no chance 
against them and was quickly made prisoner. Many of his 
men joined the enemy, but a few escaped to their own side and 
told Huang Chung of the misfortune. 

Huang Chung at once asked advice from Fa Chéng, who 
said, “This Hsiahou Ytian is easily provoked to anger, and 
being angry he is bold without discretion. Your way now is 
to work up the enthusiasm of your men, then break camp and 
advance. Do this in a series of marches, and you will excite 


‘your enemy up to the point of giving battle, when you can 


capture him. They call this the ‘Ruse of the Interchange of 
Host and Guest.’ ” 
So Huang Chung collected all the things his men liked, and 


made them presents, till the sound of rejoicing filled the whole 


valley and the men were hot to fight. Then camp was broken, 


- and the army marched forward a certain distance. Then they 


encamped. After some days’ rest the manceuvre was repeated ; 
and then again. 
When tidings of the advance reached Hsiahou Yüan, he 
“proposed to go out and fight. ° 
“No, no,” said the prudent Chang Ho. “This is a well- 
` known ruse, and you should remain on the defensive. You will 
lose if you fight.” 
Hsiahou was not the man to stomach this moderate advice, 


so he sent out Hsiahou Shang to give battle. As soon as this. 


force reached the camp of Huang Chung, hë mounted and 
rode out to fight. In the very first bout he captured Hsiahou 
Shang. Those who escaped told how their leader had been 


captured, and Hsiahou Ytian at once sent to offer an exchange 


of prisoners. This was agreed to, to be effected the following 
day in front of both armies. 
So next day both sides were arrayed in a spot where the 


- valley widened, the two leaders on horseback beneath their 


_ respective standards. Beside each stood his prisoner. Neither 


was encumbered with robe or helmet, but each wore thin, 
simple dress. At the first beat of the drum each started to 
race over to his own side. “Just as Hsiahou Shang reached 
the ranks of his own side, Huang Chung shot an arrow and 
wounded him in the back. The wounded man did not fall, but 
went on. 

But Hsiahou Yiian, mad with rage, could contain himself 
no longer. He galloped straight at Huang Chung, which was 
exactly what the latter wanted to irritate him into doing. The 
fight that then ensued went on for a score of bouts, when 
suddenly the gongs clanged out from Hsiahou Ytian’s side and 


120 - San Kuo, or > 


he drew off, losing some men while doing so. When he reached 
his own side he asked why the gong had sounded. ` 

“Because we saw the banners of Shu through openings in 
the hills in several places and we feared an ambush.” 

The leader believed them, and did not return to the battle- 
field; he simply remained defensive. Before long, Huang 
Chung had got quite near to the Ts‘ao camp, and then he asked 
further advice from his colleague. 

Fa Chéng pointed over.to the hills, and said, “There rises a 
steep hill on the west of Tingchtin Mountain, difficult of access, 
but from its summit one has a complete view of the: defences 
of the enemy. If you can take this hill, the mountain lies in 
the hollow of your hand.” 

Huang looked up and saw the top of the hill was. a small 
tableland and there were very few men there. So that evening 
he left his camp, dashed up the hill, drove out the small host . 
there and took it.’ It was just opposite Tingchitin Mount. 

Then said Fa Chéng, “Now take up position half way up the 
hill, while I go to the top. When,the enemy appears I will 
show a white flag. But you will remain quiet till the enemy . 
become tired and remiss, when I will hoist a red flag. That 
will be the signal for attack. 

Huang cheerfully prepared to act on this plan. In the 
meantime Tu Hsi, who had been driven from the hill-top, had 
run back and reported the loss of the hill to Hsiahou Yiian. 

“With Huang Chung in occupation of that hill I simply must 
give battle,” said he. 

Chang Ho strongly dissuaded him, saying the whole thing 
was but a ruse of Fa Chéng’s, but Hsiahou Ytian was obstinate. | 

“From the top of that hill the whole of our position is visible, 
our strength and our weakness; I must fight.” 

In vain were the remonstrances repeated. Hsiahou Yiian 
set out his men to surround the hill and then began to vent 
his rage at his enemy so as to incite him to give battle. 

Then the white flag was hoisted. However, Hsiahou Yiian 
was allowed to fume and rage in vain. He tried every form 
of insult, but no one appeared. In the afternoon the men 
became weary and dispirited. Plainly their ng -had 
gone; and Fa Chêng unfurled the red flag. 

Then the drums rolled out, and the men homed till the 
earth seemed to shake as the hoary old leader rode out and 
led his men down the slope with a roar as of an earthquake. 
Hsiahou Yiian was too surprised to defend himself. His chief 
enemy rushed straight to his standard and with a thundering 
shout raised his sword and cleft Hsiahou Yiian through between 
the head and shoulders so that he fell in two pieces. 


Hoary headed is he, but he gees up to battle; 
Gray haired, yet recklessly mighty; 
With his strong arms he bends the bow, . 


> 

BCH 
Fp 
Lees 


The. arrows fly. 
With the iry a of the wind he rides, 
_ The white sword gleams. 
The sound of his voice is as the roar of a Hier! 
His steed is fleet as a dragon in flight. 4 
Victory is his and its rich rewards, j 
For he extends the domain of his lord. 


At the death of their captain, the soldiers fled for their lives, 


and Huang captured the mount. Chang Ho came out to oppose 


him, but, attacked at two points by Huang Chung and Ch‘én 


Shih, he could not stand. He lost the day and fled. However, 1 
before he had gone far, another cohort flashed out from the . K 


hills and barred his. way. And the leader was Chao Yün. 
Confused and uncertain what to do, he led his men toward 


 Tingchün Mount. But a body of soldiers came out to stop 
him and said that the mount was in the hands of the enemy. 
So he and Tu Hsi joined their forces and went to the Han 
` Waters, where they camped. 


_ Thence they sent to tell Ts‘ao Ts‘ao of their defeat. At the 
news of the death of his favourite, he uttered a great cry and 


then he understood the prediction of the soothsayer, Kuan Lu, 


that the sortes showed opposition. It was the twenty-fourth 


_ year of the period, the yellow boar had met the tiger and the 
year of*the cycle was the thirty-sixth. The expedition had 


suffered a loss indeed by the death of a general, and the death 
had taken place at the mount known as “Army Halt.” -The 
affection between Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and his captain had been very 
close. 


Ts‘ AN Ts‘ao sent to enquire the whereabouts of Kuan Lu, 


but no one knew. 


Ts‘ao nourished feelings of resentment against the slayer of 
his friend, and he led his army out against Tingchiin Mount 
to avenge his death. Hsti Huang led the van. When the army 


_ reached the Han Waters, Chang Ho and Tu Hsi joined them. 


They said to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, “This mount is lost. Before march- 
ing farther, the stores in Granary Hill should be moved north.” 


And Ts‘ao Ts‘ao agreed. 
Huang Chung cut off the head of Hsiahou Yüan and took it 


to Yiian-té when he reported his victory. For his services he ~ 


was rewarded with the title “Conqueror of the West,” and 


great banquets were given in his honour. 


While these were going on, his colleague, Ch‘én Shih, brought . 
the news of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army of twenty legions on the way 


to avenge his friend’s loss; and the supplies on Granary Hill 
: were being moved north. 


Then said K‘ung-ming, “Ts‘ao Ts! ao is certainly short of 


supplies. If we can burn what he has and destroy his baggage 


train he will have but little spirit left to fight.” 
“I am willing to undertake the task,” said Huang Chung. 


Romance of A Ebre dingo AN 2r 


122 | San Kuo, or’ 


“Remember Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao is a different sort of man from 
your latest victim.” 

Yiian-té said, “After: all, Hsiahou Yüan was but a bold 
warrior. It would have been ten times better to have killed 
Chang Ho.” 

“T will go and kill him,” said the aged one, firing up. 

“Then go with Chao Yün,” said K‘ung-ming; “act in concert 
and see who can do best.” 

Huang Chung agreed to this condition, and Chang Cho was 
sent as second. 

Soon after the army had marched out, Chao Yün asked of 
his colleague what plan he had prepared against Ts‘ao T’s‘ao’s 
army of twenty legions in their ten camps, and how the stores 
of grain and forage were to be destroyed. 

“I am going to lead,” said Huang Chung. 

“No wait; I am going first,” said Chao Yün.: 

“But I am the senior leader ; you are only my second, ” said 
Huang Chung. 

“No; you and I are equal in responsibility and both anxious 
to render good service. We are no rivals. Let us cast lots 
for who is:to lead the way.” 

They did so, and the aged one gained precedence. 

“Since you have won the right to make the first attempt, you ` 
must let me help you,” said Chao Yün. “Now let us decide 
upon a fixed time, and if you have returned by that time I shall - 


not need to stir. But if at that time you have not come back — 


then I shall come to reinforce you.’ 

“That suits me admirably,” said Huang Chung. 

So they decided upon noon as the time; and Chao Yün went 
back to his own camp, where he called in ‘his next in command ~ 
and said, “My friend Huang is going to try to burn the stores 
to-morrow. If he has not returned at noon I am to go to aid 
him. You are to guard our camp, which is in a dangerous 
Pae ss the river, but you are not to move out unless com- 
re e 99 

Huang Chung went back to his camp and said to his senior 
captain, Chang, “I have slain one leader and cowed another. 
I am going to destroy the enemy’s store of grain to-morrow, 
taking with me most of the men. You are to come and assist 
me. A meal for the men is to be ready about midnight 
to-night, and we shall move at the fourth watch. We shall 
march to the foot of their hill, capture Chang- Ho and then 
start the fire.” 

A All being ready, they set out—Huang Chung leading——and 

stole across the Han Waters to the foot of the hills. As the sun’ ; 
- got up out of the east, they saw before them mountains of grain - 
and only a few men on watch. These fled at first sight of the 
men of Shu.» The horsemen dismounted and began to collect 
brushwood and pile it round the grain heaps. Just as they 


were starting the fire, there appeared a cohort led by Chang Ho, 
who at once began a fight with Huang Chung. Then Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao heard of the fight and sent Hsii Huang to help. He came 
up in the rear, and Huang Chung was surrounded. Chang Cho 
with a small company tried to get away to their camp, but they 
were intercepted by Wên P‘ing, and more men coming up by 
the rear he also was surrounded. Both were in difficulties. 

Meanwhile, time passed and noon came with no news of 
Huang Chung. Wherefore Chao Yün girded on his armour, 
took three companies with him and went to his aid. Just 
as ri was leaving he again warned Chang I to keep good 
wate 


“Guard the camp most carefully ; see that you have archers 


and crossbow men on both sides.” 

“Yes, yes,” said Chang. 

Chao Yün rode off, spear in hand, and went out to give battle 
where he could find the enemy. Soon he fell in with one of 
Wên P‘ing’s companies: these were easily disposed of. Then 


he came to the real press. A cohort barred his way, led by . 


Chiao Ping of Wei. ` 

“Where are the soldiers of Shu?” cried Chao Yün. 

“All killed,” cried Chiao Ping. 
< Chao Yün angrily dashed forward and thrust Chiao Ping 
through so that he died. The cohort scattered, and Chao Yün 
went on to the foot of the north hills, where he found Huang 
Chung surrounded. With a yell he dashed at the encircling 
ring, thrusting this way and shoving that, so that every one 
shrank and recoiled before him. The mighty spear laid low 
his opponents as the whirlwind scatters the petals of the wild 
pear tree till they lie on the bosom of the earth like snowflakes. 
Panic seized Chang Ho and Hsti Huang, so that they dared not 
stand in his way, and thus Chao Yiin fought his way through 
and rescued his fellow warrior. Then they fought their way 
out and none could withstand them. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had been watching the course of the fighting 
from a high place, and when he saw a doughty warrior forcing 
his way into the press and all going down before him he asked 
of his officers if they knew who the hero was. 

“That is Chao Yün of Ch‘angshan,” replied one who knew 
him. 

“So the hero of Tangyang is still alive,” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

He gave general orders to his men not to attack Chao Yün 
without being sure of success, no matter where they met him. 

Having rescued his colleague and got clear of the battle, some- 
one pointed out Chang Cho hemmed in on a hill not far off. 
Wherefore Chao Yün went to his relief before going back to 
his own camp. He had little need to fight, for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s 
soldiers no sooner saw the name emblazoned on the banners 
than they fled without more ado. 


Romance of the Three Wingdooms aoe 


~ 


oe San kuo, or 


But it filled Ts‘ao Ts‘ao with rage to see his men falling away — 
before Chao Yün, who marched on as though no one would | 
think of standing in his way, and he went in pursuit himself 
with his officers. . 

Chao Yün reached his own camp, where he was welcomed by 
Chang I. But a cloud of dust was seen in the distance, and 
they knew Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was in that cloud and coming upon them. 

“Let us bar the gates while we make preparation,” said 
Chang I. | 

“Do not bar the gates,” said Chao Yün.. “Have you never 
heard of my exploit at Tangyang, when I laughed at Ts‘ao’s 
many legions? Now that I have an army at my back and 


captains to help, what is there to fear?” 


Then he placed the archers and the bowmen in a covered 
position outside, while he threw down all the weapons and | 
flags within. And no drums beat. But he himself, alone, 
stood outside the gate of the camp. 

It was dusk when Chang Ho and Heü Huang neared the camp 
of the men of Shu. They saw that the ensigns and weapons had 


‘been overthrown, and no drums beat at their approach. They 


also saw the one figure of the doughty warrior at the gate, and 
then they halted and dared advance no farther. While they 
hesitated, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao arrived and urged. his army to march 
quicker. They answered with a shout and made a dash for- 
ward—but they saw. the one figure at the gate, and every man ` 
stood still. And before long, man by man they turned about 
and went away. Then Chao Yün beckoned to his men to come ~ 
out of the moat, and the archers and bowmen began to shoot. 
The men of Ts‘a0 knew not in the dusk how many their enemies 
were, but terror seized upon them and they ran, each trying 


to be first. And as they- ran the drums rolled ‘and the men 


shouted and pursued, till the flight became a perfect rout and 
a confused mass of men reached the banks of the Han Waters. 
The press continuing, many were forced into the river and 
were drowned. 

The three captains of Shu followed close on the heels of the 
routed army, and while Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was making off with all 
speed, two other captains of Shu came along and set fire to all 
the army stores of food and forage. Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao aban- 
doned the northern hill stores and set out hastily for Nanchiin. 
Chang Ho and Hsü Huang could make no stand, and they also 
abandoned their camps, which Chao Yün at once occupied. 
Beside the stores of food, the victors collected countless weapons © 
along the banks of the river. 

They sent news of the victory to Liu Pei, who came with | 
K‘ung-ming to the scene of the victory, and there they heard 
the full story of Chao Ytin’s prowess. And Ytian-té was glad, 
and when he had seen the steepness and difficulties of the © 
surrounding hills and understood the fine deeds of valour that 


ar È 
See. 
e Re 


onmes of the Three tiingooms 


had been done, he turned to ag ming and said, “Truly, the 
man is brave all through.” 


Behold Chao Yiin, the warrior of Ch‘angshan, 
Whose whole body is valour; 

Formerly he fought at Ch‘angpan, l 

And his courage to-day is no less. 

He rushes into the array to manifest nie ay eae 
Surrounded by his enemies, — 

He is dauntless and daring. 

Devils howl and spirits cry, 
The sky is afaid and earth trembles. 

Such is Chao Yiin, the brave, 

Whose whole body is valour. 


For his services Yüan-tê gave Chao Yün the title of “Tiger 
Terror.” And the men of his army were 2 rewarded and there ; 
was banqueting to a late hour. h 

Soon it was reported that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was coming again — 
down through Hsieh Valley to try to capture the Han Waters. 
But Yiian-té laughed, saying, “He will not succeed, for I think 
that we shall gain command of the river.” 

_ Then he led his army west of the river to oppose him. When - 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao drew near he sent out Hsü Huang to lead the van 
-and open the battle. A certain Wang P‘ing, who said he knew 
the country, offered to ie as well, and he was sent as. second 
in command. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao camped on the arth of Tingchiin Mount ie his 
B anced guard marched away making for the River Han. 
-And when they reached the bank, Hsü Huang gave orders to 
cross to the other side. 


“To cross the river is well,” said his second, “but what ifo 


you have to retreat?” a 
= “When Han Hsin made his array with: a river in his rear, 
-he said that out of the place of death one could return to life.” 
“You are mistaken now. The cases are not the same, for 
then Han Hsin knew his opponents were unskilful. ‘Have you | 
reckoned upon the skill of our opponents, Chao Yün and . 
‘Huang Chung?” . 
“You may lead the footmen to hold the enemy while I destroy 
them with the horsemen,” said Hsü Huang. 
Then bridges were built and the army crossed. 


A man of Wei blindly quotes Han Hsin, 
In a minister of Shu who whould recognise another Chang Liang? 


Who won the victory will next be revealed. 


, 


CHAPTER LXXII. 


CHUKO LIANG’s WIT TAKES HANCHUNG; 
Ts‘Ao A-MAN’s ARMY RETIRES UP HSIEHKU. 


Ja spite of the most earnest dissuasion, Hsü Huang crossed © 
the river and camped. Huang Chung and Chao Yiin asked 
to be allowed to go against the host of Ts‘ ao Ts‘ao, and Yüan-tê 
gave his consent. 

Then said Huang Chung, “Hsii Huang has been bold enough - 
to come; we will not go out against him till evening, when his 
men are fatigued.. Then we will fall upon him one on either 
side.” 

Chao Yün consented, and each retired to a stockade. Hsü 

. Huang appeared and for a long time tried to draw them into 
a fight, but they refused to go forth. Then Hsü ordered his | 
bowmen to begin to shoot straight before them, and the arrows 
and bolts fell in the Shu camp. 

Huang said, “He must. be-thinking of retreat or he would 
not shoot thus. Now is our time to smite him.” ; 

Then the scouts reported that the rearmost bodies of the 
-enemy had begun to retreat. The drums of Shu rolled a 
deafening peal and the armies came.to the attack, one on 
either side, and the double fight began. Defeated, the flying 
soldiers were forced to the Han Waters, where many were 
drowned. But their leader escaped, and. when he got back to 
camp he blamed his.colleague Wang Ping for not having come. 
to his aid. 

“Had I done so, the camps would have been left unguarded,” 
said Wang P‘ing. “I tried to dissuade you from going, but. 
you would not hear me, and you brought about this reverse 
yourself.” 

Hsti Huang in his wrath tried to slay Wang, but he escaped 
to his own camp. In the night a fire broke out and great 
.confusion reigned in the lines. Hsü ran away, but Wang 
crossed the river and surrendered to Chao Yün, who led him 
to Ytian-té. He told Ytian-té all about the Han Waters and 
the country near by. 

“T shall surely capture Hanchung now that you are here to 
help me, friend Wang,” said Yiian-té. 

He gave Wang P‘ing an appointment as a supernumerary 
leader and guide. 

Wang P‘ing’s defection, when Hsii Huang told him, made 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao very angry. "He placed himself at the head of a 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms dan 


Erce and tried to retake the bank of the river. Chas Yiin, 
thinking his men too few, retired to the west side, and the two | 
_armies lay on opposite sides of the stream. Yiian-té and his 
adviser came down to view the Position. The latter saw in 
the upper course of the stream a hill which might well screen 
a thousand men, so he returned to camp, called in Chao Yün 
and bade him lead haifi that number, with drums and horns, 
and place them in ambush behind the hill, to await certain 
orders which would come some time during the night or- at 
dawn. When he heard a detonation he was not to appear, 
only give a long roll of the drums at every report. 

Chao Yün departed to play his part in the drama, while 
K‘ung-ming went to a hill whence he could overlook the - 
scene. 

When next the men of Ts ao approached the camp of Shu 
and offered battle not a man came out, nor was an arrow or 
a bolt shot. They retired without any result. But in the 
depths of the night, when all the lights in the camp were 
extinguished and all appeared tranquil and restful, K‘ung-ming 
exploded a bomb, and at once Chao Yiin beat his drums and 
blared his trumpets. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s men awoke in alarm, 
thinking it was a night raid. They rushed out, but there was 
no enemy, and as the hubbub ceased they went back to sleep. 
‘Soon after there was another bomb, and again the drums and 
-the trumpets seeming to shake the "earth itself, and the fear- 
‘some roar echoing along the valleys and from ‘the hills again 
scared T's‘ao’s soldiers. Thus the night passed in constant 
alarms. The next night was the same, and the next. On the 
fourth day Ts‘ao broke up his camp, marched his men thirty li 
-to the rear and pitched his camp in a clear, wide space among 
the hills. : 

K‘ung-ming was: pleased at the result of his ruse. Said he, 
smiling, “Ts‘ao is skilled in war, but gill he is not proof against 
all deceitful tricks.” 

The men of Shu then crossed the river and camped with the 
stream behind them. When Ytian-té asked the next move he 
was told, but also told to keep the plan a secret. 

Seeing his enemy thus encamped, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao became doubt- 
ful and anxious, and, to bring things to a decision, he sent a 
written declaration of war, to which K‘ung-ming replied that ` 

they would fight a battle on the morrow. 

On the morrow the armies faced each other half way 
between the two camps in front of The Hill of Five Frontiers, 
and there they arrayed. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao presently rode up and 
stood beside his banner; with his officers right and left and the 
dragon and phoenix banners fluttering in the wind. His 
drums rolled thrice, and then he summoned Liu Pei to a parley. 
Yiian-té rode out supported by his officers. . Then Ts‘ao inso- 
lently flourished his whip and vilified his opponent. 


s 


128 Aan Kuo, or | 


“Liu Pei, you have forgotten kindness and lost the sense of’ 


right; you are a rebel against the government.” 

Yiian-té answered, “I am related to the imperial family, and 
I hold an edict authorising me to seize all rebels. You have 
dared to lift.up your hand against the Empress, made yourself 
a prince and arrogantly presume to an imperial chariot. If 
you are not a rebel, what are you?” 

Then Ts‘ao ordered Hsii Huang out to give battle, and Liu 


Féng went to meet him. As the combat began, Yiian-té retired | 


within the ranks of his array. Liu Féng was no match for 
his opponent, and fled. Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao issued an order to capture 
Liu Pei. At this the army of the king of the west country 
uttered one great roar of rage. Then Ts‘ao’s men came 
surging on. The men of Shu fled toward the river abandoning 
everything, even throwing aside their weapons, which littered 
the road. But as Ts‘ao’s men pressed forward, he suddenly 
clanged the gongs, called a halt and drew off. 

“Why did you call us off, O Prince, just as we were on the 


' point of success ?” 


.““Because I saw the enemy had encamped with the river in 
their rear, which was very suspicious. They, also abandoned 
their steeds and weapons, which made me doubt. Wherefore 
I could only retire. But retain your armour. Let not a man 


take off his harness on pain of death. Now retire as quickly 


as you can march.” 


As Ts‘ao Ts‘ao turned about to retire, K‘ung-ming hoisted _ 


the signal to attack, and the retreating soldiers were 


harassed on every side both night and day til¥ they were all - 


disordered. Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao ordered his army to take refuge in 
Nanch‘éng. 


. Presently they saw fein rising all around, and soon it was 


known that their city of refuge was in the hands of their 


enemies. Disappointed and saddened, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade them — 
march to Yangp‘ing Pass. But Yiian-té with the main army | 


followed them to Paochou in the Nanch‘éng district and there 
pacified the people and restored confidence. 

“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was exceedingly quickly overcome this time,” 
said Liu Pei; “how was that?” 

“He has always been of a suspicious nature,” said K‘ung- 
ming, “and that has led to many failures although he is a good 
leader of men. I have defeated him by playing upon his 
doubts.” 

“He is rather weakened now,” said Liu Pei. “Can you not 
devise a plan to drive him away finally?” 

“That is all thought out.” 


“Next Chang Fei and Wei Yen were sent along two different 


roads to cut off Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s supplies. Two other cohorts 
were bidden to go and fire the hills. All these four had natives 
of the place to act as guides and show the way. 


ade 


Hiomance of the Three Kingdoms "o 429 


The scouts sent out from Yangp ‘i ing Pass returned to report 
R the roads far and near were blocked by the men of Shu 
and every place seemed to be burning. They had not seen 
any soldiers. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao knew not what to do. Then they 
told him that his stores were being piundered by Chang Fei 
and Wei Yen. At this, he called for a volunteer to drive off 
the plunderers; and Hsü Ch‘u offered. He was given a com- 
pany of veterans, and went up to act as escort of the grain 
wagons. The officers in charge of the transport were very 
glad to get a guard of such renown. 

“Except for you, O General, the grain could never reach 
Yangp‘ing.”’ 

They entertained Hsii Ch‘u with the wine and food on the 
carts; and he ate and drank copiously, so that he became very 
intoxicated. And in that state he insisted on marching, urging 
the convoy to start at once. 

“The sun has nearly set,” said the transport officers, ‘ ‘and 
the road near Paochou i is bad and dangerous, so that we cannot 

-pass there at night.’ 
_ “TI can face any danger,” boasted the drunken captain; “I am 
brave as a myriad men put together. What do you think I 
fear? Beside, there is a good moon to-night, just the sort of 
_ thing to take grain carts along by.” 

Hsti Ch‘u took the lead, sword in hand. By the ad 
watch they were passing Paochou. About half the train had 
l: passed when the rolling drums and the blare of horns came 

‘down to them through a rift in the hills. It was soon followed 
by the appearance of a cohort led by Chang Fei. With spear 
ready, he came racing down. straight for Hsti Ch‘u, who, 
whirling his sword, dashed to the front to meet him. 

But Hsii Ch‘u was too drunk to stand against such a warrior. 

-After a few bouts he received a spear thrust in the shoulder, 
` turned round in his saddle and fell from his horse. His men 
_ rushed to his help, and they carried him away as they retreated, 
while Chang Fei took the whole transport train of fodder and 
forage away to his own camp. 
- The defeated escort carried their wounded leader back to | 
-Ts‘ao’s camp, where he was placed in the care of physicians. | 
Then Ts‘ao himself led out his army to fight a decisive battle 
with the men of Shu. Yüan-tê went out to meet him, and, 
‘when both sides were arrayed, Liu Féng went out to challenge. 
Ts‘ao at once let loose a torrent of taunts and reproaches. . 

“Seller of shoes, you are always sending out this pretended 
son of yours to fight for you. If I only call my youngster, your 

so-called son will be chopped to mincemeat.” 

These words enraged Liu Féng, who raised his spear and 
galloped toward Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao bade Hsü Huan do battle with 
` the young man, and Féng at once ran away. s‘ao led on his 
legions, but he was harassed by the explosion of bombs, the 


9 


130 . Aan Kuo, or. 


beating of drums and the blare of trumpets that came from 
every side. He concluded that he was being led into an ambush, 
and he hastened to retire. The retreat was unfortunate, for 
the soldiers trampled upon each other and many were killed. 
Anon they all ran off to Yangp‘ing Pass as quickly as they 
could. 

But the men of Shu came right up to the walls of the city, 
and some burned the east gate while others shouted at the 
west. Others, again, burned the north gate while drums 
rolled at the south. Leader and led were alike harassed and 
frightened, and presently they left the Pass and ran away. 
They were pursued and sore smitten. 

The road to safety was not easy. In one direction Chang 
Fei barred the way, while Chao Yün and Huang Chung came . 
and attacked from different points. Ts‘ao’s army lost many 
men, and he was severely defeated. His officers gathered 
about him and took him off toward Hsiehku. Here a great 
cloud of dust was seen in the distance. 

“If that is an ambush it is the last of me,” sighed Ts‘ao. 

The soldiers came nearer, and then Ts‘ao recognised not a 
enemy but his second son, Chang. As a lad Chang was a good 
horseman and an expert archer. He was more powerful than 
most men and could overcome a wild beast with his bare hands. © 
Ts‘ao did not approve of the young man’s bent, and often 
warned him to study instead. 

“You do not study, but only love your bow and your horse; 
this is the courage of a mere person. Think you that this 
makes for an honourable career ?” . Abii 

But Chang replied, “The really noble man ought to imitate _ 
such grand men as Wei Ching and Ho Ch‘u-ping.. They won | 
their reputation in the Shamo Desert, where they led a mighty 
host able to overrun the whole world and go anywhere. What 
have I to do with scholarship ?” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao used to ask his sons what career they found 
admirable, and Chang always replied that he would be a leader 
of armies. 

“But what should a leader be like? ” asked Ts‘ao. 

“He should be inbued with firmness and courage; never turn ` 
aside from a difficulty, but be in the van of his officers and 
men. Rewards should be certain; and so should punish- 
ments.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao smiled with pleasure. 

In the twenty-third year of the period, Wu Hian of Taichün 
revolted, and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao sent this son with five legions to 
suppress him. Just as he was leaving, his father read him a 
homily on his duty. i 

“At home we are father and son, but when a task is given 
you you have to consider your duty as a servant of your ruler. 
The law knows no kindness, and you must beware.” 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 


E When the expedition reached the north of Tai he led the y 


array and smote as far as Sangkan, and peace was restored. 
He had lately heard that his father was at Yangp‘i ing Pass, 
and had come to help him to fight. 


His coming greatly pleased his father, who said, “Now that i 
my callow-bearded | son has arrived, we can destroy Liu aon i 


for certain.” 


Then the emp was marched back again and pitched camp 
at Hsiehku. 


Someone told Yiian-té of the arrival of Ts‘ao Chang, and : a ; 
he asked for a volunteer to go out against him. -Liu Féng = 


offered. . oe Ta also desired to go, and Yiian-té decided to 
let both go. % 
“Vie with each other,” said he. 


Each captain had half a legion, and Liu Fêng led the way. 
Ts‘ao Chang rode out and engaged him, and in the third bout 


-Féng was overcome and ran off. Then Méng Ta advanced, 
and a battle was just beginning when he saw that Ts‘ao’s men 
were in confusion. The cause was the sudden coming of Ma 
-Ch‘ao and Wu Lan. Before the enemy had recovered from 
the panic, Méng Ta attacked on another side. Ma Ch‘ao’s 
men, who had been nursing their courage for a long time, 
fought brilliantly, so that none could withstand their onslaught, 
and they won the day. But in combat with Ts‘ ao Chang, Wu 
Lan received a spear thrust and fell. 
After a great fight, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army was led off and vent 
into camp at Hsiehku. Here Ts‘ao remained many days, 
prevented from advancing by Ma Ch‘ao and fearing ridicule 
if he should retreat. One day, while he was anxiously trying 
to decide what to do, his cook sent in some chicken broth. He 
‘noticed in the broth some chicken tendons, and this simple fact 
led him into a train of reflection. He was still deep in thought 
when Hsiahou Tun entered his tent to ask the watchword for 


that night. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at once inyohriraniy replied, “Chicken 


tendon.” 

The word was mod on in orders: When the Recorder 
Yang Hsiu saw the order that the watchword was “chicken 
tendon” he told all his men to pack up their belongings ready 
for the march. One who saw this went and told Hsiahou 
Tun, who sent for ‘Yang Hsiu and asked why he had packed 
up 

PH replied, “By to-night’s orders I see that the prince is 
soon going to retire. “Chicken tendons’ are tasteless things 
to eat, and yet it is a pity to waste them. Now if we advance 
we cannot conquer, and if we retire we fear we shall look 
Pid saloia: There being no advantage here, the best course is 

40 retire. You will certainly see the Prince of Wei retreat 
before long." ‘I have made my preparations so as not to be 
ae and confused at the last moment. is 


132 .. San Huo, or , 


“You seem to know the prince’s inmost heart,” said Hsiahou _ 


Tun, and he bade his servants pack. The ‘other captains 
seeing this, also made preparations for departure. 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s mind was too perturbed for sleep. In the 
night he got up, took a steel battle-axe in his hand and 
wandered privily through the camp. When he got to Hsiahou 
Tun’s tents he saw everything packed and ready for a move. 
Much surprised, he made his way back to his own tent and sent 

for that officer. _ 

“Why is everything in your camp packed as if Tne for 
the march?” 

“Yang Hsiu, the Recorder, seems to have private knowledge 
of the Prince’s design to retire,” said he. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao summoned Yang Hsiu and questioned him, and 
Yang replied with the chicken tendon incident. 

“How dare you invent such a story and. disturb he hearts 
of my army?” i 

Ts‘ao called in his lictors and told them to take the 


man away and behead him and hang his head at the camp 


gate. 

The victim was a man of acute and ingenious mind, but 
inclined to show off. His lack of restraint over his tongue 
had often wounded Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s susceptibilities. Once Ts‘ao | 
Ts‘ao was having a pleasance laid out, and when it was ~ 


completed he went to inspeet the work. "He uttered no word | ; 


of praise or blame; he just wrote the word “alive” on the 


gate and left. Nobody could guess what he meant till Yang — | 


Hsiu heard of it. ; 
“Gate”? with “alive” inside it makes the word for “wide,” 
said he. “The minister thinks the gates are too wide.” cm 

Thereupon. they rebuilt the outer walls on an altered plan. 
When complete, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was asked to go and see ae And 
he was then delighted. 

“But who guessed what I meant?” said he. 

“Yang Hsiu,” replied his men. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao ‘thereafter lauded Yang’ s ingenuity, but in his 
heart he feared. 

Another time Ts‘ao Ts‘ao received a box of cream cheese 
from Saipei (Mongolia). Ts‘ao Ts‘ao just scribbled. three 
words on the top and left it on the table. The words seemed 
to have no meaning. But Yang Hsiu happened to come in, 
saw the box and at once handed a spoonful of the contents to 
each guest in the room. When Ts‘ao asked why he did this, © 
he explained that that was the interpretation of the words on 
the box, which, resolved into primary symbols, read, “Each © 
man a mouthful.” on 

“Could I possibly disobey your orders?” said he. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao laughed with the others, but hatred was in his 3 


heart. 


fiomance of the Three Yiinguvoms ` 133 


ERs ao dived in constant fear of assassination, and said to his 
attendants, “Let none of you come near me when lam eenig, 
for I am like to slay people in my dreams.” ` 
-One day he was enjoying a siesta, and his quilt fell off. ~ One 
of the attendants saw it and hastened to cover him again. 
‘Ts‘ao Ts‘ao suddenly leaped from the couch, cut down the 
intruder with his sword and lay down again to sleep. Some 
time after he awoke, simulated surprise and asked who had 
killed his attendant. When they told him, he wept aloud for. 
the dead man and had him buried in a fine grave. Most people 
thought that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had slain the man while asleep, but 
Yang Hsiu knew better, and at the funeral of the victim he 
remarked, “The minister was in no dream, but the gentleman 
in him was asleep.” 
This only increased the hatred. 
_Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s third son, Chih, took great delight. in Yang 
RR s cleverness and often invited him, when they would talk 
the whole night. 
‘When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was considering the nomination of his. 
heir and desired to name Chih, Ts‘ao P‘ei got to hear of the 
proposal to set him aside in favour of his younger brother, so 
he secretly requested the Master of the Court Singers, Wu 
Chih, to come and discuss this matter. Then fearing that 
someone might see his visitor, he got a large basket made, in 
which his friend was smuggled into the palace. He gave out 
that the basket contained rolls of silk. Yang Hsiu heard the 
truth and informed Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who sent men to watch at the 
-gates. Ts‘ao Pei, in alarm, told Wu Chih, who told him not to 
-be afraid but to fill a basket actually with rolls of silk on the 
morrow and have it carried in as before. The searchers 
peeped into the basket and found the rolls of silk. They told 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao the result of their search, and he began to think 
Yang Hsiu was plotting aenn his son. This also added to 
his hatred. 

` Another time Ts‘ ao, wikide to compare the abilities of his 
two sons P‘ei and Chih, told them both to go out of the city, | 
at the same time ordering the gate wardens to forbid their - 
exit. Ts‘ao P‘ei first came to the gate, was stopped by the 
wardens and returned to his palace. But his brother Chih 
consulted ‘Yang Hsiu, who said, “You have received orders 
from the prince to go out; simply cut down any who may try. 
to prevent you.’ 

When Ts‘ao Chih went to the gate and was steed: he 
shouted out to the wardens, “I have the prince’ s order ` to go 
out; dare you stop me?” 

He slew the man who would have prevented him. Wherefore 

-Ts‘ao Ts‘ao considered his younger son the more able. But 
when some other person told him that the device came from 
Yang Hsiu, he was angry and took a dislike to his son Chih 


1345. San Ruo, or 


Yang Hsiu also used to coach Chih in preparing replies to 
likely questions, which were learned by heart and quoted when 
necessary. Tsʻao Ts‘ao was always asking this son his opinion 
on military matters, and Chih always had a fluent, reply ready. 
His father was not without suspicions, which were turned ‘into 
certainties when the eldest son gave his father the written 
replies which he had bribed a servant to filch from his 
brother’s apartments. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was quite angry. Ej 

“How dare he throw dust in my eyes like this?” said Ts‘ ao 
Ts‘ao. 

Yang Hsiu very nearly lost his life for his share in that 
business. Now sending him to execution on the charge of 
destroying the morale of the soldiers was only a subterfuge. 

. Yang Hsiu was but thirty-four when he met his end. 
Talented was Yang Hsiu, . yes 

Born of an illustrious stock, 

His pen traced wonderful characters 

In his breast were beautiful words. 

When he talked, his hearers were astonished, 

His alert responses oyerpast every one. 

He died because of misdirected genius 

And not because'he foretold retreat. 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao thus put to death the prime mover and simulated 
anger against Hsiahou Tun. He threatened to execute him, 
but listened to those who begged him to show mercy. 

“Get out of this! said he. 
Next he issued an order to advance on the morrow. The 
army moved out of the valley and came face to face with the, 
men of Shu led by Wei Yen. He summoned Wei to surrender, 

but received abuse and contumely in return. 

P‘ang Té went out to fight Wei Yen, but while the omba 
was in progress fires broke out in Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s camp and a 
soldier came flying to say that the rear and centre camps had 
been seized by Ma Ch‘ao.. Fearing lest this should lead to a 
rout, he drew his sword and stood before the army crying out, 
“Death for any officer who flinches!’’ 

Wherefore they pressed forward valiantly, and Wei Yen, 
. pretending defeat, retreated. Having driven back this army, 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao gave the signal to turn toward camp and fight 
with Ma Ch‘ao. He took up his station on the top of a hill 
whence he could survey the field. Suddenly a cohort appeared 
just below him, and the leader cried, “Wei Yen is here!” Wei 
fitted an arrow to his bow, shot and wounded Ts‘ao Ts‘ao just 
in the raphe of his lip. He turned and fell. Wei Yen threw. 
aside his bow, seized his sword and came charging up the hill 
to finish his enemy. But with a shout Pang Tê flashed in. 

“Spare my lord!” cried he. ity 

He rushed up and drove Wei Yen backward. Then they | 
took Ts‘ao Ts‘a0 away. Ma Ch‘ao also retired, and the wounded 
prince slowly returned to his own camp. 


d the arrow knocked out two of his front teeth. When in 

he hands of the physicians he lay thinking over Yang Hsiu’s 

“words. In a repentant mood he had the remains decently 
interred. 

Then he gave the prier to retreat: Pang Té was the rear 
aara. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao set out homeward in a padded carriage, 
escorted by his Tiger Guard. 

Before they had gone far, there was an alarm of ne and 
ambush. _ The soldiers were 'all fear-stricken. | 


Tet only biel something like the danger once at T‘ung Kuan met, 
Or like the fight at Red Cliff which Ts‘ao could n’er forget. 


How ae ao Ts‘ ao age will next be told. 


As es a baie Ts‘ao Ts ao was wounded full in the face, 


CHAPTER LXXII.. | ree 


YUAN-TE BECOMES PRINCE OF HANCHUNG; 
YUN-CH‘ANG ATTACKS AND OCCUPIES HSIANGYANG. 


hen Ts‘ao Ts‘ao retired to Hsiehku, K‘ung-ming: considered ‘ 


it to mean the abandonment of his attempt to acquire posses-. 


sion of Hanchung, and he sent out several parties to harass 


and hasten his retreat by guerilla attacks. For this reason — 


the retreating army had to keep on the move. Beside, he was 
suffering from his-wound, and marched as hurriedly as ‘possible. 
But it was a dejected army. The leading legions once encoun- 
tered fire on both flanks, which had been raised by men placed 


in ambush while Ma Ch‘ao’s main force kept driving the army 


before it. Every man in the Ts‘ao army was dispirited, and 


there was no more courage in them. They „pressed forward — 
day and night alike without halting to rest. It was only after . 


reaching Chingchao that they had some repose. 


Then Yiian-té sent Liu Féng, Méng Ta and Wang P‘i ing i ; 


take Shangyung. Shên T‘ang and his colleagues, knowing 


that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had retreated, offered their submission. After- 
confidence had been restored. among the people, Yiian-té. Te> 


warded his army generously, and they were all joyful. 


It was after this that the general body of the officers — 


decided to urge Ytian-té to assume the title of “Emperor,” but 


they dared not tell him so. However, they sent up a petition . i 


to K‘ung-ming, who replied that he had already decided on this 
course. So he and Fa Cheng headed a deputation that went 
in to see their lord. 

They said, “Now that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao really holds the reins of 
authority the people are without a king. Our lord, your 
kindness and sense of justice have spread throughout the 
empire. You have restored peace over this ‘Land of Streams,’ 
and your becoming Emperor would be according to God’s 
will and the desire of the people. Then by right and title you 
could destroy rebels. This matter should not be delayed and 
we pray you to choose the auspicious day.” 

But Ytian-té evinced great surprise, and replied, “Your 
words, O Commander of the Army, are wrong. Although I 


am of the imperial house, yet I am but a minister; and to do — 


-` this thing would be rebellion against Han.” 
K‘ung-ming replied, “Not.so. To-day the empire is riven 


X 


and many of-the bolder spirits have seized upon, and claim. 


: = Romance of the Three Kingdoms T 137 ve 


the rule of, various portions. The talented of the empire 
and the virtuous among officers, who have risked death and ` 
lost their lives in serving those above them, all desire to have 
the opportunity of serving an Emperor and doing service for 
a Throne, i Now, if you insist on modestly maintaining your 
righteous way I fear that you will lose popular support. My 
lord, I would that you should reflect upon this.” 

“But you desire me to usurp a place of great honour in the 
state, and I dare not. Let there be more delay and discussion.” 

But with one voice they said, “Our lord, if you reject this 
the hearts of the people will turn from you.” 

“My lord,” said K‘ung-ming, “you have made rectitude 
your motto all your life. If you really object to the most 
honoured title, then, since you have Chingchou and Hsiang- 
yang, take the title temporarily of ‘Prince of Hanchung.’”’ 

“Gentlemen, though you may desire to honour me by the 
title of ‘ Prince,’ yet, without an edict from the Emperor, such 
action would be usurpation.” 

Said K‘ung-ming, “The time demands recognition of the 
actual state of authority, and not a rigid ‘adherence to all the 
rules of propriety.” 

And Chang Fei roared out, “AJ sorts of people with all 
sorts of names are making themselves rulers; how much more 
ought you, O Brother, who are of the dynastic ’ stock? It ought 
not to be ‘Prince of Hanchung’ but. ‘Emperor.’ What 
prevents it?” > 

“Brother, say no more,” said xu jan- tê; roughly. 

“My lord, ” said K‘ung-ming, “it is fitting to follow political 
changes and suit one’s conduct to circumstances. Wherefore 
first take the princedom and then memorialise the Throne.” 

As there seemed no option, Yüan-tê listened and complied. 
In the twenty-fourth year (219 A.D.), in the seventh month, 
an altar was set up at Mienyang (in Hupeh), square and nine 
li about, which was set around with the proper flags and 
banners and symbols, and thereon, in the presence of all his 
officers assembled according to their rank, and at the request 
ofthe two ministers Hsii Ching and Fa Chéng, Ytian-té received - 
the head dress and seal of a prince. Then he took his seat, 
facing the south as a ruler should, and received the salutes 
and felicitations of all his officers as Prince of Hanchung. & 

And his son Liu Ch‘an was nominated his heir-apparent. 

- Hsii Ching was given the title of Royal Preceptor; Fa 
Chéng that of a president of a Board. ‘Chuko Liang was re- 
appointed Commander-in-chief of the Forces, with the addi- 
tional powers of control over the whole state policy. The 
two brothers, with Chao Yiin, Huang Chung and Ma Ch‘ao, 
were the Five Tiger Leaders. Wei Yen was made Governor 
of Hanchung, and all the otherg who had assisted were given 
ranks and offices. 


138 . ` San Kuo, or 


As soon as the investiture was completed, Liu Pei composed 
a memorial and sent iť to the capital. This is the document :— 

“I, Pei, have but ordinary talents, yet was I made a general 
of high rank and led a great army. Though I received a 
commission to purge the empire of rebels I was unable to 
cleanse it and so renew the tranquillity to Your Majesty’s 
house and restore the dynasty. Too long have I delayed to 
spread Your Majesty’s sacred poe The world is evil 
and not in good case, and as I sorrowfully think it over and 
over I am distressed as one in severe pain. 

“Rebellion began with Tung Cho, and all kinds of evils have 
spread abroad ; cruelty and ferocity have become rife. Strong 
in faith in Your Majesty’s sacred virtue and inspiring presence, 
many banded together to help. The loyal exerted themselves 
to destroy the rebels, but others of them were smitten of 
heaven. The fierce and the contumacious have been exter- 
minated, and gradually rebellion has melted away. 

“Only Ts‘ao Ts‘ao now remains, too long unpunished. He 
has arrogated to himself the authority of the state. His 
wicked heart is very rebellious. Once I, with the officer of 
high rank Tung Ch‘éng, conspired against him, but'the plot 
was discovered and my fellow conspirator suffered. Thence- 
forward I was a wanderer and my loyalty availed nothing. . It 
only allowed Ts‘ao further licence and liberty to do evil, till he 
dared even to accomplish the death of the Empress and the 
destruction of her sons. Although we might band together | 
and form associations, yet, with all our energy, we had to 
recognise that we were too weak for war. Wherefore the 
years passed and nothing was accomplished. In constant fear 
of destruction, we even forgot our duty to the state. Waking - 
and sleeping we sighed, and our nights were times of 
anxiety. 

“Now my fellows consider that history has repeated itself. 
They attach the utmost importance to the family and would 
manifest it with all their might. Hereditary succession of 
rulers is still a principle. The Rulers of Chou, taking the two 
. preceding dynasties as models, strengthened its position 
through all the states, and it reinforced itself with the support 
of Chin and Chéng. When the great Founder of the Hans 
came into his own he ennobled his whole family. Later, the 
dynasty had to issue a general command throughout the whole : 
a ae nine divisions in n order to destroy the widespread family | 
(0) u. i 

“Now Ts‘ao.is an enemy of all rectitude, and his followers 
are all evil. His treachery is manifest. Since the members 
of the imperial clan are few and weak the clan is not honoured. 
Having reflected upon the ancient models and being desirous — 
of temporary alleviation, my fellows have made me assume the 
title of ‘Prince of Hanchung’ with the addition of Ta-ssti-ma. 


Pp At Tye 
a Late hoe t 


I have deeply considered these things. If one receive kindness 
from the Throne and accept the responsibility for a portion of 
the state and fail, then such a fault would only be made the 
more serious by holding high rank and thereby increasing the 
burden of reproach. But my fellows have urged me, and they 
have convinced me that it would be right; and, should I refuse, 
the wicked will not be destroyed and the danger to the state 
will not be removed. The temple of your ancestors is in 


danger, the imperial eae aie are failing. A faithful 


servant, who in the day of tribulation can undertake a suitable 
policy whereby to preserve the dynasty, should not refuse his 
help at any cost. Wherefore I have yielded and accepted the 
position for the glory of the state. 

“Humbly I think of such a title and its exalted position and 
the favour vouchsafed me, and I would endeavour to show 
true gratitude. My anxiety is deep, for the responsibility is 
heavy. I am as one on the brink of a great gulf. I must 
surely exert myself to the utmost and encourage my armies 
and lead all disciples of rectitude, in accordance with the will 


of heaven and as occasion serves, to smite rebellion so as to ~ 


restore the dynasty.” 

= When this memorial reached the capital, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was in 
his palace at Puyeh and it annoyed him greatly. 

_ “How dare this mean weaver of straw shoes behave thus? m 
said he. “Now I swear that I will destroy him.” 

= So he issued orders for the whole force of the state to go 
out against Hsich‘uan to wage fierce war with the new Prince 
of Hanchung. 

. But a remonstrance came from the mouth of Sstima I. 

“Tet not the great Prince trouble himself to go on a distant 
expedition because of a temporary annoyance. I can propose 
a plan of which the execution will need not the bending of a 
single bow, and yet it will make Liu Pei bring down disaster 
upon his own head. When his army shall have become ex- 
hausted, it will only be necessary to send one single captain 
against him and victory will be ours.” 

“What is your exalted view, my friend?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

“Sun Chitian’s sister is wife to Liu Pei, but Sun has found 
an occasion to steal away the bride. Liu Pei is in possession 
of Chingchou still, and he and Sun are bitter enemies. There- 
fore send some able speaker with a letter to Wu to persuade 
him to send an army to recover Chingchou. That will draw 
thither all the armies of Hsich‘uan, when you can send your 
army to Han and Ch‘uan. Liu Pei will be helpless and his 
strength will be wasted.” 

_ The scheme pleased Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He at once drew up a 
letter and sent it by the hand of Man Ch‘ung, who soon arrived 
in Chiangtung. As soon as Sun Ch‘tian knew of the mission, 
he summoned his advisers to consult. 


"Romance of the Three Kingdoms | 139 


=æ zi 


140 | -an Buo, or 


` i 

Chang Chao said, “Wei and Wu are primarily enemies 
because of the dissension fomented by the words of Chuko. | 
They have been fighting for several years and many lives have 
been lost. Now this messenger has surely come to discuss- 
terms of friendship, and he should be welcomed.’ 

On the strength of this, Man Ch‘ung was well received and 
conducted into the city and into the presence of Sun Ch‘tian. 
He presented his letters at the conclusion of the ceremonies of. 
reception and declared his mission. 

“Wu and Wei have no fundamental quarrel, and their dis- 
sension has been brought about by Liu Pei. My master sends — 
me to covenant with you for an attack on Chingchou, while he 
goes against Han and Ch‘uan. This double attack being 
successful, the conquered country can be divided between you | 
two and you can: both swear to respect each other’s territory.” 

Having read the letter, Sun Ch‘tian prepared a banquet in 
honour of Man Ch‘ung and then sent him to the guest-house 
to rest while he Lilac the matter with his council - of 
advisers. 

Said Ku Yung, “Although the messenger’s speech was all 
special pleading it was correct in form. I propose that the 
messenger be allowed to return and that a covenant be made 
with Ts‘ao Ts‘ao for joint attack. In addition, let spies be sent 
over the river to find out Kuan Yti’s movements, and then we $ 
may act.” i 

Chuko Chin said, “I hear that since Kian Yü has been in 
Chingchou, Liu Pei has found him a wife, who has borne him — 
a son and a daughter. The daughter is too young to have 
been: betrothed, wherefore let me go to ask her in marriage 
with your heir. If Kuan Yü agree, then we can arrange with 
him to attack Ts‘ao. If Kuan Yü refuse, then let us aid Ts‘ao 
in an attack on Chingchou.” 

Sun took this advice. So he sent Man Ch‘ung away and 
sent Chuko Chin to Chingchou to try to arrange the betrothal. 
Chuko Chin was received; and when the time came to state the 
reason for his coming, Kuan Yui asked him bluntly what he 
had come for. 

“T have come seeking to ally the two houses. My macer: 
the Marquis of Wu, has a son who is quite clever. Hearing 
that you have a daughter, General, I ask her in marriage, where- 
by the two houses may join in an attack on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. This 
would be an admirable result and I pray you to consider the 
proposal.” ` 

But tne warrior flared up. “How can my tiger daughter — 
marry with a dog’s whelp? Were it not for your brother I 
would take your head. Say no more!” 3 

Kuan Yü called his servants to hustle forth the hapless 
messenger, who ran away with his hands over his head too 
astonished to look any one in the face. And reaching his 


Sadia 
K Ns à 
5 SRS lk 


= i "romance of ithe Three Kingdomg 141.. 


ywn place he dared not hide the manner of his reception, but 
old the whole truth. ; 

“What ruffianism!” exclaimed the mar quis. 

- Thereupon he ordered the council again to consider an 
sttack on Chingchou. 

Pu Chih rose and said, “It has been long manifest that Ts‘ao 
I's‘ao wishes to usurp the Throne, but he is afraid of Liu Pei. 
Now we are to attack Shu with an army. The marriage has 
orought us misfortune indeed.” 

“But I also want the place,” said Sun Ch‘tian. 

Said Pu Chih, “Ts‘ao Jén is already camped at Fanch‘eng 
n Hsiangyang and i in no danger from the river. If Ts‘ao can 
take Chingchou by land why does he not take it? However, 
ne wants you, my lord, to send your army, and you can judge 
nis real intention from this. Send to Ts‘ao and tell him to 
make Ts‘ao Jên attack by land. Then Kuan Yü must take 
he army from Chingchou to Fanch’éng. When he has left 
Shingchou you can send an army to seize it.” 

Sun Ch‘tian thought the scheme good and sent letters with 
hese proposals to T's‘ao Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao adopted the plan, and 


naving sent the messenger back to Wu, he next sent Man . 


Ch‘ung to help Ts‘ao Jên at Fanch’éng as assistant adviser 
in the matter of attack. He also sent despatches to Wu to ask 
for the assistance of Sun Ch‘tian’s marine force. 
_ Having laid on Wei Yen the task of holding eastern Chuan, 
the Prince of Hanchung, with his officers, returned to Ch‘ êngtu 
and began to set his new house in order. A palace was begun 
and public guest-houses were built, and between Ch‘éngtu and 
Paishui, at selected places, they built four hundred rest-houses 
and post stations. The prince also set himself to accumulate 
great stores of grain and forage and to fill his arsenals with 
weapons with the design of mastering the capital and the 
whole country. > 

Then his spies told him of the treaty between Ts‘ao and Wu, 
with designs upon Chingchou, and he hastily called in K‘ung- 
ming to ask what should be done. 
“I felt that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao would try to do this,” ena K‘ung- 


ming, “and most of the advisers in Wu will persuade Ts‘ao to 


order Ts‘ao Jén to begin the campaign.” 
“But what am I to do?” asked the prince. 

“First send a special messenger to Kuan Yü with his new 
title, telling him to capture Fanch‘éng, which will so damp the 
ardour of the enemy that he will break off himself.” 

Therefore the prince sent Fei Shih, a high official from his 
Board of War, to take the patent of his new title to Kuan Yii, 
who received the delegate with great deference and conducted 
him into the city. After they had arrived at the official 


X 


residence, Kuan Yü enquired what new: title had been con- 


ferred upon him. 


_ 142 — Ban Kuo, or 


/ 


“Chief of the Five Tiger Generals: ” replied the delegate. 

“And who are the five?” 

“Their names are Kuan, Chang, Chao, Ma and Huang.” 

“The second is my brother,” said Kuan Yü discontentedly.. 
“Ma comes of a famous family and Chao Yiin has been with 
my elder brother so long that he is as a brother. It is right 
for him to be put on a level with me. But what sort of a man 
is this Huang Chung that he is ranked with us? The really 
great man does not stand shoulder to shoulder with any old. 
soldier that comes along.” 

And he refused both title and seal. 

“You do wrong to refuse,” said Fei Shih. “Of old, Hsiao Ho 
and Ts‘ao Ts‘an helped the Founder of the Han Dynasty in his 
great enterprise and were very dear friends, while Han Hsin 
was but a runaway leader from Ch‘u. Yet Han Hsin became 
a prince, and so was placed over the heads of the other two. 
I have never heard that these two resented it. The prince has 
his Five Tiger Generals, but he is still your brother and all that 
that means. As his brother you are he and he is you. Is 
there any comparison with any other? The prince has always 
treated you with the greatest kindness. You are one in sorrow 
and joy, sharers of disaster and good fortune. No such ques- 
tion as that of a mere title ought to reckon at all. I pray you, 
Sir, to reflect.” 

Kuan Yii understood, and thanked the messenger for having 
prevented him from making a great mistake. He then received 
the seal with all humility. 

Next Fei Shih produced the edict ordering the capture af 
Fanch‘éng. Kuan Yü lost no time in obeying its command. 
He appointed Fushih Jên and Mi Fang leaders of the van to 
take the first army out of the city into camp. This done, a 
banquet was prepared for the messenger, and they sat late at 
their wine. While still at table there was an alarm of fire in 
the new camp, and Kuan Yii hastened out of the city to see. 
He found that the two captains had also been feasting and the 
fire had started behind their tent, a spark having fallen into 
some explosives, whence it spread and destroyed the whole 
camp and all that was in it. Kuan Yü and his men did what 
they could to put out the fire and then re-entered the city. 
There he summoned the two captains before him, abused them 
for their lack of care and sentenced them to death. 

However, Fei Shih interceded for them, saying, “It is not 
well to put two leaders to death at the beginning of a campaign, 


` before even the army has marched. You might reprieve them 


at least.” / 

Kuan Yii’s anger had by no means subsided, but he recalled 
the two peccant captains and said, “Were it not that I have the 
greatest regard for the President Fei here I had let the 
sentence take its course. Now I will only flog you.” 


AJA s 
how ill 
Dhata ve 
PU 


So the two officers received forty blows each and were 
degraded from leading the van. Their seals were taken away 
and one was sent to Nanchiin, the other to Kungan. 

“Now be warned,” said Kuan Yü. “If, when I return from 


my victories, there is the least sign of disorder on your part, ; 


you will suffer for both faults.” 
The two.men flushed crimson and went ante 
Then two new officers were appointed, Liao Hua and Kuan 


P‘ing. Next Kuan Yü took command of the main army, and . : 
he had two advisers. Then it was that Hu Hua’s son, Hu Pan, — 


came to Chingchou and joined Kuan, who loved him for the 


sake of his father and the good service he had rendered. Kuan 


be ‘ig him to the Prince of a aces vane in the train of Fei 

The day iat Kuan Yü sarinced i .his standard petore 
starting, he was lying in his tent resting when suddenly there 
dashed into his tent a huge boar, very large, as big as a bullock 
and quite black. It bit his foot... He jumped up to kill the 
creature, when it squealed with the sound of tearing cloth— 
and he awoke. But he had a pain in his foot. | 

The dream perplexed him, and he could not explain it. He 


related it to his son, who interpreted it happily, saying that 


the boar was something of a royal beast, like the dragon, and 
coming to his feet meant a rise for his adopted father. When 
the dream got noised abroad, for he told his officers, some 
interpreted it as auspicious and some the reverse. 

“When a man nears sixty he ought not to be greatly disturbed 


by the thought of death,” said Kuan Yü. “After all, I ama 


man.’ 


Hanchung making him Chief General, with honourable insignia 
of rank and control over the nine districts in Chingchou and 
Hsiangyang. When the officers congratulated him on his new 
honours they did not forget the dream. 

“This shows what a dream of boars means.’ 

This new distinction pleased Kuan Yü eat and he had 
no more perplexing doubts. Soon he marched away along the 
great road to the point of danger. 

Ts‘ao Jên was in the city when he heard that the great 
warrior was coming against him. He was much put about, and 
inclined to trust solely to defence. But his next command, Chai 
Yüan, did not support this course and argued against it. 

“Our prince has ordered you to act in concert with Wu and 
take Chingchou. For the other side to come against such a 
combination is to walk in the way of ae certainly we have 
no occasion to avoid a conflict.’ 

` On the other hand the newly sent adviser inculcated cau- 
tion. Said he, “Kuan is brave and cunning and one not to be 
met lightly. I think defence is best.” 


fiomance of the Three fiingooms =—«-_-«143 


Poe rugs 


-Just about that time camie an edict from the Prince of 


144 San Kuo, or 


Then Hsiahou Ts‘un said contemptuously, “This is all the 


talk of a lot of book-folk. When the flood approaches bank. 
up to keep it out. Let the enemy come and we shall only have. 
to sit still and receive our reward, for we are sure of victory.” 
Ts‘ao Jén was won over to the side of the men of. action. 
‘He placed Man’ Ch‘ung in command of the defences while he 
` went outside to beat off Kuan Yü. When the two forces met, 


Kuan Yü called to his side Kuan P‘ing and Liao Hua, to whom — 


. he gave certain orders. These two advanced, settled their 


array and Liao Hua then rode out and offered a challenge. 
Chai Yiian accepted it; but soon after the combat began Liao 
Hua made as if he was defeated and turned to leave the field. 
Chai Ytian went after him. The Chingchou men retired — 
twenty li or so. 


Soon the Chingchou E came again and offered battles 
when Hsiahou Ts‘un and Chai Yiian both went out. The 


manceuvre of the preceding day was repeated. But suddenly 
there was a detonation behind the men of Ts‘ao and the rolling 
of drums as for attack. Ts‘ao Jên hastily called upon his men 
to return. They did so; but Kuan P‘ing and Liao Hua then © 
turned and followed. on their heels so that. the men of Ts‘ao 
were thrown into confusion. 

Ts‘ao Jén by this time had seen that a trap ina been laid 
and he had fallen therein, so he hastily marched with one army 


to Hsiangyang. He got to within a short distance of the city _ 
when he saw before him a handsome banner waving in the — 
wind, and out came the great warrior with his sword ready — 


to slay. Ts‘ao Jén was powerless from fear, and, fighting 


being impossible, he turned off in a diagonal direction for? 


Hsiangyang. Nor was he pursued. © 

Shortly after, Hsiahou Ts‘un came. He fell into a rage at 
the sight of the old warrior and went to fight him. He was 
slain in the first encounter. His colleague fled, but Kuan 
. P‘ing captured and slew him. Then the pursuit was con- 


tinued, and the loss on Ts‘ao’s side was very heavy. Many 


were drowned in the Hsiang River. This phase ended with 
Ts‘ao Jên defending Fanch‘éng and Kuan in possession of 
Hsiangyang. His was the victory. 

“You have obtained this city very easily,” said the Trans- 
port Officer Wang Fu, “but the task is not ended. Ts‘ao’s 
men have been beaten and their courage broken, but there is 
danger from the side of Wu. Lü Méng is at Luk‘ou, and he 
has long cherished the desire to lay hands on Chingchou. 
Suppose he now attacks; what will happen?” 

“I was e’en thinking of that myself. You may go and attend- 
to this matter. You will certainly be able to find certain 
elevated spots on the river bank, not too far apart, suitable 
for alarm beacons, whence could be signalled any attempt of 
the men of Wu to cross the river.. Fifty. men could guard 


bY 


each station. Let there be a flame by night and a smoke by 


day. If they cross the river I must go and smite them.” 

Wang Fu replied, “Fushih Jén and Mi Fang are defending 
important places and doing it well. But there ought to be a 
commander-in-chief over Chingchou.”’ 

ae is no need for anxiety; P‘an Chiin is guarding the 
city 

“The objection i is the character of P‘an Chitin. He is jealous 
and selfish and not a fit man for the task. I think you would 
do well to replace him by Chao Lei, now of the commissariat. 
He is loyal, trusty, clean-handed and straight, a much more 
desirable man for the post.” 

“T know P‘an Chiin very well, but I have delegated him for 
that duty and cannot change now. The work your friend has 
to do in the supplies is also most important.. I do not think 
you need be anxious. Just get along with those beacons for 
me.’ 

Wang Fu, saori took his leave. Then Kuan P‘ing was 
bidden to prepare ships ready to cross the river and attack 
Fanch‘éng, whither Ts‘ao Jên had retired after his defeat. 

Now Ts‘ao Jén said to Man Ch‘ung, “‘Neglecting your advice 
I lost my men, my two captains and the city of Hebe ane, 

What am I to ‘do now?” 

“Kuan Yü is very dangerous, too brave and skilful for you 
to try to defeat. You had better remain on the defensive,” 
replied Man Ch‘ung. 

Just about this time came the tidings that Kuan Yti was 
crossing the river on the way to attack. Man maintained his 
.policy, that of defence. But the subordinate leader Lu Ch‘ang 
was for going out to meet the enemy. 

“I ask for a few companies,” said Lu, “and I will meet the 
enemy on the way.” . 

“You cannot do any good,” said Man. 

“According to the advice of you and the other bookish 
officials there is only one thing to do. But will defence drive 
off the enemy? The proper way is to attack your enemy while 
he is crossing a river, and as Kuan Yii is doing that now, why 
not attack now? It will be quite another matter if you let him 
reach the walls and get possession of the moat.” 

As a result of his arguments and protest, Lu got command 
of two companies, whom he led to the river. And there he 
found Kuan Yii already arrayed for battle. Kuan Yii at once 
: rode out, and the bold Lu was going to attack him. But his 
men were panic-stricken at the sight of Kuan Yii’s fierce 
countenance and ran away. Lu Ch‘ang called them to come 

_back, but they would not stop, and as Kuan Yü came on witha 


rush, the army of Ts‘ao again lost the day. Many were slain, — 


and the remainder ran into Fanch‘éng. Ts‘ao Jên sent off a 
hasty messenger for help and a letter to Ch’angan to tell what 


10 


Romance of the Three ikingdoms 145 


146 an Ruo 


Kuan Yü had done and how Fanch‘éng was in imminent danger 
of falling. 

The letter reached Ts‘ao, who chose a certain one among his 
officers and asked if he could relieve Fanch‘éeng. , The man. at 
once stepped out and said he could. 

The man was Yü Chin. 

“Let me have some captain to lead the van,” said he. 

“Who volunteers?” asked Ts‘ao, looking around. 

“I do,” cried a man; “I will give my poor services for what 
they are worth. And I will capture this fellow Kuan and 
bring him as an offering before your standard.” 


The men of Wei began the war 
E’er Wu had sent out spies. 


But who was the man bold enough to say he would capture 
Kuan Yü? For his name see the next chapter. 


re 


CHAPTER LXXIV. 


P‘ANG TE TAKES His COFFIN ON A CAMPAIGN; 
KUAN YU DROWNS, His ENEMIES, 


The bold and self-confident oficer of Ts‘ao’s. army who 
promised to make an end of Kuan Yü was P‘ang Te. Ts‘ao 
was glad to find such a man. 

“That fellow Kuan has a great reputation, and in the whole 
country he has no rival. ‘He has not met his match yet, but 
now you are going he will find all his work cut out.” 


So-spake Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. He conferred’ on Yü Chin the title 


of “Corrector of the South” and on P‘ang Tê that of “Corrector 


_ of the West and Leader of the Van,” and they two marched ` 


out with their seven armies to Fanch‘éng. 

These seven armies were composed of sturdy fellows from 
the north, led by two of their own chiefs named Tung Heng 
and Tung Ch‘ao. Hearing who was to command them, these 
two, supported by their chiefs, went to see. Yü Chin and 

ep presented that the leader of the van was unsuitable. 
: Tung Heng spoke, and said, “Sir General, the expedition 
you lead is for the relief of Fanch‘é êng and it can confidently 
expect victory, but is it not unwise to place such as P‘ang Te 
In command of the van?” 
“Why?” said Yü Chin, surprised. 
“Because he was once under the command of Ma Chiao. 
- He had no alternative but to surrender and fight for Wei. 
But his former chief is now in high honour in Shu, one of 
the Five Tiger Generals, and his own brother is there, too, 
as an officer. To send him as leader of the van just now 
seems like trying to extinguish a fire with oil. Would it 
not be well to inform the Prince of Wei and ask him to 
exchange this man for another?” 

Without further argument or delay Yü Chin went to see 
the prince and laid before him the objections to P‘ang’s 
appointment. As soon as Ts‘ao understood, he summoned 
Pfang Tê to the steps and bade him yield his seal as “Leader 
of the Van.” 

“OQ Prince, why do you reject my services? I was just 
about to do my best for you.’ 

“I do not doubt you, but Ma Ch‘ao is now in Hsich‘uan and 
your brother also, both in the service of Liu, Pei. I myself 
have no doubts, but it 1s what all mae crowd are saying. 
pea can I do?” 


4 


148 - an kuo, or 


P‘ang Tê took off his head-dress and prostrated himself, 
bitter tears rolling down his cheeks. 

“Since I surrendered to you, O Prince, I have experienced 
much kindness, so that I would undergo any sufferings to show 
my gratitude. I hope you will trust me. When*my brother 
and I were at home together his wife was a wicked woman 
and I slew her, pretending I was drunk. My brother has 
never forgiven me, but is permeated with hate for me. He 
swears never to see me again, and we are enemies. For my 
old master, Ma Ch‘ao, I have profound contempt. He is bold, 
but only that, and was in a pitiable and dejected state when 
he found his way to the west. Now, like me, he serves his 
own master, but our friendship is at an end. How could I 
think of another after your kindness to me?” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao raised him from the ground and soothed him, 
saying, “I have always known what a noble man you are, and 
what I said just now was to satisfy the feelings of other people. 
Now you can strive to win fame, and if you do not turn your 
back on me I shall not on you.’ 

Then P‘ang took his leave and returned to his house, where — 
he ordered the artificers to make him a coffin. Next he ‘invited 
all his friends to a banquet, and the coffin was set out in the 
reception room for all to see. And they asked one another 
what that inauspicious thing could mean put out on the eve 
of a campaign. By and by, drinking to them, P‘ang Tê said, 
“The Prince of Wei has been generous to me, and I am pledged 
to show my gratitude to the death. I am about to go out — 
against this Kuan, and I have to kill him or he must kill me. | 
If he does not kill me I must commit suicide, and so I have 
prepared what is necessary. I will not return leaving my 
task unachieved.”’ 

The terrible omen saddened the guests, and they fell to 
sighing. Then he called in his wife and bade her bring their 
son Hui, whom he commended to her care. 

“T have been appointed leader of the van of this new 
expedition against Kuan Yü, and my duty bids me seek 
death or glory on the battle-field. If I die, our son is in your 
special care. Alas, the child has been born ill-starred, and 
when he grows up he will have to avenge a father.” 

Both mother and son wept as they bade him farewell. 
When the army marched, the coffin was carried in its train.. 
He bade his officers place his body therein if he fell in 
combat with Kuan Yi. 

“And if I slay him, then will I bring his head in this coia 
as an offering to our prince.” 

Then outspake a captain of five hundred men and said, “If you 
are like this, O General, then we also will follow you to the end.” 

The vanguard then marched away. A certain man told the 


story of these happenings to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, who was very — 


| pleased, saying he tad no anxiety with such a captain to lead _ 
his men. 


Fiomance of the Three Ringdoms ate 149 i 


But Chia Hsii said, “I am anxious for P‘ang Té’s safety. 
He is over- bold and impr ndent to fight with. Kuan Yü to the 


-~ death.” 


Ts‘ao. Ts‘ao hotieht such an act woda be unwise, and he 


hastily sent a messenger with an edict warning P‘ang Te | 


against his antagonist. 


“This Kuan lacks neither cunning nor valour. You are to 


be most cautious in engaging him. If you can conquer, then 
conquer ; but if there be any doubt remain on the defensive.” 


“How highly does our prince regard this fellow Kuan!” said © 


the captain to his officers when he heard this new command. 
“But I think I shall be eile to take the keen edge off his thirty- 


year reputation.” 


“The command of the prince. is to þe obeyed; ” said Yü Chin. 
P‘ang Tê hastened to Fanch‘éng in all the pomp and panoply 


_of war, his gongs clanging, his drums rolling as he marched. — 
Kuan Yii was sitting in his tent when his spies came to tell = 


him of the approach of the men from the north, seven cohorts 
of them, all bold fighting men. And they were thirty li away. 
Rage took possession of him. His face changed colour, his 


. beard shook and he roared out, “There is never a fighting man 
in all the world who has heard my name without trembling. 


Does this fellow dare disdain me?” 


‘Then he ordered Kuan P‘ing to attack the city while he went 


out to stay the impudent boaster who dared him. 


“Father,” said Kuan P‘ing, “Mount T‘ai in its majesty does 


-not quarrel with a pebble. Let me go and fight this P‘ang 


Per 
“Well, my son, go and try, I will support you.’ 
So Kuan P‘ing took his sword, mounted his Sea and went 


out with his men. Both sides being drawn up for battle. On 
` the side of Wei there flew a single black flag on which was 


inscribed, ‘“‘P‘ang Tê, ‘Pacificator of the South,” in white. 
The leader himself wore a blue robe with a silver helmet and 


_ rode a white charger. He stood out in front backed by his 


_ Ping.” 


five hundred faithfuls, and a few foot soldiers were there too, 


bearing the gruesome coffin. 
Kuan P‘ing was startled at the crowd behind his opponent. 


“Who is that?” asked P‘ang Tê of his followers. 
A certain one replied, “That is Kuan’s adopted son, Kuan 


P‘ang cried, “I have an edict from the Prince of Wei to take 
your father’s head. You are but a weakling and I will spare 
you. But call your father.” 

‘Kuan P‘ing dashed forward flourishing his sword. ` Pang 


Té went to meet him, and there followed thirty odd bouts with 


no brad vamuage to shes 


150 ; - an Kuo, or . 


Both sides then drew off to rest. Soon the news of this 
combat reached Kuan Yü, and he was not pleased. He sent 
Liao Hua to assault the city while he went to do battle with 
P‘ang Tê. Kuan P‘ing met his.father and related the story 
of the indecisive fight. So Kuan Yii rode out with his great 


sword ready, and he shouted to P‘ang Te, ““Come quickly and 


be slain.” 

The drums re-echoed as P‘ang Tê rode out and ATEU 
“The edict from the Prince of Wei tells me to take your head. 
In case you disbelieve it, here is the coffin ready to receive it. 
If you fear death, down from your horse and surrender.” 


“I hold you for a simple fool” cried Kuan Yü. “What can 


you do? It is a pity to stain my Black Dragon sword with 
the blood of such a rat.” 


Then he galloped out toward P‘ang’ Té, flourishing ‘the ` 


sword. P‘ang Te whirled his blade and came to meet him, and 
they two fought a hundred bouts. And as they fought the 
lust of battle seemed to grow and both armies were lost in 
amazement. 

But the army of Wei began to fear for their champion, and 
the gongs sounded the retirement. At the'same time Kuan 


P‘ing began to think of his father’s fatigue, and his gongs. 
clanged too. So that both armies drew off at the same time.. 


“Kuan Yü is really a mighty man of war,” said P‘ang Té, 
when he had got back among his own men. 

Then his chief, Yu Chin, came to see him and spoke of the 
great combat of a hundred bouts which had ended indecisively. 

“T think it would be prudent to retire out of his way,” said 
Yü Chin. at the close. 

But P‘ang Tè replied haughtily, “What makes you so soft? 
Yet the prince gave you the command! But to-morrow I will 


fight again and that to the death. I swear I will never give 45 


way.” 

Yü Chin could not overcome his decision, so he went back to 
his own camp. 

When Kuan Yü had got back to his camp he extolled the 
swordsmanship of his opponent and acknowledged him a 
worthy enemy. 

“The new-born calf fears not the tiger,” said Kuan P‘ing, 
“But if you slay this fellow, my father, you have only killed a 
barbarian of the tribes beyond the frontier. If any accident 
occur, then you will have the reproach of not having considered 
your brother’ s charge.” 

“How can my resentment be assuaged save by the death of 
this man? LY returned Kuan. “I have decided to fight, so say 
no more.’ 


Next day Kuan took the field first, but P‘ang quickly came 


out. Both arrayed their men and ‘then went to the front at 
the same moment. This time neither spoke, but the comha 


< 


Roamance of the Three Ningooms i 151 


began forthwith. It went on for fifty bouts 'and then P“ ang 
pulled his horse, sheathed his sword and fled. Kuan went in 
pursuit, and Kuan P‘ing followed lest there should be need of 
him. Kuan Yü roared out revilings to his flying foe and that 
he wanted to get the chance for an unfair blow. But he was 
not afraid. 

But the fact was that P‘ang Tê hañ only pretended to try 
for a foul stroke in order to cover a resort to his bow. He 
pulled in his horse, fitted an arrow to the string and was just 
-on the point of shooting when Kuan P‘ing,-who was sharo 
eyed, shouted out a warning. 

“The bandit is going to shoot!” ; 

Kuan Yü saw it, but the bowstring sang and the arrow came | 
flying. He was not nimble enough to avoid it and it wounded 
his left arm. Kuan P‘ing at once went to his father’s assist- 
ance and led him away to the camp. P‘ang wished to follow 
up this advantage and came back whirling his sword, but, ere 
he could strike, the gongs of his own side rang out. He 
thought there was something amiss in the rear and stopped. 

The signal for retreat had been sounded by Yü Chin out of 
jealousy, for he had seen that Kuan Yü had been wounded and 
he grudged his colleague the glory which would eclipse his own. 
P‘ang obeyed, but when he got back he wanted to know why 
retreat had been sounded on the very verge of a great success. 

“Why did the gongs clang?” asked he., 

“Because of our prince’s warning. Though he was wound- . 
ed I feared some trick on his part. He is very cunning.” 

< “I should have killed him if you had not done that,” said 
P’ang. 
_ “Haste makes.slow going; you can postpone your fight with 
*him,” said Yü Chin. 

p“ ang Tê, though ignorant of the real reason why he was 
made to miss success at the critical moment, was still very 
vexed. / 

Kuan Yii went back to camp, and the arrow-head was puled 
out of the wound. Happily it had not penetrated very deeply, 
and the usual remedies against injuries by metal were applied. 
Kuan Yü was very bitter against his enemy and declared that 
he would have his revenge for his wound. 

“Never mind anything but recovering now,” said his officers. 

“Rest and get well; then you may fight again.” 
_ Before long, P‘ang Tê renewed his challenge, and Kuan Yü 
was for going out to fight ; however, he yielded. to the entreaties 
of his officers. And when P‘ang set his men to reviling the 
hero, Kuan P‘ing saw to it that his father never heard it. 
After ten days of challenges hurled uselessly at an army that 
ignored them, P‘ang. took council with Yü Chin. 

Evidently Kuan Yü is helpless from the effects of that 
‘arrow-wound. We ought to advance all our seven armies 


=e > Sra 


152 ; San Ruo, or 


against him while he is ill and destroy his camp. Thereby we ` 
shall relieve Fanch‘éng.”’ 

Thus spake P‘ang, but jealousy of the glory that might 
accrue to his next in command again made Yü Chin urge 
caution and obedience to the command of ther prince. He 
refused to move his men in spite of P‘ang’s repeated per- 
suasion; still more, he led the army to a new camping ground © 
behind the hills some distance north of Fanch‘eng. There his 
own army stopped communication by the main road, while 
he sent P‘ang into a valley in the rear so that he could do 
nothing: & 

To the son’s great joy Kuan Yti’s wound soon healed. Soon 
after they heard of Yii Chin’s new camp, and as Kuan P‘ing 
could assign no reason for the change, and suspected some ruse, 
he told his father, who went up to a high place to reconnoitre. 
Looking round, he noted that there seemed much slackness 
about everything in Fanch‘éng, that horse and foot were 
camped in a valley to the north and that the Hsiang River 
seemed to run very swiftly. After impressing the topography 
on his mind he called the guides and asked the name of the 
gully about ten li north of the city. 

“Tséngk‘ouch‘iian,” was'the reply. 

He chuckled. “I shall capture Yü Chin,” said he. i 

Those with him asked how he knew that. He replied, “Why, 
how can anyone last long in such a place?” 

Those in his train gave but little weight to what he said, and 


; presently he went back to his own tent. It was just then the 


time for the autumn rains, and a heavy downpour came on, 
lasting several days. Orders were given to get ready boats 
and rafts and such things. Kuan P‘ing could not think what, 
such preparations meant in a dry land campaign. So he asked 
his father. 

“Do you not know even?” replied his father. “Our enemies 
have camped in difficult ground instead of the open country 
and are crowded in the dangerous valley there. After some 
days of this rain the Hsiang River will swell, and I shall send 
men to dam up all the outlets and so let the water rise very 
high. When at its highest I shall open the dams and let the 
water out over Fanch‘éng. That valley will be flooded too, and 
all the soldiers will become aquatic animals.” . 

It is time to return to the Wei armies. They had camped 
in the gully, and after several days of heavy rain the captain 
Ch‘éng Ho ventured to speak to his general. 

He said, “The army is camped near the mouth of a stream 
in a depression. There are hills around us, but they are too 
far off to keep the water away. Our men are already suffering 
from these heavy rains, and, moreover, they say the Chingchou 
men have moved to higher ground. More than that, at 
Hanshuik‘ow -they are preparing boats and rafts so that they 


can take advantage of the floods if there are any. Our men 


will be in great danger, and something should be done.” 
_ But the general scoffed at his words, called him a fool and 
blamed him for injuring the spirit of his men. So Ch‘éng 
Ho went away greatly ashamed. S 
' Then he went to P‘ang Tê, who saw the force of his words 
and promised that if Yü Chin would not move camp the next 
day he himself would do so. So Ch‘éng Ho left it at that. 
That night there came a great storm. As P‘ang Tê sat in 
his tent he heard the sound as of ten thousand horses in 


stampede and a roar as of the drums of war seeming to shake ` 


the earth.c He was alarmed, left his tent and mounted his 
charger to go and see what it meant. -Then he saw the rolling 
waters coming in from every side and the seven armies flying 
from the flood, which speedily rose to the height of ten feet. 
Yü Chin and P‘ang Tê, with many other officers, sought 
safety by rushing up the hills. 

As day dawned, Kuan Yü and his men came along in large 


boats with flags flying and drums beating. Yü Chin saw no. 


way of escape, and his following was reduced to about three 
score. They all said they must surrender. Kuan Yii made 
them strip and then took them on board. 

After that he went to capture P‘ang Té, who was standing 
on a hillock with the two Tungs, Ch‘éng Ho and the faithful 
five hundred, all unarmed. P‘éng Té saw his arch enemy 
approach without a sign of fear, and even went boldly to meet 
him. Kuan Yü surrounded the party with his boats, and the 
archers began to shoot. When more than half the men had 
been struck down, the survivors became desperate. The two 
Tungs pressed their chief to give in. But P‘ang Té only 
raged. j 

“I have TECEN great kindness from the prince; think you 
that I will bow the head to any other?” 

He cut down the two Tungs and then shouted, “Anyone 
who says surrender shall be as these two.” 

So the survivors made a desperate effort to beat off their 
enemies, and they held their own up to mid-day. Then Kuan 
Yii’s men redoubled their efforts, and the arrows and stones 
rained down upon the defenders, who fought desperately hand 
to hand with their assailants. 

“The valorous leader. fears death less than desertion; the 
brave warrior does not break faith to save his life,” cried 
P‘ang Té, a This is the day of my death, but I will fight on to 
the last.” 

So shal Ho pressed on till he fell into the water mbtnitied | 
and then the soldiers yielded. 

1 Piang Tê fought on. Then one of the boats happened to 
close in to the bank. With a tremendous leap P‘ang Tê lighted 
on it and slashed at the occupants, killing several. The others 


Romance of tbe Three Bingoomg 153 


154 San uo, or 


jumped overboard and swam away. Then P‘ang Té, one 
hand still holding his sword, tried to maneuver the boat across 
the river to the city, Then there came drifting down a raft, 
which collided with and upset his boat so that he was strug- 
gling in the water. But a captain on the raft jumped into the 
water, gripped him and put him on the boat again. 

The captor was Chou. Ts‘ang, a skilful waterman who, 
having lived in Chingchou for many years, was thoroughly 
expert in boat navigation. Beside, he was very powerful and 
so was able to make P‘ang Té a prisoner. 

In this flood perished the whole of the seven armies, except 
the few that saved themselves by swimming; these latter, 
having no way of escape, surrendered to the victors. 


In the depth of night rolled the war drums, 
Summonding the warriors as to battle; - 

But the enemy was no man, 

For the waters had risen and the flood came. 
This was the plan of Kuan Yu, the crafty, 

To drown his enemies. More than human 

was he in cunning. The ages hand on his fame 
As his glory was told in his own day. 


Kuan Yü then returned to the higher ground, where his tent 
was pitched and therein took his seat to receive his prisoners. 
The lictors brought up Yü Chin, who prostrated himself » 
humbly and begged his life. 4 

“How dared you think to oppose me?” ; NA 

“I was sent; I came not of my own will. I crave my lord’s 
pity, and one day I will requite.” ("a 

“To execute you would be like killing a dog or a hog. It 
would be soiling weapons for nothing,” said: Kuan Yü, stroking 
his beard. 

Yü Chin was bound and sent to the great. prison in 
Chingchou. . 

“T will decide your fate when I return,” said Kuan Yü. 

The general having thus dealt with his chief, P‘ang Té was 
sent for. He came, pride and anger flashing from his eyes; 
he did not kneel but stood boldly erect. 

“You have a brother in Hanchung and your old chief was 
Ma Chi‘ao, also in high honour in Shu. Had you not better 
join them?” 

“Rather than surrender to you I would perish beneath the 
sword,” cried P‘ang. 

Ke reviled his captors without ceasing till, losing palionee 
at last, Kuan Yü sent him to his death. He was beheaded. 
He stretched out his neck’for the headsman’s sword. Out of 
pity he was honourably buried. 

The floods were still out, and taking advantage of them 
‘they boarded the boats to move toward Fanch‘éng, which now 


‘ Viomance of the Three Liingdoms 155 


tood cut as a mere island with waves breaking against the 
valls.. The force of the waters being great, the city wall was 
epinning to give way, and the whole population, male and 
emale, were carrying mud and bricks to strengthen it. Their 
fforts seemed vain, and the leaders of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s army were 
rery desperate. Some of the captains went to see Ts‘ao Jên, 
vho said, “No ordinary man’s strength can fend off to-day’s 
tanger. If we can hold out till nightfall we may escape by 
oat. We shall lose the city, but we shall save our skins.” 

But Man Ch‘ung interposed before the boats could be got 
sady. He pointed out that the force of the waters was too 
rreat for any boats to live, while they only had to wait ten days 
ry so and the flood would have passed. 

“Though Kuan Yü has not assaulted the city, yet he has 
ent another army to Chiahsia, and he dares not abvance lest 
ve should fall upon his rear. Remember, too, that to retire 
rom this city means the abandonment of everything south 


if the Yellow River. Therefore I decide that you defend this ' 


lace, which is strong.” 

'Ts‘ao Jên saluted Man Ch‘ung as he concluded his ie rangue, 
aying, “What a tremendous error I should have committed 
vad it not been for you, Sir!” 

Then riding his white charger he went up on the city walls, 
yathered his “officers around him and pledged himself not to 
urrender. 


“The prince’s command being to defend this city, I shall 


lefend it to the last. And I shall put to death anyone who 
yen mentions abandonment,” said he. : 

“And we desire to defend it to out last gasp,” chimed in his 
fficers: 

Then they saw to it that the means of offence were good. 
Wany hundreds of archers and crossbowmen were stationed 
n the wall and kept watch night and day. The old and the 
roung of ordinary people were made to carry earth and stones 
o strengthen the wall. 

After some ten days the flood was at an end. Then the news 
of Kuan Yii’s success got abroad, and the terror of his name 
‘pread wider and wider. About the same time, too, his second 
on, Hsing, came to visit his father in camp. Kuan Yü thought 
his a good opportunity to send his report of success to 
Sh‘engtu and entrusted to Hsing a despatch mentioning each 
yfficer’s services and requesting promotion for them. Kuan 
Hsing accordingly took leave of his father and left. 

After his departure the army was divided into two halves, 
me under Kuan Yü to attack the city and the other to go to 
Jhiahsia. One day Kuan Yü rode over to the north gate. 
dalting his steed, he pointed with his whip toward the 
iefenders on the wall, and called out, “You lot of rats will 
wot give in then! “What are you waiting for?” 


Ts ao Jên, Ee was among his ‘men on the wali AR a 
Euan Yü had no armour on, so. he ordered his men to. shoot 
The archers and bowmen at once sent a great flight | of arrow: 
and bolts that way. Kuan Yii hastily pulled the reins 
retire, but an arrow pee him in ithe! arm. , Ehe, shock of 


' Just now a mighty army Peeled | 
By the river’s overflow; 
A crossbow bolt from the city wall 


4 


pan a valiant warrior low. £ y 


CHAPTER LXXV. ye 


SURGERY ON A WOUNDED ARM; 
LU MENG IN A WHITE ROBE CROSSES THE RIVER. 


\t the sight of Kuan Yu falling from his charger, Ts‘ao Jén 
d his men out of the city to follow up with an attack, but 
uan P‘ing drove him off and escorted his father back to camp. 
‘here the arrow was extracted, but the head had been 
oisoned. The wound was deep, and the poison had penetrated 
) x bone. The right arm was discoloured and swollen and 
seless. 

Kuan P‘ing consulted with the other leaders and proposed 
nat, as fighting was impossible for the moment, they should iN 
ithdraw to Chingchou, where his father’s wound could be VS ae 
created. Having decided upon this, they went to see the |, a ee 
rounded. warrior. ah 

“What have you come for?” asked Kuan Yü when they 
atered. 

“Considering that you, Sir, aie been wounded in the right 
rm, we fear the result of the excitement of battle. More- 
ver, you can hardly take part in a fight just now and we 
rerefore propose that the army retire till you are recovered.” Meet 

‘Kuan Yü replied angrily, “I am on the point of taking the poral 
ity, and if I succeed I must press forward to the capital, ei 
[siitu, and destroy that brigand Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, so that the Hans anes 
1ay be restored to their own. Think you that I can vitiate SARR»: 
ae whole campaign because of a slight wound? Would you vig 
ishearten the army?” ei | 

Kuan P‘ing and his colleagues said no. mone, but somewhat 
nwillingly withdrew. f 

Seeing that their leader would not relied and the wound 
nowed no signs of healing, the various captains enquired far 
nd near for a good surgeon to attend their general. ; 

One day a person arrived in a small ship and, having landed 
nd come up to the gate of the camp, was led ‘in to see Kuan 

“ing. The visitor wore a square-cut cap and a loose robe. 

n his hand he carried a small black bag. He said his name 
ras Hua T‘o and he belonged to Ch‘iaochun. He had heard 
f the wound sustained by the famous hero and had come to 
eal it. 

“Surely you must be the physician who treated Chou Tai,’ 
aid Kuan Ping. 


158 an tio, or 


bd 


SA. 


Taking with hit the other captains, Kuan P‘ing went in to cas 


see his father. He found him engaged in a game of wei-ch“, 
although his arm was very painful. But he kept up appear- 
ances so as not to discourage the men. When they told him 
that a physician had come, he consented to see him. 
‘So Hua T‘o was introduced, asked to take a seat and, after 
the tea of ceremony, was shown the injured arm. Be 
“This was caused by an arr ow,” said the doctor. ‘There is 


some ‘blackhead’ poison in the wound, and it has penetrated _ 


to the bone. Unless the wound is soon treated the arm will 
become useless.” 

“What do you propose to do?” asked Kuan. 

“I know how to cure the wound, but I think you will be 
afraid of the remedy.” 

“Am I likely to be afraid of that when I am not even afraid 
of death? Death is only a return home after all.” 

Then Hua said, “This is what I shall do. In a private room 
i shall erect.a post with a ring attached. I shall ask you, Sir, 
to insert your arm in the ring, and I shall bind it firmly to the 
post. Then I shall cover your- head with a quilt so that you 
cannot see, and with a scalpel I shall open up the flesh right 
down to the bone. Then I shall scrape away the poison. This 
done, I shall dress the wound with a certain preparation, sew 


it up with a thread, and there will be no further trouble. But j 


I think you may quail at the severity of the treatment.” 

Kuan Yü smiled. “It all sounds easy enough,” said he; 
“but why the post and the ring?” 

Refreshments were then served, and after a few cups of 
wine the warrior extended his arm for the operation. With 
his other hand he went on with his game. Meanwhile the 
surgeon prepared his knife and called a lad to hold a basin 
beneath the limb. 

“I am just going to cut; do not start,” said Hua T‘o. 

“When I consented to undergo the treatment did you think 
I was like the generality of people, afraid of pain?” 

The surgeon then performed the operation as he had 
predescribed, He found the bone much discoloured, but he 


scraped it clean. “Hsi, hsi,” went the knife over the surface, 


and all those near covered their eyes and turned pale. But 
Kuan Yti went on with his game, only drinking a cup of wine 


now and again, and his face betrayed no sign of pain. When ~ 
the wound had been cleansed, sewn up and dressed, the patient -~ 
stood up smiling and said, “This arm is now as good as it ever 
was; there is no pain. Indeed, Master Leech, you are a 


marvel.” 


“T have Spei my life in the art,” said Hua T‘o; “but Ihave ~ 
never seen such a patient as you, Sir. You are the real 


marvel.” 


fiamance of the Three Kingroms 159 


Here as sur geons, there physicians, leeches boast their skill; 
Bitter few are those that cure one when one’s really ill. 

As for superhuman valour rivals Kuan had none, 

So for holy touch in healing Hua T‘o stood alone. 


When the cure was well advanced, Kuan Yü gave a fine 
banquet in honour of Hua T‘o and offered him a fee of a 
hundred taels. But he declined it. He had come to treat 
his patient from admiration of his great virtue and not for 
money. 

“Noble Marquis, although your wound is cured you must be~ 
careful of your health, and especially avoid all excitement for 
a hundred days, when you will be as well as ever you were.” 

Then Hua T‘o, having prepared dressings for the wound, 
took his leave, refusing fees to the very last. 

Having captured Yii Chin and accomplished the death of 
Pfang Tê, Kuan Yü became more famous and more fear- 
inspiring through the whole country than even before. Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao called together his advisers to help him decide upon 
what he should do. 

Said Ts‘ao, “I must apea ledge this Kuan Yiin-ch‘ang as 
the one man who, in skill and ‘valour, overtops the whole 
world. Lately he has obtained possession of Chingchou 
and the district near it, and has so become very terrible. He 
is a tiger with wings added. P‘ang Tê is no more; Yü Chin 
is his prisoner; the armies of Wei have lost their morale; and 


if he led his armies here we should be helpless. I can only 


me think of avoiding the peril by removal of the capital. What 


a think you?” 


“No; do not take that step,” said Sstuma I, rising to reply. 


HYG Chin and all the others you lost were victims of the flood 
and slain in battle. These losses do no harm at all to your 


great plan. The Suns and Lius are no longer friends since 
Kuan Yü has accomplished his desire. You may send a 
messenger into Wu to foment the quarrel and cause Sun 
Ch‘iian to send his armies to attack the army of Kuan Yü 
from the rear, promising that, when things are tranquil, you 


will reward Sun with a slice of Chiangnan. In this way you 


will relieve Fanch‘éng.” | 

Here the Recorder Chiang Chi: said, “Sstma I speaks well, 
and the messenger should Jose no time. Do not move the 
capital or send an army.’ 
- Ts‘ao Ts‘ao therefore did not carry out his first proposal. 
But he was sad at the loss of Yü Chin, and spoke of him 


affectionately. “Yü Chin had followed me faithfully for thirty 
- years, and I did not think I was sending him into danger. 


P‘ang Té was not on the same footing as he.” 


It was necessary to send someone with the letters to Wu and 


i ; also to find another leader willing to face Kuan Yü. Ts‘ao had 


not long to wait for the latter, as an officer Brenped out from 


160 i San Kuo, or 


the ranks of those in waiting and offered himself. It was Hst 
Huang. 

His offer was accepted, and he was given five legions of 
veterans. Lü Chien was sent as his second, and the army 
marched to Yanglingp‘o; where they halted to see if any 
support was coming from the south-east. 

Sun Ch‘tian fell in with the scheme of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao as soon 
as he had read his letter. He at once prepared a reply for 
the messenger to take back, and then gathered his officers,. 
civil and military, to consult. Chang Chao was the first 
speaker. 

“We know Kuan Yü has captured one leader and slain 
another. This has added greatly to his fame and reputation. 
Ts‘ao was going to move the capital rather than risk an attack. 
We also know that Fanch‘éng is in imminent danger. Ts‘ao 
has asked for our help, but when he has gained his end I doubt 
whether he will hold to his promise.’ 

Before Sun Ch‘tan had replied they announced the arrival of 
Lii Méng, who had come in a small ship from Luk‘ou with a 
special message. He was at once called in and asked what it 
was. 

Said Lü, “The armies of Kuan Yü being absent at Fanch‘éng, 
the opportunity should be taken to attack Chingchou.” 

“But I wish to attack Hstichou in the north; what of this 
plan?” said Sun Ch‘üan. 

“It would be better to attack Chingchou, and so get control 
of the Long River (Yangtse Kiang.). Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is far away 
to the north and too occupied to regard the east. Hstichou is 


weakly held and could be taken easily, but the lie of the land. — A 
favours the use of an army rather than a navy. If you’ ' 


capture it, it will not be easy, to hold, but once you hold 
Chingchou you can evolve other schemes.” 


“Really, my desire was to attack Chingchou, but I wished to ns 


hear what you would say to the other plan. Now, Sir, make 
me a plan speedily and I will act upon it.” 

So Lü Méng took his leave and went back to Luk‘ou. But 
soon they heard that beacon towers were being erected at short 
distances all along the river, and that the Chingchou army was 
being put into most efficient: condition. 

“Tf this is so, it is hard to make a plan that will ensure 
success,” said Lü Méng. “I have already advised my master 
to attack Chingchou, but I am unable to meet this complica- 
tion.” 


Therefore he made illness an excuse to stay at home, and. A 


sent to inform Sun Ch'tian, who was very distressed at the ae 

news. ie 
Then said Lu Hsiin, nba illness is feigned; he is ie Hind 

well.” Oe 


“Tf you know that so well, go and see,” said Sun, 


Famance of the Three Viingdoms 16i 


Away went Lu Hsün and speedily arrived at Luk‘ou, where 


he saw Lü Méng, who indeed appeared to be in perfect health, 


Nor did his face bear any signs of recent illness. 
“The marquis has sent me to enquire after your honourable 
complaint,” said.Lu Hsün. ~ 
How distressed I am that the state of my wretched carcase 


has caused anyone the inconvenience of enquiring!” replied 


Lü Méng. | 
“The marquis placed a very heavy responsibility on your ` 

shoulders, but you are not making the best use of the oppor- 

tunity. However, what is the real origin of your distress?” 
Lü sat gazing at his visitor a long time without replying. 
“T have a little remedy,” said Lu Hsiin. “De you think I 


might use it?” 


Lü dismissed the servants, and when the two were alone he 
said, “This remedy, my friend, please tell me what it is.” 
“Your ailment is due simply to the efficiency of the Ching- 
chou soldiers; and I know how to keep the beacons from 
flaring, and I can make the Chingchou defenders come to you 
with their hands tied. Would that cure you?” 
-` “My friend, you speak as if you saw into my inmost heart. 


Pray unfold your good scheme.” 


“Kuan Yü thinks himself too much of a hero for anyone 


_to dare to face him, and his only anxiety is yourself. Now . | 
= you must take advantage of this excuse you have made of 


illness actually to resign this post so that the farce may be 
kept up and another man be appointed. Let this man, your 
successor, humbly praise Kuan Yü till he becomes so conceited : 


that he will withdraw all the troops from Chingchou to send 


them against Fanch‘éng. When Chingchou is left undefended 
then is our chance, and the city will fall into our hands.” — 
“The plan seems most excellent,” said Lü Méng. 
Wherefore Lii Méng’s malady waxed worse, so that, he was 
confined to bed; and he gave Lu Hsiin his letter of resignation 
to carry back to Sun Ch‘iian. The messenger hastened back 


and explained the ruse to his master, who soon after issued a` 


command for Lii Méng to retire and attend to the recovery of 
his health. 
But Lü Meng came to Sun Ch‘tian to discuss the matter of 


‘a successor. Sun Ch‘iian said to him, “As to the appintment 


at Luk‘ou, you know Chou Yü recommended Lu Su, who in 
turn proposed you. Now you ought to be able to mention some 


other talented and well-known officer to succeed you.” 


“Tf you choose a well-known man, Kuan Yü will certainly 
be on his guard against him. Now Lu Hsün is deep and far- 
seeing, but he has no widespread fame. Hence no particular 
notice would be taken of his appointment and no counter- 


` measures taken. So he is the most guitable person to 


send.” 


il 


162 San Huo, or ae 
`Ñ 

“Sun Ch‘iian agreed and thereupon promoted Lu Hsün to 
the rank of “General and Commander-in-chief of the Right,” 
and sent him to defend the port. 

“T am very young,” said Lu Hsiin, “and feel unequal to such 
a post.” 

“Lü Méng has proposed you, and you will not Make any 
mistakes. Pray do not decline,” said Sun. 

So the appointment was made, and Lu Hsiin set out at once. 
When he had assumed charge of the cavalry, the infantry and 
the marines, he set about drawing up a letter to Kuan Yü, and 
he selected fine horses and beautiful silks and good wines and 


-~ delicacies suitable for gifts to go with the letter. He sent all 


by the hand of a trusty messenger to Fanch‘éng. 

The news of the change of command reached Kuan YU when 
he lay ill from the effects of his wound and unable to conduct 
any military operations. Close upon the news came the letter 
and the gifts from Lu Hsiin, and the bearer was called in to 
see the great warrior. 

“Friend Sun was not very prudent when he made a general 
out of a mere scholar,” said Kuan, pointing to the messenger. 

The messenger said, “General Lu sends this letter and some 
presents, which he hopes you will accept. He also sends his 
felicitations, and would rejoice if the two houses could become 
friends.” 

Kuan Yü EN the letter, which was couched in most modest 
language, and then threw back his head and laughed loud. He 
bade the attendants receive the various gifts, and sent the 
‘bearer away. The messenger forthwith returned to Luk‘ou 
and said the old warrior had seemed very gratified and would 
henceforward feel no anxiety that danger might threaten from | 
their direction. Spies were sent out to report on proceedings, 
and they returned to say that half the troops had been sent to 
assist in the siege of Fanch‘éng. That city was to be seriously 
assaulted as soon as Kuan Yü had recovered. l 

This news was promptly sent on to Sun Ch‘iian, who at Ri 
once called in Lü Méng to decide upon the next move. 

“Now is the favourable moment to get possession of Ching- 
chou,” said Sun. “I propose to send you and my brother, Sun 
Chiao, to lead the army.’ 

This Sun Chiao was really only a cousin, as he was the 
second son of Sun Ch'tian’ s uncle. His secondary name was 
Shu-ming. 

But Lü Méng objected. “My lord, if you think to employ 
me, then employ me only; if Shu-ming, then Shu-ming only. 
You cannot have forgotten that Chou Yü and Ch‘éng Pu were 
associate commanders, and although the final decision lay with 
Chou Yü, yet the other presumed upon his seniority and there 
was some unfrien@liness between the two.. All ended well 
because Ch‘éng-P‘u recognised the ability of his colleague and 


= — omane of the Three Kingdoms 163 
so supported him. I know I am not so clever as Chou Yü, but 
: Shu-ming’s consanguinity will be a greater obstacle than mere 
= length of service, and I fear he may not be wholly with 
me.” 

Sun Chi tian saw the force of the contention, and appointed 
Lü Méng to sole command with Sun Chiao to help him in the 
commissariat. Lü Méng thanked his lord for his commission,- 

soon got his three legions together and assembled four score 

_ ships ‘for the expedition. 

He dressed a number of sailors in the plain eana of 
ordinary merchants and put them on board to work his vessels. © 
He concealed his veterans in the holds of the kolu ships 

== (shallow-draught transports). He selected seven captains to 
iS serve under him and settled the order of their successive | 
| movements. The remainder of the forces was left with Sun 
5 _Ch‘iian as supports and reserves. Letters were also written 
to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao that he might co-operate by sending his army 
to attack Kuan Yü in the rear. 

The sailors in plain dress navigated the ships to Hsiinyang- 

chiang as quickly as possible, and then crossed to the north 
bank. When the beacon-keepers came down to question them, 
the men of Wu said they were traders forced into the bank by 
contrary winds. And they offered gifts to the beacon-keepers, 
- who accepted them and let the ships come to an anchor close 
to the shore. 
At about the second watch the soldiers came out of hiding 
in the holds of the transports, suddenly fell upon the beacon- 
keepers and made them prisoners, officers and men. Next the 
_ signal for a general landing was given, and all the soldiers 
` from the eighty ships went ashore. The guard stations were 
_ attacked, and all the men captured and carried off to the ships, 
not a man being allowed to escape. Then the whole force 
hurried off to Chingchou, having so far carried out their plans 
that no one knew of their coming 

Nearing Chingchou, Lü Méng “spoke kindly to his captives, 
and gave them gifts and comforted them in order to induce 
them to get the gates opened for him to enter the city. He won 
them over to his side, and they promised to aid him. They 
= would show a flare as a signal that the gates were free. So 
they went in advance and arrived at the gates about midnight. 
They called the watch; and the wardens of the gate, recognising 
their voices, opened for them. Once within, they shouted and. 
~ At’ the flares. Immediately. the men of Wu came in with a 
rush and were soon in possession. 

a The first order issued by Lii Méng was to spare the people. 
= Instant death should be the punishment for any murder or 
‘robbery. ‘The various officials over the people were retained 
-in their offices and continued their functions. Special guards 
were set over Kuan Yii’s family dwelling, and none dared 


164 Dan uo, or 


break open any other house. A messenger was sent with 


tidings to Sun Ch‘tian. 

One very wet day Lii Méng, with a few horsemen as escort, 
was going round the walls and visiting the gates. One of the 
soldiers took from a passer-by his broad-brimmed hat and put 
it on over his helmet to keep his armour dry. Lü Mêng saw 
-it, and the offender was seized. He was a fellow-villager of 
Lü Méng’s, but that did not save him. . 

“You are an old acquaintance, but you knew my order; ony 
did you disobey it?” 


“T thought the rain would spoil my uniform, and I teak the 


hat to protect it. I did not take it for my own advantage, but 
to protect official property. Spare me, O General, for the sake 
of our common dwelling-place.” 

“I know you were protecting your armour, but still it was 
disobedience to the order against taking anything from the 
people.” 

The soldier was beheaded, and his hea. exposed as a 
warning. But when all was over, Lü Meng had the body 
buried decently and wept at the grave for the loss of his friend. 
Never after this was there the least laxity of discipline. 

When Sun Ch‘iian visited the city, Li Méng met him at the 
boundary and led him to the official residence, where he issued 
rewards and commendations. This done,. he ordered P‘an 
Chiin to take charge of the new possession. Yti Chin, who 
was in prison, was freed and sent back to his master. When 
the people had been comforted and the soldiers rewarded, 


there was a great banquet in honour of the success of the 


expedition. 


Then said Sun Chiiian to his general, “We have got this ee 


place, but now we want Kungan and Nanchiin. How can we 


get them?” 

Suddenly one Yü Fan started up and offered his services. 
“You will need neither bows nor arrows,” said he, “‘unless my 
little tongue is worn out. I can persuade Fu ‘Shih-yen to 
surrender.” 

“Friend Yü, how will you do it?” asked Sun Ch‘tian. 

“He and I are very old friends, ever since we were boys, and 
if I explain the matter to him I am sure he will come over to 
this side.” 


So Yü Fan, with an escort, left quickly for Kungan, where — X 


his friend was in command. 


Now when Fu heard of the capture of Chingchou he closed _ 


his gates. Yti Fan arrived, but was refused entrance. So he 


wrote a letter, attached it to an arrow and shot it over the city 


wall. A soldier picked it up and took it to his commander, 


who found therein much persuasion to surrender. Having | 
read all this, he thought within himself, “I think I should do + — 


well, for the other day Kuan Yü was very bitter against me.” = ; 


eee - fiomance ot the Three 3 tmgoomg 


; “Without further ado he bade the wardens open the gate, and sa 
his friend came in.. After their greetings they talked of old Dea: 
times, and Yii Fan. ‘praised Sun -Ch'tian’s magnanimity and 
k liberality and greatness generally. So finally Fu Shih-yen- 
decided to exchange masters and went away, taking with him — 
-his seal of office. He was ‘presented to Sun Ch'‘tan, | who. 
reappointed | him to the command of Kungan under its new 
Peay eke Mating Wh beg 'Mêng ‘thought the appointment. imprudent while 
- Kuan Yü was yet unconquered, and proposed instead to send 
~ him to Nanchtin to induce his. former colleague and fellow in 
disgrace to, join him in desertion to the enemy. His advice. 
was followed, and Fu was recalled. ; a 
nee “Go to Nanchiin and win over Mi Fang, and I wil reward = 
you richly,” said Sun Ch‘üan. E: 
a Seaver accepted the mission and duly left for Nanchiin. 


Pan EARN ECW 5 ‘Kungan’s defender failed when tried, 
ae oe s y So Wang Fu’s words were justified. 


For the events of the journey see the nena ADe 


. 
ot 


CHAPTER LXXVI 


Hsu FIGHTS ON THE MIEN RIVER; 
KUAN RETREATS TO MAICH‘ENG. 


The fall of Chingchou put Mi Fang in a quandary, and 
before he could decide upon any course his ancient colleague 
Fu Shih-jén came to see him. He was admitted, and when 
asked why he had come he blurted out his business without 
beating about the bush. 

“T am faithful enough, but I got into difficulties and danger 
and could not hold on, so I have surrendered to Wu. And I 
advise you to do the same.” 

“You and I have both fed on the bounty of the Prince of 
Hanchung, and I cannot understand how you can turn against’ 
him.” 


“Kuan Yü went away hating both of us intensely, and even. ie 
if he comes back victorious I do not think he will forgive US. jit i 


Just think it over.” 


“My brother and I have followed the prince. these many : Sa 


years, and I do not like leaving him like this.” 


Mi Fang hesitated. Before he could make up his mind, y i 


there came a messenger to say that the army was short of 
grain and he had been sent to demand white" rice for the 
soldiers. Nanchün and Kungan were to send ten myriad tan 
at once. Delay would be most severely punished. i 
This sudden demand was a shock to Mi Fang. “Where 
am I to get the rice?” said he, despairingly to his friend and 
tempter. “Chingchou is now in the hands of Wu.” 
“Do not dilly-dally,” said Fu Shih-jén. Thereupon he drew 


) his sword and slew the messenger as he stood in the hall. 


“What have you done?” cried Mi Fang. 

“Kuan wanted to slay us two and has forced me to this. 
Are we to fold our hands and await death? Either you give 
in at once and go-over to Wu, or you will be put to death by | 
Kuan Yü.” = 

Just then they heard that Lü Mêng’s men had actually By 


reached the city wall. Mi Fang saw that nothing could save S 


his life but desertion, so he went out with Fu and gave in- 
his allegiance to Lü Mêng, by whom he was led to Sun Ch‘üan. 

Sun Ch‘iian gave both of them presents, after which he 
proceeded to restore order and to reward his army for their 
services. : 


-Romance of the Three Liingdome 167 


At the time that great discussion about Chitiechou was 


going on in the capital, a messenger arrived with a letter from 
un Ch‘üan. It told the tale of the acquisition of Chingchou — 
and begged Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to send an army to attack Kuan Yü 

in the rear, enjoining the utmost secrecy. 


At the meeting of advisers that Ts‘ao Ts‘ao woinetedie! ; 
to consultation, Tung Chao said, “Now that the relief of 
Fanch‘éng is contemplated it would be well to let the besieged 


know; so that they may not yield to depression. Moreover, 
if Kuan Yü hears that Chingchou is in the hands of Wu he 
will come back to try to recover it. Then let Hsii Huang take 
the chance to attack, and our victory will be complete.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao agreed that the plan was good, and so he sent 
a messenger to urge Hsü Huang to attack. Ts‘ao himself. 
led a large force to Yanglup‘o, south of Loyang, to rescue 
Ts‘ao Jén. 

Hsü Huang was sitting in his tent when they told him that 
a messenger from the Prince of Wei had arrived. The | 
messenger was called in and said. “The -prince-has led an | 
army to Loyang, and he wishes you to hasten te attack Kuan 
Yü in order to relieve Fanch‘éng.’ 

Just then the scouts came to report that Kuan Yü had 
encamped at Yench‘éng and Liao Hua at Ssitichung. The 
enemy had built a line of twelve stockades. Hsü Huang 


ordered two of his lieutenants to Yench‘éng to masquerade 


as if he himself was in command, by showing his ensigns. 


-Hsti himself, at the head of a few veterans, went along the 


Mien River to attack Yench‘éng in the rear. 

When Kuan P‘ing heard of the approach of Hsii Huang | 
he prepared his own division to meet him. When both sides 
were arrayed, Kuan P‘ing rode out and engaged one Hsii 
Shang. After three encounters Hsü Shang had the worst of 
it and fled. Then the other lieutenant, Lü Chien, went out. 


. He fought half a dozen bouts and also ran away. Thereupon 


Kuan P‘ing went in pursuit and smote the flying enemy for 
twenty li. But then there was an alarm of fire within the 


city, and Kuan P‘ing knew that he had been inveigled into | 


the pursuit and was a victim. So he turned and set out for 
the city again. On his way he met a body of troops, and 
standing under the great standard was Hsti Huang. 

Hsü Huang shouted out, “Kuan Ping, my worthy nephew, 
it is strange that you do not recognise death when it stares 
you in the face. Your Chingchou has fallen into the hands 
of Wu and yet you act so madly.” 

Kuan P‘ing, whirling his sword, just rode hard at Hsü 


Huang, and they engaged. But after the third bout there 


was a tremendous shouting among the soldiers, for the flames 
within the city burst up higher than before. Kuan P‘ing 
could not follow up his desire to continue the fight, but cut 


168 jan Kuo, or 


his way out and made a dash for Sstchung, where Liao Hua 
received him with the news of the disaster to Chingchou. 

“People say that Chingchou has fallen to Lii Méng, and the 
news has frightened the whole army; what is to a done?” 
said he.. 

“Itis only a malicious rumour; do not let it Paon If any 
one repeats it, put him to death. h 

Just then a man came running in to say that Hsü Huang 
was attacking the first stockade on the north. 

“If that goes,” said Kuan P‘ing, “the remainder will follow. 
But as we have the river at our back, they will not dare attack 
this. Let us go to the rescue.’ 

So Liao Hua-summoned his subordinate leaders and gave 


them orders to hold the camp and make a signal if the | 


enemy came. 


“There is.no danger here.” said they. “The camp is. 


defended by a tenfold line of ‘deer- horns’ (chevaux de frise): 
even a bird could not get in.’ 
Kuan P‘ing and Liao Hua mustered all the veterans they 


had and went away to the first stockade. Seeing the Wei 


soldiers camped on: a low hill, Kuan P‘ing said to his colleague, 
“Those men are stationed in an unsafe place; let us raid their 
camp to-night.” 

“You take half the force, General, and I will remain i keep 
the camp,” said Liao Hua. 

When night fell, the attacking force went out. But on 
yeaching the camp ‘not a man opposed them. The camp was 
empty. Then Kuan P‘ing knew he had been deceived, and 
turned to retreat. He was at once attacked on two "sides 
by Hsü Shang and Lü Chien. Unable to stand, his men ran 
for the camp. The men of Wei followed, and presently the 
camp was surrounded. They were compelled to abandon the 
position and set off for Sstchung. As they drew near they 


saw torches, and presently knew by the ensigns displayed | 


that the camp had also fallen to the enemy. Retiring, they 
hastened along the high road toward Fanch‘éng, but presently 
their way was barred by a force under Hsü Huang himself. 
By dint of hard fighting they got away and returned to their 
main camp, and Kuan P‘ing went to his father. 

“Hsti Huang has got possession of Yench‘éng. Ts‘ao’s main 


army is on the way in three divisions, and many say that. 


Chingchou is in the enemy’s hands.” 
Kuan Yü bade him be silent. ‘This is a fabrication of the 


enemy,” said he, “but it may dishearten the soldiers. We 


know Lü Méng is ill, and they have appointed that impractical 


fellow Lu Hsiin to succeed him at Luk‘ou. There is nothing 


to fear.” 


He was soon undeceived. The news came that Hsti Huang | 


had arrived. At once Kuan Yü bade them saddle his charger. 


fiomance of the Three Hingdoms — 169 


“Father, you are not strong enough to go into the battle,” 
said Kuan Ping. © a a 

“Hsü Huang and I were once friends, and I know what he 
ean do and not do. I will give him the chance to retire, and 
if he does not take it then I shall just slay him as a warning 
to the others.” x 

Mounting his charger, Kuan Yü rodé out as impetuously as 
of yore, and the-sight of the old warrior made to quake the 
hearts of the men of Wei. When he came close enough to 
his enemy, Kuan checked his steed and said, “Where is my 
friend Hsii?” 

As a reply, the gate of the camp opened and Hsü Huang 
appeared under the standard. With a low bow he said, 
“Some years have. passed) since I met you, most excellent — 
Marquis, but I had not expected to see you so grey. I have: 
not forgotten the old brave days, when we were together and 
you taught me so much, and I am very grateful. New your 
fame has spread throughout the whole of China, and your old 
friends cannot but praise you. I am indeed glad that I have 
the happiness to see you.” Ces ce 

Kuan Yü replied, “We have been excellent friends, Ming- 
kung; better than most. But why have you pressed. my son 
so hardly of late?’ 

Hsti Huang suddenly turned to the officers about him and 


-cried fiercely, “I would give a thousand for this Yiin-ch‘ang’s 


head.” S ey 
= Kuan Yü, greatly shocked, said, “What did you say that 
for?” . y ? 
“Because to-day I am on state business, and I have no 
inclination to let private friendship over-ride my public duty.” 
As he said this, he whirled his battle-axe and rode at Kuan 
Yii, who, greatly enraged, threw up his great sword to strike. 
They fought a half score bouts, but although his skill lacked 
nothing of its pristine vigour and excelled all the world, the 
old warrior’s right arm was still weak from the wound. 


Kuan P‘ing saw that his father failed somewhat, and so hastily 


beat the gong for retreat. Kuan Yü rode back. 

Suddenly the noise of a great shouting was heard; it came 
from the troops of the city, for Ts‘ao Jén, having heard of 
the arrival of men of his own side, had made a sortie and 
was about to attack to help Hsü Huang. His men fell on, 
and the army of Chingchou were routed. Kuan Yü, with 
as many of his officers as could, fled away along the banks 
of the Hsiang River, hotly pursued by the army of Wei. 
Crossing the river, he made for Hsiangyang. Thence he 
marched for Kungan. But the scouts told him that that city 
was in the hands of Wu. Then some of the men he had 
despatched for supplies came in and reported the murder of 


“ee - their officer and the further treachery of Mi Fang. The story 


170 San Huo, or 


filled him with boundless rage. It was too much. The wound 
re-opened, and he fell in a swoon. 

“Wang Fu, you were right,” said he when he recovered 
con sciousness. “How I regret that I did not Poen what you 
said! And. now—— 

“But why were the beacon fires nt lighted?” cantnivee he 
presently. 

“Lü Méng’s men in the guise of traders came over the river. 
There were ‘soldiers hidden in the koulu ships, and they seized — 
the beacon guards, so preventing them from kindling the fires.” 

Kuan Yii sighed. Beating the ground with his foot, he said, 
“Indeed I have fallen into their trap. How shall I look my , 
brother in the face?” 

Then outspake the commissariat officer Chao Lei, saying, 
“We are in straits. Send to Ch‘éngtu for help, and let us 
take the land road to Chingchou to try to recover it.” 

So three messengers were sent by different routes to ask 
for help, while the army set out to return to Chingchou, Kuan 
Yü leading and Liao Hua with Kuan P‘ing keeping the rear. 

The siege of Fanch‘éng being thus raised, Ts‘ao Jén went 
to see his master. With tears he acknowledged his fault 
and asked pardon. 

“It was the will of heaven, and no fault of yours,” said 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao; and he rewarded the armies. 

When he visited Sstchung and had inspected the captured 
stockades, he remarked on the defences. “Hsü Huang was 
very clever to overcome these. With my thirty years of war 
I should not have dared to penetrate such opposition. He is 
valiant and wise, and both in a high degree.” . 

“Aye,” said they with him, for they could not but agree. 

Ts‘ao’s army marched back to Mop‘o and there camped. 
When Hsti Huang returned, Ts‘ao went out of the stockade to 
meet him, and noted with joy the excellent order and discipline 
that his army showed. Every man was in his place, the ranks 
perfectly kept, all without a trace of disorder. 

“He has the spirit of Chou A-fu,” said T's‘ao, and on the 
spot conferred on his captain the title of ‘‘Pacificator of the 
South.” Hsti was sent soon after to share in the defence of 
Hsiangyang to meet Kuan Yii’s army. 

Chingchou being still in turmoil, Ts‘ao remained at Mop‘o 
waiting for news. 

Kuan Yü found himself at a standstill on the road to 
Chingchou with the army of Wu in front and the men of Wei 
coming up behind. What was to be done? He discussed the 
position with Chao Lei, who proposed a halt to try to ogi 
Lü Méng into aiding him. 

Said he, “When Lii Méng was at Luk‘ou he used to wake 
to you often, and you agreed to join hands in the destruction 
of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. Now he is a traitor and fighting on the other 


fiomance of the Chree Ringooms 171 
_ side. Send a letter and reproach him. Perhaps we may get 
a satisfactory reply.” ; 
ae So the letter was written and sent. Meanwhile, by Lii 
Mêng’s special command, the most complete protection was 
given to the families of all the officers who were serving under 
Kuan Yü, and they were kept supplied with all they required. 
Even the ailing members of their households were treated by 
physicians free of charge. The result was that they were 
quite won over to the new order of things, and there was no 
attempt to disturb it. When Kuan Yii’s letter. came, the 
messenger was led into the city and well treated. When Lü 
read the letter, he said to the bearer thereof, “You must 
understand the different circumstances. When your general 
and I were leagued together it was a personal matter. between 
us two. Now things have changed. I am sent here with 
certain orders and am not my own master. I would trouble 
you, O Messenger, to return and explain thus to your master 
and in good words.” | : peer | 
~- — The bearer of the letter was entertained at a banquet and 
` sent to repose himself in the guest-house, where the families 
-of the absent officers sought him to have news of their 
husbands and fathers. Moreover, they brought him letters 
and gave him messages for the officers, and the whole tenor 
~. of these letters and messages was that they were all in good 
~ health, all their needs were supplied and they lacked nothing: 
` When he left the city, Lü Méng himself escorted him to the 
_ outskirts and set him on his way. 
= On his return to the army, he gave to Kuan Yü the message 
of Lü Méng and told him that the family were all well and 
safe and well cared for. This, however, did not greatly please 
= Kuan Yü, for he saw in this merely a plan to gain favour and 
© popularity. . : 
a “The brigand! If I cannot slay him while I live, I will 
after I am dead. My hate shall not go unappeased.”’ 
=. - He roughly dismissed the messenger, who went out and 
was at once surrounded by those whose families were in the — 
city and who desired to have news of them. And when he 
gave them the letters and messages and told them all were 
well, there was great rejoicing among the men in the camp, . 
and kindly feelings for Lü Méng prevailed. And therewith 
— died down the spirit of fighting. 
-Kuan Yü led the army to attack Chingchou, but day by ` 
' day the men ‘deserted and ran away to the very city they were 
moving to attack. So day by day Kuan’s bitterness and anger 
increased, and he advanced in angry haste. One day there 
was a great shouting and the noise of drums, and he found 
his way blocked. Ry 
~ “Why do you not surrender, friend Kuan?” said the leader 
` of this body, Chiang Ch‘in by name. 


172 San Fo, or 


“Could I give in to a rebel, I, a servant of the Hans and a 
leader of their troops?” roared Kuan Yü in a passion. 

Thereupon he whipped his horse forward and swung up his 
sword to strike. However, Chiang Ch‘in would not fight. 
The two exchanged a few blows, and Chiang fled., Kuan Yu 
followed. When he had gone a long way, there suddenly 
appeared from a gully near him Han Tang, while Chou T‘ai 
came out from the other side. Thereupon Chiang Ch‘in 
wheeled round and once more came to do battle, so that three 
forces were opposed to Kuan Yü. Unable to withstand these, 
he retreated. 

Before he had gone very far he saw signs of many people 
bivouacking among the hills, and presently made out, on a 
huge white banner that flapped in the breeze, the words, 
“Natives of Chingchou,” and the people about were calling 


out, “All the inhabitants of this place have surrendered.” 


Kuan Yü felt like rushing up and cutting these people to pieces, 


but just then two other cohorts appeared led by Ting Féng : 


and Hsti Shéng, who supported Chiang Ch‘in. The three 
bodies of men then set on with shouting and loud beating of 


drums that seemed to make the very earth tremble. And- 


Kuan Yü was like the kernel in a nut, quite surrounded. 


This was not all. He saw the number of his followers a 


diminishing every moment. He fought on till dusk, and 


looking about him he saw all the hills crowded with Chingchou 


folk and heard them calling brother for brother and son for © = 


father, till his soldiers’ hearts had melted within them.’ One 
by one they ran to their relatives, heedless of their leader 


and his voice. Presently he had but three hundred left, but ; 


with them he kept up the battle till the third watch. Then 


there was another shouting in another note, for his faithful ; 


leaders, Kuan P‘ing, his son, and Liao Hua, came to his help. 
And they rescued him, 
“The soldiers’ hearts are all melted,” said Kuan P‘ ing. 


“We must find some place wherein to camp till help can arrive. » 


There is Maich‘éng, small, but sufficient; let us camp. there.” 

Kuan Yü consented, and the exhausted army hurried thither 
as quickly as they could. 

The small force was divided among the four gates. Here 
it seemed as though they could find safety till help could be 
. obtained from Shangyung, which was near. 

But disappointments dogged them. Very soon the army of 
Wu came up and laid siege to the city. 

“Who will try to break through and go away to Shangyung 
for assistance ?” asked Kuan Yü. 

“I will go,” said Liao Hua: 


“And I will escort you past the danger zone,” said Kuan. S A 


P‘ing. 


fiomance of the Three éinguoms DAN bs 


: „Kuan Yü wrote his letter, which Liao Hua concealed next 
his skin, and having eaten a full meal, he rode out at the gate. 
A certain leader of the enemy, Ting Féng, tried to check him, 
but Kuan P‘ing fought vigorously and drove him away. So 
Liao reached the city, while Kuan P‘ing returned. Then they 


' barred the gates and went not forth again. 


_ Now, having captured Shangyung, Liu Féng and Méng Ta 
had remained to guard it, and the Prefect had surrendered. 
Liu *Féng had been created an assistant general with Méng 
Ta to aid him. When they heard of the defeat of Kuan Yii 
they took counsel what to do. When Liao Hua came, he was 
admitted into the city.. He told the tale of Kuan Yii’s straits, 
and asked for help. 

“Kuan Yü is closely besieged in Maich‘éng. Help from the 


west will be a long time in coming, so I have been sent to ` 


beg your assistance. I hope you will march the Shangyung 
naps thither as quickly as possible, for any delay will be 
fatal.” 

Liu Féng replied, “Sir, go to the rest-house for a time, till 
we can decide.” | 

So he went, and the two leaders talked over the matter. 

Liu Féng said, “This is bad news; what is to be done?” 

“Wu is very powerful,” replied his colleague. “Now they 
- have control over the whole district save this small clod. of 
earth called Maich‘éng. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao is at hand with half a 


| ore hundred legions, and we cannot stand against the two mighty 
-= houses. I say we must not move.” 


“I know all this. But Kuan Yü is my uncle, and I cannot 
bear to sit still and not try to save him.” 
~= “So you hold him as an uncle!” said Méng Ta with a smile. 


; “Yet I do not think he holds you much as a nephew. When | 


- the Prince of Hanchung created him a generalissimo he was 
greatly annoyed. And after the prince had-accepted his new 
dignity and was nominating his heir, I hear he consulted 
K‘ung-ming, who said the affair was one to be decided within 
the family and declined to advise. Then the prince sent to 
ask Kuan Yii’s-advice. Did he name you? Not at all. You 


2 ~ were only a son by adoption and could have no place in the 


-guecession. Further, he advised that you be sent to a distance 
lest you might cause trouble. This is common knowledge, and 


I am surprised that you are ignorant of it. Yet to-day you ` 


‘make capital out of the relationship and are willing to run 


a great risk to support it.” í 
~- “Granted that what you say is true, still what reply can 


< we give?” 


“Simply say that this city is still unsettled and you dare 
not move lest it be lost.” i 

Liu Fêng took his colleague’s view, sent for the messenger 
and told him. Liao Hua was greatly disappointed. He threw 


Pease San Fun, or 


himself on the ground and knocked his head, imploring — 


assistance. 

“Tf you act thus, there is an end of Kuan Mig Vine ried he. 

“Will a cup of water extinguish a waggon load of blazing 
wood?” said Mêng Ta. “Hasten back and await patiently for 
the coming of help from the west.” 

Liao Hua renewed his entreaties. The two commanders 
simply rose, shook out their sleeves and left him. Liao Hua 
saw that things had gone against him and thought his best 
course would be to go at once to Ch‘éngtu. He rode out of 
the city cursing its defenders and went away west. 

Kuan Yu from his fortress looked anxiously, but vainly, for - 
the coming of the expected aid. He was in a sorry plight. 
His men numbered but a few hundred, many wounded; there 
was no food. 

The someone came to the foot of the wall and, ‘calling out 
to the men on the wall not to shoot, said he had a message 
for the commander. He was allowed to enter; it was Chuko © 
Chin. When he had made his salutations and taken tea, he 
= began his harangue. 

“I come at the command of my master, Marquis Wu, to 
persuade you to a wise course. From of old it has always 
been recognised that the hero must bow to circumstances. | 


The districts that you ruled have come under another, with — 


the exception of this single city. Within, there is no food, 
without, no help, so that it must fall quickly. Wherefore, O 
General, why not hear me and join your fortunes to those of 
Wu? You shall’'be restored to your governorship and you 
will preserve your family. If haply, Sir, you would reflect 
thereon.” 

Kuan Yii replied, quite calmly, “I am a simple soldier of 
Chiehliang. I am the ‘hands and feet’ of my lord, his brother. 
How can I betray. him? The city may fall, and then I can but 
die. Jade may be shattered, but its whiteness remains; 
bamboo may be burned, but its joints stand out. My body may 
be broken, but my fame shall live in history. Say no more, but | 
leave the city, I beg. I will fight Sun Ch‘tian to the death.” 

“My master desires to enter into such a league with you 
as did Ts‘in and Chin in former days, that you may mutually 
assist to destroy Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and restore the Hans. That 
is his idea, and why do you persist in this wrong course?” 

As he finished this speech, Kuan P‘ing, who was by, drew 
his sword to slay him. But his father checked him. 

“Remember his brother is in Shu, helping your uncle. If 
you hurt him. you will injure the principle of fraternity.” 

He then bade his servants lead Chuko Chin away. He went, 
his face covered with shame, and left the city. When he 
reached his master he told of Kuan Yii’s obduracy and 
rejection of all argument. 


“He i is apes a loyal servant” said Sun ditan.. “stil, 
what is to be done next? moa) Eo Na AAN 
“Take the sortes,” said Lü ent fig AE ne ; 
ay So the lots were taken and explained to mean that the lord's 
enemies should flee to a distance. > 
Then: ‘Sun Chitian. asked Lü Méng, kare Ie. he fly toa 
i distance, how can he be captured?” «© 

Quer The divination exactly ‘fits in with my eoimee e ee 
hae ee e an had wings to soar to ee oe bea vo ii 


Ae ae in a ee: is fa sport of eN (pee i an Lah 
` The phænix i in a cage is mocked of small birds. cera ay VE ONE 


it ‘Ne 


A a ‘The scheme of Lü ‘Meng will be unfolded i in mhe nest t chapter, , í 


CHAPTER LXXVII. \ 


KUAN YU MANIFESTS HIS SACRED CHARACTER AT THE 
JADE FOUNT HILL; 
Ts‘Ao TS‘AO IS POSSESSED AT LOYANG. 


Sun Ch‘iian having asked Lü Méng for a plan, Lü replied) 
“This man Kuan has very few men left, and he will not 
venture along the high road. North of Maich‘éng is a risky | 
path, and he will try to escape along that. Therefore you ~ 
must lay an ambush for him twenty li away from the city, but 
do not stop him. Let him go by, and then harass his rear. 
Thus he will be forced into Linchii. Set another small ambush 
near there, and you will capture your enemy. For the present, 
attack the city vigorously on all sides but one, leaving the ` 
north gate for escape.’ 

Before carrying out this plan, Sun bade Lü Fan consult the 
auspices. He did so, announcing that the enemy would flee 
toward the northwest, but would be caught that night before - 
midnight. 

So Chu Jan was sent in command of the first ambush, five . 
companies, and P‘an Chang with a cohort was the second. 
The men were all veterans. 

When Kuan Yü mustered his fighting men in the city, he 
had but three hundred, all told. The food was done. That 
night many men of Wu came to the city walls and called to 
their friends by name, and many of these slipped over the wall 
and deserted, reducing the small force still further. No rescue 
force appeared, and Kuan was at the end of his resources. 
Again he bewailed to Wang Fu the obstinacy that had led him 
to neglect his wise warning. 

“I think even if Tzu-ya (Lii Shang) could come to life again 
he would be helpless in this case,” replied Wang Fu, sadly. 

Said Chao Lei, “Liu Féng and Méng Ta have surely decided 
not to send help from Shangyung. Let us abandon this 
miserable place and try to regain Hsich‘uan. We may then 
tempt our fortune once more.’ 

“I agree with you that that is the pet Bien” said Kuan Yü. 

Then he ascended the walls and surveyed the country. 
Noting that the weakest side was the north, he called in some | 
of the inhabitants and enquired the nature of the country on 
that side. 

They replied, “There are only paths there, but by them one 
may get into Hsich‘uan.” 


Pounce of the bree 1 tinghoms ? or Tis 


“We will go that way to-night,” said Kuan. 
_ Wang Fu opposed it, pointing out that they would surely 
~ fall into an ambush. The main road would be safer. 
“There may be an ambush, but do I fear that?” said the old 
_ Warrior. 
Orders were ‘given to be ready to march. 


“At least be very cautious,” said Wang Fu. “I a defend 


~ this city to the very last; I only need a few men. Never will 


- we surrender. Only I hope, most noble Marquis, that you will i 


- send me speedy help.” 


The two parted in tears; Wang Fu and Chou Ts‘ang remain- — 
ing to guard Maich‘éng. Kuan Yü, Kuan P‘ing and Chao Lei- 


marched with their weak force out of the north gate. Kuan 


Yu, his great sword ready to hand, went first. About the 


a time: of watch-setting, a score of li lay between them and the 


city. There they saw a deep cleft in the hills wherefrom 


rolled the sound of beaten drums. And men were shouting. 
Soon appeared a large force with Chu Jan at their head. 


He came dashing forward, and summoned the small party Loe 
` surrender if they would save their lives. But Kuan Yü - 


whipped his steed to a gallop and bore down on the leader with 
` anger in his eyes. Then Chu Jan ran away. Kuan Yü 
_ followed him till there came the loud boom of a large drum, 
and out sprang men from all sides. Kuan Yü dared not 


engage such a number, and fled in the direction of Linchii.. 
-Chu Jan came up behind and attacked the flying soldiers, so> - 
that Kuan’s following gradually became smaller and smaller. 


Still he struggled on. A few li farther the drums. rolled 
again, and torches lit up all round. This was P‘an Chang’s 
) _ ambush, and he appeared flourishing his sword. Kuan Yü 


whirled his blade and went to meet him, but P‘an ran away 


after a couple of bouts. However; Kuan Vii saw they were too 


. many for him, and sought refuge among the mountains. His - 


` son followed, and when he got within speaking distance he gave 

- him the mournful tidings that Chao Lei had fallen. Kuan Yü 
: was very sad, and bade his son try to protect the rear while he 
~ should force his way forward. 


With a half score men he reached Chiiehshih, a place with ~ 


~ mountains on both sides.’ At their foot was a thick mass of 


$ ~ another ambush, and the men thrust forth hooks and threw 


reeled out of the saddle. In a moment he was a prisoner. 
‘Kuan P‘ing dashed to his rescue, but before he could do 
anything he also was surrounded and held. Father and son 
were both captives. 

~ With great joy Sun Ch‘tan heard of the success of his plans. 


reeds and dried grass. The trees grew very close. It was 
then the fifth watch. Presently the small party stumbled into — 


ropes. “Entangled i in these, Kuan Yü’s horse fell, and Kuan Yü ` 


He assembled all- his officers in his tent to await the arrival of — 


178 Tales Aan uo, or 


the prisoners. Before long, Ma Chung, who had actually — 


caught Kuan Yü, came hustling his prisoner before him. 

“T have long had a friendly feeling for you,” said Sun 
Ch‘iian to Kuan Yü, “on account of your great virtues. Now 
I would have made a covenant and alliance with you, if you 
would. - You and your son have long held yourselves to be 
invincible, but you see you are my prisoners to-day. Yet L 
hope to win you over to my side.” 

But Kuan Yü only answered roughly, “You green-eyed boyi. 
You red-bearded rat! I made a covenant in the Peach Garden 


. with my brothers to uphold the Hans. Think you that I will 


stand side by side with a rebel such as you are? Iam a victim 
of your vile schemes, but I can only die once. And there is no 
need of many words.” . 

“He is a real hero, and I love him,” said Sun Ch‘tian to those 
standing near. “I will treat him well and endeavour to win 
him over. Do you think it well?” 

Said one of them, “When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had hold of this man 
he treated him lavishly well. He created him a marquis; he 
feasted him day after day at public and private banquets; he 
gave him gold and presented him with silver; all this, hoping 


to retain him at his side. But he failed. The man broke. 
through his gates, slew his ‘captains and went away. 


To-day Ts‘ao Ts‘ao fears him, and almost moved the capital- 

for dread of him. Now he is in your power destroy him, oro 

you will rue the day. Evil will come if you spare him.” 
Sun Chʻüan reflected for some time. 


“You are right,” said he presently, and gave the order for 


execution. 

So father and son met their fate together in the twenty- 
fourth year (219 A.D.) in the tenth month. Kuan Kung was 
fifty-eight. 

_A poem says :— i 

Peerless indeed was our lord Kuan, of the latter days, 
Head and shoulders stood he out among the best; ; 
Godlike and terrible in war, elegant and refined in peace, 
Resplendent as the noonday sun in the heavens, 
Haloed as are the noblest of those early days, 

- He stands, the brightest model for all ages, 
And not only for the strenuous days he lived in. 


And another :— 


Seek ye a noble one?, Then take ye the way of Chichliang, 
Watch ye how all men revere Ytin-ch‘ang, 

Each excelling others to honour him, 

Him, one of the three brothers of the Peach Garden Oath, 

Of whom two have won sacrifices, as Emperor and prince. 
Incomparable, their aura spreads through the world; 

They are resplendent as the great lights of the firmament; 
Temples to our lord Kuan abound, no village lacks one, 

IN venerable trees at sundown are the resting places for birds, 


i 


‘Homance of ihe Tree ingaami 2 179 


\ 


So the great warrior ended his life. His famous steed, also 


Kanived ne master ea a short ihe he refused to feed, and 
Soon died. 
=  Forebodings of misfortune came to Wang Fu within the city 
‘of Mai. His bones felt cold; his flesh crept; and he said to his 
lee “T have had a terrible dream in which I saw our | 
lord all dripping with gore. I would question him, but I was 
overcome with dread. May it augur no evil tidings!” i 
Just then the men of Wu came up to the city wall and 
o aply the gory heads of the two, father and son. Wang 
_ Fu'and Chou Ts‘ang went up on the wall to see if the dread 
. tokens were real. There was no doubt. Wang Fu with a 
` despairing cry threw himself over the wall and perished, Chou 
He EB ang died by his own hand. Thus the city fell to Wu. 
_ Now the spirit of Kuan the Noble did not dissipate into 
“space, but wandered through.the void till it came to a certain 
spot.in Tangyanghsien on a famous hill known as the Mount 
of the Jade Spring. There lived a venerable Buddhist priest 
=- whose name in the faith was P‘u-ching. He was originally of | 
- Sstishui Kuan and abbot of a state guardian temple. In the 
course of roaming about the world he had reached this place. 
-Entranced with its natural beauty, he had built himself a 
‘shelter of Seer and grass, where he sat in meditation on | 


fine air serene. OD sat in his con attitude in the 
silence of the mountains. Suddenly he heard a great voice 
oped in the upper air, “Give back my head; give back my 
EIA 
Gazing Sprard he saw the shape of a man mounted on a 
In the hand he saw a shining blade like unto the Black 
Dragon. Two military figures were with him, one on either 
side. He on the left had a white face; he on the right was 
swarthy of countenance with a curly beard. And they 
followed the figure with the shining blade. They floated along - 
on a cloud which came to rest on the summit of the mountain. 
The recluse recognised the figure as that of Kuan the Noble, 
so with his yak’s tail flagellum he smote the lintel of his hut 
and cried, “Where is Yiin-ch‘ang?”’ ; 
The spirit understood, and the figure dismounted, glided 
lown and came to rest at the door of the hut. Interlacing its 
fingers, it stood in a reverential attitude and said, “Who is my 
teacher, and what is his name in the faith?” 
eee “In the state guardian temple in Ssushui Kuan I once saw 
you, O noble Marquis, ana I was not likely to forget your face,” 


ai 
ne 


180 > ; San uo, or- 

“I am deeply grateful for the help you gave me. Misfortune 
has befallen me, and I have ceased to live. I would seek the’. ~ 
pure instruction -and beg you to indicate the obscure way.” ih: 

“Let us not discuss former wrongdoings nor present correct, 
actions. Later events are the inevitable result, of former ` 
causes. -I know that Lü Méng has injured. you. You call | 
aloud: for the return of your head; who will also, return: the 
heads of your several victims—Yen Liang, Wên Ch’ou and the- 
guardians of the five passes?” 

Ther eupon Kuan the Noble seemed. suddenly i comprehend 
bowed in token of assent and disappeared. After this appear- 
ance to the recluse his spirit wandered hither and thither about 
the mountain, manifesting its sacred character and goon 
the people. 

Impressed by his virtue, the inhabitants builded ; a temple on 
the Mountain of the J ade Spring, wherein they sacrificed at 
the four seasons. In later days, one wrote a couplet for the 
temple, the first member reading, “Ruddy faced, reflecting the 
honest heart within, out-riding the wind on the Red Hare — 
steed, mindful of the Red Emperor” ; and the second, “In the 
light: of clear lamp, reading the histories, resting on the Black ` 
Dragon Blade curyed as the young moon, heart pure as thes t 
azure heaven.” hee 

The execution of Kuan gave Sun Chitan undisputed posses- a 
sion of the whole of the Chingchou district. He rewarded his 
soldiers and spread-a great feast at which Lü Meng was in 
the seat of honour. He made a speech, saying, “After long 
waiting, the desire of my heart has come to me very easily 
through the magnificent efforts of my friend Lü Mêng.”? ` S 

Lü Mêng bowed and bowed deprecatingly, but Sun Chitian aw 
continued, “My good Chou Yü was superior to most men, and  ~ 
he defeated Ts‘ao Tsʻao at Red Wall. Alas! he died too soon. _ 
My good Lu Su succeeded him. His first appearance inaugur-. . , 
ated the general policy of creating a state. That was the first - 
instance of his keen insight. When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao descended 
upon my country, and everyone counselled me to yield, he 
advised me to summon my good Chou Yti to oppose and smite 
him. That was the second instance of his keen insight. He 
made only one fault; he advised me to let Liu Pei occupy this ~ 
district. Now to-day my good Lü Méng has succeeded, and 
in that he far surpasses both his predecessors.” ; 

Then he filled a goblet and in person presented it to the guest 
of the evening. Lü took the cup, but as he raised it a sudden 
change came over him. Dashing the cup to the ground, he 
seized Sun Ch‘tian, crying, “O green-eyed boy! - o red-bearded 
rat! Do you know me?” Pets 

Consternation seized the whole assembly, but some rushed! 
to the rescue of their lord, who had been thrown to the floor > 
by the guest he had so lately complimented. Rushing forward — 


_ over_his body, Lü Méng sat himself in the host’s seat, his 
- eyebrows staring stiff and his eyes glaring. 

<. “After I quelled the Yellow Turbans, I went hither and 
_ thither’ for thirty years. Now I have fallen victim to:your 


_ base plots and you have overcome me. If living I have been’ 


unable to gorge upon the flesh of mine enemy, dead I; will 

. pursue the spirit of this bandit Lü. I am the Marquis of 
~ Hanshout‘ing, Kuan Yiin-ch‘ang.”’ 

-Terror-stricken, Sun Ch‘iian was the first to fall prostrate, 
and all his officers followed him. ' 


Thereupon Lü Mêng fell over dead, with blood gushing from | 


_ the seven orifices of his body. 

In due time the body was coffined and interred. He was 
created posthumously “Prefect of Nanchiin and Marquis of 
Ch‘uanling.” His son was given hereditary nobility. 

_. After this visitation Sun Ch‘iian lived in constant terror. 
Soon Chang Chao came in from Chienyeh to see him and blame 
him for the murder. 

“My lord, by the slaughter of Kuan Yü you have brought 
misfortune very near to your state. You know the oath 
sworn in the Peach Garden. Now Liu Pei has the force of 

 Hsich‘uan at his back, Chuko Liang as adviser, and those 
heroes Chang Fei, Huang and Ma Ch‘ao to carry out his 
_ behests. -When Liu Pei hears of the death of both father and 
= gon he will set in motion the whole force he has to avenge 
them, and I fear you cannot stand such an onslaught.” 

= Sun Ch‘iian started up in a fright. “Yes; I have made a 
little mistake,” said he. “But seeing it is so, what shall I do?” 
“You need have no fear,” replied Chang. “I have a plan 
__. to fend off the armies of Hsich‘uan from our borders and keep 

Chingchou quite safe.” 
“What is your plan?” asked Sun Ch‘tan. 


. “T s‘ao Ts‘ao with his many legions is greedily aiming at the ` 


-~ : whole country. Liu Pei, eager for revenge, will ally himself 


with him, and, should they combine against this country, we 


-~ should be in great danger. Therefore I advise you to send 
Kuan Yii’s head to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao to make it appear that Ts‘ao 


. Ts‘ao was the prime cause of his destruction. This should . 


divert Liu Pei’s extreme hatred toward him and send the 
~ armies of Western Shu against Wei instead of toward Wu. 
After carefully considering the whole matter, I counsel this 
as the best course of action.” 


head of the great warrior was placed in a box and sent off as 
- quickly as possible’to Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

At this time Ts‘ao’s army had marched back from Mopei to 
Loyang. When he heard of the coming of the gruesome gift 
he was glad at heart and said, “So Yiin-ch‘ang is dead; now 
- Tecan stick to my mat and sleep soundly at night.” 


Romance of the Three Hingooms 181 


Sun Chiiian thought the-move worth making, and so the | 


182 Ban Ruo, or 

But Ssima I saw through the ruse R said from his s place 
by the steps, “This is a trick to divert evil from Wu.” TER: 

“What do you mean? How?” said Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. if 

“The Peach Garden Oath bound the three brothers to live ~ 
and die together. Now Wu is fearful of revenge for the — 
execution of one of the three and sends the head to you to — 
cause Liu Pei’s wrath to fasten on you, O Prince. He wishes — 
Liu to attack you instead of himself, the real perpetrator of 
the crime. Then he will find a way of eccomphohing his ends 
while you two are quarreling.” 

“You are right, friend,” said Ts‘ao; “and now how can we 
escape?” 

“I think escape is easy. You have the head of Kian Vues 
make a wooden image of the remainder of the body and bury s 
the whole with the rites suitable to a minister of state. When © 
Liu Pei hears of this he will turn his hate toward Sun Chüan 
and raise all his forces to attack him. If you will think it out — 
you will see that whichever is victor the other will be smitten, 
and if we get one of the two the other will follow before very 
long.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was pleased with the solution. Then he ordered — 
the messenger to come in with the box, which was opened, and | 
he looked upon the face of the dead. The features had not — 
changed; the face bore the same appearance as of old. Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao smiled. 

“T hope you have been an since our last meeting, i 
Yiin-ch‘ang,” said Ts‘ao. 

To his horror, the mouth opened, the eyes rolled aid the long ie 
beard and hair stiffened. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao fell to the ground in allows 
swoon. Cae 

They rushed to him, but it was a long time betore he p 
recovered consciousness. Í Le 

“General Kuan is indeed a spirit,” he said. Ree 

Suddenly the messenger who had brought the dead warriors — 
head became also possessed by the spirit of Kuan Yu, and fell 
to cursing and reviling his master, Sun Ch‘tian, and he told Pe 
the story of what had befallen Lü Méng. f 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, filled with dread, prepared sacrifices andit 
performed the rites for the honoured dead. An effigy was 
carved out of heavy “fragrant” wood and buried outside the 
south gate with all the rites of a princely noble, a huge ce 
concourse of officials of all grades following in the procession. — 
At the funeral Ts‘ao Ts‘ao himself bowed before the coffin | 
and poured a libation. He also conferred on the dead the — 
posthumous title of “Prince Ching,” and appointed guardians oe 
of the tomb.. The messenger was sent back to Wu. Hh 

The Prince of Hanchung returned to his capital. Fa Chéng 
memorialised, saying. “O Prince, thy consort has passed 
away and. the Lady Sun has returned to her maiden home, — 


tiomance of the Three fingroms 


perhaps never to come again. Human relations should not 
_ be set at nought, wherefore a secondary consort should be 
~ sought, so that all things may be correctly ordered within 
the palace.” 
The prince having signified his acceptance of the principle, 
Fa Chéng continued, “There is the sister of Wu I, comely 
and good, and declared by the physiognomist as destined to 
high honour. She was betrothed to Liu Pao, son of Liu Yen, 
but he died in youth, and she has remained unwedded. Take 
her as a wife.” 
thts incompatible with propriety ; Liu Mao and I are of the 
same ancestry.” 
“As to the degree of relationship, would it differ from the 
marriage of Wén of Chin and Huaiying?” 
Upon this precedent the prince gave his consent and wedded l 
the lady, and she bore to him two sons, the elder of whom was. 
`. named Jung and the younger Li. _ 
ji Meanwhile, the whole land of Shu was prospering, the people 
were tranquil, and the state was becoming wealthy. The fields 
yielded’ bountiful harvests. ‘Suddenly there came one who told- 
of the attempt of Sun Ch‘tian to ally himself with Kuan Yü by 
marriage, and the indignant rejection of che proposal. 
“Chingchou is in danger, ” said K‘ung-ming. “Recall and 
- replace Kuan Yü.” 
=~ Then began to arrive a series of messengers from Ching- | 
- chou, bearers of news of the moves in the game. At first they 
~ brought good tidings, then evil. Kuan Hsing came first to tell 
. of the drowning of the seven armies. Then one reported the 
installation of beacon towers along the river bank, and other 
=- preparations which seemed as near perfect as any could be. 
And Liu Pei’s anxiety ceased. 
ota But evil tidings were on the way. Ta Pei was ill at ease 
and felt a creepiness of the skin that boded evil. He was 
restless by day and sleepless by night. One night he rose 
from his couch and was reading by the light of a candle when 
‘drowsiness overcame him and he fell asleep over the low 
table by his side. He dreamed. A cold gust of wind swept 
through the chamber, almost putting out the candle flame. 
When it brightened again he glanced up and saw a figure 
standing near the light. 
‘Who ‘are you, who thus come by night ts my chamber? REA 
= asked he. 
A The figure made no reply, and Yüan-tê got up to go over 
= and see who it was. Then the figure took the shape. of his 
brother. But it avoided him, retreating as he advanced. 
= “Brother, there is nothing wrong, I hope. But surely 
~ something of great importance brings you here thus in the 
-< dedd of the night. And why do you avoid me thus; your 
brother, who loves you as himself ? ie 


1384 — l -an Kuo, or 


Then the figure wept and said, “Brother, send your armies 
to avenge me.’ 

As Kuan Yii said that, a chilly blast went through the room, 
and the figure disappeared. Just then Ytian-t€ awoke and 
knew that he had dreamed. | ' 

The drums were beating the third watch as he awoke. He 
felt greatly worried and disturbed. So he went into the 
front portion of the palace and sent for K‘ung-ming. Soon 
he came, and Ytian-té told him of the vision. 

“You have been thinking too deeply of Kuan Yu lately, my 
lord,” said K‘ung-ming. “There is no need to be distressed.” 

But Yiian-té could not find comfort, and K‘ung-ming was _ 


_ long in calming his feelings and arguing away his fancies. 


As K‘ung-ming left the palace he met Hsti Ching, who said, 
ST have a very secret piece of news to tell you, so I came on 
here.” 

“What is your secret?” 

“There is a report about that Wu has got possession of 
Chingchou; Lü Mêng has taken it. And more “than that, 
Kuan Yü is dead. I had to come to tell you.’ 5 

“I saw it in the sky. A large star fell over against Ching- 
chou, and I knew some evil had befallen Kuan Yü. But I 
feared the effect upon our master and I forbore to. say 
anything.” S 

They did not know that Yüan-tê was standing just within 
the door. Suddenly he rushed out, seized K‘ung-ming by the — 
sleeve and said, “Why did you deceive me? Why, when you | 
had such terrible news?” ai 

“Because it is only a rumour,” replied they. “It is too- 
improbable for belief. We pray you not.to be distressed.” 

“By our oath we live or die together; how can I go on 
living if he is lost?” 

The two men soothed their lord as best they could, but even 
as they spoke to him one of the private attendants said that 
Ma Liang and I Chi had arrived. Yüan-tê called them in 
and questioned them eagerly. They said Chingchou was 
indeed lost, and Kuan YU begged for instant help. 

The letters they. brought had not been read before Liao Hua 
was ushered in. He prostrated himself and, weeping, told 


-the story of the refusal of help on the part of Liu Fêng ae 


Méng Ta. 
“Then is my brother lost!’ cried. Yiian-te. 
“Tf those two have really behaved so badly, the offence is even 
too great for death,” said K‘ung-ming. “But calm yourself, — 
O Prince. I will see about an army and lead it to the rescue.” ~ 
“If Yiin-ch‘ang is gone, I cannot live,” moaned Yiian-té. © 
“To-morrow I will set out with an army to rescue him.” poh 
Yiian-té sent off a messenger to Chang Fei and gave or Jers ; 
to muster horse and foot for instant departure. ae 


. 


CHAPTER LXXVIII. À 


` Hua T‘O, TREATING Ts‘Ao Ts‘Ao, HIMSELF DIES; 
Ts‘ao Ts‘A0’s LAST WORDS AND DEATH. 


Ak has. been said, the Prince of Hanchung swooned on 


hearing the terrible news of the death of the two Kuans, father 


and son. His officers went to his help, and when he had 
recovered sufficiently they led him to his private apartments. 

“My lord, control your grief,” said K‘ung-ming. “Life and 
death are fixed by fate. Kuan Yü brought the evil upon 


himself by his harshness and haughtiness. You must now ` 


take care of your health and mature your vengeance.” 

“When we swore brotherhood in the Peach Garden` we 
pledged ourselves to live or die together. What enjoyment of 
pones and honours is there for me now that my brother is 
gone ?” 

Just then he saw Kuan Yii’s son, Hsing, coming in in deep 
distress. At sight of the youth, Liu Pei uttered a great cry 
and again sank to the earth. By and by he came to, and spent 
the whole day weeping and swooning at intervals. For three 
days he refused all nourishment, and he wept so bitterly that 
his garments were wetted, and there were spots of blood. 
K‘ung-ming and the others tried every means to soothe him, 
but he was inconsolable. 

ST swear I will not live under the same heaven as Sun 
Ch‘tian,” cried he. 

“It is said that the head of your brother has been sent to 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, but Ts‘ a0 has buried the remains with the rites 
of a princely noble,” said K‘ung-ming. 

“Why did he do that?” asked Yüan-tê. 

“Because he thought thereby to bring evil upon Ts‘ao. But 
Ts‘ao saw through the subterfuge and has buried your brother 
with great honour so that your anger may burn against Wu.” 

“T want to send my armies to punish Wu and appease my 
wrath,” said Ytiari-té. 

“No; you may not do that. Wu wishes to move you to 
smite Wei, and Wei wishes you to attack Wu, each harbouring 
the malevolent design of taking advantage of the quarrel. 
You would do well, my lord, to keep your armies at home. 
Put on mourning for Kuan Yü, and wait till Wei and Wu are 
at war. That will be your time.” 


The other officers supported K‘ung-ming, and Yiian-té 


listened. Presently his grief spent itself, and he began to take 


PTEE 


Hamance of the Three Hingvoms 


food again. An edict was promulgated enjoining mourning 
dress upon all officials. The prince went outside the south gate 
_ to summon the spirit home, and sacrificed and wailed a whole 

: day for the dead warrior, his brother. 

Although Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had given honourable burial to the 
remains of Kuan YU, yet he was continually haunted by the 
- dead man’s spirit. Every night when he closed his eyes he 
saw- Kuan the Noble as he knew him so well in the flesh. 
‘These visions made him nervous, and he sought the advice of 


his officers. Some suggested the building of new rooms for _ 


his own use. 


“There is much. witchcraft and malign influence in this old 


palace at Loyang; build new rooms for your own occupation, ti 
said they.. 
i would, and it should be called ‘Chienshih,’ or ‘The Firm 
- Foundation, *” said he. “But where is the architect? Zan 
a They: told him there was one Su Yiieh, a very eunning 
~  artificer.g He was called and set to work on the plans for a 
nine chien pavilion for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s own use. It had 
verandahs and upper rooms as well. His plans pleased Ts‘ao 
~ greatly. 
“You have planned just meh a place as I wished, only where 
will you find the main beam for such a building? p? 


Dragon. Near it is a shrine, and beside that grows a fine 


for the roof tree. : 

_ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao at once sent men to fell the tree. But after one 
whole day’s labour the men came back to say they could make 
no impression on it neither with saw nor axe. Ts‘ao, doubting 
their word, went to see. When he had dismounted and stood 
-by the! tree he could not but admire its size and proportions, 
as it rose above him tall, straight and unbranched till the 


wide-spreading and symmetrical top reached into the clouds.. 


= But he bade the men attack it again. Then a few aged men 
eh oF the village came and said, “The tree has stood here some 
- centuries andi is the haunt of a spirit. We think it should not 
| be cut down.” ' 
= — Ts‘ao grew annoyed. “I have gone to and fro in the world 
“now some forty years, and there is no one, from the Emperor 
to the commoner, who does not fear me. What spirit is there 
-~ who dares oppose my wish?” 

Drawing the sword he was wearing, he went up to the tree 
and slashed at the trunk. The tree groaned as he struck, and 
blood stains spattered his dress. Terror-stricken, he threw 
_ down the sword, mounted his horse and galloped off. 

- But that evening when he retired to rest he could not sleep. 
He rose, went into the onter room and sat there leaning on a 


“I know a certain tree that will serve,” said the architect. 
“About thirty li from the city there is the Pool of the Leaping- 


pear tree. It is over a hundred feet high, and that will serve’ 


188 San uo, or — Saat 


low table. Suddenly a man appeared with his hair unbound, 
dressed in black and carrying a naked sword. The visitor 
came straight toward Ts‘ao stopped in front of him and, — 
- pointing, cried out, ‘Behold the Spirit of the pear tree. You. 
may desire to build your chien-shih pavilion and you may 
contemplate rebellion, but when you began to attack my sacred 
tree the number of your days was accomplished. I am come — 
now to slay you.’ ae 

“Where are the guards?” shouted Ts‘ao in terror. ý 

The figure struck at him with the sword. Ts‘ao cried out ~ 
and then awoke. His head was aching unbearably. W 

, They sought the best physicians for him,:but- they failed to — 
relieve the terrible pain. 

Sympathy for their lord. was universal among Ts‘ao’s 
subordinates. Hua Hsin one day said to his master, “My lord, 
have you heard of Hua T'o?” 

“Do you mean him of Chiangtung who cured Chou Tai?” 

“Yes; that is he,” replied Hua Hsin. 

sF have heard something of his fame, but I know nothing of 
his capabilities in his art.” 

“He is very clever; there are few so skilful. If one is ill 


and calls him in he knows immediately whether to use drugs, 
or the needle, or the cautery, and the patient finds relief at ~ 
once. Let one suffer from an internal complaint and drugs — ° 
‘are ineffectual, with a dose of hashish he throws the patient 
into a state of perfect insensibility and then opens the 
‘abdomen and washes the affected organs with a medicament. — 


The patient feels no pain. When the cleansing is complete, 


he sews up the wound with thread, dresses it, and in a month A 


or less the patient is well. This shows you how skilful he is. 


“One day Hua was travelling, when he heard a man by thess 


wayside groaning with pain. 

“ «That is dyspepsia,’ said he. And further questions con- 
firmed the diagnosis. He prescribed long draughts of the 
juice of garlic as an emetic, and the man vomited a worm; 
after this he was quite well. One Ch‘én Téng, the Prefect of 
Kuangling, suffered from a heavy feeling at the heart- His 
face was red and congested, and he had no appetite. Hua 
gave him a drug, and he threw up many internal wriggling 
parasites with red heads. The Prefect asked what had caused 
the trouble, and: Hua told him that he ate too much strong- 
smelling fish. He could cure him this once, but in three years 
the disease would recur, and then nothing could save him. 


Three years later Ch‘en died. Another man had a tumour al 
between the eyes, and it itched intolerably. Hua examined oe 


it and said there was a bird in it. The tumour was opened, — 
and, surely enough, a canary flew out. The patient was 


relieved. A dog bit a man’s toe, and two tumourous growths 


ensued, one of which itched intolerably and the other pained ea ; 


Romance of the Three tingooms 


= severely. Hua said the painful one contained, several needles, 
‘and the other a couple of wei-ch’i pips.. He-opened the two 
swellings, and the contents were as he had said. Really he is 
of the same class of leech as Pien Ch‘iao and Ts‘ang Kung. 
He lives at Chinch‘éng, not far away, and could be here very 
_ soon.’ 
a Ts‘ao Ts‘ao summoned him, and as soon as he arrived Hua 
-~ . T'o felt the pulse and made careful examination. 
“Prince, your headaches are due to a malignant humour 
-- within the brain case. The humour is too thick to get out. 
Swallowing drugs will do no good. .But I propose to 
administer. a dose of hashish, then open the brain case and 
remove the thickened humour. That will be a radical cure.” 

“You mean you want to kill me,” cried Ts‘ao angrily. 

“O Prince, you have heard how I cured Kuan Yü of the 
poison that had got into his bones? I scraped them, and he 
did not hesitate a moment. Your malady. is trifling, and why 
do you mistrust me?” 

“A painful arm may be scraped, but how can you cut open 

REA, man’ s head? The fact is you have conspired with some of 
= Kuan’s friends to take this opportunity to make away with me 
in revenge for his death.” 

He told his lictors to hale Hua To to gaol, and there he was 
tortured to try to find who were his accomplices. Chia Hsii 
i; pleaded for him on account of his rare skill, but his interven- 
tion was of no avail. 

©The man wants to get a chance to. kill me; he is the same 
7 of scoundrel as Chi P‘ing.’ 

‘ The wretched physician was subjected to worse sufferings. 
-His gaoler was a certain Wu, nicknamed “The Gaoler” by 
< nearly everybody. He was kindly disposed to Hua and saw 
~ that he was well fed. Hua T‘o conceived a liking for his- 

~ gaoler, and said to him one day, “I am doomed, I know. The 
pity is that my Black Bag treatise on medicine may be lost. 
= — You have been most kind to me, and as I have no other way 
-~ of recompensing you I will give you a letter to my wife telling 
her to send the Black Bag, and I will give it to you that you. 
may carry on my art.” 

Wau rejoiced greatly, thinking that he would throw up the 

-~ menial position of gaoler and travel about the country healing 
=- sick folk, and so he told Hua T‘o to write the letter and 
- promised to carry on his work. 

The letter was written and given to Wu “The Cau” who 
lost no time in sending a man to Hua T‘o’s house for the Black 
Bag. After Hua T‘o had read through the book carefully, he 
presented it to Wu, who took it home and hid it away. , 

~ Not many days after this, Hua T‘o died in prison. “The 
Gaoler’’ bought a coffin and had him buried. This done, he 
quitted the prison and went home. But when he asked for 


pa 


EGON re | San huo, or 


the book he found that his wife had. eted it and wás a 


using it to light the fire. He snatched away what was left — 
of it, but a whole volume was missing, and what was left 
amounted only to afew pages. He vented his anger in cursing 
his wife, and she retorted, saying, “If you become such a 
learned person as Hua T“o you will only die in prison like him. 
What good did it all do him?” 

It struck Wu that there was KOMETE in what she said, 


and he ceased grumbling at her. But the upshot of all this 


was that the learning in the “Treatise of the Black Bag” was 
finally lost to the world, for what was left only, contained a 
few recipes relating to domestic animals. . 


Hua T‘o was the ablest of leeches 
Like Chang Sung, who overtopped all, 
He saw what diseases were lurking. 
` Within a man’s outermost wall. 
Alas! that he died, and his writings 
Passed beyond any man’s ken, 
With the famous Black Bag that contained them, 
For he was a healer of men. 


Meanwhile, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao became worse, the ieopenin ey of 
the intentions of his rivals aggravating his disease not a 
little. Then they said an envoy had come with letters from _ 


Wu, the gist of which was satisfactory, as it ran like this :— 


“Thy servant, Sun Ch‘tian, has long seen whom destiny 
indicates. as master of all, and looks forward with confidence - 
to his early accession to the dignity. If he will send his | 


armies to destroy Liu Pei and sweep rebellion from the west, 
his servant at the head of his armies will: submit and accept 
his land as a fief.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao laughed as he read this, ne he said to his 
officers, “Is this youth trying to put me on a furnace?” 


But his attendants seriously replied, “O Prince, the. Hans ‘ uf 


have been feeble too long, while your virtues and merits are- 


like the mountains. All the people look to you, and when ~ 


Sun Ch‘iian acknowledges himself as your minister he is but 
responsive to the will of God and the desire of men. It is 
wrong that you oppose when such contrary influences work. to 
a common end, and you must soon ascend to the high place.” 

Ts‘ao Ts‘ao smiled. “I ‘have served the Hans for many 
years; and if I have acquired some merit, yet I have been 
rewarded with a princedom and high rank. I dare not aspire | 
to greater things. If the finger of heaven points to me, then 
shall I be.as Wên Wang of Chou. i 

“As Sun Ch’iian acknowledges himself your servant and — 
promises obedience, you, my lord, can confer a title upon him > 


and assign to him the duty of attacking Liu Pei,” said Sstma.l. © 
Approving of the suggestion, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao gave Sun Ch‘tian 


sI 


the title of ‘“P“ao-ch%, General of Cavalry, and Marquis of Ras 


TA 
E 


Xi 


| ASN a is fiomance of the Three ¥ingdom 


-~ Nanch‘ang,”’ and appointed him to the governorship of Ching- 


Le 


z Tsʻao'Tsʻao’s condition grew worse daily. One night he 
= had a dream of three horses feeding out of the same manger. 
Next day he told it to Chia Hsii, adding that he thought it 
betokened some evil through the Ma family. How did he 
interpret the dream? 
“It is auspicious to dream of lu (pay) and ma (horses) ,” 
replied Chia Hsü. “And naturally such things come to the 


ts‘ao (a manger, eating place). I do not think you need feel 


any misgivings.” 
$ Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was comforted. 
Ts‘ao dreamed three steeds together fed, 


: The vision seers could not explain, 
None guessed how soon, when Ts‘ao was dead, 
One dynasty would rule again. 
Ah, yes; Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had vainly wrought; 
Of none avail each wicked wile, s 
For, later, in Wei court, there fought 
' Against him one with equal guile. 
That night Ts‘ao Ts‘ao became worse. As he lay on his 
couch he felt dizzy and could not see, so he rose and sat by a 
_ table, upon which he leaned. It seemed to him that someone 
~ shrieked, and, peering into the darkness, he perceived the 
~ forms of many of his victims. And all were bloodstained. 
es They stood in the obscurity and whispered, demanding his 
life. He rose, lifted his sword and threw it wildly into the 
~ air. Just then there was a loud crash, and the south-west 
corner of the new building came down. And Ts‘ao Ts‘ao 


-~ another palace, where he might lie at peace. | 

— But he found no peace. The next night was disturbed by 
the ceaseless wailing of women’s voices. When day dawned, 
Ts‘ao sent for his officers, and said to them: 


always refused belief in the supernatural. But what does 
all this mean?” EEN 


“Q Prince, you should summon the Taoists to offer — 


‘sacrifices and prayers,” said they. 

. — Tsfao Ts‘ao sighed. “The wise man said, ‘He who offends 

= against heaven has'no one to pray to.’ I feel that my fate is 
accomplished, my days have run and there is no help.” 

But he would not consent to call in the priests. Next day 
his symptoms were worse. He was panting and could no 
longer see distinctly. He sent hastily for Hsiahou Tun, who 
came at once. But as he drew near the doors he too saw the 

= shadowy forms of the slain Empress and her children and 
- many other victims of. Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s cruelty. He was over- 


come with fear and fell to the ground. The servants raised 


$ z him and led him away, very ill. 


LI 


_ Chou. Forthwith this command was sent away to Sun Chiiian.. 


fell with it. His attendants raised him and bore him to . 


“Thirty years have I spent in the turmoil of war and have | 


192, o Ban Buo, or 


Then Ts‘ao called in four of his trusty advisers, Ts‘ao Hung, © 
‘Ch‘én Chiin. Chia Hsii and Sstima I, that they might hear his. 
last wishes. Tsʻao Hung, speaking for. the four, said, “Take 
good care of your precious self, O Prince, that you may ‘quickly 
recover.’ 

But Ts‘ao Ts‘ao said, “Thirty and more years have I gone 
up and down, and many a bold man has fallen before me. The 
only ones that remain are Sun Ch‘iian and Liu Pei. T have 
not yet slain them. Now I am very ill, and I shall never again 
stand before you; wherefore my family affairs must be settled. 
My first born fell in battle, when he was young. The Lady 
P‘ien bore four sons to me, as you know... The third, Chih, 
was my favourite, but he was vain and unreliable, fond of. 
wine and lax in morals. Therefore he is not my heir. My 
second son, Chang, is valiant, but imprudent. The fourth is- 
weakly and may not live long. My eldest, P‘ei, is steady and 
serious ; he is fit to succeed me, and I look to you to support.. 
him.” 

Ts‘ao Hung and the others wept as they heard these words, 
and they left the chamber. Then Ts‘ao Ts‘ao bade his servants 
bring some of the Tibetan incense that he burned every day, « 
and he handed out sticks to his handmaids. And he said to’ 
them, “After my death you must diligently attend to your- 


womanly labours. You can make silken shoes for sale, and BOG : 


earn your own living.” 
He also bade them go on living j in the Beare Bird Pavilion ; 
and celebrate a daily sacrifice for him, with music by the | 
singing women, and presentation of the eatables laid before | 
his tablet. ae 


Next he commanded that seventy- two sites for a tomb 


should be selected near Wuch‘éng in the Changté Prefecture, 
that no one should know his actual burying place, lest his 
remains should be digged up.. 

And when these final orders had been given he Cerei a few 
` times shed some tears and died. He was sixty-six, and passed 
away in the first month of the twenty-fifth. year (210 A.D.) .. 

A certain poet composed a song on Yehch‘énge expressing 
sympathy for Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, which is given here :— 


I stood in Yeh and saw the River Chang 

Go gliding by. Methought no common man 

E’er rose from such a place. Or he was great 

In war, a poet, or an artist skilled. 
Perchance a model minister, or son, 

Or famous for fraternal duty shown. 

The thoughts of heroes are not ours to judge, 

Nor are their actions for our eyes to see. 

A man may stand the first in merit; then 

His crimes may brand him chief of ‘criminals. 

And so his reputation’s fair and foul; 

His literary gifts may bear the mark 

Of Kemura ‘he may be a:ruler born; 


Viomancee of the Three Kingdoms 193 


Bui this is certain; he will stand above 
His fellows, herding not with common men. ‘ a 
Takes he the field, then is he bold in fight; 3 
Would he a mansion build, a palace springs. 
In all things great, his genius masters him. 
And such was Ts‘ao Ts‘ao.. He could never be 
Obedient; he a rebel was, foredoomed. 
He seized and ruled, but hungered for more power; 
‘ws, Became a prince, and still was not content. 
And yet this man of glorious career 2 
When gripped by sickness, wept as might a child. 
Full well he knew, when on the bed of death, 
That all is vanity and nothing worth. 
His latest acts were kindly. Simple gifts 
Of fragrant incense gave he to the maids. 
Ah me! $ i 
The ancients’ splendid deeds or secret thoughts 
We may not measure with our puny rule. > 
But criticise them, pedants, as ye may 
The mighty dead will smile at what you say. 


As Ts‘ao Ts‘ao breathed his last the whole of those present 
raised a great wailing and lamentation. The news was sent 
to the members of the family, the heir, Ts‘ao Pei, the Marquis 


ef Yenling, Ts‘ao Chang, the Marquis of Lintzt, T's‘ao Chih, 


and the Marquis of Hsiaohuai, Ts‘ao Hsiung. They wrapped 


_ the body in its shroud, enclosed it in a silver shell and laid it 


: _in a golden coffin, which was sent at once home to Yehchiin. 


The eldest son wept aloud at the tidings and went out with 
all his following to meet the procession and escort the body of 


_ his father into his home. The coffin was laid in a great hall 


beside the main building, and all the officials in deep mourning 


~ wailed in the hall. 


= Suddenly one stood out from the ranks of the mourners and 
said, “I would request the heir to cease lamentation for the 
dead and devote himself to the present needs of state.” 
It was Sstma Fu, and he continued, “The death of the 
prince will cause an upheaval in the empire, and it is essential 
that the heir should assume his dignity without loss of time. 
There is not mourning alone to be seen to.” 
The others replied. “The succession is settled, but the 
investiture can hardly proceed without the necessary edict. 


- That must be secured.” 


Said Ch‘én Chiao, who was President of the Board of War, 
“As the prince died away from home it may be that his 
favourite son will presume to succeed, and dangerous disputes 


will ensue.” 
He slashed off the sleeves of his robe with a sword and 


¢ shouted fiercely, “We will invest the prince forthwith, and 


4 


| “any who do not agree let him be treated as this robe.” 


. Still fear held most of the assembly. Then arrived Hua 


Hsin post haste from the capital. They wondered what his 


| sudden arrival meant. Soon he entered the hall and said, 


I 


ae a La 


194 Ban Kuo 


“The Prince of Wei is dead and the world is in commotion; 
why do you not invest his successor quickly ?” 

“We await the command,” cried they in chorus, “and also 
the princess-consort’s order concerning the heirship.” 

“I have procured the Imperial edict here,” cried he, pulling 
it out from his breast. 

They all began to congratulate him. And he read the edict. 

Hua Hsin had always been devoted to Wei, and so he drafted 
this edict and got it sealed by the Emperor Hsien almost by 
force. However, there it was; and therein Ts‘ao P‘ei was 
named as “Prince of Wei, First Minister of State and Governor 
of Ichou.” 

Ts‘ao P‘ei thereupon took his seat in the princely place and 
received the congratulations of all the officers. This was 
followed by a banquet. 

However, all was not to pass too smoothly. While the © 
banquet was in progress the news came that Ts‘ao Chang, 
with an army of ten legions, was approaching. 

In a state of consternation the new prince turned to his — 
courtiers, saying “What shall I do? This young brother of 
mine, always obstinate and determined and with no litile 
military skill,. is marching hither with an army to contest 
my inheritance.” 

“Let me go to see the marquis; I can make him desist,” 
said one of the guests. 

The others cried, “Only yourself, O Exalted One, can saves 3 
us in this peril!” ih 


Quartel *tween two sons of Ts‘ao 
Just as in the House of Shao. 


If you would know who proposed himself as envoy, read 
the next chapter. 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 


A CRUEL BROTHER; A POEM; 
AN UNDUTIFUL NEPHEW: PUNISHMENT. 


An eyes turned toward the speaker, the high officer of state 
Chia K‘uei, and the young prince commanded him to undertake 
the mission. So he went out of the city and sought to: speak 
with Ts‘ao Chang. Ts‘ ao Chang came quickly to the point. 

“Who has the ‘late prince’s seal?” asked he. ` 

Chia K‘uei replied calmly, “There is an eldest son to a house; 
and an heir-apparent to a state. Such a question from you 
is unbecoming, O Marquis.” 

The marquis held his peace, and the two proceeded ito the 


city to the gates of the palace. There Chia K‘uei suddenly 
asked him whether he came as a mourner or as a rival ° 
- claimant. 


. “I am come as a mourner; I never had any ulterior motive.” 
“That being so, why bring i in your soldiers?” 
Whereupon Ts‘ao Chang ordered his escort to retire, and 


entered the city alone. When the brothers met they fell into 


each other’s arms and wept. Then the younger brother 


yielded command of all his following, and he was directed to 
go back to Yenling and guard it. He obediently withdrew. 


` Ts‘ao P‘ei, being now firmly established, changed the name 


of the period of his rule to Yen-K‘ang, “Prolonged Repose.” 
He gave high rank to Chia Hst, Hua Hsin and Wang Lang, 


and made many promotions. To the late prince he gave the 
posthumous title of Wu Wang, “Prince of War,” and buried 
him in Kaoling. To the superintendence of the building of 


his tomb he nominated Yü Chin, but with malevolent intent. 
For when Yü Chin reached his post he found the walls of the 


rooms decorated with chalk sketches depicting the drowning 


of his army and the capture of himself by Kuan Yü. 


= Kuan Yü was looking very dignified and severe. P‘ang Tê 


was refusing to bow to the victor, while he himself was lying 


im the dust pleading for his life. 


Ts‘ao P‘ei had chosen this method of putting Yü to open 


_ shame because he had not preferred death to the dishonour 


of capture, and had sent an artist on purpose to depict the 
shameful scenes. When Yii Chin saw them, shame and rage 
alternately took possession of him till he fell ill. Soon after 
tie died. ; 


196 Daun Kuo, or 


War waged he for many a year, 
Yet fell prey to craven fear. 
None can know another’s heart, 
Drawing tigers, with bones start. 


Soon after the accession, Hua Hsin memorialised, saying, 
“The Marquis of Yenling has cut himself loose from his 
army and gone quietly to his post, but your other two brothers 
did not attend the funeral of their father. Their conduct 
should be enquired into and punished.” 

Ts‘ao P‘ei took up the suggestion and sent a commissioner 
to each. He who was sent to the younger quickly returned to ` 
_ say that the Marquis of Hsiaohuai had committed suicide rather 
than suffer for his fault. P‘ei ordered honourable burial for 
him and gave him the posthumous title of “Prince.” 

Soon after, the envoy to Lintzt returned to report that the 
marquis was: spending his time in dissipation, his especial boon 
companions being two brothers named Ting. They had been 
very rude. When the envoy had presented himself, the 
marquis had sat bolt upright, but would not say a word. Ting 
I had used insulting words. 

“The late prince intended our lord to succeed, but was turned 
therefrom by the slanderous tongues of certain among you. 
As soon as he is dead your master begins to think of punish- 
ment for his own flesh and blood.” 

The other brother said, “In intellect our lord leads the age, 
and he ought to have been heir to his father. Now, not 
only does he not succeed, but he is treated in this harsh way 
by a lot of court persons of your sort, ignorant of what genius 
means.” 

And then the marquis, in a fit of anger, had ordered his 
lictors to beat the envoy and turn him out. 

This treatment of his messenger annoyed. Ts‘ao P‘ei 
greatly, and he despatched a force under Hsü Chu to arrest 
his brother and all his immediate surroundings. When Hsii 
Chu arrived he found the marquis and all his companions 
dead drunk; so he bound them, put them into carts and sent 
them to court. He also arrested all the officers of the palace. 

Ts‘a0 P‘ei’s first order was to put to death the two brothers: 
Ting. The two brothers were not wholly base; they had a: 
reputation for learning, and many were sorry for them. 

Ts‘ao P‘ei’s mother, the Lady P‘ien, was alarmed at the 
severity: of the new rule, and the suicide of her youngest son 
wounded her deeply, When she heard that Ts‘ao Chih had 
been arrested and his comrades put to death, she left her 
palace and went to see her eldest son. As soon as he saw 
her, the prince hastened to meet her. She began to weep. 

“Your brother has always had that weakness for wine, but 
we let him go his way out of consideration for his undoubted 
ability. I hope you will not forget he is your brother and 


Nomante of the Three diingdoms Pe ay 


that I bore you both. Spare his life that I may close my eyes 
in peace when I set out for the deep springs.” ; 

“I also admire his ability, mother, and have no intention to 
hurt him. But I would reform him. Have no anxiety as to 
his fate,” 

So the mother was comforted and withdrew. The prince 
then went to a private room and bade them call his brother. 

_ Said Hua Hsin, “Surely the princess-mother has just been 
interceding for your brother; is it not so?” 

“It is so,” replied the prince. 

_ “Then let me say that he is too clever to be:content to remain 
” a humble station. If you do not remove him he will do you 
arm.” 

“I must obey my mother’s command.” 

“People say your brother simply talks in literature. I do 
not believe it myself, but he might be put to the test. If he 
bears a false reputation you can slay him; if what they say is 
wee then degrade him, lest the scholars of the land should 
babble.” 

Soon Ts‘ao Chih came, and in a state of great trepidation 
bowed low before his elder brother, confessing his fault. 

The prince addressed him, saying, “Though we are brothers, 
yet the proper relation between us of prince and minister 
must not be overlooked. Why then did you behave indecor- 
ously? While the late prince lived you made a boast of your 
literary powers, but I am disposed to think you may have made 


use of another’s pen. Now I require you to compose a poem - 


within the time taken to walk seven paces, and I will spare 
your life if you sueceed. If you fail, then I shall punish you 
with rigour.” is 

“Will you suggest a theme?” asked Chih. 

Now there was hanging in the hall a black and white sketch 
of two bulls that had been fighting at the foot of a wall, and 
one of them had just fallen dead into a:well. Ts‘ao Pei 
pointed to the sketch and said, “Take that as the subject. 
But you are forbidden to use the words ‘two bylls, one bull, 
fighting, wall’s foot, falling, well and dead.’ ” 

Ts‘ao Chih took seven paces and then recited this poem :— 


Two butcher’s victims lowing walked along, 
Each head bore curving bones, a sturdy pair, 
They met just by a hillock, both were strong, 
Each would avoid a pit new digged there. 
They fought unequal battle, for at length 
One lay below a gory mass, inert. 
Twas not that they were of unequal strength— 
Though wrathful both, one did not strength exert. 


This exhibition of skill amazed the prince and the whole 
court. Ts‘ao P‘ei thought he would use another test, so he 
bade his brother improvise on the theme of their fraternal 


198 San Ruo, or 


relationship, the words “brotherhood” or “brother” being 
barred. Without seeming to reflect, Ts‘ao Chih rattled off 
this rhyme :— 
They were boiling beans on a beanstalk fire; 
Came a plaintive voice from the pot, ’ 
“O why, since we sprang from the selfsame root, 
Should you kill me with anger hot?” 

The allusion in these verses to the cruel treatment of one 
member of a family by another was not lost upon Ts‘ao P*ei, 
and he dropped a few silent tears. 

The mother of both men came out at this moment from 
her abiding place and said, “Should the elder brother thus 


oppress the younger?” 


The prince jumped from his seat, saying, ““My mother, the 
laws of the state cannot be nullified.” 

Ts‘ao Chih was degraded to the rank of “Marquis of 
Anhsiang.”” He accepted the decision without a murmur and 
at once left his brother’s court. 

Ts‘ao P‘ei’s accession was the signal for a set of new laws 
and new commands. His behaviour toward the Emperor 
was more intemperate than his father’s had ever been. 

The stories of his harshness reached Ch‘éngtu and almost 
frightened Liu Pei, who summoned his counsellors to discuss 
what he should do. 

Said he, “Since the death of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and the accession 
of his son the position of the Emperor has changed for the | 


‘worse. Sun Ch‘itian acknowledges the lordship of Wei, and its - 


influence is becoming too great. I am- disposed to destroy 
Sun Ch‘iian in revenge for the death of my brother. That 
done, I will proceed to the capital and its district and purge - 
the whole land of rebellion. What think you?” 

Then Liao Hua stood out from the ranks of officers and 
threw himself upon the earth, saying with tears, “Liu Fêng 
and Mêng Ta were the true cause of the death of your brother 
and his adopted son; both these renegades deserve death.” 

Yiian-té was of the same opinion and was going to send and 
arrest them forthwith, but here K‘ung-ming intervened and 
gave wiser advice. 

“That is not the way; go slowly or you may stir up strife. 
Promote these two and separate them. After that you may 
arrest.” 

The prince saw the prudence of this procedure and stayed 
his hand. He raised Liu Fêng to the Prefectship of Mienchu, — 
and so separated the two delinquents. 

Now P‘éng Yang and Méng Ta were old friends. ` Hearing 
what was afoot, the former hastened home and wrote warning - 
his friend. The letter was confided to a trusty messenger to 
bear to Meng Ta. The messenger was caught as he went out - 
of the city and carried before Ma Ch‘ao, who thus got wind of 


Romance of the Three kingdoms 19 


_ the business. He then went to P‘éng’s house, where, nothing 
_ being suspected, he was received kindly and wine was brought 
~ in. The two drank for some time. When Ma Ch‘ao thought 
his host: sufficiently off his guard, he said, “The Prince of 
= Hanchung used to look on you with great favour; why does 
_ he do so no longer?” 

The host began to rave against his ria Ni 

“The obstinate old leather-belly! But I wi find some 
way to pay him out.” 

In order to see to what lengths he would go, Ma Ch‘ao led 
him on, saying, “Truth to tell, I have long hated the man too.” 

“Then you join Méng Ta and attck, while I will win over 
the Hsich‘uan men. That will make it easy enough,” said 
P‘éng Yang. 

“What you propose is very feasible, but we will talk it over 
again tomorrow,” said Ma Ch‘ao, and took leave. 

Taking with him the captured man and the letter he carried, 
he then proceeded to see the prince, to whom he related the 
whole story. Ytian-te was very angry and at once had the 

intended traitor arrested and put in prison, where he was 
examined under torture to get at full details. 

While P‘éng Yang lay in prison, bitterly but vainly oat: 


. ant, Yüan-tê consulted his adviser. 


“That fellow P‘êng meant to turn traitor: what shall I do 


with him?’ 


“The fellow is something of a scholar, but irresponsible,” 


ny replied K‘ung-ming. “He is too dangerous to be left alive.” 


Thereupon orders were given that he should be put to death 


~ ingaol. The news that he had been made away with frighten- 


ed his sympathiser and friend, Méng Ta, and put him in a 
quandary. What had he better do? On the top of this, Liu 
‘Féng’s promotion and transfer to Mienchu arrived, and 
frightened’ him still more. So he sought advice from two 
friends, brothers, who lived in Shangyung. 

“My friend Fa Chéng and I did much for the prince. But 
now Fa is dead and I am forgotten. More than that, he wishes 
to put me to death. What can I do?’ said Méng. 

Shén Tan, one of the two, replied, “I think I can find a plan 
that will secure your safety.” 

“What is it?” asked Méng Ta, feeling happier. 

“Desertion. My brother I and Í have long desired to go 
over to Wei.. You just write the prince a memorial resigning 
your service and betake yourself to the Prince of Wei, who will 
certainly employ you in some honourable way. Then we two 
will follow.” 

Mêng Ta saw that this was his best course, so he wrote a 
‘memorandum, which he gave to the messenger who had 
- brought the recent despatches to take back with him. That 
j night he left his post and went to Wei. 


200 San kuo, or 


The messenger returned to Ch'êngtu, handed in Mêng Ta’s i 


memorial and told the story of his desertion. The king was 
angry. He tore open the letter and read :— ` 
“In the humble opinion of thy servant, O Prince, you have 


set out to accomplish a task comparable with that of I Yin - 
and Lu Shang, and to walk in the meritorious footsteps of | 


Huan Kung and Wén Kung. When the great design was 
rough-hewn ,you had the support of Wu and Ch‘u, wherefore 
many men of ability incontinently joined you. Since I 
entered your service I have committed many faults; and if I 
recognise them, how much more do you see them! Now, 


O Prince, you are surrounded by famous men, while I, useless 


as a helper at home and inept as a leader’ abroad, should be 
shamed were I to take a place among them. 

“Tt is well known that when Fan Li saw certain sueniinlities 
he went sailing on the lakes, and Chiu Fan acknowledged his 
faults and stayed by the river. Inasmuch as one cannot take 
means of safeguarding one’s self at the critical and dangerous 
moment, I desire—as is my duty—to go away as I came, 
untainted. Moreover, I am, stupid and without use or merit, 
merely born in these days as the sport of circumstances. In 
the days of old, Shén Shéng, though perfectly filial, incurred 


the suspicions of his father and died; Tzu-hsii (Wu Yüan),- 


though perfectly loyal, was put to death. Mêng T‘ien, though — z 
he extended the borders, suffered the extreme penalty; and © 
Yueh I, though he destroyed the might of Ch‘i, was the victim — 


of calumny. Whenever I have read of these men I have been: 


moved to tears, and now I am in like case and the more i 


mortified. Lately Chingchou was overwhelmed and many 
officers of rank failed in their duty, not one in a hundred 
behaving as he should. Only I remained in Fangling and 
Shangyung and sought service abroad. Now I desire you, O 


Prince, graciously to understand, to sympathise with thy 


servant and to condone the step he is about to take.. Really 
I am but a mean man, incapable of great deeds. I know what 
I am doing, and I dare to say it is no fault. They say that 
dissolution of bonds should not occasion recrimination and the 
dismissed servant should take leave without heartburnings. 


I have taken your orders many times, and now, O Prince, — 


you must act yourself. I write this with extreme trepida- 
tion.” x4 


But the reading gave rise i great anger in the breast of the 


prince. 7 


“The stupid fellow!’’ said he. “He turns traitor and dares i 


to insult me by sending a letter of farewell.” 

He was just giving orders to send a force to seize the 
deserter, when K‘ung-ming interposed, saying, “You had better 
send Liu Féng to capture him and let the two tigers worry each 


other to weakness. Whether Liu Féng succeeds or rens he will- 


AMN WE A in 
is) 
N T Ba 


eee! 
pees: 


Romance of the Three ingdoms ie, 


have to come to the capital, and you can kill him. Thus will 
you cut off two evils.” 

-Ytian-té took his advice. Orders were sent to Mienchu, and 
_ Liu Féng obediently led out his men. | 

Now Méng Ta arrived when Ts‘an P‘ei was holding a great 
council. When the attendants told him that Méng Ta of Shu 
had come, Ts‘ao P‘ei summoned him to enter and said to him, 
“Is not this an insincere surrender?” 

Méng Ta replied, “I was in fear of death for not having 
relieved Kuan Yü. That is my only reason for coming.” 

However, Ts‘ao P‘ei did not trust him. When they reported 
that Liu Féng was coming to arrest him, with a large army, 
and had attacked Hsiangyang and was challenging Méng Ta to 
battle, Ts‘ao P‘ei said, “You seem to be true. Go then to’ 
Hsiangyang and take Liu Féng. If you bring me his head I 
shall no longer doubt.” / & 

Méng Ta replied, “I will convince him by argument; no 
soldiers will be needed. I will bring him to surrender too.” 

So Méng Ta was given rank and honours and sent to guard 
Hsiangyang. Now there were two generals there already, 
Hsiahou Shang and Hsii Huang engaged in reducing the 
surrounding district. Méng Ta arrived, met his two col- 
leagues and was told that Liu Féng was fifty li from the city. 
Whereupon he wrote him a letter urging him to surrender. 
` But Liu Feng was in no mood to surrender; instead he tore up 
the letter and put the messenger to death. 

“The renegade has already made me offend against my duty 
to my uncle, and now would sever me from my father so that 
I shall be reproached as disloyal and unfilial,’ said Liu Feng. 

Méng Ta went out with his army to give battle. Liu Feng 
rode to the front, pointed with his sword at his opponent and 
railed against him. 

“Death is very near you,” replied Méng Ta, “yet you con- 
tinue blindly in the way of foolishness and will not under- 
stand.” 7 

Liu Féng rode out flourishing his sword. He engaged Meng 
Ta, who ran away before the conflict had well begun. Liu 
Féng pursued hotly to a long distance. Then he fell into an 
ambush and found himself attacked on two sides. Also Méng 
Ta returned to the attack. Liu Feng was forced to fly. He 
made straight for Shangyung, pursued all the way. When he 
reached the city and hailed the gate he was met by a volley 
of arrows. ; 

“I have surrendered to Wei,” cried Shén Tan from the city 
tower. 

It was impossible to attack the city, as the army of Wei was 
. close behind, and having no resting place he set off for Fang- 
= jing. He arrived there to find the banners of Wei set out 

along the walls. Then he saw Shén I wave a signal from the 


? 


202 | San kuo 


tower, and at once there appeared from the shelter of the wall — 
a body of men led by Hsii Huang. ; 

Then Liu Féng made for home. But he was pursued, and- 
only a handful of his men remained to him when he regained 
Ch‘éngtu 

Seeking an interview with his adopted fathet, he Jaaa 
but scant sympathy, for in reponse to his petition, made 
prostrate and weeping, Yüan-tê said, “Shameful son! How 
are you come to see me at all?” 

“My uncles mishap was not due to my refusal of help, þut 
because Méng Ta thwarted me.’ 

“You eat as a man, you dress as a man; but you have no 
more the instincts of a man than an image of clay or wood. 
What mean you by saying another wretch thwarted you?” 

Yiian-té bade his executioners expel him and put him to 
death. But he felt some compunction later when he heard 
of the treatment meted out to the messenger who had brought 
Méng Ta’s letter inviting him to become a traitor. And he 
gave way to grief for the death of his brother until he fell 
ill. So no military movements were made. 

It may be stated here that after he had succeeded to the 
princedom, Ts‘ao P‘ei raised all his officers to high rank and 
had an army prepared of thirty legions, and manceuvred them 
over the southern districts and made great feasts. And the 
aged villagers lined the roads offering gifts of wine, just as 
when the Founder of the Hans returned home to Pei. 

When it was announced that the faithful warrior Hsiahou 
Tun was near death, Ts‘ao P‘’ei hastened back to Yeh, but 
arrived too late to see him. He put on mourning for the 
great leader and instituted magnificent funeral ceremonies. 

In the late summer of this same year it was reported that 
a phoenix had been seen to bow at Shihihsien and a ch’i-ling 
had appeared at Lintzt, while a yellow dragon was observed 
in Yeh. Whereupon certain high officers discussed these 
appearances, and putting them all together concluded that 
they presaged that Wei was about to supplant Han and the 
altar of abdication should be set up. Presently a deputation 
of two score officers went into the palace and proposed to the 
Emperor Hsien that he should abdicate and yield to the Prince 
of Wei. 


It is time to-set up the throne of Wei, 
And steal the land from the Hans. 


The next chapter will record the Emperor’s reply.. 


CHAPTER LXXX. 


DEPOSITION OF THE EMPEROR; 
THE PRINCE OF HAN CHUNG CLAIMS TO BE THE TRUE 


SUCCESSOR. 


Ha Hsin was the spokesman of the deputation of officers 
that went into the palace, and he spake thus: “Since the 
inauguration of the Prince of Wei virtue has spread to the four 
corners of the empire and humanity has permeated all the 
- earth to a degree unexcelled in all the ages, even in the days 
of the ancient rulers T‘ang and Yü. We, your servants, have 


taken account of these things and have reached the conclusion | 
that the race of Han is worn out, wherefore we trust Your 


Majesty, in imitation of the great prototypes Yao and Shun, 
will yield the empire to a more able guardian and high priest 
of the sacrifices in the person of the Prince of Wei, thereby 


pleasing Heaven and satisfying the hearts of men, and | i i 
enabling Your Majesty to enjoy the happiness of freedom and . 


repose from the exacting duties of the chief ruler. The 
happiness of your ancestors and of humanity at large would 
thereby be enhanced. Having thor oughly debated this matter, 
we have come to lay it before you.’ 

The Emperor listened in amazement, and to a time could 


not reply. Then, looking at the assembly, he said sadly, 


“How can I abandon my empire for the sake of repose; the 
empire won by my Great Ancestor, its Founder, when he 
slew the Snake and restored Right, and consolidated when he 
reduced Ts‘in and overwhelmed Ch‘u; the empire which has 
been handed down for four centuries? Though I possess not 
brilliant talents, yet I have done no wrong. Go back and 
debate this again in a just and moderate spirit.” 

Then Hua Hsin led forward Li Fu and Hsü Chih nearer the 

throne, saying, “If Your Majesty thinks we may be mistaken, 
pray ask these two, who will explain.” 
aero aks Mad ES cae “Since the Prince of Wei has taken his seat 
the Ch’i-ling has descended, the Pheenix has appeared, a yellow 
Dragon has come forth, the Grain of Felicity has flourished 
and Sweet Dew has watered the earth. All these things 
augur that Heaven decrees a change and Wei must replace 
Han.” 

Hsü Chih continued, “The astrologers, watching the aspect 
of the skies at night, have seen the blazing light of the star 


2ga San fiuo, or 


of Han gradually fade away and Your Majesty’s own star 
become dim. On the other hand, the aspect of the sky and 
the attitude of the earth have been wholly in favour of Wei 
to a degree hard to state in words. Moreover, the lots have 
_ been cast and they gave the word ‘devil’ at the side of ‘sent,’ 
and there must be an inroad upon Han. Another lot, ‘words 
and east of noon,’ gave two words which, joined, compose 
Hsti. A third gave ‘two suns, one on the other,’ which is 
chang. These signs are unmistakeable. for when put together 
the whole reads, ‘Wei at Hsitichang is to receive the abdication 
of Han.’ If you consider, Your Majesty must admit this.” 

“All ‘empty words and madness, this: talk of auguries and 
lots! Is it reasonable that I should suddenly abandon the 
great heritage for such nonsense?” 

Then Wang Lang said, “Wax and wane has been the law 
of all things from the beginning; every period of glory is 
followed by one of obscurity. Has‘any rule endured for ever 
or any House never failed? The Rule of Han, handed down 
through four centuries to Yourself, has lost its vigour and 


the time has come to yield. Retirement may not be delayed. 


or confusion will ensue.’ 

The Emperor wept aloud and retired to his private chamber, 
-while the officers left the hall laughing. 

Next morning they assembled in the court, but the Empero 
did not appear. So they sent the palace officers to request his 
‘presence. Still he feared to show himself. The Empress 
Ts‘ao asked him why he did not hold the court as usual, 
especially when he was requested to go out. 

“Because your brother wishes to depose me and become 
Emperor himself. He has set the whole host of officers 
against me to force me to abdicate, and I will not expose 
myself to this compulsion.” 

“But what can have induced my brother to do such a 
dreadfully rebellious thing?” said she. 
= Just as she spoke, ‘Ts‘ao Hung and Ts‘ao Hsiu, both armed, 
forced their way into the inner apartments and requested 
His Majesty to come to the Hall of Audience. 

The Empress broke out into abuse. ‘So you are two of 
the disorderly rebels who, for the sake of your own ends, have 
conspired to upset all the good service of my father. Though 
he overshadowed the whole land, yet he never dared to aspire 
to the sacred Throne. But my brother, who has only just 
succeeded him, sets no bounds to his ambition and temerity 
and would usurp the Throne. Heaven will surely cut off his 
offspring !” 

She wept bitterly as she went away, and the attendants 
sobbed and wept too. But Ts‘ao Hsiu and Ts‘ao Hung still 
urged the Emperor to go to the Hall of Audience, and at last 
he had to yield. There Hua Hsin took up the question again. 


b 


Fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 205. 


“Your Majesty should act as was advised yesterday and ` 


so avoid ‘any misfortune.” fs 

The Emperor sobbed, “All of you have eaten of the bounty 
of Han for years, and among you are many whose fathers 
and grandfathers were conspicuous for merit. How can you 
bring yourselves to act thus improperly toward me?” 

“If Your Majesty refuses to follow advice I fear that there 
will soon be troubie in the family. Really we are not disloyal.” 

“Who would dare to murder me?” cried the Emperor. 

“Everyone knows that Your Majesty lacks the happy 
attributes of, a successful ruler and that is why there is so 
much confusion in the country. If it was not for the presence 
of the Prince of Wei in your court many a man would murder 
you. Your Majesty has never yet learned how to treat men; 
is your sole desire to set men against you?” 

The Emperor, alarmed at the violence of his language, shook 
out his sleeves and rose to go away. Then Wang Lang 
glanced at Hua Hsin, who rushed forward and seized the 
Emperor by the sleevé. 

“Is it consent or not?” cried he angrily. “One word!” 

The Emperor was dumb with terror. : 

“Where is the Keeper of the Seal?” shouted Ts‘ao Hung and 
` Ts‘ao Hsiu, drawing their swords. 

“The Keeper of the Seal is here,” said Tsu Pi, stepping 
calmly to the front. . 

They tried to force the seal from him, but he said it belonged 
to the Emperor and he would not yield it. Ts‘ao Hung called 
up the executioners and told them to behead him, which they 
did. He abused the ruffians to the last breath. 

Dethroned by wicked traitors was the ruling House of Han, 
They falsely claimed as precedent the deeds of Yü and T‘ang. 
The crowd of officers at court were all on Ts‘ao P‘ei’s side 
Save one, the Keeper of the Seal, and loyally he died. 

The Emperor was in a state of abject terror, and when he 

saw the whole court filling up with armed men, all the soldiers 
of Wei and so enemies, he burst into tears. 

© “Yes; L will give up the throne to the prince, if haply I may 

be spared to live out the few years Heaven has assigned me,” 

wailed he. 

“The prince will always take care of Your Majesty,” said 
Chia Hsü. “It would be as well to prepare the abdication 

manifesto quickly so as to preserve tranquillity.” 
Such a hint could not be missed, and Ch‘en Chtin was 
directed to draft the document. As soon as it was finished, 
Hua Hsin followed by a host of officers, took it off to the palace 
and presented it, with the seal, in the name of the Emperor. 
Very joyfully, Ts‘ao P‘ei read this writing :— 

“During the whole of my thirty-two years of reign the land 
has been in a state of turmoil, but the spirits of my ancestors 


»X 
B26 


206 San tio, or 


` have preserved me in the midst of danger. Now from the 
signs of the heavens and the hearts of the people I see that the’ 


virtue of the Hans is exhausted and happy fortune has 
devolved upon the House of Wei, as may be seen from the 
success in war enjoyed by the late prince and the resplen- 
dent virtue of the present prince, which answers to the 
times. 

“By all noble principles the empire is no Saale possession, 
but a public trust. Wherefore the Great Yao, to his eternal 
glory, passed over his own son. How I admire this deed! 
Now in imitation thereof I have resolved to abdicate in favour 
of my Prime Minister, the Prince of Wei, who will not, I hope, 
disappoint my wishes.” : 

Ts‘ao P‘ei heard this and was going to accept it as final. 
But Sstma I said no. Although the declaration and the sea! 
had been sent, yet decorum demanded refusal at first so as to 
silence men’s criticism. Then Wang Lang drafted a memorial 
modestly declining the proposal of succession on the ground 
of unfitness and asking that some other*be sought. When this 
reached the Emperor he was much perturbed ‘and asked what — 
was to be done next. 

Replied Hua Hsin, “When his father was offered a prince- 
dom he declined thrice; but he finally accepted. Wherefore ` 
Your Majesty should renew the offer. The prince will end - 
by acceptance.” 

There was no help for it, and so Huan K‘ai was bidden to- 
draft another declaration of offer, which was sent by the hand 


vee Wai iwi ee I 


fi 


of the officer of the Dynastic Temple, Enans Yin, PEAR 


with the emblems and the seal. 

This new declaration read thus :— 

“To the Prince of Wei. You have sent your modest Fefubat. 
of Our offer to abdicate. But I have long since seen that the 
virtue of Han is passing and I could only rely upon the late 
prince, your father, who virtuously undertook the great task 
of removing the evil oppressors and purging the land. Now 
his son P‘ei has succeeded. His perfect virtue is resplendent, 


his fame universal and his benevolence is wafted to all parts. 


The divine choice rests upon him. In the days of old, Shun, 
after his twenty labours, would abdicate, and did so in favour 
of Yii the Great, who possessed merit. The House of Han 
succeeded in the course of ages to the work of Yao and now 
passes on the sacred trust, to promote the repose of the Earth — 
and manifest the command of Heaven. 

“By the hand of the Censor Chang Yin this is sent ae the 
emblems: and the seal.” 


Greatly rejoicing, Ts‘ao P‘ei received this. But he said to — 


Chia Hsii, “Although I have received two such declarations, 
yet I fear that I may not escape being branded as a usurper 
by posterity.” 


yaw 
Carre 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 207 


“That is easily arranged,” replied Chia Hsu. “Direct 


Chang Yin to take the seal back again and tell Hua Hsin to. 


- cause the Emperor to set up a Terrace of Abdication and 

select an auspicious day for the ceremony. Then assemble 
all the officers at the terrace and cause the Emperor to offer 
the seal with his own hands and surrender the empire to you. 
Thus can you dissipate all doubts and prevent any cavillings.” 


So the seal was once more rejected with a memorial to say 
so. Chang Yin returned and the Emperor enquired of the 


courtiers how he was to understand this act. Then Hua Hsin 
said, “Your Majesty can set up a Terrace of Abdication and 


assemble nobles, officers and common people to witness the act- 


of abdicatiou. Thereafter the descendants of your House 
shall receive favour at the hands of Wei.” 


The Emperor consented and sent officers to select a site at | | 


Fanyang. And there they built a terrace of three storeys, 
and they chose the day keng-wu of the tenth month for the 
act of abdication. On the appointed day the Emperor Hsien 


requested Ts‘ao P‘ei to ascend the terrace and receive his - 


abdication. At the foot of the terrace stood the officials, 
more than four hundred, and the Imperial Guards and the 


Tiger Guards, and soldiers to the number of thirty legions. — 


Thereupon the Emperor presented the seal, which Ts‘ao P‘ei 
received into his hands. Then all those about the terrace 


AC) knelt to listen to the reading of the manifesto. 


“To the Prince of Wei. In days of old, Yao yielded the 
= empire to Shun, and Shun in turn gave it to Yü. The will of 
Heaven does not follow the way of mortals, but seeks the 
virtuous. The rule of Han has lost its virility and the times 
are out of joint. When my turn came to rule, great disorder 
arose, and evils stalked abroad till the empire was in danger 
of subversion. I trusted to the military genius of the late 
Prince of Wei to restore order and purge away the evil, 
whereby to ensure tranquillity to my House. What could my 
single hand do to correct this and ensure peace for my Nine 
Domains? - 

“Fhe present prince has succeeded to his father; he is also 
resplendent in virtue, capable as Wên and Wu of the great 
task, brilliant in the glory of his father. The spirit of empire 
is upon him; gods and men declare his worth. To him be the 
bright reward, and let him accept this mandate. For all say 
his capabilities fit him to stand beside Shun. 

“As did my great predecessor, I respectfully retire that you 
may be set up. The revolution of Heaven brings the glory 
upon your person, and you will accept the high office and 
eomfort all men by reverently obeying the decree of Heaven.” 

The reading finished, the Prince of Wei, Ts‘ao P‘ei, proceeded 
to the terrace and ascended to the place of the Emperor. 
Then Chia, Hsii, at the head of the great concourse of officers. 


208 San Kuo, or 


came to the foot of the terrace, and a court was held. The 
_ year of reign was changed to the style Huang-Ch‘u and the 
government became that of Ta Wei. An edict was then 
published proclaiming a general amnesty, and the title of 
“Founder of the Dynasty” was conferred upon the late Prince 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. 

Then said Hua Hsin, “As heaven has but one sun, so the 
people can have but one ruler. The Hans have abdicated, 
and it is fitting that they withdraw to a distance. I pray for 
an edict naming the place of residence of the Liu family.” 

Taking the late Emperor by the arm, he led him forward 
and made him kneel below the terrace to hear the command: 
Then the new Emperor conferred upon him the title of “Duke 
of Shanyang,”’ bidding him. depart forthwith. Thereupon 
Hua Hsin drew his sword and in a harsh voice said, “It is an 
old rule that the setting up of one Emperor means the degrad- 
ation of another. Now, through the gracious kindness of His 


Majesty you are spared personal injury and created a duke.. 


Proceed at once and return not to court without express 
command.” 

The late Emperor controlled his emotion, thanked the 
Emperor for his clemency and left. But those who saw the 
departure could not help a feeling of pity for him. 

Said Ts‘ao P‘ei to his courtiers, “I understand the relation 
of Shun and Yü.” 


Then they all shouted “Wan-suz; O Ruler, may oe life be « 


eternal.” 


The ruling policy of Han had failed them, 
Dangers pressed in upon the House, 

And the land they had held so long 

Passed from them for ever. 

Little thought he, who then snatched their sceptre, 
That the precedent he then claimed 

Would be used in due time by another 

To justify the destruction of his own House. 


The officials then requested Ts’ao P‘ei to make a solemn 


declaration to Heaven and Earth, which he did with humble 


obeisance. 
But at this moment a sudden storm burst, whirling up the 


dust and rolling along stones till no man could see the face of- 


. his neighbour. All the lights on the terrace were extin- 


guished. The newly enthroned Emperor was terrified and | 


fell prostrate. He was borne away unconscious. When he 
revived he was assisted into the palace, but for many days he 
was too ill to hold a court. 

When he had somewhat recovered, he met his courtiers ani 


received their felicitations. He rewarded Hua Hsin, who had © 


taken so active and prominent a part in the late scenes, with 


the post of Minister of Instruction, and Wang Lang with that | 


1 


“Romance of the Three Ringoomg 209 


_ of Minister of Works. All the officers were advanced in rank. 
- But as his recovery was slow, he began to think there was too 
much witchcraft about the palace at Hstich‘ang and left it for 
_ Loyang, where he erected a large palace. REPRE: 
The tale of these doings reached Ch‘éngtu and caused great 


grief to the Prince of Hanchung, for it was told him the late ` 


Emperor had been put to death. He issued an order for 
_ mourning to be worn and instituted sacrifices, and he conferred 
„the posthumous title of Hsiao-mén on the late Emperor. This 
_ worry brought on an illness, so that he could not transact the 
business of the court, which was left in the hands of K‘ung- 
ming. ° j 
Then K‘ung-ming and some of his colleagues took counsel 
one with another, saying, “The empire cannot be one single 
day without its ruler, wherefore we desire that our prince 
should be honoured witk. the title of ‘Emperor.’ ” 
-~ Chiao Chou said, “There have been auspicious indications. 
A yellow vapour has been seen in the northwest rising to the 
` clouds, and the Emperor’s star has greatly increased in splen- 
dour. These signs mean that our prince is to become Emperor 
in succession to the House of Han. There can be no doubt.’ 
- Whereupon K‘ung-ming and Hsii Ching, at the head of a 
large number of officers, presented a memorial requesting the 
prince to assume the title of “Emperor.” But he objected. 
< “O Nobles, do you desire to set my feet in the way of 
‘disloyalty and wrong-doing?” a l 
— “Not so,” said K‘ung-ming. “But Ts‘ao P‘ei has usurped the 
. Throne, while you are a scion of the House. It is right and 
proper that you succeed and prolong the line.” 
-` But the prince suddenly showed anger, saying, “Can I 
imitate the deeds of such a rebel?” | 
- He rose and left the chamber, going to his own apartments. 
~ So the officials dispersed. But three days later K‘ung-ming 
- again led a deputation to the court, and they requested that 
_ the prince should come fort aud hear them. He came, and 
they all prostrated themselves. 


Hsii Ching spoke. “The late Emperor of the Hans has been- — 


slain by Ts‘ao P‘ei. You, O Prince, will fail both in loyalty 
and rectitude if you do not assume the succession and destroy 
. the wrong-doers. The whole empire requests you to rule that 
you may avenge the death of the late Emperor, and the people 
will be disappointed if you do not accede to their wishes.” 
: The prince replied, “Although I am descended from the 
grandson of an emperor I have not been of the least advantage, 
and if I assumed the title of ‘Emperor,’ how would that act 
differ from usurpation ?” fen ne s 
K‘ung-ming pleaded with him again and again, but the 
_ prince remained obdurate. Then K‘ung-ming bethought that 
where argument failed a ruse might succeed. So having 


reel 


210 Ban dua, or 


arranged the parts his several colleagues were to play, he 

pleaded illness and remained at home. Presently it was told 

the prince that his adviser’s condition was becoming serious, 

wherefore he went to-see him as he lay on his couch. 

$ “What illness affects you, my Commander-in- chief? ou asked 
aj : 


“My heart is sad like unto punning: a I shall soon die.” 

“What is it that causes you such grief?’ 

But K‘ung-ming did not reply. And when the tiene was. 
repeated again and again he said nothing, but just lay with — 
his eyes closed as if he was too ill to speak. The prince, 
however, pressed him to reply, and then with a deep sigh he 
said, “Great Prince, from the day I left my humble cottage to 
follow you you have always listened to my words and accepted 
my advice, and now this western district, the whole of the 
Two Ch’uan is yours just as I said it would be. But this 
usurpation of Ts‘ao P‘ei means the annihilation of the Hans ` 
and the cessation of their sacrifices, wherefore I and my 
colleagues desired you to become Emperor in order to crush 
this upstart Wei and restore the Lius. We all worked for this 


end, never thinking that you would refuse so obstinately to - 
accede to our wishes. Now the officers are all annoyed, and 


they will drift away before very long. If you are left alone’ 2 


and Wu and Wei come to attack, it will be difficult for, you to. — 
hold on to what you have. Do you not think this sufficient ae 


reason for me to feel grieved?” 


“Unless I refused, the whole land would blame me; and I am ; i 


afraid,” replied the prince. SE 
Quoting the Holy One, K‘ung-ming replied, “ ‘If names be 
not correct, language is ‘not in accordance with the truth of | 
things.’ In other words, if one be not really straight, people 
will not speak of one favourably. O Prince, you are straight 


and people speak of you favourably. What more is there to ~ 


say? You know when Heaven plc and you refuse, you are — 
certainly to blame.” 

“When you have recovered it shall be done,” said the 
prince. ; 

Up leapt P from his bed, tapped at the screen in 
front of a doorway and in rushed a number of high officers, 
who prostrated themselves, crying, “So you have consented, 
O Prince! Then choose the day for the ceremony.’ 

They were all the most -trusted of his court: Hsti Ching, 
the Grand Tutor; Mi Chu the General; Shang Chu, Marauis 


of Ch‘ingi; Liu Pao, Marquis of Yangch' tian; Chao Tsu, the ~ : 


General; and many others. The prince was greatly startled, ` 
and again said they were committing him to doing what was 
wrong. Ra 
But K‘ung-ming said, “Since consent has. been given, let as 
terrace be bagi and a day chosen for the m ceremony.” : 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 211 


Phe prince was escorted back to his palace, and officers were - 
told off to see to the building of the terrace near Ch‘éngtu, — 


south of Wutan. And when all was ready a great concourse 


~ of officers solemnly escorted the prince, seated in a carriage 


of the imperial pattern, to the ground prepared, and he went 
up to the altar and performed the appointed sacrifice. 

This done, the solemn announcement was read in a loud 
voice :— 

“On this twefth day of the fourth month of the year of 
‘Established Tranquillity’ period, Pei, the Emperor, makes 
this solemn announcement to Heaven and Earth. The 
Dynasty of Han has possessed the empire for years without 


end. Formerly Wang Mang rebelled against his sovereign, 


and the Emperor Kuang-Wu rose in his wrath and put him 
to death, thus restoring the prerogatives of the great sacrifices 
to him who rightly exercised them. Lately Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, 
powerful and cruel, slew the Empress, and his crimes cry 
aloud to Heaven for vengeance. His son, Ts‘ao P‘ei, carrying 
evils into every quarter, then, seized the sceptre. My subor- 
dinates, regarding the dynasty as having been overthrown, 


4 think it fitting that I, Pei, would continue the line. As 


successor to my two warrior ancestors, Kao-Tsu and Kuang- 


- Wu, I will punish as Heaven decrees. Fearing lest my virtue 


be inadequate to the Imperial Throne, I consulted the voices of 


` the people, and all, even the most distant, have said that the 


mandate of Heaven may not be disobeyed and the great task 


= of my ancestors. may not continue inthe hands of another; 


the land must have a lord and they aver the cynosure of all 
eyes is myself. Now I, respecting the mandate of Heaven and 
fearing lest the great achievements of Kao-Tsu and Kuang-Wu 
may be overthrown, have reverently selected this auspicious 
day to ascend the altar, sacrifice and announce my assumption 
of the imperial seal in order to comfort all the people, rejoice 
the ancestors of the Dynastic House and bring eternal 
tranquillity to’all the domains.” 

When the reading was ended,-and the sacrifice and the 


prayer, K‘ung-ming, in the name of all those assembled, 
presented the imperial seal. ‘The prince received it in both 
hands, laid it upon the altar and again declined acceptance, — 

saying, “I, Pei, am unfitted; I pray that another, more able, 


may be chosen.” s AK 
But K‘ung-ming said, “Our lord has settled the empire, and 


his merits are manifest to the whole world. Moreover, he is 
of the Dynastic Family and it is fitting that he succeed. Now 
` that the great announcement has been made such self-abnega- — 


tion is impossible.” 


So all the officers shouted, “Eternal life to the Emperor!” 


‘and did obeisance. And then the style of the reign was 


announced to be Wu-Yiian. 


See | San Kuo 


The Lady Wu was declared Empress-Consort and the eldest — 


son, Ch‘an, was declared Heir-Apparent. The second son was 


made Prince of Lu and the third, Prince of Liang. Chuko i 


Liang became Prime Minister, and Hsii Ching, Minister of 
Instruction. Many others were promoted, and a general 
amnesty was proclaimed, so that there was great rejoicing 
throughout all the length and breadth of the Two Ch‘uan. 

Next day the first court was held, and after the ceremonial 
prostrations, and when they were all arranged in due order, 
the First Ruler made a pronouncement. 


“In the Peach Garden I and my brothers Kuan and Chang — 


pledged ourselves to live and die together. Unhappily .my 
brother Yiin-chang came to his end at the hands of Sun Ch‘tian 
of Wu, and I must avenge him lest I fail to fulfil the oath. 
Therefore will I devote the whole force of my kingdom to the 
destruction of Wu and the capture of its rebellious chief, 
whereby to wipe away my reproach.” 

But just as he closed this oration an officer inne himself 
down at the foot of the throne, crying, “It may not be so.’ 

All eyes turned to this man; he was Chao Yiin. 


“Dire vengeance will I wreak!” so cried the King, 
His minister replied, “Do no such thing.” 


What arguments were used will appear in the next chapter. — 


ey 
Vy Pans 

See ot ee 
nda eee 


y AR 
Y 
EAR 


LinS ee ee ee 


CHAPTER LXXXI. 


CHANG FEI Is ASSASSINATED ; 
THE FIRST RULER GOES TO WAR. 
Cra? Yün was opposed to the attempt to fight Wu, and spoke 


against the plan. 
“The real rebel was not Sun Chiian, but Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao; and 


now it is his son who has usurped the Imperial Throne and 


called forth the anger of gods and men. You should first 
aim at the inside by camping on the River Wei, from which to 


attack the rebel. After that the right-thinking sort on the - 


east of the Passes will do their utmost to help you. If you 
leave Wei out of consideration in order to fight Wu, your 
military. force will be engaged, and could you disengage it 
quickly in case of necessity? It is worth reflection.” 

The First Ruler replied, “Sun Ch‘iian slew my „brother. 


Many of my officers hate him so that they could eat ‘his flesh - 
` with gusto and devour his relatives, whereby I should have 
= my vengeance. Why, Noble Sir, do you obstruct me?” 

= “Because the enmity against Ts‘ao is a public matter; . 
vengeance for the manner of your brother’ s end is privare 


The empire should be placed first.” - 
“What care I for myriads of li of territory as long as my 


brother is unavenged?”’ 


So Chao Ytin’s remonstrance was disregarded, and orders 
went forth to prepare an army against Wu. The king also 
sent into The Five Valleys to borrow the aid of five legions of 
barbarians. He sent a messenger to Langchung conferring 


k on Chang Fei the rank of General of Cavalry and the titles of 
“Hsiao-yù” and araen He became also Governor of 


Langchung. 
When Chang Fei heard the tidings of his brother s death at 


the hands of Sun Ch‘tian he wept very bitterly day and night, 
so that his raiment was soaked with his tears. His subordin- 


ates tried to cheer him with wine, but he over-drank and this 
increased his ill-humour, which he vented on any offender in 
his camp. Some of his men even died under the lash. Every 
day he gazed southward, grinding his teeth with rage and 
glaring. He wept and groaned without ceasing. 

= Then a messenger was announced. He was summoned 
immediately, and Chang Fei at once tore open and read his 
despatches. When he read the edict he accepted his new rank 
in all humility, bowing northward toward the imperial man- 


; date. Then he gave a banquet to the messenger. 


214 an Kun, or 


He said, “My enmity for thé death of my brother is deep 
as the sea. Why do not the officers at the court propose an 
avenging expedition?” 

The messenger replied, “Most of them favour first the 
destruction of Wei; Wu is to follow.” ° 

“What sort of talk is this?” cried Chang angrily. “When 
we three swore brotherhood in the Peach Garden we pledged 
ourselves to die together. Now, alas! my brother has perished 
by the way, and can we enjoy wealth or honours without him? 
I must see the Son of Heaven and pray to be allowed to lead 
the van. I will wear mourning, and in that garb I will smite 
Wu and capture the bandit that rules there. He shall be 
sacrificed to my brother’s manes in virtue of our oath.” 

He accompanied the messenger on his return. In the 
meantime the First Ruler had been training his armies. Day 
after day he went to the drill ground, and he decided upon a 
day to start, and he would accompany the expedition. There- 
upon a number of courtiers went to the palace of the Prime 
Minister to try to get this intention modified. 

They said, “It is not in accordance with the importance due. 
to the Emperor’ s position that he should go in personal 
command of this army, particularly as he has but lately 
assumed his throne. You, Sir, hold the weighty post of 
adviser in such a matter, and why do you not dissuade him?” 

“I have done’so, most sincerely and repeatedly, but he will 
not listen. But now. you all come with me to the drill ground, 
and we will try once more.’ 

So they proceeded thither, with K‘ung-ming at their head, 
and he said, “Your Majesty has but lately taken the imperial 
seat. :If the expedition was one to march northward to destroy 
the rebels against Han and in the interest of rectitude, it 
would be perfectly correct for the Emperor to lead the army, 
but an officer of high rank should more properly be sent against 
Wu. Why should Your Majesty expose yourself to such 
fatigues?” 

The First Ruler was touched by the depth of his minister’s 
concern and the sincerity of his counsel, and was on the point 
of yielding when the arrival of Chang Fei was announced. 
Fei was immediately summoned and came to the pavilion on 
the drill ground, where he threw himself on the ground and 
clasped the king’s feet, weeping bitterly. The king joined 
in the lamentation. 

Your Majesty is now ruler and too quickly forgets the oath 
in the Peach Garden; why is our brother’s death not avenged ?” 

The king replied, “Many officers dissuade me from such a 
course; I cannot act rashly.” 

“What do others know of our oath? If Your Majesty will 
not go, then let me sacrifice myself to avenge our brother. 
If I cannot, then would I rather die and see your face no more.” 


` Gomance of the Three ingooms 215 
“Then will I go with you,” said the king. : “Bring your 
own troops from Langchou and I will bring my veterans to 
meet you at Chiangchou. We will both attack Wu and wipe 
-out the reproach.” 
~ As Fei rose to take leave, the king said, to him, “I know 
- that your weakness for wine leads you astray, and you become 
very cruel in your cups and flog your men and the beaten men 
are kept near you. They may'be dangerous, and it is certainly 
the road to misfortune. Now you must be more kindly and 
not give way to passion as before.” 

Thus admonished, Chang Fei said farewell and left. Soon 
after, when the king was preparing to march out, Ch‘in Mi, 
a high officer, memorialised, saying, “That Your Maj esty, the 
Lord of a Myriad Chariots, should risk his person in what is 
not the way of perfect rectitude is not what the ancients would 
have done. I pray that this may be reflected upon.’ 

But the king replied, “Ytian- chang and I were as one body, 
and the way of perfect rectitude is here. Have you for- 
gotten?” 

But the officer remained at his feet and said, “I fear disaster 
if Your Majesty disregards your servant’s words.” 

The king replied angrily, Why. do you use such bad words 
when I desire to march?” 

He bade the executioners Gate forth and put to death the 
_ bold speaker. . Still Ch‘in’s face showed no sign of fear. He 
only smiled, saying, “I die without regret. It is a pity that 


this newly. established state should be overturned ere it be well 


begun.” 
~ = Others interceding, the death punishment was remitted, 
` but the faithful officer was committed to prison. His fate 
was to be decided when the army of vengeance should return. 
` K'‘ung-ming sent up a memorial in favour of Ch‘in Mi, saying, 


- “I, Chuko Liang, address Your Majesty in my own name and 


those of my colleagues; we regard as\most grievous the recent 
. events, Wu’s perfidy, by which Chingchou was lost and the star 
of a great general was brought down, and we shall never 


-~ forget. But it is to be remembered that the crime of over- 


turning the Throne of Han rests on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and the fault 
of driving away the Liu Family lies not on Sun Ch‘tian. We 
venture to think that the destruction of Wei would involve the 
submission of Wu, wherefore we beg consideration of the 
valuable words of Ch‘in Mi. Thus the army will be spared 
~ needless exertion and occasion given to make other plans for 
- the présperity of the Throne and the happiness of the people.” 
But the memorial was not well received. The king threw 

it to the floor, saying that he had decided and would listen te 


~ no remonstrances. Then he appointed the Prime Minister 
~ Regent and Guardian of his son, and the two Mas and Wei 


ren were ordered to guard Hanchung. Chao Ytin was to be 


216 ae, San kuo, ov aie tiri 


in reserve and to control the supplies. Many old leaders were 
appointed to the expedition, the veteran Huang Chung being . 
leader of the van, and some new ones. The whole army, 
including the borrowed foreign troops, numbered seventy-five 
legions. And the ping-wu day of the seventh month was 
selected as the most propitious day for the start. 

As soon as Chang Fei had got back to his post he issued 
orders that his men should be ready to march in three days. 
and the whole body was to be in mourning, white flags and 
whitened arms. Just after the order appeared, two officers - 
named Fan Chiang and Chang Ta came to their chief saying 


that the time allowed was insufficient and asked for some — 


delay. . st 

“I am hot to avenge my brother,” said Ohang Fei. “My onlý 
regret is that I cannot reach the miserable wretch’s country 
to-morrow. Do you dare to disobey my order?” 


He called in the lictors, had the two officers bound to trees a 
and ordered each to receive fifty lashes, and at the close of the — 


flogging he said, “Now you will be ready to-morrow ; if you 
are not, I will put you to death as an example.” 

The two officers returned to their place, spitting blood and > 
hot with anger, and they said one to another, “We have been 


beaten to-day; what about to-morrow? This man’s temper is i i 


unbearable, and if things are not ready we shall suffer death.” — 
“Suppose we slay him,” suddenly said ae Ta, “since if . 7 
we do not he will kill us.’ Nad . tO eae 
“But how can we get near him?” ny 
“If we are to have a chance to live, he will get drunk and go : 
to bed; if we are to die, he will remain sober.” oie 
They made all their- arrangements for the crime. Chang 
Fei was greatly disturbed in his mind and restless. He told 


some of his subordinates that he was nervous and felt creen se 


and shivery and could not rest. What did it mean?” 

“This is due to too much brooding over the loss of your 
brother,” said they. — 

Then Chang Fei bade them bring in. wine, and he drink’ 
with his officers. Presently he became quite intoxicated and 
lay down on a couch in his tent. 

Meanwhile the two assassins had followed all his doings, — 
and when they knew he was lying on his couch intoxicated and 
incapable, they went into the tent, each armed with a dagger. 
They got rid of the attendants by saying they had confidential 
matters to talk about and so got into the inner rooms. 

But even then they dared do nothing, for Chang Fei slept. 
always with open eyelids, and he lay on his couch as if still 
awake. However, huge snores soon convinced them that their — 
victim really slept, ‘and they crept to the side of the couch. 
Then both stabbed simultaneously deep into the body. Chang 

, ei uttered one cry and lay still. 


ASSIS Who swept vile rebels from the land of Han, 


T 


He who AN th’ inspector years agone, 


And thereby won great glory for the Lius, 
Whose valòur shone at Tiger Corral Pass, 
Who turned the tide of victory at the bridge, 
Who freed a captive and thus won a friend 
‘That helped him and his brothers conquer Shu, 
| Whose wisdom to a district brought repose, 

_ Is dead, the victim of assassins’ blows. — 

_ Not his t’avenge his brother’s death on Wu, ~ } 
Langti will grieve him all the ages through. i 


e done their victim to death, the two murderers hacked 


off his head and made off for the country of Wu without loss 


of time, and when the deed was known they had got too far for 
capture The assassination was reported in a memorial by 
a minor officer named Chang Pan, who had left Chingchou to 
see the king and then had been sent to serve under Chang Fei. 

He bade ‘the eldest son, Chang Pao, prepare a coffin for the 


remains and, leaving the younger brother, Chang Shao, to 


hold the Langchung Pass, went to see the Emperor. 
The day of departure had already come, and the First Ruler 


- had left the capital. K‘ung-ming and many officers had mes 


escorted him out of the city for ten li and taken leave. But 


K ung-ming felt ill at ease, and he remarked to his colleagues, 
“Tf Fa Chêng had been alive he would have been able to inter- 
~ dict this expedition.” 


One night the First Ruler felt nervous and shuddered from 
cane to time. He could not sleep so he went out of his tent 


RF looked up at the stars. Suddenly he saw a bright meteor 
` fall in the north-west, and began to wonder what the portent 
meant. He sent at once to ask K‘ung-ming to tell him. | 


K‘ung-ming sent back the reply that it meant the loss of a 


$ great leader and there would be bad news in a few days. 


So the army was halted and did not march. Then the 


- arrival of a message from Chang Pan of Langchung was 
` announced. The king’s:forebodings increased, and he stamp- 


ed his foot, saying, “My other brother is gone.’ : 

Opening the letter he found it was indeed so. As he read 
the news of the assassination he uttered a loud cry and fell in 
-aswoon. He was raised and presently they brought him back 
to life. | 

Next day they reported a hody of horsemen coming. The 
king went out of the camp to look at them and presently 
_ recognised Chang Pao, dressed all in white. As soon as he 
- reached the king’ s presence he dismounted and bowed to the 
aik weeping, “My father has been killed by the two ruffians 


< Fan Chiang and Chang Ta. They have gone over to Wu, 
taking my father’s head with them.” 


. 


FSS 


218° an tiuo, or | 


~ 


‘The news was very grievous, and the seine refused food. 
His officers remonstrated, saying, “Now Your Majesty has. 
the loss of two brothers to avenge, and you must not destroy 
yourself.” -` 

So after a time he began to eat and drink, and hethen ER 
the leadership of the van to Chang Pao, so that he might have. 
the satisfaction of avenging his father and uncle. i 

“For my country or for my father, I would chg ink Po no 
sacrifice,” said the young man. 

Just as the force for the young man’s lene sins was being 
organised, another party of horsemen approached, also dressed 
in white. This was a small force under Kuan Hsin, son of 
Kuan the Noble. The youth also threw himself to the ground 
and wept. ee 

At sight of him thoughts stirred in the king’s breast, and- 
o burst into tears. Neither reason nor persuasion could stop 
them. 

“I think of the plain and simple days of long ago whe we 
pledged ourselves one to the other. Now I am Emperor. 
How I should rejoice to share my good fortune with them! 
But they have met violent deaths, and the sight of these two 
youths wrings my heart to the very core.” - 

“Young gentlemen, please retire,” said the officers:to the. 


two youthful captains, “and let our sacred one repose his. i 


297 


‘dragon body. ; 
They went. Said the attendants, “Your Majesty is no 
longer young; you are over sixty, remember, and it is not 
fitting that you give way to such extreme sorrow.’ Sligo 
“But my brothers, —dead,” wailed the First Ruler. “How TEN 
can I live without them? i ee 
He broke into a fresh paroxysm and beat his head on the 
ground. 
“What can be done?” asked the officers one to another. © “He 
is in such trouble! How can we comfort him?” 
Ma Lang said, “Sire, it is bad for the army to spend whole 
days in wailing and tears when leading against the enemy.” 


And then Ch‘én Chén said, “There is a certain hermit living k 


among the Ch‘ingch‘éng Hills, near Ch‘éngtu, who is said to be 
three hundred years old. -He is called Li I and people say he © 
is a seer. Let us tell His Majesty and let him send for this 
old man that he may know what the future may have in store. — 
It will have more weight than anything we can say.” . 

They went to the king and told him; he agreed to summon 
the seer and sent Ch‘én Chén with the command. Soon the 
messenger reached the town near the hills and asked the people 
where the prophet dwelt. .They led him far into a secluded ~— 
valley like a fairy village, very unlike any ordinary spot. Soon ~ 
a lad came to receive the visitor. 

“You are surely Ch‘én Hsiao-ch’i.” 


“Hiomance of the Three Hingyoms 219 


chee ên Chén was startled that the lad knew him, and still 
more so at the familiar address, and said, “O superhuman boy, 
how do you know my name so well?” 

“Last evening my master told me that a essene a with 
an imperial command would come to-day and mentioned your 
name.’ By 

“Truly he is more than wise,” said Ch‘én Chén; end men 
have not believed him.” 

So the two proceeded to the old man’s abode, and Ch‘én 
declared his errand. The old man said he was too aged to 
travel. 

“But the Emperor anxiously desires to see you face to face 
if haply you would not mind making the effort.” 

In the end, and after much persuasion, the old fellow 
consented and went. The First Ruler received him affably, 
surprised at the contrast between his hoary head and fresh 
boyish complexion. The venerable one had blue eyes, with 
square and sparkling pupils. His carriage was erect and he 
stood straight as a pine tree. 

“This is no common man,’ cust he, and he tedated him 
with distinguished courtesy. 

The seer said, “I am but an old man of the barren hill 
country, without learning or wisdom; you shame me, O 
Emperor, by calling me, and I know not why.” 

“T and my two brothers, both now deceased, swore a mutual 
oath some thirty years ago. Both have gone, both by violent 
death. I would lead a great army to avenge them and wish to 
know how the expedition will end. Hearing that you, 
Venerable Sir, are learned in the deeper mysteries, I sent for 
‘you and beg you to tell me.’ 
~ “But this is fate; it is not for an old man like me to know.” 

But the First Ruler pressed him to say. However, the aged 
one got paper and a brush and wrote, “Soldiers, horses, 
weapons” again and again on many sheets of paper. Having 
done this, he suddenly tore them into fragments. Further, he 
drew a picture of a tall man lying supine and another above 
him digging a grave. And over all he wrote, “white.” 

After this he bowed and departed, leaving the First Ruler 
annoyed. 

“This is only a demented old man; what he says is not 
worthy of confidence,” said the First Ruler. And he burned 
the paper. 

Then he ordered an advance at full speed. Chang Fei’s son, 
‘Pao, came in saying, “Wu Pan and his men have come; I pray 
that I may be appointed to lead the van.’ 

The First Ruler admired his noble intent and gave him a 
van-leader’s seal. But just as he was attaching the seal to his 
girdle another youth boldly stepped forth and said, “Leave ` 
that seal to me!” ` 


220 jan uo, or 


It was Kuan Hsing, son of Kuan Yü. 


“T have already received my commission,” said Chang Pao. | 


“What abilities have you for such a task?” cried Hsing. 

“That I have been training as a soldier since my boyhood. 
J can shoot and never miss.’ 

“T should like to see your prowess,” said the First Ruler, 
“that I may decide who is the better.” 


Chang Pao ordered some of his men to set up a flag at a 


hundred paces, and on the flag he drew a heart in red. Then 
he took his bow and shot three arrows, each of which went 
through the “heart”. Those present commended the per- 
formance. Then Kuan Hsing seized his bow, saying, U 
is it to hit such a mark?” 

> Just as he said this a flock of wild geese flew over his ends 
“I will hit the third of the flying geese,” said he. 

He shot; and the third fell. 

“Fine!” cried all the assembly as one voice. 

But Chang Pao was enraged. Leaping on his steed he 
seized the long spear left him by his father, crying, “Dare you 
try a real combat?” 

Kuan Hsing took up the challenge at once. He sprang into 
the saddle, took his father’s great sword and galloped out. 


it 


“You can use the spear, think you that I cannot wield a | 


sword?” cried he. 

The two impetuous youths were on the point of a battle 
when the First Ruler bade them hold. 

“Do not behave so badly!” cried he. 


Both dropped out of the saddle, threw aside their weapons, j 


ran to his feet and begged pardon. : 

“Young men, from the time I left my native place and swore - 
brotherhood with your fathers they were as my own flesh and 
blood. You two are also brothers and you ‘should help each — 
other in vengeance rather than quarrel and dispute. You 
have lost the sense of rectitude while your fathers’ decata are 
still recent and what will happen in future?” 

Both fell at his'feet and implored forgiveness. 

“Which of you two is the elder ? ?” asked the First Ruler. 

“I am the elder by a year,” said Chang Pao. 

The ruler then bade Kuan Hsing bow to Chang Pao as to 
an elder brother, and there, in front of all, they broke an arrow 
as a pledge that each would always succour the other. 

Then the First Ruler issued a mandate appointing Wu Pan 


leader of the van, and the two young men were enrolled as his 
` own escort. 


The advance began on land and on water, and they made a 
brave show as they moved against, the land of Wu. 


‘ 


In the meantime the two assassins, with the grim ceidenel 


of their crime, duly reached Wu and told their story to the 
marquis who received them. ’ 


‘Then he aid to ne Died R PATA “Liu Pei es declared 
iself Emperor and is leading against us in person a preot 
t. What shall we do, for the danger is imminent?” 
They all turned pale and looked one at another. Then akoka 
Chin | spoke out. 
iy have been in your service these many years and have 
never justified the favour you have shown me. I will risk 
my life and go to this Liu Pei of Shu that I may talk to him 
| o and prove to him the advantages of friendship and 
F alliance against Ts‘ao P‘ei.” 

This offer pleased Sun Ch‘tian, who then appointed Chuko . 
© Chin as his messenger to try to induce the First Ruler to keep 
=- the peace. i 


ia 


` Messengers pass when states are at wrangle; 
May this one succeed and unravel this tangle! 


“What fortune attended this. messenger will be related i in the 
Fe next chapter. 


CHAPTER LXXXII. 


SUN CH‘UAN SUBMITS TO WEI AND IS REWARDED; 
THE FIRST RULER ATTACKS WU AND REWARDS HIS ARMY. 


lh the eighth month of the year Chang-wu (221 A.D.) the 
First Ruler marched at the head of his army and camped at 
Paitich‘éng (City of the White Emperor), through the K‘uei 
Pass. His advanced guard had reached Ch‘uank‘ou when his- - 
attendants told him that Chuko Chin had come as a messenger 
from Wu. He told them not to admit him. But Huang 
Ch‘iian said, “His brother being your Prime Minister he is 
certainly come on some important mission. Your Majesty 
ought to see him and hear what he says. If his proposals are 
admissible, then agree; if not, he can be made use of to take 
knowledge of your intentions to Sun Ch‘tian and let him know 
that you intend to punish his crime.” ; 

Then the First Ruler gave way, and the messenger was © 
brought in. He bowed down to the earth. 

“Sir, you have come a long journey; what is its object?” 
said the First Ruler. 

“My brother hag long served Your Majesty; I have come 
at the risk. of my life to discuss Chingchou affairs. When 
Kuan the Noble was at Chingchou my master repeatedly 
sought to ally the two families by marriage, but was refused. 
When he attacked Hsiangyang, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao wrote again and 
again urging my master to attack Chingchou. But he was 
unwilling, and it was the enmity between your brother and 
Lu Méng that led to the attack and the unfortunate success. 
My master is now very sorry for it, but it was Lü Méng’s 
doing. However, Lü Méng is now dead and -his enmity. has 
died with him’ Moreover, the Lady Sun is always thinking 
over returning to you. My master now proposes to send back 
the lady, to hand over to you those officers who surrendered 
and to restore Chingchou. If the two houses swear perpetual 
amity then they may join forces against Ts‘ao P‘ei and punish 
his usurpation.” 
- To this harangue the First Ruler only replied, “You of East 
ae klea my brother; yet you dare to come with your artful 
ta 33 E 

Chuko Chin said, “I only wish to discuss the relative © 
importance of the issues. Your Majesty is an Imperial Uncle, 
and Ts‘ao P*ei has seized the throne of your House. Yet you 


a tay 4 
7” Ye 


Sy 


NG 


‘Romance of the Three Lingdoms 


Cas Hot think of destroying the usurper, but on the ae hand 
you disregard the most honourable position in the world for the - 


sake of a so-called brother, a connection of another name. 


‘Surely this is rejecting the chief for the subordinate, the main 
= issue for a detail.« The country concerned is a part of the 
empire, and the two capitals, Loyang and Ch‘angan, are both 


famous as places whence the two, one the founder, the other 
the restorer, of the Hans, initiated their mighty task. Your 
Majesty takes. no thought of these, but would dispute over 
Chingchou; in other words, the important is adandoned for 
the worthless. All the world knows of your assumption of 


_ the dignity of Emperor and that you will assuredly restore 


the Hans and rescue their territory; only now you do not try ~ 
to deal with Ts‘ao, you only desire to attack Wu. I venture 
to think you have ‘made a bad choice.” 
All this:argument only added fuel to the fire. 
“The slayer of my brother shall not live in the same world 


-as Il. You ask me not to fight. I will cease when I have slain 


~your master. Were it not for the sake of your brether I 


would behead you at once. . As it is, you may go; and you may 
tell your master to cleanse his neck ready for the blade of the 


- executioner.” 


Chuko Chin saw that’ the position was hopeless and took | 
his leave. 
-But while he had been absent, calumny had Hor been idle. 


Chane Chao, one day when he was with Sun Ch'tian, insinuated 


- doubts of Chuko’s honesty. 


< “He knows something of the strength of the armies of Shu, 


7 “and he made this mission of his an excuse to get out of danger. 
TMe will not return.” 


The marquis replied, “I and he are sworn friends; friends 


- to the death. I shall not wrong him nor will he betray me. 
~ When -he was at Ch‘aisang and his famous brother paid him 
a visit, I wanted my friend Chuko to persuade his brother to 


remain with me. His reply was that his brother would not 


remain any more than he himself would go: each would be 


faithful to his salt. That was quite clear enough. How could 


he desert me after that? Our friendship has something of 
athe: divine. in| it, and no talk from outside can sow dissension 
a between Uso 


Even as he spoke the servants told him that Chuko Chin had 


returned. 


“What do you think now?” said Sun Ch‘iian. ; 
“Chang Chao retired overwhelmed with shame. The luckless 


ey Wesseneer unfolded his tale of failure. 


“Then the pcos is im great danger,” said Sun Ch‘tian, as he 


’ Dard the storys? iooi 


But a certain man here. interposed’ saying he could find a 


way out of the difficulty. He was Chao Tsu. 


224 San Kuo, or 


“What good scheme do you propose, friend Chao?” said Sun ia 
Ch‘tian. 


“Let my lord draw up a document, which I will take to 


Ts‘ao P‘ei in Wei, making a full statement of the case, and get 
him to attack Hanchung and so draw off the danger from our 
land.” f 
“Though the suggestion is good, yet shall we not lose some- | 
thing of our dignity by that?” said Sun Ch‘tian. 
“If there is any such thing I will simply jump into the 
river: I could not look our people in the face again.’ 
Sun Ch‘tian was satisfied and composed the memorial, 


styling himself “Minister.” Therein Chao was duly appointed 


messenger. He took the document and soon reached the ~ 
capital, where he first sought out the T‘ai-yii, Chia Hsii, and — i 
then saw certain others. i 

Soon after, Chia Hsü stood forth one day at court and said, 
“Bastern Wu has sent a high officer, Chao Tzu, with a 
memorial.” ia 

“Because he- wants the Shu armies driven off,” said Ts‘ao — 


Pei, smiling, and as if completing the sentence. But he ‘a 
summoned Chao, who, having prostrated himself in the outer 


court, handed in his memorial. After reading it, P*ei said, 
“What sort of an over-lord is the marquis?” 

“Intelligent, clear-sighted, wise, brave and perspicacious,” 
was the reply. 

P‘ei laughed, “Your praise is none too enthusiastic.” TA 

“I do not wish to overstate,” replied Chao Tzu, “but my _ 


master has shown various qualities at different times. He — 
made use of Lu Su at all times, which shows he is intelligent. _ 
He chose Lii Méng as leader of an army, which showed his | 


clear-sightedness. He captured Yü Chin but did not hurt him, | 
which shows his kindliness. He took Chingchou without Ris 
slaughter, which shows his wisdom. He maintains the three 
Chiangs so as to command the respect of the, world, which | 
shows his boldness. Lastly, he bows before Your Majesty, 
which shows his perspicacity. oe see now that my epithets. 
are justifiable.” 

“Is he at all learned?” i 

“Sire, remember he commands a large fleet and a huge army. — 
He endeavours to find wise and capable men to help him, and 
his mind is full of plans and projects. When he has a little — 
leisure he reads the histories and the annals, for the sake of — 


the general lessons to be learned therefrom. He is no dryas- — 


dust pedant seeking remarkable passages and culling model By. 

sentences.” fe: 
“Do you think I could overcome Wu?” ad 
“Tf a large state has military force to attack, a small sh a 

has also preparations for defence.” l ; 
“Does Wu fear me?” 


Romance of the Chree dtingdoms 225 
= “How can you think so, considering our army and the 
defensive ont we have in the river?” 

-~ “How many such persons as yourself does, Wu possess?” 
“Nearly a hundred, intelligent and specially qualified 
ministers like your servant; of ‘one cart or ‘one bushel’ 
capacity there are too many to reckon up.” 

Ts‘ao P‘ei sighed, saying, “You would do credit to your 
mission wherever you were sent. That is the sort of man you 
are.’ 

Thereupon he issued the mandate ordering the Tai-ch‘ang, 
Hsing Chén, to be his ambassador to Sun Chiiian, bearing for 
him the title of “Prince of Wu” and the “Nine Gifts.” 

~ But when the messenger had gone out of the city, Liu Yeh 
went to remonstrate, | saying, “Sun Ch‘iian has done this for 
fear of the armies of Shu. In my opinion, if Shu and Wu 
fight, heaven will make an end of him. If you will send an 
army across the river to attack, and Shu attack at the same 
time, Wu as a state will disappear. If Wu goes, then Shu will 
-be left alone and can be dealt with when you will.” 

“But I cannot attack him now that he has come over to my 
side. It would prevent anyone else from doing so. No; I 
will really.aeccept his submission. It is the best course.” 

- Liu Yeh said, “After all, though talented, he is but P‘iao-chi 
-Chiang-chiin and a marquis of the decadent days of Han. His 
rank is low and his influence small, and he still fears the 
central government. If you promote him to princely rank. 
‘he is only one step below yourself. While doubting the © 
reality of his submission, you give him an exalted rank and 
increase his influence. Surely this is only giving wings to a 
tiger? sit 
Not at all F am helping neither Wu nor Shu. Iam waiting 
till they are at grips, and if one goes under there will be only 
-one left to destroy. That will be easy. However, say no 
more, for I have decided.” 28 

Whereupon Hsing Chén was bidden to take’ the mandate’ “A 
with’ the “Gifts” and accompany Chao Tzt to Wu. me 
~ Sun Ch‘iian assembled his officers to discuss how the armies 
of Shu could be driven off. Then came the news of princely 
rank conferred by Wei, and: by the rules of courtesy the ee 
` messenger bearing the edict should be met at.a great distance frei 
from the capital: Ku Yung was opposed to ‘accepting the ine 
= rank, oe 

“My lord, you should style yourself “Superior Chiang-chiin’ 
and earl of- this country ; you should not receive any rank from 
Wei.” 
~ “But on one occasion: Duke P‘ei reend rank from oe 
Yü; it depends upon the times. -Why refuse?” 
£ He discussed the matter no more, but went out at the head 
-of a great gathering of officers to welcome the messenger, .. 


15 Nie $ A 


tA 


I A AAE ESSER ON 
ea ean A Nee 


ye: 
iy 


ance ft s ? A 


226 Aan hun or on es: 


Hsing Chén, the bearer of the mandate from Wei, on first _ 
arrival comported himself haughtily as the representative of 
a a superior country and an imperial ambassador. And when he 
ERR entered the city he did not descend from his carriage. Where-g 
ae fore Chang Chao ventured to rebuke him. i i 

“Everyone must obey the rules of courtesy as everyone must 
respect the laws. You, Sir, are behaving proudly as if there 
was no such thing as a ‘sword in the country. 

Immediately the messenger descended recs his chariot cud 
was presented to Sun Ch'tian. Afterwards they went in side 
by side. 

As the cavalcade proceeded, a Youd voice was heard in the 
rear of the two carriages, crying, “Here we are prevented from 
risking our lives in smashing Wei and swallowing Shu; and 
our lord receives a title from another man. _ Are not such 
things shameful?” : ; 

The man was Hsü Shêng. And- the messenger sighed, 
saying, “If all the leaders and ministers of Chiangtung are 
like this, the lord of the country will not long be content to 
obey another.” 

However, the title was accepted. And Loses he had received 
the felicitations of his officers, Sun gave orders to collect — 
beautiful works in jade and brilliant pearls, which were sent 
as return gifts. 

Not long after came tidings of the forces under the puler of 
Shu. He led his own army and a large number of barbarians 
from the east and south, Mankuo and Samoko, and the Han | 
Dynasty generals of Tunghsi. Tulu and Liu Ning, with their — 
cohorts.. They'advanced both by land and by water, a mighty 
host, of which the shouting shook the heavens. The naval 
force had already come out at Wuk’ou and the land force had 
reached Tzukuei. 

Although Sun Ch‘tian ad been cr eated a prince, yet the King’ 
of Wei would not help him. ; 

And when the news came he asked present advice from his 
officers, but there was none to help him; they only muttered 
and were silent. 

“Ah!” sighed he. “After Chou Vii I had Lu Si and Lü 
Mêng succeeded him. But now they have all three gone and ~ 
there’s no one to share my troubles!” A 

But just then a very youthful captain stepped out from the 
ranks of the officials and said, with a lowly obeisance, “Though 
keh I am young I am not a little versed in the books of war, and 
ye: with a few legions I could destroy the power of Shu.” 
oe Sun Ch‘itian recognised Sun Huan, the son of Yü Ho. Sun ~ 
Ch‘üan loved the youth and gave him his own family name of 
Sun and so made him a member of his own clan. ` Yü Ho had — 
four sons, of whom Sun Huan was the eldest. He was an 
expert archer and Horseman and had accompanied his protector 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms | 227 


In several campaigns, where he had distinguished himself 


right well and had been given a 1 rank. At this time he was 


ok five. 
. “How do you think you can overcome them?” 
“There are two able captains under my command named Li 
I and Hsieh Ching, both very brave. With a few legions I 
will capture Liu Pei.” 
“Though you are brave, nephew, yet you are young and 
ought to have an assistant. 3 
_ Thereupon the Hu-wet Chiang-chiin, Chu Jan, stepped for- 
-ward with, “Let me go.’ 
Sun Ch‘iian consented, and he told off five legions of soldiers 
and marines, over whom he placed Sun Huan and Chu Jan as 
` joint commanders. They were to start as soon as possible. 
The scouts reported that the army of Shu was camped at 
` Itu, and Sun Huan led half his men to the borders of that 
district and camped. — 
Now Wu Pan had received his seal as leader of the van. 


From the day he left the borders of Shuch‘uan he had had- 


uninterrupted success. Everyone had submitted at the mere 
rumour of his coming. He had conducted his campaign with 
- unstained swords as far as Itu. When he heard that Sun Huan 
was camped there to oppose’his progress he sent back rapid 


‘3 - messengers to the First Ruler, who was then at Tzukuei. He 
was angry: that so young a captain should be sent against him. 


“Do they think this youth able to withstand me? ay 
“Since this son of his has been made a leader,” said Kuan 


k ; Hsing, * ‘it is unnecessary to send a leader of high rank; let 


me go.” 

“T was just wishing to see what you could do.” said the 
First Ruler, and he gave him orders to go. 

Just as he was leaving, Chang Pao stepped forth and asked 
permission to go too. ` 

“Then both go, my nephews,” said the king. “But you bane 


Bi be prudent and not hasty.” 


‘So they took leave, collected their men and advanced. Sun 


Huan, hearing of the coming of a large army, called out all 


his men and drew up his array. His two famous captains 
were placed by. the great standard. They watched the men of 
Shu filing out and noted two leaders in silver helmets and silver 
mail, riding on white horses. And the flags were white. 
First came Chang Pao with a long spear, and then Kuan Hsing 
carrying a great sword. i 
“Sun Huan, you stupid, your time has come,” cried Chang 
Pao abusively. “How dare you stand against the forces of 
the Emperor?” | 
“Your father is a headless devil,” cried Sun Huan, no way 


ph backward i in reviling, “and you are going just now to join him; 


don’t you see?” . 


228 - San Kuo, or 


- Then Chang Pao rode at Sun Huan. From behind his chief, 
_ Hsieh Ching dashed out to meet him. They fought nearly 
two score bouts, and then Hsieh Ching ran away with Chang 
Pao in pursuit. 

When Li I saw his comrade overcome he whipped up his steed 
and came into the fray, whirling his silvered battle-axe. Chang 
Pao fought a score of bouts with him, but neither got the better. 

Then a certain minor captain named T‘an Hsiung, seeing 
that his two comrades could. not overcome Chang Pao, shot a 
treacherous arrow from the ranks and wounded Chang Pao’s 
steed. Feeling the pang of the wound, the horse bolted back. 
to his own side, but fell before he reached it, throwing his 
rider sprawling on the ground. Seeing this, Li I turned and — 
rode toward the prostrate leader to slay him with his battle- 
axe. But just as. he was about to deliver his blow, lo! a red 
flash came between, and his head rolled along the earth. 

The red flash was Kuan Hsing’s great sword. Seeing the 
horse fall and Li-I coming up, he had rushed in and dealt that 
fatal blow. And he had saved Chang Pao from death. Then 
they attacked and lay on so that Sun Huan suffered a great 
defeat. Then each side beat the retreat and drew off. 

Next day Sun Huan came out to offer battle again, and the . 
two cousins went forth together. “Kuan Hsing, from horseback 
by the main standard, challenged his enemy. Sun Huan rode 
out fiercely, and they two fought near two score bouts. 
But he was not strong enough and drew off. The two youths 
followed and reached his camp. Wu Pan and two others 
fought well. Chang Pao helped them with all his force and 
was the first to force his way into the ranks of Wu. He came- 
across Hsieh Ching, whom he slew with a spear thrust. The 
eee Wu scattered and fled, and the victory was on the side 
o 

But Kuan Hsing was missing. Chang Pao was desperate, 
saying he would not survive his cousin. So he girded on his 
huge spear and rode far and wide seeking him. Presently he ` 
met Kuan Hsing, bearing his sword in his left hand, while his 
right held a captive. 

“Who is this?” asked Chang Pao. 

“In the mélée I met an enemy,” 
took him prisoner.’ 

Then Chang Pao recognised the man who had let fly the 
treacherous arrow that had brought down his horse. The- 
two returned to camp, where they slew their prisoner and 
poured a libation of his blood to the dead horse. 


cried Kuan Hsing, “and I 


After this they drew up a report of the victory for the First ` < 


Ruler. Sun Huan had lost his two famous captains as well as 
many other officers and many men. His army was too 


weakened to continue the campaign, so he halted and sent back 


to Wu for reinforcements. 


-Romance of the Three Hingdoms : BG: 


Tha Chang Nan and Fêng Hsi said to Wu Pan, “ “The power 
of Wu is broken; let us raid their encampment.” 

- But Wu Pan said, “Though so many have been lost, there 
are many left. Chu Jan’s marine force is in a strong position 
on the river and is untouched. If you carry out your plan 
and the marines land in force and cut off our retreat. we shall 
be in difficulties.” 

“That is easily met,” said Chang Nan. “Let each of the 
two leaders Kuan and Chang take five companies and go into 
ambush in the valleys to guard against any such move.” 


“I think it better to send some persons to pretend to be — 


deserters. Let them tell Chu Jan of the plan to raid the camp, 
and Chu Jan will come to the rescue as soon as he sees fire. 

Then the ambushed men can attack him.” 
They thought this a fine plan, and they. made the necessary 


2 a 


Hearing of the ill success and losses of his colleague, Chu 
Jan -was already thinking of going to his help, when a few 
deserters appeared, and boarded his ship. He questioned 
them, and they said they were Féng Hsi’s men, who had 
deserted because of unfair treatment. They had a secret to 

tell. i 

“What secret can you betray?” 

“To-night Féng is going to make an attack upon General 
Sun’s camp; he thinks it is a good chance. They are going 

to raise a fire as a signal.” 

-Chu Jan saw no reason to doubt the men, and he sent off at 
once to tell Sun Huan. But the messenger never arrived, as 
Kuan Hsing intercepted and slew him. Then he deliberated 
upon going to help. 

“You cannot trust what those soldiers said, ” said Ts‘ui yü, 
one of the captains. “Both army and navy will be lost if 
anything goes agley. No, General; rather keep careful watch 
and let me go.’ 

Chu Jan saw this was the wiser plan, so he gave Ts‘ui a 
legion and he left. But that night an attack was made on Sun 
Huan’s camp, and the men were scattered and fled. Ts‘ui Yü 

. saw the flames as he marched and pressed on. ‘Then just as 
he was passing some hills he came upon the ambush, and the 
two cousins appeared, one on either side.. Taken by surprise, 
Ts‘ui could only try to flee, but he met Chang Pao, who made 
him prisoner. When Chu ‘Jan heard it he was panic-stricken 
and dropped down-river some distance. 

The remnant of Sun Huan’s men ran away. As they went 
he enquired what places lay on their road. They told him 
that if he went north he would come to Illing, where they could 
camp. So they went thither. 

Just as they reached the wall, their pursuers came up and 

the city was besieged. Kuan Hsing’ and Chang Pao went back 


x 


230 San tuo 
i beh 
to Tztikuei and saw the First Ruler, who rejoiced at their 
success. The prisoner was put to death, and the soldiers were 
rewarded. The effect of these victories spread far, so that 
the captains in Wu had no inclination to fight. 

When the Prince of Wu received Sun Huan’s call for help 
he was frightened and knew not what to do. So he called a 
great council, and he said, “Sun Huan is besieged in Illing and 
Chu Jan has been defeated on the river; what can be done?” 

Then Chang Chao said, “Though several of your captains 


` are dead, yet have you some left. Half a score is enough to 


relieve your anxiety. Send Han Tang, with Chou T‘ai as his 
second, P‘an Chang as van-leader, Ling T‘ ung as BeBe 
Kan Ning in reserve. You want ten legions.” 
Sun Ch‘iian made the appointments as proposed. Kan 
Ning .was very seriously ill just then, but he accepted the task. 
Now the First Ruler had made a ‘line of forty camps from ` 
Wuhsia and Chien-p’ing to Iling, at distances of seventy li 


apart. He was exceedingly pleased with his two nephews, 


who had distinguished themselves again and again, and 
thought how fortunate it was that they could help him at the 
time his old captains were failing. -` 

When he heard of the coming ‘of Sun Chiiian’s army under 
newly appointed leaders, he wished to select a captain to oppose 
the Wu army. Then those near him told him that Huang 
Chung and a half dozen other officers had run off to Wu. 

“Huang is no traitor,” said the ruler, smiling; “it is only 
that he heard what I happened to say about old and useless 
leaders. He will not confess he is.old and wants to prove he 
is not.” y 

Then he called his two nephews and said to them, “Huang 
Chung may fail in this enterprise of his, so I hope you two 
will not mind going to his assistance. As soon as there is 


some success to report get him to return and do not let him 


come to grief.” 
So the two got their. men together and went off to assist 
the aged warrior. 


When young, success is easy, thine at will, 
The aged servant fails, though willing still. 


The next chapter will relate the outcome of Huang Chung’ s 
expedition. 


CHAPTER LXXXIII. | ae 


FIGHTING AT HSIAOT ING; THE FIRST Rorik CAPTURES: 
A CERTAIN ENEMIES; T » 
\ —— — DEFENCE OF CHIANGK‘0U; A STUDENT ACCEPTS 
i SUPREME COMMAND. 


As ae Heck ‘said, the veteran warrior Huang Chung was SA 
among the officers who followed the First Ruler to war against > 
‘ Wu. When he heard his master talk of old and incapable ere 
leaders he girded on his sword and with a few faithful 
followers made his way to the camps at Iling. He was 
welcomed by the captains there, but they knew not why he 
had come. | 
“For what reason do you come, O Veteran? T? asked they. 
= “I have followed our lord the Emperor ever since he left. i 
` Changsha, and I have done diligent service. I am now over — ; 
o tiei but my appetite is good, I can stretch the strongest- 
bow, and I can ride any distance without fatigue. I am not 
‘weak or worn out. But our master has been talking of old _ 
and stupid leaders, and I am come to take part in the fight 
; -with Wu. If I slay one of their leaders he will see I may be 
-old but not worn out.” 
= Just about that time the leading division of the Wu army 
~- drew near, and the scouts were close to the camp. Huang a 
- Chung hastily rose, went out of the: tent and mere to go 
into the battle. . 
“Aged General, be careful, ” said the Cagis. 
But Huang Chung paid no attention and set off at full speed. a, 
However, Fêng Hsi was sent to help him. As soon as he saw AP X 
_ the array of the enemy, he pulled up and challenged the leader (leg 
of the vanguard. The van-leader, P‘an Chang, sent out one. | 
: of his subordinates, Shih Chi, to take the’ challenge. Shih Chi 
_ despised his aged antagonist and rode lightly forth with his | 
spear set, but in the third bout Huang Chung cut him down. 
-This angered P‘an, who flourished Black Dragon, the sword 
of the old warrior Kuan which had passed into his possession, 
_ and took up the battle. These two fought several bouts, and 
neither was victor, for Huang Chung was brimful of energy. 
_ His antagonist, seeing that he could not overcome the old man, 
galloped off. Huang Chung pursued ang smote him and scored 
a full victory, ; 


232 San uo, or 


On his way back he fell in with the two youthful captains, 
Kuan and Chang, who told him they had come by sacred 
command to aid him if necessary. 

“And now that you have scored so complete a victory we 
pray you to return to the main camp,” said they: 


But the veteran would not. Next day P‘ang Chang came ~ 
`- to challenge again, and Huang Chung at once accepted. Nor 


would he allow the young men to come with him, or accept 
assistance from any other. Na 

He led out five companies. Before many bouts had been. 
exchanged P‘an Chang made a feint and got away. Huang 
Chung pursued, shouting to him not to flee. 

“Flee not, for now will I avenge the death of Kuan Yü,” 
cried he. 

Huang pursued some score. li, but presently he fell into an. 


ambush “and found himself attacked on both flanks and in the © 


rear, and the erstwhile flying enemy turned, so that Huang 
was surrounded and hemmed in. Suddenly. a great storm 
came on. The wind blew violently, forcing Huang to retreat. 


And as he was passing some hills an enemy cohort came down 


the slopes, and one of the arrows wounded the veteran in the 
armpit. He nearly fell from his horse with the shock. The 
men of Wu, seeing Huang wounded, came on all together, but 


soon the two youthful captains, Kuan Hsing and Chang Pao,⁄ — 


drove them off and scattered them, Thus they rescued Huang 
Chung. 

He was taken back to the main camp. But he was old and - 
his blood was thin, and the wound gaped wide, so that he was - 


near to die. The First Ruler came to visit him and patted — 


his back and said, “It is my fault, O Veteran, that you have — 
been hurt in the battle. a: 

“I am a soldier,” said the old man. “I am glad that I could 
serve Your Majesty. But now I am seventy-five and I have 
lived long enough. Be careful of your own safety for the 
good of the state.” 

_These were his last words. He became unconscious ang 
died that night. A poem was written of him:— 
First among veterans stands Huang Chung, 
Who won great merit in the conquest of Shu. 
Old, he still donned his coat of mail, 
And laid his hand to the curving bow. . 
His valour. was the talk of all the north, 
Fear of his might maintained the new-won west. 
Tardy he bowed his snow-white head to death, 
Fighting to the end; in very truth a hero. 


The First Ruler was very sad when he heard of Huang 


Chung’s death and made him a grave in Ch‘éngtu. 
“My brave captain is gone,” sighed he, “and the third of 


ae 


my brave leaders, and I have been unable to avenge their ; 


; death. it is very grievous.’ 


fomance of the Three Liingdoms : e 238 


-Next Liu Pei led the Imperial Guard to Hsiaot‘ing, where 
he summoned a great assembly. He divided his forces into 
eight parts ready for an attack by land and water. The 
marines were placed under Huang Ch‘tian, and he himself led 
the land forces. It was then the second month, 

When Han Tang and Chou T‘ai heard that the army of Shu 
was approaching, they marched toward ‘it. When near, the 
two armies were arrayed. The two leaders of Wu rode out 
and saw the First Ruler standing beneath the great standard 
with his staff about him. A silken umbrella splashed with gold. 
was over his head; right and left were white banners, golden 
as and other insignia of an emperor. Then Han Tang 
spoke: 

“Your Majesty is now Ruler of Shu; why do you risk your ` 
life in the battle-field. It would be most regrettable if any 
untoward event happened.” 
= The First Ruler pointed the finger of scorn at the speaker 
and said; “You dogs of Wu bereft me of my brother, and I 
ay sworn that you shall not live with me under the same 
sS é 

“Who dares plunge in among the enemy?” asked Han Tang, 
turning to those in his train. | 

-A certain Hsia Hsiin set his spear and rode to the front, and 


as he did so Chang Pao with a roar galloped out to meet him. 


But this thunderous voice affrighted Hsia, and he sought to flee. 
Then Chou T‘ai’s brother, Chou Ping, seeing that his colleague 
was panic-stricken, flourished his sword and rode out too. At 
once Kuan Hsing dashed to the front. Chang Pao: roared 
again, and thrusting at Hsia bore him from his steed. This 
- disconcerted Chou P‘ing and enfeebled his defence, so that 
Kuan speedily slew him. Then the two youths rode furiously 
-at the two leaders. They sought refuge in the rear. 

“The tiger fathers have not begotten curs of. sons, ? said the 
‘First Ruler with a sigh of satisfaction. 

Then he waved his whip as a signal to fall on, znd the Wu 
army suffered a great defeat. The force of the eight divisions 
~ was irresistible as a river in flood, and the slaughter was 
immense. 

Kan Ning was in his ship ill, but he roused himself when he 
heard the armies of Shu had come, and mounted to go into 
the battle. Soon he met a cohort of the Man soldiers. These 
men wore their hair loose and went barefoot. Their weapons 
were bows and crossbows and long spears and swords and 
axes. And they had shields to ward off blows. They were 

led by their own Prince Shamoko. His face was spotted with 
red as if splashed with blood, and his eyes were grey. He 
- rushed among Kan Ning’s men wielding a spiked iron staff 

with bone pendants, and he had two bows slung at his belt. 
` He was terrible to look upon. Kan Ning recognised that he 


t 


234 an fio, or 


had no chance of victory against such a man aha did not 
engage him, but turned his steed to flee. But as he fied 
Shamoko shot an arrow that pierced Kan Ning’s skull. 
Wounded as he was, he rode on to Fuch‘ihk‘ou, but there he 
dismounted and sat under a tree,.where he died. On the tree 
were many hundreds of crows, and they gathered round the 
corpse. The Prince:of Wu was sore grieved at the news of 
his death, and had the remains buried honourably. Moreover, 
he raised a temple to his memory. 


t 


Kan Ning was first of Naal eo in Wu, 

With silken sails he stemmed the Yangtse’s tide, 
Right loyally he served his prince, and true, — 

He made two ill friends put their hate aside. 
Light horse led he by night a camp to raid, 

And first he warmed his men with generous wine. 
His resting place the solemn birds betrayed, 

And fragrant incense smoulders at his shrine. 


This victory gave the First Ruler possession of Hsiaot‘ing. 
But at the muster after the battle Kuan Hsing did not appear. 
Search parties were sent to find him, and they went far and 
wide beating the country around. 

However, the dashing young Soldier was only following in 
his father’s footsteps. When Kuan Hsing had got in among 
the men of Wu, he had caught sight of P‘an Chang, his 
especial enemy, and galloped in pursuit. In terror, P‘an took 
to the hills and disappeared in one of the valleys. In seeking 
him Kuan Hsing lost his way and went to and fro till it grew 
dark without finding a way out. It was clear moonlight. 
Near midnight he came to a farm, where he dismounted and 
knocked at the door. A venerable old man appeared and 
asked who he was. 

“I am one of the leaders oe the army, and I have lost my 
way. I beg a meal, for I am starving,” said Kuan. ; 

The old man led him into a hall lit by many candles, and there © 
- he saw a picture of his dead father. _At once he began to wail 
and bowed before it. 

“Why do you wail thus? ??” asked the old man. 

“This is my father,” said Kuan. 

At this, the old man prostrated himself before his guest. 
= “Why should you treat my father with such respect?’’ asked 

uan., 

_ “This place is sacred to his honoured spirit. While he lived. 
the people served him, and now that he is a spirit should they 

not revere him the more? ` I have been waiting for the armies 
of Shu to avenge his death, and it is indeed the great good, 

fortune of the people that you have come.” 

Then he brought forth wine and food and served his guest. 
Moreover, he unsaddled and fed his horse. 


aoma of the Three tingoomg 


Some two hours later a knocking came at the door, and when 
the old man ʻopened it, the visitor was no other than P'an 
Phang, the Wu General. He also asked shelter. 

As he came in Kuan recognised him and drew his sword 
srying, “Stay; you ruffian! Do notflee!” 


b 


P‘an turned and would have gone out, but on the threshold 


suddenly appeared a figure of ruddy complexion’ with bright 
syes and heavy eyebrows, and a long, flowing beard. And 
t wore a green robe and golden armour end was armed with 
1 huge sword. 

P‘an shrank back, for. he petoonieed the noble Kuan in spirit 
form. He uttered a shriek and became as one distraught, 
out before he could turn, Kuan Hsing raised his sword; it fell, 
and P*‘an lay dead. Taking the heart-blood of his dead enemy 
Kuan poured it in libation before the picture of his father. 
After that he took possession of his father’s sword, Black 
Dragon, curved as the young moon. 

Having hacked off the head of his fallen enemy he aad 
t to his bridle. Then he took leave of his aged host, saddled 
nis enemy’s horse and rode away toward his own camp. The 
id man dragged the Car pae of the dead soldier outside and 
urned it. 

Kuan had not gone very far when he eed the neighing 
»f horses and soon met a troop led by Ma Chung, one of P‘an 
Jhang’s lieutenants, who was looking for his chief. Ma fell 
nto a great rage when he saw the head of his chief swinging 
it the neck of Kuan Hsing’s horse and beheld the famous 
sword in his hand. He galloped up. furiously, and Kuan 
Hsing, who recognised an enemy of his late father, rushed to 
meet him. Just as he would strike, however, Ma Chung’s 
men galloped up to support their captain, and Kuan Hsing 
vas surrounded. He was in dire danger, but just opportunely 
“ame up a troop of horse led by his cousin Chang. At this, 
Ma, thinking discretion the better part, drew off his men and 
rode away.. ; 

“The two: cousins pursued hon Before they had gone far 
hey met another force under Mi Fang and Fushih Jên, who 
ad come out to seek Ma Chung. The two bodies of soldiers 
met and fought, but the men of Shu were too few for victory 


ind drew off. Thence they made their way to headquarters, - 


where they told their adventures and presented. ithe head of 
heir late enemy. 

Ma Chung went back and rejoined Han Tang hae Chou Al: 
Many men were wounded. Then they marched to Chiangchu 
and encamped. The night they arrived many men were 
yroaning with the pain of their wounds. Mi Fang, who was 


istening unknown to the men, heard one of them say, “We. 


are Chingchou men and victims of Lü Méng’s vile machi- 
rations. . Tf we had: only remained under Liu Pei! Now he 


j 


va 
a 


236 Aan Huo, or 


is Emperor and has set out to destroy Wu, and he will do it 
one day. But we have a special grudge against Mi Fang and 
Fushih Jên. Why should we not kill these two and go over 
to Shu? They will think we have done well.” Another said, 
“Do not be hasty; we will do it presently when there is a 
chance.” 

Mi Fang did not like this at all. He told his colleague the 
men were mutinous and they themselves were in danger. 

“Ma Chung is an object of especial hatred to the Ruler of 
Shu; suppose we kill him and surrender. We can say we were 
compelled to give in to Wu, but as soon as he came near we 
wanted to get back.” 

“It will not do,” said Fushih. “If we go they. will kill Us 

“No; the Ruler of Shu is liberal and kind. And the heir, 
Atou, is related to me. They will surely not do any harm 
to a connection.” ; 

In the end they decided to go. And in the third watch they 
made their way into their chief’s tent and stabbed him to 
death. Then they cut off his head, and with their grisly 
trophy and a few followers they set off for the camp of the 
Ruler of Shu. They arrived at the outposts and were taken 
to see Chang Nan and Féng Hsi, to whom they told their tale. 
Next day they went into the camp and were admitted to the 
presence of the First Ruler, to whom they offered their trophy. 
And they threw themselves on the ground- and wept, saying, 
“We are not traitors. We were the victims of Lü Méng’s 
wickedness. He said that Kuan Yti was dead and tricked us 
into giving up the city. We could not help surrendering. 
When we heard the ‘sacred chariot’ had come we slew this 
man to satisfy your vengeance, and we implore forgiveness.” 

But the First Ruler was angry, and said, “I left Ch‘éngtu 
a long time ago; why did you not ¢ome to confess your fault 
before? Now you find yourselves in danger and so you come 
with this specious tale to try to save your lives. If I pardon 
you, how shall I look my brother in the face when we meet, 
beneath the Nine Springs?” 

Then he bade Kuan Hsing set up an altar to his father in 
the camp, and thereon he offered the head they had brought 
in sacrifice before the tablet of Kuan Yü. This done, he had 
the two deserters stripped and made them kneel before the 
altar, and presently with his own hand he hewed them in 
pieces as a sacrifice. 

Presently Chang Pao came in and wailed before him, saying, 
“The two enemies of my uncle have been slain, but when will 
vengeance be taken upon those of my father?” 

“Do not grieve, my nephew,” said the First Ruler, “I am. 
going to lay waste Chiangnan and slay the whole of the curs 
that live there. I will assuredly capture the two murderers of 
your father, and you shall hack them to pieces as a sacrifice.” 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms | 237 


Chang Pao went away, still weeping. 

About this time the fear of the First Ruler was very great 
among the men of Chiangnan, who stood in dread of hini so 
that they grieved night and day. Han Tang and Chou Tai 
were rather frightened too, and they sent a report to their 
master of the assassination of Ma Chung and what had 
befallen the assassins. 

‘Then Sun Ch‘tian was distressed and called eaer his 
counsellers. At this meeting Pu Chi proposed submission and 
self-humiliation for the sake of peace. 

Said he, “There were five persons whom Liu Pei had a 
grudge against, and they are ali dead. Now the objects of 
his hate are the murderers of Chang Fei. Why not send back 
Chang Fei’s head, and these two assassins, and give up 
Chingchou and restore the Lady Sun and ask for peace and 
alliance against Wei? This will make the men of Shu retire, 
and we shall have peace.’ 

This proposal seemed good: So the head of Chane Fei was 
enclosed in a sandalwood box; Fan Chiang and Chang Ta were 
bound and put in a cage- -cart. All these were sent, with ` 
letters, by the band of Ch*‘éng Ping to the camp at Hsiaot‘i ing. 

The First Ruler was about to march farther east when they | 

told him that a messenger had come from Chiangnan and what 
he had brought: The Ruler struck his forehead with both 
hands, saying, “This is the direct gift of Heaven through my 
youngest brother’s spirit.” 
He bade Chang Pao prepare an altar whereon to sacrifice 
the heads of his father’s assassins... When he opened the box 
and saw the features of his brother he seemed at first 
outwardly unmoved, but soon he broke into wailing for the 
dead. Then the son hewed the two men in pieces and offered 
them upon the altar. 

But this sacrifice did not appease Liu Pei’s anger, and he 
still desired to destroy Wu. - Whereupon Ma ‘Liang remon- 
strated. 

- “Your enemies are now all dead: you are avenged. Wu has 
sent a high officer with large concessions and awaits your 
repl 

a Liu Pei savagely replied, “The one I would grind to 
pieces is Sun Ch‘tian. To act as he proposes and enter, into 
alliance would be treachery to my two brothers and a breach of 
our oath. Now I will exterminate Wu, and Wei shall follow.” 

He wished also to put the messenger to death, but relented 
when his officers intereeded; and poor Ch‘éng Ping ran off, 
terrified, glad to escape with life. He went back and. told Sun 
Chiiian how implacable his enemy seemed. 

-. Sun Ch‘iian was frightened and bewildered. Seeing this, 
K‘ an Tsé, stepped forward and said, “Since there is a sky- 
supporting pillar, why not use it?”. 


pue 
4 


238 = an Ruo, or 


“Whom do you refer to?” asked Sun Ch‘tian. ; 

“You once had perfect confidence in Chou Yü, and he was 
followed by Lu Su, equally able. Lü Mêng succeeded and you 
pinned your faith upon him. Though now he is dead, yet 
there is Lu Hsiin. And he is quite near, in Chingchou. He 
is reputed to be a scholar, but really he is a bold and capable 
man, no whit inferior to Chou Yü, in my opinion. The plan. 
that broke Kuan Yii was his. If anyone can destoy Shu, it 
is he. If he fail, then I will stand the same punish as 
may be his.” 

“If you had not spoken is my eae scheme might’ ee 
gone amiss,” said Sun Ch‘tian. 

“Lu Hsiin is a student,” said Chang Chao. “He is no match 
for Liu Pei. You may not use him.” 

Ku Yung also said, “He is too young and too inexperienced. 
I fear he will not be obeyed, and that will be mischievous.” 

Pu Chi also: said, “He is well enough to control a district, 
but he is not fit for a big matter.” 

K‘an Tsé got desperate. ‘It is the only hope,” shouted he. 
“I will guarantee him with the lives of all my house.” | 

“I know he is able,” said Sun Ch‘tian, “and I have now made 
up my mind he is the man. Gentlemen, that is enough.” 

Lu Hsiin was called home. Lu Hsiin was originally named 
Lu I: his tz was Po-yen. He was a native of Wu, son of Lu 
Chiin, who was Tu-yi of Kiukiang and grandson of Lu Yü. 
He was of medium height, with a clear complexion, “like the 
finest jade.” : 

Having arrived at court and made his bow, Sun Ch‘tian said 
to him, “I wish to send you in supreme command of all the 
forces against Shu.” j 

“Sir, you have numerous old and tried officers under TORE 
command: I am very young and not,at all clever,” + replied. 
Lu. 

“Kan Tsé goes bail for you and‘ pledges his whole house. 
Moreover, I know your abilities. You must be Commander-’ 
in-chief and may not refuse the appointment.” | 

“But what will happen if the officers do not support me?” 

“Here is authority!” said Sun Ch‘tian, taking his own sword 
from his side. “Slay the disobedient and report afterwards.” 

“I am grateful for this proof of confidence, but I dare net 
accept forthwith. I pray you to assemble all the officers and 
confer the office upon me in their presence.’ 

Said K‘an Tsé, “The ancient fashion was to set up a platform 
and thereon present to the leader-elect a white yak’s tail and 
a golden axe with the seal of office and the fu (commission). 
Thereafter his dignity and the reverence due from others were 
beyond all question. It would be well, O Prince, to follow the 
old rule. Choose a good day and appoint Lu Hsiin before all 
the world, and no one will refuse support.” 


: eae Somane oi the Three Hingaoma gn 


An altar was been at once. They worked at ‘it day ae 


night, and as soon as it was finished a great assembly was 


_ called. Then Lu Hsiin was requested to ascend and make his 
bow on receiving his appointment as ‘“Commander-in-chief, 
Leader of the Senior Guardian Army of the West and Marquis 
of Fenglou.” The sword of authority and the seal of office 


were presented. His powers extended over the six districts. 


and the eighty-one departments (of Chiangnan), over the 
_ forces in Chingchou and Chin. - 
And in charging him Sun Chiiian said, “Domestic affairs 
_beiong to me; outer affairs are under your direction.” 


Lu Hsün then descended. He chose Hsii Shéng and Ting © 
Feng as commanders of his guards, and the army lost notime 
in taking the field. The various dispositions of horse and foot 


were made, and despatches were sent to the outlying com- 
-~ manders. 


When the despatch reached ‘Hari Tang and Chou T‘ai thes: 


_ were much upset at this appointment of a mere bookish student 
to command them. So when the new Commander-in-chief 


came they showed their discontent by a lack of hearty support. | 


Lu Hsiin went to his tent to receive the reports, and there the 


majority of the officers. manifested only sullen respect and... 


unwilling deference. 


J am Commander-in-chief, and my commission is to destroy 
Shu. You, gentlemen, all know the ordinary military rules, 
and you would do well to obey them. The law is no respecter 
of persons, as those who disobey will find out. Do not have to 
* regret when it is too late.” 
_. They nodded in sullen acquiescence. Then Chou T“ai said, 
“There is Sun Huan, nephew of our prince; he is surrounded 
at Iling and is short of food, I venture to request you to send 
relief to him and get him out so that the prince’s heart may be 
comforted.” ; 
“I know all about him. His men are faithful, and he can 


easily maintain his position. There is no need to go to his aid. 


When Shu is broken he will be free to come out.”’ 
They all sniggered as they left the tent, and Han: Tang did not 
i fail to express his contempt for the newly appointed “‘scholar.” 


“This will be the end of Wu,” said he to his colleague. “Did 


you note what he said?” 

“J tried him just to see what he would do,” said Chou T‘ai. 

“You see he had no plan ready; he destroy Shu indeed!” 
Next day general orders were issued for defence and prohibi- 

- tions against giving battle, which provoked more laughter at 

- the incapable pedant, as they thought him, in command, and 

=- gecret resolves to disobey. Moreover, the officers showed ‘their 

_ contempt by a general disregard of orders. So once more Lu 
Hsun assembled them and said, “You know I am in command ; 


$ 


Then Lu addressed them, saying, “By order of my superior - 


240 Aan Kuo, or 


~ yet the. recent orders for defence have bees disregarded. 


Why?” 

Then Han Tang spoke up, “Some of us followed General 
Sun when he first subdued Chiangnan. Others won fame in 
destroying rebels, or in following the present prince in his 
campaigns. All of us have donned. our armour and gripped 
our weapons in many a bloody fight. Now, Sir, you have been 
placed in supreme command to repulse Shu, and there should 
be some plan of campaign made for us at-once, some disposi- 
tions of our forces and some definite advance toward that end. 
Instead of that we are told to strengthen our defences and are 


forbidden to fight. What are we to wait for? Will Heaven 


destroy our opponents for us? We are not afraid to die. Why — 


is our keenness left to be eaten away and our energies wasted 
` in idleness?’ 

All the others applauded this speech and bad that the 
speaker had expressed their own ideas. 


“General Han Tang just says what we think: let us fight a : 


decisive battle,” they cried. 
.. The new general waited till the uproar had goheidcd. Then 
drawing his sword, he shouted, “That I am a student is true. 


But I have been entrusted with a great task, a task for which _ 
the prince considers me competent and for the performance of 


which I am prepared to bear all the responsibilities. As for - 


you, you will do well to act on the defensive as I ordered and 
not allow yourselves to be led astray into any attacks. And _ 


I shall put the disobedient to death.” 


This speech had little effect, and they dispersed mumping 


and grumbling. 


As has been told, the First Ruler had made a long chain of | 


stations reaching back to his base, and these camps looked very 
imposing with their fluttering hanners by day and their fires 
at night. Then the spies came in and told him of the new 
commander of the Wu army and his policy and orders to 
defend. 

“What sort of a man is this Lu Hsiin?” said he. 

“He is famous as a scholar among the people of Wu, and, 
though young, he is very talented,” replied Ma Liang. “His 


schemes are very deep. He was the author of the villainous. 


and crafty plan of attack on Chingchou.” 
“His crafty scheme caused the deaths of my brothers, the 
blockhead; but now I shall have him,” said Liu Pei. 


\ 


He gave orders to advance. But Ma Liang ventured. to ; 


remonstrate and dissuade him. “Be very careful,” said he; 
“this Lu Hsün is no whit inferior to Chou Yü.” 


“I have grown old in the field,” said the king. “Don’t you > 


think me a match for this. callow youth?” 


He confirmed the order to go forward, and they ethaekode 


pass and ford and redoubt wherever they were. Han Tang 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms | 241 


“notified his chief of the attack, and Lu Hsiin, still rather 
dubious of the strict obedience to his orders, hastened to the 
point of danger. He found Han Tang on a hill surveying the 
enemy’s force, which advanced like a great wave. Amidst the 
ey they saw a wide yellow umbrella, and Han Tang pointed 
it out. 

“That must be Liu Pei,” said he. “I should like to kill him.” 

“Careful,” said Lu Hsiin. “So far he has scored victory | 
after victory, and his men are very keen and confident. 
Maintain a careful defence and do not go out to battle. If 
you do, you will lose. Impress that upon your officers and 
men and make them understand the strategy while you follow 
the enemy’s moves. They are hastening into the wide open 
space of P‘ingyiian, and I do not wish to hinder them. Nor 
will I accept any challenge to battle, but wait till they have 
moved their camps into the forest and among -the trees. Then 
I shall have a scheme ready.” 

Han Tang agreed so far as words went, but in his heart he 
was still mutinous and ill-conditioned. When the Shu army 
drew near, a.small force came to challenge. They shouted all 
sorts of abuse and hurled reproaches to put their opponents to 
shame, but Lu Hsün took no notice and bade his men stop their 
ears. He would not allow them to go out to battle, but he went 
from: fort to redoubt encouraging the soldiers to. remain 
carefully on the defensive. yi i 

‘The First Ruler’s heart burned within him at this refusal 
to come out to battle, and it angered him none the less that Ma 
` Liang dinned into his ears how deep Lu Hsiin was and crafty. 

“He recognises the disadvantages of Your Majesty’s troops 
in being far from their base, and from spring to autumn he . 
will not come out to fight till some move occurs that he may 
profit by.” j 

“What ruse can he be contemplating?” said Liu Pei. “The 
real fact is that he is afraid. Their army has suffered nothing 
but defeat times and again. They dare not meet us.” 

One day the leader of the van, Fêng Hsi, memorialised the 
First Ruler, saying, “The weather is scorching and the troops 
are camped in the full glare of sun. Beside, water is scarce 
and hard to get.” ; ; 

Thereupon orders were given to move the camps into the 
shade of the forest close by and near the streams till the 
summer heats should have passed. This order given, Féng 
Hsi was the first to choose a retired and shady spot for his men. 

Ma Liang said, “If our men move, the enemy will rush out 
on us and we shall be hard set.” ' 

“I will provide for that,” said the First Ruler. “I will send 
Wu Pan with a legion of our inferior troops tọ camp near 
their lines. But I will choose eight companies of veterans 
and place them in ambush. Wu Pan will have orders to flee 


16 


before the men of Wu and lead them into my ambush if they 
come out, and I will cut off their retreat. We ought to capture 
this precocious youth.” 

“A genius in plans, a marvel of prevision ! 
about him as this plan was unfolded. “Norte of us can 
approach him in cleverness.” 

So they felicitated their ruler. But Ma Liang said, “They 
say the Prime Minister is on a tour of inspection of the 
fastnesses in the eastern portion of Shu, seeing that they are 
in good order against any attack on the part of Wei. Why 


p 


not send him a sketch of your present dispositions of troops 


and ask his opinion?” 


“I also am not entirely ignorant of the art of war, and I see 


no reason to seek advice,” was the cold reply. 


“There is an old saying about hearing both sides,” said Ma 


Liang. 
“Well, then ; you go round to all the camps and make a map 


and take it to the Prime Minister. If he finds any fault you l 


may come and tell me.’ 
So he went while the First Ruler busied himself with getting 


his men into shelter from the fierce heat of summer. His 


move was no secret, and the scouts soon told Han and Chou, 


who rejoiced at the news and soon went to tell Lu Hsün that | 


all the enemies’ camps had been moved into the shade. 
“Now, Sir, you can attack!” said they. 


"Twas not a bad plan, an ambush to set, 
Thus thought he his chiefest opponent to get. 


Whether Lu Hsün acted upon the suggestion of his sub- 
ordinates will be seen in the. next Rapra 


cried all those 


CHAPTER LXXXIV. 


Lu Hsun Burns His ENEMY’s Camps; 
_ K‘UNG-MING PLANS THE EIGHT ARRAYS. 


ae last chapter. closed. with the report. that the First Ruler 
had shifted camp in search of coolth, and the news was very 
welcome to Lu Hsiin. He went forthwith to assure himself 
-of the truth of the’ report. and observe the new position. A 
level plain lay at his feet, whereon he saw something short of 
a legion, the greater part of whom appeared invalids. On the 
_ banner of their leader he read the name Wu Pan. 
_ “We despise these men,” said Chou Tai. “Let me and 
General Han go out. and smite them. OL will give the formal 
_ guarantee of victory.” 
The Commander-in- chief made no reply, but remained 
- gazing out before him. Presently he said, “It seems to me 
that an air of slaughter is rising over there from that valley ; 
surely there is an ambush there. These poor troops in the 
foreground are nothing but a bait. No, Gentlemen; do not 
leave your positions.” 

Those who heard this took it only as another proof of the 
mbci of their pedant commander. Next day Wu Pan’s 
‘men approached closer and challenged to battle, swaggering 
about and brandishing their weapons and shouting volleys of 
-abuse without end. They manifested contempt by throwing 
_ off their armour and clothing and moving to and fro with the 

utmost carelessness, bare bodies and naked forms, blatantly 
unready to fight. Some even sat or lay asleep. 

Hsii Shêng and his colleague came to the commander’s tent 
_ to complain of these insults and ask permission to go out and 
-punish the enemy, but Lu Hsiin only smiled. 

“You see everything from the point of view of brute courage. 
- You seem not to know the principles of war laid down by Sun 
and Wu. This display is only meant to entice us into fight. 
You will see the pretence yourselves in about three days.” 

“Tn three days the change of camp will be complete, and the 
enemy will be too strongly posted for our success,’ > said they. 

“Tam just letting them move their camp.’ 

These two left the tent also sniggering. But on the third 


1 


aay the officers were assembled at a certain look-out point 


_ whence they saw that Wu’s men were leaving. 
“There is still a deadly look over the valley,” said Lu Hstin. 
“Liu Pei will soon appear.” 


244 ' San Kuo, or 


He was right. Very soon they saw a whole army all well 
accoutred pass across the field escorting the First Ruler. And 
the sight took away all their courage. 

“That i is why I would not listen to those of you who s 
to fight,” said Lu. “Now that the ambush has been withdrawn 
we can settle them in about ten days.” 

“The proper time to attack was when they began to transfer 
their camp. Now they are fully established with encamp- 
ments stretching hundreds of li. Having spent seven or eight 
months in strengthening where they might be attacked, will 
it not be difficult to destroy them?” 

“I see you do not understand how to carry on war. This 
man Pei is a bad man, but capable and crafty. When he first 
started on this expedition his methods were of the best, and he 
kept to them for a long time, so we gave him no chance against 
us. When his men are worn out and his thoughts cease to be 
clear that will be our day to attack.” 

At last they agreed with their chief. 


The general discoursed on war, 
According to the book; 
Right craftily the bait for whales 
Was put upon the hook. 
When kingdoms three were carven out, 
Though famous men were many, 
Commander Lu of Chiangnan 
At least stands high as any. 


The truth is, the plan whereby the Shu army was to be 
crushed was all ready, and at this stage he wrote to the Prince 5 
Wu full details, even naming a day for the victory. 

“We have found another remarkably able man,” said the 
prince, “and I have no further anxiety. They all said he was _ 
a useless pedant, and only I knew better. Reading this letter 
shows him nothing at all of a pedant.” 

Then the Prince of Wu mustered the remainder of his 
soldiers to hold in reserve. 

Meanwhile the First Ruler had sent orders to hasten the 
marines down the river and take up stations along the banks 
deep in the territory of Wu. However, Huang Ch‘tian spoke 
against this, saying, “It is easy enough for the ships to go 
down, but how about returning? Let me make the first 
advance, and Your Majesty may follow. That will frags it 
more than probable that nothing will go wrong.” 

“Those Wu dogs are afraid,” objected the ruler, “and I 
want to make a dash at them. Where is the difficulty 2 sai ; 

It was only after many others had spoken against the 
proposal that the First Ruler gave up the notion of going into 
the forefront of the attack. Then dividing the army into two 
portions, he placed Huang Ch‘tian in command on the north 
bank, to keep a watch on Wei, while he commanded on the 


Romance of the Three ingdoms 245 


southern bank. They made encampments and stations along 
the bank. : 

The spies of Wei duly reported these doings to Ts‘ao P‘ei, 
_ who laughed aloud when he heard the details of the long line 
of camps and the encampments among the trees and all this. 

“Liu Pei is going to be defeated,” said he. 

“How do you know?” asked his courtiers. 

“Because Liu Yiian-té does not know how to wage war. 
How can he beat off an enemy along a front of seven hundred 
li? The maxims of war forbid to camp in open plains, among 
marshes, amid preciptous heights and obstacles. He will be 
defeated at the hand of Lu Hsiin, and we shall hear of it in 
about ten days.” | 

His officers felt more than doubtful and entreated their 
master to prepare an army. But the lord of Wei replied, “If _ 
successful, Lu Hsün will lead all his force westward into 
Hsich‘uan, and his country will be defenceless. I shall pretend 
to send an army to help. I shall send them in three divisions, 

„and I shall overcome Wu easily.” 

They all bowed acquiescence and approval. Then orders 
went out appointing Ts‘ao Jên to lead an army out by Juhsii, 
Ts‘ao Hsiu to take a second out by Tungk’ou and Ts‘ao Chén 
to command a third to go through Nanchiin, and the three 
armies were to combine on a given date for a sudden attack 
on Wu. 

The story of that attack will not be: told here; it is neces- 
sary to say how Ma Liang fared. Reaching Ch‘éngtu, he lost 
no time in seeing the Prime Minister and presenting the plan 
of the armies as they were in the field. 

“Now the forces are on both sides of the river extending 
along a front of seven hundred li, with forty stations, each 
beside a mountain stream or in a pleasantly shaded forest. 
At our lord’s command I prepared this map, and he sent me 

-to ask your opinion.” , 

“Who advised such an arrangement? He ought to be put 
to death, whoever it was,” cried K‘ung-ming sorrowfully, tap- 

ping the table at his side. | 

“Tt is entirely our lord’s own work; no other had any hand 

init,” said Ma. 

“The life and energy of the Hans are done indeed,” said 
K‘ung-ming. “He has committed those very faults which the 
rules of the ‘Art of War’ lay down as to be particularly avoided. 
The camps are made where free movement is impossible, and 
nothing can save him if the enemy use fire. Beside, what 
defence is possible along a seven hundred li front? Disaster 
is at hand, and Lu Hsiin sees it all, which explains his obstinate 
_ refusal to come out into the open. Go back as quickly as you 
ean and tell our lord that this will not do, that it must be 
_ changed at once.” — { 


246 San us, or 


“But if I am too late! If Wu has Fad attacked and won. 
what then.” 

“The enemy will not dare to follow up their victory by a 
march on Ch‘éngtu from fear of Wei. So this city is secure. 
Our lord will be compelled to shelter in Paitichténg. I have ~ 
already placed a legion of men in hiding at Fishbelly | Creek 
(Yiifupu). 

“Have you? I have been up and down that creek three or 
four times without seeing a man. I do not see the reason of 
telling lies to me,” said Ma. 

“You will see; do not ask so many questions.” 

With the precious instructions which he had persuaded the 
great strategist to draw up, Ma Liang hastened back to the 
imperial camp, while K‘ung-ming went to the oa to prepare — 
a relief expedition. 

The men of Shu had become slack and idle and no longer © 
maintained adequate defence, wherefore Lu Hstin perceived 
that his.moment had arrived, and called his baptains to his 
tent to receive orders. i 

“There has been no fighting since T received our lord’s 
command. I have spent the time in acquiring a knowledge of 
the enemy. As a preliminary operation I want to capture a 
camp on the south bank. Who volunteers?” 


Out stepped Han and Chou and Ling, all three at once, each — 


crying that he wanted to be sent. But they were sent back; | 
the Commander-in-chief did not want any of them. Then he — 
called up the junior captain, Shunyti Tan, and said, “You will — 
take the fourth camp on the south side; you may have half a | 
legion. The commander of the post is Fu T’ung. I shall — 
support you.” 

When Shunyii had gone, he summoned Hsti Shéng and Ting 
Féng and said, “Each of you will take three companies and 
bivouac five li from the camp, so that if your colleague is 
repulsed and pursued you can rescue him.” 

Shunyti Tan marched between the lights and reached the 
camp he was to capture just after the third watch. His 
drums rolled, and he attacked at once. The defenders came — 
out led by Fu Tung, who, spear ready to thrust, rede straight — 
toward the leader of the attack and forced him back. 
Suddenly there arose the roll of other drums, and a cohort 
under Chao Yung barred the way. Shunyti turned off along | 
another road, escaping with loss of many men. 

But he was not yet safe. Some distance farther he ran 
against the barbarian leader Shamoko. However, Shunyii 
avoided him also and went on his way, pursued now by three — 
parties. Soon he reached the spot five li from the camp, and 
here the two leaders of Shu, who had been placed ready to 
afford succour, came out and stopped the pursuit. When the- 
enemy had retired, Shunyti Tan was escorted back to camp. | 


EEM AENEA oan tate eal OR Ree Tee Bie N AST 
AGI RNG trae alee! 
4 att Aap 4 i re Ba Wiper a 


oe 
Ned y 
(te 


Romance of the Three Hinguoms 287 


He was wounded, and with the arrow still undrawn he 
appeared before Lu Hsiin and apologised for his failure. 

“It was no fault of yours,” said the Commander-in-chief. 
“I wanted to test the force of our enemy. My plan of attack 
is quite ready.” 

“The enemy is very strong and will not be easily overcome,’ 
said Asti and Ting. “We have now suffered great loss o no 
purpose.” . 

“This plan of mine would not hoodwink Chuko Liang, but 
happily he is hot here. His absence will allow me to score a 
great success.’ f 

Then he summoned his captains to receive ordérs. He sent 
Chu Jan to:lead the marine force. He was to advance next 
day, after noon, when the south-east wind would serve. His 
ships were laden with reeds and straw, which were to be used 
as ordered. Han Tang was directed to attack the north bank, 
Chou Tai the south. Each soldier, in addition to his weapons, 
was to carry a bundle of straw or reeds, with sulphur and nitre 
hidden therein, and each had a piece of tinder. They were to 
advance, and, when they reached the Shu camps, they were to 
start a conflagration. But they were to burn only alternate 
camps, twenty in all, leaving the others untouched. They were 
to advance and only stop if they captured Liu Pei. And so 
they set out. 

The First Ruler was in his own camp, pondering over a 
plan to destroy the armies of Wu, when suddenly the staff 
-= that bore the great standard in front of his own tent fell over 
and lay on the ground. There was no wind to account for this, 


| go he turned to Ch‘éng Ch’i and asked what it might portend. 


“It means only one thing, that the men of Wu will raid the 
camp to-night,” said Ch‘éng. 

“They will not. dare after the slaughter of yesterday.” 

“But suppose that was only a reconnaisance; what then?” 

Just then a report came in that some men of Wu could be 
seen, very far off, going along the hills eastward. 

“They are soldiers meant to put us off the scent,” said the 
First Ruler. “Tell the captains not to move, but let Kuan 
Hsing and Chang Hao; with a small mounted force, go out to 
_ reconnoitre.”’ 


It was dusk when ieee two returned, and they then reported . 


fire among the camps on the north bank, The king hastily 
bade Kuan Hsing go to the north camps and Chang Pao to the 
south to find out what was really happening. And they 
started. 

_ About the middle of the first watch the wind got up and 
blew strong from the east. Then fire arose from the camp on 
the left of the rulers own. He was starting to extinguish 
this flame when another fire began in the camp on his right. 
With the aid of the strong breeze both fires became fierce, and 


248 - San Kuo, or 


soon the trees caught. A confused roar showed the gathering 
strength of the fire. The soldiers of the burning camps were 
rushing into the First Ruler’s own camp to`escape the fire, and 
in their confusion they trampled on each other, so that many 
died.. 

Behind them came the men of Wu bent on slaughter. 
Ignorant of how many they might be, the First Ruler mounted 
and dashed for Féng Hsi’s:camp, but that also was in flames, 
which seemed to rise to the very sky. By this time flames 
were rising from both sides of the river, so that everything 
was as visible as by day. 

Féng Hsi leaped to his horse and fled, followed by a few of 
his mounted men. This small force ran against the men of 
Wu under Hsü Shéng. Thereupon the First Ruler turned 
and galloped west. .Hsti Shéng then left Féng Hsi and went 
in pursuit. Presently the king saw a party of soldiers in the 
way and became greatly alarmed. 

This was Ting Féng’s army, and the First Ruler was 
between two foes. In his terror he saw no possibility of 
safety, no road was open. Just at this moment another cohort 
broke through to his side and rescued him. The leader was 
Chang Pao, and he led the Imperial Guards, who fled, taking 
the First Ruler with them. As they marched along they fell 
in with another force; the leader was Fu Tung, and he joined 
up with them. The Wu army was still following when the 
fugitives reached Saddle Hill- (Ma-an Hill). . The two leaders, 
Chang and Fu, were urging their lord to go to the top of this 
out of immediate danger. Soon some of Lu Hsiin’s men 
arrived and began to surround the hill.. Chang and Fu held 
the road up the hill and kept the enemy from ascending. 
From the summit could be seen flames all around, and the 
First Ruler knew the corpses of his men lay about in heaps or 
floated in the streams. 

Soon the men of Wu set themselves to firing the hill. The 
First Ruler’s remaining escort fled for their lives like rats, 
and their lord was in despair. Suddenly he saw a captain 
followed by a few horsemen cutting his way through and 
coming up the hill. As he drew nearer the king recognised 
Kuan Hsing. Kuan quickly leapt down, prostrated himself 
and said, “Your Majesty, the fire is gaining all round, and 
this place is not safe. I request you to try to reach Paiti- 
ch‘€ng, and as many as possible will gather there.” 

“Who will dare stay behind to keep off the enemy?” as 
the First Ruler. 

Fu Tung volunteered for this task. It was dusk when they 
started. Kuan Hsing led the way. They got their lord safely 
down the hill and away. As soon as the men of Wu noticed 
the flight they pressed forward, each anxious to gain kudos 
by. the capture of the king’s person. Great armies, blotting 


diomance of the Three Liingooms 249 


out the sky and hiding the earth, went westward in pursuit. 
The First Ruler ordered the men to make fires of their clothing 
and other things in the road so as to hinder pursuit. 

„Chu Jan marched up from the river to try to intercept the 
flight, and the noise of his drums was terrifying. The king 
thought there was no possibility of escape from this force, and 
cried “This is the end!” 

His two nephews dashed to the front to cut a road through, — 
but returned wounded and bleeding. And the noise of the 
pursuers came constantly nearer as they. found their way 
along the valleys. About the first glimpse of dawn the case 
seemed quite desperate. But just at the worst they saw Chu 
Jan’s men suddenly begin to break up and scatter, tumbling 
into streams and rolling down precipices. Soon the reason was 
evident; a fearsome captain was among them leading a cohort. 

Once again the king was rescued from pressing danger, and 
this time, the rescuer was the faithful Chao Yün. He had 
been in Chiangchou, and news of the straits of his lord had 7 
reached him there. He had set out forthwith. Then he had 
seen the glow of the burnings and had marched toward it. 
And thus he had arrived just at the moment to save his master 
when danger was most imminent. 

As soon as Lu Hsiin heard that Chao Yün had appeared, he . 
ordered his men to stop pursuit and retire. Chao Yün happen- 
ing upon Chu Jan, engaged him forthwith and in the first 
encounter slew him with a spear thrust. And so the men of 
:. Wu were dispersed and retired, and the First Ruler got safely 
to Paitich‘éng. 

But on the way thither his thoughts went back to his 
companions in misfortune, and he enquired after them 

anxiously. ; 

“The pursuers are close upon us and we cannot wait for 
anything,” said Chao Yün. “I wish Your Majesty to get into 
the city as quickly as possible, and while you are reposing 
yourself we may try to rescue some of the leaders.” 

When the First Ruler reached Paitich‘éng he was in sore 
straits, only having about a hundred men left. 

A poet wrote concerning this victory of Lu Hstin:— 

He grips the spear, he kindles fire, the camps are swept away. 
Liu Pei to Paiti City flees, lonely and sad to-day. -~ 

But Lu Hsiin’s meteoric fame now shoots through Shu and Wei, 
For bookish men the Prince of Wu has naught but good to say. 

But Fu Tung, who commanded the rear-guard, was sur- 
rounded by the enemy. Ting Féng shouted to him, “You had 
better surrender. Many of the men of Shu have fallen, more 
have surrendered and your lord is a prisoner. You have no 
hope against us with your scanty force.” 

- But Fu replied, “Shall I, a servant of Han, give in to the 
curs of Wu?” 


RaQ an Kuo, or 


Undaunted, he rode at his opponents and fought many bouts. 
But his strength and valour availed naught; struggle as he 
would, he could not make his way out. And so he died among 
his enemies. ; 

A poem celebrates his valiancy. è 

Wu, at Iling, strove with Shu, 
Flames, not swords, used crafty Luy 


Worthy of a place among 
Han’s bold captains is Fu Tung. 


The Libationer Ch‘éng Ch‘i, having got clear of the battle, 
rode swiftly to the river bank and called to the marines to join 
in the battle. They landed, but were soon scattered. One of 
Ch‘éng Ch‘i’s lieutenants shouted to him to beware, for the 
men of Wu were upon him, but he shouted back, “Since I 
first followed my lord I have never yet turned my back upon 
the foe.” 

The enemy surrounded him, and, as he could do no more, he 
took his sword and slew himself. 


Noble among the warriors of Shu was Ch‘éng Ch‘i. 
He kept his sword for the service of his prince. 
When danger pressed near he wavered not, 
Wherefore his fame remains forever bright. 


Now Wu Pan and Chang Nan had been besieging Iling. 
Then came Féng Hsi and told of the need of their lord, and 
they led off their army to rescue him. Whereupon Sun Huan 
was set free as Lu Hstin had foretold would happen. 

As soon as Sun Huan was free he set off in pursuit of Féng 
and Chang. These two marched until they met an army of 
Wu face to face, and so were between two forces. -A battle | 
was fought, and both these captains perished therein. 


Féng Hsi was loyal without peer. 

Chang Nan was righteous, few have equalled him. 
In battle on the sandy shore they died, 

And the histories record their deeds. 


Wu Pan broke through. He was pursued, but he luckily 
fell in with Chao Yün and got safely to Paitich‘éng. 

The barbarian King Shamoko was flying from the battle- 
field when he met Chou T‘ai, who slew him after a short fight. 

The Shu captains T‘u Lo and Liu Ning surrendered to Wu, | 
as did many soldiers. Of the stores and weapons in the camps 
of Shu nothing was saved. 
~ When the story of the disaster to Shu reached the south, 
and with it the report that the First Ruler had been killed in 
battle, the Lady Sun gave way to wild grief. She rode down 
to the river bank and, gazing westward, wept and lamented. 
SERN Then she threw herself into the stream and was drowned. 
he: Posterity erected a temple on the shore called “The Shrine of 
he the Bold Beauty,” and one who described it wrote a poem :— 


Fiomance of the Three Hingdoms — BOL 


The king, defeated, fled, 
_ And rumour said he’d died ;, 
His consort in remcrse 
| Committed suicide. 
A caryen stone now showeth' where 
And why this heroine died. 


$ 


There could be no question that ie exploit brought trenian 


dous glory to Lu Hsün. Anxious to push his advantage as 
far as possible, he led his exultant army westward. But as 
he drew near to K‘uei Pass he suddenly pulled up his horse, 
remarking that he saw an aura of death about the mountain 
side in front. 

“We may not yet Seance farther; I suspect an ambush.” 

So they retreated ten li and camped in a wide open space. 
And the army was arrayed ready against any sudden attack. 


Meanwhile, scouts were sent out. They returned reporting _ 


= no soldiers. Lu Hsiin doubted and went up to the summit of a 


hill whence he could see over the country. The aura was 


' still visible to him, and so he despatched other men to spy. 


But he received the same report; not a man, not a horse. 
Still, as the sun got lower and lower in the west he saw the 
same appearance accentuated, and he began to feel grave 


doubts. He sent a confidant to look once more. This man’ ` 
came, back saying he had not met a single man, but he had 
noticed on the river bank nearly a hundred heaps of boulders. . 


The commander, still doubting, called in several of the 


& natives and questioned them about the stones: Who put hoe 
=~ there? Why did they look so ghastly? 


ee 


“We do not know. This place is called Fishbelly Cree: 


5 When Chuko Liang was going west into Szuch‘uan he came 


along here with a lot of soldiers and heaped up the boulders 
like that above the Sandy Rapid. We have seen vapours 
rising from the boulders ; they, seemed to come from inside 
them.” 


‘Lu Hsün decided to go and look at these boulders himself. 


So he rode off, with a small escort. Looking down at the 


-stones from a declivity they were evidently arranged with a 


design related to the eight points of the compass. There 
were doors and door-sills and lintels. . 

“This looks likely to drive a man out of his senses,” he said ; 
“I wonder whether it is any good.” 

They rode down with intent to examine the mysterious 
arrangement more closely and went in among the stones. 
Presently one of the escort called attention to the increasing 
darkness and said they ought to be returning to camp. But 
as Lu Hsiin glanced round to look for an exit a sudden squall 
came on and the dust whirled up, obscuring both sky and earth. 
And in the swirl the stones reared themselves up like steep 
mountains, pointed like swords, and the dust and sand shaped 


fyi. 


252 an uo, or 


themselves into waves and hillocks one behind the other. The 
roar of the boiling river was as the drums before a battle. 

“This is some trick of Chuko’s,” said Lu in a scared voice; 
“and I have been caught.” 

He would go out, but he had quite lost his way and could 
find no exit. As he stopped to consider what he should do, an 
old man suddenly appeared, who said, “Does the General wish 
to go out?” 

“I greatly desire that you would pilot me out, O Elder,” 
replied he. 

Leaning on his staff, the old man led the way and with quiet 
dignity conducted Lu Hsiin outside. He had no difficulty in 
finding his way and paused not a single instant. When they 
were once again on the slope Lu asked his aged guide who he 
was. 

“I am Chuko K‘ung-ming’s father-in-law; my family name 
is Huang. My son-in-law placed these boulders here as you 
see them, and he said they represented “The Eight Arrays.” 
They are like eight doors, and according to the scheme are 
named :— 


The Gate of Rest, 

The Gate of Life, 

The Gate of Injury, 

The Gate of Obstruction, 
The Gate of Prospect, 
The Gate of Death, 

The Gate of Surprise and 
The Gate of Openings. - 


They are capable of infinite mutations and would be equal — 
to ten legions of soldiers. As he was leaving he told me that — 
if any leader of Wu became mazed in them I was not to conduct 
him outside. From a precipice near by I saw you, General, 
enter in at the Gate of Death, and as I guessed you were 
ignorant of the scheme I knew you would be entangled. But 
I am of a good disposition and could not bear that you should 
be entrapped without possibility of escape, so I came to guide 
you to the Gate of Life.” > 

“Have you studied this matter, Sir?” asked Lu. . 

age variations are inexhaustible, and I could not learn them 
a 

Lu Hstin dismounted, bowed low ‘before the old man and 
then rode away. 

The famous poet Tu Fu wrote some verses which run some- 
thing like this :— 


Pounder of a Kingdom; no small praise 

Is his; Inventor of the Eight Arrays 

And for that famous. On the river’s brim, 
Firm set, the boulders stand as placed by him. 
No current rolls them.down. Time’s waters too 
Drown not regret he did not conquer Wu. 


Romance of the Three Hingooms 253 


Lu Hsün took his way to his camp in deep chouetit 
“This K‘ung-ming is well named ‘Sleeping Dragon,’” said 

he, “I am not his equal.” 

; “Then, to the amazement of Si he gave orders to retire, The 
officers ventured to remonstrate, seeing that they had been so 
successful. 

_* “General, you have utterly broken the enemy, and Liu Pei 

is shut up in one small city; it seems the time to smite, and 
yet you retire because you have come across a mysterious 
arrangement of stones.” 

“T am not afraid of the stones, and it is not on their account 
that I retire. But I fear Ts‘ao P‘ei of Wei. He is no less 
resourceful than his father, and when he hears I am marching 

; ae ah he will certainly attack us. How could I return | 
then?” — i ; 
_ The homeward march began. On the second day the scouts 
brought word that three armies of Wei had. debouched at 

| e different points and were moving toward the borders of 
Vu. 

“Just as I thought,” said Lu Hsiin. “But I am ready for 
them.” > Kes 


i 


“And now the west is mine,” the victor thought, 
i : But danger from the north discretion taught. 


3 The story of the retreat will be told in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER LXXXV. . 


LIU, THE FIRST RULER, CONFIDES HIS SON To K‘UNG-MING’S 
CARE; : 
CHUKO LIANG PEACEFULLY SETTLES THE TIVE ATTACKS. 


lt was in the sixth month of the second year of Chang-Wu 


` that Lu Hsiin destroyed the army of Shu at Iling and forced 


the king to seek refuge in Paitich‘éng, of which Chao Yün 
then undertook the defence. When Ma Liang returned only 
to find his lord defeated he was more distressed than he could 
say. He announced what K‘ung-ming had said concerning the 


plans, and the First Ruler sighed, saying, “If I had listened N 


to the Prime Minister’s advice the defeat would not have 
happened. Now how can I face a return to my capital?” — i 
So he promulgated a command to change the guest-house : — 


into the “Palace of Eternal Peace.” He was deeply grieved . 


when they told him of the death of so many of his captains. — 
Next he heard that Huang Ch‘tian, who had been given | 
command of the army on the north bank, had given in to Wei. ~ 


They suggested to him that the family of the renegade was — 
in his power and he could hold them responsible. But he only | 
said, “The army .was quite cut off, and he had no alternative ~ 


but to surrender. Really, I betrayed him, not he me. Why i 


should I take vengeance on his family?” tg 
So he continued the i issue of the renegade’s pay to his fannie: 
When Huang Ch‘tian surrendered he was led into the 

presence of the King of Wei, who said, “You have surrendered 


to me because you desired to imitate the admirable conduct of- 


Ch‘én and Han.” 

But Huang replied, weeping, “The Emperor of Shu has 
been very kind to me, and he gave me the leadership of the 
army on the north bank. Lu Hsiin cut me off so that I could - 
not return to Shu, and I would not surrender to Wu, wherefore — 
I have yielded to Your Majesty. Defeated as I am, I should ~ 
be only too happy if my life were spared, but I have no claim 
to the credit of the virtuous ones of old.” 4 

The reply satisfied the King of Wei, and he conferred an 
office on Huang, who, however, declined the offer. Then one 
of the courtiers said that a spy had reported that all the family © 
of Huang had been put to death, But the leader replied that. 
he could not believe it. ve 


fiomance of the Three Hingvoms 255 


À “I have the greatest confidence in the clemency of the King 
of Shu. He knows I would not have surrendered of my own 
free will, and he would not injure my family.” | 

And the King of Wei agreed with his opinion. 

But a poem has been written upb raiding Huang Chitian: 


’T was a pity that Huang Ch‘iian grudged to die; 
Though he yielded to Wei, not Wu, 

Yet he crooked the knee in an alien court, 
Which the loyal cannot do. 

And the judgment calm of history 

Condemns such men all through. 


Ts‘ao Pei sought advice from Chia Hsü concerning his 
design of bringing the whole country under his own rule. 


_“T wish to bring the whole empire under my rule; which atin 


shall I first reduce, Shu or Wu?” 

“Liu Pei is an able warrior, and Chuko Liang is a most 
capable administrator; Sun Chiiian possesses. discrimination, 
and his general, Lu Hsün, occupies àll the strategical positions 
ot importance. The natural obstacles, the intervening rivers 
and spreading lakes, would be hard to overcome. I do not 
think you have any leader to match either of these two men.. 
Even with the prestige of Your Majesty’s own presence, no 
one could guarantee the result. The better course is to hold 
on: and await the outcome of the sb yagi between those other 


two.’ 


= “I have already. despatched three armies: against Wu; can | 
it be that they will fail?” 

The President, Liu Yeh, held the same opinion as his 
colleague. Said he, “Lu Hstin has just won a great victory — 
over the great host of Shu, and all his army is full of con- 
fidence. Further, there are the lakes and the rivers, which 
are natural difficulties hard to cope with. And again, Lu 
Hsün is resourceful and well prepared.” 

The king said, “Formerly, Sir, you urged me to attack Wu: 
why do you now give contrary advice?” 

“Because times have changed. When Wu was suffering 
` defeat after defeat the country was depressed and might be 


smitten. Now this great. victory has changed all that and 


their morale has increased a hundredfold. I say now they 
may not be attacked.” 4 


“Well; but I have decided to attack. So say no more,” © 


said the king. 

He then led the Imperial Guards out to support his three 
armies. But the scouts soon brought news justifying, the 
opinion of his advisers. A force had been sent to, oppose each 
. of his three armies. Liu Yeh pointed this out and again said 
that no success could be expected. Still the king was 
obstinate, and marched. . 


cl eee ripe 'i 
D a eo if ie. 


256 San Kuo, or 


The Wu leader, Chu Huan, who had been sent against Ts‘ao 
Jén at Juhsii, was a young man of twenty-seven. He was 
bold and resourceful, and Sun Ch’iian held him in great regard. 
Hearing that Ts‘ao Jén was going to attack Tzuchi, Chu led 
the bulk of his men to befend it, leaving only half a legion in 
Juhsti. Then he heard that the van of the enemy, under 
Ch‘ang Tiao, had made a dash for Juhsti, so he hastened back 
and found the small garrison a prey to fear. Drawing his 
sword, he made a speech, “Success depends upon the leader 


rather than on the number of men. The ‘Art of War’ says — 


that the value of soldiers who come from afar is doubled; that 
of those who inhabit a place is halved, yet always those who 
are in possession overcome those who come from afar. Now 
the enemy is weary from a long march and I and you, my men, 
can hold this place together. We have a great river to defend 
us on the south, and we are backed by the mountains on the 
north. Success should be ours easily, and we are as hosts 
at home awaiting the arrival of our weary visitors. This 
will give us victory in every fight. Even if the great Ts‘ao 
P‘ei come, we need feel no anxiety. How much less care we 
for Ts‘ao Jên and his men?” 

Then he issued orders to furl ail the banners and to silence 
all the drums as if the city was empty of defenders. 

In time, Ch‘ang Tiao and his veterans of the van came to 
the city. Not a man was visible, and he hastened forward 
with all speed. But as he neared the city, suddenly a bomb went 
off. Immediately up rose a forest of flags, and out dashed 
Chu Huan, with his sword drawn. And he made for Ch‘ang 
Tiao. In the third encounter he cut down his enemy, and his 
men, rushing to the attack, thoroughly routed the invaders, 
slaying innumerable men. Beside scoring a complete victory, 
Chu Huan took much spoil of flags and weapons and horses. 
Ts‘ao Jên himself, coming up later, was attacked by the garrison 
of Tzuchi and also routed. He fled home to his eels with 
the news of defeat and destruction. 

And before the king could decide what course to take in 
regard to this loss the news came of the defeat of ‘his other 
two armies. 

So all three had failed and were lost, and P‘ei sighed and 
said sadly, “This has come from my wilfulness and neglect 
-of advice.” 

The summer of that year was very unhealthy, and a 
pestilence swept away the soldiers in huge numbers. - So they 
were marched home to Loyang. The two countries were at 
enmity though they were not fighting. 

Meanwhile the First Ruler was failing. He remained in 


his Palace of Eternal Peace and presently was confined to his . « 


couch. Gradually he became worse, and in the fourth moon 
of the third year his condition became serious. He himself 


fiomance of the Three kingdoms 257 


felt the end was near, and he was depressed and wank for his 
twe lost brothers till the sight of his eyes suffered. He was 


morose and ill-tempered: he could not bear any of his court - 
near him, drove away his servants and lay upon his couch sad. 


and solitary. 


One evening as thus he lay, a sudden gust of wind came 
into the chamber, almost extinguishing the candles. As they 
burned bright again he saw two men standing in AS shade- 


behind them. 


“I told you I was worried, ” said thie kora ‘and dede you 
leave me; why have you come back? Go!” 


But they remained and did not go. Wherefore the king 


rose and went over to look at them. As he drew near he saw 
one was Yiin-ch‘ang; the other I-té. 

“Are you still alive, then, brothers?” said he. 

. “We are not. men; we are shades,” said Kuan Yi. “The 
Supreme One has conferred spirithood upon us in consideration 
of our faithfulness throughout life, and ere long, brother, we 
three shall be together again.” 

The king clutched at the figures and burst into tears; then 
he awoke. The two-figures were no longer there. He called 
in his people and asked the hour: they told him the third watch. 

“I am not much longer for this world,” said he witha sigh. 

Messengers were sent to the capital to summon the Prime 
Minister and certain other high officers of state to receive the 
king’s last instructions. They came, K‘ung-ming bringing 
the two younger sons. The eldest, the heir-apparent, was 
left in charge of the capital. 

K‘ung-ming saw at once that his master was very ill. He 
bowed to the ground at the foot of the “dragon” couch. The 
dying king bade him come near and sit beside him, and he 
patted his faithful minister on the back, saying, “The attain- 
ment of emperorship was your work. Little thought you that 
I should prove so stupid as not to follow your advice and so 
bring about the late disasters. But I am deeply sorry, and 
now 2 shall not live long. My heir is a degenerate, but I must 
leave him to do the best he can with the. great inheritance.” 

And the tears flowed in streams. 

“I trust Your Majesty will fulfil the hopes of the people by 
a speedy recovery,” said K‘ung-ming, also in tears. 

Turning his head, the king saw Ma Liang’s brother at the 
bedside. He bade him retire. When he had left the chamber, 
the king’ said, “Do you think Ma Su is clever ?’ jee 

“He is one of the ablest men in the world,” said K‘ung-ming. 


“I do not think so. Ithink his words exceed his deeds. Do . 


not make much use of him. Watch him carefully.” 

Having said this, he bade them summon the high officers 
of state to the chamber. Taking paper and pen the First 
Ruler wrote his testament. He handed it to the Prime 


17 


258 ' _ San fu, or 


Minister with a sigh and said, “I am no great ehel sini! LS 
only know the rough outlines of what should be known. But — 


. the Holy One has said that a bird’s song is sad when death is ` 


near and a dying man’s words are good. I was waiting that 
we might aid each other in the destruction of Ts‘ao and the 
restoration of the Hans, but ere the work is còmplete I am 
called away, and this last command of mine I confide to you as 
Prime Minister to be handed to my son and heir, Ch‘an. My 
words are to be taken seriously. I trust that you will instruct 
and guide my son.’ l 

K‘ung-ming and all those present wept and prostrated 
themselves, saying, “We pray Your Majesty to repose yourself. 
We will do our utmost whereby to prove our gratitude for the 
kindness we have received.” 

At the king’s command the attendants raised K‘ung-ming 
from the earth. With one hand the dying man brushed away 
the falling tears, while with the other he grasped K‘ung-ming’s 
hand and said, “The end is near; I have something more to 
say as toa friend. af 

“What holy command has Your Majesty to give?” 


“You are many times more clever than Ts‘ao P‘ei, and you — 


must safeguard the kingdom and complete the great work. 


If my son can be helped, help him. But if he prove a fool bs 


then take the throne yourself.” 


Such a speech almost startled Ale mins out of his senses. — 


A cold sweat broke out all over his body, and his limbs 
threatened to. cease to support him. He fell on his knees, 


saying, “I could never do otherwise than wear myself to the 
bone in the service of your son, whom I will serve till death.” - 


He knocked his head upon the ground. The dying man 


called K‘ung-ming closer, and at the same time making his © 


` two sons come near, he said to them, “My sons, remember 


your father’s words. After my death you are to treat the 


` Prime Minister as you would your father and be not remiss, 


for thereby you will fulfil your father’s hopes.” 

He made the two princes pay to K‘ung-ming the obeisance 
due to a father. 

Said K‘ung-ming, “Were I destroyed and land into the 


earth, I should be unable to repay the kindness I have- 


experienced. i 
Turning to the assembled officers, the First Ruler said, “As 
you have seen, I have confided my orphan son to the care of 


the Prime Minister and bidden my sons treat him as a father. | 


You too, Sirs, are to treat him with deference. This is my 
dying request and charge to you.” \ 

Turning to Chao Yin, he said, “‘I and you have gone together 
` through many dangers and difficulties. Now comes the part- 


ing of our ways. You will not forget our old friendship, and - 


you must see to it that my sons follow my precepts.” 


fomance of the Three ttingdoms 


oT, shall never dare to give other than my best,” said Chao 
Yün. “The fidelity of the dog and horse is mine to give and 
shall be theirs.” 
Then he turned to the others, “Noble Sirs, I am Unable to Be 
` speak to you one by one and lay a charge upon each individual; a: 
but I say to you, Maintain your self-respect.” At e 
These were his last words. He was sixty-three, and he — 
died on the twenty-fourth day of the fourth month (228 4 AD.) i 
A poem was written by Tu Fu on his death:— 
The king set out to destroy the land that lay iieouen the gorges, 
Failed he and breathed his last in the palace “Eternal Tranquillity,” - 
The palace fair of his thoughts lay not this side the highlands. 
Beautiful chambers are vainly sought in his rural temple, i 
Now are the pines near his shrine nesting places for herons, f, 
Through the courts aged peasants saunter, enjoying their leisure. 
Nearby often is found a shrine to this strategist famous, 
Prince and minister’s needs are now but offerings in season. 


‘Thus died the First Ruler. All present lifted up their 
. voices and wept. 
The Prime Minister led the procession that escorted the 
eoffin to the capital, and the heir, Liu Ch‘an, came to the . 
outskirts of the city, as a dutiful son should, ‘to receive the © 
remains with due respect. The coffin was laid in the Great — 
. Hall of the palace, wherein they lamented and performed the 
ceremonies appointed. At the end of these the testament was 
opened and read. 
“T first fell ill from a fatmple ailment. Other disorders i 
followed, and it became evident that I should not recover. Bir 
They say that death at fifty cannot be called premature, and >. 
as I have passed three score I may not resent the call. But 
. when I think of you and your brothers I regret. Now I say =| | 
to you, strive and strive again. Do no evil because it is a 
small evil; do not leave undone a small good because it is a 
small good. Only with wisdom and virtue men can be won. 
But your father’s virtue was but slender and unequal to the 
strain. i 
“After my death you are to conduct the affairs of the state 
with the Prime Minister. You are to treat him as a father Ices 
` and serve him without remissness. You and your brothers 
are to seek instruction. This is my final and simple fe. 
command.” — 
When this had been read, K‘ung-ming said, “The state 
cannot go a single day without a prince, wherefore I beg you 
to install the heir as successor to the great line of the Hans.” 
Thereupon the ceremony was performed, and the new 
Emperor took his place. The style of the reign was changed 
to Chien-Hsing. Chuko Liang became “Marquis of Wuhsiang 
and Governor of Ichou.” 
Then they buried the late king “at Huiling with the post- 
humous style of Chao-Lieh Huang-ti. 


260 | San Kuo, or 


The Empress, of the Wu family, was formally created . 
Empress Dowager. The late consort Kan became Chao-Lieh. 
Empress, and the Lady Mi was granted similar, also post- 
humous, rank. There were promotions in rank and rewards. 
for all, and a general amnesty was proclaimed. , 

Before long, knowledge of these things came to the army of 
Wei, and a report was sent to the capital and made known to- 
the Prince of Wei. Ts‘ao P‘ei felt relieved and was glad 
of the death of his rival, and his thoughts at once turned 
toward an attack during the critical moment of a change of 
ruler. 

But Chia Hsii dissuaded him. “Liu Pei is gone, but surely 
he has confided the care of the state to Chuko Liang; who is 
indebted to him so deeply. He will exhaust every effort to 
support his young lord. You may not hastily attack.” s 

As he tendered this remonstrance, a man suddenly stepped 
out from the serried ranks of courtiers and said fiercely, “If 
you neglect this moment can you expect a more favourable 
opportunity ?” 

All eyes turned to the speaker; it was Ssuma I. 

The interruption greatly pleased P‘ei, who at once asked 
how it was to be done. He propounded his plan in the 
following speech :— 

“Tt would be very difficult to obtain success with our own 
resources. Hence we must use five armies and attack all 
round at the same time, so as to embarrass Chuko Liang.” 

“Where are the five armies to come from?” said Ts‘ao P‘ei. 

Sstma went on, “The first is to be got from Liaotung, from 
the Hsian-pi country (Inner Mongolia). You must write to- 
Prince K‘opinéng and send him presents of gold and silks so 
that he may send ten legions of the Chiang (Tanguts) from 
Liachsi to attack Hsip‘ing Pass. Secondly, the present prince 
of the Man Tribes, Ménghuo, must be persuaded to attack the 
south of Hsich‘iian, the districts of Ichou, Jungch‘ang, Tsang- 
ko and Yitiehchien. Thirdly, you must send an ambassador to 
Wu with fair promises of an increase of territory, and so. 
induce Sun Ch‘tian to lead ten legions to the attack, making 
~“Fouch‘éng his objective. The fourth army can be got from - 
Méng Ta in Shangyung, who can attack Hanchung. Lastly, 
our own force may be placed under Ts‘ao Chén, who will 
attack by way of Yangping Pass. With fifty legions making 
a simultaneous attack along five different directions, it would 
be hard for Chuko Liang to hold his own even if he had the 
talent\of Lü Wang (T‘ait Kung) himself.” 

. The scheme delighted Ts‘ao P‘ei, who at once cast about 
for four glib-tongued messengers. He also issued a commission 
to Ts‘ao Chén as Commander-in-chief. 

At this time Chang Liao and most others of the. veterans. 
who had served Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. were enjoying their leisure in 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 261 


various parts of the country, and as.nobles were keeping 
_ watch and ward at certain passes and fords and such places. 
Their appointments were more or less sinecures. They were 
not summoned for this expedition to the west. 

Although all the details of what came to pass in Shu after 
the accession of the Second King Liu Ch‘an need not be told. 
yet it may be noted that many of those who had served his 
_ father died after the decease of their master. The work of 

the administration of the kingdom, the choice of officials, 
law-making, taxation, decision of legal cases, was all done by 
the Prime Minister. ‘ : 

As the new king had no consort, the courtiers, headed by 
K‘ung-ming, proposed a daughter of the late Chang Fei as 
young and prudent, and she was married to the Emperor and 
so became Empress. | À 

It was in the autumn of the year of his accession that the 
Later Ruler heard of the plans and intentions of Wei against 
his state. The persons who told him gave him full details of 
the five armies and said they had previously told the Prime 
Minister. ; 

“But his conduct puzzles us,” said the informers. “We do 
-not know why he does not take some action instead of remain- 
ing shut up in his palace all the time.” 

-` The Later Ruler became really alarmed, and he sent one 
of his personal attendants to call the Prime Minister to court. 
- The servant was gone a long time, and then returned to say 
that the servants had told him the Prime Minister was ill and 
not to be seen. 

The young Emperor’s distress increased, and he sent two 
high officers to K‘ung-ming, saying they were to see him even 
if he was on his couch and tell him the dreadful news of 
invasion. They went; but they got no farther than the gate. - 
The keepers of the gate refused them admission.- Then they 
confided their message in brief to the wardens of the gate, 
who went inside with it. After keeping them waiting a long 
time the wardens returned to say that the Prime Minister was 
rather better and would be at court in the morning. 

The two messengers sighed deeply as they wended their way 
to the Emperor’s palace. 

Next mofning a great crowd of officers assembled at the 
‘gate of the Prime Minister’s residence to wait for him to 
appear. But he did not come out. It began to grow late, and 
many of them were tired of waiting, when at last Tu Ch‘iung, | 
one of the two who had been sent to tell K‘ung-ming why his 
presence was desired at council, went again to the Emperor 
and suggested that His Majesty should go in person and try 
to get K‘ung-ming to say what should be done. 
` The Emperor then returned to his palace and told his 
Consort his trouble. She was also alarmed. 


9 


262 an uo, or 


“What can he mean?” said she. “This does not look like 
acting in the spirit of the charge laid upon him by the late 
Emperor. „Let me go myself.” 

“Oh no,” said Tung Yün. “Your Majesty must not go. | 
We think all is well, and the Prime Minister certainly under- 
stands and will do something. Beside, you must let His. 
Majesty go first, and if the Prime Minister still shows. 
remissness then Your Maj esty can summon him to the Temple: 
of the Dynasty and ask him.” 

So it was left at that. And the next day the Emperor rode 
in his chariot to the gate of his minister. When the door- 
keepers saw the imperial chariot appear they fell upon their 
faces to welcome the Emperor. 

“Where is the Prime Minister?’ asked he. 

“We do not know. But we have orders not to let in the 
erowd of officers.” 

The Emperor then descended and went on foot richi in to 
the third gate. Then he saw K‘ung-ming leaning on a staff 


beside a fishpond looking at the fish. He approached, and 


stood behind him for a long time. Presently the king said. 


slowly and with dignity, “Is the Prime Minister really enj oying a 


himself?” 
K‘ung-ming started and looked found. When he saw whe 
the speaker was he suddenly dropped his staff and prostrated 
himself.. 
“I ought to be put-to death ten thousand times,” said he. 
But the Emperor put forth his hand and helped him to rise, 
saying, “Ts‘ao P‘ei threatens immediate invasion from five 
points; why will you not come forth and attend to business?” 
K‘ung-ming laughed. He conducted the Emperor into an 
inner room, and, when he was seated, K‘ung-ming addressed 


_ his king, saying, “Could it be possible that I was ignorant of 


these five armies? I was not looking at the fish; I was.’ 
thinking.” 

“But, this being so, what shall we don Ii ; 

ST have already turned back that K‘opinéng, of the Maleate, 
and Mênghuo of the Man and the rebel leader Mêng Ta and 
the army “from Wei. I have also thought out a plan to circum- 
vent the army from Wu, but I need a special sert of man to. 
carry it out. I want an envoy, an able talker, one capable of 
persuading other people. It was because I have not found 
such a man yet that I was so deeply in thought. But Your 
Majesty may set your mind at rest and not be anxious.” 

The Later Kuler heard this half terrified and half glad. 

“Surely your superhuman devices are too deep for mortal 
mem But may I ask how these armies have been made to turn. 

ac > 

Since His late Majesty bade me take the best care ef your 
welfare, I dare not be remiss for a single moment. These 


= Rommeæof 


Ae 
FN 
f 


officers in Ch‘éngtu are ignorant of that refinement of war 
which consists in not allowing the enemy to guess your plans. 
How could I let them know anything? When I heard that the 
_ Tanguts might invade, I remembered that Ma Ch‘ao’s fore- 


_ fathers were friendly with them and they had a high opinion 


of Ma Ch‘ao, thinking him a leader of supreme prestige. So 


_I sent orders by despatch to Ma Ch‘ao to hold the Hsip‘ing 


I sent hastily to the south to order Wei Yen to move certain — ee 
_ bodies of men about through the south-west districts, to be `| 
~ seen and then to disappear, to go in and come out and march to | 


_ are brave, but prone to doubts and hesitations, and they would 


Pass, and to prepare ambushes in certain places and change 


them daily so as to keep the Ch‘iang off. That settled them. 


and fro, so that the Mans should be perplexed. The Mans 


not advance in the face of the unknown. Hence there is 
_ nothing to fear in that quarter. I also knew that Méng Ta 


< 


and our Li Yen were sworn friends. I had left him in charge 
of the Palace of Eternal Tranquillity. I then wrote a letter 
as if from Li to Méng, so that I know Méng will feign illness 
and not move his army. I sent Chao Yiin to occupy all the 
strategical positions on the way by which Ts‘ao Chén would 


march, and bade him defend only and not go out to battle. If. 


our men refuse to come out, Ts‘ao Chén will certainly have to 


retire. So all those four are settled. But for greater security 
`- I have sent your two cousins each with three legions to camp 
_ at points whence they can quickly help any of the others who. 
- may need it. And none of these arrangements are known _ 


here. ' 


“Now there is only Wu left to deal with. Had the other 


four succeeded and Shu been in danger, Sun Ch‘tian would | 


have come to the attack. If the others fail I know he will not 
budge, for he will remember that Ts‘ac P‘ei has just sent 
three armies to attack his country. And this being so, I want 
some man with a ready tongue and ingenious mind to go and 
talk plainly to Sun Ch‘tian. So far I have not found such a 
man, and I am perplexed. I regret that I have given Your 


Majesty occasion to make this journey.” ) 
“My Consort also wanted to come,” said the Emperor. — 
“But now you have spoken, O Minister-Father, I am as one 


awakened from a dream; I shall grieve no more.” 


They two drank a few cups of wine together, and the — 


minister escorted his master to his chariot. . A ring of 
eourtiers were waiting, and they could not help remarking the 
happiness that shone in their master’s face. The Emperor 
took his leave and returned to his palace, but the courtiers 
did not know what to think. 

Now K‘ung-ming had noted a certain man among the crowd 
who smiled and looked quite happy. He looked at him intently 
and thén recollected his name, which was Téng Chih, a man of 


the Three Lingooms 968 


264 WN ane 


reputable ancestry, who came from Hsinyeh. . He sent a man- 
privately to detain Téng, and when all the others had gone, 
K‘ung-ming led him into the library for a chat. Presently 
he came to the matter near his heart. SANESE i 

“The three states have become a fact,” said he. “Now if 
our state wanted to absorb the other two and restore the 
condition of one rule, which country should it attack first?” 

“Though Wei-:is the real rebel, yet Wei is strong and would 
be very difficult to overthrow. Any move against it would 
have to develop slowly. As our Emperor has but lately 
succeeded his father and the people are none too decided in 
his favour, I should propose a treaty of mutual defence with* 
Wu. This would obliterate the enmity of His late Majesty 
and would have important results. However, you, Sir, may | 
have another opinion.. What is it?” 

“That is what I have been thinking of this long time, but 
I had not the man for the task. Now I have found him.” 

“What do you want a man to do?” 

“I want him to go as envoy to Wu to negotiate such a treaty. 
As you understand the position so well you will surely do 
honour to your prince’s commission as envoy. There is. no 
other who would succeed.” 

“I fear I am not. equal, to such” a task: I am not clever | 
enough and too ignorant.” 

I will inform the Emperor to-morrow and beg him to appoint 
-you. Of course you will accept.” 

Téng Chih consented and then took his leave. As promised, 
Kung -ming memorialised, and the Emperor consented that 
the mission should. be entrusted to Téng Chih. ` And he started. 


The din of war will cease in Wu, 
When Shu’s desires are known. ° 


For the success or failure of this mission read the next 
chapter. ) 7 


ay, 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 


A PHILOSOPHICAL ENCOUNTER; ~ 
FIRE USED TO DESTROY Ts‘AO PEYS ARMY. 


‘Atte his recent exploits Lu Hsiin became the one hero of 
Wu. He was given the title “Pillar of the State,” was 
ennobled as “Marquis of Chiangling,’” and received the Gover- 
norship of Chingchou. He became commander of all the 
military forces. e 

Chang Chao and Ku-Yung, thinking the moment opportune 
-for enhancing their lord’s dignity, sent in a memorial pro- 
‘posing that his rule should. be designated by a distinctive 
style, and he assumed Huang-Wu as his nien-hao. 

Then arrived a messenger from Wei, and he was called in 
to an assembly and bidden to state his business. He said, 
“Recently Shu sent to Wei for help, and, the situation being 
misunderstood, a force was despatched. Now this action is 
greatly regretted. In Wei it is thought desirable to set four 
_armies in motion against Shu to capture it, and if Wu will 


' assist, and success crown these efforts, Wei and Wu will share 


the conquered territory.”’ 
Sun Chitian listened, but was not prepared.to give a decided 


answer. He betook himself to his counsellors, who suggested 


that the sapient Lu Hsiin should be consulted. So he was 
called, and his speech ran thus :— 

cmp ao P‘ei is too firmly established in the capital to be 
upset now, and if this offer of his be refused we shall provoke , 
his enmity. Neither Wei nor Wu, so far as I see, has any 
man fit to oppose Chuko Liang, We must perforce consent 
and put our army in order. But we can wait till we see how 
the four armies speed. If Shu seems likely to fall and Chuko 
‘Liang is out-manceuvred, then our army can be despatched 
and we will take the “capital, If the four armies fail we shall 
have to consider.” 

So Sun Ch‘iian said to the envoy of Wei, “We are not ready 
at the moment, so we will choose a day to start later.” And 
“with this answer the envoy left. 

Next they made careful enquiries about the success or 


failure of the armies against Shu. They heard that the 


western tribes had turned back when they saw Ma Ch‘ao in 
command at Hsip‘ing Pass. The Mans had been perplexed at, 
the tactics of Wei Yen and had retreated to their caves. The 
Shangyung leader, Méng Ta, had set out, but half way had 


266 ~ _ an kuo, or 
fallen ill and gone back, and Ts‘ao Chén’s army had been 
brought to a halt by the defensive preparations of Chao Yün, 
who had garrisoned every pass and occupied every point of 
vantage. They had eventually retreated, after being camped 
in Hsiehku for some time. 

Knowing all this, Sun Ch‘iian said to his officials, “Lu 
Hsün’s words were indeed prophetic; he made most perfect 
deductions. Any rash ection on my pen would ee me on 
bad terms with Shu.” 

Just then the coming of an envoy HoN Shu was announced. 

Said Chang Chao, ‘This mission is also part of Chuko 
Liang’s scheme to divert danger from Shu. Têng omh has 
come as envoy.” 

“That being so, how should I reply?” asked Sun Ch‘tian. 

“I will tell you. Set up a large cauldron and pour therein 
a quantity of oil. Light a fire beneath. When the oil is 
boiling, choose a goodly company of your tallest and brawniest - 
fighting men, arm them and draw them up in lines between 
the palace gate and your throne room. Then summon the 
envoy, but before he can say a word upbraid him with being | 
guilty of the same sort of treachery as Li Shé-ch‘i and worthy © 


of the same fate of being boiled in oil. Then see what he will — 


say.” 
Sun Ch‘tian followed this advice, and prepared the cauldron 


of oil and had the strong men ready. Then he bade them 


introduce the envoy. 

Téng Chih came, his ceremonial Arna in perfect order, and 
advanced as far as the gate. Seeing the grim array of fighting © 
men armed, some with ‘gleaming swords, some with great axes, 
some with jong spears and some with short knives, he under- 
stood at once what was meant, but he never blenched. He | 
advanced quite steadily and bravely till he reached the door of 
. the hall. Even when he saw the boiling cauldron of oil and 
the savage executioners glaring at him he only smiled. 

He was led to the front of the curtain behind which sat the 
prince, and he made the ordinary salutation of raising his 
extended arms, but he did not bow in obeisance. 

The prince bade his attendants roll up the curtain, and 
called out, ‘Why do you not make an obeisance?” 

Téng Chih boldly replied, “The envoy of the superior state 
does not make an obeisance to the ruler of a smaller country.” 

“If you do not control that tongue of yours, but- will let it 
wag, you will be like that fellow Li who went to talk to Chi. 
You will soon find yourself in the cauldron.” 2 

Then Téng Chih laughed aloud. “People say there are many 
sages in Wu; no one would believe that they would be 
frightened of a simple scholar.” 

This reply only increased Sun Ch‘tian’ s anger, and he said, 
“Who fears a fool like you?” 


TA 


: | Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 267 


“Tf you fear not the envoy, why so anxious about what he 
“may have to say?” <4 

_. “Because you come here as spokesman of Chuko Liang and 
| you want me to sever with Wei and turn to your country; 
is not that your message?” 

“T am a simple scholar of Shu, and I am come to explain 


matters to the state of Wu. But here I find armed men and 


a boiling cauldron all prepared against a simple envoy. 
_ How can I form any other opinion than that you will not allow 
me to speak?” 


As soon as Sun Chiiian heard these Tord: he bade the 


soldiers go, and called the envoy into the hall. There he 
invited him to a seat and said, “What is the real matter 
? between Wei and Wu? I desire that you would inform 
me.’ 
Then Têng replied, “Do you, great Prince, desire to 
discuss peace with Wei or with Shu?” 
asl really desire to discuss peace with the lord of Shu. But 
he is young and inexperienced ana ignorant, and unable to 
carry a matter through.” — 
“Prince, you are a valiant warrior, just as Chuko Liang is 


< a great minister. Now Shu has the etrength of its geograph- 


- ical difficulties just as Wu has the protection of its three 


rivers. If these two countries are at peace they are mutually 


protective. They may swallow up the rest of the empire, or 
_ they may stand secure alone. If you send tribute to Wei, and 
_ acknowledge yourself one of its ministers, you will be expected 
to attend at court, and your heir- apparent will become a 
servant in that court; and if you disobey, an army will be 
sent to attack you. Shu also will come down the river and 
“invade your country. Then this country will be yours no 
longer. And if you listen not to these words of mine, and 
refuse my offer, I shall commit suicide before your face and 
-so justify the post I have as an envoy.’ 

` As he spake these last words he gathered up his robes and 
- marched down the hall as though. he was just going to jump 

into the cauldron. — 

“Stop him!” cried Sun Ch‘tian, ai they did so. Then he 


requested Têng to go into an inner apartment, where he 


treated the envoy as a guest of the highest honour. 
-= “O Master,” said Sun Ch‘tian; “your words exactly express 
my thoughts, and I desire to make a league of peace with your 
country. Are you willing to be the intermediary? ee 
“Just now it was you, O Prince, who wished to boil this 
_ poor servant; now it is also you who wish to use him. How 
ean such a doubtful person be trusted?’ 
“My mind i is made up,” replied Sun Ch'üan. “Do not doubt 
me, Master.” 
Téng an was detained, and a TE of officers gathered. 


268 ois San Ruo, or 


Said Sun Chiiian to the assembly, “Under my hand are all 


the four score and one districts of the east, and I have the 
lands of Chingchou and Ch‘u to boot, yet I am not so well off 


as that little country of Shu, for Shu has Téng Chih foran- 


envoy, and he glorifies his lord. I have no ome to send to 
declare my wishes to Shu.” 

Then one stepped forth and said he would go. The uouakcer 
was Chang Wén, of Wu, who held an office of no great rank. 
Sir, I fear that when you reach Shu and are in the presence 
of Chuko Liang you will not explain my real sentiments,” 
said Sun. 

Chang Wên replied, “Think you that I shall fear him? He 
also is but a man.’ 

Sun Ch‘iian conferred great gifts on Chang Wen, and sent 


him eh the return mission to Shu to negana the league of . 


peac 


While Têng Chih was absent, Kona ane said to his lord, 


“This mission to Wu will succeed, and of-the many wise men 
in the east one will come as return envoy. Your Majesty 
should treat him with courtesy, and let him return to Wu to 


complete the league. For if we have an alliance with Wu, 


-< Wei will not dare to send an army against us. And if we are 


safe from those quarters, I will lead an expedition to subdue ` 


the Mans in the south country. After that we can deal with. 


Wei. If Wei is reduced, Wu will not last long, and the whole 
empire will again be under one ruler 


Presently the report reached the capital that Teng Chih sna 


Chang Wen, as envoy of Wu, would soon arrive. The king 


and court assembled to receive them honourfably. The envoy — 


of Wu carried himself as one who had attained his desires, 
and advanced boldly. Having made his salute, the Later 
Ruler gave him to sit on a brocaded stool on his left hand. A 
banquet followed at which Chang Wén was treated with much 
honour. At the end of the banquet the whole court escorted 
the envoy to the guest-house where he was to lodge. 

On the second day there was a banquet at the Prime 
Minister’s palace, and K‘ung-ming broached the. real business. 
He said, “Our late ruler was not on friendly terms with Wu. 
But that is all changed, as is demonstrated by these banquets, 
and our present king is disposed to be very friendly. It is 
hoped that the former enmity may be entirely forgotten and 
the two countries swear eternal friendship and alliance in 
their common end, the destruction of Wei. I look to you, Sir, 
to speak in favour of this league.” 


Chang Wên said that he would support the plan. The ee, | 


went merrily round, and as the envoy became mellow he 
laughed freely and swaggered and put on a proud demeanour. 

The king gave Chang Wên rich presents of gold and stuffs 
and prepared a parting banquet for him in the south guest- 


he. Prime Minister paid him assiduous attention And eed 

him to drink. While this banquet was in progress, a man 
suddenly came in as if he were already drunk, made a proud © 
sort of salutation to the company aud at once took a seat. 
His conduct seemed strange to Chang Wên, who asked who 
the new comer was. 
“Beis a man named Ch'in Fu, a learned education officer 
of Ichou,” replied K‘ung-ming. 
“He may be that,” said Chang with a laugh: “but I wonder 

if he has any learning at all inside him.” 

~ Ch‘in Fu listened without changing countenance, and said, 
“Since our children are all learned, of course I am more 


972 


we What may have been your special studies, Sir? T said Chang 
ên 
“Everything; astronomy on one badd: geography on the 
other; the three teachings and the nine systems; all the 
philosophers: history all through and all sacred books and 
traditions. There is nothing I have not read.” — 

= “Since you talk so big,” said Chang, “I should like to ask | 
you a few questions on celestial matters. Now has the sky 
(tien) a head?” 

mY es pit has a head.” 

oa “Where i is it?” 

~ “In the western quarter ; the Odes say, ‘God turned his head 
kindly toward the west,’.and further it follows from this that 
the head is in the west. 3> ; 

_ “Well; has the sky ears?” - i 

“QO yes. The sky is above and listens to all things below. 

The Odes say, ‘The crane calls from the midst of the marsh, 

his cry is heard by the sky (tien). How could the sky hear 
without ears?” y 

“Has the sky feet?” 

“Tt has; the Odes say, Pien (heaven) treads down dificul- 
pties” If there were no teet how could it tread?” 

“Has heaven a name?” 


aoe “Why not?” T 
E “Then what is it?” 
S ; i “Liu.” i 


“How do you know that?” 

“Because the Emperor’ s family name is Liu, and he is the 

Son of Heaven. That is how I know.” 

“Does the sun spring from the east?” 

“Though it does, yet it disappears in the west.” 

~ All this time Ch‘in Fu’s repartees had flashed back clear 
and perfect; they came so naturally as to astonish all the 

guests. Chang Wén had no word to oen to them. Then it 
became Ch‘in’s turn. 


et as bi an Kuo, or 


“You are a famous scholar in your own land, Sir, and since 
you have asked so many questions about t’zen I take it you are 
well up in all celestial matters. When original chaos resolved 
into its two elements, yin and yang, or female and male, the 
lighter portion, or ether, rose and became tien, sky, and the 
grosser sank and solidified into ti, earth. When Kung Kung’s 
rebellion was crushed, its head struck the Puchou (Imperfect) — 
Mountain, the supports of heaven were broken and the bonds: 
of earth were destroyed. Heaven fell over to the north-west, 
and earth sank into the south-east. . Since heaven was ethereal 
and had floated to the top, how could it fall over? Another 
thing I do not know is what is beyond the ether. I should be 
glad if you would explain, Master.” 

Chang Wên had no reply ready, but he rose from his place — 
and bowed his acknowledgements, saying, “I knew not that — 
there was so much ability in this land. I am happy te havo 
heard such a discourse. Now all obstructions have disap- 
peared, and I see quite clearly.” 

But K‘ung-ming, fearing lest the guest should feel mortified, — 
soothed him with fair words., saying, “This is all play upon ` 
words, the sort of puzzles one propounds at a merry feast. — 
You, honoured Sir, know that the ranau Miky and safety of © 
states are no matters to joke with.” na 

The envoy bowed. Then Têng Chih was ordered to reU x 
to Wu and thank its ruler for his courtesy, and he was to — 
accompany Chang Wên. So both, having taken leave of the ` 
Prime Minister, set out on their journey to the east. : er 

In the meantime Sun Ch‘tian was beginning to feel perplexed — 
at the long delay of his envoy. He had summoned a council — 
to discuss this question, when the report came that his own — 
envoy had returned, and Téng was with him. They were- 
brought in forthwith; and: Chang. Wên, having made his 
obeisance, began to discourse upon the virtue of the King of- 
Shu and K‘ung-ming and to lay before his lord the proposal 
for a league of peace: ' Téng Chih, the President of a Board, 
was empowered to discuss this matter. 

Turning to Téng, Sun Ch‘iian said, “Would it not be a eae 
result if tranquillity should be restored to the empire by the. 
destruction of Wei, and Wu and Shu should share its admin- 
istration ?” 5 

“The sky knows not two suns,” replied Téng, “nor can the 
people recognise two kings. If Wei be destroyed, no one can 
say upon whom the divine command will devolve. But one who’ 
becomes a prince must perfect his virtue, and those who become | 

ministers must be wholly loyal. In this way strife will cease.” — 
an Ch‘tian smiled, saying, “And your sincerity is like this, 
eh?” 

Téng Chih was dismissed with rich gifts, and after this Wu 
and Shu were good friends. 


? 


“Homance of the Three kingooms E ZE 


The neea lons baean his two rivals were reported in 


at ithe capital without loss of time, and Ts‘ ao P’ei was very angry. 


“Tf they have made an alliance it can only mean that they 


` cherish the intention of destroying the capital. My best move 


4 


is to strike first.” 


He called a great council. This council lacked the presence 
of Ts‘ao Jên and Chia Hsii, who had both died, but Hsin P‘ 


_ stepped forward and said, “The country is extensive, but the 


population so sparse that no successful army could be raised 
just now. My. advice is to wait ten years, spending that period. 
in forming an army and in cultivating the land till stores and’ 
- weapons shall have been accumulated. Then both our rivals 
ma be destroyed.” 

“This is only the distorted opinion of a perverted pedant. 
Having made this league, the two countries may fall upon us 
at any moment. This matter cannot be postponed for ten 
years,” said the king. 

An edict appeared commanding the Giistiieut of soldiers 
and the formation of an army. Sstma I then pointed out 
that ships were necessary, as Wu was protected by the Great 
River, and he proposed a plan of campaign. | 

“Your Majesty must lead. The navy can advance by way of 


the Huai, taking Shouch‘un. When you reach Kuangling, 


the river is to be crossed and Nanhsii is to be captured.” 
‘This plan was accepted, and the construction of dragon ships 
“was put in hand and went on day and night. Ten were built 


T ae hundred feet long to carry two companies (of a thousand) 


each. They also collected three thousand fighting ships. 
In the autumn of the fifth year the various captains as- 
~ sembled, and Ts‘ao Chén was appointed leader of the first: 


te corps. ‘Change Liao, Chang Ho, Wén P‘ing and Hsti Huang 
- were chief. leaders. _Hsii Ch‘u and Lü Wen were guards of 


the centre, and Ts‘ao Ho commanded the rear guard. The 
strategists were Liu Yeh and Chiang Chi. In all, land and 
marine forces numbered over thirty legions. When the 
starting day was decided upon, Ssuma I was made President 


-~ of the Board of War with the Lordship of the Archery, and 


left in the capital with the powers of a regent. 

Passing over the story of how the ‘Wei army started, history 
shifts the scene to Wu, where the spies told the king’s attendants 
of the dangers, and the latter hastened to inform the king. They 
said Ts‘ao P‘ei was leading in person and the danger was great. 

When Sun Chiiian met his council, Ku Yung said, “My lord, 


_ you can call upon Shu for help according to the treaty. Write 


to K‘ung-ming and get him to send out an army through 
Hanchung so as to divert part of Wei’ s army. Also send an 
army to Nanhsti to oppose them there.” 

“I shall have to recall Lu Hsiin,”’ said the prince. “He is 
the only | man to undertake this great task.” 


272 San Hua, or 


X 


“Do not move him if you can help it; he is necessary for the 
protection of Chingchou.” 

“Yes, I know; but there is no other strong enough. 

At these words Hsü Shéng advanced, saying, “I ae lam 
not very able, but I desire to be given an army to meet this 
danger. If Ts‘ao P‘ei crosses the river in person Ï will make 
him prisoner and present him at the gate of your palace. If 
he does not come over here I will slay so many of his men that 
his army shall not dare even to look this way.” . 

Sun Ch‘iian was pleased to find a willing volunteer, and 
“replied, “Noble Sir, what anxiety need I feel if I have your 
protection?” 

Hsu was given the title of “Protector of the East” and made 
Commander-in-chief of all the forces in Nanhsii. As soon as 
he had received his orders, he retired. He gave command to 
gather enormous quantities of weapons, and had many flags 
and banners made for the protection of the river banks. 

But another impetuous young leader was anxious to take 
more vigorous measures, and he stood forth, saying, “My lord 
` has laid upon you, O General, a heavy responsibility, but if 
you really desire to capture the ruler of Wei you should send 
an army to meet him on the north side’in Huainan. I fear 
failure if you wait till the northern men have come this far.” 

The young man was Sun Shao, cousin of the Prince of Wu. 
He had already the title of “Leader of Wide Prestige,’ and 
was in command at Kuangling. Though young and impetu- 
ous, he was very valiant. 

“Ts‘ao P‘ei’s army is strong and its leaders famous. I 
hold that we may not cross the river to meet him, but wait the 
‘arrival of his ships on the other side. Then I shall carry out — 
my plan,” said Hsii. ‘7 

“I have three companies of my own, and I know the country 
about Kuangling thoroughly. Let me go across the river and 
fight a battle. I will willingly undergo the penalty if I fail,” 
said the younger Sun. 

_ However, Hsti Sheng refused; and all the pleadings of his 
impetuous captain were vain. And when he still persisted, . 
the Commander-in-chief grew angry and said, “What control 
shall I have if you are allowed to. disobey orders?” He 
ordered the lictors to take him out and put him to death. | 

They. led him away, and forthwith the black flag was hoisted. 

But one of Sun Shao’s ‘captains went off in hot haste to tell 
Sun Ch‘tian, who came immediately to try to save his favourite. 

Happily the execution had not been accomplished when the _ 
prince appeared on the scene, and he bade the executioners 
disperse. The youth was saved. He began to press his claim 
to the prince. “I have been at Kuangling, and if we do not 

attack the enemy there, but let him get down to the river, 
there will be an end of Wu.” 


Romance of the Three Liingdooms 273 


Sun Ch‘tian went into the camp, and Hsii Shéng came to 
receive him. When the prince was seated in his tent, he said, 
“O Prince, you placed me in command of the force to repulse 
Wei. Now this captain of mine, Sun Shao, is disobedient and 
should suffer death. I would ask why he should be pardoned.” 

LHe is naturally hot and impetuous. He has been guilty of 
disobedience, but I hope you will overlook his fault.” 

_ “The law is none of my making, nor is it yours, O Prince; it 
is a state penalty, and if relationship is enough to evade it, 
where is discipline?” 

“He has offended, and you have the right to judge and 
punish. But although his real name was Yii, yet my brother 
loved him and gave him our family name. He has rendered 
me good service, and if he should be put to death I should fail 
_ in my fraternal duty.” 

“Since you have intervened, O Prince, I remit the death 
penalty.” 

- Sun Ch‘tian bade his nephew thank his chief, but the youth 
would not make an obeisance. On the contrary, he loudly 
maintained the correctness of his view. “I can only lead my 
men against Ts‘ao and so die,” cried he. “I cannot consent 
to the other plan.” 

Hsü Shéng’s countenance changed. The recalcitrant young 

man was ordered to leave the tent. 

; “He will not be any loss,” said Sun Ch‘iian, “and I will not 
employ him again.” 

Then the prince left and returned to his own place.. That 
night they reported to Hsü Shéng that Sun Shao had gone 
secretly over the river with his own force, and the commander, 
who did not wish him to come to harm, as evidently that 
would displease the prince, sent a force to support him. Ting 
` Fêng was chosen to command this reinforcement, and he was 
told what to do. 

The Ruler of Wei, in his dragon ships, reached Kuangling, 
and the van got to the river bank. He came to survey the 
position. 

“How many soldiers are on the other bank?” asked Ts‘ao. 

Ts‘ao Chén replied, “I have not seen a single one; nor are 
there any flags or encampments.” 

“That is a ruse; I will go and find out.” 

So he set out to cross the river in one of the dragon ships. 
He anchored under the bank. On his boat were displayed the 
emblems proper to an imperial equipage, and they shone out 
bravely. Seated in the ship, the prince looked up and down the 
south bank, but not a man was visible. 

“Do you. think we should cross?” asked the prince of his 
strategists. . i ARC ; 

“Tf the rules of war mean anything, they ought to be 
prepared. We think Your Majesty should exercise caution. 


18 


sa Laud lenis es 


i 


PTAS San Ruo, or 


Wait a few days and watch. Then perhaps the van might be 
Pale sent to make a reconnaissance.” 

5 “So I think,” said the prince. “But as it is now late, we © 
will pass the night on the river.” j 

Heels It was a dark night, and the ship was brilliantly lighted up; 
Hye it seemed like day on board. But all along the south bank 
vi, there appeared no glimmer of light. 

“What do you think it means?” said Ts‘ao. 

The courtiers replied, “They heard that Your Majesty’s 
heavenly army was coming, and ran away like so many 
rats.” 

The prince laughed to himself. When daylight came there 
came with it a thick fog, so that nothing on the bank could be 
seen. After a time a breeze blew off the fog, and then, to their 
immense surprise, they found that the whole length of the 
south bank as far as they could see was one battlement, with 
towers at intervals, while spears and swords glittered in the 
sun and flags and pennons fluttered in the breeze. Also the 
scouts began to report a similar wall at Nanhsü. A long 
stone wall had grown up in a night and stood there with carts 
and masts of ships lying along it. 

This may be explained. The fact was that the wall was 
an imitation, and the warriors that manned it were bundles 
of reeds dressed in soldiers’ uniforms. But the sight chilled © 
the ardour of the invaders. 

“My hosts of men are no use against such warriors; we can 
do nothing,” said Ts‘ao. 

He thought over this sadly enough. But now the wind had 
increased in force, and white combers began to heave up in the | 
river, and seas broke over his boat, drenching the dragon 
robes. The ship seemed as if she would roll right over. So 
Ts‘ao Chén sent out small boats to rescue his master and his ~ 
men. But they were too affrighted to move. Wherefore Wen 
P‘ing, who was in charge, leaped on board and helped the 
prince down into one of the smaller craft, which then flew 
away before the wind and got safely into a creek. 

Bey: Soon came a hasty messenger from the west to say that Chao 
g Yün had marched out through Hsip‘ing Pass and threatened 
le Ch‘angan. This frightened Ts‘ao P‘ei so badly that he decided 
to retreat, and gave orders to retire. The whole army were 
Be in a mood to run away, and moved off toward the north, 


oR | pursued by the men of Wu. To hasten the march, the Prince 
A of Wei bade his men abandon all the imperial paraphernalia 
ae and impediments. The dragon ships withdrew into the Huai 


River one by one. 

As they moved in disorder, suddenly arose the sounds of an 
enemy force, shouts and the rolling of drums and the blaring 
of trumpets, and a cohort marched down obliquely on to their 
line. And at the head was Sun Shao. 


"were slain, while large numbers were driven into the river 


and drowned. By dint of great efforts, the prince was saved. 


= and got away up the river. But when they had sailed about 
_ thirty li, they saw ahead a tract of blazing reeds. The enemy 
had poured fish oil over the dry reeds and set them alight. 

The wind was spreading the flames down river toward the 


men of Wei, and the heat was intense. The dragon ships had 


to stop. 


Ts‘ao P‘ei was put into a maller eratt and taken on shore; — 3 


_ his larger ships were presently set on fire and destroyed. 

_ They mounted the prince on a horse and moved along the bank, 

~ but soon they fell in with another body of men. This time it 
_ was the supports under Ting Féng. 

_ Chang Liao rode ahead to engage the aoe. but was soon 

= wounded by an arrow in the loins. However, he was helped 

away by Hsti Huang, and the prince was got safely out of the 


turmoil. The loss of men was heavy, and a huge booty of 


horses, carts, ships and weapons fell to the victors. 
2) So the Wei armies went away north thoroughly beaten, while 
 Hsti Shéng had scored a great success. He was richly 
rewarded. 
Chang Liao. got to Hstch‘ang, but only to die from the 
effects of his wound. He was honourably buried by the prince, 
- but the story of his funeral will not be told. © 


= Tt has been said that Chao Yün was threatening Ch‘angan, hi 
— but soon after he went through the Pass the Prime Minister. 


of Shu sent a despatch to recall him because the aged General 
Yung K‘ai of Ichou had joined himself with the Mans and 

invaded the four districts. So Chao Yün returned. Mean- 
= while Ma Ch‘ao was put in charge of the Yangp‘ing Pass. 


The Prime Minister was about to go to invade the south. He 


2 was then preparing at Ch’éngtu for this expedition. 


- First Wu met Wei and drove them north, 
Then Shu against the Mans went forth. - 


The story of this campaign will follow in the next chapters. 


Romance of the Three ingooms an ee 


‘The men of Wei could make no effective stand, and many 


CHAPTER LXXXVII. > + 


K‘UNG-MING’S SOUTHERN EXPEDITION; 
THE KING OF THE Mans. 


With K‘ung-ming’s administration of affairs in the Two 
Ch‘tian began a period of happiness and prosperity for the 
people. Tranquillity prevailed, and the state of society was 
well nigh perfect, doors unbolted at night, property left by 
the roadside remaining untouched till the owner returned 
for it. Moreover, the harvests were rich year after year, and 
old and young, with fair, round bellies, well lined, simply 
sang with joy. The people hastened to fulfil their state 
duties and vied with each other in the.performance of any 
corvée. As a natural consequence all military preparations 
were perfect, the granaries bursting with grain and the 
treasury full to overflowing. 

Such was the state of things when, in the third year, the 
‘news came to the capital that a host of Mans had invaded the | 
south and were laying waste the country, and that the Prefect 
of Chienning, a man of an honourable and even noble family, 
had joined them. Already two districts had yielded to the 
invaders, but a third was staunchly holding out. The three 
rebels, who had joined the invaders, were now acting as guides 
and assisting in the attack on Jungch‘ang, which had remained 
faithful. Wang K‘ang, the Prefect of Jungch‘ang, ably 
seconded by Lü K‘ai, one of his subordinates, was making a 
desperate effort to defend the city with only its ordinary 
inhabitants as fighting men. The position was very desperate. 

When this news came, K‘ung-ming went into the palace and 
thus memorialised to his lord, “The contumacy of the Mans is 
a real danger to our state. -I feel it incumbent upon me to 
-lead an expedition to reduce the barbarians to obedience.” 

But the king was afraid, and said, “There are enemies on 
two sides; if you abandon me and either of them comes, what 
shall I do?” 

“Your Majesty need have no fear. We have just concluded 
a league of peace with Wu, and I think they will be true to 
their pledge. Li Yen is quite a match for Lu Hsiin. Ts‘ao 
P‘ei’s recent defeat has taken the keenness out of his men, so 
that he will not feel inclined to make any expeditions further. 
Ma Ch‘ao is in command at the Pass between Wei and Han- 
chung. I shall also leave Kuan and Chang with forces to 
reinforce any point, where danger may appear. I can assure 


è 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 207), 


Your Majesty that no untoward event will happen. I am 
going to sweep clean the Man country, so that we may have a 
free hand to attack Wei when the day comes. Thus I shall 
be enabled to requite the honour paid me by your father the 
First Ruler, who came thrice to seek me and who doubled my 
obligation when he confided to me the care of his son.” 

. “Indeed I am young and ignorant,” replied the king, “and 
can only exist with you to decide for me.” 

At that moment an officer, Wang Lien by name, a man of 
Nanyang, stepped forward, crying, “No, no, Sir; you may not 
go. The south is a desert country reeking with malaria. It 
is wrong that an officer of state in such an exalted and 
responsible position should go away on a distant expedition. 
These rebels and barbarians are but an irritation, not a disease, 
and an ordinary leader would be enough to send against them. 
He would not fail.” ; 

K‘ung-ming replied, “This country of the Mans is distant 
and mostly uncivilised. To reduce them to reasonableness 
will be difficult, and I feel I ought to go. When to be harsh 
and when to show leniency are matters to be decided on at the 
moment, and instructions cannot. be easily given to another.” 

K‘ung-ming steadily opposed all Wang’s efforts to bring - 
about a change of intention, and he soon took leave of his- 
master and made ready to start. 
Chiang Yüan was Councillor of the expedition. Fei Wei ` 

was Recorder; Tung Chiieh and Fan Chien were Historians; 


-~ Chao Yün and Wei Yen were Generals; Wang Ping and 


Chang I were Deputy Generals and leaders of the fighting men. 
Beside these were officers originally belonging to Shu, and the 
whole force was fifty legions. — 

Soon after the force marched south, the third son of Kuan 
the Noble appeared and wished to see K‘ung-ming. After 
- the fall of Chiangchou this youth had fied to Paochia, where 
he had fallen ill. His illness had been long and severe, and he 
had only just recovered. He was then travelling toward, 
Ch‘éngtu. He knew that vengeance had been taken on the 
murderers of his father. And he asked to take part in this 
expedition. : ; j 

K‘ung-ming was greatly surprised to see him. However, 
he sent news of the young man’s arrival to the court and gave 
Kuan So a military appointment. 

The army, foot and horse, marched in the best of order, 
eating when hungry, drinking when thirsty, camping at night 
~ and moving by day. No plundering was permitted, and the 
people suffered not at ali. ; i 

When Yung K‘ai and his fellow rebels heard that the Prime 
Minister of Shu was marching against them, they called their 
men together and formed three divisions, Kao Ting in the 
centre, Yung and Chu on the wings. They mustered about 


ate 


278 Ban Kuo, or 


five legions in all, and they went to oppose the march of the 
Shu army. Kao Ting sent O Huan to lead the van. 

This O Huan was tall of stature, but ugly and evil of 
countenance. His weapon was a sort of halberd. He was 
very valiant, and no one could face him. He led his,own cohort 
out in advance of the main body and fell in with the leading 
bodies of the Shu army immediately after they had got into 
Ichou. The two sides drew up for battle, and, the arrays 
being complete, Wei Yen rode out and vilified the rebels, 
calling upon them to surrender. Instead, O Huan galloped 
- out and fought with Wei. After a few bouts Wei seemed to 
be bested and fled. But this was only a ruse. However, O 
Huan followed, fell into the ambush as had been arranged, 
` and was captured. 

He was taken. to the tent of K‘ung-ming, ae) bade his 
attendants loose his bonds, gave him wine and comforted 
him. Then he asked who he was. 

O Huan replied, “I am one of the captains under Kao Ting.” 

“T know Kao Ting as a loyal and good sort, but he has been 
led away by this Yung K‘ai. Now I shall release you, but 
you are to bring Kao to his senses and see to it that he comes 
to surrender. It will be best for him.” 

O Huan thanked him and withdrew. He went to his own side 
and soon saw Kao Ting. He told him what K‘ung-ming had 
- said, and K‘ung-ming’s kindly feeling deeply affected Kao. 

Soon after, Yung K‘ai came over to Kao Ting’s camp to 
visit him. After the exchange of salutations, Yung asked 
how it came about that O Huan had been released. 


“Chuko Liang released him out of pure kindness,” replied eae 


Kao Ting. 
“This is a ruse of „his to separate you from me: he wishes 
to make us enemies.’ 
Kao Ting almost believed this too, and he was much 
perplexed. 

- Just then the watchers reported that the leaders of Shu had 
come up and were offering battle. So Yung K‘ai led out three 
legions to take up the challenge. But after the third encounter 
he fied. Wei-Yen pursued him and smote for a distance of 

two score li. 
i Next day Yung K‘ai challenged, but the men of Shu refused 
io fight, and remained within their lines for three days. On 
the fourth day Yung and Kao divided their men into two parts 
and came to attack the camp. Now K‘ung-ming had told Wei 
Yen to wait for this double attack, and so when it came to 
pass both divisions fell into an ambush and suffered great loss, 
many being killed and more captured. 

The prisoners were taken to the camp, and the men belong- ) 
ing to the two divisions were confined separately. Then. 
K‘ung-ming told the soldiers to let it be known that only those 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 279 


belonging to Kao Ting would be spared, the others would be put 
_ to death. When time had been given for this story to spread 


= among the prisoners, Yung’s men were brought up to the 


-commander’s tent. 
“Whose men were you?” asked he. 
“Kao Ting’s” cried they all, falsely. 


. Then they were all pardoned, and, after being given wine 
_ and food, they were taken to the frontier and set free. / 


Next the real Kao Ting’s men were brought forward, and 
the same question was put to them. 
Ny all really belong to Kao Ting’s command,” said 

ey. Kites i 

-In like manner they were pardoned and refreshed with wine 
and food. Then K‘ung-ming addressed them, saying, “Yung 
K‘ai has just sent a messenger to ask that he may surrender, 
and he offers to bring with him the heads of your commander 
and of Chu Pao as a proof of merit. But I will not receive 
him, and you, since you are Kao Ting’s men, shall be released 
and allowed to return to him. But let there be no ingratitude 
and fighting again, for if there is, I certainly will not pardon 
you next time.” Aa Sas 

So they thanked their liberator and went away. As soon 


as they reached their own camp they told the whole story. 


Then Kao Ting sent a spy to the camp of his colleague to find 
out what was doing. There he met the men who had been 
` released, and they were all talking about K‘ung-ming’s 


__ kindness, and many of them were inclined to desert their own 
= camp for the other. Although this seemed very satisfactory, 


yet Kao Ting did not feel convinced, and he sent another man 
‘to K‘ung-ming’s camp to try to verify what had happened. 
- But this man was captured and taken before the Commander- 

in-chief, who pretended that he thought the spy belonged to 
Yung K‘ai, and said to him, “Why has your leader failed to 
send me the heads of Kao and Chu as he promised? You lot 
are not very clever, and what are you come to spy out?” 

The soldier muttered and mumbled in confusion. But 
K‘ung-ming gave the man wine and food, and then wrote a 
‘letter which he handed to the spy, saying, “You give this letter 
to your commander, Yung. K‘ai, and tell him to get the job 
done quickly.” > = | | 

The spy took the letter and got away. As soon as he reached 
camp he gave the letter to Kao Ting and also the message. 

Kao Ting read the missive and became very angry. 

“I have ever been true to him, and yet he wants to kill me. 
It is hard to be either friendly or reasonable.” 


Then he decided to take O Huan into his confidence, and 


called him. O Huan was much prejudiced in favour of K‘ung- 


‘ming, and said, “K‘ung-ming is a most benevolent man, and 


it would be ill to turn our backs upon him. It is Yung K‘ai’s 


280 Dan Kuo, or 


fault that we are now rebels, and our best course would be to 
slay him and betake ourselves to K‘ung-ming.”’ 

“How could it be done?” asked Kao Ting. 

“Invite him to a banquet. If he refuse, it means he is a 
traitor, and then you can attack him in front while I will Jie 
in wait behind his camp to capture him as he runs away.’ 

They agreed to try this plan; the banquet was prepared and 
Yung invited. But as his mind was full of suspicion from 
what his returned men had said, he would not come. That 
night, as soon as darkness fell, Kao Ting attacked his camp. 

Now the men who had been released were imbued with the 
goodness of Kao Ting aud quite ready to help him fight. On 
the other hand, Yung K‘ai’s men mutinied against him, and so 
Yung K‘ai mounted his steed and fled. Before he had gone 
far he found his road blocked by the cohort under O Huan, 
who galloped out with his halberd and confronted the fugitive. 
Yung could not defend himself, and was struck down. O 
. Huan decapitated him. As soon as they knew he was dead, 
his men joined themselves to Kao Ting, who then went and 
surrendered to K‘ung-ming. 

K‘ung-ming received him sitting in state in his tent, but at 
once ordered the lictors to decapitate him. 

But Kao Ting said, “Influenced by your kindness, Sir, I 
have brought the head of my colleague as a proof of the 
sincerity of my surrender: why should I die?’ 

“You come with false intent; do you think you can hood- 
wink me?” said K‘ung-ming, laughing. 

“What proof have you that I am false?” 

K‘ung-ming drew a letter from his box, and said, “Chu Pao 
sent this secretly to say he wished to surrender, and he said 
you and Yung K‘ai were sworn friends to death. How could 
you suddenly change your feelings and slay him? That is 
how I know your treachery.” 

“Chu Pao only tried to make trouble,” cried Kao, kneeling. 

K‘ung-ming still refused to believe him, and said, “I cannot 
believe you without more solid proof. If you would slay Chu 
I could take that as proving you were sincere in your 
surrender.” 

“Do not doubt me. What if-I go and capture this man?” 

“If you did that my doubts would be set at rest.” 

Thereupon Kao Ting and his subordinate, O Huan, led away 
their men to the camp of Chu Pao. When they were about 
ten li from his camp Chu Pao appeared with a cohort. As 
soon as they recognised each other, Chu Pao hastily came 
forward to parley. But Kao Ting cried out to him, “Why 
did you write a letter to the Prime Minister and so intrigue 
with him to get me killed?” 

Chu Pao stared open mouthed and could not reply. Then 
O Huan rode out from behind his chief and struck Chu with 


EE 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 281 


his halberd so that he fell to the ground. Thereupon Kao 
Ting shouted to the men that they should either yield or be 
slain, and they yielded in a body. 

Kao Ting then went back to K‘ung-ming and offered the 
head of the man just slain. K‘ung-ming laughed again. 

“I have made you kill both these as a proof of loyalty.” 

Then he created Kao Prefect of Ichou and chief of three 
districts, while O Huan was given a junior rank. Thus the 
three divisions were disposed of and troubled the peace no 
more. 

The Prefect of Jungch‘ang then came out of the city and 
welcomed K‘ung-ming, and, when he had made his entry into 
that city, he called Wang K‘ang and asked who had aided him 
in the defence. 

The Prefect said, “The safety of this city is due entirely 
to Lü K‘ai.”’ 

So Lti was called. He came and bowed. 

K‘ung-ming said, “Long since I heard of you as a remark- 
able man of this district. We are greatly indebted to you for 
_ its safety. Now we wish to conquer the Mans; have you any 
advice to offer?” es 

Lu K‘ai then produced a map of the country and presented 
it, saying, “From the time of my appointment I have felt 
certain that the southern men would rise against you, and so 

I sent secret agents to map out the country and find the 
_strategical points. From that information I prepared this 
map, which I call ‘An Easy Scheme to Conquer the Mans.’ 
I beg you, Sir, to accept it, as it may be of use.” 

Then K‘ung-ming took Lü K‘ai into his service as adviser 
and guide. With his help he advanced and penetrated deeply 
‘into the country. 

While the army was advancing, there came a messenger 
from the Court. When he appeared, K‘ung-ming saw it was 
Ma Su, and he was clothed in white. He was in mourning 
for his brother, Ma Liang, who had just died. He had come 
by special command of the Emperor with gifts of wine and 
silk. 

When the ceremonies proper on receipt of a mandate from 
the Emperor had been performed, and the gifts distributed 
as instructed, Ma Su was asked to remain to talk over matters 

K'ung-ming said, “I have His Majesty’s command to conquer 
these Mans. I hear you have some advice to offer, and I 
should be pleased if you would instruct me.” 7% 

“Yes; I have one thing to say that may be worth thinking 
over. These people refuse to recognise our supremacy because 
they think their country is distant and difficult. If you should 
overcome them to-day, to-morrow they would revolt. Wher- 
ever your army marches they are overcome and submit, but 
the day you withdraw the army and attack Ts‘ao P‘ei they 


282 San Buo, or 


will renew their attack. In arms even it is best to attack 
hearts rather than cities; to fight with sentiment is better 
than to fight with weapons. It will be well if you can win 
them over.’ 

“You read inmost thoughts,” said K‘ung-ming, 

Then Ma Su was retained with the army as ‘adviser, and 
the army marched on. p 

When the King of the Mans, Menghuo by name, heard how 
cleverly K‘ung-ming had got rid of Yung K‘ai, he called 
together the leaders of tke “Three Ravines” to discuss matters. 

The chief of the first.Ravine was Chinhuansanchieh, of the 
second Tung-T‘una and of the third Ahuinan. These having 
come to the king’s place, he said to them, “Our country has 
been invaded, and we must exert our united strength to drive 
out the invaders. You three must lead your forces, and 
whoever conquers the enemy shall be chief of chiefs.” . 

It was arranged that Chinhuansanchieh should march in 
the centre division, with the others on his flanks. Each 
division was five legions. 

When the scouts made out that the Man armies were 
coming, they at once told K‘ung-ming, who called Chao Yün 
and Wei Yen to his side, but gave them no orders. Next he 
sent for Wang P‘ing and Ma Chung, and said to them, “T — 
cannot send Chao Yün and Wei Yen against the Mans because 
they do not know the country.. You two are to go, one against | 
each wing, and the two veteran warriors shall support you: 
Get your men ready and start to-morrow at dawn.” | j 

Then the two Changs were sent against the centre army; 
they were to act with Wang and Ma. And once more K‘ung- | 
ming seemed to taunt the two veterans with ignorance. 

The two heroes now began to feel hurt. Noticing this, 
K‘ung-ming said, “I have no wish to pass you over, you 
two, but I fear that if you get too deeply into the country and 
should fall victims to the Mans that it will have an ill effect on 
the others.” 

“But what if we did know the geography of the Countya 
said Chao Yün. 

“All I say to you is to be careful how you do anything,” 
replied K‘ung-ming. 

The two old soldiers left and went together to the camp of 
Chac Yün. 

Chao Yün said, “We are greatly ashamed at being put in 
the background because we do not know the country. We 
cannot bear this.” 

“Then let us ride out and survey,” said his colleague. “Let 
us capture a few natives and make them show us the road, and 
let us defeat these savages.’ í 

They rode off. Before they had gone far they saw a cloud 
of dust in the distance. Climbing a hill to get a better view, 


they saw a small party of mounted Mans coming toward them. 
The two waited till they were near and then suddenly burst 
out. The Mans, taken entirely by surprise, ran away all but 
a few, who yielded themselves prisoners. The two warriors 
‘returned to camp. — ne 

The prisoners were given wine and food, and when they 
had satisfied their hunger they were questioned. 

Said they, “The camp of the Chief Chinhuansanchieh is just 
in front, just by the entrance to the mountains. Near the 
camp, running east and west, is the Ravine of the Five 
Streams. The camps of the other two chiefs are behind.” 

The two leaders got together five companies, took the captur- 
ed men as guides and marched out about the second watch. It 
was a clear night, and the moon gave light to march by. 

The first camp was reached about the fourth watch. The 


Man soldiers were already awake and preparing their morning | 


meal, as they intended to attack at daylight. The vigorous 
and unexpected attack of the two captains threw the camp into 
confusion; the chief was slain and his head cut off. 
= Then Wei Yen took half the force and went west to the 
second camp. By the time he reached it day had dawned. 
They also had news of his coming, and drew up the camp to 
oppose. But when they had got clear, there was a great 
uproar behind them at the stockade gates, and confusion 
followed. The reason was the arrival of Wang P‘ing. Be- 
tween the two bodies the Mans were beaten. Their chief, 
-Tunet‘una, got away. Wei Yen’s men followed, but they could 
not catch him. 

When Chao Yün led his men to attack the third camp in the 
rear, Ma Chung made an attack on the front. They scored a 
success, but the chief, Ahuinan, escaped. 

They returned to headquarters, and K‘ung-ming said, 

“The three parties of Mans have fled; where is the head of 
the first of the three chiefs?” 


Chao Yiin produced it. At the same time he reported that _ 


the other two chiefs had escaped by abandoning their horses 
and going over the hill. They could not be followed. 

“They are already prisoners,” said K‘ung-ming with a laugh. 
The fighting men could not credit it. But soon after the 
two chiefs were brought in. When some expressed surprise 
and admiration, K‘ung-ming said, “I had studied the map and 
knew the positions of the camps. I taunted Chao Yün and Wei 
Yen into making a supreme effort at the same time that I sent 
other forces, because I knew the first two were the only men 
for the task. I felt certain the two chiefs would run away 
along those small roads, and I set men on those roads to wait 
for them. They also were supported.’” : 
They all bowed, saying, “The Prime Minister’s calculations 
-are divine and incomprehensible.” 


= Komene of the Three Kingdoms gga 


284 San Kuo, or 


The two captive chiefs were then called. As soon as they 
appeared, K‘ung-ming loosed their bonds, gave them refresh- 
ments and released them, bidding them offend no more. They 
thanked him for their liberty, and disappeared along a by-road. 

Then K‘ung-ming said to his captains, “To-morrow Ménghuo 
will come in person to make an attack. We shall probably 
capture him again.’ 

Then he summoned Chao Ytin and Wei Yen ond gave them 
crders. They left, each with a half legion. Next he sent 
Wang P‘ing. And then he sat in his tent to wait for the 
result. 

The King of the Mans was sitting in his tent when the 
scouts told him that his three chiefs had been captured and 
their armies scattered. It made him very angry, and he 
quickly got his army ready to march. Soon he met Wang 
P‘ing, and, when the armies were arrayed, Wang P‘ing rode | 
out to the front. The flaunting banners of his foes then 
epened out, and he saw their ranks. Many captains were on 
horseback. In the middle was the king, who advanced to 
the front. He wore a golden, inlaid head-dress; his belt bore 
a lion’s face as clasp; his boots had pointed toes and were 
green; he rode a frizzy-haired horse the colour of a hare; he — 
arn at his waist a pair of swords chased with the pine-tree 
devi 

Ha looked haughtily at his foes, and then, turning to his _ 
captains, said, “It has aiways been said that Chuko Liang is a 
a wonderful soldier, but I gee that is false. Look at this | 
array with its banners all in confusion and the ranks in 
disorder. There is not a weapon among all the swords and © 
spears better than ours. If I had only realised this before I 
would have fought them long ago. Who dares go out and 
capture a Shu captain to show them what sort of warriors 
we are?” 

At once a captain rode toward the leader, Wank P‘ing. His 
_ name was Huanmangyachang; his weapon was a huge heads- 
man’s sword, and he rode a dun pony. Riding up to Wang 
P‘ing, the two engaged. 

Wang Ping only fought a short time, and then fled. The 
king at once ordered his men on in quick pursuit, and the 
men of Shu retreated a score or so of li before the Mans were 
near enough to fight. Just as the Mans thought their enemies 
were in their power, a great shouting arose and two cohorts 
appeared, one on either flank, and attacked. The Mans could 
not retreat, and as another force under Kuan So also turned ` 
upon them, the Mans were surrounded and lost the day. 
Ménghuo and some of his captains fought their way out and 
made for the Chintai Mountains. The men of Shu followed 
and forced them forward, and presently there appeared, in 
front, Chao Yün. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms | 285 


Pe The king hastily changed his route to go deeper into the 
_mountains, but Chao Yiin’s men spread around, and the Mans 
could not make a stand. Here some were captured. Ménghuo 
and a few horsemen got away into a valley, which, however, 
soon became too narrow for the horses to advance. The king 
then left his horse and crawled up the mountains, but very soon 
he fell upon Wei Yen, who had been sent to lie in wait in that 
very valley. So he was again prisoner. 
~ The king and his followers were taken to the main camp, 
_where K‘ung-ming was waiting with wine and meat ready for 
_the captives. But his tent was now guarded by a seven-deep 
force of men all well armed with glittering weapons, beside 
_ the lictors bearing the golden axes, a present from the Emper- 
or, and other insignia of rank. The feather-hatted drummers 
and clarion players were in front and behind, and the Imperial 
Guards were extended on both sides. The whole was very 
imposing and awe-inspiring. 

K‘ung-ming was seated at the top of it all and watched the 
captives as they came forward in crowds. When they were 
all assembled, he ordered their bonds to be loosed, and then he 

~ addressed them. 

“You are all simple and well-disposed people who have been 
led into trouble by Ménghuo. I know your fathers and 
mothers, your brothers and wives; and your children are 

` anxiously watching from the doorways for your return, and 
they are cut to the quick now that the news of defeat and 

_ capture has reached their ears. They are weeping bitter tears 

for you. And so I will set you ali free to go home and comfort 
them.” ; 

After they had been given food and wine and a present of 
grain, he sent them all away. They went off grateful for the 

- kindness shown them, but they wept as they thanked K‘ung- 
- ming. 

Then the guards were told to bring the King before the 

tent. He came, bound, being hustled forward. He knelt in 
front of the great leader, who said, “Why did you rebel after 
the generous treatment you have received from our Emperor?” 

“The two. Ch‘uan belonged to others, and’ your lord took it 

from them by force, and gave himself the title of ‘Emperor.’ 
My people have lived here for ages, and you and yours invaded 
my country without the least excuse. How can you talk of i > 
rebellion to me?” $ , ; 
“You are my prisoner; will you submit or are you still 
: contumacious ?” 

“Why should I submit? You happened to find me in a 

narrow place; that is all.” 
“Tf I release you, what then?” 

“If you release me I shall return, and when I have set my 
army in order I shall come to fight you again. However, if l 2 
you catch me once more I will submit.” 


“Once more the c bidet chiet 
To yield barbarians are ex 


Further results. of his war wil 
Ge i 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 


CROSSING THE RIVER LU; BINDING OF THE BARBARIAN KING; 
RECOGNISING A PRETENDED SURRENDER; CAPTURE OF MENGHUO. 


The officers did not approve of the release of the King of the 
- Mans, and they came to the tent of K‘ung-ming and said, 
“Ménghuo is the most important personage of all the Mans, 
and his capture is the key to restoring order in the south. 
Why then, O Minister, did you release him?” 

“T can capture him just as easily as I can get something 
out of my pocket. What I want to do is to overcome and win 
his heart, so that peace may follow of itself.” 

They listened, but they had no great confidence in the success 

of the policy of conciliation. 

In the meantime Ménghuo had reached the Lu River, and 
there he fell in with some of his defeated men, who were 

- trying to get news of their king’s fate. They were surprised, — 
_ but glad, to see him, and asked how he had been able to get 
back. 

The king lied, saying, “They confined me in a tent, and I 

_ broke out in the night. I slew a half score of my guards and | 
ran. And then I met one of their spies, killed him, and that 

~is how I got this horse.” 

<- They never doubted his word, and very joyfully they hurried 
him over the river to a camping place. Then all the notables 
‘assembled from the various ravines, and the soldiers that had - 

-~ escaped death were ioan and got into shape as a fighting 
force. 

The two leaders in (e late campaign, Tungtuna and 
` Ahuinan, were in one of the ravines, and the king sent to ask 
them to come. They were afraid, but they could not disobey, 
and they came with an escort. When all had assembled, the 
king proclaimed as follows :—“I know Chuko Liang is too full ` 
of ruses for us to conquer him in a fight; we should only fall 
victims to other base devices. However, we must remember 
that his men have marched far and the weather is sultry, 
which are factors in our favour. Beside, the Lu River is our 
rampart. We will have boats and rafts on the south side, 
and we will build a mud wall. With such good defences we 
can afford to wait and see what the enemy intends.” 

_ His speech met with approval, and his plan was carried out. 

The wall was supported by the hills and strengthened by 
fighting turrets, upon which were placed large bows and 


1 


288 an Huo, vr. 


crossbows and balistae. The defences looked as if they were 
permanent. Moreover, each ravine sent supplies in plenty. 
And having made these preparations, Mênghuo felt comfortable 
and safe. 

K‘ung-ming had advanced, and his leading division was 
now close to the river. However, no boats or rafts could be 
found to cross, and the current was too strong to think of 
fording. Beside, they could see the formidable defences on 
the farther bank, the mud wall and the turrets all fully man- 
ned. The weather was burning hot, for it was the fifth mouth, 
and the soldiers could not tolerate their armour nor even their 
clothing. 

When K’ung-ming had inspected the river, he returned to 
his tent and assembled his officers, to whom he read this 
order: “The enemy is securely established on the south bank 
ready to repel our attack. Yet, having come so far, we cannot 
return empty. For the present you will all seek what shelter 
you can find in the forests, and rest and refresh your men.” 

Then he sent Lu K‘ai to a distance to select a cool spot, and 
there he made two stockades. Within the stockades he built 
huts for the men and sheds for the horses, so that they were 
sheltered from the intense heat. | 

However, a junior captain, Chiang Wan, was ready to carp 
at these shelters, and went to K‘ung-ming, saying, “These 
shelters of Lu K‘ai’s are very unsuitable. He has made the 
same mistake as that which led to the defeat of our: former 
king at the hands of Wu. He has not taken into account the 
surroundings of the stockades, and if the Mans should come 
over and start a fire, there could be no rescue.” : 

“Do not anticipate trouble,” said the Commander-in-chief, 
smiling. “I have provided against all such dangers.” 

The fault-finder did not know what the chief meant to do, 
but he said no more. Then Ma Tai arrived from Ch‘éngtu, © 
and he brought summer medicines and further supplies of 
grain. He saw K‘ung-ming, and then proceeded to distribute © 
the supplies he had brought according to orders. 

Then K‘ung-ming said, “What force have you brought?” | 

“Three companies,” was the reply. 

“My men are weary and worn out; I want to use yours. 
You have no objections?” 

“Of course not; they are equally government troops. They 
are ready even to die for you if you wish.” 

“This Ménghuo is established on the river, and we have no 
means of crossing. But I am anxious to sake ree Dp his supplies, 
so that his men may mutiny.” — 

“How can you do it?” 

“Some distance lower down there is a place called Shakon’ 
where the current is slow; you could cross there on rafts. T 
wish you and your men to cross and cut the road of supplies.. 


i 


ay 
de 
, 


if 
en 


Romante of the Three Kingdoms 289 


After that you are to arrange with the two leaders whose lives 


J spared to be your allies on the inside, and we shall succeed.” 


Ma Tai went off gladly enough, and marched his men to 
Sha‘kou, where they set about the crossing at once. And as 


the water was shallow they did not trouble to make rafts, but 


just tucked up their clothes and waded in. But half-way 
across, the men began to fall over; and when they had been 
rescued and taken to the bank many of them began to bleed 
from the nose and mouth and died. In great alarm, Ma Tai 
sent hasty messages to K‘ung-ming, who called in the guides 
and asked what this meant. They told him that it happened 
so every year. In the hot season, poisonous miasma collected 
over the waters of the Lu River, especially during the heat of 


the day. Anyone who drank the water would surely die. 


Travellers who wished, to cross had to wait till night, because 
the cooler waters did not breathe out the poisonous vapours. © 


_ Further, the natives said the crossing should be attempted 
on a full stomach. . 


K‘ung-ming bade the local guides point out the best crossing ~ 
place. He sent some well-seasoned soldiers to Ma Tai to lash 
together poles into rafts at Shak’ou, and in the night the 
crossing was safely accomplished. - Further, the guides then 
led the men of Shu over to where the grain road of the Mans — 
led through a narrow valley, called Chiashan Gorge, where, 


= for part of the way, only single file was possible as the road 
= was only wide enough for a man and a horse. 


Ma Tai at once occupied this valley and stationed a force 


there. And a stockade was put up with tents inside. Present- 


me ly a convoy of grain came along, and it was captured. The 


men ran off to the king’s great camp and told him. 
Ménghuo, thinking all was safe during the hot season, was 
enjoying himself; wine and music were the order of the day, 


“and military matters were far from his thoughts. In his 


cups he admitted K‘ung-ming was ruseful, but said his army 


— had nothing to fear. 


“Tf I attempt to oppose Chuko Liang I shall certainly fall a 


` victim to some wile of his. However, my waiting policy is 


a safe one. With our defences, and the river to back them, 


we can wait for the heat to overcome these men of Shu, who 


“cannot stand the hot season. They will have to retreat, and 


then we can harass them. And we will capture this Chuko.” 
He lay back and laughed at the thought. However, one 


chief, more prudent than the others, stood forth and said, 


“Remember the shallows at Shak‘ou; it would be very serious 
if the men of Shu got across there secretly.. It ought to be : 


- guarded.” 


“You belong to these parts. Do you not know that I want 


the enemy to try to get across there? Why, they will all perish- 
fi) in: the water.” pul 


19 


Phy 


290 3 San Kuo, or 


\ 


“But what if the natives tell them to cross only in the 
nignt?” 

“Do not be so anxious,” said Ménghuo. “Our own people 
will not help the enemy that far.” 

It was just then that intelligence came that the men of Shu 
had crossed the river and, moreover, had seized the Chiashan 
Gorge. The flags showed that the commander was Ma Tai. 

Ménghuo affected indifference. ‘‘This sort of fellow is not 
worth talking about,” said he. 


He sent a junior officer named Manoyanhans with three - 


companies to recapture the gorge and reopen the grain road. 


When Ma Tai saw the Man soldiers approaching, he placed a 


two companies in front of the hills and drew up the others in 
formal array. Then Mangyachang rode out to give battle. 
- This was but a small engagement, as the barbarian fell at the 
first stroke of Ma Tai’s sword. The Mans ran away at once. 

They returned to the king’s camp and told him what had’ 
happened. Whereupon he called up all his captains and asked 
for another to go up against Ma Tai. 

“T will go,” cried Tungt‘ una, y 

The king gave him three companies. After he had gone, 


Menghuo thought it would be wise to keep others from crossing E 


the river. So he sent a force to guard Shak‘ou. 
Tunegt‘una duly arrived at the gorge and made a camp. 


Ma Tai came out to meet him. Among the men in his cohort a 
were some who recognised the leader of the Mans and told Ma 


Tai certain things about how he had been captured and liberat- - 
ed. So Ma Tai galloped toward him, shouting out reproaches- 
of ingratitude and so on. Tungt’una was very greatly 


ashamed and turned red in the face, and went away without 4 a 


striking a blow. Ma Tai followed and fell on, slaying many 


of the Mans. Tungt‘una went back and told the king that Ma os y 


Tai was too strong “for him. 

But the king was angry, and cried, “You are a traitor! I 
know Chuko Liarg was. good to you, and that is why you 
wouid not fight.” 

He ordered. Tungt‘una ‘out’ to execution However, the 


notables and chiefs interceded, and the death penalty was — 


remitted, but the unhappy leader was severely beaten, one ~ 
hundred strokes with the heavy staff. 

The chiefs were mostly on the side of the beaten captain 
and against the king’s policy. 


They said, “Though we live in the Man country we have ea 7 


never had any thoughts of rebellion against the Central ie 
Government, nor has China ever encroached upon our land. 
We must own that Ménghuo’s superior power forced us into 
this rising, and we could not help ourselves. K‘ung-ming is 


too clever for us, and no one can guess what he may do. Even. aaa 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao and Sun Ch‘tian fear him; how much more must 


- Romance of the Three Vingdoms O 


`` we? Moreover, we have received kindness at his hands and 
owe him our lives. We ought to show our gratitude. Now 
let us at all risks slay this Ménghuo and submit to K‘ung-ming 
So that our people may not suffer.” 

‘ Tungt‘una said, “I do not know your inner sentiments.” 

At this, all those who had been prisoners and released cried 
vee one voice, “We desire to go te him.” 

Thereupon Tungt‘ una took in his hand a sharp sword, placed 
himself at the head of the malcontents and rushed into the 
great camp. At that moment Mênghuo was, as usual, intox- 
icated and lay in his tent. The mutineers rushed in. They 
found two captains on guard. ' 

“You also received. kindness from K‘ung-ming and ought to 

~ repay it,” cried Tungt’ una, A 

They replied, “You may not slay him; let us carry him a 
prisoner to K‘ung-ming.’ 

So they bound the king securely, tok him down to the river 
and crossed in a boat to the northern bank. There they halted 
while they sent a messenger to K‘ung-ming. _~ 

Now K‘ung-ming kn2w what had been happening, and he 
had issued orders for every camp to prepare their weapons. 
All being ready, he told the chiefs to bring up their prisoner, 
and bade the others return to their camps. Tungt‘una went 
first and told the matter to K‘ung-ming, who praised his zeal 

~ and gave him presents. Then he retired to summon the chiefs. 

a When they had arrived, the executioners brought in Ménghuo. 

si. “You Said once before that if you were captured again you 

a “would give in,” said K‘ung-ming, smiling. “Now will you 

ph yield?” 

_ “This capture is not your work,” replied the king. “It is 
‘the work of these minions of mine who want to hurt me. I 
will not yield on this.” - 

“Tf I free you again, what then? 2? 

~ “Tam only a Man, I know, but I am not pity ignorant of 
war.. If you, O Minister, let me return to my ravines I will 
muster another army and fight a decisive battle with you. If 
you capture me again then I will incline my heart and own 
myself beaten and yield.’ I will not go back on my promise 
again.’ 
PaE you refuse to yield next tine you are captured, I shall 
hardly pardon you.’ 

At K‘ung-ming’s Grae ye the cords were loosed and refresh- 
ments were brought for the prisoner. 

“Remember,” said K‘ung-ming, . “I have never failed yet. I 

lave never failed to win a battle or to take a city I have 
assaulted. Why do you Mans not yield?” 

Ménghuo only nodded his head; he said nothing. After the 
` wine, K‘ung-ming and Ménghuo rode round the camps to- 
gether, and the king saw all the arrangements and the piles of 


t 


292 ! San Kuo, or 


stores and heaps of weapons, and after the inspection he said, 
“You are silly not to yield to me. You see my veteran 
soldiers, my able captains, my stores of all kinds and war 
gear; how can you hope to prevail against me? If you will 
yield I will inform His Majesty, and you shall retain your 
kingship and your sons and grandsons shall succeed as 


perpetual guardians of the Man country. Do you not think | 


it would be well?” 

The king replied, “If I did yield, the men of my valleys 
wouid not be content. If you release me once more I will see 
to it that my own men keep the peace and bring them round to 
unanimity of feeling, and then they will not oppose any more.” 

_ But Ménghuo’s first act on his return to his own camp was 
to assassinate the two leaders Tungt‘una and Ahuinan. 
Their corpses were thrown into a gully. Then he sent his 
friends to guard the most important strategical points, while 
he marched to fight a battle with Ma:Tai. But when he got 
near the valley he saw no signs of the enemy, and, on question- 
ing en inhabitant, he heard that the Shu army, with all their 
stores, had recrossed the river and joined the main body. 


Ménghuo then returned to his own ravine and discussed | 


matters with his brother, Méngyu, and told him that he knew 
- all the details of the enemy’s force from what he had: seen in 


their camp, and he gave his brother certain instructions, which . 


he at once began to carrv out. He loaded a hundred men with 
gold and jewels and pearls and ivory and rhinoceros horn, 
crossed the Lu River and was on his way to the main camp, 


when he was stopped by a cohort under Ma Tai himself. He 


did not expect to meet an enemy, and was surprised. But Ma 
Tai only asked what he had come for. And when he had 
heard, Méngyu was detained while a message was sent to 
K‘ung- ming. 

The messenger ised while a council was in progress, 
the matter under discussion being how to reduce the Mans. 
When the messenger had announced that Méngyu had come 
bearing gifts of gold and pearls and such things, K‘ung-ming 
turned to Ma Su, who was there, saying, “Know you why this 
man has come?” 

“T dare not say plainly; but let me write it,” said Ma Su. 

“Write it, then.” 


So Ma Su wrote and handed the paper to his chief, who. 


had no sooner read it than he clapped his hands with joy, 
~ crying, “What you say is exactly what I think. But you may 
know I have already made arrangements for the capture of 
Ménghuo.”’ 

Then Chao Yün was called, and some orders were whispered 
into his ear. Next Wei Yen came, and he also went off with 
secret orders. Wang P‘ing, Ma Chung and Kuan So also 
came, and left with particular instructions. 


i aah 


Romance of the Chree kingoomg 


All these things done, the bearer of gifts was called. Henn 
= came and bowed low at the door of the tent, saying, “The © 


brother of my house, Menghuo, having received great kindness 


_ at your hands in sparing his life, feels bound to offer a paltry j 
gift. He has presumed to collect a few pearls and some gold 


and other trifling jewels by way of something to give your 


soldiers. And hereafter he will send tribute to your | 


Emperor.” 
Ww here is your brother at this moment?” asked K‘ung-ming. 
“Having been the recipient of your great bounty, he has 


gone to the Silver Pit Hills (Yink‘éng Shan) to collect some 


treasures. He will soon return.” 
“How many men have you brought?” 


<6 


large number. They are just porters.” 


They were brought in for K‘ung-ming’s inspection. They — 
had blue eyes and swarthy faces, auburn hair and brown | 
beards. They wore earrings. Their hair was fuzzy, and they 


went barefoot. They were tall and powerful. 
K‘ung-ming made them sit down, and bade his captains 


press them to drink and treat them well and compliment them. 


The King Ménghuo was anxious about the reception that 


would be given to his brother and the treatment of his gifts, © 
so he sat in his tent expecting the messenger at any moment. 
‘Then two men came, and he questioned them eagerly. They 
said the presents had been accepted, and even the porters had © 
_ been invited to drink in the tent and had been regaled with 


beef and flesh in plenty. 


“O King, your brother sent us with the news, and we were 


to tell you secretly that all would be ready at the second 
watch.” ; : l 


This was pleasing news, and he prepared his three legions f 


ready to march out to the camp.. They were divided into 
three divisions. ARONET ARAR 
The king called up his chieftains and notables, and said, 


“Let each army carry the means of making fire, and as soon _ 
as they arrive let a light be shown as a signal. I am coming © 


to try to capture Chuko Liang.” 


‘With these orders they marched, and they crossed the Lu aN 


River in the dusk. The king, with a hundred captains as 
escort, pressed on at once toward the main camp of Shu. They 


Only about a hundred; I should not dare to bring any cf 


met with no opposition. They even found the main gate open, == 


and Ménghuo and his party rode straight in. But the camp 

was a desert; not a man was visible. 
Ménghuo rode right up to the large tent and pushed open 

the flap. It was brilliantly lighted with lamps, and lying 


‘about under their light were his brother and all his men, dead 


drunk. The wine they had been pressed to drink while the 


plays were going on had been heavily drugged, and the men 


t i 


294. San Kuo, or 


“Ay 


had fallen down almost as soon as they had swallowed it. 
One or two who had recovered a little could not speak: they 
only pointed to their mouths. ~- 

Ménghuo then saw that he had been the simple victim of 
another ruse. However, he picked up his brother and the 
others and started off to return to his main army. 

But as he turned, torches began to flash out and drums to 
beat. The Mans were frightened and took to their heels. 
But they were pursued, and the pursuing cohort was led by 
Wang P‘ing. The king bore away to the left to escape, but 
again a cohort appeared in front of him; Wei Yen was there. 
He tried the other side; and was stopped by Chao Yün. He 
was in a trap; and attacked on three sides and no fourth to 
escape by, what could he do? He abandoned SEITE, 
making one wild rush for the Lu River.” 

As he reached the river bank he saw a bark on the river 
with Man soldiers on board. Here was safety. He hailed 
the boat and jumped on board as soon as it touched the bank. 
No sooner had he embarked than suddenly he was seized and 
` bound. The boat, which Ma Tai had provided and prepared, 
was part of the general plan, and the Man soldiers therein 
were his men disguised. 

Many of Ménghuo’s men accepted the chance of surrender 
held out by K‘ung-ming, who soothed them and treated them — 
well and did not injure one of them. 

The remains of the conflagration were stamped out, and in. 
a short time Ma Tai brought along his prisoner. At the same 


time Chao Yiin led in his brother, Méngyu. Each of the » E 


other captains had some prisoners too, chiefs or notables. 
K‘ung-ming looked at the king and laughed. “That was but 
a shallow ruse of yours to send your brother with presents to 
pretend to submit to me; did you really think I should not see 
through it? But here you are once more in my power; now 


do s you yield?” 


“I am a prisoner owing to the gluttony of my brother and 
the power of your poisonous drugs. If I had only Med his 
part myself and left him to support me with soldiers, I should 
have succeeded. I am the victim of fate and not of my own 
incapacity. _No; I will not yield.” 

“Remember this is the third time; why not?” said K‘ung- 
‘ming. 

Ménghuo dropped his head and made no answer. 

- “Ah well; I will let you go once more,” said K‘ung-ming. 

SO Minister, if you will let me.and my brother go we will 
get together our family and clients and fight you once more. 
If I am caught that time then I will confess myself beaten to 
the ground, ‘and that shall be the end.” 

“Certainly I shall scarcely pardon you next ‘time, ” ‘said 


K‘ung-ming. “You had better be careful. Diligently tackle ~ 


i your Book of Strategy: look over your list of confidants. If 


you can apply a good plan at the proper moment you will not 


have any need for late regrets.” 


The king and his brother and all the chiefs were released 
from their bends. They thanked K‘ung-ming for his clemency 
and went away. ; 


By the time the released prisoners had got back to the river 
the army of Shu had crossed to the farther side and were all 


in order with their flags fluttering in the breeze. As Ménghuo 
passed. the camp, he saw Ma Tai sitting in state. Ma Tai 


ee pointed his sword at the king as he passed, and said, “Next 


time you are caught you will not escape.” 
When Ménghuo came to his own camp he found Chao Yün 


_ in possession and all in order. Chao Yün was seated beneath 


the large banner, with his sword drawn, and as the king 


ae passed, he also said, “Do not presume on the kindness of the 


Prime Minister because you have been generously treated.” 
Ménghuo grunted and passed on. Just as he was going 
over the frontier hills he saw Wei Yen and a company drawn 
up on the slopes. Wei Yen shouted, “See to it; we have got 
into the inmost recesses of your country and have taken all 


your defensive positions. Yet you are fool enough to hold © 


out. Next time you are caught you will be quite destroyed. 


< There will be no more pardons.” 
_- Ménghuo and his companies ran away with their arms over 
~ their heads. Each one returned to his own ravine. 


In the fifth moon, when the sun is fierce, 
Marched the army into the desert land, 
Marched to the Lu River, bright and clear, 
But deadly with miasma. 

K‘ung-ming the leader cared not, 

Pledged was he to subdue the south ` 
Thereby to repay deference with service. 
Wherefore he attacked the Mans. 

Yet seven times he freed their captured king. 


After the crossing of the river the soldiers were feasted. 


Then he addressed his officers. : 

“I Jet Ménghuo see our camp the second time he was our 
prisoner because I wanted to tempt him into raiding it. He 
is something of a soldier, and I dangled our supplies and 
resources before his eyes, knowing he would try to burn them 
and that he would send his brother to pretend to submit that 
thereby he could get into our camp and have a chance to 
betray us. I have captured and released him three times, 


o trying to win him over. I do not wish to do him any harm. 


l 


I now explain my policy that you may understand I am not 
wasting your efforts and you are not still to work your best 
for the government.” 5 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 295 


296 an Kuo 
i \ 


They all bowed, and cne said, “O Minister, you are indeed 
perfect in every one of the three gifts: wisdom, benevolence 
and valor. Not even Chiang Tzt-ya or Chang Liang can 
equal you!” 

_ Said K‘ung-ming, “How can I expect to equal our men of 
old? But my trust is in your strength, and together we shall 
succeed.” 

This speech of their leader’s pleased them all mightily. 

In the meantime Ménghuo, puffed up with pride at getting 
off three times, hastened home to his own ravine, whence he 
sent trusted friends with gifts to the Hight Hordes of 
Barbarians and the Ninety-three Tribes and all the Man 


quarters and clans to borrow shields: and swords and Lao 


warriors and braves. He got together ten legions. They all 
assembled on an appointed day, massing like clouds and sweep- 
ing in like mists gathering on the mountains, each and all 
obeying the commands of the King Ménghuo. 


And the scouts knew it all, and they told Kuns tua who. 


said, “This is what I was waiting for, that the Mans should 
have an opportunity of knowing our might. A 


Thereupon he seated himself in a small carriage and con 


out to watch. 


O let our enemy’s courage glow 
i That we our greater might may show. 


The history of the campaign will be continued in the next 


chapter. 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 


KUNG- MING’S SUCCESSFUL FOURTH RUSE; 
THE KING OF THE Mans CAPTURED FOR THE FIFTH TIME. 


EKo -ming’s small carriage was escorted by only a few. 


horsemen. Hearing that a sluggish river, the Western Erh, 
lay in the way, and having no boat, K‘ung-ming bade the 


escort cut down some trees and make a raft. They did so; 
- but the raft sank. So K‘ung-ming turned to Lü K‘ai and said, 


“There is close by a mountain covered with bamboos. I have 
. heard of these bamboos, and some are several spans in girth. 
We can make a bridge of them for the army to cross.” 

So three legions were sent to the mountains, where they cut 
down many thousands of bamboos, and floated them down 
river. Then at the narrowest point they made a bridge a 
- hundred feet or so in length. Next the main army was 
_ brought down to the river and camped in line along the bank. 
The camp was protected by a moat, crossed by a floating 


bridge, and a mud rampart. On the south bank they con- 


structed three large stockades so as to prepare for the coming 
- of the Man soldiers. 


They had not long to wait. King Ménghuo was hot with : 
‘rage and came quickly. As soon as he got near the river, he 
led cut a legion of fierce warriors and challenged the first 


stockade. 
K‘ung-ming went forth in cea state. He wore a silk 
cap, a white robe and held in his hand a feather fan. He sat 


- in a small quadriga, and his captains rode right and left. 
The King of the Mans was clad in mail of rhinoceros hide 


and wore a bright red casque. In his left hand he bore a 
shield, and his right gripped a sword. He rode an ordinary 
Ox. ‘alee 
= As soon as he saw his enemies he opened his mouth and 
poured forth abuse and insults, while his men darted to and 
fro brandishing their weapons. 

K‘ung-ming at once ordered the army to retire within the 
-stockades and bar the gates. The Mans came close up to the 
stockade and pranced about naked, shouting in derision. 

Within the stockade the captains grew very angry, and they 
went in a body to their leader to beg that he wouid withdraw 


_ the order to remain on the defensive. But he would not Ha eR 


298 San Guo, or 


Presently he said, “These men are ay of our culture nade 


are naturally fierce and turbulent. In that mood we are no 
match for them. But all we have to do is to remain on guard 


for a few days till their ferocity has spent itself. Then I 


have a plan that will overcome them.” 

Days passed, and the men of Shu made no move: -they only 
maintained the defensive. K‘ung-ming watched the. besiegers 
from an eminence, and saw the first vigour of their advance 


give way to careless idleness. Then’ K‘ung-ming called- 


together his captains and. asked if they dared give battle. 
They all rejoiced at the suggestion; so he called them two by 
two or one by one and gave them secret orders. Chao Yun 


Re 


and Wei Yen went in first. Wang P‘ing and Ma Chung 


followed. 


To Ma Tai he said, “I am going to abandon these stockades — 
and retire north of the river. As soon as we have crossed. 


you are to cut loose the floating bridge and move it down the 
stream so that Chao and Wei may cross.’ 

Chang I was to remain by the camp and light it up at night 
as if it was still occupied. When Ménghuo pursued, then he 


was to cut off his retreat. Last of all, Kuan So was to escort i 


K‘ung-ming’s carriage. 
The soldiers marched out of the camp at evening, and the 


lamps were hung up as usual. The Mans saw this from a _ 
distance and dared not attack. But the next morning at dawn — 
Ménghuo led his men to the stockades and found all was 
quiet. He went close up and saw they were all empty and — 
bare; not a man was there. Grain and fodder lay about _ 


among empty carts; all was in confusion, suggesting hasty a 


departure. 


“They have abandoned the camp,” said Menghuo. “But A 


this is only a ruse. 


“I think that. Chuko Liang has important news from the 
capital that has made him leave without his baggage train - 


like this. Either Wu has invaded or Wei has attacked. 
They left these lamps burning to make us think the camps 


were occupied, but they ran away leaving everything behind. : 


If we pursue we cannot go wrong.’ 

So the king urged his army onward, himself heading the 
leading division. When they reached the Erhho bank they 
saw on the farther side that the camps were all in order and 
the banners flying as usual like a brightly tinted cloud of silk. 
Along the bank stood a wall of cloth. They dared not attack, 

Ménghuo said to his brother, “This means that Chuko 
fears lest -we may pursue. That is only a e uporary halt, 
and.they will retire in a couple of days.” 


The Mans camped on the river bank while they sent eo the a 
mountains to cut bamboos to make rafts. The boldest of the 
soldiers were placed in front of the camp till the rafts should a 


Hiomance of the Three kingdoms ; 299 


“be ready to cross. Little did Mênghuo suspect that the. army 

of Shu was already within his borders. 

One day was very stormy. Then the Mans saw great 
lights spring up around them, and at the same time the 
_ rolling of drums heralded an attack. The Mans and the Laos, 

instead of going out to meet the enemy, began a fight between 
= themselves. Ménghuo became alarmed and fled with all his 
~ clan and dependents. oe fought their way through and- 
made a dash for their former camp. 

Just as they reached it there appeared a cohort-of tiè enemy 
led by Chao Yün. _Ménghuo turned off west and sought refuge 
in the mountains. But he was stopped by a cohort under Ma 
Tai. With a small remnant of his men he got away into a 


< valley. Soon he saw clouds of dust rising on three sides and — 


the slow of torches, so that he was forced to halt. However, 
the east remained clear, and presently he fled in that direction. 
As he was crossing the mouth of a gully he noticed a few 
horsemen outlined against a thick wood and saw they were 
 eseorting a small carriage. And in that carriage sat K‘ung- 
ming. 
K‘ung-ming laughed, and ‘SMa “So the defeated king of 
_the Mans has got here! I have waited for you a long time, 


“O King.” 


~ Ménghuo angrily turned to his followers and said, “Thrice 
“have I been the victim of this man’s base wiles and have been 
put to shame. Now chance has sent him across my path, and © 
you must attack him with all your energy. Let us cut him 
to pieces and those with him.” 
= A few of the Man horsemen, with Ménghuo shouting to 
` encourage them, pushed forward in hot haste toward the 
wood. But in a few moments they all stumbled and disap- 


z -peared into some pits that had. been dug in the way. Ard 


just then Wei Yen emerged from the wood. One by one the 
Mans were pulled out of the pits and bound tight with cords. 
- K‘ung-ming returned to his camp, where he arrived before 
the captors of the king could bring in their prisoner. He 


~ pþusied himself in -soothing the other Man prisoners. Many 


of the notables and chiefs of the tributaries had betaken them- 
selves to their own ravines and villages with their kerns and 
followers. Many of those who remained came over and yield- 
ed to Shu. They were well fed and assured of safety, and 
-allowed to go to their own. They went off gladly enough. ~ 
By and by Chang I brought up the king’s brother. K‘ung- 
_. ming reproached him for his brother’s behaviour. 
“Your brother is a misguided simpleton; you ought to 
-remonstrate with him and persuade him to change his course. 
- Here you are, a captive for the fourth time; are you not 
~ ashamed? How can you have the sees ke to look anyone 
- in the face?” 


Pre f 


cu aa Aan duo, or 


A deep flush of shame passed over his face, and he threw 
himself to the earth begging forgiveness. 

K‘ung-ming said, “If I put you to death, it shall not be 
to-day. This time if pardon you, but you are to talk to your 
brother.” 

So Méngyu was loosed from his bonds and allawed to get 
up. He went away weeping. 


Very soon Wei Yen brought up the king, and to him K‘ung- | 


ming simulated great rage, saying, “What can you say now? 


You see you are in my hands again.” 

“I am again an unfortunate victim,” Bir the king. — “Once 
more I have blundered into your net, and now I ume die with 
no one to close my eyes.’ 

K'vung-ming shouted to the lictors to take him away and 
behead him. Ménghuo never blenched at the sentence, but he 
turned to his captor and said, “If you freed me only once more 
I would wipe out the shame of all four captures.” 
` K‘ung-ming smiled at the bold reply and bade the lictors 


loose his bonds, and the attendants served him with wine. 


| Meénghuo was invited to sit in the commander’s tent. — 


Said K‘ung-ming, “Four times you have been treated gener- ! 


ously and yet you are still defiant. Why?” 


“Though I am what you call a barbarian, I would scorn to ° 


employ your vile ruses. And that is why I remain defiant.” 


“I have liberated you four times; think you you can give 


battle again?” 


“It you catch me again I will incline my heart to yield and — i 


I will give everything in my ravine to reward your men. I 
will also take an oath not to cause any further trouble.” 


K‘ung-ming smiled, but let him go. The king thanked him 
and left. As soon as he was set at liberty the king got to- — 


gether as many of his adherents as he could and went away 


southward. Before long he fell in with his brother, Méngyu, 


who had got together some sort of an army and was on his 
way to avenge his brother. As soon as they saw each other 
the brothers fell upon each other’s necks and wept. They 
related their experiences. 


Méngyu said, “We cannot stand pattie the enemy: We 


have been defeated several times. Now I think we had better 
go into the mountains and hide in some dark gully where they 
cannot find us. Those men of Shu will never stand the summer 
heat; they must retire.” 

“Where can we hide?” asked his brother. 


“Tt know a valley away south-west from us called ‘Tulung 


Ravine,’ or ‘Bald Dragon Ravine,’ and the chief, Tossut, is a 
friend of mine. Let us take refuge with him.” 
“Very well; go and arrange it,” said Ménghuo. 


So Méngyu went. When he got there, the chief, Prince — 
Tossu, lost no time, but came out with his soldiers to welcome — 


l Menghuo, who then entered the alley. After the exchange 

_of salutations, Menghuo explained his case. 

3 Tossu said, “O King, rest content. If those men from the 
-Land of Streams come here I will see to it that not one goes 
home. And Chuko Liang will meet his death here too.” 

Naturally, Méenghuo was pleased; but he wanted to know 
how his host could feel so secure. 

Tossu said, “In this ravine there are only two roads, the 
one you came by and another by the north-west. The road 
“you travelled along is level, soft and the waters are sweet. 
-` Men and horses may both use it. But if we close the mouth 
of the ravine with a barricade no one, however strong, can 
getin. The other road is precipitous, dangerous and narrow. 
The only path is beset with venomous serpents and scorpions, 
and as evening comes on there are malarial exhalations which 
are dangerous till past noon the next day. The road is only 
practicable between shén (3 p.m.) and yu (T p.m.), for about 
three watches. Then the water is undrinkable. The road is 
very difficult. 

| “Then again there are four wells actually poisonous. One 

is called ‘The Dumb Spring.’ Its water is pleasant to the 
palate, but it makes men dumb and they die in a few days. 

_ A second fountain is called ‘The Spring of Destruction’ and is 
hot. But if a man bathe therein his flesh rots till his bones 


protrude and he dies. The third is ‘The Black Spring.’ Its 


waters are greenish. If it be sprinkled on a man’s body his 
extremities turn black and presently he dies. The fourth is 


‘The Spring of Weak Water,’ ice cold. If a man drink of © 


_ this water his breath is chilled, he becomes weak as a thread 
„and soon dies. Neither birds nor insects are found in this 
` region, and no one but the Han General Ma Yiian, who was 
| "styled ‘Fu-po’ for this exploit, has ever passed. Now the 


‘north-east road shall be blocked, and you may hide here . 


perfectly safe from those men of Shu, for, finding that way 
blocked, they will try the other road, which is waterless save 
for the four deadly springs. No matter how many they be, 
; -they will perish, and we need no weapons.’ s 
- “Now indeed I have found a place to live in,” cried Mênghuo, 
striking his forehead. Then looking to the north he said, 
“Even Chuko Liang’s wonderful cunning will be of no avail. 
_ The four springs alone will defeat him and avenge my army.” 
The two brothers settled down comfortably as guests of 
the Prince Tossu, with whom they spent the days in feasting. 
~ — In the meantime, as the Mans did not appear, K‘ung-ming 
gave orders to leave the West Erh (Hsierh) River and push 


south. It was then the sixth month, and blazing hot. A poet - 


sang about the bitter heat of the south :— 


The hills are sere, the valleys dry, 
A raging heat fills all the sky, 


.  -Homancee of the Three Kingdoms 301 


302 ; San Kuo, or 


% 


Throughout the whole wide universe 
No spot exists where heat is worse. 


Another poem runs :— 


The glowing sun darts out fierce rays, * 
No cloud gives shelter from the blaze, 
In parching heat there pants a crane, 
The whale swims through the hissing main. 
The brook’s cool margin-now I love, 
_ Or idle stroll through bamboo grove.. 
I would not march to deserts far 
In leathern jerkin donned for war. 4 


Just at the moment of setting out southward, the spies | 


brought news of Ménghuo’s retreat into the Bald Dragon 
Ravine and the barricading of one entrance. They also said 
that the valley was garrisoned, the hills were precipitous and — 
even impassable. So K‘ung-ming called in Lü K‘ai and ` 
questioned him, but he did not know exactly the conditions. — 

Then out spoke Chiang Ytian, saying, “Ménghuo’s repeated 
captures have broken his spirit so that he dare not take the 
field again. The men are exhausted with this intense heat — 


and little is to- be gained by prolonging the campaign. ‘The a 


best. move would be to return to our own country.”’ 

“Tf we do this we shall fall victims to Ménghuo’s scheme,” 
said K‘ung-ming. If we retreated he would certainly follow. 
Beside, having advanced so far, it would be foolish to turn 
back now.’ > 

Wang P‘ing was sent on wit the advanced duard and some — 
of the Mans as guides to seek an entrance on the north-west. 


They found the road and came to. the first spring, of which i 


the thirsty men and horses drank freely. 
Wang P‘ing returned to-report his success, but by the time 
he reached camp he and all his men were speechless. They ` 


qh 


could only point to their mouths. K‘ung-ming knew they had | 


been poisoned, and was alarmed. He went forward in his 
light chariot to find out the cause. He came to the spring. 
The water was very deep and dark green. A mass of vapour’ 


hung about the surface rising and falling. The men would — 


not ‘touch the water. K‘ung-ming went up the hills to look 
around,.but could see nothing except a rampart of mountains. 
A deep silence hung over all, unbroken by the cry even of a 
bird. He was perplexed. 

Presently he noticed an old temple away up among the crags. 


By the aid of the lianas and creepers he managed to clamber 
up, and in a chamber hewn out of the rock he saw the figure ; 


of an officer. Beside it was a tablet saying the temple was. 
dedicated to Ma Yüan, the famous general who had preceded 


him in that country. The natives had erected it to sacrifice 3 


to the leader. who had overcome the Mans. 


Romance of the Three Ginguoms 303 


K‘ung-ming, much impressed, bowed before the image OE 


-the great leader, and said, “Your humble servant received a 


sacred trust, the protection of the son of the First Ruler. 
That son, the present king, sent him here to subdue the Mans 
_ that the land might be free from peril when he decided to 
attack Wei and take possession of Wu and thereby restore the 
glory of the Hans. But the soldiers are ignorant of the 
country, and some of them have drunk of a poisonous spring 
so that they have become dumb. Your servant earnestly 
` prays your honoured spirit; out of regard for the kindness 
and justice of the present king, to reveal your spiritual 
-character and manifest your holiness by safeguarding and 
assisting the army.’ 
‘Having prayed thus, K‘ung-ming left the temple. While 
seeking some native whom he might question, he saw in the 
_ distance, on a hill opposite, an aged man leaning ona staff. He 
- approached, and as he drew nearer K‘ung-ming noted his 
extraordinary appearance. When he had reached the temple, 
he asked the venerable visitor to walk in. After the saluta- 
tions, the old man sat on the stones, and K‘ung-ming opened 
< the conversation with the usual questions. The old gentleman 
< replied, “Sir Minister, I know you well by repute, and am 
“harpy to meet you. “Many of the Mans owe their lives to 
you, and all have been deeply impressed by your kindness.” 


Then K‘ung-ming returned to the matter nearest his heart, 


4 e mystery of the spring. The old man told him the name 
of that spring and the symptoms its waters produced, and 
-< went on to speak of the other three springs and the malarial 
 exhalations, just as has been related. 
~ “In short, the Mans cannot be conquered,” said K‘ung- -ming, 
_ when the old man had finished. “And Wu cannot be repressed, 
nor Wei overcome. And the Hans cannot be restored. So, 
KT fail in the task set me by my king. Would that I might die! p? 
“Be not so cast down, O Minister,” said the aged one. “I 
-can lead you to a place where you may counteract all this.” 
“I would ask for your instruction, Venerable One,” said 
~~ K‘ung-ming. ‘What exalted advice have you to confer upon 
me? I hope you will instruct me.’ 


“West of this, not far off, is a valley, and twenty li from ~ 
its entrance is a stream called ‘ Wanan,’ near which there lives | 


-a recluse known as the Hermit of the Stream. He has not left 
the valley these twenty years. Behind his hut there gushes 
out a spring of, water, called the ‘Spring of the Medicine of 
“Tranquillity. This is the antidote to your poison. Bathing 
in its waters is a cure for skin diseases and for malaria. 


Ţ< 


» Moreover, near the hut grows a herb called hsiehyeh ytinhsiang, - 


-= “the garlic-leaved fragrance.” Chewing a leaf of. this 
_ safeguards one from malaria. You can do no better than go 
to the hut of the recluse forthwith and get these remedies.” 


304 Han Hilo, or 

K‘ung-ming humbly thanked his aged counsellor, and said, 
“Venerable Sir, I am profoundly affected by your merciful 
kindness and compassion. May I ask again by what name I 
may call you?” 

The old man rose and entered the temple, saying, “I am the 
Spirit of this mountain, sent by Fu-po Chiang-chiin to guide 
you.’ 

As he said this he shouted at the solid rock behind the 
temple, and it opened of itself and let him in.’ 

K‘ung-ming’s astonishment was beyond words. He made 
another obeisance to the Spirit of the temple and went down 
by the way he had come. Then he returned to his camp. 

Next day, bearing incense and gifts, Wang P‘ing and his 
stricken men went off to the spot which the old man had 
indicated. They quickly found the valley and followed its 
narrow road till they came’ to a small, farm-like enclosure, 
where tall pines and lofty cypresses, luxuriant bamboos and 
gorgeous flowers sheltered a few simple huts. An exquisite 
perfume pervaded the whole place. 

K‘ung-ming rejoiced to recognise the spot and at once 
knocked at the door. A lad answered his knock, and K‘ung-ming | 
was telling his name when the host came out quickly, saying, | 
“Surely my visitor is the Prime Minister of the Han’ Dynasty?” — 

K‘ung-ming saw at the door a man with a bamboo comb 
holding back his hair, grass shoes on his feet, and a robe of — 
white girded in by a black girdle. He had grey eyes anda — 
reddish beard. 

“Great Scholar, How did you know who I was?” said Kane K 
ming. 

“How could I not have hanid of your expedition to the 
south ?” . 

He invited K‘ung-ming to enter: and when they had eared 
themselves in their relative positions as host and guest, K‘ung- 
ming said, “My former master, the Emperor, confided to me 
the care of his son and successor. That son, now Emperor, 
gave,me a command to lead an army to this country, get the 
Mans on our side and spread our culture among them. But _ 
now to my disappointment Mênghuo, the king, has hidden 
himself in a certain ravine, and some of my men on the way 
to seek him drank of a certain fountain and are dumb. But 
last evening the former leader of an expedition, F'u-po Chiang- 
chiin, manifested his sacred presence and told me that you, 
Exalted Sir, had a remedy for this evil, and I pray you of your 
pity to give me of the potent fluid whereby my ean lives 
may be saved.” 

The recluse replied, “I am only a worthless old man of the 
wild woods and unworthy of the visit of such as you, O 
Minister. The water you desire flows out at the back of my . 
cottage and you may take what you will of it.” 


Bt Romance of the Three ingdoms 305 


f - The serving lad then showed Wang P‘ing and his dumh 


companions to the stream, and he dipped up the waters for 


_ them to drink. As soon as they had drunk they coughed up 


some mucus and could speak. The lad also led the soldiers 
to a place where they could bathe. 


~ In the cottage the recluse regaled K‘ung-ming with tea 
made of cypress seeds and a conserve of pine flowers. He 


also told his guest that in the ravines were many serpents 


_ and scorpions, and that the lily flowers blown into the springs 


by the wind made them unfit to drink. However, if he dug 
wells he would find good water. 

Then K‘ung-ming begged some of the garlic-leaved yün- 
hsiang as an antidote against malaria. The recluse said the 


_ soldiers could pluck as much as they wanted. And so every 


of his benefactor. 


man put a leaf in his mouth and thus became malaria-proof. 
K‘ung-ming, with a low bow then begged to be told the name 


A 


“I am Ménghuo’s eldest brother,” said the recluse, smiling. 


$ “My name is Mêngchieh.” 


K‘ung-ming started. 

“Do not be afraid,” said the recluse. “Let me explain. 
We were three brothers of the same parents, the eldest being 
myself. Our parents are both dead. My brother Ménghuo, 


_ being headstrong and vicious, has never been amenable to 


culture. I have talked to him many times, but he kept his 


own course. Finally, under an assumed name, I retired to 


this spot. I am ashamed for my brother’s rebellion, which has 


put you, O Minister, to the trouble of making this expedition 


into a barren country, but it has given me the privilege of 
seeing you. For my responsibility in this I deserve to die a 


thousand times, as I own to your face, and I beg your pardon.” 


K‘ung-ming sighed, saying, “Now I believe that story of 


| Robber Chih and Liu Hsia Hui; this is the same thing over 


again. Men renowned for virtue and villainy may come from 
the same stock.” , 

Then he said to his host, ‘Would you wish me to represent 
your merits to the Emperor and get you created a prince?” 
~ “How can you think I desire honours or wealth when I am 
here because of my contempt for all such things?” 

K‘ung-ming then wished to make him certain presents, but 
the recluse would have none of them. 

So taking leave of his host K‘ung-ming went back to his 


< camp. 


- In the southern expedition when the Mantsz were subdued, 
K‘ung-ming found a high-born recluse in a shady solitude. 
Up till then the gloomy forests were thought destitute of men, 
That no curling smoke wreath ever floated upwards from the glen. 


As soon as K‘ung-ming reached camp he set the men digging 


for water. They dug to a great depth but found none; nor 


20 


ie 


306 San Ruo, or | 


were they more successful when they tried other places. They 
were very discouraged. Then K‘ung-ming in the depths of 
the night burned incense and prayed to God :—‘“Unworthy as 
is thy servant Liang, he has received favour from the Great 
Hans and now has been ordered to subdue the Mans. Alas! 
now our water is spent and my men and animals are parched 
with thirst. If Thy will be to preserve the line of Han then 
give, I beseech Thee, sweet water, but if their course is run, 
then may Thy servant and those with him die in this place.” 

The morning after this prayer the wells were full of sweet 
water. 


The Mantzu must-be conquered; Chuko led a great array, 

Though his skill was superhuman, yet he held the righteous way; | 

As the wells gave forth sweet water when Kéng Kung’s head bowed 
full low, 

So the reverent prayers of Chuko made the lower springs to flow. 


The soldiers’ spirits revived with the supply of water, and 
the army soon advanced by hill paths to the Valley of the Bald 
Dragon, where they camped. 

When Ménghuo heard the news he was greatly taken aback. 

“These men do not appear to have suffered either thirst or — 
fever,” said he. “Our springs- have lost their power.” 

Tossu, the king, heard it, but doubted. He and Ménghuo 
ascended into a high hill whence they could see their enemies. 
They saw no signs of illness or distress; all went on calmly 
and quietly in the camps, water carrying and cooking, eating - 
and attending to the cattle. Tosst’s hair stood on end as he 
looked at them. 

“These are not human soldiers,” said he, shivering. 

“We two brothers will fight one fierce battie with these men 
of Shu and die therein,’ said Ménghuo, “We cannot wait 
calmly to be put into bonds.” 

“But, O King, if your men should be beaten my whole 
family will also perish. Let us encourage the men of the 
ravines. Let us kill bullocks and slaughter horses to feed 
them and urge them to go through fire and water to rush right 
up to the camp of the enemy and seize upon victory.” 

So there was great feasting before the Mans took the field. 
Just as this was going on, there arrived one Yang Féng, lord 
of twenty-and-one ravines in the west, and he led three legions. 
Ménghuo rejoiced exceedingly at this unexpected addition to 
his army and felt sure of victory. So he and Tossù went out 
of their own valley to welcome Yang Féng, who said, “I have 
with me three legions of men in iron mail, brave and intrepid 
men, who can fly over mountains and bound across the peaks; 
they of themselves are a match for the enemy even if they 
numbered a hundred legions. And, moreover, my five sons, 
all trained in arms, are with me, all to help you, O King.” 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 307 


The five sons were brought in and presented. They were 
handsome young fellows, bold and martial looking. Father 
and sons were entertained at a banquet. Halfway through 
the feast Yang Féng proposed a diversion. 

“There is but scanty amusement in the field,” said Yang, 
“and so I have brought along some native singing girls who 
have been taught fencing and such things. If you care for it, 
they might give an exhibition.” . 

The feasters hailed the suggestion with joy, and soon the 
half score maidens came to the front of the tent. Their hair 
hung about their shoulders, and they were barefooted. They 
danced and skipped and went through their performance 
outside. The guests inside clapped their hands and applauded 
their skill, and the soldiers joined in the choruses. 

Presently, at a signal from their father, two of Yang’s sons 
bore a goblet to Ménghuo and two others to his brother. They 
took the cups and were raising them to their lips when Yang 
shouted a single word of command, and, instantly, the cup- 
bearers had the two Méngs out of their seats and helpless in © 
their hands. At this, Tosst jumped up to run away, but Yang 
Féng gripped him, and he was a prisoner too. The Man 
maidens ranged themselves in a line along the front of the 
tent so that none dared approach. 

- “When the hare dies the fox mourns,” said Ménghuo. “One 
‘sympathises with one’s own as a rule. We are both chiefs 
and have been friends. I know not why you should injure 
me.” 

“T had to repay Chuko Liang the Minister for his compassion 
on me and mine, and there was no way till you rebelled. Why 
should I not offer up a rebel in propitiation?” 

Leaving Ménghuo and his brother and Tosst in the hands 
of Yang Féng, the Man warriors dispersed, each man return- 

ing to his own valley. Liu Féng then took the prisoners to 
the camp of Shu, where he bowed at the tent door, saying, 

“T and my sons and the sons of my brother are grateful to you 
for much kindness, wherefore we bring to you as an offering 
the persons of these rebels.” 
 K‘ung-ming rewarded Yang and bade them bring forward 
the king. i OR i 

“This time are you prepared to yiėld?” said the minister. 

“Tt is not your ability, but the treachery of my own people 
that has brought me to this. If you wish to slay, slay; but 
I will not yield.” a 

= “You know you were the cause of my men entering into a 
waterless land, where there were those four evil fountains, 
and yet my soldiers were not poisoned and came to no harm. 
Does it not seem to you like evidence of a superior protecting 
power? Why will you follow this misguided road and always 
be obstinate?” 


g 


308 op oo) Ban fuo 


anh. Ménghuo replied, “My fathers have long held the Silver 
hi) Pit Hills, and the three rivers are their ramparts. If you 
ati =- -can take that stronghold then will I and my heirs for ever 
BPR a acknowledge your power and yield.” 

“I am going to liberate you once more,” said P EAE CAN 
“and you may put your army in order if you will and fight a 
decisive battle. -But after that, if you are my. prisoner and 
are still refractory and unsubmissive, I shall have to exter- 
minate your whole family.” 

He ordered the lictors to loose the prisoner’s bonds and let. 
hive: go. After he had gone, the other two, the king’s brother 
and Tossu, were led in and they also received their liberty. 
They were given wine and food, but they were confused and 
could not look K‘ung-ming in ‘the face. They were given — 
horses to travel on. 


k} 


The way has been long and now danger is near, 
But faith in their leader banishes fear. 


The next chapter will tell how Ménghuo reorganised his 
army and whose was the victory. 


; $ SE 
k | EAE ; Tis beni 
% x PAE A et 


CHAPTER XO 
WILD BEASTS AS WARRIORS: K‘UNG-MING’ S SIXTH VICTORY) 


BURNING OF THE RATTAN ARMY; SEVENTH CAPTURE OF THE 
KING. d 


An the prisoners were released ; and Yang Féng and his 


sons were rewarded with ranks, and his men were, given 
presents. They expressed their gratitude and returned to 


their own, while Ménghuo and his hastened home to hea 


Ravine. 
Outside this ravine were three rivers, ve Lu, the Kannan 
Shui, or Sweet South Water, and the Hsich‘éng Shui, or West 


Water. These three streams united to form one river which | 


was called the Sanchiang, or Three Rivers: Close to the 
ravine on the north was a wide and fruitful plain; on the 
west were salt wells. The Lu River flowed about two hundred 


li to the south-west, and due: south was a valley called the 


Liangtu Ravine. There were hills in, as well as surrounding, 
the ravine, and in these they found silver ; whence the name 
“Silver Pit? 

A palace had been built in the ravine, Shih the Man iard: 
had made their stronghold, and there was an ancestral temple, 
which they called Chia-kuei, or Family Devil, where they 

‘solemnised sacrifices of bulls and horses at the four seasons. 
They called these sacrifices “Enquiring of the Demons.” 
Human sacrifices were offered also, men of Shu or men of 
their own people belonging to other villages. Sick persons 


swallowed no drugs, but prayed to a chief sorcerer, called Drug 


Demon. There was no legal code, the only punishment for 
every transgression being death. 

When girls are grown and become women they bathe in a 
‘stream. Men and women are kept separate, and they marry 
whom they will, the parents having no control in that particu- 


lar. They call this hsüeh-i. (Learning the Trade). In good — 


seasons the country produces grain, but if the harvest fails 
they make soup out of serpents and eat boiled. elephant flesh. 
All over the country the head of the family of greatest local 
consideration is termed “Lord of the Ravine,” and the next in 
importance is called a “Notable.” A market is held in the city 
of Sanchiang, or Three Rivers, on the first day of every, moon, 
and another on the fifteenth; goods are, brought in and 


bartered. 


310 . Dan Huo, or 


In his own ravine Ménghuo gathered his family and clan to 
the number of a thousand or more and addressed them: “I 
have been put to shame by the men of Shu many times, and 
I have sworn to take revenge for the insults. Has anyone 
any proposal to make?” . 

Thereupon a certain one replied, saying, ‘I ‘can produce a 
man able to defeat Chuko Liang.” 

The assembly turned to the speaker, who was a brother of 
Ménghuo’s wife. He was the head of eight tribes of bar- 
barians, and was named Tailai. He was a chief. 

“Who is the man?’ asked Ménghuo. 

Chief Tailai replied, “He is Mulu, Prince and Lord of the 
Pana Ravine. He is a master of witchcraft who can call up 
the wind and invoke the rain. He rides upon an elephant 
and is attended by tigers, leopards, wolves, venomous snakes 
and scorpions. Beside, he has under his hand three legions 
of superhuman soldiers. He is very bold. O King, write 
him a letter and send him presents, which I will deliver. If 
he will consent to lend his aid, what fear have we of Shu?” 

Ménghuo was pleased with the scheme and ordered the 
“State Uncle” to draft a letter. Then he ordered Tossu to 
defend Sanchiang and make the first line of defence. 

K‘ung-ming led his men near Sanchiang. Taking a survey 
of the country, he noted that the city could be reached by a 
bank on one face, so he sent Wei Yen and Chao Yiin to march 
along the road and attack. But when they reached the 
rampart they found it well defended by bows and crossbows. 

The men of the city were adepts.in the use of the bow, and 
they had one sort which discharged ten arrows at once.. 
Furthermore, the arrows were poisoned, and a wound meant 
certain death. The two captains saw that they could not 
succeed, and so retired. 

When K‘ung-ming heard of the poisoned arrows, he mounted 
his light chariot and went to see for himself. Having regarded 
the defences, he returned to his camp and ordered a retirement 
of ten li. This move delighted the Mans, who congratulated | 
each other on their success in driving off the besiegers, who, 
as they concluded, had been frightened away. So they gave 
themselves up to rejoicing and sepi no watch. Nor did they 
even send out scouts. 

The army of Shu made a strong camp in their new. halting 
` place and closed the gates for defence. For five days they gave 
no sign. One evening, just at sunset, a slight breeze began to 
blow. Then K‘ung-ming issued an order that every man 
should provide himself with a coat by the first watch. If 
any one lacked he would be put to death. None of the captains © 
knew what was in the wind, but the order was obeyed. Next, 
each man was ordered to fill his coat with earth. This order 
appeared equally strange, but it was carried out. When al] 


— Romance of the Three Kingooms © 311 


were ready, the men were told to carry the earth to the foot 

of the city wall, and the first arrivals would be rewarded. So 
they ran with all speed with the dry earth and reached the 
wall. Then with the earth they were ordered to make a 
raised way, and the first man on the wall was promised a 
reward. 

The whole of the ten legions of Shu, and their native allies, 
having thrown their burdens of earth near the wall, then 
quickly rushed up the incline, and with one great shout were 
on the wall.. The archers on the wall were seized and dragged 
down; those who got clear ran away into the city. Tossù was 
slain in the mêlée that followed on this attack. The men of 
Shu moved through the city slaying all they met. Thus was 
the city captured and with it great booty of jewels, which, were 
made over to the army as a reward for their prowess. 

The few soldiers who escaped went away and told the king 
what had happened. He was much distressed. Before he 
had recovered they told him that the men of Shu had come 
_ over and were encamped at the mouth of his own ravine. ~ 

Just as he was in the very depths of distress, a laugh came 
from behind the screen, and a woman appeared, saying, 
“Though you are brave, how ‘stupid you are! I am only a 
woman, but I want to go out and fight.” 

The woman was his wife, Chujung. Her family had lived 
_ long among the Mans, but she was a descendant of the Chujung 

family. She was expert in the use of the flying sword and 
never missed her aim. ‘ 

Ménghuo rose and bowed to her. The woman thereupon 
mounted a horse and forthwith marched out at the head of 
many captains, leading five legions of men of the ravines, and 
set out to drive off the men of Shu. 

Just as the host got clear of the ravine it was stopped by a 
cohort led by Chang I. At once the Mans deployed, and the 
‘woman leader armed herself with five swords such as she 
used. In one hand she held an eighteen-foot signal staff, and 

- she sat a curly-haired, reddish horse. 
Chang I was secretly troubled at the sight before him, but 
he engaged the amazon. After a few passes the lady turned 
her steed and bolted. Chang I went after her, but a sword 
- came flying through the air directly at him. He tried to fend 
off with one hand, but it wounded his arm, and he fell to the 
ground. The Mans gave a loud shout; some of them pounced 
on the unlucky leader and made him prisoner. 

Then Ma Chung, hearing his comrade had been taken, rushed 
- out to rescue, but only to be surrounded. He saw the amazon 
holding up her staff and made a dash forward, but just then 
his steed went down under him, and he was also a prisoner. 

Both captains were taken into the ravine and led before the 
king. He gave a banquet in honour of his wife’s success. 


312 San Kuo, or 


4 


and during the feast the lady bade the lictors put the two 


prisoners to death. They hustled the two captains in and 
were just going to carry out their orders when Ménghuo 
checked them. 


“No; five times has Chuko Liang set me at liberty. It. 


would be unjust to put these to death. Confine them till we 
have taken their chief; then we may execute them.” 

His wife was merry with wine and did not object. So their 
lives were spared. 


The defeated soldiers returned to their camp. K‘ung-ming 


took steps to retrieve the mishap by sending for Ma Tai, Chao 
-Yiin and Wei Yen, to each of whom he gave special and 
private orders. 


Next day the Man soldiers reported to the king that Chao 


Yiin was offering a challenge. The amazon forthwith mounted 
and rode out to battle. She engaged Chao Yün, who soon 
fled. The lady was too prudent to risk pursuit, and rode 
home. Then Wei Yen repeated the challenge; he also fled as 
if defeated. But again’ the lady declined to pursue. Next 
day Chao Yiin repeated his challenge and ran away as before. 
The amazon signalled no pursuit. But at this Wei Yen rode 


up and opened a volley of abuse and obloquy. This proved too. 


much, and she gave the signal to go after him and led the way. 
Wei Yen increased his pace, and the amazon doubled hers, and 


she and her followers pressed into a narrow road along a- 


valley. Suddenly behind her was heard a noise, and Wei Yen, 
turning his head, saw the lady tumble out of her saddle. 


She had rushed into an ambush prepared by Ma Tai; hie ‘ 


horse had been tripped up by ropes. She was captured, bound ~ 


and carried off to the Shu camp. Some of her people 


endeavoured to rescue her, but they were driven off. 

K‘ung-ming seated himself in his tent to see his prisoner, 
and the amazon was led up. He bade them remove her bonds, 
and she was conducted to another tent, where wine was laid 
before her. Then a message was sent to Ménghuo to say 
that she would be exchanged for the two captive leaders. 
The king agreed, and they were set free. As soon as they 
arrived, the lady was escorted by K‘ung-ming himself to the 
mouth of the ravine, where Menghuo welcomed her half 
gladly, half angrily. 

Then they told Ménghuo of the coming of the Lord of the 
Pana Ravine, and he went out to meet him. He rode up on 
his white elephant, dressed in silks, and with many gold and 


pearl ornaments. He wore a double sword at his belt, and he | 


was followed by the motley pack of fighting animals that he 
fed, gambolling and dancing about him. 

Ménghuo made him a lowly obeisance and then poured out 
his tale of woes. Mulu promised to avenge his wrongs and 
was led off to a banquet which had been prepared. 


9 


: -their leader to confess their failure. The chief, however, was - 
- neither angry nor dejected. ? 


Romance of the Three 4aingooms j 313 


Next day the deliverer went out to battle, with ec pack of 
wild creatures in his train. Chao Yiin and his colleague 
quickly made their array of footmen and then took their 
station in front side by side and studied their opponents. The 
Man banners and weapons were all extraordinary. Most of 
the men wore no armour and none wore any clothing. Their 
faces were ugly. They carried four sharp pointed knives in 


their belts. Signals were not given by drum or trumpet, but 


by a gong. 

King Mulu had two swords in his belt and carried a hand 
bell. He urged his white ars ure he forward and emerged 
- from between his flags. 

“We have spent all our life in the aniy. but we have never 
seen the like of that before,” said Chao Yün: 

As they talked to one another they noticed that the opposing 
leader was mumbling something that might be a spell or a 
curse, and from time to time he rang his bell. Then suddenly 
_the wind got up, stones began to roll and sand to fly, and there 
was a sound as of a heavy shower of rain. Next a horn rang 
out, and thereupon the tigers and the leopards, and the wolves 
and the serpents, and all the other wild beasts came down on 


the wind snapping and clawing. How could the men stand 
„such a thing as that? So they retreated, and the Mans came 
- after them fiercely, chasing their enemies as far as the city. 


Chao and Wei mustered their defeated men and went. to 


“The fault is not yours,” he said. “Long ago, when I was 


still in my forest hut, I knew the Mans possessed certain 


powers over beasts, and I provided against this adventure 
before we left Shu. You will find a score of small sealed 
carts | in the baggage train. We will use half of them 
now.’ 

He bade his staff bring forward ten of the red box-carts. 
They all wondered what would happen. Then the carts were 


opened, and they turned out to be carved and coloured models © 


of huge wild beasts, with coats of worsted, teeth and claws of 
steel; each could accommodate half a score of men. Choosing 
a sufficient number of seasoned warriors, he told off ten 
companies and bade each company stuff the mouths of the 
beasts full of inflammables. 

Next day the army of Shu marched out to the attack Gna 


were arrayed at the entrance to the ravine. The Man soldiers 


went into the ravine and told their lord. Mulu, thinking 
himself perfectly invincible, did not hesitate, but marched out, 
‘taking Menghuo with him. K‘ung-ming, dressed in the simple 


. robe of a Taoist, went out in his light chariot. In his hand he 


held a feather fan. Ménghuo, who recognised his enemy, 
pointed him out to Mulu. 


314 . Dan Kus, or 


y 


“That i is Chuko Liang i in that small chariot. If we can only 
capture him, our task is done.” 

Then Mulu began to mutter his spells and to ring his: bell. 
As before, the wind got up and blew with violence, and the 
wild beasts came on. 

But at a wave of the simple feather fan, lo! the wind turned 
and blew the other way. Then from out of the host of Shu 
there burst. the wonderful wild beasts. The real wild beasts 
of the Mans saw rushing down upon them huge creatures, 


whose mouths vomited flames and whose nostrils breathed 


out black smoke. They came along with jingling bells, 
snapping and clawing, and the real beasts turned tail and fled 
in among the men of their own side, trampling them down as 
they sped. K‘ung-ming gave the signal for a general onset, 
and his men rushed forward with beating drums and blaring 
trumpets. Mulu was killed. Méenghuo’s whole clan fled in 
panic and tore up among the hills out of the way. And thus 
the Silver Pit Ravine was taken. 


Next day, as K‘ung-ming was telling off parties to Senet 


for and capture the king, it was announced that the brother- 
in-law of Ménghuo and Chief Tailai, having vainly tried to 
persuade the king to yield, had made prisoners of him and his 
wife and all his clan and were bringing them to K‘ung-ming. © 

Hearing this, Chang I and Ma Chung were called and 
received certain orders, upon which they hid themselves in the 
wings of the tent with a large body of sturdy warriors. This 
dene, K‘ung-ming ordered the keepers to open the gates, and 


in came Chief Tailai with Ménghuo and his people in custody. | 


As he bowed at the entrance of the hall, K‘ung-ming called 
out, “Let my strong captors appear!” At once out came the 
hidden men, and every two of them laid hands upon a prisoner 
and bound him. 

“Did you think your paltry ruse would deceive me?” said 
K‘ung-ming. “Here you are a second time captured by your ~ 
own people and brought before me that you might surrender. 
I will not hurt you, but I firmly believe this surrender is part 
of a plot_to kill me.’ 

Then he called out to his men to search the prisoners. They 
did so, and on every man they found a sharp knife. 

“Did you not say that if your family were taken prisoners 
you. would yield? How now?” said K‘ung-ming. 

“We have come of our. own will and at the risk of our lives; 
the creditis not yours. Still I refuse to yield,” replied Ménghuo. 

“This is:the sixth time I have captured you, and yet you are 
obstinate; what do you expect?” 

“If you take me a seventh time, then I will turn to. you and 
never rebel again.’ 

“Well, your stronghold is now ' destroyed, What have I to 
fear?” said K‘ ung-ming. 


à y" 


fiomance of the Chree Giingdoms | 315 


He ordered the bonds to be loosed, saying, “If you are 
caught again and lie to me once more I shall certainly not be 
inclined to let you off.” Pi 

Ménghuo and his people put their hands over their heads 
and ran off like rats. 

The defeated Mans who had fled were many, and most of 


them were wounded. They fell in with their king, who 


restored what order was possible and felt glad that he had 
still some men left. Then he and the Chief Tailai took 
counsel together. | 

“Whither can we go?” said Menghuo. “Our stronghold is in. 
the hands of the enemy.’ 

Tailai replied, “There is but one country that can overcome 
these men; that is the Wuko country. It lies seven hundred 
li to the south-east. The king of that state is named Wut‘uku. 


- Heisa giant. He does not eat grain, but lives on serpents and 


venomous beasts. He wears scaly armour, which is impene- 
trable to swords and arrows. His men wear rattan armour. 
This rattan grows in gullies, climbing over rocks and walls. 
The inhabitants cut the rattans and steep them in oil for half 
a year. Then they are dried in the sun. When dry they are 
steeped again, and so on many times. Then they are plaited 
into helmets and armour. Clad in this the men float across 
rivers, and it does not get wet. No weapon can penetrate it. 
The soldiers are called the Rattan Army. You may seek aid 
from this king, and with his help you can take Chuko Liang 


as easily as a sharp knife cleaves a bamboo,” 


Ménghuo went to the Wuko country and saw the king. The 
people of this country do not live in houses, but dwell in caves. 
Ménghuo told the story of his woes and obtained a promise of 
help, for which he expressed great gratitude. Wut‘uku called 
up two decurions named T‘uan and Hsini and gave them three 
legions of the rattan-armoured soldiers and bade them march 
north-east. . ; 

They came to a river called the Peach-flower Water (T“ao- 
hua Shui), on both banks of which grow many peach trees. 
Year after year the leaves of these trees fall into the river and 
render it poisonous to all but the natives. But to the natives 
it is a stimulant which doubles their vigour. They camped on 
the bank of this river to await the coming of the army of Shu. 

Now K‘ungming was informed of the journey of Ménghuo 
and its results, and he knew when the rattan-clad army 
camped at the ford. He also knew that Méenghuo had callected 
all the men of his own that he could to help. He at once 
marched to the ford. Really, the Man soldiers did not seem 
human; they were so hideous. He questioned the natives, 
and they told him that the peach leaves were falling and the 


-water of the river was undrinkable. So he retired five li and 
camped. 


Ud 


316 San Ruo, or 


Next day the Wuko men crossed the stream, and, with a 
rolling of drums, Wei Yen went out to meet them. The Wuko 
men approached bent double. The men of Shu shot at them, 
but neither arrows nor bolts penetrated their armour; they 
rolled off harmless. Nor could swords cut or spears enter. 
The enemy, thus protected and armed with swords and prongs, 
were too much for the men of Shu, who had to run away. 
However, they were not pursued. When, on the retreat, they 
came to Peach-flower Water ford they saw the Mans crossing. 
Some of them were tired, so they took off their rattan breast- 
plates, sat upon them and floated to the other side. 

When K‘ung-ming heard the report of his captain he 
summoned Lu K‘ai and called in some natives. Lu K‘ai said 
he had heard of the Wuku country as perfectly barbarous, the 
people having no notion of human relations as they were 


understood in the Central Land. He had heard of this rattan | i 
` armour and the harmful Peach-flower Waters. He wound up ` 


by saying that these people were really untameable and advised 
retreat. 

“No, no,’ ’ said K‘ung-ming merrily; “we have had too much 
difficulty in getting here to go back so easily. I shall have a 
counter-plan for these people to-morrow.’ 

Having provided for the defence of his camp and given 
strict orders to his captains not to go out to fight, K‘ung-ming. 
went to reconnoitre. He rode in his light chariot with a few 
natives as guides. He came to the ford, and from a secluded — 
spot in the mountains on the north bank he looked about 
him. 

The whole country was mountainous and difficult, Lapa sealed 
for any carriage. So he got out and went afoot. Presently, 
from a hill he saw a long winding valley, like a huge serpent. ` 
The sides were very precipitous and bare. However, a road 


ran through the middle. £ 


“What is the name of the valley?” asked K‘ung-ming. 

“It is called ‘Coiled Serpent Valley, ” said the guides. “At 
the other end you come into the high road to Sanchiang. The 
valley was formerly called “T‘alangtien.’ ” 

“The very thing,” cried K‘ung-ming. “Surely this is 
providence. I shall score a great success here.” 

Having seen enough, he retraced his steps, found his chariot 
and returned to camp. Arrived at the camp, Ma Tai was — 
called and put in charge of the preparations. He was to 
take the ten black painted carts and: get a thousand long 
bamboo poles. What the carts contained and what was to be 
done with the contents K‘ung-ming told his captain in con- 
fidence. Then he was to keep the two ends of the valley. 
Half a month was allowed to carry out his task, which was to 
be performed with the most perfect secrecy under pain of 
severe punishment. 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 317 


Next Chao Yün was sent to a point on the Sanchiang road; 
Wei Yen to camp at the ford. If the Mans came. over the 
river he was to abandon the camp and march toward a certain 
white flag he would see.. Further, he was warned that in 
half a month he would have to acknowiedge defeat some fifteen 
times and abandon seven . camps. On no account was he to 
come to interview K‘ung-ming even after fourteen defeats. 

Wei Yen went off, not a little hipped at the prospect, but 
prepared to obey. | Next, Chang I was sent to make a stockade 
at a certain indicated point, and others were given other tasks. 


Ménghuo had begun to have a real terror of K‘ung-ming, : 


-and he warned the king of the Wuko, saying, “This Chuko is 

; exceedingly crafty. Ambush is one of his favourite ruses, so 
you should warn your soldiers that on no account should they 
enter a valley where the trees are thick.’ 


“Great King, you speak with reason,” said Wut‘uku. “I | 


have always heard that the men of the Central State are full of 


wiles, and I will see that your advice is followed. I will go in > 


front to fight, and you may remain in the rear to give orders.” 
Presently the scouts told them of the arrival of the men of 
Shu on the bank of the Peach-flower Water. Wut‘uku sent 


his two captains to cross the river and engage them. The two 
sides met, but Wei Yen soon left the field. The Mans were 


afraid to pursue as they dreaded an ambush. 

In the meantime, Wei laid out another camp. The Mans 
crossed the river in. greater force. Wei came out to meet 
them, but again fled after a very short fight. This time the 


Mans pursued, but having lost their hold of the enemy and. 


coming then to the late camp of the men of Shu, which seemed 
. quite safe, they occupied it. 

- Next day the two captains asked their King Wut‘uku to 
-come to the camp, and they reported what had happened. He 
` decided to make a general advance to drive the men of Shu 


before him. They fled, even casting aside their breastplates. 


and throwing away their arms, they were in such haste to flee. 
And they went toward a white flag that appeared in the 
distance. They found a camp already made, which they 
occupied. 

Soon, however, King Wut‘uku came near, and as he reseed 
forward Wei Yen abandoned this camp and fled. When the 
Mans reached the camp they took up quarters therein. 

Soon after they set out to renew the pursuit, but Wei Yen 
turned back and checked them. This was only a temporary 
check, for he fied after three encounters, going toward a 
white flag in the distance. 

To avoid wearisome iteration a may be said that this sort 
of thing continued daily until the men of Shu had been 
defeated and driven out of the field fifteen times and had 
abandoned their camp on seven different occasions. 


318 - Ban tus, or 


The Mans were now warm in pursuit and pressed on with 
all their might, the King Wut‘uku being in the forefront of 
the pursuers. But then they came to a thick umbrageous 
wood; and he halted, for he saw flags moving about behind the 
sheltering trees. 

“Just as you foretold,” said Wut‘uku to Ménghuo. 

“Yes; Chuko Liang is going to be worsted this time. We 
have beaten off his men now daily for half a month and won 
fifteen successive victories. His men simply run when they 
hear the wind. The fact is he has exhausted all his craft and 
has tried every ruse. Now our task is nearly done.” 

Wut’uku was greatly cheered and. began to feel contempt 
for his enemy. 

The sixteenth day of the long nolit found Wei Yen leading 
his oft-defeated men once more against the rattan-protected 
foe. King Wut‘uku on his white elephant was well in the 
_ forefront. He had on a cap with symbols of the sun and moon 
and streamers of wolf’s beard, a fringed garment studded with 
gems, which allowed the plates or scales of his cuirass to 
appear, and his eyes seemed to flash fire. He pointed the 
finger of scorn at Wei Yen and began to revile him. 

Wei whipped up his steed and fled. The Mans pressed 
after him. Wei made for the Coiled Serpent Valley, for he 
- saw a white flag calling him thither. Wut‘uku followed in 
hot haste, and as he saw only bare hills without a sign of 
vegetation, be felt quite confident that no ambush was laid. 

o he followed into the valley. There he saw some score 
of black painted carts in the road. The soldiers said to each 
other that they must be the commissariat waggons of the 
enemy, abandoned in their hasty flight. This only urged the 
king to greater speed, and he went on toward the other mouth 
of the valley, for the men of Shu had disappeared. However, 
he saw baulks of timber being tumbled down across the track 
and great boulders rolled down the hill side into the road. 

The pursuers cleared away the obstacles. a When they had 
done so and advanced a little they saw certain wheeled 
vehicles in the road, some large, some small, laden with wood 
and straw, which was burning. The king was suddenly 
frightened and ordered a retreat. But he heard much shouting 
in the rear, and they told him that the wood-laden carts on 
being broken open had been found to contain gunpowder, and 
they were all on fire. However, seeing that the valley was 
barren and devoid of grass and wood, Wut‘uku was not in the 
least alarmed and merely bade his men search for a way round. 

Then he saw torches being hurled down the mountain side. 
These torches rolled till they came to a certain spot, where 
they ignited the fuses leading to the powder. Then the ground 
suddenly heaved with the explosion of bombs beneath. The 
whole valley was soon full of flames, darting and playing in 


Viomance of the Three Kingdoms 319 


all directions, and wherever they met with rattan armour the 
rattan caught fire, and thus the whole army, huddled and 
crowded together, burned in the midst of the valley. 

K‘ung-ming looked on from the heights above and saw the 
Mans burning. Many of the dead had been mangled and torn 
by the explosions of the mines. The air was full of ri 
vapour. 

K‘ung-ming’s fears fell fast as he saw the slaughter, and 
-hẹ sighed, saying, “Though I am rendering great service to 
my country yet I have sacrificed many lives.” 

Those who were with him were also deeply affected. 

King Ménghuo was in his camp awaiting news of success 
when he saw a crowd of his men come along, and they bowed 
before him and told him that King Wuko was fighting a. 
great battle and was about to surround Chuko Liang in the 
Valley of the Coiled Serpent. But he needed help. They 
said they themselves had had no alternative when they had 
yielded to Shu, but now they had returned to their allegiance 
wets were come to help him. 3 

So Ménghuo placed himself at the head of his clansmen 
Bod those who fea just come to him, and lost no time in 
marching out. He bade them lead him to the spot. But 
~ when he reached the valley and saw the destruction, he knew 
he had been made a victim again. As he made to retire there 
appeared a body of his enemies cn each side, and they began 
to attack. He was making what stand he could when a great 
shouting arose. The Mans were nearly all disguised men of 


= Shu, and they quickly surrounded him and his clansmen to 


make them prisoners. 

Ménghuo galloped clear and got into the hills. Presently 
he fell upon a small chariot, with a few men about it, and 
therein sat Kung-ming, simply dressed and holding a fan. 

“What now, rebel Ménghuo?”’ cried he. 

But Ménghuo had galloped away. He was soon stopped by 
Ma Tai and lay a helpless prisoner bound hand and foot. His 
wife, Chujuhg, and the other ee of his family were also 
taken. 

K‘ung-ming returned to ee and seated himself in the high 
place in his own tent. He was stil] sad at the thought of the 
sacrifice of life, and he said to his officers, “There was no: help 
for it; I had to use that plan. But it has sadly injured my 
inner virtue and destroyed my self-satisfaction. Guessing 
that the enemy would suspect an ambush in every thicket, I 
sent persons to walk about in wooded places with flags. Really 
there was no ambush. I bade Wei lose battle after battle just 
to lead the enemy on and harden their hearts. When I saw 
the Valley of the Coiled Serpent, with its bare sides of smooth 
rock and the road in its depths, I recognised what could be 
done and sent Ma Tai to arrange the contents of the black 


BAOEN Sau Kuo, or 


carts, the mines, which I had prepared long ago for this — 
purpose. In every bomb were nine others, and they were 


buried thirty paces apart. They were connected by fuses laid 
in hollow bamboos that they might explode in succession, and 
the force was enormous. Chao Yün prepared those carts laden 
with straw and rolled down the baulks of timber and boulders 
that blocked the mouth. Wei Yen led the king on and on till 
he had enticed him into the valley, when he took up a position 
to escape. Then the burning began. They say that what is 


good for water is not much good for fire, and the oil-soaked 


rattan, excellent as a protection against swords and arrows, 
was most inflammable, catching fire at sight. The Mans were 


so stubborn that the only way was to use fire, or we should | 
never have scored a victory. But I much regret that the 


destruction of the men of Wuko has been so complete.” 
> The officers praised his ability and flattered his craftiness ; 
that need not be said. i 

Then Mênghuo was summoned. He appeared and fell upon 
his knees. His limbs were freed from the bonds, and he was 
sent into a side tent for refreshment. But the officers told 
off to entertain him received certain secret orders. 

The chief prisoners were Mênghuo, his wife, brother and 
the Chief Tailai. There were many of his clan as well. As 


they were eating and drinking a messenger apeared in the . 
door of the tent and addressed the king, “The Minister is ` 


ashamed and does not wish to see you again, Sir. He has 
sent me to release you. You may enlist another army if you 


can and once more try a decisive battle. Now you may . 


>? 


go. 
But instead of going Ménghuo began to weep. 


“Seven times a captive and seven times released!” said the 


king. “Surely there was never anything like it in the whole © 


world. I know I am a barbarian and beyond the pale, but I 
am not entirely devoid of a sense of propriety and rectitude. 
Does he think that I feel no shame?” 

Thereupon he and all his fell upon their knees and crawled 
to the tent of the Commander-in-chief and begged pardon, 
saying, “O Minister, you are the majesty of poe We men 
of the south will offer no more opposition.” 

“Then you yield?” said K‘ung-ming. 

“I and my sons and grandsons are deeply affected by your 
aU pervading and life-giving mercy. Now how can we not 
yie 39 


K‘ung-ming asked Ménghuo to come up into the tent and 


be seated, and he prepared a banquet of felicitation. Also 
he confirmed him in his headship and restored all the places 
that had. been captured. Everyone was overwhelmed with 
K‘ung-ming’s generosity, and they all went away rejoicing. 

A poem has praised K‘ung-ming’s action :— 


fiomance of the Three Lingdoms -~ 321 


He rode in his chariot green, 

In his hand just a feather fan, 

Seven times he released a king 

As part of his conquering plan. 

Having chosen a beautiful spot 

Where the valleys debouch on the plain, 

Lest his kindness should e’er be forgot, 

The vanquished erected a fane. A 

Chang Shih and Fei Wei ventured to remonstrate with 
K‘ung-ming on his policy. They said, “You, O Minister, have 
led the army this long journey into the wilds'and have reduced 
the Man country, and have brought about the submission of. 
the king; why not appoint officials to share in the admin- 
istration and hold the land?” 

K‘ung-ming replied, “There are three difficulties. To leave 
foreigners implies leaving a guard for them; there is the 
difficulty of feeding a guard. The Mans have lost many of 
their relatives. To leave foreigners without a guard will 
invite a calamity; this is the second difficulty. Among the 
- Mans dethronements and murders are frequent, and there will 
be enmities and suspicions. Foreigners and they will be 
mutually distrustful; this is the third difficulty. If I do not 
leave men I shall not have to send supplies, which makes for 
peace and freedom from trouble.” 

They had to agree that the policy was wise. 

The kindness of the conqueror was rewarded by the gratitude 
_ of these southern people, and they even erected a shrine in his 
honour, where they sacrificed at the four seasons. They 
called him their “Gracious Father” and they sent gifts of. 
jewels, cinnabar, lacquer, medicines, ploughing cattle and 
chargers for the use of the army. And they pledged them- 
selves not to rebel. 

When the feastings to the soldiers were finished, the army 
marched homeward to Shu. Wei Yen was in command of the 
advanced column. He marched to the Lu waters. But on his 
arrival the clouds gathered and a gale blew over the face of 
the waters. Because of the force of the gale the army could 
not advance. Wei Yen then returned and reported the matter 
to his chief. K’ung-ming called in Ménghuo to ask what this 
might mean. 


The Mans beyond the border have yielded now at last, 
The water demons raging mad won't let our men go past. 


The next chapter will contain Ménghuo’s explanation. 


21 


CHAPTER IXC. . ' 


SACRIFICE AT LU SHUI; HOMEWARD MARCH; 
ATTACK ON THE CAPITAL; CHUKO’S ‘MEMORIAL. 


énghuo at the head of the Man Chieftains and Notables, 
with the Lolos, attended to do honour to the army of Shu on 
its departure. They reached the Lu waters in the ninth | 
month. But on trying to cross the river a tremendous storm 
came and hindered them. The leader having reported his ` 
difficulty to K‘ung-ming, the king was asked if he knew of 
any reason for such a storm. He replied, “Wild spirits have 
always troubled those who would cross this river; Wy is neces- ` 
sary to propitiate them with. sacrifices.” 
“What is the sacrifice?” asked K‘ung-ming. 
“Tn the old days when malicious spirits brought misfortune, 
they sacrificed men to the number of seven sevens and offered — 


their heads. They also slew a black ox and a white goat. — 
Sacrifice thus; the wind will subside and the waters come to — 
rest. The same used to be done to secure a plenteous harvest.” — 


“How can I slay a single man without good reason now that 
fighting is done and peace has returned?” said K‘ ung-ming. . 

He went down to the river to see for himself. The north | 
wind was blowing hard, and the waves were high. Both men ` 
and horses seemed frightened. He himself was perplexed. | 
Then he sought out some of the natives and questioned them. — 
They said they had heard the demons moaning every night - 
since he had crossed. The cries began at dusk and continued |. 
till dawn. There were many dark demons in the malarial 
vapours and no man dared cross. 

“The sin is mine,” said K‘ung-ming, “for many of Ma Tai’s 
men perished in these waters beside the southern men. Their — 
poor distressed souls are not yet freed. Therefore I will come 
this night and sacrifice to them.” 

“According to the ancient rule the number of victims ought ` 
to be forty-nine; then the spirits will disperse,” said the © 
natives. a 

“As the resentful demons are here because of the deaths of © 
men, where is the sense in slaying more men? But this will I ° 
do. I will make balls of flour paste after the manner of — 
human heads and stuff them with the flesh of oxen and goats. 
These shall be used instead of human heads, for indeed they 
be (punningly) called man-t’ou,* heads of Man.” 


*Bread is called “ man-tow” 


j 


ee Fiomance of the Three Hingooms. 823 


_, By nightfall, an altar had been set up on the bank of the 
river with the sacrificial -objects all arranged. There were 
also forty-nine lamps. Flags were flying to summon the souls. 
The man-t’ow were piled up on the ground. In the middle of 
the third watch, at midnight, K‘ung-ming, dressed in Taoist 
garb, went to offer the sacrifice in person, and he bade Tung 
Chiieh read this prayer :— \ ' ; , 

“On the first day of the ninth month of the third year of the 
period Chien-Hsing of the Han Dynasty, I, @huko Liang, 
Prime Minister of Han, Marquis of Wuhsiang, Governor of 
Ichou, reverently order this sacrifice to appease the shades of 
those men of Shu who have died in their country’s service 
and those of the southern men who have perished. I now 
declare to you, O ye shades, the majesty of my master, the 
Emperor of the mighty Han Dynasty, excelling that of the 
Five Feudatories and brilliantly continuing the glory of the 
three ancient kings. Recently, when the distant south re- 
belliously invaded his territory, contumeliously sent an army, 
loosed the venom of their sorcery, and gave free rein to their 
‘savagery in rebellion, I was commanded to punish their crimes. 
Wherefore my brave armies marched and utterly destroyed 
the contemptible creatures. My brave soldiers gathered like 
the clouds, and the insensate rebels melted away. Hearing 
of the easy successes I won, they were entirely demoralised. 
My army consists of heroes from the Nine Provinces and 
officers and men are famous in the empire; all are expert in 
‘war and skilled in the use of arms, they go whither light leads 
them and serve the king. All have exerted themselves to obey 
‘orders and carried out the plans for the seven captures of 
Ménghuo. They were whole-hearted in their service and vied 
‘in loyalty. Who could foresee that you, O Spirits, would be 
‘sacrificed in the strategy and be involved in the enemies’ 
wicked wiles? Some of you went down to the deep springs 
wounded by flying arrows; others went out into the long night 
hurt by lethal weapons. Living you were valorous, dead you 
left behind a name. oe | 

“Now we are returning home. The victors’ song is in our 
mouths and our prisoners accompany us. Your spirits are 
with us still and certainly hear our prayers. Follow the 
banners, come with the host, return to your country, each to 
his own village, where you may enjoy the savour of the meat 
offerings and receive the sacrifices of your own families. Do 
‘not become wandering ghosts in unfamiliar hamlets of restless 
shades in strange cities. I will memorialise our Emperor that 
your wives and little ones may enjoy his gracious bounty, 
every year gifts of food and clothing, every month donations 
for sustenance. Comfort yourselves with this provision. 
“As for you, Spirits of this place, shades of the departed 
men of the south, here is the usual sacrifice. You are near 


324 San Kuo, or. 


home. Living you stood in awe of the celestial majesty, dead 
you come within the sphere of refining influence. It is right 
that you should hold your peace and refrain from uttering 
unseemly cries. With bowed head I pray you to Pa of 
the sweet savour of this sacrifice. 

“Alas, ye dead! To you this offering!” 

K‘ung-ming broke into loud lamentations at the end of. this 
prayer and manifested extreme emotion, and the whole army 
shed tears. eMénghuo and his also moaned and wept, and 
amid the sad clouds and angry mists they saw the vague 
forms of many demons floating away on the wind till they 
disappeared. 

The material portion of the sacrifice was then thrown into © 
the river. Next day the army stood on the south bank with 
a clear sky over their heads and calm waters at their feet, the 
clouds gone and the winds hushed; and the crossing was made. 
without misadventure. They continued their way, whips 
cracking, gongs clanging, spurs jingling, and ever and anon — 
the song of victory rising over all.“ 

Passing through Yungch‘ang, Wang K‘ang and Lii K‘ai were 
left there in command of the four districts, and then Ménghuo 
was permitted to leave. He was ordered to be diligent in his 
administration, maintain good control, and soothe and care for 
the people left to him to govern and to see to it that agriculture — 
was promoted: He took leave with tears rolling qoum hisi 
cheeks, i 

When the army neared the capital, the Latter Ruler came 
out in state to welcome his victorious. minister. The king 
stood by the roadside as K‘ung-ming came up, and waited. — 

K‘ung-ming quickly descended from his chariot, prostrated | 
himself and said, “Thy servant has offended in causing his . 
master anxiety ; but the conquest of the south was long.” | 

His lord took him kindly by the hand and raised him. Then 
the chariots of the king and his minister returned to Ch‘éngtu 
side by side. In the capital were great rejoicings with 
banquets and rewards for the army. -Henceforward distant 
lands sent tribute to the court to the number of two hundred. 

As proposed in a memorial, the king provided for the 
families of the soldiers who had lost their lives in the expedi- — 
tion, and they were made happy. And the whole land enjoyed © 
tranquillity. =; 

The King of Wei, Ts‘ao P‘ei, had now ruled seven years, and — 
it was the fourth year of the king’ s reign in Shu. Ts‘ao P‘ei 
had taken to wife a lady of the Chén family, formerly the 
wife of the second son of Yuan Shao. He had discovered her - 
at the sack of Yehch‘éng and had married her. Shu bore him — 
a son, Jui, also known as Yiian-chung, who was very clever and . 
a great favourite with his father. Later he took as kuei-fei 
a daughter of one Kua Jung. She was a woman of exceeding 


5 : - Hamance of the Three Kingdoms 325 


beauty whom her father called “Queen of Women,” and the 
name stuck’to her. But with her arrival at court the Lady 
_Chén fell from her lord’s favour, and the kwei-fei’s ambition 
led her to intrigue to replace the Empress. She took Chang 

-T’ao, a minister at the court, into her confidence. = 

At that time the king was indisposed, and Chang alieged 
that in the palace of the consort had been dug up a wooden 
image with the king’s date of birth written thereon, so that it 
represented him. It was meant to exercise a maleficent 
influence. Ts‘ao P‘ei in his anger put his consort to death; 
-and he set up the kwei-fei in her place. 

But she had no issue. Wherefore she nourished Jui as her 
own. However, loved as Jui was, he was not then named heir. 
When he was about fifteen Jui, who was an expert archer and 
a daring rider, accompanied his father to the hunt. In a gully 
they started a doe and its fawn. The king shot the doe, while 
the fawn fled. Seeing that the fawn’s course led past his son’s 
horse the king called out to him to shoot it. Instead the youth 
bursts into tears. : re 

“Your Majesty has slain the mother; how can one kill the 

child as well?” 

_. The words struck the king with remorse. He threw aside 
his bow, saying, “My son, you would make a benevolent and 
virtuous ruler.” 

~- From this circumstance he decided that Jui should succeed, 
and conferred upon him the princedom of P‘ingyiian. In the - 
fifth month the king fell ill, and medical treatment was of no 
avail. So the chief officers were summoned to the bedside of 

the king. They were Ts‘ao Ch‘én, Ch‘én Chiin, Sstma I. 
. When they had come, the king’s son was called, and the dying © 
king spake thus: “I am grievously ill, and my end is near. I 
- confide to your care and guidance this son of mine; you must 
support him out of good feeling for me.” 

“Why does Your Majesty talk thus?” said they. “We will 
do our utmost to serve you for a thousand autumns and a 
myriad years.” , 

. “No; I know that I am about to die,” said the king. “The 
sudden fall of the city gates was the omen, as I well knew.” 
Just then the attendants said that Ts‘ao Hsiu had come to 

ask after the king’s health. They were told to call him into 
the chamber. When he had entered, Ts‘ao P*ei said to him, 
“You and these three are the pillars and cornerstones of the 
state. If you will only uphold my son I can close my eyes in 

eace.” 
1 These were his last words. A flood of tears gushed 
forth, and he sank back on the couch dead. He was forty 
_ years of age and had reigned seven years. 
~The four ministers raised the wailing for the dead and 
forthwith busied themselves with setting up Ts‘ao Jui as the 


326 San kuo, or, nee ee 


Emperor of Ta Wei. The late king received the posthumous 
style of “Emperor Wên.” The new Emperor’s mother, the 
eee who had suffered death, was styled “Empress Wên- 
chao 

Honours were distributed freely in balehinaticht of the new. 
reign. Chung Yu was made T‘ai-fu; Ts‘ao Chén, General; 
Ts‘ao Hsiu, Minister of War: Hua Hsin a T‘ai-yu; Ssuma I 
became a Cavalry General; and many others, conspicuous and 
cbscure, were promoted. A general amnesty was declared 
throughout all the land. 

About this time a vacancy existed in the governorship of 
Yungchou and Hsiliang. Ssttma I asked for the post and got 
it. He left for his new office as soon as he had received the 


appointment. 


In due time the news of all these doings reached Kune mihg 
and perturbed him not a little. He was anxious, not because - 
of the death of one ruler and the succession of another, but — 
about Sstma I, who was very crafty, and who, in command of 
such forces as were in his two provinces, might prove.a serious 
danger to Shu. He felt that this man ought to be attacked at | 
once. 

Ma Su spoke of this matter. “You, O Minister, have just — 
returned from an arduous and exhausting expedition, and 
you should take time to recuperate before you undertake such ~ 
another. However, I have a scheme by which Ts‘ao Jui may 
be brought to work the destruction of Sstuma I. May I lay 
it before you?” 

“What plan have you?” said Hest ti 
“The young king has no confidence in Ssuma I although ne 
is a high minister of state. Now send someone secretly to | 
Loyang and Yehchün to disseminate reports that Sstma is 
about to rebel. Further, prepare a proclamation in his name 
and post it up so as to cause Ts‘ao Jui to mistrust him and put 


~ him to death. sh 


K‘ung-ming adopted the suggestion. Whence it came about 


_ that a notice suddenly appeared on the city gate of Yehch‘éng. 


The wardens of the gate took it down and sent it to Ts‘ao Jui. 
This is what it said: “I, Sstima I, Piao-chi Ta Chiang-chiin, 
Commander of the Forces of Yung and Liang, confident in the 
universal principles of right, now inform the empire, saying, 
the Founder of this Dynasty, the Emperor Wu, established 
himself with the design of securing the empire to the son of 
Prince Ch‘én Sst. Unfortunately, calumny spread abroad, and - 
the Emperor could not manifest himself for many years. His 
grandson, Ts‘ao Jui, does not follow a virtuous course, though 
sitting in the high place, and has not fulfilled the great 
intention of his ancestor. Now I, in accordance with the will 
of Heaven and favouring the desires of the people, have 
decided upon a day to set my army in motion in order to secure 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 327 


the wish of the people, and when that day arrives I call upon 

each one to gather to his lord; and I will destroy utterly the 
family of any who shall disobey. You are hereby informed 
that you may all know.” . 

_ This document frightened the young king, and he turned 

panic. At once he called a council of his lords to consider 
it. 

Hua Hsin said, “That was the reason for his having 
requested the governorship of the two provinces. Now the 
Founder of your House frequently said to me that Sstima I 
was ambitious and cruel, and should not be entrusted with 
military authority lest he harm the state. This is the first 

po oone of rebellion, and the author should be put to 
_ death.” i 


Wang Lang said, “Ssima I is a master of strategy and | 


skilled in tactics. Moreover, he is ambitious and will cause 
mischief if he be allowed to live.” yi 

Wherefore Ts‘ao Jui wrote a command to raise an army, 
which he would lead to punish the minister. Suddenly Ts‘ao 
Chén stood forth from the rank of military officers and said, 
“What you advise is impossible. His late Majesty confided 
his son to the care of certain officers of state, of whom Sstima 


Lis one, wherefore it is certain that he felt sure of his probity. — 
So far nothing is known certainly. If you hastily send an 


_army to repress him, you may force him into rebellion. This 
‘may be but one of the base tricks of Shu or Wu to cause 
dissension in our midst so that occasion be found to further 
_their own aims. As no one knows, I pray Your Majesty to 
reflect before you do anything.” _ 
“Supposing Ssuma I really contemplates a revolt; what 
‘then?’ n Te a ; 
Ts‘ao Chên replied, “If Your Majesty suspects him, then do 
as did Han Kao-Tsu when, under pretence of taking a trip on 
the lakes Yiin and Méng he summoned his vassals—and seized 
` Han Hsin, who had been denounced. Go to Ani; Sstma I will 
assuredly come out to meet you, and his actions and demeanour 
may be watched closely. He can be arrested if need be.” 
Ts‘ao Jui changed his mind. Leaving Ts‘ao Chén to 
regulate the affairs of state, the young king went out with the 
Imperial Guards, to the number of ten legions, and travelled 
to Ani. Ignorant of the reason of his coming, and anxious to 
show off his dignity, Sstima I went to welcome his ruler in dll 
the pomp of a commander of a great army. : As he approached, 
the courtiers told the king that Sstma I’s defection was 
certain since such a large army could only mean that he was 
prepared to resist. Whereupon Ts‘ao Hsiu, with a large force, 
was sent in front to meet him. Sstma I distrusted this show 
of force, but he advanced alone and stood humbly by the 
roadside till Ts‘ao Hsiu came up. 


Moma ee 
mnt tare Da 


he ANS 


ow 


328 Ban Ruo, or 


Ts‘ao Hsiu advanced and said, “Friend, His late Majesty 
entrusted you with the heavy responsibility of caring for his 
son; why are you in revolt?” 

Sstma I turned pale, and a cold sweat. broke out all over him 
as he asked the reason for such a charge. Ts‘ao Hsiu told 
him what had occurred. 

“This is a vile plot on the part of our rivals to cause 
dissension,” said he. “It is a design to make the Emperor 
work evil upon his ministers that thereby another may profit. 
I must see the Son of Heaven and explain.” 

Ordering his army to retire, he went forward alone to the 
Emperor’s chariot, bowed low and said, weeping, “His late 
Majesty gave me charge of his son; could I betray him? This 
is-a wile of the enemy. I crave permission to lead an army, 


first to destroy Shu and then to attack Wu, whereby to show - 


my gratitude to the late Emperor and Your Majesty and 
manifest my own true heart.” 


However, Jui did not feel quite convinced, and Hua Hsin . 


said, “In any case withdraw his military powers and let him 
go into retirement.” 

And thus it was decided. Ssuma I retired to his native 
village. Ts‘ao Hsiu succeeded to his command, and Jui return- 
ed to Loyang. 


K‘ung-ming rejoiced when they told him of the success that: 


had attended the ruse. 


“Ssiima I and the forces he commanded have been Ft 


cbstacles in my long-wished- for attack on Wei. Now he has 


fallen I have no more anxiety.” 
At the first great assembly of officers at court Küng: -ming 


stepped forth and presented a memorial on the expedition he — 


contemplated. 


“The late Emperor had accomplished - but half his great l 


task at his death. At this moment the empire is in three 
parts, and our country is weak; it is a most critical moment 
for us. Still, ministers are not remiss in the capital, and loyal 
and devoted soldiers sacrifice their lives abroad, for they still 
remember the special kindness of the late Emperor and wish 
to show their gratitude to him by service to Your Majesty. 
Therefore it would be indeed fitting that you should extend 


your holy virtue to glorify his virtuous memory in the stimula- 


tion of the will of your purposeful officers. Your Majesty 
should not lose yourself in the pursuit of mean things, quoting 
phrases to confound the eternal principles of rectitude and 
so preventing remonstrance from honest men. One rule 
applies to the palace of the Emperor and the residence of a 
courtier; there must be one law rewarding the good and 
punishing the evil. Evil-doers and law-breakers, as also true 


and good men, should be dealt with according to their deserts _ 
by the officers concerned in order to manifest Your Majesty’s 


Romance of the Tyree Hingdoms 329 


impartial and enlightened administration. Partiality is 
wrong, as is one law for the court and another for the 
provinces. 

“The high officers Kuo Yu-chih, Fei I and Tung Yün are 
honest men, devotedly anxious to be ivyal to the last degree; 

wherefore His late Majesty chose them in his testament. My 
~ advice is to consult them in all palace matters, great or small, 
before taking action. Your Majesty will reap the enormous 
advantage of having any failings corrected. . 

¢“General Hsiang Ch‘ung is a man of well-balanced tempera- 
ment, versed in military matters, to whom, after testing him, 
the late Emperor applied the epithet ‘capable.’ The concensus 
of opinion is that he should be Commander-in-chief. My 
advice is to consult him in all military matters, great or small, 
_whereby your military forces will yield their maximum, each 
one being employed to the best advantage. 

“Attract worthy men; repelg@mean men. This policy 
achieved the glory of the Former Hans, while its reversal © 
ruined the Latter Hans. When the late Emperor was with 
us he often discussed this with your servant, and he took much © 
to heart the story of Huan and Ling. 

“President Ch‘en Chen and Historian Chiang Wan are both 
incorruptible and enlightened men, honest to the death. I 
would that Your Majesty should have them near and hold them 
in confidence. If this be done, then the glory of the House of 
Han will be quickly consummated. _- 

“I was originally a private person, a farmer in Nanyang, 
concerned only to secure personal safety in a troubled age and 
not seeking conversation with the contending nobles. His 
-~ late Majesty, overlooking the commonness of my origin, 

condescended to seek me thrice in my humble cot and consult 
-me on the trend of events. His magnanimity affected me 
- deeply, and I consented to do my utmost for him. Then came 
defeat, and I took office at a moment of darkest outlook and at 
a most difficult crisis. This is twenty-one years ago. The 
late Emperor recognised my diligent care, and when dying he 
confided the great task to me. From that day I have lived a 
life of anxiety lest I should fail in my trust and so dim his 
glory. That is why I undertook the expedition to the wastes 
=- beyona the Lu River. Now the south has been quelled, and 
our army is in good condition, I ought to lead it against the 
north, where I may meet with a measure of success in the 
removal of the wicked ones, the restoration of Han and a 
return to the old capital. This is my duty out of gratitude to 
‘the late Emperor and loyalty to Your Majesty. As to a 
discussion of the pros and cons and giving a true version of: 
the whole matter, that belongs to Kuo and Chiang and Tung. . 
I desire Your Majesty to confide to me the task of slaying the 
rebels and restoring the Hans. If I fail, then punish me by 


330 San Buo, or- 


telling the spirit of the late Emperor. If you know not what 
restoration implies that is the fault of your advisers. 

“Your Maj esty should take pains to be guided into the right 
path and examine carefully what is laid before yon; carefully 
remembering the late Emperor’ s testament. 

“I cannot express what would be my delight if you had 
the goodness to accept and act on my advice. 

“Now I am about to depart on a distant expedition I write 
this with tears and scarce know what I have said.” 

The king read it through and said, “My Father-Minister, 
you have only just returned from a distant and fatiguing 
expedition; you are not yet refreshed, and I fear this march 
to the north will be almost too much even for you.” | 

K‘ung-ming replied, “The heaviest responsibility lies upon 
me, the well-being of Your Majesty confided to me by the late 
Emperor. My efforts may not be relaxed night or day. The 
south is at rest, at home is no anxiety; what better time could 
be hoped for to destroy the rebels and recover the capital? 

Forth from the ranks of courtiers stood Ch‘iao Chou and 
said, “I have studied the aspect of the stars; the northern 
quarter is brilliant and strong. The scheme will not speed.” 
Then turning toward the Prime Minister, he continued, “You, © 


O Minister, understand the mysteries of the skies; why do you wig 


oppose the stars?” “i 
“Because the stars are not in their courses,” replied K‘ung- 
ming; “they have been disturbed. One may rely on the stars — 
too much. Moreover, I have already sent the army into 
Hanchung, where I shall act as soon as I have studied what 

is afoot.” 

Ch‘iao Chou pleaded in vain; Pane co ae was too strongly 
set upon his purpose to yield. So Kuo Yu-chih, Tung Yun and 
Fei I were ordered to attend to matters in the palace; Hsiang 
Ch‘ung was to control all military affairs and forces. Many- 
special appointments were made; Ch‘én Chén became Shih- 
chung; Chiang Wan became Ts‘an-chiin; Chang I, Controller 
of the Prime Minister’s palace; Tu Ch‘iung was created 
Censor; Tu Wei and Yang Hung, Presidents; Méng Kuang 
and Lai Min, Libationers; Yin Mo and Li Chuan, Po-shih; Chí 
Chéng and Fei Shih, Private Secretaries; Ch‘iao Chou, a T‘a- © 
shih; and others to the number of over a hundred, all to control 
the administration of Shu in the absence of Chuko Liang. 

After having received his Emperor’s command to lead an 
expedition against the north, K‘ung-ming returned to his 
palace and summoned the officers of the army to listen to the 


orders. And they came, and to each was appointed a duty — : 


in the great army of Chuko Liang, Commander-in-chief of the 
North-conquering Expedition, Prime Minister of Shu, Marquis 
of Wu-hsiang, Governor of. Ichou, Director of Internal and 
External Affairs. 


Tea OE a a) Te n RA R 
PS ON 
Sa oe 

eH f AEE yt op 


ETE 


Romance of the Three kingdoms 


p Yen was given the task of guarding the country against 
u. i 

All being ready, a day was chosen for the start, the fifth 
year, the third month on the day ping-yen. 

After the appointments had all been made, there came 
forward a veteran who had listened in vain for the duty 
assigned him. 

= “Old I may be,” said he, “yet have I still the valour of Lien 
P‘o, the heroism of Ma Yiian. Why am I thought useless any 
more than these two who refused to acknowledge old age?” 

It was Chao Yün. . | 

K‘ung-ming said, “I have lost my friend Ma Ch‘ao by illness 


since I returned from the south, and I feel as I had lost an. 


arm. Now, General, you must own that the years are 
mounting up. Any slight lapse would not only shake the 
life-long reputation of yourself, but might have a bad effect 
on the whole army.” — 

Chao replied bitterly, “I have never quailed in the presence 
cf the enemy from the day I first joined the late Emperor; 
I have ever pressed to the front. It is a happy ending for a 
man of valour to die on the frontier. Think you that I should 
resent it? Let me lead the van, I pray.” 

K‘ung-ming used all his skill to dissuade the veteran, but 
in vain; he was set on it, threatening suicide if this honour was 
refused him. At last K‘ung-ming yielded on the condition 
that he would accept a colleague. 

“I will go to help the veteran leader,” cried Téng Chih, 
without a moment’s hesitation. “I am not worth much, but 
I will help lead the attack on the enemy.” - 

Accordingly five companies of veterans were chosen for the 
advanced guard, and with them, to assist Chao Yiin, went 
Téng Chih and half a score of lesser captains. 

After the vanguard had set out, the main body marched by 
the north gate, the Emperor himself going to see his minister 
start. The farewell was taken ten li from the gate, in the 
face of the grand army with its banners and pennons flaunting 
in the wind, and spears and swords gleaming in the sun. 
Then they took the road leading to Hanchung. 

Naturally, this movement was duly reported in Loyang at a 
court held by Ts‘ao Jui, when a minister said, “A report 
from the border stations says that Chuko Liang has marched 
thirty legions into Hanchung. Chao Yün and Téng Chih are 
leading the advanced guard.” 

The report alarmed the king, and he asked who could lead 
an army to repel the advance. At once out spake one, saying, 
“My father died in Hanchung, and to my bitter resentment his 
death is unavenged. Now I desire to lead the army against 
Shu, and I pray that the armies west of the Pass may be given 
me for this purpose. As well as taking vengeance for: my 


ey tas 


382 San uo 


private wrong I shall render a service to the state. I care not 
what fate may befall me.” 

The speaker was Hsiahou Yiian’s son Mou. He was by 
nature very impulsive and also very miserly. When young he 
had been adopted by Hsiahou Tun. When Hsiahou Yüan was 
killed by Huang Chung, Ts‘ao Ts‘ao had taken pity on him and 
married him to one of his daughters, Ching-ho (or Clear 


River), so that he was an Emperor’s son-in-law. As such he - 


enjoyed great deference at court. But although he held a 
military commission, he had. never been with the army. 
However, as he requested the command he was made Com- 
mander-in-chief to get the army ready to march. 

The Minister Wang Lang spoke against the appointment, 
saying, “The appointment is wrong. MHsiahou, the “‘Son-in- 


law,” has never seen a battle and is unsuitable for this post, | 


especially when his opponent is the clever and crafty Chuko 
Liang, a man thoroughly versed in strategy.” 

“I suppose you have arranged with Chuko Liang to be his 
ally,” sneered Hsiahou. “Ever since I was a boy I have 


studied strategy, and I am well acquainted with army matters. | 


Why do you despise my youth? Unless I capture this Chuko 
Liang I pledge myself never again to see the Emperor’s face.” 

Wang Lang and his supporters were silenced. Hsiahou 
took leave of the King of Wei and hastened to Changan to get 
his army in order. He hada score of legions. 


He would go to battle, take the signal flags in grip, 
But could he play the leader, he a lad with callow lip? 


The next chapter will deal with this campaign. 


CHAPTER VIIIC. 


CHAO YUN SLAYS FIVE CAPTAINS; 
K‘UNG-MING CRAFTILY TAKES THREE CITIES. 


K ‘ung-ming’s army marched northward, passing through 

~Mienyang, where stood Ma Ch‘ao’s tomb. In honour of the 
dead hero, K‘ung-ming sacrificed there in person, Ma Ch‘ao’s 
brother being chief mourner for the occasion. 

After this ceremony, when the Commander-in-chief was 
discussing his plans, the spies came in to tell him that Ts‘ao 
Jui had put in motion an army under Hsiahou Mou. Then 
Wei Yen went in to offer a complicated and lengthy ruse, say- 
ing, “Hsiakou Mou is a fatling, soft and stupid. Give me five 
companies, and I will go cut by Paochung, follow the line of the 
Ts‘inling east to the Tztwu Valley and then turn north. In ten 
days I can be at Ch‘angan. Hearing of my intent, Hsiahou will 
hasten to get out of my way. He must go by way of Héngmen 
and Tiko. I will come in by the east, and you, Sir, can 

advance by the Hsieh Valley. In this way all west of Hsien- 
yang will be ours.” > Sve 

_K‘ung-ming smiled at the suggestion. “I do not. think the 
‘plan quite perfect,” said he. “You are nrisled by thinking 
there is no one worth considering guarding the capital. If 
anyone suggest sending a force across by way of Shanpichung 
- we should be lucky if we lost only half a legion, to say nothing 
of the check to our élan. The ruse will not do.” 

“Tf you, O Minister, march by the high road they will bring 
against you the whole host within the Pass and will thus hold 
you indefinitely ; you will never get to the capital.” - 

“But I shall go along the level road on the right of Shénsi. 
i cannot fail if I keep to the fixed rules of war.” 

Wei Yen withdrew, gloomy and dissatisfied. Then Chao 
Yiin sent orders to the advanced guard to move. 

Hsiahou Mou was at Ch‘angan preparing his force. There 
came to him a certain captain from Hsiliang, named Han 
Té, a man of great valour, whose weapon was a mighty battle- 
axe called “Mountain Splitter. He brought with him eight 
legions of the Ch‘iang and offered his services. They were 
gladly accepted, and his army was made the van of the attack. 

This Han Té had four sons, all very expert in archery and 
horsemanship. They were named Ying, Yao, Ch‘iung and 
Ch‘i, and they came to serve under their father. Han Tê led 

his sons and the eight legions by the road to Fengming Hill 


334 San kuo, or. 


(The Hill of the Phæœnix Song), where they were near the 
men of Shu, and here they drew up the array. 

When the battle line was in order, the father, with his four 
sons, rode to the front and began to revile their enemy as — 
rebels and raiders. Chao Yün quickly lost his*temper, rode 
forward and challenged. The eldest son, Yin, accepted and 
galloped out; but he was slain in the third bout. Immediately 
his brother Yao went out, whirling his sword. But now Chao 
Yiin’s blood was up, and the old dash and vigour came upon 
him so that the young man had no chance. Then the third 
son, Ch‘iung, took his great halberd and dashed out to his 
brother’s aid. Chao Yiin had now two opponents; nevertheless 
he held his own, nor blenched nor failed a stroke. Seeing 
that his two brothers were nearing defeat, the fourth son went 
to join in the fray with his pair of swords that he had named 
“Sun and Moon.” And there was the veteran warrior with 
three against him, and he still kept them at bay. 

Presently a spear thrust got home on Han Ch‘i, who fell. 
Another captain then coming out to take his place, Chao Yün 
lowered his spear and fled. Han Ch‘iung then took his bow - 


and shot three arrows at the fugitive, who turned them aside 


so that they fell harmless. Angry at this, Han Ch‘iung again 
seized his halberd and went in pursuit. But Chao Yün took . 
his bow and shot an arrow that wounded his pursuer in the 
face. So he fell and died. Han Yao then galloped up and 


raised his sword to-strike, but Chao Yün slipped past, got © 


within his guard and made Yao a prisoner. He quickly nd 


galloped into his own array with his captive, dropped him and | 


then, dashing out, recovered his spear, which had fallen when - 
he seized his man. is 
Han Tê was overwhelmed with the loss of all his sons and 
went behind the array. His barbarians were too frightened — 
at the prowess of Chao Yün to be of any use in battle, and no ~ 
one dared to meet the old warrior. So they retired, while 
Chao Yiin rode to and fro among them slaying at his will. 


I thought of brave old men, of Chao Tztlung, 
Who, spite of numbered years three score and ten, 
Was marvellous strong in battle; who one day 
Slew four opposing captains, greater feat 

Than when at Tangyang he had saved his king. 


Seeing the successful battle that Chao Yün was waging, 
Têng Chih led on his men to join in the fight. This completed 
the discomfiture of the Hsiliang men, and they ran away. 
Han Tê, seeing the danger of being captured, threw off his 
armour and went on foot. The men of Shu drew off and 
returned to their camp. . 

In camp Téng Chih felicitated his veteran colleague. 


re aA 


“For a man of seventy years you are unique and wonderful,” 


_ Said he. “You are as much the hero as you ever were. It is 
almost an incomparable feat to have slain four captains in one 


day.” 
“Yet the minister thought me too oid and did not wish to 
employ me. I had to give him a proof.” 

The captive Han Yao was sent to the main body with the 


_ messenger who bore an account of the victory. 


In the meantime, Han Té led his defeated army back to his 


_ chief, to whom he related his sad story with many tears. | 
. Then Hsiahou Mou decided to lead his own army out against © 


Chao Yün. | wah l l 
When the scouts reported his coming, the veteran took his 


spear and mounted his steed. He led one company out to 


Féngming Hill, at the foot of which he made his array. On 


- the day of the battle Hsiahou Mou wore a golden casque, rode 


a white horse and carried a huge sword. From his place be- 


_ neath the great standard he saw Chao Yün galloping to and fro, 


He was going out to give battle, when Han Té checked him. 

“Is it not mine to avenge my four sons?” said he. 

He seized his axe, the “Mountain Splitter,” and rode directly 
at the hero, who advanced with fury. The contest was but 
short, for in the third encounter Chao Yiin’s spear thrust 
brought Han Té to the earth. Without waiting a moment he 


made for Hsiahou Mou, who hastily dashed in behind his ranks 


and so escaped. Then Téng Chih led on the main body and 
_ completed the victory. The men of Wei retired ten li and 


made a camp. 


_ This first battle having gone against him, Hsiahou called 
his officers to consult. He said he could now credit the story 


of Chao Yiin’s stand at Tangyang and that, alone, he had 


_ fought against a whole host and come out victor. But what 
_ to be done against such a champion? 


‘Then Ch‘éng Wu, an adviser, said, “My opinion is that this 
Chao, though brave in the field, is lacking in the council 
chamber. Really he is not greatly to be feared. Give battle 
again soon, but first prepare an ambush. You can retreat 
and so draw him into it. Then go up on the hill top and 


- direct the attack from that point of vantage so that he may 


be hemmed in on all sides and be captured.” 

The necessary plans for this were made, and two parties 
of three legions each, led by Tung Hsi and Hstieh Tsé, went 
into ambush right and left. The ambush laid, Hsiahou Mou 
advanced once more to attack, drums rolling and flags flying. 


_ As soon as he appeared Chao Yün and Teng Chih went to 


= Téng Chih said, “The men of Wei were beaten only yester- 


‘day. This renewed attempt must mean that they are trying 
some trick. You should be cautious, General.” 


Homance of the Three ingooms 355) ue 


336 San uo, or 


“T do not think this youth, with the smell of mother’s milk 


still on his lips, worth talking about. We shall surely capture | 


him to-day.” 

Chao Yiin pranced out, and P‘an Sui came to meet him from 
the side of Wei. But P‘an Sui made no stand and quickly ran 
away. Chao Yiin pursued. Then there came out to stop him 
no less than eight captains of Wei, all of whom passed in front 
of Hsiahou. But one by one they too fled. Chao Yün pressed 
forward at full spead, Téng Chih coming up behind. 

When Chao Yiin had got deeply involved, with the battle 
raging all around him, Téng Chih decided to retire. This was 
the signal for the ambush to come out, and Téng was so 
hampered that he could not attempt to rescue his colleague. 
Chao Yün was thus entirely.surrounded. However, he strug- 
gled on, losing men at every dash, till he had but one company 


left. He was then at the foot of the hill whence Hsiahou- 
Mou was directing operations, and observing his enemy from 


this point of vantage, he sent men to check him whithersoever 
he went. Chao decided to charge up the hill, but was stopped 
by rolling baulks of timber and tumbling rocks. 

The battle had lasted long, and Chao Yiin was fatigued. 
So he halted to rest a time, intending to renew the struggle 
when the moon should be up. But just as he had taken off 
his armour the moon rose and, with it, his enemies began to 


attack with fire as well, and the thunder of the drums was | 


accompanied by showers ‘of stones and arrows. The oncoming 
host, shouted to him to yield. However, he did not think of 


that, but got upon his steed to strive once more to extricate 


himself. And his enemies pressed closer and closer, pouring 
in flights and flights of arrows. No advance was possible, 
and the end seemed very near. 

“I refused the repose of age,” sighed he, “and now my end 
will come to me here.” 

Just then he heard new shouting from the north-east, and 
to his joy he saw Chang Pao coming toward him, his father’s 
long spear in his hand and a man’s head hanging at his bridle. 
Soon he reached the old man’s side and cried, “The minister 
feared some misfortune had befallen you, so he sent me to 
your help I have half a legion here. We heard that you were 
surrounded. On the way I met Hsiieh Tsé and slew him. 


Chao Yiin’s courage revived, and he and the young captain . 


went on toward the south-west, driving the men of Wei before 
them in disorder. Soon another cohort came in from the 
side, the leader wielding a huge curved sword. This was 
Kuan Hsing, and-he used the same words that his cousin had 
used, only that the enemy he had encountered, and slain, was 
Tung Hsi 

“Here is his head,” cried he, “and the minister is coming 

up too.” j 


Mou. feral 
During that night the army of Wei was smitten till corpses — 


Fiomance of the Gorur Hingoa 337, ae 


“But ie not press on to capture Hsiahou Mou since you 
; have had such wonderful success?” cried Chao Yün. . 
Chang Pao k the hint and went forward. ‘Kuan Hsing 
followed. 
“They are as my own,” said Chao Yün to Diss who stood 
near. “And they press on wherever there is merit to be won. 
I am an old leader and high in rank, but I am not worth’ so 


much as these two youths. Yet will I risk my life once more Was 


for the sake of my old lord the late Emperor.” sh 
So he led the remnant of his men to Hy to capture Hsiahou 


covered the earth and gore ran in rivers. Hsiahou was unskil- 

ful, and young, and inexperienced in battle. His army was 
in utter rout, and he could only flee. At the head of a few 
survivors he made for Nananchün. His army, leaderless, 
scattered like rats. 

Kuan Hsing and Chang Pao. set. out for Nananehiin:. At 
the news of their coming Hsiahou Mou closed the city gates 
and urged his men to defend. Chao Yün soon joined the 
captains, and they attacked on three sides. Teng Chih arrived 
also, and the city was quite surrounded. 


After vain efforts oF ten days, they heard that of the main 


body of the army some had occupied Yangp‘ing, others Shih- 
ch‘éng, while K‘ung-ming was leading the centre toward them. 
The four captains went to visit him and, told him their ill- ~ 


success at the city. He got into his light chariot and rode AG 7 


-out to view the city, after-which he returned and summoned 


the officers to his tent. . 


He said, “The moat is deep, the walls are steep; wherefore 
the city is well defended and difficult to take. My present — 
plan omits this place. If you persist in the attack and the 
Wei armies march to try for Hanchung cur army w þe in 
danger.” 

“Consider what the capture of Hsiahou Mou would mean,’ 
said Têng Chih. “He is a Son-in-law, and worth more a 
slaying a hundred ordinary leaders. We have begun the siege, _ 

and I do not like to raise it.” . rou 

K‘ung-ming said, “I have other plans. West of this lies 
Tjenshuichiin and north Antingchtin; does any one know — 
the Prefects of these two places?’ : 
` “Ma Sun is the Prefect of T ienshui; Ts’ui Piene that of 
Anting,” replied a scout. ; 

K‘ung-ming then called to him one by one Wei Yen. Chang. 
Pao, Kuan Hsing and two soldiers he could depend upon, and 
gave each certain instructions. They left to carry out their 
orders. 

“Next K‘ung-ming ordered the soldiers to. ‘pile up beneath 
the walls heaps of firewood and straw, saying he was going 


22 


338 R San buo, or 


to burn the city. The defenders on the wall derided W 
- him. 


The Prefect of Anting was much frightened when he heard 
that Hsiahou Mou was besieged, and began to see to his own 
defences. He mustered his four companies of soldiers, 
resolved to defend his city as long as possible. Then there 
came a man from the south, who said he had secret letters. 
The Prefect had him brought into the city, and, when question- 
ed, the man replied that he was one of Hsiahou’s trusted 


soldiers named P‘ei Hsi, sent to beg for help from T‘ienshui | 


and Anting. 


“The city is hard pressed; every day they have raised fires 


to call the attention of your cities to their plight, but their 


signals have all failed. No-one has come. I was ordered to 


fight my way through the besiegers and come to tell you. 


You are to give assistance immediately, and our general will 


open the gates to help you.’ 
“Have you a letter from the general?” asked the Prefect. 
A letter was produced from inside the man’s dress, all 


moist with perspiration. After the Prefect had read it the A 


soldier took it back and went on to Tíenshuyi. 


Two days later a mounted messenger came to say that the aa 


-. Tfienshui men had already started for Nanan, and he urged 
_ the Anting men to march at once. ve 


Tg ul Liang took the advice of his officers. Most of them 


for giving up the Son-in-law. He must be rescued.” 


Thereupon the Prefect marched; the civil officers were left ae 


-said, “If you do not go, and Nanan is taken, we shall be blamed ~ 


in charge of the city. The little army took the high road to 


Nanan.. They saw flames shooting up to the sky all the time. 
When fifty li from the city, there was heard the drums of an 


attacking force, and the scouts came to say that the road 
ahead was held by. Kuan Hsing, while Chang Pao was coming 


up quickly in their rear. 

At this news the soldiers scattered in all directions. The 
Prefect had a few men left with whom he tried to cut his way 
out that he might return to his own city. He got through. 
But when he came to his own city a flight of arrows greeted 
him from the wall, and Wei Yen shouted to him, saying, va | 
have taken the city; you had better yield.” 

This was what had happened. Wei Yen, disguised as 


Anting soldier, in the darkness of the night had beguiled he 


wardens of the gate into opening it, and the men of Shu had 


got in. 


Ts‘ui Liang set off for T‘ienshui. But one march away a 
cohort came out, and beneath the great flag he saw a light 
chariot. In the chariot sat a man in Taoist robe with a 


but as he turned, up came Kuan and Chang, who summoned 


feather fan in his hand. He at once recognised K‘ung-ming, 


/ Romance of the Three iaia 339 


Bs him te; dwrn As he was entirely surrounded, no other 
a course was open to him, so he gave in. He went to the great 
camp with K‘ung-ming, who treated him with courtesy. 


'. After a time K‘ ane mig said, “Ts the Prefect of Nanan a 


_ friend of yours?” 
“He is one Yang Lg. a brother of Yang Fou. Being 
neighbouring districts we are very good friends.’ 

“I wish to trouble you to persuade him to capture Hsiahou 
Mou; can you?” 


k _ to withdraw your men and let me go into the city to speak 
with him.” 


pr of twenty li and camp. Ts‘ui Liang himself went to the city 


he related what had happened. 
By “After the kindness we have received from Wei we cannot 
1 þe traitors, K said Yang Ling. “But we will meet ruse with 
ruse.” 

He led Ts‘ui Liang to the general ena told the whole story. 

“What ruse do you propose?” asked Hsiahou Mou. 

- “Let us pretend to offer the city, and let the men of Shu in. 
_ Once they are in we can massacre them.” 


_ hundred men are here. We can mix with them some of my 

captains dressed as your officers and so let them get into the 

city. They can hide in Hsiahou’s dwelling and arrange, with 
Yang to open the gates in the night.’ 


Shu captains would arouse suspicion. So he agreed, determin- 
ing to kill them as soon as they got within the walls. Then, 
thought he, he would give the signal and beguile K‘ung-ming 
SNA to enter, and so dispose of him. 

= So he consented to K*‘ung-ming’ S proposal, and K‘ung-ming 


gave him instructions, saying, “I will send my trusty Kuan. 


Hsing and Chang Pao with you. You will pass them off as 
the rescuers just to set Hsiahou Mou’s mind at rest. But 
when you raise a fire I shall take that as my signal and come 
in.’ 
| At dusk the two trusty captains, having received their secret 
orders, put on their armour, mounted, took their weapons and 
got in among the Anting men. Ts‘ui Liang led the small 
= force to the gate. Yang Ling was on the wall. The draw- 
_ bridge was hoisted. He leaned over the guard rail and scanned 


; 5 the men below. 


“If you, O Minister, order me to do this, I would ask you. i 


K‘ung-ming Gouden tad: ond ordered the besiegers to draw nt 


and hailed the gate. He entered and went forthwith to his. 
 friend’s residence. | As soon as he had finished the salutations, 


 Ts‘ui Liang agreed to take a share in this scheme, and went 
back to K‘ung-ming’s camp, where he told the necessary tale, 
adding that Yang Ling’s men were too few and he wanted help. | 

= “That is simple enough,” replied K‘ung-ming. “Your. 


Ts‘ui Liang thought within himself that not to take the 


` 


340 San tuo, or 


“Who are you?” asked he. 

“We are rescuers from Anting.” 

Now Ts‘ui shot an arrow over the wall, to which a secret 
letter was bound, saying, “Chuko Liang is sending two cap- 
tains into the city that they may help him to get in,- but do 
nothing till we get inside lest the ruse gets known and the 
game be spoiled. ” 

Yang went to show this letter to the general, who said, 
“Then Chuko Liang is goings to be our victim. Put a company 
of axe and bill men in the palace, and as soon as these two 


‘captains get inside shut the gates and fall on. Then give the 


signal. As soon as Chuko gets inside the gate, seize him.” 

All arrangements being made, Yang Ling went back to the 
wall and said, “Since you are Anting men you may be allowed 
in.’ 

The gate was thrown open and, while Kuan followed close 
after Ts‘ui, Chang Pao was a little way behind. Yang Ling 
came down to the gate to welcome them. As soon as Kuan 
got near he lifted his sword and smote Yang, who fell headless. ` 
Ts‘ui Liang was startled and lashed his steed to flee. 

Chang Pao cried, “Scoundrel! Did you think your vile 
plot would be hidden from the eyes of our master ?” 

With that Ts‘ui fell from a spear thrust. Then Kuan went ~ 
up on the wall and lit the fire. Soon the men of Shu filled the — 
city. Hsiahou Mou could make no defence, so he tried to 


. fight his way through the south gate. There he met Wang E A 


P‘ing and was captured. Those with him were slain. 


K‘ung- -ming entered the city and at once forbade all hinder, oe 


The various captains reported the deeds of valour. The 
captive general was placed in a prisoner’s cart. ; 
Then Têng Chih asked how the treachery of Ts‘ui Tone 
had been discovered. 


“T knew the man was unwilling in his heart io viele: so E i 


sent him into the city that he might have a chance to weave 


a counter plot with Hsiahou Mou. I saw by his manner he 
was treacherous, and so I sent my two trusty captains with 
him to give him a feeling of security. Had he been true 
to me he would have opposed this, but he accepted it gaily 


and went with them lest I should suspect him. He thought 


they could slay my two men and entice me in. But my two 
men already had orders what to do. Everything turned out 
as I thought, and as they did not expect.” 

The officers bowed their appreciation of his wonderful 
insight. 

Then K‘ung-ming said, “I sent one of my trusty men to 
pretend he was a certain P‘ei Hsü of Wei and so deceive this 
Ts‘ui Liang. I also sent another to T‘ienshui to do the same, - 
but nothing has happened yet; I do not know the reason. We 
will capture the place.” 


-fiomanre of the Three Kingdoms 341 T: 


ii was decided to take T‘ienshui next, and thither they 
moved, leaving guards at Anting and Nanan. 


When Ma Tsun, Prefect of T‘ienshui, heard of Hsiahou | 


Mou’s disaster he called a council at which one party were 
- strongly of opinion that a rescue should be attempted. 
“Tf anything sinister happens to ‘Son-in-law’ Hsiahou, 


‘Golden Branch’ and ‘Jade Leaf’ as he is, we shall be held 


guilty of having made no attempt to save him. Wherefore, 
Prefect, you must do all you can,” said they. 
Ma Tsun found decision difficult, and while thinking over 


what was best to do the arrival of P‘ei Hsü, a messenger from 


Hsiahou Mou, was announced. P‘ei was taken to the Prefect’s 


residence and there produced his despatch and asked for aid. | 


Soon came another man saying that the Anting men had set 


out and calling upon Ma Tsun to hasten. This decided him, 


and he prepared his men. 

Then an cutsider came in and said, “O Prefect, you are the 
sport of one of Chuko Liang’s wiles.” 

All looked at him with surprise. He was one Chiang Wei, 
son of a former local official who had died in the king’s service. 
Chiang Wei was well up in books, seeming to have read 
everything, and was. also skilled in all warlike exercises. He 
had studied books on war. He wasa very filial son and much 
esteemed. He held military rank. 

‘Chiang Wei said to the Preféct, “I hear Chuko Liang has 


5i . defeated Hsiahou, who is now in Nanan most closely besieged. 
` How then can this messenger have got out? P’ei is an’ 


“unknown officer whom no one has heard of, and this messen- 
ger from Anting bears no despatch, The fact is the men are 
imposters sent to beguile you into leaving your city undefended 
so that it may be the more easily captured.” 

The Prefect began to understand. He thanked Chiang for 
his caution. Then Chiang said, “But do not be anxious; I 
have a scheme by which we can capture Chuko Liang and 
relieve Nanan.” 


The fates all changing bring the man that’s needed, 
And warlike skill comes from a source unheeded. 


The next chapter will unfold the ruse proposed by Chiang 
Wei. 


CHAPTER VIIC. 


CHIANG WEI GOES OVER TO K‘UNG-MING; 
K‘UNG-MING REVILES WANG LANG, WHO DIES. 


OANA Wei propounded his scheme of defence, saying, 
“Chuko Liang will lay an ambush behind the city, induce our 
soldiers to go out and then take advantage of its undefended 
state to capture it. Now give me three companies of good 


men, and I will place them in ambush at a certain critical | 


place. Lead your men out, but go slowly and not too far, 
and then turn to retire. However, look out for a signal, and 
if you see one, attack, for the attack will be double. If Chuko 
is there himself we shall capture him.” 

The. Prefect adopted this plan, gave the needed men to 
Chiang Wei, who marched at once, and then went forth himself 
' with Liang Ch‘ien. Only two civil officials were left to guard 
the city. 

Chao Yün had been sent to lie in amie in a secret place 
among the hills till the T‘ienshui men left the city, when he 


was to rush in and capture it. His spies reported the 
departure of the Prefect, and he sent on the news to those who- 
were acting with him, Chang I and Kao Hsiang, that they — 


might attack Ma Tsun. 


Chao Yün and his five companies then quickly fared By 


the city wall and called out, “I am Chao Tzu-lung of Ch‘ang- 
shan; you have fallen into our trap you know, but if you will 
surrender quickly you will save many lives.” 
But instead of being alarmed Liang Hsii looked down and 
said, “On the contrary, you have fallen into our trap; only 
you ‘do not know it yet.” 


Chao Yiin began his attack on the walls. Soon there was 


heard a roar, and fire broke out all round, and forth came a 
youthful leader armed with a spear, riding a curvetting steed. 
“Look at me, Chiang of T‘ienshui!” cried he. 
Chao Yiin made at him, but after a few bouts he found 


Chiang Wei was getting too much for him. He was surprised, aye 


and wondered who the youngling could be, for he had never 


heard that such a man belonged to T‘ ienshui, As the fight 


went on along came the other forces -under Ma Tsun and his 
colleague, now returning. As Chao Yiin found he could not 


prevail, he set to cut his way through and lead off his defeated — 


men. He was pursued, but the timely interposition oF his 
colleagues saved: him, and he got away safely. 


Fiomance of the Chree Hingdoms Han 343 


- K‘ung-ming was surprised when he heard what had a 
happened. 

“Who is this,’ said he, “who has thus seen into the dark 
depths of my secret plan? ” Hs 


A man of Nanan, who happened to be there, told him 
Chiang’s name and all about him. Chao Yiin also praised 
_ his skill with the spear, which was superior to any other’s. Wage ; 

 K'‘ung-ming said, “I want to take T‘ienshui now; I did not 
expect to find such a man as this.” 3 i 
The Shu army then advanced in force. Chiang Wei went | 
_. back to Ma Tsun and said, “Chao Yiin’s defeat will bring up 

K‘ung-ming with the main body. He will conclude that we 
shall be in the city, wherefore you had better divide your 
force into four. I, with one party, will go into hiding on the 
east so that I may cut off our enemies if they come that way. 
You, O Prefect, and two other leaders, had better lie in ambush . — 
on the other sides of the city.. Let Liang Hsü and the common. 
people go up on the wall.” S 
K‘ung-ming’s general orders were to proceed at once to 
attack a city from the first moment they reached it, and by 


the rolling of drums incite and urge the men to: advance Withes ok ve 
arush. Thekeenness of the men would be spoiled by any delay. | i ee 
So this time also the army came straight up tothe rampart. he 


But they hesitated and dared not attack when they saw the | 


` flags flying in such good order and apparently such thorough | 


preparation. NRE 
About the middle of the night, fires started up all around 
and a great shouting was heard. No one could see whence | 
the sóldiers were coming, but there were answering shouts 
from the wall. The men of Shu grew frightened and ran. 
K‘ung-ming mounted a horse and, with Kuan Hsing and 
Chang Pao as escort, got out of danger. Looking back, they | 
saw many mounted men with torches winding along like aw AS 
huge serpent. K‘ung-ming bade Kuan Hsing find out what 
this meant, and when he heard that these were Chiang Wers | 
men, he remarked that an army owed more to its leading than | 
- to its numbers. Ma 
“This man Chiang is a true genius,” mused he. e 
He led the army back to camp, and then he thought eee’ hie ae 
long time. Suddenly he called up one of the Anting men ee ipa he 
said, “Where is the mother of this Chiang Wei?’ | epee 
“She lives in Chihsien,” replied he. 
Kue ming called Wei Yen and said to him, “March off WIth ae RIR 
a body of men, giving out that you are going to take Chihsien. _ 
If Chiang Wei comes up let him enter the city. 
“What is the most important place in connection with this 
place?’ asked K‘ ung- ming. o 
The man replied, “The storehouse of hei is at Shang- ge 
kuei; if that is taken the supplies are cut off.” es 


344 - San Huo, or . 


This was good news, so Chao Yün was sent to attack 
Shangkuei while K‘ung- -ming made a camp’ some distance south 
of the city. 

` The spies. took the news of the movements of these three 
forces into T‘ienshui. When Chiang Wei heard that one army 
was to attack his own place he pleaded with Ma Tsun the 
Prefect to let him go to its defence, that he might keep the 
city and do his duty by his mother at the same time. So he 


received command of es Sceapente: and marched toward his 


home. 


When Chiang Wei came near the walls he saw a cohort under _ 
Wei Yen. He attacked. After a show of defence Wei Yen . 


retreated, and Chiang entered the city. He closed the gates 
and prepared to defend the wall. Then he went home to see 
his mother., 

In the same way Liang Ch‘ien was ‘allowed to enter 

Shangkuei. 

Then K‘ung-ming sent for his prisoner, Hsiahou Mou, and, 
when he was brought te his tent, said suddenly. “Are you 
afraid of death?” Bs 

Hsiahou prostrated himself and begged for his life. 


“Well, Chiang Wei of T‘ienshui, who is now gone to guard : 


Chihsien, has sent a letter to say that he would surrender if 
only that would secure your safety. Now I am going to let 
you go if you will promise to induce Chiang Wei to come over 
to me. Do you accept the condition?” 

“Tam willing to induce him to yield to you,” said Hsiahou 
Mou. 


K‘ung-ming ‘then gave his prisoner clothing and a horse and 


let him ride away. Nor did he send anyone to follow him, 
but let him choose his own road. 


Having got outside, Hsiahou wanted to get away, cee he, 


was perfectly ignorant of the roads and knew not which to 
take. Presently he came across some people, apparently in 
flight, and he questioned them. 

“We are Chihsien people,” said they. “Chiang Wei has 
surrendered the city and deserted to Chuko Liang. The men 


_ of Shu are looting and burning, and we have escaped. We are 


going to Shangkuel.”’ 

“Do you know who is holding T‘ienshui?” 

“The Prefect Ma is in there,” said they. 

Hearing this, Hsiahcu rode quickly toward Tienshui. 
Presently he met more people, evidently fugitives, leading 
sons and carrying daughters, who told the same story. By 
and by he, came to the gate of the city, and, as he was 
recognised, the wardens of, the gate admitted him, and the 
Prefect came to greet him and asked of his adventures. He 


told all that had happened, that Chiang Wei had surr rendered i 


and related what the fugitives had said. 


` 


Viomance of the Three Kingdoms 345 


“I did not think Chiang Wei would have gone over “to Shu,” 


> said the Prefect sadly. 


“It seems he thought by this to save you, General, ” said 


` Liang Hsii. “I am sure he has made only a pretence of 
| surrendering.” 


“Where is the pretence when it is a fact that he has sur- 
rendered?” said Hsiahou. 

They were all perplexed. Then at the watch- setting the 
men of Shu came to begin an attack. The fires round the 


-~ wall were very bright, and there in the glare was seen Chiang 


Wei, armed and riding up and down under the ramparts 
calling out for Hsiahou Mou. 
Hsiahou Mou and the Prefect ascended the wall; whence 


- they- saw Chiang Wei swaggering to and fro. Seeing the 


chiefs on the wall, he called out, “I surrendered for the sake 


of you, General; why have you gone back on your word?” 


“Why did you surrender to Shu after enjoying so much of 
Wei’s bounty?” said Hsiahou. “And why do you talk thus?” 

“What do you mean talking thus after writing me a letter 
telling me to surrender? You want to secure your own safety ` 
` by involving me. But I have surrendered, and as I am a 
superior captain in their service ney, I see no sense in return- 
ing to Wei.” 

So saying, he urged the men on to the atik The assault 
_ continued till dawn, wher the besiegers drew off. 

_ Now the appearance of Chiang Wei in this fashion was but 
‘a ruse. K‘ ung-ming had found among his men one who 
resembled Chiang Wei and had disguised him so that Chiang 
_ Wei appeared to be leading the attack on the ramparts. In 
the smoke and fire during the hight no one could peneorate, 
the disguise. 

K‘ung-ming then led the army to attack. ‘Chihsien. The : 
grain in the city was insufficient to feed the people. From 
the wall Chiang Wei saw waggons of grain and forage being 
driven into Wei Yen’s camp, and he determined to try to secure — 


` some. ~ So-he led three companies out of the city to attack the 


train of waggons. As soon as he appeared the convoy 


abandoned the carts and fled. , Chiang, Wei seized them, and 


-was taking them into the city, “when he was met by a cohort 


` under the command of Chang I. They fought. After a short 


time Wang P‘ing came to reinforce his colleague, so that 
Chiang Wei was attacked on two sides. Ali Chiang’s efforts 


` were vain, and he had to abandon the spoil and try to re-enter 


the city. 
But as he drew near he saw the walls were decorated with 


Shu ensigns, for Wei Yen had captured the place and was in - 


possession. By desperate fighting Chiang Wei got clear and 


set off for T‘ienshui. But he only had a few score horsemen 


left. Presently the small force fell in with Chang Pao, and 


346 = San Huo, or . 


at the end of this engagement Chiang Wei found himself 
alone, a single horseman. He reached the city and hailed the 


gate. The watchers above the gate knew him and went to ; 


tell the Prefect. 

“This fellow has come to beguile me into opening the gate,” 
said Ma Tsun. 

So he ordered the defenders to shoot at him. Chiang Wei 
turned back, but there were the men of Shu close at hand. He 
set off as fast as he could for Shangkuei. But when he got 
there Liang Ch‘ien hurled a valley of abuse at him. 

“You traitor,” cried he. “Dare you come to try to cajole 
me out of my city? I know you have surrendered to Shu.” 

His men also began to shoot at the hapless fugitive. 


Chiang Wei was helpless. He could not explain the real. 


truth to those who doubted him. Lifting his eyes to heaven, 


while tears rolled down his cheeks, he wvaipaee up his steed 


and rode off toward Ch‘angan. 
` Before he had got very far he came to a spot where were 


many heavy foliaged trees. From among these appeared a 
_company of soldiers, led by Kuan Hsing. Weary as were both 


horse and rider, there was no chance of successful resistance, 


and Chiang Wei turned back. But soon appeared a sraall 


chariot in which sat K‘ung-ming, dressed simply as usual in 
a white robe and carrying his feather fan. 

“Friend Chiang,” said he, “is it not time to yield?” 

Chiang Wei stopped and pondered. There was K‘ung-ming, 
and Kuan Hsing’s men were behind him. There was no way 
out. So he dismounted and bowed his head in submission. 


K‘ung-ming at once got out of the chariot and bade him wel- 


come, taking him by the hand and saying, ‘‘Ever since I left 
my humble cottage I have been seeking some worthy man to 
whom I might impart the knowledge that my life has been 
spent in acquiring. I have found no one till this moment, and 
now my desire is attained. You are the one.’ 


Chiang Wei bowed and thanked him, and they:two returned 


to camp. ` 


Soon after their arrival the new recruit and Kune: ming 


consulted how to capture T‘ienshui and Shangkuei. Chiang 
Wei had a scheme. 

“The two civil officers in charge of the city are eacollont 
friends of mine,” said he, “and I will write a letter to each, 
shoot it over the wall tied to an arrow, and ask them to help 
by raising a revolt within the city.” 7 

They decided upon this, and two secret letters were duly 
written and sent flying over the ramparts, where they were 
- found and taken to the Prefect. Ma Tsun was doubtful what 
action to take and consulted with Hsiahou Mou, asking him to 
decide. 

“Put both the men to death, ? he replied. 


Foma ‘of he Three Fingom: ET ; , 


-Bút Yin Shane heard what was Td and said to his col- 
Poe. ‘The best course for us is to yield the city to Shu and 
trust to them to treat us well as our recompense.” 


That evening Hsiahou Mou sent many times to summon the’ 
two officers to him, but they thought it too great a risk to 
answer the call. Instead; they armed themselves and rode at 


the head of their own soldiers to the gates, opened them and let 
in the men of Shu. The Prefect and his exalted guest fled by 
the west gate with a few faithful followers and sought refuge 
with the Ch‘iang. 


The traitors welcomed Kane: -ming, who entered the city, 


restored order and calmed the people. 

This done, K‘ung-ming asked how he might capture Shang- 
kuei. Liang Hsü said, “My brother holds that city, and I will 
call upon him to yield it? 

Thereupon Liang Hsü rode over fo Shanokuel and called 
out his brother to submit. K‘ung-ming rewarded him and 


then made Liang Hsü Prefect of Tienshui; Yin Shang, 
magistrate of Chich‘e êng; and Liang Ch‘ien, magistrate of 


Shangkuei. 


~ Next the army prepored to advance, Some of the officers 


asked their ae why he did not pursue and capture Hsiahou 
Mou. ene 

He replied, “I let him go as 4 would release a duck ; in my 
friend Chiang Wei I recognised a phoenix.” 

Such awe and fear seized upon the country rond when these 
lons were heard of that many other cities simply opened 
their gates without making any resistance. The army then, 
horse and foot, marched on to Ch‘ishan. © 


When they reached the west bank of the River Wei the 


scouts reported their movements in Loyang, and, at a court 
held in the first year of the period T‘ai-Ho a minister told the 
king of the threatened invasion. He said, “Hsiahou, the 
imperial Son-in- law, has lost the three cities and fled to the 
Chiang. The enemy has reached Ch‘ishan, and their advanced 
columns are on the west bank of the Wei. I pray that an 
army be sent to repulse them.” 

The Emperor Jui was alarmed and asked for some general 
to go out.and drive off the enemy. 


The Minister Wang Lang stepped forward and. said, “I 
ae the General Ts‘ao Chén was sent by — 
the late Emperor on any expedition he succeeded; why not . 


observed that whene 


send him to drive off these men of Shu?” 

~ Jui approved of the suggestion, whereupon he called up 
Ts'ao Chén and said to him, “The late Emperor confided me 
to your guardianship ; you cannot sit by while the enemy 
ravages the country.” 


Ts‘ao Chén replied, — “Your Majesty, my talents are but 


S oy unequal to the task you propose.’ 


L Sos Se arg hrs 


348 San Kuo, or 


“You are a trusted minister of state and you may not. 


really refuse this task,” said the Emperor. 
“I will use the little strength left me to accompany you,” 
‘said Wang Lang. 


“After the bounties I have received T cannot refuse,” replied 


Ts‘ao Chén. “But I must ask for an assistant.” 

“You have only to name him, O noble One,” said the 
Emperor. 
`- So Ts‘ao Chên named Kuo Huai, a ‘man of Yangchu, whose 
official rank was Marquis of Shet‘ing; he was also Governor 
of Yungchou. 

Thereupon Ts‘ ao Chén was appointed Commander-in- chief, 
and the ensigns of rank were conferred upon him. Kuo Huai 


was appointed his second and Wang Lang was created Instruc- . 


tor of the Army. He was then already old, seventy-six. 


The army of Ts‘ao Chên consisted of twenty legions, the - 
best men from both capitals. His brother, Ts‘ao Tsun, was 
made leader of the van with an assistant, Chu Tsan, “Opposer 
of Brigands.” The army moved out in the. eleventh year, and. 


the Emperor went with it to the outside of the west gate. 


Ts‘ao Chén marched by way of Ch‘angan and camped on the — 
west bank of the Wei River. At a council which the Com. | 
mander-in-chief called to consider the best. mode of attack, 
Wang Lang asked that he might be allowed to parley with 


the enemy. 


“Let the army be drawn up in complete battle order and | 


unfurl all the banners. I will go out and call a parley with 


Chuko Liang, at which I will make him yield to us without a 


blow, and the men of Shu shall march home again: 


~ 


Ts‘ao Chén agreed that the aged councellor at try. So! 


orders were given to take the early meal at the fourth watch 


and have the men fall in in their companies and files at day- 
light, all in review order. Everything was to be grand and 
imposing, the flags fluttering and the drums rolling, every ` 


man in his place. Just before this display a messenger was 


to deliver a declaration of war. 


Next day, when the armies were drana up facing each other — 


_ in front of Ch‘ishan, the men of Shu saw that their enemies 
were fine, bold men, very different from those that Hsiahou 
Mou had brought against them. Then àfter three rolls of the 
_drums the Minister Wang Lang mounted his horse and rode 

out, preceded by the Commander-in-chief and followed by 


the second in command.: The two leaders of the van remained 


in charge of the army. Then an orderly rode to the front. and 


called out in a loud voice, “We request the. leader of the 


opposing army to come out to a parley.” 


At this, an opening was made at the main r, taroueh. 


which came out Kuan Hsing and Chang Pao, who took up their 


: fiomance of the Three Kingdoms  — 349 


stations right and left. Then followed a guard, and beneath 
the standard, in the rcentre of the array, was seen a four- 
wheeled carriage wherein sat K‘ung-ming, with turban, white 
robe and black sash; and the feather fan was in his hand. He 
advanced with the utmost dignity. Looking up, he saw three 
commander’s umbrellas and flags bearing large white charac- 
In the middle was an aged figure, the Minister Wang 
ang. - oi 
_ “He intends to deliver an oration,” thought K‘ung-ming, . 
“I must answer as best I may.” : an . 

His carriage was then pushed to the front beyond the line - 
of battle, and he directed one of his officers to reply, saying, 
“The Prime Minister of the Hans is willing to speak with the 
Minister Wang.” | 
-~ Wang Lang advanced. K‘ung-ming saluted him from the 
carriage with raised hands, and Wang replied from horseback 
with an inclination. Then he began his oration. 

“Iam happy to meet you, noble Sir; your reputation has © 
been long known to me, Since you recognise the decrees 
of Heaven and are acquainted with the conditions of the 
world, why do you, without: any excuse, lead out such an 
army D i { > 

K‘ung-ming replied, “How mean you no excuse? I hold an 
edict to destroy rebels.” rie 
- Wang Lang replied, “Heaven has its mutations, and changes 
its instruments from time to time; but the supreme dignity 
comes at last to the man of virtue. This is the inevitable 
and immutable law. - In the days of Huan and Ling arose the 
Yellow Turban rebellion, and the whole earth was involved in 
wrangling and warfare. Later, in the periods Ch’u-P’ing and 
Chien-An, Tung Cho arose in revolt, a revolt which Li Ts‘ui 
and Kuo Ssu continued after he had been destroyed. Next 
Yiian Shu usurped the imperial style, and his brother Yiian 
Shao played the man of might and valour in the land of Yeh. 
Liu Piao occupied Chingchou, and Lü Pu seized and held Hsii 
District. Thus rebels have arisen in the land like swarms of 
wasps and bold spirits have followed their own will, to the 
danger of the supreme dignity and the peril of the people. 
Then the founder of our House, the Emperor Wu (Ts‘ac 
Ts‘ao), swept away rebellion purged the land and restored 
order. All hearts turned to him in gratitude, and the people- 
of the four quarters admired his virtue. He gained his 
position by no manifestation of force; it was simply the will of 
Heaven. His son and successor, the Emperor Wên, was wise 
and warlike, adequate to the great heritage and fitted to wield 
supreme power. Wherefore, in accordance with the will of 
Heaven and the desires of men, and following the example of 
the earliest emperors, he took his place as arbiter of the 
Central Government, whereby the myriad countries are 


350 a San kuo, or 


ordered and governed. Can any maintain that it was not the 
desire of Heaven and the wish of men? j 
“Noble Sir, you are a man of natural talent and acquired 
attainments, worthy, you say yourself, to be compared with 
Kuan and Yo. Why then place yourself in opposition to the- 
decree of Heaven and turn away from the desire of mankind to 
do this thing? You cannot be ignorant of the wise old saying 
that he who accords with the Heavens shall flourish, while he 
who opposes shall be destroyed. 
“Now the armies of Wei are countless legions,’ ane as 


-~ able leaders are beyond number. Can the glow-worm in the | 


parched stubble rival the glorious moon in the sky? If you 
will turn down your weapons and throw aside your armour 
and dutifully yield, you shall not lose your rank. The ie 
will have tranquillity and the people rejoice. Is not that a 
desirable consummation?” 

K‘ung-ming laughed. Said he, “I Tea ded. you as an old 


- and tried servant of the Han Dynasty and thought you. would 
- hold some noble discourse. Could I imagine you would talk 


so foully? I have a word to say that all the army may hear. © 
In the days of Huan and Ling the rule ‘of Han declined, the 
officers of state were the authors of evil, the government fell 
into confusion and misfortune settled on the country. Trouble | 
was rife in every quarter. The three rebels you mentioned — 
arose one after another, deposing the emperor and afflicting — 
the people. Because the household officers were corrupt and | 
foolish, and the court officials were as brute beasts, living only 
that they might feed; because men, wolfishly cruel in their 
hearts, currishly mean in their conduct, were in office one after 
another and slavish flatterers bending slavish knees confound- 
ed the administration, therefore the Throne became as a waste — 
heap and the people were trodden into the mire. I know all 
about you. You came from the eastern sea-shore; you got 
into office with a low degree; you properly aided your sovereign 
and supported the state, cared for the tranquillity of Han and > 


; magnified the Lius. But. could one have imagined that you 


would turn and assist rebels and enter into a plot to usurp the 
Throne? Indeed your crime is great and your guilt heavy. — 
Heaven and earth will not suffer you; the inhabitants of this 
country would devour you. But happily the design of Heaven > 
is to retain the glorious dynasty. The late Emperor Chao- 
Lieh continued the line in Hsich‘uan, and I have been 
entrusted by the present Emperor with the task of destroying © 
you rebels. Since you are such a false and specious minister 
you have but to hide your body and cover your head, concern - 
yourself about your belly and your back, but do not come out 
before the army to rave about the decrees of Heaven. You 
hoary-headed old fool! you grey-haired rebel! Mark you, 
to-day is your last day; this day even you descend to the Nine > 


Romante ot the Three Hingooms 351 


; Springs. How will you stand before the two score and four 


emperors’ of Han that you will meet there? Retire, you old 
rebel! Go tell your rebellious companions to come and fight 
_ one battle with me that shali decide the victory.” 


Fierce wrath filled the old man’s breast. With one despair- i 


_ing cry he fell to the earth dead. 
This exploit of K‘ung-ming’s has b&n lauded in verse :— 


In west Ts4 in, when the armies met in the field, 
He, the bold one, singly faced a myriad warriors, 
And with a simple weapon, just his cruel tongue, 
He did to death an old and. wicked man. 


After Wang Lang had fallen, King. -ming waved the fan 


toward Ts‘ao Chén and said, “As for you, I leave you alone for. 4 l 
this occasion. Go and get your army in order for to-morrow’s 


battle. ne 


The chariot bined and left the ground; both armies retired ; 
for that day. To Ts‘ao Chén fell the ‘melancholy duty of | 
rendering the last services to the aged counsellor and setting i 


his coffin on its journey to Changan. ) 
Then said the general Kuo. Huai, “Chuko Liang will 


certainly think the army occupied with mourning and make a. 


night attack. Let us anticipate him and set out an ambush 


about our camp. Let two bodies of our men be hidden outside 


and two others take the occasion to raid the a of the 

enemy.” 

2T thought of hi a scheme mek if said Ts‘ ao Chên. “t 

, exactly suits my plans.” 

` So the orders were given; the two leaders of the van were 
to take a legion each, get away by the rear of the mountain 

and look out for the passing of the men of Shu. When they 
had gone by, these two were to make for their camp. They 

were only to attempt a raid if the men of Shu had left. Then 


the Commander-in-chief arranged with his second each to | ; 


- lead a force and hide outside the camp. A few men only were 
to be left within to make a fire if the enemy were seen to be 
coming. And each captain set about his necessary prepra- 
- tions. 

When K‘ung-ming reached his tent he called to him Chao 
_ Yün and Wei Yen, and said to them, “You two are to make 

a night attack.” 

“Tsʻao Chén is a man of experience and will be on the look- 
out,” ventured Wei Yen. 

“But that is just what I want; I want him to know we shell 
attack to-night. He will then put some men in hiding in rear 
of Ch‘ishan, who will make for our camp as soon as they see 

us pass toward theirs. I am sending you to let yourselves 
be seen passing the hill, but you are to camp behind it and at 
bial cee Pha the men of Wei attack this camp you will 


352 San Kuo, or ; 


see a`signal. Then Wei Yen will hold the approach to the hill, ~ 


and Chao Yiin will make his way back in fighting order. He 
will meet the men of Wei returning and will let them pass on 

to you. You will attack. The enemy will assuredly fall to 
- fighting among themselves, and we shall conquer’ 

These two having gone away to carry out their vorin of 
the plan, he next called üp Kuan Hsing and Chang Pao: “You 
are to take each a legion and hide in the high road to the 
mountain. When the men of Wei come, let them pass and 
then march along the road they came by to the camp. they 
have just left.” 

These two having left, the plan concluded with placing four 
bodies of men in ambush about the camp. 

Within the camp the tents and shelters were left standing 
_ as if the camp was occupied, while wood and straw were heaped 
- up ready to give the signal. This done, K‘ung-ming and his 
officers retired to the rear of the camp to watch proceedings. 

On the side of Wei the two van-leaders, Ts‘ao Tsun and Chu 
Tsan, left at dusk and hastened toward the camp of Shu. 
About the second watch they saw men busily moving about in 
front of the hill. 


Ts‘ao’ Tsun thought to himself, “Commander Kuo Huai is- 


an excellent strategist and of wonderful prevision.” 


Then he hastened the march, and in the third watch reached 7 


the camp of Shu. He at once dashed into the enclosure, but 


only to find it totally deserted. Not a man was visible. At. 


once he knew he had stumbled into a trap, and began to 


withdraw. Then the flames sprang up. Chu Tsan arrived — 


ready to fight, and the two bodies of men, thrown into con- 


fusion, fought with each other till the two leaders met, when aS 


they found out they were fighting their own men. 


As they were restoring order, on came the four bodies of | 


men of Shu who had lain in ambush ready for them. The 


two leaders, with a handful of those nearest to them, ran away 


to get to the high road. But before long the rolling drums: 


announced another body of their enemy, and their flight was 
stopped by Chao Yiin. 


“Whither go ye, O rebel leaders’ 2 cried: hen “Step, for here 


is death.” 
But the two leaders of Wei still fled. Then came up a 


force led by Wei Yen and completed the defeat. The men of 


Wei were wholly beaten and ran away to their own camp. 


But the guard left in the camp thought they were the enemy | 


come to raid, so they lit the fires, and at this signal Ts‘ao Chén 
rushed up from one side and Kuo Huai from the other, and a 
fierce fight with their own men began. 


While this was going on, three cohorts of the men of Shu 


arrived from three points, and a great and confused battle — 


began. Themen of Wei were driven off and chased for ten li. 


e fight Wei 1 ae ae and K‘ung-ming gained 
iccess. Ts‘ao Chén and Kuo ‘Huai got eee ngin 
men and y ent back to as own camp.. 


CHAPTER VIC, 1 


CHUKO SMITES THE BARBARIANS IN A SNOWSTORM; 
SSUMA QUICKLY CAPTURES MENG Ta. 


The scheme by which Kuo Huai proposed to overcome the 
men of Shu he laid before his colleague, saying, “The Chang 
(Tangut) tribes have paid tribute regularly since the days of — 
the Founder of our House. The Emperor Wén (220-227) 
regarded them with favour. Now let us hold such points of — 
vantage as we may while we send secret emissaries to engage — 
their help in exchange for kindly treatment. We may get 
them to attack Shu and engage their attention while we gather 
a large army to smite them at another place. Thus attacking, 

how can we help gaining a great victory?” a 

A messenger was sent forthwith bearing letters to the 
barbarians. 

The prince of the Reeser Chiang was named Ch‘élichi. ; 
He had rendered yearly tribute since the days of Ts‘ao Tsao. — 
He had two ministers, one for civil the other for military — 
affairs, named, respectively, Yatan and Ytiehchi. The former 
was termed Prime Minister and the latter Chief Leader. 

The letter was accompanied by presents of gold and pearls, — 
arid when the messenger arrived he first sought Yatan, to — 
whom he gave gifts and whose help he begged. Thus he | 
gained an interview with the prince, to whom he presented ~ 
the letter and the gifts. The prince accepted both and called 
his counsellors to consider the letter. ; 

Yatan said, “We have had regular intercourse with the 
Wei country. Now that Ts‘ao Chén asks our aid and prom : 
an alliance we ought to accede to his request.” 

The prince agreed that it was so, and he ordered his wo: 
chief. ministers to raise an army of twenty-five legions of 
trained soldiers, archers and crossbowmen, spearmen and 
swordsmen, men who flung caltrops and men who hurled — 
hammers. Beside these various weapons the barbarians used — 
chariots covered with iron plates nailed on. They prepared > 
much grain and fodder and many spare weapons, all of which 
they loaded upon these iron-clad chariots. The chariots were ~ 
drawn by camels or teams of horses. The carts or chariots 
were known as iron chariots. 

The two leaders took leave of their prince and went 
straightway to Hsip‘ing Pass. The officer in command, Han 
Chén, at once sent intelligence to K‘ung-ming, who asked who: 


- Romance of the Three Kingdoms 


vould go to attack the Ch‘tang. Kuan Hsiang and Chang 
ao said they would go. f 

Then K‘ung-ming said, “You shall be sent; but as you are 
gnorant of the road and the people, Ma Tai shall accompany 
rou. we . 3 

To Ma Tai he said, “You know the disposition of the Chiang 

‘rom your long residence there; you shall go as guide.” 
_ They chose out five legions of veterans for the expedition. 
When they had marched many days and drew near their 
nemy, Kuan Hsing went in advance with a few horsemen and 
zot first sight of them from a hill. They were marching, 
he long line of iron chariots one behind another in close order. 
Then they halted and camped, their weapons piled all along 
he line of chariots like the ramparts of a moated city. Kuan 
studied them for a long time quite at a loss to think how to 
yvercome them. He came back to camp and consulted with 
lis two colleagues. ; 

Ma Tai said, “We will see to-morrow what they will do when 
we make our array, and discuss our plans when we know 
nore.” ; : 

So the next day they drew up their army in three divisions, 
<uan Hsing’s division being in the centre. Thus -they 
.dvanced. agg 

The enemy also drew up in battle order. Their military 
hief, Yiiehchi, had an iron mace in his hand and a carven bow 
lung at his waist., He rode forward on a curvetting steed 
voldly enough. Kuan Hsing gave the order for all three 
livisions to go forward. Then the enemy’s ranks opened in 
he centre and out rolled the iron chariots like a great wave. 
At the same time the barbarians shot arrows and bolts, an 
he men of Shu could not stand against them. 

The wing divisions retired, and the Ch“iang were thus 
abled to surround the centre. In spite of every effort, 
Kuan could not get free, for the iron chariots were like a city. 
wall and no opening could be found. The men of Shu were 
absolutely helpless, and Kuan Hsing made for the mountains 
n hope of finding a road through. : 

As it grew dark a Ch‘iang leader with a black flag approach- 
sd, his men like a swarm of wasps about him. Presently 
Kuan made out the iron mace of Yiiehchi, who cried out to 
im, “Youthful captain, flee not; I am the Chief Leader of the 
rmy.” ` 5 : 

But Kuan Hsing only hastened forward, plying his whip to 
urge his steed. Then he suddenly came on a deep gully, and - 
here seemed nothing but to turn and fight. But Kuan Hsing’s 
ourage turned cold at the sight of Ytehchi, and he leaped 
nto the gully. Yiiehchi come close and struck at him with the 
nace. Kuan avoided the blow but it fell upon his steed and 
mocked him over into water. Kuan went into the water too. 


-356 Han Ruo, or 


Presently he heard a great noise again behind kini Yüehchi 
and his men had found a way down into the gully and' were 
coming at him down the stream. -Kuan braced himself for a 
struggle i in the water. 

Then he saw someone on the bank fighting with, and driving 
off, the Ch‘iang.. Kuan Hsing gripped his sword and was 
waiting to get in a stroke at Yiiehchi as he came up when 
suddenly his enemy jumped out of the water and ran away. 
At once Kuan Hsing caught the steed he had left, led him up 
the bank and soon had him ready to mount. Then he girded 
on his sword, and was just getting on the horse when again 
appeared the captain he had seen before driving off his 
enemies. 

“Whoever this may be, he has saved my life,” thought Kuan 
Hsing. “I ought to make his acquaintance.” 

He accordingly pressed forward after his deliverer. As he 
drew nearer he saw, enveloped in mist, a man, evidently an 
officer of rank, with a dark red face and heavy eyebrows, 
wearing a green robe and a golden helmet. He wielded a huge 
sword such as was Black Dragon and rode a hare-coloured 
steed. From time to time he stroked a long flowing beard. 
Then he understood; it was his dead father, Kuan the Noble. 

Kuan Hsing was frightened. But his father pointed south- 
east and said, “My son, go quickly along that road and I will 
guard you to your camp.’ p 

With that the figure disappeared. Kuan took the road 
he had been shown and hastened along. About midnight he 
saw a cohort advancing to meet him, and recognised his cousin 
Chang Pao. 

“Have you seen my uncle?” asked Chang. 

“How did you know?” asked Kuan. 

“I was pursued by the iron chariots when I suddenly saw 
my uncle coming down from the sky, and he frightened the 
pursuers away. Then he told me to come along this road and 
rescue you. So I came.’ 

Thereupon Kuan Hsing related what had happened to pice. 
and they were both astonished. 

Hone quickly gained the camp, where Ma Tai welcomed 
them 

“I do not know how to overcome these men,” said Ma Tai. 
“Let me protect the camp while you go back and ask the 
minister what we should do.” ` 

The two started at once and made the best of their nea 
back. They told K‘ung-ming what had happened. He at once 
sent off Chao Ytin and Wei Yen to go into ambush. After this 
he went himself with three legions and certain officers and 
soon came to Ma Tai’s camp. The day after, from the summit 
of a hill, he surveyed the country and the enemy, who were 
coming on in a ceaseless stream. 


I 


y l fiomance of the Three Kingdoms j§§ 357. | a 
“Tt is not difficult,” said K‘ung-ming. . 

_ He called up Ma Tai and Chang I and gave them certain | 
orders. ee 
They having gone, he turned to Chang Wei, saying, “My (a 
friend, do you know how to overcome them?” Ne 
_ “The Ch‘tang only depend upon force or courage, not upon 
fine strategy,” was the reply. “ees 

“You know,” said K‘ung-ming, smiling. “Those dark clouds 
ma a strong north wind mean snow. Then I can do what 

wish.” ; 

The two leaders, Kuan and Chang, were sent into ambush, — 
and Chiang Wei went out to offer battle. But he was to retire 
before the iron chariots. At the entrance to the camp were 
displayed many flags, but the men that should serve under 
them were not there. ne 

It was now full winter, the twelfth month, and the snow had 
come. The army of Shu went out to offer battle, and when 
the iron chariots came forward they retired and thus led the 
Chiang to the gate of the camp, Chiang Wei going to its rear. 
The Ch‘iang came to the gate and stopped to look. They heard 
the strumming of a lute, but there were no soldiers there; the 
flags meant nothing. They told Yuiehchi, and he suspected 
some ruse. Instead of entering, he went back to the Minister 
Yatan and told him. j 

“Tt is a ruse,” said Yatan. “Chuko Liang’s base trick is 
the pretence of a pretence, and you had better attack.” 

So Yuehchi led his men again to the camp gate, and there 
he saw K‘ung-ming with a lute just getting into his chariot. 
With a small escort he went toward the back of'the camp. 
The barbarians rushed into the camp and caught sight of the 
light chariot again just as it disappeared into a wood. 

Then said Yatan, “There may be an ambush, but I think we 
need not be afraid of these men.” > = i 

“Hence they decided to pursue. Ahead of them they saw the 
division under Chiang Wei hastening off through the snow. 
Yiiehchi’s rage boiled up at this sight, and he urged his men to 
go faster. The snow had filled in the roads among the hills, 
making every part look like a level plain. j 

As they marched, one reported that some of the enemy 
were appearing from the rear of the hills. Some thought 
this meant an ambush, but Yatan said it did not matter, and 
they need not fear. He urged them to hasten. Nie 

Shortly after this they heard a roaring as if the hills were. 
rending asunder and the earth falling in, and the pursuers on | 5p 
foot fell one atop of the other into great pits that were invisible Be 
in the snow. The iron chariots, being close behind and hurry- Si 
ing along, could not stop, and they went into the pits also. 

Those still farther in the rear halted, but just as they were 
facing about, Kuan and Chang came up, one on either side, 


Reeth 


358 eos _ San Kuo, or 


and attacked. Myriads of bolts flew through the air. Then 
three other divisions arrived and confusion was worse than 
ever, . 
The Chang leader, Yüehchi, fled to the rear and was 
making for the mountains when he met Kuan Hsing, who slew 
him in the first encounter. The Minister Yutan was captured 
and taken to the main camp. The soldiers scattered. - 
Hearing of the capture of one leader, K‘ung-ming took his 
seat in his tent and bade them bring the prisoner. He told 
the guards to loose his bonds, and he had wine brought to 
refresh him and soothed him with kindly words. Yatan was 
grateful for this kindness, and felt more so when K‘ung-ming 
said, “My master, the Emperor of the Great Hans, sent*me to 
destroy those who are in revolt; why are you helping them? 


But I will release you, and you will return to your master and 


say that we are neighbours and we will swear an oath of 


everlasting friendship, and tell him to listen no more to the 


words of those rebels.” 

The minister was released and so were all the soldiers that 
had been captured, and all their stuff was given back to them. 
They left for their own country. 

The Chiang being thus disposed of, K‘ung-ming quickly 
marched again to Ch‘ishan. He-sent letters to the capital 


announcing his success. 


Meanwhile Ts‘ao Chén anxiously waited for news of his 
expected allies. Then a scout came in with the news that the 
men of Shu had broken camp and were marching away. 

“That is because the Ch‘iang have attacked,” said Kuo Huai 
gleefully, and the two made ready to pursue. 

Ahead of them the army of Shu seemed to be in confusion. 
The van-leader Ts‘ao Tsun led the pursuit. Suddenly, as he 
pressed on, there came a roll of drums, followed by the 
appearance of a cohort led by Wei Yen, who cried, “Stop! 
you rebels.” 

But Ts‘ao Tsun did not obey the summons. He dashed 
forward to meet the attack. He was killed in the third 
encounter. His colleague Chu Tsan in similar fashion fell 
in with a cohort under Chao Yiin, to whose long spear he soon 
fell victim. The loss of these two made the Commander-in- 
chief and his second hesitate, and they made to retire. 

But before they could face about they heard the drums of 
an army in their rear, and Kuan Hsing and Chang Pao came 


` out and surrounded them. They made a stand for a time, 


but were soon worsted and fled. The army of Shu pursued 
the beaten enemy to the banks of the River Wei, where they 
took possession of the enemy’s camp. . 

Ts‘ao Chén was greatly chagrined at his defeat and sad at 
the loss of his captains. He sent a report of his misfortune 
to his master and asked for reinforcements. 


Romance of th Three ‘hingdome 859 


at the court of Wei one of the ministers told the story of 


: Getent of Ts‘ao Chén and the allies and asked the king to 
decide upon the next step. Jui was alarmed and asked for 
someone to say how to drive off the victorious foe. Thereupon 

Hua Hsin said, “It will be necessary for Your Majesty to go 


in person. You should call together all the nobles, and each 
will have to exert himself. Unless this is done’ the capital 
will be lost and the whole country be in danger.” 

But Chung Yu opposed him. Said he, “The knowledge of — 


every leader must exceed that of those led; then only will he - 
be able to control them. Sun, the military writer, sums it up 


very briefly : “Know the enemy, know thyself; and every battle 


“Is a victory... 1 know Ts‘ao Chén has had great experience 
“in the field, but he is no match for Chuko Liang. Still there 
-is such a match, and I will pledge my whole family that he 


will succeed. But Your Majesty may be unwilling to listen 
to me.’ 

_ King Jui replied, “You are a minister of high rank and old. 
If you know any wise man able to repel these men of Shu, 


-call him without delay and ease my mind.” 


Then said Chung Yu, “When Chuko Liang decided to invade 


us he was afraid of the one man I will name. Wherefore he 


spread calumnies eoncerning him, raising: suspicion in Your 
‘Majesty’s mind that you might dismiss him. That done, he 
invaded. ~ Now employ this man again, and the enemy will 


retire.” 


<- “Who is it?” asked Jui. 
“I mean the great general Sstma I.” 
“I have long regretted my action,” said Jui.. “Where now 


is friend Ssima?’ 


“He is at the city of Wan, idle.” 
An edict was prepared recalling Sstma and restoring him 
to his rank and titles, and conferring upon him the new title 


~ Commander-in-chief, “Pacificator of the West.” The troops 


of Nanyang were set in motion and King Jui led them to 
Chiangan. At the same time he ordered Ssuma I to be there 
` to meet him on a certain day. And the orders were sent by 


a swift messenger to the city of Wan. 


At this time K‘ung-ming greatly rejoiced at the success he 
had had. He was at Ch‘ishan, busy with plans for other 


_ victories, when Li Yen, who was still in command at Jungan, 


N 


sent his son Li Fêng to the camp. K‘ung-ming concluded 
that such a visit could only mean that Wu had invaded them, 
and he was in consequence cast down. However, he summon- 
ed Li Féng to his tent, and when asked the object of his 
mission Li replied that he had joyful news to impart. 
- “What is your joyful news?” said K‘ung-ming. 

“Formerly Méng Ta deserted to Wei, but only because he 


could do nothing else. Ts‘ao P‘ei thought much of his cap- 


360: San kuo, or 


abilities, treated him most generously, kept him at his side,. a 
gave him titles and offices and so on. But when P‘ei died all’ 
was changed. In Ts‘ao Jui’s court were many who were. 


jealous of his influence and power, so that he enjoyed no 


` peace. He used to talk about being originally one of the Shu 
leaders and he would be forced to do so-and-so. Lately he- 


has sent several confidants with letters to my father asking 


that he would state his case to you as to the happenings when > 


the five armies came upon Shu. Now he is at Hsinch’éng,. 
and, hearing you are attacking Wei, he proposes to lead the- 
men of the three districts about Chinch‘éng, Hsinch‘éng 
and Shangyung to attack Loyang while you attack Ch‘angan, 


his messenger and his letters.” 
This was good news, and the bearer was fittingly rewarded. 


But at that moment came the news that Ts‘ao Jui was leading” 


an army to Ch‘angan and had recalled’ the banished Ssuma I 
to office. This piece of bad news saddened K‘ung-ming not 
a little. He told Ma Su, who at once proposed the plan to: 


` whereby both capitals will be taken. I have brought with me | 


capture Ts‘ao Jui on the road, and there would be an end | 


of him. 
“Do you think. I fear him?” said K‘ung-ming bitterly, 
“But the recall of Sstma I.is another matter; that troubles. 


me. And Meng Ta’s proposal will avail nothing if he comes. ` 


across this man. Méng Ta is no match for him. He will be 


captured, and, if he should be, there will be no capital for us.” 


“Why not put Méng Ta on his guard then?” said Ma Su. 


K‘ung-ming decided to write, and the letter was despatched — si 
immediately. Mêng was then at Hsinch’éng, anxiously expect- 
_ ing the return of his last confidential messenger, when, one — 


day, the man returned and gave him this letter from Kung- 


ming himself :— 


“Your last letter has convinced me of your loyal rectitude, £ ; 


and I still remember. with joy our old friendship. If your 
plan succeed you will certainly stand in the first rank of- 


most worthy ministers. But I scarcely need impress upon you 


the extreme necessity for most perfect secrecy. Be very care- | 
ful whom you trust. Fear everyone, guard against everyone. 
This news of the recall of Ssuma I and the proposed junction. 


of armies at Ch‘angan is very serious, and if a word reaches — 


Sstma he will come to you first. Therefore take every 
precaution and do not regard this as a matter of unimport- 
ance.’ 

“They say K‘ung-ming leaves nothing to chance,” said 
Méng, smiling as he read. ‘This proves it.” 


He lost no time in preparing a reply, which he sent’ also by 


a trusty messenger. This letter was like this:—“I acknow- © q 


ledge your most valuable advice, but is it possible that I 
should be remiss? . For my part I do not think the Sstma. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms. 361 AiG 


~ affair need cause anxiety, for Wanch‘eng is eight hundred li 
from Loyang and twelve hundred li from here. Should he 
_ hear anything, it would take a month to send a memorial and 
geta reply. My ramparts here are strong and my forces 
- posted in the best positions. Let him come! Iam not afraid 


of the result, so you, O Minister, need feel no anxiety. You 


have only to wait for the good news of success.” 


-K‘ung-ming read the letter and threw it on the ground, 


_ stamping his foot with rage. 


- “You are a dead man,” said he; ; “a victim of Ssuma L 
“Why do you say that?” said Ma Su. 
“What does the book say? ‘Attack betore tne: enemy is 


prepared; do what he does not expect.’ What is, the use of 
© reckoning upon a month’s delay for sending up a memorial? 


Ts‘ao Jui’s commission has already gone and Ssima may 
strike whom he will. He will not have to wait to memorialise. 


_ Ten days after he hears. of Méne’s defection he will be upon 


him with an army, and Méng Ta will be helpless.” 
The others agreed. However, K‘ung-ming sent the messen- 


ger back again to say that if the matter had not yet actually 
_ started no other person was to be told of it, for if anyone 


č knew it would certainly come to nothing. And the man left. 


- for Hsinch‘éng. 


m 


% 


-~ In his idle retreat in Wan City Sstma had heard of his. 


- master’s ill-success against the armies of Shu, and the news 


made him very sad. He lifted up his eyes and sighed. 


=` He had two sons, Shih the elder and Chao, both clever and 
= ambitious, and both earnest students of military books. One 


= day they were present when their father seemed very cast. 
i on, and the elder asked his father the reason. 


- “You would not understand,” said the father. __ 
“I think you are grieving because the lord of Wei does not 
use you,” replied Ssuma Shih. 
“But they will send for you presently,” said the younger son. 
The prophecy was not long in fulfilment, for even then the 


bearer of the command stood at the gate, and the servant 


announced a messenger from the court bearing a commission. 

As soon as he heard its terms, Ssuma set about ordering the 
armies of his own city. Soon came a messenger from the 
Prefect of Chinch‘éng with a secret message for Sstma I. 
He was taken into a private chamber, and his message was 
that Méng Ta was on the point of rebellion. The authority 
for this was a confidential fried, Li Fu, and a nephew, Te 


Hsien. ) 


Ssùma I smote his forehead. 
“This is the Emperor’s great good fortune, hen as heaven 


itself. Chuko Liang’s army is at Ch‘ishan already, and if he 


had got these places all men’s courage would fail. The 
ak emiperor must go to Ch‘angan, and if he does not use me soon 


Ñ 


362 San Huo, or 


Méng Ta will carry out his plan; his plot will succeed and 
both capitals will be lost.. This fellow is surely in league 
with the enemy, and if I can seize him before he makes any 
move, that will damp Chuko’s spirits and he will retreat.” 


His elder son remarked that it would be necessary to 


memorialise. i 

“No,” replied his father ; “that would take a month, and 
delay would mean failure.” 

Sstma gave orders to prepare to advance by double marches 
and threatened death to all loiterers. In order to avert suspi- 
cion, he sent letters to Méng Ta in Hsinch‘éng to tell him to 
prepare to join the expedition. 

Sstma I quickly followed this messenger. After two days’ — 
march the general Hsü Huang came over the hills and told ` 
Sstma that the Emperor had arrived at Ch’angan to lead an 
expedition against Shu, and he asked whither the Commander- 
in-chief was “then going. . 

Sstuma, in a low voice, said to him, “Mêng Ta is on the 
verge of rebellion, and I am going to seize him.” 

“Let me go as your van-leader,” said Hsü. 

So Hsü Huang’s men were joined to the expedition and 
marched in the van. The sons of Sstuma I brought up the 
rear. 

Two days farther on some of the scouts captured Mêng 
Ta’s confidential messenger, and with him K‘ung-ming’s reply. ~ 


Sstuma promised the man his life if he would tell all he knew. — ae 


So he told all about the letters and messages he had taken from 


one to the other. When Ssùma read the captured letter he 


remarked that all able people thought the same way. 3 

“Our plan would have been foiled by K‘ung-ming’s clever- 
ness unless, by the good luck of the Emperor, this man had- 
been captured. Now Mêng Ta will þe helpless.” 

The army pressed on still more rapidly. 

Méng Ta had arranged for his stroke with the Prefects of 
the other two cities and was awaiting the way he had fixed. 
But the other two, Shén I and Chén Ch‘én, were only pretend- 
ing to abet. him, although they went on training and drilling 
their men to keep up appearances till the men of Wei could 
arrive. To Méng Ta they pretended delay in their transport 
as the reason for being unable to start. And he believed them. 

Just then Liang Ch‘i came, and when he had been cere- 
moniously received, he produced the order from Sstuma I and 
said, “The Commander-in-chief has received the edict of the 
Emperor to call in all the forces in this district, and he has 
sent me to direct you to hold your men in readiness to 
march.” 

“On what day does the Commander-in- chief start?” asked 
Méng Ta. 

“He is just about starting now,” replied the messenger. 


i 


Romance of the Three Ringromg 363 


_ Méng smiled inwardly, for, this being so, he saw success 
before him. He gave a banquet to Liang, and after he had 
set him on his way he sent to his fellow conspirators to say 
the first step must be taken next day by exchanging the 
_banners of Wei for those of Han and marching to attack 
Loyang. l ; 

Then the watchmen reported a great cloud of dust in the 
distance as though an army was coming. Mêng Ta was 
surprised and went up on the ramparts to see for himself. ` 
Soon he made out the banner of Hsü Huang leading. He ran 
down from the wall and in a state of trepidation ordered the 
raising of the drawbridge. Hsü Huang still came on and in 
due time stood on the bank of the moat. 

Then he called out, “Let the traitor Mêng Ta yield quickly!” 

Méng Ta, in a rage, opened upon him with arrows, and Hsii 
Huang was wounded in the forehead. He was helped to a 
place of safety while the arrows flew down in great numbers. 
When the men of Wei retired, Meng opened the gates and 
went in pursuit. But the whole of Sstma’s army soon came 
up, and the banners stood so thick that they hid the sun. 

“This is what K‘ung-ming foresaw,” said Méng despairingly. 

The gates were closed and barred. 

Meanwhile the wounded captain, Hsti, had been borne to his 
tent, where the arrow head was extracted and the physician 
attended to him. But that night he died. He was fifty-nine. 
-= His body was sent to Loyang for burial. 

Next day, when Méng went up on the wall, he saw the city 
was entirely surrounded as with a girdle of iron. He was 
greatly perturbed and could not decide what to do. Presently 

he saw two bodies of troops coming up, their banners bearing 
the names of his fellow conspirators. He could only conclude 
that they had come to his help, so he opened the gates to them 
and went out to fight. ae 

“Rebel, stay!’ cried they both as they came up. 

Realising that they had been false, he turned and galloped - 
toward the city, but a flight of arrows met him, and the two 
who had betrayed him, Li Fu and Téng Hsien, began to revile 

“We have already yielded the city,” they cried. 
~- Then Méng Ta fled. But he was pursued, and as he and his 
horse were both exhausted he was speedily overtaken and 
slain. They exposed his head, and his soldiers submitted. 
Ssttma was welcomed at the open gates. The people were 
pacified, the soldiers were rewarded and, this done, a report 
of their success was sent to Ts‘ao Jui. ; è 

Ts‘ao Jui ordered the body of Mêng Ta to be exposed in the - 
market place of Loyang, and he promoted the two Shêns and 

‘gave them posts in the army of Ssuma. He gave the two 
betrayers command of the cities of Hsinch‘éng and Shangyung. 


364 . Ban hue 


Then Sstma marched to Ch‘angan and camped. The leader 
entered the city to have audience with his master, by whom 
he was most graciously received. - 

“Once I doubted you,” said Ts‘ao Jui; “but then I did not. 
understand, and I listened to mischief-makers. +I regret it. 
You have preserved both capitals by the punishment of this. 
traitor.” : 

Sstma replied, “Shén I gave We information of the intended 
revolt and thought to memorialise Your Majesty. But there- 
would have been a long delay, and so I did not await orders, 
put a forth at once. Delay would have played into Chuko’s. 

ands.” 

Then he handed in K‘ung-ming’s letter to Méng Ta, and. 
when the Emperor had read that he said, “You are wiser than 
both the great strategists.” 

He conferred upon the successful leader a pair of golden 
axes and the privilege of taking action in important matters. 
without first obtaining his master’s sanction. 

When the order was given to advance against the enemy, 


Sstuma asked permission to name his leader of the van, ang 


nominated Chang Ho. 
“Just the man I wished to send,” said Ts‘ao J ui, smiling. 
And Chang Ho was appointed. 


By strategy the leader shows his skill; 
He needs bold fighting men to work his will. 


The result of the campaign will appear in the next chapter. i ; 


CHAPTER VC. 


_ MA Sv’s WRANGLING Loses CHIEHTING; 
4 -K‘UNG-MING’S LUTE REPULSES SSUMA. ' 
Pau sending Chang Ho as van-leader, Ts‘ao Jui NONE 


two other captains, Hsin P‘i and Sun Li, to assist Ts‘ao Chén. 
Each led five legions. Ssima’s army was twenty legions 


strong. They marched out through the pass and made a cam» 


When encamped, the Commander-in-chief summoned the 
leader of the van to his tent and admonished him, saying, “A 
characteristic of Chuko Liang is his most diligent carefulness ; : 
he is never hasty. If I were in his place I should advance 
through the Tzuwu Valley to capture Ch‘angan and so save 
much time. It is not that he is unskilful, but he fears lest 
that plan might miscarry, and he will not sport with risk. 
‘Therefore he will certainly come through the Hsieh Valley, 


taking Meich‘éng on the way. That place captured, he will 


i _ divide his force into two, one part to take Chi Valley. I 


have sent orders to guard Meich‘êng strictly and on no account 


Kà to let its garrison go out to battle. The captains Sun Li and 
_ Hsin P‘i are to command the Chi Valley entrance, and should 
the enemy come they are to make a sudden attack.” 


“By what road will you advance?” asked Chang. 

“I know a road west of Ts‘inling valley called Chieht‘ing, on 
which stands the city Liehliuch‘eng. These two places are 
the throat of Hanchung. Chuko Liang will take advantage 
of the unpreparedness of Ts‘ao Chén and will certainly come 
in by this way. I and you will go to Chieht‘ing, whence it is 


| a short distance to Yenp‘ing Pass, and when K‘ung-ming 


hears that the road through Chieht‘ing is blocked and his 
supplies cut off, he will know that Shénsi is in danger, and 
will retire without losing a moment into Hanchung. I shall 
smite him on the march, and I ought to gain a complete victory. 
if he should not retire, then I shall block all the smaller roads 
and so stop his supplies. A month’s starvation will kill off 
the men of Shu, and Chuko will be my prisoner.” 

Chang Ho took in the scheme and expressed his admiration 


of the prescience of his chief. 
Sstma continued, “However, it is not to be forgotten that. - 
Chuko is quite different from Méng, and you, as leader of the 


van, will have to advance with the utmost care. You must 


impress upon your captains the importance of reconnoitring a 


long way aneng and only advancing when they are sure there 


366 Zan Kuo, or 


is no ambush. The least remissness will make you the victim 
of some ruse of the enemy.’ 

Chang Ho, having received his instructions, marche ‘away. 
Meanwhile a spy had come to K‘ung-ming in Ch‘ishan with 
news of the destruction of Méng Ta and the failure of his 
conspiracy.. Ssuma, having succeeded there, had gone to 
Ch‘angan when he had marched through the pass. 

K‘ ung- ming was distressed. “Mêng’s destruction was cer- 
tain,” said he. “Such a scheme could not remain secret. 
Now Ssiima will try for Chiehtʻi ing and block the one road 
essential to us.’ 

So Chieht‘ing had to be defended, and K‘ung-ming asked 
who would go. Ma Su offered himself instantly. K‘ung- 
ming urged upon him the importance of his task. “The place 
is small, but of very great importance, for its loss would 
involve the loss of the whole army. You are deeply read in 
all the rules of strategy, but the defence of this place is difficult, 
since it has no wall and no natural defences.’* 

“I have studied the books of war since I was a boy, and I 
may say I know a little of the art of war,” Ma replied. “Why 
alone is Chieht‘ing so difficult to hold?” 

“Because Sstma I is an exceptional man, and also he has a 
famous second in Chang Ho as leader of the van. I fear you | 
may not be a match for him.” 

Ma replied, “To say nothing of these two, I would Hot mind, 
if Ts‘ao Jui himself came against me. If I fail, then I beg you 
to behead my whole family.” nak 

“There is no jesting in war, 

“I will give a written pledge.” 

The general agreed, and a written pledge was given and 
placed on record. 

K‘ung-ming continued, “I shall give you two krne and a 
half of veterans and also send an offcer of rank to assist you.” 

Next he summoned Wang P‘ing and said to him, “As you are 
a careful and cautious man I am giving you a very respensible 
position. You are to hold Chieht‘ing with the utmost tenacity. 
Camp there in the most commanding position so that the 
enemy cannot steal by. When your arrangements are com- 
plete, draw a plan of them and a'map of the local topography 
and let me see it. All my dispositions have been carefully 
thought out and are not to be changed. If you can hold this 
successfully it will be of the first service in the oone of 
Ch‘angan. So be very, very careful.” 

After these two had gone and K‘ung-ming had reflected for 
a long time, it occurred to him that there might be some slip 
between his two leaders, so he called Kao Hsiang to him and 
said, “North-east of Chieht‘ing is a city named Liehliuch‘éng 
and near it an unfrequented hill path. There you are to camp 
and make a stockade. I will give you a legion for this task, — 


9 


said K‘ung-ming. 


fomance of the Three Kingdoms 367 


and if Chieht‘ing should be threatened you may go to.the 
rescue.’ 

- After Kao Hsiang had left, and as Sa E E knew his 
man was not a match for`his opponent Chang Ho, he decided 
there ought to be additional strength on the west in order to 
make Chieht‘ing safe. So he summoned Wei Yen and bade 
him lead his troop to the rear of Chieht‘ing and camp,there. 

But Wei Yen thought this rather a slight, and said, “As 
leader of the van I should go first against the enemy; why am 
I sent to a place where there is nothing todo?” 

“The leadership of the van is really a second-rate task. 
Now I am sending you to support Chieht‘ing and take post on 
the most dangerous road to Yenp‘ing Pass. You are the chief. 

keeper of the throat of Hanchung. It is'a very responsible 

post and not at all an idle one. Do not so regard it and spoil 
_ my whole plan. Be particularly careful.” 
-~ Wei Yen, satisfied now that he was not being slighted, went 
his way. 
K‘ung-ming’s mind was at rest, and he called up Chao Yiin 
and Téng Chih, to whom he said, “Now that Sstma I is in 
command of the army the whole outlook is different. Each of 
you will lead a force out by Chi Valley and move about so as 
to mislead the enemy. Whether you meet and engage them 
-or not you will certainly cause them uneasiness. I am going 
to lead the main- army through Hsieh Valley to Meich‘éng. 
- If I can capture that, Ch‘angan will fall.” 
For this march Chiang Wei was appointed leader of the van. 
When Ma Su and Wang P‘ing had reached Chieht‘ing and 
- saw what manner of place it was, Ma Su smiled, saying, “Why 
was the minister so extremely anxious? How would the Wet 
armies dare to come to such a hilly place as this?” 

Wang P‘ing replied, “Though they might not dare to come, 
we should set our camp at this meeting of many roads.” 

So Wang ordered his men to fell trees and build a strong 
stockade as for a permanent stay. 

But Ma Su had a different idea. “What sort of a place is 
a road to make a camp in? Here is a hill standing solitary 
and well wooded. It is a heaven-created point of vantage, 
and we will camp on it.” 

“You are wrong, Sir,” replied Wang. “If we camp on the 
yoad and build a strong wall the enemy cannot possibly get 
past. If we abandon this for the hill, and the men of. Wei 
come in force, we shall be surrounded, and how then be 
“safe?” 

“You look at the thing like a woman,” said Ma Su, laughing. 
“The rules of war say that when one looks down from a 
superior position one easily overcomes the enemy. If they 


~ come I will see to it that not a breastplate ever goes back 


again.” 


SRN 


368 Dan fuo, or . 


“I have followed our general in many a campaign, and 
always he has carefully thought out his orders. Now I have 


studied this hill carefully, and it is a critical point. If we 


camp thereon and the enemy cut off our water supply we shail 
have a mutiny. 


“No such thing,” said Ma Su. “Sun Wu says that victory © 


lies im desperate positions. If they cut off our water will not _ 


our men be desperate and fight to the death? Then everyone 
of them will be worth a hundred. I have studied the books, 
and the minister has always asked my advice. Why do you 
presume to oppose me?” 

“Tf you are determined to camp on the hill, then give me part 
of the force to camp there on the west so that I can support 
you in case the enemy come.’ 

But Ma Su refused. Just then a lot of the inhabitants of 
the hills came running along saying that the Wei soldiers had 
come. 

Wang was still bent on going his own way, and so Ma said 
to him, “Since you will not obey me, I will give you half a legion 


and you can go and make your own camp, but when I report — 
my success to the minister you shall have no share of the 4 


merit.” 


Wang P‘ing marched about ten li from the hill and made — 
his camp. He drew a plan of the place and sent it quickly to ~ 
K‘ung-ming with a report that Ma Su had camped on the hill. | 

Before Ssuma marched, he sent his younger son to recon- 
noitre the road and to find out whether Chieht‘ing had a — 
garrison. He had returned with the information that there 


was a garrison. 


“Chuko Liang is rather more than human,” said his father 


regretfully when the son gave in his report. “He is too much 
for me.’ 

“Why are you despondent, father? I think Chieht‘ing is not 
so difficult to take.” 

“How dare you utter such bold words?” 


“Because I have seen. There is no camp on the road, but 


the enemy are camped on the hill.” 


This was glad news. “If they are on the hill then Heaven | 


means a victory for me,” said his father. 
Sstma changed into another dress, took a small escort and 


rode out to see for himself. ; The moon shone brilliantly, and ` & 


he rode to the hill whereon was the camp and looked all round 
it, thoroughly reconnoitring the neighbourhood. Ma Su saw 
him, but only laughed. 

“If he has any luck he will not try to surround this hill,” 
said Ma, 

He issued an order to his captains that in case the enemy’ 
came they were to look to the summit for a signal with a red 
flag, when they should rush down on all sides. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 369 


Ssma I returned to'his camp and sent out to enquire who: 
commanded in Chieht‘ing. They told him Ma Su, brother of © 


Ma Liang. 


“A man of false reputation and very ordinary ability,” kaid 
Ssuma. “If K‘ung-ming uses such as he, he will Tal ets 


Then he asked if there were any other camps near the place, | 


and they told him Wang Ping was about ten li off. Where- 
fore Chang Ho was ordered to go and check Wang P‘ing. > 
This done, the hill was surrounded and the road to the water 
supply was blocked. -Lack of water would cause a mutiny, 
and when that occurred it would be time,to attack. Chang 

Ho marched out and placed himself between Wang P‘ing and 

A oe Then Ssiima led the main body to attack the mar on 

all sides. 

From the summit of his hill Ma Su could see the hanier of 
his enemy all round, and the country about was full of men. 

-Presently the hemming in was complete, and the men of Shu 

became dejected. They dared not descend to attack although 
the red flag signalled for them to move. The captains stood 

huddled together, no one daring to go first. Ma Su was 
- furious. He cut down two officers, which frightened the 
others to the point of descending and making one desperate 
- rush. But the men of Wei would not fight with them, and 
they re-ascended the hill. 
Ma Su saw that matters were going ill, so he feened orders 
_ to bar the gates and defend till help should come. 

À When Wang P‘ing saw the hill surrounded he started to go 
to the rescue, but Chang Ho checked him, and after exchanging 
a half score encounters Wang was compelled to retire whence 

he had come. X 
` The Wei men kept a close siege. The men in the hill camp, 

having no water, were unable to prepare food, and disorder 

broke out. The shouting was audible at the foot of the hill 
and went on far into the night. The men on the south face 
got out of hand, opened the gates and surrendered. The men 
of Wei went round the hill setting fire to the wood, which led 
to still greater confusion in the beleaguered garrison. At last 

Ma Su decided to make a dash for safety toward the west. 

Sstima allowed him to pass, but Chang Ho was sent to pursue 
and chased him for thirty lz. But then there came an 
unexpected roll of drums. Chang Ho was stopped by ‘ile 

Yen while Ma Su got past. Whirling up his sword, Wei Y 
_ dashed toward Chang, who retired within his ranks and fled. 
` Wei followed and drove Chang backward toward Chieht‘ing. 
~ The pursuit continued for fifty li, and then Wang found 
himself inan ambush, Ssttma I on one side and his son on the 
other. They closed in behind Wei Yen, and he was surrounded. 
_ Chang Ho then turned back, and the attack was now on three 
sides. Wei Yen lost many men, and all his ators failed to 


a A 
IDN 


Fi A 
E TEE ae 


- G 


370 an Kuo, or 


get him clear of the press. Then help appeared in the person — 


of Wang P‘ing. 


“This is life for me,” said Wei Yen as he saw Wang coming ~ 


up, and the two forces joined in a new attack on the men of 
-Wei. So the men of Wei drew off, while Wei Yen and Wang 
P‘ing made all haste back to their own camps—only to find 
them in the hands of the enemy. 

Shén I and Shén Tan then rushed out and drove Wei and 
Wang toward Liehliuch‘éng. There they were received by 
Kao Hsiang, who „had come out to meet his unfortunate 
colleagues. ; 

When Kao Hsiang heard their story, he at once proposed a 
night attack on the Wei camp and the recovery of Chieht‘ing. 


They talked this over on the hillside and arranged their plans, ` 


after which they set themselves to wait till it was dark enough 
to start. > 


They set out along three roads; and Wei Yen was the first | 


to reach Chieht‘ing. Not a soldier was visible, which looked | 


suspicious. He decided to await the arrival of Kao Hsiang — 
and they both speculated as to the whereabouts of their enemy. 
They could find no trace, and the third army had not yet 
come up. 


Suddenly a bomb exploded, and a brilliant flash lit up the i 


sky; drums rolled as though the earth was rending, and the — 


{ 


` enemy appeared. In a trice the armies of Shu found them i 


selves hemmed in. Both leaders pushed here and shoved © 


there, but could find no way out. Then most opportunely — 
from behind a hill rolled out a thunder of drums, and there © 


was Wang P‘ing coming to their, rescue. Then the three 
forced their way to Liehliuch‘éng: But just as they drew 
near:to the rampart another body of men came up, which, 


i 
i 


` from the writing on their flags, they recognised as Kuo Huai’s | y 


army. 

Now Kuo was here from unworthy motives. He had talked 
over Sstma’s recall with his colleague Ts‘ao Chén, and, fearing 
lest the recalled general should acquire too great glory, Kuo 
had set out to anticipate him in the capture of Chieht‘ing. 
Disappointed when he heard of his rival’s success there, he 


had decided to try a similar exploit at Liehliuch‘éng. So he — 


had diverted his march thither. 

He engaged the three Shu armies at once and slew so many 
of them that at Wei Yen’s suggestion they all left for Yang- — 
p‘ing Pass, which might be in danger. 

Kuo Huai, pleased with his success, gathered in his army 
after the victory and said to his oficers! “T was disappointed 
at Chieht‘ing, but we have taken this place, and that is merit — 
of high order.” 


Thereupon he proceeded to the city gates. Just as he 


arrived, a bomb exploded on the wall, and, looking up, he saw 


“Romance of the Three Kingdoms 371 


wee Daa bedeeked with flags. On the largest banner he 
, aad the name of the general, Ssima I. At that moment 
= Ssitima himself lifted a board that hung in front of him and 
_ looked over the breast-high rail. He looked down and smiled, 

` saying, “How late you are, friend Kuo!” 
Kuo was amazed. “He is too much for me,” said he. So 


| “he resignedly entered the city and went to pay his respects to 


his successful rival. 
- Sstima was gracious, and said, “K‘ung-ming must retire now 
that Chieht‘ing is lost. You join forces with Ts‘ ao Chen and 
follow up quickly.” 

Sstma called to him his van-leader, and said, “Those two 
- thought we should win too great merit, so they tried to get 
ahead of us here. We are not the only ones who desire to 
achieve good service and acquire merit, but we had the good 
fortune to succeed. I thought the enemy would first try to 
occupy Yangp‘ing Pass, and if I went to take it then Chuko 
would fall on our rear. It says in the books on war that one 
should crush a retreating enemy not pursue broken rebels, 


$0 you may go along the by-roads and smite those withdrawing | 
Li Tene the Chi Valley, while I oppose the Hsieh Valley army. 


If they flee, do not fight, but just hold them up on the road and 
capture the baggage train.” 

Chang marched away sah half the force to carry out his 
rt of this plan, while Sstima gave orders to go to Hsieh 


important as a dépôt of stores for the Shu army, beside 
commanding the road to the three districts of Nanan, T‘ienshui 
and Anting. If this place could be captured the other three 
could be recaptured. © 
Sstima left Shén Tan and Shén I to guard Liehliuch‘éng and 
marched his army toward the Hsieh Valley. 
- After K‘ung-ming had sent Ma Su to guard Chieht‘ing he 
was undecided what to do next. Then arrived the messenger 
-~ with the plan prepared by Wang P‘ing. K‘ung-ming went 
over to his table and opened the letter. As he read it he smote 
the table in wrath. 
KN “Ma Sws foolishness has destroyed the army,” he cried. 
“Why are you so disturbed, O Minister?” asked those near. 


“By this plan I see that we have lost command of an- i 


important road. The camp has been made on the hill, and 


if the Wei men come in force our army will be surrounded : 
and their water supply interrupted. In two days the men 


will be in a state of mutiny, and if Chieht‘ing shall be lost 
_ how shall we be able to retire?” 3 
Here the Chang-shih Yang I said, “I am none too clever I 
know, but let me go to replace Ma Su.” 
K‘ung-ming explained to him how and where to camp, but 
_ before he could sae a saa toate ie brought the news of the loss 


pe lley by way of Hsich‘éng, which though a small place, was 


372 Bo Ban Kua, or. 


of Chieht‘ing and Liehliuch‘éng. This made K‘ung-ming very _ 
sad, and he sighed, saying, “The whole scheme has come to. 
nought, and it is my fault.” 

He sent for Kuan and Chang, and said, “You two. take three - 
rompanies of good men and go along the road. to Wukungshan. ~ 
If you fall in with the enemy do not fight, but beat drums and 


raise a hubbub and make them hesitate and be doubtful, so ~ 


that they may retire. Do not Pe but when they retire 
make for Yangp‘ing Pass.” 

‘He also sent Chang I to put Ghienko in order fon retreat 
and issued instructions for making ready to march. Ma Tai 
and Chiang Wei were told to guard the rear, but they were to 


go into ambush in the valleys till the army was on the march. 3 


Trusty men were sent with the news to T“ienshui, Nanan and — 
Anting that the officers, army and people might go away into — 
Hanchung. He also sent to remove to a ace of safety the Te 
aged mother of Chiang Wei. ae 
All these arrangements inn des Rives took five com- 


panies and set out for Hsich‘êng to remove the stores. But — 
messenger after. messenger came to say that Sstima I was — 


advancing rapidly on Hsich‘éng with a large army. No leader — 
of rank was left to K‘ung-ming; he had only the civil officials ~ 
and the five companies, and as half this. force had started to 
remove the stores, he had only two and a half companies left. 

His officers were all frightened at the news of near approach — 
of the enemy. K‘ung-ming himself went up on the rampart ~ 
to look around. He saw clouds of dust rising into the sky. — 
The Wei armies were nearing Hsich‘éng along two roads. ~ 


Then he ordered all the banners to be removed and concealed, 
and said if any officer ¿n command of soldiers in the city moved 
or made. any noise he would be instantly put to death. Next — 
he threw open all the gates and set a score of soldiers dressed ~ 


as ordinary people cleaning the streets at each gate. When — 
all these preparations were complete, he donned the simple — 
Taoist dress he affected on occasions. and, attended by a couple 
of lads, sat down on the wall by one of the towers with his 
lute before him and a stick of incense burning. = 
Ssiima’s scouts came near the city gate and saw all this. 
They did not enter the city, but went back and reported what 
_they had seen. Sstima I smiled incredulously. But he halted 


his army and rode ahead himself. Lo! it was exactly as the — 


scouts had reported; K‘ung-ming sat there, his face all smiles. 
A lad stood.on one side of him bearing a sword and on the — 
other a boy with the ordinary symbol of authority, a yak’s — 
tail. Just inside the gates a score of persons with their heads 
down were sweeping as if no one was about. > 
Sstma hardly believed his eyes and thought this meant some 
peculiarly subtle ruse. So he went back to his armies, faced i 
them about and moved toward the bile on the north. : 


Romance of the Three ingdooms 373 


ay im certain there are no soldiers behind this foolery,” 
iait his second son. “What do you retire for, father?” 
< “Chuko is always most careful and runs no risks. Those 
open gates undoubtedly mean an ambush, and if our men enter 
the city they will fall victims to his guile. How can you 
know?@ No; our course is to retire.” 

Thus were the two armies turned back from the city, ich: 
to the joy of K‘ung-ming, who laughed and clapped his hands 
as he saw: them hastening away. The officials gasped .with 
astonishment, and they asked K‘ung-ming to explain the phe- 
nomenon of a g cat army marching off at the sight of a single 
man. So he told them: 

- “He knows my reputation ror carefulness and that I play 

not with danger. Seeing things as they were made him 
suspect an ambush, and so he turned away. I do not run 
risks, but this time there was no help for it. Now he will 
meet with Kuan and Chang, whom I sent away into aS hills 
to wait for him.” — 

‘They were still in the grip of fea. but they pritised the 
depth of insight of their chief and his mysterious schemes 
and unfathomable plans. 

_ “We should simply have run away,” said they. 

“What could we have done with two companies and a half 
even if we had run? We should not have gone far. before 
A caught, ” said K‘ung-ming. 


Quite open jay the cizy to the foe, 

But Chuko’s lute of jasper wonders wrought; 

It turned aside the legions’ onward march 

For both the leaders guessed the other’s thought. 


“But if I had been in his place I should not have turned 
away,” said K‘ung-ming, smiling and clapping his hands. 
He gave orders that the people of the place should follow the 
army into Hanchung, for Sstuma would assuredly return. ` 

' They abandoned Hsich‘éng and returned into Hanchung. 
In due course the officials and soldiers and people out of the 

three districts also came in. 

It has been said that Sstma I turned aside from the city. 

He went to Wukungshan. Presently there came the sounds 
of an army from behind the hills. The leader turned to his 
sons, saying, “If we do not retire we shall yet somehow fall 
- victims to this Chuko Liang.” ` 

-~ Then appeared a force advancing rapidly, the SEH 
bearing the name of Chang Pao. The men of Wei were 
seized with sudden panic and ran, flinging off their armour 
_ and throwing away their weapons. But before they had fled 
_ very far they heard other terrible sounds in the valley and soon 
< saw another force, with banners inscribed “Kuan Hsing.” The 
_ roar of armed men echoing up and down the valley was 


374 San Rud, or | 


terrifying, and as no one could tell how many men there were i 
bearing down on them the panic increased. The Wei army — 
abandoned all the: baggage and took to flight. But having j 
orders not to pursue, the two Shu generals let their enemies © 
run in peace, while iney gathered up the spoils. _ Then they 
returned. al = 

Seeing the valley apparently full of men af Shu, Ssiima 
dared not leave the main road. He hurried back, to 
Chieht‘ing. 

At this time Ts‘ao Chén, hearing that the army of Shu. was y 
retreating, went in pursuit. But at a certain point he encoun- | 
tered a strong force under Ma Tai and Chiang Wei. | Valley 
and hill seemed to swarm with enemies, and Ts‘ao became © i 
alarmed. Then his van-leader was slain by Ma Tai, and the — 
soldiers were vanic-sticken and fled in disorder. 

Meanwhile she men of Shu were hastening night and day : 
along the road into Hanchung. Chao Yün and Téng Chi, — 
who had been lying in ambush in Chi Valley, heard that their - 
comrades were retreating. Then said Chao Yün, ”The men 
of Wei will surely come to smite us while we are retreating. © 
Wherefore let me first take up a position in their rear, and | 
then you leac off your men and part of mine, showing my © 
ensigns. I will follow, keeping at the same distance behind BI 
you, and thus I shall be able to protect the retreat.” = — = 
- Now Kuo Huai was leading his army through the Chi Valley 
He called uy his van-leader Su Yung and said to him, “Cha 
Yün is a- warrior whom no one can withstand. You must keep | 
a most careful guard lest you fall into some trap while they 4 
are retreating.” 

Su Yung replied, smiling, “If you will help me, o Com- i 
mander, we shall be able to capture this Chao Yün. | Og 

So Su Yung, with three companies, hastened on ahad and > 
entered the valley in the wake of the Shu army. He saw upon — 

a slope in the distance a large red banner bearing the name of | 
Chao Yün. This frightened him, and he retired. But before © 
he had gone far a great uproar arose about him, and a mighty — 
warrior came bounding forth on a switt steed, crying, “Do 
you recognise Chao Yün?” f 

Su Yung was terrified. “Whence came vou? 2? he cried. “Is 
there another Chao Yiin here.” . 

He could make no stand, and soon fell victim to the: spear 
of the veteran. His men scattered, and Chao Yün hurried on 
after the main body. € 

But soon another company came in pursuit, this time fed” 
by one Wan Chéng. As they came along Chao Yün halted — 
in the middle of the road. By the time Wan had come close _ 7 
the other Shu soldiers had gone about thirty li along the road. 
However, when Wan drew nearer still and saw who it- was _ 
standing in his path, he hesitated and finally halted. Phen 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms. B16. 


he turned back and retired altogether, confessing on his return 
that he had not dared to face the old warrior, who seemed as 
‘terrible as ever. 

However, Kuo Huai was not content and ordered him to 
return to the pursuit of the retreating army. This time he 
had many horsemen with him. Presently they came to a wood, 


and, as they entered, a loud shout arose in the rear, “Chao Yün 


is here!” 
Terror seized upon the pursuers, and many fell from their 


horses. The others scattered among the hills. Wan Chéng — 
braced himself for the encounter and went on. Chao shot an 


arrow which struck the plume on his helmet. Startled, he 
tumbled into a water-course. Then Chao pointed his spear 
at him and said, “Be off! I will not kill you.. Go and tell 
your chief to come quickly, if he is coming.” 


Wan fied for his life, while Chao continued his march as 


rear-guard, and the retreat into Hanchung steadily continued. 
There were no other episodes by the way. Ts‘ao Chen and 


Kuo Huai took to themselves all tae credit of having recovered © 


< the three districts.: 


Before the cautious. Sstima, was ready to pursue the aay 


_of Shu it had already reached Hanchung. He took a troop 
of horse and rode to Hsich‘éng and there heard from the few 
_ people who had formerly sought refuge in the hills, and now 
returned, that K‘ung-ming really had had no men in the city, 
with the exception of the two and a half companies, that he 
had not a single military commander, but only a few civil 
_ officers. He also heard that Kuan and Chang had had only a 
~ few men whom they led about among the hills making as 
much noise as they could. Sstma felt sad at having been 


tricked. “K‘ung-ming is a cleverer man than I am,” said he | 


with a sigh of resignation. 8 TOA 


He set about restoring order, and presently marched back 


-to Ch‘angan. . He saw his master Ts‘ao Jui, who was pleased 
with his success and said, Tti is s by your good service that 
Shênsi is again mine.” 


Ssŭma replied, “But the army of Shu is in Hanchung — 


undestroyed; wherefore I pray for authority to go against 
them that you may recover Shu also. 


Ts‘ao Jui rejoiced and approved, aud authorised the raising 


of an army. 


But then one of the courtiers suddenly said, “Your servant © 


can propose a plan by yich Pan will be overcome and Wu 
submit.” 


The captains lead their beaten soldiers home, 
The victors plan new deeds for days to come. 


Who offered this plan? Succeeding chapters will tell. 


CHAPTER IVC. 


K‘UNG-MING WEEPS, BUT PUTS Ma SU TO Deant 
CHOU FANG Cuts OFF His HAIR AND BEGUILES Ts‘ao HSIU. 


T he he proposer of the great plan that was to reunite the empire 
was a President of a Board, named Sun Tzu. 

aoe Sir, expound your excellent scheme,” said King Jui 
of Wei 

And Sun Tzu said, “When your great progenitor, the Em- 
peror Wu (Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao), first got Chang Lu he was at 
a critical stage in his career, but thenceforward all went well. — 
He used to say ‘Nanchéng is really a natural hell. In the 
Hsieh Valley there are five hundred li of rocks and caves, so 


that it is an impossible country for an army.’ Ifthe country — 


be denuded of soldiers in order ‘to conquer Shu, then for sure 
we shall be invaded by Wu on the east. My advice is to- 


divide the army among the various generals and appoint each — j 


a place of strategic value to hold, and let them train their 
forces. In a few years the Central Land will be prosperous 
and wealthy, while the other two, Shu and Wu, will have been 
reduced by mutual quarrels and will fall an easy prey. I hope 
Your Majesty will consider whether this is not a superior 

lan.” 

“What does the great General think? said Ts‘ av. Jui to 
Ssňma. 

He replied, “President Sun says well.” rena 

So Jui bade Sstma I draw up a scheme of defence and . 
station the soldiers, leaving Kuo Huai and Chang Ho to guard 
Ch‘angan. And having rewarded the army, he the returned to 
Loyang. < ; i 

When K‘ung-ming got back to Hanchung and missed Chao 
Yün and Téng Chih, the only two captains who had not arrived, 
he was sad at heart and bade Kuan and Chang go back to 
afford them assistance. However, -before the reinforcing 
parties could leave, the missing men arrived. Furthermore, 
they came with their men in excellent condition and not a 
man short, nor a horse nor any of their equipment. As they 
drew near, K‘ung-ming went out to welcome them. . There- 
upon Chao Yiin hastily dismounted and bowed to the earth, 
saying, “The Prime Minister should not have come forth to 
welcome a defeated general.” . 

But K‘ung-ming lifted him up and took his hand ait said, 
“Mine was the fault, mine were the ignorance and unwisdom 


Romance of the Tyree Hingooms o 3v 


: & 
that caused all this. But how is it that amid all the defeat 
and loss you have come through unscathed?” 

And Téng Chih replied, “It was because friend Chao sent 
me ahead, while he guarded the rear and warded off every 
attack. One leader he slew, and this frightened the others. 
Thus nothing was lost or left by the way.” “ie 

“A really great captain!” said K‘ung-ming. a) : 

He sent Chao Yün a gift of much gold and many rolls of 
silk for his army. But these were returned, Chao Yün saying 
that the army deserved punishment rather than reward, since 
they had accomplished nothing, and the rules for reward and 
punishment must be strictly kept. He prayed that these 
things be kept in store till the winter, when they could be 
distributed among the men.” 

“When His late Majesty lived he never tired of extolling 
Chao Ytin’s virtues; lo! he was perfectly right,” said K‘ung- 
ming. 

- And his respect for the veteran was doubled. Then came 
the turn of the four unfortunate leaders Ma, Wang, Wei and | 
Kao to render account. Wang P‘ing was called to the gen- 
eral’s tent and rebuked. ` i ; ; 
“I ordered you and Ma Su to guard Chieht‘ing; why did you 
not remonstrate with him and prevent this great loss?” : 

“T did remonstrate many times. I wished to build a ram- 

part down in the road and construct a solid camp, but the 
_ assistant general would not agree and showed ill temper. So 
I led half a legion and. camped some ten li off, and when the 
men of Wei came in crowds and surrounded my colleague, 
J led my army to attack them a score of times. But I could 
- not penetrate, and the catastrophe came quickly. Many’ of 
‘the men surrendered, and mine were toc few to stand. 
Wherefore I went to friend Wei for help, but I was intercepted 
and imprisoned in a valley and only got out by fighting most 
desperately... I got back to my camp to find the enemy in 
possession, and so I set out for Liehliuch‘éng. On the road 
I met Kao Hsiang, and we three tried to raid the enemy’s 
camp, hoping to recover Chieht‘ing, but as there was no one 
of our side there I grew suspicious. From a hill I saw my 
colleagues had been stopped by the men of Wei, so I went to 
rescue them. Thence we hastened to Yangp‘ing Pass to try 
to prevent that from falling “It was not that I failed to 
remonstrate. And you, O Minister, can get confirmation of 
my words from any of the officers.” E 

K‘ung-ming bade him retire, and sent for Ma Su. He came, 
bound, and threw himself on the earth at the tent door. 
“You have filled yourself with the study of the books on ` 
war ever since you were a boy; you know them thoroughly. 
I enjoined upon you that Chieht‘ing was most. important, and 
you pledged yourself and all your family to do pour best in à 


= 


878 San fun, or 


the enterprise; yet you would not listen to Wang P‘ing, and 

thus you caused this misfortune. The army is defeated, gen- 
erals have been slain and cities and territory lost, all through i 
you. If Ido not make you an example and vindicate the law, 
how shall I maintain a proper state of discipline? You have 
offended and you must pay the penalty. After your death 
the little ones of your family shall be my care, and I will see 
that they get a monthly allowance. Do not m their fate 
cause you anxiety.” . ed. 

He told the executioners to take him away. 

Ma Su wept bitterly, saying, “Pity me, O Minister, you have 
looked upon me.as a son; I have looked up to you as a father. 
I know my fault is worthy of death, but I pray you to re- 
member how Shun dealt with Kun, the father of Yu and with 
Yu himself. Though I die I will harbour no resentment down — 
in the dark depths of the Nine Springs.” 


K‘ung-ming brushed aside his tears and said, “We have a 


been as brothers, and your children shall be as my own. It 
is useless to say more.’ 

` They led the doomed man away. Without the main gate, 

just ‘as they were going to deal the fatal blow, Chiang Yuan, 
an officer of rank, who had just arrived from the capital, was 

passing in. He bade the executioners wait a while, and he 

-went in and interceded for Ma Su. j 

“Formerly the King of Ch‘u put his. minister to death and 
Duke Wên rejoiced. There is great confusion in the land, | 
and yet you would slay a man of admitted ability. Can you — 
not spare him?” 

K‘ung-ming’s tears fell, but he said, “Sun and Wu maintain $ 
that the one way to obtain success is to make the law supreme. 
Now confusion and actual war are in every quarter, and if. 
the law be not observed, how may rebels be made away with? 
He must die.” 

Soon after they bore in the heng as proof, and Kʻung-ming 
wailed for the victim. 

“Why do you weep for him now that he has met the just 
penalty for his fault?” said Chiang. 

“I was not weeping then because of Ma Su, but because 
I remembered the words of our late Emperor. When in great 
stress at Paitch‘éng, he said that Ma Su’s words exceeded the 
truth, and he was incapable of great deeds. It has come true, 
and I greatly regret my want of insight. That is why I weep. * 

Every officer wept. Ma Su was but thirty-nine, and he met 
his end in the fifth month of the sixth year of Chien-Hsing. 

A poet wrote about him thus :—_ 

"Twas pitiful that he who talked so glib 
Of war, should lose a city, fault most grave, +, 
With death as expiation. At the gate ; y N 


He paid stern law’s extremest penalty. 
Deep grieved, his chief recalled the late kara words. 


ae, 


“The head of the victim was paraded round the camps. Then 


he t Was sewn again to the body and buried with it. K‘ung-ming 
-~ conducted the sacrifices for the dead and read the oration. © 
_ A monthly allowance was made for the family and they were 


consoled as much as possible. Next K‘ung-ming made his 


- memorial to the Throne and bade Chiang Wan bear it to the 


king. Therein he proposed his own degradation from his 
high office.. 

“Naturally a man of mediocre abilities, I have enjoyed your 
confidence undeservedly. - Having led out an expedition, I have 
proved my inability to perform the high office of leader. Over 
solicitude was my undoing. Hence happened disobedience at 


Chieht‘i ing and the failure to guard Chiku. The fault is mine _ 


in that I erred in the use of men. In my anxiety I was too 
secretive. The ‘Spring and Autumn’ has pronounced such 
as Iam to be blameworthy, and whither may I flee from my 
fault? I pray that I may be degraded three degrees as 
punishment. I cannot express my mortification. I humbly 


await your command.” 


“Why does the Prime Minister speak thus? 2” said the king. 


Ottis put the ordinary fortune of war.” 


- The courtier Fei I said, “The Ruler must enhance the 
` majesty of the law, for without law how can men support 
him? It is right that, the minister should be degraded in 
Ao rank:? 

; Thereupon an edict was issued reducing K‘ung-ming to the 


of rank of a Chiang-chtn, Generalissimo, but retaining him in 
the same position in the ‘direction of state affairs and command 
of the military forces. Fei I was directed to communicate 


_ the decision. 

; Fei bore the edict lato Hanchung and gave it to K‘ung-ming, 
who bowed to the decree. The envoy thought K‘ung-ming 
might be mortified, so he ventured to felicitate him in other 
matters. 


“Tt was a great joy to the people when the four districts . 


were captured,” said he. 
“What sort of language is this?” said K‘ ung-ming, annoyed. 
“Success followed by failure is no success. It shames me 
` indeed to hear such a compliment.” 
“His Majesty will be very pleased. to hear of the acquisition 
of Chiang Wei.” | 
This remark also angered K‘ung-ming, who replied, “It is 
my fault that a defeated army has returned without any gain 
of territory. What injury to the enemy was the loss of this 
man?” 
Fei I tried again. “But with an army of ten legions of bold 
men you can attack Wei again.” 
“When we were at Ch‘ishan and Chi Valley we outnumbered 
the enemy, but we could not conquer them. On the contrary, 


“fiomance at the Three fingdoms 379 


t 


380 -San uo, ow. 


they beat us. The defect was not in the number of soldiers, 
but in the leadership. Now we must reduce the army, dis- 
cover our faults, reflect on our errors and mend our ways 
against the future. Unless this is so, what is the use of a 
numerous army? Hereafter every man will have to look to 
the future of his country. But most diligently we must fight © 
against our shortcomings and blame our inefficiencies; then. 
we may succeed. Rebellion can be exterminated and merit 
can be set up.’ 

Fei I and the officers acknowledged the aptness of fide 
remarks. Fei went back to the capital, leaving K‘ung-ming 
in Hanchung resting his soldiers and doing what he could 
for the people, training and heartening his men and turning 
special attention to the construction of apparatus for assaults. 


on cities and crossing rivers. He also collected grain and Ai 


fodder and built battle rafts, all for future use. 

The spies of Wei got to know of these doings, and the king 
called Sstma I to council and asked how Shu might be annexed. 

“Shu cannot be attacked,” was the reply. “In this present 
hot weather they will not come out, but, if we invade, they 
will only garrison and defend their strategic points, which we 
should find it hard to overcome.’ 

“What shall we do if they invade us again?” 

“I have prepared for that. Just. now Chuko Liang is 
imitating Han Hsin when he secretly crossed the river into 
Ch‘énts‘ang. I can recommend a man to guard the place by — 
building a rampart there and rendering it absolutely secure. 
He is a tall man, round shouldered and powerful, a good 
archer and prudent strategist.. He would be quite equal to 
dealing with an invasion. His name is Hao Chao, and he is 
in command at Hohsi.” mer 
- The king accepted the recommendation, and an edict went 
forth promoting this man and sending him to command in the 
Ch‘énts‘ang district. 
© Soon after this edict was issued, a memorial was received 
from Ts‘ao Hsiu, Minister of War and Commandant of 
Yangchou, saying that Chou Fang, Prefect of Yehyang, wished 
to tender his submission and transfer his allegiance, and had 
sent a man to present a memorandum under seven headings 
showing how the power of East Wu could be broken and to ask 
that an army be despatched soon. Ts‘ao Jui spread the docu- 
ment out on the couch that he and Sstma might read it. $ | 

““It seems very reasonable,” said Sstma. “Wu could be 
quite destroyed. Let me go with an army to help Ts‘ao Hsiu.” _ 

But from among the courtiers stepped out Chia K‘uei, who — 
said, “What this man of Wu says may be understood in two — 
ways; do not trust it. Chou Fang is a wise and crafty man 
and very unlikely to desert. In this is some ruse to decoy our 
soldiers into danger.” 


fiomance of the Chree kingdoms 381 


= “Such words also must be listened to,” said Ssima. “Yet 

such a chance must not be missed. ie 

-_. “You and he might both go to the help of Ts‘ao Hsiu,” said 
the king. 

- They went; and a large army, led by Ts‘ao Hsiu, oven to 

Wanch‘éng. (Anking, another to Yangch‘éng, just toward the 

East Pass, and a third under Ssuma I to Chiangling. 

Now the King of Wu, Sun Ch‘iian, was at the East Pass in 
Wuchang, and there he assembled his officers and said, “The 
` Prefect of Yehyang, Chou Fang, has sent up a secret memorial 
Saying that Ts‘ao Hsiu, of Wei, intends to invade. He has 
therefore set out a trap for him and has drawn up a document 
giving seven plausible circumstances, hoping thereby to cajole 
the Wei army into his power. The armies of Wei are on the 
move in three divisions, and I need your advice.” 

-Ku Yung stood forth, saying, “There is only one man fit to 
cope with the present need; he is Lu Hsiin.” . 

So Lu Hsiin was summoned and made ‘“‘Upholder of State” 
- General, Master of the Forces and Commander-in-chief of all 
- the State Armies, including the Royal Corps of. Guards, and 
_ Associate Assistant in the Royal Duties. He was given the 
White Banners and the Golden Axes, which denoted imperial 
-~ rank in the days of Chou, and all officers, civil and military, 
- were placed under his orders. Moreover, Sun Ch‘iian person- 
_ ally stood beside him and held his whip while he mounted 
his steed. 

Having received all these marks of confidence and favour, » 
Lu Hsiin named as his two immediate assistants Chu Huan 
-= and Ch‘iian Ts‘ung, who were approved by the king. Their 
. titles were Right and Left Commander-in-chief respectively. 
Then the grand army, comprising all the forces of the eighty 
-one districts of Chiangnan and the levies of Chingchou and 
- Hu, seventy-one legions, was assembled and marched out in 


` three divisions, Lu Hsiin in the.céntre, with his two lieutenants 
supporting him right and left with the other two columns. 


Then said Chu Huan, ‘‘Ts‘ao Jên is neither able nor bold; 
he holds office because he is of the blood. He has fallen into 
the trap laid by Chou Fang and marched too far to be able to 
withdraw. If the Master of the Forces will smite he must be 
defeated. Defeated, he must flee along two roads, one Chia- 
shih, the other Kueich‘e, both of which are precipitous and 
narrow. Let me and my colleague go to prepare an ambush 
in these roads. We will block them and so cut off their escape. 
If this Ts‘ao Hsiu could be captured, and a hasty advance 
- made, success would be easy and sure. We should get 
Shouch‘* un, whence Hsiich‘ang and Loyang can be seen. This 
-is the one chance in the thousand.” 

“J do not think the aries good,” said Lu Hsiin. “I have a 
; better one.” 


382 2 San Kuo, or 


Chu: Huan resented the rejection of his scheme and went — 2 
away angry. Lu Hsiin ordered Chuko Chin and certain others 


to garrison Chiangling and oppose Ssima Tand made all other 
dispositions of forces. t 

Ts‘ao Hsiu neared Huanch‘éng, and Chou Fang came out of 
the city to welcome him and went to the general’s tent. 
Ts‘ao Hsiu said, “I received your letter and the memorandum, 
which was most logical, and sent it to His Majesty. He has 
set in motion accordingly three armies. It will be a great 
merit for you, Sir, if Chiangtung can be added to his. 
dominions. Men say you are insufficient in craft, but I do 


not believe what they say, for I think you will be true to me : : 


and not fail.” 


Chou Fang wept. He seized a sword from! one of his” ; 


escort and was about to kill himself, but Ts‘ao Hsiu stopped — 


him. Still leaning on the sword, Chou Fang said, “As to the 
seven things I mentioned, my regret i is that I cannot show you 


all. You doubt me because some persons from Wu have been 
poisoning your mind against me. If you heed them the only $ 
course for me is to die. Heaven only can make manifest my ly 
loyal heart.” i 
Again he made to slay himself. But Ts‘ao Hsiu in trepida. 


tion threw his arms about him, saying, “I did not mean it: — 


the words were uttered in jest. Why do you act thus?” | $ 
Upon this, Chou Fang, with his sword, cut off his hair and 
threw it on the ground, saying, “I have dealt with you with — 


sincerity, Sir, and you joke about it. Now I have cut off the — i 
hair, which I inherited from my parents, in order to prove my 


sincerity.” 

Then Ts‘ao Hsiu doubted no more, but trusted him fully and 
prepared a banquet for him, and when the feast was over © 
Chou Fang returned to his own. f 

The General Chia K‘uei came to Ts‘ao Hsiu, and whieh asked - 
whether there was any special reason for the visit, he said, 
“T have come to warn you, Commander, to be cautious and 
wait till you and I can attack the enemy together. The whole — 
army of Wu is encamped at Wanch‘éng.” 

e “You mean you want to share in my victory,” sneered Ts‘ao 
siu. 


“It is said Chou Fang cut off his hair as a pledge of sin- x 


cerity; that is only another bit of deceit. According to the 
‘Spring and Autumn’ Yao Li cut off his arm as a pledge that | 
he meant to assassinate Chiing Chi; mutilation is no guar- 
antee. Do not trust him.” 


“Why do you come to utter ill-omened words just as I am A 


opening the campaign? You destroy the spirit of the army,” 
said Ts‘ao. 

In his wrath he told the lictors to put Chia to death. 
However, the officers interceded, and Chia was reprieved: but 


Romance of the Three ingdams 383 


he was: ‘not assigned any part in the campaign, and his men 


were left in reserve. He himself went away to Tung Kuan. 
When Chou Fang heard that Chia had been broken, he rejoiced 


in his heart, saying, “If Ts‘ao Hsiu had attended to his words © 


then Wu would have lost. Heaven is good to me and is 
giving me the means of achieving great things.” 

Then he sent a secret messenger to Wanch‘éng, and Lu Hsün 
cartes that the time had come. He assembled. the officers for 
orders. 


Lu said, “Shiht‘ing, lying over against us, is a hilly country — 
fit for preparing an ambush. It will be occupied as suitable — 
to array our army and await the coming of Wei. Hsü Shéng ` 


is to be leader of the van, and the army will move.” 

Now Ts‘ao Hsiu told Chou Fang to lead the way for his 
attack... He asked Chou the name of the place lying ahead, and 
was told Shiht‘ing. . 

“Tt is a suitable place to camp in,” said Chou Fang. 

- So a great camp was made there. But soon after the scouts 
reported that a very large number of soldiers of Wu had 
occupied the hills. Ts‘ao Hsiu began to feel alarmed. ‘Chou 
Fang said there were no soldiers; why these preparations?” 

He hastily sought Chou Fang to ask him, and was told he 
had gone away, no one knew whither. 

“I have been deceived and am in a'trap,’ said Ts‘ao Hsiu, 
now very repentant of his easy confidence. “However, there 
is nothing to fear.” 

. Then he made his arrangements to march against the enemy, 
and when they were complete and the array drawn up, Chang 
_ P‘u, the leader of the van, rode out and began to rail at the 

men of Wu. 

“Rebel leader, come and surrender!’ cried Chang. 

Then rode out Hsü Shéng and fought with him. But Chang 
was no match for the men of Wu, as was soon evident, where- 
fore he led his men to retire. . 

“Hsü Shéng is too strong,” said he when he saw Ts‘ao 
Hsiu. 

“Then will we defeat him by a surprise,’ > said Ts‘ao Hsiu. 

He sent Chang with two legions to hide in the south of 
Shiht‘ing, while another equal party was sent north. And 
they arranged that on the morrow Ts‘ao Hsiu, by pretended 
defeat, should lead the men of Wei into the ambush thus 
: prepared. 

On the other side Lu Hsiin called his two lieutenants Chu 
and Ch‘iian and said, “Each of you is to lead three legions 
and take a cross cut from Shiht‘ing to the enemy’s camp. 
Give a signal on arrival, and then the main army will advance 
between you.’ 

As evening fell these two moved out their men, and by the 
: middle of the second watch both had got close to the camp of 


384 San Kuo, or 


Wei. Chang P‘u, of Wei, who was there in ambush, as has 


been said, did not recognise that the men who approached him | 


were enemies, but went as to meet friends and was at once 
. slain by Chu "Huan of Wu. The men of Wei the fled, and 
Chu lit his signal fires. _Ch‘tan Ts‘ung, marching up, came 
across the southern ambush under Hsüeh Ch‘iao. Ch‘tian 
began a battle at once, and the men of Wei were soon put to 
flight. Both the armies of Wu pursued, and confusion reigned 
in Ts‘ao Hsiu’s camp, men fighting with others of their own 
side and slaying each other. 

Ts‘ao Hsiu despaired and fled toward Chiashih. Hsü 

Shéng, with a strong force, came along the high road and 
attacked. And the men of Wei killed were very many. Those 
who escaped did so by abandoning all their armour. 
. Ts‘ao Hsiu was in straits, but he struggled along the Chia- 
shih Road. Here came a cohort into the road from the side. 
It was led by Chia K‘uei. Ts‘ao Hsiu’s alarm gave place to 
shame on meeting Chia K‘uei. 

I took no notice of what you said, and so this evil came 
upon me,” said he. 

Chia K‘uei replied, “Sir, you should quickly get out of this 
road, for if the men of Wu block it we shall. be in grave 
danger.” 


So Ts‘ao Hsiu hastened; while Chia K‘uei protected his 


_ retreat. And he behaved cunningly, setting flags and banners 


up among trees and in thickets and along by-paths, so as to 


give an impression of having many men posted all round. 
Wherefore when Hsti Shéng came in pursuit he thought the 
country was full of ambushed men and dared not proceed far. 
So he gave up the pursuit and retired. 

By these means Ts‘ao Hsiu was rescued, and finally Sstma 
arrived and drove the enemy off. 


In the meantime, Lu Hstin was awaiting news of victory. 


- Soon his various captains came and reported their successes, 
and they brought great spoil of carts and bullocks, horses and 
mules and military material and weapons. And they had 
also many prisoners. There was great rejoicing, and Lu 
Hsiin with Chou Fang led the army home into Wu. On their 
return Sun Ch‘tian came out with a numerous cortège of 
officers to welcome the victors, and an imperial umbrella was 


borne over the head of Lu Hsün as they wended. therr way . 


homeward. 
When the officers presaniet their felicitations Sun Chitian 


noticed that Chou Fang had no hair, and he was very gracious. 


to him, saying, “This deed of yours, and the sacrifice you 

made to attain it, will surely be written in the histories.” 

l He created Chou Marquis of the “Gate Within.” Then there 
were great feastings and greetings and much revelry. 


Scie e Chuko van to attack Wei.” nto 


he east, rer in ‘one . fight, 
[ould unto war the west incite. 


R- 
a 


ae The next chapter will say if K ung-ming once more tried to 


i 


CHAPTER IIIC. 


K‘UNG-MING PROPOSES TO RENEW THE ATTACK ON WEI: 
CHIANG WEI DEFEATS AN ARMY BY MEANS 
OF A FORGED LETTER. 


I was in the autumn of the sixth year that the Wei army was 
defeated, with very great loss, by Lu Hsiin of Wu. Ts‘ao Hsiu’s 
mortification brought on an illness from which he died in 
Loyang. By command of the king he received most honour- 
able burial. i 

Then Ssùma I brought the army home again. The other 
officers went to welcome him and asked why he hurried home 
after a defeat, which affected him also as Master of the Forces. 
He replied that he came for reasons of strategy, because of 
K‘ung-ming’s probable intentions. They listened and smiled; 
for they thought he was afraid. 


Letters from Wu came to Shu proposing a joint. attack on — f 


Wei and detailing their recent victory. In these letters two 
feelings were gratified—that of telling the story of their own 
grandeur and prowess, and furthering the design of a treaty 
of peace. The king was pleased and sent the letters to K‘ung- 
ming in Hanchung. 

At that time the army was in excellent state, the men hardy, 
the horses strong. There were plentiful supplies of all kinds. 
K‘ung-ming was just going to propose a new war. 

On receipt of the letter he made a great banquet to discuss 
an expedition. A severe gale came on from the north-east 
and brought down a fir tree in front of the general’s shelter. 
It was an inauspicious omen to all the officers, and they were 
troubled. K‘ung-ming cast lots to know what portent was 
intended, and announced the loss of a great leader. They 
hardly believed him. But before the banquet ended two sons 
of Chao Yiin came and wished to see K‘ung-ming. 

K‘ung-ming, deeply affected, threw aside his wine cup and 
cried, “That is it; Chao Yün is gone.’ 

When the two young men came in they prostrated themselves 
and wept; their father had died the night before at the third 
watch. K‘ung-ming staggered and burst into lamentation. 

“My friend is gone; the country has lost its great beam and 
I my right arm.” 

Those about him joined in, wiping away their tears. - 
K‘ung-ming bade the two young men go in person to Ch‘éngtu — 
to bear the sad tidings to the king. And the king also wept. 


x 


= “Tzůù-lung was my saviour and friend; he saved my life 


= when I was a child in the time of great confusion,” eried | 4 


“the king. — ; 
= An edict was issued creating the late general “Marquis of 


_ Shun-p‘ing’” and permitting burial on the east of Chinp‘ing : 


Hill. A temple was ordered to his memory and sacrifices. 


From Ch‘angshan came a captain, tiger-bold, 
In wit and valour he was fitting mate 

For Kuan and Chang, his exploits rivalling 
E’en theirs. Han Waters and Tangyang recall 
His name. Twice in his stalwart arms he bore 
The prince, his well-loved leader’s son and heir. 
In storied page his name stands out, writ large, 
Fair record of most brave and loyal deeds. 


_ The king showed his affectionate gratitude to the late leader, 
not only in according him most honourable ‘burial, but in 
kindness to his sons, the elder, T‘ung, being made a “Fiercely- 
energetic” Chunglang General and the younger Kuang Ya-mén 
General. He also set guards over the tomb. 


oe 


` king that the dispositions of the army were complete, and the 


leader proposed to march against Wei without delay. Talking | 
this over with one and another, the king found the courtiers 
- much inclined to a cautious policy and somewhat fearful. And 


the doubts entered into the king’s mind so that he could not 
decide. Then came a memorial from K‘ung-ming, and the 
messenger, Yang I, was called into the presence and gave it 
to the king. He spread it on the imperial table and read: 
~ “The late Emperor was anxious lest the rebels should set up a 
‘rival empire and the legitimate Ruler’s domain be restricted. 
- Wherefore he laid upon me, thy minister, to destroy them. 
`- Measuring my powers by his perspicacity he knew that I 
_. should attack and oppose my talents, inadequate as they might 
be, to their strength, for, if I did not, the royal domain would 
be destroyed. It was a question whether to await destruction 
‘without effort, or to attack? Wherefore he assigned me the 
_ task confidently. Thenceforward this task occupied all my 
` thoughts. s ; 
“Considering that the south should be made secure before 
- the north could be attacked, I braved the heat of summer ana 
- plunged deep into the wilds. Sparing not, myself nor 
regarding privation, urged by the one consideration, that the 
royal domain should not be confined to the capital of Shu, I 
- faced dangers in obedience to the late Emperor’s behest. But 
there are critics who may say that I failed. Now the rebels 


have been weakened in the west and have become involved in 


the east. The rule of war is to take advantage of the enemy’s 
= weakness, and so now is the time to attack. I shall discuss the 
” various circumstances in order. 


A ir) 
y 


Romance of the Chree Kingdoms 387 


= When the two sons had left, the ministers reported to the- 


388 San Kuo, or 


_ _ “The enlightenment of the Founder of the Hans rivalled the A 
glory of the sun and moon; his counsellors were profound as ` 


the ocean abyss. Nevertheless, he trod a hazardous path and 
suffered losses, only attaining repose after passing through — 


your counsellors equal Chang Liang and Ch‘én P‘ing, yet, 
while they desire victory, they would sit idle, waiting till the 
empire should become settled. This es is beyond my 


comprehension. 


“Liu Yu and Wang Lang each occupied a ” district. -They 
-passed their time in talking of tranquillity and discussing 
plans, quoting the sayings of the sages till they were filled with 
doubts and obsessed with difficulties. So this year was not | 
the time to fight, nor next year the season to punish, and, thus. 
talking, it came about that Sun Ts‘é grew powerful and ` 
possessed himself of all Chiangtung. This sort of behaviour I 


eannot understand. 


great dangers. Your Majesty does not reach his level, nor do a 


“In craft Ts‘ao Ts‘ao surpassed all men. He could wield ` 
armies like the great strategists of old, Sun Wu and Wu Chi. 
Yet he was hemmed in in Nanyang, was in danger at Wiel og 
was in difficulties at Ch‘ilien, was hard pressed in Liyang, was — 
nearly defeated at Peishan ‘and nearly killed at Ch‘ Tiel = 
Yet, after all these experiences, there was a temporary and — 
artificial state of equilibrium. How much less can I, a man 
of feeble powers, bring about a decision without running = 


risks? I fail to understand. 


“Ts‘ao Ts‘ao failed in five attacks on Changpa, and four a 


times crossed the Ch‘aohu without success. He employed — 
Li Fu, who betrayed him, and put his trust in Hsiahou, who 
was defeated and died. His late Majesty always regarded _ 
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao as an able man, and yet he made such mistakes. 
How then can I, in my worn-out condition; necessarily 3 


conquer? I do not understand why. 


“Only one year has elapsed since I went into Hanchung, 
yet we have lost Chao Yün, Yang Chiin, Ma Yü, Yen Chih, 
Ting Li, Pai Shou, Liu Ho, Téng T‘ung, and others, and leaders 
of rank and captains of stations, to the number of near four 
score, all men unsurpassed in dash and valour, and more than 
a thousand of the irregular horse and trained cavalry of the 


Sou (aborigines) of Ts‘ung and the Tanguts of Tsinghai — 


(Gobi Desert), whose martial spirit we have fostered these _ 


ten years all about us, and not only in one district. If we 5 


delay much longer, two-thirds of this will have dissipated, and 
how then shall we meet the situation? I do not understand 


delay. 


“The people are poor and the army exhausted indeed: and © 
confusion does not cease. If confusion does not cease, ‘then, 
whether we go on or stand still the drain is the same. "Yet it 
Is it that the rebels — 


seems that attack should not be made yet! 


5 


ty 


Romance of the Chree ingdoms | a 389 ae 


_ are to be allowed to obtain a permanent hold on some province? 


Ido not understand the arguments. aa 
¿“A stable condition of affairs is indeed difficult to obtain. 


< Once, when the late Emperor was defeated in Ch‘u, Ts‘ao a 


-~ Ts‘ao patted himself on the back and said that the empire 
- was settled. Yet, after that, the late Emperor obtained the 
- support of Wu and Yiieh on the east, took Pa and Shu on the 


west and undertook an expedition to the north, wherein Hsia-. 


hou lost his life. So Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s calculations. proved erron- 
eous, and the affairs of Han seemed about to prosper. But, still 


later, Wu proved false to pledges, our Kuan was defeated, we | : 


sustained a check at Tzukuei—and Ts‘ao P‘ei assumed the 
_Imperial style. Such events prove the difficulty of forecast. 
_ I shall strive on to the end, but the final result, whether success 
or failure, whether gain or loss, is beyond my powers to 
_ foresee.” . 

_ The king was convinced, and by edict directed K‘ung-ming 


to start on the expedition. He marched out with thirty legions , 
- of well-trained men, Wei Yen leading the first division, and: 


~ made all haste to Ch‘énts‘ang. eh ee! 
~ The news soon reached Loyang, and Sstma I informed the 
King of Wei, who called his council. Then Ts‘ao Chén stepped 
_ forth and said, “I failed to hold Shénsi, and my disgrace is 
_. terrible to bear: But now I beg to be given another command 


sword, rides a swift and savage steed, bends the two hundred 
~ catty bow. and carries hidden about him when he goes into 
battle three meteor maces with which his aim is certain. So 
< valorous is he that none dare stand against him. He comes 


Ke 


ta 


_ from Shénsi and is named Wang Shuang. I would recommend 


a him for my leader of the van.” 


Ts‘ao Jui approved at once and summoned this marvel to 


= the hall. There came a tall man with a dusky complexion, 
hazel eyes, strong as a bear in the hips. and with a back 
supple as a tiger’s. 


“No need to fear anything with such a man,” said Ts‘ao Jui, 


laughing. 


He gave the new hero rich presents, a silken robe and golden ; 
breastplate, and gave him the title “Tiger-majesty” General. 


And he became leader of the van of the new army. 
Ts‘ao Chén took leave of his master and left the court. He 
~ collected his fifteen legions of veterans and, in consultation 

with Kuo Huai and Chang Ho, decided upon the districts and 

the points to be guarded. 
Y The first companies of the army of Shu sent out their scouts 
as far as Ch‘énts‘ang. They came back and reported that a 
~ rampart had been built and behind it was a captain named 
-- Hao Chao in command. The rampart was very strong and 


that I may capture Chuko Liang. Lately I have found a ~ 
-stalwart soldier for a leader, a man who wields a sixty catty © = 


Aan Kuo, or 


was further defended by “deerhorns.” And they thought its 
would be well to give up all thought of taking it and go out ~ 
to Ch‘ishan by T‘aipailing, where was a practicable, though 


Winding, road. ; 
But K‘ung-ming said, “Due north of Ch‘énts‘ang is 
Chieht‘ing, so that I must get this city in order to advance.”’ 


Wei Yen was sent to surround the city and take it. He | 


went, but days passed without success. Therefore he returned 
and told his chief the place was impregnable. In his anger, 
K‘ung-ming was going to put his general to death, but a certain 
Yin Hsiang, who said he was a close friend of Hao’ s, suddenly 
asked to be allowed to try the effect of persuasion. 


“How do you think you will persuade him?” said K‘ung- | 


ming. - “What will you say?” 


“We are both from Shensi and pledged friends from - 
boyhood. If I can get to see him I will so lay matters before Ne 


him that he must surrender.” 


He got permission to try, and rode quickly to the wall. a 
Then he called out, “Friend Hao, your old chum Yin has come — 


‘bo see you.’ 


A sentry on the wall told Hao Chao, who bade them let the a 


visitor enter and bring him up on the wall. 
“Friend, why have you come?” asked Hao. 


“I am in the service of Shu, serving under Kune aoe as, ! 
an assistant in the tactical department. I am treated - 
exceedingly well, and my chief has sent me to say something | P 


to you.’ 


Hao was rather annoyed, and said, “Chuko is our.enemy. I- 
serve Wei while you serve Shu. Each serves his own lord. — 
We were brothers once, but now we are enemies; so do not say 


any more.’ 


‘And the visitor was requested to take his leave.. He tried . 


to reopen the conversation, but his friend left him and went — 


up on the tower. The Wei soldiers hurried him on to his 
horse and led him to the gate. As he passed out he looked up 
_and saw his friend leaning on the guard rail. He pulled up 


his horse, pointed with his whip at Hao, and said, “My friend — 


and worthy brother, why has your friendship become so 
thin?” 
“Brother, you know the laws of Wei,” replied Hao. “I have 


accepted their bounty, and if that leads to death, so be it. Say 


no more, but return quickly to your master and tell him to 
come and attack. I am not afraid.” 

So the abashed Yin had to return and report failure. 

“He would not let me begin to explain,” said he. 

“Try again,” said K‘ung-ming. “Go and really talk to him.” 


- So the go-between soon found himself once more at the foot 
of the wall. Hao presently appeared on the tower, and Yin > 


shouted to him, “My worthy brother, please listen to my words 


fiomance of the Three Bingdoms 391 7 


_ while I explain clearly. Here you are holding one single city; ele 
= how can you think of opposing ten legions? If you do not yield, hi 
you will be sorry when. it is too late. Instead of serving. the i 
_ great Hans, you are serving a depraved country called Wei. 
Why do you not recognise the decree of Heaven? Why do you 
not distinguish between the pure and the foul? Think - 
over it.” ie 
Then Hao began to get really angry. He fitted an arrow | 
to his bow and he called out, “Go! or I will shoot. I meant. | 
what I said at first, and I will say no more.” hi 

Again Yin returned and reported failure to K‘ung-ming.. 

“The fool is very ill-mannered,” said K‘ung-ming. “Does 
he think he can beguile me into sparing the city?” 

He called up some of the local people and asked about the. 
forces in the city. They told him about three companies. . 

` “T do not think such a small place can beat me,” said K‘ung- a 
ming. “Attack quickly before any reinforcements can Hoe 
arrive.” “lie 

Thereupon the assailants brought up scaling ladders, upon 
the platforms of which a half score men could stand. These 
were surrounded by planks as protection. The other soldiers 
had short ladders and ropes, and, at the beat of the drum, they - 
attempted to scale the walls. ; 
-But when Hao saw the ladders being brought up he made 
his men shoot fire-arrows at them. K‘ung-ming did not expect  ă 

= this. He knew the city was not well prepared for defence, and `> 
he had had the great ladders brought up and bade the soldiers = 
` take the wall with a rush. He was greatly chagrined when 
the fire arrows set his ladders on fire and so many of his men 
were burned. And as the arrows and stones rained down = 
from the wall, the men of Shu were forced to retire. nia 

K‘ung-ming angrily said, “So you burn my ladders; then Mage! 
I will use battering rams” (“battering carts”). a i 

So the rams were brought and placed against the walls and 
again the signal given for assault. But the defenders brought 
up great stones suspended by ropes, which they swung down 
at the battering rams and so broke them to pieces. Next the 
besiegers set to work to bring up earth and fill the moat, and 
three companies were set to excavating a tunnel under the 
ramparts. But Hao Chao cut a counter-trench within the city 
and turned that device. 

So the struggle went on for near a month, and still the city 
was not taken. K‘ung-ming was very depressed. 

That was not all. The scouts reported the coming of a relief 
force, the flags of which bore the name of Wang Shuang. 
Some one had to try to turn him back, and Wei Yen offered 
himself. f i f ! 

“No,” said K‘ung-ming; “you are too valuable as leader of 


the van.” 


» 


392 - San Kuo, or 


Hsieh Hsiung offered his services; they were accepted, ana 
he was given three companies. After he had gone, K‘ung- 
ming decided to send a second force, and for command of this 
one Kung Ch‘i volunteered and was accepted. He also had 
A three companies. Then K‘ung-ming feared lest there would 
ae be a sortie from the city to aid the relief force just arriving, 
a so he led off the army twenty li and made a camp. | 

The first body sent against Wang Shuang had no success; its 
leader fell almost immediately under Wang’s great sword. 
The men fied and Wang pursued, and so came upon Kung, who 
had come to support his colleague. He met a similar fate, 
being slain in the third bout. 

When the defeated parties returned, K‘ung-ming was 
.anxious and called up three leaders to go out to check this 
Wang, They went and drew up in formal array, and then 
Chang I rode to the front. Wang Shuang rode to meet him, — 
and they two fought several bouts. Then Wang Shuang ran — 
away and Chang I/followed. His colleague, Wang Ping, — 
suspected this flight was but a ruse, so he called to Chang to 
stop Wang Shuang then turned and hurled one of his meteor 
hammers, which hit Chang I in the back, so that he fell — 
forward and lay over the saddle. Wang Shuang rode on to — 
follow up this advantage, but the two colleagues of Chang I 
interfered and checked him. Wang Shuang’s whole force then 
came on and slew many of the men of Shu. ; 

Chang I was hurt internally and vomited blood at times. 
He came back and told K‘ung-ming that Wang Shuang was 
very terrible and no one could stand up to him. Beside there 
was a strong camp at the city with double walls and a deep 
moat. 

Having lost two captains, and a third being wounded, K‘ung- 
ming called up Chiang Wei and said, “We are “stopped this © 
way; can you suggest another road?” 

“Yes, ” said Chiang, “The place is too well protected and, 
with this Wang as defender, cannot be taken. I would propose 
to move away to some suitable place and make a strong camp. 
Then try to hold the roads so that the attack on Chieht‘ing may 
be prevented. Then if you will send a strong force against 
Ch‘ishan I can do something which will give us success.” 

K‘ung-ming agreed. He sent Wang P‘ing and Li K‘uei to 
hold the side road to Chieht‘ing, and Wei Yen was sent to 

- guard the way from Ch‘énts‘ang. And then the army marched 
out of Hsieh Valley by a small road and made for Ch‘ishan. 

Now Ts‘ao Chén still remembered bitterly that in the last 
campaign Sstima I had filched from him the credit he hoped — 
to obtain. So when he reached Lok‘ou he detached Kuo Huai 
and Sun Li and sent- them to hold positions east and west. 
Then he had heard that Ch‘énts‘ang was threatened, so had 
` sent Wang Shuang to its relief, and now to his joy he heard | 


_ of his henchman’s success. He placed. Fei Yao in command of 
_ the van and stationed other captains at strategic and com- 
= manding points. | 
= ~ Then they caught a spy. He was taken into the presence 
_ of the general to be questioned. The man knelt down and 


said, “I am not really a spy in the bad sense. I was bringing - 


a secret communication for you, Sir, but I was captured by 
one of the parties in ambush. Pray send away your atten- 
dants.” 

The man’s bonds were loosed and the tent cleared. The 
captive said, “I am a confidant of Chiang Wei, who has 
entrusted me with a secret letter.” 

“Where is the letter?” etek: 

_ The man took it from among his garments and presented it 
- to Ts‘ao Chén, who read :—“I, Chiang Wei, your guilty captain, 
make a hundred prostrations to the great leader Ts‘ao, now in 
the field. I have never forgotten that I was in the employ of Wei 
~ and disgraced myself; having enjoyed favours, I never repaid 
them. Lately I have been an unhappy victim of Chuko Liang’s 
wiles and so fell into the depths. But I never forgot my old 
allegiance; how could I forget? Now happily the army of 
Shu has gone west, and Chuko Liang trusts me. I rely upon 
- your leading an army this way. If resistance be met, then 
-~ you may simulate defeat and retire, but I shall be behind and 
` will make a blaze as signal. Then I shall set fire to their 
stores, whereupon you will face about and attack. Chuko 
Liang ought to fall into your hands. If it be that I cannot 
` render service and repay my debt to the state, then punish me 
_ for my former crime. | 
» “Tf this should be deemed worthy of your attention, then 
= without delay communicate your commands.” 


ie The letter pleased Ts‘ao Chén, and he said, “This is heaven-. 


Yt Ae ates 


sent help to aid me in an achievement. 

He rewarded the man and bade him return to say that. it 

was accepted. Then he called Fei Yao to his councils and said, 

-~ “I have just had a secret letter from Chiang Wei telling me to 
-~ act in a certain fashion.” 


But Fei Yao replied, “Chuko Liang is very crafty and 


Chiang Wei is very knowing. If by chance Chuko has pianned 
all this and sent this man we may fall into a snare.” 
“But Chiang Wei is really a man of Wei; he was forced into 
surrender. Why are you suspicious?” 
=- “My advice is not to go, but to remain here on guard. Let 
~ me go to meet this man, and any service I can accomplish will 
-redound to your credit. And if there be any craft I can meet 
it for you.” 
. Ts‘ao Chén approved this and bade Fei Yao take five legions 
by way of Hsieh Valley. He told him to halt after the second 
- er third stage and send out scouts. This was done, and the 


Romance of the Three kingdoms 393 


394 Aan tua, or 


scouts reported that the Shu army was coming through the 


valley. Fei Yao at once advanced, but before the men of Shu — 


got into contact with him they retired. Fei Yao pursued. — 
Then the men of Shu came on again. Just as Fei Yao was 


forming up for battle the Shu army retreated again. And 
these manceuvres were repeated thrice, and a day and a night 
passed without any repose for the Wei army. 


At length rest was imperative, and they were on the point 


of entrenching themselves to prepare food when a great 
hubbub arose all around, and with beating of drums and 
blaring of trumpets the whole country was filled with the men 
of Shu. Suddenly there was a stir near by the great standard, 
and out came a small four-wheeled chariot in which sat K‘ung- 
ming. He bade a herald call the leader of the Wei army te 
a parley. 

Fei Yao rode: out and, seeing K‘ung-ming, he meoretie 
rejoiced. Turning to those about him, he bade them retire if 
the men of Shu came on and look out for a signal. If they 


_ saw a blaze they were to turn and attack, for they would be 


reinforced. 
Then he rode to the front and shouted, “You rebel leader 
in front there; how dare you come here again?” 


K‘ung-ming replied, “Go and call Ts‘ao Chén to a parley. mS 
“My chief, Ts‘ao Chén, is of the royal stock; think you that 


he will come to parley with rebels?” 
K‘ung-ming angrily waved his fan, and there came forth Ma 
Tai and Chang I and their men with a rush. The Wei army 


retired. But ere they had gone far they saw a blaze in the 
rear of the advancing host of Shu and heard a great shouting. 


Fei Yao could only conclude that this was the signal he was 
looking for, and so he faced about to attack. 

But the enemy also turned about and retired. Fei Yao led 
the pursuit, sword in hand, hastening to the point whence the 
shouting came. Nearing the signal fire, the drums beat louder 
than ever, and then out came two armies, one under Kuan 
Hsing and the other under Chang Pao, while arrows and 
stones rained from the hill-tops. The Wei men could not stand 
it and knew not only they were beaten, but beaten by a ruse. 
Fei Yao tried to withdraw his men into the shelter of the 
valley to rest, but the enemy pressed on him, and the army of 
Wei fell into ‘confusion. Pressing upon each otan, many fell 
into the streams and were drowned. 

Fei Yao could do nothing but flee for his life. ‘Just as he 
was passing by a steep hill there appeared a cohort, and the 
leader was Chiang Wei. Fei Yao began to upbraid him for 
his treachery and craftiness. 

Wei replied, “You are the wrong victim; we meant to- 
capture Ts‘ao Chén not you. You would do well to 
yield.” 


ERTA. 


A 
ain’ 


ha : Romance of the Three Kingdoms l 395. 


But Fei only galloped away toward a ravine. Suddenly the 
ravine filled with flame. Then he lost all hope. ‘The pursuers 
were close behind, so he put an end to his own life. 
= Of the men of Wei many surrendered. The Shu army 


pressed home their advantage and, hastening forward, reached | 


Ch‘ishan and made a camp. There the army was mustered 
and put in order. 


Chiang Wei received a reward, but he was chagrined that 
Ts ao Chên had not been taken. 


“My regret is that I did not slay Ts‘ao Chén,” said the. 


“Indeed, yes,” replied K‘ung-ming. “It is a pity that ar 


great scheme should have had so poor a result.” 
Ts‘ao Chén was very sad when he heard of the. loss of his 
captain. He consulted Kuo Huai as to a new plan to drive 
_ back the enemy. 
a “Meanwhile, flying messengers had gone to the capital with 
A news of K‘ung-ming’s arrival at Ch‘ishan and the defeat. 
Ts‘ao Jui called Sstima I to ask for a plan to meet these new 
. conditions. 
Ne “T have a scheme all ready, not only to turn pack K‘ung- 
ming, but to do so without any exertion on our part. They 
will retire of their own will.” 


; ` Ts‘ao Chén’s wits are dull; so he 
i A i a Fights on Ssuma’s strategy. 


` The strategy will appear m the next chapter. 


CHAPTER IIC. 


DEATH OF WANG SHUANG; 
K‘UNG-MING’S VICTORY AT CH‘ ENTS‘ ANG. 


N ow Sstma I spoke to the king, saying, “I have mee repeated- 
ly that K‘ung-ming would come against us by way of Ch‘èn- _ 
ts‘ang; wherefore I set Hao Chao to guard it. If an- enemy 
did invade, he could easily obtain his supplies by that road; 
but with Hao and Wang on guard there he will not dare to 
come that way. It is very difficult to get supplies any other. 
way. Therefore I can give the invaders a month to exhaust 
their food. Hence their advantage lies in forcing a battle; 
ours is postponing it as long as possible. 


tenaciously and on no account to seek battle. 


Jui was pleased to hear so succinct a statement, but he said, | 


“Since, Noble Sir, you foresaw all this so plainly, why did you 


not lead an army ‘to prevent it?” 

“It is not because I grudged the effort, but I had to keen: 
the army here to guard against Lu Hsiin of Wu. Sun Chiian i 
will declare himself ‘Emperor’ before long. If he does, I think | 


Wherefore I pray |. 
Your Majesty to order Ts‘ao.Chén to hold passes and positions 
In a month the 
enemy will have to retreat, and that will be our opportunity.” — 


Your Majesty will attack him, and I shall be ready’ to: cross | 


over the frontier. The army is prepared.” 


Just then one of the courtiers announced despatches from ae 


Ts‘ao. Chén on military affairs, and. Sstima closed his speech, — 
saying, “Your Majesty should send someone especially to- 
caution the general to be careful not to be tricked by K‘ung- — 
ming, not to pursue rashly and never to penetrate deeply into 
the enemy country.” 

The king gave the order, and he sent the command by the 
hand of the T‘ai-ch‘ang Han Chi and gave him authority to 
warn Ts‘ao Chén against giving battle. Sstma escorted the 
royal messenger out of the city and, at parting, said “I am 


giving this magnificent opportunity to obtain glory to Ts‘ao — 2 


Chén, but do not tell him the suggestion was mine; only quote 
the royal command. Tell him that defence is the best, pursuit — 
is to be most cautious, and he is not to send any impetuous man. 
to follow up the enemy.’ 

Ts‘ao Chén was deep in affairs connected with his ate 
when they brought news of a royal messenger, but he went 


forth to bid him welcome, and when the ceremonial receipt of — 
the edict had come to an end, he retired to discuss matters _ 


with Kuo Huai and Sun Li. 


Shae 


Romance of the Three Hingooms eg 


“Ssiima’s idea,” said Kuo with a laugh’ ? 
“But what of the idea?” asked Ts‘ao. 
“It means that the man who perfectly understands Chuko 
Liang’s plans and who will eventually have to be called in to. 
defeat them is our friend Sstma.” 
“But if the Shu army holds its ground?” 
“We will send Wang Shuang to reconnoitre and keep on the 
-move along the by-roads so that they dare not attempt to 
bring up supplies. They must retreat when they have no 
more to eat, and we shall be able to beat them.” 
Then said Sun Li, “Let me go out to Ch‘ishan as if to escort 


a convoy, only the carts shall be laden with combustibles > ~ 


instead of grain. We will sprinkle sulphur and nitre over 
wood and reeds. The men of Shu will surely seize the convoy 
and take it to their own camp, when we will set fire to the 
carts. When they are blazing, our hidden men can attack.” 
“It seems an excellent plan,” said Ts‘ao Chén, and he issued 
the requisite orders: Sun to pretend to escort a convoy; 
Wang to prowl about the by-roads; Kuo to command in the 
Chi Valley. Also Chang Hu, son of Chang Liao, was made 
leader of the van, and Yo Lin, son of Yo Chin, was his second. 
_ These two were to remain on ‘guard i in the outermost camp. 
Now at Ch‘ishan K‘ung-ming sought to bring on a battle, 


. - and daily sent champions to provoke a combat. But the men 


of Wei would not come out. - 
Then K‘ung-ming called Chiang Wei and certain others to 


a -him and said, “I do not know what to do. The enemy refuse 


battle, because they know we are short of food. We can get 
none by way of Ch‘énts‘ang, and all other roads are very 
difficult. I reckon the grain we brought with us will not last 
a month.” 

While thus perplexed, they heard that many carts of 
provisions for Wei were in the west and the convoy was 
commanded by Sun Li. 

“Whats known of this Sun?” asked K‘ung-ming. 

- A certain man of Wei replied, “He is a bold man. Once 
he was out hunting on Great Rock Hill, and a tiger suddenly 
- appeared in front of his master’s chariot. He jumped off his 
horse and despatched the beast with his sword. He was 
rewarded with aleadership. He is an intimate friend of Ts‘ao 
Chén.”’ 

“This is a ruse,” said K‘ung-ming. “They know we are 
short of food, and those carts are only a temptation. They are 
laden with combustibles. How can they imagine that I shall 
þe deceived by this sort of thing when I have fought them 
with fire so many times? If we go to seize the convoy they 
will come and raid our camp. But I will meet ruse with ruse.” 

Then he sent Ma Tai, with three companies, to make his 
_ way to the enemy’s store camp and, when the wind served, to 


DMRS (Sanit Ai dian eli WoL Yi Yea LM ya 
eet ik ae ROA AY mk, HA eo 
: E Tet un AN 
E SDE 


Shs Tiles 


398 Ps San Kuo, or 


\ 

start a fire. When the stores were burning, the soldiers of 
Wei would come to surround the camp of Shu. He also sent 
Ma Chung and Chang I to halt near the camp so that they 
might attack. These having gone, he called Kuan Hsing and 
Chang Pao, and said, “The outermost camp of Wei is on the 
main road. This night, when the enemy see a blaze, our camp 
will be attacked, so you two are to lie in wait on the two sides 
of the Wei camp and seize it when they have left.” 

Calling Wu Pan and Wu I, he said, “You are to lie in wait 
outside the camp to cut off the retreat of the men of Wei.” 

All these arrangements made, K‘ung-ming betook himself 
to the summit of Ch’ishan to watch the results. 

The men of Wei heard that their enemies were coming to 
seize the grain convoy and ran to tell Sun Li, who sent on a 
message to Ts‘ao Chén. Ts‘ao sent to the chief camp to the 
officers on guard ‘and told them to look out for a signal blaze. 
That would mean the coming of the men of Shu, and then 
they were to issue forth and carry out certain instructions. 

Watchers were sent on the tower to look out for the 
promised blaze.. Meanwhile Sun Li marched over and hid 


in the west hills to await the coming of the men of Shu. That — ( 


night, at the second watch, Ma Tai came with his three 
companies all silent, the men with gags, the horses with a 
lashing round their muzzles. They saw tier after tier of carts 
on the hills, making an enclosure like a walled camp, and on 
- the carts were planted many flags. ` . 

They waited. Presently the south-west wind came up, and — 
then the fire was started. Soon all the carts were in a blaze 
that lit up the sky. Sun saw the blaze and could only conclude 
that the men of Shu had arrived and his own side were giving 
the signal, so he dashed out to attack. But soon two parties 
of soldiers were heard behind him closing in. These were Ma 
Chung and Chang I, who soon had Sun as in a net. - Then he 
heard a third ominous roll of drums, which heralded the 
approach of Ma Tai from the direction of the blaze. - 

Under these several attacks the men of Wei quailed and gave 
way. The fire grew more and more fierce. Men ran and 
horses stampeded, and the dead were too many to count. Sun 
Li made a dash through the smoke and fire of the battle and 
got away. 

When Chang Hu and Yo Lin saw the fire they threw open 
the gates of their camp and sallied forth to help defeat the 
men of Shu by seizing their camp. But when they reached 
the camp they found it empty. So they set out to return. © 
That was the moment for Wu Pan and Wu I to appear and 
cut off their retreat. However, they fought bravely and got 
through. But when at length they reached their own camp 
they were met by arrows flying thick as locusts. For Kuan 
and Chang had taken possession in their absence. 


is 


ane they told him Chang Ho had come. Chang came up to the 


gate, dismounted and entered. When he saw Ts‘ao Chén he 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 399 


“They could only set out for headquarters to report their 


= mishap. As they neared Ts‘ao Chén’s camp they met another 
_ remnant marching up. They were Sun Li’s men, and the two 
~ parties went into camp together and told the tale of their 


victimisation. Ts‘ao Chén thereafter looked to his defences 
and attacked no more. 

Thus victorious, the men of Shu went to K‘ung-ming, who 
at once despatched secret directions to Wei Yen. Then he 


_ gave orders to break camp and retreat. This move was not 


understood, and Yang I asked the leader why he retired after 
a victory so damaging to the enemy. 

“Because we are short of food,” said K‘ung-ming. “Our 
success lay in swift victory, but the enemy will not fight, and 
thus they weaken us day by day. Though we have worsted 
them now they will soon be reinforced, and their light horse 
can cut off our provisions. Then we could not retreat at all. 
For a time they will not dare look at us, and we must take the © 
occasion to do what they do not expect, and retreat. But I 


-~ am solicitous about Wei Yen, who is on the Ch’énts’ang road 
- to keep off Wang Shuang. I fear he cannot get away. I have 


sent him certain orders to slay Wang, and then the men of 
Wei will not dare to pursue.’ 
So the retreat began, but to deceive the enemy the watchmen 


were left in the empty camp to beat the watches through the 
night. 


Ts‘ao Chén was depressed at his recent misfortune. Then 


said, “I have received a royal command to come and enquire 


-` into your arrangements.” 


“Did you take leave of friend Sstma?” asked T's‘ao. 
Chang said, “His instructions to me were to stay away if 


you were victor, to come if you were not. It seems that our 


side has missed success. Have you since found out what the 
men of Shu are doing?” | 

“Not yet.” 3 

- So he sent out some scouts, iia they found empty camps. 
There were flags flying, but the men had been gone two days. 
Ts‘ao Chén was disgusted. 

When Wei Yen received his secret orders he broke up camp 
that night and hastened toward Hanchung. Wang Shuang’s 


scouts heard this and told their chief, who hurried in pursuit. 


After about twenty li he came in sight of Wei Yen’s ensigns. 
As soon as he got within hailing distance he shouted, “Do not 


flee, Wei Yen.” 


` But no one looked back, so he again pressed forward. Then 
he heard one of his men behind him shouting, “There is a 
blaze in the camp outside the wall; I think it is some wile of 


-the enemy.” 


400 San Kuo, or 


\ 

Wang Shuang pulled up and, turning, saw the fire. He 
therefore tried to draw off his men. Just as he. passed a hill, 
a horseman sudenly came out of a wood. 

“Here is Wei Yen,” shouted the horseman. 

Wang Shuang was too startled to defend himself and fell 
at the first stroke of Wei Yen’s sword. His men thought this 
was only the beginning of an ambush and serious attack, so 
they scattered; but really Wei Yen only had thirty men with 
him, and they moved off leisurely toward Hanchung. 


No man could better K‘ung-ming’s foresight keen; 
Brilliant as a comet where it flashe 

Back and forth at will his soldiers dashed, 

And Wang’s dead body marked where they had been. 


Now we may tell the secret orders sent to Wei Yen. He 
was to keep back thirty men and hide beside Wang Shuang’s 
camp till that warrior left. Then the camp was to be set on 


fire. After that the thirty were to wait till Wang’s return — ) 


to fall upon him. The plan being successfully carried out, 
Wei Yen followed the retreating army into Hanchung and 
handed over his command. 


Here nothing will be said of the feastings that took place 


in Hanchung, but the story will return to Chang Ho, who, 


failing to come up with the retiring enemy, presently returned mts. 


to camp. 

Hao Chao sent a letter to say that Wang Shuang had met 
his end. This loss caused Ts‘ao Chén deep grief, so that he 
became ill and had to return to Loyang. He left Chang Ho, 
Sun Li and Kuo Huai to guard the approaches to Ch‘angan. 

At a court held by Sun Ch‘tian, King of Wu, a certain spy 
reported the doings in the west. and the results of Chuko 
Liang’s expeditions. Thereupon certain ministers urged on 
Sun Ch’iian that he should attack Wei and try to gain the 
capital. However, Sun Ch‘iian could not make up his mind, 
and Chang Chao endeavoured to prove to him that his hour 
was come by this memorial :— 

“I have heard that a phceenix has lately appeared in the hills 


ey Ree Sy Pe as cs 


east of Wuch‘ang and bowed; .that a yellow dragon has been — = 


seen in the Great River. My lord, your virtue matches that 


of Tang and Yü and your understanding is on a level with | 


that of Kings Wên and Wu. Wherefore you should now ~ 
proceed to the imperial style and then raise an army to 


maintain your authority.” 
And many other officers supported Chang Chao’s proposal. 


They finally persuaded Sun Ch‘iian to decide upon a day. | | 


They prepared an altar on the south of Wuch‘ang, and on that 
day his courtiers formally requested him to ascend to the high 
place and assume the style of “Emperor.”- 


Pie eee 


 Komauce of the Three fingdoms 401 


ia Huang-Lung was chosen as the style of the reign. Sun 
fs: Chien, the deceased father of the new Emperor, was given the 
py title of Emperor Wu-lieh, his mother a corresponding title, 
~ his elder brother, Sun T‘sé, was made posthumously Prince 
“i Huan of Ch‘angsha, and his son, Sun Téng, was styled Heir 
=~ Apparent. A high rank, Companion of the Heir Apparent, 
_ was conferred upon the eldest son of Chuko Chin and the 
-~ second son of Chang Chao. 

This son of Chuko Chin was a person below middle height, 
~ but very ciever, and especially apt at capping verses. Sun 
Ch‘tian liked him much. When he was six he went with his 
father to a banquet. Sun Ch’iian noticed that Chuko Chin 
_ had a long face, so he bade a man lead in a donkey, and he: 
= wrote on it with chalk, “My friend Chuko.” Every one roar- 
_ ed. But the youngster ran up-and added a few strokes making 
it read, “My friend Chuko’s donkey,” The guests were 
astonished at his ready wit, and praised him. Sun Chi‘tian 
-= was also pleased and made him a present of the donkey. 

_. Another day, at a large official, banquet, Sun Ch‘tian sent 
_ the boy with a goblet of wine to Chang Chao. The old man 
ae declined it, saying, “This is not the proper treatment for old 


age.” ree 

_. “Can you not make him drink?” said the host. 

` Then said K‘o to the old gentleman, “You remember Father 
= Chiang Shang; he was ninety and yet ‘gripped the signalling — 
_ flags and wielded the axes’ of an army commander in the field. 
He never spoke of age. Nowadays in battle we put seniors 
behind, but at the banquet board we give them a front place. 
How can you say we do not treat old age properly ?”’ 

Chang Chao had no reply ready, and so had to drink. This 
= „Sort of precocity endeared the boy to Sun Ch‘tian, and now he 
made him an officer, “Companion to the Heir Apparent.” 

3 Chang Chao’s son was chosen for honour on account of the 

eminent services of his father. Then Ku Yung became Prime 

_ Minister and Lu Hsiin, Generalissimo. And he assisted the 

_ Heir Apparent in the custody of Wuch‘ang. 

- As Sun Chi‘tian seemed powerful and well established, the 
~ whole of his court turned their thoughts toward the suppres- 

sion of Wei. Only Chang Chao opposed it and tendered 
_ counsels of internal reform.. 
= “Tt is not well to begin Your Majesty’s new reign with - 
= fighting; rather improve learning and hide the sword; estab- 
lish schools and so give the people the blessings of peace. 
_ Make a treaty with Shu to share the empire, and lay your 
- plans slowly and carefully.” 
Sun Ch‘iian, by nature peaceful and cautious, saw the | 
= wisdom of the advice. He sent an envoy into Shu to lay the 
scheme of an alliance before the king. The king called his 
= courtiers to discuss it. Many were opposed to Sun Ch‘tian as 


26 


402 ii an dio, or 


à ) 4 
an upstart usurper and advised rejection of any friendly 
proposals from him. Then Chiang Wan said they might get 
the opinion of K‘ung-ming. 

So they sent and put the matter before him. He said, 
“Send an envoy with presents and felicitations and ask Sun 
Ch‘tian to send Lu Hsiin against Wei. Then Ssuma I will be 
engaged, and I may once more attempt the capital.” 

Wherefore Ch‘én Chén was sent with presents of horses, 
and a jewelled belt, and gold and pearls and precious things 
into Wu to congratulate the ruler on his newly assumed 
dignity. And the presents were accepted, and the bearer 
thereof honoured and allowed to return. 

When this was all over, Sun Ch‘iian called in Lu Hsün and 


asked his opinion about the compact with Shu. Lu saw oy 


through the scheme at once. ` 


“We owe this. to K‘ung-ming’s fear of Sstma. I,” said he. , i 
“However, we must consent since they ask it.: We will make | 


a show of raising an army and in a measure support them. 
When K‘ung-ming has actually attacked Wei we will make for 
the capital ourselves.” 

Orders went forth for enlisting and training soldiers ready 
for an expedition to start presently. 


When Ch‘én Chén returned from Hanchung, he reported a 


that K‘ung-ming was grieving that he could not take Ch‘en- 
ts‘ang. Soon after this, however, he was cheered by the 


` news that the able defender of the city, Hao Chao, was very 


“That means success for me,” cried he. 


He called in Wei Yen and Chiang Wei, and said, “Take half | 


a legion and hasten to Ch‘énts‘ang. If you see-a blaze, then — : j 


attack.” 
They could hardly believe the order was meant, and came 
again to see their chief and asked the exact date of departure. 
“In three days you should be ready to march. Do not come 
to take leave of me, but set out as soon as possible.” 


After they had left his tent he summoned Kuan and Chang © 


and gave them secret instructions. 
Now when Kuo Huai heard that the commander of Ch‘én- 
ts‘ang was ill, he and Chang Ho talked over the matter. 


Kuo Huai said, “Hao Chao is very ill; you had better go and ` 


. relieve him. I will report to the capital what we have done 
that they may arrange.’ 


So Chang Ho started with his three companies to relieve the’ 
sick man. Hao was indeed at the point of death, and suddenly 


they told him that the men of Shu had reached the walls. Hao 
~ roused himself and bade them go*on the ramparts. But then 


fire broke out at each gate, a panic spread in the city and the. 
noise of the confusion startled the dying man so that he passed. 


away just as. the men of Shu were bursting in. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 403 


When Wei Yen and his colleague reached the walls they 
were perplexed to find no sign of life. No flags were flying 
and no watchmen struck the hours. They delayed their attack 
for a time. Then they heard a bomb, and suddenly the wall 
was thick with flags, and there appeared the well-known figure 
of the minister. 

“You have come too late,” cried he. 

Both dropped out of the saddle and prostrated themselves. 

“Really, you are supernatural, O Minister!’ they cried. 

They entered the city, and then he explained to them that 
they had been sent as a blind so that his real plan should be a: 
secret. He had hidden himself in the ranks of another force, 
which had come by double marches. He had sent spies into the 
city to start the fires and throw the defenders into confusion. 

“This is an instance of the rule of war. Do the unexpected ; 
attack the unprepared,” said he at the end. 

They bowed. In commiseration K‘ung-ming sent all the 


family of Hao Chao, and his coffin, over to Wei, thus showing 


his sense of the dead man’s loyalty. 
Turning once more to the two generals, he said, “But do not 
divest yourself of your armour. Go and attack San Pass and 


¿drive away the guards while they are in a state of surprise. 


If you delay, Wei will have sent reinforcements.” 

` They went. Surely enough the capture was easy. But 
when they went up to look around they saw a great cloud of 
dust moving toward them; the reinforcements were already 


“near. \ 


; & 
_ They remarked to each other how exceedingly keen was the 


- foresight of their leader. When they had looked a little longer 


they saw the leader of the Wei army then approaching was 
Chang Ho. tt» 

They then divided their men to hoid the approaches. When 
Chang Ho saw that all was prepared, he retired. Wei Yen 
followed and fought a battle, defeating Chang with only slight 
loss to himself. — í 

He sent to report his success, but K‘ung-ming had already 
left Ch‘énts‘ang and had gone into Hsieh Valley to capture 
Chienwei. 

Other armies from Shu followed. Moreover, the king sent 
Ch‘én Shih to assist in the campaign. K‘ung-ming hurried 
his main force out by Ch‘ishan and there made a camp. Then 


he called an assembly of officers. 


“Twice have I gone out by Ch‘ishan without success, but at 
last I am here. I think Wei will resume the former battle 
ground and oppose us. If so, they will assume that I shall 
attack Yung and Mei and send armies to defend them. But 
I see Yinp‘ing and Wutu are connected with Hanchung, and if 
IT can win these I can drive a wedge into the Wei force. Who 
will go to take these places ?” 


Te a ae 


404 fan Kuo. or 


Chiang Wei and Wang F‘ing offered themselves. The 
former was sent with one legion to capture Wutu; the latter, 
with an equal force, went to Yinp‘ing. 


Chang Ho went back to Ch‘angan and saw his colleagues, to 


whom he said, “‘Ch‘énts‘ang is lost, Hao Chao is dead, San Pass 
is taken and K‘ ung-ming is again at Ch‘ishan; and thence has 
sent out two armies.’ 

Kuo Huai was frightened. ‘In that case, Yung and Mei are 
in danger,” said he. 

Leaving Chang Ho to guard Ch‘angan, he sent Sun Li to 
Yungch‘éng, and he himself set out at once for Meich‘éng. He 
sent an urgent report to Loyang. 

At Wei’s next court the king was informed of all the mis- 
fortunes in the west and the threats in the east. Ts‘ao Jui 
was embarrassed and frightened. Ts‘ao Chén, being ill, could 


not be consulted, and Ssuma I was called. He was ready with 


a proposal. 

“In my humble opinion, Wu will not attack us,” said he. 

“What makes you think so?” asked the king. 

“Because K‘ung-ming still resents, and wishes to avenge, the 
event at Hsiaot‘ing. He never ceases to desire to absorb Wu. 
His only fear is that we may swoop down upon Shu. That is 


why there is an alliance with Wu. Lu Hsün knows it also. 


quite well, and he is only making a show of raising an army 
as they arranged. The truth is he is sitting on the fence. 
Hence Your Majesty may disregard the menace on the east 
and only protect yourself against Shu.” 

“Your insight is very profound,” said the king. 


Sstma I was created Commander-in-chief of all the fada l 
in the east, and the king directed a courtier to go to Ts‘ao Chên _ 


for the seal. $ 
“I would rather go myself,” said Sstma I. So he left the 
audience and went to the palace of Ts‘ao Chén, where presently 


he saw the invalid. First he asked after his health and then — e 


gradually opened his errand. 

“Shu and Wu have made an alliance to invade us, and 
K‘ung-ming is at Ch‘ishan. Have you heard, Illustrious Sir? PR 
_ “My people have kept back all news as I am ill,” said he, 

startled. “But if this is true the country is in danger. Why 
have they not made you Commander-in-chief to stop this 
invasion ?” 

“I am unequal to the post,” said Sstma. 

“Bring the seal and give it to him,” said Ts‘ao. 

“You are anxious on my account; really I am only come to 
lend you an arm. I dare not accept the seal.” 


Ts‘ao started up, saying, “If you do not take it I shall have i 


to go to see the king, ill as I am. The country is in danger.” 
“Really the king has already shown his kindness, but I dare 
not accept his offer.” 


Si -e = S pz $ ac F 
Pos ee aoe ae se 


Sc To a ee a 


Me 


ee Be 


A lee ie VAER | 
pointe ofn o 
ed the seal, but eventually he received - 


The seal of office changes | ands, | 
Two armies now one force become. 
He he nee uA; A i 


ss or failur 


CHAPTER IC. f 


CHUKO LIANG WINS A GREAT VICTORY; 
SsuMA I INVADES SHU. 


The fourth month of Chien-An, seventh year, found Chuko 


Liang camped at Ch‘ishan in three camps, waiting for the 
army of Wei. 

When Ssùma I reached Ch‘angan, the officer in E 
Chang Ho, told him all that had happened. He gave Chang Ho 
the post of leader of the van, with Tai Ling as his second, and 
then marched out toward the enemy, camping on the Wei 
River’s south bank. When the local commanders Kuo Huai 
and Sun Li went to see the new Commander-in-Chief, he asked 
if they had fought any battle. 

“Not yet,” said they. 


Sstma said, “The enemy had a long march; their chance lay 


in attacking quickly. As they have not attacked they have 


some deep laid scheme to work out. What news have you. 


from the west?” 


Kuo replied, “The scouts say that the greatest care is being | 


taken in every district. But there is no news from Wutu and 
Yinp‘ing.” 

- “I must send someone to fight a battle with them. You get 
away as quickly and privily as you can to the rescue of those 
two towns, and then attack the rear of the Shu army so as to 
throw them into disorder.” 


They set out to obey these orders, and on the way they fell. 


to discussing Sstima. ' 

“How does Ssuma compare with Chuko?” said Kuo. 

“Chuko is by far the better,” replied Sun. 

“Though Chuko may be the cleverer, yet this scheme of our 
leader’s shows him to be superior to most men. The enemy 
may have got those two cities yet; when we unexpectedly fall 
upon their rear, they will certainly be disordered.” 

Soon after this a scout came in to say that the two cities 


were in possession of the enemy, and, further, that the Shu 


army was not far in front. - 
Said Sun, “There is some crafty scheme afoot. Why are 


they prepared for battle in the open when they hold two cities? 


We had better retire.” 


His companion agreed, and they issued orders to face about i 


and retreat. Just then a bomb exploded, and, at the same 


time, there suddenly appeared from the cover of some hills a 


Romance of the Three tingdoms 407 


small body of men. On the flag that came forward they read 
the name Chuko Liang, and in the midst of the company they 
saw him, seated in a small chariot. On his left was Kuan 
Hsing, and on his right Chang Pao. 

They were quite taken aback. K‘ung-ming laughed and 
said, “Do not run away. Did you think that your leader’s. ' 
ruse would take me in? Sending a challenge to fight every 
day, indeed, while you were to slip round behind my army and 
attack! I have the two cities, and if you have not come to 
surrender, then hurry up and fight. a battle with me.” 

By now they were really frightened. Then behind them 
there rose a shout as of battle, and Wang P‘ing and Chiang 
Wei began to smite them in the rear, while Kuan and Chang 
bore down upon them in front. They were soon utterly 
broken, and the two leaders escaped by OURE up the 
hillside. 

Chang Pao saw them, and was urging his steed foward to 


$ catch them, when unhappily he and his horse went over 


together into a guily. When they picked him up they found 


that he had been kicked in the head and was badly hurt. 


K‘ung-ming sent him back to Ch‘éngtu. 
It has been said that the two leaders escaped. They got 
back to Ssuma’s camp and said, “Wutu and Yinp‘ing were 


= both in the enemy’s possession, and K‘ung-ming had prepared 
~ an ambush, so that we were attacked front and rear. We lost 
* the day and only escaped on foot.” 


“Tt is no fault of yours,” said the general. ‘The fact is he 
is sharper than I. Now go to defend Yung and Mei and 
remain on the defensive ; do not go out to give battle. I have 
a plan to defeat them.” 

These two having left, Seiima called in 1 Chang Ho and Tai- 


Ling and said, “K‘ung-ming has captured Wutu and Yinp‘ing. 


He must restore order and confidence among the people of 
these places, and so will be absent from his camp. You two 
will take a legion each, start to-night and make your way ~ 
quietly to the rear of the Shu army. Then you will attack 
vigorously. When you have done that I shall lead out the 
army in front of them and array ready for battle. While they 
are in disorder I shall make my attack. Their camp ought to 


be captured. If I can win the advantage of these hills their 


defeat will be easy.” 

These two left, marching one right the other left. They 
took by-roads and got well to the rear of the Shu army. In 
the third watch they struck the high road and joined forces. 


Then they marched toward the enemy. After about thirty li. 


there was a halt in front. The two leaders galloped up to see 
what had caused it and found many straw-carts drawn across 


‘the road. 


“This has been prepared,” said Chang. ‘We should return ” 


408 San Kuo, or 


Just as they ordered the men to turn ‘about, torches broke 
into flame all over the hills, the drums rolled, trumpets blared 
and soldiers sprang out on every side. At the same time 
K‘ung-ming shouted from the hill-top, “Tai Ling and Chang 
Ho, listen to my words. Your master reckoned that I should 
be busy restoring order in the two towns and so should nov be 
in my camp. Wherefore he sent you to take the camp, and 
you have just fallen into my snare. As you are leaders of no 
great importance I shall not harm you. Dismount and yield.” 

Chang’s wrath blazed forth at this, and he pointed at K‘ung- 
ming, crying, “You peasant out of the woods, invader of our 
great country! How dare you use such words to me? Wait 
till I catch you; I will tear you to shreds.” 

He galloped forward to ascend the hill, his spear peace for 
the thrust. But the arrows and. stones pelted too quickly. 


Then he turned and dashed in among the soldiers, scattering | 


them right and left. He got clear, but he saw his colleague 
was not with him. At once he turned back, fought his way 
to his comrade and brought him out safely. 

K‘ung-ming on the hill-top watched this warrior and saw he 
was a right doughty fighting man. 

“I have heard that men stood aghast when Chang Fei fought 


his great fight with Chang Ho. Now I can judge his valour i 


for myself.<»He will do harm to Shu: one day if I spare him. 
He will have to be removed.” 


Then he returned to his camp. By this time Ssiima had, 
completed his battle line and was waiting the moment of | 


disorder to attack. Then he saw his two captains come limp- 


ing back dejected and crestfallen. They said, “K‘ung-ming | 


forestalled us; he was well prepared, and so we were quite 


“a defeated. z? 


“He is more than human!” exclaimed Sama: -“We must 
retreat.” 


So the whole army retired into the fortified camps and would 


: not come out. 

Thus a great victory fell to Shu, and their booty was 
immense; weapons and horses innumerable. K‘ung-ming led 
his army back to camp. > 

Thereafter he sent parties to offer a challenge at the gate of 
the Wei camp every day, but the soldiers remained obstinately 
behind their shelters and would not appear. When this had 
continued half a month K‘ung-ming grew sad. s 

Then came a messenger from the capital. He was received 
with all respect, and incense was burnt as propriety, demanded. 
This done, the command was unsealed, and K‘ung-ming read :— 
“The failure at Chieht‘ing was really ‘due to the fault of Ma Su. 


7 tet a 


S 
> r: 7 Seo, 
Pipe bees a ME ae 


a aN ga A 
tid ae oat ae 


ELON L TEE Re A ae eT EO PO ED a oe ee ee 


= = 


However, you held yourself responsible and blamed yourself — 


very severely. It would have been a serious matter for me to 
have withstood your intentions, and so I did what you insisted 


ithe ala 
oa te “i 
E ie 


Pe, 
Pate 


e Three 


_ Romance of th ingdoms 409 
on. However, that was a glorious exploit last year when 
Wang Shuang was slain. This year, Kuo Huai has been 
driven back and the Ch‘iang have been reduced; the two 
districts have been recovered; you have driven fear into 
the hearts of all evil doers and thus rendered magnificent 
services. 

“But the land is in confusion, and the original evil has not 
been destroyed. You fill a great office, for you direct the 
affairs of the state. It is not well for you to remain under a 
cloud for any length of time and cloak your grand virtue, 
wherefore .I restore you to the rank of Prime Minister and 
pray you not to decline the honour.” iN 

K‘ung-ming heard the edict to the end and then said, “My 
task is not yet accomplished; how can I return to my duties 
as Prime Minister? I must really decline to accept this.” 

Fei I said, “If you decline this you flout the desires of the 
king and also show contempt for the feelings of the army. At: 


any rate accept for the moment.” 


‘Then K‘ung-ming humbly bowed acquiescence. 
Fei I went away. Seeing that Ssima remained obstinately 


a i on the defensive, K‘ung-ming thought of a plan by which to 


i f -= Why not pursue?” 


draw him. He gave orders to break camp and retire. 

When the scouts told Sstma, he said, “We may not move; 
certainly there is some deep craftiness in this move.” 

Chang said, “It must mean that their food is exhausted. 


“T reckon that K‘ung-ming laid up ample supplies last year. 


= _ Now the wheat is ripe, and he has plenty of every sort. 
. Transport might be difficult, but yet he could hold out half a 

` year. Why should he run away? He sees that we resolutely 
~ refuse battle, and he is trying some ruse to inveigle us into 


fighting. Send out spies to a distance to see what is going 
on.” ; 
They reconnoitred a long way round, and the scouts returned 
to say that a camp had been formed thirty li away. he 
“Ah; then he is not running away,” said Ssuma.. “Remain 
on the defensive still more strictly and do not advance.” 
Ten days passed without further news; nor did the men of 
Shu offer the usual challenge. Again spies were sent far 
- afield, and they reported a further retreat of thirty li and a 
new encampment. tar 
“Kung-ming is certainly working some scheme,” said 
Ssima. “Do not pursue.” ras, | ag 
Another ten days passed and spies went out. The enemy 
had gone thirty li farther and encamped. He 
_ Chang Ho said, “What makes you so over-suspicious? I can 
. gee that K‘ung-ming is retreating into Hanchung, only he is 
doing it gradually. Why not pursue before it is too late. 
Let me go and fight one battle.” ; 


410 Dan Kuo, or 


“No,” said the general. “A defeat would destroy the morale 7 


of our men, and I will not risk'it. K‘ung-ming’s vile tricks 
are innumerable.” 

“Tf I go and get beaten I will stand the full rigour of 
military punishment,” said Chang. 

“Well, if you are set on going, we will dividerthe army. 
You take your wing and go, but you will have to fight your 
best. I will follow to help in case of need:” 

So Chang got independent command of three legions and 
took Tai Ling as his second in command, and he had a few 
score of captains of lower rank. Halfway they camped. 
Then Ssŭma, leaving a substantial guard for his camp, set out 
along the same road with five legions. 

K‘ung-ming knew the movements of the army of Wei and 
when Chang’s army camped to rest. In the night he sum- 
moned his captains and told them. 

“The enemy are coming in pursuit and will fight desperately. 
You will have to fight every one of you like ten, but I will set 


an ambush to attack their rear. Only a wise and bold leader | 


is fit for this task.” 

As he closed this speech he glanced at Wei Yen, but this 
captain hung his head without response. Then Wang P‘ing 
stepped forth and said he was willing to go on this expedition. 

“But if you fail, what then?” said K‘ung-ming. 

“Then there is the military rule.” 


K‘ung-ming sighed. “Wang P‘ing is most loyal. He is 


willing to risk wounds and death in his country’s service. 
However, the enemy are in two divisions, one coming in front, 
the other trying to get round to the rear. Wang P‘ing is 


crafty and bold, but he cannot be in two places at once, so I 
must have yet another captain. Is it that among you there is- 


no other willing to devote himself to death?” 
: He did not wait long for a reply; Chang I stepped to the 
ront. 

“Chang Ho is a most famous leader. in Wei and valorous 
beyond all compare. You are not a match for him,” said 
K‘ung-ming. 

“If I fail may my head fall at the tent door? said he. 

“Since you wish to go, I accept you. Each of you shall have 
a legion of veterans. You will hide in the valleys till the 
enemy come up, and you will let them pass. Then you will fall 
upon their rear. If Ssima comes you must divide the men, 
Chang to hold the. rear and Wang to check the advance. 
But they will fight desperately, and I must find a way to aid 
you.’ 

When they had gone, Chiang Wei and Liao Hua were called, 
and K‘ung-ming said, “I am going to give you a silken bag. 
You are to proceed secretly into those mountains in front. 


When you see that your two colleagues are in great straits with. 


fiomance of the Three Kingooms 411 


the enemy, then open the bag and you will find a plan of 
escape.” 

After this he gave secret instructions to four other captains 
to observe the enemy and, if they seemed confident of victory, 
to retire, fighting at intervals, till they saw Kuan Hsing and 
Chang Pao come up, when they could turn and fight their best. 

Then calling Kuan and Chang, he said to them, “Hide in the 
valleys with half a legion till you see a red flag flutter out, and 
then fall on the enemy.” 

Chang Ho and Tai Ling hurried along like a rain squall till 
they were suddenly confronted by the men of Shu. Chang 
dashed toward his enemy, and then they retired, stopping at 
intervals to fight. The Wei army pursued for about twenty li. 

It was the sixth moon and very hot, so that men and horses 
sweated profusely. When they had gone thirty li farther the 
men and horses were panting and nearly spent. Then K‘ung- 
ming, who had watched the fighting from a hill, gave the 


= signal for Kuan Hsing to emerge and join battle. The four 


other leaders all led on their men. Chang and Tai fought well, 


-~ but they could not extricate themselves and retire. 


Presently, with a roll of drums, Wang P‘ing and Chang I 
came out and made for the rear to cut the retreat. “Why do 
you not fight?” shouted Chang Ho when he saw their move. 
The men of Wei dashed this way and that, but were stayed 
at every attempt. Then there was heard another roll of 
drums, and Ssuma came up in the rear. He at once signalled 


s -to his captains to surround Wang P‘ing and Chang I. 


“Our minister is truly wonderful. The battle goes just as 
he foretold,” cried Chang I. “He will surely send help now, 


and we will fight to the death.” 


Thereupon the men were divided into parties. Wang P‘ing 
led one army to hold up Chang Ho and Tai Ling; Chang I led 
_ the other division to oppose Ssuma. On both sides the fight- 


ing was keen and continued all the day. 


From their station on a hill, Chiang Wei and Miao Hua 
watched the battle. They saw that the Wei force was very 
strong and their side was in danger and slowly giving way. 

“Now surely is the moment to open the bag,” said Chiang 
Wei. \ 

So the bag was opened, and’ they read the letter. It said 
that if Ssima came and Wang P‘ing and Chang I seemed hard 
pressed, they were to divide forces and go off to attack Ssuma’s 
camp, which would cause him to retire, and then they could 


` attack him. The actual capture of the camp was not of great 


-~ moment. | 

So they divided the force and started for the enemy’s camp. 
Now Ssiima had really feared that he would fall victim to some 
ruse of K‘ung-ming, so he had arranged for news to meet him 
at intervals along the road. He was pressing his men to fight 


412 San Kuo, or 


when a messenger galloped up to say iat the men of Shu were 
making for his camp. j 

Ssima was frightened and changed colour. He turned on 
his captains, saying, “I knew K‘ung-ming would plan some 
trick, but you did not believe me. You forced me to pursue, 
and now the whole scheme has gone agley.” 

Thereupon he gathered in his men and turned to retire. 
The men went hurriedly and got into disorder. Chang I came 
up behind, and they were routed. Chang Ho and Tai Ling, 
having but few men left, sought refuge among the hills. The 
victory was to Shu, and Kuan Hsing came up helping in the 
rout wherever there appeared a chance to strike. . 

Sstma, defeated, hurried to the camp. But when he reached ~— 
it the men of Shu had already left. He gathered in his broken 
army and abused his captains as the cause of his failure. ý 

“You are all ignorant of the proper way to wage war, and iq 
think it simply a matter of valour and rude strength. This is 
the result of your unbridled desire to go out and give battle. 
For the future no one of you will move without definite orders, 
and I will apply strict military law to any who disobey.” 

They were all greatly ashamed and retired to their quarters. 
In this fight the losses of Wei were very heavy, not only in 
men, but in horses and weapons. i 

K‘ung-ming led his victorious army to their camp. He 
intended to advance still farther, when a messenger arrived 
from the capital with the sad news that Chang Pao had died. n 
When they told K‘ung-ming he uttered a great cry, blood q 
gushed from his mouth and he fell in a swoon. He was raised 3 
and taken to his tent, but he was too ill to march and had to i 
keep his bed. His captains were much grieved. 

A later poet sang :— 

Fierce and valiant was Chang Pao, 
Striving hard to make a name; 
Sad the gods should interfere 

And withhold a hero’s fame! 
K‘ung-ming wept his end untimely, 
For he knew a warrior gone, 


And he needed every helper; 
His own strength was nearly done. 


K‘ung-ming’s illness continued. Ten days later he sum- 
moned to his tent Tung Chiieh and Fan Chien, and said, “TI feel 
dizzy and am too ill to carry on, and the best thing for me is 
to return into Hanchung and get well. ‘You are to keep my 
apace perfectly secret, for Sstma will certainly attack if he 

ears.” = ae 

He issued orders to break up the camp that night, and the 
army retired into Hanchung forthwith. Sstma only heard of 
it five days later, and he knew that again he had been out- 
witted. 


Homance of the Three teingdoms (as 


“The man appears like a god and disappears like a demon ; 

_ he is too much for me,” sighed he. 

k _ Ssiima set certain captains over the camp and placed others 
to guard the commanding positions, and he also. marched 
~ homeward. 

_ As soon as the Shu army was settled in Hanchung, K‘ung- 
ming went to Ch‘éngtu for treatment. The officials of all 
- ranks came to greet him and escort him to his palace. The 

king also came to enquire after his condition and sent his own 
physicians to treat him. So gradually he recovered. 

In Chien-Hsing, eighth year and seventh month, Ts‘ao 
-Chén, the Commander-in-chief in Wei, had recovered, and he 
sent a memorial to his master, saying, “Shu has invaded more 
than once and threatened the capital. If this state be not 
destroyed it will ultimately be our ruin. The autumn coolth 

-~ isnow here. The army is in good form, and it is the time most 

favourable for an attack on Shu. I desire to take Sstma as 
neue and march into Hanchung to. exterminate this 
' wretched horde and free the borders from trouble.” 

= Personally, King Jui approved, but he consulted Liu Hua, 

- who replied, “The Commander-in-chief speaks well. If that 
» state be. not destroyed it will be to our hurt. Your Majesty 
-= should give effect to his desire.” 
© ~. When he came out, a crowd of officers flocked to enquire, 

_ saying; “We heard the king has consulted you about an expedi- 
tion Aaina Shu: what think you?” 

p “No such thing,” said Liu. “Shu is too difficult a country 

_ to invade; it would be a mere waste of men and weapons.’ 

“iat They left him. Then Yang Chi went into the king and said, 
“Tt is said that yesterday Liu Hua advised Your Majesty to 
- fall upon Shu; to-day when we talked with him he said Shu 
- could not be attacked. This is treating Your Majesty with 

indignity, and you should issue a command to punish him.” 

Wherefore the king called in Liu Hua and asked him to 
explain. . 

-` Liu Hua replied, “T have studied the details; Shu cannot be 

_ attacked.” 

The king laughed. In a short time Yang Chi left, and then 
Liu Hua said, “Yesterday I advised Your Majesty to attack 
Shu; that being a matter of state policy should be divulged to 
no person. The essential of a military move is secrecy.’ 

Then the king understood, and thereafter Liu Hua was held 
‘in greater consideration. Ten days later Sstma came to court, 

~ and Ts‘ao Chén’s memorial was shown him. 

Ssuma replied, “The moment is opportune; I do not think 
~ there is any danger from Wu.” 

= Ts‘ao Chén was created Minister of War and Commander- 

-in-chief of the Western Expedition, and Sstma I was made 

General and was second in command. Liu Hua was made 


414 Aan thug, or 


Master of the Army. These three then left the court, and 
the army marched to Ch‘angan, intending to dash to Chienko 
and attack Hanchung. 

The men of Hanchung told K‘ung-ming, then cute recovered 
and engaged in training his army and elaborating the “Hight 
Arrays.” All was in an efficient state and readysfor an attack 
on the capital. 

When he heard of the intended attack, he called up Chang I 
and Wang P‘ing and sent them to garrison the old road to 
Ch‘énts‘ang so as to check the Wei army. The two replied, 
“It is said the Wei army numbers forty legions, though they | 


pretend to have eighty legions. But they are very numerous, | x 


and a thousand men is a very small force to meet them.” 


K‘ung-ming replied, “I would give you more, but I fear to ~ i 


make it hard for the soldiers.” 
The two captains stood looking at each other, not daring to 
undertake such a task with such a force. "A 
“If there be a failure I shall not hold you responsible,” said n 
K‘ung-ming. “Do not say any more, but get off quickly.” ae 


The two officers pleaded with him, saying that if he desired — 2 


to kill them he had better do it, but they dared not go. mek. 
K‘ung-ming laughed. “How silly you are!” said he. “If I ` 


send you, you may be sure there is a meaning init. I observed - : 
the stars yesterday, and I see there will be a tremendous rain — 


this month. The army of Wei may consist of any number of ~ 
legions, but they will be unable to penetrate into a mountainous 


country. So there is no need to send a large force. You will — 


come to no harm, and I shall lead the main body into Hanchung ~ 
and rest for a month while the enemy retreats. Then I shall 
smite them. My army will be able to account for their four 
times as many.’ 

This satisfied them, and they left, while the main body went 
out toward Hanchung. Moreover, every station was ordered 
to lay in a stock of wood and straw and grain enough for a — 
whole month’s use, ready against the autumn rains. A month’s 
- holiday was given, and food and clothing were issued in 
advance. The expedition was postponed for the present. 3 

When Ts‘ao Chén and Sstma I approached Ch‘énts‘ang and 
entered the city, they could not find a single house. They 
questioned some of the people near, who said that K‘ung-ming 
had burned everything before he left. Then Ts‘ao proposed 
to advance along the road, but Ssňma opposed, saying that the. 
stars foretold much rain. 

“If we get deep in a difficult e aa and are always victor- 
ious it is all very well. But if we lose, we shall not get out 
again. Better remain in this city and build what shelter we 
can against the rain.” 


Ts‘ao Chén followed his advice. In the middle of the month 


the rain began, and came down in a deluge so that the sur- 


Romance of the Chree Kingdoms 415 


rounding country was three feet under water. The equipment 
of the men was soaked, and the men themselves could get no 
place to sleep. For a whole month the rain continued. The 
horses could not be fed, and the men grumbled incessantly. 
They sent to Loyang, and the king himself prayed for fine 
weather, but with no effect. i 

An officer, Wang Su, sent up a memorial :—“The histories 
say that when supplies have to be conveyed a long distance the 
soldiers are starved; if they have to gather brushwood before. 
they can cook then the army is not full fed. This applies to 
ordinary expeditions in an ordinary country. If, in addition, 
the army has to march through a difficult country and roads 
have.to be: cut, the labour is doubled. Now this expedition is 
hindered by rain and steep and slippery hills; movement is 
cramped and supplies can only be maintained with difficulty. 
All is most unpropitious to the army. 

“Ts‘ao Chén has been gone over a month and has only got 
half through the valley. Road making is monopolising all 
energies, and the fighting men have to work on them. The 
state of affairs is the opposite to ideal, and the fighting men 


_ dislike it. I may quote cértain parallels. King Wu attacked 


Chou; he went through the pass, but returned. In recent times 
your father and grandfather, attacking Sun Ch‘tian, reached. 
the river, and went no farther. Did they not recognise limita- 


= tions and act accordingly? I pray Your Majesty to remember 


the grave difficulties caused by the rain and put an end to this 
expedition. By and by another occasion will arise for using 
men, and in the joy of overcoming difficulties the people will 
forget death.” i 

The king could not make up his mind, but two other memo- 
rials followed, and then he issued the command to return, 
which was sent to the two generals. They had already dis- 
cussed the abandonment of the expedition. Ts‘ao Chên had 
said, “We have had rain for a whole month, and the men are 
downhearted and think only of getting home again. How can 
we stop them?” 

Ssuma replied, “Return is best.” 

“Tf K‘ung-ming pursue, how shall we repulse him?’ 

“We can leave an ambush.” i 

While they were discussing this matter the king’s command 
arrived. Whereupon they faced about and marched home- 
ward. : 

Now K‘ung-ming had reckoned upon this month of rain and 
-< so had had his men camped in a safe place. Then he ordered 
the main army to assemble at Ch‘ihp‘i and camp there. He 
summoned his officers to his tent and said, “In my opinion the 
enemy must retire, for the king will issue such an order. To 
pursue needs preparation, and so we will let them retire with- 
out molestation. Some other plan must be evolved.” 


135 when Wane (Bin sent news: of 
‘the meson D carried back the order no 


It is only lost labour to cover retreat 
He _ When yonr enemy doe: 


a 


By what means Ku 
toldi in the next chapte 


CHAPTER C. 


THE HAN SOLDIERS RAID A CAMP AND DEFEAT Ts‘AO CHEN; 
CHUKO, IN FRONT OF THE ARRAY, SHAMES SSUMA. 


UOA hen the officers got to know that the Wei army had gone 
~ but they were not to pursue, they were inclined to discontent 
= and went in a body to the general’s tent and said, “The rain 
has driven the enemy away ; surely it is the moment to pursue.” 
K‘ung-ming replied, “Sstma I is an able leader who would 
= — not retreat without leaving an ambush to cover it. If we 
- pursue we shall fall victims. Let him go in peace, and I shall 
then get through Hsieh Valley and take Ch‘ishan, making use 
of the enemy’s lack of defence.” 
“But there are other ways of taking Ch‘ angan, ” said they; 
“why only take this one?” 
“Because Ch‘ishan is the first step to Ch‘angan, and I want 
to gain the advantage of position. Any attack on 'Shénsi must 
= come this way. It rests on the rivers Wei and Pin in front 
and is backed by Hsieh Valley. It gives the greatest freedom 
of movement and is a natural manceuvring ground. That is 
-~ why I want it.” 
à They bowed to his wisdom. Then he despatched four 
ait Sng for Chi Valley and four others for Hsieh Valley, all 
to meet at Ch‘ishan. He led the main army himself, with 
Kuan Hsing and Miao Hua in the van. 
~ When the Wei army retreated, the Commander-in-chief and 
` his second remained in the rear superintending the movement. 
They sent a reconnoitring party along the old road to Ch‘én- 
-ts‘ang, and they returned saying no enemy was to be seen. 
Ten days later the leaders, who had commanded in the ambush, 
joined the main body saying that they had seen no sign of the 
enemy. 

Ts‘ao Chén said, “This continuous autumn rain has rendered 
all the ways impassable; how could. the men of Shu know of 
our retreat?” 

“They will appear later,” said Ssuma. 

“How can you know?” 

“These late five days they have not Piveued because they 
think we shall have left a rear-guard in ambush. Therefore 
they have let us get well away. But after we have gone they 
‘will occupy Ch‘ishan.” 

_ Ts‘ao Chén was not convinced. 


27 


418 San Kuo, or 


\ 

“Why do you doubt?” asked Sstma. “I think K‘ung-ming 
will certainly advance by way of the two valleys, and you and 
I should guard the entrances. I give them ten days, and if 
they do not appear, I will come to your camp painted and 
powdered. and dressed as a woman to own my mistake.” 


“If the men of Shu do appear I will give you the girdle and y 


the steed that the king gave me,” replied Ts‘ao. 
But they split their force, Ts‘ao Chén taking up his station 


on the west of Ch‘ishan in the Hsieh Valley, and Ssuma going a a 


to the east in the Chi Valley. 

As scon as the camp was settled, Ssuma I led a cohort into 
hiding in the valley. The remainder of the force was placed 
in detachments on the chief roads. 

Sstma disguised himself and went among the soldiers to get 
a private survey of allthe camps. In one of them he happened 
upon a junior officer:who was complaining, saying, “The rain 
has drenched us for days and they would not retire. Now 


they have camped here for a wager. They have no pity for 


us or the men.” 

Sstma returned to his tent and assembled his officers. 
Hauling out the grumbler, he said to him, angrily, “The state 
maintains soldiers a thousand days for one hour’s service. 
How dare you give vent to your spleen to the detriment of 
discipline?” 


The man would not confess, so his comrades were called to k Ng 


bear witness. Still he would not own up. 


“Tiam not here for a wager, but to overcome Shu,” said 


Ssuma. “Now you all have done well and are going home, but 
only this fellow complains and is guilty of mutinous conduct. Ki 

He ordered the lictors to put him to death, and in a’ short 
time they produced his head. The others were terrified, but 


Sstma said, “All you must do your utmost to guard against 


the enemy. When you hear a bomb explode rush out on all 
sides and attack.” 

With this order they retired. 

Now Wei Yen and his three comrades, with two legions, 
entered the Chi Valley. As they were marching, the Assistant 
Adviser Téng Chih came. 


I 


“I bear an order from the minister. As you go out of the oe 


valley beware of the enemy,” said he. 


Ch‘én Shih said, “Why is the minister so full of doubts? 


We know the men of Wei have suffered severely from the rain 
and must hasten home. They will not lay any ambush. We 


are doing double marches and shall gain a great victory. Why : 


are we to delay ?” 


Têng Chih replied, “You know the minister’s plans always 


succeed. How dare you disobey his orders?” 


Ch‘én Shih smiled, saying, “If he was really so resourceful ~ a 


we should not have lost Chieht‘ing.” 


kamani of the aires tingooms : 419 


Wei Yen, recalling that K‘ung-ming had rejecicdl his plan, 
` also laughed, and said, “If he had listened to me and gone out 
through Tziwu Valley, not only Ch‘angan but Loyang too 


= would be ours. Now he is bent on taking Ch‘ishan; what is 


4 


the good of it? He gave us the order to advance and now he 
stops us. Truly the orders are confusing.” 

Then said Ch‘én Shih, “I will tell you what I will do I 
shall take my men, get through the valley and camp at 
a on: Then you will see how ashamed: the minister will 
oo ”? i 

Têng Chih argued and Perae, but to no avail; the wilful 
leader hurried on to get out of the valley. Têng ‘could only,- 


- return as quickly as possible and report. 


Ch‘€n Shih proceeded. He had not gone far when he heard 


a bomb, and he was in an ambush. He tried to withdraw, but 


the valley. was full of the enemy, and he was surrounded as 
in an iron cask. All his efforts to get out failed. Then there 


was a shout, and Wei Yen came to the rescue. “He saved his ` 


Decade but his half legion was reduced to about a half 


ra company, and these wounded. Two other divisions coming up — 


\ y : 


prevented pursuit, and finally the men of Wei retired. The- 
two who had criticised K‘ung-ming’s powers of prevision no 
longer doubted that he saw very clearly. They regretted their 


i 5 own shortsightedness. 


When Têng Chih told his chief of the bad beha vioue of - 
 Ch‘ên and Wei he only laughed. “That fellow Wei has never 
been quite true; he has aiways been disposed to disobey and is 


-~ unsteady. However, he is valiant, and so I have used him, 


EN 


aji 


ayi 


= but he will do real harm some day.” 


Then came a messenger with news of Ch‘én’s defeat and loss 


of men. K‘ung-ming sent Téng Chih back again to console 


with him and so keep him from actual mutiny. Then he called 
_to his tent Ma Tai and Wang P‘ing, and said, “If there are any 
of the men of Wei in Hsieh Valley you are to go across the 
_ Yiiehshan range, marching by night and concealing yourselves 
by day, and make for the east. of Ch‘ishan. When you arrive, 
make a fire as a signal. Ma Chung and Chang I were told 
to go in similar fashion to the west and join up with the other 
two. Then they were to make a joint attack on Ts‘ao Chén’s 
camp. The chief would also attack in the centre. Kuan Hsing 
and Miao Hua received secret orders, which are not recorded 
here. 

The armies marched rapidly. Not long after starting, two 


| other detachments led by Wu Pan and Wu I received secret 


orders and left the main body. 

The doubts about the coming of the Shu army made Ts‘ao 
- Chén careless, and he allowed his men to become slack and 
rest. He only thought. of getting through the allotted ten 


days, when he would have the laugh against his colleague. 


420 San Kuo, or 


\ 


Seven of the days had passed, when a scout reported a few 


odd men of Shu in the valley. Ts‘ao sent to reconnoitre and 
keep them at a distance. Ch‘in Liang was in command, and 


he led his men to the entrance of the valley. As soon as he 


arrived the enemy retired. Ch‘in Liang went after them, but 
they had disappeared. He was perplexed and puzzled, and 
while trying to decide, he told the men to dismount and rest. 
But almost immediately he heard a shout, and ambushed 
men appeared in-front of him. He jumped on his horse to 


look about him, and saw a great cloud of dust rising among — 


the hills. He disposed his men for defence, but the shouting 


quickly came nearer, and then Wu Pan and Wu I appeared- 
advancing towards him. Retreat was impossible, as the hills 


were on both sides, and from the hill-tops came shouts of 
“Dismount and yield!” 

More than half did surrender. Ch‘in Liang was killed. 
K‘ung-ming put the men who had come over to his side in one 


- of the rear divisions. With their dress and arms he disguised — 
half a legion of his.own men so that they looked like his. 


enemies, and then he sent this division, under four trusty 


leaders, "to raid Ts‘ao Chén’s camp. Before they reached the 
camp they sent one of their number ahead as a galloper to -~ 
tell Ts‘ao Chén that there had been only afew men of Shu and ` 
. they had all been chased out of sight, and so lull him into 


security. 


This news satisfied Ts‘ ao Chên. But just then 4 Dan ; 
messenger from Ssuma came with a message, “Our men have — 
fallen into an ambush and many have been killed. Do not 


think any more about the wager: that is cancelled. But take 
most careful precautions.” 


“But there is not a single man of Shu near,” said Ts‘ao Chên. ; 


He told the messenger to go back. Just then they told him 
Ch‘in Liang’s men had returned, and he went out to meet them. 


Just as he got near, someone remarked that some torches had > 


flared up in the rear of his camp. | He hastened thither to see. 


As soon as he was out of sight the four leaders waved on their - 
men and dashed up to the camp. At the same time Ma Tai ~ 
and Wang P‘ing came up behind and two other troops came — 


out. 
The men of Wei were trapped and helpless; they scattered 


and fled for life. His officers got Ts‘ao Chén away to the 
eastward. The enemy chased them. As Ts‘ao fled there 


arose a great shouting, and up came a troop at full speed. 
Ts‘ao thought all was lost, and his heart sank, but it was 
Sstima, who drove off the pursuers. 

Though Ts‘ao was saved he was almost too ashamed to show 


_ his face. Then said Ssuma, “Chuko Liang has seized Ch‘ishan, SN 


and we cannot remain here; let us go to Weipin, whence we 
may try to recover our lost ground. G 


fiomance of the Three Hingooms 421 


“How did you know I was in danger of defeat? 2” asked Ts‘ao 
én. 

“My messenger told me what you had said, and I knew 
K‘ung-ming would try to seize your camp. So I came to your 
help. The enemy’s plan succeeded, but we will say no more 
about that wager. We must both do our best for the country.” 

But the fright and excitement made Ts‘ao Chén ill, and he 
took to his bed. And while the men were in such a state of 
disorder Sstma was afraid to advise a return. They camped 
at Weipin. i 

After this adventure. K‘ung- -ming hastened back to Ch‘ishan. 
After the soldiers had been feasted and services recognised, 
the four discontented leaders, headed by Wei Yen, came to the 
tent to apologise. 

_ “Who caused the loss?” said Ki ung-ming. 

F Wei Yen said, “Ch‘én Shih disobeyed orders and rushed into 
the valley.” 

“Wei Yen told me to,” said Ch‘én. 

~“Would you still try to drag him down after he Facial 
you?” said K‘ung-ming. “However, when orders have been 
disobeyed it is useless to try and gloze it over.’ j 

He sentenced Ch‘én to death, and he was led away. Soon . 
they brought his head into the presence of the assembled 


© _ captains. Wei Yen was spared as there was yet work for him ` 


to accomplish. 
After this, K‘ung-ming prepared to advance. The scouts 
reported that Ts‘ao Chén was ill, but was being treated by 


Br doctors in his tent. The news pleased K‘ung-ming, and he 
` said to his officers, “If he dies they will surely return to 


Ch‘angan. They must be delayed by his sickness. He stays 
on so that his men may not lose heart. Now I will write him 


` such a letter that he will die.” 


Then he called up the men of Wei who had yielded, and said. 
to them, “You are Wei men and your families are all over 
there: it is wrong for you to serve me. Suppose I let you go 


Gast. ome ?? 


They thanked him, falling prostrate and weeping. Then 
~ K‘ung-ming continued, “Friend Ts‘ao and I have a compact, 
and-I have a letter for him which you shall take. The bearer © 
will be well rewarded.” 

They received the letter and ran home to their own tents, © 
where- -they gave their general the letter. Ts‘ao Chén was too 
ill to rise, but he opened the cover and read:—‘“The Prime 
Minister of Han, Chuko Liang, to the Minister of War, Ts‘ao 


; . Tzu-tan: 


“You will permit me to say that a leader of an army should 
- pe able to go and come, to be facile and obdurate, to advance 
~ and retire, to show himself weak or strong, to be immovable 
as mountains, to be inseruiable, as the operations of nature, to 


sf 


422 Dan Kuo, or 


be. infinite as the universe, to be everlasting as the blue void, 
to be vast as the ocean, to be dazzling as the lights of heaven, 
to foresee droughts and floods, to know the nature of the 
ground, to understand the possibilities of battle arrays, to 
conjecture the excellences and defects of the enemy. 

“Alas! one of your sort, ignorant and inferior, rising im- 
pudently in heaven’s vault, has had the presumption to assist 
a rebel to assume the imperial style and state at Loyang, to 
send some miserable soldiers into Hsiehku. There they hap- 
- pened upon drenching rain. The difficult roads wearied both 
men and horses, driving them frantic.. Weapons and armour 
littered the countryside, swords and spears covered the ground. 
You, the Commander-in-chief, were heart-broken and cowed, 
your captains fled like rats. You dare not show your faces at 
. home, nor can you enter the halls of state. The historians’ 
pens will record your—salaries; the people will recount your 
—infamies. Chung-ta (Sstima I) is frightened when he hears 


of battle fronts, you are alarmed at mere rumours. My men. 7 


are fierce and their steeds strong; my great captains are eager 
as tigers and majestic as dragons. I shall sweep Ts‘inchiian 
bare and make Wei desolate.” 


Ts‘ao Chén’s wrath rose as he read; at the end it filled his 


breast. He died that evening. His colleague sent his coffin 
to Loyang on a waggon. ; hee 

When King Jui heard of the death, he issued an edict urging 
Ssuma to prosecute the war, to raise a great army and fight 
with Chuko Liang. 


A declaration of war.was sent one day in advance, and 


K‘ung-ming replied that he would fight on the morrow. After 
the envoy had left, K‘ung-ming called Chiang Wei by night to 
receive secret orders. He also summoned Kuan Hsing and 
told him what to do. see 

Next morning the whole force marched to the bank of the 
Wei River and took up a position in a wide plain with the river 
on one flank and hills on the other. The two armies saluted 
each other’s appearance with heavy flights of arrows. After 
the drums had rolled thrice the Wei centre opened at the great 
standard and Sstma appeared, followed by his officers. Oppo- 
site was K‘ung-ming, in a four-horse chariot, waving his 
feather fan. 

Sstima addressed him, “Our master’s ascension of the throne 
was after the manner of Yao, who abdicated in favour of Shun. 
Two emperors have succeeded and have their seat in the 


capital district. Because of his liberality and graciousness, 


my lord has suffered the rule of Shu and Wu lest the people 


should suffer in a struggle. You, who are but a peasant from ~ 


Nanyang, ignorant of the ways of Heaven, wish to invade us, 
and you should be destroyed, but if you will examine your 
heart and repent of your fault and retire, then each may main- 


2 Soe 
deg Y 


hs 
er ta 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms Doe 


tain his own borders, and a settled state will be attained. 
Thus the people may be spared distress, and you wili all save 
your lives.” 

.K‘ung-ming smiled and replied, “Our late Emperor en- 
trusted to me the custody of his orphan son: think you that I 
shall fail to exert myself to the uttermost to destroy rebels 
against his authority? Your soldiers of the Ts‘ao family will 
soon be exterminated by Han. Your ancestors were servants 
of Han and for generations ate of their bounty. Yet, instead 
of giving grateful service, you assist usurpers. Are you not 
ashamed?’ 

The flush of shame spread over Sstima’s face, but he replied, 
“We will try the test of battle. If you can conquer, I pledge 
myself to be no longer a leader of armies; but if you are 
defeated, then you will retire at once to your own village and 
I will not harm you.” | 

“Do you desire a contest of captains, or of weapons, or of 


battle array?” asked K‘ung-ming. 


“Let us try a contest of battle array,” replied Siiman. 

“Then draw up your array that I may see,” said K‘ung-ming. 

Sstma withdrew within the line and signalled to his officers 
with a yellow flag to draw up their men. When he had finished, 


~ he rode again to the front, saying, “Do you recognise my 
7. formation?’ 


“The least of my captains can do as well,” said K‘ung-ming, 


_ smiling. “This is called the ‘ Hung-ytian-i-ch‘t’ formation.” 


“Now you try while I look.on,” said Sstma. 
- K‘ung-ming entered the lines and waved his fan. Then he 


- came out and said, “Do you recognise that? TER 


“Of course; this is the pa-kua.”’ 
“Yes; you seem to know it. But dare you attack?’ 
“Why not, since I know it? 2” replied Sstma. 
“Then you need only try.” 
_ Ssiima entered the ranks and called to him three eee 


ee Tai Ling, Chang Hu and Ytieh Lin, to whom he said, “That 


formation consists of eight gates of ’ well-known names. You 
will go in from the east at the Gate of Life, turn to the south- 


west and make your way out by the Gate of Destruction. 


Then enter at the north, at the Open | Gate, and the formation 


will be broken up. But be cautious.” 


They started with Chang Hu leading, Tai Ling next and 
Yüeh Lin in rear, each with thirty horsemen. They made 
their way in at the Gate of Life amid the applause of both 
sides. But when they had got within they found themselves 
facing a wall of troops and could not find a way out. They 
hastily led their men round by the base of the line toward the 
south-west to rush out there. But they were stopped by a 


flight of arrows. They became confused and saw many gates, 
| ai they had lost their bearings. Nor could they aid each 


424 San Kuo, or 


other. They dashed hither and thither in disorder, lost as in 
gathering clouds and rolling mists. Then a shout arose, and 
each one was seized and bound. 

They were taken to the centre, where K‘ung-ming sat in his 

tent, and the three leaders with their ninety men were ranged 
in front. 
‘ “Indeed you are prisoners; are you surprised ?” aaa K‘ung- 
ming, smiling. ‘But I will set you free to return to your 
leader, and tell- him to read his books again, and study his 
tactics, before he comes to try conclusions with me. You are 
pardoned, but leave your weapons and horses.” 

So they were stripped of their arms and armour and their 
faces blackened. Thus were they led on foot out of the array. 
Ssuma lost his temper at sight of his men thus put to shame. — 

Said he, “After this disgrace, how can I face the other- 
officers in the capital?” 

He gave the signal for the army to fall on and attack the 
enemy, and, grasping his sword, led his brave captains into 
the fray and commanded the attack. But just as the two sides 
came to blows, Kuan Hsing came up, his drums rolling and 
men shouting, and attacked. Sstma told off a division from 
as rear to oppose him, and again turned to urge on his main 

ody. 


Then the army of Wei was thrown into confusion by another 


attack from Chiang Wei, who came up silently and joined in 
the battle. Thus three sides of the Wei army were engaged 


by three different divisions of the enemy, and Ssuma decided ` : 


to retire. However, this was difficult. The men of Shu 
hemmed him in and came closer every moment. At last, by a 
desperate push, he made an opening toward the south and 
freed his army. But he had lost six or seven out of every ten 
of his soldiers. 

The Wei army withdrew to the south Banik of the Wei River 
and camped. They strengthened their position and remained 
entirely on the defensive. 

K‘ung-ming mustered his victorious army and returned to 
Ch‘ishan. 

Now Li Yen sent an officer, a Tu-yu, named Kou An, from 
Jungan with a convoy of grain. -This man was a drunkard 
and loitered on the road so that he arrived ten days late. 
K‘ung-ming, angry at the delay, upbraided him, saying, “This 
grain is of the utmost importance to the army and you delay it. 


Three days’ delay ought to mean the death penalty ; what can ~ 


you say to this delay of ten?” 

Kou was sentenced to death and hustled out.. But two 
officers ventured to intervene. They said, “Kou An is a 
servant of Li Yen’s, and Li has gent large supplies of all sorts 
from the west. If you put this man to death perhaps- others 
will not undertake escort duty.” 


Romance of the Three fiingdoms 425 


MK: -ming then hee the executioners loose the offender, 
give him eighty blows and let him go. _ 

This punishment filled Kou An’s heart with bitter resent- 
ment, and, in the night, he deserted to the enemy, he and his 
half dozen personal staff. He was taken before Sstma and 
told the tale of his wrongs. 

“Your tale may be true, but it is hard to trust it,” said 
Sstma. “K‘ung-ming is full of guile. However, you may 
render me a service, and if you do, I will ask the king that — 
you may be allowed to serve him and obtain a post for you.” 

“Whatever you ask I will do the best I can,” replied the 
deserter. 

“Then go to Ch‘éngtu and spread a lying report that K‘ung- 
ming is angry. with the powers there and means to make 
himself emperor. This will get him recalled, and that will 
be a merit to you.” . 

Kou An accepted the treacherous mission. In Ch‘éngtu he 
got hold of the eunuchs and told them his lying tale. They 
became alarmed for their own safety and told the Emperor all 
these things. 

“In such a case what am I to do?” rocked the Later Ruler. 

“Recall him to the capital,” said the eunuchs; “and take 
away his military powers so that he cannot rebel.” 

The Later Ruler issued an edict recalling the army. 

“The minister has rendered many and great services since 
he led out the army; wherefore is he recalled?” said Chiang 
Wan. 

“I have a private matter to consult him about,’ 3 said the 
king. “I must see him personally.” 

So the edict was issued and sent to K‘ung-ming. The mes- 
senger was at once received as soon as he reached Ch‘ishan. 

“My king is young, and there is some jealous person by his 
side,” said K‘ung-ming sadly. “I was just going to achieve 
some solid success; why am I recalled? If I go not, I shall 
insult my king; if I retire, I shall never get such a chance 
again.” 

“If the army retire, Sstma will attack,” said Chiang Wei. 

“I will retire in five divisions. Thus to-day this camp goes. 
Supposing that there are a thousand men in the camp, then 
I shall have two thousand cooking places prepared, or if there 
are three thousand men, then four thousand cooking places 
shall be got ready; and so on, increasing the cooking NE 
ments as the men are sent away.’ 

Yang I said, “In the days of old, when Sun Pin was aekin 
P‘ang Chüan, ‘the cooking arrangements were decreased as the 
men were increased. Why do you reverse this, O Minister?” 
“Because Sstma is an able leader and would pursue if he 
knew we were retreating. But he would recognise the pro- 
bability of an ambush, and if he sees an increase in the cooking 


426 | San Kuo 


arrangements in a camp he will be unable to conclude whether 
the men have gone or not, and he will not pursue. Thus I 


‘Shall gradually withdraw without loss.” 


The order for retreat was given. 

Confident of the effect that Kou. An’s lying report would 
produce, Sstma waited for the retreat of the Shu army to 
begin. He was still waiting when the scouts told him the 
enemy’s camps were empty. Wishing to make sure, he rode 
out himself with a small reconnoitring party and inspected 


the empty camps. Then he bade them count the stoves. Soon . 


after he paid a second visit, and again the cooking stoves were 
counted. The count showed an increase of a tenth. 

“I felt sure that K‘ung-ming would have some ruse ready. 
He has increased the cooking arrangements, and so, if we 
pursue, he will be ready for us. No; we also will retire and 
await another opportunity.” 

So there was no pursuit, and Keung nine did not lose a man. 
By and by, men came in from Ch‘uank‘ou to say that the retreat 
was a fact and that only the cooking arrangements had been 
increased, not the men. \ Ssuma knew that he had been tricked, 
and once more acinowleiged sadly his rival’s superior guile. 
And he set out for Loyang. 


When players of equal skill are matched, 
Then victory hovers between; 

Perhaps your opponent’s a genius, 
So put on your lowliest mien. 


What happened when K‘ung-ming reached Oh engin will be 
told next. 


a è A SS 
=e ee- 
iS HRA 
k - 


CHAPTER CI. 


_ GOING OUT FROM SHENSI, CHUKO DRESSES AS A GOD; 
DASHING TOWARD CHIENKO, CHANG Ho FALLS INTO A SNARE. 


By means of i artifice just described, Chuko withdrew his 
army safely into Hanchung, while Sstima retreated upon 
Ch‘angan. K‘ung-ming distributed the rewards for ‘success 
and then went to the capital for audience. 


“Your Majesty recalled me just as I was about to ven ee ul i í 


upon Ch‘angan; what is the important matter? ?? said the 
minister. | 

For a long time the king made no reply Presently he said, Gor 
“I longed to see your face once more, that is the only reason.’ 

K‘ung-ming replied, “I think my recall was not on your own 
initiative; some slanderous pereon has hinted a I cherished 
ulterior obj ects,” ; 

The king, who indeed felt gdikty and ill ay ease, made no 
_reply, and K‘ung-ming continued, “Your late father laid me 
‘under an obligation which: I am pledged to fulfil to the death. 
But if vile influences are permitted to work at home, how can — 
I destroy the rebels without?’ 

“The fact is I recalled you because of the talk of the eunuchs: 
But I understand now and am unutterably sorry.” 

K‘ung-ming interrogated the eunuchs and thus found di Í 
the base rumours that had been spread abroad by Kou An. 
He sent to arrest this man, but he had already fled and gone | 
_ over to Wei. The eunuchs who had influenced the king were 
put to death, and all the others were expelled from the palace. 
The Prime Minister also upbraided Chiang Wan and Fei I` 
for not having looked into the matter and set the king right. 

K‘ung-ming then took leave of the king and returned to 
the army. He wrote to Li Yen to see to the necessary supplies 
and began preparations for a new expedition. 

Yang I said, “The soldiers are wearied by the many expedi- 
tions, and the ‘supplies are not regular. I think a better plan 
would be to send half the army to Ch‘ishan for three months, 
and at the end of that time exchange them for the other half; 
and so on alternately.« For example, if you have twenty 
legions, let ten legions go into the field and ten remain. in 
this way, using ten and ten, their energies will be conserved 
and you can gradually work toward the metropolis.” 

“I agree with you,” said K‘ung-ming. “Our attack is not- 
a matter to be achieved in haste. The suggestion for an 
extended campaign is excellent.” 


428 San iu, or 


Wherefore the army was divided, and each half went 


out for one hundred days’ service at a time, when it was 
relieved by the other half. Full penalties were provided for 
any laxity and failure to maintain the periods of active 
service. 

In the spring of the ninth year of Chien-Hsing the army once 
more took the field against Wei. In Wei it was the fifth year 
of T’ai-Ho. 

When the King of Wei heard of this new eee he 
called Sstma and asked his advice. 

“Now that my friend Ts‘ao Chén is no more, I am willing 
to do all that one man can to destroy the rebels against Your 
Majesty’s authority.” 


The king was gratified by this ready otter and honoured — 


Sstma with a banquet. Soon after came the news of actual 


attack and an edict issued for the army to move. The king, 


riding in his state chariot, escorted Ssuma I out of the city, 
and, after the farewells, the general took the road to Ch‘angan, 


where the force was gathering. There was assembled a | 


council of war. 

Chang Ho offered to guard Yung and Mei, but Ssiima said, 
“Our leading army is not strong enough to "face the enemy’s 
whole force. Moreover, to divide an army is not generally a 


successful scheme. The better plan will be to leave a guard | 
in Shangk‘uei and send all the others to Ch‘ishan. Will you | 


undertake the leadership of the van?” 

Chang Ho consented, saying, “I have always been most 
loyal and will devote my energies entirely to the service of 
the state. So far I have not had an adequate opportunity to 
prove my sincerity, but now that you confer upon me a post of 
such responsibility I can only say that no sacrifice can be too 
great for me, and I will do my utmost.” 


So Chang was appointed van-leader, and then Kuo Huai was . 


- get over Shénsi. Other captains were distributed to other 
~posts, and the march began. The spies ascertained that the 
main force of Shu was directed toward Ch‘ishan, and the 
leaders of the van were Wang P‘ing and Chang I. The route 
chosen for their march was from Ch‘énts‘ang across Chienko, 
through Sankuan and the Hsieh Valley. 

Hearing this, Ssuma said, ‘“K‘ung-ming is advancing in 
great force and certainly intends to reap the wheat in Shénsi 
for his supply. - You get sufficient men to hold Ch‘ishan, while 
I and Kuo Huai go over and foil the enemy’s plan to gather 
the wheat.” 

So Cang Ho took four legions to hold Ch‘ishan, and Ssiima 
set out westwards. 

When K‘ung-ming reached Ch‘ishan and had settled his 
men in camp, he saw that the hank of the River Wei had been 
fortified by his enemy. 


a4 ` 
Ne EENT, | 


Romance of the Three Hingooms 429 


“That must be the work of Sstima I,” remarked he to his 
captains. “But we have not enough food in camp. I have writ- 
ten to Li Yen to send grain, but it has not yet arrived. The 
wheat in Shénsi is now just ripe, and we will go and reap it.” 

Leaving a guard for the camps, K‘ung-ming, with several 
captains, went over to Luch‘éng. The Prefect of that city 
knew he could not offer any real defence, so he opened the gates 
and yielded. Then K‘ung-ming asked him where the ripe wheat 
was to be found, and Shénshang was named. Soa few men ` 


were left in the city, and the remainder of the army went to. | 


Shénshang. - Pee 
But soon the leading body returned to say that Sstma had 
already occupied that city. 
a guessed what I intended to do,” said K‘ung-ming, taken 
aback. ; 

K‘ung-ming then retired, bathed and put on another dress. 
Next he bade them bring out. three four-wheeled chariots, all 
exactly alike, that were among the impedimenta of the army. 
They had been built in Shu some time before. | 

„Chiang Wei was told off to lead a company as escort for 
one chariot, and a half company of drummers were appointed 
to accompany it. The chariot with its escort and drummers 
was sent away behind the city. In like manner two other 
chariots were equipped and sent east and west of the city. 
‘Each chariot was propelled by a team of twenty men, all 


ie _ dressed in black, barefooted and with loosened hair. Each 
one of the team also had a sword or a black seven-starred : 


‘bannerol. / A; 

While the chariots were taking up their positions the remain-. 
ing men were ordered to prepare ropes and sickles to cut and 
carry away the grain. fess ‘ 

Next K‘ung:=ming selected twenty-four handsome soldiers, 
whom he dressed and armed like those sent away with the 
three chariots, save that all carried swords instead of some 
swords and some bannerols. These were to push his own 
chariot. Kuan Hsing was told to dress up as a sort of angel 
and to walk in front of K‘ung-ming’s chariot holding a black 
_ seven-starred bannerol. These preparations complete, K‘ung- 
-` ming mounted, and the chariot took the road toward the Wei 

camp. 

The appearance of a chariot’ with such attendants more 
than startled the enemy’s scouts, who did not know whether ` 
the apparition was that of a man or a demon. They hastened 
to their general and told him. Ssuma came out himself and 
saw the cavalcade, and its central figure dressed as a Taoist 
mystic, with head-dress, white robe and a feather fan. 

“Some of K‘ung-ming’s odd doings,” said he, and he ordered 
a couple of companies to go out and bring in the chariot, — 
escort and the seated figure. ` 


430, San uo, or 


The soldiers went out to do their bidding, but as soon as 
they appeared, the chariot retired and took a road leading to 
the rear of the Shu camp. Although the Wei soldiers were 


mounted, they could not come up with the cavalcade. What — 


they did meet with was a chilly breeze and a cold mist that 
rolled about them. 

They found it uncanny and halted, saying one to another, 
“How extraordinary it is that we have been pressing on and 
yet we got no nearer. What does it mean?” 

When K‘ung-ming saw that the pursuit had ceased, he had 
his chariot pushed out again to the front and passed within 
sight of the halted men. At first they hesitated, but presently 
took up the pursuit once more. Whereupon the chariot again 
retired, proceeding slowly, but always keeping out of reach. 


` And thus more than twenty li were covered and the chariot 


was still not captured. 

Again the soldiers halted, puzzled and perplexed at this 
incomprehensible chase. But as soon as they stopped, the 
chariot came again toward them and they retook pursuit. 

Sstma now came up with a strong force. But he also 
halted, and said to his men, “This K‘ung-ming is a past master 
in the ‘arts of necromancy and juggling and knows how to call 
up spirits to his aid. I know this trick of his; it is one of 
the ‘Six Chia,’ and it is vain to pursue.” 

So they ceased following. But then a roll of drums came 
from the side of the enemy as if a body of men were approach- 


‘ing. Sstma told off some companies to repel them, but there 


only came into view a small force, and in their midst was-.a 
party of men dressed in black, the exact counterpart of the 
cavalcade he had first sent to pursue. In the chariot sat 


another K‘ung-ming just like the one that had just. dis- 


appeared. 

“But just now he was sitting in that chee chariot; how 
can he be here? It is most wonderful,” said Sstma. 

Shortly after they heard another roll of the drums, and as 
the sound died away there appeared another body of men, 


©- with a chariot in the midst, exactly like the last and also 


carrying a sitting figure of K‘ung-ming. 

“They must be magic soldiers,” said Sstma. 

The men were now feeling the strain of these weird 
appearances and began to get out of hand. They dared not 
stay to fight such beings, and some ran away. But before 
they had gone far, lo! another roll of drums, another cohort 
and another chariot with a similar figure seated therein. 

The men of Wei were now thoroughly frightened, and even 
Sstma himself began to feel doubtful whether these appear- 
ances should be ascribed to men or devils. He realised, 


_ however, that he was in the midst of dangers, and he and 


his men ran away helter-skelter, never stopping till they 


‘Fomance of the Three aingdoms a 431 


reached Shangk‘ui. | They entered the city and closed the 


gates. 


Having thus driven off the Wei soldiers, K‘ung-ming Paa 
ed to reap and gather the wheat, which was carried into 
Luch‘éng and laid out to dry. . 

Sstma remained shut up within the walls for three .days. 
Then, as he saw his enemies retiring, he sent out some scouts, 


who presently returned with a Shu soldier they had captured. ay 


The prisoner was questioned. we 
“I was of the reaping party,” said the man. ‘They caught 
me when I was looking for some horses that had strayed.” 
“What wonderful soldiers were they of yours that one saw 
here lately ? 2?” asked the general. 
The man replied, “K‘ung-ming was with one party of them, 
the others were led by Chiang Wei, Ma Tai and Wei Yen. 
There was a company of fighting men with each chariot and 
half a company of drummers. K‘ung-ming was with the 


Ay first party.” 


is comings and goings are not human, ” said Ssuma sadly. 


He sent for Kuo Huai to talk over plans. Said Kuo, “I 


hear the men of Shu are very few and they are occupied with 
gathering the grain; why not smite them?” 
 Ssùma told him his last experience of his opponent’s wiles. 


“He threw dust in your eyes. that time,” said Kuo witha | 


smile. “However, now you know. What is the good of more 


: = talk? Let me attack the rear, while you lead against the 
~ front, and we shall take the city and K‘ung-ming too.” 


- An attack was decided upon. 
While the men were still busy with the wheat, Kune mng 


One called up his captains, and said, “The enemy will attack to- — 


| night. There is a suitable place for an ambush in the newly 


reaped fields, but who will lead for me?” 
Four captains offered themselves, and he posted them, each 


| ' with two companies, outside the four corners of the city. They | | 


were to await the signal and then converge. When these had _ 
gone, K‘ung-ming led out a small party of men and hid in the 
newly reaped fields. 

In the meantime Sstuma was drawing near. It was dusk 


“when he stood beneath the walls of Luch‘éng. 


. Said he to his officers, “If we attacked by daylight we should 


f find the city well prepard, so we will take advantage of the 


darkness The moat is shallow here, and there will be no 


N difficulty in crossing it.” 


The men bivouacked till the time should come to attack. 


“About the middle of the first watch Kuo Huai arrived, and his 


force joined up with the others. This done, the drums began 
to beat, and the city was quickly surrounded, However, the 
defenders maintained such a heavy discharge of arrows, bolts 


and stones from the walls that the Perec dared not close i in. 


7 a 


432 San Kuo, or 


$ j i 
Suddenly from the midst of the Wei army came the roar of 


a bomb, soon followed by others from different places. The 


soldiers were startled, but no one could say whence the sounds 


had proceeded. Kuo Huai went to search the wheat fields, and 
then the four armies from the corners of the city converged 


upon the Wei army. At the same time the defenders burst out 


of the city gates, and a great battle began. Wei lost many men. 
After heavy fighting Sstma extricated his army from the 
battle and made his way to a hill, which he set about holding 


and fortifying, while Kuo Huai got round to the rear of tne 


city and called a halt. 

K‘ung-ming entered the city and sent his men to camp again 
at the four corners of the walls. 

Kuo Huai went to see his chief, and said, “We have long 
been at grips with these men and are unable to drive them off. 


We have now lost another fight, and unless something is done | z 


we shall not get away at all.” 
“What can we do?” asked Sstma. 


“You might write to Yung and Liang to send their Tores ae 
to our help. I will try my fortune against. Chienko and cut ~~ 
off Chuko’s retreat and supplies. That should bring about — 
discontent and mutiny, and we can attack when we see the aM: 


enemy in confusion.” 


The letters were sent, and soon Sun Li came leading the pi 


men, foot and horse, of the two districts. The new arrivals 
were sent to help Kuo in the attack on Chienko. 


After many days had’ passed without sight of the. enemy, 
K‘ung-ming thought it was time to make another move. Call- 
ing up Chiang Wei and Ma Tai, he said, “The men of Wei — 
are well posted on the hills and refuse battle because, firstly, - 
they think that we are short of food, and, secondly, they have > 


sent an army against Chienko to cut off our supplies. Now 


each of you will take a legion and garrison the important . 


points about here to show them that we are well, prepares to 
defend ourselves. Then they will retire.” 

After these two had gone, Chang Shih and Chang I came to 
see the general about the change of troops then due. They 
told him the reliefs had alredy left Hanchung and that despat+ 
ches from the leading divisions had come in. Four legions 
were due for relief. 

“There is the order; carry it out,” replied K‘ung-ming. 

So the home-going legions prepared to withdraw. Just then 
came the news of reinforcements for the enemy from Yung 


and Liang and a report of actual attacks on Luch‘éng and — 
Chienko. In the face of such important. news, Yang I went 


to ask if the change of forces was to take place or be postponed 
for a time. 

K‘ung-ming repens ‘T must keep faith with the men. Since 
the order for the periodical exchange of men has been issued 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 433 


it must be carried out. Beside, the men due for relief are all 
prepared to start, their expectations have been roused and 
their relatives await them. In the face of yet greater difficul- 
ties I would let them go.” 

So orders were given for the time-expired men to march 
that day. But when the legionaries heard it a sudden move- 
ment of generosity spread among them, and they said they 
did not wish to go, but would prefer to remain to fight. 

“But you are due for home; you cannot stay here, ” said the 
general. & 

They reiterated that they all wished to stay instead of 

© going home. 

“Since you wish to stay and fight with me you can go out 
ef the city and camp ready to encounter the men of Wei as 
soon as they arrive. Do not give them time to rest or recover 

_ breath, but attack vigorously at once. You will be fresh and 
fit, waiting for those fagged with a long march.” 
_ So they gripped their weapons and joyfully went out of 
_ the city to array themselves in readiness. . 
Now the Hsiliang men had travelled by double marches, 
-~ and so were worn out and needed rest. But while they were 
= pitching their tents the men of Shu fell upon them lustily, 
leaders full of spirit, men full of energy. The weary soldiers 
could make no proper stand, and retired. The men of Shu 
followed, pressing on them till corpses littered the whole plain 
and blood flowed in runnels. 
i It was a victory for K‘ung-ming, and he came out to 
welcome the victors and led them into the city and distributed 
rewards. 
° Just then arrived an urgent letter from Li Yen, then at 
- Jungp‘ing, and when K‘ung-ming had torn it open he read :— 
“News has just come that Wu has sent.an envoy to Loyang 
and entered into an alliance with Wei whereby Wu is to 
attack us. The army of Wu 'has not yet set out, but I am 
anxiously awaiting your plans.” 

Doubts and fears crowded in upon K‘ung-ming’s mind as 
he read. He summoned his officers: 

“As Wu is coming to invade our land, we shall have to retire 
quickly,” said he. “If I issue orders for the Ch‘ishan force 
to withdraw, Sstma will not dare to pursue while we are 
camped here.” 

The Ch‘ishan force broke camp and marched in two divi- 
gions. Chang Ho watched them go, but was too fearful of 
the movement being some ruse to attempt to follow. He went 

to see Ssuma. 

“The enemy have retired, but I know not for what reason.’ 

“K ‘ung-ming is-very crafty, and you will do well to remain 
_ where you are and keep a careful-look-out. Do nothing till 

their grain has given out, when they must retire for good.” 


434 San Kuo, or 


Here Wei Yen stepped forward, saying, “But we should seize 
the occasion of their retreat to smite them. Are they tigers — 
that you fear to move? How the world will laugh at — 
us.’ 

But Ssuma was obstinate and. ignored the protest. 

When K‘ung-ming knew that the Ch‘ishan men had got 
away safely, he called Yang I and Ma Chung and gave them 
secret orders to lead a legion of bowmen and crossbowmen ` 
out by the Wooden Gate of | Chienko and place them in ambush _ 
on both sides of the road. ` 

“Tf the men of Wei pursue, wait till you hear a bomb. — 
When you hear the bomb, at once barricade the road with ~ 


timber and stones so as to impede them. When they halt, shoot ~ 


at them with the bows and the crossbows.” 
Wei Yen and Kuan Hsing were told to attack the rear of 


the enemy. 


These orders given, the walls of the city were decorated — 
lavishly with flags, and at various points within the city were 
piled straw and kindling wood ready to raise a blaze as though ~ 
the city was on fire. The soldiers were sent out along the By: 
road from the Wooden Gate. y 

The spies of Wei returned to headquarters to say that jioni a 
of the Shu soldiers had left, only a few being in the city. In 
doubt, Ssima went himself to look, and when he saw the © 
smoke rising from within the walls and the fluttering flags he 
said, “The city is deserted.” He sent men in to confirm this, — 
and ‘they said the place was empty. a 

“Then K‘ung-ming is really gone; who will pursue? figs 
. “Let me,” replied Chang Ho. i 

“You are too impulsive,” said Sstma. k 

“I have þeen leader of the van from the first day of this 
expedition; why not use me to-day, when there is work to be 
done and glory to be gained?” 4 

“Because the utmost caution is necessary. They are 
retreating, and they will leave an ambush at every possible 
point.” 

“I know that, and you need not be afraid.” 

“Well; you wish to go and may; but whatever happens you 
must be prepared for.” 

“A really noble man is prepared to sacrifice self for country; : 
never mind what happens.” 

“Then take half a legion and start; Wei P‘ing shall follow 
with two legions of horse and foot to deal with any ambush 
that may discover itself. I will follow later with three com- © 
panies to help where need þe.” 

o Chang Ho set out and advanced quickly. Thirty li out | 
he crd a roll of drums, and suddenly appeared from a wood 
a cohort led by a captain of high rank, who galloped to the. 
front crying, “Whither would you go, O rebel leader?” 


3 Fiomance of the Three Lingdoms 435 


a Chang Ho swiftly turned and engaged Wei Yen, for it was 
-~ he who led, but after a few passes Wei fled. Chang rode after 
him along the road he had come by and then stopped and 
__ turned again. All went well till he came to a slope, when there 

eben shouts and yells and another body of soldiers came 

out. ; 
“Chang Ho, do not run away!” cried this leader, who was 
Kuan Hsing. 
Kuan galloped ‘close, and Chang did not flee. They fought, 
and after half a score of passes Kuan seemed to have the worst 
of the encounter and fled. Chang Ho followed. Presently 
they neared a dense wood. Chang was fearful of entering 
in, so he sent forward men to search the thickets. They could 
_ find no danger, and Chang again pursued. 

But quite unexpectedly Wei Yen, who had formerly fled, 
_ got round ahead of Chang and now appeared again. The two 
-~ fought a half score bouts and again Wei ran. Chang followed, 
` but Kuan also got round to the front by a side road and so 
_ stopped the pursuit of Wei. Chang attacked furiously as soon 
_ as he was checked, this time so successfully that the men of | 


ine 


littered with spoil, and the Wei men could not resist the 
-~ temptation to gather it. They slipped from their horses and 
_ began to collect the arms. 
The manceuvres just described continued, wen. and Kuan 
one after the other engaging Chang and Chang pressing on 
- after each one, but achieving nothing. And as evening fell the 
_ running fight had led both sides close to the Wooden Gate Road. 
~ Then suddenly Wei’s men made a real stand, and he rode 
Gao to the front yelling, “Yield, rebel! I have not fought yet and 
you have had it all your own way so far. Now we will fight 
to the death.” 

i Chang was furious and nothing loth, so he came on with 
his spear to meet Wei, who was flourishing his sword. They 
`. met; yet again, after a few bouts, Wei threw aside weapons, 
` armour, helmet and all his gear, and even left his horse and 
~ went away along the Wooden Gate Road. 

} Chang Ho was filled with the lust to kill, and he could not 
=- Jet Wei escape. So he set out after him, although it was 
already dark. But suddenly lights appeared, and the sky 
_ became aglow, and at the same time huge boulders and great 
- baulks of aad came rolling down the slopes and blocked 
-the way. 

- Fear beanie Chang, for he saw he had blundered into an 
ambush. The road was blocked in front and behind and 


-~ bordered by craggy precipices. Then, rat-tat-tat! came the 

sound of a rattle, and therewith flew clouds of arrows and 

-showers of bolts. Chang Ho and many of his officers were 
— killed.’ . i 


< Shu threw away their war-gear and ran. The road was thus — 


436 ; San uo, or 


With myriad shining bolts the air was filled, 
The road was littered with brave soldiers killed; 
The force to Chienko faring perished here; 
The tale of valour grows from year to year. 


Soon the second army of Wei came up, but tooslate to adba 


From the signs they knew that their comrades had been ` 


victims of a cruel trick, and they turned back. But as they 
faced about a shout was heard, and from the hill-tops came, 
“I, Chuko Liang, am here”? 

Looking up they saw his figure outlined against a fire. 


Pointing to the slain, he cried, “I have been hunting, as you ~ 
see; only instead of slaying a horse (Ma, for Ssima) I have | 
killed a deer (Chang). But you may go in peace, and when ~ 
you see your general, tell him that he will be my quarry one ~ 


day.” @& 
The soldiers told this to Sstma when they returned, and he 
was deeply mortified, and blamed himself as the cause of the 


death of ‘his colleague Chang Ho. And when he returned to Be 
Loyang the king wept at the death of his brave leader and had 35 


his body honourably buried. 


K‘ung-ming had no sooner reached Hanchung than he a 


prepared to go on to the capital and see his lord. 


But Li Yen, who was in charge of the capital beside bane a y 
` respensible for supplying the army, said to the king, “Why — 
does the Prime Minister return, for I have kept him fully 


supplied with all things needed for the army??? — 


Then the king sent Fei I into Hanchung to enquire why. the is 


army had retired. And when he had arrived and showed  — 
the cause of his coming, K‘ung-ming was greatly surprised ~~ 


and showed the letter from Li telling of the alliance and 
threatened invasion from Wu. Then Fei related the gist of 
Li’s memorial to the Throne. So. K‘ung-ming enquired care- 


fully, and then it came out that Li had failed to find sufficient 


grain to keep the army supplied and so had sent the first 
lying letter to the army that it might retire before the. 
shortage showed itself. His memorial to the Throne was . 
designed to. cover the former fault. 


“The fool has ruined the great design of the. late just to — 7 


save his own skin,” cried K‘ung-ming bitterly. 
He called in the offender and sentenced him to death. But 
Fei I interceded, saying that the late Emperor had loved and — 


mg 


trusted Li Yen, and so his life was spared. However, when 


Fei made his report the king was wroth and ordered Li Yen 
to suffer death. . La 


But this time Chiang Wan intervened, saying, “Your late = 


father named Li Yen as one of the guardians of your youth. 
And the king relented. However, Li was stripped of all rank 
and exiled. pur K‘ung-ming gave Li’s sons Sea 


Homance of the Three Kingdoms : sa 


_ Preparations then began for an expedition to start in three 
= years. Plans were discussed, provisions were accumulated, 
- weapons put in order and officers and men kept fit and trained. 
By his kindness to ali men K‘ung-ming won great popularity, 
~ and the time passed quickly. 

In the second month of the thirteenth year K‘ung-ming 
presented a memoria! saying, “I have been training the army 
for three years; supplies are ample and all is in order for an 

expedition. We may now attack Wei. If I cannot destroy 
these rebels, sweep away the evil hordes and bring about a 
- glorious entry into the capital, then may I never again enter 
- your Majesty’s presence.’ 
-The king replied, “Our state is now firmly established, and 
_ Wei troubles us not at all; why not enjoy the present tran- 
quillity, O Father-Minister ? pr : 
“Because of the mission left me by your tothe I am ever 
scheming to destroy Wei, even in my dreams. I must strive 
my best and do my utmost to restore you to the ancient capital 
` of your race and replace the Hans in their old palace.” 
As he said this a voice cried, “An army may not go forth, O 
a ~ Minister!” 
o Chou had raised a lakt protest: 


K‘ung- -ming’s sole thought was service, 
Himself he would not spare; 

But Ch‘iao haa watched the starry sky, 
And read misfortune there. 


i The next chapter will give the arguments against fighting. 


RAN 


CHAPTER CII. 


SsUMA OCCUPIES THE RIVER BANKS; 
CHUKO CONSTRUCTS ‘‘BULLOCKS”’ AND “HORSES.” 


h‘iao Chou, who protested against the war, was Grand 


Historian. He was also a student of astrology. He opposed | 


the war, saying, “My present office involves the direction of 


the observations on the Astrological Terrace, and I am bound à ~ 
to report whether the aspect forebodes misfortune or promises ` 
- happiness. Not long since, several flights of orioles came from 
the south, plunged into the Han Waters and were drowned. 


This is an evil augury. Moreover, I have studied the aspect 
of the sky, and the ‘Wolf’ constellation is influencing the 


aspect of the planet Venus. An aura of prosperity pervades 


the north. To attack Wei will not be to our profit. Again, 


the people say that the cypress trees moan in the night. With an f 
so many evil omens, I would that the Prime Minister should 
not go forth to war, but remain at home to guard what we sN 


have.” 


irresponsible talk of inauspicious signs.’ 


K‘ung-ming was not to be deterred. He detracted the! 2 


officials to prepare the Great Bovine Sacrifice in the Dynastic 


Temple. Then, weeping, he prostrated himself and made oA 


this declaration: “Thy servant Liang has made five expedi- 
tions to Ch‘ishan without gaining any extension of territory. 


His fault weighs heavily upon him. Now once again he is 


about to march, pledged to use every effort of body and mind 
to exterminate the rebels against the Han House, and to 
restore to the Dynasty its ancient glory in its old capital. To 
achieve this end he would use the last remnant of his strength 
and could die content.” 


The sacrifice ended, he took leave of the king and set out 


for Hanchung to make the final arrangements for his march. 


While so engaged, he received the unexpected news of the i a 


death of Kuan Hsing. He was greatly shocked, and fainted. 


When he had recovered consciousness his officers did their 


utmost to console him. 
“How pitiful! ‘Why does Heaven deny long life to the 


loyal and good? I have lost a most able captain just as Iam | 


setting out and need him most.” 


“How can I?” said K‘ung-ming. “His late Majesty laid | 
upon me a heavy responsibility, and I must exert myself to 

the utmost in the endeavour to destroy these rebels.. The 
policy of a state cannot be changed because of vain and ~ 


i Eao "N E PERA TAD, IKA DAN T AERE RA 
PS aly 1 OAS O a A SA AU 
a A ae EA SVA CIA COR hoa p rien i y f 

EE z eh) aE TAE NAN 5 P 4 S 

eh es “hy 3 y 


i 


§ 4 


oy 


ae 


i 
Aaya 


Homance of the Three kingdoms 439 


As all are born, so all must die; 

Men are as gnats against the sky; 
But loyalty or piety x 
May give them immortality. 


The armies of Shu numbered thirty-four legions, and they 
marched in five divisions, with Chiang Wei and Wei Yen in 
the van, and when they had reached Ch‘ishan, Li K‘uei, the 
Commissary General, was instructed to convey stores into 
Hsieh Valley in readiness. 

In Wei they had recently changed the style of the year- 
period to Ch‘ing-Lung, Black Dragon, because a black dragon 
had been seen to issue from Mop‘o Well. The year of the 
fighting was the second year. ) 

The courtiers said to King Jui, “The wardens of the marches 
report thirty or so legions advancing in five divisions from 


_ Shu upon Ch‘ishan.”’ 


The news distressed the king, who at once called in Sstma I 


-and told him of the invasion. 


Sstma replied, “The aspect of the sky is very auspicious 
for the capital. The K‘uet star has encroached upon the 
planet Venus, which bodes ill for Hsich‘iian. Thus K‘ung- 
ming is pitting his powers against the heavens and will meet 
defeat and suffer death. And I, by virtue of Your Majesty’s 
good fortune, am to be the instrument of destruction. I 


` request leave to name four men to go with me.” 


“Who are they? Name them,” said the king. 

“They are the four sons of Hsiahou Ytian, Pa, Wei, Hui 
and Ho. The first two trained archers and cavaliers, the 
other two are deep strategists. Ail four desire to avenge the 
death of their father. Pa and Wei should be leaders of the 
van; Hui and Ho Expeditionary Ministers of War to discuss 
and arrange plans for the repulse of cur enemy.” . 

“You remember the evil results of employing the ‘Dynastic 
Son-in-Law,’ Hsiahou Mou; he lost his army and is still too 


< ashamed to return to court. You are sure these are not of . 


the same kidney ?”’ 
“They are not like him in the least. l 
The king granted the request and named Ssŭma I as Com- 
mander-in-chief with the fullest authority. When Ssŭma took 
leave of the king he received a command in the king’s own 
writing :— $ AAE 
. “When you, Noble Sir, reach the banks of the Wei River 
and have well fortified that position, you are not to give battle. 
The men of Shu, disappointed of their desire, will pretend to 
retire and so entice you on, but you will not pursue. You will 
wait till their supplies are consumed and they are compelled 
to retreat, when you may smite them. Then you will obtain 
the victory without distressing the army unduly. This is the 


9 


pest plan of campaign.” 


440 - San uo, or 


Ssŭma took it with bowed head. He'proceeded forthwith to 
Ch‘angan.« When he had mustered the forces assembled from 
all districts they numbered forty legions, and they were all 
camped on the river. In addition, five legions were farther 
up the stream preparing nine floating bridges. The two 
leaders of the van were ordered to cross the river and camp, 
and in rear of the main camp on the east a solid earth rampart 
was raised to guard against any surprises from the rear. 

While these preparations were in progress, Kuo Huai and 
Sun Li came to the new camp, and the former said, “With 
the men of Shu at Ch‘ishan there is a possibility of their 
dominating the Wei River, going up on the plain and pushing 
out a line to the north hills whereby to cut off Shensi.” 

“You say well,” said Ssuma. “See to it. Take command 
of all the Shénsi forces, occupy Peiyiian and make a fortified 


camp there. But adopt a fabian policy; wait till the enemy’s ‘ 


food supplies get exhausted before you think of attack.” 

So they left to carry out these orders. 

In this expedition K‘ung-ming made five main camps at 
Ch‘ishan, and between Hsieh Valley and Chienko he establish- 
ed a line of fourteen large camps. He distributed the men 
among these camps as for a long campaign. He appointed 


inspecting officers to make daily visits to see that all was in . 


readiness. When he heard that the men of Wei had camped 
in Peiytian, he said to his officers, “They camp there fearing 
that our holding this district will sever connection with Shénsi. 
I am pretending to look toward Peiytian, but really my objec- 
tive is the Wei River. I am going to build several large rafts 
and pile them with straw, and I have five companies of 
watermen to manage them. In the darkness of the night I 
shall attack Peiytian; Sstma will come to the rescue; if he is 
only a little worsted I shall cross the river with the rear 
divisions. Then the leading divisions will embark on the 
rafts, drop down the river, set fire to the bridges and attack 
. the rear of the enemy. I shall lead an army.to take the gates 
of the first camp. If we can get the south bank of the river 
the campaign will become simple.” 


The spies carried information of the doings of the men of 


Shu to Sstma, who said to his men, “K‘ung-ming has some 
crafty scheme, but I think I know it. He proposes to make 


a show of taking Peiyüan, and then, dropping down the river, 


he will try to. burn our bridges, throw our rear into confusion 
and then attack.” 


So he ordered Hsiahou Pa and his brother to listen for the 


sounds of battle about Peiytian; if they heard the shouting 
they were to march down to the river, to the hills on the 


‘south, and attack the men of Shu as they arrived. Two other 


forces, of two companies of bowmen each, were to lie in hiding 


on the north bank near the bridges to keep off the rafts that ` 


daa 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 441 


might come down on the current and keép them from touching 
tke bridges. : 

Then he sent for Kuo Huai and Sun Li, and said, “K‘ung- 
ming is coming to Peiytian to cross the river secretly. Your 
force is small, and you can hide half way along the road. If 
the enemy come in the afternoon, that will mean an attack 
on us in the evening. Then you are to simulate defeat and 
run. They will pursue. You can shoot with all your energy, 
and our marines will attack. If the attack is in great force, 
look out for orders.” 

All these orders given, Ssùma sent his two sons Shih and 
Chao to reinforce the front camp while he led his own men to 
relieve Peiyiian. 

K‘ung-ming sent Wei Yen and Ma Tai to cross the Wei River 
and attack Peiytian, while the attempt to set fire to the bridges 
was confided to Wu Pan and Wu I. The general attack was 
to be made by three divisions. The various divisions started 

= at noon and crossed the river, where they slowly formed up 
in battle order. 

The armies sent against Peiyiian arrived about dusk. The 
scouts having informed the defenders of their approach, Sun 
Li abandoned his camp and fled. This told Wei Yen that 

his attack was expected, and he turned to retire. At this 

moment a great shouting was heara, and there appeared two 

= bodies of the enemy bearing down upon the attackers. Des- 

perate efforts were made to extricate themselves, but many of 

the men of Shu fell into the river. The others scattered. 

= However, Wu I came up and rescued the force from entire 
destruction. . 

Wu Pan set half his men to navigate the rafts down the. 
river to the bridges. But the men of Wei stationed near the 
bridges shot clouds of arrows at them, and the Shu leader, 
Wu Pan, was wounded. He fell into the river and was 

drowned. The crews of the rafts jumped into the water and 
got away. The rafts fell into the hands of the men of Wei. 

At this time Wang P‘ing and Chang I were ignorant of the . 
defeat of their Peiytian army, and they went straight for the 
camps of Wei. They arrived in the second watch. They 
heard loud shouting, and Wang P‘ing said to his colleague, 
“We do not know whether the cavalry sent to Peiytian has 

been successful or not. It is strange that we do not see'a 
single soldier of the enemy. Surely Ssuma has found out the 
-plan and prepared to frustrate the attack. Let us wait here 
till the bridges have been set on fire and we see the flames.” 

So they halted. Soon after, a mounted messenger came up 
with orders for them to retire, as the attack on the bridges 

had failed. They attempted to withdraw, but the men of 
Wei had taken a by-road to their rear, and they were at once 
attacked. A great fire started also. A disorderly battle 


442 San Guo, or A | 


ensued, from which the two leaders eventually got out, but 
only with great loss. And when K‘ung-ming collected his 
army at. Ch‘ishan once more he found, to his sorrow, that he 
had lost more than the equivalent of a legion. 

Just at this time Fei I arrived from Ch‘éngtu. K‘ung-ming 
received him and, after the ceremonies were over, said, “I 
would trouble you, Sir, to carry a letter for me EN Wu; will 
you undertake the mission?” 

“Could I possibly decline any task you laid upon me?” 

So K‘ung-ming wrote a letter and sent it to Sun Ch‘üan. 
Fei I took it and hastened to Chienyeh, where he saw Sun and 
presented this letter :—‘“‘The Hans have been unfortunate, and 
the line of rulers has been broken. The Ts‘ao party have 
usurped the seat of governmert and still hold the command. 
My late master confided a great task to me, and I must exhaust | 
every effort to achieve it. Now my army is at Ch‘ishan and J 
the rebels are on the verge of destruction on the River Wei. 
I hope Your Majesty, in accordance with your oath of alliance, — 
will send a leader against the north to assist by taking the i 
capital, and the empire can be shared. The full circumstances _ 
cannot be told, but I hope you will understand and act.” ae 

Sun Ch‘tian was pleased at the news and said to the envoy, | 
“I have long desired to set my army in motion, but have not 
been able to arrange with K‘ung-ming. After this letter I 
will lead an expedition myself and go to occupy Ch‘aomén and 
capture the new city of Wei. Moreover, I will send Lu Hsiin 
with an army to camp at Mienk‘ou and take Hsiangyang. I 
will also send an army into Huaiyang. The total number 
will be thirty legions, and they shall start at once.’ 

Fei I thanked him and said, “In such a case the capital 


SE en ed 


‘will fall forthwith.” 


A banquet was prepared. At this, Sun Ch‘iian said, “Whom 
did the minister send to lead the battle’ TA 

Fei replied, “Wei Yen was the chief leader.” 

“A man brave enough, but crooked. One day he will work 


ie) mischief unless K‘ung-ming is very wary. But surely he 


knows.” 

“Your Majesty’s words are to the point,” said the envoy ; 
“I will return at once and lay them before K‘ung-ming. 

Fei quickly took leave and hastened to Ch‘ishan with his 
news of the intended expedition.” 

“Did the King of Wu say nothing else?” asked K‘ung-ming. 

Then Fei told him what had been said about Wei Yen. $ 

“Truly a comprehending ruler,” said K‘ung-ming, apprecia- 
tively. “But I could not be ignorant of this. However, I 
use him because he is very bold.’ 

“Then, Sir, you ought to decide soon what to do with 
him.” 

“T have a scheme of my own.” 


Fei penned a Ch‘éngtu, and K‘ ung-ming ened the 

CN nn camp duties of a leader. 

= Then suddenly a certain Wei leader came and begged to be 

_ allowed to surrender. Kung-ming had the man brought in 

and questioned him. 
-~ “Tam a supplementary leader, Cnéng Wên by name. A 
_ certain Ch‘in Lang and I are old colleagues. Recently Sstma 
transferred us and, showing great partiality for my colleague, 
gave him high rank and threw me out like a weed. I was 
` disgusted and left, and I wish to join your ranks if you will 
accept my service.’ 
Just at that moment a man came in to say that Ch‘in Lang, 
- the very man whose promotion had sent the deserter to the 
_ other side, had appeared in front of the tents and was challeng- 
-ing Chêng Wên. ` f 
1 Said K‘ung-ming, “How does this man stand with you in 
_ fighting skill?” 
“TI should just kill him,” said Chéng. 
“If you were to slay him that would remove my doubts.” 
= Chéng. accepted the proposal with alacrity, mounted his 

_ horse and away he went. K‘ung-ming went out to see the fight. 

_ There was the challenger shaking his spear and reviling his 
‘late friend as rebel and brigand and horse-thief. 

“Give me back my horse you stole!” cried he, galloping 

a De ovard) Chéng as soon as he appeared. Chéng whipped up 
~ his horse, waved his sword and went to meet the attack. In 

~ the first bout he cut down Ch‘in Lang. 

-.The Wei soldiers then ran away; the victor hacked off the 

head of his victim and returned to lay it at K‘ung-ming’s feet. 

_ Seated in his tent, he summoned the victor and burst out :— 
“Take him away and behead him!” 

~ “Ihave done nothing wrong,” cried Chéng. 

oy “As if I do not know Ch‘in Lang! The man you have just 

killed was not Ch‘in Lang. How dare you try to deceive me?” 

Cheng said, “I will own up; but this was his brother 
Ming.” 
K‘ung-ming smiled. ‘“Ssuma sent you to try this on for 
-~ some reason of his own, but he couid not throw dust in my 
eyes. If you do not tell the truth I will put you to death.” 
Thus cought, the false deserter confessed and begged his 
life. 

PEN Kung- -ming said, “You can save your life by writing a letter 
~ to Ssuma telling him to come to raid our camp. I will spare 
= you on this condition. And if I capture Ssŭma, I will give 

you all the credit and reward you handsomely.” 

-There was nothing for it but to agree, and the [orter was 

AS written. Then the writer was placed in confinement. 

= “How did you know this was only a pretended desertion?” 

ee? seid Fan Chien. 


"Romance of the. Three langoat s a aas E 


444 San Kuv, or 


% 

“Sstima looks to his men,” replied K‘ung-ming. “If he 
made Ch‘in Lang a leading general, he was certainly a man 
of great military skill and not the sort of man to be overcome 
by this fellow Chéng in the first encounter. So his opponent 
certainly was not Ch‘in Lang. That is how I knew.” 

They congratulated him on his perspicacity. *Then K‘ung- 
ming selected a certain persuasive speaker from among his 
officers and whispered certain instructions in his ear. The 
officer at once left and carried the letter just written to the 
Wei camp, where he asked to see the generat He was 
admitted, and the letter was read. ; 

“Who are you?” said Ssùma, 

“Iam a man from the capital, a poor fellow stranded in 
Shu. Chéng Wên and I are fellow villagers. K‘ung-ming 


has given Chéng a van-leadership as a reward for what he — 


has done, and he got me to bring this letter to you and to say 


that he will show a light to-morrow evening as a signal, and ` 


he hopes you will lead the attack yourself. Chéng will work 
from the inside in your favour.” 


Sstma took great pains to test the reliability of these 


statements, and he examined the letter minutely to see if it 


ee ag A 


bore any signs of fabrication. Presently he ordered in refresh- — e 
ments for the bearer of the letter, and then he said, “We wil —— 


fix to-day at the second watch for the raid, and I will lead in mma 
person. If it succeeds I will give you a good appointment as- ~ 


a reward.” 


Taking leave, the soldier retraced his steps to his own camp ‘ez sf 


and reported the whole interview to K‘ung-ming. 


K‘ung-ming held his sword aloft; took the proper paces . for es 


an incantation, and prayed. This done, he summoned six of. 


his most able and trusty leaders, to whom he gave certain 


instructions. When they had gone to carry them out he a: 


ascended a hill, taking with him a few score men only. 


Sstma had been taken in by Chénge Wen’s letter and intend-. 


ed to lead the night raid. But the elder of his sons, whom he 
had selected to help him, expostulated with his father. 
“Father, you are going on 2 dangerous expedition on the 
faith of a mere scrap of paper,” said his son. “I think it 
imprudent. What if something goes unexpectedly wrong? 


Let some captain go in your place, and you come up in rear | 


as a reserve.’ 
Ssuma saw there was reason in this proposal, and he finally 


decided to send Ch‘in Lang, with a legion, and he himself 


would command the reserve. 
The night was fine with a bright moon. But about the 


middle of the second watch the sky clouded over, and it | 
became very black, so that a man could not see his next neigh- a 


bour. 
“This is providential,’ chuckled Sstma. 


“Romance of the Three, Ringdooms — 445 


The expedition duly started, men with gags, and horses with 
Ti cords round their muzzles. They moved swiftly and silently, 
mee and Ch‘in Lang made straight for the camp of Shu. 
ee But when he reached it, and entered, and saw not a man, 
he knew he had been tricked. He yelled to. his men to retire, 
but lights sprang up all round, and attacks began from four 
3 sides. Fight as he would, Ch‘in Lang could not free himself. 
: From, behind the battle area Ssiima saw flames rising from 
the camp of Shu and heard continuous shouting, but he knew <“ 
- not whether it meant victory for his own men or to his enemy. 
~ He pressed forward toward the fire. Suddenly, a shout, a 
roll of drums and a blare of trumpets close at hand, a bomb 
that seemed to rend the earth, and Wei Yen and Chiang Wei 
- bore down upon Ssuma, one on each flank. 
> _ This was the final blow to him. Of every ten men of Wei 
=- eight or nine were killed or wounded and the few others 
~ scattered to the four winds. Meanwhile Ch‘in Lang’s men 
were falling under arrows that came in locust-flights, and 
their leader was killed. Ssŭma and the remnant of his army 
h ran away to their own camp. 
= After the third watch the sky cleared. Kane mine from 
` the hill-top sounded the gong of retreat. ‘This obscurity in 
- the third watch was due to an incantation called tun-chia of 
“The concealing chia.” The sky became clear, but K‘ung- 
— ming performed another incantation of the sixth of the ting 
z and the chia in order to D away the few floating clouds 
-that still persisted. 
-The victory was complete. The first order on Kunemag s 
$ ra to camp was to put Chêng to death. 
Ì Next he considered new plans for capturing the south bank. 
= Every day he sent a party to offer a challenge before the 
_ camps of the enemy, but no one accepted. 
One day K‘ung-ming rode in his small chariot to the front of 
-Ch‘ishan, keenly scanned the course of the Wei River and 
~ carefully surveyed the lie of the land. Presently he came to 
a valley shaped like a bottle-gourd, large enough to form a 
hiding place for a whole company of soldiers in the inner " 
recess, while half as many more could hide in the outer. In 
_ rear the mountains were so close that they left passage only 
for a single horseman. The discovery pleased the great 
captain mightily, and he asked the guides what the eae was 
` called. 
' They replied, “It is called Shangfang Valley, or Hulu 
Valley.” ; 
Returning to his camp, he called up two leaders named Tu 
Jui and Hu Chung and whispered into their ears certain 
ie secret orders. Next he called up a company of the artizan 
camp followers and sent them into the valley to construct 
some wooden oxen n running horses” for the use of the 


"446 San Kuo, or 


troops. Finally he set Ma Tai with half a company to guard ~ 
the mouth of the valley and prevent all entrance and exit. 
He added that he would visit the valley at irregular intervals : 
to inspect the work. | 

“A plan for the defeat of Sstma is being prepared here and | 
must be kept a profound secret,” said he. * i 

Ma Tai left to take up the position. The two captains, Tu 1 
Jui and Hu Chung, were superintendents of the work in the | 
, valley. K‘ung-ming came every day to give instructions. j 

One day Yang I went to K‘ung-ming and said, “The stores i 
of grain are all at Chienko, and the labour of transport isig 
very heavy.. What'can be done?” a 

K‘ung-ming replied, smiling, “I have had a ‘scheme ready fora’ @ 
long time. The timber that I collected and bought in Hsi- -i 
ch‘tian was for the construction ef wooden transport animals * 
to convey grain. It will be very advantageous, as they will, 
require neither food nor water aud they. can keep on the move © 


ah 


have you, O Minister, to make such marvellous creatures?” : fA 
“They are being imade now after my. plans, but they aré not A 
yet ready. Here I have the plans for these ‘oxen and horses, 
with all their dimensions written out in full. You may see | 
the details.” 4 
K‘ung-ming then produced a paper, and all the captains: q 
crowded round to look at it. 
[Here follows a specification which appears incomprehen~ X 
sible, and is omitted.] $ 
They were all greatly astonished and lauded K‘ung-ming’ ee 
cleverness. A few days later the new transport animals were 
complete and began work. They were quite life-like and went 
over the hills in any desired direction. The whole army saw. 7 
them with delight. They were put in charge of Kao Hsiang 
and a company to guide them. They kept going constantly 
between Chienko and the front carrying grain for the use > of 


day and night without resting.” See 1 
All those within hearing said, “From old days till now no | y 
one has ever heard of such a device. What excellent plan 4 


the soldiers. 

Along the Chienko mountain roads 

The running horses bore their loads, 

And through Hsieh Valley’s narrow way 

The wooden oxen paced each day. 

O generals, use these means to-day, 

And transport troubles take away. anh 
Sstma was already sad enough at his defeat when the. ERN > 
told him of these “‘bullocks and horses” of new design which — 
the men of Shu were using to convey their grain. This £ 
troubled him still more. With tnis device they might never | 
be compelled to retreat for want of food. What was the use — 
_ for him to shut his gates and remain on the defensive waiting — 
for the enemy to be starved: when they never would be starved? 


fiomance of the Chree Kingdoms 44T 


Then he called up two captains and bade them lurk beside the 
oek of the “bullocks and horses” and capture four or five of 
em. 
So a half company went on this service disguised as men of 
Shu. They made their way along the by-ways by night and 
hid. Presently the “wooden” convoy came along under the 


escort of Kao Hsiang. Just as the end of it was passing they 


made a sudden rush, and captured a few of the “animals” 
which the men of Shu abandoned. In high glee they took 
them to their own camp. 

When Sstma saw them he had to confess they were very 
life-like. But what pleased him most was that he could 
imitate them now that he had models. 

“If you can use this sort of thing it would be strange if I 


` could not,” said he. 


He called to him many clever artizans and made them then 


_ and there take the machines to pieces and make some exactly _ 
_ like them. In less than half a month: they had completed a 
~ couple of thousand after K‘ung-ming’ s model, and they -could 


move. Then he placed Ts‘€n Wei, an officer of high rank, in 


charge of this new means of transport, and the ‘ ‘animals” 


began to ply between the camp and Shénsi. 
Kao Hsiang returned to camp and reported the loss of a 


few of his “oxen and horses.” 


“I wished him to capture some of them,” said K‘ung-ming, 
much pleased. “I am just laying out these few, and before 
long I shall get some very solid help in exchange.” 

“How do you know, O Minister,” said his officers. 

“Because Ssuma will certainly copy them, and when he has 
done that I have another trick ready to play on him.” 

Some days later K‘ung-ming received a report that the 


. enemy were using the same sort of “bullocks and horses” to 


bring up supplies from Shénsi. 

“Exactly as I thought,” said he. _ i 

Calling Wang P‘ing, he said, “Dress up a company as men 
of Wei and find your way quickly and secretly to Peiyiian. . 
Pretend you are escort men, for the convoy, and mingle with 
the real escort. Then suddenly turn on them so that they 
scatter. Then you will turn the “animals” this way. By and 
by you will be pursued. When that occurs you will give a 
turn to the tongues of the wooden animals, and they will not 
move. Leave them where they are and run away. When the 
men of Wei come up they will be unable to drag the creatures 
and equally unable to carry them. I-shall have men ready, 
and you will go back with them, give the tongues a backward 
turn and bring the convoy here. The enemy will be greatly 


a) oy i 


Next he called Chang I and said, “Dress up half a company in 


| the costume of the ‘six ting’ and the ‘six chia’ so that they appear 


448 San Kuo, or 


supernatural. Fit them with demon’ heads and wild beast 
shapes, and let them stain their faces various colours so as 
to look as strange as possible. Give them flags and swords 
and bottle-gourds with smoke issuing from combustibles 
inside. Let these men hide among the hills till the convoy 
approaches, when they will start the smoke, rush out suddenly 
and drive off the ‘animals.’ No one will dare pursue such 
uncanny creatures.” 

When he had left, Wei Yen and Chiang Wei were called. 

“You will take one legion, go to the border of Peiytian tc 
receive the wooden transport creatures and defend them 
against attack.” 

Then another half legion was sent to check Sstima if he 
should come, while a small force was sent to bid defiance to 
the enemy near their camp on the south bank. 

So one day when a convoy was on its way from Shénsi, the — 
scouts in front suddenly reported some soldiers ahead who 
` said they were escort:men for the grain. The Commander 
Ts‘én Wei halted and sent to enquire. It appeared they were | 
really men of Wei, however, and so he started once more. 

The new comers joined up with his own men. But before 

they had gone much farther there was a yell, and the men of 
Shu began to kill, while a voice shouted “Wang P‘ing is here!” 
. The convoy guard were taken aback. Many were killed, but 
the others rallied round Ts‘én Wei and made some defence. 
However, Wang P‘ing slew the leader, and the others ran. 
this way and that, while the convoy was turned toward’ the 
Shu camp. 

The fugitives ran off to Peiviian and reported the mishap 
to Kuo Huai, who set out hot foot to rescue the convoy. 
When he appeared, Wang P‘ing gave the order to turn 
tongues, left the “animals” in the road and ran away. Kuo . 
Huai made no attempt to pursue, but tried to put the 

“animals” in motion toward their proper destination. But 
could he move them? 
He was greatly perplexed. Then suddenly there arose the 

roll of drums all round, and out burst two parties of soldiers. 
These were Wei Yen and Chiang Wei’s men, and when they 
appeared Wang P‘ing’s men faced about and came to the 
attack as well. These three being too much for Kuo Huai, 
he retreated before thera. Thereupon, the tongues were 
turned back again and the “animals” set in motion, | 

Seeing this, Kuo Huai came on again. But just then he 
saw smoke curling up among the hills and a lot of extraordinary 
creatures burst out upon him. Some held swords and some 
flags, and all were terrible to look at. They rushed at the - 
“animals” and urged them away. 

“Truly these are supernatural helpers,” cried Kuo, quite 
frightened. 


s Ne 

a: 

f t5 - 
oe Sia 


me out fo ha rescue. dnas albar ihe road, just where it 
was most precipitous, a cohòrt burst out upon him with fierce | 
s and bursting bombs. Upon the leading banner read Ne 
“Chang I and Liao Hua, Generals of Han.” ` Hels 
Panic Pezen pee his sae and Bey ran ue rats. 


CHAPTER Gi  " 


SsUMA SURROUNDED IN SHANGFANG VALLEY; 
CHUKO INVOKES THE STARS IN THE WUCHANG PLAIN. 


orely smitten in the battle, Ssiima fled from the field a 


lonely horseman, a single spear: Seeing a thick wood in thè ~— 


distance he made for its shelter. 
Chang I halted the rear division wile Miao Hua pressed 
forward after the fugitive, whom he could see threading his 


way among the trees. And Sstma indeed was soon in fear of 


his life, dodging from tree to tree as his pursuer neared. 
Once Miao Hua was actually close enough to slash at his 
enemy, but he struck a tree instead of his man, and before he 


could pull his sword out of the wood Sstma had got clear | E 
away. When Miac got through into the open country he did 
not know which way to go. Presently he noticed a helmet ~ 
lying on the ground, just lately thrown aside. He picked it — 


up, hung it on his saddle and went away eastward. 


But the crafty fugitive, having flung away his helmet thus pes 
on the east side of the wood, had gone away west, so that — i 


Miao was going away from his quarry. After some time Miao 
fell in with Chiang Wei, when he abandoned the pursuit and 
rode with him back to camp. 


The “wooden oxen and running horses” having been driven 


into camp, their loads were put into the storehouse. The 


grain that fell to the victors amounted to a myriad “stone” or _ 


more. 


Miao Hua presented the enemy’s helmet as proof of his ~ 


prowess in the field and received a reward of the first grade 
of merit. But Wei Yen had nothing to offer, and so was 


overlooked. He went away angry and discontented, mutter- 


ing that the general pretended to be ignorant of his services. 
Very sadly Sstma returned to his own camp. Bad news 


followed, for a messenger brought ietters telling of an invasion — 


by three armies of Wu. The letters said that forces had been 
sent against them, and the king again enjoined upon his 
general a waiting and defensive policy. So Ssuma deepened 
his moats and raised his ramparts. 


King Ts‘ao Jui had sent three armies against the invaders; 


Liu Shao led that to save Changhsia, T‘ien Yu led the Hsiang- 
yang force. The king, with Man Ch‘ung, went into Hofei. 
This last was the main army. 


Į 


Romance of the Three Hingoome 451 


Man Chit led the eagite division toward Ch‘aohuk‘ou. 
Thence, looking across to the eastern shore, he saw only a few 
ships, but a large number of flags and. banners. So he return- 
A to the main army and proposed an attack without, loss of 

ime, s 

“The enemy think we shall be fatigued after a long march 
and have not troubled to prepare any defence; we should 
attack this night, and we shall overcome them.” . 

“What you say accords with my own ideas,” said the king, 
and he told off the cavalry leader, Chang Chi iu, to take five 
companies and try to burn out the enemy. Man Ch‘ung was 

. also to attack from the eastern bank. 

In the second watch of that night the the forces set out 
and -gradually approached the entrance to the lake, They 
reached the marine camp unobserved, burst upon it with a 
yell, and the men of Wu fled without striking a blow. The 
men of Wei set fires going in every direction and thus destroy- 
ed all the ships together with much grain and many weapons. 

Chuko Chin, who was in command, led his beaten men to 
Mienk‘ou, and the attackers returned to their camp much elated. 
- When ‘the report come to Lu Hsün he called together his 
officers and said, “I must write to the king to abandon the 
siege of Hsinch‘éng, that the men may be employed to cut off 
- the retreat of the Wei army, while I will attack them in front. 
‘They will be harassed by the double danger, and we shall break 
them.” 

All agreed that this was a good plan, and the memorial was 
drafted. It was sent by the hard of a junior officer, who was 
told to convey it secretly. But this messenger was captured 
at the ferry and taken before King Jui, who read the despatch, 
saying, with a sigh, “This Lu Hsiin is really very resourceful.” 

The captive was put into prison, and Liu Shao was told off 
~ to defend the rear and keep off Sun’s army. 

Now Chuko’s defeated men were suffering Pron hot weather 
illnesses, and at length he was compelled to write and tell Lu 
Hsiin, and ask that his army he relieved. and sent home. 
Having read this despatch, Lu said to the messenger, “Make 
my obeisance to the Great General and say that I will decide.” | 
_ When the messenger returned with this reply Chuko asked 
what was doing in the Commander-in-chief’s camp. He replied 

that the men were all outside planting beans, and the officers’ 
were amusing themselves at the gates. They were playing a 
game of skill, throwing arrows into narrow-necked vases. 

Then Chuko himself went to nis chief’s camp and asked how 
the pressing danger was to be met. 

Lu Hsün replied, “My messenger to the king was captured, 
and thus my plans were discovered. Now it is useless to 
prepare to fight, and so we had better retreat. I have sent 

in a memorial to engage the king to retire gradually.” 


+ 


452 San tno, or 


Chuko replied, “Why delay? If you think it best to retire, 
it had better be done quickly.” 

“My army must retreat slowly, or the enemy will come in 
pursuit, which will mean defeat and loss. Now you must 
first prepare your ships as if you meant to resist, while I 
make a semblance of an attack toward Hsiangyang. Under 
cover of these operations I shall withdraw into Chiangtung, 
and the enemy will not dare to follow.” 

So Chuko returned to his own camp and began to fit out 
his ships as if for an immediate expedition, while Lu made All 
preparations to march, giving out that he intended to advance 
upon Hsiangyang. The news of these movements were duly 
reported in the Wei camps, and when the leaders heard it they 
wished to go out and fight. But the king knew his opponent 
better than they and would not bring about a battle. So 


he called his officers together and said to them, “This Lu 


Hsiin is very crafty; keep careful guard, but do not risk a 
battle.” 


The officers obeyed, but a few days later the scouts brought | 


in news that the armies of Wu had retired. The king doubted 
and sent out some of his own spies, who confirmed the report. 
When he. thus knew it was true he consoled himself with the 
words, “Lu Hsiin knows the rat of war even as did Sun Wu 
and Wu P‘ing; they were no whit his superior. The subjuga- 
tion of the south-east is not for me this time.” 

Thereupon he distributed his captains among the various 
vantage points and led the main army back into Hofei, where 
he camped ready to take advantage of any change of conditions 
that might promise success. 


Meanwhile K‘ung-ming was at Ch‘ishan, where, to all 
appearances, he intended to make’a long sojourn. He made 


his soldiers mix with the people and share in the labour of the 


fields. He gave strict orders against any encroachment on — 
the property of the farmers, and so they and the soldiers 


lived together very amicably. 
Then Sstima’s son, Shih, went to his father and said, “These 
men of Shu have despoiled us of much grain, and now they 


are mingling with the people of Ch‘ishan and tilling the fields 


along the banks of the Wei River as if they intended to remain 


there. This would be a calamity for us. Why do you not ` 


appoint a time to fight a decisive battle with K‘ung-ming ?”’ 

His father replied, “I have the king’s orders to act on the 
defensive and may not do as you suggest.” 

While they were thus talking, one reported that Wei Yen 
had come near and was insulting the army and reminding them 
that they nad the helmet of its leader. And he was challeng- 
ing them. The captains were greatly incensed and desired 


to accept the challenge, out the Commander-in-chief was - i 


immovable in his decision to obey his orders. 


“The Holy One says if we cannot suffer small things, great ! 
- matters are imperilled. Our plan is to defend.” 


` So the challenge was not accepted, and there was no battle. 


After reviling them for some time, Wei Yen went away. 


Seeing that his enemy was not to be provoked into fighting, 
K‘ung-ming gave orders to build a strong stockade and therein 
to excavate pits and to collect large quantities of inflammables. 
So on the hill they piled wood and straw in the shape of sheds, 
and all about they digged pits and buried mines. When these 
preparations were complete Ma Tai received instructions to 
block the road in rear of Hulu Valley and to lay an ambush 


- at the entrance. 


“If Sstuma comes, let him enter the valley, and then explode 
the mines and set fire to the straw and the wood,” said K‘ung- 
ming. 

K‘ung-ming set up a seven-star signal at the mouth of the 


_-valley and also arranged a night signal of seven lamps on the © 
hill. After Ma Tai had gone, Wei Yen was called in, and K‘ung- 

_ ming said to him, “Go to the camp of Wei with half a company 
~ and provoke them to battle. The important matter is to- 
entice Sstma out of his stronghoid. You will be unable to 


obtain a victory, so retreat that he may pursue; and you are to 
make for the signal, the seven stars by day or the seven lamps 
at night. Thus you will lead him into the Hulu Valley, where 


A! I have a plan prepared for him. ’ 


When he had gone, Kao Hsiang was summoned. 


' “Take small herds, two or three score at a time, of the. 
‘wooden oxen and running horses,’ load them up with grain 
~ and lead them to and fro on the mountains. If you can 

BS succeed- in getting the enemy to capture them you will render - 


a service.’ 

So the transport ‘cattle’ were sent forth to lean their 
part in the scheme, and the remainder of the Ch‘ishan soldiers 
were sent to work in the fields, with orders to join in the 


battle only if Ssma came in person. In that case they were 


to attack the south bank of the river and cut off the retreat. 


_ Then K‘ung-ming led his army away to camp in the Shangfang. 


Valley. 
Hsiahou Hui and Hsiahou Ho went to their chief, Ssuma 
i and said, “The enemy have set out camps and are engaged 


. in field work as though they intended to remain. If they are 
- not destroyed now, but are allowed to consolidate their posi- 


tion, they will be hard to dislodge.” 

“This certainly is one of K‘ung-ming’s ruses,” said the 
chief. 

“You seem very afraid of him, General, ” retorted they. 
“When do you think you can destroy him? At least let us 


two brothers fight one battle that we may prove our gratitude 


for the king’s kindness.” 


fiomance af the Three Kingdoms 453 


454 | San Huo, or 


“If it must be so, then you may go in two divisions,” said 
Sstma. a 
As the two divisions were marching along they saw coming 


. foward them a number of the transport “animals” of the enemy. 


They attacked at: once, drove off the escort, captured them 
and sent them back to camp. Next day they captured more, 
with men and horses as well, and sent them also to camp. - 

Sstma called up the prisoners and questioned them. They 
told him that K‘ung-ming quite understood that he would not 
fight and so had told off the soldiers to various places to work 
in the fields and thus provide for future needs. They had 
been unwittingly captured. 

Sstma set them free and bade them begone. 

“Why spare them? ?? asked Hsiahou Ho. a 
“There is nothing to be gained by the slaughter of a few 
common soldiers. Let them go hack to their own and praise 
the kindliness of the Wei leaders. That will slacken the 


desire of their comrades to fight against us. That was the — : 


plan by which Lü Méng. captured Chingchou.”’ 


_ Then he issued general orders that all Shu prisoners should a 
be well treated and sent away free, and he rewarded those of 


his army who had done well: 
Ag has been said, Kao Hsiang was ordered to keep pretended 


convoys on the move, and the soldiers of Wei attacked and — 


captured them whenever they saw them. In half a month- 
they had scored many successes of this sort, and Ssuma’s heart 


was cheered. One day, when he had made new captures ofna 


men, he sent for them and questioned them again. 

“Where i is K‘ung-ming now?” 

“He is no longer at Ch‘ishan, but in camp bout ten-li from - 
Shangfang Valley. He is gathering great ee of grain - 
there.” ' 

After he had questioned them fully, he set the prisoners 
free. Calling together his officers, he said, “K‘ung-ming is 
not camped on Ch‘ishan, but near Shangfang Valley. To- ` 
morrow you shall. attack ‘the Ch‘ishan camp, and I will com- 
mand the reserve.’ 

The promise cheered them, and they went away to prepare. 

“Father, why do you intend to attack the enemy’s rear?” 
asked Ssiima Shih. 

“Ch‘ishan is their main position, and they will certainly 
hasten to its rescue. Then I shall make for the valley and 
burn the stores. That. will render them helpless and. will be 
a victory." 

The son dutifully agreed with his father and set out, while 
his father followed with the reserves. 
From the top of a hill K‘ung-ming watched the Wei soldiers 
march and noticed that they moved carelessly, not even keeping 
their ranks. He guessed that their object was the Ch‘ishan 


Romance of the Three kingdoms / 455 


_ camp and sent strict orders to his captains that if Sstma led 
: in person they were to go off and capture the camp on the 


| ~ south bank. 


When the men of Wei had got near and made their rush 
toward the camp of Shu, the men of Shu ran up also, yelling 
and pretending to reinforce the defenders. Sstima, seeing 
this, suddenly changed his direction and turned off for the 
Shangfang Valley. Here Wei Yen was expecting him, and as 
soon as he appeared Wei Yen galloped up and soon recognised 


=- Sstma as the leader. 


4 


“Sstma I, stay!” shouted he as he came near. He flourished 


- his sword, and Ssuma set his spear. The two warriors ex- 


changed a few passes, and then Wei Yen suddenly turned his 


= steed and bolted. As he had been ordered, he made direct for 


_the seven-starred flag, and Sstma followed, the more readily as 


-he saw the fugitive had but a small force. The two sons of 
-= Sstma rode with him, one on either hand. 


Presently Wei Yen and his men entered the mouth of the 


valley. Sstima halted a time while he sent forward a few 


a scouts, but when they returned and reported nothing to be seen 


Be, but a few straw houses on the hills, he rode in, saying, “This 


must be the store valley.” 
But when he had got well.within, Sstma noticed that kind- 
ling wood was piled over the straw huts, and as he saw no 


~ sign of Wei Yen he began to feel uneasy. 


“Supposing soldiers seize the entrance ; what then? ?” said 


K : he to his sons. 


As he spoke there arose a great shout, and from the hillside 


came many torches, which feil all around them and set fire to 
the straw, so that soon the entrance to the valley was lost in 


-. smoke and flame. ‘They tried to get away from the fire, but — 


“no road led up the hillside. Then fire-arrows came shooting 


down, and the earth-mines exploded, and the straw and fire- 
wood blazed high as the heavens. Sstma I, scared and help- 


> less, dismounted, clasped his arms about his two sons and wept, 


=- saying, “My sons, we three are doomed.” 


But suddenly a fierce gale sprang up, black clouds gathered, 


Aa peal of thunder followed and rain poured down in torrents, 


speedily extinguishing the fire all through the valley. The 


mines no longer exploded and all the fiery contrivances ceased 


to work mischief. * 
“Tf we do not break out now, what better chance shall we 
have?” cried the father, and he and his two sons made a dash 


- for the outlet. As they broke out of the valley they came upon 
reinforcements under Chang Hu and Ytieh Lin, and so were 


once more safe. Ma Tai was not strong enough to pursue, and 
the men of Wei got safely to the river. 


` But there they found their camp in the possession of the 


; enemy, while Chiang Huai and his colleague were on the float- 


456 Aan Kuo, or 


ing bridge struggling with the men of Shu. However, as 
Sstma neared, the men of Shu retreated, whereupon the 
bridges were burned and the north bank occupied. 

The Wei army attacking the Ch‘ishan camp were greatly 
disturbed when they heard of the defeat of their general and 
the loss of the camp on the Wei River. ‘The men of Shu took 


the occasion to strike with greater vigour, and so gained a. 


great victory. The beaten army suffered great loss. Those 
who escaped fled across the river. 
When K‘ung-ming from the hill-top saw that his enemy had 


been inveigled into the trap he had so carefully prepared, he: 


rejoiced exceedingly, and when he saw the flames burst forth 
he thought surely his rival was done for. Then, unhappily 
for him, Heaven thought it well to send down torrents of rain, 
which quenched the fire and upset all his calculations. 

Soon after, the scouts reported the escape of his victims, and 
he sighed, saying, “Man proposes ;\God disposes. We cannot 
wrest events to our will.” 


Fierce fires roared in the valley, 
But the rain quenched them. 
Had Chuko’s plan but succeeded, 
Where had been the Chins? 


From the new camp on the north bank of the river Ssiima 


issued an order that he would putto death‘ any officer who © 


proposed going out to battle. The final result of the late 
ill-advised expedition had been the loss of the south bank of 
the river. Accordingly no one spoke of attacking, but all 
turned their energies toward defence. 

Kuo Huai went to the general to talk over plans. He said, 
“The enemy have been carefully spying out the country and 
are certainly selecting a new position for a camp. If K‘ung- 
ming go out to Wukung, and thence eastward, we shall be in 
grave danger; if he go out by Huainan and halts on the 
Wuchang Plain, we need feel no anxiety.” 

They decided to send scouts to find out the movements of 
their enemy. Presently the scouts returned to say that he had 
chosen the plain. 

“Our great Emperor of Wei has remarkable fortune,” said 
Sstma, clapping his hand to his forehead. Then he confirmed 
the order to remain strictly on the defensive till some change 
of circumstances on the part of the enemy should Poma 
advantage. 

After his army had settled into camp on the plain, K‘ ung- 
ming continued his attempts to provoke a battle. Day after 
day, parties went to challenge the men of Wei, but they re- 
sisted all provocation. 


One day K‘ung-ming packed a woman’s head-dress and a 


robe of white silk in a box, which he sent, with a letter, to his 


ae 
cae ‘ ae 


Sas 
a 


T Be 


Se ee S AE E ee ll a 


m 


eee Co Ee à 
Lae ee 


<A = 
Pe 


jes 
Pee 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms -457 


rival. The insult ċould not be concealed, so the captains led 
the bearer of the box to their chief. He opened the box and 
saw the dress of a woman. Then he opened the letter, which 
read something like this :— 
“Friend Sstima, although you are a General and lead the 


_ troops of the capital, you seem but little disposed to display | 


the firmness and valour that would render a contest decisive. 
Instead, you have prepared a comfortable lair where you are 
safe from the keen edge of the sword. Are you not very like 
a woman? Wherefore I send the bearer with a suitable gift, 
and you will humbly accept it and the humiliation, unless, - 
indeed, you finally decide to come out and fight like a man. If 
you are not entirely indifferent to shame, if you retain any 
of the feelings of a man, you will send this back to me and 
come out and give battle. 3 

Sstma I, although inwardly raging, pretended to take it all 
as a joke and smiled. 

“So he regards me as a woman,” said he. : 
- He accepted the gift and treated the messenger well. Before 
he left, Ssima asked him a few questions about his master’s 
= eating and sleeping and hours of labour. 
zy “He works very hard,” said the messenger. ‘‘He rises early 
-~ and retires to bed late. He attends personally to all cases 
` requiring punishment of over a score of strokes. As for food, 


he does not eat more than a few hsing (pints) of grain.” 


“That is, he eats little and works much,” remarked Sstma: 
“Can he last long ?”. 
The messenger returned to his own side and reported that 


_ the general had taken the whole episode in good part and 


shown no sign of anger. He had only asked about K‘ung- 
ming’s hours of rest, and food and such’things. He had said 
`. no word about military matters. “I told him that you ate 
little and worked long hours, and then he said, ‘ Can he last 
long?” That was all.” 

“He knows,” said K‘ung-ming, pensively. 

The Accountant Yang Yung presently ventured to famon 
strate with his chief. 
“I notice,” said Yang, “that you check the books personally. 
- I think that is needless labour for a Prime Minister to under- 
take. In every administration the higher and subordinate 
ranks have their especial fields of activity, and each should 
confine his labours to his own field.. In a household, for 
example, the male servants plough and the female cook, and 
thus operations are carried on without waste of energy, and 


all needs are supplied. The master of the house has ample 


leisure and tranquillity. If one individual strives to attend 
personally to every matter he only wearies himself and 
fails to accomplish his end. How can he possibly hope to 
perform all the various tasks so well as the maids or the hinds? 


458 San Kuo, or 


He fails in his own part, that of playing the master. And, 


indeed, the ancients held this same opinion, for they said that 
the high officers should attend to the discussion of ways and 


means and the lower should carry out details. Of old, Ping 


Chi was moved to deep thought by the panting of an ox, ‘which 
showed the seasons untimely, but enquired nòt about the 
corpses—of certain brawlers—which lay about the road, for 
this matter concerned the magistrate. Ch‘én P‘ing was 
ignorant of the figures relating to taxes, for he said these were 
the concern of the controllers of taxes. 


“O Minister, you weary yourself with minor details and 


sweat yourself every day. You are wearing yourself out, 
and Ssuma I has good reason for what he said.” 

“I know; I cannot but know,” replied K‘ung-ming. “But 
this heavy responsibility was laid upon me, and I fear no other 
-will be so devoted as I am,’ 

Those who heard him wept. Thereafter K‘ung-ming 
appeared more and more harassed, and military operations 
did not speed. 


On the other side the officers of Wei resented bitterly the . 8 
insult that had been put upon them when their leader had been. 
presented with a woman’s dress. They wished to avenge the 


taunt, and went to their general, saying, “We are reputable 


captains of the army of a great state; how can we put up with 
such insults from these men of Shu? We pray you to let us 
fight them.” 


“Tt is not that I fear to go out,” said Ssiima, ‘ ‘nor that Loi 
relish the insults, but I have the king’s command to hold on | 


-and may not disobey.” 

The officers were not in the least appeased. Wherefore he 
said, “I will send your request to the Throne in a memorial ; 
what think you of that?” 

They consented to await the king’s reply, and a messenger 
bore to King Jui, in Hofei, this memoria] :— 

“I have small ability and high office. Your Majesty laid on 


me the command to defend and not fight till the men of Shu | 


had suffered by the efflux of time. But Chuko Liang has now 
sent me a gift of a woman’s dress, and my shame is very deep. 


Wherefore I advise Your Majesty that one day I shall have to. 


fight in order to justify your kindness to me and to remove the 


shameful stigma that now rests upon my army. I cannot 


express the degree to which I am urged to this course.” 
The king read it and turned questioningly to his courtiers 
seeking an explanation. Hsin P‘i supplied it. 


“Ssuma has no desire to give battle; this memorial is because j 


of the shame put upon the officers by K‘ung-ming’s gift. 
They are all in a rage. He wishes for an edict to pacity them.” 
The king understood and gave to Hsin P‘i a chieh (forma! 


= authority) and sent him to the river camp to make known that ae 


fiomance of the Three Hingdoms 459 


it was the king’s command not to fight. Sstima received the 
messenger with all respect, and it was given out that any 


i future reference to offering battle would be taken as disobedi- 


ence to the king’s especial command in the edict. 
The officers could but obey, but their general told the king’s 


messenger that he had interpreted his own desire correctly. 


It was thenceforward understood that the general was 


i forbidden to give battle. When it was told to K‘ung-ming, 


he said, “This is only Sstma’s method of pacifying his army. 
He has never had any intention of fighting and requested the 


` edict to justify his strategy. It is well known -that a general 


in the field takes no command from any person, not even his 
own king. Is it likely that he would send a thousand liito ask 


. permission to fight if that was all he needed? The officers 
= _ were bitter, and so Sstuma got.the king to assist him in main- 


_ taining discipline. All this is meant to slacken our men.” 


. Just at this time Fei I came. He was called in to see 


_ the general, and K‘ung-ming asked the reason for his coming. 
He replied, “King Jui, of Wei, hearing that Wu has invaded 


Re 


his country at three points, has led a great army to Hofei and 


sent three other armies to oppose the invaders. The stores 


and fight-material of Wu have been burned, and the men of 


| ~ Wu have fallen victims to sickness. A letter from Lu Hsiin 


containing a scheme of attack fell into the hands of the enemy, 


g and the lord of Wu has marched back into his own country.” 


x K‘ung-ming listened to the end; then, without a word, he 


£ S felli in a swoon. He recovered after a time, but he was broken. 


He said, “My mind is all in confusion. This is a return of 


- my old complaint, and I am doomed.” 


Tll as he was, K‘ung-ming that night went forth from his 


: E tent to scan the heavens and study the stars. They filled him 
= with fear. He returned and said to Chiang Wei, “My life may 


end at any moment.” 
“Why do you say such a thing we 
“Just now in the San-t‘ai constellation the roving star was 


_ twice as bright as usual, while the fixed stars were darkened; 
the supporting stars were also obscure. With such an aspect 


I know my fate.” ; 
“If the aspect be as malignant as you say, why not pray in 


-order to avert it?” replied Chiang. 


eg sty 


\ 


“I am in the habit of praying,” replied K‘ung-ming, “but 
I know not the will of God. However, prepare me forty-nine 
men and let each have a black flag. Dress them in black and 
place them outside my tent. Then will I from within my tent 


a invoke the Seven Stars of the North. If my master-lamp 


“remain alight for seven days, then is my life to be prolonged. 
If the lamp go out, then I am to die. Keep all idlers away 
from the tent and let a Pole of youths bring me what is 


necessary.’ 


460 Aan Kuo, or 


Chiang prepared as directed. It was then the eighth month, 
mid-autumn, and the Silver River (Milky Way) was brilliant 


with scattered jade. The air was perfectly calm, and nosound ~ 


was heard. 

The forty-nine men were brought up and spaced out to 
guard the tent, while within K‘ung-ming prepared incense and 
offerings. On the floor of the tent he arranged seven lamps, 


and, outside these, forty-nine smaller lamps. In the midst he — 


placed the lamp of his own fate. 

This done, he prayed, saying, “Liang; born into an age of 
trouble, would willingly have grown old in retirement. But 
His Majesty Chao-Lieh sought him thrice and confided to him 


the heavy responsibility of guarding his son. He dared not do © 
less than spend himself to the utmost in such a task and he -— 


pledged himself to destroy the rebels. Suddenly the star of 
his leadership has declined, and his life now nears its close. 


He has humbly indited a declaration to the Great Unknowable l 3 


and now hopes that He will graciously listen and extend the 


number of his days that he may prove his gratitude to his 


prince and be the saviour of the people, restore the old state — 
of the empire and establish eternally the Han sacrifices. He- 


dares not make a vain prayer; this is from his heart.” 


This prayer ended, in the solitude of his tent he awaited the — 


dawn. 


Next day, ill as he was, he dia not neglect his duties, althougks oM 
he spat blood continually. All day he laboured at his plans, 


and at night he spaced the magic steps, the steps of “the four” _ 


and “the seven” stars of Ursa Major. 


Sstma I remained still on the defensive. One night as he — 
sat gazing up at the sky and studying its aspect he suddenly 
turned to Hsiahou Pa, saying, “A leadership star has just lost . 
position; surely K‘ung-ming is ill and will soon die. Take a’ 
reconnoitring party to the Wuchang Plain and find out. If- 


you see signs of confusion do not attack; it means that K‘ung- 
ming is ill. I shall take the occasion to smite hard.” 
Hsiahou Pa left. It was the sixth night of K‘ung-ming’s 


prayers, and the lamp of his. fate still burned brightly. He — 
began to feel a secret joy. Presently Chiang Wei entered and 


watched the ceremonies. 

Suddenly a great shouting was heard outside, and imme- 
diately Wei Yen dashed i in, crying, “The Wei soldiers are upon 
us! 17? 


of Fate. 
K‘ung-ming threw down the sword and sighed, saying, 


In his bie he had knocked over and extinguished the Lamp | | 


“Life and death are foreordained; no prayers can alter ` 


them.” 
Wei Yen fell to the earth and craved forgiveness. Chiang 
drew his sword to slay the unhappy soldier. 


re 
a 


The next 


CHAPTER CIV. 


t 
A STAR FALLS AS CHUKO LIANG ASCENDS TO HEAVEN; 
A WOODEN IMAGE AFFRIGHTS SSUMA I. 


he unhappy Wei did not suffer the edge of the sword, for 
Chuko stayed the stroke, saying, “It is my fate; not his fault.” 
So Chiang put up his sword, and K‘ung-ming sank wearily 
upon his couch. 
“Ssuma I thinks I am dead, and he Sent these few men to 
make sure. Go ye and drive them off,” said he. - 


Wei Yen left the tent and led out a small party to drive . 


away the men of Wei, who fled as they appeared. He chased 
them to a distance and returned. Then K‘ung-ming sent him 
to his own camp and bade him keep a vigilant look-out. 

Presently Chiang Wei came in, went up to the sick man’s 
couch and asked how he felt. 


He replied, “My death is very near. “My chief desire has — A 
been to spend myself to the utmost to restore the Hans and | 
lead a glorious return of the Hans to their capital, but Heaven 


decrees it otherwise. I have never ceased from my studies. 
- I have written a book in twenty chapters, one hundred and 


four thousand, one hundred and twelve words, treating “The om 


eight Needfuls,’ ‘The seven Cautions,’ ‘The six Fears’ and “The a 
five Dreads’ of war. But among all those about me there is | 


no one fit to receive it and carry on my work save you. I pray 
you not to despise it.” 


He gave the treatise to Chiang Wei, ache received it sobbing. | 
“T have also a plan for a multiple crossbow, which I have. 
been unable to execute. The weapon shoots ten bolts of eight . 


inches length at every discharge. The plans are quite Ta 
and the weapons can be.made according to them.” 2 
Chiang took the papers with a deep bow. a 
The dying man continued, “There is no part of Shu that 


causes anxiety, save Yenp‘ing. That must be carefully xi 


guarded. It is protected naturally by its lofty precipices, 
but it will surely be lost by and by.” 
Next K‘ung-ming sent for Ma Tai, to whom he gave certain 


whispered instructions, and then said aloud, “You are to follow 


out my instructions after my death.” 
Soon after, Yang I entered the tent and went to the couch. 
He received a silken bag containing certain secret orders. As 


K‘ung-ming gave it him, he said, “After my death Wei Yen 
will turn traitor. When that happens you will find herein © 


who is to slay him.” 


Hiomance of the Three Lingdoms | 468 


Just as. these arrangements were finished K‘ung-ming fell 
~ into a swoon, from which he did not revive till the evening. 
_ Then he set himself to compose a memorial to the king. When 
this reached the king he was greatly alarmed and at once sent 

- Li Fu to visit and confer with the dying minister. 

Li travelied quickly to the camp and was led to the tent of 
the Commander-in-chief: He delivered the king’s command 
and enquired after the sick man’s welfare. K‘ung-ming wept, 
and he replied, “Unhappily I am dying and leaving my task’ 
incomplete. I am injuring my country’s policy and am in 
fault to the world. After my death you must aid the king in 
perfect loyalty and see that the old policy is. continued, and 

- the rules of government maintained. Do not lightly cast out 
the men I have employed. My plans of campaign have.been 
confided to Chiang Wei, who can continue my policy for the 
‘service of the state. But my hour draws near, and I must write 
my testament.” | 

Li Fu listened, and then took his leave. K‘ung-ming made 

< one final effort ‘to carry out his duties. He rose from his . 

- couch, was helped into a small carriage and thus made a round 
~ of inspection of all the camps and posts. But the cold autumn 
wind chilled him to the bone. 

“I shall never again lead the army against the rebels,” said 

he. “O distant and azure Heaven, when will this end? p? 
~ K‘ung-ming returned to his tent. He became rapidly 
_ weaker and called Yang I to his bedside. 

‘Said he, “Wang P‘ing and the others with Hini may be 
_ depended on to the death. They have fought many campaigns 
and borne many hardships; they should be retained in the 
public. service. After my death let everything go on as before, 
` but the army is to be gradually withdrawn. You know the 
_ tactics to be followed, and I need say little. My friend Chiang 

_ Wei is wise and brave: set him to guard the retreat.” __ 

is Yang received these orders weeping. Next, writing 
= materials were brought in and the dying minister set himself 
` to write his testament. It is here given in substance :— 

= “Life and death are the common lot, and fate cannot be 

evaded. Death is at hand, and I desire to prove my loyalty 

to the end. I, thy servant Liang, dull of parts, was born into 

a difficult age, and it fell to my lot to guide military operations. 

I leda northern expedition, but failed to win complete success. 

_ Now sickness has laid hold upon me and death approaches, so 

-, that I shall be unable to accomplish my task. My sorrow is 
- inexpressible. 

: “I desire Your Majesty to cleanse your heart and limit your 

~ desires, to practise self-control and to love the people, to 

ri maintain a perfectly filial attitude toward your late father and 

- to be benevolent to all the world. Seek out the recluse scholars 

that you may obtain the services of the wise and good; 


464)... San Kuo, or 


repel the wicked and depraved that your moral standard may 
be exalted. 

“To my household belong eight hundred mulberry trees and 
five thousand mou* of land; thus there is ample provision for 
my family. While I have been employed in the service of the 
state my needs have been supplied from official sources, but I 
have not contrived to make any additions to the family estate. 
At my death I shall not leave any increased possessions that 
may cause Your Majesty to suspect that I have wronged you.” 

Having composed this document, the dying man turned 
again to Yang I, saying, “Do not wear mourning for me, but 
make a large coffer and therein place my body, with seven 
grains of riĉe in my mouth. Place a lamp at my feet and let 
my body move with the army as I was wont to do. If you 
refrain from mourning, then my leadership star will not fall, 
for my inmost soul will ascend and hold it in place. So long 
as my star retains its place Sstma I will be fearsome and 
suspicious. Let the army retreat, beginning with the 
rearmost division; send it away slowly, one camp at a time. 
If Sstima pursue, array the army and offer battle, turn to meet 


him and beat the attack. Let him approach till he is very near ~ : 


and then suddenly display the image of myself that I have 
had carven, seated in my chariot in the midst of the army, 
with the captains right and left as usual. And you will 
frighten Sstma away.’ 

Yang listened to these words intently and without remark. 
That night K‘ung-ming was carried into the open and gazed 
up at the sky. 

“That is my star,” said he, pointing to one that seemed to 
be losing its brilliancy and to be tottering in its place. K*ung- 
ming’s lips moved as if he muttered a spell. Presently he was 
porn into his tent and for a time was oblivious of all about 

im 


9? 


When the anxiety caused by this siate of coma was at its : 


height Li Fu arrived. He wept when he saw the condition of 
the great leader, crying that he had foiled the great designs 
of the state. 

However, presently K‘ung-ming’s eyes reopened and fell 
upon Li Fu standing near his couch. 

“I know your mission,” said he. 

“I came with the royal command to ask also who should 


control the destinies of the state for the: next century,” 


replied Li. “In my agitation I forgot to ask that.” 


“After me, Chiang Wan is the most fitting man to deal with. 


great matters.” 
“And after him?” | 
“After him, Fei I.” 
“Who next after him?” 


*Six mou equal one acre, roughly. 


poy 
eee 


4 Se 
ates n 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 465 


No ah came, and when they looked more carefully they 
‘perceived that the soul of the Great Minister had passed. 
Thus died Chuko Liang, on the twenty-third day of the 
eighth month in the twelfth year of the period Chien-H sing, at 
the age of fifty and two sa 
The poet Tu Fu wrote some verses on his death. 


A bright star last night falling from the sky _ 

This message gave, “The Master is no more.” 

No more in camps shall bold men tramp at his command, 
_ At court no statesman e’er will fill the place he held. 

At home, his clients miss their patron kind. 

Calm was his bosom, full of strategy. 

But lately fared we to the wood’s green shade 

To hail him victor; hushed that song for him. 


_ And Po Chii-i also wrote a poem:— 


Within the forest dim the Master lived obscure, 
Till, thrice returning, there the king his mentor met. 
As when a fish the ocean gains, desire was filled 
Wholly; the dragon freed could soar aloft at will. 
-Às _king’s son’s guardian none more zealous was; 
` As minister, most loyally he wrought at court. 
‘His war memorials still to us are left | 
And, reading them, the tears unconscious fall. 


Now in past days a certain officer named Liao Li had a high © 
_ opinion of his own abilities and thought himself perfectly fitted. 
_ to be K‘ung-ming’s second. So he neglected the duties of his » 
proper post, showed discontent and indiscipline and was 


Ai constantly slandering the minister. Thereupon he was 


= degraded and exiled by K‘ung-ming. When he heard of his 
_ death he shed tears and said, “Then, after all, I am but a 
" barbarian.” | 

_. Li Yen also grieved deeply at the sad tidings, for he had 
always hoped that K‘ung-ming would restore him to office and 
so give him the opportunity of repairing his former faults. 
After K‘ung-ming had died he thought there was no hope of 
re-employment, and so he died. 

~- Another poet, Yiian Wei-chih, also wrote in praise of the 
great adviser. 


He fought disorder, helped a failing king; 

Most zealously he kept his master’s son. 

In state-craft he o’erpassed both Kuan and Yo, 

In war-craft he excelled both Sun and Wu. fe 
‘With awe the court his war memorial heard, } 
With majesty his “Eight Arrays” were planned. 

Good reader, an there’s virtue in your heart 

You ’ll sigh to think that he has had no peer. 


Heaven grieved and earth mourned on the night of K‘ung- 
-ming’s death. Even the moon was dimmed. And K‘ung- 
ming returned to Heaven. 


» 30 


466 an Kuo, or ~ 


As the late commander had directed, no one wailed his 
death. His body was placed in the coffer as he had wished, 
and three hundred of his near comrades were appointed to 
watch it. 

Secret orders were given to Wei Yen to command the 
rear-guard, and then, one by one, the camps were broken up 
and the army began its homeward march. 

Sstiima I watched the skies. One night a large red star with 
bright rays passed from the north-east to the south-west and 
dropped over the camps of Shu. It dipped thrice and rose 
again. Ssuma heard also a low rumbling in the distance. 
He was pleased and excited, and said to those about him, 
“K‘ung-ming is dead.” 

At once he ordered pursuit with a strong force. But just 


as he passed the camp gates doubts filled his mind and he gave — 


up the plan. 

“Kung- -ming is a master of mysteries, and it may be that 
this is but a ruse to get us to take the field. We may fall 
victims to his guile.” 

So he halted. But he sent Hsiahou Pa with a few scouts 
to reconnoitre the enemy’s camps. 


One night as Wei Yen lay asleep in his tent he dreamed a- 4 
dream. In his vision two horns grew out of his head. When 
he awoke he was much perplexed to explain his dream. A 


certain Expeditionary Ssz-ma, Chao Chih, came to see him, 


and Wei Yen said, ““You are versed in mysteries. I have 


dreamed that two horns grew upon my head, and would trouble aa 


you to expound the dream and tell me its portent. aR 


His visitor thought a moment and replied, “It is an : 


auspicious dream. There are horns on the head of the chilin — 


and the dragon. It augurs transformation into an ascending A 


creature.” 


Wei Yen, much pleased, thanked the interpreter of his dream > 


and promised him gifts when the dream proved true. 


Chao Chih left and presently met Fei I, who asked whence © 


he came. 

“From the camp of our friend Wei Yen. He dreamed that 
he grew horns upon his head, and I have given him an 
auspicious interpretation. But really it is inauspicious. 
However, I did not wish to annoy him.” 

“How do you know it is inauspicious?” 


“The word for horn is composed of two parts, ‘knife’ above 
and ‘use’ below, and so means that there is a knife upon his 


head. It is a terrible omen.’ 

“Keep it secret,” said Fei. 

Then Fei I went to the camp of Wei Yen, and when i 
were alone, he said, “The minister died last night in the third 


watch. Hie left certain final orders, and among them, that 


you are to command the rear-guard to keep Sstima at bay. 


‘ Homance of the Chree Lingooms 467 


x -while the army retreats. No mourning is to be worn. Here 
_ is your authority, so you can march forthwith. 
“Who is acting in place of the late minister?” asked Wei. 
_ “The chief command has been delegated to Yang I, but the 
= secret plans of campaign have been entrusted to Chiang Wei. 
This authority issues from him.” . 
4 Wei replied, “Though the minister is dead, I am yet alive. 
~ Yang is only a civil officer and unequal to this ‘post. He ought 
to conduct the coffin home while I lead the army against Ssuma 
I. I shall achieve success, and it is wrong to abandon a whole 
plan of campaign because of the death of one man, even if 
that be the Prime Minister.’ 
“His orders were to retire, and these orders are to be 
- obeyed.” 
“Tf the late minister had fisteonod to me we should now have 
-~ been at Ch‘angan. I am the senior general and of high rank. 
_ I am not going to act as rear-guard for any civil official.” 
= “It may be as you say, General, but you must not do any- 
thing to make us ridiculous. Let me go back to Yang I and 
` explain, and I may be able to persuade him to pass on to you 
_ the supreme military authority he holds.” 
Wei Yen agreed, and the visitor went back to the main camp 


- and told Yang I what had passed. 


Yang replied, “When near death the minister confided to 


a me that Wei would turn traitor. I sent him the authority 
to test him, and now he has discovered himself as the minister 


~ foretold. So I will direct Chiang Wei to command the rear- | 


- guard.” 
; The coffer containing the remains of K‘ung-ming was sent 
-on in advance, and Chiang Wei took up his post to cover the 
:- retreat. Meanwhile Wei Yen sat in his tent waiting for the 
- return of Fei I and was perplexed at the delay. When the 
= suspense became unbearable he sent Ma Tai to find out the 
~ reason. Ma returned and told him that Chiang Wei was 
- covering the retreat and that most of the army had already 
gone, 
Wei Yen was furious. “How dare he play with me, the 
pedantic blockhead?” ‘cried he. “But he shall die for this. 
‘Will you help me?” said he, turning to Ma Tai. 
= Ma replied, “I have long hated him; certainly I am ready 
to attack him.” 
“So Wei Yen broke camp and marched southward. 
: By the time Hsiahou Pa had reached the Shu camps they 
= were all empty, and he hastened back with this news. 
“Then he is really dead; let us pursue,” said Ssima I, much 


: irritated at being misled. 


eer De cautious,” said Hsiahou. “Send an inferior leader 
first.” 


468 Han Kuo, or 


“No; I must go myself this time.” ie 
So Ssiima and his two lieutenants hastened to the Wuchang — ; 
Plain. With shouts and waving flags, they rushed into the — 
camps, only to find them quite deserted. Telling his — 
lieutenants to bring up the remaining force with all speed, a) 
Sstima hastened in the wake of the retreating army. Coming 
to some hills, he saw them in the distance and pressed on still — 
harder. Then suddenly a bomb exploded, a great shout broke 
the stillness, and the retiring army turned about and came — 
toward him, ready for battle. In their midst fluttered a great. 
banner bearing the words, “Prime Minister of Han, Marquis 
of Wuhsiang, Chuko Liang.” sts 
Sstuma I stopped, pale with fear. Then out from the army tae 
came some score of captains of rank, and they were escorting _ 
a small carriage, in which sat K‘ung-ming as he had always. 
appeared, in his hand the feather fan. : 
“Then he is still alive!” gasped Sstma. “And I Bare rashly 
placed myself in his, power.’ my 
As he pulled round his horse to flee, Ohang Wei shouted, — 
“Do not try to run away, O rebel; you have fallen into one of. 
the minister’s traps and had better stay.” ; 
The soldiers, seized with panic, fled, throwing off all their 
gear. They trampled each other down, and many perished. 
Their leader galloped fifty li without pulling rein. When at — 
last two of his captains came up with him, and had stopped ~ 
his flying steed by catching at the bridle, ‘Ssitma Cotes: his. 
hand to his head, crying, “Have I still a head? 2y : 
“Do not fear, General, the soldiers of Shu are now far away,” 
they replied. | ie 
But he still panted with fear, and only after some time did — ? 
he recognise that his two companions were Hsiahou Pa and ~ 
Hsiahou Hui. v 
The three found their way by by-roads to their own camp, «i 
whence scouts were sent out in all directions. In a few days _ 
the natives brought news that the Shu army had really gone, 
and they said further that as soon as the retiring army had ~ 
entered the valley they had raised a wailing for the dead and -~ 
hoisted white flags. They also said that K‘ung-ming was ` 
really dead, and Chiang Wei’s rear-guard consisted of only 
one company. The figure in the carriage was only a wooden 
image of the minister. a 
“While he lived I could guess what he would do; dead, I Ne 
was. helpless,” said Ssuma. ie 
The people had a saying that a dead Chuko was enough fs 
scare off a live Sstuma. 


In the depth of night a brilliant star 

Fell from the northern sky; RE 
Doubts stayed Ssuma when he would pursue ~ pa N 
oe dead, but fearsome enemy. ese 


E aE e 
ar EJ: x 
EER AS PPE AN 

Eam EE O E aT. 


toate 


romance of the Three tkingoome 


Pe 


Lehn “Ande even now the western men, 
With scornful smile, will say, 
«Oh, is my head on my shoulder still? 
It was nearly lost to-day.” 


Now indeed Sstma knew that his great {val was no more, 
so he retook the pursuit. But he never came up with the 
£ Shu. army. As he took the homeward road he said to his 
officers, “We can now sleep in comfort.” 
As they marched back they saw the camps of their enemies, 
and were amazed at their skilful arrangement. Bee 
“Truly a wonderful genius?” sighed Ssuma. — : ae 
The armies of Wei returned to Ch‘angan; leaving officers to = 
guard the various strategical points. Ssiima himself went on 
“to the capital. - 
i Ye ane I and Chiang Wei brad slowly and in good order 


ToN na began to wail or their dead. The soldiers threw 
- themselves on the ground and wailed in sorrow. Some even 
wailed themselves to death. 
9 _ But as the leading companies entered upon the Tsanko road 


i aes came out baring the way. The’ leaders were taken 
a aba k and sent to inform the general. 


The regiments of Wei are nowhere near, 
‘Then who are these soldiers. that now appear? 


‘The next chapter will tell wao they were. 


CHAPTER CV. 


THE PLAN OF THE SILKEN BAG; 
THE BRONZE STATUE WITH THE DEW BOWL. 


Nemes I sent forward a man to find out what force this was _ $ 
that stood in his way, and the scout returned to say they were 
soldiers of Shu led by Wei Yen. Wei had burned the wooden : 


roads and now barred the way. 


Then said Yang, “Just before his death the late minister ; 


foretold that this man would one day turn traitor, and here it 


has come to pass. I did not expect to meet it thus, but now a 


our road of retreat is cut, and what is to be done?’ 
Then replied Fei I, “He certainly has slandered us to the 


Emperor and said that we were rebelling, and therefore he has 


destroyed the wooden roads in order to prevent our progress. 


First, therefore, we must memorialise the truth about him and pi i 


then plan his destruction.” i 
Chiang Wei said, “I know a by-way hereabout that will lead_ 


us round to the rear of these covered roads. True it is pre- 


cipitous and dangerous, but it will take us to our destination. 
It is called the Ch‘ashan Path.” 


So they prepared a memorial and turned off in order LOS 2 


follow the narrow mountain road. 
Meanwhile the King of Shu was troubled; he lost his appetite 


and was sleepless. Then he dreamed that the hill that pro- n 


tected his capital was riven and fell. This dream troubled him: 
till morning, when he called in his officers of all ranks to ask 
them to interpret his vision. 


When he had related his dream, Ch‘iao Chou stood forth and 


said, “I saw a large red star fall yesternight ; surely it forebodes. 


a misfortune to the king or to his First Minister. Yourusxs 


Majesty’s dream corresponds to what I saw.’ 

The king’s anxiety increased. Presently -Li Fu returned 
and was summoned into the king’s presence. He bowed his. 
head and wept, saying, “The Prime Minister is dead.” 

He repeated Chuko’s last messages and told all that he knew. 
The king was overcome with great sorrow, and wailed, crying, 
“Heaven smites me!” and he fell over and lay upon his couch. 


They led him within to the inner chambers, and when his : 


Consort heard the sad tidings she also wailed without ceasing. 
And all the officers were distressed and wept, and the common — 
people showed their grief. 


The kie was deeply affected, and for many days could hold 
ho Court. And while thus prostrate with grief they told him 


Fiomance of the Three mgdoms w : 


_ that Wei Yen had sent up a memorial charging Yang I with: a 


_ rebellion. The astounded courtiers went to the king’s chamber 
to talk over this thing, and his Consort was also there. The 
memorial was read aloud. It was much like this:— 

AE thy Minister and General, Wei Yen, ‘Corrector of the- 
West? and Marquis Chêng, humbly and with bowed head write 
that Yang I has assumed command of the army and is in 
rebellion. He has made off with the coffin of the late Prime 
Minister and wishes to lead enemies within our borders. As 
_ a precaution, and to hinder his progress, I have burned the 
covered ways and now report these matters.” 

The Latter Ruler said, “Wei Yen is a valiant warrior and: 
could easily have overcome Yang I; why then did he destroy 
the covered -ways?” 

‘Wu, the T‘ar-hou, said, “The lite Emperor used to say that 
K‘ung-ming knew that treachery lurked in the heart of Wei 
Yen, and he wished to put him to death; he only spared him 
because of his valour. We should not believe too readily this 
tale of his that Yang I has rebelled. Yang I is a scholar, and 
the late Prime Minister placed him in a position of great 
_ responsibility, thereby proving that he trusted him and valued 
him. If this statement is true, surely Yang would have gone 
over to Wei. Nothing should be done without due meditation.” 

As they were discussing this matter, an urgent memorial 
- came from Yang I, and opening it, they read:— | 

“I, Yang I, leader of the retreating army, humbly and with 
trepidation, present this memorial. In his last moments the 
late Prime Minister made over to me the charge of the great 
~. emprise, and bade me carry out his plan without change. I 

have respected his charge. I ordered Wei Yen to command 
the rear-guard with Chiang Wei as his second. But Wei Yen — 
, refused obedience and led away his own army into Hanchung. 
Then he burned the covered ways, tried to steal away the body | 
of the late Commander-in-chief and behaved altogether un- 
seemly. His rebellion came upon me suddenly and un- 
expectedly. I send this memorial in haste.” 

The Empress Dowager listened to the end. Then, turning 
to the nobles, she said, “What is your opinion now?” 

Chiang Wan replied, “Yang I is hasty and intolerant, but 
he has rendered great services in supplying the army. He has 
long been a trusted colleague of the late Prime Minister, who, 
being near his end, entrusted to him the conduct of affairs. 
Certainly he is no rebel. On the other hand, Wei Yen is bold 
and ambitious and thinks himself everybody’s superior. Yang 
-Iis the only one who has openly been of different opinion, and 
‘hence Wei hates him. When he saw Yang placed over his 
head in command of the army he refused his support. Then 


472 Ban uo, or 


he burned the covered, ways in order to cut off Yang’s retreat, 
and maligned him, hoping to bring about his fall. I am ready 
to guarantee Yang’s fealty to the extent of my whole house, 
but I would not answer for Wei Yen.” 

Tung Yün followed, “Wei Yen has always been conceited 
and discontented. His mouth was full of hate and:resentment, 
and only fear of the late Prime Minister held him in check. 
The minister’s death gave him his opportunity, and he turned 
traitor. This is certainly the true state of the case. Yang I 
is able, and his employment by the late minister is proof of 
his loyalty.” 


“Tf this is true and Wei is really a rebel, what should be 


done?” asked the king. 

“T think the late minister has framed some scheme by hich 
to get rid of Wei Yen. If Yang had not felt secure he would 
scarcely have set out to return through the valleys. Your 
Majesty may feel sure that Wei will fall into some trap. We 
have received, almost at the same time, two memorials from 
two men, each bringing against the other a charge of rebellion. 
Let us wait. if 

Just then Fei I arrived. He was anad into the royal 
presence and told the story of Wei Yen’s revolt. 

The king replied, “In' that case I should do well to oid 
Tung Yün with temporary authority to clear up the situation 
and attempt to persuade Wei with kind words.” 


So Tung Yiin left on this mission. At this time Wei Yen: 
, was camped at Nanku, which was a commanding position.. He - 


thought his plan was succeeding well. It had not occurred to 
him that Yang and Chiang could get past him by any by-way. 
On the other hand, Yang, thinking that Hanchung was lost, 


sent Ho P‘ing with three companies on in front_ while he Pie 


followed with ‘the coffin. 

When this little army had got to the rear of Wei’s position 
they announced their presence with rolling drums. The scouts 
quickly told Wei, who at once armed himself, took his sword 
and rode out to confront Ho P‘ing. When both sides were 
arrayed Ho rode to the front and began to revile his 
. opponent. 

“Where is that rebel Wei Yen?” cried Ho. 

“You aided that traitor Yang,” cried Wei, no way backward 
with his tongue; “how dare you abuse me?” 

Ho waxed more indignant. “You rebelled immediately after 
the late chief’s death, before even his body was cold. How 
could you?” 

Then shaking his whip at the followers of Wei, he cried, 
“And you soldiers are Hsich‘uan men. Your fathers and 
mothers, wives and children and your friends are still in the 
land. Were you treated unkindly that you have joined a 
traitor and aid his wicked schemes? You ought to have 


only steady portion of his own army was that commanded by y 


Romance of the Three hingoomg 473 


returned home and waited quietly the rewards that would have 


been yours.” 

The soldiers were touched by his words; they cheered, and 
more than a half ran away. 

Wei was now raging. He whirled up his sword and. galloped 
forward straight for Ho P‘ing, who went to meet him with his 
Spear ready. They fought several bouts, and then Ho rode 
away as if defeated. Wei followed. but Ho’s men began to 


shoot and Wei was driven backward. Ashe got near his own 
men he saw many captains leaving their companies and going — 


away. He rode after them and cut some of them down. But 
this did not stay the movement; they continued to go. The 


Ma Tai. They stood their ground. 
“Will you really help me?” said Wei Yen. “I will surely 


z remember you in the day of success.’ 

The two then went in pursuit of Ho P‘ing, who fled before. 
= them: However, it was soon evident that Ho was not to be 
_ overtaken, and the pursuers halted.. Wei mustered his now 


small force. 


Ss “What if we go over to Wei?” said he. 


“I think your words unwise,” said Ma. “Why should we 


a join anyone? A really strong man would try to carve out his 
own fortune and not be ready to crook the knee to another. 


You are able enough and brave enough to be more than a 


-~ match for any man in the west. No one would care to stand 

upto you. I pledge myself to go with you to the seizure of. 
_ Hanchung, and thence we will attack the west.” 

= So they marched together toward Nanchéng, where was. 
Chiang Wei. From the bridge he saw their approach and — 
marked their proud, martial look. He ordered the drawbridge 


to be raised and sent to tell his colleague, Yang I. 
As they drew near, both Wei and Ma shouted out, “Sur- 


render!” 


In spite of the smallness of their following, Chiang Wei felt 
that Ma Tai acting with Wei Yen was a dangerous combination, 


and he wanted the advice of Yang. 


“How shall we repel them?” asked he. 

Yang replied, “Just before his death the minister gave me 
a silken bag, which he said I was to open when Wei’s mutiny 
reached a critical point. It contains a plan to rid ourselves 
of this traitor, and it seems that now is the moment to see 
what should be done.” 

So he opened the bag and drew forth the letter it held. On 
the cover he read, “To be opened when Wei Yen is actually 
arrayed opposite you.” 

Said Chiang, “As this has all been aurangéd for I had better 
-go out, and when his line is orra then you can come 


forth. Z 


474 San Buo, or 


Chiang donned his armour, took his spear and ode out, 
with three companies. They marched out of the city gates 
with the drums beating. The array completed, Chiang took 


his place under the great standard and opened with a volley 


of abuse.. 

“Rebel Wei, the late minister never harmed you; why have 
you turned traitor? Tes ` 

Wei Yen reined up, lowered his sword and replied, “Friend 
Chiang, this is no concern of yours; tell Yang I to come.’ 

Now Yang was also beneath the standard, but hidden. He 
opened the letter, and the words therein seemed to please him, 
for he rode forward blithely. Presently he reined in, pointed 
to Wei and said, “The minister foresaw your mutiny and bade 
me be on my guard. Now if you are able thrice to shout, 
‘Who dares kill me will be a real noble!’ I will yield to you the 
whole of Hanchung.”’ 

Wei Yen laughed. “Listen, you old fool! While K‘ung- 


‘ming lived I feared him somewhat. But he is dead and no 


one dares stand before me. I will not, only shout the words 
thrice, but a myriad times. Why not 


He ‘raised his sword, shook his ee and shouted, “Who — im 


dares kill me 


He never finished. Behind him someone shouted savagely, p9 


“I dare kill you!’ and at the same moment Wei fell dead, cut 
down by Ma Tai. 


This was the dénouement, and was the secret entrusted to oe 
Ma Tai just before K‘ung-ming’s death. Wei was to be made _ E 


to shout these words and slain when he least expected it. 
Yang knew what was to happen, as it was written in the Bae 
in the silken bag. ; 

A poem says :— 


Chuko foresaw when freed from his restraint 
Wei Yen would traitor prove. The silken bag 
Contained the plan for his undoing. We see 
How it succeeded when the moment came. 


So before Tung Yiin had reached Nanchéng Wei was dead. 
Ma Tai joined his men to Chiang’s, and Yang wrote another 
memorial, which he sent to the king. The king issued an edict 
that as the guilty officer had paid the penalty of his crime he 
should be honourably buried in consideration of his former 
services. 


Then Yang I continued his journey and in due time arrived — 


at Ch‘éngtu with the coffin of the late minister. The king led 


out a large cavalcade of officers to meet the body at a point | 


twenty li from the walls, and he lifted up his voice and wailed 


for the dead, and with him wailed all the officers and the 


cones people, so that the sound of mourning filled the whole 
eart 


“‘Pomance of the oe iivanoue: 415 


By royal konini the body was borne into the city to the 


dead man’s residence, and his son Chuko Chan was chief 


mourner. — A 
When next the king held a Court Yang I appeared thereat ; 
bound, and confessed he had been in fault. The king bade 


them loose his bonds and said, “Noble Sir, the coffin would 
“never have reached home but. for you. You carried out the 


orders of the late minister, whereby Wei Yen was destroyed 
and all was made secure. This was all your doing.” 
Yang I was promoted to be the Master of the Centre Army, < 


and Ma Tai was rewarded with the rank that Wei Yen had 
_ forfeited. 


Yang I presented K‘ung-ming’ s testament, which the king 


read, weeping. By a special edict it was commanded that 
soothsayers should cast lots and select the site for the tomb of 
the great servant of the state. 


Then Fei said to the king, “When nearing his end the Prime 


_ Minister commanded that he should be buried on Tingchiin 
- Hill, in open ground, without sacrifice or monument.” 


This wish was respected, and they chose a propitious day in 


the tenth month for the interment, and the king followed in 
the funeral procession to the grave on the Tingchiin Hill. The 
posthumous title conferred upon Chuko Liang was Chung-wu, 
“Loyally Martial,” and a temple was built in Mienyang wherein 
were offered s sacrifices at the four seasons. 


The poet Tu Fu wrote a poem :— 


To Chuko stands a great memorial hall, 

In cypress shade, without the Chukuan Wall, 

The steps thereto are bright with new grass ‘springing, 
Hid ’mongst the branches orioles are singing. 
Devotion patient met reward; upon 

The throne, built for the father, sat the son. 

But ere was compassed all his plans conceived 

He died; and heroes since for him have ever grieved. 


Another poem by the same author says :— 


Chuko’s fair fame stands clear to all the world; 

Among king’s ministers he surely takes 

Exalted rank; for when the empire cleft 

In three, a kingdom for his lord he won 

By subtle craft. Throughout all time he stands 

A shining figure, clear against the sky. 

Akin was he to famous I and Lu, 

Yet stands with chiefs who failed, like Hsiao and Ts‘ao; 
The fates forbade that Han should be restored, 
War-worn and weary, yet he steadfast stood. 


Heil tidings came to the king on his return to his capital. 


He heard that ‘Ch‘iian Tsung had marched out with a large 
army from Eastern Wu and camped at the entrance to Pach‘iu. 
No one knew the object of this expedition. 


“Here is Wu breaking their oath just as the Prime Minister 


| _, has died,” cried the king. “What can we do?” 


476 | San kuo, or 


Then said Chiang Wan, “My advice is to send Wang Ping | 


and: Chang I to camp at Yungan as a measure of precaution, 
while you send an envoy to Wv. to announce the death and 
period of mourning. He can there observe the signs of the 
times.” 

“The envoy must have a ready PeT said the king. 

One stepped from the ranks of courtiers and offered himself. 
He was Tsung Yu, a man of Nanyang, an officer in the army. 
So he was appointed as envoy—and spy. 

He set out for Chinling, arrived and was taken in to the 


king’s presence. When the ceremony of introduction was over. 


and the envoy looked about him, he saw that all were dressed 
in mourning. But Sun Ch‘tian’s countenance wore a look of 
anger, and he said, “Wu and Shu are one house; why has your 
master increased the guard at Poti?” 


Tsung replied, “It seemed as necessary for the west to. 


increase the garrison there as for the east to have a ee 
at Pach‘iu. Neither is worth asking about.” 
“As an envoy you seem no way inferior to Téng Chih,’ ” 


said the king, smiling. He continued, “When I heard that 
your Minister Chuko had gone to heaven I wept daily and — 


ordered my officers to wear mourning. I feared that Wei 


might take the occasion to attack Shu, and so I increased the a 
garrison at Pach‘iu by a legion that I might be tele help 


you in case of need. That was my sole reason.’ 
The envoy bowed. and thanked the king. 


“I would not go back upon the pledge between us,” aid the a 


king. 


` mourning for the ‘late Prime Minister.” 


Sun Ch‘tian took up a silver barbed arrow and snapped iba 


in twain, saying, “If I betray my oath may my posterity be 
cut off!” 

Then he despatched an envoy with i incense and silk and other 
gifts to be offered in sacrifice to the dead in the land of 
Shu. 

The two envoys took leave of the King of Wu and journeyed 
to Ch’éngtu, where they went to the King of Shu, and Tsung 
Yü made a memorial saying, “The King of Wu has wept for 


our K‘ung-ming and put his court into mourning. The 


increased garrison at Pach‘iu is intended to safeguard us from 
Wei, lest they take the occasion of a public sorrow to attack. 


And in token of his pledge King Sun Ch‘iian broke an- be 


arrow in twain.” 
The king was pleased and rewarded Tsung Yü; moreover, 
the envoy of Wu was generously treated. 


According to the advice in K‘ung-ming’s testament, the: 


Latter Ruler made Chiang Wan Prime Minister, and Chief 


of the Presidents and General, while Fei I became wena 


The envoy said, “I have been sent to inform you: of the es 


Romante of the Three fiingdoms Pe i 


iat, OL & Board, and associate in the Prime Minister’s office. Many 
=, ‘other: promotions were made, and among them Wu I was made 
_ Governor of Hanchung, to keep Wei in check. _ aa 
=p Now as Yang I was senior in service to Chiang Wan, who had 
~ thus been promoted over his head, and as he considered his 
we services had been inadequately rewarded, he was discontented 
and spoke resentfully. . 

-He said to Fei I, “If when the minister died I had gone 
over to Wei, with the whole army, I should not have been 
thus left out in the cold.” 

Fei secretly reported this speech to the king, who was 


angered and threw Yang into prison. He intended putting — au 


him to death, but Chiang Wan reminded him of his services, 
and he was reprieved. However, he-was degraded and sent 
into Hanchung, where he committed suicide through shame. 
fa; In the thirteenth year of the period Chien-Hsing of Shu, 
-~ the same year being the third year of Ching-Lung of Wu, and 
= the fourth year of Chia-Ho of Wei, there were no military | 
expeditions. However, it is recorded that Ssuma I was 


and he departed for Loyang. 
King Jui, of Wei, at Hstich‘ang, made preparations to build 


or “Hall of Sunrise,” and the T‘at-chi Tien, or “Hall of the 


raised a “Fall Beautiful” and a storeyed building called: the 
= “Pavilion of the Pair of Phcenixes.” He also digged a Pool 
of the Nine Dragons. Over all these works he placed the 
scholar Ma Chiin as superintendent of their building. ` 
= Nothing was spared that would contribute to the beauty of 
-= these buildings. The beams were carved, the rafters were 
-= — painted, the walls were of golden bricks and the roofs of green 
- tiles. They glittered and glowed in the sunlight. The most 
© _ cunning artizans in the world were sought, many thousands 
of them, and myriads of ordinary workmen laboured day and 
=- night on these works for the king’s glory and pleasure. But 
the strength of the people was spent in this toil, and ,they 
` cried aloud and complained unceasingly. 
-< Moreover, King Jui issued an edict to carry earth and 
bring trees for the Garden of the Fragrant Forest, and he 
employed officers of state'in these labours, carrying earth 
Bi and transporting trees. 
The Minister of Education, Tung Hsiin, ventured upon a 
y remonstrance, saying, “From the beginning of the period 
x Chien-An, a generation ago, wars have been continuous and 
destruction rife. Those who have escaped death are few, and 
= these are old and weak. Now indeed it may be that the 
f palaces are too small and enlargement is desired, but would it 
Ks oat be more pine t to choose ie building season so as not to 


` created a Tai-yü, with command over all the forces of Wei, fo 


_ himself a palace. At Loyang also he built the Ch‘ao-yang Tien, © 
_ Firmament,” both lofty and of beautiful design. He also eae by 


Fas San Guo, or oin a 


3 interfere with cultivation? Your Majesty has many honour- 
able officers wearing beautiful head-dresses, clad in handsome 


=- robes, and riding in decorated chariots to distinguish them 


from the common people. Now these officers are being made 
to carry timber ‘and bear earth, to sweat and soil their feet. 
To destroy the glory of the state in order to rařse a useless 
edifice is indescribable folly. The Great Teacher said that 
princes should treat ministers with polite consideration, 
ministers should serve princes with loyalty. Without loyalty, 
without propriety, can a state endure? ` 

“T recognise that these words of mine mean death, but I 
am of no value, a mere bullock’s hair, and my life is of no 
importance, as my death would be no loss. I write with tears, 
bidding the world farewell. Sia 

“Thy servant has eight sons, who will be a burden to Your 
Majesty after his death. I cannot say with what trepidation 
I await my fate.” 

“Has the man no fear of death?” said ae Jui, greatly 
angered. ; 

The courtiers requested the king to put him to death, but 
-he remembered his rectitude and proven loyalty and only 
degraded him, adding a warning to him to curb his tongue. 

A certain Chang Mou, in the service of the Heir Apparent, 
also ventured upon a remonstrance; he suffered death. 

King Jui summoned his Master of Works, Ma Chiin, and 
said, “I have builded high terraces and lofty towers with 
intent to hold intercourse with shén and hsien, gods and 
djinn, that I may obtain from them the elixir of life.” 


Then Ma replied, “Of the four and twenty emperors of the Oe 


line of Han only the Emperor Wu enjoyed the throne very | 
long and really attained to old age. That was because he 
‘drank of the essence of the brilliancy of the sun and the ~ 
brightness of the moon. In the palace at Ch‘angan is the 
Terrace of Cyprus Beams, upon which stands the bronze 
figure of a man holding up a Dew Bowl, whereinto distils, in 
the third watch of the night, the vapour from the great 
constellation of the north. This liquid is called ‘Celestial 
Elixir, or ‘Gentle Dew.’ If mingled with powdered jade and 
swallowed it restores youth to the aged.” 

“Take men to Ch‘angan immediately and bring hither the 
oo figure to set up in the new garden,” said the 

in 

Ae the king commanded, they took a multitude of men to 
Ch‘angan, and they built a scaffold around the figure. Then 
they attached ropes to haul. it down. The terrace being two 
hundred feet high and the pedestal ten cubits in circumference, 
Ma Chiin bade his men first detach the bronze image. They 
did so and brought it down. Its eyes were moist as with 
tears, and the workmen were affrighted. 


É pS 
ere 

: 

: 


fiemance of the Three Lingdoms AID 


Then suddenly beside the terrace sprang up a whirlwind, 
with dust and pebbles flying thick as a shower of rain, and 
there was a tempestuous roar as of an earthquake. Down 
fell the pedestal, and the platform crumbled, crushing many 
men to death. 

However, the bronze figure and the golden bowl were con- 
“veyed to Loyang and presented to the king. 

“Where is the pedestal?” asked the king. 

“Tt is too heavy to transport,” replied the Master Work- 
man. i 

“Tt weighs a million dation’? 

‘Wherefore the king ordered it to be broken up and the 
metal brought, and from this he caused to be cast two figures 
which he named Wéng, Grandfather, and Chung, Uncle. They 
were placed outside the gate of the Board of War. A pair of 
dragons and a pair of phcenixes were also cast, the dragons 
forty feet high and the birds thirty. These were placed in 
front of the Hall of Audience.  - 

Moreover, in the Upper Forest Garden the ‘king planted 
wonderful flowers and rare trees, and he also established a 
menagerie of strange animals. fh 

Yang Fou remonstrated with the king on these extrava- a: 
=~ gances. 

“As is well known, Yao preferred his humble thatched 
cottage, and all the world enjoyed tranquillity; Yii contented 
himself with a small modest palace, and all the empire rejoiced. 

In the days of Yin and Chou the Hall of the ruler stood three 

feet above the usual height and its-area was nine ‘mats.’ The 
sage emperors and illustrious kings had no decorated chambers 
-in lofty palaces built with the wealth, and by the strength, 
of a worn-out and cespoiled people. Chieh built a jade cham- 
ber and elephant stables; Chou erected a surpassingly beauti- 
ful palace and a Deer Terrace. But these lost the empire. 
Duke Ling, of Ch‘u, built beautiful palaces, but he came to an 
evil end. The ‘First Emperor,’ of Ts‘in, made the Afang 
Palace, but calamity fell upon his son, for the empire rebelled 
and his house was exterminated in the second generation. — All 
those who have failed to consider the means of the people and — 
given way to sensuous pleasures have perished. Your Majes- 
_ ty has the examples of Yao and Shun, of Yü and T‘ang on the 
one hand, and the warnings of Chieh and Chou, Ch‘u and Ts‘in 
on the other. ‘To seek only self-indulgence and think only of 
fine palaces will surely end in calamity. : 

“The prince is the first and the head; his ministers are 
his limbs; they live or die together, they are involved in the 
same’ destruction. Though I am timorous, yet if I dared 

- forget my duty, or failed to speak firmly, I should be unable 
to move Your Majesty. Now I have prepared my coffin and 
bathed my body nat for the most condign punishment.” 


y 


} 


` 


~a 480 -an Kuo 


But the king disregarded this memorial and only urged on 
the rapid completion of the terrace. Thereon he set up. the 


bronze figure with the golden bowl. Moreover, he sent forth 


a command to select the most beautiful women in the empire 


for his garden of delight.. Many memorials were presented, 5i 


but the king heeded them not. li 


Now the Consort of King Jui was of the Mao family of 


Honan. In earlier days, when he was a prince, he had loved her 
exceedingly, and when he succeeded to the throne she became 


: Empress. Later he favoured the Lady Kuo, and his Consort . 
was neglected. The Lady Kuo was beautiful and clever, and 
the king delighted in her. He neglected state affairs for her © 
society and often spent a month at a time in retirement with 


her. Every day there was some new gaiety. — 

In the spring, when the plants in the Fragrant Forest 
Garden were in flower, the king and his favourite came to the 
garden to enjoy them and to feast. 

“Why not invite the Empress?” asked the Lady Kuo. 

“If she came nothing would pass my lips,” replied the king. 

He gave orders that his.Consort should be kept in ignorance 
of these rejoicings. But when a month passed without the 


appearance of the king, his Consort and her ladies went to 


the Blue Flower Pavilion to find out what was the reason. 


Hearing music, she asked who was providing it, and they told 


her that the king and the Lady Kuo were feasting in the’ | 
` grounds. 
That day she returned to her palace filled with rage. “Next 308 


day she went out in her carriage and saw the king on a 
verandah. 


“Yesterday Vout Majesty was walking in the north garden, ; 


and you had plenty of music too,” said she, laughing. 

The king was wroth and sent for all the attendants. He 
upbraided them with disobedience and put them alLto death. 
The Empress feared and returned to her palace. 


Then an edict appeared condemning the Empress to death- 
and raising the Lady Kuo to be Empress in her place. And >, 


no officer dared to utter a remonstrance. 
Just after this the Governor of Yuchou, Much ‘iu Ch‘ien, 
sent in a memorial saying that Kungsun Yüan of Liaotung 


-had risen in revolt, had assumed the style of “King” and. 


adopted a nien-hao. He had built himself a palace, established 


--an administration of his own and was disturbing the whole 


north with plundering. 
A council met to consider this memorial. 


Within, officials labour at ignoble tasks, and mean, 
Without, the glint of weapons on the border may be seen. 


How the insurgents were attacked will be related in the - 


next chapter. 


oe 


LON tas, let Mi i j Me SLs ein Wy Tee = MATE 
eine AN A, PST KEEN 


NYA 
J EUG 


CHAPTER CVI. 


DEFEAT AND DEATH OF KUNGSUN YUAN; 
PRETENDED ILLNESS OF SSUMA IL _ 


T his Kungsun Yüan was of a family long settled in Liaotung. 
= When Ts‘ao Ts‘ao was pursuing Yüan Shang, who had fled 
eastward, Kungsun K‘ang, the father of the present rebel, 
had captured him, beheaded him and sent his head to Ts‘ao. 
For this service Kungsun received the title of “Marquis of 
Hsiangp‘ing.” After Kungsun K‘ang’s death, as his two sons 
were young, his brother took the chiefship, and Ts‘ao P‘ei, 


- beside confirming the marquisate, gave him the rank of 


General. A few years later, the second son, Yuan, being now 
grown up, well-educated and trained in military exercises, 
~ obstinate and fond of fighting, took away his uncle’s power 

and ruled the heritage of his father. Ts‘ao Jui conferred 
upon him the title of Yang-lieh, “Wielder of Ferocity,” and 


z HA made him Prefect. 


t7 Then Sun Ch‘iian, anxious to secure his support, sent two 
` envoys with gifts and offered Kungsun Ytian the title of 


a “Prince Yen.” Fearing that the capital would resent any 
 dallying with Wu, the Prefect slew the envoys. For this proof 
~ of lealty Ts‘ao Jui gave him the title of Minister of War and 


the Dukedom of Ytiehlang. However, he was dissatisfied, 
and his thoughts turned toward independence. He took coun- 


. cil with his officers and proposed to style himself “King Yen” 
` and to adopt a reign-title of his own. 


One officer, Chia Fan, opposed this and said, “My lord, the 
central authorities have treated you well and honoured you. 
I fear that Sstima I is too skilful a leader for rebellion to 
- sueceed. You see even Chuko Liang cannot defeat him; how 
much less can you?” 

Kungsun’s reply was to condemn Chia Fan to death. How- 
ever, General Lun Chih ventured upon further remonstrance. 
“Chia Fan spoke well. The Sacred One says that extra- 
ordinary phenomena presage the destruction of a state. Now 
this time portents are not wanting, and wonders have been 
seen. A dog, dressed in red and wearing a turban, went up 
the length of a room walking like a man. Moreover, while 
a certain person living in a village south of the city was cook- 
ing his food, he saw a child in the pan, boiled to death. A 
= great cave opened near the market-place and threw out a 

large, fleshy body completely human save that it lacked limbs. 


6 


ol 


482 an Ruo, or 


Swords could not cut it; arrows could`not penetrate it. No 
one knew what to call it, and when they consulted the sortes 
they obtained the reply, ‘Incomplete shape, silent mouth: a 
state is near destruction? These prodigies are all inauspi- 
cious. Flee from evil and strive to walk in fair fortune’s. 
way. Make no move without most careful thought.” ` 

This second remonstrance enraged the rebel still more, and 
he sent Lun to death with Chia. Both were executed in the 
public place. 

Kungsun then prepared to make a bid for empire. He 
raised an army of fifteen legions, appointed a general, Pei 
Yen, and a leader of the van, Yang Tsu. This army set out 
for the capital. 

King Jui was alarmed at the report of this rising, and sent 
for Ssuma I. Ssima-was not greatly perturbed, and said, “My 
four legions will be equal to the task.” 

The king replied, “The task is heavy, for your men are few 
and the road is long.” 

“The strength of an army is not in numbers, but in strategy. 


Aided by Your Majesty’s good fortune I shall certainly be, 


able to bring this fellow a captive to your feet.” 
“What do you think will be the rebel’s plan ?”asked the king. 
“His best plan would be flight before our army can arrive; 
his second best is defending his position; his third, and worst, 


would be to try to hold Hsiangp ‘ing. In the last case I shall 


certainly capture him.” 

“How long will the expedition take?” 

“We have to cover four thousand li, which will take a naudai 
days. Attack will consume another hundred. The return 
will need a hundred, and with sixty days to rest we shall take 
a year.’ 

“Suppose during that year we are attacked by Wu or Shu.” 


“My plans provide for that; Your Majesty need have no 


anxiety.” ; 

The king being thus reassured, formally ordered Sstima to 
undertake the expedition. 

Hu Tsun was appointed to lead the van. He went and 
camped in Liaotung. The scouts hasted to tell Kungsun, who . 


sent his general and van-leader to camp at Liaochui. They © 


surrounded their camp with a wall twenty li in circumference 
and placed “deer-horns” outside the rampart. It seemed 
very secure. Hu Tsun saw these preparations and sent. to 
tell his chief. Sstima smiled. 


“So the rebel does not want to fight, but thinks to weary — 


my men,” said Ssuma. “Now I am disposed to think that 
most of his army is within that wall, so that his stronghold 
is empty and undefended. I will make a dash at Hsiangp‘ing. 


He will have to go to its rescue and I will smite him on the © 


way. I should score a great success.’ 


Tall 


Romance of the Chree Kingdoms 483 


So he hastened to Hsiangp‘ing along unfrequented ways. 
Meanwhile the two captains within the walled camp discuss- 


-ed their plans. 


Yang Tsu said, “When the Wei army comes near we will 
not fight. They will have come a long march and their © 
supplies will be short, so that they cannot hold out long. 
When they retreat we shall find our opportunity. These were 
the tactics Ssuma I used against Chuko on the Wei River, and 
Chuko died before the end of the expedition. We will try 
similar means.’ 

Presently the scouts reported that the Wei army had 


marched south. Pei Yen at once saw the danger and said, 


“They are going to attack Hsiangp‘ing, which they know is 


| defenceless. If that be lost this position is useless.” 


So they broke up their camp and followed the enemy. 


When Sstima heard it he rejoiced, saying, “Now they will fall | 
. into the snare I have laid for them.” 


He sent the two Hsiahous to take up position on the Chi 
River. They were to attack if the men of Liao came near 
them. They had not long to wait. As soon as Pei Yen and 


be his army approached they exploded a bomb, beat’ the drums, 
waved their flags and came out, one force on each side. The 


a: a Liao leaders made but a feeble fight and soon fled to Shoushan, 
where they joined the main army under Kungsun Yuan. * Then 


ee they turned to give battle to the Wei. army. 


Pei Yen rode to the front and reviled the enemy, tae 


o them with trickery and challenged to a fight in the open. 
-. Hsiahou Pa rode out to accept the challenge, and after a few 
bouts Pei fell. In the confusion caused by the death of their 


leader, Hsiahou urged on his men and drove Kungsun back 
to Hsiangp‘i ing. He took refuge in the city. 
_ The city was surrounded. It was autumn, and the rain fell 


day after day without ceasing. At the end ‘of the month the 


plain was under three feet of water, so that the grain boats 
sailed ‘straight from Liaohok‘ou to the city walls. The 
besiegers suffered much from the floods. 

The Commander of the Left went to Sstma and asked that 


the army might be moved to camp on the higher ground, out 


of the mud and water. But Sstma flouted the suggestion. 
“How can the army move away just when success is in 


a sight? The rebels will be conquered now any day, and if any 


other speaks about drawing off he will be put to death.” 
Pei went away muttering angrily to himself. Soon after, 


his colleague in command of the right wing repeated the 
~ suggestion and was put to death. -His head was suspended at 
the camp gate as a warning to others. The soldiers were 
much depressed. 


Then the south camp was abandoned, and the men marched 


twenty li south. This side of the city being thus left clear. 


484 an uo, or 


the soldiers and people came out to gather fuel and pasture 
their cattle. The attacking army could not understand this 
move, and Ch‘én Chün spoke about it. ; 
“When you besieged Shangyung, O T'aiyü, you attacked 
all round at eight points, and the city fell in as many days. 
Mêng Ta was taken, and you won a great suĉcess. Now 
your four legions have borne their armour many days over 
long marches and you do. not press the attack, but keep the 
men in the mud and mire and let the enemy gather supplies 
and feed their cattle. I do not know what your intention may 
pentia 
“Sir,” replied the Commander-in-chief, “I see you are 
ignorant of war after all. You do not understand the different 
conditions. Méng Ta then had ample supplies and few men; 


` we were under exactly opposite conditions, and so we had to 
attack vigorously and at once. The suddenness of the attack. = 
defeated the enemy. But look at present conditions. The | 


Liao men are many and we few; they are on the verge of 
starvation, and we are full fed. Why should we force the 


attack? Our line is to let them flee and smite them as they ne 
run. Theréfore I leave a gate open and the road free that By 


they may run away.” . 

Ch‘én then understood and acknowledged the ‘correctness 
of the strategy. Sstma sent to Loyang to hasten supplies, 
that there should be no-shortage. 


However. the war was not supported in the capital, tor 


when the messenger arrived and the king summoned his 
courtiers, they said, “In Liaotung the rain has been continuous 
for a month, and the men are in misery. Sstima ought 
to be recalled and the war renewed at a more convenient 
season.’ 

The king replied, “The leader of our army is most capable 
and best able to decide upon what should be done. He under- 
stands the conditions and is teeming with magnificent plans. 
He will certainly succeed. Wherefore, O Nobles, wait a few 
days and let us not be anxious about the result.” 

So the king heeded not the voice of the dissentients, but 
took care that provisions were sent. After a few days the 
rain ceased, and fine, clear weather followed. Sstma went 


out of his tent that he might study the sky. Suddenly he © 3 


saw a very large and bright star start from a point over 
Shoushan and travel over toward Hsiangp‘ing, where it fell. 
The soldiers were rather frightened at this apparition, but 
the leader rejoiced. ia 
“Five days from now Kungsun Yüan will be slain where 
that star fell,” said he. “Therefore attack with vigour.” 


They opened the attack the next morning at dawn, throwing — 


up banks and sapping the ‘walls, setting up balliste and 


— Romance of the Three ingdoms 485 


ie rearing ladders. When night came the attack did not cease. 


Arrows fell in the city like ‘pelting rain. 
Within the city, grain began to run short, and soon there 
was none. They slaughtered bullocks and horses for food. 


fe _ The soldiers began to be mutinous and no longer fought with 


any spirit. There was talk of slaying Kungsun and yielding 
‘the city. 

Kungsun was eae and frightened, and decided to 
sue for’ peace. He sent a minister and a censor out of the 
city to beg Ssuma to allow him to submit. These two had to 
be let down from the walls by ropes, as no other means of 


exit were possible. They found their way to Ssima and 


said, “We pray you, O T‘ai-yii, to retire twenty li and allow 

the officers to come forth and surrender.” an 

he Oey: did not _Kungsun himself come?” said Sstma. “He 
is rude.” . 

He put the two envoys to death and sent their heads back 
into the city.. 

Kungsun was still more alarmed, but he resolved to make 
one more attempt. This time he sent Wei Yen, a Shih-chung, 
as his envoy. Ssuma received this messenger sitting in state 
in his tent with his officers standing right and left. The 
- envoy approached on his knees, and when he reached the door 
of the tent recited his petition.” 


~ “T pray you, O T‘ai-yii, to turn your thundrous wrath from | 
= us; we will send the son of our leader as hostage and all the 
oe officers shall appear before you bound with cords.” 


Sstma replied. ‘There are five possible operations for any 
army. If you can fight, fight; if you cannot fight, defend; if 

you cannot defend, fiee; if you cannot flee, surrender; if you 
cannot surrender, die. ‘These five courses are open to you, 
-and a hostage would be useless. Now return and tell your 
master.” 

Wei Yen put his hands over his head and fled like a rat: 
He went. into the city and related what had happened to 


ee him., 


The Kungsuns, father ond son, resolved to flee. They chose 


a company of mounted men, and in the dead of night opened — 


the south gate and got out... They took the road to the east 


-. and were rejoiced. to find it clear. 


All went well for a distance of ten li, when a bomb exploded. 
This was followed by a roll of drums and the blare of trym- 
pets; and a cohort stood in the way. The leader was Sstma 
_I, supported by his two sons. 

1 “Stop, O rebel!” cried they. 

` But Kungsun lashed his steed to a gallop. Then Hu Tsun 
and the two Hsiahous, with their men, came up and quickly 
surrounded them so that they were helpless. Kungsun saw 


that escape was impossible, so T came with his sons, dis- 


486 | San Kuo, or 


mounted and offered surrender. Ssuma hardly looked at the © 


two men, but he turned to his officers and pointed out that 
the two Kungsuns stood where the star had fallen just five 
nights previously. They all felicitated him and praised his 


superhuman skill. The two helpless men were slain where — 


they stood. 


Sstma turned to resume the siege of the city, but before he’ 


had reached the walls Hu Tsun’s men had entered. Ssuma 
went in and was received with great respect, the people burn- 
ing incense as he passed. He went to the residence, and then 
the whole of the Kungsun clan, and all who had assisted in his 


rising, were beheaded. They counted heads to the number of 


three score and ten. ` 
The city taken and the rebels destroyed, the victor issued a 
proclamation in order to restore confidence among the people. 


Certain persons told him that Chia Fan and Lun Chih had © | 


been against the revolt and had therefore suffered death, so 
he honoured their tombs and conferred ranks upon their 
children. The contents. of the treasury were distributed 


among the soldiers as rewards, and then the army marched 


back to Loyang. 


One night the King of Wei was suddenly awakened by a 
chill blast that extinguished all the lights, but he saw the — 
form of his late Consort, with a score or two of others, coming 
toward the seat whereon he sat, and as they approached they — 

‘demanded his life. He was very frightened and A ill so. 


that he was like to die. 


So the two officers Liu Fang and Sun Tzu were set. over the 


privy council, and he summoned his brother Yü to the capital 


to make him Ta-Chiang-Chiin, and assistant to the regent, ~ — 
Ts‘ao Fang, the Heir Apparent. However, his brother being © 
modest and retiring by nature, declined these high offices and 


their responsibilities. 


The king then turned to his two confidants and enquired . 


of them who of the family was a suitable person to support 


the Heir Apparent. As they had both received many favours ° 


ae aes 
eS 


Sie SN tae ie oS 


from Ts‘ao Chén, they replied that none was so fit as Ts‘ao | nae 


Shuang, the son of their patron. . The king approved their 
choice, and thus Shuang became.a great person. Then they 


memorialised, saying that as Ts‘ao Shuang had been. chosen, = 


the king’s broher Ts‘ao Yü, Prince Yen, should be ordered to 
leaye the capital and return to his own place. 


The king consented and issued an edict, which these two - 


bore to the prince, saying, “The edict in the King’s own hand 
bids you return to your own domain at once, and you are 
not to return to court without a special command.” 


The prince wept, but he left forthwith. Thereupon Tsʻao 


Shuang was created Ta-Chiang- chiim, and. administered the 
government. 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 487 


But the king’s illness advanced rapidly, and he called 
Sstima into the palace. As soon as he arrived he was led to 
the king’s chamber. 

“I feared lest I should not see you again,” said the 
king; “but now I can die content.” 

The general bowed and said, “On the road they told me the 
sacred person was not perfectly well; I grieved that I had 
not wings to hasten hither. But I am happy in that I now 
behold the ‘dragon’ countenance.” ; 

The heir was summoned to the king’s bedside and also Ts‘ao 
Shuang, Liu Fang, Sun Tzu, and certain others. Taking 
Ssŭma by the hand, the dying king said, “When Liu Ytian-té 
lay dying at Paitich‘éng he confided his son, so soon to be an 
orphan, to the care of Chuko K‘ung-ming, who laboured in 


_ this task to the very end and whose devotion only ceased with © 


death. If such conduct is possible in the mere remnant of 


` a dying dynasty continued in a small state, how much more 


may I hope for it in a great country! My son is only eight 


` years of age, and incapable of sustaining the burden of ruler- 


ship. Happily for him he has ample merit and experience 
around him in the persons of yourself and his relatives. He 


will never lack friends for my sake.” Turning to the young 


prince, he continued, “My friend Chung-ta is as myself, and 


you are to treat him with the same respect and deference.’’. 


The king bade Sstuma lead the young prince forward. The 


. boy threw his arms around his new ¢guardian’s neck and clung 


-~ ïo him. 


“Never forget the affection he has just shown,” said the 


_ king, weeping. And Sstma wept also. 


The dying man swooned; although he could not speak, his 


_ hand still pointed to his son, and soon after he died. He had 


reigned thirteen years and was thirty-six years of age. His 
death took place in the last decade of the first month of the 


third year of Ch‘u-Ching. 


No time was lost in enthroning the new king, the supporters 
being Sstuma and Ts‘ao Shuang. The new ruler’s name was 
Ts‘ao Fang, his other name being Lan-ching. However, he 


: was the King’s son only by adoption. He had been brought 


up in the palace as a son, and no one knew his real origin. 

The posthumous title of “Emperor Ming” was conferred 
upon the late ruler, and he was buried in the Kaop‘ing Tombs. 
- The late Empress Kuo was given the title of ‘“T‘ai-hou.” 

The new reign was styled Chéng-Shih. Sstma I and Ts‘ao 
Shuang conducted the government, and in all matters the 
latter treated his colleague with deference and took no steps 
without his knowledge. ; 

Ts‘ao Shuang was no stranger at court. The late king had 


respected him for his diligence and care and had been very 


fond of him, He had had the freedom of the palace all his 


EA 
a 
fl 
? 


488 Aan uo, or 


life. He had a host of clients and retainers. Among them 
were five wholly light and foppish. Their family names were 
Ho, Téng, Li, Ting and Pi. Beside these five there was 
another named Huan Fan, a man of good parts, who had the 
sobriquet of “Bag © Wisdom”. These six , were Ts‘ ao 
Shuang’s most trusted companions and confidants. 

Now that they saw their patron in such an exalted Danan 
they began to think how to exploit it. One day Ho Yen said, 
“Ts‘ao Shuang, you should not let your great powers slip into 
the hands of any other, or you will repent it.” 

Ts‘ao replied, “Sstma I as well as I received the king’s 
sacred trust, and I mean to be true.” 

Ho said, “when your father and this Ssuma were: winning 
their victories in the east, your father suffered much from 


this man’s temper, which ultimately brought about his death. 


Why do you not look into that?” 


Ts‘ao seemed suddenly to wake up. Having entered into — 
an intrigue with the majority of the officers about the court, 


then one day he presented to the king a memorial proposing 
that Sstma should be promoted to the rank of T‘aifu for his 
great merits and services. 

The promotion was made, and, consequently, Sstma dis- 
appeared from the administration, and the whole military 
authority fell into the hands of Ts‘ao Shuang. 

Having thus far succeeded, Ts‘ao next appointed his 


brothers to high military posts, so that each commanded three | 


companies of the guards, with right to go in and out of the 
palace at will. Moreover, three of his friends were created 


Presidents, and the two others received powerful offices, one . 
of which was the governorship of Honan. These five and | 


their patron were close associates in all concerns of state. 


Ts‘ao Shuang gathered about him larger and still larger ` 


numbers of supporters, till Ssuma gave out that he was ill. 


and remained in seclusion. His two sons also resigned their 
offices. 

Ts‘ao Shuang and his friends now gave themselves up to 
dissipation, spending days and nights in drinking and music. 
In their dress and the furniture of their table they copied the 
palace patterns. Tribute in the shape of jewels and curios 
went to the residence of Ts‘ao before it entered the palace, 
and his courts swarmed with beautiful damsels. 


The eunuch Chang Fang toadied to T's‘ao Shuang so far as | 


to select a few of the late emperor’s handmaids and send 
them to the now powerful minister; he also chose for him a 


chorus of two score well-born ladies who were skilled in music 


and dancing. Ts‘ao Shuang also built for himself beautiful 
towers and pavilions and made to himself vessels of gold and 
silver, the work of the most expert craftsmen, whom he kept 
constantly employed, 


Hiemance of the Three kingdoms IE a ABITA 


Now Ho Yen heard of Kuan Lu’s great skill in ivination 
and sent to him in P‘ingyuan to invite him to take the sortes 


_ on his account. When the soothsayer arrived, Téng Yang was 
of the company to meet him, and he said to Kuan, “You call 
yourself a skilful diviner, but your speech does not resemble 


the language of the Book of Changes. How is that?’ 
Kuan replied, “An interpreter does not use the language of 


‘the original.’ 
Ho laughed, saying, “Certainly good words are not weari- 


some. But cast a lot for me, and tell me whether I shall ever 
arrive at the highest dignity or not, for I have dreamed 
repeatedly that many black flies settled on my nose.” 

Kuan replied, “Yüan K’ai aided Shun; Duke Chou assisted 
Chou; both these were kindly and modest and enjoyed great 


happiness. You, Sir, have come to high honours and wield. 
' great powers, but those who esteem you are few and those who 


fear you, many. You are not careful to walk in the way of 


good fortune. Now the nose is an eminence. If an eminence 


retains its characteristic, thereby it remains in honour. But 
is it not that black flies gather to foul objects and the lofty 


fears a fall? I would wish you to give of your abundance 


for the good of the poor and avoid walking in the wrong road. 
Then indeed may you reach the highest dignity, and the black 
ies will disperse.” | 
“This is mere senile gossip, 


99 


said Téng. 


“The gift of age is to see that which is yet to come; the gift : 


of gossip is to perceive what is not said,” replied Kuan. 
Thereupon he shook out his sleeves and went away. 
“He is very mad, really,” said his two hosts...’ 


“Kuan Lu went home. When he saw his uncle he gave him 


an account of the interview. _His uncle was alarmed at the 
probable consequences, and said, “Why did you anger them? 
They are too powerful for you to offend.” 


men.’ 
“What do you mean ?” 
“Téng Yang’s gait is that of one whose sinews are loosed 


from his bones, and his pulse is unsteady. When he would 


stand he totters as a man without limbs. This is the aspect 
of a disembodied soul. Ho Yen looks as if his soul was about 


to quit its habitation. He is bloodless, and what should be | 


solid in him is mere vapour. He looks like rotten wood. 
This is the aspect of a soul even now in the dark valley. Both 
these men will certainly soon die a violent death, and none 
need fear them.” 

His uncle left, cursing him for a madman. 

Ts‘ao Shuang and his five friends were devoted to the chase 
and were often out of the city. Ts‘ao Hsi, a brother of 
Shuang’s, remonstrated with him about this 2nd pointed out 


“What is there to fear? I have been talking to two dead : 


490 San Kuo, or 


the dangers of such frequent absence on these excursions. 
“You are in an exalted position and yet you are constantly 


going out hunting. If anyone took advantage of this to work ` 


you evil you might have cause to be exceedingly regretful.” 
Ts‘ao Shuang only showed anger, and replied, “The whole 
military authority is in my hands and what is there to fear?” 
Huan Fan, then Minister of Agriculture, also reasoned with 
- him, but he would not listen. 


About this time the style of the reign was changed to Chia- — ; 


Ping. 

Now ever since Ts‘ao had enjoyed the monopoly of military 
authority he had never heard the truth about the state of 
health of the man he had manceuvred out of power. But when 
a certain Li Shéng was appointed to the governorship of 
Ch‘ingchou he bade him go to take leave of Sstma I, at the 
same time to find out the true state of his rival’s health. 

So Li proceeded to the residence of the T‘as-fu and was 
announced. .Sstma saw through the device at once and told his 
sons the real.reason of this visit, and bade them play their parts 


in the scene he arranged before the visitor was admitted. 


e sf 


He threw aside his head-dress, so letting his hair fall in © : 


disorder, stretched himself upon his couch, tumbled the bed- 


ding into confusion, got a couple of slave girls to support | 


him, and then told his servants to lead in the visitor. 
` ` Li came in and went up to the sick man, saying, “It is a 


' long time since I have seen you, and I did not know you were. 


so-seriously ill. His Majesty is sending me to Ch‘ingchou, and 
I have come to pay my respects to you and bid you farewell.” 


“Ah; Pingchou is in the north; you will have to be very — $ 


careful there,” said Sstma feigning that he had not heard. 

“I am going as Governor of Ch‘ingchou, not Pingchou,” 
said, Li. 

“Oh, you nave just come from Pingchou.” 

“Ch'ingchou, in Shantung.” 

“Just back from Ch‘ingchou, eh?” said Sstma, smiling. 

“How very ill the T‘ai-fu is!” said Li Shéng to the servants. 

“The T‘ai-fu is deaf,” said they. 

_“Give me paper and a pen,” said Li. 

Writing materials were brought, when Li wrote what he 
wished to say and put‘it before his host. 

“My illness has made me very deaf; take care of yourself 
on the way,” said Sstma. 

Looking up, he pointed to his mouth. One of the girls 


brought some broth and held the cup for him to drink. He 


put his lips to the cup, but spilled the broth all over his dress. 

“I am very weak and ill,” said he, “and may die at any 
moment. My sons are but poor things, but you will instruct 
them, and when you see the general you will remember them, 
will you not?” = 


Romani, of the Three tmgooms 491 


xt this point he fell back on the Lan panting, and Li took 
his leave. He told his patron what he had seen, and Ts‘ac 
Shuang rejoiced, thinking his rival could not last long. 

“Tf the old man died, I should not be the one to grieve,” 

` gaid he. 

But no sconer had Li gone than Ssŭma rose from his couch 
and said to his sons, “Li Shéng will take a full account of this 
to his patron, who will not fear me any more. But wait till 
ds goes on his next hunting trip, and we will see what can be 

one.’ 

‘Soon after this, Ts‘ao Shuang proposed to the king to visit 
the tomb of his "father and perform the filial sacrifices in 

person. So they went, a goodly company in the train of the 
imperial chariot, and Ts‘ao Shuang with all his brothers and 
his friends went with the guards. Ts‘ao’s friend Huan 
-entreated him to remain in the city for fear of plots and 
- risings, but ‘Ts‘ao asked angrily and rudely who would dare 
‘make trouble, and bade him hold his tongue. And he went 
-with the king. 

-His departure rejoiced the heart. of gima. whe at once 
; began quietly to muster his trusty friends and henchmen and 
put the finishing touches to the ‘plot for the overthrow of his 
4 rival. 

Now terminates his FA, inaction, 

He must destroy the hostile faction. 


ve 
ots: ao Shung’ s fate will appear in the next chapter. 


d 


CHAPTER CVII. 


SsUMA I RECOVERS POLITICAL POWER; 
. CHIANG WEI IS DEFEATED AT NIUT‘OU HILLS. 


The Ssumas were very pleased to hear that their rival and 
his party were to follow the king on a visit to the tombs 


combined with a hunt, for it meant that the whole enemy — 
faction left the city. As soon as they left, Sstma entered, ~ 
gave the minister Kao Jou provisional command of the army ` 
and sent him to seize the camp of Ts‘ao Shuang. His brothers _ 


camp was also occupied. -Having secured his position thus, 
he and his supporters went to the palace of the Empress 


Dowager and said to her, “Ts‘ao Shuang has betrayed the — 
trust placed in him by the late Emperor and has ruined the 


government. His fault must be expiated.’’ 


She replied, “What can be done in the absence of His n 


Majesty?” 


“I have prepared plans for the destruction of these base a 
ministers and will see to it that no trouble happens to your- i 


self.” 


by the hand of an eunuch. Then the arsenals were seized. 


Soon the news of the rising came to the knowledge of the 
family of Ts‘ao Shuang, and his wife came out from the inner - 
apartments and summoned the captain of the guard to enquire — 
into the truth of the rumours. He told her that she need feel 


no alarm and he would go and see. Thereupon the captain 


The Empress was much alarmed, but could only act as she 
was directed and agree. So two of Sstinia’s supporters copied ~ 
out the memorial he had prepared and it was sent to the king — 


P‘an Chii, at the head of a few bowmen, went up on the wall — 
and looked around. At that moment Ssiima was crossing the - 


court, and P‘an bade his men shoot. But one of his officers — 


reminded him that the T‘at-fu was one of the highest officers — 


of state. 
“You must not shoot at the T‘at-fu; he is on public service.” 
Thrice he urged his chief not to let the men shoot, and so 


P‘an desisted. Ssttma went across guarded by his son Shao. 
Then he went out of the city and camped on the Lo River at 


the floating bridge. 


When the revolution began, one of Ts‘ao Shuang’s onicers $ 
Ssuma Lu-chih by name, took counsel with his subordinate | 


Hsin Ch‘ang. 
“Now that this revolt has begun, what should we do?” | 


Hsin. 


“Let us go to the king with what Wrongs we have,” replied x 


Fiomance of the Three Hingooms — 493 
“Perhaps: the best N, replied Lu-chih, and he went to 

a his own house to get ready to start. There he met his sister, 

_ Hsien-ying, who asked the meaning of all this haste. 

_ “His Majesty is out on a hunt and the T‘ai-fu has closed the 

“gates of the city. This is rebellion.” 

“I do not think so. He only means to slay Ts‘ao aiken! 
his rival,” replied she. 

“Why should he desire to do that?” asked her brother, 
sharply. 

“Ts‘ao Shuang is no match for the T‘ai-fu,”’ replied she. 

“If Ssuma asks us to join him, should we?” asked Hsin. 
___Usien-ying replied, “You know what a true man should do. 
When a man is in danger there is the greater need for 
‘sympathy. To be of his men and desert in an emergency is 
the greatest of evils.” 

This speech decided Hsin, who went with Sstuma Lu-chih. 
At the head of a few horsemen they forced the gate and got 
out of the city. When their escape was reported to Ssuma I 
he thought that Huan Fan would surely try to follow their 
‘example, so he sent to call him. However, on the advice of 
his son, Huan did not answer the summons, but decided to 


P‘ingch‘ang Gate. 
~ But the gate was barred. The warden was an old 
‘dependant of Huan’s. Huan pulled out from his sleeve a slip 
of bamboo and said, “The Empress’s command; open the gate 
for me.’ 
“Let me look,” said the warden. 
ei EW hat! How dare you, an old servant of mine, behave 
POTD Us. 

"The warden let Him pass. As soon as he had got outside 
he shouted to the. warden, “Ssuma I has raised a revolt, and 
you had better follow me.’ 

; The warden realised ae he had made a mistake, and ran 
after Huan, but failed to come up with him. 


“So Bag o Wisdom has got away too; that is a pity, but | 


-~ what can we do?” said Ssuma, when they reported the escape. 

“The old horse always hankers after the old stable and 

manger, and he would have been useless to us,” replied Chiang 
> Chi; 

Then Sstima called to him Hsü Yün and Ch‘én T'ai and 
said, “Go ye to Ts‘ao Shuang and say that I have no other 
intention than to take away the military power from him and 
his brother.” 

As soon as they had left, he called Yin Ta-mu and ordered 
- Chiang Chi prepare a letter to be taken to Ts‘ao Shuang. 
-Said Ssuma, “You are on good ‘terms with the man and are 
A aie fittest person for this mission. Tell him that Chiang Chi 
= and I are concerned solely with the military powers in the 


flee, -He got into his carriage and drove hastily to the 


y. 
Bee: 


nR 


494 an Kuo, or 


hands of himself and his brother, as we have sworn pointing a 
to the Lo River.” à 
So Yin Ta-mu went his way. oe 
Out in the country Ts‘ao Shuang was enjoying the hunting, Bt 
- flying his falcons and coursing his hounds. Suddenly came — 
the news of the rising in the city and the memorial against 
him. He almost fell out of the saddle when they told him. 
The eunuch handed in the memorial to the king in the presence | 
of Ts‘ao, who took it and opened it. A minister in. attendance a 
was ordered to read it. It said:— ae 
“On my return from the expedition into Liaotung His läte : 
i Majesty summoned Your Majesty with Prince Ts‘in, myself — 
and certain others to his bedside, took me by the arm and ~— 
impressed upon us all our duty in the years to be. Now ~ 
Ts‘ao Shuang has betrayed the trust placed in him, has — 
disordered the kingdom, usurped power at court and seized 
$ : upon power in the provinces. He has appointed the eunuch 
iia Chang Tang Commandant of the City to control the court and 
ie spy upon Your Majesty. He is surely lying in wait to seize — 
‘aaa the empire. He has sown dissension in the royal family and _ 
injured his own flesh and blood. The whole land is in, > 
confusion, and men’s hearts are full of fear. All this is ~~ 
opposed to the injunctions of His late Majesty and his — 
commands to me. Stupid and worthless as I am, yet I dare — 
not forget his words. My colleagues, T‘at-yu Chiang Chi and -> 
Shang-shu Sstma Fu agree that Ts‘ao Shuang is disloyal at ~~ 
heart. Great military powers should not be entrusted to — 
brothers. ign a 
“I have memorialised Her Majesty -and obtained her i 
authority to act. ‘oan 
‘ “All military powers have been wrested from the hands OL a 
Be the Ts‘ao family, leaving them only the simple title of Marquis, 
gens, so that hereafter they may be unable to hinder or control Your 
Majesty’s actions. If there be any obstruction, the matter 
shall be summarily dealt with. eo 
“Although in ill health, as a DEUNA measure I have 
camped at the Floating Bridge, whence I write this.” © 
When they had made an end of reading, the king turned to 
Ts‘ao Shuang and said, “Tn the face of such words what mean - 
you to do?” a 
Shuang was at a Ve and turned T his younger brother, 
saying, “What now?” 
Ts‘ao Hsi replied, “I remonsorated with you, but you were 
obstinate and listened not. So it has come to this. Sstma 
I is false and cunning beyond measure. If K‘ung-ming could 
not get the better of him, could we hope to do so? T see 
nothing but to yield that haply we may live.” gos ae 
Just at this moment arrived Hsin Ch‘ang and Sstima Lu- 
chih. Ts‘ao Shuang asked what tidings they brought. 


Ley Ayn et 


XSH: 


Romante of the Three kingdoms zi 495 


; They replied, “The city is completely and closely omdeed. 
the T‘ai-fu is camped on the river at the Floating Bridge, 
and you cannot return. You must decide how to act at once.’ 

Then galloped up Huan Fan, who said, “This is really 


rebellion; why not request His Majesty to proceed to Hsiitu. 


till provincial troops can arrive and deal with Ssuma?” — 
Ts‘ao Shuang replied, “How can we go to another place 
when all our families are in the city?” 
“Fool! Even in this crisis you think only of life. You 


have the Son of Heaven with you here and command all the | 
forces of the empire. None would dare disobey you, and yet 


you march quietly to death.” 


The unhappy man could not decide to strike a blow -for 


safety; he did nothing but snivel. 
Huan continued, “The stay in Hsiitu would be but brief, and 


there are ample supplies for years. You have forces at your ` 


call at Nankuan. You hold the seal of Minister of War, and I 
have brought it with me. Everything is in your favour. 
Act! Act at once! Delay is death.”. 

“Do not hurry me,” said Ts‘ao. “Let me think it over 
| carefully.” 
Then came the two messengers of Suma I, to say that he 


_ desired only to strip the Ts‘aos of their military power. If - 
_ they yielded they might return peacefully to the city. 


= _ Still the Ts‘aos hesitated. Next arrived Yin Ta-mu with 
Sstima’s second message that he had sworn by the Lo River 
_ te the singleness of his aim. He tendered the letter of Chiang 
_ Chi to the effect that if the conditions were complied with the 


- Ts‘aos mignt return to their palace in peace. 
i When Ts‘ao Shuang seemed disposed to accept the assurance © 


of Sstma, Huan inveighed against it, saying, “You are a dead 
man if you listen to the voice of these men.” 


Night found Ts‘ao Shuang: still vacillating. As twilight : 


_ faded into darkness he stood, sword in hand, sad, sighing and 


_ weeping. And morning found him still trying to make up his 
| mind. 


Huan again urged him to decide upon some course. ‘You 
have had a whole day and a whole night for reflection and must 
decide,” said he, — 

= “J will not fight; I will yield all and save my house,” said 

Ts‘ao, throwing down his sword. 

Huan left the tent wailing. ‘“Ts‘ao Chén might boast of his 
abilities, but his brothers are mere cattle,” said he. He wept 
- copiously. 

' The two messengers bade Ts‘ao offer his seal of office to 
Sstma, and it was brought. Its custodian clung to it and 
x would not give it up, saying, “Alas! that you, my lord, should 
resign your powers and make such a pitiful surrender. For 
surely you will not escape death in the eastern market-place.” 


496 San kuo ` 

“The T‘ai-fu will surely keep faith with me,” said Ts‘ao. 

The seal was borne away, and the captains, thus released 
from the bonds of discipline, dispersed and the hosts melted 
away. When the brothers reached the Floating Bridge, they 
were ordered to go to their dwellings, and they went. Their 
supporters were imprisoned to await the pleasure of the 
Emperor. 

Ts‘ao Shuang and his friends, so lately all-powerful, entered 
the city alone, without even a servant following. As Huan 
approached the bridge, Sstma, from horseback, pointed his 
whip disdainfully at him and said, “What brought you to this?” 
Huan made no reply, but with head bent followed the others. 

It was decided to request the Emperor to declare the hunt 


at an end and order a return to the city. The three Ts‘aos a 


were confined in their own house, the gate whereof was. 
fastened with a huge. lock, and soldiers were set to guard it 
round about. They were sad and anxious, not knowing what ` 
would be their fate. Then Ts‘ao Hsi said, “We have but little © 
food left. Let us write and ask for supplies. If he send us. | 


food we may be sure he does not intend harm.” 


They wrote, and ample supplies were sent. This cheered 


_ them, and they thought their lives were safe. 


The eunuch Chang Fang was arrested and put to the w 
question. He said he was not the only one who had tried to ~ 


subvert the government, and he named the five friends of 


Ts‘ao Shuang. So they were arrested and, when interrogated, — 


confessed that a revolt had been arranged for the third month. 


All were locked in one long wooden collar. The Warden of. i 


the Gate testified that Huan Fan had imposed upon him with 


a pretended command from Her Majesty and so had escaped i . 


out of the city. Beside he had said the T‘ai-fu was a rebel. 
Then said Sstma I, “When a man maligns another and is 


false, the punishment for such a crime as he imputes falls upon i 


-his own head.” 
Huan and those with him were thrown into prison. 


Presently Ts‘ao Shuang and his brothers, and all persons . 


connected with them, were put to death in the market-place. 


All the treasure of their houses was sent to the public treasury.. 
Now there was a certain woman of the Hsiahou family who. 


had been wife to a second cousin of Ts‘ao Shuang’s. Early 
left a childless widow, her father wished her to marry again. 
She refused and cut off one ear as a pledge of constancy. 
However, when the Ts‘aos were all put to death her father 
arranged another marriage for her; whereupon she cut off 
her nose. Her own people were chagrined at her obstinate 
determination. $ 

“For whom are you keeping your vow?” said they: “Man 
is but as the light dust upon the tender grass, and what is the 
good of mutilating your body?” 


Romance of the Three Hingdoms 


The woman replied, weeping, “The honourable woman does 
not break a vow of chastity for the sake of wealth, and the 
heart of a righteous woman is constant unto death. While 
the house of Ts‘ao enjoyed prosperity I remained faithful; 
how much more should I be true now that it has fallen upon 


evil days? 


Can I act like a mere beast of the field?’ 


The story of her devotion came to the ears of Ssiima, who 
praised her conduct and allowed her to adopt a son to rear as 
her own and so continue the family. 


A poem says :— 


¢ 


What is a man to be mindful of? 
A grain of dust on a blade of grass; 
Such virtue as Hsiahou’s daughter had 
; Stands out sublime as the ages pass. 
This fair young wife of gentle mien 
Dared all to maintain her purpose high. 
What man though strong in the flush of life 
Has equalled her in constancy? 


After Ts‘ao Shuang had suffered death, Chiang Chi recalled 
certain others who had been of his party and were still alive, 
notably Yang Tsung, who had opposed the surrender of the 
seal of the late minister. However, no action was taken 
against them: 

“He is a righteous man who serves his master faithfully,” 
said Sstma, and he even confirmed these men in their offices. 

Hsin Ch‘ang remembered that it had been on the advice of 
his sister that he had decided to stand by his lord, and thus 
had saved his reputation. 

A poet has praised his sister’s conduct. 


“You call him lord and take his pay, 
Then stand by him when danger nears.” 
Thus to her brother spake Hsien-ying, 
And won fair fame though endless years. 


A general amnesty was extended to all Ts‘ao’s partizans, 
and no officer was removed or dismissed for having supported 
the late order of things. All were left in possession of their 
property, and soon all was tranquillity. 

However, it is to be noted that Ho and Téng met the unhappy 
end that Kuan Lu had foretold for them. 


The seer Kuan Lu was deeply read 
In all the lore of th’ ancient sages. 

Thus he could see events to come 

As clear as those of former ages. 

And he perceived the soul of Ho, 
Already in the vale of gloom, 

And knew the outer shell of Téng 

- Was hastening to an early tomb. 


“After his recovery of power, Sstuma was- made Prime 


Minister 
82 


and received the Nine Gifts. Sstima refused these 


i 


eh 


498 San Kuo, or 


honours, but the king insisted and would take no denial. ‘His. a 


two sons were made assistants to their father, and all state 
affairs fell under the control of these three. 

However, Ssuma remembered that one man, Hsiahou Pa, a 
member of the Ts‘ao clan, still commanded at Yungchou. In 


his position he might be a real danger, and he must be removed. 


So an edict, was issued calling him to. the capital to discuss 


affairs. But instead of obeying this call, Hsiahou declared — 


himself a rebel, although he had but a small force to support 


him. As soon as this was known, Kuo Huai marched to | 
suppress the malcontent. The two armies were soon face to. — 
face, and Kuo en to the front and began to revile his 


opponent. 

“How could ‘you rebel against the ruling house, you who 
are of the same clan as our great founder, and who have always 
been treated generously?” 


Hsiahou Pa replied, “My forefathers served the state right $ 


well, but who is this Ssuma that he has put to death my 
kinsmen and would now destroy me? What is his aim, if it 
be not to usurp the Throne? If I can cut him off and so 
frustrate his design I shall at least be no traitor to the state.” 

Kuo Huai rode forward to attack, and Hsiahou advanced 
to the encounter. They fought a half score of bouts, and then 
Kuo turned and fled. But this was only a feint to lead on his 


enemy, for ere Hsiahou had gone far he heard a shout behind — 


him and turned to see Ch‘én T‘ai about to attack. At the — 
same moment Kuo turned again, and thus Hsiahou was between — 


two fires. He could effect nothing, so he fled, losing many men. 
Soon he decided that his only course was to desert to Shu. 


Wherefore he went into Hanchung to see if haply the Later — 


Ruler would accept his services. When Chiang Wei heard of 


his desire to surrender, he had doubts of his sincerity. 


However, after due enquiry Chiang was satisfied and allowed 
the renegade from Wei to enter the city. After making his 


obeisance, Hsiahou, with many tears, told the story of his 


wrongs. Chiang expressed sympathy. 

Said he, “A thousand years ago Wei Tsu left the court of 
Chou in disgust, and this act has assured to him everlasting 
honour. You may be able now to assist in the restoration of 


the House of Han, and you will then stand no whit inferior to © 


any man of antiquity.” 
A banquet was ordered, and while it was being prepared 
the host talked of affairs in the capital. 


“The Sstma family is now most powerful and in a position 1 


to carry out any scheme they planned. Think you that they 
have any intentions against us?” 


“The old traitor has enough to do with his rebellion; he has 


no leisure to.trouble about any outside matters. However, 


two other men in Wei have lately come to the front, and if he. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 


} oe them against your canine and Wu it meni £ go ill ah 
-you both.” 

_ “And who are these two?” ; 

“One is named Chung Hui, a man of Ch‘angsha; he is a 

_ descendant of the T‘ai-fu Chung Yu. As a mere boy he was — 

noted for being bold and smart. His father used to take him- 

‘and his brother to. court. Chung Hui was seven and his 

brother a year older. The Emperor Ts‘ao Pei noticed one 
- day that the elder boy was sweating and asked him the 

reason. — i 
= “Whenever I am frightened the sweat pours out and I 
cannot help it, ” replied the boy. 

N ‘You do not seem frightened, said the Emperor to the 

other. 

ETT ami so frightened that the sweat camo come out,’ ’ 

replied he. 

“The Emperor was the only one oa discerned the 

extraordinary ability of the boy. A little later the lad was 

_ always studying books on war and tactics, and became an able 
BP tratavist, so that he won admiration from both Sstima and 
_ Chiang Chi. 

“The second man is Teng Ai. He was left an orphan very 
_ early, but he was ambitious and enterprising. If he saw lofty 
mountains or wide marshes he always looked for those points 
‘where soldiers might be stationed or dépôts of provisions 
made or combustibles laid. People ridiculed him, but Sstima_ 
-saw there was much to admire and ima die the young man 

on his staff. 

“Têng Ai had an impediment in his Paeh, so that he called 
= himself ‘Ai-Ai, and Ssŭma used to make fun of him and asked 
- him one day how many there were Ok him since he called 
himself ‘Ai-Ai; 

. “Téng at once replied, ‘There was only one Féng in the 
- Lun-yü when Chieh Yu cried ‘O Féng” | 

“This ready repartee shows the quickness of his intellect, 

and you may well be on your guard against him and the other, 

for they are to be feared.” 
= “JI do not think them worth even talking about,” replied 

Chiang Wei. 

-Chiang Wei took Hsiahou Pa to Chiénetu and presented 
him to the king, telling the story of events in Loyang, the 
overthrow of Ts‘ao Shuang, the rise of the Ssima family to 
supreme power, the weakness of Ts‘ao Fang, the king, and 

then proposed that another attempt be made to re- establish 
i the House of Han in its old capital. 

- But Fei I opposed any expedition, saying, “We have lately 
lost by death two trusty counsellors, and there is no one left 
fit to take care of the government. The attempt ikea be 

‘postponed.”).. = 


500 -an Bus, or 


“Not so,” replied Chiang. “Life is Short. Our days flash ‘ 


by as the glint of a white horse across a chink in the door. 


We are waiting and waiting. Are we never to try to restore 


Han to its old glory?” 


“Remember the saying of the wise Sun: , Know thyself and 


know thine enemy. Then is victory sure.’ We are not the 
equals of the late Prime Minister, and where he failed, are we 
likely to succeed ?” 

Chiang said, “I would enlist the aid of the Ch‘ iang. I have 
lived near them> ‘in Shénsi and know them well. With 
their help, even if we do not gain the capital and the 
whole empire, we can at least conquer and hold all west 
of Shénsi.” 

The king here closed the discussion, saying, “Sir, as you 


‘desire to conquer Wei, do your best. I will not damp your — 


enthusiasm.” 


Thus the king’ s oneoni was given. Then Chiang Wei left Ae 


the court and betook himself, with Hsiahou Pa, into Hanchung 


- to prepare for a new expedition. 
“We will first send an envoy to the Chiang to make a league RE 
with them,” said Chiang. “Then we will march out by — 
Hsip‘ing to Yungchou, where we will throw up two ramparts — 
near the Ch‘ü Hills and garrison them. The position is a | 
point of vantage. Then we will send supplies to Ch‘uank‘ou, | 
and advance gradually, according to the plan devised by the oi. 


great strategist.” 


In the autumn of the year they sent the two Shu generals E 


Chü An and Li Hsin, with a large force, to construct the two 


ramparts, of which Chii was to hold the eastern and Li the 


western. 

When the news reached Yungchou, the Governor Kuo Huai: 
sent a report to Loyang and also despatched a force to oppose 
the men of Shu. When that army arrived both the Shu 


pee te es ees 


captains led their men to meet it, but their armies were too © . 
weak and they once more retired into the city. The army of ~ 


Wei laid siege and occupied the road that led to Hanchung, so 
_ that supplies were cut off. After some days, and when the 


men of Shu began to feel the pinch of hunger, Kuo Huai came’ 


= to see what progress his two lieutenants were making. At 


sight of the position he rejoiced exceedingly, and when he 
returned to camp he said to.Ch‘én T“ai, “In this high country 
the city must be short of water, which means that the besieged 


must come out for supplies. Let us cut off the streams that 


supply them, and they will perish of thirst.” 
So the soldiers were set to work to divert the streams above 
the city, and the besieged were soon distressed. Li Hsin led 


out a strong force to try to seize the water sources and fought si ; 
stubbornly, but. was at length worsted and driven back within ~ 


the walls. 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 501. 


x 


_ Meanwhile the soldiers were parched with thirst. They 
_ could not account for the delay of Chiang Wei’s reinforcements 
_ and finally decided that Li Hsin should try to fight his way 
out and get help. 
_ So the gates were opened, and Li rode out with a score or 
= so of horsemen. These were opposed and had to fight every 
_ inch of the way, but eventually the leader won though severely 
wounded. All his men had fallen. 


That night a strong north wind brought a heavy fall of snow, 
and the besieged were thus temporarily relieved from the’ 


water famine. They melted the snow and prepared food. 
Li Hsin, sorely wounded, made his way west along the hill 
paths. After two days he fell in with Chiang Wei. He 
dismounted, prostrated himself and told his story. 

_ “The delay is not due to my slackness; the allies we depended 
upon have not’ come,” said Chiang. 


_ to his colleague, Hsiahou Pa, he asked if he had any plan to 
_ propose. 

_. Hsiahou replied, “If we wait for the coming of the Ch‘iang 
it looks as if we shall be too late to relieve Ch‘iishan. It is 
_ very probable that Yungchou has been left undefended, where- 
= fore I propose that you go toward Niut‘ou Hills and work 


armies to fal! back to relieve Yungchou and so relieve our 
a Ores.” 
+ “The plan appears excellent,” replied Chiang. And he set 
EO bax 3 tt ni 
~ When Ch‘én T‘ai knew that Li Hsin had escaped, he said 
- to his chief. “Now that this man has got out he will tell 
= Chiang Wei of the danger, and he will conclude that our efforts 
-~ are concentrated on the ramparts and will endeavour to attack 
our rear.. Therefore I suggest, General, that you go to the 
T‘ao River and stop the supplies of our enemies, while I go 
= to the Niut‘ou Hills and smite them. They will retreat as 
‘soon as they know their supplies are threatened.” 
- So Kuo Huai marched secretly to the T‘ao River, while his 
colleague went to the hills. 


When the Shu army led by Chiang Wei came near they. 


heard a great shouting, and the scouts came in to report that 
_ the road was barred. Chiang Wei himself rode out to look. 
- “So you intended to attack Yungchou, did you?’ shouted 
 Ch‘én Tai. “But we know it and have been watching for 
— youa long time.” 
` ` Chiang Wei rode forth to attack. _His opponent advanced 
` with a flourish of his sword, and they engaged. Ch‘én T‘ai 
< goon ran away. Then the men of Shu came forward and fell 
on, driving the men of Wei back to the summit of the hills. 


; __ Chiang sent an escort with the wounded officer to conduct 
him to Ch‘éngtu, where his wounds could be treated. Turning © 


round to the rear of Yungchou, which will cause the. Wei 


f; 


502 San kuo 


But they halted there, and Chiang encamped at the foot of the 


hills, whence he challenged the enemy every day. But he 


could gain no victory. 


Seeing no result after some days of this, Hsiahou said, “This, 


is no place to remain in. We can get no victory and areni 
tempting fate by remaining open to a surprisé. I think we 


should retire till‘'some better plan can be tried.” 


Just then it was reported that the supplies road was in the i 


hands of the enemy, and it was imperative to retreat. 
' Hsiahou marched away first, and Chiang covered the retreat. 


Ch‘én T‘ai pursued in five divisions along five different roads, — 
but Chiang got possession of the meeting point and held them ` 


all in check, finally forcing them back on the hills. But from 


this position such a heavy discharge of arrows and stones was _ 
maintained that the Wei armies were forced to abandon their 


eee 


position. Chiang went to the T‘ao River, where the men of ` 
Wei attacked. Chiang went to and fro smiting where he ~ 


could, but he was surrounded and only got out by a desperate 


effort and after suffering great loss. 


Chiang hastened toward Yangp‘ing Pass, but fell in with © 


another body of the enemy, at the head of which he saw a | : 


fierce, youthful leader, who at once rode out furiously tonne 


attack. 


This leader had a round face, long ears and a square motith t 


‘with thick lips. Below his left eye was a large hairy mole. 


It was the elder son of Sstma I. He was a General of Cavalry. MF J 
“Simpleton, how dare you stand in my way?” yelled Chiang, 


as he rode forward with his spear set. 


Sstma Shih met the attack, and three bouts were fought. — 
Chiang Wei came off victor and so was free to continue his 


way. Presently he reached the pass and was welcomed within 
its sheltering walls. Sstima attacked soon after his arrival, 


- but those within the ramparts replied with the multiple cross- _ 
bows which threw ten bolts at each discharge. For the men | 
of Shu had made these engines of war after the design left DY 


Chuko Liang. 


Owing to superior weapons, Shu defeated Wei, 
Wei will ne’er recover what was lest that day. 


What:-befell Ssiima Shih will be told in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER CVIII. 


TING FENG’S SWORDSMEN WIN A VICTORY IN THE SNOW; 
SUN HSUN EXECUTES A MURDEROUS PLAN AT A BANQUET. 


As has been said, Chiang Wei, in his retreat, fell in with a 
force under Sstma Shih, barring his road. It came about 
thus. After the capture of Yungchou, Kuo Huai had sent a 
flying messenger to the capital and the king summoned Sstma 
I for advice. It had then been decided to send reinforcements 
to Yungchou, and five legions had marched, led by the son of 


_ the Prime Minister. On the march Ssuma Shih had heard 
: that the Shu army had been beaten back and had concluded 


they were weak. So he decided to meet them on the road and 


= give battle. Near the Yangp‘ing Pass, however, the roads had 
= been lined with men armed with the multiple crossbows de- 


signed by Chuko Liang. Since his death large numbers of 
these weapons had been made, and the bolts from them, which 
went in flights of ten, were poisoned. Consequently the Wei 


losses were very heavy, and Shih himself barely escaped with 


life. However, eventually he returned to Loyang. 


From the walls of Ch‘tishan the Shu captain Chii An, 


~ watched anxiously for the expected help. As it came not, he 


ultimately surrendered. And Chiang Wei, with a greatly 


reduced army, marched back into Hanchung. 


In the third year of Chia-P‘ing, in the eighth month, Ssima © 


I fell ill. His sickness increased rapidly, and, feeling that his 
end was near, he called his two sons to his bedside to hear his 


‘last words. 


“T have served Wei many years and reached the highest rank 


i possible among ministers. People have suspected me of 


ulterior aims, but I have always felt afraid to take the final 


step.. After my death the government will be in your hands, - 


and you must be doubly careful.” 
He passed away even as he said these last words. The sons 


informed the king, who conferred high honours upon the dead 


and advanced his sons; the elder to the rank of General with 


: the leadership of the Presidents, and the younger to the rank 


of General of Cavalry. 
It is here necessary to return and survey events in Wu. 
Sun Ch‘tian had named his son Têng as his heir. His mother 


was the Lady Hsii. But Téng died, and the second son was 


chosen his successor. His mother was the Lady Wang. A 


_quarrel arose between the new Heir Apparent and Princess 


he fF He 
Wh ot oe 


+ + 


504 San uo, or 


Chin, who maligned him and intrigued‘against him, so that he 
was set aside. He died of mortification. Then the third son 
was named; his mother’s name was P'an. 

At this time Lu Hsiin and Chuko.Chin were both dead, and 


the business of the government, great and small, was in the — 


hands of Chuko Ch‘üo. 

In the first year of T‘ai-Ho, on the first of the eighth month, 
a great gale passed over Wu. The waves rose to a great 
height, and the water stood eight feet deep over the low-lying 
lands. The pines and cypresses, which grew at the cemetery 
of the kings of Wu, were uprooted and carried to the gates of 
Chienyehch‘éng, where they stuck, roots upward, in the road. 

Sun Ch‘tian was frightened and fell ill. In the early days 
of the next year his illness became serious, whereupon he 
called in Chuko Ch‘iio and Lü Tai to hear the declaration of 


his last wishes. Soon after he died, at the age of seventy zong k 


He had ruled in Wu for twenty-four years. 


A hero, grey-eyed and red-bearded, 
He called forth devotion from all. 
He lorded: the east without challenge 

Till death’s one imperative call. 


Chuko immediately placed his late lord’s son Liang on the 
throne, and the opening of ‘the new reign was marked by the 


adoption of the style Ta-Hsing. A general amnesty was 
proclaimed. The late ruler received the posthumous style of- 


“Great Emperor” and was buried in Chiangling. 

When these things were reported in the Wei capital, Ssuma 
Shih’s first thought was to attack the east. But his plans 
were opposed by Fu Ku, saying, “Remember what a strong 
defence to Wu is the Great River. The country has been 
many times attacked, but never conquered. Rather let us all 
hold what we have till the time be expedient to possess the 
whole empire.” 


Shih replied, “The way of Heaven changes thrice in a` 


century, and no emperor is permanent. I wish to attack Wu.” 
Sstma Chao, his brother, was in favour of attack, saying 
- “The occasion is most opportune. Sun Ch‘iian is newly dead 
and the present ruler is a child.” 
An expedition was decided upon. There was a- certain 
general named Wang Ch‘ung, whose title was “Conqueror of 
the South,” and it was settled that he should command. He 


led away ten legions with orders to attack Tunghsing. 


Another leader, Wuch‘iu Chien, was given ten legions to go 
against Wuch‘ang. They marched in three divisions. _Ssuma 
Chao went in chief command. 

The armies drew near to the Wu frontiers in the tenth 
month and camped. Chao called together the various com- 
` manders to decide upon plans. He said, “This Tunghsing 


4 


Romance of the Three Gingdoms | 505 


district is most important to Wu. They have built a great 

rampart, with walls right and left to defend Ch‘aohu from 
an attack in the rear. You gentlemen will have to exercise 
extreme care.” 

Then he bade Wang Ch‘ung and Wuch‘iu Chien each to 
take a legion and place themselves right and left, but not to 
advance till Tunghsing had been captured. When that city 
had fallen, these two were to go forward at the same time. 
Hu Tsun was to lead the van. 

The first step was to construct a floating bridge ba storm | 
the rampart. The two walls should then be captured. 

News of the danger soon came to Wu, and Chuko Ch‘iio 
called a council to take measures. 

Then said Ting Feng, whose title was “Pacificator of the 
North, ‘“Tunghsing is of the utmost importance as its loss 
would endanger Wuch* ang.’ 

“I agree with you,” said Chuko. “You say just what I think. 
You should lead three thousand marines up the river in thirty 
ships while I follow on land.” — 
t Three other legions were sent out along different roads to 
help where needed. The sienai for the general advance was 
to be three bombs. | 

Hu Tsun, of Wei, crossed on the floating bridge, took and 
camped on the rampart. He then sent Huan Chia and Han 
Tsung to assault the flanking forts, which were held by 
Ch‘uan I and Liu Liieh. These forts had high walls and 
strong, and made a good resistance, but the garrison dared 
not venture out to attack so strong a force as was attacking 
them. 

Hu Tsun made a camp at Hstichou. It was then the depth 
of winter and intensely cold. Heavy snow fell. ‘Thinking 
that no warlike operations were possible in such weather, Hu 
` and his officers made a great feast. 

In the midst of the feasting came one to report that thirty 
ships had come up river. The general went out to look and 
saw them come into the bank. He made out a hundred men 
on each. As they were so few, he returned to the feast and 
told his officers that there was nothing to be alarmed at. 
Giving orders to keep a careful watch, they all returned to 
enjoy themselves. 

Ting Féng’s ships were all drawn up in line. Then he said 
to his officers, “To-day there is indeed a grand opportunity for 
a brave man to distinguish himself. We shall need the utmost 
freedom of movement, so throw off your armour, leave your 
helmets, cast aside your long spears and reject your heavy 
halberds. Short swords are the weapons for to-day.” 

From the shore the men of Wei watched them with amuse- 
ment, taking no trouble to prepare against an attack. But 
suddenly bombs exploded, and simultaneously with: the roar 


506 San Kuo, or 


of the third Ting Féng sprang ashore at the head of his men. 


They dashed up the bank and made straight for the camp. 
The men of Wei were taken completely by surprise and 


were helpless. Han Tsung grasped one of the halberds that 


stood by the door of the commander’s tent, but Ting Féng 
stabbed him in the breast, and he rolled over.» Huan Chia 
went round and came up on the left. Just as he poised his 
spear to thrust, Ting gripped it under his arm. Huan let go 


and turned to flee, but Ting sent his sword flying after him 


and caught him in the shoulder. He turned and was thrust 
through. 


The three companies of Wu marines went to and fro in the ji 


camp of Wei slaying as they would. Hu Tsun fled. His 
men ran away across the floating bridge, but that gave way 
and many were thrown into the water and drowned. Dead 


bodies lay about on the snow in large numbers. The spoil E 


of military gear that fell to Wu was immense. The other 
Wei leaders retreated. 
When Chuko had finished the feastings and distribution of 


rewards in celebration of victory, he thought he could push on 
and capture the capital. So he told his officers that this was | 


his intention, and also sent away letters to Shu to engage the 
aid of Chiang Wei, promising that the empire should be 
divided between them when they had taken it. 


An army of twenty legions was told off to march on the | 
capital. Just as it was starting, a stream of white vapour — 


was seen emerging from the earth, and as it spread it gradu- 


ally enveloped the whole pany so that men could not see each’ 


other. 

“It is a white rainbow,” said Chiang Yen, “and it bodes ill 
to the army. I advise you, O T‘ai-fu, to return and not march 
against Wei.” 


“How dare you utter such ill-omened words and blunt the 


keenness of my army?’ cried Chuko, angrily. 

He bade the lictors take him out and put him to death. 
Chiang’s colleagues interceded for him, and he was spared, 
but he was stripped of all rank. Orders were issued to march 
quickly. 

Then Ting offered a suggestion, saying, ““Wei’s chief defence 
is Hsinch‘éng; it would be a sore blow to Sstma Chao to 
capture it.” 

Chuko welcomed this suggestion and gave orders to march 
on Hsinch‘éng. They came up and found the city gates 
closed, wherefore they began to besiege the city. 

A hasty messenger was sent to Loyang, and one Yü Sung 
told the Prime Minister, Sstma Shih. 


Yü said, “Wu is laying siege to Hsinch‘éng ; the city should ` 
not try to repulse the attack, but simply hold out as. long as- 


possible. When the besiegers have exhausted their provisions 


: ; Si 


fiomance of the Three Lingooms | 507 | 


-they will be compelled to retire. As they reiveat we can 
smite them. However, it is necessary to provide against any — 
invasion from Shu.” 


Accordingly Ssiima Chao was sent to reinforce Kuo Huai so 


as to keep off Chiang Wei, while Wuch‘iu Chien and Hu Tsun 


kept the army of Wu at bay. 

For months the army of Chuko battered at Hsinch‘éng sate 
out success. He urged his captains to strenuous efforts, 
threatening to put to death anyone who was dilatory. At. 
last his attacks looked like succeeding, for one of the corners 

of the wall seemed shaken. 

: Then the commander of Hsinch‘éng thodebt of a device. 
He sent a messenger to the commander of the attack to say © 
that it-was a rule in Wei that if a city held out against attack 
for a hundred days its commandant might surrender without 
penalty. “Now the city has held out for over ninety days, and 

my master hopes you will allow him to withstand the few days 

_ necessary to complete the hundred, when he will yield.” 

_ The messenger also presented a letter to the same effect, 

' and Chuke had no doubts that the story was genuine. The 

_ attack therefore slackened, and the defenders enjoyed a rest. 
But all that was really desired was time wherein to strengthen 

_the weak angle of the wall. As soon as the attacks ceased the 

` defenders pulled down the houses near the corner and repaired | 

the wall with the material. As soon as the repairs were 

- complete, the commandant threw off all pretence and cried 


_ from the wall, “I have half a year’ s Pronin yet and will 
ie not surrender to any curs of Wu.” 


“The defence became as vigorous as ee the truce. Chuko 


was enraged at being so tricked, and urged on the attack. 


But one day one of the thousands of arrows that flew from the 
rampart struck him in the forehead, and he fell. He was borne 
to his tent, but the wound inflamed, and he became very iil. 
Their leader’s illness disheartened the men, and, moreover, 
the weather became very hot. Sickness invaded the camp, so 
that when Chuko had recovered sufficiently to resume command 
the men were unfit. An officer who told him the men were 
too ill to give battle met with an outburst of fierce anger, and 


Chuke said he would behead the next man who mentioned Re 


illness. 

; When the report of this threat got abroad, the men began 
to desert freely. Presently one Ts‘ai Lin, with his whole 
company, went over to the enemy. Chuko began to be alarmed 
-~ and rode through the camps to see for himself. Surely enough, 
the men all looked sickly, with pale and puffy faces. 

The siege had to be raised, and Chuko retired into his own 
country. The enemy harassed his march and inflicted a severe 
defeat. Mortified by the course of events, he did not report 

his return, but pretended illness. 


508 > San Aug, or 


King Liang went to the camp to see his general, and the 
officers came to call. In order to silence comment, Chuko 
assumed an attitude of extreme severity, investigating every 
one’s conduct very minutely, punishing rigourously any fault 


or shortcoming and meting out sentences of banishment, or ~ 


death with exposure, till every one walked in teror. He also 
placed two of his own clique over the royal guards, makine 
them the teeth and claws of his vengeance. 

Now. Sun Hsün was a great grandson of Sun Ching, 
brother of Sun Chien. Sun Ch‘tian loved him and had put 
him in command of the guards. He was enraged at being — 
superseded by the two creatures of Chuko Ch‘tio, and intrigued 
with one T‘eng Yin, who had an old quarrel with Chuko. 

Taking advantage of this rift, T‘éng said to Sun Hsin, 


“This Chuko is as cruel as he is powerful. He abuses his- 


authority and no one is safe against him. I also think he is 
aiming at something yet higher, and you, Sir, as one of the 
ruling family ought to put a stop to it.” 


“T agree with you, and I want to get rid of him,” replied B 


Sun. “Now I will obtain an edict condemning him to 
death.” 


Both went in to see King Liang, and they laid the matter he 


before him. 

“I am afraid of him, too,” replied the king. “I have wanted 
to remove him for some time, but have found no opportunity. 
If you would prove your loyalty you would do it for me.” 

Then said T’eng, “Your Majesty can give a banquet and 
invite him, and let a few bravos be ready hidden behind the 
arras. Ata signal, as the dropping of a wine cup, they might 
slay him, and all further trouble would be avoided.” ‘ce 

Chuko Ch‘iio had never been to court since his return from 
the unfortunate expedition. Under a plea of indisposition 
he had remained moping at home. One day he was going out 
of his reception room when he suddenly saw coming in a 
person dressed in the hempen garb of mourning. 

“Who are you?” said he, rather roughly. - 

The person seemed too terror-stricken to reply or resist — 
when he was seized. They questioned him, and he said he- 
was in mourning for his father newly dead, and had come into 
the city to seek a priest to read the liturgy. He had entered 
by mistake, thinking it was a temple. 

The gate wardens were questioned. They said, “There are 
scores of us at the gate, which is never unwatched. We have 
not seen a man enter.” 

Chuko raged and had the whole lot put to death. But that 
night he was restless and sleepless. By and by he heard a 
rending sound that seemed to come from the reception hall, so 
he arose and went to see what it was. The great main beam 
had broken in two. 


Romance of the Three Kingaoms | 509 


Chuko; much disturbed, returned to his chamber to try once 
more to sleep. Buta cold wind blew, and, shivering in the 
chilly air, he saw the figures of the hempen- ‘clad mourner and 
the gate wardens he had put to death. They advanced toward 
him holding their heads in their hands and seemed to threaten 
him. He was frightened, and fell in a swoon. 

Next morning, “when washing his face, the water seemed 
‘tainted with the smeli of blood. He bade the maid throw it 
away and bring more; it made no difference, the odour was 

still there. _ 

He was perplexed and distressed. Then came a messenger 
with an invitation to a royal banquet. He had his carriage 

- prepared. As he was passing through the gate a yellow dog 
jumped up and caught hold of: ‘his garment and then howled 
lugubriously. : 

“The dog even mocks me,’ > said he, annoyed, and he bade 


his attendants take it away. Then he set out for the palace. 


Before he had gone far, he saw a white rainbow rise out of the 
earth and reach up to the sky. While he Was wondering what 
-~ this might portend, his friend Chang Yüeh came up and spake 
a word of warning. , 
z “I feel doubtful about the Foal purpose of this banquet,” 
_ said Chang, “and advise you not to go.’ 
— Chuko gave orders to drive home again, but before he had 
reached his own gate the two conspirators rode up and asked 
-~ why he was turning back. 
“T feel unwell and cannot see the king to-day,” replied Chuko. 
They replied, “This court is appointed to be held especially 
- todo honour to you and the army. You have not yet reported, 
and there is a banquet for you. You may be ill, but you really 
must go to court.” 
Chuko yielded, and once more set his face toward the palace. 
- The two conspirators went with him, and his friend Chang 
- followed. The banquet was spread when he arrived, and after 


he had made his obeisance he went to his place. 


When the wine was brought in Chuko, thinking it might be, 
poisoned, excused himself from drinking on account of his 


. state of health. 


“Will you have some of the medicated wine brought from 
your own residence?” said Sun Hsiin. 
“Yes; I could drink that,” replied he. 
So a servant was sent for a supply that he might drink with 
the other guests. 
After several courses, the king made an excuse and left the 
banquet hall. Sun went to the foot of the hall and changed 


his garments of ceremony; for more homely garb, but 


~ underneath these he put on armour. Then suddenly he raised 
his keen sword and ran up the hall, shouting, “The king has 
i issued an edict to slay a rebel.” 


510° an uo 


Chuko, startled so that he dropped his cup, laid his hand ~ 


upon his sword. But he was too late; his head rolled to the 


floor. His friend Chang drew his sword and rushed at the ` i 


assassin, but Sun evaded the full force of the blow and was 
only wounded in the finger. Sun slashed back at Chang and 
wounded him in the right arm. Then the bravos:dashed in and 
finished him. 

The ruffians were then sent to murder the Chuko family, 
while the bodies of the two victims were hastily rolled in 
matting, thrown into a cart, taken to the outside of the south 
gate and tossed into a rubbish pit. 


While Chuko was absent in the palace, his wife sat in the 


women’s quarters at home feeling strangely unquiet. 
Presently a maid came in and, when she drew near her 
mistress, said, “Why does your clothing smell of blood?” 

To her horror the maid suddenly transformed into a weird 
creature with rolling eyes and gritting teeth, that went dancing 
about the room and leaping till it touched the roof-beams, 


shrieking all the time, “I am Chuko Ch‘tio, and I have been 


slain by that dastard Sun Hsiin,” 


By this time the whole family were frightened and began | 


wailing. And a few minutes later the residence was 


surrounded by a crowd of armed men sent to murder the © 


inmates, whom they bound, carried off to the Lanes = H. 


and put to the sword. 


These things occurred in the second year ofthe period. A 
Ta-Hsing. Before Chuko Chin, father of the murdered 


minister, died he had a premonition that his son’s ability would 


lead him into trouble and that he would not safeguard his 


family. Others had also predicted an early death. A certain 
officer in Wei said Chuko would die soon, and when asked why, 
replied, “Can a man live long when his dignity endangers that 
of his lord?” 

Sun Hsiin, the chief conspirator and real murderer, became 


Prime Minister in place of his victim. He was also placed in n 


command of all the military forces, and became very powerful. 
The control of all matters was in his hands. 
When the letter asking help from Chiang Wei arrived in Shu, 


Chiang had audience with the king and requested authority | 


to raise an army against the north. 


The army fought, but fought in vain, 
Success may crown a new campaign. 


Who were victorious will appear in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER CIX. 


SsUMA SURROUNDED; A HAN LEADER EMPLOYS AN 
UNEXPECTED RUSE; 
THE KING DETHRONED: RETRIBUTION FOR THE WEI FAMILY. 


l was in the sixteenth year of Yen-Hsi that Chiang Wei’s 

army of twenty legions was ready to march against the House 
of Wei. Miao Hua and Chang I were leaders of the van; 
_ Hsiahou Pa was strategist; Chang Ni was in command of the 
commissariat. The army marched out by the Yangp‘ing Pass. 
Discussing the plan of campaign with Hsiahou Pa, Chiang 
Wei said, “Our former attack on Yungchou failed, so this time 
they will doubtless be even better prepared to resist. What 


` do you suggest?” 


The strategist replied, “Nanan is the only well-provided 


_ place in all Shénsi; if we take that it will serve as an excellent 


. base. Our former ill-success was due to the non-arrival of the 
Ch‘tang. Let us therefore send early to tell them to assemble, 
after which we will move out at Shihying: and march to 

:. Naran by way of Tungt‘ing.’ 

X Chiang approved the plan and at once sent Ch‘i Chéng as 
his envoy, bearing gifts of gold and pearls and Ssuch‘uan silk 
to win the help of the Prince of the Ch‘tang, whose name was 
Mitang. The mission was successful; the prince accepted the 
presents and sent five legions to Nanan under the leadership 
of Ohoshaoko. 

When Kuo Huai heard of the threatened attack, he sent a 
hasty memorial to Loyang. Sstma Shih at once asked who 
of his captains would go out to meet the army from the west. 
Hsii Chih volunteered, and as the Prime Minister had a high 
opinion of his capacity, he was appointed leader of the van. 
The brother of the Prime Minister, Sstma Chao, went as 
Commander-in-chief. 

The Wei army set out for Shénsi, reached Tungt‘ing and 
there fell in with Chiang Wei. When both sides were arrayed 

Hsü Chih, who wielded a mighty axe called “Splitter of 
Mountains” as his weapon, rode out and challenged. Miao 
Hua went forth to accept, but after a few bouts he took 
advantage of a feint and fled. 

Then Chang I set his spear and rode forth to continue the 
fight. He also soon fled and returned within his own ranks. 
Thereupon Hsü Chih gave the signal to fall on in force, and 


512 jan uo, or 


the army of Shu lost the day... They retired city, li; Ssuma 
also drew off his men, and both sides encamped. 

“Hsti Chih is very formidable; how can we overcome ae NE 
asked Chiang Wei. 


T eke 


“To-morrow make pretence of defeat and so draw hens 


into an ambush,” was the reply. 

“But remember whose son this Ssiima Chao is,’ "said Chane 
“He cannot be a novice in war, and if he sees a likely spot for 
an ambush he will halt. Now the men of Wei have cut our 
communications many times ; let us do the same to them, and 
we may slay this Hsii.”’ 


He called in the two leaders of his van and gave them secret - 


orders, sending them in different directions. Then he laid 
iron caltrops along all the approaches and planted chevaux 
de frise (“deer-horns’”’) as if making a permanent defence. 


When the men of Wei came up and challenged, the men of | 


Shu refused battle. 


The scouts discovered that the Shu supplies were coming 


up along the rear of T‘iehlung Mountains, and they were using 


the wooden oxen and running horses as transport. They also- 


reported the look of permanency in the defences and said they 
were evidently awaiting the arrival of their allies the 
barbarian tribes. ` 

Then said Sstma, “We formerly defeated the army. of Shu 
by cutting off supplies, and we can do that again. Let half 
a legion go out to-night and occupy the road.” 

About the middle of the first watch Hsti Chih marched 
across the hills, and when he came to the other side he saw a 
couple of hundred men driving a hundred or so head of 
mechanical animals laden with grain and forage. His men 
rushed down upon them with shouts, and the men of Shu, 
seeing that their road was impassable, abandoned their 
supplies and ran away. Hsü took possession of the supply 


train, which he sent back to his own camp under the escort of — > 


half his men. With the other half he set out in pursuit. 
About ten li away, the road was found blocked: with carts 


set across the track. Some of his men dismounted to clear: 


the way, but as they did so the brushwood on both sides burst 
into a blaze. Hsü at once drew off his men and turned to 
retire, but coming to a defile he found the road again blocked 
with waggons, and again the brushwood began to burn. He 
made a dash to escape, but before he could get clear a bomb 
roared, and he saw the men of Shu coming down on him from 
two directions. Both fell on Hsü with great fury, and the 
men of Wei were wholly defeated. Hsü Chih himself got 
clear, but without any following. 


He struggled on till he and his steed were almost spent with 


fatigue. Presently he saw another company of the enemy in 


his way, and the leader was Chiang Wei. He could make no . 


: a 
P E 
“EAR kT te 


d 


Homance of the Chree Kingdoms 513 


: Pia His horse fell from a spear thrust, and as Hsü 
-Chih lay on the ground he was cut to pieces. 


Meanwhile those men of Wei who had been sent to escort to 


camp the convoy of supplies which they had seized were 
captured by Hsiahou Pa. They surrendered. Hsiahou then 

stripped them of their weapons and clothing and therein 
disguised some of his own men. Holding aloft banners of 
Wei, these disguised men made for the Wei camp. When 
they arrived they were mistaken by those in the camp for 
comrades, and the gates were thrown open. 


They rushed in and began to slay. Taken wholly by 


surprise, Sstma Chao leaped upon his steed and fled. But 
Miao Hua met him and drove him back. Then appeared 

Chiang Wei in the path of retreat, so that no road lay open. 
Sstma made off for the hills, hoping to be able to hold out on 
the T‘iehlung Hill. 


Now there was but one road up the hill, which rose steeply 


on all sides. There was but one small spring of water, enough 

‘to serve a hundred men or so, while Sstiima’s force numbered 

= six thousand. Their enemies had blocked the only road. 

_ ‘This one fountain was unequal to supplying the needs of the 

beleaguered army, and soon they were tormented with thirst. 

In despair, Ssuma looked up to heaven and ee saying, 
P “Death ee surely come to me here.” 


The host of Wei on T‘iehlung Hill 

Were once fast held by Chiang Wei’s skills 
When P‘ang first crossed the Maling line » 
His strategy was reckoned fine > 

As Hsiang Yii’s at the Nine Mile Hill; 
Both bent opponents to their will. 


In this critical situation a certain civil officer, Wang T‘ao 


by name, reminded his leader of what Kêng Kung had done, 
_ saying, “O General, why do you not imitate Kêng Kung, who, 
-being in great need, prostrated himself and prayed at a well, 
~wherefrom he afterwards was supplied with sweet water?” 


ANG 


So the leader went to the summit of the hill and knelt 


beside the spring and prayed thus:—‘The humble Chao 
_ received a command to repulse the army of Shu. If he is to 
die here, then may this spring cease its flow, when he will end 
his own life and let his soldiers yield to the enemy. But if his 

allotted span of life be not reached, then, O Blue Vault, 


3 increase the flow of water and save the lives of this multitude.” 


Thus he prayed; and the waters gushed forth in plenty, so 


that they all quenched their thirst and lived. 


Chiang Wei had surrounded the hill, holding the army 


thereon asinaprison. He said to his officers, “T have always 
regretted that our great minister was unable to capture Sstima 


Iin the Shangfang Valley, but now I think his son is doomed 
_ to fall into our hands.” ; 


28 | 


¢ 


514 e an Kuo, or 


J 
: 
B a $ 
Se 
i A 


: However, news of the dangerous position e Ssiima Chao ý 


had come to Kuo Huai, who set about a rescue. 

Ch‘én T‘ai said to him, ‘ ‘Chiang Wei has made a. league with 
the Ch‘tang, and they are helping him. They will first take | 
Nanan. If they have arrived, and you go away to rescue 
Ssuma, leaving this city weak, they will attack ‘from the rear. 


$ 


Y 


Therefore I would propose to send some one to the barbarians 


to try to create a diversion and get them to retire. If they 


‘are disposed of, you may go to the rescue of Sstma. 


Kuo saw there was much reason in this and told Ch‘én ‘to. 
take a small force and go himself to the camp of the Prince of 
the Chiang. When he reached the camp he threw off his. 
armour and entered weeping and crying that he was in danger | 


of death. - AN , 


He said, “Kuo Huai sets himself up as superior to everyone 5 
and is trying to slay me. Therefore I have come to offer my — 


ve 


services to you. I know all the secrets of the Wei army, and, | 4 


if you will, this very night I can lead you to their camp. I have — 
friends in the camp to help, and you can destroy it.” 

Prince Mitang was taken with the scheme, and sent His en 
lieutenant Ohoshaoko to go with Ch‘én. - The deserters from _ 
Wei were placed in the rear, but Ch‘én himself rode w th ‘the | 
leading body of Ch‘iang. They set out at the second watch 


% 


and soon arrived. They found the gates open, and Ch‘én rode 7 


in boldly. 
But when the Ch‘iang galloped in, there suddenly arose a 
great cry as men and horses went tumbling into great pits.. 


At the same time Ch‘én came round in the rear and attacked, T 
while Kuo appeared on the flank. The barbarians trampled — 


each other down, and many were killed. Those who encapo 
death surrendered, and the leader, Ohoshaoko, committed. 
suicide. 

Kuo and Ch‘én then hastened back into aon camp of the 
Chiiang. Mitang, taken unprepared, rushed out of his tent to 
get to horse, but was made prisoner. He was taken before — 
Kuo Huai, who hastily dismounted, loosed the prisoner: Ss bonds. - 
and soothed him with kindly words. 

“Our government has always regarded you as a lovee and 
true friend,” said Kuo. “Why then are you helping our 
enemies ?” 

Mitang sank to the ground in ‘confusion, while Kas 
continued, “If you will now raise the siege of T“ iehlung Hill 
and drive off the men of Shu, I will memorialise and obtain Cae 
substantial reward for you.” sa 

Mitang agreed. He set out forthwith, his own men ladin 
and the men of Wei in the rear. At the third watch he sent 
on a messenger to tell Chiang Wei of his coming. And the 
Shu leader was glad. Mitang was invited w enter, APATE 
the greater portion of his men outside: 


ae 8 


oe ae 
a. TE i, 


+3 etait 


“ Bomance of ee, hree dinates’ ES Oboe a 


x i On the march the men of Wei had mied with the Ch'iang, 
„and many of them were in the forefront of the army. Mitang 
_ went up toward the gate with a small company, and Chiang 
Wei with Hsiahou Pa went to welcome him. Just as they met,. ages 
- before Mitang could say a word, the Wei captains dashed -on 5. 
~ past him and set on to slay. | Chiang was taken aback, leaped = L 
on his steed and fled, while the mixed force of men of Shu and — 
_ barbarians dròve the camp defenders before them and sent 
them flying. ~ 
When Chiasg leaped upon his steed at the gate he had no 
- weapon in his hand, only his bow and quiver hung at his 
shoulder. In his. hasty flight the arrows fell out and the 
quiver was empty, so when he set off for the hills with Kuo. 
Huai in pursuit, Chiang had nothing to oppose to the spears 
‘of his pursuers. As they came near he laid hands upon his ~~ 
bow and made as if to shoot. The string twanged and Kuo © > 
Huai blenched. But as no arrow went flying by he knew PA 
Chiang had none to shoot. Kuo therefore hung his spear, . 
took his bow and shot. Chiang caught the arrow asi it flew (oe ia 
-~ by and fitted it to his bowstring. He waited till his enemy = 
came quite near, when he pulled the string with all his force = m 
and sent the arrow’ flying straight at Kuo’s face. Kuo fell cogs.) 
“even as the bowstring sang. | Se ae 
‘Chiang pulled up and turned to finish his fallen enemy, but = 
- the men of Wei were nearly upon him, and he had only time to 
- snatch up his spear and ride off. Now. that Chiang Wei was 
armed and their own leader wounded, the soldiers of Wei had 
no more desire to fight. They picked: up their general and ` 
= carried him to camp. There the arrow-head was pulled out, 
but the flow of blood could not be staunched, and Kuo Huai died. 
$ Sstma descended from the hill as soon as Chiang moved 
away, and pursued some distance. 
Hsiahou Pa rejoined his colleague as soon as he could, and 
they: marched together: The losses of Shu in this defeat were 
. very heavy. On the road they dared not halt to muster or 
reform, but went helter-skelter into Hanchung. The leaders 
said to themselves that, though they had been defeated, they 
had killed two generals on the other side and had damaged the 
prestige of Wei. 
a After rewarding the Ch‘ iang for their help, Ssuma led his 
army back to Loyang, where he joined his brother in 
. administering the government. "They were too strong for any 
of the officers to dare opposition, and they terrorised King 
i Fang so that he shook with fright whenever he saw Sstima 
Shih at court, and felt as if needles were being stuck into ‘his 
She back. SA 
- One day, when the king was Holiness a Court, Sstma Shih 
| came into the hall wearing his sword. The king hastily left 
= place oa receive him. 


BEB San kuo, or 


“What does this mean? Is this the correct etiquette for a 
prince when his minister approaches?” said Sstima, smiling. 


“I pray Your Majesty remember your dignity and listen while _ 


the ministers address the Throne.” 
Court business then proceeded. Sstma_ decided every 


question without reference to the king, and when he retired- 


he stalked haughtily down the hall and went home, followed 
by his escort, which numbered thousands of horse and foot. 
When the king left the court only three followed him to the 


private apartments. They were Hsiahou Hsien, Li Féng and — 


Chang Ch‘i, all ministers. The last was the father of his 
Consort.’ Sending away the servants, the king and thers 
three went into a private chamber. 

Seizing his father-in-law’s hand, the king began to weep, 
saying, “That man Sstma Shih treats me as a child and 
regards the officers of state as if they were so many straws. I 
am sure the throne will be his one day.” 


And he wept bitterly. Said Li, “Do not be so sad, Sire. 14 


am but a poor sort of person, but if Your Majesty will give me a 


authority, I will call together all the bold men in the country 
and slay this man.’ 


“It was from fear of this man that my brother was forced N 


to go over to Shu,” said Hsiahou Hsien. “If he were 


destroyed, my brother could return. I belong to a family — 
related to the rulers of the state for many generations, and I | 
cannot sit still while a wretch ruins the government. Put ` 
my name in the command as well as Li’s, and we will work ` 


together to remove him.” 
“Pit I am afraid,” said the king. 
They wept. The three ministers pledged themselves to 


work together for the destruction of the tyrant. The king 


them stripped himself of his innermost garment, gnawed: his 
finger till the blood flowed and with his finger-tip traced a 
command in.blood. He gave it to his father-in-law, saying, 
“My ancestor the Emperor Wu (Ts‘ao Ts‘ao) put to death 


Tung Ch‘éng for just such a matter as this, so you must be 


exceedingly careful and maintain the greatest secrecy.” 

“Oh, why use such ill-omened words?” cried Li Fêng. “We 
are not like Tung any more than Ssuma Shih resembles your 
great ancestor. Have no. doubts.” 


The three conspirators took leave and went out carrying 


the edict with them. Beside the Tunghua Gate of the palace 
they saw their enemy coming to meet them wearing a sword. 
Following him were many armed men. They took the side 
of the road to let the party go by. 


“Why are you three so late in leaving the palace?” asked | 


Sstima. 


“His Majesty was raios and we stayed. with him,” said l 


Ei 


ane of ie Tree tingoomg | a ee 


. “What was he reading?’ . aie 
-~ “The histories of the Hsia, stl ind Chou dynastied Ue 
“What questions did the king ask as he read those books?” 
_ “He asked about I Yin and how he upheld he Shangs; and 
_ Duke Chou, how he acted when he was regent. And we told 
‘His Majesty that you were both I Yin and Duke Chou to him.” 
Sstma smiled grimly. “Why did you compare me with | 
- those two? You made him think me a rebel like Wang Chieh 
or Tung Cho.” ` 
“How should we dare when we are your subordinates?” 
“You are a lot of flatterers,” said Sstima, angrily. “And 


what were you crying about in | that private chamber With the i 


king?” s 

_ “We did no such thing.” 

= “Your eyes are still red; you cannot deny. iat, ii 
= Hsiahou Hsien then knew that they had been betrayed 

_ already, so he broke out into a volley of abuse, crying, “Well, 
we were crying because of your conduct, because you terrorise 
over the king and are scheming to usurp the Throne.” 
“Seize him!” roared Ssuma. | 

= Hsiahou threw back his sleeves and struck at Ssuma with © 
his fists, but the lictors pulled him back. Then the three were 
- searched, and on Chang was found the blood-stained garment 


of the king. They handed it to their chief, who o a m 
_ the object of his search, the secret edict. 


It said:—*The two brothers Ssiima have stolen away all 
~ my authority and are plotting to take the Throne. The edicts 
I have been forced to issue do not represent my wishes, and 


hereby all officers, civil and military, may unite to destroy 


these two and restore the authority of the Throne, These ends 
achieved, I will reward those who help to accomplish them.” | 
Ssiima, more angry than ever, said, “So you wish to destroy 
me and my brother. This is too much. 
He ordered his followers to cut the three to pieces on the 


pi public execution ground and to destroy their whole clans. 


~ The three reviled without ceasing. On the way to the place 
of execution they ground their teeth with rage, spitting out. 


_ the pieces they broke off. They died muttering curses. 


- Sstima then went to the rear apartments of the palace, where 
he found the Emperor talking with his Consort. Just as he 
entered she was saying, “The palace is full of spies, and if 


. ae comes out it will mean trouble for me.’ 


Sstma strode in, sword in ‘hand. 
“My father placed Your Majesty on the throne, a service no 
less worthy than that of Duke Chou; I have served .Your 
_ Majesty as I Yin served his master. Now is kindness met by 
enmity and service regarded as a fault. Your Majesty has 
_ plotted with two or three insignificant ae to slay me and- 
Re my brother. Why is this?” 


518 San uo, or 


ST had no such intention,” said the king.. Penge 1 
-In reply, Ssuma‘drew the sarment from his sleeve and irem at 
‘it on the ground. . eee 
“Who did this?” Ki 
The king was overwhelmed; his soul flew beind the skies, = 
` his spirit fled to the ninth heaven. Shaking with fear, he said, — 
“I was forced into it. How could I think of such a thing?” 
“To slander ministers by charging them with rebellion is 
an aggravated crime,” said Ssuma. i 


The king knelt at his feet, saying, “Yes; I am guilty; forgive ; 


me.’ 
“I beg Your Majesty to rise; the laws must be neunecieds J pet 
Pointing to the Empress, he said, “She i is of the Se house y 
and must die.” pS 
“Spare her,” cried the king, weeping biter 
But Ssiima was obdurate. He bade: the lictors lead her k 
away, and she was strangled with a white- silk cord at the 
palace gate. ) Ee 


Now I heen another year; and lo! 
An empress borne away to shameful death. 

` Barefooted, weeping bitterly, she shrieks 

. “Farewell, 4 torn from her consort’s arms. To-day ` 
History repeats itself; time’s instrument, ' 
Ssŭma, avenges this on Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s. heirs. 


The day after these events Ssiima Shih assembled all the De 


officers and addressed them thus:—“Our present lord is- 4 


profligate and devoid of principle; familiar with the vile and 


friendly with the impure., He lends a ready ear to slander and 


keeps good men at a distance. His faults exceed those of | 
Chang I of Han, and he has proved himself unfit to rule. |. 


Wherefore, following the precedents of I Yin and Ho Kuang, I 


have decided to put him aside and to set up another, thereby to 
maintain the sanctity of the ruler and ensure tranquillity. 
What think you, Sirs?” 

They all agreed, saying, “General you are right to play the 
same part as I Yin and Ho Kuang, thereby acting in accordance 
with Heaven and fulfilling the desire of mankind. Who dares 
dispute it?” 


Then Ssuma, followed by the whole of the bak, went to ~ 


the Palace of Eternal Peace and informed the Empress rie 

- Dowager of his intention. ; E 
“Whom do you propose to place on the throne, General? re she 

asked. 


“I have observed that. Ts‘ao Chü, Prince P*éngch‘éng, agit ; 


intelligent, benevolent and filial; he is fit to rule the empire.” 


She “replied, “He is my uncle and cannot become Emperor. 
However, there is Ts‘ao Mao, Duke of Kaokueihsiang, and © 


grandson of the Emperor Wen. He is of mild 4, tempatamenk i 


- respectful and deferential, and may be set up. You, Sir, and 
_ the high officers of state might favourably consider this.” 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms — 519 


Then spake one, saying, “Her Majesty speaks well; he should 


- þe raised to the throne.” 


All eyes turned toward the speaker, who was Ssiima Fu, 


uncle of Ssitima Shih. 


= The duke was summoned to the capital. The Empress 
called King Ts‘ao Fang into her presence in the Hall of 


Eternity and blamed him, saying, “You are vicious beyond 
measure, a companion of lewd men and a friend of vile women: 
You are unfitted to rule. Therefore resign the imperial seal 
and revert to your status of Prince Ch‘i. You are: forbidden 
to present yourself at court without special command.” 

_ Ts‘ao Fang, weeping, threw himself at her feet. He gave 


- up the seal, got into his carriage and went away. Only a few 
faithful ministers restrained their tears and bade him farewell. 


Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, the mighty minister of Han 
Oppressed the helpless; little then thought he 
That only two score swiftly passing years 
Would bring like fate to his posterity. 


The Emperor-elect Ts‘ao Mao, who also bore the name Yen- 


- shih, was the grandson of the Emperor Wên, and son of Ts‘ao 
_ Lin, Prince Ting of Tunghai.. When he was nearing the 
` capital all the officers attended to receive him at the Nanyeh 
- Gate, where an imperial carriage awaited him. He hastily 


‘returned their salutations. 
“The ruler ought not to return these salutations,” said Wang 


: Shu, one of the officers. 


“I also am a minister and must respond,” replied he. 
They conducted him to the carriage to ride into the palace, 


2 but he refused to mount it, saying, “Her Majesty ‘has 


commanded my presence, I know not for what reason. How 
dare I enter the palace in such a carriage?” 


-He went on foot to the Hall, where Sstma Shih awaited him. 
He prostrated himself before the minister. Sstima hastily 
raised him and led him into the presence. 


- The Empress-Dowager said, “In your youth I noticed that 


— you bore the impress of majesty.. Now you are to be the Ruler 


of the Empire. You must be respectful and moderate, 
diffusing virtue and benevolence. You must do honour to your 
ancestors the former emperors.” 

-Ts‘ao Mao modestly declined the proposed honour, -but he 
was compelled to accept it. He was led out of the presence of 
the Empress-Dowager and placed in the seat of empire. 

The style of the reign was proclaimed as Chéng-Yiian. An 


-~ amnesty was granted. Honours were heaped upon Ssima 


Shih, who also received the golden axes, with the right to 
proceed leisurely within the precincts, to address the Throne 


= without using his prenom and to wear arms at court. 


Eut in the spring He was reported m poten that the | 


uch‘iu Chien and the Governor of -Yangchou, Weny 


-deposed emperor. 


were raising a rmies with the ae design 
Sstma Shih was disconcerted. N 


AE A 


JIE, ministers of Han have alway 
Wei 1 leaders, too, to prove, tl 


How this new menace was 
chapter. MEAT E et 


CHAPTER Cx. 


WEN YANG REPULSES THE ENEMY; 
CHIANG WEI DEFEATS HIS OPPONENT. 


It has been said that in the second year of Chéng-Yiian, Wén 
Ch‘in, Governor of Yangchou, and General Wuch‘iu Chien, a 
distinguished officer who commanded the forces in Huainan, 
were reported to be raising armies to avenge the deposition of 
Ts‘ao Fang. 
_ Wuch‘iu Chien was a native of Wénhsi in Honan. He was 
moved to great anger against the minister who had deposed 
_ the king, and his son Tien fomented his father’s wrath, saying, 
“Father, you are chief of all this district. With this Ssuma 
Shih in such a position the country is in danger, and you cannot 
sit still and look òn.” 

“My son, you speak well,” replied he. 
3 Whereupon he requested Governor Wên to come and consult 

with him. This Wên Ch‘in had been a client of Ts‘ao Shuang’s, 
and he hastened at the call of the general. When he arrived 
he was led into the private apartments, and, the salutations at 
an end, the two began to talk over the situation. Presently the 
host began to weep, and his visitor asked the cause of his tears. 
“Think you that this conduct of Ssuma Shih does not tear 

my heart? He has deposed the king and now holds in his 
grip all the authority of the state. Things are ae upside 
- down.” 
-~ Wên replied, “You are a Warden of the Marches. If you 
are willing to play the part, you ought to take arms and slay 


this rebel. I will help you, regardless of consequences. My 


second son, Shu, is a good soldier and a man of great valour, 
Moreover, he hates Sstma Shih and wishes to avenge on him 
and his brother the death of Ts‘ ao Shuang. He would make 
an excellent leader of the van.’ 
i Wuch‘iu was delighted to get such ready and willing mlan 

and the two poured a libation in pledge of mutual good faith. 
` Then, pretending that they held an edict from the Empress- 
Dowager, they summoned all the officers to Shouch‘un, where 
_ they built an altar on the west side and sacrificed a white horse, 
smearing their lips with its blood in token of their oath. 

‘They made this declaration:—‘“Sstma Shih is a rebel and 
devoid of rectitude. We have a secret edict commanding us 
to muster the forces of Huainan and put down this rebellion.” 


we | ft TVED A eee 
Set Sit ea 

> Aaa a 

- > 


522 San tus; or 


za 


Thus supported, Wuch‘iu led six legions to Hsiangch‘éng, , 
where he camped, while his fellow-conspirator Wên Ch‘in took | 


two legions to the front to go to and fro lending help where it 


was needed. Letters were sent all through the district calling A 


for assistance. 


Now that mole below the left eye of Ssùma Shih used to pain í 
at times, and he decided to have it removed. The surgeon ~~ 


excised it, closed and dressed the wound, and the patient rested 
quietly in his palace till it should heal. 
It was at this time that he received the disquieting news of 


opposition to his authority. Whereupon he called in the- A 


T‘ai-yu Wang Su to discuss the matter. 


Said Wang, quoting Kuan Yü as an example, “When Kuan — 
Yü was most famous, Sun Ch‘tian’ sent Lü Meng to capture 
Chingchou. What did he do? He first won over the officers ~ 


by taking care of their families and thus broke the power of- 
his enemy like a tile. Now the families of all the officers of 


Huainan are here in your hands. Treat them well, at the — 
same time taking care that they do not get away, and woe is 


will be irresistible.” 


“Your words are good,” said Ssima. “However, I cannot go sM 


out to war till I have recovered. Yet, to send another is to 3 


take great risks, and I shall feel insecure.’ 


There was also present Chung Hui, who here interposed, | 
saying, “The forces of Huai and Ch‘u are very formidable. If — 
you send another there is danger whatever happens, and if — 
your lieutenant make a serious mistake your whole policy will — 


fail.” 


his couch. . “I must go.’ 


“No one but miyaeli g can succeed,” cried Ssuma, starcie from x 


‘So, in-spite of illness, he resolved to lead in person. He a 
left his brother in charge of affairs at Loyang and set out, i 


travelling in a padded carriage. 


Chuko Tan was given command over all the forces of Yadon A 


and ordered to take possession of Shouch‘un, while Hu Tsun, 


with the Chingchou forces, was sent to bar any retreat. The. 
Governor of Ytichou, Wang Chi, was sent to capture Chennan 


and the district south. 


To his camp at Hsiangyang, Ssuma summoned all his officers i 


to a council. Chêng Pao spoke first, saying, “Wuchʻiu Chien 


is fond of laying plans, but slow to come to any decision. His — 
fellow-conspirator Wên Ch‘in is bold, but imprudent. Now © 
this scheme of theirs is too large for their minds, but as their — 


men are full of spirit they should not be engaged lightly. We 


should remain on the defensive till their ardour has burned — 


out. This is what Ya Fu did.” 


But Wang Chi objected, saying, “This is not a rising of the: 
people, nor of the soldiers, but is the work of Wuch‘iu Chien. — 
The people are merely his tools and cannot help. themselves, — 


Nomante of the Three Kingdoms y 523 


> ‘The rebellion will £0 to pieces as soon as an army approaches 
the district.” 
= “I agree with you,” replied Ssiima. 
Then he advanced upon the Yinshui River: and camped by 
the bridge. ; 
Wang Chi said, “Nant'un is an excellent camping ground; 
occupy it at once, ‘for if not the enemy will do so.” 
He was sent to carry out his own plan. 
Reports of these movements of the enemy came to Wuch‘iu 
in Hsiangch‘éng, and an-assembly of officers was called. ‘The 
leader of the van, Ho Yung, said, ““Nant‘un is an excellent site 
for a camp, with a river beside it and hills at the rear. If the 
Wei armies camp there we shall be unable to oe them. 
~ Let us occupy it.” 
So the army set out. ‘But TRR they drew near, the eoue 
reported a camp already there. It was incredible, and the 
leader rode to the front to reconnoitre. He was convinced by 
the sight of flags and-banners over all the plain, fluttering 
above an orderly array of tents and huts. The sight 
_disconcerted him, and he rode back to the main body ‘not 
F knowing what to do. Just then a scout came in to say that 
~ Sun Hsün of Wu had crossed the river to attack Shouch‘un. 
“Tf we lose that city we shall have no base,” cried Wuch‘iu. 
~ That same night he retreated upon Hsiangch‘éng. Seeing 
_ the enemy retreat, Ssuma called together his officers to talk it 
over. Fu Ku, a President, who was of the expedition, said the 
= retirement was obviously due to Wu’s threatened attack upon 
' Shouch‘un, and he advised their own attack upon Hsiangch‘éng, 
„another on Lochia and sending an army to capture Shouch‘ un. 
He also proposed that Téng Ai, the Governor of Yenchou, 
7 should attack Lochia jointly- with their own army. 
-- His plan was acceptable to Ssūma, who sent letters to 
* Yenchou telling Têng Ai to march against Lochia, where 
Ssiima himself would soon meet him. 
‘Camped ‘at Hsiangch‘éng, Wuch‘iu sent spies to Lochia to 
. see what might be happening there, for he feared it would þe 
attacked. @ When he spoke of his fears to Wên Ch'in, the latter 
said, “General; you need not be anxious.. I and my son will 
~ answer for its safety. Give us but half a legion.” - 
-~ Father and son, with the half legion, went to Lochia. 
Droe the main body arrived it was seen that Wei banners 
were flying on the west of the city. By and by they made out 
that the leader was no other than Ssuma himself. His camp 
was forming rapidly, but was not yet complete. 
When this was reported to Wên Ch‘in, his son Yang, bearing 
his famous whip of steel, was by his father’s side. 
s “We should attack before they have settled down in camp, 
father,” said he. “Let us go quickly and attack on two sides.” 
“when can we ma said the father. 


524 Han Kuo, or 


“To-night at dusk. You lead half the force round Be the — 
- south, and I will march the other half round by the north, and 
Ne we will meet in the third watch at the Wei camp.’ 
ve The youth who propounded this plan was then eighteen, 
anata tall and strong. He wore complete armour and carried at his 
Berrie waist a steel whip. When the hour came to start he took hig ie 
“het spear, swung himself into the saddle and set out. 

That night Sstma Shih, who had arrived and had at once 
set about settling into camp, lay on a couch in his tent, for he ~ 
was still suffering pain from the wound beneath his eye. The | 
tent was surrounded by a numerous guard. Téng Ai had not 
arrived. ri ; 

About the third watch he heard a great shouting Gai asked 
what it was. One replied that an army had come round from — 
the north and burst into the lines. The leader was too bold | 
for anyone to face.’ i 

Sstma became much troubled. His heart burned within ` 
him, and the excitement caused the wound to open, so that the | 
eyeball protruded and blood flowed freely. The pain became 
intense, nearly unbearable. In his agony and alarm lest his _ 
army should be thrown into confusion, he lay gnawing the © 
bedclothes till they were in rags. 

Wên Yang’s force lost no time, but attacked as soon as it 
arrived. He dashed into the camp, slashing and thrusting © 
right and left, and everyone gave way before him. If anyone — 
stayed to oppose, the sharp spear or the terrible whip did its — 
work, and he fell. But after a time, seeing no sign of his 
father, he grew anxious. And he had to retire several times i 

before the fierce flights of arrows and crossbow bolts. 

About daylight he heard shouts and thought they must mean 
the arrival of his father with help. But the shouting came 
from the north, and his father was to arrive by the south road. ~ 
He galloped out to get a clearer view, and saw a force sweeping — 
down like a gale of wind. ; 

It was not his father, but a body of the enemy, and the 
leader was Têng Ai. Têng rode forward shouting, “Rebel, 
flee not!” . 

Wên Yang had no intention to flee. Setting his spear, he 
rode savagely toward his opponent. They engaged and fought 
half a hundred bouts without either gaining the advantage. 
Then, the duel still raging, the Wei army attacked, and Wén’s — 
oe began to give way and run, so that soon he found himself 
alone. re 

' However, he got clear of the fight and went away~south. 
But he was pursued, for many captains plucked up courage to © 
A follow when he ran away. They pressed on his heels till near 
Pea the Lochia Bridge it seemed that they must catch him. Then 
dine he suddenly pulled up his steed, turned and rode in among. 
PORI them, flogging with the terrible steel whip, and wherever it 


me ACTS S 


bep 


1.2) aeDieae 
PAS 
TT sy 
ORIN 


, Romance of the Three Kingdoms =- 525 


tuck there lay men and horses in confused heaps. So they 
left him, and he retook his way in peace. 

Then ‘the Wei captains. met and said, “Lo! here is a man 
who has driven us all backward. But we are many and may 
not suffer that.” 

Wherefore they re-formed and once again took up pursuit. 

“You fools?” cried Wén, as he saw them coming on. “Have 
you then no regard for your lives ?” 

Again he fell upon them with the steel whip and slew many, 
so that the survivors retreated. But yet again they found 
courage to come on, and yet again, but they had to fall back 
before the lash of that terrible whip. 


Defiance hurled at Ts‘ao Ts‘ao’s mighty host ~ 
Arrayed near Ch‘angan Slope proclaimed Chao Yün 
A valiant man; and peerless stood he till, 

At Lochiach‘éng another hero faced, 

Alone, another host, and Wén Yang’s name 


“4 Was added to the roll of famous men. 
3 


= Wên Ch‘in never reached the appointed rendezvous. In the 
‘darkness he lost his way among the precipices and gullies, 
whence he only got out as day dawned. He saw all the signs 
«of a fight and a victory for Wei, but could not discover whither 
his son had gone. So he returned without fighting, and in 
spite of pursuit, made his way safely to Shouch‘un. 

Now Yin Ta-mu was an officer of the court and had 
ene Sstma on his expedition, but was no friend of 

He had been of the Ts‘ao Shuang party and bitterly 
Bevcentad the death of his patron. He was watching for a 
chance to avenge him. Seeing that Ssuma was ill, he thought 

to secure his end by making friends with Wén Chi in. So he 
went in to see the sick general, and said, “Wén Ch‘in had no 
sincere intention to rebel, but was led astray by Wuch‘iu. If 
you will let me go and speak with him he will come ever to you 
at once.” 
_ §$siima said he might go to try, and Yin put on his armour 
cand rode after Wên Ch‘in. By and by he got near enough to 
shout. 

“Do you not recognise me? I am Yin Ta- mu.’ 

Wên Ch‘in stopped and looked back. Yin A his 
helmet that his face might be clearly seen, and said, “O 
Governor Wên, why can you not bear up for a few days? I 
-know that Ssiima Shih is very near death, and I wish you to 
remain at hand.” 

But. Wén did not understand. He abused Yin and even 
threatened that the bowmen should shoot, and Yin could only 
«sorrowfully turn away. 

When Wen reached Shouch‘un and found it occupied he 

tried for Hsiangch‘éng, but three armies of the enemy lay near 


A 


926 Hee San us, Ob: LHOTE, 


by and it seemed impossible dhat it could hold: out long. So he 
decided to desert to Wu and serve Sun Hsitin. 

Wuch‘iu. Chien, then behind the walls of Heisiiech (Gig. ie 
heard that Shouch‘ un had fallen, that his fellow-conspirator n 
Wên had failed and, with three armies against his city, knew 
that his case was desperate. He mustered all’ the forces in Ns 
the city and marched out to try his fortune. dh 

_As he went forth he fell in with Téng Ai. He bade Ko. p 
Yung go out to fight, but he fell in the first encounter, cut down — 
by Téng himself. The enemy came on- in force. bee 
fought gallantly, but his army fell into confusion. - Then two — 
other armies came up, and he was completely surrounded. — 
Nothing could be done, and he fled from the field and made ~ 
for Shénhsien City. Here the governor received him kindly 
and comforted him with a feast. At the banquet the fugitive ` 
drowned his sorrows in the wine cup till he was helpless, when _ 
he was slain by his. host. His-head was sent to the Wei army — 
as proof of his death, and the rising came to an end. Peace A 
was restored in Huainan. a 

Sstuma Shih grew worse. Recovery being hopeless, ie called 
Chuko Tan to his tent and gave him a seal and conferred upon 
him the title of “Conqueror of the East,” with command DEN 
all the forces in Yangchou, and soon after the army marched - 
back to Hsiich‘ang. l 

The sick man began to have visions. Night after night ie 
was troubled by the apparitions of the three courtiers he had — 
put to death, and he knew that his end was near. He sent 
for his brother, who came and wept.by his couch while he 
listened: to his elder bròther’s last commands. 4 

“The responsibility of power is heavy, but we must bear it; 1 
there is no relief. You must continue my plans and maintain ie 
my policy yourself, and you must be exceedingly careful how © 
you entrust any other with power, lest you bring about ther: 
destruction of our whole clan.” 

Then he handed the seal of office to Sstiima Chao, weeping 
the while. Chao would ask some questions still, but with a 
deep groan his brother died. It was the second month of the, 
second year of Chéng-Yiian. 

Sstma Chao put on mourning for his brother and infernied | 
King Ts‘ao Mao of the death. By special edict Sstma Chao s 
was ordered to remain at: Hsüch‘ang so as to guard against. 
any attack from Wu. This order was unpleasing to its Bs 
recipient, but he felt doubtful what to do. He took counsel ` 
with Chung Hui, who said, “The death of your brother hese SA 
disturbed the’ country, and if you remain here some shifting — 
of power at the capital will surely work to your disadvantage. 

It will be too late for regrets then.” Ea 

Wherefore Sstma left Hsiich‘ang and camped on the Lo 
River.: This move alarmed the king. Then Wang Su advised - 


a 
K 


fomance of the Three Ringooms n 527 


ai to. placate the powerful minister with a new title. So 


Wang Su went, bearing an edict creating Sstima Chao Ta 


Chiang-chun, or Generalissimo, with control of the Presidents 


of Boards. He. came to. Loyang to thank the king for these 


_ honours and stayed. Henceforward all matters and the whole 
~ government were under his hand. a 


When news of these things came to Ch‘éngtu, Chiang Wei 
thought the time had come to make another bid for the empire, 


so he wrote a memorial to the king. 


“Ssuma Shih having just died, his brother, who succeeds, 
will be unable to leave Loyang until he has consolidated his 


_ position. Wherefore I crave permission to attack Wei.” 


The king agreed and bade him raise an army. So he went 
‘into Hanchung to prepare for the expedition. 
However, General Chang I was opposed to the expedition 


and said the state policy should rather be the improvement of 


-< conditions at home. He endeavoured to win over Chiang 


Wei to his views. 


“You are mistaken,” ae Chiang. “Before our great 


in Minister Chuko emerged from his reed hut in the wilds and | 
- undertook the affairs of a state, the three kingdoms were 
- already a fact. Six times he led armies to try to gain the 
northern portion of the empire, but failed to attain his desire. 
<- Unhappily he died leaving his design unaccomplished. But 
` -he bequeathed to me the legacy of his intention, and I must be 
a loyal and worthy executor. If I die in the attempt I will 
- perish without regret. Now is our opportunity, and if we 
miss it, shall we find a better?” | 


“What you say is the real truth,” said Hsiahou Pa. “Let 


us send first some light horse out by Paokan to capture Nanan 


and thereby settle that district.” 


Then said Chang I, “Procrastination and delay have been 
hitherto. the causes of our failure. We ought to obey the 


` precepts of the books of war, strike where the enemy is 


unprepared and appear where he does not expect us. A rapid 


“march and a sudden blow will find Wei unready, and we shall 


succeed.” 
-- So Chiang Wei led a huge army out by Paokan. When he 


. Deached: the T‘ao Waters the spies reported his arrival to the 


‘Governor of Yungchou, who led out seven legions against him. 


Chiang gave certain orders to his subordinates, and after they 
had marched, he drew up the main body by the T‘ao River. 


Wang Ching, the Governor of Yungchou, rode out to 


3 parley. 


“The three Na are now actually established; why then 


have you invaded our borders these many times?” 


Chiang replied, “Because Ssuma deposed your late king 


without: cause, and it behoves the neighbouring countries to 
~ punish such a crime. Moreover, yours is a rival state.” 


» y P b Ries ET tae ks vel ‘goth, Re Ne eg R re) Oia EOST oi 
‘ 1 Y US AR 5 paa A 
n ' j! |; l ‘ ` Rea | 
\ 4 t \ j a ‘ \ ñ) Ni iA 
. x À , í AN i 
f 


528 an kuo, or 


Then Wang turned and said to four of his captains, “You 


see that the enemy is drawn up with a river at his back so ` 


that his men must conquer or drown. Chiang Wei is bold, but 
- you will fight him and pursue if he retire.” | 


The four rode out two and two. Chiang stood through a 
few encounters, but then moved backward toward his camp. 
At this, Wang led on his main-body to smite. Chiang fled 
toward the river. As he drew near he shouted, “Danger, O 
captains! Now do your utmost.” 


His captains turned on the foe and fought with such vigour 


that the Wei army was defeated, and, as they turned away, 


Chang I and Hsiahou Pa fell upon their rear. Soon the Wei _. 


army was hemmed in and the bold Chiang Wei rushed in among 


the host of Wei and threw them into utter confusion. They 


trod each other down in the press, and many fell into the river. 
Dead bodies lay about over many li. 


Wang Ching and a few horsemen got clear and fled to 


Titaoch‘éng, where they entered within the walls and barred 


the gates. 
After Chiang Wei had rewarded id feasted his army he 
was for attacking the city, but Chang I was against this. 


“General, you have won a great victory, which will bring you 4 
fame. If you attempt more things may go agley, and you will 


only add legs to your sketch of a serpent.” 


“I disagree,” said Chiang. “Our opponents have been over- 


come, and if we press forward we may overrun the whole © 


north. This defeat has broken the spirit of the army, and 
this city can be easily captured. Do not damp the spirit of 
my men” 

So it was decided to attack Titaoch‘éng. 


Ch‘én T‘ai, who was also of Yungchou, was just about to set — 


out to avenge the defeat of Wang Ching when Téng Ai, the 


Governor of Yenchou, arrived with his army. Ch‘én welcomed — | 


him, and when Téng had said he had come to assist to defeat — 


the men of Shu, Ch‘@n asked his plans. 

Téng Ai replied, “They are victors on the T‘ao Waters. If 
they enlist the aid of the Ch‘tang to cause a diversion in Shénsi 
and also obtain the support of the four districts, it will be a 
misfortune for us. If they do not think of that, but try to 


take Titaoch‘éng, they will only fritter away their energies | 


against a place too strongly fortified for them to capture. 
Let us now array our force along Hsiangling, and then we can 
advance and smite them. We shall get a victory.” 

“That is well said!” cried Ch‘én. 

Then twenty cohorts were told off to find their way secretly 
to the south east of Titaoch‘€ng and there hide in the valleys. 
They were then to display many ensigns and sound trumpets 
as if they were a very large force, and make huge fires at night, 
so as to cause anxiety among the enemy. And thus they 


529 


i Ss oe . ae of the Three alua 


i waited for the men of Shu to come, while Ch‘én T‘ai and Téng 
. Ai marched against them. 
The army of Shu had marched to Titaoch‘éng and begun 
the siege around the whole circuit of the walls. At the end of 
: many days the fall of the city seemed no nearer, and Chiang 
_ Wei began to fret. He could think of no plan likely to succeed. 


One eventide a horseman came in to report the approach of — 


ae armies, and the names on the banners were Ch‘én and 
TERS sce 

= Chiang called in his colleague Hsiahou and said, “I have 
spoken to you of Téng Ai many times. He is perspicacious, 


valiant, resourceful and has always delighted - in the study of 


military topography. AS he is coming we shall have to put 
< forth all our energies.’ 

- Hsiahou replied, “We will attack before he can get a foothold 
. and while his men are fatigued with the march.” 

So Chang I was left to carry on the siege while the two 
leaders went out to meet the new armies. Chiang went 
against Têng, and his colleague against Ch‘én. 

Before Chiang had marched far the stillness was broken by 
` the roar of a bomb, and at once all about the Shu army arose 
~- the rolling of drums and the blare of trumpets, soon followed 
= by flames that shot up to the very sky. Chiang rode to the 
ot and saw the ensigns of Wei all about him. 
- “I have fallen into a trap set by Téng Ai,” cried he. 


immediately while he would cover their retreat. When they 
; “had. retired, he followed them into Hanchung, harassed all 
-along the road by the sounds of marching men and glimpses of 
enemy banners. But these enemies never attacked, and it 
-was only when too late that Chiang knew that all this was 

make-believe. j 

He camped in Chungti. , For his services and success on the 

_ T'ao River Chiang was rewarded with the rank of Ta Chiang- 
chin. © 

- As soon as the ceremonies. connected with his. promotion 

_ were ended, he began again to talk of an expedition against 

Wei. 


‘Remember enough is as good as a feast, 

Having sketched a good snake don’t add legs to the beast; 
And in fighting remember that others are bold, 

And tigers have claws though their teeth may be old. 


The result of the new expedition will be told in the next 
f Ten ; 


34 


om ae k oi. 


S He sent orders to Hsiahou and Chang to` withdraw 


CHAPTER CXL 


TENG AI OUTWITS CHIANG WEI; me 
CHUKO TAN THINKS IT His DUTY To DESTROY SSUMA CHAO. — : 


Grine Wei camped at Chungti; the army of Wei aA 
‘outside Titaoch‘éng. Wén Ching, ‘the Governor, welcomed his 
deliverers and prepared a banquet to celebrate the raising of 
the siege and also rewarded the army ‘with gifts. Then he | 
sent up a memorial to King Ts‘ao Mao, of Wei, eulogising the 
magnificent services of Téng Ai, who was rewarded with the - me 
title, “Pacificator of the West.” For the time, Téng was left in a 
the west as T“ ai-yii of the Ch‘iang tribes. He and Ch‘én T'ai 
placed their men in cantonments in Yung, Liang and the — 
districts round about. 
After Téng Ai had rendered his thanks to the king, Chèn 
T‘ai spread a great feast in his honour, and in congratulating. 
his guest, said, “Chiang Wei slipped off in the night because 
he was broken, and he will never dare to return.” 
“I think’ he will, E replied Tene smiling. “I can give fiv 
reasons why he should.” 
“What are they?” i 
“Although the men of Shu have retired, they have the Sole $ 
possessed and confident look of holding the mastery; our men -~ 4 
are really weak and broken. The men of Shu were trained 
and inspirited by K‘ung-ming and are mobile; our men are 
all- of different periods of service and indifferently trained. 
The Shu soldiers often use boats for travelling; ours do all 
their journeys on land, so that while one army moves at leisure 
and the men arrive fresh, those of the other arrive fatigued 
with marching. Again, Titaoch‘éng, Shénsi, Nanan. and — 
Ch‘ishan are all places suitable for defence or use as battle — 
fields, and thus the men of Shu can conceal their intentions © 
and strike where they will; we have to remain on guard at 
many points, thus dividing our forces. When they concentrate | : 
they have only to reckon with a part of our force. If they 
come out by way of Shénsi and Nanan, they have the grain of | 
the Ch‘iang to depend upon, and if they choose Ch‘ishan, they — y 
have the wheat there. These are the five reasons why they : 
should make another expedition.” ie 
Ch‘én T‘ai was overcome with the clear vision of his new ` 
colleague. “Sir, your foresight is godlike. I think we need: 
feel no anxiety about what the enemy can achieve. nein! 


r 


| Romance of the Three Kingdoms 


~The two soldiers became the best of friends in spite of the 

difference of age. Téng spent his time in training the army, 

out garrisons were placed at all points where surprise attacks 
seemed possible. ` 


There was feasting also at Chungti, and the occasion was — | 
taken to discuss a new attack on Wei. But Fan Chien 
-= opposed. “General, your expeditions have partly failed many — 


~ times; you have never scored a complete victory. But now 
on the T‘ao River the men of Wei recognise your superiority, 
and why should you try again? There is small chance of 
success, and you risk all you have gained.” 


The general replied, “You all regard only the kateni and ' 


population of Wei and the time necessary bg conquest, but 
ie do not see five reasons for victory.” 
_ The assembly asked what these were. 


eT he fighting spirit of the men of Wei has been badly 


Divoken. on the T'ao River, while that of our men, although we 


-Our men can travel in boats and so will not be wearied with 


‘thoroughly trained; theirs are recruits, a mere flock of crows, 
quite undisciplined. When we go out by Ch‘ishan we can 
- seize upon the autumn wheat for food. Finally they are 


concentrate on any point we wish and they will find it difficult 
-to bring up reinforcements. If we miss this chance, can we 
_ hope for a better?” . 

-Hsiahou Pa said, “Teng Ai is young, - but he is deep and 
crafty. He has certainly taken great pains to secure the 
‘district under his charge as ‘Pacificator of the West.’ Victory 
- will not be so easy as it was before.” 


“Why should I fear him?” cried Chiang, angrily. “You 


$ ‘should not laud the spirit of the enemy and belittle that of our 


own men. Butin any case I have made Hp my mind and shall- 


< take Shénsi.” 

No one dared to offer any. ‘further opposition. Chiang 
hienself led the first army; the others followed in due order, 
and thus the men of Shu marched out. 


Before they could reach Ch‘ishan the scouts reported the 


“hills already occupied’ by the armies of Wei. Chiang rode 
forward to verify this, and, surely enough; he saw the Wei 


ey camps, nine in number, stretching over the hills like a huge ~ 


serpent, and all arranged to give each other support. 
“Hsiahou Pa spoke only too well,” said he. “The plan of 
` those camps is excellent and only our ae tee could have 
lid them out with equal skill.” 
Returning to his own army, he said to his Geis “They 
a have known of my coming, and I think Téng Ai is here 
too. Now has this as base you are to send out daily small 


f ed is unimpaired. if we attack we shall certainly succeed, 


“marching; their men have to march to meet us. Our men are 


scattered, having to defend various points, while we can’ 


A Wuch‘éngshan.” 


532 an us, or \ 


reconnoitring parties showing my banner, but different flags 
and uniforms, blue, yellow, red, white and black, in turns. 
While you are thus distracting attention, I will lead the main | 
army by a détour to attack Nanan.” 

Pao Su was sent to camp at the mouth of the Ch‘ishan 
Valley while the main army marched. 

As soon as Téng had heard that the enemy would come out ait 
at Ch‘ishan he had camped there with his colleague Ch‘én T’ai. na 
But when days had passed without anyone coming to fling a = — 
challenge he sent out spies to find out where the Shu army was = 
lurking. They could find nothing, and so Téng went to the | 
summit of a high hill to look around. He came to the ~— 
conclusion that some other vulnerable point was threatened.  __ 

Finally he thought it must be Nanan. In the daily ` 
~reconnaissances he saw nothing but a feint, accentuated by — 
the daily change of uniform. He returned to camp and spoke ~ 
with his colleague. ae 

“These men have been going to and fro for days and must 
be tired, and their leaders are certainly none of the ablest. © 
Therefore, General, I advise an attack here. If that succeeds — 
the Tungt‘ing road can be occupied, and Chiang Wei will be — 
unable to retreat. I think I ought to try to relieve Nanan. I 
will go by Wuch‘éngshan, and if I occupy that, the enemy will 
try to take Shangkuei. Near that place is a narrow and 
precipitous valley called Tuan Valley, just the place for an = 
ambush, where I shall lie in wait till they come to take 


Ch‘én replied, “I have been here over a score of years and — 
have never known so much of the military possibilities of the 
ee You are very wonderful and had better carry out your © 
plan.” Pas 

So Téng marched toward Nanan by double marches. Soon 
they came to the hill, where they camped without opposition. 
He sent his son Chung and Shih Tsuan, each leading half a 
legion, to lie in wait in the Tuan Valley and not to betray their . 
presence. Sit 

In the meantime Chiang Wei was marching between  ~ 
Tungt‘ing and Nanan. Near Wuch‘éngshan he turned to 
Hsiahou Pa and said, “That hill is our point, and Nanan is — 
close. I fear lest the artful Téng Ai may seize and fortify it.” — 

They hastened, anxious to reach the hill before the enemy. — 
But it was not to be. Presently they heard the roar of bombs ` 
and the beating of drums, and then flags and banners appeared, — 
-all of Wei. And among them fluttered the leader’s standard, 
bearing the name Téng. SOM 

This was a sad disappointment. The men of Shu halted, oC ae 
and veteran soldiers of Wei came rushing down from various 
points on the hill, too many for the men of Shu to drive back. — 
So the advance guard was defeated. Chiang went to their — 


Romance of the bree Kingdoms 


A ilip with his central body, but when he got near the soldiers 
|. of Wei were nowhere to be seen. _ 
a Chiang went on to the foot of the hill and challenged, but 
= no one came out to accept. The men of Shu began to shout 
_ abuse, and kept it up till late in the day, but they failed to 
e provoke a fight. As the men of Shu began to retire, the 
_ drums beat furiously, yet no one appeared. Chiang turned 
Bas about to ascend the hill, but its defenders prevented that by 
= stones thrown from cannon (p‘ao). He hung on till the third : 
= watch, when he tried again. But he failed. 
Thereupon he went down the hill and halted, bidding his 


Wei came on again and stopped the work. 
Next day Chiang brought up many transport waggons and 
= placed them on the slope as the nucleus of a camp. But in 
a the night a number of men came down with torches and set. 
fire to them. A fight ensued, which lasted till dawn. 
ss = Seeing that a camp could not be made there Chiang retired 
a _to consider new plans with Hsiahou Pa.’ 
. “Since we cannot take Nanan, our next best plan is to try 
for Shangkuei, which is the storehouse of Nanan.” ° 
Leaving Hsiahou Pa on the hill, Chiang led a force of 
G ae veteran soldiers and bold officers along the road toward 
ee ‘fs. Shangkuei. They marched all night, and dawn found them in 
= a deep valley, which the guides said was Tuan Valley. 
“That sounds too much like ‘Cut-off Valley,’” said Chiang. 
ee “And if a force held the mouth we should be in sorry 
straits.” ! 
While hesitating whether to advance farther or not, the 
` leading men came back to say they had seen a cloud of dust 
= beyond the hills, which seemed to indicate a body of men in 
= “hiding. So the order was given to retire. 
vy At that moment the armies under Shih Tsuan and Téng 
Chung came out and attacked. Chiang Wei, alternately 
fighting and retreating, tried to get away. Then Téng himself 
at appeared, and the Shu army had enemies on three sides. They 
-~ were in grave danger, but Hsiahou ‘Pa came to their rescue, 
and so Chiang escaped. 
Chiang proposed to return to Ch‘ishan, but his rescuer said, | 
“We cannot go thither, for Ch‘én T“ai has destroyed the force 
- under Pao Su, and he himself was killed. All that was left 
of that army has gone back into Hanchung.” 
It was no longer a question of taking Tungt‘ing. Chiang 
_ sought cut by-roads to march along. Téng came in pursuit, 
Eh and as he pressed hard on the rear, Chiang sent the others on 
ahead while he covered the retreat. . 
- Soon Ch‘én T'ai came out from the hills, and Chiang was 
- surrounded by a shouting body of the enemy. He was very 
weary when Reet I, who had heard of his straits, came to his 


men build a barricade of wood and boulders. The men of ys NA 


534 o o pan Ruo, ov i 


rescue with a body of cavalry. Chang saved his general, but ` 
lost his own life. Finally Chiang Wei got back into Hanchung.. | ~ 
From Hanchung the death of Chang I in battle was reported — 
to the king and suitable honours requested. And seeing that 
there had been serious loss of life in the military’ operations 
that had just failed, Chiang, following the precedent of the = 
late Marquis of Wu, ‘asked that he himself should be-degraded 
in rank, retaining, however, the command. He was put back ae 
to Junior. Generalissimo. 
The country being now cleared of the enemy, Ch‘én Tai ‘and ; 
Téng Ai prepared a banquet in honour of victory and gave ~ 
rewards to the men who had fought. _A memorial was sent to. . 
the capital upon the services of Teng, and a special commission — 
_ brought him higher rank; the title of “Marquis” was given toy 
his. son. 
At this time the style of the reign in Wei was changed to ic 
Kan-Lu (Gentle Dew). Sstma Chao commanded all the 
military forces. He assumed great pomp, and “whenever he — 
moved outside his palace he was escorted by a guard of three — 
thousand mail-clad men, beside squadrons of cavalry. All | A 
power lay in his hands, and he decided all questions so that J ae 
the court was rather in his palace than in that of the king. SAR 
Plans for taking the final step constantly occupied his ~ 
thoughts. The question of mounting the throne was openly — 
mooted by one Chia Yün, a confidant, who was descended from & 
a family that had long held rank at court. ee 
He said, ~“‘Sir, all real authority is in your hands, and the- 
country is not "tranquil. The only remedy is for you. to 
become actual ruler, and ‘you should find out who are your- 
supporters.” a 
Sstma replied, “This has been in my thoughts a long tine: i 
You might be my emissary to the east to find out the feeling 
there. You can pretend you go to thank the soldiers who took 
part in the late campaign. That would be a good pretext.” = 
Accordingly Chia travelled into Huainan, where he saw — 
Chuko Tan, the “Guardian of the East.” This officer was of. 
the same family as the late Marquis of Wu, Chuko Liang. He. 
had gone to Wei for employment, but had received no office — 
while his brother lived. On his brother’s death his promotion — 
was rapid. He was also titular marquis. 2 
As he was in command of all the Huainan forces, Chia Yiin p 
went to him to ask him to convey to the army the appreciation — 
of the soldiers’ services. He was received courteously, and at 
a banquet, when host and guest were both mellow with wine; A 
Chia set himself to discover Chuko’s feelings. Hee 
He said, “Lately in Loyang there has been much talk of pee. Bs 
weakness and lack of ability of the king and his unfitness to _ 
rule. Now General Sstiima comes of a family. noted for state _— 
service for several generations. -His own services and virtues 


™ 


: Romance of the Three Gmouama. a 


are Shiha as the heavens, and he is the man best fitted to take 
the rulership of Wei. Is this not your opinion?” 
= But Chuko did not favour the suggestion. On the contrary, 
he broke out angrily, “If the state is in difficulty, then one 
-ought to stand up for it even to the death.” 
=- -Chia said no more. He soon returned and told his patron 
~ what had been said. 
-= “The rat!’ cried Ssiima, angrily. “He is exceedingly 
CRU there in Huainan, but if he is left too long he will do. 
arm 
< Sstma began to take measures. He wrote privately to 
_ Ytieh Lin, Governor of Yangchou, and sent a messenger to 
Chuko Tan with an edict making him President of the Board 
i ‘of Works. This meant that he had to come to the capital. 
But Chuko knew that his late guest had done him mischief, 
and he interrogated the messenger, who told him that Yiieh 
Lin knew all about the matter. 
— “How does he know?” 
“General Ssima sent him a private letter.” 
- The messenger was condemned to death. Then Chuko 
placed himself at the head of his personal guard and marched 
to Yangchou. The city gates were closed and the drawbridge 
` raised. He summoned the gate, but no one answered. 
“How dare this fellow treat me thus?” cried he. 
-~ He ordered his men to force’ the gate. A few dismounted, 
crossed the moat and climbed the ramparts, where they slew 
-all who opposed them and opened the gate. The others 
s entered, set fire to the houses and began to fight their way — 
-toward the residence. The Governor sought refuge in a tower, 
‘but Chuko made his way up and, after reproaching his enemy 
for dishonouring his father, slew him. 
` -Then Chuko sent up a memorial detailing Sstma’s many 
faults, and made preparations for war. He called up all the 
‘militia and took over the four legions who had surrendered 
on the fall of Yiieh Lin and gathered supplies. He also sent 
to Wu for aid, offering his son Chuko Ching as a hostage for 
his good faith. ; 
At this time Sun Hstin was dead and his brother, Sun Ch‘én, 
-~ was Prime Minister. He was a man of cruel and violent 
temper and had put many officers to death on his way to power. 
The King of Wu, although no fool, was helpless in his hands. 
The messenger, Wu Kang, conducted the proposed hostage 
n ie the residence of this monster, who asked what he had come 
3 for. Wu Kang explained and asked for help. His request 
was received favourably, and Sun sent seven legions with a 
full complement of officers. They marched, and Chuko 
returned to report success. Chuko thought all was going well. 
‘Chuko’s memorial angered Ssùma, who wished to set out to 
“revenge the attack at once, but Chia Yiin preached caution. 


` the two sons of Chuko set out with reinforcements. 


536 San Kuo 


“My lord, you derived your power from your father and 
brother, and people have not had time to discover your own > 
virtue. If you leave the court and there be a revulsion of | 
feeling against you, you will lose all. Rather request the = 
Empress Dowager and the Son of Heaven to go with you, and i E 
nothing is to be feared.” Ce AAN 

The plan was accepted as excellent. He went into the aay 
palace and proposed it to Her Majesty, saying, “Chuko Tan is, 
in revolt, and I and my colleagues intend to punish him. I = 
beg that you will accompany the expedition as. the -latesi ius 
Emperor: would have done.’ FNY 

She was afraid, but dared not refuse, and the next day was 
requested to set out with the king. i ; 

The king said, “General, you command all the armies and 
dispose them as you will; why do you ask me to go?” — a 

Sstma replied, “Your ‘Majesty is wrong to hesitate. -Yoü ' 
ancestors travelled over the empire and wished to unite the 
whole under one ruler. Wherever there was a worthy oppo- 
nent they went to face him. Your Majesty should follow 
their example and sweep the land clean. Why fear?” Tad 

`The king, fearing his minister’s terrible power, consented, | 
and an edict was issued for the commands to march. Wang 
Chi, a distinguished general, was in command of the van, while 
Shih Pao and Chou T‘ai led the imperial escort. The army 
moved into Huainan like a great flood. a 

The van-leader of Wu encountered them, and both sides drew 
up for battle. Chu I, the leader on the Wu side, rode out and 
took the challenge, but was overcome in the third bout. P‘ang — 
Tzu also followed, but. was also beaten in the third encounter.. ~ 

Wang Chi ordered the Wei army to pursue. The men of — 
Wu retired fifty li and camped. Thence they sent tidings of 
their ill-success to Shouch‘un and Chuko Tan; Wên Ch‘in and 


Thus Sstma was faced by many legions of valiant men. 


Now here is a check to the armies of Wu, 
‘And Wei’s gallant men advance. 


The next chapter will tell how went victory. — 


Eo ‘CHAPTER CXII 


N ‘Yu Cu'van DIES NOBLY AT SHOUCHUN; — 
CHIANG WEI FIGHTS FIERCELY AT CH‘ANGCH‘ ENG. 
-earing of this threatened attack, Ssima sought advice Pomi 


À and Chung Hui, a civil official. 
~The latter said, “The Wu army is helping our enemies for _ 

the sake of profit, and hence we can seduce them with an offer 
of greater profit.” 


_ part of his plan, he sent to lay ambushes in different piece 
near Shiht‘ouch‘éng. — 

As ordered by Ssŭma, Ch‘éng Ts‘ui led several! lesions out 
to bring on a battle, while Ch‘én Chiin got together many 
= ‘waggons, herds of oxen, droves of horses, donkeys and mules, | 
and heaps of military supplies, all of which he crowded 
together in the midst of the army. This stuff was meant 
= to be abandoned as soon as the fight began, so that the enemy 
might be tempted to plunder. 

The armies being drawn up, Chuko Tan looked across at | 
his opponents and saw that the centre of the Wei army was 
taken up by a disorderly mass of transport. Presently he led 
on his men to attack, and Ch‘éng Ts‘ui, as bidden to do gave 
way and fled, leaving a large amount of spoil. When | the © 
men of Wu saw such huge quantities of booty, theirs for the 
taking, they lost all desire to fight and scattered to gather | 

- the spoil. . 
_ While thus occupied, suddenly a bomb exploded and down 
came the men of Wei upon the spoilers. Chuko Tan attempted 
to draw off, but other forces appeared, and he was sore 
smitten. Then came on Ssima with his army, and Chuko 


i army of Wei sat down to the siege of the city, and the army 
~ of Wu retired into camp at Anfêng. The King of Wei was 
- lodging at this time in Hsiang-ch‘éng. 

Then said Chung Hui, “Chuko Tan has been worsted, but 
the city wherein he has taken refuge is well supplied, and his 
allies, the men of Wu, are not distant. His position is strong. 

Our soldiers are besieging the city all round, which means 
= that those within will hold out for a long time, or they will 
= make’'a desperate sortie. Their allies also may fall upon us 


pias of his officers, P‘ei Hsiu, a Leader of Irregular Cavalry, : ig 


Sstma agreed in this opinion and resolved PCa ali As > 


fied to Shouch‘un, where he entered and shut the gates. The | 


= 
S50 
Peres 


538 | — San uo, or > 


` atthe same time, and it would go hard with us. Therefore I 
advise that the attack be made only on three sides, leaving 
the south gate open for them if they wish to flee. If they 


flee, we can fall on the fugitives. The men of Wu cannot - 


have supplies for very long, and if we sent some light cavalry 
round by their rear we might stay their fighting power 
without a battle.” 


“You are my Tzu-fang (Chang Liang)”, said Sstma, strok- ` 


ing the back of his adviser. Your advice is excellent.” 


So Wang Chi, who was on the south of the city, was — is 


ordered to withdraw. 


But in the Wu camp at Anféng was much sadness at the 


want of success. The General Sun Ch‘én said to his captain 
Chu I, “I have given up all hope of succouring Shouch‘un, and 
overrunning the north is out of the question. Now and here 
you. have to win a victory or die, for another defeat will mean 
death.” 

The threatened leader went back to his camp and talked 
with Yü Ch‘tian. Yü said, “The south gate is free, and I will 


lead therein some of our men to help Chuko. Then you ~— 
challenge the Wei army, and we will come out from the city 


and attack.” 
Chu I thought the plan chan and many captains were 
willing to go into the city and share in the attack, They 


were allowed to march in without hindrance as the Wei : i j 


captains had no orders to stop them. 


When this was reported to Sstma, he said, “This is a plan f p 


to defeat our army by making a front and rear attack.” 


‘So he called Wang Chi and Ch‘én Chên and told them to ~ wa 


take half a legion to keep the road along which Chu I would 
come and strike him in rear. 


Chu I was advancing toward the city when he heard a 
shouting in the rear, and soon the attack began from two. 


sides. His army was worsted and returned to Anféng. 


When Sun Ch‘én heard of this new defeat he was very angry. f 


“What is the use of leaders who always lose?” cried he. 
He sentenced the unfortunate general to death and upbraid- 
ed Ch‘tian I, son of Ch‘üan Tuan, and said, “If you do not 


drive off this army of Wei let me never again see your face, 


nor that of your father. 
Then Sun Ch‘én returned to Chienyeh. 


When this was known in the Wei camp Chung Hui said to 
his chief, “Now the city may be attacked, for Sun Ch‘én has 
gone away, and there is no hope of succour for the besieged.” 

A vigorous assault began. Ch‘tian I tried to cut his way 


through and get into the city, but when he saw Shouchun - 4 


quite surrounded by the enemy and no hope of success he gave 
in and went over to Sstuma Chao, by whom he was well 
received and given office. 


~ fomance of the bree Aingooms: ae 539. 


i p eer to an arrow and shot it over the walls. So his father or 
and uncle, with their companies, came out and yielded. t 


-came to him to urge him to fight, since the rond in. the city a 
was short. He turned on them angrily. Wi 


us traitors.” Í ae 
= “He is lost,” said they, going away. “We can do no other — 
; than surrender or we shall die too.” ae 


_ were for fighting, but no one dared say. so.’ 


T Desir: affected by this kindness, he wrote to his father and Aa 
uncle advising them to follow his example. He tied the — 


Within the city Chuko Tan. was: very sad. Two adv sers Ek 


_ “Why do you tell me to fight when I am set on holding out 
-to the very last? If you say. that again you shall die as 


= That night they slipped over the wall and. surrendered. 
- Both were given employment. Of those left in the city some < 


‘Meanwhile the besieged saw the defenders making a wall _ 


ari ee again st the expected floods of the River Huai. This flood had 


cr been the only hope of the besieged, who had trusted, to be able 


‘was dry any and the river did not swell, | 


sons were defending the citadel, and they saw their men 
sinking one by one for lack off ‘food till the sight became 
: unbearable! ; 


called forth an outburst of fierce wrath. : 
~~ “Do you want me to kill you that you propose to send them 
away?” 


Armed with short swords they attacked all they met and slew 


dropped down the wall and deserted to the Wei camp. 
However, Sstuma Chao had not forgotten that one of the two, 


: first he refused to receive the deserter; he even thought to z 
put him to death, but his advisers interposed. 


- you slay those who surrender you will strengthen the obstinacy 
A of those who remain in the city.” 

~ There was reason in this, and so their submission was 
aerel: They were led to Ssŭma’s tent, and he soothed them 
with kind words and gave them gifts and employment. After 
expressing their gratitude they rode about the city on the 
horses he had given them, shouting, “We have received great 
kindness at the hands of Sstima Chao, who not only has 
Br am us but given us gifts, Why do you not all yield?” 


to smite the besiegers when it came. However, the autumn ae 


Within the besieged city the food diminished rapidly, and | z 
soon starvation stared them in the face. Wên Ch'in and his 


Wen went to Chuko to propose that the northern men 
should be sent away in order to save food. His suggestion 


Wen suffered death. His two sons ran Shin ikl rape. g 
“many score in their desperate anger., The fit over, mey: iy 
Wên Ying, had defied and held at bay his whole army. At E ? 


“The real offender was his father,” said Chung Hui, hat. 
he is dead, and these two come to you in desperation, and if 


540 | San Guo, or ` 


When their companions heard this they said one to another. — 
“This Wên Ying was an enemy, and yet he has been well: 
received ; how much more may we expect generous treatment!” _ 
The desire to surrender possessed them all. When Chuko — 
heard it, he was incensed and went round the posts night and ` 
= day on the watch for any who seemed inclined to go. He 
` put many to death in these efforts to retain his authority. E 


Chung Hui heard how things were going in the city and 
went in to the general to say the moment to attack had come. 
Sstima was only too. pleased. He stimulated his men, and 
they flocked to the ramparts and assaulted vigorously. Then 
a. certain captain treacherously opened the north gate and 
let in the Wei soldiers. p ; | ! 

When Chuko héard that the enemy were in the city he 
called his guards and tried to escape. He took his way along 
the smaller streets to.the gate, but on the drawbridge he met 
Hu Tsun, who cut him down. His followers were made 
prisoners.. i ; 


Wang Chi fought his way to the west gate, where he fell | 


in with the Wu captain, Yü Ch‘tian. 
“Why do you not yield?” shouted Wang. 


“Tt would be treachery to yield instead of obeying my “ta 
orders to seek help.” Throwing off his helmet, he cried, 


“The happiest death a man can die is on the battle-field.” 
Whirling his sword about he dashed among his enemies and 
fought till he fell under many wounds. 


Many were they who yielded at Shouch‘un 

Bowing their heads in the dust before Sstma. 

-Wu has produced its heroes, 

Yet none were faithful to the death like Yü Ch‘tian. 


When the victor entered the city he put to death the whole 


family of Chuko. Some of his guards fell into the hands of 
Sstma alive, and he offered them their lives if: they would 
yield. They all refused, saying they would rather share the 
fate of their leader. 

They were sent out of the city to be beheaded, but orders 
were given to offer each one his life at the last moment. Not 
one accepted, and they all died. In admiration for their 
fortitude they were honourably interred. 

The loyal servant flees not in the day of disaster; 

Such were they who followed Chuko to the shades. 

Ever and again begins the Song of Life’s Brevity. 
Faithful unto death were they, even as T‘ien Kéng’s men. 

As has been said, many-of the men of Wu surrendered. 
Then said P‘ei Hsiu, “The parents and children of these 
men are scattered all over the east, and if you spare them 
and they return home they will foment rebellion by and by. 
The best way is to bury them.” - l ; 

But Chung Hui said, “No; When the ancients made war 
their policy was to maintain the state as a whole, and so they 


~ Romance of the Eheee Hingdoms 


only Spit to ideal the originators- of RTTE, Tt: ani be 
_ inhumane to slay all. Rather let them return home as wite 
nesses to your liberal policy.” 
_ “That is better advice,” said Sstima. So the men of Wo 
were released and allowed to return home. 

“Tang Tzu dared not return to his own place for co 
_ the cruel Sun Ch‘én, so he went over to Wei, taking his — 
company with him. He was well received, and his men spread _ 
over the district of the three rivers. í 

The country about the Huai River being now ee Ssňma 
- decided to march. homeward. Just then the news came that — 
Chiang Wei, the Shu General, had taken Ch‘angch‘éng and © 
` was interfering with the supplies, and so a council was called — 
i to discuss this matter. 
= At this time the period-style in Shu, whieh had been Yen- 
: Ba for a score of years, was changed to Ching- Yao. Chiang 
Wei chose two officers, Chuan Ch‘ien and Chiang Shu, both of 
whom he loved greatly, and set them to train the army, horse 
and foot. When again came news that Chuko Tan. had — 
- set out to destroy Sstma Chao and had obtained the support 
and help of Wu, he said that the great opportunity had ` 
come at last, so he asked the king’ s authority to make another — ‘6 
expedition. gt 
2. But Chiao Chou heard this with grief, for internal affairs - i 
were not well. 19 nal 
~ Said- he, “The court is sunk in dissipation and the neta as 
; confidence is given to that eunuch, Huang Hao: state. affairs 
-are neglected for pleasure; “which ig the king’s sole aim. 
= Chiang Wei has led many expeditions and wasted the, lives w 
many men, so that the state is falling.” | a 
-He then. wrote an essay on “State Ir njuries,” > which he sent ; : 
‘to Chiang Wei. | i 
. “When one asks by what means ans weak. overcame the haa 
cee. in past times, the answer is that those responsible De is 
the strong state made no struggle against general laxity, | 
while those in power in a weak state took careful steps for 
- improvement. Confusion followed upon laxity and efficiency — 
w grew out of diligence, as is the universal rule. King Wên. 
devoted himself to the welfare of his people, and with a small | 
_ number achieved great results; Kou Chien sympathised with © 
“all, and. with a weak force overcame a powerful opponent. 
"These were their methods. One may recall that in the past 
Ch‘u was strong and Han weak when the country was divided | 
-by agreement at Hungkou. Then, seeing that his people were 
. satisfied and settled in their minds, Chang Liang went in. 
pursuit of Hsiang Yü and destroyed him. 
` “But is it necessary to act like King Wén and Kou Chien? 
? Listen to the reply. In the days of Shang and Chou, when 
Tanks had ong existed and the relations between prince and — 


= man strove with ‘his neighbour. 


Pde Chien. 


oar San ue, or Paes Bice 


minister were firmly established, even such.as the ounces of 
the Hans could not have carved his way to a throne. But = 
when the dynasty of Ts‘in had suppressed the feudal nobles 
and set up mere representatives of its own power, and thet casa 
people were weak and enslaved, the empire was riven asunder pi 
and there succeeded a time of contention, when every bodd — 


“But we are now in other times. Since there is not the 
state of confusion that waited on the end of Ts‘in. but a state 
of things more nearly like that of the period of the Six States, ee 
therefore one may play the part of King Wên. If one would 
found a dynasty, then must he wait upon time and favourable 
destiny. With these in his favour, the consummation will = 
follow forthwith, as the armies of T“ ang and Wu fought but. 
one battle. Therefore have real compassion for the people -> 
and wait on opportunity. If wars are constant, and a mishap 
come, even the wisest will be unable to show the way of. . 
safety.” re 

“An. effusion from the pen of a rotten pedant? 2” cried A 
_ Chiang wrathfully as he finished reading, and he dashed the i 
essay on the ground in contempt. 5 
The protest was disregarded, and the army marched. 
“In your opinion where should we begin?” asked he of Fu i: 


Fu replied, “The great storehouse of Wei is at Ch‘angeh‘éng Bee, 
and we ought to burn their grain and forage. Let us go out — 
by Lo Valley and cross the Shén Ridge. After the capture of ` i 
Ch‘angch‘éng we can go on to Ch‘inch‘uan and the conquest Bye: 
of the capital will be near.’ Pe 

“What you say just fits in with my. ‘secret Rs enhed T 
Chiang. Ate 

So the army marched. The Commander in Ch‘angch‘éng pee 
was Ssttma Wang, of the same clan as the Prime Minister. 
Huge stores of grain were in the city, but its defences were s 
weak. Soa camp was made twenty li from the walls to keep 
any attack at a distance., Wang Chên and Li Preng were 
Sstma’s two captains. 

When the enemy came up, Ssuma and his two captains 
_ went forth from the ranks to meet them; Chiang Wei stood — 
in the front of his army and said, “Seiima Chao,. you have’ . 
forced the King to go with you to war, which plainly indicates ~~ 
that you intend to emulate the deeds of Li Ts‘ui and Kuo Sst. 
My government has commanded me to punish this fault. — 
Wherefore I say to you yield at once, for if you persist in the He 
way of error you and yours shall all be put to death.” ; 

Ssuma Wang shouted back, “You and yours are’ hale ce Y, 
strangers to any feeling of rectitude. You have repeatedly = 
invaded a superior state’s territory, and if you do not at once = 
retire-I will see to it that not even a ape kala’ returns... < 


7 


= Romane of the Three ingdoms 
_ With these words the Captain Wang rode ay his spear set — 


ready to thrust. From the host of Shu came Fu Ch‘ien to 
< take the challenge, and the two champions engaged, After 


blow, snatched Wang out of the saddle and bore him off. | _ 


_ luring Li into rash pursuit. When Li was near enough, Fu 


-in the face. The blow knocked out an eye, and Li fell dead. 


captains being dead, the men of Wei fled into the city and ` 
barred the gates. . aire 
Orders were given for the men to rest that night and take 
the city on the morrow. Ses Li eas 

Next day, at dawn, the assault began. 'The men, fresh 
_ from their rest, vied with each other who should be first on 
the wall. They shot over the ramparts fire-arrows and fire- 
bombs and burned all the buildings on the wall. They next 
set it alight, so that the flames rose high. ae 

_ When the city seemed about to fall, the defenders set up a — 

howling and a lamentation that could be heard all around. © 
But suddenly a great rolling of drums diverted the attention 


to see a great host of Wei soldiers marching up in all the 
glory of waving banners. Chiang Wei faced about to meet 
this attack and took his place beneath the great standard. 
- Presently he made out a youthful-looking leader riding in 


more than twenty years of age, his face was smooth as if 
powdered, and his lips were crimson. But from them came 
_ fierce words. 


- “Do you recognise General Téng?” cried he. 


-. Thereupon Chiang set his spear and rode out. Both were 
 adepts in arms and neither gave the other an opening, so that 
at the end of near half a hundred bouts neither could claim 
< advantage.2 The youth wielded his spear with perfect skill. 
“Tf I cannot gain the advantage by some ruse, how shall I — 
- win?” thought Chiang. 

So he turned aside his steed and dashed along a certain 
road that led to the hills. The youth followed. Presently 


- with care a feathered arrow’ and laid it on the string. But 
the youth was quick of eye, and as the bowstring sang he bent 
his head over the saddle and the arrow passed harmlessly by. 


P a few encounters Fu tempted his opponent by feigning weak- me 
ness. Wang thrust at the opening he gave. Fu evaded the 


_ Seeing this, his colleague Li whirled up his sword and went — is 
pounding down toward the captor. Fu went but slowly, thus =- 


dashed his prisoner with all his strength to the earth, took ace e 
firm grip on his four-edged brand, and smote his pursuer full 


- Wang had been already killed as he lay on the ground. Both $ a 


_ brought up brushwood and piled it against the rampart and ? 3 
of the assailants from the city, and they turned their faces ~ aa 
-advance with his spear ready to thrust. He looked scarcely — . 


“80 this is Téng Ai,” thought Chiang: GR 


H -Chiang slung his spear, laid hands upon his carven bow, chose __ 


544 San Ruo, or. 


The next time Chiang turned he saw his pursuer close upon 
him, and already the spear was threatening his life. But as. 


the youth thrust, Chiang evaded the blow and caught the shaft 


under his arm. Thus deprived of*his weapon, the young man 
=- made for his own array. $ 
“What a pity! What a great pity!’ cried Chiang, turning — 


to pursue. 


He followed Téng close up to the standard, but just as he | 
came near, a warrior came to the front, saying, “Chiang Wei, — 
-you fool, do not pursue my son when I am here.” D 

Chiang Wei was taken aback; so he had only been contend- _ a 


ing with the son of his real opponent. Although he was 


astonished at the skill and vigour of the youth, he now knew 


that a heavier task lay before him and feared lest his steed was 
then too far spent for the contest. 

So he said to Téng Ai, “Seeing things are so, let us both 
hold off our men till the morrow, when we will fight.” 


Téng Ai, glancing around, saw that the place was ill-suited 


for him, so he agreed to wait, saying “Let us lead off our men 


then, and whoever shall take any secret advantage is a base je y 


fellow.” 
Both sides retired into camp, Têng on the bank of the Wei 
River and Chiang on the hills. 


Têng saw that the men of Shu had the Pavan Ske of i 


position, so he wrote off at once to Ssŭma Wang not to give 
battle, but to wait for reinforcements. Meanwhile the men 
of Shu would be consuming their supply of grain, and he 
reckoned upon striking his blow when they began to be 
Poney: He also wrote to Sstma Chao for further 
elp. i i 


i A messenger was sent to the Wei camp to deliver a letter of 
. battle, the contest to take place the next day. Téng Ai openly 
accepted, but when morning came and Chiang Wei had arrayed. 


his men, his enemy had not appeared on the field. Nor was 
there any sign of giving battle, no display of flags or rolling 
of drums all day. 


At nightfall the army of Shu returned to camp and Chistes | 


sent a letter reproaching his opponent with his failure to keep 
his word. Téng Ai treated the bearer of the letter with great 


courtesy and explained that he had been indisposed that day, (ls 


but would certainly fight on the morrow. 


But the next day passed also without any move on the part Y 


of Wei; and the same thing went on for five days. 


Then said Fu Ch‘ien to his chief, “There is some knavery i: 


afoot, and we must be on our guard. is 

“They must be waiting for reinforcements that they may 
attack on three sides,” said Chiang. “But now will I send 
Ro Wu and.get Sun Ch‘én to strike at the same time 
as I. 


pecs Ta 


sp ete Bey re 


pa 


E E A ee eee EE 


sai io 
ee eS ee E 


CN ae cape ere È 
a ESE ETE LE Le ee Ee SST 


Ee Ce Ee eee 


n en came news of the rene of the army of Wu, of the 
 Shouch‘un and the death of Chuko Tan. Moreo ver, 
i hat an army was going to attack Ch'angch'êng. E 
“So our attack on Wei is but a sham !” said Chiang, 
iso ly a. picture ofa Cake.” Mah 


Four Hone he missed! ke hailed 
The fifth occasion fovtuliy and f failed. 


CHAPTER CXIII. 


TING FENG’s PLAN TO SLAY SUN CH‘EN; 
CHIANG WEI DEFEATS TENG AI. 


F caring lest reinforcements would strengthen his enemy ce 


beyond his own power of resistance, Chiang decided to retreat 
while he could. He sent all his stores and baggage away first 


with the footmen, and kept the cavalry to cover the retirement. i 


The spies reported his movements to Téng Ai, who said, “He 
has gone because he knew that the main army would soon be 
upon him. Let him go, and do not follow. If we pursue he 
will play us some evil trick.” 

Scouts were sent to keep in touch with the retreating army, 
and when they returned they reported that preparations had 
been made in the Lo Valley to check any pursuit with fire. 
The officers praised ‘the prescience of their leader. When Téng 


reported these matters he was commended, and the Prime oe a 


Minister requested the king to confer a reward. 

The Prime Minister of Wu was greatly angered by the 
desertion of so many of his men and officers to Wei, and — 
revenged himself by putting their families to death. King 
Liang disapproved of these acts of cruelty, but he was 
powerless. 2 

The young king was of an ingenious turn of mind, as will 


be seen from the following story. One day he went to the 


West Park to eat of the newly ripened plums. He bade one 


of the eunuchs bring some honey. It was brought, but there - Na 


were lumps of dirt in it.. The young king called the store- 
keeper and blamed him for carelessness. The storekeeper 
said he was very careful to keep his stores. in good order, and 
the honey could not possibly have been fouled in the store- 
house. i 

“Has any one asked you for honey lately?” asked the king. 

“One of the eunuchs asked for some a few days ago. I 
refused him.” 


` “You defiled the honey out of spite,” said the king to the nies 


eunuch named. 
The man denied it. es 
“It is very easy to tell, ” gaid the king. “If the dirt has 
been lying in the honey for some time it will be soft all 
through.” - 
He broke one of the lumps, and it was quite dry inside. The 
eunuch then confessed. 


t 


a fiomance of the Three Hingooms 


was, he could not control his Prime Minister, whose relatives 


was unassailable. ae, 
-One day the young king, musing over his sorrows and 


x of the eunuchs, who was a “State Uncle,” stood by. 


done.” ' 3 ; i is 
_, Ch‘tan Chi said, “I would think no sacrifice too great if 


Your Majesty would make use of me.” — 


must not let anyone know, for if you tell your noble mother 
=~ she will tell her brother, and that would be very serious for 
Eme } . oe ee FROG er 

_ Now Ch‘iian’s mother was the Prime Minister’s sister. 
“Will Your Majesty give me a command that I may have 


a supporters.” 4 
could not keep his secret, and confided the plan to his father, 


a few days. 


“Oh, you are going to kill him then,” said she. 


ecret messenger with a letter to the proposed victim. 0 


were seized, with Liu Ch‘eng and Ch‘tian Shang and all their 
families. About dawn the young king was disturbed by a 
commotion at the gates, and a servant told him that the palace 
was surrounded. Rise 


- the Empress, who was of the Ch‘iian house, and reproached 


Oy out father and brother have upset all my plans.” 

- Drawing his sword, he was dashing out when his Consort 
and her people clung to his clothing and held him back, 
After putting to death Liu Ch‘éng and Ch‘tian Shang, the 
Prime Minister Sun Ch‘én assembled the officers in the court 
and addressed them thus:—‘“The king is vicious and weak, 
depraved and foolish and unfit for his high office. Wherefore 
he must be deposed. Any of you who oppose will be punished 
s for conspiracy.” % Re be : 
“Only one of those present dared to say a word of protest. 
It was an officer named Héng I, who said, “How dare you utter 


This shows the king was quick-witted. But claveneaee le ; 


were in command of all the garrisons and armies, so that he 


feeling very miserable, began to weep. The officer in charge ; 


_ “Sun Ch‘én holds all real power and does as he wishes, 
while I am: despised,” said the king. “Something must be 


_- “If you could muster the guards and help General Liu to — 
eep the gates, I would go and murder that ruffan. But you 


uthority to act when the time comes?” said Chitian. “At 
the critical moment I could show the edict and hold back Sun’s. 


The command was given, and Ch‘iian went home. | But he 


Shang. His father told his wife that Sun would be got rid of © 
1 ; f ; s 
Although she seemed to approve with her tongue, she sent a 


_ That same night Sun Ch‘én called in his four soldier 
brothers, and the palace was surrounded. The conspirators 


The king knew that he had been betrayed. He turned on 


™ 


' said to the king, “O unrighteous and unenlightened King, your — 


548 San Kuo, or A 


such words? Our ne is very ingollivent; and I will’ not 
support you. I had rather die.” a= ; 
Death was his portion. Then Sun went into the palace and 


death would be the only fitting reparation to make to the 
empire, but out of consideration for your ancestors you are 
only deposed and degraded to princely rank as Prince Hui- chi. ; 
I will select a worthy successor.’ A 
Li Tsung, the Chung-shu-lang, was ofdpedd to bring in tBe 
the royal seal, which was delivered . to ye ey The 
- deposed ruler retired gror baa: 


The sage avaible of the wise I Yin 
Perverted now to. traitor’s use we see; i 
‘And Ho Kuang’s faithful services are made i 
A cloak to cover vilest treachery. a 

„Even able princes are but toys of fate, ; 
And need our pity, fall’n from high estate. 


Then two officers of the court, Sun Kai and ine Chao, 
- went as envoys to Hulin to request Sun Hsiu; Prince of Langya, 
to ascend the throne. 

The King-elect had had some premonition of the high honour 
to which he was now called, for in a dream he ascended into ~ 
the skies seated on a dragon. Only the dragon seemed to have y 
no tail. He woke up in a fright, and Hie next day brought _ & 
the messengers. 

He set out. At Chia his carriage was stopped by a 
venerable old man who offered felicitations. 5 

“Changes are inevitable, and I wish you a prosperous 
journey,” said the aged one. ; K 

At Pusait‘ing awaited an officer with a chariot, but Sano 
Hsiu’s modesty would not allow him to mount it. He remained — 
in his own simple carriage and therein travelled to the capital. 
Officials lined the road to salute him, and he dismounted ia 
return their salutations. Then the Prime Minister stood forth 
and bade them take the newly-elected king by the arm and 
lead him into the Great Hall, where, after thrice refusing the 
honour, he at last took his seat and received the Jade seal _ 
passed from one ruler to another. Pa 

When all the officers’ had made Gbbisanec, there were the’ 

usual amnesties, promotions, honours and change of reign- 
style. Jun-An, “Eternal Tranquillity,” was the name of the — 
new reign. Sun Ch‘én was confirmed as Prime. Minister, with 
` the governorship of Chingchou.. Moreover, Sun Hao, the son 
of his elder brother, was created Marquis of Wuch‘éng. | re 

Sun Ch‘én, with five marquisates in his family and the whole y 
army under their command, was immensely powerful, able 
to set up and pull down at will. The new king secretly feared | 


him, and. oy outwardly hy SKONE him dest A: yet 
he kept careful watch over his Prime Minister, | whose 
_ arrogance knew no bounds. 
In the autumn Sun Ch‘én sent into the palace preis of 
` oxen and wine as birthday gifts. The king declined them. 
The Minister was very annoyed and took the presents to 
_ General Pu’s residence, where they two dined together. When > 
warmed. with wine, ‘Sun said, “When I deposed the present | 
Prince Hui-chi many people urged me to take the throne myself.. _ 
But I acted magnanimously and set up this present king. — 
_ Now I suffer the mortification of seeing my presents rejected. 
-You will see what will come of this slight.” _ 
Chang sympathised, but the next day he secretly told the ry 
king, and the king’s fears increased so that he: could not rest. 
Shortly after this, Sun sent a large body of troops. under the 
command of Méng Tsung into camp at Wuch‘ang, and he — 
armed them from the state arsenals. Whereupon Wei Miao 
and Shih Shuo secretly memorialised the Throne that Sun’s 
i action pointed to rebellion. j 

Then the king culled in Chang Pu to consult, and he 
‘recommended Ting Féng as an able and trustworthy officer. 
So Ting was called and taken into the king’s confidence. i 

“Have no anxiety,” said Ting. “I will find some way of | 
i ridding the state of this evil.” : PARTI n 
“What do you propose?” ` LASE ca 
“When the winter Court is held, and all the officers are | 
Desemibled spread a great paaquet and invite Sun. I shall þe 
ready to act. z? í 
Wei Miao and Shih Shuo were taken into the iat and were — 
` to do what was possible outside the palace, and Chang Pu saw 
to arrangements within. 

One night a heavy gale came on to blow, which tore up great 
trees ky the roots. However, by daylight it had abated, and 
‘that morning a king’s messenger arrived bearing an invitation 
to a banquet in the royal palace. Sun rose from his couch, 
_and, as he did so, fell flat on the ground as though he had been a 
: ‘pushed from behind. This accident troubled him, and he felt hae 
- - apprehensive, so he called half a score of his trusty men to act 
— a8 his escort to the palace. 

As he was leaving home his family besought him not to go 
out, for they feared the omens of the gale in the night and the ~ 
a fall that morning. However, he made light of their fears and 
‘said no one would dare come near him since the family was so 

_ strong. . 

“But if there is anything amiss I will penal. is ; 

So he took his seat, and the carriage set out. When he 
j id the palace the king rose from his place to welcome | 
a 8 mg at table he sat in the seat of honour. ae banquet 


is 


550 l San Kuo, or 


3 ; € 


“There i is a fire outside; what does that mean ?” said a P LS 


presently. 


Sun rose to go out, but the king said, “There is no danger, | a 


and there are plenty ‘of soldiers outside.” 
Just at that moment General Chang entered at the head of a 


couple of score of armed men. He rushed up the banquet | A Sa 


chamber shouting, “I hold a command to slay the rebel Sun.” 


Instantly the Prime Minister was seized. He fell prostrate ; È y 
_ before the king, knocking his head on the ground and crying, © ae 


“Spare my life! Exile me to my own place, but let me live.” 


“Did you exile any of your victims?” said the king, angrily. ee 
The order went forth to carry out the execution, and Sun 
was hustled out and put to death. No single person raised a. 


hand to help him. Then it was proclaimed that Sun was the rani 


only culprit and no other would be questioned. 


Then at Chang’s request the king went up on the Tames Of x 


the Five Pheenixes. The brothers of the Prime Minister were 


` brought before him and also condemned to death. After this 


their families were slain, so that many hundreds, suffered death. 


Not content with all these things, the tomb of Sun Hsiin was 


- broken open and his corpse beheaded. 


Magnificent tombs were raised to his victims, Chuko Ch‘tio, 


Téng Yin and others. Thus at last loyalty was rewarded, and | X i 


the banished were permitted to return home with full pardon. 


The conpirators were rewarded. 


= News of this revolution was sent into Shu, and King Liu f 
Ch‘an sent an envoy into Wu with felicitations. The envoy, — 


Hsiieh Hsü by name, at his audience was questioned about 


affairs in the west, and he told King Sun Hsiu, saying, “ATD am 
affairs of state are in the hands of a certain eunuch named — el 


Huang Hao, and all the courtiers look up to him as to a father. 


At Court plain truth is never heard, and the country people — ER: 


look sallow and starved. The whole country appears on the 
verge of destruction. The birds- on the roof do not know that 


the building is about to be burned.” - 


“Ah! If only Chuko Liang, The Warlike, was still alive; ` ` 


how different all would be!” said King Hsui, with a sigh. 
Letters were prepared saying that beyond doubt Sstma 
Chao intended usurpation, and when that came about in Wei, 


both Wu and Shu would be invaded. Wherefore both should Re . 


be ready. 


On the arrival of these letters Chiang Wei hastened to seek | A 
permission to attempt another expedition. Consent being | 
given, a large army marched into Hanchung, with Liao Hua 


and Chang I as van-leaders. Wang Han, Chiang Pin, Chiang 


Shu and Hu Chi were on the wings, while Chiang Wei and — 


Hsiahou Pa led the main column. 


Asked what he thought should be the first obj ective, Halakoen. ae 
Pa replied, “There is no better fighting ground than Ch‘ishan, is 


T O camp. 


~ Romance of the Chree liingdoms : BBE 


? as athe tactics of the late minister made evident, and it is oe 
_ only good exit.” 


So thither the armies marched, and they camped at the 


: entrance to the valley. At this time Téng Ai had a training 
~ camp at Ch‘ishan drilling the Shénsi troops. The scouts told 
him of the coming of the western men, and he ascended a 
hill to see and verify their reports. He seemed pearen when 

= he saw the enemy camp. i 


“They have just done as I foresaw,” said he. 


: Now Téng Ai had carefully considered the ‘ ‘pulse”. of the 
oS countryside and so had not interfered with the Shu army when 


it was on the march or settling into camp.. Moreover, he had 


- excavated a subterranean road to the spot where he had 
thought they would halt, and their “left” camp had been 


pitched just on it. Wang and Chiang Chi commanded in that 
Téng, ‘Ai called his son and Shih Tsuan and sent them to 


= attack, one on each flank. He sent men into the underground 


road, which opened in rear of the threatened camp. 
As the newly made camp was not yet well fortified, its two 


-. commanders exercised great care and kept their men under 
arms all night, watching with vigilance. So when the alarm 
= was given they had but to seize their weapons and go out. But 
as the two leaders were mounting their steeds Téng Ai also 
attacked, and two faces had to be defended. Soon they found 

the position untenable and fled. 


7 = i When Chiang Wei saw that his left camp had been aitaka 


_ on two sides he ‘mounted and took his position in front of the 
centre camp. _ | 

“Let no one move on pain of death!” he shouted. “Stand 

` still, and when the enemy approaches shoot.” 


The right camp was ordered to stand fast. His defence 


“was effective. Half a score of times the men of Wei came 

forward, only to be driven back before the arrows and bolts. 
~ of the defenders. Daylight found the Shu camps still firm, 
and Téng Ai drew off. 


“Chiang Wei has indeed learned of K‘ung-ming,” said Téng. 


“His men stood the night attack without flinching, and the 


leaders took the chances of battle quite calmly. He is 


able.” ! 

, When the two commanders of the camp that had been 

attacked went to confess their fault, Chiang said, “It was less 

-. your fault than mine, for I did not clearly recognise the nature 
of the terrain.” 


So no penalty was inflicted. The camp was made stronger, 


and the subterranean passage was filled with the bodies of the 
- slain. 


A allene to battle for the following day was sent to Têng, 


-who accepted it joyfully. 


S 


a Next day the two armies were arrayed in front of Ch‘ishan, 

Ne, the men of Shu according to the “Eight Formations” designed 

ital by Chuko Liang, which are called Heaven, Earth, Wind, Cloud, ` 
Bird, Serpent, Dragon and Tiger. While the mayceuvre was 


552 an Ruo, or ` ; cA 
E 


in progress, Têng recognised it as the pa-kua and placed his 7 

men accordingly. Chiang Wei then gripped his spear and rode . 

out, saying, “You have made a good imitation of my eight, Ke 

Revie but can you work variations?” : 
pail “You call these yours! Did you think that you alone held © 
ee the secret? Since I have made it, of course I know the ` 
variations.” . ae 

Téng re-entered his ranks, gave the signal officers certain = 

orders, and the “eight eights” of the variations were evolved = 

in rapid succession. . Then he rode to the front again. a 

“What of my evolutions?” asked he. y q 


“Not so bad; would you like to try a surrounding move with 
me?” replied Chiang. ; Hh 
“Why not?” 
The two armies moved in orderly ranks. Téng stood inthe ~ 
midst of his army giving the necessary orders. Then the - 
clash came, but his tactics did not grip. Then Chiang waved © 


eae i 


= = S$ 
eee 


a certain signal flag, and his force suddenly assumed the form _ 1 
of a serpent coiled on the ground with Têng in the centre. . 
Shouts arose all about him. He could not understand what ~~ 
had happened and began to feel afraid. Gradually the men 
of Shu closed in upon him, and he saw no way of escape. ee 


9? 


“Téng Ai, you must surrender,” cried the soldiers. 
“Indeed I am in the toils,” he replied. 
Suddenly from the north-west a cohort dashed in. To ` a 
Téng’s great joy they were soldiers of Wei, and they crossed — 
over and released him. The leader was Ssùma Wang. Ae 

But although Téng had been rescued, his nine camps were ~ 
seized by his enemy and he had to retire. He led his army to 
the south of the River Wei and halted. Raney 

“How did you know exactly where to strike?” asked Téng of 
his rescuer. 

Sstma replied, “In my youth I studied tactics and was 
friendly with Kuang Yüan of P‘ingshih. He explained that 
formation to me. Chiang Wei used what is known as “The 
Serpent Ccil,” and the only way to break it is to attack the — 
head, which I saw was in the north west.” TS 
‘eae Téng replied, “Although I have studied formations, I do not | 
BAE know all the modifications. But since you know about this: — 
pe we may be able to recover our camps.” wy 

“I fear the little I have learned will not be enough te — 
overcome Chiang Wei.” ciate 

“To-morrow you shall contend with him, and while his $ 
attention is engaged I will attack the rear of Ch‘ishan, and we 
will recover our camps.” me 


= 
z 


So's a toy bis was o to attack on the morrow, and he 
sent a challenge to a contest in tactics for the same day. 
\ Chiang accepted. . 
Chiang Wei said to his officers, “In the secret book that I 

received from the marquis the variations are three hundred 

and sixty-five, corresponding to the circuit of the heavens. 
This challenge from them is as one going to teach hewing to 
the God of Carpenters. I think some ruse lies behind this. 
= Can you guess what it is?” cone 
_ Liao replied, “While they engage oun attention in this 
competition they intend to attack our rear.” 
T Just so; that is my opinion.” replied Chiang. 

So he prepared a counter-stroke by sending Liao and Chang, 
two of his captains, to lie in wait at the back of the hills. 
-Next day the men from the nine camps were led out and 
=- drawn up in front of the hills. Ssùma Wang came out on the 
other side and presently rode to the front to parley. 

mor You have challenged me to a contest; now draw up your 
men for me to see,” said Chiang. 
 Sstima did so and arrayed the eight diagrams, i Pei. 

1) Phat is what we know as the eight diagrams,” said Chiang. 
“But it is nothing wonderful, only, a sort of array fit for a 
lai and’s raid.” 
ou also have only stolen another man’s tactics,’ ’ replied 
is adversary. 

“How many modifications of this are there?” ‘asked Chiang. 

“Since I have arranged this, naturally I know the variations, 

of which there are nine nines, Nas ne eighty- one.’ 

“Try them.” 

` Sstma returned to nis array and evolved many, finally 
riding out and asking his opponent if he recognised them. 

= “My formation admits of three hundred and sixty-five 

variations. You are but a frog in a well and know nothing of 

the deeper. mysteries.” 

Now Ssima knew that! so many variations were possible, 
’ put had not studied them. However, he put on a bold air and 

said contemptuously. that he did not believe it. And he 

challenged Chiang to show. them. — 

“Go and call Téng Ai, ” raplied he. “I will display them to 

him.” 

~ “General Teng has excellent plans and does not think much 

of such tactics.” 

= “What plans? I suppose you mean a plan to Keep me here 
= while he tries a surprise attack in the rear.’ 

 Sstima was aghast. He made a sudden dash forward. and a 
 mêlee began. Chiang Wei made a signal with his whip, and 

his men poured in from both wings. The men of Wei were 
= seized with sudden panic, threw down their weapons. and 


“ fled. 


i 


Baa -mku aN 


Now Téng had hurried on Chéng Lun to make the first 


attack. As Chéng turned the corner of the hill a bomb. 


exploded. At once the drums rolled and an ambush discovered 
itself. Liao was in command. Neither side stayed to parley, 
and the leaders engaged in single combat. In the first 
encounter Chéng fell. 

Téng had not expected such prepasation, and he hastened 


to withdraw. Then Chang came forth and attacked on the 


other side. The army of Wei was worsted. Téng fought his 


way clear, but he bore four arrow wounds upon his body. He. | 


got to the river, where he found Ssuma Wang, and they 
discussed how to "vet away. 

But Ssuma proposed another form of attack. . 

“The King of Shu has a favourite, the eunuch Huang Hao, 
in whom he places all his trust and with whom he spends his 


time in one round of pleasure. Let us use the eunuch to sow 
distrust between the king and his general and so get Chiang | 


Wei recalled. In that way we shall retrieve our defeat.” 

So Téng assembled his advisers and asked who could go into 
Shu and get into communication with the eunuch, the king’s 
favourite. 


A certain Tang Chiin volunteered at once. To him was | 
entrusted gold and pearls and precious things, and he was sent 


into Shu to win the treacherous alliance of the eunuch. As he 
went he also disseminated reports that Chiang Wei was angry 
and intended to desert. 


These rumours became the common talk in Ch‘éngtu, and 


everyone believed them. Huang Hao carried them to the king, 
and a messenger was sent to call the general to the capital. 

Meanwhile Chiang tried every day to bring the enemy to 
give battle, but they remained obstinately behind their 
defences. Chiang began to think some evil scheme was afoot, 
when suddenly he was recalled. Although ignorant of the 


reason, he could not disobey, and when he retired the Wei 


leader knew that their plot had succeeded. 
They broke camp and set out to attack the retreating army. 


Because of Court intrigues 
Yo I and Yo Fei failed. 


How matters went will be told in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER: ly 


KING Mao DRIVES TO His DEATH ; 
CHIANG WEI ABANDONS STORES AND CONQUERS. 


! hen the order ‘to retreat was given, Liao Hua reminded his 


rince, but Chiang was not inclined to disobey, and beside he 
cognised that the people, tired of war and disappointed 
Oie unfulfilled. T would be SNe to rest. 


k e, dnd mice retirement began. “The army of 
Wei, loth to forgo an opportunity, followed, but the absence 
of the least confusion gave them no chance, and as he saw 
enemy appearing in perfect order Teng Ai had to 


n relhos of Chiko. He returned to his camp on Ch‘ishan. , 
On his return to Ch‘éngtu, Chiang Wei had audience with 
e king whereat he inquired why he had been a a to 


ae noble Sir: I thought the foldie must be weary. 
here was no other reason.’ | 

“O King, thy servant had got his camps on Ch‘ishan and 
was on the eve of complete suecess. To leave off thus in the 
uiddle just played into the hands of our enemies. Surely 
eng Ai found means of sowing distrust in me.’ The king 
at lost in thought, and silent. 

Chiang Wei continued, “I am pledged to eto those 
rebels and prove my devotion to my country. Your Majesty 
should not listen to the babble of mean persons till distrust 
grows in your heart.” 

“I do not distrust you,” said the king after a long pause. 
‘You may return into Hanchung and await the next favour- 
ble opportunity.” 

$ Chiang Wei left the court and betook . himself into Han- 
chung to. the army. 

Tang Chün went back to the Ch‘ishan camp and reported 
is success. The two leaders rejoiced, knowing that trouble 
_ was. not far off when the king nae lost confidence in his 


39 


556 San uo, or , 


servants. They sent Tang to Loyang to tell his. own EN i 
to Ssuma Chao, who also rejoiced, for he ardently desired to = 
subdue Shu. are 

On this matter he consulted the military officer Chia Ch‘ung. eh. 

“What do you think of an attack upon Shu?” 4 4 

“Not to be considered,” said Chia. “The Emperor does noe ia 
trust you, and your departure would be the beginning of 
trouble for you. When the yellow dragon was seen in the 
well and all the officers were felicitating the king upon such 
a very auspicious occurrence the Emperor said, ‘It is not 
auspicious; just the reverse. The dragon symbolises the- 
ruler. To be neither in heaven, nor on earth among the 
people, but to be in a well, is a dark portent and bodes evil.’ 
. He wrote some verses, and one stanza undoubtedly points to 
you, my lord.” a 


The dragon scotched a prisoner is, 
No longer leaps he in th’ abyss, 
He soars not to the Milky Way, 

_ Nor can he in the meadows play; 

, But coiled within a dismal well, 
With slimy creatures he must dwell, 
Must close his jaws, his claws retract, 
Alas! quite like myself in fact. 


The recital of the poem annoyed Ssima Chao. “This fala 
is very like Ts‘ao Fang, and if I do not remove him he will 
hurt me,” said he. 

““T will see to it for you,’ "aid Chia. 

In the fifth year, during the fourth month, Ssuma Chia: 
had the effrontery to go to Court armed. However, the king 
received him with exaggerated courtesy, and the courtiers 
began to praise and magnify his services and say that he — 
had been inadequately rewarded with the title “Duke of Chin” y 
and the Nine Gifts. 

And Sstima himself said discontentedly, “My father and 
my brother have all given great services, to Wei, and yet Ts x 
am a mere duke; something seems wrong.” i 

“Should I dare not do what you requested?’ said the king. 

“That poem about the Lurking Dragon called us stn 
creatures ; what sort of politeness is that?” said Sstma Chao. 

The king had nothing to say, and the haughty minister left : 
the chamber, smiling cruelly as he strode past the shivering (E 
courtiers. i 

The king retired, taking with him Wang Shên, Wang BrE 
and Wang Yeh, and they went to a privy chamber to consult. 
The king was very sad. He said, “There is no doubt that he 
intends to usurp the throne; everybody knows that. But I 
will not sit thereon patiently awaiting the indignity of being 
pushed off. Cannot you irae help me to kill him?” 


' fiomance of tthe Three Hingdoms 557 

He may ast pe slain,” maa Wahne Ching. “That will not 
In the old state of Lu, Duke Shao could not bear with the 
i family, and ran away, thus losing his country. But — 
is man and his family have been in power very long and have 
innumerable supporters, many of whom are quite independent 
of any act of his whether loyal or. disloyal. | They support 
him under any conditions. Your Majesty’s guards are few — 
_ and weak and incapable; not the men for any desperate effort. — 
a would be most lamentable if Your Majesty could not bear . 


“But I will do something, and if I die, what matters?” 

= He- went into the private apartments and spoke to his 
Consort. The three men sat outside talking. 

“This matter is coming to a head, and unless we wank to 


o and warn Sstma Chao,” said Wane Shên. 
This ie un ae inde whose nature was more ; 


Wang Vie wach have nothing to do with this. Wisk to 
Sstima Chao, but the other two went to the Ssuma palace to 
betray their king. — 

Shortly after, King Mao appeared, called the officer of the 
guard, Chiao Po, and bade him muster his men, grey-heads 
and lads, as many as he could. He got together about three 
undred, and this little force marched out to the beating of a 
rum as escort to a small carriage, in which sat the king 
gripping his sword. They proceeded south. Wang Ching 
stepped to the front and prayed e king to stay his steps and 
not go. 

o cao | go against Ssuma with such a force is driving the sheep 
into the tiger’s jaws, To die such a neath is a vain sacrifice. 
You can do nothing,” said Wang. 

= “Do not hinder me. I have made up my wina: 2 replied. the 
‘king, heading toward the Dragon Gate. 

Presently Chia Ch‘ung came in sight. He was armed and 
ounted on a fine horse. Beside him rode two officers, and 
ehind him followed a body of mail- clad men, who shouted one - 
to another as they rode. 

_ Then Mao held up his sword and cried, “I am a the Emperor. 
Who are you thus breaking into the forbidden precincts? 
Are you come to murder your lawful ruler? aS 

- The soldiers suddenly stopped, for they were palace guards. 
Then Chia shouted to one of the officers, Ch‘éng Chi, saying, 
“What did the general train you for if not for this day’s 


this trial. The. correct course is to wait and not ’act 0. | 


“Tf I can bear this, what ao I bear?” said the king. p 


558 : ‘San Guo, or ' 


Ch‘éng took his halberd and turned to Chia, saying, “Death Rast 


or capture 2?” “Sstma said he had to die,” replied Chia. 
Ch‘eng rushed toward the carriage. 
“Fool! How dare you?’ cried the king. 


But the shout was cut short by a thrust from ‘the Halberd i Be 


full in the breast; another thrust, and the point came out at 


_ the back, so that the king lay there dead beside his carriage. 
Chiao Po coming up to strike a blow in defence was also slain, 
and the little escort scattered. 


Wang Ching, who had followed, upbraided Chia Chung, 
calling him traitor and regicide till Chia bade his lictors arrest 3 


him and stop his tongue. 


“When they told Ssŭma, he went into the palace, but the ; 
king was dead. He assumed an air of being greatly shocked _ 
and beat his head against the carriage, weeping and lamenting | 


the while. -He sent to tell all the officials of high rank. 


When the Tai-fu Ssitma Fu saw the dead body of the king 


he threw himself beside it, his head resting thereon, and 
wept, saying, “It is my fault that they slew Your Majesty.” 
He had a coffin brought, and the remains were laid therein 


and borne to the side hall. Therein Sstima Chao entered and 
summoned the ‘chief officers to a council. They came, all but 
the President Ch‘én T‘ai. Sstma noticed his absence and sent. 
Hsiin Chuan, his uncle and colleague, to call him. Ch‘én T“ ahs 
wept aloud, saying, “Gossips will class me and my uncle | 


together. Yet is my uncle less virtuous than I.” 


However, he obeyed the summons and came, dressed in the — a 
coarse hempeń cloth of mourning, and prostrated himself — 


before the bier. Sstma Chao feigned to be grieved also. 
“How can this day’s work be judged?” said he. 


“If only Chia Ch‘ung be put to death, that will scarce be an a 


29 


atonement to satisfy the empire, replied Ch‘én T'ai. 


Sstma was silent and thought long before he spoke. Then c 


he said, “What next, think you?” 
“That is only the beginning; I know not the. sequel.” 


“Ch‘éng Chi is the ungodly rebel and actual criminal; he ~ EB 


should suffer the death of shame; and his family,” said Sstima he 


Chao. 


passed on your own orders.” 
Ssuma bade them cut out his tongue and put him to death. 


They did so; and he and his brother were both put to death in a 


the market place, and their families were exterminated. 


“The king must die,” thus spoke Sstuma full plain 
In Chia Ch‘ung’ S hearing; and the king was slain. 
Although they killed Ch‘éng Chi, who dealt the blow, 
The author of the crime we all well know. 


Thereupon Ch‘éng broke out into abuse of Sstima and reviled 3 E 
him, saying, “It was not my crime; it was Chia Ch‘ung who f 


aae Ching s whole Howes were imprisoned. He him- 
self was standing by the T‘ing-yii Pavilion when he saw his 
- mother being brought up a prisoner. He knocked his head 
on the ground and wept, saying, “O unfilial son to pene 
distress upon a gentle mother!” j ; 

= But his mother laughed. ` : 

_ “Who does not die?” cried she. “The ae thing to be feared 
is not dying the proper death. Who would regret dying 
like tis ri A 
~ When next day the mily were led out to execution, both 
-mother and son smiled as they went past. But the whole city 
_ wept tears of sorrow. 


Fu Chien was famous at the rise of Han, 
When Han declined, Wang Ching was proved aman 
Of purest virtue and unfaltering heart; 
With resolution stern he played his part. 
His fortitude was great as T’aihua Mount, 
- His life but as the floating down did count, 
The fame of son and mother n’er will die, 
_ So long as shall endure the earth and sky. 


- §Sstma Fu proposed that the body of the late king should 
receive a royal funeral, and the minister consented. . Chia 
_Ch‘ung and those of his party urged Sstma Chao to put Wei 
Ch‘an on the throne in place of Ts‘ao Mao, but he refused. | 

_ Formerly King Wên had two-thirds of the state, and yet 
-he supported. and served Yin. Wherefore the Holy One 
called him ‘Complete of Virtue.’ Emperor Wu of Wei would 
not take Ch‘an into the Hans, nor will I receive a Ch‘an into’ 


y Those who heard this felt that in these words was an 
implication that he intended to place his own son Sstuma Yen 
on the throne, and they ceased to urge him to act. 

_ In the sixth year Ts‘ao Huang, Duke of Ch‘ angtaohsiang, 
was raised to the throne as Emperor, the period-style being 
changed to Ching-Yiian. The personal name of the Emperor 
was also changed to Huan. He was a grandson of Ts‘ao 
Ts‘ao. Sstma was still Prime Minister and Duke of Chin. 
< Beside, he received rich gifts, and all the officers were promot- 
ed or received honours. 

= When these doings in Wei were told in Shu, Chiang Wei 
seized upon them as pretext for another war, to punish Wei 
for the deposition of its ruler. So letters were written 
calling upon Wu to help, and a memorial was sent to the 
Throne. The army raised was fifteen legions, and there were 
many carts with boxes made to fit them. The two van- 
-leaders went by Tzitwu and Lo Valleys, while Chiang Wei 
took the Hsieh Valley road. They marched at a same time 
E and hastened toward Ch‘ishan. 


560 ; an uo, or 


Téng Ai was still on the mountain training the. Wei soldiers i 
when he heard that the Shu armies were once more on the © 
war path. He called his officers together. And Wang Kuan 


said he had a plan to propose, but he would not tell it openly. 
However, he agreed to write it, and he placed it» before the 
leader. 


“Though excellent, I fear it is not enough to beguile the Vj 


leader of Shu,” said Téng Ai as he finished reading. 


“I am willing to stake my life on it,” said Wang, ‘ ‘and if | 


will lead the way.’ 


“Since you have such conndanke you may try. You ough P: 


certainly to succeed.” 


So half a legion of men were put under the leadership of — 
Wang, and they set out for Hsieh Valley, where they fell in | 
with the scouts of Chiang Wei’s force. Seeing these, their ad 


leader, Wang, shouted, “We are deserters: tell your leader.” 


So the scouts told Chiang’ Wei, who replied, “Hold up the — 


soldiers, letting their leader only come to me.” 


Wang Kuan went forward and kneeled before him, saying, — s K 
“I am a nephew of Wang Ching, and I hate Sstma Chao for _ 
what he has done to the king, and my uncle and I wish to join . 


you and my men with me. I also desire {9 þe sent against ae 


the rebel crew that I may avenge my uncle.” 


Then said Chiang Wei, “Since you are sincere in your see. 


desertion, I must-be sincere in my treatment of you. Theone 


thing my army needs is grain. There is plenty at Ch‘uank‘ou, | a 


and if you can transport it to Ch‘ishan I can go straightway 
and take the Ch‘ishan camps.” 

This reply rejoiced Wang Kuan, who saw that Chiang Wei 
was just going to walk into the trap. So he agreed at once. 


“But you will not want half a legion to see after the trans- 
port. Take three companies and leave two as guides for 


me. 


attached to the army of Shu. 


Then Hsiahou Pa was announced, and, when he was come 


in, he said, “O Commander, why have you believed the tale of 


this Wang? I never heard that he was related to Wang Ching, © s 
though it is true I never made particular enquiries. You 


should look to it, for there is much pretence in his story.” 
“I know he is false,” said Chiang Wei, with a jmile. 


“That is why I have taken away many of his men. I.am Ke 


meeting trick with trick.” 
“How do you know for certain?” 


“Sstiima Chao is as wicked as Ts‘ao Ts‘ao. If he slew all 
Wang Ching’s family, would he have left a nephew on the 


Wang Kuan, thinking that suspicions would be raised by a a 
refusal, took the three companies, and the other two were | 


male side, and sent him beyond his own reach with soldiers? ~ 


You saw this, as did I.” 


ean Wei did not go mi by the Hael Valley, but he 
n ambush there ready for any move of the so-called 
deserters. And indeed, within ten days, the ambush caught 
man with a letter from Wang to Téng telling him what had 
me about, and from the letter and the bearer thereof they — 
arned that a convoy was to be diverted to the Wei camps on | 
e twentieth and Téng Ai was to send men to Yiinshan to 
help. Another letter was sent to Téng Ai by a man dressed — 
Wei soldier, the date being made m fifteenth instead of “i 

he twentieth. 
As a preparation, many waggons were. smoli of their 
‘ain and laden with inflammables, covered with green cloth. 
1e two companies of Wei soldiers were ordered to show flags _ 
elonging to the transport corps. Then Chiang Wei and his- 
oleague went into the valleys in ambush, while three bodies 
“men were sent to attack Ch‘ishan. 
The letter, apparently from Wang Kuan, was sufficient for’ 
g Ai, and he wrote back to. say it was agreed. So on the 
enth day five legions hove in sight near Yiinshan. And 
scouts saw endless carts of grain and fodder in the distance 
ing from the mountains. When Téng Ai got closer, he 
inguished the uniforms. ep Wei. His staff urged him ta 
‘as it was getting dark, but Teng was more cautious. 
tis gloomy and dark over there,” said the general. “If 
oy any chance an ambush has been laid we could hardly escape. 
Ve will wait here.” 

But just then two horsemen came up at a gallop and said, 
st as General Wang was crossing the frontier with the 
voy he was pursued, and reinforcements are urgen fiy 


-Têng Ai, omon the importance of the eed: gave 
yrders to press | onward. It was the first watch, and a full 
n was shining as bright as day. The shouting heard 
behind. the hills he could only conclude was the noise of the 
attle in which his colleague was engaged. 

o he dashed over the hills. But suddenly a body of men 
came out from the shelter of a grove of trees, and at their 
head rode the Shu leader, Fu Chʻien. 
Téng Ai, you are stupid! You have just lien into the 
set for you by our general. Dismount and prepare for 


4d \ 

A êng Ai halted and turned to flee. Then the waggons burst 

nto flame. That flame was a signal, and down came the | 
men of Shu. Téng Ai heard shouts all round him, .“A thou- 
sand taels for anyone who captures Têng Ai, and a marquisate 
; ell! 1? 
horrified, Téng dropped his arms, threw aside his armour, 
ed from his steed, mingled with the footmen, and with 
on peramiied up the hills. The captains of Shu only. looked ° 


Be 


‘defeat. Wang sent out some scouts, and the report w 


‘death.”’ 


562 .  &an Guo 


for him among the mounted leaders, never guessing that he — 
had got away among the common soldiers. So he was not 
captured. elec 
Chiang Wei gathered in his erorii: men and waal to ( 
meet Wang Kuan with his convoy. i 
Having made all arrangements, as he thoüght: complete, 
Wang Kuan was patiently awaiting the development of his 
scheme, when a trusted friend came and told him that the 
ruse had been discovered and Têng Ai had already suffered 


confirmed, with the addition that armies were coming again 
him. Moreover, clouds of dust were rising. There was 
way of escape, so he ordered his men to set ‘fire to the convoy, 
and soon huge flames were rising high into the air. 

“The case is desperate,” cried Wang. “Tt is a fight to the 


He led his men westward, but the men of Shu: came in 
pursuit. Chiang Wei thought his enemy would try at all cos 
to get back to his own, but instead, Wang Kuan went 
toward Hanchung, and as his men were too few to risk a 
battle he destroyed the military stations and covered wa; 
as he went. Fearing the loss of Hanchung, Chiang W 
abandoned ‘all thought of pursuing Téng Ai, but made | 
haste along the by-roads after Wang Kuan. Surrounded 


and so died. Those of his men who survived were Baty bya 7 
Chiang Wei. ea 
A victory had been won, but it was costly. Many men ha 
been killed, much grain had been lost and the covered roa 
had been destroyed. Chiang led his men into Hanchung. | 
Téng Ai made his way back to Ch‘ishan. From there he 
reported his defeat to the King of Wei and asked for degrad- 


not degraded, but, on the other hand, was consoled with 
magnificent gifts, which he distributed to- the families of the 
men who had been killed. Sstima Chao also sent him five 
legions as reinforcement lest Shu should attack again. 

Chiang Wei set about the restoration of the covered roads 
ready for the next expedition. £ 


Repair the roads for marching feet to tread, 
The strife will only cease when all are dead. 


The next chapter will tell who won. 


‘i ‘CHIANG Wet TAKES COMMAND OF THE CANTONMENTS _ ON. 
AND ESCAPES DEATH. Oe i, 


Ethie aboan of the fifth year of Ching-Yao, Chiang Wei 
s occupied with preparations for the renewal of an attack; 
ending the hill roads, gathering stores and mobilising his 
ats on the waterways of Hanchung. These things done, he 
sked permission to go again to the attack, saying, “Although 
have not been wholly victorious ‘nor accomplished great 
ngs, yet I have put fear into the hearts of the Wei armies. 

< Our men have been long under training, and they must now bey 
ad, or the army will go to pieces for lack of employment. ee) 
men are ready to die, the officers prepared for all risks 
I am determined to conquer or perish.” — Ro 
he king did not consent at once. As he was hesitating, ! 
hiao Chou stood forth and said, “I have observed the heavens. 
ve seen the men of Shu scattered over the wilds and the 
leader stars dull and obscured. This expedition will bes 
disastrous, and I hope Your Majesty will not approve.” 
= The king replied, “Let us see the results of this campaign ; 
-if it fail, then the war shall cease.” . 
-Chiao "resented the rejection of his advice, withdrew to his 
me and retired on the pretext of illness. 
As the final preparations were being made, Chiang Wei said 
iao Hua, “We are pledged to ‘get through to the capital 
time: what do you advise to start with?” Be 
“J dare not presume to advise you, General. For years we. 
have been fighting and giving the people no rest. In Tenge ie 
we find a most formidable and resourceful opponent and an 
xtraordinarily capable man, so that you must exert yourself 
the very utmost.” 
Chiang Wei was annoyed. Said he, “The late minister made 
attempts, all for the state. I have attacked eight times. 

Nas any one of those attacks to serve my private ends? This 
1e I go to attack T‘aoyang, and no one shall say me nay. T 
will punish opposition with death.” 
e left Liao Hua in charge of the base in Han hune and 
arched with thirty legions. His movements were reported 
‘in he Pai bon, Camps, pad Fenge spies confirmed AG news. 


SS EN AEE 


drawbridge rose. 


their lives. 


564. O° Ban Wo, ov oe 


It happened that Ssima Wang was with Téng Ai dincueeine™ 
military matters, and the former, when he. heard it, said 
“That move is a blind; he does not mean it. What he ry 
intends is an attack on Ch‘ishan.” 

“However, he has really gone to T‘aoyang,” said Téng. 

“How can you know?” 

“Formerly he has always. opened with a march to that part 
of the country where we have stored supplies. T‘aoyang has 
no stores, so he thinks we shall not have taken care for its 
defence as we shall concentrate our efforts on Ch‘ishan. But 
if he can take that place he can collect stores there, and ge 
into touch with the Ch‘iang and finally work out some è Stand 
plan.” Sisal 

“Supposing this true, what should we do?” 

“I advise the abandonment of this place and a march i in ‘ewe 
bodies toward T‘aoyang. I know a small town on the Hou 
River, not far from T‘aoyang, which is the throat of the 
place. You go to T‘aoyang, secrete your force and open th 
gates. Then act as I shall tell. you presently. I will lie in 
wait at Hou River. We shall score a victory.” 

An officer of low rank was left in charge of Chtishan station 
when the main body left. 

Meanwhile Hsiahou Pa led the van of the army joan 
T‘aoyang. As he drew near he noticed the place seemed to- 
have no defences; not a flagstaff reared its head. The gates 
stood wide open. He was too wary to go straight in however, 
though his captains agreed that the city looked empty. - A few. 
people were running away along the southern road. 

Hsiahou rode ‘south and saw there that the north-west one 
at a little distance from the city, was crowded with fugitives 

“The city is really empty,” said Hsiahou. | 

He led the way in all ready to fight, and the men followe 
As they came near to the curtain wall, however, a bomb 
exploded. At this sound the drums beat, trumpets blared, 
and flags suddenly appeared. At ones same moment t ne 


“Caught!” said Hsiahou. ; mae Se 
As he turned to retire, the arrows and stones flew. ‘doa in 
clouds, and. under these Hsiahou and many of his meg. lost 


Most able strategist and brave, 
Hsiahou, outwitted here 

By Têng, more prudent still, and’ slain, 
PEE a pitying tear. 


The flights of arrows from the EY was followed by. À 
sortie, which broke up the force of Shu entirely, and the men 
fled. However, Chiang Wei came up and drove off- Sstima 


Wang, and the men of Shu camped beside the walls. He was 
grieved at the loss of his able colleague. © a 

at night Téng Ai came up secretly and attacked the camp. 
he same time the men within ihe city made a sortie. © 
yhiang Wei could not resist the double attack, and left the | 
ield. He marched some twenty li and camped. i 
Twice beaten, the men of Shu were very downcast. The 

neral tried to console them with the truisms and platitudes 
war, the need to bear misfortune as well as enjoy good 
tune, and such sayings; but he wound up his speech with 
VIG S e ; N a SG 
ut remember, no mutiny! He who talks of retreat will | 


n Chang I said, “With so many men of Wei here, their 
“at Ch‘ishan must be undefended. I propose, General, 
at while you continue the contest here I go to try to capture 
ine camps. . If I succeed, Ch‘angan will be at our mercy.” 
e second division of the army was detached to march on 
han, and Chiang Wei went down to the river to provoke 
Ai into fighting. The challenge this time was accepted 
with, but after several bouts without a decision, both 
red to their camps. Tae E RN fae 
a or days after this, Chiang challenged again and again, but 
-Téng declined and would not fight. The Shu soldiers howled 
2 and hurled insults at their opponents, but all without 


) 


hen Téng thought within him, “There must be some reason © 
s persistence. I think they have sent an army to try 
seize Ch‘ishan while they hold me here. The force there 
nsufficient, and I shall have to go to the rescue.” : 
ng called his son Chung, and said, “Hold this place most 
ully. Let them challenge as they may, do not go out. 
ght T go to the help of Ch‘ishan.” 

was night, and Chiang Wei was in his tent, intent upon 
lans, when he was disturbed by a great shouting and 
mming. They told him Téng Ai had suddenly appeared. 
captains asked leave to go out to fight. 

Let no one move!” said Chiang Wei. ; ba 
The fact was Téng Ai had only made a demonstration at the 
m ) of Shu on his way to reinforce Ch‘ishan. i 
Then Chiang Wei said to his officers, “The attack of Téng 
as a feint; he has certainly gone to relieve Ch‘ishan.” 
o Chiang decided to go to the aid of Chang I. He left Fu 
n to guard the city. = E 5s RD 
ang I was then actually attacking the Wei position on 
ishan. The defenders were few, and it looked as though 


ust soon give in, when the sudden appearance of Téng 


de all the difference. The onslaught of Téng’s force 
s off Chang I, and he was forced to take refuge behind 


heh oe 


566 . Gan Buo, or 


into his camp, which Chiang Wei surrounded. 


the hills. No road was open to him. When hinga i 
worst he saw the Wei soldiers suddenly falling back in 
confusion. x 
“General Chiang has come!” they told him. >» 
Chang I took the opportunity to return to the ee ‘ied 
the tables were turned. ‘Téng Ai lost the game and retire 


> pas 
ae 


Here a digression is necessary. In Ch‘éngtu tie king fe 
daily more and more under the malign influence of Huang Hac 
who encouraged him in every form of self-indulgence and 
ministered to every desire for luxury and - dissipati 
Government was left to look after itself. hte 

A certain inister, Liu. Yen, had a very beautiful wife 
One day she went into the palace to visit the Empress, w 
kept her there a whole month. Liu Yen was not withe 
suspecting an intrigue with the Latter Ruler and took a brutal 
revenge. He bound the lady, and made five hundred of his 
soldiers shame her to the last degree by beating her on 
face with their boots. She swooned many times. 

The story got to the ears of the king, and he ordered t 
officials concerned to investigate and decide the crime and i 
punishment. The judges found that ‘soldiers were not proper ° 
persons to administer a punishment to a woman, and the ey 
was not a portion of the body to be mortified; the author of F: 
this crime ought to þe put to death. if - Wherefore Liu Yen wa 
beheaded. A 

Thereafter women were forbidden to go to Court. - As tim 
went on the king indulged in unbridled sensuality, — 
gradually all good men left the government, giving place 
the meanest, who soon swarmed there. 3 
` Among the sycophants of Huang Hao was a certain i incapa 
and. worthless general named Yen Yü, whose lack of meri 
had not stood in the way of preferment. Hearing of Chiang on 
defeats at Ch‘ishan, hé got his friend the eunuch to propose ~ 
to the king that Chiang should be recalled and he himself s nt. 
in command. The king agreed, and the edict was issued. 

One day, as Chiang Wei was working out his plan of att 
on the camps of Wei, three edicts came, all to the same eff 
recalling him to the capital.’ Disobedience being out of t i 
question, Chiang Wei ceased all operations and sent the 
T‘aoyang force back first. 
others. 


night, but next a ‘he heard that the Shu camps were emp 5 
However, he suspected some ruse and did not pursue. ; 
Arrived in Hanchung, the army halted, and its leader went 
on to the capital in company with’ the messenger who | 
brought his-orders. Here he waited ten days, and still 
king held no Court. He began to suspect mischief. 


C vee near the palace gate te w a onie Chi -Chéng, 
om pe knew, and asked whether he knew the reason for 
reca! 

“What General! Do you not know? Huang Hao wanted 
push Yen Yü into favour, so he intrigued for your recall. 
Now they have found out Têng Ai is too clever to be tackled, 
and so they are not fighting any more.” 


way,” said Chiang Wei. 


man to whom he bequeathed his unfinished task. You are too 


mportant to act hastily or indiscreetly. If the Emperor 


thdrew his support, it would go ill with you.” 


‘Sir, what you say is true,” replied Chiang. 

| nto the palace. The king was enjoying himself with the 
E hid himself. | Chiang approached his master and prostrated 
nemy in my power at Ch‘ishan when the triple edict came.” 
hiang Wei began his real grievance. 


e last say in everything. The times of the Emperor Ling 
d The Ten have returned. Your Majesty may recall Chang 
ng or Chao Kao, but if you will only slay this man the Court 
ill be purified and you may return gloriously to the home of 
our fathers.” . 

The king smiled.: “Huang Hao is but a minor servant, one 
who runs errands for me. If he tried to do as you say, he 
‘could not. I always wondered why Tung Yün seemed to hate 
_ poor, Hao so much. I pray you, noble Sir, to take no notice of 
him.’ 

- “Unless Your Majesty gets rid of him, evil is very close,” 
aid Chiang, beating his head upon the ground. 


my one poor eunuch?’ 


When he approached the pavilion, the king told him to ask 
ardon of Chiang Wei. 

Huang Hao prostrated himself and wept, saying, “I am 
always in attendance upon the Sacred One; that is all I do. I 
never meddle in state affairs. I pray you, General, to pay no 
heed to what people say. If you desire my death, I am in 
Da, -your hands, but pity me.’ 

And tears ran down his cheeks. Chiang Wei went away in 
li humour. Outside he sought his friend Ch‘i Chéng and told 


him what had happened. 


“I shall certainly have to put this eunuch fellow out of the ig 


à; “Hush! You are the successor of the great minister, the Y 


However, soon after this Chiang, with a small party, got 
unuch in the gardens. They told Huang Hao, who at once 
1imself, saying, “Why did Your Majesty recall me? I had the ` 
c) The king hummed and hawed, but made no reply. Then 


“This Huang Hao is wicked and artful and seems to have AH 


_ The king replied, “If you love anyone, you want him to live; ; 
f you dislike him, you, desire his death; can you not bear with if 


He bade one of the attendants go and call Huang Hao. 


568 Dan Kuo, or 


“General, you are in grave danger,” said Ch‘. “And if 


you fall, the country falls with you.” 


“Can you advise me?” said Chiang. “How can I secure the à 


state and myself?” 


Ch‘i replied, “There is a place of refuge for you in Shénsi, — 
and that is Miaochung. It is a rich country, and you can make Pie 
` a cantonment there like the Marquis of Wu did. Request the © 
Emperor to let you go thither. You can gather in corn for ` 


your armies, you can.secure all the west of Shénsi, you can 


keep Wei from troubling Hanchung, you will retain your 
military authority, so that no one will dare intrigue against 


you, and you will be safe. Thus you can ensure the safety of pa 


the state and yourself. You should lose no time.” 


“Your speech is gold and jewels,” said Chiang Wei, grate-- 


fully. 


obtained the king’s consent. Then he returned to Hanchung, 
- assembled his officers and told them his plans. - 
“Our many expeditions have failed to TES success owing 


Without loss of time, Chiang memorialised the throne and — 4 


‘to lack of supplies. Now I am about to take eight legions to — a 


Miaochung to form a cantonment and grow corn ready for the _ 
next expedition. You are spent with much fighting and may 
now repose while collecting grain and guarding Hanchung. ~— 
The armies of Wei are from home and have to drag their grain — 


over the mountains. They will be worn out with the labour 


and must soon retire. That will be the time to ‘smite them, 


and suecess must be ours.’ Oe 


Hu Chi was set over Hanshouch‘éng, Wang Han oven 


Yoch‘éng, Chiang Pin over Hanch‘éng and Chiang Shu with 


Fu Ch‘ien went to guard the passes. After these arrange- Ee 
ments had been made, Chiang Wei went off to Miaochung to 


grow grain and mature his plans, _ 
Téng Ai heard of these dispositions and discovered that the 


armies of Shu were distributed in two score camps, each | 
connected with the next like the joints of a huge serpent. He © 
sent out his spies to survey the country, and they made a 


map which was sent to the capital. 


But when the Duke of Chin saw the memorial and the map, Be? 


he was very angry. 
“This Chiang Wei has invaded our country many times, and 


we have been unable to destroy him. He is the one sorrow of — 


my heart.” EZ, 


Said Chia Ch‘ung, “He has carried on the work of Kung. 
ming only too thoroughly, and it is hard to force him back. 
What you need is some crafty. bravo to assassinate him, so = ; 


remove this constant menace of war.’ 


But Hstin Hsü said, “That is not the way. Liu Ch'an, a 


ae 


NS: sage ge 
E PE chat a arn aaa aes 


es Sean 
za aeie iD 


King of Shu, is steeped in dissipation and has given all his 
confidence to one favourite, the eunuch Huang Hao. The — 


her ee of state es ae a solely with their own 

ga ety and Chiang Wei has gone to Miaochung only that he 

May save his life. If you send an able leader, victory is 

certain. Where is the need for an assassin’s dagger ?” 

~ “These are excellent words,” said Ssima Chao, with a laugh, 
“but if T would attack Shu where is the leader?” 


; him Chung Hui as his second, and the thing is done.” 


against Wu; can you go?” w 
My lord’s design is not against Wu, but Shu,” was his reply. 


“But how would you conduct an expedition against Shu?” 
“Thinking that my lord would desire to attack Shu, I have 
lready prepared plans. Here they are.’ 
_ He laid out his maps, and thereon were shown the camps, 
and storehouses and roads all complete. 

Sstma was highly pleased.& “You are an excellent leader,” 
sa dhe. “What say you to going with Téng Ai?” 


st of operations. Teng Ai can be sent along another line.” 
Chung Hui was given the title of “Conqueror of the West” 


within the pass dnd control of the armies of Ch‘ing, Hsü, Yen, 
Yu, Ching and Yang. At the same time a commission was 
sent to Téng Ai giving him command of the forces without 


me for an attack on Shu was settled. 

_ When Sstma Chao was settling the plans in the court, the 
General Téng Tun said, “Why are you sending our armies into 
a distant and dangerous country and thus inviting trouble? 
Chiang Wei has invaded this country many times, and the 
wars have cost us many lives: We should rather seek safety 
in defence. ‘te 

“I am sending a righteous army against an unrighteous 
king; how dare you oppose my designs?” 


forthwith, and they soon returned to lay his head at the foot 
of the steps. This Eoo all those present, and they 
rned pale. 

_ Ssuma said, “It is six years since I conquered the east, and 
the six years have been spent in preparation. I have long 
intended to reduce both Wu and Shu. Now I will destroy 
Shu, and then like a flood I will descend upon Wu and conquer 


nine legions in the garrison of the capital, four or five on the 
frontier, while Chiang Wei has about six in his cantonments. 


A AAN 


“Téng Ai is the ablest leader of the day,” said Hsiin. “Give 


“Exactly what I think,” said Ssiima. So he summoned : 
Chung Hui and said to him, “T desire to send you as leader Ds 


“How well you know my inmost thought!” said Sstima. 


=- “Sstch‘uan is large, and there is space for more than one 


nd the insignia of a Commander-in-chief over the forces | 


1e pass, with the title of “Conqueror of the West.” And the 


He ordered the executioners to put Téng Tun to death. 


that. Thus will I destroy both Kuo and Yü. I can tell very © 
nearly what forces they have in Shu. There are eight or 


“Hiomance of the Three Wingdams 569 


into the east.” 


570 San hus žá 
einst them we can pit ten legions under Têng Ai, EEGA 
_ to hold Chiang Wei and keep him from moving east, and Chung 
Hui has twenty or thirty legions of veterans. And they will — 
go in three divisions straight into Hanchung. The King of 
Shu is a blind fool with his frontier cities in ruins, his | 
courtiers and women quaking with fear. He will not. Jast» i 
long.” \ 
The assembly praised this Fana ys 
Chung Hui marched as soon as he received his seal of office 
Lest his real object should be known, he gaye out that his 
force was directed against Wu, and to give colour to the 
pretence he had many large ships put in hand. He also sen 
-T‘ang Tzii to Ténglai and along the sea coast to collect vessels. 
Even his chief, Sstma, was deceived and called him to. asks . 
why he was collecting ships. 
He replied, “If Shu hears that we intend to attack the weś 
they will ask assistance from Wu. So I pretend to attack Wu 
and they will not dare to move under a year. When Shu 
beaten, the ships will be ready and useful for an expedit 


Sstma was pleased. The day chosen for the march was thi 
third day of the seventh mouth. Sstima escorted his leader 
out of the city for ten li and then took his leave. 

A certain Shao T“, the “Western Ts‘ao-chiian,” whisperec ad” 
a word of warning. 

“My lord has sent Chung Hui with a large army again 
Shu. I think he is too ambitious to be trusted with a 
powers?” ) 

“Think you I do not know?” said Ssiima. 

“Then why have you sent him alone and without | : 
colleague Say A ee 


at rest. 


Chung went alone, although his master knew, 
Occasion serving, he would be untrue. 


The next chapter will tell the reader what Shao T'i heard, itll 


M 


~. 


i 
j 
Í 
B 
; 
l 
; 
s 
H 
fi 


CHAPTER CXVI. 


URUNG HUI Dnm His Wane 
APPARITION OF Wu Hou. | 


‘ The words whispered in the ear of Shao Ti proved Ssitma’ s 
subtlety. Said he, “This morning they all maintained that 
hu should not be attacked, because they are timid. Buta 
determined attack will defeat them. You saw Chung Hui 
ras set upon his plan, and he is not afraid. Shu must there- 
ore be beaten, and then the people’s hearts will be torn. a: 
eaten leaders cannot boast, and the officers of a broken state _ 
re no fit guardjans of its welfare. When Chung turns — 
gainst us, the men of Shu will not ‘support him, and our 
en being victors they will wish to return home and will not | 
ollow their leader into revolt. Hence there is nothing to be 
eared, I know this, as you do, ‘but it must remain our 


Shao: iy understood. 
In his camp, just prior to his march, Chung’ ui assembled 
his officers, four score of them and many bearing: well-known 
names, to receive orders. 
“Firstly I-want a leader of the van,’ > said he. “He must 4 
be skilled in making roads and repairing bridges.” RAN 
_ “J will take that post,” said a voice, and the speaker was _ 
Heii I, son of the “Tiger Leader” Hsü Chu. Ay 
à “Nobody is fitter,” cried all present. = Het ih 
“You shall have the seal,” said Chung. “You are lithe and — 
strong and have the renown of your father to maintain. © 
Beside, all your colleagues recommend you. Your force shall — 
be half a legion of cavalry and a company of footmen. You 
are to march into Hanchung in three divisions, the centre one 
going through Hsieh Valley, the other two passing through 
‘Lo and Tztwu Valleys. You must level and repair the roads, 
put the bridges in order, bore tunnels and break away rocks. 
Use all diligence, for any delay will entail punishment.” 
` Hsü I was told to set out immediately, and his chief would 
start as soon as possible. | 
As soon as Téng Ai received his orders to attack Shu he © 
sent Sstima Wang to enlist the aid of the Chiang. Next he 
summoned the Prefects of the various districts, and soon 
poldiers gathered i in Shénsi like clouds. 


STZ Tie San Kuo, or > 


One night Téng dreamed a dream wherein he was. climbing 
a lofty mountain on the way into Hanchung. | Suddenly | ax 
spring of water gushed out at his feet and boiled up with a 
great force so that he was alarmed. apis 
He awoke all in a sweat and did not y again, but ant ee 


awaiting the dawn. At daybreak he summoned Shao Huan, 


who was skilled in the Book of Changes, told him the dream 
and asked the interpretation. 

He replied, “According to the book, ‘water on a mountain’ 
signifies the diagram Ch‘ien, whereunder we find that the 
south-west augurs well, but the north-east is unpropitious. 
The Sage said of Chien that it meant advantage in the south- 


west, ï.e., success; but the north-east spelt failure, i.e., there 


was no road. In this expedition, General, you will overcome T 
but you will be checked before you can proceed far.” 


Téng listened, growing more and more sad as the interpret- 


ation of his dream was unfolded. Just then came despatches  — 
from Chung Hui asking him to advance into Hanchung and — 
take Ch‘i. He at once sent Chuko Hsti, Governor of Yung 
chou, to cut off Chiang Wei’s retreat, and sent other bodies — 


` against the various cantonments. Têng Ai took command of 


a force to go to and fro and reinforce whatever body needed — 
help. PRE 
Ail the officials came out to see Chung depart. It wasa — 


grand sight, the gay banners shutting out the sun, breast- — es. 
plates and helmets glittering. ‘The men were fit ‘and the 


horses in good condition. They all felicitated the leader. 
All save one; for Liu Shih was silent. He smiled grimly. 


Then Wang Hsiang made his way through the crowd and ar 


said, “Do you think these two. will overcome Shu?” i 
“They will overcome Shu certainly, only I think netics K 
will ever come back.” ; f Pi 
“Why do you say that?” vie 
But Liu did not reply; he only smiled. And the aueia e 
was not repeated. E 
The armies of Wei were on the mE before Chiang Wei ; 
heard of the intended attack. He at once sent up a memorial — 
asking that certain defensive arrangements be made. Chang — 
I and Liao Hua were to command at the two most important ~- 
points, upon which depended the security of Hanchung. He 44 
also sent to engage the help of Wu, and gathered soldiers in ` 
Miaochung ready for defence. ve 
That year in Shu the reign-style had been changed to the — 
first year of Yen-Hsing. When the memorial came to the ~ 
king it found him as usual amusing himself with his favourite — 
Huang Hao. He read the document and said to the eunuch, > 
pate Chiang Wei says that the Wei armies under Téng Ai S 
and Chung Hui are on the way against us. What shall we 
9 a 


4 name for himself, and so he says this. Your Majesty 
eed feel no alarm, for we can. find out the truth from a 
ay AER woman I know. Sheis a real prophetess. May 
aC er?” ; 


~The king consented, and a room was fitted up for the séance. 


is RTA of the sort. Chiang Wei. buy wants to. 


They prepared therein ‘incense, flowers, paper, candles, . 


carriage to beg the wise woman to attend upon the king. 
king had kindled the incense and repeated the prayer, the 


‘a id. capered about barefoot. After several rounds of this she 
oiled herself up on a table. 


Send everyone away and pray to her.” 


of Wei shall come under you, wherefore you need not be 
sorrowful.” À 


r believed all she told him. The immediate result was 
t Chiang’s memorial remained unanswered, and as the 
king was wholly given to pleasure it was jeasy for the eunuch 
ntercept all urgent memorials from the general. 


-The van-leader Hsii I was anxious to perform some startling 
ploit, and so he led his force to Nanchéng Pass. 

He said to his officers, “If we can take this pass then we 
an ‘march directly into Hanchung; the defence is weak.” 


(0 be first. But the commander was Lu Hsün, and he had had 


ides of the bridge he posted men armed with multiple bows 
and crossbows. As soon as the attacking force appeared, the 
gnal was given by a clapper and a terrific discharge of 
rows and bolts opened. Many men fell, and the army of 
“Wei was defeated. 

` Hsiin I returned and reported his misfortune. Chung Hui 


~The eunuch then said, “The spirit has now descended. oe 


ee the attendants were cS and the king entreated | 


3 a ive: abont. other dere Within a few years the land 


ay and gave her large presents. Further, he there- 


-A dash was made for the fort, each one vying with the rest — 


‘Sacrificial articles and so on, and then the eunuch went with me 
She came and was seated on a dragon couch. ` After the | 


se woman suddenly let down her hair, dropped her slippers — 


She then fell to the Blond as in a swoon, and it was some 


‘Meanwhile Chung Hui was hastening toward Hanchung. i 


arly information of the coming of his enemies. So on both 


himself went with a few horse to see the conditions. Again . 
ae machine bows let fly clouds of missiles, and Chung turned. 


Sika pnp Ban kuo, or 


`. foot. As he ran down the slope of the bridge Lu Hsün c 
Seeing this lucky hit, Chung turned back and signalled to his- 


with the enemy, and soon the pass was in the hands of the 


-to the guards and received presents of a horse and a suit of À 


special duty was to see that the bridges were in good condition 


I nearly fell. Happily Hsün K‘ai was by, or I had been sl 
-You have been disobedient and must bear the penalty.” 


defensive with the gates of the cities closed: 


through so that he was nearly thrown. The pea coul 
free his hoof, and Chung slipped from his back and fled on 


at him with a spear, but one of Chung’s followers, Hsiin Kai 
by name, shot an arrow at him and brought him to the earth. 


men to make an attack. They came on with a dash, the 
defenders were afraid to shoot, as their men were mingled 


Wei men. The defenders scattered. i 
The pass being captured, Hsiin K‘ai was well romans “by ; 
the shot that had saved his general’s life. He was promoted 


armour. ; 

Hsün I was called to the tent, -and the general oeae him ale 
for the lack of care in his task. “You were appointed leader 
of the van to see that the roads were put in repair, and your 


Yet on the bridge just now my horse’s hoof was caught, and 


The delinquent was sentenced to death. The other adi 
tried to beg him off, but the general was obdurate, rejecting 
even the plea of the good services rendered by Hsün’s father 

“How can discipline be maintained if the laws are no 
enforced?” said he. ; Sh 

‘The sentence was carried out, and the opt man’s head 


hearts of the officers. 
On the side of Shu, Wang Han Ghanian at Loch‘éng n 

Chiang Pin was in Hanchung. As the enemy came in great 

force, they dared not go out to meet them, but stood on m 


i Ce Hui issued an order, “Speed is the soul of war} n 
alts.” 
Li Fu was ordered to lay siege to Loch‘eng, and Hsiin K'a ‘ 
was to surround Hanch‘eng. The main army would captur 
Yangp‘ing Pass. 
Fu Ch‘ien commanded at the pass. He discussed plans wit 
his second in command, and this latter was wholly in favou 
of defence, saying that. ‘the enemy was too strong to think o 
any other course. l 
“I do not agree, replied Fu. “They are now fatigued with: 
marching, and we need not fear them. Unless We go put anid ; 
attack, the two cities will fall.” ey 


enemy arrived, and both officers went up to the wall and roka ce 
out.. As soon as Chung Hui saw them he shouted, “We have 
here a host of ten legions. If you yield you shall have higher. s 


Sra pia 
Ries Midas cand 


patil 


Hiomance of the Three Hingdoms 


ih 
y tet 
n Kal 
rf 


nk than you hold now, but if you persist in holding out | 
en, when we take the pass, you shall all perish. Jewels and _ 
pebbles will share the same destruction.” Dae Ben ie te 
This threat angered Fu. He bade his lieutenant guard the | 
_ walls, and he went down to give battle, taking three companies. 
He attacked, and Chung fled; Fu pursued. But soon the army 
of Wei closed up their ranks and stood. Fu turned to retire, __ 
_but when he reached his own defences he saw they flew the 
_ flags of Wei; the banners of Shu had gone. TY Onan ea Se 
_ “I have yielded,” cried Chiang Shu from the ramparts. — 
_ Fu reviled him as ungrateful and treacherous, but that 
did no good. He turned to go once more into the battle. He — 
was soon surrounded. He fought desperately, but could not 
win clear. His men fell one by one, and when they were 
reduced to about half a score he cried, “Alive I have beena 
servant of Shu; dead I will be one of their spirits.” ai AASR 
_ He forced his way into the thickest of the fight. Then his ` 
_ steed fell, and as he was grievously wounded he put an end to 


his own life. set ; ree. 
a The loyalty Fu showed in stressful days Bae 
. Won him a thousand autumns’ noble praise; lM 
The base Chiang Shu lived on, a life disgraced, ws i 
; I would prefer the death that Fu Ch‘ien faced. ea 
_ With the pass fell into the hands of Chung great booty of 
grain and weapons. He feasted the army, and that night they 
rested in Yangan City. However, the night was disturbed by 
sounds as of men shouting, so that the leader got up and went 
out thinking there must be an attack. But the sounds ceased, = 
_and he returned to his couch. However, he slept no more. > = 
Next night the same thing happened, shoutings in the south- 
west. As soon as day dawned scouts went out to search, but 
. they came back to say they had gone ten li and found no sign 
of any person. Chung did not feel satisfied, so he took a few 
_ cavalrymen and rode in the same direction to explore. 
_ Presently they happened upon a hill of sinister aspect over- 
hung by a dismal cloud, while the summit was wreathed in 
Ai mist. 4 $ ) Nat ea 
- “What hill is that?” asked Chung, pulling up to question 
the guides. _ ; i í Lee 
“Tt is known as Tingchtinshan, “The hill of the Halted — 
_ Army,’” was the reply. “It is where Hsiahou Yiian met his — 
death.” MEOE RA oien 
This did not sound cheering at all, and Chung turned back 
~ to camp greatly depressed. Rounding the curve of a hill, he 
came full into a violent gust of wind and there suddenly 
appeared a large body of horse coming down the wind as if 
to attack. ‘tae } ; 
. The whole party galloped off panic-stricken, Chung leading 
the way. Many captains fell from their steeds. Yet when 


“te O 


576 et: an uo, or, 


they arrived at the pass not a-man was missing, although 
there were many with bruises and cuts from the falls and_ Ro 
` many had lost helmets. Everyone had seen phantom horse- > = 
` men, who did no harm when they came near, but melted away . i 
in the wind. CA 

Chung Hui called Chiang Shu and asked if there was any — 
-temple -to any supernatural being on Tingchünshan. NE, 

“No,” replied he; “there is nothing but the tomb of Chuko > 
Liang.” w 

“Then this must have been a manifestation of the noble E 
Chuko,” said Chung. “I ought to sacrifice to him.” 

So he prepared presents and slew an ox and offered 
sacrifice at the tomb, and when the sacrifice had been complet-: 
ed the wind calmed, and the dark clouds dispersed. There — 
followed a cool breeze and a gentle shower, and the sky — 
cleared. Pleased with the evidence of the acceptance of their 
offerings, the sacrificial party returned to camp. J) eae 

That night Chung fell asleep in his tent with his head _ 
resting on a small table. Suddenly a cool breeze began to — 
‘blow, and he saw a figure approaching clad in Taoist garb, — 
turban, feather fan, white robe of Taoist cut bound with a = 
black girdle. The countenance of the figure was pale and 
refined, the lips a deep red and the eyes clear. The figure 
moved with the calm serenity of a god. Maks Sis 

“Who are you, Sir?” asked Chung, rising. it 

“Out of gratitude for your kindly visit this morning, Lire 
would make a communication. Though the Hans have declin- — 
ed and the mandate of the Eternal cannot be disobeyed, yet — 
the people of the west, exposed to the inevitable miseries of 
war, are to be pitied. After you have passed the frontier — 
do not slay ruthlessly.” mere 

Then the figure disappeared with a flick of the sleeves of 
its robe, nor would it stay to answer any questions. RAE 

Chung awoke and knew that he had been dreaming, but hes 
felt that the spirit of the great Marquis of War had Visited nooi 
him, and he was astonished. 44 ei 

He issued an order that the leading division of his army 
should bear a white flag with four words plainly written 
_ thereon, “Secure state, comfort people,” so that all might know 
that no violence was to be feared. If anyone was slain ~— 
wantonly, then the offender should pay with his own life. ~ 
This tender care was greatly appreciated, so that the invaders 
were welcomed. Chung Hui soothed the people, and they — 
suffered no injury. 


a 


Those phantom armies circling in the gloom 
Moved Chung to sacrifice at Chuko’s tomb; 

For Liu had Chuko wrought unto the end, © 
Though dead, he would Liu’s people still defend. 


yared to repulse them if they came to his station. | 
_Soon they came, and he went out to encounter them. 
heir leader was the Prefect of T‘ienshui, Wang Ch‘i by 
ame. When near enough, Wang shouted: “Our forces are 
numbered ‘by millions, our captains by thousands. _ Twenty 
legions are marching against you, and Ch‘éngtu has already 


ident you do not recognise the divine command.” 

Chiang Wei cut short this tirade by galloping out with his 
ear set. Wang stood three bouts and then fled. Chiang 
rsued, but a score of li away he met a cohort drawn up 
ross the road. On the banner he read that the leader was 
jien Hung, Prefect of Shénsi. 

Despising this antagonist, he led his men straight on, and 
e enemy fell back. He drove them before him for some 
stance, and then came upon Téng Ai. A battle at once 
gan, and the lust of battle held out in the breast of Chiang 
si or a score of bouts. - 

‘But neither could overbear the other. Then in the rear 
arose the clang of gongs and other signs of coming foes. 
hiang retired the way he had come, and presently one came 
o report the destruction of his camps at Kansung. 

Ta This was evil tidings. He bade his lieutenants keep his own 
dard flying and hold Têng while he went to try to recover 
camps. On the way he met Yang Hsin, the worker of 


and made for the hills. Chiang followed till he came to a 
precipice down which the enemy were hurling boulders and 
ogs of wood so that he. could not pass. 

_ He turned to go back to the battle-field he had just left, but 
on the way he met the army of Wei, for Téng had overcome 
s lieutenants. He was surrounded, but presently got clear 
~ with a sudden rush and hastened to the great camp. 


i eachery of Chiang Shu and the death of Fu Ch‘ien. The 
=- messenger added ‘that Hanchung was now in the possession of 
_ Wei, and Loch‘éng and Hanch‘éng had also opened their gates 
„and "yielded to the invaders. Hu Ch‘i had gone to the capital 
for help. 


for the frontier. An army barred his way, and again he was 
forced to fight, this time with Yang Hsin. Chiang rode out 
a great rage, and as Yang fled he shot at him thrice, but 
his arrows missed. 

Throwing aside his bow, he gripped his spear and set off in 


37 


allen. In spite of this you do not yield, wherefore it is — 


Next came news of the loss of Yangp‘ing Pass and the 


This greatly Daaba Chiang, so he broke camp ana set out 


pursuit, but his horse tripped and fell, and Chiang lay on the 


) oa at eame koed of the invasion and wrote - is 
his three Captains to march against the enemy, while he 


ne ee a are, Cae 


m chief, but Yang had no stomach for a fight with Chiang 


578 San Huo, or , 


ground. Yang turned to slay his enemy now that he was on > 
foot, but Chiang wounded Yang’s horse in the head. Others a 


coming up. rescued Yang. 


Mounting another steed, Chiang was just setting out again a 
in pursuit when they reported that 'Têng Ai was coming 


against his rear. Realising that he could not cope with this 


new force, Chiang collected his men in order to retreat into — P 


Hanchung:- However, the scouts reported another army in 


the way holding Yinp’ing Bridge, so he halted and made a — 
camp in the mountains. Advance and retreat seemed equally — 
impossible, and he cried in anguish, “Heaven is destroying 


me!” 


Then said Ning Sui, one of his captains, “If our enemies. ae 
are guarding Yinp‘ing Bridge they can only have left a weak _ 
force in Yungchou. We can make believe to be going thither ae 


through the K‘unghan Valley and so force them to abandon 


the bridge in order to protect the city. When the bridge is 
clear, you can make a dash for Chienko and hold out there 


while the army retires into Hanchung.”’ 
This plan seemed to promise success, so they marched ito 
the valley, making as though they would go to Yungchou. 


= When Chuko Hsii, who was at the bridge, heard this he  __ 
was afraid that his own city, and his headquarters, would be _ 
lost and that he would be punished, so he set off to its relief 


by the south road. He left only a small force at the bridge. 


Chiang marched along the north road till he guessed that. a 


Chuko Hsiin had abandoned the bridge, when he retraced his 


steps. He dispersed the small force left at the bridge head 


and burned their camp. Chuko, as he marched, saw the Ni 


flames, and he turned back to the bridge, but he arrived too 


late. The army of Shu had already crossed, and he dared — 


not pursue. 
Soon after Chiang crossed the bridge he saw another force, 


but this was led by his own captains, Chang and Liao. They — 


told him that Huang Hao, firm in his faith in the wise woman, 


would not send help to defend the frontiers: They had come 4 
on their own initiative. They also reported the capture of 


Yangp‘ing Pass. 
The two armies amalgamated and marched together. 


` Liao Hua said, “We are attacked all round, and it seems to j 


me wisest to retire on Chienko.” 


But Chiang Wei was doubtful. Then they heard. that i 
enemies were approaching in ten divisions. Chiang was 
disposed to stand, but Liao Hua said the country was too _ 


difficult to fight in with any hope of success, and again urged 
the wisdom of falling back on Chienko. 


Nn Le ey 


EA nee 
ae LA 
e244. + 


a: ee 


a aie 


4 


q 


EY 


4 ling and saw 
fold thom that the pass was pol 


i Ha chung, that strong defence is lost, 


hat force was at the pass will be told in the ee chapte . 


si 


CHAPTER CXVII. 


TENG GETS THROUGH: YINP‘ING PASS; 
CHUKO DIES AT MIENCHU. _ 


The soldiers, whose coming had at first alarmed Chun wi 
Wei, were, however, from his own country, part of a force 

brought to the frontier by Tung Chüeh when he heard of th 
invasion from Wei. Two legions had. been sent to Chienko 
and when the dust showed an PPPE army me ee 


to be stopped. Cae 

When Tung found that the. newcomers’ were friends, ka let 
them pass through and gave them the news from the cap 
bad news of the deeds of both the king and the eu 
favourite. i 

“But do not grieve,” said Chiang Wei, “so long as o ve | 
will not allow Wei to come and conquer Shu.” 

They kept good guard at Chienko while they discuss d 
future plans. Ai 

“Though we are holding this pass, yet Ch‘éngtu is well-n gh 
empty of soldiers,” said Tung Chüeh. “If it was Mad it, 
would go crack!” 

Chiang Wei replied, “The natural defences are exce 
it is hard to cross over the mountains and climb the 
roads. No one need fear.” — i 

Soon after this, Chuko Hsti appeared at the pass challata F 
the defenders. Chiang Wei forthwith placed himself at the 
head of a half legion and went down to meet him. He gainec 
an easy victory, slaying many of the enemy and taking DN 
spoil in horses and weapons. 

While Chiang went back to the pass, the defeated gene 
made his way to Chung Hui’s camp to on his fail 
His general was very angry. 

“My orders to you were to hold Yinp‘ing Bridge so as 
stop Chiang Wei, and you lost it. Now without any ots 
you attack and are defeated.” Wt 

“Chiang Wei played so many deceitful tricks. He pretende d 
to be going to take Yungchou, and, I thought that was ve yS 
important, so I sent troops to rescue it. Then he meanly got 
away. I followed to the pass, but never thought he Woi {o 
come out and defeat my men.’ i 


vi 


j! pleaded thus, but he was sentenced to die. Now 
nuko was really a subordinate of Téng Ai and, admitting 
t he was in fault, his punishment should not have been — K 
ronounced by Chung Hui. But when Wei Kuan mentioned 
at as a reason for reprieve, Chung Hui swaggeringly replied, 
“I have a command from the Emperor and orders from the 
_ Prime Minister to attack Shu; if Téng Ai himself offended I — 
would behead him.” > HE a meee 
__ However, in spite of these big words, he did not put Chuko — 
to death, but sent him a prisoner to the capital to be judged. - 
he surviving men were added to Chung Hui’s army. - A 
This insolent speeech of Chung Hui was duly repeated to — 
Téng Ai, who was angry in his turn and said, “His rank and | 
ine are the same. I have held a frontier post for years and  —_ 
stained many fatigues in the country’s service. Whois he ` 
that he gives himself such airs?” , Bi Gath uae 
His son Chung endeavoured to appease his wrath. “Father, = 
you cannot suffer small things you may upset the grand | 
olicy of the state. Unfriendliness with him may do great mat: 
arm, so I hope you will bear with him.” . cv 


K 


Têng Ai.saw he was right, and said no more; but he 
urished anger in his heart. With a small escort he went to | 
l upon his colleague. When his coming was announced, = 
hung Hui asked his staff how many men were following Téng = 
“He has only half a score of horsemen,” they replied. dps 
Jhung Hui had a large body of men drawn up about his tent, 


nd then gave orders that his visitor should be led in. Téng 
i dismounted, and the two men saluted each other. But the © : 4 


itor did not like the look on the faces of his hosts guard. | 

e decided to find put what Chung Hui was thinking. Z 

“The capture of Hanchung is a piece of excellent fortune E 

for the state,” said he. “The capture of Chienko can now be ui 
accomplished easily.” ROTA 

“What is your own idea, General?” asked Chung Hui. phi 

_ Téng Ai tried to evade answering the question, but could 

not. Chung Hui pressed him to reply. Finally he said, “In | 

my simple opinion one might proceed by by-roads from the 

pass through Hanchung to _Yangt‘ing, and thence make a- 

surprise march. Chiang Wei must go to its defence, and you, 

- General, can take Chienko.” 

“A very good plan,” said Chung Hui. “You may start 

forthwith, and I will wait here till I hear news of your success,” 

= They drank, and Téng took his leave. Chung Hui went 

back to his own tent filled with contempt for Téng’s plan, 

- which he thought impracticable. _ 

-= “They say Téng Ai is able; I think he is of most ordinary 

capacity,” said he to his officers. 

“But why?” said they. 


582 Aan Hus, or \ 


“Because the by-roads by Yinp‘ing are imbasdable! nothing ae 


but lofty mountains and steep hills. A hundred defenders 
at a critical point could cut all communications, and Téng Ai’s 


men would starve to death. I shall go by the direct road, and — | 


there is no fear about the result. I shall overcome Shu.’ 
So he prepared scaling ladders and balliste and set himself 
to besiege Chienko. 


Téng Ai went out to the main gate of the court. While a 
mounting, he said to his followers, “What did Chung Hui 


think of me?” 
“He looked as though he held a poor opinion of what you 


had said, General, and disagreed with you, although his words 


were fair enough. 


it. 


He was received at his own camp by Shih Tsuan and his 
son, and a party of others of his captains, and they asked — 


what the conversation had been about. 


“T told him simple truth, but he thinks I am just a common 
person of no ability to speak of. He regards the capture of 


Hanchung as an incomparable feat of arms. Where would 


he have been if I had not held up Chiang Wei? But I think ser 


the capture of Ch‘éngtu will beat that of Hanchung.” 


That night camp was broken up, and they set out upon a 


march of seven hundred li along the hill paths. At that 


distance from Chienko they were to make a permanent camp. — ce 


Chung Hui laughed at the attempt. \ 


From his camp Têng Ai sent a secret letter to Ssima Chao. 
Then he called his officers to his tent and asked them, saying oeoa 
“I am going to make a dash for Ch‘éngtu while it is still ~ 


undefended, and success will mean unfading glory for us all. 
Will you follow me?” 
“We will follow you and obey your orders, 


7) 


cried they all. 


So the final dispositions were made. Têng Chung went 


first to improve the road. His men wore no armour, but they 
had axes and boring tools. They were to level roads and 
build bridges. 

Next went three legions furnished with dry grain and ropes. 


At every three hundred li they were to make a post of three 


companies. 
In the autumn they left Yinp‘ing, and in the emh month 


they were in most precipitous country. They had taken 
twenty-seven days to travel seven hundred Ji. They ‘were Viv ania 


an uninhabited country. After garrisoning the various posts 


on the way, they had only two companies left. Before them | 
stood a range named Mot‘ien Ling, which no horse could ascend. | 


Téng Ai climbed up on foot to see his son and the men with 
him opening up a road. They were exhausted with tee 
and weeping. 


SS 


“He thinks I, cannot take Ch‘éngtu; and so I will take i 


eee ee 
es a ee 


hy reas 


Sp oy 


e7 
we 2 
pee > oe Te 


Pca Ol eee ee 


êng Ai aked TIA they were so sad, and hig son. Nantied. 
‘We have found an impassable precipice away to the north- 
west which we cannot get through. All our labour has been 
n vain.’ 

Teng Ai said, “We have got over seven hundred li and just 
-beyond is Chiangyu: we cannot go back. How-can one get 
tiger cubs except by going into tiger caves? Here we are, 
and it will be a very great feat to capture Ch‘éngtu.” 


pice. First they threw over their weapons; then the leader 
wrapped himself in blankets and rolled over the edge, next 
the captains followed him, also wrapped in blankets. Those 


They came across a stone by the roadside. It borea myster- 
us inscription composed by Chuko Diang. Translated 
rera it read :— 
“Two fires first set out, 

Men pass by here, 


Two soldiers compete 
Both soon die.” 


+ Teng Ai was perplexed. Presently he ee before the 
stone and prayed to the spirit of Chuko Liang. 
KO: Marquis, immortal. I grieve that I am not thy worthy 


The rugged lofty mountain peaks 
Of Yinp‘ing, pierce the sky, 
The sombre crane with wearied wing 
Can scarcely o’er them fly. 
Intrepid Téng in blankets wrapped 
~ Rolled down the craggy steep, 
His feat great Chuko prophesied 
By insight wondrous deep. 


“Note. —The interpretation of the inscription is as follows:— 
“Two fires” form the ideograph yen; “set out” is hsing; “first,” ee 
to the year. Thus the first line gives the date, “Yen- Hsing, first year.” 
The two men were Téng Ai and Chung Hui, rivals for glory. 
Having crossed this great range of mountains without 
- discovery, Téng Ai marched forward. Presently he came to 
_ a roomy camp, empty and deserted. He was told that while 
~- Chuko Liang lived two companies. had been kept in garrison 
at this point of danger, but King Ch‘an had withdrawn them. 
i; Têng Ai sighed at the thought. 
~ He said to his men, “Now retreat is impossible, there is no 
road back. Before you lies Chiangyu with stores in abund- 
ance. Advance and you live, retreat and you die. You must 
fight with all your strength. ” 
$ Be aah fight to the death,” they cried. 


They all said they would go on. So they came to the preci- 


: as Sims pels y were let down by cords round the waist 


< 


J 


584 


two companies toward aes: L 

The commander at Chiangyu was Ma Yao. He) kerdi ESE 
east had fallen into the hands of the enemy. Though some- 
thing prepared for defence, yet his post had a wide area to cover ~- 
and guard, and he trusted Chiang Wei would defend Chienko. 
So he did not take his military duties very seriously, just — 
maintaining the daily drills and then going home to his Wife 
to cuddle up to the stove and drink. Ae 

His wife was of the Li family. When she heard of the state x 
of things on the frontier she said to her husband, “If there is 
so great danger on the borders, how is it you are se 
-unaffected ?” 


replied he.. | 
“Nevertheless, the general finally has to guard the ae ike 
and that is a heavy responsibility.” Y 
“O, well! The king trusts his favourite entirely and i is unk è 
in vice and pleasure. Disaster is very near, and if the Wei- 
armies get here I shall yield. Itis no good taking it seriously. N use 
“You call yourself a man! Have you such a disloyal an nE 
treacherous heart? Is it nothing to have held office and taken Bee 
pay for years? How can I bear to look upon your face?” _ 
Ma Yao was too ashamed to attempt to reply. Just t X 
his house servants came to tell him that Tene Ai, with his oe K 


already broken into the city. ; ii 
Ma was now frightened and hastily went out to find ie A 
leader and offer his formal submission. | ‘He went to the Town se 


come over to Wei. Now I yield ae and my army and all 
the town.” 

Têng Ai accepted his sutrnehder and incorporated Wa men ; 
with his own force. He took Ma into his service as guide. MEA 

In the meantime Ma’s wife had hanged herself, overcome 
with shame and mortification. Ma told Têng Ai why she had 
done it, and Têng, admiring her rectitude, gave orders for an 
honourabłe burial. He also went in person a sacrifice. 
Everyone extolled her conduct. ; 


When the King of Shu had wandered from the way, 
And the House of Han fell lower, 

The Lord sent Téng Ai to smite the land. ° 

Then did a woman show herself most noble, 

So noble in conduct, 

That no leader equalled her. 


As soon as Chiangyu was taken, the posts along the soa 
by which the army had come were ‘withdrawn, and there was — 
a general rendezvous at this point. This done, they - marched aie ‘ 
toward Fouch‘éng. ‘ 


3 n ET a tah. remonstrated, saying, “We aki just — 
nished a long and perilous march and are weary and worn 
ut. We ought to repose for a few days to recover.” i 
_ Téng Ai angrily replied, “Speed is the one important matter pat 
In war: do not encourage any discontent. I will not have it. 
_ He was sentenced to death, but as many officers interceded 
for him he was pardoned. li 
The army pressed on toward Fouch‘éng. As soon as ‘hey ; 
=- arrived, the officers yielded as if they thought Téng Ai had — 
fallen from the heavens. Some took the news to the capital, a 
and the king began to feel alarmed. He hastily called for his i 
= favourite, who at once denied the report. a 
poe spirits would not deceive Your Majesty,” said Huang ; 
ao 
The king summoned the wise woman to the palace, but the 
‘Messengers said she had gone no one knew whither. And now 
urgent memorials and letters fell in from every side like a 
‘snow storm, and messengers went to and fro in constant — 
- streams. The king called a Court to discuss the danger, but 
“no one had any plan or suggestion to offer. The courtiers | 
nes looked blankly into each other’s faces. ` 
Finally Ch‘i Chéng spoke out, “In this extremity Your 
Majesty’ should call in the help of the son of Marquis Wu.” = 
_This son of Chuko Liang, known as the Marquis of Wu after ~ 
father’s death, was named Chan. His mother was born ` 
of the Huang family. She was singularly plain and extraord- 
‘inarily talented. She had studied everything, even books of 
strategy and magic. Chuko. had married her because of her 
epee and she had shared his studies. She had pore 


Fad Deen to be loyal. i } 
"Chan had been known as a clever lad and had married a 
daughter of the king, so that he was a “Fu-ma.” His father’s 
rank had descended to him, and he had received general’s rank 
. in the guards as well. But he had retired when Huang Hao, 
= the eunuch, as first favourite, began to direct. state affairs. WEN, 

Si As suggested, the king summoned Chuko Chan to court, told 
itn the troubles that threatened the country and asked for 
some plan to save his throne. ae 
_ “My father and I owe too much to the late Emperor’s kind- vs 
‘ness for me to think any sacrifice too great to make for Your 
Majesty. I pray that you give me command of the troops in 
the capital, and I will fight a decisive battle.” 

So the soldiers, seven legions, were placed under his 
‘command. When he had gathered all together, he called the . 
fficers and asked for a volunteer for the vanguard. His son, 
Shang, then nineteen, offered himself. He had studied 

military books and made himself an adept in the various 


exercises. 


586 San Kus, or, 


So he was appointed, and the army marched to find the 
enemy. In the meantime the traitor, Ma Yao, had given Teng 


Ai very complete plans of the country showing the whole one- 


hundred and sixty li of road he had to traverse. However, 
Téng was dismayed when he saw the difficulties ahead of him. 
“If they defend the hills in front I shall fail, for if I am 
delayed Chiang Wei will come up, and my army will be in 
great danger.” 
‘The army must press on.” He called his son and Shih Tsuan 


and said, “Lead one army straight to Mienchu to keep back — . 


any Shu soldiers sent to stop our march. I will follow as soon 
as I can. But hasten; for if you let the enemy forestall you 
I will put you to death.” 

They went. Nearing Mienchu they met the army under 
Chuko ‘Chan. Both sides prepared for battle, the Shu armies 
adopted the pa-kua, or “Eight Diagrams” formation and 


presently, after the usual triple roll of drums, Shih and Téng 
saw their opponents’ ranks open in the centre, and therefrom 


emerge a light carriage in which sat a figure looking exactly 


as K‘ung-ming used to look when he appeared on the battle- — . 


field. Everybody knew the Taoist robes and the feather fan. 
The standard bore his name and titles too. 


ee 


i 


cio 


The sight was too much for the two leaders. The cold sweat — ae 


-of terror poured down them, and they stammered out, “If 
K‘ung-ming is still alive, that is the end of us.’ 

They retreated. The men of Shu came on, and the army of 
Wei was driven away in defeat and chased a distance of 


twenty li. Then the pursuers sighted Téng Ai and they | 


turned and retired. 


When Téng Ai had camped, he called the two leaders before ae 


him and reproached them for retreating without fighting. 


“We saw K‘ung-ming leading the enemy,” said Téng Chung, ~ 


“so we ran away.’ 

“Why should we fear, even if they bring K‘ung-ming to life 
again? You ran away ‘without cause, and we have lost. You 
ought both to be put to death.” 

However, they did not die. Their fellows pleaded for them, 
and Téng’s wrath was mollified. Then the scouts came in to 
say that the leader of the army was a son of K‘ung-ming, and 


they had set up on the carriage an image of the great 3 ‘a 


_ strategist. 


Téng Ai, however, said to the two, “This is the critical stage, . 


and if you ‘lose the next battle aoe will certainly lose your lives 
with it.” 
At the head of one leion they went out to battle once more. 


This. time they met the vanguard led by Chuko Shang, who > ae 


rode out alone, boldly offering to repulse the invaders. At 
Chuko Chan’s signal the two wings advanced and threw 


themselves against the line of Wei. The centre portion of the | 


ati 
daie ae 


aan ee 
ao eS 


p Ee ROAR 
NE SE J E S 


= | 
EER 


A Romante of the Three Hingdoms 587 


_. line met them and the battle went to and fro many times, till 
_ at length the men of Wei, after great losses, had to give way. 
_ Both the leaders being badly wounded, they fled and the army 
= of Shu pursued and drove the invaders into their camp. 

Shih and Teng had to acknowledge a new defeat, but when 
Téng Ai saw both were sorely wounded he forbore to blame 
them or decree any penalty. : 
To his officers he said, “This Chuko Chan well continues the 


ee We must defeat them, and that quickly, or we are © 
lost.” oY 


o> a-letter?” hrc 

_ Téng Ai agreed and wrote a letter, which he sent by the 
hand of a messenger. The warden of the camp gate led the 
messenger in to see Chuko Chan, who opened the letter and 
<- read:—“General Téng, ‘Conqueror of the West,’ writes to 
oe Chuko of the Guard, leader of the army in the 
field. 


_ you are not equal to your most honoured father. From the 
‘moment of his emergence from his retreat he said that the 
country was’to be in three divisions. He conquered Chiang- 
chou and Yichou and thus established a position. Few have 
-~ been his equal in all history. He made six expeditions from 
_. Ch‘ishan, and, if he failed, it was not that he lacked skill; it 
~ was the will of Heaven. But now this Latter Ruler is dull 
- and weak, and his kingly aura is already exhausted. I have- 
` a command from the Son of Heaven to smite Shu with severity, 

and I already possess the land. Your capital must quickly 
-~ fal. Why then do you not bow to the will of Heaven and fall 
in with the desires of men by acting rightly and coming over 
to our side? I will obtain the rank of Prince of Langya for 


- These are no vain words if happily you will consider them.” 
The letter made Chuko Chan furiously angry. He tore it to 
ee fragments and ordered the bearer thereof to be put to death 
_. immediately. He also ordered the escort to bear the head of 
-. their chief to the camp of Wei and lay it before Téng Ai. 

Téng Ai was very angry at this insult and wished to go 

` forth at once to battle. But Ch‘iu Pén dissuaded him. | 
~ . “Do not go out to battle,” said he, “rather overcome him by 
some unexpected stroke.” 

So Téng Ai laid his plans. He sent Wang Ch‘, Prefect of 
T‘ienshui, and Ch‘ien Hung, Prefect of Shénsi, to lie in wait 
in the rear while he led the main body. 
= —— Chuko Chan happened to be close at hand seeking battle, 
= — and when he heard the enemy was near he led out his army 
a eagerly and rushed into the midst of the invaders. Then Téng 


paternal tradition. Twice they have beaten us and slain great 


Then Ch‘iu Pén said, “Why not persuade their leader with > 


“Now having carefully observed your talent in attack, I see — : 


you, whereby your ancestors will be rendered illustrious. | 


W EE 
a DEA 4 ; 
ony i teak ae vat fe 
j 2 5 ay ae ý 
Y ERR V è 7 ] EAN BA a TAR 
BSS nr Aan Hus, ar Rie 


Ai fled as though worsted, so luring on Chuko. But when the — 
pursuit had lasted some time the pursuers were attacked by ' 
those who lay in wait and they were defeated. They ran away 
into Mienchu. ; 
À . Therefore Têng Ai hesieged Mienchu, and the meñ of Wee ih 
_ shouted about the city and watched the ramparts, thus T 
the defenders close shut in as if held in an iron barrel. 
-Chuko Chan was desperate, seeing no way of escape without 
“help from outside: Wherefore he wrote a letter to East Wu — 
~- begging for assistance, and he gave this letter to one Peng — 
Ho to bear through the besiegers. 

P‘éng fought his way through and reached Wu, where Hes 
saw King Hsiu. And he presented the letter showing | the Ei 
wretched plight of Chuko and. his urgent need. 

Then the king assembled his officers and said to them, “The 
land of Shu being in danger, I cannot sit ‘and look on 
unconcerned.” i 

He therefore decided to send five legions, over whom he oe 
_ the veteran captain Ting Féng, with two able lieutenants.. 
© Having received his edict, ‘the general sent away his lieutenants i J 
with two legions to Mienchung, and he himself went with Aas 
‘three legions toward Shouch‘un. The army marched in three 
divisions. 

In the city Chuko Chan waited for the rescue hicks never 
came. Weary of the hopeless delay, he said to his captains, 
“This long defence is useless; I will fight.” ) 

7; Leaving his son and another officer in the city, Chan put ote 4 ij 
_ his armour and led out three companies through three hated. a 
i to fight in the open. Seeing the defenders making a sortie, _ 
 Téng Ai drew off and Chuko Chan pursued him vigorously! 
_ thinking he really fled before his men. But there was an N h 
ambush, and falling therein he was quickly surrounded as is | 
the kernel of a nut by the shell. In vain he thrust right and 
shoved left, he only lost his men. When he halted, the men 
of Wei poured in flights of arrows, so that his men ran hither | 
and thither to escape. Before long, Chuko Chan was wounded - 
= and fell. . ber Ea i: Eo 

“Iam done,” cried he. “But in my death I will do my duty.” n i 

He drew his sword and slew himself. oil 

From the city walls his son Shang saw the death of his 
father. .Girding on his armour he made to go out to fight. A — 
colleague told him the sacrifice would be vain, but he was — 
obstinate. 

Cried he, “My father and I and all our family have RE ir 
favours from the state. My father has died in battle against 
our enemies, and can I live?” 

He whipped his horse and dashed out into the thick of the, 
fight, where he died. A poem has been. written oe they 
conduct of both father and son. 


S found wanting, 1 not in loyalty; va 
; word had gone forth, aS a 
ng of Shu was, to be cut ‘off. 


Xe 
i 


N 


P 


inen NA RTR a. ire However, inet “nun 
e small i availed sauna and the leaders were 


CHAPTER CXVIII. 


A FILIAL PRINCE DIES; 
JEALOUSY BETWEEN LEADERS. 


EL ike news of the fall of Mienchou and the death in battle of 
the two Chukos, father and son, brought home to King Ch‘an 
that danger was very near, and he summoned a council. Then 
he heard that panic had seized upon the people, and they were 


leaving the city in crowds. Sorely he felt his helplessness. . 


Soon they reported the enemy actually in the city, and many 
courtiers advised flight. 

“Leave the city and flee south to Nanchung,” said they. 
“The country is difficult and easily defended. We can get the 
Mans to come and help us.” 

But Ch‘iao Chou opposed. “No, no; that will not do. The 
Mans are old rebels, ungentle; to go to them would be a 
calamity.” 


Then some proposed seeking refuge in Wu. “The men of- 


Wu are our sworn allies, and this is a moment of extreme 
danger ; let us go thither.” 

But Chi iao Chou also opposed this. “In the whole course of 
past ages no Emperor has ever gone to another state. So far 
as I can see, Wei- will presently absorb Wu, and certainly Wu 
will never overcome Wei. Imagine the disgrace of becoming 
a minister of Wu and then having to style yourself minister of 


Wei. It would double the mortification. Do neither. Wei 


will give Your Majesty a strip of land where the ancestral 
temple can be preserved, and the people will be saved from 
suffering. I desire Your Majesty to reflect well upon this.” 

The distracted ruler retired from the council without having 
come to any decision. Next day confusion had become still 
worse. Ch‘iao Chou saw that matters were very urgent and 
presented a written memorial. The king accepted it and 
decided to yield. 

But from behind a screen stepped out one of the king’s sons, 
Liu Shén, Prince of Peiti, who shouted at Ch‘iao, “You corrupt 
pedant, unfit to live among men! How dare you offer such 
mad advice in a matter concerning the existence of a dynasty? 
Has any Emperor ever yielded to the enemy? ” 

The Latter Ruler had seven sons in all, but the ablest, and 
the only one abovetthe common level of men, was this Liu Shén. 


~ Romance of the Three Kingdoms 591 


~The king aned feebly to his son and said, “The ministers 


drench the city in blood?” 
The prince said, “While the late Emperor lived, this Ch‘iao 


EEO SER He 


Lad 


- and, talks the most subversive language. There is no reason 
at all in what he says, for we have in the city many legions of 


ae 


Ute eS a 


7 
id 


rescue as soon as he knows our straits, and we can help him to 
fight. We shall surely succeed. Why listen to the words of 


great forerunner ?”?- 

in he king became angry at this harangue and Ua to his 

son, saying, “Be silent! You are too young to understand.” 
The prince beat his head upon the ground and implored his 

father to make an effort. “If we have done our best and 

$ defeat yet comes; if father and son, prince and minister have 

_ set their backs to the wall and died in one final effort to pre- 


Fe N 


the Former Ruler in the face, unashamed. But what if we 
surrender ?” 


-not shameful in one day to throw down all that our ancestors 
built up with so great labour? I would rather die.” 
os The king, now very angry, bade the courtiers thrust the 
young man out of the palace. Then he ordered Ch‘iao Chou to 
= prepare the formal Act of Surrender. When it was written, 
j two officers, with Ch‘iao Chou, were sent with it and the 
` hereditary. seal to the camp of Téng Ai to offer submission. 
Every day Téng’s horsemen rode to the city to see what was 


4 afoot. It was a glad day when they returned reporting the - 


hoisting of the flag of surrender. The general had not long 
to wait. The three messengers soon arrived and presented the 
letter announcing surrender and the seal therewith. Téng 
read the letter with great exultation, and took possession of 
the seal. He treated the envoys courteously and by their 
hands sent back a letter to allay any anxiety among the people. 
In due time they re-entered the city and bore this missive to 
the king, who read it with much satisfaction. Then he sent 
Chang Hsien to order Chiang Wei to surrender. 

The President Li Hu carried to the victorious general a 
statistical statement of the resources of the kingdom: 280,000 
- households, 914,000 souls, 102,000 armed men of all ranks and 

40,000 civil employés. Besides, there were granaries with 
i much grain, gold and silver, silks of many qualities and many 
unenumerated but precious things in the various storehouses. 
= The same officer arranged that the ceremony of surrender 
= should take place on the first day of the twelfth month. 


= have decided otherwise; they advise surrender. You are the 
only one who thinks that boldness may avail, and would you 


soldiers, and Chiang Wei is undefeated. He will come to our © 


‘this dryasdust? Why abandon thus lightly the work of our 


serve the dynasty, then in the shades we shall be able to look < 


The appeal left the king unmoved. The prince cried, “Is it 


had no voice in state affairs. Now he gives this wild advice 


ae “sya San kuo, BRO ee 


RDP ie 
| “The wrath of Prince Peiti Siell high as heaven vla A a 
~. heard that his father had actually arranged the date of his tf 
abdication. Girding on his sword, he was setting out for the 
palace when his Consort, the Lady Ts‘u, stopped him, saying, 
“My Prince, why does your face bear. this look o ve \ 
anger?” 
He replied, “The army of Wei is at'the gates, and my Pee 
has made his Act of Surrender. To-morrow he and all his © 
ministers are going out of the city to submit formally, and the | 
dynasty will end. But rather than bow the knee to another — 
I will die and go into the presence of the late Emperor in the 
realms below.” i 
TEHO W worthy ; how heartily? replied she. “And if my idrae ihe 
sl must die, I, thy handmaid, prayi that she Erk tiy first. i 
ae may my Prince depart.” - 
+ “But why should you die?” 
pyi - “The Prince dies for his father Aid the handmaid for her 
Ay? husband. One eternal principle guides us all. bese the: 
S husband dies the wife follows without question.” 
= —_ Thereupon she dashed herself against a pillar, and so He 
i died. Then the prince slew his three sons and cut off the head 
of his Consort that he might sever all ties to life lest he be 
tempted to live.. Bearing the head of the princess in his kandi 
he went to the Temple of the Former Ruler, where he bowed n A 
his head, saying, “Thy servant is. ashamed at seeing the | 
kingdom pass to another. Therefore has he slain his Consort | 
and his sons that nothing should induce him to live and Gs an 
forego death.” p if 
This announcement recited, he made yet another es his” De E 
ancestors. ‘My ancestors, if you have spiritual intelligence — i$ A 
=- yon know the feelings of your descendant.” ets 
RNS ae Then he wept sore till his eyes ran blood, and he corimittell 
suicide. The men of Shu grieved deeply for him, and a poet 3 
has praised his noble deed. 


te Both king and courtiers, willing, bowed the knee, 
TANG One son alone was grieved and would not live. 
Oy eo The western kingdom fell to rise no more, 

` >~ A noble prince stood forth, for aye renowned 
at As one who died to save his forbears’ shame, 
ši With grievous mien and falling tears he bowed 
mA His head, declaring his intent to die. 
SENN, While such a memory lingers none may say 
ETR ‘ That Han has perished. 


When the king knew of the death of his son, he sent men to 
bury him. 

Soon the main body of the Wei army came. The king Hee ec of 
all his courtiers to the number of three score went out at the 
north gate to bow their heads in submission, the king with his a is 


ar as the grave, le a coffin Sith) Hi. j 
Ai with hie own hands raised Liu Ch‘an from the 
took off the napkin from his face. The coffin was 

. Then the victorious eader and the vanquished ould 
ned into p 7y e by side. 


Wei’ s legions. interad ae 

And the ruler thereof saved his life. 

At the price of his honour and his throne. 

"Huang Hao’s vicious counsels had brought disaster 

Against which Chiang Wei’s efforts were vain. 

How bright shone the loyalty of the faithful one! 

How noble was the fortitude of the prince, grandson of/ the 

First Ruler! | 

Alas! it led him into the way of sorrow. 

And the plans of the Former Ruler, Ae 

‘Excellent and far-reaching, j REN 

` Whereby he laid the foundations of a mighty state, | eee 
Were aig) to promit, in one ey i 


Ge met the ip. AETA aA with eee incense Ci 
_ The title of General of Cavalry was given tothe = 
ng and other eae were eiren to the ministers who had ue 8 


el possession oe fe, ates and its granaries and 
or ouses. Two officers were sent into the provinces to 
the new situation and pacify malcontents, and another 
was sS ent to ii Poong Wei to ee peaceably. A report 


a 


a poem. 

The Beene of tree-tops, apes and birds, 

‘Most lawless of created things, yet knew 

© And feared his mordant pen. The clouds and winds 
_ Conspired to aid him to defend his lord. 

But nought awaited the leader’s precepts, wise 

- To save; with base content the erstwhile king 

- Too soon surrendered, yielding all but life. 

‘In gifts Chuko was peer with Kuan and Yo, 

His hapless death compared with Kuan and Chang’ S; 

; Sad sight, his temple on the river’s brink! J 
It wrings the heart more than the tearful verse 

si ‘OF ‘Liang Fu-yin, the paet he most loved. 


594 - ; Ban kuo or > N 


in due time Chiang Hsien reached Chienko, dad. gave the- 
general the king’s command to surrender to the invaders. _ 
Chiang Wei was dumb with amazement at the order; his ~ 
officers ground their teeth rath api and mortification. > Their mist 
hair stood on end with anger: they drew their swords and 
slashed at stones in their wrath, shouting they would rather — 
die than yield thus. The roar of their angry lamentation was — 
heard for miles. ; 
But Chiang Wei soothed them with kindly words, saying, 
elas grieve not; even yet I can restore the House of 
an een 
“How?” cried they. 
And he whispered low in their ears. ; 
The flag of surrender fluttered over the ramparts of Chienko, i 
and a messenger went to Chung Hui’s camp. When Chiang 
Wei and his captains drew near, Chung Hui went out to meet - 
them. “Why have you been so long in coming?’ was his 
greeting. 
-~ Chiang Wei looked him straight in the face and said, witiGus 
a tremor, but through falling tears, “The whole armies of the- 
state are under me, and-I am here far too soon.’ i 9 A 
Chung wondered what this cryptic remark might mean, but 
said nothing more. The two saluted each other and took their 
seats, Chiang being placed in the seat of honour. ` 
Chiang Wei said, “I hear that every detail of your plans, 
from the time you left Huainan till now, has been accom- 
plished. The good fortune of the Sstma family is owing to 
you, and so I am the more content to bow my head and yield 
to you. ‘Had it been Téng Ai I should have fought to: the 
death, for I would not have surrendered to him.” 
Then Chung Hui broke an arrow in twain, and they two 
swore close brotherhood. Their | friendship became close- | 
knit. Chiang Wei was continued in command of his. own 
army, at which he secretly rejoiced. Chiang Hsien went back 
to Ch‘éngtu. Be 
As conqueror, Téng Ai arranged for the adninistralion: of 
the newly-gained territory. He made Shih Tsuan Governor of | 
Ichou and appointed many others to various posts. He also 
built a tower in Mienchu in commemoration of his conquest. 
At a great banquet, where most of the guests were men of 
the newly-conquered province, Téng Ai drank too freely and i 
in his cups became garrulous. With a patronising wave of 
his hand, he said to his guests, “You are lucky in that you have - 
had to do with me. Things might well have been otherwise, 
and you might all have been put to death.” ba 
The guests rose in a body and expressed fheir gratitude. ; 
Just at that moment Chiang Hsien arrived from his visit t 
Chiang Wei to say that he and his army had surrendered to P 
Chung Hui. Téng Ai thereupon conceived a great hatred for 


Romance of the Three A poi 595 


Ge Chung. and s soon eter he wrote to Loyang a letter iapetuine 
é like this :— 

_: “I would venture to remark that misleading rumours of war 
should precede actual attack. Now that Shu has been over- 
come, the manifest next move is against Wu, and in present 
circumstances victory would easily follow an attack. But- 
after a great effort, both leaders and led are weary and unfit 
for immediate service. Therefore of this army two legions 
should be left west of Shénsi and with them two legions of the _ 
‘men of Shu, to be employed in boiling salt so as to improve the 
finances. Moreover, ships should be built ready for an ex- 
: pedition down the river. When these preparations shall be 
“i iat complete, then send an envoy into Wu to lay before its rulers 
___ the truth about its position. It is possible that matters may be 
== settled without any fighting. Further, generous treatment of 
= Liu Ch‘an will tend to weaken Sun Hsiu, but if Liu Ch‘an be 
~- . removed to the capital, the men of Wu will be perplexed and 
_ doubtful about what may happen to them, and they will not 
be amenable. Therefore it seems the most fitting to leave the 
_ late King of Shu here. Next year, in the winter season, he 
= might be removed to the capital. For the present I would 
recommend that he be created Prince of Fuféng, and granted - 
a sufficient revenue and suitable attendants. His sons also 
_ should receive ducal rank. In this way would be demonstrated 
- that favourable treatment follows upon submission. Such a 
=: Course would inspire fear of the might of Wei and respect for 
= its virtue, and the result will be all that could be desired.” 

_ Reading this memorial, the thought entered the mind of 
_ Ssūüma Chao that Téng Ai was exaggerating his own im- 
= portance, wherefore he first wrote a private letter to Wei Kuan 
- and then caused the king to issue an edict concerning the 
` successful general. The edict ran thus:— 
“General Téng has performed a glorious exploit, penetrating 
ae ‘deeply into a hostile country and reducing to submission a- 
~ usurping potentate. This task has been quickly performed; 
-~ the clouds of war have already rolled away and peace reigns 
-~ throughout Pa and Shu. 
“The merits of Téng Ai surpass those of Po Ch‘i, who subdued 
~ the mighty state of Ch‘u and Han Hsin, who conquered Chao. 
= Têng Ai is created T‘ai-yii, and We confer upon him a fief of 
~ 20,000 homesteads, and his two sons are ennobled, each with a 
fief of 1,000 homesteads.” 
After "the edict had been received with full ceremonies, the 
Inspector of the Forces, Wei, Kuan, produced the private letter, 
= which said that. Téng’s proposals would have suitable con- 
= sideration in due time. 
Then said Téng, “A general in the field may decline to obey 
i even the orders of his prince. My commission was to conquer 
the west; why are my plans hindered ?” 


; | Ma BER Had) or AN a 


FONN the envoy. At that time it was common talk at pir that 
a  Têng Ai intended to rebel, and when Ssùma Chao read the 
letter his suspicions turned to certainty, and he ror) This 
- was the letter :— 
“General Téng, ‘Conqueror of the West,’ has redutu then, vik 
chief of the revolt to submission and must have authority to — 
act according as he sees best in order to settle the early stages 
of administration of the new territory. To await government 
orders for every step means long delays. According to the 
‘Spring and Autumn’ Annals a high officer, when abroad, has © 
authority to follow his own judgment for the safety of the. 
‘Throne and the advantage of the state. K an 
' “Now seeing that Wu is still unsubdued, all intereri centres Me a a 
upon this country, and schemes of settlement should not be 
nullified by strict adherence to rules and formalities. In war- 
~.: - advances are made without thought of reputation, retreats 
; without consideration of avoiding punishment. Though I do 
not possess the fortitude of the ancients, I shall not be deterred | 
from acting for the benefit of the state by craven and selfish 
RA fears for my own reputation.” 
‘ee In his perplexity Ssima Chao turned to Chia Ch‘ung pes oF 
at advice. Said he, “Téng Ai presumes upon his services to ean, 
haughty and imperious: his recalcitrancy is very oa ae 
What shall I do?” . 
“Why not order Chung Hui to reduce him to obedience pr 
ni replied Chia. i 
AND Sstma Chao accepted the suggestion and issued an aiid i 
=- ~- raising Chung Hui to presidential rank. After this the In- 
yi ` spector of the Forces, Wei Kuan, was set over both, with special pr ý 
orders to keep a watch upon Têng and guard against anye 
i _attempt at insubordination. 
ih) The edict sent to Chung Hui ran as follows re 
Chung, ‘Conqueror of the West,’ against whose might none ~ 
can stand, before whom no one is strong, whose virtue conquers 
every city, whose wide net no one escapes, to whom the valiant _ 
army of Shu humbly submitted, whose plans never fail, whose — 
; every undertaking succeeds, is hereby made President of the 
vip Board of Revenue and raised to the rank of Marquis of a fief 
| of 10,000 families. His two: sons also have similar rank with 
in a fief of 1,000 families.” : 
Bf » When this edict reached Chung thi) he called in hians Wer be, 
bed and said to him, “‘Téng Ai has been rewarded more richly than 
/ —— Iandisa T’ai-yti. But Ssuma suspects him of rebellion and 
has ‘ordered Wei Kuan and myself to keep him in order. ee s 
ej does my friend Po-Yiieh think ought to be done?” i 
Chiang Wei replied, “They. say Téng’s origin was ee 
and in his youth he'was a farmer and breeder of cattle. How- 
ever, he had good luck and has won a great reputation in this 


“ee 


But ‘this is tae not to his able plane ‘bak to the — 
fortune of the state. If you had not been compelled to 
me in check at Chienko he could not have succeeded. Now | 
wishes the late king to be created Prince Fuféng, whereby at 
he hopes to win the goodwill of the men of Shu. Buttomeit — 
ee Ta perfidy lies therein. The duke suspects him, it is. \ 
ident.” — s 
- Chung complimented him. Chiang Wei continued, “re you 
y ill. eer away your people I have something to say to you ani 

ivate ens 
“When this had been done and they two were alone, Chiang he 
drew a map from his sleeve and spread it before Chung, saying, | 
“Long ago, before he had left his humble cot, K‘ung-ming gave — 
this to the Former Ruler and told him of the riches of Ichou — 
and how well. it was fitted for an independent state. Where- 
upon: Ch‘éngetu was seized as a first step towards attaining it. 
Now that Téng Ai has got to the same point it is small wonder | __ 
that he has lost his balance.” ee 
-= Chung asked many questions about the details of the fea- 
tures of the map, and Chiang explained in full. Toward the — 
end, he asked how Téng could be got rid of. a, 

“By making use of Duke Chin’s suspicions,” replied Chiang. 
“Send up a memorial to say that it looks as if Téng Ai really 
ntemplated rebellion. You will receive direct orders to 
eck the revolt. at 
o a memorial was sent to Loyang. It said that Téng Ai 
imed at independence, nourished base designs, was making 
iends with the vanquished and was about to revolt. 

_ At this news the court was much disturbed. Then to sup- 
port his charges, Chung’s men intercepted Téng’s letters and 
re-wrote them in arrogant and rebellious terms. Sstma Chao 
_ was greatly angered and ordered an expedition into the Hsieh 
= Valley to arrest Téng, he himself directing it under the leader- 

ship of the King of Wei, whom he compelled to go with him. _ 
~ Then said Shao Ti, “Chung Hui’s army outnumbers that of 

‘Téng Ai by six to one. You need not go; you need only order 

A ‘Chung to arrest Têng.” URN 
= “Have you forgotten?” said Ssiima, smiling. “You said — 
Chung Hui was a danger; I am not really going against Téng 
Ai, but against the other.” 
= “I feared lest you had forgotten,” said Shao. “I ventured 

te remind you, but the matter must be kept secret.” 

= The expedition set out. By this time Chung’s attitude had 
aroused Chia Chung’ s suspicions, and he spoke of it to Ssuma 
Chao, who replied, “If I sent you should I feel doubts? How- 
ever, come to Ch‘angan and you will understand.” _ 
= The despatch of the army was reported to Chung Hui, who 
pencred what it might mean. He at once called in Chiang 


= es A ee 


pet hei is Ti here, a i 
Ni E a fags mea 


os pant ee veel eae ae 
alent aks ie We ais ia ie me op 
d oh njat, 
Vet i FA pe oe NIS ape 
Ns i Ss 
AN J tan) 25-7 
ha! a 


FALSE DESERTION ; A SUBTLE SCHEME; 
A SECOND ABDICATION RESEMBLES THE FIRST. 


id sked to say what was the best plan to secure the arrest of 
Téng Ai, Chiang Wei said, “Send Wei Kuan: Téng will try to 

kill him and so manifest the desire of his heart. Then you 

n destroy him as a traitor.” 

Hence Wei was sent, with a score or so of men, to effect the 

rest. Wer: s own men saw the danger of the enterprise and 


Fer persons koa be dealt with providing Hes submitted 
aS On the contrary, they mich Me for rewards. How- 


anid Saé for him most of the officers to whom Ke had 
Piter. They at once yielded. Têng Ai was still asleep when 
the party reached his palace, but Wei entered and forced his 
vay into Téng’ s chamber. He roared out that he had orders 


oh tumbled off his couch in alarm. But before he could do 
anything to defend himself he was seized, securely bound and 
huddled into one of the carts. Téng’s son rushed in at the - 
noise, but was also made prisoner and thrust into the other 
cart. Many captains and attendants were in the palace, but 
before they had recovered from their fright a cry arose that 
Chung Hui was close at hand, and they scattered. 

Chung Hui and Chiang Wei dismounted at the palace gates 
and entered. The former, seeing both the Têngs prisoners, 
struck the elder about the head and face with his whip and 
insulted him, calling him a vile cattle breeder and so on. Nor. 
was Chiang Wei backward. 

“You fool! See what your good luck has brought you 
to-day! 1? eried he. 

_ And Teng Ai replied in kind. Chung Hui at once sent off 
both the Pere to Loyang, and then entered the capital in 


600 ~ 


state. He added all Tong’ s army y to his own 1 fore 
became very formidable. git: 
sr its “To-day I have attained the one desire of my life,’ 4 
Pima uO Hung. ie 
Hage, Chiang replied, “Han Hsin hearkened not to Knai Tung 
<= and so blundered into trouble at the Weiyang ‘Palace; th 
hi T‘ai-fu Wên Chung would not follow Fan Li into retirement 
and fell victim to a sword on'the lakes. No one would say 
these two were not brilliant, but they dia not scent. dange 
-early enough. Now, Sir, your merit is great ‘and your prestige $ 
overwhelming, but why do you risk future dangers? ? Why not 
sail off in a boat leaving no trace of your going? > Why - not 0 
to Mount Omi and wander free with Chih Sung-tza?”, = 
Chung smiled. “I do not think your advice much to the A 
point. Lama young man, not forty yet, and think rather of 
going on than ee I could. not take ae a eer s 
hermit’s life.” ; 


Think out a careful course, aS you are well able to do, Wen 
need not trouble any old fool for advice. Ve dg 


glee. 
“How well you know my kuhn my. friend! 
he. 


They two became absorbed in the plans. for Haan 
scheme. But Chiang wrote a secret letter to his late lord 
praying him to be patient and put up with humiliations for 
season, for he would be restored in good time. The sun 
moon were all the more glorious when they burst through 
dark clouds. The House of Han was not yet done. ‘es 
While these two were planning how best. to outwit, e 
us other, but both being against Wei, there suddenly arrives 
He, letter from Ssuma Chao saying he was at Ch‘angan with a n 
asi army lest there should be any difficulty in disposing of Teng 
Ai. Chung Hui divined the real purport at once. © 
pe “He suspects,” said Chung. “He knows quite well that my é 
ar army outnumbers that of Téng many times and I could do | 
alte what he wishes easily. There is more than that in his 
WEN coming.” $ 
Lag? He consulted his fellow-conspirator, who said, “When the 
Mi prince suspects a minister, that minister dies. — Have we not 
w seen Têng Ai?” “a 
ty aides! i GES decides me,” replied - ‘Changs. Pen OG cand 
empire is mine; failure, and I go west into Shu to be anot: er 
5 ‘Liu Pei, but without his mistakes.” Beers 
Chiang said, “The Empress Kuo has just nied Yous can 
pretend she left you a command to destroy Sstima Chao, - 
real murderer of the Emperor. Your talens: are quite sufi, 
cient to conquet the empire.” 


ct 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 601 


“Will you lead the van?” said Chung. “When success is 
ours we will share the spoil.” 

“The little I can do I will do most willingly,” said Chiang. 
“But I am not sure of the support of all our subordinates.” 

“To-morrow is the Feast of Lanterns, and we can gather in 
-the palace for the congratulations. There will be grand illu- 

minations, and we will prepare a banquet for the officers, 
whereat we can kill all those who will not follow us.” 

© At this the heart of Chiang Wei leapt with joy. Invitations 

were sent out in the joint names of the two conspirators, and 
the feast began. After several courses, suddenly Chung Wei | 
lifted his cup and broke into wailing. 

Everyone asked what was the cause of this grief, and Chung . 
replied. “The Empress has just died, but before her death she 
gave me an edict, which is here, recounting the crimes of 
Ssuma Chao and charging him with aiming at the Throne. I 
am commissioned to destroy him, and you all must join me in 
the task.” 

The guests stared at each other in amazement, but no one 
uttered a word. Then the host suddenly drew his sword, 

_ crying, “Here is death for those who oppose!” 

Not one was.bold enough to refuse, and, one by one, they 
all signed a promise to help.. As further security, they were 
all kept prisoners in the palace under careful guard. 

“They are not really with us,” said Chiang Wei. “I venture 
to request you to ‘bury ’ them.” 

. “A great pit has been already dug,” replied his brother host. 
“And T have a lot of clubs ready. We can easily club those 
who disagree and bury them in the pit.” 

‘A certain officer named Ch‘iu Chien, a man in the confidence 
of the conspirators, was present. He’had once served under 
Hu Lieh, who was one of the imprisoned guests, and he found 
means. to warn his former chief. 

Hu Lieh wept and said, “My. son is in command of a force 

- outside the city. He will never suspect Chung capable of such 

a crime, and I pray you to tell him. If I am to die it will be 

with less regret if my son can be told.” 

“Kind master, have no anxiety; only leave it to me,” replied 
Ch‘iu. 

He went to Chang Hui, and said, “Sir, you are holding in 
captivity a large number of. officers, and they are suffering 
from lack of food and water. Will you not appoint an officer 
to supply their needs?” 

Chung Hui was accustomed to yield to the wishes of Ch‘iu, 
and he made no difficulty about this. He told him to see to it 
himself. Only saying, “I am placing great trust in you, and 
you must be loyal.” 

“My lord, you may be quite content. I know how to keep a 

strict watch when necessary.’ 


602.. an Buo, or, ` 
But he allowed to enter into e decu of EEE a trusty 
“confidant of Hu Lieh, who. gave him a letter. to his son Yüan. 
It told hin the whole storys ar l 
Hu -Yiian told his subordinates, and they were greatly en- 
raged. They came to their commander’s tent to say- they 
would rather die than follow a rebel. So Hu Yiian fixed upon 
the eighteenth day of the month to attempt the rescue. He ~ 
enlisted the sympathy of Wei Kuan and got his men. read ys on 
He bade Ch‘iu tell his father what was afoot. Hu Lieh told. 
his fellow-captives. 
-. Now Chung Hui dreamed a ecam, that he was bitten bs ee 
many serpents, and he asked Chiang Wei to expound the vision. __ 
Chiang replied that dreams of dragons and snakes and ‘scaly. 28 
creatures were exceedingly auspicious. Chung was only too 
ready to accept this interpretation. Then he told Chiang that — 
all was ready and they. would put the pee question to each ~: 
captive. | Mi 
~ “T know they are opposed to. us, ‘and cub would do: well to 
slay them all, and that right quickly,” replied Chiang. — a 
“Good,” replied Chung. © : 
He bade Chiang turn in some ruffians among fine captives. 
But just as Chiang was starting to carry out these instructions. 
he was seized with a sudden spasm of the heart, so severe that 
he fainted. He was raised from the earth and in time revived. 
Just as he came to, a tremendous hubbub arose outside the 
palace. ‘Chung at once sent to enquire what was afoot, but 
the noise waxed louder and pouden. sounding like the rush. of 
a multitude. 

“The officers must be raging,” > said Chung. “We had. best 
slay them at once.’ it 
But they told him that sotaiete were in the palace. Chang z 
bade them close the doors of the Hall of Audience, and he sent — 
his own men upon the roof to pelt the incoming soldiers i bigs 
tiles. A few were slain on either side. 

Then a fire broke out. The assailants broke open the dobta. VINS 
Chung Hui faced them and slew a few, but others shot at him ; 
Men arrows, and he fell and died. They hacked off his 

ea ee 
Chiang Wei ran to and fro ae all he met till another a 
heart spasm seized him. E 
“Failed!” he shrieked, “But it is the will of Heaven. X He E 
put an end to his own life. He was fifty-nine. — B 

Many hundreds were slain within the precincts of the palace. — 

Wei Kuan presently ordered that the soldiers were to be led © 
back to their various camps to await the orders of the king. 
The soldiers of Wei, burning for revenge, hacked the dead 
body of Chiang Wei to pieces.. They found his gall bladder 
extraordinarily large, as large as a hen’s ‘egg. They also seized 
and slew all the family of the dead leader. © ; 


that ea Ai’s two atiettivies” ‘on he pase Hwee Both 
his old soldiers bethought themselves of trying'to rescue 
When Wei Kuan, who had actually arrested Téng, heard ees 
he feared for his life. eae he was unwilling | to ee 
his revenge. : : 


he gets free it means my death,” said wean? $ 
hen T‘ien Hsü spoke out, saying, “When Tng i oe ee 
a arya he wished to put me to death. It was fie at the! 


SED He came up with them at Miencht- and a found 
the two prisoners had just been released from the carts in ~ 
which they were being carried to Loyang. When Téng saw 

hat those coming up were men of his own late command, ME ia 
yk no thought for defence. Nor did. T‘ien waste time in- 
reliminaries. He went up to where Têng was standing and 
cut him down. His men fell upon the son, Têng Chung, and 
slew him also, and ‘thus father and son met death in the same 
ace. ao 


g A . poem, ‘pitying Teng Ai, was s written? ae 


-While et a boy, Téng loved to ketek and plan; 
‘He was an able leader as a man.. 
The earth could hide no secrets from his eye, 
With equal skill he read the starry sky. 
Past every obstacle his way he won, z 
And onward pressed until his task was done. 
But foulest murder- closed a great career, 
His ssc ranges now a larger en 


A poem was also composed i in pity ine Chung Hui :— 


of mother-wit Chang had no scanty share, 

And in due time at court did office bear; 

His subtle plans shook Sstma’s hold on power, 

He was well named the Tzu-fang of the hour. 

Chouch‘un and Chienko ramparts straight fell down, l 
When he attacked, and he won great renown. : cae 
Ambition beckoned, he would forward press— Figs, 
His per homeward wandered, bodiless. > 


Another poem, in pity of Chiang Wei, runs:— _ Ne . ve 


Tiehaui. Senate of a hero, talent came Sith from - 
Liangchou, 

Chang mang fathered his spirit, Chuko tutored his 
mind, 

~ Valiant he ever ‘pressed forward, nor had.a thought 
_ of returning, =- 

Grieved were the soldiers of Han when death rapt 

his soul from his body. 


Ae N ie “San huo, or Ae nes 


air captains also perished, and with them died Liu Jui, ‘thes 
` heir-apparent. Followed a time of great confusion, which — 


: can order. He set Wei Kuan over the city of Ch‘éngtu and sent 
the captive king to Loyang. Few officers accompanied the | 


Wu were withdrawn and returned to their own land. 


_lips to one’s teeth, and when the lips are gone the teeth are 


banks. Over all he set the veteran Ting Féng. 


«a been taken, he dressed himself in white and wailed during — 
three days, facing toward the capital. 


“it would be well to surrender,” said his officers. 


a dies.” 


_ And thus died all three of the great outa in bah Suny 
endured till Chia Ch‘ung arrived and restored confidence and 


deposed king on this degrading journey. Liao Hua and Tung 
Chtieh made illness an excuse not to go. They died of grief — 
soon after. 

At this time the year-style of Wei was changed to Heien fe 
K‘ang. In the third month of this year, since nothing could — 
be done to assist Shu to recover its independence, the troops of : te 


Now the officer Hua Ho sent up a memorial to Sun Hsiu, 2 
King of Wu, saying, “Wu and Shu were as close as are one’s — 


cold. Without doubt Ssiima Chao will now turn his thoughts 
to attacking us, and Your Majesty must realise the danker and a 
prepare to meet it.” 0 
The king knew that he spoke truly, so he set Lu K‘ ang, ‘sont 
of the late able leader Lu Hsün, over the army of Chingchou 
and the river ports with the title “Guardian of the East,” and 
Sun I was sent to Nanhsii to control the camps along the river me 


When Ho Ko, Prefect. of Chienning, heard that Ch‘éngtu had — 


“Now that the capital has fallen and the king is a captive, 


Ho replied, “‘There is a hindrance. I know not how fares 
our lord, whether he is in comfort or in misery. If his captors 
treat him generously, then will I yield. But perhaps they willy 
put him to shame, and when his prince is shamed the minis ee 


So certain persons were sent to Loyang to find out how fared 
the late king. 

-Soon after Liu Ch‘an reached the capital of Wei, Sstima 
Chao returned. Seeing Liu Ch‘en at court, he upbraided him, © 
saying that he deserved death for his vicious courses, which 
had brought misfortune upon him. Hearing this, the face of | 
the late king turned to the colour of clay with fear, and he was - 
speechless. 

But certain of the courtiers said, “He has lost his kingdom, 
he has surrendered without a struggle, and he now deserves 
pardon.” ‘ 

Liu Ch‘an suffered no injury, but was created Duke of Anl6. 
Moreover, he was assigned a residence and a revenue, and he 
received presents of silk, and servants were sent to wait upon 
him, male and female. The officers of Shu, who had accom- 


miny 10 as the ST Taie iy 
Ho Ko heard all these things he ¢ came with hi of 
yielded submission. Shai 


2 i 


his bonny. nda a was a "au he 
banquet they performed the music of Wei, with the da 

d the hearts of the men of Shu were sad; only Liu í 
appeared merry. Half way through the feast, Ssiima said 
a Ch‘ung, “The man lacks feeling; that is what has ruin 
Even if Chuko Liang had lived, he could not have main- 
such a man. It is not wonderful that PeT Wei 


ith Sees music as this I Foree Shit is pooled. a Ohian. we 
: iy Liu. Ch'an rose and left the table. Ch‘ Cheng ‘ 
, “It you are ones again, H 


duke May “let you return.” 
i\e late king promised he would. When the wine hade eine 
hue more times Ssuma_ put the same question a 


“ae weep, but failed to shed a tear. So ie shut his eyes. — 
oe that just what Ch‘i Chéng told you to ates asked $ 


“Tt is just as you say,” was the reply. ATA ; 
aa all EE _ But really Ssuma was biensed with the 


‘Laughter loving, pleasure USUI ges vis! pve 
Rippling smiles o’er a merry face, i 

Never a thought of his former glory i SNN 
In his callous heart finds place. es 

Childish joy in a change of dwelling, 

- That he feels, and that alone; nit Ki 

Manifest now that he was never Wie ca RS = aes 

Worthy to sit on his, father’s throne. Lage 


The courtiers thought that so grand an exploit as the con- _ 
quest of the west was worthy of high honour, so they memo- oe 
rialised the King of Wei to confer princedom on Ssiima Chage oa ae 
At that time, Ts‘ao Huan ruled in name only, for he had no 
authority. “The whole land was under Sstima, whose will the 
king himself dared not cross. And so, in due course, the 4 
duke became. Prince of ‘Chin. | “To match the new honour to the ‘3 


oe San fuo, or ANSA 


son, his father, Ssuma I, was posthumously . created Prince 


Hsiian and his late elder brother Prince Ching. — 


The wife of Ssùma Chao was the daughter of Wane Su. 
She bore to him two sons, the elder of whom was named Yen. 
Yen was huge of frame, his flowing hair reached to the ground © 


when he stood up, and both hands hung down below his knees. te ie 


He was clever, brave and skilled in the use of arms. 
The second son, Yu, was mild of disposition, a filial son and 
a dutiful brother. His father loved him dearly. As Sstma 


Shih had died without leaving sons, this youth, Yu, was re- 
garded as his son, to continue that line of the family. Ssima 


Chao used to say that the empire was really his brother’s. 
Becoming a prince, it was necessary for Ssuma Chao to 


choose his heir, and he wished to name his younger son. Shan pat 


- T‘ao remonstrated. 


“It is improper and infelicitous to prefer the younger,” said 
Shan, and Chia Ch‘ung followed in the same strain. 
“The elder is clever, able in war, one of the most talented 


men in the state and popular. With such natural advantages ERA % 


he has a great destiny; and was not born to serve.’ 
Sstma hesitated, for he was still unwilling to abandon his 


desire. But two other officers of rank also remonstrated, say- 
ing, “Certain former dynasties have preferred the younger _ 


before the elder and rebellion has generally followed. Weg 
pray you reflect upon these cases.’ 


Finally Ssima Chao yielded and named his son Yen as os . 


SUCCESSOYr. 


Certain officers emer) that a gigantic figure of a man ~ 


had descended from heaven in Hsiangwuhsien. They gave 


his height as twenty feet and said that his foot-print measured - 


over three feet two inches. He had white hair and a hoary . 
beard. He wore an unlined yellow robe and a yellow cape. 
He walked leaning on a black-handled staff. 

This extraordinary man preached, saying, “I am the king of 
men now come to tell you of a change of ruler and the coming: - 
of peace.’ 

He wandered about for three days and then disappeared. 

They continued, “Evidently this portent refers to yourself, 
Noble Sir, and now you should assume the imperial head-dress 
with twelve strings of pearls, set up the imperial standard and. 
have the roads cleared when you make a progress. You should 


ride in the golden- shafted carriage with six coursers. Your 


Consort should be styled ‘Empress’ and your heir the ‘ Heir 
Apparent?” % 

Ssuma Chao was greatly pleased. He returned to his palace, 
but just as he was sitting down he was suddenly seized with 
paralysis and lost the use of his tongue. He quickly grew 
worse. His three chief confidants, Wang Hsiang, Ho Tséng 
and Hsiin I, together with many court officials, came to enque 


Fpa 


Pine een ae 
NE! ee ey 


hig health ae he coid: not pea to ‘neh! He pointed — 
rd e heir apparent, Ssima Yen, and died. Tt wa the 
nao day of the eighth month. we: 
aid Ho Tséng, “The care of the: empire do upon 
e of Chin; let us induct the heir. Then we pan ; 
m the sacrifices to the late princes? ri TRE 
ereupon Sstma Yen was set up in his father’s place. 
oor Ets Ho the title of Prime Minister and conferred many perce t 
= titles and ranks. ene Po thumps title of “Prince Wên” was. 


When he ee were finished, Sstma Yen summone 

Re ‘Ch‘ung and P‘ei Hsiu into the ’palace, and said, “Ts‘ao: 
said that if the celestial mandate rested upon him he. 
Be such as was King Wên of Chou; is this really s so?” 3 


i are im and oe him Rath no virtue. iia son differed — 
from him greatly, and his rule was marked by strife and lack- 
quillity. No single year was peaceful. ‘Later Prince — : 
ian and Prince Ching of your line rendered great services 

disseminated compassion and virtue, so that they were 


liversally abei ‘Comparison with Ts‘ao is impossible.” 
“Still T ao p'e ei a A the rule of Pan. can I not in like 


= þe taken as a E AN to continue an P A 
herefore prepare a terrace to make the great declaration. _ 
 Ssňŭma Yen resolved to act promptly. Next day he entered 
palace armed with a sword. No Court had been held for 
ny days, for Ts‘ao Huan was ill at ease and full of dread. 
hen Yen appeared, the king left his place and advanced m 
met him. Ssuma Yen sat down. 

“By whose merits did Wei succeed to empire ?? he asked | 
denl By: 
Certainly success was due to your forefathers,” replied the 
ing. & f 
Fa smiled, saying, “Your Majesty is unskilled in debate, 
inept in war and unfit to rule. Why not give place to another 
ore able and virtuous?” | 
_ The king’s lips refused a reply. But one of the ministers 
cried, “You are wrong to speak thus, O Prince. His Majesty’s 
-ancestor conquered east and west, ‘north and south, and won 
‘ he empire by strenuous - effort. The present Emperor is 


te vir Vous and without! fault. 
another ?” 
| Sstma Yen replied aneb “The perit Aa la 
ee and Ts‘ao Ts‘ ao coerced them as he did the » 


Three generations of my forefathers upheld the House iy 
so that their power is not the result of their own abilities, but 

of the labour of my house. This is known to all the world, og 
am I not equal to carrying on the rule of Wei?” 
“Tf you do this thing you: will be a rebel and an usurp 
said Chang Chieh. j 
“And what shall I be if 1 avenge the wrongs of Han? ae 


. death, while the king wept and Doten pardon for his aith 
ful counsellor. 4 
Sstma rose and left. ‘The king turned to Chia Ghtune 1d | 
Pel Hsiu, saying, “What should I do? Sone decision. must be 
taken.” AT 
=. They replied, “Truth to tell, tHe measure ‘of. your 
i “accomplished and you cannot oppose the will of Heaven. 
_ must prepare.to abdicate as did Hsien of the Hans. — 
- the throne to the prince and thereby accord with th 
_- Heaven and the will of the pronis sf oe personal saf 
hi ‘not cause you anxiety.” i 
Huan could only accept. this we and the erlade 
UNE puilt, The day chia-tzu of the twelfth month was chosen 
`- the ceremony. On that day the king, dressed in full robe Y 
|- ceremony, and bearing the seal in his hand, ascended bey te. 
terrace in the presence of a great. assembly. Bie Oh 1 


The House of Wei displaced the Hinse of Hare? CANS 
ae And Chin succeeded Wei; so turns fate’s wheel iF 
Bt And none escape its grinding. Chang the true 
' Stood in the way and died. We pity him. - eee 
Vain hope with one small hand to hide Mount Tail pat 


The iiveror elect was ; requested to ascend: thie’ hish 
: “and there received the great salute. Huan then desce idea 
—robed himself as a duke and took his place as the. first of 
subjects. tela 
iow OSUMA Yen now Brood upon the terrace, supported na Chia 
and Pʻei. Ts‘ao Huan was ordered to prostrate himself, while 
- the command was recited, and Chia Chung read :—. 
“Forty-five years have elapsed since, in the Lavon nith yea: 
of Chien-An, the House of Han gave place to the House of Wei. — 
But the favour of Heaven has now left the latter House and ~ 
reverts to Chin. The merits and services of the family ihe 
Ssitima reach to the high heavens and pervade the earth. The — 
rule. Now His Majesty the Emperor confers upon you the — ~ 
_ Prince of Chin is fitted for the high office and to continue the oS 


arene The Taifu Seim F 

king and promised eternal devotio 
a A of Wei and will never turn my c 
» sai ee, of 


” 


did t take this amiss, but offered him: a : 


ae Wei as madel: thus the A eed king 
Jas named a prince, when on the terrace high: 

His throne he had renounced. is 
le grieve when we recall these deeds. ie 


new Emperor conferred posthumous rank upon his Jate, 


er, Ssŭma I, his uncle and his grandfather. He-built seven — 


onour of his ancestors, dedicated to Ssiima Chun, 
Sstma Chien, Ssitma Fang, Sstma I, Sstma 
a Sao, All a a his E were in n his 


-The House of Han has gone tor ayer 
es E See Wu will quickly. eet 


‘CHAPTER CXX.. 


“x VETERAN OFFERS New PLANS; 
| SUN ‘Hao SURRENDERS AND THE THREE STATES REUNITE. 


Wen. the King of Wu knew that the House of Wei had fallen ig 
-before the Chins he also knew that the usurper’s next thous a i 
¿© would be the conquest of his own land. The anxiety made him ~ 
dll, so that he took to his bed and was like to die. He then 
summoned to his bedside Puyang Hsing, his First Minister, 
and his heir Sun Ling. But they two came almost too late. 
The dying ruler, with his last effort, took the minister by the- 
hand, but could only point to his son.. Then he died. ~ > 
Puyang left the couch and called a meeting of the officers, 
whereat he proposed to place the heir on his father’s throne. 
~. Then one Wan Yü rose and said the young prince was too 
:| youthful to rule in such troublous times, and he suggeste 
-. instead Sun Hao, who stood in the direct line from Sun Ch‘tian. 
He was then Marquis. of Wuch‘éng. The General Chang Pi 
supported his election, saying he was able and prompt in 
decision. However, Puyang was doubtful and consulted the 
Empress Dowager. 
“Settle this with the nobles,” she replied ; “I am a widow and sihi 
know nothing of such matters.” Re a 
Finally Sun Hao won the day, and in the seventh month he ey) 
was enthroned as Emperor in Wu, and the first year of. hini 
reign was Yüan-Hsing (264 A.D.). _ The excluded prince was 


The 


was given to the late Emperor’s father and mother. 

veteran leader Ting Féng was made Minister of War. 
However, the year-style was changed to Kan-Lu ne very 

next year. 
_ The new ruler soon proved himself cruel and oppressive and 
day by day grew more so. He indulged in every form of vice 

_and chose an eunuch as his confidant and favourite. When the” S 
Prime Minister and Chang Pu ventured upon remonstrance, s 
both, with all their family, were put to death. Thereafter — 
none dared to speak; the mouth of every courtier was. “sewn 
up. ” 

_ Another year-style, Pao-Ting, was adopted the next year, 
and the responsibility of the Prime Minister’s office was shared 
by two officers, “the left” and “the right.” pe 


Romance of the Three Kingdoms 611 


y 


-At this time the imperial residence was in Wuch‘ang. The 
people of Yangchow refused tribute and suffered exceedingly. 
There was no limit to the ruler’s extravagance; the treasury 
was swept clean and the income of the royal domain exhausted. 

At length Lu K‘ai, “left,” or senior, Prime Minister, ven- 


tured a memorial, saying, “No natural calamity has fallen 


- upon the people, yet they starve; no public work is in progress, 
yet the treasury is empty. I am distressed. The country 


under the Hans has fallen apart and three states have arisen | 


therefrom. Those ruled by the Ts‘aos and the Lius, as the 
‘result of their own folly, have been lost in Chin. Foolish I 
may be, but I would protect the state for Your Majesty against 
the evils: we have seen.in the other divisions. This city of 
Wuch‘ang is not safe as a royal residence. There is a rhyme 
concerning it, the gist of which is that it is better to drink the 
water of Chienyeh than eat the fish of Wuch‘ang, better to die 


=. in Chienyeh than to live in Wuch‘ang. This shows the regard 


of the people as well as the will of Heaven. Now the public 
storehouses are nearly empty; they contain insufficient for a 
year’s use. The officers of all grades vex and distress the 
people and none pity them. 

“In former times the palace women numbered less than a 
hundred; for years past they have exceeded a thousand. This 
is an extravagant waste of treasure. The courtiers render no 
disinterested service, but are split into cliques and cabals. 
The honest are injured and the good driven’ away. All these 
things undermine-the state and weaken the people. I beg 
Your Majesty to reduce the number of officers and remove 
_ grievances, to dismiss the palace women and select honest 

officers, to the joy of the. people and the tranquillity of the 
state.” 

But the king was displeased, and showed his contempt for 
the minister’s remonstrance by beginning to collect material 
for the building of a new palace to be called the “Chaoming 
Palace.” He even made the officers of the court go into the 
forest to fell trees for the work. 


The king called in the soothsayer Shang Kuang and bade 


him take the sortes and enquire as to the attainment of empire. 
The soothsayer replied that all was propitious and in the year 
kéng-tzu a black umbrella would enter Loyang. And the king 
was pleased. 


` He said to Hua Fu, “The former rulers listened to your- 


words‘and sent captains to various points and placed defensive 
camps along the rivers. And over all these was set Ting Féng. 
Now my desire is to conquer Han and avenge the wrongs of 


my brother, the ruler of Shu. What place. should be first 


conquered ? ” 
Hua Fu replied, “Now that Ch‘éngtu has fallen and the 
Throne there been overturned, Sstiima Yen will assuredly 


: i : : 


CANS Cie and restore conndence a your ee "That } 
~. the best plan. If you engage in war it will be like th 
eo On - hemp to put out a fire; the hemp. only adds to th blaz 
This is worthy of careful consideration.” ae, 
~ But Sun Hao grew angry and said, fay desire to take. is 
opportunity to return to my real. heritage. Why do you 
_ employ this ill-omened language? Were it not for your long 
service, now would I slay you and expose your head as a 
warning.’ ; 
He bade the lictors hustle the faithful minister from his 
presence, and Hua Fu left the court.. 
“Tt is pitiful,” said he, “Ere long our beautiful country. wi 
pass to another.” 
So he retired. And the king ordered Lu K‘ang, “Guardian 
of the East,” to camp his army at hanekam in order to attack 
Hsiangyang. 
~ Spies reported this in Loyang and it was told the King of- 
Wei. When he heard that the army of Wu threatened to- 
invade Hsiangyang he called a council, and Chia Ch‘ung stood 
forth, saying, “I hear the government of Wu, under its present. 
king, is devoid of virtue and the king has turned aside out n 


army, and when internal trouble shall arise let him attac 
and victory will then be easy.’ 
The king issued an edict ordering Yang Hu b Peo and 
so he mustered his men and set himself to guard the district. 
Yang was very popular. Any of the men of Wu who desi 
to desert to the other side were allowed to come over. ` 


area, o the hundred ee tea with which ae se 
out were soon increased to enough for ten years. . : 
Yang maintained great simplicity, wearing the lightest” of ; 
garments and no armour. His personal escort numbered oa 
~~ about a score. 
RL E One day his officers came to his tent to say that the spies 
S ree great laxity in the enemy’s camp, and they wished to. 
D: attac 
S But Yang replied, “You must not. depise Lu Kang, Con he 
is able and crafty. Formerly his master sent him to attack | 
Hsiling, and he slew Pu Shan and many of his captains. T 
could not save them. So long as he remains in command 
shall remain on the defensive. I shall not attack till there be 
trouble and confusion among our enemies. To be rash and 
‘not await the proper moment to attack is to invite defeat.” 
They found him wise and said no more. They only kept th 
boundaries. One day Yang and his officers went out to hunt, 
and it happened that Lu pad chosen we same day. te hunt ; 


ae was a, 
In the venue, atte 


own side. 


er mèd to ave been first stuck R the men of Wu. a 
was greatly pleased and sent for the bearers of th 
your leader drink wine?” asked her tee 
; “Only i on ceremonial occasions does he dri ke? 


ò nN to your general as a ai T i the 
drink on ceremonial occasions, and he shall aal 
“for to-day’s courtesy.” 

e wine and left. 
| give him wine?” asked Lu’s s officers. 
fas ashi Pr ane I must return ies ; 


2 


ar aR and the wine was poured aut: One | 
is begged him to drink moderately lest ‘there 
ome harm come of it. i 

ang is no poisoner,” replied the general. 

) drank. The as intercourse thus begun con- 


had ; ing for several ae 
_ “I think he suffers from the same Cerapan aga,” hata pee 
emedies: ready prepared and will send him 


were taken over to the other camp. But the sick coh 
yfficers were suspicious and said, “This medicine is 
ee it comes from n uA 


n? Do not doubt: A cA 
-the decoction. Next pb he was Buah rten 
1 his staff came to congratulate him he said, “If he 

stand-upon virtue and we take ours upon violence, he eon 
ag us after him without fighting. See to it that. ‘the aCe 

O und ries be well kept and that we seek not to gain any EV 
z unfai advantage. . 


; pon his general Ligaen activity. Nia 
“Our Emperor sends orders for you to press forward, TSAA 3 
‘envoy. “You are not to await invasion.’ 

You may rae and I will send ap a memorial, ie rieg 


ux aaa ee a Chin oad exhor 
a virtuous rule instead of engaging in ho cers 
him. 


and now I believe it,” said the ane Nor me 

Thereupon he deprived Lu of his anand and 0 
his commission and degraded him in rank. Anothe 
Sun Chi, was sent to ‘supersede Ta And none 
intervene. ins AE 

King Hao became still more arbitrary a of. his ow 
changed the year-style once more. Day by Gand wn life 
more wanton and vicious. Wh tet 


resentment, and at last three high ets) ed Lie 
Prime Minister, boldly and earnestly remonstrate 
king for his many idea eee hte mea 


i 


heard that his roni had been. pomnbved ae his 
and that the conduct of the king had become wh ly un 
- able he knew that the time was near for him to O ; 
Wherefore he presented a memorial.. i 
“Although fate is superior to man, vet success deper on 
human effort. Now as the danger of Chiang an Ge = 
not as those of Chienko, while the ferocity. of Sun 
- that of Liu Ch‘an, the misery of the men of Wu ex 
~ the dwellers in the west. Our armies are stronge 
before, and if we miss this opportunity to bring th 
under one rule, but continue to weary our men wi 
watching and cause the world to groan under the 
militarism, then our efficiency will decline and we sha 
endure.” s 
When Ssùma Yen read this he gave orders’ for th a ; 
move. But three officers, led by Chia Ch‘ung, opposed it, and iy 
the orders were withdrawn. Yang Hu was disappoi i 
said, “What a pity it is that of ten te enna ns 
always meets with eight or nine™? ; 


propose to settle the state: 
He replied, “Sun Hao is a very pee ruler a 1l 
conquered without fighting. ‘If he were to qie) and a 


am now eton oa. Hes too ill ae the dade, ig venti 
f me RT bold ana capable leader must be found. iG 


he was “nigh unto death, and the king went ° 0. is 
ght of his king at his bedside brought tears to tk 
faithful old soldier. “If I died a myriad 
could never requite Your Majesty,” said he. 
ng also wept, saying, “My great grief is that I ou ald 
advantage of your abilities to attack Wu. W ho now 
_is the to carry out your design?” . 
_ Hesitatingly ` the sick man replied, “I am dying aad must be 
wholly sincere. The General Tu Yü is equal to the task, and 
the one man to attack Wu.” 
= The King said, “How beautiful it is to bring good men into. 
; prominence! But yny did yon write a ERE recommend: | 


he dled, oe Sstma ven wailed for him aaa then toga: 
s palace. He conferred on the dead leader the posthumous - 
n T oe and the title of Paroi o a aders closed 


The passers-by were moved to tears when tee 
ead Yue name on the tablet, so that it came to be called . 
Stone of Tears.” Saat 


I saw the fragments of a chastened: stone |. 
One spring time on the hillside, when, alone, |- 
_ I walked to greet the sun. The pines distilled 
Big drops of dew unceasing; sadness filled ; 
My heart. I knew this was the Stone of Tears, © 
The stone of memory sad of long-past years. 


pl ced over a pi the title T Cda of thé. 
S h” was conferred upon him. He was a man of great 
ex rience, untiring in study and devoted to the Tso. Chuan, 
the book of history composed by Tso Ch‘iu-ming upon the 
record. “Spring and Autumn.” In hours of leisure a copy was 
ee out of his hand and when he went abroad an attendant 


Go ee ea ee pe N, 


ae Tu went to Hsiangyang and began by being kind to the : 
med people and caring for his soldiers. By this time Wu had lost 
eh death both Ting Féng and Lu K‘ang, its two most famous 
~ leaders. — 

The conduct of the King of Wu waxed worse and worse. | 
‘He used to give great banquets whereat intoxication was — 
`- universal. He appointed Rectors of Feasts to observe all the — 
faults committed by guests, and after these banquets all 
offenders were punished, some by flaying the face, others by 
gouging out the eyes. Every one went in terror of these — 
Rectors. vt 


ing an attack upon Wu. He said, “Sun Hao is steeped in vice 
and should be attacked at once. Should he die and be succeed- 
ed by a good ruler we might meet with serious opposition. | 
The ships I built seven years ago lie idle and rotting; why not h Aa 
use them? Iam seventy years of age and must soon die. If- 
any one of three events happen, the death of Sun Hao, the- 


oe tide.” >. 


them, “I have decided to act; I have received similar advice 
‘ from two officers.” 


~- to march north and has his army ready. Report says it is- 


another year till that army has lost its first vigour.” 

A command to cease warlike preparations was the result ors 
this counsel. The king betook himself to his private chamber 7 5 
`- where he engaged in a game of wei-ch, with Chang Hua as 
- opponent. While at the game, another ‘memorial arrived ; it 

z was trom Tu Yü. It read:— 
= = “Formerly. Yang Hu explained his plans confidentially. foe 
Your Majesty, but did not lay. them before the court. The. 
result has been much debate and conflict of opinion. In every — 
project there are pros and cons, but in this the arguments are. 
mostly in favour. The worst that can happen is failure. 
` ` Since last autumn the proposed attack has become generally — 

- known, and, if we stop now, Sun Hao will be frightened and — 
remove the capital to Wuch‘ang, repair his fortifications in: 
Chiangnan and move his threatened people out of danger. \ a 
Then the capital cannot be assaulted, nor is there anything 
left.in the countryside to rob. Hence next year’ s attack ‘will | 
also fail.” ; 
: Just as the King finished reading, Chang Hua panen back 

“io the board, rose and drew his hands into his sleeves, saying, Š 
prota U Y OUN Majesty’s skill in war is almost divine, your’ state is 
-~ prosperous and the army strong; the King of Wu is a tyrant, ~ 


Wang Chiin, Governor of Yichou, sent in a memorial advis- 


At the next assembly of officers King Ssiima Yeu said to` : o 


formidable and would be hard to defeat.. I counsel to await a | 


irai 
wig 
i a 


destruction of these ships, or my death, then success will be a 
difficult to ensure. i pray Your Majesty not to miss the ; A 


At this arose Wang Hun and said, “I hear Sun Hao intends _ a 


a 


oer 
=) 


} ng; 
to go up against enee dae. Vane J ung to mov 
pene: Hu Fén to aron tn aac f ; 


“The ioe of Wu was greatly alarmed at the news of sach 


ready to lend help at any point. 
Me felt, miserable, for he realised that no preparations had been 
lim of his dread of the enemy navy. 


“What i is it? ?? asked the King, pleased to hear iie 


sail no more.’ 


night, and soon all were in place. 


: T Chou Chih with eight hundred sailors to sail secretly along 


ighted at night to give the appearance of a great army. 


-~ Wu, under Sun Hsin, came up, and at the first encounter 
u Yii’s army retired. Sun Hsin landed his men and pursued. 


Sun Hsin was attacked on all sides. He tried to retire, but the 


‘As has been said Tu Yü was to attack Chanel and he 


the river to Lohsiang. There they were to make a great show 
hig flags along the bank and among the trees. Drums were to 
e beaten and bombs exploded during the day and many fires 


armies and fleets, and he called to him quickly his Prime | 
‘Minister Chang T‘i and two others, Ho Chih and Hsi Hsiu, to 
consult how to defend his land. The Prime Minister proposed $ 
to send Wu Yen to meet the enemy at Chiangling, Sun Hsin to 
Hsiak‘ou, while he himself took command of a camp at Niuchu, APT 


iS ae -The King approved his dispositions and felt satisted. that he se 
` was safe by land. Butin the privacy of his own apartment he — 


i e against an attack by water. Then Ts‘én Hun asked the — K : 
ing ay he bore a sad countenance and King Sun Hao told ~ 


g “But I have a scheme that will smash “ail {heir ships,” cried s 


“Iron is plentiful. Make great chains with heavy links and 
stretch them across the river at various points. Also forge — 
‘many massive hammers and arrange them in the stream so. 
s ean when the enemy’s ships sail down before the wind they | 
ill collide with the hammers and be wrecked. Then they will i 


Blacksmiths were soon at work on the r river ‘bank welding ‘ : ee 
the links and. forging the hammers. Work went ‘on day Pn ne 


So Chou sailed to Pashan. Soon after the army and the 
marine forces made a simultaneous advance, but the navy of 


But in the midst of the pursuit a signal bomb sounded and 


i joined in the attack. TERY 
-~ Wu’s losses were very caer ate Sun ‘Hsin hastened A ) 
Ries ike the city. At the ramparts the men of Chin mingled, with his 
own and so entered the gates. They raised signal fires on the 
walls. - This manœuvre amazed Sun, and he said that, the 
northern men had surely flown into the city. He made an 
effort to escape, but the leader of Chin, Chou Chih, un- 
expectedly appeared and slew him. ` 

A fleet of the ships of Wu had accompanied gun Hsin. “The 
admiral, Lu Ching, saw on the south shore a great standard 
bearing “the name of Tu Yü. He became alarmed and tandad 
_.to try to escape, but was soon found and slain. 

At his position at Chiangling Wu Yen heard of these deta” 
and knew his position was untenable, so he fled. However, he | 
was soon captured and led into the’ presence of the victorious © 
general. | 
3 “No use sparing you,” said. Tu ph Gree and he sentenced the 
_ prisoner to death. 

Thus Chiangling was captured and all the Giri ‘along 
the Hsiang and Yüan rivers as far as Agangchou which sur- 
rendered at the first summons. ; 

Tu Yii sent out officers to soothe the people of the conqmered! i 

r districts, and they suffered nothing from the soldiery. Next — 
a he marched toward Wuch‘ang, and that city also yielded. — So 
the glory of Tu Yti was very great. 
. Tu summoned his officers to a council to decide upon ata) 
ing Chienyeh. Hu Fu said, “A whole century’s raiding will 
not reduce it completedly. The time ‘of the spring rise of 
=- -waters is near and our position is precarious. We should do 

-. well to await the coming spring.” ae 
Tu Yü replied, “In the days of old, Yol obtained the. aid of 
_ the west and overcame Ch“ in one battle. Our prestige is now | 
high and success certain, easy as the splitting of a bamboo, — 


have been overcome. We shall meet no great opposition,” 


against the city. 
~= Now Wang Chiin had gone down the river with his naval 
< force. From his scouts he heard of the chains and the — 

‘hammers that had been laid in the river to hinder his progress. | 
_ But he only smiled. He constructed great rafts of timber and 
_ placed on them straw effigies of men in armour and sent them 
_ < down river with the current. The defenders of Wu took them 
© = for real men and, alarmed by their numbers, fled in panic. 
» - Then the great hammers were lifted. out of the stream and the i 

-~ rafts drifted on. 


which seems to welcome the knife after the first few joints 


So he gave orders to the various leaders t move in concert r 


Moreover, on the rafts they laid great torches many fathoms hit Ke 


_ long; and very thick, made of straw. soaked in linseed oil. _ 


fiomance of the Three Kingdoms 619 


When the raft was checked by a chain the torches were lighted 

and the chains exposed to the heat till they melted and broke 
asunder. . Thus the rafts went down stream conquering 
wherever they came. 

Then the Prime Minister of Wu sent two generals, Snén 
Jung and Chuko Ching, to'try to check the advance of the 
armies. Shén Jung said to his colleague, “The forces above 
have failed to stop the enemy, and they will surely. come here. 
We shall have to put forth all our strength. If haply we can . 
succeed, the safety of our country is assured. But suppose we 
fight and lose the battle, then is our country lost.” 

“Sir, you only say what is too true,” said his colleague. 

Just as they talked of these matters came reports of the 
approach of their enemies in irrestible force. -The two leaders 
were seized with panic and went back to see the Prime 
Minister. 

“Our country is lost,” cried Chuko. “Why not run?’ 

“We all know that the land is doomed,” replied the Prime 
Minister, “but if we make no defence, and no one dies for his 
country, shall we not be shamed?” 

Chuko Ching left, weeping; and the Prime Minister went ` 
with Shén Jung to the army. The invaders soon arrived, and 
Chou Chih was. the first to break into the camp. Chang Ti 
the Prime Minister, resisted stubbornly, but was soon slain in 
a mêlée, and Shên was killed by Chou Chih. The army of Wu 
was defeated and scattered. 


Chin’s army banners waved on Pashan mount 
And trusty Chang in Chiangling fighting died; 

He recked not that the kingly grace was spent, 
He rather chose to die than shame his side. 


The armies of Chin conquered at Niuchu and penetrated 
deeply into the country of Wu. From his camp Wang Chiin 
sent a report of his victory to Loyang, and Ssuma Yen was 
pleased. 

But Chia Ch‘ung again opposed further fighting, saying, 
“The armies have been long absent and the men will suffer 
from the unhealthiness of the country. It would be well to 
call them home.” 

Chang Hua spoke against this course, saying, “The army has 
reached the very home and centre of the enemy. Soon their 
courage will fail and the king himself will be our prisoner. To 


* recall the army now would be to waste the efforts already 


madem r 

The king inclined to neither side. Chia turned upon his 
opponent savagely, saying, “You are wholly ignorant and 
understand nothing; you are bent upon winning some sort of 
glory at the expense of our soldiers’ lives. Death would be too 
good for you.” 


Ban fu, o o 


“Why wrangle?” said the king. “Chang Hua agr 
me, and he knows my wishes.” ‘ 
sd ust at this moment came a memorial from the leader T 


3 ‘the army should go on. Bi 
The royal mandate duly parched the camp and the Ghian y 
_ went out to the attack in great pomp.. The men. of Wu made 
` no defence,. but surrendered atonce. = ` 
_. When the King of Wu heard his men had surrendered s, 3 
he turned pale, and his courtiers said, “What is to be done? 
_ Here the northern army comes nearer every day and our men 
just give in.’ 
- “But why do they not fight?” said the king. =- — 
The courtiers replied, “The one evil of to-day is the emnah. 
- Ts‘ên Hun. Slay him, and we ourselves will go out and fight 7 
to the death.” ee 
“How can a eunuch harm a sate? 9 cried the king. EN ON 
“Have we not seen what Huang Hao did in: Shu? eed shouted 
the courtiers in chorus. 
Moved by sudden fury, the courtiers eased into the palace 
- found the wretched object of their hate and slew him, me 
even tasting of his palpitating flesh: - 
Then T‘ao Chün said, “All my ships are small, but give mé 
large vessels and I will ‘place thereon two legions aao go fo h 
‘to fight. I can defeat the enemy.’ 
His. request was granted, and the royal guards were sent up 
the river to join battle, while another naval force went do 
.Stream. But a heavy gale came on. The flags were blown 
down and lay over in the ships, and the men would not embark 
“They scattered leaving their leader with only a few score 
-< men. ; s ee 
Wang Chün; the leader of Chin, set sail and went down he 
river. After passing Three Hills, the sailing master of | 
y ship said the gale was too strong for him to go on. He wish 
-to anchor till the storm had moderated. But Wang would not. 
~ listen. “I wish to capture Shiht‘ouch‘é ‘eng (now - Nanking n? 
-= said he, “and wil' not hear of anchoring.” © E EIT 
So he compelled the sailing master to continue. On the. way 
Chang Hsiang, one of the leaders of Wu, came to offer sur- 
render. . 
“If you are in earnest, you will lead the way and help me,’ ue 
said Wang. 
Chang consented, returned to his own ship and led t e 
squadron. When he reached the walls he called to the de- 
- fenders to open the gates and allow the Chin army to enter. vote 
The gates were opened. 
‘When the King heard that his enemies had etua entered 
the city he wished to put an end to his life, but his officers 
prevented this. * ey 


AR eee 


andy 


x 


Padon. ‘the stream ride orere Ae tall: pa 

. With massive chains some seek to stop their Waye 172 

= But Chinling’s independence fades away’ 
_ And soon “We yield” is signalled from phe WU 2 EVE Pe tet ian ak 


Full ae I think of bygone days and sigh, : 
-- Along the stream, unmoved, the old hills rest, ~ | 
‘While I am homeless on the earth’s broad breast, 
Where grim old forts stand grey beneath the sky. 


o Wu y was Subdued and ceased to. i as a state, its four T 


The E Chin Dynasty. e the women’s P 
a the palace were found more than five thougand 


on were issued; Se and araon. were 
~ T‘ao Chiin’s army soon melted away without striking _ 
Wan Yu and Wang Jung submitted quietly. Wang i 
“hün was greatly elated at his success, _ i 
W n the Commander-in-chief. arrived there were great 
fea Han and rewards for the soldiers. The granaries were i 


ejoicing cae Ripe a ads were redoubled. At one of the ERS, 
quets the Emperor did honour to the memory of the late 
ng Hu. Raising his wine cup, and in a voice bre py 


otek that he is not here to share our rejoicings.” EAS 
un Aes a glans of Saori in Wu, went away, ee the E 


a eT set that seat fas you ee eaten said the Rae 
“Thy servant also set a seat for Your Majesty i in t 
retorted Sun Hao. < 
The Emperor laughed loudly. Then Chia Chhari rne y 
Sun Hao and said, “I hear, nee that when Yor, were in t 


- conduct were so Laren rah 
Chia was silenced, for he was n ahamed. 
Sun Hao was created Marquis of Kueiming. ‘His: sons 
‚grandsons received minor ranks and other grades. were 
ferred upon his minişters who had followed him in ` 
vender. The sons and grandsons of the late Prime finiste 
of. Wu, Chang T, who had perished in battle, were give 
ranks, and the victorious. leader, Wang Chiin, was Y ri e 2 
with the title “Pillar of the State.” ' Ana may m Tanks Be: 
_ were conferred. TAAS 


And here we may say as in the Tages States fal | 
under and re-unite; empires wax and wane.” 
A poet has summed up Mie history of these stirring ye 


In a poem. 
It was the dawning of a glorious day > 
When first the Founder of the House of Han i 
Hsienyang’s proud palace entered. Noontide ¢ came 
When Kuang-Wu the imperial rule restored. 
Alas, that Hsien succeeded in full time ` 
- And saw the setting of the sun of power! 
Ho Chin, the feeble, fell beneath the blows — 
Of palace minions. Tung Cho, vile though bold, 
- Then ruled the court. The plot Wang Yin devised 
To oust him, failed, recoiled on his own head. : 
‘oe The Li and Kuo lit up the flame of war 
AMR And brigands swarmed like ants through ai the Bhai 
a Then rose the valiant and deployed their might. 
The Suns carved out a kingdom in the east, 
Honan the Yiians strove to make their own. 
The Lius went west and seized on Pa and Shu, — 
Another Liu laid hold on Ching and Hsiang, a 
Chang Miao, Chang Lu, in turn held Chêng by force. ys 
Each of three others seized upon a fief; - 
T‘ao Chien, Han Hsiu and EE Ts an, the bold. 


idl 


~Fomance of the Three Vingdoms 


But overtopping all Ts‘ao Ts‘ao the strong 
Became first minister, and to his side, 
Drew many able men. He swayed the court, 
Without, he held the nobles in his hand; 

By force of arms he keld the capital 
Against ali rivals. Of imperial stock 

Was born Ytian-té, who with sworn brothers E 
Made oath the dynasty should be restored. 

These wandered homeless east and west for year 5, 
A petty force. But Destiny was kind , 

And led Liu Pei to Nanyang’s rustic cot, 

Where lay Reposing Dragon, he who knew 
Already that the empire must be rent. 

Twice Liu essayed in vain to see the sage; 

Once more he went, and then his fortune turned. 
Chingchou fell to him, followed Sstch‘uan, 

A fitting base to build an empire on. 

Alas! He ruled there only three short years, 
Then left his only son to K‘ung-ming’s care. 

Full nobly K‘ung-ming played protector’s part, 
Unceasing strove to win first place for Shu; 

But Fate forbade; one night for aye his star 
Went down behind the rampart of the hills. 
Chiang Wei the strong inherited his task 

And struggled on for years. But Chung and Téng 
Attacked the Hans’ last stronghold, and it fell. 
Five sons of Ts‘ao sat on the dragon throne, 

And Sstma snatched the sceptre from Ts‘ao Huan, 
Before him bowed the kings of Shu and Wu, 
Content to forfeit kingly power for life. 

All down the ages rings the note of change, 

For fate so rules it; none escapes its sway. 

The kingdoms three have vanished as a dream, 
The useless misery is ours to grieve. 


‘THE END 


CA 9. 


BRAT 


. No book may be taken from t 
= without being charged to the 
= Borrowers are responsible for) 
age done to the volumes whil 
possession and are expected to make — 


LIBRARY RULES 


good all losses. 


(a) Reserve Books may be borrowed 
for a period of two hours. In case no 
call has been made in the interval, books 
may be renewed for a second two hours. 
(Where there is only one copy, book 
must be used in the library.) 


(b) Reserve books taken at 10 p. m. 
Mondays to Fridays are due at 9 a. m. 
the next morning. A reserve book taken 
from the library at 12 m. Saturday is due 
at 9 a. m. the following Monday. 
Books not on reserve may be drawn from 
the library for two weeks and may be 
renewed once for the same period, except 
one-day books. 

A fine of two cents a day will be charged 
on each book which is not returned ac- 
cording to the above rule. 


MAGAZINES ARE NOT to be taken 


` from the library without the special 


permission of. the librarian. 


mni 


0 0045; 


ii MANN 


2396 


